古文：刁雍王慧龙韩延之袁式
现代文：刁雍，字淑和，渤海饶安人。
English: Gong Yong, Zi Shuhe, Bohai Rao An people.

古文：刁雍，字淑和，勃海饶安人也。高祖攸，晋御史中丞。
现代文：高祖刁攸是西晋御史中丞。
English: Gao Zu Rongyou is the West Jin Dynasty Grand Historian.

古文：曾祖协，从司马叡渡江，居于京口，位至尚书令。
现代文：曾祖刁协，跟随司马睿渡江，定居京口，官至尚书令。
English: Zeng Zu Rong Xie followed Sima Rui to cross the Yangtze River, settled in Jingkou, and rose to the rank of Shang Shuling.

古文：父暢，司马德宗右卫将军。
现代文：父刁畅，任司马德宗的右卫将军。
English: His father, Yan Chang, was the right guard general of Sima Dezong.

古文：初，暢兄逵以刘裕轻狡薄行，负社钱三万，违时不还，执而徵焉。
现代文：当初，刁畅兄刁逵因刘裕轻狡薄行，欠社钱三万，过期不还，把他抓起来当兵去了。
English: At first, because of Liu Yu's cunning and devious behavior, Yan Chang's brother Yan owed the company 30,000 yuan and did not pay it back when it was overdue. He was arrested and became a soldier.

古文：及裕诛桓玄，以嫌故先诛刁氏。
现代文：等到刘裕诛杀桓玄，因与刁逵有仇，先诛刁氏一族。
English: Wait until Liu Yuxuan kills Kuan Xuan, because he has a grudge against Kuan, the first to go will be the Kuan clan.

古文：雍为暢故吏所匿，奔姚兴豫州牧姚绍于洛阳，后至长安。
现代文：刁雍被刁畅旧吏藏了起来，投奔姚兴豫州牧姚绍所在的洛阳，后来又到了长安。
English: Zou Yong was hidden by the old officials of Zou Chang and went to Luoyang, where Yao Xingyuzhou Mu Yaoshao was located, and later to Zou An.

古文：雍博览书传，姚兴以雍为太子中庶子。
现代文：刁雍博览群书，姚兴任命他为太子中庶子。
English: Yao Xing appointed him as the prince's middle child.

古文：泰常二年，姚泓灭，与司马休之等归国。
现代文：泰常二年，姚泓灭亡，刁雍与司马休之等人投奔魏国。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, Yao Zhen died, and Zhen Yong and Sima Xiu and others fled to Wei.

古文：上表陈诚，于南境自效。
现代文：刁雍上表陈述衷曲，表明诚心，请求在南疆效力。
English: Zhaoyang made a heartfelt appeal on the table, expressed sincerity, and requested that it be effective in southern Xinjiang.

古文：太宗许之，假雍建义将军。
现代文：魏太宗答应了，授予刁雍建义将军的称号。
English: Wei Taizong agreed and conferred the title of General Gong Yong Jianyi.

古文：雍遂于河济之间招集流散，得五千余人，南阻大□，扰动徐兗，建牙誓众，传檄边境。
现代文：刁雍于是在黄河、济水之间招集流散人马，共得五千多人，南据大岘，骚扰徐、兖二州，建号誓师，传檄边境。
English: Gong Yong then called for the dispersal of people and horses between the Yellow River and Jishui, a total of more than five thousand people, according to the South Daxu, harassed Xu and Zou two states, built a number of oaths, and spread the border.

古文：刘裕遣将李嵩等讨雍，雍斩之于蒙山。
现代文：刘裕派将领李嵩等率兵讨伐刁雍，刁雍在蒙山把他斩杀在阵前。
English: Liu Yu sent the general Li Song and other soldiers to fight against Fenyong, and Fenyong killed him in front of the battle in Mengshan.

古文：于是众至二万，进屯固山。
现代文：这下兵力增至二万，刁雍进驻固山。
English: This increased the number of troops to twenty thousand, and Gong Yongjin was stationed in Gushan.

古文：七年三月，雍从弟弥亦率众入京口，规共讨裕。裕遣兵破之。
现代文：泰常七年三月，刁雍堂弟刁弥也率军进入京口，谋划共同讨伐刘裕，刘裕派兵打败了他们。
English: In March of the seventh year of Taizhang, Gong Yong's cousin Gong Ya also led an army into Jingkou to plan a joint crusade against Liu Yu. Liu Yu sent soldiers to defeat them.

古文：六月，雍又侵裕青州，雍败，乃收散卒保于马耳山。
现代文：六月，刁雍又侵犯刘裕的青州，刁雍战败，于是收拾散兵在马耳山自保。
English: In June, Gongyang invaded Liu Yu's Qingzhou again. Gongyang was defeated, so it gathered scattered soldiers to defend itself in Malta Mountain.

古文：又为裕青州军所逼，遂入大乡山。
现代文：又被刘裕青州军所逼，便进入大乡山。
English: Liu Yu was also forced by the Qingzhou Army to enter Daxiang Mountain.

古文：八年，太宗南幸鄴，朝于行观。
现代文：泰常八年，魏太宗南幸邺城，刁雍在行宫朝见皇上。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Taizong of the Southern Song Dynasty was in the city of Xicheng, and Emperor Yong of the Song Dynasty was on his way to the palace to meet the emperor.

古文：问： 先闻卿家缚刘裕，于卿亲疏？ 
现代文：太宗问： 先前听说卿家有人逮捕过刘裕，这人跟你是什么关系？ 
English: Taizong asked: I heard that someone in the Qing family had previously arrested Liu Yu, what does this person have to do with you?

古文：雍曰：是臣伯父。 
现代文：刁雍说： 是为臣的伯父。 
English: Gong Yong said, "He is the uncle of a minister."

古文：太宗笑曰： 刘裕父子当应惮卿。 
现代文：太宗笑着说： 刘裕父子应当害怕爱卿。 
English: Taizong said with a smile: Liu Yu and his son should be afraid of Ai Qing.

古文：又谓之曰： 朕先遣叔孙建等攻青州，民尽藏避，城犹未下。
现代文：又对他说： 朕先前派叔孙建等人攻打青州，老百姓全部躲藏起来，城池还没被攻下。
English: He also said to him: I had previously sent uncle Sun Jian and others to attack Qingzhou, and all the common people had gone into hiding, and the city had not yet been taken.

古文：彼既素惮卿威，士民又相信服，今欲遣卿助建等，卿宜勉之。 
现代文：他们既然一向都惧怕卿的威风，士兵百姓又相信服，今天朕想派你帮助叔孙建等人，你当勉力为之。 
English: Since they have always been afraid of the prestige of the lord, and the soldiers and people believe in obedience, today I would like to send you to help uncle Sun Jian and others. You should do your best.

古文：于是假雍镇东将军、青州刺史、东光侯，给五万骑，使别立义军。
现代文：于是授刁雍为镇东将军、青州刺史，东光侯，拨给五万骑兵，让他别立义军。
English: Therefore, he awarded Gong Yong as the general of Zhendong, Qingzhou Zhishi, Dongguang Hou, and allocated fifty thousand cavalry to him, and let him lead the rebel army.

古文：建先攻东阳，雍至，招集义众，得五千人。遣抚慰郡县，土人尽下，送租供军。
现代文：叔孙建先打东阳，刁雍来到，招集义众，又得到五千人，派人安抚各郡县，当地百姓人心归顺，送租粮供给军需。
English: Jian's uncles and grandsons first fought in Dongyang, and then came to Fenyong. They summoned the righteous people, and received five thousand people. They sent people to pacify the counties, and the local people's hearts were obedient. They sent rent grain to supply the military.

古文：是时攻东阳，平其北城三十许步。
现代文：刁雍攻东阳，铲平其北城三十步左右。
English: Zhaoyang attacked Dongyang and leveled its northern city about thirty paces away.

古文：刘义符青州刺史竺夔于城内凿地道，南下入渑水涧，以为退路。
现代文：刘义符青州刺史竺夔在城内挖地道，向南延伸进入渑水涧，作为退路。
English: Liu Yifu of the Qingzhou Zhisheng dug a tunnel in the city, extending southward into the Lishui Canal, as a retreat.

古文：雍谓建曰： 此城已平，宜时入取。
现代文：刁雍对叔孙建说： 此城已平，应及时攻入。
English: Gong Yong said to his uncle Sun Jian: This city has been leveled, we should break into it in time.

古文：不者走尽。 
现代文：不然的话，城中人都逃完了。 
English: Otherwise, everyone in the city will have fled.

古文：建惧伤兵士，难之。
现代文：叔孙建担心会伤亡士兵，提出疑问。
English: Uncle Sun Jian was worried that there would be casualties among the soldiers and asked questions.

古文：雍曰： 若惧伤官兵者，雍今请将义兵先入。 
现代文：刁雍说： 如果害怕损伤官兵，刁雍今天请求带领义兵先进去。 
English: Gong Yong said: If you are afraid of injuring officers and soldiers, Gong Yong asked today to lead the volunteers to the front.

古文：建不听。夔欲东走，会义符遣其将檀道济等救青州。
现代文：叔孙建不听，竺夔想从东面逃走，正逢刘义符派将领檀道济等人救青州。
English: Uncle Sun Jian did not listen and wanted to escape from the east, just as Liu Yifu sent generals such as Dang Daoji to save Qingzhou.

古文：雍谓建曰： 贼畏官军突骑，以锁连车为函阵。
现代文：刁雍对叔孙建说： 敌人害怕官军铁骑，用锁连车成为连环阵。
English: Gong Yong said to his uncle Sun Jian: The enemy is afraid of the official army's iron cavalry, and uses locks to form a chain-link formation.

古文：大岘已南，处处狭隘，不得方轨。
现代文：大岘以南，处处狭隘，车辆不能并行。
English: South of Dalat, everywhere is narrow, and vehicles cannot travel in parallel.

古文：雍求将义兵五千，要险破之。 
现代文：刁雍请求统义兵五千，据险破敌。 
English: Gong Yong asked for a total of five thousand loyal soldiers, and nearly defeated the enemy.

古文：建不听，曰： 兵人不宜水土，疫病过半。
现代文：叔孙建不听，说： 士兵不服水土，病者已过半数。
English: Uncle Sun Jian didn't listen and said, "Soldiers don't accept soil and water, and more than half of them are sick."

古文：若相持不休，兵自死尽，何须复战？
现代文：如相持不休，士兵定会死尽，哪里还能再去战斗。
English: If they hold on to each other, the soldiers will surely die, where else can they go to fight.

古文：今不损大军，安全而返，计之上也。 
现代文：现在不损大军，安全而返，这是上策。 
English: Now is the best time to return safely, without harming the army.

古文：建乃引还。
现代文：叔孙建于是引兵而还。
English: Uncle Sun Jian then withdrew his troops and returned.

古文：雍遂镇尹卯自固。
现代文：刁雍于是镇守尹卯固。
English: As a result, the town's governor, Yin Uguo, fled the town.

古文：又诏令南入，以乱贼境。
现代文：皇帝又下诏让他南入，以扰乱敌境。
English: The emperor also issued an edict to let him enter the south to disrupt the enemy's territory.

古文：雍攻克项城。
现代文：刁雍攻克项城。
English: Shenyang conquers Xiangcheng.

古文：会有敕追令随机立效，雍于是招集谯、梁、彭、沛民五千余家，置二十七营，迁镇济阴。
现代文：这时正逢朝廷有诏追令他随机应变，刁雍于是招集谯、梁、彭、沛百姓五千余家，置二十七营，迁镇济阴。
English: At this time, the imperial court issued an imperial edict ordering him to make random adjustments, so Gong Yong called together more than 5,000 people from Zou, Liang, Peng, and Pei, set up 27 battalions, and moved the town to Jiyin.

古文：延和二年，立徐州于外黄城，置谯、梁、彭、沛四郡九县，以雍为平南将军、徐州刺史，赐爵东安侯。
现代文：延和二年，在外黄城建立徐州政府，设置谯、梁、彭、沛四郡九县，朝廷任刁雍为平南将军、徐州刺史，赐爵东安侯。
English: In the second year of the Yan He, the Xuzhou government was established in the outer Huangcheng, setting up nine counties in four counties of Min, Liang, Peng and Pei. The imperial court appointed Gong Yong as the general of Pingnan, Xuzhou as the historian, and gave him the title of Dongan Marquis.

古文：在镇七年，太延四年，徵还京师，频岁为边民所请。
现代文：刁雍在镇七年，太延四年，奉召回京，边民仍连年要求他回去。
English: Gong Yong was in the town for seven years, Tai Yan for four years, and was called back to Beijing. The border residents still asked him to return year after year.

古文：世祖嘉之，真君二年复授使持节、侍中、都督扬豫兗徐四州诸军事、征南将军、徐豫二州刺史。
现代文：魏世祖很嘉许他，太平真君二年又被授官使持节、侍中、都督扬、豫、兖、徐四州诸军事、征南将军、徐豫二州刺史。
English: Emperor Wei highly commended him, and Taiping Zhenjun was awarded the title of envoy in the second year, as well as the titles of chamberlain, governor of Yang, Henan, Shandong, and Xuzhou provinces, general of the Southern Expedition, and historian of Xuzhou and Yunnan.

古文：三年，刘义隆将裴方明寇陷仇池，诏雍与建兴公古弼等十余将讨平之。
现代文：三年，刘义隆将裴方明侵占仇池，皇帝下诏让刁雍与建兴公古弼等十余名将领讨平敌人。
English: In the third year, Liu Yilong invaded and occupied Qiqi with Pei Fangming, and the emperor issued an edict to let Yu Yong and Jian Xinggong Gushan and more than ten other generals fight the enemy.

古文：五年，以本将军为薄骨律镇将。
现代文：五年，刁雍以本将军为薄骨律镇将。
English: In the fifth year, Gong Yong took this general as the general of the town of thin bones.

古文：至镇，表曰：臣蒙宠出镇，奉辞西籓，总统诸军，户口殷广。
现代文：到镇，刁雍上表说： 臣蒙宠出镇，奉职西藩，总领各军，户民殷广。
English: When he arrived at the town, Gong Yong said at the table: "The minister is favored to leave the town, serve the West Domain, lead the army, and have a wide range of households.

古文：又总勒戎马，以防不虞，督课诸屯，以为储积。
现代文：又总领戎马，以防不测，安排屯田，作为储积。
English: In addition, the commander-in-chief of the troops and horses, in case of emergency, arranged the tunden as a reserve.

古文：夙夜惟忧，不遑宁处。
现代文：臣夙夜思虑，寝食难安。
English: The vassal is worried day and night, and it is difficult to sleep and eat.

古文：以今年四月末到镇，时以夏中，不及东作。
现代文：从今年四月末到镇，现在已至仲夏，治下百姓仍没能春种。
English: From the end of April this year to the town, it is now mid-summer, and the people still have not been able to plant spring seeds.

古文：念彼农夫，虽复布野，官渠乏水，不得广殖。
现代文：臣心念那些农夫，虽然布满原野，但官渠缺水，不能广种。
English: The vassal thought of those farmers. Although the fields were full of fields, the official canal was short of water, so they could not plant widely.

古文：乘前以来，功不充课，兵人口累，率皆饥俭。
现代文：从前段时间以来，劳动所得不抵租税，兵人口累，都很饥俭。
English: Since some time ago, the labor income is not tax deductible, the soldiers are tired, and they are very hungry.

古文：略加检行，知此土稼穑艰难。
现代文：臣略加检查，发现此地耕种困难。
English: After a little inspection, the minister found that it was difficult to farm here.

古文：夫欲育民丰国，事须大田。
现代文： 大凡想养民丰国，必须耕种农田。
English: If you want to raise a prosperous country, you must cultivate farmland.

古文：此土乏雨，正以引河为用。
现代文：此地缺雨，正应引黄河水浇灌。
English: Due to the lack of rain in this area, the Yellow River is being diverted for irrigation.

古文：观旧渠堰，乃是上古所制，非近代也。
现代文：臣观察旧渠堰，是上古所建，不是近代的事。
English: The minister's observation of the old canal weir was built in ancient times, not in modern times.

古文：富平西南三十里，有艾山，南北二十六里，东西四十五里，凿以通河，似禹旧迹。
现代文：富平西南三十里，有艾山，南北长二十六里，东西四十五里，被凿穿通向黄河，看起来像大禹当年旧迹。
English: Thirty miles southwest of Fuping, there is Mount Aishan, 26 miles long from north to south, and 45 miles from east to west, which was chiseled through to the Yellow River. It looks like the old site of Dayu.

古文：其两岸作溉田大渠，广十余步，山南引水入此渠中。计昔为之，高于水不过一丈。
现代文：这两岸作为灌田用的大渠，宽十多步，从山南面引水到此渠之中，计算过去做这些的时候，渠堤高于黄河水面不过一丈。
English: These two banks serve as a large canal for irrigation, more than ten steps wide, bringing water from the southern side of the mountain into this canal. When doing these calculations in the past, the canal embankment was not much higher than the surface of the Yellow River.

古文：河水激急，沙土漂流，今日此渠高于河水二丈三尺。又河水浸射，往往崩颓。
现代文：黄河水流湍急，沙土漂流，今天此渠高于河水已有二丈三尺，又加上河水浸射，往往崩塌。
English: The Yellow River is fast-flowing, and the sand is drifting. Today, this canal is already two feet and three feet higher than the river, and when the river is flooded, it often collapses.

古文：渠溉高悬，水不得上。
现代文：渠的位置高悬，黄河水无法入渠。
English: The location of the canal is high, and the Yellow River water cannot enter the canal.

古文：虽复诸处按旧引水，水亦难求。
现代文：虽然旧渠各处依然将就引水，水也难得。
English: Although water will still be diverted from all parts of the old canal, water will be scarce.

古文：今艾山北，河中有洲渚，水分为二。
现代文：现在艾山北面，黄河中有小岛，水分为二。
English: Now, on the north side of Mount Aishan, there are small islands in the Yellow River, and the water is divided into two.

古文：西河狭小，水广百四十步。
现代文：西河小而狭，水宽才一百四十步。
English: The West River is small and narrow, with a width of only one hundred and forty paces.

古文：臣今求入来年正月，于河西高渠之北八里，分河之下五里，平地凿渠，广十五步，深五尺，筑其两岸，令高一丈。
现代文：臣现在请求来年正月，在河西高渠的北面八里、分河之下五里处，平地凿渠，宽五十余步，深五尺，两岸筑堤，堤高一丈。
English: The minister now requests that in the first month of next year, at a place eight miles north of the Hexi High Canal and five miles below the river, a flat-land canal be dug, with a width of more than fifty paces and a depth of five feet, and a dike be built on both sides, with the dike being one story high.

古文：北行四十里，还入古高渠，即循高渠而北，复八十里，合百二十里，大有良田。
现代文：北行四十里，仍入高渠，沿高渠向北，行八十里，共一百二十里，将会出现大片良田。
English: Forty miles northbound, still into the high ditch, along the high ditch to the north, travel eighty miles, a total of one hundred and twenty miles, there will be a large area of good fields.

古文：计用四千人，四十日功，渠得成讫。
现代文：这些工程共需四千人，四十天时间，便可修成。
English: These projects require a total of four thousand people and forty days to complete.

古文：所欲凿新渠口，河下五尺，水不得入。
现代文：所要凿的新渠口，距河面五尺，河水不得入。
English: The new canal mouth to be dug is five feet away from the river surface, and river water is not allowed to enter.

古文：今求从小河东南岸斜断到西北岸，计长二百七十步，广十步，高二丈，绝断小河。
现代文：现在臣请求从黄河小河东南岸筑堤斜断到西北岸，计长二百七十步，宽十步，高二丈，绝断小河。
English: Now the minister requests that a dike be built from the south-eastern bank of the Yellow River to the north-western bank, with a length of 270 paces, a width of 10 paces, a height of 2 meters, and a small river.

古文：二十日功，计得成毕，合计用功六十日。
现代文：二十天时间便可完工，两项加起来，合计用工六十天。
English: It will take 20 days to complete, and the two together will take a total of 60 days.

古文：小河之水，尽入新渠，水则充足，溉官私田四万余顷。
现代文：小河的水，尽数引入新渠，水源充足，灌溉公私田四万余顷。
English: The water of small rivers is channeled into new canals as much as possible, and the water source is sufficient to irrigate more than 40,000 hectares of public and private fields.

古文：一旬之间，则水一遍；水凡四溉，谷得成实。
现代文：十天之间，水就可灌田一遍，四遍之后，粮食便收成在望。
English: Within ten days, the water can be used to irrigate the fields once, and after four times, the grain harvest is in sight.

古文：官课常充，民亦丰赡。
现代文：这样官税充裕，百姓也很富足。 
English: In this way, the government tax is abundant, and the people are also rich.

古文：诏曰： 卿忧国爱民，知欲更引河水，劝课大田。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 卿忧国爱民，知道重引黄河水，灌溉农田。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "The emperor is concerned about the country and loves the people. He knows that it is best to redirect Yellow River water to irrigate farmland.

古文：宜便兴立，以克就为功，何必限其日数也。
现代文：宜立即行动，以做好此事为务，何必要限定日期呢。
English: It is better to act immediately to get it right than to set a date.

古文：有可以便国利民者，动静以闻。 
现代文：有可以便国利民的事情，尽管说来。 
English: There are things that can be done to benefit the country and the people, though.

古文：七年，雍表曰： 奉诏高平、安定、统万及臣所守四镇，出车五千乘，运屯谷五十万斛付沃野镇，以供军粮。
现代文：七年，刁雍上表说： 奉诏高平、安定、统万及臣所守四镇，出车五千乘，运屯谷五十万斛交付沃野镇，以供军粮。
English: In the seventh year, Gong Yong wrote on the table: Upon the order of Gaoping, Dingping, Tongwan and the four towns guarded by the vassals, five thousand vehicles were dispatched, and half a million cormorants were transported from Tungu to Voye Town to provide military rations.

古文：臣镇去沃野八百里，道多深沙，轻车来往，犹以为难。设令载谷，不过二十石，每涉深沙，必致滞陷。
现代文：臣镇离沃野八百里，道路上多是深厚的沙，空车往来，尚且困难，假如载谷，只能装二十担，每经沙深的地方，必定会陷沙难行。
English: Zhenzhen is 800 miles away from Wuye. The roads are mostly covered with deep sand, and it is still difficult for empty cars to travel. If you are carrying grain, you can only carry 20 loads. If you go through deep sand, you will definitely get stuck in the sand.

古文：又谷在河西，转至沃野，越度大河，计车五千乘，运十万斛，百余日乃得一返，大废生民耕垦之业。
现代文：又加上谷在黄河西面，转运到沃野，中间需渡越大河，计车五千辆，运十万斛粮，一百多天才能往返一次，大大贻误老百姓耕种之业。
English: In addition, the valley is on the west side of the Yellow River, and the goods are transported to the fertile fields. In the middle, it is necessary to cross the big river, taxi five thousand cars, transport one hundred thousand mu of grain, and it takes more than one hundred days to make a round trip, greatly delaying the farming of the common people.

古文：车牛艰阻，难可全至，一岁不过二运，五十万斛乃经三年。
现代文：车牛难行，难以全至，一年不过能运上两次，五十万斛运完得花去三年。
English: It is difficult to transport cattle by wagon, and it is difficult to transport all of them. It can only be transported twice a year, and it takes three years to transport half a million yoke of oxen.

古文：臣前被诏，有可以便国利民者动静以闻。
现代文：臣前时奉诏，称有可以利国利民的计策尽管上报。
English: The minister issued an edict at the time, saying that there were plans that could benefit the country and the people, but that they should be reported.

古文：臣闻郑、白之渠，远引淮海之栗，溯流数千，周年乃得一至，犹称国有储粮，民用安乐。
现代文：臣听说郑、白之渠，远运淮海的粮食，逆流数千里，一年才能运一次，犹可说是国有余粮，百姓安乐。
English: The minister heard that the Zheng and Bai canals transported grain from far away to Huaihai, flowing thousands of miles in the opposite direction, and could only be transported once a year. It can be said that it was state-owned surplus grain, and the people were happy.

古文：今求于牵屯山河水之次，造船二百艘，二船为一舫，一船胜谷二千斛。一舫十人，计须千人。
现代文：而今臣请求在牵屯山黄河边，造船两百艘，二船并为一舫，一条船可装粮食二千斛，一舫十个人，共计需一千人。
English: However, the current minister requested that two hundred ships be built on the edge of the Yellow River in Toutun Mountain, two ships for one raft, one boat can hold two thousand rafts of grain, and one raft can hold ten people, for a total of one thousand people.

古文：臣镇内之兵，率皆习水。
现代文：臣镇内士兵，全都熟悉水性。
English: The soldiers in Zhenzhen are all familiar with the nature of water.

古文：一运二十万斛。
现代文：一次可送粮二十万斛。
English: 200,000 baht of grain can be sent at a time.

古文：方舟顺流，五日而至，自沃野牵上，十日还到，合六十日得一返。
现代文：方舟顺流，五天就到了，从沃野牵船而上，十天也便到了，合计六十天能够往返一次。
English: The ark floated down the river and arrived in five days, while the horse-drawn boat sailed up from the fertile fields and arrived in ten days. In total, it took sixty days to make the round trip.

古文：从三月至九月三返，运送六十万斛。计用人功，轻于车运十倍有余，不费牛力，又不废田。 
现代文：从三月到九月可往返三次，运粮六十万斛，计用人力，少于车运十倍有余，不费牛力，又不废弃农时。 
English: From March to September, there can be three round trips, transporting 600,000 baht of grain, using more than ten times less manpower than trucking, without any effort and without wasting farm time.

古文：诏曰： 知欲造船运谷，一冬即成，大省民力，既不费牛，又不废田，甚善。
现代文：帝下诏说： 朕知卿想造船运粮，一个冬天便可造成，大大节省民力，既不费牛又不废田，很好。
English: Emperor Zhao said: I know that if you want to build a ship to transport grain, it can be done in one winter, saving a lot of manpower, neither wasting cattle nor waste fields, very good.

古文：非但一运，自可永以为式。
现代文：这种方式不仅可用一次，而且可以作为一个永久的方式保持下去。
English: Not only can this be used once, but it can be maintained as a permanent method.

古文：今别下统万镇出兵以供运谷，卿镇可出百兵为船工，岂可专废千人？
现代文：今另命统万镇出兵运输，卿镇可出百名士兵作为船工，哪能专从你一镇出人千名呢？
English: Now it is ordered to dispatch troops from all towns for transportation. Qingzhen can send a hundred soldiers as shipbuilders. How can you send a thousand people from your town?

古文：虽遣船匠，犹须卿指授，未可专主也。
现代文：虽然是派船匠，仍须卿指授安排，不可专任。
English: Although he is a ship's carpenter, he still has to be assigned by the Lord and cannot be full-time.

古文：诸有益国利民如此者，续复以闻。 
现代文：各种类似于这种利国利民的意见，继续上报。 
English: Opinions similar to this, which are in the interest of the country and the people, will continue to be reported.

古文：九年，雍表曰： 臣闻安不妄乱，先圣之政也。
现代文：九年，刁雍上表说： 臣听说安不忘乱，是先圣的执政思想。
English: In the ninth year, Gong Yong said on the table: The minister heard that peace does not forget chaos, which is the ruling thought of the forefather.

古文：况绥服之外，带接边城，防守不备，无以御敌者也。
现代文：何况偏远之地，连接边城，防守不严，即会导致无从御敌的情况出现。
English: What's more, remote areas, connecting border cities, and lax defense will lead to situations where the enemy cannot be defeated.

古文：臣镇所绾河西，爰在边表，常惧不虞。
现代文：臣镇所统辖的河西，也在边疆，臣常担心不测。
English: The western part of the river, which is under the jurisdiction of the town of Omi, is also on the border. Omi often worries about the unexpected.

古文：平地积谷，实难守获。
现代文：平地积谷，实难守备。
English: The flat terrain is jagged and difficult to defend.

古文：兵人散居，无以依恃。
现代文：士卒散居各处，没有屏障。
English: The soldiers are scattered everywhere, there is no barrier.

古文：脱有妖奸，必致狼狈。
现代文：如贼人乘虚而入，我军必会狼狈不堪。
English: If the thieves take advantage of the situation and enter, our army will be overwhelmed.

古文：虽欲自固，无以得全。
现代文：虽想固守，也无法避免各方面的损失。
English: Although you want to stick to it, you can't avoid losses in all aspects.

古文：今求造城储谷，置兵备守。
现代文：臣请求筑城储谷，设兵防守。
English: The vassal requested to build a castle in the valley and set up troops for defense.

古文：镇自建立，更不烦官。
现代文：此城由我镇自行修建，不必烦劳朝廷。
English: This city was built by our town itself, so there was no need to bother the imperial court.

古文：又于三时之隙，不令废农。
现代文：而且建城的时间，安排于农闲之时，不会废弃耕作。
English: Moreover, the time for the construction of the city, arranged at the time of idleness, will not abandon farming.

古文：一岁，二岁不讫，三岁必成。
现代文：一年、二年不成，三年一定会建成。
English: If it is not completed in one or two years, it will definitely be completed in three years.

古文：立城之年，必在水陆之次。
现代文：立城的地方，必定要选择水陆边缘。
English: If you want to build a city, you must choose the water and land edge.

古文：大小高下。量力取办。 
现代文：大小高下，量力而行。 
English: Size up or down, according to your ability.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：帝下诏同意。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：至十年三月，城汔。
现代文：到太平真君十年三月，城修好。
English: In March of the tenth year of Taiping Zhenjun, the city was repaired.

古文：诏曰： 卿深思远虑，忧勤尽思，知城已周讫，边境无不虞之忧，千载有永安之固，朕甚嘉焉。
现代文：帝下诏说： 卿深思远虑，忧勤尽忠，朕知道城已修好，边境没有了不测之忧，千载有永安之固，朕很赞许你的行为。
English: Emperor Zhao said: Sir, you are thoughtful, diligent and loyal. I know that the city has been repaired, the border is free from unforeseen worries, and it is firmly anchored in eternal peace. I highly commend your behavior.

古文：即名此城为刁公城，以旌尔功也。 
现代文：就把这座城叫刁公城，以表彰你的功劳。 
English: I will name this city Shao Gongcheng in recognition of your service.

古文：兴光二年，诏雍还都，拜特进，将军如故。
现代文：兴光二年，帝下诏让刁雍还都，拜授特进，将军如故。
English: In the second year of the Xingguang era, the emperor issued an edict to return Gongyang to the capital, awarding special promotion, and the general remained the same.

古文：和平六年，表曰：臣闻有国有家者，莫不礼乐为先。
现代文：和平六年，刁雍上表说： 臣听说有国有家者，无不以礼乐为先。
English: In the sixth year of peace, Gong Yong said at the table: The minister heard that there are state-owned families, all of which take the ceremonial music as the first.

古文：故《乐记》云：礼所以制外，乐所以修内。
现代文：所以《礼记》说：礼用来约束行动，乐用来修养内心。
English: Therefore, the "Rituals" said: Rites are used to restrict actions, and pleasures are used to cultivate the heart.

古文：和气中释，恭敬温文。
现代文：让和气中释，恭敬温文。
English: Let the spirit of harmony be released, and show respect to the warm-hearted.

古文：是以安上治民，莫善于礼;易俗移风，莫善于乐。
现代文：所以安上治民，没有比礼更好的了；易俗移风，没有比乐更好的了。
English: Therefore, there is nothing better than etiquette to govern the people in a peaceful manner; there is nothing better than fun to change customs.

古文：且于一民一俗，尚须崇而用之，况统御八方，陶钧六合者哉？
现代文：而且于一民一俗，尚须崇而用之，何况统治八方，驯化四海呢？
English: Moreover, a people and a custom still need to be revered and used, not to mention ruling the eight directions and domesticating the four seas.

古文：故帝尧修五礼以明典章，作《咸池》以谐万类；显皇轨于云岱，扬鸿化于介丘。
现代文：所以尧帝修五礼以明典章，作《咸池》以调谐万类，彰显皇轨于云岱，发扬教化于介丘。
English: Therefore, Emperor Qian performed the Five Rites with a clear ceremony, and composed "The Salt Pond" with the tuning of all kinds, highlighting the imperial track in Yunnan and promoting the enlightenment in Jieqiu.

古文：令木石革心，鸟兽率舞。
现代文：令木石革心、乌兽起舞。
English: The wood, stone and leather heart make the black beast dance.

古文：包天地之情，达神明之德。
现代文：包容天地之情，通达神明之德。
English: Embrace the feelings of heaven and earth, and attain the virtues of the gods.

古文：夫感天动神，莫近于礼乐。
现代文：大凡感天动神，没有比礼乐更近的了。
English: There is nothing more moving than a great emotion, and nothing more recent than ceremonial music.

古文：故大乐与天地同和，大礼与天地同节。
现代文：所以大乐与天地同和，大礼与天地同节。
English: Therefore, grand music is in harmony with heaven and earth, and grand salute is in harmony with heaven and earth.

古文：和，故百物阜生;节，故报天祭地。
现代文：和，因此万物生机勃勃；节，故而报天祭地。
English: Therefore, all things are full of vigor; therefore, festivals herald the heavenly festival.

古文：礼行于郊。则上下和肃。
现代文：礼行于郊，则上下和肃。
English: In the suburbs, the etiquette is formal and dignified.

古文：肃者，礼之情;和者，乐之致。
现代文：肃，是礼的情；和，是乐的目的。
English: "Shu" is the feeling of propriety; "wa" is the aim of pleasure.

古文：乐至则无怨，礼至则不违。
现代文：乐至则无怨，礼到则不违。
English: There is nothing wrong with being happy, and there is nothing wrong with being polite.

古文：揖让而治天下者，礼乐之谓欤？
现代文：揖让而治理天下，难道说的不就是礼乐吗？
English: To govern the world by conceding, isn't that just ceremonial music?

古文：唯圣人知礼乐之不可以已，故作乐以应天，制礼以配地。
现代文： 只有圣人知道礼乐不可停止，所以作乐以应接皇天，制礼以配于后土。
English: Only a saint knows that the liturgy cannot be stopped, so the music is made to meet the emperor, and the ritual is made to match the hinterland.

古文：所以承天之道，治人之情。
现代文：所以承天之道，而治人之情。
English: Therefore, it is better to follow the way of heaven and govern with human feelings.

古文：故王者治定制礼，功成作乐。
现代文：因此王者统治安定而制定礼仪，大功告成而制作音乐。
English: That is why kings rule with stability and establish etiquette, and great achievements are made of music.

古文：虞夏殷周，易代而起。
现代文：虞、夏、殷、周，易代而起。
English: Yu, Xia, Yin, Zhou, Yi successively.

古文：及周之末，王政陵迟。
现代文：到周朝末年，王权衰落。
English: By the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the royal power was in decline.

古文：仲尼伤礼乐之崩亡，痛文武之将坠，自卫返鲁，各得其中。
现代文：孔子感伤礼乐崩亡，痛心文武之道将坠，从卫返鲁，整理礼乐，使之各得其所。
English: Confucius was saddened by the demise of ceremonial music and saddened by the decline of the literary and martial arts. He returned to Lu from Wei and organized ceremonial music so that it would have its own place.

古文：逮乎秦皇，剪弃道术，灰灭典籍，坑烬儒士，盲天下之目，绝象魏之章，《箫韶》来仪，不可复矣。
现代文：到了秦始皇时代，剪灭废弃道术，销毁典籍，坑杀儒士，盲天下之目，绝礼仪之章，《箫韶》来仪，不可恢复矣。
English: By the time of Qin Shi Huang, it was impossible to restore the abandoned Taoism, the destruction of classic books, the killing of Confucianists, the blinding of the eyes of the world, the chapter of the ceremonial rite, and the "" ceremony.

古文：赖大漠之兴，改正朔，易服色，协音乐，制礼仪，正声古礼，粗欲周备。
现代文：赖汉代兴起，改正朔，易服色，协音乐，制礼仪，正古礼，大体周备。
English: Thanks to the rise of the Han Dynasty, corrections were made, clothing colors were simplified, music was harmonized, etiquette was established, ancient rites were restored, and people were generally well prepared.

古文：至于孝章，每以三代损益，优劣殊轨，叹其薄德，无以易民视听。博士曹褒睹诏也，知上有制作之意，乃上疏求定诸仪，以为汉礼。
现代文：至于孝章帝时，每以三代损益，优劣殊途，感叹其薄德，没有办法改变百姓视听，博士曹褒看到这个诏书，知道皇上有制作礼乐的意图，于是上疏求定诸礼仪，以作为汉礼。
English: As for Emperor Xiaozhang, every three generations of losses and gains, advantages and disadvantages, lamented its weak virtue, there is no way to change the people's audio-visual, Dr. Cao Bao saw this edict and knew that the emperor had the intention of making liturgical music, so Shang Shu sought to determine the etiquette to be used as a Chinese ritual.

古文：终于休废，寝而不行。
现代文：终而停废，不能实行。
English: It was eventually repealed and can no longer be implemented.

古文：及魏晋之日，修而不备。
现代文：到魏晋时代，则修而不备。
English: By the time of the Wei and Jin dynasties, it had not been repaired.

古文：伏惟陛下无为以恭已，使贤以御世，方鸣和鸾以陟岱宗，陪群后以升中岳，而三礼缺于唐辰，象舞替于周日。
现代文： 臣思陛下无为而治以端正自身，任用贤士统治天下，方鸣和鸾以升岱宗，陪群后以升中岳，而三礼在唐时便已缺欠，象舞在周时已经改变。
English: His Majesty Zenshi did nothing, but governed himself by rectifying himself, and appointed sages to rule the world. Fangming and Zou were promoted to Zongzong, and Zongzong was promoted to Zhongyue after accompanying the group. However, the Three Rites were already lacking in the Tang Dynasty, and the Elephant Dance had changed in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：夫君举必书，古之典也。
现代文：君主的举措必定记载，这是古代典制。
English: The monarch's actions must be recorded, this is the ancient system of records.

古文：柴望之礼，帝王盛事。
现代文：祭天祭地之礼，是帝王的盛事。
English: The celebration of the festival of heaven and earth is a grand event for the emperor.

古文：臣今以为有其时而无其礼，有其德而无其乐。
现代文：臣认为如今是有其时而无其礼仪，有其德而无其乐。
English: The minister believes that nowadays there is no etiquette without etiquette, no virtue without pleasure.

古文：史阙封石之文，工绝清颂之飨，良由礼乐不兴，王政有阙所致也。
现代文：史缺封石之文，工绝清颂之享，实在是由礼乐不兴，王政有缺所导致的。
English: The lack of a historical seal, the absence of a stone inscription, and the absence of the celebration of the Qing Dynasty are actually caused by the lack of ceremonial music and the lack of royal government.

古文：臣闻乐由礼，所以象德;礼由乐，所以防淫。
现代文：臣听说乐由礼起，故而像德；礼由乐现，用来防淫。
English: The vassal heard that pleasure comes from courtesy, so it resembles virtue; courtesy comes from pleasure, and is used to prevent fornication.

古文：五帝殊时不相沿，三王异世不相袭。事与时并，名与功偕故也。
现代文：五帝异时不相沿，三王异世不相袭，是由于事与时并，名与功偕的缘故。
English: The five emperors did not coincide with each other at different times, and the three kings did not collide with each other at different times, due to the coincidence of events and time, and the coincidence of name and merit.

古文：臣识昧儒先，管窥不远，谓宜修礼正乐，以光大圣之治。
现代文：为臣见识粗浅，所虑不远，认为应该修礼正乐，以光大圣人之治。 
English: As a vassal, his understanding is shallow, but his thoughts are not far away. He believes that it is necessary to practice proper etiquette, and to follow the rule of a great sage.

古文：诏令公卿集议，会高宗崩，遂寝。
现代文：高宗下诏让公卿一起讨论此事，适逢高宗逝世，事情便耽搁下来了。
English: Gao Zong issued an edict that the nobles should discuss the matter together, but the death of Gao Zong delayed the matter.

古文：皇兴中，雍与陇西王源贺及中书监高允等并以耆年特见优礼，锡雍几杖，剑履处殿，月致珍羞焉。
现代文：皇兴年间，刁雍与陇西王源贺以及中书监高允等人都以年高特被优礼，皇帝赐给刁雍几杖，准他可佩剑上朝，每月为他送去山珍海味。
English: During the years of the emperor's rise to power, Qinyong and King Yuan He of Shaanxi, as well as Gaoyong, the supervisor of Chinese books, were all honored with the title of senior. The emperor gave Qinyong several staffs, allowed him to wear a sword to the imperial court, and sent him mountain and sea delicacies every month.

古文：雍性宽柔，好尚文典，手不释书，明敏多智。
现代文：刁雍性情宽柔，喜爱文典，手不释书，明敏多智。
English: Yuanyang has a broad and gentle temperament, likes literature, does not interpret books, and is bright and intelligent.

古文：凡所为诗赋颂论并杂文，百有余篇。
现代文：所写的诗赋颂论加上杂文，一共有一百多篇。
English: In total, he wrote more than a hundred poems and essays.

古文：又泛施爱士，怡静寡欲。
现代文：又宽宏爱士，怡静寡欲。
English: and magnanimous love, and tranquil desire.

古文：笃信佛道，著教诫二十余篇，以训导子孙。
现代文：笃信佛道，撰教诫二十多篇，用以训导子孙。
English: He was a firm believer in Buddhism and wrote more than twenty sermons to instruct his children and grandchildren.

古文：太和八年冬卒，年九十五。
现代文：太和八年冬天去世，享年九十五岁。
English: She died in the winter of 1908, at the age of 95.

古文：赐命服一袭，赗帛五百匹，赠仪同三司、冀州刺史、将军如故，谥曰简。
现代文：朝廷赐给命服一套，赠帛五百匹，赠授仪同三司、冀州刺史，将军如故，谥称简。
English: The imperial court gave him a set of life clothes, a gift of five hundred horses, a gift of the award ceremony with the three departments, the Jizhou engraving history, the general as before, and the nickname Jane.

