古文：何进与袁绍谋诛宦官，何太后不听，进乃召董卓，欲以兵胁太后。
现代文：原文东汉末年何进与袁绍计划诛杀宦官，何太后不同意，何进只好召董卓带兵进京，想利用董卓的兵力胁迫太后。
English: In the last years of the Eastern Han Dynasty, He Jin and Yuan Shao planned to fight and kill eunuchs. However, the empress dowager did not agree, and He Jin had no choice but to call on Dong Zhuo to lead an army into Beijing. He wanted to use Dong Zhuo's army to coerce the empress dowager.

古文：曹操闻而笑之，曰： 阉竖之官，古今宜有，但世主不当假之以权宠，使至于此。
现代文：曹操听了，笑着说： 太监古今各朝各代都有，只是国君不应过于宠幸，赋予太多权力，使他们跋扈到这种地步。
English: Cao Cao listened and said with a smile, "Eunuchs have existed in all dynasties and generations from ancient times to the present. However, the sovereign should not be overly favored and endowed with too much power to allow them to reach such a level.

古文：既治其罪，当诛元恶，一狱吏足矣，何必纷纷召外将乎？
现代文：如果要治他们的罪，只要诛杀元凶就行了，如此，一名狱吏也就足够了，何必请外地的军将来呢？
English: If they are to be punished for their crimes, all they have to do is to beat and kill the culprits. In that case, one warden would be enough, so why call in foreign troops in the future?

古文：欲尽诛之，事必宣露，吾见其败也。 卓未至而进见杀。
现代文：若想把太监赶尽杀绝，事情一定提前泄露出去，这样反而不会成功。我可以预见他们会失败。 果然，董卓还没到，何进就被杀了。
English: If they wanted to drive the eunuch out and kill him, the matter would have been leaked in advance, and this would not have been successful. I could foresee that they would fail. Sure enough, Dong Zhuo had not yet arrived, and he was killed.

古文：曹操袁尚、袁熙奔辽东，尚有数千骑。
现代文：东汉末年官渡之战以后，袁熙、袁尚两兄弟投奔辽东，手下尚有数千名骑兵。
English: After the Battle of Guandu at the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Yuan Xi and Yuan Shang, two brothers, fled to Liaodong. They still had thousands of cavalry under their command.

古文：初，辽东太守公孙康恃远不服，及操破乌丸，或说操遂征之，尚兄弟可擒也。
现代文：起初，辽东太守公孙康仗着地盘远离京师，不听朝廷辖治。等曹操攻下乌丸，有人劝曹操征讨，顺便可以擒住袁尚兄弟。
English: At first, the governor of Liaodong, Sun Yat-sen, stayed away from the Beijing division, not listening to the imperial court's jurisdiction. When Cao Cao conquered Wu Maru, someone advised Cao Cao to fight, and he could also capture the Yuan Shang brothers.

古文：操曰： 吾方使康斩送尚、熙首来，不烦兵矣。 
现代文：曹操说： 我正准备让公孙康自己杀了袁尚兄弟，拿他们二人脑袋来献呢，不必劳动兵力。 
English: Cao Cao said: I am preparing to have Gongsun Kang kill the Yuan Shang brothers himself and offer their two heads, without the need for labor.

古文：九月，操引兵自柳城还，康即斩尚、熙，传其首。
现代文：九月，曹操带兵从柳城回来，果然，公孙康就斩杀袁尚兄弟，将首级送来。
English: In September, Cao Cao and his soldiers returned from Liucheng, and sure enough, Gongsun Kang killed the Yuan Shang brothers and sent their heads to him.

古文：诸将问其故，操曰： 彼素畏尚等，吾急之则并力，缓之则相图，其势然也。 
现代文：诸将问曹操是何缘故，曹操说： 公孙康向来怕袁尚等人，我逼急了他们就会联合起来抵抗，我放松，他们就会互相争斗，这是情势决定、必然的。 
English: They will ask Cao Cao why. Cao Cao said: Gongsun Kang has always been afraid of Yuan Shang and others. If I force them, they will unite to resist. If I relax, they will fight each other. This is determined by the situation and is inevitable.

古文：曹公之东征也，议者惧军出，袁绍袭其后，进不得战而退失所据。
现代文：曹操东征时，众人担心军队出尽之后，袁绍会从后面袭击，如此一来，前进了也无法放手一战，想后退又失去根据地。
English: During Cao Cao's eastward expedition, people were worried that after the army was exhausted, Yuan Shao would attack from behind. As a result, they could not let go of a battle even if they advanced. If they wanted to retreat, they would lose their base.

古文：公曰： 绍性迟而多疑，来必不速；刘备新起，众心未附，急击之，必败，此存亡之机，不可失也。 
现代文：曹操说： 袁绍个性迟缓而多疑，一定不会很快就来；刘备刚兴起，民心尚未依附，此刻立即去攻击他一定成功，这是生死存亡的机会，不可失去。 
English: Cao Cao said: Yuan Shao's personality is slow and suspicious, and he will not come soon; Liu Bei has just risen, and the people's hearts have not yet attached to him. If you attack him immediately at this time, you will surely succeed. This is an opportunity of life and death, and must not be lost.

古文：卒东击备。
现代文：于是向东攻击刘备。
English: So they attacked Liu Bei from the east.

古文：田丰果说绍曰： 虎方捕鹿，熊据其穴而啖其子，虎进不得鹿，而退不得其子。
现代文：田丰果然劝袁绍说： 老虎正在捕鹿，熊去占有虎穴而吃掉虎子，老虎向前得不到鹿，退后又失去虎子。
English: Tian Feng really persuaded Yuan Shao and said: The tiger is hunting deer, the bear is going to occupy the tiger's den and eat the tiger's cubs, the tiger can't get the deer forward, and it can't get the tiger's cubs back.

古文：今操自征备，空国而去，将军长戟百万，胡骑千群，直指许都，持其巢穴，百万之师自天而下，若举炎火以焦飞蓬，覆沧海而沃漂炭，有不消灭者哉？
现代文：现在曹操亲自去攻击刘备，军队尽出，将军您有雄厚的兵力，如果直接攻进许都，捣毁他的巢穴，百万雄师从天而下，就像点一把大火来烧野草，倒大海的水来冲熄火炭，哪有不瞬间消灭的道理。
English: Now Cao Cao himself is going to attack Liu Bei. The army is exhausted. General, you have a strong army. If you directly attack Xu Du and destroy his lair, a million heroes will descend from the sky. It is like lighting a fire to burn weeds and pouring water from the sea to extinguish charcoal. There is no reason not to destroy it instantly.

古文：兵机变在斯须，军情捷于桴鼓。
现代文：只是用兵的时机稍纵即逝，形势的变动比鼓声还传得快，曹操知道了，一定放弃攻击刘备，回守许都。
English: However, the opportunity to use soldiers was fleeting, and changes in the situation spread faster than the sound of a drum. Cao Cao knew that he had to give up attacking Liu Bei and return to defend Xu Du.

古文：操闻，必舍备还许，我据其内，备攻其外，逆操之头必悬麾下矣!
现代文：然而，那时候如果我们已经占领他的巢穴，刘备又在外面在外夹攻，曹操的头颅，很快的就高悬于将军您的旗杆上了。
English: However, at that time, if we had occupied his lair and Liu Bei attacked from the outside, Cao Cao's head would soon be hanging high on the general's flagpole.

古文：失此不图，操得归国，休兵息民，积谷养士。
现代文：可是如果失去这个机会，等曹操回国的话，他就可以休养生息，储粮养士。
English: But if he loses this opportunity, when Cao Cao returns to China, he will be able to rest and recuperate.

古文：方今汉道陵迟，纲纪弛绝。而操以枭雄之资，乘跋扈之势，恣虎狼之欲，成篡逆之谋，虽百道攻击，不可图也。 绍辞以子疾，不许。
现代文：如今汉室日渐衰微，万一等到曹操篡逆的阴谋成了气候，即使再用各种方法攻击，也没有办法挽回了。 袁绍却以儿子生病为由推辞。
English: Nowadays, the Han dynasty is gradually fading away. If Cao Cao's plot to usurp the throne were to become a reality, there would be no way to reverse it, even if various methods were used to attack it. Yuan Shao, however, refused on the grounds that his son was ill.

古文：丰举杖击地曰： 夫遭此难遇之机，而以婴儿之故失其会，惜哉! 
现代文：田丰气得拿手杖敲地说： 得到这种千载难逢的机会，却为了一个婴儿而放弃，真是可惜啊！ 
English: "It's a shame to get this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity and give it up for a baby," Tian Fengqi said, tapping his cane.

古文：安定与羌胡密迩，太守毋丘兴将之官，公戒之曰： 羌胡欲与中国通，自当遣人来，慎勿遣人往!
现代文：安定郡和羌人的地界很接近，太守毋丘兴上任时，曹操警告他说： 羌人假使想与中国交往，应当由他们派人来，你千万不可派人去。
English: The border between Anding County and the Xiongnu was very close. When the eunuch, Bao Qiuxing, took office, Cao Cao warned him: "If the Xiongnu want to communicate with China, they should send someone. You must not send anyone."

古文：善人难得，必且教羌人妄有请求，因以自利。
现代文：因为好使者不容易找，派去的人一定会为了个人的私利，教羌人对中国做种种不当的请求。
English: Because good emissaries are not easy to find, the person who sent them will certainly teach others to make all kinds of improper requests to China for personal selfish interests.

古文：不从，便为失异俗意；从之则无益。 
现代文：到那时，若不应允则会失去当地羌人的民心，如果应允又对我们没有什么好处。 
English: At that time, if we do not agree, we will lose the hearts of the local people, and if we agree, it will not do us any good.

古文：兴佯诺去。
现代文：毋丘兴假装答应而去。
English: Be that as it may, Kyuko pretends to agree and leaves.

古文：及抵郡，辄遣校尉范陵至羌，陵果教羌使自请为属国都尉。
现代文：到了安定郡，却派遣校尉范陵到羌，范陵果然教羌使自己请求当中国的属国校尉。
English: When he arrived in Anding County, he sent Captain Fan Ling to Shao. Fan Ling successfully persuaded Shao to ask him to be a Chinese national captain.

古文：公笑曰： 吾预知当尔，非圣也，但更事多耳。 
现代文：曹操笑着说： 我预测必会如此，并不是我特别聪明，只是阅历多罢了。 
English: Cao Cao said with a smile, "I predicted that this would happen. It's not that I'm particularly clever, it's just that I have more experience."

古文：操明于翦备，而汉中之役，志盈得陇，纵备得蜀，不用司马懿、刘晔之计，何也？
现代文：曹操明白要得到天下，一定得消灭刘备。而汉中之役，却因急着占有陇地，而让刘备有机会占有蜀地。没有采纳司马懿、刘晔的计策，是什么原因呢？
English: Cao Cao knew that in order to gain control of the world, Liu Bei had to be eliminated. However, in the Battle of Hanzhong, Cao Cao was in such a hurry to occupy Shandong that he gave Liu Bei the opportunity to occupy Shandong. What was the reason for not adopting Sima Yi and Liu Bei's strategy?

古文：或者有天意焉？
现代文：或者是天意吧？
English: Or is it fate?

