古文：◎职官二
现代文：职官二
English: Officer Two

古文：○都察院附总督巡抚通政司大理寺詹事府附左右春坊司经局翰林院国子监衍圣公附五经博士都察院。左、右都御史，左、右副都御史，左、右佥都御史，其属，经历司，经历一人，都事一人。司务厅，司务二人，照磨所，照磨，检校，司狱司，司狱，各一人。十三道监察御史一百十人，浙江、江西、河南、山东各十人，福建、广东、广西、四川、贵州各七人，陕西、湖广、山西各八人，云南十一人。
现代文：以后不论尚书、侍郎、都御史、少卿等官，事情完毕后复命，即或停止派遣。起初称巡抚，或称镇守，后来因为镇守侍郎与巡按御史不相统辖隶属，公文来往有妨碍，定为都御史。
English: From then on, no matter whether it was Shosho, Jiro, Togoshi, Shoko, or other officials, they would be ordered to return after the matter was completed, or the dispatch would be stopped. At first, it was called the governor, or the town watchman, and later, because the town watchman, Jiro, and the patrol watchman were not under the same jurisdiction, and there was an obstacle to the exchange of official documents, it was determined to be the town watchman.

古文：其在外加都御史或副、佥都御史衔者，有总督，有提督，有巡抚，有总督兼巡抚，提督兼巡抚，及经略、总理、赞理、巡视、抚治等员。
现代文：巡抚兼理军务的加称提督，有总领军队的地方加称赞理或参赞，所管辖多、责任重大的加称总督。其它如整饬、抚治、巡治、总理等项，都因情况特别设立。那些以尚书、侍郎任总督军务的，都兼任都御史，以便行事。
English: An admiral was added to the title of the governor who was also in charge of military affairs, a praiseworthy officer or councillor was added to a place where there was a commander-in-chief of the army, and a governor was added to the title of the governor who had many jurisdictions and great responsibilities. Other items such as the rectifying officer, the governor, the governor, the prime minister, etc. were specially established according to the situation. Those who were appointed as the governor of military affairs by the shosho and the chamberlain were also appointed as the governor of the capital in order to act.

古文：都御史，职专纠劾百司，辩明冤枉，提督各道，为天子耳目风纪之司。
现代文：都御史职责专属纠察弹劾百官，辨明冤枉，提督各道，是天子耳目风纪的部门。
English: The duties of the Metropolitan Historian are exclusive to picketing and impeaching hundreds of officials, identifying wrongdoings, admiral of all roads, and is the department of the eyes and ears of the Son of Heaven.

古文：凡大臣奸邪、小人构党、作威福乱政者，劾。
现代文：所有大臣奸邪、小人结党、作威作福扰乱政令的，便弹劾他。
English: All ministers who are traitors, villains, partisans, tyrants, or good-for-nothings, and who disrupt the government order, will be impeached.

古文：凡百官猥茸贪冒坏官纪者，劾。
现代文：所有百官卑劣贪鄙败坏官纪的，便弹劾他。
English: All the despicable, greedy and corrupt officials impeached him.

古文：凡学术不正、上书陈言变乱成宪、希进用者，劾。
现代文：所有学术不正统、上书进言变乱现成章法、企图进用的，便弹劾他。
English: He was impeached for all academic irregularities, changes in the way he submitted his thesis, and attempts to use existing laws and regulations.

古文：遇朝觐、考察，同吏部司贤否陟黜。
现代文：遇上朝觐、考察，会同吏部主管确认贤能与否以及官职升降。
English: In the event of an inspection or inspection, they will work with the head of the personnel department to confirm the merits and demerits as well as the promotion and demotion of officials.

古文：大狱重囚会鞫于外朝，偕刑部、大理谳平之。
现代文：大案件重囚犯在外朝会审，偕同刑部、大理公平判决。
English: In major cases, heavy prisoners were tried in the foreign court, and the criminal justice department and Dali made a fair judgment.

古文：其奉敕内地，拊循外地，各专其敕行事。
现代文：此官奉敕内地，安抚外地，各自专奉敕命行事。
English: This official serves the mainland and appeases the outside world, each acting exclusively on his own orders.

古文：十三道监察御史，主察纠内外百司之官邪，或露章面劾，或封章奏劾。
现代文：十三道监察御史，主掌察纠内外百司的官邪，有的明章面奏弹劾，有的密封奏章弹劾。
English: The Thirteenth Circuit supervises the imperial history, and the chief inspector corrects the official evil of hundreds of departments at home and abroad. Some explicitly impeach, and some impeach with a sealed record.

古文：在内两京刷卷，巡视京营，监临乡、会试及武举，巡视光禄，巡视仓场，巡视内库、皇城、五城，轮值登闻鼓。在外巡按，清军，提督学校，巡盐，茶马，巡漕，巡关，攒运，印马，屯田。
现代文：巡枧漕运，巡视关税，宣德四年设立钞关御史，至巫筮十年开始派遣主事。催运，监督烙马印，屯田。
English: He was in charge of convoying, inspecting tariffs, setting up the Banknote Inspection Office in the fourth year of the Xuande Emperor, and dispatching officials in the tenth year of the Wuxi Emperor. He was in charge of expediting transportation, supervising the branding of horses, and setting up military camps.

古文：师行则监军纪功，各以其事专监察。
现代文：军队出征便监军记录功劳，各自按照他的事务专门监察。
English: When the army is dispatched, the inspector will record the merits of the army, and each of them will be specially supervised according to his affairs.

古文：而巡按则代天子巡狩，所按藩服大臣、府州县官诸考察，举劾尤专，大事奏裁，小事立断。
现代文：而巡按则代替天子巡狩，按察藩服大臣、府州县官等各方面的考察，举报弹劾尤其专门，大事上奏请求皇帝裁定，小事立即裁断。
English: On the other hand, the inspection is a substitute for the emperor's inspection, and the inspection is carried out according to the inspection of the Minister of Han clothing, the prefectural and county officials and other aspects. The report of impeachment is particularly special, and the big event is requested to be submitted to the emperor for ruling, and the small matter is immediately decided.

古文：按临所至，必先审录罪囚，吊刷案卷，有故出入者理辩之。
现代文：巡行所至之地，必定先审察甄别罪囚，调看讼狱案卷，有事实出入的依理辨明。
English: In the place where the patrol arrives, the court must first inspect and screen the prisoners, inspect the court case file, and identify the facts and discrepancies according to the principle.

古文：诸祭祀坛场，省其墙宇祭器。
现代文：各祭祀坛场，审视它的墙壁房屋祭器。
English: Each sacrificial altar, examine its walls housing sacrificial vessels.

古文：存恤孤老，巡视仓库，查算钱粮，勉励学校，表扬善类，翦除豪蠹，以正风俗，振纲纪。
现代文：体恤孤苦老人，巡视仓库，清查钱粮，勉励学校，表彰善良的人，剪除豪强败类，以此匡正风俗，振扬纲纪。
English: Compassionate for the lonely and destitute elderly, inspect the warehouse, check the money and grain, encourage the school, commend the good people, and cut out the strong and strong scum, so as to rectify the customs and promote the discipline.

古文：凡朝会纠仪，祭祀监礼。
现代文：凡是朝会要纠正礼仪，祭祀要监督仪程。
English: In general, the morning assembly should correct the etiquette, and the ritual should supervise the ritual.

古文：凡政事得失，军民利病，皆得直言无避。
现代文：大凡政事得失，军民利弊，都要直言不讳。
English: The gains and losses of great political affairs, the advantages and disadvantages of the military and the people, must be outspoken.

古文：有大政，集阙廷预议焉。
现代文：有重大政事，聚集在朝廷参与谋议。
English: When there was a major political event, they gathered at the Imperial Court to participate in the deliberation.

古文：盖六部至重，然有专司，而都察院总宪纲，惟所见闻得纠察。
现代文：大概六部至关重要，然而各有专属政务，而都察院总理宪章纲纪，只要有所见闻便予纠察。
English: About six departments are of vital importance, but each has its own government affairs, and all are subject to inspection by the Prime Minister's Office of the Supreme People's Procuratorate as long as they are seen or heard.

古文：诸御史纠劾，务明著实迹，开写年月，毋虚文泛诋，讦拾细琐。
现代文：各御史纠察弹劾，务必明确写清楚事实证据，开写年月，不得用空话随意诋毁，挑剔细枝末节。
English: For each history of picketing and impeachment, it is necessary to clearly write the factual evidence, write the years, and must not use empty words to discredit at will, and be picky about details.

古文：出按复命，都御史覆劾其称职不称职以闻。凡御史犯罪，加三等，有赃从重论。十三道各协管两京、直隶衙门；而都察院衙门分属河南道，独专诸内外考察。初，吴元年置御史台，设左、右御史大夫，御史中丞，侍御史，治书侍御史，殿中侍御史，察院监察御史，经历，都事，照磨、管勾。
现代文：贵州道协管吏部，太仆寺，上林苑监，内官、印绶二监，在京旗手卫，以及长芦盐运司，大宁都司，万全都司，直隶苏州、河间、顺德三府，保安州、蓝丛、太仓、镇海、蓟州、遵化、镇朔、兴州五屯，忠义中、河间、天津、天津左、天津右、宣府前、宣府左、宣府右、开平、保安右、蔚州、永宁各卫，嘉兴、昊淞江、梁城、沧州、兴和、长安、龙门各千卢所。起初，吴元年设置御史台，设左、右御史大夫，从一品，御史中丞，正二品，侍御史，从二品，治书侍御史，正三品，殿中侍御史，正五品，察院监察御史，正七品，经历，从五品，都事，正七品，照磨、管勾，正八品。
English: Guizhou Road Association Administration Department, Taipu Temple, Shanglin Garden Supervisor, Inner Officer, Yinglu Second Supervisor, in Beijing Flag Guard, and Changlu Salt Transportation Division, Danying Capital Division, Wanzhong Division, directly under Suzhou, Hebei, Shunde three provinces, Jiaozhou, Lancang, Taicang, Zhenhai, Zhangzhou, Zunhua, Zhenshuo, Xingzhou Wutun, Zhongyi, Hebei, Tianjin, Tianjin Left, Tianjin Right, Xuanfu Front, Xuanfu Left, Xuanfu Right, Kaiping, Jiaozhou Right, Uls

古文：以邓愈、汤和为御史大夫，刘基、章溢为御史中丞，谕之曰： 国家立三大府，中书总政事，都督掌军旅，御史掌纠察。
现代文：以邓愈、汤和任御史大夫，刘基、章溢任御史中丞，告谕他们说： 国家设立三大府，中书总揽政事，都督掌管军旅，御史掌管纠察。
English: He appointed Deng Yu, Tang He as chief historian, and Liu Ji and Zhang Yiyi as chief historian, and told them: The state will set up three major offices, the general secretary will handle government affairs, the governor will be in charge of military expeditions, and the chief historian will be in charge of picketing.

古文：朝廷纪纲尽系于此，而台察之任尤清要。
现代文：朝廷纲纪完全侬靠于这三大府，而御史台纠察一职尤为显贵重要。
English: The discipline of the imperial court depended entirely on these three prefectures, and the post of inspector of the Imperial Historian's Office was particularly important.

古文：卿等当正己以率下，忠勤以事上，毋委靡因循以纵奸，毋假公济私以害物。 
现代文：卿等应当端正自己以统领属下，忠心勤勉以侍奉皇上，不要委靡不振因循守旧而纵容奸邪，不要假公济私而损害他人。 
English: Sirs, etc. should rectify themselves to be subordinate to the leader, serve the emperor faithfully and diligently, do not indulge in adultery because of being old-fashioned, and do not harm others by pretending to be a public servant.

古文：洪武九年汰侍御史及治书、殿中侍御史。
现代文：洪武九年，革除侍御史以及治书、殿中侍御史。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, he was dismissed from the position of attendant to the emperor, as well as from the posts of secretary and palace attendant.

古文：十年七月，诏遣监察御史巡按州县。
现代文：十年七月，下诏命令派遣监察御史巡按州县。
English: In July of the 10th year, an imperial edict was issued to dispatch inspectors to inspect the history of Yanzhou County.

古文：十三年，专设左，右中丞，左、右侍御史。
现代文：十三年，专设左、右中丞，正二品，左、右侍御史，正四品。
English: In the thirteenth year, the left and right junior middle officers, the second-ranked officers, the third-ranked officers, and the fourth-ranked officers were specially created.

古文：寻罢御史台。
现代文：不久罢除御史台。
English: He was soon removed from his post.

古文：十五年更置都察院，设监察都御史八人，秩正七品。
现代文：十五年，更替为都察院，设监察都御史八人，官秩正七品。
English: Fifteen years later, it was replaced by the Metropolitan Inspection Office, with eight inspectors of the Metropolitan Government and seven officials of the highest rank.

古文：分监察御史为浙江、河南、山东、北平、山西、陕西、湖广、福建、江西、广东、广西、四川十二道，各道置御史或五人或三、四人，秩正九品。
现代文：分监察御史为浙江、河南、山东、北平、山西、陕西、湖广、福建、江西、广东、广西、四川十二道，各道设置御史有的五人有的三、四人，官秩正九品。
English: The 12 provinces of Zhejiang, Henan, Shandong, Beiping, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Hukang, Fujian, Jiangxi, Guangdong, Guangxi and Sichuan were assigned to supervise the imperial history. Each province set up an imperial history of five, three or four people, and nine official ranks.

古文：每道铸印二，一畀御史久次者掌之，一藏内府，有事受印以出，既事纳之，文曰 绳愆纠缪 。
现代文：每道铸印二枚，一枚交御史中长久留任的掌管，一枚收藏在内府，有事受印而出，事情完毕后交纳，印文称 绳愆纠缪 。
English: There are two cast seals for each road, one for the person in charge who has been in charge for a long time in the history of handing over, and one for the collection in the inner palace. If something is to be stamped, it will be issued, and after the matter is completed, it will be paid.

古文：以秀才李原名、詹徽等为都御史，吴荃等为试监察御史。
现代文：以秀才李原名、詹徽等为都御史，昊荃等为试监察御史。
English: Xiu Cai Li's original name, Zhan Hui and others are the capital supervisors, and Hao Tsuen and others are the trial supervisors.

古文：十六年，升都察院为正三品，设左、右都御史各一人，正三品，左、右副都御史各一人，正四品，左、右佥都御史各二人，正五品，经历一人，正七品，知事一人，正八品。
现代文：试御史，一年后寅授。又有理刑进士、理刑知县，理都察院刑狱，半年后实授。正德年间革除。十六年，升都察院为正三品，设左、右都御史各一人，正三品，左、右副都御史各一人，正四品，左、右愈都御史各二人，正五品，经历一人，正七品，知事一人，正八品。
English: In 16th year, he was promoted to Senior Third Rank, with one Left and one Right Metropolitan Historian, Senior Third Rank, one Left and one Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian, Senior Fourth Rank, two Left and two Right Metropolitan Historians, Senior Fifth Rank, one Experienced, Senior Seventh Rank, one Governor, Senior Eighth Rank.

古文：十七年，升都御史正二品，副都御史正三品，佥都御史正四品，十二道监察御史正七品。
现代文：十七年，升都御史为正二品，副都御史正三品，衾都御史正四品，十二道监察御史正七品。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was promoted to Senior Second Rank, Vice-Senior Third Rank, Senior Fourth Rank, and Senior Seventh Rank of the Twelve Inspector Generals.

古文：二十三年，左副都御史袁泰言： 各道印篆相同，虑有诈伪。 乃更铸监察御史印曰 某道监察御史印 ，其巡按印曰 巡按某处监察御史印 。
现代文：二十三年，左副都御史袁泰说， 各道印信篆文相同，顾虑有诈伪 ，于是重新铸监察御史印刻 某道监察御史印 ，其巡按印刻 巡按某处监察御史印 。
English: Twenty-three years ago, Yuan Tai, the left vice-governor of the capital, said that the seal letters of each province were the same, and there were concerns about fraud, so they recast the supervision of history seal engraved in a certain province, and the patrol stamp engraved in a certain place.

古文：建文元年，改设都御史一人，革佥都御史。
现代文：建文元年，改设都御史一人，革除食都御史。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, the post of Metropolitan Historian was changed to a one-person post, and the post of Metropolitan Historian was abolished.

古文：二年，改为御史府，设御史大夫，改十二道为左、右两院，止设御史二十八人。
现代文：二年，改为御史府，设御史大夫，改十二道为左、右两院，只设御史二十八人。
English: In the second year, it was changed to Goshi-fu, with the post of Goshi-daifu, and the twelve schools were changed to the left and right houses, with only twenty-eight Goshi.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：永乐元年，改北平道为北京道。
现代文：永乐元年，改北平道为北京道。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Beiping Road was changed to Beijing Road.

古文：十八年，罢北京道，增设贵州、云南、交阯三道。
现代文：十八年，废除北京道，增设贵州、云南、交肚三道。
English: In 18 years, Beijing Road was abolished, and Guizhou, Yunnan and Jiaotang were added.

古文：洪熙元年，称行在都察院，同六部，又定巡按以八月出巡。
现代文：洪熙元年，称行在都察院，与六部等立。又定巡按在八月出巡。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he said that he would go to the Duza Academy and stand with the six departments. He also decided to go on a tour in August.

古文：宣德十年，罢交阯道，始定为十三道。
现代文：宣德十年，废除交趾道，开始定为十三道。
English: Ten years after the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the Jiaozi Road was abolished, and it was designated as the 13th Road.

古文：正统中，去 行在 字。
现代文：正统年间，去 行在 字样。
English: In orthodox years, the go line is in the word cymbal.

古文：嘉靖中，以清屯，增副都御史三人，寻罢。
现代文：嘉靖年间，因为清屯，增加副都御史三人，不久罢除。
English: During the Jiajing period, because of the Qing Dynasty, three vice-governors of the capital were added, but they were soon removed.

古文：隆庆中，以提督京营，增右都御史三人，寻亦罢。
现代文：隆庆年间，因为提督京营，增加右都御史三人，不久也罢除。
English: During the Longqing era, because of the Admiral Beijing Camp, the number of Uto goshi was increased to three, and they were soon removed.

古文：总督漕运兼提督军务巡抚凤阳等处兼管河道一员。
现代文：总督漕运兼提督军务巡抚凤阳等处兼管河道一员。
English: He was a member of the Governor-General of Rowing and the Admiral-Military Inspector Fengyang, who was also in charge of the river.

古文：太祖时，尝置京畿都漕运司，设漕运使。
现代文：太祖时，曾经设置京畿都漕运司，设漕运使。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, the Gyeonggi-do Rowing Transport Division was established, and the Rowing Transport Officer was set up.

古文：永乐间，设漕运总兵官，以平江伯陈瑄治漕。
现代文：送茎元年，设置漕运使，正四品，知事，正八品，提控案牍，从九品，属官监运，正九品，都纲，省注。
English: In the first year of the new year, it was set up that there should be a rowing transport officer, a fourth grade official, a governor, an eighth grade official, a prosecutor, a ninth grade official, a transportation supervision official, a ninth grade official, and a provincial annotation.

古文：宣德中，又遣侍郎、都御史、少卿等官督运。
现代文：十四年罢除永乐年间，设漕运总兵官，以平江伯陈管治理漕运。宣德年间，又派遣侍郎、都御史、少卿等官员督察漕运。
English: In the 14th year of Yongle's reign, the chief officer of rowing was appointed, with Pingjiang Bo Chen in charge of rowing. In the Xuande era, officials such as the chamberlain, the governor of the capital, and the minor lord were dispatched to inspect rowing.

古文：至景泰二年，因漕运不断，始命副都御史王竑总督，因兼巡抚淮、扬、庐、凤四府，徐、和、滁三州，治淮安。
现代文：至景泰二年，因漕运中断，开始命令副都御史王兹总督，因而兼任巡抚淮、扬、庐、凤四府，徐、和、滁三州，治所在淮安。
English: In the second year of Jingtai, due to the interruption of rowing, he began to order the vice-governor of the capital, Shi Wangzi, to be the governor, and thus concurrently served as the governor of the four provinces of Huai, Yang, Lu and Feng, and the three provinces of Xu, He and Lu, with the seat in Huai'an.

古文：成化八年，分设巡抚、总漕各一员。
现代文：成化八年，分设巡抚、总漕各一员。
English: In the eighth year of Chenghua, an inspector and a chief rower were set up.

古文：九年复旧。
现代文：九年，恢复旧制。
English: Nine years later, the old system was restored.

古文：正德十三年又分设。
现代文：正德十三年，又分别设置。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhengde, they were set up separately.

古文：十六年又复旧。
现代文：十六年，又恢复旧制。
English: Sixteen years later, the old system was restored.

古文：嘉靖三十六年，以倭警，添设提督军务巡抚凤阳都御史。
现代文：嘉靖三十六年，因为倭寇警报，添设提督军务巡抚凤阳都御史。
English: In the 36th year of Jiajing, because of the wako alarm, the admiral military inspector Fengyang Duoshi was added.

古文：四十年归并，改总督漕运兼提督军务。
现代文：四十年，合并，改为总督漕运兼提督军务。
English: Forty years later, it was merged and changed to Governor-General of Navigation and Admiral of Military Affairs.

古文：万历七年加兼管河道。
现代文：万历七年，加兼管河道。
English: After seven years of hard work, the canal was completed.

古文：总督蓟辽、保定等处军务兼理粮饷一员。
现代文：总督蓟辽、保定等处军务兼理粮饷一员。
English: He was a member of the military affairs and food rations departments of the Governor of Liao and Baoding Provinces.

古文：嘉靖二十九年置。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年设置。
English: Established in the 29th year of Jiajing.

古文：先是，蓟、辽有警，间遣重臣巡视，或称提督。
现代文：在此之前，蓟、辽有敌情，间或派遣重要大臣巡枧，或称提督。
English: Prior to this, Yao and Liao had been enemies, and occasionally sent important ministers on patrols, or called admirals.

古文：至是以边患益甚，始置总督，开府密云，辖顺天、保定、辽东三巡抚，兼理粮饷。
现代文：到这时候因为边境敌患日益严重，开始设置总督，开建府署于密云，管辖顺天、保定、辽东三巡抚，兼管粮饷。
English: At this time, because of the increasingly serious border enemy problems, the governor began to be set up, and the prefectural government office began to be built in Miyun, under the jurisdiction of Shuntian, Baoding, and Liaodong three inspectors, and also in charge of grain supply.

古文：万历九年加兼巡抚顺天等处。
现代文：万历九年，加兼管巡抚顺天等处。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, he was also put in charge of the inspector Shuntian and other places.

古文：十一年复旧。天启元年，置辽东经略。
现代文：到天启元年，又以内阁孙承宗督师经略山海关，称为枢辅。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, Sun Zhengzong, the superintendent of the cabinet, passed through the Liaoshan Customs, known as the auxiliary.

古文：崇祯四年并入总督。
现代文：崇祯四年并入总督。
English: Four years later, he became the governor.

古文：十一年又增设总督于保定。
现代文：十一年，又在保定增设总督。
English: Eleven years later, a new governor was appointed in Baoding.

古文：总督宣大、山西等处军务兼理粮饷一员。
现代文：总督宣大、山西等处军务兼理粮饷一员。
English: He was a member of the military affairs and food rations committee of the governor of Xuan Da and Shanxi.

古文：正统元年，始遣佥都御史巡抚宣大。
现代文：正统元年，开始派遣愈都御史巡抚宣大。
English: In the first year of the era of orthodoxy, the dispatch of the governor of Yuto Imperial History, Nobuhide, began.

古文：景泰二年，宣府、大同各设巡抚，遣尚书石璞总理军务。
现代文：景泰二年，宣府、大同各设巡抚，派遣尚书石璞总管军务。
English: In the second year of King Jingtai, Xuanfu and Datong each set up an inspector general, and dispatched Shangshu Shiqi as the general manager of military affairs.

古文：成化、弘治间，有警则遣。
现代文：成化、弘治年间，有敌情就派遣。
English: During the Chenghua and Hongzhi years, they were dispatched whenever there was a hostile situation.

古文：正德八年设总制。
现代文：正德八年设总制。
English: In the eighth year of Zhengde, the general system was established.

古文：嘉靖初，兼辖偏、保。
现代文：嘉靖初年，兼管辖偏、保。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he was concurrently in charge of defense and defense.

古文：二十九年，去偏、保，定设总督宣大、山西等处衔。
现代文：二十九年，去掉偏、保，定设总督宣大、山西等处官衔。
English: In 1929, the title of governor of Xuan Da and Shanxi provinces was established, and the titles of vice-governor and guarantor were removed.

古文：三十八年令防秋日驻宣府。
现代文：三十八年，命令为防备秋季敌人入侵而长驻宣府。
English: In 1938, he was ordered to stay at Xuanfu in preparation for the enemy invasion in the autumn.

古文：四十三年，移驻怀来。
现代文：四十三年，移驻怀来。
English: Forty-three years old, moved to Huailai.

古文：隆庆四年，移驻阳和。
现代文：隆庆四年，移驻阳和。
English: In the fourth year of Longqing, he moved to Yanghe.

古文：总督陕西三边军务一员。
现代文：总督陕西三边军务一员。
English: The governor of Shaanxi is a member of the trilateral military affairs.

古文：弘治十年，火筛入寇，议遣重臣总督陕西、甘肃、延绥、宁夏军务，乃起左都御史王越任之。
现代文：弘治十年，火筛敌寇入侵，商议派遣重臣总督陕西甘肃、延绥、宁夏军务，于是起用左都御史王越担任此职。
English: In the tenth year of the Hongzhi era, with the invasion of the enemy invaders in full swing, they discussed the dispatch of the senior vassal governor of Shaanxi, Gansu, Yancheng and Ningxia for military affairs, and then appointed the left capital governor Wang Yue to serve in this position.

古文：十五年以后，或设或罢。
现代文：十五年以后，时设时罢。
English: Fifteen years later, let's see what happens.

古文：至嘉靖四年，始定设，初称提督军务。
现代文：到嘉靖四年，开始决定设置，起初称提督军务。
English: In the fourth year of Jiajing, the establishment of the position was decided, and it was initially called Admiral of Military Affairs.

古文：七年改为总制。
现代文：七年，改称总制。
English: Seven years later, it was renamed the General System.

古文：十九年避制字，改为总督，开府固原，防秋驻花马池。
现代文：十九年，避讳制字，改为总督，开建府署于固原，防备秋季敌人进攻驻守花马池。
English: In 1919, he changed his official title to Governor-General, and began building the prefectural government office in Gouyuan, garrisoning Hanamachi in preparation for an enemy attack in the autumn.

古文：总督两广军务兼理粮饷带管盐法兼巡抚广东地方一员。
现代文：总督两广军务兼管粮饷带管盐法兼巡抚广东地方一员。
English: He was the military governor of the two provinces, in charge of grain and salt, and the governor of Guangdong Province.

古文：永乐二年，遣给事中雷填巡抚广西。
现代文：永乐二年，派遣给事中雷填巡抚广西。
English: In the second year of Yongle, he was dispatched to Guangxi to be an inspector.

古文：十九年，遣郭瑄、艾广巡抚广东。
现代文：十九年，派遣郭管、艾广巡抚广东。
English: In 1919, Guo Guan and Ai Guang were sent to Guangdong as inspectors.

古文：景泰三年，苗寇起，以两广宜协济应援，乃设总督。
现代文：景泰三年，苗寇兴起，因为雨广应当协助支持，于是设置总督。
English: In the third year of Jingtai, Miao-Kou arose, because Yu-Guang should help support, so the governor was set up.

古文：成化元年，兼巡抚事，驻梧州。
现代文：成化元年，兼理巡抚事务，驻扎梧州。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was stationed in Wuzhou, concurrently in charge of patrolling affairs.

古文：正德十四年，改总督为总制，寻改提督。
现代文：正德十四年，改总督为总制，不久改提督。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengde, the governor was changed to the general system, and soon the admiral was changed.

古文：嘉靖四十五年，另设广东巡抚，改提督为总督，止兼巡抚广西，驻肇庆。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年，另设广东巡抚，改提督为总督，祇兼理巡抚广西，驻扎肇庆。
English: In the 45th year of Jiajing, the Guangdong governor was set up separately, the admiral was changed to the governor, and the Guangxi governor was stationed in Zhaoqing.

古文：隆庆三年，又设广西巡抚，除兼职。
现代文：隆庆三年，又设广西巡抚，革除兼职。
English: In the third year of Longqing, the Guangxi governor was also set up, and the part-time position was abolished.

古文：四年，革广东巡抚，改为提督两广军务兼理粮饷，巡抚广东。
现代文：四年，革除广东巡抚，改为提督两广军务兼理粮饷，巡抚广东。
English: In four years, he was removed from the post of Guangdong's governor and replaced with an admiral in charge of Guangdong's military affairs and grain supply.

古文：万历三年，仍改总督，加带管盐法。
现代文：万历三年，仍旧改为总督，加带管盐法。
English: After three years, it was still changed to Governor, with the addition of the salt pipe method.

古文：总督四川、陕西、河南、湖广等处军务一员。
现代文：总督四川、陕西、河南、湖广等处军务一员。
English: The governor of Sichuan, Shaanxi, Henan, and Guangxi is a member of the military affairs department.

古文：正德五年设，寻罢。
现代文：正德五年设置，不久罢除。
English: Zhengde was set up for five years, but was soon dismissed.

古文：嘉靖二十七年，以苗患，又设总督四川、湖广、贵州、云南等处军务。
现代文：嘉靖二十七年，因为苗地兵患，又设总督四川、湖广、贵州、云南等处军务。
English: In the 27th year of Jiajing, because of the suffering of soldiers in Miao, the governors of Sichuan, Hukang, Guizhou, Yunnan and other military affairs offices were set up.

古文：四十二年罢。
现代文：四十二年罢除。
English: Forty-two years removed from office.

古文：天启元年，以土官奢崇明反，又设四川、湖广、云南、贵州、广西五省总督。
现代文：天启元年，因为土官奢崇明反叛，又设四川、湖广、云南、贵州、广西五省总督。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the governors of five provinces, Sichuan, Hunan, Yunnan, Guizhou and Guangxi, were also set up because the local officials had rebelled against Chongming.

古文：四年，兼巡抚贵州。
现代文：四年，兼巡抚贵州。
English: For four years, he was also the governor of Guizhou.

古文：总督浙江、福建、江南兼制江西军务一员。
现代文：总督浙江、福建、江南兼制江西军务一员。
English: The governor of Zhejiang, Fujian and Jiangnan is also a member of the Jiangxi military.

古文：嘉靖三十三年，以倭犯杭州置。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年，因为倭寇侵犯杭州而设置。
English: It was set up in the 33rd year of Jiajing because of the Japanese invasion of Hangzhou.

古文：四十一年革。
现代文：四十一年革除。
English: Forty-one years have passed since my dismissal.

古文：总督陕西、山西、河南、湖广、四川五省军务一员。
现代文：总督陕西、山西、河南、湖广、四川五省军务一员。
English: The governor of Shaanxi, Shanxi, Henan, Hunan, and Sichuan is a member of the military.

古文：崇祯七年置，或兼七省。
现代文：崇祯七年设置，有时兼七省。
English: Chongzhen is set seven years in the future, sometimes also seven provinces.

古文：十二年后，俱以内阁督师。
现代文：崇祯十二年后，都以内阁大臣督师。
English: Twelve years after Chongzhen, Du became the supervisor of a cabinet minister.

古文：总督凤阳地方兼制河南、湖广军务一员。
现代文：总督凤阳地方兼制河南、湖广军务一员。
English: The governor of Fengyang region is also a member of the military affairs of Henan and Huguang.

古文：崇祯十四年设。
现代文：崇祯十四年设置。
English: It was set up 14 years ago.

古文：总督保定地方军务一员。
现代文：总督保定地方军务一员。
English: The governor of Baoding is a member of the local military.

古文：崇祯十一年设。
现代文：崇祯十一年设置。
English: It was established in the eleventh year of Chongzhen.

古文：总督河南、湖广军务兼巡抚河南一员。
现代文：总督河南、湖广军务兼巡抚河南一员。
English: He was the Governor of Henan Province and a member of the military affairs and the governor of Henan Province.

古文：崇祯十六年设。
现代文：崇祯十六年设置。
English: It was established in the 16th year of Chongzhen.

古文：总督九江地方兼制江西、湖广军务一员。
现代文：总督九江地方兼制江西、湖广军务一员。
English: The governor of the Jiujiang region is also a member of the military affairs of Jiangxi and Huguang.

古文：崇祯十六年设。
现代文：崇祯十六年设置。
English: It was established in the 16th year of Chongzhen.

古文：总理南直隶、河南、山东、湖广、四川军务一员。
现代文：总理南直隶、河南、山东、湖广、四川军务一员。
English: Prime Minister Nan Zhili, and a member of the Henan, Shandong, Hunan, and Sichuan military.

古文：崇祯八年设，以卢象升为之，与总督或分或并。
现代文：崇祯八年设置，以卢象升担任此职，与总督有时分关有时合并。
English: It was set up in the eighth year of Chongzhen, with Lu Xiangsheng serving in this position, sometimes separated from the governor and sometimes merged.

古文：总理河漕兼提督军务一员。
现代文：总理河漕兼提督军务一员。
English: Prime Minister He Zuo and an admiral, a member of the military.

古文：永乐九年遣尚书治河，自后间遣侍郎、都御史。
现代文：永乐九年派遣尚书治理河道，从此后问或派遣侍郎、都御史。
English: In the ninth year of Yongle, he dispatched Shang Shu to govern the river, and from then on, he dispatched his attendant, Miyoshi.

古文：成化后，始称总督河道。
现代文：成化以后，开始称总督河道。
English: After it was formed, it began to be called the Governor's Canal.

古文：正德四年，定设都御史。
现代文：正德四年，决定设都御史。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengde's reign, it was decided to establish a capital city.

古文：嘉靖二十年，以都御史加工部职衔，提督河南、山东、直隶河道。
现代文：嘉靖二十年，以都御史加授工部职衔，提督河南、山东、直隶河道。
English: In the 20th year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the title of Metropolitan Vice-Minister of Construction, and became the admiral of Henan Province, Shandong Province, and Zhili Province.

古文：隆庆四年，加提督军务。
现代文：隆庆四年，加提督军务。
English: Longqing four years, plus admiral military affairs.

古文：万历五年，改总理河漕兼提督军务。
现代文：万历五年，改总理河漕兼提督军务。
English: After five years of hard work, he was promoted to prime minister and military affairs admiral.

古文：八年革。
现代文：八年革除。
English: Eight years of dismissal.

古文：总理粮储提督军务兼巡抚应天等府一员。
现代文：总理粮储提督军务兼巡抚应天等府一员。
English: The Prime Minister, the Commodore of the Grain Reserve, the Military Affairs Officer and the Inspector-General shall be a member of the prefectural government.

古文：宣德五年，初命侍郎总督粮储兼巡抚。
现代文：宣德五年初命侍郎总督粮储兼巡抚。
English: At the beginning of the fifth year of the Xuande era, he was appointed as the governor's chamberlain, granary and inspector.

古文：景泰四年，定遣都御史。
现代文：景泰四年，决定派遣都御史。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of King Gyeongtae, it was decided to dispatch a metropolitan governor.

古文：嘉靖三十三年，以海警，加提督军务，驻苏州。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年因为海防敌警，加提督军务，驻苏州。
English: In 1933, Jiajing was stationed in Suzhou because of the coastal defense enemy police, plus the admiral of military affairs.

古文：万历中，移驻句容，已复驻苏州。
现代文：万历年间，移驻句容，随后复驻苏州。
English: During the Wanli period, it moved to Jujong, and then returned to Suzhou.

古文：巡抚浙江等处地方兼提督军务一员。
现代文：巡抚浙江等处地方兼提督军务一员。
English: Inspector of Zhejiang and other localities and a member of the Admiral Military Affairs.

古文：永乐初，遣尚书治两浙农事。
现代文：永乐初年，派遣尚书治理两浙农业事务。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Shang Shu was sent to govern the agricultural affairs of the two Zhejiang provinces.

古文：以后或巡视或督鹾，有事则遣。
现代文：以后有时巡察有时督办官盐，有事便派遣。
English: In the future, sometimes inspectors and sometimes supervisors will be sent, and if necessary, they will be dispatched.

古文：嘉靖二十六年，以海警，始命都御史巡抚浙江，兼管福建福、兴、建宁、漳、泉海道地方，提督军务。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年，因为海上有敌情，开始命令都御史巡抚浙江，兼管福建福、兴、建宁、漳、泉海道地方，提督军务。
English: In the 26th year of Jiajing, because of the hostile situation at sea, he began to order the governor of Zhejiang Province, also in charge of Fujian Fufu, Xing, Jianning, Handan and Quanhai provinces, to be the admiral of military affairs.

古文：二十七年，改巡抚为巡视。
现代文：二十七年，改巡抚为巡枧。
English: In 1927, the post of patrol officer was changed to patrol officer.

古文：二十八年罢。
现代文：二十八年罢除。
English: He was ousted in 2008.

古文：三十一年复设。
现代文：三十一年又设置。
English: It was set up again in 1931.

古文：巡抚福建地方兼提督军务一员。
现代文：巡抚福建地方兼提督军务一员。
English: He is the governor of Fujian Province and a member of the Admiralty Military Affairs.

古文：嘉靖二十六年，既设浙江巡抚兼辖福、兴、漳、泉等处，三十五年，以闽、浙道远，又设提督军务兼巡福、兴、漳、泉、福宁海道都御史。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年，设浙江巡抚兼管辖福、兴、漳、泉等地以后，三十五年因闽、浙道路遥远，又设置提督军务兼巡抚福、兴、漳、泉、福宁海道都御史。
English: In the 26th year of Jiajing, after the establishment of the Zhejiang governor and jurisdiction over Fuxing, Xing, Handan, Quan and other places, in the 35th year, because the roads of Handan and Zhejiang were far away, the admiral of military affairs and the governor of Fuxing, Xing, Handan, Quan and Funing were set up.

古文：后改巡抚福建，统辖全省。
现代文：后来改巡抚福建，统辖全省。
English: Later, he was made the governor of Fujian, with overall jurisdiction over the province.

古文：巡抚顺天等府地方兼整饬蓟州等处边备一员。
现代文：巡抚顺天等府地方兼整顿蓟州等处边境防备一员。
English: He is an inspector of Shuntian and other prefectures as well as a member of the border guard in the rectification of Zhangzhou and other places.

古文：成化二年，始专设都御史赞理军务，巡抚顺天、永平二府，寻兼抚河间、真定、保定，凡五府。
现代文：成化二年开始专设都御史协助管理军务，巡抚顺天、永平二府，不久兼抚河问、真定、保定，共计五府。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, a special governor was set up to assist in the management of military affairs, the governor of Shuntian and Yongping two prefectures, and soon also the governor of Hefen, Zhending and Baoding, a total of five prefectures.

古文：七年，兼理八府。
现代文：七年，兼理八府。
English: Seven years later, he was also in charge of eight prefectures.

古文：八年，以畿辅地广，从居庸关中分，设二巡抚，其东为巡抚顺天、永平二府，驻遵化。
现代文：八年，因为京郊地区范围宽广，从居庸关中分，设两个巡抚，它的束面为巡抚顺天、永平二府，驻扎遵化。
English: In the eighth year, because of the wide scope of the suburbs of Beijing, two governors were set up from Juyongguan in the middle, and its bundled face was the governor of Shuntian and Yongping two provinces, stationed in Zunhua.

古文：崇祯二年，又于永平分设巡抚兼提督山海军务，其旧者止辖顺天。
现代文：塞祯二年，又于永平分壳巡抚兼提督山海军务，从前的巡抚只管辖顺天。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, the Yongping District Governor and the Admiral Mountain Naval Affairs were created. The former governor only had jurisdiction over Shuntian.

古文：巡抚保定等府提督紫荆等关兼管河道一员。
现代文：巡抚保定等府提督紫剂等关兼管河道一员。
English: The governor of Baoding and other prefectural admirals, such as Zi Jiao, were also in charge of the river.

古文：成化八年，分居庸关以西，另设巡抚保定、真定、河间、顺德、大名、广平六府，提督紫荆、倒马、龙泉等关，驻真定。
现代文：成化八年，分居庸关以西，另设巡抚保定、真一定、河间、顺德、大名、广平六府，提督紫荆、倒马、龙泉等关，驻真定。
English: In the eighth year of Chenghua, he was separated to the west of Yongguan, and in addition, he set up the patrols of Baoding, Zhentang, Hema, Shunde, Daimyo, and Guangping six prefectures, and the admirals of Bauhinia, Houma, Longquan, etc. were stationed in Zhentang.

古文：万历七年，兼管河道。
现代文：万历七年，兼管河道。
English: After seven years of hard work, he is also in charge of the river.

古文：巡抚河南等处地方兼管河道提督军务一员。
现代文：巡抚河南等处地方兼管河道提督军务一员。
English: He was a member of the military affairs of the governor of Henan and other places and the admiral of the river.

古文：宣德五年，遣兵部侍郎于谦巡抚山西、河南。
现代文：宣德五年派遣兵部侍郎于谦巡抚山西、河南。
English: In the fifth year of the Xuande Emperor, Yu Qian was sent to serve as the military governor of Shanxi and Henan.

古文：正统十四年，以左副都御史王来巡抚湖广、河南。
现代文：正统十四年，以左副都御史王来巡抚湖广、河南。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, the Left Vice-Governor Wang Shishi was appointed as the governor of Hukang and Henan.

古文：景泰元年，始专设河南巡抚。
现代文：景泰元年，开始专设河南巡抚。
English: In the first year of King Taejo, the post of Henan governor was set up.

古文：万历七年，兼管河道。
现代文：万历七年，兼管河道。
English: After seven years of hard work, he is also in charge of the river.

古文：八年，加提督军务。
现代文：八年，加提督军务。
English: Eight years, plus admiral military service.

古文：巡抚山西地方兼提督雁门等关军务一员。
现代文：巡抚山西地方兼提督雁门等关军务一员。
English: He is also a member of the military affairs of Shanxi Province and Admiral Yanmen.

古文：宣德五年，以侍郎巡抚河南、山西。
现代文：宣德五年，以侍郎巡抚河南、山西。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande's reign, he was appointed to serve as the governor of Henan and Shanxi.

古文：正统十三年，始命都御史专抚山西，镇守雁门。
现代文：正统十三年，开始命令都御史专门巡抚山西，镇守雁门。
English: In the thirteenth year of orthodoxy, he began to order the special governor of Shanxi Province, the town guard of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：天顺、成化间暂革，寻复置。
现代文：天顺、成化年间短时间革除，不久恢复设置。
English: During the years of Tianshun and Chenghua, it was removed for a short time, and the setting was soon restored.

古文：巡抚山东等处地方督理营田兼管河道提督军务一员。
现代文：巡抚山东等处地方督理营田兼管河道提督军务一员。
English: Inspector of Shandong and other places, the local supervisor of Yingtian, and a member of the military affairs of the river admiral.

古文：正统五年始设巡抚。
现代文：正统五年，开始设巡抚。
English: After five years of orthodoxy, an inspector was set up.

古文：十三年，定遣都御史。
现代文：十三年，决定派遣都御史。
English: Thirteen years later, it was decided to dispatch the Metropolitan Historian.

古文：嘉靖四十二年，加督理营田。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年，加督理营田。
English: In the 42nd year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he became the governor of Yingtian.

古文：万历七年，兼管河道。
现代文：万历七年，兼管河道。
English: After seven years of hard work, he is also in charge of the river.

古文：八年，加提督军务。
现代文：八年，加提督军务。
English: Eight years, plus admiral military service.

古文：巡抚辽东地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚辽东地方赞理军务一员。
English: He is a member of the Liaodong District Military Adviser.

古文：正统元年设，旧驻辽阳，后地日蹙，移驻广宁，驻山海关，后又驻宁远。
现代文：正统元年设立，从前驻辽阳，后来地方日渐紧迫，移驻广宁，驻山海关，后来又驻宁远。
English: Established in the first year of the orthodox era, it was formerly stationed in Liaoyang. Later, as the local situation became more and more urgent, it was moved to Guangning, stationed in Shanhaiguan Customs, and later stationed in Ningyuan.

古文：巡抚宣府地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚宣府地方赞理军务一员。
English: He was a member of the military affairs committee of the Xuanfu local government.

古文：正统元年，命都御史出巡塞北，因奏设巡抚兼理大同。
现代文：正统元年，命都御史出巡塞北，因而上奏设巡抚兼理左旦。
English: In the first year of the orthodox era, the governor of the capital, Meito Goshi, went on a patrol to the north of Saitama, and as a result, the governor of Saitama and the governor of Sotan were appointed.

古文：景泰二年，另设大同巡抚，后复并为一。
现代文：量泰二年，另设大同巡抚，后来又合二为一。
English: In the second year of Jiaotai, another Datong governor was set up, and later the two were merged into one.

古文：成化十年，复分设。
现代文：成化十年，又分设。
English: Ten years later, it was separated again.

古文：十四年，加赞理军务。
现代文：十四年，加赞理军务。
English: For fourteen years, he was in charge of military affairs.

古文：巡抚大同地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚大同地方赞理军务一员。
English: The governor of Datong is a member of the military affairs council.

古文：初与宣府共一巡抚，后或分或并。
现代文：起初与宣府共派一个巡抚，后来时而分时而并。
English: At first, a governor was appointed jointly with the Xuanwu government, and later it was divided into equal parts.

古文：成化十年，复专设，加赞理军务。
现代文：成化十年，又专设，加赞理军务。
English: After ten years of development, it has been specially set up to handle military affairs.

古文：巡抚延绥等处赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚延绥等处赞理军务一员。
English: A member of the military affairs committee of the procuratorate of Yancheng and other departments.

古文：宣德十年，遣都御史出镇。
现代文：宣德十年，派遣都御史出巡镇守。
English: In the tenth year after the proclamation of the Republic of China, he dispatched the governor of the capital to go on a tour of the town.

古文：景泰元年，专设巡抚加参赞军务。
现代文：景泰元年，专设巡抚加参赞军务。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, an inspector and a military affairs counselor were set up.

古文：成化九年，徙镇榆林。
现代文：成化九年，移镇榆林。
English: Chenghua nine years, moved to the town of Yulin.

古文：隆庆六年，改赞理军务。
现代文：隆庆六年，改赞理军务。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing era, he was promoted to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：巡抚宁夏地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚宁夏地方赞理军务一员。
English: He is a member of the Ningxia local military commissariat.

古文：正统元年，以右佥都御史郭智镇抚宁夏，参赞军务。
现代文：正统元年，纵右愈都御史郭智镇抚宁夏，参赞军务。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Guo Zhi Zhen Fuzhou Ningxia, Counsellor of Military Affairs, was appointed as the governor of Yudu.

古文：天顺元年罢。
现代文：天顺元年罢除。
English: He was dismissed in the first year of Tianshun.

古文：二年复设，去参赞。
现代文：二年恢复设置，去除参赞。
English: Two years later, the position was reinstated, and the counsellor was removed.

古文：隆庆六年，加赞理军务。
现代文：隆庆六年，加赞理军务。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, Ga Zan is in charge of military affairs.

古文：巡抚甘肃等处赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚甘肃等处赞理军务一员。
English: A member of the military commended by the Gansu Provincial Government and other departments.

古文：宣德十年，命侍郎镇守。
现代文：宣德十年，命令侍郎镇守。
English: Ten years after the declaration of martial law, he ordered the retainers to become town guards.

古文：正统元年，甘、凉用兵，命侍郎参赞军务。
现代文：正统元年，甘、凉用兵，命侍郎参赞军务。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Gan and Liang enlisted in the army, and he became the Counsellor for Military Affairs.

古文：景泰元年，定设巡抚都御史。
现代文：景泰元年，确定设巡抚都御史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, it was decided to establish a governor of the capital, Gose.

古文：隆庆六年，改赞理军务。
现代文：隆庆六年改赞理军务。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing era, he was promoted to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：巡抚陕西地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚陕西地方赞理军务一员。
English: The governor of Shaanxi Province is a member of the military affairs committee.

古文：宣德初，遣尚书、侍郎出镇。
现代文：宣德初年，派遣尚书、侍郎出巡镇守。
English: In the first year of Xuande, Shangshu and his attendants were sent out to patrol the town.

古文：正统间，命右都御史陈镒、王文等出入更代。
现代文：正统年间，命令右都御史陈镒、王文等出入更替。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, he ordered the right capital emperors Chen Xi, Wang Wen and others to come and go.

古文：景泰初，耿九畴以刑部侍郎出镇，文移不得径下按察司，特改都御史巡抚。
现代文：景泰初年，耿九畴以刑部侍郎出巡镇守，公文不能直接下达到按察司，特意改为都御史巡抚。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, Geng Jiu Zang was appointed as the town guard of the criminal investigation department, and the official documents could not be directly sent to the inspector, so he was specially changed to the inspector of the capital.

古文：成化二年，加提督军务，后改赞理，驻西安，防秋驻固原。
现代文：成化二年，加提督军务，后改赞理，驻西安，防止敌寇秋天进攻驻固原。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, he was appointed admiral of military affairs, later changed to commendable, stationed in Xi'an, to prevent the autumn attack of the enemy's corsairs stationed in Gouyuan.

古文：巡抚四川等处地方兼提督军务一员。
现代文：巡抚四川等处地方兼提督军务一员。
English: He served as an inspector of Sichuan and other regions and as a member of the Admiral's staff.

古文：宣德五年，命都御史镇抚，后停遣。
现代文：宣德五年命令都御史镇抚，后来停止派遣。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande's reign, he ordered that the capital be pacified, and later stopped sending troops.

古文：正统十四年，始设巡抚。
现代文：正统十四年，开始设巡抚。
English: In the 14th year of orthodoxy, an inspector was set up.

古文：万历十一年，加提督军务。
现代文：万历十一年，加提督军务。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, he was promoted to the rank of admiral.

古文：巡抚湖广等处地方兼赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚湖广等处地方兼赞理军务一员。
English: He is also a member of the military affairs of the local government and the commendable person in the governor of Hukang and other places.

古文：正统三年，命都御史贾谅镇守，以后或侍郎或大理卿出抚。
现代文：正统三年，命令都御史贾谅镇守，以后或侍郎或大理卿出京镇抚。
English: After three years of orthodoxy, he ordered the governor of the capital, Jia Yuanzhong, to be the town warden, and later, either the chamberlain or the lord of Dali to be the town warden of the capital.

古文：景泰元年定设巡抚都御史兼赞理军务。
现代文：景泰元年，确定设巡抚都御史兼赞理军务。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, it was decided to set up an inspector of the capital and military affairs.

古文：万历八年，改为提督军务。
现代文：万历八年，改为提督军务。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to Admiral of Military Affairs.

古文：十二年，仍为赞理。
现代文：十二年，仍旧焉赞理。
English: Twelve years later, it is still widely praised.

古文：巡抚江西地方兼理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚江西地方兼理军务一员。
English: He was also in charge of military affairs in Jiangxi Province.

古文：永乐后，间设巡抚镇守。
现代文：永乐以后，问或设巡抚镇守。
English: After Yongle, ask or set up a patrol town guard.

古文：成化以后，定为巡抚，或有时罢遣。
现代文：成化以后，确定为巡抚，间或有时不派遣。
English: After formation, it is determined to be the governor, and sometimes it is not dispatched.

古文：嘉靖六年始定设。
现代文：嘉靖六年，开始确定设置。
English: Jiajing six years, began to determine the setting.

古文：四十年加兼理军务。
现代文：四十年，加兼理军务。
English: Forty years, plus military service.

古文：巡抚南赣汀韶等处地方提督军务一员。
现代文：巡抚南赣汀韶等处地方提督军务一员。
English: A member of the military staff of the local admiral in Nanlu Tingtao and other places.

古文：弘治十年，始设巡抚。
现代文：弘治十年，开始设巡抚。
English: Ten years after the establishment of Kōji, an inspector was set up in Sōma.

古文：正德十一年，改提督军务。
现代文：正德十一年，改提督军务。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhengde, he was promoted to Admiral of Military Affairs.

古文：嘉靖四十五年，定巡抚衔，所辖南安、赣州、南雄、韶州、汀州并郴州地方，驻赣州。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年，确定巡抚职衔，管辖南安、赣州、南雄、韶州、汀州并郴州地方，驻赣州。
English: In the 45th year of Jiajing, the title of the inspector was determined, with jurisdiction over Nan'an, Zhangzhou, Nanxiong, Zhangzhou, Tingzhou and Zhangzhou localities, stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：巡抚广东地方兼赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚广东地方兼赞理军务一员。
English: He was the governor of Guangdong Province and a member of the military commissariat.

古文：永乐中，设巡抚，后以总督兼巡抚事，遂罢不设。
现代文：永乐年间，设置巡抚，后来以总督兼理巡抚事务，于是罢除不设。
English: During the Yongle era, an inspector general was set up, and later the governor was also responsible for inspector general affairs, so it was not set up.

古文：嘉靖四十五年，复另设巡抚，加赞理军务。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年，又另设巡抚，加赞理军务。
English: In the 45th year of Jiajing, another governor was set up to take charge of military affairs.

古文：隆庆四年又罢。
现代文：隆庆四年又罢除。
English: He was ousted again in the fourth year of Longqing.

古文：巡抚广西地方一员。
现代文：巡抚广西地方一员。
English: A member of the Guangxi local patrol.

古文：广西旧有巡抚，沿革不常。
现代文：广西从前有巡抚，有时循例设置，有时革除，无定制。
English: Guangxi used to have an inspector-general, sometimes set by precedent, sometimes removed, no customization.

古文：隆庆三年复专设。
现代文：隆庆三年，恢复专谖。
English: In the third year of Longqing, the college was restored.

古文：巡抚云南兼建昌、毕节等处地方赞理军务兼督川、贵粮饷一员。
现代文：巡抚云南兼建昌、毕节等处地方赞理军务兼督川、贵粮饷一员。
English: The governor of Yunnan, Jianchang, Bijie, and other local military commissars, the governor of Sichuan, and a member of the Guiliang.

古文：正统九年，命侍郎参赞军务。
现代文：正统九年，命侍郎协理军务。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, Myoshiburo became the deputy director of military affairs.

古文：十年，设镇抚。
现代文：十年，设镇抚。
English: Ten years later, he was given the title of "Zhenfu."

古文：天顺元年罢。
现代文：天顺元年罢除。
English: He was dismissed in the first year of Tianshun.

古文：成化十二年复设。
现代文：成化十二年，恢复设置。
English: Twelve years later, it was restored.

古文：嘉靖三十年，加兼理军务。
现代文：塞垣三十年，加兼理军务。
English: He has been in charge of military affairs in Sagaki for 30 years.

古文：四十三年，改赞理。
现代文：四十三年，改赞理。
English: Forty-three years later, he became a professor.

古文：隆庆二年，兼抚建昌、毕节等处。
现代文：隆庆二年，兼抚建昌、毕节等处。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he also assisted Jianchang, Bijie and other places.

古文：巡抚贵州兼督理湖北、川东等处地方提督军务一员。
现代文：巡抚贵州兼督理湖北、州束等处地方提督军务一员。
English: The governor of Guizhou and the governor of Hubei Province, and a member of the military staff of the local admiral of the State Council.

古文：正统十四年，以苗乱置总督，镇守贵州、湖北、川东等处。
现代文：正统十四年，因为苗人叛乱置总督，镇守贵州、湖北、川东等处。
English: In the 14th year of orthodoxy, because of the rebellion of Miao people, the governor and town guards of Guizhou, Hubei, and East Sichuan were set up.

古文：景泰元年，另设贵州巡抚。
现代文：景泰元年，另设贵州巡抚。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, the post of Guizhou governor was established.

古文：成化八年罢。
现代文：成化八年罢除。
English: He was dismissed eight years later.

古文：十一年复设。
现代文：十一年恢复设置。
English: Eleven years later, it was set up again.

古文：正德二年又罢。
现代文：正德二年又罢除。
English: Zhengde was ousted two years later.

古文：五年又复设。
现代文：五年又恢复设置。
English: It was reinstated five years later.

古文：嘉靖四十二年，裁革总督，令巡抚兼理湖北、川东等处提督军务。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年，裁革总督，命令巡抚兼理湖北、川束等处提督军务。
English: In the 42nd year of Jiajing, the governor-general ordered the inspector-general to take charge of the military affairs of Hubei, Kawatsuka and other places.

古文：巡抚天津地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚天津地方赞理军务一员。
English: He is a member of the Military Affairs Committee of the Tianjin Local Government.

古文：万历二十五年，以倭陷朝鲜暂设，寻为定制。
现代文：万历二十五年，因为倭攻陷朝鲜，短时间设置，不久成为确定制度。
English: In the 25th year of Wanli, because of the Japanese invasion of Korea, it was set up in a short time and soon became a definite system.

古文：巡抚登莱地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚登莱地方赞理军务一员。
English: A member of the military staff of the District Military Governor of Denglai.

古文：天启元年设。
现代文：天启元年设置。
English: Set in the first year of the apocalypse.

古文：崇祯二年罢。
现代文：崇祯二年罢除。
English: He was dismissed two years later.

古文：三年复设。
现代文：三年，恢复设置。
English: Three years, reset.

古文：巡抚安庐地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚安庐地方赞理军务一员。
English: He is a member of the military affairs committee of the local government of Anhui.

古文：崇祯十年设，以史可法为之。
现代文：崇祯十年设置，以史可法担任此职。
English: It has been set up for ten years, and this post is held by Shi Kefa.

古文：十六年，又增设安、太、池、庐四府巡抚。
现代文：十六年，又增设安、太、池、庐四府巡抚。
English: Sixteen years later, the four prefectural governors of An, Tai, Chi, and Handan were added.

古文：巡抚偏沅地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚偏沅地方赞理军务一员。
English: The governor favored a member of the local military commissariat.

古文：万历二十七年，以征播暂设，寻罢。
现代文：万历二十七年，因为征讨播暂时设置，不久罢除。
English: In the 27th year of the Manchurian calendar, broadcasting was temporarily suspended due to a broadcasting levy, and it was soon removed.

古文：天启二年后，或置或罢。
现代文：天启二年后，时而设置时而罢除。
English: Two years after the apocalypse, it was set up and then abolished.

古文：崇祯二年定设。
现代文：崇祯二年确定设置。
English: Chongzhen determined the setting two years ago.

古文：巡抚密云地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚密云地方赞理军务一员。
English: He is a member of the Miyun Local Military Advisory Committee.

古文：崇祯十一年设。
现代文：崇祯十一年设置。
English: It was established in the eleventh year of Chongzhen.

古文：巡抚淮扬地方赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚淮扬地方赞理军务一员。
English: Inspector Huaiyang is a member of the local military affairs council.

古文：崇祯十一年设。
现代文：崇祯十一年设置。
English: It was established in the eleventh year of Chongzhen.

古文：巡抚承天赞理军务一员。
现代文：巡抚承天赞理军务一员。
English: The governor, Zheng Tianzan, was in charge of military affairs.

古文：崇祯十六年设。
现代文：崇祯十六年设置。
English: It was established in the 16th year of Chongzhen.

古文：抚治郧阳等处地方兼提督军务一员，成化十二年，以郧、襄流民屡叛，遣都御史安抚，因奏设官抚治之。
现代文：抚治鄙阳等处地方兼提督军务一员。成化十二年，因鄙、襄流亡人民多次叛乱，派遣都御史安抚，于是奏请设官抚治这里。
English: He was also a member of the admiral's staff in charge of military affairs in Fuzhi and other localities. In the twelfth year of Chenghua, due to the repeated rebellions of the exiled people, the capital was dispatched to pacify, so he requested the establishment of an official to govern here.

古文：万历二年以抚治事权不专，添提督军务兼抚治职衔。
现代文：万历二年，因为抚治办事权力不集中，添加提督军务兼抚治职衔。
English: In the second year of the Wanli era, because the power of governing affairs was not concentrated, the title of admiral of military affairs and governing affairs was added.

古文：九年裁革，十一年复设。
现代文：九年裁革，十一年恢复设置。
English: Nine years later, it was restored in the eleventh year.

古文：赞理松潘地方军务一员。
现代文：赞理松潘地方军务一员。
English: A member of the local military commended Songpan.

古文：正统四年，以王翱为之。
现代文：正统四年以王翱担任此职。
English: It has been four years since Wang Qi assumed this post.

古文：通政使司。通政使一人，左、右通政各一人，誊黄右通政一人，左、右参议各一人，其属，经历司，经历一人，知事一人。
现代文：即通政使司，设有通政使一人，正三品，左、有通政各一人，誊黄右通政一人，正，四品，左、右参议各一人，正五品。它的下属，经历司，经历一人，正七品，知事一人，正八品。
English: That is, the General Political Envoy Department has one General Political Envoy, Senior Third Rank, one Left and one with General Political Envoy, one Senior Yellow Right General Political Envoy, Senior Fourth Rank, one Left and one Right Councillor, Senior Fifth Rank. Its subordinate, the Experience Department, has one Experienced, Senior Seventh Rank, one Governor, Senior Eighth Rank.

古文：通政使，掌受内外章疏敷奏封驳之事。
现代文：通政使掌管接受内外奏章上疏陈述进奏封还驳正的事务。
English: The diplomatic envoy is in charge of accepting and correcting the incomplete statements in the internal and external transcripts.

古文：凡四方陈情建言，申诉冤滞，或告不法等事，于底簿内誊写诉告缘由，赍状奏闻。
现代文：所有各地陈述事情进献对策，申诉冤情积滞幽隐案件，或上告不守法律的人或事等事务，从底簿中誊写申诉上告原委，具状上奏报告。
English: For matters such as all regions to present their countermeasures, complaints, grievances, and hidden cases, or to appeal to people or things that do not abide by the law, copy the appeal to the original committee from the bottom of the book, and submit the report.

古文：凡天下臣民实封入递，即于公厅启视，节写副本，然后奏闻。
现代文：凡是天下大臣平民密封入递，立刻在公厅上开启审看，节录焉副本，然后上奏报告。
English: Whenever a civilian minister of the country submits a sealed report, it is immediately opened for review in the public hall, a copy of the excerpt is made, and then a report is submitted.

古文：即五军、六部、都察院等衙门，有事关机密重大者，其入奏仍用本司印信。
现代文：即使五军、六部、都察院等衙门，有事关机密重大事件的，他们入奏仍用本司印章。
English: Even if the five armed forces, the six ministries, the Central Investigation Agency and other government agencies have confidential and important events, they still use this department's seal.

古文：凡诸司公文、勘合辨验允当，编号注写，公文用 日照之记 、勘合用 验正之记 关防之。
现代文：所有各司公文、勘合辨明验证妥当，编号注明记录，公文用 日照之记 ，勘合用 验正之记 加盖印章。
English: All the official documents of each division, the identification and verification are valid, the number is marked as a record, the official document is marked with a date stamp, and the identification and verification is marked with a stamp.

古文：凡在外之题本、奏本，在京之奏本，并受之，于早朝汇而进之。
现代文：所有朝廷以外官员的题奏、奏本，京官的奏本，一并接受，在早朝时汇集并且进呈。
English: The theme music and transcripts of all officials outside the Imperial Court, as well as the transcripts of officials in Beijing, were accepted together, collected in the early morning, and submitted.

古文：有径自封进者则参驳。
现代文：有径直密封上奏的则参酌驳正。
English: If there is a straight sealed upbeat, it is subject to correction.

古文：午朝则引奏臣民之言事者，有机密则不时入奏。
现代文：午朝则摘引上奏大臣平民的议政言论，有机密便随时入奏。
English: In the afternoon and morning, the political speech of the Minister of Civil Affairs was quoted, and the organ was played at any time.

古文：有违误则籍而汇请。
现代文：有违背错误便登记下来汇总请示裁定。
English: If there is a violation, it will be recorded and a summary request for adjudication will be made.

古文：凡抄发、照驳诸司公移及勘合、讼牒、勾提件数、给繇人员，月终类奏，岁终通奏。
现代文：所有抄录发送、驳正各司公文以及符契、诉状、拘捕件数、服役人员，月终类集上奏，岁终汇总上奏。
English: All the transcripts are sent, the official documents of each department are corrected, as well as the contracts, complaints, the number of arrests, service personnel, the end-of-month collection is uploaded, and the end-of-year summary is uploaded.

古文：凡议大政、大狱及会推文武大臣，必参预。
现代文：凡是讨论政治大事、大案以及聚集推荐文武大臣。一定参加。
English: Whenever there is a discussion of a major political event, a major project, or a gathering to recommend a minister of culture and armed forces, everyone is sure to attend.

古文：初，洪武三年置察言司，设司令二人，掌受四方章奏，寻罢。
现代文：起初，洪武三年设置察言司，设置司令二人，掌管接受各地奏章，不久废除。
English: At first, in the third year of Hongwu's reign, a department of censors was set up, and two commanders were set up to take charge of accepting reports from all over the country, but it was soon abolished.

古文：十年置通政使司，以曾秉正为通政使，刘仁为左通政，谕之曰： 政犹水也，欲其常通，故以 通政 名官。
现代文：十年，设置通政使司，以曾秉正为通政使，刘仁为左通政，告谕他们说： 政事如同水，希望它常常畅通，因此以 通政 命名官职。
English: Ten years later, he set up the Political Correspondence Envoy Department, with Zeng Bingzheng as the Political Correspondence Envoy and Liu Ren as the Political Correspondence Envoy, and told them: "Political affairs are like water, I hope it will always flow smoothly. Therefore, the official position was named after Political Correspondence."

古文：卿其审命令以正百司，达幽隐以通庶务。
现代文：你们要审察命令以端正各政府部门，通达幽深隐微以通畅各种政务。
English: You must examine orders to straighten out all government departments, penetrate the subtle and obscure to smooth out all kinds of government affairs.

古文：当执奏者勿忌避，当驳正者勿阿随，当敷陈者毋隐蔽，当引见者毋留难。 
现代文：应当上奏的不要忌惮避讳，应当驳正的不要附和从众，应当阐明的不要隐瞒，应当引见的不要阻碍非难。 
English: Don't shy away from what should be reported, don't go along with what should be refuted, don't conceal what should be clarified, and don't obstruct what should be criticized.

古文：十二年，拨承敕监给事中、殿廷仪礼司、九关通事使隶焉。
现代文：十二年，调拨承敕监给事中、殿廷仪礼司、九关通事使为它的下属。
English: In the 12th year, he assigned Jengyuan supervisor to Jizhong, the palace ceremony and etiquette department, and Jiugansong envoy as its subordinates.

古文：建文中，改司为寺，通政使为通政卿，通政参议为少卿，寺丞增置左、右补阙，左、右拾遗各一人。
现代文：建文年间，改司为寺，通政使为通政卿，通政参议为少卿，寺丞增设左、右补阙，左、右拾遗各一人。
English: During the Jianwen period, the secretary was changed to a temple, the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the secretary to the

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧有制度。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：成化二年，置提督誊黄右通政，不理司事，录武官黄卫所袭替之故，以征赞事。
现代文：成化二年设置提督誊黄右通政，不办理本司政务，登录武官黄卫所承袭替代的缘故，以征选事务。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, Admiral Zou Huang Yutong was set up, but he did not handle the government affairs of this department, and because he was replaced by the military attaché Huang Wei, he was elected.

古文：万历九年革。
现代文：万历九年革除。
English: It's been nine years since I was laid off.

古文：大理寺。卿一人，左、右少卿各一人，左、右寺丞各一人。
现代文：大理寺，卿一人，正三品，左、右少卿各一人，正四品，左、右寺丞各一人，正五品。
English: Dairi-ji Temple, one Kyo, Senior Third Rank, one Left and Right Shosho-kyo each, Senior Fourth Rank, one Left and Right Zensho each, Senior Fifth Rank.

古文：其属，司务厅，司务二人。
现代文：它的下属，司务厅，司务二人，从九品。
English: Its subordinate, the Administrative Office, has two administrative officers from nine departments.

古文：左、右二寺，各寺正一人，寺副二人，评事四人。
现代文：左、右二寺，各有寺正一人，正六品，寺副二人，从六品，后来革除右寺副一人。
English: On the left and on the right of the two temples, there is one person from the right temple, six from the left temple, two from the left temple, and one from the right temple.

古文：卿，掌审谳平反刑狱之政令。
现代文：评事四人，正七品。起初设右评事八人，后来革除四人。卿掌管审讯平反刑狱的政令。
English: At first, eight right-hand reviewers were set up, but later four were removed. He is in charge of the government order for the trial of the rehabilitation of the prison.

古文：少卿、寺丞赞之。
现代文：少卿、寺丞辅助他。
English: Shokyo and Terajo assisted him.

古文：左、右寺分理京畿、十三布政司刑名之事。
现代文：左、右寺分别负责京城地区、十三布政司刑法的事务。
English: The Left and Right Temples are responsible for the affairs of the Keijo area and the Criminal Law of the 13th Division of the Political Bureau, respectively.

古文：凡刑部、都察院、五军断事官所推问狱讼，皆移案牍，引囚徒，诣寺详谳。
现代文：凡是刑部、都察院、五军断事官所提审案件，都要移交提审记录，引送囚犯，到大理寺详细审讯。
English: In all cases brought to trial by the Criminal Investigation Department, the Central Criminal Investigation Agency, and the five military adjudicators, the arraignment records must be handed over, the prisoners must be taken to Dali Temple for detailed interrogation.

古文：左、右寺寺正，各随其所辖而覆审之。
现代文：左、右寺寺正，各自依照所管辖的复审。
English: The left and right temples will be re-examined according to their respective jurisdictions.

古文：既按律例，必复问其款状，情允罪服，始呈堂准拟具奏。
现代文：已经按照法律条文，必须复查其条款罪证，情理公允罪证符合，纔呈交公堂准许拟定上奏。
English: In accordance with the provisions of the law, it is necessary to review the criminal evidence of its terms, and if the reasonable and fair criminal evidence is consistent, it shall be submitted to the court for approval.

古文：不则驳令改拟，曰照驳。
现代文：不符合便驳正下令改拟，称为照驳。
English: If it does not conform to the corrigendum, it is ordered to be revised and is called a corrigendum.

古文：三拟不当，则纠问官，曰参驳。
现代文：三次拟文不恰当，便督责审讯官，称为参驳。
English: Three times the proposed text was inappropriate, and the interrogating officer was reprimanded, which was called a rebuttal.

古文：有牾律失入者，调他司再讯，曰番异。
现代文：有不符合法律轻罪重判或不当判而判刑的，调其它部门再审，称为番异。
English: If a person is sentenced for a serious misdemeanor that does not comply with the law or for an improper sentence, the case will be transferred to another department for retrial, which is called "suspended sentence."

古文：犹不惬，则请下九卿会讯，曰圆审。
现代文：仍然不满意，便奏请下发九卿会同审理，称为圆审。
English: Still unsatisfied, he requested that the nine emperors be tried together, which was called a round trial.

古文：已评允而招由未明，移再讯，曰追驳。
现代文：已经审讯允当而招供原因不明，移交再审，称为追驳。
English: Where a defendant has been granted a retrial but has confessed for unknown reasons, the case will be transferred for retrial, which is called a retrial.

古文：屡驳不合，则请旨发落，曰制决。
现代文：多次追驳不相符合，便奏请下旨发藩，称为制决。
English: If the follow-up rebuttal is not consistent, the domain will be asked to make a ruling, which is called a ruling.

古文：凡狱既具，未经本寺评允，诸司毋得发遣。
现代文：所有案件已经结案，未经本寺评审允当，各部门不得发配送遣。
English: All cases have been closed, and without the approval of this temple's review, departments are not allowed to send money.

古文：误则纠之。
现代文：有误便纠正。
English: The error has been corrected.

古文：初，吴元年置大理司卿，秩正三品。
现代文：起初，吴元年，设置大理司卿，官秩正三品。
English: At first, in the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the position of Dali Sikyong was established, with the official rank of Third Rank.

古文：洪武元年革。三年，置磨勘司，凡诸司刑名、钱粮，有冤滥隐匿者，稽其功过以闻。
现代文：十四年恢复设置磨勘司，设司令一人，左、右司丞各一人，左、右司副各一人。二十年又罢除。
English: In 1914, the establishment of the Mill Surveying Division was restored, with one commander, one left and one right secretary, and one left and one right deputy. It was abolished again 20 years later.

古文：寻亦革。十四年，复置大理寺，改卿秩正五品，左、右少卿从五品，左、右寺丞正六品。
现代文：十四年，恢复设置大理寺，改卿的官秩为正五品，左、右少卿从五品，左、右寺丞正六品。
English: In 1914, the establishment of the Dali Temple was resumed, and the official rank of the highest-ranking officials was raised to Shogo-bon (Senior Fifth Rank), that of the lowest-ranking officials was raised to Shogo-bon (Junior Fifth Rank), that of the lowest-ranking officials to Shogo-bon (Junior Seventh Rank) and that of the lowest-ranking officials to Shogo-bon (Junior Sixth Rank).

古文：其属，左、右寺正各一人，寺副各二人，左评事四人，右评事八人。
现代文：它的下属，左、右寺正各一人，寺副各二人，左评事四人，右评事八人。
English: Its subordinates are one each from the left and right temple, two each from the vice-temple, four from the left commentator and eight from the right commentator.

古文：又置审刑司，共平庶狱。
现代文：又设置审刑司，共同审断各种案件。
English: It also set up the Criminal Investigation Division to jointly adjudicate various cases.

古文：凡大理寺所理之刑，审刑司复详议之。
现代文：凡是大理寺所办理的案件，审刑司再详细审议。
English: All cases handled by the Dali Temple will be reviewed in detail by the Criminal Investigation Division.

古文：十七年，改建刑部、都察院、大理寺、审刑司、五军断事官署于太平门外，名其所曰贯城。
现代文：审刑司设左、右审刑各一人，正六品；左、右详议各三人，正七品。十七年，在太平门外改建刑部、都察院、大理寺、审刑司、五军断事官官署，命名那个地方称作贯城。
English: In the 17th year, the Criminal Investigation Department, the Criminal Investigation Institute, the Dali Temple, the Criminal Investigation Department, and the five military adjudicators' offices were rebuilt outside the Taiping Gate, and the place was named Chengcheng.

古文：十九年罢审刑司。
现代文：十九年，罢除审刑司。
English: In 1919, the Criminal Investigation Division was abolished.

古文：二十二年复，卿秩正三品。二十九年又罢，尽移案牍于后湖。
现代文：它的左、右寺官和过去一样。二十九年，又罢除，完全移交案卷于后湖。
English: Its left and right temple officials are the same as in the past. In the 29th year, they were removed again and the case file was completely handed over to Houhu.

古文：建文初复置，改左、右寺为司，寺正为都评事，寺副为副都评事，司务为都典簿。
现代文：建文初年恢复设置，改左、右寺为司，寺正为都评事，寺副为副都评事，司务为都典簿。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, the establishment was restored, and the left and right temples were changed to the secretary, the temple chief was the capital critic, the temple deputy was the deputy capital critic, and the secretary was the capital directory.

古文：成祖初，仍置大理寺，其左、右寺设官，复如洪武时。
现代文：司务，洪武二十六年设置。成祖初年，仍旧设置大理寺，它的左、右寺设官，恢复如同洪武时。
English: Dairi-ji Temple was still established in the first year of the founder's reign, and its left and right temples were restored as they were in Hongwu's time.

古文：又因左、右二寺评事多寡不等，所治事亦繁简不均，以二寺评事均分，左、右各六人，如刑部、都察院十二司道，各带管直隶地方审录。永乐二年，仍复旧。后定都北京，又改分寺属。弘治元年，裁减右评事四人。
现代文：蛙垂、尘玉二府，南北直隶卫所、府州县并在外浙江等布政司、都司、卫所刑法，属于右寺。弘治元年，裁减右评事四人。
English: Frogs and toads of the two prefectures, the north and south directly under the Ministry of Public Security, prefectures and counties, and in Zhejiang, such as the Ministry of Political Affairs, the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the Ministry of Public Security Criminal Law, belong to the right temple. In the first year of Hongzhi, four right commentators were reduced.

古文：万历九年，更定左、右寺分理天下刑狱。
现代文：当时天罪囚，大都不解押审问，右寺事务比左寺简单。万历九年，重新确定左、右寺分别处理天下刑狱。
English: At that time, most of the heavenly crime prisoners were not released from detention and interrogation, and the affairs of the right temple were simpler than those of the left temple. In the ninth year of Wanli, it was re-determined that the left and right temples would separately deal with the world's prison.

古文：浙江、福建、山东、广东、四川、贵州六司道，左寺理之。
现代文：浙江、福建、山东、卢东、四川、贵州六司道，由左寺掌管。
English: Zhejiang Province, Fujian Province, Shandong Province, Ludong Province, Sichuan Province and Guizhou Province are under the jurisdiction of Zuo Temple.

古文：江西、陕西、河南、山西、湖广、广西、云南七司道，右寺理之。
现代文：江西、陕西、河南、山西、湖广、广西、云南七司道，由右寺掌管。
English: Jiangxi, Shaanxi, Henan, Shanxi, Hukang, Guangxi and Yunnan seven provinces are under the control of the Right Temple.

古文：以能按律出人罪者为称职。
现代文：垫塑以后，只查阅案卷，囚犯都不到寺。
English: After the molding, only the case file was consulted, and the prisoners did not come to the temple.

古文：司务典出纳文移。
现代文：司务掌管收发公文。
English: The secretary is in charge of receiving and sending official documents.

古文：詹事府。詹事一人，少詹事二人。
现代文：詹事府，詹事一人，正三品，少詹事二人，正四品，府丞二人，正六品。
English: Zhan Zhifu, Zhan Zhifu one, Zheng Sanpin, Shao Zhan Zhifu two, Zheng Fourpin, Fuzhong two, Zheng Sixpin.

古文：府丞二人，主簿厅，主簿一人，录事二人，通事舍人二人。
现代文：主簿厅，主簿一人，从七品，录事二人，正九品，通事舍人二人。
English: The main book room, one person for the main book, seven people for the records, two people for the records, nine people for the records, and two people for the records.

古文：左春坊，大学士，左庶子，左谕德，各一人，左中允，左赞善，左司直郎，各二人，左清纪郎一人，左司谏二人，右春坊，亦如之。
现代文：左春坊，大学士，正五品，左庶子，正五品，左论德，从五品，各一人，左中允，正六品，左赞善，从六品，左司直郎，从六品，后不常设，各二人，左清纪郎一人，从八品，不常设，左司谏二人，从九品，不常设。右春坊，也如此。
English: Zuo Chunfang, Daigaku Shih, Zheng Wupin, Zuo Zongzi, Zheng Wupin, Zuo Onde, Zheng Wupin, Zheng Wupin, Zheng Wupin, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi, Zheng Zongzi

古文：司经局，洗马一人，校书，正字，各二人。
现代文：司经局，洗马一人，从五品，校书，正九品，正字，从九品，各二人。
English: Economic Affairs Bureau, one person to wash the horse, from five products, school books, positive nine products, positive characters, from nine products, two people each.

古文：詹事，掌统府、坊、局之政事，以辅导太子。
现代文：詹事掌管府、坊、局的政事，以辅佐教导太子。
English: Zhan Zhi was in charge of the political affairs of the prefectures, provinces and bureaus, and taught the prince with the help of his assistants.

古文：少詹事佐之。
现代文：少詹事辅助他。
English: Don't hesitate to help him.

古文：凡入侍太子，与坊、局翰林官番直进讲《尚书》、《春秋》、《资治通鉴》、《大学衍义》、《贞观政要》诸书。
现代文：凡是入宫服侍太子，与坊、局翰林官轮流当值进讲《尚书》、《春秋》、《资治通鉴》、《大学衍义》、《贞观政要》各书。
English: Whenever a prince enters the palace to serve, he will take turns with the officials of the palace and the bureau to lecture on the books "Shang Shu," "Chunqiu," "Zizhi Tongjian," "Daigaku Yanyi" and "Zhenguan Zhengyao."

古文：前期纂辑成章进御，然后赴文华殿讲读。
现代文：提前编辑成章进奉，然后到文华殿讲读。
English: Edited in advance into a chapter, and then read it at the Palace of Literature.

古文：讲读毕，率其僚属，以朝廷所处分军国重事及抚谕诸蕃恩义，陈说于太子。
现代文：讲读完毕，率领他的同僚下属，以朝廷所处理的军政大事以及安抚告谕各蕃国恩义，向太子陈述。
English: After reading the speech, he led his colleagues and subordinates to report to the prince on the military and political events handled by the imperial court, as well as the pacification and gratitude of various countries.

古文：凡朝贺，必先奏朝廷，乃具启本以进。
现代文：凡是朝贺，必定先奏明朝廷，然后准备奏本进见。
English: Whenever there is a morning greeting, it must first be reported to the Ming court, and then a report is prepared for inspection.

古文：凡府僚暨坊、局官与翰林院职互相兼，试士、修书皆与焉。
现代文：所有府僚及坊、局官与翰林院职务互相兼任，考试士子、修撰国书都参加进去。
English: All the cabinet ministers and officials, bureau officials and officials of the Hanlin Academy concurrently held their positions, and all the examiners and authors of the national anthem took part.

古文：通事舍人，典东宫朝谒、辞见之礼，承令劳问之事，凡廷臣朝贺、进笺、进春、进历于太子，则引入而举案。
现代文：通事舍人掌管束宫朝见、告辞拜见的礼仪，传令慰问的事务，凡是朝廷大臣朝贺、进笺、进春、进历于太子，便引领进入并奉举盘案。
English: The courier is in charge of the etiquette of the morning visit to the Imperial Palace, the farewell visit, and the business of conveying condolences. All the ministers of the Imperial Court, such as the morning greeting, the entry into the palace, the entry into the spring, and the entry into the prince, will lead the way into the palace and present the offer.

古文：春坊大学士，掌太子上奏请、下启笺及讲读之事，皆审慎而监省之。
现代文：春坊大学士掌管太子上奏请，下启笺以及讲读的事务，都谨慎小心并监督省察。
English: Chunfang University scholars are in charge of the invitation to the crown prince, the opening ceremony and the reading of the affairs, are cautious and careful and supervise the reflection.

古文：庶子、谕德、中允、赞善各奉其职以从。
现代文：庶子、谕德、中允、赞善各自奉守职务而相从。
English: The son-in-law, the preceptor, the middle-ranking official, and the high-ranking official all fulfilled their duties and followed each other.

古文：凡东宫监国、抚军、出狩，及朝会出入，覆启，画诺，必审署以移詹事。
现代文：凡是太子监国、抚军、出外巡狩，以及朝会出入，回复书函，签章，必定审查签署而移交詹事。
English: Whenever the prince supervises the country, leads the army, goes out on patrols, and enters and leaves the imperial court, replies to letters, signs, it must be reviewed and signed and handed over to Zhan.

古文：诸祥眚必启告。
现代文：各种吉祥和灾祸必定报告。
English: Various auspicious and calamitous occurrences are sure to be reported.

古文：内外庶政可为规鉴者，随事而赞谕。
现代文：内外各种政务可以作为规谏鉴戒的，依据事情而晓谕。
English: Various government affairs at home and abroad can be used as a rule of thumb, based on the circumstances.

古文：伶人、仆御有改变新声、导逢非礼者，则陈古义，申典制，纠正而请斥远之。
现代文：伶人、仆御有改变新乐、引导逢迎不符合礼仪的，便陈述古义，申明典制，纠正并请求排斥远离他们。
English: If the eunuchs and servants have changed the new music, or if the guidance and welcome are not in accordance with the etiquette, they will state the ancient meaning, affirm the formal system, correct and request to be excluded from them.

古文：司直、清纪郎，掌弹劾宫僚，纠举职事。
现代文：司值、清纪郎掌管弹劾东宫僚属，纠察举报办事人员。
English: The deputy director, Qing Jiro, is in charge of impeaching the subordinates of the East Palace, and the picketing and reporting staff.

古文：文华殿讲读毕，诸臣班退，有独留奏事及私谒者，则共纠之。
现代文：文华殿讲读完毕，众臣退班，有单独留下奏事以及私下谒见的，便共同纠劾他。
English: After the reading of the text, all the ministers left the class, and if there was a report left alone or a private audience, they jointly reprimanded him.

古文：司谏，掌箴诲鉴戒，以拾遗补过。
现代文：司谏掌管箴劝教诲借鉴告诚，以拾遗补过。
English: The priest presided over the sermon, exhorted the students to draw on the teachings, confessed their sins, and made amends.

古文：凡有启事于东宫，与司直、清纪执笔纪令旨，规正其伪缪者。
现代文：凡是有向东官通报事情，与司直、清纪执笔记录旨意，规劝匡正那些错误不妥的。
English: Whenever there is a matter to be reported to the east official, and the intention to write down the record with the justice and discipline, and advise the rectification of those mistakes that are inappropriate.

古文：洗马，掌经史子集、制典、图书刊辑之事。
现代文：洗马掌管经史子集、制典、图书刊刻编辑的事务。
English: Zhenma is in charge of the collection, compilation, publication and editing of the history books.

古文：立正本、副本、贮本以备进览。
现代文：设立正本、副本、贮本以预备进奉阅览。
English: Set up originals, copies, and backups in preparation for the reading.

古文：凡天下图册上东宫者，皆受而藏之。
现代文：凡是天下图书籍册进献束宫的，都接受并收藏。
English: All the world's books that are donated to the Imperial Palace are accepted and collected.

古文：校书、正字，掌缮写装潢，诠其讹谬而调其音切，以佐洗马。
现代文：校书、正字掌管缮写装潢，说明书中的错误而调和其音韵反切，以辅助洗马。
English: The school book and the orthography are in charge of writing and decorating, and the mistakes in the instruction book are adjusted and their phonemes are reversed to help wash the horse.

古文：先是，洪武初，置大本堂，充古今图籍其中，召四方名儒训导太子、亲王。
现代文：在此之前，洪武初年，设置大本堂，在那里放置古今图册典籍，召各地著名儒士训导太子、亲王。
English: Prior to this, in the first year of Hongwu, a large main hall was set up, where ancient and modern picture books were placed, and famous Confucians from all over the country were called to teach princes and princes.

古文：诸儒专经面授，分番夜直。
现代文：各儒士专门讲授一经，分班轮换值夜。
English: Each Confucianist teaches one sutra at a time, and shifts rotate on duty at night.

古文：已而太子居文华堂，诸儒迭班侍从，又选才俊之士入充伴读，时时赐宴、赋诗，商榷今古，评论文学。
现代文：随后，太子住在文华堂，各儒师更替侍从，又挑选才能杰出之士入宫充当伴读，常常赐宴、赋诗，商讨古今大事，评论文章才学。
English: Subsequently, the prince lived in the Wenhua Hall, and the Confucian scholars replaced the attendants. They also selected outstanding talents to enter the palace to serve as reading accompaniment, often giving banquets, fusing poems, discussing ancient and modern events, and commenting on articles.

古文：是时东宫官属，自太子少师、少傅、少保、宾客外，则有左、右詹事，同知詹事院事，副詹事，詹事丞，左、右率府使，同知左、右率府事，左、右率府副使，谕德，赞善大夫，皆以勋旧大臣兼领其职。
现代文：这时，东宫官员，除太子少师、少傅、少保、宾客之外，便有左、右詹事，同知詹事院事，副詹事，詹事丞，左、右率府使，同知左、右率府事，左、右率府副使，谕德，赞善大夫，都以有功勋的老臣兼任其职。
English: At this time, the officials of the East Palace, in addition to the prince's young teachers, young foremen, young guards, and guests, there were left and right Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji, the same Zhanji,

古文：又有文学、中舍、正字、侍正、洗马、庶子及赞读等官。
现代文：又有文学、中舍、正字、侍正、洗马、庶子以及赞读等官。
English: In addition, there are officials in charge of literature, middle school, orthography, waiter, horse-washing, illegitimate children, and praise reading.

古文：十五年，更定左、右春坊官，各置庶子、谕德、中允、赞善、司直郎，又各设大学士。
现代文：十五年，重新确定左、右春坊官，各设庶子、谕德、中允、赞善、司直郎，又各设大学士。
English: In the fifteenth year, the positions of the Left and Right Spring Palaces were re-determined, and the positions of the illegitimate son, the disciple, the middle son, the disciple's son, the disciple's son, and the scholar were established respectively.

古文：寻定司经局官，设洗马、校书、正字。
现代文：不久确定司经局官，设洗马、校书、正字。
English: It was not long before the Secretary for Economic Affairs was appointed, and the washing of horses, school books, and orthography were set up.

古文：二十二年，以官联无统，始置詹事院。
现代文：二十二年，因为官职牵连没有统率，开始设置詹事院。
English: In 1922, due to the fact that there was no leader because of the official position, Zhanji Yuan was established.

古文：二十五年，改院为府，定詹事秩正三品，春坊大学士正五品，司经局洗马从五品。
现代文：二十五年，改院为府，定詹事官阶正三晶，春坊大学士正五品，司经局洗马从五品。
English: In the 25th year, the institute was transformed into a prefectural government, and Ding Zhan's official rank was raised to the third grade, Chunfang University's official rank was raised to the fifth grade, and the Bureau of Economic Affairs' official rank was raised to the fifth grade.

古文：虽各有印，而事总于詹事府。
现代文：虽然各有印章，而政事总揽于詹事府。
English: Although they each have their own seal, political affairs are generally handled by the Zhanji Prefecture.

古文：二十九年，增设左、右春坊清纪郎、司谏、通事舍人。
现代文：二十九年，增设左、右春坊清纪郎、司谏、通事舍人。
English: In 1929, the left and right spring lodges of Qing Jiro, the priest, and the secretary were added.

古文：建文中，增少卿、寺丞各一人，宾客二人。
现代文：建文年间，增设少卿、寺丞各一人，宾客二人。
English: During the Kenbun era, there was an additional Shokei (Junior Secretary) and Terajo (Master of the Temple), one each, and two guests.

古文：又置资德院资德一人，资善二人。
现代文：又设置资德院资德一人，资善二人。
English: In addition, there will be one person of virtue and two people of virtue in the school.

古文：其属，赞读、赞书、著作郎各二人，掌典籍各一人。
现代文：它的下属，赞读、赞书、著作郎各二人，掌管典籍各一人。
English: Its subordinates are two people for each of praise reading, praise book, and author, and one person in charge of classics.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：英宗初，命大学士提调讲读官。
现代文：英宗初年，命令大学士提调讲读官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yingzong, he ordered the university to transfer Shi Ti to the post of lecturer.

古文：按詹事府多由他官兼掌。
现代文：按詹事府多由其它官员兼任。
English: According to Zhan Shifu, most of them are concurrently held by other officials.

古文：天顺以前，或尚书、侍郎、都御史，成化以后，率以礼部尚书、侍郎由翰林出身者兼掌之。
现代文：天顺以前，或尚书、侍郎、都御史，成化以后，大都以礼部尚书、侍郎由翰林出身的兼任此职。
English: Prior to Tenshun, there may have been a Shoshu, a Jiro, and a Tsugoshi, but after coming of age, most of the Shoshu, Jiro, and Tsugoshi from the ceremonial department also held this position.

古文：其协理者无常员。
现代文：它的协理的人没有常任官员。
English: Its co-chairs are not permanent officials.

古文：春坊大学士，景泰间，倪谦、刘定之而后，仅杨廷和一任之，后不复设。
现代文：春坊大学士，景泰年间，倪谦、刘定之以后，祇有杨廷和担任一次，后来不再设置。
English: After Ni Qian and Liu Ding, during the years of Jing Tai, a scholar of Chunfang University, only Yang Tinghe held the post once, and later it was no longer set up.

古文：其司直、司谏、清纪郎亦不常置。
现代文：它的司直、司谏、清纪郎也不常设。
English: Its Sunao, Sisho, and Kiyojirou are also not permanent.

古文：惟嘉靖十八年以陆深为詹事，崔铣为少詹事，王教、罗洪先、华察等为谕德、赞善、洗马，皇甫涍、唐顺之等为司直、司谏，皆天下名儒。
现代文：只有嘉靖十八年以陆深焉詹事，崔铣为少詹事，王教、罗洪先、华察等为谕德、赞善、洗马，皇甫漳、唐顺之等焉司直、司谏，都是天下名儒。
English: Only in the 18th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Lu Shenshen and Cui Yao were the most famous Confucian scholars, Wang Jiao, Luo Hongxian and Huacha were the most famous Confucian scholars, and Wang Fuxiong and Tang Shun were the most famous Confucian scholars.

古文：自明初宋濂诸人后，宫僚莫盛于此。
现代文：从明初宋濂等人之后，束官僚属没有比这时更兴盛的了。
English: From the beginning of the Ming Dynasty to the Song Dynasty and beyond, the bureaucracy has never been more prosperous.

古文：嗣是，出阁讲读，每点别员，本府坊局仅为翰林官迁转之阶。
现代文：从此，太子出阁讲读，常常点调别的官员，本府坊局只是翰林官迁转的过渡。
English: From then on, when the crown prince went to the cabinet to give a lecture, other officials were often transferred. This prefectural office was just a transition from the Hanlin official.

古文：翰林院。学士一人，侍读学士、侍讲学士各二人，侍读、侍讲各二人，《五经》博士九人，典籍二人，侍书二人，待诏六人，孔目一人，史官修撰，编修，检讨，庶吉士，无定员。
现代文：翰林院，学士一人，正五品，侍读学士、侍讲学士各二人，都是从五品，侍读、侍讲各二人，都是正六品，《五经》博士九人，正八品，都是世袭，见他处。典籍二人，从八品，侍书二人，正九品，后来不常设。待诏六人，从九品，不常设。孔目一人，没有入流。史官修撰，从六品，编修，正七品，检讨，从七品，庶吉士，没有固定的额员。
English: In the Hanlin Academy, there was one bachelor, five grades above, two attendant bachelors, two attendant lecturers, all five grades above, two attendant readers, two attendant lecturers, all six grades above. There were nine doctors of the Five Classics, eight grades above, all hereditary, see other places. There were two classics, eight grades above, two attendant scribes, nine grades above, later not permanent. There were six waiters, nine grades above, not permanent. There was one scholar of Confucius, who did not join the school. There were six historiographers, six grades above, compilers, seven grades above, reviewers, seven grades above, and

古文：学士，掌制诰、史册、文翰之事，以考议制度，详正文书，备天子顾问。
现代文：学士掌管制策诰令、史册、文章的事务，以考订评议制度，详细订正文书，预备天子询问。
English: Bachelors are in charge of supervising the affairs of policy decrees, historical records, and articles, setting up a review system, revising documents in detail, and preparing inquiries.

古文：凡经筵日讲，纂修实录、玉牒、史志诸书，编纂六曹章奏，皆奉敕而统承之。诰敕，以学士一人兼领。
现代文：垫涂七年，恢复设置。正德年间，白钺、费宏等由礼部尚书进入塞扬，专门掌管诰敕。塞堕大年又罢除，以讲、读、编、检等官管理。
English: During the Zhengde era, Bai Rong, Fei Hong, and others were transferred from the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, where they were specifically in charge of education. They were removed from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology the following year, and were placed under the management of officials such as lecturers, readers, editors, and inspectors.

古文：大政事、大典礼，集诸臣会议，则与诸司参决其可否。
现代文：大政事、大典礼，聚集群臣会同商议，则与各部门参议决定其可否。
English: Major political affairs, major ceremonies, and gatherings of ministers will be discussed together, and then it will be decided with the participation of various departments.

古文：车驾幸太学听讲，凡郊祀庆成诸宴，则学士侍坐于四品京卿上。
现代文：皇上临幸太学听讲，所有郊祀庆贺成功等各种宴会，则学士侍坐于四品京卿以上。
English: The emperor listens to lectures, and at all banquets such as the celebration of the success of the suburb, the bachelor attendant sits above the four-star emperor.

古文：侍读、侍讲，掌讲读经史。
现代文：侍读、侍讲掌管讲读经史。
English: Attendants and lecturers are in charge of lecturing on the history of scripture.

古文：《五经》博士，初置五人，各掌专经讲义，继以优给圣贤先儒后裔世袭，不治院事。
现代文：《五经》博士；起初设置五人，各自负责专门一经讲读大义，后来特别赐予圣贤先儒的后世子孙世袭，不管理院中事务。
English: "Five Classics" doctor; at first, five people were set up, each responsible for a special lecture on the Great Righteousness, and later specially given to the descendants of the descendants of the saints and sages, and did not manage the affairs of the hospital.

古文：史官，掌修国史。
现代文：史官掌管修纂国史。
English: Historians are in charge of compiling national history.

古文：凡天文、地理、宗潢、礼乐、兵刑诸大政，及诏敕、书檄，批答王言，皆籍而记之，以备实录。
现代文：凡是天文、地理、皇室宗族、礼乐、兵刑各种大政事，以及诏敕、书信檄文，批答王言，都登记并誊录，以预备编纂实录。
English: All astronomical, geographical, royal family and clan, ceremonial music, military punishment and other major political events, as well as imperial edicts, letters and documents, and replies to royal edicts, were registered and transcribed in preparation for compiling the actual record.

古文：国家有纂修著作之书，则分掌考辑撰述之事。
现代文：国家有纂修著作书籍，便分别掌管考证辑补写作的事务。
English: The state has the right to compile and revise books, and it is in charge of the business of compiling and writing examinations and certificates.

古文：经筵充展卷官，乡试充考试官，会试充同考官，殿试充收卷官。
现代文：御前讲席充当展卷官，乡试充当考试官，会试充当同考官，殿试充当收卷官。
English: The imperial front desk acts as the examiner, the township exam acts as the examiner, the community exam acts as the examiner, and the palace exam acts as the examiner.

古文：凡记注起居，编纂六曹章奏，誊黄册封等咸充之。
现代文：凡是记录帝王日常生活，编纂六曹奏章，誊写黄籍册封等都充任。
English: He was responsible for recording the emperor's daily life, compiling the Six Recitals, and transcribing the Yellow Book.

古文：庶吉士，读书翰林院，以学士一人教习之。
现代文：庶吉士在翰林院读书，以学士一人教导他们。
English: Shoko Kishi studied at Hanlin Academy and taught them with a bachelor.

古文：侍书，掌以六书供侍。
现代文：侍书掌管以六书供奉侍候。
English: The attendant is in charge of six books to serve and wait.

古文：待诏，掌应对。
现代文：待诏负责应对。
English: It will be up to the government to respond.

古文：孔目掌文移。
现代文：孔目掌管公文。
English: Kongmoe is in charge of Kumon.

古文：吴元年，初置翰林院，秩正三品，设学士，侍讲学士，直学士，修撰、典簿，编修，洪武二年，置学士承旨，正三品，改学士，从三品。
现代文：吴元年，刚设置翰林院，官阶正三品，设学士，正三品，侍讲学士，正四品，直学士，正五品，修撰、典簿，正七品，编修，正八品。洪武二年，设置学士承旨，正三品，改学士，从三品。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the Hanlin Academy was just established, and the official ranks were as follows: Senior Third Rank, Bachelor, Senior Third Rank, Assistant Lecturer, Senior Fourth Rank, Direct Bachelor, Senior Fifth Rank, Copywriter, Classic Book, Senior Seventh Rank, Editor, Senior Eighth Rank. In the second year of the Hongwu Dynasty, the bachelor's degree was established, Senior Third Rank, and the bachelor's degree was changed from Senior Third Rank to Junior Third Rank.

古文：增设待制，应奉，典籍等官。
现代文：侍讲学士，正四品，侍读学士，从四品，修撰，正六品。
English: Attendant Lecturer Baccalaureate, grade four, Attendant Lecturer Baccalaureate, grade four, Revised, grade six.

古文：十三年，增设检阅。
现代文：增设待制，从五品，应奉，正七品，典籍从八品，等官。
English: The following officials were added to the system: to-be-made, from grade five, to-be-held, from grade seven, from grade eight, and so on.

古文：十四年，定学士为正五品，革承旨、直学士、待制、应奉、检阅、典簿，设孔目、《五经》博士、侍书、待诏、检讨。
现代文：十三年，增设检阅，从九品。十四年，确定学士焉正五品，革除承旨、直学士、待制、应奉、检阅、典簿，设孔目、《五经》博士、侍书、待诏、检讨。
English: In the 13th year, the examination was added, from nine grades. In the 14th year, it was determined that the bachelor's degree was equal to five grades, excluding the order, the direct bachelor's degree, the pending degree, the subject, the examination, the register, the aperture, the doctor of the "Five Classics," the attendant, the pending, and the examination.

古文：令编修、检讨、典籍同左春坊左司直郎、正字、赞读考驳诸司奏启，平允则署其衔曰 翰林院兼平驳诸司文章事某官某 ，列名书之。
现代文：命令编修、检讨、典籍同左春坊左司直郎、正字、赞读考察驳正各司奏章，平正允当便签署其职衔为 翰林院兼平驳诸司文章事某官某 ，署上自己姓名。
English: Ordered to compile, review, classic books with Zuo Chunbo Zuo Shi Naorong, correct words, praise and read, examine and refute each chapter, Ping Zheng Yuntang signed his title as Hanlin Academy and refute the articles of various departments, official, with his name on the post.

古文：十八年，更定品员，以侍读先侍讲。
现代文：十八年，重新确定官品人数，如网上文所列，祇是没有庶吉士，把侍读提到侍讲之前。
English: In 2018, the number of official ranks was re-determined, as listed in the online article, only there were no junior officials, and the attendant reading was mentioned before the attendant lecture.

古文：建文时，仍设承旨，改侍读、侍讲两学士为文学博士，设文翰、文史二馆，文翰以居侍读、侍讲、侍书、《五经》博士、典籍、待诏，文史以居修撰、编修、检讨。
现代文：建文时期，仍旧设承旨，改侍读、侍讲两学士焉文学博士，设立文翰、文史二馆，文翰馆居处侍读、侍讲、侍书、《五经》博士、典籍、待诏，文史馆居处修撰、编修、检讨。
English: At the time of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Succession to the Throne Office was still set up, and two bachelor's degrees and a doctorate in literature were changed to attendant reading and attendant lecturing, the Second Literature and History Museum was set up, the residence of the Literature and History Museum was for attendant reading, attendant lecturing, attendant books, "Five Classics" doctorate, classics, and imperial edict, and the residence of the Literature and History Museum was for revision, editing, and review.

古文：改孔目为典簿，改中书舍人为侍书，以隶翰林。
现代文：改孔目为典簿，改中书舍人为侍书，而隶属翰林院。
English: The rectified hole is the register, the rectified middle school is the library, and it belongs to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：又设文渊阁待诏及拾遗、补阙等官。
现代文：又设文渊阁待诏以及拾遗、补阙等官。
English: In addition, officials such as Bunyu-kaku, who were in charge of waiting for the imperial edict, as well as the officials in charge of collecting the imperial edict and supplementing the imperial edict.

古文：成祖初复旧。
现代文：成祖初年恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system in the first year.

古文：其年九月，特简讲、读、编、检等官参预机务，谓之内阁。
现代文：那年九月，特别选拔讲、读、编、检等官参与机要事务，选用没有定员，称之为内阁。
English: In September of that year, officials such as the speaker, reader, editor, and procurator were specially selected to participate in important affairs. There was no quota for the selection, and it was called a cabinet.

古文：然解缙、胡广等既直文渊阁，犹相继署院事。
现代文：因而解缙、胡广等已值班文渊阁，还是相继署理院事。
English: As a result, Wen Yuange and Hu Guang, who were already on duty, were relieved of their duties and successively became acting members of the academy.

古文：至洪熙以后，杨士奇等加至师保，礼绝百僚，始不复署。
现代文：到洪熙以后，杨士奇等加官至师保，礼仪超过百官，纔不再署理院事。
English: After the arrival of Hongxi, Yang Shichi and other officials were promoted to teachers and guards, the etiquette exceeded 100 officials, and Zou was no longer in charge of the affairs of the academy.

古文：正统七年，翰林院落成，学士钱习礼不设杨士奇、杨溥公座，曰 此非三公府也 ，二杨以闻。
现代文：正统七年，翰林院落成，学士钱习礼不设杨士奇、杨溥的座位，说 这不是三公府 ，二杨上报皇帝。
English: In the seventh year of orthodoxy, Hanlin Academy was completed, and the seat of Yang Shichi and Yang Xi was not set up for the bachelor Qian Xi Rong. It was said that this was not the three public houses, and the second Yang reported to the emperor.

古文：乃命工部具椅案，礼部定位次，以内阁固翰林职也。
现代文：于是命工部准备桌椅，礼部定位列次序，以内阁本来就是翰林职位。
English: As a result, he ordered the Ministry of Works to prepare tables and chairs, the Ministry of Ceremonies to set the order of the rows, and the Cabinet was originally Hanlin's position.

古文：其在六部，自成化时，周洪谟以后，礼部尚书、侍郎必由翰林，吏部两侍郎必有一由于翰林。
现代文：台堕、坠鏖以前，公文称呼，还称翰林院，以后则直接称内阁。它在六部，自成化时期，周洪谟以后，礼部尚书、侍郎必定来自翰林院，吏部两侍郎必有一个来自翰林院。
English: Before the fall of Taiwan and the fall of the Qing Dynasty, the official document was also called the Hanlin Academy, and later it was directly called the cabinet. It was in six parts, in the period of self-development, after Zhou Hongmu, the ceremonial secretary and the chamberlain must come from the Hanlin Academy, and one of the two chamberlains must come from the Hanlin Academy.

古文：其由翰林者，尚书则兼学士，侍郎则兼侍读、侍讲学士。
现代文：那些来自翰林院的，尚书便兼学士，六部都是这样，侍郎便兼侍读、侍讲学士。
English: For those from Hanlin Academy, the title of Shangshu is also the title of Baccalaureate, and this is the case for all six departments. The waiter is also a waiter, and the waiter is also a lecturer.

古文：其在詹事府暨坊、局官，视其品级，必带本院衔。
现代文：那些在詹事府以及坊、局官员，视其品级，必定带翰林院官街。
English: Those officials in Zhan Shifu as well as wang and bureau officials, depending on their rank, must take Hanlin Academician Street.

古文：史官，自洪武十四年置修撰三人，编修、检讨各四人。
现代文：詹事、少詹事带学士街，春坊大学士不常设，庶子、谕德、中允、赞善、洗马等则带讲、读学士以下至编、检官街。史官，从洪武十四年设置修撰三人，编修、检讨各四人。
English: Zhan Zhi and Shao Zhan Zhi are associated with Baccalaureate Street, while Chunfang University does not have a permanent Baccalaureate Street, while Zhi Zi, Zhu De, Zhong Yun, Zanzan, Zema, etc. are associated with Lectures, Baccalaureate students and below with Editing, and Censors' Street. Historians, since the 14th year of Hongwu, are set up with three people to edit, and four people each to edit and review.

古文：其后由一甲进士除授及庶吉士留馆授职，往往溢额，无定员。
现代文：此后由一甲进士任职及庶吉士留馆任职，往往超编，没有定员。
English: Since then, it has been staffed by one Jinshi and one Kishi, often super-edited, with no fixed number of employees.

古文：嘉靖八年，复定讲、读、修撰各三人，编修、检讨各六人，皆从吏部推补，如诸司例。
现代文：嘉靖八年，又确定讲、读、修撰各三人，编修、检讨各六人，都从吏部推举替补，如同各司的条例。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, it was also determined that there would be three people for each of speaking, reading, and editing, and six people for each of editing and reviewing, all of whom would be selected from the personnel department as replacements, as per the regulations of each department.

古文：然未几即以侍从人少，诏采方正有学术者以充其选，因改御史胡经、员外郎陈束、主事唐顺之等七人俱为编修。
现代文：然而不久，就因为侍从人员少，诏令选拔端正有学问的人以充当人选，因此改御史胡经、员外郎陈束、主事唐顺之等七人都为编修。
English: However, soon, due to the lack of attendants, the imperial edict was issued to select a well-educated person to serve as a candidate, so seven people, including the editor-in-chief, Hu Jing, the secretary-general, Chen Zhou, and the director, Tang Shun, were all editors.

古文：以后仍循旧例，由庶吉士除授，卒无定额。
现代文：以后仍旧因循旧例，由庶吉士授官，最终无定员。
English: Since then, the old practice has been followed, with officers being promoted from junior officers, and ultimately there is no fixed number of officers.

古文：崇祯七年，又考选推官、知县为编修、检讨，盖亦创举，非常制也。
现代文：崇祯七年，又考试选拔推官、知县等为编修、检讨，然而也是创举，不是常制。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the examination selection of officials, counties and so on was compiled and reviewed, but it was also a pioneering move, not a regular system.

古文：庶吉士，自洪武初有六科庶吉士。
现代文：庶吉士从洪武初年有六科庶吉士。
English: Second-year cadets: Since Hongwu's first year, there have been six second-year cadets.

古文：十八年以进士在翰林院、承敕监等近侍者，俱称庶吉士。
现代文：十八年，以进士在翰林院、承敕监等近侍的人，都称庶吉士。
English: In the 18th year, those who were close attendants at Hanlin Academy, such as Jang Yeon-joon and others, were called "junior Kishi."

古文：永乐二年，始定为翰林院庶吉士，选进士文学优等及善书者为之。
现代文：永乐二年，开始定为翰林院庶吉士，选拔进士中文章优等以及擅长书法的人担任。
English: In the second year of Yongle, it began to be designated as the Hanlin Academy, and people who were good at calligraphy and excellent at writing were selected.

古文：三年试之。
现代文：三年考试他们。
English: Three years of testing them.

古文：其留者，二甲授编修，三甲授检讨；不得留者，则为给事中、御史，或出为州县官。
现代文：那些留用的，二甲授官编修，三甲授官检讨；不能留下的，便焉给事中、御史，或出京任州县官。
English: Those who are retained will be assigned to the second-class officers for editing and revision, and the third-class officers for review. Those who cannot be retained will be assigned to the middle-ranking officials, the imperial historians, or will be sent to Beijing to serve as prefectural and county officials.

古文：宣德五年，始命学士教习。
现代文：宣德五年，阕始命学士教导学习。
English: In the five years of Xuande, the first bachelor's degree in teaching and learning was established.

古文：万历以后，掌教习者，专以吏、礼二部侍郎二人。
现代文：万历以后，掌管教导的，专门用吏、礼二部侍郎二人。
English: After Wanli, the person in charge of teaching was a special official, and there were two attendants for the second part of the ceremony.

古文：其属，绳愆厅，监丞一人，博士厅，《五经》博士五人。
现代文：至万历年间，命令翰林院官兼任此职。不久又罢除。不久都罢除。国子监，祭酒一人，从四品，司业一人，正六品。它的下属，绳愆厅，监丞一人，正八品。博士厅，《五经》博士五人，从八品。
English: In the year of Wanli, Hanlin academician was ordered to hold this post concurrently. He was soon dismissed. Soon they were all dismissed. Kunishi supervisor, one person from the fourth grade, one person from the sixth grade, one person from the fifth grade, one person from the sixth grade, one person from the seventh grade, one person from the eighth grade, one person from the seventh grade, one person from the eighth grade, five people from the eighth grade, five people from the eighth grade, five people from the eighth grade.

古文：率性、修道、诚心、正义、崇志、广业六堂，助教十五人，学正十人，学录七人。
现代文：率性、修道、诚心、正义、崇志、广业六堂，助教十五人，从八品，学正十人，正九品，学录七人，从九品。
English: There are six classes for leadership, self-discipline, sincerity, justice, loftiness, and wide learning, and 15 teaching assistants, from eight classes, ten students from ten classes, nine students from nine classes, seven students from nine classes, and nine students from nine classes.

古文：典簿厅，典簿一人。
现代文：典簿厅，典簿一人，从八品。
English: A librarian, a librarian, from the eighth grade.

古文：典籍厅，典籍一人。
现代文：典籍厅，典籍一人，从九品。
English: Classic Book Hall, Classic Book One, from Jiuping.

古文：掌馔厅，掌馔二人。
现代文：掌仆厅，掌撰二人，没有入流。
English: Shokuhaku-dori, composed of two musicians, did not join the school.

古文：祭酒、司业，掌国学诸生训导之政令。
现代文：祭酒、司业，掌管国学诸生训导的政令。
English: The government decrees governing the offering of sacrificial wine, the administration of business, and the instruction of all living beings in the study of Chinese.

古文：凡举人、贡生、官生、恩生、功生、例生、土官、外国生、幼勋臣及勋戚大臣子弟之入监者，奉监规而训课之，造以明体达用之学，以孝弟、礼义、忠信、廉耻为之本，以六经、诸史为之业，务各期以敦伦善行，敬业乐群，以修举古乐正、成均之师道。
现代文：所有举人、贡生、官生、恩生、功生、例生、土官、外国生、功勋之臣及功勋外戚大臣年幼子弟进入学监的，奉监规而训导教育督促他们，以明白事体通达实用的学问造就他们，以孝悌、礼义、忠信、廉耻为他们的根本，以六经、诸史作为他们的学业，务必各个朔望以敦厚善良，敬业乐群，以修习发扬古代乐正、成均之学的师道。
English: All young sons and daughters of vassals, tributary students, government students, favoured students, meritorious students, regular students, local officials, foreign students, meritorious vassals, and meritorious maternal relatives of ministers who enter the school supervisors, should follow the supervision rules to instruct and supervise their education, educate them to understand things and reach practical knowledge, take filial piety, courtesy, loyalty, and integrity as their foundation, and take the Six Classics and various histories as their studies, and be sure to expect each pupil to be good-natured and kind, dedicated to music, and to practice and carry forward the ancient music and the teacher's way

古文：有不率者，扑以夏楚，不悛，徙谪之。
现代文：有不遵从教导的，用荆条鞭打他，不悔改，贬谪驱逐他。
English: If anyone does not obey this teaching, he is to be beaten with a rod and then, if he does not repent, he is to be cast out.

古文：其率教者，有升堂积分超格叙用之法。
现代文：那些遵从教导的，有升堂积分破格录用的方法。
English: For those who follow the teachings, there is a way to break the mold and get a promotion.

古文：课业仿书，季呈翰林院考校，文册岁终奏上。
现代文：督课学业摹写文字，每季呈翰林院考核，文册在年终奏上。
English: Supervise course academic transcription, submit to the Hanlin Academy for assessment every quarter, and the textbook will be included in the year-end recital.

古文：每岁仲春秋上丁，遣大臣祀先师，则总其礼仪。
现代文：每年仲春仲秋上丁日，派遣大臣祭祀先师孔子，便总领祭祀的礼仪。
English: Every year, in the middle of spring, in the middle of autumn, and on the first day of the month of Ding, a minister is dispatched to offer sacrifices to the forerunner, Confucius, who then presides over the ritual.

古文：车驾幸学，则执经坐讲。
现代文：皇上驾临国学，便手持经书坐讲。
English: When the Emperor came to study Chinese, he sat down with a scripture in his hand.

古文：新进士释褐，则坐而受拜。
现代文：新进士登科，便坐而接受拜谒。
English: When a new student enters the university, he sits down and receives a bow.

古文：监丞掌绳愆厅之事，以参领监务，坚明其约束，诸师生有过及廪膳不洁，并纠惩之，而书之于集愆册。
现代文：监丞掌管绳愆厅的事，以参与管理监中事务，严格执行规章制度，各位师生有遇错以及供应的膳食不洁净，一并纠察惩罚，并且把它记录在记载过错的集愆册上。
English: The supervisor supervises the affairs of the rope and splint office, participates in the management of the detention center affairs, strictly implements the rules and regulations, and punishes the teachers and students for making mistakes and the unclean meals, and records it in the fault record book.

古文：博士掌分经讲授，而时其考课。
现代文：博士掌管分经讲授，并时常考查。
English: A Ph.D. is in charge of the teaching of the sutras, and they are often examined.

古文：凡经，以《易》、《诗》、《书》、《春秋》、《礼记》，人专一经，《大学》、《中庸》、《论语》、《孟子》兼习之。
现代文：凡是经书，用《易》、《诗》、《书》、《春秋》、《礼记》，每人专讲一经，《大学》、《中庸》、《论语》、《孟子》兼研习。
English: For all scriptures, use "Easy," "Poetry," "Book," "Spring and Autumn" and "Rituals," each person should read one scripture, "University," "Middle School," "Discourse" and "Mencius" and study.

古文：助教、学正、学录掌六堂之训诲，士子肄业本堂，则为讲说经义文字，导约之以规矩。
现代文：助教、学正、学录掌管六堂的训诲，学生在本堂修习学业，便为他们讲说经义文字，用规矩引导规范他们。
English: The teaching of the six halls is in charge of the teaching assistant, the principal, and the school record. The students study in this hall, and they will be told the scriptures and guided and regulated by the rules.

古文：典簿，典文移金钱出纳支受。
现代文：典簿掌管公文、金钱出纳收支。
English: The register is in charge of official documents, cashier receipts and disbursements.

古文：典籍，典书籍。
现代文：典籍掌管书籍。
English: The canon governs the books.

古文：掌馔，掌饮馔。
现代文：掌僎掌管饮食。
English: The palms of the hands are in charge of eating.

古文：明初，即置国子学。
现代文：塑朝初年，便已设置国子学。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Kuniko-gaku was established.

古文：设博士、助教、学正、学录、典乐、典书、典膳等官。
现代文：乙巳年九月设置国子学，以过去的集庆路学充当。邀亟十四年改建国子学于整坠山下。设博士、助教、学正、学录、典乐、典书、典膳等官。
English: Kuniko Gakuin was set up in September of the year of the snake, using the past Jikei Road School as its role. It was invited to rebuild Kuniko Gakuin at the foot of the mountain in the 14th year. There were doctors, assistant teachers, school principals, school records, classical music, classical books, classical meals and other officials.

古文：吴元年，定国子学官制，增设祭酒、司业、典簿。
现代文：昊元年，制定园子学官制，增设祭酒、司业、典簿。
English: In the first year of the year of Hao, the official system of gardening and education was established, and the sacrificial wine, stewardship, and register were added.

古文：洪武八年，又置中都国子学，命国子学分官领之。
现代文：祭酒，正四品，司业，正五品，博士，正七品，典簿，正八品，助教，从八品，学正，正九品，学录，从九品，典膳，省注。
English: Sacrificial wine, grade four, official business, grade five, doctor, grade seven, register, grade eight, assistant teacher, grade eight, student, grade nine, school record, grade nine, ceremonial meal, provincial annotation.

古文：十三年，改典膳为掌馔。
现代文：洪武八年，又设置中都园子学，官秩正四品，命令国子学分派官员担任。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, he also set up the Zhongdu Yuanzi School, with four official ranks, and ordered the Guozi School to assign officials to serve.

古文：十五年，改为国子监，秩从四品，设祭酒一人，司业一人，监丞、典簿各一人，博士三人，助教十六人，学正、学录各三人，掌馔一人。
现代文：十三年，改典膳焉掌僎。十五年，改为国子监，官阶从四品，设祭酒一人，司业一人，监丞、典簿各一人，博士三人，助教十六人，学正、学录各三人，掌僎一人。
English: In 15 years, it was changed to the National Children's Supervisor, the official ranks were reduced from four to one, and there was one person in charge of offering wine, one person in charge of business, one supervisor and one person in charge of records, three doctors, 16 teaching assistants, three people in charge of studies and three people in charge of records, and one supervisor.

古文：中都国子监制亦如之。
现代文：各官品级，如上文所列。园子监制度也如此。
English: The ranks of officials are as listed above, and so is the kindergarten supervision system.

古文：十六年，以宋讷为祭酒，敕谕之曰： 太学天下贤关，礼义所由出，人材所由兴。
现代文：十六年，以宋讷为祭酒，敕令告谕他说： 太学是天下贤阗，礼义从那里生出，人才从那里兴起。
English: In the 16th year, Songna was used as the sacrificial wine, and the imperial edict announced to him: "Taigaku is the world's wisdom, from there, propriety is born, and talent rises from there."

古文：卿夙学耆德，故特命为祭酒。
现代文：您学问深厚德行高洁，故特别任命为祭酒。
English: Because of your profound learning, virtuous conduct and purity, you have been specially appointed as the sacrificial wine.

古文：尚体朕立教之意，俾诸生有成，士习丕变，国家其有赖焉。 
现代文：希望体察我立儒教的愿望，使众儒生有所成就，士林习气大变，国家将有依赖。 
English: I hope that you can feel my desire to establish Confucianism, so that all Confucian students can achieve something, Shilin customs will change dramatically, and the country will be dependent.

古文：又命曹国公李文忠领监事，车驾时幸。
现代文：又命曹国公李文忠领监事，皇上时常临幸。
English: He also ordered Cao Guogong Li Wenzhong to be the supervisor, and the emperor often visited him.

古文：二十四年，更定国子监品秩、员数。
现代文：因为这个缘故监官不得在中鹿设座，从中门出入。二十四年，重新制定国子监品级、人数。
English: Because of this, supervisors are not allowed to set up a seat in Zhonglu and enter and leave from Zhongmen.In 2004, the quality level and number of Kuniko supervisors were re-established.

古文：中都国子监设祭酒、司业、监丞、典簿、博士、学正、学录、掌馔各一人，助教二人，品秩与在京同。
现代文：都如上文所列。中都园子监设祭酒、司业、监丞、典簿、博士、学正、学录、掌镤各一人，助教二人，品级与在京城的相同。
English: All are as listed above. The supervisors of the festival wine, the superintendent, the superintendent, the registrar, the registrar, the doctor, the head of the school, the school record, and the palms are one each, and there are two teaching assistants. The grades are the same as in the capital.

古文：二十六年，罢中都国子监。
现代文：二十六年，罢除中都国子监。
English: In 1926, he was removed from the position of Zhongdu Guozhixuan.

古文：建文中，升监丞为堂上官，革学正、学录。
现代文：建文年间，升监丞焉堂上官，革除学正、学录。
English: During the Jianwen era, Shonkenjo was promoted to Shokan, and Dangdang was promoted to Shokan, and he was dismissed from his position as Gakusho and Gakuro.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧有制度。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：永乐元年，置国子监于北京，设祭酒、司业、监丞、典簿、博士、学正、学录、掌馔各一人，助教二人。
现代文：后来增设没有常数，助教至十五人，学正至十一人，学录至七人。后来革除助教二人，学正四人，学录二人。蔓历九年，又革除助教四人，学录一人。
English: Later, the number of teaching assistants was increased to fifteen, students to eleven, and students to seven. Later, two teaching assistants were dismissed, four students were dismissed, and two students were dismissed. Nine years later, four teaching assistants were dismissed and one student was dismissed.

古文：宣德九年，省司业。
现代文：宣德九年撤销司业。
English: Xuande revoked the division nine years ago.

古文：弘治十五年复设。
现代文：弘治十五年恢复设置。
English: It was restored in the 15th year of the Koji era.

古文：明初，祭酒、司业，择有学行者任之，后皆由翰林院官迁转。
现代文：明朝初年，祭酒、司业，挑选有学问品行的人担任，后来都由翰林院官员转迁。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, officials of the Hanlin Academy were selected to be in charge of the sacrificial wine and the stewardship of the industry. Later, they were all transferred.

古文：衍圣公，孔氏世袭，其属，掌书、典籍、司乐、知印、奏差、书写各一人。曲阜知县，孔氏世职。翰林院世袭《五经》博士，孔氏二人，颜氏一人，曾氏一人，仲氏一人，孟氏一人，周氏一人，程氏二人，邵氏一人，张氏一人，朱氏二人，刘氏一人，教授司，教授，学录、学司，孔、颜、曾、孟四氏，各一人。
现代文：张氏一人，玉壁二年，授予先儒张载后裔子孙张文运为博士。朱氏二人，景泰六年，授予先儒朱熹后裔子孙朱梃。嘉靖二年，又授予釜墅为博士，主持婺源庙祀。刘氏一人，景泰七年，授予诚意伯刘基七世孙刘橡，后来革除。教授司，教授，从九品，学录、学司，都没有入流，孔、颜、曾、孟四氏，各一人。
English: Zhang was the only one, and in the second year of Yubi, Zhang Wenyun, a descendant of the former Confucian Zhang Zai, was awarded a doctorate. Zhu was the second, and Jing Tai was the sixth, and the descendant of the former Confucian Zhu Xi was awarded a doctorate. In the second year of Jiajing, Bushu was also awarded a doctorate, and presided over the worship of the Yuyuan Temple. Liu was the first, Jing Tai was the seventh, and awarded the seventh generation of Sincerity Bo Liu Ji's grandson Liu Gu, and was later expelled. Professors, professors, from Jiupin, school records,

古文：又尼山、洙泗二书院，各学录一人。
现代文：又尼山、洙泗两个书院，各有学录一人。
English: In addition, there are two colleges in Nishan and Handan, each with one student.

古文：先是，元代封孔子后裔为衍圣公，赐三品印。
现代文：在此之前，元代封孑子后裔为衍圣公，赐三品官印。
English: Prior to this, the descendants of the sons of the Yuan Dynasty were given three official seals.

古文：洪武元年，太祖既以孔希学袭封衍圣公，因谓礼臣曰： 孔子万世帝王之师，待其后嗣，秩止三品，弗称褒崇，其授希学秩二品，赐以银印。 
现代文：洪武元年，太祖让孔希学袭封为衍圣公之后，因此对礼臣说： 孔子是万代帝王之师，对待他的后裔，官阶只有三品，称不上褒奖尊崇，授予孔希学官阶二品，赐以银印。 
English: In the first year of Hongwu, after the great-grandfather let Kong Xi Xue Rui succeed to the title of Yansheng, he therefore said to the courtiers: Confucius is the teacher of the emperor for thousands of years. For his descendants, there are only three official ranks, which cannot be said to be praise and reverence. Confucius was awarded two official ranks and given a silver seal.

古文：又命复孔、颜、孟三家子孙徭役。
现代文：又命令免除孔、颜、孟三家子孙徭役。
English: He also ordered that the sons and grandsons of Kong, Yan, and Meng be exempted from serving in the military.

古文：十八年，敕工部询问，凡有圣贤子孙以罪输作者，释之。
现代文：十八年，敕令工部询问，凡是有圣贤子孙因犯罪判服劳役的，释放他们。
English: In 18 years, the imperial edict asked the Ministry of Works to release all the sons and grandsons of saints and sages who had been sentenced to labor service for crimes.

古文：永乐二十二年，赐衍圣公宅于京师，加一品金织衣。
现代文：永乐二十二年，在京城赐给衍圣公宅院，加一品金织衣。
English: In the 22nd year of Yongle, it was given to Yan Sheng Gong Yuan in Beijing, plus a piece of gold-woven cloth.

古文：正统元年，诏免凡圣贤子孙差役，选周、程、张、朱诸儒子孙聪明俊秀可教养者，不拘名数，送所在儒学读书，仍给廪馔。
现代文：正统元年，下诏免去所有圣贤子孙的差役，选拔周、程、张、朱各先儒子孙聪明俊秀可教育培养的，不局限人数，送到所在儒学读书，仍旧给予麇生饭食。
English: In the first year of the Orthodox era, the following edict exempted all the descendants of the sages and sages from the forced labor, and selected the descendants of the Confucians Zhou, Cheng, Zhang, and Zhu, who were clever and handsome and could be educated and trained, and sent an unlimited number of them to study Confucianism, and still gave them healthy meals.

古文：成化元年，给孔、颜、孟三氏学印，令三年贡有学行者一人，入国子监。
现代文：成化元年，给予孔、颜、孟三氏学印，令每三年贡奉有学问品行的人一名，入国子监学习。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he gave the seal of learning to Kong, Yan, and Meng San, and ordered that every three years, one person with learning and moral conduct should be paid tribute to enter the country to study.

古文：六年，命衍圣公始袭者在监读书一年。
现代文：六年，命衍圣公开始袭封的在监学读书一年。
English: In the sixth year, Myeongyeon Seongguk began to study under supervision for one year.

