古文：吴良，定远人。初名国兴，赐名良。
现代文：吴良，定远人，原名国兴，赐名为良。
English: Wu Liang, originally named Guoxing, was given the name Liang.

古文：雄伟刚直。与弟祯俱以勇略闻。
现代文：他雄伟刚直，和弟弟吴祯都因勇敢、有胆略而闻名。
English: He was majestic and upright, and both he and his brother Wu Gan were famous for their bravery and daring.

古文：从太祖起濠梁，并为帐前先锋。
现代文：他跟随太祖在濠梁起兵，担任帐前先锋。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to join the army in Qiliang and served as a vanguard.

古文：良能没水侦探，祯每易服为间谍。
现代文：吴良能潜水进行侦探，吴祯则常常化装到敌方进行侦探。
English: Wu Liang is able to dive and conduct detective work, while Wu Yao often disguises himself as an enemy and conducts detective work.

古文：祯别有传。
现代文：吴祯另有传记。
English: There is another biography of Wu Gan.

古文：良从取滁、和，战采石，克太平，下溧水、溧阳，定集庆，功多。
现代文：吴良跟随太祖夺取滁州、和州，攻采石，占领太平，下溧水、溧阳，平定集庆，战功显著。
English: Wu Liang followed his great-great-grandfather to seize Bozhou, Hezhou, attack quarry, occupy Taiping, Shimonoseki, Shenyang, and pacify Jieqing, and his war exploits are remarkable.

古文：又从徐达克镇江，下常州，进镇抚，守丹阳。
现代文：吴良又跟随徐达攻克镇江，下常州，攻占镇抚，守卫丹阳。
English: Wu Liang also followed Xu Da to conquer Zhenjiang, lower Changzhou, capture Zhenfu, and guard Danyang.

古文：与赵继祖等取江阴。
现代文：和赵继祖等人攻取了江阴。
English: and Zhao Jizu and others captured Jiangyin.

古文：张士诚兵据秦望山，良攻夺之，遂克江阴。
现代文：张士诚在秦望山屯兵，吴良攻克了秦望山，又夺取江阴。
English: Zhang Shicheng garrisoned troops in Qinwangshan, Wu Liang conquered Qinwangshan and captured Jiangyin.

古文：即命为指挥使守之。
现代文：随后被任命为指挥使，守卫江阴。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed as the commanding envoy to guard Jiangyin.

古文：时士诚全据吴，跨淮东、浙西，兵食足。
现代文：当时，张士诚占领着整个吴地，地域跨过淮东、浙西，兵强粮足。
English: At that time, Zhang Shicheng occupied the whole of Wudi, spanning the regions of Huaidong and West Zhejiang.

古文：江阴当其要冲，枕大江，扼南北襟喉，士诚数以金帛飨将士，窥衅。
现代文：江阴地势险要，背靠长江，扼守南北咽喉。张士诚多次用金银玉帛奖励将士。
English: Jiangyin is in a precarious situation, backed by the Yangtze River, holding the throat of the north and south. Zhang Shicheng has repeatedly rewarded soldiers with gold, silver and jade.

古文：太祖谕良曰： 江阴，我东南屏蔽，汝约束士卒，毋外交，毋纳逋逃，毋贪小利，毋与争锋，惟保境安民而已。 
现代文：太祖指示吴良说 ：江阴是我东南的屏障，你要对士兵加以约束，不要让他们随便出外交友，不要收留在逃人员，不要贪图小利，不要和地方势力争斗，只要保卫境内人民安居乐业就行了。 
English: The great-grandfather instructed Wu Liang, saying, "The Yangtze River is my southeastern barrier. You must restrain the soldiers, do not let them arbitrarily send out diplomatic friends, do not take in fugitives, do not covet small profits, do not fight with local forces, just protect the people's peaceful life and work.

古文：良奉命惟谨，备御修饬。
现代文：吴良听从命令，在行动上十分谨慎，修筑了防御工事。
English: Wu Liang obeyed the order, was very cautious in his actions, and built fortifications.

古文：以败敌功，进枢密院判官。
现代文：吴良因战功，担任了枢密院判官官职。
English: Wu Liang served as a judge of the Privy Council because of his military exploits.

古文：士诚大举兵来寇，艨艟蔽江，其将苏同佥驻君山，指画进兵。
现代文：张士诚大兵来犯，战舰遮盖长江，大将苏同佥在君山驻军，指挥军队向江阴进攻。
English: Zhang Shicheng's soldiers came to attack, warships covered the Yangtze River, and General Su Tongyu stationed troops in Junshan and commanded the army to attack Jiangyin.

古文：良遣弟祯出北门与战，而潜遣元帅王子明帅壮士驰出南门。合击，大败之，俘斩甚众。
现代文：吴良派弟弟吴祯出北门迎战，另派元帅王子明率壮士骑兵出南门迎战，南北夹击，大败张士诚军队，俘虏和击毙了很多敌人。
English: Wu Liang sent his brother Wu Hao out of the north gate to meet the battle, and sent another marshal, Prince Ming, to lead the strong cavalry out of the south gate to meet the battle. The north and south clamped down, defeated Zhang Shicheng's army, captured and killed many enemies.

古文：敌宵遁。
现代文：敌人乘黑夜逃跑。
English: The enemy took advantage of the darkness to escape.

古文：寻复寇常州，良遣兵从间道歼其援兵于无锡。
现代文：后来敌人又进攻常州，吴良派兵消灭敌援兵于无锡。
English: Later, the enemy attacked Changzhou again, and Wu Liang sent troops to wipe out the enemy reinforcements in Wuxi.

古文：当是时，太祖数自将争江、楚上流，与陈友谅角，大军屡出，金陵空虚。士诚不敢北出侵尺寸地，以良在江阴为屏蔽也。
现代文：这时，太祖亲自率大军和陈友谅激战于江、楚上流，大军多次出外打仗，金陵城空虚，然而张士诚不敢向北侵占一寸土地，原因是吴良在江阴作为有力屏障。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather personally led the army and Chen Youpeng fought fiercely in the upper reaches of the river and Chu. The army went out to fight many times, and Jinling City was empty. However, Zhang Shicheng did not dare to invade one inch of land to the north, because Wu Liang was in Jiangyin as a powerful barrier.

古文：良仁恕俭约，声色货利无所好。
现代文：吴良崇尚节俭，对名声、女色、利益都没有爱好。
English: Wu Liang advocated frugality and had no interest in fame, women, or profit.

古文：夜宿城楼，枕戈达旦。
现代文：他晚上就睡在城楼上，头枕着戈直到天明。
English: At night, he would sleep in the tower, with his head on his pillow, until dawn.

古文：训将练兵，常如寇至。
现代文：训练将士，就仿佛是敌人来了一样。
English: Training soldiers, as if the enemy had come.

古文：暇则延儒生讲论经史，新学宫，立社学。
现代文：闲暇时，吴良和儒生讲论经史，兴建学校，设立学社，大量屯垦田地。
English: In his spare time, Wu Liang and the Confucian scholars lectured on the history of Confucianism, built schools, established academies, and cultivated a large number of fields.

古文：大开屯田，均徭省赋。在境十年，封疆宴然。
现代文：平均徭役、赋税，减轻老百姓的负担。吴良在江阴，保卫疆土，秩序井然。
English: Wu Liang was in Jiangyin, defending the territory, and everything was in order.

古文：太祖常召良劳曰： 吴吴院判保障一方，功甚大，车马珠玉不足旌其劳。
现代文：太祖常常召见吴良，夸奖说： 有吴良保卫一方领土，我就无须顾虑和担忧东线了，他的功劳很大，车、马、珠、玉都不足以奖励他的功劳。 
English: The great-grandfather often summoned Wu Liang and praised him, saying, "With Wu Liang defending one side of the territory, I don't have to worry about the eastern front. His merits are great. Chariots, horses, beads and jade are not enough to reward his merits.

古文：吾其无东顾忧矣！ 命学士宋濂等为诗文美之，仍遣还镇。
现代文：于是，皇上命令学士宋濂等人写诗文赞美吴良，并要求他仍镇守江阴。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the scholar Song Xuan and others to write poems praising Wu Liang, and asked him to continue to guard Jiangyin.

古文：寻大发兵取淮东，克泰州。
现代文：随后吴良出兵攻取了淮东、泰州。
English: Subsequently, Wu Liang sent troops to capture Huadong and Taizhou.

古文：士诚兵复出马驮沙，侵镇江。
现代文：张士诚再次出兵马驮沙，侵占镇江。
English: Zhang Shicheng once again sent troops to Bansha and occupied Zhenjiang.

古文：巨舰数百，溯江而上。
现代文：并派数百艘大战船沿江而上。
English: and sent hundreds of large warships up the river.

古文：良戒严以待。
现代文：吴良严阵以待，太祖亲自督战。
English: Wu Liang Yan was waiting, and the great-grandfather personally supervised the battle.

古文：太祖亲督大军御之。士诚兵遁，追至浮子门。
现代文：张士诚大败而逃，太祖派兵一直追到浮子门。
English: Zhang Shicheng was defeated and fled, and Emperor Taizu sent soldiers to chase him all the way to the Floating Gate.

古文：良出兵夹击，获卒二千。
现代文：吴良派兵夹击，俘虏敌兵二千人。
English: Wu Liang sent troops to make a pincer attack, capturing two thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：太祖诣江阴劳军，周巡壁垒，叹曰： 良，今之吴起也！ 
现代文：太祖下令犒劳江阴军队，并亲自巡视江阴的壁垒，很高兴地说 ：吴良是当代的吴起啊。 
English: The great-grandfather ordered to reward the Jiangyin army, and personally inspected the barriers of Jiangyin, and was pleased to say: Wu Liang is the contemporary Wu Qi.

古文：吴平，加昭勇大将军、苏州卫指挥使，移镇苏州。
现代文：吴地平定后，吴良被任命为昭勇大将军、苏州卫指挥使，被调到苏州负责镇守。
English: After Wu's appointment, Wu Liang was appointed General Zhaoyong and Commander of the Suzhou Garrison, and was transferred to Suzhou to be in charge of the garrison.

古文：武备益修，军民辑睦。
现代文：吴良到苏州后，武器装备得到修缮，加强了军民团结。
English: After Wu Liang arrived in Suzhou, the weapons and equipment were repaired, strengthening the unity of the military and the people.

古文：进都督佥事，移守全州。
现代文：吴良又被晋升为都督佥事，调往全州镇守。
English: Wu Liang was also promoted to the post of the governor of Anji and transferred to the post of the town guard of Quanzhou.

古文：洪武三年进都督同知，封江阴侯，食禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，吴良被晋升为都督同知，并被封为江阴侯，食禄为一千五百石，给予世代承袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Wu Liang was promoted to the governor of Tongzhi, and was named the governor of Jiangyin, with a stipend of 1,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance for generations.

古文：四年讨靖州、绥宁诸蛮。
现代文：四年，吴良率军征讨靖州、绥宁蛮。
English: In four years, Wu Liang led an army to conquer Jingzhou and Huningwan.

古文：五年，广西蛮叛，副征南将军邓愈帅平章李伯升出靖州讨之。
现代文：五年，广西蛮又叛乱，副征南将军邓愈率平章李伯升出靖州征讨。
English: Five years later, Guangxi rebelled again, and the vice-commander of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Deng Yu, led by General Pingzhang Li Bo, marched out of Jingzhou to lead the expedition.

古文：数月，尽平左右两江及五溪之地，移兵入铜鼓、五开，收潭溪，开太平，歼清洞、崖山之众于铜关铁寨。
现代文：几个月后，完全平定左右江和五溪地区，移师铜鼓、五开，收复潭溪、太平，在铜关铁寨歼灭了清洞、崖山的叛兵。
English: A few months later, he completely pacified the Zuohe River and Wuxi region, transferred the divisions of Tonggu and Wukai, recovered Tanxi and Taiping, and annihilated the rebels of Qingdong and Yashan in Tongguanciezhai.

古文：诸蛮皆震慑，内附，粤西遂平。
现代文：诸蛮都十分惧怕，纷纷要求归附王朝。粤西地区终于得以平定。
English: The barbarians were very afraid and demanded to be annexed to the dynasty. The western Guangdong region was finally pacified.

古文：八年督田凤阳。
现代文：八年，吴良在凤阳督促老百姓垦田。
English: In eight years, Wu Liang urged the common people to cultivate fields in Fengyang.

古文：十二年，齐王封青州。
现代文：十二年，齐王封赐青州，王妃是吴良的女儿。
English: In the twelfth year of King Qi's reign, he bestowed the title of emperor on Qingzhou. The empress was Wu Liang's daughter.

古文：宣德十年，子升乞嗣，不许。
现代文：于是，命令吴良前往青州修建王府。十四年，吴良在青州病逝，享年五十八岁。
English: As a result, he ordered Wu Liang to go to Qingzhou to build a royal palace. In 1914, Wu Liang died in Qingzhou at the age of 58.

古文：康茂才，字寿卿，蕲人。
现代文：被赐封为江国公，谥号襄烈。康茂才，字寿卿，蕲州人。
English: He was given the title of Jiang Guogong and the posthumous name of Xiang Rong. Kang Maocai, also known as Shouqing, was a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：通经史大义。事母孝。
现代文：他精通经书史籍，孝顺母亲。
English: He is well-versed in scriptures and historical books, and is a dutiful son to his mother.

古文：元末寇乱陷蕲，结义兵保乡里。
现代文：元朝末年，寇贼乱党攻陷蕲州，康茂才召集义兵保卫家乡。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, when the bandits invaded and occupied Zhangzhou, Kangmao called up volunteers to defend his hometown.

古文：立功，自长官累迁淮西宣慰司、都元帅。
现代文：因此而立功，由长官晋升为淮西宣慰司、都元帅。
English: As a result, he made meritorious contributions and was promoted from a chief officer to the Huaxi Consolation Division and the Marshal of the Capital.

古文：太祖既渡江，将士家属留和州。
现代文：太祖渡江以后，将士的家属留在和州。
English: After the great-great-grandfather crossed the river, he left his family members in Hechu.

古文：时茂才移戍采石，扼江渡。
现代文：当时，康茂才戍守采石，扼守长江渡口。
English: At that time, it was Kangmao who guarded the quarry and the Yangtze River ferry.

古文：太祖遣兵数攻之，茂才力守。
现代文：太祖几次派兵攻打采石，康茂才顽强抵抗。
English: Emperor Taizu sent troops to attack the quarry several times, but Kangmao stubbornly resisted.

古文：常遇春设伏歼其精锐。
现代文：常遇春设下埋伏歼灭了康茂才的精锐部队。
English: An ambush set in the spring annihilated Kang Maocai's elite troops.

古文：茂才复立寨天宁洲，又破之。
现代文：康茂才又把军寨移至天宁洲，又被攻破，康茂才只好逃奔到集庆。
English: It was not until Kang Mao moved the military camp to Tianningzhou that it was breached again, and only then did Kang Mao have to flee to Jiqing.

古文：奔集庆，太祖克集庆，乃帅所部兵降。
现代文：不久太祖又攻克了集庆，于是康茂才率领他的军队向太祖投降。
English: Not long after, Emperor Taizu conquered Jieqing, and Kang Mao led his army to surrender to Emperor Taizu.

古文：太祖释之，命统所部从征。
现代文：太祖释免了康茂才，并命令他仍统率旧部和自己一起出征。
English: The great-grandfather released Kang Maocai, and ordered him to still lead the old ministry and go to war with himself.

古文：明年授秦淮翼水军元帅，守龙湾。
现代文：第二年，康茂才被任命为秦淮翼水军元帅，驻守龙湾。
English: The following year, Kang Maocai was appointed as the marshal of the Qin Huaiyi Navy, stationed in Longwan.

古文：取江阴马驮沙，败张士诚兵，获其楼船。
现代文：康茂才攻取了江阴马驮沙，打败了张士诚的部队，缴获了一批船只。
English: It was Kang Maocai who captured Jiangyin Ma Basha, defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops, and captured a number of ships.

古文：从廖永安攻池州，取枞阳。
现代文：康茂才跟随廖永安攻打池州，攻取了枞阳。
English: It was Kang Maocai who followed Liao Yongan to attack Chizhou and capture Shenyang.

古文：太祖以军兴，民失农业，命茂才为都水营田使，仍兼帐前总制亲兵左副指挥使。
现代文：由于战乱纷起，老百姓不能正常地从事农业生产，军队缺乏粮食。为此，太祖任命康茂才为都水营田使，仍兼任帐前总制亲兵左副指挥使职务。
English: Due to the outbreak of war, the common people could not normally engage in agricultural production, and the army was short of grain. For this reason, the great-grandfather appointed Kang Maocai as the field commander of the capital, and still served as the left deputy commander of the general staff of the front.

古文：陈友谅既陷太平，谋约张士诚合攻应天。
现代文：陈友谅攻陷太平之后，与张士诚协商联合攻打应天。
English: After the fall of Taiping, Chen Youjun negotiated with Zhang Shicheng to jointly attack Yingtian.

古文：太祖欲其速来，破之。
现代文：太祖希望尽快将陈友谅引诱过来，一举破敌。
English: The great-grandfather hoped to lure Chen Youzhen over as soon as possible and defeat the enemy in one fell swoop.

古文：知茂才与友谅有旧，命遣仆持书，绐为内应。
现代文：太祖了解到康茂才和陈友谅有故交，于是命令康茂才派老仆人持书信，欺哄陈友谅，表示愿做内应。
English: The great-grandfather learned that Kang Maocai and Chen Youyuan had a long-standing friendship, so he ordered Kang Maocai to send an old servant with a letter to deceive Chen Youyuan and express his willingness to do a secret correspondence.

古文：友谅大喜，问： 康公安在？ 曰： 守江东木桥。 
现代文：陈友谅十分高兴，并问康公在哪里，回答说： 在守卫江东的木桥。 
English: Chen Youzhen was very happy and asked where Kang Gong was. He replied, "He is guarding the wooden bridge on the east side of the river."

古文：使归，太祖易桥以石。
现代文：使者回来后，太祖把木桥改成石桥。
English: After the messenger returned, Taizu changed the wooden bridge into a stone bridge.

古文：友谅至，见桥，愕然，连呼 老康 ，莫应。
现代文：当友谅来到桥边，看到石桥后十分惊讶，连声大叫 老康 ，没有响应，急忙退回到龙湾。
English: When he came to the edge of the bridge, he was very surprised to see the stone bridge. He shouted loudly, "Lao Kang," but there was no response, and he hurried back to Longwan.

古文：退至龙湾，伏兵四起。茂才合诸将奋击，大破之。
现代文：这时，埋伏的部队四面出击，康茂才和其他将领奋力冲杀，打败了陈友谅。
English: At this time, the ambushed troops attacked on all sides, and Kang Maocai and other generals fought hard and defeated Chen Youyong.

古文：太祖嘉茂才功，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：太祖嘉奖康茂才的功绩，赏赐颇为丰厚。
English: The great-grandfather praised the merits of Kang Maocai, and the reward was quite rich.

古文：明年，太祖亲征友谅，茂才以舟师从克安庆，破江州，友谅西遁。
现代文：第二年，太祖亲自讨伐陈友谅，康茂才带领水兵跟随太祖，攻克安庆、江州，陈友谅向西奔逃。
English: In the second year, Emperor Taizu personally fought against Chen Youzong, and Kang Maocai led the sailors to follow Emperor Taizu to conquer Anqing and Jiangzhou. Chen Youzong fled westward.

古文：遂下蕲州、兴国、汉阳。沿流克黄梅寨，取瑞昌，败友谅八指挥，降士卒二万人。
现代文：于是，康茂才奋起直追，连下蕲州、兴国、汉阳等地，沿长江攻克黄梅寨，夺取瑞昌，打败了陈友谅的八指挥，迫使他的二万士兵向太祖投降。
English: As a result, Kang Maocai rose up and chased after him, conquering Huangmeizhai along the Yangtze River in Lower Luzhou, Xingguo, Hanyang and other places, capturing Ruichang, defeating Chen Youjun's eight commanders, and forcing his twenty thousand soldiers to surrender to Taizu.

古文：迁帐前亲兵副都指挥使。
现代文：康茂才晋升为帐前亲兵副都指挥使。
English: It was only then that Kang Maocai was promoted to the post of deputy commander of the front-line soldiers.

古文：攻左君弼庐州，未下。
现代文：随即，攻打庐州左君弼，但未攻克。
English: Thereafter, he attacked Bozhou Zuojun, but failed to conquer it.

古文：从援南昌，战彭蠡，友谅败死。
现代文：于是带兵增援南昌。彭蠡一战，陈友谅大败而死。
English: As a result, he brought reinforcements to Nanchang. In the battle of Penghu, Chen Youyong suffered a crushing defeat and died.

古文：从征武昌，皆有功。进金吾侍卫亲军都护。
现代文：康茂才随太祖征伐武昌，屡立战功，晋升为金吾侍卫亲军都护。
English: Kang Maocai followed his great-grandfather in conquering Wuchang, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and was promoted to King's personal bodyguard.

古文：从大将军徐达再攻庐州，克之，取江陵及湖南诸路。
现代文：康茂才和大将军徐达一起再次攻打庐州，攻下庐州后，又乘胜夺取了江陵和湖南等地。
English: Kang Maocai and General Xu Da once again attacked Zhangzhou. After capturing Zhangzhou, they took advantage of the victory to seize Jiangling and Hunan and other places.

古文：改神武卫指挥使，进大都督府副使。
现代文：康茂才改任神武卫指挥使，并晋升为大都督府副使。
English: It was only then that Kang Maocai was reassigned to the post of Shenwuwei commander and promoted to vice-commander of the Grand Governor's Office.

古文：士诚攻江阴，太祖自将击之。
现代文：张士诚进攻江阴，太祖带兵反击。
English: Zhang Shicheng attacked Jiangyin, and Taizu led a counterattack.

古文：比至镇江，士诚已焚瓜洲遁。
现代文：到了镇江，张士诚却已焚烧瓜洲逃跑了。
English: By the time he reached Zhenjiang, Zhang Shicheng had already burned the melon fields and fled.

古文：茂才追北至浮子门。
现代文：康茂才从北面追到浮子门。
English: It was not until Kang Mao chased it from the north that it reached the Floating Gate.

古文：吴军遮海口，乘潮来薄。
现代文：吴军拦住海口，乘海潮进犯。
English: The Wu army stopped Haikou and invaded by sea tide.

古文：茂才力战，大败之。
现代文：康茂才奋力进击，大败张士诚。
English: Kang Maocai fought hard and defeated Zhang Shicheng.

古文：捣淮安马骡港，拔其水寨，淮安平。寻拔湖州，进逼平江。
现代文：捣毁了淮安马骡港，攻克了张士诚的水寨，平定了淮安，攻取湖州，进逼平江。
English: They destroyed the port of Huai'an Ma'an, conquered Zhang Shicheng's water village, pacified Huai'an, captured Huzhou, and pushed into the Pingjiang River.

古文：士诚遣锐卒迎斗，大战尹山桥。
现代文：张士诚派精锐部队迎战，双方军队在尹山桥展开了激战。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent elite troops to fight, and the two armies fought a fierce battle at Yinshan Bridge.

古文：茂才持大戟督战，尽覆敌众。
现代文：康茂才手持大戟督战，结果张士诚的军队全军覆没。
English: It was Kang Mao who fought the battle with the big scepter in his hand. As a result, Zhang Shicheng's entire army was wiped out.

古文：与诸将合围其城，军齐门。
现代文：康茂才和其他大将一起合围平江，在齐门驻军。
English: Kang Maocai, together with other generals, encircled the Pingjiang River and garrisoned troops at Qimen.

古文：平江下，还取无锡。
现代文：攻克平江后又夺取了无锡。
English: After conquering Pingjiang, Wuxi was seized.

古文：迁同知大都督府事兼太子右率府使。
现代文：康茂才晋升为同知大都督府事，兼任太子右率府使。
English: Kang Maocai was promoted to the post of Tongzhi Grand Governor and concurrently served as the prince's right-hand government official.

古文：洪武元年，从大将军经略中原，取汴、洛，留守陕州。
现代文：洪武元年，康茂才和大将军徐达征伐中原，夺取汴州、洛阳，留守陕州。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Kang Maocai and the great general Xu Da conquered the Central Plains, captured Luzhou and Luoyang, and stayed in Shaanxi.

古文：规运馈饷，造浮桥渡师。招来绛、解诸州，扼潼关，秦兵不敢东向。
现代文：筹划运输粮饷，营造浮桥渡运兵卒，并招降绛、解等州，扼守潼关，陕西境内的元军不敢向东进犯。
English: They planned the transportation of grain, built a pontoon bridge to ferry soldiers, and recruited soldiers from the ceded and liberated provinces to guard Shaoguan. The Yuan forces in Shaanxi did not dare to advance eastward.

古文：茂才善抚绥，民立石颂德焉。
现代文：康茂才善于安抚，百姓立碑歌颂他的功德。
English: It was Kang Mao who was good at appeasing, and the people erected a monument to praise his merits.

古文：已，坐事革冠服，勒居山西，遂不得嗣。
现代文：三年，康茂才再次和大将军一起出征定西，攻取了兴元。
English: Three years later, Kang Maocai once again went to the west of Dingding with the general and captured Xingyuan.

古文：弘治末，录茂才后为世袭千户。
现代文：凯旋途中，康茂才病死。追谥为蕲国公，封号 武康 。
English: On the way back, Kang Maocai died of illness. He was named the Duke of Guizhou and given the title of Wu Kang.

古文：丁德兴，定远人。
现代文：丁德兴，定远人。
English: Ding Dexing, Dingyuan people.

古文：归太祖于濠。
现代文：早年在濠州他就归附了太祖。
English: In his early years in Zhangzhou, he was attached to his great-grandfather.

古文：伟其状貌，以 黑丁 呼之。
现代文：因他外表伟岸，旁人用 黑丁 来称呼他。
English: Because of his great appearance, others called him Hedin.

古文：从取洪山寨，以百骑破贼数千，尽降其众。
现代文：丁德兴跟随太祖攻取洪山寨，他用一百骑兵攻破敌人数千人，并使敌人全部投降。
English: Ding Dexing followed his great-grandfather to capture Hongshan Village. He used a hundred cavalry to defeat thousands of enemies and forced them all to surrender.

古文：从克滁、和，败青山盗。
现代文：后又随太祖攻克滁州、和州，打败青山的盗贼。
English: Later, he followed his great-grandfather to conquer Bozhou and Hezhou, defeating the thieves of Aoyama.

古文：从渡江，拔采石，取太平，分兵取溧水、溧阳，皆先登。
现代文：渡长江，攻取采石、太平，兵分几路攻占溧水、溧阳。
English: Crossing the Yangtze River, conquering the quarry and Taiping, the soldiers occupied several routes to Surabaya and Shenyang.

古文：从破蛮子海牙水寨，捣方山营，擒陈兆先，下集庆，取镇江。
现代文：在攻打各城过程中，丁德兴总是身先士卒，率先登城。他攻克蛮子海牙的水寨，捣毁方山的营垒，生擒了陈兆先，攻下集庆，攻克镇江。
English: In the process of attacking cities, Ding Dexing was always the first to go to the city. He conquered the water castle of the barbarian Hague, destroyed the camp of Fangshan, captured Chen Zhaoxian alive, captured Jieqing, and conquered Zhenjiang.

古文：以功进管军总管。
现代文：因战功显赫，丁德兴被晋升为管军总管。
English: For his distinguished war service, Ding Dexing was promoted to the post of chief military administrator.

古文：下金坛、广德、宁国。从平常州。擢左翼元帅。
现代文：他下金坛、广德、宁国，随太祖平定常州，被晋升为左翼元帅。
English: He went to Jintan, Guangde and Ningguo, and was promoted to the rank of left wing marshal.

古文：宁国复叛，从胡大海复之。
现代文：后宁国再次叛乱，丁德兴跟随胡大海出兵平定。
English: After Ning rebelled again, Ding Dexing followed Hu Haihai in dispatching troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：分兵下江阴，取徽州、石埭、池州、枞阳，攻江州，移兵击安庆。所向皆捷。
现代文：他分兵几路下江阴，攻取了徽州、石埭、池州、枞阳，攻打江州，又调动军队攻打安庆，所向无敌，捷报频传。
English: He sent several detachments to Jiangyin, captured Huizhou, Shijiazhuang, Chizhou, and Shenyang, attacked Jiangzhou, and mobilized troops to attack Anqing. He was invincible, and his victories were frequently reported.

古文：复援江阴，略江西傍近州县，攻双刀赵，挫其锋。
现代文：后再次增援江阴，巡视江西附近的州县，攻打双刀赵，挫败其锐气。
English: After that, he reinforced Jiangyin again, inspected the counties and prefectures near Jiangxi, attacked the double-sword Zhao, and defeated its sharpness.

古文：时徐达、邵荣攻宜兴，久不下，太祖遣使谓曰： 宜兴城西通太湖口，士诚饷道所由，断其饷则必破。 
现代文：当时徐达、邵荣攻打宜兴，很长时间也没有攻下。太祖派使者来说： 宜兴城西面通太湖口，太湖口正是张士诚粮饷经过的必由道路。
English: At that time, Xu Da and Shao Rong attacked Yixing, but did not capture it for a long time. Taizu sent an envoy to say: The west side of Yixing City leads to the Taihu mouth, and the Taihu mouth is the only way for Zhang Shicheng's grain basket to pass.

古文：达乃遣德兴绝太湖口，而并力急攻，城遂拔。
现代文：只要截断他的粮道，张士诚驻守的宜兴城就可以攻破。 徐达于是派遣丁德兴封锁太湖口，而后一起对敌展开急攻，宜兴城终于被攻破。
English: As long as his supply route was cut off, Zhang Shicheng's garrison of Yixing could be breached. Xu Da then sent Ding Dexing to blockade the mouth of Taihu Lake, and then launched a surprise attack on the enemy together. Yixing was finally breached.

古文：论功授凤翔卫指挥使。
现代文：论功行赏，丁德兴被授予凤翔指挥使。
English: On merit, Ding Dexing was awarded the Fengxiang Conductor's Award.

古文：陈友谅犯龙江，德兴军于石灰山，力战，击败之。
现代文：陈友谅进犯龙江，丁德兴则在石灰山驻军，经过奋战，大败友谅。
English: Chen Youxue invaded the Longjiang River, while Ding Dexing garrisoned troops in Lime Mountain. After a hard-fought battle, Youxue was soundly defeated.

古文：遂从征友谅，捣安庆，克九江，援安丰，败吕珍，走左君弼。
现代文：于是丁德兴跟随皇上征讨陈友谅，捣毁了安庆，攻克了九江，援救安丰，打败了吕珍，赶走左君弼。
English: So Ding Dexing followed the emperor to solicit Chen Youxuan, destroyed Anqing, conquered Jiujiang, rescued Anfeng, defeated Lucheng, and drove out Zuojun.

古文：从战鄱阳，平武昌，克庐州，略定湖南衡州诸郡。
现代文：攻占鄱阳，平定武昌，攻克庐州，平定湖南衡州诸郡。
English: We conquered Fenyang, pacified Wuchang, conquered Bozhou, and pacified the counties of Hengzhou in Hunan.

古文：又从大将军收淮东，征浙西，败士诚兵于旧馆。下湖州，围平江。
现代文：丁德兴又随大将军徐达收复淮东，征讨浙西，在旧馆打败张士诚的部队，攻克湖州，围困平江。
English: Ding Dexing, together with the great general Xu Da, recovered Huaidong, conquered western Zhejiang, defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops in the Old Pavilion, conquered Huzhou, and besieged Pingjiang.

古文：卒于军。赠都指挥使。
现代文：丁德兴最后死于军中，被授予都指挥使。
English: Ding Dexing eventually died in the army and was awarded the post of capital commander.

古文：洪武元年追封济国公，列祀功臣庙。
现代文：洪武元年，被追封为济国公，他的名字排列在功臣庙里。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was enthroned as the prince of Jeju Province, and his name is listed in the temple of meritorious warriors.

古文：子忠，龙江卫指挥使，予世袭。
现代文：丁德兴的儿子叫丁忠，是龙江卫指挥使。皇上给予世袭的权利。
English: Ding Dexing's son, Ding Zhong, was the commander of the Longjiang River Defense Force. The emperor gave him hereditary rights.

古文：耿炳文，濠人。
现代文：耿炳文，濠州人，父亲名叫君用。
English: Geng Xiwen, a native of Zhangzhou, whose father's name was Junyong.

古文：父君用，从太祖渡江，积功为管军总管。
现代文：耿君用跟随太祖渡长江，因战功累升至管军总管。
English: Geng Jun used to follow his great-grandfather to cross the Yangtze River. Due to his war service, he was promoted to the position of the Chief of the General Staff.

古文：援宜兴，与张士诚兵争栅，力战死。
现代文：增援宜兴，和张士诚的部队进行激烈争战，最后耿君用战死。
English: Reinforced Yixing, and Zhang Shicheng's troops fought a fierce battle, and finally Geng Jun died in battle.

古文：炳文袭职，领其军。
现代文：耿炳文承袭父职，率领着他父亲的军队。
English: Geng inherited his father's position and led his father's army.

古文：取广德，进攻长兴，败士诚将赵打虎，获战船三百余艘，擒其守将李福安等，遂克长兴。
现代文：他攻取了广德，进攻长兴，打败张士诚的大将赵打虎，缴获战船三百余艘，生擒敌守将李福安等人，攻克长兴。
English: He captured Guangde, attacked Changxing, defeated Zhang Shicheng's general Zhao Dehu, captured more than three hundred warships, captured the enemy commander Li Fu'an and others, and conquered Changxing.

古文：长兴据太湖口，陆通广德，与宣、歙接壤，为江、浙门户。
现代文：长兴地处太湖口，陆上通广德，与宣、歙等地接壤，是江、浙的门户。
English: Changxing is located at the mouth of Taihu Lake, and has land access to Guangde. It is bordered by Xuan and Handan, and is the gateway to Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：太祖既得其地，大喜，改为长安州，立永兴翼元帅府，以炳文为总兵都元帅，守之。
现代文：太祖得到了长兴这个地方，十分高兴，将长兴改名为长安州，并在此地设立永兴翼元帅府，任命耿炳文为总兵都元帅守卫这里。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy to get this place in Changxing, changed the name of Changxing to Chang'an, and set up the Yongxing Wing Marshal's Office here, appointing Geng Bingwen as the general marshal to guard here.

古文：温祥卿者，多智数。避乱来归，炳文引入幕府，画守御计甚悉。
现代文：温祥卿，足智多谋，因躲避战乱前来归附，耿炳文把他请入了幕府，制订实施防御计划十分周密。
English: Wen Xiangqing, resourceful and resourceful, came to attach himself because he was hiding from the war, and Geng Bingwen invited him into the shogunate, and the implementation of the defense plan was very thorough.

古文：张士诚左丞潘元明、元帅严再兴帅师来争。
现代文：张士诚的左丞潘元明、元帅严再兴率兵进犯长安州。
English: Zhang Shicheng's left-hand man Pan Yuanming and marshal Yan Zaoxing led the troops to invade Chang'an.

古文：炳文奋击，大败去。
现代文：耿炳文奋力反击，大败敌军。
English: Geng Bingwen fought back hard and defeated the enemy.

古文：久之，士诚复遣司徒李伯升帅众十万，水陆进攻。
现代文：此后，张士诚再次派司徒李伯升率兵十万，分水陆向长安州杀来。
English: After that, Zhang Shicheng once again sent the scholar Li Bo Sheng to lead 100,000 soldiers, divided by land and water, to Chang'an.

古文：城中兵七千，太祖患之，命陈德、华高、费聚往援。
现代文：当时城内只有守兵七千人，太祖十分着急，连忙命令陈德、华高、费聚前来增援。
English: At that time, there were only seven thousand guards in the city. The great-grandfather was very anxious and quickly ordered Chen De, Hua Gao, and Fei Ju to come to reinforce.

古文：伯升夜劫营，诸将皆溃。
现代文：谁知李伯升黑夜偷袭援军营寨，几位大将溃散。
English: Who knew that Li Bo-sheng would sneak attack the reinforcement camp in the dark of night, and several generals would scatter.

古文：炳文婴城固守，攻甚急，随方御之，不解甲者月余。
现代文：耿炳文固守城池，敌方攻击十分猛烈，炳文采用不同的方式加以防御。
English: Geng Bingwen firmly defended the castle, the enemy attack was very fierce, and Bingwen used different ways to defend it.

古文：常遇春复帅援兵至，伯升弃营遁，追斩五千余人。
现代文：战争持续了一个多月，在这期间，炳文一直不敢懈怠。常遇春再次率兵增援，李伯升弃营逃跑，耿炳文乘胜追击，追杀了李伯升军队五千余人。
English: The war lasted for more than a month, and during this time, Gong Wen did not dare to slack off. He often led reinforcements again in the spring, Li Bo Sheng abandoned the camp and fled, and Geng Bingwen took advantage of the victory to pursue and killed more than five thousand people of Li Bo Sheng's army.

古文：其明年，改永兴翼元帅府为永兴卫亲军指挥使司，以炳文为使。
现代文：第二年，永兴翼元帅府被改为永兴卫亲军指挥使司，任命耿炳文为永兴卫亲军指挥使。
English: The following year, the Yongxing Wing Marshal's Office was changed to the Yongxing Garrison Command and Geng Bingwen was appointed as the Yongxing Garrison Command.

古文：已而士诚大发兵，遣其弟士信复来争。
现代文：不久，张士诚又出大军，并派他的弟弟张士信来争夺永兴。
English: Soon after, Zhang Shicheng sent another large army and sent his brother Zhang Shixin to fight for Yongxing.

古文：炳文又败之，获其元帅宋兴祖。
现代文：耿炳文打败了张士信，并俘虏了敌军元帅宋兴祖。
English: Geng Bingwen defeated Zhang Shixin and captured the enemy marshal Song Xingzu.

古文：士信愤甚，益兵围城。
现代文：张士信大怒，大军围城。
English: Zhang Shixin was furious, and a large army besieged the city.

古文：炳文与费聚出战，又大败之。
现代文：耿炳文和费聚迎战，又大败敌军。
English: Geng Bingwen and Feiyu marched into battle and defeated the enemy.

古文：长兴为士诚必争地，炳文拒守凡十年，以寡御众，大小数十战，战无不胜，士诚迄不得逞。
现代文：长兴是张士诚的必争之地，耿炳文在此坚守了大概有十年之久，他以寡敌众，大小十几次战争，战无不胜，使得张士诚的目的不能得逞。
English: Changxing is a must-win place for Zhang Shicheng. Geng Bingwen has been holding out here for about ten years. He has been invincible in dozens of wars with numerous enemies, making Zhang Shicheng's goal unattainable.

古文：大军伐士诚，炳文将所部克湖州，围平江。
现代文：大军征讨张士诚，耿炳文所部攻克湖州，围困平江。
English: Zhang Shicheng led a large army to conquer Huzhou and besieged Pingjiang.

古文：吴平，进大都督府佥事。
现代文：平定吴地后，炳文被晋升为大都督府佥事。
English: After the subjugation of Wudi, Nie Wen was promoted to the highest post of the Grand Duchy.

古文：从征中原，克山东沂、峄诸州。下汴梁，徇河南，扈驾北巡。
现代文：耿炳文随大军征讨中原，攻克山东沂、峄等州，攻下汴梁，巡视河南，侍从皇上北巡。
English: Geng Bingwen followed the great army to conquer the Central Plains, conquered Shandong, Shandong, Shandong and other provinces, conquered Shiliang, inspected Henan, and accompanied the emperor on the northern inspection.

古文：已，又从常遇春取大同，克晋、冀。
现代文：又随常遇春攻占大同，攻克晋、冀。
English: In addition, as often happens in the spring, Datong was conquered, and Jin and Hebei were conquered.

古文：从大将军徐达征陕西，走李思齐、张思道，即镇其地。浚泾阳洪渠十万余丈，民赖其利。
现代文：随大将军徐达征讨陕西，打败了李思齐、张思道。镇守此地，疏通泾阳洪渠十万余丈，给老百姓带来了很多好处。
English: He accompanied the great general Xu Da to conquer Shaanxi, and defeated Li Sizi and Zhang Sido. He guarded this place and dredged the Poyang flood channel of more than 100,000 meters, which brought a lot of benefits to the people.

古文：寻拜秦王左相都督佥事。
现代文：耿炳文被任命为秦王左相都督佥事。
English: Geng Xiwen was appointed as the Left Minister of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：洪武三年，封长兴侯，食禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，封耿炳文为长兴侯，食禄为一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Geng Xiwen was given the title of Changxing Hou, with a stipend of fifteen hundred koku and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：十四年，从大将军出塞，破元平章乃儿不花于北黄河。
现代文：十四年，随大将军徐达出塞，败元朝平章乃儿不花于北黄河。
English: In the 14th year, with the departure of the great general Xu Da, the defeated Yuan Dynasty Ping Zhang Nai'er did not spend time in the North Yellow River.

古文：十九年从颍国公傅龙德征云南，讨平曲靖蛮。
现代文：十九年，随颍国公傅友德征讨云南，平定曲靖蛮。
English: In the 19th year, he went to Yunnan with Fu Youde, the governor of Yunnan Province, to subdue the Qujing barbarians.

古文：二十一年从永昌侯蓝玉北征，至捕鱼儿海。
现代文：二十一年从永昌侯蓝玉北征，到达捕鱼儿海。
English: Twenty-one years from Yongchang Hou Blue Jade Northern Expedition, reached the fishing sea.

古文：二十五年帅兵平陕西徽州妖人之乱。
现代文：二十五年，耿炳文率兵平定陕西徽州妖人之乱。
English: In the 25th year, Geng Bingwen led troops to quell the Shaanxi Huizhou witchcraft and human trafficking.

古文：三十年以征西将军擒蜀寇高福兴，俘三千人。
现代文：三十年，任征西将军，擒获蜀寇高福兴，俘虏敌军三千人。
English: Thirty years later, he was appointed the general of the Western Expedition, captured Shu Col. Gao Fuxing, and captured three thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：始，炳文守长兴，功最高，太祖榜列功臣，以炳文附大将军达为一等。
现代文：最初，炳文守卫长兴，功劳最大，太祖排列功臣，把炳文和大将军徐达列为一等。
English: In the beginning, the greatest contribution was made by the guardian of Xuanwen, Changxing. The great-grandfather ranked the heroes and ranked Xuanwen and the great general Xu Daru as first class.

古文：及洪武末年，诸公、侯且尽，存者惟炳文及武定侯郭英二人；而炳文以元功宿将，为朝廷所倚重。
现代文：到了洪武末年，诸公、侯都已经死了，幸存的只有耿炳文和郭英二人。耿炳文因是开国元勋，为朝廷器重。
English: By the end of Hongwu's life, all the princes and lords had died, and only two survived: Geng Xiwen and Guo Ying. As the founding father of the country, Geng Xiwen was important to the imperial court.

古文：建文元年，燕王兵起。帝命炳文为大将军，帅副将军李坚、宁忠北伐，时年六十有五矣。
现代文：建文元年，燕王叛乱，皇上任命耿炳文为大将军，统率副将军李坚、宁忠北伐。当时耿炳文已经六十五岁。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, when Yan Wang rebelled, the emperor appointed Geng Xiwen as the general, leading the vice-generals Li Jian and Ning Zhong in the Northern Expedition. At that time, Geng Xiwen was already sixty-five years old.

古文：兵号三十万，至者惟十三万。
现代文：号称三十万大军，实际上只有十三万人。
English: It claimed to have 300,000 soldiers, but in fact only had 130,000.

古文：八月次真定，分营滹沱河南北。
现代文：八月初，部队到达真定，在滹沱河的南北两岸分营扎寨。
English: At the beginning of August, the troops arrived in Zhending and set up camp on the north and south banks of the Min River.

古文：都督徐凯军河间，潘忠、杨松驻鄚州，先锋九千人驻雄县。
现代文：都督徐凯驻扎在河间，潘忠、杨松驻军在莫阝州，先锋九千人驻扎在雄县。
English: The governor Xu Kai was stationed in Hema, Pan Zhong and Yang Song were stationed in Mopu County, and the vanguard of nine thousand people were stationed in Xiong County.

古文：值中秋，不设备，为燕王所袭，九千人皆死。
现代文：时值中秋，部队没有多少防备，遭到燕军的突然袭击，先锋九千人全部被杀。
English: At the time of mid-autumn, the troops did not have much defense, and were suddenly attacked by Yan's army. All nine thousand pioneers were killed.

古文：忠等来援，过月漾桥，伏发水中。忠、松俱被执，不屈死。
现代文：潘忠等率军来增援，过月漾桥时，被伏击，落入水中，潘忠、杨松都被俘。
English: Pan Zhong and others led the army to reinforce. When they crossed the Yueyuan Bridge, they were ambushed and fell into the water. Pan Zhong and Yang Song were both captured.

古文：鄚州陷。
现代文：两位大将宁死不屈，最终被杀。
English: There is no reason for the fall of Zhangzhou.

古文：而炳文部将张保者降燕，备告南军虚实。
现代文：这样，莫阝州失守。而这时耿炳文的部将张保向燕军投降，并向燕军报告了南岸部队的虚实情况。
English: At this time, Geng Shouwen's subordinate Zhang Bao surrendered to Yan's army and reported to Yan's army the true and false situation of the South Bank troops.

古文：燕王纵保归，使张雄、鄚败状，谓： 北军且至。 
现代文：燕王放张保回去，要他张扬雄县、莫阝州惨败的情景，并说北军将要到来。
English: Yan Wang let Zhang Bao go back and asked him to show him the scenes of the disastrous defeats in Zhangyangxiong County and Mogao County, and said that the Northern Army was about to arrive.

古文：于是炳文移军尽渡河，并力当敌。
现代文：于是耿炳文转移部队，且全部渡河，全力抗敌。
English: As a result, Geng Bingwen transferred the troops, and all of them crossed the river to resist the enemy with all their strength.

古文：军甫移，燕兵骤至，循城蹴击。
现代文：待炳文军队转移之际，燕兵突然来临，沿城攻击。
English: At the time of the transfer of the Yanwen army, the Yan soldiers suddenly came and attacked along the city.

古文：炳文军不得成列，败入城。
现代文：耿炳文的部队不能成列，溃败入城。
English: Geng Shouwen's troops could not form a line and entered the city in a rout.

古文：争门，门塞，蹈藉死者不可数计。
现代文：部队都拥挤在城门里，造成堵塞，自相践踏，被踩死的不可数计。
English: The troops all crowded into the city gates, causing blockages, trampling on each other, and countless deaths from trampling.

古文：燕兵遂围城。炳文众尚十万，坚守不出。
现代文：燕兵将城紧紧围住，耿炳文尚有十万军队，坚守而不敢出来。
English: Yan soldiers encircled the city tightly, and Geng Bingwen still had a hundred thousand troops, holding fast and not daring to come out.

古文：燕王知炳文老将，未易下，越三日，解围还。
现代文：燕王知道耿炳文是一员老将，攻城不是件容易的事，过了三天，就自动撤兵了。
English: Yan Wang knew that Geng Xiwen was a veteran and that it was not easy to attack the city. After three days, he automatically withdrew his troops.

古文：而帝骤闻炳文败，忧甚。
现代文：皇上听说耿炳文失败了，十分担心。
English: When the emperor heard that Geng Xuanwen had failed, he was very worried.

古文：太常卿黄子澄遂荐李景隆为大将军，乘传代炳文。
现代文：太常卿黄子澄推荐李景隆为大将军，乘坐驿车前来取代耿炳文。
English: General Secretary Huang Zicheng recommended Li Jinglong as the general, and he came to replace Geng Bingwen in a carriage.

古文：比至军，燕师已先一日去。
现代文：等他来到前线，燕国的军队已于前一天撤离了。
English: By the time he arrived at the front, Yan's troops had been evacuated the day before.

古文：高被间，徙广西。
现代文：耿炳文返回，李景隆代替他统率全军，最终导致了失败。
English: Geng Bingwen returned, and Li Jinglong took his place to lead the whole army, which eventually led to failure.

古文：文守辽东，瓛数请攻永平以动北平，文不听。
现代文：燕王称帝的第二年，刑部尚书郑赐、都御史陈瑛弹劾耿炳文，原因是因为炳文的衣服、器皿上有龙凤的图饰，用红革呈做玉带，他的这些行为已是大逆不道。
English: In the second year of Yan Wang's enthronement, the Criminal Investigation Department's Shangshu Zheng Cui and the Metropolitan Historian Chen Ying impeached Geng Xiwen, because Xiwen's clothes and utensils were decorated with drawings of dragons and phoenixes, and red leather was used to make jade belts. These actions of his were already high treason.

古文：后与弟尚宝司卿瑄，皆坐罪死。郭英，巩昌侯兴弟也。
现代文：耿炳文十分害怕，就自杀了。郭英是巩昌侯郭兴的弟弟。
English: Geng Bingwen was so scared that he committed suicide. Guo Ying was the younger brother of Gongchang marquis Guo Xing.

古文：年十八，与兴同事太祖。
现代文：在他十八岁那年，就和哥哥郭兴一起为太祖服务。
English: At the age of eighteen, he served his grandfather together with his brother Guo Xing.

古文：亲信，令值宿帐中，呼为 郭四 。
现代文：太祖十分赏识他，命他在军帐里值宿，亲昵地称呼他为 郭四 。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated him very much, ordered him to stay on duty in the military headquarters, and affectionately called him Guo Si.

古文：从克滁、和、采石、太平，征陈友谅，战鄱阳湖，皆与有功。
现代文：郭英跟从太祖攻克滁州、和州、采石、太平，征讨陈友谅，激战鄱阳湖，均立下战功。
English: Guo Ying followed his great-grandfather to conquer Bozhou, Hezhou, Quarry, and Taiping, to recruit Chen Youyuan, to fight fiercely in Poyang Lake, and to win the war.

古文：从征武昌，陈氏骁将陈同佥持槊突入，太祖呼英杀之，衣以战袍。
现代文：郭英随大军征武昌，陈氏猛将陈同佥拿着长矛杀入，太祖要郭英杀了他，并穿上他的战袍。
English: Guo Ying led a large army to conquer Wuchang. The Chen clan killed Chen Tongyu with a spear. Grandfather asked Guo Ying to kill him and put on his battle robe.

古文：攻岳州，败其援兵，还克庐州、襄阳。
现代文：攻岳州，击败敌人的援兵，还攻克庐州、襄阳等地。
English: He attacked Yuezhou, defeated the enemy's reinforcements, and also conquered Zhangzhou, Xiangyang and other places.

古文：授骁骑卫千户。
现代文：郭英被任命为骁骑卫千户。
English: Guo Ying was appointed as the guardian of thousands of households.

古文：克淮安、濠州、安丰，进指挥佥事。
现代文：攻克淮安、濠州、安丰，郭英又被晋升为指挥佥事。
English: After conquering Huai'an, Zhangzhou and Anfeng, Guo Ying was promoted to the rank of commander.

古文：从徐达定中原，又从常遇春攻太原，走扩廓，下兴州、大同。
现代文：郭英又跟从徐达平定中原，随常遇春进攻太原，扩廓败逃，挥师下兴州、大同。
English: Guo Ying also followed Xu Da to pacify the Central Plains, attacked Taiyuan as often as spring, expanded and fled, and sent his division to Xingzhou and Datong.

古文：至沙净州渡河。取西安、凤翔、巩昌、庆阳，追败驾宗哲于乱山，迁本卫指挥副使。
现代文：从沙净州渡黄河，占领西安、凤翔、巩昌、庆阳，乘胜追击，在乱山打败贺宗哲。郭英被晋升为本卫指挥副使。
English: He crossed the Yellow River from Shajingzhou, occupied Xi'an, Fengxiang, Gongchang, and Qingyang, pursued victory, and defeated He Zongzhe in the turbulent mountains. Guo Ying was promoted to the deputy commander of the Hongwei.

古文：进克定西，讨察罕脑儿。克登宁州，斩首二千级，进河南都指挥使。
现代文：攻克定西，讨伐察罕脑儿，攻克登宁州，杀敌两千，被晋升为河南都指挥使。
English: He conquered Dingxi, fought against Chahanmen, and conquered Dengningzhou, killed two thousand enemies, and was promoted to the Henan Provincial Commander.

古文：时英女弟为宁妃，英将赴镇，命妃饯英于第，赐白金二十罂，厩马二十匹。
现代文：当时郭英的妹妹入宫做了宁妃，郭英正准备上任，皇上命宁妃在宫里举行宴会为他饯行，并赏赐白金二十罂，马匹二十匹。
English: At that time, Guo Ying's younger sister entered the palace as Ningfei, and Guo Ying was preparing to take office. The emperor ordered Ningfei to hold a banquet for him in the palace, and rewarded him with twenty pieces of platinum and twenty horses.

古文：在镇绥辑流亡，申明约束，境内大治。
现代文：郭英在任时，安抚流亡，出安民告示，对老百姓加以约束，因而境内社会秩序很好。
English: When Guo Ying was in office, he pacified the exiles, announced the safety of the people, and restrained the common people. As a result, the social order within the territory was very good.

古文：九年移镇北平。十三年召还，进前军都督府佥事。
现代文：九年郭英调往北平镇守，十三年被召回，晋升为前军都督府佥事。
English: In the ninth year, Guo Ying was transferred to the Beiping Town Guard, and in the thirteenth year he was recalled and promoted to the former military governor's office.

古文：十四年，从颍川侯傅友德征云南，与陈桓、胡海分道进攻赤水河路。
现代文：十四年，郭英跟从颍川侯傅友德征讨云南，与陈桓、胡海分道进攻赤水河路。
English: In the 14th year, Guo Ying followed Fu Youde, the lord of Shichuan, to conquer Yunnan, and he and Chen Huan and Hu Hai split off to attack the Chashui River Road.

古文：久雨，河水暴涨。英斩木为筏，乘夜济。比晓，抵贼营，贼大惊溃。擒乌撒并阿容等。
现代文：当时，下了比较长的雨，河水猛涨，郭英伐木做舟，趁黑夜渡河，拂晓抵达敌营，敌人大惊，溃不成军，乌撒和阿容等人被擒。
English: At that time, it rained for a long time and the river water rose sharply. Guo Ying made a boat by cutting wood and took advantage of the darkness to cross the river and arrived at the enemy camp at dawn. The enemy was shocked and could not form an army. Usa and Arong and others were captured.

古文：攻克曲靖、陆凉、越州、关索岭、椅子寨。降大理、金齿、广南，平诸山寨。
现代文：攻克曲靖、陆凉、越州、关索岭、椅子寨，大理、金齿、广南等地降服，平定诸山寨。
English: Conquered Qujing, Lulang, Yuezhou, Guansoling, Shizhezhai, Dali, Jintao, Guangnan and other places to subjugate and pacify the villages.

古文：十六年复从友德平蒙化、邓川，济金沙，取北胜、丽江。
现代文：十六年，郭英再次随友德平定蒙华、邓川，渡过金沙江，攻取北胜、丽江。
English: Sixteen years later, Guo Ying once again accompanied his friend De Pingding to Menghua and Dengchuan, crossed the Jinsha River, and captured Beisheng and Lijiang.

古文：前后斩首一万三千余级，生擒二千余人，收精甲数万，船千余艘。
现代文：前后杀敌一万三千余人，俘虏二千余人，缴获精良的战甲数万，战船一千多艘。
English: They killed more than 13,000 of the enemy, captured more than 2,000 prisoners, captured tens of thousands of sophisticated battle armor, and more than a thousand warships.

古文：十七年论平云南功，封武定侯，食禄二千五百石，予世券。
现代文：十七年，朝廷评定征讨云南的战功，郭英被封为武定侯，食禄二千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the 17th year, the imperial court assessed the war exploits of Yunnan, and Guo Ying was named the Marquis of Wuding, with a stipend of 2,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：十八年，加靖海将军，镇守辽东。
现代文：十八年，被加封为靖海将军，镇守辽东。
English: In 18 years, he was given the additional title of General Jinghai and became the town guard of Liaodong.

古文：二十年从大将军冯胜出金山，纳哈出降，进征虏右副将军。
现代文：二十年，郭英跟从大将军冯胜出金山，纳哈出投降，郭英被晋升为征虏右副将军。
English: For twenty years, Guo Ying followed the general Feng Sheng out of Jinshan, Naha out of surrender, Guo Ying was promoted to the right deputy general.

古文：从蓝玉至捕鱼儿海。
现代文：又随蓝玉到捕鱼儿海。
English: He also went fishing with Blue Jade.

古文：师还，赏赉甚厚，遣还乡。
现代文：部队班师回朝后，赏赐非常丰厚。郭英回到故乡休整。
English: After the team returned to the DPRK, they received a very rich reward. Guo Ying returned to her hometown to rest.

古文：明年召入京，命典禁兵。
现代文：第二年，郭英被召入京城，受命操练皇室禁军。
English: The following year, Guo Ying was summoned to Beijing and ordered to train the Imperial Forbidden Army.

古文：三十年副征西将军耿炳文备边陕西，平沔县贼高福兴。
现代文：三十年，副征西将军耿炳文征战陕西，平定了沔县的乱党高福兴。
English: In the past 30 years, Geng Bingwen, deputy general of the Western Expeditionary Force, led the expeditionary force to Shaanxi and pacified Gao Fuxing, the ruffian of Handan County.

古文：及还，御史裴承祖劾英私养家奴百五十余人，又擅杀男女五人。
现代文：等到部队回朝，御史裴承祖就以郭英私养家奴一百五十余人的罪名弹劾他，同时还告郭英擅自杀官家奴男女五人。
English: As soon as the troops returned to the North, Mishi Pei Chengzu impeached Guo Ying on the charge that he had raised more than 150 slaves, and also accused Guo Ying of having killed five male and female slaves.

古文：帝弗问，佥都御史张春等执奏不已，乃命诸戚里大臣议其罪。
现代文：然而皇上不予追究。佥都御史张春等人抓住不放，皇上只好命诸戚里大臣商议郭英的罪状。
English: However, the emperor did not pursue the case. Zhang Chun, the governor of the capital, and others did not let go, and the emperor had to order the relatives and ministers to discuss Guo Ying's guilt.

古文：议上，竟宥之。
现代文：议定上报后，皇上最终又宽容了郭英。
English: After agreeing on the report, the emperor finally tolerated Guo Ying.

古文：建文时，从耿炳文、李景隆伐燕，无功。
现代文：建文时期，郭英随耿炳文、李景隆讨伐燕国，没有战功。
English: During the Jianwen period, Guo Ying followed Geng Shouwen and Li Jinglong to fight against Yan Guo, but did not have any military achievements.

古文：靖难后，罢归第。
现代文：靖难之役后，郭英罢官回归故里。
English: After the Battle of Yasunan, Guo Ying was dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：永乐元年卒，年六十七。
现代文：永乐元年，郭英去世，终年六十七岁。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Guo Ying died at the age of 67.

古文：赠营国公，谥威襄。
现代文：追任为营国公，谥号威襄。
English: His posthumous title was Ying Guogong, and his nickname was Wei Xiang.

古文：英孝友，通书史，行师有纪律，以忠谨见亲于太祖。
现代文：郭英对朋友很忠义，精通史书，统率军队纪律严明，对太祖十分忠诚。
English: Guo Ying was very loyal to his friends, was well versed in history books, led the army with strict discipline, and was very loyal to his grandfather.

古文：又以宁妃故，恩宠尤渥，诸功臣莫敢望焉。
现代文：又因为宁妃的缘故，他得到的恩宠尤多，这是诸功臣望尘莫及的。
English: Also, because of Ningfei, he received a lot of favors, which is beyond the expectations of all meritorious retainers.

古文：子十二人。
现代文：郭英有子女十二人。
English: Guo Ying has 12 children.

古文：镇，尚永嘉公主。
现代文：郭镇，与永嘉公主成婚。
English: Guo Zhen married Princess Yongjia.

古文：铭，辽府典宝。
现代文：郭铭是辽府典宝。
English: Guo Ming is a treasure of Liaofu.

古文：镛，中军右都督。
现代文：郭镛是中军右都督。
English: Guo Gan was the right-hand governor of the Chinese army.

古文：女九人，二为辽郢王妃。
现代文：女儿九人，二女是辽郢王妃。
English: He has nine daughters, the second of whom is Princess Liao Wei.

古文：女孙为仁宗贵妃，铭出也，以故铭子玹得嗣侯。
现代文：郭英的孙女为仁宗贵妃，因而郭铭在兄弟中出人头地，郭铭的儿子郭王玄得以继承侯位。
English: Guo Ying's granddaughter was a noble consort of Emperor Renzong. Therefore, Guo Ming was more prominent among his brothers, and Guo Ming's son, Guo Wangxuan, was able to succeed to the throne.

古文：宣德中，玹署宗人府事，夺河间民田庐，又夺天津屯田千亩，罪其奴而宥玹。
现代文：宣德年间，郭王玄代理宗人府事职务，他强夺河间老百姓的田地和房屋，又强夺天津屯田一千亩，但上面只处罚了他的家奴，而郭王玄得到了宽恕。
English: During the Xuande era, Guo Wangxuan acted as a deputy to the minister of the people's government affairs. He forcibly seized the fields and houses of the common people in Hema, and forcibly seized a thousand mu of Tianjin's farmland. However, the authorities only punished his family slave, while Guo Wangxuan was pardoned.

古文：英宗初，永嘉公主乞以其子珍嗣侯。
现代文：英宗初年，永嘉公主请求让她的儿子郭珍继承侯位。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yingzong, Princess Yongjia requested that her son Guo Zhen succeed to the throne.

古文：珍，英嫡孙也，授锦衣卫指挥佥事。
现代文：郭珍是郭英的亲孙子，他被授予锦衣卫指挥佥事。
English: Guo Zhen is Guo Ying's grandchild. He was awarded the grand prize of the grand prize of the grand prize of the grand prize of the grand prize of the grand prize.

古文：玹卒，子聪与珍争嗣，遂并停袭，亦授聪如珍官。
现代文：郭王玄去世后，郭王玄的儿子郭聪与郭珍争夺继承权，于是停止了他们世袭的权利，授予郭聪同郭珍一样的官职。
English: After the death of Guo Wangxuan, Guo Wangxuan's son Guo Cong competed with Guo Zhen for the right of succession, so they stopped their hereditary right and granted Guo Cong the same official position as Guo Zhen.

古文：天顺元年，珍子昌以诏恩得袭，聪争之不得。
现代文：天顺元年，郭珍的儿子郭昌因得到皇恩而得以继承侯位，但郭聪始终没有争到。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Guo Zhen's son Guo Chang was able to inherit the throne due to the royal favor, but Guo Cong never competed for the throne.

古文：昌卒，子良当嗣，聪又言良非昌子，复停嗣，授指挥佥事。
现代文：郭昌去世后，他的儿子郭良理所当然应该继承父位，但郭聪说郭良不是郭昌的儿子，所以继承之事又被停止。郭良被授予指挥佥事的官职。
English: After the death of Guo Chang, his son Guo Liang should naturally inherit his father's throne, but Guo Cong said that Guo Liang was not Guo Chang's son, so the succession was stopped again. Guo Liang was awarded the official post of commanding anecdote.

古文：以屡乞嗣，下狱，寻释复官。
现代文：后因郭良多次请求继父位而被抓进监狱。不久后，郭良被释放并官复原职。
English: Later, Guo Liang was arrested and sent to prison because he repeatedly asked for the position of stepfather. Soon after, Guo Liang was released and reinstated.

古文：既而郭宗人共乞择英孙一人嗣英爵。
现代文：后来郭英宗族的人共同请求从郭英的孙子中选一人继承郭英的爵位。
English: Later, members of Guo Ying's family jointly requested that one of Guo Ying's grandchildren be chosen to inherit Guo Ying's title.

古文：勋死数年，其子守乾嗣侯，传至曾孙培民。
现代文：朝廷的大臣都说郭良本来就是郭英的亲孙子，继承侯位比较合适，皇上认可。
English: The ministers of the imperial court all said that Guo Liang was originally Guo Ying's grandchild, and it was more appropriate to inherit the marital status, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：崇祯末，死于贼。华云龙，定远人。
现代文：正德初年郭良去世，他的儿子郭勋继承他的职位。华云龙，定远人。
English: Guo Liang died in the first year of Zhengde, and his son Guo Xun inherited his post. Hua Yunlong, Dingyuan people.

古文：聚众居韭山。
现代文：他在韭山聚众为王。
English: He gathered the people together at Sheshan and became king.

古文：太祖起兵，来归。
现代文：明太祖起兵时，华云龙率兵前来归附。
English: When Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty raised an army, Hua Yunlong led an army to annex it.

古文：从克滁、和，为千夫长。
现代文：他跟随太祖攻克滁州、和州，担任千夫长职务。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather to conquer Bozhou and Hezhou, and held the post of commander.

古文：从渡江，破采石水寨及方山营。下集庆路，生擒元将，得兵万人，克镇江，迁总管。
现代文：随从大军渡长江，攻破采石的水寨和方山的营寨，挥师进军集庆路，生擒元朝大将，俘虏敌军上万人。攻克镇江，华云龙被晋升为总管。
English: He accompanied the great army to cross the Yangtze River, broke through the stone quarry and Fangshan's camp, and marched into the Jieqing Road. He defeated the Yuan Dynasty general and captured tens of thousands of enemy troops. After conquering the Zhenjiang River, Huayunlong was promoted to the general manager.

古文：攻拔广德，战旧馆，擒汤元帅，进右副元帅。
现代文：攻占广德，激战于旧馆，活捉汤元帅，被晋升为右副元帅。
English: He captured Guangde, fought a fierce battle in the old pavilion, captured Tang Marshal alive, and was promoted to the right deputy marshal.

古文：龙江之役，云龙伏石灰山，接战，杀伤相当。
现代文：龙江战役，华云龙埋伏在石灰山，通过交战，敌我死伤相当。
English: In the Battle of Longjiang River, Huayunlong ambushed in the Lime Mountain, through the battle, the enemy's death and injury are comparable.

古文：云龙跃马大呼，捣其中坚，遂大败友谅兵，乘胜复太平。
现代文：华云龙跃马大呼冲入敌阵，捣毁了敌人的中坚力量，于是大败了陈友谅的部队，并乘胜收复太平。
English: Hua Yun Long Yue Ma Dahu rushed into the enemy lines, destroyed the enemy's core strength, and then defeated Chen Youjun's troops, and won the victory to restore peace.

古文：从下九江、南昌，分兵攻下瑞州、临江、吉安。
现代文：跟从大军下九江、南昌，分兵几路攻下瑞州、临江、吉安。
English: Following the great army down to Jiujiang and Nanchang, a detachment of soldiers captured several routes to Ruizhou, Linjiang and Ji'an.

古文：从援安丰，战彭蠡，平武昌。
现代文：援助安丰，攻战彭蠡，平定武昌。
English: Aid Anfeng, attack Penghu, and pacify Wuchang.

古文：累功至豹韬卫指挥使。
现代文：战功累累，华云龙被晋升为豹韬卫指挥使。
English: For his distinguished service in the war, Hua Yunlong was promoted to commander of the Leopard Corps.

古文：从徐达帅兵取高邮，进克淮安，遂命守之，改淮安卫指挥使。
现代文：他跟随徐达率兵攻取高邮，进而攻克淮安，并受命守卫这里，改任淮安卫指挥使。
English: He followed Xu Da and led the troops to capture Gaoyou, and then conquered Huai'an, and was ordered to guard here, and was reassigned as Huai'an Military Commander.

古文：寻攻嘉兴，降吴将宋兴。围平江，军于胥门。
现代文：不久攻打嘉兴，降服了吴将宋兴，围攻平江，驻军于胥门。
English: Soon after, they attacked Jiaxing, subdued the Wu general Song Xing, besieged Pingjiang, and garrisoned at Zhimen.

古文：从大军北征，徇下山东郡县，与徐达会帅通州，进克元都。
现代文：跟从大将军徐达北征，带兵巡行山东郡县，和徐达在通州会师。进而攻克元朝都城。
English: He followed the general Xu Da to the Northern Expedition, led the troops to patrol Shandong County and County, and joined the division with Xu Da in Tongzhou. Then he conquered the capital city of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：擢大都督府佥事，总六卫兵留守兼北平行省参知政事。
现代文：华云龙被提升为大都督府佥事，总管六卫兵留守，兼任北平行省参知政事。
English: Hua Yunlong was promoted to the post of the Grand Governor, the head of the Sixth Guards stayed behind, and concurrently served as the governor of the North Parallel Province.

古文：逾年，攻下云州，获平章火儿忽答、右丞哈海。进都督同知，兼燕王左相。
现代文：第二年，攻下云州。俘虏平章火儿忽答、右丞哈海，被晋升为都督同知，并兼任燕王左相。
English: In the second year, he conquered Yunnan. The captives, Pingzhang Fei'er, Qutao, and Yuzheng Hahai, were promoted to governors-general, and he also served as Yan Wang's minister of the left.

古文：洪武三年冬，论功封淮安侯，禄一千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年冬天，论功行赏，华云龙被封为淮安侯，年食禄为一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the winter of the third year of Hongwu, Huayunlong was awarded the title of Huai'an marquess, with an annual stipend of fifteen hundred koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：云龙上言： 北平边塞，东自永平、蓟州，西至灰岭下，隘口一百二十一，相去可二千二百里。
现代文：华云龙上书说： 北平的边塞，东边自永平、蓟州，西边到灰岭，隘口有一百二十一个，从东至西有二千二百里。
English: Huayunlong said in his letter: The border fortress of Beiping stretches from Yongping and Zhangzhou in the east to Hailing in the west. There are 121 passes, and the distance from east to west is 2,200 miles.

古文：其王平口至官坐岭，隘口九，相去五百余里。
现代文：其中王平口到官坐岭，隘口有九个，相距有五百多里。
English: Among them, Wang Pingkou to Guanzhiling, there are nine passes, with a distance of more than five hundred miles.

古文：俱冲要，宜设兵。
现代文：这些位置都十分重要，应该布防军队。
English: These positions are very important and should be defended by the army.

古文：紫荆关及芦花山岭尤要害，宜设千户守御所。 
现代文：紫荆关和芦花山岭尤为要害，适宜设置千户守御所。 
English: The Bauhinia Pass and the Luhua Mountains are particularly important, and it is suitable to set up the Senju Imperial Palace.

古文：又言： 前大兵克永平，留故元八翼军士千六百人屯田，人月支粮五斗，所得不偿费。宜入燕山诸卫，补伍操练。 
现代文：他又说： 从前大兵攻克永平后，留下元八翼军士一千六百人屯田，人均支付粮食五斗，所得的还不够支出的，应该并入燕山诸卫，以此补充队伍的操练。 
English: He also said: After the former soldiers conquered Yongping, the former eight-winged sergeants left behind 1600 people to occupy the fields. Each person paid five barrels of grain. If the income was not enough to pay, it should be merged into Yanshan Zhuwei to supplement the team's training.

古文：俱从之。
现代文：华云龙的建议都被采纳。
English: All followed their advice.

古文：行边至云州，袭元平章僧家奴营于牙头，突入其帐擒之，尽俘其众。
现代文：华云龙带兵巡边到云州，在牙头袭击元平章僧家奴的营地，他们突入敌人军帐中，活捉了僧家奴，并全部俘虏了敌军。
English: Hua Yunlong led the troops on a patrol to Yunnan, and attacked the camp of Yuan Pingzhang's monk-servant at the cusp. They broke into the enemy's military account, captured the monk-servant alive, and captured all the enemy troops.

古文：至上都大石崖，攻克刘学士诸寨，驴儿国公奔漠北。
现代文：到了上都大石崖，华云龙攻克刘学士诸寨，驴儿国公逃奔漠北。
English: When they arrived at the Shangdu Great Rock Cliff, Huayun Long conquered Liu Biao Zhuzhai, and Donkey Guogong fled to the north of the desert.

古文：自是无内犯者，威名大著。
现代文：从此少有边患，华云龙因而威名远扬。
English: Since then, there have been few side effects, and Huayunlong has become famous.

古文：建燕邸，增筑北平城，皆其经画。
现代文：修建燕国的官邸，增筑北平的城墙，都是华云龙经略和筹划的。
English: The construction of the official residence of Yan Guo and the construction of the city wall of Beiping were all strategized and planned by Hua Yunlong.

古文：洪武七年，有言云龙据元相脱脱第宅，僣用故元宫中物。
现代文：洪武七年，有人告发华云龙占据元朝丞相脱脱的府邸，越级享用元朝故宫中的文物。
English: In the seventh year of Hongwu, someone accused Hua Yunlong of occupying the residence of the former prime minister and enjoying the cultural relics in the Yuan Dynasty Imperial Palace.

古文：召还，命何文辉往代。
现代文：于是华云龙被召回，任命何文辉前去取代华云龙。
English: As a result, Hua Yunlong was recalled and He Wenhui was appointed to replace Hua Yunlong.

古文：未至京，道卒。
现代文：华云龙还没回到京城，就死在途中。
English: Before Huayunlong could return to Beijing, he died on the way.

古文：子中袭。
现代文：他的儿子华中继承父位。
English: His son Huazhong succeeded his father.

古文：李文忠之卒也，中侍疾进药，坐贬死。
现代文：李文忠死时，华中在他身边侍候喂药，因而涉嫌被贬而死。
English: At the time of Li Wenzhong's death, Huazhong was by his side, waiting to administer medicine. Therefore, it is suspected that he died as a result of being demoted.

古文：二十三年追论中胡党，爵除。
现代文：二十三年，议论华中为胡党，他的爵位被废除。
English: In 1923, he was accused of being a member of Hu's party, and his title was revoked.

古文：韩政，睢人。
现代文：韩政，睢州人。
English: Han Zheng, from Zhangzhou.

古文：尝为义兵元帅，帅众归太祖，授江淮行省平章政事。
现代文：曾经为义兵元帅，他统率军队归附太祖，被授予江淮行省平章政事。
English: Once a volunteer marshal, he led the army to be annexed to Taizu and was awarded the title of Jianghuai Province.

古文：李济据濠州，名为张士诚守，实观望。
现代文：李济占据濠州，名义上为张士诚守卫，实际上则是在观望。
English: Li Jie occupied Zhangzhou, nominally guarding Zhang Shicheng, but in fact watching from the sidelines.

古文：太祖使右相国李善长以书招之，不报。
现代文：太祖命右相国李善长写信招降，但没有回音。
English: His great-grandfather's right-hand man, Li Shanzhong, sent a letter inviting him to surrender, but there was no reply.

古文：太祖叹曰： 濠，吾家也，济如此，我有国无家可乎！ 
现代文：太祖叹息说： 濠州是我的故乡，李济如此这般，我拥有整个国家而无家可归行吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather sighed and said: Zhangzhou is my hometown, Liji is like this and that, can I have the whole country and be homeless?

古文：乃命政帅指挥顾时以云梯炮石四面攻濠。
现代文：于是命令韩政率领指挥顾时用云梯、石炮石四面围攻濠州。
English: Therefore, he ordered Han Zheng to lead the commander Gu Shi to besiege Zhangzhou on all sides with ladders, stone cannons and stones.

古文：济度不能支，始出降。
现代文：李济思量着不能支撑太久，于是就出城投降了。
English: Li Jie thought that he could not hold out for too long, so he left the city and surrendered.

古文：政归济于应天。
现代文：韩政带着李济返回了应天府。
English: Han Zheng returned to Ying Tian Fu with Li Ji.

古文：太祖大悦，以时守濠州。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，命令顾时据守濠州。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy and ordered Gu to stay in Zhangzhou.

古文：政从徐达攻安丰，扼其四门，潜穴城东龙尾坝，入其城二十余丈。
现代文：韩政随徐达进攻安丰，扼守城的四门，秘密地在城东龙尾坝挖洞，洞深入城中二十多丈。
English: Han Zheng followed Xu Da in attacking Anfeng and guarded the four gates of the city. He secretly dug a hole in the Dragon's Tail Dam in the east of the city, and the hole went more than 20 meters deep into the city.

古文：城坏，遂破之。
现代文：城墙被破坏，安丰城于是被攻破。
English: The city wall was destroyed and the city of Anfeng was breached.

古文：元将忻都、竹贞、左君弼皆走。
现代文：元将忻都、竹贞、左君弼都逃跑了。
English: Former generals Xindu, Zhuzheng, and Zuojun all fled.

古文：追奔四十余里，擒都。
现代文：韩政追敌四十多里，活捉忻都。
English: Han Zheng chased the enemy for more than forty miles and captured Shidu alive.

古文：俄而贞引兵来援，与战城南门，再破走之。
现代文：不久竹贞带兵前来援救，双方激战于城南门，竹贞被打败再次逃奔。
English: Soon, Zhu Zhen came to the rescue with his soldiers. The two sides fought fiercely at the south gate of the city. Zhu Zhen was defeated and fled again.

古文：淮东、西悉平。
现代文：淮东、淮西全部平定。
English: Huaidong and Huaixi have all been pacified.

古文：已，从大军平吴。又从北伐，降梁城守将卢斌。分兵扼黄河，断山东援军，遂取益都、济宁、济南，皆有功。
现代文：此后，随大军平吴，又随大军北伐，迫使梁城守将卢斌来降，兵分几路，扼守黄河，断绝山东的援军，于是攻取了益都、济宁、济南，韩政都立下战功。
English: After that, with the large army of Pingwu, and with the large army of the Northern Expedition, he forced Liangcheng to bring down Lu Bin, divided the army into several routes, guarded the Yellow River, and cut off the reinforcements from Shandong, and then captured Yidu, Jining, Jinan, and Han Zhengdu.

古文：克东平，功尤多，改山东行省平章政事。
现代文：攻克东平，他的功绩尤为突出，担任山东行省平章政事。
English: In conquering Dongping, his achievements were particularly outstanding, and he served as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：以师会大将军于临清，檄政守东昌。
现代文：韩政率大军在临清和大将军会师。韩政受命守卫东昌。
English: Han Zheng led a large army to join the division in Linqing and the general. Han Zheng was ordered to guard Dongchang.

古文：既下大都，命政分兵守广平。
现代文：攻下大都后，韩政受命分兵守卫广平。
English: After capturing Dadu, Han Zheng was ordered to guard Guangping with a detachment of soldiers.

古文：政遂谕降白土诸寨。
现代文：韩政宣谕招降了白土诸寨。
English: Han Zheng's proclamation called for the surrender of Baidu Zhuzhai.

古文：移守彰德，下蚁尖寨。
现代文：移守彰德，攻下蚁尖寨。
English: Moved to Zhangde, captured Ant Peak Village.

古文：蚁尖者，在林虑西北二十里，为元右丞吴庸、王居义、小锁儿所据。
现代文：蚁尖位于林虑西北二十里，被元右丞吴庸、王居义、小锁儿所占。
English: Ant's Tip is located 20 miles northwest of Linxian, and was occupied by Wu Yong, Wang Juyi, and Xiao Zhao.

古文：大将军之北伐也，遣将士收复诸山寨，降者相继，蚁尖独恃险不下。
现代文：大将军北伐时，派将士收复诸山寨，都相继来降，唯独蚁尖依恃险要而攻克不下。
English: When the great general was on the Northern Expedition, he sent his soldiers to recapture all the villages, and they all came down one after another. However, the ant's tip clung to the cocoon and could not be overcome.

古文：至是兵逼之，庸诱杀居义及小锁儿以降，得士卒万余人。
现代文：兵临城下，吴庸诱杀了王居义和小锁儿向明王朝投降，得士兵万余人。
English: When the soldiers came to the city, Wu Yong induced Wang Juyi and Xiao Zhao'er to surrender to the Ming Dynasty, gaining more than ten thousand soldiers.

古文：寻调征陕西，还兵守御河北。
现代文：不久韩政调征陕西，回师后守卫河北。
English: Soon after, Han Zheng transferred his forces to Shaanxi and returned to guard Hebei.

古文：洪武三年封东平侯，禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，韩政被封为东平侯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Han Zheng was given the title of Dongping Hou, a stipend of fifteen hundred koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：移镇山东。
现代文：韩政移师镇守山东。
English: Han Zheng transferred his division to guard Shandong.

古文：未几，复移河北。
现代文：没过多久，又再次镇守河北。
English: It didn't take long before he was back in charge of Hebei again.

古文：招抚流民，复业甚众。
现代文：在此，他招抚流民，使许多老百姓能重操旧业。
English: Here, he has attracted migrants and enabled many people to return to their old jobs.

古文：从左副将军李文忠捣应昌，至胪朐河。
现代文：跟从左副将军李文忠直捣应昌，到了胪朐河。
English: He followed Li Wenzhong, the left vice-general, and went to Luohe.

古文：文忠深入，令政守辎重。
现代文：李文忠继续深入，命令韩政守护辎重。
English: Li Wenzhong continued to go deeper and ordered Han Zheng to be guarded.

古文：还，命巡河南、陕西。
现代文：回师后，韩政受命巡视河南、陕西。
English: After returning to China, Han Zheng was ordered to inspect Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：再从信国公汤和练兵于临清。
现代文：再次跟从信国公汤和在临清练兵。
English: He once again followed Shinkokukongtang and trained soldiers in Linqing.

古文：十一年二月卒，帝亲临其丧。追封郓国公。
现代文：十一年二月，韩政去世，太祖亲自参加了他的葬礼，追封为郓国公。
English: In February of the eleventh year, Han Zheng died, and the great-grandfather attended his funeral in person, and was posthumously crowned the Prince of Han.

古文：子勋袭。
现代文：韩政的儿子韩勋继承父位。
English: Han Zheng's son Han Xun succeeded to his father's throne.

古文：二十六年坐蓝党诛，爵除。
现代文：二十六年，受蓝玉案株连而被杀，爵位被免除。
English: In twenty-six years, he was killed by the blue jade case, and his title was exempted.

古文：仇成，含山人。
现代文：仇成，含山人。
English: Mucheng, including mountain people.

古文：初从军充万户，屡迁至秦淮翼副元帅。
现代文：最初从军担任万户，多次晋升到秦淮翼副元帅。
English: At first, he served as Wanyu from the army, and was promoted to Vice Marshal Qin Huaiyi several times.

古文：太祖攻安庆，敌固守不战。
现代文：太祖攻打安庆，敌人困守而不出战。
English: The great-grandfather attacked Anqing, but the enemy was trapped and did not fight.

古文：廖永忠、张志雄破其水寨，成以陆兵乘之，遂克安庆。
现代文：廖永忠、张志雄攻破敌方水寨，仇成从陆路攻敌，于是安庆城陷。
English: Liao Yongzhong and Zhang Zhixiong broke through the enemy's water fortifications and attacked the enemy by land. As a result, Anqing fell.

古文：初，元左丞余阙守安庆，陈友谅将赵普胜陷之。
现代文：当初元左丞余阙守卫安庆，陈友谅的将领赵普胜攻陷安庆。
English: At the beginning, the former left-wing general Yu Xi guarded Anqing, and Chen Youjun's general Zhao Pusheng invaded Anqing.

古文：友谅既杀普胜，元帅余某者袭取之。
现代文：陈友谅杀赵普胜后，元帅余阙趁机又占领了安庆。
English: After Chen Youyuan killed Zhao Pusheng, Marshal Yu Xi took the opportunity to occupy Anqing again.

古文：张定边复来犯，余帅走死。
现代文：张定边再次来犯，余阙败死。
English: Zhang Dingbian committed the crime again, and Yu Yu was defeated and died.

古文：至是以成为横海指挥同知，守其地。
现代文：至此仇成为横海指挥同知，守卫在安庆。
English: So far, the enemy has become a friend of the commander of Henghai, and the guard is in Anqing.

古文：时左君弼据庐州，罗友贤以池州叛，无为知州董曾陷死，四面皆贼境。
现代文：此时左君弼占据庐州，罗友贤又在池州反叛，无为知州董曾战死，安庆四面都是敌人。
English: At this time, Zuo Junyi occupied Zhangzhou, Luo Youxian rebelled in Chizhou, it is unknown whether Zhou Dong Zeng was killed in battle, and Anqing was surrounded by enemies.

古文：成抚集军民，守御严密，汉兵不敢东下。
现代文：仇成安抚军民，防御严密，致使汉兵不敢东下。
English: Enmity pacified the military and the people, and the defenses were tight, so that the Chinese soldiers did not dare to go east.

古文：从征鄱阳，歼敌泾江口，功最。
现代文：接着随大军远征鄱阳，歼敌于泾江口，仇成功劳极大。
English: Then, the great army went on an expedition to Fenyang and annihilated the enemy at the mouth of the Fenyang River.

古文：征平江，败张士诚兵于城西南。
现代文：又征讨平江，在城西南打败了张士诚的部队。
English: He also conquered Pingjiang and defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops in the southwest of the city.

古文：洪武三年，佥大都督府事，镇辽东。
现代文：洪武三年，掌管大都督府事，镇守辽东。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was in charge of the affairs of the great governor's office and the town guard of Liaodong.

古文：久之，以屯戍无功，降永平卫指挥使。
现代文：时间长了，仇成因屯田戍守方面无功，降职为永平卫指挥使。
English: After a long time, Qucheng was demoted to the position of Yongping Wei commander due to his ineffectiveness in the field of garrison defense.

古文：寻复官。
现代文：不久官复原职。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：十二年论蓝玉等征西功，当封。
现代文：十二年，评论蓝玉等人征西的功绩，应当封赐。
English: In the 12th year, he commented that the merits of the Western Expedition of Blue Jade and others should be awarded.

古文：帝念成旧勋，先封为安庆侯，岁禄二千石。
现代文：太祖念仇成旧功，先封他为安庆侯，年食禄二千石。
English: The great-great-grandfather, remembering his old feats, first made him a vassal of Anqing, with an annual stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：二十年充征南副将军，讨平容美诸峒。
现代文：二十年，仇成担任征南副将军，平定了容美诸峒。
English: For twenty years, Qiancheng served as the vice-general of the Southern Expeditionary Force and pacified Yongmei Zhulong.

古文：复从大军征云南，功多，予世券，加禄五百石。
现代文：再从大军征讨云南，战功显赫，给予世袭凭证，加禄五百石。
English: He was then recruited from the great army to fight in Yunnan, where he distinguished himself in battle. He was given a hereditary certificate and a stipend of 500 koku.

古文：二十一年七月，有疾。
现代文：二十一年七月，仇成有病。
English: In July 21st, Kecheng fell ill.

古文：赐内酝，手诏存问。
现代文：赐内酝，皇上手草信函问候。
English: The Emperor sends his greetings by letter.

古文：卒，赠皖国公，谥庄襄。
现代文：仇成去世后，封为皖国公，谥号庄襄。
English: After the death of Qiancheng, he was given the title of Duke of Shandong Province and the posthumous name of Zhuangxiang.

古文：子正袭爵。
现代文：他的儿子仇正继承父业。
English: His son, Kucho, is following in his father's footsteps.

古文：张龙，濠人。
现代文：张龙，濠州人。
English: Zhang Long, from Zhangzhou.

古文：从渡江，定常州、宁国、婺州，皆有功。
现代文：随太祖渡江，平定常州、宁国、婺州，都立有战功。
English: Along with Emperor Taizu's crossing of the Yangtze River and the pacification of Changzhou, Ningguo, and Zhangzhou, all of them achieved great military feats.

古文：从征江州，为都先锋。
现代文：从征江州，担任都先锋。
English: From the conquest of Jiangzhou, he served as a vanguard.

古文：平武昌，授花枪所千户。
现代文：平定武昌后，授予花枪所千户。
English: After the defeat of Wuchang, a thousand households of the Flower Gunnery School were awarded.

古文：从平淮东，守御海安。与张士诚将战于海口，擒彭元帅，俘其卒数百。
现代文：平定淮东，守卫海安，在海口与张士诚的部队展开了战斗，活捉了彭元帅，俘敌几百人。
English: He pacified Huaidong, guarded the safety of the sea, fought with Zhang Shicheng's troops in Haikou, captured Marshal Peng alive, and captured hundreds of enemies.

古文：进攻通州，击斩贼将。擢威武卫指挥佥事。
现代文：进攻通州，击毙敌将，张龙被提升为威武卫指挥佥事。
English: Attacking Tongzhou, killing the enemy general, Zhang Long was promoted to the command of Weiwuwei.

古文：从平山东、河南。
现代文：从征平定山东、河南。
English: Shandong and Henan were conquered.

古文：大兵克潼关，以龙为副留守。
现代文：派大部队攻克潼关，任命张龙为副留守。
English: He sent a large force to conquer Shaoguan and appointed Zhang Long as his deputy.

古文：洪武三年调守凤翔，改凤翔卫指挥。
现代文：洪武三年，调守凤翔，改任凤翔卫指挥。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was transferred to Fengxiang, and became the commander of Fengxiangwei.

古文：贺宗哲悉众围城，龙固守。
现代文：贺宗哲率其全部军队围城，张龙固守。
English: He Zongzhe led his entire army to besiege the city, and Zhanglong held fast.

古文：友仁复悉兵薄城，大治攻具。
现代文：贺宗哲进攻北门，张龙出兵迎战，虽右臂被箭伤，仍不退缩，大败敌军。
English: He Zongzhe attacked the north gate, Zhang Long sent troops to meet the battle, although his right arm was injured by arrows, he still did not retreat and defeated the enemy.

古文：龙从北门突出，绕友仁军后，敌尽弃甲仗走，自是不复窥兴元。召佥大都督府事。十一年副李文忠征西番洮州。论功，封凤翔侯，禄二千石，世指挥使。
现代文：蜀将吴友仁率兵来犯，被张龙打败而逃。任命张龙为大都督府事。十一年，协助李文忠征讨西番洮州。评功，张龙被封为凤翔侯，食禄二千石，世袭指挥使。
English: Shu general Wu Youren led an army to commit a crime, but was defeated by Zhang Long and fled. Zhang Long was appointed as the grand governor of the prefecture. In the eleventh year, he assisted Li Wenzhong in the conquest of West Panyu Prefecture. Zhang Long was awarded the title of Fengxiang Hou, a stipend of two thousand koku, and a hereditary commanding officer.

古文：复从傅友德征云南，镇七星关，破大理、鹤庆，平诸洞蛮。加禄五百石，予世券三十年。
现代文：又从傅友德征云南，镇守七星关，攻破大理、鹤庆，平定诸洞蛮，加食禄五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: He also conquered Yunnan from Fu Youde, guarded Qixing Pass, conquered Dali and Heqing, and subdued the barbarians in various caves. He was given a stipend of 500 koku and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：二十年从冯胜出金山，降纳哈出。
现代文：二十年，从冯胜出金山，纳哈出投降。
English: Twenty years have passed since Feng Sheng surrendered Jinshan and Naha surrendered.

古文：明年，胜调降军征云南，次常德，叛去。龙追至重庆，收捕之。
现代文：第二年，冯胜征调降军征讨云南，驻军常德时，降军叛逃，张龙率兵一直追到重庆，才收捕了他们。
English: In the second year, when Feng Shengzheng transferred his army to Yunnan and stationed it in Changde, the soldiers defected and Zhang Long led his soldiers to chase them all the way to Chongqing before they were arrested.

古文：杰子嗣，宣德十年，援诏恩乞嗣。吏部言：龙侯不嗣者四十年，不许。吴复，字伯起，合肥人。
现代文：二十三年春，同延安侯唐胜宗在平越、镇远、贵州等地屯田，商议设置龙里卫。都匀叛乱，张龙辅佐蓝玉讨伐平定。张龙因年老多病，请求告老还乡，三十年张龙去世。吴复，字伯起，合肥人。
English: In the spring of 23rd, with Yan'an Hou Tang Shengzong in Pingyue, Zhenyuan, Guizhou and other places, they discussed the establishment of Longliwei. Duyun rebellion was put down, Zhang Longfu assisted the Blue Jade Crusade. Zhang Long, due to old age and illness, asked to return to his hometown. Zhang Long died in 30 years. Wu Fu, surnamed Boqi, was from Hefei.

古文：少负勇略。
现代文：年少时就有勇有谋。
English: When you're young, you're brave and resourceful.

古文：元末，集众保乡里。
现代文：元朝末年，吴复召集乡民保卫乡里。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Wu Fu called the villagers together to defend the countryside.

古文：归太祖于濠，从克泗、滁、和、采石、太平，累官万户。
现代文：在濠州归附了太祖，从太祖攻克泗、滁、和、采石、太平等地，累功升至万户。
English: In Bozhou, it was attached to Taizu. From the time of Taizu, it has been equally successful in conquering Kunlun, Yunnan, Hebei, quarrying, and Tai, and has risen to 10,000 households.

古文：从破蛮子海牙水寨，定集庆。
现代文：从大军破蛮子海牙的水寨，平定集庆。
English: From the great army to break the barbarian The Hague's water fortification, to the peaceful gathering celebration.

古文：从徐达攻镇江，斩元平章定定。下丹阳、金坛，克常州，进统军元帅。
现代文：从徐达进攻镇江，杀死元平章定定，挥师下丹阳、金坛，攻克常州，晋升为统军元帅。
English: He attacked Zhenjiang from Xu Da, killed Yuan Ping Zhang Dingding, sent his army to Danyang and Jintan, conquered Changzhou, and was promoted to Marshal of the United Army.

古文：徇江阴、无锡，还守常州。
现代文：巡行江阴、无锡，回来后守卫常州。
English: They marched through Jiangyin and Wuxi. After returning, they guarded Changzhou.

古文：张士诚兵奄至，力战，败之。追奔至长兴，连败之于高桥、太湖及忠节门，士诚夺气。
现代文：张士诚的部队蜂拥而至，吴复力战败敌，追敌到长兴，再次于高桥、太湖、忠节门打败张士诚，士诚十分丧气。
English: Zhang Shicheng's troops flocked to him. Wu Zhuoli defeated the enemy, chased the enemy to Changxing, and defeated Zhang Shicheng again at Gaoqiao, Taihu, and Zhongjiemen. Shicheng was very discouraged.

古文：从援安丰，平武昌。
现代文：吴复援助安丰，平定武昌。
English: Wu Fu aided Anfeng and pacified Wuchang.

古文：从徐达克庐州，下汉、沔、荆诸郡县。授镇武卫指挥同知，守沔阳。
现代文：从徐达攻克庐州，挥师而下汉、沔、荆等诸郡县，被任命为镇武卫指挥同知，镇守沔阳。
English: From Xu Da to conquer Bozhou, he waved his division and went down to Han, Lu, Jing and other counties and counties, and was appointed as the commander of the town of Wuwei, and the town guard of Poyang.

古文：从常遇春下襄阳，别将破安陆，擒元同佥任亮，遂守之。
现代文：从常遇春下襄阳，另带兵攻破安陆，活捉了元同佥任亮，于是就地镇守安陆。
English: He often encountered Xiangyang in the spring, and led another army to break through Anlu, captured Yuan Tonglu Renliang alive, and then kept Anlu in place.

古文：克汝州、鲁山。
现代文：又攻克汝州、鲁山。
English: He also conquered Ruzhou and Lushan.

古文：洪武元年，授怀远将军、安陆卫指挥使。悉平郧、均、房、竹诸山寨之不附者。
现代文：洪武元年，吴复被任命为怀远将军、安陆卫指挥使，全部平定郧、均、房、竹诸山寨未归附的残部。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Wu Fu was appointed as the general of Huaiyuan and the commanding officer of Anluwei, and all the unattached remnants of the villages of Jiu, Jun, Fang and Zhu were pacified.

古文：三年从大将军征陕西，败扩廓，擒其将。
现代文：三年，从大将军徐达征陕西，打败扩廓，生擒其守将。
English: Three years later, General Xu Da conquered Shaanxi, defeated the Zengguo, and captured its garrison.

古文：又败扩郭于秦州。
现代文：又再次在秦州打败扩廓。
English: And again in Qinzhou to defeat the expansion.

古文：征吐番，克河州。援汉中，拔南郑。
现代文：征讨吐番，攻克河州，援助汉中，占领南郑。
English: They requisitioned Tuban, conquered Hezhou, assisted Hanzhong, and occupied Nanzheng.

古文：明年从傅友德平蜀。
现代文：第二年从傅友德平定蜀地。
English: In the second year, Fu Youde conquered Shu.

古文：又明年从邓愈平九溪、辰州诸蛮，克四十八洞，还守安陆。
现代文：第三年从邓愈平定九溪、辰州诸蛮，占领了四十八洞。回师后镇守安陆。
English: In the third year, he subdued the barbarians in Jiuxi and Chenzhou from Dengyu and occupied 48 caves. After returning to the division, he became the town guard of Anlu.

古文：七年进大都督府佥事。
现代文：七年，晋升为大都督府佥事。
English: Seven years later, he was promoted to the post of Grand Governor.

古文：巡北平还，授世袭指挥使。
现代文：巡视北平回来后，被任命为世袭指挥使。
English: After returning from the inspection tour of Beiping, he was appointed as a hereditary commander.

古文：十一年从沐英再征西番，擒三副使，得纳邻哈七站之地。
现代文：十一年，从沐英再次征讨西番，活捉三副使，占领了纳邻哈七站的地方。
English: In the eleventh year, the Western District was once again conquered from Mu Ying, the three deputy envoys were captured alive, and the seven stations near Naxi were occupied.

古文：明年，师还，论功封安陆侯，食禄二千石。
现代文：第二年，班师回朝，论功行赏，吴复被封为安陆侯，食禄二千石。
English: In the second year, the class teacher returned to the imperial court, and on the basis of merit and performance, Wu Fu was awarded the title of An Lu Hou, with a stipend of two thousand koku.

古文：十四年，从傅友德征云南，克普定，城水西。
现代文：十四年，从傅友德征讨云南，攻克了普定，在水西筑城。
English: In 14 years, he conquered Yunnan from Fu Youde, conquered Puding, and built a city in the west of the water.

古文：师还，封雄武侯，禄二千石，世指挥使。
现代文：吴复担任总兵官，剿捕诸蛮，率兵由关索岭赴箐道，攻取广西。
English: Wu Fu served as the commander-in-chief, captured the barbarians, and led the troops from Guansoling to Shandong to capture Guangxi.

古文：出理河南军务，巡抚北边。二十三年卒，赠汝国公，谥勇襄。
现代文：十六年，攻克墨定苗，到吉剌堡，修筑安庄、新城，平定七百房诸寨，杀敌和俘虏共计数万人，转移粮饷至盘江。当年十月，金疮病发，吴复死于普定，朝廷追封为黔国公，谥号威毅，增加食禄五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the 16th year, he conquered Mo Dingmiao, went to Jizhong Fort, built Anzhuang and Xincheng, conquered 700 houses and villages, killed tens of thousands of enemies and prisoners in total, and transferred grain to Panjiang. In October of that year, he was diagnosed with acne, Wu Fu died in Puding, and was posthumously awarded the title of Duke of Shandong Province by the imperial court. His posthumous name was Wei Yi, his stipend was increased by 500 koku, and he was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：胡海，字海洋，定远人。
现代文：胡海，字海洋，定远人。
English: Hu Hai, the character ocean, Dingyuan people.

古文：尝入土豪赤塘王总管营，自拔来归，授百户。
现代文：曾经加入土豪赤塘王总管的兵营，后自动归附了太祖，被授予百户。
English: He once joined the battalion of the local chieftain Chitang Wang, and later he was automatically attached to his great-grandfather and was awarded one hundred households.

古文：从败元将贾鲁兵，克泗、滁，进万户。
现代文：从征打败了元将贾鲁的部队，攻克了泗、滁等地，晋升为万户。
English: The enlisted soldiers defeated the troops of the former general Jaru, conquered the cities of Handan and Handan, and were promoted to 10,000 households.

古文：从渡江，拔蛮子海牙水寨，破陈埜先兵，从取集庆、镇江。
现代文：跟随大军渡江，攻陷蛮子海牙水寨，打败陈聎先的部队，跟随夺取了集庆、镇江。
English: He followed the great army to cross the Yangtze River, captured the barbarian Hague Water Town, defeated Chen Yuxian's troops, and captured Jiuqing and Zhenjiang.

古文：败元将谢国玺于宁国，选充先锋。
现代文：在宁国打败了元将谢国玺，被选任先锋。
English: He defeated the former general Xie Guozhen in Ningguo and was selected as the vanguard.

古文：从大军围湖州，堕其东南门月城。
现代文：跟随大军围攻湖州，攻陷了湖州东南门月城。
English: He besieged Huzhou with a large army and captured the southeast gate of Huzhou, Yuecheng.

古文：从攻宜兴，下婺州，鏖战绍兴，生得贼四百余人，进都先锋。
现代文：跟随攻打宜兴，挥师下婺州，鏖战绍兴，生擒敌军四百多人，晋升为都先锋。
English: Following the attack on Yixing, he sent his division to Bozhou and fought in Shaoxing. He killed more than 400 enemy soldiers and was promoted to the vanguard of the capital.

古文：又从战龙江，克安庆，与汉人相持，八战，皆大捷，遂入江州。
现代文：从战龙江，攻克安庆，和汉人相对峙，八次战斗均为大捷，于是部队进入江州。
English: From the War of Longjiang, the conquest of Anqing, and the confrontation with the Han people, the eight battles were all great successes, so the troops entered Jiangzhou.

古文：从徐达攻庐州，皆有功。
现代文：跟随徐达攻打庐州，立下战功。
English: He followed Xu Da to attack Bozhou and made great achievements in the war.

古文：海骁勇，屡战屡伤，手足胸腹间金痍皆遍，而斗益力。
现代文：胡海十分勇猛，屡战屡次受伤，手脚和胸腹间遍体鳞伤，但斗志十分高昂。
English: Hu Hai is very brave. He has been injured many times in repeated battles. His hands and feet and chest and abdomen are covered with injuries, but his fighting spirit is very high.

古文：士卒从之者无不激励自效。
现代文：士兵无不激励，纷纷效法。
English: The soldiers were all inspired to follow suit.

古文：太祖壮之，授花枪上千户。
现代文：太祖十分赞赏，授予花枪上千户。
English: The great-grandfather was very appreciative, awarding the flower gun to thousands of households.

古文：复从大军克荆、澧、衡、潭，擢宝庆卫指挥佥事，迁指挥使，命镇益阳。
现代文：再次跟随大军攻克荆、澧、衡、潭，担任宝庆卫指挥佥事，晋升为指挥使，受命镇守益阳。
English: Once again, he followed the great army to conquer Jing, Handan, Heng and Tan, served as the commander of Baoqingwei, was promoted to the commander, and was ordered to guard the town of Yiyang.

古文：从平章杨璟征湖南、广西未下郡县。
现代文：跟随平章杨王景征讨湖南、广西未攻下的郡县。
English: He followed the Pingzhang Yang Wangjing to conquer the counties in Hunan and Guangxi that had not been conquered.

古文：由祁阳进围永州，与守兵战于东乡桥，生得千、万户四人，以夜半先登拔之。
现代文：从祁阳进兵围攻永州，在东乡桥与守敌交战，俘千、万户四人，深夜登城并占领了永州。
English: From Shenyang, the soldiers besieged Yongzhou, fought with the enemy at Dongxiang Bridge, captured four thousand people, went to the city in the middle of the night and occupied Yongzhou.

古文：抵靖江，战南门，生得万户二人。
现代文：到了靖江，攻南门，俘虏万户二人。
English: Arrived at the Jingjiang River, attacked the South Gate, and captured two persons.

古文：夜四鼓，自北门八角亭先登，功最，命为左副总兵。
现代文：夜晚四面击鼓，从北门八角亭先登城。胡海的功劳最大，被任命为左副总兵。
English: In the evening, drums were beaten on all sides, and the first to enter the city was from the North Gate octagonal pavilion. Hu Hai did the greatest service and was appointed the left deputy commander.

古文：剿平左江上思蛮。
现代文：剿平了左江上思蛮。
English: It was a wild ride on the Zuo River.

古文：调征蜀，克龙伏隘、天门山及温汤关，予世袭指挥使，仍镇益阳。
现代文：被调征讨蜀，攻克了龙伏隘、天门山和温汤关，授予世袭指挥使，仍镇守益阳。
English: He was transferred to Shu, conquered Longfuji Pass, Tianmen Mountain and Ontang Pass, was awarded the hereditary commander, and still guarded Yiyang.

古文：武冈、靖州、五开诸苗蛮先后作乱，悉捕诛首乱而抚其余众，迁都督佥事。
现代文：武冈、靖州、五开诸苗蛮先后叛乱，全部捕杀了叛乱的首领，而对其随从则采取了安抚政策。
English: Wookang, Jingzhou and Wukai Zhu Miao rebelled successively, and all of them killed the leaders of the rebellion, while their followers adopted a policy of appeasement.

古文：十四年从征云南，由永宁趋乌撒，进克可渡河。
现代文：胡海晋升为都督佥事。十四年从征云南，从永宁到乌撒，攻克了可渡河。
English: Hu Hai was promoted to the governor of the capital. In fourteen years, he conquered Yunnan, from Yongning to Wusa, and conquered the Kodu River.

古文：与副将军沐英会师攻大理，敌悉众扼上、下关。
现代文：和副将军沐英会师进攻大理，敌人全部扼守上、下关。
English: He and Vice-General Mu Ying assembled a division to attack Dali, and the enemy all held onto Shangguan and Shimonoseki.

古文：定远侯王弼自洱水东趋上关，英帅大军趋下关，而遣海以夜四鼓取石门。间道渡河，绕点苍山后，攀大树缘崖而上，立旂帜。
现代文：定远侯王弼自洱水东向上关进军，郭英率兵向下关进逼，派遣胡海趁黑夜四面击鼓攻取了石门，悄悄地出兵渡河，绕过点苍山后，攀大树沿悬崖而上，树起了旗帜。
English: Dingyuan marched eastward from Shishui to Shangguan, Guo Ying led his troops down to Shangguan, sent Hu Hai to take advantage of the darkness to beat drums on all sides to capture the stone gate, quietly sent troops to cross the river, bypassed the point of Cangshan, climbed trees along the cliff and raised a flag.

古文：英士卒望见，皆踊跃大呼，敌众惊扰。
现代文：郭英的士兵看到旗帜后，都踊跃大呼。敌人十分惊恐。
English: Guo Ying's soldiers shouted with joy when they saw the flag. The enemy was very frightened.

古文：英遂斩关入。海亦麾山上军驰下，前后夹攻，敌悉溃走。
现代文：郭英于是斩关而入，胡海率军从山上杀下，前后夹攻，敌人全军溃败。
English: Guo Ying then rushed in, Hu Hai led the army down from the mountain, attacked back and forth, and the entire enemy army was routed.

古文：十七年，论功封东川侯，禄二千五百石，予世券。
现代文：十七年论功行赏，胡海被封为东川侯，食禄二千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: After 17 years of meritorious service, Hu Hai was awarded the title of Dongchuan Marquis, with a stipend of 2,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：逾三年，以左参将从征金山。
现代文：过了三年，胡海以左参将的身份从征金山。
English: Three years later, Hu Hai went to conquer the Jinshan Mountains as a left-handed general.

古文：又二年，以征南将军讨平澧州九溪诸蛮寇。
现代文：再过二年，以征南将军身份讨平澧州九溪诸蛮寇。
English: Two years later, he fought against the barbarian invaders from Jiuxi in Bozhou as a general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：诏授孝陵卫指挥佥事，予世袭。
现代文：班师后，请求还乡，得到金银玉帛等赏赐颇丰。
English: After graduating from the class, he requested to return to his hometown and was rewarded handsomely with gold, silver and jade.

古文：张赫，临淮人。
现代文：二十四年七月，胡海病死，终年六十三岁。张赫，临淮人。
English: In July 1924, Hu Hai died of illness at the age of 63. Zhang He was from Linhuai.

古文：江淮大乱，团义兵以捍乡里。
现代文：江、淮大乱时，他召聚义兵保卫家乡。
English: When the Jiang and Huai Dynasties were in turmoil, he called up volunteers to defend his hometown.

古文：嘉山缪把头招之，不往。
现代文：嘉山缪把头招他前往，张赫拒绝了。
English: Jiashan Miao urged him to go, but Zhang He refused.

古文：闻太祖起，帅众来附。
现代文：当听到太祖起兵的消息时，张赫立即率兵前来归附。
English: When he heard the news of Emperor Taizu's army rising, Zhang He immediately led the troops to come and surrender.

古文：授千户，以功进万户。
现代文：授予千户，因功晋升为万户。
English: Awarded to 1,000 households, promoted to 10,000 households for merit.

古文：从渡江，所至攻伐皆预，以功擢常春翼元帅，守御常州。寻从战鄱阳，攻武昌。
现代文：从太祖渡江，因功担任常春翼元帅，守卫常州。不久，从大军征战鄱阳，进攻武昌。
English: From Taizu to Wujiang, he served as the Wing Marshal of Changchun, guarding Changzhou. Soon, he was recruited from the army to fight in Poyang and attack Wuchang.

古文：已，又从大将军伐张士诚，进围平江。
现代文：此后，又从大将军徐达讨伐张士诚，围攻平江。
English: After that, Zhang Shicheng was defeated by the great general Xu Da and besieged Pingjiang.

古文：诸将分门而军，赫军阊门。
现代文：各位将领分头驻扎，张赫的部队驻扎在阊门。
English: All generals were stationed separately, and Zhang He's troops were stationed in Zhimen.

古文：士诚屡出兵突战，屡挫其锋。
现代文：张士诚多次出兵突袭，都被打败。
English: Zhang Shicheng repeatedly sent troops to make surprise attacks, but they were all defeated.

古文：又从大军克庆元，并下温、台。
现代文：又跟从大部队攻克庆元，攻下温、台等地。
English: He also followed the large force to conquer Qingyuan, and conquered Wenzhou, Taiwan and other places.

古文：洪武元年，擢福州卫都指挥副使，进本卫同知。复命署都指挥使司事。
现代文：洪武元年，晋升为福州卫都指挥副使，担任本卫同知，复命署都指挥使司事等官职。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was promoted to the post of deputy commanding officer of Fuzhou Coast Guard, and served as an official of the Coast Guard, the director of the Coast Guard of the People's Republic of China.

古文：是时，倭寇出没海岛中，乘间辄傅岸剽掠，沿海居民患苦之。
现代文：当时，倭寇在海岛出没，并乘机上岸掠夺，沿海居民深受其害。
English: At that time, the wokou haunted the island and took the opportunity to go ashore to plunder, and the coastal residents suffered from it.

古文：帝数遣使赍诏书谕日本国王，又数绝日本贡使，然竟不得倭人要领。
现代文：皇上多次派使者诏谕日本国王，又多次拒绝日本的贡使，但一直没有多大的成效。
English: The emperor repeatedly sent emissaries to issue edicts to the Japanese king, and repeatedly refused Japanese tribute envoys, but without much success.

古文：赫在海上久，所捕倭不可胜计。
现代文：张赫在海上的时间较久，捕捉倭人不可数计。
English: Zhang He has been at sea for a long time, catching countless Japanese.

古文：最后追寇至琉球大洋，与战，擒其魁十八人，斩首数十级，获倭船十余艘，收弓刀器械无算。
现代文：最后追敌至琉球大洋，与敌交战，活捉敌首领十八人，有数十人被斩首，缴获倭船十余艘，弓刀器械不计其数。
English: Finally, they chased the enemy to the Ryukyu Ocean and engaged in battle with the enemy. Eighteen enemy leaders were captured alive, dozens were beheaded, more than ten Wa ships were captured, and countless bow and knife instruments were captured.

古文：帝伟赫功，命掌都指挥印。
现代文：皇上嘉奖张赫的战功，命他掌管都指挥印。
English: The emperor commended Zhang He's war exploits and ordered him to take charge of the capital.

古文：寻调兴化卫。
现代文：不久，调至兴化卫。
English: Soon, he was transferred to Xinghuawei.

古文：召还，擢大都督府佥事。
现代文：召回，晋升为大都督府佥事。
English: Recall, promotion to the grand governor's office.

古文：会辽东漕运艰，军食后期，帝深以为虑。
现代文：当时辽东漕运艰难，军粮供应往往延期，皇上为此十分忧虑。
English: At that time, the transportation of Liaodong was difficult, and the supply of military food was often delayed. The emperor was very worried about this.

古文：以赫习海道，命督海运事。
现代文：命张赫开辟海运航道，督促海上运输事务。
English: Zhang He was ordered to open up shipping routes and supervise maritime transport affairs.

古文：子荣，从征云南有功，为水军右卫指挥使。
现代文：较长时间后，张赫被赐封为航海侯，给予世袭的凭证。
English: After a long time, Zhang He was given the title of mariner and given a hereditary certificate.

古文：孙钅盬，福建都指挥使。
现代文：他前后往来辽东十二年，押运海运达十次，劳苦功高，部队的供给赖此而不缺乏。
English: He traveled back and forth to Liaodong for twelve years, escorting shipping for ten times. His hard work was highly meritorious, and the supply of troops was not lacking.

古文：永乐中，留镇交阯。华高，和州人。
现代文：张赫病逝，追封为恩国公，谥号庄简。华高，和州人。
English: Zhang He died of illness and was posthumously named a benefactor of the country, and his posthumous name was Zhuo Jian.

古文：与俞通海等以巢湖水师来附。
现代文：和俞通海等人率巢湖水师前来归附。
English: Lake Chaohu's watermen, led by Zou Tonghai and others, came to annex it.

古文：从克太平，授总管。
现代文：从大军攻克太平，授予总管。
English: Conquered Taiping with a large army and was awarded the post of general manager.

古文：从破采石、方山兵。下集庆、镇江，迁秦淮翼元帅。
现代文：又从大军破采石、方山的敌军，挥师下集庆、镇江，晋升为秦淮翼元帅。
English: In addition, he was promoted to the rank of Qin Huaiyi Marshal from the great army of breaking quarry and Fangshan's enemy army, under the command of Zhuqing and Zhenjiang.

古文：与邓愈徇广德。守将严兵城下，高以数骑挑战，元兵坚壁不动。
现代文：与邓愈攻战于广德，守兵严阵以待，华高派数骑兵挑战，敌兵坚壁不动。
English: With Deng Yu's attack on Guangde, the defenders waited in a tight line, Hua Gao sent several cavalry to challenge, and the enemy soldiers did not move.

古文：高冲击大破之，遂取其城，得兵万人，粮数千斛。
现代文：华高派兵猛烈攻击，终于攻下了广德城，得敌兵万人，粮食几千斛。
English: Hua Gao sent troops to attack fiercely, and finally captured the city of Guangde, gaining tens of thousands of enemy soldiers and several thousand bushels of grain.

古文：从平常州，进佥行枢密院事。
现代文：跟随平定常州，晋升为佥行枢密院事。
English: Following the pacification of Changzhou, he was promoted to Minhang Privy Councillor.

古文：副俞通海击破赵普胜栅江营。
现代文：协助俞通海攻破赵普胜的栅江兵营。
English: He assisted Zhaotonghai to break through Zhao Pusheng's Jiejiang barracks.

古文：再败陈友谅。援长兴，克武昌。授湖广行省左丞。
现代文：再次打败陈友谅，援助长兴，攻克武昌，授予湖广行省左丞。
English: He once again defeated Chen Youjun, aided Changxing, conquered Wuchang, and was awarded the title of Huguangxing Provincial Left Wing Commander.

古文：帅舟师从克淮东，收浙西。进行省平章政事。
现代文：统率水师克淮东，收复浙西，晋升为行省平章政事。
English: He led the sailors to the east of Kehuai and recovered the west of Zhejiang, and was promoted to the provincial government of Pingzhang.

古文：洪武三年封广德侯，岁禄六百石。
现代文：洪武三年被封为广德侯，年食禄六百石。
English: Three years later, Hongwu was given the title of Guangde Prince, with an annual stipend of 600 koku.

古文：高性怯，且无子，请得宿卫。
现代文：华高生性胆怯，且无子。请求宿卫。
English: Hua Gao was born timid and had no children. He asked for a bodyguard.

古文：有所征讨，辄称疾不行。
现代文：只要有征讨之事，他动辄称病不接受任务。
English: Whenever there was a draft, he would pretend to be ill and not accept the assignment.

古文：令练水师，复以不习辞。
现代文：命令他练习水兵，也被他以不习惯为由而推辞掉了。
English: When he was ordered to train sailors, he refused on the grounds that he was not used to it.

古文：帝以故旧优容之。
现代文：皇上因认为是故旧而宽容了他。
English: The Emperor tolerated him because he thought it was old-fashioned.

古文：时诸勋臣多出行边，惟高不遣。
现代文：当时，诸多勋臣大多都巡边去了，唯独华高不听调遣。
English: At that time, most of the nobles and courtiers went to patrol the border, but Huagao did not listen to the dispatch.

古文：最后缮广东边海城堡，高请行。
现代文：后来需修缮广东边海城堡，华高自告奋勇请求前往。
English: Later, when the Guangdong Coastal Castle needed to be repaired, Hua Gao volunteered to go there.

古文：帝曰： 卿复自力，甚善。 
现代文：皇上说 ：你再次认识到自己的能力，很好。 
English: The emperor said, "It's good that you've rediscovered your abilities.

古文：四年四月事竣。至琼州卒。
现代文：四年四月，工程竣工，到了琼州，华高去世。
English: In April of the fourth year, the project was completed, and Hua Gao died in Qiongzhou.

古文：初，有言高殖利者，故岁禄独薄。至是贫不能葬。
现代文：最初，有人说他经营私利，所以他的年食禄最少，最终到了贫穷无法安葬的地步。
English: At first, some people said that he was self-serving, so he had the least annual income, and eventually reached the point where poverty could not be buried.

古文：帝怜之，命补支禄三百石。
现代文：皇上十分怜惜，命令补支禄三百石。
English: The emperor was very compassionate and ordered that the stipend be increased to 300 koku.

古文：以无子，纳诰券墓中。
现代文：因他没有儿子，故只好把诰券葬入他的墓中。
English: Since he did not have a son, he had to bury the money in his grave.

古文：赠巢国公，谥武庄。
现代文：封为巢国公，谥号武壮。
English: He was given the title of Prince of Xie, and his posthumous name was Wu Zhuang.

古文：授从子岳指挥佥事。
现代文：授予他的侄子华岳为指挥佥事。
English: Awarded to his nephew Hua Yue as conductor of the orchestra.

古文：张铨，定远人。
现代文：张铨，定远人。
English: Zhang Ye, a native of Dingyuan.

古文：从取太平，定集庆、镇江、常州、婺州。
现代文：跟从太祖军攻取太平，平定集庆、镇江、常州、婺州。
English: He conquered Taiping from the Taizu Army and pacified Jieqing, Zhenjiang, Changzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：捣江州，战鄱阳湖，取鄂渚。收淮东，平吴。
现代文：直捣江州，激战鄱阳湖，攻取鄂渚，收复淮东，平定吴地。
English: Directly attacked Jiangzhou, fiercely fought Poyang Lake, captured Ezhu, recovered Huadong, and pacified Wudi.

古文：累功为指挥佥事。
现代文：累计战功被任命为指挥佥事。
English: The cumulative war merit was appointed as the command anecdote.

古文：从取中原、燕、晋、秦、蜀，进都督佥事。
现代文：跟从大军攻取中原、燕、晋、秦、蜀等地，晋升为都督佥事。
English: He followed the great army to conquer Central Plains, Yan, Jin, Qin, Shu and other places, and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：使建齐王府，事竣，副江夏侯周德兴征五溪蛮。
现代文：兴建齐王府，工程竣工。协助江夏侯周德兴征讨五溪蛮。
English: The construction of King Qi's palace was completed. Assisted Jiangxia Prince Zhou De in conquering Wuxi Barbarians.

古文：已而水尽源、通塔平、散毛诸洞酋作乱，复副德兴讨平之。
现代文：当时，水尽源、通塔平、散毛诸洞的首领作乱，再次协助周德兴讨伐平定。
English: At that time, the leaders of Shui Duyuan, Tong Taping and Xiang Mao Zhu Dong once again assisted Zhou Dexing in fighting and pacifying.

古文：从征云南，由永宁克乌撒。
现代文：从征云南，从永宁攻克乌撒。
English: From the conquest of Yunnan, from Yongning to the conquest of Usa.

古文：久之，复从傅友德平乌撒及曲靖、普定、龙海、孟定诸蛮。
现代文：后来，张铨再次跟从傅友德平定乌撒和曲靖、普定、龙海、孟定诸蛮。
English: Later, Zhang Xuan once again followed Fu Youde to subdue Wusa, Qujing, Puting, Longhai and Mengding.

古文：洪武二十三年封永定侯，食禄千五百石，世指挥使。
现代文：洪武二十三年，赐封为永定侯，食禄一千五百石，世袭指挥使。
English: In the 23rd year of Hongwu, he was given the title of Yongding Hou, with a stipend of 1,500 koku, and became a hereditary commander.

古文：何真，字邦佐，东莞人。
现代文：何真，字邦佐，东莞人。
English: He Zhen, also known as Bonzo, is from Dongguan.

古文：少英伟，好书剑。
现代文：年少时英伟，喜好书剑。
English: When he was young, he was very brave and liked to use a calligraphy sword.

古文：元至正初，为河源县务副使，转淡水场管勾，弃官归。
现代文：元至正初年，为河源县务副使，后调任淡水场管勾，辞官归乡。
English: In the first year of the Yuan to Zheng dynasties, he was the deputy envoy of Heyuan County, and later he was transferred to the position of freshwater field supervisor, and then he resigned and returned to his hometown.

古文：元末盗起，真聚众保乡里。
现代文：元末盗寇纷起，何真聚众保卫乡里。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, thieves and robbers were on the rise, and He Zhen gathered people to defend the village.

古文：十四年，县人王成、陈仲玉作乱，真赴告元帅府。
现代文：十四年，河源县人王成、陈仲玉叛乱，何真告诉了元帅府。
English: In 1914, when Wang Cheng and Chen Zhongyu of Heyuan County rebelled, He Zhen told the marshal's office.

古文：帅受赂，反捕真。
现代文：元帅受了贿赂，反而抓捕何真。
English: The marshal accepted the bribe and arrested He Zhen instead.

古文：逃居坭冈，举兵攻成，不克。
现代文：何真逃至坭冈居住，率兵攻打王成，但没攻克。
English: He really fled to live in Shaoshan and led his troops to attack Wangcheng, but failed to defeat him.

古文：久之，惠州人王仲刚与叛将黄常据惠。
现代文：过了一段时间，惠州人王仲刚与叛将黄常据守惠州。
English: After a period of time, Huizhou people Wang Zhonggang and traitor Huang Chang defended Huizhou.

古文：真击走常，杀仲刚。
现代文：何真打败黄常，杀死了王仲刚。
English: He really defeated Huang Chang and killed Wang Zhonggang.

古文：以功授惠阳路同知、广东都元帅，守惠州。
现代文：因功授予惠阳路同知、广东都元帅，守卫惠州。
English: For his meritorious service, he was awarded the Huiyang Road Tongzhi, Guangdong Du Marshal, guarding Huizhou.

古文：海寇邵宗愚陷广州。真以兵破走之，复其城。擢广东分省参政，寻擢右丞。
现代文：海盗邵宗愚攻陷广州，何真率兵打败他，收复了广州，晋升为广东分省参政，不久后又晋升为右丞。
English: The pirate Shao Zongwu invaded Guangzhou, He Zhen led the troops to defeat him, recovered Guangzhou, was promoted to participate in politics in Guangdong Province, and was soon promoted to the right.

古文：赣州熊天瑞引舟师数万，欲图真，真迎之胥江。
现代文：赣州熊天瑞率几万水师进攻何真，双方在胥江交战。
English: Zhangzhou Xiong Tianrui led tens of thousands of sailors to attack He Zhen, and the two sides fought in the Li River.

古文：天大雷雨，折天瑞舟樯，击走之。
现代文：当时，天下着大雷雨，折断了熊天瑞的舟木啬，熊天瑞大败而逃。
English: At that time, there was a big thunderstorm in the world. Xiong Tianrui's boat was broken, and Xiong Tianrui was defeated and fled.

古文：广人赖以完。
现代文：广州人依赖何真而得以保全。
English: Guangzhou people rely on He Zhen to be preserved.

古文：先是真再攻成，诛仲玉而成卒固守。
现代文：何真再次攻打王成，杀了陈仲玉，但王成的士兵仍然固守。
English: He Zhen attacked Wang Cheng again and killed Chen Zhongyu, but Wang Cheng's soldiers still held on.

古文：二十六年复围成，募擒成者，予钞十千。
现代文：二十六年，再次围攻王成，募擒拿王成者，奖赏银钞十千。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, they besieged Wangcheng again, and raised funds to reward the person who captured Wangcheng with ten thousand silver coins.

古文：成奴缚成以出。
现代文：王成的奴仆把他捆起来出降。
English: Wangcheng's servants tied him up and surrendered.

古文：真予之钞，命具汤镬，趋烹奴，号于众曰： 奴叛主者视此！ 
现代文：何真奖赏了银钞，命人准备了汤锅，把王成的奴仆煮了，并告诉众人说： 奴仆背叛主人者就是这种下场。 
English: He Zhen rewarded the silver money, ordered someone to prepare a soup pot, boiled Wang Cheng's slave, and told everyone: "This is what happens when a slave betrays his master."

古文：缘海叛者皆降。
现代文：叛乱者全部降服。
English: All the rebels surrendered.

古文：时中原大乱，岭表隔绝，有劝真效尉佗故事者，不听。
现代文：当时中原大乱，岭表隔绝，有人劝说何真，要他仿效汉初尉佗割据岭南，但他没有听从。
English: At that time, the Central Plains War broke out, and Lingnan was cut off. Some people tried to persuade He Zhen to follow the example of Han's first lieutenant, who was cut off from Lingnan, but he did not listen.

古文：屡遣使由海道贡方物于朝。累进资德大夫、行省左丞。
现代文：何真多次派人从海道贡方物到朝廷，官位晋升为资德大夫、行省左丞。
English: He Zhen repeatedly sent people from the road tribute to the imperial court, and was promoted to the official rank of Zi De Dafu and Xing Shou Zu Rong.

古文：洪武元年，太祖命廖永忠为征南将军，帅舟师取广东。
现代文：洪武元年，太祖任命廖永忠为征南将军，统率水师夺取广东。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Emperor Taizu appointed Liao Yongzhong as the general to conquer the south, and he led the sailors to seize Guangdong.

古文：永忠至福州，以书谕真，遂航海趋潮州。师既至，真遣都事刘克佐诣军门上印章，籍所部郡县户口兵粮，奉表以降。
现代文：廖永忠到了福州，写信给何真，于是航海到了潮州，部队到了，何真派都事刘克佐带上军门印章、属地户口和军粮投降。
English: Liao Yongzhong arrived in Fuzhou, wrote a letter to He Zhen, then sailed to Chaozhou, the troops arrived, and He Zhen sent Liu Kezo to take the military seal, territorial household registration and military grain to surrender.

古文：永忠闻于朝，赐诏褒真曰： 朕惟古之豪杰，保境安民，以待有德。
现代文：廖永忠把此事报告了朝廷，皇上下诏书褒奖何真说 ：我思考古代的豪杰，保境安民，有德待之。
English: Liao Yongzhong reported the matter to the imperial court, and He Zhen, who received the imperial edict of commendation, said: I think about the heroes of ancient times, protecting the country and the people, and being virtuous.

古文：若窦融、李勣之属，拥兵据险，角立群雄间，非真主不屈。此汉、唐名臣，于今未见。
现代文：像窦融、李责力等人，拥兵据险，角立群雄之中，不是真正的主子不屈服，这是汉唐的名臣，但现在却没有发现。
English: Like Dou Rong, Li Rongli and others, they are not the real masters who do not give in, but the famous ministers of the Han and Tang Dynasties, but they have not found it now.

古文：尔真连数郡之众，乃不烦一兵，保境来归，虽窦、李奚让焉。 
现代文：何真联数郡之众，没动用一兵一卒，保境前来归附，就连窦融、李责力也在他之下啊。 
English: Why did the people of several counties, without using a single soldier, come to attach themselves to Baoqing, even Dou Rong and Li Wei Li were under him.

古文：永忠抵东莞，真帅官属迎劳，遂奉诏入朝。擢江西行省参知政事，且谕之曰： 天下分争，所谓豪杰有三：易乱为治者，上也；保民达变，知所归者，次也；负固偷安，身死不悔，斯其下矣。
现代文：廖永忠抵达东莞，何真率部属迎接犒劳，于是奉诏入朝，担任江西行省参知政事，皇上晓谕说： 天下纷争，所谓的豪杰有三种：变乱为治的为上，保民达变知道归附的次之，负隅偷安，至死而不悔的为下。
English: When Liao Yongzhong arrived in Dongguan, He Zhen led his subordinates to welcome the reward, and then entered the imperial court with an imperial edict to serve as the Jiangxi Provincial Councilor. The emperor said: There are three kinds of so-called heroes in the world of strife: the one who resolves turmoil is the best, the one who protects the people and achieves change is the second best, the one who loses everything is the best, and the one who dies without regret is the best.

古文：卿输诚纳土，不逆颜行，可谓识时务者。 
现代文：你真诚献地盘，不违背圣上旨意，可以说是识时务者。 
English: You sincerely dedicate the site, do not violate the sacred will, and can be said to be a time-savvy person.

古文：真顿首谢。
现代文：何真叩首称谢。
English: What a way to say thank you.

古文：在官颇著声望，尤喜儒术，读书缀文。
现代文：何真在官颇具声望，尤其喜爱儒术，读书作文。
English: He Zhen enjoys a high reputation in the government, and is particularly fond of Confucianism and reading composition.

古文：已，转山东参政。四年命还广东，收集旧卒。
现代文：此后，转任山东参政，四年受命回到广东，收集旧部。
English: After that, he was transferred to Shandong to participate in politics, and was ordered to return to Guangdong in four years to collect old ministries.

古文：事竣，仍莅山东。
现代文：此事完毕后，仍莅位山东。
English: After this matter is over, Shandong will still be in last place.

古文：九年致仕。
现代文：九年，传达官书。
English: Nine years later, the official letter was delivered.

古文：大军征云南，命真偕其子兵马指挥贵往。规画军饷，置邮驿。
现代文：大军征讨云南，命令何真偕同其子兵马指挥何贵前往，规划军饷，设置邮驿。
English: A large army was raised to invade Yunnan, and He Zhenyao and his son He Gui, commander of the soldiers and horses, were ordered to go there, plan the army camp, and set up the post office.

古文：迁山西右布政使。
现代文：晋升为山西右布政使。
English: He was promoted to the top political envoy of Shanxi Ubu.

古文：再与贵勾军广东，擢贵镇南卫指挥佥事。
现代文：再次和何贵率军巡行广东，何贵被任命为镇南卫指挥佥事。
English: Once again, He Gui and his army led a parade in Guangdong, and He Gui was appointed commander of the Zhenan Garrison.

古文：寻命真为浙江布政使，改湖广。
现代文：不久任命何真为浙江布政使，后又调往湖广。
English: Soon after, He Zhen was appointed as the political envoy of Zhejiang Province, and then transferred to Hunan Province.

古文：二十年复致仕，封东莞伯，禄一千五百石，予世券。
现代文：二十年，再次下达官书，赐封为东莞伯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭凭证。
English: Twenty years later, the official document was issued again, and he was given the title of Dongguan Count, a stipend of 1,500 koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：卒。
现代文：同年，何真去世。
English: To die.

古文：子荣嗣。
现代文：儿子何荣即位。
English: His son, He Rong, ascended the throne.

古文：与弟贵及尚宝司丞宏皆坐蓝党死。
现代文：与弟弟何贵及尚宝司丞何丞都因受蓝玉党案而死。
English: He and his brother He Gui and Shang Bao Jie He Jie all died as a result of the Blue Jade Party Incident.

古文：真弟迪疑祸及己，遂作乱。击杀南海官军三百余人，遁入海岛。
现代文：何真的弟弟何迪怀疑大祸将至，于是作乱，击杀了南海官军三百余人，逃入海岛。
English: He Zhen's younger brother, He Di, suspected that a great disaster was about to happen, so he started a riot, killed more than three hundred South Sea officials and soldiers, and fled to the island.

古文：广东都司发兵讨擒之，伏诛。
现代文：广东都司发兵征讨，生擒了他，将其斩首。
English: The governor of Guangdong Province sent soldiers to investigate, captured him alive, and beheaded him.

