古文：五年春，城毗。
现代文：五年春季，鲁国在毗地筑城。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Lu Province began to build a city in Beiji.

古文：夏，齐侯伐宋。
现代文：夏季，齐侯出兵攻打宋国。
English: In the summer, Qi Hou sent troops to attack Song.

古文：晋赵鞅帅师伐卫。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅率领军队攻打卫国。
English: Zhao Jun of Jin led an army to attack and defend the country.

古文：秋九月癸酉，齐侯杵臼卒。
现代文：秋季九月癸酉日，齐侯杵臼去世。
English: In the autumn, on the third day of September, Qi Houxuan died.

古文：冬，叔还如齐。
现代文：冬季，叔还去到齐国。
English: In winter, my uncle also went to Qi Province.

古文：闰月，葬齐景公。
现代文：闰月，安葬齐景公。
English: On the leap month, Qi Jing Gong was buried.

古文：五年春，晋围柏人，荀寅、士吉射奔齐。
现代文：五年春季，晋国包围柏人，荀寅、士吉射逃奔到齐国。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Jin Province was surrounded by the Ba'athists, and Zou Ying and Shijiazhuang fled to Qi Province.

古文：初，范氏之臣王生恶张柳朔，言诸昭子，使为柏人。
现代文：当初，范氏的家臣王生讨厌张柳朔，向范昭子建议，让张柳朔去做柏人地方长官。
English: At first, Wang Sheng, a vassal of Fan, hated Zhang Liushuo and suggested to Fan Akiko that Zhang Liushuo be made the governor of Ba Rong.

古文：昭子曰： 夫非而讎乎？ 
现代文：昭子说： 这个人不是你的仇人吗？ 
English: Akiko said, "Isn't this man your enemy?"

古文：对曰： 私讎不及公，好不废过，恶不去善，义之经也。臣敢违之？ 
现代文：王生回答说： 私仇不能危害公事，喜爱不能废弃过错，厌恶不能排除善良，这是道义的常规，我岂敢违背它？ 
English: Wang Sheng replied, "Self-hatred cannot endanger public affairs, liking cannot abolish faults, and loathing cannot eliminate goodness. This is the moral norm. How dare I violate it?"

古文：及范氏出，张柳朔谓其子： 尔从主，勉之。
现代文：等到范氏离开柏人，张柳朔对他儿子说： 你跟随主人，努力吧！
English: When Mr. Fan left Baoding, Zhang Liushuo said to his son, "Follow your master and work hard!"

古文：我将止死，王生授我矣。
现代文：我准备留下来死守，王生把死难的大节交给了我，我不能对他不讲信用。 
English: I'm prepared to stay and fight. Wang Sheng entrusted me with the most important day of his life. I can't betray his trust.

古文：吾不可以僭之。 遂死于柏人。
现代文：于是就战死在柏人。
English: As a result, he died in the Battle of Haku.

古文：夏，赵鞅伐卫，范氏之故也，遂围中牟。
现代文：夏季，赵鞅进攻卫国，这是为了帮助范氏的缘故，并乘机包围中牟。
English: In the summer, Zhao Wei attacked Wei, in order to help the Fan clan, and took the opportunity to encircle Zhong Mou.

古文：齐燕姬生子，不成而死。
现代文：齐国的燕姬生了个儿子，未成年就死了。
English: Yan Ji of Qi gave birth to a son, but he died when he was still a minor.

古文：诸子，鬻姒之子荼，嬖。
现代文：但是诸子鬻姒所生的儿子荼受到宠爱。
English: But the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons were favored.

古文：诸大夫恐其为大子也，言于公曰： 君之齿长矣，未有大子，若之何？ 
现代文：大夫们恐怕荼被立为太子，就对齐景公说： 您的年纪大了，还没有太子，怎么办？ 
English: The doctors feared that he would not be crowned prince, so they said to Prince Qi Jing: You are very old, and you haven't been crowned prince yet, what should you do?

古文：公曰： 二三子间于忧虞，则有疾疢。亦姑谋乐，何忧于无君？ 
现代文：齐景公说： 您这几位如有忧虑，就会生出疾病，姑且去寻欢作乐，何必担心没有国君？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong said: If you are worried, you will give birth to a disease. Let alone go out to have fun, why worry about not having a sovereign?

古文：公疾，使国惠子、高昭子立荼，置群公子于莱。
现代文：齐景公生病，让国惠子、高昭子立荼为太子，把公子们安置在莱地。
English: When Prince Qi Jing fell ill, he had Guo Huizi and Gao Zhaozi be crowned as princes, and the princes were placed in Laiji.

古文：秋，齐景公卒。
现代文：秋季，齐景公死去。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Qi Jing Gong passed away.

古文：冬十月，公子嘉、公子驹、公子黔奔卫，公子鉏、公子阳生来奔。
现代文：冬季十月，公子嘉、公子驹、公子黔逃亡到卫国，公子鉏，公子阳生逃亡到鲁国来。
English: In the winter of October, Gongzi Jia, Gongzi Yao, and Gongzi Yao fled to the North, while Gongzi Yao and Gongzi Yang Sheng fled to the South.

古文：莱人歌之曰： 景公死乎不与埋，三军之事乎不与谋。
现代文：莱地人歌唱说： 景公死了啊不参加埋葬，三军的大事啊不参加商量，众人啊众人，又要前往何方？ 
English: The Laidi people sang: Jinggong is dead, but he will not attend the burial, the important matters of the three armies will not participate in the discussion, everyone, everyone, where are you going?

古文：师乎师乎，何党之乎？ 郑驷秦富而侈，嬖大夫也，而常陈卿之车服于其庭。
现代文：郑国的驷秦富有而奢侈，是一个下大夫，但常常把卿的车马服饰陈列在他的院子里。
English: Yu Qin of Zhengzhou was rich and extravagant. He was a junior doctor, but he often displayed his lord's chariot and horse costumes in his courtyard.

古文：郑人恶而杀之。
现代文：郑国人讨厌他而把他杀了。
English: The Zheng people hated him and killed him.

古文：子思曰： 《诗》曰： 不解于位，民之攸塈。 
现代文：子思说： 《诗》说： 努力不懈在职位上，百姓所以才得以安宁。 
English: Zisi said: "Poetry says: Efforts and perseverance in the position, so that the people can be at peace.

古文：不守其位，而能久者鲜矣。
现代文：不安于他的职位而能够保持长久的是很少的。
English: It is rare for a minister to hold on to his post for long.

古文：《商颂》曰： 不僭不滥，不敢怠皇，命以多福。  
现代文：《商颂》说： 不出差错不自满，不敢懈怠不偷闲，上天赐予各种福禄。  
English: "Merchant's Song" says: Don't make mistakes, don't be complacent, don't dare to slack off, don't be idle, and be blessed with all kinds of blessings.

