古文：起屠维协洽八月，尽重光作噩五月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起屠维协洽八月，尽重光作噩五月，凡一年有奇。
English: From the beginning of the slaughter and maintenance cooperation in August, as much as possible to do in May, every year is strange.

古文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝下
现代文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝下
English: under the reign of Emperor Munetakao

古文：大历十四年己未，公元七七九年八月，甲辰，以道州司马杨炎为门下侍郎，怀州刺史乔琳为御史大夫，并同平章事。
现代文：唐代宗大历十四年八月，甲辰，德宗任命道州司马杨炎为门下侍郎，怀州刺史乔琳为御史大夫，二人都为同平章事。
English: In August of the 14th year of the Great Calendar of the Tang Dynasty, the Jia-Chen and De-Zong appointed the Daozhou Sima Yangyan as the servant of the disciple, and the Waizhou Sima Qiaolin as the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master of the master.

古文：上方励精求治，不次用人，卜相于崔祐甫，祐甫荐炎器业，上亦素闻其名，故自迁谪中用之。
现代文：当时，德宗正在励精图治，用人不拘等次。德宗曾向崔甫征询择相的意见，崔甫推荐杨炎有才干，能办事。德宗平素也听说过杨炎的声名，于是便起用了贬谪中的杨炎。
English: At that time, Dezong was working hard to employ people, regardless of their rank. Dezong had asked Cui Fu for advice on choosing a consort, and Cui Fu recommended Yang Yan, who was talented and able to do things. Dezong had also heard of Yang Yan's reputation, so he used Yang Yan, who was despised.

古文：琳，太原人，性粗率，喜诙谐，无他长，与张涉善，涉称其才可大用，上信涉言而用之；闻者无不骇愕。
现代文：乔琳是太原人，生性粗疏草率，喜欢诙谐，没有别的长处。乔琳与张涉关系亲密，张涉称道乔琳的才能可能可以委以大任，德宗听信了张涉的话，便起用了乔琳。
English: Jolene is a Taiyuan native, by nature rough and hasty, likes to joke, and has no other strengths. Jolene has a close relationship with Zhang Wanzhou. Zhang Wanzhou said that Jolene's talent may be entrusted with a major role. Dezong listened to Zhang Wanzhou and hired Jolene.

古文：代宗之世，吐蕃数遣使求和，而寇盗不息，代宗悉留其使者，前后八辈，有至老死不得归者；俘获其人，皆配江、岭。
现代文：听到任命乔琳为相的人，没有不感到惊讶的。代宗在位期间，吐蕃数次派遣使者，请求和好，但对唐朝的侵扰劫掠却并未止息。代宗拘留了吐蕃前后八次派来的全部使者，其中有些人直到老死，没能回归吐蕃。对俘获的吐蕃人，则统统发配到长江以南和五岭以外。
English: It was no surprise to those who heard that Jolene had been appointed as consort. During the reign of Emperor Wu, several emissaries from Tubo were sent to request reconciliation, but the invasion and plunder of the Tang Dynasty did not cease. Emperor Wu detained all the emissaries sent by Tubo eight times, some of whom did not return to Tubo until they died of old age. The captured Tubo people were all sent south of the Yangtze River and outside Wuling.

古文：上欲以德怀之，乙巳，以随州司马韦伦为太常少卿，使于吐蕃，悉集其俘五百人，各赐袭衣而遣之。
现代文：德宗打算以德政安抚吐蕃，乙巳，任命随州司马韦伦为太常少卿，出使吐蕃，全数召集俘虏来的五百吐蕃人，每人赐给衣服一套，将他们遣返吐蕃。
English: Emperor Dezong intended to pacify the Tibetans with his German policy. Therefore, he appointed Suizhou Sima Weiren as Taizhang Shaoqing (太常少卿) and sent him to Tibet to gather all the five hundred Tibetans who had been captured. He gave each of them a set of clothes and sent them back to Tibet.

古文：协律郎沈既济上选举议，以为： 选用之法，三科而已：曰德也、才也、劳也。
现代文：协律郎沈既济奏上有关选任官员的议论，他认为： 选拔任用官员的办法，只有三个类别，这就是德行、才干、劳绩。
English: Conciliator Shen Yeji made a speech on the election of officials. He said: The method of selecting and appointing officials has only three categories, namely, virtue, ability and merit.

古文：今选曹皆不及焉；考校之法，皆在书判、簿历、言词、俯仰而已。
现代文：现今，主持选官事务的选曹对此全未涉及；所实行的考查官员的办法，全都停留在书法文理、资历考课、言词和应对周旋等方面。
English: At present, none of this has been addressed by the election officials who preside over the election of officials; the methods of examining officials have all remained in the areas of calligraphy, literature and science, qualification examination, speech and dealing with gossip.

古文：夫安行徐言，非德也；丽藻芳翰，非才也；累资积考，非劳也。
现代文：行事安稳，讲话从容，这并不就是德行；撰写文章，清词丽句，这并不就是才干；长期积累下来的资望和考课成绩，这并不就是劳绩。
English: Steady conduct and calm speech are not virtues; writing articles and clear sentences are not talents; long-accumulated prestige and examination results are not achievements.

古文：执此以求天下之士，固未尽矣。
现代文：以此三项为标准，来延招天下之士，当然是不能全部延招来的。
English: With these three items as the standard, to extend the recruitment of the world's people, of course, not all can be extended.

古文：今人未土著，不可本于乡闾；鉴不独明，不可专于吏部。
现代文：现在居官的人并不是本地人在本地任职，所以用人不可以本地的评议为依据。由一个部门单独去审查官吏；是难以考核详明的，所以不可专门交给吏部。
English: The current incumbent is not a local official, so the appointment cannot be made on the basis of a local review. Officials should be reviewed by a separate department; it is difficult to assess in detail, so it cannot be handed over to the Personnel Department.

古文：臣谨详酌古今，谓五品以上及群司长官，宜令宰臣进叙，吏部、兵部得参议焉。
现代文：我慎重详细地研究了古今有关制度，认为五品以上的官员以及各部门的长官，应当让宰相提出授官与奖励的意见，而让吏部和兵部参预评论。
English: I have carefully studied the relevant systems from the past to the present in detail, and I believe that officials with more than five promotions and the heads of various departments should let the prime minister put forward opinions on awarding officers and awards, and let the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Military Affairs participate in the preliminary review.

古文：其六品以下或僚佐之属，许州、府辟用，其牧守、将帅或选用非公，则吏部、兵部得察而举之，罪其私冒。
现代文：对于六品以下的官员，或者幕僚佐吏之类人员，应该允许州、府自行任用。如有牧守、将帅选拔任用不能出于公正，吏部和兵部便可以纠察和检举他们，对偏私假冒和有失慎重加以治罪。
English: The state and prefectural governments should be allowed to appoint officials below the sixth grade, or staff officers such as staff officers, on their own. If the selection and appointment of pastors and generals cannot be made out of fairness, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Military Affairs can picket and report them, and punish them for favoritism, hypocrisy and negligence.

古文：不慎举者，小加谴黜，大正刑典。
现代文：后果轻的，予以贬官降职，后果严重的，按刑律法典治罪。
English: If the consequences are light, the offender will be demoted, but if the consequences are serious, the offender will be punished according to the Criminal Law.

古文：责成授任，谁敢不勉！
现代文：如此责成百官，授以职任，谁还敢不尽力办事呢！
English: Who would dare not to do his best with such a task entrusted to hundreds of officials and positions?

古文：夫如是，则贤者不奖而自进，不肖者不抑而自退，众才咸得而官无不治矣。
现代文：倘若能够做到这些，那么，有德有才的官员，虽未奖掖，而他们自然会得到晋升；没有贤才的官员，虽未贬抑，而他们自然会遭受摈斥。各方面具有才干的人都得到应有的官职，就没有治理不好的事情了。
English: If this can be done, then officials who are virtuous and talented, although not rewarded, will naturally be promoted; officials who are not talented, although not demeaned, will naturally be rebuked. People who are talented in all aspects will get the official positions they deserve, and there will be no bad governance.

古文：今选法皆择才于吏部，试职于州郡。
现代文：现在铨选的办法，都是由吏部选择人才，而在州郡试行职任。
English: At present, the selection method is that the talent is selected by the personnel department, and the position is tested in the state and county.

古文：若才职不称，紊乱无任，责于刺史，则曰命官出于吏曹，不敢废也；责于侍郎，则曰量书判、资考而授之，不保其往也；责于令史，则曰按由历、出入而行之，不知其他也。
现代文：如果才能与职任不能相称，办事紊乱不堪，责问刺史，刺史就会说，此人是由吏部委任为官的，我可不敢自行废黜；责问侍郎，侍郎就会说，这是通过考核书法公文和资历考课而授官的，我可不能保证他到州郡后一定能够胜任；责问令史，令史就会说，按察百官，是依据资历和任官升降来办事的，别的事情我就不知道了。
English: If one's talent is not commensurate with one's position, and one's work is disorderly, if one asks the historian, the historian will say that this person was appointed as an official by the personnel department, and I would not dare to depose him myself; if one asks the chamberlain, the chamberlain will say that this person was appointed through the examination of calligraphy and official documents and the qualification examination, and I cannot guarantee that he will be competent after arriving at the prefecture or county; if one asks the historian, the historian will say that according to the opinion of hundreds of officials, they are appointed based on their qualifications and promotion, and I do not know anything else.

古文：黎庶徒弊，谁任其咎！
现代文：百姓徒然以此为弊端，又由谁来承担罪责呢！
English: The people have taken advantage of this in vain, and who will bear the blame?

古文：若牧守自用，则罪将焉逃！
现代文：假如让牧守自行任用官佐，牧守的罪责又怎会脱逃呢！
English: If the herdsmen were allowed to appoint their own officials, how would the herdsmen's guilt escape?

古文：必州郡之滥，独换一刺史则革矣。
现代文：假定州郡治理得很糟，只要撤换刺史一人，就能使情况改变过来了。
English: Assuming that the state and county governance is very bad, it only takes one person to change the governor to change the situation.

古文：如吏部之滥，虽更其侍郎无益也。
现代文：如果吏部把任官搞滥了，就是换掉主持此事的侍郎，也是无济于事的。
English: If the cadre department makes a mess of the appointment of officials, it is useless to change the attendant who presides over the matter.

古文：盖人物浩浩，不可得而知，法使之然，非主司之过。
现代文：这是因为候选授官的人员过于繁多，不可能了解清楚。这是任官制度使事情变成这样的，并不是主管部门的过错。
English: This is due to the fact that there are so many candidates for the award that it is impossible to get a clear picture. It is the appointment system that has made things like this possible, and it is not the fault of the authorities.

古文：今诸道节度、都团练、观察、租庸等使，自判官、副将以下，皆使自择，纵其间或有情故，大举其例，十犹七全。
现代文：现在，自判官、副将以下的人员，都让各道的节度使、都团练使、观察使、租庸使等自行选任，即便其间也有徇私之事，但是大体说来，十成里犹有七成是可取的。
English: Now, the judges, vice-commanders and lower-ranking personnel are all allowed to choose their own officers, such as the commander of the division, the commander of the regiment, the observer, and the mercenary. Even if there is some favoritism, generally speaking, 70% of the ten percent is still desirable.

古文：则辟吏之法，已试于今，但未及于州县耳。
现代文：因而自行任用官佐属吏的办法，已经试行于今，只是还没有在州县普及开来罢了。
English: Therefore, the method of self-appointment of officials and subordinates has been tried and tested, but it has not yet become widespread in prefectures and counties.

古文：利害之理，较然可观。
现代文：上述两种任官办法孰利孰弊的道理是显明可见的。
English: The advantages and disadvantages of the above two methods of appointing officials are clearly visible.

古文：曏令诸使僚佐尽受于选曹，则安能镇方隅之重，理财赋之殷乎！ 
现代文：倘若让诸使的幕僚官佐完全听受选曹的任命，那又怎能镇守各方重地，料理好那里繁重的财赋事务呢！ 
English: If the staff officers and assistants of the various envoys were allowed to fully obey the appointment of the elected Cao, then how could they guard the important areas of the parties and do a good job of the heavy financial affairs there!

古文：既济，吴人也。
现代文：沈既济是吴地人。
English: Shen Yeji is from Wuxi.

古文：初，衡州刺史曹王皋有治行，湖南观察使辛京杲疾之，陷以法，贬潮州刺史。
现代文：当初，衡州刺史曹王李皋治理政务，很有成绩，湖南观察使辛京杲妒忌他，便以刑法陷害，使他被贬为潮州刺史。
English: At the beginning, Cao Wang Lijun, the chief historian of Hengzhou, governed the government affairs with great achievements. The observation of Hunan made Xin Jinglian jealous of him, so he framed him with the criminal law, so that he was relegated to the chief historian of Chaozhou.

古文：时杨炎在道州，知其直，及入相，复擢为衡州刺史。
现代文：当时，杨炎正在道州，知道李皋是无辜的。及至杨炎入朝出任宰相，再次提升李皋为衡州刺史。
English: At that time, Yang Yan was in Daozhou and knew that Li Qian was innocent. And when Yang Yan became the prime minister of the DPRK, Li Qian was once again promoted to the top of Hengzhou's history.

古文：始，皋之遭诬在治，念太妃老，将惊而戚，出则囚服就辨，入则拥笏垂鱼，即贬于潮，以迁入贺；及是，然后跪谢告实。
现代文：当初，李皋遇到诬陷，正在经受审讯，他考虑到太妃年老，将会受惊而悲伤，所以，他出门时穿上囚服去受审，回家后便穿上朝服，手执笏板，衣垂鱼袋。李皋即将被贬到潮州，他却以升迁向太妃报喜。至此，李皋才跪在太妃面前认错，并以实情相告。
English: At first, Li Yao encountered a frame-up and was undergoing an interrogation. He considered that Toffee was old and would be frightened and sad. Therefore, he put on a prison uniform to go to trial when he went out. When he got home, he put on a court uniform, holding a cutting board and hanging a fish bag. Li Yao was about to be demoted to Chaozhou, but he announced his happiness to Toffee with a promotion. At this point, Li Yao kneeled in front of Toffee and admitted his mistake and told the truth.

古文：皋，明之玄孙也。
现代文：李皋是李明的玄孙。
English: Li Lan is the great-great-grandson of Li Ming.

古文：朔方、邠宁节度使李怀光既代郭子仪，邠府宿将史抗、温儒雅、庞仙鹤、张献明、李光逸功名素出怀光右，皆怏怏不服。
现代文：朔方、宁节度使李怀光替代了郭子仪的职务以后，府的宿将史抗、温儒雅、庞仙鹤、张献明、李光逸因功劳声名素来在李怀光之上，都郁郁不乐，心中不服。
English: After Shuo Fang and Ning Jietu made Li Huaguang replace Guo Ziyi's duties, the prefectural governor Shi Rong, Wan Rugao, Pang Xianhe, Zhang Xianming, and Li Guangyi, who had always been famous for their merits, were unhappy and dissatisfied.

古文：怀光发兵防秋，屯长武城，军期进退，不时应令。
现代文：李怀光派兵防御吐蕃，在长武城屯驻，诸将对李怀光规定的军队进驻与退防的时间，都不按时应命。
English: Li Huaiguang sent troops to defend Tubo and stationed them in Changwu City. The time for the troops to be stationed and withdrawn, all of which were stipulated by Li Huaiguang, did not meet the order on time.

古文：监军翟文秀劝怀光奏令宿卫，怀光遣之，既离营，使人追捕，诬以它罪，且曰： 黄萯之败，职尔之由！ 
现代文：监军翟文秀劝说李怀光上奏朝廷，让诸将回朝执行宿卫任务。诸将离开军营后，李怀光派人追捕诸将，诬蔑诸将犯了别的罪过，而且说： 浑在黄失败，都是因为你们的原故！ 
English: After the generals left the military camp, Li Huai Guang sent people to hunt down the generals, slandering the generals for committing other sins, and saying: "The failure in Huang He is all because of you!"

古文：尽杀之。
现代文：于是将诸将全部杀掉。
English: As a result, all generals were killed.

古文：九月，甲戌，改淮西为淮宁。
现代文：九月，甲戌，朝廷将淮西改称为淮宁。
English: In September, in Jiaozuo, the imperial court renamed Huaixi as Huaining.

古文：西川节度使、同平章事崔宁，在蜀十馀年，恃地险兵强，恣为淫侈，朝廷患之而不能易。
现代文：西川节度使、同平章事崔宁，来到蜀地十余年，仗着地势险要，兵力强盛，肆意骄奢淫逸，朝廷感到忧虑，但又无法换掉他。
English: Nishikawa Setsudo's envoy, Tongping Zhang Cui Ning, came to Shu for more than ten years, relying on the precarious situation, strong military force, and wanton extravagance. The court was worried, but could not replace him.

古文：至是，入朝，加司空，兼山陵使。
现代文：至此，崔宁入朝，德宗加封他为司空，兼任山陵使。
English: At this point, Cui Ning entered the imperial court, and Dezong appointed him as the Empress Dowager's Empress Dowager, concurrently serving as the Empress Dowager's Empress Dowager.

古文：南诏王阁罗凤卒，子凤迦异前死，孙异牟寻立。
现代文：南诏王罗凤去世，他的儿子凤迦异又死在他的前头，他的孙子异牟寻即位为王。
English: Nanzhao King Luo Feng died, his son Feng Jia Ying died before him, and his grandson Yimou Xing ascended to the throne.

古文：冬，十月，丁酉朔，吐蕃与南诏合兵十万，三道入寇，一出茂州，一出扶、文，一出黎、雅，曰： 吾欲取蜀以为东府。 
现代文：冬季，十月，丁酉朔，吐蕃与南诏合兵共十万人，分三道入侵，一支军队从茂州出发，一支军队从扶州和文州出发，一支军队从黎州和雅州出发。
English: In winter, in October, a total of 100,000 soldiers from Dingyanshuo, Tubo and Nanzhao invaded in three directions. One army set out from Maozhou, one army set out from Fuzhou and Wenzhou, and one army set out from Leshou and Yazhou.

古文：崔宁在京师，所留诸将不能御，虏连陷州、县，刺史弃城走，士民窜匿山谷。
现代文：他们声称： 我们打算拿下蜀地，作为我们东部的府。 当时，崔宁正在京城，他所留下的各个将领不能抵御敌军的进攻。敌军接连攻陷了一些州县，刺史丢下守城逃跑，百姓逃避到山谷之中。
English: They claimed: "We intend to take down Shudi, as our eastern capital." At that time, Choening was in the capital, and the various generals he left behind were unable to resist the enemy's attack. The enemy army successively captured a number of prefectures and counties, abandoned the defense of the city and fled, and the people fled into the valley.

古文：上忧之，趣宁归镇。
现代文：德宗忧心忡忡，催促崔宁回西川。
English: De Jong, worried, urged Choe Ninh to return to Saikawa.

古文：宁已辞，杨炎言于上曰： 蜀地富饶，宁据有之，朝廷失其外府，十四年矣。
现代文：崔宁向德宗辞行以后，杨炎对德宗说： 蜀地物产富饶，崔宁占据此地，朝廷等于失掉了自己的外府，至今已有十四年了。
English: After Cui Ning's resignation to Dezong, Yang Yan said to Dezong: Shu is rich in products, Cui Ning occupies this place, the imperial court is equivalent to losing its capital, so far it has been fourteen years.

古文：宁虽入朝，全师尚守其后，贡赋不入，与无蜀同。
现代文：崔宁虽然入朝了，但西川的整个军队还在他背后支撑着，他们不向朝廷交纳贡赋，这与朝廷失去蜀地是一样的。
English: Although Choening entered the imperial court, Saikawa's entire army still supported him behind his back. They did not pay tribute to the imperial court, which was the same as the imperial court losing Shu.

古文：且宁本与诸将等夷，因乱得位，威令不行。
现代文：况且，崔宁本来与西川诸将是同一等辈，乘着变乱而得到节度使的地位，威望不高，命令难行。
English: Moreover, Cui Ning was originally of the same generation as Nishikawa Zhulong, and took advantage of the turmoil to obtain the status of a commander. His prestige was not high, and his orders were difficult to carry out.

古文：今虽遣之，必恐无功；若其有功，则义不可夺。
现代文：现在，即使派他回去，恐怕也是无所建树的。倘若他取得成功，从道义上说，蜀地便是不可强夺的了。
English: Now, even if he were to be sent back, it would probably accomplish nothing. If he were to succeed, then, morally speaking, the territory of Shu can no longer be taken by force.

古文：是蜀地败固失之，胜亦不得也。
现代文：这就是说，蜀地战败，朝廷固然失去了它，蜀地取胜，朝廷还是不能得到它。
English: That is to say, if Shu defeated, the imperial court certainly lost it, but if Shu won, the imperial court still could not get it.

古文：愿陛下熟察。 
现代文：希望陛下仔细考察。 
English: I hope His Majesty will consider this matter carefully.

古文：上曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：德宗说： 既然如此，那怎么办才好呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "Since this is the case, what should we do?"

古文：对曰： 请留宁，发硃泚所领范阳戍兵数千人，杂禁兵往击之，何忧不克！
现代文：杨炎回答： 请陛下将崔宁留在京城，另派朱所统领的范阳兵数千人，其间掺入禁军，前去进击敌军，还担心不能取胜吗！
English: Yang Yan replied: Please ask Your Majesty to keep Cui Ning in the capital, and send thousands of Fan Yang soldiers led by Zhu to join the forbidden army and attack the enemy. Are you still worried that you can't win?

古文：因而得内亲兵于其腹中，蜀将必不敢动，然后更授他帅，使千里沃壤复为国有，是因小害而收大利也。 
现代文：借此而得以将禁军置于西川军的心腹之中，蜀将必定不敢妄动，再任命别人为西川统帅，使蜀地的千里沃野重新为朝廷所有，这是使国家因蒙受一些较小的损害，而收取了较大的好处啊。 德宗说： 好。 
English: As a result, he was able to place the forbidden army in the heart of the Saikawa army, and Shu Shogun would certainly not dare to act rashly, and then appoint someone else as the commander of the Saikawa army, so that the thousand-mile fertile fields of Shu would once again be owned by the imperial court. This was a way for the country to receive a greater benefit by suffering some minor damage. Dezong said, "Good."

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：于是将崔宁留在京城。
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：遂留宁。初，马璘忌泾原都知兵马使李晟功名，遣入宿卫，为右神策都将。
现代文：当初，马妒忌泾原都知兵马使李晟的功绩与声名，派遣李晟入朝宿卫，李晟担任了右神策军都将的职务。
English: At first, Ma envied the exploits and fame of Li Xuan, who was a military commander of the Yuan Dynasty. He sent Li Xuan to serve as an imperial bodyguard, and Li Xuan assumed the position of the commander of the Right Divine Army.

古文：上发禁兵四千人，使晟将之，发邠、陇、范阳兵五千，使金吾大将军安邑曲环将之，以救蜀。
现代文：德宗派出禁军四千人，让李晟率领；又派出州、陇州、范阳兵五千人，让金吾大将军安邑人曲环率领，以此二军前去救蜀。
English: Dezong sent four thousand soldiers of the Imperial Army to be led by Li Xun; he also sent five thousand soldiers from Shuzhou, Zhangzhou and Fanyang to be led by Kingu's general, An'yun Quhuan, and the two armies went to rescue Shu.

古文：东川出军，自江油趣白坝，与山南兵合击吐蕃、南诏，破之。
现代文：东川也派出军队，从江油挺进白坝，与山南节度使的军队合击吐蕃和南诏，并且打败了他们。
English: Dongchuan also sent troops to advance from Jiangyou to Baiba, and fought with the troops sent by Shannan Jiedu against Tubo and Nanzhao, and defeated them.

古文：范阳兵追及于七盘，又破之，遂克维、茂二州。
现代文：范阳兵在七盘县追上了吐蕃和南诏的军队，再次打败了他们，并攻克了维州和茂州。
English: Fan Yang soldiers caught up with the armies of Tubo and Nanzhao in Qipan County, defeated them again, and conquered Wizhou and Maozhou.

古文：李晟追击于大度河外，又破之。
现代文：李晟军在大渡河外追击敌军，又打败了他们。
English: Li Lan's army chased the enemy army outside the Dadu River and defeated them.

古文：吐蕃、南诏饥寒陨于崖谷死者八九万人。
现代文：吐蕃和南诏的士兵因饥饿寒冷和坠落荒崖野谷死去的有八九万人。
English: Eight hundred and ninety thousand soldiers from Tubo and Nanzhao died from hunger and cold and from falling down cliffs and ravines.

古文：吐蕃悔怒，杀诱导使之来者。
现代文：吐蕃人既后悔，又恼怒，杀掉了诱导他们前来入侵的人。
English: Both regretful and angry, the people of Tubo killed the man who had lured them to invade.

古文：异牟寻惧，筑苴咩城，延袤十五里，徙居之。
现代文：异牟寻恐惧，修筑了苴咩城，连绵达十五里，徙居到那里。
English: In search of fear of difference, they built Shicheng, stretching for fifteen miles, and migrated there.

古文：吐蕃封之为日东王。
现代文：吐蕃封异牟寻为日东王。
English: The king of Nichidō is Tochigi Fumihimo.

古文：上用法严，百官震悚。
现代文：德宗执法严厉，百官无不震惊恐惧。
English: Dezong's law enforcement was strict, and all the officials were shocked and afraid.

古文：以山陵近，禁人屠宰；郭子仪之隶人潜杀羊，载以入城，右金吾将军裴谞奏之。
现代文：由于代宗入葬的日期已经临近，禁止人们屠牲宰畜。郭子仪的仆从暗中杀了一只羊，装在车上，运到城中，右金吾将军裴将此事上奏。
English: As the date of Daizong's burial was approaching, people were prohibited from slaughtering animals. Guo Ziyi's servants secretly killed a sheep, loaded it on a cart, and transported it to the city. General U Kingu Pei reported the matter.

古文：或谓谞曰： 郭公有社稷大功，君独不为之地乎？ 
现代文：有人对裴说： 郭公对国家有再造之功，你偏偏不肯为他留些余地吗？ 
English: Someone said to Bae: Guo Gong has made great contributions to the reformation of the country. Aren't you willing to leave some room for him?

古文：谞曰： 此乃吾所以为之地也。
现代文：裴回答： 我这样做，正是要为郭公留出余地来啊。
English: Pei replied: I am doing this to make room for Guo Gong.

古文：郭公勋高望重，上新即位，以为群臣附之者众，吾故发其小过，以明郭公威权不足畏也。
现代文：郭公勋业高，声望重，皇上刚刚即位，认为群臣中依附郭公的人很多，我故意揭发郭公的一个小小过失，以此表明郭公的威望和权力都是不足畏惧的。
English: Guo Gong was highly decorated and prestigious, and the emperor had just ascended to the throne. I thought that there were many people among the courtiers who depended on Guo Gong. I deliberately exposed a small fault of Guo Gong to show that Guo Gong's prestige and power were not enough to be feared.

古文：如此，上尊天子，下安大臣，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：这样做，上可以尊崇皇上，下可以安定大臣，不也是可以的吗！ 
English: In doing so, the emperor can be respected from above, and the minister of stability can be respected from below. Isn't that also possible?

古文：己酉，葬睿文孝武皇帝于元陵；庙号代宗。
现代文：己酉，将睿文孝武皇帝葬于元陵，庙号代宗。
English: The Emperor Rui, Wen, Xiao and Wu were buried in the Yuan Mausoleum, and the temple was called Daizong.

古文：将发引，上送之，见辒辌车不当驰道，稍指丁未之间，问其故，有司对曰： 陛下本命在午，不敢冲也。 
现代文：在将要出殡的时候，德宗亲自把灵车送了出来，看到灵车不是在道路中间行走，而是稍微偏向道路外边，便询问此中的原故。主管部门答说： 陛下本命在午，指向正中，所以不敢冲犯。 
English: When it was time for the funeral, Emperor Dezong personally sent the hearse out, and when he saw that the hearse was not walking in the middle of the road, but slightly outside the road, he asked the reason for this. The competent authority replied: His Majesty was supposed to be in the afternoon, pointing to the middle, so he did not dare to offend.

古文：上哭曰： 安有枉灵驾而谋身利乎！ 
现代文：德宗哭着说： 哪有委屈灵车来谋求自身好处的呢！ 
English: Dezong cried and said, "How can a wronged hearse driver seek his own benefit?

古文：命改辕直午而行。
现代文：于是命令灵车改向，对着午方即在道路中间行进。
English: He then ordered the hearse to change direction and travel in the middle of the road towards the afternoon.

古文：肃宗、代宗皆喜阴阳鬼神，事无大小，必谋之卜祝，故王屿、黎幹以左道得进。
现代文：肃宗和代宗都喜好阴阳鬼神，无论事情大小，必定要求占问卜，所以王屿和黎干都是靠着左道得以升官的。
English: Both Su Zong and Daizong are fond of yin and yang ghosts and spirits. No matter how big or small the matter is, divination must be required. Therefore, Wang Yu and Li Gan were promoted by relying on the left path.

古文：上雅不之信，山陵但取七月之期，事集而发，不复择日。
现代文：德宗素来不相信这一套，代宗入葬山陵的日期只依礼法定在七月期满之时，诸事准备停当便出殡下葬，不再选择日期。
English: Dezong has never believed in this set. The date of the vicar's burial in the mountain mausoleum is only in accordance with the rules of etiquette and the law at the end of July. When everything is ready, the funeral will be held, and the date will no longer be selected.

古文：十一月，丁丑，以晋州刺史韩滉为苏州刺史、浙江东、西观察使。
现代文：十一月，丁丑，德宗任命晋州刺史韩为苏州刺史、浙江东西观察使。
English: In November, Ding Yuxiu and Dezong appointed Han, the governor of Jinzhou, as the governor of Suzhou and the eastern and western observation envoy of Zhejiang.

古文：乔琳衰老耳聩，上或时访问，应对失次，所谋议复疏阔。
现代文：乔琳年老体衰，耳朵重听，德宗有时候征询他的意见，他的回答有失条理，所谋划计议的内容又很疏陋迂阔。
English: Jolene is old and frail, and her ears are hard of hearing. Dezong sometimes asks him for advice. His answers are disorganized, and the content of the plans and discussions is very crude and broad.

古文：壬午，以琳为工部尚书，罢政事。
现代文：壬午，德宗任命乔琳为工部尚书，免去同平章事。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Dezong appointed Jolene as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and exempted her from the peerage.

古文：上由是疏张涉。
现代文：德宗自此和张涉也疏远了。
English: Since then, Dezong has also distanced himself from Zhang Zang.

古文：杨炎既留崔宁，二人由是交恶。
现代文：杨炎把崔宁留在京城以后，两人的关系自此便恶化起来。
English: After Yang Yan left Cui Ning in Beijing, the relationship between the two deteriorated.

古文：炎托以北边须大臣镇抚，癸巳，以京畿观察使崔宁为单于、镇北大都护、朔方节度使，镇坊州。
现代文：杨炎托称北部边防需要大臣镇守抚慰，癸巳，德宗任命京畿观察使崔宁为单于镇北大都护、朔方节度使，镇守坊州。
English: Yang Yantuo said that the northern border defense needed to be comforted by the minister of the town guard. At the same time, Dezong appointed the Gyeonggi Observation Envoy Cui Ning as the single guard of the town of Beidadu, the guard of the town of Shuo Fang, and the guard of the town of Fangzhou.

古文：以荆南节度使张延赏为西川节度使。
现代文：任命荆南节度使张延赏为西川节度使。
English: Zhang Yanbo was appointed as the chief envoy of Jingnan Festival and became the chief envoy of Xichuan Festival.

古文：又以灵盐节度都虞侯醴泉杜希全知灵、盐州留后；代州刺史张光晟知单于、振武等城、绥、银、麟、胜州留后；延州刺史李建徽知鄜、坊、丹州留后。
现代文：又任命灵盐节度都虞侯醴泉人杜希全知灵、盐二州留后，任命代州刺史张光晟知单于、振武等城及绥、银、麟、胜各州留后，任命延州刺史李建徽知、坊、丹三州留后。
English: He also appointed the person of Duxi Quanzhiling and Yan Erzhou as the person in charge of Ling and Salt Festival, the person of Duxhi Quanzhiling and Yan Erzhou as the person in charge of Shi Festival, the person of Zhang Guangyao as the person in charge of Shi Festival, the person in charge of Shi Festival, the person in charge of Shi Festival, Zhang Guangyao as the person in charge of Shi Festival, Zhang Guangyao as the person in charge of Shi Festival, Zhang Guangyao as the person in charge of Shi Festival, Zhang Guangyao as the person in charge of Shi Festival, Zhang Guangyao as the person in charge of Shi Festival, Zhang

古文：时宁既出镇，不当更置留后，炎欲夺宁权，且窥其所为，令三人皆得自奏事，仍讽之使伺宁过失。
现代文：当时，崔宁已经出镇，不应当再设置留后，杨炎打算削夺崔宁的权力，并且暗中察看他的活动，便令杜希全等三人都可以特别奏事，同时暗示他们伺察崔宁的过失。
English: At that time, since Trai Ning had already left the town and should not be set up again, Yang Yan planned to take away Trai Ning's power and secretly inspect his activities, so Du Xichuan and the other three could make a special report, while suggesting that they investigate Trai Ning's fault.

古文：十二月，乙卯，立宣王诵为皇太子。
现代文：十二月，乙卯，德宗册立宣王李诵为皇太子。
English: In December, Emperor Dezong set up the Xuan Wang Li Chao as the crown prince.

古文：旧制，天下金帛皆贮于左藏，太府四时上其数，比部覆其出入。
现代文：根据原有的制度，全国的钱帛都收归左藏贮存，由太府按季节上报钱帛数额，由比部复核钱帛的收支情况。
English: According to the original system, the money bags of the whole country were collected and stored, and the Taifu reported the amount of money bags according to the season, and the ratio department reviewed the income and expenditure of money bags.

古文：及第五琦为度支、盐铁使，时京师多豪将，求取无节，琦不能制，乃奏尽贮于大盈内库，使宦官掌之，天子亦以取给为便，故久不出。
现代文：及至第五琦担任度支、盐铁使，当时京城中的豪帅很多，索取赏赐毫无节制，第五琦不能制止，便上奏将左藏钱帛悉数贮存于大盈内库，并让宦官管理，皇上也认为如此取用方便，所以贮存的钱帛长期有能再由内库搬出。
English: At that time, there were many great generals in the capital, and they demanded rewards without restraint. The Fifth Prince could not stop them, so he stored all the left-hidden money in the inner vault of Daying, and let the eunuchs manage it. The emperor also thought that it was convenient to use it in this way, so the stored money could be removed from the inner vault for a long time.

古文：由是以天下公赋为人君私藏，有司不复得窥其多少，校其赢缩，殆二十年。
现代文：从此，国家的财赋收入成了皇上的私人储藏，主管部门不能得知数量多少，无法核查盈亏情况，几乎达二十年之久。
English: From then on, the state's financial revenues became the emperor's private reserves, and the competent authorities could not know how much they were, and could not verify the profit and loss situation, for almost twenty years.

古文：宦官领其事者三百馀员，皆蚕食其中，蟠结根据，牢不可动。
现代文：掌管内库的宦官有三百余人，都在蚕食内库的财富，其势力盘根错节，牢固不可动摇。
English: There are more than three hundred eunuchs in charge of the inner treasury, all of whom are encroaching on the wealth of the inner treasury. Their power is entrenched and unshakable.

古文：杨炎顿首于上前曰： 财赋者，国之大本，生民之命，重轻安危，靡不由之，是以前世皆使重臣掌其事，犹或耗乱不集。
现代文：杨炎在德宗面前叩头说： 财赋是国家的根本，百姓的命脉，国家的盛衰安危，无不与财赋相关。所以，以前各朝都以重臣掌管财赋，即便如此，有时还会有财赋损耗，管理混乱的情况发生。
English: Yang Yan kowtowed in front of Dezong and said: Wealth is the foundation of the country, the lifeblood of the people, the rise and fall of the country, and the safety and security of the country are all related to wealth. Therefore, in the past, each dynasty was in charge of wealth with senior officials. Even so, sometimes there will be loss of wealth and management confusion.

古文：今独使中人出入盈虚，大臣皆不得知，政之蠹敝，莫甚于此。
现代文：现在，专门让宦官掌握财赋的收支盈亏，大臣都无法知道，朝政的蛀蚀败坏，没有比这更为严重的了。
English: Now, the income, expenditure and profit and loss of the eunuchs are specially controlled, and the ministers cannot know that there is nothing more serious than the corruption of the imperial government.

古文：请出之以归有司。
现代文：请将全国的财赋搬出内库，以便交还给主管部门管理。
English: Please move the national treasury out of the vault so that it can be returned to the management of the competent authorities.

古文：度宫中岁用几何，量数奉入，不敢有乏。
现代文：推算好宫中每年需用多少，悉数进上，决不敢有所缺少。
English: Calculate how much you need to use in the palace every year, all of it is advanced, and you dare not lack anything.

古文：如此，然后可以为政。 
现代文：能够这样，此后才能办好朝政。 
English: If we can do this, then we will be able to run the imperial government well.

古文：上即日下诏： 凡财赋皆归左藏，一用旧式，岁于数中择精好者三、五千匹，进入大盈。 
现代文：德宗当日颁下诏书： 一切财赋都交还左藏，完全采用原有的法式，每年在财赋数额内挑选出精良的布帛三五千匹，进献到大盈内库。 
English: On the same day, Emperor Dezong issued an edict: All the wealth was to be returned to Zuo Zang, and the original French style was to be fully adopted. Every year, within the amount of wealth, 35,000 fine cloth coats were to be selected and donated to the inner storehouse of Daying.

古文：炎以片言移人主意，议者称之。
现代文：杨炎只用一席话便改变了皇上的主意，议事的人们都称赞他。
English: Yang Yan changed the emperor's mind with just one speech, and everyone at the meeting praised him.

古文：丙寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：丙寅晦，出现日食。
English: On the 30th, at the end of the month, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：湖南贼帅王国良阻山为盗，上遣都官员外郎关播招抚之。
现代文：湖南赋寇首领王国良依山为盗，德宗派遣都官员外郎关播前去招抚。
English: The leader of the Hunan fuko kingdom, Liang Yishan, was a thief, and Emperor Dezong sent the capital official, Wai Lang Guan Bo, to appease him.

古文：辞行，上问以为政之要，对曰： 为政之本，必求有道贤人与之为理。 
现代文：辞行之际，德宗和关播询问办好政事的关键，关播回答道： 办好政事的根本，在于陛下必须寻找有道贤人，并与他们一齐治理国家。 
English: On the occasion of his resignation, Dezong and Guan Bao inquired about the key to running a good government, Guan Bao replied: The essence of running a good government is that His Majesty must find wise men and govern the country together with them.

古文：上曰： 朕比以下诏求贤，又遣使臣广加搜访，庶几可以为理乎！ 
现代文：德宗说： 我近来已经颁下诏书，寻求贤才，还派出使者，多方面地搜罗寻访，这大概可以使国家政治修明了吧！ 
English: Dezong said, "Recently, I have issued an imperial edict to search for talents, and I have also sent an envoy to collect and search in many ways. This can probably clarify the country's politics!"

古文：对曰： 下诏所求及使者所荐，惟得文词干进之士耳，安有有道贤人肯随牒举选乎！ 
现代文：关播回答说： 下诏寻求和使者荐举，只能得到一些凭着文词追求仕禄的人物罢了，有道贤人哪里会随着一纸公文而被推举、先拔出来呢！ 
English: Guan Bao replied, "In seeking the imperial edict and the envoy's recommendation, we can only get some people who pursue the position by virtue of the words. Where would a wise man be promoted and pulled out first with a piece of official document?

古文：上悦。
现代文：德宗闻此大悦。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：崔祐甫有疾，上令肩舆入中书，或休假在第，大事令中使咨决。
现代文：崔甫身患疾病，德宗让他坐着肩舆到中书省。有时，崔甫正在家中休假，发生了重大的事情，德宗便命中使到崔甫家中咨询，然后做出决定。
English: Sometimes, when Cui Fu was on vacation at home and something important happened, Dezong would send someone to Cui Fu's home to consult with him and then make a decision.

古文：德宗神武孝文皇帝一
现代文：宗神武孝文皇帝一
English: Emperor Sojinmu Takafumi I

古文：建中元年庚申，公元七八零年
现代文：唐德宗建中元年春季正月，丁卯朔，更改年号。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of the Tang De Zong Jian, Ding Ushuo, the year name was changed.

古文：春，正月，丁卯朔，改元。群臣上尊号曰圣神文武皇帝；赦天下。
现代文：群臣为德宗进献尊号，称作圣神文武皇帝。大赦天下。
English: The group of courtiers gave their names to Emperor Dezong, and were called Emperor Shengwenwu.

古文：始用杨炎议，命黜陟使与观察使、刺史 约百姓丁产，定等级，作两税法。
现代文：德宗开始采用杨炎的建议，命令黜陟使和观察使、刺史 估量百姓的人丁财产，定出等级，改变旧税法，实行两税法。
English: Dezong began to adopt Yang Yan's suggestion and ordered the envoy, the observer and the historian to estimate the people's personal property, determine the grade, change the old tax law and implement the two-tax law.

古文：比来新旧征科色目，一切罢之；二税外辄率一钱者，以枉法论。 
现代文：将近年来原有和新增的各项征收名目一律取消。在两税以外，就是向百姓再收敛一个铜钱，便以违法论处。 
English: In recent years, all the original and newly added tax items will be canceled. In addition to the two taxes, it is illegal to collect one more copper coin from the people.

古文：唐初，赋敛之法曰租、庸、调，有田则有租，有身则有庸，有户则有调。
现代文：在唐朝的初期，征收赋税的办法称作租、庸、调，有田土便要交租，有人丁便要服庸，有户口便要纳调。
English: In the early days of the Tang Dynasty, the methods of levying taxes were called rent, yoke, and transfer. If you had land, you had to pay rent, if you had people, you had to pay yoke, and if you had a hukou, you had to pay transfer.

古文：玄宗之末，版籍浸坏，多非其实。
现代文：在玄宗当政末期，户籍逐渐遭到破坏，大多已经与实际不符。
English: At the end of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, household registrations were gradually destroyed, and most of them no longer corresponded to reality.

古文：及至德兵起，所在赋敛，迫趣取办，无复常准。
现代文：到了至德年间，战事四起，到处征收赋敛，逼迫催促，再也没有一定的标准。
English: By the time of Zhi De, there were four wars, expropriation everywhere, persecution and urging, and there was no longer a certain standard.

古文：赋敛之司增数而莫相统摄，各随意增科，自立色目，新故相仍，不知纪极。
现代文：征收部门增加了，可是互相没有隶属关系而是各自随意增加课税，巧立名目，新老名目相互重复，毫无限度。
English: The number of tax-collecting departments has increased, but they are not subordinate to each other, but each increases taxation at will, cleverly setting up names, and the new and old names repeat each other without limit.

古文：民富者丁多，率为官、为僧以免课役，而贫者丁多，无所伏匿，故上户优而下户劳。
现代文：富足人家人丁多，大抵作官当僧人得以免除赋役；而贫困人家人丁多，全无隐瞒逃避的去处，所以上等户优游而下等户劳瘁。
English: There are many rich families, most of whom work as officials and monks to be exempted from military service; while there are many poor families, there is no place to hide and escape, so it is better to visit the upper-class households and work hard in the lower-class households.

古文：吏因缘蚕食，民旬输月送，不胜困弊，率皆逃徙为浮户，其土著百无四五。
现代文：征税的吏员又乘机侵吞，百姓十天输赋一月送税，经受不了如此困窘，大抵都逃亡流徙成为浮户，那些留下来的本地百姓，不足百分之四五。
English: The tax collectors also took the opportunity to embezzle, and the people could not bear such a predicament. Most of them fled and became floating households. Those local people who remained were less than 45 percent.

古文：至是，炎建议作两税法，先计州县每岁所应费用及上供之数而赋于人，量出以制入。
现代文：至此，杨炎建议实行两税法：首先计算州县每年所需费用和上交朝廷的数额，并以此数额向百姓征税，通过对支出的估量来制定收入的数额。
English: At this point, Yang Yan proposed the implementation of a two-tax law: first, calculate the annual expenses required by the state and county and the amount submitted to the imperial court, and tax the people with this amount, and determine the amount of income by estimating the expenditure.

古文：户无主、客，以见居为簿；人无丁、中，以贫富为差；为行商者，在所州县税三十之一，使与居者均，无侥利。
现代文：无论主户、客户，都按现在的居地制订簿册；无论成丁、中男，都按贫富状况划为等级；流动经商的人，在所居州县纳税三十分之一，使他们与定居民户一同纳税，不能侥幸获利。
English: Both the head of the household and the customer will have a book according to the current place of residence; whether it is a child or a middle-aged man, they will be classified according to the status of rich and poor; the mobile business people will pay one-thirtieth of the tax in the state and county where they live, so that they can pay taxes together with the permanent residents and cannot make a profit by chance.

古文：居人之税，秋、夏两征之。
现代文：定居百姓的赋税，在秋天和夏天两次征收。
English: The tax of the settled people is collected twice, in autumn and summer.

古文：其租、庸、调杂徭悉省，皆总统于度支。
现代文：那些租、庸、调以及杂徭等全部省去，整个征税事务由度支统一掌管。
English: Those taxes such as rent, corvee, transfer and miscellaneous taxes have all been omitted, and the entire taxation affairs have been unifiedly managed by the department of taxation and expenditure.

古文：上用其言，因赦令行之。
现代文：德宗采纳了杨炎的建议，于是颁布赦文，命令实施。
English: Dezong accepted Yang Yan's suggestion, and then issued a pardon and ordered its implementation.

古文：初，左仆射刘晏为吏部尚书，杨炎为侍郎，不相悦。
现代文：当初，左仆射刘晏担任吏部尚书，杨炎担任侍郎，两不悦服。
English: At the beginning, Liu Yao, the left-hand servant, served as the secretary of the personnel department, and Yang Yan served as the waiter. The two were not happy.

古文：元载之死，晏有力焉。
现代文：元载被杀，刘晏起了很大的作用。
English: When Yuan Zai was killed, Liu Ye played a big role.

古文：及上即位，晏久典利权，众颇疾之，多上言转运使可罢；又有风言晏尝密表劝代宗立独孤妃为皇后者。
现代文：及至德宗即位以后，刘晏长期执掌财利的权柄，众人颇为妒忌他，多上言称转运使一职应当罢去，又有流言说刘晏曾经秘密上表劝说代宗册立独孤妃为皇后。
English: After Emperor Dezong ascended the throne, Liu Bei held the power of wealth and profit for a long time. People were quite jealous of him. There were many rumours that he should be removed from his post. There was also a rumour that Liu Bei had secretly persuaded the vicar of the family register to make Du Guofei the empress.

古文：杨炎为宰相，欲为元载报仇，因为上流涕言： 晏与黎幹、刘忠翼同谋，臣为宰相不能讨，罪当万死！ 
现代文：杨炎出任宰相以后，打算为元载报仇，因而在德宗面前流着眼泪说： 刘晏与黎干和刘忠翼同谋，我作为宰相，不能声讨他，真是罪该万死。 
English: After Yang Yan became the prime minister, he planned to take revenge for Yuan Zhao, so he shed tears in front of Dezong and said, "Liu Gan was a co-conspirator with Li Gan and Liu Zhongyi. As the prime minister, I can't speak out against him. It's really a crime worthy of death."

古文：崔祐甫言： 兹事暖昧，陛下已旷然大赦，不当复究寻虚语。 
现代文：崔甫说： 这件事并未搞清楚，既然陛下已经以广阔的襟怀实行了大赦，就不应该再来追究这些不实之辞。 
English: Cui Fu said: This matter has not been clarified, since His Majesty has already implemented the amnesty with broad support, it is not necessary to investigate these untrue words.

古文：炎乃建言： 尚书省，国政之本，比置诸使，分夺其权，今宜复旧。 
现代文：于是杨炎又提出建议： 尚书省是国家大政的根本，近来设置诸使职，分掉和侵夺了尚书省的权力，现在应当恢复原有的制度。 
English: Therefore, Yang Yan also made a suggestion: Shangshuo is the foundation of national politics. Recently, various posts have been set up, and the power of Shangshuo has been separated and usurped. Now, the original system should be restored.

古文：上从之。
现代文：德宗听从了杨炎的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：甲子，诏天下钱谷皆归金部、仓部，罢晏转运、租庸、青苗、盐铁等使。
现代文：甲子，诏令全国钱谷都要交给金部、仓部管理，免除了刘晏转运、租庸、青苗、盐铁等使职。
English: At the same time, it was decreed that Qianya in the whole country should be handed over to the management of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Warehouses, exempting Liu Wei from the duties of transportation, rent, seedlings, salt and iron.

古文：二月，丙申朔，命黜陟使十一人分巡天下。
现代文：二月，丙申朔，德宗命令黜陟使十一人分道巡查全国。
English: In February, Jian Shenshuo, Dezong ordered to send eleven people to inspect the whole country.

古文：先是，魏博节度使田悦事朝廷犹恭顺，河北黜陟使洪经纶，不晓时务，闻悦军七万人，符下，罢其四万，令还农。
现代文：在此之前，魏博节度使田悦事奉朝廷还算恭顺，河北黜陟使洪经纶不通晓时务，听说田悦军有七万人，便发下军符，要求裁减四万人，命他们解甲归农。
English: Prior to this, the Wei Bo Festival made Tian Yue serve the imperial court and was still considered obedient, and Hebei Province made Hong Jing Yue not understand the current affairs. When he heard that Tian Yue's army had seventy thousand people, he issued a military flag, demanded to reduce forty thousand people, and ordered them to disarm and return to farming.

古文：悦阳顺命，如符罢之。
现代文：田悦佯装从命，按军符减员。
English: Tian Yue pretended to obey the order and reduced the number of soldiers according to the military code.

古文：既而集应罢者，激怒之曰： 汝曹久在军中，有父母妻子，今一旦为黜陟使所罢，将何资以自衣食乎！ 
现代文：不久，田悦召集应当裁减的士兵，激怒他们说： 你们长期在军中，都有父母、妻子、儿女，现在一下子被黜陟使裁减了，你们拿什么来养活自己呢！ 
English: Not long after, Tian Yue called together the soldiers who were to be reduced in number, and enraged them by saying: "You have been in the army for a long time, and all of you have parents, wives, and children, and now you are being forced to reduce your numbers at the drop of a hat. What are you going to do to support yourselves?

古文：众大哭。
现代文：大家放声大哭起来。
English: Everyone burst into tears.

古文：悦乃出家财以赐之，使各还部伍。
现代文：田悦于是拿出家财，分给士兵，让他们都回到军中。
English: Tian Yue then took out his family's money and gave it to the soldiers, so that they could all return to the army.

古文：于是军士皆德悦而怨朝廷。
现代文：由此，士兵都感谢田悦的恩德而怨恨朝廷。
English: As a result, the soldiers were grateful for Tian Yue's kindness and resented the imperial court.

古文：崔祐甫以疾，多不视事。
现代文：崔甫因为身染疾病，多不管事，杨炎独揽朝廷大权，专门去做报恩复仇的事情。
English: Due to his illness, Cui Fu did not care about many things. Yang Yan monopolized the power of the imperial court and devoted himself to repaying favors and taking revenge.

古文：杨炎独任大政，专以复恩仇为事，奏用元载遗策城原州，又欲发两京、关内丁夫浚丰州陵阳渠，以兴屯田。
现代文：他上奏采用元载生前留下的计划筑原州城，又打算征发长安、洛阳和关内的丁夫疏浚丰州陵阳渠，以便兴办屯田。
English: He proposed to adopt the plan for Chikuwara Shushen left by Yuan Zai before his death, and also planned to solicit and dispatch Dingfu from Chang'an, Luoyang and Guanai to dredge the Fengzhou Lingyang Canal in order to build a military garrison.

古文：上遣中使诣泾原节度使段秀实，访以利害，秀实以为： 今边备尚虚，未宜兴事以召寇。 
现代文：德宗派遣中使来到泾原节度使段秀实处，询问此举利弊如何，段秀实认为： 现在边疆防御还很空虚，不适宜兴办事功，召引敌人。 
English: An envoy dispatched by Emperor Dezong came to the place of Duan Xiushi, the envoy of the Suwon Festival, and inquired about the pros and cons of this move. Duan Xiushi believed that: Now the frontier defense is still very empty, it is not suitable to engage in work and summon the enemy.

古文：炎怒，以为沮已，征秀实为司农卿。
现代文：杨炎大怒，认为这是有意阻止自己，便征召段秀实担任司农卿。
English: Yang Yan flew into a rage, thinking that this was a deliberate attempt to stop him, and summoned Duan Xiushi to serve as Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：丁未，邠宁节度使李怀光兼四镇、北庭行营、泾原节度使，使移军原州，以四镇、北庭留后刘文喜为别驾。
现代文：丁未，德宗让宁节度使李怀光兼任四镇、北庭行营、泾原节度使，并让他移军原州驻扎，又任命四镇、北庭留后刘文喜为别驾。
English: Ding Wei and Dezong Zhanning sent Li Huiguang to serve as the envoy of the Four Towns, Beiting Campaign and Yuyuan Festival, and asked him to move the army to Yuanzhou, and also appointed Liu Wenshi to stay in the Four Towns and Beiting.

古文：京兆尹严郢奏： 案朔方五城，旧屯沃饶之地，自丧乱以来，人功不及，因致荒废，十不耕一。
现代文：京兆尹严郢奏称： 据悉，朔方五城过去本是肥沃丰饶的土地，自从国家遭受变乱以来，由于无暇投入人力，因而导致土地荒废，耕种的不足十分之一。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Yanzhao said: It is known that the five cities of Shuofang were originally fertile and fertile land in the past. Since the country suffered turmoil, due to the lack of time to invest manpower, the land has been wasted and less than one-tenth of the land has been cultivated.

古文：若力可垦辟，不俟浚渠。
现代文：如果有人力再将这里开垦出来，则不必等待疏通陵阳渠。
English: If there is manpower to reclaim the area, there is no need to wait for the Lingyang Canal to be unblocked.

古文：今发两京、关辅人于丰州浚渠营田，计所得不补所费，而关辅之人不免流散，是虚畿甸而无益军储也。 
现代文：现在征发长安、洛阳、关辅百姓到丰州疏浚渠道，经营屯田，算起来，所得到的不足以补赏所耗费的，而且关辅百姓不免流亡离散。这样做，是使京城辖区空虚，而对军事储备却毫无补益。 
English: At present, the people of Chang'an, Luoyang and Guanfu are conscripted and sent to Fuzhou to dredge the canals and operate the military camps. The amount received is not enough to compensate for the expenses incurred, and the people of Guanfu are forced into exile and dispersion. In doing so, the area under the jurisdiction of the capital is emptied, but there is no benefit to the military reserve.

古文：疏奏，不报。
现代文：此疏奏上，德宗不予答复。
English: No response has been received since the submission of this communication.

古文：既而陵阳渠竟不成，弃之。
现代文：后来，陵阳渠到底没能修成，将它废弃了。
English: Later, the Lingyang Canal failed to be built after all, and it was abandoned.

古文：上用杨炎之言，托以奏事不实，己酉，贬刘晏为忠州刺史。
现代文：德宗采纳杨炎的主意，借口上奏的事情与实际不符，己酉，将刘晏贬为忠州刺史。
English: Dezong adopted Yang Yan's idea, on the pretext that what was reported did not correspond to reality, and belittled Liu Ye as a traitor to Chungju.

古文：癸丑，以泽潞留后李抱真为节度使。
现代文：癸丑，德宗任命泽潞留后李抱真为该镇节度使。
English: Unfortunately, after Dezong appointed Zehu to stay, Li Bozhen became the town's festival envoy.

古文：杨炎欲城原州以复秦、原，命李怀光居前督作，硃泚、崔宁各将万人翼其后。
现代文：杨炎打算修筑原州城，以便恢复秦州和原州，命令李怀光在前面监督施工，朱和崔宁各带领一万人分布两侧，在后护卫。
English: Yang Yan planned to build Wonju City in order to restore Qin and Wonju. He ordered Li Huaiguang to supervise the construction in the front, and Zhu and Cui Ning each led ten thousand people distributed on both sides to escort the rear.

古文：诏下泾州为城具，泾之将士怒曰： 吾属为国家西门之屏，十馀年矣。
现代文：有诏书命令泾州将士准备筑城的工具，泾州将士愤怒地说： 我辈充当国家西大门的屏障，已经有十多年了。
English: An imperial edict ordered Zhangzhou soldiers to prepare the tools to build the city. Zhangzhou soldiers angrily said: We have been acting as a barrier to the west gate of the country for more than ten years.

古文：始居邠州，甫营耕桑，有地著之安。徙屯泾州，披荆榛，立军府；坐席未暖，又投之塞外。
现代文：一开始，我辈屯驻州，才将农桑各业经营起来，可以定居下来了，便又移军屯驻泾州，披荆斩棘，建立军府；在泾州还没有把座位坐暖，又被丢到塞外。
English: At the beginning, our generation was stationed in Ganzhou, and it was only after we began to manage the agricultural mulberry industry that we were able to settle down. Then, we moved the army to be stationed in Ganzhou, worked hard, and established a military headquarters. In Ganzhou, we did not have a warm seat, and we were thrown out of the country.

古文：吾属何罪而至此乎！ 
现代文：我辈到底犯了什么罪，以至非要遭受如此对待呢！ 
English: What crime did our generation commit to be treated like this?

古文：李怀光始为邠宁帅，即诛温儒雅等，军令严峻。
现代文：李怀光刚刚当上宁节帅，便杀掉了温儒雅等人，军令十分严厉。
English: As soon as Li Huaguang became the commander of the Ning Festival, he killed the gentle people and others. The military order was very strict.

古文：及兼泾原，诸将皆惧，曰： 彼五将何罪而为戮？
现代文：及至李怀光兼任泾原节帅，各个将领都很恐惧，他们说： 那五位将领到底犯了什么罪，而要遭受杀戮？
English: When Li Huaguang also became the commander of the Yuyuan Festival, all the generals were very afraid. They said, "What crime did those five generals commit to be killed?"

古文：今又来此，吾属能无忧乎！ 
现代文：现在，李怀光又来到泾州，我辈怎能不忧虑呢！ 
English: Now that Li Haiguang has come to Zhangzhou again, how can we not be worried?

古文：刘文喜因众心不安，据泾州，不受诏，上疏复求段秀实为帅，不则硃泚。
现代文：刘文喜乘大家心中不安，占据了泾州，不服从诏命，还上疏要求再派段秀实来当泾州节帅，如果不能派段秀实来，便派朱来。
English: Liu Wenxi took advantage of the uneasiness in everyone's hearts, occupied Zhangzhou, disobeyed the imperial edict, and asked Shangsu to send Duan Xiushi to be the commander of the Zhangzhou Festival. If he could not send Duan Xiushi, he would send Zhu.

古文：癸亥，以硃泚兼四镇、北庭行军、泾原节度使，代怀光。
现代文：癸亥，德宗任命朱兼任四镇、北庭行营、泾原节度使，替代李怀光。
English: At the end of the year, Emperor Dezong appointed Zhu to serve concurrently as the chief of the four towns, Beiting Xingying and Yuyuan, replacing Li Huaguang.

古文：三月，翰林学士、左散骑常侍张涉受前湖南观察使辛京杲金，事觉；上怒，欲置于法。
现代文：三月，翰林学士、左散骑常侍张涉收受前湖南观察使辛京杲钱财的事情被发觉，德宗很生气，准备依法惩办。
English: In March, it was discovered that Zhang, a scholar of Hanlin and a regular attendant of Zuo Sanzhong, was involved in receiving money from Xinjing through the former Hunan observation. Dezong was very angry and prepared to be punished according to the law.

古文：时李忠臣以检校司空、同平章事、奉朝请，言于上曰： 陛下贵为天子，而先生以乏财犯法，以臣愚观之，非先生之过也。 
现代文：李忠臣身为检校司空、同平章事、奉朝请，向德宗进言说： 陛下贵为天子，然而，天子的老师却因为缺少钱财而犯法，依我愚见，这并不是老师的过错啊。 
English: Li Zhongchen, as the inspector of the school, said: Your Majesty is a son of heaven, however, the teacher of the son of heaven broke the law because of lack of money. In my opinion, this is not the fault of the teacher.

古文：上意解，辛未，放涉归田里。
现代文：德宗的态度缓和下来。辛未，将张涉罢免还乡。
English: Dezong's attitude softened. Xin Wei dismissed Zhang Zang and returned to his hometown.

古文：辛京杲以私忿杖杀部曲，有司奏京杲罪当死，上将从之。
现代文：辛京杲因私忿用杖打死部曲，有关部门奏称辛京杲犯了死罪，德宗打算按有关部门的意见办。
English: The relevant departments reported that Xin Jingyao had committed a capital crime, and Dezong planned to act in accordance with the opinions of the relevant departments.

古文：李忠臣曰： 京杲当死久矣！ 
现代文：李忠臣说： 辛京杲早就该死了。 
English: Li Zhongchen said: Xin Jingyao should have died a long time ago.

古文：上问其故。忠臣曰： 京杲诸父兄弟皆战死，独京杲至今尚存，臣故以为当死久矣。 
现代文：德宗问他此话怎讲，李忠臣说： 辛京杲的父亲和兄弟都战死了，只有辛京杲至今还活着，所以我认为辛京杲早就该死了。 
English: De Zong asked him how to explain this, Li Zhongchen said: Xin Jingyao's father and brother both died in the war, only Xin Jingyao is still alive, so I think Xin Jingyao should have died a long time ago.

古文：上悯然，左迁京杲诸王傅。
现代文：德宗心怀怜恤之情，将辛京杲降职为诸王师傅。
English: With compassion in his heart, Dezong demoted Xin Jingyu to the position of the king's master.

古文：忠臣乘机救人，多此类。
现代文：李忠臣利用时机，挽救人命，大多如此。
English: Li Zhongchen took advantage of the opportunity to save lives, mostly.

古文：杨炎罢度支、转运使，命金部、仓部代之。
现代文：杨炎罢除了度支、转运使，命金部、仓部来代替。
English: Yang Yan abolished the transportation department and the dispatching department, and replaced them with the financial department and the warehouse department.

古文：既而省职久废，耳目不相接，莫能振举，天下钱谷无所总领。癸巳，复以谏议大夫韩洄为户部侍郎、判度支，以金部郎中万年杜佑权江、淮水陆转运使，皆如旧制。
现代文：不久，由于尚书省各部门的职任久已荒废，部门之间不通声气，未能把事办好，无法将全国的钱粮统一掌管起来，癸巳，德宗再次任命谏议大夫韩洄为户部侍郎、判度支，任命金部郎中万年人杜佑暂时代理江、淮水陆转运使，都和原来的制度一样。
English: Soon, since the posts of various departments in Shangshu Province had been abandoned for a long time, and there was no communication between departments, it was not possible to do things well, and it was not possible to control the money and grain of the whole country in a unified manner. Therefore, Dezong once again appointed Han Zheng, the doctor of deliberation, as the attendant of the household department and the branch of judgment, and appointed Du You, the permanent representative of the Ministry of Finance, as the temporary Lijiang River and Huai Shui land transportation envoy, all of which were the same as the original system.

古文：刘文喜又不受诏，欲自邀旌节；夏，四月，乙未朔，据泾州叛，遣其子质于吐蕃以求援。
现代文：刘文喜又不服从诏命，准备自求节度使的旌节。夏季，四月，乙未朔，他占据泾州叛乱，打发他的儿子到吐蕃为人质，以求援助。
English: Liu Wenxi also disobeyed the imperial edict and prepared for the self-sacrificing Dragon Boat Festival. In the summer, in April, he took part in the rebellion in Zhangzhou and sent his son as a hostage to Tubo to ask for help.

古文：上命硃泚、李怀光讨之，又命神策军使张巨济将禁兵二千助之。
现代文：德宗命令朱、李怀光前去讨伐他，还命令神策军使张巨济带领禁军二千人前往协助。
English: Dezong ordered Zhu and Li Huaiguang to go and fight against him, and also ordered Zhang Jiji, the envoy of the Divine Providence Army, to lead 2,000 forbidden soldiers to help.

古文：吐蕃始闻韦伦归其俘，不之信，及俘入境，各还部落，称： 新天子出宫人，放禽兽，英威圣德，洽于中国。 
现代文：吐蕃人最初听说韦伦将俘虏送回来时，并不相信。及至被俘者回到吐蕃，各自返还部落，声称 新皇上将宫女释放出宫，将禽兽放生，他的英风威声和圣明仁德，真是遍及中原。 
English: When the people of Tubo first heard that Wei Lun had sent the captives back, they did not believe it. When the captives returned to Tubo and each returned to the tribe, they claimed that the new emperor had released the princess from the palace and released the animals. His heroic style and saintly benevolence really spread throughout the Central Plains.

古文：吐蕃大悦，除道迎伦。
现代文：吐蕃人听了很高兴，便打扫道路，迎接韦伦。
English: The people of Tubo were very happy to hear this, so they cleaned the road to welcome Waylon.

古文：赞普即发使随伦入贡，且致赙赠。
现代文：吐蕃赞普立即派出使者，跟随韦伦入朝进贡，并且赠送助办丧事的物品。
English: Tubo Zampu immediately sent an envoy to follow Waylon into the court to pay tribute, and presented him with the funeral goods.

古文：癸卯，至京师，上礼接之。
现代文：癸卯，吐蕃使者来到京城，德宗按照礼节接待了他。
English: When the emissary of Emperor Xuanzong came to Beijing, Emperor Dezong received him according to etiquette.

古文：既而蜀将上言： 吐蕃豺狼，所获俘不可归。 
现代文：不久，蜀地的将领向上建言： 吐蕃人豺狼成性，我方捉获的俘虏不应放还。 
English: Before long, the generals in Shu advised the emperor: "Tu Han people are like wolves, and the prisoners we have captured should not be released."

古文：上曰： 戎狄犯塞则击之，服则归之。
现代文：德宗说： 戎狄侵犯边疆，我们便打击他们；他们服从朝廷，我们便归还俘虏。
English: Dezong said, "If the soldiers invade the border, we will fight them; if they obey the imperial court, we will return the captives."

古文：击以示威，归以示信。
现代文：打击他们，是为了显示朝廷的威严；归还俘虏，是显示朝廷的信义。
English: To fight them is to show the majesty of the imperial court; to return the captives is to show the loyalty of the imperial court.

古文：威信不立，何以怀远！ 
现代文：假如不能将威严和信义树立起来，又怎能安抚边远各族呢！ 
English: If we cannot establish dignity and loyalty, how can we pacify the outlying tribes?

古文：悉命归之。
现代文：德宗命令将吐蕃俘虏悉数放还。
English: Emperor Dezong ordered that all the prisoners of Tubo be released.

古文：代宗之世，每元日、冬至、端午、生日，州府于常赋之外竞为贡献，贡献多者则悦之。武将、奸吏，缘此侵渔下民。
现代文：代宗在位时期，每当大年初一、冬至、端午、皇上的生日，州府长官争着在定额赋税之外争着向朝廷进贡，进贡多的，便能得到皇上的欢心，武将和奸滑的官吏便借此侵吞百姓的财物。
English: During the reign of Emperor Daizong, whenever the first day of the year, the winter solstice, the Dragon Boat Festival, or the emperor's birthday, the prefects of the prefectures competed to pay tribute to the imperial court in addition to the fixed amount of tax. If they paid more tribute, they could win the emperor's favor, and the generals and treacherous officials used this opportunity to plunder the people's property.

古文：癸丑，上生日，四方贡献皆不受。
现代文：癸丑，是德宗的生日，德宗对各地进贡概不接受。
English: It was the birthday of Emperor Dezong. Emperor Dezong did not accept any tribute from other regions.

古文：李正己、田悦各献缣三万匹，上悉归之度支以代租赋。
现代文：李正己、田悦各献细绢三万匹，德宗悉数拨归度支，以此代替两处应纳的租税。
English: Li Zhengyi and Tian Yue each donated 30,000 yakitori, and Dezong allocated the entire amount to the provincial government, thereby replacing the tax payable in two places.

古文：五月，戊辰，以韦伦为太常卿。
现代文：五月，戊辰，德宗任命韦伦为太常卿。
English: In May, Emperor Dezong of the Boshin Dynasty appointed Waylon to the position of Tai Changqing.

古文：乙酉，复遣伦使吐蕃。
现代文：乙酉，再次派遣韦伦出使吐蕃。
English: Once again, Wei Lun was dispatched to Tibet.

古文：伦请上自为载书，与吐蕃盟。
现代文：韦伦请求德宗亲自撰写盟书，与吐蕃结盟。
English: Wei Lun asked Dezong to personally write an alliance letter and make an alliance with Tubo.

古文：杨炎以为非敌，请与郭子仪辈为载书以闻，令上画可而已，从之。
现代文：杨炎认为德宗与吐蕃赞普地位不对等，请求同郭子仪等人撰写盟书上报德宗，再由德宗批准，德宗听从了他的建议。
English: Yang Yan thought that the status of Dezong and Tubo Zampu was not equal, and he asked Guo Ziyi and others to write a letter of alliance to report to Dezong, and then approved by Dezong. Dezong followed his suggestion.

古文：硃泚等围刘文喜于泾州，杜其出入，而闭壁不与战，久之不拔。
现代文：朱泚等将刘文喜包围在泾州，堵塞了泾州出入的通道，但又关闭营垒，不与刘文喜交战，长时间不能攻克泾州。
English: Zhu Xi and others encircled Liu Wenshi in Ganzhou, blocked the access to and from Ganzhou, but also closed the camp, did not fight with Liu Wenshi, and could not conquer Ganzhou for a long time.

古文：天方旱，征发馈运，内外骚然，朝臣上书请赦文喜以苏疲人者，不可胜纪。
现代文：当时正值天旱，征发粮草，输送给养，使得朝野内外骚动不安，朝中诸臣上书请求赦免刘文喜，以便使疲乏困顿的百姓得到休息的，多得难以记载。
English: At that time, it was a time of drought. The collection and distribution of grain and grass, as well as the transportation of supplies, caused turmoil and unrest both inside and outside the court. The courtiers of the court and the middle court sent a letter to request the pardon of Liu Wenxi, in order to give the tired and distressed people a rest. It is difficult to record how many.

古文：上皆不听，曰： 微孽不除，何以令天下！ 
现代文：德宗全不听从，他说： 连个小小的忤逆之臣都不能铲除，还拿什么来号令全国！ 
English: Dezong did not listen at all, he said: Even a small traitorous minister cannot be eradicated, what else can be used to order the whole country!

古文：文喜使其将刘海宾入奏，海宾言于上曰： 臣乃陛下籓邸部曲，岂肯附叛人，必为陛下枭其首以献。
现代文：刘文喜让部将刘海宾入朝上奏。刘海宾对德宗说： 我是陛下在藩邸时的部曲，怎肯依附叛逆之臣，我一定要为陛下将刘文喜斩首示众，并献给朝廷。
English: Liu Wenshi sent his subordinate Liu Haibin to play for the imperial court. Liu Haibin said to Dezong: I was the subordinate when your majesty was in the residence, how can I cling to a traitorous vassal, I must behead Liu Wenshi for your majesty and dedicate it to the imperial court.

古文：但文喜今所求者节而已，愿陛下姑与之，文喜必怠，则臣计得施矣。
现代文：但是，刘文喜现在所希求的，不过是当节度使而已，希望陛下暂时满足他，刘文喜必然会懈怠，这样，我的计谋便能够实施了。 
English: However, what Liu Wenshi is asking for now is just to be a ceremonial envoy. I hope that His Majesty will temporarily satisfy him. Liu Wenshi will inevitably slack off, so that my plan can be implemented.

古文：上曰： 名器不可假人，尔能立效固善，我节不可得也。 
现代文：德宗说： 爵号与车服不能随便借给人，你能立刻效命固然很好，节度使一职，他不能得到。 
English: Dezong said, "You can't just lend your title and car clothes to anyone. It's great that you can do your duty right away, but he can't get a job as a bureaucrat.

古文：使海宾归以告文喜，而攻之如初。
现代文：德宗让刘海宾回去将此意告诉刘文喜，而对刘文喜的进攻也仍在继续。
English: Dezong asked Liu Haibin to go back and tell Liu Wenshi about this, and the attack on Liu Wenshi continued.

古文：减御膳以给军士，城中将士当受春服者，赐予如故。
现代文：德宗自减进食，供给士兵，城中应当得到春天服装的将士，也都象过去一样赐给。
English: Emperor Dezong himself reduced the food and supplies to the soldiers, and the soldiers in the city who should receive spring clothing were also given to the horses as in the past.

古文：于是众知上意不可移。
现代文：由此，大家才知道皇帝对刘文喜的态度是不可动摇的。
English: From this, we all know that the emperor's attitude towards Liu Wenxi is unshakable.

古文：时吐蕃方睦于唐，不为发兵，城中势穷。
现代文：当时，吐蕃才与唐朝交好，不肯为刘文喜派兵，泾州城中形势窘困。
English: At that time, it was only after the establishment of friendly relations between the Tang Dynasty and the Tu Han Dynasty that Tu Han refused to send troops for Liu Wenxi, and the situation in the city of Zhangzhou was in dire straits.

古文：庚寅，海宾与诸将共杀文喜，传首，而原州竟不果城。
现代文：庚寅，刘海宾与诸将一起杀死刘文喜，并将他的头颅传送京城，而原州城终究没能修成。
English: Geng Yin, Liu Haibin and other generals killed Liu Wenxi and sent his head to the capital, but the original capital was never built.

古文：自上即位，李正己内不自安，遣参佐入奏事；会泾州捷奏至，上使观文喜之首而归。
现代文：自从德宗即位以来，李正己内心感到不安。他派遣参佐入朝奏事，适值泾州捷报奏到朝廷，德宗便让李正己的参佐观看了刘文喜的人头，然后让他回去。
English: Since the enthronement of Emperor Dezong, Li Zhengyi felt uneasy in his heart. He sent a counselor to the imperial court to report on the matter. At the right time, Zhang Zhou Jie Bao reported to the imperial court. Emperor Dezong then asked Li Zhengyi's counselor to look at Liu Wenxi's head, and then let him go back.

古文：正己益惧。
现代文：李正己越发恐惧。
English: Li Zhengyi became more and more frightened.

古文：六月，甲午朔，门下侍郎、同平章事崔祐甫薨。
现代文：六月，甲午朔，门下侍郎、同平章事崔甫去世。
English: In June, Gao Shuo, Tongping Zhangji Cui Fu, a servant of the disciple, passed away.

古文：术士桑道茂上言： 陛下不出数年，暂有离宫之厄。
现代文：道术之士桑道茂向德宗进言： 不出几年，陛下会有暂离宫廷的危难。
English: The Taoist Sando Shigeru advised Emperor Dezong: In a few years, Your Majesty will be in danger of temporarily leaving the court.

古文：臣望奉天有天子气，宜高大其城以备非常。 
现代文：我望见奉天城有天子之气，应当将此城建得高大些，以备非常事件发生。 
English: I see that Feng Tiancheng has the spirit of a son of heaven, and this city should be built taller in order to be prepared for emergencies.

古文：辛丑，命京兆发丁夫数千，杂六军之士，筑奉天城。
现代文：辛丑，德宗命令京兆府征发民数千人，夹杂六军的士兵，前去修筑奉天城。
English: Outraged, Emperor Dezong ordered thousands of people from Jingzhao Prefecture, including soldiers from the Six Armies, to go and rebuild the City of Heaven.

古文：初，回纥风俗朴厚，君臣之等不甚异，故众志专一，劲健无敌。
现代文：当初，回纥的风俗质朴敦厚，君臣间的等级差异不甚显著，所以能够大家一条心，强劲雄健，无所匹敌。
English: At the beginning, the customs of Hui Xuan were simple and dignified, and there was not much difference in rank between the monarchs and the courtiers, so everyone could be of one mind, strong and vigorous, unmatched.

古文：及有功于唐，唐赐遗甚厚，登里可汗始自尊大，筑宫殿以居，妇人有粉黛文绣之饰。中国为之虚耗，而虏俗亦坏。
现代文：及至回纥为唐朝立了功劳，唐朝赐赠给回纥的物品甚为丰厚，登里可汗开始妄自尊大起来。他建筑了宫殿，搬进去居住，身边的妇女也有了搽粉画眉，身著绣衣的装饰，大唐因此财力空虚，而回纥的风俗也败坏了。
English: By the end of the Tang Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty had made great contributions to the Tang Dynasty, and the Tang Dynasty had given very rich gifts to the Tang Dynasty. Dengli Khan began to be arrogant. He built a palace, moved in and lived there. The women around him also had powdered eyebrows and were dressed in embroidered clothes. As a result, the Tang Dynasty was empty of financial resources, and the customs of the Tang Dynasty had been corrupted.

古文：及代宗崩，上遣中使梁文秀往告哀，登里骄不为礼。
现代文：及至代宗驾崩，德宗派遣中使梁文秀前往回纥通报噩耗时，登里态度骄傲，不按礼节接待来使。
English: When Liang Wenxiu went to Hui'an to report the bad news to Emperor Taizong after Emperor Taizong passed away, Emperor Taizong sent Liang Wenxiu to report the bad news. Emperor Taizong was proud and did not receive Liang Wenxiu with proper etiquette.

古文：九姓胡附回纥者，说登里以中国富饶，今乘丧伐之，可有大利。
现代文：依附回纥的九姓胡人劝说登里，大唐富饶，现在乘大唐忙于丧事发起进攻，可以获得莫大好处。
English: The nine surnamed Hu, who were attached to Hui Xuan, persuaded Dengli that Datang was rich, and now took advantage of the fact that Datang was busy with funerals to launch an attack, which could gain huge benefits.

古文：登里从之，欲举国入寇。
现代文：登里听从了九姓胡人的劝说，打算举国入侵大唐。
English: Dengli listened to the persuasion of nine surnamed Hu and planned to invade the whole country of Datang.

古文：其相顿莫贺达干，登里之从父兄也，谏曰： 唐，大国也，无负于我，吾前年侵太原，获羊马数万，可谓大捷，而道远粮乏，比归，士卒多徒行者。
现代文：回纥宰相顿莫贺达干是登里的堂兄，劝谏登里说： 唐朝是个大国，没有对不起我们。前年我们入侵太原，获得羊马数万，可以称得上大捷了。但是，路途太远，粮食缺乏，及至归国，士兵大多徒步行走了。
English: Hui prime minister Dong Moga Dagan, a cousin of Deng Ri, urged Deng Ri to say, "The Tang Dynasty is a great power, and it did not forgive us. The year before last, we invaded Taiyuan and obtained tens of thousands of sheep and horses, which can be called a great victory. However, the distance was too far, and there was a shortage of food. When returning to the country, most of the soldiers walked on foot.

古文：今举国深入，万一不捷，将安归乎！ 
现代文：现在又要举国远征，万一不能取得胜利，那将如何撤军回国呢！ 
English: Now a national expedition is to be launched, and in the unlikely event that victory is not achieved, how will the troops be withdrawn back home?

古文：登里不听。
现代文：登里不肯听从。
English: Deng Li refused to obey.

古文：顿莫贺乘人心之不欲南寇也，举兵击杀之，并九姓胡二千人，自立为合骨咄禄毘伽可汗，遣其臣聿达干与梁文秀俱入见，愿为籓臣，垂发不翦，以待册命。
现代文：顿莫贺乘回纥民心不愿意南下侵犯之机，发兵击杀登里以及九姓胡人二千人，自立为合骨咄禄毗伽可汗。他派遣臣属聿达干与梁文秀一齐入朝觐见，表示愿意作朝廷的藩臣，不剪垂发，等待朝廷的诏命。
English: Taking advantage of the unwillingness of the Hui people to invade the south, Don Moga dispatched troops to kill two thousand people from Dengli and nine surnamed Hu, and established himself as a joint ruler, Viga Khan. He sent his vassals Gundagan and Liang Wenxiu to enter the imperial court together, expressing his willingness to be a vassal of the imperial court, not to cut his hair, and to wait for the imperial command.

古文：乙卯，命京兆少尹临漳源休册顿莫贺为武义成功可汗。
现代文：乙卯，德宗命令京兆少尹临漳人源休册命顿莫贺为武义成功可汗。
English: At the same time, Emperor Dezong ordered Jingzhao Shosho Yin Linyi to cancel the record of human resources, and designated Moga as the successful khan of Wuyi.

古文：秋，七月，丙寅，邵州贼帅王国良降。
现代文：秋季七月，丙寅，邵州贼寇头领王国良归降。
English: In the autumn of July, Xiong Yin, the leader of the Thieves and Robbers of Shao Zhou, surrendered to Wang Guoliang.

古文：国良本湖南牙将，观察使辛京杲使戍武冈，以扞西原蛮。
现代文：王国良本是湖南牙将，湖南观察使辛京杲让他驻守武冈，以便抗御西原蛮。
English: Wang Guoliang was originally a Hunan commander, and the Hunan Observer ordered Xin Jingyi to station him in Wugang in order to resist the barbarians from the West.

古文：京杲贪暴，国良家富，京杲以死罪加之。
现代文：辛京杲贪婪残暴，知道王国良家殷富，便将死罪加到王国良身上。
English: Xin Jingyao was greedy and cruel. Knowing that Wang Guoliang's family was wealthy, he imposed the death penalty on Wang Guoliang.

古文：国良惧，据县叛，与西原蛮合，聚众千人，侵掠州县，濒湖千里，咸被其害。
现代文：王国良害怕，便占据武冈县城，发起叛乱。他与西原蛮汇合，聚集了一千人，侵犯劫掠州县，沿洞庭湖千里之内，都受到他的侵害。
English: Wang Guoliang was afraid, so he occupied the city of WuGang County and launched a rebellion. He and XiHuan bravely converged, gathered a thousand people, invaded and plundered the county, and within a thousand miles along the Dongting Lake, they were all invaded by him.

古文：诏荆、黔、洪、桂诸道合兵讨之，连年不能克。
现代文：德宗诏令荆、黔、洪、桂诸道合兵讨伐王国良，但是连年不能取胜。
English: Emperor Dezong ordered Jing, Yao, Hong and Gui to join forces to fight against Wang Guoliang, but they could not win for several years.

古文：及曹王皋为湖南观察使，曰： 驱疲，诛反仄，非策之得者也。 
现代文：及至曹王李皋出任湖南观察使，他说： 逼迫疲困的百姓诛杀反叛，这不是好办法。 
English: When Cao Wang Lijun took up the post of Hunan observation envoy, he said: "It is not a good way to force the exhausted people to fight and kill the rebels.

古文：乃遗国良书，言： 将军非敢为逆，欲救死耳。
现代文：他写了一封书信给王国良，说： 将军并不敢背叛朝廷，只想自救一死罢了。
English: He wrote a letter to Wang Guoliang, saying: "The general did not dare to betray the imperial court, he only wanted to save his own skin.

古文：我与将军俱为辛京杲所构，我已蒙圣朝湔洗，何心复加兵刃于将军乎！
现代文：我和将军都遭受辛京杲的罗织陷害，我已蒙圣明的朝廷洗刷冤屈，怎么会忍心对将军以兵刃相加呢！
English: Both I and the general have suffered from the sinister plots of the imperial court. I have been cleared of any wrongdoing by the sacred imperial court. How could I bear to raise my sword against the general?

古文：将军遇我，不速降，后悔无及！ 
现代文：将军遇上了我，如果不肯快快归降，后悔就来不及了。 
English: The general has met me, and if he does not quickly surrender, it will be too late to regret it.

古文：国良且喜且惧，遣使乞降，犹疑未决。
现代文：王国良又喜欢，又害怕，对于派遣使者请降与否，迟疑不决。
English: Wang Guoliang liked it and was afraid of it. He hesitated to send an envoy to ask for surrender.

古文：皋乃假为使者，从一骑，越五百里，抵国良壁，鞭其门，大呼曰： 我曹王也，来受降！ 
现代文：于是，李皋扮作使者，只让一人骑马跟随，奔走五百里，抵达王国良的营垒，鞭打营门，大声喊道： 我是曹王，快来受降吧！ 
English: As a result, disguised as an envoy, Li Yao only allowed one person to follow him on horseback, ran five hundred miles, arrived at Wang Guoliang's camp, whipped the camp gate, and shouted loudly: I am Cao Wang, come quickly and accept surrender!

古文：举军大惊。
现代文：全军闻此大惊。
English: The whole army was shocked.

古文：国良趋出，迎拜请罪。
现代文：王国良快步走出来，迎上去，跪拜请罪。
English: Wang Guoliang walked out at a brisk pace, greeted him, and knelt down to ask for forgiveness.

古文：皋执其手，约为兄弟，尽焚攻守之具，散其众，使还农。
现代文：李皋拉着王国良的手，与他结为兄弟，烧掉了所有的进攻与防守的器具，遣散了他的部下，让他们回家务农。
English: Li Yu took Wang Guoliang by the hand and became brothers with him. He burned all the offensive and defensive equipment, dismissed his subordinates, and let them go home to farm.

古文：诏赦国良罪，赐名惟新。
现代文：德宗下诏赦免王国良的罪，赐他名字叫做惟新。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict to pardon Wang Guoliang's sins and gave him a new name, Wo Xin.

古文：辛巳，遥尊上母沈氏为皇太后。
现代文：辛巳，遥尊德宗生母沈氏为皇太后。
English: Soon after, her mother, the Empress Dowager Shenshi, became the Empress Dowager.

古文：荆南节度使庾准希杨炎指，奏忠州刺史刘晏与硃泚书求营救，辞多怨望，又奏召补州兵，欲拒朝命，炎证成之。
现代文：荆南节度使庾准逢迎杨炎的意思，奏称忠州刺史刘晏给朱写信请求营救，讲了许多怨恨的话，又奏称刘晏征召补充忠州的士兵，打算抗拒朝廷的命令。
English: During the Southern Jing Festival, Zhai Jun, who had the intention of welcoming Yang Yan, claimed that Liu Ye, the governor of Chungju, had written to Zhu to request rescue and had spoken many words of resentment. He also claimed that Liu Ye had recruited additional soldiers from Chungju and intended to resist the order of the imperial court.

古文：上密遣中使就忠州缢杀之，己丑，乃下诏赐死。天下冤之。
现代文：杨炎又证明此说不虚。德宗便秘密派遣中使到忠州将刘晏缢杀，到己丑，才下诏赐刘晏自裁，全国人都认为刘晏冤枉。
English: Yang Yan also proved this to be true. Emperor Dezong secretly sent an envoy to Chungju to kill Liu Ye, and only after he was humiliated did he issue an edict giving Liu Ye a free hand. The whole country believed that Liu Ye had been wronged.

古文：初，安、史之乱，数年间，天下户口什亡八九，州县多为籓镇所据，贡赋不入，朝廷府库耗竭，中国多故，戎狄每岁犯边，所在宿重兵，仰给县官，所费不赀，皆倚办于晏。
现代文：当初，安禄山、史思明发动叛乱，数年之间，全国户口散失了十之八九，州县多被藩镇占据，赋税不再上缴朝廷，朝廷的库存消耗殆尽。唐朝变故频仍，戎狄每年侵犯边境，在战事所到之处，驻扎重兵，依靠县官供给给养，所消耗的费用多得不可估量，全靠刘晏办理。
English: At the beginning, An Lushan and Shi Siming launched a rebellion. Within a few years, the national hukou was lost by a factor of ten to nine. Provinces and counties were mostly occupied by towns and villages. Taxes were no longer submitted to the imperial court, and the imperial court's inventory was exhausted. The Tang Dynasty changed frequently, and the troops invaded the border every year, stationed heavy troops wherever the battlefield was, and depended on the county officials for supplies. The costs consumed were immeasurably more, and were all handled by Liu Bei.

古文：晏初为转运使，独领陕东诸道，陕西皆度支领之，末年兼领，未几而罢。
现代文：刘晏最初担任转运使时，只主管陕东各道，陕西各道全由度支主管。到了后期，刘晏兼管度支，但不久便被罢官。
English: At the beginning, when Liu Wei served as the transfer envoy, he was only in charge of the provinces in eastern Shaanxi, while the provinces in western Shaanxi were all managed by the provincial branch. Later, Liu Wei was also in charge of the provincial branch, but he was soon dismissed.

古文：晏有精力，多机智，变通有无，曲尽其妙。
现代文：刘晏精力充沛，机智过人，善于灵活地处理多变的事情，办得恰到好处。
English: Liu Wei is energetic, witty, and good at dealing with changeable things in a flexible manner. He did a perfect job.

古文：常以厚直募善走者，置递相望，觇报四方物价，虽远方，不数日皆达使司，食货轻重之权，悉制在掌握，国家获利，而天下无甚贵甚贱之忧。常以为： 办集众务，在于得人，故必择通敏、精悍、廉勤之士而用之；至于句检簿书、出纳钱谷，事虽至细，必委之士类；吏惟书符牒，不得轻出一言。 常言： 士陷赃贿，则沦弃于时，名重于利，故士多清修；吏虽洁廉，终无显荣，利重于名，故吏多贪污。 
现代文：他常主张： 要想办理好各项事务，关键在于用人得当。所以，必须选择通达敏捷、精明强干、廉洁勤勉的人，对他们加以任用。至于考核簿籍文书，支付钱粮等项工作，是一定要委派读书人去做的；而吏人只能书写公文，不应随便讲话。 他又常说： 读书人陷于贪赃受贿，就会被时世所抛弃，因此看待名声重于财利，所以读书人大多清廉自修；吏人即使廉洁自守，最终还是不能显贵荣华，因此看待财利重于名声，所以吏人大多贪污受贿。 
English: He often said: "In order to handle various affairs well, the key lies in employing people properly. Therefore, it is necessary to select and appoint people who are quick-witted, shrewd, strong-willed, honest and diligent. As for the work of assessing books and documents, paying money and grain, it is necessary to appoint readers to do it; and officials can only write official documents, and should not speak casually. He also often said: Readers who are caught in greed and bribery will be abandoned by the times, so they value reputation more than wealth, so most readers are honest and self-cultivated; officials, even if they are honest and self-preserving,

古文：然惟晏能行之，它人效者终莫能逮。
现代文：然而，只有刘晏才能实行这些主张，别人效法刘晏，到头来还是赶不上刘晏。
English: However, only Liu Hui can implement these ideas. If others follow Liu Hui, they will not be able to catch up with Liu Hui in the end.

古文：其属官虽居数千里外，奉教令如在目前，起居语言，无敢欺绐。
现代文：刘晏的属官即使身在数千里以外，奉行刘晏的教令还是和在刘晏面前一样，讲话办事，都不敢欺骗说谎。
English: Liu Bei's subordinate officials, even if they are thousands of miles away, still follow Liu Bei's edicts as if they were in front of Liu Bei, speak and act, and do not dare to deceive and lie.

古文：当时权贵，或以亲故属之者，晏亦应之，使俸给多少，迁次缓速，皆如其志，然无得亲职事。
现代文：当时，有些权贵人物将亲朋故旧嘱托给刘晏，刘晏也应承他们，领取薪俸的多少，升迁官阶的快慢，都符合他们的意愿，但是刘晏从不让他们亲理职事。
English: At that time, some dignitaries entrusted their relatives and friends to Liu Bei, and Liu Bei should also accept them. The amount of salary received and the speed of promotion were in line with their wishes, but Liu Bei never let them take care of their duties.

古文：其场院要剧之官，必尽一时之选。
现代文：他所管辖的交场、船场、巡院等处，凡是担任要职、处理繁难事务的官员，必定是当时选拔出来的得力人员。
English: All the officials who held important positions and dealt with difficult matters at the junction, shipyard, patrol station and other places under his jurisdiction must have been the most capable people selected at that time.

古文：故晏没之后，掌财赋有声者，多晏之故吏也。
现代文：所以，在刘晏去世之后，掌管财赋的有名人物，多数是刘晏旧日的属下。
English: Therefore, after Liu Bei's death, most of the famous figures in charge of wealth were Liu Bei's former subordinates.

古文：晏又以为户口滋多，则赋税自广，故其理财常以养民为先。
现代文：刘晏还认为：户口增加，赋税征收的范围就会自然拓宽。所以刘晏掌理财务，以关心民间疾苦为先务。
English: Liu Wei also believed that as the number of household accounts increased, the scope of tax collection would naturally expand. Therefore, Liu Wei was in charge of finance, with concern for people's suffering as a priority.

古文：诸道各置知院官，每旬月，具州县雨雪丰歉之状白使司，丰则贵籴，歉则贱粜，或以谷易杂货供官用，及于丰处卖之。
现代文：各道分别设置了巡院的知院官，每过十天、一月，必须陈述所在州县的雨雪丰歉状况，上报转运使司。如果丰收，就以高价买入；如果歉收，就以低价卖出。有时还将谷物换成杂货，供给官用，或者在丰收之地出卖。
English: Every ten days and every January, officials of the inspection stations were set up separately in each province. They had to report the rain and snow situation in their prefectures and report to the forwarding agent. If the harvest was good, they would buy at a high price; if the harvest was poor, they would sell at a low price. Sometimes they would exchange the grain for groceries, supply it to the government, or sell it in the place of a good harvest.

古文：知院官始见不稔之端，先申，至某月须如干蠲免，某月须如干救助，及期，晏不俟州县申请，即奏行之，应民之急，未尝失时，不待其困弊、流亡、饿殍，然后赈之也。
现代文：知院官开始见到年景不丰的苗头，就要先行申明到某月需要蠲免若干赋税，到某月需要救济资助若干物资，到了预定之期，刘晏不待州县申请，便上奏实施，解决百姓的急难，从来不曾错过时机。他并不等到百姓疲困流亡，饥饿而死以后，才去赈济百姓。
English: When the prefectural governor began to see the signs of a bad year, he would first affirm that a certain amount of taxes needed to be exempted in a certain month, and a certain amount of relief materials needed to be subsidized in a certain month. When the scheduled time came, Liu Ye did not wait for the application of the state and county, he would report and implement to solve the urgent difficulties of the people. He never missed the opportunity. He did not wait until the people were exhausted, exiled, and starving to death before going to help the people.

古文：由是民得安其居业，户口蕃息。
现代文：由此，百姓得以安居乐业，户口繁衍起来。
English: As a result, the people were able to live and work in peace, and the number of households increased.

古文：晏始为转运使，时天下见户不过二百万，其季年乃三百馀万；在晏所统则增，非晏所统则不增也。
现代文：刘晏开始担任转运使时，全国的户口不过二百万，到他任职的后期，全国户口发展到三百余万。属于刘晏统辖，户口便增加；不是刘晏统辖的范围，户口就不增加。
English: When Liu Wei began to serve as the transit envoy, the national hukou was only two million. By the latter part of his tenure, the national hukou had grown to more than three million. If it was under Liu Wei's jurisdiction, the hukou would increase; if it was not under Liu Wei's jurisdiction, the hukou would not increase.

古文：其初财赋岁入不过四百万缗，季年乃千馀万缗。
现代文：在刘晏任职的初期，财赋每年收入不过四百万缗，到他任职的后期，每年收入达到一千余万缗。
English: At the beginning of Liu Wei's tenure, the annual income of the financial endowment was only four million baht. By the latter part of his tenure, the annual income reached more than ten million baht.

古文：晏专用榷盐法充军国之用。
现代文：刘晏专门采用盐产专营法来充实军需国用。
English: Liu Wei specially adopted the salt production franchise method to enrich the military supplies for national use.

古文：时自许、汝、郑、邓之西，皆食河东池盐，度支主之；汴、滑、唐、蔡之东，皆食海盐，晏主之。
现代文：当时，自许、汝、郑、邓一带的西面，都食用河东的池盐，由度支主管其事；自汴、滑、唐、蔡一带的东面，都是食用海盐，由刘晏主管其事。
English: At that time, the west side of the Zizhu, Ru, Zheng and Deng areas all consumed the pond salt from the east of the river, and the Du branch was in charge of the matter; the east side of the Zizhu, Slip, Tang and Cai areas were all edible sea salt, and Liu Wei was in charge of the matter.

古文：晏以为官多则民扰，故但于出盐之乡置盐官，收盐户所煮之盐转鬻于商人，任其所之，自馀州县不复置官。
现代文：刘晏认为，官吏多了，百姓就会受到骚扰，所以他只在产盐地设置盐官，收购盐户所煮成的食盐，转卖给商人，听凭商人自行买卖，在产盐地以外的州县不再设置盐官。
English: Liu Wei believed that if there were more officials, the people would be harassed, so he only set up salt officials in salt-producing areas, purchased the salt boiled by salt-producing households and resold it to merchants, and allowed merchants to buy and sell on their own, and no longer set up salt officials in states and counties other than salt-producing areas.

古文：其江岭间去盐乡远者，转官盐于彼贮之。
现代文：对于长江五岭间距离产盐地遥远的地方，便将官盐转运到那里贮存。
English: For places far away from the salt-producing areas between the Yangtze River and the Five Ridges, the salt is transported there for storage.

古文：或商绝盐贵，则减价鬻之，谓之常平盐，官获其利而民不乏盐。
现代文：有时盐商断绝，盐价上涨，便降低盐价出卖，号称常平盐，官方得到了盐产专营的利益，而百姓也不缺少食盐。
English: Sometimes the salt merchants were cut off, the salt price rose, so they reduced the salt price and sold it, known as Changping salt. The government got the benefits of the salt production franchise, and the people did not lack salt.

古文：其始江、淮盐利不过四十万缗，季年乃六百馀万缗，由是国用充足而民不困弊。
现代文：在刘晏任职的初期，长江、淮河地区的盐利不过四十万缗，到他任职的后期，却达到了六百余万缗，由此，国家的经费充足起来，而百姓也不疲困不堪。
English: At the beginning of Liu Wei's tenure, the salt profit in the Yangtze River and Huaihe River regions was only 400,000 baht, but by the latter part of his tenure, it reached more than six million baht. As a result, the state's funds were sufficient, and the people were not exhausted.

古文：其河东盐利，不过八十万缗，而价复贵于海盐。
现代文：至于河东的盐利，不过只有八十万缗，而价格也比海盐更高。
English: As for salt in Hedong, it is only 800,000 baht, and the price is higher than that of sea salt.

古文：先是，运关东谷入长安者，以河流湍悍，率一斛得八斗至者，则为成劳，受优赏。
现代文：在刘晏任职之前，将关东的谷物运送到长安，因为河水流湍急凶险，大抵一斛谷物能运到八斗，便算成功，会受到优厚的奖赏。
English: Before Liu Wei took office, he transported grain from Guandong to Chang'an. Because the river flow was very rapid and dangerous, most of the time, a load of grain could be transported to Badou, which was considered a success and would be rewarded generously.

古文：晏以为江、汴、河、渭，水力不同，各随便宜，造运船，教漕卒，江船达扬州，汴船达河阴，河船达渭口，渭船达太仓，其间缘水置仓，转相受给。
现代文：刘晏认为长江、汴水、黄河、渭水的水流缓急各不相同，依据各处的不同特点，因利乘便，分别制造运送谷物的船只，训练漕运的士卒，长江的船只运抵扬州，汴水的船只运抵河阴，黄河的船只运抵渭水流入黄河的河口，渭水的船只运抵太仓，各地段之间都在水边设置粮仓，由上一段转送给下一段。
English: Liu Wei believed that the water flow priorities of the Yangtze River, Surabaya, the Yellow River and Surabaya are different. According to the different characteristics of each place, due to convenience, vessels for transporting grain are separately manufactured, and paddlers are trained. Yangtze River vessels are transported to Yangzhou, Surabaya vessels are transported to Heyin, Yellow River vessels are transported to the estuary of Surabaya into the Yellow River, and Surabaya vessels are transported to Taicang. Grain silos are set up at the water's edge between each section, and are transferred from the previous section to the next section.

古文：自是每岁运谷或至百馀万斛，无斗升沉覆者。
现代文：自此，每年运送谷物有时能够达到一百多万斛，没有一斗一升在水中沉没。
English: Since then, grain shipments have sometimes reached more than one million baht a year, and not a single bucket or liter has sunk in the water.

古文：船十艘为一纲，使军将领之，十运无失，授优劳，官其人。
现代文：刘晏将十艘船编为一组，叫一纲，让军将带领，运送十次未发生闪失，便给予优厚的慰劳，让此人作官。
English: Liu Bei organized the ten ships into a group, called a group, let the commander lead, transported ten times without a glitch, then gave generous consolation, and let this person serve as an officer.

古文：数运之后，无不斑白者。
现代文：屡次运送以后，运送者便没有不是头发花白的了。
English: After repeated transports, none of the carriers are not gray-haired.

古文：晏于扬子置十场造船，每艘给钱千缗。
现代文：刘晏在扬子设置十处船场造船，每制船一艘，给钱一千缗。
English: Liu Ye set up ten shipyards in Yangtze to build ships, and paid a thousand baht for each ship.

古文：或言 所用实不及半，虚费太多。 
现代文：有人说， 造一艘船的费用实际还用不了一半，白白浪费的钱财太多了。 
English: Some people say that half the cost of building a ship is not actually used, and too much money is wasted.

古文：晏曰： 不然，论大计者固不可惜小费，凡事必为永久之虑。
现代文：刘晏说： 不是这样。办大事，当然不可吝惜小费用，办一切事情都要有长远的考虑。
English: Liu Wei said, "That's not true. To do big things, of course, you can't begrudge small expenses. To do everything, you have to consider the long-term.

古文：今始置船场，执事者至多，当先使之私用无窘，则官物坚牢矣。
现代文：现在船场才开始设置，办事的人很多，应该首先让这些人的私人用度不受困窘，他们为官家制造的物件就会坚固牢靠了。
English: Now that the shipyard is just starting to be set up, there are a lot of people doing things, and we should first of all let these people's private use not be embarrassed, and the objects they make for the government will be solid and reliable.

古文：若遽与之屑屑校计锱铢，安能久行乎！
现代文：如果急于同这些人不厌烦细地计较分文，怎么能够长久地实行下去呢！
English: How can it be implemented for a long time if you are in a hurry with these people and do not get tired of meticulously calculating every penny!

古文：异日必有患吾所给多而减之者；减半以下犹可也，过此则不能运矣。 
现代文：他日一定会有嫌我所付给的工钱多便减少工钱的人，减少费用在半数以下还是可以的，超过此数，漕运就不能维持了。 
English: On another day, there will certainly be people who dislike the wages I pay and would like to reduce the wages. It is still possible to reduce the cost by less than half. If it exceeds this number, the operation cannot be maintained.

古文：其后五十年，有司果减其半。
现代文：此后五十年，有关部门果然将工钱减去一半。
English: Fifty years later, the relevant departments did indeed reduce wages by half.

古文：及咸通中，有司计费而给之，无复羡馀，船益脆薄易坏，漕运遂废矣。
现代文：及至咸通年间，有关部门计算费用支给工钱，造船者不再有余利可图，造出的船只愈发单薄脆弱，容易毁坏，漕运于是废止了。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the relevant departments calculated the costs and paid the wages, the shipbuilders no longer had any surplus profits, and the ships built were increasingly thin, fragile, and easy to destroy. Therefore, the rowing transport was abolished.

古文：晏为人勤力，事无闲剧，必于一日中决之，不使留宿，后来言财利者皆莫能及之。
现代文：刘晏是个勤勉力行的人，无论事务清闲抑或繁剧，都一定要在当天决断完毕，不让事情过夜，后来讲论财利的官员没有能够赶得上他的。
English: Liu Wei is a diligent person. No matter whether the matter is idle or complicated, it must be decided on the same day, and the matter should not be left overnight. Later, the officials who talked about financial interests could not catch up with him.

古文：八月，甲午，振武留后张光晟杀回纥使者突董等九百馀人。
现代文：八月，甲午，振武留后张光晟杀死回纥使者董突等九百余人。
English: In the afternoon of August, after Zhenwu left, Zhang Guangya killed more than nine hundred people, including Hui envoy Dong Zhuo.

古文：突董者，武义可汗之叔父也。
现代文：董突是武义可汗的叔父。
English: Dong Du is the uncle of Wuyi Khan.

古文：代宗之世，九姓胡常冒回纥之名，杂居京师，殖货纵暴，与回纥共为公私之患。
现代文：代宗在位期间，九姓胡经常假冒回纥的名义，杂居在京城，经商时恣意暴虐，与回纥一起，成为公家和私人的祸害。
English: During the reign of the Daizong, nine surnamed Hu often assumed the name of Hui Zong, lived in the capital, and were arbitrarily violent when doing business. Together with Hui Zong, they became a scourge to the public and private.

古文：上即位，命突董尽帅其徒归国，辎重甚盛。
现代文：德宗即位后，命令董突带领同来的人悉数回国，他们带走的包裹很多。
English: After Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, he ordered Dong Du to lead all the people who came with him back to China. They took away many packages.

古文：至振武，留数月，厚求资给，日食肉千斤，他物称是，纵樵牧者暴践果稼，振武人苦之。
现代文：董突一行到振武，逗留了几个月，索求丰厚的供给，每天吃肉一千斤，用去其他物品与此相当，还听任砍柴放牧的回纥人糟踏瓜果和庄稼，振武的百姓都苦于回纥人的骚扰。
English: Dong Du and his party went to Zhenwu and stayed there for several months, demanding rich supplies. They ate a thousand catties of meat a day and spent the same amount on other goods. They also allowed the Uighurs, who cut wood and grazed, to trample on the melons and fruits and crops. The people of Zhenwu all suffered from the harassment of the Uighurs.

古文：光晟欲杀回纥，取其辎重，而畏其众强，未敢发。
现代文：张光晟打算杀死这些回纥人，取得他们的包裹，但又忌惮回纥人多势强，未敢发起行动。
English: Zhang Guangyao planned to kill these Uighurs and get their parcels, but he feared that the Uighurs were more powerful and did not dare to take action.

古文：九姓胡闻其种族为新可汗所诛，多道亡，突董防之甚急。
现代文：九姓胡人听说他们的部族被回纥新即位的可汗所杀戮，很多人半道逃走。
English: When the nine Hu people heard that their tribe had been slaughtered by the newly enthroned Uighur khan, many fled.

古文：九姓胡不得亡，又不敢归，乃密献策于光晟，请杀回纥。
现代文：董突对九姓胡人的防范很严密，九姓胡人既不能逃走，又不敢回来，于是向张光晟秘密献策，请求杀掉回纥人。
English: Dong Du's defense against the nine Hu people was very strict. The nine Hu people could neither escape nor dare to return, so he secretly proposed to Zhang Guangyao and asked him to kill the Hui people.

古文：光晟喜其党类自离，许之。
现代文：张光晟因九姓胡人与回纥人自相背离而感到高兴，便允许九姓胡的请求。
English: Zhang Guangyao was pleased that the nine surnamed Hu and the Uighur people deviated from each other, so he allowed the request of the nine surnamed Hu.

古文：上以陕州之辱，心恨回纥。
现代文：德宗因陕州之辱，心中痛恨回纥人。
English: Because of the disgrace of Shaanxi, Dezong hated Huizong people in his heart.

古文：光晟知上旨，乃奏称： 回纥本种非多，所辅以强者，群胡耳。
现代文：张光晟知道了德宗的心思，便奉称： 回纥本族人数并不很多，能够辅助回纥强盛起来的，是那群胡人而已。
English: Zhang Guangyao knew the thoughts of Dezong, and said: The Hui people are not very numerous. It is only the Hu people who can help the Hui people become strong.

古文：今闻其自相鱼肉，顿莫贺新立，移地健有孽子，及国相、梅钅录各拥兵数千人相攻，国未定。
现代文：现在听说他们之间自相残害，顿莫贺新近即位，登里可汗移地健有个庶生的儿子，还有国相、梅录，都各自拥兵数千人，相互攻杀，国内尚未安定。
English: Now I hear that they are at each other's throats, Don Moga has recently ascended to the throne, the crown prince has an illegitimate son, and the minister of state, Mei Luo, each has thousands of soldiers, attacking and killing each other, and the country is not yet stable.

古文：彼无财则不能使其众，陛下不乘此际除之，乃归其人，与之财，正所谓借寇兵赍盗粮者也。
现代文：他们没有资财便不能指使他们的部众，陛下不乘这一时机铲除他们，却要放他们的人回国，还给他们财物，这正是人们所说的借给寇匪兵马，送给强盗粮秣的做法啊。
English: They had no resources and could not command their men. His Majesty did not take advantage of this opportunity to eradicate them, but wanted to let their men return to the country and return their property. This is exactly what people call the practice of lending soldiers and horses to robbers and giving grain to robbers.

古文：请杀之。 
现代文：请将他们杀掉。 
English: Please kill them.

古文：三奏，上不许。
现代文：三次上奏，德宗都没有许可。
English: After three performances, Dezong did not give permission to perform.

古文：光晟乃使副将过其馆门，故不为礼；突董怒，执而鞭之数十。
现代文：于是，张光晟便让副将在回纥人居住的房舍门前往来，故意做出不礼貌的行为，董突大怒，捉住副将，将他抽打了数十鞭。
English: As a result, Zhang Guangyao asked the vice-commander to go to the door of the building where the Uighurs lived, deliberately made an impolite act, Dong Du flew into a rage, caught the vice-commander, and lashed him with dozens of whips.

古文：光晟勒兵掩击，并群胡尽杀之，聚为京观。
现代文：张光晟统率士兵袭击回纥，连同九姓胡人一齐杀掉，尸首堆积起来，有如高丘。
English: Zhang Guangyao led the soldiers to attack Houyi, together with nine surnamed Hu, and killed them all. The corpses piled up like a hill.

古文：独留二胡，使归国为证，曰： 回纥鞭辱大将，且谋袭据振武，故先事诛之。 
现代文：张光晟只留下一个胡人，让他回国去做见证，以说明： 回纥人用鞭子抽打、羞辱大将，而且图谋偷袭和占领振武城，所以才先行诛杀了这一班人。 
English: Zhang Guangyao left only one Hu man, and let him return to China to bear witness, to explain: The Uighurs beat and humiliated the general with a whip, and attempted to secretly attack and occupy Zhenwu City, so they killed this group of people first.

古文：上征光晟为右金吾将军，遣中使王嘉祥征致信币。
现代文：德宗征召张光晟为右金吾将军，派遣中使王嘉祥前去去致送书信和礼物。
English: Dezong conscripted Zhang Guangyao as the right Kingu general, and sent the middle envoy Wang Jiaxiang to go forward to send letters and gifts.

古文：回纥请得专杀者以复仇，上为之贬光晟为睦王傅以慰其意。
现代文：回纥请求得到擅杀之人，好为族人报仇，德宗因此贬张光晟为睦王傅，以图慰解回纥人。
English: The Uighurs asked for the person who was killed to take revenge for the people of the tribe. As a result, Emperor Dezong demoted Zhang Guangyao to Mugu Wangfu in an attempt to appease the Uighurs.

古文：丁未，加卢龙、陇右、泾原节度使硃泚兼中书令，卢龙、陇右节度如故。
现代文：丁未，德宗加卢龙、陇右、泾原节度使朱兼任中书令衔，仍然担任卢龙、陇右节度使。
English: Ding Wei, De Zongjia, Lulong, Zou Yu, and Zou Yuan also held the title of Zhongshirong, and still served as Lulong and Zou Yu.

古文：以舒王谟为四镇、北庭行军、泾原节度大使，以泾州牙前兵马使河中姚令言为留后。
现代文：任命舒王李谟为四镇、北庭行营、泾原节度大使，任命泾州牙前兵马使河中人姚令言为留后。
English: Li Mu, the King of Shu, was appointed as the ambassador of the Four Towns, Beiting Xingyuan, and Yuyuan Festival, and Yao Lingyan, the middle-of-the-river person, was appointed as the ambassador of the Ancestral Soldiers and Horses of Zhangzhou.

古文：谟，邈之子也，早孤，上子之。
现代文：李谟是李邈的儿子，早年丧父，德宗收他为儿子。
English: Li Moo was the son of Li Yao. He lost his father at an early age, and Dezong adopted him as his son.

古文：癸丑，诏赠太后父、祖、兄、弟官，及自馀宗族男女拜官封邑者告第告身，凡百二十有七通；中使以马负而赐之。
现代文：癸丑，德宗颁诏赠给太后的父、祖、兄、弟官职，并为其余的太后族人男女颁发拜官职、封食邑的告第告身，共计一百二十七通。中使用马驼着它们，去颁赐给每个人。
English: At that time, Dezong issued an imperial edict to the father, father-in-law, brother, and younger brother of the empress dowager, and issued an imperial edict to the remaining men and women of the empress dowager's tribe to worship the official post, to fast, and to give up their lives, a total of 127 pieces. They used a horse camel to carry them and give them to everyone.

古文：九月，壬午，将作奏宣政殿廊坏，十月魁冈，未可修。
现代文：九月，壬午，将作奏称宣政殿的廓庑毁坏了，而十月在十二星次中属戌宫，为北斗魁星之气，不能进行修葺。
English: In September, at noon, the gable roof of the Xuanzheng Palace, which was used as a sounding board, was destroyed, and in October, in the 12th lunar month, it belonged to the Palace of the Dragon, which was the spirit of the Big Dipper, and could not be repaired.

古文：上曰： 但不妨公害人，则吉矣。安问时日！ 
现代文：德宗说： 只要不妨害公家和百姓，那便是吉祥了，何必卜问时日凶吉呢！ 
English: Dezong said: As long as it does not harm the public and the people, it is auspicious. Why do you need to ask if the day is unlucky?

古文：即命修之。
现代文：随即命令修葺廓庑。
English: He then ordered that the curtain wall be repaired.

古文：大历以前，赋敛出纳俸给皆无法，长吏得专之；重以元、王秉政，货赂公行，天下不按赃吏者殆二十年。
现代文：在大历以前，征税、收支、薪俸都没有法度，高级官员得以专擅其事，加上元载、王缙执掌朝政，贿赂公行，全国不再按察贪赃官吏几达二十年。
English: Prior to the advent of the Gregorian calendar, there were no laws governing taxation, income and expenditure, or salaries, and high-ranking officials were able to do as they pleased. Coupled with the fact that the Yuan Dynasty and Wang Qian were in charge of the imperial government and engaged in bribery of public officials, there was no national monitoring of official corruption for almost 20 years.

古文：惟江西观察使路嗣恭案虔州刺史源敷翰，流之。
现代文：只有江西观察使路嗣恭按察虔州刺史源敷翰，判他流刑。
English: It was only the Jiangxi observation that made Lu Jigong sentence him to exile.

古文：上以宣歙观察使薛邕，文雅旧臣，征为左丞。
现代文：德宗因宣歙观察使薛邕是位温文尔雅的老臣，征召他担任左丞。
English: Because of his observation of Xuan Zong, Dezong thought that Xue Zong was a mild-mannered and elegant veteran minister, and conscripted him to serve as the Left Wing Commander.

古文：邕去宣州，盗隐官物以巨万计，殿中侍御史员发之。
现代文：薛邕离开宣州时，盗窃隐瞒官家财物数以巨万计，殿中侍御史员揭发了他。
English: When Xue Yao left Xuanzhou, he stole and concealed tens of thousands of government property. The palace historian exposed him.

古文：冬，十月，己亥，贬连山尉。
现代文：冬季，十月己亥，德宗将薛邕贬为连山县尉。
English: In the winter, in October Jihai, Dezong demoted Xue Yao to the rank of Lianshan County Lieutenant.

古文：于是州县始畏朝典，不敢放纵。
现代文：自此，州县开始畏惧朝廷法典，不敢任意妄为。
English: From then on, prefectures and counties began to fear the Imperial Code and did not dare to act arbitrarily.

古文：上初即位，疏斥宦官，亲任朝士，而张涉以儒学入侍，薛邕以文雅登朝，继以赃败。
现代文：德宗即位之初，疏远摈斥宦官，亲近任用朝官。但是，张涉因长于儒学而入侍禁中，薛邕因温文尔雅而登上朝堂，却相继由于贪赃而垮台。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of Emperor Dezong, he distanced himself from the eunuchs and was close to the appointed imperial officials. However, Zhang Zhan was placed under house arrest because he was good at Confucianism, and Xue Ying ascended to the imperial court because of his mild manners, but they were successively brought down by greed.

古文：宦官武将得以借口，曰： 南牙文臣赃动至巨万，而谓我曹浊乱天下，岂非期罔邪！ 
现代文：宦官武将得到借口，他们说： 南衙文臣贪赃动不动就达到巨万，反而说我辈把国家搞混乱了，这难道不是欺人之谈吗！ 
English: The eunuchs and generals were given an excuse. They said, "Nanluo Wenshen's corruption has reached tens of thousands of yuan. On the contrary, they said that our generation has made a mess of the country. Isn't this a lie?"

古文：于是上心始疑，不知所倚杖矣。
现代文：由此，德宗开始心怀疑虑，不知道依靠谁人为好。
English: As a result, Dezong began to have doubts and did not know who to rely on.

古文：中书舍人高参请分遣诸沈访求太后，庚寅，以睦王述为奉迎使，工部尚书乔琳副之，又命诸沈四人为判官，与中使分行诸道求之。
现代文：中书舍人高参请求分别派遣沈氏诸人去寻访太后。庚寅，德宗任命睦王李述为奉迎使，使工部尚书乔琳为副使，又让沈氏四人任判官，与中使分别巡行各道，寻找皇太后。
English: Gao Gan, the high-ranking official of the Chinese Academy of Letters, requested that various people from the Shen clan be sent separately to search for the empress dowager. Goyang and Dezong appointed Prince Mutsu Li Shu as the envoy to welcome the empress dowager, Shang Shu Jolin of the Ministry of Industry as the deputy envoy, and four people from the Shen clan as judges, and the envoy and the vice-envoy went on separate patrols to search for the empress dowager.

古文：十一月，初令待制官外，更引朝集使二人，访以时政得失，远人疾苦。
现代文：十一月，首次命令在待制官以外，再推荐出朝集使二人，向他们询问当时朝政的得失，以及边远各地人民的疾苦。
English: In November, for the first time, an order was issued to recommend two more envoys to the imperial court, in addition to the officials in waiting, to ask them about the gains and losses of the imperial government at that time, as well as the sufferings of the people in remote areas.

古文：先是，公主下嫁者，舅姑拜之，妇不答。
现代文：先前，公主下嫁，公婆要对她行拜礼，而媳妇不必答礼。
English: Previously, when a princess got married, her in-laws had to perform a religious service for her, but her daughter-in-law did not have to respond.

古文：上命礼官定公主拜见舅、姑及婿之诸父、兄、姊之仪，舅、姑坐受于中堂，诸父、兄、姊立受于东序，如家人礼。
现代文：德宗命令礼官制定公主拜见公婆以及夫婿的叔伯、兄姊的礼仪，规定公婆坐在中堂接受公主拜见，夫婿的兄姊站在东厢房中接受公主拜见，就和凡人家庭的礼节一样。
English: Emperor Dezong ordered the etiquette officials to formulate the etiquette for the princess to meet her in-laws and her husband's uncle and elder sister, stipulating that the in-laws should sit in the middle hall to receive the princess, and the brother and sister of the husband should stand in the east wing room to receive the princess, just like the etiquette of an ordinary family.

古文：有县主将嫁，择用丁丑。
现代文：有位亲王的女儿县主将要出嫁，选定以丁丑为期。
English: The daughter of a prince, the head of the county, is about to be married.

古文：是日，上之从父妹卒，命罢之。
现代文：此日，德宗的叔伯妹妹去世，便命令县主停止出嫁。
English: On this day, Dezong's uncle and sister passed away, so he ordered the county head to stop the wedding.

古文：有司奏： 供张已备，且殇服不足废事。 
现代文：有关部门奏称： 陈设已经准备好了，而且未成年人的丧事是不足以废止婚礼的。 
English: The authorities said in a statement: "The stage is set and the death of a minor is not enough to annul the marriage.

古文：上曰： 尔爱其费，我爱其礼。 
现代文：德宗说： 你们珍惜县主出嫁的费用，我却珍惜礼节。 
English: Dezong said, "You cherish the expenses of the county head's wedding, but I cherish the etiquette.

古文：卒罢之。
现代文：还是阻止了县主在此日出嫁。
English: They still prevented the county head from getting married on this day.

古文：至德以来，国家多事，公主、郡、县主多不以时嫁。
现代文：自至德年间以来，国家变故频仍，公主、郡主、县主不能按时出嫁的人很多，有的人头发都变得花白了。
English: Since the 1950s, there have been frequent changes in the country, and there are still many princesses, princesses, and county chiefs who cannot get married on time. Some people's hair has become gray.

古文：有华发者，虽居禁中，或十年不见天子。
现代文：她们虽然在宫中居住，却有人长达十年之久看不到皇上。
English: Although they live in the palace, some have not seen the emperor for as long as ten years.

古文：上始引见诸宗女，尊者致敬，卑者存慰，悉命嫁之。
现代文：德宗命人引导宗室诸女前来会见，对年长于己的表示敬意，对年少于己的予以安慰，让她们全都嫁了出去。
English: Emperor Dezong ordered a person to guide the daughters of the family to come to meet, to show respect to those who were older than him, to comfort those who were younger than him, and let them all get married.

古文：所赍小大之物，必经心目。
现代文：对宗室诸女所携带的物品，无论大小，德宗都一定要亲自经心过目。
English: The items carried by the women of the family, no matter how big or small, had to be personally inspected by Dezong.

古文：己卯、庚辰二日，嫁岳阳等凡十一县主。
现代文：己卯、庚辰两天，德宗将岳阳等九十一位县主嫁了出去。
English: Two days after Jiwu and Gengchen, Dezong married off Yueyang and the other ninety-one county lords.

古文：吐蕃见韦伦再至，益喜。
现代文：吐蕃人看到韦伦再次到来，益发喜欢。
English: When the people of Tubo saw Waylon coming again, they liked him even more.

古文：十二月，辛卯朔，伦还，吐蕃遣其相论饮明思等入贡。
现代文：十二月，辛卯朔，韦伦回返朝廷，吐蕃便派遣国相论钦明思等人入朝进贡。
English: In December, Xin Yushuo and Weilun returned to the imperial court, and Tubo sent the Minister of State, Qin Mingshi, and others to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：是岁，册太子母王氏为淑妃。
现代文：这一年，德宗册立太子的生母王氏为淑妃。
English: In that year, the birth mother of the crown prince of the German dynasty, the Wang clan, was a concubine.

古文：天下税户三百八万五千七十六，籍后七十六万八千馀人，税钱一千八十九万八千馀缗，谷二百一十五万七千馀斛。
现代文：全国税户计有三百零八万五千零七十六户，在籍士兵计有七十六万八千余人，征收税钱计有一千零八十九万八千余缗，征收谷物计有二百一十五万七千余斛。
English: Nationwide, there were 3,085,076 tax-paying households, more than 768,000 enlisted soldiers, more than 10,898,000 baht of taxes collected, and more than 2,157,000 baht of grain collected.

古文：建中二年辛酉，公元七八一年春，正月，戊辰，成德节度使李宝臣薨。
现代文：建中二年春季，正月，戊辰，成德节度使李宝臣去世。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianzhong, the first month of the year, Bo Chen, Chengde Festival, Li Baochen passed away.

古文：宝臣欲以军府传其子行军司马惟岳，以其年少暗弱，豫诛诸将之难制者深州刺史张献诚等，至有十馀人同日死者。
现代文：李宝臣打算将军府主帅的位子传给他的儿子行军司马李惟岳，因为李惟岳年纪尚小，愚昧软弱，便事先诛杀了难以辖制的部下将领深州刺史张献诚等人，甚至有十余人同一天被杀。
English: Li Baochen planned to pass on the position of the commander of the general headquarters to his son, Marching Sima Li Wei Yue. Because Li Wei Yue was still young, ignorant and weak, he killed his subordinate generals, who were difficult to control, such as Zhang Xiancheng and others in advance, and even more than ten people were killed on the same day.

古文：宝臣召易州刺史张孝忠，孝忠不往，使其弟孝节召之。
现代文：李宝臣传召易州刺史张孝忠，张孝忠不肯前往，李宝臣又让他的弟弟张孝节去传召他。
English: Li Baochen summoned Zhang Xiaozhong, the governor of Yizhou. Zhang Xiaozhong refused to go, and Li Baochen asked his brother Zhang Xiaojie to summon him.

古文：孝忠使孝节谓宝臣曰： 诸将何罪，连颈受戮！
现代文：张孝忠让张孝节转告李宝臣说： 各位将领究竟犯了什么罪，接连不断地遭到杀戮！
English: Zhang Xiaozhong asked Zhang Xiaojie to tell Li Baochen: What crime did the generals commit, they were killed one after another!

古文：孝忠惧死，不敢往，亦不敢叛，正如公不入朝之意耳。 
现代文：我张孝忠怕死，既不敢前往，也不敢反叛，正如你不肯入朝当官一样。 
English: I, Zhang Xiaozhong, am afraid of death. I neither dare to go nor dare to rebel, just as you refuse to become an official in the imperial court.

古文：孝节泣曰： 如此，孝节必死。 
现代文：张孝节哭着说： 如果这样，我一定被杀。 
English: Zhang Xiaojie cried and said, "If this happens, I will definitely be killed."

古文：孝忠曰： 往则并命，我在此，必不敢杀汝。 
现代文：张孝忠说： 如果前往，你我便会一齐丧命，有我在这儿，李宝臣一定不敢杀你。 
English: Zhang Xiaozhong said, "If you go, you and I will die together. If I am here, Li Baochen will not dare to kill you."

古文：遂归，宝臣亦不之罪也。
现代文：于是，张孝节回到成德，李宝臣也没有加罪于他。
English: As a result, Zhang Xiaojie returned to Chengde, and Li Baochen did not punish him.

古文：兵马使王武俊，位卑而有勇，故宝臣特亲爱之，以女妻其子士真，士真复厚结其左右。
现代文：兵马使王武俊职位低下，但是作战勇敢，所以李宝臣特别亲近受护他，还把女儿嫁给他的儿子王士真为妻，王士真又深深结纳了李宝臣身边的人。
English: The soldiers and horses made Wang Wujun lower in rank, but he fought bravely, so Li Baochen was particularly close to him. He also married his daughter to his son Wang Shizhen as his wife. Wang Shizhen also deeply accepted the people around Li Baochen.

古文：故孝忠、武俊独得全。
现代文：所以，唯有张孝忠和王武俊得以保全。
English: Therefore, only Zhang Xiaozhong and Wang Wujun were preserved.

古文：及薨，孔目官胡震，家僮王它奴劝惟岳匿丧二十馀日，诈为宝臣表，求令惟岳继袭，上不许。
现代文：到李宝臣去世，孔目官胡震和家仆王他奴劝告李惟岳隐瞒丧事二十余天，假冒李宝臣上表，请求让李惟岳袭任节度使。
English: When Li Baochen died, Confucius official Hu Zhen and his servant Wang Ta Nu advised Li Wei Yue to conceal the funeral for more than 20 days, pretend to be Li Baochen's last table, and request that Li Wei Yue succeed him as the festival envoy.

古文：遣给事中汲人班宏往问宝臣疾，且谕之。
现代文：德宗不予许可，派遣给事中汲县人班宏前往问候李宝臣的病情，并进行开导。
English: Dezong did not give permission, and sent Banhong, a man from Zhongqu County, to greet Li Baochen's illness and enlighten him.

古文：惟岳厚赂宏，宏不受，还报。
现代文：李惟岳以厚资贿赂班宏，班宏不肯接受，回朝上报。
English: Li Wei Yue bribed Banhong with a large sum of money, but Banhong refused to accept it and went back to the North to report.

古文：惟岳乃发丧，自为留后，使将佐共奏求旌节，上又不许。
现代文：李惟岳于是为李宝臣发丧，自称留后，让将领佐吏连名上奏，请求颁赐节度使的旌节，德宗又没有许可。
English: Li Wei Yue then held a funeral for Li Baochen, claiming to stay behind, and asked the generals and aides to play their names in succession, requesting to be awarded the festival of the festival envoy, but De Zong did not have permission.

古文：初，宝臣与李正己、田承嗣、梁崇义相结，期以土地传之子孙。
现代文：当初，李宝臣与李正己、田承嗣、梁崇义深相结纳，约定将所管辖的土地传给子孙后代。
English: At first, Li Baochen and Li Zhengyi, Tian Chengzhi, and Liang Chongyi had a deep understanding, and agreed to pass on the land under their jurisdiction to future generations.

古文：故承嗣之死，宝臣力为之请于朝，使以节授田悦；代宗从之。
现代文：所以，田承嗣死时，李宝臣竭力向朝廷请求，让朝廷将节度使的旌节授给田悦，代宗听从了他的建议。
English: Therefore, when Tian Chengzhi died, Li Baochen tried his best to ask the imperial court to grant Tian Yue the imperial command of the festival, and the daizong followed his suggestion.

古文：悦初袭位，事朝廷礼甚恭，河东节度使马燧表其必反，请先为备。
现代文：田悦最初袭任节度使时，事奉朝廷的礼节很是恭谨，河东节度使马燧上表说田悦定会反叛，请朝廷预先作好防备。
English: When Tian Yue initially assumed the post of festival envoy, the etiquette of serving the imperial court was very respectful. The Hedong Festival made Ma Yao publicly say that Tian Yue would definitely rebel, and asked the imperial court to prepare in advance.

古文：至是悦屡为惟岳请继袭，上欲革前弊，不许。
现代文：至此，田悦屡次为李惟岳请求继任，但德宗准备革除以往的弊端，不肯答应。
English: At this point, Tian Yue repeatedly requested succession for Li Wei Yue, but Dezong was ready to eliminate the past drawbacks and refused to agree.

古文：或谏曰： 惟岳己据父业，不因而命之，必为乱。 
现代文：有人劝谏说： 李惟岳已经据有父业，若不顺水推舟任命他，准会酿成变乱。 
English: Some people tried to persuade him, saying, "Li Wei Yue has already established his father's business, if you don't appoint him smoothly, it will surely lead to chaos."

古文：上曰： 贼本无资以为乱，皆藉我土地，假我位号，以聚其众耳。
现代文：德宗说： 寇贼本来没有资格作乱，都是假借着我的土地和职位名号，才得以招聚人马的啊。
English: Dezong said: Originally, the bandits had no right to make trouble. They were only able to recruit people by falsely using my land and job title.

古文：曏日因其所欲而命之多矣，而乱益滋。
现代文：往日朝廷顺着他们的欲望来任命他们的事不少了，但是变乱还是日益增长。
English: There have been many cases in the past of the imperial court appointing them according to their desires, but the turmoil is still growing.

古文：是爵命不足以已乱而适足以长乱也。
现代文：这说明爵位的任命不但不足以止息变乱，反而助长变乱。
English: This shows that the appointment of a knighthood is not enough to stop turmoil, but rather contributes to it.

古文：然则惟岳必为乱，命与不命等耳。 
现代文：如果李惟岳一定要发起变乱，任命他与不任命他都一样。 
English: If Li Weiyue is determined to start a revolution, appointing him is the same as not appointing him.

古文：竟不许。
现代文：德宗到底还是没有答应下来。
English: In the end, Taizong was not allowed to compile the anthology.

古文：悦乃与李正己各遣使诣惟岳，潜谋勒兵拒命。
现代文：于是，田悦与李正己各自派遣使者至李惟岳处，暗中策划率兵抗拒朝命。
English: As a result, Tian Yue and Li Zheng himself each sent an envoy to Li Wei Yue's place, secretly planning to lead soldiers to resist the imperial order.

古文：魏博节度副使田庭玠谓悦曰： 尔藉伯父遗业，但谨事朝廷，坐享富贵，不亦善乎！
现代文：魏博节度副使田庭对田悦说： 你凭借着伯父留下的基业，去谨慎地事奉朝廷，坐享富贵，不是很好吗！
English: Wei Bo, vice-commander of the Wei Bo Festival, said to Tian Yue, "Isn't it great that you can use the inheritance left by your uncle to discreetly serve the imperial court and enjoy wealth?

古文：奈何无故与恒、郓共为叛臣！
现代文：为什么无缘无故地与成德、淄青一起去作反叛之臣呢！
English: Why did he go along with Chengde and Ao Qing as a rebel minister for no reason?

古文：尔观兵兴以来，逆乱者谁能保其家乎？
现代文：你看战事兴起以来，叛逆变乱的人有谁能够保全自己的家族呢？
English: You see, since the outbreak of the war, who among the rebels and mutineers has been able to protect his family?

古文：必欲行尔之志，可先杀我，无使我见田氏之族灭也。 
现代文：如果你一定要按你的想法去做，可以先把我杀了，别让我看见田氏的举族灭亡。 
English: If you must do as you think, you can kill me first, don't let me see the Tian clan perish.

古文：因称病卧家。
现代文：于是他自称有病，躺在家中。
English: So he pretended to be ill and stayed at home.

古文：悦自往谢之，庭玠闭门不内，竟以忧卒。
现代文：田悦亲自前去向田庭道歉，田庭关上家门，不肯接待田悦。
English: Tian Yue personally went to apologize to Tian Tian, who closed his door and refused to receive Tian Yue.

古文：成德判官邵真闻李惟岳之谋，泣谏曰： 先相公受国厚恩，大夫衰绖之中，遽欲负国，此甚不可。 
现代文：田庭最终因忧郁而死。成德判官邵真听到李惟岳的图谋，哭着规劝说： 先相公蒙受国家深厚的恩典，大夫您在服丧期间，忙着准备背叛国家，这种做法太不对了。 
English: When Judge Chengde Shao Zhen heard Li Weiyue's plot, he cried and tried to persuade him: The Prime Minister has received profound grace from the state, doctor, during your time of mourning, you were busy preparing to betray the country, this is so wrong.

古文：劝惟岳执李正己使者送京师，且请讨之，曰： 如此，朝廷嘉大夫之忠，则旄节庶几可得。 
现代文：邵真劝说李惟岳将李正己的使者抓起来，送往京城，并且请求讨伐李正己。他说： 这样做，朝廷会嘉许大夫的忠心，节度使的旌节也许还有得到的希望。 
English: Shao Zhen persuaded Li Wei Yue to arrest Li Zhengyi's envoy, send him to Beijing, and request a crackdown on Li Zhengyi. He said: "By doing so, the imperial court will commend the doctor's loyalty, and there may still be hope for the doctor's loyalty.

古文：惟岳然之，使真草奏。
现代文：李惟岳认为邵真说得对，便让邵真起草奏书。
English: Li Weiyue thought that Shao Zhen was right, so he asked Shao Zhen to draft a report.

古文：长史毕华曰： 先公与二道结好二十馀年，奈何一旦弃之！
现代文：长史毕华说： 先公与成德、淄青交好了二十余年。怎么能一下子舍弃了他们！
English: Changshi Bihua said, "My grandfather had been friends with Chengde and Gongqing for more than 20 years. How could he abandon them all of a sudden!

古文：且虽执其使，朝廷未必见信。
现代文：而且，即使将二镇的使者抓起来，朝廷也不一定就相信你。
English: Moreover, even if you arrest the emissaries of the two towns, the court will not necessarily believe you.

古文：正己忽来袭我，孤军无援，何以待之！ 
现代文：李正己突然来袭击我军，我军孤立无援，这又怎么办呢！ 
English: Li Zheng suddenly came to attack our army, and our army was alone and helpless. What should we do?

古文：惟岳又从之。
现代文：李惟岳又听从了毕华的意见。
English: Li Wei Yue also listened to Bi Hua's opinion.

古文：前定州刺史谷从政，惟岳之舅也，有胆略，颇读书，王武俊等皆敬惮之，为宝臣所忌，从政乃称病杜门。
现代文：前定州刺史谷从政是李惟岳的舅父，他有胆识，有谋略，颇读过一些书，王武俊等人对他都很敬畏。由于被李宝臣猜忌，谷从政便闭门称病。
English: The former governor of Dingzhou, Gu Zongcheng, was Li Weiyue's uncle in politics. He had courage, strategy, and read a lot of books. Wang Wujun and others were in awe of him. Because he was suspected by Li Baochen, Gu Zongcheng called in sick behind closed doors.

古文：憔岳亦忌之，不与图事，日夜独与胡震、王他奴等计议，多散金帛以悦将士。
现代文：李惟岳也猜忌他，有事不肯与他谋划。李惟岳整日专门与胡震、王他奴等人商量，多发放钱财布帛，以便取悦将士。
English: Li Wei Yue was also suspicious of him and refused to make any plans with him. Li Wei Yue spent the whole day discussing with Hu Zhen, Wang and others, and gave out more money and cloth in order to please the soldiers.

古文：从政往见憔岳曰： 今海内无事，自上国来者，皆言天子聪明英武，志欲致太平，深不欲诸侯子孙专地。
现代文：谷从政去见李惟岳说： 当今国内没有事端，从京城来的人都说皇上聪慧明达，英俊威武，立志要再造太平之世，十分不愿方镇的子孙专擅一方。
English: Gu went to see Li Wei Yue from politics and said: Today, there is no trouble in the country. People from Beijing all say that the emperor is intelligent, brilliant, handsome and powerful. He is determined to recreate a peaceful world and is very reluctant to let Fangzhen's children and grandchildren play one side.

古文：尔今首违诏命，天子必遣诸道致讨。
现代文：你现在头一个违抗诏命，皇上定然派遣各道兵马前来讨伐你。
English: You are now the first to disobey the imperial edict, and the emperor is determined to send soldiers and horses from all the provinces to fight you.

古文：将士受赏之际，皆言为大夫尽死。苟一战不胜，各惜其生，谁不离心！
现代文：你部下的将士接受了犒赏，都说要为你尽力至死，而如果一战不能取胜，人们各自顾惜自己的性命，谁不背叛你呢！
English: The soldiers under your command accepted the reward and all said that they would do their best to die for you, but if you can't win a battle, and people each take care of their own lives, who wouldn't betray you!

古文：大将有权者，乘危伺便，咸思取尔以自为功矣。
现代文：通达权变的大将，乘你危难之际，寻找方便的时机，便都想捉住你而自己立功。
English: The generals with access to power changes, taking advantage of your time of crisis, looking for a convenient opportunity, they all want to catch you and make their own contribution.

古文：且先相公所杀高班大将，殆以百数，挠败之际，其子弟欲复仇者，庸可数乎！
现代文：况且，先公所杀死的高职位的大将几乎上百人了，在你遭受挫败之际，死者子弟中要报仇的，难道是屈指可数的吗！
English: Moreover, there are almost a hundred high-ranking generals killed by your father-in-law. In the face of your defeat, are there only a handful of the dead's sons who want to take revenge?

古文：又，相公与幽州有隙，硃滔兄弟常切齿于我，今天子必以为将。
现代文：再者，先公与幽州结下嫌隙，朱滔兄弟一贯对我们恨得咬牙切齿，如今皇上准会任命他们为将领的。
English: Furthermore, the first lord and Yuzhou have a grudge against each other. The Zhu Tao brothers have always hated us to the teeth. Now the emperor will surely appoint them as generals.

古文：滔与吾击析相闻，计其闻命疾驱，若虎狼之得兽也，何以当之！
现代文：朱滔与我们之间近得连夜间敲打木梆报时的声音都可以相互听到，一旦朱滔接受朝廷的命令，急速前来，那就如同虎狼追捕野兽一般，你又如何抵挡呢！
English: Zhu Tao and I are so close to each other that we can even hear each other's voices at night when we knock on the wooden posts to announce the news. Once Zhu Tao accepts the order of the imperial court and comes quickly, it will be like a tiger and a wolf chasing a beast. How can you resist?

古文：昔田承嗣从安、史父子同反，身经百战，凶悍闻于天下，违诏举兵，自谓无敌。
现代文：过去，田承嗣跟随安禄山、安庆绪、史思明、史朝义父子一起造反，身经百战，凶猛骠悍，闻名天下，违抗诏命，发起战端，自认为没有敌手。
English: In the past, Tian Chengzhi followed An Lushan, An Qingxu, Shi Siming and Shi Chaoyi, father and son, to rebel together. He went through hundreds of battles, was fierce and powerful, and was famous all over the world. He disobeyed the imperial edict and initiated the battle, thinking that he had no opponent.

古文：及卢子期就擒，吴希光归国，承嗣指天垂泣，身无所措。
现代文：及至卢子期被擒获，吴希光归顺国家以后，田承嗣却只好对天而泣，不知将自身安放何处了。
English: After Lu Ziqi was captured and Wu Xiguang surrendered to the state, Tian Heji had no choice but to cry to the heavens, not knowing where to place himself.

古文：赖先相公按兵不进，且为之祈请，先帝宽仁，赦而不诛，不然，田氏岂有种乎！
现代文：全靠先公按兵不进，而且为他求情，先帝宽厚仁德，予以赦免，田承嗣才未遭到诛杀，如果不是这样，田氏还能留下根苗吗！
English: It was all thanks to the forefather, who did not advance with his army, but also begged for his forgiveness, and the forefather, who was a generous and benevolent emperor, who pardoned him. It was only because of this that Tian's heir was not killed. If this were not the case, would the Tian clan still be able to survive!

古文：况尔生长富贵，齿发尚少，不更艰危，乃信左右之言，欲效承嗣所为乎！
现代文：何况你生长在富贵之中，年龄还小，没有经受过艰难危苦，但你却听信左右的话，打算效法田承嗣的作法吗！
English: What's more, you grew up in the midst of affluence, you're still young, and you haven't experienced any hardships or hardships, but you're listening to the right and left, and you're planning to follow Tian Heizi's example!

古文：为尔之计，不若辞谢将佐，使惟诚摄领军府，身自入朝，乞留宿卫，因言惟诚且令摄事。
现代文：为你打算，你不如在将佐面前辞去职务，让李惟诚代理掌管军府，你亲身入朝，请求留下来为皇上值宿警卫，同时也说明让李惟诚暂且留下来代理掌管军府之事，对他的加恩任命取决于皇上的意志。
English: As a plan for you, you might as well resign your post in front of the generals and let Li Weicheng take charge of the military office. You personally enter the court and request to stay on duty as the emperor's guard. At the same time, you explain that Li Weicheng should stay on duty and take charge of the military office for the time being. His appointment depends on the emperor's will.

古文：恩命决于圣志，上必悦尔忠义，纵无大位，不失荣禄，永无忧矣。不然，大祸将至，悔之何及。
现代文：皇上必然喜欢你的忠义，即使得不到高位，也不会失去荣耀的禄位，永远消除忧患了，否则，大祸将要到来。
English: The emperor must like your loyalty. Even if you don't get a high position, you won't lose your glorious position, and you will eliminate sorrow forever. Otherwise, a great calamity will come.

古文：吾亦知尔素疏忌我，顾以舅甥之情，事急，不得不言耳！ 
现代文：我也知道你素来疏远猜忌我，但因你我有甥舅之情，事情又已急迫，不能不说了！ 
English: I also know that you have always been distant and suspicious of me, but because you and I have the feelings of nephews, the matter has become urgent, and it must be said!

古文：惟岳及左右见其言切，益恶之。
现代文：李惟岳见谷从政出言切中要害，越发憎恶他。
English: Li Wei Yue Yue hated him more and more after he made a critical remark in politics.

古文：从政乃复归，杜门称病。
现代文：谷从政于是再次回到家中，闭门称病。
English: As a result, Mr. Gu, who had been in politics, returned home again and declared he was ill behind closed doors.

古文：惟诚者，惟岳之庶兄也，谦厚好书，得众心，其母妹为李正己子妇。
现代文：李惟诚是李惟岳异母庶兄，他谦和厚道，喜欢读书，能得人心，他的同母妹做了李正己的儿媳妇。
English: Li Wei Cheng is the half-brother of Li Wei Yue, he is humble and kind, likes to read, and can win people's hearts. His half-sister became Li Zhengji's daughter-in-law.

古文：是日，惟岳送惟诚于正己，正己使复姓张，遂仕淄青。
现代文：此日，李惟岳将李惟诚送到李正己那里，李正己让李惟诚恢复姓张，于是他便在淄青做官了。
English: On this day, Li Weiyue sent Li Weicheng to Li Zhengji. Li Zhengji asked Li Weicheng to restore the surname Zhang, so he became an official in Jiaqing.

古文：惟岳遣王它奴诣从政家，察其起居，从政饮药而卒；且死，曰： 吾不惮死，哀张氏今族灭矣！ 
现代文：李惟岳派遣王他奴到谷从政家中去，察看谷从政的活动，谷从政吞服毒药而死。在将死之际，谷从政说： 我不怕死，只是为张氏现在将要遭到灭族之灾而悲哀。 
English: Li Weiyue sent Wang Ta Nu to Gu Zengcheng's home to observe his activities. Gu Zengcheng swallowed poison and died. As he was about to die, Gu Zengcheng said, "I'm not afraid of death, I'm just sad that the Zhang clan is about to be wiped out."

古文：刘文喜之死也，李正己、田悦等皆不自安；刘晏死，正己等益惧，相谓曰： 我辈罪恶，岂得与刘晏比乎！ 
现代文：刘文喜死去，李正己、田悦等人都感到不安；刘晏死去，李正己等人更加恐惧。他们交谈说： 我辈的罪恶，难道能够同刘晏相比吗！ 
English: When Liu Wenxi died, Li Zhengyi, Tian Yue and others were uneasy; when Liu Hui died, Li Zhengyi and others were even more afraid. They talked and said: Can the sins of our generation be compared to Liu Hui?

古文：会汴州城隘，广之，东方人讹言： 上欲东封，故城汴州。 
现代文：适逢汴州因城内狭窄，需要拓广城垣，东方人便传出谣言： 皇上准备向东面开拓封疆了，所以才修筑汴州城。 
English: At a time when Zhangzhou was in need of expanding its walls due to the narrowness of the city, the rumor spread among the easterners: the emperor was preparing to expand the eastern frontiers, so he built Zhangzhou City.

古文：正己惧，发兵万人屯曹州。
现代文：李正己害怕了，发兵一万人，屯驻曹州。
English: Li Zheng himself was afraid and sent ten thousand soldiers to be stationed in Caozhou.

古文：田悦亦完聚为备，与梁崇义、李惟岳遥相应助，河南士民骚然惊骇。
现代文：田悦也修葺城池，聚集人马，预作防备，与梁崇义，李惟岳遥相接应，互为援助，搅得河南士子庶民骚动，惊骇不安。
English: Tian Yue also repaired the castle, gathered people and horses, made preparations in advance, and corresponded with Liang Chongyi and Li Wei Yue Yao, and provided mutual assistance, stirring up the commons of Henan's scholars and commoners, shocking and unsettling.

古文：永平军旧领汴、宋、滑、亳、陈、颍、泗七州，丙子，分宋、亳、颖别为节度使，以宋州刺史刘洽为之；以泗州隶淮南；又以东都留守路嗣恭为怀、郑、汝、陕四州、河阳三城节度使。
现代文：永平军原先辖有汴、宋、滑、亳、陈、颍、泗共七州，丙子，朝廷从永平军分出宋、亳、颍三州，另设节度使，以宋州刺史刘洽充任此职。将泗州隶属于淮南，又任命东都留守路嗣恭为怀、郑、汝、陕四州及河阳三城节度使。
English: The Yongping Army originally had jurisdiction over seven prefectures, Song, Song, Nian, Nian, Chen, Nian and Nian. The imperial court divided the three prefectures of Song, Nian and Nian from the Yongping Army, and set up a festival envoy, with Song prefect Liu Cai serving in this position. He subordinated Nian to Huainan, and appointed Dongdu to stay away from Lu Cigong, and Zheng, Ru, Shaanxi four prefectures and Heyang three cities as festival envoys.

古文：旬日，又以永平节度使李勉都统洽、嗣恭二道，仍割郑州隶之，选尝为将者为诸州刺史，以备正己等。
现代文：十天以后朝廷又任命永平节度使李勉总辖刘洽、路嗣恭所在二道，再次把郑州分割隶属于他，让他选任曾经做过将官的人担任各州刺史，以防备李正己等人。
English: Ten days later, the imperial court also appointed Yongping Jiedu to make Li Yan the general in charge of Liu Cai and Lu Shigong, and once again divided Zhengzhou under him, and let him appoint people who had been generals to serve as the history of each state, in order to prevent Li Zhengyi and others.

古文：初，高力士有养女嫠居东京，颇能言宫中事，女官李真一意其为沈太后，诣使者具言其状。
现代文：当初，高力士有个养女在洛阳寡居，她挺能讲宫中轶事，女官李真一猜想此人便是沈太后，就到寻访太后的使者那里陈述了她的状貌。
English: At the beginning, Gao Lixi had an adopted daughter who was widowed in Luoyang. She was quite able to tell anecdotes from the palace. As soon as the court lady Li Zhen guessed that this person was the Empress Dowager Shen, she went to the emissary who was looking for the Empress Dowager Shen and described her appearance.

古文：上闻之，惊喜。
现代文：德宗听到这一消息，真是又惊又喜。
English: When Dezong heard the news, he was both surprised and delighted.

古文：时沈氏故老已尽，无识太后者，上遣宦官、宫人征验视之，年状颇同，宦官、宫人不审识太后，皆言是。
现代文：当时，沈氏族老辈人都已去世，再没有认识太后的人。德宗派遣宦官、宫人前往察看高氏，高氏的年龄状貌与太后颇为相似，宦官、宫人不曾仔细端详过太后，都说高氏便是太后。
English: At that time, the elders of the Shen clan had all passed away, and there was no one who knew the empress dowager any more. Emperor Dezong sent eunuchs and courtiers to inspect Gao. Gao's age and appearance were quite similar to the empress dowager. The eunuchs and courtiers had not carefully examined the empress dowager, but they all said that Gao was the empress dowager.

古文：高氏辞称实非太后，验视者益疑之，强迎入居上阳宫。
现代文：高氏推辞说自己实在并不是太后，派来察看的人却愈发怀疑，强行将高氏迎进上阳宫。
English: Gao denied that she was really not the empress dowager, but the people sent to inspect her became increasingly suspicious and forced Gao into the Shangyang Palace.

古文：上发宫女百馀人，赍乘舆御物就上阳宫供奉。
现代文：德宗打发宫女一百余人，带着车驾衣服等御用之物去上阳宫供养服侍高氏。
English: Emperor Dezong sent more than a hundred palace maids to Shangyang Palace with cars, clothes and other royal items to support and serve Gao.

古文：左右诱谕百方，高氏心动，乃自言是。
现代文：随侍的人们千方百计地劝诱她，高氏动了心，便声称自己是太后。
English: The attendants tried their best to persuade her, but Gao was so moved that she claimed to be the empress dowager.

古文：验视者走马入奏，上大喜。
现代文：察看的官员乘马飞快入朝上奏，德宗非常高兴。
English: The inspecting officials galloped into the morning rehearsal on horseback, and Dezong was very happy.

古文：二月，辛卯，上以偶日御殿，群臣皆入贺。
现代文：二月，辛卯，德宗以双日登殿，群臣都入朝庆贺。
English: In February, in the middle of the month, Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne on the second day of the month, and all the courtiers came in the morning to celebrate.

古文：诏有司草仪奉迎。
现代文：德宗还下诏命令有关部门草拟仪典，奉迎太后。
English: Emperor Dezong also issued an imperial edict ordering relevant departments to draft a ceremony to welcome the empress dowager.

古文：高氏弟承悦在长安，恐不言，久获罪，遽自言本末。
现代文：高氏的弟弟高承悦住在长安，害怕如果不讲实情，日子久了终要获罪，便急忙说出了事情的原委。
English: Gao's younger brother Gao Chengyue, who lives in Chang'an, was afraid that if he did not tell the truth, he would eventually be punished, so he hurriedly told the truth.

古文：上命力士养孙樊景超往覆视，景超见高氏居内殿，以太后自处，左右侍卫甚严。
现代文：德宗让高力士的养孙樊景超前往上阳宫复核察看。樊景超看到高氏住在内殿，以太后的身份自居，随从人员服侍防卫得很是严密。
English: Emperor Dezong had Gao's adopted grandson, Gongjing Chao, go to Shangyang Palace for a review and inspection. Gongjing Chao saw that Gao lived in the inner hall, posing as an ethereal being, and that the entourage was very closely guarded.

古文：景超谓高氏曰： 姑何自置身于俎上！ 
现代文：樊景超对高氏说： 姑姑为什么要将自己置身于刀俎之地呢！ 
English: Gong Jing Chao said to Gao: Why should my aunt put herself in the crosshairs?

古文：左右叱景超使下，景超抗声曰： 有诏，太后诈伪，左右可下。 
现代文：侍从人员呵斥樊景超下殿，樊景超高声说： 我这里带着诏书，太后是伪装的，侍从人员可速下殿来。 
English: The attendants shouted at Gongjing Chao's lower palace. Gongjing Chao said in a loud voice, "I have the imperial edict here. The empress is disguised. The attendants can come down to the palace immediately."

古文：左右皆下殿。
现代文：侍从人员都走下殿来。
English: The attendants all came down from the palace.

古文：高氏乃曰： 吾为人所强，非己出也。 
现代文：高氏于是说： 我是被人所勉强，不是出于自己意愿。 
English: Gao then said: "I was forced out, not by my own will.

古文：以牛车载还其家。
现代文：樊景超用牛车拉着高氏，将她送回家中。
English: Hao Jingchao pulled Gao with an ox cart and sent her back home.

古文：上恐后人不复敢言太后，皆不之罪，曰： 吾宁受百欺，庶几得之。 
现代文：德宗担心以后人们不再敢提太后，都不予加罪，还说： 我宁可遭受上百次的欺骗，大概总能找到太后吧。 
English: Dezong worried that people would no longer dare to mention the empress dowager in the future, and would not be punished, and said: I would rather be deceived a hundred times, I can probably always find the empress dowager.

古文：自是四方称得太后者数四，皆非是，而真太后竟不知所之。
现代文：自此以后，各地声称找到太后的事情发生了多次，但都不是，而真正的太后最终还是不知去向。
English: Since then, various regions have claimed to have found the empress dowager many times, but none of them have, and the real empress dowager still does not know where she is.

古文：御史中丞卢杞，弈之子也，貌丑，色如蓝，有口辩。
现代文：御史中丞卢杞是卢奕的儿子，他相貌丑陋，面色如蓝靛，能言善辩，德宗喜欢他。
English: Goshi Chujo Lu Ye is the son of Lu Yi. He is ugly, has a face like a blue heron, and can speak well. Dezong likes him.

古文：上悦之，丁未，擢为大夫，领京畿观察使。
现代文：丁未，德宗提升卢杞为御史大夫，兼任京畿观察使。
English: Ding Wei and Dezong promoted Lu Wei to goshi taifu, concurrently serving as Gyeonggi observation envoy.

古文：郭子仪每见宾客，姬妾不离侧。
现代文：郭子仪每次会见宾客，姬妾不离身边。
English: Every time Guo Ziyi meets with guests, her concubine is always by her side.

古文：杞尝往问疾，子仪悉屏侍妾，独隐几待之。
现代文：卢杞曾因郭子仪患病而前往问候，郭子仪却将随侍的姬妾悉数屏退，只一人凭几而坐，接待卢杞。
English: Lu Wei had gone to greet Guo Ziyi due to her illness, but Guo Ziyi had turned away all of her attendants and concubines, leaving only one person to sit and receive Lu Wei.

古文：或问其故，子仪曰： 杞貌陋而心险，妇人辈见之必笑，他日杞得志，吾族无类矣！ 
现代文：有人询问原故，郭子仪说： 卢杞面貌丑陋，心地险恶，女人见了必然要笑，以后卢杞得志了，我便举族无一幸免了！ 
English: When asked why, Guo Ziyi said: Lu Xun's appearance was ugly and her heart was sinister. When women saw her, they had to laugh. After Lu Xun's death, no one in my family was spared!

古文：杨炎既杀刘晏，朝野侧目，李正己累表请晏罪，讥斥朝廷。
现代文：杨炎杀掉刘晏以后，朝野之士都对他既畏惧又愤恨。李正己屡次上表请问刘晏何罪，讥讽贬责朝廷。
English: After Yang Yan killed Liu Bei, the people of the court and the country were both afraid of and angry with him. Li Zhengyi repeatedly asked Liu Bei what crime he had committed, and mocked and disparaged the imperial court.

古文：炎惧，遣腹心分诣诸道，以宣慰为名，实使之密谕节度使云： 晏昔附奸邪，请立独孤后，上自恶而杀之。 
现代文：杨炎害怕了，便派遣亲信分别到各道去，名义上是前去安抚地方，实际上是让他们暗中告诉节度使说： 刘晏昔日勾结并依附奸佞邪恶之人，请求册立独孤妃为皇后，是皇上自己憎恶他，因而杀了他。 
English: Yang Yan was afraid, so he sent his close confidants to various provinces, nominally to appease the local people, but in fact to secretly tell the envoys of the festival: Liu Ye had colluded with and adhered to the evil people in the past, and requested to make the lonely princess the queen. It was the emperor himself who hated him and killed him.

古文：上闻而恶之，由是有诛炎之志，隐而未发。
现代文：德宗听到此言，对杨炎厌恶，由此便有诛杀杨炎的意图，只是尚隐忍着没有发作。
English: Hearing this, Dezong was disgusted with Yang Yan, and thus had the intention of killing Yang Yan, but he did not have an attack.

古文：乙巳，迁炎中书侍郎，擢卢杞为门下侍郎，并同平章事，不专任炎矣。
现代文：乙巳，德宗调任杨炎为中书侍郎，提升卢杞为门下侍郎，二人都为同平章事，不再专门任用杨炎了。
English: At this time, Dezong transferred Yang Yan to the position of junior secretary, and promoted Lu Wei to the position of junior secretary. Both of them were the same rank, and Yang Yan was no longer specially appointed.

古文：杞蕞陋，无文学，炎轻之，多托疾不与会食；杞亦恨之。
现代文：卢杞矮小丑陋，没有文采，缺乏学识，杨炎看不起他，常常假托有病，不与他在政事堂一起进餐。
English: Lu Wei is short and ugly, has no literary talent, lacks knowledge, Yang Yan despises him, often pretends to be ill, and does not dine with him in the government building.

古文：杞阴狡，欲起势立威，小不附者必欲置之死地，引太常博士裴延龄为集贤殿直学士，亲任之。
现代文：卢杞对杨炎也是怀恨在心。卢杞阴险狡猾，打算在朝中扶植自己的势力，树立自己的威望，对稍不附合自己的人，便一定要置之于死地。他引荐太常博士裴延龄为集贤殿直学士，亲近并任用他。
English: Lu Xun also harbored a grudge against Yang Yan. Lu Xun was insidious and cunning, intending to build up his power in the court, establish his prestige, and for those who did not adhere to him, they must be put to death. He introduced Dr. Tai Chang Pei Yanling as a direct bachelor of Jixian, approached him and appointed him.

古文：丙午，更汴宋军名曰宣武。
现代文：丙午，汴宋军改称为宣武军。
English: On the morning of the 3rd, the Song Army was renamed the Xuanwu Army.

古文：振武节度使彭令芳苛虐，监军刘惠光贪婪。
现代文：振武节度使彭令芳苛刻残暴，其监军刘惠光贪得无厌。
English: Zhenwu Jiedu made Peng Lingfang harsh and cruel, and his supervisor Liu Huiguang was insatiably greedy.

古文：乙卯，军士共杀之。
现代文：乙卯，振武将士共同将二人杀死。
English: Otsu and Shinnobu killed the two men together.

古文：发京西防秋兵万二千人戍关东。
现代文：朝廷征发京西防御吐蕃兵马一万二千人驻防关东。
English: The imperial court conscripted and dispatched twelve thousand soldiers and horses from Tubo to defend the western part of Beijing and stationed them in the eastern part.

古文：上御望春楼宴劳将士，神策将士独不饮，上使诘之，其将杨惠元对曰： 臣等发奉天，军帅张巨济戒之曰： 此行大建功名，凯旋之日，相与为欢。
现代文：德宗登上望春楼，设宴犒劳将士。神策军的士兵唯独不肯饮酒，德宗让人询问原由，神策军将官杨惠元回答说： 我们来自奉天，主帅张巨济告诫我们说： 此行要大大地建树功名，待到凯旋而归的日子，我与你们好好痛快一场。 
English: Dezong boarded the Wangchun Tower and held a banquet to reward the hard-working soldiers. The soldiers of the Divine Providence Army were the only ones who refused to drink alcohol. Dezong asked why. Yang Huiyuan, the general officer of the Divine Providence Army, replied: We came from Mukden. The commander Zhang Jiji warned us: This trip is to greatly build our reputation. I will have a good time with you until the day of our triumphant return.

古文：苟未捷，勿饮酒。 
现代文：所以不敢饮酒。 
English: That's why I don't dare drink alcohol.

古文：故不敢奉诏。 及行，有司缘道设酒食，独惠元所部瓶罂不发。
现代文：到出发时，有关部门在道旁摆设酒食，只有杨惠元的部下不肯启瓶饮酒。
English: At the time of departure, the relevant departments set up alcohol and food on the roadside, only Yang Huiyuan's subordinates refused to drink alcohol.

古文：上深叹美，赐书劳之。
现代文：德宗深表赞赏，颁赐诏书慰劳杨惠元。
English: Emperor Dezong expressed deep appreciation and issued an imperial edict to commiserate with Yang Huigen.

古文：惠元，平州人也。
现代文：杨惠元是平州人。
English: Yang Huiyuan is from Pingzhou.

古文：三月，置溵州于郾城。
现代文：三月，朝廷在郾城设置州。
English: In March, the imperial court set up a prefecture in Handan.

古文：辛巳，以汾州刺史王翃为振武军使、镇北、绥、银等州留后。
现代文：辛巳，德宗任命汾州刺史王为振武军使和镇北、绥、银等州留后。
English: Soon after, Emperor Dezong appointed Zhangzhou Sisi Wang as the military envoy of Zhenwu and the governor of Zhenbei, Handan and Yin Provinces.

古文：遣殿中少监崔汉衡使于吐蕃。
现代文：朝廷派遣殿中少监崔汉衡出使吐蕃。
English: The imperial court dispatched Choi Han Heung, a junior inspector of the Imperial Household Agency, to dispatch the envoy.

古文：梁崇义虽与李正己等连结，兵势寡弱，礼数最恭。
现代文：梁崇义虽然与李正己等人联合起来，但是兵少势弱，对朝廷的礼节也最为恭敬。
English: Although Liang Chongyi joined forces with Li Zhenggi and others, his army was small and weak, and he was the most respectful of the court's etiquette.

古文：或劝其入朝，崇义曰： 来公有大功于国，上元中为阉宦所谗，迁延稽命，及代宗嗣位，不俟驾入朝，犹不免族诛。
现代文：有人劝他到朝廷中去做官，梁崇义说： 来为国家立下了大功，上元年间却遭到宦官的谗言诽谤，因此拖延着不应召入朝。等到代宗继位以后，来不待驾好车马，便去朝见，尚且不能避免族诛之祸。
English: Some people advised him to become an official in the imperial court. Liang Chongyi said, "You have made great contributions to the country, but you were slandered and defamed by eunuchs in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty. Therefore, you should not delay your call to the imperial court. After the succession of the emperor, you should drive a good car and horse to go to the imperial court, but you still cannot avoid the scourge of the clan.

古文：吾岁久衅积，何可往也！ 
现代文：我多年来与朝廷积下许多嫌隙，怎么能够再到朝廷去呢！ 
English: Over the years, I have accumulated a lot of bad blood with the imperial court. How can I go to the imperial court again?

古文：淮宁节度使李希烈屡请讨之，崇义惧，益修武备。
现代文：淮宁节度使李希烈屡次请求讨伐梁崇义，梁崇义害怕，益发整治军备。
English: The Huaining Festival made Li Xilai repeatedly request to fight against Liang Chongyi. Liang Chongyi was afraid and intensified the rectification of armaments.

古文：流人郭昔告崇义为变，崇义闻之，请罪，上为之杖昔，远流之；使金部员外郎李舟诣襄州谕旨以安之。
现代文：流人郭昔告发梁崇义准备叛乱，梁崇义听到此言，向朝廷请罪。德宗为此杖责郭昔，将他流放远方，还让金部员外郎李舟至襄州宣布圣旨，使梁安心。
English: The exile Guo Xixi told Liang Chongyi that he was preparing to rebel, and when Liang Chongyi heard this, he pleaded guilty to the imperial court. De Zong blamed Guo Xixi for this and exiled him far away. He also had Li Zhou, a member of the Ministry of Finance, travel to Xiangzhou to announce the imperial decree, giving Liang peace of mind.

古文：舟尝奉使诣刘文喜，为陈祸福，文喜囚之，会帐下杀文喜以降，诸道跋扈者闻之，谓舟能覆城杀将。
现代文：李舟曾经奉命出使刘文喜处，向他陈述利害，刘文喜将他囚禁起来。适逢部下杀了刘文喜，归降朝廷，各道专横跋扈的将帅听说了，都说李舟有倾覆城池、斩杀大将的本领。
English: When his subordinates killed Liu Wenshi and he surrendered to the imperial court, all the tyrannical generals heard about it and said that Li Zhou had the ability to overthrow the city and kill the general.

古文：至襄州，崇义恶之。
现代文：李舟来到襄州，梁崇义厌恶他。
English: When Li Zhou came to Xiangzhou, Liang Chongyi detested him.

古文：舟又劝崇义入朝，言颇切直，崇义益不悦。
现代文：李舟又规劝梁崇义入朝，讲话直率而切中要害，梁崇义愈加不高兴。
English: Li Zhou also advised Liang Chongyi to enter the DPRK, his speech was straightforward and to the point, Liang Chongyi became more and more unhappy.

古文：及遣使宣慰诸道，舟复指襄州，崇义拒境不内，上言 军中疑惧，请易以它使。 
现代文：及至派遣使者安抚各道的时候，李舟再次来到襄州，梁崇义将李舟拒于境外，不肯接待，并上奏说： 军中疑虑恐惧，请改派别的使者。 
English: When it came time to send an envoy to appease all sides, Li Zhou came to Xiangzhou again. Liang Chongyi refused to receive Li Zhou and refused to let him leave the country. He also sent a message saying, "If there are doubts and fears in the army, please send another envoy."

古文：时两河诸镇方猜阻，上欲示恩信以安之，夏，四月，庚寅，加崇义同平章事，妻子悉加封赏，赐以铁券；遣御史张著赍手诏征之，仍以其裨将蔺杲为邓州刺史。
现代文：当时，两河各镇正在猜疑朝廷，德宗打算显示恩典信义，使他们安心。夏季，四月，庚寅，德宗加封梁崇义同平章事，对他的妻子儿女全都予以封赏，赐给铁券，派遣御史张著带着皇帝的手诏征召他，还任命他的副将蔺杲为邓州刺史。
English: At that time, the towns of the two rivers were suspicious of the imperial court, and Dezong intended to show grace and trustworthiness to reassure them. In the summer, in April, Goyin, Dezong awarded Liang Chongyi with the title of nobility, rewarded all his wives and children, gave them iron coupons, sent the historian Zhang to recruit him with the emperor's edict, and also appointed his deputy general Zou as the Dangzhou historian.

古文：五月，丙寅，以军兴，增商税为什一。
现代文：五月，丙寅，因战事兴起，朝廷将商税增至十分之一。
English: In May, due to the outbreak of war, the imperial court increased the commercial tax to one-tenth.

古文：田悦卒与李正己、李惟岳定计，连兵拒命，遣兵马使孟祐将步骑五千北助惟岳。
现代文：田悦终于与李正己、李惟岳定下计划，联合三镇兵马，抗拒朝命，派遣兵马使孟带领步兵、骑兵共五千人，北去援助李惟岳。
English: Tian Yue finally made a plan with Li Zhengyi and Li Weiyue, united the soldiers and horses of the three towns, resisted the orders of the government, and sent soldiers and horses to send Meng to lead a total of five thousand infantry and cavalry to the north to assist Li Weiyue.

古文：薛嵩之死也，田承嗣盗据洺、相二州，朝廷独得邢、磁二州及临洺县。
现代文：薛嵩死去时，田承嗣私下强占了州和相州，朝廷只得到邢州和磁州以及临县。
English: At the time of Xue Song's death, Tian Cheng He privately occupied Zhoushou and Xiangzhou, and the imperial court only obtained Zhoushou, Maganzhou and Lin County.

古文：悦欲阻山为境，曰： 邢、磁如两眼，在吾腹中，不可不取。 
现代文：田悦打算依凭山势划分边境，便说： 邢州和磁州就象围棋中的两个眼，在我的中腹部位，不可不攻取。 
English: Tian Yue planned to divide the border according to the mountain range, and said: "The Fen Zhou and the Magnetic Zhou are like the two eyes in the game of Go. In my midsection, I must capture them."

古文：乃遣兵马使康愔将八千人围邢州，别将杨朝光将五千人栅于邯郸西北，以断昭义救兵，悦自将兵数万围临洺。
现代文：于是，田悦派遣兵马使康带领八千人包围邢州，派遣别将杨朝光带领五千人在邯郸西北竖起栅栏，以切断昭义的救兵，田悦则亲自带兵数万人，包围临县。
English: As a result, Tian Yue dispatched troops and horses to let Kang lead eight thousand people to encircle Luzhou, dispatched troops and horses to let Yang Chaoguang lead five thousand people to erect a fence in the northwest of Luzhou to cut off the rescuers of Zhao Yi, and Tian Yue personally led tens of thousands of soldiers to encircle Lin County.

古文：邢州刺史李共、临洺将张伾坚壁拒守。
现代文：邢州刺史李共、临将领张坚固壁垒，抵御围兵。
English: Zhang Zhou stabbed Li Gong and the vice-commander led a strong barrier to resist the encircling troops.

古文：贝州刺史邢曹俊，田承嗣旧将也，老而有谋，悦宠信牙官扈崿而疏之。
现代文：贝州刺史邢曹俊是田承嗣原来的将领，年事高，有谋略，但田悦宠信牙官扈而疏远邢曹俊。
English: Bei Zhou Zhi Shi Yan Cao Jun was Tian Cheng He's original general. He was old and had a strategy, but Tian Yue was too trusting and alienated Tian Zhi Cao Jun.

古文：及攻临洺，召曹俊问计。曹俊曰： 兵法十围五攻；尚书以逆犯顺，势更不侔。
现代文：及至攻打临时，田悦将邢曹俊召来询问计策，邢曹俊说： 兵法认为，兵力十倍于敌人，才可包围敌人，五倍于敌人，才可攻打敌人，你以叛逆军队侵犯朝廷，这形势就更不能同兵法上讲的相比了。
English: When the time came for the attack, Tian Yue called Zou Cao Jun to inquire about the strategy. Zou Cao Jun said: According to military law, the enemy can only be encircled with ten times the strength of the enemy, and the enemy can only be attacked with five times the strength of the enemy. If you invade the imperial court with a rebellious army, this situation is even more incomparable to what is said in military law.

古文：今顿兵坚城之下，粮竭卒尽，自亡之道也。
现代文：现在军队受阻于坚固的城池之下，粮食一光，士卒便会跑光，这真是自取灭亡。
English: Now the army is blocked under a strong fortress, the grain is light, the soldiers will run out, this is really self-defeating.

古文：不若置万兵于崞口以遏西师，则河北二十四州皆为尚书有矣。 
现代文：不如在崞口安置士兵一万人，以便阻止西面的军队，河北二十四州便都归你所有了。 
English: If you could station ten thousand soldiers at Hekou to stop the western army, the twenty-four provinces of Hebei would all be yours.

古文：诸将恶其异己，共毁之，悦不用其策。
现代文：诸将领讨厌邢曹俊的说法与自己不同，便一同诋毁他，田悦也就未采用邢曹俊的计策。
English: The generals disliked the fact that Cao Cao Jun's opinion was different from their own, so they denigrated him together. Tian Yue did not adopt Cao Cao Jun's strategy.

