古文：六年春，王正月癸亥，郑游速帅师灭许，以许男斯归。
现代文：流年春季，周历正月癸亥日，郑国的游速率领军队灭掉许国，将许国国君拘捕回郑国。
English: In the spring of the previous year, on the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, Zheng Guo led the army to exterminate Xu Guo and arrest him back to Zheng Guo.

古文：二月，公侵郑。
现代文：二月，定公发兵攻打郑国。
English: In February, Ding Gong sent troops to attack Zheng.

古文：公至自侵郑。
现代文：定公从攻打郑国的地方回来。
English: Sadagong returned from the attack on Zheng.

古文：夏，季孙斯、仲孙何忌如晋。
现代文：夏季，季孙斯、仲孙何忌去到晋国。
English: In the summer, Qisuns and Zhongsun should not go to Jin.

古文：秋，晋人执宋行人乐祁犁。
现代文：秋季，晋国人拘捕了宋国行人乐祁犁。
English: In autumn, the Jin people arrested the Song people's hitchhiker Le Yao.

古文：冬，城中城。
现代文：冬季，在城中筑城。
English: In winter, build a city within a city.

古文：季孙斯、仲孙忌帅师围郓。
现代文：季孙斯、仲孙忌率领军队包围郓地。
English: Gisuns and Nakasunmi led an army to encircle Shikoku.

古文：六年春，郑灭许，因楚败也。
现代文：六年春季，郑国灭亡了许国，这是由于楚国战败，不能救援。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Zheng Guo was defeated by Xu Guo, which was due to the defeat of Chu Guo, and could not be rescued.

古文：二月，公侵郑取匡，为晋讨郑之伐胥靡也。
现代文：二月，定公发兵侵袭郑国，夺取匡地，这是为晋国去讨伐郑国的攻打胥靡。
English: In February, Ding Gong sent troops to invade Zheng Guo and seize Kuang Di. This was a desperate attack for Jin Guo to fight Zheng Guo.

古文：往不假道于卫；及还，阳虎使季孟自南门入，出自东门，舍于豚泽。
现代文：去的时候不向卫国借路；等到回来，阳虎让季桓子、孟献子从卫国国都的南门进入，从东门出去，住在豚泽。
English: When they went, they didn't borrow a path from the capital; when they came back, Yang Hu let Ji Huan Zi and Meng Xian Zi enter from the south gate of the capital, and they went out from the east gate and lived in the piggery.

古文：卫侯怒，使弥子瑕追之。
现代文：卫灵公发怒，派弥子瑕追赶他们。
English: Wei Ling Gong flew into a rage and sent Yiziko to chase after them.

古文：公叔文子老矣，辇而如公，曰： 尤人而效之，非礼也。
现代文：公叔文子已经告老退休了，坐了人拉的车子去进见卫灵公，说： 怨恨别人而效法他，这是不符合礼的。
English: Uncle Fumiko, who had already retired, rode in a car pulled by a man to see Wei Linggong and said, "It is not polite to hate others and imitate him.

古文：昭公之难，君将以文之舒鼎，成之昭兆，定之鞶鉴，苟可以纳之，择用一焉。
现代文：鲁昭公遭遇危险的时候，君王准备用文公的舒鼎、成公的宝龟、定公的鞶鉴作为赏赐，如果有人能送回鲁昭公，对这些宝物就可以任意选用一件。
English: When Lu Zhaogong was in danger, the king was ready to reward him with Wengong's Shu Ding, Chenggong's Turtle, and Dinggong's Dragonfly. If someone could return Lu Zhaogong, they could choose any one of these treasures.

古文：公子与二三臣之子，诸侯苟忧之，将以为之质。
现代文：君王的儿子和几位臣下的儿子，诸侯如果为鲁昭公操心，就可以把他们送去作为人质。
English: If the princes were worried about Lu Zhaogu, they could send the king's son and the sons of several of his subjects as hostages.

古文：此群臣之所闻也。
现代文：这是下臣们所听到的。
English: That's what the courtiers heard.

古文：今将以小忿蒙旧德，无乃不可乎？
现代文：现在将要用小小的愤恨掩盖过去的恩德，恐怕不可以吧！
English: I'm afraid we can't use petty resentment to cover up past achievements.

古文：大姒之子，唯周公、康叔为相睦也。而效小人以弃之，不亦诬乎！
现代文：太姒的儿子，惟有周公、康叔是互相和睦的，而现在要效法小人而丢掉和睦，不是受骗吗？
English: The son of Taiko, only Zhou Gong and Kang Uncle are in harmony with each other, and now he wants to follow the villain and throw away the harmony, isn't he deceived?

古文：天将多阳虎之罪以毙之，君姑待之，若何？ 
现代文：上天将要让阳虎的罪过增多而使他灭亡，君王姑且等着，怎么样？ 
English: Heaven is going to let the sins of the male tiger increase and let him perish, let the king wait, how about?

古文：乃止。
现代文：卫灵公就停止出兵。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：夏，季桓子如晋，献郑俘也。
现代文：夏季，季桓子去到晋国，这是为了奉献郑国的俘虏。
English: In the summer, Ji Huan Zi went to Jin Province to dedicate a horse to the prisoners of Zheng Province.

古文：阳虎强使孟懿子往报夫人之币。
现代文：阳虎强派孟懿子前去向晋夫人回送财礼。
English: Yang Huqiang sent Meng Yao to return the gift to Mrs. Jin.

古文：晋人兼享之。
现代文：晋国人同时设享礼招待他们。
English: At the same time, the Jin people set up a feast to invite them.

古文：孟孙立于房外，谓范献子曰： 阳虎若不能居鲁，而息肩于晋，所不以为中军司马者，有如先君。 
现代文：孟孙站在房外，对范献子说： 阳虎如果在鲁国住不下去，卸除职任而来晋国，晋国不让他做中军司马，有先君在上！ 
English: Meng Sun stood outside the room and said to Fan Xianzhi: "If Yang Hu can't live in the State of Lu, he will be relieved of his duties and come to the State of Jin. The State of Jin won't let him be the Sima of the Chinese army, but his ancestors will!

古文：献子曰： 寡君有官，将使其人。鞅何知焉？ 
现代文：范献子说： 寡君设置官职，将要选择适当的人选，鞅知道什么？ 
English: Fan Xianzi said: If you set up an official position, you will choose the appropriate candidate. What do you know?

古文：献子谓简子曰： 鲁人患阳虎矣，孟孙知其衅，以为必適晋，故强为之请，以取入焉。 
现代文：范献子对赵简子说： 鲁国人讨厌阳虎了。孟孙看到了这预兆，认为阳虎一定会来晋国，所以竭力为他请求，以期求得禄位而进入晋国。 
English: Fan Xianzi said to Zhao Jianzi: Lu people hate Yang Hu. Meng Sun saw this omen and thought that Yang Hu would definitely come to Jin Province, so he tried his best to make a request for him, with a view to obtaining a position and entering Jin Province.

古文：四月己丑，吴大子终累败楚舟师，获潘子臣、小惟子及大夫七人。
现代文：四月十五日，吴国的太子终累打败楚国的水军，俘虏了潘子臣、小惟子和七个大夫。
English: On April 15, the prince of the State of Wu finally defeated the naval forces of the State of Chu and captured Pan Zichen, Xiaowei Zi and seven doctors.

古文：楚国大惕，惧亡。
现代文：楚国大为恐惧，害怕灭亡。
English: The state of Chu is in great fear, afraid of extinction.

古文：子期又以陵师败于繁扬。
现代文：子期又带着陆军在繁扬被战败。
English: During his childhood, he took the army to propagate and was defeated.

古文：令尹子西喜曰： 乃今可为矣。 
现代文：令尹子西高兴地说： 现在可以治理了。 
English: To Yin Zixi's delight, he said, "Now we can govern."

古文：于是乎迁郢于鄀，而改纪其政，以定楚国。
现代文：从这时开始把郢都迁到鄀地，改革政治，来安定楚国。
English: From then on, the capital of Chu was moved to Chu, and political reforms were carried out to stabilize the state.

古文：周儋翩率王子朝之徒，因郑人将以作乱于周。郑于是乎伐冯、滑、胥靡、负黍、狐人、阙外。
现代文：成周的儋翩率领王子朝的部下依仗郑国人，准备在成周发动叛乱，郑国在这时攻打冯地、滑地、胥靡、负黍、狐人、阙外。
English: Zheng Zhou's subordinates of the prince's dynasty, led by Zheng Zhou's subordinates, were ready to launch a rebellion against Zheng Zhou. At this time, Zheng Zhou attacked Feng Di, Slip Di, Zha Mai, Guan Di, Xijin, and Gaowai.

古文：六月，晋阎没戍周，且城胥靡。
现代文：六月，晋国的阎没到成周戌守，并且在胥靡筑城。
English: In June, Yan of Jin did not arrive in Cheng Zhou to defend the city, and he was busy building the city.

古文：秋八月，宋乐祁言于景公曰： 诸侯唯我事晋，今使不往，晋其憾矣。 
现代文：秋季，八月，宋国的乐祁对宋景公说： 诸侯中间惟有我们事奉晋国，现在使者不去，晋国恐怕要怨恨我们了。 
English: In the autumn, in August, Le Yao of the Song Dynasty said to Song Jing Gong, "Among the princes, only we serve the State of Jin. If the envoy does not go now, I am afraid the State of Jin will resent us."

古文：乐祁告其宰陈寅。
现代文：乐祁把话告诉了他的宰臣陈寅。
English: Le Yao told his vassal Chen Yin.

古文：陈寅曰： 必使子往。 
现代文：陈寅说： 一定会让您去。 
English: Chen Yin said: I will definitely let you go.

古文：他日，公谓乐祁曰： 唯寡人说子之言，子必往。 
现代文：过了些时候，宋景公对乐祁说： 唯有寡人对您的话感到高兴，您一定得去！ 
English: After a while, Song Jinggong said to Le Yao: Only a few people are happy with your words, you must go!

古文：陈寅曰： 子立后而行，吾室亦不亡。唯君亦以我为知难而行也。 
现代文：陈寅说： 您立了继承人再动身，我们家也不会灭亡，希望国君也认为我们是明知困难才去的。 
English: Chen Yin said, "You have appointed a successor, and we will set out again, and our family will not perish. I hope that the sovereign will also think that we went knowing the difficulties.

古文：见溷而行。
现代文：乐祁就让溷拜见了宋景公才动身。
English: Le Yao let Zou Bai see Song Jing Gongzai and set off.

古文：赵简子逆而饮之酒于绵上，献杨楯六十于简子。
现代文：赵简子迎接乐祁，和他在绵上喝酒，乐祁奉献六十面杨木盾牌给赵简子。
English: Zhao Jianzi greeted Le Yao and drank wine with him on the velvet. Le Yao dedicated sixty poplar shields to Zhao Jianzi.

古文：陈寅曰： 昔吾主范氏，今子主赵氏，又有纳焉。以杨楯贾祸，弗可为也已。
现代文：陈寅说： 从前我们事奉范氏，现在您事奉赵氏，又有进奉的东西，用杨木盾牌招来祸患，设法办了。
English: Chen Yin said: In the past, we served the Fan clan, now you serve the Zhao clan, and there are things to be served, using poplar shields to invite disaster, and managed to do it.

古文：然子死晋国，子孙必得志于宋。 
现代文：然而由于您出使晋国而死，子孙必然在宋国得志。 
English: However, since you were sent to Jin and died, your descendants must have made their mark in Song.

古文：范献子言于晋侯曰： 以君命越疆而使，未致使而私饮酒，不敬二君，不可不讨也。 
现代文：范献子对晋定公说： 由于国君的命令越过别国而出使，没有正式报告使命而私自饮酒，不尊敬两国国君，不能不加以讨伐。 
English: Fan Xianzi said to Jin Ding Gong: Since the order of the sovereign has been sent across other countries, without officially reporting the mission and drinking alcohol privately, disrespecting the sovereigns of the two countries, it is impossible not to fight.

古文：乃执乐祁。
现代文：于是晋国就逮捕了乐祁。
English: As a result, Jin arrested Le Yao.

古文：阳虎又盟公及三桓于周社，盟国人于亳社，诅于五父之衢。
现代文：阳虎又和鲁定公与三桓在周社盟誓，和国内的人们在亳社盟誓，在五父之衢诅咒。
English: Yang Hu also swore with Lu Ding Gong and Sanhuan in the Zhou Society, swore with the people in the country in the Shun Society, and cursed in the Five Fathers.

古文：冬十二月，天王处于姑莸，辟儋翩之乱也。
现代文：冬季，十二月，周敬王住在姑莸，这是为了逃避儋翩的祸乱。
English: In winter, in December, Zhou Jing Wang lived in Guzheng, in order to escape the calamity of Xuanping.

