古文：厮打
现代文：厮打
English: Beatings

古文：教官子与县丞子厮打，教官子屡负，归而哭诉其母。
现代文：教书先生的儿子与县官的儿子打架，教书先生的儿子总是吃亏，回家后向母亲哭诉。
English: The teacher's son fights with the son of the county official. The teacher's son always loses and comes home crying to his mother.

古文：母曰： 彼家终日吃肉，故恁般强健会打。你家终日吃腐，力气衰微，如何敌得他过？ 
现代文：母亲说： 人家整天吃肉，自然身强力壮，咱们家整天吃豆腐，当然体瘦力弱，怎么能打得过他呢？ 
English: My mother said: People eat meat all day long and are naturally strong. Our family eats tofu all day long. Of course, our body is thin and weak. How can we beat him?

古文：教官曰： 这般我儿不要忙，等祭过了丁，再与他报复便了。 
现代文：教书先生说： 这样，我儿不要着急，等祭过了孔子，再找他报仇就是了。 
English: The teacher said, "In that case, my son, don't be in a hurry. Wait until you have sacrificed Confucius, and then seek his revenge."

古文：钻刺
现代文：钻刺
English: Drilling holes

古文：鼠与黄蜂为兄弟，邀一秀才做盟证，秀才不得已往，列为第三人。
现代文：鼠和黄蜂结拜为兄弟，邀请一个秀才去做证，秀才不得已去了，只被排在第三位。
English: The rat and the wasp became brothers and invited a genius to testify. The genius had no choice but to go and was only ranked third.

古文：一友问曰： 兄何居乎鼠辈之下？ 
现代文：朋友问他： 老兄为何甘心居于鼠辈之下？ 
English: A friend asked him: Why is the old man willing to live under the rats?

古文：答曰： 他两个一会钻，一会刺，我只得让他些罢了。 
现代文：秀才回答说： 他们两个一个会钻，一个会刺，我只得让着他们些了。 
English: The scholar replied, "Two of them can drill and one can stab, I just have to let them be."

古文：证孔子
现代文：证孔子
English: Zheng Confucius

古文：两道学先生议论不合，各自诧真道学而互诋为假，久之不决，乃请证于孔子。
现代文：有两个道学先生观点不同，都说自己是真道学，别人是假道学，争论不休，于是请孔子给判断一下。
English: There were two teachers of Taoism who had different views. They both said that they were true Taoism and the others were false Taoism. They argued endlessly, so they asked Confucius to judge.

古文：孔子下阶，鞠躬致敬而言曰： 吾道甚大，何必相同。
现代文：孔子走下台阶，鞠躬致敬说道： 吾道甚大，何必相同。
English: Confucius walked down the steps, bowed and said: I am very great, why should I be the same.

古文：二位老先生皆真正道学，丘素所钦仰，岂有伪哉。 
现代文：二位老先生都是真正道学，我一直都很钦佩景仰，哪会有假呢？ 
English: The two old gentlemen are true Taoists. I have always admired and respected them. How could they be fake?

古文：两人各大喜而退。
现代文：两人欢欢喜喜地回去了。
English: The two went back home happily.

古文：弟子曰： 夫子何谀之甚也？ 
现代文：孔子的学生对孔子说： 你奉承他们为何那样厉害呢？ 
English: Confucius' students said to Confucius: Why do you flatter them so much?

古文：孔子曰： 此辈人哄得他动身就够，惹他怎么！ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 这种人哄得走就行了，惹他干什么！ 
English: Confucius replied, "This kind of person only needs to be coaxed to leave, what's the point of provoking him!

古文：三上
现代文：三上
English: Mikami

古文：一儒生，每作文字谒先辈。
现代文：有一个秀才，每次作完文章都拜请前辈指教。
English: There is a genius who asks his predecessors for advice every time he finishes an article.

古文：一先辈评其文曰： 昔欧阳公作文，自言多从三上得来，子文绝似欧阳第三上得者。 
现代文：一位前辈评价他的文章说： 古有欧阳公作文，自己说大多是从三上得来，你的文章特别像欧阳公第三上得到的那样。 
English: One of his predecessors commented on his article: "In ancient times, there was a composition by Ouyang Gong, and he said that he got most of it from Sanjia. Your article is especially like what Ouyang Gong got from Sanjia.

古文：儒生极喜。
现代文：秀才特别高兴。
English: The genius was particularly pleased.

古文：友见曰： 某公嘲尔。 
现代文：他的朋友听见了，对他说： 那人是在嘲笑你。 
English: His friend overheard and said to him, "That man is laughing at you."

古文：儒生曰： 比我欧阳，何得云嘲？ 
现代文：秀才问： 把我比做欧阳，怎么能说是嘲笑我呢？ 
English: The scholar asked: If you compare me to Ouyang, how can you say that you are mocking me?

古文：答曰： 欧阳公三上，谓枕上、马上、厕上；第三上，指厕也。 
现代文：朋友回答说： 欧阳先生的三上，说的是：枕上、马上、厕上；第三上，指厕所呀。 
English: The friend replied, "On the third day of the month, Mr. Ouyang says: on the pillow, immediately, on the toilet; on the third day, it means the toilet."

古文：儒生方悟。
现代文：秀才这时才明白人家是在讥笑他。
English: It was only then that he realized that people were laughing at him.

古文：平上去入
现代文：平上去入
English: Straight up and in

古文：某日，有友人之子结婚。晓岚携了礼物一样去吃喜酒。
现代文：有一天，一个朋友的儿子结婚，纪晓岚带了一样礼物去吃喜酒。
English: One day, when a friend's son got married, Ji Xiaojun took a gift to the wedding reception.

古文：俟来客坐定，晓岚缓缓取出礼物，是一部《诗韵大全》。
现代文：等到客人都到齐了，纪晓岚才慢慢地拿出礼物，是一部《诗韵大全》书。
English: When all the guests had arrived, Ji Xiaojuan slowly took out a gift, a "Poetic Rhymes Collection" book.

古文：有客人某觅了，对晓岚曰： 以书本作为贺礼，倒是少见，可否听听你送这样礼物的用意？ 
现代文：有个客人看见了，就对纪晓岚说： 用书作贺礼，倒是很少见，能不能听听您送这件礼物的用意？ 
English: When a guest saw it, he said to Ji Xiaohui: It is rare to use a book as a gift. Can you tell me what you had in mind for this gift?

古文：晓岚说道： 诗韵之书，所谈不外是 平、上、去、入 ，结婚之事，也不外是 平、上、去、入 ，我送这样礼物，祝他们早生贵子，谁说不宜？ 
现代文：纪晓岚说： 诗韵之书，所谈不外乎是 平、上、去、入 ，结婚的事，也不外乎是 平、上、去、入 ，我送这样的礼物，是祝他们早生贵子，谁说不适合？ 
English: Ji Xiaojun said: "In the book of rhymes, the only things that are discussed are flat, up, go, in, and marriage, which are also flat, up, go, in. I send such a gift to wish them an early birth of their precious son. Who says it is not suitable?

古文：座上宾客一听，无不捧腹。
现代文：在座的客人听了以后，没有不捧腹大笑的。
English: After listening to it, none of the guests present could help bursting into laughter.

古文：与人家吃
现代文：与人家吃
English: Eat with others

古文：某甲将投也，阎王问他： 愿与人家吃，还是愿吃人家的？ 
现代文：有个人要投胎人世，阎王问他： 愿意给人家吃，还是愿吃人家的？ 
English: There was a man who wanted to be reincarnated, and the king of hell asked him: "Would you rather eat other people's food, or would you rather eat other people's food?"

古文：彼思自己的东西，如何舍得与人吃，乃谓愿吃人家的。
现代文：他想：自己的东西，怎么舍得给别人吃？于是就说愿意吃人家的。
English: He thought: How can I give my own food to others? So he said he was willing to eat someone else's.

古文：及投生，己父为佣，帮于人，已而己亦佣于人，终年辛苦非凡。
现代文：等到投生以后，才知道自己的父亲是佣人，自己长大了便子继父业，也成了佣人，一生非常辛苦。
English: It wasn't until after he was reincarnated that he learned that his father was a servant. When he grew up, he followed in his father's footsteps and became a servant. He had a very hard life.

古文：乃悟及阎王语，原来吃人家的，就是帮佣。
现代文：这时，他才明白阎王的话，原来吃人家的就是当佣人。
English: At this time, he finally understood the king of hell's words, that to eat other people's food was to be a servant.

古文：谓来世他若再问起我来，我一定连连曰： 与人家吃，与人家吃。 
现代文：于是他想：来世如果阎王再问起来，我一定连连说： 给人家吃，给人家吃。 
English: Then he thought, "In the next life, if the King of Hell asks me again, I will surely say again and again, 'Let others eat, let others eat.'

古文：作诗自娱
现代文：作诗自娱
English: Poetry for Pleasure

古文：许义方之妻刘氏，以端洁自许。
现代文：许义方的妻子刘氏，自命行为端正。
English: Xu Yifang's wife, Ms. Liu, is a stickler for proper behavior.

古文：义方尝出，经年始归，语其妻曰： 独处无聊，得无与邻里亲戚往来乎？ 
现代文：义方曾经外出一年，第二年才回来。他对妻子说： 你自己单独生活没有意思，没和邻里亲戚往来吗？ 
English: Yifang once went out for a year and only came back the following year. He said to his wife: Isn't it interesting that you live alone and don't have any contact with your relatives in the neighborhood?

古文：刘曰： 自君之出，惟闭门自守，足未尝履阈。 
现代文：刘氏说： 自从夫君外出，我一直闭门自守，脚都没出过大门。 
English: Mr. Liu said: Since my husband went out, I have been keeping myself locked up, and my feet have never left the door.

古文：义方嗟叹不已。又问： 何以自娱？ 
现代文：义方感叹不已，又问： 那你自己怎样娱乐呢？ 
English: Yifang sighed and asked: So how do you entertain yourself?

古文：答： 惟时作小诗以适情耳。 
现代文：刘氏回答： 只是有时作作小诗，用来排解孤独和寂寞罢了。 
English: Mr. Liu answered: I just sometimes write short poems to deal with loneliness.

古文：义方欣然命取诗观之，开卷第一篇题云： 月夜招邻僧闲话。 
现代文：义方非常高兴，让她把写的诗拿来看看。他打开诗卷，第一篇写道： 月夜招邻僧闲话。 
English: Yoshikata was very pleased and asked her to take a look at the poem he had written. He opened the poem scroll and wrote the first part: "Moonlight invites neighboring monks to gossip."

古文：盗牛
现代文：盗牛
English: Cattle theft

古文：有盗牛被枷者，亲友问曰： 汝犯何罪至此？ 
现代文：有一个人偷了别人的牛，被披枷带锁示众，一个亲友看见了，就问他： 你到底犯了什么罪，竟然到了这种地步？ 
English: A relative and friend saw a man who had stolen someone else's cow and was being paraded in shackles. He asked him, "What crime did you commit to get to this point?"

古文：盗牛者曰： 偶在街上走过，见地下有条草绳，以为没用，误拾而归，故连此祸。 
现代文：偷牛的人说： 我从街上走过，偶然看见地面上有一根草绳，以为是没用的东西，就误把它捡起来拿回家了，没想到竟会遭到这种灾祸。 
English: The rustler said: I was passing through the streets when I happened to see a rope of grass lying on the ground. Thinking it was useless, I picked it up by mistake and took it home. I did not expect to encounter such a calamity.

古文：遇者曰： 误拾草绳，有何罪犯？ 
现代文：有个过路人听见了说： 误捡了一根草绳，犯了什么罪呢？ 
English: A passer-by overheard and said: "What crime did you commit by picking up a grass rope by mistake?

古文：盗牛者曰： 因绳上还有一物。 
现代文：偷牛的人说： 因为绳子上面还有一样东西。 
English: The rustler said, Because there is something else on the rope.

古文：人问： 何物？ 
现代文：过路人问他是什么东西。
English: A passerby asked him what it was.

古文：对曰： 是一只小小耕牛。 
现代文：偷牛的人回答说： 是一头小小的耕牛。 
English: The rustler replied, "It's a small farm cow.

古文：缠住
现代文：缠住
English: Entangled

古文：一螃蟹与田鸡结为兄弟，各要赌跳过涧，先过者居长。田鸡溜便早跳过来，螃蟹方行，忽被女子撞见，用草捆住。田鸡见他不来，回转唤云： 缘何还不过来？ 蟹曰： 不然几时来了，只因被这歪刺骨缠住在此，所以耽迟来不得。 
现代文：青蛙只一跳就早早地过了水沟。螃蟹刚要走，忽然被一个女人用草把它捆住了。青蛙见螃蟹迟迟不过来，便转身叫道： 什么原因，为什么还不过来？ 螃蟹回答说： 只因为被这个女人缠住在这里，所以给耽误了，迟迟不能过来。要不然，早就过来了。 
English: The frog only had to jump once to get across the ditch. The crab was just about to leave when it was suddenly tied up with grass by a woman. When the frog saw that the crab couldn't come any later, it turned around and called out, "What's the reason, why hasn't it come yet?" The crab replied, "It's only because I'm stuck here with this woman that I'm late and can't get here. Otherwise, I would have come a long time ago."

古文：老鳏
现代文：老鳏
English: Laos

古文：苏州老鳏，人问： 有了令郎么？ 
现代文：苏州有个老光棍，有个人问他说： 有了儿子吗？ 
English: There is an old bachelor in Suzhou. Someone asked him, "Do you have a son?"

古文：答云： 提起小儿，其实心酸。
现代文：老光棍回答说： 一提起小儿，实在让人心酸。
English: The old bachelor replied, "When I mention children, it really makes people sad.

古文：前面妻祖与妻父定亲，说得来垂成了，被一个天杀的用计矗退了。
现代文：当初，我妻子的爷爷给我丈人定亲，眼看着成功了，却被一个该死的王八蛋设计搅散了。
English: At first, my wife's grandad set me up with my in-laws and it seemed to be going well, but it was thrown out of kilter by a f***ing cock-up.

古文：致使妻父不曾娶得妻母，妻母不曾养得贱内，至今小儿杳然。 
现代文：以致我的老丈人没娶成丈母娘，而我丈母娘也就没生下我老婆，直到今天，我的儿子仍没有踪影。 
English: So my father-in-law did not marry my mother-in-law, and my mother-in-law did not give birth to my wife, and to this day there is no trace of my son.

古文：醵金
现代文：醵金
English: Sheet metal

古文：有人遇喜事，一友封分金一星往贺。乃密书封内云： 现五分，赊五分。 
现代文：有个人家里办喜事，他的一位朋友给他送的贺礼只有极少的一点点，贺礼的信封里面有一张纸，上面写着： 现金五分，赊五分。 
English: A friend of his sent him a very small gift for a family celebration. Inside the envelope was a piece of paper that read: "Five cents in cash, five cents in change."

古文：已而此友亦有贺分。
现代文：没过多久，那位朋友的家里也有喜事，他也用极少的一点点贺礼来回敬。
English: It wasn't long before there was joy in that friend's home, and he reciprocated with a very small gift.

古文：其人仍以一星之数答之，乃以空封往，内书云： 退五分，赊五分。 
现代文：于是，他封了一封空的贺礼，里面用信纸写着： 退五分，赊五分。 
English: As a result, he sealed an empty congratulatory letter, in which he wrote on stationery: "Give back five points, take back five points."

古文：露水桌
现代文：露水桌
English: Dewdrop table

古文：一人偶见露水桌子，因以指戏写 谋篡 字样。
现代文：有一个人偶然看到一张桌子满是露水，于是就用手指头在桌面上写了 谋篡 等字闹着玩。
English: One man happened to see a table covered with dew, so he wrote "Trickery" on the table with his finger as a joke.

古文：被一仇家见之，夺桌就走，往府首告。
现代文：没想到被一个仇人看见了，仇人夺过桌子就走，前往官府去告发。
English: Unexpectedly, he was seen by an enemy, who snatched the table and went to the government office to denounce him.

古文：及官坐堂，露水已为日色曝干，字迹减去，官问何事，其人无可说得，慌曰： 小人有桌子一堂，特把这张来看样，不知老爷要买否？ 
现代文：等到官员上堂时，露水已经被太阳晒干了，字迹也消失了。官员问他有什么事情，他无话可说，便慌慌张张禀告说： 小人有许多这样的桌子，特拿了一张来给老爷看看样，不知道老爷是否要买？ 
English: When the official came into the courtroom, the dew had been dried by the sun, and the writing had disappeared. The official asked him what was the matter, and he had nothing to say, so he panicked and wrote an obituary saying: The villain has many such tables, he took one in particular to show the master a sample, I don't know if the master wants to buy it?

古文：僧士诘辩
现代文：僧士诘辩
English: Monk-priest debate

古文：秀才诘问和尚曰： 你们经典内 南无 二字，只应念本音，为何念作 那摩 ？ 
现代文：秀才责问和尚说： 你们经典内 南无 二字，只应该念做本音，为什么念做 那摩 ？ 
English: The scholar scolded the monk, saying, "In your classics, there is no such word as Nan, you should only read the original, why read Nama?

古文：僧亦回问云： 相公四书上 於戏 二字，为何亦读作 呜呼 ？
现代文：和尚也反问说： 四书上 於戏 二字，为何也读做 呜呼 ？
English: The monk also asked back: Why is the second word in the play in the four books also read as "woo"?

古文：如今相公若读 於戏 ，小僧就念 南无 ；相公若是 呜呼 ，小僧自然 那摩 。 
现代文：现今你如果读成 於戏 ，我就念 南无 ；你如果念成 呜呼 ，我自然念成 那摩 。 
English: Nowadays, if you read it as 戏, I would read 南無; if you read it as 呜呼, I would naturally read it as 那摩.

古文：识气
现代文：识气
English: Sense and Sensibility

古文：一瞎子双目不明，善能闻香识气。有秀才拿一《西厢记》与他闻。曰： 《西厢记》。 
现代文：有个瞎子，擅长闻香识别气味。有个秀才拿《西厢记》给他闻，瞎子说： 《西厢记》。 
English: There was a blind man who was good at smelling and identifying odors. An expert smelled "West Side Story" for him, and the blind man said: "West Side Story."

古文：问： 何以知之？ 答曰： 有些脂粉气。 
现代文：秀才问瞎子凭什么猜到的，瞎子回答说： 我闻到些许脂粉气味。 
English: The scholar asked the blind man how he knew, and the blind man replied, "I smell a little grease."

古文：又拿《三国志》与他闻。曰： 《三国志》。 
现代文：秀才又拿《三国志》给他闻，瞎子闻了闻说： 是《三国志》。 
English: Xiu Cai took the "History of the Three Kingdoms" and read it to him. The blind man read it and said, "It's the "History of the Three Kingdoms."

古文：又问： 何以知之？ 答曰： 有些兵气。 
现代文：秀才又问是怎么猜到的，瞎子回答说： 书中有些兵刃的气息。 
English: The scholar then asked how he had guessed, to which the blind man replied: "There is something of the sword in the book.

古文：秀才以为奇异。却将自作的文字与他闻。瞎子曰： 此是你的佳作。 
现代文：秀才感到十分奇怪惊异，就把自己写的文章给他闻，瞎子说： 这是你的佳作。 
English: The scholar felt very strange and surprised, so he read the article he had written to him. The blind man said, "This is your masterpiece."

古文：问： 你怎知？ 
现代文：秀才问： 你是怎么知道的？ 
English: The scholar asked, "How did you know that?"

古文：答曰： 有些屁气。 
现代文：瞎子回答说： 有些屁气。 
English: The blind man replied, "I have a bad temper."

古文：后场
现代文：后场
English: The back court

古文：宾主二人同睡，客索夜壶。
现代文：主人和客人睡在一屋内，客人找夜壶。
English: The host and the guest sleep in one room, the guest has to find a chamber pot.

古文：主人说： 在床下，未曾倒得。 
现代文：主人说： 在床下，没有倒掉。 
English: The owner said: "It was under the bed, it didn't fall over."

古文：只好棚过头地场，后场断断再来不得了。
现代文：客人只能经过头一场，后场肯定再来不得了。
English: Guests can only go through the first game, the second game is sure to come.

古文：借粮
现代文：借粮
English: Borrowed food

古文：孔子在陈绝粮，命颜子往回回国借之。以其名与国号相同，冀有情熟。
现代文：孔子带着弟子在陈国不被陈国容纳，师生饿得发慌，孔子就叫颜回到回回国去借粮，考虑到颜回的回与回回国的名号一样，会有亲情之感，一定会成功。
English: Confucius and his disciples were not accepted by Chen Guo in Chen Guo, and the teachers and students were so hungry that they panicked. Confucius asked Yan to go back to China to borrow grain. Considering that Yan's return is the same as the name of returning to China, there will be a sense of kinship and it will definitely succeed.

古文：子贡请往，自称平昔极奉承。常曰： 赐也何敢望回回。 
现代文：弟子子贡请求去借粮，见了回回国酋长，极尽奉承，并用孔子的一句话 赐也何敢望回回。 
English: Disciple Gong asked to borrow grain, met the returnee chief, flattered him to the utmost, and used a word from Confucius, "Give, and how dare you hope to return."

古文：群回大喜。以白粮一担，先令携去，许以陆续运付。
现代文：博得回回高兴，给白面一担，叫他先带回去，以后还要陆续运去。
English: Bo was delighted and gave the white-faced man a load, telling him to take it back first, and then to transport it one after another.

古文：子贡归，述之夫子。孔子攒眉曰： 粮便骗了一担，只是文理不通。 
现代文：子贡回来告诉孔子，孔子皱紧眉毛说： 粮虽然骗了一担，只是文理不通。 
English: Zigong returned and told Confucius. Confucius furrowed his brow and said, "Although he cheated me out of a load of grain, he is not literate.

古文：杨相公
现代文：杨相公
English: Yang Sangong

古文：一人问曰： 相公尊姓？ 
现代文：一个人问另一个人： 贵姓？ 
English: One asks the other: What is your name?

古文：曰： 姓杨。 
现代文：那人答： 姓杨。 
English: The man replied: My surname is Yang.

古文：其人曰： 既是羊，为甚无角？ 
现代文：这人说： 既然是羊，怎么没有角？ 
English: The man said, "If it is a sheep, why doesn't it have horns?"

古文：士怒曰： 呆狗入出的。 
现代文：那人怒骂道： 呆狗入出的。 
English: The man scolded, "Stupid dogs get in and out.

古文：那人错会其意，曰： 嗄！ 
现代文：这人会错了意说： 嗄！原来如此！ 
English: This person will mistakenly say:!So it is!

古文：无一物
现代文：无一物
English: Nothing at all

古文：穷人往各寺院，窃取神物灵心。止有土地庙未取，及去挖开，见空空如也。乃骇叹曰： 看他巾便戴一顶，原来腹中毫无一物！ 
现代文：有个穷人到各寺院窃取神物灵心，只有土地庙还没有去偷，等到他来到土地庙挖开土地爷的肚皮，见肚子里什么也没有，便惊叹道说： 看他头巾倒是戴了一顶，原来腹中毫无一物！ 
English: There was a poor man who went to all the temples to steal the sacred relics. Only the land temple had not yet stolen them. When he arrived at the land temple, he dug into the belly of the land lord and saw that there was nothing in his stomach. He was amazed and said, "Look, he is wearing a turban, but there is nothing in his stomach!"

古文：穷秀才
现代文：穷秀才
English: The Poor Scholar

古文：有初死见冥王者，王谓其生前受用太过，判来生去做一秀才，与以五子。
现代文：有个刚刚死去的人，见到了阎王，阎王说他生前享乐挥霍太过分，就判他来生做个秀才，并生养五个儿子。
English: There was a man who had just died, and when he saw the king of hell, the king of hell said that he had enjoyed and squandered too much in his lifetime, and sentenced him to be a genius in his next life, and to have five sons.

古文：鬼吏禀曰： 此人罪重，不应如此善遣。 
现代文：鬼吏禀报说： 这个人罪行很重，不该对其如此行善道。 
English: The ghost official reported: This person's crime is very serious, and he should not be treated so kindly.

古文：王笑曰： 正惟罪重，我要处他一个穷秀才，把他许多儿子，活活累杀他罢了。 凑不起
现代文：阎王笑着说： 正因为其罪重，我要判他来生做个穷秀才，让他许多儿子活活累死他。 凑不起
English: The king of hell smiled and said, "Because of the seriousness of his crime, I am going to sentence him to be a poor scholar in the next life, and let his many sons wear him down to death.

古文：一士子赴试。艰于构思。
现代文：有个人应考，深感构思艰难，始终不能成篇。
English: There is a person to take the exam, deeply feeling that it is difficult to conceive, and it can never be made into an article.

古文：诸生随牌俱出。接考者候久。甲仆问乙仆曰： 不知作文一篇，约有多少字？ 
现代文：许多考生都出了考场，接他的人等候他已有很长时间，甲仆问乙仆说： 不知道做一篇文章，约用多少字？ 
English: Many candidates have left the examination hall. The person who picked him up has been waiting for him for a long time. Servant A asked Servant B, "I don't know, how many words are needed to write an article?"

古文：乙曰： 想来不过五六百。 
现代文：乙回答说： 大概不超过五六百。 
English: B replied: Probably no more than five or six hundred.

古文：甲曰： 五六百字，难道胸中便没有了，此时还不出来？ 
现代文：甲说： 五六百字，难道肚里还没有？为何此时还不出来？ 
English: A said: "Five or six hundred words, don't you have it in your stomach yet? Why can't you get it out at this time?"

古文：乙曰： 五六百字虽有在肚里，只是一时凑不起来耳。 
现代文：乙回答说： 肚里虽然有五六百字，只是一时凑不起来呀！ 
English: B replied: Although I have five or six hundred words in my stomach, I just can't get them together!

古文：不完卷
现代文：不完卷
English: Incomplete roll

古文：一生不完卷，考了四等，受杖。
现代文：有个考生未做完试卷，判为四等受到杖罚。
English: A candidate who failed to complete his examination paper was given the cane as a fourth-class punishment.

古文：对友曰： 我只缺得半篇。 
现代文：考生对其朋友说： 我只不过缺了半篇。 
English: The candidate said to his friend, "I'm only half way through.

古文：友云： 还好，若做完，看了定要打杀。 
现代文：朋友回答道： 还好，如果做完，看了定要被打死。 
English: My friend replied, "It's okay. If I finish it, I'm sure I'll be beaten to death."

古文：求签
现代文：求签
English: Call for signatures

古文：一士岁考求签。通陈曰： 考在六等求上上，四等下下。 
现代文：有个人参加岁考后算命求签，祈求说： 考在六等最好，考在四等最不好。 
English: There was a person who asked for a fortune-teller's signature after taking part in the year-end examination, praying: "It's best to take the examination in the sixth grade, and it's worst to take the examination in the fourth grade.

古文：庙祝曰： 相公差矣。
现代文：庙里管签人说： 你错了。
English: A temple official said: "You are wrong.

古文：四等止杖责，如何反是下下？ 
现代文：考在四等只受到杖罚，怎么反是最不好？ 
English: In the fourth-grade exam, I was only punished with a cane. How is that the worst?

古文：士曰： 非汝所知，六等黜退，极是干净。
现代文：那个人说： 你有所不知，考在六等赶出去极为痛快。
English: That person said, "You don't know something, it's very pleasant to get out of the exam in the sixth grade.

古文：若是四等，看了我的文字，决被打杀。 
现代文：如果考在四等，看了我写的东西，一定会被打死。 
English: If you were in the fourth grade and read what I wrote, you would be beaten to death.

古文：梦入泮
现代文：梦入泮
English: Dream into a cocoon

古文：府取童生祈梦。 考可望入泮否？ 
现代文：官府考取秀才，有个人考前祈梦说： 不知考试能否考中？ 
English: In the examination of talents by the government, there was a person who prayed before the exam and said: I don't know if I can pass the exam.

古文：神问曰： 汝祖父是科甲否？ 
现代文：神问道： 你祖父是否科甲出身？ 
English: God asked, "Was your grandfather from Kechenga?"

古文：曰： 不是。 
现代文：回答说： 不是。 
English: "No," he replied.

古文：又问： 家中富饶否？ 
现代文：又问： 家中富裕吗？ 
English: He also asked: Is the family rich?

古文：曰： 无得。 
现代文：回答说： 不富裕。 
English: He replied: Not rich.

古文：神笑曰： 既是这等，你做甚么梦！ 
现代文：神笑道： 既是这样，你还做什么梦！ 
English: Shen laughed, "Since this is the case, what kind of dream are you still having?"

古文：谒孔庙
现代文：谒孔庙
English: Temple of Confucius

古文：有以银钱汇缘入泮者，拜谒孔庙。孔子下席答之。
现代文：有个用钱买通入学的人，拜谒孔庙，孔子从神座上下来答谢。
English: A man who bought his way into school paid his respects at the Confucius Temple, and Confucius came down from the throne to thank him.

古文：士曰： 今日是夫子弟子礼，应坐受。 
现代文：那个人说： 今天是您的弟子拜您，您应该坐在神座上接受礼拜。 
English: The man said: Today it is your disciples who are worshipping you, you should sit on the throne and receive worship.

古文：孔子曰： 岂敢，你是孔方兄的弟子，断不受拜。 
现代文：孔子说： 岂敢，你是孔方兄的弟子，绝对不能受拜。 
English: Confucius said, "Don't you dare, you are a disciple of Brother Kong Fang, you absolutely cannot be worshipped.

古文：狗头师
现代文：狗头师
English: Dog Head Troupe

古文：馆师岁暮买舟回家。
现代文：有个教书先生乘船回家。
English: There was a teacher who went home by boat.

古文：舟子问曰： 相公贵庚？ 
现代文：艄公问他： 您多大年纪了？ 
English: Shao Gong asked him: How old are you?

古文：答曰： 属狗的，开年已是五十岁了。 
现代文：先生回答说： 属狗的，过了年就是五十岁了。 
English: The teacher replied, "In dog years, that would be fifty years old.

古文：舟人曰： 我也属狗，为何贵贱不等？ 
现代文：艄公说： 我也属狗，为什么你我贵贱不同？ 
English: Shao Gong said: I am also a dog, why are you different from me?

古文：又问： 哪一月生的？ 答曰： 正月。 
现代文：艄公又问先生哪个月生的，先生回答说： 正月。 
English: He also asked him what month he was born in, to which he replied: "New Year's Day."

古文：舟子大悟曰： 是了是了，怪不得！我十二月生，是个狗尾，所以摇了这一世。相公正月生，是狗头，所以教了这一世。 
现代文：艄公一听恍然大悟，说： 对了，对了，怪不得我们贵贱不同，这是因为我生在十二月是个狗尾，所以摇了这一生；你是正月生的，是个狗头，所以教了这一生。 
English: "That's right, that's right, it's no wonder we're so different. It's because I was born in December with a dog's tail, so I've been wagged all my life. You were born in the first month with a dog's head, so you've been taught all your life.

古文：狗坐馆
现代文：狗坐馆
English: The dog is sitting in the house

古文：一人惯说谎。对亲家云： 舍间有三宝，一牛每日能行千里；一鸡每更止啼一声；又一狗善能读书。 
现代文：有个人惯说谎话，对亲家说： 家里有三宝：一牛每日能行千里，一鸡每更只啼一声，又有一狗擅长读书。 
English: A person who was used to telling lies said to his relatives: There are three treasures in our home: a cow can travel a thousand miles a day, a chicken clucks once in a while, and a dog is good at reading.

古文：亲家骇云： 有此异事，来日必要登堂求看。 
现代文：亲家听了十分震惊，说： 有此奇特的事，来日一定要登门看看。 
English: Hearing this, the relatives were very shocked and said, "This is a strange thing, you must come and see it next time."

古文：其人归与妻述之。 一时说了谎，怎生回护？ 妻曰： 不妨，我自有处。 
现代文：好说谎的人回家后把自己说的谎话告诉了妻子，并为一时说了谎不好圆场而犯愁。妻子说： 不怕，我自有办法。 
English: The good liar went home and told his wife about the lie he had told, and was saddened by the fact that he had lied for a while. His wife said, "Don't be afraid, I have my own way."

古文：次日，亲家来访，内云： 早上往北京去了。 
现代文：第二天亲家来访，说谎人的妻子说： 丈夫早上到京城去了。 
English: The next day, when the family came to visit, the wife of the liar said: "My husband went to Beijing in the morning.

古文：问几时回？答曰： 七八日就来的。 
现代文：亲家问几时回来，回答说： 七八天就回来。 
English: When his family asked him when he would return, he replied, "I'll be back in seven or eight days."

古文：又问为何能快，曰： 骑了自家牛去。 
现代文：亲家又问： 怎能那么快就回来？ 回答说： 骑了自家的牛去的。 
English: His relatives also asked, "How did you get back so quickly?" He replied, "I rode my family's cow."

古文：问： 宅上还有报更鸡？ 
现代文：亲家问： 你家里的报更鸡呢？ 
English: A relative asked: What about the chicken in your home?

古文：适值亭中午鸡啼，即指曰： 只此便是，不但夜里报更，日闻生客来也报的。 
现代文：这时，院子里正好有鸡啼鸣，说谎人的妻子马上指其说： 那个鸡便是，不但夜里啼鸣报更，白天听到客人来也要报的。 
English: At this time, there happened to be a rooster crowing in the yard. The liar's wife immediately pointed at it and said, "That rooster is not only crowing at night, but also crowing when it hears guests coming during the day."

古文：又问： 读书狗请借一观。 
现代文：亲家又问： 读书狗请让我看一看。 
English: The relatives also asked: "Please let me have a look at the reading dog."

古文：答曰： 不瞒亲家说，只为家寒，出外坐馆去了。 
现代文：回答说： 不瞒亲家说，只为家寒，那狗出外住馆教书去了。 
English: He replied, "I won't lie to my family and say that it was just because of the cold weather that the dog went outside to live and teach.

古文：讲书
现代文：讲书
English: Reading a book

古文：一先生讲书，至 康子馈药 。徒问： 是煎药是丸药？ 先生向主人夸奖曰： 非令郎美质不能问，非学生博学不能答。
现代文：有个先生讲书讲到康子赠药时，学生问是煎药还是丸药，先生向主人夸奖道： 非你的儿子聪明绝顶不能问，非我学识渊博不能答。
English: When a teacher was giving a lecture on Kang Zi's gift of medicine, a student asked whether it was a decoction or a pill. The teacher praised his master, saying: If your son isn't smart, he can't ask, and if I'm not well-read, I can't answer.

古文：上节 乡人傩 ，傩的自然是丸药。下节又是煎药。不是用炉火，如何就 厩焚 起来！ 
现代文：上一节讲 乡人傩 ，举行驱疫逐鬼的活动，用的自然是丸药，下节肯定用的是煎药，否则炉火怎么会把马棚燃烧起来呢？ 
English: In the previous section, we talked about the "village people" and the activities to drive out the plague and drive out the ghosts. Naturally, pills were used, and in the next section, decoctions were definitely used. Otherwise, how could the fire burn down the stable?

古文：请先生
现代文：请先生
English: Please, sir.

古文：一师惯谋人馆，被冥王访知，着夜叉拿来。
现代文：有个教书先生一向好图谋到富贵人家教书，其劣行被冥王知道了，便让夜叉去捉拿他。
English: There was a teacher who had always been good at scheming to teach at the homes of the rich and famous. His misdeeds became known to the Dark Lord, and he had Yasha go and capture him.

古文：师躲在门内不出。鬼卒设计哄骗曰： 你快出来，有一好馆请你。 
现代文：先生躲在门内不出来，鬼卒设计哄骗说： 你快点出来，有个好地方请你去教书。 
English: The teacher was hiding inside the door and couldn't get out, so the ghost said, "Hurry up and come out, there's a good place for you to teach."

古文：师闻有馆，即便趋出，被夜叉擒住。
现代文：先生听了，立即跑出来，被夜叉擒住。
English: When the teacher heard this, he immediately ran out and was chased by the nightingale.

古文：先生曰： 看你这鬼头鬼脑，原不像个请先生的。 
现代文：先生说： 看你这鬼头鬼脑，本来就不像请先生的。 
English: The teacher said, "Look at your head, it doesn't look like your teacher's.

古文：兄弟延师
现代文：兄弟延师
English: Brother Enshi

古文：有兄弟两人，共延一师，分班供给。
现代文：有兄弟二人，请了一个教书先生，膳食轮流供给。
English: There are two brothers who have invited a teacher to take turns providing meals.

古文：每交班，必互嫌师瘦，怪供给之不丰。
现代文：每次轮换时，兄弟两人都嫌教书先生体瘦，责怪对方膳食不好。
English: During each rotation, both brothers complained about their teacher's thin body and blamed the other for not eating well.

古文：于是兄弟交师于约。师轮至日，即称斤两以为交班肥瘦之验。
现代文：于是兄弟俩约定，等到轮换之日，用秤称一下教书先生的体重作为轮换时肥瘦的凭证。
English: So the two brothers agreed that on the day of the rotation, they would use a scale to weigh the teacher's weight as proof of his weight during the rotation.

古文：一日，弟将交师于兄，乃令师餐而去，即上秤，师偶撒一屁。
现代文：一天，弟弟欲将教书先生交给哥哥，于是令教书先生饱食后再去称量。
English: One day, the younger brother wanted to give the teacher to his older brother, so he made the teacher eat his fill before weighing him.

古文：乃咎之曰： 秤上买卖，岂可轻易撒出。说不得原替我吃了下去。 
现代文：到了称体重的时候，教书先生碰巧放了一屁，弟弟立即责怪说： 秤上买卖，岂可轻易放出，快替我吃了下去。 
English: When it came time for the weigh-in, the teacher happened to fart. His younger brother immediately blamed him and said, "You can't just let it out on the scale. Go ahead and eat it for me."

古文：退束脩
现代文：退束脩
English: Throw away the shackles

古文：一师学浅。善读别字，主人恶之。
现代文：有个先生爱读别字，主人很讨厌他。
English: There was a gentleman who loved to read and his master hated him.

古文：与师约，每读一别字，除脩一分。
现代文：便和先生约定，每读一别字去掉酬金一分。
English: He then agreed with the teacher to reduce the reward by one point for each additional word read.

古文：至岁终，退除将尽。止余银三分，封送之。师怒曰： 是何言兴，是何言兴！ 
现代文：到了年终的时候，按照约定扣除念别字的罚金，酬金只剩三分银子，主人送给先生，先生大怒说： 是何言舆，是何言舆？ 
English: At the end of the year, in accordance with the agreement, the fine for reciting the last word was deducted, and the reward was only three silver cents. The master gave it to the teacher, and the teacher said angrily: "What is it, what is it?"

古文：主人曰： 如今再扣二分，存银一分矣。 
现代文：主人说： 现在又扣二分，仅存银一分了。 
English: The owner said, "Now I have to deduct another two cents. I only have one silver cent left."

古文：东家母在旁曰： 一年辛苦，半除也罢。 
现代文：主人的妻子在旁边说： 一年辛苦，除掉酬金一半就行了。 
English: The owner's wife said next to him: "After a year of hard work, it's enough to get rid of half of the remuneration.

古文：先生近前作谢曰： 夫人不言，言必有中。 
现代文：先生上前作谢说： 夫人不言，言必有中。 
English: The teacher came forward to thank her and said: Madam, if you don't say anything, you're bound to say something.

古文：主人曰： 恰好连这一分，干净拿进去。 赤壁赋
现代文：主人说： 恰好连这一分全都拿回去。 赤壁赋
English: The owner said, "I'll take it all back, even if it's just this one point."

古文：庸师惯读别字。
现代文：有个平庸的教书先生好读别字。
English: There is a mediocre teacher who is good at spelling.

古文：一夜，与徒讲论前后《赤壁》两赋，竟念 赋 字为贼字。
现代文：一天晚上为学生讲授《赤壁》前后两赋，竟把 赋 字念成 贼 字。
English: One evening, he was giving a lecture on the two fu characters in "Red Cliff" to his students, and he actually pronounced the fu character as the thief character.

古文：适有偷儿潜伺窗外，师乃朗诵大言曰： 这前面《赤壁贼》呀。 
现代文：正巧有个小偷潜藏在窗外，教书先生高声朗诵道： 这前面《赤壁贼》呀。 
English: It just so happened that there was a thief lurking outside the window, and the teacher recited aloud: "This is the Red Robber.

古文：贼大惊，因思前面既觉，不若往房后穿逾而入。
现代文：小偷十分惊慌，心想房前已被人察觉，不如到房后穿越而入。
English: The thief was very alarmed, thinking that someone had already noticed him in front of the room, so it would be better to cross the room and enter it.

古文：时已夜深，师讲完，往后房就寝。
现代文：此时夜已深，教书先生已经讲完，到后房就寝。
English: At this time, it was late at night, the teacher had finished his lecture and went to bed in the back room.

古文：既上床，复与徒论后面《赤壁赋》，亦如前读。偷儿在外叹息曰： 我前后行藏，悉被此人识破，人家请了这样先生，看家狗都不消养得了！ 
现代文：上床后又与学生论后面《赤壁赋》，如前读成 赤壁贼 ，小偷在房外听后叹息道： 我前后行踪都被此人识破，人家请了这样的先生，看家狗都不需要养了！ 
English: After going to bed, he talks with the students about "Red Cliff Fu" in the back, as if reading "Red Cliff Thief" in front, the thief sighs after listening outside the room: This person has seen my whereabouts before and after, people have invited such a teacher, and there is no need to raise a watchdog!

古文：於戏左读
现代文：於戏左读
English: Reading from left to right in the play

古文：有蒙训者，首教《大学》。至 於戏前王不忘 句，竟如字读之。
现代文：有个启蒙先生，先教《大学》篇，讲到 於戏前王不忘 句，竟然按字读音。
English: There was a teacher of initiation, who first taught the "university" part, and talked about how the king did not forget the sentence before the play, and even read it by heart.

古文：主曰： 误矣，宜读作 呜呼 。 
现代文：主人说： 错了，应读成 呜呼 。 
English: The owner said: "Wrong, it should be read as "woo."

古文：师从之。
现代文：教书先生听从了主人的意见。
English: The teacher followed his master's advice.

古文：至冬间，读《论语》注： 傩虽古礼而近於戏。 乃读做呜呼。
现代文：到了冬天，读《论语》注 傩虽古礼而近於戏 ，教书先生把 於戏 读做 呜呼 。
English: In winter, when reading the Analects, although it is an ancient ritual and close to the play, the teacher read the play as a choreography.

古文：主人曰： 又误矣，此乃於戏也。 
现代文：主人说： 又错了，此处应读成 於戏 。 
English: The owner said: Wrong again, this should be read as a play.

古文：师大怒，诉其友曰： 这东家甚难理会。只 於戏 两字，从年头直与我拗到年尾。 
现代文：教书先生十分恼怒，向其朋友诉说道： 这东家真难伺候，只 於戏 两字，从年初一直跟我拗到年末。 
English: The teacher was very angry and said to his friend, "It's really hard to serve this school, it's just a trick, from the beginning of the year to the end of the year.

古文：中酒
现代文：中酒
English: Chinese liquor

古文：一师设教，徒问 大学之道，如何讲？ 师佯醉曰： 汝偏拣醉时来问我。 
现代文：有个先生执教，弟子问 《大学》之道 如何讲，先生假装醉酒说： 你偏找我醉酒的时候来问我。 
English: There was a teacher who was teaching, and his pupil asked him how to say "university." The teacher pretended to be drunk and said, "You came to me when I was drunk.

古文：归与妻言之。妻曰： 《大学》是书名， 之道 是书中之道理。 
现代文：先生回家后对妻子讲了白天弟子所求教的问题，妻子说： 《大学》是书名， 之道 是书中道理。 
English: After the teacher went home, he told his wife about the questions his disciples had asked during the day. His wife said, "College" is the title of the book, and "Way" is the meaning of the book.

古文：师颔之。
现代文：先生点头称是。
English: The teacher nodded yes.

古文：明日，谓其徒曰： 汝辈无知，昨日乘醉便来问我，今日我醒，偏不来问，何也？
现代文：第二天先生对弟子说： 你们无知，昨天乘我醉酒时来问我，今天我酒醒了，偏又不来问，为什么？
English: The next day, the master said to his disciples: "You are ignorant. Yesterday, you took advantage of my drunkenness to question me. Today, I woke up from my drunkenness, but you didn't come to question me. Why?

古文：汝昨日所问何义？ 
现代文：你昨天所问的是什么问题？ 
English: What was the question you asked yesterday?

古文：对以 《大学》之道 。
现代文：弟子回答说是 《大学》之道 。
English: The disciple replied that it was the way of "university."

古文：师如妻言释之。
现代文：先生按照妻子的话讲解了什么是 《大学》之道 。
English: According to his wife's words, the teacher explained what the "university" way is.

古文：弟子又问：  在明明德 如何讲？ 
现代文：弟子又问：  在明明德 ，如何讲？ 
English: The disciple asked again, "In Mingmingde, how do you say it?"

古文：师遽捧额曰： 且住，我还中酒在此。 
现代文：先生急忙捧住脑袋说： 暂且停止，我现在又醉了。 
English: The teacher quickly clutched his head and said, "Let's stop for now, I'm drunk again."

古文：先生意气
现代文：先生意气
English: Mr. Spirit

古文：主人问先生曰： 为何讲书总不明白？ 
现代文：主人问教书先生道： 为什么讲书总不明白？ 
English: The master asked the teacher: Why do you always fail to understand the lectures?

古文：师曰： 兄是相知的，我胸中若有，不讲出来，天诛地灭！ 
现代文：先生说： 你是了解我的，我胸中如果有，不讲出来，天诛地灭。 
English: The teacher said, "You understand me. If there is something in my heart, if I don't say it, I'll be damned."

古文：又问： 既讲不出，也该坐定些。 
现代文：主人又问： 既然讲不出，也该坐稳些。 
English: The host asked again, "Since you can't speak, you should sit more firmly."

古文：答云： 只为家下不足，故不得不走。 
现代文：先生回答说： 只因为家中不足，故不得不走动。 
English: The teacher replied, "It's just that there's not enough food in the house, so I have to walk around."

古文：主人云： 既如此，为甚供给略淡泊，就要见过？ 
现代文：主人说： 既然这样，为什么饮食供给稍差点，就牢骚满腹？ 
English: The host said, "In that case, why are you grumbling because the food supply is a little short?"

古文：先生毅然变色曰： 若这点意气没了，还像个先生哩！ 
现代文：教书先生陡然变色说： 如果这点意气没了，还像个先生吗？ 
English: The teacher suddenly changed color and said, "If this bit of spirit is gone, do you still look like a teacher?"

古文：梦周公
现代文：梦周公
English: Meng Zhou Gong

古文：一师昼寝，而不容学生瞌睡，学生诘之。师谬言曰： 我乃梦周公耳。 
现代文：有个教书先生，白天睡觉，而不允许学生瞌睡。学生反问先生为何白天睡觉，先生谎骗道： 我是梦周公去了。 
English: There was a teacher who slept during the day and did not allow his students to doze off. When the students asked him why he slept during the day, the teacher lied and said: I went to see Meng Zhou Gong.

古文：明昼，其徒亦效之，师以戒方击醒曰： 汝何得如此？ 徒曰： 亦往见周公耳。 师曰： 周公何语？ 
现代文：第二天白天，其弟子也仿效先生白天睡觉，先生用戒尺击醒学生说： 你为何这样？ 弟子说： 我也去见周公。 先生说： 周公说了什么？ 
English: The next day, during the day, his disciple also followed his teacher's example and went to sleep during the day. The teacher woke up the student with a ruler and said, "Why are you doing this?" The disciple said, "I'm also going to see Zhou Gong." The teacher said, "What did Zhou Gong say?"

古文：答曰： 周公说，昨日并不曾会见尊师。 
现代文：弟子回答说： 周公说昨天不曾会见尊师。 
English: The disciple replied, "Zhou Gong said that he did not meet with his teacher yesterday.

古文：问馆
现代文：问馆
English: The Information Centre

古文：乞儿制一新竹筒，众丐沽酒称贺。
现代文：有个乞丐做了一个新竹筒，许多乞丐买酒相庆贺。
English: A beggar made a new bamboo canister, and many beggars bought wine to celebrate.

古文：每饮毕，辄呼曰： 庆新管酒干。 
现代文：每当喝完一竹筒，就欢呼喊道： 庆新管酒干。 
English: Every time they finished drinking a bamboo tube, they cheered and shouted: "Qingxin cane wine is dry."

古文：一师正在觅馆，偶经过闻之，误听以为庆新馆也。急向前揖之曰： 列位既有了新馆，把这旧馆让与学生罢！ 
现代文：有个教书先生正在觅馆，偶然经过听到乞丐欢呼，误听为庆新馆也，急忙上前向众乞丐作揖道： 诸位既然有了新馆，把这旧馆让给学生我吧！ 
English: A schoolteacher was looking for a hall and happened to pass by and hear the beggars cheering, mishearing it as a celebration of the new hall, and hurried forward to make a speech to the beggars: Since you have a new hall, let me have this old hall for my students!

古文：改对
现代文：改对
English: Corrected to

古文：训蒙先生出两字课与学生对曰： 马嘶。 
现代文：有个教幼童的先生出两字题让学生对，先生说： 马嘶。 
English: There was a teacher of young children who asked his students to answer a two-word question. The teacher said: Ma Xie.

古文：一徒对曰： 鹏奋。 
现代文：一弟子对说： 鹏奋。 
English: One disciple said: Peng Fen.

古文：师曰： 好，不须改得。 
现代文：先生说： 好，不须再改。 
English: The teacher said: OK, no need to change it.

古文：又一徒曰： 牛屎。 
现代文：又一个弟子对道： 牛屎。 
English: Another disciple replied, "Cow dung."

古文：师叱曰： 狗屁！ 
现代文：先生叱责说： 狗屁！ 
English: The teacher scolded: "Shit!

古文：徒亦揖而欲行，师止之曰： 你对也不曾对好，如何便走？ 
现代文：弟子揖礼想要退下，先生让其停下说： 你对也不曾对好，为什么便要离去？ 
English: Disciple Xie Li wanted to withdraw, but his master stopped him and said, "You have never been right, so why are you leaving?"

古文：徒曰： 我对的是 牛屎 ，先生改的是 狗屁 。 
现代文：弟子说： 我对的是 牛屎 ，先生改的是 狗屁 。 
English: The disciple said: I was right about the cow dung, but the teacher changed it to dog shit.

古文：挞徒
现代文：挞徒
English: 徒

古文：馆中二徒，一聪俊，一呆笨。
现代文：有个先生教两个学生，一个学生聪明，一个学生呆笨。
English: There was a teacher who taught two students, one of whom was clever and the other stupid.

古文：师出夜课，适庭中栽有梅树。即指曰： 老梅。 
现代文：晚上先生教对子，正巧庭院中栽有梅树，于是指着说： 老梅。 
English: In the evening, when he was teaching his classmates, there happened to be a plum tree in the courtyard, so he pointed at it and said, "Old plum tree."

古文：一徒见盆内种柏，应声曰： 小柏。 
现代文：一个学生见到盆中种柏，应声答道： 小柏。 
English: A student saw a cypress tree in a pot and replied, "Small cypress tree."

古文：师曰： 善。 
现代文：先生说： 对得好。 
English: The teacher said: That's right.

古文：又命一徒： 可对好些。 徒曰： 阿爹。 
现代文：先生又让另一个学生对，学生应对道： 阿爹。 
English: The teacher asked another student to do the same, and the student replied, "Daddy."

古文：师以其对得胡说，怒挞其首。徒哭曰： 他小柏不打，倒来打阿爹。 
现代文：先生因其胡对，怒打其头，学生哭着说： 先生不打他 小伯 ，倒来打 阿爹 。 
English: The teacher hit him angrily on the head because of his beard, and the student cried and said, "The teacher didn't hit him like an uncle, but like a father."

古文：吃粪
现代文：吃粪
English: Eating feces

古文：师在田间散步，见乡人挑粪灌菜。
现代文：有个教书先生在田间散步，看见乡下人挑粪灌菜。
English: A schoolteacher was walking in the fields when he saw a villager collecting manure and watering vegetables.

古文：师讶曰： 菜是人吃的，如何泼此秽物在上？ 
现代文：先生惊讶道： 菜是人吃的，为什么泼此秽物在上边？ 
English: Surprised, the teacher said, "People eat the food, so why put this filth on top?

古文：乡人曰： 相公只会读书，不晓我农家的事，菜若不用粪浇，便成苦菜矣。 
现代文：乡下人说： 你只会看书，不懂得我们农家的事。菜如果不用粪浇，便成苦菜了。 
English: The villager said, "You only read books, you don't know anything about our farming family. If you don't douse the vegetables with manure, they'll turn into bitter greens."

古文：一日东家以苦菜膳师，师问： 今日为何菜味苦之甚？ 
现代文：有一天东家拿苦菜作为饭食给先生吃，先生问： 今天为什么菜味甚苦？ 
English: One day, the owner of the house served bitter cabbage as a meal to the teacher. The teacher asked, "Why does the dish taste so bitter today?"

古文：馆僮曰： 因相公嫌龌龊。故将不浇粪的菜请相公。 
现代文：仆人说： 因为你厌恶龌龊的东西，所以将不浇粪的菜拿给你吃。 
English: The servant said, "Because you have an aversion to filth, I will serve you vegetables that have not been subjected to manure."

古文：师曰： 既如此，粪味可鉴，拿些来待我吃罢。 
现代文：先生说： 既然如此，粪味可鉴，拿些粪来让我吃吧。 
English: The teacher said: In this case, the smell of excrement can be judged, so take some excrement and let me eat it.

古文：咬饼
现代文：咬饼
English: Bite of cake

古文：一蒙师见徒手持一饼。戏之曰： 我咬个月湾与你看。 
现代文：有个教幼童的先生看见弟子手拿一饼，便对弟子开玩笑说： 我咬个月牙给你看。 
English: A teacher of young children saw a disciple holding a cake in his hand and jokingly said to him, "I'll show you my crescent teeth."

古文：既咬一口。
现代文：接着咬了一口。
English: Then he took a bite.

古文：又曰： 我再咬个定胜与你看。 
现代文：之后又说： 我再咬个月牙一定好于上次给你看。 
English: Then he said, "I'm sure my next bite will be better than the last time I showed it to you."

古文：徒不舍，乃以手掩之。
现代文：弟子不给，并用手遮掩住饼。
English: The disciple refused and covered the bread with his hand.

古文：误咬其指。
现代文：先生又咬一口，误伤弟子手指。
English: The teacher took another bite, accidentally injuring the disciple's finger.

古文：乃呵曰： 没事，没事，今日不要你念书了，家中若问你，只说是狗夺饼吃，咬伤的。 
现代文：于是哄弟子说： 没事没事，今天不让你念书了，家里人如果问你为何手指有伤，你只说是狗抢饼吃，咬伤的。 
English: So he coaxed his disciple to say, "It's all right, it's all right. I won't let you study today. If your family asks you why your finger is hurt, you'll just say it was bitten by a dog trying to steal a cookie."

古文：是我
现代文：是我
English: It's me

古文：一师值清明放学，率徒郊外踏青。
现代文：有个教书先生逢清明放学，带弟子到郊外踏青。
English: There was a teacher who used to take his pupils to the countryside after school.

古文：师在前行，偶撒一屁，徒曰： 先生，清明鬼叫了。 
现代文：先生在前边走，偶然放了一屁，弟子说： 先生，清明鬼叫了。 
English: The teacher was walking in front of him and accidentally let out a fart. The disciple said, "Teacher, the Ching Ming demon is calling."

古文：先生曰： 放狗屁！ 
现代文：先生说： 放狗屁。 
English: The teacher said: "Shut the fuck up."

古文：少顷，大雨倾盆。田间一瓦，为水淹没，仅露其背。徒又指谓先生曰： 这像是个乌龟。 
现代文：不一会儿，大雨倾盆，田间一瓦被水淹没仅露其背，弟子又指着对先生说： 这像是个乌龟。 
English: After a while, heavy rain poured down and a cow in the field was submerged in water, only showing its back. The disciple pointed to his master and said, "This looks like a turtle."

古文：师曰： 是瓦。 
现代文：先生说： 是瓦。 
English: The teacher said, "It's a tile."

古文：屎在口头
现代文：屎在口头
English: Shit in the mouth

古文：学生问先生曰：  屎 字如何写？ 
现代文：学生问先生说：  屎 字如何写？ 
English: The student asked the teacher, "How do you write the word'shit'?"

古文：师一时忘却，不能回答。沉吟半晌曰： 咦，方才在口头，如何再说不出。 
现代文：先生一时忘却回答不出，沉吟片刻说： 咦，方才在口头，怎么又说不出！ 
English: The teacher forgot for a moment that he couldn't answer, and after a moment of contemplation, he said, "Oh, I've just been speaking, why can't I say it!

古文：瘟牛
现代文：瘟牛
English: Mad cow disease

古文：经学先生出一课与学生对。
现代文：经学先生出一字题让学生对。
English: The teacher asked the students to answer a word-by-word question.

古文：曰： 隔河并马。 
现代文：先生说： 隔河并马。 
English: The teacher said, "It's all the same across the river."

古文：学生误认 并 字为 病 字，即应声曰： 过江瘟牛。 
现代文：学生误以 并 字为 病 字，即应声道： 过江瘟牛。 
English: The students mistakenly used the word "and" for "disease," that is, the corresponding vocal tract: "crossing the river to plague cattle."

古文：个人个妻
现代文：个人个妻
English: Individual to individual

古文：一上路先生向人曰： 原来吴下朋友的老妈官，个人是一个歌喇。 
现代文：一上路先生向人说： 原来吴下朋友的老妈官，个人是一歌喇。 
English: As soon as he was on the road, he said to someone, "It turns out that my friend Wu Xiao's mother is a singer.

古文：咏钟诗
现代文：咏钟诗
English: Song of the Bells

古文：有四人自负能诗。
现代文：有四个人自以为会作诗。
English: There are four people who think they can write poetry.

古文：一日同游寺中，见殿角悬钟一口。各人诗兴勃然，遂联句一首。其一曰： 寺里一口钟。 次韵云： 本质原是铜。 三曰： 覆转像只碗。 四曰： 敲来嗡嗡嗡。 
现代文：有一天四人一同到寺院里游玩，见殿角悬挂着一口钟，各个诗兴勃发，于是联句一首，其中一人说 寺里一口钟 ，第二个人说 本质原是铜 ，第三个人说 覆转像只碗 ，第四个人说 敲来嗡嗡嗡 。
English: One day, four people went to the temple to play together. They saw a bell hanging in the corner of the temple, and various poems broke out, so there was a couplet. One of them said, "There is a bell in the temple," the second person said, "The essence was originally copper," the third person said, "It spins like a bowl," and the fourth person said, "Knock and buzz."

古文：吟毕，互相赞美不置口，以为诗才敏捷，无出其右。 但天地造化之气，已泄尽无遗。定夺我辈寿算矣。 
现代文：四人吟诗完了，互相赞不绝口，皆以为诗才敏捷，没人能超过。 只是天地造化之气，已泄无遗，必定剥夺我们这些人的寿命。 
English: After the four of them finished chanting, they praised each other endlessly. They all thought that poetry was quick, and no one could surpass it. However, the creative power of heaven and earth has been exhausted, which will surely deprive us of our lives.

古文：四人忧疑，相聚环泣。
现代文：于是四人忧愁疑惑起来，围在一起哭泣。
English: So the four of them were sad and puzzled, and wept together.

古文：忽有老人自外至，询问何事，众告以故。
现代文：忽然有个老人从外面进来，向他们询问为何如此，四人以实相告。
English: Suddenly an old man came in from outside and asked them why this was happening, and the four of them told him the truth.

古文：老者曰： 寿数固无碍，但各要患病四十九日。 
现代文：老人说： 寿命倒不会减少，但得要患病四十九天。 
English: The old man said, "Life expectancy will not decrease, but it will take forty-nine days of illness.

古文：众问何病，答曰： 了膀骨痛！ 
现代文：那四人问是什么病，老人回答说： 全都是膀骨痛。 
English: The four asked what the illness was, to which the old man replied: "It's all a bad back.

古文：做不出
现代文：做不出
English: Can't do it

古文：租户连年欠租，每推田瘦做不出米来。
现代文：佃户连年欠租，推说田不好，没有收成。
English: Tenants have been in rent arrears for years, implying that the fields are not good and there is no harvest.

古文：士怒曰： 明年待我自种，看是如何？ 
现代文：秀才说： 明年我自己种，看是不是你说的那样。 
English: "Next year, I'll grow my own, see if it's what you say," the scholar said.

古文：租户曰： 凭相公拚着命去种，到底是做不出的。 
现代文：佃户说： 任凭相公拼命去做，还是做不出来。 
English: Seto said, "If you leave it to Shoko to do his best, you won't be able to do it."

古文：蛀帽
现代文：蛀帽
English: Straw hat

古文：有盛大、盛二者，所戴毡帽，合放一处。
现代文：有盛大、盛二兄弟俩人，他们戴的毡帽，放在一起。
English: There are two brothers, Shengda and Sheng, who are wearing skullcaps, placed together.

古文：一被虫蛀，兄弟二人互相推竞，各认其不蛀者夺之。
现代文：一顶被虫蛀了，兄弟二人互相争夺没有被虫蛀过的帽子。
English: One was moth-eaten, and the two brothers fought with each other for the hat that had not been moth-eaten.

古文：适一士经过，以其读书人明理，请彼决之。
现代文：正好有一秀才路过，读书人明理，就找他断。
English: Just as a great talent was passing by, the reader had the good sense to break up with him.

古文：士执蛀帽反覆细看，乃睨盛大曰： 此汝帽也！ 问： 何以见得？ 
现代文：秀才拿着虫蛀帽子反复细看，然后斜着眼睛看盛大，说： 这帽子是你的。 问： 何以见得？ 
English: Holding the moth-eaten hat, the scholar looked at it over and over, then squinted his eyes wide and said, "This hat is yours."

古文：士曰： 岂不闻《大学》注解云： 宣著，盛大之貌。  
现代文：秀才说： 难道没听《大学》注解说： 宣著盛大之貌。  
English: Shoucai said, "Didn't you listen to the commentary in the "College" saying, "Preach grandeur."

古文：歪诗
现代文：歪诗
English: Twisted Poem

古文：一士好作歪诗。偶到一寺前，见山门上塑赵玄坛喝虎像。士即诗兴勃发，遂吟曰： 玄坛菩萨怒，脚下踏个虎。旁立一判官，嘴上一脸恶。 
现代文：一相公好作歪诗，偶到一寺前，见山门上塑有赵玄坛喝虎像，诗兴大发，遂吟道： 玄坛菩萨怒，脚下踏个虎，旁立一判官，嘴上一脸恶。 
English: Once upon a time, a priest was fond of writing crooked poems. He happened to be in front of a temple and saw a statue of Zhao Xuantan drinking from a tiger on the mountain gate. The poem went viral, and he then recited: Xuantan Bodhisattva is angry, there is a tiger under his feet, a judge stands next to him, and he has an evil look on his face.

古文：及到里面，见殿宇巍峨，随又续题曰： 宝殿雄哉大，大佛归中坐。文殊骑狮子，普贤骑白兔。 
现代文：走到里面，见殿宇巍峨，随又继续作诗道： 宝殿雄哉大，大佛归中坐，文殊骑狮子，普贤骑白兔。 
English: When he went inside, he saw the grandeur of the hall, and then he continued to write poetry: the treasure hall is majestic, the great Buddha is sitting in the middle, Manjusri is riding a lion, and Pu Xian is riding a white rabbit.

古文：僧出见曰： 相公诗才敏妙，但韵脚欠妥。小僧回奉一首何如？ 
现代文：僧出来见了说： 相公诗才敏妙，但韵脚欠妥，小僧回赠一首如何？ 
English: The monk came out and said, "Sangong's poetry is brilliant, but his rhymes are not good. How about giving the boy a poem in return?"

古文：士曰： 甚好。 
现代文：相公说： 很好。 
English: Aiko said, "That's good."

古文：僧念曰： 出在山门路，撞着一瓶醋。诗又不成诗，只当放个破。 
现代文：僧念道： 出在山门路，撞着一瓶醋，诗又不成诗，只当放个破。 
English: The monk recited, "If you go out on the mountain road and bump into a bottle of vinegar, the poem will not become a poem.

古文：问藕
现代文：问藕
English: He asked.

古文：上路先生携子出外，吃着鲜藕。
现代文：上路先生携子外出，吃着鲜藕。
English: Mr. Shanglu went out with his son, eating fresh eel.

古文：乃问父曰： 爹，来个啥东西，竖搭起竟似烟囱，横搭竟好像泥笼，捏搭手里似把弯弓，嚼搭口里醒松醒松。
现代文：子问父： 爹，来个啥东西，竖搭起竟似烟囱，横搭竟好像泥笼，捏搭手里似把弯弓，嚼搭口里醒松醒松。
English: The son asked his father, "Daddy, what is it that, when erected, looks like a chimney, when placed horizontally, looks like a mud-cage, when squeezed in the hand, looks like a curved bow, and when chewed, feels light and soft in the mouth?"

古文：已介甜水浓浓，咽搭落去蜘蛛丝绊住子喉咙，从来勿曾见过？ 
现代文：已介甜水浓浓，咽搭落去蜘蛛丝绊住子喉咙，从来勿曾见过？ 
English: Have you ever seen a baby with thick sweet water and a spider's web around its throat?

古文：其父怒曰： 呆奴，呆奴！个就是南货店里包东西大叶个根结么。 
现代文：其父怒道： 呆奴，呆奴，这个就是南货店里包东西的大叶个根结么。 
English: His father angrily said, "Stupid, stupid, is this the big leaf knot that wraps things in the southern goods store?"

古文：老童生
现代文：老童生
English: Old school

古文：老虎出山而回，呼肚饥。群虎曰： 今日固不遇一人乎？ 
现代文：一只老虎出山回来，喊肚子饿了，群虎说： 今天一个人也没遇到么？ 
English: A tiger came back from the mountains, crying that he was hungry. The tigers said, "Didn't we meet anyone today?"

古文：对曰： 遇而不食。 
现代文：回答说： 遇到了但没有吃。 
English: He replied, "I met a toad, but I didn't eat it."

古文：问其故，曰： 始遇一和尚，因臊气不食。次遇一秀才，因酸气不食。最后一童生来，亦不曾食。 
现代文：问其原因，回答说： 开始遇到一个和尚，因为臊气没吃；之后遇到一秀才，因酸气没吃；最后来了一个童生，也没有吃。 
English: When asked why, he replied: First, I met a monk, because he didn't eat radon gas; then, I met a scholar, because he didn't eat acid gas; finally, a child came, and he didn't eat either.

古文：问： 童生何以不食？ 曰： 怕咬伤了牙齿。 
现代文：群虎问为何没吃，回答说： 怕咬伤了牙齿。 
English: When the group of tigers asked why he hadn't eaten, he replied, "I'm afraid of biting my teeth."

古文：认拐杖
现代文：认拐杖
English: Recognising the crutch

