古文：高祖太穆皇后窦氏，京兆始平人，隋定州总管、神武公毅之女也。
现代文：高祖太穆皇后窦氏，是京兆始平人，隋定州总管、神武公窦毅的女儿。
English: Empress Dou, the great-grandmother of Taimu, was the daughter of Dou Yi, the founder of Jingzhao and the governor of Dingzhou in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：后母，周武帝姊襄阳长公主。
现代文：窦氏的母亲，是周武帝的姐姐襄阳长公主。
English: Dou's mother was the eldest princess of Xiangyang, the elder sister of Emperor Zhou.

古文：后生而发垂过颈，三岁与身齐。
现代文：窦氏出生时头发垂过脖颈，三岁时头发和身子一样长。
English: When Dou was born, his hair hung over his neck. By the time he was three, his hair was as long as his body.

古文：周武帝特爱重之，养于宫中。
现代文：读《女诚》、《列女》等文章，看一遍就不会忘。
English: If you read articles such as "Female Sincerity" and "Women in the Queue," you won't forget them after reading them once.

古文：时武帝纳突厥女为后，无宠，后尚幼，窃言于帝曰： 四边未静，突厥尚强，愿舅抑情抚慰，以苍生为念。
现代文：周武帝尤其喜爱和看重她，在皇宫里抚养她，对待她不同于其他甥女。当时武帝娶突厥女子为皇后，却并不宠爱。窦氏还年幼，私下对周武帝说: 四面边境还未宁静，突厥还很强大，希望舅舅控制自己的感情，对皇后多加抚慰，以百姓为念。
English: Emperor Wu of Zhou especially loved and valued her. He raised her in the imperial palace and treated her differently from his other nieces. At that time, Emperor Wu married a Turkish woman to be his empress, but he did not favor her. Dou was still young and privately said to Emperor Wu of Zhou: The four-sided border is not yet peaceful, and the Turks are still very powerful. He hoped that his uncle would control his feelings, give more comfort to the queen, and think of the people.

古文：但须突厥之助，则江南、关东不能为患矣。 
现代文：只要有突厥的帮助，那么江南和关东就不足为患了。 
English: As long as there is Turkish help, then the southern part of the Yangtze River and the eastern part of the Guandong River will not be a problem.

古文：武帝深纳之。
现代文：武帝由衷地接受了她的建议。
English: Emperor Wu wholeheartedly accepted her suggestion.

古文：毅闻之，谓长公主曰： 此女才貌如此，不可妄以许人，当为求贤夫。 
现代文：窦毅听说这件事，对长公主说: 这个女孩才貌这样出众，不能轻易地将她许配给别人，应当为她找一个有才能的丈夫。 
English: When Dou Yi heard about this, he said to the eldest princess: This girl is so talented and outstanding that she cannot easily be betrothed to someone else. She should find a talented husband for her.

古文：乃于门屏画二孔雀，诸公子有求婚者，辄与两箭射之，潜约中目者许之。
现代文：就在门屏上画了两只孔雀，有来求婚的公子，就给他两支箭让他射孔雀，暗中约定能射中孔雀眼睛的就把女儿许配给他。
English: Two peacocks were drawn on the screen of the door. If a man came to propose marriage, he was given two arrows to shoot the peacock. If he could hit the peacock's eyes, he was promised his daughter.

古文：前后数十辈莫能中，高祖后至，两发各中一目。
现代文：前后来了几十个人都没有人能射中。高祖后来也来求婚，射两箭各射中了孔雀的一只眼睛。
English: Dozens of people came and went, but no one was able to hit it. Gaozu later came to propose marriage, and shot two arrows, each of which hit one of the peacock's eyes.

古文：毅大悦，遂归于我帝。
现代文：窦毅非常高兴，于是将窦氏嫁给了高祖。
English: Dou Yi was very happy, so he married Dou to Gaozu.

古文：及周武帝崩，后追思如丧所生。
现代文：等到周武帝驾崩，窦氏追思他就像失去了亲生父母一样。
English: When Emperor Zhouwu passed away, Dou thought about him as if he had lost his own parents.

古文：隋文帝受禅，后闻而流涕，自投于床曰： 恨我不为男，以救舅氏之难。 
现代文：隋文帝受禅时，窦氏听说后痛哭，扑倒在床上说: 恨我不是男人，不能拯救舅舅家的危难。 
English: When Sui Emperor Wen was meditating, Dou heard about it and burst into tears, fell on the bed and said, "I hate that I'm not a man, I can't save my uncle's family from danger.

古文：毅与长公主遽掩口曰： 汝勿妄言，灭吾族矣！ 
现代文：窦毅与长公主马上捂住她的嘴说: 你不要胡说了，否则会使我们家族灭门啊! 
English: Dou Yi and the eldest princess immediately covered her mouth and said, "Don't talk nonsense, or you'll ruin our family!"

古文：后事元贞太后，以孝闻。
现代文：窦氏侍奉元贞太后，因为孝顺而闻名。
English: The Dou clan served the former Empress Dowager Zhen, and were known for their filial piety.

古文：太后素有羸疾，时或危笃。
现代文：太后身体弱、年纪大，又得了病，并且性格一向严厉，媳妇们都很畏惧，没有敢去服侍她的。
English: The empress dowager was frail, old, and ill, and her character had always been severe. Her daughters-in-law were afraid and did not dare to serve her.

古文：诸姒以太后性严惧谴，皆称疾而退，惟后昼夜扶侍，不脱衣履者，动淹旬月焉。
现代文：窦氏侍奉她，却和悦恭谨、恪尽孝道，有时一个多月不脱衣服鞋子地伺候太后。
English: Dou served her, but he was kind, respectful, and devoted to filial piety, sometimes waiting for the empress dowager for more than a month without taking off his clothes and shoes.

古文：善书学，类高祖之书，人不能辨。
现代文：窦氏擅长写文章来作为天下女子的规范，行文素雅得体。又擅长书法，临幕的字与高祖的字放在一起，别人分辨不出来。
English: Dou is good at writing articles to serve as a standard for women around the world, writing in a refined and elegant style. She is also good at calligraphy, putting the words of the curtain and the words of Gaozu together, others can't tell them apart.

古文：工篇章，而好存规戒。
现代文：隋炀帝时，高祖做扶风太守，有几匹骏马。
English: During the reign of the Sui Dynasty, Gao Zu was the governor of Fufeng and had several fine horses.

古文：大业中，高祖为扶风太守，有骏马数匹。
现代文：窦氏常常对高祖说: 皇上喜欢雄鹰和骏马，这是您知道的。
English: Dou often said to Gao Zu: You know that the emperor likes eagles and horses.

古文：高祖未决，竟以此获谴。未几，后崩于涿郡，时年四十五。高祖追思后言，方为自安之计，数求鹰犬以进之，俄而擢拜将军，因流涕谓诸子曰： 我早从汝母之言，居此官久矣。 
现代文：高祖回想起窦氏的话，才考虑为自己谋求安全的计策，多次寻找好的鹰犬进献给皇上。不久就被提拔为将军。于是流着泪对儿子们说: 如果我早听从你母亲的话，那么做这个官已经很久了。 
English: Recalling Dou's words, Gao Zu considered the strategy of seeking security for himself, repeatedly looking for a good eagle dog to present to the emperor. He was soon promoted to general. So he said to his sons with tears: If I had listened to your mother's words, then I would have been an officer for a long time.

古文：初葬寿安陵，后祔葬献陵。
现代文：后来高祖拥有了天下，下诏在窦氏埋葬的陵园修建寿安陵。封窦氏谧号为 穆 ，后来合葬在献陵。
English: Later, Gao Zu owned the whole country, and issued an edict to build the Shouan Mausoleum in the cemetery where the Dou family was buried. The Dou family's posthumous name was Mu, and they were later buried together in the mausoleum.

古文：上元元年八月，改上尊号曰太穆顺圣皇后。
现代文：高宗上元元年八月，为长孙皇后改上尊号叫文德顺圣皇后。
English: In August of the first year of the last century, Gao Zong changed the honorary title of the eldest grandchild of the empress to the Empress Wen De Shun Sheng.

