古文：龙门山太公望四海神延娟齐桓公晋文公郑缪公晋平公齐景公妬女庙
现代文：龙门山太公望四海神延娟齐桓公晋文公郑缪公晋平公齐景公妬女庙
English: Longmen Mountain Taigongwang Four Sea Gods Yancheng Qigong Emperor Jinwen Emperor Zheng Mu Emperor Jinping Emperor Qigong Emperor Envy Temple

古文：伍子胥屈原李冰土羊神梅姑秦始皇观亭江神宛若竹王刘向何比干
现代文：伍子胥屈原李冰土羊神梅姑秦始皇观亭江神宛若竹王刘向何比干
English: Wu Zi, Qu Yuan, Li Bing, Earth Goat God, Mei Gu, Qin Shi Huang, Guan Ting, River God, Wan Ruo, Bamboo King, Liu Xiang

古文：龙门山
现代文：龙门山
English: Longmenshan Mountain

古文：禹凿龙关之山，亦谓之龙门。
现代文：大禹开凿龙关山，此山也叫龙门。
English: Dayu excavated Longguan Mountain, also known as Longmen.

古文：至一空岩，深数十里，幽暗不可复行。
现代文：他遇到一个大岩洞，数十里深，幽暗莫测，难以行进。
English: He encountered a large rock cave, dozens of miles deep, dark and unpredictable, difficult to travel.

古文：禹负火而进。
现代文：大禹举着火把向前走。
English: Dayu walked forward holding a torch.

古文：有兽状如豕，衔夜明之珠，其光如烛。
现代文：忽然，闪出一只像猪的野兽，衔着夜明珠为他照路，那珠光比蜡烛还亮。
English: Suddenly, a beast resembling a pig flashed out, holding a night pearl to light his way. The pearl's light was brighter than a candle.

古文：又有青色犬，行吠于前。
现代文：又来了一只青色的狗，叫着跑在他的前面。
English: Another blue dog came running ahead of him, yelping.

古文：禹计行十余里，迷于昼夜，既觉渐明，见向来豕犬，变为人形，皆著玄衣。
现代文：大禹估计走了十多里，迷迷糊糊地分不清白天还是夜里。渐渐看到了光亮，只见那跟来的猪状兽和狗都变成了人的模样，全穿着黑色的衣服。
English: Dayu estimated that he had walked more than ten miles, confusedly unable to tell whether it was day or night. Gradually, he saw the light, only to see that the pig-like beast and dog that came with him had turned into human form, all wearing black clothes.

古文：又见一神人面蛇身。
现代文：这时，又来了一个神仙，长着人的面孔蛇的身子。
English: At this time, another fairy appeared, with the body of a snake with a human face.

古文：禹因与之语。
现代文：大禹便跟他攀谈。
English: Dayu struck up a conversation with him.

古文：仙即示禹八卦之图，列于金板之上。
现代文：那神仙拿出八卦图给大禹看，然后摆在一块金板上面。
English: The god took out the eight trigrams and showed them to Dayu, and then placed them on a gold plate.

古文：又有八神，侍于此图之侧。
现代文：又来了八个神仙，站在八封图的两侧。
English: Here come the eight immortals again, standing on either side of the eight seals.

古文：禹问曰：华胥生圣子，是汝耶？
现代文：大禹问道：听说华胥氏生了个圣子，是你吗？
English: Dayu asked: I heard that Hua Jun had a son, is that you?

古文：答曰：华胥是九江神女，以生余也。
现代文：那神仙回答说：我母亲华胥氏是九江神女，是她生下了我。
English: The fairy godmother replied, "My mother, Hua Wei, is the goddess of Jiujiang, and she gave birth to me.

古文：乃探玉简以授禹。
现代文：然后掏出玉简送给大禹。
English: Then he took out the jade paper and gave it to Dayu.

古文：简长一尺二寸，以合十二时之数，使度量天地。
现代文：那玉简一尺二寸长，正符合每天十二时辰这个数。那神仙让大禹用它来度量天地。
English: The jewel is one foot two inches long, which corresponds to the number of twelve hours in a day. The god let Dayu use it to measure the heavens and the earth.

古文：禹即执持此简，以平定水土。
现代文：大禹就带着这玉简，来治理山河水土。
English: Dayu took this jade jane with him to govern the mountains, rivers, soil and water.

古文：授简披图，蛇身之神，则羲皇之身也。太公望
现代文：送给大禹玉筒并让他看八卦图的这位蛇身神仙，则是伏羲氏呵。太公望
English: The snake-bodied deity who gave Dayu the jade cylinder and let him look at the Eight Trigrams is the Fuxi clan.

古文：文王以太公望为灌坛令，期年，风不鸣条。
现代文：周文王任命姜子牙姜太公为灌坛令，一年来，连把树枝吹得发声的风都没有。
English: Zhou Wen Wang appointed Jiang Ziga and Jiang Taigong as the order of pouring the altar. For a year, there was not even a wind to blow the branches loudly.

古文：文王梦见有一妇人甚丽，当道而哭。
现代文：一日，文王梦见一个女人容貌艳丽，坐在路中央哭。
English: One day, King Wen dreamed of a beautiful woman sitting in the middle of the road, crying.

古文：问其故，妇人言曰：我东海泰山神女，嫁为西海妇。
现代文：问其缘故，那女人说：我是东海边泰山神女，嫁给西海龙王作妻子。
English: When asked why, the woman said, "I am the goddess of Mount Taishan on the East Sea coast, married to the Dragon King of the West Sea.

古文：欲东归，灌坛令当吾道。
现代文：我想回东海边去，不料灌坛令挡了我的道。
English: I wanted to go back to the East China Sea, but I was blocked by the grating.

古文：太公有德，吾不敢以暴风疾雨过也。
现代文：考虑到太公有德。我不敢挟暴风骤雨而过呀！
English: Considering I'm too public-spirited, I don't dare to ride out the storm!

古文：文王梦觉。
现代文：文王一惊醒来。
English: King Wen woke up in shock.

古文：明日召太公，三日三夕，果有疾风暴雨去者，皆西来也。
现代文：第二天，他召见姜公。过了三日三夜，果然有狂风暴雨从西向东而去。
English: The next day, he summoned Jiang Gong. After three days and three nights, there was indeed a storm from the west to the east.

古文：文王乃拜太公为大司马。
现代文：于是，文王就拜姜太公为大司马。
English: As a result, King Wen bowed to Jiang Taigong as the chief steed.

古文：四海神
现代文：四海神
English: The Four Gods of the Sea

古文：武王伐纣，都洛邑。
现代文：周武王伐纣时，曾建都于洛邑。
English: When King Zhou Wu was in exile, he built the capital in Luoyang.

古文：明年阴寒，雨雪十余日，深丈余。
现代文：第二年气候阴冷，一连下了十几天雨雪，有的地方积水一丈多深。
English: In the second year, the weather was gloomy and cold, and it rained and snowed for more than a dozen days in a row. In some places, the accumulated water was several feet deep.

古文：甲子平旦，五丈夫乘马车，从两骑，止王门外。
现代文：第二天天大亮的时候，五个大丈夫乘着马车而来，后面还跟着两个骑马的，他们停在武王门口。
English: The next day, at dawn, five horses came in a carriage, followed by two horsemen, and they stopped at King Wu's gate.

古文：师尚父使人持一器粥出曰：大夫在内，方对天子。
现代文：国师吕望让人拿一盆稀粥出来，说：大夫正在屋里同天子谈话呢！
English: Lu Wang, the state teacher, ordered a bowl of gruel to be brought out and said, "The doctor is in the room talking to the emperor!"

古文：未有出时，且进热粥，以知寒。
现代文：在武王没有出来之前，请那五个人先喝热粥，以避寒冷。
English: Before King Wu came out, he asked the five people to drink hot porridge to avoid the cold.

古文：粥皆毕，师尚父曰：客可见矣。
现代文：等他们喝完粥，吕望才对武王说：现在，你可以召见他们了。
English: When they had finished their porridge, Lvang said to King Wu, "Now, you can summon them."

古文：五车两骑，四海之神，与河伯风伯雨师耳。
现代文：那五车两骑，是四海之神和河神、风神及司雨之神。
English: The five chariots and two horsemen are the gods of the four seas and the god of the river, the god of wind and the god of rain.

古文：南海之神曰祝融、东海之神曰勾芒、北海之神曰颛顼、西海之神曰蓐收。
现代文：南海之神叫祝融，东海之神叫勾芒，北海之神叫颛顼，西海之神叫蓐收。
English: The god of the South Sea is called Zhu Rong, the god of the East Sea is called Gu Meng, the god of the North Sea is called Yao, and the god of the West Sea is called Yao Jie.

古文：河伯风伯雨师，请使谒者。
现代文：河神、风神、雨神，就这么称呼便可。
English: River god, wind god, rain god, you can call it what you like.

古文：各以其名召之。
现代文：他嘱咐传唤谒见者的人，一定要直呼其名召之。
English: He enjoined those summoning the witness to call him by his name.

古文：武王乃于殿上，谒者于殿下门内，引祝融进。五神皆惊，相视而叹。
现代文：武王就坐在大殿之上，使谒者于殿下门内，把祝融领了进去，其余诸神大惊，相视而叹。
English: King Wu then sat on top of the main hall and ordered the attendants to enter the gate of his highness, leading Zhu Rong inside. The rest of the gods were shocked and looked at each other with a sigh.

古文：祝融等皆拜。
现代文：祝融等都向武王下拜。
English: Zhu Rong and others all bowed down to King Wu.

古文：武王曰：天阴乃远来，何以教之？
现代文：武王说：这天气如此不好，你们却远道而来，有何见都教？
English: King Wu said, "This weather is so bad, yet you have come all the way here. What do you have to teach us?"

古文：皆曰：天伐殷立周，谨来授命。
现代文：诸神皆说：上天要伐殷立周，我们是来向你领任务的。
English: All the gods said, "The heavens are about to set the world on fire, and we have come to give you a mission."

古文：顾敕风伯雨师，各使奉其职也。
现代文：周武王看看风神和雨神说：你们各供其职、各负其责就可以了。
English: King Zhou Wu looked at the wind god and the rain god and said, "It is enough for each of you to perform your duties and bear your responsibilities."

古文：延娟
现代文：延娟
English: Yancheng

古文：周昭王二十年，东瓯贡女，一曰延娟，二曰延娱。俱辩丽词巧，能歌笑，步尘无迹，日中无影。
现代文：周昭王登基二十年的时候，东瓯越族献来两位女子，一个叫延娟，一个叫延娱，皆美丽纤巧，能言善辩，而且会唱会笑。
English: When Zhou Zhao Wang ascended to the throne twenty years ago, the Donglu Yue people presented him with two women, one named Yanqi and one named Yan Yuan, both of whom were beautiful and slender, able to speak well, and could sing and laugh.

古文：及王游江汉，与二女俱溺。
现代文：她们走路不留脚印，太阳下没有影子。
English: They go where there are no footprints, where there is no shade from the sun.

古文：故江汉之间，至今思之，乃立祠于江上。
现代文：一次，她们陪昭王游览长江和汉水，不幸全都随昭王落水而死。因此，江汉一带，至今人们还怀念她们，并修祠堂立于江边。
English: Once, they accompanied King Zhaozhou on a tour of the Yangtze River and the Han River. Unfortunately, they all died when they fell into the water with King Zhaozhou. As a result, people around the Yangtze River and the Han River still miss them, and an ancestral hall has been built on the banks of the river.

古文：后十年，人每见二女拥王泛舟，戏于水际。
现代文：十年之后，人们每天都可以看见二位女子伴昭王泛舟江上，嬉戏于水边。
English: Ten years later, people can see the two women accompanying Zhao Wang rafting on the river and playing on the water's edge every day.

古文：至暮春上巳之日，禊集祠间。或以时鲜甘果，采兰杜包裹之，以沈于水中。
现代文：到晚春上巳节这天，人们都集中到祠堂前祭祀：有的拿来又甜又新鲜的水果，采来杜兰叶将其包好，沉入水中；有的用五彩线包，还把金属系在上面。
English: By late spring, on the day of the Chinese Lantern Festival, people were all gathered in front of the ancestral hall for sacrifices: some brought sweet and fresh fruit, picked tulips to wrap it up and sink it into the water; some wrapped it with multicolored thread and tied metal on top.

古文：或结五色綵以包之，或以金铁系其上，乃蛟龙不侵。故祠所号招祗之祠。
现代文：这样一来，蛟龙就不会侵害她们的仙体了。由此，这个祠堂被称为招祗之祠。
English: In this way, the dragon would not invade their celestial bodies. Therefore, this ancestral hall is called the ancestral hall of the invocation.

古文：齐桓公
现代文：齐桓公
English: Prince Qi Huan

古文：齐桓公游于泽，管仲御。
现代文：齐桓公游历于水乡泽国，管仲亲自为他赶车。
English: Qi Kuan Gong traveled to the water town of Zeguo, and Guanzhong personally drove for him.

古文：公见怪焉。管仲云：泽有委蛇，其大如毂，其长如辕，紫衣朱冠。
现代文：齐桓公不悦地责怪他，他回答说：这湖中有大莽蛇，有车轮子这么粗，有车辕这么长。身上是紫色的，头上是红色的，如同穿着紫衣服戴着红帽子。
English: Qi Kuan Gong reproached him with displeasure, and he replied: "In this lake, there is a huge snake, with wheels so thick and ruts so long. It is purple on the body and red on the head, just like wearing purple clothes and a red hat.

古文：见人则拜其首而立，见之者殆霸乎？
现代文：见了人，它就把脖子昂起来，直盯着你。
English: When it sees you, it cranes its neck and stares straight at you.

古文：公曰：此寡人之所见也。
现代文：谁如果看见它，谁的霸业就要受到威胁！
English: If anyone sees it, his hegemony will be threatened!

古文：又桓公北征孤竹，来至卑耳之溪十里，见人长尺，而人形悉具。
现代文：齐桓公指指管仲的衣服和帽子，开玩笑道：这条蟒蛇，我已经看到了！又齐桓公向北征讨墨胎氏的孤竹国，走过卑耳溪十里处，看见一个人只有一尺多高，而人体各部器官俱全。
English: Pointing to Guanzhong's clothes and hat, Prince Qi Huan joked, "I've already seen this boa constrictor! Prince Qi Huan went to the north to fight against the Motei clan's Lone Bamboo Kingdom, and after walking ten miles through the Biel River, he saw a man who was just over a foot tall, but had all the organs of the human body.

古文：右祛衣，走马前。
现代文：他右身赤着，走在齐桓公的马前。
English: He is bare-chested on the right, walking in front of Lord Qi Kuan's horse.

古文：以问管仲，管仲曰：臣闻登山之神有余儿者，长尺而人物具焉。
现代文：齐桓公问管仲，这人是怎么回事。管仲说：我听说登山之神有个小儿子，只有一尺多高，而人的器物齐全。
English: Qi Kuan Gong asked Guan Zhong what was the matter with this man. Guan Zhong said: I heard that the god of mountaineering had a little son, only a little more than a foot high, but the human utensils were complete.

古文：霸王之君兴，而登山之神见。
现代文：你今天看见了登山之神，这就是霸业兴盛的预兆。
English: You have seen the god of mountaineering today. This is an omen of the prosperity of tyranny.

古文：走前导也。
现代文：他走在前面是给我们做向导呵。
English: He was walking ahead of us as a guide.

古文：祛衣前有水也。右祛示从右涉也。
现代文：他赤裸着右身，说明前面有水；他右侧没穿衣服，这是暗示我们应从右面涉过河去。
English: He is naked on his right side, indicating that there is water in front of him; he is not wearing clothes on his right side, suggesting that we should wade across the river from the right side.

古文：至如言。
现代文：果然，一切都像管仲说的那样。
English: Sure enough, everything happened just as Guanzhong had said.

古文：晋文公
现代文：晋文公
English: Jinwen Gong

古文：晋文公出，有大蛇如拱，当道。
现代文：晋文公出巡时，有一条大蛇，如同两手合围的大树，挡住他的路。
English: When Jinwen Gong was out on patrol, there was a big snake, like a big tree with two hands, blocking his way.

古文：文公乃修德，使吏守蛇。
现代文：文公修道积德，命一小吏守护这条蛇。
English: A scholar and a man of virtue, he ordered a minor official to guard the snake.

古文：守蛇吏梦天使杀蛇，谓曰：蛇何故当圣君道？
现代文：守护蛇的小吏睡着了，梦见天使来杀这条蛇，并说道：这条蛇为何要挡圣君之道？
English: The serpents keeper fell asleep and dreamed that an angel came to kill the snake and said: "Why does this snake want to block the path of the saint?

古文：觉而视之，蛇则臭矣。
现代文：小吏醒来看去，那条蛇不但死了，而且臭了。
English: When the petty official woke up, he saw that the snake was not only dead, but also smelly.

古文：郑缪公
现代文：郑缪公
English: Zheng Muxong

古文：郑缪公昼日处庙，有神人面鸟身，素服，而状方正，缪公大惧。
现代文：郑缪公白天住在庙里，有个神仙来见他。这神仙长着人的面孔，鸟的身子，穿着白衣服，脸型有梭有角。缪公十分害怕。
English: Zheng Miao lived in a temple during the day, and a fairy godmother came to see him. This fairy godmother had a human face, a bird's body, wore white clothes, and had a face shaped like a shuttlecock with horns. Miao was very scared.

古文：神曰：无惧，帝厚汝明德，使锡汝寿十年，使若国昌。
现代文：那神人说：你不要害怕，天帝对你的圣明贤德十分厚爱，派我赐你十年阳寿，为的是使你的国家昌盛起来。
English: The man of God said, "Do not be afraid. Heavenly Father is very fond of your wisdom and virtue. He has sent me to give you ten years of life, so that your country may prosper.

古文：公问神名，曰：予为勾芒也。
现代文：缪公问他叫什么名字，回答说：我就是东海之神勾芒呵。
English: Miao Gong asked him what his name was, and he replied, "I am the god of the East Sea, Ho Meng."

古文：晋平公
现代文：晋平公
English: Jinping Gong

古文：晋平公至浍上，见人乘白骖八驷以来。
现代文：晋平公来到田地里的水沟旁，看见有人乘坐八匹白马拉的车匆匆而来。
English: When Lord Jinping came to the ditch in the field, he saw someone hurrying by in a cart drawn by eight white horses.

古文：有狸身而狐尾，去其车而随公之车。
现代文：有一个长着狐尾野猫身子的怪物从那辆车上跳下来，紧紧跟在晋平公车子的后面。
English: A monster with the body of a fox-tailed wild cat jumped down from the car and followed closely behind Jinping's bus.

古文：公问师旷，师旷曰：狸身而狐尾，其名曰首阳之神。
现代文：平公问乐师师旷，这是个什么东西。师旷说：野猫身子狐狸尾巴，它的名字叫首阳之神。
English: Ping Gong asked the musician Shiguang what it was. Shiguang said, "It's a wild cat with a fox's tail. It's name is God of the Sun."

古文：饮酒于霍太山而归，其逢君于浍乎，君其有喜焉！
现代文：它去霍山饮酒回来，恰与你在水沟旁相遇，看来大王要有喜事了！
English: He went to Huoshan to drink, and when he came back, he just happened to meet you by the ditch. It seems that the great king is about to have a happy event!

古文：齐景公
现代文：齐景公
English: Qi Jing Gong

古文：齐景公伐宋，过泰山，梦见二人怒。公恐，谓泰山之神。
现代文：齐景公率兵讨伐宋国。过泰山时，他梦见二人大发雷霆，十分恐惧，以为他们是泰山之神。
English: When he was crossing Mount Tai, he dreamed of two men who were so angry and frightened that they thought they were the gods of Mount Tai.

古文：晏子以宋祖汤与伊尹，为言其状，汤皙容，多髭须，伊尹黑而短，即所梦也。景公进军不听。军彀毁，公恐，乃散军不伐宋。
现代文：然而，他却没有在意，继续向宋国挺进。结果，所率大军中了圈套受到重创，齐景公吓坏了，于是把士兵遣散了，从此永不伐宋。
English: However, he did not care, and continued to advance towards Song. As a result, the army he led was trapped and suffered heavy losses. Qi Jinggong was terrified, so he dismissed the soldiers and never attacked Song again.

古文：妬女庙
现代文：妬女庙
English: Jealousy Temple

古文：并州石艾、寿阳二界，有妬女泉，有神庙。
现代文：并州石艾、寿阳二县的交界处，有一条妬女泉，泉边有座神庙。
English: At the junction of the two counties of Andeshu, Shiai and Shouyang, there is a jealous woman spring, and there is a temple next to the spring.

古文：泉瀵水深沉，洁澈千丈。
现代文：这泉水是从地下喷出来的，极深，且又极清澈，一泻千丈。
English: This spring water comes out of the ground, it is very deep and very clear.

古文：祭者投钱及羊骨，皎然皆见。
现代文：来此祭奠的人投进去不少钱和羊骨头，白花花的，谁都看得见。
English: The people who came to pay their respects threw in a lot of money and sheep bones, and everyone could see the white flowers.

古文：俗传妬女者，介子推妹。
现代文：民间传说的妬女，就是郑国贵族介子推的妹妹。
English: The jealous woman in the folk legend is the younger sister of the Zheng aristocrat Jie Zi Tu.

古文：与兄竞，去泉百里，寒食不许断火，至今犹然。
现代文：她与哥哥比赛，离开该泉一百多里，寒食节不许断火，一直到今天还是这样。
English: She competed with her brother, more than a hundred miles away from the spring, and the cold food festival was not allowed to break the fire, and it is still like this to this day.

古文：女锦衣红鲜，装束盛服。
现代文：女子们穿上了节日的盛装，披红戴绿的，颇为新鲜。
English: The women are dressed in festive attire, red and green, quite fresh.

古文：及有取山丹百合经过者，必雷风电雹以震之。
现代文：等到有人进山采山丹百合等野花从这里经过时，必然遭到风雨雷电及冰雹的袭击。
English: When someone goes into the mountains to pick lilies and other wildflowers, they will inevitably be attacked by wind, rain, lightning and hail.

古文：伍子胥
现代文：伍子胥
English: Wu Ziqi

古文：伍子胥累谏吴王，赐属镂剑而死。
现代文：伍子胥屡次规劝吴王，结果把吴王惹火了，赐给他一把属镂剑，让他自杀而死。
English: Wu Zixuan repeatedly persuaded the king of Wu. As a result, he angered the king of Wu and gave him a sword belonging to the Long Sword, so that he could commit suicide and die.

古文：临终，戒其子曰：悬吾首于南门，以观越兵来。
现代文：临终之前，告戒他的儿子说：我死之后，把我的脑袋悬挂在南门上，我要亲眼看见越兵的到来。
English: Before his death, he warned his son: "After I die, I will hang my head over the south gate. I want to see the arrival of the Vietcong with my own eyes."

古文：以鮧鱼皮裹吾尸，投于江中，吾当朝暮乘潮，以观吴之败。
现代文：另外，用鮧鱼皮裹住我的尸身，投进江中，我要早晚乘潮而来，亲眼看见吴国的失败。
English: In addition, wrap my corpse with eel skin and throw it into the river. I will come by tide in the morning and evening to see the failure of Wuxi with my own eyes.

古文：自是自海门山，潮头汹高数百尺，越钱塘渔浦，方渐低小。
现代文：从这一天开始，自海门山往这里，潮头汹涌异常，比往日高数百尺，一直越过钱塘江入海口的渔场，才渐渐变小。
English: From that day onward, from Haimen Mountain to here, the tides were unusually turbulent, hundreds of feet higher than before, and the fishing grounds that had been crossing the Qiantang River into the estuary gradually became smaller.

古文：朝暮再来，其声震怒，雷奔电走百余里。
现代文：那潮头每天早晚两次，其声音如同人之震怒，雷鸣电闪般地涌过去，足有一百多里呵。
English: Twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, the tide rushes in, its sound like a man's wrath, thundering and flashing, for more than a hundred miles.

古文：时有见子胥乘素车白马在潮头之中，因立庙以祠焉。
现代文：当时，有人看见伍子胥乘着白车白马站在潮头之上，所以为他修了一座庙来祭祀他。
English: At that time, someone saw Wu Zixuan standing on a white horse and white chariot at the head of the tide, so they built a temple to worship him.

古文：庐州城内淝河岸上，亦有子胥庙。
现代文：庐州城的淝河岸上，也有一座子胥庙。
English: On the bank of the Li River in Zhangzhou City, there is also a Zibo Temple.

古文：每朝暮潮时，淝河之水，亦鼓怒而起，至其庙前。
现代文：每天早晚涨潮时，淝河的水也愤怒地鼓涨起来，一直涌到庙前。
English: Every morning and evening when the tide rises, the water of the Min River also swells up angrily and rushes all the way to the temple.

古文：高一二尺，广十余丈，食顷乃定。
现代文：那浪头一二尺高，十余丈宽，一顿饭的工夫才能够平定下来。
English: That wave is twelve feet high and more than ten feet wide, and it takes a meal to calm it down.

古文：俗云：与钱塘江水相应焉！
现代文：老百姓们说：这是它与钱塘潮相呼应呵！
English: The people said: This is because it resonates with the Qiantang tidal current!

古文：屈原
现代文：屈原
English: Kuwahara

古文：屈原以五月五日投汨罗水，而楚人哀之，至此日，以竹筒贮米，投水以祭之。
现代文：屈原于五月初五投汨罗江而死，楚国人纷纷哀悼他。到了这一天，人们用竹筒装米，扔进水里来祭奠他。
English: Qu Yuan died on the 5th day of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month.

古文：汉建武中，长沙区曲，白日忽见一士人，自云三闾大夫，谓曲曰：闻君当见祭，甚善。
现代文：东汉建武年间，长沙有个人叫区曲，大白天忽然看见一个士人，自称三闾大夫。他对区曲说：得知你正要来此祭奠一番，很好。
English: During the Jianwu period of the Eastern Han Dynasty, a man in Changsha called Guo Qu, and in broad daylight he suddenly saw a scholar who called himself Dr. Sanqi. He said to Guo Qu: "It's good to know that you're coming here to pay your respects.

古文：但常年所遗，恒为蛟龙所窃。
现代文：但这些年大家所送来的东西，全被蛟龙偷去吃了。
English: But over the years, everything everyone has sent has been stolen and eaten by the dragon.

古文：今若有惠，可以楝叶塞其上，以采丝缠之，此二物蛟龙所惮也。
现代文：今天你如果有什么东西要送的话，可以塞些楝树叶，再用五彩线缠上。这两样东西是蛟龙最害怕的呵！
English: Today, if you have something to give, you can stuff some eucalyptus leaves and then wrap them with multicolored thread. These two things are the most feared by dragons!

古文：曲依其言。
现代文：区曲照他说的这样去做了。
English: The district did as he said.

古文：今世人五月五日作粽，并带楝叶及五色丝，皆汨罗水之遗风。
现代文：今天，老百姓们在五月初五包粽子时，还要包上楝树叶、缠上五彩线，这便是汨罗河的遗风呵。
English: Today, when the common people collect five packets of hazelnuts at the beginning of May, they still have to wrap them in eucalyptus leaves and wrap them in multicolored thread. This is the legacy of the Qiluo River.

古文：李冰
现代文：李冰
English: Li Bing

古文：李冰为蜀郡守，有蛟岁暴，漂垫相望。
现代文：李冰在蜀郡做郡守的时候，有一条蛟龙年年兴风作浪，百姓们常常浸漂水中，遥遥相望。
English: When Li Bing was the county magistrate of Shu County, there was a dragon that made waves year after year, and the people often dipped into the water and looked at each other from afar.

古文：冰乃入水戮蛟。
现代文：李冰于是下水杀它，欲为民除害。
English: Li Bing then went into the water to kill it, wanting to eliminate the harm for the people.

古文：己为牛形，江神龙跃，冰不胜。
现代文：他自己化作一头牛，那江神龙上下跃动；李冰见难以取胜，便及时回到岸上。
English: He turned himself into a cow, and the river dragon jumped up and down; Li Bing found it difficult to win, so he returned to the shore in time.

古文：及出，选卒之勇者数百，持强弓大箭，约曰：吾前者为牛，今江神必亦为牛矣。我以太白练自束以辨，汝当杀其无记者。
现代文：他挑了好几百名勇敢的士兵，拿着强弓大箭，事先约定说：我在刚才变成一头牛，现在江神必定也会变成一头牛，我把一条大白绢带系在头上，你们好辨别，去射杀那个无记号的。
English: He selected several hundred brave soldiers, armed with powerful bows and arrows, and agreed in advance: "I have just turned into a cow, and now Jiang Shen will surely turn into a cow. I will tie a large white ribbon around my head, so that you can distinguish and shoot the unmarked one."

古文：遂呼吼而入。
现代文：李冰呼孔着进入水中。
English: Li Bing waded into the water.

古文：须臾雷风大起，天地一色。
现代文：顷刻之间，风雷大作，天地一色。
English: In an instant, the thunder and lightning erupted, and the sky and the earth became one color.

古文：稍定，有二牛斗于上。
现代文：稍稍平静下来，只见两头牛正在岸上拼斗。
English: I calmed down a little and saw two cows fighting on the shore.

古文：公练甚长白，武士乃齐射其神，遂毙。
现代文：李冰头上的绢带又长又白，十分醒目；士兵们便举起箭来，一齐射向江神，它当即毙命。
English: The umbilical cord on Li Bing's head was long and white, very eye-catching; the soldiers then raised their arrows and fired a volley at Jiang Sheng, killing him instantly.

古文：从此蜀人不复为水所病。
现代文：从此，蜀郡的老百姓再也没有受过水患。
English: Since then, the people of Shu County have never experienced floods again.

古文：至今大浪冲涛，欲及公之祠，皆瀰瀰而去。
现代文：直到现在发洪水的时候，那浊浪眼看就要冲及李冰祠堂了，却又减弱下来，向远处滚滚流去。
English: Until now, when there is a flood, the swell seems to be about to reach Li Bing's ancestral hall, but it weakens again and rolls away into the distance.

古文：故春冬设有斗牛之戏，未必不由此也。
现代文：另外，春冬两季举行的斗牛表演，未必不是起源于这件事。
English: In addition, the bullfighting shows held in spring and winter may not have originated from this event.

古文：祠南数千家，边江低圯，虽甚秋潦，亦不移适。
现代文：李冰祠南边有好几千户人家，房屋、桥梁均很低矮，虽然显得非常破败荒寂，也都不搬迁。
English: There are several thousand households on the south side of the Li Bing Ancestral Hall. The houses and bridges are very low, and although they appear to be very dilapidated and desolate, they have not been relocated.

古文：有石牛，在庙庭下。
现代文：那里有石牛，在庙庭下面。
English: There are stone cows there, under the temple courtyard.

古文：唐大和五年，洪水惊溃。
现代文：唐代太和五年，洪水泛滥。
English: In the fifth year of the Taihe era of the Tang Dynasty, there was a flood.

古文：冰神为龙，复与龙斗于灌口，犹以白练为志，水遂漂下。
现代文：李冰化作一条龙，又同蛟龙在都江堰的入口处杀起来，还是以白绢带为标志，顺水而下。
English: Li Bing turned into a dragon, and together with the dragon killed at the entrance of Dujiangyan, still with the white ribbon as a symbol, down the water.

古文：左绵、梓、潼，皆浮川溢峡，伤数十郡。唯西蜀无害。
现代文：江东的绵、梓、潼诸州大水溢满了所有的河流峡谷，几十个郡都受了灾，只有西蜀安然无恙。
English: The floods in Mian, Zi and Zhouzhou in the east of the Yangtze River have overflowed all the rivers and canyons. Dozens of counties have been affected, but only West Shu is safe and sound.

古文：土羊神
现代文：土羊神
English: Earth Goat God

古文：陇州汧源县，有土羊神庙。
现代文：陇州汧源县境内，有一座土羊神庙。
English: In the territory of Lianyuan County, Luzhou, there is a goat temple.

古文：昔秦始皇开御道，见二白羊斗，遣使逐之，至此化为土堆。
现代文：当年，秦始皇到此开御道，看见两只白羊在相斗。他当即派人去逐赶。
English: In that year, Emperor Qin Shihuang arrived here to open the imperial road and saw two white sheep fighting each other. He immediately sent someone to chase them away.

古文：使者惊而回。秦始皇乃幸其所，见二人拜于路隅。
现代文：那人到了跟前，见两只白羊已变成了土堆，不由大惊而回。秦始皇亲自来到那个地方，看见两个人跪拜于路旁。
English: When the man arrived and saw that the two white sheep had turned into a pile of dirt, he couldn't help but return in shock. Qin Shi Huang himself came to the place and saw the two people kneeling by the roadside.

古文：始皇问之，答曰：臣非人，乃土羊之神也。
现代文：秦始皇问他们有什么事情，回答说：我们两个不是人，而是土羊之神呵。
English: Qin Shihuang asked them what was the matter, and they replied, "We two are not human beings, but the gods of the goats."

古文：以君至此，故来相谒。
现代文：因为你来到此地，我们故来拜见。
English: We've come to see you because you're here.

古文：言讫而灭。
现代文：说完便没了踪影。
English: After saying this, the godman disappeared.

古文：始皇逐令立庙，至今祭享不绝。
现代文：秦始皇随即下令修建了这座土羊庙，至今香火不断，祭祀的供品不绝。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang then ordered the construction of this goat temple. To this day, incense continues to burn, and offerings continue to be made.

古文：梅姑
现代文：梅姑
English: Plum tree

古文：秦时，丹阳县湖侧，有梅姑庙。
现代文：秦朝的时候，丹阳县的湖畔，有一座梅姑庙。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, there was a plum tree temple on the lakeside of Danyang County.

古文：生时有道术，能著履行水上。后负道法，夫怒杀之，投尸于水。
现代文：这梅姑活着的时候有道术，能穿着鞋子在水面上行走，后来违背了道法，丈夫一气之下，把她杀死，并抛尸于水。
English: When this Mayu was alive, she had a Taoist practice and could walk on water with her shoes on. Later, she violated the Taoist practice, and her husband killed her in a fit of rage and threw her body into the water.

古文：乃随波漂流，至今庙处。
现代文：梅姑的尸体随波漂流，一直漂到现在建庙之处。
English: The corpse of Meigu drifted with the waves and floated all the way to where the temple is now.

古文：巫人常会殡敛，不须坟葬，即时有方头漆棺在祠堂下。
现代文：巫师们经常在这里集会，便将她的尸体收敛出殡，暂时没把她埋葬在坟墓里，而是装入祠堂下面正摆放着的一口方头漆木大棺材里。
English: The wizards often gathered here, and they gathered her body for burial, temporarily not burying her in a grave, but in a large square coffin made of lacquered wood, which was being placed under the shrine.

古文：晦望之日，时见水雾中，暧然有著履形。
现代文：月亮最亮的日子，时常可以看见在水雾之中，隐隐约约地，梅姑穿着鞋子在行走。
English: On the brightest days of the moon, you can often see in the mist, vaguely, Meigu walking in her shoes.

古文：庙左右不得取鱼射猎，辄有迷径溺没之患。
现代文：在庙的四周，禁止渔猎。违犯者则要遭受迷路或淹死灾祸。
English: Fishing and hunting are prohibited around the temple, and violators are subject to getting lost or drowning.

古文：巫云：姑既伤死，所以恶见残杀。
现代文：巫师们说：梅姑自己是被杀害致死的，所以她不愿再见到残杀的情景，便采用这些办法来惩罚他们。
English: The sorcerers said: Megu herself was killed to death, so she did not want to see the scene of slaughter again, so she used these methods to punish them.

古文：秦始皇
现代文：秦始皇
English: Emperor Qin Shi Huang

古文：秦始皇作石桥，欲过海，观日所出处。
现代文：秦始皇造石桥，想跨过海去，看一看太阳升起的地方。
English: Qin Shihuang built a stone bridge to cross the sea and see where the sun rises.

古文：传云：时有神能驱石下海。
现代文：传说，那时有个神仙能把石头赶下大海。
English: According to legend, at that time there was a god who could drive the stones out of the sea.

古文：阳城十一山，今尽起立，嶷嶷东倾，如相随行状。
现代文：阳城共有十一座山，如今全都巍然挺立，且向东倾斜，仿佛相随而行。
English: Yangcheng has a total of eleven mountains, all of which are now standing tall and leaning to the east, as if following each other.

古文：又云：石去不速，神人辄鞭之，皆流血，石莫不悉赤，至今犹尔。
现代文：又说，石山走得太慢，那神仙就用鞭子抽打，这些石头便会流出血来，石头没有不全变红的。
English: He also said that if the stone mountain walked too slowly, the immortal would lash it with a whip, and the stones would bleed, and the stones would turn red.

古文：秦始皇于海中作石桥，或云，非人功所建，海神为之竖柱。
现代文：不信你看，现在还是那个样子。还有人说，秦始皇在海里造的石桥，不是人工所能完成的，而是由海神立的桥墩。
English: If you don't believe it, it's still like that now. Others say that the stone bridge built by Qin Shi Huang in the sea was not made by man, but by the god of the sea.

古文：始皇感其惠，乃通敬于神，求与相见。
现代文：秦始皇感谢他的恩惠，便烧香祈祷，请求与之相见。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang thanked him for his kindness, burned incense and prayed to him, and asked to meet him.

古文：神云：我形丑，约莫图我形，当与帝会。
现代文：海神说：我的样子十分丑陋，咱们先约定好了，千万别把我画下来，这样我才能与你相会。
English: The sea god said, "I am very ugly. Let's make an appointment first. Don't draw me so that I can meet you."

古文：始皇乃从石桥入三十里，与神相见。
现代文：秦始皇当即答应下来，便从石桥上向海中走了三十里，与神相见。
English: Qin Shihuang immediately agreed and walked thirty miles from the stone bridge to the sea to meet the god.

古文：帝左右有巧者，潜以脚画。
现代文：皇帝手下有个能人，暗中用脚把海神的相貌画了下来。
English: An able man under the emperor secretly drew the face of the sea god with his foot.

古文：神怒曰：帝负约，可速去。
现代文：海神发觉后大怒道：想不到你这皇帝竟也负约，请你马上回去吧！
English: When the sea god found out, he flew into a rage and said, "I didn't expect you, the emperor, to break your promise. Please go back immediately!"

古文：始皇即转马。
现代文：秦始皇没有办法，只好打转马头。
English: Emperor Qin Shi Huang had no choice but to turn the horse around.

古文：前脚犹立，后脚随崩，仅得登岸。
现代文：那马前腿刚刚落地，后腿下面的石桥就崩塌了，仅仅使他登到岸上而已了。
English: The horse's front legs had just touched the ground when the stone bridge beneath his hind legs collapsed, leaving him stranded on the shore.

古文：观亭江神
现代文：观亭江神
English: Guan Ting Jiang Shen

古文：秦时，有中宿县千里水观亭江神祠坛。
现代文：秦朝的时候，在中宿县千里水处有一座观亭江神祠坛。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, there was a temple dedicated to the deities of the Yangtze River at Qianli Shui, Zhongshu County.

古文：经过有不恪者，必狂走入山，变为虎。
现代文：凡是经过这里而不恭谨者，必定要被弄得神志恍惚，狂走入山，变成一只大老虎。
English: Anyone who passes through here and does not respect the camel, must be made delirious, go wild into the mountains, and turn into a big tiger.

古文：中宿县民至洛，及路，见一行旅，寄其书曰：吾家在亭庙前，石间悬藤即是也。
现代文：中宿县有一个百姓去洛阳，返回的路上，看见了一个出外旅行的人。那人让他捎一封书信，并说：我家在观亭江神祠前面，那悬着枯藤的乱石中间便是了。
English: There was a villager in Zhongshu County who went to Luoyang. On his way back, he saw a traveler. The man asked him to write a letter, and said: My home is in front of the Guanting River Shrine, in the middle of the jumble of rocks with hanging wisteria.

古文：但扣藤，自有应者。
现代文：只要拽一拽藤子，就会有人迎将出来的。
English: As long as you tug and pull Fujiko, someone will come out.

古文：乃归如言，果有二人从水中出，取书而沦。
现代文：那人返回时一切都遵嘱而行，果然有两个人从水中跳了出来，接过书信又沉入水底。
English: When the man returned, everything had been done as instructed, and indeed two people jumped out of the water, took the letter and sank to the bottom.

古文：寻还云：江伯欲见君。
现代文：不一会儿，他们又回来说：江神想见一见你。
English: After a while, they came back again and said, "The river god wants to see you."

古文：此人不觉随去。
现代文：这个人不知不觉地就跟了进去。
English: The man followed him in unnoticed.

古文：便睹屋守精丽，饮食鲜香，言语接对，无异世间也。
现代文：只见眼前的房屋精美华丽，酒菜也颇为讲究；待人接物及言谈举止等，与人世间似乎也没有什么不同之处。
English: The houses in front of me are exquisitely ornate, and the food and wine are also quite exquisite; the way people treat each other and their mannerisms seem to be no different from the real world.

古文：宛若
现代文：宛若
English: 宛若

古文：汉武帝起柏梁台以处神君。
现代文：汉武帝刘彻筑起一座柏梁台，用来供神君居住。
English: Emperor Hanwu Liu Che built a wooden platform for the god to live on.

古文：神君者，长陵女，嫁为人妻。
现代文：神君原来是长陵县令的女儿，后来嫁给人家做妻子。
English: Originally, Shinkun was the daughter of the county magistrate of Changling County. Later, she married into another family.

古文：生一男，数岁死。女悼痛之，岁中亦死。
现代文：她生了一个小男孩儿，不几岁就死了；她悲痛万分，哀伤不已，当年也死了。
English: She had a little boy who died when he was only a few years old, and she was so sad and grieved that she died, too.

古文：死而有灵，其姒宛若祠之。
现代文：她死后常常显灵。她的姐姐宛若为她建起一座祠堂。
English: After her death, she often had apparitions, and her sister wanted to build a shrine to her.

古文：遂闻言：宛若为主，民人多往请福，说人家小事，颇有验。
现代文：随即听说宛若在这里做了主持，老百姓不断前来祈祷，并顺嘴说些家里人的小事情，还挺灵验。
English: Then I heard that if Wanlu presided over here, the people would constantly come to pray, and obediently say some small things about their families, which was quite effective.

古文：平原君亦事之，其后子孙尊显。
现代文：平原君也来这里祈祷，以后他的子孙果然得到高官显位。
English: Hirahara-kun also came here to pray, and later his children and grandchildren became high-ranking officials.

古文：以为神君力，益尊贵。
现代文：他们认为这是神君在相助，对她更加尊崇。
English: They believe that this is God's help, and they respect her even more.

古文：武帝即位，太后迎于宫中祭之。闻其言，不见其人。
现代文：汉武帝即位时，太后把神君迎进宫中供奉起来，只能听见她在说话，却看不见神君本人。
English: When Emperor Hanwu ascended the throne, the empress dowager welcomed the god into the palace and offered him up. She could only hear him speak, but she could not see the god himself.

古文：至是神君求出，乃营柏梁台舍之。
现代文：后来，一直到神君主动提出离宫时，这才营造柏梁台供她居住。
English: Later, it was not until Shinkun took the initiative to leave the palace that a wooden platform was built for her to live.

古文：初霍去病微时，数自祷神。
现代文：当初，霍去病还十分贫寒时，常常到这里祈祷。
English: At first, when Huo Qiao was still very poor, he often came here to pray.

古文：神君乃见其形，自修饰，欲与去病交接。
现代文：后来有一次，神君现出原形，且着意打扮了一番，欲与霍去病交媾。
English: Later, on one occasion, Shinkun appeared in his original form, and deliberately dressed up, wanting to have sex with Huo to cure his illness.

古文：去病不肯，责神君曰：吾以神君清洁，故斋戒祈福。
现代文：霍去病不肯，并斥责神君道：我总以为你是圣洁的，这才斋戒并向你祈福。
English: Huo refused to go to the hospital, and rebuked Shenjun: "I always thought you were holy, so I fasted and prayed for your blessings."

古文：今欲为淫，此非神明也。
现代文：可没想到你今天想与我淫乱，这哪里还谈得上什么神明呢？
English: But I didn't expect you to want to fornicate with me today. What kind of gods are we talking about here?

古文：自绝不复往，神君亦惭。
现代文：从此霍去病决心永不再来，神君也感到十分惭愧。
English: From then on, he resolved never to come back, and he felt very ashamed.

古文：及去病疾笃，上令祷神君。神君曰：霍将军精气少，命不长。
现代文：等到霍去病患了重病之后，皇帝让人为此向神君祈祷，神君说：霍大将军的精气不足，注定短命呵。
English: After General Huo became seriously ill, the emperor had people pray to the god for this. The god said: General Huo's energy is insufficient and his life is doomed to be short.

古文：吾尝欲以太一精补之，可得延年。霍将军不晓此意，乃见断绝。今不可救也。
现代文：我曾经想通过男女交媾之法，用太一精给他补充一下，可以延长寿命的；然而，霍将军不懂我的意思，而且再也没有去过我那里现在，他已经没有救了！
English: I once thought that I could prolong his life by supplementing him with the essence of Taichi through sexual intercourse; however, General Huo did not understand what I meant and never visited me again. Now, he is beyond salvation!

古文：去病竟卒。
现代文：果然，霍去病不久就死去了。
English: Sure enough, Huo fell ill and died soon after.

古文：卫太子未败一年，神君乃去。
现代文：卫青被匈奴打败不到一年，神君便走了。
English: Less than a year after Wei Qing was defeated by the Huns, Shinkun left.

古文：东方朔娶宛若为小妻，生子三人，与朔俱死。
现代文：东方朔纳宛若为妾，生了三个儿子。后来宛若和东方朔也都死了。
English: As a concubine, Dongfang Shona Wanlu gave birth to three sons. Later, both Wanlu and Dongfang Shao also died.

古文：竹王
现代文：竹王
English: Bamboo King

古文：汉武帝时，有竹王兴于豚水。
现代文：汉武帝当朝的时候，有一位竹王兴起于豚水之间。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, there was a bamboo king who rose from the swamp.

古文：有一女子浣于滨，有三节大竹，流入女子足间。
现代文：那年，有一个女子在河边洗衣服，只见从上游漂来三节大竹子，流到她的两脚之间，推都推不走。
English: That year, a woman was washing clothes by the river when she saw a three-knot bamboo drift upstream and land between her feet. She couldn't push it away.

古文：推之不去，闻有声，持破之，得一男儿。
现代文：仔细一听，竹子里有响动，她便将其破开，得到了一个可爱的小男孩儿。
English: After listening carefully, there was a noise in the bamboo, and she broke it to get a cute little boy.

古文：及长，遂雄夷濮，氏竹为姓。
现代文：他长大之后，遂称雄于夷陵濮阳一带。
English: After he grew up, he became famous in the area around Yiling and Shenyang.

古文：所损破竹，于夜成林，王祠竹林是也。
现代文：他以竹作姓氏，原来那三节被破开的大竹子，如今已在荒野里长成一片竹林，竹王祠旁边那片竹林便是。
English: His family name is Bamboo. The original three-sectioned big bamboo has now grown into a bamboo forest in the wilderness, which is the bamboo forest next to the Bamboo King's Shrine.

古文：王尝从人止大石上，命作羹。从者曰：无水。
现代文：竹王曾经带个随从来到一块大石头上，让随从作羹来吃，随从说没有水。
English: Bamboo King once brought a follower to a large rock and asked the follower to make soup to eat. The follower said there was no water.

古文：王以剑击石出水，今竹王水是也。
现代文：竹王用剑刺穿石头，那水便哗哗地流了出来，就是现在那股竹王水呵。
English: Bamboo King stabbed the rock with his sword, and water flowed out of the rock, which is now Bamboo King Water.

古文：后唐蒙开牂牁，斩竹王首。
现代文：后唐蒙打到牂牁郡，砍下了竹王的脑袋，当地人纷纷怨恨之。
English: After Tang Meng fought to Shixian and cut off the head of the Bamboo King, the local people resented him.

古文：夷獠威怨，以竹王非血气所生，求为立祠。
现代文：大家认为，由于竹王非血气所生，故请求为他修建祠庙。
English: It is believed that since the Bamboo King was not born by natural means, he requested that an ancestral temple be built for him.

古文：帝封三子为侯。
现代文：汉武帝封他第三个儿子为侯。
English: Emperor Hanwu made his third son, Wu, a marquess.

古文：及死，配父庙，今竹王三郎祠其神也。
现代文：待他死后，葬在其父庙里。如今的竹王三郎祠就是其神呵。
English: After his death, he was buried in his father's temple. Today's Bamboo King Saburo Shrine is his shrine.

古文：刘向
现代文：刘向
English: Liu Xiang

古文：刘向于成帝之末，校书天禄阁，专精覃思。
现代文：汉成帝末年，刘向在天禄阁校阅书籍，正聚精会神地沉思之时，有一个老人趁夜色来到他的身帝。
English: At the end of Emperor Han's reign, Liu Xiang was reading a book at the Tianluge School and meditating, when an old man took advantage of the darkness to visit him.

古文：夜有老人著黑衣，植青藜之杖，扣阁而进，见向暗中独坐诵书。老人乃吹杖端，赫然火出，因以照向，具说开辟以前。
现代文：那老人穿一套黑衣服，拄着一根青黎杖，扣门而入。看见坐在暗处读书的刘向，老人吹了吹拐杖的顶端，竟然冒出一道火光，老人就举着拐杖为他照亮，并详说开天之前的事。
English: The old man, wearing a black suit and carrying a cane, slammed the door. Seeing Liu Xiang sitting in the dark reading, the old man blew on the top of the cane, and a light of fire came out. The old man held up the cane to light it for him, and told him in detail what had happened before the sky was opened.

古文：向因受《五行洪范》之文，辞说繁广，向乃裂裳绅以记其言。
现代文：刘向由于得到宣扬五行学说的《尚书》中《洪范》一文，其文长辞繁，刘向敞开衣带，认真记录他说的话。
English: Liu Xiang opened his belt and carefully recorded what he said, because he received the article "Hong Fan" in the "Shang Shu" that promoted the five elements theory.

古文：至曙而去，向请问姓名。
现代文：天亮之后，老人才走。
English: The old man did not leave until after dawn.

古文：云：我太一之精，天帝闻金卯之子有博学者，下而教焉。
现代文：刘向问他姓名，他回答说：我是太一之神，天帝听说刘氏家族之子十分博学，因此下来教他呵。
English: Liu asked him his name, and he replied, "I am the God of Taichi. Heavenly Father heard that the son of the Liu family was very knowledgeable, so he came down to teach him."

古文：乃出怀中竹牒，有天文地图之书。
现代文：然后从怀中掏出竹简，说道：这里有天文地图之书，我把它送给你吧。
English: Then he pulled out a bamboo stick from his pocket and said, "Here is a book of astronomical maps. Let me give it to you."

古文：余略授子焉。向子歆，从向授其术，向亦不悟此人也。何比干
现代文：刘向之子刘歆，跟着刘向学习他传授的知识，可刘向却没有弄清楚他是个什么人。何比干
English: Liu Xiang's son, Liu Wei, followed Liu Xiang to learn the knowledge he imparted, but Liu Xiang did not figure out who he was.

古文：汝南何比干，通律法。
现代文：汝南县有位何比干，精通律令法典。
English: There is a He Bi Gang in Runan County, which is proficient in the Code of Laws and Regulations.

古文：元朔中，公孙洪辟为廷尉右平，狱无冤民，号曰何公。
现代文：汉武帝元朔年间，公孙洪征召他作廷尉右平，监狱中没有关押一个受冤的百姓，人们称他为何公。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo, Gongsun Hong conscripted him as a court lieutenant U-Ping. Not a single wronged commoner was held in the prison, and people called him Why Gong.

古文：征和初，去官在家。
现代文：武帝征和初年，他辞职回家。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, he resigned and returned home.

古文：天大阴雨，昼寝，梦有客车骑。
现代文：一天正下大雨，他白天就睡着了，梦见来了一辆大马车。
English: One day, when it was raining heavily, he fell asleep during the day and dreamed of a big carriage.

古文：觉而一老妪年八十余，头尽白，求寄避雨。
现代文：接着，就发现一位八十多岁的老太婆从车上走下来，她的头发全白了。老太婆请求在此避雨。
English: Then I saw an 80-plus-year-old woman get out of the car, her hair completely white, and she asked to shelter from the rain.

古文：雨方甚，而妪衣履不濡。
现代文：雨下得正急，而她衣服和鞋子却没有湿。
English: It was raining hard, but her clothes and shoes didn't get wet.

古文：比干异之，延入座。
现代文：何比干十分惊异，请她进屋落坐。
English: Surprised, he invited her to come in and sit down.

古文：须臾雨止，妪辞去，出送至门。
现代文：一会儿雨停了，老太婆告辞，他出门相送。
English: After a while, the rain stopped, the old woman said goodbye, and he went out to see her off.

古文：跪谓比干曰：君先出自后稷，尧至晋有阴德，及公之身，当继一人。
现代文：老太婆跪到地上对他说：你的祖先是周族始祖后稷，从尧帝到晋文公已积下了阴德。现在到了你这代，应当再找一个继承人。
English: The old woman knelt down on the ground and said to him, "Your ancestor was the progenitor of the Zhou people, Hou Xuan. From Emperor Qian to Emperor Jinwen, he has accumulated the virtue of the vagina. Now, in your generation, it is time to find another successor."

古文：今天赐策，以广公子孙。
现代文：今上天送竹简给你，以宽慰你的子孙后代。
English: Heaven sends bamboo slips to you now, to comfort your descendants.

古文：佩印绶者，当随简。
现代文：将来他们当中有佩以官吏印章的，就当把这竹简送给他。
English: In the future, if any of them wears an official seal, this bamboo stick should be given to him.

古文：长九寸，凡百九十板。
现代文：那竹简九寸多长，一共一百九十块。
English: The bamboo strips are more than nine inches long and cost a total of one hundred and ninety dollars.

古文：以授比干曰：子孙佩印绶者，当随此算。
现代文：老太太把它送给何比干，说：你子孙中佩以印绶的，应当得到这竹简。
English: The old lady gave it to He Bi Gan and said, "Those of your descendants who wear the seal should receive this bamboo tablet."

古文：妪东行，忽不见。
现代文：老太婆说完向东走，忽然就不见了。
English: After saying this, the old woman walked eastward and suddenly disappeared.

古文：比干年五十八，有六男，后三岁，复生三男。
现代文：何比干这年五十八，有六个儿子；三年之后，他又生了三个儿子。
English: He was fifty-eight years old and had six sons; three years later, he had three more sons.

古文：徙平陵，八男去，一子留。常祭妪如东行，及终，遗令东首。自比干已下，与张氏俱授灵瑞。累世为名族。
现代文：何比干临终之前，留下遗嘱，让他的坟墓朝东。自从比干死后，这个儿子同张氏所生之子，都做了官吏，世世代代为名门望族。
English: Before his death, He Bi Gan left a will to have his grave face east. Since He Bi Gan's death, this son and the sons born to the Zhang family have all become officials, and have been famous and prestigious families for generations.

古文：三辅旧语曰：何氏策，张氏钧也。
现代文：《三辅旧语》上说：何氏的竹简，张氏的钧陶呵。
English: "Three Auxiliary Old Words" said: Mr. He's bamboo strips, Mr. Zhang's pottery.

