古文：太祖神武元圣孝皇帝，姓硃氏，讳晃，本名温，宋州砀山人。
现代文：梁太祖神武元圣孝皇帝，姓朱，讳名晃，本名叫温，宋州砀山人。
English: Emperor Liang Taizu Shenwu Yuan Shengxiao, surnamed Zhu, alias Akira, real name Wen, was from Lushan, Songzhou.

古文：其先，舜司徒虎之后。高祖黯，曾祖茂琳，祖信，父诚。
现代文：他的先祖是舜的司徒虎的后代，高祖叫朱黯，曾祖叫朱茂琳，祖父叫朱信，父亲叫朱诚。
English: His ancestors were descendants of Shun's Stutthof. His great-great-grandfather was named Zhu Ying, his great-great-grandfather was named Zhu Maolin, his grandfather was named Zhu Xin, and his father was named Zhu Cheng.

古文：帝即诚之第三子，母曰文惠王皇后。
现代文：太祖就是朱诚的第三个儿子，他的母亲是文惠王皇后。
English: The great-grandfather was Zhu Cheng's third son, whose mother was Empress Wenhui Wang.

古文：以唐大中六年岁在壬申，十月二十一日夜，生于砀山县午沟里。
现代文：唐朝大中六年十二月二十一日夜晚，太祖出生在砀山县午沟村。
English: On the evening of December 21st, in the sixth year of Tang Dynasty, Taizu was born in the village of Ugou, Lushan County.

古文：是夕，所居庐舍之上有赤气上腾。里人望之，皆惊奔而来，曰： 硃家火发矣！ 
现代文：这天晚上，他家住的房屋上面有红色的祥云向上翻腾，村里的人们望见了，都惊慌地奔跑而来，说： 朱家发火了。 
English: That evening, a red auspicious cloud billowed up from the house where his family lived. People in the village saw it and came running in panic, saying, "The Zhu family is angry."

古文：及至，则庐舍俨然。
现代文：等跑到时，只见房屋整齐完好。
English: When they arrived, they found the house in perfect order.

古文：既入，邻人以诞孩告，众咸异之。
现代文：进屋后，邻居把生了孩子的消息告诉他们，村民们都感到惊异。
English: After entering the house, the villagers were surprised when their neighbour told them the news that she had given birth to a child.

古文：昆仲三人，俱未冠而孤，母携养寄于萧县人刘崇之家。
现代文：兄弟三人，都不及成年就死了父亲，母亲带着他们寄养在萧县人刘崇的家里。
English: Three brothers, all under the age of adulthood, died of their father, and their mother took them to be fostered in the home of Liu Chong, a resident of Xiao County.

古文：帝既壮，不事生业，以雄勇自负，里人多厌之。
现代文：太祖已经长大成人之后，不干养命维生的活计，以勇猛有力自负，乡里人大多讨厌他。
English: After the great-grandfather has grown up, he does not do the work of supporting life and sustaining life, with a brave and powerful self-conceit, the villagers mostly hate him.

古文：崇以其慵惰，每加谴杖。
现代文：刘崇因为他的懒惰，常常斥责鞭打他。
English: Liu Chong often scolded and whipped him for his laziness.

古文：唯崇母自幼怜之，亲为栉发，尝诫家人曰： 硃三非常人也，汝辈当善待之。 
现代文：只有刘崇的母亲从小就怜悯他，亲手给他梳理头发，曾经告诫家里人说 ：朱家的三儿子不是一般的人呢，你们应当好好地对待他。 
English: Only Liu Chong's mother took pity on him from a young age, combed his hair with her own hands, and once admonished the family saying, "The third son of the Zhu family is not an ordinary person, you should treat him well."

古文：家人问其故，答曰： 我尝见其熟寐之次，化为一赤蛇。 
现代文：家里人问她说这话的缘故，她回答说： 我曾经看见他在睡熟了的时候，变成了一条赤色的蛇。 
English: When asked by her family why she said this, she replied: "I once saw him turn into a red snake when he was fast asleep.

古文：然众亦未之信也。
现代文：但是大家都不相信这话。
English: But no one believes him.

古文：唐僖宗乾符中，关东荐饥，群贼啸聚。黄巢因之，起于曹、濮，饥民愿附者凡数万。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年间，关东地区连年饥荒，成群的盗贼呼啸相聚，黄巢趁机崛起于曹州、濮州地区，饥民们自愿追随他的共有数万人之多。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianfu of Tang Dynasty, the Kanto region suffered from famine for years on end, and hordes of thieves gathered together. Huang Chao took the opportunity to rise in Caozhou and Zhangzhou regions, and tens of thousands of starving people voluntarily followed him.

古文：帝乃辞崇家，与仲兄存俱入巢军，以力战屡捷，得补为队长。
现代文：太祖于是辞别刘崇家，跟他二哥朱存一同投入黄巢军中，因为奋勇战斗多次获胜，得以补缺提升为队长。
English: The great-grandfather then bid farewell to Liu Chongjia, and together with his second brother Zhu Cun, he joined the Yellow Nest Army. Because he won many battles, he was able to fill the vacancy and was promoted to captain.

古文：唐广明元年十二月甲申，黄巢陷长安，遣帝领兵屯于东渭桥。
现代文：唐广明元年十二月五日，黄巢攻陷长安，派遣太祖领兵驻扎在东渭桥。
English: On December 5, the first year of the Guangming Dynasty, Tang Dynasty, Huang Chao invaded Chang'an and sent Taizu to lead the troops stationed in Dongluo Bridge.

古文：是时，夏州节度使诸葛爽率所部屯于栎阳，巢命帝招谕爽，爽遂降于巢。
现代文：这时，夏州节度使诸葛爽率领部队驻扎在栎阳，黄巢命令太祖劝说招安诸葛爽，诸葛爽于是投降黄巢。
English: At this time, the Xiazhou Festival made Zhuge Shuang lead the troops stationed in Fenyang. Huang Chao ordered the great-grandfather to persuade Zhuge Shuang to recruit Zhuge Shuang, and Zhuge Shuang then surrendered to Huang Chao.

古文：中和元年二月，巢以帝为东南面行营先锋使，令攻南阳，下之。
现代文：唐中和元年二月，黄巢任命太祖为东南面行营先锋使，命令他进攻南阳，攻下了南阳。
English: In February of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Huang Chao appointed Taizu as the vanguard envoy to the southeast, ordered him to attack Nanyang, and captured Nanyang.

古文：六月，帝归长安，巢亲劳于灞上。
现代文：六月，太祖回到长安，黄巢亲自到灞上慰劳他。
English: In June, the great-grandfather returned to Chang'an, and Huang Chao himself came to comfort him.

古文：七月，巢遣帝西拒邠、岐、鄜、夏之师于兴平，所至皆立功。
现代文：七月，黄巢派遣太祖向西到兴平抵御、岐？夏等地军队，每到一地都立有战功。
English: In July, Huang Chao dispatched his great-grandfather to the west to resist Xingping, Qi Xia and other military forces, and each place he went to had military achievements.

古文：二年二月，巢以帝为同州防御使，使自攻取。
现代文：二年二月，黄巢任太祖为同州防御使，让他自行攻伐占取。
English: In February of the second year, Huang Chao appointed Taizu as the defense envoy of the same state, and let him attack and occupy on his own.

古文：帝乃自丹州南行，以击左冯翊，拔之，遂据其郡。
现代文：太祖于是从丹州南下，去进击左冯翊郡，攻克了它，于是占据了全郡。
English: The great-grandfather then went south from Danzhou to attack Zuofengye County, conquered it, and occupied the whole county.

古文：时河中节度使王重荣屯兵数万，纠合诸侯，以图兴复。
现代文：当时河中节度使王重荣屯扎了数万军队，纠合其他诸侯，图谋收复左冯翊。
English: At that time, the Mid-Heaven Festival caused Wang Chong Rong to garrison tens of thousands of troops, entangle other lords, and attempt to recover Zuo Feng Que.

古文：帝时与之邻封，屡为重荣所败，遂请济师于巢。
现代文：太祖当时与王重荣所据土地边界相接，多次被王重荣打败，于是向黄巢请求支援。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was adjacent to the land border of Wang Chong Rong. He was repeatedly defeated by Wang Chong Rong, so he asked Huang Xue for support.

古文：表章十上，为伪左军使孟楷所蔽，不达。
现代文：进上十次表章，被黄巢的左军使孟楷隐瞒，不送给黄巢。
English: He was promoted ten times, but Meng Kai was ordered by Huang Chao's left-wing forces to conceal it and not give it to Huang Chao.

古文：又闻巢军势蹙，诸校离心，帝知其必败。
现代文：又听说黄巢军队势力窘迫困厄，将帅们军心涣散，太祖推知他必将失败。
English: He also heard that the forces of the Yellow Nest Army were in dire straits, and the generals were disheartened. Taizu deduced that he would certainly fail.

古文：九月，帝遂与左右定计，斩伪监军使严实，举郡降于重荣。
现代文：九月，太祖就同身旁心腹计议，杀了黄巢的监军使严实，率领全郡军民投降王重荣。
English: In September, the great-great-grandfather took the initiative and killed the overseer of the Yellow Nest, Yan Si, and led the whole county's army and people to surrender to Wang Chong Rong.

古文：重荣即日飞章上奏。
现代文：王重荣当天就赶快写成奏章上报朝廷。
English: On the same day, Wang Chong Rong quickly wrote a musical score and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：时僖宗在蜀，览表而喜曰： 是天赐予也！ 
现代文：当时唐僖宗在蜀郡，看了奏章就高兴地说 ：这是上天赐给我的呀。 
English: At that time, Tang Xizong was in Shu County. When he saw the music, he said happily, "This was given to me by God."

古文：乃诏授帝左金吾卫大将军，充河中行营副招讨使。仍赐名全忠。
现代文：于是下诏授给太祖左金吾卫大将军的官职，担任河中行营副招讨使，又赐给他名字叫全忠。
English: Therefore, the emperor conferred the official post to the great-great-grandfather Zuo Jingu Wei Daizhong, served as the deputy recruiting envoy for the middle of the river, and gave him the name Quanzhong.

古文：自是率所部与河中兵士偕行，所向无不克捷。
现代文：从此太祖统率他的旧部以及河中的兵士一起行动，所到的地方没有不被攻克而取得胜利的。
English: From then on, Taizong led his old troops and the soldiers in the river to act together, and there was no place that was not conquered and won victory.

古文：三年三月，僖宗制授帝宣武军节度使，依前充河中行营副招讨使，仍令候收复京阙，即得赴镇。
现代文：三年三月，唐僖宗命令授与太祖宣武军节度使官职，仍旧担任河中行营副招讨使，又命令他等候时机收复京城长安，当即到藩镇赴任。
English: In March of the third year, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered that Emperor Taizu be awarded the post of festival envoy to the Xuanwu army, and he still served as deputy envoy to the middle of the river, and ordered him to wait for the opportunity to recover the capital Chang'an, and immediately go to the town to take office.

古文：四月，巢军自蓝关南走，帝与诸侯之师俱收长安，乃率部下一旅之众，仗节东下。
现代文：四月，黄巢军队从蓝关撤走，太祖同诸侯们的部队一起收复长安，接着率领部下士兵五百人捧着符节东下。
English: In April, the Yellow Nest army withdrew from Lan Kuan. Ta Zu, together with the troops of the princes, regained Chang'an. He then led 500 of his soldiers to the east, holding the symbols.

古文：七月丁卯，入于梁苑。
现代文：七月三日，进入梁苑。
English: On July 3, he entered Liangyuan.

古文：是时，帝年三十有二。
现代文：这时太祖年龄三十二岁。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather was thirty-two years old.

古文：时蔡州刺史秦宗权与黄巢余孽合从肆虐，共围陈州。
现代文：当时蔡州刺史秦宗权同黄巢余党纠合，放肆暴虐，一起包围了陈州。
English: At that time, Cai Zhou assassinated Qin Zongquan and entangled with Huang Chao Yu's party, indulged in violence, and surrounded Chen Zhou.

古文：久之，僖宗乃命帝为东北面都招讨使。
现代文：很久，唐僖宗就任命太祖为东北面都招讨使。
English: For a long time, Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty appointed Taizu as the envoy to the Northeast.

古文：时汴、宋连年阻饥，公私俱困，帑廪皆虚，外为大敌所攻，内则骄军难制，交锋接战，日甚一日；人皆危之，惟帝锐气益振。
现代文：这时汴州、宋州连年流于饥荒，国家和人民都很穷困，钱库和粮库都空了，外面被强大的敌人攻击，内部又有骄横的军队难以控制，短兵交锋两军接战，一天比一天激烈。别人都感到害怕，只有太祖勇气更加高涨。
English: At this time, Bozhou and Songzhou had been suffering from famine for years, the country and the people were very poor, the money and grain storehouses were empty, the outside was attacked by a powerful enemy, the inside had arrogant troops that were difficult to control, and the skirmish between the two armies became more and more intense day by day. Everyone else was afraid, only Taizu's courage was higher.

古文：是岁十二月，帝领兵于鹿邑，与巢众相遇，纵兵击之，斩首二千余级，乃引兵入亳州，因是兼有谯郡之地。
现代文：这年十二月，太祖领兵到鹿邑，与黄巢一伙相遇，太祖驱兵攻击他们，砍下敌军头颅两千多个，然后带着队伍进入亳州，因此兼并了谯郡。
English: In December of that year, Taizu led an army to Lu'eup, where he encountered a group of Yellow Nest soldiers. He drove the soldiers to attack them, cut off the heads of more than two thousand enemy soldiers, and then led the army into Luzhou, thus annexing Luzhou County.

古文：四年春，帝与许州田从异诸军同收瓦子寨，杀贼数万众。
现代文：四年春天，太祖同许州田从异诸路军队共同收复瓦子寨，杀死敌贼数万人之多。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Taizu and Huzhou Tian jointly recovered Wazizi Village from the troops of different routes, killing tens of thousands of enemy thieves.

古文：是时，陈州四面，贼寨相望，驱掳编氓，杀以充食，号为 舂磨寨 。
现代文：这时，陈州的四面，敌贼营寨接连相望，驱赶掳掠老百姓编列户籍，杀了他们当作粮食，号称为 舂磨寨 。
English: At this time, on all four sides of Chenzhou, the enemy bandits camped one after another, drove away the abducted and plundered people, compiled the household registration, and killed them for food, known as the Jima Village.

古文：帝分兵翦扑，大小凡四十战。
现代文：太祖分兵扑灭他们，经历大小四十次战斗。
English: Taizu's detachment of soldiers fought them off and went through forty battles.

古文：四月丁巳，收西华寨，贼将黄鄴单骑奔陈。
现代文：四月二十七日，攻取西华寨，敌将黄邺一个人骑着马逃奔到陈州。
English: On April 27th, after capturing West Huazhai, the enemy general Huang Qi fled to Chenzhou on horseback.

古文：帝乘胜追之，鼓噪而进。
现代文：太祖乘胜追击敌人，擂鼓呐喊前进。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, the great-grandfather chased the enemy and marched forward to the sound of drums and shouts.

古文：会黄巢遁去，遂入陈州，刺史赵犨迎于马前。
现代文：正逢黄巢悄悄逃走，于是进入陈州，陈州刺史赵韜到高祖马前相迎。
English: Just as Huang Chao quietly fled, he entered Chen Zhou, and Chen Zhou invited Shi Zhao Yao to meet Gao Zu Ma.

古文：俄闻巢党尚在陈北故阳垒，帝遂径归大梁。
现代文：不久听说黄巢余党还在陈州北面的故阳垒，太祖就直接回到大梁。
English: Soon he heard that Huang Chao Yu's party was still in the former Yangye in the north of Chenzhou, and Taizu went straight back to Daliang.

古文：是时，河东节度使李克用奉僖宗诏，统骑军数千同谋破贼，与帝合势于中牟北邀击之，贼众大败于王满渡，多束手来降。
现代文：这时，河东节度使李克用奉唐僖宗诏令，统率骑兵数千人马共同图谋攻破敌贼，与太祖会合兵力在中牟的北面向敌贼挑战，在王满渡大败敌贼，很多敌兵束手投降。
English: At this time, the Hedong Festival made Li Ke, with the imperial edict of Tang Xizong, lead thousands of cavalry to jointly plot to defeat the enemy, and join forces with Taizu to challenge the enemy in the north of Zhongmou, and defeat the enemy in Wangmandu, and many enemy soldiers surrendered.

古文：时贼将霍存、葛从周、张归厚、张归霸皆匍匐于马前，悉宥而纳之，遂逐残寇，东至于冤句。
现代文：这时敌将霍存、葛从周、张归厚、张归霸都跪倒在马前，太祖全部赦免了他们的罪行并收容了他们。
English: At this time, the enemy generals Huo Cunrong, Ge Cong Zhou, Zhang Gui Hou, and Zhang Gui Ba all knelt down in front of the horse, and Taizu pardoned all of their crimes and accommodated them.

古文：五月甲戌，帝与晋军振旅归汴，馆克用于上源驿。
现代文：接着追击残余的敌寇，向东来到了冤句。五月十四日，太祖同李克用的晋军班师回到汴州，太祖把李克用安置在上源驿客馆里。
English: On May 14, Taizu returned to Zhangzhou with Li Kegui's Jin army squadron, and Taizu placed Li Kegui in the Shangyuan Inn.

古文：既而备犒宴之礼，克用乘醉任气，帝不平之。
现代文：接着安排了周到的犒劳宴请的礼节，李克用乘喝醉了酒大发脾气，太祖气愤不平。
English: Next, after arranging the etiquette of the elaborate banquet, Li Ke used the opportunity to get drunk and lose his temper. The great-grandfather was furious.

古文：是夜，命甲士围而攻之。
现代文：当夜，命令带甲兵士围住李克用住地攻击他。
English: That night, soldiers in armour were ordered to surround Li Ke and attack him at his residence.

古文：会大雨雷电，克用因得于电光中逾垣遁去，惟杀其部下数百人而已。
现代文：正遇上天下大雨雷鸣电闪，李克用因而得以在闪电的光亮中翻越围墙逃走，只杀了他部下几百人。
English: In the midst of torrential rain, thunder and lightning, Li Ke was able to escape over the wall in a flash of lightning, killing only a few hundred of his men.

古文：六月，陈人感解围之惠，为帝建生祠堂于其郡。
现代文：六月，陈州人民为了感激太祖替他们解了围的恩惠，为太祖在他们的郡治修建了生前受祭的祠堂。
English: In June, the people of Chenzhou built the ancestral hall for their great-grandfather in their county in order to express their gratitude for the great-grandfather's kindness in relieving them of the siege.

古文：是岁，黄巢虽殁，而蔡州秦宗权继为巨孽，有众数万，攻陷邻郡，杀掠吏民，屠害之酷，更甚巢贼，帝患之。
现代文：这一年，黄巢虽然死了，但蔡州秦宗权继黄巢之后成为最大的祸首，拥有数万士卒，攻陷相邻郡县，杀害抢劫官吏和人民，屠杀、祸害的残酷比黄巢更为厉害，太祖为此担忧。
English: This year, although Huang Chao died, Caizhou Qin Zongquan became the biggest villain after Huang Chao. He had tens of thousands of soldiers, invaded neighboring counties, killed and robbed officials and people, and the brutality of the massacre and scourge was more severe than that of Huang Chao. Grandfather was worried about this.

古文：七月，遂与陈人共攻蔡贼于溵水，杀数千人。
现代文：七月，便同陈州兵民在氵殷水共同攻击蔡州贼军，杀死贼兵几千人。
English: In July, he attacked the Caizhou bandits together with the soldiers and civilians of Chenzhou in Yan'an Water, killing thousands of bandits.

古文：九月己未，僖宗就加帝检校司徒、同平章事，封沛郡侯，食邑千户。
现代文：九月二日，唐僖宗就地加封太祖为检校司徒、同平章事，封为沛郡侯，享有一千户食邑。
English: On September 2nd, Tang Yanzong added the title of "Grandfather" to the title of "school inspector" and the title of "Dong Ping" to the title of "Pei County Marquis," with a total of one thousand households.

古文：光启元年春，蔡贼掠亳、颍二郡。帝帅师以救之，遂东至于焦夷，败贼众数千，生擒贼将殷铁林，枭首以徇军而还。
现代文：唐僖宗光启元年春天，蔡州贼寇抢劫亳州、颍州，太祖率领军队前去救助，于是向东到达焦夷，击败数千的贼寇，活捉了贼寇将领殷铁林，砍下他的头悬挂起来传视贼寇后就回来了。
English: In the spring of the first year of Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong Guangqi's great-great-grandfather led an army to rescue the Caizhou Thieves and Robbers who had robbed Caizhou and Cangzhou. He then went east to Jiao'i, defeated thousands of Thieves and Robbers, captured the Thieves and Robbers' General Yin Tielin alive, cut off his head and hung it up for posterity, and then returned.

古文：二月，僖宗自蜀还长安，改元光启。
现代文：三月，僖宗从蜀地回到长安，改元为光启。
English: In March, Xizong returned to Chang'an from Shudi and changed his name to Guangqi.

古文：四月戊辰，就加帝检校太保，增食邑千五百户。
现代文：四月十四日，又加封太祖为检校太保，将食邑增加到一千五百户。
English: On April 14th, Taizu was added as a school inspector, increasing the number of restaurants to 1,500.

古文：十二月，河中、太原之师逼长安，观军容使田令孜奉僖宗出幸凤翔。
现代文：十二月，河中、太原的敌军逼近长安，观军容使田令孜侍奉僖宗离开长安抵达凤翔。
English: In December, when the enemy forces from Hechu and Taiyuan approached Chang'an, Emperor Taizong's attendant Tian Lingzi left Chang'an and arrived in Fengxiang.

古文：二年春，蔡贼益炽。
现代文：二年春天，蔡州贼寇更加猖狂。
English: In the spring of the second year, the thieves in Caizhou were even more rampant.

古文：时唐室微弱，诸道州兵不为王室所用，故宗权得以纵毒，连陷汝、洛、怀、孟、唐、邓、许、郑，圜幅数千里，殆绝人烟，惟宋、亳、滑、颍仅能闭垒而已。
现代文：当时唐朝皇室势力微弱，许多道和州的军队不听皇室的指挥，所以秦宗权得以横行为害，接连攻陷汝、洛、怀、孟、唐、邓、许、郑等州，地域方圆几千里，几乎断绝了人烟，只有宋、亳、滑、颍等州仅能闭关自守而已。
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty's imperial power was weak, and many provincial and prefectural armies did not listen to the command of the imperial family. Therefore, Qin Zongquan was able to act arrogantly, and successively invaded and occupied Ru, Luo, Huai, Meng, Tang, Deng, Xu, Zheng and other prefectures, covering an area of several thousand miles, and almost cut off the human smoke. Only the prefectures of Song, Qu, Nian, Nian and Qu could only close the gate to protect themselves.

古文：帝累出兵与之交战，然或胜或负，人甚危之。
现代文：太祖多次出兵与他们交战，但是有时胜利有时失败，人们都十分恐惧。
English: The great-grandfather sent troops to fight them many times, but sometimes they won and sometimes they lost, and people were very afraid.

古文：三月庚辰，僖宗降制就封帝为沛郡王。
现代文：三月一日，僖宗颁布诏令封太祖为沛郡王。
English: On March 1st, Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict to crown his great-grandfather as the king of Pei County.

古文：是月，僖宗移幸兴元。
现代文：同月，僖宗御驾移到兴元府。
English: In the same month, Emperor Taizong moved to Xingyuanfu.

古文：五月，嗣襄王煴僭即帝位于长安，改元为建贞。遣使赍伪诏至汴，帝命焚之于庭。
现代文：五月，嗣襄王李誰在长安违背礼制私自登上帝位，改元为建贞，派使者带着非法诏令到汴州，太祖下令在庭堂上烧掉了伪诏。
English: In May, the successor of King Li Xiang, who violated the etiquette and ascended to the throne in Chang'an, changed the Yuan to Jianzhen, sent an envoy with an illegal edict to Zhangzhou, and the great-grandfather ordered the fake edict to be burned in the courtyard.

古文：未几，襄王果败。
现代文：不久，嗣襄王果然失败了。
English: Soon after, the heir to the throne failed.

古文：七月，蔡人逼许州，节度使鹿宴宏使来求救，帝遣葛从周等率师赴援。
现代文：七月，蔡州贼寇逼近许州，许州节度使鹿宴弘派使者来求救，太祖派遣葛从周等率领军队赶赴支援。
English: In July, the Caizhou bandits approached Huzhou. At the festival of Huzhou, Lu Yenhong sent an envoy to ask for help, and Taizu dispatched Ge Cong Zhou to lead the army to rush to help.

古文：师未至而城陷，宴宏为蔡贼所害。
现代文：援军还没赶到许州城就陷落了，鹿宴弘被蔡州贼寇杀害。
English: The reinforcements did not reach the city of Huzhou before it fell, and Lu Yinghong was killed by the Caizhou bandits.

古文：十一月，滑州节度使安师儒以怠于军政，为部下所杀。帝闻之，乃遣硃珍、李唐宾袭而取之，由是遂有滑台之地。
现代文：十一月，滑州节度使安师儒因为怠慢军事和政务，被部下杀害，太祖听到消息，就派朱珍、李唐宾袭击并占领了滑州，因此就拥有了滑台地。
English: In November, during the Chuzhou Festival, An Shiru was killed by his subordinates for neglecting military and government affairs. Upon hearing the news, Taizu sent Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin to attack and occupy Chuzhou, and thus gained control of the Chuzhou Plateau.

古文：十二月，僖宗降制就加帝检校太傅，改封吴兴郡王，食邑三千户。
现代文：十二月，僖宗颁布诏令加封太祖为检校太傅，改封为吴兴郡王，享有三千户的食邑。
English: In December, Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict to add the title of Taizu to the title of Kengyo Taifu, and changed the title to Wu Xing Guo Wang, enjoying the food of three thousand households.

古文：是岁，郑州为蔡贼所陷，刺史李璠单骑来奔，帝宥而纳之，以为行军司马。
现代文：这年，郑州被蔡州贼寇攻陷，刺史李单骑匹马逃来，太祖宽宥并接纳了他，任他为行军司马。
English: In this year, Zhengzhou was invaded by the Caizhou bandits, and Zushi Li ran away on horseback. The great-grandfather pardoned and accepted him, and allowed him to be the marching steed.

古文：宗权既得郑，益骄，帝遣裨将逻于金隄驿，与贼相遇，因击之，贼众大败，追至武阳桥，斩首千余级。
现代文：秦宗权已经得到郑州，更加骄横，太祖派偏将在金堤驿巡逻，与贼寇遭遇，乘机攻击他们，众多的贼寇被打得大败，一直追击到武阳桥，杀死一千多人。
English: Qin Zongquan had already gained Zhengzhou and became even more arrogant. The Taizhu faction would patrol along the Golden Dike, encounter bandits and attack them. Many bandits were defeated and chased all the way to Wuyang Bridge, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：帝每与蔡人战于四郊，既以少击众，常出奇以制之，但患师少，未快其旨。
现代文：太祖经常与蔡州贼寇在四郊战斗，既以少击多，又常常出奇制胜，但苦于兵力太少，不能大快人意。
English: Taizu often fought with the Caizhou Thieves and Robbers in the Four Suburbs, both with fewer attacks and more, and often surprisingly won, but suffered from too few troops, which was not very satisfactory.

古文：宗权又以己众十倍于帝，耻于频败，乃誓众坚决以攻夷门。
现代文：秦宗权又由于自己兵力相当于太祖的十倍，对多次被打败感到羞耻，于是对部下发誓坚决攻进夷门。
English: Qin Zongquan was ashamed of being defeated so many times because his army was equivalent to ten times that of his great-grandfather, so he swore to his subordinates to resolutely attack Yimen.

古文：四月辛亥，达于夷门。
现代文：不久抓获了蔡贼的间谍，全部知晓他们的内情，于是太祖谋求增加兵力。
English: Cao Cao's spies, all of whom were privy to their inner workings, were soon captured, and Emperor Taizu sought to increase his forces.

古文：帝喜曰： 吾事济矣。 
现代文：三年春二月一日，按照诏命以朱珍为淄州刺史，派他到东道招募兵士。
English: On the first day of February in the spring of the third year, in accordance with the imperial decree, Zhu Zhen was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and he was sent to the host to recruit soldiers.

古文：是时，贼将张晊屯于北郊，秦贤屯于版桥，各有众数万，树栅相连二十余里，其势甚盛。
现代文：朱珍到淄、棣等州后，十天之内，应募的有一万多人。又偷袭青州，获得战马千匹，铠甲千副，于是凯旋而归。四月八日，回到夷门，太祖高兴地说 ：我大事有成了。 这时，贼将张日至屯扎在北郊，秦贤屯扎在版桥，各自都有几十万人，树起的栅栏相连二十里，势力非常强盛。
English: Within ten days of Zhu Zhen's arrival in the states of Jiangxi and Shandong, more than 10,000 people applied to be recruited. He also made a sneak attack on Qingzhou, gaining a thousand horses and a thousand pairs of armor, and then returned in triumph. On April 8, when he returned to Yimen, Taizu said happily, "I have accomplished a great deal." At this time, Zhang Zhi and Qin Xian were encamped in the northern suburbs, and Qin Xian was encamped in Pangqiao. Each of them had hundreds of thousands of people, and the fences erected were connected by twenty miles. Their power was very strong.

古文：帝谓诸将曰： 此贼方今息师蓄锐以俟时，必来攻我。
现代文：太祖对诸位将领们说 ：这些贼寇正在养精蓄锐以等待时机，一定会来进攻我们。
English: The great-grandfather said to the generals, "These bandits are building up their strength to wait for the right time, and they will definitely attack us."

古文：况宗权度我兵少，又未知珍来，谓吾畏惧，止于坚守而已。
现代文：况且秦宗权估计我们兵力少，又不知道朱珍已经来到，以为我们害怕，只能坚守阵地而已。
English: Moreover, Qin Zongquan estimated that we were short of troops, but did not know that Zhu Zhen had already arrived, thinking that we were afraid and could only hold our ground.

古文：今出不意，不如先击之。 
现代文：不如现在出其不意，先发制人。 
English: It would be better to surprise them now and pre-empt them.

古文：乃亲引兵攻秦贤寨，将士踊跃争先，贼果不备，连拔四寨，斩首万余级，时贼众以为神助。
现代文：于是亲自领兵进攻秦贤的营寨，将士们奋勇争先，贼寇果然没有防备，接连攻克四座营寨，杀死一万多人，当时贼寇都以为有天神在暗中相助。
English: So he personally led the soldiers to attack Qin Xian's camp. The soldiers fought bravely to be the first, but the bandits were unprepared and attacked four camps in succession, killing more than ten thousand people. At that time, the bandits thought that there were angels helping them secretly.

古文：庚午，贼将卢瑭领万余人于圃田北万胜戍，夹汴水为营，跨河为梁，以扼运路。
现代文：二十七日，贼将卢瑭带领一万多人在圃田北面的万胜戍沿汴水两岸扎营，跨河面建起桥梁，以控制河运道路。
English: On the 27th, the thieves took Lu Wei and led more than 10,000 people to camp along the two banks of the Surabaya River in Wansheng, north of Putian, and built a bridge across the river to control the river transport road.

古文：帝择精锐以袭之。
现代文：太祖挑选精兵锐卒去袭击他。
English: The great-great-grandfather chose a group of elite soldiers to attack him.

古文：是日昏雾四合，兵及贼垒方觉，遂突入掩杀，赴水死者甚众，卢瑭自投于河。
现代文：这天昏暗的大雾四面相合，攻击部队到达敌人营垒才被发现，于是闯入敌营一路杀去，投水而死的贼寇非常多，卢瑭投河自尽。
English: On this day, the dark fog converged on all sides, and the attacking troops were only discovered when they reached the enemy camp, so they broke into the enemy camp and killed them all the way. There were a lot of thieves and robbers who died after being thrown into the water, and Lu Wei threw himself into the river to commit suicide.

古文：河南诸贼连败，不敢复驻，皆并在张晊寨。
现代文：河南的诸多贼寇接连战败，不敢再驻扎，都合并到张日至营寨中。
English: Many bandits in Henan Province were defeated one after another and no longer dared to stay, so they all merged into Zhangzi and Yingzhai.

古文：自是蔡寇皆怀震詟，往往军中自相惊乱。
现代文：从此蔡州贼寇都感到恐惧，常常在军中自相惊扰相乱。
English: From then on, the thieves and robbers in Caizhou all felt fear, and they often panicked and confused each other in the army.

古文：帝旋师休息，大行犒赏，由是军士各怀愤激，每遇敌，无不奋勇。
现代文：太祖回师休整，大行犒赏，因此军士们各自心怀激昂的斗志，每次遇到敌人没有不奋勇向前的。
English: The great-great-grandfather returned to his division to rest and receive a large reward, so the sergeants each had a passionate fighting spirit, and every time they encountered the enemy, they did not hesitate to move forward.

古文：其日晚，大星陨于贼垒，有声如雷。
现代文：五月三日，太祖从酸枣门出兵，从清晨到中午，与敌人短兵相接，大败贼兵，追杀二十多里，死尸堆积。
English: On May 3, Taizu dispatched troops from the Acid Date Gate. From the early morning to noon, they encountered the enemy's short-range soldiers, defeated the thief soldiers, chased them for more than 20 miles, and the dead bodies piled up.

古文：辛巳，兗、郓、滑军士皆来赴援，乃陈兵于汴水之上，旌旗器甲甚盛。
现代文：秦宗权对失败感到羞耻，更加放纵他的暴虐，于是从郑州亲自带领几位突击将领，径直奔入张日至军营中。五月八日，兖、郓、滑州的军队都赶来增援，在汴水岸边摆开阵势，旌旗武器非常森严壮观。
English: Qin Zongquan felt ashamed of his failure and indulged in his tyranny even more, so he personally led several assault generals from Zhengzhou and ran straight into the Zhangyi military camp. On May 8, the troops from Handan, Handan and Slanting arrived to reinforce and set up a position on the shore of Surabaya. The weapons were very impressive.

古文：蔡人望之，不敢出寨。
现代文：蔡贼看到这些，不敢出军营。
English: When Cai Qi saw this, he did not dare to leave the camp.

古文：翌日，分布诸军，齐攻贼寨，自寅至申，斩首二万余级。
现代文：第二天，太祖指挥各路军队，一齐进攻敌贼军营，从清晨四时到下午四时，杀敌两万多人。
English: The next day, Taizu commanded all the troops and attacked the enemy camp together. From four o'clock in the morning to four o'clock in the afternoon, he killed more than twenty thousand people.

古文：会夜收军，获牛马、辎重、生口、器甲不可胜计。
现代文：到夜晚收兵，获得牛马、辎重物品、俘虏、武器铠甲数不清。
English: By nightfall, the troops had been collected, and cattle, horses, heavy equipment, prisoners, weapons, and armour had been obtained in great numbers.

古文：是夜，宗权、晊遁去，迟明追之，至阳武桥而还。
现代文：当夜秦宗权、张日至偷偷逃走，天快亮时追捕他们，追到阳武桥便回来了。
English: That night, Qin Zongquan and Zhang Zi sneaked away, and when it was nearly dawn, he chased after them, and when he reached Yangwu Bridge, he came back.

古文：宗权至郑州，乃尽焚其庐舍，屠其郡人而去。
现代文：秦宗权到郑州，竟然烧尽那里的房屋，屠杀郡城的人民才离开。
English: Qin Zongquan went to Zhengzhou, burned down all the houses there, and massacred the people of the county seat before leaving.

古文：始蔡人分兵寇陕、洛、孟、怀、许、汝，皆先据之，因是败也，贼众恐惧，咸弃之而遁。
现代文：开始时蔡州贼寇分散兵力进犯陕、洛、孟、怀、许、汝等州，都抢先占据着，因为这次的战败，贼寇们害怕极了，都放弃了州城逃走。
English: At the beginning, the Caizhou bandits scattered their forces to invade Shaanxi, Luo, Meng, Huai, Xu, You and other provinces, and occupied them first. Because of this defeat, the bandits were very afraid, and they all abandoned the provincial capital and fled.

古文：帝乃慎选将佐，俾完葺壁垒，为战守之备，于是远近流亡复归者众矣。
现代文：太祖于是慎重挑选将佐，使他们修缮城墙壁垒，做战时防守的准备，这样远近流亡失所的人又回来了很多。
English: The great-grandfather then carefully selected generals to repair the city walls and prepare for defense in wartime, and many people who had been displaced from far and near returned.

古文：是时，扬州节度使高骈为裨将毕师铎所害，复有孙儒、杨行密互相攻伐，朝廷不能制，乃就加帝检校太尉，兼领淮南节度使。
现代文：这时，扬州节度使高骈被副将毕师铎杀害，又有孙儒与杨行密互相攻伐，朝廷不能遏制，于是加封太祖为检校太尉，兼任淮南节度使。
English: At this time, the Yangzhou Festival Committee had Gao Yao killed by Vice Admiral Bi Shizhuang, and Sun Ru and Yang Xingmi were fighting against each other. The imperial court could not contain them, so Gaofen Taizu was appointed as the inspecting officer and also served as the Huainan Festival Committee member.

古文：帝之御蔡寇也，郓州硃瑄、兗州硃瑾皆领兵来援。
现代文：当太祖抵御蔡州贼寇时，郓州朱王宣、兖州朱瑾都领兵来救援。
English: When the great-grandfather resisted the Caizhou bandits, Zhu Wangxuan of Zhangzhou and Zhu Xi of Zhangzhou led soldiers to come to the rescue.

古文：及宗权既败，帝以瑄、瑾宗人也，又有力于己，皆厚礼以归之。
现代文：到秦宗权已败，太祖因为朱王宣、朱瑾与自己同姓，又对自己出过力，都送给厚礼让他们回去。
English: By the time the Qin Dynasty had been defeated, the great-grandfather, because Zhu Wangxuan and Zhu Xi had the same surname as him and he had exerted himself too much, sent gifts to Houli to let them go back.

古文：瑄、瑾以帝军士勇悍，私心爱之，乃密于曹、濮界上悬金帛以诱之，帝军利其货而赴者甚众，帝乃移檄以让之。
现代文：朱王宣、朱瑾因为太祖的军士们勇敢强悍，私下心里都很喜爱他们，于是偷偷地在曹州和濮州的边界上悬赏重金布帛来招诱他们，太祖的军士为了财货之利而离开的人很多，太祖于是传送檄文去谴责他们。
English: Zhu Wangxuan and Zhu Xi secretly offered a reward of heavy gold cloths on the border of Caozhou and Zhangzhou to lure them, because the soldiers of the great-grandfather were brave and strong. There were many people who left the soldiers of the great-grandfather for the benefit of wealth and goods. The great-grandfather then sent a letter to condemn them.

古文：但令麾下将士诈为叛者而逃，即明公奏于主上，及告四邻，以自袭叛徒为名。 
现代文：朱王宣的回话很不礼貌，太祖于是命令朱珍侵袭曹州进攻濮州，以惩罚他们的奸邪。
English: Zhu Wangxuan's reply was very impolite, so the patriarch ordered Zhu Zhen to invade Caozhou and attack Zhangzhou to punish their treachery.

古文：梁祖曰： 天降奇人，以佐于吾。 
现代文：不久，朱珍攻伐曹州，抓住曹州刺史丘礼献给太祖，接着又调动军队包围了濮州。
English: Not long after, Zhu Zhen attacked Caozhou, seized the Caozhou thorn, dedicated it to Taizu, and then mobilized the army to encircle Zhangzhou.

古文：初从其议，一出而致众十倍。 
现代文：兖州和郓州与太祖之间的间隙，从此就产生了。
English: The gap between Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou and Taizu has existed ever since.

古文：十月，僖宗命水部郎中王赞撰纪功碑以赐帝。
现代文：十月，僖宗命令水部郎中王赞撰刻纪功碑赐给太祖。
English: In October, Emperor Taizong ordered the Prince of the Ministry of Water Affairs to inscribe a monument of praise to the great ancestor.

古文：是月，帝亲帅骑数千巡师于濮上，因破硃瑄援师于范县。
现代文：同月，太祖亲自率领骑兵几千人在濮河岸边巡视，乘机在范县击败朱王宣的援兵。
English: In the same month, Taizu personally led several thousand cavalrymen to patrol the banks of the Min River, taking the opportunity to defeat Zhu Wangxuan's reinforcements in Fan County.

古文：丁未，攻陷濮州，刺史硃裕单骑奔郓。
现代文：七日，攻陷濮州，濮州刺史朱裕一人骑马逃往郓州。
English: On the seventh day, after the capture of Zhangzhou, Zhu Yu, a member of the Zhangzhou Jishi, fled to Zhangzhou on horseback.

古文：文德元年正月，帝率师东赴淮海，行次宋州，闻杨行密已拔扬州，遂还。
现代文：接着被郓州人打败，一个多月后又回来了。十二月，僖宗派遣使者赐给太祖铁券，又命翰林承旨刘崇望撰刻德政碑赐给太祖。文德元年正月，太祖率领军队向东奔赴淮南，行程中驻扎在宋州时，听到杨行密已经攻下扬州，于是回师。
English: In December, Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to present Emperor Taizong with an iron certificate, and ordered Hanlin to order Liu Chongwang to carve a political monument for Emperor Taizong. In the first month of the first year of the Wende era, Emperor Taizong led his army eastward to Huainan, and when he was stationed in Songzhou during the trip, he heard that Yang Xingmi had conquered Yangzhou, so he returned to his division.

古文：是时，李璠、郭言行至淮上，为徐戎所扼，不克进而还。
现代文：这时，李、郭言到淮河岸边，被徐州军队扼阻，不能前行只好返回。
English: At this time, Li and Guo Yan went to the bank of the Huai River and were stopped by the Xuzhou army. They could not go forward and had to return.

古文：帝怒，遂谋伐徐。
现代文：太祖大怒，便计划讨伐徐州。
English: The great-grandfather was so angry that he planned to attack Xuzhou.

古文：二月丙戌，僖宗制以帝为蔡州四面行营都统，由是诸镇之师，皆受帝之节制。
现代文：二月十八日，僖宗诏令任太祖为蔡州四面行营都统，从此各镇的军队受太祖的控制指挥。
English: On February 18th, Emperor Taizong issued an edict appointing Emperor Taizu as the commander of the army in all four sides of Caizhou. From then on, the army of each town was under the control and command of Emperor Taizu.

古文：三月庚子，昭宗即位。
现代文：三月三日，唐昭宗即位。
English: On March 3, Tang Zhaozong ascended the throne.

古文：是月，蔡人石璠领万众以剽陈、亳，帝遣硃珍率精骑数千擒璠以献。
现代文：同月，蔡州人石率领一万多人剽掠陈州、亳州，太祖派朱珍率领精锐骑兵几千人擒获石献上。
English: In the same month, Cai Zhou led more than ten thousand people to plunder Chenzhou and Zhangzhou, and Zhu Zhen led thousands of elite cavalry to capture and present the stone.

古文：四月戊辰，魏博乐彦祯失律，其子从训出奔相州，使来乞师。
现代文：四月一日，魏博镇乐彦祯违背律令，他儿子乐从训逃奔到相州，派人来请求太祖派军队援助。
English: On April 1st, Wei Bo Town's Le Yanjun violated the law. His son, Le Congxun, fled to Xiangzhou and sent someone to ask the Great Ancestor to send troops to help.

古文：帝遣硃珍领大军济河，连收黎阳、临河二邑。
现代文：太祖派朱珍率领大军渡过黄河，接连攻占黎阳、临河两邑。
English: The great-grandfather sent Zhu Zhen to lead a large army across the Yellow River and successively occupied Liyang and Linhe.

古文：既而魏军推小校罗宏信为帅。
现代文：不久魏博镇军队推举小校官罗弘信当统帅。
English: Soon, the Weibo Town Army promoted the junior school official Luo Hongxin to the position of commander.

古文：宏信既立，遣使送款于汴，帝优而纳之，遂命班师。
现代文：罗弘信当上统帅后，派遣使者到汴州致意，太祖厚待使者并接受了他的求和心意，就命令朱珍班师。
English: After Luo Hongxin became commander-in-chief, he sent an envoy to Bozhou to pay his respects. The great-grandfather treated the envoy generously and accepted his request for reconciliation. He then ordered Zhu Zhenban division.

古文：是月，河南尹张全义袭李罕之于河阳，克之。
现代文：同月，河南尹张全义在河阳袭击李罕之，打败了他。
English: In the same month, Yin Zhang Quanyi from Henan attacked Li Hanzhi in Heyang and defeated him.

古文：罕之单骑出奔，因乞师于太原，李克用为发万骑以援之。
现代文：李罕之一人骑马出逃，到太原请求救兵，李克用派出一万骑兵去支援他。
English: One of Li Han's men fled on horseback and went to Taiyuan to ask for help. Li Ke used to send ten thousand cavalry to support him.

古文：罕之遂收其众，偕晋军合势，急攻河阳。
现代文：李罕之就收聚自己的部队，与太原晋军一起联合兵力，急攻河阳。
English: Li Hanzhi gathered his own troops and joined forces with the Taiyuan Jin army to make a sudden attack on Hebei.

古文：全义危急，遣使求救于汴，帝遣丁会、牛存节、葛从周领兵赴之，大战于温县，晋人与罕之俱败。
现代文：张全义十分危急，派遣使者到汴州求救，太祖派丁会、牛存节、葛从周率领军队奔赴救援，在温县发生激烈战斗，晋军和李罕之都被打败。
English: Zhang Quanyi was in a very critical situation. He sent an envoy to Zhangzhou to ask for help. Emperor Taizu sent Dinghui, Niu Cunjie and Ge Zhou to lead the army to the rescue. A fierce battle took place in Wen County, and the Jin army and Li Han were defeated.

古文：于是河桥解围，全义归于河阳，因以丁会为河阳留后。
现代文：于是解除了河桥的围困，张全义回到河阳，趁便以丁会作为河阳留后。
English: As a result, the siege of Heqiao was lifted, and Zhang Quanyi returned to Heyang, taking advantage of the Ding Association to stay in Heyang.

古文：五月己亥，昭宗制以帝检校侍中，增食邑三千户。
现代文：五月三日，昭宗诏令授太祖为检校侍中，增加食邑到三千户。
English: On May 3rd, Shoson issued an edict awarding Taizu as a school inspection attendant, increasing the number of restaurants to three thousand.

古文：戊辰，昭改帝乡衣锦，里曰沛王里。
现代文：戊辰，诏令将太祖的故乡改叫衣锦乡，村里叫作沛王里。
English: At that time, the imperial edict changed the name of the ancestor's hometown to Imjin Township, and the village to Peiwang Village.

古文：是月，帝以兼有洛、孟之地，无西顾之患，将大整师徒，毕力诛蔡。
现代文：同月，太祖认为已经拥有了洛、孟地区，解除了对西部的忧虑，准备大力整顿军队，尽力诛除蔡州贼寇。
English: In the same month, Taizu believed that he already owned the Luo and Meng regions, relieved his worries about the west, prepared to vigorously reorganize the army, and tried his best to eradicate the Caizhou bandits.

古文：会蔡人赵德諲举汉南之地以归于朝廷，且遣使送款于帝，仍誓戮力同讨宗权。
现代文：恰好遇上蔡州人赵德将汉南地区全部归降朝廷，又派遣使者向太祖求和，发誓尽力一同讨伐秦宗权。
English: Zhao De, who happened to be from Caizhou, surrendered the entire Hannan region to the imperial court, and sent an envoy to the emperor to sue for peace, vowing to do his best to fight against the Qin Dynasty.

古文：帝表其事，朝廷因以德諲为蔡州四面副都统。
现代文：太祖向朝廷上表奏明这件事，朝廷于是任赵德为蔡州四面副都统。
English: The great-grandfather reported this to the imperial court, and the court then appointed Zhao De as the vice-governor of all four regions of Caizhou.

古文：又以河阳、保义、义昌三节度为帝行军司马，兼粮料应接。
现代文：又将河阳、保义、义昌三处节度使作为太祖的行军司马，兼管粮食马料等后勤供应。
English: In addition, he also made the three festivals of Heyang, Boyi and Yichang as the grand ancestor's marching steed, and was also in charge of the logistical supply of grain and materials.

古文：至是，帝领诸侯之师会德諲以伐蔡贼于汝水之上，遂薄其城。
现代文：到这时，太祖统领诸侯的军队会合赵德到汝水边去攻伐蔡州贼寇，于是逼近蔡州城。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizu led the armies of the princes to join Zhao De to the water's edge to attack the Caizhou bandits, and then approached Caizhou City.

古文：五日之内，树二十八寨以环之，盖象列宿之数也。
现代文：在五天之内，建起二十八座兵寨包围蔡州城，这是仿照天上二十八星宿的数量。
English: Within five days, twenty-eight military camps were built to encircle the city of Caizhou, which was modeled on the number of twenty-eight stars in the sky.

古文：时帝亲临矢石，一日，飞矢中其左腋，血渍单衣，顾谓左右曰： 勿泄。 
现代文：这时太祖亲自冒着敌人的弓箭炮石指挥战斗，一天，一支飞来的箭射中了他的左腋，鲜血浸透了单衣，太祖对身旁的人说： 不要让别人知道。 
English: At this time, the great-grandfather himself braved the enemy's bows and arrows to direct the battle. One day, a flying arrow hit his left shin, blood soaked his singlet, and the great-grandfather said to the people around him: Don't let others know.

古文：九月，以粮运不继，遂班师。
现代文：九月，因为粮食运输供应不上，便撤回军队。
English: In September, the army was withdrawn because grain transportation was not available.

古文：是时，帝知宗权残孽不足为患，遂移兵以伐徐。
现代文：这时，太祖知道秦宗权的残渣余孽已不足以构成祸害，就转移部队去攻伐徐州。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizu knew that the remnants of the Qin Dynasty were no longer enough to constitute a scourge, so he transferred troops to attack Xuzhou.

古文：十月，先遣硃珍领兵与时溥战于吴康镇，徐人大败，连收丰、萧二邑；溥携散骑驰入彭门。
现代文：十月，太祖派朱珍率领军队在吴康镇与徐州时溥交战，徐州兵马被打得大败，接连占领丰、萧两座城邑，时溥带着击散了的骑兵逃进了彭门。
English: In October, the great ancestor sent Zhu Zhen to lead the army to fight against Xuzhou Zhisheng in Wu Kang Town. The Xuzhou soldiers and horses were defeated and occupied the two cities of Feng and Xiao successively. Zhisheng fled to Pengmen with the defeated cavalry.

古文：帝命分兵以攻宿州，刺史张友携符印以降。
现代文：太祖命令分出一支兵力去攻打宿州，宿州刺史张友带着符节印章投降。
English: Taizu ordered a separate force to attack Shukushu, and Shukushu's governor, Zhang You, surrendered with the seal of the festival.

古文：既而徐人闭壁坚守，遂命庞师古屯兵守之而还。
现代文：不久徐州人关闭城门坚守，太祖就命令庞师古屯扎部队守着徐州，自己回去了。
English: Soon after, the people of Xuzhou closed the city gate and stood firm, and Emperor Taizu ordered the Pang division of the ancient Tunza troops to defend Xuzhou, and then he went back.

古文：是月，蔡贼孙儒攻陷扬州，自称淮南节度使。
现代文：同月，蔡州贼寇孙儒攻陷扬州，自称为淮南节度使。
English: In the same month, Caizhou bandit Sun Ru invaded and occupied Yangzhou, and claimed to be Huainan's special envoy.

古文：龙纪元年正月，庞师古攻下宿迁县，进军于吕梁。
现代文：龙纪元年正月，庞师古攻下宿迁县，向吕梁进军。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, Pang Shigu attacked Suqian County and marched to Luliang.

古文：时溥领军二万，晨压师古之军而阵，师古促战败之，斩首二千余级，溥复入于彭门。
现代文：时溥率领两万军队，首先压住庞师古的军队摆开战阵，庞师古紧急迎战，击败时溥，杀敌两千多人，时溥又逃进彭门。
English: Shi Lang led twenty thousand troops, first holding down Pang Shigu's army and setting up battle lines. Pang Shigu rushed to fight, defeated Shi Lang and killed more than two thousand of the enemy. Shi Lang then fled into Pengmen.

古文：二月，蔡将申丛遣使来告，缚秦宗权于帐下，折其足而囚之矣。
现代文：二月，蔡贼将领申丛派遣使者报告说，已将秦宗权捆缚在营帐下面，折断了他的腿而囚禁起来了。
English: In February, Cai Zeki sent an envoy to Shen Cong to report that he had bound Qin Zongquan under the tent, broken his leg and imprisoned him.

古文：帝即日承制以丛为淮西留后。
现代文：太祖当天接受诏令以申丛为淮西留后官。
English: On the same day, the great-grandfather accepted the imperial decree to make Shen Cong the successor of Huaixi.

古文：未几，丛复为都将郭璠所杀。
现代文：不久，申丛又被都将郭杀害。
English: Soon after, Shin Cong was killed again by Guo.

古文：是月，璠执宗权来献，帝遣行军司马李璠、牙校硃克让槛送于长安。
现代文：同月，郭押解秦宗权前来献给太祖，太祖派遣行军司马李、牙校朱克让用囚车将秦宗权解押到长安。
English: In the same month, Guo deposed Qin Zongquan and came to dedicate it to the great ancestor. The great ancestor dispatched the marching army Sima Li and the dental school Zhu Kejian to depose Qin Zongquan to Chang'an in a prisoner's wagon.

古文：既至，昭宗御延喜楼受俘，即斩宗权于独柳树下。
现代文：押到后，昭宗前往延喜楼接受俘虏，立即在一棵独柳树下面将秦宗权斩首。
English: After they arrived, Zhaozong went to Yanxi Tower to receive the captives, and immediately beheaded Qin Zongquan under a willow tree.

古文：蔡州平。
现代文：蔡州平定。
English: Caizhou has been pacified.

古文：昭宗诏加帝食实封一百户，赐庄宅各一区。
现代文：昭宗诏令增加太祖食邑实封一百户，赐给庄园和住宅各一处。
English: Zhaozong issued an edict to increase the number of households in the ancestral food village to one hundred, and gave one to each manor and residence.

古文：三月，又加帝检校太尉、兼中书令，进封东平王，赏平蔡之功也。
现代文：三月，又加封太祖为检校太尉、兼任中书令，提封为东平王，以奖赏平定蔡州的功劳。
English: In March, Emperor Taizu was awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Inspection of Schools and the post of the Vice-Regent of the People's Republic of China, as well as the title of King of Dongping, as a reward for his contribution to the pacification of Caizhou.

古文：大顺元年四月丙辰，宿州小将张筠逐刺史张绍光，拥众以附时溥。
现代文：大顺元年四月一日，宿州小将领张筠驱逐刺史张绍光，胁迫众人投靠时溥。
English: On April 1st, the first year of Dashun, Zhang Yao, a minor general of Suzhou, led the expulsion of Zhang Shaoguang, a thorn in the side of history, and coerced everyone to support Shi Yao.

古文：帝率亲军讨之，杀千余人，筠遂坚守。
现代文：太祖率领亲信部队征讨他，杀死一千多名敌人，张筠于是坚守城池。
English: The great-grandfather led the troops of his cronies to fight against him, killing more than a thousand enemies, so Zhang Ye held on to the city.

古文：乙卯，时溥出兵暴砀山县，帝遣硃友裕以兵袭之，败徐军三千余众，获沙陀援军石君和等三十人，斩于宿州城下。
现代文：乙卯日，时溥出兵蹂躏砀山县，太祖派遣朱友裕领兵袭击他，击败徐州叛军三千多人，俘虏沙陀援军石君和等三十人，杀死在宿州城下。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second year of the second month of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year

古文：六月辛酉，淮南孙儒遣使修好于帝，帝表其事，请以淮南节度授于儒焉。
现代文：六月七日，淮南孙儒派遣使者与太祖亲善友好，太祖上表奏明这件事，请求将淮南节度使授予孙儒。
English: On June 7th, Sun Ru of Huainan sent an envoy to express his friendship and friendship with the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather sent a letter to the emperor to clarify the matter and request that the Huainan Festival be awarded to Sun Ru.

古文：辛未，昭宗命帝为宣义军节度使，充河东东面行营招讨使，时朝廷宰臣张浚将兵讨太原故也。
现代文：十七日，昭宗任命太祖为宣义军节度使，又充任河东东面行营招讨使，因当时朝廷宰臣张浚正在领兵攻伐太原。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Akimune appointed Taizu as the envoy to the proclamation of the festival of the pro-independence army, and also served as the envoy to the east of the river, because at that time the imperial court vassal Zhang Jun was leading troops to attack Taiyuan.

古文：八月甲寅，昭义都将冯霸杀沙陀所署节度使李克恭来降，帝请河阳节度使硃崇节为潞州留后。
现代文：八月一日，昭义军都将冯霸杀死了沙陀人所任命的节度使李克恭来投降，太祖请河阳节度使朱崇节作为潞州留后。
English: On the first day of August, the Shouyi Army killed Feng Ba, and the Shatou people appointed Zengdu to make Li Keqiang surrender, and the great-grandfather invited Heyang Zengdu to make Zhu Chongjie stay behind as Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，李克用自率蕃汉步骑数万以围潞州，帝遣葛从周率骁勇之士，夜中衔枚犯围而入于潞。
现代文：十五日，李克用亲自率领蕃族汉族步兵骑兵几万人包围了潞州，太祖派遣葛从周率领骁勇善战的兵士，夜中悄悄地穿过包围圈潜入潞州。
English: On the 15th, Li Ke personally led tens of thousands of Yi Han infantry and cavalry to encircle Zhangzhou. Taizu dispatched Ge Zhou to lead the brave soldiers to sneak into Zhangzhou through the encirclement at night.

古文：九月壬寅，帝至河阳，遣部将李谠引军趋泽、潞，行至马牢川，为晋人所败。
现代文：九月十九日，太祖到河阳，派遣都将李谠领军直奔泽州、潞州，走到马牢川时，被晋人打败。
English: On September 19th, Emperor Taizu went to Heyang and dispatched the army led by Li Xi to march straight to Zezhou and Zhangzhou. When they reached Ma Liao River, they were defeated by the Jin people.

古文：帝又遣硃友裕、张全义率精兵至郓州北以为应援。
现代文：太祖又派遣朱友裕、张全义率领精兵到泽州北面作为接应援助。
English: The great-grandfather also dispatched Zhu Youyu and Zhang Zhengyi to the north of Zezhou to lead the elite soldiers to provide assistance.

古文：既而崇节、从周弃潞来归。
现代文：不久朱从节、葛从周放弃潞州归来。
English: Soon after, Zhu Congjie and Ge Zhou gave up and returned to Ganzhou.

古文：戊申，帝廷责诸将败军之罪，斩李谠、李重允以徇，遂班师焉。
现代文：二十五日，太祖在办公厅堂上责备众位将领的败军之罪，砍下李谠、李重胤的首级传视军中，就回师了。
English: On the 25th, Taizu reproached all the generals in the general office hall for the crime of defeating the army, cut off the heads of Li Xi and Li Shigetian in the Chuanxi Army, and returned to his division.

古文：十月乙酉，帝自河阳赴滑台。
现代文：十月三日，太祖从河阳到滑台。
English: On October 3rd, Taizu rode from Heyang to the slide.

古文：时奉诏将讨太原，先遣使假道于魏，魏人不从。
现代文：当时奉诏令将讨伐太原，先派遣使者向魏州人借路通过，魏州人不答应。
English: At that time, by imperial decree, Taiyuan was to be attacked. First, an envoy was sent to borrow a route from the people of Wei, but the people of Wei did not agree.

古文：先是，帝遣行人雷鄴告籴于魏，既而为牙军所杀。
现代文：在这之前，太祖曾派信使雷邺向魏州请购粮食，不久被罗弘信的牙军杀害。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Taizu had sent a messenger, Lei Jun, to Wei Province to request grain, but he was soon killed by Luo Hongxin's troops.

古文：罗宏信惧，故不敢从命，遂通好于太原。
现代文：罗弘信害怕，所以不敢听命，而跟太原互通友好。
English: Luo Hongxin was afraid, so he did not dare to obey orders, but he was friendly with Taiyuan.

古文：十二月辛丑，帝遣丁会、葛从周率众渡河取黎阳、临河，又令庞师古、霍存下淇门、卫县，帝徐以大军继其后。
现代文：十二月二十日，太祖派遣丁会、葛从周率领部队渡过黄河攻取黎阳、临河，又命令庞师古、霍存攻占淇门、卫县，太祖率领大军徐徐地跟随在他们后面。
English: On December 20th, Emperor Taizu sent Dinghui and Gezong Zhou to cross the Yellow River to capture Liyang and Linhe, and ordered Pang Shigu and Huo Cun to capture Qimen and Weixian. Emperor Taizu led a large army to slowly follow them.

古文：二年春正月，魏军屯于内黄。
现代文：二年春正月，魏州军队屯扎在内黄。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, the Weizhou army was stationed in Neihuang.

古文：丙辰，帝与之接战，自内黄至永定桥，魏军五败，斩首万余级。
现代文：五日，太祖与魏军交战，从内黄到永定桥，魏军连败五次，杀死魏军一万多人。
English: On the fifth day, Taizu fought with the Wei army. From Neihuang to Yongding Bridge, the Wei army was defeated five times in a row, killing more than 10,000 Wei soldiers.

古文：罗宏信惧，遣使持厚币请和。
现代文：罗弘信害怕，派遣使者带很多的钱来请求讲和。
English: Luo Hongxin was afraid and sent an envoy with a lot of money to ask for peace.

古文：帝命止其焚掠而归其俘，宏信由是感悦而听命焉。
现代文：太祖下令停止对魏州的焚烧抢掠并归还俘虏给他，罗弘信因而感激欢悦听从命令。
English: The great-grandfather ordered to stop the burning and looting of Weizhou and return the prisoners to him, so Luo Hongxin gratefully and joyfully obeyed the order.

古文：乃收军屯于河上。
现代文：太祖于是收兵驻扎在黄河岸边。
English: So the great-grandfather gathered his troops and stationed them on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：八月己丑，帝遣丁会急攻宿州，刺史张筠坚守其壁，会乃率众于州东筑堰，壅汴水以浸其城。
现代文：八月十二日，太祖派遣丁会急攻宿州，宿州刺史张筠坚守城池，丁会于是带领众人在宿州东边筑起堤堰，堵拦汴水来淹浸宿州。
English: On August 12th, Emperor Taizu dispatched the Ding Association to make a sudden attack on Shuzhou. Shuzhou's warlord Zhang Xuan held the city, and the Ding Association led the crowd to build a dike on the east side of Shuzhou to block the floodwaters from flooding Shuzhou.

古文：十月壬午，筠遂降，宿州平。
现代文：十月五日，张筠才投降，宿州平定。
English: On October 5th, Zhang Xuan finally surrendered, and Shuzhou was pacified.

古文：十一月丁未，曹州裨将郭绍宾杀刺史郭饶，举郡来降。
现代文：十一月一日，曹州副将郭绍宾杀死刺史郭饶，带着全郡军民投降。
English: On November 1, Guo Shaobin, the vice-commander of Caozhou, killed the assassin Guo Rao and surrendered with all the county's soldiers and civilians.

古文：是月，徐将刘知俊率众二千来降，自是徐军不振。
现代文：同月，徐州将领刘知俊率领两千人投降，从此徐州军势不振。
English: In the same month, the Xuzhou general Liu Zhijun led two thousand people to surrender. Since then, the Xuzhou army has been weak.

古文：副使李璠曰： 将有不如意之事。 是夜，郓州硃瑄率步骑万人袭硃友裕于斗门，友裕拔军南去。
现代文：十二月，兖州朱瑾率领三万士兵进犯单父，太祖派丁会率领大军攻袭他，在金乡界打败他们，杀敌两万多人，朱瑾一人骑马逃走。景福元年二月三日，太祖亲征郓州，先派朱友裕驻军斗门。九日夜晚，郓州朱王宣率领一万步兵骑兵在斗门袭击朱友裕，朱友裕领军南退。
English: In December, Zhu Xi of Bozhou led 30,000 soldiers to attack the single father, and the great-grandfather sent a large army to attack him, defeated them in the Jinxiang area, killed more than 20,000 enemies, and Zhu Xi fled alone on horseback. On February 3, the first year of Gingfu, the great-grandfather personally conquered Bozhou and first sent Zhu Youyu to station troops at Doumen. On the evening of the 9th day, Zhu Wangxuan of Bozhou led 10,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Zhu Youyu at Doumen, and Zhu Youyu led the army to retreat south.

古文：乙酉，帝晨救斗门，不知友裕之退，前至斗门者皆为郓人所杀。
现代文：十日，太祖一早营救斗门，不知道朱友裕已经撤退，在前面先到斗门的人都被郓军杀害。
English: On the tenth day, Taizu rescued Doumen early in the morning. He did not know that Zhu Youyu had already retreated. The people who came to Doumen first were all killed by the Shan army.

古文：帝追袭郓人至瓠河，不及，遂顿兵于村落间。
现代文：太祖追击郓军直到瓠河，没追上，于是将部队驻扎在各村庄。
English: Emperor Taizu chased the Qian army as far as the Qianhe River, but did not catch up, so he stationed his troops in various villages.

古文：时硃瑄尚在濮州。
现代文：当时朱王宣还在濮州。
English: At that time, Zhu Wangxuan was still in Ganzhou.

古文：丁亥，遇硃瑄率兵将归于郓，遂来冲击。
现代文：十二日，遇上朱王宣率领兵士准备回到郓州，前来冲击。
English: On the 12th, soldiers led by Zhu Wangxuan, who were preparing to return to Zhangzhou, came to attack.

古文：十一月，遣硃友裕率兵攻濮州，下之，擒刺史郡儒以献，濮州平。
现代文：太祖驱马南奔，被敌军追赶非常危急，前面有深峻的堑沟，太祖跃马而过，张归厚持鞘矛殿后奋力迎战，才得以逃脱。这时李和几位部将全被郓军杀害。十一月，太祖派朱友裕领兵攻击濮州，占领了它，擒获刺史邵儒献上，濮州平定。
English: The great ancestor drove the horse south and was chased by the enemy army in a very critical situation. There was a deep ravine in front of him. The great ancestor galloped past. Zhang Gui Hou held a scabbard and spear and fought hard before he was able to escape. At this time, Li and several subordinates were all killed by the Shan army. In November, the great ancestor sent Zhu Youyu to lead an army to attack Zhangzhou and occupied it. He was presented with the sword of Shao Ru, and Zhangzhou was pacified.

古文：遂命移军伐徐州。
现代文：于是下令转移军队攻伐徐州。
English: He then ordered the transfer of troops to attack Xuzhou.

古文：帝整军出寨，时瑄、瑾已阵于前，须臾，东南风大起，我军旌旗失次，甚有惧色，即令骑士扬鞭呼啸。俄而西北风骤发，时两军皆在草莽中，帝因令纵火。既而烟焰亘天，乘势以攻贼阵，瑄、瑾大败。杀万余人，余众拥入清河，因筑京观于鱼山之下，驻军数日而还。
现代文：突然间刮起强烈的东南风，太祖军旗乱了行次，兵士都有怯色，太祖立即命令骑兵扬鞭呐喊，一下子西北风猛然刮起，这时两军都在杂草中间，太祖乘机下令放火，顷刻烟雾火焰连天，太祖乘势进攻敌方阵地，朱王宣、朱瑾大败，被杀死一万多人，残兵拥挤着进入清河城，太祖在鱼山下收聚敌尸筑起高大的坟墓以纪战功，驻军几天后返回。
English: Suddenly, a strong south-easterly wind blew up, the flags of the Tai Zu army were out of order, and the soldiers were timid. The Tai Zu immediately ordered the cavalry to wave their whips and shout. Suddenly, the north-westerly wind suddenly blew up. At this time, both armies were in the middle of the weeds. The Tai Zu took the opportunity to order the fire to be set, and the smoke and flames continued for days. The Tai Zu took advantage of the situation to attack the enemy's position. Zhu Wang Xuan and Zhu Xi were defeated, and more than 10,000 people were killed. The remaining soldiers crowded into Qinghe City. The Tai Zu gathered the enemy

古文：二年正月癸亥，遣硃友恭帅师复伐兗，遂堑而围之。
现代文：二年正月二十九日，太祖派朱友恭率领军队再次攻伐兖州，挖成堑壕围住兖城。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the second year, the great ancestor sent Zhu Youqiong to lead the army to attack Zhangzhou again, digging a trench to surround Zhangcheng.

古文：未几，硃瑄自郓率步骑援粮欲入于兗，友恭设伏以败之，尽夺其饷于高吴，因擒蕃将安福顺、安福庆。
现代文：不久，朱王宣从郓州率领步卒骑兵运送支援的粮食想进入兖州，朱友恭埋下伏兵击败了他们，在高吴将他们的军粮全部夺过来，趁机俘虏了蕃将安福顺、安福庆。
English: Not long after, Zhu Wangxuan led his foot soldiers and cavalrymen from Ganzhou to transport the grain aid and wanted to enter Ganzhou. Zhu Youqun ambushed and defeated them, seized all of their grain in Gaowu, and took advantage of the opportunity to capture the warlords An Fushun and An Fuqing.

古文：二月己酉，帝领亲军屯于单父，以为友恭之援。
现代文：二月二十一日，太祖率领亲信部队驻扎在单父，作为朱友恭的后援。
English: On February 21, the great-grandfather led his trusted troops to stay in the single father, as a backup for Zhu Youqiong.

古文：四月，濠、寿二州复为杨行密所陷。
现代文：四月，濠州、寿州又被杨行密攻陷。
English: In April, Zhangzhou and Shoushou were invaded by Yang Xingmi.

古文：是时，太原遣将史俨兒、李承嗣以万骑驰入于郓。
现代文：这时，太原派将领史俨儿、李承嗣带领一万骑兵驰援郓州。
English: At this time, Taiyuan dispatched generals Shi Yuer and Li Chengzhi, leading ten thousand cavalrymen, to come to the aid of Zhangzhou.

古文：硃友恭遂归于汴。
现代文：朱友恭于是退回汴州。
English: Zhu Youqiong then returned to Ganzhou.

古文：八月，帝领亲军伐郓，至大仇，遣前军挑战，设伏于梁山以待之。
现代文：八月，太祖率领亲信部队攻伐郓州，到大仇时，派前锋部队挑战，在梁山埋下伏兵以待。
English: In August, Taizu led his trusted troops to attack Zhangzhou, and when the time came for revenge, he sent forward troops to challenge and lay an ambush in Liangshan.

古文：既而获蕃将史完府，夺马数百匹。
现代文：不久俘虏蕃将史完府，夺得战马数百匹。
English: Soon after, the captors captured Shih Chuanfu and captured hundreds of horses.

古文：硃瑄脱身遁去，复入于郓。
现代文：朱王宣脱身逃回郓城。
English: Zhu Wang Xuan escaped and fled back to Lucheng.

古文：十月，帝驻军于郓，齐州刺史硃琼遣使请降，琼即瑾之从父兄也。
现代文：十月，太祖驻军郓州，齐州刺史朱琼派使者前来请求投降，朱琼就是朱瑾的堂兄。
English: In October, Emperor Taizu stationed troops in Zhangzhou, and sent an envoy to Zhu Qiong, a cousin of Zhu Xi, to request his surrender.

古文：帝因移军至兗，琼果来降。
现代文：太祖于是将部队转往兖州，朱琼果然来投降。
English: The great-grandfather then transferred the troops to Zhangzhou, and Zhu Qiong did indeed surrender.

古文：未几，琼为硃瑾所绐，掠而杀之，帝即以其弟玭为齐州防御使。
现代文：不久，朱琼被朱瑾欺骗，被抓住杀害了，太祖就以朱琼弟弟朱王比为齐州防御使。
English: Not long after, Zhu Qiong was deceived by Zhu Xi and was caught and killed. The great-grandfather took Zhu Qiong's brother Zhu Wangbi as the defense envoy of Qi Province.

古文：十一月，硃瑄复遣将贺瑰、柳存及蕃将何怀宝等万余人以袭曹州，庶解兗州之围也。
现代文：十一月，朱王宣又派部将贺瑰、柳存以及蕃将何怀宝等一万多人袭击曹州，想解除兖州的围困。
English: In November, Zhu Wangxuan sent more than ten thousand people, including his subordinate generals He Gui and Liu Cun and his subordinate general He Huai Bao, to attack Caozhou, hoping to lift the siege of Cangzhou.

古文：帝知之，自兗领军策马先路至钜野南，追而败之，杀戮将尽，生擒贺瑰、柳存、何怀宝及贼党三千余人。
现代文：太祖知道后，从兖州带领军队策马飞奔到钜野南边，追击敌寇并打败他们，敌寇几乎被全部杀尽，活捉了贺瑰、柳存、何怀宝及剩余贼党三千多人。
English: After the great-grandfather knew, he led the army from Luzhou to the southern edge of Luzhou, chased the enemy bandits and defeated them. The enemy bandits were almost all killed, and He Gui, Liu Cun, He Huai Bao and more than 3,000 remaining thieves were captured alive.

古文：是日申时，狂风暴起，沙尘沸涌，帝曰： 此乃杀人未足耳。 
现代文：这天下午四时，忽然刮起狂风，沙尘飞腾，太祖说： 这是杀人还不够。 
English: At four o'clock in the afternoon of this day, a fierce wind suddenly blew, and sand and dust flew. The great-grandfather said, "It is not enough to kill people.

古文：是月，帝遣许州刺史硃友恭领兵万人渡淮，以便宜从事。时黄、鄂二州累遣使求援，故有是行。
现代文：于是下令将所获俘虏全部杀光，狂风才停止。第二天，捆起贺瑰等将领在兖州城下示众，太祖平素知道贺瑰名声，于是放了他，只在兖州城下杀了何怀宝，然后班师。
English: So he ordered to kill all the captives, and only then did the storm stop. The next day, the generals, including He Gui, were tied up and paraded in front of the city of Zhangzhou. Taizu knew He Gui's reputation, so he let him go. He only killed He Huai Bao and then Ban Shi in front of the city of Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，命葛从周统军屯于洹水，以备蕃军。六月，李克用帅蕃汉诸军营于斥丘，遣其男落落将铁林小兒三千骑薄于洹水，从周与战，大败之，生擒落落以献。
现代文：三年六月，李克用率领蕃族、汉族等军队在斥丘扎营，派他儿子落落领着铁林小儿骑兵三千人逼近洹水。葛从周与他们战斗，大败他们，活捉落落献上。
English: In June of the third year, Li Ke used to lead the troops of the Yi and Han ethnic groups to set up camp on the hill, and sent his son Luo Luo to lead the 3,000 cavalrymen of the Tielin children to approach Surabaya. Ge fought with them from Zhou, defeated them, and captured Luo Luo alive.

古文：是时，昭宗幸华州，遣使就加帝检校太师，守中书令。
现代文：李克用悲痛惊骇，请求重修过去的友好亲善以赎回他儿子，太祖不答应，就将落落押送给罗弘信，杀了他。
English: Li Ke was shocked with grief and asked for the restoration of the past friendship and goodwill to redeem his son. The great-grandfather did not agree, so he escorted Luo Liao to Luo Hongxin and killed him.

古文：四年正月，帝以洹水之师大举伐郓。
现代文：七天后，太祖军队回来驻扎在阳留以攻伐郓州。四年正月，太祖率领洹水的军队大举攻伐郓州。
English: Seven days later, Emperor Taizu's army returned and stationed in Yangshuo to attack Zhangzhou. In the first month of the fourth year, Emperor Taizu led the army of Surabaya to attack Zhangzhou in a big way.

古文：辛卯，营于济水之次，庞师古令诸将撤木为桥。
现代文：十五日，在济水旁边安营扎寨，庞师古命令诸将撤下各种树木搭起桥梁。
English: On the 15th, they set up camp near Jishui. Pang Shigu ordered the generals to pull down all kinds of trees and build bridges.

古文：乙未夜，师古以中军先济，声振于郓，硃瑄闻之，弃壁夜走。
现代文：十九日夜晚，庞师古率领中军先渡过济水，呐喊声震撼郓城，朱王宣听到后，弃城夜逃。
English: On the evening of the 19th, the Chinese army led by Pang Shigu crossed Jishui first. Shouts shook Handan City. After hearing Zhu Wangxuan, they abandoned the city and fled at night.

古文：葛从周逐之至中都北，擒瑄并其妻男以献。寻斩汴桥下。
现代文：葛从周追到中都北面，抓住了朱王宣和他的妻子儿女献上，立即诛杀在汴桥下面。
English: Ge chased Zhou to the north of Zhongdu, caught Zhu Wangxuan and his wife and children, and immediately killed them under the bridge.

古文：郓州平，乙亥，帝入于郓，以硃友裕为郓州兵马留后。
现代文：郓州平定。二十三日，太祖进入郓城，任命朱友裕为郓州兵马留后。
English: Bozhou was pacified. On the 23rd, Emperor Taizu entered Bozheng and appointed Zhu Youyu as commander of the Bozhou Terracotta Army.

古文：时帝闻硃瑾与史俨兒在丰沛间搜索粮馈，惟留康怀英以守兗州，帝因乘胜遣葛从周以大军袭兗。
现代文：这时太祖听说朱瑾与史俨儿在丰、沛一带搜括军粮，只留下康怀英据守兖州，太祖因而乘胜派遣葛从周带领大军袭击兖州。
English: At this time, the great-great-grandfather heard that Zhu Xi and Shi Ye'er were gathering military supplies in the Feng and Pei areas, leaving only Kang Huaiying to defend Zhangzhou. Therefore, the great-great-grandfather took advantage of the victory and sent Ge Zhou to lead a large army to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：怀英闻郓失守，俄又我军大至，乃出降；硃瑾、史俨兒遂奔淮南。
现代文：康怀英听说郓城失守，接着又有葛从周大军来临，就出城投降。朱瑾、史俨儿便逃奔淮南。
English: When Kang Huaiying heard that Lucheng had been defeated, followed by Ge's arrival from Zhou's army, she left the city and surrendered. Zhu Rong and Shi Rong then fled to Huainan.

古文：九月，帝以兗、郓既平，将士雄勇，遂大举南征。
现代文：兖、海、沂、密等州平定。于是以葛存周任兖州留后。九月，太祖因为兖、郓等州已经平定，将士们雄猛骁勇，于是大举南征淮南。
English: In September, because the states of Min, Hai, Qu, and My were pacified, Taizu sent his soldiers south to conquer Huainan on a large scale, since Qu and Qu had already been pacified.

古文：命庞师古以徐、宿、宋、滑之师直趋清口，葛从周以兗、郓、曹、濮之众径赴安丰。
现代文：命令庞师古率领徐、宿、宋、滑等州部队直奔清口，葛从周率领兖、郓、曹、濮等州部队径赴安丰。
English: He ordered Pang Shigu to lead the state troops of Xu, Shuku, Song, and Nanzhu to go straight to Qingkou, and Ge to lead the state troops of Zhou, Zou, Cao, and Zou to Anfeng.

古文：淮人遣硃瑾领兵以拒师古，因决水以浸军，遂为淮人所败，师古没焉。
现代文：淮南人派朱瑾领兵抵拒庞师古，朱瑾便决淮水来淹庞师古部队，庞师古于是被淮南人打败，庞师古战死。
English: The Huainan people sent Zhu Xi to lead the troops to resist Pang Shigu. Zhu Xi then used water to flood Pang Shigu's troops. Pang Shigu was then defeated by the Huainan people, and Pang Shigu died in battle.

古文：葛从周行及濠梁，闻师古之败，亦命班师。
现代文：葛从周行军到濠梁，听说庞师古失败了，也下令回师撤军。
English: Ge marched from Zhou to Qilian, heard that Pang Shigu had failed, and also ordered the return of the division and withdrawal.

