古文：大司马之职，掌建邦国之九法，以佐王平邦国。
现代文：大司马的职责，负责建立有关诸侯国的九项法则，以辅佐王成就诸侯国的政治。
English: The duties of the grand steward, responsible for establishing nine laws related to the principality, to assist the king in achieving the politics of the principality.

古文：制畿封国，以正邦国；设仆辨位，以等邦国；进贤兴功，以作邦国；建牧立监，以维邦国；制军诘禁，以纠邦国；施贡分职，以任邦国；简稽乡民，以用邦国；均守平则，以安邦国；比小事大，以和邦国。
现代文：制定诸侯国的封域，以正定它们的疆界；为诸侯国设立仪法、辨别君臣的尊卑之位，以明确诸侯国君臣的等级；进用和荐举贤能有功的人，进用和荐举贤能有功的人，以激发诸侯国臣民的进取心；设立州牧和国君，以维系邦国的臣民；建立军队、惩治和严禁违法者，以纠正邦国的失误；分配诸侯国应缴的贡赋，以确定诸侯国的合理负担；查核诸侯国的乡民数，以便诸侯国任用民力；根据诸侯国爵位的尊卑和拥有土地的大小，建立合理的守卫土地之法，以安定诸侯国。使大国亲小国、小国服事大国，以使各诸侯国和睦相处。
English: to establish the fiefdoms of the vassal states in order to correctly determine their boundaries; to establish the etiquette for the vassal states, to distinguish the rank of the monarchs and the subordinates, to clarify the level of the vassals of the vassal states; to promote and recommend the promotion of meritorious people, to promote and recommend the promotion of meritorious people, to stimulate the enterprising spirit of the subjects of the vassal states; to establish the provincial pastors and the sovereigns to maintain the subjects of the vassal states; to establish the army, punish and strictly prohibit the violators to correct the mistakes of the vassal states;

古文：以九伐之法正邦国，冯弱犯寡则眚之，贼贤害民则伐之，暴内陵外则坛之。
现代文：用九伐之法规正诸侯国。
English: The law of nine cuts is used to govern the state.

古文：野荒民散则削之，负固不服则侵之，贼杀其亲则正之，放弑其君则残之，犯令陵政则杜之。外内乱，鸟兽行，则灭之。
现代文：诸侯有以强陵弱、以大侵小的，就削弱他；有杀害贤良和民众的，就讨伐他；有对内暴虐、对外欺陵邻国的，就幽禁他而更立新君有土地荒芜、人民离散的，就削减他的封地；有依仗险固地形而不服从的，就派兵进入他的国境以示惩罚；有无辜杀害亲族的，就抓起来治罪；有放逐或弑杀他的国君的，就杀死他；有违犯王的命令、轻视国家政法的。
English: If a vassal is strong and weak, if he encroaches on the weak and weak, he weakens him; if he kills the wise and the good and the people, he fights against him; if he is violent at home and oppresses his neighbors abroad, he imprisons him and establishes a new prince; if he has a barren land and scattered people, he reduces his fiefs; if he relies on the rugged terrain and does not obey, he sends troops into his borders to punish him; if he kills his relatives innocently, he is arrested and punished; if he expels or kills his sovereign, he is killed; if he violates the king's orders, he despises the

古文：正月之吉，始和，布政于邦国都鄙，乃悬政象之法于象魏，使万民观政象，挟日，而敛之，乃以九畿之籍施邦国之政职。
现代文：就杜塞他同邻国交通的途径；有外内悖乱人伦，行为如同禽兽的，就诛灭他。周历正月初一，开始向各诸侯国和王畿内的采邑宣布政法，把形成文字的政法悬挂在象魏上，让万民观看政法，过十天而后收藏起来。依照划分九畿的簿籍，分施各诸篌自所当奉行的政治和职责。
English: On the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, he began to announce the political laws to the principalities and counties in the kingdom, and hung the written political laws on the elephant weir for all the people to see. After ten days, they were collected. According to the book of division of the nine kingdoms, the politics and duties to be carried out by each county were divided.

古文：方千里曰国畿，其外方五百里曰侯畿，又其外方五百里曰甸畿，又其外方五百里曰男畿，又其外方五百里曰采畿，又其外方五百里曰卫畿，又其外方五百里曰蛮畿，又其外方五百里曰夷畿，又其外方五百里曰镇畿，又其外方五百里曰蕃畿。
现代文：地方千里是国畿，国畿之外地方五百里是侯畿，侯畿之外地方五百里是甸畿，甸畿之外地方五百里是男畿，男畿之外地方五百里是采畿，采畿之外地方五百里是卫畿，卫畿之外地方五百里是蛮畿，蛮畿之外地方五百里是夷畿，夷畿之外地方五百里是镇畿，镇畿之外地方五百里是蕃畿。
English: A thousand miles away is Guoxi, five hundred miles away from Guoxi is Hokkien, five hundred miles away from Hokkien is Dianchi, five hundred miles away from Dianchi is Nanki, five hundred miles away from Nanki is Zeki, five hundred miles away from Zeki is Weiqi, five hundred miles away from Weiqi is Wangan, five hundred miles away from Wangan is Yigai, five hundred miles away from Yigai is Zengi, five hundred miles away from Zengi is Handan.

古文：凡令赋，以地舆民制之：上地，食者三之二，其民可用者家三人；中地，食者半，其民可用者二家五人；下地，食者三之一，其民可用者家二人。
现代文：凡征兵，依据土地的好坏和人口的多少来制定服役人数的标准。上等土地每年可耕种的占三分之二，休耕三分之一，耕种上等土地的农民可用以服役的每家三人；中等土地每年可耕种的占一半，休耕一半，耕种中等土地的农民可用以服役的每二家五人；下等土地每年可耕种的占三分之一，休耕三分之二，耕种下等土地的农民可用以服役的每家二人。
English: In all cases of conscription, the standards for the number of people to serve shall be determined according to the quality of the land and the size of the population. Two-thirds of the upper-class land can be cultivated every year, one-third is fallow, and the farmers who cultivate the upper-class land can use three people from each family to serve; half of the middle-class land can be cultivated every year, half can be fallow, and the farmers who cultivate the middle-class land can use five people from every two families to serve; one-third of the lower-class land can be cultivated every year, two-thirds are fallow, and the farmers who cultivate the lower-class land can

古文：丧祭，奉诏马牲。
现代文：仲春，教民众习战。
English: Nakaharu, teach the people to practice war.

