古文：高宗梦得说，使百工营求诸野，得诸傅岩，作《说命》三篇。
现代文：殷之贤王高宗，在梦中得到一个贤相，他的名字叫 说 。群臣之内没此人，他便让百官依据他所梦之处寻找，在傅岩寻找到说，写下《说命》三篇。
English: Yin Zhi Xian Wang Gaozong received a wise man in a dream, his name was "Say." There was no such person among the courtiers, so he asked the officials to search for him according to the place of his dream, found him in Fuyanhai, and wrote down "Saying Life" three times.

古文：王宅忧，亮阴三祀。
现代文：殷高宗武丁居父丧，信任冢宰默默不言，已经三年。
English: It's been three years since Yin Gao Zongwuding's father passed away, and he's been quietly confiding in Zhaozai.

古文：既免丧，其惟弗言，群臣咸谏于王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：丧期满后，他还是不论政事。于是群臣纷纷向王进谏说： 哎！
English: After the period of mourning was over, he still did not care about politics. So the courtiers said to Wang Jinyao in succession: Hey!

古文：知之曰明哲，明哲实作则。
现代文：通晓事理的叫做圣名睿智之人，圣名睿智的人才可制作法则。
English: Those who know the truth are called sages, and those who are sages can make laws.

古文：天子惟君万邦，百官承式，王言惟作命，不言臣下罔攸禀令。 
现代文：天子统治天下，文武百官都按照天子的命令行事。天子的话就是命令，天子不说，臣下就无从接受教命。 
English: The Son of Heaven rules the world, and all civil and military officials act in accordance with the Son of Heaven's orders. The Son of Heaven's words are orders, and if the Son of Heaven does not speak, his subjects cannot accept his orders.

古文：王庸作书以诰曰： 以台正于四方，惟恐德弗类，兹故弗言。
现代文：王写下诏书告诫群臣说： 要我做四方的表率，而我惟恐自己的德行不好，所以不敢说话。
English: The king wrote an edict to admonish his courtiers, saying: "I am asked to set an example for the four quarters, but I am afraid that my moral conduct is not good, so I dare not speak.

古文：恭默思道，梦帝赉予良弼，其代予言。 
现代文：我恭敬沉默思考治国的办法，梦见上天赐给我一位贤良的辅佐，让他代替我发言。 
English: In my respectful silence, I thought about how to govern the country. I dreamed that God had given me a wise assistant to speak in my place.

古文：乃审厥象，俾以形旁求于天下。
现代文：于是详细画出了他的形像，派遣人拿着图像到天下普遍寻找。
English: As a result, his image was drawn in detail, and people were sent out with the image to look for him all over the world.

古文：说筑傅岩之野，惟肖。爰立作相。
现代文：傅说在傅岩之野筑土，同图像上的人非常相似。
English: Fu said the soil in Fuyan's field is very similar to that of the man in the image.

古文：王置诸其左右。
现代文：于是王立他为相，把他安置在自己的左右。 
English: So the king set him over his household, and put him at his right hand and at his left.

古文：命之曰： 朝夕纳诲，以辅台德。
现代文：王命令他说： 请早晚进谏，来帮助我修德！
English: The king ordered him, "Please come to the palace in the morning and evening to help me cultivate virtue."

古文：若金，用汝作砺；若济巨川，用汝作舟楫；若岁大旱，用汝作霖雨。
现代文：比如铁器，要用你作磨石；比如渡大河，要用你作船和桨；比如年岁大旱，要用你作霖雨。
English: As iron sharpens iron, so you shall sharpen a chisel; as in crossing a great river, so you shall make a boat and oars; as in the drought of the year, so shall you make the showers.

古文：启乃心，沃朕心，若药弗瞑眩，厥疾弗瘳；若跣弗视地，厥足用伤。
现代文：敞开你的心泉来灌溉我的心吧！药物不猛烈，疾病就无法治好；如果赤脚走路，脚就会很容易受伤。
English: Open the springs of your heart to water my heart. Without strong medicine, disease cannot be cured; if you walk barefoot, your feet will be easily injured.

古文：惟暨乃僚，罔不同心，以匡乃辟。俾率先王，迪我高后，以康兆民。
现代文：希望你和你的同僚，齐心协力来辅佐你的君王，使他依从先王的道路，按照先祖的治国之道治理国家，使天下百姓安居乐业。啊！重视我的这个命令，要考虑取得成绩！ 
English: I hope that you and your colleagues will make a concerted effort to assist your king, so that he will follow the path of the former king, govern the country in accordance with the ancestral way of governing the country, and make the people of the world live and work in peace.

古文：说复于王曰： 惟木从绳则正，后从谏则圣。
现代文：傅说回答说： 木依从绳墨砍削就会正直，君主依从谏言行事就会圣明。
English: Fu replied, "A tree will be honest if it is chopped with rope and ink, and a monarch will be holy if he acts according to the precepts."

古文：后克圣，臣不命其承，畴敢不祗若王之休命？ 
现代文：君主能够圣明，臣下不必等待教命就将奉行，谁敢不恭敬顺从我王的英明的命令呢？ 
English: If the sovereign is holy, and his subjects do not have to wait for orders, but will obey them, who would dare not to respectfully obey the wise orders of my king?

