古文：窦泰，字世宁，大安捍殊人也。
现代文：窦泰，字世宁，大安捍殊人氏。
English: Dou Tai, Zi Shining, Daan Han Shuren.

古文：本出清河观津，曾祖罗，魏统万镇将，因居北边。
现代文：本是清河观津的后代，祖罗，魏统万镇镇将，因此迁居到了北方边地。
English: Originally, they were the descendants of Qinghe Guanzin, Zulu, and Wei Dynasty general, so they moved to the northern border.

古文：父乐，魏末破六韩拔陵为乱，与镇将杨钧固守，遇害。
现代文：父乐，魏末破六韩拔陵作乱，他与镇将杨钧固守城池，遇害身亡。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, his father, Le, caused a riot by destroying six Korean tombs. He and the town marshal, Yang Xuan, defended the city and were killed.

古文：泰贵，追赠司徒。
现代文：泰富贵后，追赠为司徒。
English: In the year of Bei Qi's demise, he died of illness. Dou Tai, Zha Shining, Taian Han Shuren.

古文：初，泰母梦风雷暴起，若有雨状，出庭观之，见电光夺目，驶雨沾洒，寤而惊汗，遂有娠。
现代文：早年，泰母梦风雷骤起，好似要下雨，出门观看，见电光刺眼，暴雨突降，醒来出了一身大汗，这样就有了身孕。
English: In the early years, Taimou dreamed of a sudden thunderstorm, as if it was going to rain, went out to watch, saw electric lights glare, sudden rain, woke up in a sweat, and thus became pregnant.

古文：期而不产，大惧。
现代文：时间超过了，也没有要生产的迹象，因此大惧。
English: His mother was terrified when she did not give birth at full term.

古文：有巫曰： 渡河湔裙，产子必易。 
现代文：有一巫士说： 渡河湿裙，生产就容易。 
English: A sorcerer once said: "Crossing the river in a wet skirt makes production easy."

古文：便向水所。忽见一人，曰： 当生贵子，可徙而南。 
现代文：泰母便来到水边，猛然间看见一人，那人对她说： 你会生一个贵重的儿子，可以迁徙到南边。 
English: Mother Tai came to the water's edge and suddenly saw a man, who said to her: "You will give birth to a precious son who can migrate to the south.

古文：泰母从之。
现代文：泰母听懂了这个人的话。
English: Tai's mother understood the man's words.

古文：俄而生泰。
现代文：很快就生下了泰。
English: Soon after, she gave birth to Tai.

古文：及长，善骑射，有勇略。
现代文：泰长大了，擅长骑射，有勇有谋。
English: Tai has grown up. He is good at riding and shooting. He is brave and resourceful.

古文：泰父兄战殁于镇，泰身负骸骨归尔朱荣。
现代文：泰的父兄都在镇上阵亡，他就背着他们的遗骨投奔了尔朱荣。
English: Tai's father and brother were both killed in battle in the town, and he carried their remains on his back and rushed to Jiu Rong.

古文：以从讨邢杲功，赐爵广阿子。
现代文：因有随从皇帝讨伐邢杲的功劳，赐爵广阿子。
English: He was awarded the title of Guang A Zi for his contribution to the campaign of Zhu Rong against the Mongols.

古文：神武之为晋州，请泰为镇城都督，参谋军事。
现代文：神武为晋州刺史，请泰任镇城都督，并参谋军事。
English: Emperor Jimmu Gao Huan appointed Jinzhou as the historical capital, recruited Dou Tai as the township governor, and participated in military planning.

古文：累迁侍中、京畿大都督，寻领御史中尉。
现代文：累迁侍中、京畿大都督，不久领御史中尉。
English: He was promoted many times, rising to the rank of chamberlain and the governor of Gyeonggi Province, and was soon appointed lieutenant of the Imperial Household Agency. He held a seat in the cabinet as an honored retainer and distinguished relative.

古文：泰以勋戚居台，虽无多纠举，而百僚畏惧。
现代文：泰因勋戚居御史台，虽纠察不多，但百官畏惧。
English: Although there have not been too many impeachment pickets against the evils of the DPRK and China, however, officials are afraid of him.

古文：天平三年，神武西讨，令泰自潼关入。
现代文：天平三年，神武向西征讨，令泰率兵向潼关进军。
English: In the third year of the Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing's Tenpyeong era, Gao Huan led an army into the Western Wei and ordered Dou Tai to attack from Shaoguan.

古文：四年，泰至小关，为周文帝所袭，众尽没，泰自杀。
现代文：四年，泰抵小关，遭周文帝的偷袭，全军覆没，泰自杀。
English: In the fourth year of the balance of power, he joined the army and came to Xiaoguan. He was attacked by Uwentai, the whole army was wiped out, and he committed suicide.

古文：初，泰将发邺，邺有惠化尼谣云： 窦行台，去不回。 
现代文：早些时候，泰准备从邺城开拔，邺人惠化尼作歌谣说： 窦行台，去不回。 
English: Earlier, when Tai was preparing to move from Lucheng, Hui Huani, a native of Lucheng, made a song and said: Dou Xing Tai, you can't go back.

古文：未行之前，夜三更，忽有朱衣冠帻数千人入台，云 收窦中尉 ，宿直兵吏皆惊，其人入数屋，俄顷而去。
现代文：动身的前一天，夜三更，忽见几千个穿着红衣戴着红头巾的人走进台来，大声说： 收窦中尉。 值班兵吏十分的惊恐，这帮人分别进了许多的屋子，不一会儿就离开了。
English: The day before the departure, on the third day of the night, I suddenly saw several thousand people wearing red clothes and red headscarves enter the stage and loudly said: "Lieutenant Dou." The officers on duty were very frightened, these people separately entered many rooms and left soon.

古文：旦视关键不异，方知非人。
现代文：早晨起床察看门锁仍是老样子，这才明白昨夜的闯入者不是人。
English: Waking up in the morning to find the locks still in place, it became clear that last night's intruder was not human.

古文：皆知其必败。
现代文：人们都认为窦泰一定要失败。
English: People think Dou Tai must fail.

古文：赠大司马、太尉、录尚书事，谥曰武贞。
现代文：朝廷赠大司马、太尉、录尚书事，谥武贞。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the title of Daishi-ma, Tai-jo, Rokusho-shuji, and Shobuzhen.

古文：泰妻，武明娄后妹也。
现代文：泰妻，武明娄后的妹妹。
English: Thai wife, sister of Wu Ming, empress dowager.

古文：泰虽以亲见待，而功名自建。齐受禅，祭告其墓。
现代文：泰虽然因亲戚受朝廷礼遇，但也建立了许多的功劳。齐氏建国，祭告其墓。
English: Although Tai was treated with courtesy by the imperial court because of his relatives, he also established many merits. The founding of the Qi Dynasty and his tomb are celebrated.

古文：皇建初，配享神武庙庭。
现代文：皇建初，配享神武庙庭。
English: In the first year of imperial construction, it was enshrined in the temple of Gao Zu.

古文：子孝敬嗣。
现代文：子孝敬嗣继。
English: His son, Takataka, succeeded him.

古文：位仪同三司。
现代文：位至仪同三司。
English: It is the third division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：尉景，字士真，善无人也。
现代文：尉景，字士真，善无人氏。
English: Fei Jing, Zi Shizhen, and Zhen Nonglu.

古文：秦、汉置尉候官，其先有居此职者，因以氏焉。
现代文：秦、汉设置尉侯官，他的祖先有任此职者，因此以尉为姓氏。
English: The Qin and Han dynasties set up the position of yeong huang, and his ancestors held this position, so his surname was yeong.

古文：景性温厚，颇有侠气。
现代文：景性格温和，却颇有豪侠之气。
English: Jing has a gentle personality, but he is quite heroic.

古文：魏孝昌中，北镇反，景与神武入杜洛周军中，仍共归尔朱荣。
现代文：魏孝昌中，北镇人反叛，景与神武投奔杜洛周，又一块归附尔朱荣。
English: In the middle of Wei Xiaochang, Beizhen people rebelled, Jing and Shenwu went to Dulozhou, and another group went to Zhu Rong.

古文：以军功封博野县伯。
现代文：以军功封博野县伯。
English: He was awarded the title of Count of Bono County for his military service.

古文：后从神武起兵信都。
现代文：后随从神武在信都举兵。
English: After that, Jimmu's followers raised an army in Shinto.

古文：韩陵之战，唯景所统失利。
现代文：韩陵之战，只有景统领的部众失败。
English: In the Battle of Hanling, only Jing's subordinates were defeated.

古文：神武入洛，留景镇邺。
现代文：神武入据洛阳，留景镇守邺城。
English: Shenwu entered Luoyang, and Liujing Town guarded Lucheng.

古文：寻进封为公。
现代文：不久晋爵为公。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the court.

古文：景妻常山君，神武之姊也。
现代文：景妻常山君，神武的姊姊。
English: His wife, Changshan Jun, is Gao Huan's younger sister.

古文：以勋戚，每有军事，与厍狄干常被委重，而不能忘怀财利，神武每嫌责之。
现代文：由于是姻亲，每有要事，就同厍狄干一道被委以重任，然而却没有忘记追求财利，神武常常责备他。
English: Since he was a relative by marriage, he was entrusted with important tasks together with Zi Dikang whenever there was an important matter. However, he did not forget to pursue financial gain. Shenwu often reproached him.

古文：转冀州刺史，又大纳贿，发夫猎，死者三百人。
现代文：转任冀州刺史，又公然地接受贿赂，召征民夫打猎，丢掉性命的有三百人。
English: He made history in Jizhou, took a large amount of bribes, and mobilized officials to go hunting. Three hundred people died.

古文：厍狄干与景在神武坐，请作御史中尉。
现代文：厍狄干与景同神武一道议事，干请求作御史中尉。
English: Yan Dikang and Jing Tong Shenwu deliberated together, and Yan requested to be made a lieutenant of the imperial historian.

古文：神武曰： 何意下求卑官？ 
现代文：神武问： 你为什么要作这样的卑官？ 
English: Shenwu asked: Why do you want to be such a low-ranking official?

古文：干曰： 欲捉尉景。 
现代文：厍狄干说： 想抓尉景。 
English: He replied, "I want to catch corrupt officials like Lt. King."

古文：神武大笑，令优者石董桶戏之。
现代文：神武听后哈哈大笑，令优人石董桶戏弄他。
English: Gao Huan listened to the laughter, and the life of Hao Youshi Dongbui was a joke.

古文：董桶剥景衣，曰： 公剥百姓，董桶何为不剥公！ 
现代文：董桶剥掉景的衣服，说： 公剥百姓，董桶为何不能剥公？ 
English: Dong Jie peeled off the clothes of the scene and said: Publicly peel the people, why can't Dong Jie publicly peel?

古文：神武诫景曰： 可以无贪也。 
现代文：神武告诫景说： 不可以贪得无厌。 
English: Gao Huan warned him, "Don't be greedy anymore."

古文：景曰： 与尔计生活孰多，我止人上取，尔割天子调。 
现代文：景说： 同你比较，谁的生计多些？我只要大官的，你却伸手向天子索取。 
English: He said, "Let me count with you which of us has received more. I only take from the people, but you take from the Son of God."

古文：神武笑不答。
现代文：神武笑而不答。
English: Gao Huan only laughed and did not answer.

古文：改长乐郡公。
现代文：改封长乐郡公。
English: He was given the title of Changle County Governor.

古文：历位太保、太傅，坐匿亡人见禁止。
现代文：历位太保、太傅，因匿藏逃人受囚拘。
English: Successively promoted to Taibo and Taifu, he was imprisoned for hiding fugitives.

古文：使崔暹谓文襄曰： 语阿惠儿，富贵欲杀我耶！ 
现代文：景派崔暹对文襄说： 告诉阿惠儿，他富贵了就想杀我吗？ 
English: Cui Siam, a member of the Jing faction, said to Wen Xiang, "Tell Ah Hui Er, if he becomes rich, will he want to kill me?

古文：神武闻之泣，诣阙曰： 臣非尉景，无以至今日。 
现代文：神武听说后为他掉泪，亲自进宫游说： 我如果没有尉景，就没有今天的好时光。 
English: After hearing that, Shenwu shed tears for him and personally went to the palace to lobby: "If I didn't have Yingjing, I wouldn't have today's good time."

古文：三请，帝乃许之。
现代文：多次请求，帝才同意不杀景。
English: After many requests, Tenzin agreed to release him.

古文：于是黜为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：因此贬黜为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: As a result, he was demoted to the post of grand general of cavalry and appointed to the post of the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：神武造之，景恚卧不动，叫曰： 杀我时趣耶！ 
现代文：神武去拜访他，他躺在床上不动，大喊： 杀我的时候到了！ 
English: When Shenwu went to visit him, he was lying on the bed, not moving, shouting: "It's time to kill me!"

古文：常山君谓神武曰： 老人去死近，何忍煎迫至此。 
现代文：常山君对神武说： 老人离死期不远了，为什么还要给以折磨。 
English: Changshan said to Shenwu: The old man is not far from death, why should he be tortured.

古文：又曰： 我为尔汲水胝生。 
现代文：又说： 我舀水来帮你洗手。 
English: And he said, Let me draw water, and wash thy hands.

古文：因出其掌。
现代文：景伸出手。
English: Jing stretched out his hand.

古文：神武抚景，为之屈膝。
现代文：神武抚摸着景，甚至弯曲了膝盖。
English: Gao Huan stretched out his palm to let him see. Gao Huan comforted the lieutenant and kneeled down unconsciously.

古文：先是，景有果下马，文襄求之，景不与，曰： 土相扶为墙，人相扶为王，一马亦不得畜而索也。 
现代文：早先，景有一匹果下马，文襄想要，景不给，说： 土相扶为墙，人相扶为王，一匹马也不让我养，却来索要。 
English: Earlier, Jing had a stallion, and Wen Xiang wanted it, but Jing wouldn't give it to him, saying, "The earth supports the wall, and the people support the king. He wouldn't let me keep a horse, but he came to ask for it."

古文：神武对景及常山君责文襄而杖之。
现代文：神武当着景和常山君的面责备、杖击文襄。
English: Gao Huan scolded Gao Cheng against Lieutenant Jing and Changshan Jun and beat him with a stick.

古文：常山君泣救之。
现代文：常山君抽泣着为文襄求情。
English: Tsuneyama-kun sobbed and begged for mercy for Wenxiang.

古文：景曰： 小儿惯去，放使作心腹，何须干啼湿哭不听打耶！ 
现代文：景说： 这小儿太放纵了，你还偏袒他，为什么要干啼湿哭地不让打呀！ 
English: Jing said, "This child is too indulgent, you are still partial to him, why don't you let him beat you dryly, wetly, and tearfully!"

古文：寻授青州刺史，操行颇改，百姓安之。
现代文：不久授青州刺史，操行有很大的改变，百姓也安定下来了。
English: Soon after, the Qingzhou Shishi was conferred, and there was a great change in behavior, and the people also settled down.

古文：征授大司马。
现代文：征授大司马。
English: He was awarded the title of Daishima.

古文：遇疾，薨于州。
现代文：因病，死在刺史任上。
English: Due to illness, he died while in office.

古文：赠太师、尚书令。
现代文：赠太师、尚书令。
English: He was given the title of Grand Master and the title of Shang Shuling.

古文：齐受禅，以景元勋，诏祭告其墓。
现代文：齐立国，以景为元勋，诏令祭告其墓。
English: Qi established the country, with Jing as the founder, and the imperial edict announced his grave.

古文：皇建初，配享神武庙庭，追封长乐王。
现代文：皇建初，配享神武庙庭，追封为长乐王。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the mayor of Qingzhou. His behavior changed dramatically, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：子粲，少历显职，性粗武。
现代文：儿子景粲，少时即任要职，性格粗暴。
English: The imperial court appointed him as grand steward, but he fell ill and died in Qingzhou. His son, Guo Wei, was rude and had held important official positions since childhood.

古文：天保初，封厍狄干等为王，粲以父不预王爵，大恚恨，十余日闭门不朝。
现代文：天保初年，封厍狄干等人为王，粲因为父没有得到王爵，十分气愤，十多天闭门不上朝。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court made Dickan and others into kings and queens. Because his father was not given the title of kings and queens, he was very angry and stayed at home for more than ten days and did not go to the imperial court.

古文：帝怪，遣使就宅问之。
现代文：帝奇怪，派人来家里询问。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was puzzled and sent someone to his home to inquire.

古文：隔门谓使者曰： 天子不封粲父为王，粲不如死。 
现代文：他隔着门对使者说： 天子不封粲的父亲为王，粲不如死了。 
English: He said to the messenger through the door: If the Son of God does not make my father king, I might as well be dead.

古文：使云： 须开门受敕。 
现代文：使者说： 应该开门接受敕令。 
English: The messenger said: You should open the door and accept the command of the Son of God.

古文：粲遂弯弓隔门射使者。
现代文：粲于是隔着门用箭射使者。
English: So he shot the messenger with an arrow through the door.

古文：使者以状闻之，文宣使段韶谕旨。
现代文：使者依实情向帝作了报告，文襄便派段韶去传达意旨。
English: The envoy reported the situation to Emperor Wenzhong, who sent Duan Er to announce the edict.

古文：粲见韶，唯抚膺大哭，不答一言。
现代文：粲见韶后，只是拍胸大哭，不说一句说。
English: After I saw her, I just beat my chest and burst into tears without saying a word.

古文：文宣亲诣其宅慰之，方复朝请。
现代文：文襄亲自来到他的家里慰问，他才上朝。
English: Wen Xiang personally came to his home to offer condolences, but he only left in the morning.

古文：寻追封景长乐王。
现代文：不久追封景为长乐王。
English: He was soon followed by Changle Wang.

古文：粲袭爵。
现代文：粲继承父爵。
English: He succeeds his father.

古文：位司徒、太傅，薨。
现代文：死于司徒、太傅位上。
English: He died in Stuto and rose to the rank of Taifu.

古文：子世辩嗣。
现代文：子世辩嗣继。
English: His descendants succeeded him.

古文：周师将入邺，令辩出千余骑觇候，出滏口，登高阜西望，遥见群乌飞起，谓是西军旗帜，即驰还，比至紫陌桥，不敢回顾。
现代文：周师快攻入邺的时候，帝令世辩率千余骑兵前往侦察，离滏口，登上高地向西眺望，见很远的地方群鸟腾飞，以为是西军的旗帜，立即驰马跑回，快到紫阳桥，他也不敢回头看一眼。
English: When Zhou's division was about to enter the city, the emperor sent more than a thousand cavalrymen to investigate. He left the city gate, climbed the hill and looked westward. He saw the birds flying far away and thought it was the flag of the Western Army. He immediately galloped back to Ziyang Bridge. He did not dare to look back.

古文：隋开皇中，卒于浙州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇中，死在淅州刺史任上。
English: He was in the middle of the Sui Dynasty and died while serving as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：娄昭，字菩萨，代郡平城人也，武明皇后之母弟也。
现代文：娄昭，字菩萨，代郡平城人，是武明皇后的舅舅。
English: Zou Zhao, also known as Bodhisattva, was from Pingcheng County and was the uncle of Empress Wu Ming.

古文：祖父提，雄杰有识度，家僮千数，牛马以谷量。
现代文：其祖父娄提，为人豪雄有器识，家僮以千数，牛马以山谷来量。
English: His grandfather, Zhai Ti, was a heroic man with great knowledge. He had thousands of family members, and his cattle and horses were as numerous as the valleys.

古文：性好周给，士多归附之。
现代文：他喜好周济别人，人士都归附于他。
English: He likes to give to others, and people are drawn to him.

古文：魏太武时，以功封真定侯。
现代文：北魏太武帝时，因功封为真定侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taivu of the Northern Wei Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Zhending Hou.

古文：父内干，有武力，未仕而卒。
现代文：其父内干，有武力，没有任官就去世了。
English: His father, a military man, died without being appointed to any post.

古文：昭贵，魏朝赠司徒。
现代文：娄昭荣贵后，魏朝廷追赠内干为司徒。
English: After Zou Zhaoxiao was honored, the Wei court posthumously awarded the inner stem to the scholar.

古文：齐受禅，追封太原王。
现代文：北齐受禅建国，追封为太原王。
English: Northern Qi founded the country under the influence of Zen and was later crowned the King of Taiyuan.

古文：昭方雅正直，有大度深谋，腰带八尺，弓马冠世。
现代文：娄昭为人方正雅直，有大度深谋，腰围八尺，骑射无人能比。
English: Zou Zhao is a man of upright and elegant manners, with a generous and profound mind, a waist circumference of eight feet, and a riding shot that no one can match.

古文：神武少亲重之。
现代文：高祖自幼就很看重他。
English: Gaozu has valued him since he was a child.

古文：昭亦早识人，恒曲尽礼敬。
现代文：娄昭也早具慧眼识英雄，对高祖总是躬身礼敬。
English: Zou Zhao was also a hero with wisdom and insight, and he always bowed down to Gao Zu.

古文：数随神武猎，每致请不宜乘危历阶。
现代文：常随高祖外出打猎，每每认真劝诫高祖不宜乘危历险，应保重自己。
English: He often went out hunting with Gao Zu, and earnestly admonished Gao Zu not to take dangerous adventures, but to take care of himself.

古文：神武将出信都，昭赞成大策，即以为中军大都督。
现代文：高祖将要对信都用兵，娄昭支持他的决策，就任他为中军大都督。
English: Gao Zu was going to use troops against Xindu, and Zou Zhao supported his decision and appointed him as the Chinese military governor.

古文：从破尔朱兆于广阿，封安喜县伯，改济北公，又徙濮阳郡公，授领军将军。
现代文：随从高祖破尔朱兆于广阿，封为安喜县伯，改为济北公，又改为濮阳郡公，拜任领军将军。
English: He followed Gao Zu to Zhu Zhao in Guang'a, was given the title of Anxi County magistrate, changed his title to Jibei County magistrate, changed his title to Poyang County magistrate, and was appointed as the leading general.

古文：魏孝武将贰于神武，昭以疾辞还晋阳。
现代文：东魏孝武帝将与高祖分裂，娄昭称病回到晋阳。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Wei Dynasty split with Gao Zu, and Zou Zhao claimed to be ill and returned to Jinyang.

古文：从神武入洛，兖州刺史樊子鹄反，以昭为东道大都督讨之。
现代文：随高祖入洛阳。兖州刺史樊子鹄造反，以娄昭为束道大都督去讨伐他。
English: He followed Gao Zu into Luoyang. Zhang Zizhi of Zhangzhou rebelled, and went to fight him with Zizhao as the grand governor.

古文：子鹄既死，诸将劝昭尽捕诛其党。
现代文：子鹄死后，诸将劝娄昭将其党羽全部捕杀干净。
English: After Zixuan's death, the generals advised Zhao Zhao to kill all of his followers.

古文：昭曰： 此州无状，横被残贼，其君是怨，其人何罪。 
现代文：娄昭说： 这个州不像样子，横遭战乱破坏蹂躏，该痛恨的是头领，别的人有什么罪责! 
English: Zou Zhao said, "This state is not like it used to be. It has been ravaged by war and destruction. It is the leaders who should be hated. What is the responsibility of others?"

古文：遂皆舍焉。
现代文：便一律释放了。
English: They were all released.

古文：后转大司马，仍领军。
现代文：后来转任大司马，仍旧任领军。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Daisima, still leading the army.

古文：迁司徒，出为定州刺史。
现代文：升为司徒，又外放任定州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the status of a scholar, and he was also appointed to the post of the historian of Dingzhou.

古文：昭好酒，晚得偏风，虽愈，犹不能处剧务，在州事委僚属，昭举其大纲而已。
现代文：娄昭好饮酒，晚年得偏瘫，虽治好了，还是不能处理繁重政务，在州把事情都委托给僚属们去办，娄昭衹是抓大的要害而已。
English: Zhai Zhao liked to drink alcohol, and in his later years he suffered from hemiplegia. Although he was cured, he was still unable to handle heavy government affairs. In the state, he entrusted everything to his colleagues. Zhai Zhao Zhao was the key to grasping the big picture.

古文：薨于州。
现代文：死在任上。
English: Died in Xiangzhou

古文：赠假黄钺、太师、太尉，谥曰武。
现代文：朝廷赠给假黄钹、太师、太尉，谧号为武。
English: The imperial court gave him the titles of pseudo-Huang Qi, Taishi, and Taiyi, and his posthumous name was Wu.

古文：齐受禅，诏祭告其墓，封太原王。
现代文：北齐接受禅让建国，下诏于其墓祭告，追封为太原王。
English: Bei Qi accepted the founding of the country by Zen Zhen, and the following edict was announced at his tomb, and he was posthumously crowned the King of Taiyuan.

古文：皇建初，配享神武庙庭。
现代文：皇建初年，使其陪祭于高祖之庙。
English: In the first year of imperial construction, it was enshrined in the temple of Gao Zu.

古文：长子仲达嗣，改封濮阳王。
现代文：长子娄仲达袭爵。改封濮阳王。
English: The eldest son, Shuzhongda, succeeded to the peerage. He was renamed Shiyang Wang.

古文：次子定远，少历显职，外戚中偏为武成爱狎。
现代文：其次子娄定远，年轻时就历任要职，外戚中衹有他最受武成帝的偏爱亲热。
English: Secondly, his son, Zou Dingyuan, held various important positions when he was young. Among his relatives, he was the most favored by Emperor Wucheng.

古文：别封临淮郡王。
现代文：特封为临淮郡王。
English: He was specially appointed as the King of Linhuai County.

古文：武成大渐，与赵郡王等同受顾命，位司空。
现代文：武成帝死前，他与赵郡王等人同受顾命，位至司空。
English: Before the death of Emperor Wucheng, he and Zhao Guowang and others received the same patronage and were promoted to the position of Siku.

古文：赵郡王之奏黜和士开，定远与其谋，遂纳士开贿赂，成赵郡之祸，其贪鄙如此。
现代文：赵郡王上奏罢免和士开，娄定速参与谋划。他竟受了和士开的贿赂，致使赵郡王蒙难，他就这么贪婪卑鄙。
English: Zhao Guowang appealed for the dismissal of He Shikai, and Yan Dingfeng participated in the plan. He actually received a bribe from He Shikai, causing Zhao Guowang to suffer, he was so greedy and despicable.

古文：寻除瀛州刺史。
现代文：不久拜任瀛州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，定远弟季略，穆提婆求其伎妾，定远不许。
现代文：当初其弟季略，穆提婆要他的艺妓，定远拒绝了。
English: At first, his younger brother Ji Liu, Muti asked him to be a geisha, but Ding Yuan refused.

古文：因高思好作乱，提婆令临淮国郎中令告定远阴与思好通。后主令开府段畅率三千骑掩之，令侍御史赵秀通至州，以赃货事劾定远。
现代文：因为高思好作乱，提婆指使临淮国郎中令告娄定远与高思好通谋，后主令开府段畅率三千骑前往缉捕定远，又令侍御史赵秀通到瀛州，以贪脏事弹劾定远。
English: Because Gao Siyi made a disturbance, Deva instructed Lin Huai Guorong, the second-in-command, to accuse Zou Dingyuan of conspiring with Gao Siyi. After that, the commander ordered Kaifu Duan to take three thousand horsemen to arrest Dingyuan, and also ordered Zhao Xiutong, the grand chamberlain, to go to Zhangzhou to impeach Dingyuan for corruption.

古文：定远疑有变，遂缢而死。
现代文：定远怀疑朝廷有变，便上吊自杀了。
English: Suspecting that there had been a change in the imperial court, he hanged himself.

古文：昭兄子睿。睿字佛仁，父拔，魏南部尚书。
现代文：娄昭哥哥的儿子娄散字佛仁，其父娄拔，任北魏南部尚书。
English: Zou Zhao's brother's son, Zou San Zi Furen, and his father, Zou Ba, were in charge of the southern Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：睿幼孤，被叔父昭所养。
现代文：娄散幼年丧父，是叔父娄昭抚养长大的。
English: He lost his father at a young age and was raised by his uncle, Zou Zhao.

古文：为神武帐内都督，封掖县子，累迁光州刺史。在任贪纵，深为文襄所责。
现代文：任高祖帐内都督，封为掖县子，逐步迁升任光州刺史，在任贪纵，被文襄帝严责。
English: Gao Zu was appointed as the prefectural governor of Gwangju, was given the title of the son of Gwangju County, and was gradually promoted to the post of the governor of Gwangju. He was accused of corruption while in office and was severely reprimanded by Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：后改封九门县公。
现代文：后来改封九门县公。
English: Later, he was given the title of Jiumen County magistrate.

古文：齐受禅，得除领军将军，别封安定侯。
现代文：北齐接受禅让建国，被任命为领军将军，另封安定侯。
English: Bei Qi accepted the establishment of the state, was appointed as the leading general, and was given the title of stable marquis.

古文：睿无他器干，以外戚贵幸，纵情财色。
现代文：娄叙没有什么本领，衹凭外戚身份被看重，纵情于女色财利。
English: 叙 has no ability,  is valued by virtue of being a relative, and indulges in womanly pursuits.

古文：为瀛州刺史，聚敛无厌。
现代文：他任瀛州刺史，聚敛无度，不知满足。
English: He is the history-maker of Zhangzhou. He is relentless in his pursuit of knowledge and never satisfied.

古文：皇建初，封东安王。
现代文：皇建之初，封为束安王。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Jianchu, he was given the title of King Sokuan.

古文：大宁元年，进位司空。
现代文：大宁元年，又进位司空。
English: In the first year of the Danying Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of Sifu.

古文：平高归彦于冀州，还拜司徒。
现代文：平定高归彦之叛于冀州，返回后拜任司徒。
English: He subdued Gao Guihong's rebellion in Jizhou, and after his return, he took over the position of the tutor.

古文：河清三年，滥杀人，为尚书左丞宋仲羡弹奏，经赦乃免。
现代文：河清三年，因为滥杀无辜，被尚书左丞宋仲羡所弹劾，经过赦免才放出来。
English: In the third year of Heqing, because of the indiscriminate killing of innocents, he was impeached by Shangshu Zuojo Song Zhongzheng, and was only released after being pardoned.

古文：寻为太尉，以军功进大司马。
现代文：不久任命为太尉，以其所立军功而升任大司马。
English: He was soon appointed to the rank of captain and was promoted to the rank of grand steward for his military achievements.

古文：武成至河阳，仍遣总偏师赴悬瓠。
现代文：武成帝来到河阳，又下令派他统领偏师去驻守悬瓠。
English: Emperor Wucheng came to Hayao, and ordered to send him to lead a detachment to garrison the Suspension Bridge.

古文：睿在豫境留停百余日，专行非法，诏免官，以王还第。
现代文：娄龈在豫州境内竟然滞留了一百多天，专门横行不法；下诏免去其官职，以王的身份回府。
English: He even stayed in the territory of Yuzhou for more than a hundred days, specifically to engage in lawlessness; he was removed from his official position and returned to the capital as the king.

古文：寻除太尉，薨。
现代文：不久拜任太尉，死。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of captain and died.

古文：赠大司马。
现代文：朝廷赠予大司马。
English: The Imperial Court gave the horse to Daisima.

古文：子子彦嗣，位开府仪同三司。
现代文：其子娄子彦继位。子彦任开府仪同三司。
English: His son, Shishihiko, succeeded to the throne. Shishihiko was appointed the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：厍狄干，善无人也。
现代文：犀狄干，善无人。
English: When he saw Duan Qian, he just stroked his chest and burst into tears, without answering a word.

古文：曾祖越豆眷，魏道武时以功割善无之西腊汙山地方百里以处之，后率部北迁，因家朔方。
现代文：曾祖父越豆眷，北魏道武帝时因为有功，割善无西部腊污山地区方圆百里来安置他。后来他率领部落北迁，因而定居于朔北。
English: When Emperor Wu of the Northern Wei Dynasty was in power, his great-grandfather, Yue Doukin, because of his meritorious service, allocated a hundred-mile radius in the western Lashoushan area to resettle him. Later, he led the tribe to move north, and thus settled in Shuo Bei.

古文：干梗直少言，有武艺。
现代文：库狄干耿直少言寡语，有武艺。
English: Cudi is a man of few words and martial arts.

古文：魏正光初，除扫逆党，授将军，宿卫于内。
现代文：北魏正光初年，他扫除叛党，拜任将军，在宫廷内值宿。
English: In the first year of the Northern Wei Xiaoming Emperor Zhengguang, he was awarded the rank of general for helping the imperial court to sweep away the rebel party, and was responsible for defending the imperial palace.

古文：以家在寒乡，不宜毒暑，冬得入京师，夏归乡里。
现代文：因为家在北方寒冷地带，不适应南方暑热，因而冬天入京师，夏天即返回家乡。
English: Because they have lived in cold places for a long time, they cannot adapt to the hot summer heat of the Central Plains. In winter, they can only go to the capital Luoyang, and in summer they return to their hometown for the summer.

古文：孝昌元年，北边扰乱，奔云中，为刺史费穆送于尔朱荣。以军主随荣入洛。
现代文：孝昌元年，北边扰乱，他奔向云中，被刺史费穆送给了氽朱荣，以军主身份随氽朱荣入洛。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, when the north side was disturbed, he ran to the clouds. He was given to Zou Zhu Rong by Zushi Feimu, and he entered Luo with Zou Zhu Rong as a military leader.

古文：后从神武起兵，破四胡于韩陵，封广平县公，寻进郡公。
现代文：后来随同高祖起兵，击败四胡于韩陵，被封为庐垩钟公，不久进封为郡公。
English: Later, he followed Gao Huan in raising an army, defeated the Er Zhu clan in Hanling, and was made the Guangping County magistrate. Soon, he was promoted to county magistrate.

古文：河阴之役，诸将大捷，唯干兵退。
现代文：蝗战役中，诸将均获大捷，衹有他退了兵。
English: In a battle in the shadow of the river, all the generals reported success, but his troops were defeated.

古文：神武以其旧功，竟不责黜。
现代文：高祖因他以往有功，竟没有追究责罚他。
English: Gao Huan did not reprimand or demote him for his past achievements.

古文：寻转太保、太傅。
现代文：不久改任太保、太傅。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Taiho and Taifu.

古文：及高仲密以武牢叛，神武讨之，以干为大都督前驱。
现代文：及至台处蜜据亘宅生反叛，区担去讨伐他，就以厘涂为大都督前锋。
English: When Taiwan's ruler, Wataka, rebelled, and the district officials went to fight him, it was Lin Tuo who emerged as the vanguard of the great governor.

古文：干上道不过家，见侯景不遑食，景使骑追馈之。
现代文：库狄干受命不回家就出征，路见娄量不吃饭就赶路，堡量派骑从追送吃食给他。
English: Kudikan was ordered to go to war without returning home, and when he did not have enough to eat, he hurried on his way. The castle sent horsemen to give him food and drink.

古文：时文帝自将兵至洛阳，军容甚盛。
现代文：时塞童自己带兵到了盗盐，军容雄壮整齐。
English: When Saido himself led the soldiers to steal salt, the army was majestic and neat.

古文：诸将未欲南度，干决计济河。神武大兵继至，遂大破之。
现代文：诸将不想南渡，库狄干决计渡河南下，高祖带大兵赶到，于是大破叛军。
English: The generals did not want to go to the south, Ku Dickan decided to go to the south of the river, Gao Zu and his soldiers arrived, and the rebels were defeated.

古文：还为定州刺史。
现代文：回师后，任定州刺史。
English: After his return, he was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, but because he was not familiar with the bureaucracy, he was harassed by many politicians.

古文：不闲吏事，事多扰烦，然清约自居，不为吏人所患。
现代文：他不熟悉衙门事务，嫌万事烦神，他清静简约，不愿被官署官吏所打扰。
English: He is not familiar with court affairs and does not like to be bothered by anything. He is quiet and simple, and does not want to be disturbed by government officials.

古文：迁太师。
现代文：升为太师。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Grand Master.

古文：天保初，以干元勋佐命，封章武郡王，转太宰。
现代文：天保初年，因他是丢平年间的功臣，辅佐高祖，封为章武郡王，转任太宰。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, because he was a meritorious vassal during the years of the Taihei era, he was appointed as the King of Zhangwu County and transferred to the position of Dazai.

古文：干尚神武妹乐陵长公主，以亲地见待。
现代文：厘墨匕王娶产担妹乐陵长公主，以贵戚身份受厚待。
English: Gao Dickan married Gao Huan's younger sister, Princess Le Ling, and was treated well because she was a relative of the imperial court.

古文：自预勤王，常总大众，威望之重，为诸将所伏，而最为严猛。
现代文：自从参预勤王以来，常统率大众，威望特别高，为诸将所佩服。
English: Ever since he became the King of Attendance, he has always led the masses, and his prestige is particularly high, and he is admired by generals.

古文：会诣京师，魏谯王元孝友于公门言戏过度，诸公无能面折者，干正色责之，孝友大惭，时人称之。
现代文：然此人最为严猛，曾亲到京师，毯盗王五耋左在厅堂上言耍过度，诸公卿大臣没一个能当面指斥他的，库狄干严肃地指责他，孝友很惭愧，时人都称赞库狄干。
English: However, this person was the most severe. He had been to Beijing to study, and the Carpet Thief Wang Wuzhong had spoken excessively in the hall. None of the nobles and ministers could rebuke him in person. Ku Dickan seriously accused him, and the filial friend was very ashamed. At that time, everyone praised Ku Dickan.

古文：薨，赠假黄钺，太宰，给辒辌车，谥曰景烈。
现代文：死后，赠给他假黄铁，太宰，给租椋丧车，谧为景烈。
English: After his death, he was given a fake Huang Tie, Dazai, a rented funeral car, and was hailed as a hero.

古文：干不知书，署名为干字，逆上画之，时人谓之穿锥。
现代文：库狄干不识字，署名 干 字时，从下往上倒着画笔画，人们戏称为穿锥。
English: Koudikan was illiterate, and when he signed his name, he drew with the brush from bottom to top, which was jokingly referred to as wearing a cone.

古文：又有武将王周者，署名先为 吉 而后成其外，二人至子孙始并知书。
现代文：还有一位武将名为王周，署名时先写裹面的 吉 字，再昼外边。二人到子孙辈才都识了字。
English: There was also a military commander named Wang Zhou who, when signing his name, first wrote the characters on the front of the envelope and then on the outside. Both of them were not able to read until their grandchildren were born.

古文：干，皇建初配享神武庙庭。
现代文：库狄干在皇建初年陪祭于高祖之庙。
English: After his death, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of pseudo-Huang Zi and Dazai, and gave him a Beijing funeral carriage, with the posthumous name of Jing Rong.

古文：子敬伏，位仪同三司，卒。子士文嗣。
现代文：子库狄敬伏，官至仪同三司，死后，子库狄士文继承爵位。
English: His son Ku Di Jing Bu, official of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division, after his death, his son Ku Di Shiwen inherited the title.

古文：士文性孤真，虽邻里至亲，莫与通狎。
现代文：库狄士文个性孤僻，即使对邻里亲朋也不苟言笑，无人与他亲近。
English: Koudesh's personality is reclusive, and he is aloof even from his neighbors and friends. No one is close to him.

古文：在齐，袭封章武郡王，位领军将军。
现代文：在北齐，袭封章武郡王，拜位领军将军。
English: In Northern Qi, he inherited the title of the King of Zhangwu County and became the leading general.

古文：周武帝平齐，山东衣冠多来迎，唯士文闭门自守。
现代文：北周武帝平定邺都，山东名门望族纷纷开门迎候，惟闭门不出。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu, Emperor Yuwen, Emperor Ding of the North Qi, and the nobles, officials and people of Shandong all came out to welcome him, but he stayed at home behind closed doors.

古文：帝奇之，授开府仪同三司，随州刺史。
现代文：周武帝奇怪这个人，授予他开府仪同三司、随州刺史。
English: Emperor Zhou Wudi was surprised by this man and awarded him the title of Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi and Suizhou Zhishi.

古文：隋文受禅，加上开府，封湖陂县子。
现代文：隋文帝接受禅让建国，加任上开府，封为湖陂县子。
English: Emperor Sui Wen accepted the founding of the country by Zen Zhen, added the post of Shang Kaifu, and was named the son of Hubei County.

古文：寻拜贝州刺史。
现代文：不久拜任贝州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Bechuanaland.

古文：性清苦，不受公料，家无余财。
现代文：此人性情清苦，不接受公家补贴，家无多余财产。
English: He is honest and hardworking, does not covet anything from the public, and there is no extra money in the family.

古文：其子尝啖官厨饼，士文枷之于狱累日，杖之二百，步送还京，僮隶无敢出门。所买盐菜，必于外境。
现代文：其子曾吃了官厨一块饼，他将儿子关在狱中好几天，打了二百大板，又徒步送回京城。他家僮仆奴才不敢出门，所买盐菜，一定到境外去购。
English: His son once ate a piece of cake from a government cook, and he locked him up in prison for several days, fined him two hundred taels of silver, and sent him back to the capital on foot. His servants did not dare to leave the house, and the salted vegetables they bought had to be purchased abroad.

古文：凡有出入，皆封署其门，亲故绝迹，庆吊不通。
现代文：凡有出入，他都封门加条，亲朋故友绝迹，互不通庆吊，没有红白往来。
English: Anyone entering or leaving the prefecture had to register at the entrance. As a result, friends and relatives cut off contacts, exchanged congratulations and condolences, and did not communicate with each other.

古文：法令严肃，吏人贴服，道不拾遗。
现代文：法令特别严肃，吏民帖服，道不拾遣。
English: The decree is particularly serious, officials and the people are in uniform, and there is no way out.

古文：凡有细过，必深文陷害之。
现代文：凡有小过失，库狄士文必定要严办。
English: If there is any minor fault, Kudai Shiv will definitely be dealt with severely.

古文：尝入朝，遇上赐公卿入左藏，任取多少。
现代文：一次入朝，遇皇上赐公卿入国库，听任取多取少。
English: He once went back to Beijing to worship the Son of Heaven, just as he was about to meet the Emperor Sui Wen, who was giving gifts from the treasury to the nobles and ministers, allowing them to take as much as they wanted.

古文：人皆极重，士文独口衔绢一匹，两手各持一匹。
现代文：人人都取得背不动，惟有士文衹是口中衔一匹绢，双手各拿一匹绢。
English: Many of them were carrying large and heavy loads, but Shiven was biting a donkey with his mouth and holding one in each hand.

古文：上问其故，士文曰： 臣口手俱足，余无所须。 
现代文：皇上问他，他说： 我口手都有了，别的再没什么需要了。 
English: Sui Wen Di asked him why he took so little, and he replied: My mouth and hands are satisfied, and I have no need for anything else.

古文：上异之，别赍遗之。
现代文：皇上很惊奇，另外派人送给他一些物品。
English: The emperor was very surprised and sent someone else to give him some items.

古文：士文至州，发摘奸吏，尺布斗粟之赃，无所宽贷，得千人奏之，悉配防岭南。
现代文：库狄士文回到州襄，揭发奸吏，尺布斗粟之脏也一一清算，绝不宽容，查得千人，上奏后一律流放岭南去戍边。
English: Ku Di Shiwen returned to Zhouzhuang, exposed the traitors, and liquidated the dirty cloth and poppies one by one. He was absolutely intolerant, investigated a thousand people, and exiled them all to the south of Lingnan after the performance.

古文：亲戚相送，哭声遍于州境。
现代文：亲戚相送，哭声传遍州境。
English: The cries of the relatives who saw the criminals off were heard throughout the whole of Bechuanaland.

古文：至岭南，遇瘴厉死者十八九，于是父母妻子唯哭士文。
现代文：到了岭南，遇瘴气患流行病死的十之八九，于是父母妻子儿女衹哭士文。
English: In Lingnan, in the event of an epidemic death caused by radon gas, nine out of ten died, so parents, wives and children wailed.

古文：士文闻之，令人捕搦，捶楚盈前，而哭者弥甚。
现代文：士文知道了，派人四处逮捕，面前尽是挨打受鞭的人，而哀号的人更多更厉害了。
English: When the magistrate learned of this, he sent out men to make arrests in all directions. In front of him were people who had been beaten and whipped, while those who were wailing were more numerous and more severe.

古文：司马京兆韦焜、清河令河东赵达十人并苛刻，唯长史有惠政，时人语曰： 刺史罗刹政，司马蝮蛇瞋，长史含笑判，清河生吃人。 
现代文：本州的司马京兆人韦焜、清河令河东人趟达二人也都极苛毒，祇有长史宽松些。社会上流传说： 刺史是个间罗王，司马毒辣如蝮蛇，长史判案带着笑，清河生吞活剥人。 
English: Honshu's Sima Jingzhao, Wei Wei, and Qinghe Ling, a person from the east of the river, are both extremely poisonous, only Changshi is more lenient. Social legends: Sima is poisonous like a python, Sima is poisonous like a python, Changshi judges cases with a smile, and Qinghe eats people alive.

古文：上闻，叹曰： 士文暴过猛兽。 
现代文：皇上知道了，叹息说： 士文强暴过于猛兽。 
English: When the emperor found out, he sighed and said, "The brutality of a scholar is too much for a ferocious beast."

古文：竟坐免。
现代文：就把他免了官。
English: He was eventually relieved of his duties over the incident.

古文：未几为雍州长史，谓人曰： 我向法深，不能窥候要贵，无乃必死此官。 
现代文：不久让他去当雍州长史，他对人说： 我向来用法严厉，不会看贵人眼色行事，恐怕就要死在这任官上了。 
English: He soon asked him to become the governor of Yongchun. He said to the man, "I have always been strict in my use of the law, and I will not behave like a nobleman. I am afraid I will die in this post."

古文：及下车，执法严正，不避贵戚，宾客莫敢至门。
现代文：及上任，执法极严正，不避贵戚权要，宾客没有敢到他门上来的。
English: When he took office, he enforced the law very strictly, and did not avoid the nobles and dignitaries. Guests did not dare to come to his door.

古文：人多怨望。
现代文：人们都埋怨他。
English: People are blaming him.

古文：士文从妹为齐氏嫔，有色，齐灭后，赐薛公长孙览。
现代文：库狄士文的堂妹在齐时为宫嫔，长得漂亮，齐灭亡之后，被赐给薛公长孙览。
English: His sister-in-law was originally the concubine of the son of Northern Qi, and was quite beautiful. After the death of Northern Qi, she was given to Xue Gongchang Sunzhan by the imperial court.

古文：览妻郑氏妒，谮之文献后，后令览离绝。
现代文：星茎冀的妻子塑旦好嫉妒，在文献皇后面前说她的坏话，皇后就叫长孙览把她给休了。
English: Xing Zhuji's wife Shoudan was so jealous that she spoke ill of her in front of the literature queen. The queen then asked her eldest grandson Zhan Zhuang to dismiss her.

古文：士文耻之，不与相见。
现代文：犀狄士文引以为耻，不与相见。
English: The scholar took this as a disgrace and did not meet her.

古文：后应州刺史唐君明居母忧，娉以为妻，由是君明、士文并为御史所劾。
现代文：后来应州刺史唐君明死了母亲，居丧守孝期间娶她为妻，御史将唐君明和屋迭土塞都弹劾了。
English: Later, in response to the death of his mother, he married her during the period of mourning and filial piety, and impeached both Tang Junming and the house.

古文：士文性刚，在狱数日，愤恚而死，家无余财，有三子，朝夕不继，亲宾无赡之者。
现代文：塞个性刚直，在狱敷，愤恨而死。死后，家无余财。有三个儿子，竟然朝不保夕，缺衣乏食，也没有亲朋给点接济。
English: He had an upright personality and died in prison, full of resentment. After his death, the family had no spare money. There were three sons who were not even safe in the morning and evening, lacked clothes and food, and had no relatives or friends to help.

古文：韩轨，字百年，太安狄那人也。
现代文：韩轨字百年，是太安地区狄那人氏。
English: The Korean alphabet has been in use for a hundred years. It was created by the Dinah people of the Tai'an region.

古文：少有志操，性深沉，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：此人年少有操行有大志，性格深沉稳重，喜怒不形于色。
English: This person is young and has great aspirations, a deep and stable personality, and is not easily angered.

古文：神武镇晋州，引为镇城都督。
现代文：直担守置业时，引荐他为镇城都督。
English: When he was directly responsible for the purchase of the property, he recommended him as the township governor.

古文：及起兵于信都，轨赞成大策。
现代文：到值都起兵时，韩轨支持成就大事。
English: When all the troops were mobilized, the Korean track supported the achievement of great things.

古文：从破尔朱兆于广阿，又从韩陵阵，封平昌县侯。
现代文：随高祖在广阿击败氽朱兆，又攻破壁堕敌阵，封为平昌县侯。
English: With Gao Zu, he defeated Gong Zhu Zhao in Guang'a, broke through the wall of the fallen enemy, and was crowned the lord of Pyeongchang County.

古文：仍督中军，从破尔朱兆于赤谼岭。
现代文：仍督中军，破尔朱兆于赤微岭。
English: He still commanded the middle army, and defeated Zhu Zhao in Chiaohuiling.

古文：再迁泰州刺史。甚得边和。
现代文：改任泰州刺史，很得安边之效。
English: His appointment as Taizhou's chief historian has had a calming effect.

古文：神武巡泰州，欲以轨还，仍赐城人户别绢布两匹。
现代文：高祖巡视泰州时，准备调韩轨回朝，便赐给州城人户各家绢布两匹。
English: When Gaozu was on a tour of Taizhou, preparing to return to Korea, he gave every household in the city of Taizhou two yakitori.

古文：州人田昭等七千户皆辞不受，唯乞留轨。
现代文：州人田昭等七千户都辞谢不受领，衹求留下韩轨。
English: Seven thousand households, including state resident Tian Zhao, did not receive a thank-you and asked to keep Hanrai.

古文：神武嘉叹，乃留焉。
现代文：高祖称赞表扬堕克，就把他留了下来。
English: Gaozu praised and commended Fucheng, and kept him on.

古文：频以军功，进封安德郡公。
现代文：多次立下军功，进封为安德郡公。
English: He repeatedly distinguished himself in the military and was awarded the title of Prince of Ande County.

古文：迁瀛州刺史，在州聚敛，为御史纠劾，削除官爵。
现代文：迁任遮刺史，在州聚敛，被御史纠弹，削掉了他的官爵。
English: He was transferred to the position of shadowing history, gathered in the state, and was corrected by history, cutting off his official title.

古文：未几，复其安德郡公。
现代文：不久，恢复安德郡公爵位。
English: He was soon reinstated as Duke of Arundel.

古文：历位中书令、司徒。
现代文：历任中书令、司徒。
English: Successive middle-ranking officials, including Shirei and Sito, have been promoted.

古文：齐受禅，封安德郡王。
现代文：北齐接受惮让建国，封为安德郡王。
English: Bei Qi accepted the establishment of the country and was named the King of Ande County.

古文：轨妹为神武所纳，生上党王涣，复以勋庸，历登台铉。
现代文：整塾之妹被直趄所娶，生上甚王直逸，又因逭层勋戚关系而曾任朝廷颢职。
English: The younger sister of the whole school was married by Naosuke, and was born as King Naosuke, and was once appointed to the Imperial Court due to the relationship between the two families.

古文：常以谦恭自处，不以富贵骄人。
现代文：他能谦恭自处，不以富贵骄人。
English: He is able to humble himself and not be proud of his wealth.

古文：后拜大司马，从文宣征蠕蠕，在军暴疾薨。
现代文：后来拜任大司马，随塞宣出征垩铝，在军中暴病而死。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of grand steward, announced the requisition of molybdenum and aluminum, and died of a violent illness in the army.

古文：赠假黄钺，太宰、太师，谥曰肃武。
现代文：朝廷赠予假黄铁，太宰、太师，谧号码肃武。
English: The imperial court presented fake Huang Tie, Dazai, Taishi, and the number of Suwu.

古文：皇建初，配飨文襄庙庭。
现代文：皇建之初，使其陪祭于文襄帝童庙。
English: At the beginning of imperial construction, it was enshrined in the Emperor Wenxiang Children's Temple.

古文：子晋明嗣。
现代文：其子置塱袭爵。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Okitsune.

古文：天统中，改封东莱王。
现代文：丢铲年间，改封为塞苤王。
English: During the shovel-throwing years, he changed his title to King Saeki.

古文：晋明有侠气，诸勋贵子孙中最留心学问。
现代文：整置塱为人有侠气，在所有勋贵子孙中是最留心学问的一位。
English: He was a man of chivalry, and he was the most studious of all the sons and daughters of nobles.

古文：好酒诞纵，招引宾客，一席之费，动至万钱，犹恨俭率。
现代文：他好酒放纵，招待宾客，一席花费动辄万钱还嫌太寒酸。
English: He likes to indulge in wine, invite guests, spend tens of thousands of dollars on a table, and is not too shabby.

古文：朝庭处之贵要之地，必以疾辞。告人云： 废人饮美酒、封名胜，安能作刀笔吏返披故纸乎？ 
现代文：朝廷安排他在显贵的位子上，他必定称病推辞，告诉别人说： 荒废别人饮美酒、面对名胜，人怎么可以做刀笔吏批阅故纸呢? 
English: The imperial court placed him in a high-ranking position. He must have pleaded illness and told others, "How can one be a clerk and read old papers while others are wasting their time drinking fine wine and seeing famous sites?

古文：武平末，除尚书左仆射，百余日便谢病解官。
现代文：武平末年，拜任尚书左仆射，百余日便推说有病自己解职回家了。
English: At the end of Wu Ping's life, he was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, and after more than a hundred days, he resigned from his post and went home, saying that he was ill.

古文：潘乐，字相贵，广宁石门人也。
现代文：潘乐，字相贵，是广宁郡石门人。
English: Pan Le, the word is precious, Guangning Shimen people.

古文：本广宗大族，魏世分镇北边，因家焉。
现代文：原是广宗的大族，北魏时分镇北疆，因而安家在那儿。
English: His family's original surname was Guangzong. During the Northern Wei Dynasty, his family was assigned to guard the northern border, so they settled there.

古文：父永，有技艺，袭爵广宗男。
现代文：其父潘永，有技艺，袭爵为广宗男。
English: His father, Pan Yong, was a talented craftsman and inherited the title of Guangzong baron.

古文：乐初生，有一雀止其母左肩，占者咸言富贵之征，因名相贵，后始为字。
现代文：潘乐初生时，有一雀飞止其母左肩，占卜的人都说是富贵的征兆，因此起名相贵，后来才改作表字的。
English: When he was born, a bird landed on his mother's left shoulder, and soothsayers said it was a symbol of wealth, so he was given the name Koga, which was later turned into a name.

古文：及长，宽厚有胆略。
现代文：及至长大成人，宽厚有胆略。
English: When he grew up, he was generous and daring.

古文：初归葛荣，授京兆王，时年十九。
现代文：初投葛荣，授予京兆王，时方十九岁。
English: He invested in Ge Rong for the first time and was awarded the title of King of Jing Zhao when he was 19 years old.

古文：荣败，随尔朱荣，为别将讨元颢，以功封敷城县男。
现代文：葛荣失败，追随氽朱荣，任别将讨伐元颢，因战功封为敷城县男。
English: Ge Rong failed, followed by Zou Zhu Rong, but did not lead the crusade against Yuan Shao, and was awarded the title of Shicheng County Man for his war service.

古文：齐神武出牧晋州，引乐为镇城都将。
现代文：后北齐高祖出守晋州，引荐潘乐为镇城都将。
English: Qishenwu Emperor Gao Huan was appointed as the governor of Jinzhou, and ordered Pan Le to be the general of the town.

古文：从破尔朱兆于广阿，进爵广宗县伯。
现代文：随大军破尔朱兆于广阿，进爵为广宗县伯。
English: With the army breaking through Zhu Zhao in Guang'a, he was ennobled as Count of Guangzong County.

古文：累以军功拜东雍州刺史。
现代文：积军功拜任束雍州刺史。
English: The military achievements of the Qing Dynasty are enshrined in the history of Yongzhou.

古文：神武尝议欲废州，乐以东雍地带山河，境连胡、蜀，形胜之会，不可弃也，遂如故。
现代文：高祖曾打算撤销此州，潘乐认为此地山河形胜，境连西魏舆梁，为军事要地，不可轻废。于是如故。
English: Emperor Shenwu once talked about abolishing the state-level system, but Pan Le believed that Dongyong Prefecture was in a precarious situation with large rivers and high mountains, and that its four borders connected Hudi and Shudi. It was an important place and could not be abandoned. Therefore, Dongyong Prefecture was retained.

古文：后破周师于河阴，议欲追之，令追者在西，不愿者东，唯乐与刘丰居西。
现代文：后来破周军于河阴，商议追击，高祖下令愿追者在西，不主张追击者在束边，祇有潘乐和刘丰在西边。
English: Later, the Zhou army was defeated in Heyin, and the pursuit was discussed. Gaozu ordered that the pursuers should be in the west, and did not advocate that the pursuers should be in Shoubian. Only Pan Le and Liu Feng were in the west.

古文：神武善之，以众议不同而止。
现代文：高祖赞许他们，但因大多数人不同意追击，所以收兵。
English: Gaozu approved of them, but because most people did not agree with the pursuit, he withdrew his troops.

古文：改封金门郡公。
现代文：潘乐改封为金门郡公。
English: Pan Le's title was changed to Kinmen County Governor.

古文：文宣嗣事，镇河阳，破西将杨檦等。
现代文：文宣帝继位主政，他镇守河阳，打败西魏将杨树等人。
English: Emperor Wenxuan succeeded to the throne as the head of the government. He guarded Heyang and defeated the West Wei general Yangshu and others.

古文：时帝以怀州刺史平鉴等所筑城深入敌境，欲弃之，乐以轵关要害，必须防固，乃更修理，增置兵将，而还镇河阳，拜司空。
现代文：逭时皇上以怀州刺史平鉴等人所筑之城深入敌境，打算放弃掉。潘乐认为轵关十分重要，必须严防死守，就加意重新修固，增兵添将，自己还镇河阳。拜任司空。
English: At that time, the emperor went deep into the enemy territory with the city built by the Waizhou assassin Shi Pingjian and others, intending to abandon it. Pan Le thought that Shaoguan was very important and must be strictly guarded, so he added that he would rebuild it, increase the number of soldiers, and restore the town of Heyang. He bowed to the sky.

古文：齐受禅，乐进玺绶。进封河东郡王，迁司徒。
现代文：北齐接受禅让建国时，潘乐进献玺绶，进封为河东郡王，迁升为司徒。
English: When the Northern Qi accepted the founding of the country, Pan Le was promoted to the position of county king of Hedong, and moved to the position of a scholar.

古文：周文东至崤、陕，遣其行台侯莫陈崇自齐子岭趣轵关，仪同杨檦从鼓钟道出建州，陷孤公戍。
现代文：周文发兵东侵至崤、陕，派遣他的行台侯莫陈崇由齐子岭直逼帜关，又派仪同杨树从鼓钟道出击建州，攻下了孤公戍。
English: Zhou sent troops eastward to invade Shandong and Shaanxi Provinces. He sent his vassal Mo Chen Chong from Qi Ziling to directly attack Yan Guan. He also sent Yi and Yang Shu from Gu Zhong Road to attack Jianzhou, and captured Guogong.

古文：诏乐总大众御之。
现代文：朝廷诏命潘乐统领大军抵御。
English: The Northern Qi imperial court ordered Pan Le to lead a large army to resist the Zhou army.

古文：乐昼夜兼行，至长子，遣仪同韩永兴从建州西趣崇，崇遂遁。
现代文：潘乐昼夜兼程，行至长子，分派仪同韩永兴从建州西进攻侯莫陈崇，侯莫陈崇引军而逃。
English: Pan Le led the army day and night, reached the eldest son, sent Yi and Han Yongxing from the west of Jianzhou to meet Hou Mo Chen Chong, and the Zhou army failed to escape.

古文：又为南道大都督，讨侯景。
现代文：潘乐又拜任南道大都督，讨伐侯景。
English: Pan Le also assumed the post of the governor of the Southern Province and fought against Houjing.

古文：乐发石鳖，南度百余里，至梁泾州。
现代文：他发兵于石鳌，南下百余里，直达梁的泾州。
English: He started from Shijiazhuang, traveled more than a hundred miles south, and arrived in Zhangzhou, Nanliang.

古文：泾州旧在石梁，侯景改为怀州，乐获其地，仍立泾州，又克安州。
现代文：泾州州治原在石梁，侯景改为怀州，潘乐攻下其地，仍恢复州治在泾州。
English: Zhangzhou was originally ruled by Shiliang, but Houjing changed it to Huaizhou, and Pan Le conquered it, but still restored state rule in Zhangzhou.

古文：除瀛州刺史，仍略淮、汉。
现代文：又攻下安州。拜任瀛州刺史，继续带兵经略淮、漠一带。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and still explored the area between the Huaihe River and the Han River.

古文：天保六年，薨于悬瓠。
现代文：天保六年，在悬瓠去世。
English: Tenpo died six years later, hanging from a noose.

古文：赠假黄钺，太师、大司马、尚书令。
现代文：朝廷赠予假黄敛，太师、大司马、尚书。
English: The Imperial Court bestowed the title of "False Huang Chuan" to Taishi, Daishima, and Shangshu.

古文：子子晃嗣。
现代文：其子潘子晃嗣爵。
English: His son, Pan Zi, is the heir to the throne.

古文：诸将子弟，率多骄纵，子晃沉密谨悫，以清净自居。
现代文：当时诸将子弟，大多骄纵不法，而潘子晃则沉静谨慎，清静自守。
English: At that time, the sons of generals were mostly arrogant and lawless, while Pan Zikang was calm and prudent, calm and self-protective.

古文：尚公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶公主为妻，拜任驸马都尉。
English: He married a princess and was appointed Captain of the Horse Guards.

古文：武平末，为幽州道行台右仆射、幽州刺史。
现代文：武平末年，任幽州道行台右仆射、幽州刺史。
English: At the end of Wu Ping's life, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Yuzhou Road, and shot and stabbed the history of Yuzhou.

古文：周师将入邺，子晃率突骑数万赴援。至博陵，知邺城不守，诣冀州降。
现代文：北周大军将攻入邺都了，荡王昱率领数万突骑兵驰援，进抵坛堕，知墓困已失守，便到冀业请降。
English: When the Northern Zhou army was about to invade Shidu, Wang Yao, led by tens of thousands of cavalry, rode to the rescue. When he arrived, he found that the army had been defeated, and he went to Jiye to ask for a surrender.

古文：周授上开府。
现代文：韭周授予他上开府。
English: Zhou granted him the title of Shangkaifu.

古文：隋大业初卒。
现代文：鹰大业初年去世。
English: Eagle Daye died the first year.

