古文：废帝废帝，讳伯宗，字奉业，小字药王，世祖嫡长子也。
现代文：废帝名伯宗，字奉业，乳名药王，是世祖的嫡长子。梁承圣三年五月初五生。
English: The deposed emperor was called Baozong, his title was Bongye, and he was known as the King of Medicine. He was the eldest legitimate son of the founder of the dynasty. Liang Cheng Sheng was born on the fifth day of the fifth month of the third year.

古文：梁承圣三年五月庚寅生。永定二年二月戊辰，拜临川王世子。三年，世祖嗣位，八月庚戌，立为皇太子。
现代文：永定二年二月初五，拜为临川王嗣子。三年世祖即位，八月二十六日，立为皇太子。自从梁室遭遇多灾多难，东宫烧烬，太子居于永福省。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of Yongding, he was named the heir of King Linchuan. Three years later, he ascended to the throne, and on the 26th day of August, he was established as the crown prince. Since the Liang family suffered many disasters and difficulties, and the East Palace burned, the prince lived in Yongfu Province.

古文：自梁室乱离，东宫焚烬，太子居于永福省。天康元年四月癸酉，世祖崩，其日，太子即皇帝位于太极前殿，诏曰： 上天降祸，大行皇帝奄弃万国，攀号靡及，五内崩殒。朕以寡德，嗣膺宝命，茕茕在疚，惧甚缀旒，方赖宰辅，匡其不逮。
现代文：天康元年四月二十七日，世祖崩，当日，太子即位于太极前殿，诏曰： 皇天降下灾祸，大行皇帝倏然离世，挽棺哭号无所逮及，五内欲焚。朕以智寡德薄之身，承继大业，心中哀痛，身逢乱世如履薄冰，仰赖宰辅匡正我所不及。
English: On the 27th day of April in the first year of Tian Kang, the founder of the world passed away. On that day, the prince was located in the front hall of Taiji, and he said: "The emperor's misfortune has fallen, the great emperor has suddenly passed away, the coffin-pulling cry has not been caught, and the five wishes to burn. I am a thin body of wisdom and virtue, inheriting a great cause, my heart is sad, I am in a chaotic world like walking on thin ice, and I can't rely on Zai Fu Kuang Zheng.

古文：可大赦天下。 
现代文：可大赦天下。 
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：又诏内外文武，各复其职，远方悉停奔赴。
现代文：又诏令朝廷内外文武百官，复其原职，远方一概停止赴丧。
English: He also decreed that all civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court should resume their original duties, and that all officials from distant regions should stop going to funerals.

古文：五月己卯，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：五月初三，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the revered empress dowager became the great empress dowager, and the empress became the empress dowager.

古文：庚寅，以骠骑将军、司空、扬州刺史、新除尚书令安成王顼为骠骑大将军，进位司徒、录尚书、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：十四日，以骠骑将军、司空、扬州刺史、新任尚书令安成王陈顼为骠骑大将军，晋位司徒、录尚书、都督中外诸军事。
English: On the 14th, Ancheng Wang Chen Qi was appointed as the grand general of cavalry with the titles of general of cavalry, secretary of cavalry and air force, governor of Yangzhou, and newly-appointed military governor. He was promoted to the ranks of general of cavalry, military governor of cavalry and air force, and military governor of foreign countries.

古文：丁酉，中军大将军、开府仪同三司徐度进位司空；镇南将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史章昭达为侍中，进号征南将军；镇东将军、东扬州刺史始兴王伯茂进号征东将军、开府仪同三司；平北将军、南徐州刺史鄱阳王伯山进号镇北将军；吏部尚书袁枢为尚书左仆射；云麾将军、吴兴太守沈钦为尚书右仆射；新除中领军吴明彻为领军将军；新除中护军沈恪为护军将军；平南将军、湘州刺史华皎进号安南将军；散骑常侍、御史中丞徐陵为吏部尚书。
现代文：二十一日，中军大将军、开府仪同三司徐度晋位司空；镇南将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史章昭达为侍中，晋号征南将军；镇东将军、东扬州刺史、始兴王陈伯茂晋号征东将军、开府仪同三司；平北将军、南徐州刺史、鄱阳王陈伯山晋号镇北将军；吏部尚书袁枢为尚书左仆射；云麾将军、吴兴太守沈钦为尚书右仆射；新任中领军吴明彻为领军将军；新任中护军沈恪为护军将军；平南将军、湘州刺史华皎晋号安南将军；散骑常侍、御史中丞徐陵为吏部尚书。
English: On the 21st, the general of the Chinese army, Kaifu Yi and the three subordinate generals were promoted to the rank of second lieutenant; the general of Zhenan, Kaifu Yi and the three subordinate generals, Jiangzhou Zhi Zhang Zhaoda was the chamberlain, the general of Jin was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant; the general of Zhendong, Dongyangzhou Zhi Shi, Shi Xing Wang Chen Bomao was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant; the general of Pingbei, Nan Xuzhou Zhi Shi, and the king of Fenyang Chen Boshan was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant; the general of the personnel department

古文：六月辛亥，翊右将军、右光禄大夫王通进号安右将军。
现代文：六月初六，翊右将军、右光禄大夫王通晋号安右将军。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th year of the 6th month of the 6th year of the 6th month of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：秋七月丁酉，立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，立妃王氏为皇后。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Princess Wang became the empress.

古文：冬十月庚申，舆驾奉祠太庙。
现代文：冬十月十七日，皇上亲临太庙祭祖。
English: On the 17th day of winter in October, the emperor himself visited the temple to offer sacrifices to the ancestors.

古文：十一月乙亥，周遣使来吊。
现代文：十一月初二，北周遣使臣来访。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Northern Zhou sent envoys to pay a visit.

古文：十二月甲子，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：十二月二十二日，高丽国遣使臣敬献土产。
English: On December 22, envoys from the Republic of Korea paid tribute to the local products.

古文：光大元年春正月癸酉，尚书左仆射袁枢卒。
现代文：光大元年春正月初一，尚书左仆射袁枢死。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Guangda era, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Jia Yuan Zuo, died.

古文：乙亥，诏曰： 昔昊天成命，降集宝图，二后重光，九区咸乂。
现代文：初三，诏曰： 从前皇天有命，降大位于我朝，文武二帝之道得以重光，九州得以治理。
English: On the third day of the first month, the imperial edict said, "Former emperors had life and death, downgrading was located in our dynasty, the way of Emperor Monmu II was able to shine, and Kyushu was able to be governed."

古文：闵余冲薄，王道未昭，荷兹神器，如涉灵海，庶亲贤并建，牧伯惟良，天下雍熙，缅同刑措。
现代文：可怜我年幼无知，王道未得昭明，身负重任，好比徒步沧海，希望能任用亲近贤能之人，各方官吏大都是贤良之才，天下和乐升平，勉力实现措置刑法以德化民的盛世。
English: Pity me for being young and ignorant. The king's path is not yet clear, and I am burdened with heavy responsibilities, like walking on the sea of vicissitudes. I hope to appoint people who are close to the virtuous. Officials from all sides are mostly virtuous, and the world is becoming more peaceful. I will strive to achieve the prosperity of the people by virtue of the criminal law.

古文：今三元改历，万国充庭，清庙无追，具僚斯在，言瞻宁位，触感崩心。
现代文：今元日改历，万国来朝，英灵已入宗庙无法追回，同僚都还活着，我看到你的灵位，触景生情心如刀绞。
English: This New Year's Day, the calendar has been changed, all nations have come to the DPRK, the imperial soul has entered the ancestral temple and cannot be recovered, my colleagues are still alive, I see your spiritual position, and my heart is like a sword.

古文：思播遗恩，俾覃黎献。
现代文：思量传布遗德，使广布天下百姓。
English: Thoughtfully spread the legacy of morality, so that the people all over the world can spread it.

古文：可大赦天下。
现代文：可大赦天下。
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：改天康二年为光大元年。
现代文：改天康二年为光大元年。
English: Two years after Tian Kang, it was the first year of Guangda.

古文：孝悌力田赐爵一级。 
现代文：孝悌力田者赐爵一级。 
English: An agrarian official who was appointed as a filial piety force field was awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：己卯，以领军将军吴明彻为丹阳尹。
现代文：初七，以领军将军吴明彻为丹陈书阳尹。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the leader of the army, General Wu Mingche, is Dan Chen Shuyang Yin.

古文：辛卯，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：十九日，皇上亲临南郊祭天。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor himself came to Nanjiao to hold a festival.

古文：二月辛亥，宣毅将军、南豫州刺史余孝顷谋反伏诛。
现代文：二月初十，宣毅将军、南豫州刺史余孝顷谋反被杀。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, General Xuan Yi and the Southern Yu Prefecture assassin Yu Xiao were killed while plotting a counterattack.

古文：癸丑，以征东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史始兴王伯茂为中卫大将军，开府仪同三司黄法抃为镇北将军、南徐州刺史，镇北将军、南徐州刺史鄱阳王伯山为镇东将军、东阳州刺史。
现代文：十二日，以征东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史、始兴王陈伯茂为中卫大将军，开府仪同三司黄法为镇北将军、南徐州刺史，镇北将军、南徐州刺史、鄱阳王陈伯山为镇东将军、东扬州刺史。
English: On the 12th, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the North Conquest, the General of the South Conquest, the General of the North Conquest, the General of the South Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest, the General of the East Conquest

古文：三月甲午，以尚书右仆射沈钦为侍中、尚书左仆射。
现代文：三月二十三日，以尚书右仆射沈钦为侍中、尚书左仆射。
English: On March 23rd, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shen Qin and Shang Shuxu's left-hand man were cast as attendants.

古文：夏四月乙卯，太白昼见。
现代文：夏四月十五日，太白星昼现。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of summer, the day of the white star appeared.

古文：五月癸巳，以领军将军、丹阳尹吴明彻为安南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：五月二十三日，以领军将军、丹阳尹吴明彻为安南将军、湘州刺史。
English: On May 23rd, with the leading general, Danyang Yin Wu Mingche as General Annan, Xiangzhou stabbed history.

古文：乙未，以镇右将军杜棱为领军将军。
现代文：二十五日，以镇右将军杜棱为领军将军。
English: On the 25th, Gen. Du Ren of Zhenyu was appointed as the leading general.

古文：安南将军、湘州刺史华皎谋反，丙申，以中抚大将军淳于量为使持节、征南大将军，总率舟师以讨之。
现代文：安南将军、湘州刺史华皎谋反，二十六日，以中抚大将军淳于量为使持节、征南大将军，总率水军征讨华皎。
English: On the 26th, General Annan and the Hunan governor of Shishi Huayu plotted a rebellion, and on the 26th, the General of the Middle Fuzhou Province, Jun Yuquan, was appointed as the General of the Southern Expedition, and led the navy to conquer Huayu.

古文：六月壬寅，以中军大将军、司空徐度进号车骑将军，总督京邑众军，步道袭湘州。
现代文：六月初三，以中军大将军、司空徐度晋号车骑将军，总领京师众军，抄小道偷袭湘州。
English: On the third day of early June, the general of the Chinese army, the general of the cavalry and cavalry of the Siku Xu Du Jin, and the general leader of the Beijing division of the army, secretly attacked Hunan Province.

古文：闰月癸巳，以云麾将军新安王伯固为丹阳尹。
现代文：闰六月二十四日，以云麾将军、新安王陈伯固为丹阳尹。
English: On the 24th day of the leap month of June, Danyang Yin was named after the general of Yunnan Province and the king of Xin'an Province, Chen Bogu.

古文：秋七月戊申，立皇子至泽为皇太子，赐天下为父后者爵一级，王公卿士已下赉帛各有差。
现代文：秋七月初十，立皇子陈至泽为皇太子，赐给天下为父后者爵一级，王公卿士以下赐帛各有等差。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the prince Chen Zhize was appointed as the crown prince, and the latter's father was given a first-class peerage, and the princes and courtiers were each given a peerage.

古文：九月乙巳，诏曰： 逆贼华皎，极恶穷凶，遂树立萧岿，谋危社稷。
现代文：九月初七，诏曰： 叛贼华皎，穷凶极恶，竟伪立萧岿，阴谋颠覆社稷。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the edict said: "The traitor Huayu, who is extremely vicious, actually set up Xiao Yu, and plotted to subvert the society."

古文：弃亲即仇，人神愤惋，王师电迈，水陆争前，枭剪之期，匪朝伊暮。
现代文：背弃祖国投靠仇敌，人神共愤，王师迅速出击，水陆并进，计其歼灭之时日，非一朝一夕之功。
English: Abandoning the motherland and siding with the enemy, people and gods were outraged, and Wang Shi quickly attacked, advancing by land and sea. It was not an overnight achievement to plan the day and time of its destruction.

古文：其家口在北里尚方，宜从诛戮，用明国宪。 
现代文：其家室在京兆北郊者，应该加以诛戮，以明国法。 
English: If their family is in the northern suburbs of Beijing, they should be punished according to the law of the country.

古文：丙辰，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：十八日，百济国派使臣敬献土产。
English: On the 18th, Baekje dispatched envoys to present local products.

古文：是月，周将长胡公拓跋定率步骑二万入郢州，与华皎水陆俱进，都督淳于量、吴明彻等与战，大破之。
现代文：同月，北周将领长胡公拓跋定率马步军二万人入郢州，同华皎军水陆并进，都督淳于量、吴明彻等人率兵与之交战，大破之。
English: In the same month, the Northern Zhou general Hu Gongtuo led a determined horse-and-foot army of 20,000 into Bozhou, marching with the Huayuan army on land and sea. The governor Junyue, Wu Mingche and other soldiers fought with them and defeated them.

古文：皎单舸奔江陵，擒拓跋定，俘获万馀人，马四千馀匹，送京师。
现代文：华皎只身一人乘船逃奔江陵，活捉拓跋定，俘虏万余人、马匹四千多，送到京师。
English: Hua Wei alone fled to Jiangling by boat, captured Tuoba Ding alive, captured more than 10,000 people and more than 4,000 horses, and sent them to Beijing Division.

古文：冬十月辛巳，赦湘、巴二州为皎所诖误者。
现代文：冬十月十四日，赦免湘、巴二州因华皎叛逆一事被牵连者。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, those who were implicated in the rebellion in Hunan and Baju were pardoned.

古文：甲申，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：十七日，皇上亲临太庙祭祖。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor himself came to the temple to celebrate the ancestor.

古文：十一月己未，以护军将军沈恪为平西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：十一月二十二日，以护军将军沈恪为平西将军、荆州刺史。
English: On November 22nd, Shen Ke, the general of the escorting army, became the general of Pingxi and Jingzhou stabbed history.

古文：甲子，侍中、中权将军、开府仪同三司、特进、左光禄大夫王冲薨。
现代文：二十七日，侍中、中权将军、开府仪同三司、特进、左光禄大夫王冲薨。
English: On the 27th, Wang Chongjun, a chamberlain, General Zhongquan, Kaifu Yi, along with Sanji, Tetsujin, and Sakoroku-taifu, marched out.

古文：十二月庚寅，以兼从事中郎孔英哲为奉圣亭侯，奉孔子祀。
现代文：十二月二十四日，封兼从事中郎孔英哲为奉圣亭侯，继奉孔子之祀。
English: On December 24th, he was appointed as the second-in-command of Kong Yingzhe to serve as the second-in-command of Confucius.

古文：二年春正月己亥，侍中、都督中外诸军事、骠骑大将军、司徒、录尚书、扬州刺史安成王顼进位太傅，领司徒，加殊礼，剑履上殿；侍中、征南将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史章昭达进号征南大将军；中抚大将军、新除征南大将军淳于量为侍中、中军大将军、开府仪同三司；安南将军、湘州刺史吴明彻即本号开府仪同三司，进号镇南将军；云麾将军、郢州刺史程灵洗进号安西将军。
现代文：二年春正月初三，侍中、都督中外诸军事、骠骑大将军、司徒、录尚书、扬州刺史、安成王陈顼晋位太傅，兼司徒，加给特殊的礼遇，可以佩剑穿履上殿；侍中、征南将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史章昭达晋号征南大将军；中抚大将军、新任征南大将军淳于量为侍中、中军大将军、开府仪同三司；安南将军、湘州刺史吴明彻即本号开府仪同三司，晋号镇南将军；云麾将军、郢州刺史程灵洗晋号安西将军。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of the second spring, the military, the generals of the imperial cavalry, the governors, the record books, the history of Yangzhou, and the king of Ancheng, Chen Xi Jin, the daifu, and the governors, were given special courtesy, and they could wear swords to the hall; the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the

古文：庚子，诏讨华皎军人死王事者并给棺槥，送还本乡，仍复其家。
现代文：初四，诏令给征讨华皎而阵亡的士兵以棺材，送还本乡，再免除其家人的赋税徭役。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, a decree was issued to give coffins to the soldiers who died in the battle for Huayu, to send them back to their hometowns, and to exempt their families from paying taxes.

古文：甲子，罢吴州，以鄱阳郡还属江州。
现代文：二十八日，撤销吴州，把鄱阳郡还属江州。
English: On the 28th, Wuzhou was revoked, and Poyang County was added to Jiangzhou.

古文：侍中、司空、车骑将军徐度薨。
现代文：侍中、司空、车骑将军徐度薨。
English: The chamberlains, the magistrates, and the chariot and cavalry generals all appear.

古文：九月甲辰，林邑国遣使献方物。
现代文：夏四月十七日，太白星昼现。二十三日，分割东扬州晋安郡为丰州。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of summer, Taibaixing became the present day Taibaixing. On the 23rd day, Jin'an County in East Yangzhou was divided into Fengzhou.

古文：丙午，狼牙修国遣使献方物。
现代文：五月二十二日，太傅安成王陈顼献王玺一枚。六月初，彗星现。
English: On May 22nd, Taifu Ancheng Wang Chen Yao presented Wang Yao with a piece. At the beginning of June, the comet appeared.

古文：以侍中、征南大将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史章昭达为中抚大将军。
现代文：秋七月十三日，皇上亲临太庙祭祖。十五日，新罗国遣使臣敬献土产。以侍中、征南大将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史章昭达为中抚大将军。
English: On the fifteenth day, Silla dispatched envoys to pay tribute to the local products, with Samurai Junior General, General of the Southern Expedition, Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies Third Division, and Jangju Sashihong Zhaoda as Vice-Generals.

古文：戊午，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星昼现。
English: On the 26th, the day of the white star appeared.

古文：冬十月庚午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：冬十月初九，皇上亲临太庙祭祖。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor himself came to the ancestral temple.

古文：十一月丙午，以前平西将军、荆州刺史沈恪为护军将军。
现代文：十一月十五日，以前平西将军、荆州刺史沈恪为护军将军。
English: On November 15th, the former General Pingxi and the former General Jingzhou Jishi Shen were appointed as the escorting generals.

古文：壬子，以镇北将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史黄法抃为镇西将军、郢州刺史，新除中军大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，以镇北将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史黄法为镇西将军、郢州刺史，新任中军大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: On the 21st, Zhenbei General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General Zhenxi General

古文：甲寅，慈训太后集群臣于朝堂，令曰：
现代文：二十三日，慈训太后召集群臣到朝堂，下令曰：
English: On the 23rd, Empress Dowager Cixun summoned her courtiers to the Imperial Palace and ordered:

古文：中军仪同、镇北仪同、镇右将军、护军将军、八座卿士：昔梁运季末，海内沸腾，天下苍生，殆无遗噍。
现代文：中军仪同、镇北将军、镇右将军、护军将军、八座卿士：昔梁朝末年，海内骚动，天下苍生百姓，已近乎没有留下多少活着的人。
English: Zhongjun Yidong, Zhenbei General, Zhenyu General, Tongjun General, and Hachiza Qingshi: In the last years of the Liang Dynasty, there was turmoil at sea, and people were scattered all over the world. There were almost no people left alive.

古文：居处谅闇，固不哀戚，嫔嫱弗隔，就馆相仍，岂但衣车所纳，是讥宗正，衰绖生子，得诮右师。
现代文：高祖武皇帝拨乱反正，顺应天命御统天下，重新确定了天地五星人间万象之秩序；世祖文皇帝承继王位，弘大帝业，养育万民，安宁八方；都是小心谨慎勤勤恳恳地治理国家，希望能使国家太平昌盛，确立像殷、夏那样兴盛的大业。伯宗昔在东宫，本无什么好名声，等到继承帝位后，更加放纵。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu cleared up the chaos and re-established the order of all things in heaven, earth and mankind in accordance with God's predestination to rule the world; Emperor Xiuwen succeeded to the throne, promoted the great imperial cause, nurtured the people, and ensured peace in all directions. They all governed the country carefully and diligently, hoping to make the country peaceful and prosperous and establish the great cause of prosperity like Yin and Xia. Emperor Baozong used to have no good reputation in the East Palace, but became more indulgent after he inherited the throne.

古文：七百之祚何凭，三千之罪为大。且费引金帛，令充椒阃，内府中藏，军备国储，未盈期稔，皆已空竭。
现代文：居丧期间，毫无哀伤之情，仍与嫔妃住在一起，频繁地去逛妓馆，岂只是以衣蒙车纳妇，为宗正责备，还在居丧期间生子，为右师谴责，王朝怎么能运作绵长，国家的刑罚怎么能实施。并且私藏金帛，以充后宫，国库及军需储备，未满一年，皆已空竭。
English: During the mourning period, without any feeling of sorrow, he still lived with his concubine and frequently visited brothels. Was it just that he married a woman with his cloak and chariot, was he reproached for being a Zongzheng, had a child while he was still in mourning, was he condemned for being a right-hand man, how could the dynasty function for a long time, how could the state's punishment be implemented. And the gold ingots he had hidden to fill the harem, the treasury and the military reserve were all depleted in less than a year.

古文：太傅亲承顾托，镇守宫闱，遗诰绸缪，义深垣屏，而欑涂未御，翌日无淹，仍遣刘师知、殷不佞等显言排斥。
现代文：太傅安成王亲承遗托，镇守宫闱，先皇遗诏中已预有说明，真是洞察秋毫，然而先帝尸骨未寒，伯宗迫不急待，也不等丧满，便派刘师知、殷不佞等人来加以诋毁。
English: Taifu Ancheng Wang personally inherited the task of guarding the palace, which was already explained in the last emperor's last will and testament. It was really insightful. However, the former emperor's bones were not cold, and Bozong was not eager to wait, nor was he satisfied, so he sent Liu Shizhi, Yin Buqi and others to defame him.

古文：韩子高小竖轻佻，推心委仗，阴谋祸乱，决起萧墙。
现代文：韩子高等轻佻小人，倚仗皇帝的信任，阴谋制造祸乱，危害宗室。
English: Han Zi Gao, a frivolous villain, relied on the emperor's trust, plotted to create havoc, and endangered his family.

古文：元相虽持，但除君侧。
现代文：良臣尽管想要扶助安成王，只是要除去君王身边的小人。
English: Although the good minister wanted to support King Ancheng, he only wanted to get rid of the villains around the king.

古文：又以余孝顷密迩京师，便相征召，殃慝之咎，凶徒自擒，宗社之灵，祅氛是灭。
现代文：又以余孝顷离京师很近，便加以征召，制造祸乱咎由自取，凶徒自然要遭到捕获，仰赖宗社之神灵，妖氛得以扫灭。
English: Moreover, since Yu Xiaoha was very close to the Beijing division, he conscripted him. He took the blame for creating the calamity himself. Naturally, the villain had to be captured. He depended on the deities of the sect to dispel the evil atmosphere.

古文：于是密诏华皎，称兵上流，国祚忧惶，几移丑类。
现代文：这时密诏华皎，于上游起兵，国运悠悠忽忽，几乎落到贼子手中。
English: At this time, Emperor Mingzhao Huayuan raised an army in the upstream, and the national movement was slow and almost fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：乃至要招远近，叶力巴、湘，支党纵横，寇扰黟、歙。
现代文：乃至于要招集远近党羽，巴、湘协力，贼党四处骚扰，劫掠黟、歙一带。
English: As for summoning party members from near and far, Ba and Hunan should work together to harass the bandits, and rob and plunder the areas around Lop Nur and Lop Nur.

古文：又别敕欧阳纥等攻逼衡州，岭表纷纭，殊淹弦望。
现代文：又令欧阳纥等人进逼衡州，岭南一带纷乱不堪，几乎延续半个月。
English: It also made Ouyang Xuan and others push into Hengzhou, and the Lingnan area was in turmoil, lasting almost half a month.

古文：岂止罪浮于昌邑，非唯声丑于太和。
现代文：岂只是罪恶比汉之刘濞还大，岂只是名声比成汉的李贽还坏。
English: Is it just that his sin is greater than that of Liu Xuan of Han, or is it just that his reputation is worse than that of Li Xuan of Chenghan?

古文：但贼竖皆亡，妖徒已散，日望惩改，犹加掩抑，而悖礼忘德，情性不悛，乐祸思乱，昏慝无已。
现代文：只是贼党皆亡，妖徒已散，初时还希望他们能够悔改，仍然未加重陈书罚，他们就是妄弃道德，本性不改，甘心于造祸，在邪恶的路上越走越远。
English: However, the thieves are all dead, the demons have dispersed, and at the beginning, they still hoped that they could repent, but still did not increase the punishment. They just abandoned morality, did not change their nature, were willing to create disasters, and went further and further on the road of evil.

古文：张安国蕞尔凶狡，穷为小盗，仍遣使人蒋裕钩出上京，即置行台，分选凶党。
现代文：张安国奸狡小人，势穷已成小盗，仍然遣使者绕道离开上京，即置行台，分选凶党为官。
English: Zhang An, the traitor and cunning villain, who had already become a petty thief, still sent an envoy to leave Shangjing by a roundabout route, that is, he set up a platform and selected the evil party as an official.

古文：贼皎妻吕，舂徒为戮，纳自奚官，藏诸永巷，使其结引亲旧，规图戕祸。
现代文：贼臣华皎妻吕氏，蠢蠢之徒也来效力，纳娶自奚官，藏之于宫内，让她结交亲朋旧友，谋划变乱大事。
English: The treacherous vassal Huayu's wife, Lv Shi, who was married to a eunuch, hid her in the palace, where she made friends with relatives and old friends, and plotted chaos.

古文：荡主侯法喜等，太傅麾下，恒游府朝，啖以深利，谋兴肘腋。
现代文：副帅侯法喜等人，本是太傅麾下，常出没于朝廷之下，以利诱人，谋划肇乱于萧墙之下。
English: The second-in-command, Hou Faxi, and others, who were originally under the command of Tai Fu, often visited the imperial court, lured people with benefits, and plotted to cause turmoil under Xiaowan.

古文：适又荡主孙泰等潜相连结，大有交通，兵力殊强，指期挺乱。
现代文：恰巧又和副帅孙泰等人暗自交往，大肆勾结，兵力强盛，约期发动叛乱。
English: Coincidentally, he secretly communicated with the vice-commander Sun Tai and others, colluded with them, had a strong army, and planned to launch a rebellion.

古文：皇家有庆，历数遐长，天诱其衷，同然开发。
现代文：皇家有福，国运长久，天遂人愿，阴谋一同败露。
English: The royal family is blessed, the national fortune is long-lasting, the heavens are victorious, the people are willing, and the conspiracy is revealed together.

古文：此诸文迹，今以相示，是而可忍，谁则不容？
现代文：这种种文字证据，现在拿出来给各位看，是可忍，孰不可忍？
English: Is this kind of textual evidence, now brought out for everyone to see, tolerable or intolerable?

古文：祖宗基业，将惧倾陨，岂可复肃恭禋祀，临御兆民？
现代文：祖宗基业，差点倾覆，怎么可能再去恭敬地祭祀，统治万民呢？
English: How is it possible for the Ancestral Foundation, which was on the verge of collapse, to once again reverently offer sacrifices and rule over the people?

古文：式稽故实，宜在流放，今可特降为临海郡王，送还籓邸。
现代文：依照旧例，宜在流放之列，现今可特降为临海郡王，送还府第。
English: According to the old example, it is appropriate to be exiled, but now it can be specially reduced to the Linhai County King and sent back to the prefecture.

古文：太傅安成王固天生德，齐圣广深，二后钟心，三灵伫眷。
现代文：太傅安成王天赐其德，与圣人一样有深广的智慧，两位皇后钟心于他，天地人三灵眷顾于他。
English: King Taifu Ancheng was blessed by heaven with virtue and wisdom as profound as that of a saint. Two queens had their hearts set on him, and the three spirits of heaven and earth attended him.

古文：自前朝不悆，任总邦家，威惠相宣，刑礼兼设，指挥啸诧，湘、郢廓清，辟地开疆，荆、益风靡，若太戊之承殷历，中都之奉汉家，校以功名，曾何仿佛。
现代文：自从前朝不虞，将重任委托给高祖，我朝开国之君恩威并重，刑礼兼设，指挥若定，扫清湘、郢之乱，开疆拓土，荆、益一带相继归顺，好比太戊中兴殷商，刘秀中兴汉室，以高祖之功名与他们相比，何其相似。
English: Since the previous dynasty did not hesitate to entrust important tasks to Gaozu, our dynasty, the founder of the country, has given equal importance to the prince's benevolence and respect, and has also set up the punishment ceremony, the command is determined, the Hunan Rebellion and the Sino-Japanese War are cleared, the territory of Xinjiang is reclaimed, and the areas of Jing and Yixing are successively surrendered, just like the Taiwu Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty, and the Liu Dynasty and the Han Dynasty. Compared with them, the achievements of Gaozu are very similar.

古文：且地彰灵玺，天表长彗，布新除旧，祯祥咸显。
现代文：况且从地神那里得到灵玺，上天又显彗星表示要改朝换代，除旧布新，祥瑞之兆都已显现出来。
English: Moreover, the coffin was obtained from the earth god, and the comet appeared in the sky to indicate a change of dynasty. In addition to the old cloth, the signs of auspiciousness have already appeared.

古文：文皇知子之鉴，事甚帝尧，传弟之怀，又符太伯。今可还申曩志，崇立贤君，方固宗祧，载贞辰象。
现代文：文皇有知子之鉴识，其心胜过帝尧之知丹朱，传弟之心，又与太伯相合，今可仍然依其旧志，尊立贤君，方可巩固社稷，以光大与天同光之大业。
English: Emperor Wen had the discernment of a wise son, and his heart was better than the wisdom of Emperor Zhou, the heart of a younger brother, and the same as that of a great uncle. Now, he can still follow his old dream, respect and establish a wise man, in order to consolidate the society, with the great light and the great cause of the same light.

古文：中外宜依旧典，奉迎舆驾。
现代文：朝廷内外应依照旧典，奉迎新皇。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, the new emperor should be welcomed according to the old custom.

古文：未亡人不幸属此殷忧，不有崇替，容危社稷，何以拜祠高寝，归祔武园？
现代文：未亡人不幸遭此忧哀，只要我还没死，就不容有人危害社稷，不然的话，我以何面目见高祖，将来礻付葬于武帝陵呢？
English: As long as I'm not dead, I won't allow anyone to harm society. Otherwise, what kind of person will I be when I'm buried in Emperor Wu's mausoleum?

古文：揽笔潸然，兼怀悲庆。
现代文：提笔潸然泪下，心中悲喜交加。
English: I raised my pen and burst into tears. My heart was filled with sadness and joy.

古文：是日，出居别第。
现代文：当日，废帝出居私第。
English: On the same day, the deposed emperor moved out of his private residence.

古文：太建二年四月薨，时年十九。
现代文：太建二年四月薨，时年十九岁。
English: Tai Jian was 19 years old at the time.

古文：帝仁弱无人君之器，世祖每虑不堪继业。既居冢嫡，废立事重，是以依违积载。
现代文：废帝仁弱无人君之气量，世祖总担心他不能承继大业，只是已立为太子，要废立事关重大，所以迁延多年。
English: Emperor Ren Ren was too weak and did not have the stamina of a prince. The founder of the dynasty was always worried that he would not be able to carry on the great cause. However, he had already been established as the crown prince, and it was very important to abolish the position, so it was postponed for many years.

古文：及疾将大渐，召高宗谓曰： 吾欲遵太伯之事。 
现代文：等到世祖病危，便召见高宗说： 我想依照太伯之旧例。 
English: When Shizu was critically ill, he summoned Gaozong and said, "I want to follow the old example of my great-uncle."

古文：高宗初未达旨，后寤，乃拜伏涕泣，固辞。
现代文：高宗起先未能理解，后来醒悟，便拜伏于地痛哭流涕，坚决推辞。
English: At first, Gao Zong did not understand, but later he came to his senses, prostrated himself on the ground, wept bitterly, and resolutely refused.

古文：其后宣太后依诏废帝焉。
现代文：其后宣太后依诏废贬废帝。
English: Subsequently, Empress Dowager Xuan abrogated the imperial edict and abdicated the throne.

古文：史臣曰：临海虽继体之重，仁厚懦弱，混一是非，不惊得丧，盖帝挚、汉惠之流也。
现代文：史臣曰：堕渔王虽然继位权重，但是仁厚懦弱，混淆是非，不经动乱就丧失帝位，大概属于帝垫、漠惠帝一类的人。
English: Shichen said: Although the succession of the fallen fishing king is important, he is benevolent and cowardly, confuses right and wrong, and loses the imperial throne without turmoil. He probably belongs to the category of the emperor cushion and the non-benevolent emperor.

古文：世祖知神器之重，谅难负荷，深鉴尧旨，弗传宝祚焉。
现代文：堂担明白国家权力重大，料想他难以承担，深深理解帝壹的意思，不传宝位给儿子。
English: Dangan understood that the power of the state was great, and thought it would be difficult for him to bear. He deeply understood the meaning of the emperor, and did not pass the throne to his son.

