古文：高宗下
现代文：高宗本纪
English: Gaozong Bongji

古文：麟德三年春正月戊辰朔，车驾至泰山顿。
现代文：麟德三年春正月一日，皇上车驾到泰山顿。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Lin De's reign, the emperor's carriage drove to Taishandong.

古文：是日亲祀昊天上帝于封祀坛，以高祖、太宗配飨。
现代文：这天皇上在封祀坛亲自祭祀昊天上帝。把高祖、太宗附带在泰山祭祀。
English: On this occasion, the emperor personally offered a sacrifice to Haotian God at the enshrined altar, and he also brought Gaozu and Taizong to offer a sacrifice at Mount Taishan.

古文：己巳，帝升山行封禅之礼。
现代文：二日，皇上登山行封禅祭天地之大礼。
English: On the second day, the Emperor's mountain climbing tour concluded with the grand opening of the Zen Festival.

古文：庚午，禅于社首，祭皇地祇，以太穆太皇太后、文德皇太后配飨；皇后为亚献，越国太妃燕氏为终献。
现代文：三日，在社首祭天，祭祀地神，以太穆太皇太后、文德皇太后附带祭祀。皇后为第二次祭奠献爵，越国太妃燕氏为第三次祭奠献爵。
English: On the third day of the festival, at the beginning of the festival, the gods of the earth were worshiped, and the great Empress Dowager Eitmu and the great Empress Dowager Wente were also worshipped. The Empress offered a knighthood for the second offering, and the great Empress Dowager Yan offered a knighthood for the third offering.

古文：辛未，御降禅坛。
现代文：四日，皇上驾到封禅祭祀坛。
English: On the fourth day, the emperor drove to the Zen altar.

古文：壬申，御朝觐坛受朝贺。
现代文：五日，皇上驾到朝觐坛接受朝贺改麟德三年为乾封元年。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor drove to the altar of the Imperial Throne to accept the morning greeting of the third year of Lin De's reign as the first year of Qianfeng.

古文：改麟德三年为乾封元年，诸行从文武官及朝觐华戎岳牧、致仕老人朝朔望者，三品已上赐爵二等，四品已下、七品以上加阶，八品已下加一阶，勋一转。
现代文：所有随从文武官员以及朝拜皇上的各州郡之长官，辞官之老人初一、十五朝拜者，三品以上官员赐爵二等，四品以下、七品以上加一阶，八品以下加一级，加勋一等。
English: All the civil and military officials who accompanied the emperor, as well as the highest-ranking officials of each prefecture and county who paid homage to the emperor, and the elders of the first and fifteenth generations who paid homage to the emperor, the officials with the rank of three or higher were awarded the second grade, those with the rank of four or lower, those with the rank of seven or higher were awarded the first grade, those with the rank of eight or lower were awarded the first grade, and those with the rank of distinguished service were awarded the first grade.

古文：诸老人百岁已上版授下州刺史，妇人郡君；九十、八十节级。
现代文：所有老人百岁以上授予下等州郡刺史的职衔，女人则授予郡君的封号。九十岁、八十岁授予节级职衔。
English: All elderly people over the age of one hundred were awarded the title of lower-level state county magistrate, and women were awarded the title of county magistrate. Ninety-year-olds and eighty-year-olds were awarded the title of section level.

古文：齐州给复一年半，管岳县二年。
现代文：齐州免除赋税一年半，管山岳之县免除租税二年。
English: Qizhou will be exempt from taxes for one and a half years, and Guanshan County will be exempt from taxes for two years.

古文：所历之处，无出今年租赋。
现代文：皇上经历之处，不再出今年租赋。
English: The emperor's experience will no longer appear in this year's rent.

古文：乾封元年正月五日已前，大赦天下，赐酺七日。
现代文：乾封元年正月五日以前，大赦天下，赐大宴七天。
English: Before the fifth day of the first month of the first year of Qianfeng, the world was pardoned and a grand banquet was given for seven days.

古文：癸酉，宴群臣，陈《九部乐》，赐物有差，日失而罢。
现代文：六日，宴请群臣，陈列《九部乐》，赐臣下物品各有等级差别，直到日光过午才罢。
English: On the sixth day, he held a banquet for the courtiers, displayed the "Nine Part Music," and gave the courtiers items with different grades, until the sun rose after noon.

古文：丙子，皇太子弘设会。
现代文：九日，皇太子弘设宴会。
English: On the 9th, Crown Prince Hirohito held a banquet.

古文：丁丑，以前恩薄，普进爵及阶勋等。
现代文：十日，因为先前太子恩情太薄，所以普遍晋爵位及晋阶晋级。
English: On the 10th, because the prince's gratitude was too weak before, he was generally promoted to a knighthood and promoted to a higher rank.

古文：男子赐古爵。兗州界置紫云。仙鹤、万岁观，封峦、非烟、重轮三寺。
现代文：兖州界设置紫云观、仙鹤观、万岁观，设置封峦寺、非烟寺、重轮寺。
English: Ziyun Temple, Cranes Temple, and Long Life Temple are set up in Zhangzhou District, as well as Fengyuan Temple, Non-Smoking Temple, and Zheulun Temple.

古文：天下诸州署观、寺一所。
现代文：天下各州设置观、寺各一所。
English: Every prefecture in Japan has its own temple.

古文：丙戌，发自泰山。
现代文：十九日，皇上从泰山出发。
English: On the 19th, the emperor set out from Mount Tai.

古文：甲午，次曲阜县，幸孔子庙。追赠太师，增修祠宇，以少牢致祭。
现代文：二十七日，临时驻扎在曲阜县，驾到孔子庙，追赠孔子为太师，增加修缮祠堂庙宇，用猪、羊致祭。
English: On the 27th, temporarily stationed in Qufu County, drove to the Confucius Temple, posthumously awarded Confucius as the Grand Master, increased the repair of ancestral halls and temples, and sacrificed pigs and sheep.

古文：其褒圣侯德伦子孙，并免赋役。
现代文：孔子后代褒圣侯德伦的子孙，都免除赋税徭役。
English: The descendants of Confucius and the descendants of Bao Sheng Hou Delun are all exempt from paying taxes.

古文：二月己未，次亳州。
现代文：二月二十二日，皇上临时驻扎亳州。
English: On February 22, the emperor was temporarily stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：幸老君庙，追号曰太上玄元皇帝，创造祠堂。其庙置令、丞各一员。
现代文：驾到老君庙，追赠称号为太上玄元皇帝，创造祠堂；老君庙设置令、丞各一员。
English: He drove to the Laojun Temple, posthumously awarded the title of Empress Dowager Xuan Yuan Emperor, created an ancestral hall; Laojun Temple establishment order, one member of the jong.

古文：改谷阳县为真源县，县内宗姓特给复一年。
现代文：改谷阳县为真源县，县内李老君宗姓特别免除赋税一年。
English: Guiyang County was changed to Zhenyuan County, and the surname of Li Laojun in the county was specially exempted from taxation for one year.

古文：夏四月甲辰，车驾至自泰山，先谒太庙而后入。
现代文：夏四月八日，车驾从泰山来，先谒见太庙而后进入皇宫。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, driving from Mount Tai, he first saw the Imperial Temple and then entered the Imperial Palace.

古文：五月庚寅，改铸乾封泉宝钱。
现代文：五月二十五日，改铸乾封泉宝钱。
English: On May 25th, the Qianfengquan treasure money was recast.

古文：六月壬寅，高丽莫离支盖苏文死。
现代文：六月七日，高丽莫离支盖苏文死。
English: On June 7th, Gao Limo died.

古文：其子男生继其父位，为其弟男建所逐，使其子献诚诣阙请降，诏左骁卫大将军契苾何力率兵以应接之。
现代文：其子男生继承父位，被他的弟弟男建所驱逐，派他的儿子献诚到朝廷请求归降，诏令左骁卫大将军契艹必何力率兵接应。
English: His son, a boy, succeeded to his father's throne, but was expelled by his younger brother, a man named Jianzhu. He sent his son to the imperial court to appeal for surrender, and ordered General of the Left Division of the National Guard, Qi Jun, to lead troops to accept.

古文：秋七月乙丑，徙封殷王旭轮为豫王。
现代文：秋七月一日，迁徙改封殷王旭轮为豫王。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, the king of Yin was moved and changed to the king of Yu.

古文：庚午，左侍极、检校右相、嘉兴子陆敦信缘老病乞辞机揆，拜大司成，兼知左侍极。
现代文：六日，左侍极、检校右相、嘉兴子陆敦信因为老病请求辞去宰相的职务，任命为大司成，兼主持左侍极事务。
English: On the 6th, Jia Xingzi Lu Dunxin, the Left Attendant of the Pole and the Right Minister of the Inspection of Schools, asked to resign from the post of prime minister due to his old illness, and was appointed as the chief secretary and also presided over the affairs of the Left Attendant of the Pole.

古文：大司宪兼检校右中护刘仁轨兼右相、检校右中护。
现代文：大司宪兼检校右中护刘仁轨兼任右相、检校右中护。
English: Liu Renlu, the chief secretary for constitutional affairs and the right middle guard of the inspection school, also served as the right minister and the right middle guard of the inspection school.

古文：八月辛丑，兼司元太常伯、兼检校左相、钜鹿男窦德玄卒。
现代文：八月八日，兼司元太常伯、兼检校左相、巨鹿男窦德玄去世。
English: On August 8th, Dou Dexuan, also known as the First Secretary of the Grand Council of State, the Left Minister of the Inspection of Schools, and the Great Deer Man, passed away.

古文：丁未，杀司卫少卿武惟良、淄州刺史武怀运，仍改姓蝮氏。
现代文：十四日，杀司卫少卿武惟良、淄州刺史武怀运，二人又改姓为蝮氏。
English: On the 14th, they killed Wei Shaoqing Wu Weiliang and Zhangzhou Jishi Wu Huaiyun, and both of them changed their surnames to Zou.

古文：冬十月己酉，命司空、英国公勣为辽东道行军大总管，以伐高丽。
现代文：冬十月十七，命令司空、英国公李责力为辽东道行军大总管，以讨伐高丽。
English: In the winter of October 17th, he ordered Siku and British officials to take charge of the Liao army and march to fight against Korea.

古文：二年春正月丁丑，以去冬至于是月无雨雪，避正殿，减膳，亲录囚徒。
现代文：二年春正月十六日，从去年冬天到这个月无雨无雪，皇上避开正殿，减少膳食亲自审讯并记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of spring, since there had been no rain or snow from last winter to this month, the emperor avoided the main hall, reduced the meal, personally interrogated and recorded the prisoner's guilt.

古文：罢乾封钱，复行开元通宝钱。
现代文：不再用乾封钱，重新通行开元通宝钱。
English: It is no longer necessary to seal the money, and it is possible to re-open the Yuan Tong treasure money.

古文：二月戊戌，涪陵郡王愔薨。
现代文：二月七日，涪陵郡王忄音去世。
English: On February 7, Wang Yuyin of Fuling County passed away.

古文：辛丑，改万年宫依旧名九成宫。
现代文：十日，改万年宫依旧名九成宫。
English: On the 10th, the Palace of Ten Thousand Years was renamed the Palace of Nine Decades.

古文：夏六月乙卯，西台侍郎杨武，西台侍郎、道国公、检校太子左中护戴至德，正谏议大夫、检校东台侍郎、安平郡公李安期，东台侍郎张文瓘，并同东西台三品。
现代文：夏六月二十六日，西台侍郎杨武，西台侍郎、道国公、检校太子左中护戴至德，正谏议大夫、检校东台侍郎、安平郡公李安期，东台侍郎张文馞，并同东西台三品。
English: On the 26th day of the 6th month of the summer, Yang Wu, the attendant of Xidai, the attendant of Xidai, the prince of the province, the prince of the inspection of the school from the left to the middle, the attendant of the east, the attendant of the inspection of the school from the east, the attendant of the county of Anping, the attendant of the east, and the attendant of the east, and the attendant of the west, and the attendant of the east and the west.

古文：秋八月己丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋八月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of autumn in August is the new moon day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丙辰，东台侍郎李安期出为荆州大都督府长史。
现代文：二十八日，东台侍郎李安期外放为荆州大都督府长史。
English: On the 28th, the Dongtai waiter Li Anji was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：三年春正月庚寅，诏缮工大监兼瀚海都护刘审礼为西域道安抚大使。
现代文：三年春正月，诏令缮工大监兼瀚海都护刘审礼为西域道安抚大使。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year, Liu Xunli, the superintendent of the construction industry and the protector of the Hanhai capital, was appointed as the ambassador of the pacification of the western region.

古文：壬子，以右相刘仁轨为辽东道副大总管。
现代文：二十七日，以右相刘仁轨为辽东道副大总管。
English: On the 27th, Liu Renlu, the Minister of the Right, was appointed as the Vice President of Liaodong University.

古文：二月戊午，辽东道破薛贺水五万人，阵斩首五千余级，获生口三万余人，器械牛马不可胜计。
现代文：二月四日，辽东道打败薛贺水五万人，在阵上斩敌人首级五千多个。活捉三万多人，军器刀矛弓箭缴获不可胜计。
English: On February 4th, Liaodong defeated 50,000 Xue Heshui soldiers, beheaded more than 5,000 enemy soldiers, captured more than 30,000 soldiers alive, and captured an incalculable number of military weapons, including swords, spears, bows and arrows.

古文：丙寅，以明堂制度历代不同，汉、魏以还，弥更讹舛，遂增损古今，新制其图。
现代文：十二日，因为明堂制度历代不同，汉、魏以来，愈加讹误错乱，于是对古代明堂制度加以增加或减少，重新制定明堂制度。
English: On the 12th, because the Myeongdong system has been different throughout the ages, and since the Han and Wei dynasties, it has become more and more erroneous and disorderly, so the ancient Myeongdong system was increased or decreased, and the Myeongdong system was reformulated.

古文：下诏大赦，改元为总章元年。
现代文：下诏令大赦，改元为总章元年。
English: He issued a decree of amnesty and changed the era to the first year of the General Chapter.

古文：二月戊寅，幸九成宫。
现代文：二月二十四日，皇上驾到九成宫。
English: On February 24th, the emperor arrived at the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：己卯，分长安、万年置乾封、明堂二县，分理于京城之中。
现代文：二十五日，分长安、万年两县而设置乾封、明堂两县，在京城之中分别治理。
English: On the 25th, Chang'an and Wanli were divided into two counties, and Qianfeng and Myeongdong were set up, and administered separately in the capital city.

古文：癸未，皇太子弘释奠于国学。赠颜回太子少师，曾参太子少保。
现代文：二十九日，皇太子弘在国学陈设酒食以祭祀先圣先师，赠颜回为太子少师，曾参为太子少保。
English: On the 29th, Crown Prince Hirohito set up a wine and food display in the Japanese language school to worship the first priest, presented Yan back as the prince's junior teacher, and once attended as the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：夏四月丙辰，有彗星见于毕、昴之间。
现代文：夏四月二日，有彗星出现于毕星与昴星之间。
English: On April 2nd, a comet appeared between the stars Bi and Eris.

古文：乙丑，上避正殿，减膳，诏内外群官各上封事，极言过失。
现代文：十一日，皇上避开正殿，减少膳食，诏命内外郡官各个奉上封章奏事，尽量陈述朝廷过失。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor avoided the main hall and reduced the meal, and ordered the county officials at home and abroad to submit a report to the emperor, and try their best to report the faults of the imperial court.

古文：于是群臣上言： 星虽孛而光芒小，此非国眚，不足上劳圣虑，请御正殿，复常馔。 
现代文：于是群臣上言 ：星虽然是彗星然而光芒很小，这不是国家的灾祸，不值得皇上辛勤忧虑，请皇上驾到正殿，恢复正常的膳食。 
English: As a result, the courtiers said, "Although the star is a comet, its light is very small. This is not a national disaster, and it is not worth the Emperor's trouble and worry. Please come to the main hall and resume normal meals."

古文：帝曰： 朕获奉宗庙，抚临亿兆，谪见于天，诫朕之不德也，当责躬修德以禳之。 
现代文：皇上道： 我获得宗庙社稷，继承皇位，统治亿万百姓，被上天所谴责，告诫我德行不好，我应当责备自己修养德行而来祈祷消除灾祸。 
English: Empress Dowager: I have received the title of patriarch, inherited the imperial throne, and ruled over hundreds of millions of people. Heaven has condemned me and warned me that my moral conduct is not good. I should reproach myself for cultivating moral conduct and come to pray to eliminate the scourge.

古文：群臣复进曰： 星孛于东北，此高丽将灭之征。 
现代文：群臣再次进言道： 彗星出现在东北，这是高丽将被消灭的征兆。 
English: The ministers said again, "The comet appeared in the northeast, which is a sign that Goryeo will be destroyed."

古文：帝曰： 高丽百姓，即朕之百姓也。
现代文：皇上道： 高丽百姓，就是我的百姓。
English: Empress Dowager: The people of Goryeo are my people.

古文：既为万国之主，岂可推过于小蕃！ 
现代文：既然成为万国之主，难道可以把过错推卸给小小的外邦国家。 
English: Since he has become the Lord of all nations, how can he shift the blame to small foreign nations?

古文：竟不从所请。
现代文：终于不同意群臣的请求。
English: Finally, he did not agree to the request of the ministers.

古文：乙亥，彗星灭。
现代文：二十一日，彗星灭。
English: On the twenty-first day, the comet disappeared.

古文：辛巳，西台侍郎杨武卒。
现代文：二十七日，西台侍郎杨武去世。
English: On the 27th, West Taiwan waiter Yang Wu passed away.

古文：秋八月癸酉，至自九成宫。
现代文：秋八月二十一日，皇上从九成宫到来。
English: On the 21st day of the 8th month of autumn, the emperor arrived from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：九月癸巳，司空、英国公勣破高丽，拔平壤城，擒其王高藏及其大臣男建等以归。
现代文：九月十二日，司空、英国公李责力破高丽，攻克平壤城，活捉高丽王高藏及其大臣男建等人回朝。
English: On September 12th, Sikyong and the British crown prince took the lead in defeating Goryeo, conquered Pyongyang City, and captured Goryeo King Gaozang and his minister Nang Jian and others alive to return to Korea.

古文：境内尽降，其城一百七十，户六十九万七千，以其地为安东都护府，分置四十二州。
现代文：高丽境内全部投降，投降城一百七十个，六十九万七千户，以高丽之地为安东都护府，分别设置四十二个州。
English: The entire territory of Goryeo surrendered, with 170 surrender cities and 697,000 households. The land of Goryeo was designated as Anton's capital, and 42 prefectures were established.

古文：二年春正月，封诸王嫡子皆为郡王。
现代文：二年春正月，封诸王正妻之子都为郡王。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, all the sons of the legitimate wife of King Fuzhuang became county kings.

古文：二月，东台侍郎、同东西台三品兼知左史事张文瓘署位，始入衔。
现代文：二月，东台侍郎、同东西台三品兼主管左史事张文馞可于姓名前书衔，才开始进入三品职衔。
English: In February, Zhang Wenyi, the attendant of the East and West Divisions and the head of the Left History Division of the East and West Divisions, was able to enter the third grade only after his name was written in the book.

古文：三月，东台侍郎郝处俊同东西台三品。
现代文：三月，东台侍郎郝处俊同东西台三品。
English: In March, the East Taiwan waiter, Shucho Toshitoshi, and the three East and West Taiwan dishes were served.

古文：癸酉，皇后亲祀先蚕。
现代文：十五日，皇后亲自祭祀先蚕，以鼓励蚕桑。
English: On the 15th, the empress personally sacrificed the first silkworm to encourage the growth of silkworms.

古文：夏四月乙酉，幸九成宫。
现代文：夏四月一日，皇上驾到九成宫。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, the emperor drove to Kuching Palace.

古文：置司列少常伯、司戎少常伯各两员。
现代文：设置司列少常伯、司戎少常伯各两员。
English: There will be two members of the Shirei Shonenjo and two members of the Shijo Shonenjo.

古文：五月庚子，移高丽户二万八千二百，车一千八十乘，牛三千三百头，马二千九百匹，驼六十头，将入内地，莱、营二州般次发遣，量配于江、淮以南及山南、并、凉以西诸州空闲处安置。
现代文：五月二十三日，把高丽二万八千二百户、一千零八十乘车、三千三百头牛、二千九百匹马、六十头骆驼，转移到内地，莱、营二州依次转移发遣，按数量分配到江、淮以南以及山南、并、凉以西各州空闲之处安置。
English: On May 23, 28,200 households, 1,080 vehicles, 3,300 heads of cattle, 2,900 horses, and 60 camels were transferred to the mainland from Goryeo. They were successively transferred to two provinces, namely, Lai and Ying, and distributed according to quantity to the south of the River and Huai, as well as to the south of Shanshan and the west of Liang.

古文：六月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of June is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：括州大风雨，海水泛溢永嘉、安固二县城郭，漂百姓宅六千八百四十三区，溺杀人九千七十、牛五百头，损田苗四千一百五十顷。
现代文：括州大风大雨，海水泛滥猛涨淹了永嘉、安固二县城郭，漂走了百姓住宅六千八百四十三区，淹死人九千零七十人，牛五百头，损害田苗四千一百五十顷。
English: Due to the heavy wind and rain in Guanzhou and the rapid rise of seawater flooding, the cities and towns of Yongjia and Angu County were flooded, and the 6,843 residential areas were swept away, drowning 9,070 people, 500 cattle, and damaging 4,150 hectares of fields and seedlings.

古文：冀州大水，漂坏居人庐舍数千家。
现代文：冀州大水，漂走冲坏民房数千家。
English: Thousands of houses in Jizhou have been washed away in the floods.

古文：并遣使赈给。
现代文：皇上派遣使者赈济。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to bring aid.

古文：秋七月，剑南益、泸、巂、茂、陵、邛、雅、绵、翼、维、始、简、资、荣、隆、果、梓、普、遂等一十九州旱，百姓乏绝，总三十六万七千六百九十户，遣司珍大夫路励行存问赈贷，癸巳，冀州大都督府奏，自六月十三日夜降雨，至二十日水深五尺，其夜暴水深一丈已上，坏屋一万四千三百九十区，害田四千四百九十六顷。
现代文：秋七月，剑南益、泸、辒、茂、陵、邛、雅、帛系、翼、维、始、简、资、荣、隆、果、梓、普、遂等十九州干旱，百姓困乏断粮，总计三十六万七千六百九十户，派司珍大夫路励行慰问赈贷救济。十七日，冀州大都督府上奏，从六月十三日夜降雨，到二十日水深五尺，当夜降雨水深一丈以上，冲坏房屋一万四千三百九十区，破坏田四千四百九十六顷。
English: In autumn and July, nineteen prefectures including Jian'nan, Yixing, Shandong, Shandong, Maoming, Lingshan, Shandong, Yangtze, Yangtze River Delta, Yangtze River Delta, Yangtze River Delta, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Shandong, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei,

古文：遣右卫大将军、凉国公契苾何力为驾海道行军大总管。
现代文：派右卫大将军、凉国公契艹必何力为驾海道行军大总管。
English: General Hui Yuwei and General Liang Guo Gongqi were appointed as the general managers of the march along the sea route.

古文：秋八月甲戌，改瀚海都护府为安北都护府。
现代文：秋八月二十八日，改瀚海都护府为安北都护府。
English: On the 28th day of the 8th month of autumn, Hanhai Duopu was changed to Anbei Duopu.

古文：九月己亥，发自九成宫。
现代文：九月二十三日，皇上从九成宫出发。
English: On September 23rd, the emperor set out from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：壬寅，停华林顿，大蒐于岐。乙巳，至岐州。
现代文：二十六日，停在华林顿，在岐州大检阅。二十九日，到岐州。
English: On the 26th, it stopped at Warrington and was inspected at Qizhou University. On the 29th, it arrived in Qizhou.

古文：高祖初仕隋为扶风太守，故曲赦岐州管内。
现代文：高祖开始在隋朝做官，任扶风太守，所以因这一特殊情况赦免岐州管辖内囚徒。
English: Gaozu began to serve as an official in the Sui Dynasty and was appointed Fu Feng Taishu, so because of this special situation, he pardoned prisoners within the jurisdiction of Qizhou.

古文：高祖时胥徒随材擢用，赐高年衣物粟帛各有差。
现代文：高祖时在官府中办文书的小官是根据才干提拔任用的，赐给高年人衣物粮食布匹绸缎，各有等级差别。
English: In Gaozu's time, minor officials who handled paperwork in government offices were promoted and appointed based on their abilities. Clothing, grain, cloth, silk and embroidery were given to senior people, each with a difference in rank.

古文：冬十月丁巳，至自九成宫。
现代文：冬十月十二日，皇上从九成宫到来。
English: On the 12th day of October in winter, the Emperor arrived from Kushinomiya.

古文：十一月庚辰，发九州人夫，转发太原仓米粟入京。
现代文：十一月五日，征调九州的夫役，转运调拨太原仓米粮入京师。
English: On November 5th, the manpower of Kyushu was transferred, and the rice grain from the Taiyuan warehouse was transferred to the Beijing division.

古文：丁亥，徙封豫王旭轮为冀王，仍令单名轮。
现代文：十二日，迁徙改封豫王旭轮为冀王，仍然令他单名为轮。
English: On the 12th, the migration changed the title of Yu Wang Xurun to Ji Wang, still making him a single-named wheel.

古文：十二月戊申，司空、太子太师、英国公勣薨。
现代文：十二月三日，司空、太子太师、英国公李责力去世。
English: On December 3rd, Siku, the crown prince, and the British crown prince Li Rongli passed away.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：三年春正月丁丑，右相、乐成男刘仁轨致仕。
现代文：三年春正月三日，右相、乐成男刘仁轨辞去官职。
English: On the third day of the first month of the third year of the Spring, Liu Renliao, the Minister of the Right and a successful man, resigned from his official post.

古文：辛卯，列辽东地为州县。
现代文：十七日，把辽东地列为州县。
English: On the 17th, Liaodong was listed as a county.

古文：二月戊申，以旱，亲录囚徒，祈祷名山大川。
现代文：二月五日，因为干旱，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒罪状，向名山大川祈祷求福。
English: On February 5, because of the drought, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' crimes, and prayed to the famous mountain and river for blessings.

古文：癸丑，日色出如赭。
现代文：十日，日光出来如赭红色。
English: On the tenth day, the sunlight came out like crimson.

古文：三月甲戌朔，大赦天下，改元为咸亨元年。
现代文：三月一日是朔日，大赦天下，改元为咸亨元年。
English: The first day of March is the New Year's Day, the general amnesty, and the year is changed to the first year of Xianheng.

古文：三月丁丑，改蓬莱宫为含元殿。
现代文：三月四日，改蓬莱宫为含元殿。
English: On March 4th, the Penglai Palace was renamed the Huan Yuan Palace.

古文：壬辰，太子少师、同东西台三品许敬宗致仕。
现代文：十九日，太子少师、同东西台三品许敬宗辞官。
English: On the 19th, the Prince's apprentice became a member of the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Xu Jing Sect.

古文：夏四月，吐蕃寇陷白州等一十八州，又与于阗合众袭龟兹拨换城，陷之。
现代文：夏四月，吐蕃入侵并攻陷白州等十八州，又与于阗之众纠合偷袭龟兹拨换城，将其攻陷。
English: In the summer of April, Tubo invaded and conquered 18 states including Baizhou, and then, in collusion with the people of Yunnan, raided the city of Zhezhou and captured it.

古文：罢安西四镇。
现代文：撤掉安西四镇。
English: Remove the four towns in Anxi.

古文：辛亥，以右威卫大将军薛仁贵为逻娑道行军大总管，右卫员外大将军阿史那道真、左卫将军郭待封为副，领兵五万以击吐蕃。
现代文：九日，以右威卫大将军薛仁贵为逻娑道行军大总管，右卫员外大将军阿史那道真、左卫将军郭待封为副，领兵五万以打击吐蕃。
English: On the 9th, with General Xue Rengui of the Right Division of Wei Guards as the commander-in-chief of the march to Lushan Road, General Ashina Doushen of the Right Division of Wei Guards and General Guo Zhifeng of the Left Division of Wei Guards as deputies, he led fifty thousand soldiers to attack Tubo.

古文：庚午，幸九成宫。
现代文：二十八日，皇上驾到九成宫。
English: On the 28th, the emperor drove to the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：雍州大雨雹。
现代文：雍州下大雨下冰雹。
English: Large hailstones fell in Yongzhou.

古文：五月丙戌，诏曰： 诸州县孔子庙堂及学馆有破坏并先来未造者，遂使生徒无肄业之所，先师阙奠祭之仪，久致飘露，深非敬本。
现代文：五月十四日，皇帝诏曰： 各州县孔子庙堂及学馆有被破坏并且先前未建造的地方，以致使生员没有学习的场所，对先圣先师缺乏祭奠之礼仪，长久使先圣先师飘零暴露，确实不是尊敬之根本。
English: On May 14, the emperor issued an edict: "Confucius temples and academies in various prefectures and counties have been destroyed and previously unbuilt places, so that the students have no place to study, there is a lack of etiquette to pay tribute to the forefathers, and it is really not fundamental to respect the forefathers who have been exposed for a long time.

古文：宜令所司速事营造。 
现代文：应命令有关官员从速进行营造。 
English: The relevant officials should be ordered to carry out the construction without delay.

古文：六月壬寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of June is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月戊子，前西台侍郎李敬玄起复本职，仍依旧同东西台三品。
现代文：秋七月十七日，前两台侍郎李敬玄恢复本职，仍然依照原来的同东西台三品。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, Li Jingxuan, the waiter of the first two trains, resumed his duties, still in accordance with the original East-West three trains.

古文：薛仁贵、郭待封至大非川，为吐蕃大将论钦陵所袭，大败，仁贵等并坐除名。
现代文：薛仁贵、郭待封到大非川，被吐蕃大将论钦陵所偷袭，大败，薛仁贵、郭待封都获罪而被除去名籍。
English: Xue Rengui and Guo Zhifeng went to Dafu River. They were attacked by the general of the Tubo Army, On Qinling, and were defeated. Xue Rengui and Guo Zhifeng were both convicted and removed from the family register.

古文：吐谷浑全国尽没，唯慕容诺曷钵及其亲信数千帐内属，仍徙于灵州界。
现代文：吐谷浑全国失陷，惟有慕容诺曷钵及其亲信数千营帐归附，仍旧迁徙到灵州界。
English: The whole country of Tugu Hun fell, except for Murong Noro and his cronies, who were given thousands of encampments and still migrated to Lingzhou.

古文：八月甲子，至自九成宫。
现代文：八月二十四日，皇上从九成宫到来。
English: On August 24th, the Emperor arrived from Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：梁州都督、赵王福薨。
现代文：梁州都督、赵王福去世。
English: Zhao Wangfu, the governor of Liangzhou, passed away.

古文：丙寅，以久旱，避正殿，尚食减膳。
现代文：二十六日，因为长久干旱，皇上避开正殿，尚食官员减少皇上膳食。
English: On the 26th, because of the long drought, the emperor avoided the main hall, and the dining officials reduced the emperor's meal.

古文：九月甲申，卫国夫人杨氏薨，赠鲁国夫人，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：九月十四日，卫国夫人杨氏去世，赠鲁国夫人称号，谥曰忠烈。
English: On September 14th, Yang, the wife of the Emperor of China, passed away. She was given the title of "Lady of the State of Lu" and given the title of "Faithful."

古文：闰月壬子，故赠司徒、周忠孝公士赠太尉、太子太师、太原郡王，赠鲁国忠烈太夫人赠太原王妃。
现代文：闰九月十二日，已故赠司徒、周忠孝公士再赠太尉、太子太师、太原郡王，已故赠鲁国忠烈太夫人再赠太原王妃。
English: On the 12th day of the 9th month of the leap year, the deceased presented Sitoru, Zhou Zhongxiao and then the lieutenant, the prince and the county king of Taiyuan, and the deceased presented Lu Guozhong and his wife and then the princess of Taiyuan.

古文：甲寅，葬太原王妃，京官文武九品已上及外命妇，送至便桥宿次。
现代文：十四日，葬太原王妃。京官文武九品以上官员及外官命妇，送到便桥停留三宿。
English: On the 14th, the funeral of Princess Taiyuan was held. The officials of the Beijing Civil and Military 9th grade and above and the foreign minister's wife were sent to Benqiao to stay in Mishuku.

古文：冬十月癸酉，大雪，平地三尺余，行人冻死者赠帛给棺木。
现代文：冬十月四日，大雪，平地有三尺多厚的雪，行人冻死的赠给布匹，给棺木。
English: In the winter, on October 4th, there was heavy snow. The snow on the flat ground was more than three feet thick. Pedestrians who froze to death were given cloths and coffins.

古文：令雍、同、华州贫窭之家，有年十五已下不能存活者，听一切任人收养为男女，充驱使，皆不得将为奴婢。
现代文：命令雍、同、华州贫寒而简陋之家，有年纪十五岁以下不能养活者，任凭人们收养为男女，充当别人的驱使，但都不能做为奴婢。
English: Yong, Tong and Huazhou were ordered to be poor and simple homes, and those who could not support themselves under the age of fifteen were allowed to be adopted as men and women to act as a driving force for others, but could not be used as slaves.

古文：丙申，太子右中护兼摄正谏大夫、同东西台三品赵仁本为左肃机，罢知政事。
现代文：二十七日，太子右中护兼摄正谏大夫、同东西台三品赵仁本为左肃机，罢免参知政事。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Renben, the Prince's Right Middle Guardian and Doctor of the Office of the Rector of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, as well as the East and West Three Princes of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was removed from the post of Vice-Chairman of the Politburo.

古文：十二月庚寅，诸司及百官各复旧名。
现代文：十二月二十一日，诸司及百官各恢复旧的官署名称。
English: On December 21st, all departments and 100 officials resumed the old name of the government office.

古文：是岁，天下四十余州旱及霜虫，百姓饥乏，关中尤甚。
现代文：这年天下四十多州干旱、霜灾、虫灾，百姓饥饿困乏，关中尤其厉害。
English: This year, droughts, frosts, and insect plagues struck more than forty states, and the people were starving and destitute, especially in Guanzhong.

古文：诏令任往诸州逐食，仍转江南租米以赈给之。
现代文：诏令任他们往各州随处求食，又转运江南租米以赈贷救济他们。
English: The imperial edict allowed them to seek food everywhere in the states, and also transported the rented rice to the south of the Yangtze River to help them with loans.

古文：二年春正月乙巳，幸东都。
现代文：咸亨二年春正月七日，皇上驾到东都。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the second year of King Hamhung's reign, the emperor drove to Dongdu.

古文：留皇太子弘于京监国，令侍臣戴至德、张文瓘、李敬玄等辅之。
现代文：留皇太子弘在京中代管国家大事。命令侍卫之臣戴至德、张文馞、李敬玄等人辅助他。
English: Remaining Crown Prince Hiroshi in charge of state affairs in Kyoto, he ordered the bodyguards Dai Zhide, Zhang Wenyu, Li Jingxuan and others to assist him.

古文：唯以阎立本、郝处俊从。
现代文：只以阎立本、郝处俊跟从皇上。
English: Only Yan Liben and Shishidokuchun followed the emperor.

古文：甲子，至东都。
现代文：二十六日，皇上到东都。
English: On the 26th, the emperor left for the eastern capital.

古文：二月丁亥，雍州人梁金柱请出钱三千贯赈济贫人。
现代文：二月二十日，雍州人梁金柱请求出钱三千贯赈贷救济贫寒之人。
English: On February 20th, Yangzhou resident Liang Jinzhu requested to pay 3,000 yuan to help the poor.

古文：夏四月戊子，大风折木。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，大风折断树木。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the wind began to break trees.

古文：六月戊寅，左散骑常侍兼检校秘书、太子宾客、周国公武敏之以罪复本姓贺兰氏，除名，流雷州。
现代文：六月十三日，左散骑常侍兼检校秘书、太子宾客、周国公武敏之因为犯罪恢复本姓贺兰，除去做官的资格流放到雷州。
English: On June 13th, Zuo Sanzhong riding attendant and school inspection secretary, the prince's guest, Zhou Guogong Wu Minzhi was exiled to Leizhou because of the crime of restoring his original surname, Helan, in addition to his qualification to be an official.

古文：丁亥，以旱，亲录囚徒。
现代文：二十二日，因为干旱，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒罪状。
English: On the 22nd, because of the drought, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' crimes.

古文：秋九月，地震。
现代文：秋九月，地震。
English: In autumn and September, an earthquake.

古文：司徒、潞州刺史、徐王元礼薨。
现代文：司徒、潞州刺史、徐王元礼去世。
English: Szeto, Zhangzhou Shishi, and Xu Wangyuanli passed away.

古文：冬十月，搜扬明达礼乐之士。
现代文：冬十月，搜寻推荐明白通达礼乐之士。
English: In the winter of October, the search was on to find the most recommended musicians.

古文：十一月甲午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of November is New Year's Day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚戌，幸许、汝等州教习。
现代文：十七日，皇上驾到许、汝等州教习。
English: On the 17th, the Emperor came to Xu, you and other states to teach.

古文：辛未，制雍、洛二州人听任本州官。
现代文：十二月十日，冬天打猎，在许州叶县昆水的北面设木栅栏遮拦野兽而打猎。二十三日，回到东都。
English: On December 10, he went hunting in winter, and set up a wooden fence to block wild animals from hunting on the north side of Kunshui, Ye County, Huzhou. On the 23rd, he returned to Dongdu.

古文：二月己卯，侍中、永安郡公姜恪卒于河西镇守。
现代文：三年春正月八日，发动梁、益等一十八州兵，招募五千三百人，派遣右卫副帅梁积寿前往姚州打击叛变的蛮夷。二月十七日，侍中、永安郡公姜恪在河西镇守任上死去。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, Liang and Yi mobilized 18 state soldiers, recruited 5,300 people, and sent the right guard vice-commander Liang Jishou to Yaozhou to fight the mutinous barbarians. On February 17th, the attendant, Yong'an County Gong Jiang Ke died on duty in Hexi Town.

古文：夏四月戊寅，幸合璧宫。
现代文：夏四月十七日，皇上驾到合璧宫。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor drove to the He Bi palace.

古文：壬午，于水南教旗。上问中书令阎立本、黄门侍郎郝处俊： 伊尹负鼎俎于汤，应是补缉时政，不知铸鼎所缘，复在何国？
现代文：皇上问中书令阎立本、黄门侍郎郝处俊： 伊尹背负烹调用的鼎、砧板求见商汤，请求任用，应该是补助国政，不知铸造鼎是什么缘故，后又放在什么国家？
English: The emperor asked Yan Liben, the Yellow Gate's steward, and Yan Shujun, the Yellow Gate's steward: "Yi Yin is carrying a spoon and a chopping board for cooking. He is asking to see Shang Tang. He is requesting to be appointed. It should be a subsidy to national politics. I don't know why the spoon was cast, and what country it was placed in.

古文：将为国之重器，历代传宝？ 
现代文：将作为国家的重器、历代流传的国宝吗？ 
English: Will it be used as a national heavy weapon, a national treasure passed down through the ages?

古文：阎立本以古义对。
现代文：阎立本以古义对答。
English: Yan Liben replied with the ancient meaning.

古文：五月乙未，五品已上改赐新鱼袋，并饰以银；三品已上各赐金装刀子、砺石一具。
现代文：五月五日，五品以上官员改赐新鱼袋，并且用银装饰；三品以上官员各赐予金子装饰的刀子、磨刀石一具。
English: On May 5, officials with five or more awards were given a new fish bag and decorated with silver; officials with three or more awards were each given a knife and whetstone decorated with gold.

古文：六月丙子，于洛州柏崖置仓。
现代文：六月十七日，在洛州柏崖设谷仓。
English: On June 17th, the company set up a barn in Los Angeles.

古文：八月壬子，特进、高阳郡公许敬宗卒。
现代文：八月，特进、高阳郡公许敬宗去世。
English: In August, the special envoy, Goyang County official Xu Jingzong passed away.

古文：九月乙卯，冀州大都督府复为魏州，魏州复为冀州。
现代文：九月二十七日，冀州大都督再次成为魏州，魏州再次成为冀州。
English: On September 27th, the Grand Duchy of Jizhou once again became Weizhou, and Weizhou once again became Jizhou.

古文：壬寅，沛王贤徙封雍王。
现代文：十四日，沛王贤迁徙改封为雍王。
English: On the 14th, Pe Wangxian moved and changed his title to Yong Wang.

古文：冬十月己未，皇太子监国。
现代文：冬十月二日，皇太子代管国家大事。
English: In the winter, on October 2, the crown prince took over the state affairs.

古文：壬戌，车驾还京师。
现代文：五日，皇上车驾回到京师。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor drove back to Beijing.

古文：乙亥，中书侍郎、同中书门下三品、道国公戴至德加兼户部尚书，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品张文瓘检校大理卿，黄门侍郎、甑山县公、同中书门下三品郝处俊为中书侍郎，兼检校吏部侍郎、同中书门下三品李敬玄为吏部侍郎，并依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：十八日，中书侍郎、同中书门下三品、道国公戴至德兼户部尚书的加官，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品张文馞任检校大理卿，黄门侍郎、甑山县公、同中书门下三品郝处俊为中书侍郎，兼检校吏部侍郎、同中书门下三品李敬玄为吏部侍郎，一律依旧同中书门下三品。
English: On the 18th, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the middle school

古文：十一月戊子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of November is New Year's Day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，至自东都。
现代文：十七日，皇上从东都回来。
English: On the 17th, Gaozong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：十二月癸卯，太子左庶子刘仁轨同中书门下三品。
现代文：十二月，太子左庶子刘仁轨同中书门下三品。
English: In December, the prince's second son, Liu Renzhao, was promoted to the third grade of middle school.

古文：是冬，左监门大将军高侃大败新罗之众于横水。
现代文：这年冬天，左监门大将军高侃在横水大败新罗众军。
English: In the winter of that year, Gao Kan, the general of Zuoying Gate, defeated the Silla army in Hengshui.

古文：四年春正月甲午，诏咸亨初收养为男女及驱使者，听量酬衣食之直，放还本处。
现代文：四年春正月七日，诏令咸亨初年收养为儿女以及供应驱使的人，听凭他们衡量计算自己衣食之报酬，放回到原来居住之处。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Spring, the Emperor issued an edict to the people who had been adopted as sons and daughters by Xianheng in the first year, as well as those who had been provided for and driven, to let them measure and calculate the remuneration of their clothing and food, and to return them to their original place of residence.

古文：丙辰，绛州刺史、郑王元懿薨。
现代文：二十九日，绛州刺史、郑王元懿去世。
English: On the 29th, Zheng Wangyuan died.

古文：二月壬午，以左金吾将军裴居道女为皇太子弘妃。
现代文：二月二十六日，以左金吾将军裴居道的女儿为皇太子李弘之妃。
English: On February 26th, the daughter of General Zuo Kingu Pei Ju Dao became the wife of Crown Prince Li Hongzhi.

古文：夏四月丙子，幸九成宫。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，皇上驾到九成宫。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor arrived at the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：闰五月丁卯，燕山道总管李谨行破高丽叛党于瓠卢河之西，高丽平壤余众遁入新罗。
现代文：闰五月十三日，燕山道总管李谨行在瓠卢河之西打败高丽叛党，高丽平壤剩余叛党逃入新罗。
English: On the 13th day of leap May, the head of the Yanshan Road, Li Zhengying, defeated the Koryo rebels in the west of the Minlu River, and the remaining rebels in Pyongyang fled to Silla.

古文：秋七月庚午，九成宫太子新宫成，上召五品已上诸亲宴太子宫，极欢而罢。
现代文：秋七月十七日，九成宫太子新宫落成，皇上诏令五品以上官员亲族在太子宫宴会庆贺，极欢而后才罢宴。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, the new palace of the crown prince was completed at the foot of the Jiu Chenggong Palace. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the relatives of officials of the Fifth Rank and above to celebrate at a banquet at the crown prince's palace. They were overjoyed and then left the banquet.

古文：辛巳，婺州暴雨，水泛溢，漂溺居民六百家，诏令赈给。
现代文：二十八日，婺州暴雨，水泛滥，淹没居民六百家，诏令赈济。
English: On the 28th, there was a rainstorm in Zhangzhou, and the water flooded, inundating 600 homes. The government issued an order to provide relief.

古文：八月辛丑，上痁疾，令太子受诸司启事。
现代文：八月十九日，皇上患虐疾，命令太子接受各衙门禀告的事情。
English: On August 19th, the Emperor fell ill with malaria and ordered the Crown Prince to accept the obituary notice from each court.

古文：己酉，大风毁太庙鸱吻。
现代文：二十七日，大风毁坏了太庙屋脊上的装饰。
English: On the 27th, high winds destroyed the decorations on the roof of the Great Temple.

古文：冬十月壬午，中书令、博陵县子阎立本卒。
现代文：冬十月一日，中书令、博陵县子阎立本去世。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Ziyan Libon, a poet from Boling County, died.

古文：乙未，皇太子弘纳妃毕，曲赦岐州，大酺三日。
现代文：十四日，皇太子李弘纳妃完毕，特赦岐州，大宴饮三天。
English: On the 14th, after Crown Prince Li Hongnai finished, he pardoned Qizhou and held a grand banquet for three days.

古文：庚子，还京师。
现代文：十九日，皇上回京师。
English: On the 19th, the emperor returned to Beijing.

古文：乙巳，至自九成宫。
现代文：二十四日，皇上从九成宫到来。
English: On the 24th, Gaozong returned to the capital from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：十一月丙寅，上制乐章，有《上元》、《二仪》、《三才》、《四时》、《五行》、《六律》、《七政》、《八风》、《九宫》、《十洲》、《得一》、《庆云》之曲，诏有司诸大祠享即奏之。
现代文：十一月十五日，皇上亲自制作乐章，有《上元》、《二仪》、《三才》、《四时》、《五行》、《六律》、《七政》、《八风》、《九宫》、《十洲》、《得一》、《庆云》乐曲，诏令有关部门，各种盛大祭祀即奏这些乐曲。
English: On November 15th, the emperor personally composed the music, including the music of "Shangyuan," "Niji," "Sanzai," "4 o'clock," "Gujing," "Liulong," "Shichisei," "Hakka," "Jiu Gong," "Jizhou," "Dehi" and "Qingyun," and ordered the relevant departments to play these pieces at various grand ceremonies.

古文：十二月丙午，弓月、疏勒二国王入朝请降。
现代文：十二月二十五日，弓月、疏勒二国王入朝请求归降。
English: On December 25th, King Qiu Yue and King Shule II entered the imperial court and requested to surrender.

古文：五年春二月壬午，遣太子左庶子、同中书门下三品刘仁轨为鸡林道大总管，以讨新罗，仍令卫尉卿李弼、右领大将军李谨行副之。
现代文：五年春二月二日，派遣太子左庶子、同中书门下三品刘仁轨为鸡林道大总管，以讨伐新罗，又命令卫尉李弼、右领大将军李谨行为副。
English: On February 2nd, Spring of the 5th year, he dispatched Prince Zuo's son-in-law, Liu Renluo, who was the third grade student of the same middle school, to be the general manager of Qilin Road to fight against Silla. He also ordered the guard lieutenant Li Jun and the right leader general Li Jian to act as deputies.

古文：三月辛亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: March 1st is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：己巳，皇后祀先蚕。
现代文：十九日，皇后祭祀先蚕神。
English: On the 19th, the empress first offered a sacrifice to the silkworm god.

古文：夏四月辛卯，以尚辇奉御、周国公武承嗣为宗正卿。
现代文：夏四月十二日，以尚辇奉御、周国公武承嗣为宗正卿。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of the summer, Shogun Zongzheng was enthroned as the heir of Shogun Zhou.

古文：五月己未，诏： 春秋二社，本以祈农，如闻此外别为邑会。
现代文：五月十日，皇上下诏曰： 春秋两季祭土神，本来是用来祈祷农业丰收，然而听说此外另有别的乡镇聚会。
English: On May 10th, the emperor issued an edict saying: The spring and autumn festivals of the earth god were originally used to pray for a good agricultural harvest, but it was heard that there were other township gatherings in addition.

古文：此后除二社外，不得聚集，有司严加禁止。 
现代文：此后除春秋两季祭土神外，不得聚集，有关部门严加禁止。 
English: After that, with the exception of the spring and autumn festivals of the soil deities, gatherings are not allowed, and are strictly prohibited by the relevant departments.

古文：六月壬寅，太白入东井。
现代文：六月二十四日，太白星进入东井星垣。
English: On June 24th, Taibai Star entered the Higashii Star Wall.

古文：秋八月壬辰，追尊宣简公为宣皇帝，懿王为光皇帝，太祖武皇帝为高祖神尧皇帝，太宗文皇帝为文武圣皇帝，太穆皇后为太穆神皇后，文德皇后为文德圣皇后。
现代文：秋八月十五日，追尊宣简公为宣皇帝，懿王为光皇帝，太祖武皇帝为高祖神尧皇帝，太宗文皇帝为文武圣皇帝，太穆皇后为太穆神皇后，文德皇后为文德圣皇后。
English: On the 15th day of the 8th month of the autumn, the revered Emperor Xuan Jian Gong was proclaimed Emperor Xuan, the King Zhao was proclaimed Emperor Guangren, the Emperor Taizhuwu was proclaimed Emperor Gaozhu Sheng, the Emperor Taizongwen was proclaimed Emperor Wenwusheng, the Empress Taimu was proclaimed Empress Taimu Sheng, and the Empress Wende was proclaimed Empress Wende Sheng.

古文：皇帝称天皇，皇后称天后。
现代文：皇帝称天皇，皇后称天后。
English: The emperor calls the emperor, the empress calls the empress.

古文：改咸亨五年为上元元年，大赦。
现代文：改咸亨五年为上元元年，大赦。
English: Change Xianheng five years to Shangyuan one year, amnesty.

古文：戊戌，敕文武官三品己上服紫，金玉带；四品深绯，五品浅绯，并金带；六品深绿，七品浅绿，并银带；八品深青，九品浅青，鍮石带；庶人服黄，铜铁带。
现代文：二十一日，命令文武官员三品以上穿紫色官服，金玉带；四品官穿深绯色官服，五品官穿浅绯色官服，都是金带；六品官穿深绿色官服，七品官穿浅绿色官服，都是银带；八品官穿深青色官服，九品官穿浅青色官服，都是黄铜带；普通百姓穿黄色，铜铁带。
English: On the 21st, it ordered the civil and military officials to wear more than three articles of purple official uniforms with gold and jade bands; four articles of officials wearing dark navy official uniforms, five articles of officials wearing light navy official uniforms, all with gold bands; six articles of officials wearing dark green official uniforms, seven articles of officials wearing light green official uniforms, all with silver bands; eight articles of officials wearing dark blue official uniforms, nine articles of officials wearing light blue official uniforms, all with brass bands; ordinary people wearing yellow, copper and iron bands.

古文：一品已下文官，并带手巾、算袋、刀子、砺石，武官欲带亦听之。
现代文：一品以下文官，都带手巾、算袋、刀子、磨刀石，武官想带也听任他。
English: Civil servants below the rank of private first class all carry a hand towel, a counting bag, a knife, and a whetstone. Military attachés are free to bring whatever they want.

古文：九月辛亥，百僚具新服，上宴之于麟德殿。
现代文：九月五日，百官具备新服，皇上在麟德殿宴请他们。
English: On September 5th, hundreds of officials were equipped with new clothes, and the emperor invited them to a banquet at the Lin De Palace.

古文：癸丑，追复长孙无忌官爵，仍以其曾孙翼袭封赵国公，许归葬于昭陵先造之坟。
现代文：七日，追认恢复长孙无忌官爵，又以他的曾孙翼承袭封赵国公，允许他将长孙无忌归葬在太宗先造之坟昭陵。
English: On the seventh day, the court recognized the restoration of the eldest grandson, Wu Gui, to the title of nobility, and also designated his great-grandson, Ying, as the heir to the title of Zhao Guogong, and allowed him to bury his eldest grandson, Wu Gui, in the tomb of Zhaoling, which was first built by Emperor Taizong.

古文：十一月丙午朔，幸东都。
现代文：十一月一日，皇上驾到东都。
English: On November 1, the emperor arrived in the eastern capital.

古文：己酉，狩于华山之曲武原。
现代文：四日，在华山之曲武原打猎。
English: On the fourth day, they went hunting in the mountains of Huashan.

古文：戊辰，至东都。
现代文：二十三日，到东都。
English: On the 23rd, I arrived in Dongdu.

古文：十二月，蒋王恽薨。
现代文：十二月，蒋王恽去世。
English: In December, Jiang Wangcheng passed away.

古文：戊子，于阗王伏阇雄来朝。
现代文：十三日，于阗王伏信前来朝见。
English: On the 13th, King Fuxin came to see the emperor.

古文：辛卯，波斯王卑路斯来朝。
现代文：十六日，波斯王卑路斯前来朝见。
English: On the 16th, the Persian king Pelusius came to see the emperor.

古文：壬寅，天后上意见十二条，请王公百僚皆习《老子》，每岁明经一准《孝经》、《论语》例试于有司。
现代文：二十七日，天后奉上意见十二条，请王公百官都学习《老子》，每年科举明经考试，一律以《孝经》、《论语》为准则由有关部门作为考试的模仿标准。
English: On the 27th, the Queen of Heaven sent the 12th article of the Opinions, inviting Wang Gong and hundreds of officials to study "Lao Zi" and to take the examination every year. All relevant departments should use "Xiao Zi" and "Analects" as the standards for the examination.

古文：又请子父在为母服三年。
现代文：又请求儿子当父亲健在而母丧时服孝三年。
English: He also asked his son to show filial piety for three years when his father was alive and his mother was dead.

古文：虢王凤薨。
现代文：虢王凤去世。
English: Gong Wangfeng passed away.

古文：二年春正月甲寅，荧惑犯房。
现代文：二年春正月十七日，支汗郡王贡献碧色玻璃。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the second year of spring, the king of Shikhan County donated blue glass.

古文：壬戌，支汗郡王献碧玻璃。丙寅，以于阗为毗沙都督府，以尉迟伏阇雄为毗沙都督，分其境内为十州，以伏阇雄有击吐蕃功故也。庚午，龟兹王白素稽献银颇罗。
现代文：二十一日，以于阗为田比沙都督府，以尉迟伏雄为田比沙都督，分其境内地方为十个州，因为伏雄有打击吐蕃功劳的缘故。二十五日，龟兹王白素稽贡献银颇罗。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Yuzhong was made the prefectural capital of Tianbisha, and Fuxiong was made the prefectural capital of Tianbisha, and the territory was divided into ten prefectures, because Fuxiong was credited with defeating the Tuoba. On the twenty-fifth day of the month, Guizi Wang Bai Suqi contributed a large amount of silver.

古文：辛未，吐蕃遣其大臣论吐浑弥来请和，不许。
现代文：二十六日，吐蕃派遣他的大臣论吐浑弥前来请求和解，皇上不许。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Tubo sent his minister, Ong Tubunyi, to request a reconciliation, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：二月，鸡林道行军大总管大破新罗之众于七重城，斩获甚众。
现代文：二月，鸡林道行军大总管在七重城大破新罗的部众，斩杀、俘虏敌军很多。
English: In February, the commander-in-chief of the march of the Qilin Road in Qihe City defeated the subordinates of Silla, killing and capturing many enemy troops.

古文：新罗遣使入朝献方物，伏罪。赦之，复其王金法敏官爵。
现代文：新罗派遣使者入朝贡献土特产，低头认罪；赦免了他，恢复新罗王金法敏的官爵。
English: Silla sent an envoy to the DPRK to contribute local products, bowed down and confessed; pardoned him and restored the official title of Silla King Jinfamin.

古文：三月丁未，日色如赭。
现代文：三月三日，日色如赤褐色。
English: On March 3, the sun was reddish-brown.

古文：丁巳，天后亲蚕于邙山之阳。
现代文：十三日，天后亲自在邙山之南养蚕。
English: On the 13th, the Queen Mother personally raised silkworms in the south of Lushan.

古文：时帝风疹不能听朝，政事皆决于天后。
现代文：当时皇上风疹不能听朝，国家政事都由天后决断。
English: At that time, Emperor Rubai couldn't listen to the imperial court, and state affairs were decided by the Empress Dowager.

古文：自诛上官仪后，上每视朝，天后垂帘于御座后，政事大小皆预闻之，内外称为 二圣 。
现代文：自从杀了上官仪以后，皇上每次上朝视事，天后垂帘在皇上宝座后倾听，大大小小的政事都参与了解。朝廷内外号称为 二圣 。
English: Since the death of the emperor, every time the emperor went to the court to inspect the situation, the empress dipped her veil behind the throne to listen, and participated in the understanding of large and small political affairs.

古文：帝欲下诏令天后摄国政，中书侍郎郝处俊谏止之。
现代文：皇上想下诏书命令天后代管国政，中书侍郎郝处俊劝谏制止。
English: When the emperor wanted to issue an imperial edict ordering future generations to manage state affairs, the chief secretary of the Imperial Household Agency advised him to stop it.

古文：夏四月，分括州永嘉、永固二县置温州，析临海县为乐安、永宁二县。
现代文：夏四月，分括州、永固二县而设置温州，分临海县为乐安、永宁二县。
English: In the summer of April, Wenzhou was divided into Guanzhou and Yonggu two counties, and Linhai County was divided into Le'an and Yongning two counties.

古文：辛巳，周王显妃赵氏以罪幽死。
现代文：七日，周王显之妃子赵氏因为犯罪被囚禁而死。
English: On the 7th, Zhao, the concubine of Zhou Wangxian, died after being imprisoned for a crime.

古文：己亥，皇太子弘薨于合璧宫之绮云殿。
现代文：二十五日，皇太子弘在合璧宫之绮云殿去世。
English: On the 25th, Crown Prince Hirohito passed away at His Majesty's Shibuya Palace.

古文：时帝幸合璧宫，是日还东都。
现代文：当时皇上驾到合璧宫，这天回到东都。
English: At that time, the emperor drove to the Hebei Palace and returned to Dongdu on this day.

古文：五月己亥，追谥太子弘为孝敬皇帝。
现代文：五月二十五日，给太子弘追加谥号为孝敬皇帝。
English: On May 25, Prince Hirohito was given an additional posthumous title, Emperor Takaakira.

古文：六月戊寅，以雍王贤为皇太子，大赦。
现代文：六月五日，以雍王贤为皇太子，大赦天下。
English: On June 5, Yong Wangxian was crowned crown prince and pardoned by the emperor.

古文：秋七月辛亥，洛州复置缑氏县，以管孝敬皇帝恭陵。
现代文：秋七月九日，洛州再次设置缑氏县，以管理孝敬皇帝的恭陵。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, Luozhou once again set up Jinshi County to manage the revered emperor's tomb.

古文：慈州刺史、杞王上金坐事，于澧州安置。
现代文：慈州刺史、杞王上金因事犯罪，安置到澧州。
English: Cizhou stabbing history, Shao Wang Shangjin for the crime, resettled to Zhangzhou.

古文：八月庚子，太子左庶子、同中书门下三品、乐成侯刘仁轨为左仆射，依旧监修国史。中书门下三品、大理卿张文瓘为侍中。中书侍郎、同三品、甑山公郝处俊为中书令，监修国史如故。吏部侍郎、检校太子左庶子、监修国史李敬玄吏部尚书兼太子左庶子、同中书门下三品，依前监修国史。左丞许圉师为户部尚书。
现代文：八月二十九日，太子左庶子、同中书门下三品、乐成侯刘仁轨为左仆射，依旧监督修纂国史；中书门下三品、大理卿张文馞为侍中；中书侍郎、同三品、甑山公郝处俊为中书令，监督编纂国史依照原来一样；吏部侍郎、检校太子左庶子、监督编纂国史的吏部尚书李敬玄兼太子左庶子、同中书门下三品，仍依照先前监督编修国史；左丞相许圉师为户部尚书。
English: On August 29th, Prince Zuo's illegitimate son, Prince Zuo's Third Rank Junior Middle School Clerk, and Prince Lecheng's valet Liu Renlu were still supervising the compilation of the national history; Prince Dali's Third Rank Junior High School Clerk Zhang Wenyu was still supervising the compilation of the national history; Prince Shaoshan's Third Rank Junior High School Clerk, Prince Shaoshan's Third Rank Junior High School Clerk, and Prince Shaoshan's Third Rank Junior High School Clerk were still supervising the compilation of the national history; Prince Keigen's Third Rank Junior High School Clerk,

古文：九月丙午，宰相刘仁轨、戴至德、张文瓘、郝处俊并兼太子宾客。
现代文：九月五日，宰相刘仁轨、戴至德、张文馞、郝处俊都兼任太子宾客。
English: On September 5th, the Prime Minister Liu Renluo, Dai Zhide, Zhang Wenyi, and Xingdian Shun were also guests of the crown prince.

古文：冬十月，析永州营道、江华、唐兴三县置道州。
现代文：冬十月，分永州之营道、江华、唐兴三县而设置道州。
English: In the winter of October, Yongzhou was divided into three counties: Yingdao, Jianghua and Tangxing.

古文：壬午，星孛于角、亢之南，长五尺。
现代文：十二日，彗星在角星、亢星南面，长五尺。
English: On the 12th, the comet moved south of Capricornus and Eris. It was five feet long.

古文：十二月丁亥，龟兹王白素稽献名马。
现代文：十二月十八日，龟兹王白素稽贡献名马。
English: On December 18th, the famous horse was contributed by Guizi Wang Bai Suxi.

古文：三年春正月戊戌，徙封冀王轮为相王。
现代文：三年春正月二十三日，迁徙改封冀王轮为相王。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the spring of the third year, the migration changed the seal of Ji Wanglun to the king of the phase.

古文：二月甲戌，移安东都护府于辽东。
现代文：二月六日，迁移安东都护府到辽东。
English: On February 6, the capital of Andong was moved to Liaodong.

古文：乙亥，坚昆献名马。
现代文：七日，坚昆贡献名马。
English: On the seventh day, Jiankun contributed a famous horse.

古文：丁亥，幸汝州之温汤。
现代文：十九日，皇上驾到汝州之温汤。
English: On the 19th, the emperor arrived in Yuzhou.

古文：三月癸卯，黄门侍郎来恆、中书侍郎薛元超并同中书门下三品。
现代文：三月五日，黄门侍郎来恒、中书侍郎薛元超都任同中书门下三品。
English: On March 5th, Huangmen waiter Lai Heng and Zhongshu waiter Xue Yuanchao were both appointed to the third grade of Zhongshu.

古文：甲辰，还东都。
现代文：六日，皇上回东都。
English: On the 6th, the emperor returned to the eastern capital.

古文：闰三月己巳朔，吐蕃入寇鄯、廓、河、芳等四州。
现代文：闰三月一日，吐蕃入侵鄯、廓、河、芳等四州。
English: On the first day of leap March, the Tibetan mastiff invaded Shizhou, Guo, He, Fang and other four prefectures.

古文：乙酉，洛州牧、周王显为洮州道行军元帅，领工部尚书刘审礼等十二总管；并州都督、相王轮为凉州道行军元帅，领左卫将军契苾何力等军，以讨吐蕃。
现代文：十七日，洛州牧、周王显为洮州道行军元帅，率领工部尚书刘审礼等十二总管；并州都督、相王轮为凉州道行军元帅，率领左卫将军契艹必何力等军以讨伐吐蕃。
English: On the 17th, the governor of Luzhou, Zhou Wangxian, was the marshal of the march on Luzhou Road, leading the 12 general managers such as Shangshu Liu Xunli of the Ministry of Industry; and the governor of Luzhou, So Wanglun, was the marshal of the march on Liangzhou Road, leading the left guard general, Qianbin He Li, and other troops to fight against the Tuyi.

古文：二王竟不行。
现代文：二王终竟没有成行。
English: In the end, the two kings did not go.

古文：戊午，敕制比用白纸，多为虫蠹，今后尚书省下诸司、州、县，宜并用黄纸。
现代文：二十日，皇上的诏令由于连续用白纸，大多被虫蛀，今后尚书省下达给各司、州、县的诏令，应全部用黄纸。
English: On the 20th, due to the continuous use of white paper, most of the Emperor's edicts were moth-eaten. In the future, the edicts issued by the Ministry of Education and Culture to departments, prefectures and counties should all be made of yellow paper.

古文：其承制敕之司，量为卷轴，以备披检。
现代文：那些承受制定诏令的有关部门，衡量诏令大小，做成卷轴，以备皇上翻阅检索。
English: The relevant departments responsible for formulating the imperial edict measured the size of the imperial edict and made a scroll for the emperor to read and search.

古文：庚寅，车驾还京。
现代文：二十二日，皇上车驾回京师。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial carriage drove back to Beijing.

古文：夏四月戊申，至自东都。
现代文：夏四月十一日，皇上从东都回来。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month in summer, the emperor returned from Dongdu.

古文：甲寅，中书侍郎李义琰同中书门下三品。
现代文：十七日，中书侍郎李义琰同中书门下三品。
English: On the 17th, Li Yixuan, the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, was promoted to the third grade of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：戊午，幸九成宫。
现代文：二十一日，皇上驾到九成宫。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor drove to Kuching Palace.

古文：六月癸丑，黄门侍郎高智周同中书门下三品。
现代文：六月十七日，黄门侍郎高智周同中书门下三品。
English: On June 17th, Gao Zhi Zhou, a Yellow Gate attendant, was promoted to the third grade of Zhongshumen.

古文：秋七月，彗起东井，指北河，渐东北，长三丈，扫中台，指文昌宫，五十八日方灭。
现代文：秋七月，彗星起于东井星，指向北河，到东北，长三丈，扫过中台星指向文昌宫斗魁上六星，五十八天才灭。
English: In autumn and July, the comet rose from the East Well Star, pointing to the Beichuan River, to the Northeast, the Long Three Heights, swept the Central Taiwan Star, and pointed to the Wenchang Palace, the top six stars, and died 58 days later.

古文：八月乙未，吐蕃寇叠州。
现代文：二十九日，吐蕃入侵迭州。
English: On the 29th, Tubo invaded Dizhou.

古文：庚子，以星变，避殿，减膳，放京城系囚，令文武官各上封事言得失。
现代文：八月五日，因为彗星变化，皇上避开正殿，减少膳食，释放京城关押的囚犯，命令文武官员各上封章奏事陈述朝政得失。
English: On August 5th, due to the change of the comet, the emperor avoided the main hall, reduced meals, released prisoners held in the capital, and ordered civil and military officials to report the gains and losses of the government.

古文：壬寅，置南选使，简补广、交、黔等州官吏。
现代文：七日，设置南选使，选拔补上广、交、黔等州官吏。
English: On the seventh day, the Southern Selection Envoy was set up, and the selection of Shangguan, Jiaotong, Handan and other state officials was completed.

古文：青、齐等州海泛溢，又大雨，漂溺居人五千家，遣使赈恤之。
现代文：青、徐等州海水泛滥，又下大雨，淹没五千家住户，皇上派遣使者赈济抚恤他们。
English: The Qing, Xu and other states were flooded with seawater, and heavy rain fell, flooding five thousand households. The emperor sent an envoy to help and support them.

古文：九月甲子朔，车驾还京。
现代文：九月一日，皇上回京。
English: On September 1, the Emperor returned to Kyoto.

古文：丙申，郇王素节削户三分之二，于袁州安置。
现代文：十月十二日，郇王素节封地食户被削减三分之二，送到袁州安置。
English: On October 12th, on the day of King Min's birthday, the number of feudal households was reduced by two-thirds, and they were sent to Yuanzhou for resettlement.

古文：癸丑，于北京置金邻州。
现代文：十九日，在北京设置金邻州。
English: On the 19th, the "Golden Neighborhood" was set up in Beijing.

古文：十一月丁卯，敕新造《上元舞》，圆丘、方泽、享太庙用之，余祭则停。
现代文：十一月三日，皇上命令新制成的《上元舞》，夏至祭地、冬天祭天、祭献太庙用它，其余祭礼就停止使用。
English: On November 3rd, the emperor ordered the newly made "Shangyuan Dance" to be used for the summer solstice festival, the winter festival, and the temple sacrifice, and the rest of the festival was stopped.

古文：壬申，以陈州言凤凰见于宛丘，改上元三年曰仪凤元年，大赦。
现代文：八日，因为陈州人说凤凰在宛丘出现，所以改上元三年为仪凤元年，大赦。
English: On the eighth day, because Chen Zhou said that the phoenix appeared in Wanchiu, it was changed to the first year of the phoenix in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, and an amnesty.

古文：庚寅，吏部尚书李敬玄为中书令。
现代文：二十六日，吏部尚书李敬玄为中书令。
English: On the 26th, Li Jingxuan, the Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, was promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of Personnel.

古文：十二月丙申，皇太子贤上所注《后汉书》，赐物三万段。
现代文：十二月三日，皇太子李贤奉上所注的《后汉书》，皇上赐布帛三万段。
English: On December 3, Crown Prince Li Xian was presented with the above-mentioned "Hou Han Shu" and the emperor gave him 30,000 pieces of cloth.

古文：戊午，遣使分道巡抚：宰相来恆河南道，薛元超河北道，左丞崔知悌等江南道。
现代文：二十五日，派遣使者分道巡视安抚：宰相来恒巡视安抚河南道，薛元超巡视安抚河北道，左丞崔知悌等人巡视安抚江南道。
English: On the 25th, envoys were sent to inspect and pacify the Henan Province: Prime Minister Lai Heng inspected and pacified the Henan Province, Xue Yuanchao inspected and pacified the Hebei Province, and Choi Chih-tao and others inspected and pacified the South Jiangsu Province.

古文：二年春正月乙亥，上躬籍田于东郊。
现代文：二年春正月十二日，皇上亲自在东郊耕种籍田。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Emperor himself began to cultivate his ancestral fields in the eastern suburbs.

古文：庚辰，京师地震。
现代文：十七日，京师地震。
English: On the 17th, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：壬辰，幸司竹园，即日还宫。
现代文：二十九日，皇上驾到司竹园，当天回宫。
English: On the 29th, the emperor drove to Shizhuyuan and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：二月丁巳，工部尚书高藏授辽东都督，封朝鲜郡王，遣归安东府，安辑高丽余众；司农卿扶余隆熊津州都督，封带方郡王，令往安辑百济余众。
现代文：二月二十五日，工部尚书高藏被授予辽东都督，封为朝鲜郡王，派回安东府，安抚高丽剩余部众；司农卿扶余隆任熊津州都督，封为带方郡王，命令他安抚百济剩余部众。
English: On February 25th, Shangshu Gaozang of the Ministry of Industry was awarded the title of Liaodong Governor and the title of county king of Korea, and sent back to Andong Prefecture to pacify the remaining members of Goryeo; the Secretary of Agriculture, Fuyulong, was appointed the governor of Kumazu Prefecture and the title of county king of Takefata, and ordered him to pacify the remaining members of Baekje.

古文：仍移安东都护府于新城以统之。
现代文：又移安东都护府到新城以统率他们。
English: He also moved the Andong Capital Protectorate to Xincheng to lead them.

古文：夏四月，以河南、河北旱，遣使赈给。
现代文：夏四月，因为河南河北干旱，派遣使者赈济他们。
English: In the summer of April, because of the drought in Henan and Hebei, an envoy was sent to help them.

古文：八月，徙封周王显为英王，改名哲。
现代文：八月，迁徙改封周王显为英王，改名为哲。
English: In August, Zhou Wangxian was moved to another province and changed his name to Zhe.

古文：乙巳，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：十五日，太白星侵犯轩辕星，暗示有兵戎之事。
English: On the 15th, Taibai Xing violated Xuan Ying Xing, implying that there was a war.

古文：十二月乙卯，敕关内、河东诸州召募勇敢，以讨吐蕃。
现代文：十二月二十七日，皇上命令关内、河东各州招募勇敢之士，以讨伐吐蕃。
English: On December 27th, the emperor ordered the states of Guanai and Hedong to recruit brave men to fight against the Tuyi.

古文：诏京文武职事官三品已上，每年各举文武才能堪任将帅牧守者一人。
现代文：诏令京中三品以上文武职事官，每年各举荐文武才干能胜任将帅或牧守者一人。
English: The imperial edict ordered the civil and military officials with three or more grades in the Beijing Middle School to nominate one person each year who is capable of being a competent general or shepherd.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：三年四月丁亥朔，以旱，避正殿，亲录囚徒，悉原之。
现代文：三年四月一日，因为干旱，避开正殿，亲自审查并记录囚徒罪状，全部宽恕了他们。
English: On April 1 of the third year, because of the drought, he avoided the main hall, personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' crimes, and pardoned them all.

古文：戊申，大赦，改来年正月一日为通乾。
现代文：二十二日，大赦，改第二年正月一日为通乾。
English: On the 22nd, the amnesty was extended to the first day of the first month of the second year.

古文：癸丑，泾州献二小兒，连心异体，年四岁。
现代文：二十七日，泾州献上二小儿，两个身躯同一个心，年纪四岁。
English: On the 27th, Zhangzhou presented two children, two bodies and one heart, four years old.

古文：五月壬戌，幸九成宫。
现代文：五月七日，皇上驾到九成宫。
English: On the 7th of May, the Emperor arrived at Kuching Palace.

古文：以相王轮为洛州牧。
现代文：以相王轮为洛州牧。
English: It is based on the Lozhou herd of the King of Sheep.

古文：秋七月丁巳，宴近臣诸亲于咸亨殿。
现代文：秋七月三日，在咸亨殿宴请近臣及各位亲族。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, he held a banquet for his close vassals and relatives at Hamken-den.

古文：上谓霍王元轨曰： 去冬无雪，今春少雨，自避暑此宫，甘雨频降，夏麦丰熟，秋稼滋荣。
现代文：皇上对霍王元轨道 ：去年冬天无雪，今年春天少雨，自从到此宫避暑，甘雨连降，夏麦丰熟，秋天的庄稼生长茂盛。
English: The emperor told Huo Wangyuan: Last winter there was no snow, and this spring there was little rain. Since coming to this palace to escape the summer heat, there has been continuous rain, the summer barley is ripe, and the autumn crops are growing well.

古文：又得敬玄表奏，吐蕃入龙支，张虔勖与之战，一日两阵，斩馘极多。
现代文：另外又得到李敬玄表章上奏，吐蕃侵入龙支，张虔勖与他作战，一天打了两仗，斩杀敌首级甚多。
English: In addition, Li Jingxuan's watch chapter was played, Tu Wei invaded Longzhi, Zhang Qianye fought with him, fought two battles in one day, and killed a lot of enemy leaders.

古文：又太史奏，七月朔，太阳合亏而不亏。
现代文：另外太史上奏，太阳该蚀而不蚀。
English: In addition, it is too historical, the sun should be eclipsed but not eclipsed.

古文：此盖上天垂祐，宗社降灵，岂虚薄所能致此！
现代文：这些大概是上天降福，宗庙显灵，难道对百姓恩情不厚会达到这样的幸福！
English: These are probably God's blessing, the ancestral temple reveals the spirit, is it possible to achieve such happiness without being generous to the people!

古文：又男轮最小，特所留爱，比来与选新妇，多不称情；近纳刘延景女，观其极有孝行，复是私衷一喜。
现代文：另外儿子轮年龄最小，我特别喜爱而留在身边，近来为他挑选新媳妇，大多不合他的心意；近来娶刘延景的女儿，观察她为人处事很有孝心，我私下是一喜。
English: In addition, my son is the youngest, I especially like him and stay by his side. Recently, I have chosen a new daughter-in-law for him, most of whom do not meet his wishes. Recently, I married Liu Yanjing's daughter, observing that she is very filial in her dealings with others, I am privately delighted.

古文：思与叔等同为此欢，各宜尽醉。 
现代文：想与叔父等人共同为此而欢乐，各人都应尽醉。 
English: If you want to have fun with your uncle and the others, everyone should get drunk.

古文：上因赋七言诗效柏梁体，侍臣并和。
现代文：皇上因而仿效柏梁体，赋七言诗，陪侍诸臣都各人和诗。
English: As a result, the emperor imitated the style of Pak Ryang and composed a seven-character poem, and all the attendants and courtiers also composed poems.

古文：九月丁巳，还京师。
现代文：九月三日，皇上回京师。
English: On September 3, the Emperor returned to Beijing.

古文：辛酉，至自九成宫。
现代文：七日，皇上从九成宫到来。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor arrived from Kushinomiya.

古文：癸亥，侍中张文瓘卒。
现代文：九日，侍中张文馞去世。
English: On the 9th, Zhang Wenyu, a chamberlain, passed away.

古文：丙寅，洮河道行军大总管中书令李敬玄、左卫大将军刘审礼等与吐蕃战于青海之上，王师败绩，审礼被俘。
现代文：十四日，洮河道行军大总管中书令李敬玄、左卫大将军刘审礼等人在青海之上与吐蕃作战，唐军大败，刘审礼被俘虏。
English: On the 14th, Li Jingxuan, the general in charge of marching troops along the Minhe River, ordered Li Jingxuan, General of the Left Division Liu Xunli and others to fight against Tubo in Qinghai. The Tang army was defeated, and Liu Xunli was captured.

古文：上以蕃寇为患，问计于侍臣中书舍人郭正一等，咸以备边不深讨为上策。
现代文：皇上以吐蕃入侵为忧患，向侍臣中书舍人郭正一等人问计策，他们都认为以防备边疆而不深入讨伐为上策。
English: The emperor was worried about the invasion of Tubo, and asked the courtiers, including Guo Zhengyi, who was in charge of the library, for a strategy. They all thought that the best strategy was to prepare for the frontier without going deep into the war.

古文：十月丙午，徐州刺史、密王元晓薨。
现代文：十月二十三日，徐州刺史、密王元晓去世。
English: On October 23rd, Xu Zhou Zhishi and Mi Wang Yuanxiao passed away.

古文：十一月乙未，昏雾四塞，连夜不解。
现代文：十一月十三日，昏夜雾气四面充塞，连夜不散。
English: On the 13th of November, at dusk, the fog was thick on all sides and did not disperse overnight.

古文：丙申，雨木冰。
现代文：十四日，大雨雪沾附于树木，凝结成冰。
English: On the 14th, heavy rain and snow clung to the trees and condensed into ice.

古文：壬子，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品来恆卒。
现代文：三十日，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品来恒去世。
English: On the 30th day, Huangmen waiter, and the same junior high school student, Sanpon Laiheng passed away.

古文：十二月，诏停明年 通乾 之号，以反语不善故也。
现代文：十二月，皇上诏令停止明年 通乾 的年号，因为 通乾 的反话不好的缘故。
English: In December, the emperor issued a decree to stop the name of the year of Tongxian next year, because the antonym of Tongxian was not good.

古文：四年正月辛未，户部尚书、平恩县公许圉师卒。
现代文：四年正月，户部尚书、平恩县公许圉师去世。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Hombu Shosho and Ping'en County's Gong Xuan Shi passed away.

古文：己酉，幸东都。
现代文：二十八日，皇上驾到东都。
English: On the 28th, the emperor drove to Dongdu.

古文：庚戌，尚书右仆射、道国公戴至德薨。
现代文：二十九日，尚书右仆射、道国公戴至德去世。
English: On the 29th, Shoshu's right-hand man Sho and the governor of Hokkaido died.

古文：二月壬戌，吐蕃赞普卒，遣使吊祭之。
现代文：二月十一日，吐蕃赞普去世，皇上派遣使者前往吊唁祭祀。
English: On February 11, Thubten Zampu passed away, and the emperor sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：乙丑，东都饥，官出糙米以救饥人。
现代文：十四日，东都发生饥荒，官府拿出糙米来救济饥荒的人。
English: On the 14th, a famine occurred in Dongdu, and the government took out brown rice to relieve the famine.

古文：夏四月戊午，荧惑入羽林星。
现代文：夏四月九日，荧惑星侵入羽林星。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, the fluorescent planet invaded the feather star.

古文：左丞崔知悌为户部尚书，中书令郝处俊为侍中。
现代文：左丞相崔知悌为户部尚书，中书令郝处俊为侍中。
English: Zuojo minister Cui Zhisheng was appointed as the head of the household, and in the imperial edict, Shishidokoro Shun was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：五月壬午，盗杀正谏大夫明崇俨。
现代文：五月三日，偷盗者杀害了正谏大夫明崇俨。
English: On May 3, thieves killed Zhengqi doctor Ming Chongyao.

古文：丙戌，皇太子贤监国。
现代文：七日，皇太子李贤代管国事。
English: On the 7th, Crown Prince Li Xian took charge of state affairs.

古文：戊戌，造紫桂宫于沔池之西。
现代文：十九日，在渑池之西建造紫桂宫。六月三日，皇上诏命大赦天下。
English: On the 19th, the Shigui Palace was built to the west of Tsugaike. On June 3rd, the emperor issued an imperial edict granting amnesty to the whole world.

古文：六月辛亥，制大赦天下，改仪凤四年为调露元年。
现代文：改仪凤四年为调露元年。
English: The year of the change of the rite of the phoenix in the fourth year is the first year of the dewdrop.

古文：秋七月己卯朔，诏以今年冬至有事嵩岳，礼官学士详定仪注。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，皇上诏令，因为今年冬至在嵩岳举行祭祀，命礼官学士详细拟定礼节制度。
English: The first day of autumn, July 1, is the New Year's Day, and the Emperor's edict, because this year's winter solstice was held in Songyue, ordered the etiquette officer to elaborate the etiquette system.

古文：八月丁巳，侍中郝处俊、左庶子高智周、黄门侍郎崔知温、给事中刘景先兼修国史。
现代文：八月九日，侍中郝处俊、左庶子高智周、黄门侍郎崔知温、给事中刘景先兼修国史。
English: On August 9th, the chamberlains, 处俊, Gao Zhizhou, the second son of Gao Zhizhou, Huangmen chamberlain Cui Zhian, and Liu Jingsen, who was also in charge of national history, attended the ceremony.

古文：九月壬午，吏部侍郎裴行俭讨西突厥，擒其十姓可汗阿史那都支及别帅李遮匐以归。
现代文：九月一日，吏部侍郎裴行俭讨伐西突厥，活捉西突厥十姓可汗阿史那都支以及别帅李遮匐而归。
English: On September 1, Pei Xingran, the attendant of the cadre department, led a crusade against the Western Turks, and captured alive the 10 Western Turks, including Khan Ashinadu branch and his second-in-command, Li Shiaqi.

古文：冬十月，单于大都护府突厥阿史德温傅及奉职二部相率反叛，立阿史那泥熟匐为可汗，二十四州首领并叛。
现代文：冬十月，单于大都护府突厥阿史德温傅及奉职二部相继反叛，立阿史那泥熟匐为可汗，二十四州首领都反叛。
English: In the winter of October, the Turk Ashdevinf of the Great Capital Protectorate and the two departments of the post rebelled one after another, and Ashina was appointed as the khan, and the heads of the 24 states rebelled.

古文：遣单于大都护长史萧嗣业，将军花大智、李景嘉等讨之。
现代文：皇上派单于大都护长史萧嗣业、将军花大智、李景嘉等人讨伐他们。
English: The emperor sent the governor of Dadu, Shi Xiao Ziye, the general Hua Dazhi, Li Jingjia and others to fight them.

古文：与突厥战，为贼所败。
现代文：与突厥作战，被贼人打败。
English: He fought against the Turks and was defeated by the Thieves.

古文：嗣业配流桂州。
现代文：萧嗣业流放充军到桂州。
English: Xiao Zihe was exiled to Guizhou.

古文：壬子，令将军曹怀舜率兵往恆州守井陉，崔献往绛州守龙门，以备突厥。
现代文：五日，令将军曹怀舜率兵往恒州守卫井陉，派崔献前往绛州守卫龙门，以防备突厥。
English: On the fifth day, he ordered General Cao Huaiya and his soldiers to go to Hengzhou to guard Jingyao, and sent Cui Xian to go to Zhangzhou to guard Longmen to guard against the Turks.

古文：庚申，前诏封嵩山，宜停。
现代文：九日，先前下诏封嵩山，应该停止。
English: On the 9th, the previously announced closure of Songshan should be stopped.

古文：癸亥，吐蕃文成公主遣其大臣论塞调傍来告丧，请和亲，不许。
现代文：十二日，吐蕃文成公主派遣她的大臣论塞调傍前来报告丧事，请求与吐蕃和亲，皇上不许。
English: On the twelfth day, Princess Tubo Wensheng sent her minister, Onsetsu, to report the funeral to the empress. She requested to be reconciled with Tubo, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：遣郎将宋令文使吐蕃，会赞普之葬。
现代文：派郎将宋令文出使吐蕃。为赞普行会葬之礼。
English: Song Lingwen was dispatched to Tubo by the emperor. It was a funeral gift for the Zampu lineage.

古文：十一月戊寅朔，左庶子、同三品高智周罢知政事。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，左庶子、同三品高智周罢免参知政事。
English: The first day of November was New Year's Day, and Zuo's son-in-law Gao Zhizhou was removed from the post of vice-governor.

古文：癸未，以吏部侍郎裴行俭为礼部尚书，赏擒都支、遮匐之功也。
现代文：六日，以吏部侍郎裴行俭为礼部尚书，奖赏他擒捉都支、遮匐的功劳。
English: On the sixth day, he made the attendant of the personnel department, Pei Xingyan, the honorary secretary of the ceremonial department, and rewarded him for his merits of capturing the capital and hiding the embezzlers.

古文：甲辰，裴行俭为定襄道大总管，与营州都督周道务等兵十八万，并西军程务挺、东军李文暕等，总三十万以讨突厥。
现代文：七日，裴行俭为定襄道大总管，与营州都督周道务等的兵十八万，以及西军程务挺、东军李文日柬等，总共三十万兵以讨伐突厥。
English: On the seventh day, Pei Xingjian, as the general manager of Dingxiang Road, and 180,000 soldiers including Yingzhou Governor Zhou Daowu, as well as the Western Army's Cheng Mu Ting, the Eastern Army's Li Wen, the Japanese and the Cambodians, etc., a total of 300,000 soldiers to fight the Turks.

古文：甲寅，临轩试应岳牧举人。二年春正月乙酉，宴诸王、诸司三品已上、诸州都督刺史于洛城南门楼，奏新造《六合还淳》之舞。
现代文：二年春正月九日，皇上在洛城南门楼宴请诸王、各司衙门三品以上官员、以及各州都督刺史，乐队奏新制作的《六合还淳》之舞。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of spring, the emperor held a banquet at the South Gate of Los Angeles, inviting kings, officials above the third grade of each priesthood, and the governors of each state, and the band played the newly produced "Rokugo Yojun" dance.

古文：二月丙午，诏曰： 故符玺郎李延寿撰《正典》一部，辞殚雅正，虽已沦亡，功犹可录，宜赐其家绢五十疋。 
现代文：二月一日，皇上下诏曰： 已去世之符玺郎李延寿撰写《正典》一部，文辞博学方正，虽然已经佚亡，功劳还可记载，应该赐给他家绢绸五十匹。
English: On February 1st, the emperor issued an imperial edict, saying, "The deceased Fu Xuan's son, Li Yan Shou, wrote a part of the "canon." Although he has passed away, his merits can still be recorded. He should be given fifty pieces of family silk."

古文：壬子，霍王元轨率文武百僚，请出一月俸料助军，以讨突厥。
现代文：七日，霍王元轨率领文武百官，请求拿出一个月的薪俸以及官俸以外的食料钱来助军用，以讨伐突厥。
English: On the seventh day, Huo Wangyuanlu led a hundred military and civilian officials to request a month's salary and food money in addition to the official salary to help the military to fight the Turks.

古文：癸丑，幸汝州温汤。
现代文：八日，皇上驾到汝州的温汤。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor arrived in Ruzhou.

古文：丁巳，至少室山。
现代文：十二日，到了少室山。
English: On the 12th, I arrived at Mt. Shomuro.

古文：戊午，亲谒少姨庙。
现代文：十三日，亲自晋见少姨庙。
English: On the 13th, I went to see the temple in person.

古文：赐故玉清观道士王远知谥曰升真先生，赠太中大夫。
现代文：赐给已故玉清观道士王远知的谥号叫升真先生，追赠为太中大夫。
English: The posthumous title given to the late Yu Qing Guan Daoist Wang Yuanchen is called Mr. Sheng Zhen, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Taichung Doctor.

古文：又幸隐士田游岩所居。己未，幸嵩阳观及启母庙，并命立碑。
现代文：皇上又驾到嵩阳观及启母庙，命令立石碑。
English: The emperor also drove to the Songyang Temple and the Qimiao Temple and ordered a stone monument to be erected.

古文：又幸逍遥谷道士潘师正所居。
现代文：皇上又驾到逍遥谷道士潘师正所居之地。
English: The emperor also drove to the place where the Taoist monk Pan Shizheng lived in the Happy Valley.

古文：甲子，自温汤还东都。
现代文：十九日，皇上从温汤返回东都。
English: On the 19th, the emperor returned to Dongdu from Ontang.

古文：三月，裴行俭大破突厥于黑山，擒其首领奉职。
现代文：三月，裴行俭在黑山大破突厥，活捉突厥首领奉职。
English: In March, Pei Xingjian defeated the Turks in Montenegro and captured the Turkish leader alive.

古文：伪可汗泥熟匐为其部下所杀，传首来降。
现代文：伪突厥可汗泥熟匐被他的部下所杀，把首级传送京师前来投降。
English: The pseudo-Turkic khan was killed by his subordinates, and his head was brought to the capital to surrender.

古文：夏四月乙丑，幸紫桂宫。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，皇上驾到紫桂宫。
English: On the 21st of April in the summer, the Emperor drove to Shigui Palace.

古文：戊辰，黄门侍郎裴炎崔知温、中书侍郎王德真并同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十四日，黄门侍郎裴炎、崔知温、中书侍郎王德真都任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 24th, Huangmen's chamberlains Pei Yan, Cui Zhiwen, and Zhongshu's chamberlain Wang Dezhen were all appointed to the same rank as Zhongshu.

古文：秋七月，吐蕃寇河源，屯于良非川。
现代文：秋七月，吐蕃入侵河源，在良非川屯扎。
English: In autumn and July, the Tuoba invaded Heyuan and settled in Liangfei River.

古文：河西镇抚大使李敬玄与吐蕃将赞婆战于湟中，官军败绩。
现代文：河西镇抚大使李敬玄与吐蕃将赞婆在湟中作战，官军大败。
English: Li Jingxuan, the ambassador of Hexi Zhenfu, and Zhanba, the governor of Tubo, fought in Yunnan, and the government army suffered a great defeat.

古文：时左武卫将军黑齿常之力战，大破蕃军，遂擢为河源军经略大使；令李敬玄镇鄯州，为之援。
现代文：当时左武卫将军黑齿常之奋力作战，大破吐蕃军队，于是被提升为河源军经略大使；并命令李敬玄镇守鄯州，为黑齿常之的声援。
English: At that time, General Zuo Wuwei fought hard against the Black Tooth Chang and defeated the Tuoba army, so he was promoted to the ambassador of the Heyuan Army for economic strategy; and ordered Li Jingxuan to stay in Bozhou to support the Black Tooth Chang.

古文：丙申，江王元祥薨。
现代文：二十四日，江王元祥去世。
English: On the 24th, Jiang Wang Li Yuanxiang passed away.

古文：是月，突厥余众围云州，中郎将程务挺击破之。
现代文：这月，突厥剩余部众包围云州，中郎将程务挺击破他们。
English: This month, the remnants of the Turks besieged Yunnan, and Zhong Lang defeated them by defeating Cheng Mu Ting.

古文：八月丁未，自紫桂宫还东都。
现代文：八月五日，皇上从紫桂宫还东都。
English: On August 5, the Emperor returned to the Eastern Capital from Shigui Palace.

古文：丁巳，鄯州都督李敬玄左迁衡州刺史。
现代文：十五日，鄯州都督李敬玄降职为衡州刺史。
English: On the 15th, the governor of Zhangzhou, Li Jingxuan, was demoted to the position of Hengzhou chief historian.

古文：甲子，废皇太子贤为庶人，幽于别所。
现代文：二十二日，废除皇太子贤为庶人，幽禁关押在别的地方。
English: On the 22nd, Crown Prince Xian was abolished as a commoner, and he was imprisoned in another place.

古文：乙丑，立英王哲为皇太子。
现代文：二十三日，立英王李哲为皇太子。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Yongle made Prince Ri Zhe the crown prince.

古文：改调露二年为永隆元年，赦天下，大酺三日。
现代文：改调露二年为永隆元年，大赦天下，大宴三天。
English: Two years later, it was changed to the first year of Yonglong, with a general amnesty and a grand banquet lasting three days.

古文：太子左庶子、同中书门下三品张大安坐庶人左迁普州刺史。
现代文：太子左庶子、同中书门下三品张大安因与庶人李贤的关系犯法降职为普州刺史。
English: Prince Zuo's illegitimate son, Zhang Da'an, the third-ranked scholar of the same school, was demoted to the position of Puzhou historian for violating the law due to his relationship with commoner Li Xian.

古文：九月，河南、河北诸州大水，遣使赈恤，溺死者官给棺槥，其家赐物七段。
现代文：九月，河南、河北各州大水，皇上派遣使者赈济抚恤，淹死的人官府给予他们小而薄的棺材安葬，死者之家赐帛布七段。
English: In September, when the provinces of Henan and Hebei were flooded, the emperor sent an envoy to provide relief. The government gave the drowned people small, thin coffins to be buried in, and the homes of the dead were given seven-layered cloth.

古文：冬十月壬寅，苏州刺史曹王明封零陵郡王，于黔州安置，坐附庶人贤也。
现代文：冬十月一日，苏州刺史曹王明封为零陵郡王，送到黔州安置，因为他犯了依附庶人李贤的罪。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Cao Wang, the prince of Suzhou, was named the king of Luling County and sent to Zhangzhou for resettlement, because he committed the crime of clinging to the commoner Li Xian.

古文：己酉，自东都还京。
现代文：八日，皇上从东都回京。
English: On the 8th, the emperor returned to Kyoto from the eastern capital.

古文：十一月朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of November is New Year's Day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：洛州饥，减价官粜，以救饥人。
现代文：洛州饥荒，粮食减价由官府出卖，以救济饥荒的人。
English: During the famine in Lozhou, the government reduced the price of grain to help the starving people.

古文：二年春正月，突厥寇原、庆等州。
现代文：二年春正月，突厥入侵原、庆等州。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Turks invaded the provinces of Yuan and Qing.

古文：乙亥，命将军李知十、王杲等分兵御之。
现代文：五日，皇上命令将军李知十、王杲等人分兵抵御突厥。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor ordered generals Li Zhizh and Wang Qi to form a detachment to resist the Turks.

古文：癸巳，遣礼部尚书裴行俭为定襄道大总管，率师讨突厥温傅部落。
现代文：二十三日，皇上派礼部尚书裴行俭为定襄道大总管，率军讨伐突厥温傅部落。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor sent Shangshu Pei Xingjian from the Ministry of Rites to be the general manager of Dingxiang Road and led the army to fight the Turkic Wenfu tribe.

古文：己亥，诏雍、岐、华、同民户宜免两年地税，河南、河北遭水处一年。
现代文：二十九日，皇上诏令雍州、岐州、华州、同州人民住户应该免除两年地税，河南、河北遭水灾之处免地税一年。
English: On the 29th, the emperor decreed that the residents of Yongzhou, Qizhou, Huazhou and the same state should be exempted from land tax for two years, and the places in Henan and Hebei that suffered from floods should be exempted from land tax for one year.

古文：上诏雍州长史李义玄曰： 朕思还淳返朴，示天下以质素。
现代文：皇上诏令雍州长史李义玄道 ：朕想返回到真淳质朴，向天下表示朴素的本质。
English: Emperor's edict Yongzheng prefect Li Yixuan said: I want to return to the true, pure and simple, and show the world the essence of simplicity.

古文：如闻游手堕业，此类极多，时稍不丰，便致饥馑。
现代文：我们听说游手好闲的人废弃劳作事业，此类人很多，年成稍微不好，便会遭到饥荒，粮食蔬菜都没有。
English: We have heard that idlers abandon their work, and there are many such people. If the harvest is not good, there will be a famine, and there will be no grain or vegetables.

古文：其异色绫锦，并花间裙衣等，糜费既广，俱害女工。
现代文：其他各色绸缎，以及妇女裙衣等，奢侈浪费既广，都害得女工劳作。
English: Other silks and skirts of all colours, as well as women's skirts and dresses, are so extravagant and wasteful that they are a hindrance to women's work.

古文：天后，我之匹敌，常著七破间裙，岂不知更有靡丽服饰？务遵节俭也。
现代文：则天天后，与朕地位相当，常常穿七条破花裙，难道她不知道还有奢侈华丽的服饰，那是务必遵循节俭。
English: But Tian Tian Hou, who is on the same level as me, often wears seven flowered dresses. Doesn't she know that there are also extravagant and gorgeous clothes? That is to follow the principle of thrift.

古文：其紫服赤衣，闾阎公然服用。兼商贾富人，厚葬越礼。
现代文：那些紫色服饰，赤色的贵重衣服，民间里巷的人公然穿戴；加之商贾富人，进行厚葬，超越礼法。
English: Those purple costumes, red precious clothes, are openly worn by people in the streets; in addition to the rich merchants, they carry out heavy funerals, surpassing etiquette.

古文：卿可严加捉搦，勿使更然。 
现代文：你可以严加拘留，不要使他们重新奢侈。 
English: You can detain them strictly, don't let them go back to luxury.

古文：二月丙午，皇太子亲行释奠礼。
现代文：二月六日，皇太子亲自陈设酒食以祭奠先圣先师。
English: On February 6th, the Crown Prince himself served food and wine to pay tribute to the saint.

古文：三月辛卯，左仆射、同三品刘仁轨兼太子少傅。
现代文：三月二十二日，左仆射、同三品刘仁轨兼任太子少傅。
English: On March 22nd, Zuo Fuxia and Tong Sanpin Liu Renluo were also appointed as the prince's sous chefs.

古文：侍中郝处俊为太子少保，罢知政事。
现代文：侍中郝处俊为太子少保，罢免知政事。
English: The chamberlain, Shishidokoro Shun, became the prince's junior bodyguard, and was removed from his position as chancellor.

古文：五月丙戌，定襄道总管曹怀舜与突厥史伏念战于横水，官军大败。
现代文：五月十八日，定襄道总管曹怀舜与突厥史伏念在横水作战，官军大败。
English: On May 18th, Cao Huaiqi, the head of Dingxiang Road, fought with Turk Fuxiong in Hengshui, and the government army was defeated.

古文：怀舜减死，配流岭南。
现代文：曹怀舜减免死罪，发配到岭南充军。
English: Cao Huaiya was pardoned from the death penalty and sent to Lingnan to join the army.

古文：六月壬子，故江王元祥男晫以犯名教，斩于大理寺后园。
现代文：六月十五日，已故江王元祥之子日卓因为违犯名教，在大理寺后园被斩首。
English: On June 15th, the son of the late King Jiang Yuanxiang, Rizhuo, was beheaded in the backyard of Dali Temple for violating the teachings of the famous religion.

古文：七月，太平公主出降薛绍，赦京城系囚。
现代文：七月，太平公主下嫁给薛绍，赦免京城关押的囚犯。
English: In July, Princess Taiping married Xue Shao and pardoned the prisoners held in Beijing.

古文：闰七月丁未，黄门侍郎裴炎为侍中，黄门侍郎崔知温、中书侍郎薛元超并为中书令。
现代文：闰七月十一日，黄门侍郎裴炎为侍中，黄门侍郎崔知温、中书侍郎薛元超并为中书令。
English: On leap July 11th, Huangmen waiter Pei Yan became a chamberlain, Huangmen waiter Cui Zhian, and Zhongshu waiter Xue Yuanchao became chancellors.

古文：庚申，上以服饵，令皇太子监国。
现代文：二十四日，皇上因为服食丹药，命令皇太子代行国政。
English: On the 24th, the emperor ordered the crown prince to carry out state affairs on his behalf because he had been taking herbal medicine.

古文：丙寅，雍州大风害稼，米价腾踊。
现代文：三十日，雍州起大风危害了庄稼，米价猛涨。
English: On the 30th, a strong wind from Yongzhou damaged crops, and rice prices soared.

古文：是月，裴行俭大破突厥史伏念之众，伏念为程务挺急追，遂执温傅来降，行俭于是尽平突厥余党。
现代文：这月，裴行俭大破突厥史伏念之部众，史伏念因为程务挺追赶太急，于是抓住温傅来投降，裴行俭于是全部平定了突厥余党。
English: This month, Pei Xingjian defeated the followers of the Turkic Shifu Nian. Shifu Nian was in a hurry to catch up with Cheng Mu Ting, so he grabbed Wen Fu to surrender. Pei Xingjian then completely subdued the Turkic Yu Party.

古文：行俭执伏念、温傅，振旅凯旋。
现代文：裴行俭捉住了史伏念、温傅，休整军队，胜利凯旋。
English: Pei Xingran captured Shi Fuxian and Wen Fu, reorganized the army, and made a triumphant return.

古文：八月丁卯朔，河南、河北大水，许遭水处往江、淮已南就食。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，河南、河北大水，允许遭水灾的地方前往江、淮以南地方寻找食物。
English: August 1 is the New Year's Day, and the flood in Henan and Hebei allows the flood-affected areas to go to the areas south of the Yangtze River and Huai River to look for food.

古文：丁亥，户部尚书崔知悌卒。
现代文：二十一日，户部尚书崔知悌去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Choi Chih-soo, the head of the household, passed away.

古文：辛卯，改交州为安南都护府。
现代文：二十五日，改交州为安南都护府。
English: On the 25th, it was changed to Annan Capital Protectorate.

古文：九月丙申，彗星见于天市，长五尺。
现代文：九月一日，彗星在天市星上出现，长五尺。
English: On September 1, the comet appeared on the celestial horizon, measuring five feet in length.

古文：冬十月丙寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: In winter, the first day of October is New Year's Day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：乙丑，改永隆二年为开耀元年。
现代文：改永隆二年为开耀元年。
English: The second year of Yonglong was changed to the first year of Kaiya.

古文：曲赦定襄军及缘征突厥官吏兵募等。
现代文：特别赦免定襄军以及为征讨突厥不力的官吏士兵等人。
English: In particular, he pardoned the Dingxiang Army as well as the officials and soldiers who were unable to fight the Turks.

古文：丙寅，斩阿史那伏念及温傅等五十四人于都市。
现代文：斩阿史那伏念及温傅等五十四人于都市。
English: Fifty-four people were killed in the city, including Ashinafu Nien and Wenfu.

古文：丁亥，新罗王金法敏薨，仍以其子政袭位。
现代文：二十二日，新罗王金法敏去世，仍以他的儿子政继承新罗王位。
English: On the 22nd, King Jinfamin of Silla passed away, but his son, Seong, still succeeded to the throne of Silla.

古文：十一月癸卯，徙庶人贤于巴州。
现代文：十一月八日，迁徙庶人贤到巴州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the former crown prince Li Xian, who was no longer a civilian, was exiled to Bazhou.

古文：十二月，吐火罗献金衣一领，上不受。
现代文：十二月，吐火罗贡献金衣一件，皇上不接受。
English: In December, Tu Huo Luo offered a piece of gold clothing, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：辛未，太子少保、甑山县公郝处俊薨。
现代文：六日，太子少保、甑山县公郝处俊去世。
English: On the 6th, the Prince's Minor Protector, Lushan County Public Security Bureau Chief Zou Jun passed away.

古文：永淳元年正月乙未朔，以年饥，罢朝会。
现代文：永淳元年正月一日是朔日，因为是荒年，皇上免除了朝会。
English: The first day of the first month of the first year of Yongjun was the new moon day, because it was a bad year, the emperor exempted the imperial meeting.

古文：关内诸府兵，令于邓、绥等州就谷。
现代文：关内各府军队，命令他们到邓州、绥州等地就地取食。
English: and ordered them to go to Dangzhou, Zhangzhou and other places to get food locally.

古文：二月癸未，以太子诞皇孙满月，大赦。
现代文：二月十九日，因为太子诞生的皇孙满月，大赦。
English: On February 19th, because of the full moon of the birth of the crown prince, there was a general amnesty.

古文：改开耀二年为永淳元年，大酺三日。
现代文：改开耀二年为永淳元年，大宴三天。
English: The celebration was changed from the second year to the first year of Yongjun, and the grand banquet lasted three days.

古文：戊午，立皇孙重照为皇太孙，欲开府置僚属。
现代文：三月二十五日，立皇孙重照为皇太孙，想要开建府署，设置僚属。
English: On March 25, the grandson of the emperor was reinstated as the great-grandson of the emperor, and he wanted to build a government office and set up subordinates.

古文：吏部郎中王方庆曰： 按周礼，有嫡子无嫡孙。
现代文：吏部郎中王方庆道： 根据周礼，只有嫡子而没有嫡孙。
English: Wang Fangqing, a middle-ranking official, said: According to the weekly ritual, there is only a legitimate son and no legitimate grandson.

古文：汉、魏已来，皇太子在，不立太孙，但封王耳。
现代文：汉魏以来皇太子健在，不立太孙，只是封王罢了。
English: Since the Han and Wei dynasties, the crown prince has been alive, but no great-grandson has been established, only the crown prince.

古文：晋立愍怀太子子彧为太孙，齐立文惠太子子昭业为太孙，便居东宫；而皇太子在而立太孙，未有前例。 
现代文：晋朝立愍怀太子之子为太孙，齐国立文惠太子昭业为太孙，太孙便住在东宫而为实际上的太子；而皇太子健在然而却立皇太孙，从古以来，未有前例。 
English: The Jin Dynasty established the son of the Crown Prince Huai as the great-grandson, the Qi Dynasty established the Prince Wenhui as the great-grandson, and the great-grandson lived in the East Palace and was actually the crown prince; however, the crown prince was still alive, but he was the crown prince's great-grandson, which was unprecedented since ancient times.

古文：上曰： 自我作古，可乎？ 
现代文：皇上道： 从我开始作为古代，可以吗？ 
English: Empress Dowager: From now on, I'll be referred to as Ancient, is that okay?

古文：曰： 可。 
现代文：王方庆道 ：可以！ 
English: A: Yes.

古文：然竟不立府僚。
现代文：然而终竟不为皇太孙开府建署。
English: However, in the end, it was not the Crown Prince's grandson who founded the prefecture.

古文：是春，关内旱，日色如赭。
现代文：这年春天，关内旱灾，日光呈赤褐色。
English: This spring, as a result of the drought in Kanto, the sunlight was reddish brown.

古文：四月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：四月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: April 1st is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：丙寅，幸东都。
现代文：三日，皇上驾到东都。
English: On the third day, the emperor drove to the eastern capital.

古文：皇太子京师留守，命刘仁轨、裴炎、薛元超等辅之。
现代文：皇太子在东京留守，命令刘仁轨、裴炎、薛元超等人辅佐太子。
English: The crown prince was absent in Tokyo and ordered Liu Renlu, Pei Yan, Xue Yuanchao and others to assist the crown prince.

古文：上以谷贵，减扈从兵，士庶从者多殍踣于路。
现代文：皇上因为谷价太贵，减少随驾扈从之兵，跟从的士子百姓大多饿倒在路上。
English: Because the price of grain was too expensive, the emperor reduced the number of soldiers accompanying him, and most of the nobles and commoners who followed him starved on the road.

古文：辛未，以裴行俭为金牙道行军大总管，与将军阎怀旦等三总管兵分道讨十姓突厥阿史那车薄。
现代文：八日，以裴行俭为金牙道行军大总管，与将军阎怀旦等三个总管分几路讨伐十姓突厥阿史那车薄。
English: On the eighth day, with Pei Xingjian as the general manager of the Jinja Road march, and with three general managers such as General Yan Huaidan, they divided into several routes to fight the Turkic Ashina.

古文：行俭未行而卒。
现代文：裴行俭尚未出师而去世。
English: Bae died before he could become a teacher.

古文：安西副都护王方翼破车薄、咽面，西域平。
现代文：安西副都护王方翼攻破车薄、咽面，西域平定。
English: Anxi vice-governor Wang Fangyi broke through the Che thin and pharynx, and the western region was pacified.

古文：戊寅，次渑池之紫桂宫。
现代文：十五日，皇上驾到渑池之紫桂宫。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor drove to Shigui Palace in Tsugaike.

古文：乙酉，至东都。
现代文：二十二日，到东都。
English: On the 22nd, I went to Dongdu.

古文：丁亥，黄门侍郎郭待举、兵部侍郎岑长倩、中书侍郎郭正一、吏部侍郎魏玄同并同中书门下同承受进止平章事。
现代文：二十四日，黄门侍郎郭待举、兵部侍郎岑长倩、中书侍郎郭正一、吏部侍郎魏玄同都任同中书门下同承受进止平章事。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Guo Zhizhi, the Yellow Gate chamberlain, Zou Changyu, the War Department chamberlain, Guo Zhengyi, the Central Secretariat chamberlain, and Wei Xuan, the General Staff chamberlain, were all appointed as subordinates of the Central Secretariat and received the same promotion.

古文：上谓参知政事崔知温曰： 待举等历任尚浅，且令预闻政事，未可即与卿等同名称。 
现代文：皇上对参知政事崔知温道 ：郭待举等人历任官职还浅，暂且让他们参预政事，不能马上与你们同受一个职务称呼。 
English: The Emperor said to Choi Chih-wen, the political advisor to the prefectural governor: Guo Diju and others who have held official positions are still young, let them participate in prefectural affairs for the time being, and they cannot immediately receive a job title together with you.

古文：自是外司四品已下知政事者，遂以平章为名。
现代文：从此宫外百官四品以下任知政事者，就以平章为职务名称。
English: From then on, governors and politicians below the rank of Shihon, one of the 100 officials outside the Imperial Court, were given the title of Pingzhang.

古文：五月壬寅，置东都苑总监。
现代文：五月十日，设置东都苑总监。
English: On May 10, the director of Dongduyuan was set up.

古文：自丙午连日澍雨，洛水溢，坏天津及中桥、立德、弘教、景行诸坊，溺居民千余家。
现代文：从十四日开始连续降下时雨，洛水猛涨，冲坏了天津及中桥、立德、弘教、景行各坊，淹没居民一千多家。
English: From the 14th, continuous rain began to fall, and the Luo water surged, damaging Tianjin and Zhongqiao, Lide, Hongyao, and Jinghang, and flooding more than a thousand residents.

古文：六月，关中初雨，麦苗涝损，后旱，京兆、岐、陇螟蝗食苗并尽，加以民多疫疠，死者枕藉于路，诏所在官司埋瘗。
现代文：六月，关中开始下雨，麦苗因水涝而受损，后来又干旱，京兆、岐、陇各州，蝗虫把麦苗全部吃光，加上人民害瘟疫，死亡者在道路上纵横交错，一个连一个，皇上诏令各所在地区的官府将他们埋葬。
English: In June, it began to rain in Guanzhong. Wheat seedlings were damaged by waterlogging, and later by drought. Locusts ate up all the wheat seedlings in the provinces of Jingzhao, Qi and Handan. In addition, there were plagues caused by the people. The dead were crisscrossed on the roads, one after another. The emperor ordered the government offices in each region to bury them.

古文：丁丑，以岐州刺史苏良嗣为雍州长史。
现代文：十六日，以岐州刺史苏良嗣为雍州长史。
English: On the 16th, the governor of Qizhou Province, Su Liangzi, was appointed as the governor of Yong.

古文：京师人相食，寇盗纵横。
现代文：京师人们互相残杀吞食，寇盗众多，横行不法。
English: People in Beijing killed and ate each other, there were many robberies, and lawlessness was rampant.

古文：秋七月己亥，造奉天宫于嵩山之阳，仍置嵩阳县。
现代文：秋七月八日，在嵩山之南建造奉天宫，仍旧设置嵩阳县。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, the construction of the Feng Tian Palace was completed in the south of Songshan, and Songyang County was still set up.

古文：又于蓝田造万全宫。
现代文：又在蓝田建造万全宫。
English: He also built the Wanzhen Palace in Lantian.

古文：庚申，零陵王明薨。
现代文：二十九日，零陵王明去世。
English: On the 29th, Jingling Wang Ming passed away.

古文：是秋，山东大水，民饥。
现代文：这年秋天，山东发大水，人民闹饥荒。
English: In the autumn of that year, Shandong was hit by floods, and the people were starving.

古文：吐蕃寇柘、松、翼等州。
现代文：吐蕃入侵柘、松、翼等州。
English: The pied flycatcher invades the provinces of Yunnan, Song and Jiangxi.

古文：冬十月甲子，京师地震。
现代文：冬天十月五日，京师地震。
English: Winter On October 5th, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：丙寅，黄门侍郎刘景先同平章事。
现代文：七日，黄门侍郎刘景先任同平章事。
English: On the seventh day, Huangmen waiter Liu Jing became the first to be promoted.

古文：十二月，南天竺、于阗各献方物。
现代文：十二月，南天竺、于阗等国各献土特产。
English: In December, Nantianyu, Yuyu and other countries will present their local special products.

古文：突厥余党阿史那骨笃禄等招合残众，据黑沙城，入寇并州北境。
现代文：突厥残余党羽阿史那骨笃禄等人招集残余部众，占据黑沙城，入侵并州北边边境。
English: The remnants of the Turkic party, such as Ashinakotsutro, summoned the remnants to occupy the Black Sand City and invade the northern border of the state.

古文：二年春正月甲午朔，幸奉天宫，遣使祭嵩岳、少室、箕山、具茨等山，西王母、启母、巢父、许由等祠。
现代文：二年春正月一日，皇上驾到奉天宫，遣使者祭祀嵩岳山、少室山、箕山、具茨等山，并祭祀西王母、启母、巢父、许由等人的祠庙。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, the emperor drove to the Fengtian Palace and sent messengers to offer sacrifices to Mount Songyue, Mount Shomuro, Mount Lushan, Mount Gutsu and other mountains, and to offer sacrifices to the ancestral temples of Xi Wangmo, Kaimo, Nesting Father, Xu You and others.

古文：二月甲午，洛州长史李仲玄为宗正卿。
现代文：六日，洛州长史李仲玄为宗正卿。
English: On the 6th, the governor of Los Angeles, Shi Li Zhongxuan, became Zong Zhengqing.

古文：庚午，突厥寇定州、妫州之境。
现代文：二月十二日，突厥入侵定州、妫州的边境。
English: On February 12, the Turks invaded the borders of Dingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：己卯，左领军卫大将军薛仁贵卒。
现代文：二十一日，左领军卫大将军薛仁贵去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, General Xue Rengui, the left leader of the Great Guard, passed away.

古文：三月庚寅，突厥阿史那骨笃禄、阿史德元珍等围单于都护府。
现代文：三月二日，突厥阿史那骨笃禄、阿史德元珍等人包围单于都护府。
English: On March 2nd, the Turks Ashinakotoku, Ashide Motozane and others encircled the capital alone.

古文：丙午，彗见五车北，二十五日而灭。
现代文：十八日，彗星在五车北星座上出现，二十五天以后才熄灭。
English: On the 18th, the comet appeared in the constellation of the Five Chariots of the North, only to disappear 25 days later.

古文：癸丑，中书令崔知温卒。
现代文：二十五日，中书令崔知温去世。
English: On the 25th, Cui Zhiyuan passed away.

古文：夏四月己巳，还东都。
现代文：夏四月十二日，皇上回东都。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor returned to Dongdu.

古文：甲申，绥州部落稽白铁余据城平县反，命将军程务挺将兵讨之。
现代文：二十七日，绥州部落稽白铁余占据城平县造反，命令将军程务挺率兵讨伐他们。
English: On the 27th, the Zhangzhou tribe Qibai Tieyu occupied the rebellion in Chengping County and ordered the general Cheng Mu Ting to lead the soldiers to fight them.

古文：五月庚寅，幸芳桂宫，阴雨，还东都。
现代文：五月三日，皇上驾到芳桂宫，遇雨受阻，车驾回东都。
English: On May 3, the emperor drove to Fang Gui Palace, but was blocked by rain, and drove back to Dongdu.

古文：突厥寇蔚州，杀刺史李思俭，丰州都督崔智辨率师出朝那山掩击之，为贼所败，遂寇岚州。
现代文：突厥入侵蔚州，杀了刺史李思俭，丰州都督崔智辨率军从朝那山出发，乘敌不备而打击他们，但被贼人所击败，于是贼人入侵岚州。
English: The Turks invaded Ulsan, killed the scribe Li Sijian, and Fongzhou's governor, Cui Zhi, led an army from Mount Chaonan to take advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness to attack them, but was defeated by the thieves, so the thieves invaded Luzhou.

古文：秋七月已丑，封皇孙重福为唐昌郡王。
现代文：秋七月四日，封皇孙重福为唐昌郡王。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, Emperor Sun Chongfu was crowned as the King of Tangchang County.

古文：甲辰，相王轮改封豫王，更名旦。
现代文：十九日，相王轮改封为豫王，更名为旦。
English: On the 19th, the king wheel was renamed the king wheel and the king wheel was renamed the king wheel.

古文：己丑，令唐昌郡王重福为京留守，刘仁轨副之。
现代文：令唐昌郡王重福为京师留守，刘仁轨为副留守。
English: Wang Chongfu of Tangchang County stayed behind as the Beijing division, and Liu Renluo as the deputy.

古文：召皇太子至东都。
现代文：皇上召皇太子到东都。
English: The emperor summoned the crown prince to the eastern capital.

古文：己巳，河水溢，坏河阳城，水面高于城内五尺，北至盐坎，居人庐舍漂没皆尽，南北并坏。
现代文：黄河水猛涨，冲坏河阳城，水面比城内高五尺，往北一直淹到盐坎，平民房屋全被淹没冲走，南北两面土地全被破坏。
English: The Yellow River water surged, washing away Heyang City. The water level was five feet higher than inside the city, and it flooded all the way north to the salt flats. Civilian houses were completely flooded and washed away, and the land on both the north and south sides was completely destroyed.

古文：庚戌，荧惑入舆鬼，犯质星。十一月，皇太子来朝。
现代文：十一月，皇太子前来朝见。
English: In November, the crown prince came to see the emperor.

古文：癸亥，幸奉天宫。时天后自封岱之后，劝上封中岳。
现代文：皇上驾到奉天宫，当时天后从封泰山以后，劝皇上封中岳。
English: The emperor drove to the Fengtian Palace. At that time, the empress dowager, after sealing Mount Tai, advised the emperor to seal Mount Zhongyue.

古文：每下诏草仪注，即岁饥、边事警急而止。
现代文：每次皇上下诏书草拟礼节制度，就马上发生荒年，发生边境警急事件而后终止。
English: Each time the Emperor issued an imperial edict to draft a etiquette system, it was immediately interrupted by a bad year and a border police emergency.

古文：至是复行封中岳礼，上疾而止。
现代文：现在又再次行分封嵩山之礼，皇上又患病而终止。
English: Now, the ceremony of dividing and sealing the Songshan Mountain has been performed again, and the emperor has fallen ill again, bringing the ceremony to an end.

古文：上苦头重不可忍，侍医秦鸣鹤曰： 刺头微出血，可愈。 
现代文：皇上苦于头痛不可忍耐，侍医秦鸣鹤道： 刺头微微出血，可以治愈。 
English: The emperor was suffering from an unbearable headache. The attendant doctor Qin Minghe said, "The thorn is bleeding slightly, it can be cured."

古文：天后帷中言曰： 此可斩，欲刺血于人主首耶！ 上曰： 吾苦头重，出血未必不佳。 
现代文：天后在帷帐中说道： 此医可斩首，想要在皇上头上刺出血来吗！ 皇上道： 我苦于头痛，出血未必不好！ 
English: The Empress Dowager said in the curtain: This doctor can behead you, do you want to prick the Emperor's head to make it bleed! The Emperor said: I suffer from headaches, bleeding is not necessarily bad!

古文：即刺百会，上曰： 吾眼明矣。 
现代文：侍医就用针刺百会，皇上道： 我的眼睛明亮了。 
English: The attendant doctor used needles to prick hundreds of eyes. The Emperor said, "My eyes have become bright."

古文：戊戌，命将军程务挺为单于道安抚大使，以招讨总管讨山贼元珍、骨笃禄、贺鲁等。
现代文：九日，命令将军程务挺为单于道安抚大使，凭借招讨总管的身份讨伐山贼元珍、骨笃禄、贺鲁等人。
English: On the 9th, he ordered the general Cheng Mu Ting to be the ambassador of appeasement in Shan-Yi Province, and to fight the bandits Yuan Zhen, Bone Tu Lu, Horu and others by virtue of the identity of the chief manager.

古文：诏皇太子监国，裴炎、刘齐贤、郭正一等于东宫同平章事。
现代文：诏命皇太子代理国政，裴炎、刘齐贤、郭正一等人在东宫任同平章事。
English: The imperial edict ordered the crown prince to be in charge of state affairs, and Pei Yan, Liu Qixian, Guo Zheng and others were appointed to the same position in the East Palace.

古文：丁未，自奉天宫还东都。
现代文：十八日，皇上从奉天宫回东都。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned to Dongdu from Bongtian Palace.

古文：上疾甚，宰臣已下并不得谒见。
现代文：皇上病得很厉害，宰相以下大臣都不能晋见皇上。
English: The Emperor is very ill, and no minister below the Prime Minister can see the Emperor.

古文：十二月己酉，诏改永淳二年为弘道元年。
现代文：十二月，诏令改永淳二年为弘道元年。
English: In December, the imperial edict changed the date to the first year of Hongdao.

古文：将宣赦书，上欲亲御则天门楼，气逆不能上马，遂召百姓于殿前宣之。
现代文：将要宣布赦免之书，皇上想要亲自到则天门楼，由于气不顺而不能上马，于是召百姓在殿前宣读赦免书。
English: The emperor wanted to go to the Zetian Gate Tower in person to announce the pardon, but he could not get on the horse due to bad breath, so he called the people to read out the pardon in front of the hall.

古文：礼毕，上问侍臣曰： 民庶喜否？ 
现代文：礼毕，皇上问侍臣道 ：百姓喜欢吗？ 
English: After bowing, the Emperor asked his courtiers: "Do the people like it?"

古文：曰： 百姓蒙赦，无不感悦。 
现代文：侍臣道 ：百姓承蒙皇上赦免，没有一个人不感动喜悦。 
English: The courtier said, "The people have been pardoned by the emperor, and no one is not moved with joy."

古文：上曰： 苍生虽喜，我命危笃。
现代文：皇上道： 百姓虽喜，但我的性命危险。
English: Empress Dowager: Although the people are happy, my life is in danger.

古文：天地神祇若延吾一两月之命，得还长安，死亦无恨。 
现代文：天神地神若延长我一两个月的命，能够回长安，死也无遗憾了。 
English: If the gods and goddesses were to extend my life by a month or two, I would be able to return to Chang'an and die with no regrets.

古文：是夕，帝崩于真观殿，时年五十六。
现代文：当晚，皇上在贞观殿去世，当时年纪五十六岁。
English: That evening, the Emperor died at the Zhenguan Palace, at the age of fifty-six.

古文：宣遗诏： 七日而殡，皇太子即位于柩前。
现代文：宣布遗诏 ：七天装在灵柩内，皇太子在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: The last will and testament was announced: after seven days in the coffin, the crown prince would ascend to the throne in front of the coffin.

古文：园陵制度，务从节俭。
现代文：园陵制度，务以节俭。
English: gardening system, we must be frugal.

古文：军国大事有不决者，取天后处分。 
现代文：军国大事有不能决断者，请天后处理决断。 
English: For those who cannot make a decision on military affairs, please ask the Queen to make a decision.

古文：群臣上谥曰天皇大帝，庙号高宗。
现代文：群臣上谥号曰天皇大帝，庙号高宗。
English: The posthumous title of the group of retainers was "Tenno daitei" (Emperor the Great), and the temple name was "Goson."

古文：文明元年八月庚寅，葬于乾陵。
现代文：文明元年八月十一日，安葬在乾陵。
English: He was buried in the Qianling Mausoleum on August 11, the first year of civilization.

古文：天宝十三载，改谥曰天皇大弘孝皇帝。
现代文：天宝十三年，改谥曰天皇大弘孝皇帝
English: In the 13th year of the Heavenly Treasure, Emperor Hirohito was enthroned

