古文：李回李序蔡荣刘元迥郑翦柳澥马总崔龟从
现代文：李回李序蔡荣刘元迥郑翦柳澥马总崔龟从
English: Li Hui, Li Xuan, Cai Rong, Liu Yuanqi, Zheng Qi, Liu Rongma, General Cui Gui,

古文：李回
现代文：李回
English: Li Hui

古文：唐故相李回，少时常久疾。
现代文：唐代做过宰相的李回，小时曾得病很久不好。
English: Li Hui, who served as prime minister in the Tang Dynasty, was ill for a long time when he was a child.

古文：兄軿，召巫觋，于庭中设酒食，以乐神。
现代文：哥哥李軿为李回请来了男巫女巫，在院里摆上酒食供果，求神佑助。
English: For Li Hui, her brother Li Yao invited a male witch and a female witch. They offered wine, food and fruit in the courtyard and prayed for God's help.

古文：方面壁而卧，忽闻庭中喧然。回视，见堂下有数十人，或衣黄衣绿，竞接酒食而啖之。
现代文：李回在屋里脸朝墙躺着，忽然听见院里人声嘈杂，一看，是院里有好几十个鬼，有的穿黄衣有的穿绿衣，抢着吃摆设的酒食。
English: Li Hui was lying in the house with his face to the wall, when he suddenly heard the noisy voices of people in the courtyard. At a glance, there were dozens of ghosts in the courtyard, some wearing yellow clothes and some wearing green clothes, rushing to eat the food and wine.

古文：良久将散，巫欲撤其席，忽有一人自空而下，左右两翅。
现代文：过了好半天人们快散去时，巫师想去撤掉桌子，忽然有个人从空中飞下来，左右长着两只翅膀。
English: After a long time, when the people were about to disperse, the sorcerer wanted to remove the table, and suddenly a man flew down from the sky, with two wings on his right and left.

古文：诸鬼皆辟易而退，且曰：陆大夫神至矣。
现代文：那些鬼怪都吓得四下奔逃，边跑边喊，陆大夫神来了！
English: Those ghosts were so scared that they all ran away, shouting as they ran, "Dr. Lu, God is coming!"

古文：巫者亦惊曰：陆大夫神来。
现代文：巫师也惊呼，真是陆大夫神到了！
English: The sorcerer also exclaimed, "Dr. Lu's god has really come!"

古文：即命致酒食于庭。其首俯于筵上，食之且尽，乃就饮其酒。俄顷，其貌頳然，若有醉色。
现代文：于是让赶快重新摆上酒菜，那神就扒在桌上，吃完了菜，又喝酒，不一会儿喝得满脸通红，有点醉了才飞走。
English: So he quickly put the wine and food back on the table, and the god sat down on the table, ate the food, drank again, and soon he was flushed and a little drunk before he flew away.

古文：遂飞去，群鬼亦随而失。后数日，回疾愈。
现代文：那群鬼也都消失了。过了几天，李回的病就好了。
English: The group of ghosts also disappeared. After a few days, Li Hui's illness was cured.

古文：李序
现代文：李序
English: Lee Seung-woo

古文：元和四年，寿州霍丘县有李六郎，自称神人御史大夫李序。
现代文：元和四年，寿州霍丘县有个李六郎，自称是神人御史大夫李序。
English: In the first and fourth years of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a Li Rokuro in Hoxha County, Shoushu, who claimed to be the godman and historian Dr. Li Xiu.

古文：与人言，不见其形。
现代文：他和人说话时人们看不见他。
English: People can't see him when he's talking to them.

古文：有王筠者，为之役。
现代文：他还有个仆人叫王筠。
English: He also had a servant called Wang Yao.

古文：至霍丘月余，赁宅住，更无余物，唯几案绳床而已。
现代文：李序主仆到霍丘县一个多月，住在租的一间房里，屋里没什么多余的东西，只有一张桌子一个吊铺。
English: Li Sequence's master and servant have been in Hoxha County for more than a month, living in a rented room. There is nothing superfluous in the house, only a table and a hammock.

古文：有人请事者，皆投状。
现代文：有人来求王序预卜吉凶。
English: Someone came to ask the king to foretell the future.

古文：王筠铺于案侧，文字温润，须臾满纸。能书。字体分明，休咎皆应。
现代文：李序就给写出来。仆人王筠先把纸铺在桌上，不一会纸上就写满了字，文字通畅，字也写得很合体，写出来的吉凶事后来都能应。
English: The servant Wang Xuan first spread the paper on the table, and soon the paper was full of words. The writing was fluent and the words fit together well, and the good and bad things that were written could be used later.

古文：时河南长孙郢为镇遏使，初不之信，及见实，时与来往。
现代文：当时的镇遏使是河南人长孙郢，起初听说时不信，等看见是真的，就常和李序来往了。
English: At that time, the governor of the city was the Henan people's Changsun Qi. At first, he did not believe it when he heard it, but when he saw it was true, he often came and went with Li Sequence.

古文：先是官宅后院空宽，夜后或枭鸣狐叫，小大为畏。
现代文：长孙郢的府第后院很空旷，半夜常有夜猫子狐狸号叫，一家大小都很害怕。
English: The backyard of the eldest grandson's house is very empty. In the middle of the night, there are often nocturnal cats and foxes calling. The whole family is scared.

古文：乃命李六郎与疏理，遂云诺。
现代文：就请李序来整治。李序答应了。
English: He asked Li Xuan to rectify the situation. Li Xuan agreed.

古文：每行，似风雨霎霎之声，须臾闻笞捶之声。遣之云：更不得来。
现代文：他到府第来时，看不见本人，只听得一片风雨飒飒声，片刻就听见拷打哭叫声，并听见李序大声斥责道：都快滚，不许再来！
English: When he arrived at the house for the first time, he couldn't see himself, he only heard a lot of noises. After a while, he heard the sounds of torture and crying, and he also heard Li Xiu rebuke loudly: "Get out, don't come back!"

古文：先知有李序之异而不信，乃长孙郢召之，须臾而至。
现代文：从此长孙郢的后院就安宁了。当时做州官的是御史大夫李湘，上面派了一个副史张宗本。年末时张宗本到各县巡视时听说了李序的事，不相信。长孙郢就把李序召了来。
English: From then on, there was peace in the backyard of the eldest Sun Yat-sen. At that time, the state official was the chief historian, Li Xiang, and a deputy historian, Zhang Zongben, was sent from above. At the end of the year, Zhang Zongben heard about Li Xue when he was on a tour of the counties, and he did not believe it. The eldest Sun Yat-sen summoned Li Xue.

古文：宗本求一扎，欲以呈于牧守，取纸笔而请。序曰：接对诸公，便书可乎？
现代文：李序来后，张宗本就请李序给李湘写封书信。取来纸笔后李序问：就在诸公面前写，可以吗？
English: After Li Xun came, Zhang Zongben asked Li Xun to write a letter to Li Xiang. After taking the paper and pen, Li Xun asked: Can I write it in front of the princes?

古文：张曰：可也。
现代文：张宗本说可以。
English: Zhang Zongben said yes.

古文：初，案上三管笔，俄而忽失一管，旋见文字满纸。后云：御史大夫李序顿首。
现代文：起初桌上有三支笔，突然就少了一支，接着就见纸上写满了字，后面还写着御史大夫李序顿首再拜。
English: At first, there were three pens on the table, but suddenly one was missing, and then the paper was covered with writing, and on the back of it was written, "Dr. Li Xudong, bow your heads in farewell."

古文：宗本心服，归而告湘，湘乃令使邀之。
现代文：这下张宗本信服了，他去告诉州官李湘，李湘就派人把李序请来，两个人交往了好几天。
English: Zhang Zongben was now convinced. He went to tell the state official Li Xiang, who sent someone to invite Li Xuan. The two men spent several days together.

古文：遂往来数日，云：是五狱之神之弟也。
现代文：李序说，我是五狱神的弟弟，我的七弟在薪州。
English: Li Zheng said, I am the younger brother of the God of the Five Jails, and my seventh brother is in Zhouzhou.

古文：第七舍弟在蕲州，某于阴道管此郡。亦饮酒，语声如女人，言词切要，宛畅笑咏。
现代文：我在冥间管理本郡。李序也喝酒，说话的声音像女人，很善于辞令，谈笑风生。
English: I manage this county in the netherworld. Li Xiu also drinks, speaks like a woman, is very good at rhetoric, and has a good sense of humor.

古文：常作笑巫诗曰：魍魉何曾见，头旋即下神。
现代文：他有一首嘲笑巫师的诗说：魍魉何曾见，头旋即下神。
English: He had a poem that mocked wizards, saying: "No matter what you've seen, if you turn your head, you'll go mad."

古文：图他衫子段，诈道大王嗔。
现代文：图他衫子段，诈道大王嗔。
English: Tutta shirt section, swindle the king of swindling.

古文：如此极多，亦不全记。
现代文：这样的诗很多，就不一一记载了。
English: There are many such poems, but they are not recorded one by one.

古文：后云：暂往蕲州看舍弟。
现代文：后来，李序说要到薪州去看弟弟。
English: Later, Li Xun said that he was going to visit his younger brother in Zhouzhou.

古文：到蕲乃七月中，仍令王筠送新粳米二斗，札一封，与长孙。
现代文：他到薪州是七月中旬，到后让仆人王筠给长孙郢送去新米二斗和一封信。
English: He arrived in Chuzhou in mid-July. After his arrival, he asked his servant Wang Yao to send two buckets of new rice and a letter to his eldest grandson Yao.

古文：邻近数州人，皆请休咎于李序。其批判处犹存。
现代文：当时，邻近几州的人，都请李序帮助避灾，他批写的字现在还留存着。
English: At that time, people in several neighboring prefectures asked Li Xuan to help them avoid disasters. The words he wrote are still preserved.

古文：蔡荣
现代文：蔡荣
English: Cai Rong

古文：中牟县三异乡木工蔡荣者，自幼信神祈。
现代文：中牟县三异乡，有个叫蔡荣的木匠，从小就信神。
English: In Sanxiang Township, Zhongmou County, there is a carpenter named Cai Rong, who has believed in God since childhood.

古文：每食必分置于地，潜祝土地，至长未常暂忘也。
现代文：每次吃饭时总往地下放些饭食祭祀土地神。长大以后一直这样做。
English: Every time I eat, I always put some food down to worship the land god. I've been doing this since I grew up.

古文：元和二年春，卧疾六七日。
现代文：元和二年春天，蔡荣病了六七天。
English: In the spring of 1902, Cai Rong fell ill for six or seven days.

古文：方暮，有武吏走来，谓母曰：蔡荣衣服器用，速藏之，勿使人见，乃速为妇人服饰。
现代文：有天傍晚，有个武官跑到家里对蔡荣的母亲说，赶快给蔡荣穿上女人的服装，他平时的衣服东西也快收起来别让人看见。
English: One evening, a military attaché ran to the house and said to Cai Rong's mother, "Quickly dress Cai Rong in a woman's costume. Put away his usual clothes and things and don't let anyone see them."

古文：有来问者，必绐之曰： 出矣。
现代文：如果有人来问你就骗他说，蔡荣不在家，问到那里去了，你也别说出准地方，说个大概就行。
English: If someone comes to ask you, just lie to him and say that Cai Rong is not at home. If you ask him where he went, don't say the exact place, just say roughly.

古文：求其处，则亦意对，勿令知所在也。
现代文：武官说完了就消失了。蔡荣的母亲和妻子记听从了武官的话。
English: After the military officer finished speaking, he disappeared. Cai Rong's mother and wife followed the military officer's words.

古文：言讫走去。妻母从其言。才毕，有将军乘马，从十余人，执弓矢，直入堂中，呼蔡荣。
现代文：果然，刚给蔡荣穿好女人的衣服，就来了个骑马的将军，带着十多个佩带弓箭的随从，一直闯进屋里喊蔡荣。
English: Sure enough, as soon as Cai Rong was dressed in women's clothes, a general on horseback came, with more than ten attendants carrying bows and arrows, and kept breaking into the house to call Cai Rong.

古文：其母惊惶曰：不在。
现代文：母亲惊慌的说，蔡荣不在家。
English: Her mother panicked and said that Cai Rong was not at home.

古文：曰：何往。
现代文：将军问，到哪儿去了？
English: The general asked, "Where did he go?"

古文：对曰：荣醉归，怠于其业，老妇怒而笞之，荣或潜去，不知何在也，十余日矣。
现代文：母亲说，蔡荣喝醉了酒回来，不好好干活，我用鞭子抽了他一顿，他赌气跑了，已经十几天没回来。
English: His mother said that Cai Rong came back drunk and couldn't work well. I whipped him, and he lost his temper and didn't come back for ten days.

古文：将军遣吏入搜，搜者出曰：房中无丈夫，亦无器物。
现代文：将军叫人在屋星搜，搜查的人说，屋里没有男人，也没有男人用的东西。
English: The general ordered people to search the house. The searchers said that there were no men in the house, nor anything used by men.

古文：将军连呼地界。
现代文：将军连声呼喊土地神出来，那个武官就出来了。
English: The general shouted at the top of his voice for the earth god to come out, and the military attaché came out.

古文：教藏者出曰：诺，责曰：蔡荣出行，岂不知处。
现代文：将军斥责说，蔡荣到哪里去了，你这个土地神能不知道吗？
English: The general scolded, "Where has Cai Rong gone? Can you, the god of the land, not know?

古文：对曰：怒而私出，不告所由。
现代文：土地神说，他是一怒之下独自出去，没说上哪儿去。
English: The god of the soil said he was angry and went out alone, without saying where he was going.

古文：将军曰：王后殿倾，须此巧匠。
现代文：将军说，大王的神殿后面倾斜了，须要找蔡荣这样的巧匠去修。
English: The general said that the back of the great king's shrine was tilted, and it was necessary to find a craftsman like Cai Rong to repair it.

古文：期限向尽，何人堪替？
现代文：期限快到了，谁能替他去？
English: The deadline is fast approaching. Who can replace him?

古文：对曰：梁城乡叶干者，巧于蔡荣。
现代文：土地神说，梁城乡有个叫叶干的木匠，手艺比蔡荣还好。
English: The land god said that there was a carpenter in Liangcheng Township named Ye Gan, whose craftsmanship was better than that of Cai Rong.

古文：计其年限，正当追役。
现代文：我算他的阳寿也到了，正应该让他去。
English: I reckon it's his birthday and he should be allowed to go.

古文：将军者走马而去。
现代文：将军一听就上马去了。
English: On hearing this, the general mounted his horse.

古文：有顷，教藏者复来曰：某地界所由也，以蔡荣每食必相召，故投恩耳。
现代文：过了一会儿，那武官又来了，对蔡母说，我就是这里的土地神。因为蔡荣每顿饭都请我来同吃，所以我要报答他。
English: After a while, the military attaché came again and said to Mother Cai, "I am the god of the land here. Because Cai Rong invited me to eat with him every meal, so I want to repay him."

古文：俄闻梁城乡叶干者暴卒。干妻乃荣母之犹子也。
现代文：说完就走了。母亲去看蔡荣，见他出了一身大汗，从此病就好了，不久就听说梁城乡的叶干突然死亡。叶干的妻子，是蔡荣母亲的干女儿。
English: After saying this, he left. My mother went to see Cai Rong, saw him sweat profusely, and his illness was cured. Soon after, she heard that Ye Gan of Liangcheng Township had died suddenly. Ye Gan's wife was the daughter of Cai Rong's mother.

古文：审其死者，正当荣服雌服之时。
现代文：计算叶干死的时候，正是蔡荣穿上女人衣服的那个时辰。
English: It was the hour when Cai Rong put on a woman's dress that was calculated as the time of Ye's death.

古文：有李复者，从母夫杨曙，为中弁团户于三异乡，遍周其事。就召荣母问之。回以相告。
现代文：有个叫李复的，姨夫杨曙当时在三异乡当中弁团户，很了解这件事，就找来蔡荣的母亲询问，把荣母所说的情况告诉了李复。
English: There was a man named Li Fu, whose uncle Yang Shu was in charge of a group of households in Sanxiang at that time. He knew the matter very well, so he called Cai Rong's mother to inquire, and told Li Fu what Rong's mother had said.

古文：其泛祭之见德者，岂其然乎？
现代文：敬神如此虔诚，难道这不就是一种回应吗？
English: Isn't this a response to the fact that God is so revered?

古文：刘元迥
现代文：刘元迥
English: Liu Yuanxuan

古文：刘元迥者，狡妄人也。
现代文：刘元迥是个狡滑奸诈的人。
English: Liu Yuanzhang is a cunning and treacherous person.

古文：自言能炼水银作黄金，又巧以鬼道惑众，众多迷之，以是致富。
现代文：他说自己会把水银炼成黄金，又花言巧语讲神论鬼迷惑人，很多人信了，他也由此骗了不少钱，过得很富足。
English: He said that he would refine mercury into gold, and that he would use rhetoric to talk about the gods and ghosts to confuse people. Many people believed him, and he also cheated a lot of money and lived a very rich life.

古文：李师古镇平卢，招延四方之士，一艺者至，则厚给之。
现代文：李师古任平卢节度使，招纳四方有才能的居士。凡是有一技之长的人，都受到优厚的待遇。
English: Li Shigu served as the Pinglu Festival Commissioner and recruited talented laymen from all over the country. Anyone with a skill was treated well.

古文：元迥遂以此术干师古，师古异之，面试其能，或十铢五铢。
现代文：元迥就跑去投奔李师古，说他会炼金术。师古不信，当面试他。
English: He ran to Li Shigu, saying that he could do alchemy. Shigu didn't believe him, so he interviewed him.

古文：皆立成焉。盖先以金屑置于汞中也。
现代文：他当时就出了好几钱金子，原来这事先就偷偷把碎金末放在水银里骗了师古。
English: At that time, he gave out several coins of gold, and it turned out that he had deceived Shigu by secretly putting the gold dust in mercury beforehand.

古文：师古曰：此诚至宝，宜何用？
现代文：师古说，这真是个了不起的技术，但怎么用法呢？
English: Shigu said that this is really a great technology, but how to use it?

古文：元迥贵成其奸，不虞后害，乃曰：杂之他药，徐烧三年，可以飞仙；为食器，可以避毒；以为玩用，可以辟邪。
现代文：刘元迥想狠狠算计一下李师古也不考虑什么后果，就对师古说，如果把水银里加上一些药物，慢慢炼上三年，吃了就可以成仙。为用来做食器，可以防毒，用来作玩物，可以辟邪。
English: Liu Yuanzhang wanted to make a tough calculation, but Li Shigu did not consider any consequences, so he said to Shigu, if you add some drugs to the mercury and slowly refine it for three years, you can become a immortal. It can be used to make tableware, it can be used to prevent poison, and it can be used as a toy to ward off evil.

古文：师古大神之，因曰：再烧其期稍缓，子且为我化十斤，将备吾所急之器也。
现代文：师古完全相信了，说，你可以慢慢烧炼，先给我炼出十斤，以备我急用。
English: Shigu was completely convinced and said, "You can slowly distill it. First, distill 10 jin for me, in case I need it in an emergency."

古文：元迥本炫此术，规师古钱帛，逡巡则谋遁去。
现代文：刘元迥本来就是炫耀炼金术骗人的。这时就打算骗了师古的钱，有机会就逃跑。
English: Originally, Liu Yuanqi was just showing off his alchemy to deceive people. At this time, he planned to cheat Shigu out of money and escape when he had the chance.

古文：为师古縻之，专令烧金。
现代文：但师古笼络刘元迥以后，让他专炼金，而且要的数量相当多。
English: However, after Liu Yuanzhang was brought in by his master, he was allowed to refine gold, and a considerable amount of gold was required.

古文：其数极广，元迥无从而致，因以鬼道说师古曰：公绍续一方，三十余载，虽戎马仓廪，天下莫与之俦，然欲遣四方仰归威德，所图必遂者，须假神祈之力。
现代文：元迥没法作假，就拿鬼神之道骗师古说，大人您镇守一方，三十多年来，虽然你的车马库存财产可以富甲天下，然而要想四方的人都感于你的威德，你想要的也都能得到，那就必须借助于神仙的帮助。
English: For more than thirty years, although your inventory of chariots and horses can enrich the world, if you want people from all over the world to be impressed by your virtue and be able to get what you want, then you must rely on the help of the gods.

古文：师古甚悦，因而询之，元迥则曰：泰岳天齐王，玄宗东封，因以沈香刻制其像。所以玄宗享国永年。
现代文：师古兴奋地问怎么借助神力，元迥就说，你应该供奉泰山的天齐王。当年唐玄宗东巡到泰山，用沉香木刻制了天齐王像供奉，所以玄宗当了一辈子的皇上。
English: Shigu excitedly asked how to use divine power, and Yuan Zang said, "You should worship the King of Heaven and Earth on Mount Tai." That year, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty traveled east to Mount Tai and carved a statue of the King of Heaven and Earth from agate wood for worship. As a result, Xuanzong became emperor for the rest of his life.

古文：公能以他宝易其像，则受福与开元等矣。师古狂悖，甚然之。
现代文：如果您能以更贵重的东西换下玄宗的那尊天齐王神像，那你的富贵就会和唐玄宗一样了。师古很有野心，就听信了。
English: If you can replace the statue of the King of Heaven and Earth, which belongs to Xuanzong, with something more valuable, then your wealth will be the same as that of Tang Xuanzong. Shigu was very ambitious, so he listened.

古文：元迥乃曰：全驱而至，或恐卒不能办。且以黄金十五斤，铸换其首，因当获祐矣。
现代文：元迥就说，如果把那尊天齐王像整个换下来，怕不好办，只要用十五斤黄金铸成天齐神的头，换下来，你就可以得到天齐神的祐护了。
English: Yuan Zang said that if the statue of King Tianqi was replaced in its entirety, it would not be difficult to do, as long as the head of King Tianqi was cast with fifteen pounds of gold. If it was replaced, you would be able to obtain the protection of King Tianqi.

古文：师古曰：君便先为烧之，速成其事。
现代文：师古让他马上炼金作头，快点办成这件事。
English: Shigu told him to start the alchemy right away and finish it quickly.

古文：元迥大笑曰：天齐虽曰贵神，乃鬼类耳。
现代文：元迥大笑说，别看天齐神是个大神，其实他不过是个鬼怪而已。
English: Geng Yao laughed loudly and said, don't look at Tianqi God as a great god, in fact he is just a ghost.

古文：若以吾金为其首，岂冥鬼敢依至灵之物哉！
现代文：如果用我所炼出的极贵重的金给他铸头，那些鬼怪还会依附于天齐神鸣？
English: If I use my precious gold to cast a head for him, will those ghosts still cling to Tianqi Shenming?

古文：是则斥逐天齐，何希其福哉！
现代文：他们会把天齐神赶走，那您还能受到他的祐护吗？
English: They will drive Tianqi away, so will you still be protected by him?

古文：但以山泽纯金而易之，则可矣。
现代文：你只要把人间平常用的黄金给天齐神铸个头就可以了。
English: All you have to do is to cast a head of gold, which is commonly used in the human world, for the sky god.

古文：师古尤异之，则以藏金二十斤，恣元迥所为，仍命元迥就岳庙而易焉。
现代文：师古更觉得惊异，就把家里的二十斤黄金给了元迥让他铸成金头，拿到泰岳庙去换天齐神的头。
English: Shigu was even more surprised, so he gave the family's twenty catties of gold to Yuan Zang and asked him to cast it into gold and take it to Taiyue Temple to exchange it for the head of Tianqi.

古文：元迥乃以铅锡杂类，镕其外而易之。
现代文：刘元迥把李师古的二十斤黄金归为己有，弄了些铅、锡之类的金属铸了个头，到庙里去给天齐神换上了。
English: Liu Yuanqi took possession of the twenty pounds of gold from Li Shigu, made some lead, tin and other metals to cast a head, and went to the temple to replace it with Tianqi.

古文：怀其真金以归，为师古作饮食器皿，靡不办集矣。师古尤加礼重，事之如兄。
现代文：又用师古金子的一少部分做了些饮食器具送给师古，假称是用自己所炼的金子作的，师古就更加器重他了，把他敬为兄长，赠给他财物、美女和宅院。
English: He also made some eating utensils with a small part of Shigu's gold and gave them to Shigu. Pretending that they were made with his own gold, Shigu valued him even more, respected him as a brother, and gave him wealth, a beautiful woman, and a mansion.

古文：玉帛姬妾居第，资奉甚厚。明年，师古方宴僚属将吏，忽有庖人，自厨径诣师古。
现代文：第二年，有一天李师古设宴招待属下的官员和将士时，有一个厨师从厨房里一直跑到李师古面前。
English: In the second year, one day when Li Shigu held a banquet to invite his subordinate officials and soldiers, a chef ran from the kitchen all the way to Li Shigu.

古文：于众会之中，因举身丈余，蹈空而立，大诟曰：我五岳之神，是何贼盗，残我仪质？
现代文：然后突然变成了一丈多高的大个子跳到了空中，对宴会上的众人愤愤地说，我是五岳庙里的天齐神，是那个盗贼残害我，把我的头给换了？
English: Then all of a sudden he turned into a big man, how tall? He jumped into the air and angrily said to the people at the banquet, I am the God of Heaven in the Five Mountains Temple. Was it the thief who mutilated me and changed my head?

古文：我上诉于帝，涉岁方归。及归，我之甲兵军马，帑藏财物，皆为黄石公所掠去。
现代文：我向天帝去告状，去了一年多，回来后，我的车马卫队和仓库里的钱财已被黄石公抢掠一空！
English: I went to appeal to the Heavenly Emperor. I went there for more than a year. When I came back, my chariot and horse guards and the money in the warehouse had all been looted by Yellowstone!

古文：则又极骂，复耸身数丈，良久履地。
现代文：越骂越凶，越长越高，竟身高好几丈。过了很久，那厨师才一下落到地上。
English: The more he cursed, the more ferocious he became. The longer he grew, the taller he became. It took a long time before the chef fell to the ground.

古文：师古令曳去。
现代文：师古叫人们把厨师拖走。
English: Shigu ordered people to drag the chef away.

古文：庖人无复知觉，但若沉醉者数日。
现代文：厨师一直不省人事，昏昏沉沉象喝醉的好几天也不醒来。
English: The chef had been unconscious, groggy as if drunk, and did not wake up for days.

古文：师古则令画作戎车战士，戈甲旌旗，及纸钱绫帛数十车，就泰山而焚之。
现代文：师古就叫人画了很多兵车战士、刀枪战旗，还装了几十车纸钱，到泰山前烧化。
English: Shigu had people draw a lot of chariot soldiers, swords, guns and battle flags, and also loaded dozens of cartloads of paper money, which were burned in front of Mount Tai.

古文：尚未悟元迥之奸。方将理之，而师古暴疡。
现代文：这时师古还没有完全看穿刘元迥的鬼计，刚想弄个明白，就得了暴病。
English: At this time, Shigu still did not completely see through Liu Yuanzhang's evil scheme. Just when he wanted to understand, he got violently ill.

古文：不数日，脑溃而卒。
现代文：不几天，师古因脑袋溃烂而死了。
English: Within a few days, Shigu died of a brain ulcer.

古文：其弟师道领事，即令判官李文会、虞早等按之。元迥词穷，戮之于市。
现代文：他的弟弟李师道继为平卢节度使之事，叫判官李文会和虞早一齐审讯刘元迥，刘元迥说不清楚，被判死刑，拖到市上斩首。
English: His younger brother, Li Shidao, continued to make things happen for the Pinglu Festival, and ordered the judge Li Wenhui and Yu Yao to interrogate Liu Yuanqi together. Liu Yuanqi did not know what to say, and was sentenced to death and dragged to the city to be beheaded.

古文：郑翦
现代文：郑翦
English: Zheng Wei

古文：穆宗有事于南郊，将谒太清空。
现代文：唐穆宗驾幸南郑，打算去太清宫祭祀。
English: Tang Mu Zong drove to Nan Zheng, intending to go to the Taiqing Palace for a ritual.

古文：长安县主簿郑翦主役，于御院之西序，见白衣老人云：此下有井，正值黄帝路过，汝速实之。不然，罪在不测。
现代文：当时长安县的主簿郑翦负责皇帝的护卫和起居，在行宫的西院值班。忽然来了个白衣老人对他说，这下面有口井，正是皇帝要去过的地方，你快将它填上，不然你会犯下大罪。
English: At that time, the main book of Chang'an County, Zheng Qi, was responsible for the emperor's escort and living, and was on duty at the West Courtyard of the Imperial Palace. Suddenly, an old man in white came and said to him, "There is a well below here, which is exactly where the emperor was going. You should fill it up quickly, otherwise you will commit a great sin."

古文：翦惶惧，使修之。其处已陷数尺，发之则古井也。
现代文：郑翦十分害怕，赶快找人来挖开地皮，一看下面已陷下去了好几尺，原来是一口古井。
English: Zheng Yao was very scared. He quickly looked for someone to dig up the ground. At first glance, several feet had fallen below. It turned out to be an old well.

古文：惊顾之际，已失老人所在。
现代文：惊讶之余再去找白衣老人，已不见了。
English: To my surprise, I went to look for the old man in white, but he had disappeared.

古文：功德使护军中尉刘弘规奏之。
现代文：于是赶紧把古井填好。当时功德使护军尉刘弘规把这事奏报给皇上。
English: So he quickly filled the old well. At that time, Liu Hongbi, a meritorious military lieutenant, reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：帝至宫朝献毕，赴南郊，于宫门驻马。
现代文：皇上在太清宫祭祀完毕回到皇宫，在宫门下马后，文武大臣都祝贺皇上平安还宫。
English: The Emperor returned to the Imperial Palace after completing the ritual at the Taiqing Palace. After dismounting from the horse at the palace gate, the ministers of literature and armed forces congratulated the Emperor on returning safely to the palace.

古文：宰臣及供奉官称贺，遂命翰林学士韦处厚撰记，令起居郎柳公权，书于实井之上，名曰《望瑞感应纪》。
现代文：穆宗就命翰林学士韦处厚撰写文章，命当起居郎的柳公权写下来刻成碑，竖在那口填实后的古井上，碑文名叫《望瑞感应记》。
English: Mu Zong ordered Hanlin Scholar Wei Shizhuang to write an article, and Liu Gongquan, who was ordered to become a disciple, wrote it down and engraved it into a monument, which was erected on the old well after it was filled in. The inscription is called "Wang Rui Induction Record."

古文：仍赐郑翦绯衣。
现代文：皇上还为此特赏给郑翦穿红袍。
English: The emperor also specially rewarded Zheng Qi with a red robe for this.

古文：柳澥
现代文：柳澥
English: Willow Warbler

古文：柳澥少贫，游岭表。
现代文：柳澥少年时家里很穷。
English: When Liu Ye was a boy, his family was very poor.

古文：广州节度使孔戣，遇之甚厚，赠百余金，谕令西上。
现代文：他到广州时，广州节度使孔戣侍他很好，给了他不少钱让他到西上求前程。
English: When he arrived in Guangzhou, the Guangzhou Festival made Confucius serve him well, and gave him a lot of money to go to the west to seek a future.

古文：遂与秀才严烛、曾黯数人，同舟北归。
现代文：于是柳澥和秀才严烛、曾黯三人一同乘船上路。
English: As a result, Yanukovych, Shuzai, Yancheng, and Zeng Ying took a boat trip together.

古文：至阳朔县南六十里，方博于舟中，忽推去博局，起离席，以手接一物。初视之，若有人投刺者。
现代文：船走到阳朔县南边六十里，三个人正在船里赌博着玩，柳澥突然推开赌具，从空中接了一件东西，看着象一张名帖，就急忙让船夫停船，穿戴整齐上了岸，向空中作拜说，我柳澥今后有幸和各位一同共事了。
English: The boat went sixty miles south of Yangshuo County. Three people were gambling and playing in the boat. Liu Yao suddenly pushed the gambling equipment, picked up a thing from the air, looking like a famous postcard. He hurriedly asked the boatman to stop the boat, dressed neatly and went ashore. He bowed to the sky and said, I, Liu Yao, have the honor of working with you in the future.

古文：即急命衫带，泊舟而下。
现代文：现在我的任命虽然已经到了，但我还有很多行李私事要处理完，请你们在前面等我。
English: Now, although my appointment has arrived, I still have a lot of luggage and personal matters to deal with. Please wait for me in front.

古文：但每至夜泊之处，则必箕踞而坐。
现代文：只是每到夜晚船停泊后，他就躬身坐着，办理公事，说的那些话和事都不象是活着的人。
English: But every night, after the ship had docked, he would sit with his head bowed, going about his business, saying things and doing things that didn't seem like those of a living person.

古文：指挥处分，皆非生者所为。阳朔去州尚三日程，其五十滩，常须舟人尽力乃过，至是一宿而至。澥常见二紫衣，具军容，执锤，驱百余卒，在水中推挽其舟。澥至桂州，修家书才毕而卒。
现代文：阳朔离桂林船要走三天，经过五十个险滩，船夫要费很大的力气才能过去，然而这船却走了一天就到了阳朔。原来柳澥看见有两个穿紫衣的军官，手执锤，指挥着一百多个兵在水里推船。柳澥到了桂林，刚写完一封家书就死了。
English: It takes three days to sail from Yangshuo to Guilin, passing through fifty dangerous beaches, and the boatman has to exert a lot of effort to get past. However, the boat only took one day to get to Yangshuo. Originally, Liu Wei saw two officers wearing purple, holding a hammer, and commanding more than a hundred soldiers to push the boat in the water. Liu Wei arrived in Guilin, and just after writing a letter to his family, he died.

古文：时唐元和十四年八月也。
现代文：这件事出在唐代元和十四年八月间。
English: This incident occurred between the first century of the Tang Dynasty and August of the 14th year.

古文：马总
现代文：马总
English: Ma Zong

古文：马总为天平节度使。暇日方修远书，时术人程居在傍。
现代文：天平节度使马总，有一天公余时正在写信给远方的友人，当时有位术士程居在他身边。
English: One day, when Ma Zong was writing a letter to a distant friend in his spare time, a sorcerer named Cheng was staying with him.

古文：总凭几，忽若假寐，而神色惨蹙，不类于常。
现代文：马总写着写着忽然打起盹来，但脸色却十分惨白，不象平时。
English: The horse kept writing and writing and suddenly dozed off, but his face was very pale, unlike usual.

古文：程不敢惊，乃徐起，诣其佐相元封告之。
现代文：程居不敢惊动，慢慢走出去找到马总的左相元封告诉了他。
English: Cheng Ju didn't dare to be alarmed, and slowly walked out to find Ma Chong's left-hand man, Yuanfeng, who told him.

古文：俄而总召元封，屏人谓曰：异事异事，某适有所诣，严邃崇閟，王者之居不若也。
现代文：不一会儿，马总把元封叫来，让左右退下，然后说，怪事怪事！我刚才去了一个地方，府第高大森严，比帝王的宫殿也不差。
English: After a while, Master Ma called Yuanfeng in, asked him to step back, and then said, "Strange, strange! I just went to a place with a very high and dense forest, not bad compared to the emperor's palace."

古文：为人导前，见故杜十丈司徒，笑而下阶相迎曰： 久延望。甚喜相见。
现代文：有人领我走进去，竟看见了已死的司徒杜十丈。杜司徒笑着迎下台阶对我说， 已经盼望你很久了，见到你真高兴。
English: Someone led me inside, and I actually saw the deceased, Stuto Du Jijo. With a smile, Stuto Du came down the steps and said to me, "I've been looking forward to seeing you for a long time. I'm so happy to see you."

古文：因留连曰： 之此官，亦人世之中书令耳。六合之内，靡不关由。
现代文：我在阴间这个官，也相当于阳间的中书令了，而且天地之间的事我都管。
English: As an official in the netherworld, I am also equivalent to the chancellor in the sunworld, and I am in charge of matters between heaven and earth.

古文：然久处会剧，心力殆倦，将求贤自代。
现代文：然而长久地处理繁忙地公务，心力交瘁有些承受不了，希望找个贤能的人换我的班。
English: However, the long-term handling of busy business affairs, the mental strain is somewhat unbearable, I hope to find a capable person to change my class.

古文：公之识度，诚克大用，况亲且故，所以奉邀。敬以相授。
现代文：你有才有识，定能担此大任，而且我们在阳世时又是好友，所以我特意把你请来，准备把我的官职授给你。 
English: You have the talent and ability to take on this great responsibility, and we were good friends in our youth, so I specifically invited you here to prepare to give you my official position.

古文：总因辞退，至于泣下。
现代文：我苦苦推辞，最后都哭了。
English: I struggled to say no and ended up crying.

古文：良久，杜乃曰： 既未为愿，则且归矣。
现代文：过了半天杜司徒才说， 既然你不愿意，那你就先回去吧。
English: It was only after half a day that the docent said, "Since you don't want to, why don't you go back."

古文：然二十年，当复相见？ 
现代文：不过二十年后，我们还会再见的。 
English: But in twenty years, we'll see each other again.

古文：总既寤，大喜其寿之遐远。
现代文：我就回来了。马总醒后，高兴地对别人说，他还有二十年的阳寿。
English: I came back. After waking up, Ma always happily told others that he still had twenty years to live.

古文：自是后二年而死，岂马公误听，将祐增其年，以悦其意也？
现代文：然而过了两年就死了。并不是马公听错了，而是在阴间杜司徒把两年后相见故意说成二十年，好让马总心里高兴罢了。
English: However, he died two years later. It wasn't that Mago had misheard, but that in the underworld, Dostoevsky had deliberately said that they would see each other after two years, so that Mago would be happy.

古文：崔龟从
现代文：崔龟从
English: Choi Turtle from

古文：崔龟从，长庆三年，以大理评事从事河中府。
现代文：长庆三年，崔龟从以大理评事的职衔在河中府当从事。
English: In the third year of Changqing, Cui Gui took up the post of Dali appraiser in Hechu Prefecture.

古文：一夕，梦与人入官署，及其庭，望见室内有人当阳，仪卫甚盛。又一人侧坐，容饰略同。
现代文：一天晚上，他梦见和一个人一同走进一个官府，进了大厅，见正面坐着一个仪态威严的人，还有一个人侧面生着，容貌服饰和中间坐散文人一样，都是高鼻大眼。
English: One night, he dreamed of walking into a government office with someone, entering the hall, and seeing a dignified person sitting in the front, and another person sitting on the side, with the same appearance and clothing as the prose writer sitting in the middle, both with a high nose and big eyes.

古文：皆隆准盱目，搦管视状，若决事者。
现代文：那个人正拿着笔看公文，像是在决断大事。
English: The man was reading a document with a pen, as if he was making a decision.

古文：因疾趋及阶，拜唯而退。
现代文：崔龟从赶快拜礼告罪退出来。
English: Cui Jie withdraws from the hasty confession.

古文：行及西庙，视庑下牖间，文簿堆积于大格，若今之吏舍。
现代文：走到西庙，看见屋檐下的窗子里一排一排架格堆放着卷宗档案，好像是官府的办公处所。
English: When I walked to the West Temple, I saw rows and rows of files stacked in the window under the eaves, as if it were a government office.

古文：有吏抱案而出，因迎问之：此当是阴府，某愿知禄寿几何。
现代文：这时看见一个官员抱着卷宗走出来。就迎上去问道：这里是冥府吧，我想知道我的寿数怎样，官运如何？
English: At this time, he saw an official coming out holding a file. He went up to him and asked, "This must be the underworld. I want to know how old I am and how my career is going."

古文：吏应曰：二人后且皆为此州刺史，无劳阅簿也。
现代文：那官员说：你们两个以后都会当上这个州的刺史，不用查簿子了。
English: The official said, "You two are going to go down in the history of this state, so there's no need to check the books."

古文：及出门，又见同时从事，席地而樗蒲。
现代文：崔龟从走出大门，又看见自己的一个同事，正坐在地上用樗蒲玩赌博的游戏。
English: After stepping out of the gate, Cui Turtle saw one of his colleagues sitting on the ground and playing a gambling game with a dandelion.

古文：归寤，大异之，仿佛在目。
现代文：梦醒后，感到十分奇怪。梦里的事好象就在眼前。
English: After waking up from the dream, I felt very strange. The things in the dream seemed to be right in front of me.

古文：唯所与同行者，梦中问之，其姓名是常所交游，及觉，遂妄其人。
现代文：只有那个和他一起走的人，在梦里问他时是自己的熟人，醒后却想不起来了。
English: Only the man who had been walking with him, and who had been an acquaintance of his when he had asked about him in the dream, did not remember him when he awoke.

古文：明日入公府，话于同舍，皆以为吉。解曰：君梦得君，而又见樗蒱者，蒲也。
现代文：第二天崔龟从到衙里去把梦中的事说给同僚，大家都说这梦很吉利，并解说梦见玩樗蒲，就是预示你将到蒲州当节度史。
English: The next day, Cui Turtle went to Shuli to tell his colleagues about the dream. Everyone said that the dream was very auspicious, and explained that dreaming of playing calamus was a sign that you would go to Puzhou to celebrate the festival.

古文：君后当如主公，节临蒲州矣。
现代文：从此以后，崔龟从每到一个神庙，都想起梦里的事。
English: From then on, whenever Cui Turtle went to a temple, she would think about the dream.

古文：尔后每入祠庙，辄思所梦，尝屡谒河渎。
现代文：曾去过河神庙，到华州时也去过西岳庙，看了所有的神像，都不象梦里的人事。
English: I have been to the River God Temple, and when I came to Huazhou, I also went to the Xiyue Temple. I saw all the statues of gods, but they were nothing like the personnel affairs in my dream.

古文：开成中，自户部侍郎，出为宣州，去前梦二十年矣。
现代文：开成年间，他从户部侍郎任上调到任宣州刺史，离开作梦已经二十年了。
English: When he came of age, he was promoted from the position of the head of the household to the position of the governor of Xuanzhou. It has been twenty years since he left Dreaming.

古文：五月至郡，吏告曰：敬亭神实州人所严奉，每岁无贵贱，必一祠焉。
现代文：五月到了蒲州郡。郡里的官员告诉他，这个州的人特别信奉敬亭神，每年不分贵贱穷富，都要进祠祭祀，平日庙里也香火不断，以往每一任州官上任后都备上祭礼上庙祭祀。
English: In May, he arrived in Puzhou County. The county officials told him that the people of this state especially believe in the deity of Jing Ting. Every year, regardless of whether they are rich or poor, they have to go to the ancestral shrine for sacrifice. On weekdays, the temple is also inundated with incense. In the past, every state official has prepared a ceremony to go to the temple for sacrifice after taking office.

古文：其他祈祷报谢无虚日。
现代文：当时崔龟从正在生病，到秋天病好了才去敬亭神庙上香。
English: At that time, Cui Turtle went from being ill to being well in the autumn before going to burn incense at the Jingting Temple.

古文：以故廉使辄备礼祠谒。龟从时病，至秋乃愈，因谒庙。及门怳然，屏上有画人，抱案而鞠躬，乃梦中之吏也。
现代文：一进了庙门就恍然有所醒悟，看见墙上的画中有个人抱着案卷在行礼，正是二十年前梦里遇到的那个官员。
English: As soon as I entered the temple gate, I suddenly woke up and saw a picture on the wall of a person holding a file and saluting. It was the same official I met in my dream twenty years ago.

古文：入庙所经历，无非昔梦，唯无同行者。
现代文：进庙以后看到的一切都和梦境相符。只是还找不到那个同行者。
English: Everything I saw after entering the temple matched the dream, but I still couldn't find the companion.

古文：归以告妻子。
现代文：从庙上回来告诉了妻子。
English: He came back from the temple and told his wife.

古文：明年七月，龟从又病，苦下泄，尤不喜食，暮夜辄大剧。因自诊前梦，以为吏所告者，吾其终于此乎？
现代文：第二年七月，崔龟从又病了，腹泻不止，到了夜里就更重，不能吃饭，病中自己回忆二十年前的梦，心想那个官员说的意思是不是我就要死在这里了？
English: In July of the following year, Cui Turtle fell ill again. His diarrhea became more and more severe at night, and he was unable to eat. During his illness, he recalled a dream from twenty years ago. He wondered if what the official meant was that he was going to die here.

古文：因心祷之。
现代文：心里就不断的祷告。
English: I kept praying in my heart.

古文：既寐，又梦晨起视事如常时。
现代文：刚睡着，又梦见自己象平时一样进衙办事。
English: I had just fallen asleep and dreamed that I was going about my business as usual.

古文：将就便室，及侧门，有家吏姚珪者，附耳言曰：左府君使人传语。
现代文：刚到休息室的侧门，一个家中的管事人附在他耳上说，左府君派使者来给你传话。
English: He had just arrived at the side door of the lounge when a house steward whispered in his ear, "Saofu-kun has sent an envoy to give you a message."

古文：闻之心悸而毛坚，意其非常人。
现代文：崔龟从立刻吓得头发都竖了起来，心想一定是阴间派人来了。
English: Cui Turtle was so scared that her hair stood on end. She thought that the underworld must have sent someone.

古文：就室未及坐，有一人，戎服提刀，奔趋而入。视其状魁岸，面黝而加赤，不类人色。紫衣黦剥，乃敬亭庙中阶下土偶人也。
现代文：进屋还没坐定，就有一个身穿军服提着刀的人闯了进来，这人身材高大，面孔黑红，紫衣服旧得掉了色，定睛一看，才想起他就是敬亭神庙大殿前的泥神像。
English: Before he had settled in, a man wearing a military uniform and carrying a knife burst in. He was tall, his face was black and red, and his purple clothes had lost their color. At first glance, he remembered that he was the mud god statue in front of the main hall of the Keihin Shrine.

古文：未及语，龟从厉声言曰：我年得几许？
现代文：还没等那人说话，崔龟从就厉声问道，我的阳寿倒底是多少年？
English: Before waiting for the man to speak, Cui Turtle asked sharply, "How old is my Yang Shou?"

古文：遽应曰：得六十几。
现代文：那人很快答道，六十多年。
English: The man quickly replied, "More than 60 years."

古文：梦中记其言，及觉，遂忘其奇载，意者神不欲人逆知其终欤？
现代文：梦中记住了这句话，醒来以后，竟忘了那神人说的是六十几年了，暗想大概是神人不能告诉他究竟能活到那一年。
English: He remembered this sentence in his dream, and when he woke up, he actually forgot that it had been more than sixty years since the god had spoken. He secretly thought that it was probably impossible for the godman to tell him whether he could live until that year.

古文：迟明，自为文以祝神，具道所以。命儿侄将酒牢庙中以祷。
现代文：天明以后，就自己写了一篇文章，把这些事都写上了，然后让儿子侄儿带上酒、肉到敬亨庙中祭神。
English: After the dawn of the day, he wrote an article by himself, wrote down all these things, and then asked his son and nephew to bring wine and meat to worship the gods in the temple.

古文：先是疾作，医言疾由寒而发，服热药辄剧。
现代文：起初他生病后，医生说是因为受寒，就给他服热性药，结果病情加重了。
English: When he first fell ill, the doctor said it was because of the cold, so he gave him a fever medicine, and his condition worsened.

古文：遂求医于浙西，医沈中遂乘驿而至。既切脉，直言公之疾，热过而气壅，当以阳治之，药剂以甘草犀角为主。
现代文：于是就求浙西一位名医。医生骑马赶来，一号脉，直率地说，你的病是热引起的，应当服以甘草犀角为主的清热药。
English: So he asked a famous doctor in western Zhejiang. The doctor arrived on horseback, and on the 1st day of the month, he said frankly that your illness was caused by heat, and you should take clear heat medicine based on licorice rhino horn.

古文：如其言，涉旬而稍间，经月而良已。
现代文：于是就按医生的话服药，十天后就见好转，一月后痊愈。
English: So he took the medicine according to the doctor's words. Ten days later, he saw improvement, and he recovered after one month.

古文：自以为必神之助，又自为文以祝神。
现代文：心想这一定是神的佑护，又写了一篇祭神的文章。
English: Thinking that this must be God's protection, I wrote another article to worship God.

古文：因出私俸，修庙之坏隳，加置土偶人，写垣墉之画绘皆新之。大设乐以享神，自举襟袖以舞。
现代文：并拿出自己的钱，修补庙里破败的地方，重塑了大殿前的神像，把墙上的壁画也重新画了，请来了鼓乐班子，他自己也随着乐声跳起舞来。
English: And he took out his own money to repair the dilapidated areas in the temple, reshaped the statues in front of the main hall, repainted the murals on the walls, invited a drum band, and danced to the music himself.

古文：始长庆感梦之时，绝不为五木之戏，及至江南，方与从事复为之。龟从后入相，罢为少保归洛。大中七年卒。
现代文：当初长庆年间梦见去阴间之后，再也不玩用樗蒲赌博的游戏，到了江南，才和同僚们又玩这种游戏了，崔龟从后来当了相国，在任太子少保时退休回洛阳，大中七年去世。
English: At the beginning of the Changqing era, after dreaming of going to the underworld, he no longer played the game of gambling with irises. It was only when he reached the south of the Yangtze River that he and his colleagues played this game again. Cui Turtle later became a compatriot, retired back to Luoyang when he was a minor prince, and died in his seventh year of high school.

