古文：公孙表，字玄元，燕郡广阳人也。
现代文：公孙表，字玄元，燕郡广阳人。
English: Gongsun table, character Xuan Yuan, Yan County Guangyang people.

古文：为慕容冲尚书郎。
现代文：担任慕容冲的尚书郎。
English: Sho Shuro, who plays Murong Chong.

古文：慕容垂破长子，从入中山。
现代文：慕容垂攻破长子城，公孙表跟随进入中山。
English: Murongdian broke through the eldest son's city, and Gongsun watch followed into Zhongshan.

古文：慕容宝走，乃归，为博士。
现代文：慕容宝逃走后，他归从道武，任博士。
English: After Murong Bao escaped, he returned to the Daowu and became a doctor.

古文：初，道武以慕容垂诸子分据势要，权柄推移，遂至亡灭，表诣阙上《韩非书》二十卷。道武称善。
现代文：当初，道武帝认为慕容垂的诸子分别位居要职，使得权柄推移，终于导致灭亡。公孙表上奏《韩非书》二十卷，道武颇为赞赏。
English: At first, Emperor Daowu thought that the sons of Mu Rongtu were in important positions, which caused the power to shift and eventually led to their demise. Gongsun played 20 volumes of "Han Fei Shu" on the table, and Daowu was quite appreciative.

古文：明元初，赐爵固安子。
现代文：明元初，赐公孙表固安子之爵。
English: At the beginning of the Ming and Yuan Dynasties, his grandson was given the title of Count of Guan Zi.

古文：河西饥胡刘武反于上党，诏表讨之。为胡所败，帝深衔之。
现代文：河西饥民胡人刘武在上党造反，明元下诏让公孙表讨伐，被胡人打败，皇帝对此耿耿于怀。
English: Liu Wu, a Hu man from the starving people in west China's Hebei Province, rebelled against the Shang Dynasty, and was defeated by the Hu people. The emperor was deeply concerned about this.

古文：泰常七年，宋武帝殂。
现代文：泰常七年，宋武帝死去。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, Emperor Songwu died.

古文：时议取河南侵地，以奚斤为都督，以表为吴兵将军、广州刺史。
现代文：朝廷议取河南一些地盘，任命奚斤为都督，公孙表为吴兵将军，广州刺史。
English: The imperial court discussed the acquisition of some land in Henan, and appointed Xing Jin as the governor, Gongsun Bo as the general Wu Bing, and Guangzhou as the chief historian.

古文：表既克滑台，遂围武牢。
现代文：公孙表攻克滑台，又将武牢围困。
English: Gongsun watch to overcome the slide, and the armed forces besieged.

古文：车驾次汲郡。
现代文：明元驾临汲郡。
English: Ming Yuan drove to Linqu County.

古文：始昌子苏坦、太史令王亮奏表置军武牢东，不得形便之地，故令贼不时灭。
现代文：始昌子苏坦、太史令王亮上奏，说公孙表屯兵在武牢东面，处在不利于进攻的地势，所以使敌兵一时间没被消灭。
English: Su Tan, the first son of Chang Zi, and Wang Liang, the first son of Taishi, said that Gongsun's troops were in the east of the military prison, in a situation that was not conducive to the attack, so the enemy soldiers were not eliminated for a while.

古文：明元雅好术数，又积前忿，及攻武牢，士卒多伤，乃使人夜就帐中缢杀之。
现代文：明元帝一向喜欢使用权术，加上以前的积怨，后来公孙表攻城时，士卒大量伤亡，明元帝就派人半夜在帐中将公孙表缢杀。
English: Emperor Mingyuan had always been fond of the right-of-use technique, and the accumulated grudges from the past. Later, when Gongsun Watch attacked the city, a large number of soldiers were killed and wounded. Emperor Mingyuan sent someone to kill Gongsun Watch in the middle of the night.

古文：以贼未退，秘而不宣。
现代文：由于敌人尚未退败，此事秘而不宣。
English: As the enemy had not yet retreated, the matter was kept secret.

古文：初，表与勃海封恺友善，后为子求恺从女，恺不许，表甚衔之。
现代文：以前，公孙表与渤海封恺友善，后来他为自己的儿子向封恺的侄女求婚，封恺不答应，公孙表怀恨在心。
English: In the past, Gongsun Table was friendly with Bohai Fongyu. Later, he proposed marriage to Fongyu's niece for his son. Fongyu did not agree, and Gongsun Table held a grudge.

古文：及封氏为司马国璠所逮，帝以旧族，欲原之。表证其罪，乃诛封氏。
现代文：后来封恺被司马国捉住，皇帝因为他是旧家族，想宽恕他，公孙表证实了他的罪状，于是封氏被杀。
English: Later, Fong Yao was caught by Sima Guo. The emperor wanted to pardon him because he was an old family member, and the grandson-in-law's watch confirmed his guilt, so Fong Ji was killed.

古文：表外和内忌，时人以此薄之。
现代文：公孙表外表谦和而内心多猜疑，当时众人因此而鄙薄其为人。
English: At that time, people despised him because he was outwardly modest and inwardly suspicious.

古文：表本与王亮同营署，及其出也，轻侮亮，故及于死。
现代文：公孙表与王亮本为同营署的同事，他后来出兵时，对王亮态度倨傲轻慢，终于导致被杀。
English: Gongsun watch and Wang Liang were originally colleagues in the same battalion. When he later went to war, he was arrogant and disrespectful to Wang Liang, which eventually led to his death.

古文：第二子轨，字元庆。
现代文：公孙表的第二子公孙轨，字元庆。
English: Gongsun Rong, the second son of Gongsun Rong, goes by the name Yuanqing.

古文：明元时，为中书郎。
现代文：明元帝时，为中书郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mingyuan, he was called Zhongshuro.

古文：出从征讨，补诸军司马。
现代文：他跟随御驾东征西讨，补授诸军司马之职。
English: He accompanied the Emperor on his eastward and westward campaigns, supplementing the duties of the steward of the armies.

古文：太武平赫连昌，引诸将帅入其府藏，各令任意取金玉。
现代文：太武帝平定赫连昌后，率领众将帅闯入他的府内藏金之地，令众人可随意挑选金银玉器。
English: After the Taiwu Emperor had subdued He Lianchang, he led the generals to break into his gold-hiding place in the capital, so that everyone could choose gold and silver jade at will.

古文：诸将取之盈怀，轨独不取。
现代文：诸将都金玉满怀，只有公孙轨什么也没拿。
English: All the generals were loaded with gold and jewels, only Gongsunlu didn't take anything.

古文：帝把手亲探金赐之，谓曰： 卿临财廉，朕所以增赐者，欲显廉于众人。 
现代文：皇帝亲手取金子赐给他，对他说： 卿见财而不起贪心，朕所以特地赏赐你，是为了在众人面前表彰清廉之风。 
English: The emperor took the gold with his own hands and gave it to him. He said to him, "Sir, you see wealth and cannot help being greedy. That is why I specially rewarded you, in order to commend the clean and honest style in front of everyone.

古文：后兼大鸿胪，持节拜立氐杨玄为南秦王。
现代文：后来他兼任大鸿胪，持节去册封氐的杨玄为南秦王。
English: Later, he also served as the Great Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Yang Xuan.

古文：及境，玄不郊迎；轨数玄无蕃臣礼。
现代文：到了氐境，杨玄没有到郊外来迎接，公孙轨指责他不守藩臣之礼。
English: When he arrived in Xizhou, Yang Xuan did not go to the suburbs to welcome him, and Gongsunlu accused him of not honoring the courtesy of a feudal retainer.

古文：玄惧，诣郊受命。
现代文：杨玄害怕了，赶到城外迎受圣命。
English: Yang Xuan was scared and rushed to the outskirts of the city to receive the sacred life.

古文：使还称旨，拜尚书，赐爵燕郡公，出为武牢镇将。
现代文：出使回来后由于完全符合皇帝旨意，被拜为尚书，赐爵为燕郡公，出任武牢镇将。
English: After returning from the mission, because he fully complied with the emperor's will, he was worshipped as Shangshu, knighted as Yan County, and appointed as Wuye Town General.

古文：初，太武将北征，发驴以运粮，使轨部调雍州。
现代文：当初，太武帝准备北征，征发民间的驴用以运粮，派公孙轨率部到雍州负责此事。
English: At first, Emperor Taowu was preparing for the Northern Expedition, requisitioning and dispatching people's donkeys to transport grain, and sent Gongsun Gu to Yongzhou to take charge of the matter.

古文：轨令驴主皆加绢一匹，乃与受之。
现代文：公孙轨令驴主要额外交一匹绢，才将驴收下。
English: The grandson ordered the donkey's master to give the donkey a donkey, and the donkey was accepted.

古文：百姓语曰： 驴无强弱，辅脊自壮。 
现代文：百姓们私下说道： 驴不管强弱，背一匹绢就能长壮。 
English: The people said privately: No matter how strong or weak the donkey is, it can grow strong with a donkey on its back.

古文：众共嗤之。
现代文：众人都很鄙视他这种做法。
English: He was widely despised for this.

古文：坐征还。
现代文：他因此有罪被召回，后来病死。
English: He was recalled as a result of his conviction and later died of illness.

古文：卒。轨既死，帝谓崔浩曰： 吾过上党，父老皆曰：公孙轨为将，受货纵贼，使至今余奸不除，轨之罪也。
现代文：公孙轨死后，皇上对崔浩道： 我路过上党时，听到老百姓说： 公孙轨做镇将时，受贿而对贼党手下留情，使得至今余奸不能消灭干净。
English: After the death of Gongsun Rong, the emperor said to Cui Hao: When I passed by the party, I heard the people say: When Gongsun Rong was a town marshal, he took bribes and showed mercy to the thief party's subordinates, making it impossible to eliminate the remaining traitors.

古文：其初来，单马执鞭；及去，从车百两。载物而南，丁零渠帅，乘山骂轨。
现代文：都是公孙轨之罪。他刚到任时，单人匹马；离任时，带着百辆大车，满载物品向南而行，丁零当地的首领站在山上大骂公孙轨。
English: It was all Gongsunlu's fault. When he first came to office, he rode alone; when he left office, he took a hundred carts full of goods and headed south. The local leader stood on the mountain and cursed Gongsunlu.

古文：轨怒，取骂轨者之母，以矛刺其阴而死之，曰： 何以生此逆子！ 
现代文：公孙轨大怒，将骂自己的人的母亲抓来，用长矛刺入她阴部而致死，还骂道： 怎么会生出这样的逆子！ 
English: Gongsunlu flew into a rage, seized the mother of the person who had cursed him, stabbed her in the genitals with a spear, and killed her. He also cursed, "How could such a traitor be born!"

古文：后以累使称旨，拜胜兵将军。
现代文：从下往上将她劈开，将四肢支解后挂在山树上。他竟然忍心干这种残忍的勾当。
English: Splitting her from the bottom up, dismembering her and hanging her from a tree, he had the nerve to do such a cruel thing.

古文：卒，子多罗袭爵，坐事除。李先，字容仁，中山卢奴人。
现代文：公孙轨幸亏死得早，如果他活到现在，朕一定要将他满门抄斩！ 李先，字容仁，中山卢奴人。
English: Fortunately, Gongsun Guo died early. If he had lived until now, I would definitely have executed him! Li Xian, Zha Rongren, Zhongshan Lu Nu people.

古文：少好学，善占相术。
现代文：年少时喜爱读书，并擅长占相之术。
English: When he was young, he loved to read and was good at fortune-telling.

古文：慕容永迎为谋主，劝永据长子城。
现代文：慕容永请他当首席谋士，他劝慕容永占据长子城。
English: Murong Yong asked him to be his chief strategist, and he advised Murong Yong to occupy the eldest son's city.

古文：仕永，位秘书监。
现代文：在慕容永属下，他官拜秘书监。
English: Under Murong Yong, he was the official secretary.

古文：永灭，徙中山。
现代文：慕容永被消灭后，他又迁往中山。
English: After Murongyong was eliminated, he moved to Zhongshan.

古文：皇始初，先于井陉归。道武问先曰： 卿何国人？
现代文：皇始初年，李先在井陉投奔道武帝，道武帝问李先道： 卿是哪里人氏？
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Emperor Lixian went to visit Emperor Daowu in Jingyao. Emperor Daowu asked Emperor Lixian: Sir, where are you from?

古文：祖父及身悉历何官？ 
现代文：祖父、父亲和卿自己曾担任过何等官职？ 
English: What offices did your grandfather, father and yourself hold?

古文：先曰： 臣本赵郡平棘人。大父重，晋平阳太守、大将军右司马。
现代文：李先道 ：臣本是赵郡平棘人，祖父李重，为晋平阳太守、大将军右司马。
English: Li Xiandao: My father-in-law was from Pingxian, Zhao County, and my grandfather, Li Chong, was the de facto ruler of Jin Dynasty Pingyang and the right-hand man of the general.

古文：父懋，石季龙乐安太守、左中郎将。
现代文：父亲李懋，为石季龙乐安太守、左中郎将。
English: His father, Li Xi, was the governor of Shijilong Le'an and the left middle commander.

古文：臣，苻丕左主客郎，慕容永秘书监、高密侯。 
现代文：臣为苻丕左主客郎，慕容永秘书监、高密侯。 
English: His vassals were Shizaochukerokuro, Murongongong secretary-supervisor, and Gaomihou.

古文：车驾还代，以先为尚书右中兵郎。
现代文：道武帝的车驾回到代都，任命李先为尚书右中兵郎。
English: Emperor Daowu returned to the capital in his chariot and appointed Li Xian as Shangshu Yuanzhongbingro.

古文：再迁博士、定州大中正。
现代文：后来又升为博士、定州大中正。
English: Later, he was promoted to doctor and became a junior high school vice-president of Dingzhou University.

古文：帝问先： 何者最善，可以益人神智？ 
现代文：皇帝问李先道 ：什么对人的聪明才智最有补益？ 
English: The emperor asked Li Xiandao: What is the most beneficial to human ingenuity?

古文：先曰： 唯有经书，三皇、五帝政化之典，可以补王者神智。 
现代文：李先道 ：只有经书、三皇五帝政事、教化的典籍，才对王者的聪明才智大有裨益。 
English: Li Xiandao: Only the scriptures, the three emperors, the five emperors, and the classics of enlightenment are of great benefit to the wisdom of the king.

古文：又问： 朕欲集天下书籍，如何？ 
现代文：皇帝又问道： 朕想要收集天下的书籍，是否可行？ 
English: The emperor then asked, "If I wanted to collect all the books in the world, would it be possible?

古文：对曰： 主之所好，集亦不难。 
现代文：李先答道： 皇上喜好的，收集起来不会困难。 
English: Li Xian replied: It will not be difficult to collect the Emperor's favorite wax.

古文：帝于是班制天下，经籍稍集。
现代文：皇帝于是颁布诏书于天下，经史典籍有所汇集。
English: The emperor then promulgated the imperial edict to the world, and historical classics have been collected.

古文：道武讨姚兴于柴壁也，问计于先。对曰： 兵以正合，战以奇胜。
现代文：道武在柴壁讨伐姚兴，向李先问计，李先答道： 以正合兵，以奇制胜。
English: Daowu fought against Yao Xing in Chaibi, and asked Li Xian about the strategy. Li Xian replied: to win with the right combination of troops, and to win by surprise.

古文：闻姚兴欲屯兵天渡，利其粮道。
现代文：听说姚兴想在天渡屯兵，能方便自己运粮。
English: I heard that Yao Xing wanted to garrison troops in Tiantu so that he could conveniently transport grain.

古文：及其到前，遣奇兵先邀天渡，柴壁左右严设伏兵，备其表里，兴欲进不得，住又乏粮。
现代文：我们在敌军未到之前，派一支奇兵先攻占天渡，并在柴壁附近严密设下伏兵，以防备敌人里应外合，姚兴欲进不能，驻守又缺粮。
English: Before the enemy army arrived, we sent a special force to capture Tiantu first, and set up a strict ambush near the wall to prevent the enemy from entering, Yao Xing could not enter, and there was a shortage of grain.

古文：夫高者为敌所栖，深者为敌所囚，兵法所忌。而兴居之，可不战而取。 
现代文：被敌人占据高处，或被敌人围困在深处，都是兵法所忌，而姚兴正处在这种情况，我们不用出战就能取胜。 
English: Being occupied by the enemy in high places, or being besieged by the enemy in the depths, are all forbidden by the laws of war, and Yao Xing is in this situation, we can win without going to war.

古文：帝从其计，兴果败归。
现代文：皇帝采用了他的计策，姚兴果然败退。
English: The emperor adopted his strategy, and Yao Xing was defeated.

古文：明元即位，问左右： 旧臣中谁为先帝所亲信？ 新息公王洛兒曰： 有李先者，为先帝所知。 俄而召先，读韩子《连珠论》二十二篇，《太公兵法》十一事。诏有司曰： 先所知者，皆军国大事，自今常宿于内。 
现代文：新息公王洛儿道 ：李先为先帝所器重。 皇帝立刻召来李先，李先诵读了韩非子《连珠论》二十二篇，《太公兵法》十一事。皇帝下诏有关部门道 ：李先了解的都是军队和国家的大事，从今天起让他一直住在宫内。 
English: Newly crowned Prince Luo Er said: Li Xian was very important to the former emperor. The emperor immediately summoned Li Xian, and Li Xian read 22 chapters of Han Feizi's "Lian Zhu Theory" and 11 chapters of "Tai Gong Hei Fa." The emperor issued a decree to the relevant departments: Li Xian understood all the important things of the army and the country, and let him live in the palace from today.

古文：以不拜荣也。窦瑾，字道瑜，顿丘卫国人，自云汉司空融之后也。
现代文：赏赐李先绢彩及御马一匹，拜为安东将军、寿春侯，赐隶属户二十二家。李先死时官至内都大官，享年九十五。皇帝下诏赐金绣官服一套，追赠定州刺史、中山公，谥号 文懿 。窦瑾，字道瑜，顿丘卫国人，自称是汉司空窦融的后代。
English: The emperor rewarded Li Xianxian with a set of gold embroidered official uniforms, and posthumously gave him the titles of Dingzhou Shishi, Zhongshan Gong, and the imperial horse. He was worshipped as General Anton and Shuchun Hou, and 22 households were given to him. When Li Xian died, he was the highest-ranking official in the Inner Capital and died at the age of 95. The emperor gave him a set of gold-embroidered official uniforms and posthumously gave him the titles of Dingzhou Shishi, Zhongshan Gong, and the posthumous name of Wen Xuan. Dou Xuan, also known as Duoyu, was a Dongqiu national

古文：高祖成，顿丘太守，因家焉。
现代文：曾祖父窦成，为顿丘太守，所以在顿丘安家。
English: His great-grandfather Dou Cheng was the governor of Dongqiu, so he settled in Dongqiu.

古文：瑾少以文学知名，自中书博士为中书侍郎，赐爵繁阳子。
现代文：窦瑾年轻时因为文才学识而知名，从中书博士官升至中书侍郎，赐为繁阳子爵。
English: When he was young, Dou Xuan was well-known for his literary talent and knowledge. He was promoted from the position of the Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy to the position of the Attendant of Chinese Calligraphy, and was given the title of Viscount Shengyang.

古文：参军国谋，屡有功，进爵卫国侯，转四部尚书。
现代文：参与谋划军国大事，屡有建树，晋爵为卫国侯，转任四部尚书。
English: He took part in the planning of military and national events, and made many achievements. He was promoted to the peerage as the Lord Protector, and transferred to the Shoshu of the Four Divisions.

古文：初定三秦，人犹去就，拜长安镇将、毗陵公。
现代文：刚刚平定三秦时，百姓们尚去留不定，任命窦瑾为长安镇将、毗陵公。
English: When the Three Qin States had just been pacified, the people were still uncertain about whether to go or stay, and appointed Dou Yu as the general of Chang'an Town and Viling Gong.

古文：在镇八年，甚著威惠。
现代文：他在这里八年，恩威并施，卓见成效。
English: He has been here for eight years and has been a great success.

古文：征为殿中都官尚书。
现代文：被升任为殿中都官尚书。
English: He was promoted to Shosho, a high-ranking official in the palace.

古文：太武亲待之，赏赐甚厚。从征盖吴，吴平，留瑾镇长安。
现代文：太武帝待他十分亲密，赏赐很丰厚，随驾出征盖吴，平定后，窦瑾被留下镇守长安。
English: Emperor Taowu treated him very closely and rewarded him very richly. He accompanied him to conquer Gai Wu. After the conquest, Dou Ye was left as the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：还京复为殿中、都官，典左右执法。
现代文：回京后重又为殿中、都官，主管左、右执法。
English: After returning to the capital, he became a court official and a city official again, in charge of enforcing the law left and right.

古文：太武叹曰： 国之良辅，毗陵公之谓矣。 
现代文：太武帝叹道： 辅国的贤良，说的就是毗陵公呀。 
English: Taiwu Emperor sighed and said, "The virtuous man of the auxiliary country is Viling Gong.

古文：出为冀州刺史，清约冲素，著称当时。
现代文：出任冀州刺史，清廉节俭，谦虚朴实，为当世所称道。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou Province. He was clean, frugal, modest and simple, and was praised by the contemporary world.

古文：还为内都大官。
现代文：回京后任内都大官。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed to the post of Inner Metropolitan Magistrate.

古文：其子僧演奸通人妇，为部人贾邈告，坐免。
现代文：兴光初年，窦瑾的女婿郁林公司马弥陀被选中应娶临泾公主，窦瑾教司马弥陀找托辞推掉。
English: In the first year of the Xingguang era, Dou Yu's son-in-law, Ma Mida of the Yulin Company, was selected to marry the Linyi Princess, but Dou Yu found an excuse to reject Ma Mida.

古文：后以善书拜库部令，卒官。李，字元盛，小名真奴，范阳人也。
现代文：朝廷借口说他有诽谤诅咒的话，窦瑾和司马弥陀一同被诛杀，只有他的小儿子窦遵藏起来幸免于难。李，字元盛，小名叫真奴，范阳人。
English: The imperial court used the excuse that he had slandered and cursed. Dou Xuan and Simamida were killed together, and only his youngest son, Dou Zunhu, survived by hiding. Li Xuan, also known as Yuan Sheng, his younger son was named Zhennu, and he was from Fanyang.

古文：曾祖产，产子绩，二世知名于慕容氏。
现代文：他的曾祖父李产和李产的儿子李绩，两代人都闻名于慕容氏政权。
English: His great-grandfather, Li Zan, and Li Zan's son, Li Bin, were both prominent members of the Murong regime.

古文：父崇，冯跋吏部尚书、石城太守。
现代文：他的父亲李崇，是冯跋的吏部尚书、石城太守。
English: His father, Li Chong, was the secretary of Fengba, Shang Shu, and the governor of Shicheng.

古文：车驾至和龙，崇率十余郡归降，太武甚礼之，呼曰李公。
现代文：太武帝到和龙，李崇率领十多个郡归降。太武帝非常尊重他，称他为李公。
English: Taiwu Emperor arrived in Hailong, and Li Chong led more than ten counties to surrender. Taiwu Emperor respected him very much and called him Li Gong.

古文：为北幽州刺史、固安侯。卒，谥曰襄侯。
现代文：李崇曾任北幽州刺史、固安侯，死后被封为襄侯。
English: Li Chong once served as the governor of Beiyuzhou and the governor of Gu'an. After his death, he was named the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：母贱，为诸兄所轻。
现代文：李的母亲地位卑贱，因此李被他的兄弟们所轻视。
English: Li Yao's mother had a lowly status, so Li Yao was despised by his brothers.

古文：崇曰： 此子之生，相者言贵，吾每观，或未可知。 
现代文：李崇说 ：这个孩子出生时，看相的先生说他将来是个贵人，我常观察他，或者说不定呢！ 
English: Li Chong said, "When this child was born, the doctor who took his photo said that he would be a nobleman in the future. I often observe him, or maybe not!

古文：遂使入都为中书学生。
现代文：李崇让儿子李入都城当中书学生。
English: Li Chong let his son Li Hao enter the capital as a junior high school student.

古文：太武幸中书学，见而异之，指谓从者曰： 此小兒终效用于朕之子孙。 
现代文：当时太武帝前去中书学堂，他见到李后很是惊异，指着李对随从的人说： 这个孩子将来会效命于我的子孙。 
English: At that time, Emperor Taowu went to the Chinese Calligraphy School. He was very surprised to see Li Qiye. He pointed to Li Qiye and said to his entourage: This child will serve my children and grandchildren in the future.

古文：因识眄之。
现代文：于是看了他一眼并记住他。
English: So I took one look at him and remembered him.

古文：帝舅阳平王杜超有女，将许贵戚，帝曰： 李后必官达，益人门户，可以妻之。 
现代文：皇帝的舅舅平阳王杜超有个女儿，想要许配给门庭高贵的人家，太武帝说： 李以后会成为达官显贵，给人家门户增光，可以将女儿许配给他为妻。 
English: The emperor's uncle, King Du Chao of Pingyang, had a daughter who wanted to be betrothed to a noble family. Emperor Taivu said: "In the future, Li Qian will become a high-ranking dignitary and add luster to people's homes, so he can marry off his daughter to him as his wife."

古文：遂劝成婚。
现代文：在他的劝说下，杜超的女儿与李成婚。
English: Under his persuasion, Du Chao's daughter married Li Lan.

古文：南人李哲常言必当贵达。
现代文：南方人李哲常说李必定会地位高贵。
English: Li Zhe, a southerner, often said that Li Yao would certainly be noble.

古文：杜超之死也，帝亲哭三日。
现代文：杜超死时，太武帝亲自上门吊唁，哭了三天。
English: When Du Chao died, Emperor Taibu personally went to the door to offer condolences and cried for three days.

古文：以超女婿，得在丧位出入。帝指谓左右曰： 观此人举动，岂不异于众也？
现代文：李以杜超女婿的身份出入于丧事之中，太武帝指着他对左右说： 看这个人的举动，难道不是与众不同吗？
English: As Du Chao's son-in-law, Li Qiye walked in and out of the funeral. Emperor Taowu pointed to him and said, "Look at this man's behavior. Isn't he different from others?

古文：必为朕家干事臣。 
现代文：他必定会成为我皇家的得力大臣。 
English: He will surely become a powerful minister of my royal family.

古文：聪敏机辩，强记明察。
现代文：李聪明、机敏、能言善辩，记忆力、观察力都很强。
English: Li Yao is intelligent, quick-witted, eloquent, and has a strong memory and observation.

古文：初，李灵为文成博士，诏崔浩选中书学生器业优者为助教。
现代文：起初，李灵是文成博士，朝廷让崔浩从中书学生中挑选成绩优秀者做助教。
English: At first, Li Ling was Dr. Wencheng, and the court asked Cui Hao to select outstanding students from the secondary school students to be teaching assistants.

古文：浩举其弟子箱子与卢度世、李敷三人应之。给事高谠子祐、尚书段霸兒侄等以为浩阿党其亲戚，言于景穆。
现代文：崔浩推荐他的学生箱子、卢度世和李敷三人，给事高谠的儿子高、尚书段霸的儿子、侄儿等认为崔浩庇护他的亲近的人，就将此事告诉了景穆。
English: Cui Hao recommended three of his students, Hako, Lu Du Ze and Li Shiki, to Gao Zhisheng's son Gao, Shang Shudanba's son, nephew and other close people who thought that Cui Hao was protecting him, and told Jing Mu about this.

古文：以浩为不平，闻之于太武。
现代文：后来，这件事又以崔浩办事不公平告到太武帝那儿。
English: Later, the matter was also reported to Emperor Taowu as being unfairly handled by Cui Hao.

古文：太武意在，曰： 云何不取幽州刺史李崇老翁兒？ 
现代文：太武帝的意思是要选拔李，他说： 为什么不取幽州刺史李崇这个老头的儿子？ 
English: Taiwu Emperor meant to select Li Qian, he said: Why not take Yuzhou's son, Li Chong, the son of the old man?

古文：浩对曰： 前亦言合选，但以其先行在外，故不取之。 
现代文：崔浩说： 原来也认为李适合入选，但因在此以前他已出门在外，所以没有推举他。 
English: Cui Hao said, "Originally, I also thought that Li Qian was suitable for selection, but because he had been out of the country before this, I did not nominate him.

古文：帝曰： 可待还，箱子等罢之。 
现代文：太武帝说 ：可以等李回来再选，箱子等人就算了吧！ 
English: Emperor Taibu said, "We can wait for Li Yao to come back and choose again. Let's just wait for the box!"

古文：遂除中书助教、博士，入授文成经。
现代文：从此，李便任中书助教，后来又任博士，教授文成帝经书。
English: Since then, Li Wei has served as an assistant professor of Chinese classics, and later as a doctor, teaching the scriptures of Emperor Wencheng.

古文：文成即位，以旧恩亲宠，迁仪曹尚书，领中秘书，赐爵扶风公。
现代文：文成帝即位后，李因旧恩亲宠，被提拔为仪曹尚书，领中秘书，赐爵扶风公。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Wencheng, because of the old grace and favor, Li Qian was promoted to the honor of Cao Shangshu, the secretary of the middle class, and the knight of Fu Feng.

古文：赠其母孙氏为容城君。
现代文：他的母亲孙氏也得到了容城君的封号。
English: His mother, Sun, also received the title of Yongcheng.

古文：帝顾群臣曰： 朕始学之岁，情未能专；既总万机，温习靡暇。是故儒道实有阙焉。岂惟予咎，抑亦师傅之不勤。
现代文：文成帝对群臣说： 我开始上学时，不能专心，现在要总理政务，没有空闲温习功课，所以在儒道的学习上实在有所欠缺，这不仅仅是我的过错，也有老师教授不够殷勤的原因。
English: Emperor Wencheng said to his courtiers: When I started school, I couldn't concentrate. Now I have to be the prime minister of the government, and I don't have time to review my lessons. Therefore, I am really lacking in the study of Confucianism. This is not only my fault, but also the reason why teachers and professors are not diligent enough.

古文：所以爵赏仍隆，盖不遗旧也。 
现代文：所以给你高爵厚禄，是因为不能忘记旧情。 
English: That's why I'm giving you a generous pension, because you can't forget the past.

古文：免冠拜谢。
现代文：李脱帽拜谢。
English: Hats off to Li Wei.

古文：出为相州刺史。
现代文：后出任相州刺史。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Sangju Province.

古文：为政清简，百姓称之。
现代文：他为政清廉，办事干练，受到百姓们的称赞。
English: He was praised by the people for his clean politics and efficient work.

古文：上疏求于州郡各立学官，使士望之流，衣冠之胄，就而受业。其经艺通明者，上王府。
现代文：李上书要求各州郡都设立学官，使士族、望族之流和读书人的子弟都能够上学读书，他们中经艺通明的可以到王府做事。
English: In his petition, Li Hongzhi demanded that all prefectures and counties should set up academicians, so that the sons and daughters of emperors, aristocrats, and scholars could go to school and study, and those who were well versed in the arts could work in the royal court.

古文：书奏，献文从之。
现代文：上奏之后，献文帝听从了。
English: After the performance, Emperor Xianwen obeyed.

古文：以政为诸州之最，加赐衣服。
现代文：因为李的政绩为各州中最好，因此皇帝加赐他衣服。
English: Because Li Xi's political performance was the best among all the states, the emperor gave him more clothes.

古文：自是遂有骄矜自得之志，受纳人财物，商胡珍宝。兵人告言。尚书李敷与少长相好，每左右之。或有劝以奏闻，敷不许。
现代文：从此，李便有些骄傲自得，开始接受别人的钱财和礼物，购买胡人的珍宝，士兵民众上告，因尚书李敷和李从小到大一直十分要好，常常相互帮助，有人劝李敷上奏朝廷，李敷不肯。
English: From then on, Li Lan was a bit proud and self-satisfied. He began to accept other people's money and gifts, buying the treasures of the Hu people. The soldiers appealed to the public. Because Shangshu Li Shiki and Li Lan had been very good friends from childhood to adulthood, they often helped each other. Some people advised Li Shiki to appeal to the imperial court, but Li Shiki refused.

古文：献文闻罪状，槛车征，拷劾抵罪。
现代文：献文帝听说了李的罪状，用槛车将李押回京拷打并追查他应负的罪责。
English: When Emperor Xianwen heard of Li Yao's crime, he sent Li Yao back to Beijing on a cart to torture him and investigate his culpability.

古文：敷兄弟将见疏斥，有司讽以中旨嫌敷兄弟之意，令告列敷等隐罪，可得自全。
现代文：李敷兄弟也被疏远和谴责。有关官员向李透露皇帝对李敷兄弟的不满，让李揭发李敷等人未暴露的罪行，这样李就可以自全，李坚决不这样做，而且他也不知道李敷等人干了些什么事。
English: The Li Shiki brothers were also alienated and condemned. Relevant officials revealed to Li Xi that the emperor was dissatisfied with the Li Shiki brothers, and asked Li Xi to expose the unrevealed crimes of Li Shiki and others, so that Li Xi could be self-sufficient. Li Xi resolutely refused to do so, and he did not know what Li Shiki and others had done.

古文：深所不欲，且弗之知也，乃谓其女婿裴攸曰： 吾与李敷，族世虽远，情如一家。在事既有此劝，昨来引簪自刺，以带自绞，而不能致绝。
现代文：他对他的女婿裴攸说 ：我与李敷是一族，虽然世代已远，但情如一家，现在竟然有人这样劝我，昨天我用簪自刺，用带子自绞，都没能送命。
English: He said to his son-in-law, Pei You, "I am from the same family as Li Shiki. Although the generations are far apart, we are like a family. Now, someone is trying to persuade me to do this. Yesterday, I stabbed myself with a spade and hanged myself with a belt, but I couldn't kill myself.

古文：且亦不知其事。 
现代文：况且我也不知道他的事。 
English: Besides, I don't know anything about him.

古文：攸曰： 何为为他死？
现代文：裴攸说 ：为什么要为他而死呢？
English: Bae said: "Why should I die for him?

古文：敷兄弟事衅可知。有冯阑者，先为敷杀，其家切恨之。
现代文：李敷兄弟的罪行可知，有个叫冯瞤的人，以前被李敷所杀，他家的人对李敷切齿痛恨。
English: The crimes of the Li Shiki brothers are well known. There was a man named Feng Yao, who was killed by Li Shiki in the past, and his family hated Li Shiki with all their teeth.

古文：但呼阑弟问之，足可知委。 
现代文：你只要叫冯瞤的弟弟来问问，就知道缘由了。 
English: All you have to do is ask Feng Yao's brother to come and ask, and you will know the reason.

古文：从其言。
现代文：李听了他的话。
English: Li Qiye listened to his words.

古文：又赵郡范标具列敷兄弟事状，有司以闻，敷坐得罪。
现代文：这时又有赵郡人范鉽将李敷兄弟的罪状全部列出，主管此案的官吏奏明皇帝，李敷被判罪。
English: At this time, Fan Qi, a resident of Zhao County, listed all the charges against the Li Shiki brothers. The official in charge of the case appealed to Emperor Ming, and Li Shiki was found guilty.

古文：诏列贪冒应死，以纠李敷兄弟，故免。
现代文：皇帝下诏书说： 李贪图财物本应处死，因能揭发李敷兄弟，所以免除死刑。 
English: The emperor's edict said: Li Qiye's greed for money and property should have been punishable by death, but because he was able to expose Li Jiki's brothers, he was exempt from the death penalty.

古文：百鞭髡刑，配为厮役。
现代文：李被处以鞭打一百和髡发的刑罚，发配为厮役。
English: Li Yao was punished with one hundred strokes of the cane, and assigned to forced labor.

古文：之废也，平寿侯张谠见，与语，奇之。谓人曰： 此佳士也，终不久屈。 
现代文：李受废黜后，平寿侯张谠见到了李，和他谈了话，张谠很惊奇对人说： 这是一位佳士，终究不能长久受屈。 
English: After the dethronement of Li Xuan, Ping Shou Hou Zhang Ye met Li Xuan and talked with him. Zhang Ye was very surprised and said to people: This is a good man, after all, he can't suffer for a long time.

古文：未几而复为太仓尚书，摄南部事。
现代文：不久李复出，任太仓尚书，统管南部大事。
English: Soon after, Li Gan returned and was appointed as Taicang Shangshu, in charge of affairs in the south.

古文：用范标陈策计，令千里之外，户别转运，诣仓输之。使所在委滞，停延岁月。百姓竞以货赂，各求在前，于是远近大为困弊。道路群议曰： 畜聚敛之人，未若盗臣。 
现代文：李用了范鉽提出的计策，他们让千里之外的百姓，每户都到官仓交纳粮食，并使他们停留在路上，李故意推延日期，百姓们争着行贿，都请求能先交粮，于是各处百姓们都感到困乏疲惫，路边人群议论： 养活这些搜括民财的人，不如养活强盗去做大臣。 
English: Li Yu used the strategy proposed by Fan Kui. They let the people thousands of miles away, each household, go to the official storehouse to pay for grain, and made them stay on the road. Li Yu deliberately postponed the date. The people fought to pay bribes, and all asked to be able to pay grain first. As a result, the people everywhere felt tired and exhausted. The roadside crowd discussed: It is better to feed these people who collect people's wealth than to feed robbers to become ministers.

古文：弟左军将军璞谓曰： 范标善能降人以色，假人以辞，未闻德义之言，但有势利之说。
现代文：李的弟弟左将军李璞对李说： 范鉽善于观颜察色来说服人，用假话来骗人，没听见他说过有德有义的话，只有势利的说辞。
English: Li Yan's brother, General Zuo Li Yan, said to Li Yan: Fan Yan is good at looking at people and telling lies to deceive people. I have never heard him say anything virtuous, only snobbish words.

古文：听其言也甘，察其行也贼，所谓谄谀谗慝，贪冒奸佞。
现代文：听他说话很甜蜜，看他行为却是贼样，他真是阿谀奉承谗害别人贪图钱财的奸佞。
English: To hear him speak is sweet, but to see him act is thievish. He is a sycophant and a money-grubbing conniver.

古文：不早绝之，后悔无及。 
现代文：如不早些与他断绝关系，以后后悔莫及。 
English: If you do not break off relations with him earlier, you will regret it later.

古文：不从，弥信之，腹心事皆以告标。
现代文：李不听弟弟的劝告，反而更信任范鉽，自己的事都告诉范鉽。
English: Li Yao did not listen to his brother's advice, but trusted Fan Yao more. He told Fan Yao everything about himself.

古文：既宠于献文，参决军国大议，兼典选举，权倾内外，百寮莫不曲节以事之。标以无功起家拜卢奴令。
现代文：李既受宠于献文帝，参与决断军国大事，又兼负责选拔官员，权力倾于朝廷内外，百官个个来曲意侍奉他，范鉽毫无功劳却被任命为卢奴令。
English: Li Qian was not only favored by Emperor Qianwen, but also participated in the decision-making of military and national affairs, and was also responsible for the selection of officials. Power was concentrated inside and outside the imperial court, and hundreds of officials came to serve him. Fan Qian was appointed to the post of Lunuling without any merit.

古文：献文崩，迁司空，进爵范阳公，出为侍中、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史。
现代文：献文帝驾崩，李升为司空，晋爵为范阳公。他出任侍中、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史。
English: After the death of Emperor Xianwen, Li Yuxing was promoted to the rank of Siku, and he was promoted to the rank of Fan Yanggu. He served as a chamberlain, Zhenan Grand General, Kaifu Yidong Third Division, and Xuzhou Jishi.

古文：范标知文明太后之忿，又知内外疾之，太和元年，希旨告外叛。
现代文：范鉽得知文明太后很恼恨李，又知道朝内朝外也都痛恨李。太和元年，他迎合太后的旨意，告发李在外反叛。
English: Fan Ye learned that the Empress Dowager Civility was very angry with Li Ye, and also knew that both inside and outside the imperial court hated Li Ye. In the first year of the Taiga era, he catered to the wishes of the Empress Dowager and denounced Li Ye for rebelling abroad.

古文：文明太后征至京师，言其叛状。
现代文：文明太后召李到京都，指出他反叛的罪状。
English: The Empress Dowager of Civilization summoned Li Xi to Kyoto and pointed out his crime of rebellion.

古文：曰： 无之。 
现代文：李说： 没有这事。 
English: Li Wei said: There is no such thing.

古文：引标证。
现代文：太后让范鉽做证。
English: The empress dowager asked Fan Qi to testify.

古文：言： 尔妄云知我，吾又何言！虽然，尔不顾余之厚德，而忍为此，不仁甚矣。 
现代文：李说： 你胡说知道我反叛，我又有什么话说，即使是这样，你不顾我对你的厚德而忍心这样做，太不仁义了！ 
English: Li Yao said, "You are talking nonsense. You know that I am a rebel and I have something to say. Even so, you have the nerve to do this regardless of my kindness to you. It is so uncharitable!"

古文：标曰： 公德于标，何若李敷之德于公？公昔忍于敷，标今敢不忍公乎？ 
现代文：范鉽说： 你对我有德，怎么比得上李敷对你的厚德，当初你忍心那样对李敷，我现在为什么不能这样对你呢？ 
English: Fan Ye said: You have a virtue for me, how can it be compared to Li Jiki's virtue for you. At the beginning, you had the patience to treat Li Jiki like that, why can't I do this to you now?

古文：子济袭父爵，位魏郡太守，政有清称。
现代文：李感慨地说： 我不听李璞的话，自己招来了灾祸，心中千悔万恨，怎么能说清。 他终于被诛杀。
English: Li Yao said with emotion: I didn't listen to Li Yao's words, I brought disaster on myself, I have a thousand regrets in my heart, how can I say it clearly, he was finally killed.

古文：加宁远将军。及宋王刘昶开府，召为谘议参军。
现代文：李璞，字季直，性情淳厚，善于识别各种人，赐爵宜阳侯，任太常卿。
English: Li Qian, nicknamed Ji Zhi, was honest and good-natured, and good at recognizing all kinds of people. He was given the title of Yiyang Marquis and appointed as Tai Changqing.

古文：毛修之，字敬文，荥阳阳武人也。
现代文：毛修之，字敬文，荥阳阳武人。
English: Mao Xiu Zhi, the character Jing Wen, and Shenyang Yangwu Ren.

古文：世仕晋。
现代文：祖上四代为晋朝官员。
English: His ancestors were officials of the Jin Dynasty for four generations.

古文：刘裕之平关中，留子义真镇长安，以修之为司马。
现代文：刘裕平定关中后，留儿子刘义真镇守长安，任命毛修之为司马。
English: After Liu Yuping passed away, he left his son Liu Yizhen to be the town guard of Chang'an, and appointed Mao Xiu as Sima.

古文：及义真败，修之没统万。
现代文：后来刘义真战败，毛修之沦没于统万。
English: Later, Liu Yizhen was defeated, and Mao Xiu's downfall did not go unnoticed.

古文：太武平赫连昌，获之。
现代文：太武帝平定赫连昌时得到了他。
English: Taiwu Emperor got him when he subdued Herenchang.

古文：使领吴兵，以功拜吴兵将军。
现代文：让他统领吴兵，因为战功官拜吴兵将军。
English: Let him lead the Wu soldiers, because the war meritorious officer should worship the Wu soldiers.

古文：修之能为南人饮食，手自煎调，多所适意。
现代文：毛修之能烧得一手南方好菜，亲手烹调，很合皇上的口味。
English: Maoshu's ability to cook Southern delicacies with his own hands was well suited to the emperor's tastes.

古文：太武亲待之，累迁尚书，赐爵南郡公，常在太官主进御膳。
现代文：太武帝待他十分亲善，慢慢地将他升任尚书，赐南郡公之爵，常常在太官负责进奉御膳。
English: Emperor Taivu treated him very kindly, and gradually promoted him to Shangshu and gave him the title of Duke of Nanshun. He was often in charge of serving meals to the emperor.

古文：从讨和龙，时诸军攻城，行宫人少，宋故将硃修之为云中将军，欲率吴兵为逆。因入和龙，冀浮海南归。
现代文：毛修之跟随太武帝御驾征讨和龙，当时众多军队都在攻城，行宫中很空虚，宋故将朱之任云中的镇将，想率领吴兵反叛，于是进入和龙，希望乘船从海上逃回南方。
English: Maoshuizhi followed Emperor Taibu on his journey to invade and conquer Hualong. At that time, many armies were attacking the city, and the palace was very empty. Song therefore appointed Zhu Zhi as the commander of the town of Yunzhong. He wanted to lead the Wu soldiers to rebel, so he entered Hualong, hoping to escape by boat from the sea to the south.

古文：以告修之，不听，乃止。
现代文：他把这个计划告诉毛修之，毛修之不同意，他也没能如愿。
English: He told this plan to Mao Shuzhi, but Mao Shuzhi did not agree, and he did not get what he wanted.

古文：是日无修之，大变几作。
现代文：当天若是毛修之不在，只怕就要发生大变故。
English: If Mao Xiu is absent on the same day, there may be a big change.

古文：硃修之遂奔冯弘。
现代文：朱之于是去投奔冯弘。
English: Zhu Zhi then went to work for Feng Hong.

古文：修之又以军功，迁特进、抚军大将军，位次崔浩下。
现代文：毛修之又因为军功，升任特进、抚军大将军，官位仅在崔浩之下。
English: Mao Xuzhi was also promoted to the rank of special advance and general of the army because of his military exploits. His official rank was just below that of Cui Hao.

古文：浩以其中国旧门，虽不博洽，犹涉猎书传，与共论说之。
现代文：崔浩因为毛修之是中原世家，虽然算不上学识渊博，但阅览过一些经书传记，就同他探讨这方面的问题。
English: Because Mao Xiu Zhi is from the Central Plains, although he is not very knowledgeable, Cui Hao has read some biographies of scriptures and discussed this issue with him.

古文：次及陈寿《三国志》，云 有古良史风，其所著述，文义典正，班史以来无及寿者 。
现代文：谈到陈寿著《三国志》，崔浩说他 有古代优秀史学家的遗风，他所著述，文字典雅，立意鲜明，班固以后的史学家再没有比得上陈寿的了。 
English: Speaking of Chen Shou's "History of the Three Kingdoms," Cui Hao said that he has the legacy of an excellent ancient historian. His writings are elegant and have a clear intention. No historian after Bangu can match Chen Shou.

古文：修之曰： 昔在蜀中，闻长老言，寿曾为诸葛亮门下书佐，得挞百下，故其论武侯云：应变非其所长。 
现代文：毛修之道： 以前我在蜀中时，听得老人们说，陈寿曾做过诸葛亮手下的书佐，被罚鞭打一百下，所以他评论武侯时说他不善于随机应变。 
English: Mao Xiu Dao: In the past, when I was in Shuzhong, I heard the old people say that Chen Shou had been Zhuge Liang's assistant and was punished with a hundred lashes, so when he commented on Wuhou, he said that he was not good at random contingency.

古文：浩乃与论曰： 承祚之评亮，乃有故义过美之誉，非挟恨之言。
现代文：崔浩和他商榷道 ：陈寿评论诸葛亮，只有特意赞誉之词，而没有怀恨之语。
English: Cui Hao and his discussion: Chen Shou commented on Zhuge Liang, only words of special praise, but no words of hatred.

古文：夫亮之相备，英雄奋发之时，君臣相得，鱼水为喻。而不能与曹氏争天下，委弃荆州，退入巴蜀，守穷崎岖之地，僭号边夷之间，此策之下者。
现代文：诸葛亮做刘备的丞相，正是英雄有所作为之时，君臣之间相辅相成，如鱼得水，却不能与曹氏争夺天下，放弃荆州，退入巴蜀，守着闭塞而崎岖之地，僭称帝号在偏僻的百夷之间，这都是下策。
English: Zhuge Liang was Liu Bei's prime minister. It was precisely when the hero made a difference that the monarchs and ministers complemented each other. It was like a fish getting water, but they could not compete with Cao for the world. They gave up Jingzhou, retreated to Bashu, guarded the congested and rugged land, and pretended that the emperor was in the remote Baiyi. This was the next strategy.

古文：可以赵佗为偶，而以管、萧之亚匹，不亦过乎！
现代文：可以用赵佗来比诸葛亮，但用管仲、萧何与之相媲美，不是对他太过誉了吗！
English: You can use Zhao Wei to compare Zhuge Liang, but using Guanzhong and Xiao He to compare, isn't that giving him too much credit?

古文：且亮既据蜀，弗量势力，严威切法，控勒蜀人，欲以边夷之众，抗衡上国。
现代文：况且诸葛亮盘踞在西蜀，又不自量力，用严厉威猛的法令统治蜀地的老百姓。想要用偏远蛮夷之众，与中原大国抗衡。
English: Moreover, Zhuge Liang was entrenched in West Shu, and he did not measure up, ruling the people of Shu with harsh and powerful decrees. He wanted to use the remote barbarians to compete with the Central Plains countries.

古文：出兵陇右，再攻祁山，一攻陈仓，疏迟失会，摧衄而反。
现代文：他出兵陇右，两次攻打祁山，一次攻击陈仓，战术上的疏忽错漏导致机会丧失，受挫而退兵。
English: He sent troops to the right and left, twice attacked Shaoshan, once attacked Chencang. Tactical negligence and mistakes led to lost opportunities, and he was frustrated and withdrew.

古文：后入秦川，更求野战。
现代文：后来进入秦川，改变战术，要求与对方在城外作战。
English: Later, he entered Qinchuan, changed his tactics, and demanded to fight the other side outside the city.

古文：魏人知其意，以不战屈之。
现代文：魏国人了解他的意图，用拒不出战之法使他再次挫败。
English: The Wei people understood his intention and foiled him again by refusing to go to war.

古文：智穷势尽，发病而死。
现代文：在无计可施，国力耗竭之下，他发病而死。
English: With nothing to do and the country exhausted, he fell ill and died.

古文：由是言之，岂合古之善将，见可知难乎？ 
现代文：由此看来，诸葛亮怎么能符合古时良将的标准，能预见可行的和难办的事情？ 
English: From this point of view, how can Zhuge Liang meet the standards of the ancient good generals and be able to foresee feasible and difficult things?

古文：修之谓浩言为然。
现代文：毛修之同意崔浩的见解。
English: Mao Xiuqi agreed with Cui Hao's opinion.

古文：后卒于外都大官，谥恭公。
现代文：毛修之死时官至外都大官，谥号 恭公 。
English: At the time of Mao Xiu's death, he was the highest-ranking official in the capital, and his posthumous name was Gongong.

古文：修之在南有四子，唯子法仁入魏。
现代文：毛修之在江南有四个儿子，只有儿子毛法仁到魏国。
English: Mao Xuzhi had four sons in the south of the Yangtze River, but only his son Mao Farren went to Wei.

古文：与叔父和归阙，俱为上客，封晋昌公。献文时，位华州刺史。
现代文：文成帝初年，任金部尚书，承袭父亲爵位，转为殿中尚书。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wencheng, he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Finance, inherited his father's title, and became the secretary of the palace.

古文：太和十六年，降为侯。
现代文：毛法仁说话声音洪亮，在军队时或出去打猎，喊叫指挥，声音震动山谷。
English: Mao Farin spoke with a booming voice. When he was in the army or out hunting, he shouted commands, and his voice shook the valley.

古文：子崇，字继祖，袭爵。
现代文：去世时，追赠征东大将军、南郡王，谥为 威 。
English: At the time of his death, he posthumously conferred the titles of General of the Eastern Expedition and King of Nan County.

古文：寇赞，字奉国，上谷人也，因难徙冯翊万年。
现代文：寇硈，字奉国，上谷人，因为遭灾而迁到冯翊万年。
English: The people of Kouyi, also known as Bongguo and Shanggu, moved to Fengye because of the disaster.

古文：父修之，字延期，苻坚东莱太守。
现代文：父亲寇之，字延期，任苻坚的东莱太守。
English: His father, Kou Zhi, had his title deferred, and he became the governor of Donglai.

古文：赞弟谦，有道术，太武敬重之，故追赠修之安西将军、秦州刺史、冯翊公。
现代文：寇硈之弟寇谦，会道术，太武帝对他很敬重，所以追赠寇之为安西将军、秦州刺史、冯翊公。
English: Emperor Taibu held him in high esteem, so he posthumously awarded him the titles of Anxi General, Qinzhou Sashih and Feng Ronggong.

古文：赐命服，谥曰哀公。
现代文：赐给朝服，谥号 哀公 。
English: He was given a royal robe and a nickname, Aiko.

古文：诏秦、雍二州为立碑墓。又赠修之母为冯翊夫人，及宗从追赠太守、县令、侯、子、男者十六人，其临职者七郡、五县。
现代文：下诏秦、雍二州为他立碑修墓，另外赠寇之的母亲为冯翊夫人，连堂叔伯等亲戚被追赠为太守、县令、侯、子、男的有十六人，就职者在七个郡、五个县。
English: Qin and Yong Erzhou erected a monument for him and repaired his tomb. In addition, his mother was Mrs. Feng Yu, and his uncle Liantang and other relatives were posthumously awarded as the governor, county magistrate, lord, son, and son. There were 16 people, and the incumbents were in seven counties and five counties.

古文：赞少以清洁知名。
现代文：寇硈年轻时就因为清秀整洁闻名于世。
English: When she was young, Kou Ye was famous for her beauty and neatness.

古文：身长八尺，姿容严嶷，非礼不动。
现代文：他身高八尺，姿态仪容庄严，不合于礼的不做。
English: He is eight feet tall, with a stately bearing and a dignified demeanor.

古文：苻坚仆射韦华，州里高达，虽年时有异，恆以风味相待。
现代文：苻坚时的仆射韦华，是州中乡里的高明显贵之人，虽然与寇硈年龄悬殊，但一直以趣味相投的朋友相待。
English: Wei Hua, the servant of Gu Jian, is a high-profile person in the middle of the state. Although there is a big age difference with Guo Jian, they have always treated each other as friends with similar interests.

古文：华为冯翊太守，召为功曹。
现代文：韦华任冯翊太守，召他作功曹。
English: Wei Hua appointed Feng Yu as the de facto ruler and called him to serve as gong cao.

古文：后除襄邑令。
现代文：后来又任襄邑县令。
English: Later, he was appointed the county magistrate of Xiangyi County.

古文：姚泓灭，秦、雍人千余家推赞为主，归魏。
现代文：姚泓灭亡后，秦、雍两地人千余家推举寇硈为首领，投奔魏。
English: After the death of Yao Xuan, more than a thousand families in Qin and Yong Dynasty selected Guo Xuan as their leader and fled to Wei.

古文：拜河南郡太守。
现代文：官拜为河南郡太守。
English: He is officially known as the governor of Henan County.

古文：其后秦、雍人来奔河南、荥阳、河内者，户至万数，拜赞南雍州刺史、轵县侯，于洛阳立雍州之郡县以抚之。
现代文：在这之后，秦、雍的百姓迁居到河南、荥阳、河内的，有万余户之多，寇硈又官拜南雍州刺史、轵县侯。在洛阳设置雍州的郡县安置那些流民。
English: After this, the people of Qin and Yong moved to Henan, Shenyang, and Hanoi, with more than 10,000 households. The Qin and Yong officials also paid tribute to the governor of Southern Yongzhou and the governor of Shen County. The counties of Yongzhou were set up in Luoyang to resettle those displaced people.

古文：由是流人襁负，自远而至，参倍于前。
现代文：由于这个措施，流民带着行李，从远处而来，比以前多出数倍。
English: As a result of this measure, the number of refugees arriving from far away, with their luggage, has increased several times.

古文：进赞爵河南公，加安南将军，领南蛮校尉，仍刺史。分洛、豫二州之侨郡以益之。
现代文：寇硈晋爵为河南公，加安南将军，领南蛮校尉，仍为刺史，并分给他洛豫二州的一些移民侨居的郡。
English: Colonel Jinzhu was Henan Gong, General Ga'nan Nan, and Lieutenant Nanban Nan, and he was still Shishi, and he was assigned to some counties where immigrants lived in two states of Luoyang and Henan.

古文：虽位高爵重，接待不倦。
现代文：寇硈虽然官职很高爵位显贵，但仍不知疲倦地接待流民。
English: Despite his high official position and noble title, he still tirelessly received the displaced people.

古文：初，赞之未贵，尝从相者唐文相。
现代文：以前，寇硈没有成为显贵时，曾经让相士唐文看相。
English: In the past, when Kou Ye did not become a prominent person, he used to have his best friend Tang Wen look after him.

古文：文曰： 君额上黑子入帻，位当至方伯，封公。 
现代文：唐文道 ：您额上有颗黑痣被头巾包住，以后将官至一方首领，封为公。 
English: Tang Wendao: You have a black mole on your forehead, which is covered by a headscarf. From now on, you will be a leader of one side, and you will be a public figure.

古文：及其贵也，文以百姓礼拜谒曰： 明公忆畴昔言乎？ 
现代文：等到他显贵后，唐文以百姓的身份拜谒寇硈道 ：明公不记得小人过去说的话吗？ 
English: After his rise to prominence, Tang Wen, as a commoner, paid homage to the villain, saying: Doesn't Ming Gong remember what the villain said in the past?

古文：延文坐曰： 往时卿言杜琼不得官长，人咸谓不然。
现代文：寇硈请唐文坐下道 ：过去您说杜琼做不了官，人们都不以为然。
English: Kou Ye asked Tang Wen to sit down and said, "In the past, you said that Du Qiong couldn't be an official, but people didn't believe you.

古文：及琼为盩厔令，卿犹言相中不见，而琼果以暴疾，未拜而终。
现代文：直到杜琼被任命为銩县令，您仍说相中了但还未显现，果然杜琼因为得了暴病，尚未拜官就死了。
English: Until Du Qiong was appointed as the county magistrate of Handan County, you still said that you were in the middle of the phase but had not yet appeared. As a matter of fact, Du Qiong died because he got a violent disease before he was appointed.

古文：昔魏舒见主人兒死，自知己必至公。
现代文：当年魏舒见主人之子已死，知道自己一定能被封为公爵。
English: When Wei Shu saw that his master's son had died, he knew that he would definitely be made a duke.

古文：吾恆以卿言琼之验，亦复不息此望也。 
现代文：我一直因为您说杜琼之事灵验，所以从来没有放弃这个希望。 
English: I have never given up this hope because I have always believed that what you said about Du Qiong is true.

古文：乃赐文衣服良马。
现代文：于是送给唐文衣服和良马。
English: So he gave Tangwen some clothes and a good horse.

古文：赞在州十七年，甚收公私之誉。年老，求致仕。
现代文：寇硈任州官十七年，得到官方和百姓们的一致称道。年老后，请求辞官回家。
English: After seventeen years as a state official, he received unanimous praise from the authorities and the people. When he was old, he asked to retire and return home.

古文：卒，遗令薄葬，敛以时服。
现代文：死后，遗言令薄葬，入殓时只穿平时穿的普通衣服。
English: After his death, his last words were to be buried in a shallow grave, and when he was buried, he only wore the ordinary clothes he normally wore.

古文：俊字祖俊。
现代文：太武帝对他哀悼惋惜，谥号宣穆。
English: Emperor Taibu felt sorry for him and gave him the nickname Xuanmu.

古文：性宽雅，幼有识量，好学强记。
现代文：儿子寇元宝承袭爵位。寇俊，字祖俊，性格温雅宽厚，小时候就有见识和抱负，好学且善于记忆。
English: His son, Kou Yuanbao, inherited the title. Kou Jun, nicknamed Zu Jun, has a gentle and generous personality. As a child, he had insight and ambition, was eager to learn and good at memory.

古文：性又廉恕，不以财利为心。
现代文：他生性廉洁，不为财物私利动心。
English: He is honest by nature and is not motivated by wealth or self-interest.

古文：家人曾卖物与人，而利得绢一匹。
现代文：家里人曾经卖东西给别人，赚了一匹绢。
English: A member of the family once sold something to someone and made a lot of money.

古文：俊于后知之，乃曰： 得财失行，吾所不取。 
现代文：寇俊后来知道了这件事，就说： 得到了财物而失去了德行，我认为很不足取。 
English: When Kou Jun learned about this later, he said, "I think it's very unlucky to get wealth and lose virtue.

古文：访主还之。
现代文：找到了货主将绢还给了他。
English: He found the owner of the goods and returned it to him.

古文：以选为孝文帝挽郎，除奉朝请。
现代文：他被选为孝文帝的挽郎，任命为奉朝请。
English: He was chosen to be Emperor Xiaowen's groomsman, and was appointed to serve the emperor.

古文：大乘贼起，燕、赵扰乱，俊参护军事东讨，以功授员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：大乘的贼寇反叛，燕、赵之地遭到侵扰，寇俊参与军中谋事，跟随东讨，因为军功而被授予员外散骑侍郎之职。
English: The Taihaku bandits rebelled, and the lands of Yan and Zhao were invaded. The Kojun took part in military affairs, followed the Eastern Controversy, and was awarded the position of non-commissioned officer riding horseback because of his military service.

古文：累迁司空府主簿。
现代文：逐步升任为司空府主簿。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of Sikyu-fu's chief accountant.

古文：时灵太后临朝，减食禄官十分之一，造永宁佛寺，令俊典之。
现代文：当时正是灵太后掌权临朝，削减了十分之一领俸禄的官员，用省下的钱来兴建永宁佛寺，命寇俊为工程主管。
English: At that time, it was the Empress Dowager Ling who held power in the Lintong Dynasty, reduced the officials who received salaries by one-tenth, and used the saved money to build the Yongning Buddhist Temple, and appointed Qojun as the project supervisor.

古文：资费巨万，主吏不能欺隐。
现代文：建寺耗资巨大，但上上下下的大小官吏，都不敢有贪污舞弊的行为。
English: The construction of the temple cost a huge amount of money, but officials of all ranks did not dare to commit acts of corruption.

古文：寺成，又极壮丽。
现代文：寺建成后，极为壮观宏丽。
English: After the completion of the temple, it was extremely spectacular and magnificent.

古文：灵太后嘉之，除左军将军。
现代文：灵太后嘉奖他，任命他为左军将军。
English: Empress Dowager Ling praised him and appointed him as the general of the Left Army.

古文：孝昌中，朝议以国用不足，乃置盐池都将，秩比上郡。
现代文：孝昌年间，朝廷商议决定因国家开支费用不足，设置掌管盐池的都将，官俸同上郡官员一样。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, the imperial court deliberated and decided that due to insufficient state expenditure, the official in charge of the salt pond would receive the same salary as the county officials.

古文：前后居职者多有侵隐，乃以俊为之，仍主簿。
现代文：前后担当这个职务的人大多有贪污之举，于是任命寇俊接管，仍兼主簿之职。
English: Most of the people in charge of this position were involved in corruption, so Kou Jun was appointed to take over, still holding the position of chief accountant.

古文：永安初，华州人史底与司徒杨椿讼田。
现代文：永安初年，华城人史底同司徒杨椿打官司争一处田产。
English: In the first year of Yong'an, the Hwaseong man Shi Di and the scholar Yang Tsunim fought a lawsuit over a piece of farmland.

古文：长史以椿势贵，皆言椿直，欲以田给椿。
现代文：长史们因为杨椿地位显贵，都说杨椿有理，想将这块田产判与杨椿。
English: Because of the prominent status of Yang Camellia, the long-term historians all said that Yang Camellia had reason to want to award this piece of land to Yang Camellia.

古文：俊曰： 史底穷人，杨公横夺其地，若欲损不足以给有余，见使雷同，未敢闻命。 
现代文：寇俊道： 史底是个穷人，杨公仗势抢了他的地，如果使穷者更亏而使富者占便宜，要让我赞同，我就不敢听命了。 
English: Kou Jun said: Shi Di was a poor man, and Yang Gongjun grabbed his land by force. If the poor were to lose more and the rich were to take advantage, if I were to agree, I would not dare to obey.

古文：遂以地还史底。
现代文：于是把地判给史底。
English: As a result, the land was awarded to the foundation.

古文：孝庄帝后知之，嘉俊守正不挠，拜司马；其附椿者咸责焉。
现代文：寿庄帝后来听说了这件事，嘉奖寇俊正直而不屈，官拜司马；那些倾向杨椿的人都受到责备。
English: When Emperor Shuzhuang heard about this, he commended Koujun for being honest and unyielding, and paid homage to Sima; those who favored Yangcun were reproached.

古文：二年，出为梁州刺史。人俗荒犷，多为盗贼。
现代文：永安二年，寇俊出任梁州刺史，当地民风凶悍不羁，很多人都去当盗贼。
English: In the second year of Yong'an, Kou Jun served as the governor of Liangzhou. The local folk customs were fierce and unruly, and many people went to be thieves.

古文：俊乃令郡县为立庠序，劝其耕桑，敦以礼让。
现代文：寇俊就令各郡县设立学校，劝百姓安心务农，用礼让之道敦促教化百姓。
English: Kou Jun ordered all counties to set up schools, advised the people to work in agriculture with peace of mind, and urged them to educate the people with courtesy.

古文：数年之中，风俗顿革。
现代文：数年之中，风俗焕然一新。
English: In the space of a few years, the custom has been reinvented.

古文：梁遣其将曹琰之镇魏兴，继日板筑。
现代文：梁派将领曹琰之镇守魏兴，连日加固城防。
English: Liang sent his general Cao Wei to defend Wei Xing and fortified the city for several days.

古文：琰之屡扰疆场，边人患之。
现代文：曹琰之屡次骚扰劫掠边境的土地，边民们为此困扰。
English: Cao Bingzhi has repeatedly harassed and plundered the land along the border, which has troubled the border residents.

古文：俊遣长史杜林道攻克其城，并禽琰之。琰之即梁大将景宗之季弟也。于是梁人惧焉。
现代文：寇俊派长史杜林道攻克了魏兴城，并且擒获了曹琰之，曹琰之是梁的大将曹景宗的小弟弟，由于这件事梁人害怕寇俊了。
English: Cao Jun's commander, Stulin Dao, conquered Wei Xing City and captured Cao Xizhi, the younger brother of Cao Jingzong, the general of Liang. As a result, the people of Liang were afraid of Cao Jun.

古文：属魏室多故，州又僻远，梁人知无外援，遂大兵顿魏兴，志图攻取。
现代文：梁人看到魏国皇室变故颇多，梁州又在偏远之地，知道没有外援，于是大兵驻扎在魏兴，图谋攻取梁城。
English: The Liang people saw that the imperial family of Wei had changed a lot, and Liangzhou was in a remote place and knew that there was no foreign aid, so the soldiers were stationed in Wei Xing and tried to capture Liangcheng.

古文：俊抚厉将士，人思效命。
现代文：寇俊鼓励将士，使得人人都愿意为他效命。
English: Kou Jun encouraged the soldiers, making everyone willing to serve him.

古文：梁人知其得众心也，弗之敢逼。
现代文：梁人打听到他很得人心，因而不敢逼近梁州。
English: Liang people heard that he was very popular, so they did not dare to approach Liangzhou.

古文：俊在州清苦，不事产业，其子等并徒步而还。吏人送俊，留连于道，久之乃得出界。
现代文：寇俊在任期间生活清苦，也从不置办私人产业，所以任期满时，和儿子一起徒步走回，官吏百姓都来相送，在路上留连不去，很久才出了州界。
English: During his term of office, Kou Jun lived a clean life and never bought private property. Therefore, when his term of office expired, he and his son walked back on foot. Officials and ordinary people came to see them off. They could not stay on the road for long, and they left the state border for a long time.

古文：大统三年，东魏授俊洛州刺史，俊因此乃谋归阙。
现代文：大统三年，东魏任命寇俊为洛州刺史，寇俊这才想回朝廷任职。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Ko Jun as the prefect of Luozhou. It was only then that Ko Jun wanted to return to the imperial court.

古文：五年，将家及亲属四百口入关，拜秘书监。
现代文：大统五年，携家室及亲属四百人入关，官拜秘书监。
English: In the fifth year of unification, he entered the customs with his family and 400 relatives, and paid his respects to the chief secretary.

古文：时军国草创，坟典散逸，俊始选置令史，抄集经籍，四部群书，稍得周备。加镇东将军，封安西县男。
现代文：当时国家和军队都在草创阶段，古代的典籍散落流失，寇俊开始选拔设置令史，抄录收集经书典籍，四部的各种书籍，逐渐齐备周全，被加官为镇东将军，封西安县男。
English: At that time, the country and the army were in the initial stage, the ancient classics were scattered and lost, and Kou Jun began to select and set the order history, transcribe and collect the classics of the scriptures, four parts of various books, gradually complete and complete, and was promoted to the general of Zhendong and the man of Xian County.

古文：十七年，加散骑常侍，遂称笃疾，不复朝觐。
现代文：大统十七年，加为散骑常侍，于是自称病重，不再朝觐皇上。
English: In the 17th year of the Great Reunification, he was added to the loose riding attendants, so he said he was seriously ill and would no longer serve the emperor.

古文：恭帝三年，赐姓若口引氏。
现代文：恭帝三年，赐姓为若口引氏。
English: In the third year of Emperor Gong, he was given the surname of Wakakuchihi.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵为子。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，给他晋为子爵。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to viscount.

古文：武成元年，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：武成元年，升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry and appointed to the Third Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：俊年齿虽高，而志识未衰。教授子孙，必先典礼。
现代文：寇俊年龄虽然很大，但心智学识丝毫未减，他教授子孙，一定要先教给典法礼仪。
English: Although Kou Jun is very old, his knowledge of mental studies has not diminished at all. He teaches his children and grandchildren, and must first teach them the etiquette of the classics.

古文：明帝尚儒重德，特钦赏之，数加思赐，思与相见。
现代文：明帝崇尚儒学重视德行，特别敬重赞赏寇俊，多次给予恩赐，很想与他相见。
English: Emperor Ming advocated Confucianism and valued virtue, especially respected and appreciated Guo Jun, gave him gifts many times, and wanted to meet him.

古文：俊不得已，乃入朝，帝与同席而坐，顾访洛阳故事。
现代文：寇俊不得已，只得入朝。明帝和他同坐一席，请教他洛阳过去的一些事情。
English: As a last resort, Kou Jun had to enter the imperial court. Emperor Ming sat down with him and asked him to teach him some things about Luoyang's past.

古文：俊身长八尺，须鬓皓然，容止端详，音韵清朗。
现代文：寇俊身高八尺，须发如雪，容貌举止端正安详，声音清朗。
English: Kou Jun is eight feet tall, his hair is like snow, his appearance and demeanor are neat and peaceful, and his voice is clear.

古文：帝与之谈论，不觉屡为之前膝。及俊辞还，帝亲执其手，曰： 公年德俱尊，朕所钦尚。
现代文：明帝和他谈论，不知不觉屡次坐到他膝前，直到寇俊辞别回家，明帝亲自拉着他的手道： 您年老德高，为朕所钦佩推崇。
English: Emperor Ming talked with him and unknowingly sat in front of his knees several times, until Ko Jun left to go home, Emperor Ming personally holding his hand: You are old and virtuous, and I admire and respect you.

古文：乞言之事，所望于公。宜数相见，以慰虚想。 
现代文：还有许多事要请您赐教，最好能经常相见，可以让我少一些思念。 
English: There are still many things I would like to ask you to teach me, and it would be best if we could see each other often, so that I would miss you less.

古文：以御舆令于帝前乘出。
现代文：命令乘上御舆在皇帝之前出宫。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to leave the palace before the emperor.

古文：顾谓左右曰： 如此事，唯积善者可以致之。何止见重于今，亦将传之万古。 
现代文：明帝对左右侍从道： 像这样的荣誉，只有积善的人才能得到，他不仅被今世所敬重，还将会流传千秋万代。 
English: Emperor Ming said to his attendants: "Such an honor can only be given to a person who is good. He is not only respected in this world, but will also be passed down for generations to come.

古文：时人咸以为荣。
现代文：当时人们无不认为这是莫大的荣耀。
English: At the time, everyone thought it was a great honor.

古文：卒年八十二。
现代文：寇俊死时八十二岁。
English: Kou Jun was 82 years old at the time of his death.

古文：武帝叹惜之，赠本官，加冀定瀛三州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥曰元。
现代文：武帝对此深为叹惜，赠他原来官位，并加冀、定、瀛三州诸军事、冀州刺史，谥号 元 。
English: Emperor Wu deeply regretted this and gave him his former official rank, and added the military of the three states of Hebei, Shandong and Fujian, the history of Jizhou, and the nickname Yuan.

古文：俊笃于仁义，期功之中有孤幼者，衣食丰约，并与之同。
现代文：寇俊厚道仁义，他家亲属当中有年幼孤儿，衣食优劣，都和他相同。
English: Kou Jun is good at morality, benevolence and righteousness. There are young orphans among his family members. Their food and clothing are all the same as his.

古文：少为司徒崔光所知，光命其子励与俊结友。
现代文：年轻时被司德崔光所器重，崔光命自己儿子崔励同寇俊结交为友。
English: When he was young, he was favored by Sede Cui Guang, and Cui Guang's own son Cui Li made friends with Kou Jun.

古文：还朝，卒京师。
现代文：寇俊每次去拜访崔光，往往倾谈到日偏西。
English: Whenever Kou Jun went to visit Cui Guang, he often talked about the west of the sun.

古文：谥曰穆。
现代文：小宗伯卢辩因为寇俊学业品行都很优异，以师友之礼相待他，一有空闲的时间，就到寇俊那里摆宴畅谈整整一天。他常对别人说 ：见不到西安君，我心头烦忧之事就不能排遣。 
English: Xiao Zongbo Lu argued that because Koujun's academic performance was excellent, he treated him as a teacher and friend. Whenever he had free time, he would go to Koujun's place to have a banquet and talk for a whole day. He often said to others: If I can't see Xi'an Jun, I can't get rid of my worries.

古文：子道元。
现代文：寇俊就是这样被人们所敬重。
English: This is how Ko Jun is respected by people.

古文：道元字善长。
现代文：郦道元，字善长。
English: His name is Dogen, and his last name is Zencho.

古文：初袭爵永宁侯，例降为伯。
现代文：开始他承袭永宁侯之爵，后来依惯例降为伯。
English: At first he succeeded to the title of Marquis of Yongning, and later, in accordance with the usual practice, he was reduced to the title of Count.

古文：御史中尉李彪以道元执法清刻，自太傅掾引为书侍御史。
现代文：御史中尉李彪因为郦道元执法清正严明，把他从太傅掾调为书侍御史。
English: Lieutenant Li Biao, who was in charge of the records, transferred him from the position of Taifu to the position of the secretary of the records because of his strictness in enforcing the law.

古文：彪为仆射李冲所奏，道元以属官坐免。
现代文：李彪被仆射李冲弹劾，郦道元因为是他的属官受牵连而被罢免。
English: Li Biao was impeached by his subordinate Li Chong, and Xing Dogen was removed from office because his subordinate officers were implicated.

古文：景明中，为冀州镇东府长史。
现代文：景明年间，任冀州镇东府长史。
English: During the next year, Jing served as the governor of the East Prefecture of Jizhou Town.

古文：刺史于劲，顺皇后父也，西讨关中，亦不至州，道元行事三年。
现代文：刺史于劲，是顺皇后的父亲，他出兵西征关中，也不返回冀州，郦道元掌管治理了三年。
English: Zhi Shi Yu Jin was the father of Queen Shun. He did not return to Jizhou during the Western Expedition, and Shantou Yuan ruled Zhi Shi for three years.

古文：为政严酷，吏人畏之，奸盗逃于他境。
现代文：他为政严酷，手下官吏都害怕他，奸徒盗贼逃到别的地方。
English: His rule was harsh, his subordinate officials were afraid of him, and traitors and thieves fled to other places.

古文：后试守鲁阳郡，道元表立黉序，崇劝学教。
现代文：后来被试用为鲁阳郡守，郦道元上奏申请设立地方学校，崇尚并奖励学校教育。
English: Later, he was put on trial as the governor of Luyang County, and applied for the establishment of a local school, advocating and rewarding school education.

古文：诏曰： 鲁阳本以蛮人，不立大学。今可听之，以成良守文翁之化。 
现代文：皇上下诏道： 鲁阳原来因为是蛮人之地，不设立高等的学校，现在接受此项建议，以实现好郡守文翁的文明教化。 
English: The Emperor issued the following edict: Luyang originally did not set up a high school because it was a land of barbarians, and now accepts this suggestion in order to realize the civilized education of good county governors.

古文：道元在郡，山蛮伏其威名，不敢为寇。
现代文：郦道元在鲁阳郡执政期间，山上蛮人敬服于他的威名，不敢做强盗。
English: During the reign of Shing Dogen in Luyang County, the barbarians on the mountain respected his prestige and did not dare to be robbers.

古文：延昌中，为东荆州刺史，威猛为政，如在冀州。蛮人诣阙讼其刻峻，请前刺史寇祖礼。
现代文：延昌年间，又出任为东荆州刺史。和在冀州一样，用铁腕执政，蛮人到朝廷上指控郦道元苛刻严酷，请求前任刺史寇祖礼复任。
English: During the Yanchang period, he also served as the chief historian of East Jingzhou. As in Jizhou, he ruled with an iron fist, and barbarians came to the court to accuse Xing Dao Yuan of being harsh and demanding the reinstatement of his predecessor, the chief historian Kuo Zu Li.

古文：及以遣戍兵七十人送道元还京，二人并坐免官。
现代文：寇祖礼派七十名戍兵送郦道元回京，因此两人一起被免官。
English: Kozu-rei sent seventy soldiers to escort Shōdōgen back to Kyoto, and as a result, they were both dismissed.

古文：后为河南尹。明帝以沃野、怀朔、薄骨律、武川、抚冥、柔玄、怀荒、御夷诸镇并改为州，其郡、县、戍名，令准古城邑。
现代文：后来郦道元出任河南尹，明帝因为沃野、怀朔、薄骨律、武川、抚冥、柔玄、怀荒、御夷诸军镇一并改为州制，下令那些郡、县、戍的命名，要依照古时的城镇。
English: Later, Shandong Dogen served as Henan Yin, and the Ming Emperor ordered the counties, counties, and counties to be named according to the ancient towns, because the military towns of Wuyuan, Fuxiu, Zhuoxuan, Huaiyuan, and Guiyi were all changed to the state system.

古文：诏道元持节兼黄门侍郎，驰驿与大都督李崇筹宜置立，裁减去留。
现代文：下诏任命郦道元为持节兼黄门侍郎骑驿马飞驰去和大都督李崇筹划如何设置的事宜，决定如何裁减去留。
English: In the following edict, Gong Dogen was appointed as the celebrant and attendant of the Yellow Gate, and he rode a steed to go and plan with the Grand Duke Li Chong how to set up the affairs and decide how to reduce and retain.

古文：会诸镇叛，不果而还。
现代文：正好诸镇叛乱，郦道元未完成使命而返。
English: Just as the towns rebelled, Shantou Yuan returned without completing his mission.

古文：孝昌初，遣将攻扬州，刺史元法僧又于彭城反叛。
现代文：孝昌初年，梁派将攻打扬州，刺史元法僧在彭城反叛。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, the Liang faction will attack Yangzhou, stabbing the former monk to rebel in Pengcheng.

古文：诏道元持节、兼侍中、摄行台尚书，节度诸军，依仆射李平故事。
现代文：皇上下诏任命郦道元为持节、兼侍中、摄行台尚书、节制调度诸军，如同仆射李平过去的权力。
English: The Emperor's edict appointed Gong Dogen to hold festivals, serve as an attendant, keep records, and dispatch troops in a restrained manner, just like the powers of Li Ping in the past.

古文：军至涡阳，败退。道元追讨，多有斩获。
现代文：梁军攻至涡阳，被击败而退兵，郦道元麾兵追击，杀敌颇多。
English: Liang's army attacked to the vortex of the sun, was defeated and retreated, and the soldiers of the Yuan Dynasty pursued and killed a lot of enemies.

古文：后除御史中尉。
现代文：后来郦道元被任命为御史中尉。
English: Later, Shinshi Dogen was appointed as a lieutenant of Goshi.

古文：道元素有严猛之称，权豪始颇惮之。
现代文：他一向以严厉威猛著称，权势豪门开始对他颇为忌惮。
English: He has always had a reputation for being stern and powerful, and powerful families began to be wary of him.

古文：而不能有所纠正，声望更损。
现代文：如果不能对不良风气有所纠正，声名威望将大为下降。
English: If the bad morals cannot be corrected, the reputation and prestige of the country will be greatly reduced.

古文：司州牧、汝南王悦嬖近左右丘念，常与卧起。
现代文：司州牧、汝南王悦十分宠信侍臣丘念，常常和他同起同卧。
English: Sishu Maki and Runan Wangyue were very fond of their retainer, Qunian, and often slept with him.

古文：及选州官，多由于念。
现代文：连选任州官之事，也大多由丘念定夺。
English: The re-election of state officials is also mostly decided by the hill.

古文：念常匿悦第，时还其家，道元密访知，收念付狱。
现代文：丘念常常藏在汝南王悦的宅中，但时不时地溜回自己家，被郦道元暗中查到，将丘念收入狱中。
English: She often hid in the house of King Yue of the Southern Kingdom, but from time to time she would sneak back to her own home, where she was secretly discovered by Shandao Yuan, who sent her to prison.

古文：悦启灵太后，请全念身，有敕赦之。
现代文：悦启奏灵太后，恳请保全丘念的性命，灵太后下令敕免他。
English: Yue Kaisong, the spiritual empress, implored that the life of Qiu Nian be preserved, and the spiritual empress ordered that he be pardoned.

古文：道元遂尽其命，因以劾悦。
现代文：郦道元立即结果了丘念的性命，并用此事弹劾悦。
English: Gong Dogen immediately ended Qiu Nian's life and used the incident to impeach Yue.

古文：时雍州刺史萧宝夤反状稍露，侍中、城阳王徽素忌道元，因讽朝廷，遣为关右大使。
现代文：当时雍州刺史萧宝夤反叛的迹象已略有暴露，侍中、城阳王徽素来忌恨郦道元，因而建议朝廷，派郦道元为关右大使。
English: At that time, the signs of the rebellion of Xiao Baojun, the governor of Yongzhou, had already been slightly exposed. The chamberlain, King Hui of Chengyang, had always hated Gong Dogen, so he suggested to the imperial court to send Gong Dogen as the ambassador to Guan Yu.

古文：宝夤虑道元图己，遣其行台郎中郭子帙围道元于阴盘驿亭。
现代文：萧宝夤恐怕郦道元对自己不利，派手下行台郎中郭子帙将郦道元包围在阴盘驿亭。
English: Xiao Baojun was afraid that Gong Dogen was not favorable to him. Guo Zijun, one of his subordinates, encircled Gong Dogen in Yinpan Pavilion.

古文：亭在冈下，常食冈下之井。既被围，穿井十余丈不得水。
现代文：驿亭在山冈上，用水需从冈下的井中取得，由于被包围，从山冈上钻井十多丈也没见到水。
English: The pavilion is on a hill, and water has to be obtained from a well under the hill. Since it is surrounded, water has not been seen from a well drilled more than ten meters above the hill.

古文：水尽力屈，贼遂逾墙而入。
现代文：没水喝则无力抵抗，敌人得以翻墙而入。
English: If there is no water to drink, it is powerless to resist, and the enemy can climb over the wall and enter.

古文：道元与其弟道阙二子俱被害。
现代文：郦道元和他弟弟及两个儿子都被杀害。
English: Gong Dogen, his younger brother and two sons were all killed.

古文：道元瞋目叱贼，厉声而死。
现代文：郦道元临死怒目斥骂敌人，声音严厉。
English: On the verge of death, Gong Dogen angrily scolded his enemies in a stern voice.

古文：宝夤犹遣敛其父子，殡于长安城东。
现代文：萧宝夤还派人收殓他们父子，在长安城东下葬。
English: Xiao Baojun also sent someone to collect their father and son and buried them in the east of Chang'an City.

古文：事平，丧还，赠吏部尚书、冀州刺史、安定县男。
现代文：叛乱平息后，回京师发丧，赠吏部尚书、冀州刺史、安定县男。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, he went back to Beijing to pay his respects, and was presented with a book on the cadres, a history of Jizhou, and a man from Anding County.

古文：尔硃荣称兵赴阙，恽与元珍不从，为荣行台郎中樊子鹄陷城，被害。所作文章，颇行于世。
现代文：郦道元好学不辍，博览奇书，撰注有《水经》四十卷，《本志》十三篇，又写了《七聘》等及别的诗章，都流传于世。
English: Shun Dogen was an avid learner and a connoisseur of books. He wrote annotations for forty volumes of the "Water Sutra," thirteen chapters of the "Honshu," as well as "Seven Appointments" and other poems, all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：撰慕容氏书，不成。
现代文：但是他们兄弟不和睦，为人多嫌忌之心，当时人们对他评价不高。
English: But the brothers did not get along well and were not well liked. People did not think much of him at the time.

古文：子怀则，司空长流参军。韩秀，字白武，昌黎人也。
现代文：他的儿子孝友承袭了爵位。韩秀，字白武，昌黎人。
English: His son, Takatomo, inherited the title. Han Xiu, also known as Baiwu, was from Changli.

古文：祖宰，慕容俊谒者仆射。
现代文：祖父韩宰，为慕容亻隽的谒者仆射。
English: His grandfather, Han Zai, was a disciple of Murong Zang.

古文：父景，皇始初归魏，拜宣威将军、骑都尉。
现代文：父亲韩景，皇始初年投奔魏。官拜宣威将军，骑都尉。
English: His father, Han Jing, went to Wei in the first year of the reign of the emperor. He was an official of General Xuan Wei and a cavalry captain.

古文：秀历位尚书郎，赐爵遂昌子。
现代文：韩秀历任尚书郎，赐爵为遂昌子。
English: Han Xiu successively held the title of Shang Shuro, and Sui Changzi was given a peerage.

古文：文成称秀聪敏清辩，才任喉舌，遂命出纳王言，并掌机密。
现代文：文成帝称赞韩秀聪慧机敏、清晰明辩，才干足以担任皇帝的喉舌，于是任命他负责传递皇上的口谕，同时掌管机密事务。
English: Emperor Wencheng praised Han Xiucong for his astuteness, clarity and ability to serve as the emperor's mouthpiece, and appointed him to be responsible for passing on the emperor's oral orders and managing confidential matters.

古文：行幸游猎，随侍左右。
现代文：皇上行幸及游猎，他都随时奉侍左右。
English: He was always at the emperor's side when he went on trips and hunting expeditions.

古文：献文即位，转给事中，参征南慕容白曜军事。
现代文：献文帝即位后，他转任为给事中，参预征南大将军慕容白曜的军事。
English: After Emperor Xianwen ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the military of General Murong Baiyou, who was in the middle of the matter and participated in the pre-enlistment of Nantai.

古文：延兴中，尚书奏以敦煌一镇，介远西北，寇贼路冲，虑或不固，欲移就凉州。
现代文：延兴年间，尚书上奏认为敦煌城单独处于西北极边远处，是贼寇侵犯的要道，顾虑到此镇也许不安全，提议迁镇到凉州。
English: During the Yanxing period, Shang Shuxu wrote that Dunhuang City was located alone in the far west of the North Pole, and was an important route for thieves and robbers to invade. Considering that the town might not be safe, he proposed moving the town to Liangzhou.

古文：群臣会议，佥以为然。
现代文：群臣在一起商议，都认为言之有理。
English: The group of courtiers discussed it together, and all agreed that it made sense.

古文：秀独曰： 此蹙国之事，非辟土之宜。
现代文：只有韩秀说： 这是缩减国土的行为，而不是扩展疆域的方法。
English: Only Han Xiu said: This is an act of shrinking the national territory, not a method of expanding the territory.

古文：愚谓敦煌之立，其来已久，虽邻强寇，而兵人素习，循常置戍，足以自全。
现代文：依臣愚见，敦煌镇的设立，由来已久，虽然毗邻强寇，但当地军民训练有素，按以前那样安排戍防，足以自保。
English: Dunhuang Town has been established for a long time. Although it is adjacent to the strong invaders, the local military and civilians are well-trained, and it is enough to protect themselves by arranging defense as before.

古文：若徙就姑臧，虑人怀异意，或贪留重迁，情不愿徙。脱引寇内侵，深为国患。
现代文：如果迁镇到姑臧，只怕当地人起了异心，或者留恋故地，不愿迁徙，背离了我国而配合外寇的入侵，成为国家大患。
English: If the town is moved to Guzheng, it is feared that the local people will become alienated, or nostalgic for their hometown, unwilling to migrate, departing from our country and cooperating with the invasion of foreign invaders, becoming a national disaster.

古文：且舍远就近，遥防有阙。一旦废罢，是启戎心，则夷狄交构，互相来往。关右荒扰，烽警不息，边役烦兴，艰难方甚。 乃从秀议。
现代文：何况舍远就近，遥远的边防就会有疏漏，一旦废弃了敦煌城，就启发了那些夷人之心，给了夷狄之间彼此沟通，互相来往的条件，他们在关外将无法无天，不断骚扰，烽火警报将不会停息，戍边兵役的征召就会接连不断，从此国家将更为困难。 
English: Moreover, what is far away is near, and what is far away will be missed by the border guards. Once the city of Dunhuang was abandoned, it inspired the hearts of those barbarians and gave the barbarians the conditions for communicating with each other and interacting with each other. They will be lawless outside the pass, constantly harassing, the campfire alarm will not stop, and the military conscription will continue, and the country will be more difficult from now on.

古文：久之，拜太中大夫，进号左将军，卒。
现代文：皇上于是听从了韩秀的建议。韩秀后来被任命为平东将军、青州刺史。
English: The emperor then followed Han Xiu's advice. Han Xiu was later appointed as the general of Pingdong and the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：尧暄，字辟邪，上党长子人也。
现代文：他去世后，儿子韩务承袭了爵位。尧暄，字辟邪，上党长子人。
English: After his death, his son, Han Mu, inherited the title of nobility.

古文：本名钟葵，后赐名暄。
现代文：原名叫钟葵，后来赐名为暄。
English: Originally named Zhong Aoi, it was later given the name Zong Wu.

古文：祖僧赖，道武平中山，与赵郡吕含首来归国。
现代文：祖父尧僧赖，道武帝平定中山时，他和赵郡吕含最先来投奔魏国。
English: When Emperor Daowu subdued Zhongshan, he and Zhao County's Luhang were the first to flee to Wei.

古文：暄聪了，美容貌。
现代文：尧暄聪明懂礼，容貌俊美。
English: He is intelligent, polite and good-looking.

古文：为千人军将。
现代文：官至千人将军。
English: From officer to general of a thousand men.

古文：太武以其恭谨，擢为中散。
现代文：太武帝因为他谦逊谨慎，提升他为中散大夫。
English: Emperor Taivu, because of his modesty and prudence, promoted him to the position of Zhongshan doctor.

古文：后兼北部尚书。
现代文：后来又兼任北部尚书。
English: Later, he also served as the Northern Crown Prince.

古文：于时始立三长，暄为东道十三州使，更比户籍，赐独车一乘，厩马四匹。
现代文：当时刚开始建立三长制，尧暄为东道十三州使，重新核对户籍，皇上单独赐他一辆车，四匹马。
English: At that time, the three-tier system was just beginning to be established. He was the host of thirteen state envoys, re-checked his household registration, and the emperor alone gave him a car and four horses.

古文：暄前后从征及出使检案三十许度，皆有克己奉公之称。
现代文：尧暄前后随驾出征及出使，调查公案三十多次，都有克己奉公的称誉。
English: He went on more than 30 military expeditions and envoys, and investigated more than 30 cases. He was praised for his self-restraint and devotion to duty.

古文：赏赐衣服、彩绢、奴婢等物，赐爵平阳伯。
现代文：皇上赏赐他衣服、彩绢、奴婢等，并赐他平阳伯之爵。
English: The emperor rewarded him with clothes, a broom, slaves, and gave him the title of Count of Pingyang.

古文：及改置百官，授太仆卿，转大司农。
现代文：等到改建百官制，授他太仆卿之职，后来转任大司农。
English: Until the reform of the one-hundred-official system, he was awarded the post of the servant of the Lord, and later he was transferred to the post of the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：卒于平城。孝文为之举哀，赠相州刺史。
现代文：死于平城，孝文帝为他举哀，追赠他为相州刺史。
English: He died in Pingcheng, Emperor Xiaowen mourned for him, and posthumously awarded him the title of "Sangzhou scribe."

古文：初，暄至徐州，见州城楼观，嫌其华盛，乃令往往毁彻，由是，后更损落。
现代文：过去，尧暄到徐州，见州城中楼台亭宇，嫌这些建筑奢华繁盛，于是下令各处均拆毁，因此，徐州便渐渐衰败。
English: In the past, if you went to Xuzhou and saw the buildings and pavilions in the middle of the city, you would think that these buildings were luxurious and prosperous, so he ordered them to be demolished everywhere. As a result, Xuzhou gradually declined.

古文：洪弟遵，位临洮太守。
现代文：等到孝文帝驾临彭城，听说此事，说 ：尧暄也还该追斩。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Pengcheng and heard about this, he said, "It's time to hunt down and behead him."

古文：卒，谥曰思。
现代文：尧暄的长子尧洪承袭了爵位。
English: Zou's eldest son, Zou Hong, inherited the title.

古文：遵弟荣，位员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：尧洪之子尧杰，字永寿。元象年间，官至开府仪同三司、乐城县公。
English: Yu Hong's son, Yu Jie, surnamed Yongshou. During the Yuanxiang era, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Lecheng County official.

古文：子雄，字休武，少骁果，轻财重气。
现代文：尧荣之子尧雄，字休武，年轻时骁勇果敢，轻财物重义气。
English: Hao Rong's son, Hao Xiong, was nicknamed "Xiu Wu" (休武) and was brave and courageous when he was young.

古文：位燕州刺史、平城县伯。
现代文：官至燕州刺史、平城县伯。
English: He was the highest-ranking official in the history of Yanzhou and the highest-ranking official in Pingcheng County.

古文：随尔硃兆与齐神武战，败于广阿，率所部据定州归神武。
现代文：他跟随尔朱兆与齐国的神武帝作战，败于广阿，率领本部军队占据定州归降神武帝。
English: He followed Er Zhuzhao to fight against the God Emperor of Qi, was defeated by Guang'a, and led the headquarters army to occupy Dingzhou and surrender to the God Emperor.

古文：其从兄杰为兆沧州刺史，亦遣使降。
现代文：他的堂兄尧杰为尔朱兆的沧州刺史，也派使者来降。
English: His cousin, Gong Jie, who was the governor of Cangzhou of the Zhu Zhao Dynasty, also sent an envoy.

古文：神武以其兄弟俱有诚款，使杰便为行瀛州事。
现代文：神武帝因为看他们兄弟都很有诚意，就让尧杰就地处理瀛州事务。
English: Emperor Jinwu, seeing the sincerity of his brothers, asked Gongjie to handle the affairs of Zhangzhou on the spot.

古文：使雄代杰为瀛州刺史，进爵为公。
现代文：不久让尧雄代替尧杰为瀛州刺史，加爵为公。
English: Soon after, he let Zou Xiong replace Zou Jie as the governor of Zhangzhou, and promoted him to the rank of general.

古文：时禁网疏阔，官司相与聚敛。
现代文：当时法纪松弛，为官者都竞相聚财敛物。
English: At that time, legal discipline was lax, and officials were competing to amass wealth.

古文：唯雄义然后取，接下以恩，甚为吏人所怀。
现代文：只有尧雄义气为重，有好处最后才拿，先赏赐于属下，因此深得手下官吏之心。
English: Only Han Xiong's sense of righteousness is important. He takes the benefits last, and rewards his subordinates first. Therefore, he won the hearts of his subordinates and officials.

古文：魏孝武帝入关，雄为大都督。随高昂破贺拔胜于穰城，仍除豫州刺史。
现代文：魏孝武帝入关时，尧雄被任命为大都督，随同高昂在穰城击败贺拔胜，仍任豫州刺史。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu entered the pass, Juxiong was appointed as the grand governor of Yu, followed by Gao'ang who defeated He Baxian in Yu and was still appointed as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：元洪威据颍川叛。叛人赵继宗杀颍川太守邵招，据乐口，北应洪威。
现代文：元洪威占据颍川反叛，叛党赵继宗杀了颍川太守邵招，占据乐口，响应北面的元洪威。
English: The rebel Zhao Jizong killed Shao Zhao, the governor of Shichuan, and occupied Lekou, responding to the northern Yuan Hongwei.

古文：雄讨之，继宗败走。城内因雄之出，据州引西魏。雄复与行台侯景讨平之。
现代文：尧雄出兵征讨叛贼，赵继宗败逃，豫州城内等尧雄走后，占据了州城召引西魏，尧雄又和行台侯景一起讨平叛党。
English: Zhao Jizong was defeated and fled, and after Zhaoxiong left, the city of Zhaoxiong was occupied by the Western Wei, and Zhaoxiong and Xiangtai Houjing fought together to defeat the rebels.

古文：梁将李洪芝、王当伯袭破平乡城，雄并禽之。
现代文：梁将李洪芝、王当伯偷袭攻破平乡城，尧雄将二人一起擒获。
English: Liang led Li Hongzhi and Wang Dangbo in a sneak attack to break through Pingxiang City, and Shao Xiong captured the two together.

古文：又破梁司州刺史陈庆之，复围南荆州。
现代文：他又打败梁司州刺史陈庆之，再将南荆州围困。
English: He also defeated Liang Shizhou's assassin Chen Qingzhi, and then besieged South Jingzhou.

古文：东救未至，雄陷其城。
现代文：由于东面来的救兵没到，尧雄攻陷了城池。
English: As the relief force from the east did not arrive, Shao Xiong captured the city.

古文：梁以元庆和为魏王，侵扰南境。雄大破之于南顿。
现代文：梁任命元庆和为魏王，侵袭骚扰南部边境，尧雄在南顿大败元庆和。
English: Liang appointed Yuan Qinghe as the king of Wei, invaded and harassed the southern border, and Shao Xiong defeated Yuan Qinghe in Nantong.

古文：寻与行台侯景破梁楚城。
现代文：不久和行台侯景攻破梁的楚城。
English: Soon after, he and Xiangtai Houjing conquered the city of Chu.

古文：豫州人上书，更乞雄为刺史，复行豫州事。
现代文：豫州百姓上书，请求再派尧雄来做刺史，尧雄又到豫州执政。
English: The people of Yuzhou submitted a petition, requesting that Zou Xiong be sent again to make a history, and Zou Xiong went to Yuzhou to govern.

古文：颍州长史贺若统执刺史田迅，据州降西魏。
现代文：颍川长史贺若统将刺史田过捉拿，占据州城归降了西魏。
English: He Ruo, the governor of Minchuan, overtook Shishida and occupied the state capital, leading to the fall of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：诏雄与广州刺史赵育、扬州刺史是宝，随行台任祥攻之。
现代文：皇上下诏令尧雄和广州刺史赵育、扬州刺史是宝随同行台任祥进攻颍州。
English: The emperor issued the imperial edict, and Zhao Xiong, Zhao Yu, and Yangzhou Xiong followed the emperor to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：西魏将怡锋败祥等，育、宝各还，据城降敌。
现代文：西魏将领怡锋打败了任祥等人，赵育、是宝逃回，并占据了各自的州城投降西魏。
English: Western Wei generals Yi Feng defeated Ren Xiang and others, Zhao Yu and Xie Bao fled back, and occupied their respective provincial capitals to surrender to the Western Wei.

古文：雄收散卒，保大梁。
现代文：尧雄收集散兵游勇，据守大梁。
English: Han Xiong rallied his scattered soldiers and marched to defend the girders.

古文：周文帝遣其右丞韦孝宽等攻豫州，雄都督程多宝降之。
现代文：周文帝派他手下右丞韦孝宽等人攻打豫州，尧雄的都督郭丞伯、程多宝投降了周兵。
English: Emperor Zhou Wenzong sent his subordinate U. Wei Xiaokuan and others to attack Yuzhou, and Zhou's governors Guo Zhenbo and Cheng Duobao surrendered to Zhou.

古文：执刺史冯邕，并雄家属及部下妻子数千口，欲送长安。
现代文：他们捉拿了刺史冯邕，以及尧雄的家属和他部下的妻子儿女数千人，想要解送到长安。
English: They captured Zhi Shi Feng Yao, as well as thousands of the family members of Zhi Xiong and the wives and children of his subordinates, and wanted to deport them to Chang'an.

古文：至乐口，友外兵参军王恆伽、都督赫连俊等从大梁邀之。斩多宝，收雄家口还大梁。
现代文：到了乐口，尧雄手下外兵参军王恒伽、都督赫连亻隽等从大梁出兵将一行人劫下，斩了程多宝，带着尧雄家属返回大梁。
English: When they arrived at Lekou, foreign soldiers under the command of Hsiang-hsiung, including Wang Heng-ga, the commander of the army, and Hsien-tao, the governor of Goryang, sent soldiers to kidnap the party from Goryang, killed Cheng Duobao, and returned to Goryang with Hsiang-hsiung's family members.

古文：雄别破乐口，禽丞伯，进讨县瓠。
现代文：尧雄另外出兵攻破乐口，擒获了郭丞伯，进兵征讨县瓠。
English: In addition, Shao Xiong sent troops to break through Lekou, captured Guo Rongbo, and sent troops to recruit county officials.

古文：复以雄行豫州事。
现代文：皇上又任命尧雄掌管豫州政事。
English: The emperor also appointed Zou Xiong to be in charge of the political affairs of Yuzhou.

古文：西魏以是宝为扬州刺史，据项城，义州刺史韩显据南顿。
现代文：西魏任命是宝为扬州刺史，占据项城，义州刺史韩显占据南顿。
English: The appointment of the Western Wei Dynasty is a treasure for the Yangzhou stabbing history, occupy Xiangcheng, Yizhou stabbing history Han Xian occupy Nantong.

古文：雄一日拔其二城，禽显及长史岳，宝遁走。
现代文：尧雄一天之内将两座城池都攻陷，擒获韩显和长史丘岳，是宝逃走。
English: Shao Xiong captured both castles in one day, and captured Han Xian and Changshi Qiuyue, which was a treasure to escape.

古文：加骠骑大将军、仪同三司，仍随侯景平鲁阳，复除豫州刺史。
现代文：尧雄加官骠骑大将军、仪同三司，依旧跟随侯景平定鲁阳，重新出任豫州刺史。
English: Xiong Xiong, the commander of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry, and the three officers of the imperial court, still followed Hou Jing to subdue Luyang, and re-served as the leader of the history of Henan.

古文：雄虽武将，性质宽厚，为政举其大纲而已。
现代文：尧雄虽然是名武将，但性格宽厚，处理政事只注重问题的关键。
English: Although Hao Xiong is a famous military commander, he has a generous personality and only focuses on the key issues when dealing with political affairs.

古文：在边十年，屡有功绩。
现代文：在边城镇守十年，功绩卓著。
English: He served in the border town for ten years, and his achievements were outstanding.

古文：爱人物，多所施与，亦以此称。
现代文：他爱惜人力物力，给下属的赐物很多，并以此著称。
English: He cherished human and material resources, and gave many gifts to his subordinates, and was known for this.

古文：兴和四年，卒于鄴，赠司徒，谥曰武恭。
现代文：兴和四年，在邺去世，追赠为司徒，谥号 武恭 。
English: Xinghe four years, died in Handan, posthumously awarded as a scholar, surnamed Wu Gong.

古文：子师嗣。
现代文：儿子尧师袭爵位。
English: His son Gong Shi succeeded to the peerage.

古文：柳崇，字僧生，河东解人也。
现代文：柳崇，字僧生，河东解人。
English: Liu Chong, a monk and student, is a member of the Hedong Liberation Movement.

古文：七世祖轨，晋廷尉卿。
现代文：他的七世祖柳轨，为晋朝廷尉卿。
English: His seventh-generation ancestor Liu Rail was a court lieutenant of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：崇方雅有器量，身长八尺，美须明目，兼有学行。
现代文：柳崇方正儒雅有器量，身高八尺，长着漂亮的须髯和明亮有神的双目，才学德行兼备。
English: Liu Chong Fang Zheng is a refined and elegant person. He is eight feet tall, with beautiful whiskers and bright and godly eyes. He is capable of both learning and doing.

古文：举秀才，射策高第。
现代文：他被举为秀才，在回答皇帝问题的考试中被评为最高等级。
English: He was hailed as a genius and was awarded the highest grade in an exam for answering the emperor's questions.

古文：解褐太尉主簿，转尚书右外兵郎中。
现代文：从此他脱下粗布衣当上了太尉主簿。后来转任尚书右外兵郎中。
English: From then on, he took off his coarse cloth and became the captain's chief clerk. Later, he was transferred to the junior clerk of the Foreign Correspondent's Office.

古文：于时河东、河北二郡争境。
现代文：当时河东、河北两个郡在边界问题上有争议。
English: At that time, the two counties of Hedong and Hebei had disputes over the border issue.

古文：其间有盐池之饶，虞坂之便，守宰百姓皆恐外割；公私朋竞，纷嚣台府。
现代文：这些地方包括富庶的盐池、交通便利的虞坂，守官和百姓都怕这些地方被别郡占去，公私两方面都有利益关系因而竞争，纷争吵闹到了朝廷。
English: These places included the affluent Yanchi and the easily accessible Yuzaka. The governors and the people were afraid that these places would be occupied by other counties. Both the public and private sectors had competing interests, and the quarrels reached the imperial court.

古文：孝文乃遣崇检断，上下息讼。
现代文：孝文帝于是派柳崇去调查裁断了此事，上上下下不再为此事诉讼。
English: Emperor Xiaowen then sent Liu Chong to investigate and adjudicated the matter, and no longer litigated the matter.

古文：属荆、郢新附，南寇窥扰，又诏崇持节与州郡经略，加慰喻。
现代文：荆、郢两地为新归顺的两座城，南面的贼寇常来侵扰，皇上下诏命柳崇持节和两地州郡官员一起进行治理，并加安抚慰问。
English: Jing and Handan are the two newly-converted cities in Shun, and the thieves and robbers in the south often intrude. The Emperor issued an imperial edict to govern Liuzhongjie and the state and county officials of the two places together, and to appease and comfort them.

古文：还，迁太子洗马、本郡中正。
现代文：回京后，升任为太子洗马、本郡中正。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was promoted to Prince Saima, the head of this county.

古文：累迁河中太守。
现代文：后来他又升任为河中太守。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Kawakuchima Taishu.

古文：崇初屈郡，郡人张明失马，疑执十余人。
现代文：柳崇刚到郡，郡中有百姓张明丢了马，捉了十几名嫌疑犯。
English: Liu Chong has just arrived in the county, there are people in the county Zhang Ming lost his horse, caught more than a dozen suspects.

古文：崇见之，不问贼事，人别借以温颜，更问其亲老存不，农业多少，而微察其辞色。即获真贼吕穆等二人，余皆放遣。
现代文：柳崇见了这些人，也不盘问偷盗之事，和颜悦色地逐个询问他们家里老人在不在，务农收入有多少，而在暗中察言观色，当场将其中的真正偷马贼吕穆等二人拿获，别人都放回。
English: When Liu Chong saw these people, he did not cross-examine them about the theft, but politely inquired one by one about the absence of the elderly in their family and how much they earned from farming. Instead, he secretly observed the situation and caught two of them, including the real horse thief Liumu, on the spot. The others were all released.

古文：郡中畏服，境内怗然。
现代文：于是郡中百姓都对他十分敬畏，境内秩序良好。
English: As a result, the people in the county are very much in awe of him, and the territory is in good order.

古文：卒于官，赠岐州刺史，谥曰穆。
现代文：柳崇死于任上，追赠为岐州刺史，谥号 穆 。
English: Liu Chong died in office and was posthumously awarded the title of "Qizhou Sashishi" and the nickname "Mu."

古文：崇所制文章，寇乱遗失。
现代文：柳崇所写的文章，在战乱时遗失。
English: An article written by Liu Chong was lost during the war.

