古文：世之显学，儒、墨也。
现代文：世上最出名的学派是儒家和墨家。
English: The most famous schools in the world are Confucianism and Buddhism.

古文：儒之所至，孔丘也。墨之所至，墨翟也。
现代文：儒家的代表人物是孔丘，墨家的代表人物是墨翟。
English: The representative figure of Confucianism is Confucius, and the representative figure of Moism is Mozu.

古文：自孔子之死也，有子张之儒，有子思之儒，有颜氏之儒，有孟氏之儒，有漆雕氏之儒，有仲良氏之儒，有孙氏之儒，有乐正氏之儒。
现代文：自从孔子死后，有子张儒学，有子思儒学，有颜氏儒学，有孟氏儒学，有漆雕氏儒学，有仲良氏儒学，有孙氏儒学，有乐正氏儒学。
English: Since the death of Confucius, there have been Zizhang Confucianism, Zizhi Confucianism, Yan's Confucianism, Meng's Confucianism, Urushi's Confucianism, Nakayoshi's Confucianism, Sun's Confucianism and Lezheng's Confucianism.

古文：自墨子之死也，有相里氏之墨，有相夫氏之墨，有邓陵氏之墨。
现代文：自从墨子死后，有相里氏墨学，有相夫氏墨学，有邓陵氏墨学。
English: Since Mozi's death, there have been the Sori school of calligraphy, the Soufu school of calligraphy, and the Dengling school of calligraphy.

古文：故孔、墨之后，儒分为八，墨离为三，取舍相反不同，而皆自谓真孔、墨，孔、墨不可复生，将谁使定世之学乎？
现代文：所以孔子、墨子死后，儒家分为八派，墨家分为三派，他们对孔、墨学说的取舍相互矛盾，各有不同，却都称是得了孔、墨的真传，孔、墨两人不能复活，叫谁来判断社会上这些学派的真假呢？
English: Therefore, after the death of Confucius and Mozi, Confucianism was divided into eight sects, and Mohism was divided into three sects. Their choice of the teachings of Confucius and Mohism contradicted each other, each had its own differences, but they all claimed to have received the true teachings of Confucius and Mohism. Confucius and Mohism cannot be resurrected, so who is to judge the truth and falsehood of these schools in society?

古文：孔子、墨子俱道尧、舜，而取舍不同，皆自谓真尧、舜，尧、舜不复生，将谁使定儒、墨之诚乎？
现代文：孔子、墨子全都称道尧、舜，但他们的取舍又大不相同，却都自称得到了真正的尧舜之道。尧和舜不能复活，该叫谁来判定儒、墨两家的真假呢？
English: Confucius and Mozi both praised the Tao of Confucius and the Tao of Confucius, but their choices were very different, but they both claimed to have obtained the true Tao of Confucius. Confucius and Mozi cannot be resurrected, so who should be called upon to judge the true and false of Confucius and Mozi?

古文：殷、周七百余岁，虞、夏二千余岁，而不能定儒、墨之真；今乃欲审尧、舜之道于三千岁之前，意者其不可必乎！
现代文：自儒家所称道的殷周之际到现在七百多年，自墨家所推祟的虞夏之际到现在两干多年，就已经不能判断儒、墨所讲的是否真实了；现在还要去考察三千多年前尧舜的思想，想来更是无法确定的吧！
English: It has been more than seven hundred years since the time of Yin Zhou, praised by Confucianists, and more than two hundred years since the time of Yu Xia, condemned by Mohists. It is no longer possible to judge whether what the Confucians and Mohists said was true or not. Now we have to examine the thought of Zhai more than three thousand years ago, and it is even more uncertain!

古文：无参验而必之者，愚也；弗能必而据之者，诬也。
现代文：不用事实加以检验就对事物作出判断，那就是愚蠢；不能正确判断就引为根据，那就是欺骗。
English: To judge of things, without examining the facts, is folly; to reason of things, without judging rightly, is fraud.

古文：故明据先王，必定尧、舜者，非愚则诬也。
现代文：所以，公开宣称依据先王之道，武断地肯定尧舜的一切，不是愚蠢，就是欺骗。
English: Therefore, it is either stupidity or deception to publicly declare that everything is arbitrarily affirmed in accordance with the way of the former king.

古文：愚诬之学，杂反之行，明主弗受也。
现代文：对于这种愚蠢欺骗的学说，杂乱矛盾的行为，明君是不能接受的。
English: For this kind of stupid and deceptive doctrine, disorderly and contradictory behavior, Mingjun is unacceptable.

古文：墨者之葬也，冬日冬服，夏日夏服，桐棺三寸，服丧三月，世主以为俭而礼之。
现代文：墨家的葬礼主张，冬天死就穿冬天的衣服，夏天死就穿夏天的衣服；只要三寸厚的桐木棺材，守丧三个月就行了，当今君主认为这是节俭，很尊崇他们。
English: The funerals of the Mo family advocated that if they died in winter, they should wear winter clothes, and if they died in summer, they should wear summer clothes; all they needed was a three-inch-thick paulownia coffin and a three-month funeral. Today's monarchs regard this as frugality and highly respect them.

古文：儒者破家而葬，服丧三年，大毁扶杖，世主以为孝而礼之。
现代文：儒家主张倾家荡产地大办葬礼，守丧需经三年，要悲痛到身体受损伤、扶杖而行的程度，当今君主认为这是尽孝，很尊崇他们。
English: Confucianism advocates that a large funeral should be held in the family's hometown, and the mourning period should last for three years, and the grief should be to the extent that the body is injured and walking with a cane. Today's monarchs think this is filial piety, and they respect them very much.

古文：夫是墨子之俭，将非孔子之侈也；是孔子之孝，将非墨子之戾也。
现代文：要是赞成墨子的节俭，那就应该反对孔子的奢侈；要是赞成孔子的尽孝，那就应该反对墨子的暴戾。
English: If you agree with Mozi's frugality, then you should oppose Confucius' extravagance; if you agree with Confucius' filial piety, then you should oppose Mozi's violence.

古文：今孝、戾、侈、俭俱在儒、墨，而上兼礼之。
现代文：现在是尽孝和暴戾、奢侈和节俭同时存在于儒、墨两家的学说之中，而君主却都要加以尊礼。
English: Nowadays, filial piety and violence, luxury and frugality coexist in the teachings of both Confucianism and Buddhism, but the monarch must be honored.

古文：漆雕之议，不色挠，不目逃，行曲则违于臧获，行直则怒于诸侯，世主以为廉而礼之。
现代文：漆雕氏的主张是脸上不露出屈服顺从的表情，眼里不显出怯懦逃避的神色；自己错了，即使对奴仆也要避让；自己做得对，即使对于诸侯也敢于抗争。当今君主认为这是为人耿直而加以尊礼。
English: Mr. Urushi's claim is that he does not show the expression of submission and obedience on his face, and does not show the look of cowardly escape in his eyes; if he is wrong, he will avoid giving in even to slaves; if he does the right thing, he will dare to fight even against princes. Today's monarchs think that this is to be honest and respect it.

古文：宋荣子之议，设不斗争，取不随仇，不羞囹圄，见侮不辱，世主以为宽而礼之。
现代文：宋荣子的主张则是完全不要斗争，绝对不要报仇，坐进监狱不感羞愧，被人欺侮不觉耻辱。当今君主认为这是为人能宽恕而加以尊崇。
English: Song Rongzi's idea was to completely refrain from fighting, absolutely not to take revenge, to go to prison without feeling ashamed, to be bullied without feeling shame. Today's monarchs believe that this is something that can be forgiven and respected.

古文：夫是漆雕之廉，将非宋荣之恕也；是宋荣之宽，将非漆雕之暴也。
现代文：要是赞成漆雕氏的为人耿直，那就应该反对宋荣子的为人随和；要是赞成宋荣子的宽容，那就应该反对漆雕氏的凶暴。
English: If one approves of Geng Zhi as a person, then one should oppose Song Rongzi's easy-goingness; if one approves of Song Rongzi's tolerance, then one should oppose the ferocity of the Urushi clan.

古文：今宽、廉、恕、暴俱在二子，人主兼而礼之。
现代文：现在是宽容与耿直、随和与凶暴同时存在于这两个人的主张中，而君主对他们都要加以尊礼。
English: Now it is tolerance and straightforwardness, easy-goingness and ferocity that coexist in the claims of these two people, and the monarch has to pay tribute to them.

古文：自愚诬之学、杂反之辞争，而人主俱听之，故海内之士，言无定术，行无常议。
现代文：显然属于愚蠢骗人的学说、杂乱相反的论争，而君主却都要听信不疑；结果世上的人，说话没有一定标准，办事没有固定主张。
English: Obviously, they belong to stupid and deceptive doctrines, chaotic and contradictory arguments, but the monarch has to listen to them without any doubt; as a result, people in the world do not have a certain standard of speech and do not have a fixed position.

古文：夫冰炭不同器而久，寒暑不兼时而至，杂反之学不两立而治。
现代文：要知道，冰和炭是不能长久放在同一个器皿中，寒冷和暑热不能同时到来，杂乱相反的学说不能兼收并蓄而治理好国家。
English: It should be known that ice and charcoal cannot be kept in the same vessel for a long time, cold and heat cannot come at the same time, and confusing and contradictory doctrines cannot govern the country in an inclusive manner.

古文：今兼听杂学缪行同异之辞，安得无乱乎？
现代文：现在君主对于那种杂乱、荒谬和矛盾百出的言行全都听信，怎么能不造成混乱呢？
English: Now that the sovereign has listened to all the ramblings, absurdities and contradictions, how can he not create confusion?

古文：听行如此，其于治人又必然矣。
现代文：听话、行事这个样子，君主在治理民众方面也就必然如此了。
English: Obedient and behaving in this way, the monarch in the governance of the people is bound to be so.

古文：今世之学士语治者，多曰： 与贫穷地以实无资。 
现代文：如今的学者一谈起国家治理问题。总是说： 给贫穷的人一些土地，以充实他们匮乏的资财。 
English: Today's scholars, when they talk about the problem of state governance, always say: Give the poor some land to enrich their scarce resources.

古文：今夫与人相善也，无丰年旁入之利而独以完给者，非力则俭也。
现代文：现在情况是，和别人的条件差不多，没有碰上丰年，没有额外收入的利益，但有的人独能做到自给自足；这不是由于勤劳，就是由于节俭的缘故。
English: It is now the case that, on the same footing as everyone else, without the benefit of a good harvest or extra income, some people can only be self-sufficient, either through hard work or thrift.

古文：与人相善也，无饥馑、疾疚、祸罪之殃独以贫穷者，非侈则堕也。
现代文：和别人的条件差不多，不存在荒年、大病、横祸、犯罪等问题，却独有他陷入贫穷；这不是由于奢侈，就是由于懒惰的缘故。
English: His condition is similar to that of others, there are no problems such as famine, serious illness, disaster, crime, but he is the only one to fall into poverty; this is not due to luxury, it is due to laziness.

古文：侈而堕者贫，而力而俭者富。
现代文：奢侈和懒惰的人会贫穷，而勤劳和节俭的人能富足。
English: The extravagant and lazy will be poor, but the diligent and frugal will be rich.

古文：今上征敛于富人以布施于贫家，是夺力俭而与侈堕也，而欲索民之疾作而节用，不可得也。
现代文：现在君主向富足的人家征收财物去散给贫穷的人家，这是夺来勤俭节约者的财物而送给奢侈懒惰的人；这样还想督促民众努力耕作，省吃俭用，就根本办不到了。
English: Now the sovereign collects the goods of the rich and distributes them to the poor; he takes away the goods of the thrifty and gives them to the lazy and extravagant; and if he wants to urge the people to work hard and be frugal, he cannot do it.

古文：今有人于此，义不入危城，不处军旅，不以天下大利易其胫一毛，世主必从而礼之，贵其智而高其行，以为轻物重生之士也。
现代文：假定这里有个人，坚决不进入危险地区，不参军打仗，不愿拿天下的大利来换自己小腿上的一根毫毛；当代君主一定会进而优待他，看重他的见识，赞扬他的行为，认为是轻视财物爱惜生命的人。
English: Suppose there is a person here who resolutely does not enter dangerous areas, does not join the army to fight, does not want to take the world's great profits for a hair on his calf; the contemporary monarch will certainly further treat him favorably, value his insight, praise his behavior, and consider him to be a person who despises wealth and cherishes life.

古文：夫上所以陈良田大宅，设爵禄，所以易民死命也。今上尊贵轻物重生之士，而索民之出死而重殉上事，不可得也。
现代文：君主所以把良田和宽大的住宅拿出来作为赏赐，设置官爵和俸禄，为的就是换取民众去拼死效命；现在君主既然尊重那些轻视财物爱惜生命的人，再想要求民众出生入死为国事作出牺牲，就根本不可能了。
English: That is why the monarch gave out good fields and spacious houses as rewards, set up peerages and salaries, in exchange for the people to fight to the death; now that the monarch respects those who despise wealth and cherish life, it is simply impossible to ask the people to sacrifice for national affairs from birth to death.

古文：藏书策，习谈论，聚徒役，服文学而议说，世主必从而礼之，曰： 敬贤士，先王之道也。 
现代文：收藏书册，讲究辩说，聚徒讲学，从事文章学术事业来高谈阔论进行游说；对于这些人，当代君主一定会进而优待他。说什么 尊敬贤士是先王的制度 。
English: To collect books, to pay attention to arguments, to gather people to lecture, to engage in articles and academic undertakings to talk about and lobby; for these people, the contemporary monarch will certainly continue to treat him favorably.

古文：夫吏之所税，耕者也；而上之所养，学士也。
现代文：官吏们征税的对象是种田的人，而君主供养的却是那些著书立说的学士。
English: The officials levied taxes on the farmers, while the monarch supported the scholars who wrote books and formulated theories.

古文：耕者则重税，学士则多赏，而索民之疾作而少言谈，不可得也。
现代文：对于种田的人征收重税，对于学士却给予厚赏，这样，再想督责民众努力耕作而少说空话，是根本不可能的。
English: It is impossible to impose a heavy tax on farmers and a large reward on graduates, and then to urge the people to work hard and not to talk nonsense.

古文：立节参明，执操不侵，怨言过于耳，必随之以剑，世主必从而礼之，以为自好之士。
现代文：讲求气节，标榜高明，坚持操守而不容侵犯，听到怨恨自己的话，马上拔剑而起；对于这样的人。当代君主一定会礼遇他，以为这是爱惜自我的人。
English: For such a person, the contemporary monarch will certainly treat him with courtesy, thinking that this is a person who cherishes himself.

古文：夫斩首之劳不赏，而家斗之勇尊显，而索民之疾战距敌而无私斗，不可得也。
现代文：对战场广杀敌意功的人不予奖赏，对那些逞勇报私仇的人反要使之尊贵，这样要想求得民众奋勇杀敌而不去私斗，是根本不可能的。
English: It is absolutely impossible to ask the people to kill the enemy bravely and not to fight for their own interests if they do not reward those who have killed a large number of enemies on the battlefield and honor those who have bravely avenged their enemies.

古文：国平则养儒侠，难至则用介士。
现代文：国家太平时供养儒生和侠客，危难到来时用战士打仗。
English: When the country is at peace, it provides for Confucianism and chivalry, and when danger comes, it uses soldiers to fight.

古文：所养者非所用，所用者非所养，此所以乱也。
现代文：所供养的人不是所要用的人，所要用的人不是所供养的人，这就是发生祸乱的原因。
English: The one who provides is not the one who is used, and the one who is used is not the one who provides. This is the reason for the calamity.

古文：且夫人主于听学也，若是其言，宜布之官而用其身；若非其言，宜去其身而息其端。
现代文：再说，君主在听取一种学说的时候，如果认为是对的，就应该正式向官府公布，并任用倡导的人。如果认为是错误的，就应该驱逐他们，并制止他们的言论。现在是。
English: Moreover, when the prince hears a doctrine, if he thinks it is right, he should officially announce it to the government and appoint advocates; if he thinks it is wrong, he should expel them and stop their speech.

古文：今以为是也，而弗布于官；以为非也，而不息其端。
现代文：认为正确的，却不在官府予以公布；认为错误的，又不从根本上加以禁止。
English: If they think it's right, they don't publish it in the government office; if they think it's wrong, they don't fundamentally ban it.

古文：是而不用，非而不息，乱亡之道也。
现代文：对的不采纳，错的不禁止，这是导致国家混乱和灭亡的做法。
English: Not adopting what is right and not prohibiting what is wrong is a practice that leads to chaos and ruin of the country.

古文：澹台子羽，君子之容也，仲尼几而取之，与处久而行不称其貌。
现代文：澹台子羽有着君子的仪表，孔子信以为真君子，就收他为徒；同他相处时间长了，却发现他的品行和他的容貌很不相称。
English: Xingtai Zi Yu had the appearance of a gentleman. Confucius believed that he was a true gentleman and accepted him as an apprentice. After spending a long time with him, he found that his character and his appearance were very incongruous.

古文：宰予之辞，雅而文也，仲尼几而取之，与处久而智不充其辩。
现代文：宰予说起话来非常文雅，孔子相信他是真文雅。就收他为徒同他相处时间一长，却发现他的智力远不及他的口才。
English: Confucius believed that Zayo was a truly elegant person, and he took him as an apprentice after spending a long time with him. However, he found that his intelligence was far less than his eloquence.

古文：故孔子曰： 以容取人乎，失之子羽；以言取人乎，失之宰予。 
现代文：因此孔子说： 按照容貌取人吧，在于羽身上行不通；按照言谈取人吧，在宰予身上行不通。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: Take a person according to his appearance, but it will not work on the feather; take a person according to his speech, but it will not work on the body.

古文：故以仲尼之智而有失实之声。
现代文：看来，即使凭借孔子那样的聪明，也还有看人失实的结论。
English: It seems that even with the wisdom of Confucius, there are still false conclusions.

古文：今之新辩滥乎宰予，而世主之听眩乎仲尼，为悦其言，因任其身，则焉得无失乎？
现代文：现在流行起来的巧辩大大超过了宰予，而当代君主听起话来又比孔子还要眩惑；因为喜欢他的言论，就去任用他这个人，这怎么能不出差错呢？
English: The sophistry that is now in vogue is far superior to Zhaoyu, and the contemporary monarch sounds even more dazzling than Confucius; how can it not be a mistake to appoint him because you like his speech?

古文：是以魏任孟卯之辩，而有华下之患；赵任马服之辩，而有长平之祸。
现代文：因此，魏国听信孟卯的花言巧语，结果带来了华阳之战的惨败；赵国听信赵括的纸上谈兵，结果造成了长平之战的大祸。
English: Therefore, Wei listened to Meng Wu's rhetoric and rhetoric, which resulted in a disastrous defeat in the Battle of Huayang; Zhao listened to Zhao Guan's paper talk about soldiers, which resulted in the disaster of the Battle of Changping.

古文：此二者，任辩之失也。
现代文：这两件事，都是任用能说会道的人而铸成了大错。
English: In both cases, it was a big mistake to appoint people who could talk the talk.

古文：夫视锻锡而察青黄，区冶不能以必剑；水击鹄雁，陆断驹马，则臧获不疑钝利。
现代文：如果炼铜造剑时只看所掺的锡和火色，就是欧冶也不能断定剑的好坏；可是用这把剑到水上砍死鸽雁，在陆上劈杀驹马，那么，就是臧获也不会把剑的利钝搞错。
English: If, when making a copper sword, one only looked at the tin and the fire color mixed in, even Ou Ye would not be able to determine whether the sword was good or bad; but if one used this sword to kill pigeons and geese on the water, and to kill horses and mules on land, then even if it was captured, the sharpness of the sword would not be mistaken.

古文：发齿吻形容，伯乐不能以必马；授车就驾，而观其末涂，则臧获不疑驽良。
现代文：如果只是打开马口看牙齿，以及观察外形，就是伯乐也不能判断马的好坏；可是让马套上车，看马究竟能跑多远。就是臧获也不会把马的优劣搞错。
English: If you just open the horse's mouth to look at the teeth and observe the shape, even Bo Le can't judge whether the horse is good or bad; but let the horse get on the car and see how far the horse can run. Even if you catch it, you won't mistake the horse's strengths and weaknesses.

古文：观容服，听辞言，仲尼不能以必士；试之官职，课其功伐，则庸人不疑于愚智。
现代文：如果只看一个人的相貌、服饰。只听他说话议论，就是孔子也不能断定这个人能力怎样；可是在官职上一试验，用办事成效一考察，就是庸人也不会怀疑他是愚蠢还是聪明了。
English: If you only look at a person's appearance and clothing, and only listen to him talk and discuss, even Confucius would not be able to determine what this person's ability is; but in the official post, if you experiment and use the results of the work, even a mediocre person will not doubt whether he is stupid or smart.

古文：故明主之吏，宰相必起于州部，猛将必发于卒伍。
现代文：所以，明着手下的官吏。宰相 定是从地方官中选拔上来的，猛将一定是从士兵队伍个挑选出来的。
English: Therefore, the officials under him, the prime minister, must have been selected from the local officials, and the general must have been selected from the soldiers.

古文：夫有功者必赏，则爵禄厚而愈劝；迁官袭级，则官职大而愈治。
现代文：有功劳的人必定给予奖赏，那么俸禄越优厚他们就越受鼓励；不断地升官晋级，那么。官职越高他们就越能办事。
English: Meritorious people are sure to reward, so the higher the salary, the more they are encouraged; continuously promoted, then the higher the position, the more they can do.

古文：夫爵禄大而官职治，王之道也。
现代文：高官厚禄，公务大治，是称王天下的正道。
English: A high-ranking official with a generous salary and a great deal of official duties is the right way to be a king.

古文：磐石千里，不可谓富；象人百万，不可谓强。
现代文：拥有巨石千里，不能算富有；拥有俑人百万，不能算强大。
English: Having thousands of miles of megaliths cannot be considered rich; having millions of people cannot be considered powerful.

古文：石非不大，数非不众也，而不可谓富强者，磐不生粟，象人不可使距敌也。
现代文：石头不是不大，俑人数目也不是不多，但不能说是富强的原凶：在丁巨石上不能生产粮食，而佣人不能用来抗击敌人。
English: The stone is not small, and the number of skeletons is not small, but it cannot be said to be the cause of wealth and strength: it is not possible to produce food on the Dinghuang stone, and the servants cannot be used to resist the enemy.

古文：今商官技艺之士亦不垦而食，是地不垦，与磐石一贯也。
现代文：现在经商谋官和凭技艺牟利的人都是不靠种田吃饭的，这样土地得不到耕种。和巨石毫无二致。
English: Nowadays, people who are engaged in business and profit from their skills do not rely on farmland to eat, so the land cannot be cultivated. It is no different from boulders.

古文：儒侠毋军劳，显而荣者，则民不使，与象人同事也。
现代文：儒生和游侠没有军功，却得以显贵和出名，那就是使不动的人，和俑人的作用一样。
English: Confucianism and rangers do not have military merit, but they are distinguished and famous. That is, the role of the immobilizer is the same as that of the instigator.

古文：夫祸知磐石象人，而不知祸商官儒侠为不垦之地、不使之民，不知事类者也。
现代文：现在只知道把巨石和俑人看成祸害。却不知道经商谋官和儒生游侠也是有地不垦、不能使用，同样是个祸害，那就是不懂得据事类推的人了。
English: Now, we only know that huge boulders and tall men are regarded as a scourge. However, we don't know that being a business strategist and a Confucian knight errant are also undesirable and can't be used, they are also a scourge, that is, people who don't know how to reason by analogy.

古文：故敌国之君王虽说吾义，吾弗入贡而臣；关内之侯虽非吾行，吾必使执禽而朝。
现代文：因此，实力抗衡的别国君主尽管喜欢我们的仁义，我们却并不能叫他进贡称臣；关内侯虽然反对我们的行为，我们却肯定能让他拿着礼物来朝拜。
English: Therefore, although the monarchs of other countries with competing strength like our benevolence and righteousness, we cannot make him pay tribute and praise us; although the Guan Nei Hou opposes our actions, we can certainly let him come to worship with gifts.

古文：是故力多则人朝，力寡则朝于人，故明君务力。
现代文：可见力量大就有人来朝拜。力量小就得去朝拜别人，所以明君务求发展实力。
English: It can be seen that when the strength is high, some people come to worship. When the strength is low, they have to worship others, so Mingjun strives to develop strength.

古文：夫严家无悍虏，而慈母有败子。
现代文：在严厉的家庭中不会有强悍不驯的奴仆。在慈母的娇惯下却会出败家子。
English: In a strict family, there will be no strong and unruly servants. Under the pampering of a loving mother, there will be a loser.

古文：吾以此知威势之可以禁暴，而德厚之不足以止乱也。
现代文：我由此得知威严和权势能够禁暴，而道德再好也不足以制止混乱。
English: I learned from this that authority and power can stop violence, but morality is not enough to stop chaos.

古文：夫圣人之治国，不恃人之为吾善也，而用其不得为非也。
现代文：圣人治理国家，不是依赖人们自觉为自己办事的善行，要的是那种人们不敢做坏事的局面。
English: A saint governs a country not by relying on the good deeds of people who consciously do things for themselves, but by creating a situation in which people do not dare to do bad things.

古文：恃人之为吾善也，境内不什数；用人不得为非，一国可使齐。
现代文：要是靠人们自觉地为自己办事的善行，国内找不出十几、几十个；要是形成人们不敢做坏事的局面，就可以使全国整齐一致。
English: If we rely on the good deeds that people consciously do for themselves, we won't be able to find dozens and dozens in the country; if we create a situation where people don't dare to do bad things, we can make the whole country neat and consistent.

古文：为治者用众而舍寡，故不务德而务法。
现代文：治理国家的人需要采用多数人都得遵守的措施，不能用只有少数人才能做到的办法，因此不应该推崇德治，而应该实行法治。
English: Those who govern the country need to adopt measures that the majority of people must comply with, and cannot use methods that only a few people can do. Therefore, the rule of virtue should not be promoted, but the rule of law should be implemented.

古文：夫必恃自直之箭，百世无矢；恃自圜之术，千世无轮矣。
现代文：定要依靠自然挺直的箭杆。几千年也造不出箭来；定要依靠自然长成的圆木，几万年也造不成车轮。
English: You have to rely on naturally straight arrow shafts. You can't make arrows for thousands of years; you have to rely on naturally grown logs, and you can't make wheels for tens of thousands of years.

古文：自直之箭，自圜之术，百世无有一，然而世皆乘车射禽者何也？
现代文：自然长成的直杆和圆木，既然千年万载也没有一个，那为什么大家还都能有车坐、还都能射箭打猎呢？
English: Since there has not been a single straight pole or round log that has grown naturally for thousands of years, why is it that everyone can still drive a car and can still shoot arrows and hunt?

古文：隐栝之道用也。
现代文：因为应用了加上木材的工具和方法。
English: Because of the tools and methods used to add the wood.

古文：虽有不恃隐栝而有自直之箭、自圜之术，良工弗贵也。
现代文：虽然也有不经过加工就自然合用的直杆和圆木，但好工匠是不看重的。
English: Although there are also straight rods and logs that can be used naturally without processing, good craftsmen do not attach importance to them.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：乘者非一人，射者非一发也。
现代文：因为要坐车的不是一个人，射箭打猎也不是只发一箭。
English: Because it's not just one person who needs to take a car, and it's not just one arrow for archery and hunting.

古文：不恃赏罚而恃自善之民，明主弗贵也。
现代文：虽然也有不靠赏罚就能自行去做好事的人，但明君是不看重的。
English: Although there are people who can do good things on their own without relying on rewards and punishments, Ming Jun does not care.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：国法不可失，而所治非一人也。
现代文：因为国法不可丧失，而所要统治的也不是一个人。
English: For the law of the land shall not perish, neither shall one man rule over another.

古文：故有术之君，不随适然之善，而行必然之道。
现代文：所以有办法的君主，不随和偶然的天生善行，而推行必然的政治措施。
English: Therefore, the monarch who has the means does not follow the accidental innate good deeds, but pursues the inevitable political measures.

古文：今或谓人曰： 使子必智而寿 ，则世必以为狂。
现代文：如果对别人说： 我让你一定又聪明又长寿。 那么。
English: If you say to someone: I'll make sure you're smart and live a long life.

古文：夫智，性也；寿，命也。
现代文：大家肯定会认为这是说谎骗人。
English: People will definitely think it's a lie.

古文：性命者，非所学于人也，而以人之所不能为说人，此世之所以谓之为狂也。
现代文：因为一个人的智力，是先天造成的；一个人的寿限，是命里注定的。这种天性和命定的东西，不是能从别人那里学来的。用人家不能做到的事去讨好人家。所以大家才说他说谎骗人。
English: Because a person's intelligence is created a priori; a person's lifespan is predetermined by fate. This kind of natural and predetermined thing can not be learned from others. Use what others can not do to please good people. That's why everyone says he's lying.

古文：谓之不能然，则是谕也，夫谕性也。
现代文：向人家说那些无法做到的事，这便是奉承，而奉承是一种本性。
English: To tell a man what he cannot do is flattery, and flattery is natural.

古文：以仁义教人，是以智与寿说也，有度之主弗受也。
现代文：用仁义教人，就跟用智力和寿命取悦别人一样，实行法治的君主是不能接受的。
English: To teach people with benevolence and righteousness is the same as pleasing others with intelligence and longevity. A monarch who practices the rule of law is unacceptable.

古文：故善毛啬、西施之美，无益吾面；用脂泽粉黛，则倍其初。
现代文：光是称赞毛啬、西施的美丽，并不能使自己变得好看；用脂泽粉黛化妆一番，就能比原来漂亮几倍。
English: Merely praising the beauty of hairiness and laxity does not make you look good; if you apply makeup with lipstick powder, you can look several times prettier than before.

古文：言先王之仁义，无益于治；明吾法度，必吾赏罚者，亦国之脂泽粉黛也。
现代文：空谈先王的仁义，对于治理国家没有什么好处；彰明自己国家的法度，在国内坚决实行赏罚，也就如同能使国家富强起来的脂泽粉黛。
English: Empty talk about the benevolence and righteousness of the former king is of no benefit to the governance of the country; clarifying the laws of one's own country and resolutely implementing rewards and punishments at home is also like grease powder that can make the country rich and strong.

古文：故明主急其助而缓其颂，故不道仁义。
现代文：所以明君急切地追求有效的手段，而不去理睬虚妄的颂扬，所以不讲什么仁义道德。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun eagerly pursues effective means, and ignores false praise, so he does not talk about any benevolence, righteousness and morality.

古文：今巫祝之祝人曰： 使若千秋万岁。 
现代文：如今的巫祝为人祈祷时总是说： 愿你长生千秋，万寿无疆！ 
English: When praying for people, today's sorcerers always say: May you live forever and ever, and may your life have no boundaries!

古文：千秋万岁之声括耳，而一日之寿无征于人，此人所以简巫祝也。
现代文：这种千秋万岁的声音在耳边喋喋不休，可是使人多活一天的应验也没有；这就是人们看不起巫视的原因。
English: This eternal voice chatter in the ear, but there is no fulfillment to make people live a day longer; this is why people despise sorcery.

古文：今世儒者之说人主，不善今之所以为治，而语已治之功；不审官法之事，不察奸邪之情，而皆道上古之传誉、先王之成功。
现代文：现在世上的儒家游说君主时，不谈现在如何才能治理好国家，反而说一些过去治理国家取得的功绩；不去考察官府法令这样的事务，不了解奸诈邪恶的实情，却都去称道上古流传的美谈和先王就的功业。
English: When the world's Confucians now lobby the monarchs, they do not talk about how to govern the country well now, but instead talk about some of the achievements made in the past to govern the country; they do not investigate matters such as government decrees, do not understand the truth of treachery and evil, but they all praise the ancient tales and the achievements of the first king.

古文：儒者饰辞曰： 听吾言，则可以霸王。 
现代文：儒家侈谈什么： 要是听从我的主张，就可以称王称霸。 
English: What Confucians talk about: If you follow my advice, you can become a king.

古文：此说者之巫祝，有度之主不受也。
现代文：这就是游说者中的巫视，实行法治的君主是不能接受的。
English: This is the witchcraft of lobbyists, and it is unacceptable for a monarch to enforce the rule of law.

古文：故明主举实事，去无用，不道仁义者故，不听学者之言。
现代文：所以，明君办实事，去无用，不空谈什么仁义道德，也不听信学者的言论。
English: Therefore, it is useless for Ming Jun to do practical things, talk about what kind of benevolence, righteousness and morality, and do not listen to the remarks of scholars.

古文：今不知治者必曰： 得民之心。 
现代文：现在，不懂得治理国家的人一定会说： 要得民心。 
English: Now, those who do not know how to govern the country must say: win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：欲得民之心而可以为治，则是伊尹、管仲无所用也，将听民而已矣。
现代文：如果得民心就可以治理好国家，那么伊尹、管仲就没有用处了，只要听任民众就一了百了了。
English: If you can govern the country well by winning the hearts and minds of the people, then Yi Yin and Guanzhong are of no use. As long as you listen to the people, you will be fine.

古文：民智之不可用，犹婴儿之心也。
现代文：民众的认识就像婴儿的心智一样，是不能信从的。
English: The public's knowledge, like a baby's mind, cannot be trusted.

古文：夫婴儿不剔首则腹痛，不痤则寖益。剔首、痤，必一人抱之，慈母治之，然犹啼呼不止，婴儿子不知犯其所小苦致其所大利也。
现代文：婴儿不剃头就会肚痛，不剖疮就逐渐加重；而要给婴儿剃头和剖疮，必须由一个人抱着，由慈母给他处理；即使这样他还会哭喊不止，因为婴儿并不知道给他吃点小苦会带来大的好处。
English: If the head is not shaved, the baby will have a tummy ache, and if it is not cut, the sores will gradually get worse; if the head is shaved and the sores are cut, the baby must be held by a person and treated by a loving mother; even then, he will cry and cry, because the baby does not know that giving him a little pain will bring great benefits.

古文：今上急耕田垦草以厚民产也，而以上为酷；修刑重罚以为禁邪也，而以上为严；征赋钱粟以实仓库，且以救饥馑、备军旅也，而以上为贪；境内必知介而无私解，并力疾斗，所以禽虏也，而以上为暴。
现代文：如今君主加紧督促开荒种田，为的是增加民众的收入，却被认为太残酷；制定刑法，加重惩罚，为的是禁止奸邪，却被认为太严厉；征收钱粮的赋税，为的是把它们用于救济灾荒、供养军队，却被认为太贪婪；使国内民众必须知道披甲上阵，而不准私自免除兵役，为的是征服敌人，却被认为太凶狠。
English: Nowadays, it is considered too cruel for the monarch to increase the income of the people by intensifying the supervision of the opening of barren fields; it is considered too severe to enact the criminal law and increase the punishment in order to prohibit adultery; it is considered too greedy to collect the tax on money and grain in order to use them for disaster relief and army supply; it is considered too fierce to make the domestic people know that they must wear armor and go into battle without being allowed to exempt themselves from military service; and it is considered too fierce to conquer the enemy.

古文：此四者，所以治安也，而民不知悦也。
现代文：上述四项措施，本是为了治国安民，可是民众却不欢迎。
English: The above-mentioned four measures were originally intended to govern the country and ensure the safety of the people, but the people did not welcome them.

古文：夫求圣通之士者，为民知之不足师用。
现代文：君主所以要寻求圣明通达的人，就是因为民众的认识是不能信从和作为标准。
English: The reason why monarchs seek out those who are well-informed is because the public's understanding cannot be trusted and used as a standard.

古文：昔禹决江濬河而民聚瓦石，子产开亩树桑郑人谤訾。
现代文：当初大禹疏通江河。而民众却用瓦石去填塞；子产提倡开荒种桑，而郑国民众却要责骂。
English: At the beginning, Dayu dredged the rivers, but the people filled them with stones; Zibo advocated planting mulberry trees, but the people of Zheng wanted to scold him.

古文：禹利天下，子产存郑，皆以受谤，夫民智之不足用亦明矣。
现代文：大禹使天下人获得利益，子产使郑国得以保全，但都受到人们的诽谤，可见民众的认识显然是靠不住的。
English: Dayu brought benefits to the people of the world, and his progeny preserved Zhengguo, but they were all slandered by the people. It can be seen that the public's understanding of him is obviously unreliable.

古文：故举士而求贤智，为政而期适民，皆乱之端，未可与为治也。
现代文：所以选拔人才时希图得到贤人智士，治理国家时指望顺应民众心理，都是造成混乱的根源，是不可能用来治理好国家的。
English: Therefore, when selecting talents, it is hoped to get wise people and sages, and when governing the country, it is hoped to conform to the psychology of the people. Both are the root causes of chaos and cannot be used to govern the country well.

