古文：真君曰：前章所言，不止育子，直将子心，亲曲体之。
现代文：真君说：前章所言，不只是讲养育子女，还有父母细微周到地体谅子女的心思。
English: Zhenjun said: The previous chapter is not only about raising children, but also about the parents' subtle and thoughtful consideration for their children.

古文：凡为人子，当以二亲，体我心者，还体亲心。
现代文：凡是作为子女的，应当以父母体谅自己的心情来体谅父母。
English: Anyone who is a child should be considerate of their parents in the same way that their parents are considerate of themselves.

古文：体我此身，骨禀父生，肉禀母成，一肤一发，或有毁伤，亲心隐痛，子心何安？
现代文：体察我的身体，骨是秉受自父母的精血而化生，肉是秉承自父母的精血而生成。即使是一块皮肤，一根毛发，如果有所毁伤，父母心中都会隐隐作痛，那么子女又如何能够心安呢？
English: Looking at my body, bones are born from the blood of my parents, and flesh is born from the blood of my parents. Even if it is a piece of skin or a hair, if it is damaged, the parents will feel pain, so how can their children be at peace?

古文：心为身主，太和蕴毓，父兮所化，母兮所育，一有不孝，失亲本来。
现代文：心是身体的主宰，主宰天地的太和之气蕴藏其中。人身是父亲精血所化生，母亲精血所孕育的。子女一旦有不孝的行为，就失去了禀自父母的本性。
English: The mind is the master of the body, and the spirit of harmony that governs heaven and earth is contained within it. The human body is born from the father's blood and nurtured by the mother's blood. If a child engages in unfilial behavior, he or she will lose the nature of self-reliance.

古文：孝先百行，根从心起，定省温清，时以敬将；每作一事，思以慰亲，每发一言，思以告亲；入承亲颜，亲欢我顺，亲愁我解；出必告亲，恐有恶行，以祸亲身，归必省亲，恐有恶声，以拂亲心。
现代文：每做一件事，都要想着慰藉父母；每说一句话，都要想着告知父母。入则侍奉父母，父母的欢乐我来顺承分享，父母的忧愁由我来化解；外出必定告知父母，恐怕有恶行，以连累父母；归来后必定要探望父母，恐怕家人有恶言恶语，不顺父母的心意。
English: Every time you do something, you should think about comforting your parents; every time you say something, you should think about telling your parents. When you come home, you should serve your parents. I will share their joy, and I will resolve their sorrow. When you go out, you must tell your parents, for fear that you will do something bad and embarrass your parents. When you come back, you must visit your parents, for fear that your family members will say something bad and displease your parents.

古文：力行戒慝，随时加惕，口业不干，身业不作，恐有意业，欺亲欺身，恐有心业，累身累亲。
现代文：尽力做到戒除恶念，随时提高警惕，不造口业，不作身业。恐怕有意业，欺骗自己，欺骗父母；恐怕有心业，牵累自身，拖累父母。
English: Do your best to banish evil thoughts, keep your guard up at all times, do not make a profession, do not make a profession. I am afraid of having a career, deceiving myself, deceiving my parents; I am afraid of having a career, involving myself, dragging my parents.

古文：我有姻娅，属亲至戚，恐失夙好，至亲不宁。
现代文：我有姻亲，属于最亲近的亲属，恐怕失去老交情，使父母不安宁。
English: I have in-laws, who are among my closest relatives, and I am afraid that I will lose old friendships and make my parents uneasy.

古文：上而有君，为亲所主，恐有不忠，致亲以逆；下而民物，与亲并育，恐有不恤，损亲之福；外而友朋，为亲之辅，恐有不信，绝亲友道；师为我法，即为亲箴，事恐失贤，以违亲训；匪人壬人，亲之所远，交恐不择，以累亲志。
现代文：向上则有君主，是父母所事奉的主宰者，恐怕有所不忠，致使父母获叛逆之罪；向下有民众万物，与父母共同生育于天地之间，恐怕对其有失怜悯，损害双亲的幸福。外面有朋友，是父母的辅助者，恐怕有失信用，断绝父母与朋友交往的准则和道义。老师是我效法的对象，老师的劝诫即是父母的劝诫，事奉老师恐怕有失贤德，违背父母的训导。行为不端和巧言谄媚的人，是父母所远离的，恐怕自己交友不慎，而连累了父母的心志。
English: Upwards, there is the monarch, who is the master of the parents' service, and who is afraid of being unfaithful, causing the parents to be guilty of rebellion; downwards, there are the people and all things, who are born with their parents between heaven and earth, and who are afraid of losing mercy and damaging the happiness of their parents; outside, there are friends, who are the parents' auxiliaries, who are afraid of losing trust and breaking the standards and morals of parents and friends. The teacher is the object of my imitation, the teacher's exhortation is the parents' exhortation, and serving the teacher is afraid of losing virtue and violating the parents' instruction.

古文：仰而天高，帝位乎上，日月星斗，亲所敬畏，恐有冒渎，妄干天怒，致重亲辜；俯而地厚，群生资始，亲所奉履，恐有亵侮，业积暴殄，致延亲祸；中而神祗，司我亲命，恐有过犯，致减亲纪。
现代文：仰望则见天之高远，天帝位在其上，日月星斗，是父母所敬畏的，恐怕有所冒犯亵渎，轻易地触犯天怒，以致增加父母的罪过。俯察则见地之厚重，众生借此以生长发育，是父母所敬奉的，恐怕有所亵渎轻慢，恶业累积，损害浪费毫不顾惜，致使灾祸蔓延及父母。中间有天神地祗，主掌父母的生死，恐怕自己有过错，致使父母的阳寿减少。
English: To look up is to see the height and distance of heaven, with the heavenly emperor on top, and the sun, moon and stars, which are feared by parents, for fear of offending and blaspheming, and easily offending the wrath of heaven, thereby increasing the sins of parents. To look down is to see the thickness of the earth, through which sentient beings grow and develop, and which is revered by parents, for fear of being blasphemous and imprudent, accumulating evil karma, and wasting and wasting without concern, causing the spread of disasters to parents. In the middle is the angelic mantle, which controls the life and death of parents, for fear of being at fault

古文：一举一动，总期归善，以成亲德。
现代文：一举一动，都期望归于善，以成全父母的德行。
English: Every move is expected to be virtuous, to fulfill the virtues of the parents.

古文：我亲有善，身顺其美，救人之难，即是亲救；济人之急，即是亲济；悯人之孤，即是亲悯；容人之过，即是亲容。
现代文：父母有善行，我要承顺他们的美德。救人于危难，也就好比是双亲施救；救济别人于危急之时，也就是双亲救济；怜悯别人的孤苦，也就是双亲怜悯；宽容别人的过错，也就是双亲宽容。
English: If one's parents are virtuous, one should follow their virtues. If one rescues someone in a time of danger, it is the same as if one's parents were rescuing; if one helps someone in a time of danger, it is the same as if one's parents were helping; if one feels sorry for someone's suffering, it is the same as if one feels sorry for one's parents; if one forgives someone's faults, it is the same as if one feels sorry for one's parents.

古文：种种不一，体亲至意。
现代文：各种不同情况，都要体察双亲的心意。
English: In all kinds of different situations, it is necessary to understand the parents' intentions.

古文：亲或有过，委曲进谏，俟其必改。
现代文：双亲如果有过错，就要委婉地提出意见，直到改正为止。
English: If the parents are at fault, they should express their opinions in a tactful manner until they are corrected.

古文：以善规亲，犹承以养，养必兼善，方得为子。
现代文：用善规劝双亲，就好比承担起赡养的责任。赡养父母，同时一定要以善来劝谏，这才是为人子所应当做的。
English: To advise one's parents with kindness is like assuming the responsibility of supporting them. To support one's parents and at the same time to advise them with kindness is what a son should do.

古文：人各有亲，曷不怀思，父母在日，寿不过百，惟德之长，垂裕弥遐，是以至孝。
现代文：人们各自都有父母，怎么能不挂怀思念？父母在世，长寿也不过百岁，唯有功德之人，才能声名久远。
English: People each have their own parents, how can they not miss them? Parents are alive, longevity is not more than a hundred years old, only people of merit can be famous for a long time.

古文：亲在一日，得养一日，堂上皆承，膝下完聚，人生最乐，惜此光阴，诚不易得，玉食三殽，勺水一菽，各尽其欢。
现代文：所以 至孝 ，就是父母在世一天，就要赡养一天。父母都健在，子女依聚在父母身边，这才是人生最快乐的事情。应当珍惜这段时光，因为这实在是太难得了。
English: Therefore, filial piety, that is, one day when the parents are alive, it is necessary to support them for one day. Parents are alive, children gather around their parents, this is the happiest thing in life. We should cherish this time, because it is really too difficult.

古文：加餐则喜，减膳则惧，贫富丰啬，敬无二心。
现代文：子女见父母多进饮食就高兴，见父母减少膳食就担心。不管是贫贱富贵，或者是丰裕贫困，孝敬父母的心意都没有改变。
English: Children are happy to see their parents eat more, and worry when they see their parents eat less. No matter whether they are poor, rich or rich, or rich and poor, the intention to honor their parents has not changed.

古文：愿亲常安，恐体失和，疾病休戚，常系子心，一当有恙，能不滋虞，药必先尝，衣不解带，服劳侍寝，愈则徐调，食不轻进，相其所宜；尚或不痊，延医询卜，酒不沾唇，至心祷祝，殚厥念力，以求必痊。
现代文：希望父母永远安康，恐怕父母身体有病痛。父母的疾病和喜忧，常常牵动子女的心。一旦父母身体有病，怎能不心生担忧？喂父母的药，要自己先尝味道的甘苦，衣不解带，辛勤侍奉，服侍父母休息。父母病好之后，要慢慢调养，食物不要乱吃，要弄清其是否适宜父母食用。如果不能痊愈，就要请医问药，占卜吉凶。滴酒不沾，诚心为父母祈祷。竭尽心力，以便祈求父母痊愈。
English: I hope that my parents will always be healthy, but I am afraid that my parents have physical ailments. The illnesses and joys and sorrows of my parents often affect the hearts of my children. Once my parents are physically ill, how can I not worry? To feed my parents' medicine, I must first taste the sweet and bitter taste, do not take off my clothes, serve diligently, and serve my parents to rest. After my parents are well, I must slowly recuperate, do not eat food indiscriminately, and find out whether it is suitable for my parents to eat. If I cannot recover, I must ask the doctor for medicine and divination. Do not drink alcohol, sincerely pray

古文：终天之日，饮食不甘，哭泣失音，衣衾棺椁，多方自尽，三年哀痛，晨昏设荐，佳茔厚穴，安置垄丘，礼送归祠，亲魂有托，庙享墓祭，四时以妥；去亲日远，追思常在，形容面目，若闻若见，动息语默，寻声觅迹，中心勿忘，抱慕如存。
现代文：父母的形体容貌，就如同自己听到见到一样。于是就会常常停下行动，停止说话，顺着声音寻找父母的踪迹，心中时刻不忘。
English: The shape and appearance of their parents are the same as what they hear and see. Therefore, they often stop moving, stop talking, follow the sound to find the traces of their parents, and never forget them in their hearts.

古文：生死同情，幽明一理，孝道由基，大经斯彰。
现代文：心怀敬慕，如同父母健在一样；不管生死，都同此心，不管在阴间或阳间，都是同一个道理。孝道从此根本上去做，则孝道人伦就会彰显。
English: Having a heart of reverence, as if your parents were still alive; no matter whether you are alive or dead, you have the same heart, no matter whether you are in the underworld or the sun, it is the same principle. If you practice filial piety from now on, then the filial piety and human relations will be highlighted.

古文：嗟尔人子，纵能如是，体之亲心，未及万一。
现代文：子女即使能够如此，体恤双亲之心，还是不及父母的万分之一。
English: Even if children are able to do so, their empathy for their parents is still less than one ten-thousandth of their parents.

古文：偈曰：幼而得亲全，安乐不之晓，设无双亲在，饥寒难自保，遭此伶仃苦，方思亲在好。
现代文：偈说：幼小时父母双全，不知道安宁快乐。假如双亲不在，饥寒交迫，生命难以自保。只有遭受了孤独无依之苦，才想念双亲健在的好处。
English: The poem says: When you are young, your parents are both absent, and you don't know peace and happiness. If your parents are absent, you will be hungry and cold, and your life will be difficult to protect yourself. Only when you suffer from loneliness and helplessness, do you miss the benefits of having both parents alive.

古文：又说偈曰：嬉嬉怀抱中，惟知依二亲，何至长大后，渐失尔天真，我亲既生我，我全不能孝，云何我养儿，我又恤之深，反观觉愧悔，方知父母恩。
现代文：又有偈说：在父母怀抱中玩耍，只知道依恋双亲。为什么长大后，渐渐丧失了天真？我的父母既然生育了我，我却完全不能尽孝。为什么我养育子女时，我又对他们怜恤至深？回头反省，感觉到惭愧后悔，这才知道父母的恩情有多大。
English: Another verse says: "Playing in my parents' arms, I only know how to cling to my parents. Why did I gradually lose my innocence when I grew up? Since my parents gave birth to me, I can't be filial at all. Why did I have the deepest sympathy for them when I was raising my children? Looking back, feeling ashamed and regretful, I only know how great my parents' gratitude is.

