古文：孔子初仕，为中都宰。
现代文：孔子刚做官时，担任中都邑的邑宰。
English: When Confucius first became an official, he served as the mayor of Zhongdu.

古文：制为养生送死之节，长幼异食，强弱异任，男女别涂，路无拾遗，器不雕伪。
现代文：他制定了使老百姓生有保障、死得安葬的制度，提倡孝敬长者，以年龄之别享有不同食物；根据能力的大小承担不同的任务；男女走路各走一边；掉在路上的东西没有人拾取据为己有，器物上不雕刻太多的浮华雕饰。
English: He established a system to ensure the safety of the people in life and to be buried after death, advocated filial piety for the elderly, enjoyed different foods according to age; undertook different tasks according to ability; men and women walked on the same side; no one picked up things that fell on the road and kept them for themselves, and did not carve too many flashy carvings on utensils.

古文：为四寸之棺，五寸之椁，因丘陵为坟，不封、不树。
现代文：死人装殓，用厚四寸的棺木、厚五寸的椁木，依傍丘陵修墓，不建高大的坟，不在墓地周围种植松柏。
English: The dead are decorated, with four-inch-thick coffins and five-inch-thick birch trees, and the graves are built next to the hills. Tall graves are not built, and pine trees are not planted around the cemetery.

古文：行之一年，而西方之诸侯则焉。
现代文：这样的制度施行一年之后，西方各诸侯国都争相效仿。
English: One year after the implementation of such a system, all the Western principalities were eager to follow suit.

古文：定公谓孔子曰： 学子此法以治鲁国，何如？ 
现代文：鲁定公对孔子说： 学习您的施政方法来治理鲁国，怎么样？ 
English: Lu Ding Gong said to Confucius: How about learning your governance methods to govern Lu?

古文：孔子对曰： 虽天下可乎，何但鲁国而已哉！ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 这个制度就算天下也能治理好，何况只是治理好鲁国呢！ 
English: Confucius replied, "This system can govern even the whole world well, let alone the country of Lu!

古文：于是二年，定公以为司空，乃别五土之性，而物各得其所生之宜，咸得厥所。
现代文：这样实施了两年，鲁定公任命孔子做了司空。孔子根据鲁国土地的性质，把它们分为山林、川泽、丘陵、高地、沼泽五类，在不同的土地上种植不同的产物，这样，万物都获得了适宜的生长环境。
English: Confucius divided the land of Lu into five categories according to its nature: mountains, forests, rivers, hills, highlands, and marshes, and planted different products on different lands. In this way, everything gained a suitable growing environment.

古文：先时，季氏葬昭公于墓道之南，孔子沟而合诸墓焉。
现代文：早先之时，季平子把鲁昭公葬在鲁国先王陵寝的墓道南面，孔子做司空后，派人将鲁昭王的陵墓与先王的陵墓圈连到一起。
English: At an earlier time, Ji Pingzi publicly buried Lu Zhao in the south of the cemetery road where the first king of Lu was buried. After Confucius became the secretary, he sent someone to connect the mausoleum of King Lu Zhao with the mausoleum circle of the first king.

古文：谓季桓子曰： 贬君以彰己罪，非礼也。
现代文：孔子对季平子的儿子季桓子说： 贬损国君却彰显了自己的罪行，这不合乎礼制。
English: Confucius said to Ji Huan Zi, the son of Ji Ping Zi, "It is not proper to disparage the sovereign but to expose one's own crimes.

古文：今合之，所以掩夫子之不臣。 
现代文：现在把陵墓合到一起，可以掩盖令尊不守臣道的行为。 
English: Now that the mausoleums have been brought together, it will be possible to cover up the fact that Emperor Taizong did not follow the path of a vassal.

古文：由司空为鲁大司寇，设法而不用，无奸民。
现代文：之后，孔子又由司空升为鲁国的大司寇，他虽然修订了法令，却无须使用，不侵扰百姓，秩序井然。
English: Later, Confucius was promoted from the position of secretary to the grand secretary of Lu. Although he amended the law, he did not need to use it, he did not disturb the people, and order was in order.

古文：定公与齐侯会于夹谷，孔子摄相事，曰： 臣闻有文事者必有武备，有武事者必有文备。
现代文：鲁定公和齐侯在齐国的夹谷会盟，孔子代理司仪，孔子对鲁定公说： 我听说，举行和平盟会一定要有武力作为后盾，而进行军事活动也一定要有和平外交的准备。
English: When Lu Ding Gong and Qi Hou held the Alliance of the Valley of the Fallen in the State of Qi, Confucius acted as the master of ceremonies. Confucius said to Lu Ding Gong: I have heard that the holding of the Alliance of Peace must be backed by force, and the military activities must also have the preparation of peaceful diplomacy.

古文：古者诸侯并出疆，必具官以从，请具左右司马。 
现代文：古达诸侯离开自己的疆土，必须配备应有的文武官员随从。因此，我请求您带上左右司马。 
English: When the lords of Guda leave their territory, they must be accompanied by the appropriate civil and military officials. Therefore, I ask you to bring your horses.

古文：定公从之。
现代文：定公听从了孔子的建议。
English: Dingong followed the advice of Confucius.

古文：至会所，为坛位，土阶三等，以遇礼相见，揖让而登。
现代文：到举行盟会的地方，盟会的高台已经筑好，并且设置了三个台阶通往高台。双方以简略的会遇之礼相见，相互行礼谦让着登上高台。
English: At the place where the alliance meeting was held, the high platform of the alliance meeting had already been built, and three steps had been set up to lead to the high platform. The two sides met with a simple courtesy of meeting, and they bowed to each other to climb the high platform.

古文：献酢既毕，齐使莱人以兵鼓噪，劫定公。
现代文：互赠礼品互相敬酒后，齐国一方派人擂鼓呼叫，以此向鲁定公示威。
English: After exchanging gifts and toasting each other, the Qi side sent people to beat drums and shout, in order to demonstrate to Luding.

古文：孔子历阶而进，以公退，曰： 士，以兵之。
现代文：孔子快步登上台阶，保护鲁定公退避，说： 鲁国士兵，拿起武器战斗。
English: Confucius quickly climbed the steps to protect Luding and said: "Lu soldiers, take up arms and fight.

古文：吾两君为好，裔夷之俘敢以兵乱之，非齐君所以命诸侯也！
现代文：我们两国国君在这里举行友好会盟，远方夷狄的俘虏竟敢手持武器行暴，这绝不是齐君和天下诸侯友好邦交之道。
English: The sovereigns of our two countries held a friendly alliance here, and the captives of the distant Yidi dared to use weapons to commit violence. This is by no means the way for the Qijun to have friendly relations with the princes of the world.

古文：裔不谋夏，夷不乱华，俘不干盟，兵不逼好，于神为不祥，于德为愆义，于人为失礼，君必不然。 
现代文：远方异国不得谋我华夏，夷狄不得扰乱中国，俘虏不可扰乱会盟，武力不能威逼友好。否则，这不但是对神明的不敬，从道德上讲是不义，从为人上讲是失礼。齐侯一定不会那样做吧？ 
English: Distant foreign countries may not invade China, barbarians may not disturb China, captives may not disturb alliances, and force may not be used to coerce friendship. Otherwise, it is not only disrespectful to the gods, it is morally unjust and disrespectful to human beings. Qi Hou will surely not do that, will he?

古文：齐侯心怍，麾而避之。
现代文：齐侯听了孔子的话，内心感到愧疚，于是挥手让莱人军队撤了下去。
English: After listening to the words of Confucius, Qi Hou felt guilty, so he waved his hand to let the Lai people's army withdraw.

古文：有顷，齐奏宫中之乐，俳优侏儒戏于前。
现代文：过了一会儿，齐国演奏宫廷乐舞，歌舞艺人和侏儒在国君面前表演歌舞杂技。
English: After a while, Qi Guo played the court music and dance, and the song and dance artists and dwarfs performed song and dance acrobatics in front of the sovereign.

古文：孔子趋进，历阶而上，不尽一等，曰： 匹夫荧侮诸侯者，罪应诛。
现代文：孔子快步登上台阶，站在第二阶上说： 卑贱的人敢戏弄诸侯国君，罪当斩。
English: Confucius hurried up the steps and stood on the second step and said, "If a lowly person dares to play tricks on princes and sovereigns, he should be executed."

古文：请右司马速刑焉！ 
现代文：请右司马立即对他们用刑。 
English: I ask the Right Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate to punish them immediately.

古文：于是斩侏儒，手足异处。
现代文：于是斩杀了侏儒小丑，砍断了他们手脚。
English: So he killed the dwarf clowns and cut off their hands and feet.

古文：齐侯惧，有惭色。
现代文：齐侯心中惧怕，脸上有愧疚之色。
English: Qi Hou was afraid in his heart, and his face was filled with guilt.

古文：将盟，齐人加载书曰： 齐师出境，而不以兵车三百乘从我者，有如此盟。 
现代文：正当齐、鲁两国将要盟誓之时，齐国在盟书上加了一段话说： 将来齐国出兵远征时，鲁国如果不派三百辆兵车从征，齐国就要按照盟书中的条约加以制裁。 
English: Just as Qi and Lu were about to take their oaths, Qi added a paragraph to the alliance document: In the future, when Qi sends troops on an expedition, if Lu does not send three hundred chariots, Qi will impose sanctions in accordance with the treaty in the alliance document.

古文：孔子使兹无还对曰： 而不返我汶阳之田，吾以供命者，亦如之。 
现代文：孔子让鲁大夫兹无还击道： 如果齐国不归还我汶河以北的属地，而要让鲁国派兵跟从的话，齐国也要按照盟书的条约接受惩罚。 
English: Confucius gave Lu no choice but to fight back, saying, "If Qi does not return our territory north of the Wen River, but wants Lu to send troops to follow, Qi will also be punished according to the treaty of alliance."

古文：齐侯将设享礼，孔子谓梁丘据曰： 齐鲁之故，吾子何不闻焉？
现代文：齐侯准备设宴款待鲁定公。孔子对齐大夫梁丘据说： 齐、鲁两国的传统礼节，阁下难道没听说过吗？
English: Qihong prepares to host a banquet for Luding. Confucius confronts Qihong's doctor Liang Qiu It is said: Haven't you heard of the traditional etiquette of Qi and Lu?

古文：事既成矣，而又享之，是勤执事。
现代文：会盟既然已经完成，贵国国君却又要款待我们君主，这岂不是徒然烦扰贵国群臣？
English: Now that the alliance has been consummated, your sovereign wishes to entertain our sovereign. Is it not in vain to trouble your courtiers?

古文：且牺象不出门，嘉乐不野合。
现代文：而且，牺尊、象尊等酒器不能拿出宫门，宫廷之乐也不能在荒野中演奏。
English: Moreover, sacrificial statues, statues of elephants and other wine vessels cannot be taken out of the palace gate, and the music of the court cannot be played in the wilderness.

古文：享而既具，是弃礼；若其不具，是用秕稗也。
现代文：假如宴席上配备了这些酒器，就是背弃礼仪；假如宴席间一切都很简陋，就如同舍弃五谷而用秕稗。
English: If the banquet is equipped with these wine vessels, it is a betrayal of etiquette; if everything is very simple between the banquets, it is like abandoning the grain and using straw.

古文：用秕稗，君辱；弃礼，名恶。
现代文：简陋的宴席有伤贵国国君的脸面，背弃礼法贵国就会臭名昭著，希望您慎重考虑。
English: A simple banquet can hurt the face of your country's sovereign, and your country will be notorious for abandoning etiquette. I hope you will consider this carefully.

古文：子盍图之？夫享，所以昭德也。不昭，不如其已。 
现代文：宴客本是为了彰显君主昭明的德行，假如宴会不能发扬威德，倒不如干脆作罢更好。 
English: The purpose of a banquet is to highlight the virtuous behavior of the monarch. If a banquet cannot promote virtue, it is better to just cancel it altogether.

古文：乃不果享。
现代文：最终齐国取消了这次宴会。
English: In the end, Qi cancelled the banquet.

古文：齐侯归，责其群臣曰： 鲁以君子道辅其君，而子独以夷狄道教寡人，使得罪。 
现代文：齐国国君回到都城，责备群臣说： 鲁国的臣子用君子之道辅佐他们的国君，而你们却偏偏用荒蛮的夷狄之道来辅佐我，招来这些羞辱。 
English: When the sovereign of Qi returned to the capital, he reproached his courtiers, saying, "The courtiers of Lu have supported their sovereign in a gentlemanly manner, but you have supported me in a savage, heathen manner, which has brought about these humiliations.

古文：于是乃归所侵鲁之四邑及汶阳之田。
现代文：于是，齐国归还了以前侵占鲁国的四座城邑和汶河以北的土地。
English: As a result, the State of Qi returned the four cities and towns and the land north of the Wen River that had previously been occupied by Lu.

古文：孔子言于定公曰： 家不藏甲，邑无百雉之城，古之制也。
现代文：孔子对鲁定公说： 卿大夫的家中不能私藏兵器铠甲，封地内不能建筑一百雉规模的都城，自古以来便是这样。
English: Confucius said to Lu Ding Gong: You can't hide weapons and armor in your doctor's home, and you can't build a capital city of a hundred dynasties in your fiefdom. This has been the case since ancient times.

古文：今三家过制，请皆损之。 
现代文：当前季孙氏、叔孙氏、孟孙氏三家大夫的城邑都逾越了礼制，请您削减他们的势力。 
English: At present, the cities and towns of the three doctors, including Qisun, Xunsun and Mengsun, have exceeded the etiquette, please reduce their power.

古文：乃使季氏宰仲由隳三都。叔孙辄不得意于季氏，因费宰公山弗扰率费人以袭鲁。
现代文：于是派季氏家臣仲由拆除三家大夫的城池，季孙氏的都城费、叔孙氏的都城郈、孟孙氏的都城成。叔孙氏的庶子叔孙辄得不到叔孙氏的器重，联合费城的长官公山弗扰率领费人进攻鲁国都城曲阜，发动叛乱。
English: Therefore, he sent Ji's vassal Zhongyu to demolish the castle of the three doctors, Ji Sun's capital Fei, Ji Sun's capital Zeng, and Meng Sun's capital Cheng. Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun's son-in-law Ji Sun

古文：孔子以公与季孙、叔孙、孟孙入于费氏之宫，登武子之台。
现代文：孔子保护着鲁定公，和季孙氏、叔孙氏、孟孙氏三大夫躲入季氏的住宅，登上武子台。
English: Confucius protected Lu Ding Gong, and the three great men, Ji Sun, Ji Sun's uncle, and Meng Sun, hid in Ji's house and boarded the stage.

古文：费人攻之，及台侧，孔子命申句须、乐颀勒士众下伐之，费人北。
现代文：费人进攻武子台，攻到台的一侧，孔子命令申句须、乐颀两位大夫统领士卒前去抵挡，将费人击退。
English: Fei Man attacked Wu Zi Tai and reached one side of the table. Confucius ordered Shen Gu Su and Le Yao, two doctors, to go forward to resist and repel Fei Man.

古文：遂隳三都之城。
现代文：这样，终于削减了三座都邑的城池。
English: In this way, the three cities of the capital were finally reduced.

古文：强公室，弱私家，尊君卑臣，政化大行。
现代文：这一行动使鲁国国君的权力得到加强，大夫的势力被削减，君尊臣卑，政治教化措施得到执行。
English: This action strengthened the power of the prince of the State of Lu, reduced the power of the doctor, made the prince superior to the subject, and implemented political education measures.

