古文：十有七年春，王二月庚午，邾子卒。
现代文：十七年春季，周历二月庚午日，邾子去世。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, on the morning of the second day of the second month of the lunar calendar, Xunzi died.

古文：宋人伐陈。
现代文：宋国攻打陈国。
English: Song attacked Chen.

古文：夏，卫石买帅师伐曹。
现代文：夏季，卫国的石买率领军队攻打曹国。
English: In the summer, Shimei, the defender of the country, led an army to attack Cao.

古文：秋，齐侯伐我北鄙，围桃。
现代文：秋季，齐侯率军攻打我国北面边境，包围了桃地。
English: In autumn, Qi Hou led the army to attack the northern border of our country and surrounded Taodi.

古文：高厚帅师伐我北鄙，围防。
现代文：高厚率军攻打我国北面边境，包围了防地。
English: The army led by Gao Hou attacked the northern border of our country and surrounded the defense zone.

古文：九月，大雩。
现代文：九月，举行大的求雨祭祀活动。
English: In September, a large rain-worshipping ceremony was held.

古文：宋华臣出奔陈。
现代文：宋国的华臣逃到陈国。
English: Song's Hua Chen fled to Chen's territory.

古文：冬，邾人伐我南鄙。
现代文：冬季，邾国人攻打我国难免边境。
English: In winter, it is inevitable that the Chinese will attack our border.

古文：十七年春，宋庄朝伐陈，获司徒卬，卑宋也。
现代文：十七年春季，宋国的庄朝进攻陈国，俘虏了司徒卬，这是由于陈国轻视宋国的缘故。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, the Zhuang Dynasty of the Song Dynasty attacked the State of Chen and captured Szeto. This was due to the fact that the State of Chen despised the State of Song.

古文：卫孙蒯田于曹隧，饮马于重丘，毁其瓶。
现代文：卫国的孙蒯在曹隧打猎，在重丘上让马喝水，打破了水瓶。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the defender of the country, hunted in Cao Tong, and broke a water bottle when he let his horse drink water on a heavy hill.

古文：重丘人闭门而之，曰： 亲逐而君，尔父为厉。
现代文：重丘人关起门来骂他，说： 亲自赶走你的国君，你的父亲做了坏事。
English: The people of Chongqiu closed the door and scolded him, saying, "Take it upon yourself to drive out your sovereign, your father has done a bad thing."

古文：是之不忧，而何以田为？ 
现代文：你不为这个担忧，为什么来打猎？ 
English: If you're not worried about that, why are you hunting?

古文：夏，卫石买、孙蒯伐曹，取重丘。
现代文：夏季，卫国的石买、孙蒯率兵进攻曹国，占取了重丘。
English: In the summer, Shimaei and Sun Yat-sen, the defenders of the country, attacked Cao and occupied the heavy hill.

古文：曹人愬于晋。
现代文：曹国人向晋国提出诉讼。
English: The people of Cao filed a lawsuit against Jin.

古文：齐人以其未得志于我故。秋，齐侯伐我北鄙，围桃。
现代文：齐国人由于他们没有能在我国满足愿望的缘故，秋季，齐灵公攻打我国北部边境，包围桃地。
English: Because the people of Qi could not satisfy their wishes in our country, in the autumn, Qiling attacked the northern border of our country and surrounded Taodi.

古文：高厚围臧纥于防。
现代文：高厚把臧纥包围在防地。
English: Gao thickly encircled the cormorant on the ground.

古文：师自阳关逆臧孙，至于旅松。
现代文：我军从阳关出动迎接臧纥，到达旅松。
English: Our troops set out from Yangguan to meet the cormorants and arrived at Lipsong.

古文：郰叔纥、臧畴、臧贾帅甲三百，宵犯齐师，送之而复。
现代文：郰叔纥、臧畴、臧贾率领甲兵三百人，夜袭齐军，把臧纥送到旅松然后回来。
English: Three hundred armored soldiers led by Gong Shuxuan, Gong Cheng and Gong Jia attacked the Qi army at night, sent Gong to Linsong and then returned.

古文：齐师去之。
现代文：齐军离开了鲁国。
English: The Qi army left Lu Province.

古文：齐人获臧坚。齐侯使夙沙卫唁之，且曰： 无死！ 
现代文：齐国人俘虏了臧坚，齐灵公派夙沙卫去慰问他，并且说 不要死 。
English: The people of Qi captured Xuan Jian, and Qi Ling Gong sent Baisha Wei to console him, and said, "Don't die."

古文：坚稽首曰： 拜命之辱！
现代文：臧坚叩头说： 谨拜谢君王的命令。
English: Yan Jian kowtowed and said, "I respectfully thank you for the king's order."

古文：抑君赐不终，姑又使其刑臣礼于士。 
现代文：然而君王赐我不死，却又故意派一个宦官来对一个士表示敬意。 
English: However, the king did not grant me death, but deliberately sent a eunuch to pay respect to a soldier.

古文：以杙抉其伤而死。
现代文：臧坚用小木桩刺进伤口而死。
English: Yu Jian used a small wooden stake to pierce the wound and died.

古文：冬，邾人伐我南鄙，为齐故也。
现代文：冬季，邾国人进攻我国南部边境，这是为了齐国的缘故。
English: In winter, the Qiang people attacked the southern border of our country. This was for the sake of Qi.

古文：宋华阅卒。华臣弱皋比之室，使贼杀其宰华吴。
现代文：宋国的华阅死，华臣认为皋比家族力量微弱，派坏人去杀他的家总管华吴。
English: After the death of Hua Yue in the Song Dynasty, Hua Chen thought that Yao was weaker than his family, so he sent a villain to kill Hua Wu, the head of his family.

古文：贼六人以铍杀诸卢门合左师之后。
现代文：六个坏人用铍刀把华吴杀死在卢门合左师后边。
English: Six villains killed Hua Wu with a scythe at the back of the Lumeng He Zuo Division.

古文：左师惧曰： 老夫无罪。 
现代文：左师害怕，说： 我老头子没有罪。 
English: Zuo Shi was afraid and said, "My old man is not guilty.

古文：贼曰： 皋比私有讨于吴。 
现代文：坏人说： 皋比私自讨伐吴国。 
English: The villain said, "It is better for me to fight against the State of Wu."

古文：遂幽其妻，曰： 畀余而大璧！ 
现代文：就幽禁了华吴的妻子，说： 把你的大玉璧给我。 
English: He locked up Hua Wu's wife and said, "Give me your precious jewels."

古文：宋公闻之，曰： 臣也，不唯其宗室是暴，大乱宋国之政，必逐之！ 
现代文：宋平公听说这件事，说： 华臣不仅残暴地对待他的宗室，而且使宋国的政令大乱，一定要驱逐他。 
English: When Song Ping Gong heard about this, he said, "Wataseon not only treated his family brutally, but also caused chaos in the government of Song, so we must expel him."

古文：左师曰： 臣也，亦卿也。
现代文：左师说： 华臣，也是卿。
English: Zuo Shi said, "Hua Sen, you are also a noble."

古文：大臣不顺，国之耻也。
现代文：大臣不和顺，这是国家的耻辱。
English: It is a national disgrace that a minister is not in harmony with his colleagues.

古文：不如盖之。 
现代文：不如掩盖起来算了。 
English: Might as well cover it up.

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：宋平公就不再加罪。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：左师为己短策，苟过华臣之门，必骋。
现代文：左师讨厌华臣，他给自己做了一根短马鞭子，如果经过华臣的门口，必定快马加鞭。
English: Zuo Shi hated Watson. He made a short horse whip for himself. If he passed through Watson's door, he would be whipped.

古文：十一月甲午，国人逐瘈狗，瘈狗入于华臣氏，国人从之。
现代文：十一月二十二日，国内的人们追赶疯狗。疯狗跑到华臣家里，人们就跟着追进去。
English: On November 22nd, people in the country chased after the mad dog. The mad dog ran to Watson's house, and people followed it in.

古文：华臣惧，遂奔陈。
现代文：华臣恐惧，就逃亡到陈国。
English: Fearing for his life, he fled to Chen Province.

古文：宋皇国父为大宰，为平公筑台，妨于农收。
现代文：宋国的皇国父做太宰，给宋平公建造一座台，妨碍了农业收割。
English: Song's imperial father, as Dazai, built a platform for Song Ping, which hindered the agricultural harvest.

古文：子罕请俟农功之毕，公弗许。
现代文：子罕请求等待农事完毕以后再建造，平公不答应。
English: Zohan requested to wait until the farm work was completed before building, but Ping Gong did not agree.

古文：筑者讴曰： 泽门之晳，实兴我役。
现代文：筑城的人唱着歌谣说： 泽门里的白面孔，要我们服劳役。
English: The people of Tsukushi sang ballads and said: "The white faces in Zemenli want us to do hard labor.

古文：邑中之黔，实慰我心。 
现代文：城里的黑皮肤，体贴我们的心意。 
English: The dark skin of the city is considerate of our minds.

古文：子罕闻之，亲执朴，以行筑者，而抶其不勉者，曰： 吾侪小人，皆有阖庐以辟燥湿寒暑。
现代文：子罕听到了，亲自拿着竹鞭，巡行督察筑城的人，又鞭打那些不勤快的人，说： 我们这一辈小人都有房子躲避干湿冷热。
English: When Zi Han heard this, he personally took a bamboo whip and went around inspecting the people who were building the city, and whipped those who were not diligent, saying, "Our generation of little people all have houses to escape the damp, cold, and heat.

古文：今君为一台而不速成，何以为役？ 
现代文：现在国君造一座台而不很快完成，怎么能做事情呢？ 
English: Now that the sovereign is building a platform and not completing it quickly, how can he do things?

古文：讴者乃止。
现代文：唱歌的人就停止不唱了。
English: The singer stopped singing.

古文：或问其故？
现代文：有人问他什么缘故？
English: Someone asked him why?

古文：子罕曰： 宋国区区，而有诅有祝，祸之本也。 
现代文：子罕说： 宋国虽小，既有诅咒，又有歌颂，这是祸乱的根本。 
English: Zihan said: Although Song is a small country, it has both curses and songs. This is the root of the calamity.

古文：齐晏桓子卒。晏婴麤缞斩，苴绖带，杖，菅屦，食鬻，居倚庐，寝苫，枕草。
现代文：齐国的晏桓子死，晏婴穿着粗布丧服，头上和腰里系着麻带，手执竹杖，脚穿草鞋，喝粥，住在草棚里，睡草垫子，用草作为枕头。
English: Qin Huanzi of Qi died, and his infant son wore a coarse cloth mourning dress, a hemp belt around his head and waist, a bamboo cane in his hand, straw sandals on his feet, drank porridge, lived in a grass hut, slept on a grass mat, and used grass as a pillow.

古文：其老曰： 非大夫之礼也。 
现代文：他的家臣头子说： 这不是大夫的礼仪。 
English: His chief retainer said, "This is not the etiquette of a doctor.

古文：曰： 唯卿为大夫。 
现代文：晏婴说： 唯独具有卿身分的人才是大夫，才能行大夫的礼仪。 
English: Zou Ying said: Only a person with noble status is a doctor, and can perform the doctor's etiquette.

