古文：宋子曰：五行之内，土为万物之母。
现代文：宋子说：在水、火、木、金、土这五行之中，土是产生万物之根本。
English: Song Zi said: Among the five elements of water, fire, wood, metal and earth, earth is the root of all things.

古文：子之贵者，岂惟五金哉。
现代文：从土中产生的众多物质之中，贵重的岂止有金属这一类呢！
English: Among the many substances produced from the earth, precious metals are not the only ones!

古文：金与水相守而流，功用谓莫尚焉矣。
现代文：金属和火相互作用而熔融流动，这种功用真可以算是足够大的了。
English: The interaction between metal and fire and the resulting flow of molten metal is actually quite useful.

古文：石得燔而成功，盖愈出而愈奇焉。
现代文：但是石头经过烈火焚烧以后也都有它的功用，而且越来越奇特。
English: But after the stone is burned in a fire, it still has its function, and it becomes more and more peculiar.

古文：水浸淫而败物，有隙必攻，所谓不遗丝发者。
现代文：水会浸坏东西，凡是有空隙的地方，水都可以渗透，可以说水连一根头发大小的裂缝都不放过。
English: Water can soak and damage things. Wherever there is a gap, water can permeate. It can be said that water can not miss even a hair-sized crack.

古文：调和一物以为外拒，漂海则冲洋澜，粘则固城雉。
现代文：但是，有了石灰这一类填补缝隙的东西，用它来填补船缝就能确保大船安全漂洋过海，用来砌砖筑城也能使城墙坚固。
English: However, with lime as a kind of gap-filling material, it can be used to fill the seams of ships to ensure that large ships can safely cross the ocean, and it can be used to build bricks to make the city walls strong.

古文：不烦历候远涉，而至宝得焉。
现代文：这种宝物，并不需要经过长途跋涉的艰苦努力就能得到。
English: You don't have to travel far to get this kind of treasure.

古文：燔石之功，殆莫之与京矣。
现代文：因此，大概没有什么东西比烧石的功用更大的了。
English: Therefore, there is probably nothing more useful than burning stones.

古文：至于矾现五金色之形，硫为群石之将，皆变化于烈火。
现代文：至于矾能呈现出五色的形态，硫能够成为群石的主将，这些也都是从烈火中变化生成的。
English: As far as the earthworm can take on the form of five colors, and sulfur can become the leader of a group of stones, these are also generated from the changes in the fire.

古文：巧极丹铅炉火，方士纵焦劳唇舌，何尝肖像天工之万一哉！
现代文：炼丹术可以说是最巧妙的了，然而，尽管炼丹术士唇焦舌烂地吹嘘，又怎能比得上自然力的万分之一呢！
English: Alchemy may be said to be the most ingenious, but, in spite of the breathless boasting of alchemists, how can it be compared to one ten-thousandth of the forces of nature!

古文：○石灰
现代文：石灰
English: Lime

古文：凡石灰经火焚炼为用。
现代文：凡是石灰都是经过火的烧制之后才制成。
English: All lime is only made after it has been fired.

古文：成质之后，入水永劫不坏。
现代文：石灰一旦成形后，即使遇到水也永远不会被破坏。
English: Once the lime is formed, it will never be destroyed, even if it encounters water.

古文：亿万舟楫，亿万垣墙，窒隙防淫，是必由之。
现代文：多少船只，多少墙壁，凡是需要填隙防水的，一定要用它。
English: How many ships, how many walls, all need to fill the gap waterproof, be sure to use it.

古文：百里内外，土中必生可燔石，石以青色为上，黄白次之。
现代文：方圆百里之间，必定会有可供煅烧石灰的石头。这种石灰石以青色的为最好，黄白色的则差些。
English: Within a radius of a hundred miles, there will certainly be stones available for calcining lime. This limestone is best in blue, yellow-white is worse.

古文：石必掩土内二三尺，掘取受燔，土面见风者不用。
现代文：石灰石一般埋在地下二三尺，可以挖取进行煅烧，但表面已经风化的石灰石就不能用了。
English: Limestone is usually buried two or three feet underground and can be excavated and calcined, but limestone that has been weathered on the surface cannot be used.

古文：燔灰火料煤炭居什九，薪炭居什一。
现代文：煅烧石灰的燃料，用煤的约占十分之九，用柴火或者炭的约占十分之一。
English: About nine-tenths of the fuel for calcining lime is coal, and about one-tenth is firewood or charcoal.

古文：先取煤炭泥和做成饼，每煤饼一层叠石一层，铺薪其底，灼火燔之。
现代文：先把煤掺和泥做成煤饼，然后一层煤饼一层石相间着堆砌，底下铺柴引燃煅烧。
English: First, the coal is mixed with mud to make coal cakes, and then a layer of coal cakes is piled up with a layer of stone, and the bottom is covered with firewood to ignite and burn.

古文：最佳者曰矿灰，最恶者曰窑滓灰。
现代文：质量最好的叫做矿灰，最差的叫做窑滓灰。
English: The best quality is called mine ash, the worst is called kiln ash.

古文：火力到后，烧酥石性，置于风中久自吹化成粉。
现代文：火候足后，石头就会变脆。放在空气中会慢慢风化成粉末。
English: After heating, the stone will become brittle. If it is placed in the air, it will slowly weather into powder.

古文：急用者以水沃之，亦自解散。
现代文：着急用的时候洒上水，也会自动散开。
English: When sprinkled with water in an emergency, it will automatically disperse.

古文：凡灰用以固舟缝，则桐油、鱼油调厚绢、细罗，和油杵千下塞念。用以砌墙石，则筛去石块，水调粘合。墁则仍用油灰。用以垩墙壁，则澄过入纸筋涂墁。用以襄墓及贮水池，则灰一分，入河沙、黄土二分，用糯粳米、羊桃藤汁和匀，轻筑坚固，永不隳坏，名曰三和土。
现代文：石灰的用途有很多，它能与桐油、鱼油调拌后同时加上舂烂的厚绢、细罗，则可以用来塞补船缝；用来砌墙时，则要先筛去石块，再用水调匀黏合；用来砌砖铺地面时，则仍用油灰；用来粉刷或者涂抹墙壁时，则要先将石灰水澄清，再加入纸筋，然后涂抹；用来造坟墓或者建蓄水池时，则是一份石灰加两份河沙和黄泥，再用粳糯米饭和猕猴桃汁拌匀，不必夯打便很坚固，永远不会损坏，这就叫做三和土。
English: There are many uses for lime. It can be mixed with tung oil and fish oil and then mixed with coarse and coarse straw. It can be used to mend ship seams. When building walls, the stones must first be sifted and then mixed with water. When laying bricks on the ground, putty is still used. When painting or coating walls, the lime water must first be clarified, then paper reinforcement is added, and then painted. When building graves or reservoirs, one part of lime is added to two parts of river sand and yellow mud, and then mixed with glutinous rice and kiwi juice. It is very strong without beating and will never be damaged

古文：其余造淀造纸。功用难以枚述。
现代文：此外，石灰还可以用于染色业和造纸业等方面，用途繁多而难以一一列举。
English: In addition, lime can also be used in the dyeing industry and the paper industry. It has many uses and it is difficult to list them all.

古文：凡温、台、闽、广海滨石不堪灰者，则天生蛎蚝以代之。
现代文：大体上说，在温州、台州、福州、广州一带，沿海的石头如果不能用来煅烧石灰，可以寻找天然的牡蛎壳来代替它。
English: Generally speaking, in Wenzhou, Taizhou, Fuzhou and Guangzhou, if the coastal stones cannot be used to calcine lime, you can look for natural oyster shells to replace it.

古文：○蛎灰
现代文：蛎灰
English: Ashes to Ashes

古文：凡海滨石山傍水处，咸浪积压，生出蛎房，闽中曰蚝房。
现代文：沿海一带背靠石山面临海水的地方，由于长期受到海浪冲击，便会生长出一种蛎房，在福建一带称为 蚝房 。
English: In places along the coast that face seawater against the backdrop of rocky mountains, due to the long-term impact of waves, a kind of cocoon will grow. In Fujian, it is called a cocoon.

古文：经年久者长成数丈，阔则数亩，崎岖如石假山形象。
现代文：如果堆积的时间太久，经过不断地补充和叠加，这种蛎房有时竟可以长至几丈高，宽可达数亩，其外表高低不平，就好像假石山一样。
English: If the accumulation time is too long, after continuous replenishment and superposition, this kind of outhouse can sometimes grow to several feet high, up to several acres wide, and its appearance is uneven, just like a rockery.

古文：蛤之类压入岩中，久则消化作肉团，名曰蛎黄，味极珍美。
现代文：一些蛤蜊一类的生物被冲入像岩石似的蛎房里面，经过长久消化就变成了肉团，名叫 蛎黄 ，味道非常珍美。
English: Some creatures, such as clams, are washed into the rock-like clam chamber, and after long digestion, they turn into a meat mass, called clam yellow, with a very rare taste.

古文：凡燔蛎灰者，执椎与凿，濡足取来，叠煤架火燔成，与前石灰共法。
现代文：煅烧蛎灰的人，拿着椎和凿子，涉水将蛎房凿取下来，去肉后，将蛎壳和煤饼堆砌在一起煅烧，方法与烧石灰的方法相同。
English: The person who burns the ashes takes a chisel and a chisel, wades into the water and chisels down the cocoon. After removing the meat, the cocoon shell and coal cake are stacked together and burned, the method is the same as the method of burning lime.

古文：粘砌成墙、桥梁，调和桐油造舟，功皆相同。
现代文：凡是砌城墙、桥梁等工程，将蛎灰调和桐油造船，功用都与石灰相同。
English: When building walls, bridges and other projects, the function of mixing tungsten ash with tung oil shipbuilding is the same as that of lime.

古文：有误以蚬灰为蛎灰者，不格物之故也。
现代文：有人误以为蚬灰是牡蛎灰，是因为没有考察客观事物的缘故。煤炭
English: Some people mistakenly think that fly ash is oyster ash, because they have not examined the objective things.

古文：○煤炭凡煤炭普天皆生，以供锻炼金石之用。南方秃山无草木者，下即有煤，北方勿论。
现代文：煤炭各地都有出产，供冶金和烧石之用。南方不生长草木的秃山底下便有煤，北方却不一定是这样。
English: Coal is produced in all parts of the country, for use in metallurgy and for burning stone. In the south, coal can be found under barren mountains where vegetation does not grow, but this is not necessarily the case in the north.

古文：煤有三种，有明煤、碎煤、末煤。
现代文：煤大致有三种：明煤、碎煤和末煤。
English: There are roughly three types of coal: bituminous coal, crushed coal and waste coal.

古文：明煤大块如斗许，燕、齐、秦、晋生之。
现代文：明煤块头大，有的像米斗那样大，产于河北、山东、陕西及山西。
English: The Ming coal is big, some as big as rice buckets, and is produced in Hebei, Shandong, Shaanxi and Shanxi.

古文：不用风箱鼓扇，以木炭少许引燃，炽达昼夜。
现代文：明煤不必用风箱鼓风，只需加入少量木炭引燃，便能日夜炽烈地燃烧。
English: Ming coal does not need to be blown with a bellows, just add a small amount of charcoal to ignite, and it can burn fiercely day and night.

古文：其傍夹带碎屑，则用洁净黄土调水作饼而烧之。
现代文：明煤的碎屑，则可以用干净的黄土调水做成煤饼来烧。
English: The detritus of Ming coal can be burned with clean loess-mixed water to make coal cakes.

古文：碎煤有两种，多生吴、楚。
现代文：碎煤有两种，多产于江苏、安徽和湖北等地区。
English: There are two types of crushed coal, mostly produced in Jiangsu, Anhui and Hubei regions.

古文：炎高者曰饭炭，用以炊烹；炎平者曰铁炭，用以治锻。
现代文：碎煤燃烧时，火焰高的叫做饭炭，用来煮饭；火焰平的叫做铁炭，用于冶炼。
English: When burning crushed coal, the high flame is called rice charcoal, which is used for cooking rice; the flat flame is called iron charcoal, which is used for smelting.

古文：入炉先用水沃湿，必用鼓鞲后红，以次增添而用。
现代文：碎煤先用水浇湿，入炉后再鼓风才能烧红，以后只要不断添煤，便可继续燃烧。
English: The crushed coal is first moistened with water, and after entering the furnace, it is blown until it burns red. After that, as long as the coal is continuously added, it can continue to burn.

古文：末煤如面者，名曰自来风。泥水调成饼，入于炉内，既灼之后，与明煤相同，经昼夜不灭，半供炊爨。
现代文：末煤呈粉状的叫做自来风，用泥水调成饼状，放入炉内，点燃之后，便和明煤一样，日夜燃烧不会熄灭。
English: Powdered bituminous coal is called draught coal. It is mixed with muddy water to form a cake, placed in a furnace, and then ignited. Like bituminous coal, it burns day and night without going out.

古文：半供熔铜、化石、升朱。
现代文：末煤有的用来烧火做饭，有的用来炼铜、熔化矿石及升炼朱砂。
English: Some bituminous coal is used for cooking, while others are used for copper smelting, ore smelting and cinnabar refining.

古文：至于燔石为灰与矾、硫，则三煤皆可用也。
现代文：至于烧制石灰、矾或者硫，上述三种煤都可使用。
English: As for firing lime, antimony or sulfur, the above three types of coal can be used.

古文：凡取煤经历久者，从土面能辨有无之色，然后掘挖，深至五丈许方始得煤。
现代文：采煤经验多的人，从地面上的土质情况就能判断地下是不是有煤，然后再往下挖掘，挖到五丈深左右才能得到煤。
English: People with more coal mining experience can judge whether there is coal underground from the soil quality on the ground, and then dig down to about five meters deep to get coal.

古文：初见煤端时，毒气灼人。
现代文：煤层出现时，毒气冒出能伤人。
English: When coal seams appear, poisonous gases can hurt people.

古文：有将巨竹凿去中节，尖锐其末，插入炭中，其毒烟从竹中透上，人从其下施拾取者。
现代文：一种方法是将大竹筒的中节凿通，削尖竹筒末端，插入煤层，毒气便通过竹筒往上空排出，人就可以下去用大锄挖煤了。
English: One method is to drill through the middle section of the large bamboo tube, sharpen the end of the bamboo tube, and insert it into the coal seam. The poisonous gas is then discharged through the bamboo tube into the air, and the person can go down and dig coal with a large shovel.

古文：或一井而下，炭纵横广有，则随其左右阔取。
现代文：井下发现煤层向四方延伸，人就可以横打巷道进行挖取。
English: When coal seams are found to extend in all directions underground, people can dig sideways through the roadway.

古文：其上枝板，以防压崩耳。
现代文：巷道要用木板支护，以防崩塌伤人。
English: The roadway should be supported by wooden planks to prevent it from collapsing and injuring people.

古文：凡煤炭取空而后，以土填实其井，以二三十年后，其下煤复生长，取之不尽。
现代文：煤层被挖空后，必须用土把空井填实，这样一来，经过二三十年后，井下自然又会长出新煤，实在是 取之不尽 。
English: After the coal seam is hollowed out, it is necessary to fill the empty well with soil. In this way, after twenty or thirty years, new coal will naturally grow under the well, it is really inexhaustible.

古文：其底及四周石卵，土人名曰铜炭者，取出烧皂矾与硫黄。
现代文：在煤层底部或其四周会有一种卵石，当地人叫做铜炭，这种物质可以用来烧取皂矾和硫磺。
English: At the bottom of the coal seam or around it there will be a pebble, which the locals call copper coal, a substance that can be used to burn saponins and sulphur.

古文：凡石卵单取硫黄者，其气薰甚，名曰臭煤，燕京房山、固安、湖广荆州等处间有之。
现代文：其中有一种只能用来烧取硫磺的铜炭，燃烧时的气味剧臭，被形象地唤做臭煤。这种臭煤，在北京的房山、河北的固安、湖北的荆州等这些地方都可以采到。
English: Among them, there is a kind of copper coal that can only be used to burn sulfur. The smell of burning is very smelly, and it is vividly called stinky coal. This stinky coal can be mined in Fangshan in Beijing, Guan in Hebei, Jingzhou in Hubei and other places.

古文：凡煤炭经焚而后，质随火神化去，总无灰滓。盖金与土石之间，造化别现此种云。
现代文：煤炭在燃烧时，煤质被全部烧光，不会留下灰烬，这说明它是自然界中介于金属与土石之间的特殊品种。
English: When coal is burned, the coal quality is completely burned out, leaving no ash, which shows that it is a special species between metal and earth and stone in nature.

古文：凡煤炭不生茂草盛木之乡，以见天心之妙。
现代文：它不会出产在草木茂盛的地方，由此又可见大自然的安排巧妙。
English: It doesn't grow where there is a lot of vegetation, which shows how cleverly nature has arranged things.

古文：其炊爨功用所不及者，唯结腐一种而已。
现代文：在炊事方面，只有豆腐不能用煤作为燃料来制作。
English: In terms of cooking, only tofu cannot be made using coal as fuel.

古文：○矾石白矾凡矾燔石而成。
现代文：用煤炉煮出的豆浆结成的豆腐有焦苦味，不宜食用。矾石白矾明矾是由矾石烧制而成的。
English: Tofu made from soya milk boiled in a coal furnace has a bitter, burnt taste and is not suitable for consumption.

古文：白矾一种，亦所在有之。最盛者山西晋、南直无为等州，值价低贱，与寒水石相仿。
现代文：白矾到处都是，出产最多的是山西的晋州和安徽的无为州等地，它的价钱十分便宜，同寒水石的价钱差不多。
English: Egrets are found everywhere, with the largest production in Shanxi's Jinzhou and Anhui's Wuweizhou. Its price is very cheap, similar to that of cold water rock.

古文：然煎水极沸，投矾化之，以之染物，则固结肤膜之间，外水永不入，故制糖饯与染画纸、红纸者需之。
现代文：然而，当水煮开之后，将明矾放入沸水中溶化并用它来染东西时，它就能够固结在所染物品的表面，使其他的水分永不渗入。所以，制蜜饯、染画纸、染红纸都要用到明矾。
English: However, when alum is dissolved in boiling water after the water is boiled and used to dye something, it can solidify on the surface of the dyed object, so that other moisture never penetrates. Therefore, alum is used for making honey, dyeing paper, and dyeing red paper.

古文：其末干撒，又能冶浸淫恶水，故湿疮家亦急需之也。
现代文：此外，用干燥的明矾粉末撒在患处，能治疗流出臭水的湿疹和疱疮等病症，因此也是皮肤科急需的药品。
English: In addition, with dry alum powder sprinkled on the affected area, it can treat eczema and herpes and other diseases that flow out of the foul water, so it is also a much-needed drug for dermatology.

古文：凡白矾，掘土取磊块石，层叠煤炭饼锻炼，如烧石灰样。
现代文：烧制明矾的过程是先挖出矾石，将它与煤饼分层叠起来烧炼，其方法与烧石灰相同。
English: The process of firing alum is to first dig out the flint, layering it with coal cakes and firing it, the method is the same as firing lime.

古文：火候已足，冷定入水。煎水极沸时，盘中有溅溢如物飞出，俗名蝴蝶矾者，则矾成矣。
现代文：烧到足够的火候时，要让它自然冷却，再放入水中使其溶解，最后将水溶液煮沸，等到有一种俗称为 蝴蝶矾 的物质飞溅出来时，明矾便算是制成了。
English: When it is sufficiently heated, it should be allowed to cool naturally, then put into water to dissolve, and finally boil the aqueous solution. When a substance commonly known as "butterfly cocoon" splashes out, alum is considered to be made.

古文：煎浓之后，入水缸内澄，其上隆结曰吊矾，洁白异常。其沉下者曰缸矾。
现代文：若想要再煮得浓一点，就将其装入缸里加以澄清，这时凝结在最上面的一层、颜色洁白的物质被称为吊矾，沉淀在缸底的则叫缸矾，而质地轻如棉絮的就叫做柳絮矾。
English: If you want to cook it a little thicker, put it in a cylinder to clarify it. At this time, the white substance that condenses on the top layer and settles at the bottom of the cylinder is called calyx, and the light texture like lint is called willow lint.

古文：轻虚如棉絮者曰柳絮矾，烧汁至尽，白如雪者，谓之巴石。
现代文：等锅里的溶液烧干后，锅底还会剩下一种颜色雪白的物质，这就是巴石。
English: After the solution in the pot is dried, there will still be a snow-white substance left on the bottom of the pot, which is the stone.

古文：方药家锻过用者曰枯矾云。
现代文：经炼丹术士、制药人烧炼后的矾可用于医药，又被叫做枯矾。
English: After being refined by alchemists and pharmacists, it can be used in medicine. It is also called withered ginger.

古文：○青矾红矾黄矾胆矾
现代文：青矾红矾黄矾胆矾
English: Blue, red, yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow

古文：凡皂、红、黄矾，皆出一种而成，变化其质。
现代文：皂矾、红矾、黄矾，是由同一物质变化而成的，性质不太一样。
English: Saponins, red yeast rice, and yellow yeast rice are all made from the same substance, but their properties are not the same.

古文：取煤炭外矿石子，每五百斤入炉，炉内用煤炭饼千余斤，周围包裹此石。
现代文：先收取五百斤煤炭外层的矿石子放入炉内，将一千多斤煤饼放在铜炭周围并包住这些矿石。
English: First of all, five hundred catties of ore from the outer layer of coal were collected and placed in the furnace, and more than one thousand catties were placed around the copper coal and wrapped around these ores.

古文：炉外砌筑土墙圈围，炉巅空一圆孔如茶碗口大，透炎直上，孔傍以矾滓厚罨。然后从底发火，此火度经十日方熄。
现代文：在锅炉外修筑一个土墙绕圈围着，在炉顶留出一个圆孔，孔径好像茶碗口大，让火焰能够从炉孔中透出，炉孔旁边用矾渣盖严实，然后从炉底发火，大概估计这炉火要连续烧十天才能熄灭。
English: Build an earthen wall outside the boiler, surround it in a circle, and leave a round hole at the top of the furnace, with an aperture the size of a teacup, so that the flame can come out of the furnace, cover it tightly with slag next to the furnace, and then ignite the fire from the bottom of the furnace. It is estimated that the fire will burn continuously for ten days before it goes out.

古文：其孔眼时有金色光直上。
现代文：燃烧时炉孔眼不时会有金色光焰冒出来。
English: From time to time, a golden flame would emerge from the hole of the furnace during combustion.

古文：锻经十日后，冷定取出。
现代文：煅烧十天以后，等待矾石都冷却了这才取出。
English: After ten days of roasting, wait for the flints to cool before removing them.

古文：半酥杂碎者另拣出，名曰时矾，为煎矾红用。
现代文：其中半酥碎的另外挑出，名叫 时矾 ，用来煎炼红矾。
English: Among them, the semi-crushed one was singled out, named Shishimai, to be used for brewing red ginger.

古文：其中清淬如矿灰形者，取入缸中浸三个时，漉入釜中煎炼。每水十石煎至一石，火候方足。
现代文：将矿灰样的精华部分放进缸里，用水浸泡约六个小时，把它过滤后再放入锅中煎炼，要将十石水熬成一石水，这才说明火候够足。
English: Put the part of the essence of the mine ash into the cylinder, soak it with water for about six hours, filter it and then put it into the pot for refining. It is necessary to boil ten kilos of water into one stone of water, which only shows that the heat is sufficient.

古文：煎干之后，上结者皆佳好皂矾，下者为矾滓。
现代文：等水快干时，上层结成的是优质的皂矾，下层便是矾渣了。
English: When the water dries quickly, the upper layer is made of high-quality soap suds, and the lower layer is slag.

古文：此皂矾染家必需用。中国煎者亦惟五六所。
现代文：这种皂矾是印染业所必需的原料，整个中国制矾的也不外五六家。
English: This saponin is an essential raw material for the printing and dyeing industry, and there are no less than five or six companies in China that produce it.

古文：原石五百斤成皂矾二百斤，其大端也。
现代文：大概每五百斤石料可以炼出二百斤皂矾来。
English: Approximately every five hundred pounds of stone can be refined into two hundred pounds of soap suds.

古文：其拣出时矾每斤入黄土四两，入罐熬炼，则成矾红。
现代文：另外挑出的 时矾 ，每斤加进黄土四两，再入罐熬炼，便成红矾了。
English: In addition, when the stalks are picked out, four ounces of loess are added to each pound, and then they are refined in a can, and they become red stalks.

古文：圬墁及油漆家用之。
现代文：泥水工和油漆工经常用到这两种矾。
English: These two types of rollers are often used by plasterers and painters.

古文：其黄矾所出又奇甚，乃即炼皂矾炉侧土墙，春夏经受火石精气，至霜降、立冬之交，冷静之时，其墙上自然爆出此种，如淮北砖墙生焰硝样。
现代文：至于黄矾，其制造的过程则更加神奇。每年春夏时节在炼取皂矾时，炉旁的土墙会自动吸附矾的蒸气，而到了霜降立冬的季节，因为土墙干冷，墙上便自然会长出这种矾，就像淮北地区的砖墙上会生出火硝一样。
English: As for the yellow cadmium, the manufacturing process is even more amazing. Every spring and summer, when the soap cadmium is refined, the earth wall next to the furnace will automatically absorb the cadmium vapor, and when the frost falls and the winter season begins, because the earth wall is dry and cold, the cadmium will naturally grow on the wall, just like the fire glass will grow on the brick wall in Huaibei.

古文：刮取下来，名曰黄矾，染家用之。
现代文：把它从墙上刮取下来之后，便是黄矾。
English: If you scrape it off the wall, you get jaundice.

古文：金色淡者涂炙，立成紫赤也。
现代文：用它在物体上涂成的淡金黄色，只要再放在火上烤一下，立刻就会变成紫红色，因此染坊中经常用到黄矾。
English: The light golden yellow that it is used to paint on objects, as long as it is put on the fire and roasted, it will immediately turn into fuchsia, so the dyer often uses yellow cadmium.

古文：其黄矾自外国来，打破，中有金丝者，名曰波斯矾，别是一种。
现代文：此外，还有一种自外国传来的黄矾，将其打碎之后中间会现出一种金丝，这种矾叫做波斯矾，这就是另外一个品种了。
English: In addition, there is also a kind of yellow tungsten that comes from abroad. After breaking it, a kind of gold wire will appear in the middle. This tungsten is called Persian tungsten, which is another variety.

古文：又山、陕烧取硫黄山上，其滓弃地，二三年后雨水浸淋，精液流入沟麓之中，自然结成皂矾。
现代文：在山西、陕西这些地方烧制硫磺的山上，提炼之后的废渣被随地丢弃。过上两三年，它们经过雨水的冲刷便会溶解，流到山沟里，经过自然蒸发后也能结成皂矾。
English: In the mountains of Shanxi and Shaanxi, where sulfur is burned, the waste residue after refining is discarded everywhere. After two or three years, they will dissolve after being washed by rainwater and flow into the ravines. After natural evaporation, they can also form soap scum.

古文：取而货用，不假煎炼。
现代文：取用这种皂矾或直接将它拿去出售，可不必再经炼制。
English: There is no need to refine the saponin before using it or selling it directly.

古文：其中色佳者，人取以混石胆云。
现代文：其中有些色泽美丽的，听说还可以冒充石胆。
English: Some of them have a beautiful color and luster, and it is said that they can also be passed off as stone gallstones.

古文：石胆一名胆矾者，亦出晋、隰等州，乃山石穴中自结成者，故绿色带宝光。
现代文：石胆又叫做胆矾，产自陕西省隰县等地。胆矾是在山崖洞穴中自然结晶的，因此它的绿色具有宝石般的光泽。
English: Gallstone, also known as cholelithium, is produced in Shanxi Province, Yu County and other places. Cholelithium is naturally crystallized in mountain caves, so its green color has a jewel-like luster.

古文：烧铁器淬于胆矾水中，即成铜色也。
现代文：将烧红的铁器淬入胆矾水中，铁器会立刻现出黄铜的颜色。
English: If red-hot ironware is dipped into gallium water, it will immediately take on the color of brass.

古文：《本草》载矾虽五种，并未分别原委。
现代文：明朝李时珍的《本草纲目》中虽然记载了矾有五类，但并没有区别它们的来源和关系。
English: Although there are five types of crickets recorded in the Ming Dynasty Li Shizhen's "Compendium of Materia Medica," there is no distinction between their sources and relationships.

古文：其昆仑矾状如黑泥，铁矾状如赤石脂者，皆西域产也。
现代文：昆仑矾好像黑泥，铁矾好像赤石脂，都是西北出产的。
English: Kunlun tungsten is like black mud, and iron tungsten is like red stone grease, both of which are produced in the northwest.

古文：○硫黄
现代文：硫黄
English: Sulphur

古文：凡硫黄，乃烧石承液而结就。著书者误以焚石为矾石，逐有矾液之说。
现代文：硫黄是由烧炼矿石时得到的液体经过冷却后凝结而成的，过去的著书者误以为硫黄都是煅烧矾石而取得的，就把它叫做矾液。
English: Sulphur is a liquid obtained from the burning of ores, which condenses after cooling. In the past, authors mistakenly thought that sulphur was obtained from calcined flint, and called it lye.

古文：然烧取硫黄，石半出特生白石，半出煤矿烧矾石，此矾液之说所由混也。
现代文：事实上，煅烧硫黄的原料，有的是来自当地特产的白石，有的是来自煤矿的煅烧矾石，矾液的说法就是这样混杂进来的。
English: In fact, the raw materials of calcined sulfur, some are from the local specialty white stone, and some are from the coal mine calcined flint, which is how the saying of molten liquid came in.

古文：又言中国有温泉处必有硫黄，今东海、广南产硫黄处又无温泉，此因温泉水气似硫黄，故意度言之也。
现代文：又有人说中国凡是有温泉的地方就一定会有硫黄，可是，东南沿海一带出产硫黄的地方并没有温泉，这可能是因为温泉的气味很像硫黄而猜想到的吧。
English: Another person said that wherever there is a hot spring in China, there must be sulfur. However, there are no hot springs where sulfur is produced along the southeast coast. This may be because the smell of hot springs is very similar to sulfur.

古文：凡烧硫黄石，与煤矿石同形。
现代文：烧取硫黄的矿石与煤矿石的形状相同。
English: The ore from which the sulphur is extracted has the same shape as coal ore.

古文：掘取其石，用煤炭饼包裹丛架，外筑土作炉。
现代文：煅烧硫黄的大致步骤是：先用煤饼包裹矿石并堆垒起来，外面用泥土夯实并建造熔炉。
English: The general procedure for calcining sulphur is as follows: first, the ore is wrapped in coal cakes and stacked, then the outside is compacted with earth and a furnace is built.

古文：炭与石皆载千斤于内，炉上用烧硫旧渣罨盖，中顶隆起，透一圆孔其中。
现代文：每炉的石料和煤饼都有千斤左右，炉上用烧硫黄的旧渣掩盖，炉顶中间要隆起，空出一个圆孔。
English: Each furnace has about a thousand pounds of stone and coal cake, and the furnace is covered with old slag from burning sulfur. The middle of the furnace roof should be raised, and a round hole should be left.

古文：火力到时，孔内透出黄焰金光。
现代文：燃烧到一定程度，炉孔内便会有金黄色的气体冒出。
English: If it burns to a certain degree, a golden yellow gas will emerge from the furnace hole.

古文：先教陶家烧一钵盂，其盂当中隆起，边弦卷成鱼袋样，覆于孔上。
现代文：预先请陶工烧制一个中部隆起的盂钵，盂钵边缘往内卷成像鱼膘状的凹槽，烧硫黄时，将盂钵覆盖在炉孔上。
English: In advance, ask the potter to fire a crucible with a bulge in the middle. The edges of the crucible roll inward to form a fish fin-like groove. When burning sulfur, cover the crucible over the furnace hole.

古文：石精感受火神，化出黄光飞走，遇盂掩住不能上飞，则化成汁液靠着盂底，其液流入弦袋之中，其弦又透小眼流入冷道灰槽小池，则凝结而成硫黄矣。
现代文：硫黄的黄色蒸气沿着炉孔上升，被盂钵挡住而不能跑掉，于是便冷凝成液体，沿着盂钵的内壁流入凹槽，又透过小眼沿着冷却管道流进小池子，最终凝结而变成固体硫黄。
English: The yellow vapour of sulphur rises along the furnace bore, is blocked by the crucible and cannot escape, whereupon it condenses into a liquid, flows along the inner wall of the crucible into the groove, and through the small eye along the cooling pipe into the small pool, and finally condenses into solid sulphur.

古文：其炭煤矿石浇取皂矾者，当其黄光上走时，仍用此法掩盖以取硫黄。
现代文：用含煤黄铁矿烧取皂矾的过程中，当黄色的蒸气上升时，同样可以用这种方法收取到硫磺。
English: In the process of burning saponin with coal-containing pyrite, when yellow vapor rises, sulfur can also be collected in this way.

古文：得硫一斤则减去皂矾三十余斤，其矾精华已结硫黄，则枯滓逐为弃物。
现代文：要想得硫一斤，就要减收皂矾三十多斤，因为皂矾的精华都已经转化为硫了，剩下的枯渣便成了废物。
English: If you want to get one kilo of sulphur, you have to reduce the amount of saponins by more than thirty kilos, because the essence of saponins has been converted into sulphur, and the remaining residue has become waste.

古文：凡火药，硫为纯阳，硝为纯阴，两精逼合，成声成变，此乾坤幻出神物也。
现代文：火药的主要原料是硫黄和硝石，硫黄是纯阳性质，硝石是纯阴性质，两种物质相互作用能引起爆炸，产生巨大的声响和力量，这真是自然界变化出来的奇物。
English: The main raw materials of gunpowder are sulfur and saltpeter. Sulfur is a pure yang property, and saltpeter is a pure yin property. The interaction of the two substances can cause an explosion, producing a huge sound and force. This is really a strange thing that has changed in nature.

古文：硫黄不产北狄，或产而不知炼取亦不可知。至奇炮出于西洋与红夷，则东徂西数万里，皆产硫黄之地也。
现代文：北方少数民族居住的地方不出产硫黄，或者也有可能是有硫黄出产而不会炼取。新式枪炮出现在西洋与荷兰，这说明由东往西数万里，都有出产硫黄的地方。
English: The places where the northern ethnic minorities live do not produce sulfur, or it may be that sulfur is produced but not refined. New guns appeared in the West and the Netherlands, which shows that there are places producing sulfur tens of thousands of miles from east to west.

古文：其琉球土硫黄、广南水硫黄，皆误纪也。
现代文：但是所谓琉球的土硫黄、广东南部的水硫黄，却都是一种错误的记载。
English: However, the so-called soil sulfur in Ryukyu and water sulfur in southern Guangdong are a false record.

古文：○砒石
现代文：砒石
English: Zircon

古文：凡烧砒霜，质料似土而坚，似石而碎，穴土数尺而取之。
现代文：烧砒霜的所用的原料是砒石，外表像泥土却比泥土还坚硬，质量像石头又比石头坚脆，向下掘土几尺就能够获取到。
English: The raw material used for the cinnamon cream is flint, which looks like dirt but is harder than dirt, has a quality like stone and is harder than stone, and can be obtained by digging down a few feet.

古文：江西信郡、河南信阳州皆有砒井，故名信石。
现代文：江西信郡、河南信阳一带都有砒井，因此砒石又名信石。
English: There are boreholes in Xin County, Jiangxi Province, and around Xinyang, Henan Province. Therefore, the borehole rock is also known as Xin Rock.

古文：近则出产独盛衡阳，一厂有造至万钧者。
现代文：近来生产砒霜最多的则是湖南衡阳，一间工厂的连产量能有达到上万斤的。
English: Recently, Hengyang, Hunan Province, has been producing the most arsenic. The continuous output of one factory can reach tens of thousands of pounds.

古文：凡砒石井中，其上常有浊绿水，先绞水尽，然后下凿。
现代文：砒井中，常常积有绿色的浊水，开采时要先将水除尽，然后再往下凿取。
English: In boreholes, green borehole water often accumulates. When mining, it is necessary to remove all the water first, and then drill down.

古文：砒有红、白两种，各因所出原石色烧成。
现代文：砒霜分为红、白两种，各由原来的红、白色砒石烧制而成。
English: The arsenic cream is divided into two types, red and white, each made from the original red and white flint.

古文：凡烧砒，下鞠土窑，纳石其上，上砌曲突，以铁釜倒悬覆突口。
现代文：烧制砒霜的时候，先要在地上挖一个土窑堆放砒石，窑的上方砌个弯曲的烟囱，然后把铁锅倒过来覆盖在烟囱口上。
English: When making arsenic cream, first dig an earthenware kiln on the ground, pile the flint, build a curved chimney above the kiln, and then turn the iron pan upside down to cover the chimney mouth.

古文：其下灼炭举火。其烟气从曲突内熏贴釜上。
现代文：在窑下引火焙烧，烟便从烟囱内上升，熏贴在锅的内壁上。
English: The smoke rises from the chimney and sticks to the inner wall of the pot.

古文：度其已贴一层厚结寸许，下复息火。
现代文：估计累计达到约有一寸厚时就熄灭炉火，等烟气已经冷却，便再次起火燃烧。
English: It is estimated that the fire will be extinguished when the cumulative thickness reaches about one inch. When the smoke has cooled, it will start burning again.

古文：待前烟冷定，又举次火，熏贴如前。一釜之内数层已满，然后提下，毁釜而取砒。
现代文：这样反复几次，一直到锅内贴满砒霜为止，才把锅拿下来，打碎锅而剥取砒霜。
English: This was repeated several times, until the pot was covered with arsenic, then the pot was taken down, the pot was broken and the arsenic was removed.

古文：故今砒底有铁沙，即破釜滓也。
现代文：因此接近锅底的砒霜常留有铁渣，那是锅的碎屑。
English: Therefore, the arsenic cream near the bottom of the pot often has iron residue, which is the debris of the pot.

古文：凡白砒止此一法。红砒则分金炉内银铜脑气有闪成者。
现代文：白砒霜的制作方法只有这一种，至于红砒霜，则还有在冶炼含砷的银铜矿石时，由分金炉内析出的蒸气冷结而成的。
English: This is the only way to make white antimony cream. As for red antimony cream, it is also cold-bonded from the vapor precipitated in the furnace during the smelting of arsenic-containing silver-copper ore.

古文：凡烧砒时，立者必于上风十余丈外，下风所近，草木皆死。
现代文：烧制砒霜的时候，操作者一定要站在上风处，要离炉子十几丈远。下风处所及之处，草木都会枯萎而死。
English: When burning arsenic, the operator must stand in the upwind, more than a dozen feet away from the stove. Wherever the downwind reaches, the plants will wither and die.

古文：烧砒之人经两载即改徙，否则须发尽落。
现代文：所以烧砒霜的人两年后一定要改行，否则就会须发全部脱光。
English: Therefore, people who burn arsenic cream must change careers after two years, otherwise they will have to go completely bald.

古文：此物生人食过分厘立死。
现代文：砒霜有剧毒，人只要吃一点点就会立即死亡。
English: Arsenic is highly poisonous, and a person who eats just a little bit of it will die immediately.

古文：然每岁千万金钱速售不滞者，以晋地菽麦必用拌种，且驱田中黄鼠害，宁、绍郡稻田必用蘸秧根，则丰收也。
现代文：然而，每年却都有价值千百万的砒霜畅销无阻，这是因为山西等地乡民都要用它来给豆和麦子拌种，而且还用它来驱除田中的鼠害；浙江宁波绍兴一带，也有用砒霜来蘸秧根而使水稻获得丰收的。
English: However, every year, arsenic cream worth millions of dollars sells well. This is because villagers in Shanxi and other places use it to mix seeds for beans and wheat, and also use it to drive away mice in the fields. In the Shaoxing area of Ningbo, Zhejiang, arsenic cream is also used to germinate roots and make rice harvest.

古文：不然火药与染铜需用能几何哉！
现代文：不然的话，如果砒霜仅仅是用于火药和炼铜方面，那又能用得了多少呢！
English: Otherwise, if arsenic is only used for gunpowder and copper smelting, how much can be used!

