古文：起昭阳协洽，尽柔兆阉茂，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。陈文帝天嘉四年
English: a total of three years. Chen Wenti Tianjia lasted four years.

古文：世祖文皇帝下天嘉四年春，正月，齐以太子少傅魏收兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：春季正月，北齐任命太子少傅魏收兼尚书右仆射。
English: In the first month of spring, Northern Qi appointed the young prince Fu Wei Jie and Shang Shushi as his right-hand men.

古文：时齐主终日酣饮，朝事专委侍中高元海。
现代文：当时武成帝整天酗酒，把朝廷的事情专门委托给侍中高元海。
English: At that time, Emperor Wucheng drank heavily all day and entrusted the affairs of the imperial court to the chamberlain Gao Yuanhai.

古文：元海庸俗，帝亦轻之；以收才名素盛，故用之。
现代文：高元海鄙陋无能，武成帝也看不起他；因为魏收的才能一向有名，所以任命他。
English: Gao Yuanhai was despicable and incompetent, and Emperor Wucheng also looked down on him; because Wei Jie's talent had always been famous, he was appointed.

古文：而收畏懦避事，寻坐阿纵，除名。
现代文：魏收胆小懦弱怕事，不久便以阿谀放纵的罪名，被革职。
English: Wei Hui was timid, cowardly and afraid of things. He was soon dismissed from his post on the charge of indulgence.

古文：兗州刺史毕义云作书与高元海，论叙时事。元海入宫，不觉遗之。
现代文：兖州刺史毕义云写信给高元海，信里议论时局，高元海在进宫时，不知不觉地把信遗失了。
English: When Gao Yuanhai entered the palace, he unknowingly lost the letter.

古文：给事中李孝贞得而奏之，帝由是疏元海。以孝贞兼中书舍人，征义云还朝。
现代文：给事中李孝贞得到了这封信，奏报给武成帝，武成帝因此疏远高元海，任用李孝贞兼职中书舍人，召回毕义云。
English: During the incident, Li Xiaozhen received this letter and reported it to Emperor Wu Chengdu. As a result, Emperor Wu Chengdu alienated Gao Yuanhai, appointed Li Xiaozhen as a part-time middle school teacher, and recalled Bi Yiyun.

古文：和士开复谮元海，帝以马鞭棰元海六十，责曰： 汝昔教我反，以弟反兄，几许不义！
现代文：和士开再次对武成帝说高元海的坏话，武成帝命令打高元海六十下马鞭，斥责说： 你以前唆使我反叛，以弟弟反叛兄长，多么不义！
English: Emperor Wu ordered that Gao Yuanhai be given 60 lashes and scolded him, saying, "You once incited me to rebel, and used my younger brother to rebel against my elder brother. How unjust!

古文：以鄴城兵抗并州，几许无智！ 
现代文：用邺城的兵力抵抗并州，多么愚笨！ 
English: How stupid to resist the annexation of the state with the strength of the city of Handan!

古文：出为兗州刺史。
现代文：贬出朝延做兖州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：甲申，周迪众溃，脱身逾岭，奔晋安，依陈宝应。
现代文：甲申周迪的部下溃败，他脱身越过东兴岭，逃奔到晋安，投靠陈宝应。
English: After the defeat of the subordinates of Jia Sheng Zhou Di, he escaped across Dongxingling, fled to Jin'an, and took refuge in Chen Baoying.

古文：官军克临川，获迪妻子。
现代文：官军攻下临州，俘虏了周迪的妻儿。
English: The government army conquered Linzhou and captured Zhou Di's wife and child.

古文：宝应以兵资迪，留异又遣其子忠臣随之。
现代文：陈宝应派兵援助周迪，留异又派儿子留忠臣跟随周迪。
English: Chen Bao should send soldiers to help Zhou Di, and Rui Yi should send his son Rui Zhongzheng to follow Zhou Di.

古文：虞寄与宝应书，以十事谏之曰： 自天厌梁德，英雄互起，人人自以为得之，然夷凶翦乱，四海乐推者，陈氏也。岂非历数有在，惟天所授乎！
现代文：虞寄写信给陈宝应，举出十件事情规劝他说： 自从上天厌恶梁朝德业不修以来，英雄纷起，人人以为天下非已莫属，然而除凶平乱，天下愿意推戴的崐，是陈氏；岂不是有天道运命在，是上天所赐给的吗！
English: Yu Ying wrote a letter to Chen Baoying, listing ten things to persuade him: "Since Heaven abhorred the Liang Dynasty for not cultivating virtue, heroes have arisen in droves. Everyone thinks that the whole world belongs to them. However, in addition to violence and chaos, the world is willing to support the Chen clan. Isn't there a heavenly path and destiny, given by Heaven?

古文：一也。
现代文：这是一。
English: So he gave it a thumbs down.

古文：以王琳之强，侯瑱之力，进足以摇荡中原，争衡天下，退足以屈强江外，雄张偏隅；然或命一旅之师，或资一士之说，琳则瓦解冰泮，投身异域，瑱则阙角稽颡，委命阙庭，斯又天假之威而除其患。
现代文：以王琳的强盛，侯的力量，进可以震撼中原，在天下争个高低；退足以在长江以外倔强，雄踞偏远一角。然而我们或者派遣一支军队，或者借助一名说客，王琳就瓦碎冰融，去异域投身，侯就叩头俯伏，托命于朝廷，这是借天威而除掉祸患。
English: With the strength of Wang Lin and the power of Hou, Jin can shake the Central Plains and compete for a high and low in the world; Ren is strong enough to be stubborn outside the Yangtze River and a remote corner. However, we either send an army, or with the help of a lobbyist, Wang Lin will break the ice and go to a foreign country, and Hou will bow down and submit to the imperial court. This is to eliminate the disaster by the power of heaven.

古文：二也。
现代文：这是二。
English: That's two.

古文：今将军以籓戚之重，东南之众，尽忠奉上，戮力勤王，岂不勋高窦融，宠过吴芮，析珪判野，南面称孤乎！
现代文：现在您将军以藩王亲戚之贵，东南人力之众，尽忠报效朝廷，全力救援皇上，功勋岂不比汉朝的窦融高，受宠超过吴芮，得到封爵和领地，能面向南坐称王称侯吗！
English: Now, your general is the most valuable relative of the lord of the domain, the most powerful man in the southeast, loyal to the imperial court, and rescuing the emperor with all his might. Isn't his merit higher than that of the Han Dynasty's Dou Rong, he is favored more than Wu Xi, he has been knighted and gained territory, can he face the south to praise the king and praise the prince?

古文：三也。
现代文：这是三。
English: That's three.

古文：圣朝弃瑕忘过，宽厚得人，至于余孝顷、潘纯陀、李孝钦、欧阳頠等，悉委以心腹，任以爪牙，脑中豁然，曾无纤芥。
现代文：圣明的朝廷不计较人的缺点和过错，以宽厚求得人才，至于像余孝顷、潘纯陀、李孝钦、欧阳等人，都把他们当成心腹，任为助手，胸怀开朗，不计较细微的事。
English: The imperial court of the Holy Ming Dynasty did not care about the shortcomings and mistakes of other people, and sought talents with generosity. As for people like Yu Xiaoha, Pan Chundu, Li Xiaoqin, Ouyang and others, they all regarded them as confidants, and appointed them as assistants. They were open-minded and did not care about minor things.

古文：况将军衅非张绣，罪异毕谌，当何虑于危亡，何失于富贵！
现代文：况且您将军的过失不如张绣，罪行不同于毕谌，何必顾虑危险存亡，又哪里会失去富贵！
English: Moreover, the fault of your general is not as bad as Zhang Xiu, the crime is different from Bi, why worry about the danger of survival, and where will you lose wealth!

古文：四也。
现代文：这是四。
English: Four, too.

古文：方今周、齐邻睦，境外无虞，并兵一向，匪朝伊夕，非刘、项竞逐之机，楚、赵连从之势；何得雍容高拱，坐论西伯哉！
现代文：现在周、齐两朝睦邻友好，境外不须疑虑，联合军队对着同一方向，已经有很长时间，不是刘邦、项羽竞争追逐的时机，楚国和赵国合纵连横的形势；怎么能从容不迫无所作为，安然割据为一方的主帅！
English: Now Zhou and Qi are good-neighborly and friendly to each other, there is no need to worry about the outside world, the joint army is moving in the same direction, it has been a long time. It is not the time for Liu Bang and Xiang Yu to compete and chase, and the situation of Chu and Zhao countries is continuous. How can we do nothing without being forced, and be safely separated as the boss of one side!

古文：五也。
现代文：这是五。
English: That's five.

古文：且留将军狼顾一隅，亟经摧衄，声实亏丧，胆气衰沮。
现代文：况且留异将军在角落里像狼那样窥伺，屡次遭到挫败，名声亏损丧尽，胆气衰退败落。
English: Moreover, the remaining generals fearfully clung to a corner, repeatedly defeated, reputation and strength lost, courage and courage faded and depressed.

古文：其将帅首鼠两端，唯利是视，孰能被坚执锐，长驱深入，系马埋轮，奋不顾命，以先士卒者乎！
现代文：他的将帅犹豫动摇，只看到自己的私利，谁能穿着铠甲、拿着锐利的武器，长驱直入，系住马匹埋掉车轮，奋勇舍命，身先士卒地战斗！
English: His general hesitates and vacillates, seeing only his own selfish interests, who can wear armor, hold sharp weapons, drive straight in, tie up horses, bury the wheels, sacrifice his life, and fight as a vanguard!

古文：六也。
现代文：这是六。
English: That's six.

古文：将军之强，孰如侯景？
现代文：将军力量的强弱，比侯景怎样？
English: How strong or weak is the general's power compared to Hou Jing?

古文：将军之众，孰如王琳？
现代文：将军部下的众多，比王琳如何？
English: How can the general's subordinates be compared to Wang Lin?

古文：武皇灭侯景于前，今上摧王琳于后，此乃天时，非复人力。
现代文：武皇帝灭侯景于前，当今皇帝击败王琳于后，这是天意，不是靠人力。
English: Emperor Wu eliminated Houjing first, and the current monarch destroyed Wang Lin later. This is the way of heaven, and is beyond human power.

古文：且兵革已后，民皆厌乱，其孰能弃坟墓，捐妻子，出万死不顾水计，从将军于白刃之间乎！
现代文：况且争战以后，百姓都讨厌动乱，谁能抛弃故园家乡，舍弃妻儿，想出万死不辞的计谋，追随您将军在刀丛之间效命吗！
English: Moreover, after the war, the people hate turmoil, who can abandon their homeland, abandon their wives and children, come up with a never-say-die strategy, and follow your general to die between the swords!

古文：七也。
现代文：这是七。
English: This is seven.

古文：历观前古，子阳、季孟，倾覆相寻；馀善、右渠，危亡继及。
现代文：综观以往历史，子阳、季孟，灭亡连续不断；馀善、右渠，危急覆亡接踵而至。
English: A comprehensive view of the past history, Ziyang, Ji Meng, perished continuously; Yu Xian, Zuo Quan, critical and repeated deaths followed one after another.

古文：天命可畏，山川难恃。
现代文：天命可畏，山川地势难以凭借。
English: The fate of heaven is formidable, and the mountain and river topography is difficult to rely on.

古文：况将军欲以数郡之地当天下之兵，以诸候之资拒天子之命，强弱逆顺，可得侔乎！
现代文：况且您将军想以几个郡的地方来抵御天下的兵力，以诸侯的实力抗拒天子的命令，强弱逆顺，能相比较吗！
English: Moreover, your general wants to use several counties to fend off the forces of the world, to resist the order of the Son of Heaven with the strength of the lords, strong and weak, can it be compared!

古文：八也。
现代文：这是八。
English: That's eight.

古文：且非我族类，其心必异；不爱其亲，岂能及物！
现代文：不是自己的同类，心意一定不同；不爱自己的亲朋，怎能顾及别人！
English: If you don't love your relatives and friends, how can you care for others?

古文：留将军身縻国爵，子尚王姬，犹且弃天属而弗顾，背明君而孤立，危亡之日，岂能同忧共患，不背将军者乎！
现代文：留异将军身系国家的爵位，儿子娶了皇家的女儿，尚且抛弃上天的眷顾而不惜，背离圣明的君主而孤立，遇到危急的时候，怎么能共同分担忧患，而不背叛您将军！
English: General Remainder is a knighthood of the country, his son married the daughter of the royal family, yet he abandoned the providence of heaven, he is isolated from the sacred monarch, and in times of crisis, how can we share the worries and sufferings without betraying you, general!

古文：至于师老力屈，惧诛利赏，必有韩、智晋阳之谋，张、陈井陉之势。
现代文：等到用兵时间过长，军队疲劳不堪，就会怕死贪财，一定会出现康子、智伯在晋阳的阴谋，张耳、陈馀在井陉那样的争斗。
English: As for the army's morale decline, exhausted strength, fear of fighting and killing for profit and reward, there will certainly be the kind of situation formed by Han and Zhi's planning in Jinyang, retreating and hastily suppressing.

古文：九也。
现代文：这是九。
English: That's nine.

古文：北军万里远斗，锋不可当。
现代文：北军远从万里来战斗，前锋锐利不可阻挡。
English: The Northern army came from thousands of miles away to fight, and the forwards were sharp and unstoppable.

古文：将军自战其地，人多顾后；众寡不敌，将帅不侔。
现代文：您将军在自己的地区打仗，人们多有后顾之忧，众寡不敌，将帅与敌军不能相比。
English: Your general is fighting a war in his own region, and many people are worried about the future. They are outnumbered and outgunned. The general and the enemy cannot be compared.

古文：师以无名而出，事以无机而动，以此称兵，未知其利。
现代文：师出无名，做事没有机会而妄动，在这种情况下举兵，不会有好处。
English: It is no good to raise an army under such circumstances.

古文：十也。
现代文：这是十。
English: That's ten.

古文：为将军计，莫若绝亲留氏。遣子入质，释甲偃兵，一遵诏旨。
现代文：为您将军着想，不如断绝和留氏的亲戚关系，解甲息兵，遵从皇帝的诏旨。
English: For the sake of your general, it is better to break off the kinship with the Rui clan, disarm the soldiers, and obey the emperor's edict.

古文：方今籓维尚少，皇子幼冲，凡预宗枝，皆蒙宠树。
现代文：现在捍卫和支持朝廷的人还少，皇子年幼，凡是宗族，都受到恩宠扶植。
English: At present, there are not many hanzhong lines tied together, the prince is still young, and all the descendants of the same clan have been favored and cultivated.

古文：况以将军之地，将军之才，将军之名，将军之势，而克修籓服，北面称臣，宁与刘泽同年而语其功业哉！寄感恩怀服，不觉狂言，斧钺之诛，其甘如荠。 
现代文：况且以您将军的门第、才干、名声、势力，能谨守作臣的职责，臣服君王，这样您的功业就能和刘泽相提并论了！虞寄感恩戴德，不禁说了这些狂妄的话，要杀要砍，我心甘情愿。 
English: Moreover, with your general's pedigree, talent, reputation, and power, you can keep your duties as a subject and obey the king, so that your achievements can be compared with Liu Ze! Gu Ying, thank you, I can't help but say these arrogant words, I'm willing to kill or cut.

古文：宝应览书大怒。
现代文：陈宝应看后大怒。
English: Chen Shijie read the letter and was very angry.

古文：或谓宝应曰： 虞公病势渐笃，言多错谬。 
现代文：有人向陈宝应说： 虞公的病情加重了，所以说话多有错误荒谬。 
English: Some people said to Chen Baoying: Lu Gong's illness is getting worse, and his speech is often wrong.

古文：宝应意乃小释，亦以寄民望，故优容之。
现代文：陈宝应的怒意才稍为平息，又因为虞寄有民望，所以宽容他。
English: Chen Baoying's anger only calmed down a little, and because Yu Ying had popular support, he was tolerated.

古文：周梁躁公侯莫陈崇从周主如原州。
现代文：北周的梁躁公侯莫陈崇跟随北周国主武帝去原州。
English: Mo Chen Chong, Prince Liang Man of North Zhou, followed Emperor Wu, the ruler of North Zhou, to Wonju.

古文：帝夜还长安，人窃怪其故，崇谓所亲曰： 吾此闻术者言，晋公今年不利，车驾今忽夜还，不过晋公死耳。 
现代文：武帝当晚就回长安，人们私下怀疑其中的原因，侯莫陈崇告诉亲信说： 我近来听方士说，晋公宇文护今年不吉利，皇上今天突然在晚上赶回来，不过是晋公宇文护死了。 
English: Emperor Wu returned to Chang'an that night, and people privately suspected the reason for this. Hou Mo Chen Chong told his close associates: I recently heard a scholar say that Jin Gongyuan was unlucky this year. The emperor suddenly came back today in the evening, but it was Jin Gongyuan who died.

古文：或发其事。
现代文：有人把这件事告发了。
English: Someone blew the whistle.

古文：乙酉，帝召诸公于大德殿，面责崇，崇惶恐谢罪。
现代文：乙酉，武帝在大德殿召见了公侯们，当面斥责侯莫陈崇，侯莫陈崇诚惶诚恐地承认有罪。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wu summoned the princes to the Great Hall of the People, rebuked Prince Mo Chen Chong in person, and Prince Mo Chen Chong sincerely pleaded guilty.

古文：其夜，冢宰护遣使将兵就崇第，逼令自杀，葬如常仪。
现代文：这天晚上，冢宰宇文护派遣使者带领士兵到侯莫陈崇家里，逼他自杀，然后按固有的仪式把他埋葬。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zhai sent an envoy to lead soldiers to the home of Hou Mo Chen Chong, forced him to commit suicide, and then buried him according to the established ritual.

古文：壬辰，以高州刺史黄法为南徐州刺史，临川太守周敷为南豫州刺史。
现代文：壬辰，陈朝任命高州刺史黄法氍为南徐州刺史，临川太守周敷为南豫州刺史。
English: In Imjin, the Chen Dynasty appointed the Gaozhou chief Huang Faqi as the South Xuzhou chief, and the Linchuan governor Zhou Shiki as the South Yuzhou chief.

古文：周主命司宪大夫拓跋迪造《大律》十五篇。二月，庚子，颁行之。其制罪：一曰杖刑，自十五至五十；二曰鞭刑，自六十至百；三曰徒刑，自一年至五年；四曰流刑，自二千五百里至四千五百里；五曰死刑，罄、绞、斩、枭、裂；凡二十五等。
现代文：北周武帝命令司宪大夫拓跋迪制定《大律》十五篇，规定对犯罪的惩罚：一是杖刑，杖十到五十下；二是鞭刑，鞭打六十到一百下；三是徒刑，刑期从一年到五年；四是流刑，流放二千五百里到四千五百里；五是死刑，分缢崐死、绞死、斩首、将首级悬挂示众、用车裂尸；一共分二十五等。
English: Emperor Zhouwu of the North ordered the chief of the Constitutional Court, Tuowadi, to draw up 15 articles of the "Great Law," stipulating the punishment for crimes: first, caning, 10 to 50 strokes of the cane; second, flogging, 60 to 100 lashes; third, imprisonment, from one year to five years; fourth, banishment, banishment from 2,500 to 4,500 miles; fifth, death penalty, strangulation, hanging, beheading, hanging the head to show the public, and splitting the corpse with a car; a total of 25 grades.

古文：庚戌，以司空、南徐州刺史侯安都为江州刺史。
现代文：庚戌，陈朝任命司空南徐州刺史侯安都为江州刺史。
English: During the reign of Geng Zheng, the Chen Dynasty appointed Sikuan Nan as the governor of Xuzhou and Hou Andu as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：辛酉，周诏： 大冢宰晋国公，亲则懿昆，任当元辅，自今诏诰及百司文书，并不得称公名。 
现代文：辛酉，北周武帝下诏： 大冢宰晋国公，是我的兄长，职位是朝延为首的大臣，今后凡是诏令诰书和所有官署的文书里，不准直呼其名。 
English: At that time, the Northern Zhouwu Emperor issued an edict: "The Grand Vizier Jin Guo Gong is my elder brother, and his position is that of a minister headed by Cha Yan. In the future, it is not allowed to call him by his first name in all imperial edicts and official documents.

古文：护抗表固让。
现代文：宇文护对诏令坚决不服从，表示谦让。
English: He pushed back hard on the table.

古文：三月，乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，乙丑朔，出现日食。
English: In March, the second month of the year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：齐诏司空斛律光督步骑二万，筑勋常城于轵关；仍筑长城二百里，置十二戍。
现代文：北齐武成帝高湛诏令司空斛律光督带二万名步、骑兵，到轵关建造勋掌城，构筑了二百里的长城，设立十二个戌所。
English: Emperor Gaozhan of the Northern Qi Dynasty ordered the Secretary of the Northern Qi Dynasty, Gong Li Guangdu, to take 20,000 infantry and cavalry to Shiguan to build a capital city, built 200 miles of the Great Wall, and established 12 imperial residences.

古文：丙戌，齐以兼尚书右仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
现代文：丙戌，北齐任命兼尚书右仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
English: North Qi appointed Zhao Yanshen, Shangshu's right-hand man, as his left-hand man.

古文：夏，四月，乙未，周以柱国达奚武为太保。
现代文：夏季四月，乙未，北周任命柱国达奚武为太保。
English: In the summer of April, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Zhuangguo Dazhongwu as Taibao.

古文：周主将视学，以太傅燕国公于谨为三老。
现代文：北周武帝准备巡视学校，任命太傅燕国公于谨为掌管国家教化的 三老 。
English: The Northern Zhouwu Emperor is preparing to inspect the school and appoint Taifu Yan Guogong as the Three Elders in charge of the country's education.

古文：谨上表固辞，不许，仍赐以延年杖。
现代文：于谨上书坚决推辞，没有得到准许，仍旧赏赐他 延年杖 。
English: He still rewarded him with the "Long Life Stick" even though he did not get permission to do so.

古文：戊午，帝幸太学。
现代文：戊午，武帝驾临太学。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Wu came to Taigaku.

古文：谨入门，帝迎拜于门屏之间，谨答拜。
现代文：于谨进门时，武帝在大门和屏风之间迎接他，于谨答谢还礼。
English: When Yu Zhen walked through the door, Emperor Wu greeted him between the gate and the screen. Yu Zhen thanked him and returned the compliment.

古文：有司设三老席于中楹，南面。
现代文：官员在厅堂中间设下三老席，坐位朝南。
English: Officials set up three old seats in the middle of the hall and sat facing south.

古文：太师护升阶，设几。谨升席，南面凭几而坐。
现代文：太师宇文护走上台阶，摆了一张小桌子，于谨入席，而朝南倚着小桌子坐定。
English: Grand Master U Wenwoo walked up the steps, set up a small table, and then took his seat, while Chaonan leaned against the small table and sat down.

古文：大司马豆卢宁升阶，正舄。
现代文：大司马豆卢宁走上台阶，把于谨脱下的鞋子放端正。
English: The chief secretary, Ma Zu Luning, walked up the steps and put Yu's shoes, which he had just taken off, on his feet.

古文：帝升阶，立于斧扆之前，西面。
现代文：武帝走上台阶，站在画有斧状图案的屏风前，面朝西。
English: Emperor Wu walked up the steps and stood in front of a screen painted with an axe-like pattern, facing west.

古文：有司进馔，帝跪设酱豆，亲为之袒割。谨食毕，帝亲跪授爵以酳。
现代文：官员送上饮食，武帝跪着放好盛放调料的食器，挽起衣袖为于谨割肉，于谨吃完后，武帝亲自跪着送上盛酒的酒器请于谨漱口。
English: The official presented the food and drink, Emperor Wu kneeled down to place the tableware containing the spices, rolled up his sleeves to cut the meat, and after he finished eating, Emperor Wu himself kneeled down to present the wine container with the wine, and asked him to rinse his mouth.

古文：有司撤讫，帝北面立而访道。
现代文：官员撤去饮食器皿，武帝面朝北站着向于谨请教治理国家的道理。
English: The officials removed the eating utensils, and Emperor Wu stood with his face to the north, respectfully asking for advice on how to govern the country.

古文：谨起，立于席后，对曰： 木受绳则正，后从谏则圣。
现代文：于谨起身站在坐席后面，回答说： 木材经过墨线校正才能平直，帝王能听从规劝就是圣明。
English: Yu Zhen stood up from behind the seat and replied, "Wood can be straightened only after it has been corrected with an ink line. If the emperor can listen to persuasion, he is a saint."

古文：明王虚心纳谏以知得失，天下乃安。 
现代文：明理的帝王能虚心听取规劝可以知道自己的得失，这样天下就能安定。 
English: A reasonable emperor can humbly listen to persuasion and can know his own gains and losses, so that the world can be stable.

古文：又曰： 去食去兵，信不可去；愿陛下守信勿失。 
现代文：又说： 即使失去食物和军队，但不能失去信用；希望陛下不要失去信用。 
English: He also said: Even if we lose food and troops, we must not lose our credibility; I hope His Majesty will not lose his credibility.

古文：又曰： 有功必赏，有罪必罚，则为善者日进，为恶者日止。 
现代文：又说： 有功必赏，有罪必罚，那么做好事的人会一天比一天多，做坏事的人会一天比一天少。 
English: He also said: "Merit must be rewarded, and guilt must be punished. Then, people who do good things will increase day by day, and people who do bad things will decrease day by day."

古文：又曰： 言行者，立身之基，愿陛下三思而言，九虑而行，勿使有过。
现代文：还说： 言论和行为，是立身的根本，希望陛下三思以后再说话，九次考虑以后再行动，不要发生过错。
English: He also said, "Speech and behavior are the foundation of one's life. I hope that His Majesty will think twice before speaking, and think nine times before acting, so as not to make a mistake."

古文：天子之过，如日月之食，人莫不知，愿陛下慎之。 
现代文：天子有了过错，正象日食和月食那样，没有人不知道的，希望陛下一定要谨慎从事。 
English: The Son of Heaven made a mistake, just like the solar and lunar eclipses, no one does not know, I hope that His Majesty must be cautious.

古文：帝再拜受言，谨答拜。
现代文：武帝再次拜谢表示听从，于谨答谢还礼。
English: Emperor Wu thanked him again and said that he would listen to him, and he thanked him in return.

古文：礼成而出。
现代文：仪礼结束后武帝离开太学。
English: After the completion of the ceremony, Gao Zu left the university.

古文：司空侯安都恃功骄横，数聚文武之士骑射赋诗，斋中宾客，动至千人。
现代文：陈朝的司空侯安都自恃有功骄傲蛮横，屡次纠集文人武士骑射赋诗，住处的宾客，往往多到上千人。
English: During the Chen Dynasty, the chief magistrate, Hou An, prided himself on his achievements, was proud and insolent, and repeatedly gathered literati and samurai to ride, shoot and compose poems. The guests at his residence often numbered more than a thousand.

古文：部下将帅，多不遵法度，检问收摄，辄奔归安都。
现代文：部下的将帅，大都不遵纪守法，遇到被检举搜崐捕捉拿，常常投奔侯安都。
English: The generals under his command, most of whom do not follow the rules and abide by the law, often go to Hou An Du when they are caught by the procuratorate.

古文：上性严整，内衔之，安都弗之觉。
现代文：陈文帝性格严厉认真，对他含恨在心，而侯安都却毫无觉察。
English: Chen Wendi's character was stern and serious, and he harbored hatred in his heart, but Hou Anlu was completely unaware of it.

古文：每有表启，封讫，有事未尽，开封自书之云： 又启某事。 
现代文：每逢向皇帝上表启事，信已经封好，想到有些事还没有写完，又拆开封口补写： 又启奏某某事。 
English: Whenever he wrote to the emperor, the letter was already sealed, and he thought of something that was not yet finished, so he opened the seal and wrote: "Another opening of so-and-so."

古文：及侍宴，酒酣，或箕踞倾倚。
现代文：在侍侯皇帝宴会时，酒喝得痛快时，有时就伸腿而坐歪斜着身子。
English: When serving the emperor at a banquet, when the wine was drunk, sometimes he stretched his legs and sat cross-legged.

古文：尝陪乐游园禊饮，谓上曰： 何如作临川王时？ 
现代文：他常陪文帝到乐游园举行修禊宴饮，饮酒时对文帝说： 现在比作临川王时如何？ 
English: He often accompanied Emperor Wen to the Le Youyuan to hold a banquet and drink. When drinking, he said to Emperor Wen: How is it now compared to when you were the king of Linchuan?

古文：上不应。
现代文：文帝不理他。
English: Emperor Wen ignored him.

古文：安都再三言之。
现代文：侯安都却再三提这件事。
English: Hou Andu, on the other hand, repeatedly mentioned this matter.

古文：上曰： 此虽天命，抑亦明公之力。 
现代文：文帝说： 这虽然是天命，却也是靠您的力量。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "Although this is the will of heaven, it also depends on your strength.

古文：宴讫，启借供帐水饰，欲载妻妾于御堂宴饮。
现代文：宴饮结束，侯安都向文帝借帷帐和彩船，要载上妻妾去皇帝的宫室摆宴饮酒。
English: At the end of the banquet, Hou Andu borrowed the curtain and the boat from Emperor Wen. He wanted to take his wife and concubine to the emperor's palace to have a banquet and drink alcohol.

古文：上虽许之，意甚不怿。
现代文：文帝虽然允准了他的要求，心里却很不高兴。
English: Although Emperor Wen agreed to his request, he was very unhappy.

古文：明日，安都坐于御座，宾客居群臣位，称觞上寿。
现代文：第二天，侯安都坐在皇帝的座位上，宾客们坐在大臣的位子上，举杯为他祝寿。
English: The next day, Hou An sat on the emperor's seat, and the guests sat on the minister's seat, raising a toast to him.

古文：会重云殿灾，安都帅将士带甲入殿，上甚恶之，阴为之备。
现代文：恰巧重云殿发生火灾，侯安都率领将士携带兵器来到重云殿，文帝非常恨他，暗下作了准备。
English: It so happened that a fire broke out in the Hall of Heavy Clouds. Hou Andu led his generals to the Hall of Heavy Clouds, carrying weapons. Emperor Wen hated him very much and secretly made preparations.

古文：及周迪反，朝议谓当使安都讨之，而上更使吴明彻。
现代文：到了周迪造反时，朝中议论说应该派侯安都去讨伐，但文帝另派了吴明彻。
English: When it came to Zhou Di's rebellion, there was discussion in the court that Hou Andu should be sent to fight, but Emperor Wen also sent Wu Mingche.

古文：又数遣台使按问安都部下，检括亡叛。
现代文：文帝还屡次派御史台的官员审讯侯安都的部下，清查他们逃亡叛乱的事情。
English: Emperor Wen also repeatedly sent officials from the Imperial History Station to interrogate Hou Andu's subordinates and investigate their escape and rebellion.

古文：安都遣其别驾周弘实自托于舍人蔡景历，并问省中事。
现代文：侯安都派别驾周弘实投身到中书舍人蔡景历那里，探听中书省的机密。
English: Hou Andu sent Zhou Hongsheng to devote himself to Cai Jinglian, the person in charge of the Chinese book department, to find out the secrets of the Chinese book department.

古文：景历录其状，具奏之，因希旨称安都谋反。
现代文：蔡景历把他的行动一一记录下来，报告了文帝，迎合文帝的意旨说侯安都要谋反。
English: Cai Jingli recorded his actions one by one, reported to Emperor Wen, and catered to Emperor Wen's intention to say that Hou An should plot a rebellion.

古文：上虑其不受召，故用为江州。
现代文：文帝考虑到侯安都不会接受召命，使任命他去江州当刺史。
English: Emperor Wen considered that Hou An would not accept the call, so he appointed him to go to Jiangzhou to be a historian.

古文：五月，安都自京口还建康，部伍入于石头。
现代文：五月，侯安都从京口回建康，部下的军队开进石头城。
English: In May, Hou Andu returned to Jiankang from Beijing, and his troops entered Stone Town.

古文：六月，帝引安都宴于嘉德殿，又集其部下将帅会于尚书朝堂，于坐收安都，囚于嘉德西省，又收其将帅，尽夺马仗而释之。
现代文：六月，文帝招侯安都到嘉德殿宴饮，又召集侯安都部下的将帅到尚书省的大厅见面，于是逮捕了侯安都，把他囚禁在嘉德西省，又逮捕了侯安都的将帅，没收了他们的马匹兵器后予以释放。
English: In June, Emperor Wen summoned Hou Andu to a banquet at the Palace of the Empress Dowager Jia De, and also summoned the generals of Hou Andu's subordinates to the hall of the Shangshu Province to meet, so they arrested Hou Andu, imprisoned him in the Jia Dexi Province, and arrested the generals of Hou Andu, confiscated their horse weapons and released them.

古文：因出蔡景历表，以示于朝，乃下诏暴其罪恶，明日，赐死，宥其妻子，资给其丧。
现代文：还拿出蔡景历所上的奏报，向朝中的官员们出示，随即下诏公布了侯安都的罪恶，第二天，赐他自尽，宽恕了他的妻儿，拨款给他们办丧事。
English: He also took out Cai Jingli's report and showed it to the officials of the central and northern governments, and then issued an edict announcing the evil of Hou Andu. The next day, he ordered him to commit suicide, forgave his wife and children, and allocated funds for them to hold a funeral.

古文：初，高祖在京口，尝与诸将宴，杜僧明、周文育、侯安都为寿，各称功伐。
现代文：当初，陈武帝在京口时曾经和将军们宴会，杜僧明、周文育、侯安都为他祝寿，各自夸耀战功。
English: At first, Chen Wudi had a banquet with the generals when he was in Beijing. Du Sengming, Zhou Wenyu, and Hou An all wished him a happy birthday and boasted of their war exploits.

古文：高祖曰： 卿等悉良将也，而并有所短。
现代文：陈武帝说： 诸位都是良将，但各有不足之处。
English: Gaozu said, "You are all good generals, but you all have weaknesses.

古文：杜公志大而识暗，狎于下而骄于上；周侯交不择人，而推心过差；侯郎傲诞而无厌，轻佻而肆志；并非全身之道。 
现代文：杜公志向虽大而见识不明，对下亲密对上骄傲；周侯不能有选择地结交朋友，而且过于推心置腹；侯郎傲慢放诞而贪得无厌，性格轻佻而放纵不羁；这都不是保全身家的行为。 
English: Although Du Gong's ambition is great and his insight is unclear, he is proud of his intimacy with his subordinates; Zhou Hou cannot selectively make friends, and he is too self-centered; Hou Lang is arrogant and greedy, and his personality is frivolous and indulgent; these are not acts of self-preservation.

古文：卒皆如其言。
现代文：后来果然象他所说的那样。
English: In the end, both of their endings fulfilled the prophecy.

古文：乙卯，齐主使兼散骑常侍崔子武来聘。
现代文：乙卯，北齐武成帝派兼散骑常侍崔子武来陈朝聘问。
English: At the same time, Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng faction and horseback riding attendant Cui Ziwu came to Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：齐侍中、开府仪同三司和士开有宠于齐主，齐主外朝视事，或在内宴赏，须臾之间，不得不与士开相见，或累日不归，一日数入；或放还之后，俄顷即追，未至之间，连骑督趣，奸谄百端，宠爱日降，前后赏赐，不可胜纪。
现代文：北齐的侍中、开府仪同三司和士开得到武成帝的宠爱，武成帝外出视察，或在宫中宴请时，过不了一会儿，就要召和士开来见面，或者留他好几天，或者一天里召他进宫许多次；或者和士开刚走，又立刻追他回来，在和士开还没回来以前，接二连三派人骑马去催促。由于他各式各样的奸诈谄媚，受到武成帝的日益宠爱，前后赏赐给他的物品，数不胜数。
English: The attendants of Beiqi, Kaifu Yi, together with Sanji and Shikai, were favored by Emperor Wucheng. When Emperor Wucheng went out to inspect, or to have a banquet in the palace, after a while, he would summon Shikai to meet him, or keep him for several days, or call him to the palace many times a day; or when Shikai had just left, he immediately chased him back, and before Shikai returned, he sent three people on horseback in succession to urge him. Because of his various treacherous and obsequious charms, he was increasingly favored by Emperor Wucheng, and he was rewarded with

古文：每侍左右，言辞容止，极诸鄙亵；以夜继昼，无复君臣之礼。
现代文：每当在武成帝身边侍候，说话和动作极其卑鄙下流；夜以继日，毫无君臣之礼。
English: Whenever he served around Emperor Wu Cheng, his words and actions were extremely despicable and lewd; day and night, he had no respect for the emperor.

古文：尝谓帝曰： 自古帝王，尽为灰土，尧舜、桀纣，竟复何异！
现代文：他常常告诉武成帝说： 自古以来的帝王，都成了灰土，尧舜和桀纣，有什么两样！
English: He often told Emperor Wu Chengdi, "The emperors since ancient times have all become ashes. What's the difference between ashes and ashes?"

古文：陛下宜及少壮，极意为乐，纵横行之，一日取快，可敌千年。
现代文：陛下应当在少崐壮时恣意行乐，放纵而不必顾忌。快乐一天，比得上一千年。
English: Your Majesty should enjoy yourself freely when you are young and strong, indulge without fear. One day of happiness is worth a thousand years of sorrow.

古文：国事尽付大臣，何虑不办，无为自勤约也！ 
现代文：国事都交给大臣，何必担心办不成，不用自己劳累约束自己！ 
English: The affairs of state are entrusted to the minister, why worry about not being able to do it, don't have to work hard to discipline yourself!

古文：帝大悦。
现代文：武成帝大喜。
English: The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：于是委赵彦深掌官爵，元文遥掌财用，唐邕掌外、骑兵，信都冯子琮、胡长粲常东宫。
现代文：于是委托赵彦深掌管封官授爵，元文遥掌管钱财费用，唐邕掌管外兵和骑兵，信都人冯子琮、胡长粲掌管东宫。
English: Therefore, he entrusted Zhao Yanshen to be in charge of awarding titles to officials, Yuan Wenyao to be in charge of money and expenses, Tang Xuan to be in charge of foreign soldiers and cavalry, and Xindu people Feng Zixuan and Hu Changyu to be in charge of the East Palace.

古文：帝三四日一视朝，书数字而已，略无所言，须臾罢入。
现代文：武成帝三四天才上一次朝，批几个字，也不说什么话，一会儿就退朝进宫。
English: It was only on the morning of the third or fourth day that Emperor Wucheng uttered a few words, and without saying anything, he left the palace and entered the palace.

古文：长粲，僧敬之子也。
现代文：胡长粲是胡僧敬的儿子。
English: Hu Changyao is the son of Hu Sangye.

古文：帝使士开与胡后握槊，河南康献王孝瑜谏曰： 皇后天下之母，岂可与臣下接手！ 
现代文：武成帝叫和士开和胡后玩 握槊 的赌博游戏。河南康献王高孝瑜规劝说： 皇后是天下人的母亲，怎么可以和臣子的手接触！ 
English: Emperor Wucheng told Wushi Kai and Hu Hou to play the gambling game of shaking the shovel. Henan Kang Xian Wang Gao Xiaoyu persuaded: The queen is the mother of the people of the world, how can she touch the hands of the courtiers!

古文：孝瑜又言： 赵郡王睿，其父死于非命，不可亲近。 
现代文：又说： 赵郡王高睿，他的父亲死于非命，不可以和他亲近。 
English: He also said: Zhao Guorong Wang Gaorui, whose father died a violent death, should not be allowed to be close to him.

古文：由是睿及士开共谮之。
现代文：因此高睿和士开一起说高孝瑜的坏话。
English: As a result, Gao Rui and Shi Kai both spoke ill of Gao Xiaoyu.

古文：士开言孝瑜奢僭，睿言 山东唯闻有河南王，不闻有陛下。 
现代文：和士开说高孝瑜生活奢侈超过他的身份，高睿说： 山东只听说有河南王，没有听说有您陛下。 
English: Gao Rui said: Shandong has only heard of the King of Henan, but has not heard of Your Majesty.

古文：帝由是忌之。
现代文：武成帝因此产生了嫉妒。
English: Emperor Wu Rongcheng therefore envied him.

古文：孝瑜窃与尔硃御女言，帝闻之，大怒。
现代文：高孝瑜偷偷地和尔朱御女说话，关系暧昧，武成帝听到这事，勃然大怒。
English: Gao Xiaoyu secretly spoke with Er Zhu's daughter, and the relationship was ambiguous. When Emperor Wucheng heard about this, he was furious.

古文：庚申，顿饮孝瑜酒三十七杯。
现代文：庚申，一次叫高孝瑜饮了三十七杯酒。
English: Goshun once made Gao Xiaoyu drink 37 glasses of wine.

古文：孝瑜体肥大，腰带十围，帝使左右娄子彦载以出，鸩之于车。至西华门，烦躁投水而绝。
现代文：高孝瑜身体肥大，腰带十围，武成帝叫在旁边侍候的近臣娄子彦用车送他出去，在车上又给他饮了毒酒，到西华门时，毒性发作烦躁投水而死。
English: Gao Xiaoyu's body was fat and his belt was ten times around his waist. Emperor Wu Rongcheng called his close retainer Zou Zihong, who was waiting next to him, to take him out by car. He also gave him poisoned wine to drink in the car. When he got to the West China Gate, he had a toxic attack and died of water intoxication.

古文：赠太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：追赠太尉、录尚书事。
English: He was posthumously awarded the rank of captain, and his record was written up.

古文：诸侯在宫中者，莫敢举声，唯河间王孝琬大哭而出。
现代文：在宫里的诸侯，都不敢出声，只有河间王高孝琬大哭而去。
English: The princes in the palace did not dare to speak out, only Kawama Wang Takataka cried and left.

古文：秋，七月，戊辰，周主幸原州。
现代文：秋季七月，戊辰，北周武帝驾临原州。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou arrived in Wuzhou.

古文：八月，辛丑，齐以三台宫为大兴圣寺。
现代文：八月，辛丑，北齐把三台宫改为大兴圣寺。
English: In August, Xinwu, North Qi changed Sandai Temple to Daxing Temple.

古文：九月，壬戌，广州刺史阳山穆公欧阳頠卒，诏其子纥袭父爵位。
现代文：九月，壬戌，陈朝的广州刺史阳山穆公欧阳去世，下诏他的儿子欧阳纥承袭父亲的爵位。
English: In September, Ouyang, Mu Gong of the Chen Dynasty's Guangzhou Zhishiyang Mountain passed away, and it was decreed that his son Ouyang Jie would succeed his father's title.

古文：甲子，周主自原州登陇。
现代文：甲子，北周武帝从原州登上陇坂。
English: Emperor Wu of the Northern Zhou Dynasty ascended Shaoshan from Wonju.

古文：周迪复越东兴岭为寇，辛未，诏护军章昭达将兵讨之。
现代文：陈朝因周迪又越过东兴岭侵犯，辛未，诏命护军章昭达率领军队去讨伐。
English: Because Zhou Di invaded Dongxingling again, the Chen dynasty ordered the military commander Zhaoda Zhang to lead the army to fight.

古文：丙戌，周主如同州。
现代文：丙戌，北周武帝去同州。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor went to Tongzhou.

古文：初，周人欲与突厥木杆可汗连兵伐齐，许纳其女为后，遣御伯大夫杨荐及左武伯大原王庆往结之。
现代文：起初，北周要和突厥木杆可汗联军讨伐北齐，答允娶可汗的女儿做皇后，派御伯大夫杨荐和左武伯太原人王庆去联系。
English: At first, Northern Zhou wanted to fight against Northern Qi with the Turkic Muxu Khan's allied forces, promised to marry the Khan's daughter to be a queen, and sent the imperial uncle doctor Yang Jin and Zuowu uncle Taiyuan man Wang Qing to make contact.

古文：齐人闻之惧，亦遣使求昏于突厥，赂遗甚厚。
现代文：北齐听了害怕，也派使者到突厥去求婚，馈赠厚礼。
English: When Bei Qi heard this, he was afraid and sent an envoy to the Turks to propose marriage and give them a gift.

古文：木杆贪齐币重，欲执荐等送齐。
现代文：木杆可汗贪图北齐的厚礼，企图捉了杨荐等人送给北齐。
English: The wooden pole khan coveted the generous gifts of Beiqi, and tried to catch Yang Recommend and others to give them to Beiqi.

古文：荐知之，责木杆曰： 太祖昔与可汗共敦邻好，蠕蠕部落数千来降。太祖悉以付可汗使者，以快可汗之意。如何今日遽欲背恩忘义，独不愧鬼神乎？ 
现代文：杨荐知道后，斥责木杆可汗说： 太祖从前和可汗共同敦守友好相处，蠕蠕部落几千人来投降，太祖把他们全部交给可汗的使者，以满足可汗的要求，为什么今天忽然背恩忘义，唯独不有愧于鬼神吗？ 
English: After knowing this, Yang Recommends rebuked the wooden pole khan and said: the great-grandfathers and khans used to live together in friendship, thousands of people from the tribe came to surrender, the great-grandfathers handed them all over to the khan's emissaries to meet the khan's requirements, why did they suddenly forget to be grateful today, but are they not worthy of ghosts and gods?

古文：木杆惨然良久曰： 君言是也。
现代文：木杆可汗悲痛了很久，说： 您的话很对。
English: Khan grieved for a long time and said, "You are right.

古文：吾意决矣，当相与共平东贼，然后送女。 
现代文：我的主意已经决定了，应该和你们一起讨平东面的贼人，然后把女儿送去。 
English: I've made up my mind that I should join you in fighting the bandits in the east, and then send my daughter away.

古文：荐等复命。
现代文：杨荐等人完成使命后回朝复命。
English: After completing their mission, Yang Recommend and the others returned to the North to resume their mission.

古文：公卿请发十万人击齐，柱国杨忠独以为得万骑足矣。
现代文：北周的公卿请发兵十万攻打北齐，柱国杨忠认为只要一万名骑兵就足够了。
English: The Northern Zhou nobles requested to send 100,000 soldiers to attack Northern Qi, but the pillar country Yang Zhong thought that only 10,000 cavalry would be enough.

古文：戊子，遣忠将步骑一万，与突厥自北道伐齐，又遣大将军达奚武帅步骑三万，自南道出平阳，期会于晋阳。
现代文：戊子，武帝派杨忠率领一万名步骑兵，和突厥从北面的道路讨崐伐北齐，又派大将军达奚武率领三万名步、骑兵，从南面的道路由平阳出发，约期在晋阳会师。
English: In response, Emperor Wu sent Yang Zhong, leading 10,000 infantry and cavalry, to fight the Turks from the northern road to the north of Qi, and also sent General Daxin Wu, leading 30,000 infantry and cavalry, from the southern road from Pingyang to meet the division in Jinyang.

古文：冬，十一月，辛酉，章昭达大破周迪。
现代文：冬季，十一月，辛酉，陈朝章昭达大破周迪。
English: Winter, November, Hsinchu, Chen Zhaozhang, Zhou Di.

古文：迪脱身潜窜山谷，民相与匿之，虽加诛戮，无肯言者。
现代文：周迪脱身潜伏逃窜到山谷里，老百姓把他隐藏起来，虽然受到诛杀，却没人肯说出来。
English: Zhou Di escaped and hid in the valley. The people hid him. Although he was beaten to death, no one was willing to speak out.

古文：十二月，辛卯，周主还长安。
现代文：十二月，辛卯，北周武帝回长安。
English: In December, Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou returned to Chang'an.

古文：丙申，大赦。
现代文：丙申，陈朝大赦全国。
English: Bishen, implement the amnesty.

古文：章昭达进军度岭，趣建安，讨陈宝应，诏益州刺史余孝顷督会稽、东阳、临海、永嘉诸军自东道会之。
现代文：陈朝的章昭达进军，经过东兴岭，向建安急进，讨伐陈宝应，文帝诏命益州刺史余孝顷督率会稽、东阳、临海、永嘉等地军队从东路来会合。
English: Zhang Zhaoda of the Chen Dynasty marched, passing through Dongxingling, to Jian'an, to fight against Chen Baoying, Emperor Wen decreed that the troops from Yizhou, Jishi, Yu Xiaohe and other places should gather from the east.

古文：是岁，初祭始兴昭烈王于建康，用天子礼。
现代文：这一年，陈朝在建康第一次祭祀始兴昭烈王，用天子的祭礼。
English: In this year, the Chen Dynasty held the first sacrifice of the King of the Martyrs in Jiankang, using the ritual of the Son of Heaven.

古文：周杨忠拔齐二十馀城。
现代文：北周杨忠攻克北齐的二十多座城池。
English: Northern Zhou Yangzhong conquered more than twenty cities in northern Qi.

古文：齐人守陉岭之隘，忠击破之。
现代文：北齐人防守陉岭的山口，杨忠攻破这里的防守。
English: The Northern Qi people defended the mountain pass of Fuling, and Yang Zhong broke through the defense here.

古文：突厥木杆、地头、步离三可汗以十万骑会之。
现代文：突厥的木杆、地头、步离三个可汗率领十万骑兵来会合。
English: Three khans led by a hundred thousand cavalrymen came to meet the Turkic wooden pole, the ground and the step.

古文：己丑，自恒州三道俱入。
现代文：已酉，从恒州分三路一齐进入。
English: It has been divided into three parts and entered from Hengzhou.

古文：时大雪数旬，南北千馀里，平地数尺。
现代文：当时下了几十天的大雪，南北一千多里，平地积雪几尺。
English: At that time, there were dozens of days of heavy snow, more than a thousand miles north and south, and several feet of snow on the plain.

古文：齐主自鄴倍道赴之，戊午，至晋阳。斛律光将步骑三万屯平阳。
现代文：北齐武成帝从邺城兼程赶去，戊午，到晋阳，斛律光率领三万步兵驻守平阳。
English: Emperor Wu Cheng of Northern Qi made a side trip from Lucheng and arrived in Jinyang in the afternoon. Li Riguang led 30,000 infantrymen to garrison Pingyang.

古文：己未，周师及突厥逼晋阳。
现代文：已未，北周军队和突厥逼近晋阳。
English: Before long, the Northern Zhou army and the Turks were approaching Jinyang.

古文：齐主畏其强，戎服率宫人东走，欲避之。
现代文：北齐武成帝对这些强大的军队感到害怕，穿上军服领了宫女打算从东面逃走躲避。
English: Emperor Wu Cheng of Northern Qi was afraid of these powerful troops. He put on a military uniform and took his concubine with him, intending to escape and hide from the east.

古文：赵郡王睿、河间王孝琬叩马谏。
现代文：赵郡王高睿、河间王高孝琬勒住他的马进行规劝。
English: Zhao County's Wang Gaorai and Kawama's Wang Gao Xiaojun held down his horse to persuade him.

古文：孝琬请委睿部分，必得严整。
现代文：高孝琬请求把军队委托给高睿部署，可以使军队得到整顿。
English: Gao Xiaoxuan's request to entrust the army to Gao Rui for deployment can make the army be rectified.

古文：帝从之，命六军进止皆取睿节度，而使并州刺史段韶总之。
现代文：武成帝采纳了意见，命令六军的行动都受高睿的指挥，派并州刺史段韶总辖。
English: Emperor Wu Cheng adopted the opinion and ordered that the actions of the six armies should all be under the command of Gao Rui and sent them to be under the jurisdiction of the General Headquarters of the State Council.

古文：世祖文皇帝下天嘉五年
现代文：天嘉五年
English: Tianjia five years

古文：春，正月，庚申朔，齐主登北城，军容甚整。
现代文：春季正月，庚申朔，北齐武成帝登上晋阳北城，军容非常整齐。
English: In the first month of spring, the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng ascended to the northern city of Jinyang, and his army was very neat.

古文：突厥咎周人曰： 尔言齐乱，故来伐之。
现代文：突厥人埋怨北周人说： 你们说齐国混乱，所以来讨伐他们。
English: The Turks complained to the Northern Zhou people, saying: "You say that there is chaos within Northern Qi, that is why we have come to fight.

古文：今齐人眼中亦有铁，何可当耶！ 
现代文：现在齐人眼中都放出铁一样的光来，怎么能抵挡啊！ 
English: Now everyone's eyes are emitting an iron-like light, how can you resist!

古文：周人以步卒为前锋，从西山下去城二里许。
现代文：北周军队以步兵为前锋，从西山下来，离城二里多路。
English: The Northern Zhou army, with infantry as the vanguard, came down from the West Mountain, more than two miles away from the city.

古文：诸将咸欲逆击之，段韶曰： 步卒力势，自当有限。今积雪既厚，逆战非便，不如陈以待之。
现代文：北齐将领们都准备迎击，段韶说： 步兵的兵势，力量很有限，现在积雪很厚，迎战很不方便，不如严阵以待。
English: The Northern Qi generals are all preparing to meet the attack, Duan Yu said: the infantry's troop strength is very limited, now the snow is very thick, it is very inconvenient to meet the battle, it is better to wait.

古文：彼劳我逸，破之必矣。 
现代文：对方疲劳而我方安逸，一定能打败对方。 
English: The enemy soldiers are fatigued, our army is idle, we can surely defeat the enemy troops.

古文：既至，齐悉其锐兵鼓噪而出。
现代文：北周军队来到，北齐精锐的军队呐喊着全数出击。
English: The North Zhou army arrived, and the North Qi elite army shouted for a full-scale attack.

古文：突厥震骇，引上西山，不肯战，周师大败而还。
现代文：突厥震动惊怕，领军队上了西山，不肯出战，北周的军队大败而还。
English: Shocked and frightened, the Turks led their army up the West Mountain and refused to go to war. The Northern Zhou army was soundly defeated but fought back.

古文：突厥引兵出塞，纵兵大掠，自晋阳以往七百馀里，人畜无遗。
现代文：突厥带着军队出了塞外，放纵士兵大肆抢劫，从晋阳以北的七百多里地方，人畜被劫掠一空。
English: The Turks took their army out of Tibet and allowed the soldiers to plunder the country. People and animals were plundered from more than seven hundred miles north of Jinyang.

古文：段韶追之，不敢逼。
现代文：段韶追赶，但不敢靠近。
English: Duan Yu chased after him, but did not dare to get close.

古文：突厥还至陉岭，冻滑，乃辅氈以度。胡马寒瘦，膝已下皆无毛，比至长城，马死且尽，截槊杖之以归。
现代文：突厥退到陉岭，地冻路滑，只好在路上铺了毛毡行走，胡地的马受冷病瘦，膝盖以下的毛都没有了，等到了长城，马都快死光了，于是截短矛杆当棍子拄着回去。
English: The Turks retreated to the Jiaoling Mountains. The frozen ground and slippery roads made it necessary for them to walk on the road covered with felt. The horses in the Jiaoling Mountains were thin from the cold and had no hair below the knees. By the time they reached the Great Wall, the horses were nearly dead, so they cut short the spears and walked back with sticks.

古文：达奚武至平阳，未知忠退。
现代文：北周的达奚武到平阳，不知道杨忠已经退走。
English: North Zhou's Daren Wu went to Pingyang, not knowing that Yang Zhong had already retreated.

古文：斛律光与书曰： 鸿鹄已翔于寥廓，罗者犹视于沮泽。 
现代文：北齐的斛律光写信给他说：崐 鸿雁已在蓝天翱翔，张网的却还在水草丛生的沼泽地等候。 
English: Bao Liguang from North Qi wrote to him: "The wild geese have already soared into the blue sky, but the net is still waiting in the swamp full of aquatic plants.

古文：武得书，亦还。
现代文：达奚武见到信，也退走了。
English: Dagongwu also retreated when he saw the letter.

古文：光逐之，入周境，获二千馀口而还。
现代文：斛律光追逐进入北周境内，俘获二千多人就返回了。
English: Zhaoliguang chased into the territory of Beizhou, captured more than two thousand people and returned.

古文：光见帝于晋阳，帝以新遭大寇，抱光头而哭。
现代文：斛律光在晋阳朝见武成帝，武成帝因为刚遭到大肆劫掠，抱住斛律光的头痛哭。
English: Baoliguang met Emperor Wu Chengdu in the morning of Jinyang. Emperor Wu Chengdu hugged Baoliguang and cried because he had just been plundered.

古文：任城王湝进曰： 何至于此！ 
现代文：任城王高劝他说： 何至于此！ 
English: Ren Chengwanggao advised him, "What about this?

古文：乃止。
现代文：这才不哭。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：初，齐显祖之世，周人常惧齐兵西度，每至冬月，守河椎冰。
现代文：当初，文宣帝在世时，北周常常怕北齐军队西渡，每到冬天，守在黄河边凿开冰凌。
English: At first, when Emperor Wenxuan was alive, Northern Zhou was often afraid of the Northern Qi army's westward crossing. Every winter, they kept chiseling ice cream on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：及世祖即位，嬖幸用事，朝政渐紊，齐人椎冰以备周兵之逼。
现代文：到武成帝即位，奸佞小人当权，朝政逐渐混乱，北齐人凿冰防备北周军队入侵。
English: When Emperor Wucheng ascended to the throne, the traitorous villain was in power, the imperial government was gradually in chaos, and the Northern Qi people cut ice to prevent the invasion of the Northern Zhou army.

古文：斛律光忧之，曰： 国家常有吞关、陇之志，今日至此，而唯玩声色乎！ 
现代文：斛律光很担忧，说： 国家常有吞并关、陇的志向，到了今天这样的地步，只好喜好声色狗马！ 
English: Gong Liguang was very worried and said, "Countries often have the ambition of annexation and annexation, and to such an extent today, they have no choice but to be petty!

古文：辛巳，上祀北郊。
现代文：辛巳，陈文帝到南郊祭天。
English: Soon, Chen Xuandi arrived at the north suburb festival site.

古文：二月，庚寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，庚寅朔，出现日食。
English: February, Geng Yin Shuo, a solar eclipse.

古文：初，齐显祖命群官刊定魏《麟趾格》为《齐律》，久而不成。
现代文：当初，文宣帝下令群臣刊定魏朝的《麟趾格》为《齐律》，过了很久还没有完成。
English: At first, Emperor Wenxuan ordered his courtiers to publish the Wei Dynasty's "Linti Ge" as "Qi Lu," but it has not been completed for a long time.

古文：时军国多事，决狱罕依律文，相承谓之 变法从事 。
现代文：这时军务和国家的事情很多，叛决案件很少依据法律条文，习惯上叫做 变法从事。 
English: At this time, there were a lot of military and national affairs, and cases of treason were rarely based on legal provisions, and were customarily referred to as "changing the law."

古文：世祖即位，思革其弊，乃督修律令者，至是而成，《律》十二篇，《令》四十卷。
现代文：武成帝即位后，想革除这种弊病，于是督促修订法律条令，这才制订了《律》十二篇，《令》四十卷。
English: After Emperor Wucheng ascended the throne, he wanted to eradicate this evil, so he urged the revision of laws and regulations, which led to the formulation of 12 "Laws" and 40 volumes of "Orders."

古文：其刑名有五：一曰死，重者轘之，次枭首，次斩，次绞；二曰流，投边裔为兵；三曰刑，自五岁至一岁；四曰鞭，自百至四十；五曰杖，自三十至十；凡十五等。
现代文：刑法的名目有五种：第一是死，罪重的车裂，依次是割下头示众、斩杀、绞死；第二是流，充军到边域；第三是刑，刑期从五年到一年不等；第四是鞭，从一百到四十下不等；第五是杖，从三十到十下不等；一共分十五等。
English: There are five categories of criminal law: the first is death, the most serious crime, followed by beheading, beheading, and hanging; the second is exile, joining the army to the frontier; the third is punishment, with a sentence ranging from five years to one year; the fourth is the whip, ranging from one hundred to forty; the fifth is the cane, ranging from thirty to ten; a total of fifteen grades.

古文：其流内官及老、小、阉、痴并过失应赎者，皆以绢代金。
现代文：凡是流放去外地的官员以及年老、年幼、太监、痴呆和犯有过失可以赎罪的，都允许用绢代替罚金。
English: All officials who are exiled to foreign countries, as well as the old, the young, the eunuchs, the demented, and those who have committed faults that can be atoned for, are allowed to use shackles instead of fines.

古文：三月，辛酉，班行之，因大赦。
现代文：三月，辛酉，《律》、《令》颁布实行，大赦在此以前的犯人。
English: In March, the "Law" and "Order" were promulgated and implemented, and the amnesty for former prisoners began.

古文：是后为吏者始守法令。
现代文：自此以后官吏才按照法律办案。
English: Since then, officials have been handling cases in accordance with the law.

古文：又敕仕门子弟常讲习之，故齐人多晓法。
现代文：又下令官吏家庭的子弟经常学习，所以北齐人都知道法律。
English: He also ordered the children of official families to study regularly, so that the people of North Qi knew the law.

古文：又令民十八受田输租调，二十充兵，六十免力役，六十六还田，免租调。
现代文：又命令老百姓中满十八岁的授给田地并交纳赋税，二十岁的当兵，六十岁可以免除劳役，六十六岁时交还田地，免去赋税。
English: He also ordered that the common people who had reached the age of 18 should be granted fields and pay taxes, the 20-year-old should serve as a soldier, the 60-year-old could be exempted from labor service, and the 66-year-old should return the fields and be exempted from taxes.

古文：一夫受露田八十亩，妇人四十亩，奴婢依良人，牛受六十亩。
现代文：男子一人授给八十亩露田，妇女授给四十亩，奴婢授给同样的亩数，有一头耕牛的增授六十亩。
English: A man was awarded eighty mu of field, a woman was awarded forty mu, a slave was awarded the same number of mu, and a cow was awarded an additional sixty mu.

古文：大率一夫一妇调绢一匹，绵八两，垦租二石，义租五斗；奴婢准良人之半；牛调二尺，垦租一斗，义租五升。
现代文：大致一对夫妇的赋税是一匹绢、八两棉，垦租二石，义租五斗。奴婢是平民的一半，一头牛征赋税二尺绢，垦租一斗，义租五升。
English: The tax for a couple is generally one mule, eighty-two cottons, mule rent two stones, and charity rent five bucks. Servants and maids are half of the commoners, and a cow is taxed two shaku, mule rent one bucks, and charity rent five liters.

古文：垦租送台，义租送郡以备水旱。
现代文：垦租上缴中央，义租缴给所在郡以防水旱灾年。
English: Rent shall be submitted to the central government, and charity rent shall be paid to the county to prevent drought.

古文：己巳，齐群盗田子礼等数十人，共劫太师彭城景思王浟为主，诈称使者，径向浟第，至内室，称敕，牵浟上马，临以白刃，欲引向南殿，浟大呼不从，盗杀之。
现代文：已巳，北齐的田子礼等数十名盗贼，要裹胁太师彭城景思王高当首领，诈称是使者，去到高的宅第，进了内室，说是皇帝的命令，拉高上马，用刀对着他，要他领着去皇宫的南殿。高大叫不肯服从，被盗贼杀死。
English: At this time, Northern Qi's Tian Zili and dozens of other thieves wanted to make the intimidator Pengcheng Jingsi Wang Gao their leader. They falsely claimed to be messengers, went to Gao's mansion, entered the inner room, said it was the emperor's order, pulled Gao onto a horse, pointed a knife at him, and demanded that he lead them to the south hall of the imperial palace. Gao shouted that he would not obey, and was killed by the thieves.

古文：庚辰，周初令百官执笏。
现代文：庚辰，北周第一次令百官上朝时手执 朝笏 。
English: Geng Chen, for the first time in the history of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, ordered hundreds of officials to hold the morning meal in the morning.

古文：齐以斛律光为司徒，武兴王普为尚书左仆射。
现代文：北齐任命斛律光为司徒，武兴王高普为尚书左仆射。
English: The Northern Qi appointed Zou Liguang as a disciple, and Wu Xing Wang Gaopu as Shang Shushi's left-hand man.

古文：普，归彦之兄子也。
现代文：高普是高归彦的侄子。
English: Gao Pu is Gao Guihiko's nephew.

古文：甲申，以冯翊王润为司空。
现代文：甲申，任命冯翊王高润为司空。
English: Kaishin, appointed Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：夏，四月，辛卯，齐主使兼散骑常侍皇甫亮来聘。
现代文：夏季四月，辛卯，北齐武成帝派兼散骑常侍皇甫亮来陈朝聘问。
English: In the summer of April, Xinwu, the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng faction and horseback riding attendant of the Emperor Fu Liang came to the Chen Dynasty for an interview.

古文：庚子，周主遣使来聘。
现代文：庚子，北周武帝派使者来陈朝聘问。
English: Emperor Zhou of the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent an envoy to the Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：癸卯，周以邓公河南窦炽为大宗伯。
现代文：癸卯，北周任命邓公河南窦炽为大宗伯。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Deng Gong Henan Dou Blaze as the Grand Patriarch.

古文：五月，壬戌，封世宗之子贤为毕公。
现代文：五月，壬戌，封明帝的儿子宇文贤为毕公。
English: In May, Uwen Xian, the son of Emperor Fengming, was crowned as Bi Gong.

古文：甲子，齐主还鄴。
现代文：甲子，北齐武成帝回邺城。
English: Emperor Wu Cheng of Northern Qi returned to Lushan.

古文：壬午，齐以赵郡王睿为录尚书事，前司徒娄睿为太尉。
现代文：壬午，北齐任命赵郡王高睿为录尚书事，以前的司徒娄睿为太尉。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, the Northern Qi appointed Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui as the recorder, and the former Siu Tuo Rui as the first lieutenant.

古文：甲申，以段韶为太师。
现代文：甲申，任命段韶为太师。
English: Gao Shin, appointed Duan Yu as Grand Master.

古文：丁亥，以任城王湝为大将军。
现代文：丁亥，任命任城王高为大将军。
English: Dinghai, appointed Ren Shingwanggao as the general.

古文：壬辰，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：壬辰，北齐武成帝去晋阳。
English: In Imjin, Northern Qi Emperor Wu Rongcheng went to Jinyang.

古文：周以太保达奚武为同州刺史。
现代文：北周任命太保达奚武为同州刺史。
English: North Zhou appointed Taibao Dazhongwu as the governor of the same province.

古文：六月，齐主杀乐陵王百年。
现代文：六月，北齐武成帝杀死乐陵王高百年。
English: In June, the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng killed Le Ling Wang Gao.

古文：时白虹围日再重，又横贯而不达，赤星见，齐主欲以百年厌之。
现代文：当时太阳周围有两道白虹，横贯而不相通，赤星出现，武成帝想用高百年的性命来驱除灾异现象。
English: At that time, there were two white rainbows around the sun, which intersected but did not connect, and the red star appeared. Emperor Wu Chengdi wanted to use his hundred-year-long life to drive away the catastrophic phenomenon.

古文：会博陵人贾德胄教百年书，百年尝作数敕字，德胄封以奏之。
现代文：恰巧博陵人贾德胄教高百年写字，高百年曾经写了几个 敕 字。贾德胄把它封好奏报给武成帝。
English: It so happened that Jia Deyu, a native of Boling, had been teaching Gao Guo to write for a hundred years. Gao Guo had once written a few  characters. Jia Deyu sealed it and reported it to Emperor Wu Cheng.

古文：帝发怒，使召百年。
现代文：武成帝看后大怒，派人召来高百年。
English: Emperor Wucheng lost his temper and sent someone to summon the centenarian.

古文：百年自知不免，割带夬留与其妃斛律氏，见帝于凉风堂。
现代文：高百年自知免不了被治罪，便割下佩带上的玉留给妃子斛律氏，在凉风堂见到武成帝。
English: At the age of a hundred, knowing that he would inevitably be punished, he cut off the jade on his belt and left it to his concubine, the Lady of the Law, and met Emperor Wu Chengdi in the Hall of Cool Winds.

古文：使百年书敕字，验与德胄所奏相似，遣左右乱捶之，又令曳之绕堂行且捶，所过血皆遍地，气息将尽，乃斩之，弃诸池，池水尽赤。
现代文：武成帝叫高百年写 敕 字，证实字迹和贾德胄所奏报的相似，于是命令侍从对他乱打，还拖着他绕凉风堂边走边打，经过的地方遍地是血，临断气时，将他杀死，把尸体仍进水池，池水都染红了。
English: Emperor Wucheng asked Gao Shicentai to write a curse word to confirm that the handwriting was similar to the one reported by Jia Degu, so he ordered his attendants to beat him indiscriminately. He also dragged him around the cool breeze hall and beat him while walking. The place he passed was covered with blood. When he died, he killed him and put the body into the pond. The pond water turned red.

古文：妃把夬哀号不食，月馀亦卒，夬犹在手，拳不可开；其父光自擘之，乃开。
现代文：妃子拿着玉哀叫绝食，一个多月后也死去，玉还在手里，紧握成拳无法掰开；她的父亲斛律光亲自去掰，才掰开。
English: The concubine went on a hunger strike with the jade mourning, and died more than a month later. The jade was still in her hands, clenched into a fist and could not be pried open; her father, Baliguang, went to pry it open himself.

古文：庚寅，周改御伯为纳言。
现代文：庚寅，北周把御伯改变纳言。
English: Goi-in and Northern Zhou changed the imperial edict.

古文：初，周太祖之从贺拔岳在关中也，遣人迎晋公护于晋阳。
现代文：当初，北周太祖在关中追随贺拔岳时，曾派人到晋阳迎来晋公宇文护。
English: In the beginning, when Northern Zhou Taizu was following He Batur in Guanzhong, he sent someone to Jinyang to welcome Jinkong Yu Wengu.

古文：护母阎氏及周主之姑皆留晋阳，齐人以配中山宫。
现代文：宇文护的母亲阎氏和北周国主的姑母留在晋阳，北齐人把她们安置在中山宫。
English: Yu Wenju's mother, Yan, and the aunt of the Northern Zhou sovereign stayed in Jinyang, and the Northern Qi people placed them in Zhongshan Palace.

古文：及护用事，遣间使入齐求之，莫知音息。
现代文：宇文护当权以后，派人到北齐去寻找她们，得不到音讯。
English: After Uwenguo came to power, he sent someone to Beiqi to look for them, but they were never heard from again.

古文：齐遣使者至玉壁，求通互市。
现代文：北齐派使者到玉壁，要求开通和北周之间的贸易来往。
English: Northern Qi sent an envoy to Yubi to request the opening of trade between Northern Qi and Northern Zhou.

古文：护欲访求母、姑，使司马下大夫尹公正至玉壁，与之言，使者甚悦。
现代文：宇文护想访求母亲和姑母的下落，便派司马下大夫尹公正去玉壁商谈，北齐的使者非常高兴。
English: Uwen Bao wanted to visit and inquire about the whereabouts of his mother and aunt, so he sent Sima's subordinate doctor Yin Zhengyi to negotiate with Yubi. The envoy from Beiqi was very happy.

古文：勋州刺史韦孝宽获关东人，复纵之，因致书为言西朝欲通好之意。
现代文：勋州刺史韦孝宽捉到关东人，又把他们放掉，还写信给北周表示愿意和对方友好相处。
English: Shwe Takahiro, the governor of Honshu, caught the Kanto people and released them. He also wrote to Northern Zhou to express his willingness to get along with the other side.

古文：是时，周人以前攻晋阳不得志，谋与突厥再伐齐。
现代文：这时，北周因为以前进攻晋阳没有达到目的，准备联合突厥再次攻打北齐。
English: At this time, the Northern Zhou, because the previous attack on Jinyang did not achieve its goal, prepared to unite with the Turks to attack the Northern Qi again.

古文：齐主闻之，大惧，许遣护母西归，且求通好，先遣其姑归。秋，八月，丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：武成帝听到后十分害怕，于是答允送回宇文护的母亲，请求双方和好，先把宇文护的姑母送回去。秋季，八月，丁亥朔，发生日食。
English: Emperor Wucheng was very afraid after hearing this, so he agreed to send back Uwen's mother, and asked both sides to make peace and send back Uwen's aunt first. In autumn, August, Dinghai New Year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：周遣柱国杨忠将兵，会突厥伐齐，至北河而还。
现代文：北周派柱国杨忠会同突厥讨伐北齐，兵到北河就返回了。
English: Yang Zhong, the pillar state of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, joined with the Turks to fight against the Northern Qi, and the soldiers returned to the North River.

古文：戊子，周以齐公宪为雍州牧，宇文贵为大司徒。
现代文：戊子，北周任命齐公宇文宪为雍州牧，宇文贵为大司徒。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Qi Gong Uwen Xian as the Yongzhou Patriarch and Uwen Gui as the Grand Patriarch.

古文：九月，丁巳，以卫公直为大司马。
现代文：九月，丁巳，任命卫公宇文直为大司空。
English: In September, Ding Si appointed Wei Gong U Wenzhi as Daishi Kuo.

古文：追录佐命元功，封开府仪同三司陇西公李昞为唐公，太驭中大夫长乐公若干凤为徐公。
现代文：追录当初辅佐君主的元勋功臣，封开府仪同三司陇西公李为唐公，太驭中大夫长乐公若干凤为徐公。
English: The following is a list of the original honorees and meritorious vassals who assisted the monarch at the time. Tang Gong Li was awarded the title of Fukaifu Yi and the three titles of Shensi Gong Li, and Xu Gong was awarded the title of Taizhu Zhongdafu Changle Gong and several titles of Feng.

古文：昞，虎之子；凤，惠之子也。
现代文：李是李虎的儿子，若干凤是若干惠的儿子。
English: Li is the son of Li Hu, and Guofeng is the son of Guofeng Hui.

古文：乙丑，齐主封其子绰为南阳王，俨为东平王。
现代文：乙丑，北齐武成帝封儿子高绰为南阳王，高俨为东平王。
English: Second Ugly, North Qi Emperor Wu Cheng's son Gao Zhuo was the king of Nanyang, and Gao Yao was the king of Dongping.

古文：俨，太子之母弟也。
现代文：高俨是太子的同母弟。
English: Takahata is the younger half-brother of the Crown Prince.

古文：突厥寇齐幽州，众十馀万，入长城，大掠而还。
现代文：突厥入侵北齐的幽州，共有十多万人，进入长城，在大肆抢掠后退去。
English: The Turks invaded Yuzhou in northern Qi, a total of more than one hundred thousand people, entered the Great Wall, and retreated after plundering.

古文：周皇姑之归也，齐主遣人为晋公护母作书，言护幼时数事，又寄其所着锦袍，以为信验。
现代文：北周武帝的姑母回去时，北齐武成帝派人代晋公宇文护的母亲写了回信，信中说到宇文护年幼时的几件事，还寄去自己穿的锦袍，作为证明。
English: When the aunt of the Northern Zhouwu Emperor returned, the Northern Qi Wucheng Emperor sent someone to write a reply on behalf of the mother of Jin Gong Uwen You. The letter mentioned several things about Uwen You when he was young, and also sent the brocade robe he was wearing as proof.

古文：且曰： 吾属千载之运，逢大齐之德，矜老开恩，许得相见。
现代文：信上说： 我遇到千载难逢的运气，蒙受大齐的恩德，怜悯我年老特别开恩，允许我们母子见面。
English: The letter said: I have met with a once-in-a-lifetime luck, received great grace, pity my old age, especially gracious, allowing our mother and son to meet.

古文：禽善草木，母子相依。
现代文：就是禽兽草木，也都母子相依为命。
English: Even animals and plants, mother and child are dependent on each other for life.

古文：吾有可罪，与汝分离！
现代文：我犯了什么罪孽，竟会和你分离！
English: What sin have I committed that I should be separated from you?

古文：今复何福，还望见汝！言此悲喜，死而更苏。
现代文：现在又得到什么福气，还能回去和你相见！说到这些，悲喜交集，死而复生。
English: What a blessing to be able to go back and see you again! Speaking of which, it's a bittersweet feeling to be back from the dead.

古文：世间所有，求皆可得，母子异国，何处可求！
现代文：世上所有的东西，只要追求都能得到，母子分处异国，又能向哪里求得团聚！
English: The things of the world can be obtained as long as the pursuit of ideas; mother and son are separated into two countries, where can you see this situation!

古文：假汝贵极王公，富过山海，有一老母，八十之年，飘然千里，死亡旦夕，不得一朝暂见，不得一日同处，寒不得汝衣，饥不得汝食。汝虽穷荣极盛，光耀世间，于吾何益！
现代文：即使你的尊贵到达王公，富有超过山海，但有个年已八十的老母亲，还飘泊在千里之外，生命在旦夕之间，得不到一天短暂的相见，得不到一天的共同生活，寒冷而得不到你的衣服，饥饿而得不到你的饮食，你虽然极其荣华富贵，光辉照耀人间，对我有什么好处！
English: Even if your dignity reaches the prince, rich beyond the mountains and seas, but there is an eighty-year-old mother, still drifting thousands of miles away, life is in the twilight, can not get a day's brief meeting, can not get a day's common life, cold but can not get your clothes, hunger but can not get your food, although you are extremely glorious and rich, shine on the world, what good is it to me!

古文：吾今日之前，汝既不得申其供养，事往何论；今日以后，吾之残命，唯系于汝尔。
现代文：在今天以前，你没有尽供养我的本份，事情已过就不必再说了；从今以后，我的余生就依赖于你了。
English: Until today, you have not done your share to provide for me, and now that it is over, there is no need to say anything; from now on, I will depend on you for the rest of my life.

古文：戴天履地，中有鬼神，勿云冥昧，而可欺负！ 
现代文：天地之间，中有鬼神，不要以为天地冥冥，可以欺骗负心！ 
English: Between heaven and earth, there are ghosts and gods. Don't think that heaven and earth are invisible and can deceive the negative mind!

古文：护得书，悲不自胜。
现代文：宇文护接到书信，忍不住悲痛。
English: After receiving the letter, Uwen couldn't help but feel sad.

古文：复书曰： 区宇分崩，遭遇灾祸，违离膝下，三十五年。
现代文：复信说： 天下四分五袭，遭遇灾祸，离开母亲，已经三十五年。
English: The reply said: It has been thirty-five years since I left my mother, when the world was torn asunder and disaster struck.

古文：受形禀气，皆知母子，谁同萨保，如此不教！
现代文：禀性承受天地自然之气，都知道母子之情，谁象我萨保一般，这样不孝！
English: Those who are hardy enough to bear the natural atmosphere of heaven and earth, know the feelings of mother and child, and who are like me, Sabo, are not filial!

古文：子为公侯，母为俘隶，暑不见母暑，寒不见母寒，衣不知有无，食不知饥饱，泯如天地之外，无由暂闻。
现代文：儿子是公侯，母亲却是被俘虏的奴隶，热天看不见母亲受暑，冷天看不见母亲挨冻，不知道有没有衣穿，不知道吃得饱不饱，踪迹消失在天地以外，无从得到一点音讯。
English: The son is a prince, but the mother is a captive slave. On a hot day, he cannot see his mother suffer from the heat, on a cold day, he cannot see his mother freeze, he does not know if she is wearing clothes, he does not know if she has had enough to eat, the trace disappears beyond heaven and earth, and there is no way to get a bit of information.

古文：分怀冤酷，终此一生，死若有知，冀奉见于泉下耳！
现代文：分别怀有冤屈和惨痛，结束一生以后，身后如果有知，希望能在九泉之下侍奉母亲！
English: They have grievances and pain, respectively. After the end of their lives, if there is knowledge behind them, they hope to be able to serve their mother under the nine springs!

古文：不谓齐朝解网，惠以德音，磨敦、四姑，并话矜放。
现代文：不意齐朝网开一面，赐给好消息，母亲和四姑母，获得怜悯允许释放。
English: Unintentionally, Qi Chao opened a page on the net and gave the good news that the mother and fourth aunt were pardoned and allowed to be released.

古文：初闻此旨，魂爽飞霸占，号天叩地，不能自胜。
现代文：刚听到这道诏旨时，连魂魄都变得清朗而飞升起来，呼天抢地，不由自己。
English: When I just heard this edict, even my soul became clear and soared up, shouting to the heavens and grabbing the earth, all by myself.

古文：齐朝霈然之恩，既已沾洽，有家有国，信义为本，伏度来期，已应有日。
现代文：现在受到齐朝雨露般恩泽的滋润，家庭和国家，应该以信义为根本，估计母亲归来之期，已经不远。
English: Now, nourished by the rain and dew-like grace of the Qi Dynasty, the family and the country should take faith and righteousness as the foundation, and it is estimated that the period of the mother's return is not far away.

古文：一得奉见慈颜，永毕生愿。
现代文：一旦能够见到母亲慈祥的面容，永远了却我毕生的愿望。
English: At that time, I will be able to see your kind face, which is my lifelong wish.

古文：生死肉骨，岂过今恩；负山载岳，未足胜荷。 
现代文：死者复生，白骨长肉，怎能比得上今天这样的恩情；象背负大山高岳，真是担当不起。 
English: The resurrection of the dead, long-fleshed and white-boned, how can it be compared to today's grace; it's like carrying a huge mountain on your back, you really can't handle it.

古文：齐人留护母，使更与护书，邀护重报，往返再三。
现代文：北齐人留下宇文护的母亲，再次给宇文护去信，希望宇文护再次回信，这样往返了好几次。
English: The North Qi people left the mother of Uwen Zhou and sent a letter to Uwen Zhou again, hoping that Uwen Zhou would reply again, and they went back and forth several times.

古文：时段韶拒突厥军于塞下，齐主遣黄门徐世荣乘传赍周书问韶。
现代文：当时段韶在边塞抵御突厥的军队，北齐武成帝派黄门郎徐世荣乘驿车带了北周的书信去问段韶的意见。
English: At that time, Duan Zhou was defending the border fortress against the Turkish army. Emperor Wu Cheng of Northern Qi sent Huang Men Lang Xu Shirong to ask Duan Zhou's opinion with a letter from Northern Zhou.

古文：韶以 周人反覆，本无信义，比晋阳之役，其事可知。
现代文：段韶表示 周人反复无常，本来就没有信义，比照晋阳之役，事情就明白了。
English: Duan Yu said that Zhou people are capricious, and there is no loyalty in the first place. Comparing with the Jinyang Campaign, things become clear.

古文：护外托为相，其实主也。
现代文：宇文护在表面上仅仅是相国，实际上是一国之主。
English: On the surface, Umenomori was merely a vassal, but in reality he was the ruler of a country.

古文：既为母请和，不遣一介之使。
现代文：既然为了母亲请求和好，却不派一个使者来。
English: He did not send a messenger to ask for peace for his mother's sake.

古文：若据移书，即送其母，恐示之以弱。
现代文：如果根据他送来的书信，就把他的母亲送回去，恐怕会给对方留下我们软弱的印象。
English: If we send his mother back on the basis of the letter he sent, I'm afraid it will give the other side the impression that we are weak.

古文：不如且外许之，待和亲坚定，然后遣之未晚。 
现代文：不如暂且对外表示答允，等和睦亲善的事完全肯定以后，再把他的母亲送回去也不晚。 
English: It would be better for him to express his consent to the outside world for the time being, and it would not be too late to send his mother back after the matter of amity and goodwill is fully confirmed.

古文：齐主不听，即遣之。
现代文：武成帝不听段韶的意见，立即把宇文护的母亲送回长安。
English: Emperor Wucheng did not listen to Duan Zang's advice and immediately sent the mother of Wu Wenzhou back to Chang'an.

古文：阎氏至周，举朝称庆，周主为之大赦。
现代文：阎氏回到北周，满朝欢庆，北周武帝为此在国内大赦。
English: When Yan returned to Northern Zhou, the whole dynasty celebrated with joy, and Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou granted an amnesty in the country.

古文：凡所资奉，穷极华盛。每四时伏腊，周主帅诸亲戚行家人之礼，称觞上寿。
现代文：他对阎氏所供奉的一切，美好丰盛到了极点，每逢四季的节日，武帝带领所有亲戚不行国礼而行家礼，举杯祝阎氏长寿。
English: Everything that he offered to Yan, was beautiful and rich to the extreme. Every four seasons' festival, Emperor Wu led all his relatives not to perform the national salute, but to perform the family salute, raising a glass to wish Yan a long life.

古文：突厥自幽州还，留屯塞北，更集诸部兵，遣使告周，欲与共击齐如前约。
现代文：突厥从幽州返回，屯兵在塞北，进一步召集各部落的军队，派使者告诉北周，打算象以前所约定那样共同进攻北齐。
English: The Turks returned from Yuzhou and set up a garrison in northern Sichuan. They further gathered the troops of various tribes and sent an envoy to tell northern Zhou that they intended to jointly attack northern Qi as previously agreed.

古文：闰月，乙巳，突厥寇齐幽州。
现代文：闰月，乙巳，突厥入侵北齐幽州。
English: At the time of the leap month, the Turks invaded Northern Qi Yuzhou.

古文：晋公护新得其母，未欲伐齐；又恐负突厥约，更生边患，不得已，征二十四军及左右厢散隶秦、陇、巴、蜀之兵并羌、胡内附者，凡二十万人。
现代文：晋公宇文护刚迎来了母亲，不想进攻北齐；但又怕违背了和突厥的约定，反而发生边患，不得已，征召关中的府兵二十四军、左右厢的禁卫兵及其隶属的秦、陇、巴、蜀等地的军队，加上归附的羌人、胡人等，一共二十万人。
English: Uwen Rong, the prince of Jin, had just welcomed his mother and did not want to attack Northern Qi. However, he was afraid of violating the agreement with the Turks and causing a border crisis. As a last resort, he conscripted the 24th Army of Guanzhong, the Imperial Guards of the left and right compartments, and the armies of Qin, Qi, Ba, Shu, and other places, as well as the subordinate Qin people and Hu people, a total of 200,000 people.

古文：冬，十月，甲子，周主授护斧钺于庙庭；丁卯，亲劳军于沙苑；癸酉，还官。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲子，北周武帝在朝廷授给宇文护斧钺；丁卯，亲自到沙苑慰劳军队；癸酉，回宫。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Zhou of the Northern Zhou Dynasty awarded Yuwen with an axe in the imperial court; Dingwu personally went to Shayuan to comfort the labor army; Zou returned to the palace.

古文：护军至潼关，遣柱国尉迟迥帅精兵十万为前锋，趣洛阳，大将军权景宣帅山南之兵趣悬瓠，少师杨檦出轵关。
现代文：宇文护的军队抵达潼关，派柱国尉迟迥领十万精兵做前锋，向洛阳进发，大将军权景宣率领荆州、襄阳的兵向悬瓠进发，少师杨进攻轵关。
English: The army of Yu Wenzhu arrived at Shaoguan, and sent the column captain Zhisheng to lead 100,000 elite soldiers as the vanguard to advance to Luoyang, the general Quan Jingxuan led the soldiers from Jingzhou and Yangyang to advance to Xuanfan, and the minor division Yang attacked Shaoguan.

古文：周迪复出东兴，宣城太守钱肃镇东兴，以城降迪。
现代文：周迪再次进攻东兴岭，宣城太守钱肃镇守东兴，献出城池向周迪投降。
English: Zhou Di attacked Dongxingling again, and Qian Su Zhen, the governor of Xuancheng, defended Dongxing and surrendered the city to Zhou Di.

古文：吴州刺史陈详将兵击之，详兵大败，迪众复振。
现代文：吴州刺史陈详领兵攻击周迪，陈详的军队大败，周迪的部众又振作起来。
English: In Wuzhou, Chen Zhaoxi led an army to attack Zhou Di. Chen Zhaoxi's army suffered a crushing defeat, and Zhou Di's subordinates took heart.

古文：南豫州刺史西丰脱侯周敷帅所部击之，至定川，与迪对垒。
现代文：南豫州刺史西丰脱侯周敷率领所属部队去攻打周迪，抵达定川，和周迪两军对垒。
English: Zhou Shiki, Marquis of Xifeng in southern Yuzhou, led his troops to attack Zhou Di, arrived in Dingchuan, and confronted Zhou Di's two armies.

古文：迪绐敷曰： 吾昔与弟戮力同心，岂规相害！
现代文：周迪欺骗周敷说： 我以前和弟弟同心协力，怎会谋划加害于你！
English: Zhou Di deceived Zhou Shiki and said: I used to work together with my brother, how could I plan to harm you!

古文：今愿伏罪还朝，因弟披露心腑，先乞挺身共盟。 
现代文：现在我愿意认罪归顺朝廷，乘弟弟前来时表露我心里的想法，先请你挺身而出和我一起盟誓。 
English: Now I am willing to plead guilty and submit to the court. I will use my younger brother to come forward and reveal my inner thoughts. First, I would like to ask you to come forward and swear an oath with me.

古文：敷许之，方登坛，为迪所杀。
现代文：周敷答允了，刚走上举行盟誓的土台，就被周迪杀死。
English: Zhou Shiji agreed, and as soon as he stepped onto the platform to take the oath, he was killed by Zhou Di.

古文：陈宝应据建安、晋安二郡，水陆为栅，以拒章昭达。
现代文：陈宝应占据晋安和建安两郡，在水路和陆路修起栅栏，用来抗拒章昭达。
English: Chen Bao should occupy the two counties of Jin'an and Jian'an, and build fences on waterways and land routes to resist Zhang Zhaoda.

古文：昭达与战，不利，因据上流，命军士伐木为筏，施拍其上。
现代文：章昭达和他打仗，很不顺利。因此占据江水上游，命令军士砍树木造木筏，筏上配备了 拍竿 。
English: Zhang Zhaoda fought with him, but it did not go well. Therefore, he occupied the upper reaches of the river and ordered the sergeant to cut down trees to build a raft. The raft was equipped with a pole.

古文：会大雨江涨，昭达放筏冲宝应水栅，尽坏之，又出兵攻其步军。
现代文：恰巧大雨以后江水猛涨，章昭达放木筏顺流而下，冲撞陈宝应在水中设立的栅栏，全部破坏。又出兵进攻陈宝应的步军。
English: After a heavy rain, the river water surged, and Zhang Zhaoda floated a raft down the river, crashing into the fence Chen Bao should have set up in the water, destroying everything. He also sent troops to attack Chen Bao's infantry.

古文：方合战，上遣将军余孝顷自海道适至，并力乘之。
现代文：正当双方崐会战时，陈文帝派将军余孝顷从海路赶到，和章昭达合力围攻。
English: Just as the two sides were about to go to war, Emperor Chen sent General Yu Xiaoha by sea to join forces with Zhang Zhaoda to lay siege.

古文：十一月，己丑，宝应大败，逃至莆口，谓其子曰： 早从虞公计，不至今日。 
现代文：十一月，已丑，陈宝应大败，逃到莆口，对儿子说： 如果早听虞寄的计谋，不致于象今天这样。 
English: In November, already ugly, Chen Bao suffered a crushing defeat and fled to Hekou, saying to his son: If you had listened to the schemes sent by Yu earlier, it wouldn't be like this today.

古文：昭达追擒之，并擒留异及其族党。送建康，斩之。
现代文：章昭达追到将他捉住，还一并抓获留异和他的族党，解送建康，将他们斩首。
English: Zhang Zhaoda chased him and caught him. He also captured Rui Yi and his clan party, sent them to Jiankang, and beheaded them.

古文：异子贞臣以尚主得免，宝应宾客皆死。
现代文：留异的儿子留贞臣因为娶公主为妻，被免罪；陈宝应的宾客都被处死。
English: Rui Zhenchen, the son of Rui Diao, was exonerated for marrying a princess; Chen Baoying's guests were all executed.

古文：上闻虞寄尝谏宝应，命昭达礼遣诣建康。
现代文：陈文帝听说虞寄曾经规劝过陈宝应，于是命章昭达礼请虞寄到建康来。
English: Chen Wendi heard that Yu Ying had once persuaded Chen Baoying, so he asked Yu Ying to come to Jiankang.

古文：既见，劳之曰： 管宁无羌？ 
现代文：见面时，陈文帝慰问他说： 问候管宁的身体健康。 
English: When they met, Chen Wendi consoled him, saying: "I wish Gongning good health.

古文：以为衡阳王掌书记。
现代文：任用他为衡阳王的书记。
English: He was appointed as the secretary of King Hengyang.

古文：周晋公护进屯弘农。
现代文：北周晋公宇文护进屯弘农。
English: North Zhou Jin Gong and Uwen Guo entered Tunhongong.

古文：甲午，尉迟迥洛阳，雍州牧齐公宪、同州刺史达奚武、汉州总管王雄军于邙山。
现代文：尉迟迥包围了洛阳，雍州牧齐公宇文宪、同州刺史达奚武、泾州总管王雄驻军在邙山。
English: Luoyang was besieged by the Wei army, Yongzhou was garrisoned in Shaoshan by the Mu Qigong Yu Wen Xian, Tongzhou was garrisoned by the Zhishida Zhenwu, and Zhangzhou was garrisoned by the Wang Xiong.

古文：戊戌，齐主使兼散骑常侍刘逖来聘。
现代文：戊戌，北齐国主派遣兼散骑常侍刘逖来陈朝聘问。
English: Wu Xi, the ruler of Northern Qi, dispatched Liu Xi, a knight-errant and his personal attendant, to pay a courtesy call on Emperor Chen.

古文：初，周杨檦为邵州刺史，镇捍东境二十馀年，数与齐战，未尝不捷，由是轻之。
现代文：起初，北周杨做邵州刺史，镇守捍卫东边国境二十多年，好几次和北齐打仗，战无不胜，因此轻敌。
English: At first, the northern Zhou Yang was the history of Shaozhou, defending the eastern border for more than 20 years, several times fighting with the northern Qi, invincible, and therefore a light enemy.

古文：既出轵关，独引兵深入，又不设备。
现代文：这次出了轵关，独自领兵深入敌方，又不设防。
English: This time, he went out of the pass and led the soldiers deep into the enemy without setting up a defense.

古文：甲辰，齐太尉娄睿将兵奄至，大破剽军，檦遂降齐。
现代文：甲辰，北齐太尉娄睿领兵突然来到，大败杨的军队，杨便向北齐投降。
English: Jia Chen, Northern Qi's First Lieutenant Zou Rui, suddenly arrived to lead the troops and defeated Yang's army. Yang then surrendered to Northern Qi.

古文：权景宣围悬瓠，十二月，齐豫州道行台、豫州刺史太原王士良、永州刺史萧世怡并以城降之。
现代文：权景宣围困悬瓠，十二月，北齐豫州道行台、豫州刺史太原王高士良、永州刺史萧世怡一起献城投降北周。
English: The siege of Quanjing was imminent. In December, Northern Qi, Yuzhou, Daogongdae, Yuzhou, Taiyuan, Wang Gao Shiliang, and Yongzhou, Xiao Shiyi, surrendered to Northern Zhou.

古文：景宣使开府郭彦守豫州，谢彻守永州，送士良、世怡及降卒千人于长安。
现代文：权景宣任命开府郭彦守豫州，谢彻守永州，把高士良、萧世怡和降兵一千人送到长安。
English: Quan Jingxuan appointed Kaifu Guo Yan to guard Yuzhou and Xie Che to guard Yongzhou, and sent Gao Shiliang, Xiao Shiyi and a thousand soldiers to Chang'an.

古文：周人为土山、地道以攻洛阳，三旬不克。
现代文：周人筑土山、挖地道攻打洛阳，三十天也没有攻下来。
English: Zhou people built mountains and dug tunnels to attack Luoyang, but they did not attack Luoyang for 30 days.

古文：晋公护命诸将堑断河阳路，遏齐救兵，然后同攻洛阳；诸将以为齐兵必不敢出，唯张斥候而已。
现代文：晋公宇文护命令部将们挖掘切断河阳的道路，阻止北齐的援军，然后一同攻打洛阳；部将们以为齐兵一定不敢出城，所以只派人侦察而已。
English: Jin Gongyu ordered the generals of the Civilian Protection Department to dig up and cut off the road to Heyang, prevent the reinforcement of Beiqi, and then attack Luoyang together; the generals thought that the Qi soldiers would not dare to leave the city, so they only sent people to reconnaissance.

古文：齐遣兰陵王长恭、大将军斛律光救洛阳，畏周兵之强，未敢进。
现代文：北齐派兰陵王高长恭、大将军斛律光救援洛阳，因为惧怕北周的兵力强大，不敢前进。
English: Northern Qi sent Lanling Wang Gao Changgong and General Bao Riguang to rescue Luoyang, because they were afraid of Northern Zhou's strong military force and did not dare to advance.

古文：齐主召并州刺史段韶，谓曰： 洛阳危急，今欲遣王救之。
现代文：北齐国主召见并州刺史段韶，对他说： 洛阳危急，现在派兰陵王去援救。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi was summoned to see the governor of Anhui Province, Zhang Shiduan, and told him: Luoyang is in a critical situation, now send Lanling Wang to the rescue.

古文：突厥在北，复须镇御，如何？ 
现代文：突厥在北面，也要加以防御，怎么办？ 
English: What about the Turks in the north, who also need to be defended?

古文：对曰： 北虏侵边，事等疥癣。
现代文：段韶回答说： 北虏侵犯边境，只不过象身上长了疥疮皮癣。
English: Duan Rong replied, "The North Korean invaders violated the border, but the elephant is covered with scabies.

古文：今西邻窥逼，乃腹心之病，请奉诏南行。 
现代文：现在西边的邻国对我们窥伺进逼，这才是心腹之患，我愿意奉陛下的诏命到南方去。 
English: Now that our neighbors to the west are spying on us, this is a problem close to my heart. I am willing to follow His Majesty's edict and go to the south.

古文：齐主曰： 朕意亦尔。 
现代文：北齐国主说： 我的意思也是如此。 
English: The North Qi sovereign said, "That's what I meant."

古文：乃令韶督精骑一千发晋阳。
现代文：于是下令段韶率领一千名精锐的骑兵从晋阳出发。
English: Therefore, he ordered Duan Yu to lead a thousand elite cavalrymen and set out from Jinyang.

古文：丁巳，齐主亦自晋阳赴洛阳。
现代文：丁巳北齐国主也从晋阳赶赴洛阳。
English: Ding Si, the ruler of Northern Qi, also rushed from Jinyang to Luoyang.

古文：己未，齐太宰平原靖翼王淹卒。
现代文：已未，北齐太宰平原靖翼王高淹去世。
English: Not long ago, the Northern Qi Dazai Plain Jing Ying Wang Gao Rong passed away.

古文：段韶自晋阳，行五日济河，会连日阴雾，壬戌，韶至洛阳，帅帐下三百骑，与诸将登邙阪，观周军形势。至太和谷，与周军遇，韶即驰告诸营，追集骑士，结陈以待之。
现代文：段韶从晋阳出发，五天以后渡过黄河，正巧连日来阴天有雾，壬戌，段韶到达洛阳，率领帐下的三百名骑兵，和将领们一同登上邙阪，观察北周军队的形势，到太和谷，和北周军队遭遇，段韶立即派人骑马遍告各营崐，会集骑士，严阵以待。
English: Duan Yu set out from Jinyang and crossed the Yellow River five days later. It just so happened that the weather was cloudy and foggy for days on end. Duan Yu arrived in Luoyang, led the 300 cavalry under his charge, and together with the generals boarded the Han River to observe the situation of the Northern Zhou army. When he encountered the Northern Zhou army in Taihe Valley, Duan Yu immediately sent people on horseback to all the battalions to gather the knights and wait for them.

古文：韶为左军，兰陵王长恭为中军，斛律光为右军。
现代文：段韶是左军，兰陵王高长恭是中军，斛律光是右军。
English: Duan Yu was the left army, Lanling Wang Gao Changgyong was the middle army, and Baoliguang was the right army.

古文：周人不意其至，皆恟惧。
现代文：周人没有想到段韶等人到来，感到恐惧。
English: Zhou did not think that Duan Yu and others would come, and felt fear.

古文：韶遥谓周人曰： 汝宇文护才得其母，遽来为寇，何也？ 
现代文：段韶远远地向周人说： 你宇文护刚得到母亲，就马上来侵扰，这是为什么？ 
English: Duan Yu said to Zhou Yu from a distance: You, Uwen Guo, have just got your mother, and you immediately come to intrude. Why is that?

古文：周人曰： 天遣我来，有何可问！ 
现代文：周人说： 上天派我们来，有什么好问的！ 
English: The man said, "God sent us here, what is there to ask!

古文：韶曰： 天道赏善罚恶，当遣汝送死来耳！ 
现代文：段韶说： 天道是赏善罚恶的，是派你们送死来了！ 
English: Duan Yu said: The heavenly way rewards good and punishes evil, and it has sent you here to die!

古文：周人以步兵在前，上山逆战。
现代文：周人以步兵在前，上山迎战。
English: With his infantry in front, Zhou went up the mountain to meet the enemy.

古文：韶且战且却以诱之；待其力弊，然后下马击之。
现代文：段韶且战且退诱敌深入；等对方兵力疲竭，于是下马进攻。
English: Duan fought and retreated to lure the enemy deeper; when the other side's forces were exhausted, he dismounted and attacked.

古文：周师大败，一时瓦解，投坠溪谷死者甚众。
现代文：北周军队大败，立刻崩溃，坠落在溪流和山谷中而丧生的很多。
English: The Northern Zhou army suffered a crushing defeat and collapsed immediately, falling into streams and valleys and losing many lives.

古文：兰陵王长恭以五百骑突入周军，遂至金墉城下。
现代文：兰陵王高长恭以五百名骑兵冲进北周军队的包围圈，到了金墉城下。
English: Lanling King Gao Changgong stormed into the encirclement of the North Zhou army with five hundred cavalrymen and arrived at the foot of Jinyu Castle.

古文：城上人弗识，长恭免胄示之面，乃下弩手救之。
现代文：城上的人不认识他，高长恭脱去甲胄露出自己的面孔，城上派了弓箭手下来救他。
English: The people in the city did not recognize him. Gao Changyong took off his armor to reveal his face. The city sent an archer to rescue him.

古文：周师在城下者亦解围遁去，委弃营幕，自邙山至穀水，三十里中，军资器械，弥满川泽。
现代文：在城下的北周军队也解围逃走，丢下营帐，从邙山到谷水的三十里间的川泽之地，都是北周丢弃的兵器辎重。
English: The troops of Beizhou under the city also broke the siege and fled, abandoning their camps. The land of Kawazawa, thirty miles from Shaoshan to Guishui, is full of weapons abandoned by Beizhou.

古文：唯齐公宪、达奚武及庸忠公王雄在后，勒兵拒战。
现代文：只有齐公宇文宪、达奚武和庸忠公王雄在后面统率兵士抵抗作战。
English: Only Qi Gong, Uwen Xian, Dajin Wu and Yongzhongong Wangxiong led the soldiers in the rear to resist the battle.

古文：王雄驰马冲斛律光陈，光退走，雄追之。
现代文：王雄策马冲入斛律光的阵营，斛退光退走，王雄紧紧追赶。
English: Wang Xiong's horse rushed into the camp of Bao Ruiguang, Bao Huiguang retreated, and Wang Xiong followed closely behind.

古文：光左右皆散，唯馀一奴一矢。
现代文：斛律光的左右都走散了，只剩下一名奴仆和一支箭。
English: The left and right halos of the halo have dispersed, leaving only a servant and an arrow.

古文：雄按槊不及光者丈馀，谓光曰： 吾惜尔不杀，当生将尔见天子。 
现代文：王雄手按着长矛离斛律光不到一丈多远，对他说： 我因为爱惜而不杀你，要活捉你去见天子。 
English: The king's mighty hand guided his spear to within a yard of the halo, and said to him: "I will not kill you out of pity, but I will capture you alive and take you to see the Son of God."

古文：光射雄中额，雄抱马走，至营而卒。军中益惧。
现代文：斛律光放箭射中王雄的额头，王雄用手抱住马颈逃走，到军营时就死去，军中更加恐惧。
English: Zhao Ruiguang shot Wang Xiong in the forehead with an arrow. Wang Xiong hugged the horse's neck with his hand and ran away. He died when he arrived at the military camp. The army was even more afraid.

古文：齐公宪拊循督励，众心小安。
现代文：齐公宇文宪抚慰激励部下，部众心里稍为平定。
English: Qigong Yu Wenxin comforted and encouraged his subordinates, and the hearts of his subordinates were somewhat calmed.

古文：至夜，收军，宪欲待明更战。
现代文：夜晚时，他将军队集中起来，准备到天亮时再战。
English: At night, he gathered his army and prepared to fight until dawn.

古文：达奚武曰： 洛阳军散，人情震骇，若不因夜速还，明日欲归不得。
现代文：达奚武说： 洛阳的军队都散了，人们的心情震撼害怕，如果不趁晚上迅速退走，只怕明天想走也走不成。
English: Dadongwu said, "Luoyang's troops have all dispersed. People are shocked and scared. If we don't retreat quickly in the evening, we won't be able to leave tomorrow.

古文：武在军久，备见形势；公少年未经事，岂可以数营士卒委之虎口乎！ 
现代文：我在军队很久了，完全了解这种形势；您年轻没有经历多少事情，怎能把几个营的士兵送进虎口！ 
English: I have been in the army for a long time and fully understand this situation; you have not experienced much in your youth, how can you send several battalions of soldiers into the jaws of the tiger!

古文：乃还。
现代文：于是退兵回去。
English: So I came back.

古文：权景宣亦弃豫州走。
现代文：权景宣也放弃豫州退走。
English: Quan Jingxuan also abandoned Yuzhou and retreated.

古文：丁卯，齐主至洛阳。
现代文：丁卯，北齐国主到洛阳。
English: Dingwu, the ruler of North Qi, came to Luoyang.

古文：己巳，以段韶为太宰，斛律光为太尉，兰陵王长恭为尚书令。
现代文：已巳，任命段韶为太宰，斛律光为太尉，兰陵王高长恭为尚书令。
English: So far, Duan Yu has been appointed as Dazai, Bao Riguang as Taifu, and Lanling Wang Gao Changgyang as Shang Shuling.

古文：壬申，齐主如虎牢，遂自滑台如黎阳，丙子，至鄴。
现代文：壬申，北齐国主去虎牢，便从滑台去黎阳，丙子，抵达邺城。
English: In Jinshin, the ruler of North Qi went to the tiger's prison, then from the slide to Liyang, and finally arrived in Lucheng.

古文：杨忠引兵出沃野，应接突厥，军粮不给，诸军忧之，计无所出。
现代文：杨忠领兵从沃野出发，接应突厥，由于军粮短缺，军中担忧，想不出办法。
English: Yang Zhong led the army from Wouno to meet the Turks. Due to the shortage of military food, the army was worried and could not think of a solution.

古文：忠乃招诱稽胡酋长咸在坐，诈使河州刺史王杰勒兵鸣鼓而至，曰： 大冢宰已平洛阳，欲与突厥共讨稽胡之不服者。 
现代文：杨忠便召集诱骗稽胡部落的酋长入座，假装叫河州刺史王杰统率士兵敲着战鼓赶到这里，说： 大冢宰已经平定洛阳，准备和突厥共同讨伐稽胡部落那些不服从的人。 
English: Yang Zhong then called together the chiefs of the Qinhu tribe, who had been tricked into taking their seats, and pretended to call the commander of the Hezhou Zhishi Wang Jie, who led the soldiers to beat the war drums and rushed here, saying: Dazhao has already pacified Luoyang and is preparing to fight the disobedient people of the Qinhu tribe together with the Turks.

古文：坐者皆惧，忠慰谕而遣之。
现代文：在座的酋长们都很害怕，杨忠安慰劝说后让他们回去。
English: The chiefs present were very scared, and Yang Zhong consoled and persuaded them to go back.

古文：于是诸胡相帅馈输，车粮填积。
现代文：于是那些胡族部落相继送来粮食，军粮于是充足。
English: As a result, those Hu tribes successively sent grain, and there was plenty of grain for the army.

古文：属周师罢归，忠亦还。
现代文：北周命令军队罢兵回朝，杨忠也一起返回。
English: North Zhou ordered the army to strike back to the North, and Yang Zhong also returned together.

古文：晋公护本无将略，是行也，又非本心，故无功，与诸将稽首谢罪。
现代文：晋公宇文护本来就没有将帅的胆略本领，这次行动，又不是他的本意，所以无功而归，只得和将领们向周武帝听头请罪。
English: Originally, Jin Gong Yu Wengu did not have the ability to be a daring general, and this action was not his intention, so it was fruitless, and he and the generals had to apologize to Emperor Zhou Wu.

古文：周主慰劳罢之。
现代文：北周国主对他们加以慰劳了事。
English: The North Zhou sovereign consoled them.

古文：是岁，齐山东大水，饥死者不可胜计。
现代文：这一年，北齐的山东水灾，饿死的人数不胜数。
English: This year, the Shandong floods in Northern Qi, the number of people who starved to death is countless.

古文：宕昌王梁弥定屡寇周边，周大将军田弘讨灭之，以其地置宕州。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥定屡次进犯北周的边界，北周的大将军田弘将他讨平，在那里设置宕州。
English: Liang Yading, the king of the Northern Zhou, repeatedly invaded the border of the Northern Zhou, and the Northern Zhou's general, Tian Hong, defeated him and set up a state of the Northern Zhou there.

古文：世祖文皇帝下天嘉六年
现代文：天嘉六年
English: Tianjia six years

古文：春，正月，癸卯，齐以任城王湝为大司马。
现代文：春季正月，癸卯，北齐任命任城王高为大司马。
English: In the first month of spring, the Northern Qi appointed Chengwang Gao as the grand steward.

古文：齐主如晋阳。
现代文：北齐国主去晋阳。
English: After Beiqi, the master went to Jinyang.

古文：二月，辛丑，周遣陈公纯、许公贵、神武公窦毅、南阳公杨荐等备皇后仪卫行殿，并六宫百二十人，诣突厥可汗牙帐逆女。
现代文：二月，辛丑，北周派陈公宇文纯、许公宇文贵、神武公窦毅、南阳公杨荐等准备皇后的仪仗、侍卫、行装，和六宫的一百二十人，到突厥可汗的牙帐迎接可汗的女儿。
English: In February, Xinwu, Northern Zhou sent Chen Gongwu Wenzhong, Xu Gongwu Wenzhuang, Shenwu Gongwu Dou Yi, Nanyang Gongwu Yang Ji, and 120 people from the Six Palaces to prepare for the queen's ceremonial battle, bodyguards, and costumes, and to meet the daughter of the khan at the Turkish khan's dental office.

古文：毅，炽之兄子也。
现代文：窦毅是窦炽哥哥的儿子。
English: Dou Yi is the son of Dou Blazing's older brother.

古文：丙寅，周以柱国安武公李穆为大司空，绥德公陆通为大司寇。
现代文：丙寅，北周任命柱国安武公李穆为大司空，绥德公陆通为大司寇。
English: Hsin-Yin, North Zhou appointed the pillar country Anwu Gong Li Mu as the chief secretary of the sky, and Shide Gong Lu Tong as the chief secretary of the sky.

古文：壬申，周主如岐州。
现代文：壬申，北周国主去岐州。
English: In Jinshin, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to Qizhou.

古文：夏，四月，甲寅，以安成王顼为司空。
现代文：夏季四月，甲寅，陈朝任命安成王陈顼为司空。
English: In the summer of April, the Jia Yin and Chen Dynasty appointed An Cheng Wang Chen Yu as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：顼以帝弟之重，势倾朝野。直兵鲍僧睿，恃顼势为不法，御史中丞徐陵为奏弹之，从南台官属引奏案而入。
现代文：陈顼因为是陈文帝的弟弟而显赫，势力压倒在朝在野的一切人，直兵鲍僧睿依仗陈顼的势力横行不法，御史中丞徐陵上奏章弹劾他，跟随御史台官员的引导经过批阅章奏的几案进入朝廷。
English: Chen Rong was prominent because he was the younger brother of Chen Wendi, and his power overwhelmed everyone in the court and in the field. The direct soldier Bao Seng Rui relied on Chen Rong's power to commit lawlessness. The official historian Xu Ling wrote a chapter to impeach him, and followed the guidance of the official of the Imperial Historian's Office to enter the imperial court through several cases that were approved and read.

古文：上见陵章服严肃，为敛容正坐。
现代文：文帝见他身穿礼服十分严肃，脸色也严肃起来，端正地坐好。
English: Emperor Wen saw that he was wearing a very serious gown, his face became serious, and he sat down neatly.

古文：陵进读奏版，时顼在殿上侍立，仰视上，流汗失色，陵遣殿中御史引顼下殿。
现代文：徐陵手持奏版读了奏章，当时陈顼正站在殿上侍候文帝，抬头看着文帝，惊慌得脸上流汗变色。徐陵叫殿中御史领陈顼下殿。
English: Xu Ling read the score with a hand-held record player. At that time, Chen Yu was standing in the hall waiting for Emperor Wen. He looked up at Emperor Wen, and his face was discolored from sweating in panic. Xu Ling called Chen Yu, the leader of the court historian, to the hall.

古文：上为之免顼侍中、中书监，朝廷肃然。
现代文：文帝因此免去陈顼担任的侍中、中书监的官职。朝廷中对徐陵肃然起敬。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen exempted Chen Qi from the official posts of chamberlain and Chinese librarian. Xu Ling was held in high esteem in the imperial court.

古文：丙午，齐大将军东安王娄睿坐事免。
现代文：丙午，北齐的大将军东安王娄睿因事获罪被免职。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, the general of North Qi, Dongan Wang Zhaorai, was removed from office for being convicted.

古文：齐著作郎祖珽，有文学，多技艺，而疏率无行。
现代文：北齐著作郎祖，有文才，多技艺，但是不拘小节，品行不好。
English: The author's great-grandfather, Bei Qi, had literary talent and many skills, but he was not punctual and his conduct was not good.

古文：尝为高祖中外府功曹，因宴失金叵罗，于珽髻上得之；又坐诈盗官粟三千石，鞭二百，配甲坊。
现代文：他曾经是神武帝的中外府功曹。因为宴会时曾经丢失过金酒杯，结果在祖的发髻中找到；又因为诈骗盗窃三千石官粟的罪行，曾被鞭打二百下，发配去甲坊服役。
English: He was once Emperor Jinwu's meritorious worker in the provinces of China and foreign countries. Because he once lost a golden goblet during a banquet, it was found in his ancestor's hair; and because of the crime of defrauding and stealing a three-thousand-koku official's poppy, he was whipped 200 times and sent to serve in the Armoury.

古文：显祖时，珽为秘书丞，盗《华林遍略》，及有它赃，当绞，除名为民。
现代文：文宣帝时，祖任秘书丞，偷走《华林遍略》一书，又发现他有其他贪赃行为，本来应该被绞死，后来改判革去官职当老百姓。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzhong, Zu Ren, a secretary, stole a copy of "The Outline of Warring States" and was found guilty of other acts of corruption. He was originally sentenced to death by hanging, but the sentence was later commuted and he was allowed to return to his official position as a commoner.

古文：显祖虽憎其数犯法，而爱其才伎，令直中书省。
现代文：文宣帝虽然厌恶他常常犯法，但是喜欢他的文才和技艺，所以叫他在中书省任职。
English: Although Emperor Wenzhong detested his frequent violations of the law, he liked his literary talent and skills, so he asked him to serve in the Ministry of Literature.

古文：世祖为长广王，珽为胡桃油献之，因言 殿下有非常骨法。
现代文：北齐武成帝早年被封为长广王时，祖做了胡桃油献给他，还说： 殿下有非同寻常的骨相。
English: In the early years of the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng, when he was crowned as the King of Changguang, his ancestor made walnut oil and dedicated it to him. He also said, "His royal highness has an unusual bone appearance.

古文：孝征梦殿下乘龙上天。 
现代文：我还梦见殿下乘龙上天。 
English: I also dreamt that His Royal Highness ascended to heaven on a dragon.

古文：王曰： 若然，当使兄大富贵。 
现代文：长广王说： 如果真是这样，当然使您老兄大富大贵。 
English: Changguang Wang said: If this is true, it will certainly make your brother very rich.

古文：及即位，擢拜中书侍郎，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：等到长广王即位做了皇帝，提拔他为中书侍郎，升迁为散骑常侍。
English: When King Nagahiro ascended the throne and became emperor, he was promoted to the position of Chusho-ziroro (chamberlain) and Zanki-no-sojishi (regular attendant).

古文：与和士开共为奸谄。
现代文：他同和士开一起作恶，巴结奉承武成帝。
English: He committed evil together with Wushi Kai and flattered Emperor Wucheng.

古文：珽私说士开曰： 君之宠幸，振古无比。
现代文：祖私下对和士开说： 皇上对我们的宠幸，自古以来无法可比。
English: Zou privately said to Washika, "The Emperor's favor to us is incomparable since ancient times.

古文：宫车一日晚驾，欲何以克终？ 
现代文：皇上一崐旦驾崩，用什么办法来保持我们的结局？ 
English: Once the emperor has passed away, what method should we use to maintain our ending?

古文：士开因从问计。
现代文：和士开便向他问计。
English: Kazuchika asked him what to do.

古文：珽曰： 宜说主上云： 文襄、文宣、孝昭之子，俱不得立，今宜令皇太子早践大位，以定君臣之分。 
现代文：祖说： 应当向皇上劝说： 文襄、文宣、孝昭等皇上的太子，都没能立为皇上，现在应当令皇太子早登皇位，决定君臣之分。 
English: The ancestor said: It is necessary to persuade the emperor that the imperial princes such as Wen Xiang, Wen Xuan, and Xiao Zhao have not been able to become emperors, and now it is necessary to make the crown prince ascend the throne as early as possible and decide the division of monarchs and subjects.

古文：若事成，中宫、少主必皆德君，此万全之计也。
现代文：如果事情成功，皇后、皇太子一定会感激您，这才是万全之计。
English: If things work out, the Empress and the Crown Prince will surely be grateful to you, which is the best way.

古文：请君微说主上令粗解，珽当自外上表论之。 
现代文：请您稍稍劝说皇上使他有所领会，我会从外面向皇上上表说这件事。 
English: I would like you to persuade the Emperor a little so that he will understand, and I will explain the matter to the Emperor face to face.

古文：士开许诺。
现代文：和士开便答应了。
English: Washika agreed to do so.

古文：会有慧星见。
现代文：正巧天上出现彗星。
English: By chance, a comet appeared in the sky.

古文：太史奏云： 慧，除旧布新之象，当有易主。 
现代文：太史奏报说： 彗星，是除旧更新的迹象，应当有皇帝传位的事发生。 
English: The Taishi Sonpo said: The comet is a sign of renewal, and there should be an emperor's enthronement.

古文：珽于是上书言： 陛下虽为天子，未为极贵，宜传位东宫，且以上应天道。 
现代文：祖于是向武成帝上书说： 陛下虽是天子，但还不是极贵，应该传位给皇太子，以顺应天道。 
English: The ancestor then wrote to Emperor Wu Cheng Yu, saying: Although His Majesty is the Son of Heaven, he is not yet extremely valuable. He should pass the throne to the crown prince in order to conform to the heavenly way.

古文：并上魏显祖禅子故事。
现代文：还说了北魏献文帝传位给儿子的故事。
English: He also told the story of the Northern Wei Emperor Xianwen passing the throne to his son.

古文：齐主从之。
现代文：武成帝听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdi followed his advice.

古文：丙子，使太宰段韶持节奉皇帝玺绶，传位于太子纬。
现代文：丙子，北齐武成帝派太宰段韶手持符节捧着皇帝的玉玺和绶带，传位给太子高纬。
English: On the other hand, the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Cheng dispatched Dazai Duan, holding the Emperor's jade scepter and sash, to convey the throne to Prince Gao Wei.

古文：太子即皇帝位于晋阳宫，大赦，改元天统。
现代文：太子在晋阳宫即皇帝位，大赦全国，改年号为天统。
English: The prince was enthroned as emperor in the Jinyang Palace, granted amnesty to the whole country, and changed his era name to Tiantong.

古文：又诏以太子妃斛律氏为皇后。
现代文：又下诏封太子的妃子斛律氏为皇后。
English: He also issued an imperial edict to crown the prince's concubine, the Empress Dowager, as empress.

古文：于是群公上世祖尊号为太上皇帝，军国大事咸以闻。
现代文：于是公侯们进奉武成帝以太上皇帝的尊号，军国大事都向他报告。
English: As a result, the princes gave Emperor Wu Chengdi the honorific title of the emperor on the ether, and reported to him on military affairs.

古文：使黄门侍郎冯子琮、尚书左丞胡长粲辅导少主，出入禁中，专典敷奏。
现代文：派黄门侍郎冯子琮、尚书左丞胡长粲辅导年轻的君主，在宫中出入，专门职掌奏章一类的事。
English: He sent Huangmen's chamberlain Feng Zixuan and Shangshu's left-hand man Hu Changtao to tutor the young monarch, enter and leave the palace, and specialize in things such as playing the chords.

古文：子琮，胡后之妹夫也。
现代文：冯子琮是胡后的妹夫。
English: Feng Zixuan was the brother-in-law of the Empress.

古文：祖珽拜秘书监，加仪同三司，大被亲宠，见重二宫。
现代文：祖被授职秘书监，加仪同三司，大受宠信，被太上皇和皇帝所看重。
English: Zu was awarded the post of Secretary Supervisor, Ji Ji and the three departments, greatly favored by the letter, and valued by the Emperor and the Emperor.

古文：丁丑，齐以贺拔仁为太师，侯莫陈相为太保，冯翊王润为司徒，赵郡王睿为司空，河南王孝琬为尚书令。
现代文：丁丑，北齐任命驾拔仁为太师，侯莫陈相为太保，冯翊王高润为司徒，赵郡王高睿为司空，河南王高孝琬为尚书令。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the Northern Qi appointed Ji Ba Ren as the Grand Master, Hou Mo Ramo Chen Xiang as the Grand Protector, Feng Yao Wang Gaorun as the Steward, Zhao Gu Wang Gaorui as the Secretary, and Henan Wang Gao Xiaojun as the Secretary.

古文：戊寅，以瀛州刺史尉粲为太尉，斛律光为大将军，东安王娄睿为太尉，尚书仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
现代文：戊寅，任命瀛州刺史尉粲为太尉，斛律光为大将军，东安王娄睿为太尉，尚书仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
English: In Wuyin, he appointed Zhang Zhou as the first lieutenant, Zou Riguang as the general, Dongan Wang Zhaorai as the second lieutenant, and Shang Shuxu's servant Zhao Yanshen as the left-hand servant.

古文：五月，突厥遣使至齐，始与齐通。
现代文：五月，突厥派使者到北齐，开始和北齐联系。
English: In May, the Turks sent an envoy to Northern Qi and began to contact Northern Qi.

古文：六月，己巳，齐主使兼散骑常侍王季高来聘。
现代文：六月，己巳，北齐国主派兼散骑常侍王季高来陈朝访问。
English: In June, Wang Jigao, the ruler of Northern Qi and a knight errant, came to visit the Chen dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季七月，辛乙朔，有日食。
English: In autumn, in July, Xin Yi Shuo, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：上遣都督程灵洗自鄱阳别道击周迪，破之。
现代文：陈文帝派都督程灵洗从鄱阳经其他道路攻击周迪，将他打败。
English: Emperor Chen Wen dispatched the governor Cheng Lingqi to attack Zhou Di from Fenyang via other roads to defeat him.

古文：迪与麾下十馀人窜于山穴中，日月浸久，从者亦稍苦之。
现代文：周迪和部下的十几人逃窜到山洞中，时间一长，跟随他的人也感到有些困苦。
English: Zhou Di and more than a dozen of his subordinates fled to the cave. It took a long time, and those who followed him also felt a little distressed.

古文：后遣人潜出临川市鱼鲑，临川太守骆牙执之，令取迪自效，因使腹心勇士随之入山。
现代文：后来派人偷偷离开临川买鱼做菜，被临川太守骆牙捉住，命令他们回去捉住周迪来报郊，派了亲信的勇士和他们一起进山。
English: Later, he sent someone to secretly leave Linchuan to buy fish to cook. Linchuan Taishu Luo Ya caught them, ordered them to go back and catch Zhou Di to report to the suburbs, and sent a trusted warrior to go into the mountains with them.

古文：其人诱迪出猎，勇士伏于道旁，出斩之。
现代文：这些人回去后引诱周迪到外面打猎，勇士们埋伏在路边，突然奔出将周迪杀死。
English: After these people returned, they lured Zhou Di outside to hunt. The warriors lay in wait on the roadside and suddenly rushed out to kill Zhou Di.

古文：丙戌，传首至建康。
现代文：丙戌，将周迪的首级送到建康。
English: and sent Zhou Di's head to Jiankang.

古文：庚寅，周主如秦州；八月，丙子，还长安。
现代文：庚寅，北周国主去秦州；八月，丙子，回长安。
English: Geng Yin, the ruler of North Zhou, went to Qinzhou; in August, Cixi, returned to Chang'an.

古文：己卯，立皇子伯固为新安王，伯恭为晋安王，伯仁为庐陵王，伯义为江夏王。
现代文：已卯，陈朝立皇子陈伯固为新安王，陈伯恭为晋安王，陈伯仁为庐陵王，陈伯义为江夏王。
English: So far, the Chen dynasty has made the prince Chen Bogu the king of Xin'an, Chen Bogong the king of Jin'an, Chen Bogren the king of Fuling, and Chen Bo Yi the king of Jiangxia.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥，周以函谷关城为通洛防，以金州刺史贺若敦为中州刺史，镇函谷。
现代文：冬季十月，辛亥，北周以函谷关的关城为通洛防，任命金州刺史贺若敦做中州刺史，镇守函谷。
English: In the winter of October, Xinhai, the Northern Zhou Dynasty took the Guancheng of Hanzhongguan as the defense of Lop Nur, and appointed the Jinzhou scribe He Ruodong as the Zhongzhou scribe and the town guard of Hanzhongguan.

古文：敦恃才负气，顾其流辈皆为大将军，敦独未得，兼以湘州之役，全军而返，谓宜受赏，翻得除名，对台使出怨言。
现代文：贺若敦依仗自己的才能，看不起别人，见到和自己差不多的人都是大将军，而唯独自己不是，加上湘州那次战役，全军都返回没有损失，认为本该受到赏赐，结果反被除名，所以对朝廷的使臣口出怨言。
English: Relying on his own talent, He Ruodong looked down on others, seeing that people who were similar to him were great generals, but he was not the only one. With the addition of the battle in Hunan, the whole army returned without loss. He thought that he should have been rewarded, but as a result he was removed from the list, so he complained to the envoys of the imperial court.

古文：晋公护怒，征还，逼令自杀。
现代文：晋公宇文护大怒，将他召回，逼他自杀。
English: Jin Gongyu Wengu flew into a rage, called him back and forced him to commit suicide.

古文：临死，谓其子弼曰： 吾志平江南，今而不果，汝必成吾志。
现代文：临死前，他对儿子贺弼说： 我的志向是平定江南，现在没能实现，你一定要完成我的遗愿。
English: Before his death, he said to his son He Zheng: My ambition is to pacify the south of the Yangtze River. Now I have not been able to achieve it. You must fulfill my last wish.

古文：吾以舌死，汝不可不思。 
现代文：我因为口舌不谨慎而死，你不能不深思。 
English: You can't help but think, I died because I was careless with my words.

古文：因引锥刺弼舌出血以诫之。
现代文：于是用锥子把儿子的舌头扎出血来告诫他。
English: So he pricked his son's tongue with a skewer to draw blood as a warning.

古文：十一月，癸未，齐太上皇至鄴。
现代文：十一月，癸未，北齐太上皇帝到了邺城。
English: In November, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi arrived in Handan.

古文：齐世祖之为长广王也，数为显祖所捶，心常衔之。
现代文：齐武成帝高湛当长广王时，屡次被文宣帝用鞭子责打，心中常常衔恨。
English: When Emperor Gaozhan of Qiwucheng was the king of Changguang, he was repeatedly beaten with a whip by Emperor Wenzhong, and he often harbored hatred in his heart.

古文：显祖每见祖珽，常呼为贼，故珽亦怨之；且欲求媚于世祖，乃说世祖曰： 文宣狂暴，何得称 文 ？
现代文：文宣帝每次见到祖，常常称他为贼，所以祖也怨恨他；因为要讨好武成帝，便对他说： 文宣帝性情粗暴，怎么能称 文 ？
English: Every time Emperor Wenxuan saw Zu, he often called him a thief, so Zu also resented him; because he wanted to please Emperor Wu Cheng, he said to him: Emperor Wenxuan has a rough temperament, how can you call him Wen?

古文：既非创业，何得称 祖 ？
现代文：又没有开创基业，怎么能称 祖 ？
English: How can you call yourself a founder if you haven't created a foundation?

古文：若文宣为祖，陛下万岁后当何所称？ 
现代文：如果文宣帝是祖，陛下万岁以后又怎样称呼？ 
English: If Emperor Wenxuan is the ancestor, what will His Majesty be called in the future?

古文：帝从之。
现代文：武成帝接受了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：己丑，改谥献武皇帝为神武皇帝，庙号高祖，献明皇后为武明皇后。
现代文：已丑，改文宣帝的谥号为太祖献武皇帝，庙号高祖，献明皇后改称武明皇后。
English: It was already ugly, and the Emperor Xuan's posthumous name was changed to Taizhu Xianwu Emperor, his temple name to Gaozu, and his empress Xianming was renamed Wuming Empress.

古文：令有司更议文宣谥号。
现代文：下令有关部门重新商议文宣帝的谥号。
English: The relevant departments were ordered to renegotiate the nickname of Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：十二月，乙卯，封皇子伯礼为武陵王。
现代文：十二月，乙卯，陈朝封皇子陈伯礼为武陵王。
English: In December, Emperor Wu of the Chen Dynasty enthroned the prince Chen Bolei as the King of Wuling.

古文：壬戌，齐上皇如晋阳。
现代文：壬戌，北齐太上皇武成帝去晋阳。
English: The Northern Qi Empress Dowager Wu Chengdi went to Jinyang.

古文：庚午，齐改谥文宣皇帝为景烈皇帝，庙号威宗。
现代文：庚午，北齐把文宣皇帝的谥号改为景烈皇帝，庙号威宗。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Northern Qi changed the nickname of Emperor Wenxuan to Emperor Jingli, and the temple name to Weizong.

古文：世祖文皇帝下天康元年春，正月，己卯，日有食之。癸未，周大赦，改元天和。
现代文：天康元年春季正月，已卯，出现日食。癸未，北周大赦全国，改年号为天和。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Tian Kang, a solar eclipse occurred. Soon after, the Northern Zhou amnestied the whole country, and the year name was changed to Tian He.

古文：辛卯，齐主祀圜丘；癸巳，祫太庙。
现代文：辛卯，北齐国主到圜丘祭天；癸巳，在太庙举行袷祀。
English: In Xinwu, the ruler of North Qi went to Mengqiu to hold a festival for the gods; in Xingwu, a ceremony was held for the gods in the Great Temple.

古文：丙申，齐以吏部尚书尉瑾为右仆射。
现代文：丙申，北齐任命吏部尚书尉瑾为右仆射。
English: Bishin, North Qi appointed the head of the cadre department, Shang Shujing, as his right-hand man.

古文：己亥，周主耕藉田。
现代文：已亥，北周国主在藉田举行耕种仪式。
English: Already in the winter, the Lord of the Northern Zhou held a cultivation ceremony in the borrowed field.

古文：庚子，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：庚子，北齐国主去晋阳。
English: Geng Zi, the ruler of North Qi, went to Jinyang.

古文：周遣小载师杜杲来聘。
现代文：北周派小载师杜杲来陈朝聘问。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty sent a courier named Du Xuan to Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：二月，庚戌，齐上皇还鄴。
现代文：二月，庚戌，北齐太上皇武成帝回邺城。
English: In February, the Northern Qi Empress Dowager Wu Chengdi returned to Lushan.

古文：丙子，大赦，改元。
现代文：丙子，陈朝大赦全国，改年号为天康。
English: On the 24th, an amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to Tianfu.

古文：三月，己卯，以安成王顼为尚书令。
现代文：三月，已卯，陈朝任命安成王陈顼为尚书令。
English: In March, the Chen Dynasty appointed Ancheng Wang Chen Qi as Shang Shuling.

古文：丙午，周主祀南郊。
现代文：丙午，北周国主到南郊祭天。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, the lord of the Northern Zhou Dynasty went to the Southern Suburbs to hold a festival.

古文：夏，四月，大雩。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛亥，因天旱而举行盛大的雩祭。
English: In the summer, in April, Xinhai, due to drought, a grand festival is held.

古文：上不豫，台阁众事，并令尚书仆射到仲举、五兵尚书孔奂共决之。
现代文：陈文帝生病，台阁等官署的事情，令尚书仆射到仲举、五兵尚书孔奂共同决定。
English: Chen Wendi was ill, and the things of the Taigak and other government departments made Shang Shuhou to mediate, and the five soldiers of Shang Shuhong to make a joint decision.

古文：奂，琇之之曾孙也。
现代文：孔奂是孔之的曾孙。
English: Confucius is the great-grandson of Confucius.

古文：疾笃，奂、仲举与司空、尚书令、扬州刺史安成王顼、吏部尚书袁枢、中书舍人刘师知入侍医药。
现代文：文帝病重，孔奂、到仲举和司空及尚书令扬州刺史安成王陈顼、吏部尚书袁枢、中书舍人刘师知进宫侍候医病服药。
English: Emperor Wen was gravely ill, and Kong Qian, Zhiqiao, He Jikong, and Shang Shuling ordered Yangzhou to send Shi Ancheng Wang Chen Qian, Zhiqiao, Shang Shuling Yuan Zu, and Liu Shizhi, who was in charge of the Central Library, to the palace to wait for medical treatment.

古文：枢，君正之子也。
现代文：袁枢是袁君正的儿子。
English: Yuan Zu is the son of Yuan Junzheng.

古文：太子伯宗柔弱，上忧其不能守位，谓顼曰： 吾欲遵太伯之事。 
现代文：太子陈伯宗懦弱，文帝担心他不能守住皇位，对安成王陈顼说： 我要像太伯那样把天下让给你。 
English: Prince Chen Bozong was weak, and Emperor Wen was worried that he would not be able to hold on to the throne. He said to Ancheng Wang Chen Qi, "I will cede the world to you, just like my great-uncle did."

古文：顼拜伏泣涕，固辞。
现代文：陈顼流泪拜伏在地，坚决推辞。
English: Chen Wei bowed to the ground in tears and resolutely refused.

古文：上又谓仲举、奂等曰： 今三方鼎峙，四海事重，宜须长居。
现代文：文帝又对到仲举、孔奂说： 现在三方鼎立对峙，天下的事情繁重，需要有个年纪较大的君主。
English: Emperor Wen also said to Zhongjiao and Kong Juan: Now that the three parties are in confrontation, the world is in turmoil, and there is a need for an older monarch.

古文：腾欲近则晋成，远隆殷法，卿等宜遵此意。 
现代文：近的，朕准备效法晋成帝，远的，遵照殷朝的法则，把皇位传给弟弟，你们要按朕的意思去做。 
English: In the near future, I am ready to follow the example of Emperor Jincheng, and in the distant future, I will follow the law of the Yin Dynasty and pass the throne to my younger brother. You should do as I want.

古文：孔奂流涕对曰： 陛下御膳违和，痊复非久。
现代文：孔奂流着泪回答说： 陛下因为饮食不当所以身体欠安，不用很久就能康复。
English: Confucius replied with tears streaming down his face, "Your Majesty's health is poor due to improper diet, and it won't take long for you to recover.

古文：皇太子为鼎盛，圣德日跻。
现代文：皇太子正在盛年，威德一天比一天高。
English: The crown prince is in his prime and his popularity is growing day by day.

古文：安成王介弟之尊，足为周旦。
现代文：安成王贵为陛下的弟弟，足以承担周公旦那样的责任。
English: As the younger brother of His Majesty, Ancheng Wanggui is able to shoulder the same responsibilities as Prince Zhou.

古文：若有废立之心，臣等愚，诚不敢闻诏。 
现代文：陛下如果有废立的想法，我们虽然愚笨，实在不敢听到这样的诏命。 
English: If Your Majesty has the idea of abolishing the post, we, although stupid, really do not dare to hear such an edict.

古文：上曰： 古之遗直，复见于卿。 
现代文：文帝说： 古代直道而行的遗风，在你们身上表现出来了。 
English: Wen Di said: The vestige of the ancient straight line has manifested itself in you.

古文：乃以奂为太子詹事。
现代文：于是任命孔奂为太子詹事。
English: So he appointed Kong Yu as the crown prince of Zhanji.

古文：臣光曰：夫臣之事君，宜将顺其美，正救其恶。
现代文：臣司马光曰：作为臣子服事君主，应该顺随他做得对的好事，以匡正补救他做得不对的坏事。
English: Vassal Sima Guang said: As a vassal serving the monarch, you should follow the good things he does right, and rectify the bad things he does wrong.

古文：孔奂在陈，处腹心之重任，决礼义之大计，苟以世祖之言为不诚，则当如窦婴面辩，袁盎廷争，防微杜渐以绝觊觎之心。
现代文：孔奂在陈朝，负有心腹大臣的重任，决定国家的大计，假如认为陈文帝的话不是真心实意，就应当像窦婴那样当面辩论，像袁盎那样在朝延上力争，在错误或坏事萌芽的时候及时制止，不使它发展，杜绝非分企图之心。
English: In the Chen Dynasty, Confucius had the important responsibility of being the minister of the heart and deciding the country's grand plan. If you think that Chen Wendi's words are not sincere, you should debate face-to-face like Dou Ying, strive in the morning and evening like Yuan Ang, and stop mistakes or bad things in time when they germinate, do not let it develop, and put an end to the wrong intention.

古文：以为诚邪，则当请明下诏书，宣告中外，使世祖有宋宣之美，高宗无楚灵之恶。
现代文：如果认为真心实意，就应当请皇帝明下诏书，向中外宣布，可以使陈文帝有宋宣公舍子立弟的美德，陈宣帝无楚灵王杀兄自立的恶行。
English: If you think it is sincere, you should ask the emperor to issue an imperial decree to announce to China and abroad that Chen Wendi can have the virtue of Song Xuan Gong's son-in-law, and Chen Xuandi does not have the evil deed of Chu Ling Wang's brother-in-law.

古文：不然，谓太子嫡嗣，不可动摇，欲保附而安全之，则当尽忠竭节，以死继之，如晋之荀息，赵之肥义。
现代文：不然，说太子是嫡系王位继承人，不能动摇，要辅佐他，使他没有危险，就应当尽忠全节，像晋国的荀息，赵国的肥义那样。
English: Otherwise, to say that the prince is the heir to the throne and cannot be shaken, and to support him so that he is not in danger, he should be loyal and wholehearted, like the son of Jin and the son of Zhao.

古文：奈何于君之存，则逆探其情而求合焉；及其既没，则权臣移国而不能救，嗣主失位而不能死！
现代文：奈何在君主活着时，预先猜度他的想法而迎合他；等到君主死后，权臣篡国而不能挽救，继位的君主失位时而不能殉节去死！
English: But when the monarch is alive, why not anticipate his thoughts and cater to him; when the monarch dies, the vassal cannot save the country, and when the succeeding monarch loses his throne, he cannot die a martyr's death!

古文：斯乃奸谀之尤者，而世祖谓之遗直，以托六尺之孤，岂不悖哉！
现代文：这就是奸诈奉承到了极点的人，而世祖说他们有古代直道而行的遗风，托付他们辅助未成年而继位的君主，岂不荒谬！
English: These are the most treacherous and obsequious of men, and for the patriarchs to say that they are the direct descendants of the ancients, and to entrust them with the assistance of a monarch who is still a minor, is not absurd!

古文：癸酉，上殂。
现代文：癸酉，陈文帝去世。
English: Suddenly, Chen Wenti passed away.

古文：上起自艰难，知民疾苦。
现代文：陈文帝出身于艰苦困难之中，知道民间的疾苦。
English: Chen Wendi was born in the midst of hardships and knew the sufferings of the people.

古文：性明察俭约，每夜刺闺取外事分判者，前后相续。
现代文：他生性目光敏锐、节俭朴实，每晚从宫中小门送来刺探外事以供分析的人，前后接连不断。
English: By nature, he is sharp-eyed, frugal and down-to-earth. Every night, people are sent from the inner and outer gates of the palace to spy on foreign affairs for analysis, one after another.

古文：敕传更签于殿中者，必投签于阶石之上，令鎗然有声，曰： 吾虽眠，亦令惊觉。 
现代文：他下令传送更签到殿中的人，一定要把签投在石阶上，使它发出清脆的声音，说： 我虽然睡着了，响声也可以让我惊醒觉察。 
English: He gave the order to send the person who signed the petition to the temple, and he must place the petition on the stone steps, so that it would make a clear sound, saying: Although I am asleep, the sound can wake me up.

古文：太子即位，大赦。
现代文：太子临海王陈伯宗即皇帝位，大赦全国。
English: Linhai Prince Chen Bozong became emperor and granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：五月，己卯，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰后太后。
现代文：五月，已卯，尊称皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: In May, it was announced that the empress dowager would become the grand empress dowager and the empress dowager the empress dowager.

古文：乙酉，齐以兼尚书左仆射武兴王普为尚书令。
现代文：乙酉，北齐任命兼尚书左仆射武兴王高普为尚书令。
English: At the same time, the Northern Qi appointed Wang Gaopu, who was also the left-hand servant of the Shang, as the Shang Shuling.

古文：吐谷浑龙涸王莫昌帅部落附于周，以其地为扶州。
现代文：吐谷浑龙涸王莫昌率领部落归附北周，北周在他们的居住地区设置扶州。
English: Mochang, king of the Tuyuan Hunlong, led the tribe to be annexed by the Northern Zhou, and the Northern Zhou set up Fuzhou in their residential area.

古文：庚寅，以安成王顼为骠骑大将军、司徒、录尚书、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：庚寅，陈朝以安成王顼为骠骑大将军、司徒、录尚书、都督中外诸军事。
English: In the Goyang and Chen Dynasties, Ancheng Wangye served as a cavalry general, a tutor, a recorder, and a military governor.

古文：丁酉，以中军大将军、开府仪同三司徐度为司空，以吏部尚书袁枢为左仆射，吴兴太守沈钦为右仆射，御史中丞徐陵为吏部尚书。
现代文：丁酉，任命中军大将军、开府仪同三司徐度为司空，任命吏部尚书袁枢为左仆射，吴兴太守沈钦为右仆射，御史中丞徐陵为吏部尚书。
English: Ding Jun, appointed the general of the Chinese army, Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of Xu Du as the division of the sky, appointed the personnel department Shang Shu Yuan Zu as the left minion, Wu Xing Daju Shen Qin as the right minion, and Gishi Zhongzheng Xuling as the personnel department of Shang Shu.

古文：陵以梁末以来，选授多滥，乃为书示众曰： 梁元帝承侯景之凶荒，王太尉接荆州之祸败，故使官方，穷此纷杂。
现代文：徐陵认为梁朝末年以来，选官授职大多宽滥，就给大家写了一封公开信，说： 梁元帝继承了侯景叛乱后的残破局面，王太尉接受了荆州被攻破后的灾难衰败，所以造成官职制度的极其混乱复杂。
English: Xu Ling believed that since the end of the Liang Dynasty, the appointment of officials was mostly lenient, so he wrote an open letter to everyone, saying: Emperor Liang Yuan inherited the broken situation after the rebellion of Hou Jing, and Lieutenant Wang accepted the disaster and decay after Jingzhou was broken, so the official system was extremely chaotic and complicated.

古文：永安之时，圣朝草创，白银难得，黄札易营，权以官阶，代于钱绢。
现代文：永定年间，我朝刚建立不久，白银难得，授予官职的文书却容易求取，暂时用官阶代替赏赐的钱币绢帛。
English: During the Yongding era, not long after the founding of the Ming Dynasty, silver was hard to come by, but official documents were easy to obtain, and official ranks were temporarily used to replace the money and coins awarded.

古文：致令员外、常侍，路上比肩，咨议、参军，市中无数，岂是朝章固应如此！
现代文：以至路上的员外、常侍一个挨一个，街坊间的谘议、参军多到无数，难道朝延的典章制度本该这样吗！
English: So much so that enlisted men and regular attendants on the road are one by one, and there are countless consultations and enlistments between neighborhoods. Isn't this how the adjudication system of Chaoyang should have been?

古文：今衣冠礼乐，日富年华，何可犹作旧意，非理望也！ 
现代文：现在朝延的衣冠服饰、典章制度，一天天完善起来，怎能还可以根据以往这种章法违反常理和民望！ 大家都很信服。
English: Now that the system of robes, crowns and medals has been perfected day by day, how can it still be possible to violate common sense and public opinion according to the previous regulations! Everyone is very convinced.

古文：众咸服之。己亥，齐立上皇子弘为齐安王，仁固为北平王，仁英为高平王，仁光为淮南王。
现代文：已亥，北齐立太上皇帝的儿子高弘为齐安王，高仁固为北平王，高仁英为高平王，高仁光为淮南王。
English: At that time, Gao Hong, the son of the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi, became the king of Qi'an, Gao Renggu became the king of Northern Ping, Gao Renying became the king of Northern Ping, and Gao Ringuang became the king of Huainan.

古文：六月，齐遣兼散骑常侍韦道儒来聘。
现代文：六月，北齐派兼散骑常侍韦道儒来陈朝聘问。
English: In June, Wei Daoju, a member of the North Qi faction and a horseback riding attendant, came to Chen Dynasty for an interview.

古文：丙寅，葬文皇帝于永宁陵，庙号世祖。
现代文：丙寅，陈朝把文帝葬在永宁陵，庙号世祖。
English: Emperor Wen of the Chen Dynasty was buried in Yongning Mausoleum by Emperor He Yin, the founder of the temple.

古文：秋，七月，戊寅，周筑武功等诸城以置军士。
现代文：秋季七月，戊寅，北周修筑武功等城池设置军队。
English: In the autumn of July, Wu Yin and Northern Zhou Xiu set up troops in the city.

古文：丁酉，立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：丁酉，陈朝立妃子王氏为皇后。
English: Ding Xi, Chen dynasty made the princess Wang as the empress.

古文：八月，齐上皇如晋阳。
现代文：八月，北齐太上皇武成帝去晋阳。
English: In August, the Northern Qi Empress Dowager Emperor Wu Chengdi went to Jinyang.

古文：周信州蛮冉令贤、向五子王等据巴峡反，攻陷白帝，党与连结二千馀里。
现代文：北周信州的蛮人冉令贤、向五子王等据有巴峡叛变，攻陷白帝城，党羽连结有二千多里。
English: The barbarians Ran Lingxian and Xiang Wuzi Wang of Shinshu in the northern Zhou Dynasty are said to have rebelled in Baqiao and captured Baidicheng. The two parties are connected by more than two thousand li.

古文：周遣开府仪同三司元契、赵刚等前后讨之，终不克。
现代文：北周派开府仪同三司元契、赵刚等前后对他们进行讨伐，都没有攻克。
English: The Northern Zhou faction led by Kaifu Yi, together with the Third Division led by Yuan Qi and Zhao Gang, fought against them back and forth, but failed to conquer them.

古文：九月，诏开府仪同三司陆腾督开府仪同三司王亮、司马裔讨之。
现代文：九月，北周武帝下诏派开府仪同三司陆腾督率开府仪同三司王亮、司马裔去讨伐。
English: In September, the Northern Zhouwu Emperor sent Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments of Lu and Teng under the command of Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments of Wang Liang and Sima He to fight.

古文：腾军于汤口，令贤于江南据险要，置十城，远结涔阳蛮为声援，自帅精卒固守水逻城。
现代文：陆腾把军队驻扎在汤口，冉令贤在长江南面据守险要地形，设置十个城池，勾结远处的涔阳蛮人互为声援，自己率领精兵在水逻城固守。
English: Lu Teng stationed his army in Tanggu, Ran Lingxian in the south of the Yangtze River defended the dangerous terrain, set up ten fortresses, colluded with the distant barbarians of Shenyang for mutual support, and led the elite soldiers in the waterlogged city.

古文：腾召诸将问计，皆欲先取水逻，后攻江南。
现代文：陆腾召集将领们询问对策，都认为应该先攻取水逻城，后进攻长江南面一带。
English: Lu Teng gathered the generals to inquire about countermeasures, and they all believed that they should first capture Shuiluo City, and then attack the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：腾曰： 令贤内恃水逻金汤之固，外托涔阳辅车之援。资粮充实，器械精新。
现代文：陆腾说： 冉崐令贤内部依仗水逻城固若金汤，外部寄托涔阳蛮人互相依存的支援，物资和粮食充足，兵器和军械精良而且新造成。
English: Lu Teng said: Ran Rong Lingxian internally relies on the water logic, the city is solid and golden soup, externally relies on the support of the interdependence of the barbarians in Fenyang, the materials and food are sufficient, the weapons and armaments are sophisticated and newly created.

古文：以我悬军，攻其严垒，脱一战不克，更成其气。
现代文：以我方深入前敌的孤军，去攻打对方严阵以待的军垒，如果不能一仗攻克，会更加助长他们的气焰。
English: To attack the enemy's fortified strongholds with a lone army that has penetrated deep into the enemy's front, if it cannot be defeated in one battle, will further fuel their arrogance.

古文：不如顿军汤口，先取江南，剪其羽毛，然后进军水逻，此制胜之术也。 
现代文：不如把军队驻屯在汤口，先攻取长江南面的地方，好比剪掉了他们的羽毛，然后向水逻城进军，这才是克敌制胜的战术。 
English: It would be better to station the army in Tanggu, first capture the south side of the Yangtze River, like cutting off their feathers, and then march to Shuiluo City. This is the tactic to defeat the enemy and win.

古文：乃遣王亮帅众渡江，旬日，拔其八城，捕虏及纳降各千计。
现代文：于是派遣王亮率领军队渡过长江，只用十天，攻下八城，俘虏和收纳投降的分别以千计。
English: As a result, Wang Liang was sent to lead the army across the Yangtze River. In just ten days, he captured eight cities, taking thousands of prisoners and receiving thousands of surrenders.

古文：遂间募骁勇，数道进攻水逻。
现代文：于是挑选骁勇的士兵，分几路进攻水逻城。
English: Therefore, they selected brave soldiers and attacked Shuiluo Town in several ways.

古文：蛮帅冉伯犁、冉安西素与令贤有仇，腾说诱，赂以金帛，使为乡导。
现代文：信州蛮人将帅冉伯犁、冉安西素来和冉令贤有仇，陆腾对他们诱说，用金帛贿赂收买，收他们当向导。
English: The barbarians of Shinshu had always had a grudge against the handsome Ran Bo-yeon and Ran An-si and Ran Ling-hyun. Lu Teng lured them, bribed them with gold ingots, and hired them as guides.

古文：水逻之旁有石胜城，令贤使其兄子龙真据之。
现代文：水逻城旁边有石胜城，冉令贤叫侄子冉龙真在那里据守。
English: Next to Waterlog City is Shek Sheng City, where Ran Ling Xian's nephew, Ran Long Zhen, is stationed.

古文：腾密诱龙真，龙真遂以城降。
现代文：陆腾秘密地劝诱冉龙真，冉龙真便举城投降。
English: Lu Teng secretly persuaded Ran Rongzhen, and Ran Rongzhen surrendered the city.

古文：水逻众溃，斩首万馀级，捕虏万馀口。
现代文：水逻城的守众溃散，被杀死一万多人，俘虏了一万多人。
English: The defenders of Shuiluo City were dispersed, more than ten thousand people were killed, and more than ten thousand people were captured.

古文：令贤走，追获，斩之。
现代文：冉令贤逃走时被追上抓住，斩杀了他。
English: When Ran Lingxian ran away, he was caught and killed.

古文：腾积骸于水逻城侧为京观，是后群蛮望之，辄大哭，不敢复叛。
现代文：陆腾在水逻城帝把尸骸堆成高丘。此后各部蛮人见到这种惨状，就大哭，不敢再叛乱。
English: Lu Teng piled the corpses into a mound in the city of Shuiluo. After that, when the barbarians of various departments saw this misery, they cried loudly and dared not rebel again.

古文：向五子王据石黑城，使其子宝胜据双城。
现代文：向五子王占据石墨城，叫他的儿子向宝胜据守双城。
English: Xiang Wuzi Wang occupied Graphite City and ordered his son Xiang Baosheng to defend the two cities.

古文：水逻既平，腾频遣谕之，犹不下。
现代文：水逻城被平定后，陆腾不断派人去劝说，他们还是不肯投降。
English: After Shuiluo was subdued, Lu Teng continued to send people to persuade them, but they still refused to surrender.

古文：进击，皆擒之，尽斩诸向酋长，捕虏万馀户。
现代文：陆腾于是发起进攻，把他们全部捉到，将姓向的各个酋长全都杀掉，还捉到一万多个俘虏。
English: Lu Teng then launched an attack, caught them all, killed all the chiefs with the surname Xiang, and captured more than ten thousand prisoners.

古文：信州旧治白帝，腾徙之于八陈滩北，以司马裔为信州刺史。
现代文：信州的旧治所在白帝城，陆腾把治所迁到八陈滩的北面，任命司马裔为信州刺史。
English: Shinshu's former seat of government was in Baidicheng. Lu Teng moved the seat of government to the north of Bacheng Beach and appointed a Sima-descended person as the governor of Shinshu.

古文：小吏部陇西辛昂，奉使梁、益，且为腾督军粮。
现代文：小吏部、陇西人辛昂，奉命出使梁州、益州，并且替陆腾操办军粮。
English: Xin'an, a minor official and native of Shaanxi, was ordered to dispatch envoys to Liangzhou and Yizhou, and to manage military grain for Lu Teng.

古文：时临、信、楚、合等州民多众乱，昂谕以祸福，赴者如归。
现代文：当时临州、信州、楚州、合州的民众很多参加了叛乱，辛昂对他们说明利害关系，人们都来归附他好象回家一样。
English: At that time, many people in Linshou, Xinshou, Chuzhou and Hezhou participated in the rebellion. Xin'an explained the stakes to them, and people came to join him as if they were going home.

古文：乃令老弱负粮，壮夫拒战，咸乐为用。
现代文：辛昂于是叫年老体弱的背粮食，身体强壮的男子参加打仗，大家都愿意为他效力。
English: Cynon then called the old and weak to carry grain, and the strong men to join the war, and everyone was willing to serve him.

古文：使还，会巴州万荣郡民反，攻围郡城，遏绝山路。
现代文：辛昂完成使命返回时，正遇到巴州万荣郡的百姓造反，进攻包围了郡城，阻断山路。
English: When Xin'an returned after completing his mission, he was facing a rebellion by the people of Wanrong County, Pazhou. The attack encircled the county seat and blocked the mountain road.

古文：昂谓其徒曰： 凶狡猖狂，若待上闻，孤城必陷。
现代文：辛昂对部下说： 乱民凶狡猖狂，我们如果先坐等报告朝延，孤城一定陷落。
English: Xin'an said to his subordinates: "The ruffians are ferocious and cunning. If we wait until the morning to report, the Lone City will surely fall.

古文：苟利百姓，专之可也。 
现代文：如果对老百姓有利，不如先斩后奏。 
English: If it is beneficial to the people, it is better to cut first and play later.

古文：遂募通、开二州，得三千人。
现代文：便在通、开二州招募壮丁，得到三千人。
English: He then recruited young men in Tong and Kaizhou and gained 3,000 men.

古文：倍道兼行，出其不意，直趣贼垒。
现代文：加倍地赶路，出其不意，直逼贼垒。
English: Doubled the speed, caught him by surprise, and drove him into a ditch.

古文：贼以为大军至，望风瓦解，一郡获全。
现代文：贼寇以为大军到来，便望风瓦解，郡城得以保全。
English: The bandits thought that a large army was coming, so they waited for the wind to dissipate, and the county seat was preserved.

古文：周朝嘉之，以为渠州刺史。
现代文：北周朝延嘉奖辛昂，任命他为渠州刺史。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty commended Xin'an and appointed him as the governor of Quzhou.

古文：冬，十月，齐以侯莫陈相为太傅，任城王湝为太保，娄睿为大司马，冯翊王润为太尉，开府仪同三司韩祖念为司徒。
现代文：冬季十月，北齐任命侯莫陈相为太傅，任城王高为太保，娄睿为大司马，冯翊王高润为太尉，开府仪同三司韩祖念为司徒。
English: In the winter of October, the Northern Qi appointed Hou Mo Chen Xiang as Tai Fu, Ren Cheng Wang Gao as Tai Bao, Zha Rui as Da Sima, Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as Taifu, and Kaifu Yi and San Si Han Zu Nien as Sitoru.

古文：庚申，帝享太庙。
现代文：庚申，陈废帝陈伯宗到太庙祭祀。
English: Emperor Go-shin and Emperor Chen Bozong went to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：十一月，乙亥，周遣使来吊。
现代文：十一月，乙亥，北周派使者来陈朝吊丧。
English: In November, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent an envoy to Chen's funeral.

古文：丙戌，周主行视武功等新城；十二月，庚申，还长安。
现代文：丙戌，北周国主巡行视察武功等新城；十二月，庚申，回长安。
English: In June, the northern Zhou sovereigns went on a tour to inspect the martial arts and other new cities; in December, Goshun returned to Chang'an.

古文：齐河间王孝琬怨执政，为草人而射之。
现代文：北齐河间王高孝琬怨恨执政大臣，扎了草人当靶子用箭射它。
English: Wang Gao Xiaojun, the ruler of Northern Qi, resented the ruling minister and shot arrows at the straw man as a target.

古文：和士开、祖珽谮之于上皇曰： 草人以拟圣躬也。
现代文：和士开、祖向太上皇帝进谗言说： 草人是模拟圣上的。
English: And Shikai, the ancestor, said to the Empress Dowager Emperor Jin Rongyan, "Grasshopper is a simulacrum of a saint.

古文：又，前突厥至并州，孝琬脱兜鍪抵地，云： 我岂老妪，须著此物！ 
现代文：再有，以前突厥到了并州，高孝琬脱下头盔扔在地上，说： 我难道是老太婆，要用这种东西！ 
English: Moreover, before the Turks arrived in the annexation of the state, Gao Xiaojuan took off his helmet and threw it on the ground, saying: "Am I an old woman to use such a thing!

古文：此言属大家也。
现代文：这也是针对圣上的。
English: It's making fun of everyone.

古文：又，魏世谣言： 河南种谷河北生，白杨树端金鸡鸣。 
现代文：此外，魏朝之世有民谣说： 河南种谷河北生，白杨树上金鸡鸣。 
English: In addition, during the Wei Dynasty, there was a folk song that said: Henan seeds grow in Hebei, and golden roosters sing in poplar trees.

古文：河南、北者，河间也。
现代文：黄河的南、北，就是河间一带。
English: The south and north of the Yellow River are the inter-river area.

古文：孝琬将建金鸡大赦耳。 
现代文：高孝琬将要设置金鸡，表示要象皇帝那崐样大赦天下。 
English: Gao Xiaojuan is going to set up a golden rooster, indicating that he wants to be as generous as the emperor.

古文：上皇颇惑之。
现代文：太上皇武成帝心里非常疑惑。
English: Empress Dowager Wu Chengdi was very puzzled.

古文：会孝琬得佛牙，置第内，夜有光。
现代文：恰逢高孝琬得到佛牙，将它放在宅第内，佛牙在夜间发光。
English: Coincidentally, Gao Xiaojuan obtained the Buddha's tooth and placed it in his house. The tooth glows at night.

古文：上皇闻之，使搜之，得填库槊幡数百。上皇以为反具，收讯。
现代文：太上皇听说之后，派人去搜导，发现仓库里放着几百件长矛和旗幡，太上皇认为这是图谋造反的用具，便逮捕他加以审讯。
English: When the Emperor heard of this, he sent someone to investigate and found that there were hundreds of spears and banners in the warehouse. The Emperor thought that this was a tool for plotting rebellion and arrested him for interrogation.

古文：诸姬有陈氏者，无宠，诬孝琬云： 孝琬常画陛下像而哭之。 其实世宗像也。
现代文：高孝琬的妾妃中有个陈氏，因为得不到主人的宠爱，就诬告高孝琬说： 高孝琬经常画了陛下的像对着它哭泣 ，其实所画的是高孝琬父亲文襄皇帝的像。
English: One of Gao Xiaojuan's concubines was a Chen, who, because he did not receive his master's favor, falsely accused Gao Xiaojuan, saying: Gao Xiaojuan often painted the image of His Majesty and wept over it, but what he actually painted was the image of Gao Xiaojuan's father, Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：上皇怒，使武卫赫连辅玄倒鞭挝之。
现代文：太上皇勃然大怒，派武卫赫连辅玄用鞭子粗的一头揍他。
English: The Emperor flew into a rage and sent the martial guard, Heren Fuxuan, to beat him with the thick end of a whip.

古文：孝琬呼叔，上皇曰： 何敢呼我为叔！ 
现代文：高孝琬被打得大叫 叔父 。太上皇说： 你怎么胆敢叫我叔父！ 
English: Gao Xiaojuan was beaten and shouted "uncle." The Empress Dowager said: "How dare you call me uncle!

古文：孝琬曰： 臣神武皇帝嫡孙，文襄皇帝嫡子，魏孝静皇帝之甥，何为不得呼叔！ 
现代文：高孝琬说： 臣是神武皇帝的嫡生孙子，文襄皇帝的嫡生儿子，魏孝静皇帝的外甥，为什么不能称你为叔父！ 
English: Gao Xiaojuan said: I am the legitimate grandson of Emperor Shenwu, the legitimate son of Emperor Wenxiang, and the nephew of Emperor Wei Xiaojing. Why can't I call you uncle?

古文：上皇愈怒，折其两胫而死。
现代文：太上皇更加发怒，将他的两条小腿打断因而死去。
English: The Empress Dowager became even angrier, broke his two legs and died.

古文：安德王延宗哭之，泪赤。
现代文：安德王高延宗说后大哭，直到哭出血来。
English: Gao Yanzong, King of Ande, cried until he bled.

古文：又为草人，鞭而讯之曰： 何故杀我兄！ 
现代文：高延宗又扎了个草人，对它一面鞭打一面责问说： 你为什么要杀我的哥哥？ 
English: Gao Yanzong also stabbed a straw man, and scolded it while whipping it, saying, "Why did you kill my brother?

古文：奴告之，上皇覆延宗于地，马鞭鞭之二百，几死。
现代文：奴仆检举了这件事，太上皇把高延宗掀翻在地，用马鞭鞭打二百，高延宗几乎被打死。
English: Gao Yanzong was nearly beaten to death when a servant reported the incident. The emperor flipped Gao Yanzong to the ground and gave him 200 lashes with a horse whip.

古文：是岁，齐赐侍中、中书监元文遥姓高氏，顷之，迁尚书左仆射。
现代文：这一年，北齐赐侍中、中书监元文遥姓高，不久，又升职为尚书左仆射。
English: In the same year, Northern Qi bestowed the title of Gao (高) on the attendant and the supervisor of the Chinese books, and soon he was promoted to the position of the left assistant of the secretary.

古文：魏末以来，县令多用厮役，由是士流耻为之。
现代文：魏朝末年以来，多用出身低贱的厮役当县令，因此一般士人都不屑于充当。
English: Since the end of the Wei Dynasty, low-born eunuchs were often used as county magistrates, so ordinary nobles disdained to serve as eunuchs.

古文：文遥以为县令治民之本，遂请革选，密择贵游子弟，发敕用之；犹恐其披诉、悉召之集神武门，令赵郡王睿宣旨唱名，厚加尉谕而遣之。
现代文：元文遥认为县令是治理百姓的根本，便请求改变选用县令的办法，秘密挑选没有官职的贵族子弟，发出敕令加以任命；还怕这些人申诉，把他们都召集到神武门，叫赵郡王高睿宣布圣旨逐个点名，郑重地进行安慰和劝说，然后派遣出去。
English: Yuan Wenyao believed that county magistrates were fundamental to the governance of the people, so he requested that the method of selecting county magistrates be changed. He secretly selected the sons of aristocrats who did not have official positions and issued a royal decree to appoint them. Fearing that these people would appeal, he called them all to Shenwumen, asked Zhao Guo Wang Gaorui to announce the sacred will by name, solemnly consoled and persuaded them, and then sent them out.

古文：齐之士人为县自此始。
现代文：北齐的士人做县令由此开端。
English: This marked the beginning of officials in North Qi making county orders.

