古文：子曰： 武王、周公，其达孝矣乎。
现代文：孔子说： 武王，周公真是最守孝道的人了！
English: Confucius said: King Wu, Zhou Gong is really the most filial person!

古文：夫孝者，善继人之志，善述人之事者也。
现代文：所谓的孝者，就是善于继承先人的遗志，善于继续先人未完成的事业。
English: Those who keep filial piety are good at inheriting the will of the ancestors, and are good at inheriting the unfinished work of the ancestors.

古文：春秋，修其祖庙，陈其宗器，设其裳衣，荐其时食。
现代文：在春秋两季祭祀的时节，整修祖宗庙宇，陈列祭祀器具，摆设先王遗留下来的衣裳，进献祭祀的鲜美食物。
English: During the spring and autumn festival seasons, the ancestral temple is renovated, the sacrificial tools are displayed, the clothes left by the ancestors are arranged, and the delicious food for the sacrifice is offered.

古文：宗庙之礼，所以序昭穆也。
现代文：宗庙祭祀的礼制，是要排列父子、长幼的顺序。
English: The ritual system of the ancestral temple ritual is to arrange the father and son, the eldest and youngest in order.

古文：序爵，所以辨贵贱也。序事，所以辨贤也。旅酬下为上，所以逮贱也。燕毛所以序齿也。
现代文：按官爵排列次序，就可以分辨出贵贱，按职位排列次序，就能分辨出贤与不贤；敬酒时晚辈先向长辈举杯，这样祖先的恩惠就会延及到晚辈，宴饮时按头发的黑白次序坐，这样就使老少有次序。
English: According to the order of officials and nobles, it is possible to distinguish the noble and the lowly, and according to the order of positions, it is possible to distinguish the virtuous and the wicked; when toasting, the younger generation first raises a glass to the elders, so that the ancestors' bounty will extend to the younger generation, and when dining, they sit according to the black and white order of the hair, so that the old and the young are in order.

古文：践其位，行其礼，奏其乐，敬其所尊，爱其所亲，事死如事生，事亡如事存，孝之至也。
现代文：站到自己的位置上，进行应有礼节，奏起那音乐，恭敬那所尊重的，敬爱那所亲爱的，侍奉死者如同侍奉生者一样，侍奉亡者如同侍奉生存的一样，这是最高的孝了。
English: To stand in the proper place, to perform the rites handed down by the previous king, to play the music of the previous king, to respect the respected by the previous king, the dear by the previous king. To serve the dead as if they were alive, to serve the dead as if they were alive, this is the highest level of filial piety. Suburban festival.

古文：郊社之礼，所以事上帝也。宗庙之礼，所以祀乎其先也。
现代文：郊祭与社祭的礼节，用以侍奉先帝，宗庙的祭礼，用以祭祀祖先。
English: The etiquette of the suburb festival and the company festival is used to serve the former emperor, and the festival of the ancestral temple is used to worship the ancestors.

古文：明乎郊社之礼，禘尝之义，治国其如示诸掌乎。 
现代文：明白郊、社这两种祭礼以及禘与尝的义理，治理国家就如同展示这手掌一样容易了。 
English: With these two kinds of festivals, the Ming Pao Suburb Festival and the Shifang Festival, as well as the principles of bowing and prostration, governing the country is as easy as showing the palm of one's hand.

