古文：百体皆血肉之躯，五官有贵贱之别。
现代文：身体的各种器官都是由血肉组成的，从人的五官上就可以看出贵贱之别。
English: The various organs of the body are made up of flesh and blood, and the difference between the high and the low can be seen from the human five senses.

古文：尧眉分八彩，舜目有重瞳。
现代文：相传尧的眉毛有八种颜色，舜的眼中有两颗瞳仁。
English: According to legend, a baboon's eyebrows have eight colors, and a baboon's eyes have two pupils.

古文：耳有三漏，大禹之奇形；臂有四肘，成汤之异体。
现代文：耳朵上有三个耳孔，这是大禹的奇特之处；胳膊上有四个关节，这是成汤与众不同之处。
English: There are three ear holes on the ear, which is the peculiarity of Dayu; there are four joints on the arm, which is the distinctive feature of Cheng Tang.

古文：文王龙颜而虎眉，汉高斗胸而隆准。
现代文：周文王有像龙一样的额头和虎一样的眉毛，汉高祖有像斗一样的胸膛和高高的鼻梁。
English: Zhou Wenwang has a forehead like a dragon and eyebrows like a tiger, and Henkel has a chest like a bucket and a high nose.

古文：孔圣之顶若芋，文王之胸四乳。
现代文：孔子的头像 圩 一样呈凹形，周文王胸部有四个乳头。
English: The head of Confucius is concave like a dragonfly, and Zhou Wenwang has four nipples on his chest.

古文：周公反握，作兴周之相；重耳骈胁，为霸晋之君。
现代文：周公的手掌柔软，可以反掌握住手腕，后来成为振兴周的国相；重耳的肋骨连接在一起，最后成为晋国的君主，称霸天下。
English: Zhou Gong's palms are soft, and he can hold his wrists backwards. Later, he became the Minister of Revitalization of Zhou; the ribs of the heavy ear are connected together, and finally he became the monarch of Jin Province, dominating the world.

古文：此皆古圣之英姿，不凡之贵品。
现代文：这些都是古代圣贤的体态，超凡脱俗的品相。
English: These are the physique of the ancient sages, the otherworldly appearance.

古文：至若发肤不可毁伤，曾子常以守身为大；待人须当量大，师德贵于唾面自干。
现代文：至于连头发、皮肤都不能毁伤，所以曾子常常把爱惜身体当作一件大事；对待别人应该宽宏大量，就像娄师德那样，就算被人唾在脸上，也不去擦拭它，让他自然的干掉。
English: As for not being able to damage even hair and skin, Zeng Zi often regards caring for one's body as an important matter; one should treat others generously, just like Zou Shide, even if someone spits on his face, he does not wipe it and lets it dry naturally.

古文：谗口中伤，金可铄而骨可销；虐政诛求，敲其肤而吸其髓。
现代文：中伤别人的谗言可以使金石熔化，也可以使骨肉毁灭；横征暴敛的残酷统治，就像敲打人的肌肤吸吮人的骨髓一样。
English: The slander of others can melt the gold and stone, and can also destroy the flesh and bones; the cruel rule of violence is like beating the human skin and sucking the human bone marrow.

古文：受人牵制曰掣肘，不知羞愧曰厚颜。
现代文：做事情被别人牵制叫做 掣肘 ，不知羞愧叫做 厚颜 。
English: To be held back by others in doing things is called "restraint," and not knowing shame is called "impudence."

古文：好生议论，曰摇唇鼓舌；共话衷肠，曰促膝谈心。
现代文：喜欢议论别人，叫做 摇唇鼓舌 ；一起倾诉感情，叫做 促膝谈心 。
English: If you like to talk about others, it's called lip-smacking; if you talk about your feelings together, it's called heart-to-heart talk.

古文：怒发冲冠，蔺相如之英气勃勃；炙手可热，唐崔铉之贵势炎炎。
现代文： 怒发冲冠 ，是蔺相如斥责秦王不守信用时的英勇气概； 炙手可热 ，是人们形容唐代崔铉贵为宰相时的咄咄权势。
English: "Furious and furious" is a description of the courage of Gu Xiangru when he rebuked King Qin for not keeping his word; "hot-tempered" is a description of the aggressive power of the Tang Dynasty's Cui Ronggui when he was prime minister.

古文：貌虽瘦而天下肥，唐玄宗之自谓；口有蜜而腹有剑，李林甫之为人。
现代文：自己的容貌虽然瘦了，却让天下百姓得到了利益，这是唐玄宗形容自己的话；口中说着甜蜜的话，肚子里却拔剑相向，这是人们形容奸相李林甫的为人。
English: Although his appearance is thin, he has benefited the people of the world, which is how Tang Xuan Zong described himself. People describe the adulterer Li Linfu as a person who speaks sweet words with his mouth, but draws a sword in his stomach.

古文：赵子龙一身都是胆，周灵王初生便有须。
现代文：刘备称赞赵子龙一身都是胆，周灵王刚出生时就长有胡须。
English: Liu Bei praised Zhao Zilong for being full of gall, and Zhou Lingwang was born with a beard.

古文：来俊臣注醋于囚鼻，法外行凶；严子陵加足于帝腹，忘其尊贵。
现代文：来俊臣把醋灌到囚犯的鼻子里，这是违法行凶的行为；严子陵睡梦中把脚伸到光武帝刘秀的肚子上，忘记了皇帝的尊贵。
English: Lai Junchen poured vinegar into the prisoner's nose, which was an illegal act of murder; Yan Zi Ling stretched his foot onto the stomach of the Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu in his sleep, forgetting the emperor's dignity.

古文：久不屈兹膝，郭子仪尊居宰相；不为米折腰，陶渊明不拜吏胥。
现代文：田承嗣很少向别人下拜，却向郭子仪屈膝跪拜，因为只有郭子仪能够使强藩屈服；陶渊明不愿为五斗米的俸禄而奉承上司，于是辞官归隐。
English: Tian Chengzhi rarely bowed down to others, but bowed down to Guo Ziyi, because only Guo Ziyi could make the strong domain bow down; Tao Yuanming did not want to flatter his boss for the salary of five bucks, so the official retired.

古文：断送老头皮，杨璞得妻送之诗；新剥鸡头肉，明皇爱贵妃之乳。
现代文： 断送老头皮 ，这是宋代杨璞的妻子送给他的诗里的一句； 新剥鸡头肉 ，这是唐明皇形容杨贵妃乳房的用语。
English: Cut off the old scalp, this is a sentence from a poem sent to him by the wife of Yang Gui in the Song Dynasty; Freshly peeled chicken head meat, this is a term used by Tang Ming Emperor to describe Yang Guifei's breasts.

古文：纤指如春笋，媚眼若秋波。
现代文：女人的手指纤细，就像春天的竹笋一样；眼神妩媚，就像秋天的水波一样。
English: A woman's fingers are slender, like spring bamboo shoots; her eyes are lovely, like autumn waves.

古文：肩曰玉楼，眼名银海；泪曰玉箸，顶曰珠庭。
现代文：肩膀又称 玉楼 ，眼睛又名 银海 ；眼泪叫作 玉箸 ，天庭名为 珠庭 。
English: The shoulders are also known as the Jade Tower, the eyes are also known as the Silver Sea, the tears are called the Jade Chopsticks, and the heavenly garden is called the Pearl Garden.

古文：歇担曰息肩，不服曰强项。
现代文：把担子放下休息叫做 息肩 ，不肯屈服于人叫做 强项 。
English: To lay down one's burden and rest is called "shouldering one's burdens," and refusing to give in to others is called "strength."

古文：丁谓与人拂须，何其谄也；彭乐截肠决战，不亦勇乎。
现代文：丁谓替寇准拂拭胡须上沾的汤，这是何其的谄媚啊!彭乐把被敌人刺出的肠子截断继续与敌决战，这是何等的英勇啊！
English: Ding is said to have wiped the soup stained on his beard for the robber, how charming! Peng Le cut off the intestine stabbed out by the enemy and continued the decisive battle with the enemy, what a heroic act!

古文：剜肉医疮，权济目前之急；伤胸扪足，计安众士之心。
现代文： 剜肉医疮 ，只能暂时缓解目前的窘境； 伤胸扪足 ，这是刘邦使将士安心的计谋。
English: Bruising, can only temporarily alleviate the current predicament; bruising the chest and feet, this is Liu Bang's strategy to reassure the soldiers.

古文：汉张良蹑足附耳，东方朔洗髓伐毛。
现代文：汉代的张良曾经蹑足附耳，为刘邦献计献策；东方朔曾经遇到的奇人黄眉翁，可以每三千年洗一次骨髓，每两千年剥皮去一次毛。
English: Zhang Liang of the Han Dynasty once stood on tiptoe and offered advice to Liu Bang; Huang Mei Weng, a strange man whom Dongfang Shuo once met, can wash bone marrow once every three thousand years, and peel skin and remove hair once every two thousand years.

古文：尹维伦，契丹称为黑面大王；傅尧俞，宋后称为金玉君子。
现代文：北宋大将尹继伦多次打败契丹人，契丹人称他为 黑面大王 ；北宋大臣傅尧俞敢于直抨朝政，后人称他为 金玉君子 。
English: Northern Song Dynasty General Yin Jilun repeatedly defeated the Khitans, who called him the Black-Faced King; Northern Song Dynasty Minister Fu Xi dared to directly criticize the government, and later generations called him the Golden Gentleman.

古文：土木形骸，不自妆饰；铁石心肠，秉性坚刚。
现代文： 土木形骸 是形容人的身体不用额外妆饰； 铁石心肠 是形容人的秉性坚毅刚强。
English: Civil-engineered skeleton is to describe a person's body without additional adornment; hard-hearted is to describe a person's tenacity and strength.

古文：叙会晤曰得挹芝眉，叙契阔曰久违颜范。
现代文：跟君子会晤叫做 得挹芝眉 ，跟别人久别重逢叫做 久违颜范 。
English: A meeting with a gentleman is called a meeting of the minds, but a meeting with someone you haven't seen for a long time is called a meeting of the minds.

古文：请女客曰奉迓金莲，邀亲友曰敢攀玉趾。
现代文：邀请女性宾客叫做 奉迓金莲 ，邀请亲朋好友叫做 敢攀玉趾 。
English: Inviting female guests is called "Bongye Jinlian," and inviting relatives and friends is called "Dare to climb the jade toe."

古文：侏儒谓人身矮，魁梧称人貌奇。
现代文： 侏儒 是指人的身材矮小， 魁梧 是说人的相貌奇特。
English: Dwarf refers to a person's short stature, and burly refers to a person's peculiar appearance.

古文：龙章凤姿，廊庙之彦；獐头鼠目，草野之夫。
现代文： 龙章凤姿 的人一定是朝廷中的杰出君子； 獐头鼠目 的人一定是田野中的无用小人。
English: Those who wear the dragon and phoenix must be distinguished gentlemen in the imperial court; those who wear the skull and crossbones must be useless runts in the fields.

古文：恐惧过甚，曰畏首畏尾；感佩不忘，曰刻骨铭心。
现代文：过度的恐惧叫做 畏首畏尾 ，感激别人的恩情不忘叫做 刻骨铭心 。
English: Excessive fear is called "fear of one's own shadow," and not forgetting to be grateful for the kindness of others is called "grinding one's bones."

古文：貌丑曰不扬，貌美曰冠玉。
现代文：形容相貌丑陋，叫做 不扬 ；形容相貌俊美，叫做 冠玉 。
English: Describing an ugly appearance is called "unimpressive"; describing a handsome appearance is called "crown jewel."

古文：足跛曰蹒跚，耳聋曰重听。
现代文：走路一瘸一拐，叫做 蹒跚 ；形容耳聋之人，叫做 重听 。
English: A person who walks with a limp is called a cripple; a person who is deaf is described as hard of hearing.

古文：欺欺艾艾，口讷之称；喋喋便便，言多之状。
现代文： 期期艾艾 是形容不善言辞的样子， 喋喋便便 是形容善于言辞的样子。
English: Long-winded is to describe the appearance of not being good at speech, and chatter is to describe the appearance of being good at speech.

古文：可嘉者小心翼翼，可鄙者大言不惭。
现代文：令人称赞的，是做事小心翼翼的人；令人鄙视的，是说话大言不惭的人。
English: He is to be commended who is careful in what he does, and he is to be despised who speaks out of turn.

古文：腰细曰柳腰，身小曰鸡肋。
现代文：形容腰肢纤细，叫作 柳腰 ；形容身材瘦小，叫作 鸡肋 。
English: Describe a slender waist and limbs, called willow waist; describe a thin body, called chicken ribs.

古文：笑人齿缺，曰狗窦大开；讥人不决，曰鼠首僨事。
现代文：嘲笑别人缺少牙齿，叫做 狗窦大开 ；讥讽别人犹犹豫豫，叫做 鼠首偾事 。
English: Laughing at others' lack of teeth is called 狗窦大开; mocking others' hesitation is called 鼠首事.

古文：口中雌黄，言事而多改移；皮里春秋，胸中自有褒贬。
现代文： 口中雌黄 是形容人口中说的事情经常改变； 皮里春秋 是指人嘴上不说，但心里却有明确的褒贬。
English: Tongue-in-cheek is used to describe people who say things that change frequently; tongue-in-cheek refers to people who don't say it out loud, but have clear praise and criticism in their hearts.

古文：唇亡齿寒，谓彼此之失依；足上首下，谓尊卑之颠倒。
现代文： 唇亡齿寒 是形容两者相互失去依靠， 足上首下 是形容颠倒了上下尊卑的次序。
English: To lose one's teeth and lose one's lips is to describe the loss of mutual reliance between the two, and to lose one's foot and lose one's head is to describe the reversal of the order of superiority and inferiority.

古文：所为得意，曰吐气扬眉；待人诚心，曰推心置腹。
现代文：所作所为非常得意顺心，叫作 吐气扬眉 ；诚心诚意地对待别人，叫作 推心置腹 。
English: Those who are very good at what they do are called "high-spirited"; those who treat others with sincerity are called "heart-to-heart."

古文：心荒曰灵台乱，醉倒曰玉山颓。
现代文：心里慌张，叫做 灵台乱 ；喝酒醉倒，叫做 玉山颓 。
English: Panic in the heart is called "Ling Tai Ran"; drinking and getting drunk is called "Yushan Yao."

古文：睡曰黑甜，卧曰偃息。
现代文：睡觉称做 黑甜 ，卧倒称做 息偃 。
English: Sleeping is called "hei sui rong" and lying down is called "shih hui."

古文：口尚乳臭，调世人年少无知；三折其肱，谓医士老成谙练。
现代文： 口尚乳臭 是形容世人年少无知； 三折其肱 是形容医师经验老到。
English: To say that the world is young and ignorant is to say that the mouth is milky; to say that the doctor is old and experienced is to say that the world is young and ignorant is to say that the doctor is experienced.

古文：西子捧心，愈见增妍；丑妇效颦，弄巧反拙。
现代文：西施捧心皱眉，越发增加了几分柔弱之美；东施仿效西施皱起眉头，反而显得更加难看。
English: Xishi frowned, and her beauty became more and more delicate; Dongshi frowned in imitation of Xishi, but she looked even more ugly.

古文：慧眼始知道骨，肉眼不识贤人。
现代文：具有慧眼的人，才能分辨出得道的仙人；只有肉眼凡胎的人，分辨不出贤良之士。
English: A person with a discerning eye can distinguish a sage who has attained the truth; an ordinary person with the naked eye cannot distinguish a virtuous person.

古文：婢膝奴颜，谄容可厌；胁肩谄笑，媚态难堪。
现代文： 婢膝奴颜 这种谄媚的样子让人厌恶， 胁肩谄笑 这种谄媚的姿态让人难堪。
English: This kind of obsequious look is repulsive, and this kind of obsequious gesture is embarrassing.

古文：忠臣披肝，为君之药；妇人长舌，为厉之阶。
现代文：忠臣像披肝沥胆一样向帝王建言，就是帝王的良药；妇人搬弄是非，就是为祸的阶梯。
English: A loyal subject advises the emperor as if he were wearing a liver and gallbladder, which is the emperor's good medicine; a woman's meddling is a ladder to disaster.

古文：事遂心曰如愿，事可愧曰汗颜。
现代文：事情符合自己的心意叫做 如愿 ，做事情有愧于心叫做 汗颜 。
English: Doing things according to one's heart's desire is called fulfilling one's wishes, and doing things that one is ashamed of is called being ashamed.

古文：人多言曰饶舌，物堪食曰可口。
现代文：人说的话多了，叫做 饶舌 ；食物合乎口味，叫做 可口 。
English: When people talk a lot, it is called rapping; when food is to one's taste, it is called delicious.

古文：泽及枯骨，西伯之深仁；灼艾分痛，宋祖之友爱。
现代文： 泽及枯骨 ，可见周文王宅心仁厚； 灼艾分痛 ，可见宋太祖对弟弟的友爱。
English: Zhe and withered bones, we can see the benevolence of Zhou Wenwang's house; burning pain, we can see the friendship of Song Taizu to his brother.

古文：唐太宗为臣疗病，亲剪其须；颜杲卿骂贼不辍，贼断其舌。
现代文：唐太宗为给大臣李绩治病，亲自剪下自己的胡须入药；颜杲卿被安禄山俘虏之后骂不绝口，反贼就割断了他的舌头。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang personally cut off his own beard to cure the minister Li Jizhong; Yan Xuanqing was cursed incessantly after being captured by Anlu Mountain, and the anti-thief cut off his tongue.

古文：不较横逆，曰置之度外；洞悉虏情，曰已入掌中。
现代文：不去计较强横无理的事，叫做 置之度外 ；洞悉了敌人的情况，叫做 已入掌中 。
English: To ignore the more powerful and unreasonable things is to be "out of control"; to understand the enemy's situation is to be "in the palm of one's hand."

古文：马良有白眉，独出乎众；阮籍作青眼，厚待乎人。
现代文：马良眉中有白毛，在他的五个兄弟中才华最高；阮籍用青眼看人的话，就是尊重客人。
English: Ma Liang has white hair in his eyebrows and is the most talented of his five brothers; Nguyen Qui looks at people with blue eyes, which means he respects his guests.

古文：咬牙封雍齿，计安众将之心；含泪斩丁公，法正叛臣之罪。
现代文：刘邦咬牙封雍齿为侯，是为了让众将安心；刘邦含泪斩杀救过自己的丁公，是为了让叛臣伏法。
English: Liu Bang gritted his teeth to seal Yong Zi as a prince, in order to give the general public peace of mind; Liu Bang killed Ding Gong, who had saved him with tears, in order to let the traitor submit to the law.

古文：掷果盈车，潘安仁美姿可爱；投石满载，张孟阳丑态堪憎。
现代文：晋代潘安仁容貌俊美，每次乘车出门，爱慕他的妇人会给他的车上扔满水果；张孟阳容貌奇丑，每次乘车出门，妇人就往他车上扔满石头。
English: Emperor Jin's successor, Pan Anren, was so handsome that every time he went out by car, his adoring wife would throw fruit at his car; Zhang Mengyang was so ugly that every time he went out by car, his wife would throw stones at his car.

古文：事之可怪，妇人生须；事所骇闻，男人诞子。
现代文：最奇怪的事情，莫过于妇女长出胡须；最骇人听闻的事情，莫过于男人生出孩子。
English: The strangest thing is for a woman to grow a beard; the most appalling thing is for a man to have a child.

古文：求物济用，谓燃眉之急；悔事无成，曰噬脐何及。
现代文：寻找应急用的东西，叫作解 燃眉之急 ；后悔做事情没有成功，叫作 噬脐何及 。
English: Looking for something to use in an emergency is called solving an urgent problem; regretting doing something that didn't work out is called being too hasty.

古文：情不相关，如秦越人之视肥瘠；事当探本，如善医者只论精神。
现代文：形容两件事情毫不相关，就像秦国人和越国人对彼此的胖廋毫不关心一样；事情应该探本究源，就像有经验的医生探究精气元神一样。
English: Describe the two things are unrelated, just as the Qin and Yue people do not care about each other's fat people; the matter should be investigated, just as experienced doctors investigate the essence of the spirit.

古文：无功食禄，谓之尸位素餐；谫劣无能，谓之行尸走肉。
现代文：没什么功劳却吃着国家的俸禄，这就叫 尸位素餐 ；浅薄无能的人，可以称为 行尸走肉 。
English: Those who have little merit but eat the state's salary are called "corpse vegetarians"; those who are shallow and incompetent can be called "walking dead."

古文：老当益壮，宁知白首之心；穷且益坚，不坠青云之志。
现代文：老当益壮，可以知道白首之人的心志；穷且益坚，不能丧失青云直上的志气。
English: If you are old and strong, you can know the aspirations of people with white heads; if you are poor and strong, you can't lose your youthful spirit.

古文：一息尚存，此志不容少懈；十手所指，此心安可自欺。
现代文：只要还有一口气在，立下的志愿就不应松懈；一个人的言论和行动总处于众人的监督之下，不能自欺欺人。
English: As long as there is breath in one's body, one should not slacken one's determination; one's speech and actions are always under the supervision of many people, and one should not deceive oneself.

