古文：三极彝训，其书言经。
现代文：讲述天、地、人三才不变道理的书籍叫做 经 。
English: The books that tell the unchanging truth that heaven, earth, and man are three are called Sutra.

古文：经也者，恒久之至道，不刊之鸿教也。
现代文：所谓 经 ，就是永恒不变的道理，不可改易的伟大教典。
English: The so-called "sutra" is the eternal and unchanging truth, the great and unchangeable scripture.

古文：故象天地，效鬼神，参物序，制人纪，洞性灵之奥区，极文章之骨髓者也。
现代文：经书取法于天地，征验于鬼神，深究事物的秩序，从而制订出人类的纲纪；它们深入到人的灵魂深处，并掌握了文章最根本的东西。
English: Through books, we can learn from heaven and earth, learn from ghosts and gods, and deeply investigate the order of things, so as to formulate a human discipline; they go deep into the depths of the human soul, and grasp the most fundamental things of the article.

古文：皇世《三坟》，帝代《五典》，重以《八索》，申以《九丘》。岁历绵暧，条流纷糅，自夫子删述，而大宝咸耀。
现代文：三皇时产生了《三坟》，五帝时出现了《五典》，又加上《八索》、《九邱》等古书；它们经过长期的流传而不清楚了，后来的著作越来越错综复杂。
English: "Three Graves" appeared during the reign of the Third Emperor, "Five Classics" appeared during the reign of the Fifth Emperor, and ancient books such as "Eight Soars" and "Jiu Qiu" were added; they were not clear after a long period of circulation, and later works became more and more intricate.

古文：于是《易》张《十翼》，《书》标七观，《诗》列四始，《礼》正五经，《春秋》五例。
现代文：自从经过孔子对古书的整理，它们的精华都放射出光芒。于是，《易》的意义有《十翼》来发挥，《书》中指出了 七观 ，《诗》里分列出四部分作品，《礼》明确了五种主要的礼仪，《春秋》中提出五种记事条例。
English: After Confucius had sorted out the ancient books, their essence radiated light. Therefore, the meaning of "Yi" was brought into play by the "Ten Wings," the "Book" pointed out the "Seven Views," the "Poem" listed the four parts of the work, the "Rite" clarified the five main etiquettes, and the "Spring and Autumn" proposed five kinds of record-keeping regulations.

古文：义既极乎性情，辞亦匠于文理，故能开学养正，昭明有融。
现代文：所有这些，在义理上既有陶冶性情的作用，在文辞上也可称为写作的典范；因此可以启发学习，培养正道，让本身明白的道理更加显著。
English: All of these, in terms of doctrine, have the effect of cultivating temperament, and in terms of literature, they can also be called a model of writing; therefore, they can inspire learning, cultivate the right path, and make the self-evident truth more prominent.

古文：然而道心惟微，圣谟卓绝，墙宇重峻，而吐纳自深。譬万钧之洪钟，无铮铮之细响矣。
现代文：但是自然之道的基本精神十分微妙，圣人的见解卓越；就像高大的墙能包容宽广，千万斤重的大钟，决不会发出细小的声音来。
English: But the essential spirit of the ways of nature is subtle, and the insights of sages are sublime; just as a high wall can contain a wide, thousand-pound bell, it will never emit a small sound.

古文：夫《易》惟谈天，入神致用。故《系》称旨远辞文，言中事隐。
现代文：《易经》是专门研究自然的道理的，讲得精深微妙，可以在实际中运用；所以《系辞》中说：《易经》的意旨深远，辞句有文采，说的话符合实际，但其中讲的事情难以明白。
English: The I Ching is dedicated to studying the principles of nature. It is profound and subtle, and can be applied in practice. Therefore, it is said in the "Dictionary": The meaning of the I Ching is far-reaching, the words are literary, and the words are in line with reality, but the things told in it are difficult to understand.

古文：韦编三绝，固哲人之骊渊也。
现代文：孔子读这部书时，三次翻断了系竹简的皮绳，可见这部书是圣人深奥哲理的宝库。
English: When Confucius read this book, he broke the leather cord that tied the bamboo strips three times, which shows that this book is a treasure trove of the sage's profound philosophy.

古文：《书》实记言，而训诂茫昧，通乎尔雅，则文意晓然。
现代文：《尚书》主要记载古代王者的语录，只是文字不易理解；但只要通过《尔雅》了解古代语言，它的意思也就简单了。
English: "Shangshu" mainly records the quotations of ancient kings, but the text is not easy to understand; but as long as you understand the ancient language through "Lya," its meaning is simple.

古文：故子夏叹《书》 昭昭若日月之明，离离如星辰之行 ，言昭灼也。
现代文：所以子夏赞叹《尚书》说： 它像日月那样明亮，像星辰那样清晰。 
English: Therefore, Zixia praised "Shang Shu" and said: It is as bright as the sun and moon, as clear as the stars.

古文：《诗》主言志，诂训同《书》，攡风裁兴，藻辞谲喻，温柔在诵，故最附深衷矣。
现代文：这无非是赞美《尚书》记的很清楚明白。
English: This is nothing more than to praise the "Shang Shu" as it is written very clearly.

古文：《礼》以立体，据事制范，章条纤曲，执而后显，采掇生言，莫非宝也。《春秋》辨理，一字见义，五石六鹢，以详略成文；雉门两观，以先后显旨；其婉章志晦，谅以邃矣。
现代文：《诗经》主要是抒发作者思想情感的，它的文字和《尚书》一样不易理解；里边有《风》、《雅》等不同类型的诗篇，又有 比 、 兴 等不同的表现方法，文辞华美，比喻曲折；讽诵起来，可以体会到它温柔敦厚的特点，所以它切合了圣人的情怀。
English: The "Book of Songs" mainly expresses the author's thoughts and emotions, and its text is as difficult to understand as the "Book of Songs." There are different types of poems such as "Wind" and "Elegance" inside, and there are different methods of expression such as comparison and rhyme. The words are beautiful and the metaphors are tortuous. When reciting it, you can experience its gentle and dignified characteristics, so it fits the feelings of the saint.

古文：《尚书》则览文如诡，而寻理即畅；《春秋》则观辞立晓，而访义方隐。
现代文：《礼经》可以树立体制，它根据各种事务来制订法度，其中的条款非常详细周密；如果照它去实行，效果一目了然；任意从中取出一词一句，也是十分珍贵的。《春秋》这部书在辨明道理上，一个字就能显示出赞美或批评来。
English: The "Book of Rites" can establish a system. It formulates laws according to various matters, and its provisions are very detailed and thorough. If it is implemented according to it, the effect is clear at a glance. It is also very precious to take a word from it. In the discernment of this book, "Spring and Autumn," one word can show praise or criticism.

古文：此圣人之殊致，表里之异体者也。至根柢槃深，枝叶峻茂，辞约而旨丰，事近而喻远。
现代文：例如 陨石五块  六只水鸟倒飞 ，这是用文字的详尽来显示写作的技巧； 宫门和门前两观失火 ，则用先后次序的不同来显示主次。《春秋》委婉曲折、用意隐晦，确实非常深刻。《尚书》文辞古奥但内容明确易懂；《春秋》文辞简单，但意义深奥难懂。
English: For example, five pieces of meteorites and six waterfowl inverted, which is to use the details of the text to show the writing skills; the palace gate and the two views of the fire in front of the gate, then use the different order of precedence to show the order of priority. "Spring and Autumn" is euphemistic and tortuous, with obscure intentions, it is indeed very profound. "Shang Shu" is ancient and profound, but the content is clear and easy to understand; "Spring and Autumn" is simple, but the meaning is profound and difficult to understand.

古文：是以往者虽旧，馀味日新。
现代文：这就是说圣人文章辞藻各有特色，形式和内容各不相同。
English: That is to say, the words of the sages have their own characteristics, and the form and content are different.

古文：后进追取而非晚，前修文用而未先，可谓太山遍雨，河润千里者也。
现代文：后世的人向它们学习，一点不嫌太晚；前代先贤用了很久也不嫌过时。经书的伟大作用，可以说像泰山云雨洒遍天下，又像黄河之水可以使周围千里都得到灌溉。
English: It is not too late for future generations to learn from them; it is not too old-fashioned for the previous generation of sages to have used them for a long time. The great role of scriptures can be said to be like Mount Tai's clouds and rain spreading all over the world, and like the water of the Yellow River, which can irrigate thousands of miles around.

古文：故论说辞序，则《易》统其首；诏策章奏，则《书》发其源；赋颂歌赞，则《诗》立其本；铭诔箴祝，则《礼》总其端；记传铭檄，则《春秋》为根：并穷高以树表，极远为启疆，所以百家腾跃，终入环内者也。
现代文：所以论、说、辞、序等体裁，都从《周易》开始；诏、策、章、奏等体裁，都发源于《尚书》；赋、颂、歌、赞等体裁，都以《诗经》为本源；铭、诔、箴、祝等体裁，都从《礼经》开端；纪、传、盟、檄等体裁，都以《春秋》为根本。这些经书都为后世树立了最好的榜样，替文章的发展开辟了极为广阔的领域。
English: Therefore, the genre of discourse, saying, speech, and preface all started from "Zhou Yi"; the genre of edict, policy, chapter, and recitation all originated from "Shang Shu"; the genre of fu, ode, song, and praise all originated from "Shijing"; the genre of inscription, poem, proverb, and congratulation all began from "Li Jing"; and the genre of discipline, transmission, alliance, and eulogy all originated from "Spring and Autumn." These scriptures have set the best example for future generations and opened up a very broad field for the development of articles.

古文：若禀经以制式，酌雅以富言，是仰山而铸铜，煮海而为盐也。
现代文：因此，在创作上任凭诸子百家怎样驰骋活跃，归根到底总是超不出经书的范围。如果能根据经书来制定文章的格式，学习经书中的词汇来丰富语言，这就如同靠近矿山来炼铜，煎熬海水来制盐。
English: Therefore, no matter how active the hundreds of scholars are in their creative work, in the final analysis, they can never go beyond the scope of the scriptures. If you can formulate the format of the article according to the scriptures, and learn the vocabulary in the scriptures to enrich the language, this is like approaching the mine to refine copper, and boiling seawater to make salt.

古文：故文能宗经，体有六义∶一则情深而不诡，二则风清而不杂，三则事信而不诞，四则义直而不回，五则体约而不芜，六则文丽而不淫。
现代文：所以如果能够学习圣人经典来写文章，这种文章就能基本上具备六种特点：第一是感情深挚而不欺诈，第二是教训纯正而不杂乱，第三是所写事物真实而不虚妄，第四是意义正确而不歪曲，第五是风格简练而不繁杂，第六是文辞华丽而不过分。
English: Therefore, if you can learn the classics of sages to write an article, such an article can basically have six characteristics: the first is deep feelings without deception, the second is pure teachings without clutter, the third is that the things written are true and not false, the fourth is correct meaning without distortion, the fifth is concise style without complexity, and the sixth is gorgeous wording without excess.

古文：扬子比雕玉以作器，谓五经之含文也。
现代文：扬雄用玉必雕琢然后才能成器作比喻，说明五经里面也必须有文采。
English: Yang Xiong used the metaphor that jade must be carved before it can be made into a tool to illustrate that there must also be poetry in the Five Classics.

古文：夫文以行立，行以文传，四教所先，符采相济。
现代文：人的德行决定着文章的好坏，而德行又是通过文辞表现出来的。
English: People's virtue determines the quality of the article, and virtue is expressed through words.

古文：励德树声，莫不师圣，而建言修辞，鲜克宗经。是以楚艳汉侈，流弊不还，正末归本，不其懿欤！
现代文：孔子用 文、行、忠、信 四项来教育学生，而把 文 放在首要地位；正如美玉必须有精致的花纹一样， 文 是和其他三项相配合的。
English: Confucius used the four subjects of writing, conduct, loyalty, and faith to educate students, and put writing in the first place; just as the gems must have exquisite patterns, writing is compatible with the other three subjects.

古文：赞曰∶三极彝训，训深稽古。
现代文：后世的人在勉励德行、建树功名上，都知道要向圣人学习，只有在文章的写作上，很少学习圣人的经典。
English: People in later generations all know that they should learn from saints when it comes to encouraging virtue and building up merit. However, when it comes to writing articles, they rarely study the classics of saints.

古文：致化归一，分教斯五。
现代文：因此，楚国宋玉等人的作品就比较艳丽，汉代更出现了许多过分铺排的辞赋。
English: As a result, the works of Song Yu and others from the State of Chu were more colorful, and many excessively extravagant words and phrases appeared in the Han Dynasty.

古文：性灵熔匠，文章奥府。
现代文：真是一切文章的祖宗。
English: It really is the granddaddy of all articles.

