古文：高祖高祖神尧大圣大光孝皇帝讳渊，字叔德，姓李氏，陇西成纪人也。
现代文：高祖姓李名渊，字叔德，陇西成纪人。
English: Gao Zu's family name was Li Mianyuan, his family name was Shude, and he was born in Shannxi.

古文：其七世祖皓，当晋末，据秦、凉以自王，是为凉武昭王。
现代文：他的前七代先祖李詗，晋末时占据秦、凉二州，自称为王，即凉武昭王。
English: The first seven generations of his ancestor, Li Xi, occupied Qin and Liang two states at the end of the Jin Dynasty, and called himself the king, that is, the king of Liangwuzhao.

古文：皓生歆，歆为沮渠蒙逊所灭。
现代文：李詗的儿子李歆，被北凉首领沮渠蒙逊灭掉。
English: Li Yao's son, Li Yao, was eliminated by the leader of the Beiliang, Deqiu Mengxun.

古文：歆生重耳，魏弘农太守。
现代文：李歆之子重耳，是北魏的弘农太守。
English: Jie Er, the son of Li Xi, was the crown prince of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：重耳生熙，金门镇将，戍于武川，因留家焉。
现代文：其子李熙，是才能优异的朝廷诏用镇将，因驻守武川，安家长居此地。
English: His son, Li Xi, was a talented imperial general who was stationed in Bukawa, so the An family lived there.

古文：熙生天赐，为幢主。
现代文：李熙之子李天赐，任幢主。
English: Li Xi's son, Li Tianzai, became the owner of the building.

古文：天赐生虎，西魏时，赐姓大野氏，官至太尉，与李弼等八人佐周代魏有功，皆为柱国，号 八柱国家 。
现代文：其子李虎，西魏时被赐姓大野，官做到太尉，与李弼等八人辅助北周取代西魏有功，都成为加 柱国 衔的最高武官，号称 八柱国家 。
English: His son, Li Hu, was given the surname Ohno during the Western Wei Dynasty, and was promoted to the rank of captain. Together with Li Xi and other eight people who assisted the Northern Zhou Dynasty to replace the Western Wei Dynasty, they all became the highest military officer of the pillar country, known as the eight pillar country.

古文：周闵帝受魏禅，虎已卒，乃追录其功，封唐国公，谥曰襄。
现代文：北周孝闵帝承继西魏帝位时，李虎已去世，便追认他的功劳，封为唐国公，谥号 襄 。
English: When the Northern Zhou Xiaoqi Emperor succeeded the Western Wei Emperor, Li Hu had already passed away, and he recognized his merits and was named Tang Guo, with the surname of Xiang.

古文：襄公生昺，袭封唐公，隋安州总管、柱国大将军，卒，谥曰仁。
现代文：襄公之子李昞，承袭其父爵位封为唐公，任北周的安州总管、柱国大将军，谥号 仁 。
English: The son of Prince Xiang, Li Qian, inherited his father's title of Prince of Tang and served as the governor of Anzhou in northern Zhou and the general of Zhuguo, surnamed Ren.

古文：仁公生高祖于长安，体有三乳，性宽仁，袭封唐公。
现代文：李昞在长安生下高祖，李渊性情宽厚仁爱，袭位封为唐公。
English: Li Yu was born in Chang'an, and his great-grandfather, Li Yuan, had a generous and benevolent disposition. He was given the title of Tang Gong.

古文：隋文帝独孤皇后，高祖之从母也，以故文帝与高祖相亲爱。
现代文：隋文帝的独孤皇后是高祖姨母，因此文帝与高祖亲近友爱。
English: The lone empress of Sui Emperor Wen was Gao Zu's aunt, so Emperor Wen was close to Gao Zu.

古文：文帝相周，复高祖姓李氏，以为千牛备身，事隋谯、陇二州刺史。
现代文：文帝任北周宰相时，恢复高祖姓李，委任他做侍卫官千牛备身，任用为隋朝的谯、陇二州刺史。
English: When Emperor Wen was the prime minister of Northern Zhou, he restored Gao Zu's surname Li, appointed him as a bodyguard, and appointed him as the Sui Dynasty's  and  of the two states.

古文：大业中，历岐州刺史、荥阳楼烦二郡太守，召为殿内少监、卫尉少卿。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年间，高祖历任岐州刺史、荥阳楼烦二郡太守，召任为殿内少监、卫尉少卿。
English: During the years of the Sui Dynasty, Gao Zu successively served as the governor of Qizhou and the governor of Shenyang, and was appointed as the junior inspector of the palace and the junior captain of the guards.

古文：炀帝征辽东，遣高祖督运粮于怀远镇。
现代文：炀帝征讨辽东，派高祖在怀远镇督运军粮。
English: Emperor Qian conquered Liaodong and sent Gao Zu to transport military grain in Huaiyuan Town.

古文：杨玄感将反，其兄弟从征辽者皆逃归，高祖先觉以闻。炀帝遽班师，以高祖为弘化留守，以御玄感，诏关右诸郡兵皆受高祖节度。
现代文：杨玄感想要谋反，他随从炀帝征辽的兄弟们尽都逃回，高祖事前察觉，禀报炀帝，炀帝迅即率军返回，调高祖任弘化留守抵御杨玄感，并诏令关右诸郡军队统受高祖调度指挥。
English: Yang Xuanquan wanted to rebel, he followed Gao Zu's brothers, who wanted to conquer Liao, and they all fled back. Gao Zu was aware of this in advance, so he reported to Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao Xun immediately returned with his army, transferred Gao Zu to defend against Yang Xuanquan, and ordered the troops of Guanzhu County to be under Gao Zu's command.

古文：是时，隋政荒，天下大乱，炀帝多以猜忌杀戮大臣。
现代文：这时，隋朝政务荒废，天下大乱，炀帝多凭猜忌杀戮大臣。
English: At this time, the Sui Dynasty's government affairs were in ruins, the country was in turmoil, and Emperor Zhao killed ministers mostly on the basis of suspicion.

古文：尝以事召高祖，高祖遇疾，不时谒。
现代文：他曾因事召见高祖，高祖有病，未按时谒见。
English: He had been summoned to see Gao Zu due to an incident. Gao Zu was ill and did not appear on time.

古文：高祖有甥王氏在后宫，炀帝问之，王氏对以疾，炀帝曰： 可得死否？ 
现代文：高祖的外甥王氏，在后宫供职，炀帝问王氏，王氏回禀高祖有病，炀帝说： 可会死吗？ 
English: Gaozu's nephew Wang, who served in the harem, asked Emperor Qian about Wang. Wang replied that Gaozu was ill. Emperor Qian said, "Can he die?"

古文：高祖闻之益惧，因纵酒纳赂以自晦。
现代文：高祖听说后更为恐惧，于是放肆饮酒、收受馈赠，借以掩藏行迹。
English: Hearing this, Gaozu was even more afraid, so he drank freely and accepted gifts to cover his tracks.

古文：十一年，拜山西河东慰抚大使，击龙门贼母端儿，射七十发皆中，贼败去，而敛其尸以筑京观，尽得其箭于其尸。
现代文：大业十一年，高祖任山西河东慰抚大使，还击龙门的贼寇母端儿，射七十箭全部命中，贼寇败逃。高祖收聚贼寇尸体垒高示众，从尸体上尽数收得所射的箭。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taiei era, Gao Zu, the consolation ambassador of Shanxi Hedong, hit back at the bandit mother and son at the dragon gate, shot all seventy arrows, and the bandit fled. Gao Zu gathered the bandit corpses and showed them to the public, and collected as many arrows as possible from the corpses.

古文：又击绛州贼柴保昌，降其众数万人。
现代文：又攻打绛州贼寇柴保昌，降服其部众数万人。
English: He also attacked the Zhangzhou bandit Chai Baochang and subdued tens of thousands of his troops.

古文：突厥犯塞，高祖与马邑太守王仁恭击之。
现代文：突厥侵犯边塞，高祖与马邑太守王仁恭迎击，隋军兵少，不足抵敌。
English: When the Turks invaded the border fortress, Gaozu and the governor of Ma'iyu, Wang Renkong, met the attack. The Sui army was short of soldiers and unable to resist the enemy.

古文：隋兵少，不敌，高祖选精骑二千为游军，居处饮食随水草如突厥，而射猎驰骋示以闲暇，别选善射者伏为奇兵。
现代文：高祖挑选两千精锐骑兵作为流动部队，宿营、饮食傍水就草，习俗如同突厥，并射箭捕猎纵马驰骋，以示兵力悠闲有余；又另选擅长射术的士兵埋伏作为出奇制胜之军。
English: Gaozu selected two thousand elite cavalrymen as mobile troops, camped and ate by the water, with customs like the Turks, and shot arrows, hunted, and galloped on horseback to show that there were more than enough troops; he also selected soldiers who were good at shooting to ambush as a surprisingly victorious army.

古文：虏见高祖，疑不敢战，高祖乘而击之，突厥败走。
现代文：敌寇遭遇高祖，犯疑不敢交战；高祖趁机攻击，突厥军大败而逃。
English: When the enemy raiders encountered Gaozu, they hesitated to fight; Gaozu took the opportunity to attack, and the Turkish army was defeated and fled.

古文：十三年，拜太原留守，击高阳历山飞贼甄翟儿于西河，破之。
现代文：大业十三年，高祖任太原留守，在西河攻打高阳历山飞的贼寇甄翟儿，攻破贼军。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taiei era, Gao Zu Ren stayed behind in Taiyuan to attack the bandits of Gaoyang Leshanfei in the West River and defeat the bandits.

古文：是时，炀帝南游江都，天下盗起。
现代文：这时，炀帝南游江都，天下盗寇四起。
English: At this time, Emperor Qian traveled to the south of the Yangtze River, and there were robberies everywhere.

古文：高祖子世民知隋必亡，阴结豪杰，招纳亡命，与晋阳令刘文静谋举大事。计已决，而高祖未之知，欲以情告，惧不见听。
现代文：高祖之子李世民料定隋朝必亡，暗中交结豪杰，招纳逃亡人士，与晋阳县令刘文静策划夺取天下，计谋已定，而高祖尚不知道，想以实情相告，又怕他不听从。
English: Gao Zu's son, Li Shimin, had already decided that the Sui Dynasty was doomed. He secretly befriended heroes, recruited fugitives, and plotted with Liu Wenzhing, the leader of Jinyang County, to seize the world. The plot was already decided, but Gao Zu did not know it yet. He wanted to tell the truth, but was afraid that he would not listen.

古文：高祖留守太原，领晋阳宫监，而所善客裴寂为副监，世民阴与寂谋，寂因选晋阳宫人私侍高祖。
现代文：高祖留守太原，兼任晋阳宫监，他所赞许的宾客裴寂任副监。李世民暗地与裴寂商议，于是裴寂挑选晋阳宫的宫女私下侍奉高祖。
English: Gaozhu stayed in Taiyuan and concurrently served as the palace inspector of Jinyang, and his approved guest Peizhang served as the deputy inspector. Li Shimin secretly negotiated with Peizhang, so Peizhang selected the palace maids of Jinyang Palace to privately serve Gaozhu.

古文：高祖过寂饮酒，酒酣从容，寂具以大事告之，高祖大惊。
现代文：高祖到裴家饮酒，酒兴正浓心情舒畅时，裴寂才将夺取天下的事告诉他，高祖大惊。
English: Gao Zu went to Pei's house to drink, and when he was in a good mood, Pei Shanzhong told him about conquering the world. Gao Zu was shocked.

古文：寂曰： 正为宫人奉公，事发当诛，为此尔。 
现代文：裴寂说： 正因为宫女私下侍奉您，事情暴露罪当处死，才这样做的。 
English: Pei Zha said: It is precisely because the concubine served you in private that she did so, and the crime of revealing the matter is punishable by death.

古文：世民因亦入白其事，高祖初阳不许，欲执世民送官，已而许之，曰： 吾爱汝，岂忍告汝邪？ 
现代文：李世民也趁势进来禀告这件事。高祖起初假装反对，要抓李世民送官府，之后才表示赞同，说： 我钟爱你，难道忍心告发你吗？ 
English: Li Shimin also took advantage of the situation to come in and denounce the matter. Gaozhu initially pretended to object and wanted to arrest Li Shimin and send him to the government, but later agreed, saying: I love you, can I bear to denounce you?

古文：然未有以发。
现代文：但没有发难。
English: But there was no trouble.

古文：而所在盗贼益多，突厥数犯边，高祖兵出无功，炀帝遣使者执高祖诣江都，高祖大惧。
现代文：而他所在地区盗贼越来越多，突厥屡屡侵犯边塞，高祖出兵不见功效，炀帝派使臣来抓高祖到江都，高祖十分恐惧。
English: However, there were more and more thieves in his area, the Turks repeatedly violated the border fortress, Gaozu's military deployment was not effective, and Emperor Qian sent envoys to capture Gaozu to Jiangdu. Gaozu was very afraid.

古文：世民曰： 事急矣，可举事！ 
现代文：李世民说： 势态危急，可以行动了！ 
English: Li Shimin said: The situation is critical, we can act!

古文：已而炀帝复驰使者赦止高祖，其事遂已。
现代文：随即炀帝又派使臣快马赶来赦免高祖，起兵发难才中止。
English: Emperor Xuan then sent the envoy Qiaoma to come and pardon Gao Zu, and only then did he stop sending troops.

古文：是时，刘武周起马邑，林士弘起豫章，刘元进起晋安，皆称皇帝；硃粲起南阳，号楚帝；李子通起海陵，号楚王；邵江海据岐州，号新平王；薛举起金城，号西秦霸王；郭子和起榆林，号永乐王；窦建德起河间，号长乐王；王须拔起恒、定，号漫天王；汪华起新安，杜伏威起淮南，皆号吴王；李密起巩，号魏公；王德仁起鄴，号太公；左才相起齐郡，号博山公；罗艺据幽州，左难当据泾，冯盎据高、罗，皆号总管；梁师都据朔方，号大丞相；孟海公据曹州，号录事；周文举据淮阳，号柳叶军；高开道据北平，张长逊据五原，周洮据上洛，杨士林据山南，徐圆朗据兗州，杨仲达据豫州，张善相据伊、汝，王要汉据汴州，时德睿据尉氏，李义满据平陵，綦公顺据青、莱，淳于难据文登，徐师顺据任城，蒋弘度据东海，王薄据齐郡，蒋善合据郓州，田留安据章丘，张青特据济北，臧君相据海州，殷恭邃据舒州，周法明据永安，苗海潮据永嘉，梅知岩据宣城，邓文进据广州，俚酋杨世略据循、潮，冉安昌据巴东，甯长真据郁林，其别号诸盗往往屯聚山泽。
现代文：这时，刘武周起兵马邑，林士弘起兵豫章，刘元进起兵晋安，都自称皇帝；朱粲起兵南阳，号称楚帝；李子通起兵海陵，号称楚王；邵江海占据岐州，号称新平王；薛举起兵金城，号称西秦霸王；郭子和起兵榆林，号称永乐王；窦建德起兵河间，号称长乐王；王须拔在恒、定一带起兵，号称漫天王；汪华在新安起兵，杜伏威在淮南起兵，都号称吴王；李密在巩地起兵，号称魏公；王德仁在邺地起兵，号称太公；左才相在齐郡起兵，号称博山公；罗艺占据幽州，左难当占据泾，冯盎占据高、罗，都号称总管；梁师都占据朔方，号称大丞相；孟海公占据曹州，号称录事；周文举占据淮阳，号称柳叶军；高开道占据北平，张长訹占据五原，周洮占据上洛，杨士林占据山南，徐圆朗占据兖州，杨仲达占据豫州，张善相占据伊、汝，王要汉占据汴州，时德睿又占据尉氏，李义满占据平陵，綦公顺占据青、莱，淳于难占据文登，徐师顺占据任城，蒋弘度占据东海，王薄占据齐郡，蒋善合占据郓州，田留安占据章丘，张青特占据济北，臧君相占据海州，殷恭邃占据舒州，周法明占据永安，苗海潮占据永嘉，梅知岩占据宣城，邓文进占据广州，俚族首领杨世略占据循、潮，冉安昌占据巴东，宁长真占据郁林，其他另有称号的各盗群往往啸聚山林水泽。
English: At this time, Liu Wuzhong set out from Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Lin Shihong set out from Yuzhang, and Liu Yuanjin set out from Jin'an, all of whom claimed to be emperors; Zhu Di set out from Nanyang, known as Emperor Chu; Li Zi Tong set out from Hailing, known as King Chu; Shao Jianghai occupied Qizhou, known as King Xinping; Xue set out from Jincheng, known as King of Western Qin; Guo Zi set out from Yulin, known as King Yongle; Dou Jian De set out from Hema, known as King Changle; Wang Suba

古文：而刘武周攻汾阳宫，高祖乃集将吏告曰： 今吾为留守，而贼据离宫，纵贼不诛，罪当死。
现代文：当刘武周攻打汾阳宫时，高祖便召集众将领、吏属，对他们讲： 如今我任留守，如果贼寇攻占了皇帝别宫，即使贼寇不杀我等，论罪也该处死。
English: When Liu Wuzhou attacked the Poyang Palace, Gao Zu called together all the generals and officials and said to them: "Now I will stay behind. If the thieves capture the emperor's palace, even if the thieves do not kill me, they should be sentenced to death.

古文：然出兵必待报，今江都隔远，后期奈何？ 
现代文：但要出兵迎击，必待朝廷答复，眼下江都交通阻隔、路途遥远，延误了规定的奏报时间怎么办？ 
English: But to send troops to meet the attack, we must wait for the reply of the imperial court. At present, the traffic in Jiangdu is blocked, the road is far away, and the prescribed reporting time is delayed. What should we do?

古文：将吏皆曰： 国家之利可专者，公也。 高祖曰： 善。 
现代文：众将、吏都说： 国家利益大事，现在能独自决断的人是您。 高祖说： 好！ 
English: The generals and officials all said, "This is a matter of national interest, and you are the one who can make the final decision." Gaozu said, "Good!

古文：乃募兵，旬日间得众一万。
现代文：于是招募兵丁，十天时间招得一万人。
English: So he recruited soldiers, and in ten days he had ten thousand men.

古文：副留守虎贲郎将王威、虎牙郎将高君雅见兵大集，疑有变，谋因祷雨晋祠以图高祖。
现代文：副留守、虎贲郎将王威、虎牙郎将高君雅见大量募集士兵，疑心发生异常事变，商量趁着到晋祠求雨的机会除掉高祖。
English: Wang Wei, the deputy left-behind, and Wang Yazhong, the vice-left-behind, and Gao Junya, the vice-left-behind and vice-left-behind, recruited a large number of soldiers, suspected that an abnormal event had occurred, and discussed taking advantage of the opportunity to go to Jin Temple to pray for rain to get rid of Gao Zu.

古文：高祖觉之，乃阴为备。
现代文：被高祖察觉，便暗地做了防备。
English: When Gao Zu noticed, he secretly took precautions.

古文：五月甲子，高祖及威、君雅视事，开阳府司马刘政会告威、君雅反，即坐上执之。
现代文：五月十五日，高祖和王威、高君雅一道办理公务，开阳府司马刘政会指控王威、高君雅谋反，高祖当即在座位上把他们抓了。
English: On May 15, Gao Zu, Wang Wei, and Gao Junya were working together on official business. The Secretary of Koyang Prefecture, Ma Liu, accused Wang Wei and Gao Junya of plotting a rebellion, and Gao Zu immediately arrested them at their seats.

古文：丙寅，突厥犯边，高祖令军中曰： 人告威、君雅召突厥，今其果然。 
现代文：十七日，突厥进犯边境，高祖传令军中说： 有人告发王威、高君雅招来突厥，现证实果然如此。 
English: On the 17th, when the Turks invaded the border, Gaozhu Chuan issued an order to the troops, saying: "Some people have accused Wang Wei and Gaojun Ya of inviting the Turks, and now it has been confirmed that this is indeed the case.

古文：遂杀之以起兵。
现代文：于是杀了王、高二人趁势起兵。
English: So they killed the king, and the two Gaos took advantage of the situation and raised an army.

古文：遣刘文静使突厥，约连和。
现代文：并派刘文静出使突厥，相约媾和。
English: And sent Liu Wenzhing as envoy to Turkey to make peace.

古文：六月己卯，传檄诸郡，称义兵，开大将军府，置三军。
现代文：六月己卯日，高祖向各郡发布军事文告，号称是禁暴救乱的义兵，设置大将军府，建立左、中、右三军。
English: On the last day of June, Gaozu issued a military proclamation to all counties, claiming to be a riot control and rescue volunteer, setting up a general's office, and establishing the left, middle, and right armies.

古文：以子建成为陇西公、左领军大都督，左军隶焉；世民为炖煌公、右领军大都督，右军隶焉；元吉为姑臧公，中军隶焉。
现代文：以长子李建成任陇西公、左领军大都督，左军隶属其下；次子李世民为敦煌公、右领军大都督，右军隶属其下；三子李元吉为姑臧公，中军隶属其下。
English: The eldest son, Li Jiancheng, served as the governor of Shaanxi Province and the left leader of the left army, and the left army was subordinate to him; the second son, Li Shimin, was the governor of Dunhuang Province and the right leader of the right army, and the right army was subordinate to him; the third son, Li Yuanji, was the governor of Gushan Province and the central army was subordinate to him.

古文：裴寂为长史，刘文静为司马，石艾县长殷开山为掾，刘政会为属，长孙顺德、王长谐、刘弘基、窦琮为统军。
现代文：裴寂任长史，刘文静任司马，石艾县县长殷开山任掾史，刘政会为属，长孙顺德、王长谐、刘弘基、窦琮为统军。
English: Pei Jia as the chief historian, Liu Wenzhing as the secretary, Shiai County Governor Yin Kaishan as the secretary, Liu Zhenghui as the subordinate, and the eldest grandson Shunde, Wang Changhong, Liu Hongji and Dou Ying as the unified army.

古文：开仓库赈穷乏。
现代文：开仓救济穷困百姓。
English: Opening warehouses to help poor people.

古文：七月壬子，高祖杖白旗，誓众于野，有兵三万，以元吉为太原留守。
现代文：七月初三，高祖手执白色军旗，在原野上对全军动员、宣誓，拥有三万人马，派李元吉任太原留守。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Gao Zu, holding a white flag, mobilized and swore an oath to the whole army on the plain. He had thirty thousand horses and sent Li Yuanji to stay in Taiyuan.

古文：癸丑，发太原。
现代文：初四，从太原发兵。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, troops were dispatched from Taiyuan.

古文：甲寅遣将张纶徇下离石、龙泉、文城三郡。
现代文：初五，派将领张纶攻下离石、龙泉、文城三郡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Ye, the leader of the faction, conquered the three counties of Lishi, Longquan, and Wencheng.

古文：丙辰，次灵石，营于贾胡堡。
现代文：初七，行军至灵石县，安营在贾胡堡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they marched to Lingshi County and camped at Jahu Fort.

古文：隋虎牙郎将宋老生屯于霍邑，以拒义师。
现代文：隋朝虎牙郎将宋老生驻扎霍邑，抗拒义军。
English: Emperor Taiga of the Sui Dynasty stationed Song Laosheng in Huoyu to resist the rebels.

古文：丙寅，隋鹰扬府司马李轨起武威，号大凉王。
现代文：十七日，隋朝鹰扬府司马李轨在武威起兵，自号大凉王。
English: On the seventeenth day of the Sui Dynasty, the governor of Yingyang Prefecture, Ma Liguo, raised an army in Wuwei and called himself the King of Cool.

古文：八月辛巳，败宋老生于霍邑。丙戌，下临汾郡。
现代文：八月初三，义军在霍邑打败宋老生。初八，攻下临汾郡。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, the rebels defeated Song Laosheng in Huoyi. On the eighth day of the first month, they captured Linyi County.

古文：辛卯，克绛郡。
现代文：十三日，攻克绛郡。
English: On the thirteenth day, he conquered Jixian County.

古文：癸巳，次龙门，突厥来助。
现代文：十五日，义军在龙门县驻扎，突厥派军前来助战。
English: On the 15th, the rebels were stationed in Longmen County, and the Turks sent troops to help.

古文：隋骁卫大将军屈突通守河东，绝津梁。
现代文：隋朝骁卫大将军屈突通驻守河东县，拆断了渡桥。
English: General Qu Jutong of the Sui Dynasty stationed in Hedong County tore down the bridge.

古文：壬寅，冯翊贼孙华、土门贼白玄度皆具舟以来逆。
现代文：二十四日，冯翊的盗贼孙华、土门的盗贼白玄度都备好舟船前来迎接义军。
English: On the 24th, Sun Hua, the thief of Fengye, and Bai Xundu, the thief of Dumen, both prepared boats and ships to meet the rebels.

古文：九月戊午，高祖领太尉，加置僚佐。
现代文：九月初十，高祖兼任太尉，增设下属僚吏。
English: At the beginning of September 10th, Gaozu also served as a captain and added subordinate officials.

古文：以少牢祀河，乃济。
现代文：高祖用猪、羊做祭礼祭祀黄河，然后渡河。
English: Gao Zu used pigs and sheep to make sacrifices to worship the Yellow River, and then crossed the river.

古文：甲子，次长春宫。
现代文：十六日，行军停驻长春宫。
English: On the 16th, the march stopped at Changchun Palace.

古文：丙寅，陇西公建成、刘文静屯永丰仓守潼关，敦煌公世民自渭北徇三辅，从父弟神通起兵于鄠，柴氏妇，高祖女也，亦起兵于司竹，皆与世民会。
现代文：十八日，陇西公李建成、刘文静屯兵永丰仓，驻守潼关。敦煌公李世民从渭北攻下三辅一带，高祖的堂弟李神通在县起兵，高祖的女儿、柴绍之妻也在司竹起兵，都来与李世民会合。
English: On the 18th, Shaanxi Gong Li Jiancheng and Liu Wenzhing garrisoned Yongfeng Cang and garrisoned Shaoguan. Dunhuang Gong Li Shimin attacked the Sanfu area from the north of Shaanxi, Gao Zu's cousin Li Shentong raised an army in the county, Gao Zu's daughter and Chai Shao's wife also raised an army in Sizhu, and they all came to meet Li Shimin.

古文：眉阝贼丘师利李仲文、盩厔贼何潘仁向善思、宜君贼刘炅皆来降，因略定鄠、杜。
现代文：县的盗贼丘师利、李仲文，周至县的盗贼何潘仁、向善思，宜君县的盗贼刘炅等来降顺义军，因而夺取平定了、杜两县。
English: The county's thieves Qiu Shili and Li Zhongwen, the county's thieves He Panren and Xiang Sansi, and the county's thief Liu Qi, etc. came to subdue the Shun rebels and thus conquered the two counties.

古文：壬申，高祖次冯翊。
现代文：十四日，高祖进驻冯翊。
English: On the 14th, Gao Zu was stationed in Fengyuan.

古文：乙亥，敦煌公世民屯阿城，陇西公建成自新丰趋霸上。
现代文：二十七日，敦煌公李世民驻扎阿城，陇西公李建成由新丰县奔赴军事要地霸上。
English: On the 27th, the Dunhuang gong li shimin was stationed in Acheng, and the Shaanxi gong li Jiancheng rushed from Xinfeng County to occupy the military important place.

古文：丙子，高祖自下邽以西，所经隋行宫、苑御，悉罢之，出宫女还其家。
现代文：二十八日，高祖从下圭阝西进，将所经过的隋帝行宫、园林禁苑，全部废止，放出宫女让她们回家。
English: On the 28th, Gao Zu marched westward from Lower Guizhou to abolish the imperial palace and gardens of the Sui Dynasty that he had passed through, and let the imperial concubines go home.

古文：十月辛巳，次长乐宫，有众二十万。
现代文：十月初四，高祖停驻长乐宫，拥有部众二十万人。
English: On the fourth day of October, Gao Zu stopped at the Changle Palace, with 200,000 followers.

古文：隋留守卫文升等奉代王侑守京城，高祖遣使谕之，不报。
现代文：隋朝留守卫文升等辅助代王杨侑守卫京城大兴，高祖派使者去通告他们，他们不予答复。
English: Gao Zu sent an envoy to inform them that they would not reply.

古文：乃围城，下令曰： 犯隋七庙及宗室者，罪三族。 
现代文：于是高祖围攻京城，但下令： 凡侵犯隋朝宗庙及皇室宗族者，罪及三族。 
English: Gao Zu then besieged the capital, but ordered: Anyone who violates the Sui Dynasty's ancestral temple and the royal family's ancestral clan will be punished by the three clans.

古文：丙申，隋罗山令萧铣自号梁公。
现代文：十九日，隋朝山县令萧铣自称梁公。
English: On the 19th, Xiao Wei, the governor of Sui Dynasty's Asan County, called himself Liang Gong.

古文：十一月丙辰，克京城。
现代文：十一月初九，义军攻克京城。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, the rebel army captured the capital.

古文：命主符郎宋公弼收图籍。
现代文：高祖责成主符郎宋公弼收取地图、户籍。
English: Gao Zu ordered the chief priest Song Gongyi to collect maps and household registrations.

古文：约法十二条，杀人、劫盗、背军、叛者死。
现代文：制定了十二条法律：杀人、抢劫、违反军令、反叛者处死。
English: Twelve laws were enacted: homicide, robbery, violation of military orders, and the death penalty for rebels.

古文：癸亥，遥尊隋帝为太上皇，立代王为皇帝。
现代文：十六日，尊奉远在外地的炀帝为太上皇，立代王杨侑为皇帝。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Emperor Zhao, who was far away in the provinces, was enthroned as the last emperor, and the new king, Yang Di, was proclaimed emperor.

古文：大赦，改元义宁。
现代文：施行大赦，改皇帝年号为义宁。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and the emperor's era name was changed to Yining.

古文：甲子，高祖入京师，至朝堂，望阙而拜。
现代文：十七日，高祖进入京城，来到朝堂，向宫门叩拜。
English: On the seventeenth day, Gao Zu entered the capital, came to the imperial court, and bowed to the palace gate.

古文：隋帝授高祖假黄钺、使持节、大都督内外诸军事、大丞相、录尚书事，进封唐王。
现代文：隋恭帝杨侑授予高祖以代皇帝亲征的最高权位 假黄钺 称号、有诛杀中级以下官吏权力的 使持节 、任职大都督内外诸军事、大丞相、录尚书事，晋封高祖为唐王。
English: Emperor Yang Jie of the Sui Dynasty awarded Gao Zu with the highest authority of the emperor's personal enlistment, the title of "False Huang Jie," the power of the officials below the middle level, the power of the enlistment, the military inside and outside the military, the grand military governor, the grand military minister, the record of the records, and the promotion of Gao Zu to the Tang King.

古文：以武德殿为丞相府，下教曰令，视事于虔化门。
现代文：将武德殿作为丞相府，他发布的训示称为 令 ，在虔化门处理政事。
English: He designated Wude-den as the prime minister's office, and the instructions he issued were called "Orders," and he handled political affairs at Kyonhakado.

古文：十二月癸未，隋帝赠唐襄公为景王；仁公为元王；夫人窦氏为唐国妃，谥曰穆。
现代文：十二月初七，隋恭帝追赠唐襄公李虎为景王；唐仁公李昞为元王；高祖夫人窦氏为唐国妃，谥号 穆 。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Sui Gong presented Tang Xiang Gong Li Hu as King of Jing; Tang Ren Gong Li Jie as King of Yuan; Gao Zu Lady Dou as Queen of Tang, surnamed Mu.

古文：以建成为唐国世子；世民为唐国内史，徙封秦国公；元吉为齐国公。
现代文：以李建成为唐国承袭爵位的世子；李世民为唐国内史令，改封为秦国公；李元吉为齐国公。
English: Li Jian became Tang's heir to inherit the title of nobility; Li Shimin became Tang's domestic historian and was renamed Qin Guogong; Li Yuanji became Qi Guogong.

古文：丞相府置长史、司录以下官。
现代文：丞相府设置长史、司录以下的官员。
English: Long history of the establishment of the prime minister's office, officials below the secretary.

古文：赵郡公孝恭徇山南。
现代文：赵郡公李孝恭攻下山南。
English: Zhao County official Li Xiaogong invaded the southern part of the mountain.

古文：甲辰，云阳令詹俊徇巴、蜀。
现代文：初八，云阳县令詹俊攻克巴、蜀二地。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Yunyang County ordered Zhan Jun to conquer Keba and Shu.

古文：二年正月丁未，隋帝诏唐王剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，加前后羽葆、鼓吹。
现代文：义宁二年正月初一，隋恭帝下诏：唐王李渊可佩剑径直上殿，入朝可不按臣子礼仪小步快行，朝拜皇帝不自报名号，出行增加前、后羽饰车盖、仪仗乐队。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Yining, Emperor Sui Gong issued an edict: Tang King Li Yuan could wear a sword and go straight to the palace, he could enter the court without following the courtiers' etiquette and marching quickly, he could worship the emperor without registering, and he could travel with an increased number of front and rear wings, decorated car lids, and ceremonial bands.

古文：戊午，周洮降。
现代文：十一日，周洮投降。
English: On the 11th day, Zhou Qi surrendered.

古文：戊辰，世子建成为左元帅，秦国公世民为右元帅，徇地东都。
现代文：二十一日，世子李建成任左元帅，秦国公李世民任右元帅；攻克东都洛阳。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Jiancheng, the heir to the throne, was appointed left field marshal, and Li Shimin, the Qin sovereign, was appointed right field marshal; Luoyang, the eastern capital, was conquered.

古文：二月己卯，太常卿郑元定樊、邓，使者马元规徇荆、襄。
现代文：二月初四，太常卿郑元王寿平定樊、邓二地，使者马元规攻克荆、襄一带。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Zheng Yuan Wang Shou, the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, conquered Dingcheng and Dengdi, and Ma Yuanjie, the envoy of the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, conquered Jing and Xiang.

古文：三月己酉，齐国公元吉为太原道行军元帅。
现代文：三月初四，齐国公李元吉任太原道行军元帅。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, Li Yuanji, the prince of Qi, was appointed as the marshal of Taiyuan Road.

古文：乙卯，世民徙封赵国公。
现代文：初十，李世民改封为赵国公。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Li Shimin changed his title to Zhao Guogong.

古文：丙辰，隋右屯卫将军宇文化及弑太上皇于江都，立秦王浩为皇帝。
现代文：十一日，隋朝的右屯卫将军宇文化及在江都杀了太上皇杨广，立秦王杨浩为皇帝。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Right Tunwei general of the Sui Dynasty, U Bunyan, killed the Emperor Yang Guang in Jiangdu and installed the Qin King Yang Hao as emperor.

古文：吴兴郡守沈法兴据丹阳，自称江南道总管。
现代文：吴兴郡太守沈法兴占据丹阳，自称江南道总管。
English: The governor of Wuxing County, Shen Faxing, occupied Danyang and claimed to be the governor of Jiangnan Province.

古文：乐安人卢祖尚据光州，自称刺史。
现代文：乐安人祖尚占据光州，自称刺史。
English: The ancestors of the Le An people still occupy Gwangju and claim to be history makers.

古文：戊辰，隋帝进唐王位相国，总百揆，备九锡，唐国置丞相等官，立四庙。
现代文：二十三日，隋恭帝提升唐王李渊为相国，统领百官、总理朝政，赐予 九锡 一一一九种显示最高权势的器物，唐国设置丞相等官职，建立祭祀祖先的四庙。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Sui Gong elevated the Tang King Li Yuan to the status of a peer country, leading hundreds of officials and the prime minister of the dynasty, giving Jiuxi 119 kinds of utensils showing the highest power, setting up official positions such as chancellor, and establishing four temples to worship ancestors.

古文：四月己卯，张长逊降。
现代文：四月初四，张长訹降顺。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 10

古文：辛巳，停竹使符，班银菟符。
现代文：初六，朝廷停止使用竹制的使臣信符，颁行银菟符节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Imperial Court stopped using bamboo envoys' letters, and issued the Silver Knot Festival.

古文：五月乙巳，隋帝命唐王冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸。
现代文：五月初一，恭帝下诏赐予唐王李渊受用垂有十二条玉串的皇冠，竖立天子的旗帜，出入所经之地按天子规矩戒严。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Gong issued an edict to Tang King Li Yuan to receive a crown with twelve strings of beads, to erect the banner of Tianzi, and to impose martial law according to the rules of Tianzi wherever he went.

古文：甲寅，王德仁降。
现代文：初十，王德仁降顺。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Deren surrendered.

古文：戊午，隋帝逊于位，以刑部尚书萧造、司农少卿裴之隐奉皇帝玺绂于唐王，三让乃受。
现代文：十四日，隋恭帝让位，派刑部尚书萧造、司农少卿裴之隐将皇帝印玺奉送唐王，李渊推辞再三才接受。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Sui Gong abdicated and sent the head of the Department of Criminal Law, Shang Shu Xiao Zuo, and the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Pei Zhiyin, to send the Emperor's seal to the Tang King. Li Yuan repeatedly declined to accept it.

古文：武德元年五月甲子，即皇帝位于太极殿。
现代文：唐朝武德元年五月二十日，高祖在太极殿登皇帝位。
English: On May 20, the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Gaozu ascended to the throne in the Taiji Palace.

古文：命萧造兼太尉，告于南郊，大赦，改元。
现代文：任命萧造兼太尉，在京城南郊祭告天地以示承受天命，施行大赦，更改皇帝年号。
English: He appointed Xiao Zou, who was also a captain, to hold a festival in the southern suburb of Beijing to announce to the world that he had received the Mandate of Heaven, to grant an amnesty, and to change the emperor's era name.

古文：赐百官、庶人爵一级，义师所过给复三年，其馀给复一年。
现代文：赏赐文武百官和平民加爵位一级，义军所经之地免除徭役三年，其他地方免徭役一年。
English: A hundred civil and military officials and commoners were rewarded with a first-class knighthood, the places where the rebels passed were exempted from corvee service for three years, and other places were exempted from corvee service for one year.

古文：改郡为州，太守为刺史。
现代文：改郡为州，太守改为刺史。
English: The county was changed to a prefecture, and the governor was changed to Sashihime.

古文：庚午，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，白天出现太白星。
English: On the 26th, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：隋东都留守元文都及左武卫大将军王世充立越王侗为皇帝。
现代文：隋朝东部留守元文都和左武卫大将军王世充立越王杨侗为皇帝。
English: In the eastern part of the Sui Dynasty, Yuan Wendu, who stayed behind, and Wang Shizhong, the General of the Left Division of Wu Wei, made Yue Wang Yang Hui the emperor.

古文：六月甲戌，赵国公世民为尚书令，裴寂为尚书右仆射、知政事，刘文静为纳言，隋民部尚书萧瑀、丞相府司录参军窦威为内史令。
现代文：六月初一，赵国公李世民任尚书令，裴寂任尚书右仆射，主持政事，刘文静任纳言，原隋朝的民部尚书萧蠫、丞相府司录参军窦威任内史令。
English: On the first day of June, Zhao Guogong Li Shimin was appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Pei Zhang was appointed as the right-hand man of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs to preside over political affairs, Liu Wenzhing was appointed as the Councilor of State, and the former Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs of the Sui Dynasty Xiao Wei and the Secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister of the Sui Dynasty Dou Wei were appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：丙子，太白昼见。
现代文：初三，白天出现太白星。
English: On the third day of the new year, a white star appeared during the day.

古文：己卯，追谥皇高祖曰宣简公；皇曾祖曰懿王；皇祖曰景皇帝，庙号太祖，祖妣梁氏曰景烈皇后；皇考曰元皇帝，庙号世祖，妣独孤氏曰元贞皇后；妃窦氏曰穆皇后。
现代文：初六，朝廷追赠高祖李渊的高祖父李熙为宣简公；曾祖父李天赐为懿王；祖父李虎为景皇帝，庙号太祖，祖母梁氏为景烈皇后；父亲李昞为元皇帝，庙号世祖，母亲独孤氏为元贞皇后；妻子窦氏为穆皇后。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the imperial court posthumously presented Li Yuan's great-great-grandfather, Li Xi, as Xuan Jian Gong; his great-grandfather, Li Tian Zhi, as the King of Shanshan; his grandfather, Li Hu, as the Emperor of Jing, the Grandfather of Miao, and his grandmother, Liang, as the Empress of Jingli; his father, Li Xi, as the Former Emperor, the Grandfather of Miao, and his mother, Du Guo, as the Empress of Yuan Zhen; and his wife, Dou, as the Empress of Mu.

古文：庚辰，立世子建成为皇太子，封世民为秦王，元吉齐王。
现代文：初七，立世子李建成为皇太子，封李世民为秦王，李元吉为齐王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Li Jian became the crown prince, Li Shimin became the king of Qin, and Li Yuanji became the king of Qi.

古文：癸未，薛举寇泾州，秦王世民为西讨元帅，刘文静为司马。
现代文：初十，薛举劫掠泾州，秦王李世民任西讨元帅，刘文静任司马。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Xue held a raid on Zhangzhou, Qin King Li Shimin was appointed as the Western Field Marshal, and Liu Wenzhing was appointed as the Sima.

古文：太仆卿宇文明达招慰山东。
现代文：太仆卿宇文明达赴山东招降抚慰。
English: Great-great-grandson Yu Wenzhongda went to Shandong to recruit and pacify.

古文：乙酉，奉隋帝为酅国公，诏曰： 近世时运迁革，前代亲族，莫不夷绝。
现代文：十二日，封隋恭帝杨侑为阝国公，并下诏书说： 近来时世变迁，前朝的皇室宗亲，无不尽遭诛灭。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Sui and Emperor Gong were enthroned, and Emperor Yang Jie declared in his imperial edict: "Due to the recent changes in society, the imperial ancestors of the previous dynasty have all been wiped out.

古文：历数有归，实惟天命；兴亡之效，岂伊人力。
现代文：世运终有了结，实为天命所定；国运兴亡的显露，哪由人力左右？
English: The fate of the world has finally come to an end, which is actually determined by the fate of heaven; the emergence of the rise and fall of the national movement, which is controlled by manpower?

古文：前隋蔡王智积等子孙，皆选用之。 
现代文：隋朝蔡王杨智积等之子孙皆应量才录用。 
English: The sons of Cai Wang Yang Zhizhe and others in the Sui Dynasty, Sun Yimin, were only hired when they were needed.

古文：癸巳，禁言符瑞者。
现代文：二十日，禁止借某种征兆议论国家的吉凶。
English: On the 20th, it was forbidden to use some kind of omen to discuss the fortunes of the country.

古文：辛丑，窦威薨。
现代文：二十八日，窦威去世。
English: On the 28th, Dou Wei passed away.

古文：黄门侍郎陈叔达判纳言，将作大匠窦抗兼纳言。
现代文：黄门侍郎陈叔达兼任低于本职的纳言，将作大匠窦抗兼任纳言。
English: Huangmen waiter Chen Shuda will also serve as a lower-ranking Nagan, and will serve as a great master Dou Anti and Nagan.

古文：七月壬子，刘文静及薛举战于泾州，败绩。
现代文：七月初九，刘文静在泾州与薛举交战，大败。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, Liu Wenzhing fought against Xue Zhuo in Zhangzhou, and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：乙卯，郭子和降。
现代文：十二日，郭子和投降。
English: On the 12th, Guo Zi surrendered.

古文：庚申，废隋离宫。
现代文：十七日，废除隋帝的行宫。
English: On the 17th, the imperial procession of the Sui Dynasty was abolished.

古文：八月壬申，刘文静除名。
现代文：八月壬申，刘文静被削职为民。
English: In August, Liu Wenzhing was removed from her post.

古文：戊寅，约功臣恕死罪。
现代文：初五，节制功臣免除死罪。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the hero of temperance is exempted from the death penalty.

古文：辛巳，薛举卒。
现代文：初八，薛举死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Xue died.

古文：壬午，李轨降。
现代文：初九，李轨降顺。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Li Rail descends to Shun.

古文：甲申，岩州刺史王德仁杀招慰使宇文明达以反。
现代文：十一日，岩州刺史王德仁杀死招慰使宇文明达反叛。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Iwashu assassin, Wang Deren, killed Zhaotiao, who had incited the universe to rebel.

古文：己丑，秦王世民为西讨元帅，以讨薛仁杲。
现代文：十六日，秦王李世民任西讨元帅，讨伐薛仁杲。
English: On the 16th, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, was appointed as the marshal of the Western Crusade and led the crusade against Xue Renyu.

古文：庚子，赠隋太常卿高颎上柱国、郯国公，上柱国贺若杞国公，司隶大夫薛道衡上开府、临河县公，刑部尚书宇文弼上开府、平昌县公，左翊卫将军董纯柱国、狄道公，右骁卫将军李金才上柱国、申国公，左光禄大夫李敏柱国、观国公。
现代文：二十七日，赠封原隋朝太常卿高赹为上柱国、郯国公，上柱国贺若弼为杞国公，司隶大夫薛道衡为上开府、临河县公，刑部尚书宇文耟为上开府、平昌县公，左翊卫将军董纯为柱国、狄道公，右骁卫将军李金才为上柱国、申国公，左光禄大夫李敏为柱国、观国公。
English: On the 27th, the former Sui Dynasty Taizongqing Gao Wei was awarded the titles of Shangzhuo and Shandong Guo Guo, Shangzhuo He Ruo Wei was awarded the titles of Shandong Guo Guo, Sili Doctor Xue Daoheng was awarded the titles of Shangkaifu and Linhe County, Criminal Division Shangshu Wenyu was awarded the titles of Shangkaifu and Pyeongchang County, Zuo Wei General Dong Chun was awarded the titles of Shangzhuo and Shandong Guo, Shangzhuo He Ruo Wei General Li Jincai was awarded the titles of Shangzhuo and Shen Guo

古文：诸遭隋枉杀而子孙被流者，皆还之。
现代文：原遭隋朝屈杀的人们的子孙被流放的，全部放回他们。
English: The descendants of the people who were killed by the Sui Dynasty and exiled were all returned to them.

古文：九月乙巳，虑囚。
现代文：九月初三，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, the investigation records the prisoner's charges.

古文：始置军府。
现代文：开始设军府。
English: The military government was established.

古文：癸丑，改银菟符为铜鱼符。
现代文：十一日，改银菟节为铜鱼符节。
English: On the 11th day, the Silver Kite Festival was changed to the Bronze Fish Symbol Festival.

古文：甲寅，秦州总管窦轨及薛仁杲战，败绩。
现代文：十二日，秦州总管窦轨与薛仁杲交战，大败。
English: On the 12th, the Qin State Governor Dou Liao fought against Xue Renzhao and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：辛未，宇文化及杀秦王浩，自称皇帝。
现代文：二十九日，宇文化及杀了秦王杨浩，自称皇帝。
English: On the 29th, Yu Wencheng killed Yang Hao, King of Qin, who claimed to be the emperor.

古文：十月壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，合朔一一一日月同时出没，地面不见月光，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of October, the crescent moon appears at the same time, the moonlight disappears from the ground, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：己卯，李密降。
现代文：初八，李密降顺。
English: In the eighth grade, Li Mi was demoted.

古文：壬午，硃粲陷邓州，刺史吕子臧死之。
现代文：十一日，朱粲攻陷邓州，刺史吕子臧殉难。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhu Xi invaded and conquered Dangzhou, and martyred Lu Zixuan.

古文：乙酉，邵江海降。
现代文：十四日，邵江海降顺。
English: On the 14th, Shao Jianghai surrendered.

古文：己亥，盗杀商州刺史泉彦宗。
现代文：二十八日，盗贼杀了商州刺史泉彦宗。
English: On the 28th, a thief killed the merchant statesman Quan Yanzong.

古文：辛丑，大阅。
现代文：三十日，大阅兵。
English: On the 30th, a grand military parade was held.

古文：是月，窦抗罢。
现代文：本月，窦抗被免职。
English: Dou was removed from his post this month.

古文：十一月，窦建德败王须拔于幽州，须拔亡入于突厥。
现代文：十一月，窦建德在幽州打败王须拔，王须拔逃亡到突厥。
English: In November, Dou Jiande defeated Wang Suba in Yuzhou, and Wang Suba fled to Turkey.

古文：乙巳，凉王李轨反。
现代文：初四，凉王李轨反叛。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Li Rail, the king of cool, rebelled.

古文：戊申，禁献侏儒短节、小马庳牛、异兽奇禽者。
现代文：初七，下令禁献肢体短小的优弄、体型矮小的牛马以及奇异兽禽。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, it was ordered to prohibit the donation of short limbs, short-bodied bulls and horses, and strange animals and birds.

古文：己酉，秦王世民败薛仁杲，执之。
现代文：初八，秦王李世民打败薛仁杲，并将他俘获。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, defeated Xue Renzhao and captured him.

古文：癸丑，行军总管赵慈景攻蒲州，隋刺史尧君素拒战，执慈景。
现代文：十二日，行军总管赵慈景攻打蒲州，隋朝的刺史尧君索迎战，活捉赵慈景。
English: On the 12th, the commander-in-chief of the march, Zhao Cijing, attacked Puzhou, and the Sui Dynasty's assassin, Shijun So, met the battle and captured Zhao Cijing alive.

古文：癸亥，秦王世民俘薛仁杲以献。
现代文：二十二日，秦王李世民俘获薛仁杲并进献祖庙。
English: On the 22nd, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, captured Xue Renyu and presented him to the ancestral temple.

古文：十二月壬申，世民为太尉。
现代文：十二月初二，李世民任太尉。
English: On the second day of December, Li Shimin was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：丙子，蒲州人杀尧君素，立其将王行本。
现代文：初六，蒲州民众杀了尧君素，拥立他的部将王行本。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the people of Puzhou killed Su Junso and supported his subordinate, Wang Xingben.

古文：辛已，郑元及硃粲战于商州，败之。
现代文：十一日，郑元王寿追上朱粲，在幽州交战，打败朱粲。
English: On the 11th day, Zheng Yuan Wang Shou caught up with Zhu Xi, fought in Yuzhou, and defeated Zhu Xi.

古文：乙酉，如周氏陂。
现代文：十五日，高祖去周氏陂。
English: On the 15th, Gaozu went to Zhou's tomb.

古文：丁亥，至自周氏陂。
现代文：十七日，自周氏陂返回京城。
English: On the 17th, he returned to Beijing from Zhou's Bazaar.

古文：庚子，光禄卿李密反，伏诛。
现代文：三十日，光禄卿李密反叛，被处死。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Guanglu's son Li Mi rebelled and was executed.

古文：是岁，高开道陷渔阳，号燕王。
现代文：这年，高开道攻陷渔阳，自称为燕王。
English: This year, Gao Kai Dao invaded Yuyang and called himself the King of Swallows.

古文：二年正月甲子，陈叔达兼纳言。
现代文：武德二年正月二十三日，陈叔达兼任纳言。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the second year of Wude, Chen Shuda also assumed the post of Nagan.

古文：诏自今正月、五月、九月不行死刑，禁屠杀。
现代文：高祖下诏：此后正月、五月、九月不施行死刑，禁止屠杀。
English: Gao Zu issued an edict: From then on, the death penalty would not be carried out in the first month, May, and September, and slaughter would be prohibited.

古文：丙寅，张善相降。
现代文：二十五日，张善相降顺。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Zenso surrendered.

古文：己巳，杨士林降。
现代文：二十八日，杨士林降顺。
English: On the 28th, Yang Shilin surrendered.

古文：二月乙酉，初定租、庸、调法。
现代文：二月十四日，初定向成丁征派田租力庸、户调的 租、庸、调法 。
English: On February 14th, the "rent, tax, and transfer method" of land rent, tax, and transfer to households was initially issued to Chengding.

古文：令文武官终丧。
现代文：命令文武官员实行守丧礼制。
English: ordered the civil and military officials to observe the funeral rites.

古文：丙戌，州置宗师一人。
现代文：十五日，下令各州设置训导宗室弟子的官员 宗师 一名。
English: On the 15th, he ordered each state to set up an official, a guru, to train disciples.

古文：甲午，赦并、浩、介、石四州贾胡堡以北击囚。
现代文：二十三日，赦免并、浩、介、石四州贾胡堡以北的囚犯。
English: On the 23rd, he pardoned prisoners from Nian, Hao, Jie and Shizhou, north of Jiahu Fort.

古文：闰月，窦建德陷邢州，执总管陈君宾。
现代文：闰二月，窦建德攻陷邢州，活捉了总管陈君宾。
English: In leap February, Dou Jiande invaded Zhangzhou and captured the general manager Chen Junbin alive.

古文：辛丑，窦建德杀宇文化及于聊城。
现代文：闰月初一，窦建德在聊城杀了宇文化及。朱粲降顺。
English: On the first day of the leap month, Dou Jiande killed U Culture and Zhu Xi in Liaocheng.

古文：硃粲降。壬寅，皇太子及秦王世民、裴寂巡于畿县。
现代文：初二，皇太子李建成和秦王李世民、尚书右仆射裴寂巡视京城管辖的各县。
English: On the second day of the new year, the crown prince Li Jiancheng, the Qin king Li Shimin, and his right-hand man, Shang Shuxu, made a tour of the counties under the jurisdiction of Beijing.

古文：乙巳，御史大夫段确劳硃粲于菊潭。
现代文：初五，御史大夫段确在菊潭慰劳朱粲。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the new year, Dr. Goshi really went to comfort Zhu Xi in Jutan.

古文：庚戌，微行，察风俗。
现代文：初十，高祖隐蔽身份便装外出，考察乡风民俗。
English: On the tenth day of the month, Gao Zu went out in disguise to investigate local customs.

古文：乙卯，以谷贵，禁关内屠酤。
现代文：十五日，因谷物昂贵，下令禁止关内各地屠宰、卖酒。
English: On the 15th, because grain was expensive, he ordered a ban on slaughtering and the sale of alcohol in all parts of Kansai.

古文：左屯卫将军何潘仁及山跋张子惠战于司竹，死之。
现代文：左屯卫将军何潘仁在司竹与山寇张子惠交战，殉难。
English: Zuotunwei general He Panren fought with mountain bandit Zhang Zihui in Sizhu and was martyred.

古文：丁巳，虑囚。
现代文：十七日，高祖讯察囚犯罪状的记录。
English: On the 17th, Gaozhu sent a record of the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：庚申，骁骑将军赵钦、王娑罗及山贼战于盩厔，死之。
现代文：二十日，骁骑将军赵钦、王娑罗在周至与山寇作战，殉难。
English: On the 20th, the cavalry generals Zhao Qin and Wang Qilao fought against the mountain bandits in Zhou and were martyred.

古文：丁卯，王世充隐殷州，陟州刺史李育德死之。
现代文：二十七日，王世充攻陷殷州，陟州刺史李育德殉难。
English: On the 27th, Wang Shicheng invaded Yinzhou, and Li Yude, the governor of Zhangzhou, was martyred.

古文：三月甲戌，王薄降。
现代文：三月初五，王薄降顺。
English: On March 5th, Wang Bo stepped down.

古文：庚辰，蒋弘度、徐师顺降。
现代文：十一日，蒋弘度、徐师顺归降。
English: On the 11th day, Jiang Hongdu and Xu Shishun surrendered.

古文：丁亥，窦建德陷赵州。
现代文：十八日，窦建德攻陷赵州。
English: On the 18th, Dou Jiande invaded Zhaozhou.

古文：丁酉，李义满降。
现代文：二十八日，李义满归降。
English: On the 28th, Li Yimang surrendered.

古文：四月，綦公顺降。
现代文：四月，綦公顺归降。
English: In April, Zou Gongshun surrendered.

古文：庚子，并州总管、齐王元吉及刘武周战于榆次，败绩。
现代文：初二，并州总管、齐王李元吉在榆州与刘武周交战，大败。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Li Yuanji, the governor of Anhui Province and the king of Qi, fought with Liu Wuzhou in Zhangzhou, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：辛丑，硃粲杀段确以反。
现代文：初三，朱粲杀段确反叛。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhu Xi did indeed rebel.

古文：乙巳，王世充废越王侗，自称皇帝。
现代文：初七，王世充废黜隋朝的越王杨侗，自称皇帝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wang Shichong dethroned the Sui Dynasty's Yue Wang Yang Di, and proclaimed himself emperor.

古文：癸亥，陷伊州，执总管张善相。
现代文：二十五日，攻陷伊州，俘虏了总管张善相。
English: On the 25th, they invaded Izhou and captured the general manager, Zhang Sanso.

古文：五月庚辰，凉州将安脩仁执李轨以降。
现代文：五月十三日，凉州将领安仁活捉李轨归降朝廷。
English: On May 13th, Liangzhou General An Ren captured Li Rail alive and returned to the imperial court.

古文：癸未，曲赦凉、甘、瓜、鄯、肃、会、兰、河、廓九州。
现代文：十六日，朝廷对凉、甘、瓜、鄯、肃、会、兰、河、廓九个州的罪犯实行局部赦免。
English: On the 16th, the imperial court partially pardoned criminals from nine prefectures, including Liang, Gan, Gua, Qu, Su, He, Lan, He and Gu.

古文：六月，王世充杀越王侗。
现代文：六月，王世充杀了隋朝越王杨侗。
English: In June, Wang Shih assassinated the Sui and Yue King Yang Hui.

古文：戊戌，立周公、孔子庙于国子监。庚子，窦建德陷沧州。
现代文：初一，唐朝在国子监设立周公、孔子庙。初三，窦建德攻破沧州。
English: On the first day of the new year, the Tang Dynasty set up Zhou Gong and Confucius Temple in Guozihuan. On the third day of the new year, Dou Jiande conquered Cangzhou.

古文：丁未，刘武周陷介州。
现代文：初十，刘武周攻陷介州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Liu Wuzhou invaded Jingzhou.

古文：癸亥，裴寂为晋州道行军总管。
现代文：二十六日，裴寂任晋州道行军总管。
English: On the 26th, Pei Jia was appointed as the head of the Jinzhou Road march.

古文：离石胡刘季真叛，陷石州，刺史王俭死之。
现代文：离石胡、刘季真反叛，攻陷石州，刺史王俭殉难。
English: He rebelled against Shi Hu and Liu Jizhen, invaded Shizhou, and stabbed Shi Wang Jian to death.

古文：七月壬申，徐圆朗降。
现代文：七月初六，徐圆朗归降。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Xu Yuanlang was demoted.

古文：八月丁酉，酅国公薨。
现代文：八月初一，阝国公杨侑逝世。
English: On the first day of August, Prince Yang Jie of Shan State passed away.

古文：甲子，窦建德陷洺州，执总管袁子干。
现代文：二十八日，窦建德攻陷氵名州，俘虏了总管袁子干。
English: On the 28th, Dou Jiande invaded and occupied Zhangmeizhou, and captured the general manager Yuan Zikang.

古文：九月辛未，杀户部尚书刘文静。
现代文：九月初六，户部尚书刘文静被杀。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Liu Wenzhing, a member of the Household Division, was killed.

古文：李子通自称皇帝。
现代文：李子通自称皇帝。
English: Li Zittong declared himself emperor.

古文：沈法兴自称梁王。
现代文：沈法兴自称梁王。
English: Shen Faxing called himself the King of Liang.

古文：丁丑，杜伏威降。
现代文：十二日，杜伏威归降。
English: On the 12th, Duvois capitulated.

古文：裴寂及刘武周战于介州，败绩，右武卫大将军姜宝谊死之。
现代文：裴寂在介州与刘武周交战，大败，右武卫大将军姜宝谊殉难。
English: Peizhang fought with Liu Wuzhou in Jiezhou and suffered a crushing defeat, and the right wing general Jiang Baoyi was martyred.

古文：庚辰，窦建德陷相州，总管吕珉死之。
现代文：十五日，窦建德攻陷相州，总管吕珉殉难。
English: On the fifteenth day, Dou Jiande attacked and occupied the city of Xiangzhou, and the commander-in-chief, Lv Ying, was martyred.

古文：辛巳，刘武周陷并州。
现代文：十六日，刘武周攻陷并州。
English: On the 16th, Liu Wuzhou invaded and annexed Zhou.

古文：庚寅，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，白天出现太白星。
English: On the 25th, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：窦建德陷赵州，执总管张志昂。
现代文：窦建德攻陷赵州，俘虏了总管张志昂。
English: Dou Jiande invaded Zhaozhou and captured the general manager Zhang Zhiang.

古文：乙未，京师地震。
现代文：三十日，京城地震。
English: On the 30th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：梁师都寇延州，鄜州刺史梁礼死之。
现代文：梁师都劫掠延州，州刺史梁礼殉难。
English: Liang Shidu plundered Yanzhou, and Liang Liangli was martyred in Yanzhou.

古文：十月己亥，罗艺降。
现代文：十月初四，罗艺归降。
English: On the fourth day of October, Luo Yi surrendered.

古文：乙卯，如华阴，赦募士背军者。
现代文：二十日，高祖到华阴，赦免应募士兵逃离军队的人。
English: On the 20th, Gaozu went to Huayin and pardoned the conscripts who had fled from the army.

古文：壬戌，刘武周寇晋州，永安王孝基及工部尚书独孤怀恩、陕州总管于筠、内史侍郎唐俭讨之。
现代文：二十七日，刘武周攻掠晋州，永安王李孝基和工部尚书独孤怀恩、陕州总管于筠、内史侍郎唐俭前往讨伐。
English: On the 27th, Liu Wuzhou attacked and plundered Jinzhou, and the Yongan King Li Xiaoji and the Ministry of Industry Shang Shuxu alone, the General Manager of Shaanxi Yu Wei, and the Secretary of History Tang Jian went to fight.

古文：甲子，祠华山。
现代文：二十九日，高祖祭祀华山。
English: On the 29th, Gao Zu worshipped Huashan.

古文：是月，夏县人吕崇茂反。
现代文：本月，夏县人吕崇茂反叛。
English: This month, Xia County resident Lü Chongmao rebelled.

古文：秦王世民讨刘武周。
现代文：秦王李世民征讨刘武周。
English: Qin King Li Shimin called for Liu Wuzhou.

古文：十一月丙子，窦建德陷黎州，执淮安王神通、总管李世勣。
现代文：十一月十一日，窦建德攻陷黎州，俘虏了淮安王李神通、总管李世责力。
English: On November 11, Dou Jiande invaded Lizhou and captured the king of Huai'an, Li Shentong, and the general manager, Li Shileili.

古文：十二月丙申，猎于华山。
现代文：十二月初一，高祖在华山打猎。
English: On the first day of December, Gao Zu went hunting in Huashan.

古文：永安王孝基及刘武周战于下邽，败绩。
现代文：永安王李孝基在下圭阝与刘武周交战，大败。
English: Yongan King Li Xiaoji fought Liu Wu Zhou in Lower Guizhou and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：壬子，大风拔木。
现代文：十七日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 17th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：三年正月己巳，猎于渭滨。
现代文：武德三年正月初五，高祖在渭水边打猎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the third year of Wude, Gao Zu went hunting on the edge of Surabaya.

古文：戊寅，王行本降。
现代文：十五日，王行本归降。
English: On the 15th, Wang Xingbon surrendered.

古文：辛巳，如蒲州。
现代文：十八日，高祖去蒲州。
English: On the 18th, Gaozu went to Puzhou.

古文：癸巳，至自蒲州。
现代文：三十日，从蒲州返回京城。
English: On the 30th, he returned to Kyoto from Pushu.

古文：二月丁酉，京师西南地有声。
现代文：二月初三，京城长安西南方有地动声。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, there was a commotion in the southwestern part of the capital Chang'an.

古文：庚子，如华阴。
现代文：初六，高祖去华阴。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Gao Zu went to Huayin.

古文：甲寅，独孤怀恩谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十日，独孤怀恩谋反，被处死刑。
English: On the 20th, he was sentenced to death for conspiring to rebel.

古文：辛酉，检校隰州总管刘师善谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十七日，检校隰州总管刘师善谋反，被处死刑。
English: On the 27th, Liu Shishan, the head of the Bozhou inspection, was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：三月庚午，改纳言为侍中，内史令为中书令。
现代文：三月初七，朝廷将纳言改为侍中，内史令改为中书令。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, the imperial court changed Nagan to Samurai, and Naishi to Chushiro.

古文：甲戌，中书侍郎封德彝兼中书令。
现代文：十一日，中书侍郎封德彝兼任中书令。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the second-in-command of the General Secretariat of the CPC Central Committee, Fong Dejun, was also appointed as the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：乙酉，刘季真降。
现代文：二十二日，刘季真归降。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Jizhen surrendered.

古文：四月丙申，祠华山。
现代文：四月初三，高祖祭祀华山。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, Gao Zu held a ritual to worship Huashan.

古文：壬寅，至自华阴。
现代文：初九，自华阴返回京城。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he returned to Beijing from Huayin.

古文：癸卯，禁关内诸州屠。
现代文：初十，禁止关内各州的屠宰业。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the slaughter industry in all prefectures in Kansai was banned.

古文：甲寅，秦王世民及宋金刚战于雀鼠谷，败之。
现代文：二十一日，秦王李世民在雀鼠谷与宋金刚交战，打败宋金刚。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Qin king Li Shimin fought with Song Jingang in the Sparrow Mouse Valley and defeated Song Jingang.

古文：辛酉，王世充陷邓州，总管雷四郎死之。
现代文：二十八日，王世充攻陷邓州，总管雷四郎殉难。
English: On the 28th, Wang Shicheng invaded and occupied Dangzhou, and the general manager, Lei Shiro, was martyred.

古文：壬戌，秦王世民及刘武周战于洺州，败之，武周亡入于突厥。
现代文：二十九日，秦王李世民在氵名州与刘武周交战，打败刘武周，刘武周逃亡到突厥。
English: On the 29th, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, fought with Liu Wuzhou in Renmin County, defeated Liu Wuzhou, and Liu Wuzhou fled to Turkey.

古文：克并州。
现代文：攻克并州。
English: Conquest and annexation of the state.

古文：五月壬午，秦王世民屠夏县。
现代文：五月二十日，秦王李世民在夏县屠城。
English: On May 20, Qin King Li Shimin died in Tu Cheng, Xia County.

古文：六月丙申，赦晋、隰、潞、并四州。
现代文：六月初五，朝廷对晋、隰、潞、并四州的罪犯施行赦免。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the imperial court pardoned the criminals from Jin, Shan, Shan and Shizhou.

古文：癸卯，诏隋帝及其宗室柩在江都者，为营窆，置陵庙，以故宫人守之。
现代文：十二日，高祖下诏书：隋帝及其宗室停柩在江都的，给他们造坟落葬，建立陵墓寝庙，由原来的宫人守护。
English: On the 12th, Gao Zu issued an edict: Sui Emperor and his family should stay in Jiangdu, build a tomb for them, establish a mausoleum and temple, and be guarded by the original palace guards.

古文：丙午，虑囚。
现代文：十五日，高祖讯察囚犯的断狱记录。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zuxun inspected the record of the prisoner's release.

古文：封子元景为赵王，元晶鲁王，元亨丰王。
现代文：封儿子李元景为赵王，李元昌为鲁王，李元亨为酆王。
English: Fong's son Li Yuanjing became King Zhao, Li Yuanchang became King Lu, and Li Yuanheng became King Zou.

古文：己酉，出宫女五百人，赐东征将士有功者。
现代文：十八日，放出宫女五百人，赏赐东征的有功将士。
English: On the 18th, 500 maids of honor were released to reward meritorious soldiers of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：甲寅，显州长史田瓚杀行台尚书令杨士林，叛附于王世充。
现代文：二十三日，显州长史田瓒杀了行台尚书杨士林，叛变投靠王世充。
English: On the 23rd, the governor of Xian Province, Shida Zou, killed Yang Shulin, the governor of Xian Province, and Wang Shichong defected.

古文：乙卯，瘗州县暴骨。
现代文：二十四日，掩埋各州县暴露地面的尸骨。
English: On the 24th, the bones of the corpses exposed on the ground in all prefectures and counties were buried.

古文：七月壬戌，秦王世民讨王世充。
现代文：七月初一，秦王李世民讨伐王世充。
English: On the first day of July, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, attacked Wang Shichong.

古文：甲戌，皇太子屯于蒲州，以备突厥。
现代文：十三日，皇太子李建成在蒲州屯兵，防备突厥来犯。
English: On the 13th, the Crown Prince Ri Jiancheng stationed troops in Puzhou to guard against the Turks.

古文：丙戌，梁师都导突厥、稽胡寇边，行军总管段德操败之。
现代文：二十五日，梁师都引突厥、稽胡军侵掠边境，行军总管段德操打败了他们。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Liang Shidu led the Turkic and Jiuhu armies to invade and plunder the border, and the general management section of the march, De Du, defeated them.

古文：八月庚子，虑囚。
现代文：八月初十，高祖讯察囚犯的断狱记录。
English: At the beginning of August 10th, Gaozu Xun checked the record of the prisoner's release.

古文：甲辰，时德睿降。
现代文：十四日，时德睿归降。
English: On the 14th, Ji De Rui abdicated.

古文：九月癸酉，田瓚降。
现代文：九月十三日，田瓒归降。
English: On September 13th, Tianyu surrendered.

古文：己丑，给复陕、鼎、熊、谷四州二年。
现代文：二十九日，朝廷免除陕、鼎、熊、谷四州百姓的徭役二年。
English: On the 29th, the imperial court exempted the people of Shenshan, Ding, Xiong, and Gu from the forced labor for two years.

古文：十月戊申，高开道降。
现代文：十月十九日，高开道归降。
English: On October 19th, Gaokaido surrendered.

古文：己酉，杨仲达降。
现代文：二十日，杨仲达归降。
English: On the 20th, Yang Zhongda surrendered.

古文：己未，有星陨于东都。
现代文：三十日，有流星在东都洛阳陨落。
English: On the 30th, a meteor fell in the eastern city of Luoyang.

古文：十二月己酉，瓜州刺史贺拔行威反。
现代文：十二月二十一日，瓜州刺史贺拔行威反叛。
English: On December 21st, Guazhou assassin He Zong rebelled.

古文：四年正月辛巳，皇太子伐稽胡。
现代文：武德四年正月二十三日，皇太子李建成讨伐稽胡。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the 4th year of Wude, Crown Prince Li Jiancheng led a crusade against Hu.

古文：二月，窦建德陷曹州，执孟海公。
现代文：二月，窦建德攻陷曹州，俘虏孟海公。
English: In February, Dou Jiande invaded Caozhou and captured Meng Haigong.

古文：己丑，车骑将军董阿兴反于陇州，伏诛。
现代文：初一，车骑将军董阿兴在陇州反叛，被处死刑。
English: On the first day of the first month, the cavalry general Dong A Xing rebelled in Zhangzhou and was sentenced to death.

古文：乙巳，太常少卿李仲文谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十七日，太常少卿李仲文谋反，被处死刑。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Li Zhongwen, a member of the Taizheng Shaoqing, plotted a rebellion and was sentenced to death.

古文：丙午，虑囚。
现代文：十八日，高祖讯察囚犯的断狱记录。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zuxun inspected the record of the prisoner's release.

古文：丁巳，赦代州总管府石岭之北。
现代文：二十九日，对代州总管府所辖石岭以北地区施行赦免。
English: On the 29th, an amnesty was implemented for the area north of Shihling, which is under the jurisdiction of the State Administration of Daizhou.

古文：三月，进封宜都郡王泰为卫王。
现代文：三月，晋封宜都郡王李泰为卫王。
English: In March, Li Tai, the king of Yidu County, was awarded the title of Wei Wang.

古文：庚申，虑囚。
现代文：初二，高祖讯察囚犯的断狱记录。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Gao Zuxun inspected the record of the prisoner's release.

古文：乙酉，窦建德陷管州，刺史郭志安死之。
现代文：二十七日，窦建德攻陷管州，刺史郭志安殉难。
English: On the 27th, Dou Jiande invaded Guanzhou and assassinated Guo Zhi'an.

古文：四月壬寅，齐王元吉及王世充战于东都，败绩，行军总管卢君谔死之。
现代文：四月十五日，齐王李元吉在东都洛阳与王世充交战，大败，行军总管卢君谔殉难。
English: On April 15, the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, went into battle with Wang Shicheng in the eastern capital of Luoyang, and suffered a crushing defeat. Lu Junyao, the head of the march, was martyred.

古文：戊申，突厥寇并州，执汉阳郡王环、太常卿郑元、左骁骑卫大将军长孙顺德。
现代文：二十一日，突厥军侵掠并州，俘虏了汉阳郡王李耡、太常卿郑元王寿、左骁骑大将军长孙顺德。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Turkic army invaded and plundered the annexed state, and captured the Hanyang County King Li Qian, the Grand Duke Zheng Yuan Wang Shou, and the left-handed cavalry general Sun Shunde.

古文：甲寅，封子元方为周王，元礼郑王，元嘉宋王，元则荆王，元茂越王。
现代文：二十七日，高祖封儿子李元方为周王，李元礼为郑王，李元嘉为宋王，李元则为荆王，李元茂为越王。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zufeng's son Li Yuanfang became King Zhou, Li Yuanli became King Zheng, Li Yuanjia became King Song, Li Yuan became King Jing, and Li Yuanmao became King Yue.

古文：丁巳，左武卫将军王君廓败张青特，执之。
现代文：三十日，左武卫将军王君廓打败张青特，俘虏了他。
English: On the 30th, Wang Junku, General of the Left Division, defeated Zhang Qingte and captured him.

古文：五月壬戌，秦王世民败窦建德于虎牢，执之。
现代文：五月初五，秦王李世民在虎牢打败窦建德，并擒获窦。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, defeated Dou Jiande in the tiger prison and captured Dou.

古文：乙丑，赦山东为建德所诖误者。
现代文：初八，赦免山东因受窦建德连累而失官去职的人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Shandong pardoned those who lost their posts due to being implicated by Dou Jiande.

古文：戊辰，王世充降。
现代文：十一日，王世充投降。
English: On the 11th day, Wang Shichong surrendered.

古文：庚午，周法明降。
现代文：十三日，周法明归降。
English: On the 13th, Zhou Farming surrendered.

古文：六月庚寅，赦河南为王世充所诖误者。
现代文：六月初四，赦免河南因受王世充连累而失官去职的人。
English: On the 4th of June, Henan pardoned those who lost their posts due to the Wang Shijian incident.

古文：戊戌，蒋善合降。
现代文：十一月，蒋善合归降。
English: In November, Jiang Shanhe surrendered.

古文：庚子，营州人石世则执其总管晋文衍，叛附于靺鞨。
现代文：十三日，营州人石世则抓了本州总管晋文衍，叛变投靠。
English: On the 13th, the Yingzhou man Shi Shi arrested the head of the state, Jin Wenyan, and defected.

古文：乙卯，臧君相降。
现代文：二十八日，臧君相归降。
English: On the 28th, Shijunzo surrendered.

古文：七月甲子，秦王世民俘王世充以献。
现代文：七月初九，秦王李世民将被俘的王世充进献祖庙。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, took Wang Shifeng into the ancestral temple.

古文：丙寅，窦建德伏诛。
现代文：十一日，窦建德被处死刑。
English: On the 11th, Dou Jiande was sentenced to death.

古文：丁卯，大赦，给复天下一年，陕、鼎、函、虢、虞、芮、豳七州二年。
现代文：十二日，施行大赦，全国免除徭役一年，对陕、鼎、函、虢、虞、芮、豳七州免除徭役二年。
English: On the 12th, an amnesty was implemented, exempting the whole country from corvee service for one year, and exempting the seven states of Shaanxi, Ding, Hanzhong, Shandong, Yu, Fujian and Fujian from corvee service for two years.

古文：甲戌，刘黑闼反于贝州。
现代文：十九日，刘黑闼在贝州反叛。
English: On the 19th, Liu Heyao rebelled in Beizhou.

古文：辛巳，戴州刺史孟啖鬼反，伏诛。
现代文：二十六日，戴州刺史孟口敢鬼反叛，被处死刑。
English: On the 26th, Dai Zhou stabbed Shi Mengkou for daring to rebel and was sentenced to death.

古文：八月丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，合朔，有日蚀现象。
English: On the first day of August, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，皇太子安抚北境。
现代文：初二，皇太子李建成安抚北方边境。
English: On the second day of the new year, Crown Prince Ri Jiancheng moved to pacify the northern border.

古文：丁酉，刘黑闼陷鄃县，魏州刺史权威、贝州刺史戴元祥死之。
现代文：十一日，刘黑闼攻陷俞阝县，魏州刺史权威、贝州刺史戴元祥殉难。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Heixuan attacked and occupied Jixian County, and Dai Yuanxiang, the most authoritative historian of Wei Province and the most authoritative historian of Bei Province, was martyred.

古文：癸卯，窦厥寇代州，执行军总管王孝基。
现代文：十七日，突厥侵掠代州，俘虏了行军总管王孝基。
English: On the 17th, the Turks invaded and plundered Daizhou and captured the commander-in-chief of the march, Wang Xiaoji.

古文：丁未，刘黑闼陷历亭，屯卫将军王行敏死之。
现代文：二十一日，刘黑闼攻陷历亭，屯卫将军王行敏殉难。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Heixuan captured Liting, and the general of the garrison, Wang Xingmin, was martyred.

古文：辛亥，深州人崔元逊杀其刺史裴晞，叛附于刘黑闼。
现代文：二十五日，深州人崔元逊杀了本州刺史裴，反叛投靠刘黑闼。
English: On the 25th, Cui Yuanxun, a native of Shenzhou, killed the Honshu assassin Shi Pei, and Liu Heijun defected to the rebels.

古文：兗州总管徐圆朗反。
现代文：兖州总管徐圆朗反叛。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Xu Yuanlang, rebelled.

古文：九月，卢祖尚降。
现代文：九月，卢祖尚归降。
English: In September, Lu Zu still surrendered.

古文：乙卯，淳于难降。
现代文：初一，淳于难归降。
English: On the first day of the new school year, Jun was forced to drop out.

古文：甲子，汪华降。
现代文：初十，汪华归降。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Hua surrendered.

古文：是秋，夔州总管、赵郡王孝恭率十二总管兵以讨萧铣。
现代文：这年秋季，夔州总管、赵郡王李孝恭率领十二个总管的军队征讨萧铣。
English: In the autumn of that year, the general manager of Zhangzhou and the king of Zhao County, Li Xiaogong, led the army of twelve general managers to recruit Xiao Yu.

古文：十月己丑，秦王世民为天策上将，领司徒，齐王元吉为司空。
现代文：十月初五，秦王李世民任天策上将，兼任低于本职的司徒，齐王李元吉任司空。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October, the Qin king Li Shimin was appointed as the general of the heavenly policy, concurrently serving as a subordinate officer, and the Qi king Li Yuanji was appointed as a subordinate officer.

古文：庚寅，刘黑闼陷瀛州，执刺史卢士睿，又陷观州。
现代文：初六，刘黑闼攻陷瀛州，俘虏刺史卢士睿，又攻陷观州。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Liu Heixuan invaded and occupied Ganzhou, captured Zhang Slushe Rui, and invaded and occupied Guanzhou.

古文：癸卯，毛州人董灯明杀其刺史赵元恺。
现代文：十九日，毛州人董灯明杀了本州刺史赵元恺。
English: On the 19th, Maozhou man Dong Lanming killed Honshu assassin Zhao Yuanjun.

古文：乙巳，赵郡王孝恭败萧铣于荆州，执之。闰月乙卯，如稷州。
现代文：二十一日，赵郡王李孝恭在荆州打败并俘虏了萧铣。闰十月初二，高祖去稷州。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the king of Zhao County, Li Xiaogong, defeated and captured Xiao Yao in Jingzhou. On the second day of the first month of October, Gaozu went to Jingzhou.

古文：己未，幸旧墅。
现代文：初六，亲临旧日别墅。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, I visited the old villa.

古文：壬戌，猎于好畤。
现代文：初九，在好打猎。
English: It's the first day of the new year, so it's time for a good hunt.

古文：乙丑，猎于九。
现代文：十二日，在九萯打猎。
English: On the 12th, I went hunting in Jiuzhaigou.

古文：丁卯，猎于仲山。
现代文：十三日，在仲山打猎。
English: On the 13th, they went hunting in Zhongshan.

古文：戊辰，猎于清水谷，遂幸三原。
现代文：十四日，在清水谷打猎，顺道游三原。
English: On the 14th, I went hunting in Shimizu Valley and took a side trip to Mihara.

古文：辛未，如周氏陂。
现代文：十七日，去周氏陂。
English: On the 17th, he went to Zhou's home.

古文：壬申，至自周氏陂。
现代文：十八日，由周氏陂回到京城。
English: On the 18th, Zhou Shizhen returned to Beijing.

古文：十一月甲申，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月初一，高祖在都城南面郊野举行祭天大祀。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Gaozu held a grand festival in the countryside south of the capital.

古文：庚寅，李子通降。
现代文：初七，李子通归降。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Li Zi Tong was demoted.

古文：丙申，子通谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十三日，李子通谋反，被处死刑。
English: On the 13th, Li Zi conspired to rebel and was sentenced to death.

古文：壬寅，刘黑闼陷定州，总管李玄通死之。
现代文：十九日，刘黑闼攻陷定州，总管李玄通殉难。
English: On the 19th, Liu Heixuan attacked and besieged Dingzhou, and the commander-in-chief, Li Xuan Tong, was martyred.

古文：庚戌，杞州人周文举杀其刺史王孝矩，叛附于黑闼。
现代文：二十六日，杞州人周文举杀了本州刺史王孝矩，反叛投靠刘黑闼。
English: On the 26th, Zhou Wen, a native of Zhangzhou, killed the Honshu assassin, Wang Xiao Rui, and Liu Heyao became a rebel.

古文：十二月乙卯，黑闼陷冀州，总管麹棱死之。
现代文：十二月初三，刘黑闼攻陷冀州，总管麴眣殉难。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Liu Hefei invaded Jizhou, and the head of the Jurchen army, Liu Hefei, was martyred.

古文：甲子，左武候将军李世勣及黑闼战于宋州，败绩。
现代文：十二日，左武侯将军李世责力在宋州与刘黑闼交战，大败。
English: On the 12th, Zuo Wuhou general Li Shili Li fought against Liu Heixuan in Songzhou and was soundly defeated.

古文：丁卯，秦王世民、齐王元吉讨黑闼。
现代文：十五日，秦王李世民、齐王李元吉征讨刘黑闼。
English: On the fifteenth day, Qin King Li Shimin and Qi King Li Yuanji went to recruit Liu Heyao.

古文：己巳，黑闼陷邢州。庚午，陷魏州，总管潘道毅死之。辛未，隐业州。
现代文：十七日，刘黑闼攻陷邢州；十八日，攻陷魏州，总管潘道毅殉难；十九日攻陷莘州。
English: On the seventeenth day, Liu Hefei invaded Ganzhou; on the eighteenth day, he invaded Weizhou, and the commander-in-chief, Pan Daoyi, was martyred; on the nineteenth day, he invaded Ganzhou.

古文：壬申，徙封元嘉为徐王。
现代文：二十日，改封李元嘉为徐王。
English: On the 20th, Li Yuanjia was renamed Xu Wang.

古文：五年正月乙酉，刘黑闼陷相州，刺史房晃死之。
现代文：武德五年正月初三，刘黑闼攻陷相州，刺史房晃殉难。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Wude Emperor, Liu Heyao attacked and captured the city of Xiangzhou, and stabbed Fusang into martyrdom.

古文：丙戌殷恭邃降。
现代文：初四，殷恭邃归降。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Yin Gongjun was demoted.

古文：丁亥，济州别驾刘伯通执其刺史窦务本，叛附于徐圆朗。
现代文：初五，济州别驾刘伯通抓了本州刺史窦务本，反叛投靠徐圆朗。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Liu Bertong, the governor of Jeju, captured the head of the state, and the rebels were led by Xu Yuanlang.

古文：庚寅，东盐州治中王才艺杀其刺史田华，叛附于刘黑闼。
现代文：初八，东盐州治中王才艺杀了刺史田华，反叛投靠刘黑闼。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wang Caiyi of the East Yanzhou Jizhong killed the assassin Tian Hua, and Liu Heyao became a rebel.

古文：丙申，相州人杀其刺史独孤彻以其州叛附于黥闼。
现代文：十四日相州百姓杀了本州刺史独孤彻，将相州归附刘黑闼。
English: On the 14th, the people of Xiangzhou killed the sole assassin of Honshu, and annexed Xiangzhou to Liu Heyao.

古文：己酉，杨世略、刘元进降。
现代文：二十七日，杨世略、刘元进归降。
English: On the 27th, Yang Shiliu and Liu Yuanjin resigned.

古文：二月，王要汉降。
现代文：二月，王要汉归降。
English: In February, Wang Yaohan surrendered.

古文：己巳，秦王世民克邢州。
现代文：十七日，秦王李世民攻克邢州。
English: On the 17th, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：丁丑，刘黑闼陷洺水，总管罗士信死之。
现代文：二十五日，刘黑闼攻陷氵名水，总管罗士信殉难。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Liu Hefei captured the famous water of the Yunnan River, and the general manager, Luo Shixin, was martyred.

古文：戊寅，汴州总管王要汉败徐圆郎于杞州，执周文举。
现代文：二十六日，汴州总管王要汉在杞州打败徐圆朗，俘虏周文举。
English: On the 26th, the governor of Zhangzhou, Wang Yaohan, defeated Xu Yuanlang in Zhangzhou, and captured Zhou Wenqiu.

古文：三月戊戌，谭州刺名李义满杀齐州都督王薄。
现代文：三月十七日，谭州刺史杀了齐州都督王薄。
English: On March 17th, Tanzhou assassinated the governor of Qizhou, Wang Bo.

古文：丁未，秦王世民及刘黑闼战于洺水，败之，黑闼亡入于突厥。
现代文：二十六日，秦王李世民在氵名水打败刘黑闼，刘黑闼逃入突厥。
English: On the 26th, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, defeated Liu Heyao in the famous water, and Liu Heyao fled to Turkey.

古文：蔚州总管高开道反，寇易州，刺史慕容孝干死之。
现代文：蔚州总管高开道反叛，攻打易州，刺史慕容孝干殉难。
English: Gao Kaido, the governor of Ulshu, rebelled, attacked Yizhou, and stabbed Murong Xiaogang to death.

古文：四月，梁州野蚕成茧。
现代文：四月，梁州野蚕结茧。
English: In April, the wild silkworms in Liangzhou sprouted cocoons.

古文：冉安昌降。
现代文：冉安昌归降。
English: Ran Anchang surrenders.

古文：己未，宁长真降。
现代文：初八，宁长真归降。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Ning Changzheng surrendered.

古文：戊辰，释流罪以下获麦。
现代文：十七日，释放判流放罪以下的罪犯，令其收割麦子。
English: On the 17th, criminals sentenced to less than banishment were released and ordered to harvest wheat.

古文：壬申，代州总管李大恩及突厥战，死之。
现代文：二十一日，代州总管李大恩与突厥军交战殉难。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Daizhou governor, Li Daing, was martyred in a battle with the Turkish army.

古文：戊寅，邓文进降。
现代文：二十七日，邓文进归降。
English: On the 27th, Deng Wenjin resigned.

古文：五月，田留安降。
现代文：五月，田留安归降。
English: In May, Taruyasu surrendered.

古文：庚寅，瓜州人王干杀贺拔行威以降。
现代文：初九，瓜州人王干杀了贺拔行威归顺朝廷。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the king of Guazhou killed He Bajing and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：乙巳，赐荆州今岁田租。
现代文：二十四日，朝廷赐予荆州本年的田租。
English: On the 24th, the imperial court granted Jingzhou this year's field rent.

古文：六月辛亥，刘黑闼与突厥寇山东。
现代文：六月初一，刘黑闼与突厥侵掠山东。
English: On the first day of June, Liu Heyao and the Turks invaded and plundered Shandong.

古文：车骑将军元韶为瓜州道行军总管，以备突厥。
现代文：车骑将军元绍任瓜州道行军总管，以防御突厥。
English: General of cavalry and cavalry Yuan Shao served as the head of the march of Guazhou Road to defend against the Turks.

古文：癸丑，吐谷浑寇洮、旭、叠三州，岷州总管李长卿败之。
现代文：初三，吐谷浑军侵掠洮、旭、叠三个州，岷州总管李长卿击败寇军。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Tugu Hun army invaded and pillaged the three provinces of Yunnan, Xuxi and Yunnan, and the governor of Yunnan Province, Li Changqing, defeated the invaders.

古文：乙卯，淮安郡王神通讨徐圆朗。
现代文：初五，淮安郡王李神通讨伐徐圆朗。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the king of Huai'an County, Li Shentong, fought against Xu Yuanlang.

古文：七月甲申，作弘义宫。
现代文：七月初五，建造弘义宫。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month, the construction of Hongyi Palace was completed.

古文：甲午，淮阳郡王道玄为河北道行军总管，讨刘黑闼。
现代文：十五日，淮阳郡王李道玄任河北道行军总管，讨伐刘黑闼。
English: On the 15th, Li Daoxuan, the king of Huaiyang County, was appointed as the general manager of the march of Hebei Province to fight against Liu Heixuan.

古文：贝州人董该以定州叛附于黑闼。
现代文：贝州人董该反叛，将定州归附刘黑闼。
English: Baizhou resident Dong Gao rebelled and annexed Dingzhou to Liu Heixuan.

古文：丙申，突厥杀刘武周于白道。
现代文：十七日，突厥在白道杀了刘武周。
English: On the 17th, the Turks killed Liu Wu Zhou in Baidoa.

古文：迁州人邓士政反，执其刺史李敬昂。
现代文：迁州人邓士政反叛，抓了其刺史李敬昂。
English: Deng Shizheng, a resident of Mianzhou, rebelled and was caught by his assassin, Li Jing'ang.

古文：丁酉，冯盎降。
现代文：十八日，冯盎归降。
English: On the 18th, Feng Ang surrendered.

古文：八月辛亥，葬隋炀帝。
现代文：八月初一，安葬隋炀帝。
English: On the first day of August, Emperor Sui Xuan was buried.

古文：甲寅，吐谷浑寇岷州，益州道行台左仆射窦轨败之。
现代文：初四，吐谷浑军侵掠岷州，益州道行台左仆射窦轨击败了它。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Tugu Hun army invaded and plundered Bozhou, and the left-hand servant of Yizhou Daogangdai shot and defeated it.

古文：乙卯，突厥寇边。
现代文：初五，突厥侵犯边境。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Turks invaded the border.

古文：庚申，皇太子出豳州道，秦王世民出秦州道，以御突厥。
现代文：初十，皇太子李建成赴豳州道，秦王李世民赴秦州道，以抵御突厥。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the crown prince Li Jiancheng went to Quzhou Road, and the Qin king Li Shimin went to Qinzhou Road to resist the Turks.

古文：己巳，吐谷浑陷洮州。
现代文：十九日，吐谷浑军攻陷洮州。
English: On the 19th, the Tugu Hun army captured Zhangzhou.

古文：并州总管、襄邑郡王神符及突厥战于汾东，败之。
现代文：并州总管、襄邑郡王李神符在汾东与突厥军交战，打败突厥军。
English: And Li Shenfu, the head of the prefecture and the king of Xiangyi County, fought with the Turkish army in Shandong and defeated the Turkish army.

古文：戊寅，突厥陷大震关。
现代文：二十八日，突厥军攻陷大震关。
English: On the 28th, the Turkish army captured the Great Seismic Barrier.

古文：九月癸巳，灵州总管杨师道败之于三观山。
现代文：九月十五日，灵州总管杨师道在三观山打败突厥军。
English: On September 15, Yang Shidao, the governor of Lingzhou, defeated the Turkish army at Sankang Mountain.

古文：丙申，洪州总管宇文歆又败之于崇冈。
现代文：十八日，洪州总管宇文歆在崇冈又击败它。
English: On the 18th, Hongzhou Governor U Wenjun defeated it again in Chonggang.

古文：壬寅，定州总管双士洛、骠骑将军魏道仁又败之于恒山之阳。
现代文：二十四日，定州总管双士洛、骠骑将军魏道仁在恒山之南，再次将其击败。
English: On the 24th, Wei Daoren, the governor of Dingzhou and the general of Shuansiluo, defeated him again in the south of Hengshan.

古文：丙午，领军将军安兴贵之又败之于甘州。
现代文：二十八日，领军将军安兴贵再一次在甘州击败突厥军。
English: On the 28th, the leading general, An Xinggui, once again defeated the Turkish army in Ganzhou.

古文：刘黑闼陷瀛州，刺史马匡武死之。
现代文：刘黑闼攻陷瀛州，刺史马匡武殉难。
English: Liu Heixuan invaded Zhangzhou, stabbed Shi Ma Kuangwu and was martyred.

古文：东盐州人马君德以其州叛附于黑闼。
现代文：东盐州人马君德反叛，将本州归附刘黑闼。
English: East Yanzhou resident Ma Junde rebelled and annexed the state to Liu Heixuan.

古文：十月己酉，齐王元吉讨黑闼。
现代文：十月初一，齐王李元吉讨伐刘黑闼。
English: On the first day of October, the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, fought against Liu Heyao.

古文：癸丑，贝州刺史许善护及黑闼战于鄃县，死之。
现代文：初五，贝州刺史许善护在俞阝县与刘黑闼交战，殉难。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the besiegers of Bechuan Shi, Xu Shanzhou, fought with Liu Heyao in Jixian County and was martyred.

古文：甲寅，观州刺史刘君会叛附于黑闼。
现代文：初六，观州刺史刘君会反叛，投靠刘黑闼。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Liu Junhui, a scholar from Guanzhou, rebelled and sided with Liu Heibei.

古文：乙丑，淮阳郡王道玄及黑闼战于下博，死之。己巳，林士弘降。
现代文：十七日，淮阳郡王李道玄在下博与刘黑闼交战，殉难。二十一日，林士弘归降。
English: On the 17th, Li Daoxuan, the king of Huaiyang County, fought Liu Heixuan in lower Bo and was martyred. On the 21st, Lin Shihong surrendered.

古文：十一月庚辰，刘黑闼陷沧州。
现代文：十一月初三，刘黑闼攻破沧州。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Liu Hefei invaded Cangzhou.

古文：甲申，皇太子讨黑闼。
现代文：初七，皇太子李建成讨伐刘黑闼。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Crown Prince Li Jiancheng led a crusade against Liu Heyao.

古文：丙申，如宜州。
现代文：十九日，高祖去宜州。
English: On the 19th, Gaozu went to Yizhou.

古文：癸卯，猎于富平北原。
现代文：二十六日，在富平北原打猎。
English: On the 26th, I went hunting in the North Plains of Fuping.

古文：十二月丙辰，猎于万寿原。
现代文：十二月初九，高祖在万寿原打猎。
English: On the ninth day of the twelfth month, Gao Zu went hunting in Wanshouyuan.

古文：戊午，刘黑闼陷恒州，刺史王公政死之。
现代文：十一日，刘黑闼攻破恒州，刺史王公政殉难。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Hefei defeated Hengzhou and stabbed Wang Gongzheng to death.

古文：庚申，至自万寿原。
现代文：十三日，高祖从万寿原回到京城。
English: On the 13th, Gao Zu returned to Beijing from Wanshouyuan.

古文：壬申，皇太子及刘黑闼战于魏州，败之。
现代文：二十五日，皇太子李建成在魏州打败刘黑闼。二十七日，在毛州再次击败刘黑闼。
English: On the 25th, Crown Prince Li Jiancheng defeated Liu Heyao in Weizhou. On the 27th, he defeated Liu Heyao again in Maozhou.

古文：甲戌，又败之于毛州。六年正月己卯，黑闼将葛德威执黑闼以降。
现代文：武德六年正月初三，刘黑闼的部将葛德威抓了刘黑闼归顺朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of the sixth year of the Wude Dynasty, Liu Heyao's commander, Gedwei, captured Liu Heyao and handed him over to the imperial court.

古文：壬午，巂州人王摩娑反，骠骑将军卫彦讨之。
现代文：初六，州人王摩娑反叛，骠骑将军卫彦讨伐他。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the year, the statesman Wang Maqi rebelled, and the cavalry general Wei Yan went to fight him.

古文：庚寅，徐圆朗陷泗州。
现代文：十四日，徐圆朗攻破泗州。
English: On the 14th, Xu Yuanlang defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：二月，刘黑闼伏诛。
现代文：二月，刘黑闼被处死刑。
English: In February, Liu Hefei was sentenced to death.

古文：庚戌，幸温汤。壬子，猎于骊山。
现代文：初四，高祖亲临温泉；初六，在骊山打猎。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Gao Zu visited a hot spring; in the sixth year of junior high school, he went hunting in Lushan.

古文：甲寅，至自温汤。
现代文：初八，自温泉回到京城。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, I returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：丙寅，行军总管李世勣败徐圆朗，执之。
现代文：二十日，行军总管李世责力打败、并俘虏了徐圆朗。
English: On the 20th, the head of the march, Li Shileili, defeated and captured Xu Yuanlang.

古文：三月，苗海潮、梅知岩、左难当降乙巳，洪州总管张善安反。
现代文：三月，苗海潮、梅知岩、左难当归降。二十九日，洪州总管张善安反叛。
English: In March, Miao Haichao, Mei Zhiyan and Zuo Nantang surrendered. On the 29th, Zhang Shan'an, the head of Hongzhou, rebelled.

古文：四月己酉，吐蕃陷芳州。
现代文：四月初四，吐蕃军攻破芳州。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, the Tubo army broke through Fangzhou.

古文：己未，以故第为通义宫，祭元皇帝、元贞皇后于旧寝。赦京城，赐从官帛。
现代文：十四日，高祖以旧日府宅做通义宫，在原陵庙祭祀先父元贞皇帝、先母元贞皇后；对京城的有罪人员施行赦免，赏赐丝织品给侍从官员。
English: On the 14th, Gao Zu used the former residence of the Japanese government to build the Tongyi Palace, and held a memorial service for his father, Emperor Yuanzheng, and his mother, Empress Yuanzheng, in the original mausoleum. He pardoned the guilty persons in the capital, and rewarded the attendant officials with silk fabrics.

古文：辛酉，张善安陷孙州，执总管王戎。
现代文：十六日，张善安攻破孙州，俘虏了总管王戎。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Shan'an invaded Sunzhou and captured the general manager Wang Rong.

古文：丁卯，南州刺史庞孝泰反，陷南越州。
现代文：二十二日，南州刺史庞孝泰反叛，攻破南越州。
English: On the 22nd, Nanzhou rebelled against Pang Xiaotai and defeated Nanzhou.

古文：壬申，封子元为蜀王，元庆汉王。
现代文：二十七日，高祖封儿子李元王寿为蜀王，李元庆为汉王。
English: On the 27th, Gaozufeng's son Li Yuanwang Shou became the King of Shu, and Li Yuanqing became the King of Han.

古文：癸酉，裴寂为尚书左仆射，萧瑀为右仆射，封德彝为中书令，吏部尚书赵恭仁兼中书令、检校凉州诸军事。
现代文：二十八日，委任裴寂为尚书左仆射，萧蠫为右仆射，封德彝为中书令，吏部尚书赵恭仁兼中书令、检校凉州诸军事。
English: On the 28th, Peizhong was appointed as the left assistant of Shangshu, Xiao Jun was appointed as the right assistant of Shangshu, Feng Dejun was appointed as the middle assistant of Shangshu, Zhao Guoren was appointed as the middle assistant of Shangshu, and Liangzhou was inspected by the military.

古文：五月庚寅，吐谷浑、党项寇河州，刺史卢士良败之。
现代文：五月十五日，吐谷浑、党项侵掠河州，刺史卢士良打败他们。
English: On the 15th of May, Tugu Hun and Danzhao invaded and plundered Hezhou, and defeated them at Shiluxiliang.

古文：癸卯，高开道以奚寇幽州，长史王说败之。
现代文：二十八日，高开道依靠奚族侵掠幽州，长史王说击败了他。
English: On the 28th, Gao Kaidou relied on the Yi people to invade and plunder Yuzhou, and Changshi Wang said that he defeated him.

古文：六月丁卯，突厥寇朔州，总管高满政败之。
现代文：六月二十三日，突厥军侵掠朔州，总管高满政打败了他们。
English: On June 23, the Turkish army invaded and plundered Shuozhou, and the general manager Gao Manzheng defeated them.

古文：曲赦朔州。
现代文：朝廷对朔州施行部分赦免。
English: The imperial court partially pardoned Shuozhou.

古文：七月丙子，沙州别驾窦伏明反，杀其总管贺若怀廓。
现代文：七月初二，沙州别驾窦伏明反叛，杀了本州总管贺若怀廓。
English: On the second day of the first month of July, Beijiao Dou Fuming rebelled in Shazhou and killed He Ruohuaiqiu, the head of the state.

古文：己亥，皇太子屯于北边，秦王世民屯于并州，以备突厥。
现代文：二十五日，皇太子李建成屯兵北方边境，秦王李世民屯兵于并州，以防御突厥来犯。
English: On the 25th, the crown prince Li Jiancheng stationed troops on the northern border, and the Qin king Li Shimin stationed troops in Bianzhou to defend against the Turkish invaders.

古文：八月壬子，淮南道行台左仆射辅公祏反。
现代文：八月初九，淮南道行台左仆射辅公礻石反叛。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Gaotai Zuopu of Huainan Province rebelled against Shifu.

古文：乙丑，赵郡王孝恭讨之。
现代文：二十二日，赵郡王李孝恭讨伐他。
English: On the 22nd, the king of Zhao County, Li Xiaogong, went to fight against him.

古文：九月壬辰，秦王世民为江州道行军元帅。
现代文：九月十九日，秦王李世民任江州道行军元帅。
English: On September 19th, Qin King Li Shimin was appointed marshal of the march of Jiangzhou Road.

古文：丙申，渝州人张大智反。
现代文：二十三日，渝州人张大智反叛。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Dazhi from Yuzhou rebelled.

古文：十月丙午，杀广州都督刘世让。
现代文：十月初四，杀了广州都督刘世让。
English: On the 4th of October, he killed Liu Shijang, the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：戊申，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：初六，对死罪犯降低量刑等级，流放罪以下罪犯给予宽恕。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the sentencing level of death-row prisoners will be lowered, and those convicted of crimes below banishment will be pardoned.

古文：己未，如华阴。
现代文：十七日，高祖去华阴。
English: On the 17th, Gao Zu went to Huayin.

古文：张大智降。
现代文：张大智归降。
English: Zhang Dazhi surrendered.

古文：庚申，猎于白鹿原。
现代文：十八日，高祖在白鹿原打猎。
English: On the 18th, Gaozu went hunting in Shirokawara.

古文：壬戌，石虞侯率杜士远杀高满政，以朔州反。
现代文：二十日，右虞候首领杜士远杀了朔州总管高满政，带领朔州反叛。
English: On the 20th, Du Shiyuan, the leader of the Yuyu, killed Gao Man Zheng, the general manager of Shuozhou, and led the Shuozhou rebellion.

古文：丁卯，突厥请和。
现代文：二十五日，突厥求和。
English: On the 25th, the Turks sued for peace.

古文：十一月壬午，张善安袭杀黄州总管周法明。
现代文：十一月初十，张善安袭击黄州，杀了州总管周法明。
English: At the beginning of November, Zhang Shan'an attacked Huangzhou and killed Zhou Farming, the governor of the province.

古文：丁亥，如华阴。
现代文：十五日，高祖去华阴。
English: On the 15th, Gao Zu went to Huayin.

古文：辛卯，猎于沙苑。
现代文：十九日，在沙苑打猎。
English: On the 19th, I went hunting in Sha Yuan.

古文：丁酉，猎于伏龙原。
现代文：二十四日，在伏龙原打猎。
English: On the 24th, they went hunting in Fulongyuan.

古文：十二月壬寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀现象。
English: On the first day of December, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸卯，张善安降。
现代文：初二，张善安归降。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Zhang Shan'an was demoted.

古文：庚戌，以奉义监为龙跃宫，武功宅为庆善宫。
现代文：初九，以原奉义监做龙跃宫，武功宅做庆善宫。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the Dragon Leaping Palace was built with the original Bongyi Supervisor, and the Martial Arts House was built with the Qingzen Palace.

古文：甲寅，至自华阴。
现代文：十三日，高祖从华阴回到京城。
English: On the 13th, Gaozu returned to Beijing from Huayin.

古文：七年正月庚寅，邹州人邓同颖杀其刺史李士衡。
现代文：武德七年正月十九日，邹州人邓同颖杀了本州刺史李士衡。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Wu De era, Deng Tongying, a native of Zhangzhou, killed Li Shiheng, the chief official of Honshu.

古文：二月丁巳，释奠于国学。
现代文：二月十七日，在国都官学陈设酒食祭祀先圣先师。
English: On February 17th, alcohol and food offerings were set up in front of the Imperial Palace.

古文：己未，渔阳部将张金树杀高开道以降。
现代文：十九日，渔阳部将张金树杀了高开道归降。
English: On the 19th, the Yuyang Department killed Zhang Jinshu and forced Gao Kaido to surrender.

古文：三月戊戌，赵郡王孝恭败辅公祐，执之。
现代文：三月廿八日，赵郡王李孝恭打败并俘虏了辅公礻石。
English: On March 28th, the king of Zhao County, Li Xiaogong, defeated and captured Fu Gong and Shishi.

古文：己亥，孝恭杀赵州都督阚棱。
现代文：二十九日，李孝恭杀了越州都督阚眣。
English: On the 29th, Li Xiaogong killed the governor of Yuezhou.

古文：四月庚子，大赦。
现代文：四月初一，施行大赦。
English: On the first day of April, a general amnesty came into effect.

古文：班新律令。
现代文：颁布新法令。
English: Enact a new law.

古文：给复江州道二年、扬越一年。
现代文：免除江州道百姓的徭役二年，扬、越二州免除一年。
English: The people of Jiangzhou Province will be exempted from forced labor for two years, and those of Yang and Yue Provinces will be exempted for one year.

古文：五月丙戌，作仁智宫。
现代文：五月十七日，兴建仁智宫。
English: On May 17th, the construction of the Ren Zhi Palace began.

古文：六月辛丑，如仁智宫。
现代文：六月初三，高祖前往仁智宫。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Gaozu went to the Nizhi Palace.

古文：壬戌，庆州都督杨文干反。
现代文：二十三日，庆州都督杨文干反叛。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Wengan, the governor of Gyeongju, rebelled.

古文：七月己巳，突厥寇朔州，总管秦武通败之。
现代文：七月初一，突厥侵掠朔州，总管秦武通击败寇军。
English: On the first day of July, the Turks invaded and plundered Shuozhou, and the commander-in-chief, Qin Wutong, defeated the invaders.

古文：癸酉，庆州人杀杨文干以降。
现代文：初五，庆州百姓杀了杨文干归顺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the people of Gyeongju killed Yang Wengan.

古文：甲午，至自仁智宫。
现代文：二十六日，高祖从仁智宫返京。
English: On the 26th, Gaozu returned to Beijing from Nanzhi Palace.

古文：巂州地震山崩，遏江水。
现代文：州地震，山岳崩塌，江水受阻。
English: State earthquake, mountain collapse, river blocked.

古文：闰月己未，秦王世民、齐王元吉屯于豳州，以备突厥。
现代文：闰七月二十一日，秦王李世民、齐王李元吉在豳州屯兵，防备突厥侵犯。
English: On July 21, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, and Li Yuanji, the king of Qi, set up a garrison in Ganzhou to guard against Turkish invasion.

古文：八月己巳，吐谷浑寇鄯州，骠骑将军彭武杰死之。
现代文：八月初二，吐谷浑侵掠鄯州，骠骑将军彭武杰殉难。
English: On the second day of the first month of August, Tugu invaded and plundered Bozhou, and the cavalry general Peng Wujie was martyred.

古文：戊寅，突厥寇绥州，刺史刘大俱败之。
现代文：十一日，突厥侵掠绥州，刺史刘大俱击败寇军。
English: On the 11th day, the Turks invaded and plundered Bozhou, and Liu Dagu defeated the invaders.

古文：壬辰，突厥请和。
现代文：二十五日，突厥求和。
English: On the 25th, the Turks sued for peace.

古文：丁酉，裴寂使于突厥。
现代文：三十日，裴寂出使突厥。
English: On the 30th, Pei sent an envoy to Turkey.

古文：十月丁卯，如庆善宫。
现代文：十月初一，高祖前往庆善宫。
English: On the first day of October, Gaozu went to Qingzengong.

古文：辛未，猎于鄠南。癸酉，幸终南山。
现代文：初五，在南打猎。初七，游终南山。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, they went hunting in Nan. In the seventh year of junior high school, they went on a trip to Nanshan.

古文：丙子，谒楼观老子祠。
现代文：初十，拜谒楼观的老子祠。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Lao Zi Ancestral Hall of worshipping the mirage.

古文：庚寅，猎于围川。
现代文：二十四日，在围川打猎。
English: On the 24th, they went hunting in the Wai River.

古文：十二月丁卯，如龙跃宫。
现代文：十二月初二，高祖去龙跃宫。
English: On the second day of December, Gao Zu went to Longyue Palace.

古文：戊辰，猎于高陵。
现代文：初三，在高陵打猎。
English: Junior 3, hunting in Goryeong.

古文：庚午，至自高陵。
现代文：初五，自高陵返回京城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he returned to the capital from Goryeo.

古文：太子詹事裴矩检校侍中。
现代文：太子詹事裴矩任检校侍中。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Pei Rui served as a school inspector.

古文：八年二月癸未，虑囚。
现代文：武德八年二月十九日，高祖讯察囚犯的断狱记录。
English: On February 19, 2008, Gao Zuxun inspected the record of the prisoner's release.

古文：四月甲申，如鄠，猎于甘谷。
现代文：四月二十一日，高祖去，在甘谷打猎。
English: On April 21st, Gao Zu went hunting in Gan Valley.

古文：作太和宫。
现代文：兴建太和宫。
English: Construction of the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Japan.

古文：丙戌，至自鄠。
现代文：二十二日，自返回京城。
English: On the 22nd, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：六月甲子，如太和宫。
现代文：六月初二，高祖去太和宫。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Gaozu went to Taihegu.

古文：七月丙午，至自太和宫。
现代文：七月十四日，高祖从太和宫返回京城。
English: On July 14, Gaozu returned to the capital from Taihegu.

古文：丁巳，秦王世民屯于蒲州，以备突厥。
现代文：二十五日，秦王李世民屯兵蒲州，防御突厥。
English: On the 25th, Qin King Li Shimin sent troops to Buzhou to defend against the Turks.

古文：八月壬申，并州行军总管张瑾及突厥战于太谷，败绩，郓州都督张德政死之，执行军长史温彦博。
现代文：八月十一日，并州行军总管张瑾在太谷与突厥军交战，大败；郓州都督张德政殉难，行军长史温彦博被俘。
English: On August 11th, Zhang Ye, the general manager of the state march, fought with the Turkish army in Taiyuan and was defeated. Zhang Dezheng, the governor of Zhangzhou, was martyred, and Shi Wenyanbo, the head of the march, was captured.

古文：甲申，任城郡王道宗及突厥战于灵州，败之。
现代文：二十三日，任城郡王李道宗在灵州与突厥军交战，打败寇军。
English: On the 23rd, Li Daozong, the king of Rencheng County, fought with the Turkish army in Lingshou and defeated the invaders.

古文：丁亥，突厥请和。
现代文：二十六日，突厥求和。
English: On the 26th, the Turks sued for peace.

古文：十月辛巳，如周氏陂，猎于北原。
现代文：十月二十日，高祖去周氏陂，在北原打猎。
English: On October 20th, Gao Zu went to the Zhou Clan to hunt in the North Plains.

古文：壬午，如龙跃宫。
现代文：二十一日，去龙跃宫。
English: On the 21st, I went to Long Yue Palace.

古文：十一月辛卯，如宜州，猎于西原。
现代文：十一月初一，高祖去宜州，在西原打猎。
English: On the first day of November, Gaozu went to Yizhou to go hunting in the Western Plains.

古文：裴矩罢。
现代文：裴矩被免职。
English: Baikang was removed from his post.

古文：庚子，讲武于同官。
现代文：初九，在同官讲习武事。
English: In junior high school, he learned martial arts from his classmates.

古文：天策府司马宇文士及权检校侍中。
现代文：天策府司马宇文士及代理检校侍中。
English: Tensaku-fu's secretary, Ma Yu Wenshi, and the acting school inspector.

古文：辛丑，徙封元为吴王，元庆陈王。
现代文：初十，改封李元王寿为吴王，李元庆为陈王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Li Yuanwang Shou was renamed as Wu Wang, and Li Yuanqing was renamed as Chen Wang.

古文：癸卯，秦王世民为中书令，齐王元吉为侍中。
现代文：十二日，秦王李世民任中书令，齐王李元吉任侍中。
English: On the 12th, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, was appointed as the middle secretary, and Li Yuanji, the king of Qi, was appointed as the middle attendant.

古文：癸丑，猎于华池北原。
现代文：二十二日，高祖在华池的北边原野打猎。
English: On the 22nd, Gao Zu went hunting in the fields to the north of Hua Chi.

古文：十二月辛酉，至自华池。
现代文：十二月初一，高祖从华池回到京城。
English: On the first day of December, Gao Zu returned to Beijing from Huachi.

古文：庚辰，猎于鸣犊泉。
现代文：二十日，在鸣犊泉打猎。
English: On the 20th, they went hunting in Mingtouquan.

古文：辛巳，至自鸣犊泉。
现代文：二十一日，从鸣犊泉回京。
English: On the twenty-first, he returned to Kyoto from Mingtouquan.

古文：九年正月甲寅，裴寂为司空。
现代文：武德九年正月二十五日，裴寂任司空。
English: On the 25th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of Wude, Pei Jia assumed the post of Siku.

古文：二月庚申，齐王元吉为司徒。
现代文：二月初一，齐王李元吉任司徒。
English: On the first day of February, the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, became a disciple.

古文：壬午，有星孛于胃、昴。
现代文：二十三日，在天区的胃宿与昴宿之间，出现彗星。
English: On the 23rd, a comet appeared in the celestial region between the stomach and the abdomen.

古文：丁亥，孛于卷舌。
现代文：二十八日，在昴宿北面的卷舌星附近出现彗星。
English: On the 28th, a comet appeared in the vicinity of Comet Ophiuchus to the north of Pleiades.

古文：三月庚寅，幸昆明池，习水战。壬辰，至自昆明池。
现代文：三月初二，高祖亲临昆明池，了解水战训练；初四，从昆明池回到京城。
English: On the second day of March, Gao Zu came to Kunming Pool to learn about water combat training; on the fourth day of the first semester, he returned to Beijing from Kunming Pool.

古文：丙午，如周氏陂。乙卯，至自周氏陂。
现代文：十八日，高祖去周氏陂；二十七日，从周氏陂返京。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zu went to Zhou Clan Quarters; on the 27th, he returned to Beijing from Zhou Clan Quarters.

古文：丁巳，突厥寇凉州，都督、长乐郡王幼良败之。
现代文：二十九日，突厥军侵掠凉州，被都督、长乐郡王李幼良击败。
English: On the 29th, the Turkic army invaded and plundered Liangzhou, and was defeated by the governor and the king of Changle County, Li Youliang.

古文：四月辛巳，废浮屠，老子法。
现代文：四月二十三日，废止奉行佛教、老子的礼法。
English: On April 23, the etiquette of practicing Buddhism and Laozi was abolished.

古文：六月丁巳，太白经天。
现代文：六月初一，太白星行经天空。
English: On the first day of June, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：庚申，秦王世民杀皇太子建成、齐王元吉。
现代文：初四，秦王李世民杀了皇太子李建成、齐王李元吉。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Qin King Li Shimin killed Crown Prince Li Jiancheng and Qi King Li Yuanji.

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：复浮屠、老子法。
现代文：恢复奉行佛教、老子的礼法。
English: to resume the practice of Buddhism and the etiquette of Laozi.

古文：癸亥，立秦王世民为皇太子，听政。
现代文：初七，高祖立秦王李世民为皇太子，让他处理政务。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Gaozong made Qin King Li Shimin the crown prince and let him handle government affairs.

古文：赐为父后者袭勋、爵，赤牒官得为真，免民逋租宿赋。
现代文：朝廷赐予作为父亲继承人的人们承继其父的勋官、爵位，其中持有杀敌立功簿牒的可实授官职，免除百姓旧欠的田租赋税。
English: The imperial court bestowed orders and titles of nobility on those who succeeded their fathers as their father's heirs. Among them, those who had a certificate of merit for killing the enemy could actually be appointed to official posts, and the people were exempted from the old land rent tax.

古文：己卯，太白昼见。
现代文：二十三日，白天出现太白星。
English: On the 23rd, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：庚辰，幽州都督、庐江郡王瑗反，伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，幽州都督、庐江郡王李瑗反叛，被处死刑。
English: On the 24th, the governor of Yuzhou and Wang Lijuan of Minjiang County rebelled and was sentenced to death.

古文：癸未，赦幽州管内为瑗所诖误者。
现代文：二十七日，赦免幽州辖区内因李瑗反叛而受连累的人们。
English: On the 27th, he pardoned the people in the Yuzhou area who were implicated in the rebellion of Li Xi.

古文：七月辛卯，杨恭仁罢。
现代文：七月初五，杨恭仁被免职。
English: On the 5th of July, Yang Guoren was removed from office.

古文：太子右庶子高士廉为侍中，左庶子房玄龄为中书令，萧瑀为尚书左仆射。
现代文：太子右庶子高士廉任侍中，左庶子房玄龄任中书令，萧蠫任尚书左仆射。
English: The prince's right illegitimate son Gao Shi Ren served as an aide-de-camp, the left illegitimate son Bo Xuanling served as the middle secretary, and Xiao Yu served as the left assistant secretary.

古文：癸巳，宇文士及为中书令，封德彝为尚书左仆射。
现代文：初七，宇文士及任中书令，封德彝任尚书右仆射。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he was promoted to the rank of Uwenshi and appointed to the post of middle-ranked calligrapher. He was assigned to the post of middle-ranked calligrapher and the post of middle-ranked calligrapher.

古文：辛亥，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，白天出现太白星。
English: On the 25th, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：甲寅，太白昼见。八月丙辰，突厥请和。
现代文：二十八日，白天出现太白星。八月初一，突厥求和。
English: On the 28th, a white star appeared during the day. On the first day of August, Turkey sued for peace.

古文：丁巳，太白昼见。
现代文：初二，白天出现太白星。
English: On the second day of the first semester, a white star appeared during the day.

古文：壬戌，吐谷浑请和。
现代文：初七，吐谷浑求和。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Tugu is begging for peace.

古文：甲子，皇太子即皇帝位。
现代文：初九，皇太子李世民登基。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Crown Prince Li Shimin ascended to the throne.

古文：贞观三年，太上皇徙居大安宫。
现代文：贞观三年，太上皇李渊迁居大安宫。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, the Retired Emperor Li Yuan moved to the Da'an Palace.

古文：九年五月，崩于垂拱前殿，年七十一。
现代文：贞观九年五月，高祖李渊在垂拱前殿逝世，享年七十一岁。
English: In May of the ninth year of Zhenguan, the great ancestor Li Yuan died in the front hall of the Hanging Arch, at the age of seventy-one.

古文：谥曰大武，庙号高祖。
现代文：谥号为 太武 ，庙号 高祖 。
English: His nickname is Taibu, and his temple name is Gaozu.

古文：上元元年，改谥神尧皇帝。
现代文：上元元年，改高祖的谥号为 神尧皇帝 。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Gaozu's nickname was changed to Emperor Shennong.

古文：天宝八载，谥神尧大圣皇帝；十三载，增谥神尧大圣大光孝皇帝。
现代文：天宝八载，谥号为 神尧大圣皇帝 ；十三载，其谥号增为 神尧大圣大光孝皇帝 。
English: In the eighth year of the Heavenly Treasure era, his posthumous name was Shennong Daesheng Emperor; in the thirteenth year, his posthumous name was increased to Shennong Daesheng Daiguangxiao Emperor.

古文：赞曰：自古受命之君，非有德不王。
现代文：赞语：自古承受天命的君主，不是有德贤明者王业不旺。
English: Praise: Since ancient times, the monarch who bears the fate of heaven is not a virtuous and wise person.

古文：自夏后氏以来，始传以世，而有贤有不肖，故其为世，数亦或短或长。
现代文：自夏后氏以来，才兴世袭传位，而继位者有的德才兼备，有的寡德少才，因此，占有天下，气数也就有长有短。
English: Since the Xia Hou clan, hereditary succession has only been in vogue, and some successors have both virtues and talents, and some have few virtues and talents. Therefore, they occupy the world, and the number of qi also has its advantages and disadvantages.

古文：论者乃谓周自后稷至于文、武，积功累仁，其来也远，故其为世尤长。
现代文：论家于是讲：周朝从始祖后稷直到文王、武王，积聚功德累集仁爱，由来久远，因此统治天下特别长久。
English: The commentator then said: The Zhou Dynasty, from the founding father Houyi to King Wen and King Wu, accumulated merit and benevolence for a long time, so it ruled the world for a very long time.

古文：然考于《世本》，夏、商、周皆出于黄帝，夏自鲧以前，商自契至于成汤，其间寂寥无闻，与周之兴异矣。
现代文：然而考察史书《世本》，夏、商、周三代均由黄帝而来，夏朝在其始祖鲧之前，商朝从始祖契直至开国君主成汤，这期间默默无闻，与周朝的兴起不同。
English: However, an examination of the history book "World Book" reveals that Xia, Shang, and the third generation all came from the Yellow Emperor. The Xia Dynasty came before its progenitor, and the Shang Dynasty from the progenitor until the founding monarch. During this period, they were unknown, which is different from the rise of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：而汉亦起于亭长叛亡之徒。
现代文：而汉朝也兴起于亭长、叛逃的人们。
English: And the Han Dynasty also arose from the pavilion leaders and defectors.

古文：及其兴也，有天下皆数百年而后已。
现代文：到它们兴国之后，各都占有天下数百年才结束。
English: After their re-establishment of the country, each of them occupied the world for hundreds of years before the end.

古文：由是言之，天命岂易知哉！
现代文：由此说来， 天命 难道容易知道吗？
English: So, isn't it easy to know the fate of the world?

古文：然考其终始治乱，顾其功德有厚薄与其制度纪纲所以维持者何如，而其后世，或浸以隆昌，或遽以坏乱，或渐以陵迟，或能振而复起，或遂至于不可支持，虽各因其势，然有德则兴，无德则绝，岂非所谓天命者常不显其符，而俾有国者兢兢以自勉耶？
现代文：但考察一个王朝的兴起与终止、太平与动乱，看看它们的功业、德行有高有低、有厚有薄和用来维持它的制度法纪的是什么，以及它的后代，有的渐渐兴盛繁荣，有的突然败坏混乱，有的逐步加剧衰颓，有的能够振起中兴，有的终于不能支撑而垮台，虽然各顺其势，然而都是有德的就兴盛，无德行就绝灭，这难道不是所谓的 天命 总不显示它的征兆，而使握有国柄者兢兢业业以自勉吗？
English: But if we examine the rise and end of a dynasty, the peace and turmoil, and look at their achievements, the highs and lows of their virtues, the thick and thin, and the institutions and laws used to maintain it, as well as their descendants, some gradually flourish and prosper, some suddenly fall into chaos, some gradually intensify their decline, some are able to invigorate and rejuvenate, and some are finally unable to sustain and fall. Although they all follow their own momentum, they all prosper when they have virtue, and perish when they have no virtue. Isn't this the so-called "Mandate of Heaven" that never shows any signs of it, but makes those who have a national

古文：唐在周、隋之际，世虽贵矣，然乌有所谓积功累仁之渐，而高祖之兴，亦何异因时而特起者欤？
现代文：唐公在北周、隋朝之际，家世虽已高贵了，然而并没有所谓积聚功德累集仁爱的渐进迹象；而高祖的兴起，与顺应时势崛起的人士有什么两样呢？
English: At the time of the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty, although Tang Gong's family line was already noble, there was no gradual sign of the so-called accumulation of merit and benevolence; and what is the difference between the rise of Gao Zu and those who rise in accordance with the current situation?

古文：虽其有治有乱，或绝或微，然其有天下年几三百，可谓盛哉！
现代文：尽管唐朝有时太平、有时动乱、有时危困、有时衰败，但它拥有天下将近三百年，可称得上兴盛啊！
English: Although the Tang Dynasty was at times peaceful, at times turbulent, at times in crisis, and at times in decline, it ruled the world for nearly three hundred years and could be called prosperous.

古文：岂非人厌隋乱而蒙德泽，继以太宗之治，制度纪纲之法，后世有以凭藉扶持，而能永其天命欤？
现代文：难道不是人民厌弃隋朝的乱世，而得到高祖的恩惠，又继之以太宗的治理，制度纲纪的法则，使后继者治国得以有所依凭、扶助，才能 天命 长久的吗？
English: Wasn't it the people who rejected the chaotic world of the Sui Dynasty and received the grace of Gao Zu, followed by the governance of Emperor Taizong and the rules of the system and discipline, so that the successors could rely on and support the governance of the country, in order to have a long-term destiny?

