古文：杨行密，庐州人。
现代文：杨行密，庐州人。
English: Yang Xingmi, from Zhangzhou.

古文：少孤贫，有膂力，日行三百里。
现代文：小时死了父亲，家庭贫困。有体力，一天可走三百里路。
English: His father died when he was an hour old, the family was poor. He had physical strength and could walk three hundred miles a day.

古文：唐中和之乱，天子幸蜀，郡将遣行密徒步奏事，如期而复。
现代文：唐朝中和年间动乱，天子驾幸蜀地，庐州郡将派杨行密徒步到蜀地报告事情，按期返回。
English: During the upheavals in the middle and middle years of the Tang Dynasty, Shuzhou County sent Yang Xingmi on foot to Shoudi to report the situation and return on schedule.

古文：《北梦琐言》：郑綮尝典杨行密为本州步奏官。光启初，秦宗权扰淮右，频寇庐、寿，郡将募能致战擒贼者，计级赏之，行密以胆力应募，往必有获，得补为队长。
现代文：光启初年，秦宗权扰乱淮北，频频进犯庐州、寿州，郡将招募能参战擒获贼兵的人，按擒获敌人数目多少予以奖赏，杨行密凭胆识勇力应募，与敌接战必有收获，得以补升为队长。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, Qin Zongquan disrupted Huaibei and frequently invaded Luzhou and Shoushou. The county would recruit people who could participate in the war and capture the enemy soldiers, and reward them according to the number of enemy soldiers captured. Yang Xingmi applied for the recruitment with courage and bravery, and there was bound to be a gain in the battle with the enemy, and he was promoted to the captain.

古文：行密乃自募百余人，皆璟勇无行者，杀都将，自权州兵，郡将即以符印付之而去，朝廷因正授行密庐州刺史。
现代文：杨行密就自行招募一百多人，都是凶勇而无品行的人，杀死庐州都将，自己临时掌领州兵，郡将便将符节印玺交给杨行密就走了，朝廷因此正式授杨行密为庐州刺史。
English: Yang Xingmi recruited more than a hundred people on his own, all of whom were ferocious and unprincipled, and killed all of Zhangzhou. He temporarily took charge of the National Guard. The county general then handed the festival seal to Yang Xingmi and left. Therefore, the court officially awarded Yang Xingmi as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：光启三年，扬州节度使高骈失政，委任妖人吕用之辈。
现代文：光启三年，扬州节度使高骈放弃政柄，交给妖人吕用之一类人。
English: In the third year of Guangqi, the Yangzhou Festival made Gao Gan give up his political position and handed it over to the sorcerer Lü Ying.

古文：牙将毕师铎惧为用之所谮，自高邮起兵以袭广陵，为用之所却，乃乞师于宣州秦彦，且言事克之日，愿以扬州帅之。
现代文：牙将毕师铎害怕被吕用之陷害，从高邮起兵袭击广陵，被吕用之挫败，于是向宣州秦彦请求救兵，并答应事成之日，愿让秦彦统帅扬州。
English: The commander Bi Shizhen was afraid of being framed by Lü Ying, so he sent troops from Gaoyou to attack Guangling, but was defeated by Lü Ying. He then asked Qin Yan of Xuanzhou to rescue the troops, and promised that he would let Qin Yan lead Yangzhou on the day of success.

古文：彦先遣将秦稠以兵三千人助师铎攻陷广陵，高骈署师铎为行军司马。
现代文：秦彦先派将领秦稠领三千兵士帮助毕师铎攻陷广陵，高骈任毕师铎为行军司马。
English: Qin Yanxian sent general Qin Chouzhu with three thousand soldiers to help Bi Shizhao to conquer Guangling, and Gao Zhen served as the commander of the marching army.

古文：未几，秦彦率大众并家属渡江，入扬州军府，自称节度使。
现代文：不久，秦彦率领许多部属以及家属渡江，进入扬州军府，自称为节度使。
English: Soon, Qin Yan led many subordinates and family members to cross the river and enter the Yangzhou Military Government, calling himself the commander-in-chief.

古文：初，扬州未陷，吕用之诈为高骈檄，征兵于庐州，及城陷，行密以万人奄至。
现代文：当初，扬州尚未被攻陷时，吕用之假造高骈檄文，到庐州征兵，到扬州被攻陷后，杨行密带领一万大军扑来。
English: At the beginning, when Yangzhou had not yet been conquered, Lu used the fake Gaozhou script to recruit soldiers in Zhangzhou. After Yangzhou was conquered, Yang Xingmi led a 10,000-strong army to attack.

古文：毕师铎之入广陵也，吕用之出奔于外，至是委质于行密。
现代文：毕师铎攻陷广陵后，吕用之逃奔外地，这时归顺于杨行密。
English: After the fall of Guangling by Bi Shizhen, Lv Yizhi fled abroad and surrendered to Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密攻广陵，营于大明寺，秦、毕出兵以攻行密之营，短兵才接，行密伪遁，秦、毕之兵争入其栅，以取金帛，行密发伏兵以击之，秦、毕大败，退走其壁，自是不复出战。
现代文：杨行密进攻广陵，驻扎在大明寺，秦彦、毕师铎出兵攻击杨行密军营，刚刚短兵相接，杨行密诈败逃走，秦、毕的兵士争着冲进杨行密军营，以抢夺金钱财物，杨行密出动埋伏的士兵攻击他们，秦彦和毕师铎大败，退回自己城中，从此不再出战。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked Guangling and was stationed at Daming Temple. Qin Yan and Bi Shijie sent troops to attack Yang Xingmi's camp. They were just close to each other. Yang Xingmi cheated and fled. Qin and Bi's soldiers rushed into Yang Xingmi's camp to rob money and property. Yang Xingmi sent ambush soldiers to attack them. Qin Yan and Bi Shijie were defeated and returned to their own city. They never fought again.

古文：其年九月，秦、毕害高骈于幽所，少长皆死，同坎痤于道院北垣下。
现代文：同年九月，秦彦、毕师铎在监禁的地方杀害了高骈，并杀死了他一家老少，一起埋在道院北院墙下。
English: In September of the same year, Qin Yan and Bi Shijun killed Gao Yao in the place where he was imprisoned, and killed his family, old and young, and buried them together under the wall of the North Courtyard of the Taoist Temple.

古文：行密攻围弥急，城中食尽，米斗四十千，居人相啖略尽。
现代文：杨行密攻城更加激烈，城中粮食吃尽，一斗米值四十千钱，居民互相啖食将尽。
English: Yang Xingmi's attack on the city was even more fierce. The food in the city was exhausted. A bucket of rice was worth forty thousand yuan. The residents were eating each other.

古文：十月，城陷，秦、毕走东塘，行密入广陵，辇外寨之粟以食饥民，即日米价减至三千。
现代文：十月，城被攻陷，秦、毕逃走东塘，杨行密进入广陵，用车子装来城外营寨的粮食以救济饥民，当天米价降到一斗三千钱。
English: In October, the city was captured, Qin and Bi fled Dongtang, Yang Xingmi entered Guangling, and used a car to load grain from the camp outside the city to relieve the hungry. On the same day, the price of rice dropped to 3,000 yuan per barrel.

古文：十一月，蔡贼孙儒以众万人自淮西奄至，还据外寨，行密辎重牛羊军食未入城者，皆为儒所有。
现代文：十一月，蔡州贼寇孙儒率领一万人自淮西扑来，再次据守城外营寨，杨行密辎重牛羊军粮来不及运进城的，都被孙儒占有。
English: In November, the Caizhou thief and robber Sun Ru, led by ten thousand people from Huaixi, once again defended the encampment outside the city. Yang Xing's densely packed heavy cattle and sheep and military grain were too late to be transported into the city, and were all occupied by Sun Ru.

古文：时秦、毕来自东塘，与儒军合，自是西门之外，复为敌境矣。
现代文：这时秦彦、毕师铎从东塘卷土重来，与孙儒合兵一处，从此西门之外，又成为敌人的境地。
English: At this time, Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan returned from Dongtang and joined forces with Sun Ru. From then on, they became enemies outside the West Gate.

古文：初，吕用之遇行密于天长，绐行密曰： 用之有白金五千铤，瘗于所居之庑下，寇平之日，愿备将士倡楼一醉之资。 
现代文：当初，吕用之在天长遇上杨行密，骗杨行密说： 我有白金五千锭，埋在我住处的走廊下面，平定敌寇时，愿作为慰劳将士到娼楼醉饮一场的用费。 
English: At first, Lv Yanzhi met Yang Xingmi in Tianchang, and deceived Yang Xingmi by saying: I have five thousand baht of platinum, buried under the corridor of my residence, and when I subdue the enemy, I would like to use it as a consolation prize to go to the brothel to get drunk.

古文：至是，行密阅兵，用之在侧，谓用之曰： 仆射许此辈银，何负心也！ 
现代文：到这时，杨行密检阅部队，吕用之在身旁，杨行密对吕用之说： 你答应过给这些人银子，怎么能负心呢？ 
English: By this time, Yang Xingmi was inspecting the troops with Lv Yizhi by his side. Yang Xingmi said to Lv Yizhi, "You promised to give these people money, how can you go against your heart?

古文：遽命斩于三桥之下，夷其族。
现代文：立即下令杀死在三桥下，灭了他的家族。
English: Immediately ordered to kill under three bridges, wiped out his family.

古文：行密既有广陵，遣使至大梁，陈归附之意。
现代文：杨行密既占领广陵，派使者到大梁，陈述归顺之意。
English: Yang Xingmi not only occupied Guangling, but also sent an envoy to Daliang to declare his intention to surrender.

古文：是时，梁祖兼领淮南，乃遣牙将张廷范使于淮南，与行密结盟，寻遣行军司马李璠权知淮南留后，令都将郭言以兵援送。
现代文：这时，梁太祖兼统领淮南，就派牙将张廷范出使淮南，与杨行密结盟，旋即派行军司马李临时担任淮南留后，令都将郭言领兵援送。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu, who was also the leader of Huainan, sent Zhang Tingfan to Huainan to form an alliance with Yang Xingmi, and immediately sent Ma Li, the military commander, to temporarily stay in Huainan, and ordered Guo Yan to lead the troops.

古文：行密初则厚礼廷范，及闻李璠之行，勃然有拒命之意。
现代文：杨行密开始时还以厚礼接待张廷范，当听到李要来淮南任职，就顿时产生抗拒命令的主意。
English: At the beginning, Yang Xingmi also received Zhang Tingfan with great courtesy. When he heard that Li was going to work in Huainan, he immediately had the idea of resisting the order.

古文：廷范惧，易衣夜遁，遇梁祖于宋州，备言行密不轨之心，酌其兵势未可图也，乃追李璠等还，即表行密为淮南留后。
现代文：张廷范害怕了，换了衣服连夜逃走，在宋州遇上梁太祖，详细谈论杨行密图谋不轨，惦量他的兵力觉得还不能处置他，于是追回李等人，就上表推荐杨行密做淮南留后。
English: Zhang Tingfan was scared, changed his clothes and fled overnight. He met Liang Taizu in Songzhou and talked in detail about Yang Xingmi's plotting and scheming. Considering his military strength, he felt that he could not dispose of him, so he tracked down Li and others and recommended Yang Xingmi to stay in Huainan.

古文：文德元年正月，孙儒杀秦彦、毕师铎于高邮，引军袭广陵，下之，儒自称节度使，行密收其众归于庐江。
现代文：唐僖宗文德元年正月，孙儒在高邮杀死秦彦、毕师铎，领兵袭击并攻下了广陵，孙儒自称为节度使，杨行密收集他的部下到庐江。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Wende of the Tang Dynasty, Sun Ru killed Qin Yan and Bi Shijun in Gaoyou, led the troops to attack and captured Guangling. Sun Ru called himself the festival envoy, and Yang Xingmi gathered his subordinates to the Li River.

古文：十一月，梁祖遣大将庞师古自颍上渡淮，讨孙儒之乱，师古引兵深入淮甸，不利，还。
现代文：十一月，梁太祖派大将庞师古从颍上渡过淮河，攻讨孙儒的动乱，庞师古引兵深入淮甸，不利，返回。
English: In November, Liang Taizu sent the general Pang Shigu to cross the Huai River from Shaoshan to attack the unrest of Sun Ru. Pang Shigu led the troops deep into Huai Dian, but was not successful, and returned.

古文：龙纪元年，孙儒出攻宣州，行密乘虚袭据扬州，北通时溥，孙儒引兵复攻行密。
现代文：龙纪元年，孙儒出兵攻打宣州，杨行密乘虚袭击占领扬州，向北与时溥联合，孙儒领兵又攻杨行密。
English: In the first year of the Dragon Age, Sun Ru sent troops to attack Xuanzhou, Yang Xingmi took advantage of the false attack to occupy Yangzhou, and united with Shi Yan to the north. Sun Ru led the troops to attack Yang Xingmi.

古文：大顺元年，行密危蹙，率众夜遁，出据宣州，儒复入扬州。
现代文：大顺元年，杨行密危急，带着部下连夜逃走，据守宣州，孙儒再次入据扬州。
English: In the first year of Dashun, Yang Xingmi was in a critical situation and fled with his subordinates overnight. Sun Ru once again entered Xuanzhou.

古文：二年，乃蒐练兵甲以攻行密，属江、淮疾疫，师人多死，儒亦卧病，为部下所执，送于行密，杀之。
现代文：二年，便收集训练兵马准备攻打杨行密，碰上江、淮一带流行病疫，士兵病死很多，孙儒也病倒了，被部下抓起来，送给杨行密，杀了他。
English: In the second year, he gathered trained soldiers and horses to prepare to attack Yang Xingmi, and encountered epidemic diseases in the Jiang and Huai areas. Many soldiers died of illness, and Sun Ru also fell ill. He was arrested by his subordinates and sent to Yang Xingmi to kill him.

古文：行密自宣城长驱入于广陵，尽得孙儒之众。
现代文：杨行密从宣城长驱直入广陵，全部占有了孙儒的部众。
English: Yang Xingmi drove straight into Guangling from Xuancheng, and occupied all of Sun Ru's followers.

古文：自光启末，高骈失守之后，行密与毕师铎、秦彦、孙儒递相窥图，六七年中，兵革竞起，八州之内，鞠为荒榛，圜幅数百里，人烟断绝。
现代文：自光启末年起，高骈失去权柄后，杨行密与毕师铎、秦彦、孙儒一个接一个想夺得权柄，六七年间，兵戈争逐，八州之内，踏为荒芜草地，方圆数百里，人烟断绝。
English: Since the end of the Guangqi era, after Gao Qi lost power, Yang Xingmi and Bi Shijun, Qin Yan and Sun Ru have tried to seize power one after another. In the past 67 years, the war has been fought, and within the eight states, it has become a barren grassland, hundreds of miles in circumference, and people have been cut off.

古文：行密既并孙儒，乃招合遗散，与民休息，政事宽简，百姓便之，蒐兵练将，以图霸道。
现代文：杨行密兼并孙儒后，就招集流亡百姓，让他们休养生息，政治宽松简易，老百姓感到舒适，杨行密收集兵马操练将士，以图谋霸业。
English: After Yang Xingmi's annexation of Sun Ju's territory, he summoned the exiled people to let them rest and recuperate. The politics were relaxed and simple, and the people felt comfortable. Yang Xingmi collected soldiers and horses to train soldiers in an attempt to dominate the industry.

古文：所得孙儒之众，皆淮南之骁果也，选五千人豢养于府第，厚其衣食，驱之既战，靡不争先。
现代文：所得到的孙儒部众，都是淮西的骁勇善战之士，挑选五千人豢养在官府里，供以优厚的衣服食物，调遣他们走上战场，无不奋勇争先。
English: The members of the Sun Confucius Club were all brave and good fighters from Huaxi. They selected five thousand people to be raised in the government, provided them with fine clothes and food, sent them to the battlefield, and all of them fought bravely to be the first.

古文：甲胄皆以黑绘饰之，命曰 黑云都 。
现代文：穿的甲胄都用黑缯布装饰着，命名叫 黑云都 。
English: The armour they wear is decorated with black satin cloth and is called the Black Cloud.

古文：乾宁二年，行密尽有淮南之地，昭宗乃降制授行密淮南节度副大使知节度事、管内营田观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事、扬州大都督府长史、上柱国、宏农郡王，食邑三千户，食实封一百户。
现代文：乾宁二年，杨行密全部占有淮南地区，唐昭宗便降诏授杨行密为淮南节度副大使知节度事、管内营田观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事兼扬州大都督府长史、上柱国、弘农郡王，食邑三千户，食实封一百户。
English: In the second year of Qianning, Yang Xingmi occupied all of the Huainan region. Tang Zhaozong then issued an imperial edict to appoint Yang Xingmi as the deputy ambassador of the Huainan Festival to know the festival affairs, to observe and dispose of the yakitori fields within the jurisdiction, to be the keeper of the prefectural office and the three departments, the inspector of the school, the deputy governor of the Yangzhou Capital and the governor of the prefectural office, the upper pillar state, and the king of the county of Hongnong. There were three thousand households in the food village and one hundred households in the food real estate.

古文：四年，梁祖平兗、郓，硃瑾及沙陀将李承嗣、史俨等皆奔淮南，行密待之优厚，任以为将，瑾与承嗣皆位至方伯。
现代文：四年，梁太祖平定兖州、郓州，朱瑾以及沙陀将领李承嗣、史俨等人都投奔淮南，杨行密对待他们甚为优厚，任用做将领，朱瑾与李承嗣都居官位直到成为一方之霸。
English: In the fourth year, Liang Taizu conquered Bozhou, Bozhou, Zhu Xi, and the Shatou generals Li Chengzhi and Shi Yan, and they all went to Huainan. Yang Xingmi treated them very generously and appointed them as generals. Zhu Xi and Li Chengzhi both held official positions until they became the hegemony of one side.

古文：是岁，行密纵兵侵掠邻部，两浙钱、江西钟传、鄂州杜洪皆遣使求救于梁。
现代文：这年，杨行密纵兵侵掠邻近地区，两浙的钱、江西的钟传、鄂州的杜洪都派使者向梁求救。
English: In this year, Yang Xingmi's soldiers invaded and plundered the neighboring regions. Qian of Zhejiang, Zhong Chuan of Jiangxi, and Du Hong of Ezhou all sent envoys to Liang for help.

古文：梁祖遣硃友恭率部骑万人渡江，取便讨伐。
现代文：梁太祖派朱友恭率领步兵骑兵一万人渡过长江，伺机讨伐。
English: Liang Taizu sent Zhu Youqiong to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry across the Yangtze River and wait for an opportunity to fight.

古文：行密先令都将翟章据黄州，及梁师至，即弃郡南渡，固守武昌寨，行密遣将马珣以精兵五千助之，友恭与杜洪大破其众，遂拔武昌寨，擒翟章并淮军三千余人，获马五百匹，淮人大恐。
现代文：杨行密先令都将瞿章据守黄州，当梁军到来时，就放弃郡城南退过江，固守武昌寨。杨行密派将领马王旬率领五千精兵援助他，朱友恭与杜洪大破他们的部队，于是占领武昌寨，俘获瞿章和淮南吴国士兵三千多人，获得战马五百匹，淮南贼寇大为惊恐。
English: Yang Xingmi sent his general Ma Wang Jun with five thousand soldiers to help him, Zhu Youqiong and Du Hong defeated their troops, and then occupied Wuchangzhai, captured more than three thousand soldiers from Huainan and Wu, and obtained five hundred horses. The Huainan bandits were greatly alarmed.

古文：光化二年，行密北侵，遣张归厚御之而退。
现代文：八月，梁太祖派葛从周率领步兵骑兵一万人从霍丘渡过淮河，派庞师古率领大军在清口扎营。淮南人挖开堤堰放水，流水奔涌而至。
English: In August, Liang Taizu sent Ge from Zhou to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry across the Huai River from Huoqiu, and sent Pang Shigu to lead a large army to camp at Qingkou. The Huainan people dug up the dike and released water, and the water came rushing.

古文：天复三年，青州王师范叛，乞师于淮南，行密遣将王景仁率师二万以援之，攻讨密州。
现代文：杨行密又令朱瑾率领精兵袭击梁军，梁军大败，庞师古战死。葛从周听到庞师古失败，便从濠梁回师，到淠河，又被淮南人追击，各军仅仅得以北归。天复三年，青州王师范反叛，向淮南吴国请求救兵，杨行密派将领王景仁率领两万军队援助他，攻讨密州。
English: Yang Xingmi also ordered Zhu Rong to lead his elite soldiers to attack Liang's army. Liang's army suffered a major defeat, and Pang Shigu died in battle. Ge heard from Zhou that Pang Shigu had failed, so he returned to his division from Zhaolang and went to Luohe. He was also pursued by the Huainan people, and the armies were only able to return to the north. Three years after Tianfu, Wang Shifan of Qingzhou rebelled and asked Huainan and Wu for help. Yang Xingmi sent the general Wang Jingren to help him, leading 20,000 troops to attack Mishu.

古文：七月，梁祖大破师范及景仁之众，景仁遁还，追至辅唐，杀数千人，进取密州。
现代文：七月，梁太祖大破王师范和王景仁部众，王景仁逃回，梁军追到辅唐，杀死几千人，进攻占领了密州。
English: In July, Liang Taizu defeated Wang Shifan and Wang Jingren's troops, Wang Jingren fled back, Liang's army chased to Fu Tang, killed thousands of people, and attacked and occupied Myizhou.

古文：天祐元年十一月，淮人攻光州，梁祖率军抵霍丘，略地于庐、寿之境，淮人遁去。
现代文：天祐元年十一月，吴军进攻光州，梁太祖领军到达霍丘，攻入庐州、寿州境内，吴军逃走。
English: In November of the first year of Tianyu, the Wu army attacked Gwangju. Liang Taizu led the army to Huoqiu, invaded the territory of Ganzhou and Shoushou, and the Wu army fled.

古文：二年正月，进攻寿州，淮人闭壁不出，大掠而还。
现代文：二年正月，梁军进攻寿州，吴军闭城不出，梁军大肆掠夺而回。
English: In the first month of the second year, Liang's army attacked Shoushou, Wu's army did not close the city, Liang's army plundered and returned.

古文：是月，行密攻陷鄂州，擒节度使杜洪，戮于扬州市，梁之戍兵数千人亦陷焉。
现代文：同月，杨行密攻陷鄂州，擒获鄂州节度使杜洪，诛杀在扬州街市上，戍守鄂州的数千梁兵也落入敌人手中。
English: In the same month, Yang Xingmi invaded Ezhou, captured the Ezhou Festival and sent Du Hong to fight and kill in the Yangzhou street market. Thousands of Liang soldiers who defended Ezhou also fell into the hands of the enemy.

古文：其后，江西钟传、宣州田頵俱为行密所并。
现代文：后来，江西的钟传、宣州的田君页都被杨行密兼并。
English: Later, Jiangxi's Zhong Chuan and Xuanzhou's Tian Junshi were both merged by Yang Xingmi.

古文：三年，行密以疾卒于广陵。
现代文：三年，杨行密病死在广陵。
English: Three years later, Yang Xingmi died of illness in Guangling.

古文：及其子渭僭号，伪追尊为太祖武皇帝。
现代文：当他儿子杨渭僭号称帝后，追尊杨行密为太祖武皇帝。
English: When his son, Yang Pi, was proclaimed empress, Yang Xingmi was revered as the great-great-grandfather, Emperor Wu.

古文：初封丹阳王，渭卒，徐温乃推溥为主，后僭伪号。
现代文：杨溥，是杨行密的小儿子。开始时封为丹阳王，杨渭死后，徐温便推杨溥为君主，仍僭称伪吴国皇帝名号。
English: Yang Hui, the youngest son of Yang Xingmi, was initially crowned as the King of Danyang. After Yang Hui's death, Xu Wen promoted Yang Hui as the monarch, and he was still called the pseudo-emperor of the State of Wu.

古文：唐同光元年，庄宗平梁，迁都于洛阳。
现代文：后唐同光元年，庄宗平定后梁，迁都洛阳。
English: In the first year of post-Tang Tongguang, Zhuozong conquered Houliang and moved the capital to Luoyang.

古文：十二月，溥遣使章景来朝，称 大吴国主致书上大唐皇帝 ，其辞旨卑逊，有同笺表。
现代文：十二月，杨溥派使者章景来朝拜，称 大吴国主致信给大唐皇帝 。
English: In December, Yang Pi sent an envoy, Zhang Jing, to pay homage, saying that the Great Lord of Wu had sent a letter to the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：明年八月，又遣其司农卿卢蘋贡方物，及献贞简太后珍玩，庄宗命左藏库使王居敏、通事舍人张朗等以名马报之。
现代文：第二年八月，又派司农卿卢苹进贡地方物产，又献给贞简太后珍宝玩物，庄宗命左藏库使王居敏、通事舍人张朗等人用名马回报他。
English: In August of the following year, he also sent Lu Ping, the Secretary of Agriculture, to pay tribute to local products, and also dedicated precious toys to Empress Dowager Zhengyan. Zhuangzong ordered Wang Jimin and Zhang Lang, the courier, to return him with famous horses.

古文：郭崇韬之平西川也，淮人大惧，将去伪号，称籓于唐。
现代文：郭崇韬平定西川后，吴人大惊，准备去掉伪帝号，向后唐称藩臣。
English: After Guo Chongzhen subdued the West River, the Wu people were shocked and prepared to remove the pseudo-emperor's title, and the Tang Dynasty was called the vassal.

古文：时崇韬欲陈舟师下峡，为平吴之策，会崇韬既诛，洛城有变，淮人闻之，比屋相庆。
现代文：这时郭崇韬准备发水军下峡州，制定平定吴国的计策，不料郭崇韬被杀，洛阳京城有变，吴人听说后，举国欢庆。
English: At this time, Guo Chongzhen was preparing to send a naval force to Shimoxia Prefecture to formulate a strategy to pacify the state of Wuxia. However, Guo Chongzhen was killed, the capital city of Luoyang was changed, and after the people of Wuxi heard about it, the whole country celebrated.

古文：明宗纂嗣，溥复遣使修好，安重诲奏曰： 杨溥既不称籓，无足与之抗礼，来侦国情，不如辞绝。 
现代文：唐明宗即位后，杨溥又派使者以通友好，安重诲上奏说： 杨溥既然不称藩臣，不值得以平等礼仪对待，他派人来侦探我们的国情，不如辞绝他。 
English: After Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, Yang Hui again sent an envoy to pass on friendship and reassure the emperor, saying: Since Yang Hui is not a minister of the domain, he is not worthy of being treated with equal etiquette. If he sent someone to investigate our national conditions, it would be better to refuse him.

古文：乃谢其使，不受所贡，遣之。
现代文：于是在馆舍安置他的来使，不接受他的贡物，再送走来使。
English: So he placed his emissary in the house, did not accept his tribute, and then sent the emissary away.

古文：唐天成二年十月，徐温卒，追封为齐王。
现代文：唐天成二年十月，徐温去世，追封为齐王。
English: In October of the second year of Tang Tiancheng, Xu Wen died and was posthumously crowned as the King of Qi.

古文：温之养子李棨代温佐辅，秉政数年，位至太尉、中书令、录尚书事，袭封齐王，伪加九锡。
现代文：徐温的养子李棨代替徐温辅佐朝政，掌握政权几年，位至太尉、中书令、录尚书事，继封为齐王，加以皇帝所用的九锡之礼。
English: Xu Wen's adopted son, Li Qian, replaced Xu Wen as the assistant of the imperial government. He controlled the political power for several years, and was promoted to the rank of the first lieutenant, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, the position of the secretary, and the position of the secretary.

古文：晋天福二年，溥不得已逊位于棨。
现代文：后晋天福二年，杨溥不得已让位给李棨。
English: Two years after Jian Tianfu, Yang Jie was forced to give way to Li Jie.

古文：棨迁溥于润州，筑丹阳宫以处之。
现代文：李棨将杨溥迁往润州，修建丹阳宫让他居住。
English: Li Yao moved Yang Yao to Runzhou and built the Danyang Palace for him to live in.

古文：行密尝命以大索为钱贯，号曰 穿钱眼 ，闻之，每岁命以大斧科柳，谓之 斫杨头 。
现代文：杨溥从此身穿道服，学辟谷食气的方术，一年多后因被幽禁而死。李棨又将他家人迁往海陵。后周显德年间，李景听到周朝军队渡过淮河，担心杨溥的家人作乱，便派人全部杀死他们。
English: From then on, Yang Jie put on a Taoist robe and learned the way of eliminating the qi of the valley, and died more than a year later due to confinement. Li Jie also moved his family to Hailing. Later, during Zhou Xiande, Li Jing heard that the Zhou army had crossed the Huai River, and fearing that Yang Jie's family would make trouble, he sent people to kill them all.

古文：至是，以元蒨通婚，二境渐睦，穿眼、斫头之论始止。李棨，本海州人。伪吴大丞相徐温之养子也。
现代文：从唐朝大顺二年杨行密开始拥有淮南土地起，到杨溥让出帝位为止，吴国共享国四十七年而亡。李棨，本为海州人，是伪吴国大丞相徐温的养子。
English: From the beginning of Yang Xingmi's possession of the land of Huainan in the second year of the Tang Dynasty's Dashun to the time of Yang Jie's abdication from the imperial throne, Wu shared the country for 47 years until his death. Li Jie, originally from Haizhou, was the adopted son of Xu Wen, the pseudo prime minister of the State of Wu.

古文：温字敦美，亦海州人，初从淮南节度使杨行密起师于庐州，渐至军校。
现代文：徐温字叫敦美，也是海州人，开始时跟随淮南节度使杨行密在庐州起兵，逐渐升到军校职位。
English: Xu Wenzi, also a native of Haizhou, called Dunmei. At the beginning, he followed the Huainan Festival to make Yang Xingmi raise an army in Ganzhou, and gradually rose to the position of military school.

古文：唐末，青州王师范为梁祖所围，乞师于淮南，杨行密发兵赴之，温时为小将，亦预其行。
现代文：唐朝末年，青州王师范被梁太祖朱温围困，到淮南请求救兵，杨行密发兵救援，徐温当时担任小将，也在救兵行列之中。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Shifan of Qingzhou was besieged by Zhu Wen, Liang Taizu, and went to Huainan to request a rescue. Yang Xingmi sent soldiers to rescue him. Xu Wen was a junior general at the time and was also in the ranks of the rescuers.

古文：师次青之南鄙，师范已败，淮兵大掠而还。
现代文：部队到达青州南部边界时，王师范已被打败，淮南部队士兵于是大肆抢掠而回。
English: When the troops reached the southern border of Qingzhou, Wang Shifan had already been defeated, and the soldiers of the Huainan troops then returned with a large amount of loot.

古文：棨时幼稚，为温所掳，温爱其慧黠，遂育为己子，名曰知诰。
现代文：李棨当时年龄幼小，被徐温抓获，徐温喜爱他的聪明机灵，于是收养他做自己的儿子，起名叫徐知诰。
English: At that time, Li Qian was very young and was captured by Xu Wen. Xu Wen loved his cleverness, so he adopted him as his own son and named him Xu Zhisheng.

古文：天祐初，行密卒，其子渥嗣，会左卫都指挥使张颢杀渥，欲归命于梁。
现代文：唐昭宗天祐初年，杨行密去世，他的儿子杨渥即位，遇上左卫都指挥使张颢杀害了杨渥，想投降梁太祖。
English: In the first year of Emperor Tianyu of the Tang Zhaozong Dynasty, Yang Xingmi died and his son Yang Wou ascended to the throne. When he met the commander of the Left Guards, Zhang Xi killed Yang Wou and wanted to surrender to Liang Taizu.

古文：温谓颢曰： 此去梁国，往复三千里，不月余事不成，军国未有主，无主将乱，不如有所立，徐图其事。 
现代文：徐温对张颢说 ：这里距离梁国，往返三千里，不经过一个多月都不能成事，军队国家没有了主，没有了主就将发生变乱，不如先立一人为主，再慢慢筹划投奔梁国的事。 
English: Xu Wen said to Zhang Xuan, "Here is a distance of three thousand miles from Liangguo, and it takes more than a month to make a round trip. The military country has no master, and without a master, there will be chaos. It is better to make one person the master first, and then slowly plan to go to Liangguo.

古文：颢然之，乃立渥弟渭为帅。
现代文：张颢认为他说得对，于是拥立杨渥的弟弟杨渭为统帅。
English: Zhang Ye thought he was right, so he appointed Yang Wo's younger brother, Yang Ye, as commander.

古文：温寻杀颢，渭授温常州刺史、检校司徒。
现代文：徐温接着杀掉了张颢，杨渭授予徐温常州刺史、检校司徒的伪职。
English: Xu Wen then killed Zhang Ye, and Yang Ye awarded Xu Wen the pseudo-position of Changzhou stabbing history and school inspector.

古文：温留广陵，遣棨知州事。
现代文：徐温留在广陵，派李棨主持常州事务。
English: Xu Wen stayed in Guangling and sent Li Wei to preside over the affairs of Changzhou.

古文：是岁，唐天祐五年也。
现代文：这一年是唐朝天祐五年。
English: This year is the fifth year of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：七年，丁母忧，起复授检校太尉、温州刺史，充本州团练观察使。
现代文：天祐七年，徐温服母丧，服丧期满后重新授予检校太尉、温州刺史官职，充当温州团练观察使。
English: In the seventh year of Tianyu, Xu Wen mourned his mother, and after the mourning period was over, he was re-awarded the post of school inspector and Wenzhou historian, and served as the Wenzhou group exercise observer.

古文：八年，宣州叛，温与都将柴再用讨平之，加同中书平章事，充淮南行军司马、内外马步都指挥使、镇海军节度、浙江西道观察等使。
现代文：八年，宣州反叛，徐温与都将柴再用征讨平定了叛乱，被加封为同中书平章事，充当淮南行军司马、内外马步军都指挥使、镇海军节度使、浙江西道观察使。
English: In the eighth year, Xu Wen and Du Du both quelled the Xuanzhou Rebellion with the use of firewood, and were sealed as the same book and chapter, acting as the secretary of the Huainan Marching Army, the commanding envoy of the Domestic and Foreign Horse Marching Army, the town naval festival envoy, and the Zhejiang West Road observation envoy.

古文：十二年八月，温出镇润州，以其子知训知政事，加温镇海军管内水陵马步军都军使，兼宁国军节度、宣歙池等州观察使。
现代文：十二年八月，吴王命徐温出任镇守润州，以他的儿子徐知训主持政事，加封徐温为镇海军辖区内水陆马步军都指挥使，兼任宁国军节度使，宣州、歙州、池州观察使。
English: In August of the 12th year, Wu Wang appointed Xu Wen as the town guard of Renzhou, with his son Xu Zhixun presiding over the affairs of state, and added Xu Wen as the commander of the water, land and horse marching troops in the naval jurisdiction area of the town, and also served as the Ningguo Army Festival envoy, Xuanzhou, Zhangzhou and Chizhou observation envoy.

古文：时棨为温属郡升州刺史，乃大理郡廨，温表移其府于金陵，伪授升州大都督府长史，充镇海军节度副大使，知节度事，以棨为镇海军节度副使、行润州刺史，充本州团练使。
现代文：这时李棨任徐温的属郡升州的刺史，于是大力治理升州官署，徐温上表奏请将升州官府搬到金陵，吴国国王授予徐温升州大都督府长史的伪职，充当镇海军节度副使，主持节度使的事务，任李棨为镇海军节度副使、代理润州刺史，充当润州团练使。
English: At this time, Li Yan served as Xu Wen's deputy governor of the county of Shengzhou, so he vigorously governed the Shengzhou government office. Xu Wen made a request to move the Shengzhou government office to Jinling. The king of Wu awarded Xu Wen the pseudo-position of the governor of Shengzhou, acting as the deputy envoy of the town navy festival and presiding over the affairs of the festival envoy. Li Yan was appointed as the deputy envoy of the town navy festival, acting as the deputy governor of Shengzhou and acting as the training envoy of the Lunzhou regiment.

古文：十五年，知训授淮南行军副使、内外马步军都指挥使，通判军府事。
现代文：十五年，徐知训被授与淮南行军副使、内外马步军都指挥使官职，统管军府事务。
English: In the fifteenth year, Xu Zhixun was awarded the post of deputy envoy to the Huainan Campaign, and commanded both the domestic and foreign horse marching troops, and was in charge of the military affairs.

古文：居无何，知训为大将硃瑾所杀，温以棨代知政事。
现代文：不多久，徐知训被大将朱瑾杀死，徐温以李棨代理主持国政。
English: Not long after, Xu Zhixun was killed by General Zhu Xi, and Xu Wen assumed the presidency of the country with Li Xi as his deputy.

古文：明年，温册杨渭为天子，僭称大吴，改唐天祐十六年为武义元年。
现代文：第二年，徐温册立杨渭为天子，僭号称为大吴国，改唐朝天祐十六年为武义元年。
English: In the second year, Xu Wenxuan established Yang Zhe as the son of heaven, and his posthumous name was called the Great Wu Kingdom, and the 16th year of the Tang Dynasty was changed to the first year of Wuyi.

古文：十八年，渭死，温闻之，自金陵驰归扬州，夜入广陵，议有所立。
现代文：天祐十八年，杨渭去世，徐温闻讯后，从金陵飞驰回到扬州，连夜进入广陵，商议拥立谁即位。
English: In the 18th year of Tianyu, Yang Hui died. After hearing the news, Xu Wen flew back to Yangzhou from Jinling and entered Guangling overnight to discuss who should be enthroned.

古文：或有希温旨，言及蜀先主遗命诸葛亮之事，温厉声曰： 若杨氏无男，有女当立矣，无得异议。 
现代文：有人打探徐温的意旨，就谈到三国时蜀主刘备临死遗命诸葛亮的故事，徐温厉声说： 即使杨家没有男儿，有女儿都应当拥立，不得有异议。 
English: When someone inquired about Xu Wen's intention, he talked about the story of Zhuge Liang, who was the head of the Three Kingdoms at the time of Liu Bei's death. Xu Wen said in a strong voice: Even if the Yang family does not have a son, all daughters should be supported, and there must be no objection.

古文：由是群心乃定，遂迎丹阳王溥于润州，以其年六月十八日即伪位，改元为顺义。
现代文：因此大家内心才安定，于是到润州迎回丹阳王杨溥，于当年六月十八日即伪位，改元为顺义。
English: Therefore, everyone's heart was stable, so they went to Rongzhou to welcome back the King of Danyang, Yang Zhen. On June 18 of that year, he was enthroned and the era was changed to Shunyi.

古文：自是温父子愈盛，中外共专其国，杨氏主祭而已。
现代文：从此徐温父子势力更加强盛，内外共同专擅吴国国政，杨氏只是主持吴国的祭祀而已。
English: From then on, the influence of Xu Wen and his son became even more powerful. Both at home and abroad, they were in charge of the state affairs of Wuxi, while the Yang clan only presided over the sacrificial rituals of Wuxi.

古文：温累官至竭忠定难建国功臣、大丞相、都督中外诸军事、诸道都统、镇海宁国等军节度、宣歙池等州管内营田观察等使、开府仪同三司、守太师、中书令、金陵尹、东海王，食邑一万户，实封五百户。
现代文：徐温接连升官到竭忠定难建国功臣、大丞相、都督中外诸军事、诸道都统、镇海军节度使、宁国军节度使、宣歙池等州管区内营田观察使、开府仪同三司、守太师、中书令、金陵尹、东海王，食邑一万户，食实封五百户。
English: Xu Wen was successively promoted to the position of the most loyal and hard-working national hero, the grand chancellor, the military governor of various countries and regions, the military governor of various provinces and regions, the town naval festival envoy, the Ningguo Army festival envoy, the Yingtian observation envoy in the Xuanwu Lake and other prefectures, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the guard master, the Chinese book editor, Jinling Yin, the East Sea King, 10,000 households in the food village, and 500 households in the food real estate.

古文：伪顺义七年改乾贞元年，即后唐天成二年。
现代文：将伪顺义七年改元为伪乾贞元年，即后唐天成二年。
English: The seventh year of the pseudo Shunyi era was changed to the first year of the pseudo Qian Zhen era, that is, two years after the Tang Dynasty.

古文：其年十月二十三日，温卒，伪赠大元帅，追封齐王，谥曰忠武。
现代文：这一年十月二十三日，徐温去世，伪赠为大元帅，追封为齐王，谥号叫忠武。
English: On October 23rd of that year, Xu Wen passed away. He was given the title of grand marshal and the posthumous title of Qi Wang. His posthumous name was Zhongwu.

古文：棨前梦温负登山，逾年温卒，棨乃伪授辅政兴邦功臣，知内外左右事、开府仪同三同、守太尉、中书令、宣城公。
现代文：李棨在此以前梦见被徐温背着上山，一个月后徐温去世，李棨就被伪授为辅政兴邦功臣，知内外左右事、开府仪同三司、守太尉、中书令、宣城公。
English: Prior to this, Li Qian dreamed of being carried up the mountain on the back of Xu Wen. A month later, Xu Wen passed away. Li Qian was falsely awarded the title of "Auxiliary Politician, Hero of the Reunification of the Country," "Leader of Internal and External Affairs," "Commander of the Ceremonies of the Capital and the Three Departments," "Lieutenant of the Guard," "Secretary of the Central Government," and "Governor of Xuancheng."

古文：棨自平硃瑾之乱，遂执吴政。
现代文：李棨从平定朱瑾之乱后，就执掌吴国国政。
English: After suppressing the Zhu Xi Rebellion, Li Xi took charge of the state affairs of Wu.

古文：天成四年，伪吴改太和元年，是岁棨出镇金陵，寻封东海王。
现代文：天成四年，伪吴国改元为太和元年，这年李棨出镇金陵，旋即被封为东海王。
English: In the fourth year of Tiancheng, the pseudo-state of Wu changed its name to Taihe, and in the first year of Tahe, Li Xuan left the town of Jinling and was immediately crowned the king of the East Sea.

古文：至清泰二年改天祚元年，其年以金陵为齐国，封棨为齐王，乃追谥温为忠武王，庙号太祖。
现代文：到清泰二年吴国改元为天祚元年，这一年以金陵作为齐国，封李棨为齐王，于是追封徐温谥号为忠武王，庙号为太祖。
English: In the 2nd year of the Qing Dynasty, the Wu State changed its name to the Tianyu First Year. In this year, Jinling was named as the Qi State, Li Qian was named as the Qi King, and then Xu Wenjun was named as the Zhongwu King, and Miao was named as the Taizu.

古文：棨又进位太尉、录尚书事，留镇金陵，以其子景总政于扬州。
现代文：李棨又进位为太尉、录尚书事，留镇金陵，以他的儿子李景在扬州总理国政。
English: Li Jiong was promoted to the rank of captain, recorded records, stayed in Jinling Town, and his son Li Jing became the prime minister of Yangzhou.

古文：未几，伪加棨九锡，建天子旌旗，改金陵为西都，以扬州为东都。
现代文：不久，伪加李棨九锡隆礼，建立天子旌旗，改金陵为西都，以扬州为东都。
English: Soon, the pseudo-Li Jia Jiu Xilong Rite was established, and the banner of Tianzi was set up. Jinling was changed to the west capital, and Yangzhou was changed to the east capital.

古文：棨开国依齐、梁故事。用徐玠为齐国右丞相，宋齐丘为左丞相，以为谋主。
现代文：李棨建国依照齐、梁旧例，起用徐王介为齐国右丞相，宋齐丘为左丞相，作为谋划的重臣。
English: In accordance with the old example of Qi and Liang, Li Jing Jianguo appointed Xu Wangsuke as the Minister of the Right of Qi, and Song Qiqiu as the Minister of the Left of Qi, as the senior ministers in charge of planning.

古文：伪吴天祚三年，杨溥逊位于棨，国号大齐，改元为升元，建都于金陵，时晋氏天福二年也。
现代文：伪吴国天祚三年，杨溥把帝位禅让给李棨，称国号叫大齐，改元为升元，建都于金陵，这时是后晋天福二年。
English: In the third year of the pseudo-Wu Kingdom's reign, Yang Di conceded the imperial throne of Zen to Li Di. He called the country Daqi, changed the era name to Shangyuan, and built the capital in Jinling. At this time, it was the second year of Emperor Tianfu's reign.

古文：棨乃册杨溥为让皇，其册文曰 受禅老臣知诰，谨上册皇帝为高尚思元宏古让皇 云。
现代文：李棨于是册封杨溥为让皇，那册文说： 接受禅位的老臣徐知诰，谨上册封皇帝为高思元弘古让皇等。 
English: Li Qiye then anointed Yang Jie as the new emperor. The document said: "The old minister Xu Zhisheng, who accepted the position of Zen, is hereby anointed as the new emperor Gao Si Yuan Honggu.

古文：仍以其子遥领平庐军节度使，迁于海陵。
现代文：仍以杨溥的儿子遥任平卢军节度使，迁到海陵。
English: He still appointed Yang Xuan's son Yao as the envoy of the Pinglu Army and moved to Hailing.

古文：棨自云唐明皇第六子永王璘之裔。唐天宝末，安禄山连陷两京，明皇幸蜀，诏以璘为山南、岭南、黔中、江南四道节度采访等使，璘至广陵，大募兵甲，有窥图江左之志，后为官军所败，死于大庾岭北，故棨指之以为远祖。
现代文：李棨自己说他是唐玄宗的第六个儿子永王李瞞的后裔，唐朝天宝末年，安禄山接连攻陷两京，玄宗逃到蜀地，诏令任李瞞为山南、岭南、黔中、江南四道节度采访等使。李瞞到广陵后，大量募集兵马战甲，有窥视图谋江左之心，后被唐朝官军打败，死在大庾岭北，所以李棨认他为远祖。
English: Li Zhe himself said that he was the sixth son of Tang Xuan Zong, a descendant of Yong Wang Li Zhe. In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, Anlu Mountain successively attacked and conquered two capitals, and Xuan Zong fled to Shoudi. Li Zhe was appointed as an envoy of the four provinces of Shannan, Lingnan, Yuzhong and Jiangnan. After Li Zhe went to Guangling, he recruited a large number of soldiers and horses, and there was a glimpse of the attempt to plot the left heart of the river. Later, he was defeated by the Tang Dynasty official army and died in the north of Dalatling, so Li Z

古文：因还姓李氏，始改名棨，国号大唐，尊徐温为义祖。
现代文：于是恢复姓李，开始改名为棨，国号叫作大唐，尊徐温为义祖。
English: As a result, he restored the surname Li and began to change his name to Zhai, the country name was called Datang, and Xu Wen was revered as a righteous ancestor.

古文：烈祖惊起，使人侦之，顾见元宗方倚楹而立，遣人候上动静，于是立嫡之意遂决。棨卒，乃袭伪位，改元为保大。
现代文：李棨僭即帝位共七年，后由儿子李景即位。李景，本名璟，到将向后周称臣时，因触犯庙讳的缘故，所以改了名。李景是李繮的长子，李繮去世后，就继承了伪帝位，改元为保大。
English: For a total of seven years, Li Xi was the emperor, and then his son Li Jing ascended the throne. Li Jing, whose real name was Zou, changed his name when he became a vassal to Zhou, because he had violated the temple taboo. Li Jing was the eldest son of Li Xi, and after the death of Li Xi, he inherited the pseudo-imperial throne and changed the era to Baoda.

古文：以仲弟遂为皇太弟，季弟达为齐王，仍于父柩前设盟约，兄弟相继。
现代文：以二弟李遂为皇太弟，三弟李达为齐王，又在父亲的灵柩前设盟发誓，兄弟相继帝位。
English: With the second brother, Li Sui, as the crown prince, and the third brother, Li Da, as the king of Qi, and swearing an oath in front of the father's coffin, the brothers successively ascended the throne.

古文：景僭号之后，属中原多事，北土乱离，雄据一方，行余一纪。
现代文：李景僭称帝号之后，正逢中原多有战事，北方动乱流离，因而雄据一方，将近十几年。
English: After Li Jingyao assumed the title of emperor, there were many wars in the Central Plains, and the North was in turmoil and displaced. As a result, there was a stronghold for nearly a dozen years.

古文：嗣主曰： 孤守江、淮，社稷已固，与梁、宋阻隔。
现代文：他的地盘东连衢州、婺州，南到五岭，西至湖湘，北据长淮，共拥有三十多州，广袤数千里，都为他所占有，在近代僭占窃据的地盘中最为强盛。
English: His territory stretches from Luzhou and Luzhou in the east, to Wuling in the south, to Hunan in the west, and to Changhuai in the north. In total, he owns more than 30 prefectures and thousands of miles of land. He is the most powerful in the territory occupied and stolen in modern times.

古文：若尔主不忘先好，惠赐行人，受赐多矣，其他不敢拜命之辱。 
现代文：又曾经派遣使者私自买通北方戎族，使之成为中原的祸患，以实现自己偷安一隅的计策。
English: Moreover, he once sent an envoy to secretly bribe the Northern Yongzhu to become the scourge of the Central Plains, in order to realize his strategy of stealing a corner of peace.

古文：周显德二年冬，世宗始议南征，以宰臣李穀为前军都部署。
现代文：后周显德二年冬天，周世宗开始计划南征，以宰相李谷为前军都部署。
English: In the winter of the second year after Zhou Xiande, Zhou Shizong began to plan the Southern Expedition, with the Prime Minister Li Gu as the vanguard.

古文：是冬，周师围寿春。
现代文：这年冬天，后周军队包围了寿州。
English: Later that winter, Zhou's army encircled Shoushu.

古文：三年春，世宗亲征淮甸，大败淮寇于正阳，遂进攻寿州。
现代文：显德三年春天，周世宗亲征淮甸，在正阳大败淮南贼寇，于是进攻寿州。
English: In the spring of the third year of Xiande, Zhou Shizong personally conquered Huai Dian, defeated the Huai Nan bandits in Zhengyang, and then attacked Shuzhou.

古文：寻又今上败何延锡于涡口，擒皇甫晖于滁州。
现代文：接着又在涡口打败何延锡，在滁州活捉皇甫晖。
English: Next, he defeated He Yanxi in Turbidor and captured Emperor Fu Zong alive in Zhangzhou.

古文：景闻之大惧，遣其臣钟谟、李德明等奉表于世宗，乞为附庸之国，仍岁贡百万之数，又进金银器币及犒军牛酒。
现代文：李景闻讯后大为惊恐，就派他的大臣钟谟、李德明等人奉上降表给周世宗，请求作为后周的附庸国。仍然每年进贡百万的巨额财富，又进上金银宝器钱币以及犒劳军队的牛酒。
English: After hearing the news, Li Jing was greatly alarmed. He sent his ministers Zhong Moo, Li Deming and others to Zhou Shizong to request that he be made a vassal state of Hou Zhou. He still paid an annual tribute of millions of huge wealth, gold, silver, precious objects, coins and cow wine to reward the hard work of the army.

古文：未几，又遣其臣孙晟、王崇质等奉表修贡，且言： 景愿割濠、寿、泗、楚、光、海等六州之地，隶于大朝，乞罢攻讨。 
现代文：不久，又派他的大臣孙晟、王崇质等人奉表调整贡赋，又说 ：李景愿意割让濠、寿、泗、楚、光、海等六州的地盘，归于大周朝廷，请求停止进攻讨伐。 
English: Soon, he sent his ministers, Sun Yat-sen, Wang Chong Chien and others, to submit a table to adjust the tribute, and also said: Li Jing is willing to cede the territory of six states, such as Yunnan, Shou, Yunnan, Chu, Guangxi and Hai, to the Zhou Dynasty, and request to stop the attack and crusade.

古文：世宗未之许。
现代文：周世宗没有答应他。
English: Zhou Shizong did not agree.

古文：时李德明等见周师争攻寿春，虑不能保，乃奏云： 宽臣等五日之诛，容臣等自往江南，取本国表章，举江北诸州，尽献于大朝。 
现代文：这时李德明等人见后周军队急攻寿州，估计不能保住，于是上奏说： 请放宽五天时间诛杀臣下，容许臣下亲自前往江南，取来本国的表章，将江北各州全部奉献给大周朝廷。 
English: At this time, Li Deming and others saw that Zhou's army was suddenly attacking Shoushou, and it was estimated that it could not be saved, so the report said: Please allow five days to kill the vassals, allow the vassals to go to the south of the Yangtze River in person, take their country's seal, and dedicate all the states north of the Yangtze River to the Zhou court.

古文：世宗许其行。久之，德明等不至，乃权议回銮，惟留偏师数千围守寿春而已。
现代文：周世宗允许他们走，很久，李德明等人没有回来，于是商定暂时御驾回朝，只留下偏师数千人包围困守寿州罢了。
English: Zhou Shizong allowed them to leave, but Li Deming and others did not return for a long time, so they agreed to temporarily return to the North, leaving only thousands of partisans to besiege and besiege Shoushou.

古文：四年春，世宗再驾南征。
现代文：显德四年春天，周世宗再次御驾南征。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of Xiande, Zhou Shizong once again embarked on the Southern Expedition.

古文：三月，大败江南援军于紫金山，寻下寿州，乃命班师。
现代文：三月，在紫金山大败江南援军，旋即攻下寿州，才下令班师。
English: In March, after defeating the reinforcements from the south of the Yangtze River in Zijinshan and immediately capturing Shoushou, he ordered the formation of a division.

古文：是岁冬十月，世宗复临淮甸，连下濠、泗二郡，进攻楚州。
现代文：这年冬天十月，周世宗再次驾临淮甸，接连攻下濠、泗二郡，进攻楚州。
English: In the winter of October of that year, Zhou Shizong once again arrived in Huai Dian, and successively conquered the counties of Yunnan and Fujian, and attacked Chuzhou.

古文：明年春正月，拔之，遂移幸扬州，驻大军于迎銮，将议济江。
现代文：第二年春天正月，攻下楚州，于是移驾扬州，在迎銮驻扎大军，将商议渡过长江。
English: In the first month of the second spring, they captured Chuzhou, then moved to Yangzhou, stationed a large army in Yingluo, and negotiated across the Yangtze River.

古文：景闻之，自谓亡在朝夕，乃谋欲传位其世子，使称籓于周。
现代文：李景听说后，自思灭亡就在朝夕之间，于是计划把帝位传给他的大儿子，使他向后周称为藩臣。
English: After hearing this, Li Jing thought that his death would be between morning and evening, so he planned to pass the imperial throne to his eldest son, making him a vassal of the domain.

古文：《南唐书》：正月，改无交泰。遣其臣陈觉奉表陈情，且顺世宗之旨焉。觉至，世宗召对于御幄。
现代文：派他的大臣陈觉奉表向周世宗陈述心意，顺合周世宗的意旨。陈觉到后，周世宗在御营召见陈觉对话。
English: He sent his minister, Chen Jue, to Zhou Shizong to state his intentions, which was in line with Zhou Shizong's intentions. After Chen Jue arrived, Zhou Shizong called Chen Jue for a dialogue at the Imperial Camp.

古文：是时江北诸州，唯庐、舒、蕲、黄四郡未下，世宗因谓觉曰： 江南国主若能以江北之地尽归于我，则朕亦不至穷兵黩武。 
现代文：这时江北各州，只有庐、舒、蕲、黄四郡没有被攻下，世宗于是对陈觉说 ：江南国主如果能将江北的土地全部归于我，那么我也不至于穷兵黩武。 
English: At this time, only four counties in the north of the Yangtze River, namely, Min, Shu, Min and Huang, had not been conquered. Therefore, Shizong said to Chen Jue, "If the sovereign of the south of the Yangtze River can return all the land of the north of the Yangtze River to me, then I will not be a poor soldier."

古文：觉闻命欣然，即遣人过江取景表，以庐、舒、蕲、黄等四州来上，乞画江为界，仍岁贡地征数十万。
现代文：陈觉听后欣然高兴，立即派人渡过长江去取李景的表章，把庐、舒、蕲、黄四州奉送给世宗，请求划江为界，仍旧每年进贡地方赋税数十万。
English: Chen Jue was delighted to hear this, and immediately sent someone across the Yangtze River to get Li Jing's seal, and sent the four states of Yunnan, Shuxi, Shandong, and Hunan to Shizong, requesting that the river be demarcated, and that the local tribute tax should still be hundreds of thousands of yuan every year.

古文：世宗许之，乃还京。
现代文：周世宗答应了他，于是撤军回到京城。
English: Zhou Shizong agreed to this, and the troops withdrew back to Beijing.

古文：复有医人及烧炼僧数辈，每来无不升堂入室，与女仆等杂处，伪主知之，虽怒，以其大臣，不欲直指其过，因命待诏画为图以赐之，使其自愧，而熙载视之安然。王审知，字信通，光州固始人。
现代文：从此李景开始奉行后周朝廷的正朔，上表章自称为 唐国主臣景 ，数次派遣使者进奉贡物，也不失外臣的礼仪呢！北宋建隆二年夏天，李景因病在金陵去世，时年四十六岁。以他儿子李煜承袭伪帝位，那以后的事情都记载在北宋朝廷日历中。王审知，字信通，光州固始人。
English: From then on, Li Jing began to follow the Zhengshuo of the later Zhou Dynasty. He called himself Jing, the chief minister of Tang, and sent emissaries to pay tribute several times. He also did not lose the etiquette of a foreign minister! In the summer of the second year of the Northern Song Dynasty, Li Jing died of illness in Jinling, at the age of 46. He was succeeded to the pseudo-imperial throne by his son Li Xi. Everything after that was recorded in the Northern Song Dynasty calendar. Wang Xizhi, a man of letters, was the founder of Gwangju.

古文：父恁，世为农民。
现代文：父亲王恁，一生务农。
English: His father, Wang Yao, was a farmer all his life.

古文：唐广明中，黄巢犯阙，江、淮盗贼蜂起。
现代文：唐朝广明年间，黄巢攻进京城，江、淮一带盗贼蜂起，有叫王绪的盗贼头头，自称为将军，攻陷固始县。
English: During the Guangming period of the Tang Dynasty, the Yellow Nest invaded the capital city, and thieves revolted in the Jiang and Huai areas. There was a thief leader called Wang Xu, who called himself a general, and invaded Gushi County.

古文：有贼帅王绪者，自称将军，陷固始县，审知兄潮时为县佐，绪署为军正。蔡贼秦宗权以绪为光州刺史，寻遣兵攻之，绪率众渡江，所在剽掠，自南康转至闽中，入临汀，自称刺史。
现代文：王审知的哥哥王潮，当时是县里辅助的官员，王绪任用他做军正。蔡州贼寇秦宗权任命王绪为光州刺史，随即又派兵攻打他，王绪率领部下渡过长江，一路剽掠抢劫，从南康流窜到闽中，进入临汀，自称为刺史。
English: Wang Chao, the elder brother of Wang Xizhi, was an auxiliary official in the county at that time, and Wang Xuan appointed him as the military commander. Caizhou bandit Qin Zongquan appointed Wang Xuan as the assassin of Gwangju, and then sent troops to attack him. Wang Xuan led his subordinates across the Yangtze River, plundered and robbed all the way, from Nankangliu to Jizhong, entered Linting, and called himself the assassin.

古文：绪多疑忌，部将有出己之右者皆诛之。
现代文：王绪爱猜疑嫉妒，部将中有才能高于自己的人都杀掉他。
English: Wang Xuxu is suspicious and envious. His most talented subordinates all kill him.

古文：潮与豪首数辈共杀绪，其众求帅，乃刑牲歃血为盟，植剑于前，祝曰： 拜此剑动者为将军。 
现代文：王潮与几位豪强首领一起杀死王绪，部众们要立一位统帅，于是杀了牲畜喝血盟誓，把一把剑插在前面，祷告说： 能拜动这把剑的人做将军。 
English: Wang Chao, together with several powerful leaders, killed Wang Xu. His subordinates wanted to appoint a commander, so they killed livestock, swore to drink blood, stuck a sword in front of them, and prayed, "The one who can wield this sword will be the general."

古文：至潮拜，剑跃于地，众以为神异，即奉潮为帅。
现代文：到王潮祷拜时，剑跳起来掉到地上，众人都认为神奇灵异，就拥戴王潮做统帅。
English: When Wang Chao was praying, his sword jumped up and fell to the ground. Everyone thought it was magical, so they embraced Wang Chao as their commander.

古文：时泉州刺史廖彦若为政贪暴，军民若之，闻潮为理整肃，耆老乃奉牛酒，遮道请留。
现代文：这时泉州刺史廖彦若执政贪婪残暴，军民都痛恨他，听说王潮执政严明，年老一辈的人就捧着慰问的酒肉，拦在路上请求王潮留下。
English: At this time, the Quanzhou assassin Liao Yanru ruled greedily and brutally, and the military and the people hated him. Hearing that Wang Chao ruled strictly, the older generation held the wine and meat of condolences and stopped on the road to ask Wang Chao to stay.

古文：潮因引兵围彦若，岁余克之，又平狼山贼帅薛蕴，兵锋日盛。
现代文：王潮就领兵包围了廖彦若，一年多攻克了泉州，又平定了狼山上的盗贼头子薛蕴，兵势日益强盛。
English: Wang Chao led an army to encircle Liao Yanrao, conquered Quanzhou for more than a year, and pacified the thief leader Xue Kun on the Wolf Mountain, and the army became increasingly strong.

古文：唐光启二年，福建观察使陈岩表潮为泉州刺史。
现代文：唐朝光启二年，福建观察使陈岩上表推荐王潮做泉州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Tang Dynasty, Fujian observation led Chen Yan to recommend Wang Chao as Quanzhou history.

古文：大顺中，岩卒，子婿范晖自称留后，潮遣审知将兵攻之，逾年，城中食尽，乃斩晖而降，由是尽有闽、岭五州之地。
现代文：大顺年中，陈岩去世，他女婿范晖自称为留后，王潮派弟弟王审知领兵攻打范晖。一年多，城中粮尽，于是军士们杀了范晖投降，由此王潮全部占有了闽、岭五州的疆域。
English: In the middle of the year of the great lunar new year, Chen Yan died, his son-in-law Fan Yu claimed to be his heir, and Wang Chao sent his brother Wang Xizhi to lead the troops to attack Fan Yu. For more than a year, there was no food in the city, so the soldiers killed Fan Yu and surrendered. As a result, Wang Chao completely occupied the territory of the five states of Yunnan and Lingnan.

古文：潮即表其事，昭宗因建威武军于福州，以潮为节度、福建管内观察使，审知为副。
现代文：王潮即上表陈述这些事，唐昭宗因而在福州设置威武军，任王潮为节度使、福建管区内观察使，王审知为副使。
English: Wang Chao immediately presented these things, and Tang Zhaozong therefore set up a powerful military force in Fuzhou, appointed Wang Chao as the festival envoy, the observation envoy in the Fujian region, and Wang Xizhi as the deputy envoy.

古文：审知为观察副使，有过，潮犹加捶挞，审知无怨色。
现代文：王审知任观察副使时，犯了过错，王潮仍然加以鞭打，王审知没有怨怒之色。
English: Wang Xizhi made a mistake when he was assigned to observe the deputy envoy, but Wang Chao still whipped him. Wang Xizhi did not show any resentment.

古文：潮寝疾，舍其子延兴、延虹、延丰、延休，命审知知军府事。
现代文：王潮病倒时，舍开他的儿子延兴、延虹、延丰、延休，而委任王审知掌管军政事务。
English: When Wang Chao fell ill, he gave up his sons Yanxing, Yanhong, Yanfeng, and Yanju, and appointed Wang Jianzhi to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：十二月丁未，潮薨，审知以让其兄审邽，审邽以审知有功，辞不受。
现代文：十二月丁未，王潮去世，王审知将职权让给二哥王审邦。审邦认为审知有功，推辞而不接受。
English: In December of the same year, Wang Chao passed away, and Wang Xizhi ceded his authority to his second brother, Wang Xibang. Xibang considered Xizhi's resignation to be meritorious and did not accept it.

古文：审知自称福建留后，表于朝廷。
现代文：王审知自称为福建留后，上表告知朝廷。
English: After Wang Xizhi said he would stay in Fujian, he informed the Imperial Court of the above.

古文：唐末，为威武军节度、福建观察使，累迁检校太保，封琅邪郡王。
现代文：唐朝末年，任威武军节度使、福建观察使，接连迁升到检校太保，封为琅笽郡王。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Ren Weiwu Jun was appointed as the festival envoy and the Fujian observation envoy, and was successively promoted to the inspector of schools, and was named the king of Shixian County.

古文：梁朝开国，累加中书令，封闽王。
现代文：梁代开国，迁任中书令，封为闽王。
English: Liang dynasty founded the country, was transferred to the post of Zhongshirong, and was given the title of Shao Wang.

古文：是时，杨氏据江、淮，故闽中与中国隔越，审知每岁朝贡，泛海至登莱抵岸，往复颇有风水之患，漂没者十四五。
现代文：这时，杨行密占据江、淮一带，所以闽中与中原隔越，王审知每年朝贡，越过大海到登莱上岸，来去都有许多狂风波涛的灾祸，被卷翻淹没的船只有十分之四五。
English: At this time, Yang Xingmi occupied the area of the Yangtze River and Huai River, so that Yuzhong was separated from the Central Plains. Wang Xizhi paid tribute every year, crossed the sea to go ashore in Denglai, and there were many disasters of violent winds and waves. Only four or five out of ten ships were overturned and flooded.

古文：后唐庄宗即位，遣使奉贡，制加功臣，进爵邑。
现代文：后唐庄宗即位时，王审知派使者朝奉纳贡，庄宗诏令加封功臣，增加爵位食邑。
English: Later, when Emperor Zhuangzong of Tang ascended the throne, Wang Xizhi sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, and Zhuangzong issued an edict to add the title of meritorious vassal and the title of peerage to Shiyu.

古文：审知起自陇亩，以至富贵。每以节俭自处，选任良吏，省刑惜费，轻徭薄敛，与民休息。三十年间，一境晏然。
现代文：王审知起自田间，而到富贵，常常以节省勤俭为原则，选拔任用优良的官吏，减省刑法，珍惜费用，减轻徭役，降低税收，与人民休养生息，三十年中，全境之内平安欢乐。
English: Wang Xizhi started from the fields, but when he became rich, he often took the principle of saving and frugality as the principle, selected and appointed excellent officials, reduced the criminal law, cherished expenses, reduced the corvee, reduced taxes, and rested and recuperated with the people. In the past 30 years, the whole territory has been safe and happy.

古文：同光元年，审知卒，子延翰嗣，为弟延钧所杀。
现代文：同光元年，王审知逝世，他儿子王延嗣接位，被延嗣弟弟王延钧杀害。
English: In the same year, Wang Xizhi died, and his son Wang Yanxi succeeded to the throne. He was killed by Yanxi's younger brother, Wang Yanjun.

