古文：凡战，若敌众我寡，敌强我弱，兵势不利；彼或远来，粮饷不绝，皆不可与战，宜坚壁持久以敝之，则敌可破。
现代文：凡是作战，如果处于敌众我寡、敌强我弱，兵力对比于我方不利的形势下，或者敌人虽远道而来但粮饷供应源源不断，这些情况下我方都不能与地方交战，而应当坚守壁垒，持久防御以消耗和拖垮敌人，然后再一举消灭他们。
English: In any battle, if we are in a situation where the number of enemies is small, the enemy is strong or weak, and the strength of the troops is unfavorable to us, or the enemy comes from far away but the supply of grain and straw is continuous, under these circumstances, we can not fight with the localities, but should adhere to the barriers and persistent defense to consume and drag down the enemy, and then destroy them at one stroke.

古文：法曰： 不战在我。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 不轻易与敌人交战的主动权要牢牢掌握在我方手中。 
English: As stated in the Art of War, the initiative to engage the enemy should be firmly in our hands.

古文：唐武德中，太宗帅兵渡河东讨刘武周。
现代文：唐朝武德二年，秦王李世民奉命率军东渡黄河讨伐割据势力刘武周。
English: In the second year of Wude of the Tang Dynasty, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, was ordered to lead his army eastward across the Yellow River to fight the separatist forces of Liu Wuzhou.

古文：江夏王李道宗时年十七，从军，与太宗登玉壁城观贼阵，顾谓道宗曰： 贼恃其众，来邀我战，汝谓如何？ 
现代文：当时江夏王李道宗只有十七岁，随军出征，与李世民一道登上玉壁城观察敌情。世民回过头来问道宗说： 敌人依仗其兵多势众，企图与我军决战，你说我们应当怎么办？ 
English: At that time, the king of Jiangxia, Li Daozong, was only seventeen years old. He went to the front with the army, and together with Li Shimin, he climbed the Jade Walled City to observe the enemy situation. The people of the world turned around and asked Zong: "The enemy is relying on his overwhelming number of soldiers and is trying to fight a decisive battle with our army. What do you think we should do?"

古文：对曰： 群贼锋不可当，易以计屈，难以力争。
现代文：道宗回答说： 敌人锋芒正锐不可直接抵挡，我们可以采取计谋打垮他们，难以单凭武力同它争胜。
English: Dao Zong replied, "The enemy's sharp edge cannot be directly resisted. We can adopt strategies to defeat them, but it is difficult to win by force alone.

古文：今深沟高垒，以挫其锋，乌合之徒，莫能持久，粮运将竭，当自离散，可不战而擒也。 
现代文：现在我们自由固守深沟高垒，防止他们进攻，便可挫杀敌人锐气；敌人人数虽多但属乌合之众，不能持久作战，等到他们粮草耗尽，必定自然离散，那时我们就可以擒获敌人了。 
English: Now that we are free to hold fast to the high and deep ditch to prevent their attack, we can break the enemy's spirit. Although the enemy is numerous, they are a rabble and cannot fight for a long time. When they run out of food and grass, they must naturally disperse, and then we can capture the enemy.

古文：太宗曰： 汝见识与我相合。 
现代文：李世民称赞地说： 你的看法跟我一样。 
English: Li Shimin said in praise: Your opinion is the same as mine.

古文：后果食尽夜遁，追入介州，一战败之。
现代文：其后，敌人果然粮尽而连夜北逃，李世民率军追到介州，一战而把刘武周军打得大败。
English: After that, the enemy ran out of food and fled north overnight. Li Shimin led the army to chase them to Jiezhou, and defeated Liu Wu Zhou's army in one battle.

