古文：◎舆服一
现代文：舆服一
English: Public service number one

古文：大辂玉辂大马辇小马辇步辇大凉步辇板轿耕根车后妃车舆皇太子亲王以下车舆公卿以下车舆伞盖鞍辔
现代文：大辂玉辂大马辇小马辇步辇大凉步辇板轿耕根车后妃车舆皇太子亲王以下车舆公卿以下车舆伞盖鞍辔
English: Large beak, jade beak, large horse beak, small horse beak, large cool beak, plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow plow

古文：有虞氏御天下，车服以庸。
现代文：有虞氏掌管天下，车乘服饰注重实用。
English: There is a yakuza clan in charge of the world, and the dress code is practical.

古文：夏则黻冕致美。
现代文：夏代则礼服礼帽极其华美。
English: In summer, the dress and hat are extremely gorgeous.

古文：商则大辂示俭。
现代文：商代的车服显示出节俭。
English: Shangdai's car clothes show frugality.

古文：成周有巾车、典辂、弁师、司服之职，天子以之表式万邦，而服车五乘，下逮臣民。
现代文：成周有巾车、典辖、弁师、司服的官职，天子用它们作为万邦的表率，而服事者所乘的官车用五匹马拉，往下施及臣下百姓。
English: Cheng Zhou had the official posts of draper, magistrate, benshi, and civil servant. The heavenly son used them as a model for the nations, and the official car used by the servants was pulled by five horses.

古文：汉承秦制，御金根为乘舆，服袀玄以承大祀。东都乃有九斿、云罕、旒冕、絇屦之仪物，踵事增华，日新代异。
现代文：汉代承袭秦代的制度，驾御用黄金装饰的金根车作为天子所乘的车，穿构玄礼服来举行最隆重的祭祀束都于是有九脖、云罕、旒冕、绚屦之类的用于仪礼的器物，继承以前的制度并加以发展，日日更新代代不同。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the system of the Qin Dynasty, driving a golden chariot decorated with royal gold as the chariot of the heavenly son, wearing a ceremonial dress to hold the grandest sacrificial bundles, and all of them had nine necks, clouds, crowns, and ornaments for ceremonial purposes. They inherited the previous system and developed it, and it was different from generation to generation.

古文：江左偏安，玉辂栖宝凤，采旄衔金龙。
现代文：江左苟安一方，帝王所乘的玉辖车附有凤凰形的装饰品，用耗牛尾装饰的彩旗配有金色龙形的装饰物。
English: On the other hand, Emperor Jiang Zuoguo's imperial carriage had a phoenix-shaped decoration, and the bunting decorated with a cow's tail had a golden dragon-shaped decoration.

古文：其服冕也，或饰翡翠、珊瑚、杂珠。
现代文：它的服装冕冠，有的用翡翠、珊瑚、杂珠装饰。
English: Some of them are decorated with emeralds, corals, and mixed beads.

古文：岂古所谓法驾、法服者哉？
现代文：哪里是古代所说的根据礼法规定的不同等级的车驾、服饰啊？
English: Where are the chariots and clothing of different ranks according to the rules of etiquette, as they were called in ancient times?

古文：唐武德间著车舆、衣服之制，上得兼下，下不得拟上。
现代文：唐武德年间规定车子、衣服的制度，上级可以兼用下级，下级不得效法上级。
English: During the Tang and Wu Dynasties, the system of cars and clothes was stipulated. The superior could use the inferior at the same time, and the inferior could not imitate the superior.

古文：宋初，衮冕不缀珠玉。
现代文：宋朝初年，礼服礼帽不缀珍珠宝玉。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, the ceremonial dress and hat were not decorated with pearl jewels.

古文：政和中诏修车辂，并建旂常，议礼局所厘定，用为成宪。
现代文：政和年间下诏修订车辆制度，并制定旗帜的建制，议礼局整理规定，用作固定的制度。
English: The vehicle system was revised in the following year, and the flag system was established, and the regulations of the Bureau of Etiquette were discussed, and it was used as a fixed system.

古文：元制，郊祀则驾玉辂，服衮冕；巡幸，或乘象轿，四时质孙之服，各随其宜。
现代文：元朝制度，举行郊祀天地的礼仪乘用玉作为装饰的车，穿礼服戴礼帽；皇帝出外巡枧，有时乘坐象驮的轿子，四季一种颜色的服饰，各自依随其适宜。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty system, the rituals of worshipping heaven and earth were held in the suburbs, and people rode in cars decorated with jade, wore ceremonial dress and ceremonial hats; the emperor went on a cruise, and sometimes rode in an elephant-drawn palanquin. The four seasons had one color of clothing, and each season was appropriate.

古文：明太祖甫有天下，考定邦礼，车服尚质。
现代文：明太祖刚刚拥有天下，考核审定国家的礼制，车乘服饰崇尚质朴。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty had just gained control of the country, and the country's etiquette had been approved by the examination. The passengers' clothing was simple and simple.

古文：酌古通今，合乎礼意。
现代文：斟酌古代好的礼制应用于今天，合乎礼制的本意。
English: Considering the ancient good etiquette applied to today, it is in line with the original intention of etiquette.

古文：迄于世宗，耤田造耕根，燕居服燕弁，讲武用武弁，更为忠靖冠以风有位，为保和冠以亲宗藩，亦一王之制也。
现代文：一直到世宗，举行藉田礼便制造耕田时所乘坐的车，闲居时穿着闲居的冠帽，讲习武艺时戴武冠，改为忠靖冠来教化居官的人，制保和冠来亲近宗室诸侯，也是一代帝王的制度。
English: All the way down to King Sejong, they held a land-borrowing ceremony to make a cart to ride in when cultivating the land, wore a crown cap when they were idle, wore a military crown when they were studying martial arts, changed to a loyalty and tranquility crown to teach the officials, and a security and a crown to be close to the royal family, which was also the system of a generation of emperors.

古文：若夫前代伞扇、鞍勒之仪，门戟、旌节之属，咸别等威，至宋加密。
现代文：至于前代的伞扇仪仗、鞍子马笼头的仪制，门前陈列的戟、旌旗和符节之类，都区别等级权威，到宋朝更加严密。
English: As for the previous generation of umbrella fan ceremonial war, the ceremonial system of the saddle horse cage head, the front of the door display of the banner, the banner and the symbols, all distinguish the level of authority, and are more strict in the Song Dynasty.

古文：明初俭德开基，宫殿落成，不用文石甃地。
现代文：明朝初年，用节俭的品德开创基业，官殿落成，不用有纹理的石块铺设地面。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he used his frugal character to create a foundation, and the government palace was completed without laying the ground with textured stones.

古文：以此坊民，武臣犹有饰金龙于床幔，马厩用九五间数，而豪民亦或熔金为酒器，饰以玉珠。太祖皆重惩其弊。
现代文：以此作为百姓的表率，武臣还有在床幔上点缀金色龙形装饰物，马厩采用帝王的制度，而有钱有势的人也有的熔炼黄金制成酒器，用美玉珠宝装饰，太祖都严厉惩处这种弊端。
English: Taking this as a model for the common people, the samurai warriors also decorated the mattresses with golden dragon-shaped ornaments, the stables used the emperor's system, and the rich and powerful people also smelted gold to make wine vessels and decorated them with beautiful jewels. The ancestors severely punished this kind of defect.

古文：乃命儒臣稽古讲礼，定官民服舍器用制度。
现代文：于是命令文臣考察古制研习礼仪，制定官民服饰房舍器用的制度。
English: Therefore, he ordered Wencheng to investigate the ancient system, study the etiquette, and formulate a system for the use of government and civilian clothing and furnishings.

古文：历代守之，递有禁例。
现代文：历代遵守，代代相传有禁例。
English: Observed throughout the ages, there are prohibitions passed down from generation to generation.

古文：兹更以朝家册宝、中外符信及宫室器用之等差，附叙于后焉。
现代文：这里另将皇家的册书宝玺、朝廷内外的符信以及宫室器用的等级差别，附带记录在后边。
English: In addition, the royal books and treasures, the imperial and foreign emblems, and the class differences in the use of palace utensils are also recorded at the back.

古文：天子车辂：明初大朝会，则拱卫司设五辂于奉天门，玉居中，左金，次革，右象，次木。
现代文：天子车辆。明朝初年举行大型朝见天子的仪式，拱卫司在奉天门设置了天子所乘坐的五种车，玉辖居中间，左边是金辖，左下边是革辖，右边是象辖，右下边是木辖。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, a large-scale ceremony was held to see the Son of Heaven, and the arch guards set up five kinds of cars for the Son of Heaven to ride in at the Gate of Heaven, with the Jade Throne in the middle, the Gold Throne on the left, the Leather Throne on the bottom left, the Elephant Throne on the right, and the Wooden Throne on the bottom right.

古文：驾出则乘玉辂，后有腰舆，以八人载之。
现代文：天子外出，就乘坐玉辖，后面有用手挽的轻便腰舆，用八个人运载。
English: When Tenshi goes out, he takes the yakitori, behind which there is a handy, hand-wrapped, light loincloth, which takes eight people to carry.

古文：其后太祖考《周礼》五辂，以询儒臣，曰： 玉辂太侈，何若祗用木辂？ 
现代文：后来太祖考察《周礼》所记载的天子乘坐的五种车，以此询问博士官，说： 玉辖太奢侈，只用木辖怎么样？ 
English: Later, the great-grandfather examined the five types of cars that the heavenly son rode in, as recorded in the "Weekly Ritual," and asked the doctoral officer, saying: The yakuza is too extravagant, how about using only the wooden yakuza?

古文：博士詹同对曰： 孔子云 乘殷之辂 ，即木辂也。 
现代文：博士詹同回答说： 孔子说 乘坐殷代的辖车，就是指木辖。 
English: Dr. Zhandong replied, "Confucius said, 'To ride in a Yin Dynasty chariot is to ride in a wooden chariot.'

古文：太祖曰： 以玉饰车，古惟祀天用之，常乘宜用殷辂。
现代文：大祖说： 用玉装饰车，古代只是祭祀上天时用，平常乘坐应该用殷代时的车。
English: The great ancestor said, "The car decorated with jade was only used in ancient times when people made offerings to the heavens. Normally, you should use a car from the Yin Dynasty.

古文：然祀天之际，玉辂未备，木辂亦未为不可。 
现代文：然而祭天之时，玉辖没有备办，木辖也未尝不可。 
English: However, at the time of the festival, Gyokushu did not prepare anything, and Mokushu did not have to.

古文：参政张昶曰： 木辂，戎辂也，不可以祀天。 
现代文：参政张昶说： 木辖，是兵车，不可以用来祭天。 
English: Zhang Ye, a politician, said: Muxiu is a chariot, it should not be used to worship God.

古文：太祖曰： 孔子斟酌四代礼乐，以为万世法，木辂宁不可祀？
现代文：太祖说： 孔子反复考虑择善制定四代礼乐，把它们作为万世的法则，木辖难道不可以用于祭祀吗？
English: The great-grandfather said: Confucius repeatedly considered the selection of good and formulated four generations of ritual music, taking them as the law of the ages. Couldn't it be used for sacrificial rituals?

古文：祀在诚敬，岂泥仪文。 
现代文：祭祀贵在诚恳恭敬，哪里要拘泥于祭祀的仪节形式。 
English: Sacrifices should be sincere and respectful, and the form of the ritual should be adhered to.

古文：洪武元年，有司奏乘舆服御，应以金饰，诏用铜。
现代文：洪武元年，主管官吏上奏天子乘坐的车子服饰器用，应该用黄金来装饰，下诏用铜。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the officials in charge should use gold to decorate the chariots and carriages that the emperor rode in, and copper to decorate the lower tiers.

古文：有司言费小不足惜。
现代文：主管官吏进言用黄金来装饰花费也不大，不值得吝惜。
English: The officials in charge said that it was not expensive to decorate with gold, and it was not worth grudgingly.

古文：太祖曰： 朕富有四海，岂吝乎此？
现代文：太祖说： 朕富有四海，哪里是吝惜这些花费？
English: The great-grandfather said, "I am rich beyond measure. Why do I grudge these expenses?

古文：第俭约非身先无以率下，且奢泰之习，未有不由小而至大者也。 
现代文：只是节俭不自己带头就不能作下属的表率。而且奢侈浪费的风习没有哪件不是由小变大的。 
English: It's just that if you don't take the lead in being frugal, you can't set an example for your subordinates. And there's no such thing as an extravagant and wasteful habit that doesn't grow from small to large.

古文：六年，命礼官考五辂制，为木辂二乘。
现代文：洪武六年，传令礼官考察天子乘坐的五种车的形制，制造木辖二辆。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, the eunuch ordered the etiquette officer to investigate the shape of the five types of cars that the heavenly son rode, and made two wooden cars.

古文：一以丹漆，祭祀用之；一以皮鞔，行幸用之。
现代文：一辆用朱漆涂饰，祭祀时使用；一辆用皮革蒙覆，出行时使用。
English: One is decorated with vermilion lacquer and is used for religious services; one is covered with leather and is used for travel.

古文：是冬，大辂成。
现代文：这年冬天，大辖造成。
English: This winter, Dazaifu was hit by a typhoon.

古文：命更造大辂一，象辂十，中宫辂一，后宫车十，饰俱以凤。
现代文：下令再造大辖一辆，象辖十辆，皇后所乘辖车一辆，嫔妃乘坐的车十辆，都用凤凰形状的饰物装饰。
English: An order was issued to rebuild one grand carriage, ten elephant-drawn carriages, one carriage used by the empress, and ten carriages used by the empress dowager, all decorated with ornaments in the shape of a phoenix.

古文：以将幸中立府，故造之，非常制也。
现代文：因为要临幸中立府，所以制造这些车，不是通常情况下的制度。
English: Because it is necessary to be close to the central government, it is not the usual system to manufacture these cars.

古文：二十六年，始定卤簿大驾之制。
现代文：洪武二十六年，开始制定天子出行时规模最大的仪仗队制度。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, he began to formulate the largest honor guard system when the emperor traveled.

古文：玉辂一，大辂一，九龙车一，步辇一。
现代文：玉辖一辆，大辖一辆，九龙车一辆，步辇一辆。
English: There is one in Tamguk, one in Taiji, one in Kowloon, and one in Busan.

古文：后罢九龙车。
现代文：后来撤去九龙车。
English: The Kowloon train was later withdrawn.

古文：永乐三年更定卤簿大驾，有大辂、玉辂、大马辇、小马辇、步辇、大凉步辇、板轿各一，具服、幄殿各一。
现代文：永乐三年，重新制定天子出行时规模最大的仪仗队的制度，有大辖、玉辖、大马车、小马车、步辇、大凉步辇、板轿各一辆，朝服、休息时用作行宫的帐幕各一套。
English: In the third year of Yongle, the system of the largest-scale honor guard for the emperor's travel was re-established, with a grand carriage, a jade carriage, a large carriage, a small carriage, a horse-drawn carriage, a large cool horse-drawn carriage, and a sedan chair, as well as a set of court dress and a set of tents used as a palace during rest.

古文：大辂，高一丈三尺九寸五分，广八尺二寸五分。
现代文：大辂，高一丈三尺九才五分，宽八尺二寸五分。
English: The great gong is three feet nine inches high and eight feet two inches wide.

古文：辂座高四尺一寸有奇，上平盘。
现代文：辖座高四尺一寸有余，上部是平盘。
English: The chancel is more than four feet one inch high, and the upper part is flat.

古文：前后车棂并雁翅及四垂如意滴珠板。
现代文：前后有车檀和雁翅装饰物以及四面垂挂的如意滴珠板。
English: There are sandalwood and goose-wing decorations on the front and back, as well as droplet beads hanging on all four sides.

古文：辕长二丈二尺九寸有奇，红髹。
现代文：辕长二丈二尺九寸有余，涂红漆。
English: The yakitori bowl is over 2 feet, 2 inches long, and painted red.

古文：镀金铜龙头、龙尾、龙鳞叶片装钉。
现代文：镀金的铜制龙头、龙尾、龙鳞叶片装钉。
English: Gold-plated copper dragon's head, tail, and scales are nailed together.

古文：平盘下方箱，四周红髹，匡俱十二槅。
现代文：平盘下面是方箱，四周涂红漆，边框共有十二桶。
English: Below the flat plate is a square box, with red paint around it, and a total of twelve barrels around the rim.

古文：内饰绿地描金，绘兽六，麟、狻猊、犀、象、天马、天禄；禽六，鸾、凤、孔雀、朱雀、翟、鹤。
现代文：里面有绿色底子上用金粉描绘的装饰物，绘成兽类六种，麒麟、狮子、犀牛、大象、天马、天禄；禽类六种，鸾、凤凰、孔雀、朱雀、长尾野鸡、鹤。
English: Inside, there are ornaments painted with gold powder on a green base, depicting six kinds of animals, unicorn, lion, rhinoceros, elephant, heavenly horse, and heavenly rook; six kinds of birds, dragonfly, phoenix, peacock, scarlet ibis, long-tailed pheasant, and crane.

古文：盘左右下有护泥板及车轮二，贯轴一。
现代文：盘左右的下方有护泥板以及车轮两个，贯轴一条。
English: There are mudguards and two wheels below the disc on the left and right, and one axle.

古文：每轮辐十有八，其辋皆红髹，抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：每个车轮有辐条十八根，车轮外框都涂红漆，抹金的用铜刻镂出的花纹叶片装钉。
English: Each wheel has eighteen spokes, the wheel rims are painted red, and the gold-plated ones are studded with patterned blades engraved in copper.

古文：轮内车心，用抹金铜鈒莲花瓣轮盘装钉，轴中缠黄绒驾辕诸索。
现代文：车轮内车心，用抹金镶嵌铜质莲花瓣轮盘装钉，车轴上缠有驾车辕的用黄色丝缕编成的绳索。
English: The inside of the wheels has a center, the wheels are studded with copper lotus petals inlaid with plaster of gold, and the axles are wrapped with a rope made of yellow silk strands from the driving yoke.

古文：辂亭高六尺七寸九分，四柱长五尺八寸四分。
现代文：辖亭高六尺七寸九分，四根柱子长五尺八寸四分。
English: The pavilion is six feet, seven inches and nine minutes high, with four pillars measuring five feet, eight inches and four minutes.

古文：槛座皆红髹。
现代文：门坎车座都涂红漆。
English: The door frame is painted red.

古文：前二柱戗金，柱首宝相花，中云龙文，下龟文锦。
现代文：前面两根柱子上镶嵌有黄金图案，柱子上端刻有宝相花，中间刻有云龙图案，下端是龟背纹理的锦缎。
English: The front two pillars are inlaid with gold patterns, the upper end of the column is engraved with a hologram flower, the middle is engraved with a cloud dragon pattern, and the lower end is a turtle-back textured brocade.

古文：前左右有门，高五尺一寸九分，广二尺四寸九分，四周装雕木沉香色描金香草板十二片。
现代文：亭前面左右有门，门高五尺一寸九分，宽二尺四寸九分，四周装有用金粉描绘装饰的黄黑色的雕木香草板十二片。
English: In front of the pavilion, there are doors on the left and right. The doors are five feet one inch and nine minutes high and two feet four inches and nine minutes wide. They are surrounded by twelve yellow and black carved wooden vanilla plates decorated with gold paint.

古文：门旁槅各二及明栨，俱红髹，以抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉，槅编以黄线条。
现代文：门旁有桶各两个和露在外面的短柱，都涂红漆，用抹金镶嵌铜质花纹叶片装钉，桶用黄残丝带编织。
English: Next to the door, there are two barrels each and a short pillar exposed outside, all painted red, studded with copper-colored leaves inlaid with gold, and the barrels are woven with yellow remnant ribbons.

古文：后红髹屏风，上雕描金云龙五，红髹板戗金云龙一。
现代文：亭后有红漆屏风，上面雕刻了涂有金粉的五条云龙，红漆板嵌有，一条金龙。
English: Behind the pavilion, there is a red lacquer screen, on which five dragons painted with gold powder are carved. The red lacquer board is embedded with a golden dragon.

古文：屏后地沉香色，上四槅雕描金云龙四，其次云板如之。
现代文：屏风后面是黄黑色的底子，上边四桶雕刻了涂有金粉的云龙四条，它下面绘有云形图案的小板跟它一样。
English: Behind the screen there is a yellow-black base, on the upper side four barrels are carved with four cloud dragons coated with gold powder, and below it there is a small board with a cloud-shaped pattern just like it.

古文：下三槅雕描金云龙三，其次云板亦如之。
现代文：下边三桶雕刻了涂有金粉的云龙三条，它下面绘有云形图案的小板跟它一样。
English: The bottom of the three barrels is engraved with three clouds of dragons coated with gold powder, and the small board with a cloud pattern below it is the same as it.

古文：俱抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：都用抹金的嵌有花纹的铜质叶片装钉。
English: All of them are nailed with copper blades embedded with patterns made of plastered gold.

古文：亭内黄线条编红髹匡软座，下莲花坠石，上施花毯、红锦褥席、红髹坐椅。
现代文：辖亭内有黄线丝带编织的有红漆边框的柔软座位，座下边莲花坠石形，上面铺设花毯、红色有花纹的丝织品制成的褥席、红漆坐椅。
English: In the pavilion, there is a soft seat with a red lacquer border woven with yellow thread ribbon, a lotus pendant stone under the seat, a flower carpet laid on top, a banquet made of red patterned silk fabric, and a red lacquer chair.

古文：靠背上雕描金云龙一，下雕云板一，红髹福寿板一，并褥。
现代文：靠背上雕刻涂有金粉的云龙一条，下面是雕刻有云形图案的小板一块，红漆的福寿板一块和褥席。
English: On the backrest, there is a cloud dragon carved with gold powder, below is a small board carved with a cloud pattern, a red lacquer fortune board and a table.

古文：椅中黄织金椅靠坐褥，四围椅裙，施黄绮帷幔。
现代文：椅子中铺有黄色的织金椅靠背和坐褥，四周垂有椅裙，布上用黄色的有花纹的帷幔。
English: The chair is covered with yellow gold-woven fabric for the backrest and seat cushion, with a chair skirt draped around it, and yellow patterned drapery on the fabric.

古文：亭外青绮缘边红帘十扇。
现代文：辖亭外边是青色有花纹的丝织品绿边的红色帘子十扇。
English: On the outside of the pavilion there are ten red curtains with a blue patterned silk fabric with a green border.

古文：辂顶并圆盘，高三尺有奇，镀金铜蹲龙顶，带仰覆莲座，垂攀顶黄线圆条。
现代文：辖顶加上圆盘高三尺有余，镀金的铜制蹲踞之龙位于顶部，环绕仰覆莲花座位，垂挂着攀顶的黄线圆形丝带。
English: The domed top and the disc are more than three feet high, and the gilded copper crest of the crouching dragon is located at the top, surrounding the upturned lotus seat, with a yellow line round ribbon hanging from the top.

古文：盘上以红髹，其下外四面地沉香色，描金云；内四角地青，绘五彩云。
现代文：盘上用红漆，它下面外部的四面是黄黑色的底子，用金粉描绘成云形图案；内部四角是青色的底子，描绘有五彩云。
English: The red lacquer is used on the disk, the four outer sides of the disk are yellow-black base, painted with gold powder into a cloud-shaped pattern; the inner four corners are blue base, painted with multicolored clouds.

古文：以青饰辂盖，亭内贴金斗拱，承红髹匡宝盖，斗以八顶，冒以黄绮，谓之黄屋；中并四周绣五彩云龙九。
现代文：用青色涂饰辖顶盖，亭内有贴金的斗棋，支撑着有红漆边框的宝盖，亭盖由八面顶拼合而成，用黄色的有花纹的丝织品覆盖，叫做黄屋；中间和四周绣有五彩云龙九条。
English: The roof of the pavilion is decorated with blue, and there are gold-plated chess pieces in the pavilion, supporting the treasure lid with a red lacquer border. The pavilion cover is made of eight-sided top, covered with yellow patterned silk fabric, called Huangya; there are nine five-colored cloud dragons embroidered in the middle and around.

古文：天轮三层，皆红髹，上安雕木贴金边耀叶板八十一片，内绿地雕木贴金云龙文三层，间绘五彩云衬板八十一片。
现代文：天轮有三层，都涂红漆，上层安有贴金边的发光的雕木薄板八十一片，内部是贴金的绘有云龙图案的绿色底子的雕木三层，中间是绘有五彩云的衬板八十一片。
English: The celestial wheel has three layers, all of which are painted red. On the upper layer, there are eighty-one pieces of light-emitting carved wood with gold-plated edges. On the inside, there are three layers of engraved wood with gold-plated green bases and dragon motifs. In the middle, there are eighty-one pieces of lining board with multicolored clouds.

古文：盘下四周，黄铜钉装，施黄绮沥水三层，每层八十一摺，间绣五彩云龙文。
现代文：盘下四周，用黄铜钉装，铺设沥水的黄色有花纹的丝织品三层，每层八十一折，中间绣有五彩云龙图案。
English: Around the bottom of the dish, with brass nails, three layers of yellow patterned silk fabric are laid, each layer folded in eighty-one folds, with a multicolored cloud dragon pattern embroidered in the middle.

古文：四角垂青绮络带，各绣五彩云升龙。
现代文：四角垂挂青色的有花纹的丝织品络带，各锈有五彩云中升起龙的图案。
English: Four-cornered hanging blue patterned silk webbing, each rust with multicolored clouds rising dragon pattern.

古文：圆盘四角连辂坐板，用攀顶黄线圆条，并贴金木鱼。
现代文：圆盘四角与辖的坐板相连，有攀顶黄线圆形丝带，并有贴金木鱼。
English: The four corners of the disk are connected to the seat plate, there is a yellow round ribbon, and there is a goldfish.

古文：辂亭前有左右转角阑干二扇，后一字带左右转角阑干一扇，皆红髹，内嵌雕木贴金龙，间以五彩云。
现代文：辖亭前面有左右转角栏杆二扇，后面一条字带左右有转角栏杆一扇，都涂红漆，里面嵌有刻成的涂上金粉的龙形图案，中间绘有五彩云。
English: There are two left and right corner railings in front of the pavilion, and one left and right corner railing in the back of a word belt. They are all painted red, with an engraved dragon pattern coated with gold powder embedded inside, and multicolored clouds painted in the middle.

古文：三扇共十二柱，柱首雕木贴金蹲龙及线金五彩莲花抱柱。
现代文：三扇共有十二根柱子，柱子上端雕刻着涂上金粉的蹲踞龙形图案和环绕柱子的金线五彩莲花。
English: There are a total of twelve pillars in the three wings. The upper end of the pillars is engraved with a crouching dragon pattern coated with gold powder and a multicolored lotus surrounded by gold thread.

古文：阑干内四周布花毯。
现代文：栏杆内四周铺设绘有花形的毯子。
English: A flower-patterned blanket is spread around the railing.

古文：亭后树太常旗二，以黄线罗为之，皆十有二斿，每斿内外绣升龙一。
现代文：辖亭后面树有太常旗二面，用黄色丝线编织而成，都垂有十二条飘带，每条飘带正反面绣有腾飞的龙一条。
English: At the back of the pavilion, there are two flags on the tree, woven with yellow silk thread, each hanging with twelve streamers, each of which is embroidered with a soaring dragon on the front and back.

古文：左旗腰绣日月北斗，竿首用镀金铜龙首。
现代文：左边旗腰绣日月北斗，旗竿顶端有镀金的铜制龙头。
English: The left side of the flag is embroidered with the sun, moon and the Big Dipper, and the top of the flagpole has a gold-plated copper spigot.

古文：右旗腰绣黻字，竿首用镀金铜戟。
现代文：右边旗腰绣黑青相问的花纹，旗竿顶端有镀金的铜戟。
English: The right side of the flag is embroidered with a black and blue interlaced pattern, and the top of the flagpole has a gold-plated gong.

古文：各缀抹金铜铃二，垂红缨十二，缨上施抹金铜宝盖，下垂青线帉錔。
现代文：各缀有抹金的铜铃二个，垂挂红缨十二条，红缨上面施有抹金的铜制宝盖，下边垂挂青线编成的饰有小铃的襄帕。
English: There are two copper bells with gold-plated decoration on each of them, twelve hanging red bells, a copper treasure lid with gold-plated decoration on the top of the red bells, and a handkerchief made of blue thread decorated with small bells hanging on the bottom.

古文：踏梯一，红髹，以抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：踏梯一条，涂红漆，用抹金的刻有花纹的铜制叶片装钉。
English: A step ladder, painted red, is nailed with copper leaves engraved with patterns of gold.

古文：行马架二，红髹，上有黄绒匾条，用抹金铜叶片装钉。
现代文：行马架二个，涂红漆，上面有黄色绒线织成的扁带，用抹金铜质嵌花叶片装钉。
English: There are two horse-drawn carriages, painted red, with flat ribbons woven from yellow yarn and studded with gold-plated copper inlaid leaves.

古文：有黄绢幰衣、油绢雨衣、青毡衣及红油合扇梯、红油托叉各一。
现代文：有黄色绢布的御尘布幔、就是遮尘。细薄光滑丝织品制成的雨衣、青色毡衣以及红油的两面相合的梯子、红油托叉各一个。
English: There is a yellow dust cloth, which is a dust cover, a raincoat made of thin and smooth silk fabric, a blue dust cloth, a ladder made of red oil and a fork made of red oil.

古文：辂以二象驾之。
现代文：辖用两头象驾驶。
English: Two elephants are used for driving.

古文：玉辂，亦驾以二象，制如大辂，而无平盘下十二槅之饰。
现代文：玉辂，也用两头象驾驶，形制和大辖相同，而没有平盘下面十二桶的装饰物。
English: The jade gong, also driven by two elephants, has the same shape as the mandala, but without the decoration of the twelve barrels below the flat plate.

古文：辂亭前二柱，饰以搏换贴金升龙。
现代文：辖亭前面的两根柱子，用髹漆脱胎的搏换塑法制作的贴金飞龙图案来装饰。
English: The two pillars in front of the pavilion are decorated with gold-painted flying dragons, made by the process of beating the paint out of the tire.

古文：屏风后无上四槅云龙及云板之饰。
现代文：屏风后面没有上边四桶的龙形图寨以及绘有云形图案的小板的装饰。
English: Behind the screen, there is no decoration of the dragon-shaped village with four barrels on the upper side and the small board with a cloud-shaped pattern.

古文：天轮内用青地雕木饰玉色云龙文。
现代文：天轮内用青色底子雕木饰以玉色云龙图案。
English: Inside the celestial wheel, carved wood with a blue base is decorated with a jade cloud dragon pattern.

古文：而太常旗及踏梯、行马之类，悉与大辂同。
现代文：而太常旗以及踏梯、行马架之类，全部与大辖相同。
English: However, the Tai Chang banner, as well as the stepladder and horse-drawn carriage, are all the same as those in Taiji.

古文：大马辇，古者辇以人挽之。
现代文：大马辇，古代辇用人拉挽。
English: The large horse-drawn plough, the ancient plough, was pulled by a ploughman.

古文：《周礼·巾车》后五辂，其一 辇车，组挽 。
现代文：《周礼，巾车》后五辖，其中之一 辇车，用丝带拉挽 。
English: "Zhou Li, Handkerchief" has five chapters in the back, one of which is a handkerchief, tied with a ribbon.

古文：然《县师》有 车辇之稽 ，《黍苗》诗云 我任我辇 ，则臣民所乘亦名辇。
现代文：但《县师》有 车辇之稽 的句子，《黍苗》诗有 我任我辇 的句子，那么臣下百姓所乘坐的也叫辇。
English: However, "County magistrate" has a sentence of "car" and "seedling" poem has a sentence of "let me ride my horse," so what the people ride is also called "horse."

古文：至秦始去其轮，而制乃尊。
现代文：到了秦代开始去掉它的轮，而这种形制于是尊贵起来。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, they began to remove its wheels, and this form became more prestigious.

古文：明诸辇有轮者驾以马，以别于步辇焉。
现代文：明朝各辇有轮的用马驾驶，用来与步相区别。
English: In the Ming and Qing dynasties, each yakitori had a wheel and was driven by a horse, which was used to distinguish it from a go.

古文：其制，高一丈二尺五寸九分，广八尺九寸五分，辕长二丈五寸有奇，辇座高三尺四寸有奇，馀同大辂。
现代文：它的形制，高一丈二尺五寸九分，宽八尺九寸五分，车辕长二丈零五寸有余，辇座高三尺四寸有余，其余的与大辖相同。
English: It has the same shape as Daiji, with a height of 2'5'9" and a width of 8'9"5, a carriage with a length of 2'0" and a seat height of 3'4."

古文：辇亭高六尺四寸有奇，红髹四柱，长五尺四寸有奇。
现代文：辇亭，高六尺四寸有余，四根红漆柱子，长五尺四寸有余。
English: The pavilion is more than six feet four inches high, with four red-lacquered pillars more than five feet four inches long.

古文：槛座高与辂同，四周红髹条环板。
现代文：门坎辇座，高度与大辖相同，四周是红漆的用丝带环绕的木板。
English: The lintel stands at the same height as the main door, and is surrounded by red-painted wooden boards tied with ribbons.

古文：前左右有门，高五尺有奇，广二尺四寸有奇。
现代文：前面左右有门，高五尺有余，宽二尺四寸有余。
English: There are doors to the left and right of the front, and it is more than five feet high and more than two feet four inches wide.

古文：门旁槅各二，后槅三及明栨，皆红髹，抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：门旁有桶各两个，后面有桶三个和露在外面的短柱，都涂以红漆，用抹金的嵌有花纹的铜质叶片装钉。
English: Next to the door there are two buckets each, behind there are three buckets and a short column exposed on the outside, all painted with red lacquer and studded with copper leaves inlaid with patterned gold.

古文：槅心编以黄线条。
现代文：桶的中心用黄线丝带编织而成。
English: The center of the bucket is woven with yellow threaded ribbon.

古文：亭内制与大辂同，第软座上不用花毯，而用红毯。
现代文：亭内形制与大辖相同，祇是软座上不铺设有花纹的毯子，而用红色毯子。
English: The interior of the pavilion is the same as that of the Daihaku, except that instead of a patterned blanket on the soft seat, a red blanket is used.

古文：亭外用红帘十二扇。
现代文：亭外部用红色帘子十二扇。
English: Twelve red curtains line the outside of the pavilion.

古文：辇顶并圆盘高二尺六寸有奇，上下俱红髹，以青饰辇盖。
现代文：辇顶加上圆盘高二尺六寸有余，上下都涂红漆，用青色装饰辇盖。
English: The top of the urn, together with the disc, is more than two feet and six inches high. Both the top and bottom are painted red, and the lid of the urn is decorated with blue.

古文：其铜龙、莲座、宝盖、黄屋及天轮、辇亭，制悉与大辂同。
现代文：它的铜制的龙、莲花座、实盖、黄屋以及天轮、辇亭，形制都与大辖相同。
English: Its bronze dragon, lotus seat, solid lid, yellow house, as well as the celestial wheel and pavilion, all have the same shape as the Great Jurisdiction.

古文：太常旗、踏梯、行马之属，亦同大辂。
现代文：太常旗、踏梯、行马架之类，也与大辖相同。
English: The flags, stepladders, horse-drawn carriages, etc. are also the same as those in Taiji.

古文：驾以八马，备鞍鞯、鞦辔、铃缨之饰。
现代文：用八匹马驾驶，备有马鞍和托马鞍的垫子、马缰绳、马铃丝带等装饰物。
English: It is driven by eight horses and is furnished with saddles and saddle pads, bridles, bells, ribbons and other decorations.

古文：小马辇，视大马辇高广皆减一尺，辕长一丈九尺有奇，馀同大马辇。
现代文：小马辇，比大马辇高度宽度都减少一尺，车辕长一丈九尺有余，其余与大马辇相同。
English: The height and width of the small horse-drawn carriage are one foot less than those of the large horse-drawn carriage, and the length of the carriage is more than nine feet, and the rest is the same as that of the large horse-drawn carriage.

古文：辇亭高五尺五寸有奇，红髹四柱，长五尺四寸有奇。
现代文：辇亭高五尺五寸有余，四根红漆柱子，畏五尺四寸有余。
English: The pavilion is more than five feet and five inches tall, with four red lacquer pillars measuring more than five feet and four inches.

古文：槛座红髹，四周条环板，前左右有门，高五尺，广二尺二寸有奇。
现代文：门坎辇座，涂以红漆，四周是丝带环绕的木板，亭前面左右有门，高五尺，宽二尺二寸有余。
English: The door jamb, painted with red lacquer, is surrounded by a wooden board surrounded by ribbons. There are doors on the left and right in front of the pavilion. It is five feet high and more than two feet two inches wide.

古文：门旁槅各二及明栨，后屏风壁板，俱红髹，用抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：门旁桶各两个和露在外面的短柱，后面屏风的壁板，都涂红漆，用抹金的刻有花纹的铜制叶片装钉。
English: The two barrels by the door and the exposed short columns, the wainscoting of the screen behind, are painted red and studded with copper blades engraved with patterns of gold.

古文：亭底红髹，上施红花毯、红锦褥席。
现代文：亭底部涂红漆，上面铺有红色的有花纹的毯子、红色锦褥席。
English: The bottom of the pavilion is painted red, with red patterned blankets and red brocade seats on top.

古文：外用红帘四扇，驾以四马。
现代文：亭外部有红色帘子四扇，用四匹马驾驶。
English: There are four red curtains on the outside of the pavilion, driven by four horses.

古文：馀同大马辇。
现代文：其余部分与大马辇相同。
English: The rest is the same as the Great Stirrup.

古文：步辇者，古之步挽。
现代文：步辇，是古代的用人力拉的步挽。
English: The shakuhachi is an ancient hand-pulled shakuhachi.

古文：明制，高一丈三尺二寸有奇，广八尺二寸有奇。
现代文：明代的形制，高一丈三尺二寸有余，宽八尺二寸有余。
English: The Ming-dynasty design is more than three feet two inches high and more than eight feet two inches wide.

古文：辇座高三尺二寸有奇，四周雕木五彩云浑贴金龙板十二片，间以浑贴金仰覆莲座，下雕木线金五彩云板十二片。
现代文：辇座高三尺二寸有余，四周是雕刻有五彩云图案全贴金的有龙形图案的木板十二片，杂以全贴金装饰的仰覆莲花座，下面是雕刻有金线五彩云图案的木板十二片。
English: The pedestal is more than three feet two inches high, surrounded by twelve dragon-shaped wooden boards engraved with a five-colored cloud pattern in all-overlapping gold, a raised lotus seat decorated with all-overlapping gold, and twelve wooden boards engraved with a five-colored cloud pattern in gold thread.

古文：辕四，红髹。
现代文：辕四根，涂以红漆。
English: Four gourds, painted red.

古文：中二辕长三丈五尺九寸，左右二辕长二丈九尺五寸有奇，俱以镀金铜龙头、龙尾装钉。
现代文：中间两根辕长三丈五尺九寸，左右二根辕长二丈九尺五寸有余，都用镀金的铜制笼头、龙尾装钉。
English: The middle two hooks are 3 feet, 5 feet, 9 inches long, and the left and right two hooks are 2 feet, 9 feet, 5 inches long. They are all mounted with gold-plated copper cage heads and dragon tails.

古文：辇亭高六尺三寸有奇，四柱长六尺二寸有奇。
现代文：辇亭离六尺三寸有余，四根柱长六尺二寸有余。
English: The pavilion is more than six feet three inches away, and the four columns are more than six feet two inches long.

古文：槛座红髹，四周雕木沉香色描金香草板十二片，抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：门坎辇座，涂以红漆，四周是用金粉描绘装饰的黄黑色雕木香草板十二片，用抹金的嵌有花纹的铜质叶片装钉。
English: The lintel of the door, painted with red lacquer, is surrounded by twelve yellow-black carved wooden vanilla plates decorated with gold-painted decoration, and studded with copper leaves with patterns inlaid with gold.

古文：前左右有门，高五尺七寸有奇，广二尺四寸有奇。
现代文：亭前面左右有门，高五尺七寸有余，宽二尺四寸有余。
English: There are doors on the left and right in front of the pavilion, with a height of more than five feet seven inches and a width of more than two feet four inches.

古文：门旁红髹十字槅各二扇，雕饰沉香色描金云龙板八片，下云板如其数。
现代文：门旁有红漆的十字桶各二扇，雕刻装饰用金粉在龙形图案上描画的黄黑色木板八片，下边绘有云形图案的小板跟它的数目相同。
English: Next to the door, there are two red-painted cross-barrels, eight yellow-and-black wooden boards decorated with dragon motifs painted with gold powder, and the same number of small boards with cloud motifs painted on the underside.

古文：后红髹屏风，上雕沉香色描金云龙五。
现代文：亭后面是红漆屏风，上面雕刻用金粉描画的黄黑色云龙五条。
English: Behind the pavilion is a red lacquer screen, on which five yellow and black dragons, painted with gold powder, are carved.

古文：屏后雕沉香色描金云龙板三片，又云板如其数，俱用抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：屏风后面是雕刻有用金粉描画的黄黑色云龙形图案的木板三片，刻有云形图案的木板和它数目相同，都用抹金嵌有花纹的铜质叶片装钉。
English: Behind the screen there are three wooden boards engraved with a yellow-black cloud-dragon pattern painted with gold powder. There are the same number of wooden boards engraved with a cloud-shaped pattern, and they are all nailed with copper blades with patterns embedded in gold.

古文：馀同马辇，惟红帘用十扇。
现代文：其余部分与马辇相同，祇是红色帘子用十扇。
English: The rest of the piece is the same as the stirrup, except for the ten red cords.

古文：辇顶并圆盘高二尺六寸有奇，其莲座、辇盖、天轮、幰衣之属，俱同马辇。
现代文：辇顶加上圆盘高二尺六寸有余，它的莲花座、辇盖、天轮、御尘的布幔之类，都与马辇相同。
English: The top of the cocoon, together with the disk, is more than two feet and six inches high. Its lotus seat, cocoon cover, celestial wheel, and dust cloth are all the same as the horse cocoon.

古文：大凉步辇，高一丈二尺五寸有奇，广一丈二尺五寸有奇。
现代文：大凉步辇，高一丈二尺五寸有余，宽一丈二尺五寸有余。
English: A large cool step stool, with a height of 2'5" and a width of 2'5."

古文：四面红髹匡，装雕木五彩云板二十片，间以贴金仰覆莲座，下红髹如意条环板，如其数。
现代文：四面是红漆的边框，安装了雕刻着五彩云图案的木板二十片，间杂着贴金的仰覆莲花座，下面是红漆的缀有如意的丝带环绕的木板，和云板的数目一样。
English: On all four sides is a red lacquer border, mounted with twenty wooden boards engraved with a five-colored cloud pattern, interspersed with a gold-plated overhanging lotus seat, below is a red lacquer plate decorated with the desired ribbon, and the same number of cloud plates.

古文：红髹辕六：中二辕长四丈三尺五寸有奇，左右二辕长四丈有奇，外二辕长三丈六尺五寸有奇，前后俱饰以雕木贴金龙头、龙尾。
现代文：红漆辕六根：中间雨根长四丈三尺五寸有余，左右两根辕长四丈有余，最外的二根辕长三丈六尺五寸有余，前后都用雕木贴金的龙头、龙尾装饰。
English: Six red-lacquered gongs: the middle gong is four-feet-three-and-a-half-inches long, the left and right gongs are two-feet-four-and-a-half-inches long, and the outermost two gongs are three-feet-six-and-a-half-inches long. Both the front and back are decorated with carved wood and gold-plated dragon heads and tails.

古文：辇亭高六尺五寸有奇，广八尺五寸有奇，四柱红髹。
现代文：辇亭高六尺五寸有余，宽八尺五寸有余，四根柱子涂红漆。
English: The pavilion is more than six feet five inches high and more than eight feet five inches wide, with four pillars painted red.

古文：前左右有门，高五尺八寸有奇，广二尺五寸有奇，四周描金香草板十二片。
现代文：亭前左右有门，高五尺八寸有余，宽二尺五寸有余，四周是用金粉描画装饰的香草板十二片。
English: There are doors around the front of the pavilion, with a height of more than five feet and eight inches and a width of more than two feet and five inches, surrounded by twelve vanilla plates decorated with gold paint.

古文：门旁槅各二，后槅三及明栨皆红髹，编以黄线条。
现代文：门旁慑各两个，后桶三个以及露在外面的短柱都涂以红漆，用黄线丝带编织。
English: The two sides of the door, the three rear barrels and the exposed short columns are all painted red and woven with yellow threaded ribbons.

古文：亭底上施垫毡，加红锦褥并席。
现代文：亭底上面铺设垫毹，外加红色锦褥和席。
English: Cushions are laid on the bottom of the pavilion, plus red brocade and seats.

古文：红髹坐椅一，四周雕木沉香色，描金宝相花，靠背、褥、裙、帷幔与马辇同。
现代文：红漆坐椅一把，四周是黄黑色的雕花木，绘有用金粉勾勒的宝相花，靠背、褥、椅裙、帷幔与马辇相同。
English: A red-lacquered chair, surrounded by yellow-black carved wood, painted with gold-painted flowers, the backrest, armrests, chair skirt, and drapery are the same as the stirrups.

古文：内设红髹桌二；红髹阑干香桌一，阑干四，柱首俱雕木贴金蹲龙；镀金铜龙盖香炉一，并香匙、箸、瓶；红锦墩二。
现代文：里面设有红漆桌子二张；红漆栏杆陈放香炉的桌子一张，栏杆四根，柱子上端都是雕花木头贴金的蹲龙图案；镀金的铜质龙形盖香炉一个，还有香匙、筷子、瓶子；红锦覆盖的墩子两个。
English: Inside, there are two red lacquer tables; a table with red lacquer railings for the incense burner, four railings, and carved wood with a gold-plated crouching dragon pattern at the top of the pillars; a gold-plated copper dragon-shaped lid incense burner, as well as spoon, chopsticks, and bottle; two braids covered with red brocade.

古文：外红帘三扇。
现代文：亭外有红色帘子三扇。
English: There are three red curtains outside the pavilion.

古文：辇顶高二尺七寸有奇，又镀金铜宝珠顶，带仰覆莲座，高一尺三寸有奇；垂攀顶黄线圆条四。
现代文：辇顶高二尺七寸有余，有镀金的铜质宝珠顶，带有仰覆莲花座，莲花座高一尺三寸有余；垂挂着攀顶的黄线圆丝带四条。
English: The chrysanthemum top is more than two feet and seven inches high, with a gold-plated copper bead top, with an overhanging lotus seat, the lotus seat is more than one foot and three inches high; hanging from the top of the yellow line are four round ribbons.

古文：顶用丹漆，上冒红毡，四垂以黄毡为如意云，黄毡缘条；四周施黄绮沥水三层，每层百三十二摺，间绣五彩云龙文。
现代文：亭顶涂红漆，上面覆盖红毡，四面垂挂黄毡制成如意装饰像云状的丝带，黄毡绿丝带的边；四周铺设有沥水的黄绮三层，每层一百三十二折，间杂锈有五彩云龙的图案。
English: The top of the pavilion is painted red, the top is covered with red enamel, the four sides are made of hanging yellow enamel, which is decorated like a cloud-shaped ribbon, the edge of the yellow enamel green ribbon; three layers of yellow enamel with asphalt are laid around, each layer is one hundred and thirty-two folds, and there is a five-color cloud dragon pattern between the rusts.

古文：或用大红罗冒顶，以黄罗为如意云缘条，沥水亦用黄罗。
现代文：有的用大红的丝织品覆盖亭顶，用黄色的丝织品作如意装饰像云状丝带的绿边，沥水也用黄色丝织品。
English: Some covered the top of the pavilion with red silk fabric, used yellow silk fabric to decorate the green edge like a cloud-like ribbon, and also used yellow silk fabric.

古文：顶下四周以红毡为帷，黄毡缘条，四角镀金铜云四。
现代文：亭顶下面四周用红毡为帷幔，黄毡绿边，四角是镀金的铜质云状物四个。
English: Around the bottom of the top of the pavilion, red satin is used as drapery, yellow satin has a green edge, and the four corners are four gilded copper clouds.

古文：亭内宝盖绣五龙，顶以红髹木匡，冒以黄绮为黄屋，顶心四周绣云龙各一。
现代文：亭内宝盖绣有五条龙，顶部是红漆木框，用黄绮覆盖为黄屋，顶心四周绣有云龙各一条。
English: The treasure lid inside the pavilion is embroidered with five dragons, the top is a red lacquered wooden frame, covered with yellow enamel as a yellow roof, and the top center is embroidered with one cloud dragon each.

古文：辇亭四角至辇座，用攀顶黄线圆条四，并贴金木鱼。
现代文：辇亭四角到辇座，用攀顶黄线圆带四条，还有贴金木鱼。
English: From the four corners of the pavilion to the pavilion, there are four yellow lines with climbing tops, and there are also goldfish.

古文：辇亭前左右转角阑干二扇，后一字带转角阑干一扇，皆红髹，雕木浑贴金龙，间以五彩云板。
现代文：辇亭前面左右有转角栏杆两扇，后面一个字带转角栏杆一扇，都涂红漆，雕花木头全部贴金龙形图案，间杂着五彩的绘有云形图案的小板。
English: In front of the pavilion, there are two corner railings on the left and right, and one corner railing with a banner on the back. They are all painted red, and the carved wood is all covered with golden dragon patterns, interspersed with colorful small plates with cloud patterns.

古文：阑干内四周布席。
现代文：栏杆内部四周铺设席子。
English: A mat is laid around the inside of the railing.

古文：其阑干十二柱之饰及踏梯之属，俱与马辇同。
现代文：它的栏杆十二根柱子的装饰及踏梯之类，都与马辇相同。
English: Its railing, the decoration of its twelve pillars, and its steps are all the same as those of a stable.

古文：轿者，肩行之车。
现代文：轿，是用肩扛的车。
English: A sedan is a car that is carried on the shoulders.

古文：宋中兴以后，皇后尝乘龙肩舆。
现代文：宋代偏安一方以后，皇后曾经乘坐龙轿。
English: After the Song Dynasty, the empress once rode in a dragon sedan.

古文：又以征伐，道路险阻，诏百官乘轿，名曰 竹轿子 ，亦曰 竹舆 。
现代文：又因为征伐，道路险阻，下诏令百官乘轿，名叫 竹轿子 ，也叫 竹舆 。
English: Also, because of the conquest and the dangerous obstacles on the road, the emperor ordered the officials to take a sedan, called the bamboo sedan, also called the bamboo sedan.

古文：元皇帝用象轿，驾以二象。
现代文：五朝皇帝用象轿，用两头象来驾驶。
English: The emperors of the Five Dynasties used two elephants to drive an elephant carriage.

古文：至用红板轿，则自明始也。
现代文：至于用红板轿，则从明朝开始。
English: As for using the red-plate sedan, it will start from tomorrow morning.

古文：其制，高六尺九寸有奇。
现代文：它的形制，高六尺九寸有余。
English: Its shape, more than six feet nine inches high.

古文：顶红髹。
现代文：顶部涂红漆。
English: The top is painted red.

古文：近顶装圆匡蜊房窗，镀金铜火焰宝，带仰覆莲座，四角镀金铜云朵。
现代文：靠近顶部装有圆框蜊形窗子，镀金的铜质火焰宝，环绕着仰覆莲花座，四角是镀金的铜质云朵状饰物。
English: Near the top, there is a round-framed cornice-shaped window, a gilded copper flame treasure, surrounded by an overhanging lotus seat, and the four corners are gold-plated copper cloud-like ornaments.

古文：轿杠二，前后以镀金铜龙头、龙尾装钉，有黄绒坠角索。
现代文：轿杠两根，前后用镀金的铜质龙头、龙尾装钉，角内有垂挂的黄色绒线编成的绳索。
English: Two palanquins, front and back with a gold-plated copper spigot, dragon tail mounted nails, hanging in the corner of the yellow yarn braided rope.

古文：四周红髹板，左右门二，用镀金铜钉铰。
现代文：四周是红漆木板，左右门两扇，用镀金的铜来镶嵌。
English: It is surrounded by red lacquered wooden boards, with two doors on the left and right, inlaid with gold-plated copper.

古文：轿内红髹匡坐椅一，福寿板一并褥。
现代文：轿内有红漆框的坐椅一把，福寿板一面和褥子。
English: Inside the car, there is a red-painted chair, a fortune board and a pair of pliers.

古文：椅内黄织金绮靠坐褥，四周椅裙，下铺席并踏褥。
现代文：椅内铺有用黄色织金罗绮制成的靠背和坐褥，四周有椅裙，下面铺设席子和踏足褥。
English: The inside of the chair is covered with a backrest and seat cushion made of yellow gold braid, surrounded by a chair skirt, with a mat and footrest underneath.

古文：有黄绢轿衣、油绢雨衣各一，青毡衣，红毡缘条云子。
现代文：有黄绢制成的轿衣、细薄光滑的丝织品制成的雨衣各一套，青色毡衣，红色毡绿边的云状装饰物。
English: There is a yellow satin dress, a raincoat made of thin and smooth silk fabric, a blue satin dress, a red satin dress, and a cloud-like decoration with green edges.

古文：嘉靖十三年谒庙，帝及后妃俱乘肩舆出宫，至奉天门降舆升辂。
现代文：嘉靖十三年拜谒祖庙，皇帝以及后妃都乘轿出宫，到了奉天门下轿乘车。
English: In the 13th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor and the empress dowager went out of the palace in a sedan, and they took a sedan to the Fengtian Gate.

古文：隆庆四年设郊祀庆成宴，帝乘板舆由归极门出，入皇极门，至殿上降舆。
现代文：隆庆四年，设庆祝郊祀天地仪式完成的宴席，皇帝乘坐板舆由归极门出去，进入皇极门，到大殿上下轿。
English: In the fourth year of the Longqing, a banquet was set up to celebrate the completion of the ceremony of worshipping heaven and earth in the suburbs. The emperor went out from the Guigui Gate on a board, entered the Guigui Gate, and took a sedan to the main hall.

古文：车驾之出，有具服幄殿。
现代文：皇帝出行，有朝服休息时用的帐幕。
English: When the emperor travels, there is a tent for him to rest in after putting on his imperial robes.

古文：按《周官》大小次，木架苇障，上下四旁周以幄坝，以象宫室。
现代文：依照《周官》的制度，有大小帐幕，用木制架子芦苇编成的屏障，上下四周围着帐帷小幕，以象征宫室。
English: According to the system of "Zhou Guan," there is a large and small tent curtain, a barrier made of reed with a wooden frame, and a small curtain with a curtain around the top and bottom to symbolize the palace room.

古文：明卤簿载具服幄殿，仪仗有黄帐房，仍元制也。
现代文：明代皇帝出行时扈行的仪仗队运载朝服帐篷，仪仗有黄色的帐篷，是因循元朝的制度。
English: When the Ming Dynasty emperors traveled, the limping honor guard carried the imperial dress tent. The honor guard had a yellow tent, which was based on the system of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：帐并帷幕，以黄木棉布为之。
现代文：帐子和帷幕，用黄木棉布做成。
English: The blinds and curtains were made of yellow cotton.

古文：上施兽吻，柱竿红髹，竿首彩装蹲狮，毡顶。
现代文：上面绘有兽嘴图案，柱竿涂红漆，柱竿上端是彩色装饰的蹲踞狮子的图案，用毡作帐篷顶。
English: The animal's beak is painted on the top, the pole is painted red, and the upper end of the pole is decorated with a colorful crouching lion pattern. The tent is topped with a skull.

古文：耕根车，世宗朝始造。
现代文：耕根车，世宗时期开始制造。
English: Cultivator, the manufacture of which began in the Sejong period.

古文：汉有耕车，晋曰耕根车，俱天子亲耕所用。
现代文：汉代有耕车，晋代称为耕根车，都是天子举行亲耕礼时所使用的。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a cultivator, and in the Jin Dynasty, it was called a root cultivator. Both were used when the heavenly son held the pro-cultivation ceremony.

古文：嘉靖十年，帝将耕耤田，诏造耕根车。
现代文：嘉靖十年，皇帝将要举行耕藉田的礼仪，下诏制造耕根车。
English: In the tenth year of Jiajing, the emperor will hold the ceremony of cultivating the land, and issue an edict to manufacture a ploughing machine.

古文：礼官上言： 考《大明集礼》，耕耤用宋制，乘玉辂，以耕根车载耒耜同行。
现代文：礼官进言： 考察《大明集礼》，耕藉礼遵循宋代制度，乘坐玉辖，用耕根车装载末耜同行。
English: The etiquette officer said: "Look at the Daming Collection Rite. The cultivator's rite follows the Song Dynasty system, riding on the yuzui, and loading the last straw with the cultivator.

古文：今考仪注，顺天府官奉耒耜及穜稑种置彩舆，先于祭前二日而出。
现代文：现在考察仪式礼节，顺天府官奉上耒耜以及檀桂种放在彩轿上，在祭祀的前两天先行出去。
English: Now we will examine the etiquette of the ceremony. The Shunten prefectural official will present the yakitori and the sandalwood seeds on the palanquin and go out two days before the ceremony.

古文：今用耕根车以载耒耜，宜令造车，于祭祀日早进呈，置耒耜，先玉辂以行。
现代文：现在用耕根车来装载耒耜，应该现在造车，在祭祀当天早上进呈，放上末耜，先于玉辖出行。
English: Now they use a plough truck to load the cocoons. They should build a truck now, present it in the morning of the day of the sacrifice, put the last cocoons on it, and leave before the yakuza.

古文：第稽诸礼书，只有图式，而无高广尺寸。
现代文：只是考察各部礼制方面的书籍，只有图形样式，而没有高宽尺寸。
English: They only examined books on the etiquette of various ministries, and only looked at the graphic style, not the height and width dimensions.

古文：宜依今置车式差小，通用青质。 
现代文：应该按照现在造车的样式稍微小一些，全部用青色的底子。 
English: It should be slightly smaller in accordance with the current model of the car, all with a blue base.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了礼官的提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：皇后辂：一，高一丈一尺三寸有奇，平盘。
现代文：皇后乘坐的赣车，有一种。高一丈一尺三寸有余，平盘。
English: There is one kind of carriage that the empress rides in. It is a flat carriage, one foot three inches high.

古文：前后车棂并雁翅，四垂如意滴珠板。
现代文：前后车极上有雁翅状装饰物，四面垂挂如意滴珠板。
English: There are goose-wing-shaped ornaments on the front and rear wheels, and bead plates hanging on all four sides.

古文：辕长一丈九尺六寸，皆红髹。
现代文：辕长一丈九尺六寸，都涂红漆。
English: They are 9'6" tall and painted red.

古文：辕用抹金铜凤头、凤尾、凤翎叶片装钉。
现代文：车辕用抹金的铜质凤头、凤尾、凤翎叶片装钉。
English: The bronze phoenix head, phoenix tail, and phoenix beak are nailed with a gold-coated chariot anchor.

古文：平盘左右垂护泥板及轮二，贯轴一。
现代文：平盘左右垂下护泥板以及辖轮二个，贯轴一根。
English: There are mudguards and two wheels hanging on the left and right of the flat plate, and one axle.

古文：每轮辐十有八，皆红髹，辋以抹金鈒花铜叶片装钉。
现代文：每个辖轮有辐条十八根，都涂红漆，轮外框用抹金嵌有花纹的铜质叶片装钉。
English: Each wheel has eighteen spokes, all painted red, and the outer frame of the wheel is studded with copper blades with patterns inlaid with gold.

古文：轮内车毂，用抹金铜鈒莲花瓣轮盘装钉，轴中缠黄绒驾辕诸索。
现代文：轮中心插轴的部分，用抹金的铜质嵌饰图案的莲花瓣轮盘装钉，轴上缠绕黄色绒线编织成的用来驾辕的各种绳索。
English: The part of the wheel center spindle is nailed with a lotus petal wheel disc with a gold-plated copper inlay pattern, and various ropes woven with yellow yarn are wrapped around the shaft to drive the yoke.

古文：辂亭高五尺八寸有奇，红髹四柱。
现代文：辖亭高五尺八寸有余，用红漆漆四根柱子。
English: The pavilion is more than five feet eight inches high, with four pillars painted red.

古文：槛座上沉香色描金香草板十二片。
现代文：槛座上方是沉香色的用金粉勾勒出花纹的香草板十二片。
English: Above the threshold are twelve vanilla-coloured plates with patterns outlined in gold dust.

古文：前左右有门，高四尺五寸有奇，广二尺四寸有奇。
现代文：亭前面左右有门，高四尺五寸有余，宽二尺四寸有余。
English: There are doors on the left and right in front of the pavilion, with a height of more than four feet and five inches and a width of more than two feet and four inches.

古文：门旁沉香色线金菱花槅各二，下条环板，有明栨，抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：门旁有沉香色用金线勾勒出菱花图案的木桶各两个，垂下丝带环绕木板，有露在外面的短柱，用抹金的铜嵌饰花纹的叶片装钉。
English: Next to the door, there are two wooden buckets, each with an incense-coloured rhombus pattern outlined in gold thread, hanging ribbons around the wooden boards, exposed short columns, and nails with leaves inlaid with gold-plated copper.

古文：后红髹五山屏风，戗金鸾凤云文，屏上红髹板，戗金云文，中装雕木浑贴金凤一。
现代文：后面有绘饰五座山图案的红漆屏风，在鸾凤云纹圆案上嵌金，屏风上方是红漆木板，在云形图案上嵌金，中间装有雕花木板全部贴金的凤凰一只。
English: At the back, there is a red lacquer screen decorated with a five-mountain pattern, with gold inlaid on a cloud-patterned phoenix circle. Above the screen is a red lacquer wooden board, with gold inlaid on a cloud-shaped pattern. In the middle, there is a phoenix whose carved wooden board is all gold-plated.

古文：屏后红髹板，俱用抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：屏风后面是红漆木板，都用抹金的嵌有花纹的铜质叶片装订。
English: Behind the screen is a red lacquered wooden board, all bound with gold-plated copper leaves with patterns.

古文：亭底红髹，上施红花毯、红锦褥席、红髹坐椅一。
现代文：亭底部涂红漆，上面铺设绘有红花图案的毯子、红锦褥席，红漆坐椅一把。
English: The bottom of the pavilion is painted red, and a blanket with a red flower pattern, a red brocade seat, and a red lacquer chair are laid on top.

古文：靠背雕木线金五彩装凤一，上下香草云板各一，红福寿板一并褥。
现代文：靠背雕木上有用五彩金线装饰的一只凤凰图案，上下是绘有云形图案的香草木板各一块，红福寿板一块和褥席。
English: There is a phoenix pattern decorated with multicolored gold thread on the carved wood of the backrest. The top and bottom are each a vanilla board with a cloud pattern, a red fortune board and a table.

古文：椅中黄织金绮靠坐褥，四周有椅裙，施黄绮帷幔。
现代文：椅子中铺设黄色织金罗绮做的靠背坐褥，四周有椅裙，挂着黄色罗绮的帷幔。
English: In the middle of the chair there is a backrest made of yellow woven gold satin, surrounded by a chair skirt and hung with yellow satin drapery.

古文：外用红帘十二扇。
现代文：有的用黄色残罗。亭外用红色帘子十二扇。
English: Some use yellow remnants. Twelve red curtains are strung outside the pavilion.

古文：前二柱，戗金，上宝相花，中鸾凤云文，下龟文锦。
现代文：前面有二根柱子，嵌有黄金，上端刻有宝相花，中间是鸾凤云图案，下端是龟背纹理的锦缎。
English: There are two pillars in front, inlaid with gold, the upper end is engraved with the Baosheng flower, the middle is the pattern of the dragon and phoenix cloud, and the lower end is the brocade with the texture of the turtle's back.

古文：辂顶并圆盘，高二尺有奇，抹金铜立凤顶，带仰覆莲座，垂攀顶黄线圆条四。
现代文：辖顶加上圆盘高二尺有余，抹金的铜质凤凰图案的亭顶，带以仰覆莲花座，垂下攀顶黄线编成的圆形丝带四条。
English: At the top of the pavilion, there is a two-foot-tall copper phoenix with a disc at the top. The pavilion is topped with four circular ribbons made of yellow lines that rise above the lotus position and hang down from the top.

古文：盘上红髹，下四周沉香色描金云文，内青地五彩云文，以青饰辂盖。
现代文：盘土涂红漆，下面四周是黄黑色的用金粉勾勒的云形图案，里面青色底子上绘有五彩云的图案，用青色来装饰辖盖。
English: The base is painted with red lacquer, the lower four sides are surrounded by a yellow-black cloud pattern outlined with gold powder, inside there is a blue base with a multicolored cloud pattern, and the lid is decorated with blue.

古文：内宝盖，红髹匡，斗以八顶，冒以黄绮；顶心及四周绣凤九，并五彩云文。
现代文：内层宝盖，红漆的边框，用八面顶拼合而成，用黄色的有花纹的丝织品覆盖；顶心以及四周绣有凤凰九只，还有五彩云的图案。
English: The inner lid of the treasure, the red lacquer border, is made of eight-sided top cuffs, covered with yellow patterned silk fabric; the top center and all around are embroidered with nine phoenixes, as well as colorful clouds.

古文：天轮三层，红髹，上雕木贴金边耀叶板七十二片，内饰青地雕木五彩云鸾凤文三层，间绘五彩云衬板七十二片。
现代文：天轮三层，涂红漆，上面是雕刻花纹贴金的边沿鲜艳的薄木板七十二片，里面是在青色底子上雕刻五彩云鸾凤图案的木板三层，间杂绘有五彩云图案的衬板七十二片。
English: The three-tiered celestial wheel, painted red, is topped with seventy-two thin, brightly colored wooden boards with carved patterns and gilt edges. Inside, there are three tiers of wooden boards with multicolored clouds and phoenixes carved on a blue base, and seventy-two interspersed panels with multicolored clouds.

古文：下四周黄铜装钉，上施黄绮沥水三层，间绣鸾凤文。
现代文：下面四周用黄铜装钉，上面铺设沥水的黄色有花纹的丝织品三层，问杂锈有鸾凤图案。
English: The lower four sides are studded with brass, and three layers of yellow patterned silk fabric are laid on top of the asphalt.

古文：四垂青绮络带，绣鸾凤各一。
现代文：四面垂下青色有花纹的丝织品做成的络带，绣有鸾凤各一只。
English: On all four sides hangs a cord made of blue patterned silk fabric, embroidered with a single chrysanthemum.

古文：圆盘四角连辂座板，用攀顶黄线圆条四。
现代文：圆盘四角与辖座木板相连，用攀顶黄残编织成的圆形丝带四条。
English: The four corners of the disc are connected to the wooden board of the seat, and four round ribbons are woven with the yellow remnants of climbing.

古文：辂亭前后有左右转角阑干各二扇，内嵌条环板，皆红髹；计十二柱，柱首雕木红莲花，线金青绿装莲花抱柱。
现代文：辖亭前后有左右转角栏杆各二扇，里面镶嵌有用丝带环绕的木板，都涂红漆；共有十二根柱子，柱子上端雕有红色蓬花图案，青绿色叶子托起的金线勾勒出的莲花环绕着柱子。
English: There are two left and right corner railings in front of and behind the pavilion. Inside, there are wooden boards inlaid with cords surrounded by useful ribbons, all painted red. There are a total of twelve columns. The upper ends of the columns are carved with red fluffy patterns. Lotus flowers outlined by gold lines held up by blue-green leaves surround the columns.

古文：其踏梯、行马之属，与大马辇同。
现代文：它的踏梯、行马之类，与大马辇相同。
English: It has the same steps, gaiters, and so on as the draught horse.

古文：安车，本《周礼》后五辂之一。
现代文：安车，本是《周礼》所载皇后乘坐的五种车之一。
English: It was originally one of the five types of car used by the empress in "Weekly Rituals."

古文：应劭《汉官卤簿图》有五色安车。
现代文：应劭《汉官卤簿图》记载有五色安车。
English: According to the "Han Guan Halogen Book Map," there are five-colored cars.

古文：晋皇后乘云母安车。
现代文：晋代皇后乘坐以云母为饰的安车。
English: The Empress of the Jin Dynasty rides in a carriage decorated with mica.

古文：唐皇后安车，制如金辂。
现代文：唐代皇后乘坐的安车，形制如同金辖。
English: The carriage in which the empress of the Tang Dynasty rode was shaped like a crane.

古文：明皇后安车独简素。
现代文：明代皇后乘坐的安车特别简约朴素。
English: The carriage used by the empress of the Ming Dynasty is particularly simple and plain.

古文：其制，高九尺七寸有奇，平盘，前后车棂并雁翅板。
现代文：它的形制，高九尺七寸有余，平盘，前后车极都有雁翅板。
English: Its shape, more than nine feet and seven inches high, is a flat disc, with goose-wing plates at the front and rear ends.

古文：辕二，长一丈六尺七寸有奇，皆红髹，用抹金铜凤头、凤尾、凤翎叶片装钉。
现代文：辕两根，长一丈六尺七寸有余，都涂红漆，用拣金的铜质凤头、凤尾、凤翎叶片装钉。
English: Two hawksbills, each more than six feet seven inches long, were painted red and studded with gold-plated copper head, tail, and beak blades.

古文：平盘左右垂护泥板及轮二，贯轴一。
现代文：平盘左右垂有护泥板以及车轮两个，贯轴一根。
English: There are mudguards and two wheels hanging on the left and right of the flat plate, and one axle.

古文：每轮辐十有八，皆红髹，轴中缠黄绒驾辕诸索。
现代文：每个车轮有车辐十八根，都涂红漆，轴上缠绕黄色绒线编成的驾辕的各种绳索。
English: Each wheel has eighteen spokes, all painted red, and on the axle are various ropes made of yellow yarn.

古文：车亭高四尺四寸，红髹方柱四，上装五彩花板十二片。
现代文：车亭高四尺四寸，红漆的方形柱子四根，上面装有五彩花板十二片。
English: The pavilion is four feet four inches high, with four red-painted square pillars and twelve multicolored flower panels on top.

古文：前左右有门，高三尺七寸有奇，广二尺二寸有奇。
现代文：亭前面左右有门，高三尺七寸有余，宽二尺二寸有余。
English: There are doors on the left and right in front of the pavilion, with a height of more than three feet seven inches and a width of more than two feet two inches.

古文：门旁红髹十字槅各二。
现代文：门旁有红漆的十字桶各两个。
English: Next to the door there are two red-painted cross-barrels.

古文：后三山屏凤，屏后壁板俱红髹，用抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：后面是绘有三山图案的屏风，屏风后壁板都涂红漆，用抹金的嵌有花纹的铜质叶片装钉。
English: At the back is a screen painted with a pattern of the Three Mountains. The wall panels behind the screen are painted red, and are nailed with copper leaves embedded with patterns made of gold.

古文：亭底红髹板，上施红花毯、红锦褥，四周施黄绮帷幔，外用红帘四扇。
现代文：亭底是红漆木板，上面铺设绣有红花图案的毯子、红色锦褥，四周挂着黄色罗绮做的帷幔，外边用红色帘子四扇。
English: The bottom of the pavilion is made of red lacquered wood, with a blanket embroidered with a red flower pattern and red brocade on top. Yellow ribbon curtains are hung all around, and four red curtains are used on the outside.

古文：车盖用红髹抹金铜宝珠顶，带莲座，高六寸，四角抹金铜凤头，用攀条四，并红髹木鱼。
现代文：车盖用红漆的抹金铜质宝珠装饰作盖顶，带以莲座，高六寸，四角是抹金的铜质凤头，用攀顶丝带四条，和红漆的木鱼。
English: The car cover is topped with a red lacquered gold-plated copper bead, with a lotus seat, six inches high, the four corners are a gold-plated copper phoenix head, four climbing ribbons, and a red lacquered wooden fish.

古文：盖施黄绮沥水三层，销金鸾凤文，凤头下垂红帉錔。
现代文：亭盖铺设黄色罗绮沥水三层，嵌有金色线的鸾凤图案，凤头下垂红色的小铃。
English: The roof of the pavilion is covered with three layers of yellow bitumen, inlaid with a gold-coloured pattern of cresting phoenixes and a red bell with a drooping phoenix head.

古文：其踏梯、行马、幰衣与辂同。
现代文：它的踏梯、行马、御尘的布幔与辖车相同。
English: It has the same steps, horse-drawn carriages, and dust cloths as the official carriage.

古文：行障：坐障，自唐、宋有之。
现代文：行障、坐障，从唐、宋开始具有。
English: From the Tang and Song Dynasties, people began to have the ability to walk and sit on obstacles.

古文：皇后重翟车后，皆有行障六，坐障三，左右夹车宫人执之。
现代文：呈后祭祀时乘坐的以雉羽焉饰的车子后面，都有行障六把，坐障三把，由左右夹车的宫女执持。
English: Behind the chariot decorated with feathers, which was used for the post-offering ritual, there were six yakitori floats and three yakitori floats, which were carried by the court ladies clinging to the side of the chariot.

古文：而《唐书》、《宋史》不载其制。
现代文：而《唐书》、《宋史》没有记载它的形制。
English: However, "Tang Shu" and "Song Shi" did not record its form.

古文：《金史》：行障长八尺，高六尺；坐障长七尺，高五尺。
现代文：《金史》，行障长八尺，高六尺；坐障长七尺，高五尺。
English: In the "Golden History," the travel barricade is eight feet long and six feet high; the seat barricade is seven feet long and five feet high.

古文：明皇后用行障、坐障，皆以红绫为之，绘升降鸾凤云文；行障绘瑞草于沥水，坐障绘云文于顶。
现代文：明代皇后所用行障、坐障，都用红绫做成，绘有升降的鸾凤云图案；行障在沥水处绘有瑞草，坐障在障顶绘有云形图案。
English: The walking and sitting barriers used by the empresses of the Ming Dynasty were both made of red enamel, with patterns of ascending and descending phoenix clouds; the walking barriers were painted with fresh grass at the asphalt, and the sitting barriers were painted with cloud-shaped patterns at the top of the barriers.

古文：太皇太后、皇太后辂及安车、行障、坐障，制与皇后同。
现代文：太皇太后、皇太后辖车以及安车、行障、坐障，形制与皇后的相同。
English: The cars used by the Grand Empress Dowager and the Grand Empress Dowager, as well as chariots, carriages, and carriages, have the same shape as those used by the Empress.

古文：皇妃车曰凤轿，与历代异名。
现代文：皇妃乘坐的车叫凤轿，与历代不同名。
English: The car the empress rides in is called the phoenix sedan, which has a different name from previous generations.

古文：其制，青顶，上抹金铜珠顶，四角抹金铜飞凤各一，垂银香圆宝盖并彩结。
现代文：它的形制，青色轿顶，上面是抹金的铜珠装饰的轿顶，四角有抹金的铜质飞凤各一只，垂挂银香圆实盖和彩结。
English: Its shape, blue top, above is a top decorated with gold-plated copper beads, four corners with gold-plated copper flying phoenixes, one each, hanging silver-scented round solid lid and colored knot.

古文：轿身红髹木匡，三面篾织纹簟，绘以翟文，抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：轿身，是红漆木框，三面是薄竹片编织成的有纹理的席子，绘有翟的图案，用抹金铜质嵌有花纹的叶片装钉。
English: The body of the sedan is a red lacquered wooden frame, with a textured mat woven from thin bamboo strips on three sides, painted with patterns of dragonflies, and studded with gold-plated copper blades embedded with patterns.

古文：红髹掆，饰以抹金铜凤头、凤尾。
现代文：红漆轿扛，用抹金的铜凤头、凤尾装饰。
English: A red lacquered palanquin, decorated with a gold-plated bronze phoenix head and tail.

古文：青销金罗缘边红帘并看带，内红交床并坐踏褥。
现代文：青色而嵌金线的绫罗绿边红色帘子和看带，里面是红色的交床和坐踏褥子。
English: Blue and gold-inlaid satin green bordered red curtain and ribbon, inside is a red bed and satin satin ribbon.

古文：红销金罗轿衣一顶，用销金宝珠文；沥水，香草文；看带并帏，皆凤文。
现代文：红色而嵌金线的丝织品做成轿子外罩一顶，用嵌金线的宝珠图案；沥水处，有香草的图案；看带和轿帏，都有凤的图案。
English: A red silk fabric with gold thread is used to make the outer cover of a sedan chair, with a bead pattern with gold thread; at the asphalt, there is a vanilla pattern; the watch band and the sedan chair have a phoenix pattern.

古文：红油绢雨轿衣一。
现代文：红色细薄光滑的丝织品做成防雨的轿子外罩一顶。
English: A thin, smooth red silk fabric is used to make a rainproof outer cover for the palanquin.

古文：自皇后以下，皆用行障二，坐障一，第别以彩绘。
现代文：自皇后以下，都用行障两把，坐障一把，只是用彩色的绘饰来区别。
English: From the empress on down, two gaiters are used for walking and one for sitting, with the only difference being the color of the decorations.

古文：皇妃行障、坐障，俱红绫为之，绘云凤，而行障沥水绘香草。
现代文：皇妃的行障、坐障，都用红绫做成，绘有云凤图案，而行障沥水处绘有香草。
English: The empress's walking and sitting obstacles are both made of red enamel, with patterns of clouds and phoenixes, while the walking and sitting obstacles are painted with vanilla.

古文：皇太子金辂，高一丈二尺二寸有奇，广八尺九寸。
现代文：皇太子乘尘金辖，高一丈二尺二寸有余，宽八尺九寸。
English: The crown prince is a goldsmith. He is more than two feet two inches tall and eight feet nine inches wide.

古文：辕长一丈九尺五寸。
现代文：车辕长一丈九尺五寸。
English: The length of the wheel rim has been increased to nine feet and five inches.

古文：辂座高三尺二寸有奇。
现代文：辖座高三尺二寸有余。
English: The seat of jurisdiction is more than three feet two inches high.

古文：平盘、滴珠板、轮辐、轮辋悉同玉辂。
现代文：平盘、滴珠板、辖轮辐条、辖轮外框都与天子乘坐的玉辖相同。
English: The flat plate, bead plate, hub wheel spokes, and hub wheel outer frame are all the same as the jade rim on which the heavenly son rides.

古文：辂亭高六尺四寸有奇，红髹四柱，长五尺四寸。
现代文：辖亭高六尺四寸有余，红漆漆四柱，长五尺四寸。
English: The pavilion is more than six feet four inches high, with four red lacquer pillars, and is five feet four inches long.

古文：槛座上四周线金五彩香草板。
现代文：槛座上四周用金线绘成五彩香草板。
English: On the four sides of the threshold, gold thread was used to draw a multicolored vanilla plate.

古文：前左右有门，高五尺有奇，广二尺四寸有奇。
现代文：前面左右有门，高五尺有余，宽二尺四寸有余。
English: There are doors to the left and right of the front, and it is more than five feet high and more than two feet four inches wide.

古文：门旁槅各二，编红线条及明栨，皆红髹。
现代文：门旁桶各两个，连接红线编织成的丝带和明揿，都涂红漆。
English: Next to the door, two buckets each, connected by a red thread woven into a ribbon and alum, are painted red.

古文：后五山屏凤，青地上雕木贴金龙五，间以五彩云文。
现代文：后面是绘有五座山图案的屏风，青色底子的雕木上贴金龙形图案五条，间杂以五彩云图案装饰。
English: At the back is a screen with a pattern of five mountains. Five golden dragon patterns are affixed to the carved wood of the blue base, interspersed with colorful cloud patterns.

古文：屏后红髹板，皆抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：屏风后是红漆木板，都用抹金铜质镶嵌花纹的叶片装钉。
English: Behind the screen is a red lacquered wooden board, all nailed with gold-plated, copper-inlaid leaves.

古文：红髹匡软座，红绒坠座，大索四，下垂莲花坠石，上施红毯红锦褥席。
现代文：红漆边框软座，红色绒线从座上垂下，大索四根，下垂莲花状的坠石，上面铺设红毯红锦褥席。
English: A soft seat with a red lacquer border, a red velvet cord hanging down from the seat, four large cables, a lotus-shaped pendant stone, and a red brocade seat with a red carpet.

古文：红髹椅一，纳板一并褥。
现代文：红漆椅子一把，纳板一块和褥席。
English: A red-lacquered chair, a serving board and a table.

古文：椅中红织金绮靠坐褥，四周有椅裙，施红罗帷幔，外用青绮缘边。
现代文：椅子上是金色丝织品织成的红色靠背坐褥，四周有椅裙，挂着红色丝织品的帷幔，外用青色丝织品绿边。
English: On the chair there is a red backrest made of golden silk fabric, there are chair skirts all around, red silk drapes, and blue silk green edges.

古文：红帘十二扇。
现代文：红色帘子十二扇。
English: Twelve red curtains.

古文：椅雕贴金龙彩云，下线金彩云板一。
现代文：椅子雕有贴金龙和彩云的图案，下面是嵌有金线的彩云形图案的小板一块。
English: The chair is carved with a pattern of gold-painted dragons and colored clouds, and below is a small plate with a pattern of colored clouds embedded with gold thread.

古文：亭内编红线条。
现代文：亭内编织红线丝带。
English: A red ribbon is woven inside the pavilion.

古文：辂顶并圆盘，高二尺五寸有奇，又镀金铜宝珠顶，带仰覆莲座，高九寸，垂攀顶红线圆条四。
现代文：辖顶加上圆盘，高二尺五寸有余，又有镀金的铜宝珠装饰的辖顶，带以仰覆莲花座，高九寸，垂下攀顶红线圆形丝带四根。
English: The crest is topped with a disk, more than two feet and five inches high, and the crest is decorated with gold-plated copper beads, with an upturned lotus seat, nine inches high, and four hanging red line round ribbons.

古文：盘上丹漆，下内外皆青地绘云文，以青饰辂盖。
现代文：盘上涂丹漆，盘下内外都是青色底子绘有云彩图案，用青色装饰辖盖。
English: The top of the dish is painted with red ochre, the inside and outside of the dish have a blue base with a cloud pattern, and the lid is decorated with blue.

古文：亭内周围青斗拱，承以丹漆匡，宝盖斗以八顶，冒以红绮，顶心绣云龙，馀绣五彩云文。
现代文：亭内周围是青色斗拱，用丹漆的边框支撑，宝盖用八面顶拼合而成，用红色有花纹的丝织品覆盖，顶心绣云龙图案，其余部分绣五彩云图案。
English: The pavilion is surrounded by a blue arch, supported by a border of red lacquer, the lid is pieced together with an eight-sided top, covered with red patterned silk fabric, the top is embroidered with a cloud dragon pattern, and the rest is embroidered with a multicolored cloud pattern.

古文：天轮三层皆红髹，上雕木贴金边耀叶板七十二片，内饰青地雕木贴金云龙文三层，间绘五彩云衬板七十二片，四周黄铜装钉。
现代文：天轮三层都涂以红漆，上面雕刻贴金边框发光的叶片薄板七十二片，里面用青色底子的雕木贴金云龙图案三层装饰，问杂绘有五彩云图案的衬板七二片，四周用黄铜装钉。
English: The three layers of the celestial wheel are painted with red lacquer, and the top is decorated with 72 thin plates of carved leaves with a gold border and luminescent crescents. The inside is decorated with three layers of carved wood with a blue base and a gold cloud dragon pattern. There are also 72 pieces of lining board with a multicolored cloud pattern, and brass nails are used all around.

古文：上施红绮沥水三层，每层七十二摺，间绣五彩云龙文。
现代文：上面设有沥水的红色有花纹的丝织品三层，每层七十二折，间杂绣有五彩云龙的图案。
English: On the top, there are three layers of red, patterned silk fabric, each with 72 folds, embroidered with multicolored dragons.

古文：四角之饰与大辂同，第圆条用红线。
现代文：四个角的装饰与大辖相同，祇是圆形丝带用红线编成。
English: The decoration of the four corners is the same as that of the Great Jurisdiction, except that a circular ribbon is woven with red thread.

古文：辂亭前一字阑干一扇，后一字带转角阑干一扇，左右阑干二扇，内嵌五彩云板，皆丹漆。
现代文：辖亭前有一字形栏杆一扇，后一字带转角栏杆一扇，左右有栏杆两扇，里面是镶嵌有五彩云图案的木板，都涂丹漆。
English: There is a zigzag railing in front of the pavilion, a railing with a corner at the back, and two railings on the left and right. Inside, there are wooden boards inlaid with colorful cloud patterns, all painted with dan lacquer.

古文：计十四柱，柱首制与大辂同。
现代文：共有十四根柱子，柱子上端的形制与大辖相同。
English: There are a total of fourteen pillars, and the upper end of the pillars has the same shape as the Great Imperial Throne.

古文：亭后建红旗二，以红罗为之。
现代文：亭后树立红旗两杆，用红色丝织品做成，有九条下垂的飘带。
English: Behind the pavilion stand two red flags, made of red silk fabric, with nine hanging streamers.

古文：九斿，每斿内外绣升龙一。
现代文：每绦飘带内外绣有腾飞的龙一条。
English: Each ribbon is embroidered with a soaring dragon inside and out.

古文：左旗腰绣日月北斗，竿用抹金铜龙首。
现代文：左边旗中部绣有日月北斗图案，旗竿用抹金的铜质龙头。
English: The middle of the left-hand flag is embroidered with the sun, moon and the Big Dipper, and the flagpole has a gold-plated copper spigot.

古文：右旗腰绣黻字，竿用抹金铜戟。
现代文：右边旗中部锈有黑青相问的花纹，旗竿用抹金的铜戟。
English: On the right, the central rust of the flag has a black-and-blue interlaced pattern, and the flagpole is made of gold-plated copper.

古文：缀抹金铜铃二，垂红缨。
现代文：用抹金的铜铃两个装饰，垂有红缨。
English: Decorated with two gilt bronze bells, hung with red ribbons.

古文：其踏梯、行马之属，与玉辂同。
现代文：它的踏梯、行马之类，与玉辖相同。
English: It has the same steps, horses and so on as Yuji.

古文：帐房用青木棉布，竿首青绿蹲猊，馀同乘舆帐房。
现代文：账房用青色木棉布制成，竿上端有青绿色蹲踞的狮像，其余部分与皇帝乘坐的车的账房相同。
English: The accounting room is made of cyan wood-cotton cloth, and the upper end of the pole has a blue-green crouching lion statue. The rest of the room is the same as the accounting room of the car the emperor took.

古文：东宫妃车，亦曰凤轿、小轿，制同皇妃。
现代文：东宫妃子乘坐的车，也叫凤轿、小轿，形制与皇妃乘坐的车相同。
English: The car used by the concubine of the Eastern Palace, also known as the phoenix car or the small car, has the same shape as the car used by the empress.

古文：行障、坐障之制亦同。
现代文：行障、坐障的形制也相同。
English: The form of the walking and sitting obstacles is also the same.

古文：亲王象辂，其高视金辂减六寸，其广减一尺。
现代文：亲王乘坐象辖，它的高度比金辖少六寸，它的宽度比金辖少一尺。
English: The prince rode on the elephant's saddle, which was six inches shorter and one foot wider than the golden saddle.

古文：辕长视大辂减一尺。
现代文：车辕长比大辖少一尺。
English: The length of the chariot is one foot less than that of Taiji.

古文：辂座高三尺有奇，馀饰同金辂。
现代文：辖座高三尺有余，其余装饰与金辖相同。
English: The seat is more than three feet high, and the rest of the decoration is the same as the gold seat.

古文：辂亭高五尺二寸有奇，红髹四柱。
现代文：辖亭高五尺二寸有余，红漆四柱。
English: The pavilion is more than five feet two inches high, with four red-painted pillars.

古文：槛座上四周红髹条环板。
现代文：槛座上方四周是红漆的丝带缠绕的木板。
English: Above the threshold is a red lacquered ribbon wrapped around a wooden board.

古文：前左右有门，高四尺五寸有奇，广二尺二寸有奇。
现代文：亭前左右有门，高四尺五寸有余，宽二尺二寸有余。
English: There are doors around the front of the pavilion, with a height of more than four feet and five inches and a width of more than two feet and two inches.

古文：门旁槅各二及明栨、后五山屏风，皆红髹，用抹金铜鈒花叶片装钉。
现代文：门旁桶板各两个以及明袱、后面绘有五座山的屏风，都涂红漆，用抹金铜质嵌有花纹的叶片装钉。
English: Each of the two barrel plates next to the door, as well as the clear binding and the screen with five mountains painted on the back, are painted red and fastened with gold-plated copper leaves embedded with patterns.

古文：亭底红髹，施红花毯、红锦褥席。
现代文：亭底漆红漆，铺有红花图案的毯子、红锦褥席。
English: The bottom of the pavilion is painted red, covered with red flower pattern blankets, and red brocade seats.

古文：其椅靠、坐褥、帷幔、红帘之制，俱同金辂。
现代文：它的椅靠、坐褥、帷幔、红帘的形制，都与金辖相同。
English: The shape of its chair back, seat cushion, drapery and red curtain are all the same as that of Jinji.

古文：辂顶并圆盘，高二尺四寸有奇，用抹金铜宝珠顶，馀同金辂。
现代文：辖顶加上圆盘高二尺四寸有余，用抹金的铜宝珠装饰辖顶，其余部分与金辖相同。
English: The top of the case, together with the disc, is more than two feet four inches high. The top of the case is decorated with gold-plated copper beads, and the rest of the case is the same as the gold case.

古文：天轮三层，皆红髹，上雕木贴金边耀叶板六十三片，内饰青地雕木五彩云文三层，间绘五彩云衬板六十三片，四周黄铜装钉。
现代文：天轮三层都涂红漆，上面是雕木贴金边框发光的薄板六十三片，里面用木质青色底子雕刻五彩云图案三层作为装饰，闲杂绘有五彩云图案的衬板六十三片，四周用黄铜装钉。
English: The three layers of the celestial wheel are painted red. On top, there are sixty-three thin plates of carved wood with a gold border and a luminous border. Inside, three layers of multicolored clouds are carved with a wooden blue base as decoration. There are sixty-three pieces of lining plates with multicolored cloud patterns, and brass nails are used on all sides.

古文：上施红绮沥水三层，每层八十一摺，绣瑞草文。
现代文：上面铺设沥水的红色丝织品三层，每层八十一折，绣有瑞草图案。
English: There are three layers of red silk fabric with asphalt laid on top, with eighty-one folds on each layer, embroidered with a grass pattern.

古文：前垂青绮络带二，俱绣升龙五彩云文。
现代文：前面垂下青色有花纹的丝织品制的络带两条，都绣有飞龙五彩云的图案。
English: Hanging down in front of him are two blue, patterned silk webbing loops, both embroidered with the motif of flying dragons and multicolored clouds.

古文：圆盘四角连辂座板，用攀顶红线圆条四，并红髹木鱼。
现代文：圆盘四角与辖座板相连，用攀顶红线圆形丝带四绦，还有红漆的木鱼。
English: The four corners of the disc are connected to the seat plate, the four ribbons are tied with a red round ribbon, and there is a red-painted wooden fish.

古文：亭前后阑干同金辂，左右阑干各一扇，内嵌条环板，皆红髹。
现代文：亭前后栏杆与金辖相同，左右栏杆各一扇，里面镶嵌由丝带环绕的木板，都涂红漆。
English: The railings in front of and behind the pavilion are the same as those in Jinyu, with one railing on each side. The wooden panels, which are inlaid with ribbons, are painted red.

古文：计十四柱，柱首雕木红莲花，线金青绿装莲花抱柱，前阑干内布花毯。
现代文：共有十四根柱子，柱子上端有雕木红色莲花图案，金线勾勒的青绿色莲花环绕着柱子，前面栏杆内铺着有花纹的毯子。
English: There are a total of fourteen pillars, with a carved red lotus pattern at the top of the pillar, a blue-green lotus outlined in gold surrounding the pillar, and a patterned blanket inside the front railing.

古文：红旗二，与金辂所树同，竿上只垂红缨五。
现代文：红旗二面，与金辖所树立的旗帜相同，竿上只垂挂红缨五条。
English: The two sides of the red flag are the same as the flag set up by Jinji, with only five red ribbons hanging from the pole.

古文：其踏梯、行马之属，亦同金辂。
现代文：它的踏梯、行马之类，也与金辖相同。
English: It also has the same steps, horse-drawn carriages and so on as Jinji.

古文：帐房用绿色螭头，馀与东宫同。
现代文：账房用绿色螭龙头图案，其余部分与太子相同。
English: The accounting room is decorated with a green dragon's head, and the rest of the room is the same as the crown prince's.

古文：亲王妃车，亦曰凤轿、小轿，制俱同东宫妃。
现代文：亲王妃乘坐的车，也叫凤轿、小轿，形制都与束宫妃乘坐的车相同。
English: The car in which the prince and princess ride, also known as the phoenix car or the small car, has the same shape as the car in which the princess rides.

古文：惟凤轿衣用木红平罗。
现代文：只是凤轿外罩用木红平罗做成。
English: Only the outer cover of the phoenix sedan is made of red wood.

古文：小轿衣二：一用矾红素纻丝，一用木红平罗。
现代文：小的轿子外罩两套：一套用矾红白色贮麻丝做成，一套用木红平罗做成。
English: There are two sets of small palanquin covers: one is made of crimson and white linen, and the other is made of red and white wood.

古文：行障、坐障，制同东宫妃。
现代文：行障、坐障，形制与柬宫妃相同。
English: Walking and sitting barriers, the shape is the same as that of the Cambodian palace.

古文：公主车，宋用厌翟车，明初因之。
现代文：公主乘坐的车，宋代用由翟尾为蔽的车，明代初年因袭使用。
English: The car in which the princess rode was covered by a ponytail during the Song Dynasty, and was used in the first year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：其后定制，凤轿、行障、坐障，如亲王妃。
现代文：后来规定形制，凤轿、行障、坐障，和亲王妃相同。
English: Later, the shape system was specified, phoenix sedan, traveling carriage, sitting carriage, the same as the prince and princess.

古文：皇孙车，永乐中，定皇太孙婚礼仪仗如亲王，降皇太子一等，而用象辂。
现代文：皇孙乘坐的车，永乐年间，规定皇太孙婚礼仪仗和亲王相同，比皇太子低一等，而用象辖。
English: During the Yongle era, it was stipulated that the grandchild's wedding ceremony would be the same as that of a prince, one rank lower than that of a crown prince, and the elephant would be used.

古文：郡王无辂，只有帐房，制同亲王。
现代文：郡王没有辖车，只有账房，形制与亲王的账房相同。
English: The county king does not have a chariot, only a counting house, the same shape as the prince's counting house.

古文：郡王妃及郡主俱用翟轿，制与皇妃凤轿同，第易凤为翟。
现代文：郡王妃以及郡主都用由翟尾为蔽的轿子，形制与皇妃乘坐的凤轿相同，只是把凤凰图案改为长尾野鸡图案。
English: Both the county princess and the princess used a sedan covered with a dragon's tail, the same shape as the phoenix sedan that the princess rode in, except that the phoenix pattern was changed to a pheasant pattern.

古文：行障、坐障同亲王妃，而绘云翟文。
现代文：行障、坐障与亲王妃的相同，而绘长尾野鹦的图案。
English: The procession and seating are the same as those of the prince and princess, but a picture of a parakeet is drawn.

古文：百官乘车之制：洪武元年令，凡车不得雕饰龙凤文。
现代文：百官所乘车的制度。洪武元年命令，凡是百官乘坐的车不准雕饰龙凤图案。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, it was ordered that cars used by officials were not allowed to be decorated with dragon and phoenix patterns.

古文：职官一品至三品，用间金饰银螭绣带，青缦。
现代文：官职一品到三品，用杂有金子装饰绘有银色螭龙图案的锈带，青色帷幕。
English: There are one to three official ranks, with a rust belt decorated with mixed gold and a silver dragon pattern, and a blue curtain.

古文：四品五品，素狮头绣带，青缦。
现代文：四品五品，用素色的绘有狮头图案的绣带，青色帷幕。
English: Four-piece, five-piece, plain-colored embroidered ribbon with a lion's head pattern, blue curtain.

古文：六品至九品，用素云头青带，青缦。
现代文：六品至九品，用素色的绘有云形图案的青色带子，青色帷幕。
English: From six pieces to nine pieces, with a plain blue ribbon painted with a cloud pattern, and a blue curtain.

古文：轿同车制。
现代文：轿与车的形制相同。
English: The shape of the sedan is the same as that of the car.

古文：庶民车及轿，并用黑油，齐头平顶，皂缦，禁用云头。
现代文：百姓乘坐的车及轿，都用黑色油漆，齐头平顶，黑色帷幕，禁止用云形图案。
English: The cars and sedans used by the common people are all painted black, with flat tops, black curtains, and the use of cloud patterns is prohibited.

古文：六年令，凡车轿禁丹漆，五品以上车止用青缦。
现代文：六年下令，凡是车轿禁止涂朱红色的漆，五品以上官员乘坐的车只用青色帷幕。
English: Six years ago, it was decreed that all cars and limousines were forbidden to be painted vermilion, and cars carrying officials above the fifth grade were only allowed to have blue curtains.

古文：妇女许坐轿，官民老疾者亦得乘之。
现代文：妇女允许坐轿，官员百姓年老有病的也可以乘轿。
English: Women are allowed to ride in the carriages, and officials, the elderly and the sick can also ride in the carriages.

古文：景泰四年令，在京三品以上得乘轿。
现代文：景泰四年下令，在京城的三品以上的官员可以乘轿。
English: Jing Tai ordered four years ago that officials with more than three official posts in Beijing could travel by car.

古文：弘治七年令，文武官例应乘轿者，以四人舁之。
现代文：弘治七年下令，文武官员按规定允许乘轿的，用四人抬轿。
English: In the seventh year of the Hongzhi era, civil and military officials were ordered to allow four people to carry a sedan in accordance with regulations.

古文：其五府管事，内外镇守、守备及公、侯、伯、都督等，不问老少，皆不得乘轿，违例乘轿及擅用八人者，奏闻。
现代文：那些五府管事，京城内外的镇守、守备及公、侯、伯、都督等，不管老少，都不能乘轿，违反规定乘轿及擅用八人抬轿的，上报皇帝。
English: Those officials in charge of the five prefectures, town guards, garrisons in and outside the capital, and princes, lords, townsmen, and governors, regardless of age, are not allowed to ride in a carriage. Those who ride in a carriage in violation of the regulations and use eight people to carry the carriage without authorization shall be reported to the emperor.

古文：盖自太祖不欲勋臣废骑射，虽上公，出必乘马。
现代文：大概在太祖时不想要有功勋的大臣废弃骑马和射箭，虽然是高官显爵，出行必须乘马。
English: Probably at the time of the great-grandfather, he did not want meritorious ministers to abandon horseback riding and archery. Although he was a high-ranking official, he had to travel by horse.

古文：永乐元年，驸马都尉胡观越制乘晋王济熹朱〈车尞〉棕轿，为给事中周景所劾。
现代文：永燊元年，驸马都尉胡观违反规定乘坐普王朱济焙的朱红顶篷覆以棕盖的轿舆，被给事中周景所弹劾。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Emperor's reign, Captain Hu Guanzhong violated regulations by riding in King Pu's vermilion-roofed, brown-covered sedan, and was impeached by Zhou Jing.

古文：有诏宥观而赐济熹书，切责之。
现代文：下诏宽恕胡观而赐朱济熔书信，严厉斥责了他。
English: He issued an edict to pardon Hu Guan and give Zhu Jiaolong a letter, severely reprimanding him.

古文：惟文职大臣乘轿，庶官亦乘马。
现代文：祇有文职大臣乘轿，一般官员也乘马。
English: Only civilian ministers rode in carriages, while ordinary officials rode on horses.

古文：又文臣皆许乘车，大臣得乘安车。
现代文：又文臣都允许乘车，大臣可以乘安车。
English: In addition, civil servants are allowed to travel by car, and ministers can travel by train.

古文：后久废不用。
现代文：后来长期废弃不再使用。
English: Later, it was abandoned for a long time and no longer used.

古文：正德四年，礼部侍郎刘机言，《大明集礼》，公卿大臣得乘安车，因请定轿扇伞盖品级等差。
现代文：正德四年，礼部侍郎刘机进言说，按照《大明集礼》，公卿大臣可以乘安车，因而请求规定轿扇伞盖品级的区别。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengde, Liu Ji, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said that according to the "Daming Collection of Ceremonies," the noble minister can take the safe car, and therefore requested that the difference in the grade of the car umbrella cover be stipulated.

古文：帝以京城内安车伞盖久不行，却其请，而命轿扇俱如例行。
现代文：皇帝因为京城内，安车伞盖长期没有施行，拒绝了他的请求，而传令轿扇都按规定实行。
English: The emperor refused his request because the umbrella cover had not been enforced for a long time in the capital, and the fan fan was implemented according to regulations.

古文：嘉靖十五年，礼部尚书霍韬言： 礼仪定式，京官三品以上乘轿，迩者文官皆用肩舆，或乘女轿。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，礼部尚书霍韬进言： 礼仪确定的标准，京官三品以上乘轿，近来文官都乘肩舆，有的乘女轿。
English: In the 15th year of Jiajing, the etiquette department's Shangshu Huoqi said: The standard determined by etiquette is that Beijing officials of three or more ranks should ride in a sedan. Recently, officials have been riding on the shoulders, and some have been riding in a women's sedan.

古文：乞申明礼制，俾臣下有所遵守。 
现代文：乞求申明礼制，使臣下有所遵守。 
English: Begged to affirm the etiquette, the envoys complied.

古文：乃定四品下不许乘轿，亦毋得用肩舆。
现代文：于是规定四品以下官员不许乘轿，也不能乘肩舆。
English: As a result, it was stipulated that officials below the fourth grade were not allowed to ride in a sedan, nor could they ride on the shoulders.

古文：隆庆二年，给事中徐尚劾应城伯孙文栋等乘轿出入，骄僣无状。
现代文：隆庆二年，给事中徐尚弹劾应城伯孙文栋等乘轿出入，骄横僭越，行为失检。
English: In the second year of the Longqing era, Xu Shang was impeached for entering and exiting the city by car, arrogance and misconduct.

古文：帝命夺文栋等俸。
现代文：皇帝命令削夺孙文栋等人的俸禄。
English: The emperor ordered to cut the salary of Sun Wentong and others.

古文：乃谕两京武职非奉特恩不许乘轿，文官四品以下用帷轿者，禁如例。
现代文：于是诏谕两京武官不是受特别恩准不许乘轿，文官四品以下用有帷幕的轿子的，按规定禁止。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that the military attachés of the two capitals were not allowed to ride in the palanquins unless they had special permission, and that the use of palanquins with curtains by civil servants with a rank of four or less was prohibited according to regulations.

古文：万历三年奏定勋戚及武臣不许用帷轿、肩舆并交床上马。
现代文：万历三年，奏请规定有功大臣皇亲国戚以及武臣不允许用有帷幕的轿子、肩舆和藉助胡床上马。
English: After three years of hard work, the report stipulated that meritorious ministers, relatives of the emperor, and warriors were not allowed to use draped palanquins, shoulder cushions, and horses in the hutch.

古文：至若破格殊典，则宣德中少保黄淮陪游西苑，尝乘肩舆入禁中。
现代文：至于破格的特别恩典，有宣德年问少保黄淮陪同巡游西苑，曾经乘肩舆进入皇宫。
English: As for the extraordinary special grace, there was the proclamation of the virtuous and virtuous minor Huang Huai, who accompanied the parade in the West Courtyard, and once entered the imperial palace on my shoulders.

古文：嘉靖间，严嵩奉诏苑直，年及八旬，出入得乘肩舆。
现代文：嘉靖年间，严嵩奉诏到御苑值班，年至八十岁，出入允许乘肩舆。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, Yan Song was on duty at the Imperial Palace, and was allowed to enter and leave the palace on his shoulders until he was 80 years old.

古文：武臣则郭勋、朱希忠特命乘肩舆扈南巡跸，后遂赐常乘焉。
现代文：武臣则有郭勋、朱希忠特许乘肩舆跟随皇帝到南方巡视时禁止行人通行，后来便恩准平常乘坐。
English: The vassals, Guo Xun and Zhu Xizhong, were given special permission to accompany the emperor to the south, where pedestrians were prohibited from passing. Later, they were allowed to ride as usual.

古文：皆非制也。
现代文：都不是正常制度。
English: It's not a normal system.

古文：伞盖之制：洪武元年，令庶民不得用罗绢凉伞，但许用油纸雨伞。
现代文：伞盖的制度。洪武元年，下令百姓不准用罗绢制成的遮蔽阳光的伞，但是允许使用油纸制的雨伞。
English: Umbrella cover system. In the first year of Hongwu, it was ordered that people were not allowed to use umbrellas made of wordy to shield the sun, but umbrellas made of oil paper were allowed.

古文：三年，令京城内一品二品用伞盖，其余用雨伞。
现代文：三年，下令京城内一品二品官员用伞盖，其余人员用雨伞。
English: Three years ago, he ordered that one- and two-star officials in the capital should use umbrella covers, while the rest of the staff should use umbrellas.

古文：十六年，令尚书、侍郎、左右都御史、通政使、太常卿、应天府尹、国子祭酒、翰林学士许张伞盖。
现代文：十六年，下令尚书、侍郎、左右都御史、通政使、太常卿、应天府尹、国子祭酒翰林学士允许张设伞盖。
English: In the 16th year, it was ordered that Shangshu, his attendants, the governors of the left and right capitals, Tong Zhengzhu, Taizhongqing, Ying Tianfu Yin, and the scholar of the National Children's Festival, Sake Hanlin, were allowed to set up umbrella covers.

古文：二十六年定一品、二品伞用银浮屠顶，三品、四品用红浮屠顶，俱用黑色茶褐罗表，红绢裹，三檐；雨伞用红油绢。
现代文：二十六年，规定一品、二品官员的伞盖用银色的塔形顶，三品、四品官员用红色的塔形顶，都用黑色茶褐色的绫罗作表层，红色绢作里层，三处檐口；雨伞用红油绢。
English: In 2006, it was stipulated that the umbrellas of first-class and second-class officials should have a silver pagoda-shaped top, and those of third-class and fourth-class officials should have a red pagoda-shaped top. Both should have a black tea-brown satin for the surface layer, a red satin for the inner layer, and three openings; umbrellas should have a red oil finish.

古文：五品红浮屠顶，青罗表，红绢裹，两檐；雨伞同。
现代文：五品官用红色浮屠顶，青色绫罗作表层，红色绢作里层，两处檐口；雨伞相同。
English: The officials of the five estates used red floats for the top, blue gauze for the surface layer, red felt for the inner layer, and two hooks; the umbrellas are the same.

古文：四品、六品至九品，用红浮屠顶，青绢表，红绢裹，两檐；雨伞俱用油纸。
现代文：四品、六品至九品官员，用红色塔形顶，青色绢作表层，红色绢作里层，两处檐口；雨伞都用油纸。
English: Officials of the 4th, 6th and 9th grades, with a red tower-shaped top, a blue ribbon for the outer layer, a red ribbon for the inner layer, two hooks; umbrellas are made of oil paper.

古文：三十五年，官员伞盖不许用金绣，朱丹装饰。
现代文：三十五年，官员伞盖不许用金丝刺绣和朱红色装饰。
English: Thirty-five years ago, officials were not allowed to use gold embroidery and vermilion to decorate umbrella covers.

古文：公、侯、驸马、伯与一品、二品同。
现代文：公、侯、驸马、伯与一品、二品官员相同。
English: The titles of kogo, hou, noma, and bo are the same as those of ichi-pon and nihon (first and second class) officials.

古文：成化九年，令两京官遇雨任用油伞，其凉伞不许张于京城。
现代文：成化九年，下令两京官员遇到雨时任意使用油伞，那些遮蔽阳光的伞在京城不能使用。
English: In 2009, officials in the two capitals were ordered to use umbrellas at will when it rained. Umbrellas that blocked the sun could not be used in the capital.

古文：鞍辔之制：洪武六年，令庶民不得描金，惟铜铁装饰。
现代文：鞍辔的制度。洪武六年，下令百姓不准用金银粉描绘图案装饰，只能用铜铁装饰。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered that the people were not allowed to use gold and silver powder to depict patterns for decoration, but could only use copper and iron.

古文：二十六年，定公、侯、一品、二品用银，铁事件，〈革占〉用描银。
现代文：二十六年，规定公、侯、一品、二品用银质马首饰，铁马鞍，马鞍上的障泥用金粉勾勒描绘。
English: In 1926, it was stipulated that silver horse jewelry and iron saddles were to be used for the prince, marquess, first-class and second-class, and the mud on the saddle was to be outlined with gold powder.

古文：三品至五品，用银，铁事件，〈革占〉用油画。
现代文：三品至五品，用银质马首饰，铁马鞍，马鞍上的障泥用油彩图饰。
English: Three pieces to five pieces, with silver horse jewelry, iron saddle, saddle mud with oil painting decoration.

古文：六品至九品，用摆锡，铁事件，〈革占〉用油画。
现代文：六品到九品，用摆锡，铁马鞍，马鞍上的障泥用油彩图饰。
English: From six pieces to nine pieces, decorated with pewter, iron saddle, and the mud on the saddle with oil painting.

古文：三十五年，官民人等马颔下缨并鞦辔俱用黑色，不许红缨及描金、嵌金、天青、朱红装饰。
现代文：三十五年，官民人等马下巴下的缨和绊带缰绳都用黑色，不许用红缨及用金粉勾勒描绘、镶嵌金银、天青色、朱红色装饰。
English: In the 35th year, the bridle under the horse's chin and the bridle reins are all black, and it is not allowed to use the red bridle and use gold powder to draw and decorate with gold and silver, azure and scarlet.

古文：军民用铁事件，黑绿油〈革占〉。
现代文：军民用铁马鞍，黑绿油的马鞍障泥。
English: Military and civilian iron saddle, black and green oil saddle mud.

