古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余闻九针于夫子众多矣，不可胜数。
现代文：黄帝对岐伯道：我听你讲解九针的学问已经很多了，是难以计数的。
English: Huang Di said to Qi Bo: I have listened to you explain the knowledge of the nine stitches a lot, it is difficult to count.

古文：余推而论之，以为一纪。
现代文：这些内容经过我详细的推究和阐发，已经把它概括为一个系统的纲要。
English: After my detailed investigation and elaboration of these contents, I have summarized it into a systematic outline.

古文：余司诵之，子听其理，非则语余，请正其道，令可久传，后世无患。
现代文：现在我诵读一下，你听听其中的理论有无错误，有错误就指出来，并请把正确的道理告诉我，以使九针学能够长久地传于后世而不留遗害。
English: Now I'll read it, and you listen to see if there are any mistakes in the theory, point out any mistakes, and please tell me the correct reason, so that the Nine Needles can be passed down to future generations without leaving a legacy.

古文：得其人乃传，非其人勿言。
现代文：如果遇到合适的人就传授给他，不合适的人就不必和他说。
English: If you meet the right person, pass it on to him. If you don't meet the right person, you don't have to talk to him.

古文：岐伯稽首再拜曰：请听圣王之道。
现代文：岐伯恭敬地一拜后说：让我来恭听这些高深的道理吧。
English: After bowing respectfully, Qi Bo said, "Let me listen to these profound truths."

古文：黄帝曰：用针之理，必知形气之所在，左右上下，阴阳表里，血气多少，行之逆顺，出入之合，谋伐有过。
现代文：黄帝说：针刺治病的原理在于，必须知道病症邪气所在的部位，辨别分清身体的左右上下，明白阴阳表里关系，血气的多少，脉气在全身运行的逆顺方向，血气出入离合的位置，才能根据病情作出适当的治疗。
English: Huang Di said: The principle of acupuncture treatment is that it is necessary to know the part of the disease where the evil gas is located, distinguish the left and right sides of the body, understand the relationship between yin and yang, the amount of blood gas, the counterclockwise direction of pulse gas in the whole body, and the position of blood gas in and out of the clutch, in order to make appropriate treatment according to the condition.

古文：知解结，知补虚泻实，上下气门，明通于四海，审其所在。
现代文：应懂得如何排解结聚，了解补虚泄实的手法，以及各经经气上下交通的腧穴，更要明确气海、血海、髓海和水谷之海这四海的路线的作用，审知其虚实所在。
English: It is necessary to know how to resolve the agglomeration, to understand the methods of making up for the false and exposing the true, as well as the bottlenecks of the traffic up and down through the air, and to clarify the role of the four seas of the gas sea, the blood sea, the marrow sea and the valley sea, and to know where the false and true are.

古文：寒热淋露，以输异处，审于调气，明于经隧，左右肢络，尽知其会。
现代文：如果寒热症经久不愈以致身体羸弱，那是因为寒热之邪流注于不同部位的腧穴，治疗时应小心谨慎地调和其脉气，弄清楚经气流行的通道及其散在左右的支络，全部了解它们的并合聚会之处。
English: If the cold fever persists for a long time and the body is weak, it is because the evil flow of cold and heat is poured into the anus in different parts. When treating, it is necessary to carefully adjust the pulse and qi, find out the channels through which the qi is circulated and the supporting networks scattered on the left and right, and fully understand where they meet.

古文：寒与热争，能合而调之，虚与实邻，知决而通之；左右不调，把而行之。
现代文：如出现寒与热争的病象，要能参合各种因素加以调治，如果虚的部位与实的部位相邻近，要懂得用导引的方法使之畅通；如左右不相协调，须用把而行之的手法调治。
English: If there is a cold and heat disease, it is necessary to be able to participate in various factors to adjust it. If the virtual part is close to the real part, it is necessary to know how to use the guidance method to make it smooth. If the left and right are not coordinated, it is necessary to use the method of adjusting.

古文：明于逆顺，乃知可治。
现代文：明白病的属逆属顺，才能知道病的可以刺治或不可刺治。
English: Only when it is clear that the disease belongs to the opposite side and the opposite side belongs to the right side, can we know whether the disease can be cured or not.

古文：阴阳不奇，故知起时。
现代文：阴阳已经和调而无所偏倚，便知疾病已接近痊愈之时。
English: The yin and yang have been harmonized without any bias, so you know that the disease is close to being cured.

古文：审于本末，察其寒热，得邪所在，万刺不殆。
现代文：审明疾病的本部和标部，观察其寒热症状，了解了病邪所在部位，而后施治，即使针刺万遍，也不会出什么差错。
English: Examine the main and standard parts of the disease, observe its cold and fever symptoms, understand the location of the disease, and then treat it. Even if you need to prick it a million times, nothing will go wrong.

古文：知官九针，刺道毕矣。
现代文：九针各有所宜，如能区别不同情况各尽其用，针刺的技艺也就全部掌握了。
English: Each of the nine needles is appropriate. If you can distinguish different situations and make the best use of them, you will have mastered all the skills of needling.

古文：明于五俞，徐疾所在，屈伸出入，皆有条理。
现代文：要明了十二经脉各自具有的井、荥、输、经、合五输穴，以及使用徐疾针法的道理所在。还应明了经脉往来的屈伸出入，都有一定的条理。
English: It should be made clear that the twelve meridians each have five meridians: the well, the navel, the outlet, the meridian, and the junction, as well as the reason for using the slow needle method. It should also be made clear that the warp and weft of the meridians have a certain structure.

古文：言阴与阳，合于五行。
现代文：人体的阴阳两个方面，是与五行相合的。
English: The two aspects of yin and yang of the human body are compatible with the five elements.

古文：五脏六腑，亦有所藏。
现代文：五脏六腑，配属于阴阳五行，也各有其所藏的功能。
English: The five viscera and six glands belong to the yin and yang and the five elements, and each has its own function.

古文：四时八风，尽有阴阳。
现代文：四时八节的风，都有阴阳之分。
English: The wind at four o'clock and eight knots is divided into yin and yang.

古文：各得其位，合于明堂，各处色部，五脏六腑。
现代文：人的颜面各部，也与阴阳五行相应，各得其位，而会合于鼻部，五脏六腑如有疾病，则分别反映于颜面的各个色部。
English: Each part of a person's face also corresponds to the five elements of yin and yang, each in its proper place, but they meet at the nose, and if there is a disease in the five viscera, it is separately reflected in each color part of the face.

古文：察其所痛，左右上下，知其寒温，何经所在。
现代文：五脏六腑的病变，可通过观察其疼痛的部位，再结合面部左右上下所显现的颜色，就可知道疾病的寒温属性以及疾病发生于哪一条经脉。
English: The lesions of the five viscera and six glands can be seen by observing the painful area, and then combining the colors that appear on the left and right sides of the face, it is possible to know the cold temperature property of the disease and which meridian the disease occurs in.

古文：审皮肤之寒温滑涩，知其所苦。
现代文：审察尺肤部位的皮肤寒、温、滑、涩，就能了解被何邪所苦了。
English: Examining the cold, warm, slippery, and astringent skin of the skin part of the ruler, you can understand what evil you are suffering from.

古文：膈有上下，知其气所在。
现代文：膈以上为心肺所居处，膈以下为肝脾肾所居处，所以审察膈的上下，就可知道病气的所在。
English: Above the navel is the location of the heart and lungs, and below the navel is the location of the liver, spleen and kidneys. Therefore, if you examine the upper and lower navel, you can know where the disease is.

古文：先得其道，稀而疏之，稍深以留，故能徐入之。
现代文：行针前先要掌握经脉的通路，然后取穴，取穴贵在精当而稀少，进针渐渐由浅至深，而后留针，使正气能徐徐导入。
English: Before inserting the needle, it is first necessary to grasp the passage of the meridian, and then take the hole. The hole is precious in precision and rare. The needle is gradually introduced from shallow to deep, and the needle is left behind, so that the positive energy can be slowly introduced.

古文：大热在上，推而下之；从上下者，引而去之。
现代文：大热如出现在身体上部，当用推而下之的针刺手法；病邪由下向上发展的，则应引导病邪发散而排除它。
English: If a high fever occurs in the upper part of the body, a push-down needling method should be used; if the disease develops from the bottom up, the disease should be guided to disperse and eliminate it.

古文：视前痛者，常先取之。
现代文：还应注意疾病的以前发作情况，先按以前情况取穴，以治其本。
English: You should also pay attention to the previous onset of the disease. First, according to the previous situation, take a hole to treat the root cause.

古文：大寒在外，留而补之；入于中者，从合泻之；针所不为，灸之所宜。
现代文：如大寒之象出现于体表，应当留针使针下发热以补之；如寒邪已深入内里，应当取合穴以泄之；有的寒邪不适宜用针，应改用灸法加以治疗。
English: If a cold sore appears on the surface of the body, a needle should be left to generate heat under the needle to make up for it; if the cold sore has penetrated deep inside, it should be drained; some cold sores are not suitable for use with a needle and should be treated with moxibustion instead.

古文：上气不足，推而扬之；下气不足，积而从之；阴阳皆虚，火自当之。
现代文：上部之气不足，当用推补的针法引致其气，使上气充盛；下部之气不足，应当用留针随气的方法，以充实其下；阴阳都虚的，当则宜用灸法治疗。
English: If the upper part of the qi is deficient, the needling method should be used to draw out the qi and make the upper qi rich; if the lower part of the qi is deficient, the method of leaving the needle with the qi should be used to enrich the lower part; if the yin and yang are both deficient, it should be treated with the moxibustion method.

古文：厥而寒甚，骨廉陷下，寒过于膝，下陵三里。
现代文：当寒气厥而上逆，阳气大虚，或骨侧的肌肉陷下，或寒冷已过两膝，就应当灸足阳明胃经的三里穴。
English: When the cold is on the contrary, the yang is very weak, or the muscles of the bone side are sunken, or the cold has passed the knees, it should be moxibustion foot Yang Ming stomach Jing Sanli hole.

古文：阴络所过，得之留止，寒入于中，推而行之；经陷下者，火则当之；结络坚紧，火所治之。
现代文：阴络所过之处受了寒邪，留滞不去，如果深入于内脏的，则当用针推散寒邪之气使它行出；如果经脉陷下的，当用艾火灸治；如果络脉凝结而坚紧的，也应用艾火灸治。
English: If it penetrates deep into the internal organs, the cold evil spirit should be pushed out with a needle; if the meridians are sunken, it should be treated with moxibustion; if the meridians are clotted and tight, moxibustion should also be applied.

古文：不知所苦，两蹻之下，男阴女阳，良工所禁。针论毕矣。
现代文：如患者对病苦麻木不仁，没有疼痛不适之感，应取阳蹻脉交会穴申脉、阴蹻脉交会穴照海二穴位治疗，男子取阳跷脉，女子取阴跷脉，如果取穴反了，这是高明医工所禁忌的。
English: If the patient is insensitive to the suffering of the disease and does not feel any pain or discomfort, it should be treated by taking the two acupoints of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acupoint of the acup

古文：用针之服，必有法则，上视天光，下司八正，以辟奇邪，而观百姓，审于虚实，无犯其邪。
现代文：知道了上述道理，针灸的理论就学完备了。学习用针治疗疾病，一定要有所取法，有所准依，上要观察日月星辰的运行规律，下要掌握八个主要节气的正常气候情况，以避开四时的不正之气，同时把这些预防疾病的常识告诉百姓们，让他们了解邪气对人体的影响，及时加以预防，以免受邪气侵袭而发病。
English: After learning the above principles, the theory of acupuncture and moxibustion is complete. When learning to treat diseases with needles, it is necessary to adopt some methods and have some evidence to rely on. First, it is necessary to observe the laws of the sun, moon and stars, and second, it is necessary to master the normal climate conditions of the eight major solar terms to avoid the four o'clock wrong qi. At the same time, it is necessary to tell the common sense of preventing diseases to the people, let them understand the influence of evil qi on the human body, and prevent it in time to avoid the attack of evil qi and disease.

古文：是得天之灵，遇岁之虚，救而不胜，反受其殃，故曰： 必知天忌，乃言针意。 
现代文：假若受到与时令不符的风雨邪气的侵袭，或是在气运不足的年份未加以防范，而医生又不了解这些自然变化，不能及时治疗，病人就会遭受祸殃，所以说： 只有了解了天时的宜忌，才能谈论针治的意义 。
English: If the doctor does not understand these natural changes and is unable to treat the patient in time, the patient will suffer a disaster. Therefore, it is said: Only after understanding the signs of the times can we talk about the significance of acupuncture.

古文：法于往古，验于来今，观于窈冥，通于无穷。
现代文：要继承古人的成就，并在今时的医疗实践中加以检验，只有仔细观察微妙难见的变化，才可以通达变化的无穷的疾病。
English: In order to inherit the achievements of the ancients and test them in today's medical practice, only by carefully observing subtle and invisible changes can we access the endless diseases of change.

古文：麤之所不见，良工之所贵。
现代文：平庸的医生是不会注意这些方面的，而高明的医生却很珍视它。
English: Mediocre doctors do not pay attention to these aspects, but skilled doctors cherish it.

古文：莫知其形，若神髣髴。
现代文：如果诊察不到细微的形迹变化，那么疾病就显得神秘莫测，难以把握了。
English: If subtle changes in appearance are not detected, then the disease appears to be mysterious and difficult to grasp.

古文：邪气之中人也，洒淅动形；正邪之中人也，微先见于色，不知于其身，若有若无，若亡若存，有形无形，莫知其情。
现代文：邪气伤害了人体，便会出现恶寒战栗，形体振动的症状；正邪伤害人体，先只是在气色上稍微有一些变化，身体上并没有什么特殊感觉，此时邪气似有似无，若存若亡，症状也不明显，病人的确切病情也不易知道。
English: When evil spirits harm the human body, the symptoms of chills, shivers, and body vibration will appear; when righteous and evil spirits harm the human body, at first there are only slight changes in appearance, and there is no special feeling on the body. At this time, the evil spirits are similar, and if they survive, the symptoms are not obvious, and it is not easy to know the exact condition of the patient.

古文：是故上工之取气，乃救其萌芽；下工守其已成，因败其形。
现代文：所以高明的医生能根据脉气的变化，在疾病的初期就进行治疗；医术低下的医生，则往往要等到疾病已经形成，才知道如何进行治疗，这样就容易造成病人的形体衰败。
English: Therefore, a skilled doctor can treat the early stage of the disease according to the changes in pulse and qi; a doctor with low medical skills often has to wait until the disease has formed before he knows how to treat it, which is likely to cause the patient's body to decay.

古文：是故工之用针也，知气之所在，而守其门户，明于调气，补泻所在，徐疾之意，所取之处。
现代文：所以医生在运用针刺治疗疾病时，首先应该知道脉气运行的情况，以及邪气的所在，然后守候其出入的门户，审时度势，掌握调理气机的方法，宜补宜泻，进针快慢，以及选择应取的穴位等。
English: Therefore, when using acupuncture to treat diseases, doctors should first know the status of the pulse gas and the location of the evil gas, and then wait for the portal of its entry and exit, examine the time and situation, master the method of regulating the gas engine, appropriate supplementation and diarrhea, the speed of the needle, and the selection of the desired acupoints.

古文：泻必用员，切而转之，其气乃行，疾而徐出，邪气乃出，伸而迎之，遥大其穴，气出乃疾。
现代文：如用泻法，手法必须圆活流利，逼近病所则捻转针，这样，经气就通畅，快速进针、缓慢出针，以引邪气外出，针尖的方向迎着经气的运行方向，出针时摇动针体使针孔扩大，以使邪气随针迅速外散。
English: If the laxative method is used, the technique must be smooth and fluent, and the needle must be twisted and turned when approaching the clinic. In this way, the qi flow is smooth, the needle is quickly inserted, and the needle is slowly withdrawn to draw out the evil qi. The direction of the needle tip faces the direction of the qi flow, and when the needle is withdrawn, the needle body is shaken to enlarge the needle hole, so that the evil qi is quickly dispersed with the needle.

古文：补必用方，外引其皮，令当其门，左引其枢，右推其肤，微旋而徐推之，必端以正，安以静，坚心无解，欲微以留，气下而疾出之，推其皮，盖其外门，真气乃存。
现代文：运用补法时，手法必须端正沉稳，精神安静从容而和缓，首先按抚皮肤，使肌肉放松而舒缓，然后看准穴位，左手按摩腧穴周围以引动经气，右手推循着皮肤，徐徐进针，轻轻地捻转，必须使针身保持端正，同时医生要平心静气，安神定志，坚持不懈地以候气至，气至后稍微留针，待经气流通就马上出针，揉按皮肤，掩闭针孔，这样使真气留存于内而不外泄。
English: When applying the method of supplementation, the method must be correct and steady, the spirit is quiet, calm and gentle. First, the skin is stroked, so that the muscles are relaxed and soothing, and then the acupoints are targeted. The left hand massages around the acupoints to attract the qi, and the right hand follows the skin. The needle is slowly inserted and gently twisted, and the needle body must be kept correct. At the same time, the doctor must be calm, calm and determined, and persistently wait for the qi to arrive, and leave the needle slightly after the qi arrives. When the qi is circulated, the needle will come out immediately

古文：用针之要，无忘其神。
现代文：用针的奥妙和关键，在于千万不要忘了 神 。
English: The secret and the key to using the needle is to never forget God.

古文：雷公问于黄帝曰：《针论》曰： 得其人乃传，非其人勿言。 
现代文：雷公问黄帝道：《针论》说： 遇到合适的人才能教他，不合适的人就不能教。 。
English: Lei Gong asked Huang Di Dao: "The Theory of Needles" said: "Only when you meet the right person can you teach him, and you can't teach the wrong person."

古文：何以知其可传？
现代文：那么，你怎样来判断谁是适当的人选呢？
English: So how do you decide who is a good fit?

古文：黄帝曰：各得其人，任之其能，故能明其事。
现代文：黄帝说：根据每个人的特点，让他承担一定的技术职能，在实际工作中观察他的技能，就能了解是否可以传授给他。
English: Huang Di said: According to the characteristics of each person, let him undertake certain technical functions, and observe his skills in actual work to see if they can be taught to him.

古文：雷公曰：愿闻官能奈何？
现代文：雷公说：我想知道怎样根据每个人的不同才能而分别使用呢？
English: Lei Gong said, "I want to know how to use it according to each person's different talents."

古文：黄帝曰：明目者，可使视色；聪耳者，可使听音；捷疾辞语者，可使传论；语徐而安静，手巧而心审谛者，可使行针艾，理血气而调诸逆顺，察阴阳而兼诸方。缓节柔筋而心和调者，可使导引行气；疾毒言语轻人者，可使唾痈呪病；爪苦手毒，为事善伤者，可使按积抑痹。
现代文：黄帝说：眼睛明亮的人，可以让他分辨各种色泽；听觉敏锐的人，可以让他辨别声音；言语辩捷，善于讲话的人，可以让他传达言论；语言徐缓，行动安静，心细手巧的人，可以让他使用针灸，调理气血的顺逆，观察阴阳的盛衰，以及兼理各种治疗工作；手势轻缓，举止柔和，性情平和的人，可以让他做按摩导引，用运行气血的方法来治病；生性嫉妒，口舌恶毒而且语言轻薄的人，可以让他掌握唾痈肿、咒邪病的祝由疗法；若是爪甲粗恶，手势狠毒，做事常常损坏器具的人，可以让他揉按积聚，抑制痹痛。
English: The Yellow Emperor said: A person with bright eyes can distinguish various colors; a person with keen hearing can distinguish voices; a person with quick speech and good speech can convey speech; a person with slow speech, quiet action, and delicate hands can use acupuncture, regulate the flow of qi and blood, observe the rise and fall of yin and yang, and handle various treatment work; a person with light gestures, soft demeanor, and peaceful disposition can do massage guidance and use the method of running qi and blood to treat diseases; a person with natural jealousy, vicious tongue, and light language can master the treatment of salivary abscess and malignant disease; if the nail is thick, it can be

古文：各得其能，方乃可行，其名乃彰。
现代文：这样依据每个人的才能，发挥他们的特长，各种治疗方法才能得以施行，他们才能声名远扬。
English: In this way, according to each person's talent, give play to their strengths, various treatment methods can be implemented, and they can become famous.

古文：不得其人，其功不成，其师无名。
现代文：否则，传人不当，就不会成功，老师的声名也会被埋没。
English: Otherwise, if the succession is improper, it will not be successful, and the teacher's reputation will be buried.

古文：故曰： 得其人乃言，非其人勿传。 
现代文：所以说： 遇到合适的人才能教他，不合适的人就不能教。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If you meet the right person, you can teach him; if you meet the wrong person, you can't teach him.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：手毒者，可使试按龟，置龟于器下，而按其上，五十日而死矣；手甘者，复生如故也。
现代文：试人的手是否狠毒，可叫他按乌龟，把乌龟放在器具下面，将他的手按在器具上面，手毒的人按五十天，乌龟就会死；而手柔顺的人，即使过了五十天乌龟也还是活着的。
English: To test whether a person's hand is venomous, ask him to press a turtle, place the turtle under the utensil, and press his hand on the top of the utensil. If the person with the venomous hand presses it for fifty days, the turtle will die. If the person with the soft hand presses it for fifty days, the turtle will still be alive.

