古文：到捴刘悛虞悰胡谐之
现代文：到捴字茂谦，彭城武原人。
English: To Shanzi Maochen, Pengcheng Wuyuan people.

古文：到捴，字茂谦，彭城武原人也。祖彦之，宋骠骑将军。父仲度，骠骑从事中郎。捴袭爵建昌公。
现代文：他祖父到彦之，是宋骠骑将军。他父亲到仲度，是骠骑从事中郎。到捴承袭爵位为建昌公。
English: His grandfather, Zu Hanyu, was a general in the Song Dynasty. His father, Zu Zhongdu, was a middle-ranking official in the Song Dynasty. Zu Yan inherited the title of Jianchang.

古文：起家为太学博士，除奉车都尉，试守延陵令，非所乐，去官。
现代文：从家中征召出来授以太学博士，奉车都尉，试行代理延陵令，不是他乐意干的，离开了这一官职。
English: He was called out of his home to confer a doctorate in etheric science, to serve as captain of a carriage, and to serve as an agent of the Yanling Order on a trial basis. He did not do it willingly, and left this official post.

古文：除新安王北中郎行参军，坐公事免。
现代文：除授新安王北中郎行参军，因公事被免职。
English: In addition to the award, Xin'an Wang Beizhongro went to join the army and was dismissed for official business.

古文：除新安王抚军参军，未拜，新安王子鸾被杀，仍除长兼尚书左民郎中。
现代文：授新安王抚军参军，没有接受任职命令，新安王子鸾被杀，被授予长兼尚书左民郎中。
English: He gave Xin'an Wangfujun the order to join the army, but he did not accept the order to serve. Xin'an Wangfujun was killed, and he was awarded the title of Senior General and the title of Junior General of the Left.

古文：明帝立，欲收物情，以捴功臣后，擢为太子洗马。
现代文：明帝即皇帝位，想收买人心，因为到局是功臣的后代，提升为太子洗马。
English: Emperor Ming, that is, the emperor, wanted to buy people's hearts, because he was the descendant of a meritorious subject, and was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：除王景文安南谘议参军。
现代文：授任王景文安南谘议参军。
English: Appointed Wang Jingwen to advise Annan to join the army.

古文：捴资籍豪富，厚自奉养，宅宇山池京师第一，妓妾姿艺，皆穷上品。
现代文：到捴家资豪富，供养丰厚，宅院山池，京城中数第一位，家中养的妓妾，姿容技艺都是最上等的。
English: He was born into a wealthy family, was well-provided for, lived in a mansion in the mountains and ponds, and was one of the highest-ranking people in the capital. The prostitutes and concubines he raised at home were of the highest caliber in appearance and skills.

古文：才调流赡，善纳交游，庖厨丰腆，多致宾客。
现代文：文才横溢，很会交朋结友，莱蔬饮食丰富精美，广泛罗致各方宾客。
English: He is a brilliant writer, very good at making friends, and has a rich and exquisite Lao vegetable diet, which is widely praised by guests from all walks of life.

古文：爱妓陈玉珠，明帝遣求，不与，逼夺之，捴颇怨望。
现代文：陈玉珠是他的爱妓，明帝派人来要她，到损不给，逼迫着把陈玉珠夺走了，到揭颇为怨恨。
English: Chen Yuzhu was his love prostitute. Emperor Ming sent someone to ask for her, but he would not give her up. He forced her to take Chen Yuzhu away, which caused a lot of resentment.

古文：帝令有司诬奏捴罪，付廷尉，将杀之。
现代文：皇帝命令有关官员诬奏到捐的罪行，到携被交付廷尉，将要杀他。
English: The emperor ordered the relevant officials to falsify the crime of donating, and he was handed over to the court lieutenant, who was going to kill him.

古文：捴入狱，数宿须鬓皆白。
现代文：他在入狱之后，几个夜晚胡须鬓发全都白了。
English: A few nights after he was jailed, his beard broke out and turned white.

古文：免死，系尚方，夺封与弟贲。
现代文：免去死罪，拘押专管制造供应帝王器物的官署，剥夺他承袭的封爵，改由他的弟弟到贲承袭。
English: He was exempted from the death penalty, detained by the government office in charge of manufacturing and supplying imperial wares, stripped of his hereditary knighthood, and replaced by his younger brother.

古文：捴由是屏斥声玩，更以贬素自立。
现代文：到揭从此摒弃声色玩乐，改用素朴来树立自己的形象。
English: From then on, Deng abandoned the play of tone and color, and used simplicity to establish his own image.

古文：帝除捴为羊希恭宁朔府参军，徙刘韫辅国、王景文镇南参军，并辞疾不就。
现代文：皇帝授到捅作羊希恭宁朔府参军，调任刘韫辅国、王景文镇南参军，他都以疾病推辞没有就职。
English: The emperor conferred the title of 作羊 on Xikong of Ningshuofu to join the army, and transferred Liu Bingyu to the country, and Wang Jingwen to the south to join the army. He did not take up his post due to illness.

古文：寻板假明威将军，仍除桂阳王征南参军，转通直郎，解职。
现代文：不久册封委任他代理明威将军，仍然授桂阳王征南参军，转通直郎，后又卸去官职。
English: Soon after, he was appointed acting general of Mingwei, still awarded Guiyang Wang to join the army to conquer the south, transferred to Nairo, and then removed from his official position.

古文：帝崩后，弟贲表让封还捴，朝议许之。
现代文：明帝逝世后，他的弟弟到贲卜表奏请将袭封的爵位让出还给到捅，朝廷商议答应了这件事。
English: After the death of Emperor Ming, his younger brother went to Zibo to request that the hereditary title be returned to Zou, and the imperial court agreed to the matter after deliberation.

古文：迁司徒左西属，又不拜。
现代文：迁到损为司徒左西属，他又未接受任命。
English: He did not accept the appointment when he was transferred to Kashi, which was under the jurisdiction of the Satsuma Shogunate.

古文：居家累年。
现代文：在家过了好些年。
English: It's been years since I've been home.

古文：弟遁，元徽中为宁远将军、辅国长史、南海太守，在广州。
现代文：到捴的弟弟到遁，元徽年间为宁远将军、辅国长史、南海太守，在广州。
English: Zhu Xi's younger brother Zhu Xi, who was the general of Ningyuan, the assistant to the governor of the country, and the governor of the South China Sea during the Yuan Dynasty, was in Guangzhou.

古文：升明元年，沈攸之反，刺史陈显达起兵以应朝廷，遁以犹预见杀。
现代文：升明元年，沈攸之反叛，刺史陈显达起兵响应朝廷，到遁因为犹豫而被杀。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Shen You rebelled, and Chen Xianda, the head of the imperial court, raised an army in response. He was killed because he hesitated.

古文：遁家人在都，从野夜归，见两三人持垩刷其家门，须臾灭，明日而遁死问至。
现代文：到遁的家裹人住在京都，夜间由野外返回家中时，看见两三个人拿白土涂刷他家的门，不一会儿消失了，第二天到遁的死讯就传到了。
English: When he returned home from the field at night, he saw two or three people painting the door of his house with white soil. They disappeared in a moment, and the next day news of his death came.

古文：捴遑惧，诣太祖谢，即板为世祖中军谘议参军。
现代文：到携心中很害怕，到太祖萧道成那裹谢罪，于是就任命为世祖中军谘议参军。
English: He was very afraid in his heart, and his great-great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng committed the sin of concealing his gratitude, so he was appointed to advise and join the army in the ancestral Chinese army.

古文：建元初，迁司徒右长史，出为永嘉太守，为黄门郎，解职。
现代文：建元初年，迁司徒右长史，出任为永嘉太守，为黄门郎，卸去官职。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was transferred to the position of the governor-general of Yongjia, and became the governor of Huangmen. He then resigned from his official position.

古文：世祖即位，迁太子中庶子，不拜。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，到揭迁太子中庶子，他没接受任职命令。
English: The founder, that is, the emperor's throne, did not accept the appointment order when he became the illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：又除长沙王中军长史，司徒左长史。
现代文：又授长沙王中军长史，司徒左长史。
English: He also conferred the Changsha Wangzhong Army General History, and the Sitou Zuo Long History.

古文：宋世，上数游会捴家，同从明帝射雉郊野，渴倦，捴为得早青瓜，与上对剖食之。
现代文：在宋时，世祖多次到到揭家游玩聚会，又一同跟随宋明帝在郊外野地射雉，口渴疲倦了，到捣弄到一个早青瓜，同世祖分开吃了。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Shizu visited Jiejia many times to attend gatherings. He also accompanied Emperor Song to shoot quail in the countryside. When he was tired and thirsty, he tampered with an early cucumber and ate it separately from Shizu.

古文：上怀其旧德，意眄良厚。
现代文：世祖想着他先前的好处，对他另眼厚待。
English: The patriarch thought about his previous benefits and treated him differently.

古文：至是一岁三迁。
现代文：至此一年之中升迁了三次。
English: So far, they have been promoted three times this year.

古文：永明元年，加辅国将军，转御史中丞。
现代文：永明元年，加到锅辅国将军，转御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, he was promoted to the general of Bofu Province and became the middle-ranking official of the imperial court.

古文：车驾幸丹阳郡宴饮，捴恃旧，酒后狎侮同列，言笑过度，为左丞庾杲之所纠，赎论。
现代文：皇帝车驾临幸丹阳郡，在宴饮时，到揭凭仗先前的老交情，在酒后亲昵玩笑，羞辱同一品级的人，言语笑态过分，被左丞庾杲之纠劾，论处用财物折赎刑罚。
English: The emperor drove to Danyang County, and during the banquet, he revealed his previous old friendships, made intimate jokes after drinking, humiliated people of the same grade, and his speech was too funny. He was reprimanded by Zuo Rong and punished with the punishment of using property for ransom.

古文：三年，复为司徒左长史，转左卫将军。
现代文：永明三年，又任司徒左长史，转左卫将军。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, he was also appointed as the chief historian of the Southern Song Dynasty and became the general of the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：随王子隆带彭城郡，捴问讯，不修民敬，为有司所举，免官。
现代文：随王子隆带彭城郡，到捅探问，没有遵循百姓恭敬王爷的礼仪，被有关官员检举，被免去官职。
English: Accompanied by Prince Long and Pengcheng County, he went to Handan to inquire, did not follow the etiquette of the people to respect the prince, was reported by relevant officials, and was removed from office.

古文：久之，白衣兼御史中丞。
现代文：过了很长时间，以布衣百姓兼任御史中丞。
English: After a long time, a commoner in civilian clothes was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：转临川王骠骑长史，司徒左长史，迁五兵尚书，出为辅国将军、庐陵王中军长史。
现代文：转临川王骠骑长史，司徒左长史，迁五兵尚书，外任辅国将军、庐陵王中军长史。
English: Then, there is the long history of the King of Linyi, the long history of the King of Linyi, the long history of the King of Linyi, the long history of the King of Linyi, the long history of the King of Linyi, the long history of the King of Linyi, the long history of the King of Linyi, the long history of the King of Linyi.

古文：母忧去官，服未终，八年，卒，年五十八。
现代文：因为母亲逝世服丧离职，守服未完，永明八年逝世。终年五十八岁。
English: Because of the death of his mother, he left office in mourning and did not complete his term of office. He passed away in the eighth year of Yongming at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：弟贲，初为卫尉主簿，奉车都尉。
现代文：到捅的弟弟到贲，起初任卫尉主簿，奉车都尉。
English: Zu Zu's younger brother, Zu Zu, initially served as the captain of the guards and the captain of the carriage.

古文：升明初，为中书郎，太祖骠骑谘议。
现代文：升明初年，任中书郎，人祖骠骑谘议。
English: In the first year after ascending the throne, he was appointed to the post of middle school teacher, and became a member of the advisory council.

古文：建元中，为征虏司马。
现代文：建元年间，任征虏司马，后逝世。
English: During the first year of the Jianwen era, Sima was conscripted and later died.

古文：卒。贲弟坦，解褐本州西曹。
现代文：到贲的弟弟到坦，起初担任本州西曹。
English: Zu Zu's younger brother Zu Tan initially served as the Honshu Hatchetman.

古文：升明二年，亦为太祖骠骑参军。
现代文：升明二年，也做太祖骠骑参军。
English: Two years after ascending the throne, he also joined the army on horseback.

古文：历豫章王镇西骠骑二府谘议。
现代文：历职豫章王镇西骠骑二府谘议。
English: Historically, the two prefectures of Wanzhen and Xi'an have been consulted.

古文：坦美须髯。与世祖、豫章王有旧。
现代文：至坦须髯漂亮，与世祖和豫章王有老交情。
English: She was very beautiful and had a long friendship with the founder of the dynasty and King Yuanzhang.

古文：坦仍随府转司空太尉参军。
现代文：至坦仍随府转司空太尉参军。
English: Shitan still joined the army as a transfer officer from the prefecture.

古文：出为晋安内史，还又为大司马谘议，中书郎，卒。
现代文：外出任置窘内史，返朝又为大司马谘议，中书郎，后逝世。
English: He served as an external adviser on internal history, and returned to the court as the chief secretary and advisor, Chushiro, and later passed away.

古文：刘悛，字士操，彭城安上里人也。
现代文：刘悛，字士操，是彭城安上里人。
English: Liu Wei, a calligrapher, is from Pengcheng An Shangri-La.

古文：彭城刘同出楚元王，分为三里，以别宋氏帝族。
现代文：彭城刘姓都源出楚元王，分作三里，用来分别宋氏的帝族。
English: The Pengcheng Liu surname all originated from King Chu Yuan, divided into three li, used to distinguish the imperial family of the Song Dynasty.

古文：祖颖之，汝南新蔡二郡太守。
现代文：他的祖父刘颖之，曾是汝南新蔡二郡太守。
English: His grandfather, Liu Yingzhi, was once the governor of South Yunnan Province.

古文：父勔，司空。
现代文：他的父亲刘劻，曾是司空。
English: His father, Liu Wei, was once a flight attendant.

古文：刘延孙为南徐州，初辟悛从事。随父勔征竟陵王诞于广陵，以功拜驸马都尉。转宗悫宁蛮府主簿，建安王司徒骑兵参军。复随父勔征殷琰于寿春，于横塘、死虎累战皆胜。
现代文：刘延孙做南徐州刺史，起初征刘悛做从事，跟随父亲刘劻在广陵征讨竟陵王刘诞，凭功劳拜授驸马都尉，转宗悫宁蛮府主簿，建安王司徒骑兵参军又跟随父亲刘劭到寿春征讨殷琰，在横塘、死虎几次战斗都取得了胜利。
English: Liu Yansun made the history of southern Xuzhou, at first he was engaged in the recruitment of Liu Ye, followed his father Liu Ye in Guangling to fight against the birth of King Liu of Guangling, was awarded the title of captain of the horse on merit, transferred to the main book of the barbarian government of Jining, joined the cavalry of King Jianan and followed his father Liu Ye to Shouchun to fight for Yin Ye, and won several battles in Hengtang and the Dead Tiger.

古文：历迁员外郎，太尉司徒二府参军，代世祖为尚书库部郎。
现代文：先后迁员外郎，太尉司徒二府参军，代世祖为尚书库部郎。
English: He was successively transferred to a post outside the capital, and joined the army in the second prefecture as Second Lieutenant Sito. He was the ancestor of the Shobo library department.

古文：迁振武将军、蜀郡太守，未之任，复从父勔征讨，假宁朔将军，拜鄱阳县侯世子。
现代文：迁振武将军、蜀郡太守，他没有到任就职，又跟随他父亲刘劻去征讨，代理宁朔将军，拜鄱阳县侯世子。
English: Qian Zhenwu general, Shu County Governor, he did not arrive to take office, and followed his father Liu Ye to solicit, acting for Ningshuo general, Baizhiyang County hosiery.

古文：转桂阳王征北中兵参军，与世祖同直殿内，为明帝所亲待，由是与世祖款好。
现代文：转桂阳王征北中兵参军，和世祖一同在殿内当值，被宋明帝所亲近优待，并由此同世祖亲密友好。
English: He then joined the army of Guiyang Wang Zhengbei Middle School soldiers, and was on duty in the hall with his grandfather. He was treated kindly by Emperor Song Ming, and thus became close friends with his grandfather.

古文：迁通直散骑侍郎，出为安远护军、武陵内史。
现代文：刘悛迁通直散骑侍郎，外任安远护军、武陵内史。
English: Liu Qianqian served as the attendant of Zhuang Zanzhong, the external protector of Anyuan, and the internal historian of Wuling.

古文：郡南江古堤，久废不缉。
现代文：郡的南江古堤，年久颓废没有修整。
English: The county's ancient Nanjiang River levee has not been repaired after years of decay.

古文：悛修治未毕，而江水忽至，百姓弃役奔走，悛亲率厉之，于是乃立。
现代文：刘悛修治还没完工，江水就忽然来了，百姓放弃工役奔逃，刘悛亲自作表率劝勉他们，于是堤坝才修好。
English: Before Liu Bei's repairs were completed, the river water suddenly surged. The people abandoned their labor service and fled. Liu Bei personally led by example to persuade them, and the dam was finally repaired.

古文：汉寿人邵荣兴六世同爨，表其门闾。
现代文：汉寿人邵荣兴六代人还在同锅巍吃饭而没分家，表彰他的门板。
English: The six generations of Han Shou people, Shao Rongxing, still eat in the same pot without splitting up, and commend his door plate.

古文：悛强济有世调，善于流俗。
现代文：刘悛精强干练会协调世务，善处流俗。
English: Liu Wei is shrewd and strong-willed, has a worldly temperament, and has a good relationship with the general public.

古文：蛮王田僮在山中，年垂百余岁，南谯王义宣为荆州，僮出谒。
现代文：蛮王田僮身居山中，年龄已有一百多岁，南谯王义宣做荆州刺史，田僮曾出来拜谒。
English: The barbarian king Tian Xuan lived in the mountains and was more than a hundred years old. Nan Xuan's king Yixuan was the chief historian of Jingzhou, and Tian Xuan once came out to pay homage.

古文：至是又出谒悛。
现代文：到这时田僮又出来拜见刘悛。
English: At this time, Tian Yao came out to meet Liu Yao again.

古文：明帝崩，表奔赴，敕带郡还都。
现代文：宋明帝驾崩，上表请求返京奔丧，得皇上批示带着郡印返回都城。
English: After the death of Emperor Song Ming, the above table requested to return to Beijing to mourn, and received the emperor's order to return to the capital with the county seal.

古文：吏民送者数千人，悛人人执手，系以涕泣，百姓感之，赠送甚厚。
现代文：办事小吏和百姓有几千人来送行，刘悛握着每个人的手，淌着眼泪，百姓为此深受感动，赠送他的物品很丰盛。
English: There were thousands of minor officials and common people who came to see him off. Liu Ye shook everyone's hand and shed tears. The common people were deeply moved by this and gave him a lot of gifts.

古文：仍除散骑侍郎。
现代文：刘悛仍被除授散骑侍郎。
English: Liu Yao was still deprived of the title of riding attendant.

古文：桂阳难，加宁朔将军，助守石头。
现代文：桂阳王发难，他被加授宁朔将军，协助别人守护石头城。
English: When King Guiyang was in trouble, he was promoted to General of Ningshuo to help others guard the Stone City.

古文：父勔于大桁战死，悛时疾病，扶伏路次，号哭求勔尸。
现代文：他父亲刘劻在大桁战死，刘悛当睁也身患疾病，他让人扶到路边，哭号着寻求刘劻的尸身。
English: His father, Liu Hui, was killed in the Battle of Dajia, and Liu Hui Dangcan was also ill. He had people help him to the side of the road, crying and looking for Liu Hui's body.

古文：勔尸项后伤缺，悛割发补之。
现代文：刘劻尸颈项后伤残，刘悛割下自己的头发来缝补。
English: Liu Yao was crippled behind the neck. Liu Yao cut off his own hair to make up for it.

古文：持丧墓侧，冬月不衣絮。
现代文：在坟墓侧旁守丧，冬季不穿棉絮澳。
English: They hold a vigil next to the grave and do not wear cotton wool in winter.

古文：太祖代勔为领军，素与勔善，书譬悛曰： 承至性毁瘵，转之危虑，深以酸怛。
现代文：太祖代替刘劻为领军，他向来同刘劻很要好，写信劝慰刘悛说： 顺承纯厚的天性哀伤过度，转而令人担忧，伤心悲痛太深。
English: The great-grandfather replaced Liu Ye as the leader of the army. He had always been very friendly with Liu Ye, and wrote a letter to comfort Liu Ye, saying: Obeying the pure nature, sorrow is excessive, turning into worrying, sad and sorrowful.

古文：终哀全生，先王明轨，岂有去缣纩，撤温席，以此悲号，得终其孝性邪？
现代文：终哀全生，这是先王明白的规矩，难道说夏天不穿单衣，冬天不穿棉衣，撒去温暖的卧席，这样悲号着，就能够完其孝性吗?
English: To mourn for the rest of one's life, this was the clear rule of the first king. Can one fulfill one's filial duty by not wearing a singlet in the summer, not wearing a cotton coat in the winter, and scattering the warm bedding, thus lamenting?

古文：当深顾往旨，少自抑勉。 
现代文：应当多顾今后，稍为尽力压抑自己的悲痛。 
English: You should pay more attention to the future and do your best to suppress your grief.

古文：建平王景素反，太祖总众军出顿玄武湖。
现代文：建平王景素反叛时，太祖总顿众军出屯玄武湖。
English: When King Jianping rebelled against King Jingsu, Emperor Taizu's army marched out of Xuanwu Lake.

古文：悛初免丧，太祖欲使领支军，召见悛兄弟，皆羸削改貌，于是乃止。
现代文：刘悛刚刚服完丧，太祖想让他统领一支军队，召见刘悛兄弟，都瘦得变了。形貌，于是作罢。
English: Liu Xuan had just finished his funeral, and the great-grandfather wanted him to lead an army, summoning Liu Xuan's brothers, who were thin and disfigured.

古文：除中书郎，行宋南阳八王事，转南阳王南中郎司马、长沙内史，行湘州事。
现代文：除授刘悛中书郎，行宋南阳八王事，转南阳王南中郎司马、长沙内史，行湘州事。
English: In addition to conferring Liu Xizhong Shulang, Song Nanyang eight kings, Nanyang king Nanzhong Lang Sima, Changsha history, and Hunan state affairs.

古文：未发，霸业初建，悛先致诚节。
现代文：尚未等到动身出发，太祖刚刚建立霸业，刘悛就先行表达至诚忠心。
English: Before leaving for the journey, Liu Ye expressed his sincerity and loyalty to Taizu, who had just established a dominant position.

古文：沈攸之事起，加辅国将军。
现代文：沈攸之起兵发难，刘悛加辅国将军。
English: Shen Yu's army was in trouble, and Liu Bei and the general of the Sui Dynasty were in the lead.

古文：世祖镇盆城，上表西讨，求悛自代。
现代文：世祖镇守盆城，曾上奏请求向西讨伐，要求让刘悛代理自己。
English: The town of Shizu, which guards the basin city, once made a request for a westward crusade and asked Liu Ye to act on its behalf.

古文：世祖既不行，悛除黄门郎，行吴郡事。
现代文：世祖既然没有西去，刘悛被授黄门郎，行吴郡事。
English: Since the ancestor did not go to the West, Liu Ye was given the title of Huangmen Lang and went to Wu County.

古文：寻转晋熙王抚军中军二府长史，行扬州事。
现代文：时过不久转晋熙王抚军中军二府长史，行扬州事。
English: Not long after, he became the second prefect of the army in the army of King Fuzhi of Jinxi, and carried out Yangzhou affairs.

古文：出为持节、督广州、广州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：外任持节、督广州、广州刺史，将军职衔依前未变。
English: The external posts of Jisetsu, Governor of Guangzhou, and Historian of Guangzhou, and the military titles remain unchanged.

古文：袭爵鄱阳县侯。
现代文：袭爵鄱阳县侯。
English: He succeeded to the title of Lord of Shenyang County.

古文：世祖自寻阳还，遇悛于舟渚间，欢宴叙旧，停十余日乃下。
现代文：世祖由寻阳返朝，在行船途中遇到刘悛，停泊洲渚，欢乐饮宴叙述旧情，停留十多天才顺江而下。
English: The ancestor of the world returned to the North from the sun-seeking, met Liu Ye on the way, anchored at Zhouzhu, had a happy banquet to recount the old days, and stayed for more than ten days down the river.

古文：遣文惠太子及竟陵王子良摄衣履，修父友之敬。
现代文：世祖派遣文惠太子及竟陵王子良帮着他提衣裳鞋子来表示对父亲朋友的尊敬。
English: To show his respect for his father's friend, the founder sent Prince Wen Hui and Prince Jingting to help him pick up his clothes and shoes.

古文：太祖受禅，国除。
现代文：太祖接受惮位，撤除宋号。
English: The great-great-grandfather accepted the position and removed the Song name.

古文：进号冠军将军。
现代文：刘悛进爵号为冠军将军。
English: Liu Bingjin's title is Champion General.

古文：平西记室参军夏侯恭叔上书，以柳元景中兴功臣，刘勔殒身王事，宜存封爵。
现代文：平西记室参军夏侯恭叔上书，认为柳元景是中兴功臣，刘劻为王事牺牲性命，应该保留封爵。
English: Xia Hou Gongshu, a member of the Western Pingxi Recorder's Office, submitted a letter, saying that Liu Yuanjing was a meritorious soldier of Zhongxing, Liu Bei sacrificed his life for the king's cause, and should retain his knighthood.

古文：诏曰： 与运隆替，自古有之，朝议已定，不容复厝意也。 
现代文：皇帝韶告说： 跟随国家命运一起变更的事，自古以来都是这样的。朝廷商议已定，不容再另外措置。 
English: The emperor's obituary said: "Things that change along with the country's fate have been like this since ancient times. The imperial court's deliberation has been decided, and no other measures are allowed.

古文：初，苍梧废，太祖集议中华门，见悛，谓之曰： 君昨直耶？ 
现代文：当初，苍梧王被废黜时，太祖和大家一起聚在中华门谈论，看见刘悛，太祖对他说： 您昨天当值吗? 
English: At the beginning, when King Cangwu was deposed, Grandfather gathered with everyone at Zhonghua Gate to talk. When he saw Liu Ye, Grandfather said to him, "Were you on duty yesterday?"

古文：悛答曰： 仆昨乃正直，而言急在外。 
现代文：刘悛回答说： 我昨天是正当值，可是因为说得太急就说成是在外头。 
English: Liu Wei replied: I was correct yesterday, but because I spoke too hastily, I said I was outside.

古文：至是上谓悛曰： 功名之际，人所不忘。
现代文：至此皇上对刘悛说： 功名方面的事，是人们挂在心头上的。
English: At this point, the emperor said to Liu Ye: People are concerned about the matter of fame and glory.

古文：卿昔于中华门答我，何其欲谢世事？ 
现代文：你先前在中华门回答我时，为何规避世事? 
English: When you answered me at Zhonghua Gate earlier, why did you avoid worldly affairs?

古文：悛曰： 臣世受宋恩，门荷齐眷，非常之勋，非臣所及。
现代文：刘悛说： 我家世代蒙受宋的恩德，我又受到齐的眷爱，特别超常的功勋。
English: Liu Wei said: My family's generation has received Song's benevolence, and I have received Qi's affection, especially extraordinary merits.

古文：进不远怨前代，退不孤负圣明，敢不以实仰答。 
现代文：不是我能建立的。我今进取时不能够埋怨先辈。退隐又不能辜负皇上的英明，我能不照实回答皇上的问话吗? 
English: It's not something I can build. I can't complain about my predecessors when I'm aggressive. I can't live up to the emperor's wisdom when I retire. Can I not answer the emperor's question truthfully?

古文：迁太子中庶子，领越骑校尉。
现代文：刘悛被提升为太子中庶子，领越骑校尉。
English: Later, he was reassigned as the prince's middle child and also served as an officer of the Viet Cavalry.

古文：时世祖在东宫，每幸悛坊，闲言至夕，赐屏风帷帐。
现代文：那时一尚在束宫，每次到型堕院宅，聊天直聊到天晚，赏赐刘悛屏风帷帐。
English: At that time, I was still in Sokgong, and every time I went to the house of a prostitute, we chatted until late at night, and I was rewarded with Liu Ye's screen curtain.

古文：世祖即位，改领前军将军，中庶子如故。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，刘悛改领前军将军，中庶子依前不变。
English: The founder of the dynasty is the emperor, Liu Bei will lead the former army generals, and the middle son will remain unchanged.

古文：征北竟陵王子良带南兖州，以悛为长史，加冠军将军、广陵太守。
现代文：征北竟陵王子良带南兖州，以刘悛为长史，加冠军将军、广堕太守。
English: Qingting Prince Liang led the Northern Expedition to Southern Luzhou, with Liu Bei as the long history, plus the champion general and Guangpu Taishou.

古文：转持节、都督司州诸军事、司州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：刘悛转为持节、都督司州诸军事、司州刺史，将军依前未变。
English: Liu Ye changed to Jixi, the military governor of Zhouzhou, and the historian of Zhouzhou, but the generals remained unchanged.

古文：悛父勔讨殷琰，平寿阳，无所犯害，百姓德之，为立碑祀。
现代文：刘悛父亲刘劻讨伐殷琰，平定寿阳，没有侵犯地方，老百姓感激他的恩德，为他树碑祭祀。
English: Liu Ye's father, Liu Ye, fought against Yin Xi, pacified Shouyang, and did not encroach on localities. The common people were grateful for his benevolence and erected a monument for him.

古文：悛步道从寿阳之镇，过勔碑，拜敬泣涕。
现代文：刘悛徒步经由寿阳到镇治，经过刘劻碑，流着眼泪哭着拜敬。
English: Liu Ye walked through Shouyang to Zhenzhi, passing the Liu Ye Monument, weeping and bowing with tears.

古文：初，义阳人夏伯宜杀刚陵戍主叛渡淮，虏以为义阳太守。
现代文：起初，义阳人夏伯宜杀掉刚陵戍主反叛，渡过淮河投奔魏虏，魏虏让他做了义阳太守。
English: At first, the Yiyang people, Xia Bo Yi, killed the rebel lord of Goryeong and crossed the Huai River to join Wei Krup. Wei Krup made him the governor of Yiyang.

古文：悛设计购诱之，虏囗州刺史谢景杀伯宜兄弟、北襄城太守李荣公归降。
现代文：刘悛悬赏讨捕诱杀夏伯宜，魏虏某州刺史谢景杀了夏伯宜兄弟，北襄城太守李荣公归降。
English: Liu Bei offered a reward for trapping and killing Xia Bo Yi, Wei Rui killed Xia Bo Yi's brothers with the help of a certain state assassin, Xie Jing, and Li Rongguo, the governor of North Xiangcheng, surrendered.

古文：悛于州治下立学校，得古礼器铜罍、铜甑、山罍樽、铜豆钟各二口，献之。
现代文：刘悛在他的州管辖地区内设立学校，他得到古代的礼器铜昙、铜甑、山晕樽、铜豆钟各二口进献皇上。
English: Liu Ye set up a school in the area under his state's jurisdiction. He received two pieces each of the ancient ceremonial objects, the gong, the gong, the mountain halo barrel and the copper bean clock, to present to the emperor.

古文：迁长兼侍中。
现代文：刘悛迁长兼侍中。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of chancellor and chamberlain.

古文：车驾数幸悛宅。
现代文：世祖多次临幸刘悛宅院。
English: He drove to Liu Yao's house several times.

古文：宅盛治山池，造瓮牖。
现代文：刘悛的宅院修了好些假山水池，造了蓬户茅屋。
English: Liu Yao's mansion has built a number of fake landscape pools and a thatched cottage.

古文：世祖著鹿皮冠，被悛菟皮衾，于牖中宴乐，以冠赐悛，至夜乃去。
现代文：世祖头戴鹿皮帽子，身披刘悛的兔皮被子，在茅屋裹面饮酒作乐，把自己戴的鹿皮帽子赏赐给刘悛，到深夜才离去。
English: The ancestor, wearing a deerskin hat on his head and a rabbit-skin quilt made by Liu Yao, drank alcohol and played music in a thatched hut. He gave Liu Yao the deerskin hat he was wearing, and only left late at night.

古文：后悛从驾登蒋山，上数叹曰： 贫贱之交不可忘，糟糠之妻不下堂。 
现代文：后来刘悛伴随皇帝车驾登蒋山，皇上多次感慨地说： 贫贱之交不可忘，糟糠之妻不下堂。 
English: Later, Liu Ye accompanied the emperor to drive up Mount Jiang, and the emperor repeatedly said with emotion: The poor and lowly friends are unforgettable, and the wife of the trash can't go down the hall.

古文：顾谓悛曰： 此况卿也。
现代文：并回过头来对刘悛说： 这是比拟你啊。
English: He turned back to Liu Ye and said, "This is your metaphor.

古文：世言富贵好改其素情，吾虽有四海，今日与卿尽布衣之适。 
现代文：常言说富贵了就喜欢改变他干素的感情，我虽然富有天下，今天我要同你尽尽寻常百姓的交情。 
English: People in the world say that it is good to change ordinary feelings after becoming rich. Although I have the four seas, today I want to enjoy the happiness of the common people.

古文：悛起拜谢。
现代文：刘悛起身拜谢。
English: Liu Ye stood up and bowed.

古文：迁冠军将军，司徒左长史。
现代文：提升刘悛做冠军将军，司徒左长史。
English: Liu Ye was promoted to champion general, and Szeto was promoted to general.

古文：寻以本官行北兖州缘淮诸军事。
现代文：随后又以本来官职行北兖州缘淮诸军事。
English: Subsequently, he became a military officer with the official rank of the North Luzhou Province.

古文：徙始兴王前军长史、平蛮校尉、蜀郡太守，将军如故，行益州府、州事。
现代文：转调始兴王前军长史、平蛮校尉、蜀郡太守，将军依前未变，行益州府、州事。
English: The former army commander Shi Xingwang, the lieutenant Ping Man, and the governor of Shu County were transferred, and the generals remained unchanged, carrying out the state capital and state affairs.

古文：郡寻改为内史。
现代文：蜀郡太守不久改作内史。
English: Shu County Taishou was soon changed to Inner History.

古文：随府转安西。
现代文：跟随府衙转安西。
English: Follow the prefectural road to Anxi.

古文：悛治事严办，以是会旨。
现代文：刘悛治理严格认真，因此很合皂上的心意。
English: Liu Ye's governance is strict and conscientious, so it is very much in line with Soap's intentions.

古文：宋代太祖辅政，有意欲铸钱，以禅让之际，未及施行。
现代文：宋时太祖辅政，有心要铸造钱币，因正处在禅让的时候，没有来得及施行。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the great-grandfather Fu Zheng had the intention to mint coins, but he did not have time to do so because he was in the middle of a retreat.

古文：建元四年，奉朝请孔觊上《铸钱均货议》，辞证甚博。
现代文：建元四年，奉朝请孔觊向皇帝上《铸钱均货议》，繁征博引，议论周详。
English: In the fourth year of the first century, the imperial court asked Confucius to submit to the emperor the "Discussion on the Equalization of Coinage and Commodities," which was extensively cited and discussed in detail.

古文：其略以为 食货相通，理势自然。
现代文：其文摘要为：粮食钱物融通，道理天然。
English: The abstract of the article is as follows: It is natural for grain, money and goods to be integrated.

古文：李悝曰：籴甚贵伤民，甚贱伤农。 
现代文：李悝说 粮价太贵，则伤害百姓，太贱则伤农 。
English: Li Wei said that if the grain price is too expensive, it will hurt the people, and if it is too low, it will hurt the farmers.

古文：民伤则离散，农伤则国贫。
现代文：伤害了百姓，百姓就会离散，伤损了农业，国家就会贫穷。
English: Hurt the people, the people will be scattered, hurt the agriculture, the country will be poor.

古文：甚贱与甚贵，其伤一也。
现代文：太贱太贵那伤害则是一样的。
English: Too cheap and too expensive are the same in terms of causing damage.

古文：三吴国之关阃，比岁被水潦而籴不贵，是天下钱少。非谷穰贱，此不可不察也。
现代文：三吴是国家的心腹重地，连年被水淹可是粮价不贵，这不是粮食丰收了价贱，而是天下钱少了，这一点不能不考察清楚。
English: Sanwu is the heartland of the country. It has been flooded for years, but grain prices are not expensive. This is not a bumper harvest of grain with low prices, but a shortage of money in the world. This must be clearly examined.

古文：铸钱之弊，在轻重屡变。
现代文：铸钱的弊病在于轻重屡次变更。
English: The drawback of minting money lies in the repeated changes in weight.

古文：重钱患难用，而难用为累轻；轻钱弊盗铸，而盗铸为祸深。
现代文：重钱的缺点是不合用，可是不合用的弊端小；轻钱的弊病在于容易被盗铸，而盗铸的灾祸深。
English: When money is too heavy, people worry that it is inconvenient to circulate, but the damage caused by the inconvenience of circulation is small. The drawback of money being too light is that people can easily forge it secretly. However, the disaster caused by counterfeiting coins is quite serious.

古文：民所盗铸，严法不禁者，由上铸钱惜铜爱工也。
现代文：民间盗铸钱，严厉的法规也禁止不了，是由于官府铸造钱币时省铜省工的缘故。
English: Strict laws and regulations cannot prevent people from stealing and minting money. This is due to the fact that the government saves copper and labor when minting coins.

古文：惜铜爱工者，谓钱无用之器，以通交易，务欲令轻而数多，使省工而易成，不详虑其为患也。
现代文：省铜省工的人，认为钱币本身是无用之物，衹用作沟通交易，因而力求让它分量轻而数量多，使得工夫省而又容易成功，没有详细深入了解它的弊害。
English: Those who wanted to save copper and labor thought that the coin itself was useless and was only used for communication and trade, so they tried to make it light in weight and large in quantity, so that it would save time and be easy to succeed. They did not have a detailed understanding of its drawbacks.

古文：自汉铸五铢钱，至宋文帝，历五百余年，制度世有废兴，而不变五铢钱者，明其轻重可法，得货之宜。
现代文：自从汉铸造五铢钱，到宋文帝，历时五百余年，制度每代有兴有废，却没有变革五铢钱，是因为知道它的轻重合适，适宜货物交换。
English: It took more than five hundred years from the Han Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, and the system had its ups and downs in each generation, but it did not change the five-baht coin, because it knew that its weight was appropriate and it was suitable for the exchange of goods.

古文：以为宜开置泉府，方牧贡金，大兴熔铸。
现代文：认为应该设置钱府，各地诸侯封疆大吏贡献金属，大兴熔铸。
English: It was believed that the Qianfu should be set up, and the great officials of the various provinces and principalities should contribute metal, and the smelting and casting should be greatly promoted.

古文：钱重五铢，一依汉法。
现代文：每钱重五铢，一律依照还塑标准。
English: The weight of the money is five monme, which is completely in accordance with the Han Dynasty.

古文：府库已实，国用有储，乃量奉禄，薄赋税，则家给民足。
现代文：官府库藏充实，国家费用之外仍有储存，就可以衡量俸禄，减轻赋税，那么就会家家有给养、人人得丰足。
English: If the treasury of the government is well-stocked and there are reserves in addition to the state expenses, it will be possible to measure the salary and reduce the tax, then everyone will be well-fed and everyone will be well-off.

古文：顷盗铸新钱者，皆效作翦凿，不铸大钱也。
现代文：近来盗铸新钱的人，都会效作剪凿，不铸大钱。
English: Those who have been stealing new money recently have been cutting and chiseling, not minting large sums of money.

古文：摩泽淄染，始皆类故；交易之后，渝变还新。
现代文：磨去光泽染成黑色，开始都像旧馋，交易之后，又变回盗铸的新钱的样子。
English: Tarnished and dyed black, they start out looking like old money, but after the transaction, they turn back into stolen new money.

古文：良民弗皆淄染，不复行矣。
现代文：善良的百姓都拒绝使用，盗铸的钱也就不再流行。
English: The good people refused to use it, and the stolen money fell out of fashion.

古文：所鬻卖者，皆徒失其物。
现代文：否则，卖的人白白失去他的东西。
English: Otherwise, the seller loses his goods for nothing.

古文：盗铸者，复贱买新钱，淄染更用，反覆生诈，循环起奸，此明主尤所宜禁而不可长也。
现代文：盗铸的人，又再贱买新钱，翻铸再用。反复造假，循环欺诈，这是圣明的君主应予禁止而不许任其发展的。
English: The person who steals money, buys new money at a lower price, recasts it and uses it again. Repeated counterfeiting, circular fraud, this is what the holy monarch should prohibit and not allow to develop.

古文：若官铸已布于民，便严断翦凿：小轻破缺无周郭者，悉不得行；官钱细小者，称合铢两，销以为大。
现代文：假若官府铸钱已流布百姓手中，又严令查搜剪凿盗铸的钱币，使稍轻稍有破损周郭不全的钱，全都不能流行，官府铸的钱不合分量的，称合铢两，重新翻铸成标准钱。
English: If the government-minted money has spread to the hands of the people, and if the government-minted money that is slightly damaged and incomplete can not be popular, the government-minted money that does not match the weight will be weighed and recast into standard money.

古文：利贫良之民，塞奸巧之路。
现代文：有益于贫苦善良的百姓，堵塞行奸取巧的路子。
English: It is beneficial to the poor and kind-hearted people, and blocks the path of those who act treacherously.

古文：钱货既均，远近若一，百姓乐业，市道无争，衣食滋殖矣。 
现代文：做到钱货均平，远近如一，百姓乐业，市场交易没有争吵，衣食就会增产。
English: With the unification of coins, far and near are the same, the people can enjoy their work, there is no dispute in market transactions, and clothing and food will be rich and prosperous.

古文：时议者多以钱货转少，宜更广铸，重其铢两，以防民奸。
现代文：当时议论认为钱币越来越少，应该再多铸些，加重分量，以此防止民间盗铸。
English: At the time, it was argued that there were fewer and fewer coins, and that more should be minted and the weight increased in order to prevent people from stealing them.

古文：太祖使诸州郡大市铜，会晏驾，事寝。
现代文：太祖命诸州郡大量购买铜和炭，适逢太祖晏驾铸造钱币的事就停下来了。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Zhouzhou County to buy a large amount of copper and charcoal, and the minting of coins by the great-grandfather stopped.

古文：永明八年，悛启世祖曰： 南广郡界蒙山下，有城名蒙城，可二顷地，有烧炉四所，高一丈，广一丈五尺。
现代文：丞塱八年，刘悛启奏世祖说： 南卢郡内的蒙山下有座羞继，约二顷地，有四所烧炉，高一丈，宽一丈五尺。
English: In the eighth year of the Joseon Dynasty, Liu Yingqi, the founder of the Song Dynasty, said: "There is a hut at the foot of Mengshan Mountain in Nanlu County. It covers an area of about two hectares and has four kilns. It is one meter high and five meters wide.

古文：从蒙城渡水南百许步，平地掘土深二尺，得铜。
现代文：从蒙城渡过河向南百来步，平地掘土掘到二尺深，得到了铜。
English: From Mengcheng, they walked across the river to the south for a hundred paces, dug into the flat ground to a depth of two feet, and obtained copper.

古文：又有古掘铜坑，深二丈，并居宅处犹存。
现代文：还发现了古代掘铜坑，有二丈深，连同古代掘铜者住的宅屋遗址。
English: An ancient copper mine, two meters deep, was also discovered, along with the ruins of a house where the ancient copper miners lived.

古文：邓通，南安人，汉文帝赐严道县铜山铸钱，今蒙山近青衣水南，青衣左侧并是故秦之严道地。
现代文：邓通，是南安人，汉文帝曾赏赐严道县铜山让他铸钱，现在蒙山临近青衣水南，青衣左侧并是先前秦的严道属地。
English: Duntong, a native of Nan'an, was once rewarded by Emperor Hanwen with the Copper Mountain of Yandao County to mint money. Now, Mengshan is close to the south of Qingyi, and the left side of Qingyi is the former territory of Yandao in Qin.

古文：青衣县又改名汉嘉。
现代文：青衣县又改名叫汉毫。
English: Qingyi County also changed its name to Hanchuo.

古文：且蒙山去南安二百里，案此必是通所铸。
现代文：而且墓山距离直室二百里，依据这些看来必定是邓通当年铸钱的地方。
English: Moreover, the tomb hill is two hundred miles away from the anteroom. According to these, it must be the place where Duntong minted money that year.

古文：近唤蒙山獠出，云 甚可经略 。此议若立，润利无极。 
现代文：就近询问蒙山土居少数民族人，据说 很可经营，此项建议若能施行，利润非常之大。 
English: It is said that Mengshan aboriginal ethnic minority people can be easily operated, and if this suggestion can be implemented, the profit will be very large.

古文：并献蒙山铜一片，又铜石一片，平州铁刀一口。
现代文：并献上蒙山铜一片，铜石一块，平州铁刀一口。
English: He also presented a piece of Mengshan copper, a piece of copper stone, and a piece of Pingzhou iron knife.

古文：上从之，遣使入蜀铸钱，得千余万，功费多，乃止。
现代文：皇上听从了他的建议。派遣使臣进蜀去铸钱，铸了一千余万钱，因为工程花费太多，就停止了。
English: The emperor listened to his suggestion. He sent an envoy to Shu to mint money, and more than ten million coins were minted, but the project was stopped because it cost too much.

古文：悛仍代始兴王鉴为持节、监益宁二州诸军事、益州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：刘悛仍代始兴王萧鉴为持节、监益宁二州诸军事、益州刺史，将军职依前未变。
English: Liu Ye is still the successor of Shi Xing Wang Xiao Jian as the military commander and supervisor of the military in the two states of Yining and Yizhou, and the military post remains unchanged.

古文：悛既藉旧恩，尤能悦附人主，承迎权贵。
现代文：刘悛既凭藉先前的恩宠，又特别能取悦天子，顺承迎合权贵。
English: By virtue of his previous grace, Liu Bei was especially able to please the Son of Heaven, and obediently catered to the powerful.

古文：宾客闺房，供费奢广。
现代文：他家的宾客闺房，供养开销奢费很多。
English: His family's guest boudoir has a lot of luxury expenses.

古文：罢广、司二州，倾资贡献，家无留储。
现代文：罢广、司二州时，他倾资贡献，家中不存储留。
English: He dismissed Guang and Si from their posts in the two prefectures. He gave away all of his wealth, and nothing was left in the family.

古文：在蜀作金浴盆，余金物称是。
现代文：在蜀的时候制作了金浴盆，其余物品用黄金制作的也比比皆是。
English: A gold bathtub was once made in Shudi, and the rest of the gold and silver belongings are comparable to this.

古文：罢任，以本号还都，欲献之，而世祖晏驾。郁林新立，悛奉献减少，郁林知之，讽有司收悛付廷尉，将加诛戮。高宗启救之，见原，禁锢终身。
现代文：罢任后以本号返回京都，本打算把这些献给皇上，可是世祖已晏驾，而郁林王刚即皇帝位，刘悛减少了原先准备的贡献，郁林王晓得这事后，暗示有关官吏收捕刘俊交付廷尉，本打算将他诛杀，高宗启奏说情救他，被谅解，终身不许做官。
English: After his resignation, he returned to Kyoto with this number, intending to present it to the emperor. However, the patriarch had already passed away, and King Ulin, who was the emperor, reduced Liu Jun's originally prepared contribution. King Ulin knew this after the fact, suggesting that the relevant officials arrest Liu Jun and hand him over to the court lieutenant, intending to kill him. Gaozong Qisong said that he would save him, which was understood, and he was not allowed to work as an official for life.

古文：虽见废黜，而宾客日至。
现代文：虽说刘悛被废黜，可是天天有宾客到他家来。
English: Even though he was deposed, guests came to see him every day.

古文：悛妇弟王法显同宋桂阳事，遂启别居，终身不复见之。
现代文：型惶妻子的弟弟王一送题参预了塞挂延的反叛，于是他奏请同妻子分居，终生不再见他的妻子。
English: His wife's younger brother, Wang Yizhong, took part in the rebellion, so he was forced to separate from his wife and never saw her again.

古文：海陵王即位，以白衣除兼左民尚书，寻除正。
现代文：海陵王即皇帝位，玺噬以平民身份兼任左民尚书，不久即授正职。
English: Hailing himself as the emperor, he took on the role of a commoner and also served as the Left Minster of Letters, and was soon given an official post.

古文：高宗立，加领骁骑将军，复故官，驸马都尉。
现代文：高宗被立为皇帝后，刘悛加领骁骑将军，恢复先前的官职，仍然任驸马都尉。
English: After Gaozong was installed as emperor, Liu Bijia led the cavalry general, restored the previous official position, and still served as the captain of the cavalry.

古文：建武二年，虏主侵寿阳，诏悛以本官假节出镇漅湖，迁散骑常侍、右卫将军。
现代文：堑叁二年，魏虏主侵犯蠢千，皇上诏命型堕以本官假节出镇遝姻，迁散骑常侍、右卫将军。
English: In the thirty-second year of the Wei Dynasty, the ruler of Wei invaded Buxian, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering his officials to leave the town for the holiday, dispersing the equestrian constables and the right guards.

古文：虏寇既盛，悛又以本官出屯新亭。
现代文：魏虏侵犯更凶，刘悛又以本官出屯新亭。
English: Wei Rui's encroachments were even more ferocious, and Liu Bei marched out of Xinting with his own officials.

古文：悛历朝皆见恩遇。
现代文：历朝都被恩宠厚待。
English: All dynasties have been treated graciously.

古文：太祖为鄱阳王锵纳悛妹为妃，高宗又为晋安王宝义纳悛女为妃，自此连姻帝室。
现代文：太祖为鄱阳王萧锵纳娶型堕的妹妹作王妃，高宗又为晋安王宝羞纳娶型撞的女儿作王妃，从此以后与皇帝家联姻。
English: The great-great-grandfather made the queen consort of King Xiao Rongna of Shenyang, who married his unlucky sister, and Gaozong made the queen consort of King Bao Shina of Jinan, who married his unlucky daughter. From then on, they were united with the imperial family.

古文：王敬则反，悛出守琅邪城，转五兵尚书，领太子左卫率。
现代文：王敬则反叛时，型逡外出镇守堕至啦，转五兵尚书，领太子左卫率。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, when he rebelled, fell to the level of a town guard who went out of town, became a five-soldier Shangshu, and led the prince to the left guard.

古文：未拜，明帝崩，东昏即位，改授散骑常侍，领骁骑将军，尚书如故。
现代文：他没有接受任职命令，旦困驾崩，塞亘堡继皇帝位，改授刘悛为散骑常侍，领骁骑将军，尚书依前未变。
English: He did not accept the order to hold office, and once he died, he was forced to abdicate the throne, and Liu Bei was re-designated as a knight-errant and general. Shang Shu remained unchanged.

古文：卫送山陵，卒，年六十一。
现代文：守护皇陵。逝世，享年六十一。
English: He guarded the imperial mausoleum. He died at the age of sixty-one.

古文：赠太常，常侍、都尉如故。
现代文：追赠太常，常侍、都尉依前不变。
English: The posthumous gift is too frequent, and the regular attendants and captains remain unchanged.

古文：谥曰敬。
现代文：谧号为敬。
English: His nickname is Zeng.

古文：虞悰，字景豫，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：虞悰字景豫，是会稽余姚人。
English: The character Jing Yu, also known as Yu Xuan, is a member of the Yuyao people.

古文：祖啸父，晋左民尚书。
现代文：他祖父虞啸父，是晋左民尚书。
English: His grandfather, Yu Xiaotian, was a Jin Zuomin Shangshu.

古文：父秀之，黄门郎。
现代文：他父亲虞秀之，是黄门郎。
English: His father, Yu Xiu Zhi, was Huang Men Lang.

古文：悰少而谨敕，有至性。
现代文：虞悰从少年起就谨慎整饬，有至性。
English: Since he was a young boy, Gu Yao has been careful to tidy up his life.

古文：秀之于都亡，悰东出奔丧，水浆不入口。
现代文：他的父亲虞秀之在京城死亡，虞悰束去奔丧，水浆都不喝。
English: His father, Yu Xiu Zhi, died in the capital, and Yu Xiu Zhou went to the funeral and did not drink the water.

古文：州辟主簿，建平王参军，尚书仪曹郎，太子洗马，领军长史，正员郎，累至州治中，别驾，黄门郎。
现代文：先被州征作主簿，后任建平王参军，尚书仪曹郎，太子洗马，领军长史，正员郎，直升至州治中，别驾，黄门郎。
English: First, he was enlisted by the state as a master, and later he was appointed as Jianping Wang to join the army, Shang Shuxi Cao, Prince Zhaima, the leader of the army, Changshi, Zhengjian Lang, and rushed to the state middle school, Do not drive, Huangmen Lang.

古文：初，世祖始从官，家尚贫薄。悰推国士之眷，数相分与；每行，必呼上同载。上甚德之。
现代文：起先，世祖刚刚出来作官，家境尚贫穷，虞悰推施对国中杰出人才的眷爱，多次分给家财，每次出行，一定要叫上世祖一同坐在车上，世祖很感激他。
English: At first, Shizu had just come out as an official, his family was still poor, and Gu Ying pushed his affection for the outstanding talents in the country. He distributed his family's wealth many times. Every time he traveled, he made sure to have Shizu sit in the car with him. Shizu was very grateful to him.

古文：升明中，世祖为中军，引悰为谘议参军，遣吏部郎江谧持手书谓悰曰： 今因江吏郎有白，以君情顾，意欲相屈。 
现代文：升明年间，世祖为中军，引荐虞悰做谘议参军，派遣吏部郎江谧带着他的亲笔信对虞悰说： 现在通过江吏郎转告，因为你一向与我的情谊，有心想请你屈就。 
English: In the middle of the following year, the ancestor of the Chinese army recommended Yu Qi to consult and join the army, and sent the secretary, Lang Jiangjun, with his personal letter to Yu Qi, saying: Now I will tell you through Jiang Rilang, because you have always been my friend, and I would like to ask you to bow down.

古文：建元初，转太子中庶子，迁后军长史，领步兵校尉，镇北长史、宁朔将军、南东海太守。
现代文：建元初年，虞悰转太子中庶子，迁后军长史，领步兵校尉，镇北长史、宁朔将军、南东海太守。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, Yuxuan became the prince's middle child, and later became the commander of the army, the leader of the infantry, the commander of the north, the general of Ningshuo, and the governor of the South East Sea.

古文：寻为豫章内史，将军如故。
现代文：不久任豫章内史，将军职依前未变。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Yuzhang Naishi, and his military post remained unchanged.

古文：悰治家富殖，奴婢无游手，虽在南土，而会稽海味无不毕致焉。
现代文：虞悰治家生财有道，家中奴婢没有闲人，虽然在南方做官，而会稽的海味没有不全部弄到那裹的。
English: His family was well-to-do, and there was no lack of servants in the family. Although he was an official in the south, there was no way he could not get all the seafood from the inspection there.

古文：迁辅国将军、始兴王长史、平蛮校尉、蜀郡太守。
现代文：后迁辅国将军、始兴王长史、平蛮校尉、蜀郡太守。
English: Later, the general of Shu Province, Shi Xing Wang Changshi, the lieutenant of Ping Man, and the governor of Shu County followed.

古文：转司徒司马，将军如故。
现代文：转司徒司马，将军职仍未变。
English: Transferring to Sima, the military post remains unchanged.

古文：悰善为滋味，和齐皆有方法。
现代文：虞悰很会制作各种美味食品，腌制酱菜也很有技巧。
English: The yakitori is very good at making all kinds of delicious foods, and the pickled sauces are also very skillful.

古文：豫章王嶷盛馔享宾，谓悰曰： 今日肴羞，宁有所遗不？ 
现代文：豫章王萧嶷广设僎肴招待宾朋，对虞悰说： 今天的肴馑，难道有什么漏掉的吗? 
English: Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui prepared a wide range of dishes to invite guests and friends, and said to Yu Yu: Today's dishes, is there anything missing?

古文：悰曰： 恨无黄颔，何曾《食疏》所载也。 
现代文：虞悰说： 遗憾的是没有雏鸟肉羹，这是何曾《食疏》上载有的。 
English: Gu Yao said, "Unfortunately, there is no broiler meat soup, which is what once appeared in the "Food Diary."

古文：迁散骑常侍，太子右率。
现代文：虞悰迁散骑常侍，太子右率。
English: Gu Ying, the prince's right-hand man, rode horseback.

古文：永明八年，大水，百官戎服救太庙，悰朱衣乘车卤簿，于宣阳门外行马内驱打人，为有司所奏，见原。
现代文：永明八年，大水，所有官员都穿着军服抢救太庙，虞悰身着红色官服乘车带着仪仗队，在宣阳门外行马内驱打人，被有关官员弹奏。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, there was a big flood, and all officials wore military uniforms to save the Great Temple. Gu Yu, dressed in a red official uniform, rode in a car with an honor guard, and drove a man outside the Xuanyang Gate, and was played by the relevant officials.

古文：上以悰布衣之旧，从容谓悰曰： 我当令卿复祖业。 
现代文：被皇上原谅了。皇上由于发迹前的老交情，从容对虞悰说： 我要让你恢复祖上的基业。 
English: He was forgiven by the emperor. Due to the old friendship before his rise to fame, the emperor calmly said to Yuxuan: I want you to restore the ancestral inheritance.

古文：转侍中，朝廷咸惊其美拜。
现代文：虞悰转侍中。朝廷上下都惊讶他能有如此好的任命。
English: The imperial court was surprised that he had been so well appointed.

古文：迁祠部尚书。
现代文：迁祠部尚书。
English: The relocation of the ancestral hall is still a work in progress.

古文：世祖幸芳林园，就悰求扁米粣。
现代文：世祖临幸芳林园，到虞悰处要扁米粽子。
English: The ancestor of Linxingfang Forest Park, to the yakitori place to make flat rice dumplings.

古文：悰献粣及杂肴数十舆，太官鼎味不及也。
现代文：虞悰献上粽子以及各种杂肴几十舆，掌百官膳食的太官烹饪也赶不上。
English: There are dozens of yakitori and various side dishes presented with yakitori, and the eunuch cooking, which is in charge of hundreds of official meals, can't keep up.

古文：上就悰求诸饮食方，悰秘不肯出。上醉后体不快，悰乃献醒酒鲭鲊一方而已。
现代文：皇上向虞悰要各种饮食制作的配方，虞悰保密不肯出具，皇上醉后身体不舒畅，虞悰才献醒酒鲭舴一种配方完事。
English: The emperor asked Yuxuan for recipes for various food preparations, but Yuxuan kept them confidential and refused to issue them. After the emperor got drunk, his body was not comfortable, so Yuxuan presented him with a recipe.

古文：出为冠军将军，车骑长史，转度支尚书，领步兵校尉。
现代文：出任冠军将军，车骑长史，转度支尚书，领步兵校尉。
English: He served as a champion general, has a long history of driving and riding, has a good record of support, and is an infantry captain.

古文：郁林立，改领右军将军，扬州大中正，兼大匠卿。
现代文：郁林王被立做皇帝，虞悰改为领右军将军，扬州大中正，兼大匠卿。
English: Yu Lin Wang was made emperor, and Yu Xuan was made the general leading the right army. Yangzhou Da Zhongzheng was also made the grand master.

古文：起休安陵，于陵所受局下牛酒，坐免官。
现代文：起造休安陵，在陵所接受局下给的祭祀用的牛和酒，因此受罚被免去官职。
English: He was punished by being removed from his official post for starting the construction of the Shu'an Mausoleum and accepting the sacrificial cattle and wine provided by the government at the mausoleum.

古文：隆昌元年，以白衣领职。
现代文：隆昌元年，以平民身份领职。
English: In the first year of Longchang, he took the lead as a civilian.

古文：郁林废，悰窃叹曰： 王、徐遂缚袴废天子，天下岂有此理邪？ 
现代文：郁林王被废黜皇帝位，虞悰私下感叹说： 王、徐就这样像绑扎起裤子来一样轻易地把天子废了，天下哪有这种道理? 
English: When King Yulin was dethroned as emperor, Yu Xi privately lamented, "Wang and Xu have dethroned the Son of Heaven as easily as if they had tied up their trousers. How can this be justified?

古文：延兴元年，复领右军。
现代文：延兴元年，他又领右军将军。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, he also led the right-wing general.

古文：明帝立，悰称疾不陪位。
现代文：明帝萧鸾被立为皇帝，虞悰谎称患病不愿陪侍。
English: When the Ming Emperor Xiao Wei was enthroned, Yu Wei lied that he was ill and did not want to accompany him.

古文：帝使尚书令王晏赍废立事示悰，以悰旧人，引参佐命。
现代文：皇帝派尚书令王晏拿着有关废立事的文书给虞悰看，因为虞悰是先朝老臣，想拉拢来参与辅佐创业。
English: The emperor sent Shang Shu to order Wang Yao to show Yu Yao the document on waste disposal, because Yu Yao was an old minister of the previous dynasty and wanted to recruit him to participate in assisting entrepreneurship.

古文：悰谓晏曰： 主上圣明，公卿戮力，宁假朽老以匡赞惟新乎？
现代文：虞悰对王晏说： 主上圣明，公卿们齐心努力，还用藉助老朽来匡扶赞助维新吗?
English: Gu Yao said to Wang Yao, "Lord, the nobles have made a concerted effort, but are they still using their old age to support and sponsor the renovation?

古文：不敢闻命。 
现代文：不敢听从。 
English: I dare not obey.

古文：朝议欲纠之，仆射徐孝嗣曰： 此亦古之遗直。 
现代文：朝廷上商议想纠查他，仆射徐孝嗣说： 这也是古时遗留的耿直做法。 
English: When the imperial court wanted to investigate him, his attendant, Xu Xiaoji, said: This is also an ancient practice of Geng Zhi.

古文：众议乃止。
现代文：众人的提议才停止。
English: That's when the crowd's suggestions stopped.

古文：悰称疾笃还东，上表曰： 臣族陋海区，身微稽土，猥属兴运，荷窃稠私，徒越星纪，终惭报答。
现代文：虞悰称自己病重想返回老家去，上表说： 我的家族在偏僻的海边，贫寒的门户在会稽的土地上，辱值兴盛的运道，叨荷深深的偏爱，虚度岁月，到头来因未能报答而惭愧。
English: Gu Yao said that he was seriously ill and wanted to return to his hometown, the above table said: My family is in the remote seaside, the poor gateway is in the land of the association, the dishonor of the prosperous fortune, the burden of deep preference, the waste of time, and finally the shame of not being able to repay.

古文：卫养乖方，抱疾婴固，寝瘵以来，倏逾旬朔，频加医治，曾未瘳损。
现代文：保养无方，患病更为沉重，卧病以来转眼过了一个月，频频医治，竟然不见效果。
English: There was no way to take care of him, his illness was more severe, and it had been a month since he had been bedridden. He was treated frequently, but to no avail.

古文：惟此朽顿，理难振复，乞解所职，尽疗余辰。 
现代文：就这样衰弱，按理也难恢复振作起来，请求解除官职，在剩余的时能尽心疗养。 
English: Thus weakened, it would be difficult for him to recover his spirits, ask to be relieved of his duties, and spend the rest of his time recuperating.

古文：诏赐假百日。
现代文：皇上有诏答应给他百天假期。
English: The emperor had promised him a hundred-day vacation.

古文：转给事中，光禄大夫，寻加正员常侍。
现代文：后转给事中，光禄大夫，不久又加正员常侍。
English: Later, he was transferred to Dr. Guanglu during the incident, and he was soon promoted to a regular attendant.

古文：永元元年，卒。
现代文：永元元年逝世。
English: He died in the first year of the Eisho era.

古文：时年六十五。
现代文：当时六十五岁。
English: He was then sixty-five years old.

古文：悰性敦实，与人知识，必相存访，亲疏皆有终始，世以此称之。
现代文：虞悰生性诚实厚道，同别人相知相识，必定去拜访，亲近疏远都能有始有终，很为世人称道。
English: Soon, Zou Bo-yu's sister was to be married, and she was supposed to leave the next day, but she ran away with others the night before, and no one at home could find her.

古文：从弟袤，矢志不仕。王敬则反，取袤监会稽郡，而军事悉付寒人张灵宝，郡人攻郡杀灵宝，袤以不豫事得全。
现代文：堂弟虞袤，守志不作官，王敬则造反时，要他监理会稽郡，可是他把军事全交由出身贫寒的张玺宜去管理，郡民攻打郡衙杀了张玺宣，虞童由于没有参预管理而能够保全自己。
English: His cousin, Yuxuan, did not hold any official position. When Wang Jing rebelled, he asked him to supervise the county government. However, he left the entire military to Zhang Xiyi, who was born poor, to manage. The county people attacked the county and killed Zhang Xuanxuan. Since Yuxuan did not participate in the pre-administration, he was able to protect himself.

古文：胡谐之，豫章南昌人也。
现代文：胡谐之，是豫章南昌人。
English: Later, he finally became a Buddhist monk. Zibo Yu was also finally defeated. Hu Junzhi, Yu Zhang Nanchang people.

古文：祖廉之，治书侍御史。
现代文：他祖父胡廉之，曾任治书侍御史。
English: His grandfather, Hu Lianzhi, was once the chief secretary to the emperor.

古文：父翼之，州辟不就。
现代文：他父亲翅睾造，州裹曾征他任职他不就任。
English: His father, Hu Yizhi, was hired by the state government but did not take up the post.

古文：谐之初辟州从事主簿，临贺王国常侍，员外郎，抚军行参军，晋熙王安西中兵参军，南梁郡太守。
现代文：胡谐之起初被征作州从事主簿，堕垄逗国常侍，员外郎，抚军行参军，晋熙王安西中兵参军，亩遝盛太守。
English: At first, Hu Jini was conscripted into the state to engage in the master book, fell into a rut, served as the country's regular attendant, served as a foreign rooster, led the army to join the army, joined the army as a junior enlisted soldier of King Anxi of Jinxi, and became the governor of Muyun Sheng.

古文：以器局见称。
现代文：以才识气度而被人称道。
English: He was praised for his talent and grace.

古文：徙邵陵王南中郎中兵，领汝南太守，不拜。
现代文：徙迎陆王南中郎中兵，领这直太守，没有接受任命。
English: Wang Nanzhongro, the lieutenant general who led the troops to welcome the landing, did not accept the appointment.

古文：除射声校尉，州别驾。
现代文：除授射声校尉，州别驾。
English: Unless you're a lieutenant, you're out of your league.

古文：除左军将军，不拜，仍除邵陵王左军谘议。
现代文：除授左军将军，没有接受任命。乃除授塑厘王左军谘议。
English: However, he did not accept the appointment. Instead, he consulted with Wang Shuli, the commander of the Left Army.

古文：世祖顿盆城，使谐之守寻阳城，及为江州，复以谐之为别驾，委以事任。
现代文：世祖屯驻盆城时，派胡谐之守寻阳城，待到世祖为江州刺史时，又任用胡谐之作别驾，把职任上的事委托给他。
English: When the founder of the dynasty was stationed in Boncheng, he sent Hu Xinyi to guard Huan Yangcheng. When the founder of the dynasty was writing the history of Jiangzhou, he also appointed Hu Xinyi to be his second-in-command, entrusting him with his duties.

古文：文惠太子镇襄阳，世祖以谐之心腹，出为北中郎征虏司马、扶风太守，爵关内侯。
现代文：文惠太子镇守襄阳时，世祖把胡谐之当心腹看待，让他出任北中郎征虏司马、扶风太守，进爵关内侯。
English: When the Prince Wen Hui was in charge of Xiangyang, the founder of the dynasty took care of Hu Xian and appointed him as the Northern Middle Lord, the Conqueror of Sima, the Protector of Fu Feng, and the Duke of Guanai.

古文：在镇毗赞，甚有心力。
现代文：在镇治辅佐相赞，很有心力。
English: In the town of Zhenzhi, the assistant assistant minister is very enthusiastic and has a lot of energy.

古文：建元二年，还为给事中，骁骑将军，本州中正，转黄门郎，领羽林监。
现代文：建元二年，还京为给事中，骁骑将军，本州中正，转黄门郎，领羽林监。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, he returned to Beijing as a middle-ranking official, a general riding a horse, a middle-ranking official in Honshu, a Huangmen Lang, and a forestry inspector.

古文：永明元年，转守卫尉，中正如故。
现代文：永明元年，转守卫尉，中正依前未变。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was transferred to the position of guard lieutenant, but remained in the same position as before.

古文：明年，加给事中。
现代文：第二年，加给事中。
English: The following year, he was added to the case.

古文：三年，迁散骑常侍，太子右率。
现代文：永明三年，迁散骑常侍，太子右率。
English: In the third year of Yongming, the imperial equerries were dispersed, with the crown prince leading from the right.

古文：五年，迁左卫将军，加给事中，中正如故。
现代文：永明五年，迁左卫将军，加给事中，中正依前未变。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, General Zhao Wei was transferred to the capital, and Zhongzheng remained unchanged.

古文：谐之风形瑰润，善自居处，兼以旧恩见遇，朝士多与交游。
现代文：胡谐之风度潇洒形貌漂亮，很会为人，加上同皇上有老交情而被厚待，所以朝中的官员大多同他交好往来。
English: He had a humorous demeanor, a dashing appearance, and was very personable. In addition, he had a long friendship with the emperor and was treated well, so most of the officials in the imperial court had a good relationship with him.

古文：六年，迁都官尚书。
现代文：永明六年，迁都官尚书。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the post of metropolitan official.

古文：上欲迁谐之，尝从容谓谐之曰： 江州有几侍中邪？ 
现代文：皇上想再提升胡谐之，曾经从容地对他说： 曾在江州共事的人中有几个侍中啊? 
English: The emperor wanted to elevate Hunny again, and once calmly said to him: How many attendants were there among those who worked together in Jiangzhou?

古文：谐之答曰： 近世唯有程道惠一人而已。 
现代文：胡谐之回答说： 最近衹有程道惠一个人。 
English: Hu Junzhi replied, "Recently, there was a person named Cheng Daohui.

古文：上曰： 当令有二。 
现代文：皇上说： 应当让有两个。 
English: The emperor said: Let there be two.

古文：后以语尚书令王俭，俭意更异，乃以为太子中庶子，领左卫率。
现代文：后来把这说给尚书令王俭听王俭的意见是另外任职，于是就任用胡谐之做太子中庶子，领左卫率。
English: Later, he told this to Shang Shuling Wang Jian, who listened to Wang Jian's opinion that it was a separate post, so he appointed Hu Jian as the prince's middle child, leading the left guard.

古文：谐之兄谟之亡，谐之上表曰： 臣私门罪衅，早备荼苦。
现代文：胡谐之的哥哥胡谟之死了，胡谐之上表奏道： 我私门的罪孽，早就经受了苦毒。
English: Hu Junzhi's brother, Humuzhi, died. Hu Junzhi said, "I have already endured the bitterness of my family's sins.

古文：兄弟三人，共相抚鞠，婴孩抱疾，得及成人。
现代文：兄弟三个人，共同生活互相抚养，从婴孩时起经常患病，好不容易长大成人。
English: The three brothers, who live together and support each other, have often been ill since they were babies, but have managed to grow to adulthood.

古文：长兄臣谌之，复早殒没，与亡第二兄臣谟之衔戚家庭，得蒙训长，情同极荫。
现代文：大哥胡谌之，又早早去世，和二哥胡谟之在家中饱含忧伤。得蒙二哥的教训长大成人，那情感就像受到极大的荫庇一样。
English: The elder brother, Hu Yanzhi, died at an early age, and the second brother, Humuzhi, was full of sorrow at home. Having grown up with the teachings of the second brother, that emotion was like being greatly overshadowed.

古文：何图一旦奄见弃放，吉凶分违，不获临奉，乞解所职。 
现代文：怎能想到突然弃舍。彼凶我吉互相离违，不能亲临侍奉，请求解除我的官职。 
English: How can I think of suddenly abandoning him? He and I have fallen out with each other, I can't attend the service in person, and I've asked to be relieved of my official duties.

古文：诏不许。
现代文：韶告不许。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：改卫尉，中庶子如故。
现代文：改任卫尉，中庶子依前未变。
English: He was reappointed to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, while his son-in-law remained unchanged.

古文：八年，上遣谐之率禁兵讨巴东王子响于江陵，兼长史行事。
现代文：八年，皇上派塑造之率领禁兵到逗堕讨伐巴束王王飨，兼长史行事。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor sent Shaping Zhou to lead the forbidden soldiers to Zhaopu to fight against the barbarian King Wangqi, and also acted for a long time.

古文：台军为子响所败，有司奏免官，权行军事如故。
现代文：禁军被子响打败，被有关官员劾奏免宫，暂代军事职务和前时一样。
English: The Forbidden Army was soundly defeated by the Sons of Heaven, and was dismissed from the palace by the relevant officials. The temporary military positions were the same as before.

古文：复为卫尉，领中庶子，本州中正。
现代文：再做卫尉，领中庶子，本州中正。
English: He was also a lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, an illegitimate son of a chieftain, and a middle-ranking official in Honshu.

古文：谐之有识计，每朝廷官缺及应迁代，密量上所用人，皆如其言，虞悰以此称服之。
现代文：塑趱之对于考核官吏很有见解，每当朝廷官员缺额以及应提拔替代，他暗中分析预测皇上要任用的人，都像他所说的那样，虞悰因为这些佩服他。
English: Shuxuan Zhi was very insightful about the evaluation of officials. Whenever there was a shortage of court officials and they needed to be promoted, he secretly analyzed and predicted the people the emperor wanted to appoint. As he said, Gu Ying admired him for these reasons.

古文：十年，转度支尚书，领卫尉。
现代文：塱十年，胡谐之转度支尚书，领卫尉。
English: Over the past ten years, he has been promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the guard.

古文：明年，卒，年五十一。
现代文：永塱十一年逝世，终年五十一岁。
English: Yongzheng died at the age of fifty-one in the eleventh year of his reign.

古文：赠右将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：追赠右将军、豫州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Right General and the title of Henan Provincial Grand Historian.

古文：谥曰肃。
现代文：谧号为肃。
English: His posthumous name is Su.

古文：史臣曰：送钱赢两，言此无忘。一笥之怀，报以都尉。千金可失，贵在人心。
现代文：史臣曰：送一铜钱赢一两银，说到这些切莫忘记，一笥饭食的恩德，获得一个都尉的报答，可失的是千金，可贵的是人心。
English: Shichen said, "When it comes to giving a copper coin to win a silver coin or two, don't forget that the reward of a bowl of rice and the reward of a captain can cost thousands of gold and precious human hearts.

古文：夫谨而信，泛爱众，其为利也博矣。
现代文：谨慎而诚信，广施爱心，那就能获得很多好处。
English: Prudence, honesty, and a generous heart bring many benefits.

古文：况乎先觉潜龙，结厚于布素？随才致位，理固然也。
现代文：何况对于潜藏蛟龙事先有了觉察，在贫贱的时候结交深厚，依凭才华达到高位，其道理本当如此。
English: What's more, they were aware of the hidden dragon in advance, had deep friendships when they were poor, and achieved high positions by virtue of their talent, which is really the reason.

古文：赞曰：到藉豪华，晚怀虚素。
现代文：赞曰：到掐家业豪华，后能心怀简朴。
English: Zang said: "I was born into a luxurious family, but later I was able to keep things simple.

古文：虞生富厚，侈不违度。
现代文：虞悰家资富厚，花费能不超越限度。
English: The wealth of the Guozhen family is rich, and the expenditure can not exceed the limit.

古文：刘实朝交，胡乃蕃故，颉颃亮采，康衢骋步。
现代文：刘悛真正同朝廷交好，塑证之是世担在藩镇时的旧友，辅助办事刘、胡二人不相上下，共同在康庄大道上驰骋。
English: Liu Ye truly befriended the imperial court. This is evidenced by the fact that he was an old friend of Shetan Luo when they were in the town of the domain. The two assistants, Liu and Hu, were on a par with each other, and they galloped together on Kangzhuang Avenue.

