古文：万士和王之诰吴百朋刘应节王遴毕锵舒化李世达曾同享辛自修温纯赵世卿李汝华万士和，字思节，宜兴人。
现代文：万士和，字思节，宜兴人。
English: Wanshe, Bixi, Yixing.

古文：父吉，桐庐训导，有学术。
现代文：父亲万吉，为桐庐训导，有学术造诣。
English: His father, Wanji, was Tonglu's tutor and was academically accomplished.

古文：士和成嘉靖二十年进士，改庶吉士，授礼部主事。
现代文：万士和为嘉靖二十年的进士，改任庶吉士，授职为礼部主事。
English: Wanshiwa, who has been a member of Jiajing for 20 years, was appointed as an associate member of Jiajing, and was in charge of the ceremonial department.

古文：父丧除，乞便养母，改南京兵部。
现代文：父丧期满，请求就便赡养母亲，改任南京兵部的职务。
English: When his father's mourning period expired, he asked to support his mother and was reassigned to the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：累迁江西佥事，岁裁上供瓷器千计。
现代文：逐渐迁职为江西佥事，一年裁减上供瓷器上千件。
English: The gradual transfer of posts is a Jiangxi anecdote, and the supply of more than a thousand pieces of porcelain is reduced every year.

古文：迁贵州提学副使，进湖广参政。
现代文：调任贵州提学副使，升任湖广参政。
English: He was transferred to the post of deputy envoy of Guizhou to promote education, and was promoted to participate in politics in Guangxi.

古文：抚纳叛苗二十八砦，以功赉银币。
现代文：安抚、接纳了二十八寨的叛乱苗民，因功被赏赐银币。
English: He pacified and accepted the rebellious Miao people of the 28 Villages, and was awarded a silver coin for his service.

古文：三殿工兴，采木使者旁午。
现代文：营造三殿的工程动工，采集木料的使者交错纷繁。
English: The project to build the three halls has begun, and the messengers collecting wood are intertwined.

古文：士和经画备至，民赖以安。
现代文：万士和的谋划备至，百姓赖以安宁。
English: The peace plan is ready, and the people rely on peace.

古文：迁江西按察使，之官逾期，劾免。
现代文：调任江西按察使，赴任超过日期，被弹劾而免职。
English: He was transferred to the post of inspector general of Jiangxi Province, and was impeached and removed from office.

古文：起山东按察使，再行广东左布政使。
现代文：他出任山东按察使，再调任广东左布政使。
English: He served as the inspector of Shandong Province, and then was transferred to the political envoy of Guangdong Province.

古文：政事故专决于左，士和曰： 朝廷设二使，如左右手，非有轩轾。 
现代文：政事以往专门由左职决定，万士和称 ：朝廷设置左右布政，如同左右手，没有轻重高低。 
English: In the past, political affairs were exclusively decided by the left office, and Wanshiwa said: the imperial court set up a left-right distribution of power, just like the right and left hands, there is no importance.

古文：乃约右使分日治事。
现代文：于是与右使相约分日办事。
English: As a result, he and the right-hand man agreed to split the day's work.

古文：召拜应天府尹，道迁右副都御史。
现代文：皇帝召见，任命他为应天府尹，循例调任为右副都御史。
English: The emperor summoned him and appointed him as Ying Tianfu Yin, and he was successively appointed as the right vice-governor of the capital.

古文：督南京粮储，奏请便民六事。
现代文：督导南京的粮食储备，奏请六项便利百姓的事。
English: Supervise the grain reserves of Nanjing, and report six matters of convenience to the people.

古文：隆庆初，进户部右侍郎，总督仓场。
现代文：隆庆初年，晋升为户部右侍郎，统管仓场。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he was promoted to the right-hand man of the household, in charge of the warehouse.

古文：寻改礼部，进左。
现代文：不久，改任礼部职，晋升为左侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the position of the Ministry of Ceremonies and was promoted to the position of the Left Attendant.

古文：引疾归。
现代文：称病回乡。
English: He returned to his hometown saying he was ill.

古文：神宗立，起南京礼部侍郎，署国子监事。
现代文：神宗即位，他出任南京礼部侍郎，负责国子监的事务。
English: When Emperor Jinsong ascended to the throne, he became the attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department and was responsible for the affairs of the Imperial Procurator.

古文：万历元年，礼部尚书陆树声去位。
现代文：万历元年，礼部尚书陆树声离职。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the head of the ceremonial department, Shangshu Lu Shusheng, left the post.

古文：张居正用树声言，召士和代之。
现代文：张居正采纳了陆树声的建议，召万士和代替他。
English: Zhang Juzheng accepted the suggestion of Lu Shusheng, summoned Wan Shao and replaced him.

古文：条上崇俭数事。
现代文：上任后逐条奏陈崇尚节俭的数件事。
English: After taking office, Chen Chongxiang sparingly listed several things.

古文：又以灾祲屡见，奏乞杜幸门，容戆直，汰冗员，抑干请，多犯时忌。
现代文：又因为灾异与不祥之气屡次出现，奏请关闭宠幸之门，容纳刚直，淘汰冗员、抑制分外求请，大都触犯了当时的禁忌。
English: Also, due to the repeated occurrence of calamities and ominous spirits, most of the taboos at that time were violated, such as closing the door of the favorite, accommodating the upright, eliminating redundant personnel, and suppressing extra requests.

古文：俺答及所部贡马，边臣请加官赏。
现代文：俺答与部属贡奉马匹，边防大臣奏请增加对他们的官方奖赏。
English: I asked my subordinates to donate horses, and the Minister of Border Defense asked to increase the official reward for them.

古文：士和言赏赉有成额，毋徇边臣额外请，从之。
现代文：万士和称赏赐有规定的数额，不要依从边防大臣额外的请求，皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor listened to the border minister's additional request not to grant the reward in the prescribed amount, and the emperor followed his advice.

古文：方士倚冯保求官，士和持不可。
现代文：方士倚仗冯保请求封官，万士和坚决不同意。
English: Fang Shi leaned on Feng Bao to request the closure of the official, and Wanshi and resolutely disagreed.

古文：成国公朱希忠殁，居正许赠王，士和力争。
现代文：成国公朱希忠去世，张居正同意赠封为王，万士和极力争辩。
English: After the death of Zhu Xizhong, the prince of Chengguo, Zhang Juzheng agreed to bestow the title of king, which was vigorously disputed.

古文：给事中余懋学言事得罪，士和言直臣不当斥。
现代文：给事中余懋学议论事情被治罪，万士和称正直的大臣不应当责备。
English: In the case of Yu Yingxue discussing the matter of being punished, the people and the minister who claimed to be honest should not be blamed.

古文：于是积忤居正。
现代文：因此屡次抵触张居正。
English: As a result, Zhang Jizheng was repeatedly opposed.

古文：给事中朱南雍承风劾之，遂谢病去。
现代文：给事中朱南雍乘机弹劾他，他便告病离去。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhu Nanyong took the opportunity to impeach him, and he then left, saying he was ill.

古文：居正殁，起南京礼部尚书，再疏引年不赴。
现代文：张居正去世后，请他出任南京礼部尚书，他再次上奏延年不赴任。
English: After the death of Zhang Juzheng, he was asked to serve as the secretary of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, and he again announced that he would not take up the post for another year.

古文：卒，年七十一。
现代文：直至他去世了，享年七十一岁。
English: He died at the age of 71.

古文：赠太子少保，谥文恭。
现代文：赠封为太子少保，谥号文恭。
English: He was awarded the title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard and given the posthumous name of Wenyong.

古文：王之诰，字告若，石首人。
现代文：王之诰，字告若，石首人。
English: The king's scepter, the word is young, the stone-headed man.

古文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年的进士。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：授吉水知县。
现代文：授职为吉水知县。
English: The post was awarded to Yoshimizu Prefecture.

古文：迁户部主事，改兵部员外郎，出为河南佥事。
现代文：升任户部主事，改任兵部员外郎，出京担任河南佥事。
English: He was promoted to the head of the household department, changed to the member of the military department, and went to Beijing to serve as the Henan anecdote.

古文：讨师尚诏有功，转参议。
现代文：讨伐师尚诏有功，转为参议。
English: The crusader Shang Zhaozhu was promoted to be a councillor.

古文：调大同兵备副使。
现代文：调迁为大同的兵备副使。
English: He was transferred to be Datong's deputy envoy for military preparedness.

古文：以捣板升功，增俸一级，进山西右参政，擢右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：因为捣毁蒙古居屋的功劳，增加一级俸禄，晋升为山西右参政。又被提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
English: Because of the merit of destroying the Mongolian HOS, his salary was increased by one grade, and he was promoted to the Shanxi right-wing politician. He was also promoted to the right-wing governor of the capital, the governor of Liaodong.

古文：大兴屯田，每营垦田百五十顷，役军四百人。
现代文：他大兴屯田，每营开垦田地一百五十顷，服役的军士四百人。
English: He greatly expanded the garrison, with each battalion reclaiming one hundred and fifty hectares of farmland, and with four hundred soldiers in service.

古文：列上便宜八事，行之。
现代文：向皇上奏陈八项便利、适宜的事情，世宗施行了他的主张。
English: He reported eight convenient and appropriate things to the emperor, and Shizong implemented his proposal.

古文：召为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：召见他，任命为兵部右侍郎。
English: He was summoned and appointed as the right hand man of the military department.

古文：寻以左侍郎总督宣、大、山西军务。
现代文：不久，他以左侍郎的身份总督宣府、大同、山西的军务。
English: Soon, he assumed the position of Governor of Xuanfu, Datong, and Shanxi Provinces.

古文：隆庆元年，就进右都御史。
现代文：隆庆元年，他升任右都御史。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he was promoted to the post of Utsu Imperial Historian.

古文：俺答犯石州，之诰令山西总兵官申维岳、参将刘宝、尤月、黑云龙四营兵尾之南下，而檄大同总兵官孙吴、山西副总兵田世威等出天门关，遏其东归。
现代文：俺答侵犯石州，王之诰命令山西总兵申维岳，参将刘宝、尤月、黑云龙四营的兵马尾随他南下，传达檄文征召大同总兵官孙吴、山西副总兵田世威等人出征天门关，遏制他们向东的归途。
English: In response to the invasion of Shishu, Wang Zhiqi ordered the Shanxi general soldier Shen Weiyue, and the soldiers and horses of the four battalions of Liu Bao, You Yue and Hei Yunlong followed him to the south, and conveyed the message to summon the Datong general officer Sun Wu, the Shanxi deputy general soldier Tian Shwei and others to go to Tianmenguan, to prevent them from returning to the east.

古文：巡抚王继洛驻代州不出，维岳不敢前，石州遂陷。
现代文：巡抚王继洛驻扎在代州不出征，申维岳不敢前进，于是石州陷落。
English: The governor Wang Jilo was stationed in Daizhou and did not go to war, and Shen Wei Yue did not dare to advance, so Shishu fell.

古文：杀人数万，所过无孑遗，大掠十有四日而去。
现代文：俺答杀害数万人，所过之处没有孑遗，大肆掠夺了十四天后离去。
English: We killed tens of thousands of people, left no trace of our passage, plundered extensively, and left fourteen days later.

古文：事闻，维岳、世威、宝论死，继洛戍边，吴落职。
现代文：事情被朝廷知道后，申维岳、田世威、刘宝被处死，王继洛戍守边关，孙吴被撤职。
English: After the matter was made known to the imperial court, Shen Weiyue, Tian Shiyi and Liu Bao were executed, Wang Jilou guarded the border, and Sun Wu was removed from his post.

古文：之诰以还守南山，止贬二秩。
现代文：王之诰因为回守南山，只降了两级。
English: Wang Zhiqi was only downgraded by two levels for returning to defend Nanshan.

古文：明年，诏之诰以左侍郎巡视蓟、辽、保定、宣、大、山西，侍郎刘焘巡陕西、延绥、宁夏、甘肃。
现代文：第二年诏令王之诰以左侍郎的身份巡视蓟、辽、保定、宣、大、山西，侍郎刘焘巡视陕西、延绥、宁夏、甘肃。
English: In the second year, Wang Zhiqi was ordered to patrol Shanxi, Liao, Baoding, Xuan, Daya and Shanxi as the left attendant, and the attendant Liu Yi was ordered to patrol Shaanxi, Yancheng, Ningxia and Gansu.

古文：之诰以疾辞，代以冀练。
现代文：王之诰因疾病辞官。由冀练代替。
English: Wang Zhisheng resigns due to illness. Replaced by Ji Rong.

古文：已，复因给事中张卤言，皆罢不遣。
现代文：此后，又因为给事中张卤的劝谏，两人都被罢免而不作派遣。
English: After that, both of them were removed from their posts rather than dispatched because of Zhang Huan's persuasion.

古文：三年，起督京营。
现代文：隆庆三年，出任官职督导京营。
English: In the third year of Longqing, he served as the official supervisor of the Beijing camp.

古文：进右都御史，总督陕西三边军务。
现代文：晋升右都御史，总督陕西三边的军务。
English: He was promoted to the post of the governor of the Right Capital and the military affairs of the three sides of Shaanxi Province.

古文：以延宁将士捣巢功，予一子官，迁南京兵部尚书。
现代文：因为延宁的将士捣毁敌人巢穴的功劳，给他的一个儿子授予官职，他升任南京兵部尚书。
English: Because of Yanning's soldiers' achievements in destroying the enemy's lair, one of his sons was awarded an official post, and he was promoted to the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：神宗嗣位，召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：神宗继位，任命他为刑部尚书。
English: Shinshu succeeded to the throne and appointed him as the head of the Penal Department.

古文：张居正专政，之诰与有连，每规切之。
现代文：张居正专权，王之诰与他有姻亲关系，每每规劝他。
English: Zhang Juzheng has exclusive power, and Wang Zhixuan is related to him by marriage, so he advised him every time.

古文：万历三年，乞假送母归，逾时不至，被劾。
现代文：万历三年，他请求护送母亲而请假回乡，逾期不返朝廷，被弹劾。
English: After three long years, he requested to escort his mother and asked for leave to return to his hometown. He did not return to the court on time and was impeached.

古文：南京御史李一阳请还一儒于朝，以厉恬让。
现代文：遇王之诰也奏请终养天年，便答复可以。后来张居正的父亲去世，丧期未满就提前入仕，在朝廷杖责议论的人。
English: Later, Zhang Jizheng's father passed away, and he entered the service ahead of schedule before the period of mourning was over, and he was scolded at the imperial court.

古文：帝可其奏。一儒竟不赴召，卒于家。天启中，追谥庄介。吴百朋，字维锡，义乌人。
现代文：张居正回乡葬了父亲后返回朝廷，王之诰劝他召回正直的大臣，收买人心。王之诰去世后，被赠为太子太保，谥号端襄。吴百朋，字维锡，义乌人。
English: Zhang Jiusheng returned to the imperial court after returning to his hometown to bury his father. Wang Zhulun advised him to recall honest ministers and win over people's hearts. After Wang Zhulun's death, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, with the posthumous name of Duan Xiang. Wu Bai Peng, a native of Wuxi and Yiwu.

古文：嘉靖二十六主年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年的进士。
English: He became a priest in the 26th year of Jiajing.

古文：授永丰知县。
现代文：授职为永丰知县。
English: Yongfeng County is the recipient of the award.

古文：徵拜御史，历按淮、扬、湖广。
现代文：他受征召，就任御史，历任淮、扬、湖广的按察使。
English: He was conscripted, assumed the post of imperial historian, and successively served as the inspector general of Huai, Yang, and Hukang.

古文：擢大理寺丞，进右少卿。
现代文：晋升为大理寺丞、右少卿。
English: He was promoted to Daliji no jo and Ushokyo.

古文：四十二年夏，进右佥都御史，抚治郧阳。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年夏天，他升任右佥都御史、郧阳巡抚。
English: In the summer of the 42nd year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand capital governor and the governor of Shenyang.

古文：改提督军务，巡抚南、赣、汀、漳。
现代文：改任提督，负责军务，巡视南昌、赣州、汀州、漳州。
English: He was appointed admiral, responsible for military affairs, and inspected Nanchang, Zhangzhou, Tingzhou, and Zhangzhou.

古文：与两广提督吴芳讨平河源贼李亚元、程乡贼叶丹楼，又会师破倭海丰。
现代文：与两广提督吴桂芳讨伐、平定河源的乱贼李亚元、程乡的乱贼叶丹楼，又会师一处，在海丰打败倭寇。
English: Li Yayuan, the bandit who fought against and pacified Heyuan, and Ye Danlou, the bandit from Chengxiang, joined forces with the two Guang admiral Wu Guifang to defeat the wokou in Haifeng.

古文：初，广东大埔民蓝松山、余大眷倡乱，流劫潼、延、兴、泉间。
现代文：起初，广东大埔的百姓蓝松山、余大眷倡导叛乱，在漳州、延平、兴州、泉州之间流窜、抢劫。
English: At first, the people of Lan Songshan and Yu Dazhong in Guangdong's Tai Po advocated rebellion, wandered and robbed between Zhangzhou, Yanping, Xingzhou and Quanzhou.

古文：官军击败之，奔永春。与香寮盗苏阿普、范继祖连兵犯德化，为都指挥耿宗元所败，伪请抚。
现代文：官军击败了他们，他们逃到永春，与香寮的盗贼蓝阿普、范继祖联合侵犯德化，被都指挥耿宗元打败，他们假装请求招安。
English: The government army defeated them. They fled to Yongchun and invaded Dehua jointly with the thieves of Xiangliao, Lan Apu and Fan Jizu. They were defeated by the commander of Duan, Geng Zongyuan. They pretended to ask for peace.

古文：百朋亦阳罢兵，而诱贼党为内应，先后悉擒之，惟三巢未下。
现代文：吴百朋也佯装罢兵，利诱乱贼的党徒为内应，先后将他们全部抓获，只有三个叛贼巢穴没有攻下。
English: Wu Bai Peng also pretended to be a deserter in order to entice the party members of the ruffians to cooperate with him. He captured all of them one after another, and only three of the traitors' lairs were not captured.

古文：三巢者，和平李文彪据岑冈，龙南谢允樟据高沙，赖清规据下历。
现代文：三个巢穴是指和平的李文彪所占据的岑冈，龙南的谢允樟所占据的高沙，赖清规所占据的下历。
English: The three nests refer to Shaoshan occupied by the peaceful Li Wenbiao, Gaosha occupied by Longnan's Xie Yunqin, and Zhulian occupied by Lai Qingbai.

古文：朝廷以倭患棘，不讨且十年。
现代文：朝廷因为倭患棘手，十年没有讨伐三股乱贼。
English: The imperial court did not crack down on the three groups of bandits for ten years because of the intractable Yamato disease.

古文：文彪死，子珍及江月照继之，益猖獗。
现代文：李文彪死后，他的儿子李珍与江月照接替他，更加猖獗。
English: After the death of Li Wenbiao, his sons Li Zhen and Jiang Yuezhao succeeded him, and became even more rampant.

古文：四十四年秋，百朋进右副都御史，巡抚如故。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年秋天，吴百朋晋升为右副都御史，依然巡防上述地区。
English: In the autumn of the 44th year of Jiajing, Wu Bai Peng was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, and still patrolled the above-mentioned areas.

古文：上疏曰： 三巢僣号称王，旋抚旋叛。
现代文：他上奏说 ：三个巢穴的乱贼冒犯尊卑之礼而称王，即刻招安即刻又叛乱。
English: He recited, "The ruffians of the three lairs offend the superior and the inferior and become kings; they immediately invite peace and immediately rebel."

古文：广东和平、龙川、兴宁，江西龙南、信丰、安远，蚕食过半。
现代文：广东的和平、龙川、兴宁，江西的龙南、信丰、安远，被蚕食过半。
English: Guangdong's Heping, Longchuan, and Xingning, and Jiangxi's Longnan, Xinfeng, and Anyuan have been eroded by more than half.

古文：不亟讨，祸不可言。
现代文：不赶紧讨伐，祸害不可言说。
English: Without a speedy crackdown, the scourge cannot be said to have begun.

古文：三巢中惟清规跨江、赓六县，最逆命，用兵必自下历始。 
现代文：三个巢穴中只有赖清规的势力跨江西、广东六县，最违逆圣命，讨伐必须从下历开始。 
English: Among the three nests, only the forces of Lai Ching Gu, spanning six counties in Jiangxi and Guangdong, are the most rebellious, and the crusade must begin from the next calendar.

古文：帝采部义，从之。
现代文：世宗将奏章交给部中议论，并依从了他。
English: Sejong submitted the music to the ministry for discussion, and they complied.

古文：百朋乃命守备蔡汝兰讨擒清规于苦竹嶂，群贼震慑。
现代文：吴百朋便命令守备蔡汝兰在苦竹嶂讨伐并擒拿了赖清规，震慑了众贼。
English: Wu Bai Peng then ordered guard Cai Rulan to fight and capture Lai Qing Gui in Quchuqiao, which deterred the thieves.

古文：隆庆初，吏部以百朋积苦兵间，稍迁大理卿。
现代文：隆庆初年，吏部因为吴百朋颇受兵营之苦，渐次升他任大理卿。
English: In the first year of Longqing, because Wu Bai Peng suffered a lot from the military camp, he was gradually promoted to be the leader of the party.

古文：给事中欧阳一敬等请留百朋剿贼，诏进兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，巡抚如故。
现代文：给事中欧阳一敬等人奏请穆宗仍将吴百朋留任负责剿灭乱贼，穆宗下诏将他升任兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，依旧巡抚故地。
English: During the incident, Ouyang Yijie and others asked Mu Zong to keep Wu Bai Peng in charge of wiping out the rioters, and Mu Zong issued an edict to promote him to the position of the right attendant of the military department and the right attendant of the capital, and he was still the governor of his hometown.

古文：百朋奏，春夏用兵妨耕作，宜且听抚，帝从之。
现代文：吴百朋上奏，春天用兵妨碍农田的耕作，应该进行招安，穆宗听从了他的建议。
English: Wu Bai Peng proposed that recruiting soldiers in the spring hindered the cultivation of farmland, and recruitment should be carried out. Mu Zong followed his suggestion.

古文：寻擢南京兵部右侍郎。
现代文：不久，他升任南京兵部右侍郎。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the post of the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：乞终养，不许。
现代文：请求回乡终养天年，穆宗不同意。
English: Mu Zong did not agree to his request to return to his hometown to live out the rest of his days.

古文：改刑部右侍郎。
现代文：改任为刑部右侍郎。
English: He was reassigned to the position of the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：父丧归，起改兵部。
现代文：父亲去世后回乡服丧，再度出山时改任兵部职。
English: After his father's death, he went back to his hometown to pay his respects. When he went to the mountains again, he was reassigned to the military department.

古文：万历初，奉命阅视宣、大、山西三镇。
现代文：万历初年，奉命巡视宣州、大同、山西三镇。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he was ordered to inspect the three towns of Xuanzhou, Datong and Shanxi.

古文：百朋以粮饷、险隘、兵马、器械、屯田、盐法、番马、逆党八事核边臣，督抚王崇古、吴兑、总兵郭琥以下，升赏黜革有差。
现代文：吴百朋以粮饷、险隘、兵马、器械、屯田、盐法、番马、逆党等八件事情考核边疆大臣，督抚王崇古、吴兑，总兵郭琥以下的官吏，分别受到升官赏赐或罢免的处理。
English: Wu Baihong evaluated the frontier minister, the superintendent Wang Chongu, Wu Dui, and the officials below the chief soldier Guo Amber with eight things including grain, danger, soldiers, horses, equipment, farmland, salt law, guard horses, and anti-party, and they were promoted or dismissed respectively.

古文：又进边图，凡关塞险隘，番族部落，士马强弱，亭障远近，历历如指掌。
现代文：又进呈边防图，凡是关塞险隘，番族部落，士马强弱，亭障远近，了如指掌。
English: He also presented the border defense map. He knew all about the dangers of the pass, the tribes of the Fan people, the strengths and weaknesses of the horses, and the barriers near and far.

古文：以省母归。
现代文：后由于探视母亲回乡。
English: He later returned to his hometown to visit his mother.

古文：起南京右都御史，召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：又出任南京右都御史，升任刑部尚书。
English: He also served as the governor of Nanjing's right-wing capital, and was promoted to the position of the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：逾年卒。
现代文：过了一年去世。
English: A year later, Ying Xuan passed away.

古文：刘应节，字子和，濰人。
现代文：刘应节，字子和，潍县人。
English: Liu Yingjie, Zi Zi, a resident of Jixian County.

古文：嘉靖二十六年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年的进士。
English: He became a priest in the 26th year of Jiajing.

古文：授户部主事。
现代文：授任户部主事。
English: Assigned to be in charge of the Household Department.

古文：历井陉兵备副使，兼辖三关。
现代文：历任井陉兵备副使，兼管三关。
English: Successive vice-envoys of Jinghong Military Preparedness, concurrently in charge of Sankuan.

古文：三关属井陉道自此始。
现代文：三关从此隶属井陉道。
English: Since then, Sanguan has been under the jurisdiction of Jingye Road.

古文：四十三年，以山西右参政擢右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：四十三年，任山西右参政，升任右佥都御史，管理辽东。
English: In 1943, he was appointed as the Shanxi right-wing politician, promoted to the right-wing capital historian, and managed Liaodong.

古文：母丧归。
现代文：因母亲去世而回乡。
English: After his mother's death, he returned home to be a filial son.

古文：隆庆元年，起抚河南。
现代文：隆庆元年，出任河南地方官。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he served as a local official of Henan Province.

古文：俺答寇石州，山西骚动，诏应节赴援。
现代文：俺答侵犯石州，山西骚动，皇帝下诏命令刘应节前往援救。
English: We responded to the invasion of Shizhou, Shanxi riot, the emperor ordered Liu Yingjie to go to the rescue.

古文：已，寇退。
现代文：此后，敌寇退去。
English: After that, the enemy bandits retreated.

古文：会顺天巡抚耿随卿坐杀平民充首功逮治，改应节代之。
现代文：遇上顺天巡抚耿随卿杀害平民冒充首功被逮捕治罪，改派刘应节代替他。
English: When Geng Zuixing, the governor of Shuntian, was arrested and punished for killing civilians and impersonating the first merit, Liu Yingjie was reassigned to replace him.

古文：建议永平西门抵海口距天津止五百里，可通漕，请募民习海道者赴天津领运，同运官出海达永平。
现代文：他认为永平西门抵海口距离天津只五百里，可以通漕运，奏请招募熟习海运的百姓赴天津负责运输，与漕运官由海路抵达永平。
English: He believed that the port of arrival of Yongping West Gate was only 500 miles away from Tianjin and could be reached by rowing. He requested to recruit people who were familiar with sea transport to go to Tianjin to be responsible for transportation, and arrived in Yongping by sea with the rowing officer.

古文：部议以漕卒冒险不便，发山东、河南粟十万石储天津，令永平官民自运焉。
现代文：部里议论由漕卒冒险不方便，发运山东、河南的十万石粟，储存在天津，命令永平的官吏和百姓自己运输。
English: The ministry argued that it was inconvenient for the oarsmen to take the risk, so they shipped 100,000 koku of opium poppy from Shandong and Henan and stored it in Tianjin, and ordered the officials and people of Yongping to transport it themselves.

古文：四年秋，进右副都御史，巡抚如故。旋进兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，代谭纶总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：隆庆四年秋天，升任右副都御史，负责原来的辖区，不久，晋升为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，代替谭纶统管蓟、辽、保定的军务。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Longqing, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, responsible for the original jurisdiction. Soon, he was promoted to the right attendant of the military department and the right deputy governor of the capital, replacing Tan Ying, who was in charge of the military affairs of Liaoning, Liaoning and Baoding.

古文：奏罢永平、密云、霸州采矿。
现代文：他上奏罢除了永平、密云、霸州的采矿活动。
English: He announced the suspension of mining activities in Yongping, Miyun and Bazhou.

古文：又因御史傅孟春言，议诸镇积贮，当计岁丰歉。
现代文：又因为御史傅孟春的谏言，讨论各镇的贮备，应当考虑到年成的丰歉。
English: In addition, because of the criticism of the imperial historian Fu Mengchun, the discussion of the reserves of each town should take into account the rich apology of the year.

古文：常时以折色便军，可以积粟；凶岁以本色济荒，可以积银。
现代文：平常的时候可以折成银两方便军队，可以积蓄粟谷；灾荒之年就以实物救济灾荒，可以积蓄银两。
English: In normal times, it can be converted into silver two convenient troops, and can accumulate millet valley; in the year of disaster, it can be used to relieve the disaster in kind, and can accumulate silver two.

古文：又明年建议通漕密云，上疏曰： 密云环控潮、白二水，天设之以便漕者也。
现代文：第二年又建议将漕运通达密云，上奏称： 密云完全控制了潮、白两条河水，上天安排它们以便利于漕运。
English: The following year, it was proposed that the paddle transport be extended to Miyun, and the report said: Miyun completely controlled the tide and the two rivers, and arranged them to facilitate the paddle transport.

古文：向二水分流，到牛栏山始合。
现代文：从前两河分流，到了牛栏山才汇合。
English: In the past, the two rivers diverged, and only converged at Niu Ran Shan.

古文：通州运艘至牛栏山，以上陆运至龙庆仓，输挽甚苦。
现代文：通州的漕运船只到了牛栏山，便由陆路运至龙庆仓，车辆运输很艰苦。
English: When the Tongzhou rowing boat arrived at Niu Ran Shan, it was transported by road to Longqing Cang, and the transportation of vehicles was very difficult.

古文：今白水徙流城西，去潮水不二百武，近且疏渠植坝，合为一流，水深漕便。
现代文：现在白水迁流城西，距离潮水不到二百步，况且近来又开渠筑坝，两条河流又合二为一，水流加深，漕运更方便。
English: Now the white water flows west of the city, less than two hundred paces from the tide. Moreover, a canal has recently been opened to build a dam. The two rivers have merged into one, the water flow has deepened, and paddling is more convenient.

古文：旧昌平运额共十八万石有奇，今止十四万，密云仅得十万，惟赖召商一法，而地瘠民贫，势难长恃。
现代文：以往昌平的漕运额共计十八万多石，现在只有十四万石，密云仅得到十万石，只有依赖招商承运一个办法，而且土地贫瘠，百姓穷困，势必难以长期维持。
English: In the past, Changping's paddling freight totaled more than 180,000 koku, but now it is only 140,000 koku, and Miyun only received 100,000 koku. It is only possible to rely on investment in transportation, and the land is barren and the people are poor. It is bound to be difficult to maintain for a long time.

古文：闻通仓粟多红朽。
现代文：听说通州仓中的粟很多霉变。
English: I heard that the millet in the warehouse in Tongzhou has a lot of mildew.

古文：若漕五万石于密云，而以本镇折色三万五千两留给京军，则通仓无腐粟，京军沾实惠，密云免佥商，一举而三善备矣。 
现代文：如果漕运五万石到密云，而将本镇所折算的三万五千两白银留给京城的部队，则通州的仓库中不会有粟腐烂，京城的军队获得了实惠，密云免去召商之事，这是一举三得的好事啊！ 
English: If 50,000 koku were transported to Miyun, and the 35,000 taels of silver converted from the town were left to the troops in the capital, then there would be no millet rot in the warehouses in Tongzhou, the troops in the capital would receive tangible benefits, and Miyun would be free from the need to call in merchants. This is a win-win situation!

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝答复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：给事中陈渠以蓟镇多虚伍，请核兵省饷。
现代文：给事中陈渠因为蓟镇有很多虚冒的兵丁，奏请核查兵卒节省粮饷。
English: In the middle of the matter, Chen Qu, because there are a lot of reckless soldiers in Handan Town, asked the soldiers to check and save grain.

古文：应节上疏曰： 国初设立大宁，蓟门犹称内地。
现代文：刘应节上奏称： 国家开始设立大宁府，蓟门还称为内地。
English: Liu Yingjie made a report at the festival, saying: The country began to establish the Daning Prefecture, and the gate was also called the mainland.

古文：既大宁内徙，三卫反覆，一切防御之计，与宣、大相埒，而额兵不满三万。
现代文：不久，大宁府内迁，三卫反叛，一切防御措施，与宣州、大同方面相同，但在册的兵丁不足三万人。
English: Soon, the Daning government moved in, the Sanwei rebelled, and all defensive measures were the same as those of Xuanzhou and Datong, but there were less than 30,000 soldiers registered.

古文：仓卒召外兵，疲于奔命，又半孱弱。
现代文：仓促招募外地的兵丁，又疲于奔命，半数羸弱不堪。
English: The soldiers were hastily recruited from overseas, exhausted from running for their lives, and half of them were too weak to fight.

古文：于是议减客兵，募土著，而游食之徒，饥聚饱飏。
现代文：因此提议减少外地兵，招募当地人，而吃游食的人，饥饿的时候聚集在一起吃饱了就飞扬散去。
English: Therefore, it is proposed to reduce the number of foreign soldiers, recruit local people, and the people who eat food, gather together when they are hungry, and fly away when they are full.

古文：请清勾逃军，而所勾皆老稚，又未必安于其伍。
现代文：请清除逃兵，而留下的人都是非老即幼，又未必安于当兵。
English: Please remove the deserters, and those who remain are either too young or too old, and may not be satisfied with being a soldier.

古文：本镇西起镇边，东抵山海，因地制兵，非三十万不可。
现代文：本镇的辖区西起镇边，东达山海关，依地势驻守兵马，没有三十万人不行。
English: The jurisdiction of this town extends from the edge of the town in the west to the customs office in Dashan in the east. Depending on the situation, soldiers and horses are stationed there. It is not possible without 300,000 people.

古文：今主、客兵不过十三万而已。
现代文：现在当地的兵丁与外地的兵丁不到十三万人。
English: At present, there are less than 130,000 local soldiers and foreign soldiers.

古文：且宣府地方六百里，额兵十五万；大同地方千余里，额兵十三万五千；今蓟、昌地兼二镇，而兵力独不足。
现代文：而且宣府方圆六百里，额定兵士十五万人；大同方圆一千多里，额定兵士十三万五千人；现在蓟、昌的地域就有两镇的大小，而唯独兵力不足。
English: Moreover, Xuanfu has a radius of 600 miles and a rated strength of 150,000 soldiers; Datong has a radius of more than 1,000 miles and a rated strength of 135,000 soldiers; at present, the areas of Handan and Chang'an are the size of two towns, but they are all short of troops.

古文：援彼例此，何以能守？
现代文：两相援引比较，怎么能够防守？
English: Comparing the two phases, how can you defend?

古文：以今上计，发精兵二十余万，恢复大宁，控制外边，俾畿辅肩背益厚，宣、辽声援相通，国有重关，庭无近寇，此万年之利也。
现代文：现在最好的计策是派遣二十多万精兵，恢复大宁府，控制关外的边疆，使京都的肩背更加厚实，宣府、辽远彼此声援，国家有稳固的关防，家室中没有匪寇，这是万年的利益所在。
English: The best strategy now is to dispatch more than two hundred thousand elite soldiers, restore the capital city of Daning, control the border outside of Guan, make the shoulders of Kyoto more solid, the capital of Xuan and Liao Yuan support each other, the country has a solid border defense, and there are no bandits in the family, which is the eternal benefit.

古文：如其不然，集兵三十万，分屯列戍，使首尾相应，此百年之利也。
现代文：如果不能如此就调集三十万军马，分区屯田、逐线设防，使军队首尾相呼应，这是百年的利益所在。
English: If this is not possible, it is in the interest of a hundred years to mobilize 300,000 horses and chariots, subdivide the garrisons, and set up fortifications line by line, so that the army will echo from end to end.

古文：又不然，则选主、客兵十七万，训练有成，不必仰藉邻镇，亦目前苟安之计。
现代文：还不能办到的话，就挑选十七万当地和外地的兵丁，使他们训练有素，不必仰仗邻镇的援助，也是目前苟且偷安的办法。
English: If this is still not possible, then 170,000 local and foreign soldiers should be selected, so that they are well trained and do not have to rely on the assistance of neighboring towns. This is also a way to ensure peace.

古文：今皆不然，征兵如弈棋，请饷如乞籴，操练如抟沙，教战如谈虎。
现代文：现在却全然不是如此，征兵如同下棋，请求粮饷如同请求买粮，操练如同抓沙，讨论战争如同谈论老虎。
English: Now it's not like that at all, recruiting is like playing chess, asking for grain is like asking for grain, training is like grabbing sand, and discussing war is like talking about tigers.

古文：边长兵寡，掣襟肘见。
现代文：边防线长，兵力孤寡，捉襟见肘。
English: The frontier line is long, the troops are few and far between, and we are stretched.

古文：今为不得已之计，姑勾新军补主兵旧额十一万，与入卫客兵分番休息，庶军不告劳，稍定边计。 
现代文：现在不得已的办法，姑且录用新兵补充当地兵丁十一万的旧额，与进入卫所的外地兵丁分批休整，使众军不觉疲劳稍稍稳定边防。 
English: Now, the last resort is to recruit new soldiers to supplement the old quota of 110,000 local soldiers, and to rest in batches with the foreign soldiers entering the garrison, so that the troops will not feel tired and the border defense will be slightly stabilized.

古文：部议行所司清军，而补兵之说卒不行。
现代文：部中议论让所司清理军队，而补充兵马的意见最终没有被采纳。
English: In the middle of the ministry, there was a discussion to have the commander-in-chief clean up the army, but the idea of supplementing the soldiers and horses was ultimately not adopted.

古文：万历元年，进右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，总督如故。
现代文：万历元年，他升任右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，统辖原来的辖区。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the post of the Right Metropolitan Historian and the Right Attendant of the Military Department, overseeing the original jurisdiction.

古文：进南京工部尚书，召为戎政尚书，改刑部。
现代文：后来又升任南京工部尚书、戎政尚书，改任刑部的职务。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the Nanjing Engineering Department, the post of secretary of the Military Government, and the post of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：锦衣冯邦宁者，太监保从子，道遇不引避，应节叱下之，保不悦。
现代文：锦衣冯邦宁是太监冯保的从子，与刘应节在路上相遇不做回避，刘应节叱责他退下，冯保不高兴。
English: The brocade Feng Banning is the eunuch Feng Bao's follower, and Liu Yingjie met him on the road and did not avoid him. Liu Yingjie scolded him to withdraw, and Feng Bao was not happy.

古文：会云南参政罗汝芳奉表至京，应节出郭与谈禅，给事中周良寅疏论之，遂偕汝芳劾罢。
现代文：遇上云南的参政罗汝芳带着奏章到京都，刘应节出城郭与他谈论禅事，给事中周良寅上奏抨击他，于是与罗汝芳一同被弹劾、罢免。
English: Liu Yingjie went out of the city to talk to him about Zen, and in the middle of the meeting, Zhou Liangyin criticized him, and was impeached and dismissed together with Luo Rufang.

古文：卒，赠太子少保。
现代文：他去世后被赠封为太子少保。
English: He died and was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：初，王宗沐建议海运，应节与工部侍郎徐栻请开胶莱河，张居正力主之。
现代文：起初，王宗沐建议实行海运，刘应节与工部侍郎徐木式奏请开通胶莱河，张居正极力支持。
English: At first, Wang Zongmu suggested the implementation of maritime transport, Liu Yingjie and the Minister of Industry and Commerce Xu Muxi played the role of opening the Jiaolai River, and Zhang Juzheng strongly supported it.

古文：用栻样兼佥都御史以往，议凿山引泉，计费百万。
现代文：任用徐木式兼佥都御史前往办理，商议凿山引泉，计算须耗百万两。
English: The appointment of a Xu Mu-style concurrently appointed Metropolitan Historian to go and negotiate the excavation of a mountain spring was calculated to cost one million taels.

古文：议者争驳之。
现代文：议论者争相驳斥。
English: Opponents are scrambling to refute it.

古文：召式还，罢其役。
现代文：皇帝召回徐木式，罢除了此项劳役。
English: The emperor recalled Xu Muxi and abolished this labor service.

古文：栻，常熟人，累官南京工部尚书。王遴，字继津，霸州人。
现代文：王遴，字继津，霸州人。
English: Wang Zhan, surnamed Jijin, a resident of Bashu.

古文：嘉靖二十六年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年的进士。
English: He became a priest in the 26th year of Jiajing.

古文：除绍兴推官。
现代文：就任绍兴推官。
English: He was appointed as the shogun of Shaoxing.

古文：入为兵部主事，历员外郎。
现代文：入朝任兵部主事，历任员外郎。
English: He entered the imperial court as the head of the military department, and successively served as a member of the outer circle.

古文：峭直矜节概，不妄交。
现代文：耿直矜持，不轻易与人结交。
English: Geng is reserved and does not easily make friends.

古文：同官杨继盛劾严嵩及其孙效忠冒功事，下部覆。
现代文：同僚杨继盛弹劾严嵩和他的孙子严效忠冒领功绩，奏章被下达给部中复查。
English: Colleague Yang Jisheng impeached Yan Song and his grandson Yan Loyalty for taking credit, and the report was sent to the ministry for review.

古文：世蕃自为稿，以属武选郎中周冕。
现代文：严世蕃自己撰稿，以此给武选郎中周冕。
English: Yan Shiyan wrote the article himself, thus giving the crown to Wu Xuan Lang.

古文：冕发之，反得罪。
现代文：周冕揭发了他，反而被治罪。
English: Zhou Guanyin exposed him, but he was punished instead.

古文：尚书聂豹惧，趣所司以世蕃稿上。遴直前争，豹怒，竟覆如世蕃言。
现代文：尚书聂豹恐惧，催促所司将严世蕃的文稿呈上，王遴径直上前争辩，聂豹恼怒，最终如严世蕃所言向上全报。
English: Shang Shuxuan was terrified and urged the director of the institute to submit Yan Shijun's manuscript, Wang Zhan went straight forward to argue, Yan Leopard was angry, and finally, as Yan Shijun said, the full report was submitted.

古文：继盛论死，遴为资粥饘，且以女字其子应箕。
现代文：杨继盛被判死罪，王遴替他送去稠粥，并且将女儿许配给他的儿子杨应箕。
English: Yang Jisheng was sentenced to death, Wang Zhan sent thick porridge for him and betrothed his daughter to his son Yang Yingyao.

古文：嵩父子大恚，摭他事下之诏狱。
现代文：严嵩的父子大为愤恨，借口其他的事情将他投入诏狱。
English: Yan Song's father and son were very angry and threw him into the imperial prison on the pretext of other things.

古文：事白复官。
现代文：事情搞清楚后才恢复官职。
English: He was reinstated only after the matter was clarified.

古文：及继盛死，收葬之。
现代文：等到杨继盛死去，他收殓、安葬了杨继盛。
English: When Yang Jisheng died, he received the coffin and buried Yang Jisheng.

古文：迁山东佥事，再迁岢岚兵备副使。
现代文：调任山东佥事，再调任岢岚兵备副使。
English: He was transferred to Shandong Anji, and then transferred to the position of deputy envoy of He Bei.

古文：有威名，为巡抚所忌，劾去。
现代文：他享有威名，为巡抚忌恨，受弹劾而离去。
English: He enjoyed prestige, was hated as governor, was impeached and left.

古文：官民相率讼冤，诏许起用。
现代文：官民争相为他诉讼冤屈，皇帝下诏准许他再度起用。
English: The government and the people vied with each other to sue him for grievances, and the emperor issued an edict allowing him to serve again.

古文：四十五年，擢右佥都御史，巡抚延绥。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年，王遴升为右佥都御史，管理延绥。
English: In the 45th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Wang Qi was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the prefectural governor, managing Yan'an.

古文：寇大入定边、固原，总兵官郭江战殁。
现代文：敌寇大举入侵定边、固原，总兵官郭江战死。
English: The enemy raiders invaded Dingbian and Guyuan on a large scale, and the general officer Guo Jiang was killed in the battle.

古文：总督陈其学、陕西巡抚戴才坐免，遴贬俸一秩。
现代文：总督陈其学、陕西巡抚戴才遭罢免，王遴降俸一级。
English: Governor Chen Qigong and the governor of Shaanxi Province Dai Cai were dismissed, and Wang Qi was demoted to the first grade.

古文：隆庆改元，寇六入塞，皆失利去。
现代文：隆庆元年，敌寇六次入塞，都战败而逃。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, enemy raiders entered the city six times, but were all defeated and fled.

古文：而御史温如玉论遴不已，解官候勘。
现代文：而御史温如玉不断抨击王遴，将他解除官职听候审查。
English: On the other hand, Wang Zhan was constantly criticized by Emperor Wen, who removed him from his post pending a review.

古文：后御史杨鉁勘上其功，遂以故官巡抚宣府。总兵官马芳骁勇，寇不敢深入。
现代文：后来御史杨轸核查汇报了他的功绩，于是又恢复原职，管辖宣府，总兵官马芳骁勇，敌寇不敢深入。
English: Later, the inspector-general Yang Jie reported his exploits, so he resumed his original post, governed by the Xuanwu, the general officer Ma Fang Rongyong, and the enemy pirates did not dare to go deep.

古文：遴乃大兴屯田，边储赖之。
现代文：王遴便大兴屯田，边防的储备都有赖于此。
English: Wang Zhanben greatly expanded the military garrison, and the reserves of the frontier defense depended on it.

古文：秩满，进右副都御史。
现代文：十年期满，他升任右副都御史。
English: At the end of his ten-year term, he was promoted to the post of Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian.

古文：寻召拜兵部右侍郎。
现代文：不久被任命为兵部右侍郎。
English: He was soon appointed as the right hand man of the military department.

古文：省亲归，起协理戎政。
现代文：探亲回乡，又起用他协助处理边防事务。
English: He went back to his hometown to visit his relatives, and he was appointed to assist in handling border affairs.

古文：神宗立，张居正秉政。遴其同年生，然雅不相能。
现代文：神宗继位，张居正执政，他与王遴同年出生，然而一向不和。
English: Shenzong succeeded to the throne, and Zhang Ju was in power. He was born the same year as Wang Qi, but they never got along.

古文：会议阅边，遴请行。
现代文：遇上商议、检阅边防事务，王遴请求前往。
English: When it came to discussing and reviewing border affairs, Wang Zhao requested to go.

古文：命往陕西四镇。
现代文：皇帝命令他前往陕西四镇。
English: The emperor ordered him to go to four towns in Shaanxi Province.

古文：峻绝馈遗。
现代文：他冷峻地拒绝馈赠。
English: He coldly refused the gift.

古文：事竣，遽移疾归。
现代文：事情完成之后，就称病回乡。
English: When the job was done, he called in sick.

古文：居正殁，始起南京工部尚书。
现代文：张居正去世后，他才出任南京工部尚书。
English: After Zhang Juzheng's death, he became the secretary of the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：寻改兵部，参赞机务。
现代文：不久，改任兵部，参与机要事务。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the military department to participate in important affairs.

古文：守备中官丘得用滥役营军，遴奏禁之，因奏行计安留都十二事。
现代文：守备太监丘得用大肆奴役营中的兵丁，王遴上奏请求禁止此事，趁机奏请施行谋略、安定留都等十二件事。
English: To guard the eunuch's hill, soldiers from the slave camp were used. The king made a petition to prohibit this, and took the opportunity to ask for twelve things such as the implementation of the strategy and the stability of the capital.

古文：召拜户部尚书。
现代文：皇帝召见并任命他为户部尚书。
English: The emperor summoned him and appointed him as the head of the household.

古文：先奉诏蠲除及织造议留共银百七十六万余两，命于太仓库补进，遴言： 陛下历十余年之储积，仅三百余万，今因一载蠲除，即收补于库。
现代文：他先奉皇帝的诏令，免除一年赋税以及织造商议的提留，共计一百七十六万多两白银，此时，皇帝命令由太仓库中补充，王遴劝谏： 陛下经过十多年的积蓄仅有三百多万两白银，现在因为一年的赋税被免除，即刻在府库中进行补充。
English: He first, by imperial decree, was exempted from a year's tax, as well as the withholding of fabrication and negotiation, totaling more than 1.76 million taels of silver. At this time, the emperor ordered that the warehouse be replenished, and Wang Qi advised: His Majesty, after more than ten years of savings, has only more than three million taels of silver. Now, because he has been exempted from a year's tax, he will immediately replenish it in the treasury.

古文：计十余年之积，不足偿二年取补之资。
现代文：估计十多年的积蓄，不足偿还二年被提取用作补缺的资产。
English: It is estimated that more than ten years of savings are insufficient to repay the assets that were withdrawn for two years to make up for the shortfall.

古文：矧金花额进岁当百万，自六年以后增进二十万，今合六年计之，不啻百万矣。
现代文：况且每年额定的金花银进奉额为一百万两，从万历六年之后，增加了二十万两，现在合计六年的数额，不只百万两。
English: Moreover, the annual amount of gold and silver was increased to one million taels. After six years of Wanli, it increased by 200,000 taels, and now the total amount for six years is more than one million taels.

古文：库积非源泉，岁进不已，后将何继？ 
现代文：府库的积蓄不是源泉，每年贡俸不断，以后将拿什么维持？ 
English: The savings of the prefectural treasury are not a source, the annual tribute continues, what will be maintained from now on?

古文：因言京、通二仓粮积八百万石，足供九年之需，请量改折百五十万石，三年而止。
现代文：于是指出京仓和通仓的粮食积蓄达八百万石，足以供给九年的需求，请酌量将一百五十万石折换成银两，三年后停止。
English: He then pointed out that the grain reserves in the main warehouse and the secondary warehouse amounted to eight million koku, enough to supply the demand for nine years. Please convert the 1.5 million koku into silver at your discretion, and stop after two or three years.

古文：诏许一年。
现代文：皇帝下诏准许他施行一年。
English: The emperor issued an edict allowing him to do so for one year.

古文：时尚宝丞徐贞明、御史徐待开京东水田，遴力赞之，议遂决。
现代文：当时尚宝丞徐贞明、御史徐待在京城东面开辟水田，王遴极力赞赏此举，提议很快被决定。
English: At that time, Shang Baozhen Xu Zhenming and Gu Shi Xu stayed in the east of Beijing to open up paddy fields. Wang Zhan strongly appreciated this move, and the proposal was quickly decided.

古文：故事，户部银专供军国，不给他用。
现代文：以往，户部银专门供给军队和京都，不提供给其他事务。
English: In the past, the household silver was exclusively supplied to the army and Kyoto, and not to other matters.

古文：帝大婚，暂取济边银九万两为织造费，至是复欲行之，遴执争。
现代文：皇帝举行婚礼时，暂时提取了用于接济边关的银两九万两作为织造的费用，此时皇帝又打算这么做，王遴执意争辩。
English: When the emperor held the wedding, he temporarily withdrew 290,000 taels of silver, which was used to help the border guards, as the cost of weaving. At this time, the emperor planned to do this again, and Wang Zhan insisted on arguing.

古文：未几，诏取金四千两为慈宁宫用，遴又力持。
现代文：不久，皇帝下诏提取四千两黄金作为慈宁宫的开支，王遴又极力反对。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict to withdraw 4,000 taels of gold as expenses for the Cining Palace, which Wang Zhan strenuously opposed.

古文：皆不纳。
现代文：皇帝都没有采纳。
English: The emperor did not accept their criticism.

古文：已，陈理财七事，请崇节俭、重农务、督逋负、惩贪墨、广储蓄、饬贡市。
现代文：此后，他陈述理财的七件事情，奏请皇帝崇尚节俭、重视农业、督促拖欠的偿还、惩治贪官污吏、扩大储蓄、整治贡市。
English: After that, he stated seven things about financial management, asking the emperor to advocate thrift, attach importance to agriculture, urge the repayment of arrears, punish corrupt officials, expand savings, and rectify the tribute market.

古文：帝报曰： 事关朕躬者已知之。馀饬所司议行。 
现代文：皇帝答复： 有关我自己的事我已经知道了，其余的事责成所司商议办理。 
English: The emperor replied: I have already known about my own affairs, and the rest of the matters should be discussed and handled by the directorate.

古文：时释教大盛，遴请汰其庄者归农，聚众修斋者坐左道罪。
现代文：当时佛教盛行，王遴奏请将身强力壮的和尚淘汰，令他们回乡务农，聚众进行斋戒的人以邪道罪论处。
English: At that time, Buddhism was in vogue, and the king requested that all able-bodied monks be weeded out and sent back to their hometowns to work in agriculture. Those who gathered in large numbers to fast were punished as heretics.

古文：礼部尚书沈鲤请如遴言。
现代文：礼部尚书沈鲁奏请依王遴的谏言行事。
English: Please act in accordance with Wang Zhao's advice.

古文：诏已许，后妃宦官多言不便，事中止。
现代文：皇帝已经下诏同意，后妃和宦官大都声称不行，事情中途废止。
English: The emperor had already given his consent by imperial edict, but the empress dowager and most of the eunuchs claimed that it was not possible, and the matter was cancelled midway.

古文：改兵部尚书。
现代文：他改任兵部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the Military Department of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：辽东总兵官李成梁赂遗遍辇毂，不敢至遴门。
现代文：辽东总兵官李成梁的贿赂遍及皇帝身边的大臣，但不敢进入王遴的家门。
English: Li Chengliang, the general officer of Liaodong, bribed the ministers around the emperor, but they did not dare to enter Wang Zhao's home.

古文：遴在户部频执争，已为中官所嫉。
现代文：王遴在户部频繁争执，已经被宦官嫉恨。
English: Wang Zhan frequently quarrels in the household, and has been envied by the eunuchs.

古文：会帝阅寿宫，中官持御批索马。
现代文：遇上皇帝察看去世后享用的寝宫，宦官拿着皇帝的批示向他索要马匹。
English: Encountering the emperor inspecting the bedchamber he enjoyed after his death, the eunuch took the emperor's instructions and asked him for a horse.

古文：遴以为题本当钤印，司礼传奉由科发部，无径下部者，援故事执奏。
现代文：王遴认为题本应该盖章，司礼的传递应当由科发给部里，没有径直下达给部里的，他援引先例执意上奏。
English: Wang Zhan thought that the inscription should be stamped, and the transmission of the ceremony should be sent from the department to the ministry, but it was not sent directly to the ministry. He cited the precedent and insisted on playing it.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：皇帝不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：大学士申时行尝以管事指挥罗秀属遴补锦衣佥书，遴格不许。
现代文：大学士申时行曾经因管事指挥罗秀而嘱托王遴将他补作锦衣佥书，王遴阻止不准许。
English: University scholar Shen Jigang once asked Wang Zhan to make him a supplementary book because of the steward conductor Luo Xiu, but Wang Zhan did not allow it.

古文：时行乃调旨责遴擅留御批，失敬上体。
现代文：申时行便拟旨责备王遴擅自扣留皇帝的批示，对皇上缺乏尊敬。
English: At the time of the petition, he drafted an order to reproach Wang Qi for arbitrarily detaining the emperor's instructions and for lacking respect for the emperor.

古文：御史因交章劾遴，遴乞休去，张佳胤代之。
现代文：御史争相弹劾王遴，王遴请求退休而离去，张佳胤代替了他。
English: Wang Zhan was impeached, Wang Zhan asked to retire and left, and Zhang Jiayin replaced him.

古文：给事中张养蒙言： 罗秀本太监滕祥奴，贿入禁卫。
现代文：给事中张养蒙称： 罗秀本是太监滕祥的奴仆，靠贿赂进入禁卫中。
English: During the case, Zhang Yimeng said: Luo Xiubon was a slave of eunuch Teng Xiang, and he was bribed to join the imperial guard.

古文：往岁营佥书，尚书遴持正，为所中伤去。
现代文：往年他图谋佥书，尚书王遴主持公正，被他们中伤而离去。
English: In previous years, he attempted to steal books, but was slandered by the book thieves and left.

古文：未几秀即躐用，物议沸腾。 
现代文：不久，罗秀马上被越级录用，众议沸腾。 
English: Soon after, Luo Xiu was immediately hired by Yuefeng, and the discussion was heated.

古文：于是黜秀，佳胤亦罢。
现代文：因此罢黜了罗秀，张佳胤也被罢免。
English: Therefore, Luo Xiu was ousted, and Zhang Jiayin was also ousted.

古文：遴虽退，声望愈重，以年高存问者再三。
现代文：王遴虽然退位，声望更高，因为他年事很高而一再受到朝廷慰问。
English: Although Wang Zhan abdicated, his reputation was higher because he was very old and repeatedly received condolences from the imperial court.

古文：三十六年卒。
现代文：万历三十六年，王遴去世。
English: In the 36th year of Wanli, Wang Zhan died.

古文：赠太子太保。
现代文：赠封为太子太保。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：天启中，追谥恭肃。
现代文：天启年间，追赠谥号恭肃。
English: In the year of the Apocalypse, he was posthumously awarded the posthumous name of Genshu.

古文：毕锵，字廷鸣，石埭人。
现代文：毕锵，字廷鸣，石埭人。
English: Bi,字廷鸣,石人.

古文：嘉靖三十二年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年的进士。
English: He became a priest in 32nd year of Jiajing.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：授职为刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：历郎中，擢浙江提学副使，迁广西右参政，进按察使，再迁湖广左布政使。
现代文：历任郎中，晋升为浙江提学副使，调任广西右参政，升任按察使再调任湖广左布政使。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of Zhejiang for education, transferred to the right to participate in politics in Guangxi, promoted to the position of inspector, and then transferred to the position of political envoy of Hubei and Guangxi.

古文：召为太仆卿，未至，改应天尹。
现代文：世宗召他担任太仆卿，没有赴任，改任应天府尹。
English: King Sejong called him to serve as a eunuch, but he did not take up the post, and was reassigned to Ying Tianfu Yin.

古文：海瑞抚江南，移檄京府，等于属吏，锵却不受。
现代文：海瑞辖治江南，发送公文到南京应天府，将应天官员视为下属，毕锵拒不接受。
English: Hai Rui governed the south of the Yangtze River, and sent official documents to Nanjing Yingtianfu, and regarded Yingtian officials as subordinates, which was rejected.

古文：瑞察锵政，更与善。
现代文：海瑞考核毕锵的政绩，反而与他友好。
English: On the contrary, Hai Rui appraised the political achievements of Bi Gan and became friendly with him.

古文：进南京户部右侍郎，督理粮储。
现代文：他升任南京户部右侍郎，负责粮食储备。
English: He was promoted to the post of the right-hand man of the household in Nanjing, responsible for grain reserves.

古文：万历二年，入为刑部右侍郎。
现代文：万历二年，他进入朝廷担任刑部右侍郎。
English: In the second year of Wanli, he entered the imperial court to serve as the right hand man of the criminal department.

古文：改户部，总督仓场。
现代文：改任户部职，统辖仓场。
English: He was reassigned to the position of head of the household department, with overall control of the warehouse.

古文：擢南京户部尚书，谢病去。
现代文：晋升为南京户部尚书，告病而离去。
English: He was promoted to the position of the head of the household in Nanjing, but he became ill and left the position.

古文：起南京工部尚书，就改吏部，征为户部尚书。
现代文：后出任南京工部尚书，改任吏部职，神宗征召他担任户部尚书。
English: After that, he served as the secretary of the Nanjing Engineering Department, and was reassigned to the post of secretary, and Shinso recruited him to serve as the secretary of the household department.

古文：帝以风霾谕所司陈时政，锵以九事上。
现代文：神宗因为刮风卷尘就告谕所司陈述当时的政情，毕锵上奏陈述了九件事。
English: Because of the wind and dust, Shenzong ordered his secretary to state the political situation at that time, and nine things were stated.

古文：中言： 锦衣旗校至万七千四百余人，内府诸监局匠役数亦称是。
现代文：其中称： 锦衣旗校达一万七千四百多人，内府的各监局服役的工匠数也是如此。
English: It said: More than 17,400 people graduated from the Jin Yiqi School, and the same is true for the number of craftsmen serving in various supervisory bureaus in the inner prefecture.

古文：此冗食之尤，宜屏除冒滥。
现代文：这是最严重的冗食者，应当清除假冒与滥用者。
English: This is the worst of the gluttons, and the fakers and abusers should be weeded out.

古文：州县丈田滋弊，云南鼓铸不酬工直，官已裁而复置，田欲垦而再停。
现代文：州县丈量田地滋生弊端，云南铸鼓不给工匠支付报酬，官员已经裁减又重新设置，田地准备垦种而又停止丈量。
English: Measuring fields by state and county has its drawbacks. Yunnan Foundry Drum does not pay remuneration to craftsmen. Officials have reduced and re-established, the field is ready for sowing and the measurement is stopped.

古文：请酌土俗人情，毋率意更改。
现代文：请考虑各地的习俗与人情，不要随意进行更改。
English: Please consider the local customs and human conditions, and do not arbitrarily make changes.

古文：至袍服锦绮，岁有积余，何烦频织。
现代文：至于袍服锦绮，每年有多余的积蓄，为何烦劳人频频织造？
English: As for the robe brocade, why bother people to weave frequently when they have extra savings every year?

古文：天灯费巨万，尤不经。
现代文：天灯费用开支达万两，尤其不合常规。
English: The cost of the skylights is exorbitant, especially out of the ordinary.

古文：滥予不可不裁，淫巧不可不革。 
现代文：无节制的赏赐不能不裁减，投机取巧的事不能不革除。 
English: Unrestrained rewards must be reduced, and opportunistic things must be eliminated.

古文：他所奏，并多切要。
现代文：他所奏的事情，大多切中要害。
English: Most of the things he plays are to the point.

古文：近幸从中挠之，不尽行。
现代文：神宗身边的宠幸之人从中阻挠，没有能全部施行。
English: Shenzong's favorite people around him obstructed it, and it was not able to be fully implemented.

古文：锵乃引年乞罢。
现代文：毕锵就称年纪大了请求罢免。
English: Bi Hao claimed to be too old and asked to be dismissed.

古文：予驰驿归。
现代文：世宗准许他乘驿车回乡。
English: Shizong allowed him to take a train back to his hometown.

古文：锵遇事守正，有物望。
现代文：毕锵遇事严守公正，享有众望。
English: He is widely respected for his strict adherence to justice in all matters.

古文：年及八十，赐存问，加太子少保。
现代文：八十岁时，神宗派人问候他，加封他为太子少保。
English: At the age of eighty, the Shinshu sect sent greetings to him, and he was given the additional title of Prince Junior Protector.

古文：后凡存问者再。
现代文：后来两次派人去慰问。
English: Later, two people were sent to the mountain to offer condolences.

古文：其孙汝楩奉表入谢，诏以为太学生。
现代文：他的孙子毕汝木便带着奏表入朝答谢，世宗下诏收他为太学生。
English: His grandson, Bi Ruki, went to the emperor with a report card to express his thanks, and the emperor accepted him as a student.

古文：年九十三而卒。
现代文：毕锵九十三岁去世。
English: Bi Gan passed away at the age of 93.

古文：赠太子太保，谥恭介。
现代文：赠封为太子太保，谥号恭介。
English: He was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Kyosuke.

古文：舒化，字汝德，临川人。
现代文：舒化，字汝德，临川人。
English: Shuhua, the character Rud, the people of Linchuan.

古文：嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Jiajing.

古文：授衡州推官。
现代文：授职为衡州推官。
English: He was awarded the post of Henzhou magistrate.

古文：改补凤阳，擢户科给事中。
现代文：改任凤阳推官候补升户科给事中。
English: Fengyang has been appointed as a candidate for promotion to the post of deputy mayor.

古文：隆庆初，三迁刑科给事中。
现代文：隆庆初年，三次调任至刑科给事中。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he was transferred to the criminal investigation department three times.

古文：帝任宦官，旨多从中下。
现代文：皇帝任用宦官，旨令多从宫中发出。
English: The emperor appointed eunuchs, and most edicts were issued from the palace.

古文：化言： 法者天下之公，大小罪犯宜悉付法司。
现代文：舒化称： 法律是天下的公理，大小罪犯应该全部交付给法司。
English: Shuhua said: The law is a universal axiom. Criminals big and small should all be handed over to the legal department.

古文：不当，则臣等论劾。
现代文：不恰当的地方，则由我们疏论、弹劾。
English: Where it is inappropriate, it is up to us to discuss and impeach.

古文：若竟自敕行，则喜怒未必当，而法司与臣等俱虚设。 
现代文：如果全然由敕令直接执行，则或喜或怒之事未必恰当，而法司与我们都形同虚设。 
English: If everything is carried out directly by the imperial order, then either joy or anger may not be appropriate, and the magistrate and we are nothing.

古文：诏是其言。
现代文：皇帝下诏肯定了他的说法。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict affirming his claim.

古文：冬至郊天，闻帝咳声，推论阴阳姤复之渐，请法天养微阳，词甚切直。
现代文：冬天到郊外祭天，他听到皇帝的咳嗽声，推断阴阳相遇次数又增加了，请皇帝效法上天培养藏匿的阳气，话语很真切、耿直。
English: In the winter, when he went to the suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven, he heard the emperor coughing, inferred that the number of encounters between yin and yang had increased again, and asked the emperor to follow the example of heaven to cultivate the hidden yang. The words were very sincere and straightforward.

古文：有诏言灾眚洊至，由部院政事不修，令厂卫密察。
现代文：有诏书称灾祸又来临了，是因为部院不处理政事，让厂卫秘密监察的缘故。
English: An imperial edict said that the disaster had come again because the ministry and academy did not deal with political affairs, leaving the factory guards to secretly monitor the situation.

古文：化偕同列言： 厂卫徼巡辇下，惟诘奸宄、禁盗贼耳。
现代文：舒化与同僚上奏称： 厂卫在京城巡察，希望查办犯法作乱的人、禁锢盗贼。
English: Shuhua and his colleagues made a report: the guards of the factory were on patrol in the capital, hoping to investigate and deal with those who had broken the law and caused disturbances, and to imprison thieves.

古文：驾驭百官，乃天子权，而纠察非法，则责在台谏，岂厂卫所得干。
现代文：驾驭百官是天子的权力，而纠察非法的人和事，则是御史的职责，岂能由厂卫处置？
English: Driving hundreds of officials is the power of the Son of Heaven, while picketing illegal people and things is the responsibility of the Emperor. Can it be handled by the guards?

古文：今命之刺访，将必开罗织之门，逞机阱之术，祸贻善类，使人人重足累息，何以为治。
现代文：现在指令他们刺探、查访，必将打开罗织罪名的大门，大展陷害的权术，祸害善良的人们，使人人屏声静气，不敢移步，从何治理。
English: If they are ordered to spy and investigate now, they will surely open the door to fabricating crimes, and will carry out the power trick of framing, harming good people, making everyone hold their breath and not dare to move, from what governance.

古文：且厂卫非能自廉察，必属之番校。陛下不信大臣，反信若属耶？ 
现代文：况且厂卫又不能自己察访，必然将此事委派给卫卒，陛下不相信大臣，反而相信此类人吗？ 
English: Moreover, the guards cannot inspect the factory on their own, but must delegate the matter to the guards. Does His Majesty not trust the minister, but instead trusts this kind of person?

古文：御史刘思贤等亦极陈其害。
现代文：御史刘思贤等人也极力陈述它的危害。
English: Historian Liu Sixian and others also tried their best to explain its harm.

古文：帝并不从。
现代文：皇帝都不听从。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：已而事竟寝。
现代文：不久，此事最终停止。
English: The matter was eventually dropped a short time later.

古文：校尉负尸出北安门，兵马指挥孙承芳见之，疑有奸，系狱鞫讯，词连内官李阳春。
现代文：校尉背着尸体由北安门出来，兵马指挥孙承芳看见了，怀疑有奸诈，将他囚禁在监狱进行审讯，供词牵连太监李阳春。
English: The school captain came out of the Bei'an Gate with the corpse on his back. Sun Chengfang, commander of the army and cavalry, saw him and suspected him of treachery. He was imprisoned for interrogation, and his confession implicated the eunuch Li Yangchun.

古文：阳春惧，诉于帝。
现代文：李阳春惊惧，向皇帝诉说。
English: Li Yangchun was alarmed and complained to the emperor.

古文：言尉所负非死者，出外乃死，承芳妄生事，刑校尉。
现代文：称校尉背的不是死人，出城后才死，孙承芳妄自滋出事端，对校尉施加刑罚。
English: Saying that the captain was not a dead man, but died after leaving the city, Sun Chengfang delusionally caused an accident and imposed a penalty on the captain.

古文：帝信之，杖承芳六十，斥为民。
现代文：皇帝相信了他，杖责孙承芳六十下，贬为平民。
English: The emperor believed him and punished Sun Chengfang with 60 strokes of the cane, reducing him to a commoner.

古文：化请以阳春所奏下法司勘问，不纳。
现代文：舒化请求将李阳春的奏章下达给法司核查，皇帝不接受。
English: The emperor did not accept Shuhua's request to send Li Yangchun's score to the legal department for verification.

古文：四年热审，请释累臣郑履淳、李芳，及朝审，又请释李已，皆得宥。
现代文：隆庆四年的热季审讯，他请求释放被囚禁的大臣郑履淳、李芳，等到朝廷会审，又请求释放李巳，他们都得到宽恕。
English: During the hot-season trial of the four years of Longqing, he requested the release of the imprisoned ministers Zheng Lushun and Li Fang, and when the imperial court held a trial, he also requested the release of Li Si, and they were all forgiven.

古文：时高拱当国，路楷、杨顺以构杀沈炼论死。
现代文：当时高拱执政，路楷、杨顺因为诬陷并杀害了沈炼而判死罪。
English: At that time, Gao Gong was in power, and Lu Kai and Yang Shun were sentenced to death for framing and killing Shen Lian.

古文：拱欲为楷地，谓顺首祸，顺死，楷可勿坐。
现代文：高拱想改变路楷的处境，称杨顺是祸首，杨顺处死，路楷可以不处死。
English: Gao Gong wanted to change Lu Kai's situation, saying that Yang Shun was the culprit, Yang Shun should be executed, and Lu Kai should not be executed.

古文：化取狱牍示拱曰： 狱故无炼名。
现代文：舒化将狱案文件向高拱展示说： 案狱中本来没有沈炼的姓名。
English: Shu Hua showed the prison case documents to Gao Gong and said: There was no name of Shen Zhen in the prison.

古文：有之，自楷始。
现代文：他的姓名被加入，从路楷开始。
English: His name was added, beginning with a comma.

古文：楷诚罪首。 
现代文：路楷的确是祸首。 
English: Roadblocks are indeed the main culprit.

古文：拱又议宥方士王金等罪，化言： 此遗诏意，即欲勿罪，宜何辞？ 
现代文：高拱又提议宽恕方士王金等人的罪过，舒化说： 这是先帝的遗诏的指示，假如想免罪，应该怎么解释？ 
English: Gao Gong also proposed to forgive the sins of Fang Shi Wang Jin and others, Shuwa said: This is the instruction of the last emperor's will, if you want to be absolved, how should you explain it?

古文：忤拱，出为陕西参政。
现代文：与高拱相抵触，被贬出京城任陕西参政。
English: In conflict with Gao Gong, he was banished from Beijing to take part in politics in Shaanxi.

古文：再疏致仕归。
现代文：他再次上疏请求退休回家。
English: He once again asked to be allowed to retire and return home.

古文：万历初，累擢太仆少卿。
现代文：万历初年，晋升为太仆少卿。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the rank of Taigu Shaoqing (太僕少卿).

古文：复以疾归。
现代文：又因病回乡。
English: Due to illness, he returned to his hometown.

古文：由南京大理卿召拜刑部左侍郎。
现代文：后由南京大理卿召至京都担任刑部左侍郎。
English: Later, he was called to Kyoto by the Lord of the Great Council of Nanking to serve as the Left Attendant of the Criminal Division.

古文：云南缅贼平，帝御午门楼受俘。
现代文：平定了云南、缅甸的乱贼，皇帝驾临于午门楼察看俘虏。
English: The bandits in Yunnan and Burma were subdued, and the emperor came to the gatehouse at noon to inspect the captives.

古文：化读奏词，音吐洪亮，进止有仪，帝目属之。
现代文：舒化宣读奏词，声音洪亮，抑扬顿挫，皇帝的目光盯着他。
English: Shuhua read out the lyrics, his voice booming, the cadences tumultuous, the emperor's gaze fixed on him.

古文：会刑部缺尚书，手诏用化。
现代文：遇上刑部尚书空缺，皇帝亲拟诏令录用舒化。
English: When there was a vacancy in the Criminal Investigation Department, the emperor personally issued an edict to recruit Shuhua.

古文：化言： 陛下仁心出天性。
现代文：舒化上奏称： 陛下的仁慈出自天性。
English: Shuhua said, "His Majesty's benevolence comes from his nature.

古文：知府钱若赓、知州方复乾以残酷死戍。
现代文：知府钱若赓、知州方复乾因为酷刑而死于戍边。
English: Chifu's Qian Ruoqi and Chishu's Fang Fuqian both died of torture in Fuxian.

古文：请饬大小臣僚各遵律例，毋淫刑。
现代文：请求申命大小臣僚，让他们各自遵守律法条例，不要滥施酷刑。
English: I would like to ask you to instruct your ministers, big and small, to abide by the laws and regulations and not to torture.

古文：《大明律》一书，高皇帝揭之两庑，手加更定。
现代文：《大明律》一书，高皇帝在两厢房中阅览，亲手更改、审定。
English: Emperor Gao read the book "Daming Lu" in the two chambers and personally revised and approved it.

古文：今未经详断者或命从重拟议，已经定议者又诏加等处斩，是谓律不足用也。
现代文：现在还没有经过详细审议的案子就命令从重治罪，已经审定了的案子又下诏指令加罪而后斩杀，这就是说律法不值得为根据。
English: Cases that have not yet undergone detailed deliberation are ordered to be given a heavier punishment, and cases that have already been decided are ordered to be punished and then killed, which means that the law is not worth the basis.

古文：去冬雨雪不时，灾异频见，咎当在此。 
现代文：去年冬天不时下雨下雪，灾异频繁出现，过错就在此处。 
English: Last winter, it rained and snowed from time to time, and disasters occurred frequently. The fault lies here.

古文：帝优诏答之。
现代文：皇帝下优诏答复他。
English: The Empress Dowager replied.

古文：会续修《会典》，因辑嘉靖三十四年以后事例与刑名相关者三百八十二条，奏之。
现代文：遇上续修《会典》，于是他编辑了嘉靖三十四年以后事例与刑法名称相关的案子三百八十二条，上奏皇帝。
English: On the occasion of the renewal of the "Code of the Association," he edited the 382 articles of cases related to the name of the criminal law after the 34th year of Jiajing, and submitted to the emperor.

古文：诏颁示中外。
现代文：皇帝下诏将它告示朝廷内外。
English: The emperor issued an edict announcing it both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：十四年，应诏陈言。
现代文：万历十四年他响应诏令上奏陈述。
English: In the 14th year of Wanli, he made a statement in response to the imperial edict.

古文：请信诏令，清狱讼，速讯谳，严检验，禁冤滥，而以格天安民归本圣心。
现代文：请求皇帝讲求诏令的信用，使狱案诉讼清廉，迅速审讯定罪，严格检验，禁止冤屈和滥施刑罚，而以恪守天条、安抚百姓、回归本源的圣心。
English: He asked the emperor to uphold the credibility of the imperial edict, make the prison case proceedings clean, prompt trial and conviction, strict examination, prohibit grievances and excessive punishment, and adhere to the heavenly law, appease the people, and return to the sacred heart of the source.

古文：帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：皇帝接纳并嘉奖了他。
English: Emperor Wen approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：帝虑群下欺罔，间有讦发，辄遣官逮捕，牵引证佐，文案累积。
现代文：皇帝顾虑手下的大臣进行欺骗，间或有人揭发，就派遣官吏去加以逮捕，搜取证据，文书累叠积压。
English: The emperor was worried that his ministers were cheating, and occasionally someone would expose them, so he sent officials to arrest them, search for evidence, and the paperwork accumulated.

古文：化言： 主术贵执要，不当侵有司；徒使人归过于上，而下得缘以饰非。 
现代文：舒化称： 主上治政法则贵在抓住纲要，不应当侵扰有司；徒然使人将过失归咎于皇上，而下属反而借机掩饰过失。 
English: Shuhua said: The superior's governing law is to grasp the outline, and should not interfere with the superior; it is in vain to make people blame the fault on the emperor, while the subordinates take the opportunity to cover up the fault.

古文：潞王府小校以事为兵马司吏目所笞，帝怒，逮吏目下诏狱，掠死，又罪其捕卒七人。
现代文：潞王府的小校因事被兵马司吏目鞭笞，皇帝恼怒，将吏目逮捕，投入诏狱，拷打致死，又将七名捕卒治罪。
English: As a result of the incident, the small school in Shao Wangfu was whipped by the officer of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division, and the emperor was angry, arrested the officer, put him in the imperial prison, tortured him to death, and punished seven arresting officers.

古文：化争之。
现代文：舒化为此争辩。
English: Shuhua disputes this.

古文：诏罪为首一人，余并获宥。
现代文：皇帝下诏将为首的一人治罪，其余的都被宽恕。
English: The emperor decreed that the first one would be punished and the rest would be pardoned.

古文：明年，京察拾遗，南京科道论及化。
现代文：第二年，京官考核，南京科道抨击舒化。
English: In the second year, the Beijing official assessment, Nanjing Science and Technology criticized Shuhua.

古文：遂三疏乞归。帝不许。
现代文：于是他多次上疏请求回乡，皇帝不同意。
English: As a result, he repeatedly requested to go back to his hometown, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：会当虑囚，复起视事。
现代文：遇上考察囚犯的事，他又开始办公。
English: He started working again when he was called to inspect prisoners.

古文：中贵传帝意宥重辟三十余人，化争不可。
现代文：宦官中的贵人传达皇帝的旨意要宽恕三十多名死囚，舒化争辩主张不宽恕。
English: The noble among the eunuchs conveyed the emperor's will to pardon more than thirty death-row prisoners, and tried to settle the dispute by arguing that there should be no pardon.

古文：诏卒从其议。
现代文：诏令最后依从了他的建议。
English: The edict finally followed his suggestion.

古文：寻称病笃，乃听归。
现代文：不久他称病重，于是回到家乡。
English: He soon fell seriously ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：卒，赠太子少保，谥庄僖。
现代文：去世后，赠封为太子少保，谥号庄僖。
English: After his death, he was bestowed the title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard, with the posthumous name Zhuangzi.

古文：李世达，字子成，泾阳人。
现代文：李世达，字子成，泾阳人。
English: Li Shida, character Zicheng, Shenyang people.

古文：嘉靖三十五年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 35th year of Jiajing.

古文：授户部主事。
现代文：授职为户部主事。
English: Assigned to be in charge of the Household Department.

古文：改吏部，历考功、文选郎中，与陆光祖并为尚书所倚。
现代文：改任吏部职务，历任考功、文选郎中，与陆光祖一起充当尚书的得力助手。
English: He was appointed to the position of the cadre, and served as the right-hand man of Shangshu together with Lu Guangzu.

古文：隆庆初，丁曾祖忧。
现代文：隆庆初年，遇上曾祖父的丧事回家守孝。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he met with the death of his great-grandfather and returned home to pay his respects.

古文：起右通政，历南京太仆卿。
现代文：后起用为右通政，历任南京太仆卿。
English: Later, he was appointed as Utsusho-sei, and successively held the post of Nanjing Taipo-kyo.

古文：万历二年以右佥都御史巡抚山东。
现代文：万历二年，任右佥都御史巡抚山东。
English: In the second year of Wanli, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：寻进右副都御史，总理河道。
现代文：不久晋升为右副都御史，总管河道。
English: He was soon promoted to Right Vice-Governor of the Capital and Chief Administrator of Waterways.

古文：未上，改抚浙江。
现代文：还未上任就改任浙江巡抚。
English: He was appointed governor of Zhejiang Province before taking office.

古文：旋移疾归，起督漕运兼巡抚凤阳。
现代文：旋即称病回乡，后起用督察漕运兼凤阳巡抚。
English: He immediately claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown. Later, he was appointed inspector of rowing and Fengyang patrol.

古文：黄河南侵，淮安告警，世达请修石堤捍城；宝应氾光湖风涛险恶，岁漂溺，请开越河杀水势。
现代文：黄河向南侵蚀，淮安报警，李世达请求修筑石堤捍卫城邑；宝应汜光湖风涛险恶，每年都造成水灾，请求开通越河抑制水势。
English: The Yellow River eroded to the south, Huai'an alerted the police, Li Shida requested the construction of a stone dike to defend the city; Bao Yinghuang Lake had a dangerous wind, causing floods every year, and requested the opening of the river to control the water potential.

古文：俱报可。
现代文：神宗都答复可以。
English: Both emperors agreed.

古文：迁南京兵部右侍郎。
现代文：他调任南京兵部右侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：召改户部，复改吏部，进左侍郎。
现代文：改任户部职，又改任吏部职，升任左侍郎。
English: He was reappointed to the position of the head of the household department, and then to the position of the secretary department, and was promoted to the position of the left attendant.

古文：擢南京吏部尚书，就改兵部，参赞机务。
现代文：提拔为南京吏部尚书，就职后又改任兵部，参与机要事务。
English: He was promoted to the Nanjing cadre department, and after taking office, he was transferred to the military department to participate in important affairs.

古文：俄召为刑部尚书。
现代文：不久他又被命为刑部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：中官张德殴人死，世达请置于理，刑科唐尧钦亦言之，德遂属吏。
现代文：宦官张德将人殴打致死，李世达奏请将其交法司处理，刑科唐尧钦也主张如此，张德才被交给主管的官吏处治。
English: The eunuch Zhang De beat a person to death, Li Shidao requested that it be handed over to the Department of Justice, the Criminal Law Department Tang Yuqin also advocated this, Zhang De was only handed over to the competent officials for punishment.

古文：大兴知县王阶坐挞乐舞生下吏，帝密遣两校尉侦之，谳日为巡风主事孙承荣所拒。
现代文：大兴知县王阶因用鞭子抽打乐舞生被交法司处治，神宗秘密地派遣两名校尉侦察此事，审判定罪的那一天被巡风主事孙承荣拒绝。
English: Wang Ji of Daxing County was handed over to the legal department for beating a music dancer with a whip. Shenzong secretly sent two lieutenants to investigate the matter. On the day of the trial and conviction, he was rejected by the leader of the patrol, Sun Cheng Rong.

古文：校尉还奏，帝怒诘世达。
现代文：校尉返京上奏，神宗愤怒地责备李世达。
English: When the school captain returned to Beijing for the rehearsal, Shenzong angrily scolded Li Shida.

古文：世达言侦伺非大体。
现代文：李世达称侦探不合大体。
English: Li Shida said the detective was not a good fit.

古文：承荣竟夺俸。
现代文：孙承荣最终被剥夺了俸禄。
English: Sun Cheng Rong was eventually deprived of his salary.

古文：东厂太监张鲸有罪，言官交劾，帝曲贷之。
现代文：东厂太监张鲸犯罪，言官争相弹劾，神宗曲意宽恕了他。
English: The eunuch of the East Factory, Zhang Jiali, committed a crime, and the officials vied with each other to impeach him. Shenzong Quyi pardoned him.

古文：世达执奏，帝乃屏鲸于外。
现代文：李世达执意上奏，神宗才将张鲸排斥出京城。
English: Li Shida insisted on playing, but it was Shenzong who ousted Zhang Jiali from the capital.

古文：驸马都尉侯拱宸仆毙平民抵法，世达请并坐拱宸。
现代文：驸马都尉侯拱宸的奴仆打死了平民被依法惩治，李世达请求将侯拱宸一起治罪。
English: The slave of the commander Hou Gonglu killed a civilian and was punished according to the law. Li Shida requested that Hou Gonglu be punished together with him.

古文：乃革其任，命国学肄礼。
现代文：于是革除了侯拱宸的官职，命令他去国子监学习礼仪。
English: As a result, he dismissed Hou Gongyao from his official post and ordered him to go to the state orphanage to study etiquette.

古文：罪人焦文粲法不当死，帝怒入之。
现代文：罪犯焦文灿依法不应判死刑，神宗恼怒地将他列入死囚之中。
English: The criminal Jiao Wencang should not be sentenced to death according to the law. Shenzong angrily put him on death row.

古文：会朝审，命户部尚书宋纁主笔。
现代文：遇上朝廷会审，命令户部尚书宋纟熏主笔。
English: When faced with an imperial court trial, he ordered the head of the Household Division, Shang Shuxu, to have Song Jian as his chief scribe.

古文：世达言于纁，薄文粲罪。
现代文：李世达对宋纟熏说，对焦文灿从轻发落。
English: Li Shida said to Song Yuxuan that he would never give up on Jiao Wencang.

古文：忤旨，诘问，复据法以对。
现代文：这抵触了圣旨，神宗责问，他又据法律做回答。
English: This was contrary to God's will. Shenton reprimanded him, and he answered according to the law.

古文：帝卒不从。
现代文：神宗最终没有依从。
English: In the end, Shenzong did not comply.

古文：时帝燕居多暴怒，近侍屡以非罪死，世达因灾异上书以讽。
现代文：当时，皇帝闲居，很暴躁，身边的侍从屡屡无罪被处死，李世达趁着灾异上奏讽谏。
English: At that time, the emperor was idle and very grumpy, and the attendants around him were repeatedly executed without charge. Li Shida took advantage of the calamity to ridicule them.

古文：浙江饥，或请令罪人出粟除罪。
现代文：浙江发生饥荒，有人请求让罪犯捐出粟以免罪。
English: A famine occurred in Zhejiang, and there were requests for criminals to donate corn to avoid punishment.

古文：世达言： 法不可废，宁赦毋赎。
现代文：李世达称： 法律不能废弃，宁可赦免也不能出卖。
English: Li Shida said: The law cannot be abolished, and it is better to pardon than to betray.

古文：赦则恩出于上，法犹存。
现代文：赦免就体现了皇恩，法律仍然存在。
English: The pardon shows the grace of the king, and the law still exists.

古文：赎则力出于下，人滋玩。 
现代文：赎人则力量来自下面，人们更加藐视法律。 
English: The power to redeem comes from below, and people are more contemptuous of the law.

古文：识者韪之。
现代文：有识之士对此称是。
English: Those in the know say yes.

古文：改左都御史。
现代文：他改任左都御史。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Sado goshi.

古文：兵马指挥何价虐死三人，御史刘思瑜庇之。
现代文：兵马指挥何价虐待三人致死，御史刘思瑜庇护他。
English: The commander of the soldiers and horses, He Quan, abused three people to death, and the governor Liu Siyu sheltered him.

古文：世达劾奏，帝镌思秩。
现代文：李世达上奏弹劾，皇帝降了刘思瑜的官级。
English: Li Shida appealed for impeachment, and the emperor reduced Liu Siyu's official rank.

古文：复劾罢御史韩介等数人。
现代文：他又弹劾并使御史韩介等人受到罢免。
English: He also impeached and dismissed Mishi Hanseki and others.

古文：帝深恶言官，下诏申饬，责以挟私报复。
现代文：皇帝很厌恶言官，下诏申斥，指责他们挟私报复。
English: The emperor was disgusted with the officials and issued an imperial edict to reprimand them, accusing them of taking revenge.

古文：世达言： 效忠持正者，语虽过激，心实无他。
现代文：李世达劝谏： 效忠且正直的人，话语虽然偏激，心中实在没有别的意思。
English: Li Shida advised: A loyal and honest person, although the words are extreme, there is really no other meaning in his heart.

古文：即或心未可知，而言不可废，并宜容纳。
现代文：即使居心叵测，而谏言不能废置，应该一并容纳。
English: Even if it is a deliberate miscalculation, while criticism cannot be discarded, it should be accommodated.

古文：惟缄默依阿，然后加黜罚。
现代文：只是阿谀奉承的人，此后应加以罢黜。
English: Just a sycophant who should be sacked after this.

古文：则谠言日进，邪说渐消。 
现代文：则正直的话每天能听到，邪说渐渐消失。 
English: But to be honest, I hear it every day, and the myth is gradually disappearing.

古文：报闻。
现代文：皇帝答复知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：二十一年，与吏部尚书孙鑨同主京察，斥政府私人殆尽。
现代文：万历二十一年他与吏部尚书孙钅龙共同主持京官的考核，将政府中的私人全部贬斥。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, he co-chaired the appraisal of Beijing officials with Shangshu Sun Yulong of the Personnel Department, and disparaged all private individuals in the government.

古文：考功郎中赵南星被劾贬官，世达力争之，反除南星等名，遂求去，不许。
现代文：考功郎中赵南星被弹劾贬官，李世达极力抗争，皇上反而将南星除名，于是他请求辞职，皇上不同意。
English: Zhao Nansing was impeached and demoted in the examination for meritorious service, and Li Shida vigorously protested, but the emperor instead removed Nansing from the list, so he asked to resign, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：其秋，吏部侍郎赵用贤以绝婚事被讦，世达白其无罪。
现代文：这年秋天吏部侍郎赵用贤因为拒绝婚事遭人攻击，李世达辩白他无罪。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zhao Yingxian, a waiter in the clerk's office, was attacked for refusing to marry. Li Shida pleaded his innocence.

古文：郎中杨应宿、郑材疏诋世达，遂连章乞休去。
现代文：郎中杨应宿、郑材上奏诋毁李世达，他便接连上奏请求退休。
English: Yang Yingjuku and Zheng Zai denigrated Li Shida, and he subsequently requested retirement.

古文：归七年卒。
现代文：回乡七年后去世。
English: He died seven years after returning to his hometown.

古文：赠太子太保，谥敏肃。
现代文：赠封为太子太保，谥号敏肃。
English: He was given the title of Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Minshu.

古文：曾同亨，字于野，吉水人。
现代文：曾同亨，字于野，吉水县人。
English: Zeng Tongheng, surnamed Yuye, from Jishui County.

古文：父存仁，云南布政使。
现代文：父亲曾存仁，为云南布政使。
English: His father, Zeng Cunren, was a political envoy of Yunnan Province.

古文：同亨举嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：曾同亨考取嘉靖三十八年的进士。
English: He was a member of the 38th year of Jiajing.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：授职为刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：改礼部，迁吏部文选主事。
现代文：改任礼部，调任吏部文选主事。
English: He was reassigned to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and transferred to the Ministry of Public Administration as the chief of literary selection.

古文：故事，丞簿以下官，听胥吏铨注，同亨悉躬亲之。
现代文：先例，丞、簿以下的官员，听任胥吏选拔，曾同亨却全都亲自挑选。
English: In the past, officials below the rank of joe and sho were selected by officials, but Zeng Tonghong personally selected all of them.

古文：与陆光祖、李世达齐名。
现代文：他与陆光祖、李世达齐名。
English: He is as famous as Lu Guangzu and Li Shida.

古文：隆庆初，为文选郎中，荐用遗佚几尽。
现代文：隆庆初年，任文选郎中，几乎将旧臣举荐任用完了。
English: In the first year of Longqing, almost all of the former vassals were recommended for appointment.

古文：进太常少卿，请急去。
现代文：晋升为太常少卿，因急事请假离去。
English: He was promoted to Taizang Shaoqing, but had to take leave of absence due to an emergency.

古文：万历初，起大理少卿。
现代文：万历初年，出任大理少卿。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he was appointed Dali Shosho.

古文：历顺天府尹，以右副都御史巡抚贵州。
现代文：历任顺天府尹，任右副都御史管辖贵州。
English: Successively held the post of Shuntianfu Yin, and served as the right vice-governor of Guizhou.

古文：御史刘台得罪张居正，同亨，台姊夫也，给事中陈三谟欲并逐之，奏同亨羸不任职。
现代文：御史刘台触犯了张居正。曾同亨是刘台的姐夫，给事中陈三谟想将他们一起驱逐，上奏曾同亨羸弱不胜职。
English: Liu Tai, the chief historian, offended Zhang Juzheng. Zeng Tongheng was Liu Tai's brother-in-law. During the incident, Chen Sanmu wanted to expel them together. Zeng Tongheng was weak and incompetent.

古文：诏调南京，遂移疾归。
现代文：诏令调他到南京，于是称病回乡。
English: The imperial edict transferred him to Nanjing, so he called in sick and returned to his hometown.

古文：九年，京察拾遗，给事中奏翟、御史钱岱等复希居正指，列同亨名。
现代文：万历九年，京城考核纠察官，给事中秦灿、御史钱岱等人又秉承张居正旨意，列上曾同亨的姓名。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, the Beijing city assessment picket officer, Qin Can, Goshi Qian Qi and others also adhered to Zhang Jizheng's will and listed the names of Tongheng.

古文：勒休致。
现代文：张居正勒令他休息。
English: Zhang Jizheng ordered him to rest.

古文：居正卒，起南京太常卿。
现代文：张居正死后，他出任南京太常卿。
English: After the death of Zhang Jizheng, he served as the Nanjing Taizongqing.

古文：召为大理卿，迁工部右侍郎。
现代文：皇帝召他担任大理卿，调任工部右侍郎。
English: The emperor called him to serve as the Dali Lord and transferred him to the right hand man of the Ministry of Works.

古文：督治寿宫，节浮费三十余万。
现代文：负责督促营建皇帝逝世后的寝宫，节省三十多万两白银。
English: He was responsible for supervising the construction of the emperor's bedchamber after his death, saving more than 300,000 taels of silver.

古文：由左侍郎进尚书。
现代文：由左侍郎升为尚书。
English: He was promoted from Sasajiro to Shosho.

古文：军器自外输，率不中程，奏请半收其直，又请减织造之半。
现代文：军事器械都从外地输送来，全都不合乎标准，他奏请以半价签收，又请求减少一半的织造额。
English: All the military equipment was imported from abroad, and none of it was up to standard. He asked to sign for it at half the price, and requested that the fabrication cost be reduced by half.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：皇帝都答复可以。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：汝安王妃乞桥税，同亨拒之。
现代文：汝安王妃请求征收桥税，曾同亨拒绝了。
English: Princess Ruan requested to levy a bridge tax, but Zeng Tongheng refused.

古文：帝竟如妃请。
现代文：皇帝最终应允了王妃的请求。
English: The emperor eventually acceded to the empress's request.

古文：内府工匠，隆庆初数至万五千八百人，寻汰二千五百人，而中官滥增不已。
现代文：内府的工匠，隆庆初年人数达到一万五千八百人，不久淘汰了两千五百人，但是宦官却不断增加。
English: The number of craftsmen in Naifu reached 15,800 in the first year of Longqing, and soon eliminated 2,500, but the number of eunuchs continued to increase.

古文：同亨疏请清厘。
现代文：曾同亨上奏请求清理、整治。
English: He and Heng Shangsoo had requested the clean-up and rectification.

古文：已得旨，中官复奏寝之。
现代文：已经得到圣旨，宦官又上奏压制了此事。
English: Having received the sacred edict, the eunuch suppressed the matter.

古文：给事中杨其休疏争，弗纳。
现代文：给事中杨其休上奏争辩，皇帝不接纳。
English: The emperor did not accept Yang Qiheu's argument in the case.

古文：同亨弟乾亨请裁冗员以裕经费，京卫诸武臣谓减己月俸也，大哗，伺同亨出朝，围而噪之。
现代文：曾同亨的弟弟曾乾亨奏请裁减冗员使经费宽裕些，京城卫戍部队的诸位武臣声称减少了自己的月薪，一片哗然，窥伺着曾同亨走出朝房就围着他叫嚷。
English: Zeng Qianheng, the younger brother of Zeng Tongheng, requested that redundancies be reduced to make funds more abundant. All the warriors of the Beijing Garrison claimed that they had reduced their monthly salary. There was an uproar. They watched Zeng Tongheng walk out of the Imperial Palace and shouted around him.

古文：同亨再乞休，不得请。
现代文：曾同亨再次请求退休，没有结果。
English: Tongheng once again asked to retire, but to no avail.

古文：九门工成，加太子少保。
现代文：九门的工程完工，他被加封为太子少保。
English: When the nine gates project was completed, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：力乞去，诏乘传归。
现代文：极力请求离去，皇帝下诏令他乘驿车回乡。
English: He begged to be allowed to leave, but the emperor ordered him to take a stagecoach back to his hometown.

古文：起南京吏部尚书，辞不拜。
现代文：启用他任南京吏部尚书，他推辞了。
English: He refused to accept his appointment to the Nanjing Cadre Department.

古文：久之，再起故官，累辞乃就职。
现代文：此后很久，再度起用他任原职，他多次推辞之后才就职。
English: He was reappointed to his old post long afterwards, only taking up the post after several refusals.

古文：税使所在虐民，同亨极谏。
现代文：税使在当地肆虐百姓，曾同亨极力劝谏。
English: The tax authorities had been wreaking havoc on the local people, and Tong Heng had tried his best to dissuade them.

古文：三十三年，大计京官，与考功郎徐必达持正不挠。
现代文：万历三十三年，全面考核京官，他与考功郎徐必达正直不徇私情。
English: Thirty-three years old, a comprehensive assessment of Beijing officials, he and the examination winner Xu Bida are honest and honest.

古文：是年，北察失执政意，中旨留给事中钱梦皋等；南察及同亨自陈疏，亦久不下。
现代文：当年，北都考核拂逆了当政者的意愿，宫中传旨保留给事中钱梦皋等人；南都的考核和曾同亨自己的奏疏，也很久不下发。
English: In that year, the evaluation of the Northern Capital went against the wishes of the political leaders, and the imperial edict was reserved for Qian Mengyao and others; the evaluation of the Southern Capital and Zeng Tongheng's own report were not issued for a long time.

古文：同亨适给由入都，遂引疾。
现代文：曾同亨恰好因事进京，于是称病。
English: Once, Tongheng happened to be in Beijing for an event, so he called in sick.

古文：诏加太子太保致仕。
现代文：诏令加封他为太子太保，而后退休。
English: He was given the additional title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm, and then retired.

古文：同亨初入吏部，严嵩其乡人，尚书吴鹏则父同年也，同亨无私谒。
现代文：曾同亨初次进入吏部，严嵩是他的同乡，尚书吴鹏与他父亲同年进士，曾同亨没有做私下拜访。
English: Zeng Tongheng entered the cadre department for the first time, Yan Song was his countryman, Shangshu Wu Peng entered the same year as his father, Zeng Tongheng did not make a private visit.

古文：尝止宿署舍，弥月不归。
现代文：曾在署舍住食，整月不回家。
English: He once lived and ate in the police station and didn't go home for a whole month.

古文：雅与罗汝芳、耿定向善。
现代文：一向与罗汝芳、耿定向相好。
English: He has always been friendly with Luo Rufang and Geng Xiang.

古文：廷推巡抚者三，俱不用。
现代文：尚书杨博痛骂伪儒，曾同亨说： 他们中间多愚昧者，不可以一概斥责。
English: Shangshu Yangbo scolded the pseudo-Confucianists, and once said to Tongheng: "You can't reprimand all of them because some of them are stupid."

古文：遂引疾归，未几卒。乾亨言行不苟，与其兄并以名德称。
现代文：即使表面上借儒学名义，这与卖身进取，恬不知耻的人相比，谁更可恶呢？ 
English: Even if it ostensibly borrows the name of Confucianism, who is more detestable than a self-promoting, shameless person?

古文：辛自修，字子吉，襄城人。
现代文：他在七十五岁去世。被赠封为少保，谥号恭端。辛自修，字子吉，襄城人。
English: He died at the age of seventy-five. He was awarded the title of Shōhō, and his posthumous name was Kyōdan. He was a self-educated scholar, a good son, and a citizen of Xiangcheng.

古文：嘉靖三十五年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 35th year of Jiajing.

古文：除海宁知县。
现代文：授任海宁知县。
English: Awarded the post of Haining Zhixian.

古文：擢吏科给事中，奏言： 吏部铨注，遴才要矣，量地尤急。
现代文：他升任吏科给事中。上奏称： 吏部选拔官吏，选才重要，量地选才尤为急迫。
English: He was in the process of being promoted to the position of the personnel department. The report said: the personnel department selects officials, the selection is important, and the quantitative selection is particularly urgent.

古文：迩京府属吏以大计去者十之五，岂畿辇下独多不肖哉？
现代文：近来京府的属吏因为全面考察而离去的人有十分之五，难道唯独京城不肖之人很多吗？
English: Recently, five-tenths of the officials of the Beijing government have left because of a comprehensive inspection. Is it just that there are a lot of unsightly people in Beijing?

古文：地艰而事猥也。请量地剧易以除官，量事繁简以注考。 
现代文：地方艰苦而事情繁多，请求根据地方的复杂和简易来授予官职，根据事情的繁琐、简单来做考核的依据。 
English: The localities are arduous and the matters are numerous. The official positions should be awarded according to the complexity and simplicity of the localities, and the assessment should be based on the complexity and simplicity of the matters.

古文：吏部善其言，请令抚按举劾如自修议。
现代文：吏部认为他的建议很好，奏请皇帝下令抚按大臣，像辛自修所提议的那样来举荐和弹劾有关人员。
English: The cadre department thought his suggestion was very good, and requested the emperor to order the minister to recommend and impeach the relevant personnel as proposed by Xin Zixiu.

古文：巡视京营，劾典营务镇远侯顾寰、协理佥都御史李燧，请戒寰罢燧。
现代文：他巡视京都兵营，弹劾典营务镇远侯顾寰、协理佥都御史李燧，请求警告顾寰，罢免李燧。
English: He toured the Kyoto barracks, impeached the commander of the camp, Gu Yao, and the deputy commander, Li Yao, and requested that Gu Yao be warned and Li Yao be dismissed.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝依从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：历迁礼科都给事中。
现代文：辛自修历任礼科都给事中。
English: Xin Zi studied all the etiquette courses and is now in charge.

古文：诚意伯刘世延不法，自修极论其奸。
现代文：诚意伯刘世延不守法，辛自修极力抨击他的奸诈。
English: Liu Shiyan did not abide by the law in good faith, and Xin Zi Xiu strongly criticized his treachery.

古文：诏革任禁锢。
现代文：诏令将他革职囚禁。
English: He was dismissed from his post and imprisoned.

古文：隆庆元年，给事中胡应嘉言事斥，自修疏救。
现代文：隆庆元年，给事中胡应嘉论事被贬斥，辛自修上奏救助。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Hu Yingjia was reprimanded in a dispute, and Xin Zixiu came to his rescue.

古文：未几，论夺尚书顾可学、徐可成，侍郎朱隆禧、郭文英赠谥；以可成由黄冠，文英由工匠，可学、隆禧俱以方药进也。
现代文：不久，他疏论剥夺尚书顾可学、徐可成，侍郎朱隆禧、郭文英的封赠与谥号；因为徐可成由道士进用，郭文英由工匠进用，顾可学、朱隆禧都是凭方士的药丸得以进用。
English: Soon, he casually talked about depriving Shang Shu, Gu Kegui, Xu Kecheng, Zhu Rongxi and Guo Wenying of their titles and surnames; because Xu Kegui was used by Taoists, Guo Wenying was used by craftsmen, and Gu Kegui and Zhu Rongxi were able to use the tablets of magicians.

古文：擢太仆少卿，引疾归。
现代文：他升任太仆少卿，称病回乡。
English: He was promoted to Taichu Shoken and returned to his hometown saying he was ill.

古文：万历六年，起应天府丞，再迁光禄卿。
现代文：万历六年，他出任应天府丞，再调任光禄卿。
English: After six long years, he was appointed as Ying Tianfu cheng, and then transferred to Guanglu cheng.

古文：以右佥都御史巡抚保定六府。
现代文：担任右佥都御史辖治保定的六府。
English: He served as the right-hand governor of the six prefectures of Baoding.

古文：奏减均徭里甲银六万两，增筑雄、任丘二县堤，以御滹沱水患。
现代文：上奏减少了六万两的里甲均徭役费，加筑了雄、任丘两县的堤防，用来防御滹沱河的水患。
English: He reduced the 60,000 rupees per rupee service charge, and built more dikes in Xiong and Renqiu counties to prevent floods in the Minhe River.

古文：每岁防秋，巡抚移驻易州，征所部供费，防秋已罢，征如故，自修奏已之。
现代文：每年秋防期间，巡抚迁移到易州驻扎，向部属征收供给的费用，秋季防御期已经结束，征集依旧，辛自修上奏终止了此事。
English: During the autumn defense every year, the governor moved to Yizhou and stationed there, collecting the cost of supplies from his subordinates. The autumn defense period has ended, the recruitment is still the same, and Xin Zi Xiu has terminated the matter.

古文：入历大理卿，兵部左、右侍郎，擢南京右都御史。
现代文：他入朝担任大理卿，兵部左、右侍郎，升任南京右都御史。
English: He entered the imperial court as the Lord of Dali, the left and right attendant of the military department, and was promoted to the position of the governor of Nanjing.

古文：御史沈汝梁者，巡视下江，用馈遗为名，尽括所部赎鍰，自修劾奏之。
现代文：御史沈汝梁巡视下江，以馈赠为名，搜刮完了部属的赎金，辛自修上奏弹劾了他。
English: Grand Historian Shen Ruliang inspected the Lower River and, in the name of a gift, scrounged up the ransom money of his subordinates. Xin Zixiu impeached him.

古文：帝方欲惩贪吏，乃命逮治汝梁，而召自修为左都御史。
现代文：皇帝正想惩治贪官，下令将沈汝梁逮捕、治罪，并且召见辛自修任命他为左部御史。
English: The emperor wanted to punish corrupt officials, so he ordered Shen Ruliang to be arrested and punished, and summoned Xin Zi Xiu to appoint him as the left imperial historian.

古文：十五年，大计京官，政府欲庇私人，去异己。
现代文：万历十五年，全面考察京官，执政者想庇护私人，排斥异己。
English: After fifteen years, a comprehensive inspection of Beijing officials, the ruling party wants to protect private individuals and exclude dissidents.

古文：吏部尚书杨巍承意指惟谨，自修患之，先期上奏，请勿以爱憎为喜怒，排抑孤立之人。
现代文：吏部尚书杨巍秉承旨意、谨小慎微，辛自修对此表示忧虑，事先上奏，请求不要以自己的爱憎为喜怒，排斥、压抑不结党派的人。
English: Yang Jie, secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, adhering to the will, prudence, and self-cultivation, expressed concern about this, played in advance, and asked not to use their own love and hate as anger, and to reject and suppress those who do not form a party.

古文：帝善其言，而政府不悦。
现代文：神宗认为他的谏言很好，而执政者不满意。
English: Shenzong thinks his criticism is good, but the government is not satisfied.

古文：有贪竞者十余辈，皆政府所厚，自修欲去之。
现代文：有十多个贪图钻营的人，都是执政者所看重的，辛自修想除去他们。
English: There are more than a dozen people who are greedy for drilling camps, all of whom are valued by the ruling party, and they are trying hard to get rid of them.

古文：给事中陈与郊自度不免，遂言宪臣将以一眚弃人，一举空国。
现代文：给事中陈与郊自己估量不能幸免，于是称执宪大臣将以一次过失就废弃人，想一举使京都空虚。
English: Chen and Suburban could not spare their own judgment in the matter, so they said that the Minister of the Constitution would abandon people with a single mistake, and wanted to empty Kyoto at one stroke.

古文：于是自修所欲斥者悉获免。
现代文：因此辛自修想贬斥的人都获得赦免。
English: As a result, those who tried hard to discredit him were pardoned.

古文：已而御史张鸣冈等拾遗，首工部尚书何起鸣。
现代文：不久御史张鸣冈等人行纠察职责，首攻工部尚书何起鸣。
English: Not long after, the Minister of History Zhang Minggang and others went on picket duty, and the first to attack the Ministry of Industry was Shangshu.

古文：起鸣故以督工与中官张诚厚，而雅不善自修，遂讦自修仇主使。
现代文：何起鸣以前因为督察工程与宦官张诚相好，而且一向不喜欢辛自修，于是攻击辛自修挟私仇在背后指使。
English: Because the inspector of the project was friendly with the eunuch Zhang Cheng, and had always disliked Xin Zi Xiu, he attacked Xin Zi Xiu and instigated behind his back.

古文：与郊及给事中吴之佳助之。
现代文：陈与郊和给事中吴之佳支持他。
English: Chen and Suburban and Wu Zhi Jia all supported him.

古文：御史高维崧、赵卿、张鸣冈、左之宜不平，劾起鸣饰非诡辨。
现代文：御史高维崧、赵卿、张鸣冈、左之宜愤恨不平，弹劾何起鸣掩饰过失，进行诡辩。
English: Gao Weiqi, Zhao Qing, Zhang Minggang, and Zuozhegi were indignant and indignant, and how many impeachments were made to cover up mistakes and carry out sophistry.

古文：帝先入张诚言，颇疑自修。
现代文：皇帝先听到张诚的话，颇怀疑辛自修。
English: When the emperor first heard Zhang Cheng's words, he was quite suspicious.

古文：得疏益不悦，曰： 朝廷每用一人，言官辄纷纷排击。
现代文：见到他们的奏疏更加不高兴，说： 朝廷每次任用一个人，言官就纷纷排挤、打击。
English: He was even more displeased to see their protestations, saying, "Every time the imperial court appoints a person, the gokenin push them out one after another and attack them.

古文：今起鸣去，尔等举堪此任者。 
现代文：现在何起鸣离去，你们举荐堪当此任的人。 
English: Now that so many have left, who would you recommend for this position?

古文：维崧等具疏引罪，无他举。
现代文：高维崧等人都上奏认罪，没有推举其他的人。
English: Gao Weizhen and others all pleaded guilty and did not nominate others.

古文：帝怒，悉出之外。
现代文：神宗恼怒，将他们全部调出京城。
English: Enraged, Shinso transferred them all out of the capital.

古文：给事中张养蒙申救，亦夺俸。
现代文：给事中张养蒙救助，也被剥夺俸禄。
English: Zhang Yimeng, who came to the rescue, was also deprived of his salary.

古文：刑部主事王德新复疏争，语侵嬖幸。
现代文：刑部主事王德新又上奏争辩，话语触犯了神宗宠幸的人。
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Wang Dexin, once again got into an argument, and his words offended the favorite of the Shenzong.

古文：帝下之诏狱，酷刑究主者。
现代文：神宗将他投入诏狱，施加酷刑追究主使人。
English: Shenzong threw him into the imperial prison and subjected him to torture.

古文：无所承，乃削其籍。
现代文：他没有承认，于是削夺了他的官籍。
English: He didn't admit it, so they stripped him of his official status.

古文：自修不自安，亟引疾归。
现代文：辛自修自感不安，赶紧称病回乡。
English: Xin Zi Xiu felt uneasy and hurriedly called in sick to return to his hometown.

古文：自修之进也，非执政意，故不为所容。
现代文：辛自修的奏章，不合执政者的意愿，所以不被他们容纳。
English: The painstakingly self-studied music score does not meet the wishes of the rulers, so it is not accepted by them.

古文：久之，起南京刑部尚书。
现代文：此后很久，才起用他任南京刑部尚书。
English: It was not until much later that he was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：复以工部尚书召。
现代文：又召他担任工部尚书。
English: He was also called upon to serve as an official of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：未上，卒。
现代文：他没有上任就去世了。
English: He died before taking office.

古文：赠太子太保，谥肃敏。
现代文：赠封为太子太保，谥号肃敏。
English: He was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Shumin.

古文：德新，安福人，后起官至光禄丞。温纯，字景文，三原人。
现代文：温纯，字景文，三原人。
English: Warm and pure, characters and scenes, the three originals.

古文：嘉靖四十四年进士。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年的进士。
English: The 44th year of Jiajing.

古文：由寿光知县征为户科给事中。
现代文：由寿光知县征召为户科给事中。
English: Summoned by Shukoichi County, he is now in the process of being transferred to the household science department.

古文：隆庆三年，穆宗既禫除，犹不与大臣接。
现代文：隆庆三年，穆宗已除丧服，仍不与大臣接触。
English: In the third year of the Longqing, Mu Zong has removed his mourning clothes and still does not contact the minister.

古文：纯请遵祖制延访群工，亲决章奏，报闻。
现代文：温纯请求皇帝遵循祖制，垂询群臣，亲自批阅奏章，皇帝答复知道了。
English: Wen Chun requested the emperor to follow the ancestral system, inquire the ministers, and personally approve the reading of the music chapter. The emperor replied that he knew.

古文：屡迁兵科都给事中。
现代文：他调任兵科都给事中。
English: He's reassigned the entire military science department.

古文：倭陷广东广海卫，大杀掠而去。
现代文：倭寇攻陷了广东的广海卫，大肆屠杀、劫掠而后离去。
English: Wokou invaded Guanghaiwei in Guangdong, massacred and plundered, and then left.

古文：总兵刘焘以战却闻，纯劾焘欺罔。
现代文：总兵刘焘报告将敌人打退了，温纯弹劾刘焘进行欺骗。
English: General Liu Bei reported that he had beaten back the enemy, and Wen Rong impeached Liu Bei for deception.

古文：时方召焘督京营，遂置不问。
现代文：当时刚刚召刘焘督率京都的部队，就搁置不问。
English: At that time, Liu Bei had just been summoned to lead the troops in Kyoto, and he did not question it.

古文：黔国公沐朝弼有罪，诏许其子袭爵。
现代文：黔国公沐朝弼犯罪，诏令允许他的儿子继承爵位。
English: When the Duke of Xing committed the crime of usurping the throne, the imperial edict allowed his son to inherit the title.

古文：纯言事未竟，不当遽袭。
现代文：温纯称事情还没了结，不应当匆忙继承爵位。
English: Wen Chun said that the matter is not over yet, and he should not rush to inherit the title.

古文：中官陈洪请封其父母，纯执不可。
现代文：宦官陈洪请求封赠他的父母，温纯坚决不同意。
English: The eunuch Chen Hong requested that his parents be given the seal, but Wen Jun strongly disagreed.

古文：言官李已、石星获谴，疏救之。
现代文：言官李巳、石星遭谴责，他上奏救助他们。
English: The spokesman Li Si and Shi Xing were reprimanded, and he came to their rescue.

古文：初，赵贞吉更营制，三营各统一大将。
现代文：起初，赵贞吉更改军营制度，三营各由一名大将统辖。
English: At first, Zhao Zhengyi changed the military camp system, and each of the three battalions was controlled by a general.

古文：以恭顺侯吴继爵典五军，而都督袁正、焦泽典神枢、神机。
现代文：由恭顺侯吴继爵主持五军事务，而都督袁正、焦泽主持神枢、神机二营。
English: The five armies affairs were presided over by Gongshun marquess Wu Jijie, while the governors Yuan Zheng and Jiao Ze presided over Shenshu and Shensi two battalions.

古文：继爵耻与同列，固辞。
现代文：吴继爵耻于与他为同僚，坚决推辞。
English: Wu Jizhe was ashamed to have him as a colleague and resolutely refused.

古文：帝为罢二人，尽易以勋臣。
现代文：皇帝罢免了两人，全部换成有功勋的大臣。
English: The emperor dismissed the two and replaced them all with meritorious ministers.

古文：纯请广求将才，毋拘世爵，不纳。
现代文：温纯奏请广求将才，不要拘泥于世族侯爵，皇帝没有采纳。
English: The emperor did not approve of Wen Chunso's request to recruit generals from all over the country, and not to stick to the marquis of the world.

古文：已，复命文臣三人分督之，时号 六提督 。
现代文：此后，皇帝又任命三名文臣分别督率部队，当时称为 六提督 。
English: After that, the emperor appointed three civil servants to lead the troops separately, then known as the Six Admirals.

古文：纯以政令多门，极陈不便，遂复旧制。
现代文：温纯认为政出多门，极力陈述它的不利之处，于是恢复了旧制。
English: Wen Chun thought that there were many ways to come to power, and tried his best to explain the disadvantages of it, so he restored the old system.

古文：俺答请贡市，高拱定议许之。
现代文：俺答请求通贡互市，高拱决定准许他们。
English: In response, I asked for the exchange of tribute between the two cities, and Gao Gong decided to allow them.

古文：纯以为弛边备，非中国利。
现代文：温纯认为边防松弛，对中原不利。
English: Wen Chun believes that the relaxation of border defense is unfavorable to the Central Plains.

古文：出为湖广参政，引疾归。
现代文：被调出京城担任湖广参政后，他称病回乡。
English: After he was transferred out of the capital to participate in politics in Hukang, he called in sick to return to his hometown.

古文：万历初，用荐起河南参议。
现代文：万历初年，被举荐担任河南参议。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he was recommended to serve as a Henan counselor.

古文：十二年，以大理卿改兵部右侍郎兼右副都御史，巡抚浙江。
现代文：万历十二年，他由大理卿改任兵部右侍郎兼右副都御史，统辖浙江。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian by Lord Dali, with jurisdiction over Zhejiang Province.

古文：入为户部左侍郎，进右副都御史，督仓场。
现代文：担任户部左侍郎，升任右副都御史，督理仓场。
English: He served as the left-hand attendant of the household, was promoted to the right-hand assistant to the governor, and supervised the warehouse.

古文：母忧去。
现代文：母亲逝世后他离职。
English: He left after his mother's death.

古文：进南京吏部尚书。
现代文：丧期满后担任南京吏部尚书。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he served as the Nanjing Libe Shangshu.

古文：召拜工部尚书。
现代文：皇帝召见他，任命为工部尚书。
English: He was called to the Ministry of Works.

古文：父老，乞养归。
现代文：父亲去世，他请求回乡养老。
English: When his father died, he asked to go back to his hometown to retire.

古文：终丧，召为左都御史。
现代文：服丧期满，他被召封为左都御史。
English: At the end of the period of mourning, he was appointed as the Left Capital Imperial Historian.

古文：矿税使四出，有司逮系累累，纯极论其害，请尽释之，不报。
现代文：矿税使四出横行，有司逮捕、囚禁的犯人极多，温纯极力疏论他们的危害，请求将他们全部放了，皇帝没有答复。
English: The mining tax was rampant, and there were many prisoners who were arrested and imprisoned by the magistrates. However, Emperor Wencheng tried his best to dissuade them from doing harm, and requested that they all be released. The emperor did not reply.

古文：已，诸阉益横，所至剽夺，污人妇女。
现代文：此后，诸位宦官更加横暴，到处剽窃、掠夺，玷污妇女。
English: After that, the eunuchs became even more violent, stealing, plundering, and defiling women everywhere.

古文：四方无赖奸人蜂起言利：有请开云南塞外宝井者；或又言海外吕宋国有机易山，素产金银，岁可得金十万、银三十万；或言淮、扬饶盐利，用其策，岁可得银五十万。
现代文：四方的无赖奸人群起言利：有请求开挖云南塞外的宝井的人；又有人称海外的吕宋国有座机易山，一向出产金银，每年可以获得十万两黄金和三十万两白银；又有人称淮、扬地区盐利富饶，采纳他的主张，每年可以获得五十万两白银。
English: The group of rogues and spies in the four directions began to talk about profit: there was a person who requested to dig a treasure well outside Yunnan Province; another person said that Yishan, a state-owned site in overseas Luzon, has always produced gold and silver, and can obtain 100,000 taels of gold and 300,000 taels of silver every year; another person said that Huai and Yang regions are rich in salt, and adopting his idea, can obtain 500,000 taels of silver every year.

古文：帝并欣然纳之，远近骇震。
现代文：皇帝全部欣然接受了，远近的人骇然震惊。
English: The emperor readily accepted all of them, and people near and far were shocked.

古文：纯言： 缅人方伺隙，宝井一开，兵端必起。
现代文：温纯劝谏： 缅甸的人正在窥伺机会，一旦开挖宝井，必然发生兵变。
English: Warm and pure advice: People in Myanmar are spying on opportunities. Once a treasure well is dug, there will inevitably be a mutiny.

古文：余元俊一盐犯，数千赃不能输，而欲得五十万金，将安取之？
现代文：余元俊是个盐贩，数千两的贮备都不能输出，而想得到五十万两，准备怎样获取？
English: Yu Yuanjun is a salt trader. He can't export his stockpile of several thousand taels, but if he wants to get half a million taels, how is he going to get it?

古文：机易山在海外，必无遍地金银，任人往取；不过假借诏旨，阑出禁物与番人市易，利归群小，害贻国家。
现代文：机易山在海外，必定不是遍地金银，任人前往拿取；不过是假借诏书、圣旨，使禁物擅自出入，与外番的人进行买卖，利益归众吏，祸害留给国家。
English: In overseas countries, Ji Yishan is definitely not full of gold and silver, and people are allowed to go there to get it. However, it is only to borrow the imperial edict and sacred edict, make prohibited items enter and leave the country without permission, and do business with people who are off-duty. The benefits go to all officials, and the harm is left to the country.

古文：乞尽捕诸奸人，付臣等行法，而亟撤税监之害民者。 
现代文：请将诸位奸诈之人全部逮捕，交给我们进行法律制裁，并赶紧撤换祸害百姓的税监。 也没有答复。
English: Please arrest all of you treacherous people, hand them over to us for legal sanctions, and quickly remove and replace the tax inspectors who are harming the people.

古文：亦不报。当是时，中外争请罢矿税，帝悉置不省。
现代文：正值此时，朝廷内外争相请求罢除矿税，皇帝全都置之不理。
English: At this time, both inside and outside the imperial court were clamoring for the abolition of the mineral tax, but the emperor ignored them all.

古文：纯等忧惧不知所出，乃倡诸大臣伏阙泣请。
现代文：温纯等人忧虑、惊惧，不知所措，就倡议诸位大臣匍伏在皇宫前涕泪请求。
English: Anxious, alarmed, and at a loss for what to do, Onjun and others urged the ministers to kneel in front of the Imperial Palace and beg for tears.

古文：帝震怒，问谁倡者，对曰： 都御史臣纯。 
现代文：皇帝震怒，质问谁是倡议者。他回答： 都御史温纯。 
English: The emperor was enraged and asked who was the initiator. He replied: "The Emperor Wenjun."

古文：帝为霁威，遣人慰谕曰： 疏且下。 
现代文：皇帝为此敛威，派人传谕抚慰他说： 奏疏将下达。 
English: For this reason, the emperor restrained himself and sent an envoy to soothe him, saying, "The imperial edict will be issued.

古文：乃退。
现代文：他们才退去。
English: So back off.

古文：已而卒不行。
现代文：然而皇帝最终没有施行。
English: However, the emperor ultimately did not implement it.

古文：广东李凤、陕西梁永、云南杨荣并以矿税激民变，纯又抗言： 税使窃弄陛下威福以十计，参随凭藉税使声势以百计，地方奸民窜身为参随爪牙以万计。宇内生灵困于水旱，困于采办、营运、转输，既嚣然丧其乐生之心，安能复胜此千万虎狼耶！
现代文：广东的李凤、陕西的梁永、云南的杨荣都因征收矿税激起民变，温纯又上奏说： 偷偷假借陛下的威福的税使以十计算，凭借税使的声势的参议随从以百计算，做参议随从的爪牙而奔走的困苦，受采办、营运、转输的困苦，既然丧失了生活的信心，又怎么能再抵御这千万个虎狼呢？
English: Li Feng of Guangdong, Liang Yong of Shaanxi, and Yang Rong of Yunnan have all stirred up the people's revolution due to the imposition of the mineral tax, and the warm and pure also reported that: the tax officer who secretly and falsely borrowed his majesty's wealth is counted as ten, the counselor's followers who rely on the tax officer's voice are counted as one hundred, the troubles of the minions who accompany the counselor and run around, the troubles of procurement, operation, and transfer, since they have lost the confidence of life, how can they resist these millions of tigers and wolves?

古文：愿即日罢矿税，逮凤等置于理。 
现代文：希望当天就罢除矿税，将李凤等人逮捕，关押到大理寺。 
English: It is hoped that the mining tax will be abolished on the same day, and Li Feng and others will be arrested and detained in Dali Temple.

古文：亦不报。
现代文：皇帝又没答复。
English: There was no answer to that either.

古文：先是，御史顾龙桢巡按广东，与布政使王泮语不合，起殴之，泮即弃官去。
现代文：在此之前，御史顾龙桢巡视广东，与布政使王泮言谈不合，起身殴打了他，王泮当即弃官离去。
English: Prior to this, Gu Longtao, an envoy to inspect Guangdong, had a disagreement with the Bu government envoy Wang Xuan, got up and beat him. Wang Xuan immediately resigned and left.

古文：纯劾罢龙桢。
现代文：温纯弹劾并罢免了顾龙桢。
English: Wen Chun impeached and dismissed Gu Longtao.

古文：御史于永清按陕西贪，惧纯举奏，倡同列救龙桢，显与纯异，以胁制纯，又与都给事中姚文蔚比而倾纯。
现代文：御史于永清巡视陕西时贪污，害怕温纯上奏揭发，倡议同僚救助顾龙桢，明显地与温纯相背，以便牵制温纯，又与都给事中姚文尉勾结，倾轧温纯。
English: During the Yongqing Emperor's inspection tour of Shaanxi, Gu Shi was afraid that Wen Chun would expose the corruption, so he urged his colleagues to help Gu Longtao. He obviously opposed Wen Chun in order to contain him, and colluded with Yao Wenzhong in the Du Du affair to crush Wen Chun.

古文：纯不胜愤，上疏尽发永清交构状，并及文蔚，语颇侵首辅沈一贯。
现代文：温纯愤怒不已，上奏皇帝全部揭发了于永清进行勾结活动的罪状，并涉及姚文尉，话语颇为触犯首辅沈一贯。
English: Wen Chun was furious, and Emperor Shangso fully exposed the crimes of Yu Yongqing's collusion activities, and implicated Yao Wenfei. The words were quite consistent with the offense of Shou Fu Shen.

古文：一贯等疏辨。
现代文：沈一贯等人上奏辩解。
English: Shen consistently waited for others to make a defense.

古文：纯遂与一贯忤。给事中陈治则、钟兆斗皆一贯私人，先后劾纯。
现代文：皇帝下发了于永清、姚文尉的两分奏章，而温纯弹劾的奏章留在宫中没有下发。温纯更加愤恨，三次上奏疏论此事，并极力乞求罢免自己，于是皇帝降了于永清的职。温纯就与沈一贯相抵忤了。
English: The emperor issued a two-point report to Yongqing and Yao Wenqi, but the report of Wenjun's impeachment remained in the palace and was not issued. Wenjun was even more indignant. He made three reports on the matter and begged to be removed from his post. As a result, the emperor was demoted to Yongqing's post. Wenjun was in constant conflict with Shen.

古文：御史汤兆京不平，疏斥其妄。
现代文：给事中陈治则、钟兆京鸣不平，上奏斥责他们荒谬。
English: Chen Zizi and Zhong Zhaojing complained about the matter, and Shangso rebuked them for being absurd.

古文：纯求去，章二十上，杜门者九阅月。
现代文：温纯请求离去，上奏二十次闭门在家数月。
English: Warm and pure request to leave, played twenty times behind closed doors at home for months.

古文：帝雅重纯，谕留之。
现代文：皇帝一向看重温纯，传谕挽留他。
English: The emperor has always valued warmth and purity, and ordered him to stay.

古文：纯不得已，强起视事。
现代文：温纯迫不得已，勉强就职处理公务。
English: As a last resort, Wen Chun reluctantly took office to deal with his official duties.

古文：及妖书事起，力为沈鲤、郭正域辨诬。
现代文：等到妖书的事件发生，他极力替沈鲤、郭正域辩驳诬言。
English: When the Yanshu incident occurred, he tried his best to refute the slander on behalf of Shen Yi and Guo Zhengwei.

古文：楚宗人戕杀抚臣，纯复言无反状。
现代文：楚王宗族的杀害抚臣，温纯又称他们没有造反的罪状。
English: The murder of Fushin, a member of King Chu's clan, was also said to be a crime of rebellion.

古文：一贯怨益深。
现代文：沈一贯对他的怨恨更深。
English: Shen had always harbored a deeper grudge against him.

古文：三十二年，大计京朝官。
现代文：万历三十二年，全面考核京官、朝官。
English: In the 32nd year of Wanli, a comprehensive assessment of Beijing officials and imperial officials was carried out.

古文：纯与吏部侍郎杨时乔主之，一贯所欲庇者兆斗及钱梦皋等皆在谪中。
现代文：温纯与吏部侍郎杨时乔主持此事，沈一贯想庇护的兆斗和钱梦皋等人都在贬谪之列。
English: Wen Chun and Yang Shijiao, the secretary of the personnel department, presided over this matter, and Zhaodu and Qian Mengyao, whom Shen had always wanted to protect, were among those who were demeaned.

古文：疏入久之，忽降旨切责，尽留被察科道官，而察疏仍不下。
现代文：奏疏送入宫中，很久之后忽然下旨责备他，将被核查的科道官全部留任，而且考核的结果仍然不向下发。
English: Sonosuke was sent to the Imperial Palace, and after a long time, suddenly an order was issued to reprimand him. All the scientific officers who were to be inspected were kept in office, and the results of the assessment were still not sent down.

古文：纯求去益力。
现代文：温纯更加请求离去。
English: Wen Chun even more requested to leave.

古文：梦皋、兆斗既得留，则连章讦纯楚事。
现代文：钱梦皋、兆斗既留任，就接连上奏攻击温纯对楚地一事的处理。
English: Since Qian Mengyao and Zhao Dou have remained in office, they have successively attacked Wen Chun's handling of the situation in Chudi.

古文：言纯曲庇叛人，且诬以纳贿。
现代文：称温纯曲意庇护反叛的人，并诬蔑他受贿。
English: He has been accused of harbouring a rebel and of taking bribes.

古文：廷臣大骇，争劾梦皋等。
现代文：朝廷大臣大为惊骇，争相弹劾温纯以便取胜。
English: The ministers of the Imperial Court were so shocked that they scrambled to impeach him in order to win.

古文：梦皋等亦再疏劾纯求胜。
现代文：皇帝将奏章都留在宫中。
English: The emperor kept all the music in the palace.

古文：俱留中。已，南京给事中陈嘉训等极论二人阴有所恃，朋比作奸，当亟斥之，而听纯归，以全大臣之体。
现代文：此后，南京给事中陈嘉训等人极力抨击钱梦皋、兆斗两人暗中有依靠，结成朋党做奸诈之事，应当尽快贬斥他们，而听任温纯回乡，以保全大臣的体统。
English: After that, Chen Jiaxun and others in Nanjing vigorously criticized Qianmenqiao and Zhaodu for secretly relying on each other and forming a crony party to do treacherous things. They should be reprimanded as soon as possible, and allowed to return to their hometowns to preserve the minister's dignity.

古文：帝竟批梦皋等前疏，予纯致仕，梦皋、兆斗亦罢归。
现代文：皇帝竟然批复了陈嘉训等人的奏疏，准许温纯结束仕途，钱梦皋、兆斗也被罢免回乡。
English: The emperor even approved the resignation of Chen Jiaxun and others, allowing Wen Chun to end his career. Qian Mengyuan and Zhaodu were also dismissed and returned to their hometowns.

古文：纯清白奉公。
现代文：温纯清白公正。
English: Warm, pure, innocent and fair.

古文：五主南北考察，澄汰悉当。
现代文：五次主持南北的考核，澄清汰劣适当。
English: Five times presided over the assessment of the north and the south, and clarified that it was appropriate to eliminate inferiority.

古文：肃百僚，振风纪，时称名臣。
现代文：整肃百僚，振兴风纪，为一时名臣。
English: He purged hundreds of officials and reinvigorated discipline. He was a famous minister for a while.

古文：卒，赠少保。
现代文：去世后，封赠为少保。
English: After his death, he was awarded the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：天启初，追谥恭毅。
现代文：天启初年，追赠谥号为恭毅。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, the posthumous nickname was Gongyi.

古文：赵世卿，字象贤，历城人。
现代文：赵世卿，字象贵，历城人。
English: Zhao Shijing, a man of letters.

古文：隆庆五年进士。
现代文：隆庆五年的进士。
English: Longqing five-year star.

古文：授南京兵部主事。
现代文：授职为南京兵部主事。
English: He was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：张居正当国，政尚严。
现代文：张居正执政，治政严格。
English: Zhang Ju is in power, and the government is strict.

古文：州县学取士不得过十五人；布按二司以下官，虽公事毋许乘驿马；大辟之刑，岁有定额；征赋以九分为率，有司不及格者罚；又数重谴言事者。
现代文：州县学选取士子不得超过十五人；布政使司与按察使司以下的官吏，虽然是公事也不许乘驿马；处死的刑罚，每年有定额；征赋以九分为标准，如不及格有关部门要受罚；又屡次重责议论事情的人。
English: There shall not be more than fifteen scholars selected from the state and county schools; the highest-ranking government officials and officials below the inspector-general are not allowed to ride a horse, although it is a business; there is an annual quota for the death penalty; recruitment is divided into nine grades, and if the relevant departments fail, they will be punished; and those who repeatedly discuss things are severely punished.

古文：世卿奏匡时五要。
现代文：赵世卿上奏纠正当时的五件重要的事。
English: Zhao Shijing made a report to correct the five important things at that time.

古文：请广取士之额，宽驿传之禁，省大辟，缓催科，而末极论言路当开，言： 近者台谏习为脂韦，以希世取宠。
现代文：请求扩大取士的名额，放宽驿车的禁例，减少处死刑罚，延缓对科税的催征，而最后极力疏论应该广开言路，称： 现在的台谏习惯阿谀奉承，以便希求一生受宠幸。
English: He requested to expand the number of tax collectors, relax the ban on hitchhiking, reduce the death penalty, and delay the collection of tax. Finally, he argued that the discussion should be wide-ranging, saying: Today's Taiwanese are accustomed to flattery, so that they can hope to be favored for life.

古文：事关军国，卷舌无声。
现代文：有关军务国政，就舌头卷曲悄然无声。
English: When it comes to military affairs and national politics, there is no sound of tongues curling.

古文：徒摭不急之务，姑塞言责。
现代文：徒然拣取不紧急的事情，姑且搪塞责备的言辞。
English: It is futile to pick on non-urgent matters, let alone to refrain from words of reproach.

古文：延及数年，居然高踞卿贰，夸耀士林矣。
现代文：过了几年，居然高踞公卿之位，炫耀于士林。
English: A few years later, Gao Yu was actually elevated to the position of a noble, showing off in Shilin.

古文：然此诸人岂尽矩诟无节，忍负陛下哉，亦有所惩而不敢耳。
现代文：难道这些人都是没有志气节操忍心辜负陛下吗？是有所惩戒而不敢作为呀。
English: Could it be that all of these people lack the willpower, discipline, and perseverance to live up to His Majesty's expectations? They have been chastised and dare not act.

古文：如往岁傅应祯、艾穆、沈思孝、邹元标皆以建言远窜，至今与戍卒伍。
现代文：像往年的傅应祯、艾穆、沈思孝、邹元标都因为建议言事而流放他乡，至今仍与戍卒为伍。
English: As in previous years, Fu Yingtao, Ai Mu, Shen Sihiao, and Xuan Yuanbiao were all exiled from their hometowns because of their words and deeds, they are still with their comrades.

古文：此中才之士，所以内自顾恤，宁自同于寒蝉也。
现代文：现在的有才之士，所以自顾怜恤，宁愿自己与寒蝉比附。
English: Today's talented people are so self-pitying that they would rather compare themselves to the chills.

古文：宜特发德音，放还诸人，使天下晓然知圣天子无恶直言之意，则士皆慕义输诚，效忠于陛下矣。 
现代文：皇上应该特别发布圣音，将那些人放回，使天下的人知道圣明天子没有厌恶直言的意思，则士人都仰慕大义，尽献忠诚，效忠陛下。 
English: The emperor should issue a special proclamation to release those people, so that the people of the world know that St. Nicholas did not mean to abhor speaking out, but that all people should admire the Great Righteousness, be devoted to loyalty, and be loyal to His Majesty.

古文：居正欲重罪之。
现代文：张居正想判他重罪。
English: Zhang Jiusheng wants to convict him of a felony.

古文：吏部尚书王国光曰： 罪之适成其名，请为公任怨。 
现代文：吏部尚书王国光说： 惩治他正好使他成名，请用他替你树立宽恕的形象。 
English: "Punishing him is just to make him famous, please use him to build an image of forgiveness for you," said Shangshu Guoguang.

古文：遂出为楚府右长史。
现代文：于是将他调出京城，担任楚府的右长吏。
English: As a result, he was transferred out of the capital to serve as the right-hand man of Chu Prefecture.

古文：明年京察，复坐以不谨，落职归。
现代文：第二年的京官考核，又以不谨慎为名，将他撤职使他回到家乡。
English: The following year, he was removed from his post by the Beijing authorities in the name of carelessness, forcing him to return to his hometown.

古文：居正死，起户部郎中，出为陕西副使。
现代文：张居正死后，他被起用为户部郎中，出京任陕西副使。
English: After the death of Zhang Jizheng, he was appointed as the vice-minister of the household department and went to Beijing to serve as the deputy envoy of Shaanxi.

古文：累迁户部右侍郎，督理仓场。
现代文：调任户部右侍郎，督理仓场。
English: He was transferred to the position of the right-hand man of the household, supervising the warehouse.

古文：世卿饶心计。
现代文：赵世卿工于心计。
English: Zhao Shijing worked out a plan.

古文：凡所条奏，酌剂赢缩，军国赖焉。
现代文：凡是他所上奏的事，都斟酌了分寸，军务国政有赖于此。
English: Everything he has done has been well-calculated. Military affairs and state affairs depend on this.

古文：户部尚书陈垞有疾，侍郎张养蒙避不署事，帝怒，并罢之，而进世卿为尚书。
现代文：户部尚书陈蕖有病，侍郎张养蒙避身不负责事务，皇帝恼怒，将他们一起罢免，而提拔赵世卿任尚书。
English: The head of the household, Shangshu Chen Zhen, was ill, and his attendant Zhang Yangmen avoided taking responsibility for affairs. The emperor was angry and dismissed them together, and promoted Zhao Shijing as Shangshu.

古文：时矿税使四出为害，江西税监潘相至擅捕系宗室。
现代文：当时矿税使为害四方，江西税监潘相竟至于擅自逮捕皇族的宗室。
English: At that time, the mining tax caused harm to all sides, and the Jiangxi tax inspector Pan Xiang was actually the first to arbitrarily arrest the royal family's family.

古文：曩时关税所入岁四十余万，自为税使所夺，商贾不行，数年间减三之一，四方杂课亦如之。岁入益寡，国用不支，边储告匮，而内供日繁。岁增金花银二十万，宫帑日充羡。
现代文：过去的关税收入每年四十多万两，自从被税使控制后，商贾不行，数年之间减少了三分之一，四方的杂税也是如此，每年的收入更少，国家的费用不够，边防储备匮乏，而内府的供需一天天繁多，每年增加二十万两金花银的旧额，宫廷费用一天天充盈起来。
English: In the past, the tariff revenue was more than 400,000 taels per year. Since being controlled by the tax authorities, merchants have not been able to do so, and it has decreased by one-third in a few years. The same is true of the miscellaneous taxes of the four sides. The annual income is less, the state expenses are not enough, and the border defense reserves are scarce. Meanwhile, the supply and demand of the inner government is more and more abundant, the old amount of 200,000 taels of gold and silver is increased every year, and the palace expenses are filled up day by day.

古文：世卿请复金花银百万故额，罢续增数，不许。
现代文：世卿请恢复到过去百万两的数额，罢除增加的数目，皇帝不允许。
English: Your Highness, please restore the amount to the previous one million taels, and cancel the increase. The emperor will not allow it.

古文：乞发内库银百万及太仆马价五十万以济边储，复忤旨切责。
现代文：他乞求发放内库一百万两白银以及太仆寺的五十万两马价钱接济边防储备，又违反皇上的心意，受到批评。
English: He begged for the release of one million taels of silver from the treasury and five hundred thousand taels from Taipu Temple to help the border defense reserve, and was criticized for violating the emperor's will.

古文：世卿又请正潘相罪，且偕九卿数陈其害，皆不纳。
现代文：赵世卿又请求确定潘相的罪行，并与九卿数次陈述他的危害，皇帝都不接受。
English: Zhao Shijing also requested that Pan Xiang's crime be determined, and he and the Nine Lords made several statements about his harm, which the emperor did not accept.

古文：世卿复言脂膏已竭，闾井萧然，丧乱可虞，揭竿非远，不及今罢之，恐后将无及。
现代文：赵世卿又称百姓脂膏枯竭，乡里萧条，丧乱已可预料，百姓揭竿造反为时不远，现在不及时罢除矿税，恐怕以后来不及了。
English: Zhao Shijing, also known as the people's grease is exhausted, the countryside is depressed, and chaos can be expected. The time for the people to rebel is not far away. If the mineral tax is not removed in time, I am afraid it will be too late.

古文：帝亦不省。
现代文：皇帝都不作理会。
English: The emperor did not do any self-reflection.

古文：三十二年，苏、松税监刘成以水灾请暂停米税。
现代文：万历三十二年，苏、淞地区的税监刘成因为水灾请求暂时停征米税。
English: In the 32nd year of Wanli, Liu Cheng, the tax inspector of the Su and Handan regions, temporarily suspended the rice tax due to the flood.

古文：帝以岁额六万，米税居半，不当尽停，今以四万为额。
现代文：皇帝认为每年六万两的税额，米税占一半，不应该全部停征，限令定额四万两。
English: The emperor believed that the annual tax of sixty thousand taels, of which the rice tax accounted for half, should not be completely suspended, and the quota was limited to forty thousand taels.

古文：世卿上言： 乡者既免米税，旋复再征，已失大信于天下。
现代文：赵世卿上奏称： 过去已经免除了米税，即刻又再征收，已经失信于天下。
English: Zhao Shijing said in his report: In the past, the rice tax was exempted, but it was immediately levied again, which has lost credibility in the world.

古文：今成欲免税额之半，而陛下不尽从，岂恻隐一念，貂榼尚存，而陛下反漠然不动心乎？ 
现代文：现在刘成想免去一半的税额，而陛下完全不依从，难道小宦官尚且存在的恻隐之心，而陛下反而漠然不动心吗？ 
English: Now that Liu Cheng wants to exempt half of the tax amount, and His Majesty does not comply at all, is it possible that the little eunuch still has compassion, but His Majesty is indifferent?

古文：不报。
现代文：皇帝没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：其夏，雷火毁祖陵明楼，妖虫蚀树，又大雨坏神道桥梁。
现代文：当年夏天，雷火烧毁了祖陵的明楼，怪虫侵害树木，大雨又毁坏了神道桥梁。
English: In the summer of that year, lightning and fire destroyed the Ming Lou of the ancestral mausoleum, strange insects attacked trees, and heavy rain destroyed the Shinto bridge.

古文：帝下诏咨实政。
现代文：皇帝下诏咨询实际的政务。
English: The emperor issued an edict to consult the actual government affairs.

古文：世卿上疏曰：
现代文：赵世卿上奏称：
English: Zhao Shijing said in his speech:

古文：今日实政，孰有切于罢矿税者！
现代文： 今天的实际政务，没有比罢除矿税更急切的了。
English: In today's practical government affairs, nothing is more urgent than the abolition of the mineral tax.

古文：古明主不贵异物，今也聚悖入之财，敛苍生之怨，节俭之谓何？
现代文：古代的明君不看重奇异的东西，现在却聚积不该收刮的钱财，聚敛百姓的怨恨，何谓节俭？
English: The ancient Ming ruler did not value strange things, but now he is accumulating money and wealth that should not be scraped, and gathering the resentment of the people. What is frugality?

古文：是为君德计，不可不罢者一。
现代文：这是为君王的圣德考虑，不能不罢除的第一条原因。
English: This is the first reason which, for the sake of the king's sanctity, must be eliminated.

古文：多取所以招尤，慢藏必将诲盗。
现代文：过多刮取必然招来罪过，保管疏忽必将招致盗贼。
English: Excessive scraping will inevitably lead to crime, and careless storage will inevitably lead to theft.

古文：鹿台、钜桥，足致倒戈之祸。
现代文：鹿台、巨桥足以导致人们举矛相向的祸害。
English: Deer Park and the huge bridge are enough to cause people to raise their spears against each other.

古文：是为宗社计，不可不罢者二。
现代文：这是为宗庙社稷考虑，不能不罢除的第二条原因。
English: This is the second reason why he must be removed from the position, for the sake of the family temple and shrine.

古文：古者国家无事则预桑土之谋，有事则议金汤之策。
现代文：古代，国家没有危难的事就考虑耕织的事情，有了危急的事就讨论使国家防务巩固的策略。
English: In ancient times, when the country was not in danger, it considered farming and weaving, and when it was in danger, it discussed strategies to strengthen national defense.

古文：安有凿四海之山，榷三家之市，操弓挟矢，戕及良民，毁室逾垣，祸延鸡犬，经十数年而不休者！
现代文：哪有开凿四海诸山，专榷三家市利的，操弓挟矢，杀害善良的百姓，毁室坏垣，祸害波及鸡犬，历经十多年不止。
English: It has been more than ten years since the four seas and mountains have been excavated, the profits of three companies have been made, bows and arrows have been used, good people have been killed, houses have been destroyed, and dogs and chickens have been affected.

古文：是为国体计，不可不罢者三。
现代文：这是为国家本体考虑，不能不罢除的第三条原因。
English: This is the third reason that must be eliminated for the sake of the country itself.

古文：貂榼渔猎，翼虎咆哮。
现代文：宦官渔猎，帮凶咆哮。
English: The eunuch fishes and hunts, the accomplice roars.

古文：毁掘冢墓，则枯骨蒙殃，奸虐子女，而良家饮恨。
现代文：毁掘坟墓使枯骨遭殃，奸淫虐待子女使善良人家饮恨。
English: Digging up graves brings misfortune to dead bones, adultery and child abuse bring hatred to good people.

古文：人与为怨，讙噪屡闻，此而不已，后将何极！
现代文：人人生怨，喧哗之声不绝于耳，如此不止，以后将达到何种境地？
English: Everyone has a grudge, the noise is incessant, and so on. What kind of situation will we reach in the future?

古文：是为民困计，不可不罢者四。
现代文：这是为百姓的困苦考虑，不能不罢除的第四条原因。
English: This is the fourth reason that must be eliminated in consideration of the hardships of the people.

古文：国家财赋不在民则在官，今尽括入奸人之室。
现代文：国家的财富不在民间就在官府，现在全部被搜括到了奸人的家室。
English: The wealth of the country is not in the hands of the people, but in the hands of the government, and now it has all been collected in the family of a traitor.

古文：故督逋租而逋租绌，稽关税而关税亏，搜库藏而库藏绝，课盐策而盐策薄，征赎鍰而赎鍰消。
现代文：所以督促缴纳欠租而欠租不足数，稽查关税而关税亏损，征收盐税而盐税微薄，征收赎金而赎金无存。
English: Therefore, supervise the payment of rent arrears but the rent arrears are insufficient, inspect tariffs but the tariffs are a loss, collect salt tax but the salt tax is meager, collect ransom but there is no ransom.

古文：外府一空，司农若埽。
现代文：外府一空，司农如同被清扫般干净。
English: Gaifu was completely emptied, and Shennong was as clean as if it had been swept clean.

古文：是为国课计，不可不罢者五。
现代文：这是为国家的赋税考虑，不能不罢除的第五条原因。
English: This is the fifth reason for the country's tax considerations, which must be eliminated.

古文：天子之令，信如四时。
现代文：天子的命令，如同一年四季一样确定不移。
English: The Son of God's command is as certain as the four seasons of the year.

古文：三载前尝曰 朕心仁爱，自有停止之时 ，今年复一年，更待何日？
现代文：皇上在三年前曾说： 我的心是仁爱的，自然有停止的时候。 现在年复一年，等到哪天才能停止？
English: Three years ago, the Emperor said, "My heart is benevolent, and naturally there comes a time when I must stop. Now, year after year, when can I stop?

古文：天子有戏言，王命委草莽。
现代文：天子话如玩笑，那么大王的命令就弃之在草莽之中。
English: If God's word is a joke, then the great king's order will be abandoned in haste.

古文：是为诏令计，不可不罢者六。
现代文：这是为诏令考虑，不能不罢除的第六条原因。
English: This is the reason for Article 6, which cannot but be deleted in consideration of the edict.

古文：陛下试思：服食宫室，以至营造征讨，上何事不取之民，民何事不供之上？
现代文： 陛下不妨考虑服装膳食、宫阙居室，以及营造征讨，皇上的什么事情不是取之于民？百姓的什么事情不是为皇上服务的？
English: Your Majesty may wish to consider clothing, meals, the imperial apartments, and building requisitions. What matters of the emperor are not taken from the people? What matters of the people do not serve the emperor?

古文：嗟此赤子，曾无负于国，乃民方欢呼以供九重之欲，而陛下不少遂其欲；民方奔走以供九重之劳，而陛下不少慰其劳；民方竭蹶以赴九重之难，而陛下不少恤其难。
现代文：如此赤诚之子，不曾辜负国家，百姓正高兴地满足天子的欲望，而陛下却不稍减您的欲望。百姓正为了供奉天子而奔走、困苦，而陛下也不稍稍慰问他们的辛劳。百姓竭诚解救天子的危难，而陛下不稍稍抚恤他们的艰难。
English: The people are happily satisfying the desires of the Son of Heaven, but Your Majesty does not reduce Your desires in the slightest. The people are running and suffering in order to worship the Son of Heaven, and Your Majesty does not condole their hardships in the slightest. The people wholeheartedly relieve the perils of the Son of Heaven, and Your Majesty does not condole their hardships in the slightest.

古文：返之于心，必有不自安者矣。
现代文：反求于心，必然会自感不安。
English: If you ask your heart instead, you will inevitably feel uneasy.

古文：陛下勿谓蠢蠢小民可驾驭自我，生杀自我，而不足介意也。
现代文：陛下不要认为愚昧的小百姓可以由您驾驭、生杀予夺，而不值得介意。
English: Your Majesty, don't think that the stupid little people can be driven by you, live and die, and are not worth minding.

古文：民之心既天之心，今天谴频仍，雷火妖虫，淫雨叠至，变不虚生，其应非远。
现代文：百姓的心就是老天的心，现在上天频繁谴责，雷电与怪虫、暴雨接踵而来，变乱不会凭空产生，它的应验为时不远了。
English: The hearts of the people are the hearts of the gods. Now the heavens are frequently condemning. Thunder and lightning, strange insects, and torrential rains are coming one after another. Turmoil will not arise out of thin air. Its fulfillment is not far away.

古文：故今日欲回天意在恤民心，欲恤民心在罢矿税，无烦再计而决者。
现代文：所以现在要挽回天意就在于体恤民心，要想体恤民心就在于罢除矿税，不需要再考虑以做决定。 
English: Therefore, to save the will of heaven now is to sympathize with the people's heart, and to sympathize with the people's heart is to abolish the mineral tax, and there is no need to consider it again to make a decision.

古文：帝优答之，而不行。
现代文：皇帝好言回答，却不施行他的建议。
English: The emperor replied kindly, but did not carry out his suggestion.

古文：至三十四年三月，始诏罢矿使，税亦稍减。
现代文：到了万历三十四年三月，皇帝才下诏罢除了矿税使，税也稍稍减少了。
English: It was not until March of the 34th year of Wanli that the emperor issued an edict abolishing the mining tax, and the tax was slightly reduced.

古文：然辽东、云南、四川税使自若，吏民尤苦之。
现代文：然而辽东、云南、四川的税使依然如故，官吏百姓深受其苦。
English: However, the taxation of Liaodong, Yunnan and Sichuan is still the same as before, and officials and people are suffering from it.

古文：云南遂变作，杨荣被戕。
现代文：于是云南发生变乱，杨荣被杀。
English: As a result, riots broke out in Yunnan, and Yang Rong was killed.

古文：而西北水旱时时见告，世卿屡请减租发振，国用益不支。
现代文：而且西北地区也时时报告水旱灾情，赵世卿屡次请求减少租税进行赈济，国家的费用更加不够支付。
English: Moreover, the northwest region also reported floods and droughts from time to time. Zhao Shijing repeatedly requested to reduce taxes for relief, and the state's expenses were even more insufficiently paid.

古文：逾月复奏请捐内帑百万佐军用，不从。
现代文：过了一个月他又奏请从内府费用中提取一百万两资助军费开支，皇帝不听从。
English: A month later, he asked the emperor to withdraw one million taels from the expenses of the Inner Court to subsidize military expenses, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：世卿遂连章求去，至十五上，竟不许。
现代文：赵世卿就接连上奏请求离去，上奏达到十五次，皇帝最终不同意。
English: Zhao Shijing successively requested to leave the performance, the performance reached fifteen times, the emperor finally disagreed.

古文：先是，福王将婚，进部帑二十七万，帝犹以为少，数遣中使趣之。中使出谇语，且劾世卿抗命。
现代文：在此之前，福王准备完婚，提取户部的二十七万两白银，皇帝仍认为少了，多次派宦官催促，宦官口出粗语，并且弹劾赵世卿违抗命令。
English: Prior to this, Fu Wang was preparing to get married and withdraw 270,000 taels of silver from his household, but the emperor still thought it was too little. He sent eunuchs to urge him many times, and the eunuchs used coarse language, and impeached Zhao Shijing for disobeying orders.

古文：世卿以为辱国，疏闻于朝，帝置不问。至三十六年，七公主下嫁，宣索至数十万。
现代文：赵世卿认为这有辱国家。万历三十六年，七公主出嫁，索要费用达到数十万两。
English: Zhao Shijing thought that this was a disgrace to the country. In the 36th year of Wanli, seven princesses got married, and the expenses demanded reached hundreds of thousands of taels.

古文：世卿引故事力争，诏减三之一。
现代文：赵世卿引用先例极力争辩，皇帝下诏减去了三分之一。
English: Citing precedents, Zhao Shijing vigorously argued that the emperor had reduced the imperial edict by one-third.

古文：世卿复言： 陛下大婚止七万，长公主下嫁止十二万，乞陛下再裁损，一仿长公主例。 
现代文：赵世卿又劝谏： 陛下举行大婚之礼也只用了七万两白银，长公主出嫁只用了十二万两白银，请陛下再做裁减，一样仿效长公主的例子。 
English: Zhao Shijing also advised: His Majesty used only 72,000 silver to hold the grand wedding ceremony, and the eldest princess only used 122,000 silver to get married. I would like to ask His Majesty to make further reductions, following the example of the eldest princess.

古文：帝不得已从之。
现代文：皇帝不得已依从了他。
English: The emperor reluctantly obeyed him.

古文：福王新出府第，设崇文税店，争民利，世卿亦谏阻。
现代文：福王新造了府第，开设崇文税店，争夺百姓的利益，赵世卿也上书劝阻。
English: Fu Wang built a new residence, opened the Chongwen Tax Store, and competed for the interests of the people. Zhao Shijing also wrote to him to dissuade him.

古文：世卿素励清操，当官尽职。
现代文：赵世卿素来讲求节操，为官尽职。
English: Zhao Shijing has always advocated discipline and doing one's duty as an official.

古文：帝雅重之。
现代文：皇帝一向看重他。
English: The emperor has always valued him.

古文：吏部缺尚书，尝使兼署，推举无所私。
现代文：吏部尚书空缺，曾派他兼任，他推举官吏没有私心。
English: There was a vacancy in the personnel department, and he was appointed to fill it. He had no selfishness in selecting officials.

古文：惟楚宗人与王相讦，世卿力言王非伪，与沈一贯议合。
现代文：只是楚王府宗族的人与楚王相互攻击，赵世卿极力称楚王不是伪王，与沈一贯的观点相一致。
English: However, the people of the Chu Wangfu clan and King Chu attacked each other. Zhao Shijing insisted that King Chu was not a pseudo-king, which was consistent with Shen Yu's consistent view.

古文：李廷机辅政，世卿力推之。
现代文：李廷机辅佐朝政，赵世卿极力推举他。
English: Li Tingji was an assistant to the imperial government, and Zhao Shijing strongly recommended him.

古文：廷臣遂疑世卿党比。
现代文：于是朝廷大臣怀疑赵世卿结成党派。
English: As a result, the Minister of the Imperial Court suspected Zhao Shijing of forming a party.

古文：于是给事中杜士全、邓去霄、何士晋、胡忻，御史苏为霖、马孟祯等先后劾之，世卿遂杜门乞去。
现代文：因此给事中杜士全、邓云霄、何士晋、胡忻，御史苏为霖、马孟祯等人先后弹劾他，赵世卿便闭门在家请求去职。
English: Therefore, he was impeached successively by Du Shiquan, Deng Yunxiao, He Shijin, Hu Yao, Goshi Su Weilin, Ma Mengyao and others in the case, and Zhao Shijing closed the door at home and asked to leave the post.

古文：章复十余上，不报。
现代文：他上书十多次，皇帝没有答复。
English: He wrote more than ten times, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：三十八年秋，世卿乃拜疏出城候命。
现代文：万历三十八年秋天，赵世卿就上疏出城等候命令。
English: In the autumn of the 38th year of Wanli, Zhao Shijing left the city to await orders.

古文：明年十月，乘柴车径去。廷臣以闻，帝亦不罪也。
现代文：第二年十月他乘坐简陋的车子径直离去，朝廷大臣报告皇帝，皇帝也没有怪罪于他。
English: In October of the following year, he drove away in a humble car. The minister of the court reported to the emperor, and the emperor did not blame him.

古文：家居七年卒，赠太子少保。
现代文：他在家居住七年后去世，朝廷赠他为太子少保。
English: When he died after seven years of living at home, the Imperial Court gave him the title of Junior Protector of the Crown Prince.

古文：李汝华，字茂夫，睢州人。
现代文：李汝华，字茂夫，睢州人。
English: Li Ruhua, nicknamed Mofu, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：万历八年进士。
现代文：万历八年的进士。
English: The eight-year-old trainee.

古文：授兖州推官。
现代文：授职为兖州推官。
English: Awarded the post of Zhangzhou magistrate.

古文：征授工科给事中，尝劾戎政尚书郑洛不职。
现代文：被征召为工科给事中，曾经弹劾负责军务的尚书郑洛不称职。
English: In the case of being called up for engineering, Shangshu Zhengluo, who was in charge of military affairs, was once impeached for incompetence.

古文：及出阅甘肃边务，洛方经略西事，主和戎。
现代文：等到他出京到甘肃巡视边防事务，郑洛正巧负责西部边疆的事务，主张和议兵事。
English: By the time he left Beijing for Gansu to inspect the border defense affairs, Zheng Luo was in charge of the affairs of the western frontier, advocating and discussing military affairs.

古文：汝华疏洛畏敌贻患，且劾诸将吏侵军资，复请尽垦甘肃闲田。
现代文：李汝华上奏称郑洛畏惧敌人、遗留祸患，并且弹劾诸位将领、官吏侵吞军饷，又奏请将甘肃的闲田全部开垦出来。
English: Li Ruhua made a report that Zheng Luo was afraid of the enemy and left behind a calamity, and impeached the generals and officials for embezzling military funds, and also requested that all idle fields in Gansu be reclaimed.

古文：还朝，历吏科都给事中，多所纠擿。
现代文：回到朝廷，他担任了吏科都给事中，在朝多所纠察、揭发。
English: When he returned to the imperial court, he served as an official in charge of various departments, and picketed and exposed many things in the imperial court.

古文：寻迁太常少卿，擢右佥都御史，巡抚南、赣。
现代文：不久，他调任太常少卿，升任右佥都御史巡抚南昌、赣州地区。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing, and was promoted to the position of the right imperial governor of Nanchang and Zhangzhou regions.

古文：税使四出，议括关津诸税输内府。
现代文：当时税使四出，朝议征收关隘、渡口的税银输往内府。
English: At that time, tax officials were dispatched everywhere, and the imperial court discussed the collection of taxes and levies at the pass and ferry ports, which were then transported to Naifu.

古文：汝华以税本饷军，力争止之。
现代文：李汝华认为此税本为军饷，极力争辩，要求停止此项动议。
English: Li Ruhua believed that the tax was a military tax, and argued vigorously to stop the motion.

古文：既而诏四方税务尽领于有司，以其半输税监，进内府，半输户部。
现代文：不久，诏令各地的税务全部由有司负责，将其中的一半交给税监，送入内府，另一半交给户部。
English: Soon after, the Emperor issued an edict that all taxation in various regions would be the responsibility of the departments, half of which would be handed over to the tax inspectors and sent to the Inner Government, while the other half would be handed over to the Household Ministry.

古文：独江西潘相勒有司悉由己输。
现代文：唯独江西的潘相勒令有司将税收全部交给自己。
English: However, Pan Xiangle of Jiangxi ordered the company to hand over all the tax revenue to itself.

古文：汝华极论相违诏，帝竟如相议，且推行之四方。
现代文：李汝华极力抨击潘相违抗圣旨，皇帝最后同意了潘相的提议，并且向各地推广。
English: Li Ruhua strongly criticized Pan Xiang for defying the sacred will, and the emperor finally agreed to Pan Xiang's proposal and promoted it to all parts of the country.

古文：汝华在赣十四年，威惠甚著，进秩兵部右侍郎，召拜户部左侍郎。
现代文：李汝华在赣任职十四年，很有威望，升任兵部右侍郎，皇帝召见并任命他为户部左侍郎。
English: Li Ruhua served in the imperial court for fourteen years. He was very prestigious and was promoted to the position of the right attendant of the military department. The emperor summoned him and appointed him as the left attendant of the household department.

古文：尚书赵世卿去位，遂掌部事。
现代文：尚书赵世卿离职，他就掌握了户部。
English: When Shangshu Zhao Shijing left office, he took control of the household department.

古文：福王庄田四万顷，诏旨屡趣，不能及额。
现代文：福王要求四万顷的庄田，皇帝下诏屡屡催促，不能达到定额。
English: King Fukuda asked for 40,000 hectares of farmland, and the emperor issued an imperial edict repeatedly urging him to do so, but the quota could not be met.

古文：汝华数偕廷臣执争，仅减四之一。
现代文：李汝华多次联合朝廷大臣进行争辩，皇帝仅仅减少了四分之一。
English: Li Ruhua repeatedly argued with the imperial minister, but the emperor only reduced it by a quarter.

古文：及王既之国，诏许自遣使督租，所在驿骚。
现代文：等福王到达封地，皇帝下诏允许他自己派使者督促收租，当地的驿站骚动。
English: When King Fufu arrived at the fief, the emperor issued an edict allowing him to send his own emissaries to urge the collection of rent, and the local stations were in an uproar.

古文：内使阎时诣汝州，杖二人死。
现代文：太监阎时到汝州，将两人杖死。
English: The eunuch Yan Shi came to Ruzhou and beat two people to death.

古文：汝华请遵祖制隶有司，尽撤还使者，不纳。
现代文：李汝华请求遵循祖制辖治有司，将使者全部撤回，皇帝不接受。
English: The emperor did not accept Li Ruhua's request to withdraw all the emissaries and follow the ancestral system.

古文：畿辅、山东大饥，因汝华言，出仓米平粜，且发银以振。
现代文：京郊、山东发生饥荒，于是李汝华建议拿出太仓的粮来平抑粮价，并发放银两赈济。
English: There was a famine in the suburbs of Beijing and in Shandong, so Li Ruhua suggested that grain from Taicang be taken out to stabilize grain prices, and that silver rations be distributed.

古文：汝华复奏行救荒数事，两地赖之。
现代文：李汝华还上奏陈述进行救荒的几个办法，两地赖以为生。
English: Li Ruhua also made a report on several ways to carry out famine relief, which the two places rely on for their livelihood.

古文：先是，山东饥，蠲岁赋七十万。是年尽蠲又百七十余万。
现代文：先前，山东发生饥荒，减少了七十万两赋税，此年减免全部的赋税一百七十多万两。
English: Previously, a famine occurred in Shandong, reducing taxes by 700,000 taels. This year, the total tax reduction and exemption reached more than 1.7 million taels.

古文：汝华以边饷不继，请天下税课未入内藏者，暂留一年补其缺，辅臣亦助为言。
现代文：李汝华认为边防的粮饷不够，奏请将全国没有送入内库的税收暂时留下一年的以补充粮饷的欠缺，辅佐大臣也帮助说话。
English: Li Ruhua believed that the grain fund of the border defense was insufficient, and requested that the tax revenue that was not sent to the national treasury be temporarily left for one year to supplement the shortage of grain fund. The assistant minister also helped to speak.

古文：疏三上，不报。
现代文：他三次上奏，没有答复。
English: The complaint was filed three times, but received no response.

古文：已，进尚书。
现代文：此后，他升任尚书。
English: After that, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：四十六年，郑继之去，兼摄吏部事。
现代文：万历四十六年，郑继之离去，他兼管吏部。
English: In the 46th year of Wanli, Zheng Jizhi passed away. He was also in charge of the personnel department.

古文：畿辅、陕西大饥，汝华请振，皆不报。
现代文：京郊、陕西发生大饥荒，李汝华奏请赈济都没有答复。
English: Large-scale famine occurred in the suburbs of Beijing and in Shaanxi Province, and Li Ruhua's pleas for aid went unanswered.

古文：辽东兵事兴，骤增饷三百万。
现代文：辽东爆发战争，粮饷骤然增加三百万两。
English: When war broke out in eastern Liaodong, the grain harvest suddenly increased by three million taels.

古文：汝华累请发内帑不得，则借支南京部帑，括天下库藏余积，征宿逋，裁工食，开事例。
现代文：李汝华屡次请求调拨内府的银两，没有得到，他就借用南京户部的钱财，搜集全国库藏的多余的积蓄，征收多年的拖欠赋税，裁减工匠的口粮，开创了新事例。
English: Li Ruhua repeatedly asked for the allocation of the inner government's silver two, and when he did not get it, he borrowed money from the Nanjing Household Department, collected excess savings from the national treasury, collected years of tax arrears, and reduced the rations of craftsmen, creating a new case.

古文：而辽东巡抚周永春请益兵加赋，汝华议：天下田赋，自贵州外，亩增银三厘五毫，得饷二百万。
现代文：辽东巡抚周永春请求增加兵马、赋税，李汝华提议：全国的田赋，除贵州之外，每亩增加白银三厘五毫，可以得到二百万两军饷。
English: Zhou Yongchun, the governor of Liaodong Province, requested an increase in soldiers, horses, and taxes. Li Ruhua proposed that the land all over the country, with the exception of Guizhou, should receive an increase of 3.5 milligrams of silver per mu, which would amount to 2 million taels.

古文：明年，复议益兵增赋如前。
现代文：第二年又提议照前例增加兵马、赋税。
English: The following year, he proposed to increase the number of soldiers and horses and taxes as before.

古文：又明年四月，兵部以募兵市马，工部以制器，再议增赋。
现代文：第三年四月，兵部因为要招兵买马，工部因为要制作军械，再次商讨增加赋税。
English: In April of the third year, the Ministry of Military Affairs, because it wanted to recruit soldiers and buy horses, and the Ministry of Industry, because it wanted to produce armaments, again discussed increasing taxes.

古文：于是亩增二厘，为银百二十万。
现代文：因此每亩增加银两厘，收到二十万两白银。
English: For this reason, silver was increased by two per cent per mu, bringing the total to two hundred thousand two silver.

古文：先后三增赋，凡五百二十万有奇，遂为岁额。
现代文：先后三次增加赋税，共达五百二十多万两白银，于是成为每年的数额。
English: The tax was increased three times in succession, reaching a total of more than 5.2 million taels of silver, thus becoming an annual amount.

古文：当是时，内帑山积，廷臣请发，率不应。
现代文：当时，内府的钱币堆积如山，朝廷大臣请求发放，皇帝全都不答应。
English: At that time, there was a mountain of coins piled up in the Inner Court. The Minister of the Imperial Court requested that they be released, but the emperor did not agree to all of them.

古文：计臣无如何，遂为一切苟且之计，苛敛百姓。
现代文：理财大臣没有别的办法，一切权作苟且之计，苛敛百姓。
English: The Minister of Finance had no other choice but to use all his powers to coerce the people.

古文：而枢臣征兵，乃远及蛮方，致奢崇明、安邦彦相继反，用师连年。
现代文：而枢密大臣征兵，远及南蛮之地，导致奢崇明、安邦彦相继造反，朝廷连年征讨。
English: However, the recruitment of soldiers by the Minister of the Privy Council extended as far as southern Spain, which led to the successive rebellions of Suko Takaaki and An Banghiko, and the Imperial Court continued to solicit soldiers for years.

古文：又割四川、云南、广西、湖广、广东所加之赋以饷之，而辽饷仍不充，天下已不可支矣。
现代文：又扣下四川、云南、广西、湖广、广东地区增加的赋税充当征讨部队的粮饷，而辽东的军饷仍然不充足，国家已经不能再支付了。
English: He also deducted the increased taxes in Sichuan, Yunnan, Guangxi, Hunan, and Guangdong to collect grain for the troops, but the military pay in Liaodong was still insufficient, and the state could no longer pay.

古文：汝华练达勤敏，立朝无党阿。
现代文：李汝华干练、通达、勤快、机敏，在朝廷不结党派。
English: Li Ruhua is capable, knowledgeable, diligent, and astute, and does not form a party in the imperial court.

古文：官户部久，于国计赢缩，边储虚实，与盐漕屯牧诸大政，皆殚心裁剂。
现代文：在户部任职很久，对国家的盛衰，边防储备的虚实，以及盐纲、漕运、屯田、放牧等要政，都殚精竭力加以裁决、调济。
English: He served in the Household Department for a long time, and tried his best to adjudicate and adjust the economy for the rise and fall of the country, the falsity and reality of the border defense reserve, as well as the important policies such as salt program, rowing transport, farmland settlement, and grazing.

古文：岁比不登，意常主宽恤，独加赋之议不能力持，驯致万方虚耗，内外交讧。
现代文：每年相比都没有增加，他常常主张宽缓、体恤，唯独增加赋税的提议不能极力坚持免征，导致全国空虚，朝廷内外一片争吵混乱。
English: There was no increase from year to year, and he often advocated leniency and compassion. However, the proposal to increase taxes could not be strongly insisted on exemption, leading to emptiness throughout the country and a chaos of quarrels inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：天启元年得疾乞休，加太子太保致仕。
现代文：天启元年，他患病请求退休，被加封为太子太保退休。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was ill and asked to retire, and was given the title of crown prince and retired.

古文：卒，谥恭敏。
现代文：去世后，谥号恭敏。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was changed to Gongmin.

