古文：志序历上左史记言，右史记事，事则《春秋》是也，言则《尚书》是也。
现代文：左史修记言之史，右史修记事之史，记事之史的典型是《春秋》，记言之史则以《尚书》为代表。
English: On the left is the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history of the history.

古文：至于楚《书》、郑《志》、晋《乘》、楚《杌》之篇，皆所以昭述前史，俾不泯于后。
现代文：至于楚史《书》、郑史《志》、晋史《乘》和另一楚史《杌》等篇都是明白地叙述了以前的历史，使它们不致泯灭，从而流传下来。
English: As for the Chu history "Book," Zheng history "Zhi," Jin history "Meng" and another Chu history "Ji," they all clearly described the previous history, so that they would not be destroyed, and thus passed down.

古文：司马迁制一家之言，始区别名题。至乎礼仪刑政，有所不尽；乃于纪传之外，创立八书。片文只事，鸿纤备举。
现代文：司马迁制订了独有的修史规则，最早用标题名称对史料进行分类归纳，又根据礼仪、刑法、政令等问题未能叙述清楚的情况，在纪、传这些叙述史事的内容之外又创造性地另外写了八种称为书的部分，将有关问题中的内容事无巨细都收集了进来。
English: Sima Qian formulated unique rules for editing history. He was the first to use title names to classify and summarize historical materials. He also based on etiquette, criminal law, government orders and other issues that could not be described clearly. In addition to the content of these historical narratives, he creatively wrote eight other parts called books, collecting all the details of the relevant issues.

古文：班氏因之，靡违前式，网罗一代，条流遂广。
现代文：班固作《汉书》时继承了司马迁的传统，而没有违反，由于其内容涉及一个朝代的事情，所叙述的内容是比较丰富的。
English: When Banggu wrote "Hanshu," he inherited the tradition of Sima Qian, but did not violate it. Since its content involves a dynastic event, the content described is relatively rich.

古文：《律历》、《礼乐》，其名不变，以《天官》为《天文》，改《封禅》为《郊祀》，易《货殖》、《平准》之称，革《河渠》、《沟洫》之名；缀孙卿之辞，以述《刑法》；采孟轲之书，用序《食货》。
现代文：在《汉书》中，《律历》、《礼乐》的名称没有改变，《天官》则改为《天文》，《封禅》改成《郊祀》，《货殖》、抨准》、《河渠》、《沟洫》的名称都作了改变；将逐卿的话联系在一起，叙述了与《刑法》有关的内容，根据孟轲著作中的观点，作为《食货》的序言。
English: In the "Hanshu," the names of "Ritsuryo" and "Rite and Music" have not changed, "Tian Guan" has been changed to "Tianwen," "Fu Zhen" has been changed to "Suburban Worship," and the names of "Commodity Propagation," "Assessment," "River Channel" and "Ditch" have all been changed. The words of Fu Xueqing have been linked together to describe the content related to the "Criminal Law," and according to the views in Meng Xi's works, as the preface to "Food."

古文：刘向《鸿范》，始自《春秋》；刘歆《七略》，儒墨异部，硃赣博采风谣，尤为详洽。
现代文：刘向所著的《鸿范》，自《春秋》开始，型趑的《七略》列出了儒、墨不同门类的著作，圭赣广泛收集了民间歌谣，记述尤为详尽。
English: "Hong Fan" by Liu Xiang, from "Spring and Autumn" onwards, and the "Seven Sketches" by Gui Yan listed the works of different categories of Confucianism and Buddhism. Gui Yan collected a wide range of folk songs, and the description was particularly detailed.

古文：固并因仍，以为三志。
现代文：班固沿袭了这三人所做的工作，分别写成了三种志。
English: Bangu followed the work done by these three people and wrote three kinds of biographies.

古文：而《礼乐》疏简，所漏者多，典章事数，百不记一。
现代文：《礼乐》写得粗疏简约，遗漏的内容很多，制度法令和有关的事项，记下的还不到百分之一。
English: "Ritual" is written in a rough and simple way, with many omissions, and less than one percent of the institutional laws and related matters have been recorded.

古文：《天文》虽为该举，而不言天形，致使三天之说，纷然莫辨。
现代文：《天文》虽然比较齐全，但没有谈到天的形状，以致使二种宇宙学说显得很为混乱而难以明了。
English: The Astronomia, although more complete, does not mention the shape of the heavens, so that the two cosmologies appear confused and difficult to understand.

古文：是故蔡邕于朔方上书，谓宜载述者也。
现代文：正因为这样，摹邕才在塑左进献文书，谈到应当对此予以叙述。
English: That's why I'm writing about it and saying it needs to be addressed.

古文：汉兴，接秦坑儒之后，典坟残缺，耆生硕老，常以亡逸为虑。
现代文：汉代的兴起是紧接在秦代坑儒之后，各种古籍均有残缺，老年学者们常担心会有亡失。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty was immediately after the Qin Dynasty. All kinds of ancient books are incomplete, and elderly scholars are often worried that they will be lost.

古文：刘歆《七略》，固之《艺文》，盖为此也。
现代文：刘歆着《七略》，班固撰《艺文》，都是针对这一情况的。
English: Liu Yao's "Seven Sketches" and Ban Gu's "Artistic Works" were both written in response to this situation.

古文：河自龙门东注，横被中国，每漂决所渐，寄重灾深，堤筑之功，劳役天下。
现代文：黄河从龙门向东奔流，横穿国家的中部，每当漂冰和决口流过的地方，都发生了重大的灾难，为修筑堤防，就耗费了大量的人力物力。
English: The Yellow River flows eastward from Longmen and crosses the central part of the country. Whenever ice floes and ruptures flow through, major disasters have occurred. In order to build dikes, a lot of manpower and material resources have been spent.

古文：且关、洛高垲，地少川源，是故镐、酆、潦、潏，咸入礼典。
现代文：而关、洛之地高而干燥，土地少，又是河川的源头，于是镐、酆、潦、浦四处都被写进了礼典。
English: But the land of Guan and Luo is high and dry, land is scarce, and it is also the source of rivers, so the,,, and 浦 have all been written into the ceremony.

古文：漳、滏、郑、白之饶，沟渠沾溉之利，皆民命所祖，国以为天，《沟洫》立志，亦其宜也。
现代文：漳、滏、郑、白四处的富饶，沟渠灌溉农田之便利，都是人们生存之根本，国家也视其为依靠，写《沟洫志》看来也是适宜的。
English: The abundance of rice, barley, wheat and barley, and the convenience of ditch irrigation of farmland are all fundamental to people's survival. The state also regards them as a reliance, and it seems appropriate to write "Gou Xizhi."

古文：世殊事改，于今可得而略。
现代文：但是时代不同了，事情也有变化，现在可简略叙述。
English: But times have changed, things have changed, and now it can be briefly described.

古文：窃以班氏《律历》，前事已详，自杨伟改创《景初》，而《魏书》阙志。
现代文：我认为班固的《律历志》对以前的事情已讲得较为详细，自从杨伟改历编制了《景初历》后，在《魏书》中却没有记述。
English: I think that Ban Gu's "Law Calendar" has already talked about the previous events in more detail. Since Yang Wei changed the calendar and compiled the "New Year's Calendar," it has not been recorded in the "Weishu."

古文：及元嘉重造新法，大明博议回改。
现代文：后来刘宋时元嘉年间又制作了新历，大明年问又广泛讨论了是否要改回去。
English: Later, during the reign of Liu Song and Yuan Jia, a new calendar was made, and the question of whether to change it back was widely discussed.

古文：自魏至宋，宜入今书。
现代文：从魏到刘宋期间的这些事情都应写入本书。
English: All these events from the Wei Dynasty to the Liu Song Dynasty should be recorded in this book.

古文：班固《礼乐》、《郊祀》，马彪《祭祀》、《礼仪》，蔡邕《朝会》，董巴《舆服》，并各立志。
现代文：班固写了《礼乐志》、《郊祀志》，司马彪则有《祭祀志》、《礼仪志》，蔡邕着《朝会志》，董巴撰《舆服志》，都是以相应的内容写的志。
English: Banggu wrote "History of Rites and Music" and "History of Suburban Rituals," Sima Biao wrote "History of Sacrifices" and "History of Rites," Cai Zhen wrote "History of the Morning Assembly," and Dongba wrote "History of Public Uniforms," all of which were written with the corresponding content.

古文：夫礼之所苞，其用非一，郊祭朝飨，匪云别事，旗章服物，非礼而何？
现代文：然而礼所包含的内容有各种不同的用途，其他事情都不说，就说祭祀天地社稷的过程中所用的旗帜、标识、服式、器物不属于礼的内容又是什么呢?
English: However, the contents included in the ritual have various different uses. Without mentioning anything else, what are the contents that are not part of the ritual, such as the flags, signs, clothing, and utensils used in the process of sacrificing heaven, earth, and society?

古文：今总而裁之，同谓《礼志》。
现代文：现在可以将这些内容归纳起来，一起写在《礼志》中。
English: Now we can summarize these contents and write them together in "Li Zhi."

古文：《刑法》、《食货》，前说已该，随流派别，附之纪传。
现代文：《刑法志》、《食货志》以前的叙述已经比较完备，故随着演变中出现的不同附在纪、传中进行相应的叙述。
English: The descriptions before "The Criminal Law" and "The Groceries" have been relatively complete, so with the evolution of the differences that have emerged, the corresponding descriptions are attached to the discipline and transmission.

古文：《乐经》残缺，其来已远。班氏所述，止抄举《乐记》；马彪《后书》，又不备续。
现代文：《乐经》的残缺由来已久，坦墨在《汉书》中的叙述也就是从《乐记》中摘抄的，司马彪《后汉书》中又没有完备的续述。
English: Fragments of the "Song of Songs" have been around for a long time. The description of Tanmo in the "Chinese Book" is also excerpted from the "Song of Songs," and there is no complete continuation in Sima Biao's "Post-Chinese Book."

古文：至于八音众器，并不见书，虽略见《世本》，所阙犹众。
现代文：至于各种乐器的情况，均没有专门著作记述，虽然其大略情况在《世本》中谈到一些，但缺少相当多。
English: As for the situation of various musical instruments, there is no special work to describe them. Although some of their general conditions are mentioned in the "World Book," there are quite a few things missing.

古文：爰及《雅》《郑》，讴谣之节，一皆屏落，曾无概见。
现代文：谈到《雅乐》和《郑声》，歌谣一节全部除去而不见。
English: When it comes to "Yale" and "Zheng Sheng," one section of the ballad is completely removed and does not appear.

古文：郊庙乐章，每随世改，雅声旧典，咸有遗文。
现代文：祭祀用的乐章随着时代的变迁而改动，但在雅声过去的典籍中却遗留有记述。
English: The music used for the ritual has changed with the times, but it is still recorded in the ancient books of Yaxing.

古文：又案今鼓吹铙歌，虽有章曲，乐人传习，口相师祖，所务者声，不先训以义。
现代文：现在的鼓吹、铙歌虽然有乐章曲调，但乐师们传授学习均是口头上的，他们所著重的是乐曲的声音，而不是先了解其中的道理。
English: Although today's preaching and chanting have movements and tunes, the musicians' teaching and learning are all oral. They focus on the sound of the music, rather than first understanding the reason for it.

古文：今乐府铙歌，校汉、魏旧曲，曲名时同，文字永异，寻文求义，无一可了。
现代文：现在的乐府铙歌是修改汉、魏时代原有的乐曲，虽然乐曲的名称有时是相同的，但文字是决不相同的，衹从研究文字入手探求其中的道理，没有一首可以得出结论。
English: Today's Yingge music is a modification of the original music from the Han and Wei dynasties. Although the names of the music are sometimes the same, the words are by no means the same. To explore the reason from the study of the words, there is no song that can be concluded.

古文：不知今之铙章，何代曲也。
现代文：也不知现在的铙章是哪一个时代的乐曲。
English: I also don't know which era's music the current national anthem is based on.

古文：今《志》自郊庙以下，凡诸乐章，非淫哇之辞，并皆详载。《天文》、《五行》，自马彪以后，无复记录。
现代文：本书的志从祭祀乐曲开始，衹要不是淫辞的乐章均予以详细记述。《天文志》、《五行志》，在司马彪以后再也没有记录。
English: The ambition of this book begins with the sacrificial music, and if it is not lewd, the music is described in detail. "The Astronomy" and "The Five Elements" are no longer recorded after Sima Biao.

古文：何书自黄初之始，徐志肇义熙之元。
现代文：何氏所著的书是从黄初年开始的，徐氏所写的志则开始于义熙的元年。
English: The book written by He began in the first year of Huang, and the will written by Xu began in the first year of Yixi.

古文：今以魏接汉，式遵何氏。
现代文：现在根据魏紧接在漠代后面的情况，依照何氏所采取的形式进行叙述。
English: Now, according to the situation of Wei immediately after the desert era, it is described according to the form taken by He.

古文：然则自汉高帝五年之首冬，暨宋顺帝升明二年之孟夏，二辰六沴，甲子无差。
现代文：然而从汉高祖五年冬天的开始到刘宋顺帝升明二年的夏初，二辰、六诊，甲子都没有偏差。
English: However, from the beginning of the winter of the 5th year of the founder of the Han Dynasty to the beginning of the summer of the 2nd year of the ascension of Emperor Liu Song Shun, there were no deviations in the two hours, six clinics, and one child.

古文：圣帝哲王，咸有瑞命之纪。盖所以神明宝位，幽赞祯符，欲使逐鹿弭谋，窥觊不作，握河括地，绿文赤字之书，言之详矣。
现代文：贤明的帝王都遇有吉祥的年代，就是有神明维护，暗中显示一些吉祥的征兆，以使企图争夺天下的阴谋消除掉，使具有非分之想的人不敢行动，从而牢靠地掌握河山，这在那些有绿色条纹、写有红字的书中有详细的记述。
English: Wise emperors have auspicious times, that is, they are protected by gods and secretly show some auspicious signs, so as to eliminate the conspiracy of attempting to compete for the world, so that those with unreasonable thoughts dare not act, and thus firmly grasp the rivers and mountains, which is detailed in those books with green stripes and red letters.

古文：爰逮道至天而甘露下，德洞地而醴泉出，金芝玄秬之祥，硃草白乌之瑞，斯固不可诬也。
现代文：于是，正确的政治主张上达天穹就会有甘露降下来，德政得到贯彻地层就会有甘美的泉水涌出，金色的灵芝、黑色的柜黍所表示的吉祥，红色的草、白色的乌所显现的瑞兆，看来不可能是虚构的。
English: As a result, if the correct political proposition reaches the firmament, the nectar will fall down. If the German policy is implemented, the strata will have luscious springs. The auspiciousness expressed by golden reishi mushrooms and black counters, and the auspiciousness manifested by red grass and white wax, it seems impossible to be fictitious.

古文：若夫衰世德爽，而嘉应不息，斯固天道茫昧，难以数推。
现代文：假若是世道衰落道德沦丧的时代也不断地出现祥瑞之兆，那就是上天的规律难以捉摸了。
English: If, in an age of moral decline, there are also signs of prosperity, then the laws of heaven are elusive.

古文：亦由明主居上，而震蚀之灾不弭；百灵咸顺，而悬象之应独违。
现代文：也有时尽管是贤明的君主统治着，但地震、日食之类的灾祸却接连不断，各种生灵都很顺意，惟有上天通过天象发出的预兆却是相反的。
English: There are also times when, despite the rule of a wise monarch, disasters such as earthquakes and solar eclipses continue, and all kinds of beings are happy, but the omens sent by heaven through the celestial objects are the opposite.

古文：今立《符瑞志》，以补前史之阙。
现代文：现在写《符瑞志》，以补以前史书之不足。
English: To make up for the lack of previous history books, I am now writing "Fu Ruishi."

古文：地理参差，事难该辨，魏晋以来，迁徙百计，一郡分为四五，一县割成两三，或昨属荆、豫，今隶司、兗，朝为零、桂之士，夕为庐、九之民。
现代文：地理上的千差万别很难一一理清楚。魏、晋以后的变迁数以百计，有时一郡分为四五个郡，有的一县被分割成两三个县，有的地方昨天还属于回丛、逸业的范围，今天就归司州、兖州管辖了。
English: There are hundreds of changes since the Wei and Jin dynasties, sometimes a county is divided into four or five counties, some counties are divided into two or three counties, and some places that were under the jurisdiction of Huizhong and Yiye yesterday are now under the jurisdiction of Shizhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：去来纷扰，无暂止息，版籍为之浑淆，职方所不能记。
现代文：有的人早晨还是零阳、桂阳人士，晚上就成了庐辽、土逛的居民，地域的归属变来变去没有止息，户籍也变得相当混乱，掌管地图和区域划分情况的官员也难以记清。
English: Some people in the morning are still people from Ziyang and Guiyang, and in the evening they become residents of Fengliao and Tuhuang. The regional affiliation changes from time to time without stopping. The household registration has also become quite confusing, and the officials in charge of the map and regional division are also difficult to remember.

古文：自戎狄内侮，有晋东迁，中土遗氓，播徙江外，幽、并、冀、雍、兗、豫、青、徐之境，幽沦寇逆。自扶莫而裹足奉首，免身于荆、越者，百郡千城，流寓比室。
现代文：自从外族入侵，晋都束迁，中原地区原来的居民迁徙到江南各地，幽、韭、冀、雍、兖、邃、贵、途等地不幸沦落外族之手他们自己找到安定的地方而停留下来并推举出首领在荆、越之地繁衍生息的人，来白不同的郡、城，但在异乡的住处却相邻。
English: Since the foreign invasion and the forced relocation of the capital city of Jin, the original inhabitants of the Central Plains have migrated to various parts of the south of the Yangtze River. Yuxi, Shandong, Hebei, Yongkang, Shandong, Guizhou, Tonglu and other places have unfortunately fallen into the hands of foreigners. They themselves found a stable place and stayed and elected leaders in the land of Jing and Yue. People who come from different counties and cities come to Bai, but their residences in foreign countries are adjacent.

古文：人伫鸿雁之歌，士蓄怀本之念，莫不各树邦邑，思复旧井。
现代文：他们站着唱游民的歌，心裹充满对故土的思念，都各自建立起相应的邦邑，以寄托回归故上的愿望。
English: They stood singing the songs of the wanderers, their hearts filled with nostalgia for their homeland, and each of them established a corresponding township, with the hope of returning to the past.

古文：既而民单户约，不可独建，故魏邦而有韩邑，齐县而有赵民。且省置交加，日回月徙，寄寓迁流，迄无定托，邦名邑号，难或详书。
现代文：然而几家数户的力量终究单薄，不可能建立起独立的邦邑，因此出现了在魏邦的范围内有韩国人的城邑，齐县中居住有赵地的居民的情况加上邦邑的取消和设置频繁交织在一起，随着时间的推移，又有寄住和迁移的情况，至今尚没有固定下来，邦邑的名称也很难详细叙述。
English: However, the power of several families is ultimately weak, and it is impossible to establish an independent county seat. As a result, there are Korean townships within the scope of Weibang. The situation of residents living in Zhao in Qi County and the cancellation and establishment of county seats are frequently intertwined. With the passage of time, there are also cases of lodging and relocation. So far, it has not been fixed, and the name of county seat is difficult to describe in detail.

古文：大宋受命，重启边隙，淮北五州，翦为寇境，其或奔亡播迁，复立郡县，斯则元嘉、泰始，同名异实。
现代文：刘宋建立以后，边境地区重新燃起了战火，淮北的五州变为外族的统治区，它们有的逃亡搬迁后又重新建立了郡、县，这样元嘉年间和泰始年间的郡县名称虽然相同但实际上是不同的。
English: After the establishment of Liu Song, the border areas reignited the war, the five states of Huaibei became the ruling areas of foreign ethnic groups, and some of them fled and relocated and re-established counties and counties. Thus, although the names of counties and counties in the Yuan Jia and Tai Shi years were the same, they were actually different.

古文：今以班固、马彪二志，晋、宋《起居》，凡诸记注，悉加推讨，随条辨析，使悉该详。
现代文：现在根据班固、司马彪的两种《地理志》，晋、刘宋的《起居》中的各种记述和注释，进行详细的推讨，逐条辨正分析，使其更加全面和详尽。
English: Now, based on the two "Geography" of Ban Gu and Sima Biao, and the various descriptions and annotations in the "Living" of Jin and Liu Song, we will carry out detailed discussions, analyze and correct them one by one, and make them more comprehensive and detailed.

古文：百官置省，备有前说，寻源讨流，于事为易。
现代文：各种官员的设置和取消以前已有完备的记述，寻找其起源、探讨历史上的变化情况，都是较为方便的事情。
English: It is convenient to have a complete record of the establishment and abolition of various officials in the past, to find their origin, and to explore the changes in history.

古文：元嘉中，东海何承天受诏纂《宋书》，其志十五篇，以续马彪《汉志》，其证引该博者，即而因之，亦由班固、马迁共为一家者也。
现代文：元嘉年间，东海何承天接受命令编纂《宋书》，其中志有十五篇，是司马彪《续汉书》中志的继续。其中收集资料是广博全面的，就保存沿袭下来，也与班固、司马迁是一脉相承的。
English: During the Yuan Jia era, He Chengtian of the East Sea accepted the order to compile the "Song Book," of which there are fifteen chapters, which is the continuation of the middle chapter of Sima Biao's "Continuation of the Han Dynasty." The collection of information is extensive and comprehensive, and it has been preserved and passed down, and it is also inherited from Bangu and Sima Qian.

古文：其有漏阙，及何氏后事，备加搜采，随就补缀焉。
现代文：其有遗漏的地方，或者是在何承大以后发生的事情，就广加收集随时予以补充。
English: If there are omissions, or if something happened after He Chongda, the collection will be expanded and supplemented at any time.

古文：渊流浩漫，非孤学所尽；足蹇途遥，岂短策能运。
现代文：历史上的事物源远流长，不是浅薄的学识所能讲清楚的，腿脚不便而路途遥远，短时间的努力又怎能到达目的地。
English: Things in history have a long history, which is not something that can be explained by a shallow knowledge. The journey is long and the legs and feet are inconvenient. How can the efforts of a short time reach the destination?

古文：虽斟酌前史，备睹姘嗤，而爱嗜异情，取舍殊意，每含豪握简，杼轴忘餐，终亦不足与班、左并驰，董、南齐辔。庶为后之君子，削稿而已焉。
现代文：虽然对以前的史书进行过推敲研究，对其优缺点都已清楚了解，然而不同的人对资料的偏爱不同，取舍也就有所差异，虽然下笔之时常要进行思考、组织，以致忘记了用餐，然而终究难以与历史上著名的史家班固、左丘明、董狐、南史并驾齐驱权且当作以后人们要销毁的草稿吧!
English: Although previous history books have been thoroughly studied, and their advantages and disadvantages have been clearly understood, different people have different preferences for materials, and the choice of materials is also different. Although it is often necessary to think and organize when writing down, so that you forget the meal, it is ultimately difficult to keep up with the famous historians of history, Ban Gu, Zuo Qiuming, Dong Fox, and Nan Shi, and use it as a draft to be destroyed by people in the future!

古文：黄帝使伶伦自大夏之西，阮隃之阴，取竹之嶰谷生，其窍厚均者，断两节间而吹之，以为黄钟之宫。制十二管，以听凤鸣，以定律吕。
现代文：童查曾派遣俭俭去左夏的西边，医脸山的北面，在岖谷生长的竹子中选取其竹管厚薄均匀的，截两竹节之间的部分而吹奏，以它作为黄钟的宫音制作了十二根律管，听取凤凰的呜叫声以确定律管的长度。
English: Tong Zha once sent Jian Jian to the west of Zuo Xia and the north of He Jian Shan. In the bamboo growing in the craggy valley, he selected the bamboo tube with uniform thickness and thickness, cut the part between the two bamboo knots and played it. He used it as the palace sound of the yellow bell to make twelve tuning forks. Listen to the phoenix's whine to determine the length of the tuning forks.

古文：夫声有清浊，故协以宫商；形有长短，故检以丈尺；器有大小，故定以斛斗；质有累重，故平以钧石。
现代文：然而声音有高低之分，藉助于五音来将其区分；形状上有长短的区别，藉助于丈、尺来检测；容器有大小之不同，用斛、斗来确定；质料有轻重的差异，可用钩、石来衡量。
English: However, there are differences in the pitch of sound, which can be distinguished by means of the five tones; there are differences in the length of shape, which can be detected by means of length and ruler; containers have different sizes, which can be determined by means of ladles and buckets; materials have differences in weight, which can be measured by hooks and stones.

古文：故《虞书》曰： 乃同律、度、量、衡。 
现代文：因此，在《虞书》中说： 于是就规定了律、度、量、衡。 
English: Therefore, it is said in "The Book of the State": Thus, laws, measures, quantities, and weights were established.

古文：然则律吕、宫商之所由生也。
现代文：然而律吕则是由五音所产生的。
English: However, ruryu is produced by five tones.

古文：夫乐有器有文，有情有官。
现代文：音乐有乐器、乐曲、感情和感官。
English: Music has instruments, music, emotions and senses.

古文：钟鼓干戚，乐之器也；屈伸舒疾，乐之文也； 论伦无患，乐之情也；欣喜欢爱，乐之官也。 
现代文：钟鼓干戚就是乐器，有高低快慢的是乐曲； 叙述人伦道德而没有忧患是音乐的感情，表示欢乐高兴则是音乐的感官。 
English: The gong and drum are musical instruments, and it is the music that has high and low rhythm; it is the emotion of music to describe human ethics and morality without sorrow, and it is the musical sense to express joy and happiness.

古文： 是以君子反情以和志，广乐以成教，故能情深而文明，气盛而化神，和顺积中，而英华发外。 
现代文： 这样君子反映情感以调和志趣，推广音乐以完成教化，所以能情趣高深而有文采，精气旺盛而转化为神采，心情舒和而显得英气勃发。 
English: In this way, a gentleman reflects his emotions by harmonizing his aspirations and interests, and promotes music to complete his enlightenment. Therefore, he can have a profound and literary taste, vigorous energy can be transformed into brilliance, and a comfortable mood can appear heroic.

古文：故曰： 乐者，心之动也；声者，乐之象也。 
现代文：所以说： 音乐是心灵活动的反映，声音是音乐的表现形式。 
English: Therefore, music is a reflection of mental activity, and sound is a form of musical expression.

古文：《周礼》曰： 乃奏黄钟，歌大吕，舞《云门》，以祀天神。乃奏太蔟，歌应钟，舞《咸池》，以祭地祇。 四望山川先祖，各有其乐。
现代文：《周礼》中说： 奏黄钟的乐曲，唱大吕的歌调，跳《云门》之舞，来祭祀天神，奏太簇的乐曲，唱应镊的歌调，跳《咸池》之舞，来祭祀土地神， 日常所见的山和祖先的祭祀都各自有演奏的乐曲。
English: "Zhou Li" said: "Play the music of the yellow bell, sing the melody of the big lute, dance the dance of the "Cloud Gate" to worship the gods, play the music of the taifu, sing the melody of the egret, dance the dance of the "Salt Pond" to worship the gods of the land, the mountains we see every day and the sacrifices of our ancestors all have their own music to play.

古文：又曰： 圜钟为宫，黄钟为徵，姑洗为羽，雷鼓雷鼗，孤竹之管，云和之琴瑟，《云门》之舞，冬日至，于地上之圜丘奏之。
现代文：又说： 圆钟的声音为宫音，黄钟为角音，太簇为征音，姑洗为羽音，冬至曰在地面上的祭坛圜丘擂响鼓鼗，奏起巫笪的管乐、雪翅的琴瑟，跳起《云门》之舞。
English: He also said: The sound of the round bell is the sound of the palace, the yellow bell is the sound of the horn, the tassel is the sound of the call, and the purifying is the sound of the feather. On the winter solstice, the altar on the ground, the mound, the drums, the pipe music of the witch, the snow-winged zither, and the dance of the "Cloud Gate" are played.

古文：若乐六变，则天神皆降，可得而礼矣。 
现代文：如果乐曲经过六次变化，那么天神就全部降临了，这样就可以进行祭祀了。 
English: If there are six changes in the music, then the gods will all fall down, and it will be good luck.

古文：地祇人鬼，礼亦如之。
现代文：对土地神和死去的人祭祀礼仪也大体相同。
English: The rituals for the land deities and the dead are generally the same.

古文：其可以感物兴化，若此之深也。
现代文：音乐可以感染事物、倡导风化，其影响就有如此之深。
English: Music can infect things, promote custom, and its influence is so profound.

古文： 道始于一，一生二，二生三，三三而九。
现代文：万物的本源从一开始。
English: The origin of all things is from the beginning.

古文：故黄钟之数六，分而为雌雄十二钟。钟以三成，故置一而三之，凡积分十七万七千一百四十七，为黄钟之实。
现代文：一产生二，二再产生三，一：二三得九于是黄钟与数字六相对应，它又分为雌雄，故有十二种黄钟之数由三生成，所以每取一钟就乘以三，这样积分为十七万七千一百四十，造就是黄钟的实数。
English: One produces two, two again produces three, one: two-three makes nine, so the yellow bell corresponds to the number six, which is also divided into male and female, so there are twelve kinds of yellow bell numbers generated by three, so every time a bell is taken, it is multiplied by three, so the product is divided into 177,140, which is the real number of the yellow bell.

古文：故黄钟位子，主十一月，下生林钟。
现代文：于是黄钟位于子，对应于十一月，向下产生林钟。
English: As a result, the yellow bell is located at the cusp, corresponding to November, and the forest bell is generated downwards.

古文：林钟之数五十四，主六月，上生太蔟。
现代文：林钟相应的数为五十四，对应于六月，向上产生太簇。
English: The corresponding number of forest bells is fifty-four, corresponding to the month of June, and produces a large cluster upward.

古文：太蔟之数七十二，主正月，下生南吕。
现代文：太簇相应的数为七十二，对应于正月，向下产生南吕。
English: The corresponding number of large clusters is seventy-two, corresponding to the first month of the year, and downwards to produce Nanluo.

古文：南吕之数四十八，主八月，上生姑洗。
现代文：南吕相应的数为四十八，对应于八月，向上产生姑洗。
English: The corresponding number for South Lu is forty-eight, corresponding to the month of August, resulting in the rise of Guba.

古文：姑洗之数六十四，主三月，下生应钟。
现代文：姑洗相应的数为六十四，对应于三月，向下产生应钟。
English: The corresponding number is sixty-four, corresponding to the month of March, and produces a downward chiming clock.

古文：应钟之数四十三，主十月，上生蕤宾。
现代文：应钟相应的数为四十三。对应于十月，向上产生蕤宾。
English: According to the clock, the corresponding number is forty-three. Corresponding to October, there is an increase in the number of guests.

古文：蕤宾之数五十七，主五月，上生大吕。
现代文：蕤宾相应的数是五十七，对应于五月，向上产生大吕。
English: The corresponding number of auspicious people is fifty-seven, corresponding to the month of May.

古文：大吕之数七十六，主十二月，下生夷则。
现代文：大吕相应的数是七十六，对应于十二月，向下产生夷则。
English: The corresponding number of the Great Lu is seventy-six, corresponding to December, and the downward movement produces Heze.

古文：夷则之数五十，主七月，上生夹钟。
现代文：夷则相应的数是五十一，对应于七月，向上产生夹钟。
English: The corresponding number for 夷 is fifty-one, which corresponds to the month of July, and produces an upward chime.

古文：夹钟之数六十七，主二月，下生无射。
现代文：夹钟相应的数是六十七，对应于二月，向下产生无射。
English: The clock's corresponding number is 67, corresponding to the month of February, with no downward projection.

古文：无射之数四十五，主九月，上生中吕。
现代文：无射相应的数是四十五，对应于九月，向上产生中吕。
English: The corresponding number without projection is forty-five, corresponding to the month of September, with the middle ridge rising upwards.

古文：中吕之数六十，主四月，极不生。
现代文：中吕相应的数是六十，对应于四月，这时到了端点，不生成新的律。
English: The corresponding number in the middle is sixty, corresponding to April, when the end point is reached, and no new law is generated.

古文：宫生徵，徵生商，商生羽，羽生角，角生姑洗，姑洗生应钟，不比于正音，故为和。应钟生蕤宾，蕤宾不比于正音，故为缪。
现代文：周代的音律中就有缪、和，是武王伐纣时的匕种音。冬至时以林钟律相对应音乐逐渐显得低沉；夏至时以黄钟律对应音乐逐渐显得高亢。
English: Among the tunes of the Zhou Dynasty, there are Miao and He, which are the three kinds of sounds in the music of King Wu. At the winter solstice, the music corresponding to the Lin Bell Rhythms gradually becomes muffled; at the summer solstice, the music corresponding to the Yellow Bell Rhythms gradually becomes high-pitched.

古文：日冬至，音比林钟浸以浊；日夏至，音比黄钟浸以清，以十二月律应二十四时。甲子，中吕之徵也；丙子，夹钟之羽也；戊子，黄钟之宫也；庚子，无射之商也；壬子，夷则之角也。 
现代文：可用与十二个月对应的音律与二十四节气再对应起来。甲子，与中吕的征音相对应；丙子，与夹钟的羽声对应；戊子，与黄钟的宫音相对应；庚子，与无射的商音对应；壬子，与夷则的角音相对应。 
English: It is possible to use the musical rhythms corresponding to the twelve months to correspond to the twenty-four solar terms. Ka Zi corresponds to the pronunciation of Zhong Lv; Bi Zi corresponds to the chime of the pendulum clock; Bo Zi corresponds to the imperial tone of the yellow clock; Geng Zi corresponds to the commercial tone without projection; Ren Zi corresponds to the angular tone of Yizi.

古文： 古人为度量轻重，皆生乎天道。
现代文： 古代的人们确定度、量、衡的标准都是从自然规律中产生的。
English: In ancient times, people's standards of precision, quantity and weight were all derived from the laws of nature.

古文：黄钟之律长九寸，物以三生，三三九，三九二十七，故幅广二尺七寸，古之制也。
现代文：黄钟的律管长九寸，事物的产生都与三相关，三乘三得九，三九二十七，故布帛的宽度为二尺七寸，这是自古以来的规定。
English: The bell of the yellow bell is nine inches long, and the creation of all things is related to three. Three times three is nine, and three times three is twenty-nine. Therefore, the width of the cloth curtain is two feet and seven inches, which has been the rule since ancient times.

古文：音以八相生，故人长八尺，寻自倍，故八尺而为寻。
现代文：音律每隔八律产生一律，这样人的高度也就是八尺，寻为自己的一倍，故八尺为一寻。
English: Every octave produces the same rhythm, so the height of such a person is eight feet, which is twice that of himself, so eight feet is one octave.

古文：有形即有声，音之数五，以五乘八，五八四十尺为匹。
现代文：有形状也就会有相应的声音，音的数字为五，用五乘八，五八四十尺为一匹。
English: If there is a shape, there will also be a corresponding sound. The number of the sound is five, with five times eight, five-eight-forty feet for one horse.

古文：匹者，中人之度也，一匹为制。
现代文：一匹恰为中等水平的人的标准，就以一匹作为规定。
English: The standard for a horse that is just a medium-level person is one horse.

古文：秋分而禾票定，票定而禾孰。
现代文：秋分时禾标就不再生长了，标是指禾穗的芒。
English: At the autumnal equinox, the standard no longer grows. The standard is the spike of the ear of corn.

古文：律之数十二，故十二票而当一粟，十粟而当一寸。律以当辰，音以当日。
现代文：禾标不再生长时禾穗也就成熟了。律的个数为十二，故十二标与一粟相当，十二栗与一寸相当，律与辰相当，音与数相当。
English: When the corm ceases to grow, the ear of corn is ripe. The number of cormlets is twelve, so twelve cormlets are equivalent to one millet, twelve chestnuts are equivalent to one centimeter, the law is equivalent to the hour, and the sound is equivalent to the number.

古文：日之数十，故十寸而为尺，十尺为丈。
现代文：与相应的数是十，这样就以十寸为一尺，十尺为一丈。
English: and the corresponding number is ten, so ten sun is one shaku, and ten shaku is one jo.

古文：其以为重，十二粟而当一分，十二分而当一铢，十二铢而当半两。
现代文：将它用在重量上，十二粟相当于一分，十二分相当于一铢，十二铢相当于半两。
English: Using it in terms of weight, twelve millets are equivalent to one point, twelve points are equivalent to one shekel, and twelve shekels are equivalent to one and a half crowns.

古文：衡有左右，因而倍之，故二十四铢而当一两。
现代文：秤杆有左右两边，因而要将其加倍，故有二十四铢相当于一两。
English: A balance has two sides, so it is necessary to double it, so there are twenty-four weights equal to one and two.

古文：天有四时，以成一岁，因而四之，四四十六，故十六两而一斤。
现代文：一年有四季，因而要乘以四。四乘四为十六，故十六两为一斤。
English: There are four seasons in a year, so it is necessary to multiply by four. Four times four is sixteen, so sixteen times two is one catty.

古文：三月而一时，三十日一月，故三十斤为一钧。
现代文：一季有三个月，三十天为一个月，故三十斤为一钧。
English: There are three months in a season, and thirty days make up a month, so thirty catties make up one corm.

古文：四时而一岁，故四钧而一石。 
现代文：四季为一年，故四钩为一石。 
English: Four seasons equal one year, so four hooks equal one stone.

古文： 其为音也，一律而生五音，十二律而为六十音；因而六之，六六三十六，故三百六十音以当一岁之日。
现代文：扬子云说： 乐音产生于记日的办法，指甲己是角音，乙庚是商音，丙辛是征音，丁壬是羽音，戊癸是宫音。
English: Yang Ziyun said: The musical sound is produced by the method of recording the day, the fingernail is the horn sound, the second is the commercial sound, the third is the consonant sound, the fourth is the feather sound, and the fifth is the palace sound.

古文：故律历之数，天地之道也。
现代文：律产生于记时的办法，指于是黄钟，丑为大吕之类的叙述。
English: Therefore, the number of rites and calendars reflects the principle of heaven and earth.

古文：下生者倍，以三除之；上生者四，以三除之。 扬子云曰： 声生于日，律生于辰，声以情质，律以和声，声律相协，而八音生。
现代文：乐音以感情为质，质就是正，乐音各根据其所表现的固有感情而称为正。律用来使乐音和谐，应使律管调校准，做到高低之声和谐。声与律互相协调和谐，产生了八音。协，就是和谐。
English: The quality of musical sound is emotion, and the quality is positive, and each musical sound is called positive according to the inherent emotion it expresses. The rhythm is used to make the musical sound harmonious, and the rhythms should be calibrated to achieve the harmony of the high and low voices. The voice and the rhythm coordinate and harmonize with each other, resulting in eight tones. Harmony is harmony.

古文：宫、商、角、徵、羽，谓之五声。
现代文：宫、商、角、征、羽，称为五声。
English: Gong, Shang, Angle, Zheng, and Feather are called the five voices.

古文：金、石、匏、革、丝、竹、土、木，谓之八音。
现代文：金、石、匏、革、丝、竹、土、木，称为八音。
English: Various musical instruments made of gold, stone, rattan, leather, silk, bamboo, earth and wood are called eight tones.

古文：声和音谐，是谓五乐。 
现代文：声音和谐，就叫做五乐。 
English: The eight tones can harmonize with the five tones, which is called five sounds.

古文：夫阴阳和则景至，律气应则灰除。
现代文：阴阳协调则用圭表测曰影时表影长度就符合标准，律与节气相应就会使律管中的灰飞出。
English: The yin and yang and the mirage will be accurate, the qi of the legal department will be fulfilled, and the ashes in the pipe will be removed.

古文：是故天子常以冬夏至御前殿，合八能之士，陈八音，听乐均，度晷景，候钟律，权土炭，效阴阳。
现代文：这样皇帝常在冬、夏至时在皇宫的前殿聚集具有八种能力的人演奏八类乐器，听乐均的声音，测量圭表的表影长度，观察钟律的变化情况，权衡土炭的轻重，验证阴阳的变化。
English: In this way, the emperor often gathered people with eight kinds of abilities in the vestibule of the imperial palace at the winter and summer solstice to play eight kinds of musical instruments, listen to the sound of music, measure the length of the Gui watch, observe the changes in the clock rhythm, weigh the weight of soil charcoal, and verify the changes in yin and yang.

古文：冬至阳气应，则乐均清，景长极，黄钟通，土炭轻而衡仰。
现代文：冬至时阳气开始上升，乐均的声音清亮，圭表的表影最长，黄钟与气相应而贯通，土炭变轻而使其所在的杠杆端上抬。
English: At the winter solstice, the yang qi begins to rise, the sound of the music is clear, the Gui watch has the longest watch shadow, the yellow bell and the qi are correspondingly penetrated, the soil charcoal becomes lighter and the lever end where it is located is raised.

古文：夏至阴气应，则乐均浊，景短极，蕤宾通，土炭重而衡低。
现代文：夏至时阴气开始上升，乐均的声音混浊，圭表的表影最短，蕤宾与气相应而贯通，土炭变重而使杠杆端下降。
English: At the time of the summer solstice, the gloomy atmosphere began to rise, the sound of the music was muddy, the appearance and shadow of the Gui table was the shortest, the guests and the qi were correspondingly penetrated, the soil charcoal became heavy and the lever end fell.

古文：进退于先后五日之中，八能各以候状闻。太史令封上。
现代文：这种情况的发生可以在冬至、夏至前后五天中增进减退，具有八种能力的人各以观察到的情况汇报上来，由太史令密封上报。
English: The occurrence of this situation can increase or decrease in the five days before and after the winter solstice and summer solstice. People with eight abilities each report the observed situation, and the Taishi ordered to report it in a sealed form.

古文：效则和，否则占。
现代文：如果情况正常就表示和顺，否则就要进行占卜。
English: Fulfillment means peace, while non-fulfillment requires the prediction of good or bad fortune.

古文：候气之法，为室三重，户闭，涂衅周密，布缇幔。
现代文：候气的方法足建造裹外三层的房屋，门户均关闭，用牲口的血将隙缝涂抹周密，悬挂丹黄色的帐幕。
English: The traditional method is to build a triple secret room, close the portal, paint the four walls with blood, and hang an orange-red curtain.

古文：室中以木为案，每律各一，内庳外高，从其方位，加律其上。
现代文：在室内放一张木制长桌，每律各备一根律管，根据各自相应的方位，将律管内低外高地安放在桌子上。
English: In the room, place a long wooden table, each with a pipe, and according to their respective positions, place the pipe inside low and outside high on the table.

古文：以葭莩灰布其内端，案历而候之。
现代文：以芦苇中的薄膜烧出的灰放在律管的内端，按照历法中的节气来观察。
English: The ash burned with a thin film of reed is placed on the inner end of the law pipe and observed according to the solar terms in the calendar.

古文：气至者灰动，其为气动者其灰散，人及风所动者，其灰聚。
现代文：某一节气到了，相应律管中的灰就会动。被气所动的灰是散开的，人或风使灰动时灰则是聚在一起的。
English: When a certain solar term arrives, the ash in the corresponding law pipe will move. The ash moved by the gas is scattered, but when the ash is moved by people or the wind, the ash is gathered together.

古文：殿中候，用玉律十二。
现代文：平时是在殿中候气的，用玉制的律管十二根。
English: In ordinary times, the air is breathed in the hall, and twelve pipes are used to blow the air.

古文：唯二至乃候灵台，用竹律六十。
现代文：衹有冬、夏至时是在垂台候气，这时就用六十根竹制的律管。
English: In the winter and at the summer solstice, when the air is wafting in the hanging platform, sixty bamboo rhythms are used.

古文：取弘农宜阳县金门山竹为管，河内葭莩为灰。
现代文：其竹取白弘农郡宜阳县金门山，用河内出产的芦苇内膜烧灰。
English: The bamboo was taken from Mount Kinmen in Baihongnong County, Yiyang County, and the reed inner film produced in Hanoi was used to burn the ash.

古文：三代陵迟，音律失度。
现代文：夏、商、周三代衰颓，音律不准确。
English: Xia, Shang, and the three dynasties of the decline and fall, the melody is not accurate.

古文：汉兴，北平侯张苍始定律历。
现代文：西汉政权建立后，北平侯张苍才最早制定丁关于音律和历法的规贝。
English: After the establishment of the Western Han Dynasty, Zhang Cang, the Marquis of Beiping, was the first to formulate the rules on musical rhythm and calendar.

古文：孝武之世，置协律之官。
现代文：漠武帝时设立了负责使音律和谐的官员。
English: At the time of Emperor Momotake, officials responsible for harmonizing musical rhythms were established.

古文：元帝时，郎中京房知五音六十律之数，受学于小黄令焦延寿。
现代文：元帝时，郎中京房知道五音六十律所对应的数字，并从师于小黄县令焦延寿学习。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, the retainer Kyofusa knew the numbers corresponding to the five tones and sixty laws, and learned from the teacher in Xiaowang County Ling Jiao Yan Shou.

古文：其下生、上生，终于中吕，而十二律毕矣。
现代文：音律向下或向上产生新的音律，最后在中吕终止，就有了完整的十二律。
English: Down or up, the rhythm creates a new rhythm, and finally ends in the middle of the rhyme, so there are a complete set of twelve rhythms.

古文：中吕上生执始，执始下生去灭，终于南事，而六十律毕矣。
现代文：从中吕向上生成执始，执始向下又生成去灭，最后直到南事终止，也就有了完整的六十律。
English: From the middle to the top, there is a beginning and an end, and from the beginning to the bottom, there is a beginning and an end, and finally, until the end of the South, there is a complete rule of sixty.

古文：夫十二律之变至于六十，犹八卦之变至于六十四也。宓羲作《易》，纪阳气之初，以为律法。
现代文：十二律变化到六十律与变到六十四卦是相似的。伏羲作《易》时以阳气开始上升作为律的标准。
English: The change from the Twelve Rites to the Sixty Rites is similar to the change from the Twelve Rites to the Sixty-Four Rites.

古文：建日冬至之声，以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，林钟为徵，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫，蕤宾为变徵。
现代文：确定了冬至曰的乐律以黄钟为宫音，太簇为商，姑洗为角，林钟为征，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫，蕤宾为变征。
English: It was determined that the melody of the winter solstice day is based on the yellow bell as the palace sound, the tuft as the merchant, the wash as the corner, the forest bell as the sign, the South Lu as the feather, the bell as the changing palace, and the guest as the changing sign.

古文：此声气之元，五音之正也。
现代文：这是声和气之间关系的初始情况，也是五音的正位。
English: This is the beginning of the tone, the beginning of the five notes.

古文：故各统一日。
现代文：各律均有对应的一天，其余律则按次序进行对应。
English: Each law has a corresponding day, and the remaining laws correspond in order.

古文：其余以次运行，当日者各自为宫，而商角徵羽以类从焉。
现代文：统领每一的律各自为宫音，商角征羽各依其宫顺次排列。
English: Each ruler's rune is a palace sound, and the merchant's horns and plumes are arranged in order according to their palaces.

古文：《礼运篇》曰： 五声、六律、十二管还相为宫。 
现代文：《礼运篇》中讲到： 五声、六律、十二律管轮转后又重新为宫音。 
English: In the "Rite of Spring" it says: After the five-voice, six-voice, and twelve-voice gongs are turned, they will once again become the sound of the palace.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是说的这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：以六十律分一期之日，黄钟自冬至始，及冬至而复，阴阳寒暖风雨之占于是生焉。
现代文：以一年的天数用六十律来均分，从冬至对应于黄钟开始，到下次冬至又对应于黄钟，于是阴阳、冷暖、风雨的预测也就出现了。
English: The number of days in a year is evenly divided according to the rule of sixty, starting from the winter solstice corresponding to the yellow bell, to the next winter solstice corresponding to the yellow bell, so the prediction of yin and yang, cold and warm, wind and rain also appeared.

古文：房又曰： 竹声不可以度调，故作准以定数。
现代文：京房说过： 竹声不能用来度量音调，故制作一种被称为准的器具来确定相应的数。
English: Kyofusa also said, "The sound of bamboo utensils cannot be used to measure the adjustment, so a standard is made to determine the number of adjustments."

古文：准之状如瑟，长丈而十三弦，隐间九尺，以应黄钟之律九寸；中央一弦，下有画分寸，以为六十律清浊之节。 
现代文：准的形状和瑟相象，长一丈。有十三根弦，有效弦长为九尺，以与黄钟律管长九、厂的数字相对应。中央的一根弦下有分寸标识，据此可以作为六十律的清浊变化的节度。 
English: There are thirteen strings, and the effective string length is nine feet, which corresponds to the number of the factory that is nine feet long. There is a measurement mark under the central string, according to which it can be used as a measure for the change of the clear gong of the sixtieth law.

古文：房言律详，其术施行于史官，候部用之。
现代文：豆廛对律的叙述比刘歆所上奏的要详尽，其方法被史官采用了，候部使用了它。
English: Doudou's description of the counterpoint is more detailed than Liu Xuan's. Its method was adopted by the historian, and the waiters used it.

古文：《续汉志》具载其律准度数。
现代文：《续漠书律历志》中详细记载了其律、准所对应的长度
English: The length corresponding to its rhythms and coefficients is recorded in detail in the "Continuation of the Book of the Laws of the Desert"

古文：汉章帝元和元年，待诏候钟律殷肜上言： 官无晓六十律以准调音者，故待诏严嵩具以准法教子男宣，愿召宣补学官，主调乐器。 
现代文：连堂童互扭元年，待韶候钟律殷肜上书谈到： 官方没有懂得六十律用准来调音的人，以前的待诏鼓昆将使用准的方法传授给他的儿子严宣，希望召用堡宣，补其学官的职务，让他主持调节乐器。 
English: In the first year of the Lian Tong Tong mutual twisting, the letter of the wait for the bell and the drum said: The official did not understand the person who used the sixty rules to tune the instrument. The former wait for the bell and the drum would teach his son Yan Xuan to use the correct method. He hoped to recruit the castle Xuan to supplement his duties as a scholar and let him preside over the adjustment of the musical instrument.

古文：诏曰： 嵩子学审晓律，别其族，协其声者，审试。
现代文：皇帝的诏书对此指出： 严嵩的儿子精通音律，能区别不同的音律，又能使各种音调和谐起来，这是需要审查考试的。
English: The emperor's edict pointed this out: Yan Chong's son is proficient in musical notation, can distinguish different musical notation, and can harmonize various tones, which requires a review exam.

古文：不得依托父学，以聋为聪。
现代文：不能依赖其父亲的学问，以聋为聪。
English: You can't rely on your father's learning to be smart.

古文：声微妙，独非莫知，独是莫晓，以律错吹，能知命十二律不失一，乃为能传嵩学耳。 
现代文：音乐是深奥玄妙的，但难道就再没有了解它的人，掌握它的人了吗?于是，用律管混杂后吹奏，能够知道十二律而没有一个错误的，才是能将严嵩的学问传下来的人。 
English: Music is profound and mysterious, but are there no more people who understand it, who have mastered it? Therefore, the person who can pass down the rigorous knowledge is the one who can know the twelve precepts and not make a single mistake after playing with the melody tube.

古文：试宣十二律，其二中，其四不中，其六不知何律，宣遂罢；自此律家莫能为准。
现代文：对严宣进行十二律的测试，有两律是对的，四律是错的，另外六律则不知道是什么律，这样就没有任用严宣。自此之后研究音律的人都不会使用准了。
English: When Yan Xuan was tested on the twelve laws, two were right, four were wrong, and the other six he did not know what they were, so Yan Xuan was not appointed. From then on, people who studied musical rhythms would not use the criterion.

古文：灵帝熹平六年，东观召典律者太子舍人张光等问准意，光等不知。
现代文：漠灵帝熹平六年，宫中的束观召见典律者太子舍人张光等人询问有关准的情况，张光等人不知道。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Qianping, Prince Zhang Guang and other courtiers were summoned to the palace to inquire about the situation. Zhang Guang and other courtiers did not know about it.

古文：归阅旧藏，乃得其器，形制如房书，犹不能定其弦缓急。音不可书以晓人，知之者欲教而无从，心达者体知而无师，故史官能辨清浊者遂绝。
现代文：回去看所藏旧物，找到了准，其形制和京房在书中所讲的相同，然而不能确定准上弦的松紧音律问题不能够总结出来让人了解，懂一些音律道理的人想着教授没有根据，里明白的人能够体察它却没有表达的器物，这样在史宫中能够分辨音律高低的人就没有了。
English: I went back to look at the old objects in the collection and found the standard. Its shape is the same as that described by Kyofusa in his book. However, the problem of the loose tuning of the strings, which cannot be determined, cannot be summed up to make people understand. People who understand some principles of tuning think that the professor has no basis. People who understand the inside can experience the object that it does not express. In this way, there are no people who can distinguish the high and low tuning in the historical palace.

古文：其可以相传者，唯候气而已。
现代文：能够传下来的衹有候气而已。
English: But the content that can be passed on to others, that's what's left.

古文：论曰：律吕相生，皆三分而损益之。
现代文：论口：音律的产生均是用三来缩减或扩展的。
English: On the mouth: the generation of musical rhythm is reduced or expanded by three.

古文：先儒推十二律，从子至亥，每三之，凡十七万七千一百四十七，而三约之，是为上生。
现代文：古人推求十二律，从子到亥，每一律的律数都乘以三，最后总共为十七万七千一百四十七，而生律时用三除就能产生上生的律。
English: The ancients deduced twelve laws. From the son to the son, the number of laws of each law is multiplied by three, and the final total is one hundred and seventy-seven thousand one hundred and forty-seven.

古文：故《汉志》云：三分损一，下生林钟，三分益一，上生太蔟。
现代文：所以《汉书律历志》中讲到，减少三分之一就向下产生林钟。增加三分之一就向上产生太簇。
English: Therefore, it is said in the "Chinese Calendar" that a decrease of one-third produces a downward forest bell, and an increase of one-third produces an upward cluster.

古文：无射既上生中吕，则中吕又当上生黄钟，然后五声、六律、十二管还相为宫。
现代文：无射已经向上产生了中吕，则中吕又应该向上产生黄钟，这样五声、六律、十二律管轮转后又重新回到了宫音。
English: If the no-shooting has already produced the middle lute, then the middle lute should also produce the yellow bell, so that the five, six, and twelve-stringed reels turn around and return to the palace sound.

古文：今上生不及黄钟实二千三百八十四，九约实一千九百六十八为一分，此则不周九分寸之律一分有奇，岂得还为宫乎？
现代文：现在向上生成黄钟时比其相应的实数少二千三百八十四。将黄钟相应的实数除以九，得一千九百六十八为律管长度的一分，这样就相当于未能回到九寸的律管长度而是短了一分多，那怎么可能还是宫音呢?
English: Dividing the real number corresponding to the yellow bell by nine, we get nineteen hundred and sixty-eight as one minute of the tuning fork length, which is equivalent to failing to return to the nine-inch tuning fork length but being more than a minute shorter, so how can it still be a palace sound?

古文：凡三分益一为上生，三分损一为下生，此其大略，犹周天斗分四分之一耳。
现代文：凡是增加三分之一就是向上生成新的音律，减少三分之一就是向下生成新的音律，造就是大概的情况，就好像足一周天中斗宿的奇零部分是四分之一度一样。
English: Every increase of one-third creates a new melody upwards, and every decrease of one-third creates a new melody downwards. Creation is an approximate situation, just as the odd-zero part of the full circle is a quarter of a degree.

古文：京房不思此意，比十二律微有所增，方引而伸之，中吕上生执始，执始下生去灭，至于南事，为六十律，竟复不合，弥益其疏。
现代文：京房不考虑这种说法，比较十二律有一点增加，就进行了引伸，使中吕向上生成执始，执始又向下生成去灭，这样一直到生成南事为止，形成了六十律，最后仍然不能相合，而且显得更加粗疏。
English: Jingfang did not consider this argument, and compared the twelve laws with a little increase, and extended it, so that the middle ridge generated the beginning, and the beginning generated the end, and so on until the formation of the south, forming sixty laws. In the end, it still could not match, and it appeared more coarse.

古文：班氏所志，未能通律吕本源，徒训角为触，徵为祉，阳气施种于黄钟，如斯之属，空烦其文，而为辞费。
现代文：班固所写的对律吕的本源也未弄懂，徒然地将角解释为触、征解释为福，并说阳气从黄钟开始萌发，这类的话空洞无物，浪费了笔墨。
English: Ban Gu also did not understand the origin of the law of attraction, and in vain interpreted the angle as a touch, the sign as a blessing, and said that the yang qi began to germinate from the yellow bell. Such words are empty and useless, and wasted pen and ink.

古文：又推九六，欲符刘歆三统之数，假托非类，以饰其说，皆孟坚之妄矣。
现代文：又主观地将音律中出现的九、六数字与刘逖的三统之数符合起来，假藉神明的意旨来使其说法得以成立，这都是像孟坚那样的荒诞错误。
English: They also subjectively matched the nine and six numbers appearing in the musical rhythm with the three universal numbers of Liu Bei, and pretended to be the will of the gods to make their argument valid. These are all absurd mistakes like Meng Jian.

古文：蔡邕从朔方上书，云《前汉志》但载十律，不及六十。
现代文：墓垦在塑直所写的进献文书中说到，《汉书。律历志》衹记载有十二音律，而没有谈到六十律。
English: The tombstone said in the donation document written by Shao Zhizhong that the "Hanshu. Ritsu Li Zhi" contained twelve tones, but did not mention sixty tones.

古文：六律尺寸相生，司马彪皆已志之。
现代文：音律所对应尺寸的产生，司马彪在《续漠书律历志》中已有记述。
English: Sima Biao has already described the production of the size of the corresponding crane in the "Continuation of the Book of Rhythms."

古文：汉末，亡失雅乐。黄初中，铸工柴玉巧有意思，形器之中，多所造作。
现代文：汉代末年，宫廷中的雅乐失传，垩蝈董翅年间，铸造工匠柴玉灵巧而善于动脑，曾制作过多种形状的器具。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, courtly music in the court was lost. During the reign of Emperor Dongying, the casting craftsman Chai Yu was clever and good at using his brain. He had made many shapes of utensils.

古文：协律都尉杜夔令玉铸钟，其声清浊，多不如法。
现代文：协律都尉杜塑要他铸造钟，钟声的高、低总是达不到规定。
English: He was asked to cast a bell by Du Shou, the lieutenant of the Conciliation Committee. The high and low tones of the bell always fell short of the requirements.

古文：数毁改作，玉甚厌之，谓夔清浊任意。更相诉白于魏王。
现代文：经过几次销毁重铸以后，柴玉感到厌烦，认为杜夔随意确定音高的标准，并且在魏王面前也这样说。
English: After several times of destruction and recasting, Chaiyu felt bored and thought that Cuckoo arbitrarily determined the pitch standard, and said so in front of Wei Wang.

古文：魏王取玉所铸钟，杂错更试，然后知夔为精，于是罪玉及诸子，皆为养马主。
现代文：组王就将基王所铸造的钟混杂在一起再进行测试，这才知道拄夔在音律方面确是精通的。于是对些玉和他的儿子们进行了处罚，让他们都去当马夫了。
English: The king of the group mixed the bells cast by King Ki together and then tested them, only to find out that Zou was indeed proficient in music. Therefore, he punished Zhou Yu and his sons, and let them all go to be stablemen.

古文：晋泰始十年，中书监荀勖、中书令张华，出御府铜竹律二十五具，部太乐郎刘秀等校试，其三具与杜夔及左延年律法同，其二十二具，视其铭题尺寸，是笛律也。
现代文：置伐泰始十年，中书监荀勖、中书令张华将御府保存的二十五件铜、竹律管拿出来，让太乐郎型壶等人校试，其中有三件与杜夔、左延年的音律制度相同，另外二十二件从其铭文和尺寸来看是与笛有关的律管。
English: In the 10th year of the Taifu era, Zhang Hua, the supervisor of Chinese books and the commander of Chinese books, took out the 25 bronze and bamboo rhythms preserved by the imperial government and had them checked by people such as Tai Le Lang type kettle. Among them, three were the same as the rhythms system of cuckoo and left elongation, and the other 22 rhythms were related to the flute from the perspective of their inscriptions and sizes.

古文：问协律中郎将列和，辞： 昔魏明帝时，令和承受笛声，以作此律，欲使学者别居一坊，歌咏讲习，依此律调。
现代文：对协律中郎将列和进行了询问，列和回答： 当年魏明帝时曾命令我顺承笛子发出的声音，制定下这种规定的律管，准备让学习的人另外居住在一个乐坊中，歌唱讲解练习均按照这一规定来调整。
English: He inquired about the music director, Li He, and Li He replied: In those days, Emperor Wei Ming ordered me to obey the sound made by the flute. The music director made such a regulation and prepared for the students to live in a separate music workshop. The singing and explanation exercises were adjusted according to this regulation.

古文：至于都合乐时，但识其尺寸之名，则丝竹歌咏，皆得均合。
现代文：到了合奏的时候，衹要辨认它的尺寸名称，弦乐器、竹管乐器和歌唱的声音就都能够做到与均的声音谐和。
English: As for the whole ensemble, it is only necessary to know the nominal size of the chorus, then the instrumental singing can be in tune.

古文：歌声浊者，用长笛长律；歌声清者，用短笛短律。
现代文：歌声低沉时就用长的笛子、长的律管。歌声清亮时则用短的笛子和律管。
English: When the singing voice is low, a long flute and a long reed pipe are used. When the singing voice is clear, a short flute and a reed pipe are used.

古文：凡弦歌调张清浊之制，不依笛尺寸名之，则不可知也。 
现代文：凡是用弦乐器伴唱时给乐器调弦的清浊标准不用笛子的尺寸来称呼，就不能够知道。 
English: If you don't follow the size of the melody, you won't know how to tune the flute.

古文：勖等奏： 昔先王之作乐也，以振风荡俗，飨神佐贤，必协律吕之和，以节八音之中。
现代文：荀勖等人上奏： 以前帝王所以提倡音乐，是用以振兴风气改变不好的习俗，祭献神明、保护贤能，必须使音律协调，以调节各种乐器发出的声音使其适中。
English: The gongs and other instruments were played: In the past, emperors promoted music to invigorate the culture and change bad customs, to sacrifice gods and protect virtue. It was necessary to harmonize the musical rhythms to adjust the sound emitted by various musical instruments to make them moderate.

古文：是故郊祀朝宴，用之有制，歌奏分叙，清浊有宜。
现代文：这样祭祀天地和朝廷中宴会的音乐在使用上是有规定的，歌唱和奏乐各有次序，音律的高低也很合适。
English: In this way, the music of the sacrificial heaven and earth and the banquet in the imperial court is regulated in use, the singing and the music have their own order, and the pitch of the melody is also appropriate.

古文：故曰 五声十二律，还相为宫。 
现代文：故有 五声十二律，轮转后又重新回到宫音 的说法。
English: Therefore, there is a saying that there are five tones and twelve rhythms, and after the rotation, it will return to the palace sound.

古文：此经传记籍可得而知者也。
现代文：这些在经传和书籍中均可以找到因而了解。
English: These can be found and understood in the sutras and books.

古文：如和对辞，笛之长短，无所象则，率意而作，不由曲度。
现代文：如列和的回答中所说，笛子的长短没有用以参照的标准，可能随意制作，而不必根据乐曲中的规定。
English: As stated in the summing-up answer, the length of the flute has no standard to refer to, and may be made arbitrarily, without having to be in accordance with the provisions of the music.

古文：考以正律，皆不相应，吹其声均，多不谐合。
现代文：将其用标准的音律来考校，都不符合，吹出的声韵也大都不和谐。
English: When it is tested with a standard melody, it does not match, and the sound rhyme it blows out is mostly not harmonious.

古文：又辞： 先师传笛，别其清浊，直以长短，工人裁制，旧不依律。 是为作笛无法。
现代文：型和的回答中又说： 已去世的老师传下来的笛子，径直以长短分别高低，用人工截取制作，一直是不根据音律的规定的，造就是制作笛子没有相应的规定。
English: He also said in his answer: The flutes handed down by the deceased teacher are straight and have different heights and lengths. They are made by manual interception and are not based on the rules of musical notation. There is no corresponding rule for making flutes.

古文：而知写笛造律，又令琴瑟歌咏，从之为正，非所以稽古先哲，垂宪于后者也。
现代文：列和根据笛子的情况来规定音律，又让琴瑟和歌唱咏诵都以其为标准的正音，这既不是沿袭古代有才德的人的方法。
English: It is not the way of the ancient sages to arrange the strings and determine the rhythm according to the condition of the flute, and to make the lyre and the singing recitation all use it as the standard positive tone.

古文：谨条牒诸律，问和意状如左。
现代文：也不能为后人流传下有关法则。
English: I would like to record the contents of the various laws and regulations, and the sum of inquiries as follows.

古文：及依典制，用十二律造笛像十二枚，声均调和，器用便利。
现代文：现慎重地对各种音律及询问乏姻的有关认识情况按条款写成文书如下。并依据有关规定，利用十二律作为制作十二根笛的标准，其均发出的声音和谐，使用也很便利。
English: Now, it is prudent to write a document according to the following terms for various musical rhythms and inquire about the relevant understanding of the lack of laws. And according to the relevant regulations, use the twelve laws as the standard for making twelve flutes, all of which emit a harmonious sound and are easy to use.

古文：讲肄弹击，必合律吕，况乎宴飨万国，奏之庙堂者哉！
现代文：平时讲授、学习、演奏时都要符合律吕的规定，何况朝廷的宴会和祭祀的演奏情况呢?
English: In ordinary times, lectures, studies, and performances must comply with the provisions of Lv Lv, not to mention the performance of banquets and rituals at the imperial court.

古文：虽伶、夔旷远，至音难精，犹宜刑古昔，以求厥衷，合于经礼，于制为详。
现代文：虽然蛐、拄垦已经离现在很远，最标准的音难以做到精确，然而仍应当效法古代以了解当时的用意，从而与儒家的经学和礼仪符合，对其规定也就知悉了。
English: Although  and  have come a long way from the present, and the most standard sounds are difficult to achieve accuracy, it is still necessary to follow the ancient times to understand the intention at that time, so as to conform to the Confucian classics and etiquette, and to know its provisions.

古文：若可施用，请更部笛工，选竹造作，太乐、乐府施行。
现代文：假若这种办法可以实行的话，要求另外安排制笛工匠，选取竹料进行制作，让太乐、乐府施用。
English: If this method can be implemented, it is required to arrange another flute-making craftsman, select bamboo materials for production, and let Taile and Lefu apply them.

古文：平议诸杜夔、左延年律可皆留。
现代文：公平地评论表明，杜夔、左延年的这些律是可以留下来。
English: To be fair, the review shows that these laws of cuckoo and left elongation can stay.

古文：其御府笛正声下徵各一具，皆铭题作者姓名。其余无所施用，还付御府毁。 
现代文：御府的笛中正声、下征各一根，都刻有制作者的姓名，其余都没有什么用处，可还给御府销毁。 
English: Every flute in the Imperial Household has the maker's name engraved on it, and the rest are of no use and can be returned to the Imperial Household for destruction.

古文：奏可。
现代文：这一上奏得到了同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：勖又问和： 作笛为可依十二律作十二笛，令一孔依一律，然后乃以为乐不？ 
现代文：荀勖又问列和： 制作笛子是否可以按照十二律制作十二根笛子，使其与一律相应，然后用它们来奏乐呢? 
English: Gong Li also asked Lianhe: Can the method of making a flute be made according to the principle of making twelve flutes, so that each hole of the flute is uniformly tuned, and then used for playing?

古文：和辞： 太乐东厢长笛正声已长四尺二寸，令当复取其下徵之声；于法，声浊者笛当长，计其尺寸，乃五尺有余，和昔日作之，不可吹也。
现代文：列和回答： 在太乐东厢的长笛其正声就已有四尺二寸长，现在应该再取相应于下征之声的笛长，根据规律，声音粗重的笛也应长，算出其尺寸应该是五尺多，我以前曾经做过，但不能用于吹奏。
English: Column and answer: The flute in the east wing of the hall is already four feet and two inches long at the stem. Now it is time to take the flute corresponding to the downbeat. According to the law, the flute with a coarse sound should also be long, and its size should be more than five feet. I have done this before, but it cannot be used for playing.

古文：又笛诸孔，虽不校试，意谓不能得一孔辄应一律也。 
现代文：另外，笛子的各孔虽然没有校试，但从意义上说不可能一孔就与一律相对应。 
English: In addition, although there is no proofreading for each hole of the flute, it is impossible to say that one hole corresponds to all.

古文：案太乐，四尺二寸笛正声均应蕤宾，以十二律还相为宫，推法下徵之孔，当应律大吕。
现代文：依照太乐，四尺二寸笛子的正声，其均与蕤宾是相应的，根据十二律轮转一周后又回到宫音的规则推求下征之孔的位置，它应该与大吕律相应。
English: According to Tai Le, the positive sound of a four-foot-two-centimeter flute corresponds to the cymbals. According to the rule of the twelve-law wheel, after turning around for a week and returning to the palace sound, the position of the hole should correspond to the Great Lu.

古文：大吕笛长二尺六寸有奇，不得长五尺余。
现代文：大吕的笛长应为二尺六寸多，而不是五尺多长。
English: The large lute is 2'6" long, and must not exceed 5' in length.

古文：令太乐郎刘秀、邓昊等依律作大吕笛以示和。
现代文：命令太乐郎刘秀、邓昊等依据音律的规定制作了相应于大吕律的笛子给列和看。
English: He ordered the music masters Liu Xiu and Deng Hao to make flutes corresponding to the Great Lyu Rhythms according to the rules of the music.

古文：又吹七律，一孔一校，声皆相应。
现代文：又吹奏七根律管，对每一孔都作了校验，其声音都是相应的。
English: And he blew on the seven trumpets, and the sound of them was according to their sound, after that he had made the seven trumpets.

古文：然后令郝生鼓筝，宋同吹笛，以为《杂引》、《相和》诸曲。
现代文：后来又叫郝生弹筝，宋同吹笛，演奏了《杂引》、《相和》等乐曲。
English: Later, he was also called to play the kite and the flute with Song, and performed "Miscellaneous Notes," "Simultaneous Harmony" and other pieces.

古文：和乃辞曰： 自和父祖汉世以来，笛家相传，不知此法，而令调均与律相应，实非所及也。 
现代文：列和对此回答： 从我祖先自选代以来，有关笛子的知识代代相传，而不知道有这种方法，现在调节均使其与音律相应，实在不是我所能作的。 
English: Reiwa replied, "My family has been making flutes since my ancestors were still alive. I don't know how to do it, especially how to make the hole of the flute correspond to the tone. I really can't do it.

古文：郝生、鲁基、种整、硃夏，皆与和同。
现代文：郝生、鲁基、种整、苤夏都和乏蜘有相同的观点。
English: Sheng Sheng, Luki, Zeng Jie, Zeng Xia all have the same view as Bozhuang.

古文：又问和： 笛有六孔，及其体中之空为七。
现代文：荀勖又问乏圆： 笛有六孔，加上笛体中空共有七孔。
English: Zou also asked Biao Yuan: The flute has six holes, and with the flute body hollow, there are a total of seven holes.

古文：和为能尽名其宫商角徵不？
现代文：你能够用宫商角征这些名称来称呼它们吗?
English: Can you call them by these names?

古文：孔调与不调，以何检知？ 
现代文：孔是否声调合适，用什么方法来检测了解呢? 
English: How to check whether the hole tone is accurately adjusted?

古文：和辞： 先师相传，吹笛但以作曲相语，为某曲当举某指，初不知七孔尽应何声也。
现代文：歹跑回答： 已去世的老师所传授，吹笛衹讲如何吹出乐曲，吹某一曲时应提起哪一只手指头，本来就不知追七个孔应该与什么声相应。
English: The ruffian replied, "The deceased teacher taught me how to play a piece of music on the flute, and which finger should be raised when playing a certain piece of music. I didn't know what sound the seven holes should correspond to.

古文：若当作笛，其仰尚方笛工，依案旧像讫，但吹取鸣者，初不复校其诸孔调与不调也。 
现代文：如果制作笛子，则依靠尚方的笛工，依照旧有的样式做好，衹要吹起来有声音就行，本来就不用校验各孔的声调是否合适。 
English: If you make a flute, you rely on Shangfang's flute maker to make the flute according to the old style. If you want the flute to sound, you don't have to check whether the tone of each hole is appropriate.

古文：案《周礼》调乐金石，有一定之声，是故造钟磬者，先依律调之，然后施于厢悬。
现代文：依照《周礼》中的记述，对金属、石头制作的乐器进行调音就会有一定的声音发出来，这样制造钟磬的人先根据音律对其调音，然后挂在边上使用。
English: According to the description in "Zhou Li," when a musical instrument made of metal or stone is tuned, a certain sound will be emitted. The person who made the bell first tuned it according to the melody, and then hung it on the side for use.

古文：作乐之时，诸音皆受钟磬之均，即为悉应律也。
现代文：在奏乐时各类乐器都将钟磬作为均，就能做到都与音律相应。
English: During the performance, other musical instruments can match the pitch of the gong, so they are all considered to be in tune.

古文：至于飨宴殿堂之上，无厢悬钟磬，以笛有一定调，故诸弦歌皆从笛为正。
现代文：至于在殿堂之上举行宴会，边上未挂钟磬，但因笛的音调足确定了的，故各种弦乐器和歌唱都可依据笛声来正音。
English: As for holding a banquet on top of the hall of fame, there is no bell on the edge, but because the tone of the flute is fixed, all kinds of stringed instruments and singing can be based on the sound of the flute.

古文：是为笛犹钟磬，宜必合于律吕。
现代文：这样笛的作用就和钟磬差不多了，它必须与音律相合。
English: In this way, the role of the flute is similar to that of the gong. It must be in harmony with the melody.

古文：如和所对，直以意造，率短一寸，七孔声均，不知其皆应何律？
现代文：如果像列和所回答的那样径直随意去制作，轻率地短了一寸，则七孔的声音作为均就不知与哪一律对应了。
English: If, as in the case of the series and the answer, it is made directly and arbitrarily, and is carelessly shortened by one inch, then the sound of the seven holes will correspond to no one.

古文：调与不调，无以检正。
现代文：声调是否合适，没有办法检测校正。
English: There is no way to check the calibration to see if the pitch is correct.

古文：唯取竹之鸣者，为无法制。
现代文：衹取能够吹奏有声的竹笛，是没有严格的规定的。
English: There are no strict rules for obtaining a bamboo flute that can be played with a sound.

古文：辄令部郎刘秀、邓昊、魏邵等与笛工参共作笛。工人造其形，律者定其声，然后器象有制，音均和协。
现代文：这样就命令部郎刘秀、塑昱、旦艳、魏塑等人与笛工共同去制笛，工人负责制作，管音律的人确定其声音对应的音律，从而做到乐器规格有明确的规定，它的声音作为均也就协调了。
English: In this way, he ordered the minister Liu Xiu, Shuxuan, Danyan, Wei Shuxu and other people to work with the flute maker to make the flute, the workers were responsible for the production, and the person in charge of the melody determined the melody corresponding to its sound, so that the specifications of the musical instrument were clearly defined, and its sound was coordinated.

古文：又问和： 若不知律吕之义，作乐音均高下清浊之调，当以何名之？ 
现代文：荀勖又问烈扣： 如果不知道音律的有关定义，奏乐和音均都有高亢和低沉的音调，以什么来称呼它们呢? 
English: Zou also asked Li Jie: If you don't know the relevant definition of music, both music and sound have high and low tones, what do you call them?

古文：和辞： 每合乐时，随歌者声之清浊，用笛有长短。
现代文：列和回答： 每当奏乐时根据唱歌者声音的高低使用长短不同的笛子。
English: Column and answer: Whenever there is an ensemble, choose a flute of different length according to the pitch of the singer's voice.

古文：假令声浊者用三尺二笛，因名曰此三尺二调也。声清者用二尺九笛，因名曰此二尺九调也。汉、魏相传，施行皆然。 
现代文：如声音低沉的用三尺二的笛子，就称呼它为三尺二调声音高亢的用二尺九的笛子，则称呼为二尺九调谨、魏流传来都是使用这种方法。 
English: If a low-pitched flute with a three-foot-two top is called a three-foot-two-tone flute, a high-pitched flute with a two-foot-nine-tone flute is called a two-foot-nine-tone flute, and this method has been used since the Wei Dynasty.

古文：案《周礼》奏六乐，乃奏黄钟；歌大吕，乃奏太蔟，歌应钟，皆以律吕之义，纪歌奏清浊。
现代文：按照《周礼》奏六乐的记述，是奏黄钟的乐曲，唱大吕的歌调；奏太簇的乐曲，唱应钟的歌调。
English: According to the description of playing six pieces of music in "Zhou Li," it is to play the music of the yellow bell and sing the melody of the big lute; to play the music of the taizu and sing the melody of the bell.

古文：而和所称以二尺三尺为名，虽汉、魏用之，俗而不典。
现代文：都是根据音律的名称来表示歌唱和演奏的音调高低的。而型趣说用二尺、三尺为名称，虽然汉、魏时就已使用，却是通俗而不标准的。
English: Both are based on the name of the melody to indicate the pitch of singing and playing. And the type of fun is called two feet, three feet, although it has been used in the Han and Wei dynasties, it is popular and not standard.

古文：部郎刘秀、邓昊等以律作笛，三尺二寸者，应无射之律，若宜用长笛，执乐者曰： 请奏无射。 
现代文：令太乐郎刘秀、邓昱等人依照音律制作笛子，三尺二寸与无射律相应，如果要用长的笛子，管理奏乐的人说： 请奏无射之乐。 
English: Liu Xiu, Deng Yu and others, who were in charge of orchestral musicians, made flutes in accordance with the melody. Three feet and two inches corresponds to the no-shooting melody. If you want to use a long flute, the person in charge of the music said: Please play the no-shooting melody.

古文：《周语》曰： 无射所以宣布哲人之令德，示民轨仪也。 
现代文：《周语》中讲到： 无射传扬才智超群的人的美德，要人们遵行向往。 
English: "Zhou Yu" said: to spread the virtues of the super-intelligent people, and to make people follow the yearning.

古文：二尺八寸四分四厘应黄钟之律，若宜用短笛，执乐者曰： 请奏黄钟。 
现代文：二尺八寸四分四厘与黄钟律相对应，如果要用短的笛子，管理奏乐的人就可说： 请奏黄钟。 
English: Two feet, eight inches, four minutes and four percent corresponds to the yellow bell rhythm. If you want to use a short flute, the person in charge of the music can say: Please play the yellow bell.

古文：《周语》曰： 黄钟所以宣养六气九德也。 
现代文：《周语》中说： 黄钟传播培养六气九德。 
English: "Zhouyu" said: The yellow bell spreads and cultivates the six airs and nine virtues.

古文：是则歌奏之义，当合经礼，考之古典，于制为雅。
现代文：这样唱歌和奏乐的意义就能和儒家经学和礼仪符合，在古代经典中查核，它在体制上是高雅的。
English: In this way, the meaning of singing and playing music can be consistent with Confucian classics and etiquette, and checked in the ancient classics, it is elegant in the system.

古文：《书》曰： 予欲闻六律五声八音，在治忽始。 
现代文：《尚书》中说： 我要听六律五声八音是在于治理懈怠的习气。 
English: "Shangshu" said: I want to listen to the six laws, five voices and eight tones is to control the habit of slacking.

古文：《周礼》载六律六同。
现代文：《周礼》中记载有六律六同。
English: In the "Weekly Ritual," there are six laws and six customs.

古文：《礼记》又曰： 五声十二律，还相为宫。 
现代文：《礼记》中又说： 五声十二律，轮转一周后又回到宫音。 
English: "Li Ji" also said: "Five syllables, twelve rhythms, after a week of rotation, it returns to the palace sound.

古文：刘歆、班固纂《律历志》，亦纪十二律。
现代文：刘邀、坦回所写的《律历志》中也记有十二律。
English: There are also twelve laws recorded in the "Law Calendar" written by Liu Ying and Tan Hui.

古文：唯京房始创六十律，至章帝时，其法已亡；蔡邕虽追古作，其言亦曰： 今无能为者。 
现代文：惟有基庆才创立了六十律，到汉童童时这一方法已经失传，蔡邕虽然对京房的话进行了追记，但也说 现在没有能用六十律的了 。
English: It was only Ki Qing who created the sixtieth law. By the time of Han Tong Tong, this method had already been lost. Although Cai Wei made a note of the words of Kyofang, he also said that there is no one who can use the sixtieth law now.

古文：依案古典及今音家所用六十律者，无施于乐。
现代文：依照古代经典和现在音律家所用的六十律，都没有在音乐上应用。
English: According to the ancient classics and the sixty laws used by music theorists today, none of them have been applied to music.

古文：谨依典记，以五声十二律还相为宫之法，制十二笛象，记注图侧，如别。
现代文：现按照经典的记述，用五声十二律轮转一周又回到宫音的规定，绘制了十二根笛子的图样，在图的旁边记有注解，如同分类。
English: Now, in accordance with the classical description, using the five-voice, twelve-measure wheel to turn around and return to the palace sound, a pattern of twelve flutes has been drawn, with annotations next to the picture, as if it were a classification.

古文：省图，不如视笛之了，故复重作蕤宾伏孔笛。
现代文：看图不如看笛的实物明了，所以又重新制作了蕤宾伏孔笛。
English: Looking at a picture is not as clear as looking at the actual flute, so they re-made the Qibin Fu Kong flute.

古文：其制云：
现代文：其有关规定说：
English: Its shape is:

古文：黄钟之笛，正声应黄钟，下徵应林钟，长二尺八寸四分四厘有奇。
现代文：黄钟之笛，其正声与黄钟相应，下征与林钟相应，长二尺八寸四分四厘多。
English: The flute of the yellow bell, the positive tone corresponds to the yellow bell rhythm, the lower tone corresponds to the forest bell rhythm, the length is two feet eight inches and four minutes and four percent.

古文：正声调法，黄钟为宫，应钟为变宫，南吕为羽，林钟为徵，蕤宾为变徵，姑洗为角，太蔟为商。
现代文：《周语》中说： 黄钟传播培养六气九德。 正声声调的规定，以黄钟为宫声，这样姑洗就是角声。
English: "Zhouyu" said: The yellow bell spreads and cultivates the six airs and nine virtues. According to the regulation of the positive tone, the yellow bell is the palace tone, so the gurgling is the horn sound.

古文：正声调法，黄钟为宫，宫生徵，黄钟生林钟也。
现代文：翕笛之声与姑洗相应，这样就以四倍于角的长来制作黄钟之笛它的宫声纯正而没有违背，故称为正声。正声声调的规定，黄钟是宫声，第一孔。
English: The sound of the gong corresponds to the sound of the gong, so the gong of the yellow bell is made with four times the length of the horn. Its palace sound is pure and not violated, so it is called the positive sound. According to the positive tone, the yellow bell is the palace sound, the first hole.

古文：徵生商，林钟生太蔟也。
现代文：应钟是变宫，南吕是羽声，第三孔林钟为征声，第四孔。
English: Lin Zhongsheng, a recruiter, is too shy.

古文：商生羽，太蔟生南吕也。
现代文：蕤宾是变征，第五附孔。
English: Shang Shou Yu, Taibing Shou Nanlu.

古文：羽生角，南吕生姑洗也。
现代文：《周语》中说，匏竹乐器在制作上方便，评论它足适宜的，是说它方便于使用而适宜。
English: Hanyu Cape, South Lv Sheng Gu Zai.

古文：角生变宫，姑洗生应钟也。
现代文：角声生出变宫，也就是姑洗生出应钟。
English: The sound of the horn brings forth the changing of the seasons, that is, the gushing of water brings forth the ringing of the bell.

古文：变宫生变徵，应钟生蕤宾也。下徵调法，林钟为宫，南吕为商，应钟为角，黄钟为变徵，姑洗为羽，蕤宾为变宫，清角之调：以姑洗为宫，蕤宾为商，林钟为角，南吕为变徵，应钟为徵，黄钟为羽，太蔟为变宫。凡笛体用角律，其长者八之，短者四之，空中实容，长者十六，三宫二十一变也。伏孔四，所以便事用也。大吕之笛：正声应大吕，下徵应夷则，长二尺六寸六分三厘有奇。
现代文：第四个称为变征，比征孔更远，增加一倍使其上移的。有时增加一倍，有时减为一半，有时变为四分之一，其规则是根据琴徽来作为标准的。四个伏孔均不开孔，而衹取其长度，用以适应旨律进退、上卜的变化规则，从而使均的声音协调，使用较为方便。阂这些孔都隐而不见，故称为伏子 。大吕之笛：其正声与大吕相应，下征与夷则相应，长二尺六寸六分三厘多。《周语》说： 第一间的大吕是帮助疏通事物的。 
English: The fourth is called the variation, which is farther than the sound hole, and it is doubled to make it move up. Sometimes it is doubled, sometimes it is reduced to half, and sometimes it becomes a quarter, and the rule is based on the harp emblem as the standard. The four sound holes do not open the hole, but the length is taken to adapt to the rule of change of the eulogy, so that the equal sound is coordinated and it is more convenient to use. These holes are invisible, so it is called the fuse. The flute of the Great Lu: its positive sound corresponds to the Great Lu, and the lower sound corresponds to the lower sound, and it is more than two feet

古文：太蔟之笛：正声应太蔟，下徵应南吕，长二尺五寸三分一厘有奇。
现代文：太蔟之笛：其正声与太蔟相应，下征与南吕相应，长：尺五寸二分八厘多。
English: Taiko's flute: its positive tone corresponds to Taiko, its downward stroke corresponds to Nanryu, and its length is more than 1.5 meters.

古文：夹钟之笛：正声应夹钟，下徵应无射，长二尺四寸。
现代文：《周语》： 太蔟用金属制的乐器演奏，是要佐助阳气脱离滞留状态。 夹钟之笛：其正声与夹钟相应，下征与无射相应，长二尺四寸。
English: "Zhou Yu": Taiko plays with metal musical instruments to help the yang out of the state of stagnation.The bell's flute: its positive sound corresponds to the bell, the downward stroke corresponds to the no shot, and it is two feet four inches long.

古文：姑洗之笛：正声应姑洗，下徵应应钟，长二尺二寸三分三厘有奇。
现代文：《周语》说： 第二间的夹钟，出现四条细隙缝。 姑洗之笛：其正声与姑洗相应，下征与应钟相应，长二尺二寸四分七厘多。
English: "Zhou Yu" said: The second clamped bell has four small gaps. The flute of the dowager: its positive sound corresponds to the dowager, and the downward call corresponds to the answering bell. It is more than two feet, two inches, four minutes and seven percent long.

古文：蕤宾之笛，正声应蕤宾，下徵应大吕，长三尺九寸九分五厘有奇。
现代文：《周语》说： 姑洗使各种事物美好整洁，敬献神明和接待宾客。 中吕之笛：其止声与中吕相应，下征与黄钟相应，长二尺一寸三分三厘多。《周语》说： 第三间的中吕宣发中气。 
English: Qibin's flute, the positive tone should be in accordance with the Qibin melody, the lower tone should be in accordance with the Great Lu melody, the length is three feet, nine inches, nine and a half percent hanging zero.

古文：林钟之笛：正声应林钟，下徵应太蔟，长三尺七寸九分二厘有奇。
现代文：蕤宾之笛：其正声与蕤宾相应，下征与大吕相应，长三尺九寸九分五厘多。
English: Qibin's flute: its positive tone corresponds to Qibin, and its downward stroke corresponds to Dalu. It is more than three feet, nine inches, nine and a half centimeters long.

古文：夷则之笛：正声应夷则，下徵应夹钟，长三尺六寸。
现代文：《周语》说： 蕤宾使神人安静，互相敬酒。 变宫之几比宫声孔近，故采取加倍或减半的办法使其下移，以便使用。林钟也是这样。
English: "Zhou Yu" said: "The guests make the gods and mortals quiet and toast each other. The number of the changing palace is closer than the palace sound hole, so they take the method of doubling or halving it to move it down so that it can be used. Lin Zhong is also like this.

古文：南吕之笛，正声应南吕，下徵应姑洗，长三尺三寸七分。
现代文：林钟之笛：其正声与林钟相应，下征与太蔟相应，长三尺七寸九分二厘多。
English: Lin Zhong's flute: its positive tone corresponds to Lin Zhong, and its downward stroke corresponds to Taiko, and its length is more than three feet seven inches nine point two percent.

古文：无射之笛：正声应无射，下徵应中吕，长三尺二寸。
现代文：无射之笛：其正声与无射相应，下征与中吕相应，长三尺二寸。
English: No-shoot flute: its positive tone corresponds to no-shoot, and its downward stroke corresponds to mid-bow, and it is 3 feet 2 inches long.

古文：应钟之笛：正声应应钟，下徵应蕤宾，长五尺九寸九分六厘有奇。
现代文：《周语》说： 无射传扬才智超群的人的美德，要人们遵守向往。 应钟之笛：其正声与应镊相应，下征与蕤宾相应，长二尺九寸九分六厘多。
English: "Zhouyu" said: to spread the virtues of people with extraordinary talents and intelligence, and people should abide by the yearning.Ying Zhong's flute: its positive tone corresponds to Ying Zheng, and its lower tone corresponds to Zheng Bin, with a length of more than two feet, nine inches, nine minutes and six percent.

古文：勖又以魏杜夔所制律吕，检校太乐、总章、鼓吹八音，与律乖错。
现代文：《周语》说： 第六间的应钟其均对乐器的使用方便，使其响应回复。 茎垦又根据蕴厘丛壁对音律所作的规定，对太乐、总章、鼓吹以及八音乐器进行检验校正，它们都与音律不符。
English: "Zhouyu" said: The sixth section of the bell is convenient for the use of musical instruments, so that it responds to the reply; the stem and the rim are also in accordance with the provisions made by the Yuri Congbi on the musical rhythm, and the Tai Le, the general chapter, the propaganda and the eight musical instruments are inspected and corrected, and they are all inconsistent with the musical rhythm.

古文：始知后汉至魏，尺度渐长于古四分有余。夔依为律吕，故致失韵。
现代文：这样就知道从后汉到魏尺的长度逐渐比古代长了四分多，杜夔用这一尺度来制作律管声音就有了变化。
English: In this way, it is known that from the Later Han to the Wei Dynasty, the length of the shaku gradually increased by more than a quarter compared to ancient times, and there was a change in the way cuckoos used this scale to produce rhotic sound.

古文：乃部佐著作郎刘恭依《周礼》更积黍起度，以铸新律。
现代文：于是就安排佐着作郎型苤根据《周礼》中的记述重新排列黍粒来确定尺度，以制作新的律管。
English: Therefore, it was decided to make a new ritsukan by rearranging the rhizomes according to the description in "Zhouli" to determine the scale.

古文：既成，募求古器，得周时玉律，比之不差毫厘。
现代文：制成后又征求古代的器物，得到凰伐的玉制律管，两者相比丝毫不差。
English: After it was made, the ancient utensils were solicited, and the jade-made law pipe of the phoenix was obtained, which was no worse than the other two.

古文：又汉世故钟，以律命之，不叩而自应。
现代文：另外有选伐的古钟，吹响相应的音律，占钟在不敲击时也有反应。
English: In addition, there is a selected ancient bell, which blows the corresponding melody, and the divining bell also reacts when it is not struck.

古文：初，勖行道，逢赵郡商人县铎于牛，其声甚韵。
现代文：当年荀勖在路上遇到赵郡的商人将铎挂在牛身上，其声音很为和谐。
English: That year, a merchant from Zhao County met a yakitori on the road and hung the yakitori on a cow. The sound was very harmonious.

古文：至是搜得此铎，以调律吕焉。
现代文：于是收集到该铎以调整音律。
English: So the cymbals were collected to adjust the rhythm.

古文：晋武帝以勖律与周、汉器合，乃施用之。
现代文：晋基壶时因为：堑鱼的音律规定与周代、汉代的古器相合，就使用了它。
English: When making the Jinki pot, it was used because: the melody of the eel matches that of ancient vessels from the Zhou and Han dynasties.

古文：散骑侍郎阮咸讥其声高，非兴国之音。咸亡后，掘地得古铜尺，果长勖尺四分，时人咸服其妙。
现代文：散骑侍郎阮咸说它的声音太高，不是使国家兴旺的声音阮咸去世后在挖地时得到一把古铜尺，果然要比荀勖的尺长四分，当时大家都佩服苟勖的高明。
English: After the death of Nguyn Ánh, he was given a bronze ruler when he was digging in the ground. It was indeed four minutes longer than the dragon's ruler. At that time, everyone admired Nguyn Ánh's skill.

古文：元康中，裴頠以为医方民命之急，而称两不与古同，为害特重，宜因此改治权衡。
现代文：亘堡年间，寻逝认为医生的处方是救百姓性命之急的，而重量单位与古代不同，产生了严重的坏影响，需要对重量制度进行改革整治。
English: During the Wancheng period, it was believed that the doctor's prescription was urgent to save people's lives, and the unit of weight, unlike the ancient times, had a serious negative impact, and the weight system needed to be reformed and rectified.

古文：不见省。
现代文：这一意见未能上报
English: I wrote to them, but there was no answer.

古文：黄钟箱笛，晋时三尺八寸。元嘉九年，太乐令钟宗之减为三尺七寸。
现代文：黄钟箱笛，置伐时长三尺八寸，元嘉九年时太乐令钟宗之将其减为三尺七寸。
English: The yellow bell box flute, which was originally 3 feet 8 inches long, was reduced to 3 feet 7 inches by Emperor Taile in the 9th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：十四年，治书令吏奚纵又减五分，为三尺六寸五分。
现代文：元嘉十四年治书令史奚纵又减短了五分，成为三尺六寸五分。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, the length of the imperial standard was shortened by another five minutes, to three feet six inches and five minutes.

古文：太蔟箱笛，晋时三尺七寸，宗之减为三尺三寸七分，纵又减一寸一分，为三尺二寸六分。
现代文：列和说： 束箱长笛长四 太蔟箱笛，晋代时长三尺七寸，钟宗之减为三尺三寸七分，奚纵又减去一寸一分，为三尺二寸六分。
English: Lianhe said, "The bundle box flute is four times the length of the taiko box flute, and the length of the Jin Dynasty is three feet seven inches, the reduction of the bell is three feet three inches and seven minutes, and the escapement is one inch and one minute, and it is three feet two inches and six minutes.

古文：姑洗箱笛，晋时三尺五寸，宗之减为二尺九寸七分，纵又减五分，为二尺九寸二分。
现代文：姑洗箱笛，晋代时长三尺五寸，钟宗之减为二尺九寸七分，奚纵又将其减去五分，为二尺九寸二分。
English: In the Jinshan period, the length of the box flute was reduced from 3'5" to 2'9.7" for the bell and 5'5" to 2'9.2" for the escapement.

古文：蕤宾箱笛，晋时二尺九寸，宗之减为二尺六寸，纵又减二分，为二尺五寸八分。
现代文：蕤宾箱笛，晋代时长二尺九寸，钟宗之减为二尺六寸，奚纵又将其减去两分，为二尺五寸八分。
English: Gongbin box flute, the length of the Jin Dynasty is two feet nine inches, the bell is reduced to two feet six inches, and the escapement is reduced by two points, to two feet five inches eight points.

