古文：十有八年春，白狄来。
现代文：十八年春季，白狄第一次来鲁国。
English: In the spring of 18th, Bai Di came to Russia for the first time.

古文：夏，晋人执卫行人石买。
现代文：夏季，晋国人拘捕了卫国的行人石买。
English: In the summer, the people of Jin arrested a pedestrian who was buying stones to defend the country.

古文：秋，齐师伐我北鄙。
现代文：秋季，齐国军队攻打我国北面边境。
English: In autumn, the Qi army attacked the northern border of our country.

古文：冬十月，公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子，同围齐。
现代文：冬季十月，襄公会合晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子一起围困齐国。
English: In the winter of October, the Xiang Gong gathered Jin Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Cao Bo, Zou Zi, Zou Zi, Teng Zi, Xue Bo, Zou Bo and Xiao Zou Zi together to besiege Qi.

古文：曹伯负刍卒于师。
现代文：曹伯负刍在军中去世。
English: Cao Bozhong died in the army.

古文：楚公子午帅师伐郑。
现代文：楚国公子午率领军队攻打郑国。
English: Prince Zi Wu of Chu led an army to attack Zheng.

古文：十八年春，白狄始来。
现代文：十八年春季，白狄第一次来鲁国。
English: In the spring of 18th, Bai Di came to Russia for the first time.

古文：夏，晋人执卫行人石买于长子，执孙蒯于纯留，为曹故也。
现代文：夏季，晋国人在长子拘捕了卫国的行人石买，在纯留拘捕了孙蒯，这是为了曹国的缘故。
English: In the summer, the people of Jin arrested the eldest son of the pedestrians in the defense of the country, and arrested Sun Yat-sen in Chunliu, which was for the sake of Cao.

古文：秋，齐侯伐我北鄙。
现代文：秋季，齐灵公进攻我国北部边境。
English: In autumn, Qiling attacked the northern border of our country.

古文：中行献子将伐齐，梦与厉公讼，弗胜；公以戈击之，首队于前，跪而戴之，奉之以走，见梗阳之巫皋。
现代文：中行献子准备进攻齐国，梦见和晋厉公争讼，没有胜诉。晋厉公用戈打他，脑袋在前面掉下来，跪下来安在脖子上，两手捧着他的头走路，见到梗阳的巫皋。
English: Zhong Xing Xianzi was preparing to attack Qi, and he dreamed of a dispute with Jin Liguo, but he did not win the case. Jin Liguo beat him with a club, his head fell down in front of him, he knelt down and put it on his neck, he walked with his head in his hands, and he saw the sorceress of Yiyang.

古文：他日见诸道，与之言，同。
现代文：过了几天，在路上遇见巫皋，中行献子和他谈起做梦的情况，居然和巫皋梦见的相同。
English: A few days later, he met Moxie on the road. Zhong Xing Xianzi talked to him about the dream situation, which was actually the same as Moxie's dream.

古文：巫曰： 今兹主必死，若有事于东方，则可以逞。 
现代文：巫皋说： 今年您一定要死，如果在东边有战事，那是可以如愿的。 
English: The sorceress said, "This year you must die. If there is a war in the East, then your wish will come true."

古文：献子许诺。
现代文：中行献子答应了。
English: Zhonghang Zhenzi agreed.

古文：晋侯伐齐，将济河。献子以朱丝系玉二瑴而祷曰： 齐环怙恃其险，负其众庶，弃好背盟，陵虐神主。
现代文：晋平公发兵进攻齐国，将要渡过黄河，中行献子用朱丝系着两对玉而祷告说： 齐国的环靠着地形险要，仗着人多，丢弃好友违背盟誓，欺凌虐待百姓。
English: Jin Ping Gong sent soldiers to attack Qi, and they were about to cross the Yellow River. Zhong Xing Xianzi tied two pairs of beads with jade and prayed, saying, "The ring of Qi is surrounded by dangerous terrain, surrounded by many people, abandoning friends, breaking oaths, bullying and abusing the people.

古文：曾臣彪将率诸侯以讨焉，其官臣偃实先后之。苟捷有功，无作神羞，官臣偃无敢复济。
现代文：陪臣彪将要率领诸侯去讨伐，他的官臣偃在前后辅助，如果得到成功，不要使神灵羞耻，官臣偃不敢再次渡河。
English: His attendant Biao will lead the lords to fight, and his officials and ministers will support him. If he succeeds, don't shame the gods. The officials and ministers won't dare to cross the river again.

古文：唯尔有神裁之！ 
现代文：惟你神灵加以制裁。 
English: Except for the sanction of your gods.

古文：沈玉而济。
现代文：把玉沉入黄河然后渡河。
English: Sink the ball into the Yellow River and then cross the river.

古文：冬十月，会于鲁济，寻湨梁之言，同伐齐。齐侯御诸平阴，堑防门而守之，广里。
现代文：冬季，十月，鲁襄公和晋平公、宋平公、卫殇公、郑简公、曹成公、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在鲁国济水上会见，重温湨梁的盟誓，一起进攻齐国。齐灵公在平阴抵御，在防门外挖壕据守，壕沟的长度有一里。
English: In the winter, in October, Prince Lu Xiang and Prince Jin Ping, Prince Song Ping, Prince Weizong, Prince Zheng Jian, Prince Cao Cheng, Prince Nanzi, Prince Nanzi, Prince Tengzi, Prince Xue Bo, Prince Nanzi and Prince Xiao Nanzi met on the Jishui River in the State of Lu, revisited the oath of Nuliang, and attacked the State of Qi together. Prince Qiling resisted in the shade of the moon, dug a trench outside the gate and defended it. The trench was one mile long.

古文：夙沙卫曰： 不能战，莫如守险。 
现代文：夙沙卫说： 如果不能作战，还不如扼守险要为好。 
English: Basha Wei said: If we cannot fight, it is better to hold on to the danger.

古文：弗听。
现代文：齐灵公不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：诸侯之士门焉，齐人多死。
现代文：诸侯的士兵进攻防门，齐军战死很多人。
English: The soldiers of the princes attacked the defense gate, and many people were killed by the Qi army.

古文：范宣子告析文子曰： 吾知子，敢匿情乎？
现代文：范宣子告诉析文子说： 我了解您，难道敢隐瞒情况吗？
English: Fan Xuan Zi told the analyst, "I know you, do you dare to hide the situation?

古文：鲁人、莒人皆请以车千乘自其乡入，既许之矣。
现代文：鲁国人、莒国人都请求带一千辆战车从他们那里一往西北，一往东北打进去，我们已经答应了。
English: The people of Lu and Shan both asked us to take a thousand chariots from them and drive northwest and northeast, and we have agreed.

古文：若入，君必失国。
现代文：如果攻进来，贵国君王必然丢掉国家。
English: If they invade, your king will lose his country.

古文：子盍图之？ 
现代文：您何不考虑一下！ 
English: Why don't you think about it!

古文：子家以告公，公恐。
现代文：析文子把这些话告诉齐灵公，齐灵公听了十分恐惧。
English: He told these words to Qi Linggong, and Qi Linggong was very frightened.

古文：晏婴闻之曰： 君固无勇，而又闻是，弗能久矣。 
现代文：晏婴听到了，说： 国君本来没有勇气，而又听到了这些话，活不了多久了。 
English: When the baby heard this, he said, "The Emperor didn't have the courage originally, but now that he has heard these words, he won't live much longer."

古文：齐侯登巫山以望晋师。
现代文：齐灵公登上巫山观望晋。
English: Qilinggong climbed up Wushan Mountain to watch.

古文：晋人使司马斥山泽之险，虽所不至，必旆而疏陈之。
现代文：晋国人派司马排除山林河泽的险阻，虽然是军队达不到的地方，也一定树起大旗而稀疏地布置军阵。
English: The Jin people sent Sima to eliminate the dangerous obstacles of mountains, forests and rivers. Although it was a place that the army could not reach, they must also raise a large flag and sparsely arrange the army.

古文：使乘车者左实右伪，以旆先，舆曳柴而从之。
现代文：让战车左边坐上真人而右边放上伪装的人，用大旗前导，战车后面拖上木柴跟着走。
English: Let the real person sit on the left side of the chariot and the disguised person on the right side, lead with a large flag, drag firewood behind the chariot and follow.

古文：齐侯见之，畏其众也，乃脱归。
现代文：齐灵公看到，害怕晋军人多，就离开军队脱身回去。
English: Seeing that many Jin soldiers were afraid of him, Qilinggong left the army and went back.

古文：丙寅晦，齐师夜遁。
现代文：二十九日，齐军夜里逃走。
English: On the 29th, the Qi army fled in the night.

古文：师旷告晋侯曰： 鸟乌之声乐，齐师其遁？ 
现代文：师旷告诉晋平公说： 乌鸦的声音愉快，齐军恐怕逃走了。 
English: Shi Yu told Jin Ping Gong: "The crow's voice is happy, and I'm afraid the Qi army has fled.

古文：刑伯告中行伯曰： 有班马之声，齐师其遁？ 
现代文：邢伯告诉中行献子说： 有马匹盘旋不进的声音，齐军恐怕逃走了。 
English: Zou Bo told Zhong Xing Xianzi that: There was a sound of horses circling and not advancing. I'm afraid the Qi army has fled.

古文：叔向告晋侯曰： 城上有乌，齐师其遁？ 
现代文：叔向告诉晋平公说： 城上有乌鸦，齐军恐怕逃走了。 
English: Uncle Xiang told Jinping Gong: There are crows in the city, I'm afraid the Qi army has fled.

古文：十一月丁卯朔，入平阴，遂从齐师。
现代文：十一月初一日，晋军进入平阴，于是就追赶齐军。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the Jin army entered the twilight, so they chased the Qi army.

古文：夙沙卫连大车以塞隧而殿。
现代文：夙沙卫拉着大车，堵塞山里的小路然后自己作为殿后。
English: Basha Wei pulls the cart, blocks the mountain path and then himself as the back of the palace.

古文：殖绰、郭最曰： 子殿国师，齐之辱也。
现代文：殖绰、郭最说： 您来作为国家军队的殿后，这是齐国的耻辱。
English: Guo Zhaozhu and Guo Zhaozhu said, "You come to the palace as the national army, which is a disgrace to Qi.

古文：子姑先乎！ 
现代文：您姑且先走吧！ 
English: I'll let you go first!

古文：乃代之殿。
现代文：便代他殿后。
English: She became the queen of his court.

古文：卫杀马于隘以塞道。
现代文：夙沙卫杀了马匹放在狭路上来堵塞道路。
English: Basha Wei killed horses and put them on the narrow road to block the road.

古文：晋州绰及之，射殖绰中肩，两矢夹脰，曰： 止，将为三军获。不止，将取其衷。 
现代文：晋国的州绰追上来，用箭射殖绰，射中肩膀，两枝箭夹着脖子。州绰说： 停下别跑，你还可以被我军俘虏；不停，我将会向你心口射一箭。 
English: Jin's Zhou Qi caught up with him, shot him with an arrow, shot him in the shoulder, two arrows caught his neck. Zhou Qi said: Stop running, you can still be captured by our army; keep going, I will shoot an arrow into your heart.

古文：顾曰： 为私誓。 
现代文：殖绰回过头来说： 你发誓。 
English: Geng Yao turned around and said, "Swear it."

古文：州绰曰： 有如日！ 
现代文：州绰说： 有太阳为证！ 
English: The state motto says: The sun is the proof!

古文：乃弛弓而自后缚之。其右具丙亦舍兵而缚郭最。皆衿甲面缚，坐于中军之鼓下。
现代文：于是就把弓弦解下来而从后边捆绑殖绰的手，他的车右具丙也放下武器而捆绑郭最，都不解除盔甲从后面捆绑，他们坐在中军的战鼓下边。
English: So they untied the bowstrings and tied Genghis Khan's hands behind his back. His right-hand men also put down their weapons and tied up Guo Shan. They did not remove their armor and tied it behind their backs. They sat under the war drums of the Chinese army.

古文：晋人欲逐归者，鲁、卫请攻险。
现代文：晋国人要追赶逃兵，鲁国、卫国请求进攻险要的地方。
English: The Jin people wanted to catch up with the deserters, and the Lu and the defenders of the country asked them to attack the most dangerous places.

古文：己卯，荀偃、士匄以中军克京兹。
现代文：十三日，荀偃、士匄带领中军攻下京兹。
English: On the 13th, Zou and Shifu led the Chinese army to capture Beijing and Zhejiang.

古文：乙酉，魏绛、栾盈以下军克邿。赵武、韩起以上军围卢，弗克。
现代文：十九日，魏绛、栾盈带领下军攻下邿地；赵武、韩起带领上军包围卢地，没有攻下。
English: On the 19th, Wei Wei and Hao Ying led the army to capture Handan; Zhao Wu and Han Qi led the army to encircle Ludi, but did not capture it.

古文：十二月戊戌，及秦周伐雍门之萩。
现代文：十二月初二日，到达秦周地方，砍伐了雍门外边的萩木。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, they arrived at the Qin Zhou region and cut down the Hagi trees outside the Yongmen Gate.

古文：范鞅门于雍门，其御追喜以戈杀犬于门中。
现代文：范鞅进攻雍门，他的御者追喜用戈在门里杀死一条狗。
English: Fan Ye attacked Yongmen, and his driver, He He, killed a dog in the gate with a club.

古文：孟庄子斩其橁以为公琴。
现代文：孟庄子砍下橁木制作颂琴。
English: Meng Zhuangzi chopped down the elm tree to make a carol.

古文：己亥，焚雍门及西郭、南郭。
现代文：初三日，放火烧毁了雍门和西边、南边的外城。
English: On the third day of the first month, the Yongmen and the western and southern outskirts of the city were set on fire.

古文：刘难、士弱率诸侯之师焚申池之竹木。
现代文：刘难、士弱率领诸侯的军队放火烧了申池边上的竹子树木。
English: Liu Nan and Shi Weak led the armies of the princes to set fire to the bamboo trees on the edge of the pond.

古文：壬寅，焚东郭、北郭。范鞅门于扬门。
现代文：初六日，放火烧了东边、北边的外城，范鞅攻打扬门。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, they set fire to the outer city on the east and north, and Fan Yu attacked Yangmen.

古文：州绰门于东闾，左骖迫还于门中，以枚数阖。
现代文：州绰攻打东闾，左边的骖马由于拥挤而不能前进，回到门里盘旋，停留很久，把城门门扇上的铜钉都数清楚了。
English: The state trooper attacked the east gate, the horse on the left could not advance because of the crowding, circled back to the gate, stayed for a long time, and counted the copper nails on the gate of the gate.

古文：齐侯驾，将走邮棠。
现代文：齐灵公驾了车，准备逃到邮棠去。
English: Mr. Qi Ling drove his car and prepared to flee to Postang.

古文：大子与郭荣扣马，曰： 师速而疾，略也。将退矣，君何惧焉！
现代文：太子和郭荣牵住马，说： 诸侯的兵行动快速而且勇敢，这是在掠取物资，将要退走了，君王害怕什么？
English: The prince and Guo Rong held their horses and said, "The soldiers of the princes are acting quickly and bravely. They are looting materials and will retreat. What is the king afraid of?"

古文：且社稷之主，不可以轻，轻则失众。
现代文：而且国家之主不能逃走，逃走就会失去大众。
English: Moreover, the head of state cannot run away. If he does, he will lose the public.

古文：君必待之。 
现代文：君王一定要等着！ 
English: The king must wait!

古文：将犯之，大子抽剑断鞅，乃止。
现代文：齐灵公准备冲向前去，太子抽出剑来砍断马缰，这才停了下来。
English: Qilinggong prepared to rush forward, but the prince pulled out his sword to cut off the horse's bridle, and then he stopped.

古文：甲辰，东侵及潍，南及沂。
现代文：初八日，诸侯的军队向东边进攻到达潍水，南边到达沂水。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the armies of the princes attacked to the east and reached Surabaya, and to the south they reached Surabaya.

古文：郑子孔欲去诸大夫，将叛晋而起楚师以去之。
现代文：郑国的子孔想要除掉大夫们，准备背叛晋国然后发动楚国军队来除掉他们。
English: Zheng's Zikong wanted to get rid of the doctors, prepared to betray Jin and then unleashed the Chu army to get rid of them.

古文：使告子庚，子庚弗许。
现代文：派人告诉子庚，子庚不答应。
English: He sent someone to tell Zi Geng, but Zi Geng did not agree.

古文：楚子闻之，使杨豚尹宜告子庚曰： 国人谓不穀主社稷，而不出师，死不从礼。
现代文：楚康王听说了这件事，派扬豚尹宜告诉子庚说： 国内的人们认为我主持国政而不出兵，死后就不能用规定的礼仪安葬祭祀。
English: When King Chu Kang heard about this, he sent the pig Yin Yi to tell Zi Geng that: People in the country think that I preside over state affairs without sending troops, and after death I cannot be buried with the prescribed etiquette.

古文：不穀即位，于今五年，师徒不出，人其以不穀为自逸，而忘先君之业矣。
现代文：我即位后，到现在五年，军队不出动，人们恐怕认为我只顾自己安逸而忘了先君的霸业了。
English: After my accession to the throne, until now five years, the army does not move, I am afraid that people think that I only care about my own comfort and have forgotten the hegemony of my predecessor.

古文：大夫图之！
现代文：大夫考虑一下，怎么办？ 
English: Doctor, think about it!

古文：其若之何？ 子庚叹曰： 君王其谓午怀安乎！
现代文：子庚叹气说： 君王恐怕认为午是贪图安逸吧！
English: Zi Geng sighed and said, "I'm afraid the king thinks the afternoon is a time to seek comfort."

古文：吾以利社稷也。 
现代文：我这样做是为了有利于国家啊。 
English: I'm doing this for the good of the country.

古文：见使者，稽首而对曰： 诸侯方睦于晋，臣请尝之。
现代文：接见使者，叩头然后回答： 诸侯正和晋国和睦，下臣请求试探一下。
English: He received the envoy, bowed before him, and then replied, "The lords are making peace with the Jin Dynasty, and the vassals have asked me to probe into the matter."

古文：若可，君而继之。
现代文：如果可行，君王就跟着来。
English: If it were possible, the king would follow.

古文：不可，收师而退，可以无害，君亦无辱。 
现代文：如果不行，收兵而退回去，可以没有损害，君王也不会受到羞辱。 
English: If he does not succeed, he may withdraw his army without loss, and the king will not be humiliated.

古文：子庚帅师治兵于汾。
现代文：子庚率领军队在汾地颁发武器。
English: Zi Geng led the army in handing out weapons in Handan.

古文：于是子、伯有、子张从郑伯伐齐。子孔、子展、子西守。
现代文：当时子蟜、伯有、子张跟从郑简公进攻齐国，子孔、子展、子西留守。
English: At that time, Zihong, Bo You and Zizhang followed Zheng Jiankong to attack Qi, while Zikong, Zizhan and Zixi stayed behind.

古文：二子知子孔之谋，完守入保。
现代文：子展、子西两个人知道子孔的策略，就加强守备入城坚守。
English: Knowing Zikong's strategy, Zotan and Zixi strengthened their defenses and entered the city.

古文：子孔不敢会楚师。
现代文：子孔不敢和楚军会合。
English: Zikong did not dare to join the Chu army.

古文：楚师伐郑，次于鱼陵。
现代文：楚军进攻郑国，驻扎在鱼陵。
English: The Chu army attacked Zheng and was stationed in Yulong.

古文：右师城上棘，遂涉颍，次于旃然。
现代文：右翼部队在上棘筑城，就徒步渡过颍水，驻扎在旃然水边。
English: The right-wing troops built a city in Shangxian, crossed the Yanshui River on foot, and stationed themselves at the edge of the Yanshan River.

古文：子冯、公子格率锐师侵费滑、胥靡、献于、雍梁，右回梅山，侵郑东北，至于虫牢而反。
现代文：蒍子冯、公子格率领精锐部队攻打费滑、胥靡、献于、雍梁，向右绕过梅山，入侵郑国东北部，到达虫牢然后回去。
English: Xun Zi Feng and Gong Zi Ge led the elite troops to attack Fei Sui, Sui Hui, Xian Yu and Yong Liang, bypass Meishan to the right, invade the northeast of Zheng Guo, reach the insect prison and then go back.

古文：子庚门于纯门，信于城下而还。
现代文：子庚进攻纯门，在城下住了两晚然后回去。
English: Zi Geng attacked Chunmen, stayed two nights under the castle and then went back.

古文：涉于鱼齿之下，甚雨及之，楚师多冻，役徒几尽。
现代文：军队渡过鱼齿山下的滍水，遇到大雨，楚军大多被冻坏，服杂役的人几乎死光。
English: The army crossed the floodwaters under the Fish Tooth Mountain and encountered heavy rain. Most of the Chu army was frozen, and almost all the people who served as attendants died.

古文：晋人闻有楚师，师旷曰： 不害。
现代文：晋国人听到楚国出兵，师旷说： 没有妨害。
English: When the people of Jin heard that Chu dispatched troops, Shi Yuan said: There is no obstruction.

古文：吾骤歌北风，又歌南风。
现代文：我屡次歌唱北方的曲调，又歌唱南方的曲调。
English: Time and again I have sung the tune of the north and the tune of the south.

古文：南风不竞，多死声。
现代文：南方的曲调不强，象征死亡的声音很多。
English: Southern tunes are not strong, and there are many sounds that symbolize death.

古文：楚必无功。 
现代文：楚国一定不能建功。 
English: The state of Chu must not make any contributions.

古文：董叔曰： 天道多在西北，南师不时，必无功。 
现代文：董叔说： 天象在于西北。南方的军队不合天时，一定不能建功。 
English: Uncle Dong said: The celestial body is in the northwest. When the southern army does not suit the celestial body, it must not make contributions.

古文：叔向曰： 在其君之德也。 
现代文：叔向说： 决定胜负还在于他们国君的德行。 
English: Uncle Xiang said: It is the virtue of their sovereign that decides whether they win or lose.

