古文：儒林
现代文：如今的儒学，本是承继古时的六经之学。
English: Today's Confucianism is based on the ancient Six Classics.

古文：伏曼容何佟之严植之司马筠卞华崔灵恩
现代文：以此来弘扬王化匡正风俗，这是王者治国的首要之举。自从秦氏焚书坑儒，儒道因之亡缺。
English: This was the king's first move in governing the country to promote the orthodox customs of Wang Huakong. Since the Qin Dynasty burned the books of Confucianism, Confucianism has been in short supply.

古文：孔佥卢广沈峻孔子驱皇侃沈洙戚衮郑灼全缓
现代文：到汉武帝时，开设学校，立五经博士，设置弟子生员，分设科目进行策问，并以官禄相鼓励，因此传习儒学者便越来越多了。
English: When Emperor Hanwu came, he opened a school, established the Five Classics Doctorate, set up disciples and students, set up subjects for questioning, and encouraged them with official positions. As a result, there are more and more Confucian scholars.

古文：张讥顾越沈不害王元规伏曼容字公仪，平昌安丘人，晋着作郎滔之曾孙也。
现代文：此后的太学生徒，经常有上万人，各郡国的学校也处处满员，那些自学于山野的人，也都来加入其行列。
English: Since then, there have often been tens of thousands of Taisei students, and schools in every prefecture and country have been full. Those who have learned from the mountains and fields have also come to join their ranks.

古文：父胤之，宋司空主簿。
现代文：所以自两汉荐举贤人，都是根据其经术如何。
English: His father, Fuchin, was the chief secretary of the Song Dynasty.

古文：曼容早孤，与母兄客居南海。
现代文：到魏正始年间以后，改为崇尚玄虚，无论公卿士庶，少有人能通经术。
English: Fuman Rong lost his father at a very early age. He lives with his mother and elder brother in Nanhai.

古文：少笃学，善老、易，倜傥好大言。
现代文：当时荀靑、挚虞等人，虽然也曾议及创尊儒之制，但没有人能够改换当时的风气。从此中原溃败，礼义沉沦。
English: At that time, although the creation of the Confucianism system was also discussed by Yu, Jingyu, and others, no one was able to change the culture at that time. From then on, Central Plains was defeated, and propriety sank.

古文：常云： 何晏疑易中九事，以吾观之，晏了不学也。
现代文：等到东晋偏安江左，自身难保，也就顾不上这些。
English: When the East Jin Dynasty was on the right side of the Yangtze River, and it was difficult to protect themselves, they could not take these things into account.

古文：故知平叔有所短。 聚徒教授以自业。
现代文：这种状况一直到宋、齐，国家的学校虽然有时也开办，然而勉励督导不够，难以维持到十年以上，只不过作一时文饰而已。
English: This situation lasted until the Song and Qi dynasties. Although state schools were sometimes opened, the encouragement and supervision were not enough, and it was difficult to maintain them for more than ten years. It was just a temporary decoration.

古文：爲骠骑行参军。
现代文：当时各地乡间无人开馆讲学，公卿也少有通经术的。
English: At that time, there was no one in the countryside to open a lecture hall, and there were few court nobles who were versed in the art.

古文：宋明帝好周易，尝集朝臣于清暑殿讲，诏曼容执经。曼容素美风采，明帝恒以方嵇叔夜，使吴人陆探微画叔夜像以赐之。
现代文：朝廷大儒，只是自学而不肯培养徒众，后生晚辈孤陋寡闻，抱着经书而没地方听人讲授，大道郁闭不通实在太久了。
English: The great scholars of the imperial court were only self-taught and did not want to train disciples. The younger generation was uneducated and ignorant. They clutched scriptures and had no place to listen to lectures. The avenue was blocked for too long.

古文：爲尚书外兵郎，尝与袁粲罢朝相会言玄理，时论以爲一台二绝。升明末，爲辅国长史、南海太守，至石门作贪泉铭。
现代文：到梁武帝开创基业，很为儒道败落忧伤。天监四年，下诏开设五经学馆，建立国家的学校，总括《五经》进行讲授，设置《五经》博士各一人。
English: When Emperor Liangwu initiated the founding of Confucianism, he was very saddened by the failure of Confucianism. In the fourth year of Tianjing, he issued an edict to open the Five Classics Academy, establish a national school, summarize the "Five Classics" for teaching, and set up one "Five Classics" doctor each.

古文：齐建元中，上书劝封禅，高帝以爲其礼难备，不从。
现代文：当时以平原明山宾、吴郡陆琏、吴兴沈峻、建平严植之、会稽贺蠩充任博士，各人主持一馆。
English: At that time, Pingyuan Mingshan Bin, Wugun Lujun, Wu Xing Shenjun, Jianping Yan Zhi, and He Xuan were appointed as doctors, each presiding over a hall.

古文：仕爲太子率更令，侍皇太子讲。
现代文：每馆有数百生员，供给其生活用度，其中经考核通晓经术的，马上就任为官吏，于是学习儒家经典的人云集而来。
English: There are hundreds of students in each hall, providing their living expenses. Among them, those who are proficient in Confucianism, after examination, are immediately appointed as officials, so people who study Confucian classics come in droves.

古文：卫将军王俭深相爱好，令与河内司马宪、吴郡陆澄共撰丧服义。
现代文：又选拔学生派遣到会稽云门山，向庐江何胤受学业。分派博士、祭酒到各州郡开设学校。
English: In addition, students were selected to be sent to Yunmen Mountain of the Association of Auditors, and students were sent to Lijiang Heyin to study. Doctors and sacrificial wine were sent to open schools in various states and counties.

古文：天监元年卒官，年八十二。曼容多伎术，善音律，射驭、风角、医算，莫不闲了。
现代文：七年，又下诏令皇太子、宗室、王侯都到学校受业，武帝御驾亲临，祭祀先师先圣孔子，对师生们殷勤寄语，赠束帛以慰劳，一时人才满座，济济一堂，一派奉行大道的气象。及陈武帝创立新朝，正经历天下动乱，士大夫遭难，贼寇尚未平定，敦促勉励经学之事，也就顾不上了。
English: In the seventh year, the imperial edict was issued ordering the crown prince, his family and princes to attend school. Emperor Wu personally came to the school to offer sacrifices to the first teacher, St. Confucius. He sent courteous words to the teachers and students, and gave them gifts to comfort them. At the time, the school was full of talented people, and there was a large number of students, and a group of people were following the weather of the boulevard. And Emperor Chen Wu founded the new dynasty, and the country was experiencing turmoil, the scholars were suffering, and the bandits had not yet been subdued. He urged them to study the classics, but they did not pay attention

古文：爲周易、毛诗、丧服集解，老、庄、论语义。
现代文：天嘉年间以后，逐渐设置学官，虽然广招生徒，但成就很少。
English: After the Tianjia era, academic officials were gradually set up, and although a wide range of students were recruited, there were few achievements.

古文：子暅。暅字玄曜，幼传父业，能言玄理，与乐安任昉、彭城刘曼俱知名。
现代文：所搜罗来作点缀的，也都还是梁朝遗儒。如今一并汇集起来，以作为儒林传。伏暅，字玄曜，从小就受到父亲的传授，能说玄理，与乐安人任日方、彭城人刘曼都很有名。
English: All of the items collected for decoration are also remnants of the Liang Dynasty. Today, they have been brought together to be passed down through the generations. Fuxi, the character Xuan You, was taught by his father from a young age, and can speak metaphysics. He is famous for being a member of the Le An people, Ren Nikfang, and a resident of Pengcheng, Liu Man.

古文：仕齐位东阳郡丞、鄞令。
现代文：在齐时曾任东阳郡丞、鄞县令。
English: At the time of Qi, he served as Dongyang county magistrate and Jixian county magistrate.

古文：时曼容已致仕，故频以外职处暅，令得养焉。
现代文：当时伏暅的父亲伏曼容已经辞官隐居，朝廷经常让伏暅在外任职，让他有能力赡养父母。
English: At that time, Fuxiong's father, Fuman Rong, had resigned from his post and lived in seclusion. The imperial court often allowed Fuxiong to work outside, so that he could support his parents.

古文：梁武帝践阼，兼五经博士，与吏部尚书徐勉、中书侍郎周舍总知五礼事。
现代文：梁武帝登基后，伏暅兼五经博士，和吏部尚书徐勉、中书侍郎周扌舍总管五礼之事。
English: After Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, Fuxi was also a doctor of the Five Classics, and the matter of the Five Rites was taken up by the secretary of the General Office, Shangshu Xu, and the secretary of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office, Zhou Yanshe.

古文：出爲永阳内史，在郡清洁，政务安静，郡人何贞秀等一百五十四人诣州言状，湘州刺史以闻。
现代文：伏暅又出任永阳内史，在郡时，为政十分清廉，百姓安宁，郡中人何贞秀等一百五十四人一起到州中叙说了这个情况，湘州刺史便把伏暅为政的情形上奏了朝廷。
English: Fuxi also served as the Yongyang Inner History. When he was in the county, he was a very clean politician and the people were peaceful. One hundred and fifty-four people from the county, including He Zhenxiu, went to the state middle school to report this situation. The Hunan Provincial History then played the situation of Fuxi as a politician to the imperial court.

古文：诏勘有十五事爲吏人所怀，帝善之。
现代文：皇帝下诏后发现有十五件事被吏人所怀念，皇帝很赞赏他。
English: After the emperor issued the edict, he found that there were fifteen things that were missed by the officials. The emperor appreciated him very much.

古文：徙新安太守，在郡清恪如永阳时。
现代文：伏暅升迁为新安太守，在新安，他与在永阳时同样清廉。
English: Fuxi was promoted to the position of the new governor of An. In An, he was just as incorruptible as he was in Yongyang.

古文：人赋税不登者，辄以太守田米助之。
现代文：百姓中有交不上赋税的，伏暅就用太守的公田米来帮助他们。
English: Among the common people, there were some who could not pay their taxes, so Fushun used the rice from the Emperor's fields to help them.

古文：郡多麻苎，家人乃至无以爲绳，其厉志如此。
现代文：新安郡中盛产苎麻，但伏家人却没有麻可以制作绳子，他就是这样严格地要求自己。
English: Xin'an County is rich in nettle, but Fuxin's family did not have any nettle to make rope, so he was strict with himself.

古文：属县始新、遂安、海宁并同时生爲立祠。
现代文：新安郡所属的始新、遂安、海宁三县，同时为他立祠。
English: Xin'an County belongs to the three counties of Shixin, Sui'an and Haining. At the same time, a shrine was built for him.

古文：征爲国子博士，领长水校尉。
现代文：后征召伏暅为国子博士，领长水校尉。
English: Later, Fuxi was conscripted as Dr. Guo Zi, and became the captain of the water brigade.

古文：时始兴内史何远累着清绩，武帝擢爲黄门侍郎，俄迁信武将军、监吴郡事。
现代文：当时任始兴内史的何远一直以清廉闻名，梁武帝提拔他为黄门侍郎，不久又升为信武将军，监吴郡事。
English: At that time, Ren Shixing's internal history was known for his incorruptibility. Emperor Liang Wu promoted him to Yellow Gate Attendant, and soon he was promoted to General Xinwu, Supervisor of Wu County Affairs.

古文：暅自以名辈素在远前，爲吏俱称廉白，远累见擢，暅循阶而已，意望不满，多托疾居家。
现代文：伏暅认为自己的名声和资格都在何远之前，他的清白被府吏们称赞，但何远多次被破格提拔，伏暅只是逐级提升而已。他心中不满，常托病在家中。
English: Fuxi thought that his reputation and qualifications were far ahead of him. His innocence was praised by government officials, but he was promoted many times, and Fuxi was only promoted step by step. He was dissatisfied and often nursed his illness at home.

古文：寻求假到东阳迎妹丧，因留会稽筑宅，自表解职。诏以爲豫章内史，乃出拜。
现代文：不久，他请假到东阳去为妹妹办丧事，便趁机留在了会稽，在那里盖了房子，并上表要求辞职，皇帝下诏任他为豫章内史，他才出来拜谢。
English: Not long after, he asked for leave to go to Dongyang to attend his sister's funeral. He took advantage of the opportunity to stay in the auditorium, where he built a house, and asked for his resignation on the table. The emperor decreed that he would be the internal history of Yuzhang, and he came out to give thanks.

古文：书侍御史虞暅奏曰： 风闻豫章内史伏暅，去岁啓假，以迎妹丧爲辞，因停会稽不去。
现代文：书侍御史虞日爵上奏说： 听说豫章内史伏暅，去年请假，以为妹妹办丧事为理由，趁机停留在会稽不回。
English: "I heard that Yu Zhang, a member of the Inner History Commission, took a leave of absence last year to attend his sister's funeral. He took advantage of the opportunity to stay at the Commission and did not return.

古文：入东之始，货宅卖车，以此而推，则是本无还意。
现代文：他去东阳时，卖了房屋宅院及车马，从这些现象可以看出，他那时就不打算回来了。
English: When he went to Dongyang, he sold his house, mansion, car and horse. From these phenomena, it can be seen that he did not intend to return at that time.

古文：暅历典二邦，少免贪浊，此自爲政之本，岂得称功？
现代文：伏暅曾掌管两个地方，很少贪污，这本是为政的本分，怎么能以此称功？
English: Fuxi had been in charge of two places, there was little corruption, this was the duty of politics, how can this be praised?

古文：常谓人才品望居何远之右，而远以清见擢，名位转隆。暅深怀诽怨，形于辞色。
现代文：他常说自己的才能品望在何远之上，而何远以清廉被拔擢，名望地位越来越高，伏暅深怀怨恨，在他的言语和神态中都表露出来。
English: He often said that his talent was far above his reputation, but how far he was promoted with integrity, his reputation status was getting higher and higher, and he harbored deep resentment, which was revealed in his words and demeanor.

古文：天高听卑，无私不照。去年十二月二十一日下诏曰： 国子博士、领长水校尉伏暅爲政廉平，宜加将养，勿使恚望，致亏士风，可豫章内史。 
现代文：皇上居高临下，明察秋毫，知道他的私心，在去年十二月二十一日下诏说： 国子博士、领长水校尉伏暅为政清廉公平，应加以鼓励，不要使他产生怨望，以致有损士风，可任命为豫章内史。 
English: On December 21 of last year, the Emperor, who was sitting on high, saw his every move and knew his selfishness, issued an edict saying: Dr. Kuniko and Lieutenant Fuchu, who led the Chosui regiment, were clean, honest and fair. They should be encouraged, and they should not cause resentment, which would be detrimental to the style of a scholar, and they could be appointed to the internal history of Yuanzhang.

古文：岂有人臣奉如此之诏，而不亡魂破胆，归罪有司。
现代文：哪有臣子得到这样的诏书而不吓得魂飞魄散而向有司去请罪的？
English: Which of the courtiers received such an edict without being scared out of his wits and pleading guilty to Yoshi?

古文：而冒宠不辞，吝斯苟得。
现代文：而伏暅却冒得恩宠而不辞，这种苟得之物实在令人羞耻。
English: However, Fuxi was gracious and generous, which is a shameful thing to do.

古文：故以士流解体，行路沸腾，辨迹求心，无一可恕。
现代文：所以现今士人四分五裂，路人议论纷纷，寻求和分析其心迹，没有一点可以宽恕的。
English: So now the scholar is torn apart, passers-by are discussing, seeking and analyzing his thoughts, and there is nothing to forgive.

古文：请以暅大不敬论。 
现代文：请将伏暅以大不敬论罪。 
English: Please sentence Fuxi to be treated with great disrespect.

古文：有诏勿论，暅遂得就郡。
现代文：皇帝有诏不加追究，伏暅因此得到豫章内史的职务。
English: The emperor had issued an edict not to investigate, and Fuxiong was given the post of Yuzhang's internal historian.

古文：征爲给事黄门侍郎，领国子博士，未赴卒。
现代文：伏暅又被征召为给事黄门侍郎，领国子博士，未赴任而去世。
English: Fusang was also called up to serve as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, leading Dr. Kuniko, but he died before taking up the post.

古文：初，暅父曼容与乐安任遥皆昵于齐太尉王俭，遥子昉及暅并见知。
现代文：当初，伏暅的父亲伏曼容和乐安的任遥都和齐太尉王俭很亲近，任遥的儿子任日方和伏暅也都被王俭所深知。
English: At the beginning, Fuxi's father, Fuman Rong, and Le'an's Ren Yadu were very close to Qi Taijun Wang Jian. Ren Yadu's son, Ren Yifang, and Fuxi were also well known by Wang Jian.

古文：顷之，昉才遇稍盛，齐末已爲司徒左长史，暅独滞于参军事，及终名位略相侔。
现代文：不久，任日方的才情和所遇都比较好，到齐末已担任了司徒左长史，伏暅却仍独停滞于参军事这一职务，直到死时名位才大致相符。
English: Soon, both the talent and the experience of the Japanese side were better, and by the end of the Qi Dynasty, he had served as the chief historian of the Sidu Left, but Fuxi was still stuck in the position of military participation, and until his death, the positions were roughly the same.

古文：故事，左丞无赠官者，帝特诏赠黄门侍郎，儒者荣之。
现代文：伏暅一向俭朴，使用的车马和服饰都很简陋。他表面上希望退隐和追求安宁，内心却不免有和人竞争的想法，因此受到当时人的讥讽。
English: Fuxi had always been frugal, and the car, horse and clothes he used were very simple. On the surface, he hoped to retire and pursue peace, but in his heart he inevitably had the idea of competing with others, so he was ridiculed by the people of the time.

古文：所着文章礼议百许篇。
现代文：但他能够推荐后进者，常常自以为不足，年轻的读书人因此而喜欢依靠他。
English: But his ability to recommend up-and-comers, often self-deprecatingly, means younger readers like to rely on him.

古文：子朝隐、朝晦。严植之字孝源，建平秭归人也。
现代文：伏暅的儿子叫伏挺。严植之，字孝源，建平秭归人。
English: Fuxi's son was named Futian. Yan Zhi, also known as Xiaoyuan, and Jian Ping, also known as Jian.

古文：少善庄、老，能玄言，精解丧服、孝经、论语。
现代文：年轻时精通《庄子》、《老子》，能够讲玄言，精于解读《丧服》、《孝经》、《论语》。
English: When he was young, he was proficient in "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi" and could recite aphorisms. He was also good at interpreting "Funeral Robe," "Book of Filial Piety" and "Analects."

古文：及长，遍习郑氏礼、周易、毛诗、左氏春秋。
现代文：年长之后，他遍学了郑注《礼》、《周易》、《毛诗》、《左氏春秋》。
English: When he was older, he studied Zheng Zhu's "Rite," "Zhou Yi," "Mao Shi" and "Zao Shi's Spring and Autumn."

古文：性淳孝谨厚，不以所长高人。
现代文：他性情淳朴忠厚，不因自己有特长而自以为高人一等。
English: His disposition is simple and filial, respectful and kind, and he does not rely on his own strengths to dominate others.

古文：少遭父忧，因菜食二十三载。
现代文：他幼年时父亲去世，因此有二十三年时间吃菜食。
English: His father died when he was young, so he has been a vegetarian for 23 years.

古文：仕齐爲广汉王国右常侍，仍侍王读。
现代文：在齐朝出仕时任广汉王国的右常侍，仍侍奉广汉王读书。
English: He was the right attendant of the Guanghan Kingdom when he served in the Qi Dynasty, and he still served the Guanghan King to study.

古文：及王诛，国人莫敢视，植之独奔哭，手营殡敛，徒跣送丧墓所，爲起冢，葬毕乃还。
现代文：当广汉王被杀时，国中没有人敢来看视，严植之独自奔来哭泣，亲手为他收殓殡葬，赤脚徒步把广汉王送到墓地，给他建了坟墓，葬毕才回。
English: When Guanghan Wang was killed, no one in the country dared to come to see him. Yan Zhi rushed alone to weep, personally received the funeral and burial for him, walked barefoot to the cemetery to take Guanghan Wang to the cemetery, built a grave for him, and buried him before returning.

古文：当时义之。
现代文：当时人都认为他有情义。
English: At the time, people thought he had a point.

古文：后爲康乐令。
现代文：后来任康乐县令。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Governor of Kangra County.

古文：植之在县清白，人吏称之。
现代文：严植之任县令期间十分清廉，民众和官吏们都称赞他。
English: During his tenure as county magistrate, Yan Zhi was very clean, and the people and officials all praised him.

古文：梁天监二年，诏求通儒修五礼，有司奏植之主凶礼。
现代文：梁天监二年，朝廷下诏征求精通儒学的学者以修五礼，有关方面上奏让严植之主管凶礼。
English: In the second year of Liang Tianjun, the imperial court issued an edict to solicit scholars proficient in Confucianism to perform the Five Rites, and the relevant parties reported to the head of Yan Zi.

古文：四年，初置五经博士，各开馆教授，以植之兼五经博士。
现代文：四年，首次设置《五经》博士，各自开馆教授学生，让严植之兼任《五经》博士。
English: In four years, for the first time, a "Five Classics" doctorate was set up, and each opened a library to teach students, allowing Yan Zhi to also serve as a "Five Classics" doctor.

古文：植之馆在潮沟，生徒常百数。
现代文：严植之的学馆设在潮沟，学生常常数以百计。
English: Yan Zhi's school is located in Zhaozhou, and there are often hundreds of students.

古文：讲说有区段次第，析理分明。
现代文：他在讲课时划分段落顺序，解释得条理分明。
English: He divides his lectures into a sequence of paragraphs, and his explanations are coherent.

古文：每当登讲，五馆生毕至，听者千馀人。
现代文：每当他登坛讲课时，五个学馆的学生都全部来到，听众多达一千多人。
English: Whenever he gave a lecture, all the students from the five schools came to listen, numbering more than a thousand.

古文：迁中抚记室参军，犹兼博士。
现代文：后又迁任中抚记室参军，还兼任博士。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Central Records Office, joined the army, and also served as a doctor.

古文：卒于馆。
现代文：死于学馆中。
English: He died in the gymnasium.

古文：植之自疾后便不受禀奉，妻子困乏。
现代文：严植之自从有病以后就不接受俸禄，妻子十分贫困。
English: Since his illness, Yan Zhezhi has not accepted his salary, and his wife is very poor.

古文：及卒，丧无所寄，生徒爲市宅，乃得成丧。
现代文：严植之去世时，治丧无所依靠，学生们给他买了墓地，才得以安葬。
English: When Yan Zi Zhi died, there was nothing to rely on for mourning, so the students bought him a cemetery so that he could be buried.

古文：植之性慈仁，好行阴德，在闇室未尝怠也。
现代文：严植之性情仁慈，喜欢积阴德，就是在暗处也不曾懈怠。
English: Strictly benevolent disposition, likes to accumulate virtue, even in the dark did not slacken.

古文：少尝山行，见一患者，问其姓名不能答。
现代文：年轻时曾经上山行走，遇见一位病人，问他叫什么名字都不能回答。
English: When I was young, I used to go hiking in the mountains and met a patient. When I asked him what his name was, I couldn't answer.

古文：载与俱归，爲营医药，六日而死，爲棺敛殡之，卒不知何许人也。
现代文：严植之载着他一起回家来，替他请医求药，六天以后病人死去，严植之又给他准备棺木收殓殡葬，到底也不知是什么人。
English: Yan Zhi came home with him, asked for a doctor and medicine for him. Six days later, the patient died. Yan Zi also prepared a coffin for him to receive the coffin and bury him. In the end, he did not know who he was.

古文：又尝缘栅塘行，见患人卧塘侧，问之，云 姓黄，家本荆州，爲人佣赁。
现代文：他又曾经沿着栅塘步行，遇见有个病人躺在塘边，他便问病人情况，病人说： 姓黄，家本在荆州，给人当雇工。
English: He also once walked along the Lattang and met a patient lying on the edge of the pond. He asked the patient about his condition. The patient said, "My surname is Huang, my family is from Jingzhou, and I work as a hired laborer.

古文：子驱凡着尚书义二十卷，集注尚书三十卷，续朱异集注周易一百卷，续何承天集礼论一百五十卷。
现代文：病重，船主准备出发，将我丢在岸上。 严植之听后十分伤感，便载他回家治疗，过了一年病愈。病人请求终身给他充当奴仆以报答厚恩。
English: Seriously ill, the ship's owner was about to set off and left me on the shore. After listening to Yan Zhi, he was very sad and took him home for treatment. He recovered after a year. The patient asked to be his servant for life to repay his kindness.

古文：皇侃，吴郡人，青州刺史皇象九世孙也。
现代文：严植之不肯答应，送给他钱和粮食让他回家。严植之撰有《凶礼仪注》四百七十九卷。皇侃，吴郡人，是青州刺史皇象的九世孙。
English: Wang Kan, a native of Wuxi County, is the ninth generation descendant of the Qingzhou King Elephant.

古文：少好学，师事贺瑒，精力专门，尽通其业，尤明三礼、孝经、论语。
现代文：他从小好学，以贺蠩为老师，集中精力专攻学问，几乎精通各门学业，尤其明于《三礼》、《孝经》、《论语》。
English: He was eager to learn from an early age, with He Zhen as his teacher, concentrating his energy on studying, and was proficient in almost all subjects, especially in the "Three Rites," "Filial Piety" and "Analects."

古文：爲兼国子助教，于学讲说，听者常数百人。
现代文：当他兼国子助教在学中讲课时，听的人经常多达几百人。
English: When he, who is also Kuniko's assistant teacher, gives a lecture at school, there are often several hundred people listening.

古文：撰礼记讲疏五十卷。
现代文：撰有《礼记讲疏》五十卷。
English: Authored 50 volumes of "Rites and Traditions."

古文：书成奏上，诏付秘阁。
现代文：书写成后上奏朝廷，诏令交付秘阁收藏。
English: After it was written, it was presented to the imperial court, and the edict was delivered to a secret collection.

古文：顷之，召入寿光殿说礼记义，梁武帝善之，加员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：不久，又召他进寿光殿讲说《礼记义》，梁武帝对他很好，加封他为员外散骑侍郎。
English: Not long after, Emperor Liangwu summoned him to Shouguang Palace to lecture on "The Book of Rites and Decrees." Emperor Liangwu was very kind to him and gave him the title of non-commissioned officer.

古文：侃性至孝，常日限诵孝经二十遍，以拟观世音经。
现代文：皇侃本性十分孝顺，每天规定自己要诵读二十遍《孝经》，以比之于《观世音经》。
English: The emperor's nature was very filial, and he made it a rule to recite the "Filial Piety Sutra" twenty times a day, comparing it to the "Kunseon Sutra."

古文：丁母忧还乡里，平西邵陵王钦其学，厚礼迎之。
现代文：母亲去世后他回到故乡，平西邵陵王钦佩他的学识，用厚礼来迎候他。
English: After his mother's death, he returned to his hometown. Shao Ling Wang of Pingxi admired his knowledge and greeted him with a heavy gift.

古文：乃筑室屏居，以禅诵爲事，由是传经受业者盖鲜焉。论曰：语云： 上好之，下必有甚焉者。 
现代文：当皇侃到达后，由于发了心脏病而去世。所撰写的《论语义》、《礼记义》，被世人所敬重，在学者中广为流传。评论：常言说： 上边喜好什么，下边必然有更厉害的行为。 
English: When Emperor Kan arrived, he died of a heart attack. "On Semantics" and "On Etiquette" written by Emperor Kan were respected by the world and widely circulated among scholars. Commentary: It is often said: What the upper side likes, the lower side must have more severe behavior.

古文：是以邹缨齐紫，且以移俗，况禄在其中，可无尚欤。
现代文：因此邹君佩长缨、齐桓穿紫服尚且能改变一国时尚，何况有禄位在其中，那就没有什么比这更有感召力的了。
English: For this reason, there is nothing more inspiring than the fact that a prince wearing a long robe and a king wearing a purple robe can change a country's fashion, not to mention the fact that there is a vacancy among them.

古文：当天监之际，时主方崇儒业，如崔、严、何、伏之徒，前后互见升宠，于时四方学者，靡然向风，斯亦曩时之盛也。
现代文：当天监年间，当时的君主正崇尚儒术，像崔灵恩、严植之、何佟之、伏曼容等人，前后都被提拔恩宠，当时四方的学者望风响应，可算是昔时的盛况了。
English: During the time of the celestial governor, the monarch at that time was advocating Confucianism, and people such as Cui Ling'en, Yan Zi Zhi, He Xizhi, Fu Man Rong, and others were promoted and favored. At that time, scholars in the four directions looked to the wind and responded, which can be regarded as the grand occasion of the past.

古文：自梁迄陈，年且数十，虽时经屯詖，郊生戎马，而风流不替，岂俗化之移人乎。
现代文：自梁至陈，近几十年间，虽然时事艰难坎坷，而风流儒雅流传不废，难道不是风化对人的教育改造吗。
English: From Liang to Chen, in recent decades, although the current affairs are difficult and bumpy, and the elegance and sophistication are passed down, isn't it the education and transformation of people by the weather?

古文：古人称上德若风，下应犹草，美矣，岂斯之谓也。
现代文：古人说上边的德行好比风，下边的应和就像是草，说得好啊，不就是指的这种情况吗。
English: The ancients said that the virtue above is like the wind, and the virtue below is like the grass. Well said, isn't this exactly the case?

