古文：二李元牛杨李逢吉，字虚舟，系出陇西。父颜，有锢疾，逢吉自料医剂，遂通方书。
现代文：李逢吉的字叫虚舟，陇西人。他父亲李颜，患有长期难治的病，李逢吉自己料理求医用药，就懂医书了。
English: Li Fengji's family name is Qiu Zhou and he is from Shaanxi. His father, Li Yan, suffers from a long-term incurable disease. Li Fengji learned how to use medicine by cooking his own food.

古文：举明经，又擢进士第。
现代文：他考中了明经科，又考中了进士。
English: He passed the exam of Mingjing Science, and passed the exam of Jinzhi.

古文：范希朝表为振武掌书记，荐之德宗，拜左拾遗。
现代文：范希朝任命他为振武军掌书记，又向唐德宗推荐他，于是被任命为左拾遗。
English: Fan Xichang appointed him as the secretary of the Zhenwu army, and recommended him to Tang Dezong, so he was appointed to collect relics.

古文：元和时，迁给事中、皇太子侍读。
现代文：元和年间，他升任给事中、皇太子侍读。
English: During the first half of the 19th century, he was promoted to the position of reading room attendant to the crown prince.

古文：改中书舍人，知礼部贡举。
现代文：后调任中书舍人、知礼部贡举。
English: Later, he was transferred to the middle school teacher, and then to the tribute department of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：未已事，拜门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：贡举没结束，升任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The tribute did not end, and he was promoted to the position of junior attendant and junior secretary of the same school.

古文：诏礼部尚书王播署榜。
现代文：有诏命礼部尚书王播签署贡举发榜。
English: An imperial edict ordered the etiquette department, Shangshu Wangban, to sign the tribute and release the list.

古文：逢吉性忌刻，险谲多端。
现代文：李逢吉生性忌妒别人超过自己，阴险狡猾诡计多端。
English: Li Fengji is jealous of others surpassing him, and he is insidious, cunning and tricky.

古文：及得位，务偿好恶。
现代文：到任宰相，一心满足个人好恶。
English: After taking office as prime minister, he was bent on satisfying his personal likes and dislikes.

古文：裴度讨淮西，逢吉虑成功，密图沮止，趣和议者请罢诸道兵。
现代文：裴度讨伐淮西，李逢吉怕他立功，阴谋破坏阻挠，促使主和者请求遣回各地派来的军队。
English: Pei Du fought against Huaxi, but Li Fengji was afraid that he would make a contribution, so he plotted to sabotage and obstruct, prompting the lord and master to request the repatriation of the troops sent from all over the country.

古文：宪宗知而恶之，出为剑南东川节度使。
现代文：宪宗知道后讨厌他，贬他出京城任剑南东川节度使。
English: After learning of this, Kenzong disliked him and banished him from the capital to serve as an envoy to the Jianan Dongchuan Festival.

古文：穆宗即位，徙山南东道。
现代文：穆宗登基，调他到山南东道。
English: Emperor Muzong ascended to the throne and transferred him to Shandong Province.

古文：缘讲侍恩，阴结近幸。
现代文：他依靠曾给皇帝侍读的关系，又私下巴结近侍幸臣。
English: He relied on the relationship he had with the emperor's attendant, and he was privately close to the attendant.

古文：长庆二年，召入为兵部尚书。
现代文：长庆二年，被召进京城任兵部尚书。
English: In the second year of the Long Qing Dynasty, he was called to Beijing to serve as the military secretary.

古文：时度与元稹知政，度尝条稹憸佞，逢吉以为其隙易乘，遂并中之，遣人上变，言： 和王傅于方结客，欲为稹刺度。 
现代文：当时裴度和元稹执政，裴度曾上奏说元稹谄媚奸邪，李逢吉认为他们的矛盾可利用，就同时中伤他们，派人告发说：和王傅于方结交侠客，想替元稹刺杀裴度。
English: At that time, Pei Du and Yuan Shao were in power. Pei Du had made a report that Yuan Shao was a lecherous adulterer. Li Fengji thought he could take advantage of their conflict and slandered them at the same time. He sent someone to report that Wang Fu Yufang had made friends with a knight and wanted to assassinate Pei Du on behalf of Yuan Shao.

古文：帝命尚书左仆射韩皋、给事中郑覃与逢吉参鞠方，无状，稹、度坐是皆罢，逢吉代为门下侍郎、平章事。
现代文：皇帝令尚书左仆射韩皋、给事中郑覃和李逢吉共同审讯于方，认为他行为不端，元稹、裴度为这都被罢免了。李逢吉取代裴度担任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shu's left-hand servant to shoot Han Zheng, and Zheng Zheng and Li Fengji jointly interrogated him, believing that he had misbehaved. Yuan Zheng and Pei Du were both dismissed for this. Li Fengji replaced Pei Du as a footman and a footman.

古文：因以恩爵动诡薄者，更相挺以诋伤度，于是李绅、韦处厚等诵言度为逢吉排迮，度初得留。
现代文：他又用恩惠和官爵收买品行不好的大臣轮番攻击裴度，这时李绅、韦处厚等人指出裴度受李逢吉排挤，裴度起初才能留在朝中。
English: He also attacked Pei Du in turn, using favors and lordships to bribe ministers with bad behavior. At this time, Li Sheng, Wei Shuanhuo and others pointed out that Pei Du was pushed out by Li Fengji, and Pei Du could only stay in the court at first.

古文：时已失河朔，王智兴以徐叛，李騕以汴叛，国威不振，天下延颈俟相度，而中外交章言之，帝讫不省，度遂外迁。
现代文：当时河朔已丢失了，王智兴据徐州反叛，李宀介据汴州反叛，国家威望扫地，全国人迫切希望任命裴度为宰相，朝廷内外不断上奏要求，皇帝终不省悟，裴度于是被调出京城。
English: At that time, Heshao had already been lost. Wang Zhixing rebelled according to Xuzhou, Li Shizhen rebelled according to Zhangzhou, and the national prestige was swept away. The people of the whole country desperately wanted to appoint Pei Du as prime minister. The imperial court and the outside world continued to make demands. The emperor finally did not realize, and Pei Du was transferred out of Beijing.

古文：騕平，进尚书右仆射。
现代文：李宀介被讨平后，他升任尚书左仆射。
English: After Li Jiankui was defeated, he was promoted to Shangshu Zuopuchao.

古文：帝暴疾，中外阻遏，逢吉因中人梁守谦、刘弘规、王守澄议，请立景王为皇太子，帝不能言，颔之而已。
现代文：皇帝突然患病，宫中外廷不通消息，李逢吉通过宦官梁守谦、刘弘规、王守澄提议，请求定景王做皇太子，皇帝不能说话，点头答应了。
English: The emperor suddenly fell ill, and there was no communication between the court and the outside world. Li Fengji proposed through eunuchs Liang Shouqian, Liu Hongbi, and Wang Shoucheng, and asked Dingjing Wang to be the crown prince. The emperor could not speak, but nodded and agreed.

古文：明日下诏，皇太子遂定。
现代文：第二天颁下诏书，皇太子就确定了。
English: The next day, the imperial edict was issued, and the crown prince's succession was confirmed.

古文：郑注得幸于王守澄，逢吉遣从子训赂注，结守澄为奥援，自是肆志无所惮。
现代文：郑注被王守澄宠幸，李逢吉派侄儿李训贿赂郑注，巴结王守澄做靠山，从此肆无忌惮。
English: Zheng Shou was favored by Wang Shoucheng. Li Fengji sent his nephew Li Xun to bribe Zheng Shou, and made Wang Shoucheng his patron. From then on, he was unscrupulous.

古文：其党有张又新、李续、张权舆、刘栖楚、李虞、程昔范、姜洽及训八人，而傅会者又八人，皆任要剧，故号 八关十六子 。
现代文：他的党羽有张又新、李续、张权舆、刘栖楚、李楚、李虞、程昔范、姜洽和李训八个人，巴结他们的又有八个人，都任重要职务，因此号称 八大将十六个儿子 。
English: His followers include Zhang Muxin, Li Cui, Zhang Quanzhong, Liu Qichu, Li Chu, Li Yu, Cheng Xifan, Jiang Ciao and Li Xun. There are eight of them, and eight of them are flattering them, all of whom hold important positions. Therefore, they are known as the 16 sons of the Eight Great Generals.

古文：有所求请，先赂关子，后达于逢吉，无不得所欲。
现代文：有事求情，先要买通这些人，再转告李逢吉，没有不见效的。
English: If you want to intercede, you must first buy through these people, and then tell Li Fengji. It will not be ineffective.

古文：未几，封凉国公。
现代文：不久他被封为凉国公。
English: Soon he was named Prince of Liang.

古文：敬宗新立，度求入觐，逢吉不自安，张权舆为作谶言以沮度，而韦处厚亟为帝言之，计卒不行。
现代文：敬宗刚即位，裴度请求进京朝拜，李逢吉心里不安，张权舆帮他制造谶语来中伤裴度，但韦处厚立即对皇帝分析这事，阴谋终未得逞。
English: Just after Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, Pei Du requested to go to Beijing to worship, Li Fengji was uneasy, and Zhang Quanzhong helped him create slang to slander Pei Du. However, Wei Duhou immediately analyzed the matter with the emperor, and the conspiracy was ultimately unsuccessful.

古文：有武昭者，陈留人，果敢而辩。
现代文：有个叫武昭的，是陈留县人，果断、勇敢又善辩。
English: There was a man named Wu Zhao, a native of Chenliu County, who was decisive, brave and eloquent.

古文：度之讨蔡，遣说吴元济，元济临以兵，辞不挠，厚礼遣还，度署以军职，从镇太原，除石州刺史。
现代文：裴度讨伐蔡州，派他去劝说吴元济，吴元济用兵器威胁他，他不害怕，吴元济赠厚礼送他回来，裴度任命他在军中任职，又随从镇守太原，被任命为石州刺史。
English: Pei Du campaigned in Caizhou and sent him to persuade Wu Yuanji. Wu Yuanji threatened him with weapons, but he was not afraid. Wu Yuanji sent him back with a generous gift. Pei Du appointed him to serve in the army, and he also followed the town guard of Taiyuan and was appointed as the chief historian of Shizhou.

古文：罢归不得用，怨望，与太学博士李涉、金吾兵曹参军茅汇居长安中，以气侠相许。
现代文：后被罢官回京没被任用，心里怨恨，和太学博士李涉、金吾兵曹参军茅汇住在京城里，以志向、侠义自负。
English: After he was dismissed and returned to Beijing, he was not appointed, and he harbored resentment in his heart. He lived in Beijing with Li Zhan, a doctor of Taixue, and Mao Hui, a petty officer who had joined the army, and he was proud of his ambition and chivalry.

古文：逢吉与李程同执政，不叶。
现代文：李逢吉和李程共同执政，合不来。
English: Li Fengji and Li Cheng cannot govern together.

古文：程族人仍叔谓昭曰： 丞相欲用君，顾逢吉持不可。 
现代文：李程的亲戚李仍叔对武昭说： 李宰相想任用你，但李逢吉不赞成。 
English: Li Cheng's relative, Li Yingxu, said to Wu Zhao: Prime Minister Li wants to appoint you, but Li Fengji does not approve.

古文：昭愈愤，酒所，语其友刘审，欲刺逢吉。
现代文：武昭更生气了，喝酒时，对他们的朋友刘审说，想刺杀李逢吉。
English: Wu Zhao became even more angry. While drinking, he told their friend Liu Xian that he wanted to assassinate Li Fengji.

古文：审窃语权舆，逢吉因汇召见昭，厚相结纳，忿隙得解。
现代文：刘审私下告诉了张权舆，李逢吉通过茅汇叫武昭去见面，送厚礼结交，矛盾消除了。
English: Liu Xian privately told Zhang Quanzhong that Li Fengji had called Wu Zhao through Mao Hui to meet, send a gift and make friends, and the contradiction was eliminated.

古文：逢吉素厚待汇，尝与书曰： 足下当以 自求 字仆，吾当以 利见 字君。 
现代文：李逢吉一向对茅汇很好，曾写信给他说： 你应称我为知己，我就称你为好友。 
English: Li Fengji has always been very kind to Mao Hui, and once wrote to him: You should call me your confidant, and I will call you my friend.

古文：辞颇猥昵。
现代文：言词很亲热。
English: The words were very intimate.

古文：及度将还，复命人发昭事。
现代文：到裴度将回朝廷，李逢吉又派人告发武昭之事。
English: When Pei Du was about to return to the imperial court, Li Fengji sent someone to inform Wu Zhao.

古文：由是昭、汇皆下狱，命御史中丞王播按之。
现代文：为这武昭、茅汇都被抓进监狱，皇帝令御史中丞王播审讯他们。
English: Both Wu Zhao and Mao Hui were taken to prison for this, and the emperor ordered the court historian Zhongzheng Wang Xuan to interrogate them.

古文：训讽汇使诬昭与李程同谋，不然且死。
现代文：李训暗示茅汇诬告武昭和李程合谋，否则将丢命。
English: Li Xun hinted that Mao Hui falsely accused Wu Shou Li Cheng of conspiracy, otherwise he would lose his life.

古文：汇不可，曰： 诬人以自免，不为也！ 
现代文：茅汇不同意说： 诬告别人解脱自己，我不干！ 
English: Mao Hui disagreed and said, "I won't accuse others falsely to free myself!

古文：狱成，昭榜死，汇流崖州，涉康州，仍叔贬道州司马，训流象州。
现代文：案子判决后，武昭被处死了，茅汇流放到崖州，李涉流放到康州，李仍叔贬任道州司马，李训流放到象州。
English: After the case was adjudicated, Wu Zhao was executed, Mao Hui was exiled to Yanzhou, Li Wu was exiled to Kangzhou, Li Yanzhong was appointed as Sima of Daozhou, and Li Xun was exiled to Xiangzhou.

古文：擢审长寿主簿。
现代文：刘审升任长奉县主簿。
English: Liu Xun was promoted to the post of chief magistrate of the county.

古文：而逢吉谋益露。
现代文：李逢吉的阴谋更加暴露了。
English: Li Fengji's plot was further exposed.

古文：昭死，人皆冤之。
现代文：武昭死了，人们都认为他冤枉。
English: Takeaki is dead, and people think he was wronged.

古文：初，逢吉兴昭狱以止度入而不果，天子知度忠，卒相之。
现代文：开始，李逢吉挑起武昭的案子来阻止裴度进京没有成功，皇帝知道裴度忠诚，最后任命他当了宰相。
English: At first, Li Fengji provoked the case of Wu Zhao to prevent Pei Du from entering Beijing without success. The emperor knew that Pei Du was loyal, and finally appointed him as prime minister.

古文：逢吉于是浸疏，以检校司空、平章事为山南东道节度使，表李续自副，张又新行军司马。
现代文：李逢吉这时逐渐被疏远，以检校司空、同中书门下平章事身份任山南东道节度使，他任命李续任副使、张又新任行军司马。
English: At this time, Li Fengji was gradually alienated, and he was appointed as the Shannan host festival envoy in the capacity of the inspection of the school and the registration of the school. He appointed Li to continue as the deputy envoy, and Zhang as the new marshal.

古文：顷之，检校司徒。
现代文：不久，他又任检校司徒。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a school inspector.

古文：初，门下史田伾倚逢吉亲信，顾财利，进婢，嬖之。
现代文：先前，门下史田亻丕倚仗受李逢吉亲近信任，贪图钱财，亲近婢女，并宠爱她。
English: Previously, Li Fengji's disciple, Shi Tianyao, was trusted by Li Fengji, coveted money, was close to his maid, and doted on her.

古文：伾坐事匿逢吉家，名捕弗获。
现代文：田亻丕犯了罪藏在李逢吉家里，因此指名逮捕没抓到。
English: Tian Qi committed a crime and hid in Li Fengji's home, so he was not arrested.

古文：及出镇，表随军，满岁不敢集，使人伪过门下省，调房州司马。
现代文：到李逢吉出京任职，请求让他到军中任职，过了一年不敢上任，派人假冒到门下省去，调他任房州司马。
English: When Li Fengji went to Beijing to take office, he asked him to serve in the army. After a year, he did not dare to take office. He sent someone to pretend to be his subordinate and transferred him to the post of Fangzhou Sima.

古文：为有司所发，即襄州捕之，诡谰不遣。
现代文：被有关部门告发到襄州去逮捕他，李逢吉抵赖不交出来。
English: Li Fengji refused to turn himself in when he was reported to the relevant authorities in Xiangzhou for arrest.

古文：御史劾奏，诏夺一季俸，因是贬续为涪州刺史，又新汀州刺史。
现代文：御史上奏弹劾李逢吉，有诏扣发他一季度的薪俸，为这贬李续任涪州刺史、张又新为汀州刺史。
English: He ordered the impeachment of Li Fengji and withheld his salary for the first quarter. As a result, Li was reappointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and Zhang Yaxin as the governor of Tingzhou.

古文：久乃徙宣武，以太子太师为东都留守。
现代文：很长时间后贬李逢吉任宣武军节度使，后又以太子太师身份担任东都留守。
English: After a long time, Li Fengji was appointed as the commander of the Xuanwu army, and later he stayed in Dongdu as the Grand Master.

古文：父于陵，始见识于浙西观察使韩滉，妻以其女。
现代文：到李训执政，召他进京任命为尚书左仆射，因脚患病不能上朝，以司徒身份退休；后去世了，享年七十八岁，赠官太尉，赐谥号叫成。
English: When Li Xun came to power, he summoned him to Beijing and appointed him as Shang Shuxi's second-in-command, but he was unable to go to the imperial court due to a foot ailment, so he retired as an attendant. Later, he passed away at the age of 78, and was given the title of second lieutenant and given the nickname "Cheng."

古文：归谓妻曰： 吾阅人多矣，后贵且寿无若生者，有子必位宰相。 既而生嗣复，滉抚其顶曰： 名与位皆逾其父，杨氏之庆也。 
现代文：他没有儿子，要堂弟的儿子李植继承他。杨嗣复的字是继之。他父亲杨于陵，开始受浙西观察使韩氵晃赏识，韩氵晃把女儿嫁给他，并回去对妻子说： 我看到的人很多，今后显贵并长寿没有比得上他的，他有儿子一定当宰相。 后来生了杨嗣复，韩氵晃摸着他的头说： 你的名声和地位都超过你父亲，这是杨家值得庆贺的事。 
English: He did not have a son and wanted his cousin's son, Li Zhi, to succeed him. Yang Sifu's words followed suit. His father, Yang Yuling, began to be observed by the West of Zhejiang and was appreciated by Han Shao-kang. Han Shao-kang married his daughter to him, and went back to his wife and said, "I have seen many people who are distinguished and long-lived in the future and cannot be compared to him. If he has a son, he must become the prime minister." Later, Yang Sifu was born, and Han Shao-kang touched his head and said, "Your reputation and status surpass your father'

古文：因字曰庆门。
现代文：因此定字叫庆门。
English: Therefore, the fixed character is called Qingmen.

古文：八岁知属文，后擢进士、博学宏辞，与裴度、柳公绰皆为武元衡所知，表署剑南幕府。
现代文：他八岁会写文章，后考中了进士和博学宏辞科。他和裴度、柳公绰都受武元衡赏识，被任命在剑南幕府中任职。
English: At the age of eight, he could write an article, and in the final examination, he was awarded the title of "advanced scholar" and "erudite macro-diction." He, Baidu, and Liu Gongchao were all appreciated by Wu Yuanheng and were appointed to serve in the Jiannan Shogunate.

古文：进右拾遗，直史馆。
现代文：后升任右拾遗、直史馆。
English: Later, he was promoted to the right to collect relics and the direct history museum.

古文：尤善礼家学，改太常博士，再迁礼部员外郎。
现代文：他特别擅长礼制学说，故改任太常博士，两次升官后任礼部员外郎。
English: He was particularly good at the theory of the etiquette system, so he was reassigned to the position of Dr. Taijo, and was promoted twice to the position of the member of the etiquette department, Wairo.

古文：时于陵为户部侍郎，嗣复避同省，换他官，有诏： 同司，亲大功以上，非联判句检官长，皆勿避。
现代文：当时杨于陵任户部侍郎，杨嗣复为避免同在尚书省任职，请求改任别的职务，皇帝下诏说 ：同部门官员有大功以上丧服的亲戚，不是共同负责同一事务和考核官员的，都不要回避。
English: At that time, Yang Yuling was the steward of the Household Department, and Yang Shifu, in order to avoid serving with Shangshu Province, requested to be reassigned to other positions. The emperor issued an edict saying: "Relatives of officials in the same department who have made great contributions or more, and who are not jointly responsible for the same affairs and assessment officials, should not avoid.

古文：官同职异，虽父子兄弟无嫌。 
现代文：官名相同但分管不同，即使是父子和亲兄弟也不避嫌。 
English: Even father and son and brother are not averse to having the same official title but different responsibilities.

古文：迁累中书舍人。
现代文：后又升任中书舍人。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of middle school teacher.

古文：嗣复与牛僧孺、李宗闵雅相善，二人辅政，引之，然不欲越父当国，故权知礼部侍郎。
现代文：他和牛僧孺、李宗闵一向要好，他们两人当权，引荐他，但他不想超越父亲当宰相，因此暂任礼部侍郎。
English: He had always been on good terms with Niu Zonglu and Li Zonglu. Both of them were in power and recommended him, but he did not want to surpass his father as prime minister, so he temporarily served as a ceremonial attendant.

古文：凡二期，得士六十八人，多显官。
现代文：他共主持两次科举，录取贡士六十八人，多数后来当了大官。
English: He presided over a total of two imperial examinations, admitting sixty-eight scholars, most of whom later became high-ranking officials.

古文：文宗嗣位，进户部侍郎。
现代文：唐文宗即位，他升任户部侍郎。
English: When Emperor Tang Wenzong ascended the throne, he was promoted to the position of household attendant.

古文：于陵老，求侍不许。
现代文：杨于陵老了，他请求去侍奉皇帝不让。
English: When Yang Yuling was old, he asked to serve the emperor and was refused.

古文：丧除，擢尚书左丞。
现代文：他守丧期满，升任尚书左丞。
English: At the end of his term of mourning, he was promoted to the post of Senior Secretary of the Left.

古文：太和中，宗闵罢，嗣复出为剑南东川节度使。
现代文：大和年间，李宗闵罢相，他出任剑南东川节度使。
English: During the Yamato era, when Li Zonglu retired from the position of prime minister, he served as an envoy to the Jianan Dongchuan Festival.

古文：宗闵复相，徙西川。
现代文：李宗闵又任宰相，他调到剑南西川。
English: Li Zongyao was also appointed prime minister, and he was transferred to Jianan Nishikawa.

古文：开成初，以户部侍郎召，领诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：开成初年，召他任户部侍郎，又任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, he was called to serve as a steward of the household department, and was also appointed as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：俄与李珏并拜同中书门下平章事，弘农县伯，仍领盐铁。
现代文：不久和李珏同时任同中书门下平章事，封弘农县伯爵，仍旧掌管盐铁。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the second-ranked official at the same time as Li Xi, Count of Fonghongnong County, but he was still in charge of Yancheng.

古文：后紫宸奏事，嗣复为帝言： 陆洿屏居民间，而上书论兵，可劝以官。 
现代文：后在紫宸殿奏报事务，他对皇帝说 ：陆氵夸贬为平民，上奏讨论军事，可任命官职来鼓励。 
English: After reporting the matter to the Empress Dowager Ziyu, he said to the emperor: Lu Yongkuo was relegated to a commoner, the report discussed military affairs, and an official post could be appointed to encourage him.

古文：珏趣和曰： 土多趋竞，能奖洿，贪夫廉矣。
现代文：李珏响应说 ：士人多趋炎附势，能褒奖他，贪婪的人也变廉洁了。
English: Li Wei said in response: The scholar is more likely to have the power of fire, can praise him, and the greedy person has become clean.

古文：比窦洵直以论事见赏，天下释然，况官洿耶！ 
现代文：先前窦洵直因讨论政事受赏，全国都高兴，何况封陆氵夸的官呢！ 
English: The whole country was happy when Dou Yanzhong was awarded for discussing political affairs. What's more, the officials praised by Lu Yanzhong were arrested!

古文：帝曰： 朕赏洵直，褒其心尔。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我奖赏窦洵直，是褒奖他的忠心。 
English: The emperor said: I reward Dou Yanzhi for his loyalty.

古文：郑覃不平曰： 彼苞藏固未易知。 
现代文：郑覃不满地说 ：他的内心肯定难以知道。 
English: Zheng Qi said indignantly: It must be difficult to know his heart.

古文：嗣复曰： 洵直无邪，臣知之。 
现代文：杨嗣复说 ：窦洵直没有坏心，我了解他。 
English: Yang Shifu said: Dou Yanzhong does not have a bad heart, I understand him.

古文：覃曰： 陛下当察朋党。 
现代文：郑覃说 ：皇上应提防宗派。 
English: Zheng Yi said: The emperor should beware of sects.

古文：嗣复曰： 覃疑臣党，臣应免。 
现代文：他说 ：郑覃怀疑我拉宗派，我应免职。 
English: He said: Zheng Yao suspected me of being a sectarian, and I should be removed from office.

古文：即再拜祈罢。
现代文：马上拜两次请求罢相。
English: He immediately made two requests to quit the film.

古文：珏见言切，缪曰： 朋党固少弭。 覃曰： 附离复生。 
现代文：李珏看郑覃说得太生硬，转弯说： 宗派确实几乎消灭了。 郑覃说： 有头子又产生了。 
English: Seeing that Zheng Yao's words were too blunt, Li Yan turned around and said, "The sect has indeed almost been wiped out," and Zheng Yao said, "The headman has arisen again."

古文：帝曰： 向所谓党与，不已尽乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 过去所说的宗派不是已经完蛋了吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Hasn't the sect mentioned in the past come to an end?

古文：覃曰： 杨汉公、张又新、李续故在。 
现代文：郑覃说 ：杨汉公、张又新、李续还在。 
English: Zheng Yao said: Yang Han Gong, Zhang Yuxin and Li Jiu are still there.

古文：珏乃陈边事，欲绝其语。
现代文：李珏就谈边境情况，想扯开话题。
English: On the subject of the border situation, Li Yao wanted to open up the topic.

古文：覃曰： 论边事安危，臣不如珏；嫉朋比，珏不如臣。 
现代文：郑覃说： 谈边境情况好坏，我不如李珏；讨厌宗派，李珏不如我。 
English: Zheng Wei said: I am not as good as Li Wei in talking about whether the border situation is good or bad; I hate sects, and Li Wei is not as good as me.

古文：嗣复曰： 臣闻左右佩剑，彼此相笑，未知覃果谓谁为朋党邪？ 
现代文：杨嗣复说 ：我听说左边和右边的佩剑，互相嘲笑，不知郑覃到底说谁拉宗派呢？ 
English: Yang Shifu said, "I have heard that the left and right sabers are laughing at each other. I don't know who Zheng He is talking about.

古文：因当香案顿首曰： 臣位宰相，不能进贤退不肖，以朋党获讥，非所以重朝廷。 
现代文：于是对着香案行顿首礼说 ：我当宰相，不能推荐贤才贬斥奸臣，被人嘲讽为拉宗派，这不能维护朝廷的威信。 
English: So he bowed his head to the incense and said, "I am the prime minister. I cannot recommend a wise man, disparage a treacherous minister, and be ridiculed as a heretic. This cannot uphold the prestige of the imperial court."

古文：固乞罢，帝方委以政，故尉安之。
现代文：坚决请求罢相，皇帝正靠他辅政，所以安慰他。
English: The emperor consoled him because he was relying on him to help him govern.

古文：它日，帝问： 符谶可信乎？
现代文：有一天，皇帝问： 图谶可以相信吗？
English: One day, the emperor asked: Can Thun be trusted?

古文：何从而生？ 
现代文：什么时候产生的？ 
English: When did it come into being?

古文：嗣复曰： 汉光武以谶决事，隋文帝亦喜之，故其书蔓天下。
现代文：他说 ：汉光武帝靠谶纬决定政务，隋文帝也喜爱它，所以关于它的书传遍全国。
English: He said: Emperor Guangwu of Han Dynasty depended on it to decide government affairs, and Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty also loved it, so books about it spread all over the country.

古文：班彪《王命论》有所引述，特以止贼乱，非重之也。 
现代文：班彪《天命论》引用过，只是用它来制止反叛，不是推崇它。 
English: "Manifest Destiny" was quoted by Ban Biao, but he only used it to stop rebellion, not to praise it.

古文：珏曰： 治乱宜直推人事耳。 帝曰： 然。 
现代文：李珏说： 治理好坏应直接根据人间情况。 皇帝说 ：对。 
English: "Good or bad governance should be directly based on the human condition," said Li Yu. The emperor said, "That's right."

古文：又问： 天后时有起布衣为宰相者，果可用乎？ 
现代文：皇帝又问 ：武则天皇后时有人从百姓直接当宰相，果真可以顶事吗？ 
English: The emperor also asked: When Empress Wu Zetian was in power, someone from the people directly became the prime minister. Is it really possible?

古文：嗣复曰： 天后重用刑，轻用官，自为之计耳。
现代文：他说： 武则天皇后注重刑罚，看轻官员，这是亲自治理的办法。
English: He said: Empress Wu Zi focused on punishment and looked down on officials. This was a method of self-governance.

古文：必责能否，要待历试乃可。 
现代文：确切知道有无能力，需要试试各级职务才行。 
English: To know for sure whether you are capable or not, you need to try positions at all levels.

古文：是时延英访对，史官不及知。
现代文：当时延英殿召见谈话，史臣都不知道。
English: At that time, Yan Ying Dian was summoned for a talk, and Shisen didn't even know about it.

古文：嗣复建言： 故事，正衙，起居注在前；便坐，无所纪录。
现代文：他建议说 ：按旧制，在正殿，前面有记起居注的官员；在便殿，没人记录。
English: He suggested: According to the old system, in the main hall, there are officials who remember the residents' notes in front; in the vestibule, no one records.

古文：姚、赵憬皆请置时政记，不能行。
现代文：姚王焘、赵瞡都请求设置时政记，没能实施。
English: Both Yao Wangyao and Zhao Yao requested the establishment of a chronicle of the time, but it was not implemented.

古文：臣请延英对宰相语关道德刑政者，委中书门下直日纪录，月付史官。 
现代文：我请求将皇上在延英殿对宰相谈的有关道德、刑法、政令的话，命中书、门下省值日官记录，每月交给史臣。 
English: I request that the Emperor's words concerning morality, criminal law, and government orders, which he spoke to the Prime Minister at Yan Ying Dian, the hit letter, and the records of the provincial duty officer under him, be handed over to Shichen every month.

古文：它宰相议不同，止。
现代文：其他的宰相看法不同，就搁置了。
English: Other prime ministers had a different view and put it on hold.

古文：久之，帝又问： 延英政事，孰当记之？ 
现代文：一段时间后，皇帝又问道 ：延英殿讨论政务，该谁记录？ 
English: After a while, the emperor asked again: If the Yan Ying court discusses government affairs, who should record it?

古文：珏监修国史，对曰： 臣之职也。 
现代文：李珏任监修国史，回答说： 这是我的职责。 
English: Li Wei, who is in charge of supervising the national history, replied: This is my duty.

古文：陈夷行曰： 宰相所录，恐掩蔽圣德，自盗美名。
现代文：陈夷行说： 宰相记录，恐怕隐瞒皇上的仁德，自夸功劳。
English: Chen Yixing said: The prime minister's record, I am afraid, conceals the emperor's benevolence and boasts of his merits.

古文：臣向言不欲威权在下者，此也。 
现代文：我过去说不想让威望权力在臣子身上，就是指这。 
English: When I said in the past that I didn't want the prestige and power to rest with the courtiers, that's what I meant.

古文：珏曰： 夷行疑宰相卖威权，货刑赏。
现代文：李珏说 ：陈夷行怀疑宰相中有耍威风弄权势、接受贿赂的。
English: Li Wei said: Chen Yixing suspected that one of the prime ministers was a bully, a power player, and a bribe taker.

古文：不然，何自居位而为此言邪？
现代文：不这样，怎么自己任宰相却说这样的话呢？
English: Otherwise, how can he say such a thing when he is the prime minister?

古文：臣得罢为幸。 
现代文：我希望能免职。 
English: I'd like to be relieved of my duties.

古文：覃曰： 陛下开成初政甚善，三年后，日不逮前。 
现代文：郑覃说 ：皇上开成初年治理得很好，开成三年以后，一天不如一天。 
English: Zheng Yao said: The emperor governed well in the first year of Kaisei, but after three years of Kaisei, one day is not as good as another.

古文：嗣复曰： 开成初，覃、夷行当国，三年后，臣与李珏同进。
现代文：杨嗣复说： 开成初年，郑覃、陈夷行执政，开成三年后，我和李珏一起提升。
English: Yang Shifu said, "In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Zheng He and Chen Yi were in power. Three years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, I was promoted together with Li Yong.

古文：臣不能悉心奉职，使政事日不逮前，臣之罪也。
现代文：我不能尽心履行职责，使政务一天不如一天，这是我的过错。
English: It is my fault that I cannot fulfill my duties to the best of my ability, and that the government's performance is deteriorating day by day.

古文：纵陛下不忍加诛，当自殄灭。 
现代文：即使皇上不忍心杀我，我也将自杀。 
English: Even if the Emperor could not bear to kill me, I would commit suicide.

古文：即叩头请从此辞，不敢更至中书，乃趋出。
现代文：马上磕头请求立即辞职，不敢再到中书省来，于是快步走出殿去。
English: Shantou immediately asked for immediate resignation and did not dare to go back to the study, so he quickly walked out of the hall.

古文：帝使使者召还，曰： 覃言失，何及此邪？ 
现代文：皇帝派使臣召他回来，说： 郑覃的话说错了，你怎么要这样呢？ 
English: The emperor sent an envoy to call him back and said, "What Zheng Jun said was wrong. Why would you do such a thing?

古文：覃起谢曰： 臣愚不知忌讳，近事虽善，犹未尽公。
现代文：郑覃起身道歉说 ：我愚蠢不知道避讳，现在政务虽然好，还不十分公允。
English: Zheng Rong stood up and apologized, saying, "I'm stupid and don't know how to be discreet. Although the current government affairs are good, they are still not very fair."

古文：臣非专斥嗣复，而遽求去，乃不使臣言耳。 
现代文：我不是单单指责杨嗣复，他马上请求去职，简直不让我说话。 
English: I didn't just accuse Yang Shifu, he immediately asked to leave the post and simply wouldn't let me speak.

古文：嗣复曰： 陛下月费俸禀数十万，时新异赐必先及，将责臣辅圣功，求至治也。
现代文：杨嗣复说 ：皇上每月花费俸禄几十万文钱，赏新鲜稀奇的东西一定先给，是要我辅佐圣王治理，追求尽善尽美。
English: Yang Shifu said, "The Emperor spends hundreds of thousands of monies every month, and he must first give me something new and unusual. He wants me to help the holy king govern and pursue perfection."

古文：使不及初，岂臣当死，累陛下之德，奈何？
现代文：如果不如先前，不仅我该死，还连累了皇上的仁德，怎么行呢？
English: If I am not as good as before, not only do I deserve to die, but I have also encumbered the Emperor's benevolence, how can it be done?

古文：惟陛下别求贤以自辅。 
现代文：只有请皇上另找贤才辅佐自己。 
English: Only by asking the emperor to find another wise man could he support himself.

古文：帝曰： 覃偶及之，奚执咎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 郑覃偶尔说到，不要责怪他。 
English: The emperor said: Zheng Yao occasionally said, don't blame him.

古文：嗣复阖门不肯起，帝乃免覃、夷行相，而嗣复专天下事。
现代文：他闭门不肯到职，皇帝就将郑覃、陈夷行罢相，他独揽了大权。
English: When he refused to take office behind closed doors, the emperor dismissed Zheng Rong and Chen Yi, and he took sole power.

古文：进门下侍郎。
现代文：后升任门下侍郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to a junior chamberlain.

古文：建言： 使府官属多，宜省。 
现代文：他建议说 ：使臣官府属员太多，应裁减。 
English: He suggested, "There are too many staff in the legation and they should be reduced."

古文：帝曰： 无反滞才乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 不会反而压抑人才吧？ 
English: The emperor said: Wouldn't that suppress talent?

古文：对曰： 才者自异，汰去粃滓者，菁华乃出。 
现代文：他回答说 ：有才能的自然例外，淘汰秕糠，好米就出来了。 
English: He replied, "Talented natural exceptions, eliminating badgers, good rice will come out."

古文：帝曰： 昔萧复乘政，难言者必言，卿其志之！ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：过去萧复任宰相，难办的事必定去办，你要记住这事！ 
English: The emperor said: In the past, Xiao Fuzhong was appointed as the prime minister. Difficult things must be done. You must remember this!

古文：未几，帝崩，中尉仇士良废遗诏，立武宗。
现代文：不久，皇帝去世了，护军中尉仇士良违背留下的诏命，拥立武宗。
English: Soon after, the emperor died, and Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang of the escort army disobeyed the imperial edict and supported Emperor Wuzong.

古文：帝之立，非宰相意，故内薄执政臣，不加礼，自用李德裕而罢嗣复为吏部尚书，出为湖南观察使。
现代文：武宗即位，不是宰相的主张，所以轻视宰相们，不予礼遇，自己任用了李德裕，将杨嗣复罢相，任命为吏部尚书，出京任湖南观察使。
English: Wu Zong's accession to the throne was not the idea of the prime minister, so he despised the prime ministers and did not give them courtesy. He appointed Li Deyu, dismissed Yang Shifu as the prime minister, appointed Shang Shu to the Ministry of Personnel, and went to Beijing to serve as the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：会诛薛季棱、刘弘逸，中人多言尝附嗣复、珏，不利于陛下。
现代文：遇上处死了薛季眣、刘弘逸，宦官多有人说他们曾依附杨嗣复、李珏，对皇帝不利。
English: When Xue Jizhe and Liu Hongyi were executed, many eunuchs said that they had been dependent on Yang Shifu and Li Xi, which was unfavorable to the emperor.

古文：帝刚急，即诏中使分道诛嗣复等，德裕与崔郓、崔珙等诣延英言： 故事，大臣非恶状明白，未有诛死者。
现代文：皇帝刚强急躁，马上下诏命使者到各地去杀杨嗣复等人。李德裕和崔郸、崔珙等人到延英殿上奏说： 按旧制，重臣除非罪行明显，没有处死的。
English: The emperor was strong and impetuous, and immediately issued an edict ordering emissaries to go to various places to kill Yang Shifu and others. Li Deyu and Cui Wei and Cui Wei and others went to Yan Ying palace to report: According to the old system, senior officials were not executed unless their crimes were obvious.

古文：昔太宗、玄宗、德宗三帝，皆尝用重刑，后无不悔，愿徐思其宜，使天下知盛德有所容，不欲人以为冤。 
现代文：过去太宗、玄宗、德宗三位皇帝，都曾施用重刑，事后没有不后悔的，希望慢慢想更好的办法，让全国人知道皇上宽宏大量，不让人们认为冤枉。 
English: In the past, three emperors, Taizong, Xuanzong, and Dezong, had all imposed heavy sentences, and none of them did not regret it afterwards. I hope to slowly think of a better way to let the whole country know that the emperor is magnanimous and not let people think that they were wronged.

古文：帝曰： 朕缵嗣之际，宰相何尝比数！
现代文：皇帝说 ：我即位的时候，你们当宰相没有？
English: The emperor said, "Weren't you the prime minister when I came to the throne?"

古文：且珏等各有附会，若珏、季棱属陈王，犹是先帝意。
现代文：李珏等人各有效忠对象，李珏、薛季眣想拥立陈王，还是父皇的意图。
English: Li Yu and others were loyal to their respective subjects, but Li Yu and Xue Jizhe wanted to support King Chen, which was the father's intention.

古文：如嗣复、弘逸属安王，乃内为杨妃谋。
现代文：杨嗣复、刘弘逸想拥立安王，是为宫中杨妃效力。
English: Yang Shifu and Liu Hongyi wanted to support the establishment of King An, and they worked for Yang Hui in the palace.

古文：且其所绐书曰： 姑何不斅天后？  
现代文：他们送给她的信中说： 您为什么不效法武则天皇后？  
English: In a letter they sent to her, they said: Why don't you follow the example of the Empress Dowager of Emperor Homu?

古文：德裕曰： 飞语难辨。 
现代文：李德裕说： 流言难分真假。 
English: Li Deyu said: Rumors are hard to distinguish between true and false.

古文：帝曰： 妃昔有疾，先帝许其弟入侍，得通其谋。禁中证左尤具，我不欲暴于外。
现代文：皇帝说 ：杨妃过去有病，父皇让她弟弟进宫侍奉，将他们的计划传了进来，宫中证据非常齐全，我不想在外面宣扬。
English: The emperor said: Yangfei was ill in the past, the father emperor let her brother enter the palace to serve, and passed on their plan. The evidence in the palace is very complete, I don't want to promote it outside.

古文：使安王立，肯容我耶？ 
现代文：假如安王即位，能容下我吗？ 
English: If King Ahn ascends to the throne, will he be able to tolerate me?

古文：言毕戚然，乃曰： 为卿赦之！ 
现代文：说完后很伤心，后说 ：为你赦免了他！ 
English: After saying this, she was very sad and later said, "He was pardoned for you!"

古文：因追使者还，贬嗣复潮州刺史。
现代文：派人追回了使者，将杨嗣复贬为潮州刺史。
English: They sent someone to retrieve the messenger and relegated Yang Shifu to a footnote in the history of Chaozhou.

古文：宣宗立，起为江州刺史。
现代文：宣宗即位，升他任江州刺史，又召他进京任吏部尚书。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the post of the governor of Jiangsu Province, and he was also called to Beijing to serve as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：以吏部尚书召，道岳州卒，年六十六，赠尚书左仆射，谥曰孝穆。
现代文：他走到岳州去世了，享年六十六岁，赠官尚书左仆射，赐谥号叫孝穆。
English: He went to Yuezhou and died at the age of sixty-six. He was given the official title of Shangshu Zuopuzha and the posthumous title of Xiaomu.

古文：嗣复领贡举时，于陵自洛入朝，乃率门生出迎，置酒第中，于陵坐堂上，嗣复与诸生坐两序。
现代文：他掌管科举时，杨于陵从洛阳进京朝拜，他就带领学生出去迎接，在家中摆酒，他父亲坐在大堂上，他和众学生坐在两边。
English: When he was in charge of the imperial examination, Yang Yuling made a pilgrimage from Luoyang to Beijing. He led the students out to meet him and served wine at home. His father sat in the lobby, and he and the students sat on both sides.

古文：始于陵在考功，擢浙东观察使李师稷及第，时亦在焉。
现代文：当初他父亲在京城任职时，录取了浙东观察使李师稷，他当时也在座。
English: At that time, when his father was in Beijing, he was also present when Li Shizhen, the East Zhejiang Observation Envoy, was admitted.

古文：人谓杨氏上下门生，世以为美。
现代文：人们称他们是杨家两代的学生，当时人认为很荣耀。
English: People said they were two generations of students from the Yang family, which was considered a great honor at the time.

古文：嗣复五子，其显者：授、损。
现代文：他有五个儿子，其中突出的是杨授、杨损。
English: He has five sons, the most prominent of whom are Yang Zhu and Yang Zai.

