古文：晋王存勖大败梁兵，梁兵亦退。
现代文：原文五代十国时，晋王李存勖大败梁兵后，梁暂时退兵。
English: In the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, after the Jin king Li Cunxu defeated Liang soldiers, Liang temporarily withdrew from the army.

古文：周德威言于晋王曰： 贼势甚盛，宜按兵以待其衰。 
现代文：周德威知道晋王想乘胜追击，于是对晋王说： 敌人气势盛，我军应该先按兵不动，等梁兵疲敝后再进攻。 
English: Zhou Dewei knew that Jin Wang wanted to take advantage of the victory and pursue the attack, so he said to Jin Wang: The enemy is very powerful, our army should first stand still and wait for Liang soldiers to get tired before attacking.

古文：王曰： 吾孤军远来，救人之急，三镇乌合，利于速战。公乃欲按兵持重，何也？ 
现代文：晋王说： 我率军远征，急切救人，再说我军是仓促成军，适合速战，现在将军却建议孤王按兵不动，这是什么原因？ 
English: Jin Wang said, "I led an expeditionary force to rescue people urgently. Moreover, our army is a quick reaction force, suitable for a quick battle. Now, the general has suggested that Guowang should not move his troops. What is the reason for this?"

古文：德威曰： 镇、定之兵，长于守城，短于野战；吾所恃者骑兵，利于平原旷野，可以驰突。今压城垒门，骑无所展其足；且众寡不敌，使彼知己虚实，则事危矣。 
现代文：周德威说： 梁兵善于守城，不善于野地作战；我军仗恃的是骑兵，对骑兵而言，平原旷野是最有利的地形，可以驰骋突袭，但现在面对城门堡垒，骑兵根本无法施展，再说敌众我寡，假使让敌人摸清了我军的兵力，对我军实在大大不利。 
English: Zhou Dewei said: Liang soldiers are good at defending the city, but not good at fighting in the field; our army is made up of cavalry. For cavalry, the plains and wilderness are the most favorable terrain, and they can gallop and raid. But now, facing the city gate fortress, the cavalry can not exert themselves at all. Moreover, we have few enemies. If we let the enemy know the strength of our army, it will be very disadvantageous to our army.

古文：王不悦，退卧帐中，诸将莫敢言。
现代文：晋王听了周德威的解释仍不满意，就自己回帐休息，其他将军见晋王一脸的不高兴，也都不敢再多说什么。
English: After listening to Zhou Dewei's explanation, Jin Wang was still not satisfied, so he took a break and rested. Other generals saw the displeasure on Jin Wang's face and did not dare to say anything more.

古文：德威往见张承业，曰： 大王骤胜而轻敌，不量力而务速战，今去贼咫尺，所限者一水耳，彼若造桥以薄我，我众立尽矣，不若退军高邑，诱贼离营，彼出则归，彼归则出，别以轻骑，掠其馈饷，不过逾月，破之必矣! 
现代文：不出一个月，一定能破梁。 
English: In less than a month, I'm sure I'll be able to break through.

古文：承业入，褰帐抚王曰： 此岂王安寝时邪？
现代文：张承业于是来到晋王的营帐，掀起帘帐说： 这哪是您平日安寝的时间呢？
English: Zhang Chengye then came to Jin Wang's tent, raised the curtain and said: What time is it when you sleep peacefully on weekdays?

古文：周德威老将知兵，言不可忽也。 
现代文：周德威是老将，深懂用兵之道，他的话可不能忽视。 
English: Zhou Dewei is a veteran who understands the way of using soldiers, and his words cannot be ignored.

古文：王蹶然而兴，曰： 予方思之。 
现代文：晋王突然从床上跳起来大声说： 我正在想这件事。 
English: Jin Wang suddenly jumped up from the bed and said loudly, "I'm thinking about it."

古文：时梁王闭垒不出，有降者，诘之，曰： 景仁方多造浮桥。 
现代文：这期间梁王虽在军垒却闭门不出，后来晋兵侦讯一个投降的梁兵，他供说： 梁王正命人建造多座浮桥，准备攻晋。 
English: During this period, although Liang Wang was at the fortress, he did not come out. Later, the Jin soldiers interrogated a Liang soldier who had surrendered. He confessed: Liang Wang was ordering people to build a number of floating bridges in preparation for attacking Jin.

古文：王谓德威曰： 果如公言。 
现代文：晋王对周德威说： 果然不出将军所料。 
English: Jin Wang said to Zhou Dewei: The general's expectations were not met.

