古文：耶律解里耶律拔里得耶律朔古耶律鲁不古赵延寿高模翰赵思温耶律沤里思张砺耶律解里，字泼单，突吕不部人，世为小吏。
现代文：耶律解里，字泼单，突吕不部人。世代担任小吏。
English: In the interpretation of the law, he was a word-wrangler and a troublemaker. He served as a petty official for generations.

古文：解里早隶太宗麾下，擢为军校。
现代文：解里早年隶属于太宗部下，提升为军校。
English: In the early years, Xie Li was subordinate to the subordinates of Emperor Taizong and was promoted to a military school.

古文：天显间，唐攻定州，既陷，解里为唐兵所获。
现代文：天显年间，唐进攻定州，攻陷之后，解里为唐军俘虏。
English: During the Tian Xian period, Tang attacked Dingzhou. After the attack and fall, Ge Li was taken prisoner by the Tang army.

古文：晋高祖立，始归国。
现代文：直到晋高祖即位，方才得以归国。
English: It was not until the enthronement of Emperor Gaozu that he was able to return to Japan.

古文：太宗贳其罪，拜御史大夫。
现代文：太宗宽贷其罪，拜为御史大夫。
English: Emperor Taizong forgave him for his crime and made him a goshi taifu.

古文：会同九年伐晋，师次滹沱河，夺中渡桥，降其将杜重威。
现代文：会同九年讨伐晋，军队驻扎于滹沱河，夺占中渡桥，晋将杜伏威降。
English: In the ninth year of Huitong's crusade against Jin, the army was stationed in Luohe, captured Zhongdu Bridge, and forced the Jin general Du Fuwei to surrender.

古文：上命解里与降将张彦泽率骑兵三千疾趋河南，所至无敢当其锋。
现代文：皇上下令解里与降将张彦泽率骑兵三千飞速赶往河南，所到之处无人敢当其兵锋。
English: The emperor ordered Zhang Yanzhe and 3,000 cavalry to rush to Henan. No one dared to be his vanguard wherever he went.

古文：既入汴，解里等迁晋主重贵于开封府。
现代文：入汴京之后，解里等人迁晋主石重贵到开封府。
English: After entering Beijing, Ge Li and others moved the main stone to Kaifeng.

古文：会同初，从讨党项，俘获最诸将，师还。
现代文：彦泽恣意杀戮抢掠，淫乱宫廷，解里未加禁止，百姓动荡不安，无人不怨恨。
English: Hikozawa killed and plundered at will, corrupted the court, was not banned from ruling, the people were restless, and no one was without resentment.

古文：天禄中，拜于越。六年，为北院大王。
现代文：皇上到汴京，列举张彦泽罪状，斩首于市，汴人十分高兴；解里也遭到责问，不久释免了他。天禄年间，升任守太子太傅。
English: When the emperor went to Beijing and enumerated the charges against Zhang Yanze and beheaded him in the city, the people of Beijing were very happy; Ge Li was also questioned, but he was soon released. During the Tenroku era, he was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：终年五十五。赵延寿，本姓刘，恒山人。
现代文：应历初年，设置本部令稳，由解里家族世代任其职，不久去世。赵延寿，本姓刘，恒山人。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the headquarters was set up by Ryozen, who was appointed by generations of the Gehri family. He died soon after. Zhao Yanju, whose real surname was Liu, was from Hengshan.

古文：父邟，令蓚。
现代文：父赵亢阝，县县令。
English: His father, Zhao Jun, was a county magistrate.

古文：梁开平初，沧州节度使刘守文陷蓚，其稗将赵德钧获延寿，养以为子。
现代文：梁开平初，沧州节度使刘守文攻陷县，其稗将赵德钧俘获延寿，养为己子。
English: At the beginning of Liang Kaiping, the Cangzhou Festival caused Liu Shouwen to invade the county, and he captured Zhao Deyu and raised him as his own son.

古文：少美容貌，好书史。
现代文：延寿少时容貌俊美，喜读经史典籍。
English: When Yan Shou was young, he was handsome and enjoyed reading classics.

古文：唐明宗先以女妻之，及即位，封其女为兴平公主，拜延寿驸马都尉、枢密使。
现代文：唐明宗先是将女儿嫁给他，待到即位，封其女为兴平公主，拜延寿为驸马都尉、枢密使。
English: Tang Mingzong first married his daughter to him and stayed until the enthronement, naming his daughter as Xingping Princess, and Bai Yanshou as Hema Lieutenant and Privy Envoy.

古文：明宗子从荣恃权跋扈，内外莫不震慑，延寿求补外避之，出为宣武军节度使。
现代文：明宗子李从荣自恃权势，专横跋扈，内外官员无不震恐，延寿请求补为京外官避祸，便出为宣武军节度使。
English: Emperor Mingzong's son Li Rongzhu wielded power and was domineering. Officials at home and abroad were horrified. He asked to extend his life in order to avoid misfortune as a foreign official in Beijing, and then he was appointed as the envoy of the Xuanwu army.

古文：清泰初，加鲁国公，复为枢密使，镇许州。
现代文：清泰初，加鲁国公，再次出任枢密使，镇许州。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, Garu Guogong, once again served as a privy councilor, Zhen Xuzhou.

古文：石敬瑭发兵太原，唐遣张敬达往讨。
现代文：石敬瑭自太原发兵，唐派张敬达前往讨伐。
English: Shi Jingyao sent troops from Taiyuan, Tang sent Zhang Jingda to fight.

古文：会敬达败保晋安寨，延寿与德钧往救，闻晋安已破，走团柏峪。
现代文：适逢敬达败退，守晋安寨，延寿与德钧前往援救，听得晋安已破，逃至团柏峪。
English: When Jingda was defeated and retreated, he guarded Jin Anzhai, and Yan Shou and De Yao went to rescue him. Hearing that Jin An had been defeated, they fled to Tuanbaoji.

古文：太宗追及，延寿与其父俱降。
现代文：太宗追及之，延寿与他父亲一同投降。
English: Taizong chased after him, and Yan Shou surrendered together with his father.

古文：明年，德钧卒，以延寿为幽州节度使，封燕王。
现代文：次年，德钧卒，以延寿为幽州节度使，封燕王。
English: The following year, the Emperor Dezong decreed that Yan Shou would be the Yuzhou Festival Emissary, and the Emperor Yan was crowned.

古文：及改幽州为南京，迁留守，总山南事。
现代文：待到改幽州为南京，迁之为留守，总理山南事务。
English: He waited until Yuzhou was changed to Nanjing, and then moved to Shandong, where he remained as the prime minister in charge of Shandong affairs.

古文：天显末，以延寿妻在晋，诏取之以归。
现代文：天显末，因延寿妻在晋，诏令取回。
English: At the end of the Heian period, due to the death of his wife in the Jin Dynasty, the imperial edict was issued to retrieve it.

古文：自是益自激昂图报。
现代文：从这以后更加振奋昂扬，一心思报皇上之恩。
English: From then on, he became even more excited and eager to repay the emperor's kindness.

古文：会同初，帝幸其第，加政事令。
现代文：会同初，皇上幸其府第，加政事令。
English: At the beginning of the meeting, the emperor was happy to leave his residence and add a government order.

古文：六年冬，晋人背盟，帝亲征，延寿为先锋，下贝州，授魏、博等州节度使，封魏王。
现代文：六年冬，晋人背叛盟约，皇上亲征，延寿为先锋，攻下贝州，授魏、博等州节度使，封魏王。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, the Jin people betrayed the covenant, the emperor personally led the expedition, Yan Shou was the pioneer, conquered Beizhou, awarded Wei, Bo and other state festival envoys, and crowned Wei Wang.

古文：败晋军于南乐，获其将赛项羽。
现代文：败晋军于南乐，俘获其将赛项羽。
English: Defeated the Jin army in Nanle and captured its general, Saekangyu.

古文：军元城，晋将李守贞、高行周率兵来逆，破之。
现代文：驻军元城，晋将李守贞、高行周率兵来迎战，破之。
English: Garrisoned in Yuancheng, Jin generals Li Shuzhen and Gao Xingzhou led their troops to fight and defeated them.

古文：至顿丘，会大霖雨，帝欲班师，延寿谏曰： 晋军屯河滨，不敢出战，若径入澶州，夺其桥，则晋不足平。 
现代文：至顿丘，遭遇大暴雨，皇上想班师。延寿上谏说： 晋军屯驻于河滨，不敢出战，如果径直进入澶州，夺占其桥，则平晋不在话下了。 
English: When they reached Dongqiu, they encountered a heavy rainstorm, and the emperor wanted to send a division. Yan Shou Shang Yi said: The Jin army was stationed on the riverbank and did not dare to go to war. If they went straight into Zhangzhou and seized its bridge, then the Pingjin was out of the question.

古文：上然之。
现代文：皇上觉得有理。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：适晋军先归澶州，高行周至析城，延寿将轻兵逆战；上亲督骑士突其阵，敌遂溃。
现代文：适逢晋军先回澶州，高行周到了析城，延寿率轻兵迎战；皇上亲统骑兵冲击其阵角，敌人于是溃败。
English: At the right time, the Jin army returned to Bozhou first, and Gao Xing Zhou arrived at the dismantling of the city. Prolonged life rate light soldiers faced the battle; the emperor's relatives cavalry stormed their positions, and the enemy was defeated.

古文：师还，留延寿徇贝、冀、深三州。
现代文：大军回，留延寿攻战掠地于贝、冀、深三州。
English: When the large army returned, they stayed in Yanju to attack and plunder the lands of Bei, Hebei and Shenshoushou.

古文：八年，再伐晋，晋主遣延寿族人赵行实以书来招。
现代文：八年，再伐晋，晋主派延寿族人赵行实带着书信招他回晋。
English: Eight years later, when he returned to Jin, the ruler of Jin sent Zhao Xingshi, a member of the Yanshou tribe, with a letter to invite him back to Jin.

古文：时晋人坚壁不出，延寿绐曰： 我陷虏久，宁忘父母之邦？
现代文：当时晋军坚守壁垒不出战，延寿骗他们说： 我身陷胡虏虽久，岂能忘了父母之邦。
English: At that time, the Jin army held fast to the barrier and did not fight, and Yan Shou deceived them by saying: Although I have been trapped in Huru for a long time, I can't forget the country of my parents.

古文：若以军逆，我即归。 
现代文：如果派兵来迎，我就回来。 
English: If they send troops to meet us, I'll come back.

古文：晋人以为然，遣杜重威率兵迎之。
现代文：晋人信以为真，派杜重威派兵迎接。
English: Jin believed it to be true and sent Du Chongwei to send troops to meet him.

古文：延寿至滹沱河，据中渡桥，与晋军力战，手杀其将王清，两军相拒。
现代文：延寿到滹沱河据守中渡桥，与晋军力战，亲手杀其将王清，两军相持不下。
English: Yan Shou went to the Lugu River to defend the Zhongdu Bridge, fought with the Jin army, and killed its commander Wang Qing with his own hands. The two armies could not stand each other.

古文：太宗潜由他渡济，留延寿与耶律朔古据桥，敌不能夺，屡败之，杜重威扫厥众降。
现代文：太宗暗地里从别的渡口渡河，留下延寿与耶律朔古据守桥梁，敌人不能夺取，且屡败于延寿，杜重威举全军投降。
English: Taizong secretly crossed the river from another ferry, leaving Yeonsu and Yerushaogu to defend the bridge. The enemy could not take it, and they were repeatedly defeated in Yeonsu. Du Chong raised the whole army and surrendered.

古文：上喜，赐延寿龙凤赭袍，且曰： 汉兵皆尔所有，尔宜亲往抚慰。 
现代文：皇上大喜，赐给延寿龙凤赭袍，又说 ：汉兵都归你所有，你该亲自前往抚慰。 
English: The emperor was overjoyed and gave Yan Shou the dragon and phoenix robes. He also said, "The Han soldiers all belong to you. You should go and comfort them yourself."

古文：延寿至营，杜重威、李守贞迎谒马首。
现代文：延寿至军营，杜重威、李守贞拜迎于马前。
English: Yan Shou arrived at the military camp, and Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen greeted him in front of the horse.

古文：后太宗克汴，延寿因李崧求为皇太子，上曰： 吾于魏王虽割肌肉亦不惜，但皇太子须天子之子得为，魏王岂得为也？ 
现代文：后来太宗攻下汴京，延寿通过李崧请求立为皇太子，皇上说： 我对于魏王，即使割下肉来给他也在所不惜，只是皇太子必须是天子的儿子才能做，魏王怎么能做呢？ 
English: Later, Emperor Taizong captured Beijing, and Yan Shou requested the crown prince through Li Yanran. The emperor said, "I don't mind giving the king of Wei a piece of meat, but the crown prince must be the son of the son of heaven. How can the king of Wei do it?

古文：盖上尝许灭晋后，以中原帝延寿，以故摧坚破敌，延寿常以身先，至是以崧达意。
现代文：原来皇上曾允诺灭晋之后，以延寿为中原皇帝，所以摧坚垒，破强敌，延寿往往身先士卒。
English: Originally, after the emperor had promised to exterminate Jin, he made Yan Shou the emperor of Central Plains. Therefore, to destroy strongholds and break strong enemies, Yan Shou was often the first to act.

古文：上命迁延寿秩，翰林学士承旨张砺进拟中京留守、大丞相、录尚书事、都督中外诸军事，上涂 录尚书事、都督中外诸军事 。
现代文：到这时通过李崧传达心意，皇上命迁延寿之职位。翰林学士承旨张砺拟进之为中京留守、大丞相、录尚书事、都督中外诸军事；皇上抹去 录尚书事、都督中外诸军事 。
English: At this time, the emperor's intention was conveyed through Li Qian, and the emperor's life was transferred to the position of prolonging his life. The scholar of Hanlin ordered Zhang Qian to be transferred to the position of staying in Beijing, the grand secretary, the recorder of records, and the military governor; the emperor erased the recorder of records and the military governor.

古文：世宗即位，以翊戴功，授枢密使。
现代文：世宗即位，以拥戴之功，授枢密使。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he was awarded the post of Privy Councilor for his support.

古文：天禄二年薨。
现代文：天禄二年薨。
English: He died two years later.

古文：高模翰，一名松，渤海人。
现代文：高模翰，又名松，渤海人。
English: Gao Mochan, also known as Song, is from Bohai.

古文：有膂力，善骑射，好谈兵。
现代文：颇有膂力，擅长骑射，喜欢谈兵。
English: He is quite strong, good at riding and shooting, and likes to talk about soldiers.

古文：初，太祖平渤海，模翰避地高丽，王妻以女。
现代文：起先，太祖平定渤海，模翰逃至高丽，高丽王将女儿嫁给他。
English: At first, the great-grandfather pacified the Bohai Sea, Mochan fled to Goryeo, and the king of Goryeo married his daughter to him.

古文：因罪亡归。
现代文：因为有罪逃回。
English: He fled back because he was guilty.

古文：坐使酒杀人下狱，太祖知其才，贳之。
现代文：后因酗酒杀人获罪入狱，太祖知他有才，宽恕了他。
English: He was later jailed for murder and drunkenness, but his great-grandfather knew he had talent and forgave him.

古文：天显十一年七月，唐遣张敬达、杨光远帅师五十万攻太原，势锐甚。
现代文：天显十一年七月，唐遣张敬达、杨光远率兵五十万进攻太原，兵锋十分锐利。
English: In July of the eleventh year of Tian Xian, the Tang sent Zhang Jingda and Yang Guangyuan with half a million soldiers to attack Taiyuan. The soldiers were very sharp.

古文：石敬瑭遣人求救，太宗许之。
现代文：石敬瑭派人求救，太宗答应了。
English: Shi Jingyao sent someone to ask for help, and Taizong agreed.

古文：九月，征兵出雁门，模翰与敬达军接战，败之，太原围解。
现代文：九月，发兵出雁门，模翰与敬达军交战，败之，太原之围遂解。
English: In September, the troops were sent out to the Wild Goose Gate. Mochan fought with the Jingda Army and was defeated. The siege of Taiyuan was lifted.

古文：敬瑭夜出谒帝，约为父子。
现代文：石敬瑭于夜里出城拜见皇上，相约为父子。
English: Shi Jingyao went out of the city at night to visit the emperor, which is similar to father and son.

古文：帝召模翰等赐以酒馔，亲飨士卒，士气益振。
现代文：皇上召高模翰等赐给酒食，亲自宴饮士卒，士气更加高涨。
English: The emperor summoned Gao Mochan and others to give them food and drink, and personally served them to the soldiers. Morale rose even higher.

古文：翌日，复战，又败之。
现代文：次日，再战，又败之。
English: The next day, they fought again and lost again.

古文：敬达鼠窜晋安寨，模翰献俘于帝。
现代文：敬达奔窜于晋安寨，模翰向皇上献俘。
English: Jingda rushed to Jin'an Village, and Mochan offered himself as a prisoner to the emperor.

古文：会敬瑭自立为晋帝，光远斩敬达以降，诸州悉下。
现代文：适逢石敬瑭自立为晋帝，光远斩敬达出降，各州全部攻下。
English: At the right time, Shi Jinglian became the Emperor of Jin, and Guangyuan defeated Jinglian and conquered all the states.

古文：上谕模翰曰： 朕自起兵，百余战，卿功第一，虽古名将无以加。 
现代文：皇上晓谕模翰说： 朕自从起兵，经百余战，卿的功劳第一，即使古之名将也没人能超过你。 
English: The Emperor told Mochan, "Since I took up arms, I have fought more than a hundred battles. Sir's merits come first. Even if you have an ancient name, no one can surpass you.

古文：乃授上将军。
现代文：于是授上将军。
English: As a result, he was promoted to general.

古文：会同元年，册礼告成，宴百官及诸国使于二仪殿。
现代文：会同元年，册礼完成，宴请百官及各国使者于二仪殿。
English: In the first year of reunification, the registration ceremony was completed, and a banquet was held for hundreds of officials and emissaries from various countries in the Second Hall.

古文：帝指模翰曰： 此国之勇将，朕统一天下，斯人之力也。 
现代文：皇上手指高模翰说 ：这位是我国的勇将，朕统一天下，此人之力也。 
English: The emperor pointed his finger at Gao Miao Han and said, "This is our country's brave general. I am unified as one, and so is this man's strength."

古文：群臣皆称万岁。
现代文：群臣都呼万岁。
English: The courtiers in the hall cheered loudly.

古文：及晋叛盟，出师南伐。
现代文：及至晋人背反盟约，出师南伐。
English: Until the Jin people reneged on the alliance and marched south.

古文：模翰为统军副使，与僧遏前驱，拔赤城，破德、贝诸寨。
现代文：模翰为统军副使，跟僧遏一起为先锋，攻下赤城，破德、贝诸寨。
English: Mokhan was the deputy envoy of the United Front, and together with Sangye, he was the vanguard, capturing Akagi, Hade, and Beitzhuzhai.

古文：是冬，兼总左右铁鹞子军，下关南城邑数十。
现代文：这年冬，兼统左右铁鹞子军，攻下关南城邑数十。
English: In the winter of that year, the Iron Mule Army, led by Kanetomo, captured dozens of towns in Guannan.

古文：三月，敕虎官杨覃赴乾宁军，为沧州节度使田武名所围，模翰与赵延寿聚议往救。
现代文：三月，敕虎官杨覃到乾宁军，为沧州节度使田武名包围，模翰与赵延寿聚在一处商议前往援助。
English: In March, Yang Hui, an official of the Qianling Army, went to the Qianling Army to besiege Tianwu for the festival of Cangzhou. Mo Han and Zhao Yanshou gathered in a place to discuss and go to the aid.

古文：俄有光自模翰目中出，萦绕旗矛，焰焰如流星久之。
现代文：不一会儿，只见有光从模翰眼中飞出，萦绕旗矛，光耀夺目犹如流星，很久才消失。
English: After a while, I saw a light fly out of Mochan's eyes, haunting the flagpole, dazzling like a meteor, before disappearing for a long time.

古文：模翰喜曰： 此天赞之祥！ 
现代文：模翰高兴地说 ：此乃天助之祥瑞！ 
English: Mochan said happily, "This is a blessing from heaven!"

古文：遂进兵，杀获甚众。
现代文：于是进兵，斩首俘获甚众。
English: As a result, soldiers marched in, beheaded and captured many people.

古文：以功加侍中。
现代文：因功升为侍中。
English: He was promoted to Samurai Junior Middle Officer for his achievements.

古文：略地盐山，破饶安，晋人震怖，不敢接战。
现代文：掠地于盐山，破饶安，晋人震惊，不敢交战。
English: They seized land in Yanshan and destroyed Rao'an. The Jin people were shocked and did not dare to fight.

古文：加太傅。
现代文：加太傅。
English: Add taifu.

古文：晋以魏府节度使杜重威领兵三十万来拒，模翰谓左右曰： 军法在正不在多。
现代文：晋派魏府节度使杜重威领兵三十万前来拒战，模翰对左右说： 用兵之法在得体而不在于多。
English: When the Jin Dynasty sent the Wei-fu governor Du Chongwei to lead 300,000 soldiers to resist the war, Mokhan said to the right and left: The way to use soldiers is to be decent, but not too much.

古文：以多陵少，不义必败。
现代文：以多欺少，不义之师再多也是一败。
English: The more one deceives, the less one is deceived, and the more one deceives, the more one is deceived.

古文：其晋之谓乎！ 
现代文：这不正是说的晋军吗？ 
English: Isn't this exactly what is meant by the Jin army?

古文：诘旦，以麾下三百人逆战，杀其先锋梁汉璋，余兵败走。
现代文：次晨，率麾下三百人迎战，杀其先锋梁汉璋，其余兵马败走。
English: The next morning, he led 300 men under his command into battle, killed his vanguard, Liang Hanzhong, and the rest of the soldiers and horses were defeated.

古文：手诏褒美，比汉之李陵。
现代文：皇上亲自起草诏书加以褒奖，比之为汉代李陵。
English: The emperor personally drafted the edict and praised it, likening it to the Han Dynasty's Tomb of Li.

古文：顷之，杜重威等复至滹沱河，帝召模翰问计。
现代文：不久，杜重威等又到滹沱河，皇上召模翰问计。
English: Not long after, Du Chongwei and others went to Luohe again, and the emperor summoned Mochan to inquire about the plan.

古文：上善其言曰： 诸将莫及此。 
现代文：皇上称他说的好，说： 诸将都不及此计。 
English: The emperor said that he had spoken well, and said, "All generals are not equal to this."

古文：乃令模翰守中渡桥。
现代文：于是派模翰守中渡桥。
English: So they sent Mochan to guard the bridge.

古文：及战，复败之，上曰： 朕凭高观两军之势，顾卿英锐无敌，如鹰逐雉兔。
现代文：待到交战，又败晋军，皇上说： 朕登高观看两军形势，看到卿英勇无敌，好比雄鹰追逐野鸡野兔一般。
English: When the battle came and the Jin army was defeated, the emperor said, "I ascended high to observe the situation of the two armies and saw that the emperor was heroic and invincible, just like an eagle chasing a pheasant and a hare.

古文：当图形麟阁，爵貤后裔。 
现代文：应该在麟阁中为你画像，赐爵使你子孙世代沿袭。 
English: You should have your portrait in the Lin Pavilion, and be given a knighthood to be passed down to your descendants.

古文：已而杜重威等降。
现代文：不久杜重威等投降。
English: Du Chongwei and others soon surrendered.

古文：车驾入汴，加特进检校太师，封悊郡开国公，赐玺书、剑器。
现代文：皇上进入汴京，加模翰为特进检校太师，封胐郡开国公，赐予玺书、剑器。
English: When the emperor entered Beijing, he made Camo Han a special inspector of schools and crowned him the founding father of Qin County, bestowing him with a seal and a sword.

古文：为汴州巡检使，平汜水诸山土贼，迁镇中京。
现代文：为汴州巡检使，平定汜水诸地的山贼土贼，迁镇中京。
English: He was the inspector of Bozhou, pacified the bandits and thieves in all parts of Bishui, and moved the town to Beijing.

古文：天禄二年，加开府仪同三司，赐对衣、鞍勒、名马。
现代文：天禄二年，加开府仪同三司，赐予对衣、马鞍和马络头、名马。
English: In the second year of the Tenroku era, he was given the Kaifu ceremony and the three offices, and was given a matching robe, a saddle, a horse's head and a famous horse.

古文：应历初，召为中台省右相。
现代文：应历初，征召为中台省右相。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was called up as the right minister of Zhongtai Province.

古文：至东京，父老欢迎曰： 公起戎行，致身富贵，为乡里荣，相如、买臣辈不足过也。 
现代文：至东京，父老欢笑着迎接，说 ：您靠打仗起家，挣得一身富贵，实在是乡中荣耀，司马相如、朱买臣之流都还比不上您。 
English: When he arrived in Tokyo, his father greeted him with a smile and said, "You started your family by fighting in the war, and you have made yourself rich. This is truly the glory of the village. Sima Xiangru and Zhu Bai Sheng's lineage are nothing compared to you."

古文：九年正月，迁左相，卒。
现代文：九年正月，迁左相，卒。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, he moved to the left and graduated.

古文：赵思温，字文美，卢龙人。
现代文：赵思温，字文美，卢龙人。
English: Zhao Siwen, beautiful writing, Lulong people.

古文：少果锐，膂力兼人，隶燕帅刘仁恭幕。
现代文：少时果断敏锐，力大无比，隶属于燕帅刘仁恭幕府。
English: At a young age, he was decisive and keen, with incomparable strength. He belonged to the Yan Shuai Liu Rengong Shogunate.

古文：李存勖问罪于燕，思温统偏师拒之。
现代文：李存勖对燕国兴师问罪，思温统率偏师与之拒战。
English: Li Cunxu accused Yan Guoxing, and Siming refused to fight him.

古文：流矢中目，裂裳渍血，战犹不已。
现代文：流矢射中眼睛，他撕下战袍拭去血渍，继续力战不已。
English: He was shot in the eye by a stray arrow. He tore off his uniform to wipe away the blood and continued to fight.

古文：为存勖将周德威所擒，存勖壮而释其缚。
现代文：为存勖将领周德威所俘。存勖感佩其豪壮，亲自解去他身上的绳索，将他收录到手下。
English: He was captured by Zhou Dewei, the commander of Cunxu. Cunxu admired his bravery and personally untied the ropes around his body, enlisting him as a subordinate.

古文：久之，日见信用。
现代文：久而久之，日渐得到存勖的信任和重用。
English: With the passage of time, it has gradually gained the trust and re-use of the preserved cormorants.

古文：与梁战于莘县，以骁勇闻，授平州刺史，兼平、营、蓟三州都指挥使。
现代文：与梁军交战于莘县，以骁勇闻名，授为平州刺史，兼任平、营、蓟三州都指挥使。
English: He fought against Liang's army in Jixian County, and was famous for his bravery. He was awarded the title of the history of Pingzhou, and also served as the commander of the three states of Ping, Ying, and Jia.

古文：神册二年，太祖遣大将经略燕地，思温来降。
现代文：神册二年，太祖派大将攻夺燕地，思温前来降附。
English: In the second year of the divine record, the great ancestor sent a general to conquer Yan's land, and Siwen came to annex it.

古文：及伐渤海，以思温为汉军都团练使，力战，拔扶余城。
现代文：及至讨伐渤海时，皇上任命思温为汉军都团练使，奋力作战，攻下了扶余城。
English: When it came to the Battle of the Bohai Sea, the emperor appointed Siwen as the commander of the Han army, and he fought hard and captured Fuyu City.

古文：身被数创，太祖亲为调药。
现代文：身上多处受伤，太祖亲自为他调药。
English: He was injured in many places on his body, and his great-grandfather personally prescribed medicine for him.

古文：太宗即位，以功擢检校太保、保静军节度使。
现代文：太宗即位，思温因功提升为检校太保、保静军节度使。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and Siwen was promoted to the post of inspector of schools, and the post of military governor.

古文：天显十一年，唐兵攻太原，石敬瑭遣使求救，上命思温自岚、宪间出兵援之。
现代文：天显十一年，唐军进攻太原，石敬瑭派使者求救，皇上命思温从岚、宪之间出兵救援。
English: In the eleventh year of Tian Xian, the Tang army attacked Taiyuan. Shi Jingyi sent an envoy to ask for help, and the emperor ordered Si Wen to send troops to rescue the troops from the area between Lu and Xian.

古文：既罢兵，改南京留守、卢龙军节度使、管内观察处置等使、开府仪同三司，兼侍中，赐协谋静乱翊圣功臣，寻改临海军节度使。
现代文：撤兵之后，改任南京留守、卢龙军节度使、管内观察处置等使、开府仪同三司，兼任侍中，赐为协谋静乱翊圣功臣，不久改任临海军节度使。
English: After the withdrawal of the troops, he was reassigned to stay in Nanjing, to be the festival envoy of the Lulong Army, to be the envoy of observation and disposition within the jurisdiction, to be the keeper of the imperial rescript and the three departments, to be the chamberlain at the same time, to be the co-conspirator of the peaceful revolution and the saintly hero, and soon he was reassigned to be the naval festival envoy.

古文：会同初，从耶律牒摐使晋行册礼，还，加检校太师。
现代文：会同初年，随耶律牒虫葛出使晋举行册礼，回国，升任为检校太师。
English: In the first year of the association, he held the enrollment ceremony with the envoy of Ye Luo Zhi Ge Jin, returned to China, and was promoted to the position of inspector.

古文：二年，有星陨于庭，卒。
现代文：二年，有星坠落于庭中，去世。
English: Two years later, a star fell in the courtyard and died.

古文：上遣使赙祭，赠太师、魏国公。
现代文：皇上派使者赠资助祭，赠为太师、魏国公。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to present a subsidy to the festival, and presented it to the Grand Master, Wei Guogong.

古文：子延照、延靖，官至使相。
现代文：子延照、延靖，官至使相。
English: His sons were Yan Zhao and Yan Jing, and they rose through the ranks to become envoys.

古文：耶律沤里思，六院夷离堇蒲古只之后。
现代文：耶律沤里思，六院夷离堇蒲古只之后。
English: Yeludong Lisi, after the Sixth Precinct was razed to the ground.

古文：负勇略，每战被重铠，挥铁槊，所向披靡。
现代文：自负勇武及谋略，每当作战时身披重铠甲，挥舞铁槊，所向披靡。
English: He is proud of his bravery and strategy. Whenever he fights, he wears heavy armor and wields an iron scepter, which makes him invincible.

古文：会同间，伐晋，上至河而猎，适海东青鹘搏雉，晋人隔水以鸽引去。
现代文：会同年间，讨伐晋，皇上到黄河而田猎，适逢海东青鹘与野鸡相斗，晋人隔着黄河用鸽子引走了野鸡。
English: In the same year, when the emperor went to the Yellow River to hunt pheasants, the East China pheasants fought with the pheasants, and the Jin people used pigeons to take away the pheasants across the Yellow River.

古文：上顾左右曰： 谁为我得此人？ 
现代文：皇上回头对左右说 ：有谁愿替我抓住此人？ 
English: The Emperor turned his head to the right and to the left and said, "Who will catch this man for me?"

古文：沤里思请内厩马，济河擒之，并杀救者数人还。
现代文：沤里思请求乘坐内厩的马前去，渡河擒捉住此人，并杀死相救野鸡的数人之后纵马驰回。
English: Burris asked for a ride on a horse from the inner stable, crossed the river to catch the man, killed several people who tried to save the pheasants and then rode back.

古文：上大悦，优加赏赉。
现代文：皇上大喜，给予他优厚的赏赐。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and gave him a generous reward.

古文：既而晋将杜重威逆于望都，据水勒战。
现代文：接着晋将杜重威迎战我军于望都，依托河流部署兵力作战。
English: Next, the promoted general Du Chongwei met our army in the city of Wangdu, and deployed troops to fight by relying on the river.

古文：沤里思介马突阵，余军继之。
现代文：沤里思单人独马冲入敌军战阵，麾下人马也相继随后冲击。
English: Balis single-handedly rushed into the enemy's battle line, and his subordinates also followed suit.

古文：被围，众言阵薄处可出，沤里思曰： 恐彼有他备。 
现代文：被包围，众人认为可以从阵形薄弱之处突围出去，沤里思说： 恐怕敌人另有预谋。 
English: Surrounded, everyone thought that they could break out of the weak points of the formation, and Balis said: I'm afraid the enemy has other plans.

古文：竟引兵冲坚而出；回视众所指，皆大堑也。
现代文：终于率军冲击阵形坚固处而突围；回头看众人所指薄弱处，都是大壕沟。
English: Finally, he led the army to break through the strong points of the formation; looking back, the weak points pointed out by many people were all large trenches.

古文：其料敌多此类。
现代文：其料敌制胜大多如此。
English: That's how most of their victories come about.

古文：是年，总领敌烈皮室军，坐私免部曲，夺官，卒。
现代文：同年，总领敌烈皮室军，因私自释放部曲获罪，被削夺官职，不久去世。
English: In the same year, the commander-in-chief of the enemy's fierce fur-clad troops was convicted of illegally releasing prisoners, stripped of his official position, and died soon after.

古文：张砺，磁州人，初仕唐为掌书记，迁翰林学士。
现代文：张砺，磁州人，早先在唐担任掌书记，迁任翰林学士。
English: Zhang Qian, a native of Magengzhou, had earlier served as the chief secretary in Tang and was transferred to the position of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：会石敬瑭起兵，唐主以砺为招讨判官，从赵德钧援张敬达于河东。
现代文：适逢石敬瑭起兵，唐主任命张砺为招讨判官，随赵德钧到河东援救张敬达。
English: At the time when Shi Jingyao raised an army, the Tang Lord appointed Zhang Ye as the judge of recruiting, and he followed Zhao Deyao to rescue Zhang Jingda in Hedong.

古文：及敬达败，砺入契丹。
现代文：及至敬达兵败，张砺到了契丹。
English: After the defeat of Jingda, Zhang Ye went to Khitan.

古文：后太宗见砺刚直有文彩，擢翰林学士。
现代文：后来太宗见张砺刚强正直，颇有文采，提升为翰林学士。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong saw Zhang Ye as a strong and honest person, who was quite literate, and promoted him to the rank of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：砺临事必尽言，无所避，上益重之。
现代文：张砺遇事总是有言必发，无所回避，皇上更加重用他。
English: Zhang Ye always said what needed to be said and did what needed to be done, and the emperor used him even more.

古文：未几，谋亡归，为追骑所获。
现代文：不久，计划逃跑回故国，为骑兵追获。
English: Before long, plans to escape back to his homeland are pursued by the cavalry.

古文：上责曰： 汝何故亡？ 
现代文：皇上责备他说 ：你为什么要逃走？ 
English: The Emperor scolded him: "Why did you run away?

古文：砺对曰： 臣不习北方土俗，饮食居处，意常郁郁，以是亡耳。 
现代文：张砺回答说 ：我不习惯风俗、饮食、居处，心里总是郁郁不乐，因此想逃走。 
English: Zhang Ye replied, "I am not used to the customs, diet, and place of residence. My heart is always depressed and unhappy, so I want to escape."

古文：上顾通事高彦英曰： 朕尝戒汝善遇此人，何乃使失所而亡？
现代文：皇上回头对通事高彦英说 ：我曾经告诫你要好好待他，为什么还是让他因不得其所而逃走？
English: The Emperor turned to his secretary, Takahiko Inoue, and said, "I once warned you to treat him well. Why did you let him escape when he was cornered?

古文：砺去，可再得耶？ 
现代文：张砺要是走了，你能再找回一个张砺来吗？ 
English: If Zhang Ye leaves, can you find another Zhang Ye to come back?

古文：遂杖彦英而谢砺。
现代文：于是杖击彦英而向张砺致歉。
English: As a result, the stick hit Hikohide and he apologized to Zhang Ye.

古文：会同初，升翰林承旨，兼吏部尚书，从太宗伐晋。
现代文：会同初年，升任翰林承旨，兼吏部尚书，随从太宗讨伐晋国。
English: In the first year of the association, he was promoted to the post of Hanlin Zhengzhi, and concurrently he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. He followed Emperor Taizong to fight in Jin Province.

古文：入汴，诸将萧翰、耶律郎五、麻答辈肆杀掠，砺奏曰： 今大辽始得中国，宜以中国人治之，不可专用国人及左右近习。
现代文：进入汴京，诸将萧翰、耶律郎五、麻答等人肆意杀人抢掠，张砺上奏说： 现在大辽刚刚得到中国，应该任用中国人治理他们，不能专用我国人及左右亲信。
English: Entering Beijing, generals Xiao Han, Yerulong V, Ma Tuo and others wantonly killed and plundered. Zhang Xuan said: Now that Daliao has just obtained China, it is necessary to appoint Chinese to govern them, and it is not possible to exclusively use Chinese people and right and left cronies.

古文：苟政令乖失，则人心不服，虽得之亦将失之。 
现代文：倘使政策和法令出现差错，那么人心就会不服，即使暂时得到中原也还是要失去的。 
English: If the policies and decrees go wrong, then the people will not be satisfied, and even if the Central Plains are temporarily gained, they will still be lost.

古文：上不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：改右仆射，兼门下侍郎、平章事。
现代文：改任张砺为右仆射，兼门下侍郎、平章事。
English: He was reassigned as Zhang Xuan's right-hand man, and also as a subordinate attendant and subordinate officer.

古文：顷之，车驾北还，至栾城崩。
现代文：不久，皇上北归，到达栾城便崩逝了。
English: Not long after, the emperor returned to the north and died in Shicheng.

古文：时砺在恒州，萧翰与麻答以兵围其第。
现代文：当时张砺在恒州，萧翰与麻答派兵包围了其府第。
English: At that time, Zhang Ye was in Hengzhou, and Xiao Han and Ma Du sent troops to surround his capital.

古文：砺方卧病，出见之。
现代文：张砺正卧病于床，勉力支撑着出门见他们。
English: Zhang Ye was lying ill in bed, barely able to support himself to go out to meet them.

古文：翰数之曰： 汝何故于先帝言国人不可为节度使？
现代文：萧翰数落他说 ：你为什么要在先帝面前说契丹国人不可以做节度使？
English: Xiao Han chided him: "Why did you say in front of the former emperor that people from Khitan could not serve as emissaries?

古文：我以国舅之亲，有征伐功，先帝留我守汴，以为宣武军节度使，汝独以为不可。
现代文：我以国舅之亲，出兵征讨有功，先帝留我守卫汴京，任命我为宣武军节度使，独有你以为不行。
English: As a relative of my uncle, I did a good job of sending out troops for conscription. The former emperor left me to guard Beijing and appointed me as the festival envoy of the proclamation army. Only you think it is not possible.

古文：又谮我与解里好掠人财物子女。
现代文：又诬陷我与解里喜欢抢掠别人的财物子女。
English: They also accused me and my brother-in-law of being children who like to loot other people's property.

古文：今必杀汝！ 
现代文：今天我一定要杀了你！ 
English: Today I'm going to kill you!

古文：趣令锁之。
现代文：敦促手下人将他拘锁起来。
English: Urging his men to lock him up.

古文：砺抗声曰： 此国家大体，安危所系，吾实言之。
现代文：张砺大声抗言道 ：此乃事关国家大局，维系国家安危之所在；所以我直言不讳。
English: Zhang Ye protested loudly, "This is related to the overall situation of the country and the maintenance of national security; that is why I am outspoken.

古文：欲杀即杀，奚以锁为？ 
现代文：你要杀就杀，何必要锁起来呢？ 
English: If you're going to kill, kill. Why lock them up?

古文：麻答以砺大臣，不可专杀，乃救止之。
现代文：麻答觉得张砺乃是重臣，不可擅自滥杀，便出面相救制止。
English: Ma Du thought that Zhang Ye was a senior vassal and should not be allowed to kill indiscriminately, so he came forward to help and stop him.

古文：是夕，砺恚愤卒。
现代文：当晚，张砺愤恨而死。
English: That night, Zhang Rong died of resentment.

