古文：○周德威周德威，字镇远，朔州马邑人也。
现代文：周德威字镇速，朔州马邑人。
English: Zhou Dewei Zhenhai, a native of Ma'e, Shuozhou.

古文：为人勇而多智，能望尘以知敌数。
现代文：为人勇猛而足智多谋，望见烟尘就能够判断敌军的人数。
English: He was a brave and resourceful man, able to judge the number of enemy troops by looking at the smoke and dust.

古文：其状貌雄伟，笑不改容，人见之，凛如也。
现代文：他的身材高大，笑起来也不改变脸色，人们见了他，都觉得严肃可畏。
English: He is tall, his face does not change color when he laughs, and when people see him, they feel terribly serious.

古文：事晋王为骑将，稍迁铁林军使，从破王行瑜，以功迁衙内指挥使。
现代文：跟随晋王任骑将，逐渐升迁为铁林军使，跟随晋王攻破王行瑜，因功升迁衙内指挥使。
English: He followed Jin Wang as a cavalry commander and was gradually promoted to a Tielin military envoy. He followed Jin Wang to defeat Wang Xingyu and was promoted to the post of commander of the Inner Court for his achievements.

古文：其小字阳五，当梁、晋之际，周阳五之勇闻天下。
现代文：他的小名叫阳五，在梁、晋那个时候，周阳五的勇猛闻名天下。
English: His nickname was Yang Wu. At the time of Liang and Jin, Zhou Yang Wu was famous for his bravery.

古文：梁军围晋太原，令军中曰： 能生得周阳五者为刺史。 
现代文：梁军包围晋太原，向军中发布命令说： 能够活捉周阳五的人委任他为刺史。 
English: Liang's army encircled Jin Taiyuan and issued an order to the army, saying, "Anyone who can capture Zhou Yangwu alive should appoint him as chief of staff."

古文：有骁将陈章者，号陈野义，常乘白马被硃甲以自异，出入阵中，求周阳五，欲必生致之。
现代文：有一个勇猛的将领陈章，号称陈野义，常常骑着白色的马，身穿红色的镗甲以示自己与众不同，在战阵中出役，寻找周阳五，打算一定要活捉他。
English: There was a brave general Chen Zhang, known as Chen Nongyi, who often rode a white horse and wore red armor to show that he was different. He served in the battle, looking for Zhou Yangwu, intending to capture him alive.

古文：晋王戒德威曰： 陈野义欲得汝以求刺史，见白马硃甲者，宜善备之！ 
现代文：晋王警告周德威说： 陈野义想活捉你来求得刺史，你看见骑白马穿红镗甲的人，要好好防备他！ 
English: Jin Wang warned Zhou Dewei, "Chen Noyi wants to capture you alive in order to obtain a record. If you see a man on a white horse wearing red armor, beware of him!

古文：德威笑曰： 陈章好大言耳，安知刺史非臣作邪？ 
现代文：周德威笑着说： 陈章喜欢说大话罢了，怎么知道刺史不该我做呢？ 
English: Zhou Dewi said with a smile: Chen Zhang only likes to talk big, how do I know that I shouldn't do it?

古文：因戒其部兵曰： 见白马硃甲者，当佯走以避之。 
现代文：于是告诚他手下的士兵说： 如果看见骑白马穿红镗甲的人，就假装逃跑躲开他。 
English: So the soldiers under his command said, "If you see a man on a white horse wearing red armor, pretend to run away from him."

古文：两军皆阵，德威微服杂卒伍中。
现代文：两军对阵，周德威穿着普通军卒的衣服混在队伍中。
English: As the two armies faced off, Zhou Dewei mingled in the ranks wearing the clothes of an ordinary soldier.

古文：陈章出挑战，兵始交，德威部下见白马硃甲者，因退走，章果奋槊急追之，德威伺章已过，挥铁槌击之，中章堕马，遂生擒之。
现代文：陈章出来挑战，两军纔开始交锋，周德威的部下看见骑白马穿红镗甲的人，于是撤退，陈章果然举起长矛紧迫他们，周德威等陈章冲过去后，挥起铁锤向他击去，陈章被击中，摔下马来，于是被活捉。
English: Chen Zhang came out to challenge, and the two armies began to clash. Zhou Dewei's men saw a man on a white horse wearing red armor, so they retreated. Chen Zhang really raised a spear and pressed them. After Zhou Dewei and Chen Zhang rushed over, he swung a hammer at him. Chen Zhang was hit, fell off his horse, and was captured alive.

古文：梁攻燕，晋遣德威将五万人为燕攻梁，取潞州，迁代州刺史、内外蕃汉马步军都指挥使。
现代文：梁进攻燕，晋派周德威率领五万人助燕进攻梁，攻取潞州，升迁周德威为代州刺史、内外蕃漠马步军都指挥使。
English: When Liang attacked Yan, the Jin sent Zhou Dewei to lead fifty thousand people to help Yan attack Liang and capture Zhangzhou. Zhou Dewei was promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou and the commander and envoy of the horse-marching army in and out of Zhangzhou.

古文：梁军舍燕攻潞，围以夹城，潞州守将李嗣昭闭城拒守，而德威与梁军相持于外逾年。
现代文：梁军放弃燕进攻潞州，用夹城包围，潞州守将李嗣昭关闭城门抵抗守卫，而周德威和梁军在城外相互对峙一年多。
English: Liang's army abandoned Yan's attack on Bozhou and surrounded it with the city. Bozhou's guard, Li Shizhao, closed the city gate and resisted the guards, while Zhou Dewei and Liang's army confronted each other outside the city for more than a year.

古文：嗣昭与德威素有隙，晋王病且革，语庄宗曰： 梁军围潞，而德威与嗣昭有隙，吾甚忧之！ 
现代文：李嗣昭和周德威素来有矛盾，晋王病危，对唐庄宗说： 梁军围困潞州，而周德威和李嗣昭有矛盾，我很担忧他们啊！ 
English: Li Zhi Shou Zhou Dewei has always had conflicts, Jin Wang is critically ill, said to Tang Zhuangzong: Liang's army besieged Ganzhou, and Zhou Dewei and Li Zhi Zhao have conflicts, I am very worried about them!

古文：王丧在殡，庄宗新立，杀其叔父克宁，国中未定，而晋之重兵，悉属德威于外，晋人皆恐。
现代文：晋王死了还没有安葬，唐庄宗刚刚登位，杀死他的叔父李克宁，国内还没有安定，而晋的主要兵力，都归周德威统率在外，晋人都感到恐惧。
English: The Jin king was dead and not yet buried, Tang Zhuangzong had just ascended the throne and killed his uncle Li Kening, the country was not yet stable, and Jin's main forces were under the leadership of Zhou Dewei, and the Jin people were afraid.

古文：庄宗使人以丧及克宁之难告德威，且召其军。
现代文：唐庄宗派人把晋王的死和李克宁被杀告诉周德威，并且召他的军队回来。
English: Tangzhuang sect members told Zhou Dewei about the death of King Jin and the killing of Li Kening, and called his army back.

古文：德威闻命，即日还军太原，留其兵城外，徒步而入，伏梓宫前恸哭几绝，晋人乃安。
现代文：周德威接到命令后，当天就率军回到太原，把军队留在城外，步行进城，伏在晋王的棺木前痛哭得几乎气绝，晋人于是纔安下心来。
English: After receiving the order, Zhou Dewei led the army back to Taiyuan on the same day, left the army outside the city, walked into the city, and prostrated himself in front of the Jin king's coffin, weeping almost to the point of exhaustion. The Jin people then made peace.

古文：遂从庄宗复击梁军，破夹城，与李嗣昭欢如初。
现代文：于是周德威跟随唐庄宗再次进攻梁军，攻破夹城，和李嗣昭和好如初。
English: As a result, Zhou Dewei followed Tang Zhuozong to attack Liang's army again, broke through the city, and was as good as ever with Li Xi.

古文：以破夹城功，拜振武节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：周德威因攻破夹城的功劳，被任为振武军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhou Dewei was appointed as the Zhenwu Army's festival envoy for the achievement of breaking through the city, and was awarded the title of the next level in the same school.

古文：天祐七年秋，梁遣王景仁将魏、滑、汴、宋等兵七万人击赵。
现代文：天佑七年秋，梁派王景仁率魏、滑、汴、宋等州士兵七万人进攻赵州。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of Heaven's blessing, Liang sent Wang Jingren to lead 70,000 soldiers from the states of Wei, Sui, Qin and Song to attack Zhao.

古文：赵王王熔乞师于晋，晋遣德威先屯赵州。
现代文：赵王王镕向晋请求援兵，晋派周德威事先屯驻在赵州。
English: Zhao Wang Wangqi asked Jin for reinforcements, and Jin sent Zhou Dewei to be stationed in Zhao Prefecture in advance.

古文：冬，梁军至柏乡，赵人告急，庄宗自将出赞皇，会德威于石桥，进距柏乡五里，营于野河北。
现代文：冬季，梁军到达柏乡，赵州人告急，唐庄宗亲自率兵出赞皇，在石桥和周德威会师，前进到距离柏乡互里的地方，在野河北面安营扎寨。
English: In winter, when Liang's army reached Baoxiang and the people of Zhaozhou were in a hurry, Tang Zhuozong personally led the troops out of Zhanhuang, joined the division in Shijiao and Zhou Dewei, advanced to a place that was far away from Baoxiang, and set up camp in the north of the wild river.

古文：晋兵少，而景仁所将神威、龙骧、拱宸等军，皆梁精兵，人马铠甲饰以组绣金银，其光耀日，晋军望之色动。
现代文：晋军人少，而王景仁统率的神威、龙骥、拱宸等军，都是梁的精锐部队，用绸带金银装饰人马镗甲，光彩和日光相辉映，晋军望见后脸色都变了。
English: There were few Jin soldiers, but the Shenwei, Longyu, Gongyu and other troops led by Wang Jingren were Liang's elite troops. They decorated their man-horse armor with silk, gold and silver, and their splendor reflected the sunlight. The Jin soldiers' faces changed when they saw them.

古文：德威勉其众曰： 此汴、宋佣贩兒，徒饰其外耳，其中不足惧也！
现代文：周德威鼓励他的士兵说： 这不过是汴、宋二州雇来的小商贩，枉自打扮外表罢了，其实不值得害怕。
English: Zhou Dewei encouraged his soldiers, saying, "This is just a small trader hired by Gong and Song Erzhou. He is just putting on a show, but he is not to be feared.

古文：其一甲直数十千，擒之适足为吾资，无徒望而爱之，当勉以往取之。 
现代文：他们的一副镗甲价值几万，抓到他们恰恰够我们的资用，不要只是望着羡慕他们，应当努力上前去夺取。 
English: A pair of their armor is worth tens of thousands, catching them is just enough for our resources, don't just look at them with envy, you should strive to go ahead and seize them.

古文：退而告庄宗曰： 梁兵甚锐，未可与争，宜少退以待之。 
现代文：退下来却对唐庄宗说： 梁军锐不可挡，不能和他们争斗，应稍稍撤退等待时机。 
English: However, he retreated and said to Tang Zhuangzong: Liang's army is unstoppable, we cannot fight with them, we should retreat a little and wait for the right time.

古文：庄宗曰： 吾提孤军出千里，其利速战。
现代文：唐庄宗说： 我率孤军千里出战，速战速决纔有利。
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: I am leading a lone army thousands of miles away to fight, and it is advantageous to fight quickly.

古文：今不乘势急击之，使敌知吾之众寡，则吾无所施矣！ 
现代文：现在不乘势猛攻他们，让敌人知道我们人马的多少，那我们就无计可施了！ 
English: If we don't storm them now and let the enemy know how many men and horses we have, then there's nothing we can do!

古文：德威曰： 不然，赵人能城守而不能野战。
现代文：周德威说： 不是这样，趟州人能够守城而不能野战。
English: Zhou Dewei said: This is not the case. Wanzhou people can defend the city but cannot fight in the field.

古文：吾之取胜，利在骑兵，平川广野，骑兵之所长也。
现代文：我们要取得胜利，有利的是骑兵，平原旷野，纔是骑兵发挥优势的地方。
English: We're going to win. The cavalry has the advantage. The plains are the wilderness. The plains are where the cavalry has the advantage.

古文：今吾军于河上，迫贼营门，非吾用长之地也。 
现代文：现在我们驻军在河边，靠近敌人的营门，不是我们利用优势的地方。 
English: Now we are encamped by the river, close to the enemy's camp gate, not a place where we can take advantage.

古文：庄宗不悦，退卧帐中，诸将无敢入见。
现代文：唐庄宗不高兴，退回营帐中休息，将领们没有人敢进见。
English: Unhappy, Tang Zhuozong retreated to his camp to rest. None of the generals dared to enter.

古文：德威谓监军张承业曰： 王怒老兵。
现代文：周德威对监军张承业说： 大王愤怒军队经久衰疲。
English: Zhou Dewei said to Zhang Chengye, the supervisor of the army: The great king's anger has exhausted the army.

古文：不速战者，非怯也。
现代文：不速战速决，不是胆怯。
English: It is not cowardice to act quickly.

古文：且吾兵少而临贼营门，所恃者，一水隔耳。
现代文：况且我们的军队少又靠近贼军的营门，所倚仗的，不过是一水之隔罢了。
English: Moreover, our army is small and close to the gate of the enemy's camp, relying on the fact that it is only a stone's throw away.

古文：使梁得舟筏渡河，吾无类矣！
现代文：假如梁军得到船渡过河来，我们都没命了！
English: If Liang's army gets a boat across the river, we're all dead!

古文：不如退军鄗邑，诱敌出营，扰而劳之，可以策胜也。 
现代文：不如撤退驻扎在鄗邑，引诱敌人走出营垒，骚扰拖疲他们，这样纔能够用计谋打败敌人。 
English: It is better to retreat and stay in the county, lure the enemy out of the camp, harass and wear them down, so that they can defeat the enemy with strategy.

古文：承业入言曰： 德威老将知兵，愿无忽其言！ 
现代文：张承业进见唐庄宗说： 周德威这个老将军懂得用兵，希望不要轻视他的意见！ 
English: Zhang Chengye met with Tang Zhuangzong and said: Zhou Dewei, this old general, knows how to use soldiers, I hope you don't despise his opinion!

古文：庄宗遽起曰： 吾方思之耳。 
现代文：唐庄宗于是起身说： 我正在考虑呢。 
English: Tang Zhuozong then stood up and said: I am considering it.

古文：已而德威获梁游兵，问景仁何为，曰： 治舟数百，将以为浮梁。 
现代文：不久周德威抓到梁的散兵，问他王景仁在做什么，回答说： 正在造几百只船，准备连成浮桥。 
English: Soon after, Zhou Dewei caught Liang's stragglers and asked Wang Jingren what he was doing, to which he replied, "I am building hundreds of boats, ready to be connected to form a floating bridge."

古文：德威引与俱见，庄宗笑曰： 果如公所料。 
现代文：周德威带着这个士兵一起进见唐庄宗，唐庄宗笑着说： 果然像你料想的那样。 
English: Zhou Dewei took this soldier to see Tang Zhuozong. Tang Zhuozong smiled and said, "It's just as you expected."

古文：乃退军鄗邑。
现代文：于是撤退到鄗邑。
English: Therefore, they retreated to Sono-eup.

古文：德威晨遣三百骑叩梁营挑战，自以劲兵三千继之。
现代文：周德威早晨派遣三百骑兵到梁的军营挑战，自己率强兵三干人紧随。
English: In the morning, Zhou Dewei sent three hundred horsemen to challenge Liang's military camp, followed by three strong soldiers led by himself.

古文：景仁怒，悉其军以出，与德威转斗数十里，至于鄗南。
现代文：王景仁发怒，率领他的全部军队出击，和周德威辗转作战几十里地，到达鄗邑南面。
English: Wang Jingren got angry, led his entire army to attack, and fought with Zhou Dewei for dozens of miles, reaching the south of Zouyue.

古文：两军皆阵，梁军横亘六七里，汴、宋之军居西，魏、滑之军居东。
现代文：两军都组成战阵，梁军横豆六七里地，汴、宋二州的军队在西面，魏、滑二州的军队在束面。
English: Both armies formed battle lines, with Liang's army covering a distance of sixty-seven li, the armies of the two states of Min and Song in the west, and the armies of the two states of Wei and Nian in Sokou.

古文：庄宗策马登高，望而喜曰： 平原浅草，可前可却，真吾之胜地！ 
现代文：唐庄宗打马登上高处，望见后高兴地说： 平原浅草，可进可退，确实是我打胜仗的地方！ 
English: Tang Zhuang Zong rode his horse to the top of the hill. After seeing it, he said happily: Asakusa Plain, you can go in or out, it is indeed the place where I won the battle!

古文：乃使人告德威曰： 吾当为公先，公可继进。 
现代文：于是派人告诉周德威说： 我应为你打前阵，你随我前进。 
English: So he sent someone to tell Zhou Dewei: "I should play up front for you, you should follow my lead."

古文：德威谏曰： 梁军轻出而远来，与吾转战，其来必不暇赍粮糗，纵其能赍亦不暇食，不及日午，人马俱饥，因其将退而击之胜。 
现代文：周德威劝阻说： 梁军没有准备从速处而来，和我们辗转作战，他们来时一定来不及带干粮，即使带了，也役时间吃，不到申午，人马都饿了，趁他们快要撤退时攻击他们，必定取胜。 
English: Zhou Dewei dissuaded: Liang's army is not ready to come from a quick place and fight with us. When they come, they will definitely not have time to bring dry food. Even if they bring it, it will take time to eat. By noon, everyone is hungry. Take advantage of them when they are about to retreat and attack them. You will surely win.

古文：诸将亦皆以为然。
现代文：将领们也都认为是这样。
English: The generals thought so, too.

古文：至未申时，梁军东偏尘起，德威鼓噪而进，麾其西偏曰： 魏、滑军走矣！ 
现代文：到未申时候，梁军的东面扬起烟尘，周德威呜鼓前进，指挥他西面的军队说： 魏、滑二州的军队逃了！ 
English: Before the announcement, the east side of Liang's army was covered with smoke and dust. Zhou Dewei marched forward, commanding his army in the west and said: The armies of Wei and Nian slipped away!

古文：又麾其东偏曰： 梁军走矣！ 
现代文：又指挥他东面的军队说： 梁军逃了！ 
English: He also commanded his army in the east and said, "The Liang army has fled!"

古文：梁阵动，不可复整，乃皆走，遂大败。
现代文：梁军的战阵骚动，不能重新整顿，于是都逃跑了，因而大败。
English: Liang's army was in turmoil and could not be reorganized, so they all fled, resulting in a crushing defeat.

古文：自鄗追至于柏乡，横尸数十里，景仁以十余骑仅而免。
现代文：周德威从鄗邑追到柏乡，梁军横尸几十里，王景仁仅率十多骑兵逃脱。
English: Zhou Dewei chased Liang's army for dozens of miles from Zhaoyu to Baoxiang. Wang Jingren escaped with only a dozen horsemen.

古文：自梁与晋争，凡数十战，其大败未尝如此。
现代文：自从梁和晋发生争斗，共几十次打仗，梁军不曾像这样大败遇。
English: Since the battle between Liang and Jin, Liang's army has been defeated dozens of times.

古文：刘守光僭号于燕，晋遣德威将三万出飞狐以击之。
现代文：刘守光在燕越分自封为帝，晋派周德威率三万人马出飞狐进攻他。
English: Liu Shouguang proclaimed himself emperor in Yan Yue, and the Jin sent Zhou Dewei and thirty thousand horses to attack him.

古文：德威入祁沟关，取涿州，遂围守光于幽州，破其外城，守光闭门距守。
现代文：周德威进入祁沟关，攻取涿州，于是把刘守光包围在幽州，攻破幽州外城，刘守光关闭城门拒守。
English: Zhou Dewei entered Yuzhou Pass and captured Yuzhou. He then encircled Liu Shouguang in Yuzhou and broke through the outer city of Yuzhou. Liu Shouguang closed the city gate and refused to defend.

古文：而晋军尽下燕诸州县，独幽州不下，围之逾年乃破之，以功拜卢龙军节度使。
现代文：而晋军全部攻克燕的各个州县，只有幽州没有攻克，包围了一年多纔攻破，周德威因功拜为卢龙军节度使。
English: While the Jin army conquered all of Yan's prefectures and counties, only Yuzhou was not conquered and was besieged for more than a year. Zhou Dewei was appointed as the commander of the Lulong army for his service.

古文：德威虽为大将，而常身与士卒驰骋矢石之间。
现代文：周德威虽然身焉大将，但常常亲自和士兵在战阵上驰骋。
English: Although Zhou Dewei was a general, he often personally galloped with soldiers on the battlefield.

古文：守光骁将单廷珪，望见德威于阵，曰： 此周阳五也！ 
现代文：刘守光的猛将单廷珪，望见周德威在战阵上，说： 造就是周阳五！ 
English: Liu Shouguang's fierce general, Shan Tingyu, saw Zhou Dewei on the battlefield and said: Zou is Zhou Yang Wu!

古文：乃挺枪驰骑追之。
现代文：于是举飞马追他。
English: So he picked up his flying horse and chased him.

古文：德威佯走，度廷珪垂及，侧身少却，廷珪马方驰，不可止，纵其少过，奋槌击之，廷珪坠马，遂见擒。
现代文：周德威假装逃跑，估计单廷珪快要追到了，侧转身体稍稍一退，单廷珪的战马正在飞奔，不能停，放他稍稍过去，周德威举起挝子猛击他，单廷珪从马上摔下，被抓获。
English: Zhou Dewei pretended to run away, estimated that Shan Tingyao was about to catch up, turned his body slightly back, Shan Tingyao's warhorse was galloping, could not stop, let him pass a little, Zhou Dewei raised his paw to hit him, Shan Tingyao fell off the horse and was caught.

古文：庄宗与刘掞相持于魏，掞夜潜军出黄泽关以袭太原，德威自幽州以千骑入土门以蹑之。
现代文：唐庄宗和刘郡在魏州对峙，刘郡晚上暗自派军队经黄泽关袭击太原，周德威从幽州率一千人马进入土门追击刘郭。
English: Tang Zhuangzong and Liu County confronted each other in Weizhou. In the evening, Liu County secretly sent troops to attack Taiyuan via Huangze Pass. Zhou Dewei led a thousand horses from Yuzhou into the Dumen to pursue Liu Guo.

古文：掞至乐平，遇雨不得进而还。
现代文：刘郡到达乐平，碰上下雨不能前进而返回。
English: Liu County arrived in Leping, but when it rained, they could not go forward and returned.

古文：德威与掞俱东，争趋临清。
现代文：周德威和刘郭都向东面前进，争相赶赴临清。
English: Zhou Dewei and Liu Guo both advanced eastward, competing to rush to Linqing.

古文：临清有积粟，且晋军饷道也，德威先驰据之，以故庄宗卒能困掞军而败之。
现代文：临清屯积有粮食，而且是供应晋军军饷的必经之路，周德威先驰马占据了临清，因此唐庄宗最终纔能使刘郭的军队疲困而击败他们。
English: Linqing was well-stocked with grain and was a vital supply route for the Jin army. Zhou Dewei first occupied Linqing on horseback, so Tang Zhuangzong was eventually able to wear down Liu Guo's army and defeat them.

古文：庄宗勇而好战，尤锐于见敌。
现代文：唐庄宗勇猛好战，尤其看见敌军锋芒更加毕露。
English: Tang Zhuozong fought bravely and aggressively, especially seeing the enemy's edge more exposed.

古文：德威老将，常务持重以挫人之锋，故其用兵，常伺敌之隙以取胜。
现代文：周德威是老将，常常力求稳重以挫伤敌人的锋芒，因此他用兵打仗，常常窥视敌人的漏洞来取得胜利。
English: Zhou Dewei is a veteran. He often strives to be steady to frustrate the enemy's edge. Therefore, he fights with soldiers and often peeks at the enemy's loopholes to achieve victory.

古文：十五年，德威将燕兵三万人，与镇、定等军从庄宗于河上，自麻家渡进军临濮，以趋汴州。
现代文：十五年，周德威率燕兵三万人，和镇、定等州的军队跟随唐庄宗到黄河边，从麻家渡进军临濮，以便赶赴汴州。
English: In 15 years, Zhou Dewei led 30,000 Yan soldiers, and the troops from Zhen, Ding and other prefectures followed Tangzhuang Zong to the Yellow River and marched into Linyi from Majiadu in order to rush to Ganzhou.

古文：军宿胡柳陂，黎明，候骑报曰： 梁军至矣！ 
现代文：军队驻扎在胡柳陂，黎明时，探望军情的骑兵报告说： 梁军来了！ 
English: The army was stationed in Hu Liucheng. At dawn, the cavalrymen who visited the military situation reported: Liang's army is coming!

古文：庄宗问战于德威，德威对曰： 此去汴州，信宿而近，梁军父母妻子皆在其中，而梁人家国系此一举。
现代文：唐庄宗向周德威询问战术，周德威回答谎： 这里到汴州，要不了两天两夜，梁军十兵的父母妻子儿女都在那里，而梁人家庭、国家的命运都取决于这次战斗。
English: Tang Zhuangzong asked Zhou Dewei about tactics, and Zhou Dewei lied in his answer: It takes less than two days and two nights to get here to Zhangzhou. The parents, wives and children of the ten Liang soldiers are all there, and the fate of Liang's family and the country all depend on this battle.

古文：吾以深入之兵，当其必死之战，可以计胜，而难与力争也。
现代文：我们以深入敌境的军队，面对他们必定誓死取胜的战斗，只能智取，而很难和他们硬斗。
English: We can only outwit them with troops that have penetrated deep into the enemy's territory, and it is difficult to fight them hard in the face of a battle that they are sure to win.

古文：且吾军先至此，粮爨具而营栅完，是谓以逸待劳之师也。
现代文：况且我们的军队先到这里，准备好了粮灶营栅，逭可叫做以逸待劳的军队。
English: Moreover, our army arrived here first, prepared grain stoves and camp fences, and can be called an army of laborers.

古文：王宜按军无动，而臣请以骑军扰之，使其营栅不得成，樵爨不暇给，因其劳乏而乘之，可以胜也。 
现代文：大王应按兵不动，请让我率骑兵骚扰他们，让他们不能修筑营栅，没有时间砍柴做饭，趁他们疲劳困乏的时候进攻他们，就能够取胜。 
English: The king should not move his troops, please let me lead the cavalry to harass them, so that they can not build camp fences, do not have time to chop wood for cooking, take advantage of their fatigue and attack them, so that they can win.

古文：庄宗曰： 吾军河上，终日俟敌，今见敌不击，复何为乎？ 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 我们驻扎在黄河边，整天等候敌人到来，现在见到敌人却不打，又做什么呢？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: We were stationed along the Yellow River, waiting all day for the enemy to arrive, but now we see the enemy but do not fight, what do we do?

古文：顾李存审曰： 公以辎重先，吾为公殿。 遽督军而出。
现代文：回头对李存审说： 你带着军需先走，我为你殿后 立即督促军队出发。
English: He turned back to Li Cunxin and said, "You go first with the army supplies, and I will immediately urge the army to set out after you."

古文：德威谓其子曰： 吾不知死所矣！ 
现代文：周德威对他的儿子说： 我不知道会死在哪里！ 
English: Zhou Dewei said to his son: I don't know where I will die!

古文：前遇梁军而阵：王居中，镇、定之军居左，德威之军居右，而辎重次右之西。
现代文：前面碰上梁军而摆开阵势：唐庄宗在中间，镇、定二州的军队在左面，周德威的军队在右面，而军需物资在周德威的西面。
English: They met Liang's army in front and took up positions: Tang Zhuozong in the middle, the army of Zhen and Ding Erzhou on the left, Zhou Dewei's army on the right, and the military supplies on the west of Zhou Dewei.

古文：兵已接，庄宗率银枪军驰入梁阵，梁军小败，犯晋辎重，辎重见梁硃旗，皆惊走入德威军，德威军乱，梁军乘之，德威父子皆战死。
现代文：两军交战后，唐庄宗率银军飞驰进入梁军阵地，梁军小败，进攻晋运送军需的部队，运送军需的部队看见梁的红色战旗，都惊慌地逃进周德威的军队中，周德威的军队大乱，梁军趁势进攻，周德威父子都战死。
English: After the two armies clashed, Tang Zhuangzong led the Silver Army to rush into the Liang Army's position. The Liang Army suffered a small defeat and attacked the troops transporting the paymasters. The troops transporting the paymasters saw Liang's red battle flag and fled in panic into Zhou Dewei's army. Zhou Dewei's army was in chaos, Liang's army took advantage of the situation to attack, and both Zhou Dewei and his son were killed in battle.

古文：庄宗与诸将相持而哭曰： 吾不听老将之言，而使其父子至此！ 
现代文：唐庄宗和将领们相抱痛哭说： 我不听老将军的话，而让他们父子俩得到这个下场！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong and the generals hugged each other and cried bitterly, saying, "I will not listen to the old general, but let their father and son get this fate!"

古文：庄宗即位，赠德威太师。
现代文：唐庄宗登皇位后，赠周德威太师。
English: After Tangzhuangzong ascended the throne, he gave Zhou Dewei the title of Grand Master.

古文：明宗时，加赠太尉，配享庄宗庙。
现代文：唐明宗时，加赠太尉，拊祭在唐庄宗庙。
English: When the Tang and Ming dynasties were in power, it was customary to add the rank of taifu, and the sacrificial offering took place in the Tangzhuang ancestral temple.

古文：晋高祖追封德威燕王。
现代文：晋高祖追封周德威为燕王。
English: Zhou Dewei was crowned the King of Swallows.

古文：子光辅，官至刺史。
现代文：儿子周光辅，官做到刺史。
English: His son, Zhou Guangfu, became a high-ranking official.

古文：○符存审子彦超彦饶彦卿
现代文：符存审字德详，陈州宛丘人。
English: Fuxun Zhenzhi De Zhao, Chenzhou Wanqiu Ren.

古文：符存审，字德详，陈州宛丘人也。初名存，少微贱，尝犯法当死，临刑，指旁坏垣顾主者曰： 愿就死于彼，冀得垣土覆尸。 
现代文：原名符存，年轻时很贫贱，曾犯法应当处死，临刑时，指着一旁的破墙对执刑的人说： 希望死在那里，能有墙土盖尸。 
English: His original name survives, he was very poor when he was young, he once committed a crime that should have been punishable by death, and when he was about to be executed, he pointed to a broken wall nearby and said to the executioner: I hope to die there, so that there will be a wall of earth to cover my corpse.

古文：主者哀而许之，为徙垣下。
现代文：行刑的人哀怜他就同意了，把他带到墙下。
English: The executioner took pity on him and agreed, leading him under the wall.

古文：而主将方饮酒，顾其爱妓，思得善歌者佐酒，妓言： 有符存常为妾歌，甚善。 
现代文：而主将正在饮酒，望着他的爱妓，想找一个会唱歌的人助酒，他的爱妓说： 有个叫符存的人常常为我唱歌，唱得很好。 
English: While the lord was drinking, he looked at his concubine and wanted to find someone who could sing to help him drink. His concubine said, "There is a man named Fuzun who often sings to me, and he sings very well."

古文：主将驰骑召存审，而存审以徙垣下故，未加刑，因往就召，使歌而悦之，存审因得不死。
现代文：主将驰马召见符存审，而符存审由于移到墙下执刑的缘故，还没有被处死，于是前往应召，主将让他唱歌，很喜欢他，符存审因此得以不死。
English: The master summoned Fu Cunxiu on horseback, and since Fu Cunxiu had not yet been executed because he had been moved under the wall to serve his sentence, he went to answer the summons. The master asked him to sing, and he liked him very much. As a result, Fu Cunxiu did not die.

古文：其后事李罕之，从罕之归晋，晋王以为义兒军使，赐姓李氏，名存审。
现代文：后来追随李罕之，跟着李罕之投奔晋，晋王任他为义儿军使，赐姓李，名叫存审。
English: Later, he followed Li Han Zhi, and with Li Han Zhi, he went to Jin. The king of Jin appointed him as a military envoy for the righteous, gave him the surname Li, and named him Cunxin.

古文：从晋王击李匡俦，为前锋，破居庸关。
现代文：跟随晋王进攻李匡俦，任前锋，攻破居庸关。
English: He followed Jin Wang's attack on Li Kuangtao, served as a striker, and broke through Ju Yongguan.

古文：又从击王行瑜，破龙泉寨，以功迁检校左仆射。
现代文：又随晋王进攻王行瑜，攻破龙泉寨，因功迁检校左仆射。
English: He also attacked Wang Xingyu with Jin Wang, broke through Longquanzhai, and was expelled from the school because of his merits.

古文：从李嗣昭攻汾州，执李瑭，迁左右厢步军指挥使。
现代文：跟随李嗣昭进攻汾州，捉获李瑭，迁左右厢步军指挥使。
English: He followed Li Shizhao's attack on Zhangzhou, captured Li Jun, and transferred the commanders of the left and right wing infantry.

古文：又从嗣昭攻潞州，降丁会。
现代文：又随李嗣晤进攻潞州，降服丁会。
English: He also followed Li Xiuhi to attack Zhangzhou and subjugated the Dinghui.

古文：从周德威破梁夹城，迁忻州刺史、蕃汉马步军指挥使。
现代文：随周德威攻破梁军夹城，迁忻州刺史、蕃汉马步军指挥使。
English: With Zhou Dewi's attack on the city surrounded by Liang's army, the commanding envoys of the Bozhou and Han horse-marching army were transferred.

古文：晋、赵攻燕，梁救燕，击赵深州，围蓚县，存审与史建瑭军下博，击走梁军，迁领邢州团练使。
现代文：晋、赵进攻燕，梁救燕，进攻赵的深州，包围蓓县，符存审和史建瑭驻扎在下博，打跑梁军，迁领邢州团练使。
English: Jin and Zhao attacked Yan, Liang saved Yan, attacked Zhao's Shenzhou, and encircled Jixian County. Fu Cunxuan and Shi Jianyong were stationed in lower Bo, ran Liang's army, and relocated the Bozhou regimental training envoy.

古文：魏博叛梁降晋，存审为前锋，屯临清。
现代文：魏博背叛梁向晋投降，符存审任前锋，屯驻临清。
English: Wei Bo betrayed Liang and surrendered to Jin. He was appointed as a vanguard and stationed in Linqing.

古文：庄宗入魏，存审殿军魏县，与刘掞相距于莘西。
现代文：唐庄宗进入魏，符存审在魏县驻军作后盾，和刘郡在莘州西面相对峙。
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Wei, Fu Cunxun backed up the garrison in Wei County, and confronted Liu County in the west of Zhangzhou.

古文：从庄宗败掞于故元城，阎宝以邢州降，乃以存审为安国军节度使。
现代文：随唐庄宗在旧元城打败刘郡，间宝以邢州投降，于是任符存审为安国军节度使。
English: Following Tang Zhuangzong's defeat of Liu County in Old Yuancheng and Bao's surrender in Bozhou, he was appointed as an envoy of the An Guo Army.

古文：毛璋以沧州降，徙存审横海，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：毛璋以沧州投降，调任符存审到横海，加同中书门下平章事。
English: Mao Zheng surrendered to Cangzhou, transferred to Henghai, and signed the Treaty of Pingzhang under Zhongshumen.

古文：契丹围幽州，是时晋与梁相持河上，欲发兵，兵少，欲勿救，惧失之。
现代文：契丹包围幽州，这时晋和梁在黄河边相持不下，想派兵救幽州，兵力太少，如果不救，又怕失去幽州。
English: The Khitan besieged Yuzhou. At this time, Jin and Liang could not stand each other on the edge of the Yellow River. They wanted to send troops to rescue Yuzhou. The troops were too few. If they did not rescue, they were afraid of losing Yuzhou.

古文：庄宗疑，以问诸将，而存审独以为当救，曰： 愿假臣骑兵五千足矣！ 
现代文：唐庄宗拿不定主意，询问各将领，而只有符存审认为应当救，说： 希望借给我骑兵五千人就够了！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong was undecided and asked the generals, but only Fu Cunxuan thought it was worth saving, saying, "I hope you will lend me five thousand cavalry, that's enough!"

古文：乃遣存审分兵救之，卒击走契丹。
现代文：于是派符存审分出兵力救幽州，终于打跑了契丹。
English: As a result, he sent troops to rescue Yuzhou, and finally chased away Khitan.

古文：从战胡柳陂，晋军晨败，亡周德威，存审与其子彦图力战，暮复败梁军于土山，遂取德胜，筑河南北为两城，晋人谓之 夹寨 。
现代文：随唐庄宗在胡柳陂打仗，晋军在早晨被打败，损失周德威，符存审和他的儿子符彦图奋力作战，傍晚又在土山上打败梁军，于是攻取德胜，在黄河南北修筑两个城，晋人把它叫做 夹寨 。
English: He fought with Tang Zhuangzong in Huludao. The Jin army was defeated in the morning and lost Zhou Dewei. Fu Cunxin and his son Fu Yantu fought hard. In the evening, they defeated Liang's army on the hill. So they conquered Desheng and built two cities north and south of the Yellow River. The Jin people called it Jizhai.

古文：迁内外蕃汉马步军总管。
现代文：迁内外蕃汉马步军总管。
English: He was transferred to be the general manager of the Han horse marching army.

古文：梁硃友谦以河中同州降晋，梁遣刘掞攻同州，友谦求救，乃遣存审与李嗣昭救之。
现代文：梁朱友谦以河中同州向晋投降，梁派刘郡进攻同州，朱友谦求救，于是派符存审和李嗣昭去营救。
English: Liang Zhu Youqian surrendered to Jin with the help of Tongzhou in the middle of the river, Liang sent Liu County to attack Tongzhou, Zhu Youqian called for help, and then sent Fu Cunxin and Li Shizhao to rescue.

古文：河中兵少而弱，梁人素易之，且不虞晋军之速至也。
现代文：河中军队少而又弱小，梁人素来小看它，而且没有料到晋军迅速赶到。
English: The army in the middle of the river is small and weak. Liang people have always looked down on it, and they did not expect the Jin army to arrive quickly.

古文：存审选精骑二百杂河中兵出击掞垒，阳败而走，掞兵追之，晋骑反击，获其骑兵五十，梁人知其晋军也，皆大惊。
现代文：符存审挑选精锐的骑兵两百人混在河中士兵中出击刘郡的营垒，假装失败逃跑，刘郭的军队追击他们，晋的骑兵掉头攻击梁军，俘获梁的骑兵五十人，梁人纔知道这是晋军，都很吃惊。
English: Two hundred elite cavalrymen were selected by the judge to attack the Liu County camp, pretending to be defeated and fleeing. Liu Guo's army chased them, Jin's cavalry turned around and attacked Liang's army, capturing fifty of Liang's cavalrymen. Liang's people were surprised to know that this was Jin's army.

古文：然河中粮少而新降，人心颇持两端，晋军屯朝邑，诸将皆欲速战，存审曰： 使梁军知吾利于速战，则将夹渭而营，断我饷道，以持久困我，则进退不可，败之道也。
现代文：但河中粮食少而又刚刚投降，人心很动摇，晋军驻扎在朝邑，将领们都想速战速决，符存审说： 如果梁军知道速战对我们有利，就会在渭河两边筑营，断绝我们的军饷供应线，用持久战困扰我们，那么我们就进退两难，这是失败的战术。
English: However, there was little food in the river and they had just surrendered. People's hearts were shaken. The Jin army was stationed in the imperial capital, and the generals all wanted to fight a quick war. Fu Cunxian said, "If the Liang army knows that a quick war is beneficial to us, they will build camps on both sides of the Wei River, cut off our supply line of military supplies, and plague us with a protracted war, then we will be in a dilemma. This is a failed tactic."

古文：不若缓师示弱，伺隙出奇，可以取胜。 
现代文：不如暂缓进攻显示弱小，等待机会出奇制胜，这样纔能取胜。 
English: It is better to delay the attack to show weakness, and wait for the opportunity to win unexpectedly, so that the dragonfly can win.

古文：乃按军不动。
现代文：于是按兵不动。
English: As a result, the soldiers did not move.

古文：居旬日，望气者言： 有黑气，状如斗鸡。 
现代文：过了十天，观望云气的人说： 天有罴气，形状就像斗鸡一样。 
English: After ten days, people who observed the clouds said, "The sky is hazy and shaped like a cockfight."

古文：存审曰： 可以一战矣！ 
现代文：符存审说： 可以打仗了！ 
English: Fu Cunxin said: It's time to fight!

古文：乃进军击掞，大败之，掞闭壁不复出。
现代文：于是进军攻击刘郡，大败刘郡，刘郡躲在营垒中不再出来。
English: So they marched to attack Liu County, defeated Liu County, and Liu County hid in the camp and never came out.

古文：存审曰： 掞兵已败，不如逸之。 
现代文：符存审说： 刘郡的军队已被打败，不如放走他。 
English: Fu Cunxin said: Liu County's army has been defeated, it is better to let him go.

古文：乃休士卒，遣裨将王建及牧马于沙苑，掞以谓晋军且懈，乃夜遁去，存审追击于渭河，又大败之。
现代文：于是让士兵休息，派副将王建及在沙苑牧马，刘郭认为晋军松懈了，于是在晚上逃跑，符存审追击到渭河，再次大败刘郡。
English: So he let the soldiers rest, and sent Vice-General Wang Jian to herd horses in Shayuan. Liu Guo thought that the Jin army was slack, so he ran away in the evening, and pursued them to Luohe, and once again defeated Liu County.

古文：张文礼弑赵王王镕，晋遣阎宝、李嗣昭等攻之，至辄战死，最后遣存审破之。
现代文：张文礼杀趟王王铬，晋派阎宝、李嗣昭等人进攻他，到后就都战死了，最后派符存审去纔攻破。
English: Zhang Wenli killed Wang Wang Chrom, Jin sent Yan Bao, Li Shizhao and others to attack him, and then they all died in the battle. Finally, he sent Fu Cunxin to break through.

古文：存审为将有机略，大小百余战，未尝败衄，与周德威齐名。
现代文：符存审作将，有机智谋略，大小一百多次战斗，不曾受到挫败，和周德威齐名。
English: He is a match for Zhou Dewei, who has more than a hundred battles and has never been defeated.

古文：德威死，晋之旧将独存审在。
现代文：周德威死后，晋的老将祇有符存审还在。
English: After Zhou Dewei's death, Jin's veteran only has a record and is still under investigation.

古文：契丹攻遮虏，乃以存审为卢龙军节度使。
现代文：契丹进攻遮虏，于是任符存审为卢龙军节度使。
English: When the Khitan attacked the Qajars, he appointed Fu Cunxun as the military commander of the Lulong Army.

古文：时存审已病，辞不肯行，庄宗使人慰谕，强遣之。
现代文：这时符存审巳患病，推辞不愿去，唐庄宗派人安慰晓谕他，强行派他去。
English: At this time, Fu Cunxin was ill and did not want to go, so the Tangzhuang sect sent someone to comfort him and force him to go.

古文：庄宗灭梁入洛，存审自以身为大将，不得与破梁之功，怏怏，疾益甚，因请朝京师。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁进入洛阳，符存审自以为身为大将，未能有灭梁的功劳，怏怏不乐，病情更加严重，于是请求到京师朝见。
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Luoyang to eliminate Liang. Fu Cunxin thought that he was a general, but he could not have the merit of eliminating Liang. He was unhappy, and his condition was more serious, so he requested to go to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：是时，郭崇韬权位已重，然其名望素出存审下，不乐其来而加己上，因沮其事，存审妻郭氏泣诉于崇韬曰： 吾夫于国有功，而于公乡里之旧，奈何忍令死弃穷野！ 
现代文：适时，郭崇韬的权位日重一日，但他的声望素来在符存审之下，不喜欢符存审到京师来处在自己之上，于是阻止这件事，符存审的妻子郭氏哭着向郭崇韬诉苦说： 我的丈夫对国家有功劳，而对你来说是同乡好友，怎么忍心让他死后弃尸荒野呢！ 
English: At the right time, Guo Chongzhen's power was increasing day by day, but his reputation had always been under scrutiny. He did not like the scrutiny of the Beijing division to be above himself, so he stopped the matter. Guo's wife, Guo, cried and complained to Guo Chongzhen: My husband is a credit to the country, but for you he is a fellow countryman and friend. How can you bear to let him die and leave his body in the wilderness!

古文：崇韬愈怒。
现代文：郭崇韬更加恼怒。
English: Guo Chongyao was even more angry.

古文：存审章累上，辄不许，存审伏枕叹曰： 老夫事二主四十年，今日天下一家，四夷远俗，至于亡国之将、射钩斩袪之人，皆得亲见天子，奉觞为寿，而独予弃死于此，岂非命哉！ 
现代文：符存审多次上书，郭崇韬就是不准许，符存审伏在枕头上叹息说： 我跟随两个君主四十年，现在天下统一，四方少数民族、远方鄙俗之人，以至亡国的将领、射带钩斩衣袖的小人物，都能够亲自进见天子，举杯祝寿，偏偏我却被抛弃死在这里，难道不是命中注定的吗！ 
English: Fu Cunxian repeatedly wrote to Guo Chongyi, but he would not allow it. Fu Cunxian prostrated himself on the pillow and sighed, "I have followed two monarchs for forty years, and now the world is unified. Ethnic minorities from all over the world, despicable people from far away, and even generals who have lost their country, and small people who have had their sleeves cut off by archery hooks, are all able to see the Son of Heaven in person and raise a glass to wish him a happy birthday. However, I was abandoned and died here. Isn't it fate?

古文：崇韬度存审病已亟，乃请许其来朝。
现代文：郭崇韬估计符存审病情已经危急，于是请求准许他来朝。
English: Guo Chongyao estimated that Fu Cunxiu's condition was critical, so he requested permission to come to the DPRK.

古文：徙存审宣武军节度使，卒于幽州。
现代文：调任符存审为宣武军节度使，死在幽州。
English: He died in Yuzhou after being appointed as the commander of the Xuanwu army.

古文：临终，戒其子曰： 吾少提一剑去乡里，四十年间取将相，然履锋冒刃出死入生而得至此也。 
现代文：临终时，告诫他的儿子说： 我年轻时提着一把剑离开家乡，四十年内得到将相的职位，却是通过冲锋陷阵出生入死纔得到这些的呀。 
English: On his deathbed, he admonished his son: "I left my hometown with a sword when I was young, and in forty years I got the position of commander, but I got this by charging into battle and dying.

古文：因出其平生身所中矢镞百余而示之曰： 尔其勉哉！ 
现代文：于是拿出一生中身上所中的箭头一百多枚给他们看并说： 你们要努力啊！ 
English: So he took out more than a hundred arrows he had shot in his life and showed them to them, saying: "You must work hard!

古文：存审三子：彦超、彦饶、彦卿。
现代文：符存审有三个儿子：符彦超、符彦饶、符彦卿。
English: Fuzenshin had three sons: Fuhiko Cho, Fuhiko Rao, and Fuhiko Kyo.

古文：彦超为汾州刺史。
现代文：符彦超任汾州刺史。
English: Fuhiko Chao was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：郭从谦弑庄宗，明宗入洛阳，是时，彦超为北京巡检，永王存霸奔于太原，彦超见留守张宪谋之。
现代文：郭从谦杀唐庄宗，唐明宗进入洛阳，适时符彦超任北京巡检，永王李存霸逃奔到太原，符彦超会见留守张宪商讨对策。
English: Guo Congqian killed Tangzhuangzong, Tangmingzong entered Luoyang, Fuyan took over the Beijing inspection at the right time, Yongwang Li Cunba fled to Taiyuan, and Fuyan met with Zhang Xian to discuss countermeasures.

古文：宪，儒者，事庄宗最久，不忍背恩，欲纳之，彦超不从，存霸遂见杀。
现代文：张宪，是个儒生，跟随唐庄宗最久，不忍心背恩负义，想接纳永王，符彦超不听从，李存霸于是被杀。
English: Zhang Xian, a Confucian scholar, had been a follower of the Tangzhuang sect for the longest time. He could not bear to be ungrateful. He wanted to accept Yongwang, but Fuyan Chao disobeyed, and Li Cunba was killed.

古文：明宗即位，彦超来朝，明宗德之，劳曰： 河东无事，赖尔之力也。 
现代文：唐明宗登位后，符彦超前来朝拜，唐明宗对他很感激，慰劳他说： 河东没有事端，全靠你尽心尽力啊。 
English: After Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, Fu Yanchao came to pay homage. Tang Mingzong was very grateful to him and consoled him, saying, "There is no trouble in Hedong. It is all up to you to do your best."

古文：以为建雄军留后。
现代文：任他为建雄军留后。
English: He was left as the leader of Jianxiong's army.

古文：迁北京留守，徙镇昭义，罢为上将军，复为泰宁军节度使，又徙安远。
现代文：迁北京留守，调任镇守昭义军，罢官为上将军，又任泰宁军节度使，又调任安远。
English: He was transferred to Beijing to stay, transferred to the town guard of the Shouyi Army, dismissed as a general, appointed as the commander of the Taining Army, and transferred to Anyuan.

古文：彦超主藏奴王希全盗其赀，彦超稍责之，奴惧，夜叩其门，言有急，彦超出，见杀，赠太尉。
现代文：符彦超管理家产的仆人王希全盗窃他的家财，符彦超稍稍责备他，家奴害怕，晚上敲开他的房门，说有急事，符彦超出来，被家奴所杀，追赠太尉。
English: Wang Xiquan, the servant of Fuhiko Chao, who managed the family property, stole his family's wealth. Fuhiko Chao slightly reproached him. The family slave was afraid and knocked on the door of his house at night, saying that there was an emergency. Fuhiko Chao came out, was killed by the family slave, and was posthumously awarded the rank of captain.

古文：次子彦饶，为汴州马步军都指挥使。
现代文：次子符彦饶，任汴州马步军都指挥使。
English: His second son, Fuhiko Rao, was appointed commander and envoy of the Bozhou horse cavalry.

古文：天成元年，发汴兵三千戍瓦桥关，控鹤指挥使张谏为乱，杀权知州高逖，迫彦饶为帅。
现代文：天成元年，率汴州兵三干人戍守瓦桥关，控鹤指挥使张谏作乱，杀权知州高逖，逼迫符彦饶任统帅。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he led three cadres of the Qizhou soldiers to guard the tile bridge pass. The commander of the controlling cranes caused Zhang Ye to make a disturbance, kill the authority of Chizhou Gaoqi, and force Fu Yanrao to be the commander.

古文：彦饶阳许之曰： 欲吾为帅，当止焚掠，明日以军礼见吾于南衙。 
现代文：符彦饶假装答应他说： 想让我做统帅，应当禁止放火抢劫，明天按军礼在南衙门见我。 
English: Fu Yanrao pretended to promise him: "If you want me to be commander-in-chief, you should ban arson and robbery. Meet me at the South Gate tomorrow according to military etiquette."

古文：乃阴与拱衙指挥使庞起伏甲于衙内。
现代文：于是暗中和拱衙指挥使庞起在衙门内埋下伏兵。
English: As a result, he secretly ordered Pang Qi to ambush the soldiers in the gate.

古文：明日，谏等皆集，伏兵发，诛谏等，杀四百余人，即日牒州事与推官韦俨。
现代文：第二天，张谏等人都聚集在南衙门外，伏兵出动，杀死张谏等人，又杀死四百多人，当天发布公告，令推官韦俨管理州中事务。
English: The next day, Zhang Ye and others gathered outside the South Gate, and an ambush was sent out, killing Zhang Ye and others, and killing more than 400 people. On the same day, an announcement was issued, ordering the magistrate Wei Ye to manage the affairs of the middle school.

古文：明宗下诏褒其忠略。
现代文：唐明宗下诏褒奖他的忠诚和胆略。
English: Tang Mingzong issued an edict praising his loyalty and boldness.

古文：其后累迁彰圣都指挥使，历曹、沂、饶三州刺史。
现代文：后来累迁彰圣都指挥使，历任曹、沂、饶三州刺史。
English: Later, he successively served as the commanding envoy of the Zhang Sheng capital, and successively held the posts of Cao, Yao, and Rao in the history of Sanshou.

古文：清泰三年，自饶州刺史拜忠正军节度使、侍卫马步军都指挥使。
现代文：清泰三年，从饶州刺史拜为忠正军节度使，侍卫马步军都指挥使。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, Zhishibai from Raozhou was the commander of the festival of the Zhongzheng Army, and the bodyguards and horse cavalry all commanded the envoys.

古文：晋高祖起太原，彦饶以侍卫兵从废帝至河阳。
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，符彦饶率侍卫兵随唐废帝到河阳。
English: Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, and Fuhiko Rao and his bodyguards followed the deposed Emperor Tang to Kheyang.

古文：废帝败，晋高祖以杨光远代彦饶将亲军，徙彦饶义成军节度使。
现代文：唐废帝被打败，晋高祖任命杨光速代替符彦饶率亲军，调符彦饶任义成军节度使。
English: After Emperor Tang was defeated, Emperor Jingu appointed Yang Guanghui to replace Fuhiko Rao as the commander of the imperial army, and appointed Fuhiko Rao as the commander of the imperial army.

古文：范延光反，白奉进以侍卫兵三千屯滑州。
现代文：范延光反叛，白奉进率侍卫兵三干人屯驻滑州。
English: Fan Yanguang rebelled, and Bai Bongjin led three cadres of bodyguards to settle in Leshou.

古文：兵士犯法，奉进捕得五人，其三人义成兵也，因并斩之，彦饶怒。
现代文：士兵犯法，白奉进抓到五个人，其中三个人是义成军的士兵，于是全部杀掉，符彦饶大怒。
English: The soldiers broke the law. Bai Fengjin caught five people, three of whom were soldiers of the Volunteer Army, and then killed them all. Fuhiko was furious.

古文：明日，奉进从数骑过彦饶谢不先告而杀，彦饶曰： 军士各有部分，义成兵卒岂公所得斩邪？
现代文：第二天，白奉进带着几个骑兵到符彦饶那里，对没有事先告诉他就杀掉他的士兵表示道歉，符彦饶说： 士兵各有所属，义成军的士兵难道是你能杀的吗？
English: The next day, Bai Fengjin took several cavalrymen to Fuhiko Rao and apologized for killing his soldiers without telling him in advance. Fuhiko Rao said, "Soldiers belong to each other. Can you kill soldiers of the Yicheng Army?"

古文：何无主客之礼也！ 
现代文：怎么没有主客的礼仪呢！ 
English: How come there is no host and guest etiquette!

古文：奉进怒曰： 军士犯法，安有彼此！
现代文：白奉进发怒说： 士兵犯法，怎么还分你我！
English: Bai Fengjin said angrily, "Soldiers break the law, why are you punishing me!"

古文：且仆已自谢过，而公怒不息，欲与延光同反邪！ 
现代文：况且我已亲自就我的过失道歉，而你大怒不止，想和范延光一同反叛吗！ 
English: Moreover, I have personally apologized for my mistake, and you are still furious, do you want to rebel with Fan Yanguang!

古文：拂衣而起，彦饶不复留之，其麾下大噪，追奉进杀之，彦饶不之止也。
现代文：于是拂衣起身，符彦饶不再韶他，而部下们大肆喧哗，追上白奉进杀了他，符彦饶没有制止他们。
English: As a result, Whiskers stood up, Fuhiko Rao no longer beat him, and his subordinates made a lot of noise, caught up with Baibong and killed him, Fuhiko Rao did not stop them.

古文：已而屯驻军将马万等闻乱，以兵擒彦饶送之京师，遂以彦饶应延光反闻。
现代文：不久屯驻军将马万等人听说发生骚乱，率兵捉到符彦饶送到京师，于是以符彦饶策应范延光反叛的罪名上奏。
English: Soon after, the garrison troops arrested Fuhiko Rao and sent him to the capital with his soldiers after hearing that Ma Wan and others had heard that there had been a riot. Fuhiko Rao was charged with conspiring with Fan Yankuang to rebel.

古文：行至赤冈，高祖使人杀之，下诏削夺在身官爵。
现代文：走到赤冈时，晋高祖派人杀了他，下韶取消他的官爵。
English: When he reached Akaoka, Emperor Jingu sent someone to kill him and revoke his title.

古文：彦饶与晋初无衅隙，以一旦之忿，不能驭其军，杀奉进已非其本意，以反见诛，非其罪也！
现代文：符彦饶和晋原本没有矛盾，因一时的忿恨，没能管好他的军队，杀死白奉进已经不是他的本意，因反叛被杀，更不是他的罪行。
English: Fuhiko Rao and Jin originally had no conflict, but because of a momentary anger, he failed to control his army, killing Bai Fengjin was not his intention, and being killed for rebellion was not his crime.

古文：○史建瑭子匡翰
现代文：史建瑭，雁门人。
English: Shi Jianqian, a native of Ganmen.

古文：史建瑭，雁门人也。晋王为雁门节度使，其父敬思为九府都督，从晋王入关破黄巢，复京师，击秦宗权于陈州，尝将骑兵为先锋。
现代文：晋王任雁门节度使时，他的父亲史敬思任九府都督，跟随晋王入潼关攻破黄巢，收复京师，在陈州进攻秦宗权，曾率领骑兵作为先锋。
English: When Jin Wang was appointed as the envoy of the Ganmen Festival, his father Shi Jing Si was appointed as the governor of nine prefectures, followed Jin Wang into Shaoguan, broke the Yellow Nest, recovered the Beijing Division, attacked Qin Zongquan in Chenzhou, and led the cavalry as the vanguard.

古文：晋王东追黄巢于冤朐，还过梁，军其城北。
现代文：晋王向东追击黄巢到冤朐，返回时经过梁，在城北驻扎。
English: Jin Wang chased Huang Chao eastward to Fuxin, and when he returned, he passed Liang and stationed himself in the north of the city.

古文：梁王置酒上源驿，独敬思与薛铁山、贺回鹘等十余人侍。
现代文：梁王在上源驿摆酒，只有史敬思和薛铁山、贺回鹊等十多人侍奉。
English: Liang Wang served wine at Shangyuan Pavilion. Only Shi Jingsi, Xue Tieshan, He Hui Yao and more than ten other people served.

古文：晋王醉，留宿梁驿，梁兵夜围而攻之。
现代文：晋王喝醉了，在上源驿留宿，梁兵在晚上围攻他们。
English: Jin Wang got drunk and stayed at Shangyuan. Liang's soldiers besieged them at night.

古文：敬思登驿楼，射杀梁兵十余人，会天大雨，晋王得与从者俱去，缒尉氏门以出。
现代文：史敬思登上驿楼，射死梁兵十多人，碰上天下大雨，晋王纔得以和随行的人一同逃走，从上面吊绳子逃出尉氏门。
English: Shi Jingsi boarded the watchtower, shot and killed more than ten Liang soldiers, and encountered heavy rain. Jin Wangtao was able to escape with his entourage, and escaped from the gate of the prince by hanging a rope from above.

古文：而敬思为梁追兵所得，见杀。
现代文：而史敬思被梁兵追上，被杀。
English: But Shi Jingsi was caught by Liang soldiers and killed.

古文：建瑭少事军中为裨校，自晋降丁会，与梁相距于潞州，建瑭已为晋兵先锋。
现代文：史建瑭年轻时在军中任副校，自从晋降服丁会后，和梁在潞州相对峙，史建瑭已是晋军的先锋。
English: When he was young, Shi Jianyong served as a vice-college in the army. Since he was promoted and demoted from the service committee, he and Liang have been confronting each other in Zhangzhou. Shi Jianyong is already the vanguard of the promotion army.

古文：梁兵数为建瑭所杀，相戒常避史先锋。
现代文：梁兵多次被史建瑭杀死，常常相互告诫要躲开史先锋。
English: Liang Bing was killed many times by Shi Jiankun, and they often warned each other to stay away from Shi Fengfeng.

古文：梁遣王景仁攻赵，晋军救赵，建瑭以先锋兵出井陉，战于柏乡。
现代文：梁派遣王景仁进攻赵，晋军救赵，史建瑭率先锋兵经过井陉，在柏乡打仗。
English: Liang sent Wang Jingren to attack Zhao, the Jin army to save Zhao, and Shi Jiankun led the vanguard through Jingyao and fought in Baixiang.

古文：梁军为方阵，分其兵为二：汴、宋之军居左，魏、滑之军居右。
现代文：梁军组成方阵，把军队分成两部分：汴、宋二州的军队在左面，魏、滑二州的军队在右面。
English: Liang's army formed a phalanx, dividing the army into two parts: the army of the two states of Wei and Song on the left, and the army of the two states of Wei and Sui on the right.

古文：周德威击其左，建瑭击其右，梁军皆走，遂大败之。
现代文：周德威攻击他们左面的军队，史建瑭攻击他们右面的军队，梁军都逃跑了，于是大败梁军。
English: Zhou Dewei attacked the army on their left, Shi Jiankun attacked the army on their right, and Liang's army all fled, thus defeating Liang's army.

古文：以功加检校左仆射。
现代文：因功加检校左仆射。
English: For his efforts, he was promoted to left-handed archer.

古文：天祐九年，晋攻燕，燕王刘守光乞师于梁，梁太祖自将击赵，围枣强、蓚县。
现代文：天佑九年，晋进攻燕，燕王刘守光向梁请求军队增援，梁太祖亲自率兵进攻赵，包围橐强、蓓县。
English: In the ninth year of Heaven's blessing, Jin attacked Yan, and Yan's king, Liu Shuguang, asked Liang for reinforcements. Liang Taizu personally led the troops to attack Zhao, and encircled He Qiang and Shixian.

古文：是时晋精兵皆北攻燕，独符存审与建瑭以三千骑屯赵州。
现代文：这时晋的精兵都在北方进攻燕，只有符存审和史建瑭率三千骑兵屯驻在趟州。
English: At this time, Jin's elite soldiers were all attacking Yan in the north, and only Fuxun Xuan and Shi Jianxuan stationed 3,000 cavalry in Wuzhou.

古文：梁军已破枣强，存审扼下博桥。
现代文：梁军攻破枣强后，符存审把守下博桥。
English: After Liang's army defeated Zaoqiang, Fuxun was put in charge of guarding Xiaobo Bridge.

古文：建瑭分其麾下五百骑为五队：一之衡水，一之南宫，一之信都，一之阜城，而自将其一，约各取梁刍牧者十人会下博。
现代文：史建瑭把他的部下五百人马分成五队：一队到衡水，一队到南宫，一队到信都，一队到阜城，而自己率一队，约定各自捉取梁军割草放牧的人十个到下博会合。
English: Shi Jiankun divided his 500 subordinates into five teams: one team went to Hengshui, one team went to Nangu, one team went to Xindu, one team went to Fucheng, and he led a team and agreed to each capture ten people from Liang's army who were cutting grass and grazing.

古文：至暮，擒梁兵数十，皆杀之，各留其一人，纵使逸去，告之曰： 晋王军且大至。 
现代文：到傍晚，抓到梁兵几十人，都杀掉了，各队留下一人，放他逃去，告诉他说： 晋王的大军快到了。 
English: In the evening, they caught dozens of Liang's soldiers and killed them all. Each team kept one man and let him escape, telling him: "King Jin's great army is approaching."

古文：明日，建瑭率百骑为梁旗帜，杂其刍牧者，暮叩梁营，杀其守门卒，纵火大呼，斩击数十百人。
现代文：第二天，史建瑭率领一酉骑兵打着梁的旗帜，混在割草放牧的梁军中，在傍晚叩开梁的营门，杀死守门的士兵，放火大叫，斩杀几十上百人。
English: The next day, Shi Jiankun led a group of cavalrymen with the banner of Liang and mixed with Liang's troops who were cutting grass and grazing. In the evening, he knocked down the gate of Liang's camp, killed the soldiers guarding the gate, set it on fire, shouted, and killed dozens and hundreds of people.

古文：而梁刍牧者所出，各遇晋兵，有所亡失，其纵而不杀者，归而皆言晋军且至。
现代文：而梁派出去割草放牧的人，各自都碰上了晋兵，有的已经不见了，那些被放回来没有被杀的士兵，回来后都说晋军快到了。
English: But the people Liang sent out to cut grass and graze cattle all ran into Jin soldiers, some of whom had already disappeared. Those soldiers who were released and not killed returned saying that the Jin army was approaching.

古文：梁太祖夜拔营去，蓚县人追击之，梁军弃其辎重铠甲不可胜计。
现代文：于是梁太祖在晚上拔营离去，蒋县人追击他们，梁军丢下的粮草武器不可胜数。
English: As a result, Liang Taizu left the camp in the evening, and the people of Jiang County pursued them. The grain and grass weapons left behind by Liang's army were countless.

古文：梁太祖方病，由是增剧，而晋军以故得并力以收燕者，二人之力也。
现代文：梁太祖这时正患病，从此更加严重。而晋军因此能同心协力收复燕，全是他们两人的功劳。
English: Liang Taizu was ill at the time, and his condition worsened. It was thanks to the two of them that the Jin army was able to work together to recapture Yan.

古文：后从庄宗入魏博，败刘掞于故元城，累以功历贝、相二州刺史。
现代文：后来随唐庄宗进入魏博，在旧元城打败刘郭，积累功劳历任贝、相二州刺史。
English: Later, he entered Weibo with Tang Zhuangzong, defeated Liu Guo in the old Yuancheng, and accumulated the achievements of successive Renbei and Xiang Erzhou.

古文：十八年，晋军讨张文礼于镇州，建瑭以先锋兵下赵州，执其刺史王珽。
现代文：十八年，晋军在镇州讨伐张文礼，史建瑭率先锋兵攻克趟州，抓到刺史王挺。
English: In 18 years, the Jin army fought against Zhang Wenli in Zhenzhou, Shi Jiankun led the vanguard to conquer Wanzhou, and caught the assassin Shi Wang Ting.

古文：兵傅镇州，建瑭攻其城门，中流矢卒，年四十二。
现代文：军队到达镇州，史建瑭进攻城门，中飞箭而死，终年四十二岁。
English: When the army arrived at Zhenzhou, Shi Jiankun attacked the city gate and was killed by flying arrows. He was forty-two years old.

古文：建瑭子匡翰，尚晋高祖女，是为鲁国长公主。
现代文：史建瑭的儿子史匡翰，娶晋高祖的女儿，这就是鲁国长公主。
English: Shi Jianjun's son Shi Kuanghan married the daughter of Jin Gaozu, this is the eldest princess of Lu.

古文：匡翰为将，沉毅有谋，而接下以礼，与部曲语未尝不名。
现代文：史匡翰为将，沉着刚毅有智谋，而礼贤下士，和部下谈话都称自己的名字。
English: Squire John is the general, calm and resolute with a clever plan, while Corporal Reckless calls himself by his first name when talking to his subordinates.

古文：历天雄军步军都指挥使、彰圣马军都指挥使。
现代文：历任天雄军步军都指挥使、彰圣马军都指挥使。
English: Successive commanders of the Tianxiong Army's marching corps have all been commanders, and commanders of the Zhang Shengma Army have all been commanders.

古文：事晋为怀和二州刺史、郑州防御使、义成军节度使，所至兵民称慕之。
现代文：在晋任怀、和二州刺史、郑州防御使、义成军节度使，所到之处军队和百姓都称颂敬重他。
English: In Jin Ren Huai, He Erzhou Zhishi, Zhengzhou Defense Envoy, Yicheng Army Festival Envoy, the army and the people praised and respected him everywhere he went.

古文：史氏世为将，而匡翰好读书，尤喜《春秋三传》，与学者讲论，终日无倦。
现代文：史氏世代为将，而史匡翰喜好读书，特别喜欢《春秋三传》，和学者探讨，整天没有倦意。
English: Shi's generation is the best, and Shi Kuanghan likes to read, especially likes "The Three Classics of Spring and Autumn," and discusses with scholars, and is not tired all day.

古文：义成军从事关澈尤嗜酒，尝醉骂匡翰曰： 近闻张彦泽脔张式，未见史匡翰斩关澈，天下谈者未有偶尔！ 
现代文：义成军从事关澈特别喜欢喝酒，曾醉骂史匡翰说： 最近听说张彦泽宰割张式，没见史匡翰杀我关澈，天下谈论的人找不到与这事成双成对的。 
English: Yicheng soldiers particularly like to drink when engaged in battle, and once drunkenly scolded Shi Kuanghan, saying: Recently, I heard that Zhang Yanze slaughtered Zhang style, but I did not see Shi Kuanghan kill me in battle, and people around the world can not find a pair with this.

古文：匡翰不怒，引满自罚而慰勉之，人皆服其量。
现代文：史匡翰没有发怒，倒满酒割自己还安慰勉励他，人们都佩服他的气量。
English: Squireham didn't get angry. He drank himself into a stupor and consoled and encouraged him. People admired his courage.

古文：卒年四十。
现代文：死时四十岁。
English: He was forty when he died.

古文：○王建及
现代文：王建及，许州人。
English: Wang Jianyi, a native of Xuzhou.

古文：王建及，许州人也。少事李罕之，从罕之奔晋，为匡卫指挥使。
现代文：年轻时跟随李罕之，随李罕之投奔晋，任匡卫指挥使。
English: When he was young, he followed Li Han Zhi, and with Li Han Zhi, he went to the Jin Dynasty and served as the commanding officer of Kuangwei.

古文：梁、晋战柏乡，相距鄗邑野河上，镇、定兵扼河桥，梁兵急击之。
现代文：梁、晋在柏乡打仗，在鄗邑野河岸边对峙，镇、定二州兵把守河上的桥，梁兵迅速进攻他们。
English: Liang and Jin fought in Baoxiang and confronted each other on the bank of the Suiyuye River. The town and Ding soldiers of the two states guarded the bridge over the river. Liang's soldiers quickly attacked them.

古文：庄宗登高台望见镇、定兵将败，顾建及曰： 桥为梁夺，则吾军危矣，奈何？ 
现代文：唐庄宗登上高台望见镇、定二州兵快要被打败，回头对王建及说： 桥如果被梁军夺去，那么我们的军队就危险了，怎么办呢？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong ascended the high ground of Wangjing Town, determined that the two state soldiers were about to be defeated, and turned back to Wang Jianji and said: If the bridge is taken by Liang's army, then our army will be in danger, what should we do?

古文：建及选二百人驰击梁兵，梁兵败，解去。
现代文：王建及挑选两百人飞马进攻梁兵，梁兵被打败，散去。
English: Wang Jian and selected two hundred Pegasus to attack the Liang soldiers. The Liang soldiers were defeated and dispersed.

古文：从战莘县、故元城，皆先登陷阵，以功累拜辽州刺史，将银枪效节军。
现代文：跟睫唐庄宗在莘县、旧元城打仗，都首先登城冲锋陷障，累积功劳拜为辽州刺史，统领银效节军。
English: He fought with Tang Zhuangzong in Lixian County and Old Yuancheng, and both of them were the first to go to the city to charge into the trap. He accumulated merits for Liaozhou's history, and led the Silver Effect Festival Army.

古文：晋攻杨刘，建及躬自负葭苇堙堑，先登拔之。
现代文：晋进攻杨刘，王建及亲自背芦苇填沟，首先登城攻克杨刘。
English: Jin attacked Yang Liu, Wang Jian and personally backed the reeds to fill the ditch, and first went to the city to conquer Yang Liu.

古文：从战胡柳，晋兵已败，与梁争土山，梁兵先至，登山而阵。
现代文：随唐庄宗在胡柳打仗，晋兵被打败后，和梁军争夺土山，梁兵先到，上山摆开阵势。
English: Following Tang Zhuangzong's war in Huliu, after the Jin soldiers were defeated, they fought with Liang's army for the soil mountain. Liang's soldiers arrived first and went up the mountain to set up a position.

古文：庄宗至山下望梁阵坚而整，呼其军曰： 今日之战，得山者胜。 
现代文：唐庄宗到山下望见梁军阵地牢固而严整，对他的军队喊话说： 今天的战斗，占领土山的取胜。 
English: When Tang Zhuangzong looked down the mountain and saw Liang's army in a strong and well-organized position, he shouted to his troops: "Today's battle is to win the territory of the mountain.

古文：因驰骑犯之，建及以银枪军继进，梁兵下走，阵山西，晋兵遂得土山。
现代文：于是驰马冲向梁军，王建及率银军跟着前进，梁兵下山逃跑，在山的西面布阵，晋兵于是夺取了土山。
English: As a result, the galloping horses rushed to Liang's army, Wang Jian and the silver army led by Liang followed the advance, Liang's soldiers fled down the mountain and set up a formation on the west side of the mountain, and the Jin soldiers then captured the soil mountain.

古文：诸将皆言： 溃兵未集，日暮不可战。 
现代文：将领们都说： 溃散的士兵还没有集聚，短时间内不能打仗。 
English: The generals all said: The scattered soldiers have not yet gathered, and they cannot fight in a short time.

古文：阎宝曰： 彼阵山上，吾在其下，尚能击之，况以高而击下，不可失也。 
现代文：间宝说： 他们在山上布阵，我们在山下，还能击败他们，何况居高临下出击，机不可失。 
English: Miao Bao said, "They set up their positions on the mountain, but we can still defeat them at the foot of the mountain. What's more, we should attack from a higher position, so as not to lose the opportunity."

古文：建及以为然，因白庄宗曰： 请登高望臣破敌！ 
现代文：王建及认为是这样，于是对唐庄宗说： 请你登上高处看我攻破敌军！ 
English: Wang Jianyi thought so, so he said to Tang Zhuangzong: "Please climb to a high place to watch me defeat the enemy army!"

古文：即呼众曰： 今日所失辎重皆在山西，盍往取之！ 
现代文：随即对士兵们呼叫说： 今天损失的军需物资都在山的西面，焉什么不去拿回来呢！ 
English: He then called out to the soldiers, "The munitions lost today are all on the west side of the mountain, why don't you go and get them back!"

古文：即驰犯梁阵，梁兵大败。
现代文：立即驰马进攻梁军阵地，梁兵大败。
English: They immediately galloped to attack Liang's army's positions, and Liang's soldiers suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：晋遂军德胜，为南北城于河上。
现代文：晋军于是在德胜驻扎，在黄河两岸修筑南北城。
English: The Jin army was stationed in Desheng and built the North and South Cities on both sides of the Yellow River.

古文：梁将贺瑰攻其南城，以竹笮维战舰于河，晋兵不得渡，南城危甚。
现代文：梁将贺瓖进攻南城，用竹绳把战船系在黄河河边，晋兵不能渡河，南城很危急。
English: Liang ordered He Xuan to attack Nancheng, and tied the warship to the Yellow River with a bamboo rope. Jin soldiers could not cross the river, and Nancheng was in great danger.

古文：庄宗积金帛于军门，募能破梁战舰者，至于吐火禁咒莫不皆有。
现代文：唐庄宗在军营门口堆放金银绸缎，招募能够攻破梁军战船的人，以至于吐火焰念禁咒的，无奇不有。
English: It is not surprising that Tang Zhuangzong would pile up gold and silver silk cocoons at the gate of the military camp and recruit people who could break through the warships of Liang's army, so that they would spit fire and recite the forbidden spell.

古文：建及重铠执槊呼曰： 梁、晋一水间尔，何必巧为！
现代文：王建及穿着双层镗甲手执长矛叫道： 梁、晋一水之隔罢了，何必施巧计！
English: Wang Jianyi, wearing double-layered armor and holding a spear, shouted: Liang and Jin are only separated by water, why do they need to use clever tricks!

古文：吾今破之矣。 
现代文：看我今天如何破敌！ 
English: Look how I beat the enemy today!

古文：即以大甕积薪，自上流纵火焚梁战舰，建及以二舟载甲士随之，斧其竹笮，梁兵皆走。
现代文：立即用大瓮堆上柴草，从上游放火焚烧梁的战船，王建及率两只船载上穿镗甲的士兵随火而去，砍掉他们的竹绳，梁兵都逃跑了。
English: They immediately piled up firewood with large hoes and set fire to the warship from upstream to burn the beams. Wang Jianyi and his two armored soldiers on board followed the fire, cut their bamboo ropes, and the beam soldiers all fled.

古文：晋军乃得渡。救南城，瑰围解去。
现代文：晋军于是得以渡过黄河，援救南城，贺瓖撤围离去。
English: As a result, the Jin army was able to cross the Yellow River, rescue Nancheng, and withdraw from Hefei.

古文：自庄宗得魏博，建及将银枪效节军。
现代文：自从唐庄宗取得魏博后，王建及统率银效节军。
English: Since Tang Zhuozong obtained Wei Bo, Wang Jianyi has been leading the Silver Effect Festival army.

古文：建及为将，喜以家赀散士卒。
现代文：王建及带兵，喜欢把家财分发给士兵。
English: Wang Jian and his soldiers like to distribute their family wealth to the soldiers.

古文：庄宗遣宦官韦令图监其军，令图言： 建及得士心，惧有异志，不可令典牙兵。 
现代文：唐庄宗派宦官韦令图监督他的军队，韦令图说： 王建及得到士兵的拥护，怕他有二心，不能让他掌管牙兵。 
English: Wei Lingtu, the eunuch of the Tangzhuang sect, oversaw his army. Wei Lingtu said: Wang Jian got the support of the soldiers. If he has two hearts, he cannot be allowed to control the soldiers.

古文：即以为代州刺史。
现代文：随即改任为代州刺史。
English: He was immediately reassigned to the post of daishu sashimi chef.

古文：建及怏怏而卒，年五十七。
现代文：王建及怏快不乐而死，终年五十七岁。
English: Wang Jian and Zou are both dead, aged fifty-seven.

古文：○元行钦
现代文：元行钦，幽州人。
English: Yuan Xingqin, from Yuzhou.

古文：元行钦，幽州人也。为刘守光裨将，守光篡其父仁恭，使行钦以兵攻仁恭于大安山而囚之，又使行钦害诸兄弟。
现代文：任刘守光的副将，刘守光篡夺父亲刘仁恭的权位，派元行钦率兵在大安山进攻刘仁恭并囚禁了他，又派元行钦谋害他的兄弟们。
English: As the vice-general of Liu Shouguang, Liu Shouguang usurped the power of his father Liu Rengong, sent Yuan Xingqin to attack Liu Rengong and imprison him on Mount Da'an, and sent Yuan Xingqin to murder his brothers.

古文：其后晋攻幽州，守光使行钦募兵云、朔间。
现代文：后来晋进攻幽州，刘守光派元行钦在云、朔二州间招募士兵。
English: Later, Jin attacked Yuzhou, and Liu Shuguang sent Yuan Xingqin to recruit soldiers between Yun and Shuo.

古文：是时明宗掠地山北，与行钦相拒广边军，凡八战，明宗七射中行钦，行钦拔矢而战，亦射明宗中股。
现代文：这时唐明宗在山北夺占土她，和元行钦在广边军相对峙，一共打了八仗，唐明宗七次射中元行钦，元行钦拔出箭继续作战，也射中唐明宗的大腿。
English: At this time, Tang Mingzong conquered the occupied territory in the north of Shanxi Province, and confronted with Yuan Xingqin in the Guangyuan Army. A total of eight battles were fought. Tang Mingzong shot Yuan Xingqin seven times, Yuan Xingqin pulled out his arrow and continued to fight, and also shot Tang Mingzong's thigh.

古文：行钦屡败，乃降。
现代文：元行钦多次被打败，于是投降。
English: Yuan Xingqin was defeated many times, so he surrendered.

古文：明宗抚其背而饮以酒曰： 壮士也！ 
现代文：唐明宗摸着他的背用酒招待他说： 壮士啊！ 
English: Tang Mingzong touched his back with wine and invited him to say: "Brave man!

古文：因养以为子。
现代文：于是收为养子。
English: So he was adopted.

古文：常从明宗战，数立功。
现代文：常常跟随唐明宗打仗，多次立下战功。
English: He often fought with the Tang and Ming dynasties, and won many victories.

古文：庄宗已下魏，益选骁将自卫，闻行钦骁勇，取之为散员都部署，赐姓名曰李绍荣。
现代文：唐庄宗攻克魏后，增选勇猛的将领保卫自己，听说元行钦骁悍勇猛，选他做散员都部署，赐姓名叫李绍荣。
English: After Tang Zhuangzong conquered Wei, he co-elected a brave general to defend himself. He heard that Yuan Xingqian was brave and courageous, and selected him to be a non-commissioned officer. He was given the name Li Shaorong.

古文：庄宗好战而轻敌，与梁军战潘张，军败而溃，庄宗得三四骑驰去，梁兵数百追及，攒槊围之。
现代文：唐庄宗好战又轻敌，和梁军在潘张打仗，军队被打败后逃散，唐庄宗剩下三四个骑兵飞马逃去，梁兵几百人追上，手持长矛包围他们。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was belligerent and disdainful of the enemy. He fought with Liang's army in Pan Zhang. The army was defeated and fled. The remaining three or four cavalry of Tang Zhuangzong fled on flying horses. Liang's soldiers caught up with them and surrounded them with spears.

古文：行钦望其旗而识之，驰一骑，夺剑断其二矛，斩首一级，梁兵解去。
现代文：元行钦认出他们的旗帜了，一马飞驰，举剑斩断两支长矛，杀死一个梁兵，梁军溃散逃去。
English: Yuan Xingqin recognized their flag, galloped with one horse, raised his sword and cut off two spears, killing a Liang soldier. Liang's army scattered and fled.

古文：庄宗还营，持行钦泣曰： 富贵与卿共之！ 
现代文：唐庄宗返回营寨，抱着元行钦哭着说： 和你共享富贵！ 
English: Tang Zhuozong returned to the encampment, hugged Yuan Xingqin and cried: "Share the wealth with you!"

古文：由是宠绝诸将。
现代文：从此对他的宠爱超过了其它将领。
English: From then on, he was favoured above all other generals.

古文：拜忻州刺史，迁武宁军节度使。
现代文：拜为忻州刺史，迁武宁军节度使。
English: Pray for the history of Zhangzhou and the transfer of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：庄宗宴群臣于内殿，酒酣乐作，道平生战阵事以为笑乐，而怪行钦不在，因左右顾视曰： 绍荣安在？ 
现代文：唐庄宗在内殿宴请群臣，畅饮奏乐，谈起一生打仗的事开玩笑取乐，而奇怪元行钦不在，于是环视左右说： 李绍荣在哪里？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong held a banquet for the ministers in the inner hall, enjoyed drinking and playing music, talked about the war of a lifetime, joked and had fun, and it was strange that Yuan Xingqin was not there, so he looked around and said: Where is Li Shaorong?

古文：所司奏曰： 奉敕宴使相，绍荣散官，不得与也。 
现代文：管事的报告说： 奉命宴请使相，李绍荣是散官，不能参加。 
English: The report of the steward said: I was ordered to invite the envoys to the banquet. Li Shaorong is a non-official and cannot attend.

古文：庄宗罢会不乐。
现代文：唐庄宗很不高兴地取消宴会。
English: Tang Zhuozong was very unhappy to cancel the banquet.

古文：明日，即拜行钦同中书门下平章事。
现代文：第二天，立即拜元行钦为同中书门下平章事。
English: The next day, he immediately asked Yuan Xingqin to write a letter of commendation for him.

古文：自此不召群臣入内殿，但宴武臣而已。
现代文：从此就不召群臣进内殿，只是宴请武臣罢了。
English: From then on, he did not invite retainers to the inner hall, but only invited samurai.

古文：赵在礼反于魏，庄宗方选大将击之，刘皇后曰： 此小事，可趣绍荣指挥。 
现代文：赵在礼在魏反叛，唐庄宗正选派大将攻打他。刘皇后说： 这是小事情，可催李绍荣去指挥。 
English: Zhao Zaili rebelled in Wei, and Tang Zhaozong Zhengxuan sent a general to attack him. Empress Liu said: This is a small matter, you can urge Li Shaorong to command.

古文：乃以为鄴都行营招抚使，将二千人讨之。
现代文：于是任他为邺都行营招抚使，率两千人讨伐赵在礼。
English: As a result, he was appointed as the envoy to the capital and led two thousand people to fight against Zhao Zeli.

古文：行钦攻鄴南门，以诏书招在礼。
现代文：元行钦进攻邺都南门，用诏书招降趟在礼。
English: Yuan Xingqin attacked the south gate of the capital and used the imperial edict to invite surrender.

古文：在礼送羊酒犒军，登城谓行钦曰： 将士经年离去父母，不取敕旨奔归，上贻圣忧，追悔何及？
现代文：趟在礼送来羊酒犒劳军队，登上城墙对元行钦说： 将士们离开父母多年，没有得到圣旨准许就逃奔回家，给皇上带来忧虑，追悔莫及！
English: At the time of the ceremony, he sent sheep wine to reward the troops for their hard work, and climbed onto the city wall to say to Yuan Xingqin: The soldiers have left their parents for many years, and fled home without the permission of the Holy Will, bringing worries to the emperor, and there is no way to regret it!

古文：若公善为之辞，尚能改过自新。 
现代文：如果你为他们说好话，还能改过自新。 
English: If you put in a good word for them, you can turn them around.

古文：行钦曰： 天子以汝等有社稷之功，小过必当赦宥。 
现代文：元行钦说： 天子因为你们对国家有功，这个小错误必定会宽恕你们。 
English: Yuan Xingqin said, "Son of Heaven, because you are of service to the country, this small mistake will surely forgive you.

古文：在礼再拜，以诏书示诸军。
现代文：趟在礼行再拜礼，把诏书拿给各军看。
English: The imperial rescript should be shown to the troops after the ceremony.

古文：皇甫晖从旁夺诏书坏之，军士大噪。行钦具以闻，庄宗大怒，敕行钦： 破城之日，无遗种！ 
现代文：皇甫晖在一旁夺过诏书撕掉，军士大肆喧哗，元行钦都上报了，唐庄宗大怒，命令元行钦说： 攻破州域那天，不要留下活的！ 
English: Emperor Fuxiong took the edict aside and tore it up, the sergeants made a lot of noise, and Yuan Xingqin reported everything. Tang Zhuozong was furious and ordered Yuan Xingqin to say, "On the day of breaking through the state territory, do not leave anyone alive!"

古文：乃益召诸镇兵，皆属行钦。
现代文：于是增召各镇军队，都归元行钦统率。
English: As a result, additional troops were called up from all the towns, and they all returned to Yuan Xingxing.

古文：行钦屯澶州，分诸镇兵为五道，毁民车轮、门扉、屋椽为筏，渡长庆河攻冠氏门，不克。
现代文：元行钦屯驻澶州，把各镇军队分成五路，拆毁百姓的车轮、门窗、屋椽做成木筏，渡过长庆河进攻冠氏门，役能攻克。
English: Yuan marched to Qingtun and stationed in Bozhou. He divided the troops of each town into five groups, tore down the people's wheels, doors and windows, and eaves to make rafts, crossed the Changqing River to attack Kuan Shih Gate, and was able to conquer it.

古文：是时，邢、洺诸州，相继皆叛，而行钦攻鄴无功，庄宗欲自将以往，群臣皆谏止，乃遣明宗讨之。
现代文：这时，邢、沼各州都相继反叛，而元行钦进攻邺都没有成功，唐庄宗打算亲自率兵前去，群臣都劝阻，于是派唐明宗讨伐他们。
English: At this time, the states of Min and Numa revolted one after another, and Yuan Xingqin's attack on Min did not succeed. Tang Zhuozong planned to personally lead the troops forward, but the ministers dissuaded him, so he sent Tang Mingzong to fight them.

古文：明宗至魏，军城西，行钦军城南。
现代文：唐明宗到魏，驻扎在城西，元行钦驻扎在城南。
English: Tang Mingzong came to Wei, stationed in the west of the city, and Yuan Xingqin was stationed in the south of the city.

古文：而明宗军变，入于魏，与在礼合。
现代文：而唐明宗发动兵变，进入魏后，和赵在礼合谋。
English: But Tang Mingzong launched a mutiny, and after entering Wei, he conspired with Zhao Zaili.

古文：行钦闻之，退屯卫州，以明宗反闻。
现代文：元行钦听说了，撤退屯驻卫州，把唐明宗反叛的事上奏。
English: When Yuan Xingqin heard of this, he withdrew his garrison to Weizhou and played down the rebellion of the Tang and Ming dynasties.

古文：庄宗遣金枪指挥使李从璟驰诏明宗计事。
现代文：唐庄宗派金指挥使李从璟飞马召来唐明宗商量事情。
English: The leader of the Tangzhuang Sect sent Kim to have Li call Tangming Sect members from Yao Feima to discuss the matter.

古文：从璟，明宗子也。
现代文：李从璟，是唐明宗的儿子。
English: Li Conglu is the son of Tang Mingzong.

古文：行至卫州，而明宗已反，行钦乃系从璟，将杀之，从璟请还京师，乃许之。
现代文：走到卫州时，唐明宗已经反叛，元行钦于是捉住李从璟，准备杀掉他，李从璟请求返回京师，元行钦于是准许了他。
English: When he came to Weizhou, Tang Mingzong had already rebelled, so Yuan Xingqin caught Li Conglu and prepared to kill him. Li Conglu asked him to return to Beijing, and Yuan Xingqin allowed him to do so.

古文：明宗自魏县引兵南，行钦率兵趋还京师。
现代文：唐明宗从魏县率兵向南，元行钦率兵赶回京师。
English: Tang Mingzong led the troops from Wei County to the south, and Yuan Xingqin led the troops back to Beijing.

古文：从庄宗幸汴州，行至荥泽，闻明宗已渡黎阳，庄宗复遣从璟通问于明宗，行钦以为不可，因击杀从璟。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗到汴州，走到荣泽时，听说唐明宗已经渡过黎阳，唐庄宗又派李从璟向唐明宗表示和好，元行钦认为不行，因而杀死了李从璟。
English: When he followed Tangzhuangzong to Bozhou and walked to Rongze, he heard that Tangmingzong had crossed Liyang. Tangzhuangzong also sent Li Conglu to Tangmingzong to express reconciliation. Yuan Xingqin thought it was not possible, so he killed Li Conglu.

古文：明宗入汴州，庄宗至万胜镇，不得进，与行钦登道旁冢，置酒，相顾泣下。
现代文：唐明宗进入汴州，唐庄宗到万胜镇时不能再前进，他和元行钦登上路旁的山顶，摆酒，相视而哭。
English: When Tang Mingzong entered Zhangzhou and Tang Zhuozong reached Wansheng Town, they could not advance any further. He and Yuan Xingqin climbed to the top of the hill by the roadside, put out wine, looked at each other and cried.

古文：有野人献雉，问其冢名，野人曰： 愁台也。 
现代文：有一个乡下人进献野鸡，问他这个山的名字，乡下人说： 叫愁台。 
English: A villager offered a pheasant and asked him the name of the mountain. The villager said, "It's called Sorrowful."

古文：庄宗益不悦，因罢酒去。
现代文：唐庄宗更加不高兴，于是罢酒离去。
English: Tang Zhuozong was even more unhappy, so he stopped drinking and left.

古文：西至石桥，置酒野次，庄宗谓行钦曰： 卿等从我久，富贵急难无不同也。
现代文：向西走到石桥，在野地上摆酒，唐庄宗对元行钦说： 你们跟随我很久了，富贵危难无不同甘共苦。
English: Walking westward to the stone bridge and setting out wine on the field, Tang Zhuozong said to Yuan Xingqin: You have been following me for a long time. Rich and poor are no different in their hardships.

古文：今兹危蹙，而默默无言，坐视成败。
现代文：现在危急紧迫，却默默无语，坐观成败。
English: Now it is critical and urgent, but they are silent, watching the success or failure.

古文：我至荥泽，欲单骑渡河，自求总管，卿等各陈利害。
现代文：我到荣泽时，准备独自骑马渡过黄河，亲自请求唐明宗，你们各自陈说利害。
English: When I arrived in Rongze, I was preparing to cross the Yellow River alone on horseback, and I personally asked Tang Mingzong to let each of you state your interests.

古文：今日俾我至此，卿等何如？ 
现代文：现在让我落到这个地步，你们怎么样呢？ 
English: Now that I've made it this far, how about you?

古文：行钦泣而对曰： 臣本小人，蒙陛下抚养，位至将相。
现代文：元行钦哭泣着回答说： 我原是微贱之人，承蒙陛下抚养，官至将相。
English: Weeping, Yuan Xingqin replied, "I was a lowly person who was brought up by Your Majesty, but I became a high-ranking official.

古文：危难之时，不能报国，虽死无以塞责。 
现代文：危难的时候，不能报效国家，即使死也不能免去罪责。 
English: In times of crisis, you cannot repay the country, and even death cannot absolve you of guilt.

古文：因与诸将百余人，皆解髻断发，置之于地，誓以死报，君臣相持恸哭。
现代文：于是和将领一百多人，都解开发髻割断头发，放在地上，发誓以死报国，君臣相抱痛哭。
English: So he and more than a hundred generals cut off their hair, laid it on the ground, swore to serve the country to the death, and the princes and ministers hugged each other and cried bitterly.

古文：庄宗还洛阳，数日，复幸汜水。
现代文：唐庄宗回到洛阳，几天后，又到汜水。
English: Tang Zhuozong returned to Luoyang and, a few days later, to Surabaya.

古文：郭从谦反，庄宗崩，行钦出奔。
现代文：郭从谦反叛，唐庄宗死，元行钦出逃。
English: Guo Congqian rebelled, Tangzhuang Zong died, and Yuan Xingqin fled.

古文：行至平陆，为野人所执，送虢州，刺史石潭折其两足，载以槛车，送京师。
现代文：走到平陆时，被乡下人抓住，送到虢州，刺史石潭打断他的双腿，载在囚车上，送到京师。
English: When he reached Pinglu, he was caught by a villager and sent to Zhangzhou. Zishi Shitan broke his legs, and he was put on a cart and sent to Beijing Division.

古文：明宗见之，骂曰： 我兒何负于尔！ 
现代文：唐明宗见了，骂道： 我的儿子有什么对不起你的！ 
English: When Tang Mingzong saw him, he scolded, "What does my son have to do with you? I'm sorry!"

古文：行钦真目直视曰： 先皇帝何负于尔！ 
现代文：元行钦睁大眼睛盯着唐明宗说： 先皇帝有什么封不起你的！ 
English: Yuan Xingqin stared wide-eyed at Tang Mingzong and said: What is it that the former emperor can't afford to seal you?

古文：乃斩于洛阳市，市人皆为之流涕。
现代文：于是在洛阳街上被斩首，人们都为他哭泣。唉！
English: So he was beheaded in the streets of Luoyang, and people cried for him. Alas!

古文：呜呼！死之所以可贵者，以其义不苟生尔。
现代文：死之所以可贵的地方，就在于为义而不苟且偷生。
English: The preciousness of death lies in the fact that it is lived for the sake of righteousness.

古文：故曰：主在与在，主亡与亡者，社稷之臣也。
现代文：因此说：君主在就和他同在，君主死就和他同死的人，纔是国家的忠臣。
English: Therefore it is said: The sovereign is with him in life, and those who die with him in death are the loyal subjects of the state.

古文：方明宗之兵变于魏，诸将未知去就，而行钦独以反闻，又杀其子从璟，至于断发自誓，其诚节有足嘉矣。
现代文：当唐明宗的军队在魏叛乱时，将领们不知该跟谁，而惟独元行钦以反叛罪上奏，又杀掉唐明宗的儿子李从璟，以至于割下头发发誓，他的忠诚的节操值得颂扬。
English: When Tang Mingzong's army rebelled in Wei, the generals didn't know who to side with, but Yuan Xingqin was the only one to plead guilty to treason, and he killed Tang Mingzong's son Li Conglu, so much so that he cut off his hair and swore an oath. His loyalty and self-restraint are worthy of praise.

古文：及庄宗之崩，不能自决，而反逃死以求生，终于被执而见杀。
现代文：到唐庄宗死时，他不能自杀，反而逃亡求生，最终被抓到杀死。
English: At the time of Tang Zhuozong's death, he could not commit suicide, but instead fled for his life and was eventually caught and killed.

古文：其言虽不屈，而死非其志也，乌足贵哉！
现代文：他的话虽然没有屈服，但死却不是他的意愿，有什么可贵的呢？
English: Although his words did not yield, but death is not his will, what is precious?

古文：○安金全
现代文：安金全，代北人。
English: An Jinquan, a representative of the North.

古文：安金全，代北人也。为人骁果，工骑射，号能擒生踏伏。
现代文：为人勇猛果断，擅长骑马射箭，号称能够生擒敌人、搜索伏兵。
English: He was a brave and decisive man, good at riding and archery, and was reputed to be able to capture enemies and search for ambushes.

古文：事晋为骑将，数从庄宗用兵有功，官至刺史，以疾居于太原。
现代文：在晋任骑将，多次随唐庄宗打仗立功，官做到刺史，因病住在太原。
English: After he was promoted to cavalry general, he fought with Tangzhuangzong many times and made meritorious service. He was a great officer and lived in Taiyuan due to illness.

古文：庄宗已下魏博，与梁相距河上。
现代文：唐庄宗攻下魏博后，和梁在黄河对峙。
English: After Tang Zhuangzong captured Weibo, he confronted Liang in the Yellow River.

古文：梁将王檀袭太原，晋兵皆从庄宗于河上，太原无备，监军张承业大恐，率诸司工匠登城捍御，而外攻甚急。
现代文：梁将王檀袭击太原，晋军都跟随唐庄宗在黄河，太原没有防备，监军张承业十分恐惧，率领各部门工匠登上城墙抵抗，而外面进攻很急。
English: Liang sent Wang Dan to attack Taiyuan. The Jin army all followed Tang Zhuang Zong in the Yellow River. Taiyuan was unprepared. The supervisor of the army, Zhang Chengye, was very afraid and led the craftsmen of various departments to climb the city wall to resist. The outside attack was very urgent.

古文：金全强起谓承业曰： 太原，晋之根本也。
现代文：安金全勉强支撑着起来对张承业说： 太原，是晋的根基。
English: An Jinquan reluctantly stood up and said to Zhang Chengye: Taiyuan is the foundation of Jin.

古文：一旦不守，则大事去矣！
现代文：一旦失守，大事就完了。
English: Once you lose, it's all over.

古文：老夫诚惫矣，然尚能为公破贼。 
现代文：我确实精疲力尽了，但还能为你打败贼军。 
English: I am indeed exhausted, but I can still defeat the bandits for you.

古文：承业喜，授以甲兵。
现代文：张承业很高兴，把镗甲武器交给他。
English: Zhang Chengye was very pleased and gave him the armored weapon.

古文：金全被甲跨马，召率子弟及故将吏得百余人，夜出北门，击檀于羊马城中，檀军惊溃，而晋救兵稍至。
现代文：安金全穿上镗甲跨上马，召集率领子弟和过去的将吏一百多人，晚上冲出北门，在羊马城中进攻王檀，王檀的军队惊慌逃散，而晋的救兵陆续来到。
English: An Jin fully put on his armor and mounted his horse. He gathered more than a hundred people, including his sons and former generals, and rushed out of the north gate at night to attack Wang Dan in the city of Yangma. Wang Dan's army panicked and fled, and Jin's rescuers came one after another.

古文：然庄宗不以金全为能，终其世不录其功。
现代文：但唐庄宗不认为安金全有才能，在有生之年都没有为他记功。
English: However, Tangzhuangzong did not think that Anjin had any talent at all, and did not give him any credit during his lifetime.

古文：金全与明宗有旧，明宗即位，拜金全振武军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：安金全和唐明宗有老交情，唐明宗登位后，拜安金全为振武军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: An Jinquan and Tang Mingzong had a long-standing friendship. After the Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, Bai An Jinquan was the festival envoy of the Zhenwu Army, and he signed a peace treaty with the Chinese.

古文：晋王讨黄巢至华阴，阑得之，时方九岁，爱其俊爽，收养之。
现代文：在任两年，召回京师，因病死去。袁建丰，不知道他的家世。晋王讨伐黄巢到华阴，捡到他，当时纔九岁，喜欢他俊俏爽朗，收养了他。
English: During his two years in office, he recalled the Beijing division and died of illness. Yuan Jianfeng, who did not know his family history. Jin Wang fought the Yellow Nest to Huayin, picked him up, was nine years old at the time, liked his handsome and cheerful, and adopted him.

古文：长习骑射，为铁林都虞候，从击王行瑜、李匡威，以功迁突阵指挥使。
现代文：长大后学习骑马射箭，任铁林都虞候，跟随晋王进攻王行瑜、李匡威，因功迁突阵指挥使。
English: When he grew up, he learned to ride a horse and shoot arrows. He was in charge of the iron forest, and followed Jin Wang to attack Wang Xingyu and Li Kuangwei. Due to his achievements, he became the commander of the sudden attack.

古文：从庄宗破夹城，战柏乡，迁左厢马军指挥使。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗攻破夹城，在柏乡打仗，迁左厢马军指挥使。
English: He followed Tangzhuangzong to break through Jiancheng, fought in Baixiang, and transferred to the left compartment of the horse army commander.

古文：明宗为衙内指挥使，建丰为副使，从庄宗入魏，取卫、磁、洺三州，拜洺州刺史。
现代文：唐明宗任衙内指挥使时，袁建丰任副使，跟睫唐庄宗进入魏，攻取卫、磁、溶三州，拜为沼州刺史。
English: When Tang Mingzong held the post of commander and envoy to Inner Mongolia, Yuan Jianfeng served as deputy envoy, followed Tang Zhuangzong into Wei, captured Wei, Magnetism, and Soluble Three Provinces, and was worshiped as the historian of Nuzhou.

古文：击梁将王千，斩首千余级，获其将校七十余人。
现代文：进攻梁将王千，杀敌一千多人，抓获将校七十多人。
English: Liang attacked General Wang Qian, killing more than a thousand of the enemy and capturing more than seventy officers.

古文：迁相州刺史。
现代文：迁相州刺史。
English: The history of the relocation of the imperial family to another province.

古文：从战胡柳，指挥使孟谦据相州叛，建丰还讨平之。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗在胡柳打仗，指挥使孟谦占据相州反叛，袁建丰返回讨伐平定了他。
English: He followed Tang Zhuangzong to fight in Huliu, commanded Meng Qian to occupy the rebel state of Xiangzhou, and Yuan Jianfeng returned to fight and subdue him.

古文：徙隰州刺史，病风废。
现代文：调任隰州刺史，因风病罢任。
English: Transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, but resigned due to illness.

古文：明宗即位，以旧恩召还京师，亲幸其第，抚慰甚厚，加检校太尉，遥领镇南军节度使，俾食其俸以卒，赠太尉。
现代文：唐明宗登位，因旧时的交情召他回京师，并亲自到他家里，安抚慰问很殷勤，加检校太尉，在京师任镇南军节度使，让他领俸禄到死，赠太尉。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, and because of his old friendship, he called him back to Beijing Division, and personally went to his home, and he was very courteous in appeasing and consoling him. He was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and was appointed as the commander of the Southern Army in Beijing Division. He was allowed to receive a salary until his death, and was given the rank of lieutenant.

古文：○西方鄴西方鄴，定州满城人也。
现代文：西方邺，定州满城人。
English: From the West, from Dingzhou, from Manchuria.

古文：父再遇，为汴州军校，鄴居军中，以勇力闻。
现代文：父亲西方再遇，任汴州军校，西方邺在车中，以勇猛有力出名。
English: When his father met the West again, he was appointed to Zhangzhou Military Academy, and the West was in the car, famous for his bravery and strength.

古文：年二十，南渡河游梁，不见用，复归庄宗于河上，庄宗以为孝义指挥使，数从征伐有功，同光中为曹州刺史，以州兵屯汴州。
现代文：二十岁时，南渡黄河求官于梁，不被任用，到黄河边投奔唐庄宗，唐庄宗任他为孝义指挥使，多次跟随唐庄宗征伐立下战功，同光中任曹州刺史，率领州军屯驻汴州。
English: At the age of twenty, he went to the south of the Yellow River to seek a post in Liang, but was not appointed. He went to the Yellow River to join Tangzhuangzong. Tangzhuangzong appointed him as the commander of filial piety, and he repeatedly followed Tangzhuangzong in conquering and setting up military exploits. In the same light, he was appointed as the chief of Caozhou and led the state army stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：明宗自魏反，兵南渡河，而庄宗东幸汴州，汴州节度使孔循怀二志，使北门迎明宗，西门迎庄宗，所以供帐委积如一，曰： 先至者入之。 
现代文：唐明宗从魏回师南渡黄河，而唐庄宗向东去汴州，汴州节度使孔循有二心，令在北门迎接唐明宗，在西门迎接唐庄宗，陈设堆放的东西一样，说： 先到的进去。 
English: Tang Mingzong crossed the Yellow River from the south of Wei Huishi, while Tang Zhuangzong went east to Ganzhou. The Ganzhou Festival made Kongxun have two minds, ordering to meet Tang Mingzong at the north gate and Tang Zhuangzong at the west gate, displaying the same things and saying: "Let the first come in."

古文：鄴因责循曰： 主上破梁而得公，有不杀之恩，奈何欲纳总管而负国！ 
现代文：西方邺于是斥责孔循说： 皇上攻破梁抓到你，对你有不杀之恩，怎么想接纳唐明宗而对不起国家呢！ 
English: Xifang Yao then rebuked Kong Xuan, saying, "The emperor broke through the beam to catch you, but he did not kill you. How can you want to accept Tang Mingzong and be sorry for the country?"

古文：循不答。
现代文：孔循不回答。
English: Confucius did not answer.

古文：鄴度循不可争，而石敬瑭妻，明宗女也，时方在汴，鄴欲杀之，以坚人心。
现代文：西方邺估计争不过孔循，而石敬瑭的妻子，是唐明宗的女儿，当时正在汴州，西方邺想杀掉她，以便稳定人心。
English: Xifang Yao estimated that he could not compete with Confucius, but Shi Jingyao's wife, the daughter of Tang Mingzong, was in Zhangzhou at the time, and Xifang Yao wanted to kill her in order to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：循知其谋，取藏其家，鄴无如之何。
现代文：孔循知道他的打算后，把她带到白己家中藏起来，西方邺没有办法。
English: When Kong Xun learned of his plan, he took her to his home and hid her. The Westerners had no choice.

古文：而明宗已及汴，乃将五百骑西迎庄宗于汜水，呜咽泣下，庄宗亦为之嘘唏，乃使以兵为先锋。
现代文：而唐明宗已到汴州，于是率领五百骑兵向西在汜水迎接唐庄宗，呜咽哭泣，唐庄宗也为此嘘晞流泪，于是让他率兵作先锋。
English: But Tang Mingzong had already arrived in Zhangzhou, so he led five hundred cavalry to the west in Surabaya to meet Tang Zhuangzong, sobbing and crying. Tang Zhuangzong also lied about this and shed tears, so he let him lead the troops as the vanguard.

古文：庆宗至汴西，不得入，还洛阳，遇弑。
现代文：唐庄宗到汴州西面，不能进城，返回洛阳，被杀。
English: Tang Zhuang lived to the west of Zhangzhou, could not enter the city, returned to Luoyang, and was killed.

古文：明宗入洛，鄴请死于马前，明宗嘉叹久之。
现代文：唐明宗进入洛阳，西方邺在马前请求赐死，唐明宗称赞叹息很久。
English: When Tang Mingzong entered Luoyang, the Western Zou pleaded for his death in front of the horse. Tang Mingzong praised and sighed for a long time.

古文：明年，荆南高季兴叛，明宗遣襄州节度使刘训等招讨，而以东川董璋为西南面招讨使，乃拜鄴夔州刺史，副璋以兵出三峡。
现代文：第二年，剂南高季兴反叛，唐明宗派襄州节度使刘训等人招抚讨伐，而任束川董璋为西南面招讨使，于是拜西方邺为夔州刺史，作董璋副手率兵出三峡。
English: In the second year, because of Gao Jixing's rebellion in the south, Liu Xun and others were invited by the Tangming sect's Yangzhou Festival to lead a crusade, and Zuchuan Dongyi was invited by the southwestern side, so Bai Xiahui became the leader of Zhangzhou, and led the troops out of the Three Gorges as Dongyi's deputy.

古文：已而训等无功见黜，诸将皆罢，璋亦尝出兵，惟鄴独取三州，乃以夔州为宁江军，拜鄴节度使。
现代文：不久刘训等人因无战功被贬黜，将领们都被罢官，董璋也曾出兵，只有西方邺一人攻取三个州，于是以夔州为宁江军，拜西方邺为节度使。
English: Soon, Liu Xun and others were demoted because of their lack of war merit. The generals were all dismissed, and Dong Xi also sent troops. Only Xi Xi alone captured three states, so he used Zhangzhou as the Ningjiang Army and Bai Xi as the festival envoy.

古文：已而又取归州，数败季兴之兵。
现代文：不久他又夺取归州，多次打败高季兴的军队。
English: Soon after, he captured Gushu and repeatedly defeated Gao Jixing's army.

古文：鄴武人，所为多不中法度，判官谭善达数以谏。
现代文：西方邺是个武臣，做的事很多不合法律，判官谭善达多次劝阻。
English: Xifang Yao was a military officer, and many of his actions were against the law. Judge Tan Xanda tried to dissuade him many times.

古文：鄴怒，遣人告善达受人金，下狱。
现代文：西方邺发怒，派人上告谭善连接受别人的钱财，把他投进狱中。
English: Enraged, the West sent someone to sue Tan Shanlian for accepting other people's money and threw him in jail.

古文：善达素刚，辞益不逊，遂死于狱中。
现代文：谭善达素来刚烈，说的话更加不恭敬，于是死在狱中。
English: Tan Shanda, who had always been tough and spoke even more disrespectfully, died in prison.

古文：鄴病，见善达为祟，卒于镇。
现代文：西方邺患病，梦见谭善达作祟，死在任镇。
English: Xifang Yao fell ill, dreamed of Tan Xanda causing trouble, and died in Renzhen.

