古文：景皇帝讳师，字子元，宣帝长子也。
现代文：景皇帝名师，字子元，是宣帝的长子。
English: Emperor Jing's famous teacher, Zizi Yuan, was the eldest son of Emperor Xuan.

古文：雅有风彩，沈毅多大略。
现代文：文雅有风采，沉着坚毅很有远大的谋略。
English: Elegant and graceful, calm and resolute is a very far-reaching strategy.

古文：少流美誉，与夏侯玄、何晏齐名。
现代文：他年少时就留传有好声誉，和夏侯玄、何晏名望相同。
English: When he was young, he was rumored to have a good reputation, the same as Xia Houxuan and He Yao.

古文：晏常称曰： 惟几也能成天下之务，司马子元是也。 
现代文：何晏时常称说： 差不多可以成就天下事的，是司马子元。 
English: He Zhen often said: Sima Ziyuan is the one who can almost achieve the world's affairs.

古文：魏景初中，拜散骑常侍，累迁中护军。
现代文：魏景初年间，任散骑常侍，多次升官为中护军。
English: During the first year of Wei Jing, he was appointed as a knight-errant, and was promoted to the rank of middle guard several times.

古文：为选用之法，举不越功，吏无私焉。
现代文：制定选用人才的方法，提拔人不超越他的功绩，官吏无私情。
English: We should work out a method for selecting talents, and promote no one beyond his merits. Officials should be selfless.

古文：宣穆皇后崩，居丧以至孝闻。
现代文：宣穆皇后去世，景帝服丧以极端孝顺闻名。
English: When Empress Xuan Mu died, Emperor Jing was known for his extreme filial piety.

古文：宣帝之将诛曹爽，深谋秘策，独与帝潜画，文帝弗之知也。
现代文：宣帝将要诛杀曹爽时，精心秘密谋划，单独跟景帝悄悄策划，文帝不知道造件事，将要动手的前一天晚上才告诉他。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was about to kill Cao Shuang, he carefully and secretly plotted with Emperor Jing to do it alone. Emperor Wen did not know about it and only told him the night before he was going to do it.

古文：将发夕乃告之，既而使人觇之，帝寝如常，而文帝不能安席。
现代文：之后派人窥视，景帝像平常一样入睡，而文帝不能安然就寝。
English: After that, someone was sent to spy on the emperor, and he fell asleep as usual, but Emperor Wen could not sleep peacefully.

古文：晨会兵司马门，镇静内外，置阵甚整。
现代文：清晨在司马门会集兵众，景帝镇静内外，布置非常严整。
English: In the early morning, soldiers gathered at Sima Gate. Jingdi was calm inside and outside, and the layout was very neat.

古文：宣帝曰： 此子竟可也。 
现代文：宣帝说： 这个儿子终究真行啊。 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "After all, this son is really capable."

古文：初，帝阴养死士三千，散在人间，至是一朝而集，众莫知所出也。
现代文：当初，景帝暗地裹收留了三千名不怕死的士人，分散在百姓中，到逭时一个早晨就集合起来，众人不知道这些人是从哪裹来的。
English: At first, Emperor Jing secretly took in three thousand scholars who were not afraid of death. They were dispersed among the people and gathered at dusk one morning. People did not know where these people had come from.

古文：事平，以功封长平乡侯，食邑千户，寻加卫将军。
现代文：事件平息后，因为有功被封为长平乡侯，食邑千户，接着加封为卫将军。
English: After the incident subsided, because of his meritorious service, he was awarded the title of Changping Township Mayor, and then the title of Wei General.

古文：及宣帝薨，议者咸云 伊尹既卒，伊陟嗣事 ，天子命帝以抚军大将军辅政。
现代文：等到宣帝死时，议政的人们都说： 伊尹已死，伊陟继承事业。 天子任命景帝为抚军大将军辅佐朝政。
English: When Emperor Xuan died, the people who discussed politics all said, "Iyin is dead, and Iyi will take over the business," and Heaven's Son appointed Emperor Jing as the general to lead the army and assist the government.

古文：魏嘉平四年春正月，迁大将军，加侍中，持节、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：魏嘉平四年春正月，升为大将军，加封侍中，持节、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
English: In the first month of spring in the fourth year of Wei Jiaping's reign, he was promoted to the rank of general, was appointed to the position of attendant, held festivals, became the military governor of various countries, and recorded records.

古文：命百官举贤才，明少长，恤穷独，理废滞。
现代文：命令百官推举人才，明确年少与年长者的尊卑，体恤穷困舆孤独的人，清理被废弃不用的人。
English: He ordered the officials to nominate talents, clarify the superiority and inferiority of the young and the elderly, sympathize with the poor and the lonely, and clean up the abandoned people.

古文：诸葛诞、毌丘俭、王昶、陈泰、胡遵都督四方，王基、州泰、邓艾、石苞典州郡，卢毓、李丰裳选举，傅嘏、虞松参计谋，钟会、夏侯玄、王肃、陈本、孟康、赵酆、张缉预朝议，四海倾注，朝野肃然。
现代文：诸葛诞、母丘俭、王昶、陈泰、胡遵任四方的都督，王基、州泰、邓艾、石苞掌管州郡，卢毓、李丰掌管选举，傅嘏、虞松参预出谋划策，钟会、夏侯玄、王肃、陈本、孟康、趟酆、张缉参预朝议，四海倾心向往，朝廷内外恭敬。
English: Zhuge Xizhi, Mu Qiu Jian, Wang Hui, Chen Tai and Hu Zun were appointed as the governors of the four regions, Wang Ji, Zhu Tai, Deng Ai and Shi Jian were in charge of the prefectures, Lu Wei and Li Feng were in charge of the elections, Fu Wei and Gu Song were in charge of the planning and strategy, Zhong Hui, Xia Hou Xuan, Wang Su, Chen Ben, Meng Kang, Zhi Wei and Zhang Jia Jian were in charge of the pre-imperial deliberation, the four seas were yearning, and the court was respectful inside and outside.

古文：或有请改易制度者，帝曰：  不识不知，顺帝之则 ，诗人之美也。
现代文：间或有请求改变制度的人，景帝说：  好像什么都不知道，顺从上天的法度去做 ，这是诗人所赞美的。
English: Sometimes there are people who ask for a change in the system, Jingdi said: It seems that they do not know anything, and obey the laws of heaven, which is praised by the poet.

古文：三祖典制，所宜遵奉；自非军事，不得妄有改革。 
现代文：三代祖先的典章制度，是应当遵守的；假如不是有战争，不能随意更改。 
English: The code system of the three generations of ancestors should be observed; if there is no war, it cannot be changed at will.

古文：五年夏五月，吴太傅诸葛恪围新城，朝议虑其分兵以寇淮泗，欲戍诸水口。
现代文：五年夏五月，吴国太傅诸葛恪包围新城，朝廷的议论担心他分兵侵犯淮泗，打算守卫各水路口岸。
English: In the summer and May of the 5th year of the Wu Dynasty, Zhuge Ke surrounded the new city. The imperial court was worried that his detachment would encroach on Huai'an and planned to guard the waterway ports.

古文：帝曰： 诸葛恪新得政于吴，欲徼一时之利，并兵合肥，以冀万一，不暇复为青徐患也。
现代文：景帝说： 诸葛恪新近在吴国得到权势，想求得一时的好处，聚兵于合肥，希望侥幸得手，没有精力再在青徐找麻烦。
English: Emperor Jing said: Zhuge Jia had recently gained power in the State of Wu, and wanted to gain temporary benefits. He gathered his troops in Hefei, hoping to get lucky. He did not have the energy to look for trouble in Qingxu.

古文：且水口非一，多戍则用兵众，少戍则不足以御寇。 
现代文：再说水路口岸不是一个，多守卫就用兵多，少守卫又不足以抵御敌寇。 
English: Besides, there is no such thing as a single waterway port. More guards means more soldiers, and fewer guards are not enough to fend off enemy piracy.

古文：恪果并力合肥，卒如所度。
现代文：诸葛恪果然在合肥集中兵力，最终正像景帝所推测的那样。
English: Zhuge Ke indeed concentrated his forces in Hefei, and in the end it was just as Emperor Jing had predicted.

古文：帝于是使镇东将军毌丘俭、扬州刺史文钦等距之。
现代文：景帝便派镇东将军毋丘俭、扰塑刺史塞筮等人抵御敌军。
English: Emperor Jing then dispatched the Zhendong generals, Bo Qiuqian, Zhou Shuxian, Shi Xieqi and others to defend against the enemy army.

古文：俭、钦请战，帝曰： 恪卷甲深入，投兵死地，其锋未易当。
现代文：旦丘俭、塞筮请求出战，景帝说： 诸葛恪全力深入我方，把军队置于险境，他们的锋芒难以抵挡。
English: Tang Qujian and Xie Jun requested to go to war, and Jing Di said: Zhuge Ke has made every effort to penetrate into our side, putting the army in a dangerous situation, and their edge is difficult to resist.

古文：且新城小而固，攻之未可拔。 
现代文：再说新城既小又坚固，敌军进攻也难以攻克。 
English: Moreover, the new city is both small and strong, and the enemy's attack is also difficult to overcome.

古文：遂命诸将高垒以弊之。
现代文：于是命令众将领高筑营垒来防守。
English: So he ordered the generals to build high camps to defend themselves.

古文：相持数月，恪攻城力屈，死伤太半。
现代文：相持了几个月，诸葛恪攻城的力量耗尽，死伤超过半敷。
English: After holding out for several months, Zhuge's forces were exhausted and more than half of the casualties occurred.

古文：帝乃敕钦督锐卒趋合榆，要其归路，俭帅诸将以为后继。
现代文：景帝就命令文敛督率精锐部队奔赴合榆，拦截敌军的退路，毋旦俊率众将领作为后继。
English: Emperor Jing then ordered Wen Qian and his elite troops to rush to Hebei to intercept the retreat of the enemy army, followed by Jun and his generals.

古文：恪惧而遁，钦逆击，大破之，斩首万余级。
现代文：谴姜监因恐惧而逃跑，塞筮迎上去攻击，大败敌军，斩敌万余。
English: Jiang Jian fled out of fear, and Sai Ye went to meet the attack, defeated the enemy army, and killed more than a thousand enemies.

古文：正元元年春正月，天子与中书令李丰、后父光禄大夫张缉、黄门监苏铄、永宁署令乐敦、冗从仆射刘宝贤等谋以太常夏侯玄代帝辅政。
现代文：正五元年春正月，天子与中书令李丰、皇后之父光禄大夫张缉、黄门监苏铄、永宁署令乐堑、冗从仆射刘直里等人谋划用太常星娄塞代替景帝辅佐朝政。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of the old lunar calendar, Tian Zi and Li Feng, the Chinese calligrapher, Zhang Ji, the father of the Empress Guanglu, the Yellow Gate Warden Su Yao, the Yongning Department's Ling Le Yao, and Liu Naoli, a diligent servant, planned to replace the Emperor Jing's aide-de-camp with a too-frequent star pusher.

古文：帝密知之，使舍人王羡以车迎丰。
现代文：景帝秘密知道此事，派舍人王羡用车去迎接奎丰。
English: Emperor Jing secretly knew about this, and sent a courier, Wang En, to meet Qui Feng with a car.

古文：丰见迫，随羡而至，帝数之。
现代文：奎丰被迫，跟随王董来见基童，垦童列举他的罪过。
English: Kuei Feng was forced to follow Wang Dong to see Ji Tong, who enumerated his sins.

古文：丰知祸及，因肆恶言。
现代文：奎丰知道祸已临头，于是肆意辱骂。
English: Kuei Feng knew that disaster was imminent, so he abused freely.

古文：帝怒，遣勇士以刀镮筑杀之。
现代文：景帝愤怒，派勇士用刀头的镖打死了他。
English: Emperor Jing was enraged and sent warriors to kill him with sword-tipped darts.

古文：逮捕玄、缉等，皆夷三族。
现代文：逮捕夏侯玄、张缉等人，都减了三族。
English: The arrests of Xia Houxuan, Zhang Jie and others have reduced the three tribes.

古文：三月，乃讽天子废皇后张氏，因下诏曰： 奸臣李丰等靖谮庸回，阴构凶慝。
现代文：三月，婉言劝天子废黜皇后张氏，天子于是下诏书说： 奸臣李丰等人惯听谗言，任用奸邪，暗地图谋凶险邪恶。
English: In March, Wan Yan advised Tian Zi to depose Empress Zhang. Tian Zi then issued an edict saying: The treacherous minister Li Feng and others are accustomed to listening to slander, appointing treachery, and plotting evil.

古文：大将军纠虔天刑，致之诛辟。
现代文：大将军督察敬奉上天的法规，把他们付诸刑法。
English: The general inspector revered the laws of heaven and put them under criminal law.

古文：周勃之克吕氏，霍光之擒上官，曷以过之。
现代文：周勃降服吕氏，霍光擒获上宣的功绩，难以超过。
English: It is difficult to surpass Zhou Bo's surrender to the Lü clan and Huo Guangya's achievement of being proclaimed emperor.

古文：其增邑九千户，并前四万。 
现代文：给大将军增加食邑九千户，加上以前的共四万户。 
English: Nine thousand households in food villages were added to the general, adding to the previous total of forty thousand households.

古文：帝让不受。
现代文：景帝推辞不接受。
English: Emperor Jing did not accept the resignation.

古文：天子以玄、缉之诛，深不自安。
现代文：天子因为夏侯玄、张缉被诛杀，自己深感不安全。
English: Tianzi felt deeply insecure because Xia Houxuan and Zhang Ji were killed in a fight.

古文：而帝亦虑难作，潜谋废立，乃密讽魏永宁太后。
现代文：而量查也担心引起灾祸，秘密谋划废黜重立天子，便暗地裹婉言劝谏魏永宁太后。
English: However, Qianchao was also worried about causing a calamity and secretly plotted to depose Wei and reinstate Tianzi, so he secretly persuaded Empress Dowager Wei Yongning.

古文：秋九月甲戌，太后下令曰： 皇帝春秋已长，不亲万机，耽淫内宠，沈嫚女德，日近倡优，纵其丑虐，迎六宫家人留止内房，毁人伦之叙，乱男女之节。
现代文：秋九月甲戌，太后下令说： 皇帝年龄已大，不能亲自治理纷繁的政务，沉溺于内宫宠幸，沉迷亵狎于女色，每天接近艺人戏子，放纵他们的丑恶行为，迎来后妃的家人留宿在内宫，毁坏了人与人之间的道德，扰乱了男女的节操。
English: In the autumn and September, the empress dowager ordered: "The emperor is too old to personally manage the complicated government affairs. He indulges in the favors of the inner palace, indulges in the desecration of women, approaches artists and actors every day, indulges their ugly behavior, and welcomes the empress dowager's family to stay in the inner palace. This has destroyed the morality between people and disturbed the discipline of men and women.

古文：又为群小所迫，将危社稷，不可承奉宗庙。 
现代文：又被一群小人胁迫，将要危害国家，不能继承供奉宗庙。 
English: He was also coerced by a group of villains, will endanger the country, and cannot inherit the ancestral temple.

古文：帝召群臣会议，流涕曰： 太后令如是，诸君其如王室何？ 
现代文：景帝召集群臣聚会商议，流着泪说： 太后的命令是这样，大家对王室怎么办呢? 
English: Emperor Jing convened a group of courtiers to discuss the matter, and said through tears: "The Empress Dowager's order is as follows. What should we do with the royal family?

古文：咸曰： 伊尹放太甲以宁殷，霍光废昌邑以安汉，权定社稷，以清四海。
现代文：大臣们都说： 伊尹流放太甲来使殷安宁，霍光废黜昌邑王来使漠安定，权衡轻重，稳定国家，以便使四海清平。
English: The ministers all said, "Yi Yin exiled Taiga to bring peace to Yin, while Huo Guang deposed Changyi to bring stability to the country and stabilize the country in order to bring peace to the four seas."

古文：二代行之于古，明公当之于今，今日之事，惟命是从。 
现代文：殷、汉两代在古时候这样做了，明公在今天也应当这样做，今天的事，全听从明公的命令。 
English: The Yin and Han dynasties did this in ancient times. Ming Gong should do the same today. Today's affairs are all subject to the orders of Ming Gong.

古文：帝曰： 诸君见望者重，安敢避之？ 
现代文：景帝说： 大家对我的期望深重，我怎么敢回避呢? 
English: Jingdi said: Everyone's expectations of me are heavy. How dare I avoid them?

古文：乃与群公卿士共奏太后曰： 臣闻天子者，所以济育群生，永安万国。
现代文：于是与众臣一起奏告太后说： 臣下听说天子是救助养育人民的，是使天下长久安定的。
English: So, together with all the courtiers, they reported to the Empress Dowager, saying, "The courtiers have heard that the Heavenly Son is the one who rescues and nurtures the people, and is the one who makes the world stable for a long time.

古文：皇帝春秋已长，未亲万机，日使小优郭怀、袁信等裸袒淫戏。
现代文：皇帝年龄已经大了，不能亲自治理纷繁的政务，每天让小戏子郭怀、袁信等人袒露身体淫乱游戏。
English: The emperor was too old to personally manage the complicated affairs of state, so he let the little actors Guo Huai, Yuan Xin and others play sexual games with him every day.

古文：又于广望观下作辽东妖妇，道路行人莫不掩目。
现代文：又在广望观下装扮辽东妖冶的妇人，路人都遮住双眼。
English: Another woman dressed up as a Liaodong demon under the wide view, and passers-by covered their eyes.

古文：清商令令狐景谏帝，帝烧铁炙之。
现代文：清商令令狐景劝谏皇帝，皇帝烧铁器烫他。
English: The Qing merchants ordered the fox to persuade the emperor, and the emperor burned him with a hot iron.

古文：太后遭合阳君丧，帝嬉乐自若。
现代文：太后遇到合阳君的丧事，皇帝像往常一样嬉笑娱乐。
English: When the empress dowager encountered the funeral of Heyangjun, the emperor laughed and entertained as usual.

古文：清商丞庞熙谏帝，帝弗听。
现代文：清商丞庞熙劝谏皇帝，皇帝不听。
English: The emperor did not listen to the advice of the Qing merchant Pang Xi.

古文：太后还北宫，杀张美人，帝甚恚望。
现代文：太后回到北宫，杀了张美人，皇帝很是怨恨。
English: The empress dowager returned to the Northern Palace and killed Zhang Bijin, which made the emperor very angry.

古文：熙谏，帝怒，复以弹弹熙。
现代文：庞熙劝谏，皇帝恼怒，又用弹弓弹射庞熙。
English: Pang Xizhi tried to dissuade him, but the emperor got angry and shot Pang Xizhi with a slingshot.

古文：每文书入，帝不省视。
现代文：每逢文书送入，皇帝不看。
English: Whenever a document is sent in, the emperor does not look at it.

古文：太后令帝在式乾殿讲学，帝又不从。
现代文：太后命令皇帝在式干殿讲学，皇帝又不依从。
English: The empress dowager ordered the emperor to give a lecture in the Shikkan-den, but the emperor did not comply.

古文：不可以承天序。
现代文：他不能继承皇家世系。
English: He can't be in the royal line.

古文：臣请依汉霍光故事，收皇帝玺绶，以齐王归籓。 
现代文：臣下请求依照汉代霍光的做法，收回皇帝的印玺，让他以齐王的身份回封地。 
English: The vassals requested that the emperor's seal money be taken back in accordance with the practice of the Han dynasty Ho Guang, and that he be allowed to return to his fiefdom as the King of Qi.

古文：奏可，于是有司以太牢策告宗庙，王就乘舆副车，群臣从至西掖门。
现代文：太后准奏，有关官员用牛、羊、猪三牲做祭品书写简策上告宗庙，齐王登上皇家侍从车，大臣们跟随到西掖门。
English: The empress dowager played the accordion, the officials concerned used cattle, sheep and pigs to make sacrifices, wrote a brief report to the ancestral temple, King Qi boarded the royal attendant car, and the ministers followed to the West Gate.

古文：帝泣曰： 先臣受历世殊遇，先帝临崩，托以遣诏。臣复忝重任，不能献可替否。
现代文：景帝哭泣着说： 我的祖先受了历代的特殊待遇，先帝临死，用遣韶相托，我有愧于重任，不能劝善规过。
English: Emperor Jing wept and said, "My ancestors have received special treatment throughout the ages. When the previous emperor was about to die, he entrusted me with the imperial edict. I am not worthy of the heavy responsibility, and I can't override the imperial edict.

古文：群公卿士，远翟旧典，为社稷深计，宁负圣躬，使宗庙血食。 
现代文：诸位公卿大臣，思用古代典章，为国家长远考虑，宁可背弃皇帝本人，也要使皇家宗庙受祭祀。 
English: Your Imperial Highnesses and Ministers, for the sake of the country's long-term interests, it is better to abandon the Emperor himself than to allow the Imperial Family Temple to be sacrificed.

古文：于是使使者持节卫送，舍河内之重门，诛郭怀、袁信等。
现代文：于是派使者持符节护送，住在河内的重门，诛杀郭怀、袁信等人。
English: So he sent an envoy with a festival of symbols to escort them to Chongmen, where they lived in Hanoi, to kill Guo Huai, Yuan Xin and others.

古文：是日，与群臣议所立。
现代文：当天，和群臣商议立新君。
English: On the same day, he and his ministers discussed the formation of a new government.

古文：帝曰： 方今宇宙未清，二虏争衡，四海之主，惟在贤哲。
现代文：景帝说： 当今天下没有清平，两个敌国在争强斗胜，四海的君主，必是贤明圣哲的人。
English: Emperor Jing said: Today, there is no peace and tranquility, two enemy countries are fighting and winning. The ruler of the four seas must be a wise sage.

古文：彭城王据，太祖之子，以贤，则仁圣明允；以年，则皇室之长。
现代文：彭城王曹据，是太祖的儿子，论贤明，他仁爱圣明公允；论年纪，他在皇室中是长兄。
English: According to Pengcheng Wang Cao, he is the son of the great-grandfather. In terms of wisdom, he is benevolent and fair; in terms of age, he is the eldest brother in the royal family.

古文：天位至重，不得其才，不足以宁济六合。 
现代文：皇帝的位置至关重要，没有他那样的才干，不足以平定救助天地四方。 
English: The position of the emperor is very important. Without his talent, it is not enough to pacify and save the world.

古文：乃兴群公奏太后。
现代文：于是和群臣奏报太后。
English: So he and his retainers reported the matter to the empress dowager.

古文：太后以彭城王先帝诸父，于昭穆之序为不次，则烈祖之世永无承嗣。
现代文：太后认为彭城王是先帝的叔父，不符合宗法制度的秩序，那么烈祖的世系就永远无人继承了。
English: The empress dowager believed that Pengcheng Wang was the uncle of the former emperor and did not conform to the order of the patriarchal system, so the lineage of the martyrs would never be inherited.

古文：东海定王，明帝之弟，欲立其子高贵乡公髦。
现代文：束海定王，是明帝的弟弟，打算立他的儿子高贵乡公曹髦。
English: King Sokhaidong, the younger brother of Emperor Ming, planned to make his son a noble.

古文：帝固争不获，乃从太后令，遣使迎高贵乡公于元城而立之，改元曰正元。
现代文：景帝坚持争辩未果，便依从了太后的命令，派人在元城迎来高贵乡公立为皇帝，改年号叫正元。
English: Emperor Jing persisted in arguing unsuccessfully, then obeyed the order of the empress dowager and sent people to Yuancheng to usher in the emperor of the noble township, and changed the year name to Zhengyuan.

古文：天子受玺惰，举趾高，帝闻而忧之。
现代文：天子接受印玺时懒散，脚抬得很高，景帝听说后感到担忧。
English: When the emperor received the seal, he was sluggish and raised his feet very high. Emperor Jing was worried when he heard about this.

古文：及将大会，帝训于天子曰： 夫圣王重始，正本敬初，古人所慎也。
现代文：等到将举行大朝会，景帝训导天子说： 圣明的君王看重开端，端正根本敬肃初始，这是古人所谨慎的。
English: When the Great Imperial Conference was about to be held, Emperor Jing said, "Holy kings value the beginning, and respect the beginning. This is what the ancients were cautious about."

古文：明当大会，万众瞻穆穆之容，公卿听玉振之音。
现代文：明天面对大朝会，万众瞻仰皇上端庄的容貌，公卿倾听悦耳的声音。
English: Facing the Grand Imperial Court Assembly tomorrow, the emperor's dignified appearance will be admired by all, and courtiers will listen to his melodious voice.

古文：诗云： 示人不佻，是则是效。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 展示给人们的是不轻佻，这是可供效法的。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: What is shown to people is not frivolous, it is for imitation.

古文：易曰： 出其言善，则千里之外应之 。
现代文：《易经》说： 说出的话好，那么千里之外有人响应。 
English: "I Ching" says: If what you say is good, then someone thousands of miles away will respond.

古文：虽礼仪周备，犹宜加之以祗恪，以副四海颙颙式仰。 
现代文：虽然礼仪周全完备，还应当加上恭敬谨慎，以符合四海的仰望。 
English: Although the etiquette is comprehensive and complete, respect and caution should also be added to meet the expectations of the four seas.

古文：癸巳，天子诏曰： 朕闻创业之君，必须股肱之臣；守文之主，亦赖匡佐之辅。
现代文：癸巳，天子下诏书说： 我听说创立基业的国君，必须有得力的臣子；遵守成法的帝王，也须依赖能匡正辅佐的大臣。
English: Now, the imperial edict issued by the emperor said: I have heard that the sovereign who establishes the foundation must have powerful vassals; the emperor who abides by the law must also rely on ministers who can support and assist.

古文：是故文武以吕召彰受命之功，宣王倚山甫享中兴之业。
现代文：因此，周文王、周武王凭藉旦堂、丑公使承受天命的功续显扬，旦宣王倚靠山卢享有中兴的业绩。
English: Therefore, King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu were able to achieve great success with the help of the Tiantang and Ugong envoys, who had received the Mandate of Heaven, while King Dan Xuan relied on the Shanlu to enjoy the performance of ZTE.

古文：大将军世载明德，应期作辅。
现代文：大将军世代拥有美德，顺应天时辅佐朝政。
English: Generations of great generals have had the virtue to assist the imperial government in accordance with the times.

古文：遭天降险，帝室多难，齐王莅政，不迪率典。
现代文：国家遭受上天降下的凶险，皇室多有灾难，齐王在皇位，不依照遵循法典。
English: The country suffers from the perils of heaven, the royal family has many disasters, King Qi is on the throne, and does not follow the code.

古文：公履义执忠，以宁区夏，式是百辟，总齐庶事。
现代文：大将军履行正义秉执忠诚，来安宁华夏，匡正百官，统管庶事。
English: The great general performs justice, upholds loyalty, brings tranquility to Huaxia, upholds the integrity of all officials, and supervises general affairs.

古文：内摧寇虐，外静奸宄，日昃忧勤，劬劳夙夜。
现代文：内摧毁盗匪暴虐，外平定奸佞乱臣，太阳偏西仍因为国事而劳苦，操劳不分昼夜。
English: Destroy the robbers and tyrants at home, settle the traitors and turbulent vassals abroad, the sun is still westward because of national affairs, and work hard day and night.

古文：德声光于上下，勋烈施于四方。
现代文：道德声望光照上下，功勋业绩散布四方。
English: Moral prestige shines up and down, and meritorious achievements are scattered in all directions.

古文：深惟大议，首建明策，权定社稷，援立朕躬，宗庙获安，亿兆庆赖。
现代文：深切思考宏大的议论，首先建立明智的策略，权衡轻重，安定国家，帮助我登上皇位，宗庙获得安宁，万民庆幸依赖。
English: Think deeply about the grand discussion, first establish a wise strategy, weigh the weight, stabilize the country, help me ascend the throne, the ancestral temple to obtain peace, and the people to rely on.

古文：伊挚之保乂殷邦，公旦之绥宁周室，蔑以尚焉。
现代文：伊挚保护治理殷邦，公旦安宁垄，都无法超过大将军。
English: No one can surpass the great general in protecting and governing the country, and ensuring public peace and tranquility.

古文：朕甚嘉之。
现代文：我非常赞许他。
English: I give him a lot of credit.

古文：夫德茂者位尊，庸大者禄厚，古今之通义也。
现代文：道德高的人地位尊贵，功劳大的人俸禄丰厚，这是从古到今都通行的道理。
English: People with high moral standards are held in high esteem, and those who have performed great feats are richly rewarded. This has been the prevailing principle from ancient times to the present.

古文：其登位相国，增邑九千，并前四万户；进号大都督、假黄钺，入朝不趋，奏事不名，剑履上殿；赐钱五百万，帛五千匹，以彰元勋。 
现代文：封大将军为相国，增加食邑九千户，并入以前的共四万户；升号为大都督，假黄铁，入朝不必迈小碎步，奏报事情不必自报姓名，可佩剑穿鞋上殿；赐钱五百万，帛五千匹，以此表彰大功。 
English: He gave the title of grand general to his son-in-law, increased the number of food villages by nine thousand, and merged them into the previous total of forty thousand; his title was upgraded to grand governor, fake yellow iron, he did not have to take small steps to enter the court, he did not have to report his name when reporting the matter, he could wear a sword and shoes to the palace; he gave five million yuan and five thousand horses to commend his great service.

古文：帝固辞相国。
现代文：景帝坚决辞掉相国的职位。
English: Emperor Jing resolutely resigned from his position in his home country.

古文：又上书训于天子曰： 荆山之璞虽美，不琢不成其宝；颜冉之才虽茂，不学不弘其量。
现代文：又上书训诫天子说： 荆山的玉璞虽美，但不雕琢不成宝物；颜回、冉有的才学虽高，不学习就不能扩充他们的知识。
English: He also wrote a letter of admonition to the Son of Heaven, saying, "Although the jade ornaments of Mount Jing are beautiful, they cannot be made into treasures unless they are carved. Although some scholars are talented, they cannot expand their knowledge unless they study.

古文：仲尼有云： 予非生而知之者，好古敏以求之者也。 
现代文：仲尼说： 我不是一生下来就知道事理的人，而是爱好古代的东西而勤勉地探求的人，上溯黄轩以来五代的君主，没有一个不是有所遵循的。
English: Zhong Ni said: I am not a person who knows the truth from birth, but a person who loves ancient things and diligently explores them. There is not a single monarch in the five generations since Huang Xuan who has not followed something.

古文：仰观黄轩五代之主，莫不有所禀则，颛顼受学于绿图，高辛问道于柏招。逮至周成，旦望作辅，故能离经辩志，安道乐业。
现代文：颛顼从绿圆那裹受教育，高辛向柏招问道。到了周成王，有周公旦、吕望作辅佐，因而能分辨经书的章句主旨，安于正道乐于事业。
English: Gao Xin asked Baizhang about the education he received from Luoyuan. When he came to Zhoucheng, he had Zhou Gongdan and Lü Wang as assistants, so he was able to distinguish the main points of the chapters and sentences of the scriptures, and he was satisfied with the righteous path and enjoyed his career.

古文：夫然，故君道明于上，兆庶顺于下。
现代文：像这样，那么君王之道在上显明，庶民百姓在下顺从。
English: In this way, the way of the king is clear above, and the common people are obedient below.

古文：刑措之隆，实由于此。
现代文：刑法被搁置不用的盛世，实在由此而来。
English: The fact that criminal law was shelved and not used during the golden age is a direct result of this.

古文：宜遵先王下问之义，使讲诵之业屡闻于听，典谟之言日陈于侧也。 
现代文：应该遵循先王不耻下问的精神，让讲经诵诗的事时常听说，经典的话每天在身旁陈述。 
English: It is necessary to follow the spirit of the former king's shameless question, so that the matter of reciting scripture and poetry is often heard, and the classic words are recited every day.

古文：时天子颇修华饰，帝又谏曰： 履端初政，宜崇玄朴。 
现代文：当时天子很爱华丽侈靡，景帝又劝谏说： 刚刚涉足朝政，应该崇尚简朴。 
English: At that time, the emperor was very fond of opulent luxury, and Emperor Jing advised him: You have just stepped into the court politics, you should advocate simplicity.

古文：并敬纳焉。
现代文：天子一并恭敬地采纳。
English: All of them respectfully accepted.

古文：十一月，有白气经天。
现代文：十一月，有白色云气弥漫天空。
English: In November, white clouds filled the sky.

古文：二年春正月，有彗星见于吴楚之分，西北竟天。
现代文：二年春正月，有彗星出现在吴楚的分野，消失在西北上空。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, a comet appeared in the field of Wu Chu and disappeared in the northwest sky.

古文：镇东大将军毌丘俭、扬州刺史文钦举兵作乱，矫太后令移檄郡国，为坛盟于西门之外，各遣子四人质于吴以请救。
现代文：镇东大将军母丘俭、扬州刺史文钦起兵作乱，假托太后命令在郡国传送檄文，设立祭坛在西门外盟誓，各派四个儿子在吴国做人质来请求救助。
English: The mother of Zhen Dongda's general, Qiu Jian, and Yangzhou's general, Shishi Wenqin, raised an army to create a disturbance. They ordered the Empress Dowager to transmit the imperial edict in the county, set up an altar outside the West Gate, and swore an oath. Each sent four sons to be hostages in the State of Wu to ask for help.

古文：二月，俭、钦帅众六万，渡淮而西。
现代文：二月，母丘俭、文钦率领六万兵众，渡淮河向西进兵。
English: In February, his mother Qiu Jian and Wen Qin led 60,000 soldiers across the Huai River and marched westward.

古文：帝会公卿谋征讨计，朝议多谓可遣诸将击之，王肃及尚书傅嘏、中书侍郎钟会劝帝自行。
现代文：景帝会聚公卿谋划征讨的计策，朝廷的议论多数认为可以派遣众将出兵，王肃及尚书傅嘏、中书侍郎钟会劝景帝亲自出征。
English: Emperor Jing gathered nobles to plan and discuss the strategy of conscription, and most of the discussions in the imperial court believed that it was possible to send generals to send troops. Wang Su, Shang Shufu, and Zhong Shuzhirang would persuade Emperor Jing to personally go to war.

古文：戊午，帝统中军步骑十余万以征之。
现代文：戊午，景帝统率中军步兵骑兵十余万人去征讨。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Jing led more than one hundred thousand infantry and cavalry soldiers of the Chinese army to go to enlist.

古文：倍道兼行，召三方兵，大会于陈许之郊。
现代文：日夜兼程，召集三方的军队，大规模会聚在陈许的郊野。
English: He traveled day and night, gathering troops from the three sides and assembling on a large scale in the countryside of Chen Xu.

古文：甲申，次于隐桥，俭将史招、李绩相次来降。
现代文：甲申，驻在滁桥，母丘俭手下将领史招、李续先后来投降。
English: Gao Shin, stationed in Fenqiao, his mother Qiu Jian's subordinates, generals Shi Zhao and Li Ruixian, later surrendered.

古文：俭、钦移入项城，帝遣荆州刺史王基进据南顿以逼俭。
现代文：毋丘俭、文钦移兵到项城，景帝派遣荆州刺史王基进兵占据南顿来逼迫毋丘俭。
English: Although Qiuqian and Wenqin moved their troops to Xiangcheng, Emperor Jing dispatched the Jingzhou statesman Wang Ji to occupy Nantong to force Qiuqian.

古文：帝深壁高垒，以待东军之集。
现代文：景帝高筑壁垒，等待束面军队的集结。
English: Emperor Jing built high barriers and waited for Sokumen's army to assemble.

古文：诸将请进军攻其城，帝曰： 诸君得其一，未知其二。
现代文：众将请求进军攻打项城，景帝说： 诸位衹知其一，不知其二。
English: The crowd will request to march to attack Xiangcheng, and Emperor Jing said: You all know one thing, but you don't know another.

古文：淮南将士本无反志。
现代文：淮河以南的将士本来没有反叛的意思。
English: The soldiers south of the Huai River had no intention of rebelling.

古文：且俭、钦欲蹈纵横之迹，习仪秦之说，谓远近必应。
现代文：况且册丘俭、文钦想走纵横家的路，学习张仪、苏秦的学说，认为远近必定响应。
English: In addition, Zhuang Qiu Jian and Wen Qin wanted to take the road of vertical and horizontal home, learn the teachings of Zhang Yi and Su Qin, and believe that far and near must respond.

古文：而事起之日，淮北不从，史招、李绩前后瓦解。
现代文：然而发动叛乱的时候，淮河以北不依从，史招、李续先后瓦解。
English: However, when the rebellion was launched, the north of the Huaihe River did not obey, and Shizhu and Lihong disintegrated successively.

古文：内乖外叛，自知必败，困兽思斗，速战更合其志。
现代文：内部不顺从，外部背叛，自知必定失败，被困的野兽想要决斗，迅速交战更合他们心意。
English: Internal disobedience, external treachery, self-knowledge of inevitable defeat, the trapped beast wants a duel, a quick engagement is more to their liking.

古文：虽云必克，伤人亦多。
现代文：虽说必定克敌，但伤人也多。
English: Although we must defeat the enemy, there are many wounded.

古文：且俭等欺诳将士，诡变万端，小与持久，诈情自露，此不战而克之也。 
现代文：再说母丘俭等人欺骗将士，十分狡诈善变，稍稍与他们相持一段时间，骗局自然会败露，这样就能不战而胜。 
English: Moreover, the mother, Qiu Jian, and others deceived the soldiers and were very cunning and fickle. If you hold out with them for a while, the deception will naturally be exposed, so you can win without a fight.

古文：乃遣诸葛诞督豫州诸军自安风向寿春，征东将军胡遵督青、徐诸军出谯宋之间，绝其归路。
现代文：于是派遣诸葛诞督率豫州诸军从安风向寿春进兵，征东将军胡遵督率青、徐诸军向谯宋之间出兵，切断叛军退路。
English: Therefore, Zhuge Zetong led the troops of Yuzhou from Anfeng to Shuchun, and sent the troops of the East Conquest General Hu Zundu led the troops of Qing and Xu to the Song Dynasty to cut off the retreat of the rebels.

古文：帝屯汝阳，遣竞州刺史邓艾督太山诸军进屯乐嘉，示弱以诱之。
现代文：基帝屯兵于汝阳，派遣兖州刺史邓艾督率泰山诸军进驻乐嘉，示弱来诱敌。
English: Emperor Ke Di stationed troops in Ruyang, and dispatched the governor of Zhangzhou, Zishi Deng Ai, to lead the armies of Mount Tai into Lejia to lure the enemy by showing weakness.

古文：钦进军将攻艾，帝潜军衔枚，轻造乐嘉，与钦相遇。
现代文：文钦进军将攻打邓艾，景帝秘密派兵，径直奔赴乐嘉，与文钦相遇。
English: Wenqin marched to attack Deng Ai, and Emperor Jing secretly sent troops to go straight to Lejia to meet Wenqin.

古文：钦子鸯，年十八，勇冠三军，谓钦曰： 及其未定，请登城鼓噪，击之可破也。 
现代文：文钦的儿子文鸯，十八岁，在三军中最为勇猛，对文钦说： 趁对方立足未稳，请登上城墙擂鼓呐喊，可以击败对手。 
English: Wenqin's son, Wen Rong, eighteen years old, the bravest of the three armies, said to Wenqin: Take advantage of the other side's unstable footing, please climb the city wall to play drums and shout, you can defeat the opponent.

古文：既谋而行，三噪而钦不能应，鸯退，相与引而东。
现代文：然后按计谋行事，三次呐喊而文钦不能响应，文鸯退兵，一起引兵向东。
English: Then he acted according to the plan. He shouted three times and Wenqin couldn't respond. Wen Rong retreated and together they led the troops to the east.

古文：帝谓诸将曰： 钦走矣。 
现代文：量帝对众将说： 文钦逃跑了。 
English: The emperor said to the generals: "Wenqin has run away.

古文：命发锐军以追之。
现代文：命令派精锐部队追击文钦。
English: He ordered his elite troops to pursue Wencheng.

古文：诸将皆曰： 钦旧将，鸯少而锐，引军内入，未有失利，必不走也。 
现代文：众将都说： 文钦久经沙场，文鸯年轻有锐气，引军入项城，并没有失利，必不会逃走。 
English: The generals all said: "Wenqin has been in the battlefield for a long time, Wenyi is young and vigorous, he led the army into Xiangcheng, he did not lose, and he will not run away."

古文：帝曰： 一鼓作气，再而衰，三而竭。
现代文：景帝说： 一鼓作气，再而衰，三而竭。
English: Emperor Jing said: "One drum beats, then fades, and then dies.

古文：鸯三鼓，钦不应，其势已屈，不走何待？ 
现代文：塞尽三次击鼓，塞趑不响应，他们的气势已经衰竭，不逃走还等什么? 
English: They have beaten the drums three times, but the cymbals do not respond. Their momentum has been exhausted. If they do not run away, what are they waiting for?

古文：钦将遁，鸯曰： 不先折其势，不得去也。 
现代文：文钦将要逃走，文蠢说： 不先打掉敌军锐气，是不能走的。 
English: Wenqin was about to flee, and Wen Yu said, "You can't leave without first knocking out the enemy's morale."

古文：乃与骁骑十余摧锋陷阵，所向皆披靡，遂引去。
现代文：于是与十余名骁勇的骑兵攻入景帝军队的阵地，所向披靡，然后引兵撤离。
English: As a result, he and more than ten brave cavalrymen broke into the positions of Emperor Jing's army, which was overwhelming, and then withdrew the troops.

古文：帝遣左长史司马琏督骁骑八千翼而追之，使将军乐林等督步兵继其后。
现代文：景帝派左长史司马琏督率八千精壮骑兵从侧翼追敌，派将军乐绋等督率步兵为后继。
English: King Gyeonggi sent the left-in-command, Admiral Shi Simak, with 8,000 strong cavalry to pursue the enemy from the flanks, followed by General Le Son and other infantry commanders.

古文：比至沙阳，频陷钦阵，弩矢雨下，钦蒙盾而驰。
现代文：等到了沙阳，多次攻破文钦的军阵，射出的箭密集如下雨，文钦顶着盾牌逃奔。
English: When he reached Shayang, he repeatedly broke through Wenqin's army, and the arrows shot out were as dense as rain. Wenqin fled with his shield.

古文：大破其军。众皆投戈而降，钦父子与麾下走保项。
现代文：大破敌军，众人都扔下兵器投降，文钦父子与部下逃跑去保玺城。
English: The enemy army was completely defeated, everyone threw down their weapons and surrendered, and Wenqin father and son and their subordinates fled to Baojun City.

古文：俭闻钦败，弃众宵遁淮南。
现代文：旦旦俭听说塞麸战败，抛弃众人连夜逃往淮河以南。
English: When Dandan Jian heard that Sai Ye was defeated, he abandoned everyone and fled to the south of the Huai River overnight.

古文：安风津都尉追俭，斩之，传首京都。
现代文：安风津都尉追上母丘俭，杀了他，把旦丘伧的首级传到京都。
English: Lieutenant An Fengjin caught up with his mother Qiu Jian, killed him, and sent the severed head of Qiu Jian to Kyoto.

古文：钦遂奔吴，淮南平。
现代文：塞筮于是投奔呈国，淮南平定。
English: So Sai Ye ran to Zhen Guo, and Huainan was pacified.

古文：初，帝目有瘤疾，使医割之。
现代文：当初，景帝眼睛上长了瘤子，让医生割除。
English: At first, Jingdi had a pimple on his eye and asked the doctor to remove it.

古文：鸯之来攻也，惊而目出。
现代文：塞蠢进攻时，量童因受惊吓眼珠进出。
English: At the time of the stupid attack, the measuring child's eyes darted in and out in fright.

古文：惧六军之恐，蒙之以被，痛甚，啮被败而左右莫知焉。
现代文：怕六军因此恐慌，把头蒙在被裹，疼痛得受不了，把被子都咬破了，然而左右没人知道此事。
English: Fearing that the Sixth Army would panic because of this, he wrapped his head in a blanket. The pain was unbearable, and he bit through the blanket. However, no one knew about this.

古文：闰月疾笃，使文帝总统诸军。
现代文：闰月病势加重，让塞童总管诸军。
English: During the intercalary month, his condition worsened, and he was forced to relinquish his position as commander-in-chief.

古文：辛亥，崩于许昌，时年四十八。
现代文：辛亥，死于许昌，时年四十八岁。
English: Xinhai, died of Xu Chang, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：二月，帝之丧至自许昌，天子素服临吊，诏曰： 公有济世宁国之勋，克定祸乱之功，重之以死王事，宜加殊礼。
现代文：二月，基童丧车从注旦到了京都，天子身穿素服亲临吊丧，下韶说： 公有救助天下安宁国家的勋绩，有平定祸患动乱的功劳，再加上是为国事而死，应增加特殊的礼遇。
English: In February, the foundation's funeral car traveled from Zhentang to Kyoto. The emperor, dressed in plain clothes, attended the funeral in person. He said, "The public's achievement of saving the country and bringing peace to the world is a merit of pacifying disasters and turmoil. In addition, dying for national affairs should be given special courtesy."

古文：其令公卿议制。 
现代文：命令公卿商议丧制。 
English: Ordered nobles to discuss funeral arrangements.

古文：有司议以为忠安社稷，功济宇内，宜依霍光故事，追加大司马之号以冠大将军，增邑五万户，谥曰武公。
现代文：有关官员商议认为，景帝的忠心安定了国家，功业救助了天下，应该依照霍光的先例。追加大司马的称号加在大将军前，增加食邑五万户，谧号武公。
English: The officials concerned considered that Jingdi's loyalty had stabilized the country and his deeds had saved the world, and they should follow Huo Guang's precedent, adding the title of Da Sima in front of the general, increasing the number of households to 50,000, and the nickname of Wu Gong.

古文：文帝表让曰： 臣亡父不敢受丞相相国九命之礼，亡兄不敢受相国之位，诚以太祖常所阶历也。
现代文：文帝上表辞让说： 臣下已故的父亲不敢接受丞相相国九命的礼遇，已故的兄长不敢接受相国的高位，完全是因为太祖曾经任过丞相一职。
English: Emperor Wen said in his eulogy: The deceased father of the subject dared not accept the courtesy of the nine lives of the prime minister and the minister of the country, and the deceased brother dared not accept the high position of the country, entirely because the great-grandfather had once served as the prime minister.

古文：今谥与二祖同，必所祗惧。
现代文：如今谧号舆武帝、文帝相同，必定令人惶恐。
English: Nowadays, the names of Emperor Wudi and Emperor Wen are the same, which must be frightening.

古文：昔萧何、张良、霍光咸有匡佐之功，何谥文终，良谥文成，光谥宣成必以文武为谥，请依何等就加。 
现代文：过去萧何、张良、霍光都有挽救时局辅佐国君的功绩，萧何的谧号是文终，张良的谧号是文成，霍光的谧号是宣成。如果一定要以文武作为谧号，请依照萧何等人的先例来加赠。 
English: In the past, Xiao He, Zhang Liang, and Huo Guang all had the merit of saving the situation and assisting the country. Xiao He's nickname is Wenzhong, Zhang Liang's nickname is Wencheng, and Huo Guang's nickname is Xuancheng. If you must use Wenwu as your nickname, please follow the example of Xiao He and others.

古文：诏许之，谥曰忠武。
现代文：天子下诏应允，定谧号为忠武。
English: The emperor agreed, and the name was changed to Zhongwu.

古文：晋国既建，追尊曰景王。
现代文：晋国建立以后。追加尊号为景王。
English: After the establishment of Jin, the additional honorific title was King Jing.

古文：武帝受禅，上尊号曰景皇帝，陵曰峻平，庙称世宗。
现代文：武帝接受惮让，追尊号为景皇帝，山陵叫峻平，宗庙称为世宗。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the offer, and his posthumous name was Emperor Jing. The mountain was called Mount Junping, and the ancestral temple was called Shizong.

古文：文皇帝讳昭，字子上，景帝之母弟也。
现代文：文皇帝名昭，字子上，是景帝的同母兄弟。
English: Emperor Wen was the half-brother of Emperor Jing.

古文：魏景初二年，封新城乡侯。
现代文：魏景初二年，被封为新城乡侯。
English: In the first two years of the Wei and Qing Dynasties, he was awarded the title of Xincheng Township Mayor.

古文：正始初，为洛阳典农中郎将。
现代文：正始初年，任洛阳典农中郎将。
English: At the beginning of the first year, he was appointed as Luoyang Deng Nongzhuro.

古文：值魏明奢侈之后，帝蠲除苛碎，不夺农时，百姓大悦。
现代文：时值魏明帝奢侈之风的后期，文帝免除苛刻繁琐，不占农时，百姓十分高兴。
English: It was the late period of the extravagant style of Wei and Ming Dynasties. Emperor Wen was exempt from the harsh and cumbersome, and did not occupy the agricultural time. The people were very happy.

古文：转散骑常侍。
现代文：转任散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to the post of Sangai (free riding) Samurai.

古文：大将军曹爽之伐蜀也，以帝为征蜀将军，副夏侯玄出骆谷，次于兴势。
现代文：大将军曹爽讨伐蜀国的时候，任命文帝为征蜀将军，作夏侯玄的副手出兵骆谷，驻在兴势。
English: When the great general Cao Shuang invaded Shu, Emperor Wen was appointed as the general to conquer Shu, and sent troops to Luogu as the deputy of Xia Houxuan, and stationed in Xingze.

古文：蜀将王林夜袭帝营，帝坚卧不动。
现代文：蜀将王林夜袭文帝的军营，文帝躺着不动。
English: Shu general Wang Lin raided Emperor Wen's camp at night. Emperor Wen lay motionless.

古文：林退，帝谓玄曰： 费祎以据险距守，进不获战，攻之不可，宜亟旋军，以为后图。 
现代文：王林退兵，文帝对夏侯玄说： 费樟占据险阻来抵抗坚守，我们进兵无法交战，强攻又不行，应该赶快回师，以后再考虑。 
English: When Wang Lin retired from the army, Emperor Wen said to Xia Houxuan: "If we occupy dangerous obstacles to resist and hold on, we can't fight when we enter the army, and we can't attack forcefully. We should quickly return to the division and think about it later."

古文：爽等引旋，祎果驰兵趣三岭，争险乃得过。
现代文：曹爽等人引兵回撤，费樟果然引兵追逐直奔三岭，经过争夺险阻魏军才得以通过。
English: Cao Shuang and others led the troops to retreat, Fei Yao led the troops to chase straight to Sanling, and the Wei army was able to pass through after competing for the dangerous obstacle.

古文：遂还，拜议郎。
现代文：于是还朝，官拜议郎。
English: As a result, he returned to the court and became a courtier.

古文：及诛曹爽，帅众卫二宫，以功增邑千户。
现代文：等到诛杀曹爽时，率众人保卫二宫，因有功增加食邑一千户。
English: When Cao Shuang was killed, he led all the people to defend the second palace, and because of his achievements, he increased the number of households by a thousand.

古文：蜀将姜维之寇陇右也，征西将军郭淮自长安距之。
现代文：蜀将姜维进犯陇西时，征西将军郭淮从长安出兵御敌。
English: When Shu general Jiang Wei invaded Western Hunan, Western Conquest general Guo Huai sent troops from Chang'an to repel the enemy.

古文：进帝位安西将军、持节，屯关中，为诸军节度。
现代文：提升文帝为安西将军、持节，屯兵于关中，为诸军节度。
English: Emperor Wen was promoted to General of Anxi, held a festival, stationed troops in Guanzhong, and became the military festival.

古文：淮攻维别将句安于麹，久而不决。
现代文：郭淮在曲地攻击姜维的副将句安，长时间不分胜负。
English: Guo Huai attacked Jiang Wei's second-in-command, Guan An, on the curved terrain, and the battle went on for a long time.

古文：帝乃进据长城，南趣骆谷以疑之。
现代文：文帝于是进兵占据长城，南奔骆谷来迷惑敌军。
English: Emperor Wen then marched in troops to occupy the Great Wall, and ran south to Loke Valley to confuse the enemy.

古文：维惧，退保南郑，安军绝援，帅众来降。
现代文：姜维恐惧，退兵守南鄞，句室的军队断绝了后援，率领众人来投降。
English: Jiang Wei was afraid and withdrew his troops to guard Nanlu. The army of the sentence room cut off the support and led the people to surrender.

古文：转安东将军、持节，镇许昌。
现代文：文帝转任安束将军、持节，镇守许昌。
English: Emperor Wen was transferred to the post of General Anzuk, Jisetsu, and the town's governor, Xu Chang.

古文：及大军讨王凌，帝督淮北诸军事，帅师会于项。
现代文：到大军讨伐王浚时，文帝督察淮北诸军事务，率领军队在项地会师。
English: When the great army came to fight against Wang Jun, Emperor Wen inspected the affairs of the armies in northern Huai and led the army to join the division in Xiangzhou.

古文：增邑三百户，假金印紫绶。
现代文：增食邑三百户，暂授金印紫绶。
English: Three hundred households in Zengshui Township have been temporarily awarded the Gold Seal Purple Ribbon.

古文：寻进号都督，统征东将军胡遵、镇东将军诸葛诞伐吴，战于东关。
现代文：不久提升为都督，统率征东将军胡遵、镇东将军诸葛诞讨伐吴国，在束关交战。
English: He was soon promoted to the governor of the capital, and led the Eastern General Hu Zun and the Eastern General Zhu Ge Xing to fight in the Wu Kingdom, and fought in Shouguan.

古文：二军败绩，坐失侯。
现代文：两军打丁败仗，获罪失去侯爵。
English: The two armies fought to a stalemate and lost the Marquis.

古文：蜀将姜维又寇陇右，扬声欲攻狄道。
现代文：蜀将姜维又进犯陇西，扬言要攻打狄道。
English: Shu general Jiang Wei invaded western Shaanxi again, threatening to attack Di Dao.

古文：以帝行征西将军，次长安。
现代文：派文帝暂兼征西将军，驻在长安。
English: Emperor Wen sent a general to conquer the west and stationed him in Chang'an.

古文：雍州刺史陈泰欲先贼据狄道，帝曰： 姜维攻羌，收其质任，聚谷作邸阁讫，而复转行至此，正欲了塞外诸羌，为后年之资耳。
现代文：雍州刺史陈泰打算在敌来之前占据狄道，文帝说： 姜维攻打羌，收取了羌的人质，聚集粮草建完了军需库，然后又转道行军到造裹，正是想要了结塞外羌部落的事，作为以后的资本。
English: Chen Tai, the governor of Yongzhou, planned to occupy Di Dao before the enemy arrived. Emperor Wen said: "Jiang Wei attacked Di, took the hostages of Di, gathered grain and grass, completed the construction of the munitions depot, and then marched to Zawu. It was precisely because he wanted to block the affairs of the Waizhu tribe, as the future capital.

古文：若实向狄道，安肯宣露，令外人知？
现代文：假如真要攻打狄道。怎么肯宣扬暴露，让外人知道?
English: If they really wanted to attack Dido, how could they announce the exposure and let outsiders know about it?

古文：今扬声言出，此欲归也。 
现代文：如今扬言要出兵，这是打算班师了。 
English: Now he's threatening to send in the troops.

古文：维果烧营而去。
现代文：姜维果然烧了军营撤走。
English: Jiang Wei did indeed burn down the military camp and withdraw.

古文：会新平羌胡叛，帝击破之，遂耀兵灵州，北虏震詟，叛者悉降。
现代文：正赶上新平羌胡部族叛乱，文帝打败了他们，于是在灵州炫耀兵力，北方敌人震惊恐惧，叛乱的人都投降了。
English: Just in time for the Xinping Yahu Tribe's rebellion, Emperor Wen defeated them and then made a show of force in Lingzhou. The northern enemy was shocked and terrified, and the rebels all surrendered.

古文：以功复封新城乡侯。
现代文：因为有功重新被封为新城乡侯。
English: Because of his meritorious service, he was re-christened as a new town and village chief.

古文：高贵乡公之立也，以参定策，进封高都侯，增封二千户。
现代文：高贵乡公被立为国君时，因塞童参与了制定策谋，被进封为高都侯，增封食邑二干户。
English: When the noble townsman was enthroned as the ruler of the country, because Seydong participated in the formulation of the strategy, he was given the title of Gaoduo, and two households were added to the food village.

古文：毌丘俭、文钦之乱，大军东征，帝兼中领军，留镇洛阳。
现代文：坦丘俭、文钦叛乱时，大军东征，文帝兼中领军，留下镇守洛阳。
English: When Tang Qujian and Wenqin rebelled, the great army marched eastward, with Emperor Wen leading the army, leaving Luoyang as the garrison.

古文：及景帝疾笃，帝自京都省疾，拜卫将军。
现代文：等到景帝病重时，文帝从京都去探视，被任为卫将军。
English: When Emperor Jing fell gravely ill, Emperor Wen visited from Kyoto and was appointed as Wei general.

古文：景帝崩，天子命帝镇许昌，尚书傅嘏帅六军还京师。
现代文：景帝死，天子命令文帝镇守许昌，尚书塑率领六军返回京师。
English: After the death of Emperor Jing, Heaven's Son ordered Emperor Wen to guard Xu Chang, and Shang Shuxuo led the Sixth Army to return to the capital.

古文：帝用嘏及钟会策，自帅军而还。
现代文：塞童采用垡逦及钟盒的策略，自己率军返回。
English: Using the strategy of the crossbow and the bell box, Saido led his army back.

古文：至洛阳，进位大将军加侍中，都督中外诸军、录尚书事，辅政，剑履上殿。
现代文：到了洛阳，升为大将军，加侍中，都督中外诸军、录尚书事，辅佐朝政，佩剑穿鞋上殿。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he was promoted to the rank of general, and was appointed to the position of attendant, and was appointed as the military governor of all the armies at home and abroad, recorded the records, assisted in the government, and entered the palace with a sword in his shoe.

古文：帝固辞不受。
现代文：文帝坚决推辞不接受。
English: Emperor Wen resolutely refused to accept the resignation.

古文：甘露元年春正月，加大都督，奏事不名。
现代文：苴灵元年春正月，加封大都督，奏事不必报姓名。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Xingling, he was appointed as the grand governor, and his name did not have to be reported.

古文：夏六月，进封高都公，地方七百里，加之九锡，假斧钺，进号大都督，剑履上殿。
现代文：夏六月，加封为高都公，封地方圆七百里，外加九锡，赐斧钹，进封为大都督，佩剑穿鞋上殿。
English: In the summer of June, he was awarded the title of Gaotokong, and the area of his fief was seven hundred li in circumference, plus nine hundred taels of silver. He was also given an axe and a plough, and he was made the grand governor of the city. He wore a sword on his shoe to enter the palace.

古文：又固辞不受。
现代文：又坚决推辞不接受。
English: He also resolutely refused to accept the refusal.

古文：秋八月庚申，加假黄钺，增封三县。
现代文：秋八月庚申，加假黄铁，增封三个县。
English: In autumn and August, Goshun added fake yellow iron, and three counties were added.

古文：二年夏五月辛未，镇东大将军诸葛诞杀扬州刺史乐綝，以淮南作乱，遣子靓为质于吴以请救。
现代文：二年夏五月辛未，镇东大将军诸葛诞杀了扬州刺史銮继，在进南作乱，派遣儿子诸葛靓去吴国作人质以请救兵。
English: In the summer and May of the second year of Xinwei, the general of the town of Dongdong, Zhu Ge, killed the Yangzhou assassin, Shi Xunji, and sent his son Zhu Ge to Wu as a hostage to ask for rescue.

古文：议者请速伐之，帝曰： 诞以毌丘俭轻疾倾覆，今必外连吴寇，此为变大而迟。
现代文：商议的人们请求迅速讨伐他。塞童说： 谴姜涎因为看到旦旦俭轻兵疾进而覆灭，如今必定勾结吴国，这使得他兵力加大而行动迟缓。
English: The people at the meeting asked for a speedy crackdown on him. Sedong said: "Because the punisher, Jiang Chen, saw that his frugality and light-handedness led to his downfall, he must now collude with the State of Wu, which has made him increase his strength and slow down his actions."

古文：吾当与四方同力，以全胜制之。 
现代文：我们当与四方同心协力，用全胜制伏诸葛诞。 
English: We should make concerted efforts with the four parties and win the birth of Zhuge with a total victory.

古文：乃表曰： 昔黥布叛逆，汉祖亲征；隗嚣违戾，光武西伐；烈祖明皇帝乘舆仍出：皆所以奋扬赫斯，震耀威武也。
现代文：于是上表说： 过去黥布叛乱，汉高担亲自征讨；隗嚣背逆，光亘游西讨；烈祖明皇童战车频繁出动。这些都是为了激奋宣扬气势，显耀威风武力。
English: Therefore, the above table said: in the past, the Zibo Rebellion, Han Gaotan personally led the discussion; the arrogance and treachery, the light traveled to the West to discuss; the Emperor Ming's chariots were frequently dispatched. These are all for the purpose of arousing propaganda momentum and showing the prestige of force.

古文：陛下宜暂临戎，使将士得凭天威。
现代文：陛下应该暂时亲临战场，使将士们得以凭仗天子的威名。
English: His Majesty should temporarily be present on the battlefield, so that the soldiers can fight with the prestige of the Son of Heaven.

古文：今诸军可五十万，以众击寡，蔑不克矣。 
现代文：如今诸军约五十万人，以多击少，战无不胜。 
English: Now the armies number about half a million men, and they are invincible in battle.

古文：秋七月，奉天子及皇太后东征，征兵青、徐、荆、豫，分取关中游军，皆会淮北。
现代文：秋七月，事奉天子及皇太后一同束征，在青、徐、荆、豫征兵，又征集了一部分关中的流动部队，都会合于淮北。
English: In the autumn and July, the emperor and empress dowager were conscripted together, and soldiers were conscripted in Qing, Xu, Jing and Yu, and a part of the mobile troops in Guanzhong were also conscripted, all of which would meet in Huaibei.

古文：师次于项，假廷尉何桢节，使淮南，宣慰将士，申明逆顺，示以诛赏。
现代文：军队驻扎在项，令廷尉何桢持符节，出使淮南，对将士们宣示抚慰，申明叛逆舆忠顺，诛罚与赏赐等。
English: The army was stationed in Xiangyang, so the courtier He Zhen held the festival, sent to Huainan, declared comfort to the soldiers, affirmed the loyalty of the rebels, and punished and rewarded them.

古文：甲戌，帝进军丘头。
现代文：甲戌，文帝进军到丘头。
English: Armor-plated, Emperor Wen marched to the hilltop.

古文：吴使文钦、唐咨、全端、全怿等三万余人来救诞，诸将逆击，不能御。
现代文：吴国派文钦、唐咨、全端、全惮等三万余人来救援诸葛诞，诸将迎击，抵挡不住。
English: Wu sent more than 30,000 people, including Wenqin, Tangzhi, Quandong, and Quanzhuo, to rescue Zhuge, and Zhuge met the attack and could not resist.

古文：将军李广临敌不进，泰山太守常时称疾不出，并斩之以徇。
现代文：将军李广面对敌人不进，泰山太守常时称病不出门，一并杀掉示众。
English: General Li Guang did not advance in the face of the enemy, and Taishan Taishou always said that he would not go out when he was ill, and killed the demonstrators together.

古文：八月，吴将硃异帅兵万余人，留辎重于都陆，轻兵至黎浆。
现代文：八月，吴国将领朱异率兵万余人，把辎重留在都陆，轻兵到达黎浆。
English: In August, Zhu Yixing, the general of the State of Wu, led more than ten thousand soldiers and left the main body of the army in Tulu, while the light troops arrived in Lipu.

古文：监军石苞、衮州刺史州泰御之，异退。
现代文：监军石苞、兖州刺史州泰抵御吴军，朱异退兵。
English: The supervising troops of Shijie and Zhangzhou and Shizhu and Tai resisted the Wu army, and Zhu Yi withdrew.

古文：泰山太守胡烈以奇兵袭都陆，焚其粮运。
现代文：泰山太守胡烈出奇兵袭击都陆，焚烧了吴军的粮草车辆。
English: Emperor Taishan's eunuch Hu Lie attacked the capital and burned the grain and grass vehicles of the Wu army.

古文：苞、泰复进击异，大破之。
现代文：石苞、州泰又向朱异进击，大败敌军。
English: Shijiazhuang and Zhutai also attacked Zhu Rong and defeated the enemy.

古文：异之余卒馁甚，食葛叶而遁，吴人杀异。
现代文：朱异剩下的士卒饿极了，吃葛草叶子然后逃跑，吴国人杀了朱异。
English: Zhu Ying's remaining soldiers were so hungry that they ate kudzu leaves and ran away. The Wu people killed Zhu Ying.

古文：帝曰： 异不得至寿春，非其罪也，而吴人杀之，适以谢寿春而坚诞意，使其犹望救耳。
现代文：文帝说： 朱异未能到寿春，不是他的罪过，而吴国人杀了他，正是想以此来向寿春方面谢罪，从而坚定诸葛诞守城的信念，使他仍然期望着救兵。
English: Emperor Wen said: Zhu Yi's failure to reach Shouchun was not his fault, and the Wu people killed him in order to apologize to Shouchun, thereby strengthening Zhuge's belief in defending the city, so that he still expected to be rescued.

古文：若其不尔，彼当突围，决一旦之命。
现代文：如果诸葛诞不是这样，他将会突围，拼一时的你死我活。
English: If Zhuge is not like this, he will break through and fight to the death.

古文：或谓大军不能久，省食减口，冀有他变。
现代文：或者认为大军不能持久围困，于是减省粮，期待着有其他变化。
English: Or they thought that a large army could not sustain a siege, so they cut back on grain and looked forward to other changes.

古文：料贼之情，不出此三者。
现代文：估计敌兵的情势，出不了这三种。
English: Estimating the situation of the enemy soldiers, these three things cannot come out.

古文：今当多方以乱之，备其越逸，此胜计也。 
现代文：如今应当多方面迷惑他们，防备他们逃跑，这是打胜仗的计谋。 
English: Now it is necessary to confuse them in many ways and prevent them from escaping. This is the strategy for winning the war.

古文：因命合围，分遣羸疾就谷淮北，禀军士大豆，人三升。
现代文：于是命令合拢包围圈，分批派遣病弱者去淮北取得给养，开仓分给军士大豆，每人三升。
English: Therefore, the order was given to close the encirclement, send the sick and weak to Huaibei in batches to obtain supplies, and distribute soybeans to the soldiers, three liters per person.

古文：钦闻之，果喜。
现代文：文钦听到消息，果然高兴。
English: When Wen Qin heard the news, he was really happy.

古文：帝愈羸形以示之，多纵反间，扬言吴救方至。
现代文：文帝更加显示出兵力虚弱的样子，多次行使反问计，扬言吴国救兵快要到了。
English: Emperor Wen further showed the appearance of a weak military force, repeatedly exercised the counter-questioning strategy, and threatened that the rescue of Wu was about to arrive.

古文：诞等益宽恣食，俄而城中乏粮。
现代文：诸葛诞等人更加宽心任意吃喝，不久城中缺粮。
English: Zhuge Xing and others were more relaxed to eat and drink at will, and soon there was a shortage of grain in the city.

古文：石苞、王基并请攻之，帝曰： 诞之逆谋，非一朝一夕也，聚粮完守，外结吴人，自谓足据淮南。
现代文：石苞、王基一同请求攻打，文帝说： 诸葛诞谋反，不是一朝一夕的事，聚集粮食修治守备，对外勾结吴国人，自以为足以占据淮南。
English: Shi Yan and Wang Ji both requested an attack, and Emperor Wen said: Zhuge's rebelling was not an overnight event. They gathered grain, repaired and guarded, and colluded with the people of Wu, and thought they had enough to occupy Huainan.

古文：钦既同恶相济，必不便走。
现代文：文钦既然是同恶相助，必定不会轻易逃走。
English: Since Wenqin is an accomplice of evil, he will not run away easily.

古文：今若急攻之，损游军之力。
现代文：如今假若急切进攻，有损流动部队的实力。
English: Now, if there is a rush to attack, it will damage the strength of the mobile forces.

古文：外寇卒至，表里受敌，此危道也。
现代文：外寇突然到来，裹外受敌，这是危险的道路。
English: The sudden arrival of foreign invaders and being surrounded by enemies is a dangerous path.

古文：今三叛相聚于孤城之中，天其或者将使同戮。
现代文：现今三个叛贼在孤城中聚在一起，上天或许将使他们同时遭受杀戮。
English: Now that the three traitors are gathered together in the lonely city, Heaven may have them killed at the same time.

古文：吾当以长策縻之，但坚守三面。
现代文：我们应当用长远的策略牵制敌人，衹需坚守三面。
English: We should use a long-term strategy to contain the enemy, and we need to adhere to the three aspects.

古文：若贼陆道而来，军粮必少，吾以游兵轻骑绝其转输，可不战而破外贼。
现代文：如果敌人从陆路来，军粮一定少，我们用装备轻便行动迅速的骑兵断绝他们的中转运输，可以不交战而打败外来敌人。
English: If the enemy comes by land, there must be a shortage of military supplies, and we can defeat the foreign enemy without engaging in battle by using lightly equipped and fast-moving cavalry to cut off their transit transportation.

古文：外贼破，钦等必成擒矣。 
现代文：外敌被击败，文钦等人必定成俘虏。 
English: If the foreign enemy is defeated, Wenqin and others will certainly become prisoners.

古文：全怿母，孙权女也，得罪于吴，全端兄子祎及仪奉其母来奔。
现代文：全恽的母亲，是孙权的女儿，得罪了吴国，全端的侄子全樟及全仪带着他母亲来投奔。
English: Quanzhang's mother, the daughter of Sun Quan, offended the State of Wu, and Quanzhang's nephews, Quanzhang and Quanzhang, fled with their mother.

古文：仪兄静时在寿春，用钟会计，作祎、仪书以谲静。
现代文：全仪的兄长全静当时正在寿春，采用钟会的计谋，假造全樟、全仪的书信来欺诈全静。
English: Zeng Yi's brother, Zeng Jing, was celebrating his birthday at the time, and he used the trick of the bell association to forge Zeng Yi's and Zeng Yi's letters to deceive Zeng Jing.

古文：静兄弟五人帅其众来降，城中大骇。
现代文：全静兄弟五人率手下人来投降，寿春城中大为惊恐。
English: The five brothers of Quan Jing and their subordinates came to surrender, causing great consternation in Shouchun.

古文：三年春正月壬寅，诞、钦等出攻长围，诸军逆击，走之。
现代文：三年春正月壬寅，诸葛诞、文钦等出城攻打围城军队，各军迎击，打跑了他们。
English: In the first month of the third year of spring, Ren Yin, Zhuge Zi, Wen Qin and others went out of the city to attack the besieging army. All the armies counterattacked and beat them away.

古文：初，诞、钦内不相协，及至穷蹙，转相疑贰。
现代文：起初，诸葛涎舆塞敛内部不相融洽，到了处境窘迫时，转相猜疑。
English: At first, Zhuge Liang was not harmonious internally, and when he was in a difficult situation, he became suspicious.

古文：会钦计事与诞忤，诞手刃杀钦。
现代文：恰逢文钦与诸葛诞商议事情时意见不一，盏姜涎持刀杀了塞麸。
English: When Wenqin and Zhuge Zhao had a disagreement while discussing the matter, Zhan Jiangyu held a knife and killed Xie Rong.

古文：钦子鸯攻诞，不克，逾城降。
现代文：塞筮的儿子塞盏进攻盏姜诞，不胜，出城投降。
English: Sai Yan's son Sai Zhan attacked Zhan Jiang Zhao, but was defeated and left the city to surrender.

古文：以为将军，封侯，使鸯巡城而呼。
现代文：以他为将军，封侯，派文鸯绕城呼唤。
English: Take him as a general, appoint him as a feudal lord, and send him to call around the city.

古文：帝见城上持弓者不发，谓诸将曰： 可攻矣！ 
现代文：文帝看见城上拿弓的人不放箭，对众将说： 可以攻城了。 
English: When Emperor Wen saw that the men with bows on the city wall were not letting go of their arrows, he said to the commanders, "You may now attack the city."

古文：二月乙酉，攻而拔之，斩诞，夷三族。
现代文：二月乙酉，攻城并夺取了城池，杀诸葛诞，灭三族。
English: February acetylene, attacked the city and captured the city, killed Zhuge Zi, and destroyed the three tribes.

古文：吴将唐咨、孙弥、徐韶等帅其属皆降，表加爵位，禀其馁疾。
现代文：吴国将领唐咨、孙曼、孙弥、徐韶等人率领他们的部属都投降，表彰加封爵位，救济饥饿伤病的人。
English: Wu generals Tang Zhi, Sun Man, Sun Mi, Xu Xi and others led their subordinates to surrender, commended and knighted, and provided relief for the starving, injured and sick.

古文：或言吴兵必不为用，请坑之。
现代文：有人说吴国兵士必定不会为魏国效力，请求活埋了他们。
English: Some people said that the soldiers of the State of Wu would definitely not serve the State of Wei, and requested that they be buried alive.

古文：帝曰： 就令亡还，适见中国之弘耳。 
现代文：文帝说： 即使他们逃回昱玺，正好显示我中原国家的大度。 
English: Wen Di said: Even if they flee back to Handan, it just shows the generosity of my Central Plains country.

古文：于是徙之三河。
现代文：于是把他们迁徙到三河。
English: So they moved them to Mikawa.

古文：夏四月，归于京师，魏帝命改丘头曰武丘，以旌武功。
现代文：夏四月，回到京师，魏帝命令把丘头改名为武丘，用以表彰武功。
English: In the summer of April, when he returned to Beijing, Emperor Wei ordered that the top of the hill be renamed Wuqiu to commend his military exploits.

古文：五月，天子以并州之太原上党西河乐平新兴雁门、司州之河东平阳八郡，地方七百里，封帝为晋公，加九锡，进位相国，晋国置官司焉。
现代文：五月，天子把并州的太原、上党、西河、乐垩、逝璺、压旦，旦蛆的眯、至扰八个郡，方圆七百里，封给塞壹并封为晋公，加赐九锡，进宫为相国，在置玺设置官府。
English: In May, the Son of Heaven made Taiyuan, Shangdang, Xihe, Lequan, Zhouzhuang, Boudan, Danzhuang, and Zhouzhuang into eight counties with a total area of 700 miles, and bestowed the title of "Imperial Prince" and "Imperial Prince" on Saiyuan, and the title of "Imperial Prince" and "Imperial Prince" on Jiuxi, and the title of "Imperial Consort" and "Imperial Consort" on Xihe. He also set up the government office in Jiuxi.

古文：九让，乃止。
现代文：塞童九次辞让，才作罢。
English: Saido resigned nine times before giving up.

古文：于是增邑万户，食三县，诸子之无爵者皆封列侯。
现代文：于是增加食邑一万户，收三个县的赋税，儿子们没有爵位的都封为侯。
English: As a result, 10,000 households in Shokui were added, taxes from three prefectures were collected, and all sons without a peerage were made marquesses.

古文：秋七月，奏录先世名臣元功大勋之子了，随才叙用。
现代文：秋七月，奏请天子录用先朝名臣及有大功勋者的子孙，根据才能任用。
English: In autumn and July, the emperor was asked to recruit the sons and grandsons of famous ministers of the previous dynasty and those who had made great contributions, and to appoint them according to their abilities.

古文：四年夏六月，分荆州置二都督，王基镇新野，州泰镇襄阳。
现代文：四年夏六月，分割荆州设置两个都督，王基镇守麦嘤；岖镇守襄区。
English: In the summer and June of the fourth year, Jingzhou was divided and two governors were set up. Wangji Town was put in charge of Meituan, and Guzhen Town was put in charge of Xiang District.

古文：使石苞都督扬州，陈骞都督豫州，钟毓都督徐州，宋钧监青州诸军事。景元元年夏四月，天子复命帝爵秩如前，又让不受。
现代文：派亘苞任挝真都督，龌任龃都督，鲢任曲都督，曲监剀诸军事。基五元年夏四月，天子又下令给文帝以前的爵位俸禄，又辞让不接受。
English: In the summer and April of the fifth year of the Keiji era, the Emperor also ordered that the former title of nobility be given to Emperor Wen in exchange for a salary, and also refused to accept his resignation.

古文：天子既以帝三世宰辅，政非己出，情不能安，又虑废辱，将临轩召百僚而行放黜。
现代文：天子既因为文帝三代辅佐朝政，政令不是自己发出，因此于心不安，又顾虑被废受辱，将亲临大殿前召集百官放逐罢黜文帝。
English: As Emperor Wen's third-generation aide-de-camp, Tianzi was not the one to issue the decree, he was uneasy and worried about being deposed and humiliated, so he summoned hundreds of officials in front of the Great Hall to expel Emperor Wen.

古文：五月戊子夜，使冗从仆射李昭等发甲于陵云台，召侍中王沈、散骑常侍王业、尚书王经，出怀中黄素诏示之，戒严俟旦。
现代文：五月戊子夜，派冗从仆射李昭等人在陵云台发兵，召侍中王沈、散骑常侍王业、尚书王经，拿出怀中的黄绢韶书给他们看，戒严等待天亮。
English: On the night of May 18th, Li Zhao and others sent troops to Lingyuntai, summoned the attendant Wang Shen, the horseman Wang Ye, and the scribe Wang Jing, and took out the Huang Di book in their arms to show them. Martial law awaited the dawn.

古文：沈、业驰告于帝，帝召护军贾充等为之备。
现代文：王沈、王业急速向文帝报告，文帝召集护军贾充等人做了准备。
English: Wang Shen and Wang Ye quickly reported to Emperor Wen, and Emperor Wen summoned the escort Jia Chong and others to make preparations.

古文：天子知事泄，帅左右攻相府，称有所讨，敢有动者族诛。
现代文：天子知道事情泄露，率手下人攻打相府，宣称有叛逆要讨伐，谁敢妄动诛杀全族。
English: Knowing that the matter had leaked out, the emperor led his men to attack the imperial palace, declaring that there was a rebellion to be fought, and that anyone who dared to do so would kill the whole family.

古文：相府兵将止不敢战，贾充叱诸将曰： 公畜养汝辈，正为今日耳！ 
现代文：相府的兵将住手不敢交战，买充喝斥诸将说： 司马公供养你们这些人，正是为了今天啊! 
English: The soldiers of the neighboring prefectures will stop their hands and not dare to engage in battle, and they will be full of shouts and shouts, saying: Sima Gong provides for you people, just for today!

古文：太子舍人成济抽戈犯跸，刺之，刃出于背，天子崩于车中。
现代文：太子舍人成济抽出戈进击车驾，刺天子，从后背刺出，天子死在车中。
English: The crown prince let Cheng Zhi pull out his sword and drove into the car, stabbed Tian Zi, stabbed him in the back, and Tian Zi died in the car.

古文：帝召百僚谋其故，仆射陈泰不至。
现代文：文帝召集百官商讨这次变故，仆射陈泰不到场。
English: Emperor Wen summoned hundreds of officials to discuss the incident, but Chen Tai did not attend.

古文：帝遣其舅荀顗舆致之，延于曲室，谓曰： 玄伯，天下其如我何？ 
现代文：文帝派遣他的舅舅荀颉用车接他来，引入密室，文帝对他说： 玄伯，天下将对我怎么样呢? 
English: Emperor Wen sent his uncle Zou to pick him up in a car and brought him to the secret room. Emperor Wen said to him: Xuanbo, what will the world do to me?

古文：泰曰： 惟腰斩贾充，微以谢天下。 
现代文：陈泰说： 衹有腰斩贾充，否则无法向天下谢罪。 
English: Chen Tai said, "If you have the guts to behead Jia Chong, you will not be able to apologize to the world."

古文：帝曰： 卿更思其次。 
现代文：文帝说： 卿再考虑一下其他的方法。 
English: Wen Di said: Sir, please consider other methods.

古文：泰曰： 但见其上。不见其次。 
现代文：陈泰说： 我祇看到其上策，看不到其次。 
English: Chen Tai said: I only see the best policy, I don't see the second best.

古文：于是归罪成济而斩之。
现代文：于是归罪于成济而杀了他。
English: So he blamed it on Chengzhi and killed him.

古文：太后令曰： 昔汉昌邑王以罪发为庶人，此兒亦宜以庶人礼葬之，使外内咸知其所行也。 
现代文：太后下令说： 过去汉昌邑王因罪被废为百姓，这个人也应该用百姓的礼节埋葬他，使朝廷内外都知道他所做的事。 
English: The empress dowager ordered, "In the past, the king of Hanchang-eup was dethroned as a commoner for a crime. This man should also be buried with the etiquette of a commoner, so that both inside and outside the court know what he has done.

古文：杀尚书王经，贰于我也。
现代文：杀掉尚书王经，因为对自己有不忠之心。
English: He killed Shang Shu Wang Jing because he was disloyal to himself.

古文：庚寅，帝奏曰： 故高贵乡公帅从驾人兵，拔刃鸣鼓向臣所，臣惧兵刃相接，即敕将士不得有所伤害，违令者以军法从事。
现代文：戊申，文帝奏报说： 已故的高贵乡公率领手下兵马，拔刀击鼓冲向我的住宅，臣不敢动武交战，当即命令将士不许伤害人，违反命令的人当按军法处置。
English: Wuxin, the "Wen Di Sono" newspaper said: The late noble townsman led his soldiers and horses, drew his sword and beat the drum to rush to my house. The minister did not dare to fight, and immediately ordered the soldiers not to hurt people. Those who violated the order should be dealt with according to military law.

古文：骑督成倅弟太子舍人济入兵阵，伤公至陨。
现代文：骑督成悴的弟弟太子舍人成济冲入兵阵，杀伤高贵乡公以致死亡。
English: The younger brother of the cavalry commander Cheng Yao, Prince Shenren Cheng Ji, rushed into the line of battle, killing and wounding the noble townsman, resulting in his death.

古文：臣闻人臣之节，有死无贰，事上之义，不敢逃难。
现代文：臣知道做臣的节操，应死而尽忠；事奉君主之大义，不敢逃避灾难。
English: The vassal knows the discipline of being a vassal, and is loyal to the death; he serves the great justice of the monarch, and does not dare to escape disaster.

古文：前者变故卒至，祸同发机，诚欲委身守死，惟命所裁。
现代文：前发生的变故来得突然，灾祸如同箭在弦上，我真想把命交出来等死，全听命运裁决。
English: The previous incident happened so suddenly, the disaster is like an arrow on the string, I really want to give up my life and wait for death, all subject to the judgment of fate.

古文：然惟本谋，乃欲上危皇太后，倾覆宗庙。
现代文：然而考虑到这次策谋，是要对上危及皇太后，颠覆宗庙。
English: However, considering this scheme, it was to endanger the empress dowager and subvert the ancestral temple.

古文：臣忝当元辅，义在安国，即骆驿申敕，不得迫近舆辇。
现代文：臣愧当大臣之首，大义在于安定国家，因而就不断告诚，不许迫近皇帝车驾。
English: A vassal should be the head of a minister, and the greater good lies in the stability of the country. Therefore, he should constantly declare his sincerity, and should not approach the emperor's chariot.

古文：而济妄入阵间，以致大变，哀怛痛恨，五内摧裂。
现代文：而成济冲进阵中，以致发生大变故，我哀伤痛苦悔恨，五脏俱裂。
English: But Cheng Zhi rushed into the fray, resulting in a big change, I was saddened, pained, remorseful, and my guts were torn.

古文：济干国乱纪，罪不容诛，辄收济家属，付廷尉。 
现代文：成济干犯国君扰乱法纪，判死罪也抵偿不了罪过，就捉他的家属，交付给廷尉。 
English: Cheng Jie arrested his family members and handed them over to the imperial lieutenant for the crime of disturbing the law and order. Even the death penalty could not satisfy the crime.

古文：太后从之，夷济三族。
现代文：太后听从，灭了成济三族。
English: The empress dowager obeyed and destroyed the three clans of Chengji.

古文：与公卿议，立燕王宇之子常道乡公璜为帝。
现代文：与公卿商议，立燕王曹宇的儿子常道乡公曹璜作皇帝。
English: In consultation with the nobles, the son of Yan Wang Cao Yu, Changdao Xianggong Cao Pi, was made emperor.

古文：六月，改元。
现代文：六月，改年号。
English: June, New Year's Eve.

古文：丙辰，天子进帝为相国，封晋公，增十郡，加九锡如初，群从子弟未侯者封亭侯，赐钱千万，帛万匹。
现代文：丙辰，天子升任文帝为相国，封为晋公，增加十个郡，像当初一样加赐九锡，那些叔伯兄弟子侄中还没封侯的封为亭侯，赐钱千万，帛万匹。
English: Guchen, the son of Heaven, was promoted to Emperor Wen as a peer, and was given the title of Jin Gong, and ten counties were added. As in the beginning, Jiuxi was given, and those uncles, brothers, and nephews who had not yet been given the title of Jin Gong were given the title of Ting Gong, and were given tens of millions of money and thousands of horses.

古文：固让，乃止。
现代文：文帝坚决辞让，才作罢。
English: Emperor Wen resolutely refused to make concessions, and only then did he give up.

古文：冬十一月，吴吉阳督萧慎以书诣镇东将军石苞伪降，求迎。
现代文：冬十一月，吴国吉阳都督萧慎写信给镇东将军亘苞假意投降，请求接应。
English: In the winter of November, Xiao Sheng, the governor of Jiyang in the State of Wu, wrote a letter to Zhendong General Watanabe, asking him to accept his surrender.

古文：帝知其诈也，使苞外示迎之，而内为之备。
现代文：文帝知道他是欺诈，让石苞表面迎接，暗中做好准备。
English: Emperor Wen knew that he was a fraud, let the surface of the stalagmite meet, secretly prepare.

古文：二年秋八月甲寅，天子使太尉高柔授帝相国印绶，司空郑冲致晋公茅土九锡，固辞。
现代文：二年秋八月甲寅，天子派太尉高柔授给文帝相国的官印，派司空郑冲送给晋公象征分封的茅土及九锡，文帝坚决辞让。
English: In the autumn and August of the second year of Jia Yin, the heavenly son sent Lieutenant Gao Ju to give the official seal of the country to Emperor Wen, and sent Secretary Kong Zhengchong to send the symbolic fiefs of Mao and Jiu Xi to Emperor Jin. Emperor Wen resolutely refused to give in.

古文：三年夏四月，肃慎来献楛矢、石砮、弓甲、貂皮等，天子命归于大将军府。
现代文：三年夏四月，肃慎来奉献楛矢、石磐、弓甲、貂皮等，天子命令送到大将军府。
English: In the summer and April of the third year, So Sheng came to dedicate the crossbow arrows, stone rocks, bow armor, sable skins, etc. and was sent to the great general's palace by order of the heavenly son.

古文：四年春二月丁丑，天子复命帝如前，又固让。
现代文：四年春二月丁丑，天子又像以前一样任命塞童，又坚决辞让。
English: In the spring of the fourth year and in February of the ding ugly, the heavenly son appointed Saido as before, and resolutely resigned.

古文：三月，诏大将军府增置司马一人，从事中郎二人，舍人十人。
现代文：三月，下诏书命大将军府增置司马一人，从事中人，舍人十人。
English: In March, the next imperial edict ordered the general's office to add one Sima, to engage in middle-level personnel, and to lay off ten people.

古文：夏，帝将伐蜀，乃谋众曰： 自定寿春已来，息役六年，治兵缮甲，以拟二虏。
现代文：夏，塞壶将讨伐星厘，于是和众人谋划说： 自从平定寿春以来，六年没有战事，训练士卒，修缮兵器，准备消灭两个敌国。
English: In the summer, Cai Jian was going to fight against Xingli, so he and the others made a plan: Since the suppression of Shuchun, there has been no war for six years, training soldiers, repairing weapons, and preparing to destroy two enemy countries.

古文：略计取吴，作战船，通水道，当用千余万功，此十万人百数十日事也。
现代文：如果谋划攻取吴厘，要造战船。疏通河道，当需用千余万人工，这是十万人一百多天的事。
English: If you plan to attack Wuli, you need to build warships. To clear the river, you need to use more than ten million people, which is a matter of more than one hundred thousand people and one hundred days.

古文：又南土下湿，必生疾疫。
现代文：再说南方地势低下潮湿，必定会产生瘟疫疾病。
English: In addition, the low and humid terrain in the south is bound to produce plague diseases.

古文：今宜先取蜀，三年之后，在巴蜀顺流之势，水陆并进，此灭虞定虢，吞韩并魏之势也。
现代文：如今应当先攻取蜀国，三年之后，可从旦蜀顺流而下，水陆一同出击，这是消灭卢平定堕，吞掉韩兼并球的形势啊。
English: Today, Shu should be conquered first. Three years later, we can sail down the river from Danshu and attack together with land and water. This is the situation of eliminating Lu Pingding and swallowing the Korean annexation ball.

古文：计蜀战士九万，居守成都及备他郡不下四万，然则余众不过五万。
现代文：算计星厘战士有九万人，居守成都及守备其他郡的不下四万，这样一来剩下的兵力不过五万。
English: Counting Xingli's soldiers, there were ninety thousand, with no less than forty thousand guarding Chengdu and other counties, leaving only fifty thousand troops.

古文：今绊姜维于沓中，使不得东顾，直指骆谷，出其空虚之地，以袭汉中。
现代文：假如在查生缠住差雄，使他不能顾及东部，兵力直指坚釜，从里厘空虚的地方出击，偷袭汉生。
English: If he entangled Shaxiong in Chasheng, so that he could not consider the east, the troops pointed straight at the cauldron, attacked from the empty place of Lili, and attacked Hansheng.

古文：彼若婴城守险，兵势必散，首尾离绝。
现代文：他们如果据城守险，兵力必定分散，首尾分离难以相顾。
English: If they defend the city, the troops will be dispersed, and it will be difficult to take care of each other if they are separated.

古文：举大众以屠城，散锐卒以略野，剑阁不暇守险，关头不能自存。
现代文：率大军来血洗城市，分散精兵去占领郊野，塞蝈来不及据守，开头不能自保。
English: He led a large army to wash the city in blood, dispersed the elite soldiers to occupy the countryside, but the Saiyans were too late to defend themselves and could not protect themselves at the beginning.

古文：以刘禅之暗，而边城外破，士女内震，其亡可知也。 
现代文：以刘塑的愚昧，加上边境城池被攻破，朝内官员女眷震惊恐惧，星厘的灭亡足可以推测的了。 
English: With Liu Shuxu's stupidity, coupled with the border city being breached, the female relatives of officials in the DPRK were shocked and frightened, and Xingli's demise could be predicted.

古文：征西将军邓艾以为未有衅，屡陈异议。
现代文：征西将军塑墓认为没有机会可乘，屡次陈述不同意见。
English: The General of the Western Expedition thought that there was no opportunity to take advantage of, and repeatedly stated different opinions.

古文：帝患之，使主簿师纂为艾司马以喻之，艾乃奉命。
现代文：塞童为此忧虑，派主簿师纂任邓艾的司马，以此晓谕他，塑墓造才接受了命令。
English: Saido was worried about this and sent his chief accountant to write to Deng Ai's steward to tell him that it was only after he had received the order to build the tomb.

古文：于是征四方之兵十八万，使邓艾自狄道攻姜维于沓中，雍州刺史诸葛绪自祁山军于武街，绝维归路，镇西将军钟会帅前将军李辅、征蜀护军胡烈等自骆谷袭汉中。
现代文：于是征集各地兵员十八万，派塑塞从曲堇兵出查主攻打差维，雍州刺史诸葛绪从祁山出兵驻在武街，断绝姜维的退路，镇西将军钟会率前将军李辅、征蜀护军胡烈等人从骆谷袭击汉中。
English: As a result, 180,000 soldiers from all over the country were recruited, and plastic plug soldiers were sent from Quyi to investigate and attack Zhaowei, soldiers from Yongzhou, Shishizhi and Zhugexu from Lushan were stationed in Wu Street to cut off the retreat of Jiang Wei, and the former general Li Yu led by the Zhenxi general Zhonghui and the Shu protection force Hu Lie and others attacked Hanzhong from Luohu.

古文：秋八月，军发洛阳，大赉将士，陈师誓众。
现代文：秋八月，在洛阳发兵，大赏将士，列阵誓师。
English: In autumn and August, troops were dispatched to Luoyang, soldiers were awarded, and oaths were taken.

古文：将军邓敦谓蜀未可讨，帝斩以徇。
现代文：将军邓敦提出蜀国不宜讨伐，文帝杀了他示众。
English: General Deng Dun proposed that Shu should not be attacked, and Emperor Wen killed him in public.

古文：九月，又使天水太守王颀攻维营，陇西太守牵弘邀其前，金城太守杨颀趣甘松。
现代文：九月，又派天水太守王颀攻打姜维的营垒，派陇西太守牵弘在正面拦击，金城太守杨欣奔赴甘松。
English: In September, he also sent Tianshui's grand marshal Wang Hui to attack Jiang Wei's camp, the grand marshal Yan Xixi to stop him in front, and the grand marshal of Jincheng, Yang Xin, to go to Gansong.

古文：钟会分为二队，入自斜谷，使李辅围王含于乐城，又使步将易恺攻蒋斌于汉城。
现代文：钟会分兵两路，从斜谷进击，派李辅在乐城包围王含，又派部将易恺在汉城攻击蒋斌。
English: The bell association divided its soldiers into two groups, advancing from the valley, sending Li Shuo to encircle Wang Han in Lecheng, and sending General Yi Jun to attack Jiang Bin in Seoul.

古文：会直指阳安，护军胡烈攻陷关城。
现代文：钟会直趋阳安，护军胡烈攻下关城。
English: The bell will go straight to Yang'an, and the escort Hu Lie will capture Guancheng.

古文：姜维闻之，引还，王颀追败维于强川。
现代文：姜维听说后，引兵回撤，王颀追击并在彊川打败姜维。
English: After Jiang Wei heard about it, he withdrew his troops, and Wang Xi chased and defeated Jiang Wei in Luochuan.

古文：维与张翼、廖化合军守剑阁，钟会攻之。
现代文：姜维舆张翼、廖化合军守卫剑阁，钟会攻打剑阁。
English: Jiang Wei Mei Zhang Ying, Liao Hua He Army guarded Jian Ge, and the Bell Association attacked Jian Ge.

古文：冬十月，天子以诸侯献捷交至，乃申前命曰：朕以寡德，获承天序，嗣我祖宗之洪烈。
现代文：冬十月，天子因诸侯纷纷呈上战利品，于是重申以前的命令说：我德行不高，继承了帝位，继续我祖宗的伟业。
English: In the winter of October, the heavenly son was presented with the spoils of war by the princes, and he reiterated his previous order, saying, "I am not virtuous, I have inherited the imperial throne, and I will continue the great deeds of my ancestors.

古文：遭家多难，不明于训。
现代文：碰上国中多难，对祖宗教诲不能光大。
English: In the face of many difficulties in the country, we cannot be too proud of our ancestors' religious teachings.

古文：曩者奸逆屡兴，方寇内侮，大惧沦丧四海，以堕三祖之弘业。
现代文：过去奸臣叛逆屡次作乱，四方敌寇欺侮我国，我十分害怕国家沦丧，从而毁掉三代祖先的大业。
English: In the past, treacherous and traitorous vassals have repeatedly caused turmoil, and the four-sided enemy bandits have bullied our country. I am very afraid that the country will be lost, thus ruining the great cause of the three generations of ancestors.

古文：惟公经德履哲，明允广深，迪宣武文，世作保傅，以辅乂皇家。
现代文：公有德望，举止明哲，明察公允识广谋深，展示武功文才，世代作天子保傅，辅佐皇家。
English: He had the public's respect, behaved like a philosopher, was fair-minded, knowledgeable, broad-minded, displayed martial arts and literary talent, and served as a tutelary god and royal aide for generations.

古文：栉风沐雨，周旋征伐，劬劳王室，二十有余载。
现代文：不避风雨在外奔波，应战征伐，为王室操劳，已有二十多年。
English: It has been more than 20 years since she has been running around outside, braving the storm, and working for the royal family.

古文：毗翼前人，乃断大政，克厌不端，维安社稷。
现代文：辅助前人，屡次决断大政，能制止不端行为，安定国家。
English: In addition to his predecessors, he has repeatedly decided on major policies, can stop misconduct, and stabilize the country.

古文：暨俭、钦之乱，公绥援有众，分命兴师，统纪有方，用缉宁淮浦。
现代文：等到毋丘俭、文钦作乱时，公安抚救助大众，受命起兵，统率军队有方，因此淮河两岸得以平定安宁。
English: When Neocuchuan and Wenqin made a disturbance, the public security department came to the rescue of the public, was ordered to raise an army, and led the army well, so that the two sides of the Huaihe River could be pacified.

古文：其后巴蜀屡侵，西土不靖，公奇画指授，制胜千里。
现代文：以后巴蜀屡次侵扰，西部不安宁，公出奇谋指点授意，千里之外取得胜利。
English: After that, Bashu repeatedly intruded, the west was restless, the public made conjectures and suggestions, and thousands of miles away won the victory.

古文：是以段谷之战，乘衅大捷，斩将搴旗，效首万计。
现代文：段谷之战，抓住战机大获全胜，斩将拔旗，杀敌数以万计。
English: In the Battle of Duan Valley, he won a complete victory by seizing a fighter plane, raised the flag, and killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：孙峻猾夏，致寇徐方，戎车首路，威灵先迈，黄钺未启，鲸鲵窜迹。
现代文：孙峻扰乱中原，进犯徐方，公战车出发，威力先行，黄钹还没打开，敌人已经鼠窜。
English: Sun Jun disturbs the Central Plains, attacks Xu Fang, the official chariot sets off, the power is ahead, the yellow raft has not yet opened, and the enemy has already fled.

古文：孙壹构隙，自相疑阻，幽鉴远照，奇策洞微，远人归命，作籓南夏，爰授锐卒，毕力戎行。
现代文：孙壹结怨，自相疑忌，公深奥的分析如明镜远照，神奇的策谋洞察细微，远方人归顺，于是授予他精锐士卒，在军队中尽力。
English: Sun Yat-sen's grudge, self-doubt, and profound analysis of public affairs are like a mirror's far-sighted vision, a magic strategy's subtle insight, and people from far away are amenable, so he was awarded the title of an elite soldier and did his best in the army.

古文：暨诸葛诞，滔天作逆，称兵扬楚，钦、咨逋罪，同恶相济，帅其蝥贼，以入寿春，凭阻淮山，敢距王命。
现代文：等到诸葛诞犯叛逆的滔天大罪，在扬楚举兵，文钦、唐咨逃避刑罚和诸葛诞狼狈为奸，率领着叛贼进入寿春，凭藉着淮河山川的险阻，大胆抗拒王命。
English: When Zhuge Zheng committed the heinous crime of rebellion and raised an army in Yangchu, Wenqin and Tang Zhe evaded punishment and Zhuge Zheng became a traitor, led the traitors into Shouchun, and boldly resisted the king's life with the help of the perilous obstacles of the Huaihe Mountains and Rivers.

古文：公躬擐甲胄，龚行在罚，玄谋庙算，遵养时晦。
现代文：公亲披盔甲，恭敬地执行上天的刑罚，计谋玄妙，决策英明，遵奉时令晦朔。
English: Public relatives wear armor, respectfully carry out the punishment of heaven, have subtle strategies, make wise decisions, and abide by the time.

古文：奇兵震击，而硃异摧破；神变应机，而全琮稽服；取乱攻昧，而高墉不守。
现代文：出奇兵猛烈攻击，于是朱异被摧毁；以神奇的变化捕捉战机，于是全琮顺服；平定骚乱，攻打昏昧，就是高墙也无法据守。
English: Surprising soldiers attacked violently, so Zhu Yiyi was destroyed; with miraculous changes to capture warplanes, so the whole country obeyed; to quell riots, to attack vagueness, even high walls can not be defended.

古文：兼九伐之弘略，究五兵之正度，用能战不穷武，而大敌歼溃；旗不再麾，而元憝授首。
现代文：兼有九伐的宏大谋略，探求战争的胜败。凭着善战而不好战，大敌或歼灭或溃散；战旗不必挥动两次，首恶就掉了脑袋。
English: There is also a grand strategy of nine fathoms to explore the victory and defeat of the war. By virtue of good warfare rather than belligerence, the great enemy is either annihilated or dispersed; the battle flag does not have to be waved twice, and the head of the evil has lost his head.

古文：收勍吴之隽臣，系亡命之逋虏。
现代文：收降强吴的俊臣，俘获逃亡的罪犯。
English: Wu's vassals were captured, and fugitive criminals were recaptured.

古文：交臂屈膝，委命下吏，俘馘十万积尸成京。
现代文：有的屈膝投降，有的听命于慈玺小吏，俘虏斩杀的有十万人，尸首堆积成山。
English: Some surrendered on bended knee, others obeyed the orders of Cixi's henchmen, captives slaughtered one hundred thousand people, and corpses piled up into mountains.

古文：雪宗庙之滞耻，拯兆庶之艰难。
现代文：洗刷了宗庙先前的耻辱，拯救万民的艰难。
English: It has washed away the previous shame of the ancestral temple and saved the hardships of the people.

古文：扫平区域，信威吴会，遂戢干戈，靖我疆土，天地鬼神，罔不获乂。
现代文：扫平了边境，威风伸张到了吴会，于是收起兵器，安定我国的疆土，天地鬼神，没有不安定的。
English: We have leveled the border, and the prestige has spread to the Wu Society, so we put away weapons and stabilize our country's territory. Heaven and earth are not unstable.

古文：乃者王室之难，变起萧墙，赖公之灵，弘济艰险。
现代文：从前王室的灾难，变故出白宫室内部，幸赖公的威灵，度过了艰险。
English: The disaster of the former royal family turned out to be the inside of the White House room, and fortunately, the prince's spirit survived the hardships.

古文：宗庙危而获安，社稷坠而复宁。
现代文：宗庙转危为安，国家从败亡又走向安宁。
English: The ancestral temple has turned from crisis to peace, and the country has moved from defeat to peace.

古文：忠格皇天，功济六合。
现代文：公忠诚上达皇天，功高天地。
English: Public loyalty reaches up to the emperor, and meritorious deeds reach up to the heavens.

古文：是用畴咨古训，稽诸典籍，命公崇位相国，加于群后，启土参墟，封以晋域。所以方轨齐鲁，翰屏帝室。
现代文：因此访求古训，考查典籍，命公登位相国，地位在列侯之上。把古代置的地域分封给公，以此来比拟齐叠，从而做皇室的支柱与屏障。
English: Therefore, they visited the ancient teachings, examined the classics, and ordered the prince to ascend to the throne of the country, and the status was above the feudal lords. The regions that were placed in ancient times were divided and given to the prince, so as to match the alignment, and thus to be the pillar and barrier of the royal family.

古文：而公远蹈谦损，深履冲让，固辞策命，至于八九。
现代文：而公十分谦逊退让，坚决推辞策命，以至于八九次之多。
English: On the other hand, the emperor humbly conceded and resolutely refused to give the order, as many as eighty-nine times.

古文：朕重违让德，抑礼亏制，以彰公志，于今四载。
现代文：我恐怕违背了谦让的美德，因而抑制礼法枉屈制度，来显扬公的志向，到今天已有四年。
English: I am afraid that I have violated the virtue of modesty, and thus suppressed the system of etiquette and law, to show the ambition of the public, and it has been four years today.

古文：上阙在昔建侯之典，下违兆庶具瞻之望。
现代文：对上有损当初封侯的典法，对下违背了万民的殷切期望。
English: On the one hand, it undermined the canon law of the original feudal lord, and on the other, it violated the ardent expectations of the people.

古文：惟公严虔王度，阐济大猷，敦尚纯朴，省繇节用，务穑劝分，九野康乂。
现代文：公对王法严肃恭敬，阐发大道，崇尚纯朴，节省徭役费用，务农劝农，九州地域康泰安定。
English: The court is serious and respectful of the king and the law, clarifies the avenue, advocates simplicity, saves the expenses of the bailiff, advises farmers on agriculture, and the Kyushu region is prosperous and stable.

古文：耆叟荷崇养之德，鳏寡蒙矜恤之施，仁风兴于中夏，流泽布于遐荒。
现代文：老年人感受到崇敬奉养的美德，鳏夫寡妇蒙受到怜悯体恤的恩施，仁义之风在中原兴盛，散布的恩德遍及遥远的地方。
English: The elderly feel the virtue of reverence and support, the widows and widowers receive the mercy of mercy, the winds of benevolence flourish in the Central Plains, and the spread of benevolence extends to distant places.

古文：是以东夷西戎，南蛮北狄，狂狡贪悍，世为寇雠者，皆感义怀惠，款塞内附，或委命纳贡，或求置官司。
现代文：因此束夷西戎，南蛮北狄，狂暴狡猾贪婪凶悍，世代做强盗仇敌的人，都感怀仁义恩惠，敲门来依附，有的听命纳贡，有的请求设置官府。
English: As a result, the people of Shokuishi, Nanban and Beidi, who are fierce, cunning, greedy and fierce, and who have been enemies of robbers for generations, all feel benevolence, righteousness and grace, knock on the door to attach themselves, some are ordered to pay tribute, and some request to set up a government office.

古文：九服之外，绝域之氓，旷世所希至者，咸浮海来享，鼓舞王德，前后至者八百七十余万口。
现代文：九服之外，绝远地域的百姓，当代人迹鲜至之地，都漂洋遇海来上贡，鼓舞王德，前后来的人有八百七十多万。
English: In addition to the Jiufu, people from far-flung regions, places with few contemporary traces, have all drifted across the ocean to pay tribute and inspire Wang De. There are more than 8.7 million people who have come and gone.

古文：海隅幽裔，无思不服；虽西旅远贡，越裳九译，义无以逾。
现代文：海角幽远之处，没有不顺服的；即便是西域旅人也远途纳贡，茎塞辗转翻译，没有超出此义。
English: In the remotest parts of the Cape, there is no disobedience; even the travelers in the western regions do not exceed this meaning.

古文：维翼朕躬，下匡万国，思靖殊方，宁济八极。
现代文：思虑着辅翼我皇帝，对下匡正万国，思虑着安抚异域，平定四面八方。
English: I am thinking about supporting my emperor, correcting all countries, pacifying foreign countries, and pacifying all directions.

古文：以庸蜀未宾，蛮荆作猾，潜谋独断，整军经武。
现代文：因为庸蜀尚未臣服，蛮荆还在作乱，公潜心谋划，独自决断，整顿军队，经营武备。
English: Because the Yongshu had not yet surrendered, the Brute Jing was still wreaking havoc, plotting in secret, making decisions independently, reorganizing the army, and managing armaments.

古文：简练将帅，授以成策，始践贼境，应时摧陷。
现代文：选择训练将帅，教授他们已定好的策谋，然后开始跨入贼寇的境域，顺应天时，将他们摧毁攻陷。
English: Choose a drill sergeant, teach them the well-established strategy, and then begin to cross into the territory of the bandits, in accordance with the weather, destroy them and capture them.

古文：狂狡奔北，首尾震溃，禽其戎帅，屠其城邑。
现代文：狂暴的敌人向北逃奔，首尾震恐溃散，擒获他们的首领，血洗他们的城邑。
English: The furious enemy fled northward and scattered, capturing their chieftains and washing their cities in blood.

古文：巴汉震叠，江源云彻，地平天成，诚在斯举。
现代文：巴汉惊惧，长江源头乌云消散，万事安排妥帖，全在此举。
English: Bahan was alarmed, the dark clouds at the source of the Yangtze River dissipated, and everything was arranged, all thanks to this move.

古文：公有济六合之勋，加以茂德，实总百揆，允厘庶政。
现代文：公有救助天地四方的功勋，再加上美德，确实能总领百官，从而治理各种政务。
English: The merits of the public rescue of heaven and earth and the four quarters, coupled with virtue, can indeed lead hundreds of officials to govern various government affairs.

古文：敦五品以崇仁，恢六典以敷训。
现代文：公重视五常来推崇仁义，弘大六典来敷陈古训。
English: The public attaches great importance to the Five Precepts to promote benevolence and the Six Precepts to inculcate the ancient teachings.

古文：而靖恭夙夜，劳谦昧旦，虽尚父之左右文武，周公之勤劳王家，罔以加焉。
现代文：昼夜恭敬，早晚辛劳谦逊，就是尚父辅佐文王武王，周公勤劳于王室，也无法超过公。
English: Respectful day and night, hard-working and humble in the morning and evening, even if his father was the assistant of King Wen and King Wu, and Zhou Gong worked hard in the royal family, he could not surpass Gong.

古文：昔先王选建明德，光启诸侯，体国经野，方制五等。
现代文：从前先王选建美德，光大诸侯，划分都城，丈量田野，方圆制度分为五等。
English: In the past, the first king selected the virtue of construction, the magnificence of the princes, the division of the capital city, the measurement of the fields, and the square system were divided into five grades.

古文：所以籓翼王畿，垂祚百世也。
现代文：以此分封领地作为藩篱和羽翼，使福祚流传百世。
English: Using this fief territory as a hedge and a wing, Fukuchiyama has been passed down for centuries.

古文：故齐鲁之封，于周为弘，山川土田，邦畿七百，官司典策，制殊群后。
现代文：因此齐鲁的封地在周为大，山川原野，都城辖地七百里，机构典章，制度与众诸侯不同。
English: As a result, Qilu's fiefdom was larger than Zhou's, encompassing mountains, rivers, and fields, as well as seven hundred li of land under the jurisdiction of the capital, and its institutional regulations and system were different from those of other lords.

古文：惠襄之难，桓文以翼戴之劳，犹受锡命之礼，咸用光畴大德，作范于后。
现代文：惠王襄王遇难，桓公文公因保驾拥戴的功劳，受到了九锡策命的礼遇，全是为了要光大宏德，为后世作出典范。
English: Hui Wang Xiang Wang was killed in the disaster, and Huan Gongwen Gong received the courtesy of Jiu Xizhe's life for the merit of protecting and supporting him, all in order to be magnanimous and to set an example for future generations.

古文：惟公功迈于前烈，而赏阙于旧式，百辟于邑，人神同恨焉，岂可以公谦冲而久淹弘典哉？
现代文：公的功劳超过了前代的勋臣，而赏赐却不合于旧典，屡次推辞封邑，入神都感到遗憾，怎能因为公的谦逊而长久违背大典呢?
English: The public's merit exceeded that of the previous generation of honored ministers, but the reward was not in accordance with the old scripture. Repeatedly refusing to seal the city, he felt regret. How could he violate the great scripture for a long time because of public modesty?

古文：今以并州之太原上党西河乐平新兴雁门、司州之河东平阳弘农、雍州之冯翊凡十郡，南至于华，北至于陉，东至于壶口，西逾于河，提封之数，方七百里，皆晋之故壤，唐叔受之，世作盟主，实纪纲诸夏，用率旧职。
现代文：今天把并州的太原上党、西河、乐平、新兴、雁门，司州的河东、平阳、弘农，雍州的冯翊共十个郡，南到华，北到陉，束到壶，西到黄河，总共方圆七百里，都是晋国过去的土地，唐叔接受了逭片土地。世代做盟主，实际上管理着中原，以遵循以往的职责。
English: Today, there are a total of ten counties in Taiyuan Shangdang, Xihe, Leping, Xinxing, and Ganmen in the merged state, and Hedong, Pingyang, Hongnong in the merged state, and Fenghuang in the merged state, and a total of seven hundred miles in circumference, from south to China, north to Yunnan, west to the Yellow River, all of which are the land of Jin in the past. Uncle Tang accepted this piece of land. As the leader of the generation, he actually manages the Central Plains to follow the previous responsibilities.

古文：爰胙兹土，封公为晋公。
现代文：因而赐逭片土地给公，封公为晋公。
English: As a result, a piece of land was given to Gong and Gong was promoted to Shangguo.

古文：命使持节、兼司徒、司隶校尉陔即授印绶策书，金兽符第一至第五，竹使符第一至第十。
现代文：命令使持节、兼司徒、司隶校尉陔即授公官印策书，金兽符第一至第五，竹使符第一至第十。
English: It was ordered that officials holding the title of Ji Jie, concurrently serving as Jie Tu, and serving as Jie Li were to be awarded the official seal, the first to the fifth of the gold and animal seals, and the first to the tenth of the bamboo seal.

古文：锡兹玄土，苴以白茅，建尔国家，以永籓魏室。
现代文：赐给公玄土，用白茅包裹，建立你的封国，从而永远做魏国王室的屏障。
English: Give it to the public underground, wrap it with white wool, establish your fiefdom, and thus forever be a barrier to the Wei royal family.

古文：昔在周召，并以公侯，入作保傅。
现代文：过去在且公丑公的时候，都是以公侯的身份，入朝作保傅。
English: In the past, when princes and commoners were at loggerheads, it was the prince who entered the imperial court as the guardian.

古文：其在近代，酂侯萧何，实以相国，光尹汉朝。
现代文：在近代，鄙侯萧何以相国的身份，协助治理汉朝。
English: In modern times, the vassal lord Xiao He assisted in the governance of the Han Dynasty as a fellow countryman.

古文：随时之制，礼亦宜之。
现代文：这是顺随天时的制度，在礼法上也是适宜的。
English: This is a system that goes with the times, and it is also appropriate in terms of etiquette.

古文：今进公位为相国，加绿綟绶。
现代文：今天提升公的官位为相国，加绿纹绶。
English: Today, he was promoted to the official rank of consort, with the addition of a green ribbon.

古文：又加公九锡，其敬听后命。
现代文：又加公九锡，敬听后命。
English: He also added that he would do his best to listen to his successor.

古文：以公思弘大猷，崇正典礼，仪刑作范，旁训四方，是用锡公大辂、戎辂各一，玄牡二驷。
现代文：由于公思虑弘扬大道，崇敬典章礼法，遵循法度，作出典范，成为四方的榜样，因此赐公大格、戎辖各一驾，牡马八匹。
English: As a result of public consideration to promote the avenue, reverence the ceremony and etiquette, follow the law, set an example, and become a role model for the four parties, he gave the grand duke, the military jurisdiction one car each, and eight horses.

古文：公道和阴阳，敬授人时，啬夫反本，农殖维丰，是用锡公衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。
现代文：公的道行顺应天地，崇敬天授人命，农夫返回田地，农业养殖业丰盛，因此赐公衮冕之服，配上赤舄鞋。
English: The public way of life conforms to heaven and earth, reverence for heaven bestows human life, farmers return to the fields, agricultural breeding industry is abundant, so give the public crowned clothes, with red shoes.

古文：公光敷显德，惠下以和，敬信思顺，庶尹允谐，是用锡公轩悬之乐、六佾之舞。
现代文：公传布显赫的德行，用谦和施惠下人，崇敬诚信思虑忠顺，官民和美信实，因此赐公轩悬之乐、六佾之舞。
English: He publicly propagated the virtues of eminence, used modesty and benevolence to benefit subordinates, revered honesty, thoughtfulness and loyalty, and the public and the people were faithful. Therefore, he gave the public the music of hanging and the dance of six gongs.

古文：公镇靖宇宙，翼播声教，海外怀服，荒裔款附，殊方驰义，诸夏顺轨，是用锡公硃户以居。
现代文：公镇抚平定宇宙，辅翼传播声威教化，海外归向顺服，远方诚心依附，异域慕义，诸侯顺从，因此赐公红漆大门用于居所。
English: The public town is to pacify the universe, the auxiliary wing is to spread the voice of enlightenment, the overseas is to be obedient, the distant is to be sincerely attached, the foreign is to be pious, and the princes are to be obedient. Therefore, the public red lacquer gate is used for residence.

古文：公简贤料材，营求俊逸，爰升多士，置彼周行，是用锡公纳陛以登。
现代文：公选择衡量贤才，搜求寻觅能士，提拔了多人，置身于我朝官员行列，因此赐公纳陛登殿。
English: The public choice of measuring talents, searching for talents, promoted many people, placed themselves in the ranks of our officials, and therefore granted His Majesty to enter the palace.

古文：公严恭寅畏，底平四国，式遏寇虐，苛厉不作，是用锡公武贲之士三百人。
现代文：公严肃恭顺敬畏，平定四国，遏制敌寇暴虐，苛刻虐害不再兴起，因此赐公勇猛武士三百人。
English: Honesty, solemnity, obedience, reverence, to pacify the four kingdoms, to curb the tyranny of the enemy, harsh abuse will no longer arise, so he gave three hundred brave and fierce warriors.

古文：公明慎用刑，简恤大中，章厥天威，以纠不虔，是用锡公鈇钺各一。
现代文：公用刑明察慎重，公允不滥，彰明天威，纠杀反叛，因此赐公鈇铁各一。
English: Public punishments should be prudent, fair and not excessive, and they should enhance the authority of the government and suppress rebellion. Therefore, the public should be given one piece of iron each.

古文：公爰整六军，典司征伐，犯命凌正，乃维诛殛，是用锡公彤弓一、彤矢百，卢弓十、卢矢千。
现代文：公整治六军，主持征伐，冒犯天命超越正道的，都遭诛戮，因此赐公彤弓一张、彤矢百枝，旅弓十张、辕矢千枝。
English: Gong rectified the six armies, presided over the conquest, and offended the fate of heaven by going beyond the right path, all of which were slaughtered. Therefore, he gave Gong a crossbow, a hundred arrows, ten travel bows, and a thousand arrows.

古文：公飨祀蒸蒸，孝思维则，笃诚之至，通于神明，是用锡公秬鬯一卣，圭瓚副焉。
现代文：公礼敬祖先，孝心可作榜样，笃厚真诚至极，神明知晓，因此赐公柜鬯一卣，配上珪瓒。
English: Public propriety honors the ancestors, filial piety can serve as an example, and sincerity is the utmost, and God knows it. Therefore, the public coffer is given a bowl, and it is paired with a bowl.

古文：晋国置官司以下，率由旧式。
现代文：晋国官府的设置，一切按以前的制度。可敬佩啊!
English: The establishment of the Jin government, everything according to the previous system. Admirable!

古文：往钦哉！祗服朕命，弘敷训典，光泽庶方，永终尔明德，丕显余一人之休命。
现代文：应恭敬服从我的命令，弘扬古训典章，光芒照亮四方，永远继续你的美德，大显我的美好命令。
English: You should respectfully obey my order, carry forward the ancient teachings and regulations, shine the light in all directions, continue your virtue forever, and magnify my beautiful order.

古文：公卿将校皆诣府喻旨，帝以礼辞让。
现代文：公卿将校都去文帝府上宣旨，文帝以礼辞让。
English: The court nobles and officers all went to Emperor Wen's palace to announce their orders, and Emperor Wen accepted with a polite speech.

古文：司空郑冲率群官劝进曰： 伏见嘉命显至，窃闻明公固让，冲等眷眷，实有愚心。
现代文：司空郑冲率众官吏劝告文帝说： 看到美好的命令显赫地来到，听到明公坚决地辞让，郑冲等人敬慕，实在有诚心。
English: Siku Zhengchong led all the officials to advise Emperor Wen, saying: Seeing the good order come to prominence, hearing Ming Gong resolutely concede, Zhengchong and others admire, it is really sincere.

古文：以为圣王作制，百代同风，褒德赏功，有自来矣。
现代文：我们认为圣王立下制度，百代同一风气，褒奖美德赏赐功劳，这是有渊源的。
English: We believe that the system established by the holy king, the same culture for hundreds of generations, the reward of virtue and the reward of merit, this is the origin.

古文：昔伊尹，有莘氏之媵臣耳，一佐成汤，遂荷阿衡之号。
现代文：往昔的伊尹，是有莘氏的家奴，一旦佐助了成汤，就有了阿衡的称号。
English: In the past, Yi Yin was a domestic slave of the Yi clan. Once Sasuke became a soup, he was given the title of Aheng.

古文：周公藉已成之势，据既安之业，光宅曲阜，奄有龟蒙。
现代文：周公凭藉已形成的国势，依据着已经安稳的基业，在曲阜光耀宅第，覆盖龟蒙。
English: Zhou Gong, by virtue of the national situation that has been formed, based on the foundation that has been stable, shines brightly in Qufu, covering the gloom.

古文：吕尚，磻溪之渔者也，一朝指麾，乃封营丘。
现代文：吕尚，是磷溪的渔夫，一朝挥动令旗，就封地于营丘。
English: Lushang, a fisherman of Phosphorus Creek, waved the banner of command in the morning and fenced in Yingqiu.

古文：自是以来，功薄而赏厚者，不可胜数，然贤哲之士，犹以为美谈。
现代文：从那时以来，功绩薄而赏赐厚的情况，不可胜敷，然而贤哲的人们，仍把这当成美谈。
English: Since then, the situation where merit is thin and reward is thick has never been bettered, yet wise people still consider this to be a fairy tale.

古文：况自先相国以来，世有明德，翼辅魏室，以绥天下，朝无秕政，人无谤言。
现代文：况且自先朝相国以来，世代有美德，辅佐魏王室，平定天下，朝无弊端，人无怨言。
English: Moreover, since the previous dynasty ruled the country, generations have had virtues, assisted the Wei royal family, pacified the world, the dynasty has no drawbacks, and people have no complaints.

古文：前者明公西征灵州，北临沙漠，榆中以西，望风震服，羌戎来驰，回首内向，东诛叛逆，全军独克。
现代文：以前明公西征灵州，北临沙漠，榆中以西，听到风声就震恐顺服，羌戎来追随，回心归顺，柬伐叛逆，全军大胜。
English: In the past, Ming Gong used to conquer Lingshou in the west, the desert in the north, and Yunnan in the middle and west. When he heard the wind, he trembled and obeyed, and the Yunnan army followed him, and they were converted, and the Cambodian army rebelled, and the whole army won a great victory.

古文：禽阖闾之将，虏轻锐之卒以万万计，威加南海，名慑三越，宇内康宁，苛慝不作。
现代文：擒获阖间的将领，俘虏精锐的士卒数以万万计，威严覆盖南海，名声震慑三越，天下安康平定，奸邪不兴。
English: Tens of thousands of generals have been captured, tens of thousands of elite soldiers have been captured, the majesty covers the South China Sea, the reputation shocks Mitsukoshi, the country is stable and peaceful, and treason is not popular.

古文：是以时俗畏怀，东夷献舞。
现代文：因此时俗敬畏感怀，束夷献上舞乐。
English: Therefore, with a sense of reverence for the times and customs, Sokui presented dance music.

古文：故圣上览乃昔以来礼典旧章，开国光宅，显兹太原。
现代文：于是圣上阅览古代以来的礼典旧章，为公立封国光耀宅第，显赫于太原。
English: As a result, the saint read the old chapter of the ceremony since ancient times, and it was a glittering residence for the public fiefdom, prominent in Taiyuan.

古文：明公宜承奉圣旨，受兹介福，允当天人。
现代文：明公应该遵奉圣旨，接受这个大福，使天人关系允当。
English: Ming Gong should obey the sacred will, accept this great blessing, and make the relationship between heaven and man fair.

古文：元功盛勋，光光如彼；国土嘉祚，巍巍如此。
现代文：首功盛勋，辉煌如彼；国土美福盛大如此。
English: The first merit is great, the glory is like him; the land is great, so is the blessing.

古文：内外协同，靡愆靡违。
现代文：赏赐与功绩洽合，没有超过没有违背。
English: The reward is commensurate with the merit, no more, no less.

古文：由斯征伐，则可朝服济江，扫除吴会，西塞江源，望祀岷山。
现代文：从此以后的征伐，就可以身穿朝服渡过长江，扫荡吴会，向西以长江源头为边塞，遥祭岷山。
English: From now on, the conquest can cross the Yangtze River wearing a court dress, sweep the Wu Association, and head west to the source of the Yangtze River as a border fortress, and then go to Mount Lushan.

古文：回戈弭节，以麾天下，远无不服，迩无不肃。
现代文：回师收兵，来指挥天下，远方没有不顺服的，近处没有不整肃的。
English: There is no disobedience in the distance, and there is no disobedience in the vicinity.

古文：令大魏之德，光于唐虞；明公盛勋，超于桓文。
现代文：让大魏的德行，光耀于晋国；明公至大的功勋，超过了齐桓晋文。
English: Let the virtue of the Wei Dynasty shine in the Jin Dynasty; the great merit of the Ming Dynasty surpasses that of the Qiguan Dynasty.

古文：然后临沧海而谢支伯，登箕山而揖许由，岂不盛乎！
现代文：面对沧海向文伯谢恩，登上箕山向许由致礼，逭难道不是盛事吗!
English: Facing the sea of vicissitudes, thanking Wenbo, and climbing Shaoshan to pay tribute to Xu Rong, isn't it a grand event!

古文：至公至平，谁与为邻，何必勤勤小让也哉。 
现代文：十分公平，谁可相比，何必一味谦让呢。 
English: Very fair, who can compare, why be modest.

古文：帝乃受命。
现代文：文帝这才接受了天子的封赐。
English: It was only then that Emperor Wen accepted the title of the Son of Heaven.

古文：十一月，邓艾帅万余人自阴平逾绝险至江由，破蜀将诸葛瞻于绵竹，斩瞻，传首。
现代文：十一月，邓艾率万余人自阴平跨越险阻到达江由，在绵竹打败蜀国将领诸葛瞻，杀死诸葛瞻，传首示众。
English: In November, Deng Ai led more than 10,000 people from Yinping to cross the obstacles and reach Jiangyou. In Mianzhu, he defeated Zhugezhan, the general of Shu, killed Zhugezhan, and presented his head to the public.

古文：进军雒县，刘禅降。
现代文：进军雒县，刘禅投降。
English: Liu Zen surrendered after marching into Jixian.

古文：天子命晋公以相国总百揆，于是上节传，去侍中、大都督、录尚书之号焉。
现代文：天子命令晋公以相国身份总管百事，于是文帝上节传，免去自己侍中、大都督、录尚书的称号。
English: Tenshi ordered Jingu to be in charge of Pepsi as a relative of the state, so Emperor Wen passed on the sutra and exempted himself from the titles of attendant, grand governor, and recorder.

古文：表邓艾为太尉，钟会为司徒。
现代文：上表请封邓艾为太尉，钟会为司徒。
English: The table above shows Deng Ai as the first lieutenant and Zhong Hui as the second lieutenant.

古文：会潜谋叛逆，因密使谮艾。
现代文：钟会密谋叛逆，便暗地裹派人说邓艾的坏话。
English: The bell society conspired to rebel, and secretly sent people to say bad things about Deng Ai.

古文：咸熙元年春正月，槛车征艾。
现代文：咸熙元年春正月，派槛车去收捕邓艾。
English: In the first month of spring of the first year of the Xianxi Dynasty, a sill car was sent to capture Deng Ai.

古文：乙丑，帝奉天子西征，次于长安。
现代文：乙丑，文帝偕天子西征，驻在长安。
English: Second Ugly, Emperor Wen's son, Western Expedition, stationed in Chang'an.

古文：是时魏诸王侯悉在鄴城，命从事中郎山涛行军司事，镇于鄴，遣护军贾充持节、督诸军，据汉中。
现代文：那时诸王侯都在邺城，命令从事中郎山涛行军司事，镇守在邺，派遣护军贾充持节、督诸军，据守汉中。
English: At that time, all the princes were in Lucheng, ordered to engage in Zhonglang, Shantao, marching troops, town guards in Lucheng, dispatched the escort Jia Chongji Festival, the governor of the army, and guarded Hanzhong.

古文：钟会遂反于蜀，监军卫瓘、右将军胡烈攻会，斩之。
现代文：钟会于是在蜀反叛，监军卫罐、右将军胡烈攻打钟会，杀了他。
English: The bell ringers then rebelled in Shu, and Wei Can, the overseer of the army, and Hu Lie, the right general, attacked the bell ringers and killed him.

古文：初，会之伐蜀也，西曹属邵悌言于帝曰： 钟会难信，不可令行。 
现代文：当初，在钟会攻伐蜀国的时候，西曹属邵悌对文帝说： 钟会难信任，不可令他出兵。 
English: At the beginning, when the bell society was attacking Shu, the Western Cao, Shao Wei, said to Emperor Wen: The bell society is hard to trust, and he should not be allowed to send troops.

古文：帝笑曰： 取蜀如指掌，而众人皆言不可，唯会与吾意同。
现代文：文帝笑着说： 攻取蜀国如在指掌之中，而众人都说不行，惟独钟会与我意见相同。
English: Emperor Wen said with a smile, "Conquering Shu is within our grasp, but everyone says it's impossible, except for Bell, who shares my opinion.

古文：灭蜀之后，中国将士，人自思归，蜀之遗黎，犹怀震恐，纵有异志，无能为也。 
现代文：减蜀之后，中原的将士人心思念故土，蜀国遗留下的百姓仍旧心怀震惊恐惧，纵然有反叛之心，也无能为力。 
English: After the reduction of Shu, the soldiers of the Central Plains yearn for their homeland, and the people left behind in Shu are still shocked and afraid, and even if they have a rebellious heart, they can do nothing.

古文：卒如所量。
现代文：结果正如文帝的预见。
English: The result was just as Emperor Wen had foreseen.

古文：丙辰，帝至自长安。
现代文：丙辰，文帝从长安回来。
English: Hsin-Chen, Emperor Wen returned from Chang'an.

古文：三月己卯，进帝爵为王，增封并前二十郡。
现代文：三月己卯，封升文帝的爵位为王，增加封邑连同以前的共二十郡。
English: In March, Emperor Shengwen's title of nobility became king, and the number of fiefs was increased to twenty counties.

古文：夏五月癸未，天子追加舞阳宣文侯为晋宣王，舞阳忠武侯为晋景王。
现代文：夏五月癸未，天子升舞阳宣文侯为晋宣王，舞阳忠武侯为晋景王。
English: In the late summer and early May, Tianzi ascended to the position of Dangyang, Xuanwen Hou became the King of Jinxuan, and Dangyang Zhongwu Hou became the King of Jinjing.

古文：秋七月，帝奏司空荀顗定礼仪，中护军贾充正法律，尚书仆射裴秀议官制，太保郑冲总而裁焉。
现代文：秋七月，文帝奏请司空荀颉制定礼仪，中护军贾充修正法律，尚书仆射裴秀议定官制，太保郑冲总领裁定。
English: In the autumn and July, Emperor Wenzong asked Jie Kuo-tao to formulate the etiquette, Jia Chong, the middle guard, amended the law, Shang Shufu and Sha Peixiu agreed on the official system, and Zheng Chong, the head of the Tai Po, ruled.

古文：始建五等爵。
现代文：开始建立五等爵位。
English: The creation of fifth-class honours began.

古文：冬十月丁亥，奏遣吴人相国参军徐劭、散骑常侍水曹属孙彧使吴，喻孙皓以平蜀之事，致马锦等物，以示威怀。
现代文：冬十月丁亥，奏请派遣吴人相国参军徐劭、散骑常侍水曹属孙或出使吴国，把平定蜀国的事情通报孙皓，赠送马匹织锦等物，以示威严安抚。
English: In the winter and October of Dinghai, the request was made to send the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the

古文：丙午，天子命中抚军新昌乡侯炎为晋世子。
现代文：丙午，天子命中抚军新昌乡侯司马炎为晋世子。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the heavenly son hit the army of Fuzhou in Xinchang Township, and Hou Sima Yan became the successor of Jin.

古文：二年春二月甲辰，朐县献灵龟，归于相府。
现代文：二年春二月甲辰，朐腮县献灵龟，送到了相府。
English: In February of the second year of spring, Jia Chen, a turtle donated by Jixian County, was sent to Sohu.

古文：夏四月，孙皓使纪陟来聘，且献方物。
现代文：夏四月，孙皓派遣纪陟来聘问，并送地方特产。
English: In the summer of April, Sun Yat-sen sent Ji Xuan to ask questions, and sent local special products.

古文：五月，天子命帝冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟虡宫悬，位在燕王上。
现代文：五月，天子命令文帝的冠冕装饰有十二旒，建立天子的旌旗，出入行警跸的礼制，乘坐金根车，驾六匹马，备用五时副车，设置旄头云罕，乐舞用八佾，乐队编钟用四列，地位在燕王之上。
English: In May, Heaven's Son ordered that Emperor Wen's crown be decorated with twelve cymbals, established Heaven's Son's cymbals, established the etiquette of entering and leaving the police station, rode a golden chariot, rode six horses, had a five-hour backup car, set up a steeple, eight cymbals for music and dance, and four rows of bells for the orchestra, and ranked higher than the king of swallows.

古文：进王妃为王后，世子为太子，王女王孙爵命之号皆如帝者之仪。
现代文：以王妃为王后，世子为太子，王女王孙的爵号都如同皇帝的礼仪。
English: Taking the princess as the queen, the heir as the prince, and the title of the grandson of the queen are all like the etiquette of the emperor.

古文：诸禁网烦苛及法式不便于时者，帝皆奏除之。
现代文：宫禁法纪中烦琐苛细及法式中不便于实行的，文帝都奏请免除。
English: The Palace Forbidden Law and Discipline is cumbersome and cumbersome, and the French style is inconvenient to implement, and Emperor Wen has requested to be exempted.

古文：晋国置御史大夫、侍中、常侍、尚书、中领军、卫将军官。
现代文：晋国设置御史大夫、侍中、常侍、尚书、中领军、卫将军诸官职。
English: Jin established the positions of goshi daibu (chief historian), samurai chu (chamberlain), tsunezamurai (regular attendant), shoshu (chief secretary), chululugun (commander-in-chief) and weijun (commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guard).

古文：秋八月辛卯，帝崩于露寝，时年五十五。
现代文：秋八月辛卯，文帝死于正堂，终年五十五岁。
English: In the autumn and August of Xinwu, Emperor Wen died in the main hall, he was 55 years old.

古文：九月癸酉，葬崇阳陵，谥曰文王。
现代文：九月癸酉，埋葬于崇阳陵，谧号文王。
English: He died in September and was buried in the Chongyang Mausoleum. His posthumous name was King Wen.

古文：武帝受禅，追尊号曰文皇帝，庙称太祖。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，追加尊号为文皇帝，庙号称太祖。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's concession, adding the honorific title Emperor Wen and the temple name Taizu.

古文：史臣曰：世宗以睿略创基，太祖以雄才成务。
现代文：史臣曰：世宗以谋略创立基业，太祖以雄才成事。
English: Shichen said: Shizong created the foundation with a strategy, and Taizu did it with great talent.

古文：事殷之迹空存，翦商之志弥远，三分天下，功业在焉。
现代文：循殷之迹空留，灭商之志更远，三分天下，才是他们的功业所在。
English: To follow Yin's footsteps and remain empty, to destroy the merchants' aspirations even further, to divide the world into three parts, that is where their work lies.

古文：及逾剑销氛，浮淮静乱，桐宫胥怨，或所不堪。
现代文：论及跨越剑合消除战患，渡过淮河平定战乱，以及桐宫君臣相怨，是有的人所不能承受的。
English: It is unbearable for some people to talk about crossing the Jianhe to eliminate the war, crossing the Huaihe River to quell the war, and the quarrel between the Emperor and the Emperor's son.

古文：若乃体以名臣，格之端揆，周公流连于此岁，魏武得意于兹日。
现代文：如果能包容名臣，由尚书省网罗他们，那么周公会留恋于这个年代，魏武会得意于这个时期。
English: If we can tolerate eminent courtiers and recruit them from Shangshu Province, then the Zhou Guild will be nostalgic for this era, and the Wei Wu Guild will be proud of this period.

古文：轩悬之乐，大启南阳，师挚之图，于焉北面。
现代文：用轩悬的乐队，开发南阳，师挚那一班人，北面称臣。
English: With the band of Xuanxing, Nanyang is developed, and the group of people who are teachers are praised in the north.

古文：壮矣哉，包举天人者也！
现代文：能包举天意人事的人，真伟大啊!
English: How great is the man who is able to carry out God's will!

古文：为帝之主，不亦难乎。
现代文：在帝王下做诸侯，不也是很难吗?
English: Isn't it hard to be a vassal under the emperor?

古文：赞曰：世宗继文，邦权未分。
现代文：赞曰：世宗继承宣帝，国家政权尚未分裂。
English: Zang said: Shizong succeeded Emperor Xuan, and the state power has not yet been divided.

古文：三千之士，其从如云。
现代文：三千名士，追随相从。
English: Three thousand nobles, following the same path.

古文：世祖无外，灵关静氛。
现代文：太祖权极一时，平定灵关。
English: Great-great-grandfather power at the eleventh hour, to pacify the spiritual pass.

古文：反虽讨贼，终为弑君。
现代文：虽有讨伐贼寇的举动，最终留下弑君的罪名。
English: Although there was a crusade against the thieves and robbers, he was eventually accused of being a thief and robber.

