古文：白石先生皇初平王远伯山甫马鸣生李八百李阿
现代文：白石先生皇初平王远伯山甫马鸣生李八百李阿
English: Mr. ShiraishiEmperorWangZhongPingWangYuanBoshanFumaMingShengLi800LiAh

古文：白石先生
现代文：白石先生
English: Mr. Shiraishi

古文：白石先生者，中黄丈人弟子也，至彭祖时，已二千岁余矣。
现代文：白石先生是中黄丈人的弟子，古代仙人彭祖在世时，白石先生已活了两千岁了。
English: Mr. Shiraishi was a disciple of Zhonghuang Zojin. When the ancient sage Peng Zu was alive, Mr. Shiraishi had already lived for two thousand years.

古文：其所据行者，正以交接之道为主，而金液之药为上也。初以居贫，不能得药，乃养羊牧猪，十数年间，约衣节用，置货万金，乃大买药服之。
现代文：他并不热衷于得道成仙，只是希望长生不死就可以了，所以对人间的享乐都不放弃。他最注重的就是节制男女交合的事，经常服用的药只有用金石炼成的丹液。起初由于非常贫穷没有钱买药，他就养羊喂猪，节衣缩食。积攒了不少钱，就开始经常买药服用。
English: He was not keen on becoming an immortal. He just wanted to live forever, so he did not give up the pleasures of the world. His most important thing was to control the sexual intercourse between men and women. The only medicine he often took was a tincture made of gold and stone. At first, because he was very poor and had no money to buy medicine, he raised sheep and pigs and cut back on food. After saving a lot of money, he began to buy and take medicine regularly.

古文：常煮白石为粮，因就白石山居，时人故号曰白石先生。
现代文：他还经常煮白石当饭吃，又住在白石山中，所以当时人们都称他为白石先生。
English: He also often cooked and ate shiraishi and lived in the Shiraishi Mountains, so people called him Mr. Shiraishi at that time.

古文：亦食脯饮酒，亦食谷食。
现代文：但他也吃肉喝酒，也吃五谷杂粮。
English: But he also eats meat, drinks alcohol and eats cereals.

古文：日行三四百里，视之色如四十许人。
现代文：他可以一天走三四百里，虽然两千多岁了，看着仍像四十多岁的人。
English: He can walk three or four hundred miles a day, and although he is more than two thousand years old, he still looks like a man in his forties.

古文：性好朝拜事神，好读幽经及太素传。
现代文：他好朝拜神仙，爱读著名道家浮丘公著的《相鹤经》和论述宇宙物质构成的《太素传》。
English: He was fond of worshipping the gods and loved to read "Sohaku-kyo," a book by the famous Taoist Fukyu, and "Taiso-kyo," which discusses the composition of cosmic matter.

古文：彭祖问之曰： 何不服升天之药？ 
现代文：彭祖有一次问白石先生， 你为什么不服用可以成仙的药呢？ 
English: Peng Zu once asked Mr. Shiraishi, Why don't you take medicine that can make you immortal?

古文：答曰： 天上复能乐比人间乎？
现代文：白石先生回答说， 天上能有人间这么多的欢乐吗？
English: Mr. Shiraishi replied, "Can there be so much joy in the world?

古文：但莫使老死耳。
现代文：我只求不老不死就满足了。
English: All I ask is that I don't die.

古文：天上多至尊，相奉事，更苦于人间。 
现代文：再说天上有那么多的神仙，我去侍奉他们，比在人间可苦多了。 
English: Besides, there are so many immortals in heaven, it would be much harder for me to serve them than on earth.

古文：故时人呼白石先生为隐遁仙人，以其不汲汲于升天为仙官，亦犹不求闻达者也。
现代文：所以当时人们都称白石先生为 隐居世人的神仙 ，因为他并不苦苦追求升天当仙官，正如在世人不追求功名利禄。
English: Therefore, at that time, people called Mr. Shiraishi a "recluse god," because he did not pursue ascension to heaven to become a god, just as he did not pursue fame and fortune in the world.

古文：皇初平
现代文：皇初平
English: Emperor Hatsuhira

古文：皇初平者。丹溪人也。
现代文：皇初平是丹溪人。
English: Emperor Zhongping was from Danxi.

古文：年十五，家使牧羊，有道士见其良谨，便将至金华山石室中，四十余年，不复念家。
现代文：十五岁时，家里让他出去放羊，遇见一个道士，道士看他憨厚善良，就把他领到浙江金华山的山洞中，一去就是四十多年，他也不再想家。
English: At the age of fifteen, his family let him go out to herd sheep, and he met a Taoist. The Taoist thought he was kind and generous, and led him to a cave in the Jinhua Mountains in Zhejiang Province. He has been gone for more than forty years, and he no longer misses home.

古文：其兄初起，行山寻索初平，历年不得。
现代文：他的哥哥叫皇初起，进山寻找，找了好几年也找不到。
English: His older brother, whose name was Empress Dowager Cixi, went into the mountains to look for it, but couldn't find it after several years of searching.

古文：后见市中有一道士，初起召问之曰： 吾有弟名初平，因令牧羊，失之四十余年，莫知死生所在，愿道君为占之。 道士曰： 金华山中有一牧羊儿，姓皇，字初平，是卿弟非疑。 
现代文：后来他在街上见一个道士，就向他打听说， 我有个弟弟叫皇初平，家里让他放羊，已经走失了四十多年，不知他的死活，也不知他在什么地方，恳求道长给算一算。 道士说，金华山中有一个放羊的小孩，姓皇字初平，肯定就是你的弟弟了。 
English: Later, he saw a Taoist priest on the street and asked him, "I have a brother named Wang Chuping. At home, he was asked to herd sheep. He has been lost for more than forty years. I don't know if he is alive or dead, and I don't know where he is. I implored the Taoist priest to calculate it." The priest said, "There is a child who herds sheep in the Jinhua Mountains. His surname is Wang Zi Chuping. He must be your brother."

古文：初起闻之，即随道士去，求弟遂得，相见悲喜。
现代文：初起听后就跟着道士，到金华山里找到了弟弟，兄弟相见悲喜交加。
English: After hearing it for the first time, he followed the Taoist and found his brother in the Jinhua Mountains. The brothers were both sad and happy to see each other.

古文：语毕，问初平羊何在，曰： 近在山东耳。 
现代文：初起就问初平那羊都哪去了，初平说， 就在东边山坡上。 
English: At first, I asked Hatsuhira where the sheep had gone. Hatsuhira said, "It's on the eastern slope of the mountain."

古文：初起往视之，不见，但见白石而还，谓初平曰： 山东无羊也。 
现代文：初起就到东山坡上去找，没看见羊，只看见一堆白石头，就回来对初平说， 东山坡上哪里有羊啊？ 
English: At first, he went to the eastern slope to look for cattle. He didn't see any sheep, only a pile of white stones. He came back and said to Huping, "Where are there sheep on the eastern slope?"

古文：初平曰： 羊在耳，兄但自不见之。 
现代文：初平说 羊就在那儿，只是哥哥你看不见罢了。 
English: Hatsuhira said, "The sheep is right there, but you can't see my brother."

古文：初平与初起俱往看之。初平乃叱曰： 羊起。 
现代文：初平就领哥哥来到东山坡，吆喝了一声 羊快起来！ 
English: Hatsudaira led his brother to the east slope of the mountain and called out, "Sheep, hurry up!

古文：于是白石皆变为羊数万头。
现代文：只见那些白石头一下子变成了几万头羊。
English: All of a sudden, those white stones turned into tens of thousands of sheep.

古文：初起曰： 弟独得仙道如此，吾可学乎？ 
现代文：初起说， 弟弟你已经得了仙道，我能学成吗？ 
English: To begin with, my brother, you have already acquired the Way of the Immortal. Can I learn it?

古文：初平曰： 唯好道，便可得之耳。 
现代文：初平说。 只要你诚心修道，就能学成。 
English: Hatsuhira said. As long as you sincerely practice, you can learn.

古文：初起便弃妻子留住，就初平学。
现代文：初起就离开了妻子儿女，来跟弟弟学道。
English: Right from the start, he left his wife and children to study Buddhism with his younger brother.

古文：共服松脂茯苓，至五百岁，能坐在立亡，行于日中无影，而有童子之色。
现代文：和他一起服用松脂和茯苓，活到了五百岁，修炼得能坐在那里忽然消失，在大白天走路，谁也看不见他，面容也像孩童一样。
English: With him he took turpentine and camphor, and lived to be five hundred years old, and became so skilled that he could sit there and suddenly disappear, and walk in broad daylight, and no one could see him, and his face was like that of a child.

古文：后乃俱还乡里，亲族死终略尽，乃复还去。
现代文：后来兄弟俩一起回乡，见亲族都已死光了，就又回了山。
English: Later, the two brothers returned to their hometown together, and when they saw that all their relatives were dead, they returned to the mountains.

古文：初平改字为赤松子，初起改字为鲁班。
现代文：初平改名赤松子，初起改名叫鲁般。
English: Hatsudaira changed her name to Akamatsuko, and from then on changed her name to Luhan.

古文：其后服此药得仙者数十人。
现代文：后来服他们的药成仙的有好几十人。
English: Later, dozens of people became immortals after taking their medicine.

古文：王远
现代文：王远
English: Wang Yuan

古文：王远，字方平，东海人也。
现代文：王远，字方平，是东海人。
English: Wang Yuan, also known as Fang Ping, is from the East China Sea.

古文：举孝廉，除郎中，稍加中散大夫。
现代文：曾被举荐为孝廉，任过郎中，后来升任为中散大夫。
English: He was once recommended as a filial son, served as a junior vassal, and was later promoted to a junior doctor.

古文：学通五经，尤明天文图谶河洛之要，逆知天下盛衰之期，九州吉凶，如观之掌握。
现代文：熟读《尚书》、《诗经》、《春秋》、《易经》、《仪礼》五部经典，尤其精通天文、河图、符命的深奥理论，可以预知天下盛衰的日期，九州将要有什么吉凶祸福，他都了如指掌。
English: Familiar with the five classics of "Shangshu," "Shijing," "Chunqiu," "Wangjing" and "Rite," he is especially proficient in astronomy, river charts, and the esoteric theory of life signs. He can predict the date of the rise and fall of the world, and he knows everything about Kyushu.

古文：后弃官，入山修道。
现代文：后来他辞去官职进山修道。
English: Later, he resigned from his government post to become a mountain monk.

古文：道成，汉孝桓帝闻之，连征不出。
现代文：修成得道后，汉孝桓帝刘志听说后，几次召他进宫，他始终不出山。
English: After he was ordained, Emperor Han Xiaokuan heard of Liu Zhi and summoned him to the palace several times, but he never went to the mountain.

古文：使郡国逼载，以诣京师，远低头闭口，不答诏。
现代文：桓帝又派地方官吏去找他，强迫他上车，把他拉到京城。但他见了桓帝后，始终低着头一言不发。桓帝问话，刘远也不回答。
English: Emperor Huan also sent local officials to look for him, forced him into a car, and dragged him to the capital. However, after he saw Emperor Huan, he kept his head down and did not say a word. When Emperor Huan asked questions, Liu Yuan did not answer.

古文：乃题宫门扇板四百余字，皆说方来之事。
现代文：后来他在宫门上题了四百多字，说的都是未来的事。
English: Later, he wrote more than four hundred words on the palace gate, all of which were about the future.

古文：帝恶之，使削去。
现代文：桓帝十分生气，让把宫门上的字用刀削去。
English: Emperor Kan became very angry and had the words on the palace gate chiseled off with a knife.

古文：外字适去，内字复见，墨皆彻板里，削之愈分明。
现代文：面上的字刚削掉，板里的字又显了出来，因为字的墨已渗透到门板里了，越削越清楚。
English: As soon as the words on the face were cut off, the words in the board appeared again, because the ink of the words had penetrated into the door board, and the more they were cut, the clearer they became.

古文：远无子孙，乡里人累世相传供养之。
现代文：王远没有后代，他家乡的人世代相传供养他。
English: Wang Yu has no descendants, and the people of his hometown have provided for him for generations.

古文：同郡太尉陈耽，为远营道室，旦夕朝拜之，但乞福，未言学道也。
现代文：同郡有个太尉叫陈耽，专门为王远建了一座修道的专室，并早晚向他行礼叩拜，只说是向他祈福，并不说想跟他学道。
English: In the same county, there was a captain named Chen Tan, who built a special room for Wang Yuan to practice Taoism, and bowed to him morning and evening, saying only that he wished him good luck, but not that he wanted to study Taoism with him.

古文：远在陈家四十余年，陈家曾无疾病死丧，奴婢皆然。
现代文：王远在陈耽家住了四十多年，陈家没有一个人生病或死亡，连奴仆婢女都平安无恙。
English: Wang Yuan lived in the Chen Tan family for more than forty years. No one in the Chen family got sick or died, and even the slaves and maids were safe and sound.

古文：六畜繁息，田桑倍获。
现代文：陈家始终六畜兴旺，庄稼丰收。
English: The Chen family has always thrived with six livestock and a bumper harvest of crops.

古文：远忽语陈耽曰： 吾期运当去，不得久停，明日日中当发。 
现代文：有一天王远突然对陈耽说， 我的阳寿到了，不会再在你这里久留，明天中午我就去了。 
English: One day, Wang Yuan suddenly said to Chen Tan, "My birthday has come, I won't stay with you for long, I'll go tomorrow at noon."

古文：至时远死，耽知其仙去，不敢下着地，但悲啼叹息曰： 先生舍我，我将何怙？ 
现代文：果然第二天中午就死了。陈耽知道王远已经升仙而去，不敢把他的尸体放在地上，只是悲痛地哭道： 先生扔了我走了，今后我还能依靠谁呢？ 
English: Sure enough, he died at noon the next day. Chen Tan knew that Wang Yuan had ascended to heaven and left, and did not dare to put his body on the ground, but he cried with grief: My teacher has left me, who can I rely on in the future?

古文：具棺器烧香，就床衣装之。
现代文：就作了棺材，烧上香烛，用床单包起他的尸体。
English: They made a coffin, burned incense and wrapped his body in a sheet.

古文：至三日夜，忽失其尸，衣冠不解，如蛇蜕耳。
现代文：三天后的夜晚，尸体忽然不见了，但他的衣服并没有解开，像蛇蜕皮一样留在床上。
English: Three days later, in the evening, the body suddenly disappeared, but his clothes were not undone and remained on the bed like snakeskin.

古文：远卒后百余日，耽亦卒。
现代文：王远死后一百多天，陈耽也死了。
English: More than a hundred days after Wang Yuan's death, Chen Tan also died.

古文：或谓耽得远之道化去；或曰，知耽将终，故委之而去也。
现代文：有人说陈耽得到了王远的道术也成仙飞升了；也有人说王远知道陈耽快死了所以才离开他先走了。
English: Some people said that Chen Tan obtained Wang Yuan's Taoism and soared into immortality; others said that Wang Yuan knew that Chen Tan was about to die, so he left him first.

古文：初远欲东入括苍山，过吴，住胥门蔡经家。
现代文：在此之前，王远曾打算往浙江东南的括苍山，经过江苏吴郡，住在苏州西门的蔡经家。
English: Prior to this, Wang Yuan had planned to go to the Cangshan Mountains in southeastern Zhejiang, passing through Wuxi County, Jiangsu Province, and live in the Caijing family in Ximen, Suzhou.

古文：蔡经者，小民耳，而骨相当仙。远知之，故往其家。
现代文：蔡经是个普通老百姓，然而从骨相上看可以成仙，王远看出来了，所以住在他家。
English: Cai Jing is an ordinary commoner, however, from a skeletal point of view, he can become immortal. Wang Yuan saw this, so he lived in his home.

古文：遂语经曰： 汝生命应得度世，欲取汝以补官僚耳。然少不知道，今气少肉多，不得上去，当为尸解，如从狗窦中过耳。 
现代文：王远对蔡经说， 你命中该得道成仙，上天打算接你去补充仙宫的缺额，由于你从年轻时就没有学习道术的修炼，所以你现在精气少而身子肥胖，不可能成仙飞升。只有从肉体中解脱出来才能成仙，肉身的解脱不过像从狗洞中钻出去一样，你不要怕。 
English: Wang Yuan said to Cai Jing, "Your destiny is to become a Taoist Immortal. Heaven intends to pick you up to replenish the shortfall of the Immortal Palace. Since you have not learned the cultivation of Taoism from a young age, you are now short of energy and fat, and it is impossible to become a flying Immortal. You can only become a Immortal when you are freed from the flesh. The liberation of the flesh is just like getting out of a dog hole. Don't be afraid.

古文：于是告以要言，乃委经而去。
现代文：于是王远就把解脱肉体的方术传授给蔡经。然后就离开他去了。
English: So Wang Yuan taught Cai Jing the method of liberating the body, and then left him.

古文：经后忽身体发热如火，欲得冷水灌之。
现代文：蔡经后来突然身体变得像火一样发热，要求家里人用冷水浇他。
English: Cai Jing's body suddenly became as hot as fire and he asked his family to douse him with cold water.

古文：举家汲水灌之，如沃焦石。
现代文：全家就都打来水向他身上浇，像浇一块烧焦的石头。
English: The whole family came and poured water on him, like pouring on a burnt stone.

古文：如此三日，销耗骨立，乃入室，以被自覆。
现代文：这样浇了三天水，蔡经就只剩下一副骨头架子了。
English: After three days of watering, Cai Jing was left with only a skeleton frame.

古文：忽然失之。视其被内，唯有皮，头足具如蝉脱也。
现代文：然后家里人把蔡经弄到屋里床上躺下，他用被子把自己完全蒙上，忽然就不见了。揭开被子一看，只留下全身的皮，像蝉蜕下的皮一样。
English: Then the family members dragged Cai Jing into the house and made him lie down on the bed. He covered himself completely with a quilt and suddenly disappeared. When he opened the quilt, all that was left was the skin of his whole body, like the skin under the beak of a cicada.

古文：去十余年，忽还家，容色少壮。鬓发霅黑。
现代文：蔡经去了十几年后，突然又回到家来，容貌像青年一样，身体强壮，头发胡须又密又黑。
English: A dozen years after Cai Jing left, he suddenly returned home, looking like a young man, with a strong body and thick, dark hair and beard.

古文：语家人曰： 七月七日，王君当来，其日可多作饮食，以供从官。 
现代文：蔡经对家里人说： 七月七日王远要到咱家来，那天要多多作些饭菜，好招待他的随从官员们。 
English: Cai Jing said to her family, "Wang Yuan is coming to our home on July 7th. On that day, we need to prepare more food to invite his entourage of officials.

古文：至其日，经家乃借瓮器，作饮食百余斛，罗列布置庭下。是日，王君果来。
现代文：到了七月七日那天，蔡经家借了不少炊具，作了好几百斗粮食的饭，摆放在院子里，后来王远果然来了。
English: On July 7th, Cai Jing's family borrowed a lot of cooking utensils, made several hundred barrels of grain meal, and placed it in the yard. Wang Yuan finally came.

古文：未至，先闻金鼓箫管人马之声，比近皆惊，莫知所在。
现代文：王远来到之前，先听见了敲锣打鼓吹奏箫管的音乐声和人喊马嘶声，周围邻居们都十分惊恐，也看不见仙人究竟在哪里。
English: Before Wang Yuan arrived, he first heard the music of gongs and drums and the sound of people shouting horses. The surrounding neighbors were very frightened and could not see where the fairy was.

古文：及至经舍，举家皆见远。
现代文：及王远来到蔡经的家，家人们全看到了他。
English: When Wang Yuan came to Cai Jing's home, all the family members saw him.

古文：冠远游冠，朱衣，虎头鞶囊，五色绶，带剑。
现代文：只见他穿着大红袍服，头戴远游冠，腰带上挂着虎头形的装绶带用的皮包，系着五色的绶带，挂着宝剑。
English: I only saw him wearing a large red robe, a long-distance travel crown on his head, a leather bag with a tiger head-shaped decorative band on his belt, a five-colored ribbon, and a sword.

古文：黄色少髭，长短中形人也。
现代文：看他脸上有淡黄色的少年人的唇髭，中等身材。
English: Look at his face, he has the moustache of a young man with a yellowish complexion. He is of medium height.

古文：乘羽车，驾五龙，龙各异色，前后麾节，幡旗导从，威仪奕奕，如大将军也。
现代文：他乘着有翠羽伞盖的车，车由五条龙拉着，车的前后都是手执旗幡旌节的仪仗侍从，像大将军般的十分威风。
English: He rode in a chariot covered with green feathers and an umbrella. The chariot was pulled by five dragons. In front of and behind the chariot were attendants holding flags and banners. He was very dignified, like a great general.

古文：有十二伍伯，皆以蜡封其口，鼓吹皆乘龙，从天而下，悬集于庭。
现代文：有十二个差役在前面开道，他们的嘴都用蜡封着，接着又有一队骑着龙的乐队从天而降，聚集在院子里。
English: A dozen officers marched ahead, their mouths sealed with wax, and then a band of dragons descended from the sky and gathered in the courtyard.

古文：从官皆长丈余，不从道衢。
现代文：还有一些身高一丈多的随从官员，都没在道路上站立，而是停在空中。
English: There were also a number of much taller entourage officials, who did not stand on the road, but stopped in the air.

古文：既至，从官皆隐，不知所在，唯独见远坐耳。
现代文：王远到了以后，所有的随从仪仗立刻不见了，只有王远坐在那里。
English: After Wang Yuan arrived, all the attendants and attendants immediately disappeared, and only Wang Yuan sat there.

古文：须臾，引见经父母兄弟，因遣人召麻姑，亦莫知麻姑是何人也。
现代文：过了片刻，王远召见了蔡经的父母兄弟，然后又派人请麻姑到这儿来，大家都不知道麻姑是什么人。
English: After a while, Wang Yuan summoned Cai Jing's parents and brothers, and then sent someone to invite Ma Gu to come here. No one knew who Ma Gu was.

古文：言曰： 王方平敬报，久不到民间，今来在此，想姑能暂来语否？ 
现代文：王远让派去请麻姑的人对麻姑说。 王方平恭敬的向麻姑禀报，说他很久不到人间来了。现在他来到人间，不知麻姑您能不能赏光到人间来一趟，一起叙叙话。 
English: Wang Yuan asked the person who was sent to invite Ma Gu to speak to Ma Gu. Wang Fangping respectfully reported to Ma Gu that he had not come to the human world for a long time. Now that he has come to the human world, I don't know if you can appreciate Ma Gu coming to the human world and reciting the story together.

古文：须臾信还，不见其使，但闻信语曰： 麻姑载拜。
现代文：不一会儿麻姑的信使就来了，不见那使者，只听他发出了声音说， 麻姑我这里向王远君施礼了。
English: After a short while, Magu's messenger arrived, but the messenger was nowhere to be seen. All she heard was his voice saying, "Magu, I'm here to pay my respects to Wang Yuanjun."

古文：不相见忽已五百余年，尊卑有序，拜敬无阶。
现代文：我们已经五百年没见面了，虽然我们地位身份不同，但互相尊重敬仰，没有什么尊卑之分。
English: We have not seen each other for five hundred years. Although our status and identity are different, we respect and admire each other. There is no superiority or inferiority.

古文：烦信承来在彼，食顷即到。
现代文：先给你捎去个信，我一顿饭工夫就到。
English: First, I'll send you a letter. I'll be there in time for dinner.

古文：先受命当按行蓬莱，今便暂住，如是当还，还便亲觐，愿未即去。 
现代文：我已接受了使命要到蓬莱仙去视察，必须去一趟，但很快就会回来，回来后我就马上到你那儿去拜望，希望你等等我不要马上离开人间。 
English: I have accepted the mission to go to Penglai to inspect the hermit crabs. I have to go once, but I will be back soon. After I return, I will visit you immediately. I hope you will wait for me and not leave the world immediately.

古文：如此两时，闻麻姑来。
现代文：过了两个时辰，就听说麻姑到了。
English: After two hours, I heard that Ma Gu had arrived.

古文：来时亦先闻人马声。既至，从官半于远也。
现代文：也是先听见人马声，等到了以后，都看见麻姑的随从仪仗只有王远的一半多。
English: They also heard the sound of people and horses first, and after waiting, they all saw that Ma Gu's entourage was only more than half of Wang Yuan's.

古文：麻姑至，蔡经亦举家见之。
现代文：麻姑到了以后，蔡经领着全家上前拜见。
English: After Ma Gu arrived, Cai Jing led the whole family to visit her.

古文：是好女子，年可十八九许，于顶上作髻，余发散垂至腰。
现代文：只见麻姑是个十八九岁的美貌的女子，头顶上挽了个发髻，剩下的头发都披散下来垂到腰间。
English: I saw that Magu was a beautiful woman of eighteen or nineteen years old. She wore a bun on the top of her head, and the rest of her hair was loose and hung down to her waist.

古文：衣有文采，又非锦绮，光彩耀目，不可名状，皆世之所无也。
现代文：衣服上有美丽的图案，但不是绸缎，却光彩照人，不知是什么做的，反正是世上绝对没有的。
English: There is a beautiful pattern on the dress, but it is not satin, it is shiny, I do not know what it is made of, but it is absolutely nothing in the world.

古文：入拜远，远为之起立。
现代文：麻姑进屋拜见了王远，王远忙站起来还礼。
English: When Mabu entered the house and saw Wang Yuan, Wang Yuan hurriedly stood up and returned the salute.

古文：坐定，各进行厨，皆金盘玉杯无限也，肴膳多是诸花，而香气达于内外。
现代文：两人坐完以后，双方带来的厨师把各种佳肴呈送上来，食具都是金杯玉盘，不计其数，但盘中的菜肴大都是各种花，香气立刻充溢了屋子内外。
English: After the two of them were seated, the chefs brought by both sides presented a variety of delicacies. The utensils were gold cups and jade plates, countless in number, but the dishes on the plates were mostly all kinds of flowers. The aroma immediately filled the room inside and out.

古文：擘脯而食之，云：麟脯。
现代文：这时宾主切开盘里的肉干吃，原来是天上麒麟肉作的肉干。
English: At this time, the guest cut open the dried meat in the dish and ate it. It turned out to be dried meat made from the meat of the celestial unicorn.

古文：麻姑自说云： 接侍以来，已见东海三为桑田。
现代文：这时麻姑对王远说， 我从上次接待你以来，已经看见东海三次变成桑园田野了。
English: At this time, Magu said to Wang Yuan, Since I last received you, I have seen the East China Sea turn into a mulberry field three times.

古文：向到蓬莱，又水浅于往日会时略半耳，岂将复为陵陆乎？ 
现代文：刚才我到蓬莱仙洲去，看见岛周围的水，比上次我来会见时又浅了一半，是不是蓬莱仙洲的水也要干涸而变成陆地呢？ 
English: Just now I went to Penglai Fairyland and saw that the water around the island was only half as shallow as the last time I visited. Is the water in Penglai Fairyland going to dry up and turn into land?

古文：远叹曰： 圣人皆言海中行复扬尘也。 
现代文：王远感叹地说。 怪不得圣人也都说过，在海里行走也会扬起灰尘的！ 
English: Wang Yuan sighed and said, "No wonder the sages also said that walking in the sea would raise dust!"

古文：麻姑欲见蔡经母及妇等，时经弟妇新产数日，姑见知之，曰： 噫，且立勿前，即求少许米来。 
现代文：这时麻姑想看看蔡经的母亲和妻子，当时蔡经的弟媳正坐月子，麻姑一看就知道她刚生完孩子，立刻说， 哎哟，你先站住，不要往前来。 
English: At this time, Ma Gu wanted to see Cai Jing's mother and wife. At that time, Cai Jing's younger sister-in-law was about to give birth. At a glance, Ma Gu knew that she had just given birth to a child. She immediately said, "Hey, you should stop first and not come forward."

古文：得米掷之堕地，谓以米祛其秽也。视其米皆成丹砂。
现代文：说着他家人拿了一把米撒在地上，说米能除掉产妇身不洁的东西。再一看，洒在地上的米已变成了丹砂。
English: He said that his family took a handful of rice and scattered it on the ground, saying that rice can remove maternal body impurities. Looking again, the rice sprinkled on the ground has turned into quicksand.

古文：远笑曰： 姑故年少也，吾老矣，不喜复作如此狡狯变化也。 
现代文：王远笑着对麻姑说， 看来你还是年轻好胜啊。我老了，早就不喜欢做这些小小的法术了。 
English: Wang Yuan smiled and said to Ma Gu, "It seems that you are still young and eager to win. I am old, and I don't like to do these little spells anymore.

古文：远谓经家人曰： 吾欲赐汝辈美酒，此酒方出天厨，其味醇浓，非俗人所宜饮，饮之或能烂肠，今当以水和之，汝辈勿怪也。 
现代文：王远又对蔡经家的人说， 我想赏给你们一些美酒，这酒是刚刚从天上的酒库里带来的，味道非常醇厚，世间人喝不太合适，如果就这样喝下去，肠子会烂掉，我必须往酒里兑些水，你们别怪罪我。 
English: Wang Yuan also said to the people of Cai Jing's family, "I want to reward you with some fine wine. This wine was just brought from the heavenly storehouse. The taste is very mellow. It is not suitable for people in the world to drink. If you continue to drink like this, your intestines will rot. I must add some water to the wine. Don't blame me."

古文：乃以斗水，合升酒搅之，以赐经家人，人饮一升许，皆醉。
现代文：说罢就用一半水兑了一升酒赐给蔡经家的人，每人喝了一升就都醉了。
English: After saying this, he used half of the water to make a liter of wine and gave it to the people of Cai Jing's family. Everyone drank a liter and got drunk.

古文：良久酒尽，远遣左右曰： 不足复还取也。 
现代文：不一会儿酒喝光了王远说。 酒不够了就再去拿。 
English: Wang Yuan said that he ran out of wine in a short while. If there is not enough wine, he will go and get it again.

古文：以千钱与余杭姥，乞酤酒。
现代文：就命左右的人拿了一千钱到余杭城的一个老太太那里去买酒。
English: Someone who was desperate took a thousand yuan to go to an old lady in Hangzhou to buy alcohol.

古文：须臾信还，得一油囊酒，五斗许。
现代文：派去买酒的人片刻就回来了，买来了一油袋子的酒，有五斗多。
English: The man who had been sent to buy wine came back a moment later and bought a sack of wine, more than five barrels.

古文：使传余杭姥答言： 恐地上酒不中尊饮耳。 
现代文：余杭城老太太捎话给王远说。 我担心人世上的酒你们喝不惯吧。 
English: The old lady of Yuhang City said to Wang Yuan, "I am worried that you are not used to drinking the world's wine.

古文：麻姑手爪似鸟，经见之，心中念曰： 背大痒时，得此爪以爬背，当佳之。 
现代文：麻姑的手生得像鸟的爪子，蔡经看见就心里暗想， 如果我后背发痒时，用她那爪子挠一挠，大概会挺舒服吧。 
English: Maju's hands were like the claws of a bird. When Cai Jing saw them, she thought to herself, "If my back is itchy, I can scratch it with her claws and it will probably feel quite comfortable."

古文：远已知经心中所言，即使人牵经鞭之，谓曰： 麻姑神人也，汝何忽谓其爪可爬背耶？ 
现代文：蔡经心里刚刚一想，王远就知道了，就让随从把蔡经抓来抽了一顿鞭子，斥责蔡经道， 麻姑是神仙，你怎么竟敢胡思乱想让她为你挠痒痒呢？ 
English: As soon as Cai Jing thought about it, Wang Yuan knew about it, so he had his attendant catch Cai Jing, whip him, and scold Cai Jing. Magu is a fairy godmother, how dare you think of letting her tickle you?

古文：但见鞭着经背，亦莫见有人持鞭者。
现代文：只见鞭子抽打在蔡经身上，却看不见有拿鞭子的人。
English: I only saw the whip being beaten on Cai Jing's body, but I couldn't see the person with the whip.

古文：远告经曰： 吾鞭不可妄得也。 
现代文：打完了，王远对蔡经说， 我的鞭子从不随便打人，你能挨我的鞭打也是你的造化。 
English: After the whipping, Wang Yuan said to Cai Jing, "My whip never beats people arbitrarily, and you are my whipping creation.

古文：经比舍有姓陈者，失其名，尝罢县尉，闻经家有神人，乃诣门叩头，求乞拜见。
现代文：蔡经的邻居有个姓陈的，不知道叫什么名，曾做过县尉被罢了官，听说蔡经家来了神仙，就登门磕头要求拜见神仙。
English: Cai Jing's neighbor had a surname Chen, I don't know what his name was, he had been a county lieutenant and had been dismissed. When he heard that a god had come to Cai Jing's house, he went to Shantou to ask to see the god.

古文：于是远使引前与语。
现代文：王远听说后，就让把陈某带上来。
English: After Wang Yuan heard about it, he asked Chen to come with him.

古文：此人便欲从驱使，比于蔡经。
现代文：见面后，陈某就恳求王远收留他在他的左右当差，和蔡经在一起。
English: After the meeting, Chen asked Wang Yuan to let him stay with him and Cai Jing.

古文：远曰： 君且向日而立。 远从后观之曰： 噫，君心邪不正，终未可教以仙道，当授君地上主者之职司。 
现代文：王远让陈某面朝太阳站着，从后面观察他，看后说， 哎呀，你这个人心术不正，我不能教给你成仙得道的事。这样吧，我让你当地上的主宰官吧。 
English: Wang Yuan asked Chen to stand with a certain face towards the sun, observed him from behind, looked at him and said, Alas, you are not good at mind tricks, I can't teach you the way to become a fairy godmother. Well, I'll let you be the local leader.

古文：临去，以一符并一传，著以小箱中，与陈尉。
现代文：陈某临走时，授给陈某一张符和一块写着经文的板子，装在一个小箱子里。
English: When Chen Mou was about to leave, he gave Chen Mou a badge and a board with a scripture written on it, which was placed in a small box.

古文：告言 此不能令君度世，止能存君本寿，自出百岁向上。
现代文：交给陈某后嘱咐说， 这些东西并不能让你得道转世，只能使你的寿命延长一百岁以上。
English: After handing it to Chen Mou, he said, "These things can't make you reincarnate, but can only extend your life by more than 100 years."

古文：可以攘灾治病者，命未终及无罪者，君以符到其家，便愈矣。
现代文：如果有那些生病有灾的，或者那些没有什么罪过不该死的人，你可以拿着这符到他们家去，他们就会消灾除病。
English: If there are those who are sick and afflicted, or those who have no sin deserving death, you can take this mark to their home, and they will eliminate the disaster and eliminate the disease.

古文：若邪鬼血食作祟祸者，便带此符，以传敕吏，遣其鬼。
现代文：如果有谁家有妖魔作怪的，你可以拿着这仙符，把阴曹的官吏传了来，让他把鬼带回去。
English: If anyone has a demon haunting their home, you can take this talisman and pass it on to the evil officials, so that they can take the ghost back with them.

古文：君心中亦当知其轻重，临时以意治之。 
现代文：你要根据所遇到的具体情况，见机而行的使用这符。 
English: You should use this symbol as you see fit, according to the specific situation you encounter.

古文：陈以此符治病有效，事之者数百家。
现代文：陈某用此符给好几百家消了灾除了病。
English: Chen used this symbol to eliminate disasters and diseases for hundreds of families.

古文：寿一百一十岁而死。
现代文：陈某活到一百一十岁才去世。
English: Chen lived to be 110 years old before he passed away.

古文：死后子弟行其符，不复验矣。
现代文：他死后他的弟子又拿他的符使用，就不再灵了。
English: After his death, his disciples took his symbols and used them, and there was no more spirit.

古文：远去后，经家所作饮食，数百斛皆尽，亦不见有人饮食也。
现代文：王远离开蔡经家以后。蔡家院子里摆放的那些饮食都光光的了，但当时并没有看哪个神仙吃饭。
English: After Wang Yuan left Cai Jing's house, all the food and drink that had been placed in the courtyard of Cai Jing's house were gone, but at that time he did not look to see which deity was eating.

古文：经父母私问经曰： 王君是何神人，复居何处？ 
现代文：蔡经的父母私下问蔡经王远是位什么神，住在哪里。
English: Cai Jing's parents privately asked Cai Jing Wangyuan what kind of god he was and where he lived.

古文：经曰： 常在昆仑山，往来罗浮括苍等山，山上皆有宫室。
现代文：蔡经说， 他经常住在昆仑山，往来于罗浮山，括苍山等各山，每个山上都有他的宫室。
English: Cai Jing said that he often lived in Kunlun Mountain, and traveled to and from Luofu Mountain, including Cangshan and other mountains. Each mountain had his palace.

古文：主天曹事，一日之中，与天上相反覆者十数过。
现代文：他主管天曹的事，每天在天上地下反复来往十几次。
English: He is in charge of Tenso's affairs and goes back and forth between heaven and earth a dozen times a day.

古文：地上五岳生死之事，皆先来告王君。
现代文：地上三山五岳的事和人间的生死，都先报告给王远。
English: The affairs of the three mountains and five hills on earth and the life and death of human beings were all reported to Wang Yuan first.

古文：王君出，城尽将百官从行，唯乘一黄麟，将十数侍人。
现代文：他每次出行时，并不带着百官，只骑着一头黄色麒麟，带十几个侍从。
English: Every time he travels, he doesn't take a hundred officials with him, but rides a yellow unicorn with a dozen attendants.

古文：每行常见山林在下，去地常数百丈，所到则山海之神皆来奉迎拜谒。 
现代文：他出行都是腾空飞行，山林都在他下面，离地常好几百丈，所到之处山海之神都迎接拜见。 
English: He travels by taking off and flying, the mountains and forests are below him, he is always several hundred meters above the ground, and the gods of the mountains and seas greet him wherever he goes.

古文：其后数十年，经复暂归家，远有书与陈尉，其书廓落，大而不工。
现代文：几十年后蔡经回了次家，王远让他带信给陈某，字写得很大很潦草。
English: Several decades later, Cai Jing returned to his second home. Wang Yuan asked him to take a letter to Chen Mou. The letter was very large and scribbled.

古文：先是人无知方平名远者，因此乃知之。
现代文：从前没有人知道王方平就是王远，由于此信才知。
English: In the past, no one knew that Wang Fangping was Wang Yuan, but this letter made it known.

古文：陈尉家于今世世存录王君手书，并符传于小箱中。
现代文：陈县尉家到现在世代保存着王远当年亲笔写的信和那仙符，都收藏在王远当初给陈尉的那个小箱子里。
English: To this day, the Chen family has preserved Wang Yuan's handwritten letter and the talisman, which are both kept in the small box that Wang Yuan originally gave to Chen.

古文：伯山甫
现代文：伯山甫
English: Hossan Fu

古文：伯山甫者，雍州人也。
现代文：伯山甫是古代九州之一的雍州人。
English: He Shanfu was a native of Yongzhou, one of the ancient provinces of Kyushu.

古文：入华山中，精思服食，时时归乡里省亲，如此二百年不老。
现代文：进了西狱华山专心修道，服食丹砂仙药，也常常回到家乡探亲，这样活了二百岁还不显老。
English: He went into the West Prison of Huashan Concentration Monasticism, took Dansha Immortal Medicine, and often returned to his hometown to visit relatives. In this way, he lived for two hundred years and still did not look old.

古文：到人家，即数人先世以来善恶功过，有如临见。
现代文：伯山甫每到别人家去时，就历数这家人祖祖辈辈的善恶和功过，好像他亲眼见过似的。
English: Whenever he went to someone else's home, he would recite the good and bad deeds of this family's ancestors as if he had seen them with his own eyes.

古文：又知方来吉凶，言无不效。
现代文：他还知道别人未来的吉凶福祸，说出来没有不灵验的。
English: He also knew the future fortune and misfortune of others, and there was nothing he couldn't say.

古文：其外甥女年老多病，乃以药与之。
现代文：伯山甫的外甥女年老又多病，就给了她一些药。
English: When Hossanpo's niece was old and sick, he gave her some medicine.

古文：女时年已八十，转还少，色如桃花。
现代文：外甥女当时已经八十多岁，服下药以后，立刻变得年轻了，面色像桃花样艳丽。
English: My niece was already in her eighties at the time. After taking the medicine, she immediately became younger and her complexion was as beautiful as a peach blossom.

古文：汉武遣使者行河东，忽见城西有一女子，笞一老翁，俯首跪受杖。
现代文：有一次，汉帝派了使者到河东去，忽然看见城西有一个女子用鞭子抽打一个老头，老头老老实实地低着头挨打。
English: Once, the Han Emperor sent an envoy to the east of the river and suddenly saw a woman in the west of the city beating an old man with a whip. The old man honestly kept his head down and was beaten.

古文：使者怪问之，女曰： 此翁乃妾子也，昔吾舅氏伯山甫，以神药教妾，妾教子服之，不肯，今遂衰老，行不及妾，故杖之。 
现代文：使者十分奇怪，就上去问怎么回事，那女子说， 我是在打我儿子哩。从前我的舅舅伯山甫给了我一些仙药，我叫我儿子吃，他不肯吃，现在就老成这样，走路连我都不如，慢腾腾地，所以我才打他。 
English: The messenger was very puzzled, and went up to ask what was the matter. The woman said, "I am beating my son. Once upon a time, my uncle gave me some elixir, and I asked my son to eat it. He refused to eat it, and now he is like this, he can't even walk as well as I can, he walks slowly, so I beat him."

古文：使者问女及子年几，答曰： 妾已二百三十岁，儿八十矣。 
现代文：使者问那女子和他儿子都是多大岁数，女子回答说， 我已经二百三十岁，儿子才八十岁。 
English: The messenger asked the woman and her son how old they were. The woman replied, "I am two hundred and thirty years old, and my son is eighty years old.

古文：后入华山去。
现代文：后来这女子也进了华山修道去了。
English: Later, this woman also entered the Huashan monastery.

古文：马鸣生
现代文：马鸣生
English: Ma Mingsheng

古文：马鸣生者，临淄人也，本姓和，字君贤。
现代文：马鸣生是山东临淄人，原来姓和，字君贤。
English: Ma Mingsheng is from Linyi, Shandong Province. His original surname was Wa, and his Chinese name is Junxian.

古文：少为县吏，捕贼，为贼所伤，当时暂死，忽遇神人以药救之，便活。
现代文：他年轻时当过县衙里的小官。因为捕捉强盗，被强盗所伤，忽然遇见一个神仙用药救活了他。
English: When he was young, he was a minor official in the county magistrate's office. Because he caught a robber and was injured by the robber, he suddenly met a fairy who used medicine to revive him.

古文：鸣生无以报之，遂弃职随神。
现代文：马鸣生觉得无法报答神仙救命之恩，就丢掉了官职跟着神仙去了。
English: Ma Mingsheng felt that he could not repay the gods for saving his life, so he lost his official position and followed the gods.

古文：初但欲治金疮方耳，后知有长生之道，乃久随之，为负笈，西之女儿山，北到玄丘，南至庐江，周游天下，勤苦历年，及受《太阳神丹经》三卷归。
现代文：一开始他只想得到医治刀枪红伤的方，后来知道神仙还有长生的方术，就长期跟随着神仙，为他挑着书箱，进了河南宜阳县的女几山，往北到了玄丘，往南到了安徽的庐江，和神仙一同周游天下，辛苦勤劳地侍奉神仙很多年，神仙终于给了他三卷《太阳神丹经》。
English: At the beginning, he only wanted to get the cure for the red wounds of the sword and gun. Later, knowing that the immortals also had the longevity method, he followed the immortals for a long time, picked up the book box for him, entered the mountains of Yixian County, Henan Province, went north to Xuanqiu, and south to the Lijiang River in Anhui Province. He traveled around the world with the immortals and worked hard to serve the immortals for many years. The immortals finally gave him three volumes of the "Sun God's Classics."

古文：入山合药服之。不乐升天，但服半剂，为地仙，恒居人间。不过三年，辄易其处，时人不知是仙人也。
现代文：马鸣生服药以后，每三年搬一个地方住，所以人们都不知道他是神仙。他也修造房舍，也有仆人和车马，和人们完全一样。他就这样不断地换地方住，走遍了九州，过了五百多年，有些人认识他，见他总也不老，十分奇怪。
English: After Ma Mingsheng took medicine, he moved every three years to a new place to live, so people didn't know he was a god. He also built houses, had servants and horses, just like people. In this way, he constantly changed places to live, traveled all over Kyushu, and after more than five hundred years, some people knew him, and it was very strange to see that he was always not old.

古文：怪其不老。后乃白日升天而去。
现代文：后来他终于大白天成仙，升天而去。
English: Later, he finally became immortal in broad daylight and ascended to heaven.

古文：李八百
现代文：李八百
English: Li Bahe

古文：李八百，蜀人也，莫知其名。
现代文：李八百是四川人，不知道他名叫什么。
English: Li Yahe is from Sichuan. I don't know his name.

古文：历世见之，时人计其年八百岁，因以为号。
现代文：由于好几代人都见过他，推算他已活了八百岁，所以叫他李八百。
English: Since several generations of people have seen him, it is estimated that he has lived for eight hundred years, so he is called Li eight hundred.

古文：或隐山林，或出市廛。
现代文：他有时隐居在山林里，有时又到城镇里来。
English: Sometimes he secluded himself in the mountains and forests, and sometimes he came to the towns.

古文：知汉中唐公昉有志，不遇明师，欲教授之。
现代文：他听说陕南汉中有个叫唐公昉有志于修道，但没有高明的老师指点，就打算把修炼的方术教给他。
English: He heard that there was a man in the Southern Han Dynasty of Shaanxi Province named Tang Gongyu who was interested in cultivation, but without the guidance of a high-level teacher, he planned to teach him the cultivation method.

古文：乃先往试之，为作客佣赁者，公昉不知也。
现代文：李八百打算先试试唐公昉，就假装是外地人，到唐公昉家受雇当仆人。
English: Li Baibai planned to try Tang Gongyao first, so he pretended to be a foreigner and was hired as a servant in Tang Gongyao's house.

古文：八百驱使用意，异于他客，公昉爱异之。
现代文：李八百对唐公昉侍护得非常细心周到。
English: Li Yaobao was very careful and thoughtful in his attendance of Tang Gongyao.

古文：八百乃伪病困，当欲死，公昉即为迎医合药，费数十万钱，不以为损，忧念之意，形于颜色。
现代文：能充分领会唐公昉的心意，不同于其他的仆人，唐公昉就特别喜欢他，对待他和别的仆人不同，李八百有一次装病，而且病得要死，唐公昉就给他请医生抓药诊治，化费了几十万钱也不心疼，而且为李八百的病情十分忧虑担心。
English: Being able to fully understand Tang Gongyao's mind, unlike other servants, Tang Gongyao especially liked him and treated him differently from other servants. Li Baobao once feigned illness and was so sick that he was about to die. Tang Gongyao asked a doctor to take medicine and treat him. He did not mind spending hundreds of thousands of money, and he was very worried about Li Baobao's condition.

古文：八百又转作恶疮，周遍身体，脓血臭恶，不可忍近。
现代文：李八百又让自己生了恶疮，全身都是，又是脓又是血发出很大的臭味，使人不忍心挨近。
English: Eight-hundred-pound Lee also gave himself bad sores, all over his body, and the pus and blood emitted a great stench, making people reluctant to get close.

古文：公昉为之流涕曰： 卿为吾家使者，勤苦历年，常得笃疾，吾取医欲令卿愈，无所吝惜。
现代文：唐公昉哭着说， 你到我家来当仆人，辛苦了好几年，现在又得了这样重的病，我想尽办法给你治病，化多少钱也不吝惜。
English: Tang Gongyao cried and said, "You came to my house as a servant, worked hard for several years, and now you have such a serious illness. I will do my best to cure you, and I will not begrudge you any amount of money.

古文：而犹不愈，当如卿何！ 八百曰： 吾疮不愈，须人舐之当可。 
现代文：可是你的病总也不好，叫我怎么办啊！ 李八百说， 如果用舌头舔我的疮，就能好了。 
English: But your illness is not good at all. What should I do? Li Ba Ba said, "If you lick my sores with your tongue, you will get better."

古文：公昉乃使三婢，三婢为舐之。
现代文：唐公昉就让三个丫环给李八百舔恶疮。
English: Tang Gongyi let three maids lick Li Yaobao's sores.

古文：八百又曰： 婢舐不愈，若得君为舐之，即当愈耳。 
现代文：李八百又说， 丫环舔还是好不了，如果你给我舔，我的疮就能好了。 
English: Li Bahe also said, "It's still not good for a maiden to lick. If you lick me, my sores will get better."

古文：公昉即舐。
现代文：公昉就用嘴给他舔疮。
English: So she licked his sores with her mouth.

古文：八百又告曰： 吾疮乃欲差，当得三十斛美酒，浴身当愈。
现代文：但李八百说， 你舔还是不见好，如果让你夫人舔就好了。 公昉就让妻子给他舔疮。李八百又说， 我的疮要想完全治好，必须用几十斗的酒洗澡才行。 
English: But Li Yaobai said, "It's still not good for you to lick pimples, but it would be better if you let your wife lick them." Gong Li let his wife lick his sores. Li Yaobai also said, "In order for my sores to completely heal, I must take a bath with dozens of barrels of wine."

古文：公昉即为具酒，着大器中。八百即起，入酒中浴，疮即愈，体如凝脂，亦无余痕。
现代文：于是唐公昉就买了几十斗的酒装在一个大桶里，李八百就起床进入酒桶中洗澡，全身的疮果然立刻好了，而且皮肤白得像凝住的油脂，连一点疤痕都没有。
English: So Tang Gongyao bought dozens of barrels of wine and put them in a large barrel. Li Baobao got up and took a bath in the wine barrel. The sores all over his body immediately healed, and his skin was as white as congealed grease, without even a scar.

古文：乃告公曰： 吾是仙人也，子有志，故此相试。子真可教也，今当授子度世之诀。 
现代文：这时李八百才告诉公昉说， 我是神仙，听说你有志于修道，所以才来故意考验你，看来你是可以受教了，现在我要传授给你成仙的秘诀。 
English: At this time, Li Baobao told Gongjun, "I am a immortal. I heard that you were interested in becoming a monk, so I came to deliberately test you. It seems that you can be taught. Now I will teach you the secret of becoming a immortal."

古文：乃使公昉夫妻，并舐疮三婢，以其浴酒自浴，即皆更少，颜色美悦。
现代文：李八百就让唐公昉夫妻以及三个舔过疮的丫环都用他洗过澡的酒洗浴，他们立刻都变得十分年轻，而且很漂亮。
English: Li Baiping let Tang Gongyao and his wife and three maids who had licked sores take a bath with the wine he had bathed in, and they immediately became very young and very beautiful.

古文：以丹经一卷授公昉。
现代文：然后李八百又授给公昉一本炼丹的经书。
English: Then, Li Yahe also gave Gongjun a copy of the Book of Pure Dan.

古文：公昉入云台山中作药，药成，服之仙去。
现代文：唐公昉就进入浙江绍兴的云台山中炼制丹药，服用之后成仙升天而去。
English: Tang Gongyao went to Yuntai Mountain in Shaoxing, Zhejiang to refine the elixir. After taking the elixir, he ascended to heaven.

古文：李阿
现代文：李阿
English: Li Ah

古文：李阿者，蜀人，传世见之不老。
现代文：李阿是四川人，好几代人都见他不老。
English: Li Ah is a Sichuanese, and several generations have seen him grow old.

古文：常乞于成都市，所得复散赐与贫穷者。
现代文：李阿常常在成都街上乞讨，但却把讨来的东西又都散给了穷苦的人。
English: Li Ah often begged on the streets of Chengdu, but gave away everything she got to the poor.

古文：夜去朝还，市人莫知所止。
现代文：他夜晚离开成都，第二天早上又回来，人们不知他住在什么地方。
English: He left Chengdu at night and came back the next morning. People don't know where he lives.

古文：或往问事，阿无所言。但占阿颜色，若颜色欣然，则事皆吉；若容貌惨戚，则事皆凶；若阿含笑者，则有大庆；微叹者，则有深忧。
现代文：如果问李阿什么事，李阿从来不回答，但只要看他脸上的表情也就明白了，如果李阿脸露出高兴的样子，那么问的事就是吉利的，如果李阿满脸愁容，那么问的事就是灾祸，如果李阿听后微笑，就一定有大喜事；如果李阿轻轻叹口气，那问事的人一定会有很大的愁事。
English: If you ask Li Ah anything, Li Ah will never answer, but just look at the expression on his face and you will understand. If Li Ah's face is happy, then the question is auspicious. If Li Ah's face is sad, then the question is a disaster. If Li Ah smiles after listening, there must be great joy; if Li Ah sighs lightly, then the questioner must have great sorrow.

古文：如此候之，未尝不审也。
现代文：就这样向李阿问事。结果都十分灵验。
English: That's how I asked Li Ah for information. The results were very effective.

古文：有古强者，疑阿异人，常亲事之，试随阿还，所宿乃在青城山中。
现代文：有个叫古强的人，怀疑李阿不是凡人，就经常侍候李阿，并试着跟李阿走，才知道他住在青城山里。
English: A man named Gu Qiang suspected that Li Ah was not an ordinary man, so he often waited for Li Ah, and tried to follow Li Ah, only to find out that he lived in the Qingcheng Mountains.

古文：强后复欲随阿去，然身未知道，恐有虎狼，私持其父大刀。
现代文：古强打算跟李阿去山中修道，但自己没有道术，怕遇见山中虎狼，就偷偷带上他父亲的一把大刀。
English: Gu Qiang planned to go to the mountains with Li Ah, but he didn't have any Taoist skills. Afraid of encountering tigers and wolves in the mountains, he secretly brought his father's big sword.

古文：阿见而怒强曰： 汝随我行，那畏虎也！ 
现代文：李阿就很生气地对古强说， 你和我一同走，还用害怕虎狼吗？ 
English: Li Ah angrily said to Gu Qiang, "Are you still afraid of tigers and wolves when you walk with me?"

古文：取强刀以击石，刀折坏。
现代文：说罢夺过刀摔在石头上，刀就断了。
English: So saying, he took hold of the knife, and smote it on a stone, and it broke.

古文：强忧刀败。
现代文：古强见刀坏了，心里很犯愁。
English: When Guqiang saw that his sword was broken, he felt very sad.

古文：至旦随出，阿问强曰： 汝愁刀败也？ 
现代文：第二天早上古强跟着李阿出山时，李阿问道， 你是不是为刀坏了而发愁？ 
English: The next morning, when Gu Qiang followed Li Ah out of the mountain, Li Ah asked, Are you worried about the broken sword?

古文：强言实恐父怪怒。
现代文：古强说实在是怕回去后被父亲责怪。
English: Gou Qiang said that he was really afraid of being blamed by his father after returning.

古文：阿则取刀，左手击地，刀复如故。
现代文：李阿就取来断了的刀，用左手把刀放在地上敲了一下，刀就又恢复原状了。
English: Li Ah took the broken knife, put it on the ground with his left hand and tapped it, and the knife was restored to its original state.

古文：强随阿还成都，未至，道逢人奔车，阿以脚置其车下，轹脚皆折。
现代文：古强跟着李阿回成都时，在城外遇见一辆飞奔的马车，李阿把脚放在车轮下，结果车轮子硌坏了，李阿的脚也被压断，倒在地上死去。
English: When Gu Qiang followed Li Ah back to Chengdu, he met a speeding carriage outside the city. Li Ah put his foot under the wheel. As a result, the wheel rim broke, Li Ah's foot was crushed, and he fell to the ground and died.

古文：阿即死，强怖，守视之。须臾阿起，以手抚脚，而复如常。
现代文：古强吓坏了，守着李阿的尸体，李阿突然翻身爬了起来，用手揉了揉压断的脚，脚立刻完好如初。
English: Frightened, Guqiang guarded Li Ah's corpse. Li Ah suddenly rolled over and got up. He rubbed his crushed feet with his hands, and his feet were immediately as good as new.

古文：强年十八，见阿年五十许，强年八十余，而阿犹然不异。
现代文：古强十八岁时就看见李阿有五十来岁，古强八十多岁时，李阿仍然是五十岁的样子，一点也没变。
English: When Guqiang was eighteen, he saw that Li Ah was in his fifties. When Guqiang was in his eighties, Li Ah still looked like a fifty-year-old, and nothing had changed.

古文：后语人被昆仑山召，当去。
现代文：后来李阿对人说昆仑山的神仙召他，马上就去。
English: Later, Li Ah told people that the gods of Kunlun Mountain had summoned him, and that he would go immediately.

古文：遂不复还也。
现代文：李阿进昆仑山后，就再也没回来。
English: After Li Ah entered Kunlun Mountain, he never came back.

