古文：齐桓公问管子曰： 吾念有而勿失，得而勿忘，为之有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说； 我想常有天下而不失，常得天下而不亡，能办到么？ 
English: Kuan Gong asked Guanzhong, "I think that you can always have the world without losing it, and you can always win the world without losing it. Can you do it?

古文：对曰： 勿创勿作，时至而随。
现代文：回答说： 不急于创始，不急于作新，等到条件成熟再随之行事。
English: He replied: Don't be in a hurry to start something, don't be in a hurry to do something new, wait until the conditions are ripe and then act accordingly.

古文：毋以私好恶害公正，察民所恶，以自为戒。
现代文：不可以个人好恶损害公正原则。要调查了解人民之所恶，以便自身为戒。
English: Do not allow personal likes and dislikes to undermine the principle of justice. Investigate and understand the people's evil so that you can be a warning to yourself.

古文：黄帝立明台之议者，上观于贤也；尧有衢室之问者，下听于人也；舜有告善之旌，而主不蔽也；禹立谏鼓于朝，而备讯唉；汤有总街之庭，以观人诽也；武王有灵台之复，而贤者进也。
现代文：黄帝建立明台的咨议制度，就是为了从上面搜集贤士的意见；尧实行衢室的询问制度，也是为了从下面听取人们的呼声；舜有号召进谏的旌旗，君主就不受蒙蔽；禹把谏鼓立在朝堂上，可以准备人们上告；汤有总街的厅堂，可以搜集人们的非议；周武王有灵台的报告制度，贤者都得以进用。
English: The consultation system of the Ming Dynasty was established by the Yellow Emperor in order to collect the opinions of the sages from above; the inquiry system of the imperial court was implemented in order to listen to the voices of the people from below; if there is a banner calling to enter the imperial court, the monarch will not be deceived; if there is a gong drum in the morning hall, it can prepare people to appeal; if there is a hall in the main street, it can collect people's criticisms; if there is a report system of the Chow King's memorial hall, the sages can use it.

古文：此古圣帝明王所以有而勿失，得而勿忘者也。 
现代文：这就是古代圣帝明王能够常有天下而不失、常得天下而不亡的原因。 
English: This is the reason why the ancient Holy Emperor Ming Wang could often have the world without losing it, and often gain the world without dying.

古文：桓公曰： 吾欲效而为之，其名云何？ 
现代文：桓公说； 我也想效法他们实行这项制度，应当叫什么名字呢？ 
English: "I also want to follow their example and implement this system. What should it be called?

古文：对曰： 名曰啧室之议。
现代文：回答说： 名称可叫作 喷室的咨议制度 。
English: He replied: The name can be called the consultation system of the spray room.

古文：曰：法简而易行，刑审而不犯，事约而易从，求寡而易足。
现代文：就是说：国家法度要简而易行，刑罚要审慎而无人犯罪，政事要简而易从，征税要少而容易交足。
English: That is to say: the national legislation should be simple and easy to implement, the punishment should be prudent and no one should commit a crime, the politics should be easy to follow, the taxation should be less and easy to pay.

古文：人有非上之所过，谓之正士，内于啧室之议。
现代文：老百姓有在这些方面提出君主过失的，就称之为 正士 ，其意见都纳入 喷室 的咨议制度来处理。
English: If ordinary people raise the issue of the monarch's negligence in these areas, they are called "officials," and their opinions are included in the consultation system of the Press Office to be dealt with.

古文：有司执事者咸以厥事奉职，而不忘为。
现代文：负责办事的人员，都要把受理此事作为本职工作，而不许有所遗忘。
English: The personnel in charge of the work should take the acceptance of this matter as their own work, and must not forget anything.

古文：此啧室之事也，请以东郭牙为之。
现代文：这项 喷室 的大事，请派东郭牙主管。
English: Please send the person in charge of Dongguo Dental to attend to this emergency.

古文：此人能以正事争于君前者也。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：此人是能够为正事在君主面前力争的。 桓公说： 好 。
English: This person is able to fight for the cause in front of the monarch.Kang said: Good.

