古文：窦傅周珰竺法义王珉妻竺长舒潘道秀栾荀张崇释开达竺法纯释道泰郭宣吕竦徐荣刘度南宫子敖徐义毕览释法智孙道德张兴昙无竭车母释昙颖邢怀明王球
现代文：窦傅周珰竺法义王珉妻竺长舒潘道秀栾荀张崇释开达竺法纯释道泰郭宣吕竦徐荣刘度南宫子敖徐义毕览释法智孙道德张兴昙无竭车母释昙颖邢怀明王球
English: Wu Fu Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou Zhou, Zhou Zhou Zhou Zhou, Z

古文：窦傅
现代文：窦傅
English: Dou Fu

古文：晋窦傅者，河内人。
现代文：晋朝的窦傅，是河内人。
English: Dou Fu of the Jin Dynasty was a native of Hanoi.

古文：永和中，并州刺史高昌、冀州刺史吕护各权部曲，相与不和。
现代文：永和年中，并州刺史高昌，冀州刺史吕护，各个都掌握军队，相互之间不和。
English: In the middle of the Yonghe period, Gaochang, Jizhou, and Lvugou, all of which controlled armies, were at odds with each other.

古文：傅为昌所用，作官长。
现代文：窦傅被高昌所用，作官长。
English: Dou Fu was used by Gaochang as a chief official.

古文：护遣骑抄击，为所俘执，同伴六七人，共系一狱，锁械甚严，克日当杀之。
现代文：吕护派骑兵抄击，窦傅被俘，同伴六七个人，一同被抓到监狱中，带上枷锁看管甚严，等到了时候就杀死他们。
English: The cavalrymen of Lvgou sent a counterattack, Dou Fu was captured, and his six or seven companions were taken to prison together. They were put in shackles and kept under very strict supervision. When the time came, they were killed.

古文：沙门支遁山时在护营中，先与傅相识，闻其执厄，山至狱所候视之，隔户共语。
现代文：僧人支遁山当时在吕护营中，先和窦傅相识。听说他被俘将死，遁山到狱中去看望他。隔着门说话。
English: At that time, the monk Shih Lushan first met Dou Fu in the Lvou Camp. Hearing that he was about to die, Shih Lushan went to visit him in prison and spoke to him through the door.

古文：傅谓山曰： 今困厄，命在漏刻，何方得相救？ 
现代文：窦傅对遁山说： 现在被囚禁，命在旦夕，什么人能相救呢？ 
English: Dou Fu said to Lushan, "Now that you are imprisoned and your life is in danger, who can save you?

古文：山曰： 若能至心归请，必有感应。 
现代文：遁山说： 如果能虔诚地请求皈依佛法，就一定有感应。 
English: Hatakeyama said, "If you can sincerely ask to be converted to Buddhism, you will definitely receive a response.

古文：傅先亦颇闻观世音，及得山语，遂专心属念，昼夜三日，至诚自归。
现代文：窦傅先前也听说过观世音，等听遁山的一番话，就专心诵念。三天三夜，诚心诚意自然向佛。
English: Dou Fu had also heard of Guanyin before, and after listening to Shaoshan's words, he concentrated on chanting. For three days and three nights, his sincere heart naturally turned to the Buddha.

古文：观其锁械，如觉缓解，有异于常。
现代文：再看他的锁枷，象感觉有缓解似的，和平常不同，就试着活动活动，刑具一下子离开身体。
English: Looking at his shackles again, it's as if there's a sense of relief, and unlike usual, he tries to move around, and the torture device suddenly leaves his body.

古文：聊试推荡，摧然离体，傅乃复致心曰： 今蒙哀祐，已令桎梏自解，而同伴尚多，无心独去，观世音神力普济，当令俱免。 
现代文：窦傅又诚心地说： 今天承蒙你可怜庇祐，已让枷锁自开。而我的同伴很多，我无心独自离去。观世音神力普渡，应当让他们都免难。 
English: Dou Fu also said sincerely, "Today, thanks to your compassionate protection, I have let the shackles come off. And I have many companions, I have no intention of leaving alone. Guanyin's divine power is universal, so they should all be spared.

古文：言毕，复牵挽余人，皆以次解落，若有割剔之者。
现代文：说完。又拉其他的人，其他的人都先后解落枷锁，就象有人割掉了似的，于是开门逃走。
English: And he took the others, and they all threw off their chains one by one, as if someone had cut them off, and they opened the door and ran away.

古文：遂开户走出，于警徼之间，莫有觉者，便逾城迳去。行四五里，天明，不敢复进，共逃隐一林中。
现代文：在巡逻人之间，没有人察觉，就越城而去，走了四五里，天亮了，不敢再走了，就隐蔽在一个树林中。
English: Among the patrolmen, no one noticed, so he left the city, walked four or five miles, and at dawn, not daring to walk any further, he hid in a forest.

古文：须臾，护觉失囚，人马络绎，四出寻捕，焚草践林，无不遍至。唯傅所隐一亩许地，终无至者，遂得免还。
现代文：不一会，吕护发觉囚犯逃走，大队人马去追，四处收捕，烧草毁林，没有搜查不到的地方，唯独窦傅所隐藏的一亩左右的地方，始终没有人到，才能脱险而回。
English: After a while, Lvong discovered that the prisoner had escaped, and a large group of people went to chase him, arresting him everywhere, burning grass and destroying forests. There was no place that could not be searched, except for the one mu or so that Dou Fu had hidden. No one ever came to the place, so that he could escape and return.

古文：乡里敬信异常，咸信奉佛法，遁山后过江，为谢居士敷具说其事焉。
现代文：乡里的人都异常地敬信，都非常信奉佛法。遁山以后过江，为了感谢遁山窦敷把这些事到处传扬。
English: The people in the village are unusually devout and very much believe in Buddhism. After Lushan, they crossed the river, and in order to thank Lushan Dou, they spread these things everywhere.

古文：周珰
现代文：周珰
English: Zhou Ying

古文：晋周珰，会稽剡人也，家世奉法。
现代文：晋朝周珰，会稽剡人，家中世代奉法。
English: He was a member of the Jin Dynasty Zhou court, and his family had been practicing law for generations.

古文：珰年十六。
现代文：珰年纪十六岁，就吃素诵经。
English: At the age of sixteen, he became a vegetarian and began to chant.

古文：便蔬食诵经，正月长斋竟，延僧设八关斋，及请其师竺佛密、支法阶，佛密令持小品，斋转读。
现代文：正月长斋完毕，便请和尚设八关斋，又请他的师傅竺佛密、支法阶。佛密让他拿着小品经，斋戒时诵读。
English: After the long fast in the first month, he asked the monk to set up eight fasts, and also asked his master to recite the Buddha's teachings and branch teachings. The Buddha's teachings asked him to hold a small scripture and recite it while fasting.

古文：三日僧赴斋，忘持小品。
现代文：三天后和尚赴斋，忘记了带小品经。
English: Three days later, the monk went to break the fast and forgot to bring the small scripture.

古文：至中食毕，欲读经，方忆，甚惆怅。
现代文：到了中午吃完斋饭，想要读经，他才想起来，非常惆怅。
English: It wasn't until midday, when he had finished his meal and wanted to read the Bible, that he remembered. He was very embarrassed.

古文：珰家在坂怡村，去寺三十里，无人遣取。
现代文：珰家在坂怡村，距离寺庙三十里，无人去取。
English: His home is in the village of Sakaimura, 30 miles from the temple, and no one has come to claim him.

古文：至人定烧香毕，本家恨不得经，密益踧躇。
现代文：等到人们烧香完毕后。恨自家不能念经，佛密更加不安。
English: After people have finished burning incense, they hate not being able to recite sutras at home, and they are even more anxious about Buddhism.

古文：有顷，闻叩门者，言送小品经。
现代文：过了一会，听到有人敲门，说是送小品经的。
English: After a while, I heard someone knocking on the door, saying that they were delivering a book of short stories.

古文：珰愕然心喜，开门，见一年少，著单衣夹，先所不识，又非时人，疑其神异，便长跪受经。
现代文：周珰惊讶心喜，开门，看见一个少年，穿着单衣服，是先前所不认识的，又不是当时的人，疑心他是神灵。便长跪接受经书，邀请让他入座。
English: Surprised and delighted, Zhou Jun opened the door and saw a young man, dressed in a single garment, whom he had not known before, and who was not a person at that time. He suspected that he was a god. He knelt down to receive the scripture and invited him to sit down.

古文：要使前坐，年少不肯进，曰： 斯夜当来听经。 
现代文：少年不肯进来，说： 这一夜应当来听经书。 
English: The boy refused to come in, saying: "You should come and listen to the scriptures this evening."

古文：比出不复见，香气满宅，既而视之，乃是密经也，道俗惊喜。
现代文：等他出来后就不见了，而香气满屋，接着一看，原来是密经，道俗都很惊喜。
English: When he came out, he was gone, and the aroma filled the house. Then, at a glance, it turned out to be a tantric sutra, and everyone was surprised.

古文：密经先在厨中，缄钥甚谨，还视其钥，俨然如故。
现代文：密经先前在橱中，锁得很严。回去看那个锁，依然如故。
English: The sutra was previously in a cupboard, tightly locked. When I went back to look at the lock, it was still there.

古文：于是村中十余家，咸皆奉佛。
现代文：于是村中的十几家，都信奉佛教。
English: As a result, more than a dozen families in the village now believe in Buddhism.

古文：珰遂出家，字昙嶷，讽诵众经二十万言。
现代文：周珰于是出家，字为昙嶷，诵读经书二十多万言。
English: Zhou Yi then became a monk, the character for which is, and he recited more than two hundred thousand sutras.

古文：竺法义
现代文：竺法义
English: 法義from

古文：晋兴宁中，沙门竺法义，山居好善，住在始宁保山。
现代文：晋朝的兴宁年中，僧人竺兴义，住在山里常做好事，住在始宁保山。
English: In the Xingning era of the Jin Dynasty, the monk Zou Xingyi, who lived in the mountains and often did good deeds, lived in Xining Baoshan.

古文：后得病积时，攻治备至，而了不损，日就绵笃。遂不复自治，唯归诚观世音，如此数日。
现代文：以后得了病经很长时间百般治疗，始终不愈，一天一天更加严重，于是不再治病了，只诚心地拜求观世音，象这样过了几天。
English: After that, I got sick for a long time and was treated in various ways. It never got better and became more and more serious day by day. So I stopped treating the illness and just sincerely prayed to Guanyin. I spent a few days like this.

古文：昼眠，梦见一道人来候其病，因为治之，刳出肠胃，湔洗脏腑，见有结聚不净物甚多。洗濯毕，还纳之，语义曰： 汝病已除。 
现代文：一天白天睡着了，在梦中看到一位道人来看病，并给他治，先掏出他的肠胃，清洗五脏六腑，看见有很多不干净的东西，洗完后，又收回原处，并告诉他说： 你的病已除掉。 
English: One day, he fell asleep during the day. In his dream, he saw a Taoist come to see him and cure him. First, he took out his stomach and intestines and washed them. He saw a lot of unclean things. After washing, he took back the original place and told him: "Your illness has been eliminated."

古文：梦觉，众患豁然，寻得复常业。
现代文：梦醒后，所有的病一下子好了，不久又恢复了他的常业。
English: After waking from the dream, all his ailments suddenly improved, and he soon resumed his regular work.

古文：故其经云： 或现沙门梵志之象。 
现代文：所以经书说： 有时会出现沙门梵志的迹象。 
English: Therefore, the sutras say: Sometimes there are signs of samadhi.

古文：意者义公梦其是乎！
现代文：象义公的梦就可以证明吧！
English: The dream of Prince Ziyi can prove it!

古文：义以太原七年亡，宋尚书令傅亮撰其事迹。
现代文：法义在太原七年死去。宋尚书叫傅亮为他的事迹作传。
English: Ho Yi died in Taiyuan seven years ago. Song Shangshu asked Fu Liang to write a biography of his deeds.

古文：亮自云： 其先君与义游，义每说其事，辄凛然增肃焉。 
现代文：亮自己说，他的过世的父亲曾和法义交游，法义每当说到这件事，总是肃然起敬的样子。
English: He said that his late father had been friends with Fa Yi, and whenever Fa Yi talked about it, he always looked awestruck.

古文：王珉妻
现代文：王珉妻
English: Wang Xizhe

古文：晋琅琊王珉，其妻无子，尝祈观世音云乞儿。
现代文：晋朝琅琊的王珉，他的妻子没有孩子，曾祈祷观世音菩萨让他有个儿子。
English: Wang Xi of the Jin Dynasty, whose wife had no children, once prayed to the Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara to give him a son.

古文：珉后路行，逢一胡僧，意甚悦之。
现代文：以后王珉行在路上，遇到了一个胡僧，对他很喜欢。
English: Later, when Wang Minxing was on the road, he met a goth monk and liked him very much.

古文：僧曰： 我死，当为君作子。 
现代文：和尚说： 我死了，当做你的儿子。 
English: The monk said, "I am dead, I am your son."

古文：少时道人果亡，而珉妻有孕，及生能语，即解西域十六国梵音，大聪明，有器度，即晋尚书王洪明身也。
现代文：不一会道人果然死了。而王珉的妻子有了身孕。等生下来就会说话，又会西域十六国的梵语，非常聪明，又有气度。就是原来晋朝的尚书王洪明。
English: Soon after, the Taoist did indeed die, and Wang Qian's wife became pregnant. When he was born, he could speak, and he also knew Sanskrit from 16 countries in the Western Regions. He was very intelligent and had an air of grandeur. He was the Shang Shu King Hong Ming of the original Jin Dynasty.

古文：故小名阿练，叙前生时，事事有验。
现代文：所以小名又叫阿练，叙述他的前生时，事事都应验。
English: That's why his nickname is Ah Lien. When he describes his past life, everything comes true.

古文：竺长舒
现代文：竺长舒
English: Zou Changshu

古文：晋有竺长舒者，本天竺人，专心诵观音经为业。
现代文：晋朝有个竺长舒，原是天竺人，一心以读观世音经为业。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Zou Changshu, who was originally from Tianyao and devoted his life to reading the Guan Shiyin.

古文：后居吴中，于邑内遭火，屋宇连栋，薨檐相继，火至皆焚。
现代文：以后住在吴中，城内遭火灾，房屋接连，屋檐相接，火到之处全都烧毁。
English: After that, he lived in Wuzhong. There was a fire in the city, houses were connected, roofs were connected, and the fire burned everything.

古文：长舒家正住下，分意烧毁，一心念观世音。
现代文：长舒家正住在下风口，估计要被烧毁，他一心念观世音经。
English: Changshu's home is in the lee of the wind and is expected to be burned down. He is intent on reading the Guan Yin Jing.

古文：欲至舒家，风回火灭，合县惊异之。
现代文：火快到舒家，忽然风转火灭，全县都异常惊讶。
English: The fire quickly reached Shu's home, and suddenly the wind changed and the fire was extinguished. The whole county was extremely surprised.

古文：时有恶少，讶其灵应，到后夜风急，少年以火投屋，四投皆灭。
现代文：当时有个品质恶劣的少年，对他的灵验很惊讶，到后半夜，风急，把火投向长舒的房子上，投四次都灭了。
English: At that time, there was a bad boy who was surprised at his success. In the middle of the night, in a hurry, he threw fire at Changshu's house, and the fire was extinguished four times.

古文：少年嗟感，至明，乃叩头首过。
现代文：少年感叹不止，到了天亮，便磕头认过。
English: The boy sighed more than once. By dawn, he recognized the steamed bread.

古文：舒云： 我无神力，常以诵观世音为业，每有事，恒得脱免。 
现代文：长舒说： 我没有什么神力，常常以诵观世音经为业，每当有事，总得到脱免。 
English: Changshu said, "I don't have any supernatural power. I often chant the Avalokiteshvara Sutra as my occupation. Whenever something happens, I always get out of it.

古文：潘道秀
现代文：潘道秀
English: Pan Daoxiu

古文：潘道秀，吴郡人，年二十余，尝随军北征。
现代文：潘道秀，是吴郡人，年龄二十多岁，曾经随军北征。
English: Pan Daoxiu, a resident of Wuxi County in his twenties, once accompanied the army on the Northern Expedition.

古文：少信佛法，恒至心念观世音，每梦寐，辄见像，后既南奔，迷不知道，于穷山中，忽睹真形，如今行像，因作礼怡然。
现代文：不久，因军队小失利，道秀逃跑而被俘，经过几个地方作奴仆，在域外作俘虏，想回去又没有办法。年少时信守佛法，常年诚恳地念观世音经。
English: Soon, due to a small defeat in the army, Dao Xiu was captured while escaping. He went through several places as a slave and was captured outside the region. There was no way to go back. When he was young, he believed in Buddhism and sincerely recited the Guanyin Sutra all year round.

古文：不觉安行，乃得还路，遂归本土。
现代文：每当入梦，总是于是他便高兴地施礼。不知不觉平安前行，就走上归路，回归本土。
English: Whenever he fell into a dream, he would always salute happily. Unconsciously, he would go forward safely and return to his home country.

古文：后精进弥笃。
现代文：以后他更精心读经，信奉更诚。
English: Later, he read the Bible more carefully and believed in it more sincerely.

古文：栾荀
现代文：栾荀
English: 

古文：晋栾荀，不知何许人也。
现代文：晋朝的栾荀，不知是哪里的人，少年信佛法。
English: In the reign of Emperor Jin, I don't know where it came from, but young people believed in Buddhism.

古文：俄见江中有一人，挺然孤立，腰与水齐。荀心知念经有感，便投水就之，体既浮涌，脚似履地，俄而天军遣船迎接败者，于是遂得济。
现代文：曾经做富平令，先前跟着庐循出征，正赶上有个小小的失利，船遭火而沉没，贼人也逼近，又正在江心，风浪惊人，栾荀吓得要死，可还诵念观世音经。忽然看见江中有一人，挺身屹立，腰和水齐。栾荀知道是念经有效，就投水奔去。投水后身体就浮上来，脚就象踩着地一样。一会儿天军派船救迎败者，于是栾荀便得救。
English: Once upon a time, he had been ordered by Fuping to go to war, and he had previously followed the dragonfly. He was just catching up with a small defeat. The ship was set on fire and sank. Thieves were also approaching. At the same time, he was in the middle of the river. The wind and waves were amazing, and the dragonfly was scared to death, but he could still recite the Sutra of Contemplation of the World. Suddenly, he saw a person in the river, standing up straight, with his waist level with the water. The dragonfly knew that the sutra was effective, so he threw water and ran. After throwing water, his body floated

古文：张崇
现代文：张崇
English: Zhang Chong

古文：晋张崇者，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：晋朝的张崇，是京兆杜陵人，年少信奉佛法。
English: Zhang Chong of the Jin Dynasty was from Jingzha Tulin, and he believed in Buddhism from a young age.

古文：年少奉法，太元中，苻坚既败，长安百姓千有余家，南走归晋，为镇戎所拘，谓为游寇。
现代文：太元年间，苻坚已败，长安有一千多家的百姓，南逃归晋，被镇戎所扣，称他们是游寇。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, Shujian had already been defeated, and more than a thousand people in Chang'an fled south to return to Jin. They were detained by the town troops, who called them wandering bandits.

古文：崇与同等五人，手足杻械置坑中，埋筑至腰，各相去二十步，明日将驰马射之。
现代文：张崇和他的五个同事，都被带上手铐、脚镣推到坑中，已埋到腰部，各自相距二十步远，准备第二天骑马射死他们。
English: Zhang Chong and his five colleagues, all handcuffed and shackled, were pushed into the pit. They were buried up to their waists, twenty paces apart, ready to be shot on horseback the next day.

古文：崇虑望穷尽，唯洁心念观世音。
现代文：张崇已经绝望，只净心念观世音经。
English: Zhang Chong was already in despair, and he only had a pure heart to meditate on the Tao Te Ching.

古文：夜中械忽自破，因得脱走，路经一寺，乃复称观世音名，至心礼拜。以一石置前，发誓愿云： 今欲过江东，诉辞晋帝，理此冤魂，救其妻息，心愿获果，此石当分为二。 
现代文：夜里刑械忽然自己脱落，因而得以脱逃。路过一寺，又称诵观世音的名，并诚心礼拜，用一块石头放在面前，发誓愿说： 现在想要过江东去，向晋帝倾诉，处理这个冤案，救他的妻子儿女，如心愿有结果，这块石头就应当分为两瓣。 
English: Passing by a temple, also known as the Chanting of Guanyin, and sincerely praying, he put a stone in front of him and vowed to say: Now I want to go across the East River, confide in Emperor Jin, deal with this unjust case, and save his wife and children. If I wish to have a result, this stone should be divided into two pieces.

古文：崇拜，石即破焉。
现代文：张崇拜谢。石头就破为二块。
English: Zhang worshiped Xie. The stone broke into two pieces.

古文：崇至京师，发白虎樽，具列冤状，帝乃加宥。
现代文：张崇到了京城，执虎樽全部诉说冤情，皇帝就宽恕了他。
English: When Zhang Chong arrived in Beijing, he told all his grievances to the emperor, and the emperor forgave him.

古文：已为人所略卖者，皆赎为编户。
现代文：那些已经被变卖的人，都赎回为他编了户。
English: Those who have already been sold have been redeemed and made a home for him.

古文：智生道人目所亲见其事者。
现代文：智生道人亲眼目睹了这件事。
English: Chisheng Taoist witnessed the incident with his own eyes.

古文：释开达
现代文：释开达
English: Sakyamuni Buddha

古文：晋沙门释开达，隆安二年，登陇采甘草，为羗所执。
现代文：晋朝有个和尚叫开达，隆安二年，登陇山去采甘草，被羗族所抓。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, there was a monk named Kaida. In the second year of Longan, he climbed Mount Lushan to collect licorice and was captured by the Yi people.

古文：时年大饥，羗胡相啖，乃置达栅中，将食之。
现代文：当时正是饥荒年，羗地人吃人，就抓开达放在栅栏中，将要吃他。
English: It was the year of famine, and the people of the ploughed land were eating people, so they caught the cow and put it in the stockade, intending to eat it.

古文：先在栅中十有余人，羗日夕烹菹，唯达尚存。
现代文：在栅栏中一共有十多个人，羗人每天晚上烹煮，只有开达还留着。
English: There are a total of more than ten people in the stockade, and the eunuchs cook every night. Only Kaida remains.

古文：自达被执，便潜诵观世音经，不懈于心。
现代文：自从开达被俘，便暗中诵读观世音经，从不懈怠。
English: Since Kaida was captured, he secretly recited the Avalokiteshvara Sutra and never slacked off.

古文：达初见虎噬栅，谓必见害。栅既穿不入，心疑其异，谓是观世音力，计诸羗未及，便即穿栅逃走，夜行昼伏，遂得免脱。
现代文：等到明天，应当被吃。那天早晨刚亮，忽然有只大虎，远远逼着一群羗人，奋怒吼叫，羗人各自都惊恐而逃。老虎就上前咬栅木，咬成小缺口，可以容下一人通过，不久虎慢慢离去，开达才看见老虎咬的栅栏时，认为一定是要吃自己，栅栏咬破了又不进去，心里感到十分惊异，认为是观世音经的神力。估计那些羗人还没回来，便穿过栅栏逃去。夜行白天躲藏，于是脱险。
English: Wait until tomorrow, it should be eaten. Just after dawn that morning, there was suddenly a big tiger, forcing a group of baboons far away, roaring with rage. The baboons all fled in fright. The tiger went forward to bite the fence, biting into a small gap to allow one person to pass. Soon the tiger slowly left. When Kaida saw the fence the tiger had bitten through, he thought he must be trying to eat himself. The fence was bitten through and would not go in. He felt very surprised and thought it was the power of Guanyin. He guessed that the baboons had not yet returned and fled through the fence. He hid during the day and escaped during the night

古文：竺法纯
现代文：竺法纯
English: 法純

古文：晋沙门竺法纯，山阴显义寺主也。
现代文：晋朝和尚竺法纯，是山阴显义寺的寺主。
English: Jin Dynasty monk Zou Fa Chun was the head priest of Shanyin Xianyi Temple.

古文：元兴中，起寺买材，路经湖道，材主是妇人，与同船俱行。
现代文：元兴年间，买木材筑寺，路过湖道。木材的主人是妇女，和他同一船走。
English: During the period of prosperity, he bought wood to build a temple, and passed through the lake. The owner of the wood was a woman, and he was in the same boat.

古文：既入湖，日暮暴风，波浪如山，船小水入，又与妇人俱行，命在瞬息，乃一心诵观世音经。
现代文：已经入湖，天色渐晚暴风突起，波浪如山，船小被水又溅进来，又和妇人一起走，性命就在瞬息之间，于是法纯一心诵读观世音经。
English: He had already entered the lake, the sky was getting darker, the storm was rising, the waves were like mountains, the boat was splashed by the water and came in, and he walked with the woman, his life was in the blink of an eye, so Fa Chun read the Guanyin Sutra with one heart.

古文：时既入夜，行旅已绝，俄有大船流至，纯即乘度之，而此小船应时沦没。
现代文：当时已经深夜，沿途已没有行旅之人了。忽然有一条大船到，法纯就乘上大船。而这个小船立刻就沉没了。
English: It was already late at night, and there were no travelers along the route. Suddenly, a large ship arrived, and Fa Chun boarded the large ship. The small boat sank immediately.

古文：大舟随波鼓荡，俄得达岸也。
现代文：大船随波逐浪任其飘荡不一会就到达了岸边。
English: The big ship drifted with the waves and soon reached the shore.

古文：释道泰
现代文：释道泰
English: Shigeru Doty

古文：晋沙门释道泰，常山衡唐精舍僧。
现代文：晋朝有个和尚叫释道泰，是常山衡唐精舍的和尚。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a monk named Xie Daotai, who was a monk of Changshan Heng Tang.

古文：义熙中，尝梦人云： 君命当终六七。 
现代文：义熙年中，曾梦见一个人说： 你命当六七年终。 
English: In my middle school years, I once had a dream in which a man said to me, "Your life should end in 1967."

古文：泰年至四十二，遇笃疾，虑必不济，悉以衣钵之资，厚为福施。又归诚念诵观世音，昼夜四日，勤心不替。
现代文：道泰年到四十二岁时，得了重病，他想到一定不会好了，所以就把衣钵等全部资财，作为很丰厚的福施舍给别人，回来虔诚一心念诵观世音经，四天四夜，勤心不止。
English: When Tao Tai was forty-two years old, he fell seriously ill. He thought he would never get better, so he gave away all his wealth, including his wardrobe, as a great blessing to others. When he returned, he devoted himself to reciting the Guanyin Sutra, for four days and four nights, with great diligence.

古文：时所坐床前垂帷，忽于帷下见人跨户而入，足趺金色，光明照屋。
现代文：当时他所坐的床前挂着垂幕，忽然在幕下看见一个人跨门而进，脚背金色，光明照亮屋内。
English: At that time, there was a curtain hanging in front of the bed he was sitting on, and suddenly, under the curtain, he saw a person step through the door, the soles of his feet were golden, and the light illuminated the room.

古文：泰乃搴帷遽视，奄然而灭。
现代文：道泰便牵开帷幕惶恐地看，忽然没有了。
English: Dotai pulled back the curtain to watch in dismay, and suddenly it was gone.

古文：惊欣交萃，因大流汗，胸体即轻，所患平差。
现代文：道泰惊喜交加，于是满身流汗，身体便感到轻松，所得的病也转好。
English: Dao Tai was surprised, so he was sweating all over, his body felt relaxed, and his illness got better.

古文：郭宣
现代文：郭宣
English: Guo Xuan

古文：晋义熙十一年，太原郭宣、蜀郡文处茂，先与梁州刺史杨收敬为友。
现代文：晋朝义熙十一年，太原的郭宣，蜀郡的文处茂，先与梁州刺史杨收敬为朋友。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jin Dynasty, Guo Xuan of Taiyuan and Wen Shizhu of Shu County first became friends with Yang Xiejing of Liangzhou.

古文：收敬有罪下狱，宣与处茂同被桎梏，念观世音。
现代文：杨收敬有罪下狱，郭宣和处茂同被关押戴上脚镣手铐，念观世音经。
English: Yang Jiejing was found guilty and sent to prison, while Guo Xuanhe and Shigetong were detained, handcuffed and shackled, and forced to recite the Avalokiteshvara Sutra.

古文：十日后，夜梦一菩萨慰谕之，告以大命无忧。
现代文：十天后，夜里梦见一个菩萨慰问他，并告诉他们生命无忧。
English: Ten days later, he dreamed of a bodhisattva consoling him and telling him that his life was safe.

古文：俄而锁械自脱，及晓还著，如是复解，二人遂发愿：若得免罪，各出钱十万上明西寺作功德。
现代文：不一会枷锁自己脱落，到天亮又给锁上，后来还是象那样脱落。于是二人发愿：如果能免除此罪，他们各出十万钱到明西寺作功德。
English: After a while, the shackles fell off, and at dawn, they were locked again, and then they fell off just like that. So the two men made a vow: if they could be absolved of this sin, they would each give one hundred thousand dollars to Mingsi Temple to make merit.

古文：少日俱免，宣依愿送钱向寺，处茂违誓不送。
现代文：不几天就被免了罪。郭宣就按照誓愿送钱给明西寺。处茂则违誓不送。
English: Within a few days he was acquitted. Guo Xuan sent money to Mingsi Temple in accordance with his oath. Zhenmao did not send it in violation of his oath.

古文：及卢循举兵，茂于香浦为流失所中，未死之间曰： 我有大罪。 
现代文：等到庐循举兵，处茂在香浦被流箭射中，未死之时说： 我有大罪 。
English: While waiting for Gongxun to raise an army, Zhengmao was shot by a stray arrow in Xiangpu. Before he died, he said, "I have committed a great sin."

古文：语讫而死。
现代文：说完就死去了。
English: After saying this, he died.

古文：吕竦
现代文：吕竦
English: Lv Ying

古文：晋吕竦字茂高，兖州人也。
现代文：晋朝的吕竦字茂高，是兖州人，住在始丰县。
English: Lv Ying Zi Maogao of the Jin Dynasty was a native of Zhangzhou and lived in Shifeng County.

古文：寓居始丰县，其南溪，流急岸峭，回曲如萦，又多大石，白日行者，尤怀危惧。
现代文：它南边的溪水，岸陡流急，回曲萦绕，又有许多大石头。白天走在这里，都恐惧万分。
English: The stream on the south side of it, the steep bank, the whirlpools, and many large stones. Walking here during the day is very scary.

古文：竦自说：其父尝行溪中，去家十余里，日向暮，大风雨，晦暝如漆，不复知东西，自分覆溺，唯归心观世音，且诵且念。
现代文：竦自己说，他的父亲曾在水中走，离家十多里路，一天傍晚，大风大雨，漆黑一片，辨别不出东西南北，觉得要淹死，就只一心念观世音经，边诵边念。
English: Zou himself said that his father had been walking in the water, more than ten miles away from home, one evening, a heavy wind and rain, pitch black, unable to distinguish between east and west, north and south, and felt that he was going to drown.

古文：须臾，有火光来岸，如人捉炬者，照见溪中了了，径得归家。
现代文：不一会，就有火光从岸上来，象人举着火炬一样，照得溪中很清楚，才得到回家。
English: In a little while, the glow of the fire came up from the shore, like a man holding a torch, illuminating the creek so clearly that he was able to get home.

古文：火常在前后，去船十余步。
现代文：火常在他的前后，离船十多步。
English: There were flames in front and behind him, more than ten paces from the boat.

古文：竦后与郗嘉宾周旋，郗所传说。
现代文：以后吕竦和郗嘉宾在一起共事，是郗所传说的。
English: After that, Lv Ying and Zou Jiabin worked together, which is the legend of Zou.

古文：徐荣
现代文：徐荣
English: Xu Rong

古文：晋有徐荣者，琅琊人也。
现代文：晋朝有个叫徐荣的是琅琊人。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Xu Rong.

古文：尝至东阳，还经定山，舟人不惯，误堕洄洑中，垂欲沉没，荣无复计，唯至心呼观世音名。
现代文：曾到东阳去回来，经过定山。行船上的人不熟练，误落入漩涡中，就要沉没，徐荣再也没有什么计出，只是诚心呼唤观世音的名字。
English: He went to Dongyang and came back, passing through Jingshan. The people on the boat were unskilled, and if they fell into the whirlpool by mistake, they would sink. Xu Rong did not calculate anything, but sincerely called the name of Guanyin.

古文：须臾间，如有数十人齐力引舡者，踊出洄洑中，沿江而下。
现代文：不一会，象有几十个人一齐用力拉船，跳出漩涡，顺江而下。
English: After a while, it was as if dozens of people were pulling the boat together, jumping out of the whirlpool and going down the river.

古文：日已暮，天大昏暗，风雨甚驶，不知所向，而涌浪转盛，荣诵经不辍，忽望见山头有火焰赫奕，回舟趋之，径得达岸，既至，即不复见。
现代文：天色已晚，天气非常昏暗，风雨更急，不知去向，而波浪更加汹涌。徐荣诵经不停，忽然看见山头有火焰显耀盛大，调回船头朝那个方向走，一直到达岸边，已经到岸，就再也见不到了。
English: It was late in the day, the weather was very dark, the wind and rain were more intense, I didn't know where to go, and the waves were more turbulent. Xu Rong chanted the sutra non-stop, suddenly saw a huge flame at the top of the mountain, turned back to the bow of the boat and walked in that direction until he reached the shore. Once he reached the shore, he would never see it again.

古文：明旦，问浦中人： 昨夜山上是何火？ 
现代文：第二天早晨，问浦中的人： 昨天夜里山上是什么火？ 
English: The next morning, the people of Urachu asked: What was that fire on the mountain last night?

古文：众愕然曰： 风雨如此，岂有火耶？ 
现代文：大家惊讶地说： 象这么大的风雨，怎么能有火呢？ 
English: Everyone was surprised and said, "How can there be fire in such a big storm?"

古文：乃知佛力冥祐矣。
现代文：才知道是佛力暗中庇祐。
English: Only then did I know that it was the Buddha's power that was secretly protecting me.

古文：荣后为会稽府督护，谢敷尝闻荣说。
现代文：徐荣以后做会稽府督护，谢敷曾听徐荣说。
English: After Xu Rong became the supervisor of the Audit Office, Xie Shiki once heard Xu Rong say.

古文：时与荣同船者沙门支道蕴，谨笃士也，亦具其事，为傅亮言之，与荣所说同。
现代文：当时和徐荣同船的人僧人支道蕴，是谨慎忠厚的人，也详知这些事，对傅亮说过，和与徐荣所说的一样。
English: At that time, Xu Rong's shipmates, the monks and followers of Taoism, were prudent and loyal people. They also knew these things in detail and said the same thing to Fu Liang as they had said to Xu Rong.

古文：刘度
现代文：刘度
English: Liu Du

古文：刘度，平原聊城人也。
现代文：刘度，是平原聊城人。
English: Liu Du is a resident of Pingyuan Liaocheng.

古文：乡里千余家，并奉大法，造立形像，供养僧尼。
现代文：乡里一千多家，都信奉大法，建造佛像，供养僧尼。
English: There are more than a thousand people in the village, all of whom believe in Dafa, build Buddha statues, and support monks and nuns.

古文：值虏主木末之时，此县常有逋逃。
现代文：正当虏主木末时，这个县常常有逃跑的人。
English: There are often people in this county who run away just as the main culprit is about to be caught.

古文：末大怒，欲尽灭一城，众皆凶惧，分必殄尽。
现代文：木末便大怒，想杀掉一城的人。大家都非常害怕，估计当被灭绝。
English: The woodcutter was very angry and wanted to kill everyone in the town. Everyone was very scared and thought they would be exterminated.

古文：度乃虔诚率众，归命观世音。
现代文：刘度便虔诚带领大家，向观世音求救。
English: Liu Du then piously led everyone to seek help from Guan Shiyin.

古文：顷之，末见物从空下，绕其屋柱，惊视，乃观世音经。
现代文：不一会，木末看见一个东西从空中落下，围绕他的屋前柱子转，惊讶地看，原来是观世音经。
English: After a while, Kinue saw something falling from the sky and spinning around the pillar in front of his house. To his surprise, it turned out to be the Avalokiteshvara Sutra.

古文：末大欢喜，因省刑戮，于是此城即得免害。
现代文：木末非常高兴，于是免去了刑戮，这座城里的人也都得以幸免。
English: The woodcutter was so happy that he was spared the torture, and everyone in the city was spared.

古文：南宫子敖
现代文：南宫子敖
English: Minami Miyazaki

古文：南宫子敖，始平人也。戍新平城，为狒狒虏儿长乐公所破，合城数千人皆被诛害。
现代文：南宫子敖是始平人，戍守新平城，被狒狒虏儿长乐公攻破，全城几千人都被杀害。
English: Nanmiya Zixuan was a member of the Shihping clan, who guarded Xinping City. He was defeated by the warlord Changle Gong, and several thousand people in the city were killed.

古文：子敖虽分必死，而犹至心念观世音。
现代文：子敖虽然想到必死无疑，但还是诚心念观世音经。
English: Although Zixuan thought that he would surely die, he still sincerely recited the Guan Yin Jing.

古文：既而次至子敖，群刃交下，或高或僻，持刀之人忽疲懈，四支不随，尔时长乐公亲自临刑，惊问之。
现代文：不久轮到子敖，大刀一齐落下，有高的也有低的，拿刀的人忽然感到疲惫不堪，四肢不能动弹。当时长乐公亲临刑场，惊讶地问。
English: Soon it was the turn of the henchmen, and all the swords, high and low, fell together. The one who held the sword suddenly felt exhausted and could not move his limbs. At that time, Changle Gong himself came to the execution site and asked in surprise.

古文：子敖聊尔答云： 能作马鞍。 
现代文：子敖姑且答道： 能作马鞍。 
English: Zixuan replied, "It can be used as a saddle."

古文：乃令原释。
现代文：于是释放了他。
English: So they let him go.

古文：子敖亦不知所以作此言时。
现代文：子敖也不知道回答这句话是干什么。
English: Zi Yan didn't know what to do in response to this.

古文：后遂得遁逸，乃造一观音小像，贮以香函，行则顶戴。
现代文：以后就逃跑了，于是他造了一个小观音像，用香匣子装着，出门就顶戴奉侍终不舍离。
English: After that, he ran away, so he made a small Guanyin statue, put it in a box of incense, and when he went out, he put it on his head and did not give it up.

古文：徐义
现代文：徐义
English: Xu Yi

古文：苻秦徐义，高陆人，为尚书，少奉佛法。
现代文：苻秦徐义是高陆人，做了尚书，从小奉佛法。
English: Gong Qin Xu Yi was a Gaolu person, he made Shangshu and practiced Buddhism from an early age.

古文：时兵革蜂起，贼获义，将加害，乃埋其两足，编发于树。
现代文：当时兵革蜂起，贼人抓住了徐义，将要加害于他，于是就埋住了他的两脚，把头发绑在树上。
English: At that time, there was a military uprising. Thieves caught Xu Yi and were about to harm him, so they buried his feet and tied his hair to a tree.

古文：至夜，义专念观世音，有顷，忽梦人谓之曰： 今事亟矣，何暇眠乎！ 
现代文：到了夜里，徐义便专心念观世音经，一会儿，忽然梦见一个人对他说： 现在事情紧急你还有闲心睡觉！ 
English: In the night, Xu Yi concentrated on reciting the Guanyin Sutra. For a while, he suddenly dreamed of a person saying to him: Now that things are urgent, you still have time to sleep!

古文：义便惊起，见防守者，并疲而寝，乃试自奋动，手发既解，足亦得脱，而遁百余步，隐草中，便闻追者交驰，秉炬无见者。
现代文：徐义便惊起，看防守的人都疲惫而入睡。于是就自动活动，把手和头发都解开了，脚也拔出来了，逃了一百多步，藏在草中，便听到追的人来来往往，拿着火把没有发现他。
English: Xu Yi was startled, and the people watching the defense were tired and fell asleep. So he automatically moved, untied his hands and hair, pulled out his feet, escaped more than a hundred steps, hid in the grass, heard the chasing people coming and going, and did not find him with a torch.

古文：迨明贼散，义归投邺寺，遂得免焉。毕览
现代文：等到天亮贼人走了，徐义才投奔邺寺去了，于是得以幸免。毕览
English: When the thieves left in the morning, Xu Yi went to Panchen Temple and was spared.

古文：苻秦毕览，东平人，少奉法，随慕容垂北征，没虏，单马逃窜。
现代文：苻秦时毕览是东平人。年少信奉佛法，跟着慕容垂北征，被俘，单马而逃窜。
English: At the time of the Qin Dynasty, Bi Yuan was a Dongping person. He believed in Buddhism at a young age, followed Murong to the Northern Expedition, was captured, and fled alone.

古文：虏骑追将及，览至心诵念观世音，既得免脱。
现代文：看敌人骑马将要追上他，毕览诚心诵念观世音经，就得以脱免。
English: Seeing the enemy on horseback about to overtake him, he earnestly recited the Avalokiteshvara Sutra and was able to escape.

古文：入山，迷惑失道，又专心持念。
现代文：进入山中，又迷了路，又专心念经。
English: He went into the mountains, lost his way again, and concentrated on studying the sutras.

古文：中夜见一道人，法服持锡，示以途径，安然至家。
现代文：则看见一个道人，穿着法衣拿着锡杖，给他指出去路，毕览便安全到达家中。
English: On the other hand, he saw a Taoist, wearing a cassock and holding a tin cane, who pointed out the way to him, and he arrived home safely.

古文：释法智
现代文：释法智
English: Interpretive wisdom

古文：沙门释法智，为白衣时，尝独行至大泽中。忽遇猛火，四方俱起，走路已绝，便至心礼诵观世音。俄而火过，一泽之草，无有遗茎者，唯法智所容身处不烧，始乃敬奉大法。
现代文：出家僧人法智，为平民时，曾经独自走在大泽中，忽然遇到猛火，四方烧起，走投无路，便诚心诵念观世音经，不一会火烧过了，一泽之草，没有一点保留的，只有法智所藏的地方一点也没烧着，于是他开始更加敬奉大法。
English: The ordained monk Fa Zhi, when he was a commoner, once walked alone in Osawa, suddenly encountered a fierce fire, burned in all directions, had no choice but to sincerely recite the Avalokiteshvara Sutra. After a while, the fire burned out, and there was nothing left of the grass in Osawa, only the place where Fa Zhi was hiding did not burn at all. So he began to worship Dafa more.

古文：后为姚兴将，从征索虏，军退失马，落在围里，乃隐沟边丛棘中，得蔽头，复念观世音，心甚勤至。
现代文：后来做了姚兴的将官。从征追赶敌人，退军时落马，落在包围中，于是他便隐藏在沟旁的荆棘里才遮住了头，又念观世音经，心更加忠诚。
English: Later, he became the general of Yao Xing. He chased the enemy from the enlistment, fell off his horse when he retreated, and fell into the siege, so he hid in the thorns next to the ditch before he covered his head. He also recited the Guanyin Sutra, and his heart was more loyal.

古文：隔沟人遥唤后军，指令杀之，而军过搜觅，辄无见者，遂得免。
现代文：隔沟人远远地喊后军。让他们杀死他，而后军过来搜索，都没有看见他，于是获救。
English: The ditchers called the rearguard from a distance. Let them kill him, and the rearguard came to search, did not see him, and was rescued.

古文：后径出家。
现代文：以后他便出家。
English: He later became a monk.

古文：孙道德
现代文：孙道德
English: Sun Daode

古文：宋孙道德，益州人也。
现代文：宋朝的孙道德，是益州人，信奉道教，任主管。
English: The Song Dynasty's Sun Daode, a native of Yizhou and a believer in Taoism, was in charge.

古文：奉道祭酒，年过五十，未有子息，居近精舍。
现代文：年龄已过五十岁，还没有子女，居在精舍附近。
English: He is over fifty years old, has no children, and lives near the monastery.

古文：景平中，沙门谓道德曰： 必愿有儿，当至心礼诵观世音经，此可冀也。 
现代文：景平年中，僧人对道德说： 你一定希望有儿子，就应当诚心礼念观世音经，这样才可以有希望。 
English: In the middle of the year of Jingping, the monk said to the moralist: You must hope to have a son, so you should sincerely worship and recite the Guanyin Sutra, so that you can have hope.

古文：德遂罢不事道，丹心投诚，归诵观世音。
现代文：道德就不去事道，而诚心诚意去念观世音经。
English: Morality does not go to the way of things, but sincerity and sincerity go to recite the Sutra of Contemplation of the World.

古文：少日之中，而有梦应，妇即有孕，产男。
现代文：几日之中，有梦应验，妇人即有了身孕，后生下一男。
English: Within a few days, the dream came true and the woman became pregnant, later giving birth to a son.

古文：张兴
现代文：张兴
English: Zhang Xing

古文：宋张兴，新兴人，颇信佛法，常从沙门僧融、昙翼时受八戒。
现代文：南朝宋时的张兴是新兴人，很信奉佛法，曾跟着僧人僧融、昙翼同时受八斋戒。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty, Zhang Xing was an up-and-comer. He was a great believer in Buddhism. He once fasted for eight days and eight nights along with the monks Zong Rong and Zou Ying.

古文：元嘉初，兴尝为劫贼所引，逃避。
现代文：元嘉年初，张兴尝被劫贼所牵连逃跑躲避。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Jia year, Zhang Xing was involved in a robbery and ran away.

古文：妻系狱，掠笞积日。
现代文：妻子被抓进监狱，几天来严刑拷打。
English: His wife was taken to prison and severely tortured for several days.

古文：时县失火，出囚路侧，会融、翼同行，偶经囚边，妻惊呼： 阇梨何不赐救？ 
现代文：当时县里失火，就把囚徒放在路边，正赶上僧融、昙翼路过，偶然经过囚徒处。张兴的妻子惊呼： 阇梨为何不救救我！ 
English: At that time, there was a fire in the county, so the prisoners were put on the side of the road. Just as they were about to catch up with Seng Rong and Xing Ying, they happened to pass by the prisoners' place. Zhang Xing's wife exclaimed: "Why didn't Ying Li save me!

古文：融曰： 贫道力弱，不能救如何？
现代文：融说： 我力量单弱，不能救你怎么办呢？
English: Rong said, "My strength is too weak, I can't save you. What should I do?

古文：唯宜劝念观世音，庶获免耳。 
现代文：只应勤念观世音经。大概能获免罢。 
English: You should only diligently recite the Avalokiteshvara Sutra. You will probably be exempted.

古文：妻便昼夜祈念，经十日许，夜梦一沙门以足蹑之曰： 咄咄，可起。 
现代文：他的妻子便昼夜念经祈祷，过了十天左右，夜里梦见一个僧人用脚踢她说： 喂！喂！可以起来了。 
English: His wife then prayed the sutras day and night. After about ten days, she dreamed at night that a monk kicked her and said, "Hey! Hey! You can get up now."

古文：妻即惊起，钳锁桎梏俱解，然闭户警防，无由得出，虑有觉者，乃却自械。
现代文：妻子惊起，钳枷锁都解开了，然而关着门又有防守，没有办法出去。怕有人觉察，于是自己卸下刑具。
English: The wife was startled, and the shackles were loosened, but the door was closed and guarded, and there was no way to get out. Afraid that someone would notice, she unloaded the torture device herself.

古文：又梦向者沙门曰： 户已开矣。 
现代文：又梦见先前的僧人说： 门已经开了。 
English: I also dreamt that the previous monk said, "The door has already opened."

古文：妻觉而驰出，守备俱寝，安步而逸。
现代文：他的妻子便醒来快跑，守备的人都睡了，她便顺当地逃出。
English: His wife woke up and ran. The guards were asleep, so she escaped.

古文：暗行数里，卒值一人，妻惧躄地，已而相讯，乃其夫也。
现代文：暗行几里，偶然碰到一个人，她惊怕地仆倒在地上，过了一会又互相问，才知道是她的丈夫。
English: After walking for several miles, she accidentally bumped into a man and fell to the ground in shock. After a while, they asked each other again, only to find out that it was her husband.

古文：相见悲喜，夜投僧翼，翼匿之，获免焉。
现代文：相见后悲喜交加，连夜投奔僧翼，翼把他们藏了起来，才获免了。
English: After seeing each other, he was overcome with grief and joy. He ran to the monk Tsubasa in the middle of the night, and Tsubasa hid them until he was released.

古文：昙无竭
现代文：昙无竭
English: inexhaustible

古文：宋元嘉初，有黄龙沙门昙无竭者，诵观世音经，净修苦行。
现代文：南朝刘宋元嘉年初。有个黄龙僧人昙无竭，诵读观世音经，净修苦行。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Southern Dynasty of Liu Song and Yuan Jia, there was a Yellow Dragon monk who was inexhaustible, chanting the Avalokiteshvara Sutra and practising austerities.

古文：与徒属二十五人，往寻佛国，备经艰险。
现代文：和他的徒弟们二十五人，去寻找佛国，经历了许多艰难险阻，终于到达了天竺国舍卫。
English: He and twenty-five of his disciples went in search of the Buddha's land, went through many hardships and obstacles, and finally arrived in the heavenly kingdom of Shewei.

古文：既达天竺舍卫，路逢山象一群，竭赍经诵念，称名 归命 。
现代文：在路上碰到一群山象，他抱着经诵念，呼唤救命。
English: On the way, he encountered a group of mountain elephants. He hugged them, chanted, and called for help.

古文：有狮子从林中出，象惊奔走，后有野牛一群，鸣吼而来，将欲加害。竭又如初归命，有大鹫飞来，牛便惊散，遂得免。
现代文：有一个狮子从树林中出来，大象惊慌逃走，后来有一群野牛，吼叫而来，将要加害于他们，无竭又象起初那样念经求救，又有大鹫飞来，野牛便惊散，才得以脱免。
English: A lion came out of the forest, an elephant ran away in panic, then a herd of bison came roaring towards them, ready to do them harm, and as inexhaustible as they had been at first, they called out for help, and then there was a great snipe, and the bison were startled into scattering before they could escape.

古文：车母
现代文：车母
English: Mother car

古文：车母者，遭宋庐陵王青泥之难，为虏所得。在贼营中。
现代文：车母，遭南朝宋时庐陵王青泥之难，被俘在贼营中。
English: The vehicle's mother was captured in a bandit camp during the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：其母先来奉佛，即然七灯于佛前，夜精心念观世音，愿子得脱。
现代文：他的母亲从来供佛，就在佛前点燃了七盏灯，整夜精心念观世音经，愿儿子能脱险。
English: His mother had always made offerings to the Buddha. She lit seven lamps in front of the Buddha and carefully recited the Avalokiteshvara Sutra all night, hoping that her son would be able to escape.

古文：如是经年，其子忽叛还，七日七夜独行，自南走，常值天阴，不知东西，遥见有七段火光，望火而走，似村欲投，终不可至。
现代文：象这样整一年，她的儿子忽然逃走，独自走了七天七夜，向南走，常赶上天阴，就不知道东西。远远看见有七段火光，望见火而跟着走，好象是村子想要去投宿，却始终不能到达。
English: In this way, for a whole year, her son suddenly ran away, walked alone for seven days and seven nights, went south, often caught the shade of the sky, and did not know anything. He saw seven lights in the distance, saw the fire and followed it, as if he wanted to go to the village to stay, but could not reach it.

古文：如是七夕，不觉到家，见其母犹在佛前伏地，又见七灯，因乃发悟。
现代文：象这样又经七个晚上不知不觉就到家了。看见他的母亲还在佛前跪在地上，又看见七盏灯，他才明白过来。
English: After seven more nights like this, he arrived home unnoticed. It was only when he saw his mother kneeling on the ground in front of the Buddha and saw the seven lamps that he came to understand.

古文：母子共谈，知是佛力，自后恳祷，专行慈悲。
现代文：母子共谈，知道是佛的力量，从此更加诚恳祷告，专门行善。
English: Mother and son talked together and knew that it was the power of Buddha. From then on, they prayed more earnestly and devoted themselves to doing good.

古文：释昙颖
现代文：释昙颖
English: Xie Liangying

古文：宋长干寺有释昙颖，会稽人，少出家，谨于戒行，诵经十余万言，止长干寺。
现代文：宋朝长干寺有个和尚昙颖，是会稽人，少年出家。谨守戒行，诵读经书十多万言，后到长干寺。
English: During the Song Dynasty, there was a monk at Changkang Temple who was a member of the board of supervisors. He was a young monk who had become a monk. He strictly observed the precepts, recited more than a hundred thousand sutras, and then went to Changkang Temple.

古文：善巧宣唱，天然独绝。
现代文：善于宣唱，天下独一无二。
English: He is good at singing and is unique in the world.

古文：颖常患癣疾，积治不除。
现代文：昙颖常年患癣病久治不愈。
English: Yu Ying suffered from rickets for many years, and it took a long time for her to recover.

古文：房内恒供养一观世音像，晨夕礼拜，求差此疾。
现代文：房内常常供奉一位观世音像，早晚礼拜，请求治好这个病。
English: The room is often dedicated to a Kannon, and morning and evening services are held to pray for a cure for the disease.

古文：异时，忽见一蛇，缘壁上屋。
现代文：不长时间，忽然看见一条蛇，沿着墙壁爬上屋顶。
English: Not long after, he suddenly saw a snake crawling along the wall and up onto the roof.

古文：须臾，有一鼠子，从屋坠地，涎液沐身，状如已死。
现代文：不一会，又有一个老鼠，从屋顶落地，涎液满身，象是已死了。
English: A moment later, another mouse fell from the roof, covered in pus, as if it were already dead.

古文：颖候以活，即取竹刮除涎液，又闻蛇所吞鼠，能疗疮疾，即取涎以傅癣上。所傅既遍，鼠亦还活。
现代文：昙颖等它活，就拿竹刮掉它身上的涎液，又听说蛇所吞吃的老鼠，能治疗疮病，就取涎液上到癣上，都上遍了，老鼠也就活了，两夜之间疮病都好了。
English: Liang Ying waited for it to be alive, then he took bamboo to scrape off the pus from its body. He also heard that the mice eaten by the snake could cure the sores, so he took the pus and rubbed it all over the cocoon. The mice were alive, and the sores were cured within two nights.

古文：信宿之间，疮疾顿尽，方悟蛇之与鼠，皆是祈请所致。
现代文：才明白蛇与鼠，都是自己祈祷请求的东西。因此被君王所器重，远近闻名，后寿终正寝。
English: Only then did he understand that both the snake and the rat were things he had prayed for. Therefore, they were treasured by kings and became famous far and wide, and eventually passed away.

古文：于是王所重，名播遐迩，后卒所在，年八十一。
现代文：享年八十一岁。
English: He was eighty-one years old.

古文：邢怀明
现代文：邢怀明
English: Wai Ming

古文：宋邢怀明，河间人，为大将军参军。尝随南郡太守朱循之北伐，同见陷没，伺候间隙，俱遁南归。
现代文：南朝宋时的邢怀明，是河间人，做了大将军的参军，曾随同南郡太守朱循之去北伐，一同陷入敌手。他们找个了时机，一起逃走南归。
English: At the time of the Southern Song Dynasty, Zou Huaming, a native of Kawama, became a general and joined the army. He had accompanied Zhu Xun, the governor of Nan County, to the Northern Expedition, and together they fell into the enemy's hands. They found an opportunity to escape together and return to the south.

古文：夜行昼伏，三日，犹惧追捕，乃遣人前觇虏候，数日不还。
现代文：夜里行走白天躲藏，三天还怕来追捕，于是就派人前去窥探虏候情况，几天不回。
English: Walking at night, hiding during the day, afraid to be chased for three days, he sent someone to spy on the situation of the captives, and did not return for several days.

古文：一夕，将雨阴暗，所遣人将晓忽至，乃惊曰： 向遥见火光甚明，故来投之，那得至而反暗。 
现代文：一天夜里，阴暗将要下雨。所派的人将要天亮时忽然回来了，惊讶地说： 先前远远地看见火光很明，所以就一直奔来，结果到了跟前火光反而暗了。 
English: One night, when it was dark and about to rain, the man who had been sent suddenly returned at dawn and said in surprise, "I saw a very bright fire in the distance, so I kept running, but when I got there, the fire was dark."

古文：循等惊愕。
现代文：朱循之等非常惊愕。
English: Zhu Xunzhi and others were very surprised.

古文：怀明先奉法，自出征，恒顶戴观世音经，诵读不废。
现代文：怀明先前信佛，自从出征，总是带着观世音经，诵读不停。
English: He had believed in Buddhism before, but since he went to the front, he always carried the Avalokiteshvara Sutra with him and recited it constantly.

古文：夕亦暗诵，咸疑是经神力，遂得脱免。
现代文：那天晚上也暗中诵读。都疑心是诵经的神力，于是能够走脱。
English: That night, he also secretly recited the sutra. They all suspected that it was the power of chanting, so they were able to escape.

古文：居于京师，忽有沙门诣怀明云： 贫道见此巷中及君家有血气，宜移避。 
现代文：他住在京城，忽然有个出家僧人对怀明说： 我看见这个巷子中及你家有血气，应当躲避。 
English: He lived in the capital, and suddenly an ordained monk said to him, "I see that there is blood in this alley and in your family, and you should avoid it."

古文：语毕去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：怀明追而目之，出门便不见，意甚恶之。
现代文：怀明追出看他，他出门便不见了，心里很讨厌。
English: I chased him out to see him, and when he went out, he was gone. I was disgusted.

古文：经二旬，邻人张景秀，伤父及杀妻，怀明以为血气之征，庶得无事。
现代文：过了二十天，邻居张景秀，伤害了他的父亲并杀死了他的妻子。怀明认为这正是血气证明，希望自己相安无事。
English: Twenty days later, a neighbor, Zhang Jingxiu, injured his father and killed his wife. Huaming thought that this was proof of blood and gas, and hoped that he would be safe.

古文：时与刘斌、刘敬文同在一巷，其年并以刘湛之党，被诛夷。
现代文：当时和刘斌、刘敬文同住在一个巷子里，那一年因为是刘湛的同党，一起被杀害。
English: At that time, he lived in an alley with Liu Bin and Liu Jingwen. That year, they were killed together because they were Liu Zhan's fellow party members.

古文：王球
现代文：王球
English: King's Ball

古文：宋王球字叔达，太原人，为涪陵太守。
现代文：南朝宋时的王球字叔达，是太原人，做涪陵太守。
English: In the Southern Song Dynasty, Wang Qiu Zi Shuda, a native of Taiyuan, was the governor of Fuling.

古文：以元嘉元年，于郡失守，系在刑狱，防锁坚固。
现代文：在元嘉元年，由于郡失守，被抓入狱，看守得很严。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, due to the county's loss of defense, he was arrested and imprisoned, and the guards were very strict.

古文：球先精进，用心尤至。
现代文：王球先前精心求进，用心更加忠诚。
English: Wang Qiu had previously diligently pursued advancement and was more loyal with his heart.

古文：狱中百余人，并多饥饿，球每食，皆分施之，日自持斋，至心念观世音。
现代文：狱中有一百多人，很多人挨饿，王球每当吃饭，都分别施舍给他们，每天坚持斋戒，诚心念观世音经。
English: There are more than a hundred people in the prison, many of whom are starving. Every time Wang Qiu eats, he gives alms to them separately, insists on fasting every day, and sincerely recites the Guan Yin Sutra.

古文：夜梦升高座，见一沙门，以一卷经与之，题名《光明按行品》。并诸菩萨名。
现代文：夜里梦见升上一个高座，看见一僧人，把一卷经书送给他。题名《光明按行品》，并且写着许多菩萨的名字。
English: At night, I dreamed of ascending to a high seat, saw a monk, and gave him a scroll of scriptures, entitled "The Light According to the Practice," and written with the names of many bodhisattvas.

古文：球得而披读，忘第一菩萨名，第二观音，第三大势至。
现代文：王球翻阅诵读，忘记了第一菩萨的名字，第二是观音，第三是大势至。
English: Wang Qiu flipped through the readings and forgot the names of the first Bodhisattva, the second was Guanyin, and the third was Dasheng Zhi.

古文：又见一车轮，沙门曰： 此五道门也。 
现代文：又看见一个车轮，僧人说： 这是五道门。 
English: Seeing another wheel, the monk said, "This is the fifth door."

古文：既觉，锁皆断脱。球心知神力，弥增专志，因自钉治其锁。
现代文：等醒后锁都断而脱落，球知道这是神力，更增加专心的志向，从而自己钉好原锁。
English: After waking up, the locks are broken and fall off. The ball knows that this is divine power, and it increases the aspiration of concentration, so that it can nail the original lock.

古文：经三日而被原宥。
现代文：第三天就被赦了。
English: He was pardoned on the third day.

