古文：十有八年春，王三月，日有食之。
现代文：十八年春季，周历三月，有日食。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, in March of the lunar calendar, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：夏，公追戎于济西。秋，有蜮。
现代文：夏季，庄公在济水的西边追逐戎人。秋季，有蜮虫。
English: In summer, Zhuanggong chases the eunuchs on the west side of Jishui. In autumn, there are ladybugs.

古文：冬十月。
现代文：冬季十月，无事。
English: Winter, October, nothing.

古文：十八年春，虢公、晋侯朝王，王飨醴，命之宥，皆赐玉五瑴，马三匹。
现代文：十八年春季，虢公、晋献公朝觐周惠王。周惠王用甜酒招待，又允许他们向自己敬酒。同时各赐给他们玉五对，马四匹。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, the Duke of Xing and the Duke of Jin made a pilgrimage to King Zhou Hui. King Zhou invited them with sweet wine and allowed them to make a toast to themselves. At the same time, they were each given five pairs of jade and four horses.

古文：非礼也。
现代文：这是不合于礼的。
English: But he added: "It's so rude.

古文：王命诸侯，名位不同，礼亦异数，不以礼假人。
现代文：周天子对诸侯有所策命，封爵地位不一样，礼仪的等级也不一样，不能把礼仪随便给人。
English: Zhou Tianzi had a plan for the princes, the knighthood status was different, the level of etiquette was different, and the etiquette could not be given to anyone.

古文：虢公、晋侯、郑伯使原庄公逆王后于陈。
现代文：虢公、晋献公、郑厉公派原庄公去陈国迎接王后。
English: Emperor Xizong, Emperor Jinxian and Emperor Zheng Li sent Emperor Yuanzhuang to Chen Province to welcome the queen.

古文：陈妫归于京师，实惠后。
现代文：陈妫嫁到京城，就是惠后。
English: Chen Yao married into the capital, that is, Hui Hou.

古文：夏，公追戎于济西。
现代文：夏季，庄公在济水的西边追逐戎人。
English: In the summer, Zhuang Gong chased the eunuchs in the west side of Jishui.

古文：不言其来，讳之也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载戎人来攻，这是由于避讳提起这件事。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record the attack of the soldiers, this is due to the taboo of mentioning this matter.

古文：秋，有蜮。为灾也。
现代文：秋季，有蜮虫，《春秋》所以记载，是由于造成了灾害。
English: In autumn, there are aphids, "Spring and Autumn" so recorded, is due to caused disasters.

古文：初，楚武王克权，使鬥缗尹之。以叛，围而杀之。
现代文：当初，楚武王攻克权国，派鬬缗做这里的长官，鬬缗据有权地而叛变楚国。
English: In the beginning, King Chuwu conquered the sovereign state and sent Yu to be the governor here. Yu then rebelled against the sovereign state of Chu.

古文：迁权于那处，使阎敖尹之。
现代文：楚国包围权地而杀掉了鬬缗，又把权地的百姓迁到那处，改派阎敖治理这个地方。
English: Chu encircled the place of power and killed Yao, and moved the people of the place of power to that place, reassigning Yao to govern the place.

古文：及文王即位，与巴人伐申而惊其师。
现代文：等到文王即位，和巴国人一起进攻申国，楚军使巴军受到惊恐。
English: When King Wen ascended the throne, he and the Pak people attacked Shen together. The Chu army terrified the Pak army.

古文：巴人叛楚而伐那处，取之，遂门于楚。
现代文：巴国人背叛楚国而进攻那处，加以占领，于是又攻打楚国都城的城门。
English: The Pakok people betrayed Chu and attacked that place, occupied it, and then attacked the gate of the capital city of Chu.

古文：阎敖游涌而逸。楚子杀之，其族为乱。
现代文：阎敖在涌水里游泳逃走，楚文王杀了阎敖，他的族人作乱。
English: Yan Xun swam away in the rushing water. King Chu Wen killed Yan Xun and his people rioted.

古文：冬，巴人因之以伐楚。
现代文：冬季，巴国人因此进攻楚国。
English: As a result, the Pakok people attacked Chu in the winter.

