古文：陈代曰： 不见诸侯，宜若小然；今一见之，大则以王，小则以霸。
现代文：陈代说： 您不愿意去见诸侯，似乎气量小了些；如果现在去见一下诸侯，从大的方面来说，就能凭借他们推行王政，从小的方面来说，就能凭借富国强兵而称霸于世。
English: Chen Dai said: You are not willing to meet with the princes, it seems that you have lost some of your stamina; if you meet with the princes now, from a large perspective, you will be able to use them to promote the royal government, and from a small perspective, you will be able to dominate the world with the help of a rich country and strong soldiers.

古文：且志曰： 枉尺而直寻 ，宜若可为也。 
现代文：何况《志》上说： 屈曲一尺却能伸直八尺 ，好像是值得去做的。 
English: What's more, "Zhi" said: "Bending one foot but being able to straighten eight feet seems to be worth doing."

古文：孟子曰： 昔齐景公田，招虞人以旌，不至，将杀之。
现代文：孟子说： 从前齐景公田猎时，拿饰有羽毛装饰的旌旗召唤管山林苑囿的小吏，小吏没有去，就想杀掉他。
English: Mencius said: Once upon a time, when Qi Jing Gong was hunting in the fields, he took a feather-decorated banner to summon the minor official in charge of the mountains, forests and gardens. When the minor official did not go, he wanted to kill him.

古文：志士不忘在沟壑，勇士不忘丧其元。
现代文：孔子知道后说： 有志之士不怕自己身处沟壑，勇士不会害怕抛头颅洒热血。 
English: After knowing this, Confucius said, "A person with aspiration is not afraid of being in a ravine, and a warrior is not afraid of throwing his head and spilling his blood.

古文：孔子奚取焉？
现代文：孔子会取哪一种呢？
English: Which one would Confucius choose?

古文：取非其招不往也，如不待其招而往，何哉？
现代文：取不召唤就不去的那种。如果不待其召唤就前往，那算什么呢？
English: The kind that doesn't go when it's not called. If you go when you're not called, what's that?

古文：且夫枉尺而直寻者，以利言也。
现代文：而且你所谓的屈曲一尺而所伸直的却是八尺，那只是从利益观点出发说的。
English: And what you call bending one foot and straightening it is eight feet, and that's just from a profit point of view.

古文：如以利，则枉寻直尺而利，亦可为与？
现代文：如果要说利，那么屈曲八尺而伸展一尺有利，难道也能做到吗？
English: If it is advantageous, then it is advantageous to bend eight feet and stretch one foot. Can it be done?

古文：昔者赵简子使王良与嬖奚乘，终日而不获一禽。
现代文：从前赵简子派王良为他宠幸的小臣奚驾车田猎，一整天也打不到一只鸟。
English: Once upon a time, Zhao Jianzi sent Wang Liang to drive a car to hunt for his favorite vassal, and he couldn't catch a single bird all day.

古文：嬖奚反命曰： 天下之贱工也。 
现代文：宠臣奚回去汇报说： 王良是天下最差的车手。 
English: Wang Liang is the worst driver in the world.

古文：或以告王良。良曰： 请复之。 
现代文：有人把这话告诉了王良，王良说： 请让我们再来一次吧。 
English: Someone told Wang Liang about this, and Wang Liang said, "Let's do it again, please."

古文：强而后可，一朝而获十禽。
现代文：奚勉强同意后又去，一早上就捕获到十只鸟。
English: The stork reluctantly agreed and went again, catching ten birds in the morning.

古文：嬖奚反命曰： 天下之良工也。 
现代文：宠臣奚回去汇报说： 王良是天下最优秀的驾车手。 
English: Wang Liang is the best driver in the world.

古文：简子曰： 我使掌与女乘。 
现代文：赵简子说： 我派他专门为你驾车。 
English: Zhao Jianzi said: I sent him specially to drive for you.

古文：谓王良。
现代文：便告诉了王良。
English: So he told Wang Liang.

古文：良不可，曰： 吾为之范我驰驱，终日不获一；为之诡遇，一朝而获十。
现代文：王良不同意，说： 我按照规矩赶车奔驰，终日捕不到一只鸟；不按照驾车的规矩赶车，一早晨却捕获十只鸟。
English: Wang Liang disagreed, saying, "I followed the rules of driving a car, but I couldn't catch a bird all day. I didn't follow the rules of driving a car, but I caught ten birds in the morning."

古文：诗云： 不失其驰，舍矢如破。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 驱车驰马极熟练，放箭有如椎破物。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "He is very skillful at driving a chariot and riding a horse, and at shooting arrows he is like a broken vertebra.

古文：我不贯与小人乘，请辞。 
现代文：我不习惯替小人驾车，请不要让我做这份差事。 
English: I'm not used to driving for villains, so please don't ask me to do this job.

古文：御者且羞与射者比。比而得禽兽，虽若丘陵，弗为也。
现代文：驾御战车的人尚且羞于与奚这样的射手合作，即便合作得到的鸟兽多得象山丘一样，也是不屑做的。
English: The driver of the chariot is still ashamed to cooperate with an archer like the dragonfly, even if the birds and beasts obtained through cooperation are as numerous as the hills, he disdains to do so.

古文：如枉道而从彼，何也？
现代文：如果改变自己的原则去顺从别人，那又算什么呢？
English: If you change your principles to conform to someone else's, so what?

古文：且子过矣，枉己者，未有能直人者也。 
现代文：并且你也弄错了，弯曲自己人生道路的人，是不能矫正别人的人生道路的。
English: And you are also mistaken, a person who bends his own life path cannot correct the life path of others.

