古文：起玄黓涒滩，尽阏逢阉茂五月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起玄黓涒滩，尽阏逢阉茂五月，凡二年有奇。
English: Xuanwu Beach, the most beautiful beach in Shimao in May, every two years there is a miracle.

古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝九
现代文：德宗神武圣文皇帝九
English: Emperor Dezong of the Ninth Dynasty

古文：贞元八年壬申，公元七九二年春，二月，壬寅，执梦冲，数其罪而斩之。
现代文：唐纪五十唐德宗贞元八年春季二月，壬寅，韦皋捉获苴梦冲，在数说他的罪行后，斩杀了他。
English: In the spring of February of the 50th year of the Tang Dynasty, the 8th year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, Wei Wei captured Xing Mengchong and beheaded him after counting his crimes.

古文：云南之路始通。
现代文：前往云南的道路开始畅通了。
English: The road to Yunnan is beginning to clear.

古文：三月，丁丑，山南东道节度使曹成王皋薨。
现代文：三月，丁丑，山南东道节度使曹成王李皋去世。
English: In March, Dingwuxi, the host festival of Shannan, caused the death of Cao Chengwang Li Yao.

古文：宣武节度使刘玄佐有威略，每李纳使至，玄佐厚结之，故常得其阴事，先为之备。纳惮之。
现代文：宣武节度使刘玄佐威严而有谋略，每当李纳的使者到来时，刘玄佐便深深地结纳他们，所以经常能够得知李纳的秘事，预告做好防备，李纳畏惧他。
English: The proclamation of martial law made Liu Xuanzuo dignified and strategic. Whenever Li Na's emissaries arrived, Liu Xuanzuo deeply accepted them, so he was often able to learn Li Na's secrets and warn him to be prepared. Li Na was afraid of him.

古文：其母虽贵，日织绢一匹，谓玄佐曰： 汝本寒微，天子富贵汝至此，必以死报之！ 
现代文：他的母亲虽地位尊贵，但每天都要织绢帛一匹。她对刘玄佐说： 你本来门第卑微，天子使你富裕尊贵到这般地步，你一定要不惜一死，报答天子。 
English: Although his mother held a high position, she had to weave a yakitori every day. She said to Liu Xuanzuo, "You are originally from a lowly family, but the Son of Heaven has made you rich and honorable to such an extent. You must not hesitate to die to repay the Son of Heaven.

古文：故玄佐始终不失臣节。
现代文：所以，刘玄佐自始至终不曾失去为臣的节操。
English: Therefore, Liu Xuanzu did not lose his discipline as a vassal from beginning to end.

古文：庚午，玄佐薨。
现代文：庚午刘玄佐去世。
English: In the afternoon, Liu Xuan passed away.

古文：山南东道节度判官李实知留后事，性刻薄，裁损军士衣食。
现代文：山南东道节度判官李实执掌留后事务，他生性苛酷，削减将士的给养。
English: Li Si, the judge of the Shannan Host Festival, was in charge of the post-retention affairs. He was harsh by nature and cut the supply of soldiers.

古文：鼓角将杨清潭帅众作乱。夜焚掠城中，独不犯曹王皋家。
现代文：掌管鼓角的将领扬清潭率领众人发动变乱，夜里在城中纵火抢劫，唯独不冒犯曹王李皋一家。
English: Yang Qingtan, the general in charge of the drum and bugle, led the crowd to start a riot, setting fires and robbing in the city at night, but he did not offend Cao Wang Lijuan and his family.

古文：实逾城走免。
现代文：李实翻越城墙逃走，得以不死。
English: Li Si climbed over the city wall to escape and was able to survive.

古文：明旦，都将徐诚缒城而入，号令禁遏，然后止。收清潭等六人斩之。
现代文：第二天早晨，都将徐诚用绳索缒入城中，发布命令，禁止变乱，此后变乱便停止了，徐诚收捕了杨清潭等六人，斩杀了他们。
English: The next morning, they all roped Xu Cheng into the city and issued an order to ban the riot, after which the riot stopped. Xu Cheng arrested Yang Qingtan and six others and killed them.

古文：实归京师，以为司农少卿。
现代文：李实回到京城，德宗任命他为司农少卿。
English: When Li Si returned to Beijing, Emperor Dezong appointed him as Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：实，元庆之玄孙也。
现代文：李实是李元庆的玄孙。
English: Li Si is the great-great-grandson of Li Yuanqing.

古文：丙子，以荆南节度使樊泽为山南东道节度使。
现代文：丙子，德宗任命荆南节度使樊泽为山南东道节度使。
English: B, Dezong appointed Jingnan Festival to make Heze the host festival in Shannan.

古文：初，窦参为度支转运使，班宏副之。
现代文：当初，窦参出任度支转运使，班宏担任他的副职。
English: At the beginning, Dou Zhen served as the transfer envoy, and Ban Hong served as his deputy.

古文：参许宏，俟一岁以使职归之。
现代文：窦参向班宏许诺，等到一年以后，便将度支转运使的正职交给他。
English: Dou San promised Ban Hong that after one year, he would give him the official post of the transfer agent.

古文：岁馀，参无归意，宏怒。
现代文：过了一年多时间，窦参还没有交出使职的意思，班宏大怒。
English: After more than a year of time, Dou Zhan has not yet handed over the meaning of the assignment, and Pan Hong is furious.

古文：司农少卿张滂，宏所荐也，参欲使滂分主江、淮盐铁，宏不可。
现代文：司农少卿张滂是由班宏荐举上来的，窦参打算让张滂分管江淮地区的盐铁事务，班宏不肯答应。
English: Zhang Qian, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, was recommended by Ban Hong. Dou Zhan intended to let Zhang Qian be in charge of the salt and iron affairs in the Jianghuai region, but Ban Hong refused to agree.

古文：滂知之，亦怨宏。
现代文：张滂听说此事，也怨恨班宏。
English: When Zhang Ye heard about this, he also resented Ban Hong.

古文：及参为上所疏，乃让度支使于宏，又不欲利权专归于宏，乃荐滂于上。
现代文：及至窦参被德宗疏远以后，他才将度支使让给班宏，但是他又不愿意让财政大权独自落到班宏手中，于是便向德宗推荐张滂。
English: It was not until after Dou Zhan had been alienated by Dezong that he relinquished the post of imperial envoy to Ban Hong. However, he did not want the financial power to fall into the hands of Ban Hong alone, so he recommended Zhang Ye to Dezong.

古文：以宏判度支，以滂为户部侍郎、盐铁转运使，仍隶于宏以悦之。
现代文：德宗任命张滂为户部侍郎、盐铁转运使，仍然隶属于班宏，以便取悦于他。
English: In order to please Banhong, Dezong appointed Zhang Ye as a household attendant and salt and iron transport envoy, still subordinate to him.

古文：窦参阴狡而愎，恃权而贪，每迁除，多与族子给事中申议之。
现代文：窦参阴险狡诈而又刚愎自用，凭借着手中的权力，贪图财利，每当任命官员时，他往往与担任给事中的族侄窦申计议其事。
English: Dou is cunning and cunning, but also self-serving, with the power in his hands, greedy for money. Whenever an official is appointed, he often discusses the matter with his nephew Dou Shen, who is in charge of the matter.

古文：申招权受赂，时人谓之 喜鹊 。
现代文：窦申借此招揽权事，收受贿赂，当时的人们把他叫做 喜鹊 。
English: Dou Shen took advantage of this to solicit power and accept bribes. At that time, people called him "Magpie."

古文：上颇闻之，谓参曰： 申必为卿累，宜出之以息物议。 参再三保其无他，申亦不悛。
现代文：德宗听到了一些风声，便对窦参说： 窦申肯定会连累你的，最好将他调出朝廷，也好平息众人的议论。 窦参反复担保窦申没做别的事情，窦申却依然不肯悔改。
English: When Dezong heard some rumors, he said to Dou Sheng: Dou Sheng will definitely implicate you, it is best to transfer him out of the imperial court, so as to quell everyone's discussion. Dou Sheng repeatedly guaranteed that Dou Sheng did not do anything else, but Dou Sheng still refused to repent.

古文：左金吾大将军虢王则之，巨之子也，与申善，左谏议大夫、知制诰吴通玄与陆贽不叶，窦申恐贽进用，阴与通玄、则之作谤书以倾贽。
现代文：左金吾大将军虢王李则之是李巨的儿子，与窦申交好。左谏议大夫、知制诰吴通玄与陆贽关系不睦，窦申唯恐陆贽被提拔任用，便暗中与吴通玄、李则之编造攻击陆贽的书函，排挤他。
English: Zuo Kingu's general, King Li Zechi, was the son of Li Jiu, and was on good terms with Dou Shen. Zuo Kingu's councilor and intellectual leader, Wu Tongxuan, had an uneasy relationship with Lu Xun. Dou Shen was afraid that Lu Xun would be promoted and appointed, so he secretly forged a letter with Wu Tongxuan and Li Zechi to attack Lu Xun and oust him.

古文：上皆察知其状。
现代文：德宗完全查清了他们的情况。
English: Dezong has fully ascertained their situation.

古文：夏，四月，丁亥，贬则之昭州司马，通玄泉州司马，申道州司马。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁亥，德宗将李则之贬为昭州司马，将吴通玄贬为泉州司马，将窦申贬为道州司马。
English: In the summer, in April, Dinghai and Dezong demoted Li Zecheng to Zhaozhou Sima, Wu Tongxuan to Quanzhou Sima, and Dou Shen to Doushou Sima.

古文：寻赐通玄死。
现代文：不久，德宗又让吴通玄自裁而死。
English: Soon after, Emperor Dezong let Wu Tongxuan die by his own hand.

古文：刘玄佐之丧，将佐匿之，称疾请代，上亦为之隐，遣使即军中问： 以陕虢观察使吴氵奏为代可乎？ 
现代文：刘玄佐去世后，将佐隐瞒实情，声称刘玄佐得了重病，请求派人替代。德宗也装作不知道，还派遣使者到军中询问 让陕虢观察使吴凑来替代刘玄佐的职务可以吗？ 
English: After Liu Xuan Cao's death, the general concealed the truth, claiming that Liu Xuan Cao had fallen seriously ill and requesting that someone be sent to replace him. Dezong also pretended not to know, and sent an envoy to the army to inquire, "Is it okay to have Shaanxi Province observe and have Wu Qian come to replace Liu Xuan Cao's position?"

古文：监军孟介、行军司马卢瑗皆以为便，然后除之。
现代文：监军孟介、行军司马卢瑗一致认为这是适宜的，此后德宗才任命了吴凑。
English: The inspector of troops, Meng Jie, and the marching secretary, Ma Lucheng, agreed that this was appropriate, after which Emperor Dezong appointed Wu Qiao.

古文：氵奏行至汜水，玄佐之柩将发，军中请备仪仗，瑗不许，又令留器用以俟新使。
现代文：吴凑来到汜水时，刘玄佐的灵柩正要出殡，军中将士请求为他备办仪仗，卢瑗不肯答应，还命令留着器物用具，等新任观察使到来时使用。
English: When Wu Pin came to Surabaya, Liu Xuan Cao's coffin was about to be buried, and the lieutenant general requested that a ceremonial battle be prepared for him. Lu Yao refused to agree, and also ordered to keep the utensils and equipment for use when the new observer arrived.

古文：将士怒。玄佐之婿及亲兵皆被甲，拥玄佐之子士宁释缞绖，登重榻，自为留后。
现代文：将士发怒，刘玄佐的女婿以及随身士兵都穿上铠甲，簇拥着刘玄佐的儿子刘士宁脱去丧服，登上主帅的座位，自命为留后。
English: The officers were enraged. Liu Xuanza's son-in-law and the soldiers with him all put on armor and surrounded Liu Xuanza's son, Liu Shining, who took off his mourning clothes and climbed onto the coach's seat, promising to stay behind.

古文：执城将曹金岸、浚仪令李迈，曰： 尔皆请吴凑者！ 
现代文：他们逮捕了守城将领曹金岸和浚仪县令李迈，对二人说： 你们都是主张迎接吴凑的人！ 
English: They arrested Cao Jinan, the commander of the city's garrison, and Li Mai, the governor of Dzhungyi County, and said to the two of them: "You are both advocates of welcoming Wu Qimong!"

古文：遂呙之。
现代文：于是将他们二人剐杀了。
English: He then beat them both to death.

古文：卢瑗逃免。
现代文：卢瑗逃脱，幸免于死。
English: Lu Yao escaped and survived.

古文：士宁以财赏将士，劫孟介以请于朝。
现代文：刘士宁用钱财奖赏将士，劫持着孟介，让他向朝廷请求任命。
English: Liu Shining rewarded the generals with money and kidnapped Meng Jie and made him request an appointment from the imperial court.

古文：上以问宰相，窦参曰： 今汴人指李纳以邀制命，不许，将合于纳。 
现代文：德宗询问宰相的意见，窦参说： 现在汴州人指望着李纳，才敢于请求任命，如果不答应，他们就要与李纳联合了。 
English: Dezong asked the opinion of the prime minister, Dou San said: Now the people of Zhangzhou are counting on Li Na before they dare to request an appointment. If they do not agree, they will be united with Li Na.

古文：庚寅，以士宁为宣武节度使。
现代文：庚寅，德宗任命刘士宁为宣武节度使。
English: Emperor Go-In and Emperor Dezong appointed Liu Shining as the envoy to the military parade.

古文：士宁疑宋州刺史崔良佐不附己，托言巡抚，至宋州，以都知兵马使刘逸准代之。
现代文：刘士宁怀疑宋州刺史翟良佐没有归附自己，便假托巡视的名义，来到宋州，让都知兵马使刘逸准替代了他。
English: Liu Shining suspected that Liu Shizhong, the governor of Songzhou, did not attach himself, so he came to Songzhou under the guise of inspection and asked Liu Yizhong, the military commander of Sichuan, to replace him.

古文：逸准，正臣之子也。
现代文：刘逸准是刘正臣的儿子。
English: Liu Yizhong is the son of Liu Zhengcheng.

古文：乙未，贬中书侍郎、同平章事窦参为郴州别驾，贬窦申锦州司户。以尚书左丞赵憬、兵部侍郎陆贽并为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：乙未，德宗将中书侍郎、同平章事窦参贬为郴州别驾，将窦申贬为锦州司户，让尚书左丞赵憬、兵部侍郎陆贽一并出任中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Emperor Dezong demoted the Chusho waiter and Tongping chapter clerk Dou Shen to the position of Jingzhou deputy, and demoted Dou Shen to the position of Jinzhou secretary, and made Shang Shuzo Zhao Jing and the Hyobu waiter Lu Wei jointly serve as the Chusho waiter and Tongping chapter clerk.

古文：憬，仁本之曾孙也。
现代文：赵憬是赵仁本的曾孙。
English: Zhao Jing is the great-grandson of Zhao Renben.

古文：张滂请盐铁旧簿于班宏，宏不与。
现代文：张滂请班宏交出原有的盐铁帐簿，班宏不肯给他。
English: Zhang Ye asked Ban Hong to hand over the original salt and iron account book, but Ban Hong refused to give it to him.

古文：滂与宏共择巡院官，莫有合者，阙官甚多。
现代文：张滂与班宏一起选任巡院官，两人的意见没有相合的时候，因而缺任的官员为数很多。
English: Zhang Qian and Ban Hong were elected as patrol officers together. When the opinions of the two did not coincide, a large number of officials were absent.

古文：滂言于上曰： 如此，职事必废，臣罪无所逃。 
现代文：张滂向德宗进言说： 像这个样子，职任以内的事必然要荒废了，我的罪责是无法逃脱的了。 
English: Zhang Ye made a suggestion to Dezong, saying, "In this way, the affairs within the scope of my duties will inevitably be wasted, and my culpability cannot be escaped.

古文：丙午，上命宏、滂分掌天下财赋，如大历故事。
现代文：丙午，德宗命令班宏与张滂分别掌管全国的财税，一如大历年间的先例。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Dezong ordered Banhong and Zhangye to take charge of the country's finance and taxation separately, as was the case in previous years.

古文：壬子，吐蕃寇灵州，陷水口支渠，败营田。
现代文：壬子，吐蕃侵犯灵州，毁去水口支流的渠道，破坏屯田。
English: Imzi and Tubo invaded Lingzhou, destroyed the channels of the Shuikou tributary, and destroyed the townships.

古文：诏河东、振武救之，遣神策六军二千戍定远、怀远城。吐蕃乃退。
现代文：德宗颁诏命令河东、振武前去援救，派遣神策六军共两千人戍守定远和怀远二城，于是吐蕃撤退了。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering Hedong and Zhenwu to go to the rescue, and dispatched a total of two thousand people from the six armies of the divine policy to defend the two cities of Dingyuan and Huaiyuan, so the Tuyi retreated.

古文：陆贽请令台省长官各举其属，著其名于诏书，异日考其殿最，并以升黜举者。
现代文：陆贽请求让中书、门下、尚书三省的长官各自推举本省的属官，将他们的名字登录到诏书上，以便日后按名单考核他们办事成绩的优劣，并且据此提升或贬黜他们的推举人。
English: Lu Yao requested that the governors of the three provinces of Zhongshu, Xunxu and Shangshu should each nominate their subordinate officials, and their names should be recorded in the imperial edict, so that in the future their performance could be evaluated according to the list, and their nominees could be promoted or demoted accordingly.

古文：五月，戊辰，诏行贽议。
现代文：五月，戊辰，德宗颁诏命令实施陆贽的建议。
English: In May, Emperor Dezong issued a decree to implement Lu Xun's suggestion.

古文：未几，或言于上曰： 诸司所举皆有情故，或受货赂，不得实才。 
现代文：没过多久，有人对德宗说： 各部门推举的属官都弄虚作假，有的人还收受贿赂，所以不能得到真有才干的人。 
English: It didn't take long before someone said to Dezong, "The subordinate officials elected by various departments all cheat and lie, and some even take bribes, so we can't get people with real talent.

古文：上密谕贽： 自今除改，卿宜自择，勿任诸司。 
现代文：德宗暗中晓示陆贽说： 今后任官改官，最好由你亲自选择，不要让各有关部门办理。 
English: Desong secretly told Lu Wei: In the future, it is best for you to choose the appointment and change of officials, and do not let the relevant departments handle it.

古文：贽上奏，其略曰： 国朝五品以上，制敕命之，盖宰相商议奏可者也。
现代文：于是，陆贽进上奏章，大略是说： 本朝对于五品以上的官员，是通过诏书来加以任命的，这便是经由宰相互相商酌计议，上奏圣上批准的任命方法。
English: As a result, Lu Hanjin wrote the following chapter, roughly saying: In this dynasty, officials above the fifth grade were appointed by imperial edict. This was the method of appointment approved by the emperor through mutual consultation and deliberation.

古文：六品以下则旨授，盖吏部铨材署职，诏旨画闻而不可否者也。
现代文：对于六品以下的官员的任命方法，则是通过圣上的旨意来授给官职，即经由吏部铨选人材，署任职务，圣上在诏旨上标上一个 闻 字，但不置可否。
English: As for the method of appointing officials below the rank of Roppon, they are given official positions through the will of the emperor, that is, through the selection of personnel by the personnel department and the appointment of positions. The emperor marked a notice on the imperial edict, but did not say whether or not.

古文：开元中，起居、遗、补、御史等官，犹并列于选曹。
现代文：在开元年间，起居郎、舍人、拾遗、补阙、御史等官职，还是由吏部选任上报的。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, the posts of kichijuro, shojin, tsukurei, shosei, and goshi were still selected and reported by the personnel department.

古文：其后幸臣专朝，舍佥议而重己权，废公举而行私惠，是使周行庶品，苛不出时宰之意，则莫致也。 
现代文：此后，宠臣专擅朝政，丢开众人的公议而扩大自己的权力，废弃公开的选举而推行私人的恩惠，使宰相奏任官员的办法遍及各级官员，如果不经过现任宰相的同意，就无法任官。 
English: Since then, the favorite has been exclusively in charge of the government, expanding his power without public discussion, abolishing open elections and promoting private favors, and making the prime minister an official at all levels. If he does not have the consent of the current prime minister, he cannot be appointed.

古文：又曰： 宣行以来，才举十数，议其资望，既不愧于班行，考其行能，又未闻于阙败。
现代文：他又说： 由三省长官各自推举属官的办法宣布实行以来，只推举了十几个人。评议他们的资历与声望，已是无愧于他们的班列位次，考查他们的品行与才能，又没有听说有缺失败坏的地方。
English: He also said: Since the implementation of the method of appointing subordinate officials by the governors of the three provinces was announced, only a dozen people have been elected. Their qualifications and reputation have been judged to be worthy of their class rank, their character and talents have been examined, and there has been no shortage of failures.

古文：而议者遽以腾口，上烦圣聪。
现代文：然而议论的人骤然横加批评，向上打搅陛下的视听。
English: However, the commentator suddenly made a criticism, upsetting His Majesty's audio-visual.

古文：道之难行，亦可知矣！
现代文：治道的难以实行，于此也可见一斑了。
English: The fact that it is difficult to enforce the rules of the road is also evident here.

古文：请使所言之人指陈其状，某人受贿，某举有情，付之有司，核其虚实。
现代文：请让进言的人指出并陈述具体情况，讲清楚哪个人接受了贿赂，哪个人推举时作弊，将这些人交付有关部门，核实所言是实在的，还是没有根据的。
English: Please let the person who made the statement point out and state the specific circumstances, make it clear which person accepted the bribe, which person cheated during the election, and turn these people over to the relevant departments to verify whether the statement is true or unfounded.

古文：谬举者必行其罚，诬善者亦反其辜。
现代文：对推举失误的人一定要实行惩罚，对诬告好人的人也要反过来追究他们的罪责。
English: Those who made mistakes in the election must be punished, and those who falsely accused good people must in turn be held accountable.

古文：何必贷其奸赃，不加辩诘，私其公议，不出主名，使无辜见疑，有罪获纵，枉直同贯，人何赖焉！
现代文：为什么一定要姑息作弊与贪赃行为而不肯给以分辩与追究呢！将公开的评议变成私下进行的活动，而不肯公布发言人的名字，使无罪的人遭受怀疑，使有罪的人得到纵容，无论亏理还是有理，全都一律对待，人们还有什么依靠呢！
English: Why should fraud and corruption be tolerated, but not debate and investigation? How can one rely on turning public deliberation into a private activity, refusing to publish the names of speakers, subjecting the innocent to suspicion and the guilty to indulgence, and treating everyone the same, regardless of whether they are guilty or not?

古文：又，宰相不过数人，岂能遍谙多士！
现代文：加之，宰相不过只有几个人，哪能普遍熟悉众多的士子！
English: In addition, there are only a few prime ministers, so how can they be familiar with a large number of scholars?

古文：若令悉命群官，理须展转询访，是则变公举为私荐，易明扬以暗投，情故必多，为弊益甚。
现代文：如果让宰相任命所有的官员，理应反复询问访求，但这样便将公开举用变成私下推荐，将察举贤良变成暗中投靠，弄虚作假的事情肯定很多，形成的流弊愈发严重。
English: If the prime minister were allowed to appoint all officials, it would be reasonable to repeatedly inquire about requests for visits, but in this way, public recommendation would turn into private recommendation, and inspection of the virtuous would turn into secret patronage. There would certainly be many cases of deception and fraud, and the resulting malpractice would become increasingly serious.

古文：所以承前命官，罕不涉谤。
现代文：所以，承续以前的办法任命官员，很少有不牵涉谤议的。
English: As a result, it is rare for an official to be appointed under the previous system without being involved in a libel suit.

古文：虽则秉钧不一，或自行情，亦由私访所亲，转为所卖。
现代文：虽然说这因为宰相把握标准不够一致，有时会自行作弊，但也由于私下访问亲近的人们，反而被他们捉弄了。
English: Although it is said that this is because the prime minister's grasp of standards is not consistent enough, sometimes he will cheat on his own, but also because of private visits to people close to him, he was teased by them.

古文：其弊非远，圣鉴明知。 
现代文：这一弊病并不是很久以前的事情，陛下圣明垂鉴，分明知道这些事情。 
English: This malady is not of long standing, and His Holiness is well aware of these matters.

古文：又曰： 今之宰相则往日台省长官，今之台省长官乃将来之宰相，但是职名暂异，固非行举顿殊。
现代文：他又说： 现在的宰相，就是过去的三省长官，现在的三省长官，便是将来的宰相，这不过是职务的名称暂时不同，本不是推举官员与任命官员在职权上有区别。
English: He also said: The current prime minister is the former governor of the three provinces, and the current governor of the three provinces is the future prime minister. This is just a temporary difference in the name of the post, and is not a difference in the powers between the elected officials and the appointed officials.

古文：岂有为长官之时则不能举一二属吏，居宰相之位则可择千百具僚。
现代文：担任三省长官的时候不能够举用一两个下属的官吏，到出任宰相以后便可选拔成千上百个官员，难道有这样的道理吗？
English: When he was the governor of three provinces, he could not appoint one or two subordinate officials, but after he became the prime minister, he could select hundreds of officials. Is there any reason for this?

古文：物议悠悠，其惑斯甚。
现代文：众人的议论飘忽不定，他们的迷惑以这一点最为严重。
English: This is the most serious reason for their perplexity, that the discourse of the crowd is erratic.

古文：盖尊者领其要，卑者任其详，是以人主择辅臣，辅臣择庶长，庶长择佐僚，将务得人，无易于此。
现代文：一般说来，尊贵者统领事务的纲要，卑下者负责细节的处理。所以，君主选任宰相，宰相选任各部门的长官，各部门的长官选任处于辅助地位的官吏，要想务求用人得当，便无法改变这种做法。
English: Generally speaking, the dignitaries are in charge of the outline of affairs, and the lowly are in charge of the details. Therefore, the monarch selects the prime minister, the prime minister selects the directors of various departments, and the directors of various departments select the officials in a supporting position. If you want to ensure the proper use of people, you can't change this practice.

古文：夫求才贵广，考课贵精。
现代文：大凡寻求人才贵在广博，考核官吏的成绩贵在专精。
English: When seeking talents, it is important to be broad-minded, and when evaluating officials, it is important to be specialized.

古文：往者则天欲收人心，进用不次，非但人得荐士，亦得自举其才。
现代文：过去武则天想收买人心，提拔官吏不拘等次，不但百姓可以推荐士子，还可以自己推举自己。
English: In the past, Wu Zetian wanted to win the hearts and minds of the people, and promoted officials regardless of their ranks. Not only could the people recommend officials, but they could also promote themselves.

古文：然而课责既严，进退皆速，是以当代谓知人之明，累朝赖多士之用。 
现代文：然而，那时对官吏的考核与督责非常严厉，官吏的升降都很迅速，所以当世认为武则天是有知人的明智的，连续几朝都仰仗她选拔出来的众多士子为朝廷效力。 
English: However, at that time, the evaluation and supervision of officials was very strict, and the promotion and demotion of officials were very rapid, so the contemporary world thought that Wu Zetian was wise to know people. For several consecutive dynasties, they relied on the many scholars she selected to serve the imperial court.

古文：又曰： 则天举用之法伤易而得人，陛下慎简之规太精而失士。 
现代文：他又说： 武则天推举任用人才方法的失误在于变动太快，但是能够得到人才。陛下慎重选择官吏的方法过于精细，反而会失去人才。 
English: He also said: The mistake of Wu Zetian's method of selecting and appointing talent is that the changes are too fast, but talent can be obtained. His Majesty's method of carefully selecting officials is too fine, but it will lose talent.

古文：上竟追前诏不行。
现代文：德宗终于还是追回了前不久颁发的诏书，不再实行。
English: Finally, Emperor Dezong retrieved the imperial edict issued not long before and no longer implemented it.

古文：癸酉，平卢节度使李纳薨。军中推其子师古知留后。
现代文：癸酉，平卢节度使李纳去世，军中将士推举他的儿子李师古执掌留后事务。
English: However, the Pinglu Festival caused the death of Li Na, and the lieutenant generals elected his son Li Shigu to take charge of the post-retirement affairs.

古文：六月，吐蕃千馀骑寇泾州，掠田军千馀人而去。
现代文：六月，吐蕃骑兵一千余人侵犯泾州，掳掠屯田军一千多人，便离去了。
English: In June, more than a thousand cavalrymen from Tubo invaded Zhangzhou, captured more than a thousand people from the Tuntian Army, and then left.

古文：岭南节度使奏： 近日海舶珍异，多就安南市易，欲遣判官就安南收市，乞命中使一人与俱。 
现代文：岭南节度使奏称： 近些时候，海上来的大船运载着珍奇的货物，往往开到安南买卖交易，我准备派遣判官去安南收买，请派中使一人与判官同去。 
English: Lingnan Festival envoy said: Recently, large ships coming from the sea are carrying rare goods and often go to Annan to buy and sell. I am going to send a judge to Annan to buy. Please send an envoy to go with the judge.

古文：上欲从之，陆贽上言，以为： 远国商贩，惟利是求，缓之斯来，扰之则去。
现代文：德宗打算准奏。陆贽进言认为： 远方各国经商贩卖，唯利是图，对他们宽和，他们就前来，对他们有所烦扰，他们就离去。
English: De Zong planned to play it straight. Lu Hao Jinyan thought: "Trading and selling in distant countries is only for profit. If you are kind to them, they will come. If you bother them, they will leave."

古文：广州素为众舶所凑，今忽改就安南，若非侵刻过深，则必招携失所，曾不内讼，更荡上心。
现代文：广州历来是各处船舶汇集的地方，现在忽然改道去安南，如果不是广州方面侵渔刻剥过于严重，那肯定就是他们招引远方各国商人的办法不对头，他们不曾自责，却还想动摇陛下的心志。
English: Guangzhou has always been a gathering place for ships from all over the world, but now they have suddenly changed their route to Annan. If it is not that Guangzhou's infringement of fishing rights is too serious, it must be that their method of attracting merchants from distant countries is wrong. They have never blamed themselves, but they still want to shake His Majesty's spirit.

古文：况岭南、安南，莫非王土，中使、外使，悉是王臣，岂必信岭南而绝安南，重中使以轻外使。
现代文：况且，岭南与安南，无不是陛下的国土，中使与外使无不是陛下的臣属，何必相信岭南而拒绝安南，重视中使而轻视外使呢！
English: Moreover, Lingnan and Annan are His Majesty's lands, and the Chinese and foreign envoys are His Majesty's subjects. Why should we believe Lingnan and reject Annan, or attach importance to the Chinese and despise the foreign envoys?

古文：所奏望寝不行。 
现代文：希望陛下将岭南的奏议废止了，不要实行。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will cancel the Lingnan Proclamation and not implement it.

古文：秋，七月，甲寅朔，户部尚书判度支班宏薨。
现代文：秋季七月，甲寅朔，户部尚书、判度支班宏去世。
English: In the autumn of July, Gao Yinshuo, Hube Shangshu, and Jandu Zhi Banhong passed away.

古文：陆贽请以前湖南观察使李巽权判度支，上许之。
现代文：陆贽奏请任命前湖南观察使李巽暂时兼管度支，德宗准许了这一建议。
English: Lu Yingxiao requested the appointment of the former Hunan Observer, Li Xuan, to temporarily take charge of the branch, and Dezong approved this suggestion.

古文：既而复欲用司农少卿裴延龄，贽上言，以为： 今之度支，准平万货，刻吝则生患，宽假则容奸。
现代文：不久，德宗又打算起用司农少卿裴延龄，陆贽进言认为： 如今度支使的职任，需要运输各种货物，平抑物价，如果刻薄吝啬，便会生出麻烦，如果宽容，便会姑息邪恶。
English: Not long after, Dezong also planned to appoint Pei Yanling, the Minor Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, and Lu Yingjin said that: Nowadays, the post of the Minister of Agriculture requires the transportation of various goods and the stabilization of prices. If you are mean and stingy, you will cause trouble. If you are tolerant, you will appease evil.

古文：延龄诞妄小人，用之交骇物听。
现代文：裴延龄是一个荒诞虚妄的小人，起用他会震骇人们的视听。
English: Pei Yanling is a preposterous and delusional villain, and his appointment will shock people.

古文：尸禄之责，固宜及于微臣。知人之明，亦恐伤于圣鉴。 
现代文：尸位素餐的罪责，固然应当有我这微末小臣的一份；若说到知人善任的明德，恐怕也会有损陛下圣明的裁鉴。 
English: Of course, I, a lowly vassal, should bear part of the blame for the corpse-free meal; if I speak of the virtue of knowing people well, I am afraid that it will also damage His Majesty's sacred and wise judgment.

古文：上不从。
现代文：德宗不肯听从。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：己未，以延龄判度支事。
现代文：己未，德宗让裴延龄兼管度支事务。
English: For the time being, Dezong let Pei Yanling take charge of the branch affairs.

古文：河南、北、江、淮、荆、襄、陈、许等四十馀州大水，溺死者二万馀人，陆贽请遣使赈抚。
现代文：河南、河北、江淮、荆襄、陈许等四十余州洪水泛滥，淹死了两万余人，陆贽请求派遣使者赈济抚慰。
English: Floods in more than forty provinces, including Henan, Hebei, Jianghuai, Jingxiang, and Chenxu, drowned more than twenty thousand people. Lu Yao requested that an envoy be sent to help and comfort them.

古文：上曰： 闻所损殊少，即议优恤，恐生奸欺。 
现代文：德宗说： 听说损失很少，如果议行丰厚的抚恤，恐怕会生出奸诈欺骗的事情来。 
English: Dezong said, "I've heard that the losses are very small. If the bank were to offer a generous pension, I'm afraid there would be a case of fraud.

古文：贽上奏，其略曰： 流俗之弊，多徇谄谀，揣所悦意则侈其言，度所恶闻则小其事，制备失所，恒病于斯。 
现代文：陆贽上奏，大略是说： 世俗的弊病，往往是曲从人意，阿谀奉承，揣摩到人主喜欢什么，便夸大其辞，猜度到人主讨厌听见什么，便缩小其事。朝廷所采取的措制与防备失去凭依，问题就经常出在这里。 
English: Lu Xun played on, roughly saying: The ills of the world are often the result of people's wishes and flattery. If you guess what people like, you will exaggerate their words, and if you guess what people hate to hear, you will narrow down the matter. The measures and precautions taken by the imperial court lose their basis, and the problem often arises here.

古文：又曰： 所费者财用，所收者人心，苛不失人，何忧乏用！ 
现代文：他又说： 赈济灾民，消耗的是资财，得到的是人心。如果不失去百姓的拥护，还用为缺少用度发愁吗！ 
English: He also said, "When providing aid to disaster victims, what is consumed is capital and wealth, but what is gained is people's hearts. If you don't lose the support of the people, should you still worry about the lack of resources?

古文：上许为遣使，而曰： 淮西贡赋既阙，不必遣使。 
现代文：德宗答应派遣使者，但又说： 既然淮西不向朝廷缴纳赋税，就不要派遣使者赈济他们了。 
English: Dezong agreed to send an envoy, but added: Since Huaxi does not pay taxes to the imperial court, do not send an envoy to help them.

古文：贽复上奏，以为： 陛下息师含垢，宥彼渠魁，惟兹下人，所宜矜恤。
现代文：陆贽再次上奏认为： 陛下停息战事，隐忍包容，宽宥了那些作乱者的首领，对于这些处于下层的人们，自当加以怜惜。
English: Lu Yao once again made an appeal, saying, "Your Majesty has halted the war, shown forbearance and tolerance, and pardoned the leaders of the rioters. You should feel pity for these people who are in the lower class."

古文：昔秦、晋仇敌，穆公犹救其饥，况帝王怀柔万邦，唯德与义，宁人负我，我无负人。 
现代文：过去在诸侯国中秦国和晋国成了仇敌，秦穆公仍然救济晋国的饥荒，况且帝王招抚万邦，只有实行仁德与信义，宁可让别人辜负我们，不能让我们辜负别人。 
English: In the past, among the vassal states, Qin and Jin became enemies. Qin Mu Gong still provided relief for the famine in Jin. Moreover, the emperor invited all nations. Only by practicing benevolence and righteousness, we would rather let others fail us than let us fail others.

古文：八月，遣中书舍人京兆奚陟等宣抚诸道水灾。
现代文：八月，德宗派遣中书舍人京兆人奚陟等人前往各道宣诏抚慰遭受水灾的人们。
English: In August, Emperor Dezong sent Zhongshushe people, Jingzhao people, and others to go to various provinces to announce and comfort people who suffered from floods.

古文：以前青州刺史李师古为平卢节度使。
现代文：德宗任命前任青州刺史李师古为平卢节度使。
English: Emperor Dezong appointed Li Shigu, the former Qingzhou scribe, as the envoy to Pinglu.

古文：韦皋攻吐蕃维州，获其大将论赞热。
现代文：韦皋攻打维州，俘虏了吐蕃大将论赞热。
English: Wei Zheng attacked Wizhou and captured the general Tu Zheng.

古文：陆贽上言，以边储不赡，由措置失当，蓄敛乖宜，其略曰： 所谓措置失当者，戍卒不隶于守臣，守臣不总于元帅。至有一城之将，一旅之兵，各降中使监临，皆承别诏委任。
现代文：陆贽进言认为，边疆的储备不充足，是由于处理不恰当，对粮食的储积和征收都不合时宜，他大略是说： 所说的处理不恰当，指的是戍边的士兵不由守边的将领管辖，守边的将领不由元帅统领，以至于有时对同一城中的将士，同一军中的官兵，朝廷都分别派遣中使监督，是按不同的诏旨委以职任。
English: Lu Yaojin said that the inadequacy of the frontier reserves was due to improper handling, and the storage and collection of grain was not timely. He said roughly: The improper handling refers to the soldiers on the border not being under the jurisdiction of the generals guarding the border, and the generals guarding the border not being commanded by the marshal, so that sometimes the soldiers in the same city, the officers and soldiers in the same army, and the imperial court are separately dispatched to supervise the envoys, and they are assigned to duties according to different orders.

古文：分镇亘千里之地，莫相率从。缘边列十万之师，不设谋主。
现代文：朝廷所划分的军镇绵亘在远届千里的土地上，无法相互统属；沿着边疆布置了十万军队，没有设置主谋的人物。
English: The military towns divided by the imperial court stretch across thousands of miles of land and cannot be subordinated to each other; 100,000 troops are arranged along the border, and there is no mastermind.

古文：每有寇至，方从中覆，比蒙征发救援，寇已获胜罢归。
现代文：每当有敌寇前来，也正好是自己内部倾轧瓦解之时，及至得到朝廷征调的军队前来救援时，敌寇已经取得胜利，罢兵而归了。
English: Whenever an enemy bandit came, it happened to be at the time of its own internal collapse, and when the army conscripted by the imperial court came to the rescue, the enemy bandit had already achieved victory and returned home.

古文：吐蕃之比中国，众寡不敌，工拙不侔，然而彼攻有馀，我守不足。
现代文：吐蕃与大唐相比，众多与寡少不相匹敌，工巧与拙笨不能对比。然而吐蕃发动进攻，还有余力，我军处于防守，仍然力量不足。
English: Compared with the Great Tang Dynasty, the numerous and the few are not comparable, and the skillful and the clumsy cannot be compared. However, when the Tubo launched an attack, there was still room for manoeuvre. Our army was on the defensive and still lacked strength.

古文：盖彼之号令由将，而我之节制在朝，彼之兵众合并，而我之部分离析故也。
现代文：其原因大概就在于他们发布命令是由将领掌管，我军的调度管束却由朝廷控制；他们的兵力合成一个整体，而我军的各部却是分散的。
English: This is probably due to the fact that they issue orders under the control of generals, while our army's dispatching control is controlled by the court; their forces are integrated into a whole, while our army's departments are scattered.

古文：所谓蓄敛乖宜者，陛下顷设就军、和籴之法以省运，制与人加倍之价以劝农，此令初行，人皆悦慕。
现代文：所说的对粮食的储积和征收都不合时宜，指的是前不久陛下规定由官府前往军屯处收购粮食以便节省运输的办法，命令付给人们加倍的粮食价钱，以示勉励农耕的措施。这一命令实行的初期，百姓们都是悦服而向往的。
English: What was said about the storage and collection of grain being out of time, referred to His Majesty's recent regulation that the government should go to the garrison to purchase grain in order to save on transportation, and the order to pay people double the price of grain as a measure to encourage farming. At the beginning of the implementation of this order, the people were pleased and yearning.

古文：而有司竞为苟且，专事纤啬，岁稔则不时敛藏，艰食则抑使收籴。
现代文：然而，有关部门争相得过且过地混日子，专门干琐屑悭吝的事情。年景丰收时，有关部门不肯将粮食按时征收并储存起来；五谷欠收时，他们却强行指使有关人员收购粮食。
English: However, the relevant departments scramble to make ends meet, and are especially concerned with petty and miserly matters. When the harvest is good, the relevant departments refuse to collect and store grain on time; when the grain harvest is poor, they forcibly instruct the relevant personnel to purchase grain.

古文：遂使豪家、贪吏，反操利权，贱取于人以俟公私之乏。
现代文：于是，使豪门富室、贪官污吏反而掌握了财利的权柄，用贱价向人们收购粮食，等到公家与私人缺粮时再卖出去。
English: As a result, wealthy families and corrupt officials seized the power of financial gain, buying grain from people at low prices and selling it when the public and private sectors were short of grain.

古文：又有势要、近亲、羁游之士，委贱籴于军城，取高价于京邑，又多支絺紵充直。
现代文：加之，有一些权势之家、亲近宠幸之臣、游食之人委托军镇低价收买粮食，再运往京城，高价出售。
English: In addition, some powerful families, close favorites, and wandering eaters commissioned military towns to buy grain at low prices, and then transported it to the capital to sell it at high prices.

古文：穷边寒不可衣，鬻无所售。
现代文：而且人们往往支付葛布麻布充当粮食的价值，致使荒远的边疆在严寒季节穿不上衣服，买不到布料。
English: Moreover, people often pay for the value of burlap as food, so that the desolate frontier cannot wear clothes in the cold season and cannot buy fabrics.

古文：上既无信于下，下亦以伪应之，度支物估转高，军城谷价转贵。
现代文：既然上面对下面不讲信用，下面也就以欺诈回报上面。度支规定的物价变得高了，军镇的谷价就变得贵了。
English: Since those at the top do not trust those at the bottom, those at the bottom return the favor by cheating those at the top. The price of grain stipulated in the budget has become high, and the price of grain in the military towns has become expensive.

古文：度支以苟售滞货为功利，军司以所得加价为羡馀。
现代文：度支通过随意售出滞销的货物获取利益，军镇从粮食的加价中得到额外的收入。
English: Doushi gains profits by selling unsold goods at will, and the military town gets additional income from the increase in the price of grain.

古文：虽高巡院，转成囊橐。至有空申簿帐，伪指囷仓，计其数则亿万有馀，考其实则百十不足。 
现代文：虽然设有巡院访查各地，实际上巡院反而成了藏污纳垢之所，以至于有人凭空申报帐目，虚指粮食储存，计算粮食数额虽然超过亿万，考核存粮的实况却不足十分之一。 
English: Although there are inspection stations set up to visit various regions, in fact, the inspection stations have become a place of filth and dirt, so that some people declare accounts on the basis of nothing, referring to grain storage. Although the amount of grain is calculated to be more than 100 million yuan, the actual assessment of grain storage is less than one-tenth.

古文：又曰： 旧制以关中用度之多，岁运东方租米，至有斗钱运斗米之言。
现代文：陆贽又说： 依据原有的制度，由于关中费用浩繁，每年都需要从东部地区运输租米，以至于有一斗钱运一斗米的说法。
English: Lu Wei also said: According to the original system, due to the high cost of customs clearance, it is necessary to transport rent rice from the eastern region every year, so that there is a saying that there is a bucket of money to transport a bucket of rice.

古文：习闻见而不达时宜者，则曰： 国之大事，不计费损，虽知劳烦，不可废也。 
现代文：对此，只晓得见闻之谈而不能通达当时需要的人便会说： 国家的大事，不应该计较损耗，虽然知道运粮劳苦烦剧，但是不可废止。 
English: In this regard, people who only know what they have seen and heard and can not get through to the needs of the time will say: the important thing of the country should not take into account the loss, although they know the hardship of grain transportation, but it can not be abolished.

古文：习近利而不防远患者，则曰： 每至秋成之时，但令畿内和籴，既易集事，又足劝农。 
现代文：只晓得眼前利益而不懂得预防长远忧患的人又会说： 每到秋天庄稼收获时，只让官府在京城周围和籴，这既容易把事情办好，又足以勉励农耕。 
English: Those who only know the immediate benefits and do not know how to prevent long-term troubles will also say: Every autumn, when the crops are harvested, just let the government be peaceful around the capital, which is both easy to do things well and enough to encourage farming.

古文：臣以两家之论，互有长短，将制国用，须权重轻。
现代文：我认为这两派的议论各有所长，各有所短。要想节制国家的用度，必须权衡轻重。
English: I think that the arguments of these two groups have their own strengths and weaknesses. If we want to control the use of the state, we must weigh them.

古文：食不足而财有馀，则弛于积财而务实仓廪；食有馀而财不足，则缓于积食而啬用货泉。
现代文：如果粮食不足而钱财有余，便应该延缓钱财积累，而务必使粮仓充盈起来；如果粮食有余而钱财不足，便应该推迟储备粮食，而节省使用货币。
English: If food is scarce and money is plentiful, the accumulation of money should be delayed, and the granary should be filled; if food is plentiful and money is scarce, the storage of grain should be delayed, and the use of money should be economized.

古文：近岁关辅屡丰，公储委积，足给数年；今夏江、淮水潦，米贵加倍，人多流庸。
现代文：近年以来，关中地区连年丰收，公家储备的粮食积聚起来，足够供应好几年。今年夏天，江淮地带雨水成灾，粮米贵了一倍，有许多人流亡他乡，沦为雇工。
English: In recent years, the Guanzhong area has had consecutive years of bumper harvests, and the grain stored by the public has accumulated, which is enough to supply for several years. This summer, the Jianghuai area was hit by heavy rains, and the price of grain and rice doubled. Many people fled their hometowns and became wage laborers.

古文：关辅以谷贱伤农，宜加价以籴而无钱；江、淮以谷贵人困，宜减价以粜而无米。
现代文：关中地区因谷物跌价，损害了农民的利益，应当提高粮价收购，但没有钱。江淮地区因谷物昂贵，百姓困窘，应当降低粮价出售，但没有米。
English: In Guanzhong District, due to the fall in grain prices, which has damaged the interests of farmers, grain prices should be raised for purchase, but there is no money. In Jianghuai District, due to the high cost of grain, the people are in distress, grain prices should be reduced for sale, but there is no rice.

古文：而又运彼所乏，益此所馀，斯所谓习见闻而不达时宜者也。
现代文：现在反而将江淮地区所缺少的粮食运送出来，用以增益粮食已经有余的关中地区，这就是我所说的只晓得见闻之谈而不能够通达当时需要的人。
English: Now, on the contrary, the grain that is lacking in the Jianghuai region is being transported to the Guanzhong region, which already has surplus grain. This is what I call hearsay and cannot reach the people who need it at that time.

古文：今江、淮斗米直百五十钱，运至东渭桥，僦直又约二百，米糙且陈，尤为京邑所贱。
现代文：如今江淮地区一斗米价值一百五十钱，运送到东渭桥，雇运的价钱每斗大约又要付二百钱，米碾磨不精，而且放陈了，所以在京城的价钱尤其低贱。
English: Nowadays, a barrel of rice in the Jianghuai region is worth 150 yuan, and it is transported to Dongluqiao. The price of hiring transportation is about 200 yuan per barrel. The rice is not finely milled, and it is stale, so the price in Beijing is particularly low.

古文：据市司月估，斗粜三十七钱。
现代文：根据市司公布的本月的价钱，一斗米的售价为三十七钱。
English: According to this month's prices released by the city government, a barrel of rice costs 37 yuan.

古文：耗其九而存其一，馁彼人而伤此农，制事若斯，可谓深失矣！
现代文：耗费了米价的十分之九而仅剩下十分之一，让江淮地区的百姓挨饿，却又损害关中地区农民的利益，象这样办事，可以说是严重的失误。
English: It can be said that it is a serious mistake to act in such a way as to consume nine-tenths of the rice price and have only one-tenth left, let the people in the Jianghuai region go hungry, but damage the interests of the farmers in the Guanzhong region.

古文：顷者每年自江、湖、淮、浙运米百一十万斛，至河阴留四十万斛，贮河阴仓，至陕州又留三十万斛，贮太原仓，馀四十万斛输东渭桥。
现代文：不久以前，每年从江、湖、淮、浙运米一百一十万斛，运到河阴，留下四十万斛，储存在河阴仓，运到陕州，再留下三十万斛，储存在太原仓，剩下的四十万斛输送到东渭桥。
English: Not long ago, 1.1 million bunches of rice were transported annually from Jiangsu, Hubei, Huai and Zhejiang to Hexin, leaving 400,000 bunches to be stored in the Hexin warehouse, transported to Shaanxi, leaving another 300,000 bunches to be stored in the Taiyuan warehouse, and the remaining 400,000 bunches were transported to Donglu Bridge.

古文：今河阴、太原仓见米犹有三百二十馀万斛，京兆诸县斗米不过直钱七十，请令来年江、淮止运三十万斛至河阴，河阴、陕州以次运至东渭桥，其江、淮所停运米八十万斛，委转运使每斗取八十钱于水灾州县粜之，以救贫乏，计得钱六十四万缗，减僦直六十九万缗。
现代文：现在，河阴仓和太原仓现存的米仍然有三百二十多万斛，京兆府所属各县每斗米不过值七十钱。请让江淮地区明年只运送三十万斛到河阴，再让河阴、陕州依次运送到东渭桥，将江淮地区停止运送的八十万斛米，委托转运使，每斗定价八十钱，运往发生水灾的州县出售，以便救助缺乏粮食的人，算来可得钱六十四万缗，减少雇运钱六十九万缗。
English: At present, there are still more than 3.2 million mu of rice stored in Heyin and Taiyuan warehouses, and each bucket of rice in the counties belonging to Beijing and Chaozhou is worth only 70 yuan. Please let the Jianghuai region transport only 300,000 mu to Heyin next year, and then let Heyin and Shaanxi Province transport to Dongluoqiao in turn, and stop transporting the 800,000 mu of rice in the Jianghuai region, entrust the transshipment agent, price 80 yuan per bucket, and sell it to the counties and prefectures where the floods occurred, so as to help people who lack food, which can be calculated to earn 640,000 mu, and reduce the

古文：请令户部先以二十万缗付京兆，令籴入以补渭桥仓之缺数，斗用百钱以利农人。
现代文：请让户部首先拿出钱二十万缗，交给京兆府，让京兆府收购粮米，以便弥补东渭桥仓缺运的数额，可以每斗定价一百钱，以使农民得到好处。
English: Please let the Household Department first take out the money of 200,000 baht and hand it over to the Beijing and Shanghai Municipal Government, and let the Beijing and Shanghai Municipal Government purchase grain and rice in order to make up for the shortage of the Dongluo bridge warehouse. The amount can be priced at 100 yuan per bucket, so that farmers can benefit.

古文：以一百二万六千缗付边镇，使籴十万人一年之粮，馀十万四千缗以充来年和籴之价。
现代文：请再拿出钱一百零二万六千缗，交给边疆军镇，让各军镇购进可供十万人吃一年的粮食。剩下的钱十万四千缗，可以用来充当明年和籴的本钱。
English: Please take out another 1,026,000 baht and give it to the border military towns, so that each military town can buy grain that can feed 100,000 people for a year. The remaining money, 104,000 baht, can be used as capital for the next year's war.

古文：其江、淮米钱、僦直并委转运使折市绫、绢、絁、绵，以输上都，偿先贷户部钱。 
现代文：对江淮地区的米钱和雇运钱，一并委托转运使经折算后购买绫、绢？绵，运往京城，偿还原先向户部所借的钱。 
English: For the rice money and hired transport money in the Jianghuai region, the forwarding agent was commissioned to purchase the cocoons and cocoons after conversion and transported them to Beijing to repay the money originally borrowed from the household department.

古文：九月，诏西北边贵籴以实仓储，边备浸充。
现代文：九月，德宗颁诏命令西北边疆官府以高价收购粮食，以便充实粮仓的储备。于是，边地的储备逐渐充足起来。
English: In September, Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering the government offices of the Northwest Frontier to purchase grain at high prices in order to replenish the reserves of grain silos. As a result, the reserves of the frontier gradually became sufficient.

古文：冬，十一月，壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，壬子朔，出现日食。
English: Winter, November, New Year's Eve, solar eclipse.

古文：吐蕃、云南日益相猜，每云南兵至境上，吐蕃辄亦发兵，声言相应，实为之备。
现代文：吐蕃与云南的互相猜疑与日俱增。每当云南的兵马开到边境上，吐蕃总是也派出兵马，声称前来接应，实际上是在防备云南。
English: The mutual suspicion between Tuvalu and Yunnan is increasing day by day. Whenever Yunnan's soldiers and horses come to the border, Tuvalu always sends soldiers and horses, claiming to come to meet them, but actually guarding Yunnan.

古文：辛酉，韦皋复遗云南王书，欲与共袭吐蕃，驱之云岭之外，悉平吐蕃城堡，独与云南筑大城于境上，置戍相保，永同一家。
现代文：辛酉，韦皋再次给云南王送去书信，希望与云南一起袭击吐蕃，将他们驱逐到云岭以外，全部摧毁吐蕃的城关堡垒，仅与云南在边境上修筑起一座大城，设置戍守人员自相保卫，永远像一家人般地和睦相处。
English: Xin Zheng and Wei Zheng again sent a letter to the king of Yunnan, hoping to attack Tubo together with Yunnan, expel them beyond the Yunnan Mountains, destroy all the fortresses of Tubo, build a big city only on the border with Yunnan, set up guards to protect each other, and always live in harmony like a family.

古文：右庶子妆公辅久不迁官，诣陆贽求迁，贽密语之曰： 闻窦相屡奏拟，上不允，有怒公之言。 
现代文：右庶子姜公辅长期没有升官，便到陆贽处请求提升。陆贽暗中告诉他说： 听说窦相屡次上奏准备提升你，皇上不肯允许，而且说了恼怒你的话。 
English: His son-in-law Jiang Gongfu, who had not been promoted for a long time, went to Lu Xun to ask for a promotion. Lu Xun told him in secret: I heard that Dou Xiang had repeatedly prepared to promote you, but the emperor did not want to allow it, and said something that annoyed you.

古文：公辅惧，请为道士。
现代文：姜公辅害怕，请求去做道士。
English: Jiang Gongfu was afraid and asked to become a Taoist.

古文：上问其故，公辅不敢泄贽语，以闻参言为对。
现代文：德宗询问其中的原故，姜公辅不敢泄露陆贽说的话，便回答说这是听窦参说的。
English: Dezong asked the reason for this, Jiang Gongfu did not dare to divulge what Lu Xi said, and replied that this was what Dou Sang said.

古文：上怒参归怨于君。己巳，贬公辅为吉州别驾，又遣中使责参。
现代文：皇帝恼怒窦参把怨恨推给君主，己巳，将姜公辅贬为吉州别驾，还派遣中使去责备窦参。
English: The emperor, irritated by Dou Zhan's resentment towards the monarch, demoted Jiang Gongfu to the status of a stranger in Jizhou and sent an envoy to rebuke Dou Zhan.

古文：庚午，山南西道节度使严震奏败吐蕃于芳州及黑水堡。
现代文：庚午，山南西道节度使严震上奏说，他们在芳州与黑水堡打败吐蕃。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Shannan Xi Dao Festival made Yan Zhen report that they defeated Tubo in Fangzhou and Heishui Fort.

古文：初，李纳以棣州蛤虫朵有盐利，城而据之。又戍德州之南三汊城，以通田绪之路。
现代文：当初，李纳因棣州的蛤有盐产之利，便在那里筑城据守，还戍守德州南面的三汊城，以便打通与田绪联系的道路。
English: At first, Li Na, because of the advantage of salt production in Ganzhou, built a castle there and guarded it. He also guarded Sanluo Castle in the south of Dezhou in order to open a road to connect with Tianxu.

古文：及李师古袭位，王武俊以其年少，轻之，是月，引兵屯德、棣，将取蛤虫朵及三汊城。师古遣赵镐将兵拒之。
现代文：及到李师古承袭节度使职位以后，王武俊因李师古年纪还轻，便轻视他。就在这一月，王武俊领兵在德州与棣州驻扎，准备攻取蛤与三汊城，李师古派遣赵镐领兵抵御他。
English: And after Li Shigu inherited the post of commander, Wang Wujun despised him because Li Shigu was still young. Just this month, Wang Wujun led the troops stationed in Texas and Zhangzhou to prepare to capture Zhang and Samye City, and Li Shigu sent Zhao Wei to lead the troops to resist him.

古文：上遣中使谕止之，武俊乃还。
现代文：德宗派遣中使劝告王武俊罢手，于是王武俊领兵而回。
English: When Emperor Dezong sent an envoy to advise Wang Wujun to stop fighting, Wang Wujun led his troops back.

古文：初，刘怦薨，刘济在莫州，其母弟澭在父侧，以父命召济而以军府授之。
现代文：当初，刘怦去世时，刘济正在莫州，他的同母弟刘正在父亲身边，便以父亲的名义召回刘济，将节度使的军府交给了他。
English: At the time of Liu Zhe's death, Liu Jie was in Mozhou, and his younger brother Liu Jie was at his father's side. He recalled Liu Jie in the name of his father and handed over the military headquarters of the Chinese envoy.

古文：济以澭为瀛州刺史，许它日代己。
现代文：刘济让刘出任瀛州刺史，向他许下将来由他代替自己的诺言。
English: Liu Jie appointed Liu as the governor of Zhangzhou, and promised him that he would replace him in the future.

古文：既而济用其子为副大使，澭怨之，擅通表朝廷，遣兵千人防秋。
现代文：不久，刘济起用自己的儿子为副大使，刘怨恨刘济，便擅自向朝廷上表，派兵一千人参加防御吐蕃。
English: Soon after, Liu Jizhi appointed his son as vice-ambassador. Liu Jizhi resented Liu Jizhi and sent a thousand soldiers to participate in the defense of Tubo without authorization.

古文：济怒，发兵击澭，破之。
现代文：刘济大怒，派兵进击刘，并打败了他。
English: Enraged, Liu Ji sent troops to attack Liu and defeated him.

古文：左神策大将军柏良器，募才勇之士以易贩鬻者，监军窦文场恶之。
现代文：左神策大将军柏良器，招募既有才干、又很勇敢的人们更换军中的买卖人，监军窦文场憎恶他。
English: Zuo Sheng made General Bai Liangqi recruit both talented and very brave people to replace the merchants in the army. The supervisor Dou Wenfang hated him.

古文：会良器妻族饮醉，寓宿宫舍。
现代文：恰巧柏良器妻子的族人喝醉了酒，曾在宫中值宿的房舍中过夜。
English: It just so happened that a member of his wife's family got drunk and spent the night in a room in the palace.

古文：十二月，丙戌，良器坐左迁右领军。
现代文：十二月，丙戌，柏良器获罪，贬为右领军。
English: In December, he and Bai Liangqi were found guilty and demoted to right-wing leaders.

古文：自是宦官始专军政。
现代文：自此，宦官开始专擅军中大政。
English: From then on, eunuchs began to specialize in military and political affairs.

古文：贞元九年癸酉，公元七九三年
现代文：贞元九年春季正月，癸卯，开始征收茶税。
English: In the first month of the spring of the ninth year of the Zhengyuan, the tea tax began to be levied.

古文：春，正月，癸卯，初税茶。凡州、县产茶及茶山外要路，皆估其直，什税一，从盐铁使张滂之请也。
现代文：凡是生产茶叶的州、县以及通往茶山的重要道路，都要估算茶叶的价值，收取十分之一的茶税，这是听从盐铁使张滂的建议才实行的。
English: All tea-producing prefectures and counties, as well as major roads leading to tea mountains, are required to estimate the value of tea and collect one-tenth of the tea tax. This was only implemented after listening to the advice of Salt and Iron Minister Zhang Qi.

古文：滂奏： 去岁水灾减税，用度不足，请税茶以足之。
现代文：张滂上奏： 去年因发生水灾而减少税收，国家的费用不够，请征收茶税来补足税收的缺额。
English: Zhang Ye's speech: Last year, due to floods, taxes were reduced. The state's expenses are insufficient. Please levy a tea tax to make up for the shortfall in taxes.

古文：自明年以往，税茶之钱，令所在别贮，俟有水旱，以代民田税。 
现代文：从明年以后，对征收茶税得到钱，可以让征收茶税所在地另行储存，等遇到水旱灾害时，用此钱代替百姓的田税。 
English: From next year, the money obtained from the tea tax can be stored separately in the place where the tea tax is levied. In the event of a flood or drought, this money can be used to replace the people's field tax.

古文：自是岁收茶税钱四十万缗，未尝以救水旱也。
现代文：自此以后，朝廷每年征收茶税得钱四十万缗，但不曾用来救济水旱灾害。
English: Since then, the imperial court has collected 400,000 baht of tea tax every year, but it has not been used to relieve floods and droughts.

古文：滂又奏： 奸人销钱为铜器以求赢，请悉禁铜器。铜山听人开采，无得私卖。
现代文：张滂又上奏说： 邪恶的人将钱熔化，铸成铜器，借以求利。请禁止制造一切铜器，任凭人们开采产铜的矿山，但不能私自出卖。 
English: Zhang Ye also wrote: Evil people melt money and cast it into copperware for profit. Please ban the manufacture of all copperware. Let people mine copper, but they cannot sell it privately.

古文：二月，甲寅，以义武留后张升云为节度使。
现代文：二月，甲寅，德宗任命义武留后张升云为节度使。
English: In February, Koin and Dezong appointed Zhang Shengyun as the festival envoy after Yoshitake stayed.

古文：初，盐州既陷，塞外无复保障。吐蕃常阻绝灵武，侵扰鄜坊。
现代文：当初，盐州陷落以后，边疆地区不再有防守的屏障，吐蕃经常截断灵武的通路，侵害搅扰州、坊州。
English: At first, after the fall of Yanzhou, there was no longer a defensive barrier in the frontier areas. Tubo often cut off the passage of Lingwu and encroached on Zhouzhu and Fangzhou.

古文：辛酉，诏发兵三万五千人城盐州，又诏泾原、山南、剑南各发兵深入吐蕃以分其势，城之二旬而毕。
现代文：辛酉，德宗颁诏派兵三万五千人修筑盐州城，还颁诏命令泾原、山南、剑南各自派兵深入吐蕃地区，以便分散吐蕃的势力。
English: At Xin'an, Dezong issued an edict to send thirty-five thousand soldiers to build Yanzhou City, and also issued an edict to send soldiers from Xuan Yuan, Shannan, and Jian Nan into the Tuyun region, in order to disperse the Tuyun forces.

古文：命盐州节度使杜彦光戍之，朔方都虞候杨朝晟戍木波堡，由是灵、武银、夏、河西获安。
现代文：盐州城经二十天的修筑便告竣了，朝廷命令盐州节度使杜彦光前往戍守，命令朔方都虞候杨朝晟戍守木波堡。从此以后，灵州、夏州、河西一带获得安宁。
English: After twenty days of construction, the construction of Yanzhou City was completed. The imperial court ordered the Yanzhou Festival to send Du Yanguang to defend the city, and ordered the Shuo Fangdu Guo to wait for Yang Zhaohui to defend Mubo Castle. Since then, Lingshou, Xiazhou and Hexi have been peaceful.

古文：上使人谕陆贽，以 要重之事，勿对赵憬陈论，当密封手疏以闻。 
现代文：德宗让人告诉陆贽，说是 对于机要而重大的事情，不要当着赵憬的面陈述议论，应当将亲手所写的奏疏密封后上报朕闻知。 
English: Dezong had someone tell Lu Yao that it was said that for important and important matters, do not make statements and discussions in front of Zhao Jing, and that the handwritten transcript should be sealed and reported to me.

古文：又 苗粲以父晋卿往年摄政，尝有不臣之言，诸子皆与古帝王同名，今不欲明行斥逐，兄弟亦各除外官，勿使近屯兵之地。 
现代文：又说： 苗粲因他的父亲苗晋卿当年代理朝政时，曾经有过不合臣礼的言论，几个儿子都与古代帝王的名字相同，现在不准备公开驱逐他，对他的兄弟也分别授给外地的官职，但不能让他们接近驻扎军队的地方。 
English: He also said: Miao Wei, because his father, Miao Jinqing, had once made remarks that were not in line with court etiquette when he was in charge of the government, several sons have the same name as the ancient emperor, and now he is not ready to publicly expel him. His brothers have also been given official positions in foreign countries, but they cannot be allowed to approach the place where the army is stationed.

古文：又 卿清慎太过，诸道馈遗，一皆拒绝，恐事情不通，如鞭靴之类，受亦无伤。 
现代文：又说： 你清廉谨慎得太过分了，对于各道赠送的物品，一概拒不接受，恐怕在事情的情理上是讲不通的。比如马鞭、长靴一类的东西，接受了也无伤事体。 
English: He also said, "You are too honest and prudent. You refuse to accept any gifts from anyone. I'm afraid it doesn't make sense in terms of the circumstances of the matter. For example, it doesn't hurt to accept things such as horsewhips and boots.

古文：贽上奏，其略曰： 昨臣所奏，惟赵憬得闻，陛下已至劳神，委曲防护。
现代文：陆贽进上奏章，大略是说： 昨天我上奏的事情，只有赵憬知道，陛下已经极为劳心费神，辗转曲折地提防回护。
English: Lu Wei entered the opening chapter, roughly saying: Only Zhao Jing knows what I played yesterday. His Majesty has worked extremely hard, twisting and turning to guard against retreat.

古文：是于心膂之内，尚有形迹之拘，迹同事殊，鲜克以济。
现代文：这表明陛下在亲近信任的大臣中间，行为举止还有种种拘束。然而，外面表现出来的迹象相同，而内里包含的事实不同，很少能够把事情办好。
English: This shows that among the ministers who are close to and trusted by His Majesty, there are still various restraints on their behavior. However, the signs on the outside are the same, but the facts on the inside are different, and they are rarely able to do things well.

古文：恐爽无私之德，且伤不吝之明。 
现代文：恐怕会违背毫无私心的德行，而且损害不惜改过的明智。 
English: I'm afraid it would violate the virtue of selflessness, and damage the wisdom of not hesitating to change.

古文：又曰： 爵人必于朝，刑人必于市，惟恐众之不睹，事之不彰。
现代文：他又说： 一定要在朝廷上给人以爵赏，一定要在闹市中处人以死刑，这是惟恐大家看不见这些事情，事情办理得不够显明。
English: He also said: It is necessary to give people knighthoods at court, and it is necessary to sentence people to death in the middle of the city. This is for fear that people will not see these things, and that things will not be handled clearly enough.

古文：君上行之无愧心，兆庶听之无疑议，受赏安之无怍色，当刑居之无怨言，此圣王所以宣明典章，与天下公共者也。
现代文：君主问心无愧地实行赏罚，百姓毫无疑义地听任处治，接受奖赏的人毫无愧色地安心受赏，应当受刑的人毫无怨言地接受惩处，这是圣明的君主发扬光大法令制度，并与百姓公开共同遵行的结果啊。
English: The monarch, with a clear conscience, administers rewards and punishments, and the people unquestioningly submit to his rulings. Those who receive rewards are rewarded with peace of mind, and those who should be punished are punished without complaint. This is the result of the enlightened monarch developing a splendid legal system and openly abiding by it together with the people.

古文：凡是谮诉之事，多非信实之言，利于中伤，惧于公辩。
现代文：凡是谗言诽谤的事情，多数不是实在可信的言论，利于阴谋陷害而害怕公开论辩。
English: Most of the things that are slanderous and defamatory are not really credible statements, which are conducive to conspiracy and framing and are afraid of public debate.

古文：或云岁月已久，不可究寻；或云事体有妨，须为隐忍；或云恶迹未露，宜假它事为名；或云但弃其人，何必明言责辱。
现代文：一旦进行公开论辩，有的说已经过了很长时间，难以追究下去；有的说妨碍事情的体统，需要克制忍耐；有的说不良的行迹还没有暴露出来，最好以其他事情为借口；有的说只要抛弃他本人就行了，为什么一定要明确表示责备与侮辱呢？
English: Once the public debate has begun, some say that a long time has passed and it is difficult to pursue the matter; some say that it is a hindrance to the integrity of the matter and requires restraint and patience; some say that the bad conduct has not yet been exposed, it is best to use other things as an excuse; some say that it is enough to abandon him, so why do we have to clearly express blame and insult?

古文：词皆近于情理，意实苑于矫诬，伤善售奸，莫斯为甚！
现代文：这些措词都与情理接近，而其中实在包藏着假托名义、诬陷别人的意图，伤害善良，散布邪恶，没有比这些说法更为严重的了！
English: These words are close to the truth, but they are actually disguised as pretexts, with the intention of framing others, harming the good, and spreading evil. There is nothing more serious than these words!

古文：若晋卿父子实有大罪，则当公议典宪；若被诬枉，岂令阴受播迁。
现代文：倘若苗晋卿父子确实有大罪恶，那就应当公开按照法律议处；如果他们遭到不实之辞的冤屈，怎么能够让他们暗中遭受流亡迁徙？
English: If Miao Jinqing and his son are indeed guilty of serious crimes, then they should be dealt with openly in accordance with the law; if they have been wronged by untrue words, how can they secretly suffer exile and migration?

古文：夫听讼辨谗，必求情辨迹，情见迹著，辞服理穷，然后加刑罚焉，是以下无冤人，上无谬听。 
现代文：一般说来，听取诉讼，分辨谗言，必须寻求实情，辨别形迹。实情显现，形迹昭著，无话可说而无理可辩，这时再施加刑罚。由此下面才没有遭受冤屈的人，上面才没有错听人言的过失。 
English: Generally speaking, when hearing a lawsuit and distinguishing between criticisms, it is necessary to seek the truth and distinguish the signs. When the truth is revealed and the signs are obvious, there is nothing to say and there is no reason to argue, and then the punishment is imposed. Therefore, there is no wronged person below, and there is no fault of mishearing above.

古文：又曰： 监临受贿，盈尺有刑，至于士吏之微，尚当严禁，矧居风化之首，反可通行！
现代文：他又说： 监督有关部门的长官收受贿赂，只要所得财物折为布帛以后满了一尺，便以刑律相加。下至卑微的士民属吏，尚且该当严格禁止行贿，何况宰相是风俗教化的倡导者，怎么反而能够放过他们受贿的行为呢！
English: He also said: "Supervising the relevant department heads to accept bribes, as long as the property received is folded into cloth, it will be added to the criminal law. It should be strictly prohibited to pay bribes, even if it is down to the lowly civil servant. Moreover, the prime minister is an advocate of moral education, how can he let them get away with bribery?

古文：贿道一开，展转滋甚，鞭靴不已，必及金玉。
现代文：贿赂的途径一经打通，反复实行，就会益加严重，赠送马鞭和长靴没有止息，必然发展到赠送金玉。
English: Once bribery has been established and repeatedly practiced, it will become more and more serious. The gift of horse whips and boots will not stop, and will inevitably develop into the gift of gold.

古文：目见可欲，何能自窒于心！
现代文：眼睛看见愿意得到的东西，怎么能够在心中自行打消得到它的念头呢！
English: How can the eye, seeing what it would like to obtain, on its own dispel in the mind the idea of obtaining it?

古文：已与交私，何能中绝其意！
现代文：已经跟赠物人结交了私情，怎么能够中途拒绝他的请求呢！
English: Having already established a personal relationship with the donor, how could he refuse his request halfway through!

古文：是以涓流不绝，溪壑成灾矣。 
现代文：所以，如果不断绝行贿的涓涓细流，就要填满溪涧沟壑而泛滥成灾了！ 
English: Therefore, if the trickle of bribery continues, it will fill the stream and become a flood!

古文：又曰： 若有所受，有所却，则遇却者疑乎见拒而不通矣；若俱辞不受，则咸知不受者乃其常理，复何嫌阻之有乎！ 
现代文：他又说： 假如对赠送的物品有的接受，有的推却，赠品被推却了的人便会怀疑自己遭受拒绝而办事难以顺利。如果一概推辞而不接受，人们便都知道不接受赠品才是通常的道理，又怎么会生出疑虑来呢！ 
English: He also said: If there is some acceptance and some rejection of the gift, the person who is rejected will suspect that he has been rejected and it will be difficult to do well. If he rejects and does not accept, people know that not accepting gifts is the usual reason, how can doubts arise?

古文：初，窦参恶左司郎中李巽，出为常州刺史。
现代文：当初，窦参嫌恶左司郎中李巽，将他斥逐为常州刺史。
English: At first, Dou Sheng disliked the left-hand sergeant, Li Yao, and banished him to Changzhou.

古文：及参贬郴州，巽为湖南观察使。
现代文：及至窦参被贬为郴州别驾时，李巽正担任湖南观察使。
English: When Douzheng was relegated to the status of a provincial capital, Li Ying was serving as the Hunan observation envoy.

古文：汴州节度使刘士宁遗参绢五十匹，巽奏参交结籓镇。
现代文：汴州节度使刘士宁赠给窦参绢帛五十匹，李巽申奏窦参与藩镇交往。
English: The Bozhou Festival made Liu Shining give Dou Shengkun fifty horses, and Li Yuxin played Dou Shengkun to participate in the exchanges between the provinces and towns.

古文：上大怒，欲杀参，陆贽以为参罪不至死，上乃止，既而复遣中使谓贽曰： 参交结中外，其意难测，社稷事重，卿速进文书处分。 
现代文：德宗非常气愤，打算杀掉窦参，陆贽认为窦参的罪过不至于处死，德宗才没有处死窦参。不久，德宗又派遣中使对陆贽说： 窦参与朝廷内外官员交往，他的意图难以测度，这关系到国家存亡，事情重大，你快奏进一份处治他的公文。 
English: Dezong was very angry and planned to kill Dou Zhan. Lu Xuan thought that Dou Zhan's crime was not punishable by death, so Dezong did not execute Dou Zhan. Soon after, Dezong also sent an envoy to Lu Xuan saying: Dou is involved in the interaction of officials inside and outside the imperial court, his intention is difficult to measure. This is related to the survival of the country, the matter is important, you should quickly submit a document to deal with him.

古文：贽上言： 参朝廷大臣，诛之不可无名。
现代文：陆贽进言说： 窦参是朝廷大臣，要诛杀他不能没有名义。
English: Lu Yaojin said: Dou Zhan is a minister of the imperial court, and he cannot be killed without a name.

古文：昔刘晏之死，罪不明白，至今众议为之愤邑，叛臣得以为辞。
现代文：过去，刘晏被处死时，罪状不够清楚，直到今天，大家还在议论，为他愤懑不平，而背叛朝廷的臣属却在其中找到借口。
English: In the past, when Liu Yao was executed, the charges were not clear enough, and to this day, people are still talking about it, and they are angry with him, but the subjects who betrayed the imperial court found an excuse in it.

古文：参贪纵之罪，天下共知；至于潜怀异图，事迹暧昧。
现代文：窦参贪婪放纵，这是天下人都知道的，至于说他是否暗中包藏别的图谋，事情的迹象还模糊不清。
English: Dou Zhen is greedy and indulgent, which is known to the whole world. As for whether he secretly conceals other plans, the signs of the matter are still vague.

古文：若不推鞫，遽加重辟，骇动不细。
现代文：如果不进行审讯，骤然间便将他治以重罪，对舆论的惊动不算太小。
English: If the trial does not take place, he will suddenly be sentenced to a felony, which is not a small shock to public opinion.

古文：窦参于臣无分，陛下所知，岂欲营救其人，盖惜典刑不滥。 
现代文：窦参和我没有情分，这是陛下所了解的。这并不是我打算营救他这个人，而是顾惜朝廷的常规，不宜越轨而行。 
English: Dou Zhen and I have no love affair, which His Majesty understands. It is not my intention to rescue him as a person, but to take care of the routine of the imperial court, and it is not appropriate to go off track.

古文：三月，更贬参驩州司马，男女皆配流。
现代文：三月，德宗又将窦参贬为州司马，家中男女人口一概被发配到边远地方。
English: In March, Dezong also demoted Dou Zhan to the rank of prefectural Sima, and all the men and women in the family were sent to outlying areas.

古文：上又命理其亲党，贽奏： 罪有首从，法有重轻，参既蒙宥，亲党亦应末减。
现代文：德宗又命令处治与窦参亲近的同党，陆贽上奏说： 犯罪有主犯与胁从的区分，刑法有重惩与轻处的不同，既然窦参蒙受宽宥，与他亲近的同党也应该从轻论罪。
English: Dezong also ordered the punishment of Dou Sang's close associates, and Lu Yao reported: Crimes have a distinction between principal offender and coercion, criminal law has a difference between heavy punishment and light punishment. Since Dou Sang was pardoned, his close associates should also be treated lightly.

古文：况参得罪之初，私党并已连坐，人心久定，请更不问。 
现代文：况且窦参刚刚被判罪时，他私结的党羽已经一并连带受罚，现在人心久已安定下来，请不要再追究下去。 
English: Moreover, when Dou Sang was just convicted, his cronies had already been punished together. Now, people's hearts have settled down for a long time. Please do not investigate further.

古文：从之。
现代文：德宗听从了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：上又欲籍其家赀，贽曰： 在法，反逆者尽没其财，赃污者止征所犯。皆须结正施刑，然后收籍。
现代文：德宗又打算没收他全家的资财入官，陆贽说： 在刑法上明文规定，对于反叛忤逆的人，没收全部财产入官，对于盗窃贪污的人，只惩戒犯法者本人，而且都必须经过结案判定，才能施加刑罚，此后才能没收家产。
English: Dezong also intends to confiscate his entire family's assets and wealth to enter the government, Lu Wei said: In the criminal law, it is clearly stipulated that for those who rebel and rebel, confiscate all property to enter the government, for those who steal and embezzle, only discipline the lawbreaker himself, and must be determined by closing the case before imposing punishment, and then confiscate the family property.

古文：今罪法未详，陛下已存惠贷，若簿录其家，恐以财伤义。 
现代文：如今对窦参没有详细地依法判罪，陛下对他已经存心加惠，予以宽恕，如果现在又要登记他的家产，恐怕会因财物而损害道义。 
English: Today, Dou Zhen has not been convicted in detail according to law. His Majesty has already granted him favors and forgiveness. If he now wants to register his family property, I am afraid that it will damage morality due to property.

古文：时宦官左右恨参尤深，谤毁不已。
现代文：当时，宦官周围的人怀恨窦参尤其深切，对窦参的诽谤仍然没有止息。
English: At that time, the people around the eunuch held a particularly deep grudge against Dou Zhen, and the slander against Dou Zhen still did not stop.

古文：参未至驩州，竟赐死于路。窦申杖杀，货财、奴婢悉传送京师。
现代文：窦参没有到达州，德宗终于在半路上赐他自裁而死，窦申服杖刑而死，他们的财物和奴婢全部由驿站送往京城。
English: Dou San did not reach the state, and finally, half-way through the journey, Dezong gave him a self-imposed death sentence, and Dou Shin died while serving a cane sentence. All of their belongings and slaves were sent to the capital from the railway station.

古文：海州团练使张升璘，升云之弟，李纳之婿也。
现代文：海州团练使张升是张升云的弟弟，李纳的女婿。
English: Zhang Sheng is the younger brother of Zhang Shengyun, Li Na's son-in-law.

古文：以父大祥归于定州，尝于公座骂王武俊，武俊奏之。
现代文：他因父亲两周年的忌日需要祭奠而回到定州，曾经在公开场合辱骂王武俊，王武俊将此事上奏朝廷。
English: He returned to Dingzhou because the second anniversary of his father's death needed to be commemorated. He once insulted Wang Wujun in public, and Wang Wujun reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：夏，四月，丁丑，诏削其官，遣中使杖而囚之。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁丑，德宗颁诏革除张升的官职，派遣中使用棍棒责打并囚禁了他。
English: In the summer, in April, in Dingwuxi, Dezong issued an edict to remove Zhang Sheng from his official post, and sent him to be beaten with a club and imprisoned.

古文：定州富庶，武俊常欲之，因是遣兵袭取义丰，掠安喜、无极万馀口，徙之德、棣。
现代文：定州物产丰饶，王武俊经常希望得到此地，因此派兵袭取义丰，掳掠了安喜和无极的百姓一万多人，将他们迁徙到德州和棣州。
English: Dingzhou is rich in products, Wang Wujun often hoped to get here, so he sent troops to attack Yifeng, kidnapped more than ten thousand people from Anxi and Wuji, and moved them to Texas and Zhangzhou.

古文：升云闭城自守，屡遣使谢之，乃止。
现代文：张升云关闭城门，自行防守，屡次派遣使者向王武俊道歉，王武俊才停止了对他的攻掠。
English: Zhang Shengyun closed the city gate, defended himself, and repeatedly sent messengers to apologize to Wang Wujun. Only then did Wang Wujun stop attacking and plundering him.

古文：上命李师古毁三汊城，师古奉诏。
现代文：德宗命令李师古毁除三汊城，李师古接受了诏旨。
English: Dezong ordered Li Shigu to destroy Samye City, and Li Shigu accepted the edict.

古文：然常招聚亡命，有得罪于朝廷者，皆抚而用之。
现代文：然而，他经常招募聚集逃亡的人，凡是对朝廷犯有罪过的人，他都抚慰并任用他们。
English: However, he often recruited those who had gathered to escape, and he comforted and appointed those who had committed crimes against the imperial prisoners.

古文：五月，甲辰，以中书侍郎赵憬为门下侍郎、同平章事，义成节度使贾耽为在右仆射，右丞卢迈守本官，并同平章事。
现代文：五月，甲辰，德宗任命中书侍郎赵憬为门下侍郎、同平章事，任命义成节度使贾耽为右仆射，又让右丞卢迈署理本官，与贾耽一起同平章事。
English: In May, Jia Chen, Emperor Dezong appointed Zhao Jing, the attendant of the book of records, as a subordinate attendant, and Tongping Zhangji, appointed Yicheng Jiedu to make Jia Tan as a right-hand man, and also made Rumei, the right-hand man, the acting official, and Jia Tan together with Tongping Zhangji.

古文：迈，翰之族子也。
现代文：卢迈是卢翰的族侄。
English: Lumai is the nephew of Rohan.

古文：憬疑陆贽恃恩，欲专大政，排己置之门下，多称疾不豫事，由是与贽有隙。
现代文：赵憬怀疑陆贽仗恩恃宠，准备独揽朝廷大政，将自己排挤到门下省，于是往往托病不问朝政。由此以后，他与陆贽便结下嫌隙。
English: Zhao Jing suspected that Lu Ye was trying to curry favor with the emperor and was preparing to monopolize the power of the imperial court by pushing himself into a subordinate province. As a result, he often feigned illness and did not ask about the imperial government. After this, he and Lu Ye had a rift.

古文：陆贽上奏论备边六失，以为 措置乖方，课责亏度，财匮于兵众，力分于将多，怨生于不均，机失于遥制。
现代文：陆贽进上奏疏，论说边疆防御的六种过失。他认为： 处理办法违背方策，考核督责缺少法度，资财被众多的士兵所耗尽，兵力被繁多的将领所分散，怨恨由分配不均产生出来，战机因朝廷在远处控制而丧失。
English: Lu Yujin, in his essay, discussed the six faults of frontier defense, saying that: the handling method is contrary to the strategy, the assessment and supervision are not legal, the resources are exhausted by a large number of soldiers, the troops are dispersed by a large number of generals, the resentment is generated by the uneven distribution, and the warplanes are lost due to the distant control of the imperial court.

古文： 关东戍卒，不习土风，身苦边荒，心畏戎虏。
现代文： 来自关东的戍边士兵，不熟悉边疆固有的风俗习惯，身受边塞之困苦，心中畏惧戎虏。
English: Lijiang soldiers from Kanto were not familiar with the customs and habits inherent in the frontier, suffered from the hardships of the frontier, and were afraid of the soldiers.

古文：国家资奉若骄子，姑息如倩人。
现代文：朝廷像对骄生惯养的儿子那样拿出资财来奉养他们，像对女婿那样无原则地宽容他们。
English: The imperial court supported them with money and resources, as it did with its arrogant and spoiled sons, and tolerated them without any principles, as it did with its son-in-law.

古文：屈指计归，张颐待哺；或利王师之败，乘扰攘而东溃；或拔弃城镇，摇远近之心。
现代文：他们屈指计算归期，张嘴等待喂饭。有时在官军的失败中寻找方便，乘着混乱之机向东溃退；有时又舍弃城邑市镇，动摇远近各地的民心。
English: Sometimes, they took advantage of the chaos to retreat to the east, seeking convenience in the defeat of the government army; sometimes, they abandoned their towns and cities, shaking the hearts of people near and far.

古文：岂惟无益，实亦有损。
现代文：让他们戍守边防，不但没有益处，实际上还有损害。
English: Letting them guard the border is not only unhelpful, it is actually harmful.

古文：复有犯刑谪徙者，既是无良之类，且加怀土之情，思乱幸灾，又甚戍卒。
现代文：戍边的士兵中更有触犯刑律流放而来的人，本来就是些不良之辈，再加上怀念故土的情绪，他们希图变乱兴起，庆幸灾祸发生，就比戍边的士兵更严重了。
English: Among the soldiers of Lopeng, there were more people who had violated the criminal law and were exiled. They were basically bad people. Coupled with the feeling of nostalgia for the motherland, they hoped for turmoil to arise and were glad that the disaster occurred, they were more serious than the soldiers of Lopeng.

古文：可谓措置乖方矣。
现代文：这些可以称作处理办法违背方策了。
English: These can be called countermeasures.

古文：自顷权移于下，柄失于朝，将之号令既鲜克行之于军，国之典常又不能施之于将，务相遵养，苟度岁时。
现代文：近来权力转移到下面，朝廷失去了权柄，将领发布的命令既很少能够在军队中执行，国家惯常的法规又不能够在将领中实施，上下务求相互姑息，苟且度日。
English: Recently, power has shifted to the lower ranks, the imperial court has lost its authority, the orders issued by generals can rarely be implemented in the army, and the country's customary laws and regulations cannot be implemented among generals. The upper and lower ranks should seek to appease each other and live in peace.

古文：欲赏一有功，翻虑无功者反仄；欲罚一有罪，复虑同恶者忧虞。
现代文：朝廷打算奖赏一个有功劳的人，反而顾虎没有功劳的人会因此动荡不安；准备惩罚一个犯下罪过的人，又要顾虑与他狼狈为奸的人会因此忧虑不安。
English: The court intends to reward a person of merit, but those who have no merit will be disturbed by it; those who are ready to punish a person who has committed a crime, and who are worried about interfering with him, will be worried about it.

古文：罪以隐忍而不彰，功以嫌疑而不赏，姑息之道，乃至于斯。
现代文：人们犯下的罪过，因克制忍耐而不能给以揭露；人们立下的功劳，因嫌猜疑惑而不能给与奖赏。
English: The sins committed by people cannot be revealed because of restraint and patience; the merits established by people cannot be rewarded because of suspicion.

古文：故使忘身效节者获诮于等夷，率众先登者取怨于士卒，偾军蹙国者不怀于愧畏，缓救失期者自以为智能。
现代文：无原则的宽容态度，竟然达到了这种程度，以至使忘记自身、竭尽忠诚的人在同辈中招致责备，使率领众人首先登上敌城的人在士兵中自取埋怨，使败坏军旅、逼迫朝廷的人心中没有一点渐愧与畏惧，使故意不肯按期发兵援救的人认为自己机智能干。
English: The unprincipled attitude of tolerance has reached such a degree that those who forget themselves and are loyal to the end incur reproach among their peers, those who lead the first people to climb the enemy city take their own complaints among the soldiers, those who corrupt the military expedition and persecute the court have no sense of shame and fear in their hearts, and those who deliberately refuse to send troops to rescue on time think that they are smart.

古文：此义士所以痛心，勇夫所体。
现代文：这便是有节操的人痛楚悲伤，勇敢的人心灰意冷的原因。
English: This is the reason why the upright are in anguish and sorrow, and the brave are disheartened.

古文：可谓课责亏度矣。
现代文：这可以称作考核督责缺少法度了。
English: This can be called assessment supervision and lack of law.

古文：虏每入寇，将帅递相推倚，无敢谁何。虚张贼势上闻，则曰兵少不敌。
现代文：每当异族前来侵犯时，将帅交相推委倚靠，没有人敢于查问，凭空张扬敌军的声势上报朝廷，就说是兵力太少，不能抵敌。
English: Whenever a foreign nation came to invade, they relied on the "commander-in-chief" and no one dared to inquire, and reported the enemy's strength to the imperial court out of thin air, saying that the army was too small to resist the enemy.

古文：朝廷莫之省察，唯务征发益师，无裨备御之功，重增供亿之弊。
现代文：朝廷未能检查实情，只是致力于征调人马，增加兵力，结果没有增益防备的功效，反而使军需供应更加疲困。
English: The imperial court failed to check the facts, but only devoted itself to recruiting manpower and increasing troop strength. As a result, it did not increase the effectiveness of defense, but made the supply of munitions even more exhausted.

古文：闾井日耗，征求日繁，以编户倾家、破产之资，兼有司榷盐、税酒之利，总其所入，岁以事边。可谓财匮于兵众矣。
现代文：村落百姓日益消耗，官府索求日益繁多。用在编人户倾家荡产才交纳上来的物资，加上有关部门专卖食盐与征收酒税的钱财，将这些收入合在一起，每年拿来从事边备，这可以称作资财被众多的士兵所耗尽了。
English: The villagers were consuming more and more, and the demands of the government were becoming more and more numerous. The materials that were used to pay for the production of the editorial staff, together with the money and wealth of the relevant departments specializing in the sale of salt and the collection of alcohol taxes, combined these revenues and used them every year for border maintenance. This can be called the depletion of resources by numerous soldiers.

古文： 吐蕃举国胜兵之徒，才当中国十数大郡而已，动则中国惧其众而不敢抗，静则中国惮其强而不敢侵，厥理何哉？
现代文： 吐蕃全国可以拿起兵器当兵的人，只抵得上大唐十几个大郡的人数罢了。一有战事发生，大唐便害怕他们人马众多，不敢抵抗他们，战事平息以后，大唐又忌惮他们强盛，不敢侵犯他们，这是什么道理呢？
English: The number of people in the whole of Tibet who can take up arms and serve as soldiers is only equal to the number of people in more than a dozen large counties in the Great Tang Dynasty. Whenever there is a war, the Great Tang Dynasty is afraid of their large number of people and does not dare to resist them. After the war subsides, the Great Tang Dynasty is afraid of their strength and does not dare to encroach on them. What is the reason for this?

古文：良以中国之节制多门，蕃丑之统帅专一故也。
现代文：这实在是由于大唐军队需要接受许多部门的指挥，而吐蕃军队却集中在一个将领的统帅之下的原故。
English: This is really due to the fact that the Datang army needs to accept the command of many departments, while the Tubo army is concentrated under the command of one general.

古文：夫统帅专一，则人心不分，号令不贰，进退可齐，疾徐中意，机会靡愆，气势自壮。
现代文：一般说来，如果军队的统帅是专一的，便会使人心不分散，号令不重复，军队的进退可以整齐划一，行军的快慢能够符合统帅的意愿，不会丧失战机，军队的气势自然壮盛。
English: Generally speaking, if the commander-in-chief of an army is single-minded, people will not be distracted, orders will not be repeated, the advance and retreat of the army can be neat and uniform, the speed of the march can meet the wishes of the commander-in-chief, warplanes will not be lost, and the momentum of the army will naturally flourish.

古文：斯乃以少为众，以弱为强者也。
现代文：这便是变少成多，变弱为强的原因啊。
English: This is the reason why less becomes more and weak becomes strong.

古文：开元、天宝之间，控御西北两蕃，唯朔方、河西、陇右三节度。
现代文：在开元、天宝年间，控制西北地区吐蕃、突厥两部番人，只有朔方、河西、陇右三处的节度使。
English: In the years of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty and the reign of Emperor Tianbao, the two guardians who controlled the northwest regions of Tibet and Turkestan were only the three sectional envoys of Shuo, Hexi, and Shizhu.

古文：中兴以来，未遑外讨，抗两蕃者亦朔方、泾原、陇右、河东四节度而已。
现代文：国家中兴以来，来不及对外讨伐，抵抗吐蕃、回纥两部番人的，也只有朔方、泾原、陇石、河东四处的节度使罢了。
English: Since the rise of the People's Republic of China, it has been too late to fight against the outside world, and the guards of the two departments of Tuyun and Huiun have only been resisted by the guards of the four departments of Shuofang, Yuyuan, Shanshi and Hedong.

古文：自顷分朔方之地，建牙拥节者凡三使焉，其馀镇军，数且四十，皆承特诏委寄，各降中贵监临，人得抗衡，莫相禀属。
现代文：不久前，朝廷划分朔方的地域，于是建立牙门、拥有旌节的便有三个节度使了，其余的镇军为数差不多还有四十个。军队的主帅一概接受特别诏旨的委任，朝廷还要各自派显贵的宦官前来监督，他们可以与军中主帅相互对抗，两人互不从属。
English: Not long ago, the imperial court divided the territory of the Shuo side, so they established the Zhamen, and those who had the fiefs had three fiefs, and the remaining town troops numbered almost forty. The commanders of the army all accepted the appointment of a special edict, and the imperial court also sent distinguished eunuchs to supervise. They could confront the commanders of the army, and the two did not subordinate to each other.

古文：每俟边书告急，方令计会用兵，既无军法下临，惟以客礼相待。
现代文：每当边疆告急文书到来，朝廷这才命令他们盘算如何采取军事行动。既然没有军法不达，他们只好用宾客的礼节相互对待。
English: Every time an urgent document arrives from the frontier, the imperial court orders them to calculate how to take military action. Since there is no military law, they have to treat each other with the etiquette of guests.

古文：夫兵，以气势为用者也，气聚则盛，散则消；势合则威，析则弱。
现代文：大凡军事行动，是要讲究气势的。士气凝聚便旺盛，士气离散便消沉；声势会合便威猛，声势离析便衰弱。
English: In large-scale military operations, it is necessary to pay attention to momentum. The morale of cohesion is strong, the morale of dispersion is depressed; the meeting of momentum is powerful, and the separation of momentum is weak.

古文：今之边备，势弱气消，可谓力分于将多矣。
现代文：现在的边疆防御，声势衰微，士气消沉，这可以称作兵力被繁多的将领所分散了。
English: The present frontier defences, enfeebled and demoralised, may be said to have been dispersed by numerous generals.

古文： 理戎之要，在于练核优劣之科以为衣食等级之制，使能者企及，否者息心，虽有薄厚之殊而无觖望之衅。
现代文： 治理军队的关键，在于精细地核查将士的优劣品类，据以制定有关军饷等级的制度，使有能力的人盼望得到较好的待遇，使没有能力的人消除非份之想，虽然有待遇丰厚与菲薄的区别，但不会产生怨恨不满的事端。
English: The key to managing the military lies in carefully verifying the quality of soldiers, and using this as a basis to develop a system for military pay grades, so that capable people can hope for better treatment, and those who are not capable can eliminate the feeling of inadequacy. Although there is a difference between rich and poor treatment, it will not cause resentment and dissatisfaction.

古文：今穷边之地，长镇之兵，皆百战伤夷之馀，终年勤苦之剧，然衣粮所给，唯止当身，例为妻子所分，常有冻馁之色。
现代文：现在，在荒远的边境的土地上，长期镇守的士兵，都是身经百战，遍体创伤，又长年经受无以复加的劳苦与艰辛。但是，供应他们的衣服与口粮，只限于本人，而这些东西通常都是被他们的妻子儿女分去一部分，所以他们经常面有饥寒之色。
English: Now, in the desolate frontier lands, the long-serving soldiers are all battle-scarred and battle-worn, and have endured years of unremitting toil and hardship; but the provision of clothing and rations is limited to themselves, and these things are usually shared by their wives and children, so they are often cold and hungry.

古文：而关东戍卒，怯于应敌，懈于服劳，衣粮所颁，厚逾数等。
现代文：然而，在关东地区戍守的士兵，害怕与敌人应战，不愿意担承勤苦的劳作，但是颁发给他们的衣服与口粮，却高出好几个等级。
English: However, the soldiers stationed in the Kanto region were afraid of challenging the enemy and unwilling to undertake hard labor, but the clothes and rations issued to them were several grades higher.

古文：又有素非禁旅，本是边军，将校诡为媚词，因请遥隶神策，不离旧所，唯改虚名，其于廪赐之饶，遂有三倍之益。
现代文：又有平素就不属于禁军，本来就是边防军队的，他们的将领编造逢迎之辞，乘机请求遥遥隶属于神策军，他们并不离开原来的驻地，只更改了原有的名称，便得到了丰饶的军饷颁赐，收到三倍的好处。
English: There were also those who did not belong to the Forbidden Army, but were originally border troops. Their generals made up words of welcome and took the opportunity to request that they be subordinated to the Divine Providence Army. They did not leave the original station, but only changed the original name. They were awarded rich military medals and received three times the benefits.

古文：夫事业未异而给养有殊，苛未忘怀，孰能无愠！
现代文：所从事的工作没有不同，而颁发的给养却有区别，如果人们尚不能忘却利禄，有谁能够不恼怒呢？
English: There is no difference in the work done, but there is a difference in the provisions given. If people cannot forget about the stipend, who can but get angry?

古文：可谓怨生于不均矣。
现代文：这可以称作怨恨由分配不均产生出来了。
English: This can be called resentment generated by unequal distribution.

古文： 凡欲选任将帅，必先考察行能，可者遣之，不可者退之，疑者不使，使者不疑，故将在军，君命有所不受。
现代文： 大凡打算选择任用将帅，必须事先考核验察他的品行与才能，对满意的人选，便派遣出去，对于不满意的人选，便退还回去。疑人不用，用人不疑，所以将在外，君命有所不受。
English: Anyone who intends to choose to appoint a general must first examine and examine his character and talents. If he is satisfied with the candidate, he will be sent out, and if he is not satisfied with the candidate, he will be returned back. The suspect is not needed, the employer is not in doubt, so he will be outside, and his life will not be accepted.

古文：自顷边军去就，裁断多出宸衷，选置戎臣，先求易制，多其部以分其力，轻其任以弱其心，遂令爽于军情亦听命，乖于事宜亦听命。
现代文：近来，对边防军队的调动，由规划到决断，多数出于陛下的心意，选拔安排军中的将领，首先要求容易辖制。增加部队的数目，借以分散他们的势力，减轻他们的职任，借以削弱他们的心志，于是使他们即便不符合军队的实情也要服从命令，即便违反事情的处理也要服从命令。
English: Recently, the mobilization of the frontier troops, from planning to decision-making, is mostly due to His Majesty's will, the selection and arrangement of the generals in the army, the first requirement is easy to control, increase the number of troops, so as to disperse their power, reduce their duties, and weaken their will, so that they obey orders even if they do not conform to the reality of the army, and obey orders even if they violate the handling of the matter.

古文：戎虏驰突，迅如风飙，驲书上闻，旬月方报。
现代文：异族兵马奔驰冲突，像暴风一样迅速，而我军由驿站传递文书上报朝廷，却需要一整月的时间才能答复下来。
English: Foreign soldiers and horses gallop into conflict as swiftly as a storm, while our army reports to the imperial court by courier station, but it takes a whole month to reply.

古文：守土者以兵寡不敢抗敌，分镇者以无诏不肯出师，贼既纵掠退归，此乃陈功告捷。
现代文：守卫疆土的将领因兵力微少而不敢抵抗敌军，分守军镇的将领因没有诏命而不肯出兵。敌军纵兵掳掠以后便撤退了，这时将领们便陈述功劳，向朝廷报捷。
English: The generals guarding the territory did not dare to resist the enemy army because of the small number of troops, and the generals guarding the military towns did not want to send troops because they did not have the edict. After the enemy troops were captured and plundered, they retreated. At this time, the generals presented their merits and reported their success to the imperial court.

古文：其败丧则减百而为一，其捃获则张百而成千。
现代文：在兵败人亡时，他们便将损失减少到百分之一；在有所俘获时，他们便将所得由一百张扬成一千。
English: In the event of defeat and death, they reduced their losses to one percent; in the event of capture, they increased their gains from one hundred to one thousand.

古文：将帅既幸于总制在朝，不忧罪累，陛下又以为大权由己，不究事情。
现代文：将帅既庆幸朝廷统揽全局，不用为朝廷加罪担忧，陛下又认为自己独操大权，不再追究事情的真伪。
English: Not only was the general glad that the imperial court was in charge of the whole situation, and he did not have to worry about the imperial court adding to his guilt, but his majesty also thought that he had the sole power and would no longer investigate the truth of the matter.

古文：可谓机失于遥制矣。
现代文：这可以称战机因朝廷在远处控制而丧失了。
English: It can be said that the fighter plane was lost due to the distant control of the imperial court.

古文：臣愚谓宜罢诸道将士防秋之制，令本道但供衣粮，募戍卒愿留及蕃、汉子弟以给之。
现代文：依我愚见，应当废止征调各道将士防御吐蕃的制度，命令各道只供应衣服与口粮，召募愿意留下来的戍边士兵以及番族人、汉族人的子弟，将各道提供的给养供应他们。
English: In my foolish opinion, the system of conscripting and transferring soldiers from each province to defend Tubo should be abolished, each province should be ordered to supply only clothes and rations, and the soldiers from the Lijiang and the children of the Gansu and Han people who are willing to stay should be recruited, and the supplies provided by each province should be supplied to them.

古文：又多开屯田，官为收籴，寇至则人自为战，时至则家自力农，与夫倏来忽往者，岂可同等而论哉！
现代文：还要大量开辟屯田，由官府收购屯田收获和粮食。敌寇到来，屯田上的士兵每个人都要自行参加战斗，农忙之时，屯田上的士兵每一家都要自行努力务农，这与那种频繁调动士兵、来去匆忙的情况相比，难道能够同日而语吗！
English: In addition, a large number of military cantonments had to be opened up, and the government had to purchase the harvest and grain from the military cantonments. When the enemy came, each soldier on the military cantonments had to take part in the battle on his own. During the agricultural rush, each family of soldiers on the military cantonments had to work hard at farming on their own. Can this be compared to the situation where soldiers were frequently mobilized and came and went in a hurry?

古文：又宜择文武能臣为陇右、朔方、河东三元帅，分统缘边诸节度使，有非要者，随所便近而并之。
现代文：还应该选拔有能力的文武大臣出任陇右、朔方、河东三处的元帅，让他们分别统领分布在边境一带的各位节度使，对于不够重要的节镇，按照方便与就近加以合并。
English: It is also necessary to select capable ministers of culture and armed forces to serve as marshals of the three places of Shandong, Shandong and Shandong, and let them separately command the various festival towns distributed along the border. For the festival towns that are not important enough, they should be merged according to convenience and proximity.

古文：然后减奸滥虚浮之费以丰财，定衣粮等级之制以和众，弘委任之道以宣其用，悬赏罚之典以考其成。
现代文：此后，还要减少不正当和不切实的费用，以使资财充实起来；确定有关屯田将士的衣服、口粮的等级，以调整将士之间的关系；弘扬委托信任将帅的原则，以显示将帅的作用；公布奖赏与惩罚的典章，以考核屯田将士的成绩。
English: After that, it is also necessary to reduce the unjustified and unrealistic expenses to enrich the resources; determine the level of clothing and rations for the soldiers in the garrison to adjust the relationship between the soldiers; promote the principle of entrusting trust to the general to show the role of the general; publish the award and punishment regulations to assess the achievements of the soldiers in the garrison.

古文：如是，则戎狄威怀，疆场宁谧矣。 
现代文：这样，异族便会畏服归附，国家的边境便会安宁了。 
English: In this way, foreigners will be afraid to attach themselves, and the country's borders will be peaceful.

古文：上虽不能尽从，心甚重之。
现代文：虽然德宗未能完全听从他的建议，但在内心却对他非常推重。
English: Although Dezong did not fully follow his advice, in his heart he had a great respect for him.

古文：韦皋遣大将董面力等将兵出西山，破吐蕃之众，拔堡栅五十馀。
现代文：韦皋派遣大将董等人领兵开出西山，打败吐蕃的兵马，攻克堡垒、栅栏五十多处。
English: Wei Wei dispatched General Dong and others to lead the troops out of the West Mountain, defeated the soldiers and horses of Tubo, and conquered more than 50 fortresses and fences.

古文：丙午，门下侍郎、同平章事董晋罢为礼部尚书。
现代文：丙午，门下侍郎、同平章事董晋被罢免为礼部尚书。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Tongping Zhengji Dongjin, a subordinate waiter, was removed from his post as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：云南王异牟寻遣使者三辈，一出戎州，一出黔州，一出安南，各赍生金、丹砂诣韦皋。金以示坚，丹砂以示赤心，三分皋所与书为信，皆达成都。
现代文：云南王异牟寻派遣使者共三批，一批取道戎州，一批取道黔州，一批取道安南，各自携带着金矿石和砂前往韦皋处，金矿石用以表示心地坚定，砂用以表示心地真诚。云南又将韦皋给他们写的书信分成三份作为凭信，全都带到成都。
English: Yunnan Wang Yimuhang sent a total of three groups of envoys, one group took the road to Yongzhou, one group took the road to Bozhou, and one group took the road to Annan, each carrying gold ore and sand to Wei Xuan's place. Gold ore was used to express the firmness of the heart, and sand was used to express the sincerity of the heart. Yunnan also divided Wei Xuan's letter to them into three copies as proof, all of which were brought to Chengdu.

古文：异牟寻上表请弃吐蕃归唐，并遗皋帛书，自称唐故云南王孙、吐蕃赞普义弟日东王。
现代文：异牟寻上表请求背弃吐蕃，归顺唐朝，并且给韦皋送去用丝织品写成的文书，称自己为唐云南王孙、吐蕃赞普义弟日东王。
English: Yimou asked the above table to abandon Tubo and submit to the Tang Dynasty, and sent Wei Tong a document written in silk fabric, calling himself the grandson of the king of Tang Yunnan and the brother-in-law of Tubo Zhanpu, the King of Nichidong.

古文：皋遣其使者诣长安，并上表贺。
现代文：韦皋打发云南使者前往长安，并且上表祝贺。
English: Wei Wei sent the Yunnan envoy to Chang'an, and congratulated the table.

古文：上赐异牟寻诏书，令皋遣使慰抚之。
现代文：德宗向异牟寻颁赐了诏书，命令韦皋派遣使者慰问安抚云南。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict to Yimuhang, ordering Wei to send an envoy to comfort and pacify Yunnan.

古文：贾耽、陆贽、赵憬、卢迈为相，百官白事，更让不言。
现代文：贾耽、陆贽、赵憬、卢迈四人担任宰相，对百官禀报的事情交互推让，不肯发言。
English: Jia Tan, Lu Wei, Zhao Jing, and Lumai, four people who served as prime ministers, made concessions to the things that were falsely reported by hundreds of officials, and refused to speak.

古文：秋，七月，奏请依至德故事，宰相迭秉笔以处政事，旬日一易；诏从之。
现代文：秋季，七月，他们上奏请求依据至德年间的惯例，由各位宰相轮流在政事堂执笔，以便处理行政事务，每十天一换人。
English: In the autumn, in July, they submitted their request. In accordance with the practice of the post-war years, the chancellors took turns to write in the government hall in order to deal with administrative matters, changing every ten days.

古文：其后日一易之。
现代文：德宗颁诏同意此议。后来，又改为一天一换人。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict agreeing to this proposal. Later, it was changed to one person a day.

古文：剑南、西山诸羌女王汤立志、哥邻王董卧庭、白狗王罗陀忽、弱水王董辟和、南水王薛莫庭、悉董王汤悉赞、清远王苏唐磨、咄霸王董邈蓬及逋租王，先皆役属吐蕃，至是各帅众内附。
现代文：居住在剑南、西山一带的诸羌女王汤立志、哥邻王董卧庭、白狗王罗陀、弱水王董辟和、南水王薛莫庭、悉董王汤悉赞、清远王苏唐磨、咄霸王董邈蓬以及逋租王，原先都臣属于吐蕃，受其役使，至此，他们各自率领本部人众归附。
English: Queen Tang Lizhi, Neighbor King Dong Lie Ting, White Dog King Luo Tuo, Weak Water King Dong Bi He, South Water King Xue Mo Ting, Strong Water King Dong Tang Si Zan, Qingyuan King Su Tang Ma, Strong Water King Dong Xi Peng, and Renting King, who lived in the southern part of Jian and the western part of the mountain, were originally all vassals of Tubo and served by Tubo. At this time, they each led the headquarters people to annexation.

古文：韦皋处之于维、保、霸州，给以耕牛种粮。
现代文：韦皋将他们安置在维州、保州和霸州，供给他们耕牛与粮种。
English: Wei Yan settled them in Wizhou, Baozhou and Bazhou, and provided them with cattle and grain.

古文：立志、陀忽、辟和入朝，皆拜官，厚赐而遣之。
现代文：汤立志、罗陀、董辟和入京朝见，德宗一律授给官职，给他们优厚的赏赐，然后打发他们回去。
English: When Tang Lizhi, Luo Dua, Dong Bi and Dezong visited the imperial court in Beijing, they were all appointed to official posts, given generous rewards, and then sent back.

古文：癸卯，户部侍郎裴延龄奏： 自判度支以来，检责诸州欠负钱八百馀万缗，收诸州抽贯钱三百万缗，呈样物三十馀万缗，请别置欠负耗剩季库以掌之，染练物则别置月库以掌。 
现代文：癸卯，户部侍郎裴延龄上奏说： 我自从兼管度支事务以来，查收各州亏欠钱计有八百多万缗，收取各州抽贯钱三百万缗，进呈上贡样品三十多万缗。请将归还亏欠和消耗所剩的钱另外交给季库掌管，而将着色熟绢另外交给月库掌管。 
English: At the end of the speech, the head of the household, Pei Yanling, said: Since I have been in charge of the expenditure and expenditure affairs, I have collected more than 8 million baht of money owed by the states, collected 3 million baht of money drawn by the states, and submitted more than 300 thousand baht of tribute samples. Please return the money owed and the remaining money spent separately to the quarterly fund, and hand over the dyed bamboo shoots separately to the monthly fund.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：德宗颁诏同意此议。
English: He complied.

古文：欠负皆贫人无可偿，徒存其数者，抽贯钱给用随尽，呈样、染练皆左藏正物。
现代文：亏欠官府钱的，都是一些贫穷的人，无法偿还，徒然存留着亏欠的数额，抽贯钱用来支付用度，随用随光，进呈上贡样品与着色熟绢本来都是应归左藏储存的物品。
English: Those who owed money to the government were all poor people who could not repay the debt and kept the amount of the debt in vain, withdrawing money to pay for expenses, using it as and when they needed it, and bringing in tribute samples and colored jars, which should have been kept and stored.

古文：延龄徙置别库，虚张名数以惑上。
现代文：裴延龄徒然将它们安放到别的仓库里，虚张名目与数额，以此迷惑德宗。
English: Pei Yanling placed them in other warehouses in vain, faked the name and amount, and thus confused Dezong.

古文：上信之，以为能富国而宠之，于实无所增也，虚费吏人簿书而已。
现代文：德宗信以为真，认为他能够使国家富裕起来，因而宠爱他。实际上他什么也没有增加，只是白白浪费吏人帐薄罢了。
English: Dezongxin believed that he could make the country rich, so he loved him. In fact, he did not increase anything, but just wasted the officials' accounts.

古文：京城西污湿地生芦苇数亩，延龄奏称长安、咸阳有陂泽数百顷，可牧厩马。
现代文：京城西面有一片污秽潮湿的地面，生长着几亩芦苇，裴延龄奏称在长安与咸阳一带有数百顷的坡地与水沼，可以放牧厩中的马匹。
English: On the west side of the capital, there is a piece of dirty and wet ground with a few mu of reeds. Pei Yanling said that there are hundreds of hectares of slopes and swamps in Chang'an and Xianyang, which can graze the horses in the stables.

古文：上使有司阅视，无之，亦不罪也。
现代文：德宗让有关部门前去核实观看，并没有坡地与水沼，也不归罪他。
English: Dezong let the relevant departments go to verify and watch, there is no slope and swamp, and they do not blame him.

古文：左补阙权德舆上奏，以为： 延龄取常赋支用未尽者充羡馀以为己功。
现代文：左补阙权德舆上奏认为： 裴延龄将支付使用而尚未用光的经常性的赋税，拿来充当正常赋税以外的收益，并将此作为自己的功劳。
English: Zuo Shu Xuan Quan De, the public opinion reporter, said: Pei Yanling will pay the regular tax that has been used and has not been used up, use it as income other than normal tax, and take this as his own merit.

古文：县官先所市物，再给其直，用充别贮。
现代文：县官先购买物品，再交付物品的价钱，以此充当另外的储存。
English: County officials first purchase items and then deliver the price of the items to serve as additional storage.

古文：边军自今春以来并不支粮。
现代文：自从今年春天以来，边疆的军队都没有支付口粮。
English: Troops on the border have not been paid rations since the spring.

古文：陛下必以延龄孤贞独立，时人丑正流言，何不遣信臣覆视，究其本末，明行赏罚。
现代文：如果陛下认为裴延龄独守节操，出类拔萃，而时下之人嫉害正直，散布谣言，为什么不派遣一位可信的臣下重行审察，推究事情的原委，公开实行奖赏或惩罚？
English: If Your Majesty thinks that Pei Yanling is the only one who keeps the discipline and is outstanding, and people nowadays are jealous of honesty and spread rumors, why not send a trustworthy subject to re-examine, investigate the cause of the matter, and publicly reward or punish?

古文：今群情众口喧于朝市，岂京城士庶皆为朋党邪！
现代文：现在，大家情绪愤激，议论纷纷，在朝廷与市肆喧闹不已，难道京城的士子与庶民都已经结成宗派私党了吗！
English: Now, everyone is in an outraged mood, discussions are taking place one after another, and there is a lot of noise in the imperial court and the city hall. Could it be that the nobles and common people of Beijing have formed a sectarian private party?

古文：陛下亦宜稍回圣虑而察之。 
现代文：陛下也应该稍微改变自己的考虑，调查他了。 
English: His Majesty should also change his mind a little and investigate him.

古文：上不从。
现代文：皇帝没有采纳他的建议。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：八月，庚戌，太尉、中书令、西平忠武王李晟薨。
现代文：八月，庚戌，太尉、中书令、西平忠武王李晟去世。
English: In August, Geng Yao, Tai Lai, Zhongshu Ling, and Xiping Zhongwu Wang Li Yao passed away.

古文：冬，十月，甲子，韦皋遣其节度巡官崔佐时赍诏书诣云南，并自为皋书答之。
现代文：冬季十月，甲子，韦皋派遣他的节度巡官崔佐时携带诏书前往云南，并且亲自用丝织品写成文书来答复云南王。
English: In the winter of October, Jia Zi, Wei Zang sent his festival inspector Cui Zuo to Yunnan with the edict, and personally wrote a document with silk to reply to the king of Yunnan.

古文：十一月，乙酉，上祀圆丘，赦天下。
现代文：十一月，乙酉，德宗祭祀圜丘，大赦天下。
English: In November, at Acetylene, the German Sect began to hold a festival in Shizuoka, and the world was at their mercy.

古文：刘士宁既为宣武节度使，诸将多不服。
现代文：刘士宁出任宣武节度使以后，将领们多数并不佩服他。
English: After Liu Shining served as the envoy of the Xuanwu Festival, most of the generals did not admire him.

古文：士宁淫乱残忍，出畋辄数日不返，军中苦之。
现代文：刘士宁纵欲放荡而生性残忍，每当外出打猎时，总是好几天都不回来，军中将士困苦不堪。
English: Liu Shining indulged in debauchery and was cruel by nature. Whenever he went out hunting, he would not come back for several days. The lieutenant general was miserable.

古文：都知兵马使李万荣得众心，士宁疑之，夺其兵权，令摄汴州事。
现代文：都知兵马使李万荣得到大家的拥护，刘士宁猜疑他，剥夺了他的兵权，命令他代理汴州事务。
English: Liu Shining suspected him, deprived him of his military powers, and ordered him to take over the affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，乙卯，士宁帅众二万畋于外野。
现代文：十二月，乙卯，刘士宁带领两万人到城外的郊野去打猎。
English: In December, Liu Shining led 20,000 people to go hunting in the countryside outside the city.

古文：万荣晨入使府，召所留亲兵千馀人，诈之曰： 敕征大夫入朝，以吾掌留务，汝辈人赐钱三十缗。 
现代文：李万荣早晨走进节度使的府署，召集刘士宁留下来的亲兵一千多人，欺骗他们说： 敕旨征召大夫入京朝见，任命我掌管留后事务，还颁赐给你们每人钱三十缗。 
English: In the morning, Li Wan Rong went to the headquarters of the festival envoy, gathered more than a thousand of Liu Shining's remaining soldiers, and deceived them by saying, "I have ordered to recruit doctors to visit the imperial court in Beijing, appointed me to be in charge of the post-residence affairs, and also awarded each of you money of thirty baht."

古文：众皆拜。
现代文：大家都拜谢应命。
English: Everyone fell to their knees.

古文：又谕外营兵，皆听命。
现代文：李万荣又开导外营的士兵，他们也都服从命令了。
English: Li Wanrong also enlightened the soldiers of the foreign battalion, and they all obeyed the order.

古文：乃分兵闭城门，使驰白士宁曰： 敕征大夫，宜速就路，少或迁延，当传首以献。 
现代文：于是，他分别派兵关闭了城门，让人骑马跑去禀告刘士宁说： 敕旨征召大夫，大夫应当迅速登程，如果稍有拖延，我便要将大夫的头颅传送京师，献给朝廷了。 
English: As a result, he separately sent soldiers to close the city gate and had people ride on horseback to report Liu Shining, saying: "I have decided to conscript a doctor. The doctor should quickly embark on the journey. If there is a slight delay, I will send the doctor's head to Beijing and dedicate it to the imperial court."

古文：士宁知众不为用，以五百骑逃归京师，比至东都，所馀仆妾而已。
现代文：刘士宁知道大家不肯听从自己的命令，便带着五百人骑马逃回京城，及至来到东都洛阳时，只剩下他的仆从与姬妾了。
English: Liu Shining knew that everyone would not obey his orders, so he fled back to the capital on horseback with five hundred people. By the time he arrived in the eastern capital Luoyang, only his servants and concubines were left.

古文：至京师，敕归第行丧，禁其出入。
现代文：刘士宁来到京城以后，德宗颁布敕旨，命他回府第为父亲刘玄佐服丧，禁止他与外界联系。
English: After Liu Shining arrived in Beijing, Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering him to return to the capital to attend the funeral of his father, Liu Xuanzu, and forbade him from contacting the outside world.

古文：淮西节度使吴少诚闻变，发兵屯郾城，遣使问故，且请战。
现代文：淮西节度使吴少诚听到宣武变乱以后，便派兵在郾城驻扎，派遣使者质问李万荣驱逐刘士宁的原故，而且向他挑战。
English: After Wu Shaocheng heard the proclamation of armed rebellion, the Huaixi Festival made Wu Shaocheng send troops to be stationed in Lucheng, and send an envoy to question Li Wanrong about the reason for expelling Liu Shining, and challenge him.

古文：万荣以言戏之，少诚惭而退。
现代文：李万荣讲了一番嘲弄吴少诚的话，吴少诚便渐愧地撤退了。
English: Li Wanrong said some words mocking Wu Shaocheng, and Wu Shaocheng gradually retreated in shame.

古文：上闻万荣逐士宁，使问陆贽，贽上奏，以为今军州已定，宜且遣朝臣宣劳，徐察事情，冀免差失，其略曰： 今士宁见逐，虽是众情，万荣典军，且非朝旨。此安危强弱之机也，愿陛下审之慎之。 
现代文：德宗听到李万荣驱逐刘士宁的消息以后，让人征求陆贽的意见，陆贽上奏认为，现在宣武军与汴州城都已经安定下来了，最好派遣朝廷的官员前去宣布慰劳的诏旨，缓缓察看事态的发展，以期避免过失。他大略是说： 如今刘士宁被驱逐，虽然是由大家的情绪所导致的，但是李万荣掌管军事，也并不是朝廷的旨意，这是关系安危强弱的时机，希望陛下审慎再审慎。 
English: After hearing the news of Li Wanrong's expulsion of Liu Shining, Dezong had Lu Yao's opinion solicited. Lu Yao thought that now both the Xuanwu Army and Zhangzhou City had settled down, it would be best to send an official from the imperial court to announce the decree of consolation, and to observe the development of the situation in order to avoid mistakes. He roughly said: Now that Liu Shining has been expelled, although it is caused by everyone's emotions, but Li Wanrong is in charge of the military, and it is not the will of the imperial court. This is an opportunity for the relationship to be safe and strong. I hope that His Majesty will be

古文：上复使谓贽： 若更淹迟，恐于事非便。
现代文：德宗又让人对陆贽说： 如果再拖延下去，恐怕对事态的发展是不利的。
English: Dezong also had someone say to Lu Yao: If you delay any longer, I'm afraid it will be detrimental to the development of the situation.

古文：今议除一亲王充节度使，且令万荣知留后，其制即从内出。 
现代文：现在打算任命一位亲王担当节度使，准备命令李万荣执掌留后事务，有关这一任命的制书就要从内廷发出。 
English: It is now planned to appoint a prince to be in charge of the festival envoy, to prepare to order Li Wanrong to take charge of the succession affairs, and the document concerning this appointment will be issued from the Inner Court.

古文：贽复上奏，其略曰： 臣虽服戎角力谅匪克堪，而经武伐谋或有所见。
现代文：陆贽再次上奏，大略是说： 虽然我对佩带着兵器比武的事情不能胜任，但是对筹划军事并破坏敌人计划的事情也许还有一些见解。
English: Lu Yao raised his voice again, saying roughly, "Although I am not competent in the matter of wearing weapons and fighting, I may have some opinions on the matter of military planning and disrupting the enemy's plans."

古文：夫制置之安危由势，付授之济否由才。
现代文：一般说来，控置安危是由形势决定的，委任官职的成功与否是由才能决定的。
English: Generally speaking, the control of security is determined by the situation, and the success of the appointment is determined by the ability.

古文：势如器焉，惟在所置，置之夷地则平。
现代文：形势就如同器物一样，就看如何安放，安放在平地上就平稳。
English: The situation is like a vessel, it depends on how it is placed. If it is placed on a flat surface, it will be stable.

古文：才如负焉，唯在所授，授逾其力则踣。
现代文：才能就如同背负东西，就看负重多少，负担过重就会跌倒。
English: Talent is like carrying something on one's back, depending on how heavy the load is. If the burden is too heavy, one will fall.

古文：万荣今所陈奏，颇涉张皇，但露徼求之情，殊无退让之礼，据兹鄙躁，殊异循良。
现代文：如今李万荣上奏陈述的内容，颇为猖狂，只显露出要求任命的态度，绝没有谦让的礼数，根据这种卑下浮躁行为来看，他与奉公守法的人大有区别。
English: Today, the content of Li Wanyong's statement is quite rampant, only showing the attitude of demanding an appointment, and there is no humble courtesy. According to this despicable impetuous behavior, he is very different from those who are law-abiding.

古文：又闻本是滑人，偏厚当州将士，与之相得，才止三千，诸营之兵已甚怀怨。
现代文：又听说李万荣本来是滑州人氏，偏袒厚待本州的将士，但与他投合的滑州将士，只有三千人，而各军营的士兵已经甚为抱怨。
English: It was also heard that Li Wan Rong was originally from the city of Gansu and favored soldiers from his home province. However, only 3,000 soldiers from Gansu sided with him, and soldiers from various military camps were already complaining.

古文：据此颇僻，亦非将材，若得志骄盈，不悖则败，悖则犯上，败则偾军。 
现代文：根据这种偏颇不公的态度来看，他也不是担任将领的材料。倘若李万荣如愿以偿，骄傲自满起来，结果不是行为忤逆，就是自取灭亡。行为忤逆就会犯上作乱；自取灭败亡就会使军队败坏。 
English: Judging from this biased and unfair attitude, he is not the material to serve as a general. If Li Wanrong gets his wish and becomes proud and complacent, the result will be either insubordination or self-defeat. Insubordination will lead to disorder; self-defeat will corrupt the army.

古文：又曰： 苟邀则不顺，苟允则不诚，君臣之间，势必嫌阻。
现代文：他又说： 苟且要求是不合正道的，苟且应允是没有诚意的，势必会使君臣之间生出嫌疑。
English: He also said: Even if the request is not righteous, even if the response is not sincere, it is bound to cause suspicion between the monarchs and ministers.

古文：与其图之于滋蔓，不若绝之于萌芽。 
现代文：与其在嫌疑滋长蔓延后再去图谋，不如在萌芽状态便去根绝。 
English: Instead of plotting after suspicion has grown and spread, it is better to eradicate it while it is still in its infancy.

古文：又曰： 为国之道，以义训人，将教事君，先令顺长。 
现代文：他又说： 治理国家的原则，是用正道教诲人，要让人事奉君主，先要使人服从长官。 
English: He also said: "The principle of governing the country is to teach people the right way, to make people serve the monarch, and to make people obey their superiors.

古文：又曰： 方镇之臣，事多专制，欲加之罪，谁则无辞！
现代文：他又说： 掌握一方兵权的军事长官，办事往往专断独行，要想把罪名加给他们，谁不能找到借口！
English: He also said: Military commanders who control the military power of one side often act arbitrarily. If you want to blame them, you can't find an excuse!

古文：若使倾夺之徒便得代居其任，利之所在，人各有心，此源潜滋，祸必难救。
现代文：倘若谁是倾轧强取的人，谁就能够替代他的职务，那么，面对利益，人们各自都想得到它，这个念头一经暗中滋生，所产生的祸患肯定是难以挽救的。
English: If anyone can take the place of someone who has been forced out of his job, then when it comes to profit, everyone wants to get it. Once this idea has been secretly nurtured, the resulting disaster will certainly be difficult to save.

古文：非独长乱之道，亦关谋逆之端。 
现代文：这不单是助长变乱的途径，也关系到谋逆的发端。 
English: This is not only a way to promote turmoil, but also related to the onset of rebellion.

古文：又曰： 昨逐士宁，起于仓卒，诸郡守将固非连谋，一城师人亦未协志。
现代文：他又说： 昨日李万荣赶走刘士宁，是匆促发生的，各州县的守将固然不曾合谋，汴州一城众人也并非意见统一。
English: He also said: Yesterday, Li Wanyong drove away Liu Shining, which happened in a hurry. Of course, the provincial and county governors did not conspire, and the people of Zhangzhou City did not have a unified opinion.

古文：各计度于成败之势，回遑于逆顺之名，安肯捐躯与之同恶！ 
现代文：他们各自估量着形势发展成败的可能，彷徨在从逆作乱与顺承朝廷之间，怎么肯捐弃性命，与他狼狈为奸呢！ 
English: Each of them weighed the potential for success or failure in the development of the situation, hovering between rebellion and obedience to the imperial court. How could they give up their lives and become his accomplices?

古文：又曰： 陛下但选文武群臣一人命为节度，仍降优诏，慰劳本军。
现代文：他又说： 陛下只需在文武群臣中选择一个人任命他为节度使，并颁布宽和的诏旨，慰劳李万荣军。
English: He also said, "Your Majesty only needs to choose one person from the civil and military ministers to appoint him as the Festival Envoy, and issue the edict of peace to comfort the Li Wan Rong army.

古文：奖万荣以抚定之功，别加宠任，褒将士以辑睦之义，厚赐资装，揆其大情，理必宁息。
现代文：以镇抚安定宣武的功劳奖励李万荣，对他另外加以恩宠与委任；以上下和睦的道理表扬宣武将士，赐给优厚的物资与装备，估计宣武军的大体情势，照理说是一定会安定平息下来的。
English: Li Wan Rong was rewarded for his efforts in pacifying and stabilizing the Xuanwu army, and he was given additional grace and appointment; the above-mentioned principle of harmony praised the Xuanwu soldiers, gave them generous materials and equipment, and estimated the general situation of the Xuanwu army, which was said to be stable and calm down.

古文：万荣纵欲跋扈，势何能为！ 
现代文：即使李万荣打算骄纵专横，在这种情势下，又怎么能够办得到呢！ 
English: Even if Li Wanrong intends to be arrogant and domineering, how can he do it under such circumstances!

古文：又曰： 倘后事有愆素，臣请受败桡之罪。 
现代文：他又说： 倘若以后的事情超出我原来的估计，请让我接受破坏军旅的罪罚。 
English: He also said, "If things turn out to be beyond my original estimate, please let me accept the punishment of sabotaging the military brigade."

古文：上不从。
现代文：德宗不肯听从。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：壬戌，以通王谌为宣武节度大使，以万荣为留后。
现代文：壬戌，德宗任命通王李谌为宣武节度大使，任命李万荣为留后。
English: At the same time, Emperor Dezong appointed Tong Wang Lijun as the ambassador of the Xuanwu Festival, and appointed Li Wanrong as the successor.

古文：丁卯，纳故驸马都尉郭暧女为广陵王淳妃。
现代文：丁卯，将已故的驸马都尉郭暧的女儿聘娶为广陵王李淳妃。
English: Dingwu hired the daughter of the late commander of the Horse Guards, Guo Jun, to marry Guangling King Li Junfei.

古文：淳，太子之长子。妃母，即升平公主也。
现代文：李淳是太子的长子，郭妃的母亲便是升平公主。
English: Li Jun is the eldest son of the crown prince, and Guo Fei's mother is Princess Shengping.

古文：贞元十年甲戌，公元七九四年春，正月，剑南、西山羌、蛮二万馀户来降。诏加韦皋押近界羌、蛮及西山八国使。
现代文：贞元十年春季正月，剑南、西山一带的羌人、蛮人二万多户前来归降。德宗颁诏加封韦皋为押近界羌、蛮及西山八国使。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 10th year of the Zhengyuan era, more than 20,000 families of barbarians and barbarians from around Jianan and Xishan came to surrender. Dezong issued an edict and sealed Wei Wei as the envoy of the eight countries near the border, barbarians and Xishan.

古文：崔佐时至云南所都羊苴咩城，吐蕃使者数百人先在其国，云南王异牟寻尚不欲吐蕃知之，令佐时衣牂柯服而入。
现代文：崔佐时来到云南的都城羊苴城，几百名吐蕃使者原先便在云南国中。云南王异牟寻还不打算让吐蕃知道自己已经归附唐朝，便让崔佐时穿着柯人的服装进入羊苴城。
English: Cui Zuoxi came to the capital city of Yunnan, Yangpu, while hundreds of emissaries from Tibet were already in Yunnan. Yunnan King Yimou did not intend to let Tibetans know that he had been annexed by the Tang Dynasty, so he let Cui Zuoxi enter Yangpu wearing the clothing of the Qiang people.

古文：佐时不可，曰： 我大唐使者，岂得衣小夷之服！ 
现代文：崔佐时认为不恰当，他说： 我是大唐朝廷的使者，怎么能穿著小小夷人的衣服呢！ 
English: Cui Zuoxi thought it was inappropriate, he said: I am an envoy of the Great Tang Dynasty, how can I wear the clothes of a small barbarian!

古文：异牟寻不得已，夜迎之。
现代文：异牟寻没有办法，只好在夜晚迎接他。
English: Yimuhou had no choice but to meet him in the evening.

古文：佐时大宣诏书，异牟寻恐惧，顾左右失色。
现代文：崔佐时大声宣读诏书，异牟寻害怕，他望着周围的人们，连脸色都改变了。
English: When Cui Zuo read the edict aloud, Yimou was scared. He looked at the people around him, and even his face changed.

古文：业已归唐，乃歔欷流涕，俯伏受诏。
现代文：然而，已经归顺唐朝，只好抽抽咽咽地流着眼泪，趴在地上接受诏旨。
English: However, he had already submitted to the Tang Dynasty, so he had to swallow his tears and lie on the ground to accept the edict.

古文：郑回密见佐时教之，故佐时尽得其情，因劝异牟寻悉斩吐蕃使者，去吐蕃所立之号，献其金印，复南诏旧名。异牟寻皆从之。仍刻金契以献。
现代文：郑回暗中去见崔佐时，教给他如何去做。所以崔佐时完全了解了其中的情由，因而劝说异牟寻悉数斩杀吐蕃使者，除去吐蕃封立的名号，献出吐蕃给予的金印，恢复南诏原来的名称，异牟寻完全听从了这些建议，还刻成金质的契约献给崔佐时。
English: When Zheng Hui secretly went to see Cui Zuo, he taught him how to do it. Therefore, Cui Zuo fully understood the reasons for this, so he persuaded Yimou to completely kill the emissaries of Tubo, remove the name of Tubo, present the gold seal given by Tubo, and restore the original name of Nanzhao. Yimou fully followed these suggestions, and also engraved a gold contract dedicated to Cui Zuo.

古文：异牟寻帅其子寻梦凑等与佐时盟于点苍山神祠。
现代文：异牟寻带邻他的儿子寻梦凑等人与崔佐时在点苍山神祠会盟。
English: Yimou took his neighbor's son, Xing Meng, and others to join forces with Cui Zuoxi at the Cangshan Shrine.

古文：先是，吐蕃与回鹘争北庭，大战，死伤颇众，征兵万人于云南。
现代文：在此之前，吐蕃与回鹘争夺北庭，发生激战，死亡与负伤的人很多，便向去南征调兵员一万人。
English: Prior to this, there was a fierce battle between Tubo and Uighur for the Northern Court, in which many people were killed and injured. As a result, 10,000 soldiers were sent south for conscription.

古文：异牟寻辞以国小，请发三千人，吐蕃少之。益至五千，乃许之。
现代文：异牟寻借口国家微小，请求派兵三千人，吐蕃嫌少，云南将兵员增加到五千人，吐蕃才答应下来。
English: On the pretext that the country was too small, Yunnan requested to send 3,000 soldiers, which was rejected by Tuvalu. Yunnan increased the number of soldiers to 5,000, which was accepted by Tuvalu.

古文：异牟寻遣五千人前行，自将数万人踵其后，昼夜兼行，袭击吐蕃，战于神川，大破之，取桥等十六城，虏其五王，降其众十馀万。
现代文：异牟寻派遣五千人在前面行进，自己却率领好几万人跟随在他们后边，日夜兼程，前去袭击吐蕃。云南吐蕃在神川交战，大破吐蕃，占领了铁桥等十六座城，俘虏了吐蕃的五个王，降服吐蕃人众十余万。
English: Yimuhang sent five thousand men to march in front, but he himself led tens of thousands of people to follow behind them, day and night, to attack Tubo. Yunnan Tubo fought in Jinchuan, destroyed Tubo, occupied sixteen cities such as Iron Bridge, captured five kings of Tubo, and surrendered more than one hundred thousand Tubo people.

古文：戊戌，遣使来献捷。
现代文：戊戌，云南派遣使者前来进献捷报。
English: Wuzhen, Yunnan sent an envoy to present the successful report.

古文：瀛州刺史刘澭为兄济所逼，请西扞陇坻，遂将部兵千五百人、男女万馀口诣京师，号令严整，在道无一人敢取人鸡犬者。
现代文：瀛州刺史刘被哥哥刘济所逼迫，便请求到西边去保卫陇坻地区。于是，他带领部下士兵一千五百人以及男女家眷一万余口前往京城。由于号令严明整肃，沿途没有一个人强取百姓的鸡狗，德宗很是嘉许他。
English: Persecuted by his brother Liu Jie, Liu, the governor of Zhangzhou, requested to go to the west to defend the Zhang region. Therefore, he led 1,500 soldiers and more than 10,000 male and female family members to the capital. Due to the strict order of rectification, no one forced the people's chickens and dogs along the way, and Dezong was very appreciative of him.

古文：上嘉之，二月，丙午，以为秦州刺史、陇右经略军使，理普润。
现代文：二月，丙午，德宗任命刘为秦州刺史、陇右经略军使，以普润为治所。
English: In February, in the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Dezong appointed Liu to be the military envoy of the Qin State and the commander of the right wing, with Purun as the capital.

古文：军中不击柝，不设音乐。
现代文：刘不让人敲打着木梆在军中巡夜，也不设置音乐。
English: Liu did not allow people to patrol the night in the army with wooden rattles, nor did he set up music.

古文：士卒病者，澭亲视之，死者哭之。
现代文：士兵病了，刘亲自去看望他们；士兵死了，刘亲自去哀哭他们。
English: When soldiers were ill, Liu himself would visit them; when soldiers died, Liu himself would go to mourn them.

古文：乙丑，义成节度使李融薨。
现代文：乙丑，义成节度使李融去世。
English: Second, the Yicheng Festival caused Li Rong's death.

古文：丁卯，以华州刺史李复为义成节度使。
现代文：丁卯，德宗任命华州刺史李复为义成节度使。
English: Dingwu, Dezong appointed Li Fu, the governor of Huazhou, as the envoy to the Yicheng Festival.

古文：复，齐物之子也。
现代文：李复是李齐物的儿子。
English: Li Fu is the son of Li Qichen.

古文：复辟河南尉洛阳卢坦为判官。监军薛盈珍数侵军政，坦每据理以拒之。
现代文：李复征召河南县尉洛阳人卢坦担任判官，由于监军薛盈珍屡次干扰军中政事，卢坦往往依据理法反对他。
English: Li Fuzhou conscripted Lu Tan, a Henan County lieutenant from Luoyang, to serve as a judge. Since the supervisor Xue Yizhen repeatedly interfered in the political affairs of the army, Lu Tan often opposed him on the basis of reason and law.

古文：盈珍常曰： 卢侍御所言公，我固不违也。 
现代文：薛盈珍经常说： 卢侍御讲的话都是为公家着想，我当然不能够违背他。 
English: Xue Yingzhen often said: Lu Zhiguo's words are for the sake of the public, of course, I can't go against him.

古文：横海节度使程怀直入朝，厚赐遣归。
现代文：横海节度使程怀直入京朝见，德宗给与优厚的赏赐，然后打发他回去。
English: Henghai Jie Du made Cheng Huai Zhi go to Beijing to see the emperor, and Dezong gave him a generous reward, and then sent him back.

古文：夏，四月，庚午，宣武军乱，留后李万荣讨平之。
现代文：夏季四月，庚午，宣武军发生变乱，留后李万荣讨伐并平定了变乱。
English: In the summer of April, in the afternoon, there was a mutiny in the Xuanwu army. Li Wanrong stayed behind to fight and quell the mutiny.

古文：先是，宣武亲兵三百人素骄横，万荣恶之，遣诣京西防秋，亲兵怨之。
现代文：在此之前，由于宣武军的亲兵三百人素来骄矜专横，李万荣憎恶他们，便派遣他们到京城西面防御吐蕃，亲兵都怨恨他。
English: Prior to this, since the 300 soldiers of the Xuanwu army had always been arrogant and domineering, Li Wanyong detested them and sent them to the west side of Beijing to defend Tubo. The soldiers all resented him.

古文：大将韩惟清、张彦琳诱亲兵作乱，攻万荣，万荣击破之。
现代文：大将韩惟清、张彦琳诱使亲兵发起变乱，进攻李万荣，李万荣击败了他们。
English: Generals Han Weiqing and Zhang Yanlin induced their own soldiers to launch a mutiny and attack Li Wanrong, who defeated them.

古文：亲兵掠而溃，多奔宋州，宋州刺史刘逸准厚抚之。
现代文：亲兵边掳掠，边溃退，多数逃奔宋州，宋州刺史刘逸准优厚地安抚他们。
English: Most of the soldiers fled to Songzhou, and Liu Yijun, the governor of Songzhou, was kind enough to pacify them.

古文：惟清奔郑州，彦琳奔东都。
现代文：韩惟清逃奔郑州，张彦琳逃奔东都洛阳。
English: Han Weiqing fled to Zhengzhou, Zhang Yilin fled to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：万荣悉诛乱者妻子数千人。
现代文：李万荣悉数诛杀了作乱将士的妻子儿女几千人。
English: Li Wanrong killed thousands of wives and children of the rioters.

古文：有军士数人呼于市曰： 今夕兵大至，城当破！ 
现代文：有几个军士在街市中大声呼喊说： 今天晚上，部队大规模开来，汴州城就会被攻破。 
English: Several sergeants shouted loudly in the streets: "Tonight, the troops will come in large numbers, and Zhangzhou City will be breached."

古文：万荣收斩之，奏称刘士宁所为。
现代文：李万荣收捕斩杀了他们，还上奏声称这是刘士宁所做的事情。
English: Li Wan Rong captured and killed them, and also claimed that this was what Liu Shining had done.

古文：庚子，徙士宁于郴州。
现代文：五月，庚子，朝廷将刘士宁迁移到郴州。
English: In May, Geng Zi, the imperial court moved Liu Shining to Zhangzhou.

古文：钦州蛮酋黄少卿反，围州城，邕管经略使孙公器奏请发岭南兵救之。上不许，遣中使谕解之。
现代文：钦州蛮人的酋长黄少卿造反，包围了州城，邕管经略使孙公器上奏请求征调岭南军队前去救援，德宗不肯允许，派遣中使宣旨劝解他们。
English: Huang Shaoqing, the chieftain of the barbarians in Qin, rebelled and besieged the state capital. He ordered Sun Gongyi to appeal for the transfer of the Lingnan army to the rescue, but Dezong refused to allow it. He sent an envoy to persuade them.

古文：陆贽上言： 郑礼赦下已近半年，而窜谪者尚未沾恩。 
现代文：陆贽进言说： 自从圜丘祭天，大赦天下的赦令颁下，已经将近半年，但是，贬官流放的人们还没有得到大赦的恩典。 
English: Lu Yaojin said: It has been nearly half a year since the amnesty was issued, but the people who were exiled for demeaning officials have not yet received the grace of amnesty.

古文：乃为三状拟进。
现代文：于是他写成三个状书，进呈上来。
English: So he wrote three letters of complaint and submitted them.

古文：上使谓之曰： 故事，左降官准赦量移，不过三五百里，今所拟稍似超越，又多近兵马及当路州县，事恐非便。 
现代文：德宗让人告诉他说： 根据惯例，对降职的官员可以依照赦令酌情迁移到近处来，但不能超过三五百里地。现在，你拟定的迁官办法似乎稍微超过了规定，安置的地点又往往接近军队驻地，或者是处于进京路线上的州县，此事恐怕不够妥当。 
English: Dezong had someone tell him: "According to the usual practice, officials who have been demoted can be relocated to the nearest place in accordance with the pardon order, but not more than three and a half hundred miles. Now, the relocation method you have drawn up seems to slightly exceed the regulations, and the relocation locations are often close to military bases, or are in prefectures on the route to Beijing. I am afraid that this matter is not appropriate.

古文：贽复上言，以为： 王者待人以诚，有责怒而无猜嫌，有惩沮而无怨忌。
现代文：陆贽再次进言认为： 君王要以诚意对待众人，可以责备臣下，对他们发怒，但不能够猜疑他们；可以惩处臣下败坏事功的行为，但不能够怨恨他们。
English: Lu Yao once again said that: The king should treat people with sincerity. He can blame his vassals and be angry with them, but he cannot suspect them. He can punish the actions of his vassals who corrupt their achievements, but he cannot resent them.

古文：斥远以儆其不恪，甄恕以勉其自新；不儆则浸及威刑，不勉而复加黜削，虽屡进退，俱非爱憎。
现代文：将臣下斥逐远方，是为了警告他们没有恭谨听命；甄别并宽恕臣下的过失，是为了劝勉他们重新做人。不加警告，就会使臣下逐渐触犯刑法；不加劝勉，只会使臣下再遭贬黜。虽然君王屡次进用或罢黜臣下，但完全不是出于个人的好恶。
English: To banish a vassal far away is to warn them that they are not obedient; to judge and forgive the faults of a vassal is to encourage them to become a new person. Without warning, the vassal will gradually violate the criminal law; without encouragement, the vassal will only be demeaned again. Although the monarch has repeatedly promoted or dismissed vassals, it is not at all out of personal likes and dislikes.

古文：行法乃暂使左迂，念材而渐加进叙，又知复用，谁不增修！
现代文：执行法规，这是让臣下暂时降职，以后顾念臣下的才能，便又逐渐地加以提拔任用，臣下知道自己还能够再次被起用，有谁还不加强自身的修养呢！
English: Enforcement of laws and regulations, this is to let the subordinates temporarily demote, and then gradually promote and appoint them in consideration of the talents of the subordinates. The subordinates know that they can still be re-appointed. Who does not strengthen their own cultivation!

古文：何忧乎乱常，何患乎蓄憾！
现代文：又何必为打乱常规变乱而发愁，为留下遗憾而担心呢！
English: And why worry about upsetting the routine, and worry about leaving regrets!

古文：如或以其贬黜，便谓奸凶，恒处防闲之中，长从摈弃之例，则是悔过者无由自补，蕴才者终不见伸。
现代文：如果因臣下被降职免官，便认为他们是奸邪凶恶的，永远将他们置于防备与禁阻之中，使他们长期废免，不得任用，这便是让悔改的人无法自行弥补过失，使蕴含着才华的人终究不能施展抱负。
English: If a subordinate is demoted and removed from office, they will be regarded as evil and wicked, and they will always be placed under prevention and prohibition, so that they will be abolished for a long time and will not be appointed. This will make it impossible for repentant people to make up for their mistakes on their own, and make it impossible for talented people to fulfill their ambitions.

古文：凡人之情，穷则思变，含凄贪乱，或起于兹。
现代文：大凡人之常情，穷困潦倒，就希望变革；身境痛苦，便图谋作乱，或许就是产生于此。
English: Perhaps this is the origin of the common human tendency to hope for change when one is poor and downtrodden, and to try to stir up trouble when one is in pain.

古文：今若所移不过三五百里，则有疆域不离于本道，风土反恶于旧州，徒有徙家之劳，是增移配之扰。
现代文：如果现在迁移被贬的官员不超过三五百里地，便会发生仍然没有离开原先被贬去的州道，而风土人情反而比原来更为恶劣的情况，空有迁徙家室的劳顿，实际上是增加了迁徙流亡的骚扰。
English: If the current relocation of the demoted officials does not exceed three and a half hundred miles, it will lead to a situation where they still have not left the state road that was originally demoted, but the local customs and people's living conditions are even worse than before. The stress of having an empty migration home is actually an increase in the harassment of migration and exile.

古文：又，当今郡府，多有军兵，所在封疆，少无馆驿，示人疑虑，体又非弘。
现代文：此外，现在的郡府，往往驻扎着军队，而州境之内，驿站的房舍是很少或者没有的。既让人们感到疑虑，于国体也不够宽宏。
English: In addition, today's county capitals are often garrisoned by the military, while within the state, there are few or no post houses. Both make people feel doubtful and are not generous enough for the National Games.

古文：乞更赐裁审。 
现代文：请陛下再予以斟酌审核吧。 
English: I would ask Your Majesty to reconsider.

古文：上性猜忌，不委任臣下，官无大小，必自选而用之，宰相进拟，少所称可；及群臣一有谴责，往往终身不复收用；好以辩给取人，不得敦实之士；艰于进用，群材滞淹。
现代文：德宗生性猜疑而又妒忌，不肯信任臣下。无论官职是大是小，一定要由自己选拔任用，对于宰相进呈的规划，很少称许认可。及至群臣一旦遭到斥责，往往一辈子不再收录起用；好以能言善辩为条件选取人才，不能得到敦厚忠实的人选；对官吏的提拔任用困难重重，各种人材沉抑于下，不得升进。
English: Emperor Dezong was suspicious and envious, and did not want to trust his vassals. Regardless of whether the official position was large or small, he must select and appoint by himself. He rarely praised and approved the plan submitted by the prime minister. And even if the ministers were reprimanded, they would often not be recruited and employed for the rest of their lives; it was good to select talents on the condition of being able to speak and argue, but they could not get loyal candidates; there were many difficulties in the promotion and appointment of officials, and all kinds of talents were depressed and could not be promoted.

古文：贽上奏谏，其略曰： 夫登进以懋庸，黜退以惩过，二者迭用，理如循环。
现代文：陆贽上奏进谏，大略是说： 提拔任用是为了勉励功劳，贬抑降职是为了惩戒过失，两方面交相为用，其中的道理就如同圆环周而复始。
English: Lu Xuan's report on the promotion of cadres, roughly said: promotion and appointment is to encourage merit, demotion and demotion is to punish negligence, the two aspects interact with each other, and the reason is like a circle and a circle.

古文：进而有过则示惩，惩而改修则复进，既不废法，亦无弃人，虽纤介必惩而用材不匮。
现代文：受到进用以后又有了过失，便需要给予惩罚，受到惩罚以后又修正过来了，便应该再提升上来，这既不会荒废法度，也不会捐弃人才。即使对任何细微的过失都一定惩罚，但可供使用的人才不会缺乏。
English: If there is a fault after being used, it needs to be punished, and if it is corrected after being punished, it should be promoted again. This will neither waste the law nor sacrifice talent. Even if there is a certain punishment for any minor fault, there will be no shortage of talent available for use.

古文：故能使黜退者克励以求复，登进者警饬而恪居，上无滞疑，下无蓄怨。 
现代文：所以，这可以使受到贬逐的人勉励自己力求恢复官职，也可以使被提升的人告诫自己恭谨地任官办事，使上面没有难解的疑虑，下面没有积蓄的怨恨。 
English: Therefore, it can make the demoted person exhort himself and strive to resume his official position, and it can also make the promoted person exhort himself to respectfully perform official duties, so that there are no difficult doubts above and no accumulated resentment below.

古文：又曰： 明主不以辞尽人，不以意选士，如或好善而不择所用，悦言而不验所行，进退随爱憎之情，离合系异同之趣，是由舍绳墨而意裁曲直，弃权衡而手揣重轻，虽甚精微，不能无谬。 
现代文：他又说： 明智的君主不会根据言词来使用人才，也不会按照主观的意想去选拔士子。如果对自己所亲善的人便不加选择地任用，如果喜欢一个人的言词便不去检验他的行为，升官降职全随着个人的爱憎情感，亲疏远近全凭着人们与自己的志趣相同与否，这是舍弃墨斗而靠心意来判断线的曲直，丢开秤锤而用双手来掂量物体的轻重的作法，即使极其精细，还是不能没有谬误。 
English: He also said: "A wise ruler will not use talent according to words, nor will he select scholars according to subjective intentions. If he appoints people who are friendly to him without selection, if he likes a person's words, he will not check his behavior, promotion and demotion are all based on personal love and hate, and closeness and distance are all based on whether people are the same as their own interests. This is to abandon the ink bucket and rely on the mind to judge the curvature of the line, discard the scale hammer and use the hands to weigh the weight of the object. Even if it is extremely fine, it is still not without fallacy.

古文：又曰： 中人以上，迭有所长，苟区别得宜，付授当器，各适其性，各宣其能，及乎合以成功，亦与全才无异。
现代文：他又说： 中等智能以上的人们，是互有长处的。如果能够恰当地区分辨别人们的长处，交付给人们的职任与他们的才具相当，各自适应人们的性情，分别发挥他们的能力，及至将大家聚合在一起，成就了事功，这与人人都是全才也是没有区别的。
English: He also said: People with above-average intelligence have each other's strengths. If you can properly distinguish the strengths of others, the duties assigned to people are equivalent to their talents, each of them adapts to people's dispositions, exerts their abilities separately, and finally brings everyone together and achieves achievements, this is no different from everyone being a genius.

古文：但在明鉴大度，御之有道而已。 
现代文：要做到这一点，只在于善于识别，襟度阔达，驾驭有方罢了。 
English: To do this, you only need to be good at recognition, broad-minded, and have the ability to drive.

古文：又曰： 以一言称惬为能而不核虚实，以一事违忤为咎而不考忠邪，其称惬则付任逾涯，不思其所不及，其违忤则罪责过当，不恕其所不能，是以职司之内无成功，君臣之际无定分。 
现代文：他又说： 由于一句话讲得使自己惬意，便以为讲话人是有才能的，因而不再核查他的实际情况；由于一件事违背了自己的意志，便以为办事人是有罪过的，因而不再考究他是忠是邪。对讲话使人惬意的人，将超过他能力极限的重任交给他，而不去考虑这是他所难以胜任的；对于办事违背自己意志的人，将有失允当的罪责加给他，不肯宽恕他的无能为力，这就使人在职务范围以内难得成就事功，使君臣之间没有确定的责任。 
English: He also said: Because of a sentence spoken to please oneself, the speaker is considered to be talented, so there is no longer a need to check his actual situation; because of a thing that violates one's own will, the official is considered to be guilty, so there is no longer a need to examine whether he is loyal or evil. For the person who makes the speech pleasing, he will be given a heavy task that exceeds the limit of his ability, without considering that it is difficult for him to perform; for the person who acts against his own will, he will have unreasonable guilt imposed on him, unwilling to forgive his powerlessness, which makes it difficult for people to accomplish things within the scope of their duties, so

古文：上不听。
现代文：德宗没有听从他的建议。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：贽又请均节财赋，凡六条：
现代文：陆贽又请求平均并节省财税，共有六条：
English: Lu Wei also requested an average and tax savings, a total of six:

古文：其一，论两税之弊，其略曰： 旧制赋役之法，曰租、调、庸。
现代文：第一条，论述两税法的弊端。他大略是说： 依照国家原有的制度，征派赋税徭役的办法，称作租、调、庸。
English: The first article discusses the drawbacks of the two tax laws. He said roughly: According to the country's original system, the method of assigning tax collectors is called rent, transfer, and mediocrity.

古文：丁男一人受田百亩、岁输粟二石，谓之租。
现代文：成年男子每人可以得到田地一百亩，每年交纳粮食二石，称作租。
English: Each adult male could receive 100 mu of farmland and pay 2 kilos of grain per year, known as rent.

古文：每户各随土宜出绢若绫若絁共二丈，绵三两，不蚕之土输布二丈五尺，麻三斤，谓之调。
现代文：每户各自按照土地所生产出来的不同产品，交纳绢或者绫或者，一共二丈，丝绵三两，不养蚕的土地，交纳棉布二丈五尺，麻三斤，称作调。
English: According to the different products produced by the land, each household shall pay a tax of one yuan or one yuan or one yuan, a total of two yuan, silk three yuan, land without silkworms, pay cotton cloth two yuan and five feet, hemp three pounds, known as adjustment.

古文：每丁岁役，则收其庸，日准绢三尺，谓之庸。
现代文：每个成年男子每年应当承担的徭役，则是收取雇人代役所应该偿付的佣金，每天以交纳绢三尺为标准，称作庸。
English: The service that every adult man should undertake every year is to collect the commission to be paid by the employment agency, and the standard is to pay 3 shaku per day, which is called yang.

古文：天下为家，法制均一，虽欲转徙，莫容其奸，故人无摇心而事有定制。
现代文：天下成为一家，法令制度平均如一。即使有人打算辗转迁徙，这样的奸谋也是无处可以容纳的，所以人们不会有动荡不安情绪，而事情都有固定的规制。
English: The whole world has become one family, and the legal system is on average the same. Even if someone intends to migrate, such a conspiracy is nowhere to be accommodated, so people will not have turbulent emotions, and things will have a fixed regulation.

古文：及羯胡乱华，兆庶云扰，版图堕于避地，赋法坏于奉军。
现代文：及至羯胡安禄山、史思明祸乱中华，百姓如乱云纷扰，户籍与地图因朝廷躲避他处而毁去，税法因供应军需而破坏。
English: As far as Mount Huanglu and Shishiming, the people were in turmoil. Household registers and maps were destroyed because the imperial court was hiding elsewhere, and the tax law was destroyed because of the supply of military supplies.

古文：建中之初，再造百度，执事者知弊之宜革而所作兼失其原，知简之可从而所操不得其要。
现代文：在建中初年，重新建置各种制度，执掌朝政的人知道旧弊应当革除，但建立新制时却连本意都抛弃了，也知道应当从简，却没把握住要领。
English: In the first year of the construction of the middle school, various systems were rebuilt. The people in charge of the government knew that the old evils should be eliminated, but when the new system was established, they even abandoned their original intention. They also knew that it should be simplified, but they did not grasp the essentials.

古文：凡欲拯其弊，须穷致弊之由，时弊则但理其时，法弊则全革其法，所为必当，其悔乃亡。
现代文：凡是打算改正以往的弊端，必须穷究导致弊端的原由。如果是时势造成的弊端，便应当只就时势来加以治理，如果是制度造成的弊端，便应该完全革除这一制度。所做的事情一定是确当的，一切悔恨必将消亡。
English: Anyone who intends to correct the evils of the past must exhaustively investigate the causes of the evils. If it is an evil caused by the current situation, it should be governed only by the current situation. If it is an evil caused by the system, it should be completely eliminated. What has been done must be correct, and all regrets will surely disappear.

古文：兵兴以来，供亿无度，此乃时弊，非法弊也。
现代文：在战事兴起以来，对军队的供给没有限度，这正是时势造成的弊端，而不是制度造成的弊端啊。
English: Since the outbreak of the war, there has been no limit to the supply of troops. This is the drawback caused by the current situation, not the drawback caused by the system.

古文：而遽更租、庸、调法，分遣使者，搜擿郡邑，校验簿书，每州取大历中一年科率最多者以为两税定额。
现代文：然而，朝廷急忙更改了租、庸、调法，分别派遣使者，搜刮郡县，核实验证赋役簿籍，每州选取大历年间征收赋税最多的年份，便以此年的数额作为两税的定额。
English: However, the imperial court hastily changed the methods of rent, tax, and transfer, dispatched emissaries separately, searched counties and counties, and nuclear experiment certificates, and each state selected the year with the highest tax collection during the calendar year, and the amount of this year was used as the quota of two taxes.

古文：夫财之所生，必因人力，故先王之制赋入，必以丁夫为本。
现代文：财富的产生，一定是由人力造成的，所以先代的君王制定赋税收入，一定要以成年男丁为依据。
English: The generation of wealth must be caused by manpower, so the previous monarchs must base their tax revenue on adult males.

古文：不以务穑增其税，不以辍稼减其租，则播种多；不以殖产厚其征，不以流寓免其调，则地著固；不以饬励重其役，不以窳怠蠲其庸，则功力勤。
现代文：不因致力耕耘而增加税收，也不因停止种植而减少田租，人们便愿意多加播种了。不因产业扩大而多加征收，也不因寄居他乡而免去纳调，人们便牢固地定居下来了。不因勤勉自励而加重徭役，也不因懒情懈怠而免除纳庸，人们便会辛勤劳作了。
English: People are willing to sow more seeds if taxes are not increased as a result of hard work, and if farm rents are not reduced as a result of the cessation of planting. People are willing to sow more seeds if taxes are not increased as a result of the expansion of industry, and if they are not exempted from taxation as a result of living in a foreign country. People are willing to settle down firmly. People are willing to work hard if they are not burdened with taxes as a result of hard work, and if they are not exempted from taxation as a result of idleness.

古文：如是，故人安其居，尽其力矣。
现代文：这些都做到了，人们就会安心居住下来，竭尽力气务农了。
English: Once all of this is done, people will be able to live in peace and do their best in gas farming.

古文：两税之立，惟以资产为宗，不以丁身为本。
现代文：两税法的设立，只以资财产业为依据，不以人丁多少为根本。
English: The establishment of the two tax laws is only based on the capital and financial industry, and is not based on the number of people.

古文：曾不寤资产之中，有藏于襟怀囊箧，物虽贵而人莫能窥；其积于场圃囷仓，直虽轻而众以为富流通蕃息之货，数虽寡而计日收赢；有庐舍器用之资，价虽高而终岁无利。
现代文：人们竟不懂得，在资财产业中，有的可以收藏在怀里或口袋、箱子里，虽然物品贵重，但人们无法查看；有的堆积在场院、田圃、粮仓中，虽然价值低廉，但大家却以为这是富有。有的是便于交易与增殖的财货，虽然数量不大，但收取盈利是按日计算的；有的是茅棚房舍与器皿用具等资产，虽然定价很高，但常年没有增益可图。
English: What people don't understand is that in the asset and wealth industry, some things can be kept in one's arms or pockets or boxes, and although the items are valuable, people can't see them; some are piled up in yards, fields and granaries, and although the value is low, people think they are rich; some are goods that are easy to trade and increase, although the quantity is small, but the profit is calculated on a daily basis; some are assets such as huts and utensils, although the price is high, but there is no gain for many years.

古文：如此之比，其流实繁，一概计估算缗，宜其失平长伪。
现代文：这样的比较，种类实在繁多，一律估计价钱并折算成缗，这种办法有失公允，助长作弊。
English: There are many types of such comparisons, all of which estimate the price and convert it into money. This method is unfair and encourages cheating.

古文：由是务轻资而乐转徙者，恒脱于徭税；敦本业而树居产者，每困于征求。
现代文：由此，专门谋求细软的财货而愿意辗转迁徙的人们，总是能够摆脱徭役和赋税；追求农业而置备不定居的产业的人们，却往往为赋税征收而困顿。
English: As a result, people who are willing to migrate in search of soft goods are always able to get rid of taxes and taxes; people who pursue agriculture and set up non-residential industries are often in trouble for tax collection.

古文：此乃诱之为奸，驱之避役，力用不得不弛，赋入不得不阙。
现代文：这简直是诱导人们去做邪恶的事情，驱赶着他们去逃避徭役，使劳役的效能不得不松懈下来，赋税的收入不得不缺欠。
English: This is simply inducing people to do evil things, driving them to evade corvée, so that the effectiveness of corvée has to be slackened, and the income from taxation has to be lacking.

古文：复以创制之首，不务齐平，供应有烦简之殊，牧守有能否之异，所在徭赋，轻重相悬，所遣使臣，意见各异，计奏一定，有加无除。
现代文：又因两税处于创立制度的初期，没有追求制度的整齐划一，物资的供应办法有繁琐与简便的区别，州府长官有精明与愚笨的不同，各处的徭役赋税，轻重悬殊，朝廷派遣的使臣，意见各有分歧，但计划上奏，一经决定，就只有增加，没有减除。
English: In addition, because the two taxes were in the early stage of the establishment of the system, there was no pursuit of a uniform system, the supply methods of materials were complicated and simple, the prefects of the prefectures were clever and stupid, the taxes paid by the officials in various places were of different weights, and the envoys sent by the imperial court had different opinions. However, the plan was submitted, and once it was decided, there was only an increase, not a decrease.

古文：又大历中供军、进奉之类，既收入两税，今于两税之外，复又并存，望稍行均减，以救凋残。 
现代文：加之，大历年间的供军、进奉一类的杂征，既然已经收到两税中，现在却在两税以外，又保留了这些名目。希望陛下逐渐实行赋税的平均与削减，以便救助凋零衰谢的百姓。 
English: In addition, since the miscellaneous levies such as military supply and military service during the calendar year have already been received in the two taxes, they now retain these items in addition to the two taxes. I hope that His Majesty will gradually implement the average and reduction of taxes in order to rescue the withered and withered people.

古文：其二，请二税以布帛为额，不计钱数。
现代文：第二条，请求以布帛作为两税征收的税额，不再按钱数计算。
English: Article 2 The amount of tax requested to be levied as "two taxes" shall no longer be calculated according to the amount of money.

古文：其略曰： 凡国之赋税，必量人之力，任土之宜，故所入者惟布、麻、缯、纩与百谷而已。
现代文：他大略是说： 大凡国家的赋税，必须估量人们的承受能力，根据土地出产的实际条件来加以制定。因此，国家征收进来的赋税，只有布、麻、丝织品、丝帛和各种谷物罢了。
English: He said roughly: The taxation of a great country must first assess the people's ability to bear it, and be formulated according to the actual conditions of land production. Therefore, the country only levies import taxes on cloth, hemp, silk fabrics, silk cocoons and various grains.

古文：先王惧物之贵贱失平，而人之交易难准，又定泉布之法以节轻重之宜，敛散弛张，必由于是。
现代文：先代的君王恐怕物品的价格贵贱失平，而人们物物交换缺少标准，又制定了钱币制度，以便节制物品流通中轻重缓急的机宜，财货的聚集与分散，废弛与盛旺，都一定要以此为依据。
English: The previous monarchs were afraid that the price of goods would be out of balance, and people's barter lacked standards. They also developed a monetary system in order to control the priorities in the circulation of goods, the accumulation and dispersion of goods, waste and prosperity. All must be based on this.

古文：盖御财之大柄，为国之利权，守之在官，不以任下。
现代文：因此，治理财利的重大权柄，即国家的财政大权，只能由官府执掌，不能把它交给下面的人。
English: Therefore, the important power of governing financial interests, that is, the financial power of the country, can only be handled by the government, and cannot be handed over to the people below.

古文：然则谷帛者，人之所为也；钱货者，官之所为也。
现代文：由此可见，谷物与丝帛，是百姓们所生产的；钱财货币，是官府制造的。
English: From this it can be seen that grain and silk cocoons were produced by the people; money and currency were manufactured by the government.

古文：是以国朝著令，租出谷，庸出绢，调出缯、纩、布，曷尝有禁人铸钱而以钱为赋者也！
现代文：所以，我朝法令明文规定：以谷物交租，以绢交庸，以丝帛、丝绵、布匹交调。何曾有过禁止人们铸造钱币，却又以钱币充当赋税的事情呢！
English: That is why our imperial edict clearly stipulates that rent should be paid in grain, money should be paid in money, and money should be paid in silk, silk thread, and cloth. How many times have we prohibited people from minting coins, but used coins to pay taxes?

古文：今之两税，独异旧章，但估资产为差，便以钱谷定税，临时折征杂物，每岁色目颇殊，唯计求得之利宜，靡论供办之难易。
现代文：唯独现在实行的两税法，与原有的典章大相径庭。两税法只通过估算资财产业来规定征税的等级，于是以钱币和谷物为数额确定了税收，还要临时折算为杂物征收，而杂物的种类每年也大有区别。但官府只算计如何得到税收才是方便有利的，而不考虑备办这些物品的难易程度。
English: However, the current implementation of the two-tax law is quite different from the original regulations. The two-tax law only stipulates the level of taxation by estimating the capital and financial industry, so the tax is determined by the amount of coins and grains, and it is also temporarily converted into miscellaneous goods, and the types of miscellaneous goods are also very different every year. However, the government only calculates how to get the tax is convenient and advantageous, without considering the difficulty of preparing these items.

古文：所征非所业，所业非所征，遂或增价以买其所无，减价以卖其所有，一增一减，耗损已多。
现代文：官府要征收的物品不是人们生产的物品，人们生产的物品不是官府要征收的物品，于是，人们有时需要加价购买他们所没有的物品，而减价出卖他们所拥有的物品，这样一加价一减价，其间的损耗已经很多。
English: The goods to be levied by the government are not the goods produced by the people, and the goods produced by the people are not the goods to be levied by the government. Therefore, people sometimes need to increase the price to buy the goods they don't have, and sell the goods they have at a reduced price. Such a price increase and price decrease has caused a lot of losses.

古文：望勘会诸州初纳两税年绢布，定估比类当今时价，加贱减贵，酌取其中，总计合税之钱，折为布帛之数。 
现代文：希望核定各州最初实行两税那一年所交纳的绢帛布匹总额，按照现在通行的物价确定绢帛布匹总额的价值，如果物价偏低就加价，如果物价偏高就减价，酌量着取中定价，然后总计全部税收应得的价钱，折合成布匹丝帛的数额。 
English: It is desired to ascertain the sum total of the taxes paid by the States in the year of the first imposition of the two taxes, to determine the value of the total of the taxes according to the current price, to increase the price if the price is too low, to reduce the price if the price is too high, to fix the price at a reasonable rate, and then to sum up the total of the taxes due, to be converted into the amount of the tax.

古文：又曰： 夫地力之生物有大限，取之有度，用之有节，则常足。取之无度，用之无节，则常不足。
现代文：他又说： 大凡土地生长物产的能力是有最大限度的。因而，索取物产有限度，使用物产有节制，才能经常充裕；索取物产没有限度，使用物产没有节制，就会经常匮乏。
English: He also said: "The land has a maximum capacity to grow goods. Therefore, only when the demand for goods is limited and the use of goods is controlled can there be constant abundance; when the demand for goods is unlimited and the use of goods is uncontrolled, there will be constant scarcity.

古文：生物之丰败由天，用物之多少由人。
现代文：生长物产的丰饶与衰歉是由上天决定的，消费物产的多少是由人决定的。
English: The abundance and decline of growth products are determined by the heavens, and the amount of consumption products is determined by people.

古文：是以圣王立程，量入为出，虽遇灾难，下无困穷。
现代文：所以，圣明的君王立下法规，即是估量收入的情况以制定支出的计划，即使遇到灾害祸难，民间不会困顿窘迫。
English: Therefore, the king of wisdom decreed, that is, the situation of income is estimated to make an expenditure plan, even if it encounters disasters and calamities, the people will not be in distress.

古文：理化既衰，则乃反是，量出为入，不恤所无。
现代文：在政治与教化衰败以后，却恰好与此相反，即是估量支出的情况以制定收入的计划，并不考虑没有这些收入。
English: After the decline of politics and education, the opposite happened, that is, the situation of expenditure was estimated in order to plan for income, without taking into account the absence of such income.

古文：桀用天下而不足，汤用七十里而有馀，是乃用之盈虚，在节与不节耳。 
现代文：他大略是说： 为人长官的人很少能够推究在地位相互变易以后忠诚与宽恕是什么情形，也不能体察大公无私，为国献身是何等情意。
English: He said, in a nutshell, "It is rare for a chief of staff to be able to fathom what loyalty and forgiveness look like after a mutual change in status, or to experience the feelings of selflessness and dedication to the country.

古文：其三，论长吏以增户、加税、辟田为课绩，其略曰： 长人者罕能推忠恕易地之情，体至公徇国之意，迭行小惠，竞诱奸，以倾夺邻境为智能，以招萃逋逃为理化，舍彼适此者既为新收而有复，倏往忽来者又以复业而见优。唯怀土安居，首末不迁者，则使之日重，敛之日加。
现代文：他们交替着给人们一些小小的恩惠，争着诱引奸民，把与相邻的州道的相互排挤与争夺视为精明能干，将招徕和聚集逃亡的人口视为政治清明、教化大行。由外地迁到此处的人们既由于新近才被收罗而得以免征赋税，往来倏忽不定的人们又因属于恢复故业而受到优待，只有对那些依恋故土、安心定居、自始至终不肯迁徙他乡的人们，却役使日见繁重，征收日益增加。
English: They alternately give people some small favors, compete to lure villains, regard the mutual exclusion and competition with neighboring state roads as shrewd and capable, and regard the recruitment and gathering of fugitive populations as politically clear and edifying. People who moved here from other places were exempted from taxation because they were recently collected, and people who were uncertain were treated favorably because they belonged to the restoration of the old business. Only for those who were attached to their homeland, settled down safely, and refused to move away from home from beginning to end, but the service was increasingly burdensome and the levy was increasing.

古文：是令地著之人恒代惰游赋役，则何异驱之转徙，教之浇讹。
现代文：这就使定居的人们经常替懒散游荡的人们提供赋税与徭役，这与驱赶人们辗转流徙，唆使人们浇薄欺诈又有什么区别呢！
English: What is the difference between this and driving people to migrate and inciting them to commit fraud?

古文：此由牧宰不克弘通，各私所部之过也。 
现代文：这都是由于地方长官缺少广博通达的见识，各自对自己所统领的事务怀有私心的过错啊！ 
English: This is all due to the fact that local governors lack broad and comprehensive knowledge, and each of them is guilty of selfishness in the affairs they preside over!

古文：又曰： 立法齐人，久无不弊，理之者若不知维御损益之宜，则巧伪萌生，恒因沮劝而滋矣。
现代文：他又说： 设置法规，治理人民，时间长了，没有不产生弊病的。如果掌管法规的人不懂得掌握时机，适时变革，便会使奸巧诈伪萌生，并经常由于执法者不听劝告而滋长。
English: He also said: It takes a long time to set up regulations and govern the people, and there is nothing that does not produce ills. If the people in charge of regulations do not know how to seize the opportunity and make timely changes, they will cause cunning and fraud to germinate, and often grow because the law enforcers do not listen to advice.

古文：请申命有司，详定考绩。
现代文：请向有关部门发布命令，详细制定考核成绩的办法。
English: Please issue an order to the relevant departments to work out a detailed method for assessing the results.

古文：若当管之内，人益阜殷，所定税额有馀，任其据户口均减，以减数多少为考课等差。
现代文：如果在应管辖的地域以内，人口愈益富实繁盛，在完成规定的税收数额以后仍有剩余，便听凭该地长官根据户口平均减税，依照减税数量的多少来规定考核官吏成绩的等级。
English: If, within the area to be governed, the population becomes more and more affluent and prosperous, and there is still a surplus after the specified amount of tax has been paid, the governor of the area shall, based on the average tax reduction of the household registration and the number of tax reductions, determine the grade for assessing the performance of officials.

古文：其当管税物通比，每户十分减三者为上课，减二者次焉，减一者又次焉。
现代文：关于减税的数量与应管辖税收物资通常的比率，每户纳税减少十分之三的，考核成绩为上等，减少十分之二的，考核成绩为次一等，减少十分之一的，考核成绩为再次一等。
English: With regard to the ratio between the amount of tax reduction and the normal amount of taxable materials subject to jurisdiction, if the tax payment per household is reduced by three-tenths, the assessment result is superior, if it is reduced by two-tenths, the assessment result is second-class, and if it is reduced by one-tenth, the assessment result is again first-class.

古文：如或人多流亡，加税见户，比校殿罚亦如之。 
现代文：如果人口多有流离散失，于是在现存户口上增加税收，考查成绩居于劣等，其惩罚办法，也按照前述原则处理。 
English: If the population is mostly displaced and dispersed, then the tax is increased on the existing household registration, the examination results are inferior, and the punishment methods are also dealt with in accordance with the aforementioned principles.

古文：其四，论税限迫促，其略曰： 建官立国，所以养人也；赋人取财，所以资国也。
现代文：第四条，论述征收税务的期限失于紧迫。他大略是说： 设置百官，创立国家，是以养民为目的的；向百姓征收赋税，索取财货，是以供给国家为目的的。
English: Article 4 discusses that the time limit for levying taxes is too short. He said roughly: The purpose of setting up a hundred officials and founding a country is to feed the people; the purpose of levying taxes on the people and demanding goods and money is to supply the country.

古文：明君不厚其所资而害其所养，故必先人事而借其暇力，先家给而敛其馀财。 
现代文：贤明的君王不肯为了丰厚的供给而使所养的人民受到损害，所以必须首先办好人们应做的事情，而后借用人们的余力，必须首先使家家富足起来，而后征收人们剩余的资财。 
English: A wise prince does not want to harm the people he feeds for the sake of abundant supply, so he must first do what people should do, and then borrow people's spare time. He must first make his family rich, and then collect people's surplus assets.

古文：又曰： 蚕事方兴，已输缣税，农功未艾，遽敛谷租。
现代文：他又说： 养蚕的事情刚刚开始，已经要交纳丝织品的税收了；农田的活计还没有结束，已经赶忙征收谷物的田租了。
English: He also said: The business of raising silkworms has just begun, and the tax on silk fabrics has already been paid; the work of the farmland has not ended, and the land rent of grain has been hastily collected.

古文：上司之绳责既严，下吏之威暴愈促，有者急卖而耗其半直，无者求假而费其倍酬。
现代文：既然上级长官的管束督责是严厉的，不级官吏的欺凌暴虐也就益发紧迫。尚有东西可以纳税的人们赶忙出卖物品，因而要损耗一半的价值；没有东西可以纳税的人们求人借贷，因而要加倍还债。
English: Since the control and supervision of superiors is strict, the bullying and tyranny of subordinate officials is more urgent. People who still have something to pay taxes are in a hurry to sell goods, so they have to lose half of the value; people who have nothing to pay taxes ask for loans, so they have to double the debt.

古文：望更详定征税期限。 
现代文：希望再详慎地制定收税的期限。 
English: It is hoped that the time limit for tax collection will be set out in more detail.

古文：其五，请以税茶钱置义仓以备水旱，其略曰： 古称九年、六年之蓄者，率土臣庶通为之计耳，固非独丰公庚，不及编也。
现代文：第五条，请求用征收的茶税钱来设置义仓，以便防备水旱灾害。他大略是说： 古时候关于国家在三十年内要有九年、六年粮食储备的说法，是将疆域以内的臣民全部计算在内，而不是单单让公家的谷仓丰足而不把编入户藉的百姓计算在内。
English: He said roughly: In ancient times, the saying that the country should have nine years or six years of grain reserves within thirty years was to count all the subjects within the territory, rather than just letting the public granaries be plentiful and not counting the people enrolled in household loans.

古文：近者有司奏请税茶，岁约得五十万贯，元敕令贮户部，用救百姓凶饥。
现代文：近来，有关部门上奏请求征收茶税，每年大约可以得到钱五十万贯，原来的敕令要求将茶税钱储存在户部，用来救济百姓的饥荒。
English: Recently, the relevant departments submitted a request to levy a tea tax, which can get about half a million Korean won every year. The original royal order required the tea tax money to be stored in the household, to be used to relieve the famine of the people.

古文：今以蓄粮，适副前旨。 
现代文：现在，用这笔钱储备粮食，恰好符合以前的旨意。 
English: Now, using that money to stockpile food is exactly what they wanted to do.

古文：其六，论兼并之家，私敛重于公税，其略曰： 今京畿之内，每田一亩，官税五升，而私家收租殆有亩至一石者，是二十倍于官税也。
现代文：第六条，论述吞并土地的人家，私下收租比官府征税更为繁重。他大略是说： 如今在京城周围地区之内，每一亩田地，官府征税五升，但私人收租有的大约每亩多达一石，是官府征税的二十倍。
English: Article 6, discussing the people who have annexed land, privately collecting rent is more burdensome than the government's taxation. He roughly said: Nowadays, in the area around Beijing, the government levies five liters per mu of field, but private rent collection has about one stone per mu, which is twenty times the government's taxation.

古文：降及中等，租犹半之。
现代文：降到中等田地，所收田租仍有半石。
English: If it is reduced to a medium-sized field, the field rent received is still half a stone.

古文：夫土地王者之所有，耕稼农夫之所为，而兼并之徒，居然受利。 
现代文：一般说来，土地，是归君王所有的，耕种，是由农夫完成的。然而，吞并土地的人居然在其中得到好处。 
English: Generally speaking, the land is owned by the king and cultivated by the farmer, but those who annex the land actually benefit from it.

古文：又曰： 望凡所占田，约为条限，裁减租价，务利贫人。
现代文：他又说： 希望对一切被占有的田地，预先规定限制性的条款，裁减田租的价钱，务必让贫困的人得到好处。
English: He also said: I hope that restrictive clauses will be stipulated in advance for all occupied fields, and the price of field rent will be reduced, so that the poor will benefit.

古文：法贵必行，慎在深刻，裕其制以便俗，严其令以惩违，微损有馀，稍优不足，失不损富，优可赈穷，此乃古者安富恤穷之善经，不可舍也。 
现代文：法规可贵的是一定要实行下去，需要谨慎的是防止深究苛察。将制度设立得宽和一些是为了方便大众，将法令规定得严厉一些是为了惩诫违法者。要微微损伤一点富裕人家的收入，而稍稍照顾一下贫穷人家的利益，使富裕人家的损失并不致于有伤富足，而使对贫穷人家的照顾足以赈济穷困。这便是安定富人，体恤贫民的美好的筹措，是不可舍弃的啊。 
English: Valuable laws and regulations must continue to be implemented, but caution is needed to prevent in-depth scrutiny. The system should be set up in a broad manner to facilitate the public, and the laws and regulations should be made more stringent in order to discipline violators. It is necessary to slightly damage the income of the rich, but slightly take care of the interests of the poor, so that the loss of the rich does not result in injury to the rich, and the care of the poor is sufficient to relieve poverty. This is a stable rich, sympathetic to the poor, beautiful financing, which is indispensable.

