古文：一曰：凡为天下，治国家，必务本而後末。
现代文：孝行凡是统治天下，治理国家，必先致力于根本，而把非根本的东西放在后边。
English: In terms of filial piety, if you want to rule the world and govern the country, you must first work on the fundamentals and leave the non-fundamental things behind.

古文：所谓本者，非耕耘种植之谓，务其人也。务其人，非贫而富之，寡而众之，务其本也。
现代文：所谓根本，不是说的耕耘种植，而是致力于人事、致力于人事，不是人民贫困而让人民富足，人口稀少而让人口众多，而是致力于根本。
English: The so-called "fundamental" is not cultivation, but commitment to people, commitment to people, not the people's poverty but the people's affluence, not the sparse population but the large population, but commitment to the fundamental.

古文：务本莫贵於孝。人主孝，则名章荣，下服听，天下誉；人臣孝，则事君忠，处官廉，临难死；士民孝，则耕芸疾，守战固，不罢北。
现代文：致力于根本，没有比孝道更重要的了，君主做到孝，那么名声就卓著荣耀，下面的人就服从，天下的人就赞誉；臣子做到孝，那么侍奉君主就忠诚，居官就清廉，面临灾难就能献身，士人百姓做到孝，那么耕耘就用力，攻必克，守必固，不疲困，不败逃。
English: There is nothing more important than filial piety. If the monarch is filial, then the reputation will be distinguished with glory, the people below will obey, and the people around the world will praise; if the courtiers are filial, then they will serve the monarch loyally, the officials will be clean, and they will be able to devote themselves in the face of disaster. If the scholars and the people are filial, then they will work hard, attack, and keep firm, and they will not be exhausted, and they will not be defeated.

古文：夫孝，三皇五帝之本务，而万事之纪也。
现代文：孝道，是三皇五帝的根本，是各种事情的纲纪。
English: Filial piety is the foundation of the three emperors and five emperors, and is the discipline of all things.

古文：夫执一术而百善至，百邪去，天下从者，其惟孝也！
现代文：掌握了一种原则因而所有的好事都会出现，所有的坏事都去掉，天下都会顺从，大概只有孝道吧!
English: Having mastered a principle, all the good things will appear, all the bad things will be eliminated, the whole world will obey, probably only filial piety!

古文：故论人必先以所亲，而後及所疏；必先以所重，而後及所轻。
现代文：所以评论人一定先根据他对亲人的态度，然后再推及到他对一般人的态度；一定先依据他对关系重要之人的态度，然后再推及到他对关系轻微之人的态度。
English: Therefore, the commentator must first base his attitude on his relatives, and then extend his attitude to ordinary people; he must first base his attitude on people with important relationships, and then extend his attitude to people with light relationships.

古文：今有人於此，行於亲重，而不简慢於轻疏，则是笃谨孝道。
现代文：假如有这样一个人，对跟他关系亲近重要的人行孝道，而对跟他关系轻微疏远的人也不怠慢，那么这就是谨慎笃厚于孝道了。
English: If there is such a person who shows filial piety to those who are close to him and important to him, but does not neglect those who are slightly distant from him, then this is prudence and is rich in filial piety.

古文：先王之所以治天下也。
现代文：这就是先王用来治理天下的方法啊！
English: This is how the last king used to rule the world!

古文：故爱其亲，不敢恶人；敬其亲，不敢慢人。
现代文：所以，热爱自己的亲人，不敢厌恶别人，尊敬自己的亲人，不敢怠慢别人。
English: Therefore, love your relatives, do not dare to loathe others, respect your relatives, do not dare to neglect others.

古文：爱敬尽於事亲，光耀加於百姓，究於四海，此天子之孝也。
现代文：把热爱尊敬全都用在侍奉亲人上，把光明施加在百姓身上，推广到普天下。这些就是天子的孝道啊！
English: To use all love and respect in serving one's relatives, to shed light on the people, and to spread it to the whole world. These are the filial piety of the Son of Heaven!

古文：曾子曰： 身者，父母之遗体也。行父母之遗体，敢不敬乎？
现代文：曾子说： 人的身体是父母所生，使用父母给予的身体，怎敢不小心谨慎呢?
English: Zeng Zi said: The human body is born from the parents. How dare we not be careful when using the body given by the parents?

古文：居处不庄，非孝也；事君不忠，非孝也；莅官不敬，非孝也；朋友不笃，非孝也；战陈无勇，非孝也。
现代文：平居不恭敬，不是孝顺，侍奉君主不忠诚，不是，孝顺；居官不谨慎，不是孝顺；交友不诚实，不是孝顺！临战不勇敢，不是孝顺。
English: To live in peace without respect is not filial piety; to serve the sovereign without loyalty is not filial piety; to hold public office without discretion is not filial piety; to make friends without honesty is not filial piety; to go to war without courage is not filial piety.

古文：五行不遂，灾及乎亲，敢不敬乎？ 
现代文：上面五种情况不能做到，灾祸就会连累到亲人，怎敢不小心谨慎呢? 
English: If the above five situations cannot be achieved, the disaster will involve relatives. How dare you not be careful?

古文：《商书》曰： 刑三百，罪莫重於不孝。 
现代文：《商书》上说， 刑法三百条，罪过没有比不孝顺更重的了。 
English: "Commercial Book" said that there are three hundred articles in the Criminal Law, and there is no more serious crime than not being filial.

古文：曾子曰： 先王之所以治天下者五：贵德、贵贵、贵老、敬长、慈幼。
现代文：曾子说： 先王用来治理天下的方法有五条：崇尚道德，崇尚尊贵，尊敬老人，尊敬年长的，爱护年幼的。
English: Zeng Zi said: There are five methods used by the previous king to govern the world: advocating morality, advocating dignity, respecting the elderly, respecting the elderly, and caring for the young.

古文：此五者，先王之所以定天下也。
现代文：这五条，就是先王用来使天下安定的方法。
English: These five rules were used by the former king to determine the fate of the world.

古文：所谓贵德，为其近於圣也；所谓贵贵，为其近於君也；所谓贵老，为其近於亲也；所谓敬长，为其近於兄也；所谓慈幼，为其近於弟也。 
现代文：所以崇尚道德，是因为它接近于圣贤，所以崇尚尊贵，是因为它接近于君主；所以尊敬老人，是因他接近于父母，所以尊敬年长的，是因为他接近于兄长，所以爱护年幼的，是因为他接近于弟弟。 
English: Therefore, to venerate virtue is to be close to a sage, to venerate nobility is to be close to a monarch, to respect an old man is to be close to a parent, to respect an elder is to be close to an elder brother, and to cherish the young is to be close to a younger brother.

古文：曾子曰： 父母生之，子弗敢杀；父母置之，子弗敢废；父母全之，子弗敢阙。故舟而不游，道而不径，能全支体，以守宗庙；可谓孝矣。 
现代文：曾子说： 父母生下了自身，儿子不敢毁坏；父母养育了自身，儿子不敢废弃；父母保全了自身，儿子不敢损伤，所以渡水时乘船而不浒涉，走路时走大路而不走小路。能保全四肢身体，以便守住祖庙，可以叫做孝顺了。 
English: Zengzi said: The parents gave birth to themselves, the son did not dare to destroy; the parents raised themselves, the son did not dare to abandon; the parents preserved themselves, the son did not dare to damage, so when crossing the water, they took the boat without interference, and when walking, they took the high road without taking the small road. Being able to preserve the limbs and body in order to keep the ancestral temple can be called filial piety.

古文：养有五道：修宫室、安床笫、节饮食、养体之道也；树五色，施五采，列文章，养目之道也；正六律，和五声，杂八音，养耳之道也；熟五谷，烹六畜，和煎调，养口之道也；和颜色，说言语，敬进退，养志之道也。
现代文：养身之道有五条：整修房屋，使卧具安适，节制饮食，这是保养身体的方法；树立五色，设置五采，排列花纹，这是保养眼睛的方法，使六律准确，使五声和惜，使八音协调，这是保养耳朵的方法 把饭做熟，把肉煮熟调和味道，这是保养嘴的方法，面色和悦，言语动听，举止恭敬，这是保养意志的方法。
English: There are five ways to improve one's health: renovate the house, make the bedding comfortable, control the diet, this is the way to maintain the body; establish the five colors, set up the five mines, arrange the patterns, this is the way to maintain the eyes, make the six laws accurate, make the five voices harmonious, make the eight tones harmonious, this is the way to maintain the ears Cook the rice well, cook the meat well and adjust the taste, this is the way to maintain the mouth, the complexion is pleasant, the speech is pleasant, the behavior is respectful, this is the way to maintain the will.

古文：此五者，代进而厚用之，可谓善养矣。
现代文：这五条，依次更替实行，就可以叫做善于保养身体了。
English: These five, implemented in turn, can be called good at maintaining the body.

古文：乐正子春下堂而伤足，瘳而数月不出，犹有忧色。
现代文：乐正子春下堂时伤了脚，脚好了可是几个月都不出门，脸上仍然有忧愁的颜色。
English: Le Zhengzi hurt her foot when she went to the hall in spring. Although her foot is fine, she hasn't left the house for months. Her face still has a sad look.

古文：门人问之曰： 夫子下堂而伤足，瘳而数月不出，犹有忧色，敢问其故？ 
现代文：学生们问他说； 先生您下堂时伤了脚，脚好了可是几个月都不出门，脸上仍然有忧愁的颜色，请问这是什么缘故? 
English: The students asked him, "Sir, you hurt your foot when you were walking down the hall. Your foot is fine now, but you haven't left the house in months. Your face still has a sad look to it. What's the reason for this?"

古文：乐正子春曰： 善乎而问之！吾闻之曾子，曾子闻之仲尼：父母全而生之，子全而归之，不亏其身，不损其形，可谓孝矣。
现代文：乐正子春说： 你们问这个问得真好啊，我从曾子那里听说过，曾于又从孔于那里听说过这样的话，父母完好地把儿子生下来，儿子要完好地把身体归还父母，不亏损自己的身子，不毁坏自己的形体，这可以叫敞孝顺了。
English: Lezheng Zichun said, "It's really good of you to ask this question. I have heard from my great-grandson, and I have also heard from Kong Yu, that parents should give birth to their son in good health, and the son should return his body to his parents in good health, without losing his body or destroying his body. This can be called filial piety.

古文：君子无行咫步而忘之。
现代文：君子一举一动都不忘记孝道。
English: A gentleman never forgets his filial duty.

古文：余忘孝道，是以忧。 
现代文：我忘记了孝道，因此才忧愁。 
English: I forgot my filial duty, and that's why I'm sad.

古文：故曰，身者非其私有也，严亲之遗躬也。
现代文：所以说，身体不是白己私有的，而是父母亲留给的。
English: Therefore, one's body is not one's own, but is left to one by one's parents.

古文：民之本教曰孝，其行孝曰养。
现代文：人民根本的教养是孝顺，行孝道是奉养。
English: The fundamental upbringing of the people is filial piety, and the practice of filial piety is upbringing.

古文：养可能也，敬为难；敬可能也，安为难；安可能也，卒为难。父母既没，敬行其身，无遗父母恶名，可谓能终矣。
现代文：奉养父母是可以做到的，对父母恭敬是难做到的，对父母恭敬是可以做到的，使父母舒适是难做到的，使父母舒适是可以做到的，能始终如一是难做到的。父母死了以后，自己行为谨慎，不要带给父母坏名声，可以叫做能善始善终了。
English: It is possible to support one's parents, it is difficult to respect one's parents, it is possible to respect one's parents, it is difficult to make one's parents comfortable, it is possible to make one's parents comfortable, and it is difficult to be consistent. After one's parents die, one should be careful not to bring a bad reputation to one's parents. It can be said that one can have a good beginning and a good ending.

古文：仁者，仁此者也；礼者，履此者也；义者，宜此者也；信者，信此者也；强者，强此者也。
现代文：所谓仁，就是以孝道为仁；所谓礼，就是实行孝道，所谓义，就是以孝道为宜，所谓信，就是以孝道为信，所谓强，就是以孝道为强。
English: The so-called benevolence is to be benevolent in filial piety; the so-called virtue is to fulfill filial piety; the so-called righteousness is to do what is suitable for filial piety; the so-called faith is to be honest in filial piety; the so-called effort is to make efforts in filial piety.

古文：乐自顺此生也，刑自逆此作也。
现代文：欢乐自然会由于实行孝道而产生。
English: Joy naturally arises from the practice of filial piety.

古文：二曰：求之其本，经旬必得；求之其末，劳而无功。
现代文：刑法自然会由于违背孝道而施行。
English: Criminal law will naturally be enforced for violating filial piety.

古文：功名之立，由事之本也，得贤之化也。
现代文：本味做事情从根本做起超，经过短时间必定有收获，从枝节做起，就会劳而无功。功名的建立，是由于抓住了事物的根本，得到了贤人教化。
English: The principle of doing things is to start from the root and go beyond. After a short time, there must be a harvest. If you start from the branches, you will work in vain. The establishment of fame is due to grasping the root of things and being enlightened by sages.

古文：非贤，其孰知乎事化？
现代文：不是贤人，谁懂得事情的教化呢?
English: Who, if not a sage, knows how to enlighten things?

古文：故曰其本在得贤。
现代文：所以说，建立功名的根本在于得到贤人。
English: Therefore, the foundation of building a reputation is to get a wise man.

古文：有侁氏女子采桑，得婴儿于空桑之中，献之其君。
现代文：有侁氏的女子采摘桑叶，在中空的桑树里捡到一个婴儿，把他献给了自己的君主。
English: A woman of the Yi clan, picking mulberry leaves, found a baby in a hollowed-out mulberry tree and gave him to her lord.

古文：其君令烰人养之，察其所以然。
现代文：君主命厨师哺育这个婴儿，并让他击了解这是怎么回事儿。
English: The monarch ordered the chef to nurse the baby and make him understand what was going on.

古文：曰： 其母居伊水之上，孕，梦有神告之曰： 臼出水而东走，毋顾！ 
现代文：厨师向君主报告说： 婴儿的母亲住在伊水边，怀了孕，梦见天神告诉她说： 臼里如果出丁水就向东跑，不要回头看。 
English: The cook reported to the monarch: "The baby's mother lived near the Yishui River, was pregnant, and dreamed that the gods told her: 'If there is water in the mill, run east and don't look back.

古文：明日，视臼出水，告其邻，东走十里而顾，其邑尽为水，身因化为空桑。
现代文：第二天，她看到臼里出丁水，就把情况告诉了她的邻居，向东跑了十里，回头一看，她的村子已是一片汪洋。
English: The next day, when she saw water gushing from the mill, she told her neighbors about the situation, ran ten miles east, and when she looked back, her village was already a sea.

古文：故命之曰伊尹。 
现代文：于是她的身体变成了一棵中空的桑树。
English: So her body turned into a hollow mulberry tree.

古文：此伊尹生空桑之故也。
现代文：因此给这个婴儿起名叫伊尹。 这就是伊尹出生在空桑之中的缘由。
English: Therefore, the baby was named Yi Yun, which is the reason why Yi Yun was born in the middle of the sky.

古文：长而贤。汤闻伊尹，使人请之有侁氏，有侁氏不可。
现代文：伊尹长大了很贤德，商汤听说伊尹贤德，就派人向有侁氏请求要伊尹，有侁氏不答应。
English: Yi Yin grew up to be very virtuous. When Shang Tang heard about Yi Yin's virtuousness, they sent someone to the Youyi clan to ask for Yi Yin, but the Youyi clan did not agree.

古文：伊尹亦欲归汤，汤於是请取妇为婚。
现代文：伊尹也想归附汤。汤于是就请球娶有侁氏女为妻，结为婿姻。
English: Yi Yin also wanted to become a vassal of Tang, who then asked the ball to marry a daughter of the Xing family, making him a son-in-law.

古文：有侁氏喜，以伊尹媵女。
现代文：有侁氏很高兴，就把伊尹作为女子陪嫁的奴仆给了汤。
English: Mr. Yu was very happy, so he gave the soup to Yin as a servant accompanying the bride.

古文：故贤主之求有道之士，无不以也；有道之士求贤主，无不行也。
现代文：所以，贤明的君主为求得有道之士，没有什么办法不可使用。有道之士为求得贤明的君主，没有什么事不能做。
English: Therefore, there is nothing that a wise ruler cannot do to obtain a virtuous person, and there is nothing that a virtuous person cannot do to obtain a wise ruler.

古文：相得然後乐，不谋而亲，不约而信，相为殚智竭力，犯危行苦，志欢乐之。
现代文：贤明的君主和有道之士各如其愿，然后彼此都很快乐。他们事先不谋划就能亲密无间，不约定就能恪守信用，共同尽心竭力，承担危难和劳苦，内心却以此为乐。
English: The wise ruler and the virtuous person each do as they wish, and then they are happy with each other. They can be intimate without prior planning, they can abide by the trust without agreement, they can make every effort together, bear danger and labor, but their hearts are happy with this.

古文：此功名所以大成也。
现代文：这就是功名取得极大成就的原因。
English: That's why it's been so successful.

古文：固不独，士有孤而自恃，人主有奋而好独者，则名号必废熄，社稷必危殆。
现代文：贤明的君主、有道之士本来不会孤独，士如果孤独傲慢，君主如果骄傲而且喜好孤独，那么名声必定被毁灭，国家必定遭危险。
English: A wise ruler and a virtuous person would not be lonely. If a ruler is proud and likes to be alone, his reputation will be ruined and the country will be in danger.

古文：故黄帝立四面，尧、舜得伯阳、续耳然後成。
现代文：所以黄帝派人去四方寻求贤人立为辅佐，尧、舜得到伯阳、续耳，然后成就了帝业。
English: Therefore, the Yellow Emperor sent people to the four directions to seek sages to serve as assistants, and Zou and Zou were awarded the title of Boyang and Duanlu, and then the imperial cause was achieved.

古文：凡贤人之德，有以知之也。
现代文：大凡贤德之人的品德，是有办法了解的。
English: There is a way to understand the character of a great and virtuous man.

古文：伯牙鼓琴，锺子期听之。方鼓琴而志在太山，锺子期曰： 善哉乎鼓琴！巍巍乎若太山。 
现代文：伯牙弹琴，钟子期听刚开始弹琴时表现出攀登高山的志向，钟子期说： 弹琴弹得太好了，就象高山一样巍峨。 
English: When he first started to play the piano, he showed an ambition to climb mountains. He said, "I play the piano so well, it's as tall as a mountain."

古文：少选之间，而志在流水，锺子期又曰： 善哉乎鼓琴！汤汤乎若流水。 
现代文：过了一会儿，琴声表现出随流水奔流的志向，钟子期又说； 弹琴弹得太好了，就象流水一样激荡。 
English: After a while, the sound of the harp showed the intention of rushing with the flowing water, and the bell phase said; Playing the harp is playing so well, it is stirring like flowing water.

古文：锺子期死，伯牙破琴绝弦，终身不复鼓琴，以为世无足复为鼓琴者。
现代文：钟子期死丁以后，伯平摔坏了琴，折断丁弦，终身不再弹琴，认为世上再没有值得为之弹琴的人。
English: After Ding's death in the Zhongzi period, Bo Ping broke the piano, broke the Ding string, and stopped playing the piano for life, believing that there was no one in the world worth playing the piano for.

古文：非独琴若此也，贤者亦然。
现代文：不仅弹琴是这样，寻求贤德的人也是这样。
English: So it is not only with those who play the harp, but also with those who seek wisdom.

古文：虽有贤者，而无礼以接之，贤奚由尽忠？
现代文：即便是有贤德的人，如果不以礼相待，贤德的人怎样尽忠呢?
English: Even if there are virtuous people, if they do not treat each other with courtesy, how can virtuous people be loyal?

古文：犹御之不善，骥不自千里也。
现代文：这就如同御手不好，良马也不能跟随他跑千里远一样。
English: It's like a bad rider and a good horse can't follow him for thousands of miles.

古文：汤得伊尹，祓之於庙，爝以爟火，衅以牺豕叚。
现代文：汤得到伊尹之后，在宗庙里举行祓除灾邪的仪式，点燃苇把消除不祥，用纯色雄猪的血涤祭器。
English: After the soup was given to Yi Yin, a ceremony was held in the ancestral temple to exorcise the evil, lighting the pestle to eliminate the ominous, and using the pure-colored boar's blood to dye the sacrificial vessel.

古文：明日，设朝而见之。
现代文：第二天上朝，汤以礼接见伊尹。
English: In the morning of the next day, Tang Yili met with Yin Rong.

古文：说汤以至味，汤曰： 可对而为乎？ 
现代文：伊尹为场讲述美味，汤说： 可以得到并制作这些美味吗? 
English: Yi Yin was on hand to introduce the delicacies, and Tang said, "Is it possible to obtain and make these delicacies?"

古文：对曰： 君之国小，不足以具之，为天子然後可具。
现代文：伊尹回答说： 您的国家小，不足以具备这些东西，当了天子，然后才可取具备。
English: Yi Yin replied: Your country is too small to have these things, but if you are a son of heaven, then you should have them.

古文：夫三群之虫，水居者腥，肉犭瞿者臊，草食者膻。
现代文：三类动物，生活在水里的腥，吃肉的臊，吃草的膻。
English: Three kinds of animals, living in the water, eating meat, eating grass.

古文：臭恶犹美，皆有所以。
现代文：气味不好的仍然可以使之变好，这些都各有它们内在的原因。
English: Bad smells can still be made better, each with their own intrinsic reasons.

古文：凡味之本，水最为始。
现代文：调和味道的根本，在于首先用水。
English: The key to blending flavours is to start with water.

古文：五味三材，九沸九变，火为之纪。
现代文：五种味道，三样材料，多次煮沸，多次变化，火是关键。
English: Five flavours, three ingredients, multiple boiling, multiple changes, fire is the key.

古文：时疾时徐，灭腥去臊除膻，必以其胜，无失其理。
现代文：火时而炽热，时而微弱，一定要用火除去腥味，臊味、膻味，但火候要适中。
English: The fire is sometimes hot and sometimes weak. It is necessary to use fire to remove the smell, taste and taste, but the heat should be moderate.

古文：调和之事，必以甘酸苦辛咸，先後多少，其齐甚微，皆有自起。
现代文：调和味道，必定要用甜酸苦辣咸。先放后放，放多放少，调料的剂量很小，这些都有一定的规定。
English: To harmonize the taste, it is necessary to use sweet, sour, bitter, spicy and salty. There are certain rules for putting it first, putting it later, putting more and less, and the dosage of the seasoning is very small.

古文：鼎中之变，精妙微纤，口弗能言，志弗能喻，若射御之微，阴阳之化，四时之数。
现代文：鼎中味道的变化，精妙微细，既不能言传，又不能意会，就如同射技御技的精微、阴阳二气的交台、四季的变化一样。
English: The changes in the taste of the ding, exquisite and subtle, can neither be told nor understood, just like the refinement of the shooting technique, the intersection of yin and yang, and the changes in the four seasons.

古文：故久而不弊，熟而不烂，甘而不哝，酸而不酷，咸而不减，辛而不烈，澹而不薄。
现代文：所以，时间长，但不毁坏，做得熟，但不超过火候，甜，但不过度，酸，但不过分，咸，但不减损原味，辣，但不浓烈，清淡，但不过薄，肥，但不腻。
English: Therefore, long time, but not destroyed, cooked, but not over cooked, sweet, but not excessive, sour, but not excessive, salty, but does not detract from the original flavor, spicy, but not strong, light, but not thin, fat, but not greasy.

古文：肥而不候，肉之美者，猩猩之唇，獾獾之炙，隽觾之翠，述荡之腕，旄象之约，流沙之西，丹山之南，有凤之丸，沃民所食。
现代文：肉中的美味，有猩猩的嘴唇，獾獾的脚掌，隽觾的尾肉，述荡的小船，旄牛大象的短尾。以及流沙西边、丹山南边出产的沃国人所食用的凰凰卵。
English: The delicacies in the meat include the lips of the orangutan, the feet of the baboon, the tail of the baboon, the swinging boat, the short tail of the yakitori elephant, and the phoenix eggs produced on the west side of the sandbank and on the south side of the Dan Mountain.

古文：鱼之美者，洞庭之尃，东海之鲕，醴水之鱼，名曰朱鳖，六足、有珠、百碧。雚水之鱼，名曰鳐，其状若鲤而有翼，常从西海夜飞游於东海。
现代文：鱼中的美昧，有洞庭湖的鳟鱼，东海的鲕鱼，醴水中长着六只脚、能吐珠子、青翠色的名叫朱鳖的鱼，雚水中形状象鲤鱼可是却有翅膀、经常夜里从西海飞到东海的名叫鳐的鱼。
English: There is beauty in fish. There are eels from Dongting Lake, eels from the East Sea, a fish with six legs that can spit beads and a greenish color called the cinnamon eel, and a fish shaped like an eel but with wings that often flies from the West Sea to the East Sea at night.

古文：菜之美者，昆仑之苹，寿木之华，指姑之东。中容之国，有赤木玄木之叶焉，馀瞀之南，南极之崖，有菜，其名曰嘉树，其色若碧，阳华之芸，云梦之芹，具区之菁，浸渊之草，名曰土英。
现代文：菜中的美味，有昆仓山的茹菜，寿木的花果，指姑东边、中容国里的红树黑树的树叶，余瞀南边，南极边上颜色象碧玉一样的名叫嘉树的菜，阳华池的芸菜，云梦泽的水芹，具区泽的菁菜，浸渊的名叫土英的草。
English: Among the delicious dishes, there are the boiled vegetables of Kuncang Mountain, the flowers and fruits of Shoumu, the leaves of the mangroves and black trees in the east and middle of the country, the south of Yunnan Province and the south pole, the vegetables with the same color as jasper, the vegetables of Yanghua Pond, the cress of Yunmenze, the cabbage of Guzhu, and the grass of Tuying.

古文：和之美者，阳朴之姜，招摇之桂，越骆之菌，鳖鲔之醢，大夏之盐，宰揭之露，其色如玉，长泽之卵。
现代文：调料中的美味，有阳朴的姜，招摇的桂，骆越的笋，外来鲔鱼做的肉酱，大夏的盐，宰揭的洁白如玉的露，大泽的鸟卵。
English: The delicacies in the seasonings include rustic ginger, ostentatious cinnamon, Luo Yue's goji berry, meat sauce made from exotic squid, Baxter's salt, Zai Jie's pure white jade dew, and Osawa's bird's eggs.

古文：饭之美者，玄山之禾，不周之粟，阳山之穄，南海之秬。
现代文：粮食中的美味，有杰山的禾谷，不周山的小米，阳山的糜子，南海的黑黍。
English: The delicacies in the grain include the grain of Jie Mountain, the millet of Fuzhou Mountain, the hazelnuts of Yangshan Mountain, and the nigella of the South Sea.

古文：水之美者，三危之露，昆仑之井，沮江之丘，名曰摇水，曰山之水，高泉之山，其上有涌泉焉，冀州之原。
现代文：水中的美味，有三危山的露水，昆仓山的泉水，沮江也山丘上名叫摇木的泉水，白山的水，高泉山上作为冀州之水源头的涌泉。
English: Delicacies in water are the dew of the Sanxia Mountains, the spring water of the Kuncang Mountains, the spring water called the rocking tree on the Desolation River and the hills, the water of the Baishan Mountains, and the spring water of the Gaoquan Mountains as the source of water in Jizhou.

古文：果之美者，沙棠之实，常山之北，投渊之上，有百果焉，群帝所食，箕山之东，青鸟之所，有甘栌焉，江浦之橘，云梦之柚，汉上石耳。
现代文：水果中的美味，有沙棠树的果实，常山北边、投渊上面先帝们享用的各种果实，箕山东边、青鸟居住之处的甜山楂，长江边的橘子，云梦畔的袖子，汉水旁的石耳。
English: Among the delicious fruits, there are the fruits of the sandalwood tree, the various fruits enjoyed by the ancient emperors on the north side of the Changshan Mountains and the Tuyuan Mountains, the sweet hawthorn on the east side of the Lushan Mountains, where the blue bird lives, the tangerine on the Yangtze River, the sleeve on the side of the cloud dream, and the stone ear on the side of the Han River.

古文：所以致之，马之美者，青龙之匹，遗风之乘。非先为天子，不可得而具。
现代文：运来这些水果，要用青龙马和遗风马。不先当天子，就不可能具备这些美味。
English: These fruits are transported using Qinglongma and Yifengma. It is impossible to have these delicacies without first eating Tianzi.

古文：天子不可强为，必先知道。
现代文：天子不可以勉强去当，必须先懂得仁义之遣，仁义之道不在别人，而在于自己。
English: The Son of Heaven cannot be deceived by force. He must first understand the way of benevolence and righteousness. The way of benevolence and righteousness does not lie in others, but in himself.

古文：道者止彼在己，己成而天子成，天子成则至味具。
现代文：自己具备了仁义之道，因而就能成为天子。能成为天子，那么美味就齐备了。
English: If you have the way of benevolence and righteousness, you can become a heavenly son. If you can become a heavenly son, then deliciousness is ready.

古文：故审近所以知远也，成己所以成人也。
现代文：所以，审察近的就可以了解远的，自己具备了仁义之道就可以教化别人。
English: Therefore, if you examine what is near, you can understand what is far, and if you have the way of benevolence and righteousness, you can enlighten others.

古文：圣王之道要矣，岂越越多业哉！ 
现代文：圣人的办法很简约，哪里用得着费力去做许多事情昵? 
English: The sage's method is very simple, where do you have to work hard to do a lot of things?

古文：三曰：圣人之於事，似缓而急，似迟而速，以待时。
现代文：首时圣人的事情，好象很迟缓，无所作为，而实际却很迅速，能够成功，这是为了等待时机。
English: At first, the sage's affairs seem to be very slow and do nothing, but in fact they are very fast and can succeed, this is in order to wait for the opportunity.

古文：王季历困而死，文王苦之，有不忘羑里之丑，时未可也。
现代文：王季历为国事辛劳而死，周文王很痛苦，同时又不忘被封拘于羑需要里的耻辱他所以没有讨伐纣，是因为时机尚未成熟。
English: Wang Jili died for the hard work of state affairs, King Zhouwen was very painful, and at the same time, he did not forget the shame of being confined to his needs. The reason why he did not fight for his rights was because the time was not ripe.

古文：武王事之，夙夜不懈，亦不忘王门之辱。
现代文：武王臣事商纣，从早到晚都不敢懈怠，他也不忘文王被骂于玉门的耻辱。
English: King Wu and his courtiers discussed matters and did not dare to slack off from morning to night. He also did not forget the disgrace of King Wen being scolded at the Jade Gate.

古文：立十二年，而成甲子之事。
现代文：武王继位十二年，终于在甲子日大败殷军。
English: In the twelfth year of King Wu's succession to the throne, he finally defeated the Yin army on the Day of the Goat.

古文：时固不易得。
现代文：时机本来就不易得到。
English: The timing was never going to be easy.

古文：太公望，东夷之士也，欲定一世而无其主。
现代文：太公望是东夷人，他想平定天下，可是没有贤明的君主。
English: Taigongwang was from the Eastern Barbarians. He wanted to pacify the world, but there was no wise ruler.

古文：闻文王贤，故钓於渭以观之。
现代文：他听说文王贤明，所以到渭水边钓鱼，以便观察文王的品德。
English: He heard that King Wen was wise, so he went fishing at the edge of the Surabaya waters to observe King Wen's virtue.

古文：伍子胥欲见吴王而不得，客有言之於王子光者，见之而恶其貌，不听其说而辞之。
现代文：伍子胥想见吴王僚，但没能见到。有个门客对王子光讲了伍子胥的情况，王子光见到伍子胥却讨厌他的相貌，不听他讲话就谢绝了他。
English: Wu Zixuan wanted to see Wu Wangliang, but was unable to see him. A concierge told Prince Guang about Wu Zixuan. Prince Guang saw Wu Zixuan, but disliked his appearance and turned him down without listening to his speech.

古文：客请之王子光，王子光曰： 其貌适吾所甚恶也。 
现代文：门客问王子光为什么这样，王子光说： 他的相貌正是我特别讨厌的。 
English: The doorman asked the prince why this was so, and the prince said, "His appearance is exactly what I particularly dislike.

古文：客以闻伍子胥，伍子胥曰： 此易故也。
现代文：门客把这话告诉了伍子胥，伍子胥说： 这是容易的事情。
English: The doorkeeper told this to Wu Zixuan, and Wu Zixuan said, "This is an easy matter.

古文：愿令王子居於堂上，重帷而见其衣若手，请因说之。 
现代文：希望让王子光坐在堂上，我在两层帷幕里只露出衣服和手来。请让我借此同他谈话。 
English: I would like the prince to sit in the hall, and I would like to speak to him through the two-tiered curtain, revealing only my clothes and my hands.

古文：王子许。
现代文：王子光答应了。
English: Prince Hikaru agreed.

古文：伍子胥说之半，王子光举帷，搏其手而与之坐；说毕，王子光大说。
现代文：伍子胥谈话谈了一半，王子光就掀起帷幕，握住他的手，然后跟他一起坐下。伍子胥说完了，王子光非常高兴。
English: Wu Zixuan talked for half of the conversation, and Wang Ziguang raised the curtain, shook his hand, and then sat down with him. After Wu Zixuan finished speaking, Wang Ziguang was very happy.

古文：伍子胥以为有吴国者，必王子光也，退而耕于野。
现代文：伍子胥认为享有吴国的，必定是王子光，回去以后就在乡问耕作。
English: Wu Zixuan thought that it must be the prince's light to enjoy the country of Wuxu. After returning home, he asked about farming in the township.

古文：七年，王子光代吴王僚为王。
现代文：过了七年，王子光取代吴王僚当了吴王。
English: After seven years, Prince Guang replaced Wu Wangliang as the King of Wu.

古文：任子胥，子胥乃修法制，下贤良，选练士，习战斗。
现代文：他任用伍子胥，伍子胥于是就整顿法度，举用贤良，简选精兵，演习战斗。
English: He appointed Wu Zixuan, and then Wu Zixuan rectified the laws and regulations, promoted the virtuous, selected the elite soldiers, and practiced the battle.

古文：六年，然後大胜楚于柏举。九战九胜，追北千里。
现代文：过了六年，然后才在柏举大败楚国，九战九胜，追赶楚国的败军追了千余里。
English: After six years, it was only after the great defeat of the Chu Kingdom in the Baiji, the nine victories in nine battles, and the pursuit of the defeated army of the Chu Kingdom for more than a thousand miles.

古文：昭王出奔随，遂有郢。
现代文：楚昭王逃到随，吴军于是占领了郢都。
English: King Chu Zhao fled to Sui, and the Wu army then occupied Shu.

古文：亲射王宫，鞭荆平之坟三百。
现代文：伍子胥亲自箭射楚王宫，鞭打楚平王之墓三百下，以报杀父杀兄之仇。
English: Wu Zixuan personally shot the palace of King Chu with an arrow and lashed the tomb of King Chu Ping with three hundred lashes to avenge the murder of his father and brother.

古文：乡之耕，非忘其父之雠也，待时也。
现代文：他先前耕作，并不是忘记了杀父之仇，而是在等待时机。
English: He had previously cultivated, not forgetting the revenge of his father's murder, but waiting for the opportunity.

古文：墨者有田鸠，欲见秦惠王，留秦三年而弗得见。
现代文：墨家有个叫田鸠的，想见秦惠王，在秦国呆了三年但不能见到。
English: There was a young man from the Mo family named Tian Yao who wanted to see Qin Hui Wang. He stayed in Qin for three years, but was unable to see him.

古文：客有言之於楚王者，往见楚王。
现代文：有个客人把这情况告诉了楚王，田鸠就去见楚王。
English: A guest told King Chu about the situation, and Tian Xuan went to see King Chu.

古文：楚王说之，与将军之节以如秦。
现代文：楚王很喜欢他，给了他将军的符节让他到秦国去。
English: King Chu liked him very much and gave him the general's rune so that he could go to Qin.

古文：至，因见惠王。
现代文：他到了秦国，才见到了惠王。
English: It was not until he arrived in Qin that he met Hui Wang.

古文：告人曰： 之秦之道，乃之楚乎？ 
现代文：也告诉别人说： 到秦国来见惠王的途径，竟然是要先到楚国去啊! 
English: He also told others: The best way to go to Qin to see Hui Wang is to go to Chu first!

古文：固有近之而远、远之而近者。
现代文：事情本来就有离得近反而被疏远、离得远反而能接近的。
English: There are things that are far away that can be approached, and things that are far away that can be approached.

古文：时亦然。
现代文：时机也是这样。
English: So is the timing.

古文：有汤武之贤，而无桀纣之时，不成；有桀纣之时，而无汤武之贤，亦不成。
现代文：有商汤、武王这样的贤德，而没有桀、纣无道那样的时机，就不能成就王业，有桀、纣无道那样的时机，而没有商汤、武王那样的贤德，也不能成就王业。
English: If you have the virtues of Shang Tang and King Wu, but do not have the opportunities of Zou and Zhu Mudao, you cannot achieve the kingly career. If you have the opportunities of Zou and Zhu Mudao, but do not have the virtues of Shang Tang and King Wu, you cannot achieve the kingly career.

古文：圣人之见时，若步之与影不可离。
现代文：圣人与时机的关系，就象步行时影与身不可分离一样。
English: The relationship between the sage and the time is like that between the shadow and the body when walking.

古文：故有道之士未遇时，隐匿分窜，勤以待时。
现代文：所以，有道之士没有遇到时机的时候，就到处隐匿藏伏起来，甘受劳苦，等待时机。
English: Therefore, when a Taoist does not have the opportunity, he hides everywhere, works hard, and waits for the opportunity.

古文：时至，有从布衣而为天子者，有从千乘而得天下者，有从卑贱而佐三王者，有从匹夫而报万乘者。
现代文：时机一到，有的从平民而成为天子，有的从诸侯而得到天下，有的从卑贱的地位进而辅佐三王，有的从普通百姓进而能向万乘之主报仇。
English: When the time comes, some will become the Son of Heaven from the common people, some will get the world from the princes, some will support the three kings from a lowly position, and some will be able to take revenge on the Lord of Mansei from the common people.

古文：故圣人之所贵，唯时也。
现代文：所以圣人所看重的，只是时机。
English: So all the sage cares about is the timing.

古文：水冻方固，后稷不种，后稷之种必待春。
现代文：水冻得正坚固时，后稷不去耕种，后稷耕种，一定要等待春天到来。
English: When the water is frozen solid, you must wait for spring to come.

古文：故人虽智而不遇时，无功。
现代文：所以人即使有智慧，但如果遇不到时机，也不能建立功业。
English: Therefore, even if a person has wisdom, if he does not have the opportunity, he will not be able to build a career.

古文：方叶之茂美，终日采之而不知；秋霜既下，众林皆羸。
现代文：正当树叶长得繁茂的时候，整天采摘，也采不光，等到秋霜降下以后，所有树林里，树叶都落下来了。
English: Just as the leaves are growing luxuriantly, they are picked all day long, but they are not picked well, and when the autumn frost falls, the leaves have fallen in all the woods.

古文：事之难易，不在小大，务在知时。
现代文：事情的难易，不在于大小，关键在于掌握时机。
English: The difficulty of things is not in the size, the key is to grasp the opportunity.

古文：郑子阳之难，猘狗溃之；齐高、国之难，失牛溃之。
现代文：郑国的子阳遇难，正发生在追逐疯狗的混乱时候，齐国的高氏、国氏遇难，正旋生在追赶逃窜之牛的时候。
English: Zheng Ziyang was killed in the chaos of chasing a mad dog, while Gao and Guo of Qi were killed while chasing a fleeing ox.

古文：众因之以杀子阳、高、国。
现代文：众人乘着混乱杀死了子阳和高氏、国氏。
English: Taking advantage of the chaos, many people killed Ziyang, Gao and Guo.

古文：当其时，狗牛犹可以为人唱，而况乎以人为唱乎？
现代文：遇上合适的时机，狗和牛尚且可以作为人们发难的先导，更何况以人为先导呢?
English: When the time is right, dogs and cows can even act as a guide for people in times of trouble, let alone a human guide?

古文：饥马盈厩，嗼然，未见刍也；饥狗盈窖，嗼然。未见骨也。
现代文：饥饿的马充满了马棚，默然无声，是因为它们没有见到草，饥饿的狗充满了狗窝，默然无声，是因为它们没有见到骨头。
English: Hungry horses filled the stables, silent because they saw no grass; hungry dogs filled the kennels, silent because they saw no bones.

古文：见骨与刍，动不可禁。
现代文：如果见到骨头和草，那幺它们就会争枪，不能制止住。
English: If you see bones and grass, they will fight and cannot be stopped.

古文：乱世之民，嗼然，未见贤者也；见贤人，则往不可止。
现代文：混乱世道的人民，默然无声，是因为他们没有见到贤人。如果见到贤人，那么他们就会去归附，不能制止住。
English: The people of the chaotic world are silent because they do not see the wise men. If they see the wise men, then they will go to join and cannot be stopped.

古文：往者非其形心之谓乎？
现代文：他们去归附贤人，难道不是身心都归附吗?
English: If they go to join the sages, won't they be joined in mind and body?

古文：齐以东帝困於天下，而鲁取徐州；邯郸以寿陵困於万民，而卫取茧氏。
现代文：齐泯王困为僭称东帝而被天下诸侯弄得困窘不堪，因而被鲁国夺取了徐州。赵肃侯因修建寝陵扰民，人民都不亲附他，因而被卫国夺取了茧氏。
English: King Qizong was embarrassed by being called the Eastern Emperor and was embarrassed by the world's princes, so he was seized by the State of Lu. The State of Lu seized Xuzhou. Because Zhao Su Hou disturbed the people by building a mausoleum, the people did not support him, so he was seized by the State of Wei.

古文：以鲁卫之细，而皆得志於大国，遇其时也。
现代文：凭着鲁国，卫国那样的小国，却都能从大国那里占到便宜，是因为遇到了恰当时机。
English: With the help of Russia, small countries such as Japan can take advantage of big countries, because they have met the right time.

古文：故贤主秀士之欲忧黔首者，乱世当之矣。
现代文：所以贤明的君主和杰出的人士想为百姓忧虑的，遇到混乱的世道。正是合适的时机。
English: So when wise monarchs and great men want to worry about their people, and the world is in turmoil, it's the right time.

古文：天不再与，时不久留，能不两工，事在当之。
现代文：​
English: Home

古文：四曰：春气至则草木产，秋气至则草木落。
现代文：义赏春气到来草木就生长，秋气到来草木就凋零。
English: When the spring qi arrives, the plants will grow, and when the autumn qi arrives, the plants will wither.

古文：产与落，或使之，非自然也。
现代文：生长与凋零，是节气支配的，不是它们自然而然会这样的。
English: Growth and decay are governed by the solar terms, and do not occur naturally.

古文：故使之者至，物无不为；使之者不至，物无可为。
现代文：所以支配者一出现，万物没有不随之变化的，支配者不出现，万物没有可以发生变化的。
English: Therefore, as soon as a ruler appears, all things will not change. As long as a ruler does not appear, all things cannot change.

古文：古之人审其所以使，故物莫不为用。
现代文：古人能够审察支配者的情况，所以万物没有不能被自己利用的。
English: The ancients were able to examine the situation of the ruler, so there is nothing that cannot be used by oneself.

古文：赏罚之柄，此上之所以使也。
现代文：赏罚的权力，这是由君主所掌握的。
English: The power to reward and punish, which is held by the monarch.

古文：其所以加者义，则忠信亲爱之道彰。
现代文：施加赏罚符合道义，那么忠诚守信相亲相爱的原则就会彰明。
English: If the imposition of rewards and punishments is consistent with morality, then the principle of loyalty, trustworthiness, and mutual affection will be made clear.

古文：久彰而愈长，民之安之若性，此之谓教成。
现代文：彰明长久而且日益增加，人们就象出于本性一样信守它，这就叫做教化成功。
English: If the enlightenment is long-lasting and increasing, and people adhere to it as if by nature, this is called the success of enlightenment.

古文：教成，则虽有厚赏严威弗能禁。
现代文：教化成功了，那么即使有厚赏严刑也不能禁止人们去实行。
English: If the indoctrination is successful, then even if there is a heavy reward and severe punishment, it cannot prohibit people from practicing it.

古文：故善教者，不以赏罚而教成，教成而赏罚弗能禁。
现代文：所以善于进行教化的人，根据道义施行赏罚，因而教化能够成功。教化成功了，即使施行赏罚也不能禁止人们去实行。
English: Therefore, those who are good at indoctrination should reward and punish according to morality, so that indoctrination can be successful. If indoctrination is successful, even if rewards and punishments are implemented, people cannot be prohibited from practicing.

古文：用赏罚不当亦然。
现代文：施行赏罚不恰当也是这样。
English: This is also the case with the inappropriate implementation of rewards and punishments.

古文：奸伪贼乱贪戾之道兴，久兴而不息，民之雠之若性。戎夷胡貉巴越之民是以，虽有厚赏严罚弗能禁。
现代文：奸诈虚伪贼乱贪暴的原别兴起，长期兴起而且不能平息，人们就象出于本性一样照此去做，这就跟戎夷胡貉巴越等族的人一样了，即使有厚赏严刑也不能禁止人们这样做。
English: The reasons for the rise of treachery, hypocrisy, thievery, disorder, and corruption are different. They have been on the rise for a long time and cannot be quelled. People do this as if by nature. This is the same as the people of the Wuyi, Hubei, and Yue ethnic groups. Even if there is a heavy reward and severe punishment, people cannot be prohibited from doing this.

古文：郢人之以两版垣也，吴起变之而见恶。
现代文：郢人用两块夹板筑土墙，吴起改变了这种方法因而遭到怨恨。
English: People used to build earthen walls with two pieces of plywood, but Wu Qi changed this method and was resented.

古文：赏罚易而民安乐。氐羌之民，其虏也，不忧其系累，而忧其死不焚也。
现代文：氐族羌族的人，他们被俘虏以后，不担心被捆绑，却担心死后不能被焚烧。
English: The Yao people of the Yao people, after they were captured, did not worry about being tied up, but worried that they could not be burned after death.

古文：皆成乎邪也。
现代文：这些都是由于邪曲造成的。
English: All of this was caused by bad music.

古文：故赏罚之所加，不可不慎。
现代文：再说，邪曲形成了，就会对人民有害处。
English: Moreover, if the evil plot is formed, it will be harmful to the people.

古文：且成而贼民。
现代文：用赏罚改变这种情况，人民就会感到安乐。
English: Use rewards and punishments to change this situation, and the people will feel at ease.

古文：昔晋文公将与楚人战於城濮，召咎犯而问曰： 楚众我寡，柰何而可？ 
现代文：所以施加赏罚，不可不慎重啊。从前晋文公要跟楚国人在城濮作战，召来咎犯问他说： 楚国兵多，我国兵少，怎样做才可以取胜? 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be cautious when imposing rewards and punishments. Once upon a time, Prince Jinwen wanted to fight with the people of Chu in the citadel. He summoned the culprit and asked him, "There are many soldiers from Chu, but few soldiers from our country. How can we win?"

古文：咎犯对曰： 臣闻繁礼之君，不足於文，繁战之君，不足於诈。
现代文：咎犯回答说。 我听说礼仪繁杂的君主，对于礼仪的盛大从不感到满足，作战频繁的君主，对于诡诈之术从不感到满足。
English: The culprit replied, I have heard it said that a prince of great propriety is never satisfied with great propriety, and a prince of great war is never satisfied with great treachery.

古文：君亦诈之而已。 
现代文：您只对楚国实行诈术就行了。 
English: All you have to do is to cheat Chu.

古文：文公以咎犯言告雍季，雍季曰： 竭泽而渔，岂不获得？
现代文：文公把咎犯的话告诉了雍季，雍季说： 把池塘弄干了来捕鱼，怎能不获得鱼?
English: Wen Gong told the culprit's words to Yong Ji. Yong Ji said: If you dry up the pond to catch fish, how can you not get fish?

古文：而明年无鱼；焚薮而田，岂不获得？
现代文：可是第二年就没有鱼了，把沼泽地烧光了来打猎，怎能不获得野兽?
English: But the next year there were no fish, and after burning the marshes for hunting, how could they not get a beast?

古文：而明年无兽。
现代文：可是第二年就没有野兽了。
English: But the next year, there was no beast.

古文：诈伪之道，虽今偷可，後将无复，非长术也。 
现代文：诈骗的方法，虽说现在可以苟且得利，以后就不能再得利了，达不是长久之计。 
English: The method of swindling, although it is possible to make a profit now, it will not be possible to make a profit in the future. It is not a long-term solution.

古文：文公用咎犯之言，而败楚人於城濮。反而为赏，雍季在上。
现代文：文公采纳了咎犯的意见，因而在城濮打败了楚国人。回国以后行赏，雍季居首位。
English: Wen Gong adopted the opinion of the culprit, and thus defeated the people of Chu in Chenghuang. After returning to the country, Yong Ji Rong ranked first.

古文：左右谏曰： 城濮之功，咎犯之谋也。
现代文：文公身边的入劝谏说： 城濮之战的胜利，是由于采用了咎犯的谋略。
English: The scholars around Wen Gong said: The victory of the Battle of Chenghuang was due to the use of the culprit's strategy.

古文：君用其言而赏後其身，或者不可乎！ 
现代文：您采纳了他的意见，可是行赏却把他放在后边，这或许不可以吧！ 
English: Perhaps it is not right that you have taken his opinion into account, but that you have put him on the back burner.

古文：文公曰： 雍季之言，百世之利也；咎犯之言，一时之务也。
现代文：文公说： 雍季的话，对百世有利，咎犯的话，只是顾及一时。
English: Wen Gong said: Yong Ji's words are beneficial to the world, and the words of the culprit are only considered for a moment.

古文：焉有以一时之务先百世之利者乎？ 
现代文：哪有把只顾及一时的敞在对百世有利的前面的道理呢？ 
English: What is the reason for putting a temporary opening in front of the benefit of the world?

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 临难用诈，足以却敌；反而尊贤，足以报德。
现代文：孔子听到这件事以后，说： 遇到危难用诈术，足以打败敌人；回国以后尊崇贤人，足以报答恩德。
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said, "When in danger, it is enough to use deception to defeat the enemy; when returning home, it is enough to honor the wise to repay their kindness."

古文：文公虽不终，始足以霸矣。 
现代文：文公虽然不能坚持到底，却足以成就霸业了。 
English: Although Wen Gong couldn't persevere to the end, it was enough to achieve hegemony.

古文：赏重则民移之，民移之则成焉。
现代文：赏赐重人民就羡慕，人民羡慕就能成功。
English: If you reward and cherish the people, they will be envious, and if the people are envious, you will succeed.

古文：成乎诈，其成毁，其胜败。
现代文：靠诈术成功，即便成功了，最终也必定毁坏，即便胜利了，最终也必定失败。
English: If you succeed by trickery, even if you succeed, you will eventually be destroyed; even if you win, you will eventually fail.

古文：天下胜者众矣，而霸者乃五。
现代文：普天下取得过胜利的人很多，可是成就霸业的才五个。
English: There are many people in the world who have achieved victory, but only five have achieved supremacy.

古文：文公处其一，知胜之所成也。
现代文：文公作为其中的一个，知道胜利是如何取得的。
English: As one of them, Wen Gong knows how the victory was achieved.

古文：胜而不知胜之所成，与无胜同。
现代文：取得了胜利如果不知这胜利是如何取得的，那就跟没有取得胜利一样。
English: If you don't know how you won, it's the same as not winning.

古文：秦胜於戎，而败乎淆；楚胜於诸夏，而败乎柏举。
现代文：秦国战胜了戎，但却在淆打了败仗，楚国战胜了中原国家，但却在柏举打了败仗。
English: Qin defeated Rong, but lost the battle at Zoufu; Chu defeated the Central Plains, but lost the battle at Baiju.

古文：武王得之矣，故一胜而王天下。
现代文：周武王懂得这个道理，所以打了一次胜仗就称王于天下了。
English: King Zhou Wu understood this principle, so once he won a battle, he proclaimed himself king.

古文：众诈盈国，不可以为安，患非独外也。
现代文：各种诈术充满国家，国家不可能安定，祸患不只是来自国外啊！
English: The country is full of all kinds of tricks, the country cannot be stable, and the scourge does not only come from abroad!

古文：赵襄子出围，赏有功者五人，高赦为首。
现代文：赵襄子从晋用的围困中出来以后，赏赐五个有功劳的人，高赦为首。
English: After Zhao Xiangzi emerged from the siege of Jinbei, he rewarded five meritorious people, headed by Gao Miao.

古文：张孟谈曰： 晋阳之中，赦无大功，赏而为首，何也？ 
现代文：张孟谈说： 晋阳之事，高赦没有大功，赏赐时却以他为首，这是为什么呢? 
English: Zhang Meng said: In the matter of Jinyang, Gao Miao did not have great merit, but he was the first to be rewarded. Why is this?

古文：襄子曰： 寡人之国危，社稷殆，身在忧约之中，与寡人交而不失君臣之礼者，惟赦。
现代文：襄子说， 我的国家社稷遇到危险，我自身陷于忧困之中，跟我交往而不失君臣之礼的，只有高教。
English: Xiangzi said, My country and society are in danger, I myself am in distress, and the only one who can interact with me without losing the courtesy of a prince or a minister is high education.

古文：吾是以先之。 
现代文：我因此把他放在最前边。 
English: That's why I'm telling you this.

古文：仲尼闻之，曰： 襄子可谓善赏矣！
现代文：孔于听到这件事以后，说； 襄于可以说是善子赏赐了。
English: When Kong Yu heard about this, he said, "I can say that I have been blessed with a good son."

古文：赏一人，而天下之为人臣莫敢失礼。 
现代文：赏赐了一个人，天下那些当臣子的就没人敢于失礼了。 
English: If you reward a person, no one in the world who is a courtier will dare to be impolite.

古文：为六军则不可易，北取代，东迫齐，令张孟谈逾城潜行，与魏桓、韩康期而击智伯，断其头以为觞，遂定三家，岂非用赏罚当邪？
现代文：赵襄早用这种办法治理军队，军队就不敢轻慢。他向北灭掉代国，向东威逼齐国，让张孟谈越出城墙暗中去跟魏桓、韩康约定日期共同攻打智怕，胜利以后砍下智伯的头作为酒器，终于奠定了三家分晋的局面，难道不是施行赏罚恰当吗?
English: Zhao Xiang had already used this method to govern the army, and the army did not dare to take it lightly. He wiped out the Qing Dynasty to the north, forced the Qing Dynasty to the east, let Zhang Meng talk about going out of the city wall to secretly attack Zhibo with Wei Huan and Han Kang on the agreed date, and cut off Zhibo's head as a drinking vessel after the victory, finally establishing the situation of the three branches of the Jin Dynasty. Isn't the implementation of rewards and punishments appropriate?

古文：五曰：凡治乱存亡，安危强弱，必有其遇，然後可成，各一则不设。
现代文：长攻几治和乱，存和亡，安和危，强和弱，一定要彼此相遇，然后才能实现。
English: Long-term attack, several rules and chaos, survival and death, safety and danger, strong and weak, must meet each other before they can be realized.

古文：故桀纣虽不肖，其亡，遇汤武也。
现代文：如果彼此相同，就不可能实现。所吼，桀、纣虽然不贤，但他们之所以被灭亡，是因为遇上了商汤，武王。
English: If they are the same, it is impossible to achieve. Although Shou, Zou and Zou are not virtuous, the reason why they were destroyed is because they met Shang Tang, King Wu.

古文：遇汤武，天也，非桀纣之不肖也。
现代文：遇上商汤、武王，这是天意，不是因为桀、纣不贤。
English: In the case of Shang Tang and King Wu, this is the will of heaven, not because of the unethical behavior of Zou and Zou.

古文：汤武虽贤，其王，遇桀纣也。
现代文：商汤，武王虽然贤德，但他们之所以能成就王业，是因为遇上了桀、纣。
English: Shang Tang, King Wu, although they were virtuous, they were able to achieve the king's career because they met the dragonfly, the dragonfly.

古文：遇桀纣，天也，非汤武之贤也。
现代文：遇上桀、纣，这是天意，不是因为商汤、武王贤德。
English: In the event of calamity, calamity, this is the will of heaven, not because of Shang Tang, King Wu's virtue.

古文：若桀纣不遇汤武，未必亡也。
现代文：如果桀、纣不遇上商汤、武王，未必会灭亡。
English: If  and  do not encounter Shang Tang and King Wu, they will not necessarily perish.

古文：桀纣不亡，虽不肖，辱未至於此。
现代文：桀、纣如果不灭亡，他们即使不贤，耻辱也不至于到亡国的地步。
English: If  and  do not perish, even if they are not virtuous, their disgrace will not rise to the level of ruining the country.

古文：若使汤武不遇桀纣，未必王也。
现代文：假使商汤、武王不遇上桀、纣，未必会成就王业。
English: If Shang Tang and King Wu do not encounter the dragonfly and dragonfly, they will not necessarily achieve the king's career.

古文：汤武不王，虽贤，显未至於此。
现代文：商汤、武壬如果不成就王业，他们即使贤德，荣耀也不至于到称王天下的地步。
English: If Shang Tang and Wu Ren do not achieve the royal inheritance, even if they are virtuous, their glory will not rise to the level of kings and queens.

古文：故人主有大功，不闻不肖；亡国之主，不闻贤。
现代文：所以，君主有大功，就听不到他有什么不好，亡国的君主，就听不到他有什么好。
English: Therefore, if a monarch has made great achievements, one cannot hear anything bad about him, and if a monarch has lost his country, one cannot hear anything good about him.

古文：譬之若良农，辩土地之宜，谨耕耨之事，未必收也。
现代文：这就好比优秀的农民，他们善于区分土地适宜种植什么，勤勤恳恳地耕种锄草，但未必能有收获。
English: This is like good farmers who are good at distinguishing what land is suitable for planting and diligently cultivating rushes, but may not be able to make a profit.

古文：然而收者，必此人也始，在於遇时雨。
现代文：然而有收获的，一定首先是这些人。收获的关键在于遇上及时雨。
English: However, those people must be the first to reap the benefits. The key to the harvest lies in timely rain.

古文：遇时雨，天地也，非良农所能为也。
现代文：遇上及时雨，这是靠了上天，不是优秀农民所能做到的。
English: In the event of timely rain, this is relying on the heavens, not what good farmers can do.

古文：越国大饥，王恐，召范蠡而谋。
现代文：越国遇上大灾年，越王很害怕，召范蠡来商量。
English: In the year of the great disaster in Yue, King Yue was very afraid and summoned Fan Rong to consult.

古文：范蠡曰： 王何患焉？
现代文：范蠡说： 您对此何必忧虑呢?
English: Fan Yu said, "Why should you worry about this?

古文：今之饥，此越之福，而吴之祸也。
现代文：如今的荒年，这是越国的福气，却是吴国的灾祸。
English: In the current year of famine, this is a blessing for Yue, but a disaster for Wu.

古文：夫吴国甚富，而财有馀，其王年少，智寡才轻，好须臾之名，不思後患。
现代文：吴国很富足，钱财有余，它的君主年少，缺少智谋和才能，喜欢一时的虚名，不思虑后患。
English: The state of Wu is very rich and has plenty of money. Its monarch is young, lacks wisdom and talent, likes a temporary false name, and does not think about the consequences.

古文：王若重币卑辞以请籴於吴，则食可得也。
现代文：您如果用贵重的礼物、卑谦的言辞去向吴国请求借粮，那么粮食就可以得到了。
English: If you use precious gifts and humble words to go to the State of Wu to ask to borrow grain, then grain can be obtained.

古文：食得，其卒越必有吴，而王何患焉？ 越王曰： 善！ 
现代文：得到粮食，最终越国必定会占有吴国，您对此何必忧虑呢? 越王说： 好！ 
English: If you get food, Yue will eventually occupy Wu, so why worry about it? Yue Wang said, "Good!

古文：乃使人请食於吴。
现代文：于是就派人向吴国请求借粮。
English: So they sent someone to ask Wu for a loan of grain.

古文：吴王将与之，伍子胥进谏曰： 不可与也！
现代文：吴王将要给越国粮食，伍手胥劝阻说： 不可给越国粮食。
English: The king of Wu was about to give grain to Yue, but Wu Teh-tsu dissuaded him, saying, "Don't give grain to Yue.

古文：夫吴之与越，接土邻境，道易人通，仇雠敌战之国也，非吴丧越，越必丧吴。
现代文：吴国与越国，土地相接，边境相邻，道路平坦通畅，人民往来频繁，是势均力敌的仇国。不是吴国灭掉越国，就必定是越国灭掉吴国。
English: Wu and Yue, with their contiguous land and adjacent borders, smooth roads and frequent exchanges of people, are equal enemies. If Wu does not annihilate Yue, then Yue must annihilate Wu.

古文：若燕秦齐晋，山处陆居，岂能逾五湖九江越十七厄以有吴哉？
现代文：象燕国、秦国、齐国、晋国，它们处于高山陆地，怎能跨越五湖九江穿过十七处险阻来占有吴国呢?
English: Like Yan, Qin, Qi, and Jin, they are located in high mountains and on land. How can they cross the five lakes and nine rivers and pass through seventeen dangerous obstacles to occupy Wu?

古文：故曰非吴丧越，越必丧吴。
现代文：所以说，不是吴国灭掉越国，就必定是越国灭掉吴国。
English: Therefore, if Wu did not destroy Yue, then Yue must have destroyed Wu.

古文：今将输之粟，与之食，是长吾雠而养吾仇也。
现代文：现在要送给它粮食，给它吃的，这是长我们对手的锐气、养活我们的仇人啊。
English: Now we have to give it grain, give it food, this is to keep our opponent sharp, to feed our enemy.

古文：财匮而民恐，悔无及也。
现代文：国家钱财缺乏，人民怨恨，后悔就来不及了。
English: The country is short of money, the people are resentful, and it is too late to regret.

古文：不若勿与而攻之，固其数也。
现代文：不如不给它粮食而去攻打它，这本来是普通的道理。
English: It is common sense that it is better to attack it without giving it food.

古文：此昔吾先王之所以霸。
现代文：这就是从前我们的先王所以成就霸业的原因啊。
English: This is the reason why our former king achieved dominance in the past.

古文：且夫饥，代事也，犹渊之与阪，谁国无有？ 吴王曰： 不然。
现代文：再说闹饥荒，这是交替出现的事，就如同深渊和山坡一样，哪个国家没有? 吴王说。 不对。
English: Besides, famine is an alternating phenomenon, just like the abyss and the mountain slope, which country doesn't have it? said King Wu.

古文：吾闻之，义兵不攻服，仁者食饥饿。
现代文：我听说过，正义的军队不攻打已经归服了的国家，仁德的人给饥饿的人粮食吃。
English: I have heard it said that a just army does not attack a conquered country, and a benevolent man gives food to the hungry.

古文：今服而攻之，非义兵也；饥而不食，非仁体也。
现代文：现在越国归服了却去攻打它，这不是正义的军队！越国闹饥荒却不给它粮食屹，这不是仁德的事情。
English: It is not a righteous army that attacks Viet Nam after it has surrendered. It is not a matter of benevolence that Viet Nam is starving and we do not give it food.

古文：不仁不义，虽得十越，吾不为也。 
现代文：不仁不义，即使得到十个越国，我也不去做。 
English: I wouldn't do it even if I won ten yueguos.

古文：遂与之食。
现代文：于是就给了越国粮食。
English: So they gave grain to Yue.

古文：不出三年，而吴亦饥。使人请食於越，越王弗与，乃攻之，夫差为禽。
现代文：没有过三年，吴国也遇到灾年，吴人向越国请求借粮，越王不给，却来攻打吴国，吴王夫差被擒。
English: Less than three years later, the State of Wu also encountered a year of disaster. The people of Wu asked the State of Yue for a loan of grain, but the King of Yue refused to give it. Instead, he attacked the State of Wu, and the King of Wu was captured.

古文：楚王欲取息与蔡，乃先佯善蔡侯，而与之谋曰： 吾欲得息，柰何？ 
现代文：楚王想夺取息国和蔡国，于是就假装跟蔡侯友好，并且与他商量说： 我想得到息国，该怎么办? 
English: King Chu wanted to take over Sui and Cai states, so he pretended to be friendly with Cai Hou and discussed with him: I want to take over Sui and Cai states, what should I do?

古文：蔡侯曰： 息夫人，吾妻之姨也。吾请为飨息侯与其妻者，而与王俱，因而袭之。 楚王曰： 诺。 
现代文：蔡侯说； 息侯的夫人是我妻子的妹妹，请让我替您宴飨息侯和他的妻子，跟您一起去，乘机偷袭息国。 楚王说； 好吧。 
English: Cai Hou said; Sihou's wife is my wife's sister, please let me entertain Sihou and his wife for you, go with you, take the opportunity to raid Sihou's country. King Chu said; Okay.

古文：於是与蔡侯以飨礼入於息，因与俱，遂取息。
现代文：于是楚王与蔡侯带着宴飨用的食品进入息国，军队与他们同行，乘机夺取丁息国。
English: As a result, King Chu and Cai Hou brought food for the banquet into their country, and the army went with them, taking the opportunity to seize Dingxi Province.

古文：旋舍於蔡，又取蔡。
现代文：楚军回师驻扎在蔡国，又夺取了蔡国。
English: The return division of the Chu army was stationed in Cai Guo and captured Cai Guo again.

古文：赵简子病，召太子而告之曰： 我死已葬，服衰而上夏屋之山以望。 太子敬诺。
现代文：赵简子病重，召见太子告诉他说； 等我死了，安葬完毕，你穿着孝服登上夏屋山去观望 太子恭恭敬敬地答应了。
English: Zhao Jianzi was seriously ill and summoned the prince to tell him: When I am dead and buried, you should go up to Xiaya Mountain in your filial piety to watch. The prince respectfully agreed.

古文：简子死，已葬，服衰，召大臣而告之曰： 愿登夏屋以望。 
现代文：简子死了，安葬完毕以后，太子穿着孝服，召见大臣们并且告诉他们说： 我想登上夏屋山去观望。 
English: After Yasuko died and was buried, the crown prince, dressed in filial piety, summoned his ministers and told them, "I want to go up to Mount Natsuya to watch.

古文：大臣皆谏曰； 登夏屋以望，是游也。
现代文：大臣们都劝阻说； 登上夏屋山去观望，这就是出游啊。
English: The ministers all advised against it, saying, "Going up to Mount Natsuya to watch, that's a trip."

古文：服衰以游，不可。 
现代文：穿着孝服去出游，不可以。 
English: You can't go on a trip wearing your filial piety.

古文：襄子曰： 此先君之命也，寡人弗敢废。 
现代文：襄子说： 这是先君的命令，我不敢废除。 
English: Xiangzi said, "This is the order of the late emperor, I dare not revoke it."

古文：群臣敬诺。
现代文：大臣们都恭恭敬教地答应了。
English: The ministers all politely and respectfully agreed.

古文：襄子上於夏屋，以望代俗，其乐甚美。於是襄子曰： 先君必以此教之也。 
现代文：襄子登上夏屋山观看代国的风土人情，看到代国一派欢乐景象，于是襄子说； 先君必定是用这种办法来教诲我啊！ 
English: Xiangzi climbed the Xiaya Mountain to watch the customs of the ancestral country, and saw a happy scene of the ancestral country. Then Xiangzi said, "The Ancestor must have used this method to teach me!"

古文：及归，虑所以取代，乃先善之。
现代文：等到回来以后，思考夺取代国的方法，于是就先友好地对待代国。
English: When he came back, he thought about how to conquer the foreign country, so he first treated the foreign country in a friendly manner.

古文：代君好色，请以其弟姊妻之，代君许诺。
现代文：代国君主爱好女色，襄子就请求把姐姐嫁给代国君主为妻，代国君主答应了。
English: The acting monarch was fond of women, and his son-in-law requested that his sister be married to the acting monarch as his wife. The acting monarch agreed.

古文：弟姊已往，所以善代者乃万故。马郡宜马，代君以善马奉襄子。
现代文：襄子的姐姐嫁给代国君主以后，襄子事事都讨好代国，代地适宜养马，代国君主把好马奉献给襄子，代地的马都送光了。
English: After Xiangzi's sister married the acting monarch, Xiangzi did everything to please the acting monarch, and the place was suitable for raising horses. The acting monarch dedicated a good horse to Xiangzi, and all the horses in the place were sent away.

古文：襄子谒於代君而请觞之。马郡尽。先令舞者置兵其羽中，数百人。先具大金斗。
现代文：襄子告诉代国君主，请求宴飨他事先命令几百个跳舞的人把兵器减茌舞具之中，事先准备好大的金斗。
English: Xiangzi told the acting monarch, requesting a banquet. He ordered hundreds of dancers in advance to reduce weapons to dance equipment and prepare a large gold fight in advance.

古文：代君至，酒酣，反斗而击之，一成，脑涂地。
现代文：代国君主来了，喝酒喝到正畅快的时候，把酒器翻过来击在代国君主头上，只一下，代君脑浆就流了一地。
English: The acting monarch arrived, drank until he was in a good mood, turned the wine glass upside down and hit the acting monarch on the head. In one fell swoop, the acting monarch's brains spilled all over the floor.

古文：舞者操兵以斗，尽杀其从者。
现代文：跳舞的人拿着兵器搏斗，把代君的随从全都杀死了。
English: The dancers fought with weapons and killed all of the king's attendants.

古文：因以代君之车迎其妻，其妻遥闻之状，磨笄以自刺。
现代文：于是就用代君的车子去迎接他的妻子，他的妻子在远处听说代君死亡的情形，就唐尖簪子自刺而死。
English: So he used the deputy's car to meet his wife. When his wife heard in the distance about the circumstances of the deputy's death, she stabbed herself to death.

古文：故赵氏至今有刺笄之证，与反斗之号。
现代文：所以赵国至今有 利笄山 和 反斗 的名号。
English: That's why Zhao Guo still has the names of Lishan Mountain and Lantou Mountain.

古文：此三君者，其有所自而得之，不备遵理，然而後世称之，有功故也。
现代文：这三位君主，他们都有办法得到自己昕需要的东西，并不完全按照常理行事，然而后世都称赞他们，这是因为他们有成就的缘故。
English: These three monarchs, all of whom had the means to get what they wanted, did not act entirely according to common sense, but later generations praised them because of their achievements.

古文：有功於此，而无其失，虽王可也。
现代文：如果有这种大功而又不失礼，他们即使称王天下，也是可以的。
English: If they have this kind of great achievement without being disrespectful, they can even be called the king of the world.

古文：六曰：功名大立，天也。
现代文：慎人能显赫地建立功名，靠的是天意。
English: It is the providence that enables a prudent man to make a great name for himself.

古文：为是故，因不慎其人，不可。
现代文：因为这个缘故，就不慎重地对持人为的努力，是不行的。
English: Because of this, it is not possible to be careless about holding artificial efforts.

古文：夫舜遇尧，天也。
现代文：舜遇到尧那样的明君，是天意。
English: It was God's will for me to meet a wise man like you.

古文：舜耕於历山，陶於河滨，钓於雷泽，天下说之，秀士从之，人也。
现代文：舜在历山种地，在黄河边制作陶器，在雷泽钓鱼，天下人很喜欢他，杰出的人士都跟随着他，这是人为努力的结果。
English: He farmed in Leshan, made pottery by the Yellow River, and fished in Lai Ze. People all over the world liked him very much, and outstanding people followed him. This was the result of human efforts.

古文：夫禹遇舜，天也。
现代文：禹遇到舜那样的明君，是天意。
English: It was God's will for Yu to meet a wise man like Yao.

古文：禹周於天下，以求贤者，事利黔首，水潦川泽之湛滞壅塞可通者，禹尽为之，人也。
现代文：禹周游天下以便寻求贤德之人，做对百姓有利的事情。那些淤积阻塞的积水河流湖泊，凡是可以疏通的，禹全都疏通了。
English: Yu travels around the world in order to seek virtuous people and do things that are beneficial to the people. Those silt-blocked stagnant rivers and lakes, which can be unblocked, have all been unblocked by Yu.

古文：夫汤遇桀，武遇纣，天也。
现代文：这些就是人为的努力。汤遇上桀那样的暴君，武王遇上封那样的暴君，是天意。
English: These are man-made efforts. It is God's will for Tang to encounter a tyrant like Zou, and for King Wu to encounter a tyrant like Feng.

古文：汤、武修身积善为义，以忧苦於民，人也。
现代文：汤、武王修养自身品德，积善行义，为百姓忧虑劳苦，这是人为的努力。
English: Tang and Wu Wang cultivated their own moral character, accumulated good deeds and righteousness, and worried and worked hard for the people. This was a man-made effort.

古文：舜之耕渔，其贤不肖与为天子同。
现代文：舜种地捕鱼的时候，他的贤与不肖的情况同当夫子时是一样的。
English: When fishing on a shoal, the situation of his virtue and vice is the same as when he was a master fisherman.

古文：其未遇时也，以其徒属堀地财，取水利，编蒲苇，结罘网，手足胼胝不居，然後免於冻馁之患。
现代文：他在没有遇到有利时机的时侯，带领自己的下属种五谷，捕鱼鳖，编蒲苇，织鱼网，手和脚磨出茧子都不体息，然后才免于冻饿之苦。
English: When he did not encounter a favorable time, he led his subordinates to grow grain, fish bait, weave cormorants, weave fish nets, and grind lice by hand and foot, and then he was free from the suffering of cold and hunger.

古文：其遇时也，登为天子，贤士归之，万民誉之，丈夫女子，振振殷殷，无不戴说。
现代文：他在遇到有利时机的时侯，即位当了天子，贤德的人全归附他，所有的人都赞誉他，男男女女都非常高兴，没有不爱戴喜欢他的。
English: When the time was right, he became the Son of Heaven. All the virtuous people followed him, everyone praised him, men and women were very happy, and no one disliked or disliked him.

古文：舜自为诗曰： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。 
现代文：舜亲自做诗道： 普天之下尽归依，无处不是王的土地，四海之内皆归顺，无不是王的臣民。 
English: Zou himself wrote a poem: "All under heaven are converted, nowhere is it not the king's land, all within the four seas are converted, none are not the king's subjects."

古文：所以见尽有之也。
现代文：用以表明自己全都占有了。
English: It's a way of saying you've got it all.

古文：尽有之，贤非加也；尽无之，贤非损也。
现代文：全都占有了，他的贤德并没有增加，全都没有占有，他的贤德并没有减损。
English: All possessed, his virtue did not increase; all not possessed, his virtue did not diminish.

古文：时使然也。
现代文：这是时机的有无使他这样的。
English: It's a matter of timing.

古文：百里奚之未遇时也，亡虢而虏晋，饭牛於秦，传鬻以五羊之皮。
现代文：百里奚没有遇到有利时机的时候，从虞国逃出，被晋国俘虏，后在秦国喂牛，以五张羊皮的价格被转卖。
English: When Bai Lijuan did not encounter a favorable opportunity, he escaped from Yu Province, was captured by Jin Province, then fed cattle in Qin Province, and was resold at the price of five sheepskins.

古文：公孙枝得而说之，献诸缪公，三日，请属事焉。
现代文：公孙枝得到百里奚以后很喜欢他，把他推荐给秦穆公，过了三天，请求委任他官职。
English: Gongsun Zhi liked him very much after he got Baili Yao, and recommended him to Qin Mu Gong. Three days later, he requested to appoint him to an official post.

古文：缪公曰： 买之五羊之皮而属事焉，无乃天下笑乎？ 
现代文：穆公说： 用五张羊皮买了他来却委任他官职，恐怕要被天下耻笑吧！ 
English: Mu Gong said, "I bought him with five sheepskins and appointed him to an official position. I'm afraid the whole world will laugh at me!"

古文：公孙枝对曰： 信贤而任之，君之明也；让贤而下之，臣之忠也。
现代文：公孙枝回答说， 信征贤人而任用他，这是君主的英明，让位爷贤人而自己甘居贤人之下，这是臣子的忠诚。
English: Gongsun Zhi replied, "It is the wisdom of the monarch to recruit a wise man and appoint him as his heir. It is the loyalty of a courtier to let his lord be a wise man and to live under a wise man.

古文：君为明君，臣为忠臣。
现代文：君主是英明的君主，臣子是忠诚的臣子。
English: The sovereign is a wise sovereign, the vassal is a loyal vassal.

古文：彼信贤，境内将服，敌国且畏，夫谁暇笑哉？ 
现代文：他如果真的贤德，国内都将顺服，敌国都将是惧，谁还会有闲暇耻笑呢? 
English: If he is truly virtuous, the country will be obedient, the enemy countries will be afraid, and who will have leisure to laugh?

古文：缪公遂用之。
现代文：穆公于是就任用了百里奚。
English: As a result, Mu Gong took office with a hundred li.

古文：谋无不当，举必有功，非加贤也。
现代文：他出谋略无不得当，做事情必定成功，这并不说明他的贤德增加了。
English: The fact that he always makes the right moves and succeeds in everything he does does not mean that his virtue has increased.

古文：使百里奚虽贤，无得缪公，必无此名矣。
现代文：百里奚即使贤德，如果不被穆公得到，也必定没有选样的名声。
English: Even if you are virtuous, if you are not chosen by Mu Gong, you will not have the reputation of being chosen.

古文：今焉知世之无百里奚哉？
现代文：现在怎么知道世上没有百里奚这样的人呢?
English: Now, how do we know that there is no such person as Baidilao in the world?

古文：故人主之欲求士者，不可不务博也。
现代文：所以君主中想要寻求贤士的人，不可不广泛地去寻求。
English: Therefore, a prince who wishes to find a wise man must search far and wide.

古文：孔子穷於陈、蔡之间，七日不尝食，藜羹不糁。
现代文：孔子在陈国、蔡国之闻处于困境，七天没吃粮食，煮的野菜里也没有米粒。
English: Confucius heard that he was in a difficult situation in Chen and Cai Provinces. He had not eaten any grain for seven days, and there were no grains of rice in the boiled vegetables.

古文：宰予备矣，孔子弦歌於室，颜回择菜於外。
现代文：宰予饿坏了，孔子在屋里用瑟伴奏唱歌，颜回在外面择野菜。
English: Zayo is starving, Confucius is singing in the house to the accompaniment of a siren, and Yan Hui is picking vegetables outside.

古文：子路与子贡相与而言曰： 夫子逐於鲁，削迹於卫，伐树於宋，穷於陈、蔡。
现代文：子路跟子贡一起说道： 先生在鲁国被逐，在卫国隐居，在宋国树下习礼时被人伐倒树，在陈国、蔡国遇到困境。
English: Together with Zigong, Zilu said, "My teacher was banished in the State of Lu, lived in seclusion in the State of Wei, had a tree felled while he was studying etiquette under a tree in the State of Song, and encountered difficulties in the State of Chen and the State of Cai.

古文：杀夫子者无罪，藉夫子者不禁，夫子弦歌鼓舞，未尝绝音。
现代文：要杀先生的人没有罪，凌辱先生的人不受禁止，而先生歌声从未中止过。
English: Those who want to kill him are not guilty, those who abuse him are not banned, and his singing has never stopped.

古文：盖君子之无所丑也若此乎？ 
现代文：君子竟是这样没有感到羞耻的事吗? 
English: Is there nothing of which a gentleman is not ashamed?

古文：颜回无以对，入以告孔子。
现代文：颜回无话回答，进屋把这些话告诉了孔子。
English: Yan Hui did not answer, but went into the house and told these words to Confucius.

古文：孔子憱然推琴，喟然而叹曰： 由与赐小人也。
现代文：孔子很不高兴地推开瑟，叹息着说： 仲由和端木赐是小人啊！
English: Unhappily, Confucius shrugged his shoulders and said with a sigh, "Nakayu and Hatagi are villains!

古文：召，吾语之。 
现代文：叫他们来，我告诉他们。 
English: Tell them to come. I'll tell them.

古文：子路与子贡入，子贡曰： 如此者，可谓穷矣！ 孔子曰： 是何言也？
现代文：子路和王子贡进来了，子贡说：像现在这种情况，可以说是困窘了。 孔子说： 这是什么话呢?
English: Zi Lu and Prince Gong came in. Zi Gong said, "As things are now, it can be said that we are in a difficult situation." Confucius said, "What is this saying?

古文：君子达於道之谓达，穷於道之谓穷。
现代文：君子在道义上通达叫做通达，在道义上困穷叫做咀穷。
English: A gentleman who is morally enlightened is called enlightened, and one who is morally impoverished is called impoverished.

古文：今丘也拘仁义之道，以遭乱世之患，其所也，何穷之谓？
现代文：现在我固守仁义的原则，因而遭受混乱世道的祸患，这正是我应该得到的处境，怎么能叫困穷呢?
English: Now that I adhere to the principle of benevolence and righteousness, and thus suffer the scourge of the chaotic world, this is exactly the situation I should get, how can I be poor?

古文：故内省而不疚於道，临难而不失其德，大寒既至，霜雪既降，吾是以知松柏之茂也。
现代文：所以，反省自己，在原则上不感封内疚，面临灾难，不丧失自己的品德。严寒到来，霜雪降落以后，松柏不凋落，我因此而知道松柏生命力的旺盛。
English: Therefore, reflect on yourself, in principle, do not feel guilty, face disaster, and do not lose your character. When the cold comes, after the frost and snow fall, the pine tree does not fall, so I know that the vitality of the pine tree is strong.

古文：昔桓公得之莒，文公得之曹，越王得之会稽。
现代文：从前齐桓公因出奔莒国而萌生复国称霸之心，晋文公因出亡曹国而萌生复国称霸之心，越王勾践因受会稽之耻而萌生复国称霸之心。
English: In the past, Lord Qi Kuan's desire to restore the country's hegemony arose as a result of his journey to the country of Qi, Lord Jinwen's desire to restore the country's hegemony arose as a result of his journey to the country of Ca, and King Yue's desire to restore the country's hegemony arose as a result of the shame of being censured by the association.

古文：陈、蔡之厄，於丘其幸乎！ 
现代文：在陈国、蔡国遇到的困境，对我大慨是幸运吧! 
English: In the predicament encountered by Chen Guo and Cai Guo, it is fortunate for me!

古文：孔子烈然返瑟而弦，子路抗然执干而舞。
现代文：孔子威严地重薪拿起瑟弹起来，子路威武地拿着盾牌跳起舞米。
English: Confucius majestically picked up his sword and swung it up, and Zilu bravely danced with his shield.

古文：子贡曰： 吾不知天之高也，不知地之下也。 
现代文：子贡说； 我不知天的高远，地的广大啊! 
English: Zigong said, "I do not know the height of the sky, nor the breadth of the earth.

古文：古之得道者，穷亦乐，达亦乐，所乐非穷达也。
现代文：古代得道的人，困窘时也高兴，显达时也高兴，高兴的不是困窘和显达。
English: In ancient times, those who attained the Way were also happy when they were embarrassed, and happy when they achieved enlightenment. It is not the embarrassment and enlightenment that are happy.

古文：道得於此，则穷达一也，为寒暑风雨之序矣。
现代文：如果自身得到了道，那么困窘和显达都是一样的，就象寒暑风雨交替出现一样。
English: If one has attained the way, then one's embarrassment and enlightenment are the same, just like the alternation of cold, heat, wind and rain.

古文：故许由虞乎颍阳，而共伯得乎共首。
现代文：所以许由在颖水之北自得其乐，共伯在共首山逍遥迫遣自得。
English: Therefore, Xu Yu enjoyed himself in the north of Yingshui, and his brother enjoyed himself in the mountains of Shoushan.

古文：七曰：凡遇，合也。
现代文：遇合
English: Encounter

古文：时不合，必待合而後行。
现代文：凡是受到赏识，一定是因为有合适的时机。时机不合适，一定要等待合适的时机然后再行动。
English: Everything that is appreciated must be because there is a right time. If the time is not right, you must wait for the right time and then act.

古文：故比翼之鸟死乎木，比目之鱼死乎海。
现代文：所以，比翼鸟死在树上，比目鱼死在海里。
English: So the pterodactyl died in the tree and the flounder died in the sea.

古文：孔子周流海内，再干世主，如齐至卫，所见八十馀君。
现代文：孔子周游天下，两次向当世君主谋求官职，到过齐国卫国，谒见过八十多个君主。
English: Confucius traveled around the world, twice seeking an official position from the current monarch, and went to Qi to defend the country. He met more than eighty monarchs.

古文：委质为弟子者三千人，达徒七十人。
现代文：献上见面礼给他当学生前有三千人，其中成绩卓著的学生有七十人。
English: There were three thousand students before he became a student, and seventy of them were outstanding students.

古文：七十人者，万乘之主得一人用可为师，不为无人。
现代文：这七十个人，拥有万辆兵车的大国君主得到任何一个人都可以把他当成老师，这不能说没有人才。
English: These seventy people, the monarch of a great country with ten thousand chariots, can be regarded as a teacher by anyone. This cannot be said to be a lack of talent.

古文：以此游，仅至於鲁司寇。
现代文：然而孔子带领这些人周游，做官仅仅做到鲁国的司寇。
English: However, Confucius led these people to travel around, and as an official, he only managed to be a spy of Lu.

古文：此天子之所以时绝也，诸侯之所以大乱也。
现代文：不任用圣人，这就是周天子之所以应时灭绝的原因，这就是诸侯之所以大乱的原因。
English: Without appointing a saint, this is the reason why Zhou Tianzi was exterminated in time, and this is the reason why the provinces were in turmoil.

古文：乱则愚者之多幸也，幸则必不胜其任矣。
现代文：混乱，那么愚昧的人就多被侥幸任用。侥幸任用，那就必定不能胜任了。
English: Confusion, so many stupid people are appointed by chance. If they are appointed by chance, they must be incompetent.

古文：任久不胜，则幸反为祸。
现代文：长期不能胜任，那么侥幸反而成为祸害。
English: If you are incompetent for a long time, then luck becomes a scourge.

古文：其幸大者，其祸亦大，非祸独及己也。
现代文：越侥幸的，祸害也就越大，并不是祸害偏偏让自己赶上。
English: The luckier you are, the greater the calamity. It is not a calamity to let yourself catch up.

古文：故君子不处幸，不为苟，必审诸己然後任，任然後动。
现代文：所以君子不存侥幸心理，不做苟且之事，一定慎重考虑自己的能力然后再担当职务，担当职务然后再行动。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not have a fluke mentality, does not do things meticulously, must carefully consider his ability and then take up the position, take up the position and then act.

古文：凡能听说者，必达乎论议者也。
现代文：凡是能听从劝说的人一定是通晓议论的人。
English: Anyone who can listen to persuasion must be a good debater.

古文：世主之能识论议者寡，所遇恶得不苟？
现代文：世上的君主能识别议论的人很少，他们所赏识的人怎能不是苟且求荣的呢?
English: The princes of the earth can discern but few men of speech; how can they not discern men of glory?

古文：凡能听音者，必达於五声。
现代文：凡是能欣赏音乐的人，一定通晓五音。
English: Anyone who can appreciate music must be familiar with the five tones.

古文：人之能知五声者寡，所善恶得不苟？
现代文：人能懂五音的很少，他们所喜欢的怎能不是鄙俗之音?
English: Very few people can understand the five tones, so how can their favorite not be the vulgar sound?

古文：客有以吹籁见越王者，羽、角、宫、徵、商不缪，越王不善；为野音，而反善之。
现代文：宾客中有个凭吹箫谒见越主的人，羽、角、宫、徽、商五音吹得一点儿不走调，越王却认为不好，吹奏鄙野之音，越王反而认为很好。
English: Among the guests, there was a person who could see the Yue Lord by blowing a trumpet. He could blow the five tones of feather, horn, palace, crest, and merchant without going out of tune at all, but the Yue King thought it was bad. He blew the sound of the lower field, but the Yue King thought it was good.

古文：说之道亦有如此者也。
现代文：劝说人的事也有象这种情形的。
English: Persuasion is like that.

古文：人有为人妻者，人告其父母曰： 嫁不必生也，衣器之物，可外藏之，以备不生。 
现代文：有个给人家当妻子的人，有人告诉她的父母说： 出嫁以后不一定生孩子，衣服器具等物品，可以拿到外边藏起来，以便防备不生孩子被休弃。 
English: There was a wife-beater who was told by her parents, "You don't have to have children after you get married. You can take your clothes, utensils, and other belongings outside and hide them to avoid being abandoned if you don't have children."

古文：其父母以为然，於是令其女常外藏。
现代文：她的父母认为这人说得对，于是就让女儿经常把财物拿到外也藏起来。
English: Her parents thought he was right, so they let their daughter take her belongings outside and hide them.

古文：姑妐知之，曰： 为我妇而有外心，不可畜。 
现代文：公婆知道了这事，说， 当我们的媳妇却有外心，不可以留着她。 
English: My in-laws found out about this and said, "We can't keep our daughter-in-law when she has an ulterior motive."

古文：因出之。
现代文：于是就休弃了她。
English: So he broke up with her.

古文：妇之父母以谓为己谋者，以为忠，终身善之，亦不知所以然矣。宗庙之灭，天下之失，亦由此矣。
现代文：这个女子的父母把女儿被休的事告诉了给自己出主意的人，认为这个人对自己忠减，终身与他交好，最终也不知道女儿被体弃的原因，宗庙的毁灭，天下的丧失，也是由于这样的原因。
English: This woman's parents told the person who gave them the advice about their daughter's dismissal, believing that this person was less loyal to them and had been friends with him for life. In the end, they did not know the reason for their daughter's abandonment, the destruction of the ancestral temple, and the loss of the world, also due to this reason.

古文：故曰：遇合也无常，说适然也。
现代文：所以说，受到君主赏识是不固定的，被人喜欢也是偶然的。
English: Therefore, it is not fixed to be appreciated by the monarch, and it is also accidental to be liked.

古文：若人之於色也，无不知说美者，而美者未必遇也。
现代文：就象人们对于女色一样，没有不知道喜欢长得漂亮的，可是长得漂亮的未必能遇上。
English: Just like people with women, there is no doubt that they like to look beautiful, but they may not be able to meet beautiful.

古文：故嫫母执乎黄帝，黄帝曰： 厉女德而弗忘，与女正而弗衰，虽恶奚伤？ 
现代文：所以嫫母受到黄帝的亲厚，黄帝说： 修养你的品德，不要停止，付与你内宫之政，不疏远你，虽然长得丑陋又有什么妨碍? 
English: Therefore, Yan's mother was favored by the Yellow Emperor. The Yellow Emperor said to Yan: Cultivate your character, do not stop, pay attention to your inner palace politics, do not alienate you, although you are ugly, what is the obstacle?

古文：若人之於滋味，无不说甘脆，而甘脆未必受也。
现代文：就象人们对于滋味一样，没有人不喜欢又甜又脆的东西，可是又甜又脆的东西有的人未必受用。
English: Just like people's taste, no one dislikes sweet and crunchy things, but sweet and crunchy things may not be used by some people.

古文：文王嗜昌蒲菹，孔子闻而服之，缩頞而食之。
现代文：周文王爱吃菖蒲作的腌莱，孔子听丁，皱着眉才吃下去。
English: Zhou Wenwang loved to eat the crepe made of calamari, and Confucius listened to Ding and only ate it with a frown.

古文：三年，然後胜之。
现代文：过了三年，才吃习惯。
English: It took me three years to get used to it.

古文：人有大臭者，其亲戚兄弟妻妾知识，无能与居者。
现代文：有个有狐臭的人，他的父母、兄弟，妻子、朋友，没有人能跟他在一起居住。
English: There was a man who had the stench of a fox. His parents, brothers, wife, friends, no one could live with him.

古文：自苦而居海上。
现代文：他自己感到很痛苦，就住在海上。
English: He himself felt so miserable that he lived on the sea.

古文：海上人有说其臭者，昼夜随之而弗能去。
现代文：海上有喜欢他的臭味的人，日夜跟随着他不能离开。
English: There are people at sea who like his stink and follow him day and night, unable to leave.

古文：说亦有若此者。
现代文：喜欢人也有象这种情形的。
English: Lovers are like that, too.

古文：陈有恶人焉，曰敦洽雠麋，椎颡广颜，色如漆赭，垂眼临鼻，长肘而盭。
现代文：陈国有个丑陋的人，叫救敦洽雠麋，尖顶宽额，面色黑红，眼睛下垂，接近鼻子，胳膊很长，大腿向两侧弯曲。
English: There was an ugly man in Chen Guo. He was called "Salvation Dunjia," with a wide forehead, a dark red complexion, droopy eyes, close to the nose, long arms, and thighs bent to both sides.

古文：陈侯见而甚说之，外使治其国，内使制其身。
现代文：陈侯看到了，很喜欢他，在宫外让他治理国家，在宫内让他管理自己饮食起居。
English: Chen Hou saw this and liked him very much. Outside the palace, he let him govern the country, and inside the palace, he let him manage his diet and living.

古文：楚合诸侯，陈侯病，不能往，使敦洽雠麋往谢焉。
现代文：楚国盟会诸侯，陈侯有病，不能前往，派敦洽雠麋去向楚国道歉。
English: Chen Hou was ill and unable to travel, so he sent a delegation to apologize to the State of Chu.

古文：楚王怪其名而先见之，客有进状。
现代文：楚王对他的名字感到奇怪，就先接见了他。他进去了，相貌又丑陋，说话又粗野。
English: King Chu was puzzled by his name and received him first. He went in, looking ugly and speaking rudely.

古文：有恶其名言有恶状。楚王怒，合大夫而告之，曰： 陈侯不知其不可使，是不知也；知而使之，是侮也。
现代文：楚王很生气，召来大夫们，告诉他们说： 陈侯不知道这个人不可以派遣，这就是不明智，知道这个人不可以派遣却还要派遣他，这就是轻慢。
English: King Chu was very angry. He summoned the doctors and told them: Chen Hou did not know that this person could not be sent, which was unwise. Knowing that this person could not be sent, but still sending him, was contemptible.

古文：侮且不智，不可不攻也。 
现代文：轻慢而且不明智，不可不攻打他。 
English: It would be imprudent and unwise not to attack him.

古文：兴师伐陈，三月然後丧。
现代文：于是发兵攻打陈国，过了三个月之后灭掉了陈国。
English: So he sent troops to attack Chen Guo, and three months later he eliminated Chen Guo.

古文：恶足以骇人，言足以丧国，而友之足於陈侯而无上也，至於亡而友不衰。
现代文：丑陋足以惊吓别人，言论足以丧失国家，可是陈侯却对他喜爱到极点，没有人能超过他了，直到亡国，喜爱的程度都不减弱。
English: His ugliness is enough to frighten others, his speech is enough to lose the country, but Chen Hou loves him to the extreme, no one can surpass him, and the degree of love will not diminish until the country is destroyed.

古文：夫不宜遇而遇者，则必废。
现代文：不应该受赏识却受到赏识的，那就一定会被废弃。
English: If something is appreciated when it shouldn't be, it's bound to be discarded.

古文：宜遇而不遇者，此国之所以乱、世之所以衰也。
现代文：应该受赏识却没有受到赏识的，这就是国家之所以混乱、世道之所以衰微的原因。
English: What should be appreciated is not appreciated, which is why the country is in chaos and the world is in decline.

古文：天下之民，其苦愁劳务从此生。
现代文：天下的百姓，他们的愁苦劳碌就由此产生出来了。
English: The people of the world, their sorrows and hardships have come from this.

古文：凡举人之本，太上以志，其次以事，其次以功。
现代文：大凡举荐人的根本，最上等的是凭道德，其次是凭事业，其次是凭功绩。
English: The foundation of a great recommender is that the highest recommendation is based on morality, followed by career, followed by merit.

古文：三者弗能，国必残亡，群孽大至，身必死殃，年得至七十、九十犹尚幸。
现代文：这三种凡不能举荐上来，国家一定会残破灭亡，各种灾祸就会一齐到来，自身一定会遭殃，能活到七十岁九十岁，就是侥幸的了。
English: If these three cannot be recommended, the country will surely be destroyed, all kinds of disasters will come together, and you will certainly suffer. If you can live to be seventy or ninety years old, you are lucky.

古文：贤圣之後，反而孽民，是以贼其身，岂能独哉？
现代文：圣贤的后代，反而给人民带来危害，因此残害到自身，岂只是独自受危害呢?
English: The descendants of the sages, on the other hand, bring harm to the people, and thus harm themselves, are they only harmed alone?

古文：八曰：外物不可必。
现代文：连人民也要跟着受害啊！必己外物不可依仗。
English: Even the people will suffer along with them! They must not rely on external things.

古文：故龙逄诛，比干戮，箕子狂，恶来死，桀纣亡。
现代文：所以龙逢被杀，比干遇害，箕子装疯，恶来被杀死，桀、纣遭灭亡。
English: Therefore, Long Feng was killed, Bi Gan was killed, Zang Zi pretended to be mad, Xilai was killed, and Zou and Zou were destroyed.

古文：人主莫不欲其臣之忠，而忠未必信。
现代文：君主没有不希望自己的臣子忠诚的，可是忠诚却不一定受到君主信任。
English: There is no monarch who does not want his subjects to be loyal, but loyalty is not necessarily trusted by the monarch.

古文：故伍员流乎江，苌弘死，藏其血三年而为碧。
现代文：所以伍员的尸体破投入江中，苌弘被杀死，他的血藏了三年化为碧玉。
English: Therefore, the corpse of the soldier was thrown into the river, Zou Hong was killed, and his blood was hidden for three years and turned into jasper.

古文：亲莫不欲其子之孝，而孝未必爱。
现代文：父母没有不希望自己的儿子孝顺的，可是孝顺却不一定受到父母喜爱。
English: There are no parents who do not want their sons to be filial, but filial piety is not necessarily loved by parents.

古文：故孝己疑，曾子悲。
现代文：所以孝已被怀疑，曾子因遭父母打而悲伤。
English: Therefore, Xiao has been suspected, and Zengzi is sad because he was beaten by his parents.

古文：庄子行於山中，见木甚美长大，枝叶盛茂，伐木者止其旁而弗取。
现代文：庄子在山里行走，看到一棵树长得很好很高大，枝叶很茂盛，伐树的人停在树旁却不伐取它。
English: Zhuang Zi was walking in the mountains. He saw a tree that was growing very well, very tall, with lush branches and leaves. The tree-cutter stopped by the tree but did not cut it down.

古文：问其故，曰： 无所可用。 
现代文：问他是什么缘故，他说； 没有什么用处。 
English: Ask him why, he says; it's no use.

古文：庄子曰： 此以不材得终其天年矣。 
现代文：庄子说：这棵树因为不成材而得以终其天年了。 
English: Chuang Tzu said, "This tree has been able to live out the rest of its days because it did not become wood.

古文：出於山，及邑，舍故人之家。
现代文：从山里出来，到了村子里，住在老朋友家里。
English: Came out of the mountains, went to the village, stayed at an old friend's house.

古文：故人喜，具酒肉，令竖子为杀雁飨之。
现代文：老朋友很高兴，准备酒肉，让童仆为他杀鹅款待他。
English: The old friend was delighted, prepared wine and meat, and let the boy servant kill a goose for him.

古文：竖子请曰： 其一雁能鸣，一雁不能鸣，请奚杀？ 
现代文：童仆请示说。 一只鹅能叫，一只鹅不能叫，请问杀哪一只? 
English: One goose can crow, one goose cannot crow, which one should I kill?

古文：主人之公曰： 杀其不能鸣者。 
现代文：主人的父亲说。 杀那只不能叫的。 
English: The owner's father said, "Kill the one that can't call."

古文：明日，弟子问於庄子曰： 昔者山中之木以不材得终天年，主人之雁以不材死，先生将何以处？ 
现代文：第二天，学生向庄子问道。 昨天山里的树因为不成材而得以终其天年，主人的鹅因为不成材而被杀死，先生您将在成材与不成材达两者同处于哪一边呢？ 
English: The next day, the student asked Zhuang Zi, "Yesterday, the tree in the mountain was able to live out the rest of its days because it did not become timber, and the owner's goose was killed because it did not become timber. Sir, which side are you on when it comes to both becoming timber and not becoming timber?"

古文：庄子笑曰： 周将处於材不材之间。
现代文：庄子笑着悦； 我将处于成材与不成材之间。
English: Zhuang Zi smiled happily; I would be in the middle between success and failure.

古文：材不材之间，似之而非也，故未免乎累。
现代文：成材与不成材之间，似乎是合适的位置，其实不是，所以也不能免于祸害。
English: Between the material and the non-material, it seems to be a suitable position, but in fact it is not, so it is not immune to the scourge.

古文：若夫道德则不然。
现代文：至于达到了真道，就不是这样了。
English: When it comes to attaining the true way, this is not the case.

古文：无讶无訾，一龙一蛇，与时俱化，而无肯专为；一上一下，以禾为量，而浮游乎万物之祖，物物而不物於物，则胡可得而累？
现代文：既没有惊讶，又没有敏辱，时而为龙，时而为蛇，随时势一起变化，而不肯专为一物；时而上，时而下，以顺应自然为准则，邀游于虚无之境，主宰外物而不为外物所主宰，那又怎幺可能受祸害呢?
English: There is no surprise, no sense of humiliation, sometimes a dragon, sometimes a snake, at any time the situation changes together, but does not want to be one thing; sometimes up, sometimes down, with the principle of conforming to nature, inviting you to swim in the realm of nothingness, dominating foreign objects without being dominated by foreign objects, then how can you possibly be harmed?

古文：此神农、黄帝之所法。
现代文：这就是神农、黄帝所取法的处世准则。
English: This is the code of conduct adopted by Shennong and the Yellow Emperor.

古文：若夫万物之情、人伦之传则不然。
现代文：至于万物之情，人伦相传之道，就与此不一样了。
English: As for the love of all things, the way of passing on human ethics, it is different from this.

古文：成则毁，大则衰，廉则锉，尊则亏，直则骫，合则离，爱则隳，多智则谋，不肖则欺，胡可得而必？ 
现代文：成功了就会毁坏，强大了就会衰微，锋利了就会缺损，尊崇了就会亏损，直了就会弯曲，聚合了就会离散，受到宠爱就会被废弃，智谋多就会受算计，不贤德就会受欺悔。这些怎么可阻依仗呢?
English: If it succeeds, it will be destroyed; if it is powerful, it will be weakened; if it is sharp, it will be defective; if it is respected, it will be a loss; if it is straight, it will be bent; if it is aggregated, it will be dispersed; if it is favored, it will be discarded; if it is clever, it will be calculated; if it is not virtuous, it will be regretted. How can these be prevented by war?

古文：牛缺居上地，大儒也。
现代文：牛缺居住在上地，是个知识渊博的儒者。
English: Niu Qiao lives in Shangdi and is a knowledgeable Confucian.

古文：下之邯郸，遇盗於耦沙之中。
现代文：他到邯郸去，在渭水一带遇上盗贼。
English: He went to Surabaya and was confronted by thieves in the Surabaya area.

古文：盗求其橐中之载，则与之；求其车马，则与之；求其衣被，则与之。
现代文：盗贼要他口袋里装的财物，他给了他们，要他的车马，他给了他们，要他的衣服被子，他给了他们。
English: The thieves asked him for the money in his pockets and he gave it to them, for his chariot and horse and he gave it to them, for his clothes and bedspread and he gave it to them.

古文：牛缺出而去，盗相谓曰： 此天下之显人也，今辱之如此，此必诉我於万乘之主。
现代文：牛缺步行走了以后，盗贼们相互说道； 这是个天下杰出的人，现在这样侮辱他，他一定要向大国君主诉说我们的所作所为，大国君主一定要用全国的力量讨伐我们，我们一定不能活命。
English: After the cowherd had gone away on foot, the thieves said to one another, "This is an outstanding man in the world, and now you are insulting him in this way. He must tell the great monarch what we have done. The great monarch must fight us with the strength of the whole country. We must not live."

古文：万乘之主必以国诛我，我必不生，不若相与追而杀之，以灭其迹。 
现代文：不如一起赶上他，把他杀死，灭掉踪迹。 于是就一起追赶他，追了三十里，追上他，把他杀死了。
English: It would be better to catch him together, kill him, and erase the traces. So they chased him together, chased him for thirty miles, caught up with him, and killed him.

古文：於是相与趋之，行三十里，及而杀之。
现代文：这是因为牛缺让盗贼知道了自己是贤人的缘故。
English: This is because the lack of cattle lets thieves know that they are wise.

古文：此以知故也。
现代文：孟贲渡河，抢在队伍前边上了船。
English: Meng Wei crossed the river and boarded the boat ahead of the group.

古文：孟贲过於河，先其五。
现代文：船工很生气，用桨敲他的头，不知道他是孟贲。
English: The boatman was angry and hit him on the head with an oar, not knowing that he was Meng Yao.

古文：船人怒，而以楫虓其头，顾不知其孟贲也。
现代文：到了河中间，孟贲瞪大了眼睛看着船工，头发直立起来，眼眶都瞪裂了，鬓发竖立起来。
English: When they reached the middle of the river, Meng Yao stared at the boatman with wide eyes. His hair stood straight up, his eyelids were cracked, and his hair stood on end.

古文：中河，孟贲嗔目而视船人，发植，目裂，鬓指，舟中之人尽扬播入於河。
现代文：船上的人都骚动着躲开，掉到了河里。假使船工知道他是孟贲，连正眼看他都不敢，也没有人敢在他之前渡河，更何况侮辱他呢?
English: If the boatmen knew that he was Meng Yao, they would not dare to look at him, and no one would dare to cross the river before him, let alone insult him.

古文：使船人知其孟贲，弗敢直视，涉无先者，又况於辱之乎？此以不知故也。知与不知，皆不足恃，其惟和调近之。
现代文：这是因为孟贲没有让船工知道自己是孟贲的缘故。让人知道与不让人知道，都不足以依靠，大概只有和调才近于免除患难，但还是不足以依仗。
English: This is because Meng Xuan did not let the shipwright know that he was Meng Xuan. It is not enough to rely on whether people know or do not know. Probably, only reconciliation is close to avoiding difficulties, but it is still not enough to rely on.

古文：犹未可必。盖有不辨和调者，则和调有不免也。
现代文：这是因为有不能辩识和调的，那么和调仍然不能免于患难。
English: This is because there are things that cannot be identified and harmonized, so harmonization is still not free from difficulties.

古文：宋桓司马有宝珠，抵罪出亡。王使人问珠之所在，曰： 投之池中。 
现代文：宋国的桓魅有颗宝珠，他犯了罪逃亡在外，朱景公派人问他宝珠在哪里，他说。 把它扔到池塘里了。 
English: Huan Mei of the Song Dynasty had a precious pearl. He had committed a crime and fled abroad. Zhu Jing Gong sent someone to ask him where the precious pearl was, he said. He threw it into the pond.

古文：於是竭池而求之，无得，鱼死焉。
现代文：于是弄干了池塘来寻找宝珠，没有找到，鱼却因此都死了。
English: So he drained the pond to look for the pearl. When he didn't find it, all the fish died.

古文：此言祸福之相及也。
现代文：这表明祸和福是相互依存的。
English: This shows that misfortune and good fortune are interdependent.

古文：纣为不善於商，而祸充天地，和调何益？
现代文：纣在商朝干坏事，祸患觅满天地之间，和调又有什么用处?
English: What is the use of making peace between the Shang Dynasty and the Qin Dynasty, both of which committed evil deeds and plagued heaven and earth?

古文：张毅好恭，门闾帷薄聚居众无不趋，舆隶姻媾小童无不敬，以定其身。
现代文：张毅喜欢恭敬待人，经过门间，帷幕垂帘及人聚集处无不快步走过，对待奴隶、姻媾及童仆没有不尊敬的，以便使自身平安。
English: Zhang Yi liked to treat people with respect. He walked through doorways, curtain rails, and gathering places without any discomfort. He treated slaves, in-laws, and servants with no disrespect in order to keep himself safe.

古文：不终其寿，内热而死。
现代文：但是他的寿命却不长，因内热而死去。
English: But he did not live long and died of internal heat.

古文：单豹好术，离俗弃尘，不食谷实，不衣芮温，身处山林岩堀，以全其生。不尽其年，而虎食之。
现代文：单豹喜欢道术，超尘离俗，不吃五谷，不穿丝絮，住在山林岩穴之中，以便保垒自己的生命，可是却不能终其天年，被老虎吃掉了。
English: Lone leopards like martial arts, are very different from ordinary people, don't eat grain, don't wear silk, and live in mountain forests and caves in order to protect their lives, but they can't live forever, they are eaten by tigers.

古文：孔子行道而息，马逸，食人之稼，野人取其马。
现代文：孔子在路上行走，沐息时，马跑了，吃了人家的庄稼。种田人牵走他的马。
English: When Confucius was walking on the road and taking a shower, his horse ran away and ate someone else's crops. The farmer took his horse away.

古文：子贡请往说之，毕辞，野人不听。
现代文：子贡请求去劝说那个人，把话都说完了，可是种田人不听从。
English: Zigong asked him to persuade the man, and he finished his speech, but the farmer did not listen.

古文：有鄙人始事孔子者，曰： 请往说之。 
现代文：有个刚侍奉孔子的也远地区的人说； 请让我去劝说他。 
English: A man from a distant region who had just served Confucius said, "Please let me persuade him."

古文：因谓野人曰： 子不耕於东海，吾不耕於西海也。吾马何得不食子之禾？ 
现代文：于是他对那个种田人说： 您耕种的土地从东海一直到西海，我们的马怎么能不吃您的庄稼? 
English: So he said to the farmer, "The land you cultivate stretches from the East Sea to the West Sea. How can our horses not eat your crops?"

古文：其野人大说，相谓曰： 说亦皆如此其辩也！独如向之人？ 
现代文：那个种田人非常高兴，对他说： 说的话竞这样的善辩，哪象刚才那个人那样呢? 
English: The farmer was overjoyed and said to him, "Who is as eloquent as the man who just spoke?

古文：解马而与之。
现代文：解下马交给了他。
English: I untied the horse and handed it to him.

古文：说如此其无方也而犹行，外物岂可必哉？
现代文：劝说人如此不讲方式尚且行得通，外物怎么可以依仗呢?
English: Persuading people in such an unspoken way is still feasible, how can external things be relied on?

古文：君子之自行也，敬人而不必见敬，爱人而不必见爱。
现代文：君子自己的作为是，尊敬别人而不一定被别人尊敬，热爱别人而不一定被别人热爱。
English: A gentleman's own conduct is to respect others without necessarily being respected by others, and to love others without necessarily being loved by others.

古文：敬爱人者，己也；见敬爱者，人也。
现代文：尊敬热爱别人，在于自己，被别人尊敬热爱，在于别人。
English: To respect and love others lies in oneself, to be respected and loved by others lies in others.

古文：君子必在己者，不必在人者也。
现代文：君子依仗在于自己的东西，不依仗在于别人的东西。
English: A gentleman relies on his own things, not on the things of others.

古文：必在己，无不遇矣。
现代文：依仗在于自己的东西，就能无所不通。
English: If you rely on your own resources, you will be able to do everything.

