古文：二十有四年春，叔孙豹如晋。
现代文：二十四年春季，叔孙豹去到晋国。
English: In the spring of 1924, Uncle Sun Leopard went to Jin Province.

古文：仲孙羯帅师侵齐。
现代文：仲孙羯率领军队入侵齐国。
English: Sun Yat-sen led an army to invade Qi.

古文：夏，楚子伐吴。
现代文：夏季，楚康王攻打吴国。
English: In the summer, King Chu Kang attacked Wu.

古文：秋七月甲子朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：秋季七月甲子初一这天，有日食发生，是日全食。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, a solar eclipse occurred, a total solar eclipse.

古文：齐崔杼帅师伐莒。
现代文：齐国的崔杼率领军队攻打莒国。
English: Choe Son of Qi led an army to attack Ye.

古文：大水。
现代文：鲁国发大水。
English: It's a big mess.

古文：八月癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月癸巳初一这天，有日食发生。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子于夷仪。
现代文：襄公与晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在夷仪会见。
English: Prince Xiang met with Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Zheng, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, Prince Teng, Prince Xue, Prince Zibo, and Prince Xiao Zizi in Yiyi.

古文：冬，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯、许男伐郑。
现代文：冬季，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯、许男一起攻打郑国。
English: In winter, Chu Tzu, Cai Hou, Chen Hou, and Xu Man attacked Zheng together.

古文：公至自会。
现代文：襄公从诸侯见面的地方回来。
English: Wen Gong returns from Xincheng.

古文：陈鍼宜咎出奔楚。
现代文：陈国的鍼宜咎逃到楚国。
English: The acupuncturists of Chen fled to Chu.

古文：叔孙豹如京师。
现代文：叔孙豹去到京师。
English: Uncle Sun Leopard went to Beijing to train.

古文：大饥。
现代文：鲁国发生大饥荒。
English: There was a great famine.

古文：二十四年春，穆叔如晋。范宣子逆之，问焉，曰： 古人有言曰， 死而不朽 ，何谓也？ 
现代文：二十四年春季，穆叔到了晋国，范宣子迎接他，询问他，说： 古人有话说， 死而不朽 ，这是说的什么？ 
English: In the spring of the twenty-fourth year, Mu Shifu arrived in Jin Province. Fan Xuan Zi greeted him and asked him, "The ancients said, 'Death and immortality,' what does this mean?"

古文：穆叔未对。
现代文：穆叔没有回答。
English: Mu Xiu did not answer.

古文：宣子曰： 昔匄之祖，自虞以上，为陶唐氏，在夏为御龙氏，在商为豕韦氏，在周为唐、杜氏，晋主夏盟为范氏，其是之谓乎？ 
现代文：范宣子说： 从前匄的祖先，从虞舜以上是陶唐氏，在夏朝是御龙氏，在商朝是豕韦氏，在周朝是唐杜氏，晋国主持中原的盟会的时候是范氏，恐怕所说的不朽就是这个吧！ 
English: Fan Xuan Zi said, "Once upon a time, the ancestors of the Jin Dynasty were the Tao and Tang Dynasties, from the Yu Dynasty onward, the Xia Dynasty was the Goryong Dynasty, the Shang Dynasty was the Wei Dynasty, the Zhou Dynasty was the Tang Dynasty, and the Jin Dynasty presided over the Central Plains League when it was the Fan Dynasty. I'm afraid this is the immortality I'm talking about!

古文：穆叔曰： 以豹所闻，此之谓世禄，非不朽也。
现代文：穆叔说： 据豹所听到的，这叫做世禄，不是不朽。
English: Mu Xiu said: According to what the leopard heard, this is called Shilu, not immortality.

古文：鲁有先大夫曰臧文仲，既没，其言立。其是之谓乎？
现代文：鲁国有一位先大夫叫臧文仲，死了以后，他的话世代不废，所谓不朽，说的就是这个吧！
English: There was a pioneer doctor in Russia named Gong Wenzhong. After his death, his words were passed down for generations. So-called immortality, that's what he was talking about!

古文：豹闻之，太上有立德，其次有立功，其次有立言，虽久不废，此之谓不朽。
现代文：豹听说： 最高的是树立德行，其次是树立功业，再其次是树立言论。 能做到这样，虽然死了也久久不会废弃，这叫做不朽。
English: The leopard heard: The best thing is to establish virtue, the next is to establish merit, and the next is to establish speech. If you can do this, even if you die, you will not be abandoned for a long time. This is called immortality.

古文：若夫保姓受氏，以守宗祊，世不绝祀，无国无之。
现代文：像这样保存姓、接受氏，用业守住宗庙，世世代代不断绝祭祀。没有一个国家没有这种情况。
English: There is no country that does not have such a situation, preserving the family name, accepting the clan name, using the occupation to keep the ancestral temple, and ceasing sacrifice from generation to generation.

古文：禄之大者，不可谓不朽。 
现代文：这只是官禄中的大的，不能说是不朽。 
English: This is only the highest of official ranks, and cannot be said to be immortal.

古文：范宣子为政，诸侯之币重。郑人病之。
现代文：范宣子主持政事，诸侯朝见晋国的贡品很重，郑国人对这件事感到忧虑。
English: Fan Xuan Zi presided over the political affairs, and the tributes of the princes of Jin were very heavy. The people of Zheng were worried about this.

古文：二月，郑伯如晋。子产寓书于子西以告宣子，曰： 子为晋国，四邻诸侯，不闻令德，而闻重币，侨也惑之。
现代文：二月，郑简公去到晋国，子产托子西带信给范宣子，说： 您治理晋国，四邻的诸侯不听说有美德，而听说要很重的贡品，侨对这种情况感到迷惑。
English: In February, Zheng Jiangong went to Jin Province and sent a letter to Fan Xunzi, saying: You govern Jin Province. The four neighboring princes have not heard of virtue, but have heard of heavy tribute. Overseas Chinese are puzzled by this situation.

古文：侨闻君子长国家者，非无贿之患，而无令名之难。
现代文：侨听说君子治理国和家，不是担心没有财礼，而是害怕没有好名声。
English: Overseas Chinese have heard that when a gentleman governs the country and his family, he is not worried about not having enough wealth, but is afraid of not having a good reputation.

古文：夫诸侯之贿聚于公室，则诸侯贰。
现代文：诸侯的财货，聚集在国君家里，内部就分裂。
English: The goods of the princes are gathered in the house of the sovereign, and then they are divided.

古文：若吾子赖之，则晋国贰。
现代文：如果您把这个作为利己之物，晋国的内部就不和。
English: If you take this as a selfish thing, there will be discord within Jin.

古文：诸侯贰，则晋国坏。
现代文：诸侯的内部不和，晋国就受到损害。
English: If there is discord among the lords, Jin will be damaged.

古文：晋国贰，则子之家坏。
现代文：晋国的内部不和，您的家就受到损害。
English: If there is internal discord in Jin, your home will be damaged.

古文：何没没也！
现代文：为什么那么糊涂呢！
English: Why are you so confused!

古文：将焉用贿？
现代文：还哪里用得着财货？
English: What else do you need with goods?

古文：夫令名，德之舆也。
现代文：好名声，是装载德行的车子。
English: A good reputation is a chariot loaded with virtues.

古文：德，国家之基也。
现代文：德行，是国家和家族的基础。
English: Virtue is the foundation of the nation and the family.

古文：有基无坏，无亦是务乎！
现代文：有基础才不至于毁坏，您不也应该这么做吗？
English: A foundation cannot be destroyed. Shouldn't you do the same?

古文：有德则乐，乐则能久。
现代文：有了德行就快乐，快乐了就能长久。
English: If you have virtue, you will be happy, and if you are happy, you will live a long time.

古文：《诗》云： 乐只君子，邦家之基。 有令德也夫！ 上帝临女，无贰尔心。 有令名也夫！
现代文：《诗》说， 快乐啊君子，是国家和家族的基础 ，这就是有美德吧！ 天帝在你的上面，你不要有二心 ，这就是有好名声吧！
English: "Poetry" says, "Happiness, O gentleman, is the foundation of the country and the family, that is to have virtue! God is above you, you should not have two hearts, that is to have a good reputation!"

古文：恕思以明德，则令名载而行之，是以远至迩安。
现代文：用宽恕来发扬德行，那么好的名声就会自然传布天下，因此远方的人会因仰慕而来，近处的人也会获得安宁。
English: Cultivate virtue with forgiveness, and a good name will naturally spread throughout the world, so that those who are far away will come in admiration, and those who are near will obtain peace.

古文：毋宁使人谓子： 子实生我，而谓子浚我以生乎？ 
现代文：您是宁可使人对您说 您确实养活了我 ，还是说 您剥削了我，来养活自己 呢？
English: Would you rather have people tell you that you did feed me, or that you exploited me to feed yourself?

古文：象有齿以焚其身，贿也。 
现代文：象有了象牙而毁了自己，这是由于象牙值钱的缘故。 
English: The elephant destroys itself with ivory because ivory is valuable.

古文：宣子说，乃轻币。
现代文：范宣子听了子产的这番道理之后很高兴，就减轻了贡品。
English: Fan Xuan Zi was very happy after listening to the reason for the child's birth, and reduced the tribute.

古文：是行也，郑伯朝晋，为重币故，且请伐陈也。
现代文：这一趟，郑简公朝见晋国，是为了贡品太重的缘故，同时请求进攻陈国。
English: On this trip, Zheng Jiankong visited Jin for the reason that the tribute was too heavy, and at the same time he requested to attack Chen.

古文：郑伯稽首，宣子辞。
现代文：郑简公行叩首礼，范宣子辞谢不敢当。
English: Zheng Jian Gong bowed his head, Fan Xuan Zi did not dare to say thank you.

古文：子西相，曰： 以陈国之介恃大国而陵虐于敝邑，寡君是以请罪焉。敢不稽首。 
现代文：子西相礼，说： 由于陈国仗恃大国而欺凌侵害敝邑，寡君因此请求向陈国问罪，岂敢不叩头？ 
English: Zixi Xiangli, said: Since Chen Guo fought against the great powers and bullied and infringed upon the county, the oligarch therefore asked Chen Guo to plead guilty. Would he dare not kowtow?

古文：孟孝伯侵齐，晋故也。
现代文：孟孝伯入侵齐国，这是为了晋国的缘故。
English: Meng Xiaobo invaded Qi for the sake of Jin.

古文：夏，楚子为舟师以伐吴，不为军政，无功而还。
现代文：夏季，楚康王出动水兵以攻打吴国，由于不教育军队，没有得到成功就回来了。
English: In the summer, King Chu Kang sent out sailors to attack the State of Wu, but since he did not educate his troops, he returned without success.

古文：齐侯既伐晋而惧，将欲见楚子。
现代文：齐庄公对晋国发动进攻以后又害怕，打算会见楚康王。
English: After launching an attack on Jin, Prince Qizhuang was afraid again and planned to meet King Chu Kang.

古文：楚子使薳启彊如齐聘，且请期。
现代文：楚康王派薳启彊去到齐国聘问，同时请问会见的日期。
English: The king of Chu Kang sent his envoy to Qi to ask questions, and asked for the date of the meeting.

古文：齐社，蒐军实，使客观之。
现代文：齐国人在军队中祭祀土地神，并举行大检阅，让客人观看。
English: The people of Qi worshipped the land god in the army, and held a grand parade for guests to watch.

古文：陈文子曰： 齐将有寇。
现代文：陈文子说： 齐国将要受到侵犯。
English: Chen Wenzi said: Qi is about to be invaded.

古文：吾闻之，兵不戢，必取其族。 
现代文：我听说，不收敛武力，还会自己害自己。 
English: I've heard that if you don't restrain force, you'll hurt yourself.

古文：秋，齐侯闻将有晋师，使陈无宇从薳启彊如楚，辞，且乞师。
现代文：秋季，齐庄公听说晋国打算出兵，就派遣陈无宇跟随薳启彊去到楚国。
English: In the autumn, when Lord Qizhuang heard that Jin was planning to send troops, he sent Chen Wuyu to go to Chu with Emperor Qi.

古文：崔杼帅师送之，遂伐莒，侵介根。
现代文：说明将有战事而不能会见，同时请求出兵。崔杼带兵送他，就乘机进攻莒国，侵袭介根。
English: He explained that there would be a war and he would not be able to meet, and at the same time he requested the dispatch of troops. Cui Yong led the troops to send him, and he took the opportunity to attack Shandong Province and invade Kaigen.

古文：会于夷仪，将以伐齐，水，不克。
现代文：鲁襄公和晋平公、宋平公、卫殇公、郑简公、曹武公、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在夷仪会见，准备进攻齐国。
English: Prince Lu Xiang met with Prince Jinping, Prince Songping, Prince Weizong, Prince Zheng Jian, Prince Cao Wu, Zizi, Zizi, Tengzi, Xue Bo, Zibo and Xiao Zizi in Yiyi and prepared to attack Qi.

古文：冬，楚子伐郑以救齐，门于东门，次于棘泽。
现代文：由于大水，没有能进攻。冬季，楚康王进攻郑国以救援齐国，进攻东门，驻扎在棘泽。
English: Due to heavy water, they were unable to attack. In winter, King Chu Kang attacked Zheng Province to rescue Qi Province, attacked Dongmen, and was stationed in Thorn Lake.

古文：诸侯还救郑。
现代文：诸侯回军救援郑国。
English: Princes and nobles returned to rescue Zheng.

古文：晋侯使张骼、辅跞致楚师，求御于郑。
现代文：晋平公派遣张骼，辅跞向楚军单车挑战，向郑国求取驾御战车的人。
English: Jin Ping Gong dispatched Zhang Qi to help him challenge the Chu army by bicycle and ask Zheng Guo for someone who could drive a chariot.

古文：郑人卜宛射犬吉。
现代文：郑国人占卜派遣宛射犬，吉利。
English: Zheng Guozhong sent a fortune-telling dog, Geely.

古文：子大叔戒之曰： 大国之人，不可与也。 
现代文：子太叔告诫宛射犬说： 对大国的人不能和他们平行抗礼。 
English: The great-uncle admonished the shooting dog, saying, "You can't stand up to people from big countries at the same time as them.

古文：对曰： 无有众寡，其上一也。 
现代文：宛射犬回答说： 不论兵多兵少，御者的地位在车左车右之上是一样的。 太叔说： 不是这样。
English: To which the gun dog replied, "Regardless of the number of soldiers, the position of the driver is the same on the left and right of the vehicle.

古文：大叔曰： 不然，部娄无松柏。 
现代文：小土山上没有松柏。 
English: There are no conifers on the hill.

古文：二子在幄，坐射犬于外，既食，而后食之。
现代文：张骼、辅跞两个人在帐篷里，让射犬坐在帐篷外，吃完饭，才让射犬吃。
English: Zhang Qi and his assistant were two people in the tent, let the shooting dog sit outside the tent, and let the shooting dog eat after finishing the meal.

古文：使御广车而行，已皆乘乘车。将及楚师，而后从之乘，皆踞转而鼓琴。
现代文：让射犬驾御进攻的车前进，张、辅自己却坐着平时的战车，将要到达楚军营垒，然后才登上射犬的车子，二人均蹲在车后边的横木上弹琴。
English: Let Sagittarius drive the attacking car forward, but Zhang and Fu themselves are sitting in the usual chariot, they are going to reach the Chu army camp, and then board the Sagittarius car. Both of them are squatting on the crossbar at the back of the car and playing the piano.

古文：近，不告而驰之。
现代文：车子驶近楚营，射犬没有告诉这两个人就疾驰而进。
English: The car approached the Chu camp, and without telling the two men, the shooting dog sped ahead.

古文：皆取胄于櫜而胄，入垒皆下，搏人以投，收禽挟囚。
现代文：这两个人都从袋子里拿出头盔戴上，进入营垒，都下车，把楚兵抓起来扔出去，把俘虏的楚兵捆绑好或者挟在腋下。
English: These two men both took their helmets out of their bags and put them on, entered the camp, got off the bus, grabbed the Chu soldiers and threw them out, and tied up the captured Chu soldiers or held them under their arms.

古文：弗待而出。皆超乘，抽弓而射。
现代文：射犬不等待这两个人而独自驱车出来，这两个人就都跳上车，抽出弓箭来射向追兵。
English: The gun dog did not wait for the two men and drove out alone. The two men jumped on the car and drew their bows and arrows to shoot at the pursuing soldiers.

古文：既免，复踞转而鼓琴，曰： 公孙！
现代文：脱险以后，张、辅二人又蹲在车后边横木上弹琴，说： 公孙！
English: After escaping danger, Zhang and Fu squatted on the crossbar at the back of the car and played the piano, saying: "Grandchild!

古文：同乘，兄弟也，胡再不谋？ 
现代文：同坐一辆战车，就是兄弟，为什么两次都不招呼一下？ 
English: We are in the same chariot, we are brothers, why don't we say hello twice?

古文：对曰： 曩者志入而已，今则怯也。 皆笑曰： 公孙之亟也。 
现代文：射犬回答说： 从前一心想着冲人敌营，这次是心里害怕敌军人多，顾不上商量。 两个人都笑了，说： 公孙是个急性的人啊！ 
English: The gun dog replied, "In the past, my only thought was to attack the enemy camp, but this time, I was too afraid of the enemy soldiers in my heart, so I couldn't think about it." Both of them laughed and said, "The grandson is an acute person!

古文：楚子自棘泽还，使薳启彊帅师送陈无宇。
现代文：楚康王从棘泽回来，派薳启彊护送陈无宇。
English: When King Chu Kang returned from Thorn Lake, he sent Gao Qicheng to escort Chen Muyu.

古文：吴人为楚舟师之役故，召舒鸠人，舒鸠人叛楚。
现代文：吴国人为楚国 舟师之役 的缘故，召集舒鸠人。舒鸠人背叛楚国。
English: The people of Wu summoned the people of Shushi for the sake of the Battle of Chu. The people of Shushi betrayed the state of Chu.

古文：楚子师于荒浦，使沈尹寿与师祁犁让之。
现代文：楚康王在荒浦驻兵，派沈尹寿和师祁犁责备他们。
English: King Chu Kang stationed troops in Arapu and sent Shen Yin Shou and Shi Yan to reprimand them.

古文：舒鸠子敬逆二子，而告无之，且请受盟。
现代文：舒鸠子恭恭敬敬地迎接这两个人，告诉他们没有这回事。同时请求接受盟约。
English: Shuzhenzi respectfully greeted the two men, told them that there was no such thing, and asked them to accept the covenant.

古文：二子复命，王欲伐之。薳子曰： 不可。
现代文：这两个人回见楚康王复命，楚康王想要进攻舒鸠。薳子说： 不行。
English: These two men returned to see that King Chu Kang had regained his life. King Chu Kang wanted to attack Shuxiong. The mule said, "No."

古文：彼告不叛，且请受盟，而又伐之，伐无罪也。
现代文：他告诉我们说不背叛，同时又请求接受盟约，而我们又去进攻他，这是进攻无罪的国家。
English: He tells us not to betray, and at the same time asks us to accept the Covenant, and we attack him, an innocent country.

古文：姑归息民，以待其卒。
现代文：姑且回去使百姓休息，以等待结果。
English: Let's go back and let the people rest and wait for the results.

古文：卒而不贰，吾又何求？
现代文：结果没有三心二意，我们还有什么可要求的？
English: The result was not half-hearted, what more could we ask for?

古文：若犹叛我，无辞，有庸。 
现代文：如果还是背叛我们，他就无话可说，我们打它就可以获得成功了。 
English: If he still betrays us, he will have nothing to say, and we can succeed in defeating him.

古文：乃还。
现代文：楚康王于是就退兵回去。
English: So I came back.

古文：陈人复讨庆氏之党，鍼宜咎出奔楚。
现代文：陈国人再次讨伐庆氏的亲族，鍼宜咎逃亡到楚国。
English: The people of Chen again fought against the relatives of the Qing clan, and they were forced to flee to Chu.

古文：齐人城郏。
现代文：齐国人在郏地为周王筑城。
English: The people of Qi built a city for King Zhou at the site of Xuan.

古文：穆叔如周聘，且贺城。
现代文：穆叔到成周聘问，同时祝贺筑城完工。
English: Uncle Mu visited Cheng Zhou to ask questions and congratulate him on the completion of the city.

古文：王嘉其有礼也，赐之大路。
现代文：周灵王嘉奖穆叔合于礼仪，赐给他大路之车。
English: King Zhou Ling commended Mu Xiu for conforming to the etiquette and gave him a carriage.

古文：晋侯嬖程郑，使佐下军。
现代文：晋平公宠信程郑，任命他为下军副帅。
English: Jinping's favorite, Xincheng Zheng, appointed him deputy commander of the army.

古文：郑行人公孙挥如晋聘。程郑问焉，曰： 敢问降阶何由？ 
现代文：郑国的行人公孙挥去到晋国聘问，程郑向他请教，说： 谨敢请问怎样才能降级？ 
English: Gongsun, a pedestrian from Zhengzhou, went to Jin Province to ask questions. Cheng Zheng asked him for advice, saying: "Dare I ask how to downgrade?

古文：子羽不能对。
现代文：公孙挥不能回答，回去告诉了然明。
English: Gongsunwei couldn't answer, so he went back and told everyone.

古文：归以语然明，然明曰： 是将死矣。不然将亡。
现代文：然明说： 这个人将要死了。否则，就将要逃亡。
English: But he said, "The man must be put to death, or else he will escape."

古文：贵而知惧，惧而思降，乃得其阶，下人而已，又何问焉？
现代文：地位尊贵而知道害怕，害怕而想到了降级，就可以得到适合他的地位，不过是在别人下面罢了，又问什么？
English: If a man is in a high position and is afraid, or in a low position and is afraid, he can get a position that suits him, but it will be beneath others, so what is the point?

古文：且夫既登而求降阶者，知人也，不在程郑。
现代文：而且既己登上高位而要求降级的，这是聪明人，不是程郑这样的人。
English: Moreover, it is a clever person, not someone like Cheng Zheng, who has ascended to a high position and asks to be demoted.

古文：其有亡衅乎？
现代文：恐怕有了逃亡的迹象了吧！
English: I'm afraid there are signs of escape!

古文：不然，其有惑疾，将死而忧也。 
现代文：否则，恐怕就是有疑心病，自知将要死了而忧虑啊！ 
English: Otherwise, I'm afraid it's just paranoia, worrying that you're going to die!

