古文：二十六年夏五月，叔孙舒帅师会越皋如、后庸、宋乐茷，纳卫侯。
现代文：二十六年夏季，五月，叔孙舒带兵会合越国的皋如、后庸、宋国的乐茷送卫出公回国，公孙弥牟想要接纳。
English: In the summer of the twenty-sixth year, in May, Gongsun Yimou wanted to be received by his uncles and grandsons, Shu and his soldiers, who were gathering to send Gongru, Houyong, and Le Yao from the Song Dynasty back to China.

古文：文子欲纳之。懿子曰： 君愎而虐，少待之，必毒于民，乃睦于子矣。 师侵外州，大获。
现代文：懿子说： 国君执拗又暴虐，稍等一些时候，必定残害百姓，百姓就会跟您和睦了。 联军侵袭外州，大肆劫掠。
English: The cripple said: The sovereign is obstinate and tyrannical. If you wait a little while, you will surely kill the people, and the people will be reconciled with you. The allied forces invaded outlying provinces and plundered extensively.

古文：出御之，大败。
现代文：卫军出去抵御，大败。
English: The guards went out to defend themselves and were soundly defeated.

古文：掘褚师定子之墓，焚之于平庄之上。
现代文：卫出公发掘褚师定子的坟墓，把棺材放在平庄之上放火烧了。
English: Wei Dejong excavated the grave of Zou Shi Tezi, placed the coffin on top of Pingzhuang and set it on fire.

古文：文子使王孙齐私于皋如曰： 子将大灭卫乎，抑纳君而已乎？ 
现代文：公孙弥牟派王孙齐私下去见皋如，说： 您是打算大举灭亡卫国呢，还是把国君送回来就算了呢？ 
English: Gongsun Yimou sent Wang Sunqi to see Xunru in private, saying, "Are you planning to destroy and defend the country on a large scale, or do you just want to send the sovereign back?

古文：皋如曰： 寡君之命无他，纳卫君而已。 
现代文：皋如说： 寡君的命令没有别的，只把卫君送回来就算了。 
English: Zou Ru said, "There is nothing else in your order, but to send Wei Jun back.

古文：文子致众而问焉，曰： 君以蛮夷伐国，国几亡矣。请纳之。 众曰： 勿纳。 
现代文：公孙弥牟召集大家征求意见，说： 国君带着蛮夷来攻打我国家，国家差一点灭亡了，请接纳他。 大家说： 不要接纳。 
English: Gongsun Yimou called everyone together to solicit opinions and said, "The sovereign has brought barbarians to attack our country. The country is almost destroyed. Please accept him." Everyone said, "Don't accept him."

古文：曰： 弥牟亡而有益，请自北门出。 
现代文：公孙弥牟说： 如果我逃亡对大家有好处，请让我从北门出去。 
English: Gongsun Yimou said: If my escape is good for everyone, please let me go out from the north gate.

古文：众曰： 勿出。 
现代文：大家说： 不要出走。 
English: Everyone said: Don't run away.

古文：重赂越人，申开守陴而纳公，公不敢入。
现代文：公孙弥牟重重地贿赂越国人，大开城门接纳卫出公，城上守卫甚严，卫出公不敢进城。
English: King Sun Yat-sen bribed the Viet Minh generously and opened the city gates wide to receive Wei Deguang. The guards on the city were very strict, and Wei Deguang did not dare to enter the city.

古文：师还。立悼公，南氏相之。以城鉏与越人。
现代文：护送卫出公的联军退兵回去，卫国立了悼公，南氏辅助他，卫国把城鉏给越国人。
English: The allied forces that had escorted Wei Dechuang returned home. Wei Guo gave a eulogy to Wei Dechuang, Nanshi assisted him, and Wei Guo gave the citadel to the Yue Guo people.

古文：公曰： 期则为此。 
现代文：卫出公说： 这是期干的。 
English: Mr. Weide said, "This was done ahead of schedule.

古文：令苟有怨于夫人者，报之。
现代文：命令如果对夫人有怨的可以报复。
English: He ordered that anyone who had a grudge against his wife could take revenge.

古文：司徒期聘于越，公攻而夺之币。
现代文：司徒期到越国聘问，卫出公攻打他并且夺走了财礼。
English: When Sutoku went to Vietnam to ask questions, Wei Deukong attacked him and took away his wealth.

古文：期告王，王命取之。期以众取之。
现代文：司徒期报告越王，越王命令取回来，司徒期带了一批人又把财礼取了回来。
English: Stout reported to King Yue. King Yue ordered him to retrieve it. Stout brought a group of people and retrieved the money and gifts.

古文：公怒，杀期之甥之为大子者。
现代文：卫出公发怒，杀死了太子，太子是司徒期的外甥。
English: In a fit of rage, Wei Deguang killed the prince, who was the nephew of Sutou.

古文：遂卒于越。
现代文：卫出公也就死在越国。
English: Wei Deguang also died in Yue.

古文：宋景公无子，取公孙周之子得与启，畜诸公宫，未有立焉。
现代文：宋景公没有儿子，要了公孙周的儿子得和启养在公宫里，还没有立继承人。
English: Song Jing Gong didn't have a son, so he asked his grandson Zhou's son to be raised in the imperial palace, but there was no heir.

古文：于是皇缓为右师，皇非我为大司马，皇怀为司徒，灵不缓为左师，乐茷为司城，乐朱鉏为大司寇。六卿三族降听政，因大尹以达。
现代文：当时皇缓做右师，皇非我做大司马，皇怀做司徒，灵不缓做左师，乐茷做司城，乐朱鉏做大司寇，六卿三族共同听取政事，通过大尹上达国君。
English: At that time, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the big division, the emperor was slow to do the left division, the emperor was slow to do the left division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow to do the right division, the emperor was slow

古文：大尹常不告，而以其欲称君命以令。
现代文：大尹经常不向宋景公报告，而按照自己的意图假称君命以发号施令。
English: Dayin often did not report to Song Jinggong, but issued orders according to his own intentions, pretending to be the king.

古文：国人恶之。
现代文：国内的人们厌恶他。
English: People in the country loathe him.

古文：司城欲去大尹，左师曰： 纵之使盈其罪。
现代文：司城想要除掉大尹，左师说： 随他去，让他恶贯满盈。
English: Shicheng wanted to get rid of Dairin, and Zuo said, "Let him go, and let his evil run rampant."

古文：重而无基，能无敝乎？ 
现代文：权势重而没有基础，能够不失败吗？ 
English: Is it possible to wield great power without a foundation and not fail?

古文：冬十月，公游于空泽。
现代文：冬季，十月，宋景公在空泽游玩。
English: In winter, in October, Song Jinggong went to play in Kuisawa.

古文：辛巳，卒于连中。
现代文：初四日，死在连中。
English: He died in the company on the fourth day of the first month.

古文：大尹兴空泽之士千甲，奉公自空桐入，如沃宫。
现代文：大尹出动空泽的甲士一千人，奉着宋景公的尸体从空桐进入国都，到了沃宫。
English: The Great Yin dispatched a thousand soldiers from Kuusawa to carry the body of Song Jinggong from Kuotong into the capital and to the Wogu Palace.

古文：使召六子曰： 闻下有师，君请六子画。 
现代文：派人召来六卿，说： 听说下邑有战事，国君请六卿一起谋划。 
English: A messenger was sent to summon the six lords, saying: I have heard that there is a war in the next town, and the sovereign has asked the six lords to plan together.

古文：六子至，以甲劫之，曰： 君有疾病，请二三子盟。 
现代文：六卿到达，用甲士劫持他们说： 国君有重病，请诸位盟誓。 
English: When the six nobles arrived, they abducted them with a horse-drawn carriage and said, "Your majesty is seriously ill, please take an oath."

古文：乃盟于少寝之庭，曰： 无为公室不利。 
现代文：就在小寝院子里盟誓，说： 不做对公室不利的事！ 
English: And he swore in the courtyard of the little house, saying, I will do nothing that is not for the good of the king's house.

古文：大尹立启，奉丧殡于大宫。
现代文：大尹立启为国君，奉着棺材停放在祖庙里。
English: Great Yin Liqi was crowned as the country's king, and his coffin was placed in the ancestral temple.

古文：三日，而后国人知之。
现代文：三天以后国内的人们才知道这件事。
English: It was three days before anyone in the country knew about it.

古文：司城茷使宣言于国曰： 大尹惑蛊其君而专其利，今君无疾而死，死又匿之，是无他矣，大尹之罪也。 
现代文：司城乐茷派人在国内宣布说： 大尹蛊惑他的国君，专权好利，现在国君没有生病就死了。死了以后又藏匿遗体，没有别的好说，就是大尹的罪过。 
English: Szecheng Leju sent a person to announce in the country, "Big Yin seduced his sovereign, monopolized power and profited, and now the sovereign died without getting sick. After he died, he hid the body. There is nothing else to say, it is Big Yin's sin."

古文：得梦启北首而寝于卢门之外，己为乌而集于其上，咮加于南门，尾加于桐门。
现代文：得梦见启头向北睡在卢门的外边，自己变作大乌鸦栖止在他的上面，嘴巴搁在南门上，尾巴搁在北门上。
English: He had a dream that he was sleeping with his head to the north outside the Lu door, and he turned into a big crow and perched on top of him, with his mouth on the south door and his tail on the north door.

古文：曰： 余梦美，必立。 
现代文：醒来以后说： 我的梦很好，一定立为国君。 
English: When he woke up, he said, "My dream was a good one. I must become the king."

古文：大尹谋曰： 我不在盟，无乃逐我复盟之乎？ 
现代文：大尹和别人策划说： 我没有参加盟誓，恐怕会驱逐我吧！再跟他们盟誓吧！ 
English: Big Yin and the others plotted, saying, "I didn't take the oath, I'm afraid they'll expel me! Swear with them again!"

古文：使祝为载书，六子在唐盂。将盟之。
现代文：让太祝制作盟书。六卿正在唐盂，准备和他盟誓。
English: Let Taizhou make a covenant. The six nobles are in Tanggu, ready to swear an oath with him.

古文：祝襄以载书告皇非我。
现代文：太祝襄把盟书的内容告诉皇非我。
English: I wish you would tell me the contents of the alliance.

古文：皇非我因子潞、门尹得、左师谋曰： 民与我，逐之乎？ 
现代文：皇非我依靠乐茷、门尹得、左师谋划说： 百姓亲附我们，把他赶走吧！ 
English: The emperor did not rely on Le Ying, Men Yin De, and Zuo Shi to plan and say: The people are close to us, let's drive him away!

古文：皆归授甲，使徇于国曰： 大尹惑蛊其君，以陵虐公室。
现代文：于是都回去把武装发给部下，让他们在国都内巡行，宣布说： 大尹蛊惑他的国君，欺压虐待公室。
English: So they all went back to issue their subordinates with weapons and let them parade in the national capital, announcing: "Big Yin is seducing his sovereign, oppressing and abusing the office."

古文：与我者，救君者也。 
现代文：亲附我们的人，就是救援国君的人。 
English: Those who are close to us are those who rescue the sovereign.

古文：众曰： 与之。 
现代文：大家说： 亲附你们！ 
English: Everyone said: Come on!

古文：大尹徇曰： 戴氏、皇氏将不利公室，与我者无忧不富。 
现代文：大尹也巡行，宣布说： 戴氏、皇氏准备对公室不利，亲附我的，不要担心不发财。 
English: Dayin also marched in the parade and announced, "Dai and Wang are preparing to be unfavorable to the office. If you are close to me, don't worry about not making a fortune.

古文：众曰： 无别。 
现代文：大家说： 你和国君没有什么两样！ 
English: Everyone said: You are no different from the sovereign!

古文：戴氏、皇氏欲伐公。乐得曰： 不可。彼以陵公有罪，我伐公则甚焉。 使国人施于大尹。
现代文：戴氏、皇氏想要攻打启，乐得说： 不行，他因为欺凌国君有罪，我们要是出兵攻打，罪就更大了。 
English: Mr. Dai and Mr. Wang wanted to attack and attack, and they were happy to say: No, he is guilty of bullying the sovereign. If we attack with troops, the crime will be greater.

古文：大尹奉启以奔楚，乃立得。
现代文：让国内的人们把罪过加在大尹身上。大尹奉事启逃亡到楚国，于是就立得为国君。
English: Let the people of the country place the blame on Big Yin. Big Yin fled to Chu and became the ruler of the country.

古文：司城为上卿，盟曰： 三族共政，无相害也。 
现代文：司城做了上卿，盟誓说： 三族共同掌握国政，不要互相残害！ 
English: Shicheng became Shangqing, and swore: The three ethnic groups should jointly control national affairs, and should not harm each other!

古文：卫出公自城鉏使以弓问子赣，且曰： 吾其入乎？ 
现代文：卫出公从城鉏派人用弓问候子赣，并且说： 我能回国吗？ 
English: The Duke of Wei sent a man from the city to greet the Empress Dowager with a bow and said, "May I return to my country?"

古文：子赣稽首受弓，对曰： 臣不识也。 
现代文：子赣叩头受弓，回答说： 我不知道。 
English: "I don't know," he replied, bowing his head.

古文：私于使者曰： 昔成公孙于陈，甯武子、孙庄子为宛濮之盟而君入；献公孙于齐，子鲜、子展为夷仪之盟而君入。
现代文：私下对使者说： 从前成公流亡到陈国，宁武子、孙庄子在宛濮结盟然后国君回国。献公流亡到齐国，子鲜、子展在夷仪结盟然后国君回国。
English: Privately, he said to the envoy, "Previously, Cheng Gong was exiled to Chen Province, Ning Wuzi and Sun Zhuangzi were allied in Wanlu, and then the sovereign returned to the country; Xian Gong was exiled to Qi Province, and Zixiang and Zizhan were allied in Yiyi, and then the sovereign returned to the country.

古文：今君再在孙矣，内不闻献之亲，外不闻成之卿，则赐不识所由入也。《诗》曰： 无竞惟人，四方其顺之。 
现代文：现在国君再次流亡在外，内部没有听说有像献公时代的亲信，外部没有听说有像成公时代的大臣，那么赐就不懂得根据什么能回国。《诗》说： 最强莫过于得到人才，四方将会顺服。 
English: Now that the sovereign is once again in exile, no one inside the country has heard of a close confidant like the one from the era of dedication, and no one outside the country has heard of a minister like the one from the era of becoming a prince, so I don't understand how they can return to the country. "Poem" says: The strongest thing is to get talent, and all sides will obey.

古文：若得其人，四方以为主，而国于何有？ 
现代文：如果得到这样的人，四方把他作为主人，取得国家又有什么困难呢？ 
English: If you get such a man and the four quarters regard him as their master, what is the difficulty in acquiring a state?

