古文：阿柴虏吐谷浑，辽东鲜卑也。
现代文：阿柴虏吐谷浑，本是辽东的鲜卑族。
English: A Chai Rui Tu Guhun is originally from the Xianbei ethnic group in East Liaodong.

古文：父弈洛韩，有二子，长曰吐谷浑，少曰若洛廆。
现代文：吐谷浑的父亲奕洛韩有两个儿子，长子便是吐谷浑，少子叫若洛蝅。
English: Tu Guhun's father, Yi Lohan, has two sons. The eldest son is Tu Guhun, and the younger son is called Ruo Luo Zhuang.

古文：若洛廆别为慕容氏，浑庶长，廆正嫡。
现代文：若洛蝅即是慕容氏。吐谷浑是长子，但不是奕洛韩正妻所生，若洛蝅是嫡妻生的。
English: If Luo Han is a member of the Murong clan, then Tu Guhun is the eldest son, but he was not born to I Luo Han's legal wife. If Luo Han was born to his legal wife, then Tu Guhun is the eldest son.

古文：父在时，分七百户与浑。
现代文：他们的父亲活着的时候，分出他的七百户牧民给吐谷浑，吐谷浑和若洛蝅两部分都放牧马羊。
English: When their father was alive, he allocated seven hundred of his herdsmen to Tukuhun, and both Tukuhun and Rarotonga herded horses and sheep.

古文：浑与廆二部俱牧马，马斗相伤，廆怒，遣信谓浑曰： 先公处分，与兄异部，牧马何不相远，而致斗争相伤？ 
现代文：马相互争斗，而若洛蝅的马受了伤，若洛蝅非常愤怒，派人对吐谷浑说： 先父把我们分开，你放马为什么不走开，而让它们互相斗伤？ 
English: The horses were fighting with each other, and if Luo Yan's horse was injured, if Luo Yan was very angry, he would send someone to Tu Gu Hun and say, "My father separated us, why don't you let the horses go and let them fight and hurt each other?"

古文：浑曰： 马是畜生，食草饮水，春气发动，所以致斗。
现代文：吐谷浑说： 马是畜生，吃草饮水为生，春天气息发动，所以马群争斗，怎么能对人发怒呢？
English: Tu Guhun said, "Horses are beasts. They eat grass and drink water for a living. When spring comes, they breathe fire. That's why horses fight. How can they get angry with people?

古文：斗在于马，而怒及人邪？
现代文：彻底分开很容易，现在便离开你一万里。 于是赶着马群向西而行。
English: It is easy to separate completely, now I am ten thousand miles away from you, so I drove the horses to the west.

古文：乖别甚易，今当去汝万里。 于是拥马西行，日移一顿，顿八十里。经数顿，廆悔悟，深自咎责，遣旧父老及长史乙那楼追浑，令还。浑曰： 我乃祖以来，树德辽右，又卜筮之言，先公有二子，福胙并流子孙。
现代文：每天走一顿，每顿八十里，在几顿之后，若洛蝅非常后悔，深深地责备自己，派堂伯父和长史乙那楼追回吐谷浑。吐谷浑说： 从我们的祖父以来，在辽右地区积德累仁，卜筮的人说： 先父的两个儿子，福都会遗传给子孙后世。 
English: They walked one meal a day, each meal eighty miles. After a few meals, Luo Luo regretted very much and deeply reproached himself. He sent his uncle and Chang Shi to the second floor to recover Tu Guhun. Tu Guhun said: Since our grandfathers, there has been a lot of hardship in the Liaoyu region. The people of Bu Qian said: The two sons of the father will inherit the fortune to their children and grandchildren.

古文：我是卑庶，理无并大，今以马致别，殆天所启。
现代文：我是庶生的儿子，按说没有同时兴盛的道理，今日因为马斗相离别，大概是老天爷造成的。
English: I am the son of an illegitimate child. According to the principle that there is no simultaneous prosperity, today's separation because of the horse fight was probably caused by God.

古文：诸君试拥马令东，马若还东，我当相随去。 
现代文：各位试试赶马向东，马如果东还，我一定随你们回去。 
English: Everyone, try to catch the horse to the east. If the horse is still in the east, I will definitely follow you back.

古文：楼喜拜曰： 处可寒。 
现代文：乙那楼高兴地说： 处可汗。 
English: The second floor said happily, "It's all Khan."

古文：虏言 处可寒 ，宋言尔官家也。
现代文：鲜卑人说： 处可汗。 宋人的意思是你是我们的主人。
English: The Xianbei people said, "You are a great khan," while the Song people said, "You are our master."

古文：即使所从二千骑共遮马令回，不盈三百步，炎然悲鸣突走，声若颓山。
现代文：乙那楼马上叫他带来的二千骑士共同遮住吐谷浑的马群要它们转去。马群走不到三百步，突然啸声大起，马群悲声大叫，突破遮拦的骑墙，向前奔去。
English: B immediately asked the two thousand knights he had brought to jointly cover the horses of Tu Gu Hun to turn them away. The horses walked less than three hundred paces and suddenly roared loudly. The horses cried out in grief and broke through the covered riding wall and ran forward.

古文：如是者十余辈，一向一远。
现代文：发出山崩地裂般地响鸣，这样地搞了上十次，每次都向西方走得更远。
English: It sounded like a landslide, and it did this about ten times, each time moving further west.

古文：楼力屈，又跪曰： 可寒，此非复人事。 
现代文：乙那楼竭尽全力，只好作罢，便跪着说： 可汗，这不是人能改变的。 
English: The second floor tried its best, but had to give up, and kneeled down and said: "Khan, this is not something a person can change.

古文：浑谓其部落曰： 我兄弟子孙，并应昌盛，廆当传子及曾孙玄孙，其间可百余年，我乃玄孙间始当显耳。 
现代文：吐谷浑对他的部众说： 我们兄弟俩的子孙，都应昌盛。若洛蝅应传到儿子和孙子及曾孙玄孙一辈，这中间大约一百来年，我则是到玄孙辈间才会崛起罢了。 
English: Tu Guhun said to his followers: "The descendants of our two brothers should all prosper. If Luoyang should be passed down to sons and grandsons and great-grandsons and great-grandchildren, in the next hundred years or so, I will only rise to the great-grandchildren.

古文：于是遂西附阴山。遭晋乱，遂得上陇。
现代文：于是向西依靠阴山，恰晋朝大乱，于是又西行到陇西一带。
English: As a result, he relied on the gloomy mountains to the west, causing chaos in the Chajing Dynasty, and then went west to the Shaanxi region.

古文：后廆追思浑，作《阿干之歌》。鲜卑呼兄为 阿干 。
现代文：后来若洛蝅追思吐谷浑，作了一首《阿干之歌》，鲜卑人称哥哥为 阿干 。
English: Later, if Luo Wei thought about Tu Guhun, he made a "Song of Agan," and people called his brother Agan.

古文：廆子孙窃号，以此歌为辇后大曲。
现代文：若洛蝅子孙称王称帝，用这首歌作为他们的国歌。
English: The descendants of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the

古文：浑既上陇，出罕开、西零。
现代文：吐谷浑既然到了陇西，又从罕开，西零出行。
English: Since he arrived in the west of Shaanxi Province, Mr. Tugu has been traveling from Hanking and West Zero.

古文：西零，今之西平郡；罕开，今桴罕县。
现代文：西零，即今天的西平郡，罕开，今天的木包罕县。
English: West Zero, that is, today's Xiping County, Hankai, today's Mubo Han County.

古文：自桴罕以东千余里，暨甘松，西至河南，南界昂城、龙涸。
现代文：从木包罕向东一千多里，一直到甘松，西抵河南，南达昴城、龙涸。
English: From Muboohan, it is more than a thousand miles to the east, all the way to Gansong, to Henan in the west, and to Lucheng and Longyi in the south.

古文：自洮水西南，极白兰，数千里中，逐水草，庐帐居，以肉酪为粮。
现代文：从洮水向西南，到达白兰，几千里中，吐谷浑都是依靠有水草的地方做小屋和帐篷居住，用肉酪作为食粮。
English: In the thousands of miles from Surabaya in the southwest to Bran, the Tukuhuns relied on places with aquatic plants to make huts and tents to live in, and used meat and cheese as food.

古文：西北诸杂种谓之为阿柴虏。
现代文：西北少数民族称他们为 阿柴虏 。
English: Northwest ethnic minorities call them Achairu.

古文：浑年七十二死，有子六十人，长吐延嗣。
现代文：吐谷浑七十二岁时去世，有六十个儿子，长子吐延继位。
English: He died at the age of seventy-two. He had sixty sons, and his eldest son, Tuyan, succeeded to the throne.

古文：吐延身长七尺八寸，勇力过人，性刻暴，为昂城羌酋姜聪所刺；剑犹在体，呼子叶延，语其大将绝拔渥曰： 吾气绝，棺敛讫，便远去保白兰。白兰地既嶮远，又土俗懦弱，易为控御。叶延小，意乃欲授与余人，恐仓卒终不能相制。
现代文：吐延身长七尺八寸，勇力过人，性格刻薄而残暴，被昴城羌族酋长姜聪刺杀，在长剑还在身上时，叫来儿子叶延，对他的大将绝拔渥说： 我的性命快要完了，你们安葬完毕，应该到远远的白兰保城而居，白兰地形险要，又偏远难到，当地人民胆小，容易控制，吐延年幼，我想把王位授给别人，但又怕太短时间内不能制服他。
English: Tu Yan was seven feet and eight inches tall, had superior courage, and a mean and cruel personality. He was assassinated by Jiang Cong, the chief of the Yao people in Lucheng. While he was still wearing the long sword, he called his son Ye Yan, and said to his general Yu Baiwu: "My life is almost over. After you are buried, you should go and live in the distant city of Bran. Bran's terrain is dangerous and difficult to reach. The local people are timid and easy to control. Tu Yan is young. I want to give the throne to someone else, but I'm afraid I won't be able to subdue him in too short a time

古文：今以叶延付汝，汝竭股肱之力以辅之，孺子得立，吾无恨矣！ 
现代文：今天我把叶延托付给你，你竭尽全力辅佐他，小子得以继承我，我便没有遗恨了。 
English: Today I entrust Ye Yan to you, you do your best to assist him, the boy can inherit me, I have no hatred left.

古文：抽剑而死。
现代文：说完抽出长剑死了。
English: Pull out your sword and die.

古文：嗣位十三年，年三十五，有子十二人。
现代文：吐延继位十三年，卒三十五岁，有十二个儿子。
English: Thirteen years have passed since Tuyan ascended the throne, he is now thirty-five years old and has twelve sons.

古文：叶延少而勇果，年十岁，缚草为人，号曰姜聪，每旦辄射之，射中则喜，不中则号叫泣涕。
现代文：叶延小时候勇敢果断，他十岁时，扎草做一个人，把它当成姜聪，每天都射击它。射中便喜欢，不中便放声大哭。
English: When Ye Yan was a child, he was brave and decisive. When he was ten years old, he took Zha Cao as a person and thought of him as Jiang Cong. He shot him every day. When he hit him, he liked it. When he missed, he burst into tears.

古文：其母曰： 仇贼诸将已屠脍之，汝年小，何烦朝朝自苦如此！ 
现代文：他的母亲说： 将领们已将仇人杀掉吃了。你还小，何必每天都如此折磨自己。 
English: His mother said: "The generals have killed and eaten their enemies. You are still a child, why do you have to torture yourself like this every day."

古文：叶延呜咽不自胜。答母曰： 诚知无益，然叶延罔极之心，不胜其痛耳。 
现代文：叶延不停地哭，回答母亲说： 我确实知道这没用，然而我思慕父亲的心情是万分痛苦的。 
English: Ye Yan kept crying and replied to her mother, "I know it's useless, but it's very painful for me to think about my father."

古文：性至孝，母病，三日不能食，叶延亦不食。
现代文：叶延非常孝顺，母亲病了，三天没吃下一点东西，叶延便三天不吃饭。
English: Ye Yan was very dutiful. His mother was ill and hadn't eaten anything for three days, so Ye Yan didn't eat for three days.

古文：颇视书传，自谓曾祖弈洛韩始封昌黎公，曰： 吾为公孙之子，案礼，公孙之子，得氏王父字。 
现代文：他看了些书，自以为他的曾祖父奕洛韩开始封的是昌黎公，想： 我是昌黎公的孙子的儿子，接照礼规定：公孙之子，能以父王的字为姓氏。 
English: He read some books and thought to himself that his great-grandfather Yi Luohan was originally named Chang Liguo, and thought: I am the son of the grandson of Chang Liguo, and the acceptance ceremony stipulates that the son of the grandson can use the father's name as the surname.

古文：命姓为吐谷浑氏。
现代文：便把吐谷浑作为自己部落的姓氏。
English: They took "Tukugun" as the surname of their tribe.

古文：嗣立二十三年，年三十三。有子四人。
现代文：他继位二十三年，享年三十三岁，有四个儿子。
English: He succeeded to the throne for 23 years, died at the age of 33, and had four sons.

古文：长子碎奚立。
现代文：他的长子碎奚继位。
English: He was succeeded by his eldest son, Chizuko.

古文：碎奚性纯谨，三弟专权，碎奚不能制，诸大将共诛之。
现代文：碎奚性格纯朴恭谨。三个弟弟非常专权，碎奚不能控制，大将们联合杀掉碎奚的三个弟弟。
English: The three younger brothers were very autocratic and could not be controlled, so the generals jointly killed the three younger brothers.

古文：碎奚忧哀不复摄事，遂立子视连为世子，委之事，号曰： 莫贺郎 。 莫贺 ，宋言父也。
现代文：碎奚悲痛得不再管事，于是立儿子视连当世子，把政事都委托给他。叫他： 莫贺郎。  莫贺 ，宋国的意思是父亲。
English: Broken-hearted and grief-stricken, he was no longer in charge of affairs, so he set up a son, Zhuang, who regarded Lian as his heir and entrusted all government affairs to him. He called him: Mo Herong. Mo Herong, in Song, means father.

古文：碎奚遂以忧死。在位二十五年，年四十一。有子六人。
现代文：碎奚忧虑而死，他在位二十五年，享年四十二岁，有六个儿子。
English: He reigned for 25 years, died at the age of 42, and had six sons.

古文：子视连以父忧卒，不游娱，不酣宴。
现代文：儿子视连因为父亲因忧伤过度而逝，不娱乐，不遨游，不喝酒。
English: Because his father passed away due to excessive sadness, his son Qilian did not entertain, travel, or drink.

古文：在位十五年，年四十二。有子二人，长曰视罴，次乌纥提。
现代文：在位十五年，年四十二岁，有两个儿子，长子叫视罴，次子叫乌纥提。
English: He reigned for fifteen years, and at the age of forty-two, he had two sons, the eldest son was named Zhisheng, and the second son was named Wuxi.

古文：视罴嗣立十一年，年四十二；子树洛干等并小，弟乌纥提立。
现代文：视罴继位一十一年，享年四十二，儿子树洛干等都很小，弟弟乌纥提立。
English: In the eleventh year of his succession, he died at the age of forty-two. His son, Shu Luo Gan, was very young, and his younger brother, Wu Xuan Ti Liang.

古文：纥提立八年，年三十五。
现代文：乌纥提继位八年，享年三十五。
English: Eight years after his succession, Emperor Wu Xi died at the age of thirty-five.

古文：视罴子树洛干立，自称车骑将军，义熙初也。
现代文：视罴的儿子树洛干继位，自称车骑将军，正在义熙初年。
English: Shu Luo Gan, the son of Guan Yu, succeeded to the throne and claimed to be a chariot and cavalry general. He was in the first year of Yixi.

古文：树洛干死，弟阿豺自称骠骑将军。
现代文：树洛干死了，他的弟弟阿犭才自称骠骑将军。
English: When Shu Luo died of thirst, his younger brother, A Yan, claimed to be the general riding the horse.

古文：谯纵乱蜀，阿豺遣其从子西强公吐谷浑敕来泥拓土至龙涸、平康。
现代文：谯纵扰乱四川，阿犭才派他的侄儿西强公吐谷浑敕来泥开辟国土到龙涸、平康。
English: After he had disturbed Sichuan, his nephew, Xi Qianggong, was sent by his uncle, Xi Qianggong, to open up the land and make it dry and prosperous.

古文：少帝景平中，阿豺遣使上表献方物。
现代文：少帝景平年中，阿犭才派使者上表贡献土特产。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingping, Empress Dowager Cixi sent an envoy to the table to contribute local specialties.

古文：诏曰： 吐谷浑阿豺介在遐表，募义可嘉，宜有宠任。
现代文：朝廷下诏书说： 吐谷浑阿犭才在偏远的地方，心白忠义，这种精神是可贵的。
English: The imperial decree issued by the imperial court said: "Tukoku Hunahata was born in a remote place, with a pure and loyal heart. This spirit is precious."

古文：今酬其来款，可督塞表诸军事、安西将军、沙州刺史、浇河公。 
现代文：应该好好对待他们。今日回报他投诚的好心，可以任命他为塞表诸军事、安西将军、沙州刺史、浇河公。 
English: They should be treated well. Today, in return for his goodwill to devote himself to the cause, he can be appointed as the military commander, the general of Anxi, the governor of Shazhou, and the governor of Gehe.

古文：未及拜受，太祖元嘉三年，又诏加除命。未至而阿犲死，弟慕璝立。
现代文：还未受命，太祖在元嘉三年又下诏任命，使者还未到吐谷浑，阿犭才便死了，他的弟弟慕王贵继位。
English: Before receiving the order, the great-great-grandfather issued another imperial edict in the third year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, and the envoy had not yet arrived in Tugu Hun. It was only after his death that his brother Mu Wang Gui succeeded to the throne.

古文：六年，表曰： 大宋应运，四海宅心，臣亡兄阿犲慕义天朝，款情素著。
现代文：六年，慕礍上书说： 大宋应天顺民成立，四海归心。我的亡兄阿犭才心向天朝，忠诚顺民显著。
English: In the sixth year, Muxun wrote: "The Great Song Dynasty was established in accordance with the will of Heaven and the people, and the four seas were converted to the heart. My late brother, Ah Qian Caixin, showed remarkable loyalty to Heaven and the people.

古文：去年七月五日，谒者董湛至，宣传明诏，显授荣爵，而臣私门不幸，亡兄见背。
现代文：去年七月五日，使者董湛到达这里，宣传诏书，授予显赫的爵位，而我家门不幸，亡兄去世。
English: On July 5 last year, the emissary Dong Zhan arrived here to promote the imperial edict and confer a distinguished title, and unfortunately, my deceased brother passed away.

古文：臣以懦弱，负荷后任，然天恩所报，本在臣门，若更反覆，惧停信命。辄拜受宠任，奉遵上旨，伏愿详处，更授章策。 
现代文：我一向无能胆怯，承担重任，然而寻思回报，本在我的家门，如果再反复纷纭，恐怕有碍朝廷使者，我便拜受皇上恩命，遵从皇上的圣旨，完全愿意接受这个决定，再接受印绶节杖。 
English: I have always been unable and timid to take on heavy responsibilities, but I am looking for a reward. This is in my family, and if there are repeated disputes, I am afraid that it will hinder the imperial envoys. I will bow to the emperor's grace and obey the emperor's will. I am fully willing to accept this decision, and then accept the seal festival cane.

古文：七年，诏曰： 吐谷浑慕璝兄弟慕义，至诚可嘉，宜授策爵，以甄忠款。
现代文：七年，文帝下诏说： 吐谷浑慕王贵兄弟真心向善，极为忠诚，实在可嘉，应该授予节仗和尊位，以表彰他的忠顺。
English: In the seventh year, Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "Tugu Hunmu Wang Gui's brother, who is genuinely good-natured and extremely loyal, is truly praiseworthy. He should be awarded a festival and a high rank in recognition of his loyalty."

古文：可督塞表诸军事、征西将军、沙州刺史、陇西公。 
现代文：可以任命为督塞表诸军事、征西将军、沙州刺史、陇西公。 
English: He can be appointed as the military governor of Shandong Province, the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of Shandong Province, and the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：先是晋末，金城东允街县胡人乞伏乾归拥部众据洮河、罕开，自号陇西公。
现代文：以前晋朝末年，金城以东允街县胡人乞伏乾归带领部落占据洮河、罕开，自称陇西公。
English: In the last years of the Jin Dynasty, the Hu people of Dongyunjie County, east of Jincheng, begged Qian Gui to lead the tribe to occupy Luohe and Hankai, and called himself Shaanxi Gong.

古文：乾归死，子炽磐立，遣使诣晋朝归顺，以为使持节、都督河西诸军事、平西将军，公如故。
现代文：乾归死后，他儿子乞伏炽磐继位，派人到晋朝归顺，晋朝用他当使持节、督河西诸军事、平西将军、陇西公。
English: After the death of Qian Gui, his son, Buku Blazing Rock Succession, sent people to the Jin Dynasty to surrender, and the Jin Dynasty used him as an envoy to hold the festival, the military governor of the west of the river, the general of the west of the river, and the lord of the west of the river.

古文：高祖即位，进号安西大将军。炽磐死，子茂蔓立。
现代文：宋高祖称帝，增乞伏炽磐为安西大将军，炽磐死去，他儿子乞伏茂蔓继位。
English: Song Gao Zu proclaimed himself emperor, Zeng Kui-Fu Blazing Rock became the general of Anxi, Blazing Rock died, and his son Kui-Fu Maoman succeeded to the throne.

古文：慕璝前后屡遣军击，茂蔓率部落东奔陇右，慕璝据有其地。
现代文：慕王贵前后多次派兵攻击乞伏氏，乞伏茂蔓率领部落东奔陇右，慕王贵占据乞伏氏的旧地。
English: Mu Wang Gui repeatedly sent troops to attack the Beggar Clan, and the Beggar Clan led the tribe eastward and westward, while Mu Wang Gui occupied the former territory of the Beggar Clan.

古文：是岁，赫连定于长安为索虏拓跋焘所攻，拥秦户口十余万西次罕开，欲向凉州。
现代文：这年赫连定在长安被魏主拓跋焘攻打，带关中户口十多万向西驻扎罕秆，希望抵达凉州。
English: In this year, He Lianding was attacked in Chang'an by the Wei general Tuobao, and with more than one hundred thousand households in Guanzhong, he stationed in the west, hoping to reach Liangzhou.

古文：慕璝距击，大破之，生擒定。
现代文：慕王贵袭击了他，大败赫连定并活捉除了他。
English: Mu Wanggui attacked him, defeated him and captured him alive.

古文：焘遣使求，慕璝以定与之。
现代文：拓跋焘派人来要把赫连定、慕王贵送给魏人。
English: Tuobao sent people to give Herengding and Muwangui to Wei.

古文：九年，慕璝遣司马赵叙奉贡献，并言二万人捷。
现代文：九年，慕王贵派司马赵叙带着土特产贡献宋朝，并声称他们击败二万人的大捷。
English: In the ninth year, Mu Wang Gui sent Sima Zhao Xiu to contribute to the Song Dynasty with local special products, and claimed that they had defeated 20,000 people.

古文：太祖加其使持节、散骑常侍、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、征西大将军、西秦河二州刺史、领护羌校尉，进爵陇西王。
现代文：太祖加慕王贵为使持节、散骑常侍、都督西秦河沙洲诸军事、征西大将军、西秦河二州刺史，兼任护羌校尉，升爵陇西王。
English: The great-great-grandfather Kamu Wanggui was an envoy, horseback riding attendant, military governor of the West Qin River and Shazhou, general of the Western Expedition, historian of the two states of the West Qin River, and also served as a guard lieutenant, and was promoted to the title of King of Shaanxi.

古文：弟慕延为平东将军，慕璝兄树洛干子拾寅为平北将军，阿豺子炜代镇军将军。
现代文：他的弟弟慕延为平东将军，慕王贵的兄长树洛干的儿子拾寅为平北将军，阿豺的儿子炜代为镇军将军。
English: His younger brother Mu Yan was the general of Pingdong, Mu Wang Gui's elder brother Shu Luo Gan's son Shu Yin was the general of Pingbei, and A Yan's son Juntao was the general of Zhenjun.

古文：诏慕璝南国将士，昔没在佛佛者，并悉致。慕璝遣送硃昕之等五十五户，一百五十四人。
现代文：诏书命令慕王贵将当年被赫连氏俘虏的宋国的将士都送回来。慕王贵派人送回朱昕之等五十五户，一百五十四人。
English: The edict ordered Mu Wang Gui to send back all the Song soldiers who had been captured by the Heren clan that year. Mu Wang Gui sent people to send back one hundred and fifty-four people from fifty-five households, including Zhu Xi.

古文：慕璝死，弟慕延立，遣使奉表。
现代文：慕王贵死去，弟弟慕延继位，派人向宋朝上表。
English: Mu Wanggui died, and his brother Mu Yan succeeded to the throne, and sent someone to petition the Song Dynasty.

古文：十五年，除慕延使持节、散骑常侍、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、征西大将军、领护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史、陇西王。
现代文：十五年，朝廷任命慕延使持节、散骑常侍、都督西秦河沙三州诸军事、镇西大将军、兼护羌校尉、西秦河州刺史、陇西王。
English: In the fifteenth year, the imperial court appointed Mu Yan envoy to hold the festival, strolling equerry, military governor of West Qin He Shanzhou, Zhen Xi general, concurrent guarding lieutenant, West Qin He Shuzhou magistrate, and King of Shaanxi.

古文：十六年，改封河南王。
现代文：十六年，改封河南王。
English: Sixteen years later, he was given the title King of Henan.

古文：其年，以拾虔弟拾寅为平西将军，慕延庶长子繁昵为抚军将军，慕延嫡子瑍为左将军、河南王世子。
现代文：当年，朝廷以拾虔的弟弟拾寅为平西将军，慕延庶长子繁日匿当抚军将军，慕延嫡子礎为左将军河南王世子。
English: In that year, the imperial court selected Shuyin, the younger brother of Shuqian, as the general of Pingxi, Muyan's eldest illegitimate son, Shigeyuki, as the general of Dangfujun, and Muyan's eldest legitimate son, Keisuke, as the successor of Henan Wang, the left general.

古文：十九年，追赠阿豺本号安西、秦沙三州诸军事、沙州刺史、领护羌校尉、陇西王。
现代文：十九年，追认阿豺本号 安西将军、秦沙河三州诸军事、沙州刺史，任护羌校尉、陇西王。 
English: In the 19th year, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Anxi General, Qin Shahe Sanzhou Military, and Shazhou Sashih, and was appointed to the positions of Guard Lieutenant and King of Shaanxi.

古文：索虏拓跋焘遣军击慕延，大破之，慕延率部落西奔白兰，攻破于阗国。虑虏复至，二十七年，遣使上表云： 若不自固者，欲率部曲入龙涸越巂门。 
现代文：魏王拓跋焘派兵进攻慕延，大败慕延，慕延带部落向西逃到白兰，攻破于阗国，他担心魏人再来，二十七年，派人上书说： 如果我们不能自保，希望带部落进入龙涸越礏关。 
English: The Wei king Tuobao sent troops to attack Muyan and defeated Muyan. Muyan and his tribe fled westward to Bai Lan and broke through into Shan State. He was afraid that the Wei people would come again. In the 27th year, he sent a letter saying: If we can't protect ourselves, I hope to take the tribe into Longyi Yue Pass.

古文：并求牵车，献乌丸帽、女国金酒器、胡王金钏等物。
现代文：同时请赐给他牵车，贡献乌丸帽子、女国的金制酒器、胡王的金钏等物。
English: At the same time, please give him a car to drive, and donate a ebony hat, a woman's gold wine container, King Hu's gold bracelet and other items.

古文：太祖赐以牵车，若虏至不自立，听入越巂。
现代文：太祖赐给他牵车，并说如果魏人到了不能自保，允许进入越礏。
English: The great-grandfather gave him a cart and said that if the Wei people could not protect themselves when they arrived, they were allowed to enter Yueyang.

古文：虏竟不至也。慕延死，拾寅自立。
现代文：魏人最终没有到那里去。慕延死去，拾寅继位。
English: The Wei people did not go there in the end. Mu Yan died, and Shu Yin succeeded.

古文：二十九年，以拾寅为使持节、督西秦河沙三州诸军事、安西将军、领护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史、河南王。
现代文：二十九年，朝廷用拾寅当使持节，督西秦河沙三州诸军事、安西将军，兼护羌校尉、西秦河二州刺史、河南王。
English: In the 29th year, the imperial court used Shu Yin as an envoy to hold the festival, the military of the three states of the West Qin River, the Anxi General, and the lieutenant of the guard, the two states of the West Qin River, and the King of Henan.

古文：拾寅东破索虏，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：拾寅向东击败魏军，朝廷增他开府仪同三司。
English: When Shuyin defeated the Wei army in the east, the imperial court gave him the honor of opening the capital along with three divisions.

古文：世祖大明五年，拾寅遣使献善舞马，四角羊。
现代文：世祖大明五年，拾寅派人贡献会跳舞的马、四角的羊。
English: In the fifth year of King Sejong's reign, King Sejong sent people to contribute a dancing horse and a four-horned sheep.

古文：皇太子、王公以下上《舞马歌》者二十七首。
现代文：太子、王公以下上《舞马歌》等，共二十七首。
English: Princes and princes sang "Dancing Horse Song" and so on, a total of 27 songs.

古文：太宗泰始三年，进号征西大将军。
现代文：太宗泰始三年，进号征西大将军，五年，拾寅上表贡献土产。
English: In the first three years of Taizong Tai, he was promoted to General of the Western Expedition, and in the next five years, he contributed to the production of local products.

古文：五年，拾寅奉表献方物，以弟拾皮为平西将军、金城公。前废帝又进号车骑大将军。
现代文：朝廷用他弟弟拾皮为平西将军、金城公，后废帝又为他进号车骑大将军。
English: The imperial court used his younger brother, Pinxi, as a general and the prince of Jincheng. Later, the deposed emperor gave him a carriage to ride as a general.

古文：其国西有黄沙，南北一百二十里，东西七十里，不生草木，沙州因此为号。
现代文：吐谷浑西边有个沙漠，南北一百二十里，东西七十里，不长草木，沙州因此得名。
English: There is a desert on the west side of Tuyun, one hundred and twenty miles north and south, seventy miles east and west, not long grass, hence the name of Shazhou.

古文：屈真川有盐池，甘谷岭北有雀鼠同穴，或在山岭，或在平地，雀色白，鼠色黄，地生黄紫花草，便有雀鼠穴。
现代文：屈真川有个盐池，甘谷岭北面有雀子老鼠同在一起的穴洞，或者在山上，或者在平地，雀的颜色是白的，老鼠的颜色是黄的，地上生黄紫的花草的地方，便有老鼠和雀同处的穴洞。
English: There is a salt pond in the Qu Zhen River, and a hole where a sparrow and a mouse are together on the north side of the Gan Gu Ridge, or on the mountain, or on the plain, the color of the sparrow is white, the color of the mouse is yellow, and where yellow-purple flowers and plants grow on the ground, there is a hole where a mouse and a sparrow are together.

古文：白兰土出黄金、铜、铁。
现代文：白兰那里出产黄金、铜铁。
English: Gold, copper and iron are produced there.

古文：其国虽随水草，大抵治慕贺川。
现代文：吐谷浑人虽然随着有水草的地方居住，但多半时候是呆在慕贺川。
English: Although they live in areas with aquatic plants, they mostly stay in the Muga River.

