古文：狄青在泾原，常以寡当众。
现代文：原文北宋的名将狄青戍守泾原的时候，常常能够以寡敌众。
English: When the famous general of the Northern Song Dynasty, Di Qingxu, was in charge of the Hetian Plain, he was often able to deal with a large number of enemies.

古文：密令军中闻钲一声则止，再声则严阵而阳却，声止即大呼驰突。
现代文：他密令全军的士卒在听到第一声钲音时就要全军肃立，两声钲音就表示故意退却而实际上是要严阵以待敌，钲声停止，则要立刻大喊向前奔驰突击。
English: He secretly ordered the soldiers of the whole army to stand up when they heard the first beep, two beeps indicated a deliberate retreat, but in fact they wanted to wait for the enemy, and when the beep stopped, they should immediately shout forward and attack.

古文：士卒皆如教。
现代文：全军士卒都能严密地遵守狄青的教令。
English: All the non-commissioned officers were able to strictly abide by Di Qing's edict.

古文：才遇敌，未接，遽声钲，士卒皆止，再声再却。虏大笑曰： 孰谓狄天使勇？ 
现代文：有一次和敌虏相遇，双方还没有交战，士卒们突然听到一声钲音，全军就止步不前，两声钲音响起之后，只见士卒们开始向后退却，敌虏都大笑着说： 谁说狄青勇武？ 
English: Once upon a time, when meeting with the enemy, the two sides had not yet engaged in battle. The soldiers suddenly heard a gong, and the whole army stopped moving. After the two gongs sounded, the soldiers began to retreat. The enemy soldiers all laughed and said: Who said that Di Qing was brave?

古文：钲声止，忽前突之，虏兵大乱，相蹂多死。
现代文：钲音停止，宋兵突然冲向敌阵，敌人阵脚大乱，竟然相互践踏，死伤惨重。
English: The cheering stopped, the Song soldiers suddenly rushed to the enemy lines, the enemy lines were in chaos, they even trampled on each other, and the casualties were heavy.

古文：追奔数里，前临深涧，虏忽壅遏山隅，青遽鸣钲而止。
现代文：宋兵乘胜追击数里，前面到了一处深涧，敌人在山脚聚集，狄青立即鸣钲而止，全军就不再追击，敌虏才得以逃脱。
English: Song soldiers took advantage of the victory and chased for several miles. The front reached a deep ravine. The enemy gathered at the foot of the mountain. Di Qing immediately shouted and stopped. The whole army no longer chased, and the enemy was able to escape.

古文：虏得引去，时将佐悔不追击，青曰： 奔命之际，忽止而拒我，安知非谋，军已大胜，残寇不足贪也。 
现代文：事后，副将们却因为当时没有继续追击败逃的敌虏而后悔，狄青说： 亡命奔逃的敌人，突然停止而有心和我军对抗，哪里知道这其中是否有其他的诈谋呢？反正我军已经大获全胜了，这些残兵败寇也就不必再去贪功计较了。 
English: After the event, the vice generals regretted that they did not continue to pursue the fleeing enemy at that time. Di Qing said: The enemy, who was running for his life, suddenly stopped and had the intention to confront our army. How do we know if there is any other deception in this? Anyway, our army has won a great victory, and these remnants of the defeated invaders do not have to compete for merit.

古文：侬智高反邕州，诏以青为宣抚使击之，或言： 贼标牌不可当。 
现代文：侬智高在邕州叛乱，仁宗命令狄青为宣抚使出兵讨伐，有人说： 侬智高的标牌兵锐不可当。 
English: Nong Zhi Gao rebelled in Zhangzhou, and Nianzong ordered Di Qing to send troops to fight for the proclamation. Some people said: Nong Zhi Gao's sign soldiers cannot be trusted.

古文：青曰： 标牌，步兵也，遇骑兵必不能施，愿得西边蕃落民自从。 
现代文：狄青说： 标牌兵是步兵，步兵一旦遇到骑兵就没有办法充分发挥自己的战斗力，我将征调西边的蕃民编为部伍。 
English: Di Qing said, "Signalmen are infantrymen, and infantrymen will not be able to give full play to their combat effectiveness once they encounter cavalrymen. I will conscript the peasants in the west to form a troop.

古文：或又言： 南方非骑兵所宜。 
现代文：又有人说： 南方的地形不适宜骑兵作战。 
English: Others said: The terrain in the south is not suitable for cavalry combat.

古文：青曰： 蕃部善射，耐艰苦，上下山如平地，当瘴未发时，疾驰破之，必胜之道也。 
现代文：狄青说： 蕃人善于射箭，能吃苦耐劳，上高山下险坡，如在平地行走，只要趁着当地瘴气没有起来的时候，快马驰冲突击，必定能够破敌。 
English: Di Qing said: "Hangul people are good at archery, can endure hardships, climb high mountains and dangerous slopes, such as walking on flat ground, as long as they take advantage of the local stagnation, speed up and clash, they will surely be able to defeat the enemy.

古文：及行，日不过一驿，所至州，辄休士一日。
现代文：等到大军出发征讨的时候，每天行军的路程都不超过一个驿站，每到一个州，狄青就下令士卒休整一天。
English: By the time the great army set out for the campaign, the distance of the march did not exceed one post every day. Every time they reached a state, Di Qing ordered the soldiers to rest for a whole day.

古文：至潭州，遂立行伍，明约束，军人有夺逆旅菜一把者，立斩以徇，于是一军肃然。
现代文：来到潭州之后，狄青重新整编了部队，严明了军纪。有一个士兵抢了百姓一把青菜，狄青当场下令将这个士兵处斩，于是全军再也没有人敢违抗军令了。
English: After coming to Tanzhou, Di Qing reorganized the troops and made military discipline strict. A soldier robbed a handful of vegetables from the people, and Di Qing ordered the soldier to be beheaded on the spot. As a result, no one in the entire army dared to disobey the military order.

古文：时智高还守邕州，青惧昆仑关险厄为所据，乃按兵不动，下令宾州具五日粮，休士卒。
现代文：当时侬智高回邕州据守，狄青因为昆仑关位置险要，害怕被侬智高给占据了，于是先按兵不动，一面命宾州准备全军五天的军粮，并让士卒们就地休养。
English: At that time, Nong Zhigao was holding out in Bozhou. Because of the precarious position of Kunlun Pass, Di Qing was afraid of being occupied by Nong Zhigao. Therefore, he ordered Pengzhou to prepare five days of military rations for the whole army and let the soldiers rest and recuperate on the spot.

古文：值上元节，令大张灯烛，首夜宴将佐，次夜宴从军官，三夜飨军校。
现代文：这时正逢上元节，狄青命人张灯结彩，第一天晚上，宴请副将，第二天晚上宴请各个营的军官，第三天晚上宴请各个营的军吏。
English: At this time, it was the Lantern Festival. Di Qing ordered the lanterns to be lit and decorated. On the first night, the vice generals were invited to the banquet, the officers of each battalion were invited to the banquet on the second night, and the military officials of each battalion were invited to the banquet on the third night.

古文：首夜乐饮彻晓，次夜大风雨，二鼓时，青忽称病，暂起如内。
现代文：第一天晚上，宾主欢饮一直到天快亮了，第二天晚上正好遇到大风雨，大约到二鼓时，狄青突然对大家说自己稍微有点不舒服，暂时离席进入内室。
English: On the first night, the guests drank until it was almost dawn. On the second night, there happened to be a big storm. At around 2pm, Di Qing suddenly told everyone that he was a little uncomfortable and temporarily left the table to go into the inner room.

古文：久之，使人谕孙沔，令暂主席行酒，少服药乃出。
现代文：过了一阵子，狄青命人告诉孙沔，请他暂时代替主人招待宾客，自己则要等到服过药休息一会儿就出来了。
English: After a while, Di Qing's commanding officer told Sun Yao to invite him to entertain guests on behalf of his master for the time being, and that he would wait until he had taken his medicine and rested for a while before coming out.

古文：数使劝劳座客，至晓，客未敢退。
现代文：席中，多次派人劝客人饮酒，一直到第二天天亮，客人们都不敢离席告辞。
English: During the meal, several people were sent to persuade the guests to drink alcohol, and until dawn the next day, the guests did not dare to leave the table.

古文：忽有驰报者，云： 夜时三鼓，元帅已夺昆仑关矣。 
现代文：这时忽然有人骑着马前来禀报说： 昨夜三更时分，元帅已经攻占了昆仑关。 
English: At this time, someone on horseback suddenly came to report: Last night, at 3:00 a.m., the marshal had captured Kunlun Pass.

古文：青既渡，喜曰： 贼不知守此，无能为也。 
现代文：狄青既然已经成功地夺取了昆仑关，非常高兴地说： 昆仑关非常险要，贼人不知道据守，日后想必也不会有多大的作为了。 
English: Now that Di Qing has successfully captured Kunlun Pass, he is very happy to say: Kunlun Pass is very dangerous, thieves do not know how to defend it, and there will not be much to do in the future.

古文：已近邕州，贼方觉，逆战于归仁铺，青登高望之，贼据坡上，我军薄之，青使步卒居前，匿骑兵于后。
现代文：狄青率军逼近邕州的时候，贼人才有所发觉，两军在归仁铺交战，狄青站在高地观看两方交战的情形。贼人在土坡上据守，宋军节节进逼，狄青命步兵做前锋，骑兵隐藏在后面。
English: When the army led by Di Qing approached Zhangzhou, the thieves noticed something. The two armies fought in Guirenpu, and Di Qing stood on the high ground to watch the two sides fighting. The thieves defended themselves on the dirt slope, the Song Army advanced, the infantry of Di Qing was the front, and the cavalry was hidden behind.

古文：蛮使骁勇者当前，尽执长枪。前锋孙节战不利，死。将士畏青，莫敢退。
现代文：贼人派出善战的军队在阵前手拿着长枪抵御，前锋孙节失利，不幸捐躯，将士们都因为畏惧狄青的军纪严明而不敢撤退。
English: The Thieves sent out a well-trained army with long guns to defend themselves at the front of the battle. The forward Sun Jie was defeated and unfortunately died. The soldiers did not dare to retreat because they were afraid of Di Qing's strict military discipline.

古文：青登高山，执五色旗，麾骑兵为左右翼，出其后，断蛮军为三，旋而击之。左者右，右者左，已而右者复左，左者复右，贼不知所为。贼之标牌军，为马军所冲突，皆不能驻，枪立如束，我军又纵马上铁连枷击之，遂皆披靡。智高焚城遁去。
现代文：狄青站在高山上，手拿着五色旗，指挥骑兵分别从左、右、后三方抄敌人后路，将贼人的军队截成了三段，轮番攻击，右军攻左，左军攻右，不久又交替攻击，贼人根本没有办法弄清楚宋军是从哪个方向进攻的，而敌人的标牌军也被宋军的骑兵给冲散了，根本没有办法发挥自己的战斗力。贼人的长枪排列如林，宋军就在马匹上加装了铁连枷冲击，于是贼兵溃逃，侬智高最终将城烧毁逃跑。
English: Di Qing stood on a high mountain, holding a five-color flag in his hand, commanding the cavalry to copy the enemy's rear path from the left, right and back three sides respectively, cutting the thief's army into three sections, attacking in turn, the right army attacking the left, the left army attacking the right, and soon alternating attacks. The thief had no way of figuring out which direction the Song army was attacking from, and the enemy's signboard army was also scattered by the cavalry of the Song army. There was no way to exert their combat effectiveness. The thief's long guns were lined up like a forest, and the Song army added iron flails to their horses

古文：按是役，谏官韩绛言： 青武人，不足专任，请以侍从文臣为之副。 
现代文：这次战役，谏官韩绛曾经上言： 狄青是个武人，不能单独担当重任，请任命文臣作为他的副手。 
English: In this battle, eunuch Han Zheng once said: Di Qing is a warrior, he cannot take on heavy responsibilities alone, please appoint Wen Qian as his deputy.

古文：时庞籍独为相，对曰： 属者王师屡败，皆由大将轻，偏裨自用，不能制也。
现代文：当时庞籍为宰相，反驳说： 以往宋军屡战屡败，都是大将权轻，副将们自作主张，根本没有办法指挥军队。
English: At that time, Pang, who was the prime minister, retorted: In the past, the Song Army repeatedly lost battles. The generals had little power, and the vice-generals made their own proposals. There was no way to command the army.

古文：今青起于行伍，若以侍从之臣副之，号令复不得行。
现代文：而狄青军旅出身，如果派文臣作为他的副帅，军令又会没有办法加以贯彻了。
English: However, since Di Qing was from a military brigade, if he sent Wencheng as his second-in-command, there would be no way to carry out the military order.

古文：青昔在鄜延，居臣麾下，沉勇有智略，若专以智高事委之，必能办贼。 
现代文：从前狄青在鄜州、延州，曾做过我的部属，为人沉稳勇敢有谋略，如果能将征讨侬智高的大任交给他，他定会不辱使命，平定叛乱的。 
English: Once upon a time, Di Qing was my subordinate in Zhangzhou and Yanzhou. He was a calm, brave and strategic person. If he could be given the important task of recruiting Nong Zhigao, he would certainly not dishonor his mission and quell the rebellion.

古文：于是诏岭南用兵，皆受节制。
现代文：于是仁宗下诏，由狄青一人指挥征伐岭南之事。
English: As a result, Emperor Jinzong issued an edict that the conquest of Lingnan should be led by Di Qing alone.

古文：青临行，上言： 古之俘馘奏凯，割耳鼻则有之，不闻以获首者，秦、汉以来，获一首，赐爵一级，因谓之 首级 。
现代文：狄青出发之前，也曾上奏说： 古时将帅率兵作战，为了激励兵士，曾经有以割敌人的耳朵、鼻子用来计数战功的，却没有砍敌人首级的事。秦汉以来，斩敌人头颅一颗，就会赐给一级爵位，因此称之为 首级 。
English: Before setting out, Di Qing also wrote: In ancient times, generals led soldiers in battle. In order to motivate soldiers, they used to cut off the ears and noses of the enemy to count their war exploits, but they did not cut off the enemy's head. Since the Qin and Han dynasties, if you cut off an enemy's head, you will be given a first-class knighthood, so it is called the head.

古文：故军士争首级，以致相杀。又其间多以首级为货，售于无功不战之人，愿一切皆罢之。 
现代文：现在演变到军士为了争夺敌人的首级，打架斗殴、自相残杀的地步，甚至将敌军的脑袋当成货物，卖给那些没有尽力作战的人，我希望能废除这种赏功的制度。 
English: Now it has evolved to the point where sergeants fight and kill each other for the heads of the enemy, and even sell the heads of the enemy as a commodity to those who did not fight hard enough. I hope to abolish this system of awarding merit.

古文：又青行时，有因贵近求从行者。
现代文：另外，狄青出发之前，有人托权贵人士请求和他同行。
English: In addition, before the departure of Di Qing, someone entrusted a high-ranking person with the request to accompany him.

古文：青谓之曰： 君欲从行甚善，然智高小寇，至遣青行，可以知事急矣。
现代文：狄青告诉他们说： 先生想要随军出征的确令人佩服，但是侬智高只是个小毛贼，至于派我狄青前去征讨也仅仅是由于事出紧急。
English: Di Qing told them: It's really admirable that you want to go to war with the army, but Nong Zhigao is just a petty thief, and as for sending me to go to war with Di Qing, it's just because of an emergency.

古文：从青之士，击贼有功，当有厚赏；不然，军中法重，青不能私，君自思之，愿行则即奏取君矣。 
现代文：再说凡是跟随我出征的人，如果能尽力杀贼，必定会有重赏；否则，军法严厉，我不能徇私。请先生三思，如果还是愿意随军出征的话，那么狄青立刻奏请皇上准先生同行。 
English: Furthermore, anyone who goes to war with me, if he can kill a thief to the best of his ability, will surely be rewarded; otherwise, the military law is strict, and I cannot be selfish. Please think twice, if you still want to go to war with the army, then Diceng immediately ask the emperor to accompany him.

古文：于是无复敢言求从行者，即此一节，知青能持法，必能成功。
现代文：于是再也没有人敢随便要求同行了，仅仅就这一件事，就可以知道狄青能严守法纪，日后必定可以成功。
English: As a result, no one dared to casually ask for a ride anymore. From this incident alone, we can know that Di Qing can strictly abide by the law, and will surely succeed in the future.

古文：又青既入邕州，敛积尸内有衣金龙之衣者，又得金龙楯于其旁，或言： 智高已死，当亟奏! 
现代文：另外还有一件事，狄青攻破邕州之后，搜查敌人尸体的时候，发现有个身穿金龙衣的人，身旁还有一副刻有金龙图案的盾牌，有人说： 侬智高已经死了，应当立即禀奏皇帝。 
English: In addition, there was another matter. After Di Qing broke through Zhangzhou, when searching the bodies of the enemy, it was found that there was a person wearing a golden dragon robe, with a shield engraved with a golden dragon pattern next to him. Someone said: Nong Zhigao is dead, and the emperor should be played immediately.

古文：青曰： 安知非诈，宁失智高，敢欺朝廷耶？ 
现代文：狄青阻止说： 怎么能知道这不是贼人使诈呢，宁可失去杀死侬智高的功劳，怎么能不加以查证而贸然欺骗朝廷呢？ 
English: Di Qing stopped him and said, "How can you know that this is not a thief's trick? You would rather lose the credit for killing Nong Zhigao. How can you blatantly deceive the court without verifying it?"

古文：合观二事，不唯不敢使人冒功，即己亦不敢冒不可知之功。
现代文：综观这两件事情，就知道狄青不但不敢让人冒功求赏，即使自己也不敢冒不能确定的功劳。
English: A comprehensive view of these two things shows that Di Qing not only does not dare to let people seek rewards, even he does not dare to risk uncertain credit.

