古文：天生民而制其度，度小大以整，权轻重以极，明本末以立中。
现代文：上天生下民众就给他们制定了法度。量度大的与小的，就能确定大小适中的，称量轻的与重的，就能确定轻重适中的，弄清本末两端，就能确定正中间。
English: If you measure large and small, you can determine the appropriate size, if you weigh light and heavy, you can determine the appropriate weight, and if you know the ends of the book, you can determine the middle.

古文：立中以补损，补损以知足。
现代文：确定适中的标准才能补其不足损其有余，直到补损到恰当为止。
English: Determining the appropriate standard can make up for the shortfall until the shortfall is made up to the appropriate level.

古文：爵以明等极，极以正民，正中外以成命。
现代文：排列爵次，以明确尊卑贵贱。辨明等级以安定民众。
English: Arrange the ranks of knighthoods to make it clear which is higher and which is lower. Identify ranks to stabilize the people.

古文：正上下以顺政。自迩弥兴自远，远迩备极终也。
现代文：安定好朝廷内外，以成就君命；安定好公卿庶民，以便政令顺行。
English: Good stability inside and outside the imperial court to fulfill the king's mission; good stability for nobles and commoners so that government decrees can be carried out smoothly.

古文：明王是以敬微而顺分，分次以知和，知和以知乐，知乐以知哀，知哀以知慧，内外以知人。
现代文：政令在朝廷内制定。
English: The decree was made within the imperial court.

古文：凡民生而有好有恶，小得其所好则喜，大得其所好则乐，小遭其所恶则忧，大遭其所恶则哀。
现代文：区分了等级，民众就知道和睦；知道了和睦就会知道欢乐,知道了欢乐也会知道识哀伤；知道了欢乐哀伤就知道怎样做一个最明白的人，在朝庭内外分辨好人与恶人。所有民众皆有喜欢有厌恶。得到一点他所爱的就高兴，得到很多他所爱的就欢乐。遇到一点他厌恶的事就忧伤遇到很多他厌恶的事就会悲哀。
English: Having differentiated the levels, the people know harmony; knowing harmony, they will know joy; knowing joy, they will know sadness; knowing joy and sadness, they will know how to be the most clear person, to distinguish good people from bad people both inside and outside the court. All people have likes and dislikes. If you get something you love, you will be happy; if you get a lot of what you love, you will be happy. If you encounter something you dislike, you will be sad. If you encounter a lot of things you dislike, you will be sad.

古文：然凡民之所好恶，生物是好，死物是恶，民至有好而不让，不从其所好，必犯法，无以事上。
现代文：大凡民众的好恶都一样，喜欢养生之物，厌恶致死之物。民众遇到自己喜爱的东西就相争不让。如果不能顺从他的爱好，就一定犯法作乱，不能侍奉上司；民众遇到自己厌恶的东西就争相回避。
English: The likes and dislikes of the general public are all the same, they like things that keep you healthy and dislike things that kill you. When people encounter things they like, they fight over them. If they can't follow their hobbies, they're bound to break the law and make trouble, and they can't serve their bosses; when people encounter things they dislike, they fight to avoid them.

古文：民至有恶不让，不去其所恶，必犯法，无以事上，边行于此，尚有顽民，而况□不去其所恶，而从其所好，民能居乎。
现代文：如果不能除去他厌恶的东西，就一定犯法作乱，不能侍奉上司。即使上司顺其所好又除其所厌，也还会有顽民，何况还不能除其厌恶，顺其爱好，民众能安居吗?
English: If he can't get rid of what he dislikes, he will surely break the law and make trouble, and won't be able to serve his boss. Even if the boss does what he likes and what he dislikes, there will still be villains. Moreover, he can't get rid of what he dislikes and what he likes. Can the people live in peace?

古文：若不□力何以求之，力争则力政，力政则无让，无让则无礼，无礼，虽得所好，民乐乎？
现代文：民众如果不能安居，又凭什么求得民众呢?以力相争就会用武力强取，用武力强取就会失去谦让：失去谦让，就丢掉了礼制。丢掉礼制，即使得到喜爱的东西，民众会快乐吗?
English: If the people cannot live in peace, how can the people be won over? If they fight with force, they will be won over by force. If they are won over by force, they will lose their modesty. If they lose their modesty, they will lose their etiquette. If they lose their etiquette, will the people be happy even if they get something they like?

古文：若不乐乃所恶也。
现代文：如果不快乐，就是他厌恶的了。
English: If he's not happy, he's disgusted.

古文：凡民不忍好恶，不能分次，不次则夺，夺则战，战则何以养老幼，何以救痛疾葬丧，何以胥役也。
现代文：大凡做人，不能克制自己的好恶，就不能安守本分。不守分就会争夺，争夺必然打斗，相互打斗又怎么能抚养老人和幼儿，怎么能救助病痛、疾苦、死亡、丧葬，怎么能相互帮助呢?
English: Without keeping score, there will be competition, and competition will inevitably lead to fighting. How can we care for the elderly and young children if we fight with each other? How can we relieve pain, illness, death, and funerals? How can we help each other?

古文：明王是以极等以断好恶，教民次分扬举力竞。
现代文：英明的君王因此而区分等级来阻断庶民的好恶之心，教会民众安守本分。
English: Therefore, the wise monarchs divided the ranks to block the likes and dislikes of the common people and taught the people to keep their duty.

古文：任壮养老长幼有报，民是以胥役也。
现代文：表彰那些努力使壮年人有事做、老年人有供养、幼年人能成长的人，让壮年、老年、幼年人相互能报答，民众因此而能彼此帮助。
English: To commend those who have made efforts to enable the adults to have something to do, the elderly to be provided for, and the young people to grow, so that the adults, the elderly, and the young people can reciprocate, and the people can help each other.

古文：夫力竞，非众不克，众非和不众，和非中不立，中非礼不慎，礼非乐不履。
现代文：凭力气争斗，除非人多不能制止；人多，除非和睦不能聚集；和睦，除非诚心不能实现；诚心，除非礼仪慎重不能表现；礼仪，除非心情舒畅不能履行。
English: Struggle by force, unless there are many people, cannot be stopped; many people, unless there is harmony, cannot be gathered; harmony, unless there is sincerity, cannot be realized; sincerity, unless there is etiquette, cannot be shown; etiquette, unless there is a comfortable mood, cannot be fulfilled.

古文：明王是以无乐非人，无哀非人。
现代文：英明君王因此而与民同乐，与民同哀，百姓因此也就多起来。
English: As a result, the wise king and the people had the same joy and the same sorrow. As a result, the people multiplied.

古文：人是以众，人众赏多罚少，政之美也。罚多赏少，政之恶也。
现代文：人多了，赏赐多而处罚少，是善政；处罚多而赏赐少，就是恶政。
English: The more people, the more rewards and fewer punishments, the better the government; the more punishments and fewer rewards, the worse the government.

古文：罚多则困，赏多则乏，乏困无丑，教乃不至。
现代文：处罚多了百姓会困窘，赏赐少了百姓会贫乏。一旦贫乏、困窘，就不知羞耻，教化就不能到他们身上。
English: If there are more punishments, the people will be embarrassed, and if there are fewer rewards, the people will be impoverished. Once they are impoverished and embarrassed, they will not know shame, and enlightenment will not be able to reach them.

古文：是故民主明丑以长子孙，子孙习服，鸟兽仁德。
现代文：所以，英明君王以晓明廉耻来教育子孙成长。儿孙们习知有耻而身体力行，就是鸟兽也会怀有仁德。
English: Therefore, wise monarchs educate their children and grandchildren to grow up with knowledge, honesty and shame. Children and grandchildren learn to be shameless and practice it. Even birds and beasts will have benevolence.

古文：土宜天时，百物和治，治之初，厉初哉。
现代文：加之地得其宜与天得其时，百事都会平稳。一开始就重视治教劝励民众，整个教化都会顺利。
English: Add the right place at the right time and the right time, and everything will be stable. From the very beginning, we will attach importance to educating and encouraging the people, and the entire education will be smooth.

古文：治化则顺，是故无顺非厉，长幼成而生，曰顺极。
现代文：所以，教化的不顺是没有劝励民众。培养幼儿的事情成功，并且生出 义 来，可说是顺极了。
English: Therefore, the failure of the indoctrination is not to encourage the people. The success of the training of young children, and the birth of righteousness, can be said to be extremely successful.

