古文：二十有八年春，无冰。
现代文：二十八年春季，没有冰。
English: In the spring of 1928, there was no ice.

古文：夏，卫石恶出奔晋。
现代文：夏季，卫国的石恶逃到晋国。
English: In the summer, the stone evildoers of Heiguo fled to Jin.

古文：邾子来朝。
现代文：邾悼公前来朝见。
English: He came to see me in the morning.

古文：秋八月，大雩。
现代文：秋季八月，举行大的秋雨祭祀活动。
English: In August, the festival of praying for rain is held.

古文：仲孙羯如晋。
现代文：仲孙羯去到晋国。
English: Nakasone went to Jin Province.

古文：冬，齐庆封来奔。
现代文：冬季，齐国的庆封逃到鲁国。
English: In winter, Qingfeng of Qi fled to Lu.

古文：十有一月，公如楚。
现代文：十一月，襄公到楚国去。
English: In November, Prince Xiang went to Chu.

古文：十有二月甲寅，天王崩。
现代文：十二月甲寅日，周灵王去世。
English: On December 4th, King Zhou Ling passed away.

古文：乙未，楚子昭卒。
现代文：乙未日，楚康王昭去世。
English: On the following day, Chu Kang Wang Zhao passed away.

古文：二十八年春，无冰。
现代文：二十八年春季，没有冰。
English: In the spring of 1928, there was no ice.

古文：梓慎曰： 今兹宋、郑其饥乎？
现代文：梓慎说： 今年宋国和郑国恐怕要发生饥荒了吧！
English: Zi Shen said: I'm afraid there will be a famine in Song and Zheng this year!

古文：岁在星纪，而淫于玄枵，以有时菑，阴不堪阳。
现代文：岁星应当在星纪，但已经过头到了玄枵。这是因为要发生天时不正的灾荒，阴不能战胜阳。
English: The year star should be in the sidereal period, but it has already passed to the ecliptic. This is because there will be a natural disaster, and the yin cannot defeat the yang.

古文：蛇乘龙。龙，宋、郑之星也，宋、郑必饥。
现代文：蛇乘坐在龙的上边，龙是宋国、郑国的星宿，所以宋国、郑国必然发生饥荒。
English: The snake sits on top of the dragon. The dragon is the star of Song and Zheng dynasties. Therefore, famine is inevitable in Song and Zheng dynasties.

古文：玄枵，虚中也。
现代文：玄枵，虚宿在它的中间。
English: The Xuan Zang, the empty lodging in the middle of it.

古文：枵，耗名也。
现代文：枵，是消耗的名称。
English: , is the name of the consumption.

古文：土虚而民耗，不饥何为？ 
现代文：土地虚而百姓耗，不发生饥荒才怪呢！ 
English: The land is empty and the people are exhausted, it is a wonder that there is no famine!

古文：夏，齐侯、陈侯、蔡侯、北燕伯、杞伯、胡子、沈子、白狄朝于晋，宋之盟故也。
现代文：夏季，齐景公、陈哀公、蔡景侯、北燕伯、杞文公、胡子、沈子、白狄到晋国朝见，这是由于在宋国那次结盟的缘故。
English: In the summer, Qi Jing Gong, Chen Aigong, Cai Jing Hou, Bei Yan Bo, Xing Wen Gong, Hu Zi, Shen Zi, and Baidi went to the Jin Dynasty for a meeting, which was due to the alliance in the Song Dynasty.

古文：齐侯将行，庆封曰： 我不与盟，何为于晋？ 
现代文：齐景公准备出行，庆封说： 我们没有参加结盟，为什么要向晋国朝见？ 
English: As Qi Jinggong prepared to travel, Qingfeng said: We did not join the alliance, why should we meet the Jin Dynasty?

古文：陈文子曰： 先事后贿，礼也。
现代文：陈文子说： 先考虑事奉大国而后考虑财货，这是合于礼的。
English: Chen Wenzi said: It is proper to think about serving the country first and then think about goods.

古文：小事大，未获事焉，从之如志，礼也。
现代文：小国事奉大国，如果没有得到事奉的机会，就要顺从大国的意图，这也是合于礼的。
English: Small countries serve big countries, and if they do not get the opportunity to serve, they must obey the intentions of big countries, which is also proper.

古文：虽不与盟，敢叛晋乎？
现代文：我们虽然没有参加结盟，岂敢背叛晋国呢？
English: Although we did not participate in the alliance, how dare we betray Jin?

古文：重丘之盟，未可忘也。
现代文：重丘的盟会，不可以忘记啊。
English: The League of Heavy Hills, you can't forget it.

古文：子其劝行！ 
现代文：您还是劝国君出行！ 
English: You should still urge Kunimoto to travel!

古文：卫人讨甯氏之党，故石恶出奔晋。
现代文：卫国人讨伐甯氏的亲族，所以石恶逃亡到晋国。
English: The defenders of the country fought against the relatives of the Yi clan, so Shi Xi fled to Jin.

古文：卫人立其从子圃以守石氏之祀，礼也。
现代文：卫国人立了他的侄儿石圃，以保存石氏的祭祀，这是合于礼的。
English: The guardian of the country set up his nephew's stone garden to preserve the sacrifice of the stone clan, which is in accordance with the ritual.

古文：邾悼公来朝，时事也。
现代文：邾悼公前来朝见，这是按时令而来朝见。
English: Zou Yougong came to see me in the morning. This was his coming to see me in the morning as scheduled.

古文：秋八月，大雩，旱也。
现代文：秋季，八月，举行大雩祭，这是由于发生了旱灾。
English: In the autumn, in August, there is a great burnt offering, because of the drought.

古文：蔡侯归自晋，入于郑。
现代文：蔡景侯从晋国回国，路过郑国。
English: Cai Jinghou passed through Zhengzhou on his way back from Jin.

古文：郑伯享之，不敬。
现代文：郑简公设享礼招待他，蔡景侯表现得不恭敬。
English: Zheng Bo set up a banquet to entertain him, but he was rude during the meal.

古文：子产曰： 蔡侯其不免乎？
现代文：子产说： 蔡侯恐怕不能免于祸难吧！
English: Zi Yuan said, "I'm afraid Cai Hou can't escape the calamity!

古文：日其过此也，君使子展迋劳于东门之外，而傲。
现代文：以前经过这里的时候，国君派子展去到东门外边慰劳，但是他很骄傲。
English: When he passed by here in the past, the sovereign sent Zosen to work outside the east gate, but he was very proud.

古文：吾曰： 犹将更之。 
现代文：我认为他还是会改变的。
English: I think he's still going to change.

古文：今还，受享而惰，乃其心也。
现代文：现在他回来，接受享礼而显得怠惰，这就是他的本性了。
English: Now he's come back and taken the plaudits and been lazy, which is his nature.

古文：君小国事大国，而惰傲以为己心，将得死乎？
现代文：作为小国的国君，事奉大国，反而把怠惰骄傲作为本性，将来能有好死吗？
English: As the sovereign of a small country, serving a big country, but taking laziness and pride as nature, can there be a good death in the future?

古文：若不免，必由其子。
现代文：如果不免于祸难，一定由于他的儿子。
English: If he is not spared, it is because of his son.

古文：其为君也，淫而不父。
现代文：他做国君，淫乱而不像做父亲的样子。
English: As a sovereign, he behaves like an adulterer and not like a father.

古文：侨闻之，如是者，恒有子祸。 
现代文：侨听说，像这样的人，经常会遇到儿子来作乱。 
English: Overseas Chinese have heard that people like this often have sons who cause trouble.

古文：孟孝伯如晋，告将为宋之盟故如楚也。
现代文：孟孝伯去到晋国，这是由于报告为 宋之盟 的缘故而将到楚国去。
English: Meng Xiao Bo went to Jin Province, which is due to the report that he will go to Chu Province because of the Song Alliance.

古文：蔡侯之如晋也，郑伯使游吉如楚。
现代文：蔡景公去到晋国的时候，郑简公派游吉去到楚国。
English: When Cai Jing Gong went to Jin Province, Zheng Jian Gong sent Youji to Chu Province.

古文：及汉，楚人还之，曰： 宋之盟，君实亲辱。
现代文：到达汉水，楚国人让他回去，说： 在宋国的那次结盟，贵国君王亲自参加。
English: When he reached Hanshui, the people of Chu asked him to go back, saying: In the alliance of Song, the king of your country took part in person.

古文：今吾子来，寡君谓吾子姑还！吾将使驲奔问诸晋而以告。 
现代文：现在大夫前来，寡君说大夫暂且回去，我将要派传车奔赴晋国询问以后再告诉您。 
English: Now that the doctor has come, the widower said that the doctor should go back for the time being. I will send a car to go to Jin Province to inquire and tell you later.

古文：子大叔曰： 宋之盟，君命将利小国，而亦使安定其社稷，镇抚其民人，以礼承天之休，此君之宪令，而小国之望也。
现代文：游吉说： 在宋国的那次结盟，贵国君王的命令将要有利于小国，而也使小国安定他的国家，镇抚它的百姓，用礼仪承受上天的福禄，这是贵国君王的法令，同时也是小国的希望。
English: Youji said: In the alliance of the Song Dynasty, the order of your king will be beneficial to the small country, and also make the small country stabilize its country, pacify its people, and use etiquette to receive the blessings of heaven. This is the decree of your king, and also the hope of the small country.

古文：寡君是故使吉奉其皮币，以岁之不易，聘于下执事。
现代文：寡君因此派吉奉上财礼，由于年来多难，特向下级执事聘问。
English: As a result, the widower presented Pai Ji with a financial gift. Due to the difficulties over the years, he specifically asked the lower-ranking deacon for advice.

古文：今执事有命曰，女何与政令之有？
现代文：现在执事命令说：你怎么能参与郑国的政令？
English: Now the deacon orders: How can you participate in Zheng Guo's decrees?

古文：必使而君弃而封守，跋涉山川，蒙犯霜露，以逞君心。
现代文：一定要让你们国君丢掉你们的疆土和守备，跋山涉水，冒着霜露，以满足我国君王的心意。
English: You must make your sovereigns abandon their territories and garrisons, travel over mountains and through water, and brave frost and dew, in order to satisfy the will of our sovereign.

古文：小国将君是望，敢不唯命是听。
现代文：小国还想期望贵国君王赐给恩惠，哪里敢不唯命是听？
English: How dare a small country expect favors from your king?

古文：无乃非盟载之言，以阙君德，而执事有不利焉，小国是惧。
现代文：但这不符合盟书的话，而使贵国君王的德行有缺失，也对执享有所不利，小国就害怕这个。
English: But this is not in accordance with the words of the Covenant, and makes your king's virtue deficient and unfavorable to the enjoyment of it, and small countries are afraid of this.

古文：不然，其何劳之敢惮？ 
现代文：否则，还敢怕什么劳苦呢？ 
English: Otherwise, how can you be afraid of hard work?

古文：子大叔归，复命，告子展曰： 楚子将死矣！
现代文：游吉回国，复命，告诉子展说： 楚王将要死了。
English: When Youji returned to China, he was ordered to tell Zicheng: King Chu is about to die.

古文：不修其政德，而贪昧于诸侯，以逞其愿，欲久得乎？
现代文：不修明他的政事德行，反而在诸侯那里贪图进奉，以达到自己的愿望，想要活得长久，行吗？
English: Is it all right not to cultivate his political virtue, but to covet the vassalage of the princes in order to achieve his desire to live a long life?

古文：《周易》有之，在《复》之《颐》，曰： 迷复，凶。 
现代文：《周易》有这样的情况，得到《复》卦变成《颐》卦，说 迷路往回走，不吉利。 
English: "Zhou Yi" has such a situation, getting "Fu" gua into "Yu" gua, saying that it is unlucky to get lost and go back.

古文：其楚子之谓乎？
现代文：这说的就是楚王吧？
English: Isn't that what King Chu said?

古文：欲复其愿，而弃其本，复归无所，是谓迷复。能无凶乎？
现代文：想实现他的愿望，而放弃了本来的道路，想回去没有了归路，这就叫 迷复 ，能够吉利吗？
English: Want to realize his desire, and gave up the original path, want to go back, there is no way back, this is called "confusion," can you be lucky?

古文：楚不几十年，未能恤诸侯也。吾乃休吾民矣。 
现代文：国君就去吧，送了葬回来，让楚国痛快一下。楚国没有近十年的时间，不能争霸，我们就可以让百姓休息了。 
English: Let the king go, send him back after the funeral, and let the state of Chu have a good time. The state of Chu does not have nearly ten years to fight for supremacy, so we can let the people rest.

古文：裨竈曰： 今兹周王及楚子皆将死。
现代文：裨灶说： 今年周天子和楚王都将死去。
English: Zhou Tianzi and King Chu will both die this year.

古文：岁弃其次，而旅于明年之次，以害鸟帑。周、楚恶之。 
现代文：岁星失去它应有的位置，而运行在明年的位置上，要危害鸟尾，周朝和楚国要受灾祸。 
English: If the year star loses its rightful position, and runs in the next year's position, it will endanger the bird's tail, and the Zhou Dynasty and the State of Chu will be plagued.

古文：九月，郑游吉如晋，告将朝于楚，以从宋之盟。
现代文：九月，郑国的游吉去到晋国，报告说按照在宋国的盟誓将要去楚国朝见。
English: In September, Youji of Zheng went to Jin and reported that he would go to the court of Chu in accordance with his oath in Song.

古文：子产相郑伯以如楚，舍不为坛。
现代文：子产辅助郑伯去到楚国，搭了帐篷而不筑坛。
English: Zheng Bo, a midwife, went to Chu and pitched a tent instead of building an altar.

古文：外仆言曰： 昔先大夫相先君，適四国，未尝不为坛。
现代文：外仆说： 从前先大夫辅助先君到四方各国，从没有不筑坛的。
English: The maidservant said, "In the past, there was no one who did not build an altar when the first doctor assisted the first prince to travel to the four corners of the world.

古文：自是至今，亦皆循之。
现代文：从那个时候到今天也都没有改变。
English: Nothing has changed since then.

古文：今子草舍，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：现在您不除草就搭起帐篷，恐怕不可以吧！ 
English: Now you can't put up a tent without weeding, I'm afraid!

古文：子产曰： 大適小，则为坛。小適大，苟舍而已，焉用坛？
现代文：子产说： 大国君臣去到小国，就筑坛；小国去到大国，随便搭个帐篷就行了，哪里用得着筑坛？
English: The progeny said: When a great country's princes and ministers go to a small country, they build an altar; when a small country goes to a great country, they just set up a tent. What is the use of building an altar?

古文：侨闻之，大適小有五美：宥其罪戾，赦其过失，救其菑患，赏其德刑，教其不及。
现代文：侨听说过：大国君臣去到小国有五种好处：赦免它的罪过，原谅它的失误，救助它的灾难，赞赏它的德行和刑法。
English: Overseas Chinese have heard that there are five kinds of benefits for a big country's ruler to go to a small country: pardon its sins, forgive its mistakes, rescue its disasters, and appreciate its virtues and criminal laws.

古文：小国不困，怀服如归。是故作坛以昭其功，宣告后人，无怠于德。
现代文：教导它所想不到的地方，小国不困乏，想念和顺服大国，好像回家一样，因此筑坛来表扬它的功德，公开告诉后代的人，不要怠情于修德业。
English: Teach it where it is not thought of, small countries are not bored, miss and obey big countries, as if going home, so build an altar to praise its merits, and openly tell future generations not to be lazy in cultivating morality.

古文：小適大有五恶：说其罪戾，请其不足，行其政事，共其职贡，从其时命。
现代文：小国去到大国有五种坏处：向小国掩饰它的罪过，请求得到它所缺乏的东西，要求小国奉行它的命令，供给它贡品，服从它的随时发出的命令。
English: There are five evils of a small country going to a big country: concealing its sins from a small country, asking for what it lacks, demanding that a small country follow its orders, providing it with tribute, and obeying its orders at any time.

古文：不然，则重其币帛，以贺其福而吊其凶，皆小国之祸也。焉用作坛以昭其祸。
现代文：不这样，就得加重小国的财礼，用来祝贺它的喜事和吊唁它的祸事，这都是小国的祸患，哪里用得着筑坛招来它的祸患？
English: Otherwise, it is necessary to increase the financial gifts of a small country, to be used to congratulate its joys and commiserate its woes. These are all the woes of a small country. Why build an altar to invite its woes?

古文：所以告子孙，无昭祸焉可也。 
现代文：把这些告诉子孙，不要招来祸患就可以了。 
English: Tell this to your children and grandchildren, and don't invite disaster.

古文：齐庆封好田而耆酒，与庆舍政。则以其内实迁于卢蒲嫳氏，易内而饮酒。
现代文：齐国的庆封喜欢打猎而嗜好喝酒，把政权交付给庆舍，就带着他的妻妾财物迁到卢蒲嫳家里，交换妻妾而喝酒。
English: Qingfeng of Qi liked to hunt and was fond of drinking. When he handed over power to Qingxiao, he took his wife and concubine and their belongings and moved to the home of Lu Puxi. He exchanged his wife and concubine for drinking.

古文：数日，国迁朝焉。
现代文：几天以后，官员们就改到这里来朝见。
English: A few days later, the officials came here for a meeting.

古文：使诸亡人得贼者，以告而反之。故反卢蒲癸。
现代文：庆封让逃亡在外而知道崔氏馀党的人，如果前来报告就允许他回国，所以就让卢蒲癸回来。
English: Since Qingfeng Zang, who had fled abroad, knew the remaining members of Choi's party, if he came to report, he would be allowed to return to the country, so he let Lu Bumen return.

古文：癸臣子之，有宠，妻之。
现代文：卢蒲癸做了庆舍的家臣，受到宠信，庆舍就把女儿嫁给了卢蒲癸。
English: Lu Puxuan became a retainer of Qing She and was favored by her. Qing She then married her daughter to Lu Puxuan.

古文：庆舍之士谓卢蒲癸曰： 男女辨姓。子不辟宗，何也？ 
现代文：庆舍的家臣对卢蒲癸说： 男女结婚要区别是否同姓，您却不避同宗，为什么？ 
English: Qingshe's vassal said to Lu Puxiong: When a man and a woman get married, it is necessary to distinguish whether they have the same surname, but you do not avoid the same clan. Why?

古文：曰： 宗不余辟，余独焉辟之？
现代文：卢蒲癸说： 同宗不避我，我怎么能独独避开同宗？
English: Lu Puxuan said: If the same clan does not avoid me, how can I avoid the same clan?

古文：赋诗断章，余取所求焉，恶识宗？ 
现代文：比如赋诗时的断章取义，我取我所需要的就是了，哪里知道什么同宗不同宗？ 
English: For example, taking the meaning out of context when composing a poem, I take what I need and that's it, where do I know what is the same sect and different sects?

古文：癸言王何而反之，二人皆嬖。
现代文：卢蒲癸又对庆舍说起王何而让他回来，两个人都受到了庆舍的宠信。
English: Lu Puxuan also told Qingxiao about why Wang let him come back, and both of them were favored by Qingxiao.

古文：使执寝戈，而先后之。
现代文：庆舍让他们拿着武器寝戈作为随身警卫。
English: Qing She let them sleep with weapons as bodyguards.

古文：公膳，日双鸡。饔人窃更之以鹜。
现代文：卿大夫在朝廷办公务用餐，每天有两只鸡，管伙食的人偷偷地换成鸭子。
English: Sir Doctor Meals in the court office, every day there are two chickens, the person in charge of the meal secretly changed to ducks.

古文：御者知之，则去其肉而以其洎馈。
现代文：送饭的人知道了，把肉都拿掉而只将肉汤送上来。
English: When the server found out, he removed the meat and served only the broth.

古文：子雅、子尾怒。
现代文：子雅、子尾生气。
English: Zoya and Zio get angry.

古文：庆封告卢蒲嫳。
现代文：庆封告诉卢蒲嫳。
English: Qingfeng told Lu Bupu.

古文：卢蒲嫳曰： 譬之如禽兽，吾寝处之矣。 
现代文：卢蒲嫳说： 把他们比成禽兽，我睡在他们的皮毛上了。 
English: "Compare them to beasts, I sleep on their fur," said Lupu.

古文：使析归父告晏平仲。
现代文：于是就派析归父告诉晏平仲。
English: So he sent his analysis back to his father and told Zou Pingzhong.

古文：平仲曰： 婴之众不足用也，知无能谋也。
现代文：晏平仲说： 婴的一伙人不足以使用，聪明也出不了主意。
English: Zou Pingzhong said: A group of infants is not enough to use, and they can't come up with a clever idea.

古文：言弗敢出，有盟可也。 
现代文：但是决不敢泄露这些话，可以盟誓。 
English: But I would never dare to reveal these words, I swear it.

古文：子家曰： 子之言云，又焉用盟？ 
现代文：析归父说： 您已经这样说了，哪里还用盟誓？ 
English: "You've already said this, where else would you use an oath?

古文：告北郭子车。
现代文：又告诉北郭子车。
English: He also told Beiguo Zicai to leave.

古文：子车曰： 人各有以事君，非佐之所能也。 
现代文：子车说： 各人都有不同的方式事奉国君，这不是佐所能做到的。 
English: "Everyone has a different way of serving the king, and this is not something that Sasa can do," he said.

古文：陈文子谓桓子曰： 祸将作矣！吾其何得？ 
现代文：陈文子对陈无宇说： 祸难将要发生了，我们能得到什么？ 
English: Chen Wenzi said to Chen Wuyu: The disaster is about to happen, what can we get?

古文：对曰： 得庆氏之木百车于庄。 
现代文：陈无宇回答说： 可以在庄街上得到庆氏的木头一百车。 
English: Chen Wuyu replied, "You can get a hundred carts of Kei's wood on Zhuang Street.

古文：文子曰： 可慎守也已！ 
现代文：陈文子说： 可以谨慎地保守住就行了。 
English: Chen Wenzi said: You can just live conservatively.

古文：卢蒲癸、王何卜攻庆氏，示子之兆，曰： 或卜攻仇，敢献其兆。 
现代文：卢蒲癸、王何为进攻庆氏而占卜，把卦像给庆舍看，说： 有人为攻打仇人而占卜，谨敢奉献卦像。 
English: Lu Puxuan and Wang He divined for the attack on the Qing clan and showed the fortunetelling image to the Qing family, saying, "Someone divined for the attack on the enemy and dared to offer the fortunetelling image.

古文：子之曰： 克，见血。 
现代文：庆舍说： 攻下了，见到血。 
English: Qing She said, "I was captured and saw blood.

古文：冬十月，庆封田于莱，陈无宇从。
现代文：冬季，十月，庆封在莱地打猎，陈无宇跟从。
English: In winter, October, Qingfeng went hunting in Laiji, Chen Wuyu followed.

古文：丙辰，文子使召之。请曰： 无宇之母疾病，请归。 
现代文：十七日，陈文子派人召唤陈无宇回去，陈无宇请求说： 无宇的母亲病了，请求回去。 
English: On the 17th, Chen Wenzi sent someone to summon Chen Wuyu to come back. Chen Wuyu pleaded: "Wuyu's mother is ill, please come back."

古文：庆季卜之，示之兆，曰： 死。 
现代文：庆封占卜，把卦像给陈无宇看，陈无宇说： 这是死的卦像。 
English: Qingfeng divination, the image of the hexagram to Chen Wuyu, Chen Wuyu said: This is the image of the hexagram.

古文：奉龟而泣。
现代文：捧着龟甲而哭泣，于是就让他回去了。
English: Holding his tortoise shell and crying, they let him go.

古文：乃使归。庆嗣闻之，曰： 祸将作矣！ 
现代文：庆嗣听到这件事，说： 祸难将要发生了。 
English: When Keiji heard about this, he said, "A disaster is about to happen.

古文：子家弗听，亦无悛志。子息曰： 亡矣！
现代文：告诉庆封说： 赶快回去，祸难必然发生在秋祭的时候，回去还来得及。 庆封不听，也没有改悔的意思。
English: He told Qingfeng: "Hurry back, the calamity will inevitably occur during the autumn festival, there is still time to go back." Qingfeng did not listen and had no intention of repenting.

古文：幸而获在吴、越。 
现代文：庆嗣说： 他要逃亡了，能够逃到吴国、楚国就是侥幸。 
English: Qingzi said, "He's going to escape. It's just a fluke that he was able to escape to Wu and Chu."

古文：陈无宇济水而戕舟发梁。
现代文：陈无宇渡过河，就破坏了渡船撤毁了桥梁。
English: When Chen Wuyu crossed the river, he damaged the ferry and destroyed the bridge.

古文：卢蒲姜谓癸曰： 有事而不告我，必不捷矣。 
现代文：卢蒲姜对卢蒲癸说： 有事情而不告诉我，必然不能成功。 
English: Lupu Jiang said to Lupu Zheng: If you don't tell me about something, it's bound to fail.

古文：癸告之。
现代文：卢蒲癸告诉了她。
English: Louboutin told her.

古文：姜曰： 夫子愎，莫之止，将不出，我请止之。 癸曰： 诺。 
现代文：卢蒲姜说： 我父亲性情倔强，没有人劝阻他，反倒不出来了。请让我去劝阻他。 卢蒲癸说： 好。 
English: Lupu Jiang said, "My father is stubborn, and no one can dissuade him, but he can't come out. Please let me dissuade him." Lupu Yao said, "Okay."

古文：十一月乙亥，尝于大公之庙，庆舍涖事。
现代文：十一月初七日，在太公的庙里举行秋祭，庆舍将亲临主持祭祀。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the autumn festival will be held in the temple of Taigong, and Qing She will preside over the ceremony in person.

古文：卢蒲姜告之，且止之。弗听，曰： 谁敢者！ 
现代文：卢蒲姜告诉他有人要发动祸乱，而且劝他不要去。他不听，说： 谁敢这么干？ 
English: Lu Pujiang told him that someone wanted to start a calamity and advised him not to go. He did not listen and said, "Who would dare to do such a thing?"

古文：遂如公。
现代文：就去到太庙参加祭祀。
English: He went to the Imperial Temple to take part in a religious service.

古文：麻婴为尸，庆为上献。
现代文：麻婴充当祭尸，庆奊充当上献。
English: The pockmarked infant serves as the sacrificial corpse, and the gladiolus serves as the offering.

古文：卢蒲癸、王何执寝戈。庆氏以其甲环公宫。
现代文：卢蒲癸、王何手拿寝戈，庆氏领着他的甲士围住公宫。
English: Roh Puh-tao and Wang Ho-tao sleep with their swords in their hands, while King Gyeong-il leads his warriors to surround the royal palace.

古文：陈氏、鲍氏之圉人为优。庆氏之马善惊，士皆释甲束马而饮酒，且观优，至于鱼里。
现代文：陈氏、鲍氏的养马人表演，庆氏的马容易受惊，甲士都解甲系马而喝酒，同时看戏，到了鱼里。
English: Mr. Chen and Mr. Bao's horse breeders performed, Mr. Qing's horse was easily frightened, and the horsemen all dismounted their horses and drank, while watching the play, to the fish.

古文：栾、高、陈、鲍之徒介庆氏之甲。
现代文：栾氏、高氏、陈氏、鲍氏的徒兵就穿上了庆氏的皮甲。
English: The apprentice soldiers of the Min, Gao, Chen and Bao clans put on the leather armor of the Kei clan.

古文：子尾抽桷击扉三，卢蒲癸自后刺子之。王何以戈击之，解其左肩。
现代文：子尾抽出槌子，在门上敲了三下，卢蒲癸从后边刺庆舍，王何用戈对他猛击，打下了庆舍的左肩。
English: Ziwei took out a mallet and knocked three times on the door. Lu Buya stabbed Qing She from behind. Wang He hit him with a club, knocking down Qing She's left shoulder.

古文：犹援庙桷，动于甍，以俎壶投杀人而后死。
现代文：庆舍还能攀着庙宇的椽子，震动了栋梁，把俎和壶向人扔去，杀死了人才死去。
English: Qing She could also climb the temple's rafters, shake the beams, throw the pestle and mortar at people, and kill people to die.

古文：遂杀庆绳、麻婴。
现代文：卢蒲癸等人就杀死了庆绳、麻婴。
English: Lu Puxuan and others killed Qing Rope and Po Baby.

古文：公惧。鲍国曰： 群臣为君故也。 
现代文：齐景公恐惧，鲍国说： 臣下们是为了君王的缘故。 
English: When Lord Qi Jing was afraid, Bao Guo said, "The vassals are marching for the sake of the king."

古文：陈须无以公归，税服而如内宫。
现代文：陈须无带着齐景公回去，脱去祭服进了内宫。
English: Chen Shumu took Qi Jing back with him, took off his ceremonial robes and entered the inner palace.

古文：庆封归，遇告乱者。
现代文：庆封回来，碰到报告动乱的人。
English: When he returned to Qingfeng, he met some people who reported the turmoil.

古文：丁亥，伐西门，弗克。
现代文：十九日，攻打西门，没有攻下。
English: On the 19th, they attacked the West Gate, but failed to capture it.

古文：还伐北门，克之。
现代文：回过来攻打北门，攻下了。
English: He turned around and attacked the north gate, capturing it.

古文：入伐内宫，弗克。
现代文：进城，攻打内宫，没有攻下。
English: Entered the city, attacked the Inner Court, but failed to capture Tome.

古文：反陈于岳，请战，弗许。
现代文：返回来，列阵于大街上，庆封请求决战，没有得到允许，就逃亡到鲁国来。
English: When they returned, they lined up on the street to celebrate the sealing and ask for a decisive battle. Without permission, they fled to Lu.

古文：遂来奔。献车于季武子，美泽可以鉴。
现代文：庆封把车子献给季武子，美丽光亮可以作镜子。
English: Qingfeng dedicated the car to Ji Wu Zi. The beautiful light can be used as a mirror.

古文：展庄叔见之，曰： 车甚泽，人必瘁，宜其亡也。 
现代文：展庄叔进见季武子，说： 车很光亮，人必然憔悴，无怪乎他要逃亡了。 
English: Uncle Zhan Zhuang went to see Ji Wu Zi and said: "The car is very bright, people are inevitably shy, no wonder he wants to escape."

古文：叔孙穆子食庆封，庆封氾祭。
现代文：叔孙穆子设便宴招待庆封，庆封先遍祭诸神。
English: His uncle and grandson, Mu Zi, held a banquet to invite Qingfeng, and Qingfeng was the first to offer sacrifices to the gods.

古文：穆子不说，使工为之诵《茅鸱》。亦不知。
现代文：穆子不高兴，让乐工为他诵《茅鸱》这首诗，他也不明白。
English: Mu Zi was not happy, so he asked the musicians to recite the poem "The Thatch" for him, but he did not understand it.

古文：既而齐人来让，奔吴。
现代文：不久以后齐国人前来责问，庆封又逃亡到吴国。
English: Soon after, the people of Qi came to interrogate him, and Qingfeng fled to Wu.

古文：吴句馀予之朱方，聚其族焉而居之，富于其旧。
现代文：吴子勾馀把朱方封给了庆封，他聚集了族人住在那里，比以前更富有。
English: Wu Zi Guo Yu gave Zhu Fangfeng to Qingfeng, he gathered the tribesmen to live there, richer than before.

古文：子服惠伯谓叔孙曰： 天殆富淫人，庆封又富矣。 
现代文：子服惠伯对叔孙穆子说： 上天大概要让坏人富有的，庆封又富有起来了。 
English: Zifu Huibo said to his great-uncle Mu Zi: Heaven has probably made bad people rich, and Qingfeng has become rich again.

古文：穆子曰： 善人富谓之赏。淫人富谓之殃。
现代文：叔孙穆子说： 好人富有叫做奖赏，坏人富有叫做灾殃。
English: Uncle Sun Mu Zi said: "If a good person is rich, it is called a reward, but if a bad person is rich, it is called a disaster."

古文：天其殃之也，其将聚而歼旃？ 
现代文：上天恐怕是降灾于他了，将要让他们聚集而一起被杀尽吧！ 
English: Heaven, I fear, has fallen upon him, and is about to let them gather and be killed together!

古文：癸巳，天王崩。
现代文：十一月二十五日，周灵王逝世。
English: On November 25, King Zhou Ling passed away.

古文：未来赴，亦未书，礼也。
现代文：没有发来讣告，《春秋》也没有记载，这是合于礼的。
English: No obituary notice has been sent, and there is no record of "Spring and Autumn," which is proper.

古文：崔氏之乱，丧群公子。故鉏在鲁，叔孙还在燕，贾在句渎之丘。
现代文：崔氏那次动乱，公子们各自逃亡，所以鉏在鲁国，叔孙还在燕国，贾在句渎之丘。
English: During the turmoil of the Cui clan, the nobles fled separately, so Zou was in the State of Lu, his uncles and grandsons were still in the State of Yan, and Jia was in the Hill of Sin.

古文：及庆氏亡，皆召之，具其器用而反其邑焉。
现代文：等到庆氏逃亡，把他们都召了回来，为他们准备了器物用具并且发还给他们封邑。
English: He waited until the Keishi had fled, called them all back, prepared utensils and equipment for them, and returned the fiefs to them.

古文：与晏子邶殿，其鄙六十。弗受。
现代文：另外封给晏子邶殿边上六十个城邑，晏子不接受。
English: In addition, sixty cities and towns on the edge of the palace were given to the sons of Yao, but the sons of Yao did not accept them.

古文：子尾曰： 富，人之所欲也，何独弗欲？ 
现代文：子尾说： 富有，是人所需要的。为什么独独您不要？ 
English: Ziwei said, "Being rich is what people need. Why don't you want to be alone?

古文：对曰： 庆氏之邑足欲，故亡。
现代文：晏子回答说： 庆氏的城邑满足了欲望，所以逃亡。
English: The cripple replied, "Keiji's cities satisfied my desires, so I fled."

古文：吾邑不足欲也，益之以邶殿，乃足欲。
现代文：我的城邑不能满足欲望，加上邶殿，就满足欲望了。
English: My city can't satisfy my desires. If I add the Imperial Palace, my desires will be satisfied.

古文：足欲，亡无日矣。
现代文：满足了欲望，离逃亡就没有几天了。
English: Having satisfied his desire, he was only a few days away from fleeing.

古文：在外，不得宰吾一邑。
现代文：逃亡在外边连一个城邑都不能主宰。
English: You can't rule a city if you're running away.

古文：不受邶殿，非恶富也，恐失富也。
现代文：不接受邶殿，不是讨厌富有，而是恐怕失去富有。
English: If you don't accept it, it's not because you hate being rich, but because you're afraid of losing it.

古文：且夫富如布帛之有幅焉，为之制度，使无迁也。
现代文：而且富有，就像布帛的有一定宽度。给它规定幅度，让它不能改变。
English: And he is rich, inasmuch as a piece of cloth is of a certain width, and its measure is fixed, and cannot be changed.

古文：夫民生厚而用利，于是乎正德以幅之，使无黜嫚，谓之幅利。
现代文：百姓，总是想生活丰厚，器用富饶，因此就要端正道德，而加以限制，让它不要不够，也不要过分，这叫做限制私利。
English: People always want to live a rich life and be resourceful, so they should rectify morality and restrict it, so that it is neither insufficient nor excessive. This is called restricting self-interest.

古文：利过则为败。
现代文：私利过了头就会败坏。
English: Excessive self-interest corrupts.

古文：吾不敢贪多，所谓幅也。 
现代文：我不敢贪多，就是所谓限制私利。 
English: I dare not covet more, which is the so-called restriction of self-interest.

古文：与北郭佐邑六十，受之。
现代文：齐景公赐给北郭佐六十个城邑，他接受了。
English: He accepted the sixty townships given by Prince Qi Jing to Beiguo Zuo.

古文：与子雅邑，辞多受少。
现代文：赐给子雅城邑，他婉辞了大多数而接受了少数。
English: To his son he gave the city of Yaxiang, and he accepted the few at the expense of the many.

古文：与子尾邑，受而稍致之。
现代文：赐给子尾城邑，他接受之后又奉还了。
English: It was given to Ziwei Township, and after he accepted it, it was returned to him.

古文：公以为忠，故有宠。
现代文：齐景公认为子尾忠诚，所以子尾很得宠信。
English: Qi Jing Gong believed that Zio was loyal, so Zio was very popular.

古文：释卢蒲嫳于北竟。
现代文：把卢蒲嫳放逐到齐国北部边境。
English: He banished Lu Bubao to the northern border of Qi.

古文：求崔杼之尸，将戮之，不得。
现代文：齐国人接着求取崔杼的尸体，准备戮尸，但没找到。
English: The people of Qi then asked for Cui Yao's body and prepared to butcher it, but they did not find it.

古文：叔孙穆子曰： 必得之。
现代文：叔孙穆子说： 一定找得着的。
English: Uncle Sun Mu Zi said, "I'm sure I can find it."

古文：武王有乱臣十人，崔杼其有乎？
现代文：武王有十个治世之臣，崔杼难道能有吗？
English: King Wu has ten reigning vassals, can Cui Zhen really have any more?

古文：不十人，不足以葬。 
现代文：不到十个人，不足以安葬。 
English: Less than ten people is not enough for a proper burial.

古文：既，崔氏之臣曰： 与我其拱璧，吾献其柩。 
现代文：过了不久，崔氏的家臣说： 把他的大玉璧给我，我献出他的棺材。 
English: After a while, Cui's vassal said, "Give me his jewels, and I will give you his coffin."

古文：于是得之。
现代文：因此就找到了崔杼的尸体。
English: That's why they found Choi Min's body.

古文：十二月乙亥朔，齐人迁庄公，殡于大寝。
现代文：十二月初一日，齐国人迁葬庄公，停棺在正寝。
English: On the first day of December, the people of Qi relocated the funeral of Zhuang Gong, and the coffin was placed in the upright position.

古文：以其棺尸崔杼于市。
现代文：用崔杼的棺材装着崔杼的尸体放在街上示众。
English: They used the coffin of Choe Son to carry the body of Choe Son and put it on display in the street.

古文：国人犹知之，皆曰： 崔子也。 
现代文：国内人们都知道，都说： 这是崔杼。 
English: People all over the country know and say: This is Choe Hee.

古文：为宋之盟故，公及宋公、陈侯、郑伯、许男如楚。
现代文：由于 宋国之盟 的缘故，鲁襄公和宋平公、陈哀公、郑简公、许悼公到了楚国。
English: As a result of the alliance of the Song Dynasty, Lu Xiang, Song Ping, Chen Ai, Zheng Jian, and Xu Eui arrived in Chu.

古文：公过郑，郑伯不在。伯有迋劳于黄崖，不敬。穆叔曰： 伯有无戾于郑，郑必有大咎。
现代文：鲁襄公经过郑国，郑简公不在国内，伯有到黄崖慰劳，表现得不恭敬，穆叔说： 伯有如果在郑国没有罪，郑国必然有大灾祸。
English: Lu Xianggong passed through Zheng Guo, Zheng Jiangong was not in the country, Bo Ye went to the Yellow Cliff to offer consolation, but he did not show respect. Mu Shu said: If Bo Ye does not have a crime in Zheng Guo, Zheng Guo will inevitably have a great disaster.

古文：敬，民之主也，而弃之，何以承守。
现代文：恭敬，是百姓的主宰，现在丢弃了它，如何能继承祖宗保持的家业？
English: Respectfully, is the master of the people, now abandoned it, how can inherit the family business maintained by the ancestors?

古文：郑人不讨，必受其辜。
现代文：郑国人不讨伐他，必然要遭到他的灾祸。
English: If the Zheng people do not fight against him, they will inevitably suffer his calamity.

古文：济泽之阿，行潦之苹藻，寘诸宗室，季兰尸之，敬也。敬可弃乎？ 
现代文：水边的薄土，路边积水中的浮萍水草，用来作祭品，季兰作为祭尸，这是由于恭敬。恭敬难道能丢弃吗？ 
English: The thin soil at the water's edge, the duckweed in the stagnant water by the roadside, used as offerings, and the lily of the valley as a sacrificial corpse, are due to reverence. Can reverence be discarded?

古文：及汉，楚康王卒。
现代文：到达汉水，楚康王死。
English: Arriving at Hanshui, Chu Kang Wang died.

古文：公欲反，叔仲昭伯曰： 我楚国之为，岂为一人行也。 
现代文：鲁襄公想要回去。叔仲昭伯说： 我们是为了楚国，哪里是为了一个人？继续走吧！ 
English: Lu Xiang wanted to go back. Uncle Zhong Zhao said: We are for Chu, where is for one person? Let's keep going!

古文：子服惠伯曰： 君子有远虑，小人从迩。
现代文：子服惠伯说： 君子有长远考虑，小人只看到眼前。
English: Zifu Huibo said: A gentleman has long-term considerations, while a villain only sees the immediate future.

古文：饥寒之不恤，谁遑其后？
现代文：饥寒都顾不上，谁有工夫顾到后果？
English: Hunger and cold can not be taken into account, who has time to consider the consequences?

古文：不如姑归也。 
现代文：不如暂且回去吧。 
English: Let's go back for a while.

古文：叔孙穆子曰： 叔仲子专之矣，子服子始学者也。 荣成伯曰： 远图者，忠也。 
现代文：叔孙穆子说： 叔仲子可以被专门任用了，子服子，是刚刚开始学习的人。 荣成伯说： 长远打算的人是忠诚的。 
English: Uncles and grandsons Mu Zi said: Uncle Zhong Zi can be specially appointed, and Zifu Zi is a person who has just begun to study.Rong Cheng Bo said: People with long-term plans are loyal.

古文：公遂行。
现代文：鲁襄公就继续前往楚国。
English: Lu Xiang continued to travel to Chu.

古文：宋向戌曰： 我一人之为，非为楚也。
现代文：宋国的向戌说： 我们是为了一个人，不是为了楚国。
English: Song Dynasty's Xiang Yu said: We are for one person, not for Chu.

古文：饥寒之不恤，谁能恤楚？
现代文：饥寒都顾不上，谁能顾得上楚国？
English: Hunger and cold can not be taken into account, who can take care of Chu?

古文：姑归而息民，待其立君而为之备。 
现代文：姑且回去而使百姓休息，等他们立了国君再戒备他们。 
English: Let him go and give the people rest, till they have appointed a king over them.

古文：宋公遂反。
现代文：宋平公就回去了。
English: So Song Pingguo went back home.

古文：楚屈建卒。赵文子丧之如同盟，礼也。
现代文：楚国的屈建死，赵文子去吊丧好像对待盟国一样，这是合于礼的。
English: When Qu Jian of Chu died, Zhao Wenzi went to pay his respects as if he were treating an ally, which was proper.

古文：王人来告丧。问崩日，以甲寅告。故书之，以征过也。
现代文：周朝的使者来鲁国通知丧事，问他周天子死去的日期，用十二月十六日作为回答，所以《春秋》也这样记载，用以惩戒过错。
English: An emissary of the Zhou Dynasty came to Lu to announce the funeral, asked him the date of Zhou Tianzi's death, and used December 16 as the answer, so "Spring and Autumn" also recorded this way to punish mistakes.

