古文：亲始死，鸡斯徒跣，扱上衽，交手哭。恻怛之心，痛疾之意，伤肾干肝焦肺，水浆不入口，三日不举火，故邻里为之糜粥以饮食之。
现代文：在父亲或是母亲刚去世的时候，孝子要脱下吉冠，露出发笋和裹髻的帛，光着脚，把深衣前襟的下摆掖在腰带上，双手交替捶着胸口痛哭，那种悲伤万分的心情，那种痛不欲生的心情，真是五内如焚，三天一点汤水都喝不下。家中不生火做饭，所以左右邻居只好熬点糜粥让他喝让他吃。
English: When the father or mother has just died, the filial son should take off the crown of righteousness, expose the scabbard and the wrapped scabbard, barefoot, put the hem of the deep-clothed forelock on the belt, and hold his hands alternately on his chest and weep bitterly. That sorrowful mood, that painful mood, is really burning inside, and I can't drink any soup for three days. There is no fire to cook at home, so the neighbors had to boil some porridge for him to drink and eat.

古文：夫悲哀在中，故形变于外也，痛疾在心，故口不甘味，身不安美也。
现代文：因为心中悲伤哀痛，所以面色憔悴，形容枯搞；因为痛不欲生，所以不想吃也不想喝，也不讲究穿什么为好。
English: Because the heart is sad and sorrowful, the face is haggard, described as withered; because the pain does not want to live, it does not want to eat or drink, and it is better not to pay attention to what to wear.

古文：三日而敛，在床曰尸，在棺曰柩，动尸举柩，哭踊无数。
现代文：死后三天大殓，死人放在床上叫做尸，装进棺材叫做柩。每一次迁动尸体，每一次抬起灵枢，孝子都要尽情地痛哭跺脚。
English: Three days after death, the dead person is called a corpse when placed on the bed, and is called a coffin when placed in the coffin. Every time the body is moved, every time the soul is lifted, the filial son must weep bitterly and stomp his feet.

古文：恻怛之心，痛疾之意，悲哀志懑气盛，故袒而踊之，所以动体安心下气也。
现代文：那种万分悲伤的心情，那种痛不欲生的心情，悲哀烦闷，达到了即将爆炸的地步，所以孝子才袒露左臂，跺脚痛哭，以此来安定情绪，使烦闷之气得到发泄。
English: That extremely sad mood, that morose mood, sad and bored, reached the point of imminent explosion, so the filial son only bared his left arm, stomped his feet and cried, in order to stabilize his mood and vent his boredom.

古文：妇人不宜袒，故发胸击心爵踊，殷殷田田，如坏墙然，悲哀痛疾之至也。
现代文：妇人不适合袒露左臂，所以敞开外衣前襟，双手捶胸，两脚一齐跺地，乒乒乓乓，就像筑墙一般，这都是悲哀万分、经》上说： 捶胸跺脚，痛哭流涕痛不欲生的表现啊发出的声音！
English: It is not suitable for a woman to expose her left arm, so she opens the front of her coat, rubs her chest with both hands, stomps her feet together, ping-pong, like building a wall, all of which are very sad, the sutra says: "Stomping on the chest, stomping on the feet, weeping bitterly, the expression of not wanting to live ah, the sound emitted!

古文：故曰： 辟踊哭泣，哀以送之。
现代文：所以《孝，用悲伤的心情送别死者。 
English: Therefore, "Filial piety, bid farewell to the deceased with a sad heart.

古文：送形而往，迎精而反也。 
现代文：把死者的形骸送到墓地埋葬，把死者的灵魂迎接回来加以安顿。
English: The remains of the deceased are sent to the cemetery for burial, and the soul of the deceased is welcomed back and settled.

古文：其往送也，望望然、汲汲然如有追而弗及也；其反哭也，皇皇然若有求而弗得也。
现代文：在送葬的时候，孝子眼睛看着前面，显出焦急的神情，就像是在追赶死去的亲人而又追不上的样子。葬毕哭着返回的时候，显出惶恐不安的样子，就像寻找亲人而又找不到的样子。
English: At the time of the funeral, the filial son looked ahead with his eyes and showed an anxious expression, as if he was chasing the dead relatives and could not catch up. When he returned crying after the funeral, he showed a frightened look, as if he was looking for relatives and could not find them.

古文：故其往送也如慕，其反也如疑。求而无所得之也，入门而弗见也，上堂又弗见也，入室又弗见也。
现代文：所以孝子在前往送葬的路上，就像幼儿思慕父母那样哭泣不止；在葬毕返回的路上，又像是担心亲人的神灵不能跟着一道回来而迟疑不前。满腹心事而未曾了结，回到家里，推门一看，却怎么也见不到亲人的影子；上堂再看，还是见不到亲人的影子；进到亲人的住室再看，还是见不到亲人的影子。
English: Therefore, on the way to the funeral, the filial son kept crying like a toddler pining for his parents; on the way back after the funeral, he hesitated as if he was worried that the gods of his relatives could not come back together. Full of heartache and unfinished, he returned home, pushed the door open, but could not see the shadow of his relatives; when he went to the hall, he still could not see the shadow of his relatives; when he went into his relatives' living room, he still could not see the shadow of his relatives.

古文：亡矣丧矣！不可复见矣！
现代文：这样看来，亲人是真正地死了，走了，再也不能相见了！
English: In this way, relatives are truly dead, gone, never to be seen again!

古文：故哭泣辟踊，尽哀而止矣。
现代文：所以哭天嚎地，捶胸跺脚，要把心中的悲哀尽情发泄，只有这样才觉得心中好受点。
English: Therefore, crying hysterically, beating one's chest and stomping one's feet, and venting one's sorrow to the full, is the only way to feel better.

古文：心怅焉怆焉、惚焉忾焉，心绝志悲而已矣。
现代文：内心无限的凋怅，无限的悲伤，无限的恍惚，无限的感叹，除了伤心和悲哀以外，还有什么办法呢！
English: The infinite withering of the heart, the infinite sorrow, the infinite trance, the infinite lamentation, what else is there to do but to be sad and sorrowful!

古文：祭之宗庙，以鬼飨之，徼幸复反也。
现代文：在宗庙中致祭，把亲人当作鬼神来祭飨，也不过是希望亲人的灵魂能够幸而回来罢了。
English: Offering sacrifices in the ancestral temple, and offering up relatives as ghosts and gods, is nothing more than hoping that the souls of relatives can return with good fortune.

古文：成圹而归，不敢入处室，居于倚庐，哀亲之在外也；寝苫枕块，哀亲之在土也。
现代文：孝子把亲人在墓穴中埋好以后从墓地返回家中，不敢进入自己的寝室居住，而是住在简陋的倚庐里，就是因为哀伤死去的亲人还在荒郊野外；睡在草苫上，拿土块当枕头，是因为哀伤亲人躺在泥土之中。
English: After the filial son buried his relatives in the grave, he returned home from the cemetery. He did not dare to enter his bedroom to live, but lived in a simple reclining chair, because the grieving dead relatives were still in the wilderness; he slept on a straw mat and used a clod as a pillow, because the grieving relatives were lying in the dirt.

古文：故哭泣无时，服勤三年，思慕之心，孝子之志也，人情之实也。
现代文：所以想起来就哭，没有定时，服丧三年，忧心劳思，曰夜思慕，这些都是孝子尽孝的表现，也是人的感情的真实流露。
English: Therefore, crying when you think about it, not having a set time, mourning for three years, worrying and thinking, saying and thinking at night, these are all manifestations of filial piety, and are also the true expression of human feelings.

古文：或问曰： 死三日而后敛者，何也？ 
现代文：有人问道： 人死后三天才入敛，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Some people asked: Why is it that it takes three days after a person's death for them to come to their senses?

古文：曰：孝子亲死，悲哀志懑，故匍匐而哭之，若将复生然，安可得夺而敛之也。
现代文：回答是： 孝子在父母刚刚去世时，心中哀痛，所以趴在尸体上痛哭，好像亲人还能复活似的，人们怎么可以不顾及他的感受而强行马上入敛呢？
English: The answer is: When a filial son's parents have just died, his heart is sad, so he lies down on the corpse and weeps bitterly, as if his relatives could still be revived. How can people ignore his feelings and forcibly restrain him immediately?

古文：故曰三日而后敛者，以俟其生也；三日而不生，亦不生矣。
现代文：所以说三天以后入殓，是为了等待死者复活。
English: That is why it is said that the dead are buried after three days, in order to wait for the resurrection of the dead.

古文：孝子之心亦益衰矣；家室之计，衣服之具，亦可以成矣；亲戚之远者，亦可以至矣。
现代文：三天以后还不复生，那就说明没有复生的希望了，孝子企盼父母复生的信念也逐渐动摇了；而且在这三天之内，有关治丧花费的筹划，入敛衣物的准备，也可以完成了；远方的亲属也可以赶来了。
English: If there is no revival after three days, it means there is no hope of revival, and the faith of the filial son hoping for the revival of his parents is gradually shaken; moreover, within these three days, the planning of funeral expenses, the preparation of clothing, can also be completed; distant relatives can also arrive.

古文：是故圣人为之断决以三日为之礼制也。
现代文：所以圣人就根据这种情况做出决断，把死后三天才入敛作为礼制定了下来。
English: Therefore, the saint made a decision based on this situation and established the three-day abstinence after death as a ritual.

古文：或问曰： 冠者不肉袒，何也？ 
现代文：有人问道： 在戴着冠的时候不能袒露左臂，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Someone asked: Why can't you show your left arm while wearing a crown?

古文：曰：冠，至尊也，不居肉袒之体也，故为之免以代之也。
现代文：回答是： 冠，是最尊贵的头饰，当一个人赤膀露肉时是不能戴冠的，否则就是对冠的裹读，所以特地制作免来代替冠。
English: The answer was: A crown is the most precious headgear. When a person is bare-chested, he cannot wear a crown. Otherwise, it would be a misreading of the crown, so it was specially made to replace the crown.

古文：然则秃者不免，伛者不袒，跛者不踊，非不悲也；身有锢疾，不可以备礼也。
现代文：这样一来，秃子就不用戴免，驼背的人就不用袒露左臂，瘸子哭时就不用跺脚，这并不是他们不悲哀，而是他们身体有不可治愈的疾病，不可能完全依照礼节去做。
English: In this way, bald people do not have to wear a hairpiece, hunchbacks do not have to bare their left arm, and cripples do not have to stomp their feet when they cry. This does not mean that they are not sad, but that they have an incurable disease in their body, and it is impossible to do it completely according to etiquette.

古文：故曰：丧礼唯哀为主矣。
现代文：所以说，丧礼只是以悲哀为主。
English: That is why funerals are mainly sad.

古文：女子哭泣悲哀，击胸伤心；男子哭泣悲哀，稽颡触地无容，哀之至也。
现代文：女子哭泣悲哀，捶胸伤心；男子哭泣悲哀，叩头触地，不注意仪容：这都是极度悲哀的表现。
English: Women weep and beat their chests in grief; men weep and bow their heads and pay no attention to their appearance: these are all signs of extreme grief.

古文：或问曰： 免者以何为也？ 
现代文：有人问道： 童子为什么也要戴免呢？ 
English: Someone asked: Why does a boy have to wear a cap?

古文：曰：不冠者之所服也。
现代文：回答说：免是尚未加冠的童子所戴的东西。
English: And he said, It is the robe of him that hath no crown.

古文：《礼》曰： 童子不缌，唯当室缌。 
现代文：《仪礼》上说： 童子不为族人有绍麻之亲的人服绍，只有当室的童子才为族人服绍。 
English: "Rituals" said: A boy does not wear a shawl for a person who is a relative of the tribe, only the boy in charge of the room wears a shawl for the tribe.

古文：缌者其免也，当室则免而杖矣。或问曰： 杖者何也？ 
现代文：童子当室，就要为有练麻之亲的族人服细，服绍就要戴免，甚至还要拄丧杖。有人问道： 丧杖是用什么做的呢？ 
English: When a boy is in charge of a family, he has to dress up for the members of the tribe who have relatives who practice hemp cultivation, and he has to wear and take off his uniform, and even carry a funeral stick. Someone asked: What is the funeral stick made of?

古文：曰：竹、桐一也。
现代文：回答说：有用竹子做的，有用桐木做的。
English: He replied, "It's useful if it's made of bamboo or paulownia.

古文：故为父苴杖苴杖，竹也；为母削杖削杖，桐也。
现代文：无论用什么做的，其作用是一样的。所以为父亲用直杖，直杖是用竹子做成的；为母亲用削杖，削杖是用桐木削成的。
English: No matter what it is made of, its function is the same. Therefore, for the father, use a cane, the cane is made of bamboo; for the mother, use a cane, the cane is made of paulownia.

古文：或问曰： 杖者以何为也？ 
现代文：有人问道： 为什么要拄孝棒呢? 
English: Someone asked: Why do we have to be filial?

古文：曰：孝子丧亲，哭泣无数，服勤三年，身病体羸，以杖扶病也。
现代文：答道: 孝子在父母死后，经常哭泣，服丧忧心劳思三年，身体虚弱，用孝棒来扶持病体。
English: Answer: After the death of their parents, filial sons and daughters often cry, grieve for three years, are physically weak, and use the filial rod to support the sick body.

古文：则父在不敢杖矣，尊者在故也；堂上不杖，辟尊者之处也；堂上不趋，示不遽也。
现代文：然而父亲健在就不敢拄孝棒，是为了避尊者的嫌疑。在堂上不拄孝棒，是为了避开尊者所处的地方。在堂上不快步走，表示不急促。
English: However, when his father was alive, he did not dare to walk with a stick, in order to avoid suspicion from the venerable one. In the hall, he did not walk with a stick, in order to avoid the place where the venerable one was. In the hall, he did not walk fast, indicating that he was not in a hurry.

古文：此孝子之志也，人情之实也，礼义之经也，非从天降也，非从地出也，人情而已矣。
现代文：这些都是孝子尽孝的表现，是人们感情的真实流露，也是礼的含义的主要部分。这些不是从天上掉下来的，也不是从地里冒出来的，而是出于人的本性。 
English: These are all manifestations of filial piety, the true expression of people's feelings, and also the main part of the meaning of etiquette. These do not fall from the sky, nor do they emerge from the ground, but come from human nature.

