古文：戊寅正月初一日阴雨复绵连，至初六稍止。
现代文：戊寅年正月初一日又是阴雨连绵，到初六才稍稍止住。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year of Wu Yin, it was cloudy and raining continuously, and it did not stop until the sixth day of the first month.

古文：陆君往宾州，十一日归。
现代文：陆君前去宾州，十一日归来。
English: Lu Jun went to Pennsylvania and came back on the 11th.

古文：十三日游独山岩，又小独山。
现代文：十三日游览独山岩，又游了小独山。
English: On the 13th, we toured the Dokuzan Rock and swam through the Little Dokuzan.

古文：十五日雨中往游周泊隘。
现代文：十五日雨中去游览周泊隘。
English: On the 15th, I went to visit Zhouba Pass in the rain.

古文：隘在三里东二十五里。
现代文：周泊隘在三里城东二十五里处。
English: Zhoubo Pass is located 25 miles east of Sanli City.

古文：晚酌南楼，观龙灯甚盛。
现代文：晚上在南楼饮酒，观赏龙灯，非常热闹。
English: In the evening, drinking alcohol in the south building, watching dragon lanterns, it was very lively.

古文：二十七日同陆伯恒游白崖堡岩洞。
现代文：二十七日同陆伯恒游览白崖堡的岩洞。
English: On the 27th, he and Lu Boheng toured the rock cave of Baiya Castle.

古文：洞在杨渡西，北向高洞三层，又东南向深洞，内分二支。
现代文：岩洞在杨渡西面，朝向北方，有三层高洞，又有朝向东南的深洞，洞内分为两个支洞。
English: The rock cave in the west of Yangdu, facing north, has a three-storey high cave, and a deep cave facing southeast. The cave is divided into two subsidiary caves.

古文：入宿白崖哨官秦余家。
现代文：到白崖堡哨官秦徐家住宿。
English: To stay at the home of Qin Xu, the sentry of Baiya Castle.

古文：二十八日陆公昆仲至，同游青狮岩。
现代文：二十八日陆公兄弟到来，一同游览青狮岩。
English: On the 28th, the Lukong brothers arrived and toured the Blue Lion Rock together.

古文：岩在杨渡东南，过渡四里乃至。
现代文：岩洞在杨渡东南，过了渡口四里才到。
English: The cave is in the south-east of Yangdu, four miles past the ferry port.

古文：其岩东西直透，东门平，西门高，洞内下甚宽平，上两层中空透顶。
现代文：这个岩洞东西两头一直穿通，东洞口平，西洞口高，洞内下边非常宽敞平整，上两层中间空阔通到山顶。
English: The east and west ends of this cave are connected all the way through. The east mouth of the cave is flat and the west mouth is high. The lower side of the cave is very spacious and flat, and the middle of the upper two layers is open to the top of the mountain.

古文：西门内可望而高不可上，须由山北小窦攀崖而入，下临西门之顶。
现代文：西洞口内可以望得见但高得不能上去，必须由山北的小洞攀着山崖进去，下临西洞口的顶上。
English: You can see the inside of the west cave entrance, but it's too high to climb up. You have to climb up the cliff from the small cave on the north side of the mountain and descend to the top of the west cave entrance.

古文：又东入深奥，又北透重门，俱在绝壁之上。
现代文：又向东进入深处，又向北钻出两层洞口，都是在绝壁之上。
English: Further east into the depths, and further north, two-storey openings were drilled, both on top of cliffs.

古文：是日酌于洞中，有孙、张、王三指挥使同饮。
现代文：这一天在洞中饮酒，有姓孙、姓张、姓王的三个指挥使同饮。
English: On this day, drinking in the cave, there are three conductors surnamed Sun, surnamed Zhang and surnamed Wang who drink together.

古文：既乃观打鱼于江畔，抵暮归，乃病。
现代文：随后在江畔观看打鱼，到天黑归来，便病了。
English: He then watched the fishing on the riverbank, and when he returned in the dark, he fell ill.

古文：二十九、三十两日余卧疴ｋē病东阁。
现代文：二十九日、三十日两天我卧病在东阁。
English: On the 29th and 30th, I was bedridden in the East Pavilion for two days.

古文：天雨复不止。
现代文：天又不停地下雨。
English: It rained again and again.

古文：二月初一日稍霁。
现代文：二月初一日稍稍晴开。
English: On the first day of February, the weather cleared up slightly.

古文：初二日复雨。
现代文：初二日又下雨。
English: It rained again on the first two days.

古文：是日余病少愈，乃起。
现代文：这天我的病情稍微好转些，于是起床来。
English: This day I felt a little better, so I got up.

古文：初三日雨中复往青狮潭观打鱼。
现代文：初三日在雨中又去青狮潭观看打鱼。
English: On the first three days, I went to Qingshi Lake in the rain to watch the fishing.

古文：先是张挥使即指挥使简称言，青狮岩之南有鸡笼山，亦有大岩，故陆公以骑送余至此，命张往同游。
现代文：这之前张指挥使说起，青狮岩的南面有座鸡笼山，也有个大岩洞，所以陆公派马送我到此地，命令张指挥使一同去游洞。
English: Prior to this, Commander Zhang said that there was a chicken coop mountain and a large cave on the south side of Qingshi Rock, so Lu Gong sent a horse to take me to this place and ordered Commander Zhang to go to the cave together.

古文：张言雨中不可入，且久无游者，固阻余，仍冒雨归。
现代文：姓张的说雨中不能进洞，而且很长时间没有人去游了，坚决阻止我去，仍冒雨归来。
English: The man surnamed Zhang said that he couldn't go into the cave in the rain, and that no one had gone swimming for a long time. He resolutely stopped me from going and still returned in the rain.

古文：自后余欲辞陆公行，陆公择十三日为期。
现代文：自那以后我打算告辞陆公上路，陆公择定十三日作为动身的日期。
English: From then on, I planned to say goodbye to Lu Gong on the road. Lu Gong chose the 13th as the departure date.

古文：连日多雨，至初九稍霁。
现代文：连日来多雨，到初九日稍微晴开。
English: It rained for days on end, but it cleared up a bit on the 9th.

古文：陆公命内侄刘玉池、嘉生昆仲并玄芝、伯恒各分日为宴饯余。
现代文：陆公命令内侄刘玉池、刘嘉生兄弟及陆玄芝、陆伯恒各人分别每天为我设宴饯行。
English: Lu Gong ordered his nephews Liu Yuqi, Liu Jiasheng brothers, Lu Xianzhi and Lu Boheng to set up a banquet for me every day.

古文：因出演武场，伯恒、二刘为走马命射。
现代文：于是到演武场，陆伯恒、两个姓刘的为我跑马射箭。
English: So I went to the martial arts arena, where Lu Boheng and two surnamed Liu ran for me and shot arrows.

古文：演武场周围有土城，即凤化县址也，在城东。
现代文：演武场周围有土城墙，就是凤化县的旧址，在城东。
English: There are earthen walls around the martial arts arena, which is the former site of Fenghua County, in the east of the city.

古文：十一日早闻雨声，余甚恐为行路之阻。
现代文：十一日早晨听见雨声，我十分担心成为我上路的障碍。
English: When I heard the rain on the morning of the 11th, I was very worried that it would be an obstacle to my journey.

古文：及起，则霁色渐开。
现代文：到起床时，却见天色渐渐晴开。
English: By the time I got up, however, the sky was gradually clearing.

古文：至晚，饯余于署后山亭。
现代文：到晚上，东道主在衙门后山的亭子中为我饯行。
English: In the evening, my hosts took me for a walk in the pavilion on the hill behind the gate.

古文：月色皎然，松影零乱，如濯冰壶，为之醉饮。
现代文：月光皎洁，松影零乱，如沐浴在盛冰的玉壶中，因此饮醉了。
English: The moonlight is dazzling, pine shadows are scattered, as if bathed in a jade jug of ice, so drunk.

古文：十二日日色甚丽。
现代文：十二日阳光十分艳丽。
English: On the 12th, the sun was very bright.

古文：自至三里，始见此竟日之晴朗。
现代文：自从来到三里城，这才见到整天晴朗的天气。
English: Since I came to Sanli, I have only seen sunny weather all day.

古文：是日陆公自饯余，且以厚赆ｊìｎ钱财或礼物为馈，并马牌、荐书相畀，极缱绻，且订久要焉。
现代文：这一天陆公亲自为我饯行，并且拿出厚重的礼物作为馈赠，连同马牌、推荐信相送，极尽难分难舍的情意，而且讲定日后长期相会。
English: On this day, Lu Gong personally walked for me, and took out a heavy gift as a gift, together with a horse plate and a letter of recommendation. It was extremely difficult to part with, and they agreed to meet for a long time in the future.

古文：何意天末得此知己，岂非虞仲翔即虞翻，三国时吴国经学家，孔融曾看过他的《易》学著作，认为以他为知己而一生无憾，后以其名代称知己之所为开颐者乎？十三日五鼓，雨声复作。既起，雨止，雷声殷殷。
现代文：何曾想到天涯末路会得到这样的知己，莫非是虞仲翔那样使孔融为之开颜而笑的人吗？十三日五更时，又响起雨声。
English: Who would have thought that the end of the world would get such a confidant, could it be someone like Yu Zhongxiang, who made Kong Rong smile? At 5:00 a.m. on the 13th, the rain started again.

古文：陆公亲为治装毕，既饭，送至辕门，命数骑送余。
现代文：起床后，雨停了，雷声隆隆。陆公亲自为我整理行装，饭后，送到辕门，命令数名骑兵送我。
English: After I got up, the rain stopped and thunder rumbled. Lu Gong personally sorted out and packed for me. After the meal, he took me to the gate and ordered several cavalrymen to escort me.

古文：遂东出东门，过演武场，抵琴水桥，伯恒与苏友陈仲容别去。
现代文：于是向东走出东门，经演武场，抵达琴水桥，陆伯恒与苏州友人陈仲容告别去了。
English: So he walked east out of the east gate, through the martial arts arena, and arrived at Qinshui Bridge. Lu Boheng said goodbye to his Suzhou friend Chen Zhongrong.

古文：又一哨官王姓者以骑来，与刘玉池同送渡琴水桥。
现代文：又有一个姓王的哨官率领骑兵来到，与刘玉池一同送过琴水桥。
English: Another sentry, surnamed Wang, led the cavalry and accompanied Liu Yuchi across Qinshui Bridge.

古文：其石山东即罗洪洞贼。营北一里有墟场，趁墟者多贼人。
现代文：又向东一里，向北进山，升登在山坡土陇之间，向东北走十四里，抵达最高的一座石峰的山麓，有座土阜在西面连缀在石峰之下，这里是左营。左营北边一里有处集市，赶集的人大多是贼人。
English: Another mile to the east, north into the mountains, climb up between the mounds on the hillside, walk fourteen miles to the northeast, reach the foot of the highest stone peak, there is a clay pavement in the west under the stone peak, here is Zuoying. There is a market in the north of Zuoying, and most of the people gathering are thieves.

古文：然墟无他物，肉米而已。
现代文：不过集市上没有其他东西，只有米肉而已。
English: But there was nothing else in the market, just rice.

古文：又北行，皆东石西土。
现代文：又往北行，东面都是石山西边是土山。
English: Heading north again, there are stone mountains to the east and dirt hills to the west.

古文：共七里，有石崖夹道，竖峰当门，乃金鸡山也。
现代文：共走七里，有石崖夹在道旁，山峰迎面竖立，是金鸡山。
English: A total of seven miles, there is a cliff clamped on the side of the road, the mountain peaks facing each other, is the Jinji Mountain.

古文：透山腋二里，北复开间峡北去。
现代文：穿越山侧二里，北面又分开一线峡谷向北而去。
English: After crossing the mountain side for two miles, the north side is separated by a line of canyons to the north.

古文：又十里，为后营。
现代文：又走十里，是后营。
English: Another ten miles and it was the back camp.

古文：哨官杨迎款甚勤。杨号耀先，闽漳州人。
现代文：营房在西面土山之上，东面一支山脉是参差的石峰，西面一支却是盘绕交错的土山。营房在山头，土山的形状如像船舶。杨哨官迎接款待十分殷勤。
English: The barracks are on top of a hill in the west, a mountain range in the east is a jagged stone peak, and one in the west is a winding and staggered hill. The barracks are at the top of the hill, and the hill is shaped like a ship. Yang Sentinel welcomes the hospitality very attentively.

古文：欲往游东岩，以雨色复来，恐暮，乃止。
现代文：想去游览东岩，因为雨色又来，担心天晚，便住下了。
English: I wanted to visit Dongyan, but because it was raining again, I was worried about the weather, so I stayed.

古文：自旧年十二月廿三日入三里，至今二月十三日由三里起程，共五十日。
现代文：自从去年十二月二十三日进人三里城，到今天二月十三日由三里城起程，共五十天。
English: It has been a total of 50 days since I entered Sanli City on December 23 last year and departed from Sanli City on February 13.

古文：三里砖城，周回大三里。
现代文：三里城是砖城，周围大三里。
English: Sanli City is a brick city, surrounded by large Sanli.

古文：东西皆石山排列，自后营分枝南下，中有土山一支，至此而尽，又起一圆泡，以城环之。
现代文：东西两面都排列着石山，从后营分出支脉南下，中间有一支土山，到此地便完了，又突起一座圆泡形的山，筑以城墙环绕着它。
English: On both sides, east and west, there are stone hills. From the rear of the camp, there is a branch to the south. In the middle, there is a dirt hill. It ends here, and a bubble-shaped mountain protrudes and is surrounded by a city wall.

古文：西抵苏坑，五十五里。纵横皆七十里。
现代文：参将府就背靠圆泡建起衙门。城墙坍塌了很久，并且没有望楼，陆公特意增修整治了女墙，在三道城门上创建了城楼。
English: The general staff built the gate on the back of the round bubble. The city wall collapsed for a long time, and there was no watchtower. Lu Gong specially repaired the female wall and created a city tower on the three gates.

古文：名 三里 者，以昔为贼踞，王文成即王守仁也平八寨，始清出之，编户三里：一曰上无虞，二曰下无虞，三曰顺业里。
现代文：南门之外，又建成南楼，以增强这一方的地理形势。又往前去，是东西两条溪水在汇水桥汇流，而独山岩又矗立在中央成为下游的门户，前方又有独山村所在的山成为第二层门户。三里的地界，南面越过杨渡抵达鸡笼山，北面越过后营到达山脊分支的山岭，东面抵达周泊隘，西面到达苏坑，纵横都是七十里。
English: Beyond the south gate, the south tower was built to enhance the geographical situation on this side. Going forward, the east and west streams converge at the water bridge, and the rock of Doku Mountain stands in the center to become the gateway to the downstream, and the mountain where the Doku Mountain Village is located in front becomes the second-level gateway. The three-mile land boundary crosses Yangdu in the south to reach the Chicken Cage Mountain, crosses Houying in the north to reach the mountain ridge of the ridge branch, reaches Zhoubo Pass in the east, and reaches Sukeng in the west, with a length and width of seventy miles.

古文：今顺业北境与八寨接壤者十余里，那历、玄岸并蓝漳皆贼踞为巢。
现代文：起名叫 三里 的原因，因为从前被盗贼盘踞，王文成平定八寨，这才把他们清理出来，按户口编为三个里：一里叫上无虞，二里叫下无虞，三里叫顺业里。
English: The reason for the name "Sanli" is that Wang Wensheng used to subdue eight villages that had been occupied by thieves, and only then did he clear them out and organize them into three "li" according to their hukou: one "li" is called "Shang Mugu," two "li" is called "Shang Mugu," and three "li" is called "Shun Ye Li."

古文：曾置凤化县，即今演武场周围土城，遗址尚存。
现代文：曾经设置过凤化县，随后废除，后来把南丹卫迁到此地，而且设了参将府镇守这里。
English: Fenghua County was once set up, then abolished, and later Nantanwei was moved to this place, and the town guard of the General Headquarters was set up here.

古文：随废，后以南丹卫迁此，而设参府镇之。田粮初输卫收，后归上林县，而民以不便，复纷纷议归卫矣。
现代文：最初按田地征收的税粮由卫里收缴，后来拨归上林县，可百姓认为不方便，又在纷纷商议归还卫里了。
English: The grain tax, which was initially levied according to fields, was collected by Weili and later allocated to Shanglin County, but the people considered it inconvenient and are now discussing the return of Weili.

古文：三里以洋渡为前门，有江西自上林县大明山发源，东流至此，横为杨渡。
现代文：三里城以洋渡作为前门，有李依江从西面上林县的大明山发源，向东流到此地，横流为杨渡。
English: Sanli City takes Yangdu as its front gate, and the Li Yijiang River flows from the source of Daming Mountain in Lin County on the west to this place on the east, with Yangdu as its cross-stream.

古文：渡之南则石峰离立，若建标列戟；渡之北则石峰回合，中开一峡，外凑如门，有小江自北而南，注于洋渡下流，溯小江西岸入峡，宛转俱从两界石山中，北行数里，两界山渐开渐拓，中环平畴，有独山村界其中，为外案，又有独山岩为内案。
现代文：渡口的南面就是石峰成排并立，如标杆竖起似剑戟排列；渡口的北面是回绕合拢的石峰，中间裂开一条峡谷，外边凑拢如像一道门，有条小江自北往南流，注入洋渡的下游，就是汇水桥下合流的水流了。溯小江西岸进入峡中，弯弯转转都是在两列石山中，往北行数里，两列山渐渐开阔起来，中间环绕成平坦的田野，有独山村隔在其中，一座石山当中立在溪流西面是外层的案山，又有独山岩作为内层的案山。
English: On the south side of the ferry, there are stone peaks standing side by side in rows, like a yardstick standing up and arranged like a sword; on the north side of the ferry, there are stone peaks circling back and forth. A canyon opens in the middle, and the outside is close together like a door. There is a stream flowing from the north to the south, and it flows into the downstream of the ocean crossing, which is the confluence of the water flow under the confluence bridge. The west bank of the small river enters the gorge, and the bends and turns are in the two rows of stone mountains. A few miles to the north, the two rows of mountains gradually open up

古文：于是东西两溪之水前合而南去，北面石山愈开，土山自北而来，结为城治焉。
现代文：在这里东西两条溪水在前方会合后往南流去，北面的石山愈加开阔，土山从北面延伸而来，盘结为三里城的治所。
English: Here, the east-west two streams meet in the front and flow southward, the stone mountain in the north becomes more and more open, and the earthen mountain extends from the north, coalescing into the sanli city.

古文：城北土山中悬，直自后营西北夭矫而下，至此而尽。
现代文：城北的土山悬在中央，一直从后营西北方屈曲曲折往下而来，到这里便到了头。
English: The earthen hill to the north of the city hangs in the centre, twisting and turning all the way down from the north-west of the rear camp.

古文：其东西两界石山回合如抱，愈远愈密，若天成石郭，另辟一函盖于中者，盖西来之脊高峙为大明山，分支东走，环绕于苏坑南北者，遂为西界之障；又北转而东抵后营之后，乃中分土山一支，直南四十里而结三里，若萼中之房；其分支东度者，又南转环绕为东界之障。
现代文：那东西两列石山回绕拢来如像围抱一样，越远处越密集，好似天然形成的石头城墙，另外辟有一个盒盖在中央的样子。大体上，西面来的山脊高高耸起成为大明山，分出支脉向东延伸，环绕在苏坑南北两面的，便成西面的屏障；又从北面转向东抵达后营的后面，于是从中间分出一支土山，一直往南四十里便盘结为三里城，好像花警中的花房；那分支向东延伸的，又向南转环绕成东面的屏障。
English: In general, the ridge from the west rises high to become the Daming Mountain, and the branch extends to the east, encircling the north and south sides of the Sukeng, forming a barrier on the west side; and it turns to the east from the north to reach the back of the rear camp, and then a hill is separated from the middle, and it is coiled into a three-mile city all the way to the south for forty miles, like a flower house in the flower guard; the branch extending to the east, and turning to the south to encircle the barrier on the east side.

古文：故周泊今作刁泊、苏坑两处，为三里东西之腋，正中与城治相对。
现代文：所以周泊隘、苏坑两处，是三里城东西两面的肘腋，与正中的三里城治所相对。
English: Therefore, the two places of Zhoupo Pass and Sukeng are the elbows of the east and west sides of Sanli City, opposite the central Sanli City Government.

古文：其处最拓，若萼之中折处焉。
现代文：此处东西最为开阔，好似花尊中间裂开之处。
English: Here things are at their most open, like the split in the middle of a flower.

古文：由周泊而南，渐转渐合，至洋渡而西向临溪，则青狮庙之后崖也。
现代文：由周泊隘往南延，渐渐转过来渐渐合拢，到洋渡便向西面临溪流，就是青狮庙后面的山崖。
English: It stretches from Zhoubo Pass to the south, gradually turns around and gradually closes, and faces the stream to the west at Yangdu, which is the cliff behind the Blue Lion Temple.

古文：由苏坑而南，渐转渐合，至洋渡而东向临溪，则白崖堡之东崖也。
现代文：由苏坑往南延，渐渐转过来渐渐合拢，到洋渡便向东面临溪流，就是白崖堡东面的山崖。
English: It extends southward from Sukeng, gradually turns around and gradually closes, and faces the stream to the east at Yangdu, which is the cliff to the east of Baiya Castle.

古文：二崖凑合于洋渡，即所入之前门，若萼之合尖处焉。
现代文：两座山崖在洋渡会合，就是进城的前门，好像花粤合拢的尖角处一样。
English: The junction of the two cliffs in Yangdu is the front door to the city, just like the sharp corner where Huayuang closes.

古文：东西两溪，俱在两界石山之内，土山北自后营盘伏而来，两源遂夹而与俱。
现代文：东西两条溪流，都在两列石山之内，土山从北面的后营盘旋起伏而来，两条水流便夹在两旁与它一同流来。
English: The two streams, east and west, are both within the two rows of stone mountains. The earthen mound spirals and undulates from the northern rear camp, and the two streams flow with it on both sides.

古文：西界者，南至罗墟今作罗圩北，又合一绕城西，又西抵石村，合汛塘之水，乃东南出汇水桥下，合东溪。
现代文：在西面的，南面流到罗墟北边，又会合一条西来的水流，曲折绕到城西，又往西流抵石村，会合汛塘的水，于是向东南流到汇水桥下，会合东边的溪流。
English: In the west, it flows from the south to the north of Luoshu, and meets a stream coming from the west, twists and turns to the west of the city, and flows west to Shicun, meeting the water of Qutang, and then flows southeast to the bottom of Huishui Bridge, meeting the stream on the east.

古文：东界者，南至琴水岩东，又南出琴水桥，又合一东来之水，曲折抵东南石峰下，又穿流山峡中，乃西出而合西溪。
现代文：东面的，往南流到琴水岩东边，又向南流出琴水桥，又会合一条东来的水流，曲折流抵东南的石峰下，又穿流在山峡中，于是向西出峡后会合西边的溪流。
English: On the eastern side, it flows southward to the eastern edge of the Qinshui rock, flows southward out of the Qinshui Bridge, and meets a stream coming from the east. The meandering stream reaches the southeast under the stone peak, and flows through the mountain gorge, so it flows westward out of the gorge and meets the west stream.

古文：二水合而南，经两独山，潆之，又注于洋渡之东。
现代文：两条溪水合流后往南，流经两座独山，潇绕过独山，又向南流注到洋渡的东面。
English: After the confluence of the two streams, it flows south, passing through two isolated mountains, bypassing the isolated mountains, and flowing south to the east of the ocean crossing.

古文：大江西下，此水北下，合并东去。
现代文：大江从西面下来，这条水流从北面下来，合并后往东流去。
English: The big river comes down from the west, this stream comes down from the north, and after merging, it flows to the east.

古文：其西北之夹，即洋渡；东北之夹，为青狮庙后崖。
现代文：它们在西北的夹角地带，就是洋渡；东北的夹角，是青狮庙后的山崖。
English: They are in the northwest corner zone, that is, the ocean crossing; the northeast corner is the cliff behind the Blue Lion Temple.

古文：韦龟洞，在城西十里韦龟村今作韦归。
现代文：韦龟洞，在城西十里的韦龟村。
English: Weigel Cave, in Weigel Village, ten miles west of the city.

古文：西由汛塘今作信桃逾佛子岭而北，其路近：北由罗墟转石山嘴而南，其路远。
现代文：西面由汛塘越过佛子岭往北走，这条路近；北面由罗墟转过石山嘴往南走，这条路远。
English: On the west side, walk from Qutang to the north across Fosiling, this road is close; on the north side, walk from Luo Hui to the south across Shishanzui, this road is far.

古文：其中群峰环绕，内拓平畴，有小水自北而南，分流石穴而去。
现代文：其中群峰环绕，里面拓展为平坦的田野，有小河自北流向南，分别流进石洞中去。
English: Surrounded by a group of peaks, it expands into a flat field, with small rivers flowing from the north to the south, separately flowing into the cave.

古文：惟北面石山少开，亦有独峰中峙若标。
现代文：唯有北面的石山稍微缺开，也有独立的山峰耸峙在中央好像标杆。
English: Only the stone mountain in the north is slightly open, and there is also an independent peak standing in the center like a benchmark.

古文：韦龟之山自东南中悬，北向而对之，函盖独成，山水皆逆，真世外丹丘也。
现代文：韦龟洞所在的山在东南悬在中央，向着北方与它相对，独成一个盒盖，山水都是逆向的，真是神仙居住的世外丹丘。
English: The mountain where the Weigu Cave is located hangs in the southeast in the center, opposite to it to the north, unique as a box lid, the landscape is all in reverse, truly a fairy-inhabited world of Danqiu.

古文：数十家倚山北麓，以造纸为业，栖舍累累，或高或下，层嵌石隙，望之已飘然欲仙。
现代文：数十家人背靠山的北麓，以造纸为业，房屋重重叠叠，有的高有的低，层层镶嵌在石缝间，望见它已经飘飘然想要成仙。
English: Dozens of families live at the northern foot of the mountain, making paper for a living. The houses are stacked on top of each other, some high, some low, and they are set in layers between the stone crevices. You can see that they are already dreaming of becoming immortals.

古文：其西即洞门，门亦北向。
现代文：村西就是洞口，洞口也是向北。
English: The west of the village is the cave entrance, and the cave entrance is also to the north.

古文：初入甚隘而黑，西南下数步，透出石隙，忽穹然高盘，划然内朗。
现代文：起初进去十分狭窄十分黑暗，向西南下走几步，钻出石缝，洞忽然高高隆起，里面豁然明朗。
English: At first, the entrance was very narrow and dark. After a few steps to the southwest, a stone crevice was drilled, and the cave suddenly rose up high, revealing the inside.

古文：其四际甚拓，而顶有悬空之穴，天光倒映，正坠其中。
现代文：洞内四边非常宽广，而洞顶有悬空的洞穴，天光下射，正射入洞中。
English: The four sides of the cave are very wide, and there is an overhanging cave at the top of the cave. Light from the sky is shining into the cave.

古文：北向跻石而上，乳柱前排，内环平台，可布几席；南向拾级而下，碧黛中汇，源泉不竭，村人之取汲者，咸取给焉。
现代文：向北踏着岩石上登，钟乳石柱排在前边，里面环绕成平台，可摆上几桌酒席；向南沿石阶下走，洞中积着墨绿色的水，源泉不会枯竭，村里人都到这里取水。
English: Climbing up the rock to the north, stalactite columns line up in front, surrounded by a platform inside, where several tables can be placed; walking down the stone steps to the south, there is dark green water in the cave, the source will not be depleted, the villagers come here to get water.

古文：平台之前，右多森列之柱，幢盖骈错，纹理明莹；左多层叠之块，狮象交踞，形影磊落。
现代文：平台的前方，右边有很多森然罗列的石柱，石幢伞盖并列错杂，纹理明丽晶莹；左边有许多层层叠叠的石块，狮象交错盘踞，狮形象影杂乱众多。
English: In front of the platform, on the right side, there are many stone pillars, stone umbrella covers, and the texture is bright and crystal clear; on the left side, there are many layers of overlapping stones, the lion and elephant are interlaced, and the lion image is cluttered.

古文：其内左右又可深入焉。
现代文：它里面左右两侧又可以深入进去。
English: Inside it, the left and right sides can go deep into it.

古文：秉炬由右西向入，渐下渐岐，而南可半里，又开一壑而出。
现代文：举着火把由右边向西进去，渐渐下走渐渐分出岔洞，可往南约走半里，又裂开一个豁口出去。
English: Holding a torch, go in from the right to the west, gradually go down and gradually separate the wormhole, you can go about half a mile south, and then open a gap to get out.

古文：秉炬由左东向入，渐跻渐逾而北，可半里，又转一窦而还。
现代文：举着火把由左边向东进去，渐渐上爬渐渐穿越到北面，约半里，又转过一个洞穴便返回来。
English: Holding a torch, he entered from the left to the east, gradually climbed up and gradually crossed to the north, about half a mile, turned around a cave and returned.

古文：闻由右壑梯险而上，其入甚深；然觅导不得，惟能言之，不能前也。
现代文：听说由右边的豁口踏着险途上登，那里进去非常深；然而找不到向导，仅是能说说，不能前进了。
English: It was said that they had climbed perilously through a gap on the right, where it was very deep to get in; however, they could not find a guide, they could only talk, but could not move forward.

古文：是岩外密中宽，上有通天之影可以内照，下有逢源之窍不待外求，一丸塞口，千古长春。
现代文：这个岩洞外面隐蔽洞中宽敞，上面有通到天上的光影可以照到洞内，下边有遇到水源的洞穴不需要到外面找水。如一颗丹丸塞在口中，可以千古长寿一样。
English: The cave is hidden from the outside and is spacious inside. The light and shadow from the sky above can shine into the cave. If there is a water source below, there is no need to go outside to find water. If you put a pill in your mouth, you can live for thousands of years.

古文：况其外村居，又擅桃源、谷口之胜乎？
现代文：三里城虽然岩洞山谷极多，但应该以这个岩洞为第一。何况洞外的村舍，又独揽了桃源、谷口的优美之处呢？
English: Although there are many caves and valleys in Sanli Castle, this cave should be the first. What's more, the village houses outside the cave also have the beauty of Taoyuan and Taniguchi.

古文：琴水岩，在城东六里琴水桥之北，中支土山东南尽处也。
现代文：琴水岩，在城东六里琴水桥的北面，中间一座土山在东南的尽头处。
English: Qin Shui Rock, in the north of Qin Shui Bridge in Liuli, east of the city, with a hill in the middle at the southeast end.

古文：东溪自北环山之东。
现代文：东边的溪流从北面环绕到山的东边。
English: The eastern stream runs from the north around to the east of the mountain.

古文：土山既尽，独露石山一拳，其石参差层沓。
现代文：土山完后，唯独露出一座拳头样的石山，山石参差层叠杂沓。
English: After the soil mound was finished, only a fist-like rock mound was revealed, a jumble of jagged layers of rocks.

古文：山南亦有数家之村。
现代文：山南也有个几家人的村子。
English: There is also a village of several families in Shannan.

古文：洞在村西山半，其门南向。
现代文：洞在村西的山腰上，洞口向南。
English: The cave is on the mountainside west of the village, with the entrance facing south.

古文：初入洼而下，甚欹侧；北进数丈，秉炬逾一隘，转而西，始穹然中高，西透明穴，北有暗窍；当明处有平石阔三丈，卧洞底如坠，可攀而憩焉。
现代文：开始进去洼下去，十分倾斜；向北前进数丈，举着火把穿过一处隘口，转向西，洞中这才向高处弯然隆起，西边通着明亮的洞穴，北面有暗洞；在明亮之处有块平台宽三丈，躺在洞底如像坠落下去的一样，可以登上去休息。
English: He began by going into a depression, which was very sloping; he advanced several feet to the north, carried a torch and passed through a pass, turned to the west, and in the cave he swung up to a high place. To the west there was a bright cave, to the north there was a dark cave; in the bright place there was a platform three feet wide, he lay at the bottom of the cave as if he had fallen down, and he could climb up and rest.

古文：秉炬穷暗窍，数丈而隘，跻其上，亦不能深入。
现代文：握着火把穷究暗洞，数丈后窄起来，登上去，也不能深入。
English: Holding torches, they explored the dark cave. After counting the heights, they narrowed it down, climbed up, and could not go deeper.

古文：乃仍出至平石，跻西穴而出，则山之西面也。
现代文：于是仍出来到平台，从西面的洞穴爬出来，是山的西面。
English: So he still went out to the platform and climbed out of the cave on the west side, which is the west side of the mountain.

古文：下山，仍转山前，骑而周周游玩之。
现代文：下山，仍转到山前，骑马周游观赏山景。
English: Down the mountain, still turn to the front of the mountain, ride around to enjoy the mountain scenery.

古文：洞前稍下，其东亦开一岩，门亦南向，外高而中浅，村人积薪于中焉。
现代文：洞前稍低处，它东边也开有一个洞，洞口也是向南，外边高中间浅，村里人在洞中堆积了薪柴。
English: A little lower in front of the cave, there is also a hole on the east side of it, the mouth of the cave is also to the south, the outside is high and the middle is shallow, the villagers have piled up firewood in the cave.

古文：其北又开两岩，一上一下：上者在重崖，无路；下者多潴水，然亦不能与前通也。
现代文：它北边又开有两个岩洞，一上一下：下面的在重重山崖之上，无路；下面的积了很多水，不过也不能与前边相通。
English: To the north of it, there are two more caves, one above the other: the lower one is on top of a mountain cliff, there is no road; there is a lot of water below, but it cannot be connected to the front.

古文：佛子岭北岩，在城西七里汛塘村之西。
现代文：佛子岭北岩，在城西七里汛塘村的西面。
English: Beiyan, Fosiling, in the west of Qitang Village, seven miles west of the city.

古文：佛子岭者，石山自西分支而东，东为汛塘、仙庙诸峰，而岭界其间，石骨嶙嶙。
现代文：佛子岭，石山从西面分支往东延，在东面成为汛塘、仙庙诸峰，而佛子岭列在其间，石骨嶙峋。
English: Fosiling, the stone mountain extends from the western branch to the east, and becomes the Qutang and the peaks of the Immortal Temple in the east, and Fosiling is among them, the stone skeleton.

古文：逾岭而北下，则韦龟村西坞之水，南流而抵其麓，倾入洞焉。
现代文：越过岭往北下走，就见韦龟村西面山坞的水流，向南流抵它的山麓，倾泻进洞中。
English: Walking north across the ridge, you can see the water flowing from the dock on the west side of Weiqiu Village, flowing south to the foot of the mountain and pouring into the cave.

古文：洞门北向甚豁，中回环成潭，潭中潴水渊澄，深不可测，潭四周皆石壁无隙。
现代文：洞口向北非常开阔，洞中回绕成水潭，潭中的积水渊深澄碧，深不可测，水潭四周都是石壁毫无缝隙。
English: The mouth of the cave is very wide to the north, and the middle of the cave turns into a pool. The reservoir in the pool is deep and fathomless, and the pool is surrounded by stone walls without any gaps.

古文：闻其南有隙在水下，大潦从北捣下，洞满不能容，则跃而出于山南之崖。
现代文：听说它南面在水下有缝隙，大水从北面冲捣下来，洞装满不能容纳，就跃出山南的石崖。
English: I heard that there is a gap under the water on the south side of it, and the water rushes down from the north side, and the hole cannot be filled, so it leaps out of the stone cliff in the south of the mountain.

古文：盖南崖较高，水涸则潴于北而不泄，中满则内激而反射于外，其交关之隙，则中伏云。
现代文：原来南面的石崖较高，水干涸时就积在北面而不外泄，洞中水满时就在洞内激荡，然后反冲到外面，两面连结的缝隙，就隐伏在中间。
English: Originally, the cliff on the south side was higher. When the water dried up, it accumulated on the north side and did not leak out. When the water in the cave was full, it swirled inside the cave and then recoiled to the outside. The gap connecting the two sides was hidden in the middle.

古文：门右穿旁窦，南抵潭东涯上。
现代文：在洞口右侧穿过旁洞，往南走到水潭东面的水边上。
English: Go through the side hole on the right side of the hole and walk south to the water's edge on the east side of the pool.

古文：其上有石高蛩潭旁，上与洞顶不即不离，各悬尺许，如鹊桥然。
现代文：那上面有块岩石高高拱起在水潭旁，上边与洞顶不即不离，各自悬空一尺左右，如鹊桥的样子。
English: Above that, a rock arched high above the pool. The top of the rock arch and the top of the cave were inseparable, each hanging about a foot in the air, like a bridge.

古文：坐桥下而瞰深潭，更悠然也。
现代文：坐在桥下俯瞰深潭，更加悠然自得。
English: Sitting under the bridge overlooking the deep lake, I felt more at ease.

古文：佛子岭南岩，在佛子岭之南。
现代文：佛子岭南岩，在佛子岭的南面。
English: Fosiling Nanyan Rock, on the south side of Fosiling.

古文：其门南向，前有石涧天成若槽，有桥横其上。
现代文：洞口向南，洞前有天然形成的石涧若像水槽，有桥横架在涧上。
English: The mouth of the cave faces south. In front of the cave, there is a naturally formed stone basin that looks like a water tank, with a bridge cross-supported on the basin.

古文：时涧中无水，即由涧入洞。
现代文：此时涧中无水，就由涧中进洞。
English: At this time, if there is no water in the cocoon, a hole is made in the cocoon.

古文：洞外高岩层穹侧裂，不能宏拓。
现代文：洞外高大的岩洞层层隆起侧向裂开，不能往大处拓展。
English: Outside the cave, the tall rock outcrop is cracked sideways and cannot expand to a large extent.

古文：北入洞，止容一人，渐入渐黑，而光滑如琢磨者；其入颇深，即北洞泄水之道也。
现代文：向北入洞，只容得下一个人，渐渐深入渐渐黑下来，但洞壁光滑得如同琢磨出来的一样；洞内进去很深，就是北洞泄水的通道了。
English: Northward into the cave, only the next person can be accommodated, gradually deeper and darker, but the cave walls are smooth as if they were polished; it is very deep to enter the cave, which is the channel for draining the North Cave.

古文：盖水大时北洞中满，水从下反溢而出此，激涌势壮，故洞与涧皆若磨砺以成云。
现代文：大概是水大时北洞洞中装满，水从下面反向溢出到此处，激流的水势汹涌强劲，所以山洞与石涧都好像是打磨而成的一样。
English: Presumably, the North Cave was filled with water when the water was high, and the water overflowed from below to here. The torrent of water was strong and powerful, so the cave and the stalagmite seemed to be polished.

古文：佛子岭西北岩，在佛子岭西北一里，其门东向。
现代文：佛子岭西北岩，在佛子岭西北一里处，洞口向东。
English: The northwest rock of Fosiling is one mile northwest of Fosiling, and the cave entrance is to the east.

古文：韦村西坞之水自北来，又分流一涧，西抵此洞前，忽穴地下坠。
现代文：韦龟村西面山坞的水从北面流来，又分流一条山涧，向西流抵此洞前，忽然坠入地下的洞穴中。
English: The water from the dock on the west side of Weigueming Village flows from the north, splits into a mountain stream, and flows westward before reaching this cave, where it suddenly falls into an underground cave.

古文：洞临其上，外门高朗，西入三、四丈即止。
现代文：洞在山的上方，外面的洞口高大明亮，往西进去三四丈就到了头。
English: The cave is at the top of the mountain, the outside of the cave is tall and bright, and if you go to the west, you will reach the top.

古文：洞南有一隙，亦倾侧而下，渐下渐黑，转向西南，无炬而出。
现代文：洞南侧有一条缝隙，也是倾斜而下，渐渐下去渐渐黑下来，转向西南，因没有火把便出来了。
English: There is a gap on the south side of the cave, also sloping down, gradually getting darker, turning to the southwest, and because there are no torches, they come out.

古文：闻下与水遇，循水西南行，即透出后山。
现代文：听说下边与水相遇，沿水流往西南行，就能钻出后山。
English: It is said that the lower side meets the water, and if you follow the water flow to the southwest, you can drill out the back of the mountain.

古文：乃知此村水坠穴，山透腹，亦与向武一辙也。
现代文：这才知道此村水坠入洞穴后，穿透山腹，也与向武州百感岩如出一辙。
English: It was only then that I learned that the water in this village, after falling into the cave, penetrates the mountainside, and is also exactly the same as that of the Buzhou Hundred Senses Rock.

古文：独山岩，今名砥柱岩，在城南四里。
现代文：独山岩，今天名叫砒柱岩，在城南四里处。
English: Dokusan Rock, today called Shizuchizuru Rock, is located four miles south of the city.

古文：此地有三独山，皆以旁无附丽得名：一在溪东岸，与东界石山近，其山小而更峭；一在此山南五里，障溪而东环之，其山突而无奇；独此山既高而正当其中，与向武之琅山岩相似，省中之独秀无此峭拔，亦无此透漏也。
现代文：此地有三座独山，都是由于四旁没有其他山附着而得名：一座在溪流东岸，与东面一列石山接近，此山小但陡峭；一座在此山南边五里处，挡住溪流往东环绕着它流去，此山高突但无奇特之处；唯有独山岩既高而且正当坞中，与向武州的琅山岩相似，省城中的独秀峰没有此山陡峭挺拔，也无此玲珑剔透。
English: There are three unique mountains here, all of which are named because there are no other mountains attached to them on all sides: one is on the east bank of the stream, close to a row of stone mountains on the east, this mountain is small but steep; one is five miles south of this mountain, blocking the stream from flowing eastward around it, this mountain is high but there is nothing special about it; only the unique rock is high and right in the dock, similar to the Lushan rock in Wuzhou, and the unique peak in the provincial capital is not as steep and upright as this mountain, nor is it as exquisite.

古文：其岩当山之腹，南北直透。
现代文：这个岩洞位于山腹，南北直线穿通。
English: The cave is located on the side of a mountain and is cut in a straight line from north to south.

古文：南门高迸如裂阙，其前有巨石，自岩顶分跨而下，界为两门，正门在东，偏门在西南，皆有古木虬藤倒挂其上，轻风飘曳，漾翠飞香，甚异也。
现代文：南洞口高高迸裂开如像裂开的缺口，洞前有块巨石，从洞顶分跨而下，隔成两个洞口，正洞口在东边，偏洞口在西南，都有古树曲藤倒挂在洞顶上，微风飘拂，漾碧飞香，非常奇异。
English: At the south mouth of the cave, the high cliff cracks open like a cracked gap. In front of the cave, there is a boulder, which is separated from the top of the cave and separated into two holes. The main hole is in the east, and the side hole is in the southwest. There are ancient trees and vines hanging upside down on the top of the cave. The breeze is blowing, and the jasmine is flying. It is very strange.

古文：岩中如合掌而起，高数丈，平通山后上有飞崖外覆，下有涌石如栏，南北遥望，众山排闼，无不罗列献于前。
现代文：洞中如合起的手掌样隆起，高数丈，宽一丈五尺，水平通向山后之处有五六丈。上有飞崖在外面下覆，下边有穿空的岩石如像栏杆，远望南北，群山排列，无不在眼前罗列献奇。
English: In the cave, there is a hand-like protrusion, a few feet high and five feet wide, and the horizontal passage to the back of the mountain is five or six feet. There are cliffs on the outside, and below there are hollow rocks like railings. Looking north and south, the mountains are lined up, and there are wonders everywhere in front of you.

古文：岩之中分窍西透，亦转而北，又通一门，其内架阁两重，皆上穿圆窍，人下窍行，又若透桥而出者。
现代文：岩洞的中段分出一个旁洞通向西边，也是转向北，又通有一个洞口，它里面架起两层楼阁，都是上面穿通一个圆圆的石窍，人走在下面的石窍中，又似穿过桥洞出来的样子。
English: The middle section of the cave is divided into a side cave that leads to the west and also turns to the north, and there is also a cave entrance. Inside it, there are two-storey pavilions, both of which pass through a round stone hole. When walking in the stone hole below, it looks like you are going through a bridge hole.

古文：此一洞四门相通，山甚小而中甚幻也。
现代文：此处一个洞四个洞口相通，山很小但洞中十分奇幻。
English: Here, a cave connects four openings. The mountain is small, but the cave is very magical.

古文：惟东向不通。
现代文：唯有向东的一面不通。
English: Only the eastbound side is blocked.

古文：其崖外又有一门东向，而西入深亦数丈，是又各分门立户者。
现代文：洞外的山崖上又有一个向东的洞口，向西进去深处也有数丈，这又是各自分门立户的洞了。
English: On the cliff outside the cave, there is another cave opening to the east, and there are also several meters of depth to the west. This is again a cave with its own door.

古文：小独山岩，在城东南五里，与砥柱东西相向，夹小江而立。
现代文：小独山岩，在城东南方五里，与砒柱岩东西相对，夹立在小江两边。
English: Xiaoduoshan Rock, five miles southeast of the city, stands on both sides of the creek, facing the pillar rock from east to west.

古文：自砥柱东望，似此山偏与东界近；自此山西望，又似砥柱偏与西界近；自其中望之，其实两山之去东西两界各悬绝等也。
现代文：从砒柱岩往东望，似乎此山偏一些与东面一列山接近；从此山向西望去，又似乎砒柱岩偏在一方与西面一列山相近；从两山中间望它们，其实两座山距东西两列山悬隔之处各自相等。
English: Looking from the pillar rock to the east, it seems that this mountain is closer to the east row of mountains; looking from this mountain to the west, it seems that the pillar rock is closer to the west row of mountains; looking at them from the middle of the two mountains, in fact, the two mountains are equally separated from the east and west mountains.

古文：山小于砥柱，而尖锐亦甚，极似一浮屠中立者。
现代文：山小于低柱岩，但也是非常尖锐，极似一座佛塔立在中央的样子。
English: The mountain is smaller than the low pillar rock, but it is also very sharp, very similar to the appearance of a stupa standing in the center.

古文：下亦通一门，有石跨其外而不甚高。
现代文：山下也通着一个洞口，有岩石跨在洞外但不怎么高。
English: There is also a cave under the mountain, with rocks straddling the outside of the cave, but they are not very high.

古文：西透小隙而上，悬崖之侧，有石平峙为台。
现代文：向西钻过小缝隙上去，悬崖的侧边，有块平石耸立成为平台。
English: Drilling through a small gap to the west, a flat rock rises on the side of the cliff to become a platform.

古文：其上悬绝处，有洞南向甚深，若能梯阶而升，亦异境也。
现代文：它上方悬绝之处，有个洞向南十分深，如果能登石阶上去，也是奇异之境。
English: Above it, where it hangs precariously, there is a cave that is very deep to the south, and if you can climb the stone steps, it is also a strange place.

古文：游砥柱日独随一骑导而浮江，并尽此胜。
现代文：游砒柱岩那天独自跟随着一个骑马的人导游，而后浮过江，一并穷尽了此处胜境。
English: That day, the peregrine falcon followed a guide on horseback alone, and then floated across the river, and together they exhausted the beauty of this place.

古文：白崖堡南岩，在城南十六里。
现代文：白崖堡南岩，在城南十六里。
English: Baiya Fort Nanyan, 16 miles south of the city.

古文：由洋渡北岸溯江西行，转入山坞则堡在其中。
现代文：由洋渡北岸溯江往西行，转入山坞中，土堡就在坞中。
English: From the north bank of the Yangdu River to the west, turn into the dock, the earthen fort is in the dock.

古文：盖其山南北回合，又成一洞天矣，洞在南山之上，重门北向，高缀万仞之壁，自堡中望之，即在举首间，而无从着足。
现代文：原来这里的山南北回绕合拢来，又成为一处洞天了。洞在南山之上，两层洞口向北，高高点缀在万初高的石壁上，从堡中望它，就在举头之间，但无从落脚。
English: Originally, the north and south ridges of the mountain closed around here, and it became a cave again. The cave is on the south mountain, the two-story cave entrance faces north, and it is high and dotted on the very high stone wall. Looking at it from the castle, it is between lifting the head, but there is no way to land.

古文：岩下石脚外插，亦开裂成纹。
现代文：岩洞下边石山脚向外插，也裂开成纹路。
English: The foot of the rock mountain at the bottom of the cave sticks out, and the crevice road is also cracked.

古文：初开捱数隙，如升层楼，而不知去洞犹甚远；复出重之，而后觉枪榆枋者榆树和檀木挺立，无及于垂天之翼也。
现代文：最初开始艰难地爬过几条裂隙，如上登层层高楼，却不知高洞还很远；再出来观望地形，然后才觉得在丛林间碰碰撞撞的走法，赶不上能在天空中飞翔的翅膀了。
English: At first, I began to climb through several cracks with difficulty, such as climbing a high-rise building, but I did not know that the cave was still far away; I came out again to see the terrain, and then I felt that the collision between the jungles could not keep up with the wings that could fly in the sky.

古文：既而土人秦余至，为秉炬前导，仍从山口出，循南山之东而转其南始拾级上，得一门东南向，是为后洞，由洞中东北上跻，乃暗而需炬，更转而北，其上甚峻，遥望天光中透矣，益攀跃以升，得一隙仅如掌，瞰其外辟巨门焉，则上洞之下层也。
现代文：不久本地人秦徐来到，为我举着火把在前领路，仍从山口出来，沿南山的东麓转到此山的南麓，开始沿石阶上登，走到一处朝向东南的洞口，这是后洞，正对着卓笔峰、青狮岩诸峰。由洞中向东北上登，就暗下来需要火把；再转向北，那上面非常陡峻，远望天光透射到洞中了。更加踊跃攀登，找到一处仅如手掌宽的缝隙，俯瞰缝隙外边，辟开一个巨大的门洞，是上洞的下层。
English: Soon the local man Qin Xu arrived, leading the way for me with a torch, still coming out of the mountain pass, along the eastern foot of Nanshan to the southern foot of this mountain, began to climb up the stone steps, walked to a southeastern cave mouth, this is the back hole, facing the peaks of Zhuo Pen Peak and Qingshi Rock. From the cave to the northeast, it was dark and I needed a torch; then turned north, the top was very steep, and the sky was shining into the cave. Climbing more vigorously, I found a gap that was only as wide as my palm, looked down the outside of the gap, and opened a huge door hole,

古文：隙隘不容侧身向外，只可俯眺而已。
现代文：缝隙太窄不容侧身走向外面，只能俯身远眺而已。
English: The gap is too narrow to allow you to walk sideways to the outside, you can only lean over and look into the distance.

古文：从其内更上跻，透隘而出，则洞门岍然，北临无地，向之仰眺而莫可及者，今忽身跻其上矣。
现代文：从裂缝内再上登，穿过隘口出来，就见洞口十分深邃，面临北方不见大地，是先前抬头远眺却无法可到之处，现在忽然间已亲自登到它上面了。
English: Climbing up again from inside the crack and coming out through the narrow passage, he saw that the mouth of the cave was very deep, that there was no land to the north, and that he had previously looked up but could not get there. Now, all of a sudden, he had climbed up to it himself.

古文：此洞甚高，呼吸可通帝座，其前夹崖下陷，以木横架而补其阙，即堪憩托，然止可凭揽诸峰，非久栖地也。
现代文：此洞非常高，呼吸可以通天庭，它前方山崖相夹下陷，用木头横架补在这里的缺口上，就能安身歇息，不过只可以凭眺群峰，不是久住之地。
English: This cave is very high, you can breathe through the heavens, the cliff in front of it is caved in, and a wooden cross-beam is used to fill in the gap here, so you can rest peacefully, but you can only look at the peaks, not a place to stay for a long time.

古文：仍从内隘下，再窥其外第二层洞，亦以为不可到矣。
现代文：仍从洞内的隘口下走，再窥视它外边的第二层洞，也以为不能到了。
English: I still walked under the narrow passage inside the cave, and then peered at the second layer of the cave outside it, thinking that I couldn't get there.

古文：姑以杖从隙中投之，再由故道俯级直坠，抵前遥望天光处，明炬遍烛，于洞北崖下得一穴焉。
现代文：姑且把手杖从缝隙中投下去，再由原路俯身沿石阶一直下坠，抵达先前远远望见天光之处，点亮火把四处照射，在洞北边的石崖下找到一个洞穴。
English: Let's say you throw your cane down from the crevice, then lean down from the original path and fall all the way down the stone steps, reaching the place where you could see the skylight from far away, light the torch and shine it everywhere, and find a cave under the stone cliff on the north side of the cave.

古文：其口甚隘，亟引炬蛇行而入，其中渐高而成峡，其底甚平，数丈后宛转东折，又数丈而北透，则其门北向高裂，有巨树盘根洞中，偃ｙｎ仰卧出洞外，是为第三层洞。
现代文：洞口非常狭窄，急忙把火把伸向前如蛇一样爬行进去，洞中渐渐变高成为峡谷，洞底十分平坦，数丈后弯弯曲曲向东折去，又走数丈后向北钻出来，就见这个洞凶向北高高裂开，有巨树树根盘绕在洞中，倒卧出洞外，这是第三层洞。
English: The mouth of the cave is very narrow. I quickly extended the torch forward and crawled in like a snake. The cave gradually became higher and became a canyon. The bottom of the cave is very flat. After a few steps, I bent it to the east, and after a few steps, I drilled it out to the north. I saw that the hole was high and cracked to the north. There were huge tree roots coiled in the hole, lying upside down outside the hole. This was the third layer of the cave.

古文：洞前平石如掌，上下皆危崖峭壁，轰悬无级。
现代文：洞前平滑的岩石如像手掌，上下都是危崖峭壁，崩裂高悬没有台阶。
English: The smooth rock in front of the cave is like the palm of a hand, with cliffs above and below, and no steps.

古文：回首上眺，则层门重叠，出数十仞之巅者，即上洞与第二层洞也。
现代文：回头向上眺望，就见洞口层层重叠，高出数十初的山顶，这是上洞与第二层洞了。
English: Looking back and looking up, you can see the overlapping layers of the cave mouth, which is several tens of meters higher than the top of the mountain. This is the upper cave and the second layer of the cave.

古文：稍悬平石而东，峡壁间有藤树虬络，乃猱升猿引以登。
现代文：稍沿平滑的岩石往东走，峡壁上有藤条树枝拳曲缠绕在一起，于是像猿猴一样拉着上登。
English: Slightly along the smooth rock to the east, there are rattan twigs twisted together on the canyon wall, so it is like a monkey pulling up.

古文：半晌，遂历第二层外洞，前所投杖俨然在也。
现代文：半晌，终于历险到达第二层外洞，就是我先前投下手杖之处。
English: Halfway through, the adventure finally reached the second level of the outer cave, which is where I had previously thrown my cane.

古文：其洞深三丈，高五丈，嵌上下两洞之间，而独不中通，反由外跻。
现代文：此洞深三丈，高五丈，嵌在上下两个洞之间，但唯独中间不通，反而要由洞外爬进来。
English: This hole is three meters deep and five meters high, embedded between the upper and lower two holes, but only the middle is impassable, but you have to climb in from outside the hole.

古文：因为吟句曰： 洞门千古无人到，古干虬藤独为谁？
现代文：因而为此吟诵了诗句，曰： 洞口千古无人到，古树曲藤独为谁？
English: Therefore, a poem was recited for this purpose, saying: "No one has come to the cave entrance for thousands of years, who is the ancient tree song vine?

古文：投杖此中还得杖，三生长与菖坡通 猖披 ，衣带不整，引中为任意而为，随。 
现代文：投杖此中还得杖，三生长与逍遥随。 
English: Throw a stick and get a stick, and the three grow and prosper.

古文：乃仍挂枝下，循平石篝火穿第三层洞入，再抵前遥望天光处，则仍还后洞腹中矣。
现代文：于是仍挂着树枝下来，沿着平台点燃火把穿人第三层洞，再次到达前边远远望见天光之处，便仍旧返回到后洞的腹中了。
English: So he still hung down with the branches, lit a torch along the platform to pierce the third-storey hole, reached the front again where he could see the light of the sky far away, and still returned to the belly of the back hole.

古文：盖是洞如蹲虎，中空如腹，而上洞则其口也。
现代文：大体上此洞如像一只蹲踞的老虎，洞中空阔如像腹部，而上洞就是虎口了。
English: In general, this hole is like a crouching tiger, the hollow is as wide as the abdomen, and the upper hole is the tiger's mouth.

古文：第二层洞在其喉管之外，向从隙外窥处则喉管也。
现代文：第二层洞在它的喉管之外，先前从缝隙向外窥视之处就是喉管了。
English: The second layer of the hole is outside its larynx, and the place where it previously peeked out from the gap is the larynx.

古文：人从喉管上透，出其口，由喉管下坠，抵腹中。
现代文：人如从喉管往上钻，出到它的口中，由喉管中下坠，到达腹中。
English: If a person drills up from the larynx, goes out into its mouth, falls down from the larynx, and reaches the abdomen.

古文：第三层洞为其脐之所通，故在腹之前。
现代文：第三层洞是它肚脐眼通着的地方，所以在腹部的前方。
English: The third layer of the hole is where it passes through the navel, so it is in front of the abdomen.

古文：后洞乃其尾闾边，故在腹之下云。
现代文：后洞是它的尾部，所以在腹部的下方。
English: The back hole is its tail, so it's below the belly.

古文：白崖堡南山下洞，在后洞之西三百步。
现代文：白崖堡南山下洞，在后洞以西三百步。
English: Baiyakubo Nanshan lower cave, three hundred paces west of the back cave.

古文：洞门亦东南向，洞外高崖层亘，洞内即横分二道，一向西南，一向东北，皆稍下从洼中入，须用炬矣。
现代文：洞口也是向东南，洞外高大的山崖层层横亘，洞内马上横分为两条通道，一条通向西南，一条通向东北，都是稍下走从洼地中进去，必须用火把。
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the southeast, the tall cliffs outside the cave are layered, and the cave is immediately divided into two channels, one leading to the southwest, one to the northeast, all of which are a short walk from the depression, you must use a torch.

古文：从西南者，数丈后辄分两层，下层一穴如井。
现代文：从西南去的，数丈后就分为两层，下层的一个洞穴如井。
English: If you go from the southwest, after a few meters, it is divided into two layers, and the lower layer is a cave like a well.

古文：由井下坠，即得平峡，西行三丈，又悬峡下坠，复得平洼，其中峡窍盘错，交互层叠，乳柱花萼，倒垂团簇，不啻千万。
现代文：由井中下坠，就走到平坦的峡谷，往西行三丈，又从高高的峡谷下坠，才走到平坦的洼地，其中峡谷盘绕洞穴交错，相互层层叠垒，钟乳石柱倒垂，花尊成团成簇，何止成千上万。
English: Descending from the middle of the well, one comes to a flat canyon, climbing three heights to the west, and descending from a high canyon, one comes to a flat depression, in which canyons are intertwined with caves, layers of barriers are stacked on top of each other, stalactite columns are inverted, and flowers are clustered in clusters, numbering in the thousands.

古文：随行胡生金陵人。折得石乳数十条，俱长六七寸，中空如管，外白如晶，天成白玉搔头即 簪 的俗称也。
现代文：随行姓胡的儒生折到石钟乳数十条，都是长六七寸，中间似竹管一样空着，外面洁白如水晶，是天然形成的白玉替。
English: The Confucian scholar surnamed Hu, who accompanied the procession, folded dozens of stone bells, all of which were six or seven inches long, empty in the middle like bamboo tubes, and white as crystal on the outside. They were naturally formed white jade.

古文：又有白乳莲花一簇，径大三尺，细瓣攒合，倒垂洞底，其根平贴上石，但悬一线，而实粘连处，蒂仅如拳，铲而下之甚易。
现代文：又有一簇乳白色的莲花，直径大三尺，细细的花瓣攒合拢来，倒垂在洞底，它的根部平贴在顶上的岩石上，全都只悬挂着一线，而实际粘连处，花蒂仅如拳头大，把它铲下来十分容易。
English: There was also a cluster of milky white lotus flowers, three feet in diameter, their thin petals bunched together, hanging upside down at the bottom of the cave, its roots flat against the rock at the top, all hanging only by a thread, and the actual sticking place, the petals only as big as a fist, it was very easy to shovel it down.

古文：第出窦多隘，且下无所承，恐坠下时伤损其瓣，不忍轻掷也。
现代文：但只是出去的洞穴大多很狭窄，而且下面没有东西接着，担心落下时损伤了它的花瓣，不忍心轻易抛掷了它。
English: However, most of the caves were very narrow, and there was nothing underneath. I was afraid of damaging its petals when I dropped it, so I couldn't bear to throw it.

古文：盘旋久之，忽见明光一缕，透窍而出，井口亦如前，又在前井之南矣。
现代文：盘旋了很久，忽然见到一缕明亮的光辉，透过洞穴射出来，也是如前边一样的井口，又在前那个井的南边了。
English: After circling for a long time, I suddenly saw a bright ray of light shoot out through the cave. It was the same wellhead as before, and it was on the south side of the previous well.

古文：又从上层西南入，其中石脊高下，屡见下陷之坑，窅黑无底，疑即前所探下层也。
现代文：又从上层向西南进去，其中石脊高高低低，屡次见到下陷的深坑，深黑无底，怀疑就是先前探过的下层了。
English: From the upper layer, I went to the southwest, where the ridge was high and low. I repeatedly saw a deep sinkhole, deep and black, and I suspected that it was the lower layer that I had previously explored.

古文：深入亦盘错交互，多乳柱攒丛，与下层竞远。
现代文：深入进去也是互相盘绕交错，钟乳石柱很多，攒聚成丛，细得像手掌上的骄枝，每千百枝聚成一团，与下层比高下长短。
English: Deeper into the cave, the stalactite columns are intertwined and interlaced with each other. There are many stalactite columns, gathered into clumps, so thin that they look like tall branches on the palm of the hand. Each thousand and hundred branches are gathered into a mass, which is longer and shorter than the lower layer.

古文：从东北者，不五丈，有北嵌之窍两重，皆不甚深。
现代文：唯有后营的东洞，钟乳石柱又多又大，都作出蛇龙垂舞之状，并排排列都有数十丈。从东北去的，不到五丈，有两层嵌在北面的洞穴，都不怎么深。
English: Only in the east cave of the rear camp, the stalactite columns are many and large, all of which are in the shape of a snake and dragon dance, and are arranged side by side with tens of meters. From the northeast, less than five meters, there are two layers embedded in the north side of the cave, and they are not very deep.

古文：东向攀崖而上，渐进渐曲，其盘错亦如西洞，而深奥少杀减也之。
现代文：向东攀石崖上去，慢慢进去渐渐弯弯曲曲的，其中也像西洞一样盘绕交错，但深邃之处比西洞稍差些。
English: Climb up the cliff to the east, slowly enter the gradually curving, which is also intertwined like the West Cave, but the depth is slightly worse than the West Cave.

古文：青狮南洞，在城南二十里，西南与上林分界处，路由杨渡过江，东南四里乃至。
现代文：青狮南洞，在城南二十里，西南是与上林县分界的地方，去那里的路由杨渡过江，向东南走四里才到。
English: Qingshi South Cave is located 20 miles south of the city and southwest of the border with Shanglin County. The way to get there is to cross the river from Yangdu and walk four miles southeast.

古文：其山石峰卓立，洞在山之下，开东西二门。
现代文：这里的山石峰卓立，洞在山下，开有东西两个洞口。
English: Here, the mountain's rocky peak stands out, the cave is at the bottom of the mountain, and there are two openings.

古文：东门坦下，门高数丈，阔亦数丈，直透山西者约三十丈，平拓修整，下壁如砥，上覆如幔，间有石柱倒垂幔下。
现代文：东洞口平坦低下，洞口高数丈，宽也有数丈，一直向西穿透山腹之处约三十丈，平展地拓开，高大整齐，下面展开如磨刀石，顶上下覆如同筛慢，间或有石柱倒垂在筛慢下。
English: The east mouth of the cave is flat and low, the mouth of the cave is a few meters high and a few meters wide, and it penetrates the hillside to the west for about thirty meters. It is flat and open, tall and neat, the bottom is spread like a grindstone, the top and bottom are covered like a sieve, and occasionally there are stone pillars hanging upside down under the sieve.

古文：洞之西垂，又有石柱一队，外自洞口排列，抵洞后西界，别成长榭；从榭中瞩外洞，疏楞绮牖，牵幕披云，又恍然分境也。
现代文：洞的西边，又有一队石柱，从外边的洞口排列而来，抵达洞后西面，另外形成一个长长的榭廓；从榭廓中望外面的洞，稀疏的窗棍绮丽的窗户，筛幕高挂，云层绽开，又恍然分出一境了。
English: On the west side of the cave, there is another group of stone pillars, coming from the outer mouth of the cave, reaching the west side behind the cave, and forming a long silhouette; from the silhouette, the cave looks out, the sparse window sticks are beautiful, the screen is high, the clouds are open, and the land is suddenly separated.

古文：西门崇峻，下有巨石盘叠为台，上忽中盘高穹。
现代文：西洞口高峻，下边有巨石回绕重叠成平台，上方忽然中间弯曲高高隆起。
English: The west entrance of the cave is high and steep, with boulders winding around and overlapping to form a platform on the lower side, and a high rise curving in the middle above.

古文：从台内眺，已不见前洞之顶，只见高盘之上，四面层回叠绕，如云气融结，皆有窍穴钩连，窗楞罗列，而空悬无上处。
现代文：从台上向内眺望，已看不见前洞的洞顶，只见高高弯曲的上方，四面回绕层层叠叠，如云气融化凝结成，都有洞穴连接，窗权罗列，但悬在高空无处可上。
English: Looking inward from the platform, you can no longer see the top of the front hole, only the high and curved top, the four sides of the winding layer upon layer, like clouds melting and condensing, all have cave connections, the windows are lined up, but there is nowhere to hang in the sky.

古文：从台外眺，则西面三岐之峰，卓笔之岫，近当洞门中央，若设之供者。
现代文：从台上往外眺望，就见西面分出三岔的山峰，高耸笔直的山峦，近在洞口中央，就像设立的供桌一样。
English: Looking out from the platform, you can see three peaks in the west, towering straight peaks, close to the center of the cave, like a set table.

古文：由台北下，奥窟中复开平洞一围，外峙巨石为障，下透中虚，从此秉炬北入东转，其穴大而易穷；东从腋隘直入，其窍狭而甚远。
现代文：由平台向北下走，深窟中又开出一圈平坦的山洞，外边巨石矗立着成为屏障，下面穿透中间空虚，好像桥样越过高空。从这里举火把往北进去向东转，这个洞穴大而容易穷尽；往东从侧旁的隘口一直进去，这个石窍窄而十分深远。
English: Going down from the platform to the north, a circle of flat caves opens up in the deep cave. Outside, boulders stand as a barrier, below penetrating the middle emptiness, like a bridge over the sky. From here, hold a torch to enter the north and turn to the east, this cave is large and easy to exhaust; to the east, go through the side entrance, this stone cave is narrow and very deep.

古文：计其止处，当已逾外洞之半。
现代文：估计它到头之处，当不下十五丈，已超过外洞的一半。
English: It is estimated that when it reaches the end, it is no less than fifteen meters high, which is more than half of the outer cave.

古文：此下洞之最奥处也。
现代文：这是下洞最隐密之处。
English: This is the most secret part of the lower cave.

古文：出小穴，复酌于西门之台，仰视上层云气叠绕处，冀一登，不可得。
现代文：走出小洞，又在西洞口的平台上饮酒，仰望上层云气重叠缭绕之处，希望登上去一次，不可能。
English: I walked out of the small cave and drank alcohol on the platform at the entrance of the west cave. I looked up at the place where the upper clouds overlapped and swirled. I hoped to climb up once, but it was impossible.

古文：忽见其北有光逗影，知其外通，陆公令健而捷者从山外攀崖索之。
现代文：忽然看见它北边有光影逗人，知道它通到山外，陆公命令健壮敏捷的人从山外攀山崖去寻找它。
English: Suddenly, he saw a dazzling light and shadow on the north side of it. Knowing that it led to the outside of the mountain, Lu Gong ordered the strong and agile people to climb the cliff from the outside of the mountain to find it.

古文：久之，其人已穿入其上，从下眺，真若乘云朵而卷雾叶也。
现代文：很久之后，那人已穿进来在那上边，从下边眺望过去，真好像乘在云朵中卷在云雾中的树叶了。
English: After a long time, the man had penetrated to the top, and looked down from below, as if he were riding on a cloud of leaves in the mist.

古文：既而其人呼曰： 速携炬至，尚可深入。 
现代文：不久那人大呼道： 赶快带火把来，还可以深入。 
English: Before long, the man in the crowd shouted: "Bring torches, we can go deeper."

古文：余从之。
现代文：我听从他的话。
English: I listened to him.

古文：乃从西门下，循山麓转其北，复南向攀崖跻。
现代文：于是从西洞口下来，沿山麓转到山北，再向南攀登山崖。
English: So I went down from the west mouth of the cave, along the foot of the mountain to the north of the mountain, and then climbed the cliff to the south.

古文：山之半，有门北向。
现代文：山腰上，有个洞口向北。
English: On the mountainside, there is a cave opening to the north.

古文：穿石窦入，则其内下陷通明，俯见诸君群酌台上，又若登月窟、扪天门而俯瞩尘界矣。
现代文：穿过石洞进去，就见洞内下陷通明透亮，俯身见诸君成群在台上饮酒，又好像登上月宫、摸着天门而俯视尘世了。
English: Entering through the stone cave, you will see the inside of the cave flooded with light, and you will bend down to see groups of people drinking alcohol on the stage. It is as if you have ascended to the Moon Palace, touched the Heaven Gate, and looked down on the world.

古文：其上有石砥平庋，石端悬空处，复有石柱外列，分窗界户，故自下望之，不一其窦，而内实旁通也。
现代文：那上面有岩石磨刀石一样地平架着，岩石顶端悬在空中之处，又有石柱排列在外，分隔为门窗，所以从下边望它，不止一个洞穴，可洞内实际是四通八达的。
English: Above it, there is a flat surface of rock like a grindstone, where the top of the rock hangs in the air, and there are stone pillars lined up outside, separated by doors and windows, so from the bottom it looks like more than one cave, but the cave is actually accessible in all directions.

古文：于是秉炬东入，愈入愈深窅，然中辟亦几二十丈焉。
现代文：从这里举着火把向东进去，越进去越深，中间杳然拓开，也几乎有二十丈。
English: From here, they hold torches and head east, getting deeper and deeper as they go. The middle of the cave suddenly opens up, and it's almost twenty stories high.

古文：东入既穷，复转西北，得一窦。
现代文：向东走到头后，再转向西北，找到一个洞穴。
English: After heading east, turn northwest to find a cave.

古文：攀而北上，忽倒影遥透，有峡纵横，高深骈沓。
现代文：向北攀登而上，忽然倒影远远透入，有峡谷纵横交错，又高又深骄闻杂沓。
English: Climbing to the north, suddenly the reflection penetrates far and wide, there are canyons criss-crossing, and tall and deep chimneys.

古文：攀其东北，有穴高悬，内峡既峻，外壁弥更加削，只纳接受光晖，无从升降。
现代文：攀到它的东北，有洞穴高悬，里面的峡谷既已陡峻，外边的石壁更加陡削，只接纳进光辉，无法上下。
English: Climbing to the northeast of it, there are caves hanging high. The canyon inside is already steep, and the outer stone walls are even steeper. They only accept light, and cannot go up and down.

古文：更从奥窟披其西北，穿腋上透，又得一门，平整明拓。
现代文：再从深窟中探索它的西北方，穿过侧边向上钻出去，又找到一个洞口，平滑整齐，明亮开阔。
English: Then explore the northwest of it from the deep cave, drill up through the side, and find a hole, smooth and neat, bright and open.

古文：其门北向，其处愈高，吐纳风云，驾驭日月，非复凡境。
现代文：洞口向北，此处愈加高了，呼吸风云，驾驭日月，如在仙境一般。
English: The mouth of the cave is to the north, and it's getting higher and higher here. Breathing the wind and clouds, riding the sun and moon, it's like being in a fairyland.

古文：其北腋尚有余奥，然所入已不甚遥。
现代文：它的北侧还有别的幽深之处，但进去之处已不怎么远了。
English: There are other recesses on the north side of it, but the entrance is not far away.

古文：由其门出，欲缘石觅磴而下，其下皆削立之壁，悬突之崖，无从着足。
现代文：由这个洞口出来，想沿着石崖寻找石瞪下走，那下边全是削立的石壁，悬空高突的山崖，无处落脚。
English: From the mouth of this cave, you want to walk along the cliff to look for stone gnomes. The lower side is full of hewn stone walls, high cliffs, and there is nowhere to land.

古文：乃复从洞中故道，降出至悬台下瞰处。
现代文：只得再从洞中的原路走，往下出来到石台高悬下瞰之处。
English: You just have to walk from the original path in the cave and come down to the place where the stone platform hangs high.

古文：诸君自下呼噪，人人以为仙，即余亦自以为仙也。
现代文：诸君在下边鼓噪狂呼，人人以为是神仙，即便是我也自以为是仙人了。
English: Everyone thinks you're a fairy godmother, even I think I'm a fairy godmother.

古文：倏明倏暗，倏隔倏通，倏上倏下，倏凡倏仙，此洞之灵，抑人之灵也？
现代文：忽而明亮忽而黑暗，倏地隔断倏地相通，时而上时而下，一时是凡人一时又是仙人，这是洞的灵气，还是人的灵气呢？
English: Suddenly bright, suddenly dark, abruptly separated, abruptly connected, sometimes up, sometimes down, sometimes mortal, sometimes celestial, is this the aura of the cave, or the aura of man?

古文：非陆公之力，何以得此！
现代文：不是陆公的力量，如何才能到此地！
English: It is not the strength of Lu Gong, how can I get here!

古文：青狮北洞，在青狮潭北岸。
现代文：青狮北洞，在青狮潭北岸。
English: Qingshi North Cave, on the north shore of Qingshi Lake.

古文：青狮潭者，即洋渡之下流也，江潭深汇，为群鱼之宫，乃参府之禁沼罟也网所不敢入者。
现代文：青狮潭这地方，就是洋渡的下游，江水汇成深潭，是各种鱼类的深宫，是参将府封禁的池沼，是鱼网不敢放进去的地方。
English: This place, Qingshi Lake, is the lower reaches of the ocean crossing, the river water merges into a deep pool, it is a deep palace of various fishes, it is a pond banned by the government, and it is a place where fish nets dare not be put in.

古文：其北崖亦多穹门，与南洞隔江相对。
现代文：它北面的山崖上也有很多弯隆的洞口，与南洞隔江相对。
English: On the cliffs to the north of it, there are also many craggy cave entrances, opposite the South Cave across the river.

古文：余雨中过此，不及旁搜。
现代文：我在雨中走过此地，来不及四处搜寻。
English: I walked past here in the rain and didn't have time to search around.

古文：又西为青狮庙。
现代文：又见西面是青狮庙。
English: You can also see the Blue Lion Temple to the west.

古文：危峰西南来，抵水而尽。
现代文：险峰从西南而来，到水边便完了。
English: The dangerous peak comes from the southwest, and it's all over by the water's edge.

古文：洋渡之水从西，三里之水从北，至此合流而东，峰截其湾，愈为屼嵲，庙倚其下，遂极幽閟焉。
现代文：洋渡的水流从西面，三里城的水流从北面，流到此处合流后往东流，山峰横截水湾，愈加显得突兀，庙紧靠山下，就极为幽静隐秘。
English: The water of Ocean Crossing flows from the west, the water of Sanli Town flows from the north, flows to this place, merges and flows to the east, the mountain peaks intersect the water bay, becoming more and more abrupt, the temple is close to the mountain, it is extremely quiet and secret.

古文：堡北岩，在城南十二里堡之北。
现代文：堡北岩，在城南十二里巨堡的北面。
English: Beiyan Fortress, on the north side of the huge fortress twelve miles south of the city.

古文：其门东向，中深五六丈，后洼而下，不能深入。
现代文：堡南距洋渡仅三里。洞口向东，洞中深五六丈，后面洼下去，不能深入。
English: The south of the castle is only three miles away from the ocean. The entrance to the cave is to the east, the depth of the cave is five or six meters, and it is not possible to go deeper.

古文：独山村西北水岩，在城南八里大路之西。
现代文：独山村西北水岩，在城南八里大路的西面。
English: Northwest Shuiyan, Doku Mountain Village, on the west side of Nanbaili Road.

古文：洞门东向，前有石路，中跨为桥，盖水发时自洞溢出也。
现代文：洞口向东，洞前有石子路，路中跨有桥梁，大概是发大水时从洞中溢出水来。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east, there is a stone path in front of the cave, and there is a bridge across the road. It is likely that water overflows from the cave when there is heavy water.

古文：洞倚西山下，洞口危石磊落，欹嵌而下，其中窅然深黑，不能悬入也。
现代文：洞依傍在西山下，洞口危石众多杂乱，倾斜深嵌下去，洞中杳渺深黑，不能悬空进去。
English: The cave is located at the foot of the West Mountain. The rocks at the mouth of the cave are cluttered, and the slope is deeply embedded. The cave is dark and dark, and it is not possible to enter the cave from the air.

古文：砥柱岩西峰水岩，在城南四里。
现代文：砒柱岩西峰水岩，在城南四里处。
English: Xifeng Water Rock, a stalactite pillar, is located four miles south of the city.

古文：有峰屼突于砥柱之西，高不及砥柱，而回列倍之，上冒下削，其南多空裂成门，而北麓有门北向，两崖如合掌上并。
现代文：有座山峰突兀在砒柱岩的西边，高处赶不上砒晓，可回绕排列有它的一倍，上边下覆下面陡削，它上面有雨水流淌的痕迹，俨然似黄熟香片侧着竖立。它南面有很多空裂成的洞口，而北麓有向北的洞口，两侧的山崖如合拢的手掌并排上耸。
English: There is a peak jutting out on the west side of the pillar rock. The height can not catch up with the dawn, but it can be arranged twice as much. The upper side is covered and the lower side is steeply cut. There are traces of rainwater flowing on it, and it looks like a yellow ripe incense stick. There are many holes in the south, and there is a hole to the north at the northern foot. The cliffs on both sides rise side by side like closed palms.

古文：其内深窅，有光南透，若甚崆峒，第门有潴水溢于两涯，不能入。
现代文：洞内深远，有亮光从南面透进来，好像十分空阔，只是洞口有积水溢满在两岸，不能进去。
English: The cave is deep, with bright light coming through from the south. It seems to be very wide, but the mouth of the cave is full of standing water on both sides, so you can't go in.

古文：几番欲以马渡，而水下多乱石，骑亦不前。
现代文：几次想要骑马渡水，但水下乱石很多，马也不能前进。
English: Several times I wanted to ride a horse across the water, but there were a lot of rocks under the water, and the horse could not move forward.

古文：后营东山洞，在城北四十里，即后营东界石山之西麓也，去后营四里。
现代文：后营东山洞，在城北四十里，就在后营东面一列石山的西麓，距后营四里。
English: Houying Dongshan Cave, forty miles north of the city, at the western foot of a row of stone mountains east of Houying, four miles from Houying.

古文：中又有小山一重为界，山坳中断处，有尖峰在前，亦曰独山，则其西护也。
现代文：中间又有一重小山作为分界，山坳中断之处，有座尖峰在前方，也叫独山，是它在西面的卫兵了。
English: In the middle, there is another small hill as a boundary, and where the ridge breaks, there is a spike in front, also called Dokuzan, which is its guard in the west.

古文：直抵东山下，有石笋一圆云。
现代文：直达东山下，有一根圆形石笋。
English: Directly to the east at the foot of the mountain, there is a round stone pillar.

古文：备记二月十四日。仙庙山，在城西四里，西面石峰之最近城者也。
现代文：仙庙山，在城西四里，是西面石峰最靠近城的山。
English: Xianmiao Mountain, four miles west of the city, is the mountain closest to the city.

古文：石峰中悬，三面陡绝，惟从西南坳中攀崖上，则三里四境尽在目中。
现代文：石峰耸在中央，三面陡绝，唯有从西南方的山坳中攀山崖上去，三里城的四境全进入眼中。
English: The stone peak is towering in the center, and the three sides are steep. It is only by climbing up the cliff from the southwest mountains that the four regions of Sanli City can be seen.

古文：昔有村氓登山而樵，遇仙得道，故土人祀之。
现代文：从前有个村民登山打柴，遇上仙人成仙，所以当地人祭祀他。
English: Once upon a time, there was a villager who went hiking to collect firewood and met a hermit, so the locals worshipped him.

古文：汛塘浮石，在城西五里汛塘中。
现代文：汛塘浮石，在城西五里汛塘中。
English: Qutang pumice, in the middle of Qutang, five miles west of the city.

古文：汛塘者，即仙庙山南之坞也，自仙庙山前西接狮子坳。
现代文：汛塘这地方，就是仙庙山南面的山坞，从仙庙山前往西连接到狮子坳。
English: This place, Shantang, is the dock on the south side of Xianmiao Mountain, connected to Lion's Roost from Xianmiao Mountain to the west.

古文：坞中有塘长数里，水涨时洪流漫衍，巨鱼逆流而上，土人利之，故不疏为田，而障为塘。
现代文：坞中有水塘长数里，水涨时洪流漫溢，大鱼逆流而上，当地人因此获益，所以不疏挖垦为田地，却拦水筑为水塘。
English: There is a reservoir several miles long in the dock. When the water rises, the torrent overflows, and large fish swim upstream. The local people benefit from this, so they do not dig ditches for fields, but build dams for reservoirs.

古文：有石壑一区当塘之中，上浮如败荷覆叶，支撑旁偃，中空外漏，水一潭绕之，石箕踞其上，又如数梁攒凑，去水不及三尺，而虹卧云嘘，若分若合，极氤氲蜿蜒之势。
现代文：在水塘的中央有一片石坑地，上面浮出水面如败谢的荷叶下覆，支撑着向四旁倒卧，中间空外边通，一潭水环绕着它，岩石盘踞在水上，又如数条桥梁攒聚会拢，离水不到三尺，而彩虹横卧，吞吐云雾，似分似合，极尽氰氯蜿蜒的气势。
English: In the middle of the pond there is a stone pit, above which the surface of the water is like a submerged lotus leaf, supporting the four sides, the middle is empty, the outside is open, a pool of water surrounds it, the rocks are stuck on the water, and like several bridges are gathered together, less than three feet from the water, and the rainbow is lying on its side, swallowing clouds, it seems to be the same, and the momentum of cyanogen chloride is exhausted.

古文：其西北里余即汛塘村，倚北山之下。
现代文：它西北一里多就是汛塘村，紧靠在北山之下。
English: More than a mile northwest of it is the village of Qutang, close to the foot of the North Mountain.

古文：周泊隘，在城东二十五里，东界石山之脊也。
现代文：周泊隘，在城东二十五里处，东面一列石山的山脊上。
English: Zhoubo Pass, 25 miles east of the city, on the ridge of a row of stone mountains to the east.

古文：东南石山内，为马场洞。
现代文：隘口正当山脊中央，南北的高峻山崖高高压过来，云气出没在其中。
English: The pass is right in the middle of the ridge, with high pressure coming from the high cliffs to the north and south, and cloud haunting them.

古文：犹三里属。
现代文：越过隘口往东走，就是迁江县的辖境。
English: If you go east across the pass, you will be in the jurisdiction of Qianjiang County.

古文：第地无居民，皆巨木。
现代文：它东北面的石山内，是八寨的罗洪洞。
English: In the stone mountain to the northeast of it is the Luohong Cave of the Eight Villages.

古文：汛塘后坞石洞，在城西七里。
现代文：东南方的石山内，是马场洞。汛塘后坞石洞，在城西七里。
English: In the southeast of Shishan, there is the Horse Farm Cave. In the west of the city, seven miles away, there is the Shitang Back Dock Cave.

古文：西山东来，过佛子岭分为两支，一支直东为汛塘村后峰，一支北转为韦龟山。
现代文：西面的山向东而来，延过佛子岭分为两条支脉，一支一直向东成为汛塘村的后峰，一支转向北方成为韦龟山。
English: The mountain in the west comes to the east, and is divided into two branches as it extends over Fosiling. One goes all the way to the east to become the back peak of Shantang Village, and one turns to the north to become Weiguishan.

古文：二山之东北又环成一坞，东以仙庙山为前障，中有支峰对。
现代文：两座山的东北又环绕成一个山坞，东边以仙庙山作为前方的屏障，中间有支峰相对。
English: The northeast of the two mountains is also surrounded by a dock, with Mount Xianmiao on the east as a barrier in front, and a spur opposite in the middle.

古文：其麓有洞，门东向，前有水隔之，内望甚深，土人云中： 可容千人。
现代文：山麓有洞，洞口向东，洞前有水隔开，望洞内非常深，当地人说： 洞中可容纳一千人。
English: There is a cave at the foot of the mountain. The mouth of the cave faces east. There is water in front of the cave. The cave is very deep. Locals say: The cave can hold a thousand people.

古文：昔其西有村，今已鞠，穷为草莽。 所向东峰之上，亦有洞，门西向，高悬欹侧，亦翳于草莽，俱未及登。
现代文：从前洞西有村子，今天已全部成为荒芜之地。 它面向的东峰之上，也有洞，洞口向西，高悬倾侧，也被草莽遮住，全来不及登。
English: In the past, there was a village to the west of the cave, but today it has all become a barren land. Above the east peak, which it faces, there is also a cave, the mouth of the cave faces west, the high-hanging side is also covered by grass, and it is too late to climb.

古文：三层阁在参府厅事东，陆公所新构也。
现代文：三层阁在参将府厅堂东面，是陆公新建的。
English: The three-story pavilion on the east side of the General Staff Building was newly built by Lukong.

古文：长松环荫，群峰四合，翛然有遗世之想。
现代文：高大的松树，树荫环绕，群峰四面合围，悠然自在有脱离尘世的遐想。
English: Tall pine trees, surrounded by the shade of the trees, surrounded by peaks on all sides, leisurely and freely have the reverie of being detached from the world.

古文：松风亭在署后土山之巅，松荫山色，遥连埤堄，月色尤佳。
现代文：松风亭在衙门后面的土山头上，松树荫璐，山色葱翠，远远城墙相连，月光下的景色尤其美。
English: Songfeng Pavilion is on the top of the hill behind the gate. It is shaded by pine trees and has a mountain green color. The city walls are connected far away, and the scenery under the moonlight is especially beautiful.

古文：余下榻于层阁，几至忘行。
现代文：我住宿在三层阁，几乎忘了上路远行。
English: I stayed in a three-story pavilion and almost forgot to go on a long journey.

古文：剥丁，东与苏吉对。
现代文：陆公在松风亭为我饯行，沉醉在月夜中，所以始终记得。
English: Lu Gong walked for me in Songfeng Pavilion and was intoxicated in the moonlit night, so I always remember.

古文：东界者曰罗洪、西与左营对。
现代文：三里：一个叫上无虞里，一个叫下无虞里，一个叫顺业里。
English: Sanli: one is called Shangmouli, one is called Shimomouli, and one is called Shunyeli.

古文：那良、西与后营对。古卯、古钵、何罗。
现代文：八寨：西面的叫寨垒、都者、剥丁，东面的叫罗洪、那良、古卯、古钵、何罗。
English: Eight villages: the west side is called Zhaiye, Duzha, Pei Ding, and the east side is called Luo Hong, Nara, Guwu, Guwu, and He Luo.

古文：三镇：中曰周安，北曰苏吉，西南曰古鹏。
现代文：三镇：中间的叫周安，北方的叫苏吉，西南的叫古鹏。
English: Three towns: the middle one is called Zhou'an, the northern one is called Suji, and the southwestern one is called Gupeng.

古文：贯八寨之中者，南自后营，北抵周安，极于罗木渡。
现代文：纵贯八寨之中的路，南面起自后营，北边抵达周安，在罗木渡到头。
English: The road runs through the middle of the eight wards, starting from Houying in the south, reaching Zhou'an in the north, and ending at Luo Mudu.

古文：其中有那历、玄岸、蓝涧、桥蓝诸村，南北十余里。
现代文：其中有那历、玄岸、蓝涧、桥蓝诸村，南北有十多里。
English: Among them are Nalian, Xuan'an, Lan'an, Qiao'an and other villages, stretching more than ten miles from north to south.

古文：昔乃顺业里及周安之属，今为八寨余党所踞。
现代文：三里周围是石峰，中间正当土山的尽头处，风光宜人气候温和，唯独此地最适宜；土地肥沃丰美，作物茁壮茂盛，不是其他地方可以赶得上的。
English: Sanli is surrounded by stone peaks, in the middle is the end of the earthen mountain, the scenery is pleasant and the climate is mild, but this place is the most suitable; the land is fertile and beautiful, the crops are thriving, and it is not possible to catch up with other places.

古文：渠魁蓝海潮。八寨交通，而三里之后门不通矣。三里畜物无所不有。
现代文：所种水稻收获的谷粒特别大，常年种满在城郭附近，产量是其他地方的一倍，煮出的饭柔软味美，也不同于其他许多地方种植的。牲畜无所不有。
English: The grain harvested from the rice grown here is particularly large. It is grown all year round near the castle, and the yield is double that of other places. The rice cooked is soft and delicious, and is also different from that grown in many other places. Livestock is everywhere.

古文：鸡豚俱食米饭，其肥异常。
现代文：鸡猪都吃米饭，肥壮异常。
English: Chickens and pigs all eat rice and are abnormally fat.

古文：鸭大者重四斤而方。
现代文：鸭子大的重四斤，体大。
English: A large duck weighs four pounds and has a large body.

古文：此邦鲫鱼甚艰，长仅逾寸，而独有长四五寸者。
现代文：这个省吃螂鱼十分艰难，长处仅超过一寸，但唯独此地有长四五寸的。
English: It is very difficult to eat mantis fish in this province, the advantage is only more than one inch, but there are only four or five inches long here.

古文：三里出孔雀。
现代文：三里出产孔雀。
English: Sanli produces peacocks.

古文：风俗：正月初五起，十五止，男妇答歌曰 打跋 ，或曰 打卜 。举国若狂，亦淫俗也。
现代文：风俗是，正月初五开始，十五停止，男子妇女对歌，叫 打跋 举国若狂，也是淫荡的习俗。
English: The custom is that it starts on the fifth day of the first month of the year and ends on the fifteenth day of the same month. Men and women sing duets and call each other names. It is also a lewd custom.

古文：果品南种无丹荔，北种无核桃，其余皆有之。
现代文：果子的品种南方的品种没有荔枝，北方的品种没有核桃，其余的品种都有。
English: Fruit varieties The southern varieties do not have lychees, the northern varieties do not have walnuts, and the remaining varieties all have cucumbers.

古文：春初，枸杞芽大如箸云，采于树，高二三丈而不结实，瀹其芽实之入口，微似有苦而带凉，旋有异味，非吾土所能望。
现代文：初春时，拘祀芽大如筷子，从树上采来。树高二三丈却不结果实，把它的芽煮来塞入口中，似乎略有苦味而带凉味，随即有怪味，不同我们地方所生产的。
English: At the beginning of spring, the buds are as big as chopsticks, harvested from the tree. The tree is two or three meters high but does not produce fruit. When its buds are boiled and stuffed into the mouth, it seems to have a slightly bitter and cool taste, followed by a strange taste, unlike those produced in our region.

古文：木棉树甚高而巨，粤西随处有之，而此中尤多。
现代文：木棉树非常高大，粤西到处都有，而这一带特别多。
English: Cottonwood trees are very tall and can be found everywhere in western Guangdong, and this area has a particularly large number of cacti.

古文：春时花大如木笔即辛彝，而红色灿然，如云锦浮空，有白鸟成群，四面翔绕之，想食啄其丛也。
现代文：春天时花大如木兰，但红色灿烂，如彩云般的锦缎浮在空中，有成群的白鸟，绕着它四面飞翔，想啄食它的花朵。
English: In spring, the flowers are as big as magnolias, but the red is brilliant. The brocade floats in the air like a colorful cloud, and there are flocks of white birds flying around it on all sides, trying to eat its flowers.

古文：结苞如鸭蛋，老裂而吐花，则攀枝花也，如鹅翎、羊绒，白而有光。
现代文：结出的花苞如同鸭蛋，成熟后裂开吐出花，就是攀枝花了，如像鹅毛、羊绒，白而有光。
English: The flower buds that come out are like duck eggs. After ripening, they crack open and spit out flowers, that is, climbing flowers, such as goose feathers and cashmere, white and shiny.

古文：云泗城人亦有练蒸煮使柔软洁白之为布者，细密难成，而其色微黄，想杂丝以成之也。
现代文：听说泅城州也有人把它煮后织成布的，又细又密难以织成，这种布的颜色微带黄色，料想是搀杂蚕丝织成的。
English: I heard that some people in Lucheng also boiled it and woven it into cloth, which is thin and dense and difficult to weave. The color of this cloth is slightly yellow, and it is thought to be woven from cocooned silk.

古文：相思豆树即红豆树高三四丈，有荚如皂荚而细，每枝四五荚，如攒一处，长一寸而大仅如指。
现代文：相思豆树高三四丈，有豆荚如皂荚但细一些，每枝上有四五个豆荚，如同攒聚在一处，长一寸而大处仅如手指。
English: The acacia bean tree is three or four feet tall, with pods like soap pods but thinner, with four or five pods on each branch, as if gathered in one place, one inch long and only as big as a finger.

古文：子三四粒缀英中，冬间荚老裂为两片，盘缩如花朵，子犹不落。
现代文：三四粒子实连缀在豆荚中，冬天豆荚长老时裂为两片，卷缩起来如像花朵，子实仍然不掉落。
English: Three or four particles of fruit are intertwined in the pod. In winter, when the pod is old, it splits into two pieces and curls up like a flower. The fruit still does not fall off.

古文：其子如豆之细者而扁，色如点朱，珊瑚不能比其彩也。
现代文：它的子实如像细小的豆子但扁一些，颜色如一点朱砂，珊瑚不能与它的色彩相比。
English: Its seeds are like small beans but flatter, its color is like a bit of cinnabar, coral can't compare to its color.

古文：余索得合许。
现代文：我要到一捧左右。
English: I'm down to about a handful.

古文：竹有中实外多巨刺者，丛生而最大；有长节枝弱不繁者，潇洒而颇细；如吾地之耸节虚中，则间有之而无巨者；又一种节细而平，仅若缀一缕而色白，可为杖，土人亦曰粽竹，出三镇之苏吉；其地亦有方竹，止在下数节而不甚端。
现代文：竹子有种中间实心外边有很多巨刺的，成丛生长而且很大；有种竹子节长枝柔不繁杂，样子潇洒而且很细；如我家乡竹节高中间空的竹子，这里却偶然有一些但没有大的；又有一种竹节又细又平，仅如连缀着一缕纹路而且颜色发白，可作手杖，当地人也叫做粽竹，出产在三镇中的苏吉；此地也有方竹，只在下边的几节是方的而且不怎么端正。
English: There is a kind of bamboo with a solid core in the middle and a lot of huge thorns on the outside, which grows in clumps and is very large; there is a kind of bamboo with long branches that are soft and not complicated, which looks chic and is very thin; for example, in my hometown, there is a kind of bamboo with a high hollow in the middle, but here there are some but there are no big ones; there is also a kind of bamboo with thin and flat, only if it is decorated with a strand of lines and the color is white, it can be used as a cane, the local people are also called bamboo shoots, produced in the three towns of Suj; there

