古文：齐庄公之难，晏子不死不亡，而曰： 君为社稷死则死之，为社稷亡则亡之；若为己死而为己亡，非其私昵，谁敢任之？ 
现代文：齐庄公遇难被杀之时，晏子既不死也不逃亡，而是说： 君主为国家而死，那么就为他而死。为国家而逃亡，就为他而逃亡；如果君主为自己而死，为自己而逃亡，不是他个人宠爱的人，谁敢承担责任？ 
English: When Prince Qizhong was killed in a calamity, the mule neither died nor fled, but said: If the monarch dies for the country, then die for him; if he flees for the country, then flee for him; if the monarch dies for himself and flees for himself, and is not his personal favorite, who would dare to take responsibility?

古文：及崔杼、庆封盟国人曰： 所不与崔、庆者 晏子叹曰： 婴所不唯忠于君，利社稷者是与，有如上帝！ 
现代文：等到崔杼、庆封和国内的人在太公的宗庙结盟说： 有不亲附崔氏、庆氏的。 晏子叹气说： 我晏婴如果不亲附忠君利国的人，有天帝为证！ 
English: When Cui Zhen, Qingfeng and the people in the country allied with the ancestral temple of the grand duke, they said: Are there people who are not close to the Cui and Qing dynasties? Zou Zi sighed and said: If I am not close to the people who are loyal to the king and benefit the country, there is the heavenly emperor as a proof!

古文：晏子此意正与豫子所言众人遇我之义同，特不以身殉庄公耳。
现代文：晏子这番话正和豫子所说众人待我如何如何那番话意义相同，只是不为庄公献出生命罢了。
English: These words of Zou Zi have the same meaning as what Yu Zi said about how people treat me, except that he did not give his life for Zhuang Gong.

古文：至于毅然据正以社稷为辞，非豫子可比也。
现代文：至于他坚决地据守正义，拿国家利益作理由，不是豫子能比得上的。
English: As for his resolute adherence to justice, using the national interest as a reason, it is not comparable to that of Yu Zi.

古文：扬雄仕汉，亲蹈王莽之变，退托其身于列大夫中，不与高位者同其死，抱道没齿，与晏子同科。
现代文：扬雄在西汉作官，亲身经历王莽叛汉的变乱。退步托身在一般士大夫行列中，不和官位高的人一同去死，终身坚持正道，与晏子同等。
English: Yang Xiong served as an official in the Western Han Dynasty and personally experienced Wang Manglu's rebellion against the Han Dynasty. He retreated into the ranks of ordinary magistrates, refusing to die with high-ranking officials, and adhered to the righteous path for life, equal to the mule.

古文：世儒或以《剧秦美新》贬之；是不然，此雄不得已而作也。
现代文：社会上有些儒生拿他的《剧秦美新》来贬斥他，其实是不对的，因为这是扬雄迫不得已才写的。
English: Some Confucians in society use his "Drama Qin Meixin" to disparage him, but it is actually wrong, because this was written by Yang Xiong out of necessity.

古文：夫诵述新莽之德，止能美于暴秦，其深意固可知矣。
现代文：颂扬新莽的恩德，结果只能是美化残暴的秦王朝，其中深意不难体会。
English: The result of extolling the new reckless Ende can only be to glorify the brutal Qin Dynasty, and it is not difficult to understand the deep meaning of this.

古文：序所言配五帝冠三王，开辟以来未之闻，直以戏莽尔。
现代文：序中所说新莽与传说中圣明的五帝一样，甚至比夏禹、商汤、周文王、武王还强之类的话，有史以来没有听人说过，这只不过是在戏弄王莽罢了。
English: In the preface, it is said that Xin Meng is the same as the legendary Five Holy Emperors, and even stronger than Xia Yu, Shang Tang, King Zhouwen, and King Wu. No one has ever said such a thing. This is just teasing Wang Meng.

古文：使雄善为谀佞，撰符命，称功德，以邀爵位，当与国师公司列，岂固究如是哉？
现代文：如果扬雄善于逢迎讨好，杜撰符命，称颂功德，以此求取高官厚禄，本应与国师公等同了，怎会一直穷困如此呢？
English: If Yang Xiong was so good at courting favor at every turn, inventing charms, and praising merits and virtues in order to obtain high-ranking officials and rich rewards, he should have been equal to the national teacher, how could he have been so impoverished?

