古文：○理宗二端平二年正月丁酉，太阴行犯太白。
现代文：端平二年正月初三，月亮侵犯太白星。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of Dengping, the moon invaded the white star.

古文：甲寅，诏议胡瑗、孙明复、邵雍、欧阳修、周敦颐、司马光、苏轼、张载、程颢、程颐等十人从祀孔子庙庭，升孔伋十哲。
现代文：二十日，下诏讨论胡缓、孙明复、邵雍、欧阳修、周敦颐、司马光、苏轼、张载、程颖、程颐等十人从祀孔子庙庭，升孔极十哲。
English: On the 20th, the following ten people, including Hu Xuan, Sun Mingfu, Shao Yong, Ouyang Xiu, Zhou Dunyao, Sima Guang, Su Yao, Zhang Zai, Cheng Ying, and Cheng Yao, from the Confucius Temple were discussed, and the top ten Confucius scholars were promoted.

古文：丙辰，诏主管侍卫马军孟珙黄州驻扎，措置边防。
现代文：二十二日，下诏主管侍卫马军孟琪黄州驻扎，措置边务。
English: On the 22nd, Meng Qi, the commander of the Horse Guards, stationed in Huangzhou and took charge of border affairs.

古文：丁巳，孟珙入见。
现代文：二十三日，孟琪朝见理宗。
English: On the 23rd, Meng Qichang met with Rizong.

古文：辛酉，以御前宁淮军统制、借和州防御使程芾为大元通好使，从义郎王全副之，寻以武功郎杜显为添差通好副使。
现代文：二十七日，以御前宁淮军统制、借和州防御使程莆为大元通好使，从义郎王全为副使，不久以武功郎杜显为添差通好副使。
English: On the 27th, with Emperor Ninghuai's army in control and the defense of He Prefecture, Cheng Qi was appointed as the deputy envoy, with Yiro Wangquan as the deputy envoy, and with Wu Gonglang Du Xian as the additional deputy envoy.

古文：二月甲子朔，日当亏不亏。
现代文：二月初一，日当亏而未亏。
English: On the first day of February, the sun should rise, not set.

古文：癸酉，岁星守氐。
现代文：初十，岁星守氏宿。
English: At the age of ten, the Hoshimori family moved in.

古文：壬午，太白、填星合于胃。
现代文：十九日，太白星、填星合于胃宿。
English: On the 19th, Taibai Xing and Fufeng Xing met at the gastro inn.

古文：三月乙未，诏太学生陈均编《宋长编纲目》，进士陈文蔚著《尚书解》，并补迪功郎。
现代文：三月初二，下诏：太学生陈均编宋长编纲目》，进士陈文蔚著《尚书解，都补迪功郎。
English: On the second day of the third month, the following edict was issued: Chen Jun, a student, compiled the outline of the Song Dynasty, and Chen Wenwei, a scholar, wrote the book "Shang Shuxue, Du Shu Di Gong Lang."

古文：丁酉，杨谷、杨石并升太师，寻辞免。
现代文：初四，杨谷、杨石都升为太师，不久辞免。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, both Yang Gu and Yang Shi were promoted to the rank of grandmaster, but were dismissed soon after.

古文：乙巳，曾从龙兼同知枢密院事，真德秀参知政事，兼给事中、兼侍读陈卓同签书枢密院事。
现代文：十二日，曾从龙兼同知枢密院事，真德秀为参知政事，兼给事中、兼侍读陈卓同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 12th, Long Tongzhi was appointed to the Privy Council, Zhen Dexiu was appointed to the Council of State, and Chen Zhuo was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：夏四月甲子，诏： 前四川制置郑损，城池失守，且盗陕西五路府库财钜万，削官二秩，谪居温州，簿录其家。 
现代文：夏四月初二，下诏：前四川制置郑损，城池失守，并且盗窃陕西五路府库财产高达巨万，削夺官二秩，贬滴温州，簿录其家。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: the former Sichuan system was damaged, the city was lost, and the theft of the five prefectural treasuries in Shaanxi amounted to a huge amount of property, the second rank of officials was cut, Wenzhou was downgraded, and their homes were recorded.

古文：丁卯，都城火。
现代文：初五，都城发生火灾。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a fire broke out in Miyakonojo.

古文：丁亥，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，太白星白天出现。
English: Dinghai, Taibai Star appeared during the day.

古文：戊子，大阅。有流星大如太白。
现代文：二十六日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 26th, there was a meteor as big as a white star.

古文：五月乙未，雨雹。
现代文：五月初三，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, hail fell.

古文：军民交哄，御前诸军都统制赵胜削三秩，罢，命韩昱代之。
现代文：军民交相哄闹，御前诸军都统制赵胜削夺三官，罢免，命令韩星代替他。
English: Military-civilian relations were tumultuous, and all the armies in front of the imperial court were controlled by Zhao Shengge, who seized three officials, dismissed them, and ordered Han Xing to replace him.

古文：丙申，大雨、雹。
现代文：初四，降大冰雹。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, large hailstones fell.

古文：甲辰，真德秀薨，赠银青光禄大夫，谥文忠。
现代文：十二日，真德秀去世，赠银青光禄大夫，溢号为忠。
English: On the twelfth day, Zhendexiu passed away. He was awarded the Silver Qingguanglu Doctor, and given the honorary title of "loyal."

古文：庚戌，以乔行简兼参知政事。
现代文：十八日，以乔行简为参知政事。
English: On the 18th, it was announced that Qiao Xingjian would be the new governor.

古文：六月壬申，太阴入氐。
现代文：六月十一日，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On June 11th, the moon entered Mr. Jin's house.

古文：戊寅，以郑清之为特进、左丞相兼枢密使，乔行简金紫光禄大夫、右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：十七日，以郑清之为特进、左承相兼枢密使，乔行简为金紫光禄大夫、右承相兼枢密使。
English: On the 17th, Zheng Qing was designated as the special envoy, the left successor minister and the confidential envoy, Qiao Xingyan as the Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, and the right successor minister and the confidential envoy.

古文：己卯，葛洪资政殿大学士，予祠禄。
现代文：十八日，葛洪为资政殿大学士，给予祠禄官。
English: On the 18th, Ge Hong was awarded the title of Senior Scholar of the Palace of the Great Counselor, and was given the post of shrine stipendiary officer.

古文：庚辰，流星昼陨。
现代文：十九日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 19th, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：祈雨。
现代文：祈祷降雨。
English: Pray for rain.

古文：壬午，以曾从龙知枢密院事兼参知政事，崔与之参知政事，郑性之同知枢密院事，陈卓签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十一日，以曾从龙为知枢密院事兼参知政事，崔与之为参知政事，郑性之为同知枢密院事，陈卓为签书枢密院事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zeng Zonglong was appointed as a privy councilor and a member of the Privy Council, Cui Youwei was appointed as a privy councilor and a member of the Privy Council, Zheng Shixing was appointed as a privy councilor and a member of the Privy Council, and Chen Zhuo was appointed as a signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：赐进士吴叔告以下四百五十四人及第、出身有差。
现代文：赐进士吴叔告以下四百五十四人及第、出身不等。
English: The following four hundred and fifty-four people, and their ranks and origins vary.

古文：己丑，荧惑入太微垣。
现代文：二十八日，荧惑星进人太微垣。
English: On the 28th, the fluorescent planet entered the sky.

古文：庚寅，诏郑损更削两秩，窜南剑州。
现代文：二十九日，诏令郑损再削夺两秩，贬窜南剑州。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Zhengzong further reduced two ranks and demoted Nanjianzhou.

古文：秋七月丁酉，有流星大如太白。
现代文：秋七月初六，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, there is a meteor as big as a white star.

古文：戊戌，太白经天。
现代文：初七，太白星经天。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the planet Venus passes through the sky.

古文：辛丑，流星昼陨。
现代文：初十，流星白天坠落。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：丙午，太白入东井。
现代文：十五日，太白星进人东井。
English: On the 15th, Tai Bai Xing entered the East Well.

古文：庚申，礼部尚书魏了翁上十事，不报。
现代文：二十九日，礼部尚书魏了翁奏上十件事情，没有得到回答。
English: On the 29th, the etiquette department sent out a list of ten questions, but received no response.

古文：闰七月戊寅，诏录开禧蜀难死事之臣，大安知军杨震仲孙忠孙补下州文学；利州路常平干官刘当可母王氏义不降曦，投江而死，追赠和义郡夫人，当可与升官差除。
现代文：闰七月十七日，下诏录用开禧时川蜀死难之臣后代，大安知军杨震仲孙杨忠孙补下州文学，利州路常平干官刘当可母王氏讲大义不投降吴曦，投江而死，追赠和义郡夫人，刘当可升官差除。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the leap year, the following imperial edict was issued to the descendants of the martyred subjects of the Qing Dynasty, Yang Zhenzhong, Yang Zhong, and Liu Dangke, the descendants of the Great Anchi Army, the descendants of Yang Zhong, the descendants of Yang Zhong, and Liu Dangke, the descendants of Li Zhou, the descendants of Li Zhou, the descendants of Li Zhou, the descendants of Li Zhou, the descendants of Li Zhou, Liu Dangke, the descendants of Li Zhou, Liu Dangke, the descendants of Li Zhou, Liu Dangke, the descendants of Li Zhou,

古文：乙酉，赐少师、特进、银青光禄大夫赵方谥忠肃。
现代文：二十四日，赐少师、特进、银青光禄大夫赵方溢号忠肃。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhao Fangyue, a junior teacher, a special promotion, and a silver Qingguanglu doctor, was awarded the title of chastity.

古文：丙戌，故保宁军节度使、鲁国公安丙谥忠定。
现代文：二十五日，赐已故保宁军节度使、鲁国公安丙溢号忠定。
English: On the 25th, he bestowed the honorary title of Zhongding (忠定) on the late Boryeong military envoy to the festival and the public security chief of the Republic of Korea.

古文：丁亥，全子才、刘子澄坐唐州之役弃兵宵遁，子才削二秩，谪居衡州，子澄削二秩，谪居瑞州。八月癸巳，岁星入氐。
现代文：二十六日，全子才、刘子澄因唐州之战弃兵逃跑，都被削夺二官，分别滴居衡州和瑞州。八月初三，岁星进人氏宿。
English: On the 26th, Zengzicai and Liu Zicheng abandoned the army and fled because of the Battle of Tangzhou, and both were deprived of two posts, respectively, Dijuhengzhou and Ruizhou. At the beginning of August 3, the year star entered the people's lodge.

古文：乙卯，以太师赵汝愚配享宁宗庙庭，仍图像于昭勋崇德之阁。
现代文：二十五日，以太师赵汝愚配享宁宗庙庭，图像挂在昭勋崇德阁。
English: On the 25th, ether master Zhao Rugu was awarded the honor of enjoying the Ningzong Temple Garden. The image hangs in the Zhaoxun Chongde Pavilion.

古文：丁巳，太白犯太微垣右执法。
现代文：二十七日，太白星侵犯太微垣右执法。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Xing violated the right of Taibai to enforce the law.

古文：九月癸未，崇国公主薨。
现代文：九月二十三日，崇国公主去世。
English: On September 23, Princess Takakuni passed away.

古文：冬十月辛卯，有流星大如太白。
现代文：冬十月初二，有流星大如太白星。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, a meteor as big as the Taibai Star occurs.

古文：己未，填星犯毕，岁星、太白合于心。
现代文：三十日，填星侵犯毕宿，岁星和太白星合于心宿。
English: On the thirtieth day, the star-filled invaded the final destination, and the year star and the white star met in the final destination.

古文：十一月乙丑，以曾从龙为枢密使、督视江淮军马，魏了翁同签书枢密院事、督视京湖军马，郑性之兼权参知政事。
现代文：十一月初六，以曾从龙为枢密使、督视江淮军马，魏了翁为同签书枢密院事、督视京湖军马，郑性之兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the year, Zeng Zonglong was appointed as the Privy Envoy to supervise the military affairs of Jianghuai, Wei Yaowong was appointed as the Signatory Privy Councillor to supervise the military affairs of Beijing and Hubei, and Zheng Xizhi was appointed as the Acting Councillor.

古文：戊辰，诏两督府各给金千两、银五万两、度牒千、缗钱五百万为随军资。
现代文：初九，诏令两督府分别供给金千两、银五万两、度碟千道、络钱五百万，作为随军费用。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the imperial edict ordered the two governor-generals to provide 1,000 taels of gold, 50,000 taels of silver, 1,000 taels of copper, and 5 million taels of rupees respectively as expenses for accompanying the troops.

古文：台臣李鸣复论曾从龙、魏了翁督府事，不允。
现代文：台臣李鸣复论曾从龙、魏了翁督府事，理宗没有理会。
English: The Taiwanese minister, Li Mingfu, had been a prefectural governor from the Long and Wei dynasties, but Rizong ignored him.

古文：戊子，安南国贡方物。
现代文：二十九日，安南国进贡土特产。
English: On the 29th, Annan Province paid tribute to local special products.

古文：十二月庚寅，曾从龙六疏乞寝枢密使命，依旧知枢密院事、督视江淮军马。
现代文：十二月初二，曾从龙六次上疏请求停发任枢密使的命令，依旧知枢密院事和督视江淮军马。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, he made six requests to the emperor to suspend the order of appointing the envoy. He still knew the affairs of the Privy Council and supervised the military affairs of Jianghuai.

古文：诏许辞枢密使。
现代文：下诏允许辞去枢密使。
English: Permission to resign as a Privy Counsellor was granted.

古文：以魏了翁兼督视江淮军马。
现代文：任命魏了翁兼督视江淮军马。
English: Appointed Wei Liao Weng and Supervisor of the Jianghuai Armies.

古文：癸巳，四川制置司遣将斩叛军首贼蒲世兴于万州。
现代文：初五，四川制置司派遣将领斩杀叛军首贼蒲世兴于万州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Sichuan Provincial Government dispatched a general to kill the rebel leader Pu Shixing in Wanzhou.

古文：己亥，填星守天街星。
现代文：十一日，填星守天街星。
English: On the 11th day, fill the stars to keep the stars in the sky.

古文：庚子，诏官告院制修武郎以下告身给督视府。
现代文：十二日，下诏官告院制作修武郎以下空白任命书交给督视府。
English: On the 12th, the lower magistrate sued the court to produce the following blank appointment letter for Shouwuro and handed it to the inspectorate.

古文：太阴入井。
现代文：月亮进人井宿。
English: The moon enters Hitoii-juku.

古文：壬寅，魏了翁陛辞，诏事干机速，许便宜行之。
现代文：十四日，魏了翁到朝廷辞行，诏令他事关机密，允许不上奏自行处理。
English: On the 14th, Wei Lioweng went to the imperial court to resign, and the emperor ordered him to keep the matter confidential, allowing him to deal with it on his own.

古文：吴潜枢密都承旨、督府参谋官，赵善瀚、马光祖督府参议官。
现代文：吴潜为枢密都承旨、督府参谋官，赵善瀚、马光祖为督府参议官。
English: Wu Qian was the Privy Councilor and the staff officer of the governor's office, Zhao Shanhan and Ma Guangzu were the councillors of the governor's office.

古文：甲辰，曾从龙薨，赠少师。
现代文：十六日，曾从龙去世，赠少师。
English: On the 16th, Zeng Conglong passed away, leaving a young teacher.

古文：余嵘同签书枢密院事。
现代文：余嵘为同签书枢密院事。
English: Yu Yu is a co-signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：庚戌，故参知政事李壁谥文懿。
现代文：二十二日，已故参知政事李壁溢号文爵。
English: On the 22nd, the late senator and politician, Li Qibai, was awarded a knighthood.

古文：辛亥，雷。
现代文：二十三日，打雷。
English: On the 23rd, there was thunder.

古文：三年春正月己未朔，以星行失度，雷发非时，罢天基节宴。
现代文：端平三年春正月初一，以星行失度，雷发非时，罢除天基节宴会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Spring Festival of Dengping, the banquet of the Space Foundation Festival was cancelled.

古文：诏劝农桑。
现代文：下诏劝农桑。
English: The following is an exhortation to farmers and mulberry trees.

古文：赐安南国王封爵、袭衣、金带。
现代文：赐安南国王封爵、衣服、金带。
English: He gave King Annan a knighthood, robes and a gold belt.

古文：丁卯，填星犯毕。
现代文：初九，填星侵犯毕宿。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the star-filled sky invaded the last house.

古文：壬申，大元兵连攻洪山，张顺、翁大成等以兵捍御之。
现代文：十四日，大元兵攻洪山，张顺、翁大成等率兵抵抗元军。
English: On the 14th, Taiyuan soldiers attacked Hongshan, and Zhang Shun, Weng Dacheng and other soldiers led the resistance against the Yuan army.

古文：二月甲午，诏以大元兵攻江陵，统制李复明奋勇战没，其赠三秩，仍官其二子。
现代文：二月初七，下诏因大元兵进攻江陵，统制李复明奋勇战死，赠三秩，并给其二子官。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：死伤士卒，趣具姓名来上。
现代文：死伤士卒，赶快开列姓名报上来。
English: Dead and wounded soldiers, please list their names as soon as possible.

古文：壬寅，诏侍从、台谏、给舍条具边防事宜。
现代文：初九，下诏侍从、台谏、给舍官陈述边防事宜。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the attendant of the imperial edict, the Taiwu, made a statement on border defense matters to the officials.

古文：甲辰，起居郎吴泳上疏论淮、蜀、京、襄捍御十事，不报。
现代文：十一日，起居郎吴泳上疏论淮、蜀、京、襄抵御元军十项事情，没有得到回答。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wu Yongxiang, a resident of the village, discussed the ten things of Huai, Shu, Beijing and Xiang against the Yuan army, but did not get an answer.

古文：诏魏了翁依旧端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，其速赴阙。
现代文：下诏魏了翁依旧为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，迅速赶到朝廷。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, Weng, who was still a member of the Academy and a signatory to the Privy Council, quickly rushed to the imperial court.

古文：诏史嵩之淮西制置使兼副使。
现代文：下诏史篙之为淮西制置使兼副使。
English: In the following edict, Shi Jianwei was appointed as the deputy envoy of Huaixi Province.

古文：辛亥，日晕周匝。
现代文：十八日，太阳周围光圈环绕。
English: On the 18th, the sun was surrounded by a halo.

古文：甲寅，左曹郎官赵以夫上备边十策。
现代文：二十一日，左曹郎官赵以夫呈上边备十策。
English: On the twenty-first day, the left-hand sergeant Zhao Yifu presented the top ten measures.

古文：三月乙亥，吴潜赴阙。
现代文：三月十八日，吴潜到朝廷。
English: On March 18, Wu Xian went to the imperial court.

古文：是月，襄阳北军主将王旻、李伯渊焚城郭仓库，相继降北。
现代文：这个月，襄阳北军主将王、李伯渊焚城廓仓库，相继投降元军。
English: This month, the commander-in-chief of the Northern Army of Xiangyang, Wang and Li Boyuan, set fire to the warehouse of the city wall and surrendered to the Yuan Army one after another.

古文：时城中官民兵四万七千有奇，其财粟三十万、军器二十四库皆亡，金银盐钞不与焉。
现代文：当时城中官民兵共四万七千多人，财粟三十万和军器二十四库都散亡，金银盐钞不计在内。
English: At that time, there were a total of more than 47,000 militia officers in the city, 300,000 pieces of money and 24 warehouses of military equipment were lost, excluding gold, silver and salt banknotes.

古文：南军主将李虎乘火纵掠，襄阳为空。
现代文：南军主将李虎乘火纵掠，襄阳为之一空。
English: The leader of the Southern Army, Li Hu, plundered by fire, and Xiangyang was left empty-handed.

古文：制置使赵范坐失抚御，致南北军交争造乱，诏削官三秩，落龙图阁学士，姑仍制置职任。
现代文：制置使赵范因失于抚御，致使南北军交争造乱，下诏削夺官三秩，免龙图阁学士，暂且任命他继续担任制置职务。
English: Zhao Fan was relieved of his position as the emperor's regent, which led to the North and South armies fighting and creating chaos. He was demoted three ranks and relieved of his position as the Dragon Academy's academician. He was temporarily appointed to continue to serve as the regent.

古文：阶、岷、叠、宕十八族降。
现代文：阶、山民、叠、宕十八族降服。
English: Eighteen ethnic groups, including peasants, mountaineers, peasants and peasants, surrendered.

古文：有谍者以檄招曹友闻军降，友闻斩之以闻。
现代文：有间谍发布檄文招降曹友闻军，曹友闻斩杀了他然后上报。
English: There was a spy who published an article calling for the surrender of Cao Youwen's army. Cao Youwen killed him and then reported it.

古文：夏四月丙申，太阴入太微垣。
现代文：夏四月初十，月亮进人太微垣。
English: On the tenth day of the fourth month in summer, the moon is too faint to see.

古文：己酉，魏了翁乞归田里，诏不允，以资政殿学士知潭州。
现代文：二十三日，魏了翁请求解职归田，下诏不允，以资政殿学士知潭州。
English: On the 23rd, Wei Liaowong requested to be relieved of his duties and returned to the field, but was not allowed to do so. He came to Zhitangzhou as a scholar of the Palace of the Grand Vizier.

古文：癸丑，诏悔开边，责己，其京湖、兴、沔州军县镇见系囚情理轻者释之。
现代文：二十七日，理宗诏悔开边，责备自己，京湖、洒州州军县镇现在押囚犯中情节较轻者释放。
English: On the 27th, while expressing remorse and reproaching himself, Li Zongzhao released the prisoners with minor offenses from the towns of Jinghu and Jinshan in Jinshan County.

古文：五月戊寅，提举万寿观洪咨夔依旧兼侍读。
现代文：五月二十三日，提举万寿观洪咨夔依旧兼侍读。
English: On May 23rd, Wang Shouqun and Hong Zhiyao were still appointed to attend the lecture.

古文：己卯，有流星出心，大如太白。
现代文：二十四日，有流星出现在心宿，大如太白星。
English: On the 24th, a meteor appeared in Shinshuku, as big as a white star.

古文：辛巳，太阴入毕。
现代文：二十六日，月亮进人毕宿。
English: On the 26th, the moon sets.

古文：甲申，赵葵华文阁直学士、淮东安抚制置使兼知扬州。
现代文：二十九日，赵葵为华文阁直学士、淮东安抚制置使兼扬州知州。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Kwai became the direct bachelor of Huaweng Pavilion, the ambassador of Huaidong pacification system and Yangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：六月丁亥，流星夕陨。
现代文：六月初二，流星夜晚陨落。
English: On the second day of June, a meteor fell in the night.

古文：己亥，洪咨夔卒，诏与执政恩例，赠二秩，谥忠文。
现代文：十四日，洪咨夔去世，诏令给予执政待遇，赠二秩，溢号忠文。
English: On the 14th, Hong Zhaojun passed away, and the imperial edict gave him the ruling treatment, two ranks, and the honorary title of Zhongwen.

古文：癸卯，荧惑、填星合于毕。
现代文：十八日，荧惑星、填星合于毕宿。
English: On the 18th, the fluorescent planet and the star-filled star merged at the end of the night.

古文：丙午，荧惑犯填星。
现代文：二十一日，荧惑星侵犯填星。
English: On the twenty-first day, the fluorescent planet invaded the star.

古文：庚戌，大雨、雹。
现代文：二十五日，大降冰雹。
English: On the 25th, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：秋七月丁巳，祈睛。
现代文：秋七月初二，祈求天晴。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, pray for a fine day.

古文：诏权徐州国安用力战役而殁，已赠顺昌军节度使，仍官其子国兴承节郎。
现代文：下诏：代理徐州国安用力战而死，除赠为顺昌军节度使外，再给其子国兴官承节郎。
English: The following edict: Acting Xuzhou Guoan died in battle, and in addition to being given to the Shunchang Army, he was also given to his son Guo Xingguan Cheng Jielang.

古文：庚申，以赵范失襄城，罪重罚轻，诏罢职奉祠。
现代文：初五，赵范因失守襄城，罪重罚轻，下诏罢职奉祠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Fan was dismissed from his post at the temple due to his failure to defend Xiangcheng.

古文：辛酉，太阴入氐。
现代文：初六，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the moon enters Hitoshi's house.

古文：丁卯，以郑性之参知政事，李呜复签书枢密院事，戊辰，监察御史杜范、吴昌裔以言事不报，上疏乞罢官，诏改授范太常少卿，昌裔太常卿。
现代文：十二日，以郑性之为参知政事，李鸣复签书枢密院事。十三日，监察御史杜范、吴昌裔因言事没得到回答，上疏请求罢官，诏令改授杜范为太常少卿，吴昌裔为太常卿。
English: On the 12th, with Zheng as the subject, Du Fan and Wu Changxiang, inspectors of the Imperial Household Agency, signed a letter of reply to the Privy Council. On the 13th, Du Fan and Wu Changxiang, inspectors of the Imperial Household Agency, did not receive an answer due to their speech, so Shangsu requested that they be dismissed. Du Fan was awarded the title of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and Wu Changxiang was awarded the title of Senior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：庚午，荧惑入井。
现代文：十五日，荧惑星进人井宿。
English: On the 15th, the fluorescent planet entered Jinjing.

古文：戊寅，太阴入东井。
现代文：二十三日，月亮进人东井。
English: On the 23rd, the moon entered Higashii.

古文：甲申，雨血。
现代文：二十九日，下雨。
English: On the 29th, it rained.

古文：八月丙戌，诏赵范更削两秩、谪居建宁府，李虎削三秩、落刺史，罢御器械，各令任责捍御自效。
现代文：八月初二，诏令赵范再削夺二级官职，贬滴建宁府，李虎削夺官三级，免刺史，罢御器械，分别命令他们率军抗敌，改过自新。
English: On the second day of August, the emperor ordered Zhao Fan to be relegated to the second-level official post, and Jianningfu to be downgraded, and Li Hu to be relegated to the third-level official post, free from the stigma of history, and banished from the army, respectively, and ordered them to lead the army to resist the enemy and reform themselves.

古文：癸卯，诏前龙图阁学士、光禄大夫、赠开府仪同三司傅伯成谥忠简。
现代文：十九日，下诏前龙图阁学士、光禄大夫、赠开府仪同三司傅伯成溢号 忠简 。
English: On the 19th, the former Longtu Ge bachelor, Guanglu doctor, presented the Kaifu ceremony with the name of Zhong Jian.

古文：九月庚申，太白、岁星合于尾。
现代文：九月初六，太白星、岁星合于尾宿。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the Taibai Star and the New Year's Star will converge on Ojuku.

古文：庚午，雷。
现代文：十六日，打雷。
English: On the 16th, there was thunder.

古文：辛未，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：十七日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On the 17th, the memorial service was held at Myeongdong, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：雷雨。
现代文：雷雨交作。
English: The thunderstorms are interspersed.

古文：乙亥，左丞相兼枢密使郑清之罢为观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，右丞相兼枢密使乔行简罢为观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：二十一日，左承相兼枢密使郑清之罢为观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读，右承相兼枢密使乔行简罢为观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zheng Qingzhi, the left lineage minister and privy councillor, became a scholar at the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, and Yu Dequan, the right lineage minister and privy councillor, became a scholar at the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, and Yu Dequan, the right lineage minister and privy councillor, became a scholar at the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, and Yu Dequan, the right lineage minister, became a scholar at the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, and Yu Dequan, the right lineage minister, became a scholar at

古文：以崔与之为右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：任命崔与之为右承相兼枢密使。
English: Choe and Kimito were appointed as Ujoseong and Privy Councilors.

古文：壬午，骁卫大将军、利州驻扎御前诸军统制曹友闻与大元兵大战于大安军阳平关，兵败，死之。
现代文：二十八日，晓卫大将军、利州驻扎御前诸军统制曹友闻与元军在大安军阳平关交战，兵败，战死。
English: On the 28th, General Xiao Wei and Cao Youwen, who was in charge of the troops stationed in front of the imperial court in Lizhou, fought against the Yuan army in Yangping Pass of the Da'an Army, were defeated and died in battle.

古文：诏赠龙图阁学士、大中大夫，谥毅节，立庙曰褒忠，官其二子承务郎。
现代文：诏令赠龙图阁学士、大中大夫，溢号毅节，立庙为褒忠，任命他的两个儿子为承务郎。
English: The imperial edict presented Longtuge with a bachelor's degree, a doctor's degree, the honorary title of Yi Jie, the establishment of a temple as a reward for loyalty, and the appointment of his two sons as stewards.

古文：冬十月乙酉，诏： 殿前司将胡斌，曩死邵武之寇，赠武节大夫，有司为立后授官，因旧庙赐额。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏： 殿前司将胡斌，原来死于邵武寇贼之手，赠武节大夫，有关部门为之立后授官，为其旧庙赐给匾额。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: The former palace secretary presented Hu Bin, who had originally died at the hands of Shao Wu's bandits, with the title of Wu Jie Daifu, and the relevant departments conferred on him the post of official, and gave him a plaque for his old temple.

古文：宗室师礻贾死尤溪之战，赠武节郎，官其一子进义校尉，立庙林岭。 
现代文：宗室赵少耐贾死于尤溪之战，赠武节郎，任其一子为进义校尉，立庙林岭。 
English: Zhao Shao Nei Jia's father-in-law died in the Battle of Youxi, and he presented Wu Jielang as a gift. One of his sons was named Jin Yi, a school captain, and the Linling Temple was built.

古文：甲午，诏： 沿江制置使陈韡应援淮东，授淮西制置使兼沿江制置副使史嵩之应援江陵、峡州江面上流。 
现代文：初十，下诏： 沿江制置使陈擎应援淮东，授淮西制置使兼沿江制置副使史篙之应援江陵、峡州江面上游。 
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Chen Qing, who was awarded the title of "River-side Construction Envoy," should support East Huai, and Shi Xizhi, who was awarded the title of "West Huai Construction Envoy" and the title of "River-side Construction Deputy Envoy," should support Jiangling and the upper reaches of the Xiaozhou River.

古文：壬寅，大元兵破固始县，淮西将吕文信、杜林率溃兵数万叛，六安、霍丘皆为群盗所据。
现代文：十八日，元军攻破固始县，淮西将领吕文信、杜林率领数万溃兵叛变，六安、霍丘都被群盗占据。
English: On the 18th, the Yuan army broke through Gushi County, Huaxi generals Lü Wensin and Du Lin led tens of thousands of routed soldiers to mutiny, and Lu'an and Huoqiu were occupied by bandits.

古文：丙午，安南国贡方物，诏授金紫光禄大夫、静海军节度、观察等使，赐袭衣、金银带。
现代文：二十二日，安南国进贡士特产，下诏授为金紫光禄大夫、静海军节度使、观察使，赐给衣服一套和金银带。
English: On the 22nd, the special products donated by Annan Province were awarded to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Jing Navy Festival Envoy and Observation Envoy, and they were given a set of clothes and a gold and silver belt.

古文：大元太子阔端兵离成都，大元兵破文州，守臣刘锐、通判赵汝曏死之。
现代文：元朝太子阔端兵离开成都，大元军攻破文州，守臣刘锐、通判赵汝战死。
English: The prince of the Yuan Dynasty, Kuo Duan, left Chengdu, the Great Yuan Army broke through Wenzhou, and the vassals Liu Rui and Tong Han Zhao Ru died in battle.

古文：十一月戊午，诏嗣秀王师弥授少师。
现代文：十一月初五，诏令嗣秀王赵师弥授为少师。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, Zhao Shiya, the heir of King Xiu, was awarded the title of Junior Teacher.

古文：丙寅，以乔行简为特进、左丞相兼枢密使，封肃国公。
现代文：十三日，以乔行简为特进、左承相兼枢密使，封为肃国公。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Qiao Xingjian as a special envoy, Zuo Chengxiang as well as a confidential envoy, and named him Su Guogong.

古文：大元兵围光州，诏史嵩之援光，赵葵援合肥，陈韡遏和州，为淮西声援。
现代文：元军围攻光州，下诏史篙之援救光州，赵葵救援合肥，陈擎在和州阻击，为淮西声援。
English: The Yuan army besieged Gwangju, Zhao Shizhi came to the rescue of Gwangju, Zhao Kwai came to the rescue of Hefei, Chen Qing blocked the attack in Hezhou, and supported Huaxi.

古文：戊辰，魏了翁依旧资政殿学士、知绍兴府、浙东安抚使，吴潜、袁甫、徐清叟赴阙。
现代文：十五日，魏了翁依旧为资政殿大学士，知绍兴府、浙东安抚使，吴潜、袁甫、徐清雯到朝廷。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wei Liao Weng was still a member of the Academy of Capital and Political Affairs, and he sent Wu Qian, Yuan Fu, and Xu Qingwen to the imperial court from Shaoxing Prefecture and East Zhejiang Province.

古文：壬申，诏侍从、两省、台谏、卿监、宰掾、枢属、郎官、钤辖，各陈防边方略。
现代文：十九日，下诏侍从、两省、台谏、卿监、宰椽、枢属、郎官、铃辖，分别向朝廷陈述防边策略。
English: On the 19th day of the following month, the imperial attendants, the two provinces, the Taiwans, the chancellors, the vice-chancellors, the vassals, the vassals, and the fiefs separately presented the border defense strategy to the imperial court.

古文：甲戌，太阴入太微垣。
现代文：二十一日，月亮进人太微垣。
English: On the twenty-first day, the moon was too faint to see.

古文：戊寅，复成都府。
现代文：二十五日，收复成都府。
English: On the 25th, Chengdu was recaptured.

古文：十二月戎戌，以吴渊户部侍郎、淮东总领财赋兼知镇江府。
现代文：十二月十五日，以吴渊为户部侍郎、淮东总领财赋兼知镇江府。
English: On December 15th, Wu Yuan was appointed as the steward of the household, the general manager of Huaidong and the governor of Zhenjiang.

古文：壬寅，诏改明年为嘉熙元年。
现代文：十九日，下诏改明年为嘉熙元年。
English: On the 19th, the following edict changed the next year to the first year of Jiaxi.

古文：癸卯，郑清之辞免观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，诏仍旧观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：二十日，郑清之辞去观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读。下诏郑清之仍旧为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: On the 20th, Zheng Qingzhi resigned as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, and as an attendant of the Yongdequan Academy of Confucianism. Zheng Qingzhi is still a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and Literature and was promoted to Dongxiao Palace.

古文：丁未，宣缯薨，以定策功，赠太师，谥忠靖。
现代文：二十四日，宣增去世，因定策之功，赠太师，溢号为忠靖。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Xuan Zeng passed away. He was given the title of Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Zhongjing.

古文：甲寅，池州都统赵邦永以援滁州功，诏邦永转左武大夫，其余立功将士具等第、姓名推赏。
现代文：甲寅日，池州都统赵邦永因援救滁州之功，下诏赵邦永转为左武大夫，其余立功将士，开列等第、姓名施加恩赏。
English: On the first day of the year, the Chizhou Metropolitan Government awarded Zhao Bangyong the title of Zuowu Doctor for his outstanding contribution to the rescue of Ganzhou, and the rest of the meritorious soldiers were listed by name and rank.

古文：嘉熙元年春正月乙卯，以魏了翁知福州兼福建安抚使。
现代文：嘉熙元年春正月初三，任命魏了翁知福州兼福建安抚使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jiaxi, Wei appointed Weng Zhi Fuzhou and Fujian Pacifying Envoy.

古文：丁巳，诏京西兵马都监、随州驻扎程再暹官三转，带行阁门宣赞舍人、京西钤辖兼知随州，赏其洪山战功，余有功将士趣以名上。
现代文：初五，下诏京西兵马都监、随州驻扎程再逞转三官，带行阎门宣赞舍人、京西铃辖兼知随少，赏其洪山战功，其余有功将士赶快上报姓名。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Beijing-Western Terracotta Warriors and Horses Supervisor and the Suizhou Stationing Commander were transferred to the three officials, and the Yanmen Xuan Xuan Xuan Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren, the Beijing-Western Suizhou Stationing Commander and the Suizhou Stationing Commander Xuan Xuan Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren Ren

古文：辛酉，以李同知枢密院事、四川宣抚使。
现代文：初九，以李皇同知枢密院事、四川宣抚使。
English: In the early 9th century, Emperor Li Tongzhi appointed him Privy Counsellor and Envoy to Sichuan.

古文：甲子，诏： 两淮、荆襄之民，避地江南，沿江州县，间有招集振恤，尚虑恩惠不周，流离失所。
现代文：十二日，下诏： 两淮、荆襄之民，避地江南，沿江州县，经常招集贩恤，仍然怀疑恩惠不周，致使百姓流离失所。
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued: The people of the two Huai and Jingxiang Dynasties, the refuge south of the Yangtze River and the counties along the Yangtze River, often invited the smugglers, but still suspected that the favors were inadequate, resulting in the displacement of the people.

古文：江阴、镇江、建宁、太平、池、江、兴国、鄂、岳、江陵境内流民，其计口给米，期十日竣事以闻。 
现代文：江阴、镇江、建宁、太平、池、江、兴国、鄂、岳、江陵境内流民，计口给米，十日之内完成任务上报朝廷。 
English: Jiangyin, Zhenjiang, Jianning, Taiping, Chi, Jiang, Xingguo, E, Yue, and Jiangling, the displaced persons shall be counted and reported to the imperial court within ten days of completing the task.

古文：癸酉，荧惑守鬼宿。
现代文：二十一日，荧惑星守鬼宿。
English: On the twenty-first day, the fluorescent planet guards the haunted house.

古文：壬午，流星大如太白。
现代文：三十日，流星大如太白星。
English: On the 30th, the meteor was as big as a white star.

古文：二月癸未朔，以郑性之知枢密院事兼参知政事，邹应龙端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，李宗勉同签书枢密院事。
现代文：二月初一，以郑性之为知枢密院事兼参知政事，邹应龙为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，李宗勉为同签书枢密院事。
English: On the first day of February, Zheng Shixin was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council and also participated in the political affairs of the President, Zou Yinglong was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and Li Zongren was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：李呜复罢，以资政殿学士知绍兴府。
现代文：李鸣复被罢免，以资政殿学士知绍兴府。
English: Li Mingfu was ousted from his post and became the patron of Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：乙酉，葛洪薨。
现代文：初三，葛洪逝世。
English: In his junior year, Ge Hong passed away.

古文：壬寅，雨雹。
现代文：二十日，降冰雹。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, hail fell.

古文：丙申，诏忠义选锋张顺、屈伸等，以舟师战公安县之巴芒有功，各官一转，余推恩有差。
现代文：丙申日，下诏： 忠义选锋张顺、屈伸等，率领舟师在公安县巴芒作战有功，各转一官，其余施加恩惠不等。 
English: On the day of Xinshen, the following edict was issued: Zhang Shun, Qu Sheng and others who were loyal to the front and led the boat division in the battle of Bamang in the public security county were meritorious, each of them was transferred to a post, and the rest were given different favors.

古文：癸卯，诏以朱熹《通鉴纲目》下国子监，并进经筵。
现代文：二十一日，诏令以朱熹通鉴纲目》下给国子监，并进呈给经筵。
English: On the twenty-first day, the imperial edict was given to the provincial overseer under the "Zhu Xi Tong Jian Guan Guan Moku" and submitted to the magistrate.

古文：己酉，太白昼见，日晕周匝。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现，太阳周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the 27th, a very white star appeared during the day, with a halo around the sun.

古文：三月癸亥，日生背气。
现代文：三月十二日，太阳生出背气。
English: On March 12th, the sun rebelled.

古文：己巳，诏阵韡、史嵩之、赵葵各官两转。
现代文：十八日，下诏陈酥史篙之、赵葵各转两官。
English: On the 18th, Chen Xuxi and Zhao Kwai were promoted to their respective posts.

古文：乙亥，魏了翁薨，赠少师，赐谥文靖。
现代文：二十四日，魏了翁去世，赠少师，赐给溢号文靖。
English: On the 24th day of the month, Wei Liaowong passed away, bestowed the title of Shoshi, and bestowed the title of Wenjing.

古文：以孟珙为忠州团练使、知江陵府、京西湖北安抚副使，别之杰宝章阁待制、知太平州。
现代文：任命孟琪为忠州团练使、江陵知府、京西湖北安抚副使，别之杰为宝章阁待制、知太平州。
English: Meng Qi was appointed as the envoy of Chungju Reunification, the deputy envoy of Jiangling Prefecture, and the deputy envoy of the pacification of West Hubei Province, and the outstanding one was the ambassador of Bozhang Pavilion, and the ambassador of Taiping Province.

古文：夏四月壬午朔，以李同知枢密院事、四川宣抚使、知成都府。
现代文：夏四月初一，以李皇为同知枢密院事、四川宣抚使、成都知府。
English: On the first day of April in summer, Emperor Li was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor, Sichuan Procurator, and Chengdu prefect.

古文：壬辰，弟贵谦保康军节度使，仍奉朝请，进封天水郡开国侯，加食邑；与芮武康军节度使、提举万寿观，仍奉朝请，进封开国子。
现代文：十一日，弟赵贵谦为保康军节度使，逢一日、五日朝见皇帝，进封为天水郡开国侯，加食邑；赵与丙为武康军节度使、提举万寿观，逢一日、五日朝见皇帝，进封为开国子。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhao Guiqian, the younger brother of Zhao Guiqian, was the festival envoy of the Baokang Army, and met the emperor every day and five days in the morning, and Jinfeng was the prince of Tianshui County and Jia Shuxiu; Zhao and Zhe were the festival envoys of the Wukang Army and raised the view of longevity, and met the emperor every day and five days in the morning, and Jinfeng was the son of the opening of the country.

古文：丙申，诏： 两淮策应军战宣化，两军杀伤相当，陈亡将校李仙、王海、李雄、廖雷各赠武翼大夫，余赠官有差。 
现代文：十五日，下诏： 两淮策应军在宣化作战，两军杀伤相当，阵亡将校李仙、王海、李雄、廖雷各赠武翼大夫，其余赠官不等。 
English: On the 15th, the following edict was issued: The two Huaihe armies were in the battle of Xuanhua, and the two armies had the same number of casualties. The fallen officers Li Xian, Wang Hai, Li Xiong, and Liao Lei were each given the title of military doctor, and the other officers were given different ranks.

古文：庚子，荧惑犯权星。
现代文：十九日，荧惑星侵犯权星。
English: On the 19th, the fluorescent planet violated the rights of the star.

古文：丙午，诏： 沔州诸镇将帅，昨以大元兵压境，皆弃官遁。
现代文：二十五日，下诏： 洒洲各镇将帅，近因元军大兵压境，都弃官逃跑。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: The generals of all the towns in the Spratly Islands had all resigned their posts and fled, as they were about to be crushed by the soldiers of the former army.

古文：夔路钤辖、知恩州田兴隆，独自大安德胜堡至潼川，逆战数合，虽兵寡不敌，而忠节可尚，特与官一转。 
现代文：夔路铃辖、恩州知州田兴隆，一个人从大安军德胜堡至撞川，抵抗多次，虽然兵少不敌，但忠节可尚，特与转一官。 
English: Kushiro Ringu, Enshu Chishu Tian Xinglong, a person from the Da'an Army Desheng Fort to Qianchuan, resisted many times, although the number of soldiers was small, but the loyalty was still good, especially with the transfer of a post.

古文：五月丙辰，袁韶薨。
现代文：五月初六，袁韶去世。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, Yuan Shao passed away.

古文：太阴犯荧惑。
现代文：月亮侵犯荧惑星。
English: The Moon encroaches on the fluorescent planet.

古文：壬申，京城大火。
现代文：二十二日，京城发生大火灾。
English: On the 22nd, a large fire broke out in the capital.

古文：丙子，荧惑犯将星。
现代文：二十六日，荧惑星侵犯将星。
English: On the 26th, the fluorescent planet will invade the star.

古文：六月壬辰，诏赏蕲州都统制万文胜、知州徐守城之功，将士在行间者，论功补官有差。
现代文：六月十三日，下诏赏赐薪州都统制万文胜、知州徐镐守城之功，将士在战阵者，论功补官不等。
English: On June 13th, the following edict was issued to reward the merits of the control of the capital city of Zhouzhou, Wan Wensheng, and the defense of the capital city of Chizhou, Xu Xi. Those who were in the battle line were rewarded with additional posts.

古文：癸巳，以邹应龙为资政殿学士、知庆元府、沿海制置使。
现代文：十四日，任命邹应龙为资政殿学士、知庆元府、沿海制置使。
English: On the 14th, Zou Yinglong was appointed as the Vice-President of the Academy, the Vice-governor of Zhiqing Yuanfu, and the Vice-governor of the Coastal Military Region.

古文：乙未，太白、填星合于井。
现代文：十六日，太白星、填星合于井宿。
English: On the 16th, Taibai Xing and Fufeng Xing rendezvoused at Ijuku.

古文：甲辰，祈雨。
现代文：二十五日，祈求降雨。
English: On the 25th, pray for rain.

古文：丙午，以吴潜为工部侍郎、知庆元府兼沿海制置使。
现代文：二十七日，以吴潜为工部侍郎、知庆元府兼沿海制置使。
English: On the 27th, Wu Qian was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Works, and Chih Ching Yuanfu and the coastal construction envoy.

古文：知黄州兼淮西安抚使、本路提刑李寿朋一被命三月，不即便途之官，遂还私舍，诏削三秩，送建昌军居住。
现代文：知黄州兼淮西安抚使、本路提刑李寿朋，接到命令三个月，没有到任，于是回到私舍，下诏削夺三秩，送到建昌军居住。
English: After receiving the order, Li Shoupeng, the Huangzhou and Huaixi pacification envoy, did not arrive at his post for three months, so he returned to his private residence, took three ranks and was sent to Jianchang Army to live.

古文：诏建内小学，择宗子十岁以下资质美者二三人，置师教之。
现代文：下诏建皇宫小学，选择宗室子十岁以下资质优者二三人，设师教之。
English: The next edict is to build an imperial palace elementary school, select two or three people with excellent qualifications under the age of ten, and set them up as teachers.

古文：秋七月壬子，湖北提举董槐朝辞，奏楮币物价重轻之弊。
现代文：秋七月初三，湖北提举董槐到朝廷告辞，奏疏褚币物价重轻弊端。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Hubei raised the Dongqi to the imperial court to bid farewell, and reported that the price of Dongqi was more important than the drawbacks.

古文：己未，枢密院言： 大元兵自光州、信阳抵合肥，制司参议官李曾伯、庐州守臣赵胜、都统王福战守，俱有劳效。 
现代文：初十，枢密院说： 大元兵从光州、信阳到合肥，制司参议官李曾伯、庐州守臣赵胜、都统王福战守，都有功劳。 
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Privy Council said: The great Yuan soldiers from Gwangju and Shinyang to Hefei, the Secretary-General and Councilor of State Li Zengbo, the governor of Bozhou Zhao Sheng, and the governor of the capital Wang Fu, all contributed to the war effort.

古文：诏曾伯等十一人各官一转。
现代文：下诏李曾伯等十一人各转一官。
English: Li Zengbo and eleven other officials will be promoted one rank each.

古文：辛酉，太阴犯岁星、填星入井，庚午，岁星守建星。
现代文：十二日，月亮侵犯岁星、填星进人井宿。二十一日，岁星守建星。
English: On the twelfth day, the moon invaded the year star, filling the star into the manhole. On the twenty-first day, the year star guarded the star.

古文：壬申，日生背气。
现代文：二十三日，太阳旁边出现背气。
English: On the 23rd, a backlash appeared next to the sun.

古文：癸酉，太阴入井。
现代文：二十四日，月亮进人井宿。
English: On the 24th, the moon entered the man's well.

古文：八月甲申，太师、秦国公汝愚追封福王。
现代文：八月初六，太师、秦国公赵汝愚追封为福王。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Zhao Rugu, the Grand Master and Qin sovereign, was posthumously crowned as the King of Good Fortune.

古文：乙酉，填星犯井，癸巳，以李鸣复参知政事，李宗勉签书枢密院事。
现代文：初七，填星进犯井宿。十五日，以李鸣复为参知政事，李宗勉为签书枢密院事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Li Mingfu was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Li Zongren was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：甲辰，诏：蜀鸡冠隘都统王宣战殁，其总管吴桂弃所守走，又纵部伍剽劫，削三官勒停。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：川蜀鸡冠隘都统王宣战死，其总管吴桂弃守地逃跑，又纵所部士兵劫掠，削夺三官，勒令停职。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: the king of Chuanshu, Jiankuang, Guanzhai and Dadu was declared dead in battle, and his general manager, Wu Gui, abandoned the garrison and fled, and the soldiers of the headquarters were robbed and plundered, and the three officials were stripped of their posts and suspended from duty.

古文：九月壬子，填星留于井。
现代文：九月初四，填星停留在井宿。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Fu Xing stayed at Ijuku.

古文：癸丑，有流星出七公西星，至浊没。
现代文：初五，有流星出现在七公西星，到浊星消失。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, a meteor appeared in the constellation of the Dog Star and disappeared in the constellation of the Dragon.

古文：丁巳，雷。
现代文：初九，打雷。
English: Nine o'clock, thunder.

古文：冬十月戊戌，有流星大如桃。
现代文：冬十月二十日，有流星大如桃。
English: On the 20th of October in winter, there was a meteor as big as a peach.

古文：十一月戊辰，诏陈韡、史嵩之、赵葵于沿江、淮、汉州军，备舟师战具，防遏冲要堡隘。
现代文：十一月二十一日，下诏陈擎、史篙之、赵葵在江、淮、汉州军，准备舟师战船，防守要冲堡隘。
English: On November 21st, Chen Qing, Shi Xizhi, Zhao Kwai in the Jiang, Huai, and Hanzhou armies issued an order to prepare boats and warships, and to defend the fortress.

古文：辛未，太史言十二月朔日食将既，日与金、木、水、火四星俱缠于斗。
现代文：二十四日，太史说十二月初一将出现日全食，太阳与金、木、水、火四星都盘绕斗星。
English: On the 24th, Tai Shi said that there would be a total solar eclipse on the first day of December. The sun and the four stars of gold, wood, water and fire were all coiled around the star.

古文：诏损膳避朝，庶图消弭，其令有司检会故实以闻。
现代文：下诏减膳避朝，希望消灭灾异现象，并命令有关部门检查过去这方面的情况上报朝廷。
English: He issued an edict to reduce meals and avoid the imperial court, hoping to eliminate the disastrous phenomenon, and ordered the relevant departments to check the situation in this regard in the past and report to the imperial court.

古文：十二月戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：二年春正月戊申朔，诏令侍从、台谏、卿监、郎官、帅臣、监司、前宰执侍从举晓畅兵财各二人，三衙、诸军统制举将材二人。
现代文：嘉熙二年春正月初一，下诏侍从、台谏、卿监、郎官、帅臣、监司、前任宰执侍从官举荐通晓军事财政者各二人，三衙和各军统制举荐将才二人。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the second year of the Spring of Jiahi, there were two persons each who were familiar with military finance who were recommended by the lower eunuch, the eunuch, the lord overseer, the vassal, the soldier, the vassal, the overseer, and the former vassal, and two persons each who were recommended by the three eunuchs and the generals of the military command system.

古文：己未，诏史嵩之、赵葵应援黄州、安丰，其立功将士等第，亟具名以闻；光州、信阳二城，共图克复。
现代文：十二日，下诏史篙之、赵葵应援黄州和安丰，立功将士等等，迅速开列姓名上报；光州、信阳二城要一同收复。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Shi Xizhi, Zhao Kwai should support Huangzhou and Anfeng, make meritorious soldiers and so on, and quickly list the names and report them; Gwangju and Xinyang should be recovered together.

古文：辛酉，诏史嵩之进端明殿学士，视执政恩数；赵葵刑部尚书，制置并如旧；余玠知招信军兼淮东制置司参议官，进三秩；孟珙宁远军承宣使，依旧带御器械。
现代文：十四日，下诏史篙之升为端明殿学士，享受执政待遇；赵葵为刑部尚书，制置仍如旧；余知招信军兼淮东制置司参议官，进三秩；孟琪为宁远军承宣使，依旧带御器械。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Shizhi was promoted to Duanming Palace Bachelor, enjoying the ruling treatment; Zhao Kwai was promoted to the Penal Department, and the system was still the same as before; Yu Zhi Zhaoxin and Huadong Zheji Councillor, promoted to the third rank; Meng Qi was promoted to the Ningyuan Army, and still carried the imperial instrument.

古文：史嵩之端明殿学士，依是京湖安抚制置使兼沿江制置副使兼知鄂州，召赴阙。
现代文：史篙之为端明殿学士，依旧为京湖安抚制置使兼沿江制置副使、兼鄂州知州，召前往朝廷。
English: Shi Xuan, a Duanming palace scholar, was still called to the imperial court as the Beijing-Hubei pacification envoy and deputy envoy along the Yangtze River, as well as the Ezhou chizhou.

古文：甲子，两浙转运判官王野察访江面还，进对，劾吴潜知平江府不法厉民数事。
现代文：十七日，两浙转运判官王眺察访江面回朝，进对，弹勃吴潜知平江府不法苛民数事。
English: On the 17th, Wang Xuan, the judge of the two Zhejiang transshipment, visited the Yangtze River and went back to the DPRK. He learned from Bo Wu that there were several cases of illegal and harsh treatment of the people in Pingjiang.

古文：诏野直华文阁、知建宁府。
现代文：下诏王眺直华文阁、知建宁府。
English: Wang Zhanzhonghua Wengge and Zhijian Ningfu are shown below.

古文：二月甲申，大理少卿朱扬祖充押伴使，借章服、金鱼。
现代文：二月初八，大理少卿朱扬祖担任押伴使，借章服、金鱼。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, Zhu Yangzu, the Dali Shaoqing, served as the escort envoy, borrowing the uniform and goldfish.

古文：庚寅，诏吏嵩之以参知政事督视京西荆湖南北路、江西军马，置司鄂州。
现代文：十四日，下诏史篙之以参知政事督视京西、荆湖南北路、江西军马，置司鄂州。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued by the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, with the advice of the Political Director of the CPC Central Committee, to inspect the West Beijing, South Jinghu Road, and Jiangxi Military Region, and to set up a division in Ezhou.

古文：癸己，大宗正丞贾似道奏言： 北使将至，地界、名称、岁例，宜有成说。 
现代文：十七日，大宗正承贾似道上奏： 元军使臣将至，地界、名称、岁例，应该有一个统一的意见。 
English: On the 17th, Daizong Zhengcheng Jia Lian Dao issued a proclamation: Former military envoys are coming, and there should be a unified opinion on territorial boundaries, names, and years.

古文：又奏： 裕财之道，莫急于去赃吏，艺祖治赃吏，杖杀朝堂，孝宗真决刺面，今日行之，则财自裕。 
现代文：又上奏说： 使财富充足的办法，最急切的是除掉赃吏，太祖惩治赃吏，杖杀前堂，孝宗真决刺面，今天如果按此实行，那么财富自然可以充裕。 
English: He also said: The most urgent way to make wealth sufficient is to get rid of corrupt officials, the great-grandfather punished corrupt officials, the cane killed the front hall, and the filial piety of the true believers killed the face. If this is implemented today, then wealth can naturally be abundant.

古文：戊戌，诏： 近览李奏，知蜀渐次收复，然创残之余，绥抚为急，宜施荡宥之泽。
现代文：二十二日，下诏： 近日观看李皇奏疏，得知川蜀逐渐收复，然而这些地区在遭受兵火破坏之后，紧要的事情是安定抚恤，应该向这些地区施加恩惠。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: Having recently watched the performance of Emperor Li and learned that Sichuan-Shu has gradually recovered, however, after these regions were devastated by war, the most important thing is to stabilize the pensions. Favors should be imposed on these regions.

古文：淮西被兵，恩泽亦如之。
现代文：淮西遭受兵火之祸，也应该如此。
English: The same should be true for Huaxi, which suffered the scourge of war.

古文：其降德音，谕朕轸恤之意。 
现代文：颁降德音，以示肤的抚恤之意。 
English: Awarded a demotion in deanery, to show the meaning of skin care.

古文：大元再遣王楫来。
现代文：元军再次派哺绪来。
English: Once again, the ex-army has sent in the puppets.

古文：辛丑，楫还，以朱扬祖充送伴使。
现代文：二十五日，哺绪回国，以朱扬祖担任送伴使。
English: On the 25th, he returned to China with Zhu Yangzu as his escort.

古文：癸卯，以孟珙为京湖安抚制置副使，置司松滋县。
现代文：二十七日，以孟琪为京湖安抚制置副使，置司松滋县。
English: On the 27th, Mengqi was appointed as the vice envoy for the pacification of Beijing Lake, and he was assigned to Songzhi County.

古文：三月己丑，命将作监周次说为大元通好使。
现代文：三月己丑日，命令将作监周次说为大元通好使。
English: On March Fool's Day, the order said that the supervisor, Zhou Zi, was a good envoy of the great general.

古文：壬子，以李心传为秘书少监、史馆修撰，修高宗、孝宗、光宗、宁宗四朝国史实录。
现代文：初六，以李心传为秘书少监、史馆修撰，修撰高宗、孝宗、光宗、宁宗四朝咽史、侠录。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Li Xinchuan was appointed as the secretary of the junior superintendent to compile the history of the four dynasties of Gaozong, Xiaozong, Guangzong and Ningzong.

古文：癸丑，以高定子为中书舍人、京湖江西督视参赞军事。
现代文：初七，以高定子为中书舍人、京湖江西督视参赞军事。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Gao Dingzi was promoted to the post of middle school teacher, and the Beijing-Hubei-Jiangsu West Supervisor was promoted to the post of military counselor.

古文：庚申，诏史嵩之兼督视光、蕲、黄、夔、施州军马。
现代文：十四日，下诏史篙之兼督视光、薪、黄、夔、施州军马。
English: On the 14th day of the following month, he issued the edict that Shi Jizhi, concurrently the governor of Shizhou, should supervise the inspection of light, firewood, yellow, straw and horses of the Shizhou army.

古文：戊辰，发行都会子二百万、并湖广九百万，下都督参政行府犒师。
现代文：二十二日，发行都会子二百万、湖广九百万。下都督参政行府搞师。
English: On the 22nd, 2 million urban children and 9 million Hukang children were issued. The lower governor participated in politics and engaged teachers.

古文：乙亥，诏四川被兵州、军、府、县、镇并转输劳役之所，见禁囚人情理轻者释之。
现代文：二十九日，下诏四川遭受兵火州县军府镇并为转输劳役之所，现在押囚犯情节轻者释放。
English: On the 29th, it was announced that Sichuan had been taken over by the military town of Hefei Prefecture and turned into a labor camp, and that prisoners with minor offenses would be released.

古文：诏四川帅臣招集流民复业，给种与牛，优与振赡。
现代文：下诏四川帅臣招集流民回到农业生产上来，供给种子和耕牛，优给贩济。
English: The next edict from Sichuan's grand vizier called on the exiles to return to agricultural production, supplying seeds and oxen, and preferring to help the traffickers.

古文：夏四月癸未，以李同签书枢密院事，督视江淮、京湖军马。
现代文：夏四月初八，以李野同签书枢密院事，督视江、淮和京湖军马。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, Li Ye jointly signed the document of the Privy Council to supervise the troops of Jiang, Huai and Jinghu.

古文：己酉，雨土。
现代文：己酉日，降土。
English: On the day of Jiayuguan, the earth began to fall.

古文：太阴入太微垣。
现代文：月亮进人太微垣。
English: The moon is too faint to see.

古文：闰月丁未，太阴入井。
现代文：闰四月初二，月亮进人井宿。
English: On the second day of the fourth lunar month, the moon enters the well.

古文：甲子，有流星大如太白。
现代文：十九日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 19th, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：壬申，赐礼部进士周坦以下四百二十二人及第、出身有差。
现代文：二十七日，赐礼部进士周坦以下四百二十二人及第、出身不等。
English: On the 27th, 422 members of the Ceremonial Division from Zhou Tan on down were conferred the title, regardless of rank or origin.

古文：五月辛巳，太白昼见。
现代文：五月初七，太白星白天显现。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, the Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸未，以李鸣复知枢密院事，李宗勉参知政事，余天锡签书枢密院事。
现代文：初九，以李鸣复为知枢密院事，李宗勉为参知政事，余天锡为签书枢密院事。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Li Mingfu was appointed to the Privy Council, Li Zongmeng was appointed to the Council of State, and Yu Tianxi was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：甲申，乔行简请 以兵事委李鸣复，财用委李宗勉，楮币委余天锡，当会议者，臣则参酌行之 。
现代文：初十，乔行简请求 以军队打仗事委托给李鸣复，财政开支收人事情委托给李宗勉，纸币委托给余天锡，应该集体商量的事情，臣则参酌实行。 
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Qiao Xingjian requested that Li Mingfu be entrusted with the army's war-fighting affairs, Li Zongnian with the financial expenditure collection affairs, and Yu Tianxi with the banknotes, and that the matters should be collectively discussed, and the ministers should participate in the implementation.

古文：诏允所请。
现代文：下诏允许他的请求。
English: The Emperor granted his request.

古文：诏严州布衣钱时、成忠郎吴如愚以隐居著书，并选为秘阁校勘。
现代文：下诏：严州布衣钱时、成忠郎吴如愚以隐居著书，都选为秘阁校勘。
English: The following edict: When Yanzhou clothed money, Cheng Zhong Lang Wu Rugu lived in seclusion and wrote books, all of which were selected as secret examination.

古文：丙戌诏崔与之提举洞霄宫，任便居住，李鸣复复参知政事。
现代文：十二日，下诏崔与之提举洞霄宫，任其自由选择居住地，李鸣复再为参知政事。
English: On the 12th, Cui Zhaozhao raised Dongxiao Palace with him, allowing him to freely choose his place of residence, and Li Mingfu once again became a member of the Council of State.

古文：壬寅，岁星犯壁垒阵。
现代文：二十八日，岁星侵犯壁垒阵。
English: On the 28th, the year star invaded the barrier array.

古文：六月甲辰朔，流星昼陨。
现代文：六月初一，流星白天陨落。
English: On the first day of June, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：戊申，吴渊知太平州、措置采石江防。
现代文：初五，吴渊知太平州，措置采石段长江防务。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wuyunchi, Taiping Prefecture, took the lead in the quarry section of the Yangtze River defense.

古文：以吴潜为淮东总领财赋、知镇江府。
现代文：以吴潜为淮东总领财赋、镇江知府。
English: With Wu Qian as the general leader of Huadong and Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：丙寅，李薨，特赠资政殿大学士。
现代文：二十三日，李野去世，特赠资政殿大学士。
English: On the 23rd, Lino passed away. He was awarded a special scholarship to study at the University of Political Science.

古文：秋七月壬午，以霖雨不止，烈风大作，诏避殿、减膳、彻乐，令中外之臣极言阙失。
现代文：秋七月初九，因阴雨连绵不止，狂风大作，下诏避殿、减膳、撤乐，命令中外臣僚极言缺失。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, due to the continuous rain and strong winds, the imperial edict was issued to evacuate the palace, reduce meals, and withdraw music, and the Chinese and foreign ministers were ordered not to say a word.

古文：辛卯，有流星大如太白。
现代文：十八日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 18th, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：壬寅，荧惑犯鬼，积尸气。
现代文：二十九日，荧惑星侵犯鬼宿，积尸气。
English: On the 29th, the fluorescent planet invaded the haunted house, accumulating dead gas.

古文：八月辛酉，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：八月十九日，太白星白天显现经天。
English: On August 19th, the white star appeared in the sky during the day.

古文：癸亥，流星昼陨。
现代文：二十一日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 21st, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：九月壬午，荧惑犯权星。
现代文：九月初十，荧惑星侵犯权星。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, the fluorescent planet encroached on the star.

古文：子维生。
现代文：子赵维出生。
English: His son Zhao Wei was born.

古文：甲申，封宫人谢氏为永宁郡夫人。
现代文：十二日，封宫人谢氏为永宁郡夫人。
English: On the 12th, the person who sealed the palace, Mr. Xie, became the wife of Yongning County.

古文：乙未，有流星大如太白。
现代文：二十三日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 23rd, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：冬十月庚戌，雷。
现代文：冬十月初九，打雷。
English: In winter, on the ninth day of the tenth month, there is thunder.

古文：丁卯，吴潜言： 宗子赵时更集真、滁、丰、濠四郡流民十余万，团结十七砦。
现代文：二十六日，吴潜说： 宗子赵时硬招集真、滁、丰、壕四郡流民十多万人，团结十七寨。
English: On the 26th, Wu Qian said: Zhao Shihong summoned more than one hundred thousand displaced people from four counties of Zhen, Quan, Feng and Hun, and united seventeen villages.

古文：其强壮二万可籍为兵，近调五百援合肥，宜补时更官。
现代文：其中强壮二万人可籍为兵，近日调遣五百人救援合肥，应该补赵时硬官职。
English: Among them, 20,000 strong people can be enlisted as soldiers. Recently, 500 people have been dispatched to rescue Hefei. Zhao Shihong should be promoted to an official post.

古文：又沙上芦场田可得二十余万亩，卖之以赡流民，以佐砦兵。 
现代文：又沙上芦场田可以获得二十多万亩，出售用来贩济流民，以佐寨兵。 
English: In addition, more than two hundred thousand mu of sandy fields can be obtained, which can be sold to help the displaced people, including the soldiers from Sazhai.

古文：从之。
现代文：理宗采纳了这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：荧惑入太微垣。
现代文：荧惑星进人太微垣。
English: The fluorescent planet enters the constellation of the Great Wall.

古文：戊辰，太白入于氐。
现代文：二十七日，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the 27th, Tai Bai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：己巳，日生黑子。
现代文：二十八日，太阳出现黑子。
English: On the 28th, a spot appeared on the sun.

古文：辛未，复光州。
现代文：三十日，收复光州。
English: On the 30th, Gwangju was recaptured.

古文：十一月甲申，子维薨，追封祁王，谥冲昭。
现代文：十一月十三日，子赵维去世。追封为祁王，溢号冲昭。
English: On November 13th, his son Zhao Wei passed away. He was posthumously crowned as the King of Gong and given the posthumous name Chong Zhao.

古文：十二月丙午，光州守臣董尧臣伏诛，司户柳臣举配雷州。
现代文：十二月初五，光州守臣董筐臣被处以死刑，司户柳臣举流放雷州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Gwangju Shoshin, Dong Kyoshin, was sentenced to death, and Shido Yagishin was exiled to Leizhou.

古文：乙卯，诏四川诸州县盐酒榷额，自明年始更减免三年，其四路合发总所纲运者亦免。
现代文：十四日，下诏：四川各州县盐酒榷额从明年开始再减免三年，这四路应该发往总领所的纲运也免除。
English: On the 14th, the following decree was issued: the amount of salt and wine in each prefecture and county of Sichuan will be reduced and exempted for another three years from next year. These four routes should also be exempted from sending to the General Consulate.

古文：戊辰，诏诸路和籴给时直，平概量，毋科抑，申严收租苛取之禁。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：各路和来给付时值，平其斗解，不得科抑，申严收租时苛取的禁令。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: all roads and roads should pay the current value, even if it is a fight, it must not be suppressed, and it is strictly prohibited to collect rent.

古文：己巳，出祠牒、会子共七百万纸，给四川制司为三年生券。
现代文：二十八日，出度碟、会子共七百万纸，给付四川制司为三年生券。
English: On the 28th, a total of 7 million paper discs and certificates were issued, and the third-year students were given the Sichuan system.

古文：三年春正月癸酉，以乔行简为少傅、平章军国重事，封益国公；李宗勉为左丞相兼枢密使；史嵩之右丞相兼枢密使，督视两淮、四川、京湖军马；余天锡参知政事；游似同签书枢院事。
现代文：嘉熙三年春正月初二，以乔行简为少傅、平章军国重事，封为益国公；李宗勉为左承相兼枢密使；史篙之为右承相兼枢密使，督视两淮、四川、京湖军马；余天锡为参知政事；游侣为同签书枢密院事。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Jiaxi, Qiao Xingjian was the junior minister, Pingzhang was in charge of military and state affairs, and he was given the title of Yixing Guogong; Li Zongren was the left successor minister and privy envoy; Shi Bingli was the right successor minister and privy envoy, supervising the armies of the two Huai, Sichuan, and Beijing and Hubei; Yu Tianxi was the co-chairman of the political affairs; and Yu Liao was the co-signer of the Privy Council affairs.

古文：二月丙午，诏史嵩之依旧兼都督江西、湖南军马。
现代文：二月初六，下诏史篙之依旧兼都督江西、湖南军马。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：丁卯，又命嵩之都督江淮、京湖、四川军马。
现代文：二十七日，又命令史篙之都督江淮、京湖、四川军马。
English: On the 27th, he also ordered the military horses of the governors of Jianghuai, Jinghu and Sichuan.

古文：己巳，窜赵邦永，坐救滁不进兵。
现代文：二十九日，贬窜赵邦永，是因救援滁州没进兵。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Bangyong was demoted because he did not enter the army to rescue Zhangzhou.

古文：三月辛未朔，以吴潜为敷文阁直学士、沿海制置使兼知庆元府。
现代文：三月初一，以吴潜为敷文阁直学士、沿海制置使兼知庆元府。
English: On the first day of March, Wu Qian was appointed as the first-ranked scholar of Shibunkaku and the first-ranked envoy to Qingyuan.

古文：甲戌，以别之杰权兵部尚书，依旧沿江制置安抚使兼都督行府参赞军事，李曾伯兼都督行府参议官，孟珙兼都督行府参谋官。
现代文：初四，以别之杰代理兵部尚书，依旧担任沿江制置安抚使兼都督行府参赞军事，李曾伯兼都督行府参议官，孟琪兼都督行府参谋官。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school career, Heibun Shangshu, a distinguished deputy of Heibun Shangshu, still served as the riverside pacification envoy and the military adviser to the governor, Li Zengbo and the councillor to the governor, and Meng Qi and the staff officer to the governor.

古文：流星昼陨。
现代文：流星白天陨落。
English: The meteor fell during the day.

古文：辛卯，雨土。
现代文：二十一日，降土。
English: On the morning of the 9th, the earth fell.

古文：夏四月壬寅，祈雨。
现代文：夏四月初三，祈求降雨。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, pray for rain.

古文：癸卯，以吴渊权工部尚书、沿江制置副使、知江州。
现代文：初四，以吴渊代理工部尚书、沿江制置副使、江州知州。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Wuyuan was appointed as the deputy of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Shangshu as the deputy of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and Jiangzhou Chizhou as the deputy of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：五月辛未，荧惑犯太微垣执法星。
现代文：五月初二，荧惑星侵犯太微垣执法星。
English: On the second day of May, the fluorescent planet encroached on the law enforcement star.

古文：戊寅，以吴潜为兵部尚书、浙西制置使、知镇江府。
现代文：初九，以吴潜为兵部尚书、浙西制置使、镇江知府。
English: In the early 9th century, Wu Qian was appointed as the military governor of Shangshu, the western Zhejiang governor, and the governor of Zhenjiang.

古文：辛卯，乔行简五疏乞罢机政，诏不允。
现代文：二十二日，乔行简五次上疏请求罢除自己的职务，下诏不允。
English: On the 22nd, Qiao Xingjian made five requests to the Supreme People's Procuratorate to remove him from his post, but the request was not accepted.

古文：秋七月庚午，以董槐知江州兼都督行府参议官。
现代文：秋七月初三，以董槐知江州兼都督行府参议官。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Dong Shizhi was appointed as the councillor of Jiangzhou and the governor of the capital.

古文：甲申，以吴渊兼都督行府参赞军事。
现代文：十七日，以吴渊兼都督行府参赞军事。
English: On the 17th, Wu Yuan, who was also the governor of the capital, was appointed as the military counselor.

古文：八月戊戌朔，以浙江潮患，告天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：八月初一，以浙江潮患，告诉天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the first day of August, the tidal wave in Zhejiang was used to tell the world, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：以游似参知政事，许应龙签书枢密院事，林略同签书枢密院事。
现代文：以游侣为参知政事，许应龙为签书枢密院事。林略为同签书枢密院事。
English: With You Rui as the political advisor, Xu Yinglong as the Privy Councillor who signed the document, and Lin Liu as the Privy Councillor who also signed the document.

古文：己亥，荧惑入氐。
现代文：初二，荧惑星进人氏宿。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, a fluorescent planet enters Mr. Jin's room.

古文：辛丑，太阴入氐。
现代文：初四，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the moon enters Mr. Jin's house.

古文：有流星大如太白。
现代文：有流星大如太白星。
English: There are meteors like white stars.

古文：丁亥，荧惑犯房宿。
现代文：丁亥日，荧惑星侵犯房宿。
English: On the day of Dinghai, the fluorescent planet invaded the room.

古文：九月辛巳，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：九月十五日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On September 15th, the sacrificial Myeongdong ended, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：壬午，淮西敢勇将官陆旺、李威特与官三转，同出战二百人官两转，以赏庐州磨店北之功，其阵没者优与抚恤。
现代文：十六日，淮西敢勇将官陆旺、李威特给转三官，一同出战的二百人转两官，因赏赐庐州磨店北之功，其阵亡者优与抚恤。
English: On the 16th, Lu Wang and Li Witt, generals of Huaxi Dangyong, were promoted to the third rank, and the two hundred people who went to war together were promoted to the second rank. For awarding the northern merit of Bozhou Mill, the dead were given benefits and pensions.

古文：冬十月丁未，故太师鲁王谢深甫赐谥惠正。
现代文：冬十月十一日，已故太师鲁王谢深甫赐给溢号惠正。
English: In the winter of October 11th, the late Grand Master Lu Wang Xie Shenfu bestowed the posthumous title of Huizheng.

古文：己未，出祠牒百给济处州。
现代文：二十三日，出度碟一百道接济处州。
English: On the 23rd, a hundred dishes were sent out to help the prefecture.

古文：秉义郎李良守鄂州长寿县，没于战阵，诏赠官三转。
现代文：秉义郎李良守卫鄂州长寿县，死于战场，下诏赠转三官。
English: Bingyi's brother, Li Liang, who was in charge of the defense of Shou County, Hubei Province, died on the battlefield, and was awarded three official positions.

古文：癸亥，荧惑、太白合于斗。
现代文：二十七日，荧惑星、太白星合于斗宿。
English: On the 27th, the fluorescent planet and the too-white star merged in the dojo.

古文：乙丑，虹见。
现代文：二十九日，虹显现。
English: On the 29th, the rainbow appeared.

古文：十一月丙子，以范钟签书枢密院事。
现代文：十一月十一日，以范钟为签书枢密院事。
English: On November 11th, the Privy Council signed the document with Fan Zhong as the signatory.

古文：十二月己未，观文殿大学士崔与之薨，赠少师，谥清献。
现代文：十二月二十四日，观文殿大学士崔与之去世，赠少师，溢号清献。
English: On December 24th, Guanwenden University scholar Cui passed away together with him. He was awarded the title of "Junior Teacher" and given a posthumous award.

古文：辛酉，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 28th, the too-white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：甲子，复夔州，录荆鄂都统张顺、孟璋等将士战功。
现代文：二十九日，收复夔州，录用荆鄂都统张顺、孟璋等将士战功。
English: On the 29th, after recovering Bozhou, Zhang Shun, Meng Yao and other soldiers of Jing-Odu were recruited.

古文：四年春正月辛未，彗星出营室。
现代文：嘉熙四年春正月初六，彗星出现在营室。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Jiaxi, the comet appeared in the camp room.

古文：庚辰，以星变，下诏罪己。
现代文：十五日，因星变下诏罪己。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to a change in the stars, he committed a crime.

古文：辛巳，有流星大如太白。
现代文：十六日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 16th, there was a meteor as big as the Taibai Star.

古文：甲午，彗星犯王良第二星。
现代文：二十九日，彗星侵犯王良第二星。
English: On the 29th, the comet invaded Wang Liang's second star.

古文：二月丙申朔，日生背气。
现代文：二月初一，太阳生背气。
English: On the first day of February, the sun became angry.

古文：戊戌，大赦。
现代文：初三，大赦。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：辛丑，流星昼陨。
现代文：初六，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：白虹遮蔽太阳。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：丁未，太白昼见。
现代文：十二日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 23rd, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸丑，以孟珙为四川宣抚使兼知夔州，节制归、峡、鼎、澧州军马。
现代文：十八日，以孟琪为四川宣抚使兼夔州知州，节制归、峡、鼎、遭州军马。
English: On the 18th, Mengqi was appointed as the Sichuan envoy and the envoy of Bozhou and Chizhou, and the restraint was returned, the gorge, the ding, and the state horse.

古文：丙辰，白气亘天。
现代文：白气贯穿天空。
English: White gas streaks across the sky.

古文：三月辛未，诏四川安抚制置副使彭大雅削三秩。
现代文：三月初七，下诏四川安抚制置副使彭大雅削夺三秩。
English: On the seventh day of the third month of the year, the deputy envoy of the Sichuan pacification system, Peng Daya, won the third rank.

古文：彗星消伏。
现代文：彗星消失。
English: The comet disappears.

古文：乙酉，流星昼陨。
现代文：二十一日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 21st, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：夏四月壬寅，前潼川运判吴申进对，因论蜀事，为上言： 郑损弃边郡不守，桂如渊启溃卒为乱，赵彦呐忌忠勇不救，彭大雅险谲变诈，殊费关防。
现代文：夏四月初八，前撞川运判吴申进对，因论蜀事，对理宗说： 郑损放弃边郡不守，桂如渊发动溃卒叛乱，赵彦呐忌妒忠勇不救，彭大雅阴险狡诈，都影响关防。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wu Shenjin, who was sentenced to transportation to Qianchuan, said to Li Zong, because of the matter of Shu: Zheng Ji abandoned the border county and did not keep it, Gui Ruyuan launched a rebellion, Zhao Yanna was jealous of loyalty and courage and did not save it, and Peng Daya was insidious and cunning, all of which affected the border defense.

古文：宜进孟珙于夔门。
现代文：应该把孟琪提拔到夔门担任守将。
English: Meng Qi should be promoted to Shimen to serve as a keeper.

古文：夔事力固乏，东南能助之，则夔足以自立。 
现代文：夔门力量固然贫乏，但借助东南的力量，那么夔门足以自立。 
English: Although the strength of the gate is poor, with the help of Southeastern's strength, the gate is strong enough to stand on its own.

古文：又言： 张祥有保全赵彦呐、杨恢两制置之功，敌人惮其果毅，宜见录用。 
现代文：又说： 张样有保全赵彦呐、杨恢两制置之功，敌人害怕其果敢刚毅，应该予以录用。 
English: He also said: Zhang Samye has the merit of preserving the two systems of Zhao Yannan and Yang Hui, the enemy is afraid of his courage and fortitude, and he should be hired.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：理宗高兴地采纳了。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：乙巳，诏史嵩之进三秩，依前右丞相兼枢密使，即日彻都督局。
现代文：十一日，下诏史篙之进官三级，依旧为右承相兼枢密使，当日撤除都督局。
English: On the 11th day of the following month, Shih Chun was promoted to the third rank, still serving as Ujisho (Minister of the Right) and Privy Counsellor. On the same day, the office of the Governor-General was abolished.

古文：五月庚午，太阴入太微垣，岁星、太白合于娄。
现代文：五月初七，月亮进人太微垣，岁星、太白星合于娄宿。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month, the moon was too small to enter, and the year star and the white star were too close to Oshuku.

古文：甲戌，太阴入氐。
现代文：十一日，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the moon enters Mr. Jin's house.

古文：乙亥，子寿国公薨。
现代文：十二日，子寿国公去世。
English: On the 12th, Prince Zishu passed away.

古文：戊子，命吴潜兼侍读，李性传兼侍讲。
现代文：二十五日，命令吴潜兼侍读，李性传兼侍讲。
English: On the 25th, Wu Qian was ordered to serve as a reader and Li Xichuan was ordered to serve as a speaker.

古文：六月甲午朔，江、浙、福建大旱，蝗。
现代文：六月初一，江、浙、福建大早，蝗灾。
English: On the first day of June, Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Fujian were hit by a plague of locusts.

古文：乙未，祈雨。
现代文：初二，祈祷降雨。
English: On the second day of junior high school, I prayed for rain.

古文：己亥，太白犯毕。
现代文：初六，太白星侵犯毕宿。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Tai Bai Xing invaded the guest house.

古文：辛丑，追封阆州签厅陈承己妻彭氏为恭人，赐庙阆州，以强寇入奉国县市，承己为贼所创，彭骂贼死之。
现代文：初八，追封间州签厅陈承己妻彭氏为恭人，赐庙间州，因强寇进人奉国县时，陈承己为贼所伤，彭氏骂贼而死。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Chen Cheng himself and his wife, Peng Shi, were chased by the seal of the inter-state signing office and awarded the inter-temple state. Due to the strong invasion of people into Fengguo County, Chen Cheng himself was injured by a thief, and Peng Shi cursed the thief and died.

古文：辛亥，追赠儒林郎王巩为通直郎，官其一子为文学，以丙申蜀破，巩阖门死于兵。
现代文：十八日，追赠儒林郎王巩为通直郎，任其一子为文学官，因蜀被攻破时，王巩全家死于兵祸。
English: On the 18th, he posthumously promoted his disciple Wang Gong to Tong Nairo, and appointed one of his sons as a literary official. When Shu was conquered, Wang Gong's entire family died in a military accident.

古文：癸丑，太白犯天关星。
现代文：二十日，太白星侵犯天关星。
English: On the 20th, the Taibai Star encroached on the Tianguan Star.

古文：戊午，有流星大如太白。
现代文：二十五日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 25th, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：秋七月乙丑，诏： 今夏六月恒阳，飞蝗为孽，朕德未修，民瘼尤甚，中外臣僚其直言阙失毋隐。 
现代文：秋七月初三，下诏： 今年夏天六月阳恒，飞蝗为灾，肤德没有达到高的修养水平，民间疾苦甚为严重，中外臣僚直言缺失，不要隐瞒。 
English: On the third day of the first month of July in autumn, the following edict was issued: This summer, the June sun will be constant, flying locusts will be a disaster, skin morality has not reached a high level of cultivation, people's suffering is very serious, Chinese and foreign ministers lack frankness, do not hide it.

古文：又诏有司振灾恤刑。
现代文：又下诏有关部门贩灾，慎用刑法。
English: The relevant departments also issued a decree on disaster trafficking, cautiously using the criminal law.

古文：太白入井。
现代文：太白星进人井宿。
English: Taibai Xingjinjing Youth Hostel.

古文：甲戌，太白、荧惑合于井。
现代文：十二日，太白星、荧惑星合于井宿。
English: On the 12th, Taibai Star and Fluorescent Planet rendezvoused at Ijuku.

古文：己丑，荧惑、太白合于鬼。
现代文：二十七日，荧惑星、太白星合于鬼宿。
English: On the 27th, the fluorescent planet and the too-white star converged on the haunted house.

古文：八月己酉，荧惑、填星合于柳，太白犯权星大星。
现代文：八月十八日，荧惑星、填星合于柳宿，太白星侵犯权星大星。
English: On August 18th, the fluorescent planet and the filling star met in the willow lodge, and the white star violated the rights of the big star.

古文：癸丑，荧惑犯填星。
现代文：二十二日，荧惑星侵犯填星。
English: On the 22nd, the fluorescent planet invaded the star.

古文：九月乙丑，诏余玠进三秩，直华文阁、淮东提刑、节制招信军屯戍军马。
现代文：九月初四，下诏余进升三级，直华文阁、淮东提刑、节制招信军屯戍军马。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the year, Yu Jin was promoted to the 3rd grade, while Zhaohua Wengke, Huai Dong were punished, and the army of temperance recruiters were sent to the army.

古文：以玠昨帅舟师渡淮入河抵汴，所向有功，全师而还。
现代文：因余前日率领水军逆淮河而上抵达汁京，所向立功，班师而回。
English: Because Yu had led the naval force up the Huai River the day before and arrived in Shijing, he made a great contribution to the city and returned in a group.

古文：至是，论功定赏，是役将士，趣以名上所司议推恩。
现代文：至此，论功定赏，参加这些战役的将士督促将姓名上报有关部门，商议推赏。
English: At this point, on the merits award, the soldiers who participated in these campaigns were urged to report their names to the relevant departments to discuss the award.

古文：冬十月癸巳，诏改明年为淳祐元年。
现代文：冬十月初三，下诏改明年为淳元年。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in winter, the emperor decreed that the next year would be the first year of the Juche era.

古文：丁巳，命余玠兼节制应天府、泗、宿、永、海、邳、徐、涟水屯戍军马。
现代文：二十七日，命令余兼节制应天府、泅、宿、永、海、邱、徐、涟水等地屯戍军马。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Yu Kengsheng to encamp troops and horses in Yingtianfu, Yao, Shuku, Yong, Hai, Qiu, Xu, and Lishui.

古文：十一月甲子，荧惑入太微垣。
现代文：十一月初五，荧惑星进人太微垣。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the fluorescent planet entered the sky.

古文：己巳，荧惑犯太微垣左执法星。
现代文：初十，荧惑星侵犯太微垣左执法星。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the fluorescent planet encroached on the left enforcement star.

古文：癸酉，诏武功大夫、荆鄂都统制张顺以私钱招襄、汉溃卒，创忠义、虎翼两军，及援安庆、池州有功，特与官两转。
现代文：十四日，下诏：武功大夫、荆鄂都统制张顺，以自己的钱财招集襄、汉溃卒，创立忠义、虎翼两军和救援安庆、池州有功，特给转两官。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: Dr. Wu Gong and Dr. Jing O, both of whom have made great contributions in controlling Zhang Shun, will use their own money and resources to recruit soldiers to defeat Xiang and Han, establish the two armies of Loyalty and Tiger Wing, and rescue Anqing and Chizhou.

古文：丙子，与芮妻钱氏封安康郡夫人。
现代文：十七日，赵与丙妻钱氏被封为安康郡夫人。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Qian and his wife Qiu Qian were named the wife of Ankang County.

古文：辛巳，荧惑犯太微上相垣。
现代文：二十二日，荧惑星侵犯太微上相垣。
English: On the 22nd, the fluorescent planet encroached too close to the upper boundary.

古文：十二月甲辰，奉国军节度使、提举万寿观多谟薨。
现代文：十二月十五日，奉国军节度使、提举万寿观赵多漠去世。
English: On December 15th, Zhao Doma, the military envoy to the National Day of the People's Republic of China, passed away.

古文：丙辰，地震。
现代文：二十七日，地震。
English: On the 17th, there was an earthquake.

古文：己未，诏求直言。
现代文：三十日，下诏求直言。
English: On the 30th, he issued the following edict.

古文：闰十二月丙寅，李宗勉薨，赠少师，赐谥文清。
现代文：闰十二月初七，李宗勉去世，赠少师，赐给溢号文清。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the leap year, Li Zongtian passed away, bestowing the title of "Junior Teacher" and bestowing the title of "Grandmaster" to Wenqing.

古文：以游似知枢密院事兼参知政事，范钟参知政事，徐荣叟签书枢密院事。
现代文：以游侣为知枢密院事兼参知政事，范钟为参知政事，徐荣雯为签书枢密院事。
English: Yu Rui was the member of the Privy Council and the member of the Council of State, Fan Zhong was the member of the Council of State, and Xu Rongwen was the member of the Council of State who signed the document.

古文：庚午，诏系囚情理轻者释之。
现代文：十一日，下诏在押囚犯情节轻者释放。
English: On the 11th, it was announced that prisoners with minor offenses would be released.

古文：乙亥，诏民间赋输仍用钱会中半，其会半以十八界直纳，半以十七界纽纳。
现代文：十六日，下诏民间输纳赋税仍然钱会各半，其中会子一半按十八界会子价值计算，一半按十七界会子计算。
English: On the 16th, it was announced that the amount of tax paid by the people would be halved, of which half would be calculated according to the value of the 18 sectors and half according to the value of the 17 sectors.

古文：戊寅，以吴潜为福建安抚使，史宅之为浙东安抚使。
现代文：十九日，以吴潜为福建安抚使，史宅之为浙东安抚使。
English: On the 19th, Wu Qian was appointed as the Fujian Pacifying Envoy, and Shi Zhiguo as the East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy.

古文：淳祐元年春正月庚寅朔，诏举文武才。
现代文：淳元年春正月初一，下诏举荐文武才能之人。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1

古文：庚子，雷。
现代文：十一日，打雷。
English: On the 11th, there was thunder.

古文：甲辰，诏： 朕惟孔子之道，自孟轲后不得其传，至我朝周惇颐、张载、程颢、程颐，真见实践，深探圣域，千载绝学，始有指归。
现代文：十五日，下诏： 肤认为孔子之道，从孟子以后没人传承，到我宋朝周敦颐、张载、程颖、程颐，发挥圣学意蕴，亲自实践，千载绝学，始有指归。
English: On the fifteenth day, the following edict was issued: I believe that the way of Confucius, which has not been passed down since Mencius, has been passed down to my Song Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, Z

古文：中兴以来，又得朱熹精思明辨，表里浑融，使《大学》、《论》、《孟》、《中庸》之书，本末洞彻，孔子之道，益以大明于世。
现代文：中兴以来，又有朱熹精思明辨，表里混融，使大学、沦语、孟予、《中氰之书本末洞彻，孔子之道，更加明白于世。
English: Since the rise of China, Zhu Xi Jingshi has made clear distinctions and blended the outside with the inside, making the university, the fallen language, Meng Yu, the book of Zhong Xiao, and the way of Confucius more clear to the world.

古文：朕每观五臣论著，启沃良多，今视学有日，其令学官列诸从祀，以示崇奖之意。 
现代文：肤每次阅读五臣论著，发挥甚多，今视学有日，命令学官将五臣列为从祀，以示崇敬褒奖之意。 
English: Every time I read the five ministers' treatise, I got a lot out of it. One day when I was inspecting the school, I ordered the academic officer to classify the five ministers as subordinates, as a sign of reverence and reward.

古文：寻以王安石谓 天命不足畏，祖宗不足法，人言不足恤 ，为万世罪人，岂宜从祀孔子庙庭，黜之。
现代文：不久，因王安石提出过 天命不足畏，祖宗不足法，人言不足恤 ，而定他为万世罪人，怎么可以从祀孔子庙庭，罢除他。
English: Soon, because Wang Anshi once proposed that the fate of heaven is not enough to fear, the ancestors are not enough for the law, and people are not enough for mercy, and that he is a universal sinner, how can he be removed from the Confucius Temple?

古文：丙午，封周惇颐为汝南伯，张载郿伯，程颢河南伯，程颐伊阳伯。
现代文：十七日，封周敦颐为汝南伯，张载为邵伯，程颖为河南伯，程颐为伊阳伯。
English: On the 17th, Zhou Dunyi was named Ru Nanbo, Zhang Zai was named Shao Bo, Cheng Ying was named Henan Bo, and Cheng Yao was named Iyang Bo.

古文：丁未，太阴入氐。
现代文：十八日，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the 18th, the moon entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：戊申，幸太学谒孔子，遂御崇化堂，命祭酒曹觱讲《礼记·大学》篇，监学官各进一秩，诸生推恩锡帛有差。
现代文：十九日，到太学朝拜孔子，于是到崇化堂，命令祭酒曹醋讲解件记&;;大学篇，监学官各进升一级，诸生推恩赐帛不等。
English: On the 19th, he went to Taigaku to pay homage to Confucius, and then went to Chongwado, where he ordered a lecture on the explanation of the sacrificial wine and vinegar in the university section, and the supervisors were promoted to the next level.

古文：制《道统十三赞》，就赐国子监宣示诸生。
现代文：理宗亲自撰写道统十三赞，当即赐给国子监给诸生观看。
English: Risong personally wrote down the thirteen praises for unification, and immediately gave them to the son-in-law of the state for all to see.

古文：二月戊寅，日生晕。
现代文：二月二十日，太阳旁出现光环。
English: On February 20th, a halo appeared next to the sun.

古文：壬午，乔行简薨，谥文惠。
现代文：二十四日，乔行简去世，溢号文惠。
English: On the 24th, Qiao Xingjian passed away.

古文：夏四月丁丑，诏以与芮为开府仪同三司、万寿观使、嗣荣王，贵谦开府仪同三司、嗣沂王。
现代文：夏四月十九日，下诏任命赵与丙为开府仪同三司、万寿观使、嗣荣王，赵贵谦为开府仪同三司、嗣沂王。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict appointed Zhao and C to be the keifu ceremony and the three departments, the Wan Shou Guan envoy, and the heir to the throne, and Zhao Gui Qian to be the keifu ceremony and the three departments, and the heir to the throne.

古文：辛巳，以贾似道为太府少卿、湖广总领财赋。
现代文：二十三日，任命贾似道为太府少卿、湖广总领财赋。
English: On the 23rd, Jia Xi Dao was appointed as the Taifu Shaoqing and the general leader of Hukang.

古文：五月庚寅，以少师、保宁军节度使、判大宗正事、嗣秀王师弥为太子少保，奉国军节度使充万寿观使师贡为少师。
现代文：五月初三，任命少师、保宁军节度使、判大宗正事、嗣秀王赵师弥为太子少保，奉国军节度使、担任万寿观使的赵师贡为少师。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the year, Zhao Shigong, who was appointed as a young master, a festival envoy of the Boryeong Army, and a judge of the Grand Council of State, and a descendant of Xiu Wang, Zhao Shiya, was appointed as a young prince, and Zhao Shigong, who was appointed as a festival envoy of the Boryeong Army and a Manshukon envoy, was appointed as a young master.

古文：己亥，诏沿江淮西制置使别之杰任责边防。
现代文：十二日，下诏沿江淮西制置使别之杰担任边防重任。
English: On the 12th, the next edict along the west of the Huai River was issued to appoint other outstanding people to take on the important task of border defense.

古文：戊申，赐礼部进士徐俨夫以下三百六十七人及第、出身有差。
现代文：二十一日，赐礼部进士徐俨夫等三百六十七人及第、出身不等。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, three hundred and sixty-seven people from various ranks and backgrounds, including Xu Yifu, a member of the Ceremonial Department, were awarded.

古文：六月庚申，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：螟。
现代文：螟灾。
English: A plague of locusts.

古文：癸酉，有流星大如太白。
现代文：十六日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 16th, there was a meteor as big as the Taibai Star.

古文：己卯，流星昼陨。
现代文：二十二日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 22nd, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：丙戌，荧惑入氐。
现代文：二十九日，荧惑星进人氏宿。
English: On the 29th, the fluorescent planet entered Mr. Jin's house.

古文：秋七月壬辰，祈雨。
现代文：秋七月初六，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, pray for rain.

古文：八月辛巳，杨石薨，赠太师。
现代文：八月二十六日，杨石去世，赠太师。
English: On August 26th, Yang Shi passed away and was given the title of Grand Master.

古文：冬十月庚辰，太白入氐。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the 26th day of winter in October, Tai Bai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：十一月戊戌，太白昼见。
现代文：十一月十五日，太白星白天出现。
English: On November 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：己亥，淮东提刑余玠以舟师解安丰之围。
现代文：十六日，淮东提刑余率领水军解安丰之围。
English: On the 16th, Huai Dongti led the naval forces to lift the siege of Anfeng.

古文：己巳，太白经天，昼见。
现代文：己巳日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the same day, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十二月丁卯，余天锡薨，赠太师，赐谥忠惠。
现代文：十二月十四日，余天锡去世，赠太师，赐给溢号忠惠。
English: On December 14th, Yu Tianxi passed away, bestowed the title of Grand Master, and bestowed the title of Yue Zi Zhonghui.

古文：丁丑，侍御史金渊言：彭大雅贪黩残忍，蜀人衔怨，罪重罚轻，乞更窜责。
现代文：二十四日，侍御史金渊说： 彭大雅贪默残忍，蜀人怨恨，罪重罚轻，请求再予贬降流放。 
English: On the 24th, the chamberlain Shi Jinyuan said: Peng Daya is greedy and cruel, the Shu people are resentful, the crime is heavy and the punishment is light, and he requests to be demoted and exiled again.

古文：诏除名、赣州居住。
现代文：下诏除名，赣州居住。
English: The following day, he was removed from his post and went to live in Zhangzhou.

古文：二年春正月甲申朔，诏作新吏治。
现代文：淳二年春正月初一，下诏制定新吏治。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the second year of the Spring, the following edict was issued to establish a new cadre system.

古文：戊戌，右丞相史嵩之等进《玉牒》及《中兴四朝国史》、《孝宗经武要略》、《宁宗玉牒》《日历》《会要实录》。
现代文：十五日，右承相史篙之等进呈医碟和《中兴四朝国史、孝宗经武要略、泞宗玉牌、《日厉、啥要、侠录。
English: On the 15th, the Right Heir to the Imperial Throne, Zou Zi, presented a medical disk and the "Zhongxing Four Dynasties National History, Xiao Zong's Military Strategy, Zou Zong's Jade Medal," "Nichili, Neyao, and Chivalry."

古文：二月甲戌，以游似知绍兴府、浙东安抚使，请祠禄，诏提举洞霄宫。
现代文：二月二十二日，任命游侣为绍兴知府、浙东安抚使，他请求祠禄官，下诏游侣提举洞霄宫。
English: On February 22nd, Yu Rui was appointed as the governor of Shaoxing and the East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy. He asked the ancestral hall official to nominate Dongxiao Palace for Yu Rui.

古文：范钟知枢密院事兼参知政事，徐荣叟参知政事，赵葵赐进士出身、同知枢密院事，别之杰签书枢密院事。
现代文：范钟为知枢密院事兼参知政事，徐荣雯为参知政事，赵葵赐给进士出身、同知枢密院事，别之杰为签书枢密院事。
English: Fan Zhong is a member of the Privy Council and a member of the Council of State, Xu Rongwen is a member of the Council of State, Zhao Kwai Zi is a member of the Privy Council and a member of the Council of State, and Bei Xie is a member of the Council of State.

古文：三月戊子，诏和州、无为军、安庆府，并听沿江制置司节制。
现代文：三月初六，下诏和州、无为军、安庆府，都听从沿江制置司节制调遣。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, He Prefecture, Wuwei Army, and Anqing Prefecture all obeyed the river-side system of placing officers and dispatching them in a controlled manner.

古文：诏今后州县官有罪，诸帅司毋辄加杖责。
现代文：下诏今后州县官有罪，各帅司不得动不动就杖责。
English: The following decree states that in the future, county and prefectural officials will be guilty, and all marshals must be held accountable.

古文：夏四月甲寅，白气亘天。
现代文：夏四月初二，白气贯穿天空。
English: On the second day of the fourth month in summer, a white haze permeates the sky.

古文：壬申，雨雹。
现代文：二十日，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the new year, hail fell.

古文：五月己亥，淮东制置副使余玠进对。
现代文：五月十八日，淮东制置副使知介进对。
English: On May 18th, the deputy envoy of Huaidong was set up.

古文：戊申，台臣言知建宁府吴潜有三罪。诏夺职，罢新任。
现代文：二十七日，台臣说建宁知府吴潜有三罪，下诏削夺官职，罢免新任职务。
English: On the 27th, a Taiwanese courtier said that Wu Qian, the governor of Jianning Prefecture, had committed three crimes. He was stripped of his official position and removed from his new position.

古文：己酉，以赵葵为湖南安抚使、知潭州。
现代文：二十八日，以赵葵为湖南安抚使、潭州知州。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Kwai was appointed as the pacification envoy of Hunan, and Tanzhou became Chizhou.

古文：六月壬子朔，徐荣叟乞归田里，从之。
现代文：六月初一，徐荣雯请求解职归田，理宗批准了他的请求。
English: On the first day of June, Xu Rongwen requested to be relieved of his duties and returned to the field, and Li Zong approved his request.

古文：丁巳，诏以余玠为四川宣谕使，事干机速，许同制臣共议措置，先行后奏，仍给金字符、黄榜各十，以备招抚。
现代文：初六，下诏任命余分为四川宣谕使，事关机要，允许同制臣共同商议措置，先行后奏，仍给金字符、黄榜各十，以备招抚。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor appointed Yu to be the envoy of the proclamation of Sichuan Province. The matter was urgent, and he was allowed to discuss the measures with his vassal, and he was still given ten gold characters and ten yellow banners to prepare for the invitation.

古文：丙寅，以别之杰同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，高定子签书枢密院事，杜范同签书枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命别之杰同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，高定子为签书枢密院事，杜范为同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, he appointed Beizhijie Tongzhi as Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State, Gao Dingzi as Signatory Privy Councillor, and Du Fan as Co-Signatory Privy Councillor.

古文：是月盛夏积雨，浙右大水。
现代文：这个月盛夏积雨，浙右大水。
English: This month, the midsummer accumulated rain has caused heavy water in Zhejiang.

古文：丁丑。岁星犯井。
现代文：二十六日，岁星侵犯井宿。
English: On the 26th, the year star invaded the well.

古文：秋七月辛巳朔，常、润、建康大水，两淮尤甚。
现代文：秋七月初一，常、润、建康发生大水，两淮水灾尤其严重。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, heavy water occurred in Chang, Run and Jiankang, and the floods in Zhuhai and Hebei were particularly serious.

古文：八月丁卯，诏淮东先锋马军邓淳、李海等扬州挞扒店之战，宣劳居多，各官两转，余推恩有差。
现代文：八月十七日，下诏：淮东先锋马军邓淳、李海等在扬州挞扒店与敌军作战，功劳居多，各转两官，其余推恩不等。
English: On August 17th, the following edict was issued: Deng Chun, Li Hai and other pioneers of the East Huai-Dong Horse Army fought against the enemy army in the Yangzhou Yao Steak House. Most of the credit goes to them, and each of them was promoted to two posts, while the others received varying degrees of gratitude.

古文：九月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。初十，打雷。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse. On the tenth day of the month, thunder.

古文：己丑，雷。辛卯，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：十二日，祭祀明堂。大赦。
English: On the 12th, a memorial service was held at Myeongdong. The amnesty ended.

古文：癸巳，诏： 淮东忠勇军统领王温等二十四人战天长县东，众寡不敌，皆没于阵，赠温武翼大夫、吉州刺史，其子兴国补保义郎，更官其一子承信郎，厚赐其家。
现代文：十四日，下诏： 淮东忠勇军统领王温等二十四人在天长县东作战，众少不敌，都死于战场。赠王温武翼大夫、吉州刺史，其子王兴国补为保义郎，又另外任其一子为承信郎，厚厚地赏赐其家。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: Twenty-four people, including Wang Wen, the leader of the loyal and brave army of Huai-dong, fought in the east of Tianchang County. Few of them were defeated, and all died on the battlefield. Wang Wen was given to Dr. Wu Wu-yi and Jizhou Shishi, and his son Wang Xingguo-chi was given to Baoyiro, and his other son was given to Chengxinro, and his family was generously rewarded.

古文：余人恤典有差。 
现代文：其余人抚恤不等。 
English: The rest receive pensions of varying amounts.

古文：冬十月甲寅，史嵩之进封永国公。
现代文：冬十月初五，史篙之进封永国公。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, Shi Xizhi was enthroned as Yonggukong.

古文：乙丑，大元兵大入通州。
现代文：十六日，元军大举进人通州。
English: On the 16th, the Yuan army entered Tongzhou on a large scale.

古文：十一月辛卯，诏谕两淮节制李曾伯，毋以通州被兵之故，不安厥职，其督励诸将，勉图后功。
现代文：十一月十三日，诏谕两淮节制李曾伯，不得以通州遭受元军进攻的缘故，不安其职，要求督促各将领，勉励立功。
English: On November 13, Li Zengbo issued an edict to the two Huai states that they should not be worried about their duties due to the attack on Tongzhou by the Yuan army, and asked them to urge the generals to do their best.

古文：己亥，日南至，雷电交作，诏避殿减膳，求直言。
现代文：二十一日，冬至，雷电交作，下诏避殿减膳，求寻直言。
English: On the twenty-first day of the winter solstice, thunder and lightning occurred, and the emperor issued an edict to evacuate the palace, reduce meals, and seek out frankness.

古文：癸卯，诏决中外系囚。
现代文：二十五日，下诏处理中外在押囚犯。
English: On the 25th, a decree was issued to deal with Chinese and foreign prisoners.

古文：十二月己未，诏： 通州守臣杜霆，兵至弃城弗守，载其私帑渡江以遁，遂致民被屠戮，虽已夺三秩，厥罚犹轻。
现代文：十二月十一日，下诏： 通州守臣杜霆，元兵到达，弃城不守，载其私货渡江而逃，于是致使兵民被杀，虽已经削夺三秩，其罚仍然嫌轻。
English: On December 11th, the following edict was issued: Tongzhou warden Du Ting, a former soldier, arrived, abandoned the city and fled across the river with his personal belongings. As a result, soldiers and civilians were killed. Although he had lost three ranks, his punishment was still light.

古文：其追毁出身以来文字，窜南雄州。 
现代文：决定追毁出身以来文字，流放南雄州。 
English: He decided to destroy the writing he had been using since birth and banished him to Nanxiong Prefecture.

古文：壬戌，太白昼见。
现代文：十四日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸亥，大元兵连攻叙州，帐前都统杨大全等水陆并进，自卯至午，战十数合，殁于行伍。
现代文：十五日，大元军队连攻叙州，帐前都统杨大全等水陆并进，从卯时至午时交战十几个回合，战死在战场。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Taiyuan army attacked Shuzhou in a row, with Yang Daquan and others marching on land and sea. From dusk to noon, they fought more than a dozen rounds, and died on the battlefield.

古文：诏赠武节大夫、眉州防御使，官其二子承节郎。
现代文：下诏赠杨大全武节大夫、眉州防御史，任其两个儿子为承节郎。
English: The following edict presented Yang Daquan with Dr. Wu Jie, Meizhou Defense History, and appointed his two sons as Jie Jie Lang.

古文：丙寅，以孟珙为检校少保，依旧宁武军节度使、京湖安抚制置大使、夔路策应大使，余玠权资政殿学士、湖南安抚大使兼知潭州，赵葵资政殿大学士、福建安抚使、知福州。
现代文：十八日，以孟琪为检校少保，依旧为宁武军节度使、京湖安抚制置大使、夔路策应大使，余暂为资政殿学士、湖南安抚大使兼潭州知州，赵葵为资政殿大学士、福建安抚使、福州知州。
English: On the 18th, with Meng Qi as the junior guard of the inspection school, he was still the Ningwu Military Festival Envoy, the Beijing Lake Pacification Ambassador, and the Kushiro Zeyong Ambassador. Yu was temporarily the Vice-President's Bachelor, the Hunan Pacification Ambassador and the Tanzhou Chizhou, and Zhao Kwai was the Vice-President's Bachelor, the Fujian Pacification Envoy, and the Fuzhou Chizhou.

古文：三年春正月戊寅朔，以高定子兼参知政事。
现代文：淳三年春正月初一，任命高定子兼参知政事。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 3rd month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9

古文：庚辰，荧惑入氐。
现代文：初三，荧惑星进人氏宿。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the fluorescent planet enters Mr. Jin's house.

古文：乙未，以李曾伯为华文阁待制，依旧淮东西制置使、知扬州；杜杲敷文阁学士，依旧沿江制置使、知建康府；董槐秘阁修撰，依旧沿江制置副使、知江州、主管江西安抚司事。
现代文：十八日，以李曾伯为华文阁待制，依旧为淮东西制置使、扬州知州；杜呆为敷文阁学士，依旧为沿江制置使、建康知府；董槐为秘阁修撰，依旧为沿江制置副使、江州知州，主管江西安抚司事。
English: On the 18th, Li Zengbo was appointed as the Chinese scholar-in-waiting, still as the envoy of Huai-Xi system and Yangzhou-Chizhou; Du Dun was appointed as the scholar-in-residence, still as the envoy of the riverside system and Jiankang-Chifu; Dong Hao was appointed as the scholar-in-residence, still as the vice-envoy of the riverside system and Jiangzhou-Chizhou, and was in charge of the secretary of Jiangxi pacification.

古文：辛丑，诏安南国王陈日煚元赐功臣号，特增 守义 二字。
现代文：二十四日，下诏安南国王陈日砖在原赐功臣号基础上，特增加 守义 二字。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the following edict was issued by the King of Annam, Chen Nichibai, adding the word "Shouyi" to the name of the meritorious subject.

古文：二月乙丑，以吕文德为福州观察使、侍卫马军副都指挥使，总统两淮出战军马，捍御边陲。
现代文：二月十八日，以吕文德为福州观察使、侍卫马军副都指挥使，总统两淮出战军马，在边境抵抗元军。
English: On February 18th, with Lü Wende as the Fuzhou observation envoy and the deputy commander of the Horse Guards Army, the president of the two Huai made war horses and resisted the Yuan army at the border.

古文：庚午，以郢州推官黄从龙死节，诏赠通直郎，一子补下州文学。
现代文：二十三日，以即州推官黄从龙为国捐躯，下诏赠给通直郎，一个儿子补为下州文学官。
English: On the 23rd, with the death of Huang Conglong, the governor of Jiaozhou, who sacrificed his life for the country, the imperial edict was presented to Tong Nairo, and a son was appointed as the literary officer of Jiaozhou.

古文：三月丁丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：夏四月癸丑，左武卫中郎将、濠州措置捍御王烈，阁门宣赞、淮西路钤王杰，阁门祗候、江东路钤李季实往马帅王鉴军前议事，遇大元兵战死，赠官，仍各官其二子。
现代文：夏四月初七，左武卫中郎将、壕州措置抵抗王烈，间门宣赞、淮西路铃辖王杰，闯门抵候、江东路铃辖李季实，前往马帅王鉴军前商议军事，遇到元军战死，赠官，并且各有二个儿子任命为官。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zuo Wu Wei Zhong Rong, commander of Zuozhou Measures to Resist Wang Lie, Xuan Zhan, Wang Jie, governor of Huaixi Province, and Li Ji Si, governor of Jiangdong Province, went to the front of the army of Marshal Wang Jian to discuss military affairs. When they met the former army, they were killed in battle and given positions, and each of them had two sons appointed as officials.

古文：乙卯，嘉定守臣程立之固守，诏官一转。
现代文：初九，嘉定守臣程立之固守城池，下诏转一官。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Cheng Li, the governor of Jiading, resigned from his post of castle keeper and was transferred to another post.

古文：丙辰，安丰军统领陈友直以王家堈战功，与官两转，壬申，布衣王与之进所著《周礼订议》，补下州文学。
现代文：初十，安丰军统领陈友直因王家冈战斗有功，转两官。二十六日，布衣王与之进呈所著凋礼订议，补为下州文学官。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Chen Youzhi, the commander of the Anfeng Army, was transferred to two posts due to his distinguished service in the battle of Wangjiagang. On the 26th day, King Buyi and Chen Youzhi presented their written withering ceremony, and Chen Youzhi was appointed as the literary officer of Shimonoseki.

古文：五月庚子，诏施州创筑郡城及关隘六十余所，本州将士及忠州戍卒执役三年者，各补转一官。
现代文：五月二十五日，下诏施州创筑郡城和关隘六十多所，本州将士和忠州戍卒执役三年者，各补转一官。
English: On May 25th, Shizhou issued an order to build more than 60 county-level cities and counties. Honshu soldiers and Chungju soldiers who have served for three years will each be promoted to a higher rank.

古文：六月甲戌，有流星大如太白，出于氐。
现代文：六月二十九日，有流星大如太白星出现在氏宿。
English: On the 29th of June, a meteor as big as the Great White Star appeared in Ujiyado.

古文：秋七月丁亥，诏海州屯驻借补保义郎申政，密州之役先登陷阵，后以战没，特赠保义郎，官其子进勇副尉。
现代文：秋七月十二日，下诏海州屯驻借补保义郎申政，密州之役冲锋陷阵，后来战死，特赠保义郎，任其子为进勇副尉。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: Haizhou garrisoned on loan to supplement Hoyiro Shinsei, the Battle of Mishu was stormed, and later died in battle, Hoyiro was specially presented, and his son was appointed as Vice-Lieutenant Jin Yong.

古文：太白入井。
现代文：太白星进井宿。
English: Taibai Xingjinjing Youth Hostel.

古文：壬辰，四川制司言：大元兵破大安军，忠义副总管杨世威坚守鱼孔隘，孤垒不降，有特立之操，可任责边防。
现代文：十七日，四川制司说： 大元军攻破大安军，忠义副总管杨世威坚守鱼孔隘，孤垒不降，有超常操行，可任边防重担。 
English: On the 17th, the Sichuan Provincial Party Secretary said: the Dayuan Army defeated the Dayan Army, and Yang Shihwei, the vice-governor of Zhongyi, adhered to the fish hole, did not fall down alone, had extraordinary behavior, and could be entrusted with the heavy burden of border defense.

古文：诏以世威就知大安军。
现代文：下诏任命杨世威为大安知军。
English: The following edict appointed Yang Shih-wei as the leader of the Da'an army.

古文：甲午，日生格气。
现代文：十九日，太阳旁出现格气。
English: On the 19th, the moon appeared next to the sun.

古文：己亥，太白经天，昼见。
现代文：二十四日，太白星白天显现，经天。
English: On the 26th, the white star appeared during the day and moved across the sky.

古文：八月乙卯，流星昼陨。
现代文：八月十一日，流星白天坠落。
English: On August 11th, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：癸亥，诏福州延祥、荻芦两砦并置武济水军，摘本州厢禁习水者充，千五百人为额。
现代文：十九日，下诏福建延样、荻芦两寨，都设置武济水军，选择本州厢军禁军熟习水性者充任，以一千五百人为定额。
English: On the 19th day of the following month, Fujian Yanxing and Huludao both set up the Wuzhi Navy, and selected those who were familiar with the watery nature of the Honshu Hanzhong Navy to fill the position, with a quota of 1,500 people.

古文：闰月丁丑，四川总领余玠言，知巴州向牷、钤辖谭渊白土坪等战有功。诏佺等十八人各官三转，余转官有差。其中创人各给缗钱百，阵没者趣上姓名，赠恤其家。太白犯权星。
现代文：闰八月初三，四川总领余说，巴州知州向侄、铃辖谭渊，在白土坪作战有功，下诏向佳等十八人各转三官，其余转官不等，其中受伤者各给络钱一百，阵亡者赶快上报姓名，赠恤其家，太白星侵犯权星。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, the general leader of Sichuan, Yu, said that Bazhou, Zhizhou, Xiangnei, and Lingzhi, Tanyuan, had distinguished themselves in the Battle of Bai Tu Ping. He ordered 18 people, including Xiang Jia, to be transferred to three positions, and the rest to be transferred to different positions. The injured were each given one hundred yuan, and those who died in battle were required to report their names as soon as possible, and their families were given a bonus.

古文：壬寅，太白、填星合于翼。
现代文：二十八日，太白星和填星合于冀宿。
English: On the 28th, the Taibai Star and the Filling Star coincided in Jieju.

古文：九月壬申，诏蠲高邮民耕荒田租。
现代文：九月二十九日，下诏免除高邮百姓耕垦荒田租税。
English: On September 29th, the following edict exempted the people of Gaoyou from the tax on cultivating wasteland.

古文：冬十月丙戌，太白入于氐。
现代文：冬十月十三日，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, Tai Bai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：十二月己丑，史嵩之五请祠，不允。
现代文：十二月十七日，史篙之五次上疏请求祠禄官，没有被批准。
English: On December 17th, Shi Xizhi's fifth request to the ancestral hall for a salary was not approved.

