古文：隗嚣字季孟，天水成纪人也。
现代文：隗嚣字季孟，是天水郡成纪县人。
English: Ji Meng is a native of Chengji County, Tianshui County.

古文：少仕州郡。
现代文：年少时做过州郡的官。
English: As a young man, he served as a state and county official.

古文：王莽国师刘歆引嚣为士。
现代文：王莽国师刘歆引隗嚣作自己的元士。
English: Wang Mangguo's country teacher Liu Zhi led his followers to become their own genshi.

古文：歆死，嚣归乡里。
现代文：刘歆死后，隗嚣回到了故里。
English: After Liu Ye's death, Gong Hanli returned to his hometown.

古文：季父崔，素豪侠，能得众。
现代文：他的叔父隗崔，素来豪爽侠义，得众人拥护。
English: His uncle, Hao Cui, has always been courageous and chivalrous, and has won the support of many people.

古文：闻更始立而莽兵连败，于是乃与兄义及上邽人杨广、冀人周宗谋起兵应汉。
现代文：听到更始立为天子而王莽兵连败，于是就与兄长隗义及上圭阝人杨广、冀人周宗谋划着起兵响应汉军。
English: When he heard that Wang Mang's soldiers had suffered back-to-back defeats, he and his elder brother, Zou Yi, as well as Yang Guang from Shanggui and Zhou Zong from Hebei, planned to raise an army in response to the Chinese army.

古文：嚣止之曰： 夫兵，凶事也。
现代文：隗嚣制止说： 出兵打仗，是凶险的事！
English: Stop the clamor and say: Sending troops to fight is a dangerous thing!

古文：宗族何辜！ 崔不听，遂聚众数千人，攻平襄，杀莽镇戎大尹，崔、广等以为举事宜立主以一众心，咸谓嚣素有名，好经书，遂共推为上将军。
现代文：我们的宗族有什么罪过呢？ 隗崔不听，就聚众数千人，攻平襄，杀王莽的镇戎大尹。隗崔、杨广等以为要举事就应立个主将以统一众人思想，都说隗嚣素有名气，喜爱经书，于是共推举隗嚣为上将军。
English: What is the fault of our clan? Xing Cui did not listen, so he gathered thousands of people, attacked Ping Xiang, and killed the reckless Zhen Rong Da Yin. Xing Cui, Yang Guang and others thought that if they wanted to do something, they should set up a master who would unify the thoughts of everyone. They all said that Xing Rong was famous and loved scriptures, so they jointly promoted Xing Rong as the superior general.

古文：嚣辞让不得已，曰： 诸父众贤不量小子。必能用嚣言者，乃敢从命。 众皆曰 诺 。
现代文：隗嚣辞让，不得已，说： 诸父和众贤看得起我小子，必须用我的意见，我才敢从命。 众人都说： 好。 
English: He had no choice but to concede, saying, "All the fathers and all the wise men have judged my boy to be worthy, so I must use my own judgment before I dare to carry out my orders."

古文：嚣既立，遣使聘请平陵人方望，以为军师。
现代文：隗嚣既立，遣使聘请平陵人方望，作为军师。
English: As the clamor had already arisen, he sent an envoy to hire the people of Pingling as military instructors.

古文：望至，说嚣曰： 足下欲承天顺民，辅汉而起，今立者乃在南阳，王莽尚据长安，虽欲以汉为名，其实无所受命，将何以见信于众乎？
现代文：方望至，向隗嚣建议说： 足下想要承天命顺民心，辅汉而起事，今更始立在南阳，王莽还据守长安，虽想以汉的名义行事，其实没有接到汉的命令，将用什么让众人相信呢？
English: Fang looked up and suggested to the hubbub: If you want to follow the destiny of heaven, follow the people's hearts, and help Han, and rise up, and now you have begun to stand in Nanyang, and Wang Mang is still guarding Chang'an. Although you want to act in the name of Han, you have not actually received Han's order. What will you use to make everyone believe?

古文：宜急立高庙，称臣奉祠，所谓 神道设教 ，求助人神者也。
现代文：应当赶快建立高祖庙，称臣奉祀，所谓 神道设教 ，求助于人神。
English: It is necessary to quickly build a temple to the ancestors, to worship the so-called Shinto religion, and to seek help from the human gods.

古文：且礼有损益，质文无常。
现代文：而且礼因时不同而有增删变易，朴实与华丽并没有常规。
English: Moreover, etiquette is subject to change from time to time, and there is no standard for plain and gorgeous.

古文：削地开兆，茅茨土阶，以致其肃敬。
现代文：削地以开兆域，虽然是茅屋土阶，也可以表示肃敬。
English: Shaving the ground with a hoop, although it is a thatched-roof step, can also show respect.

古文：虽未备物，神明其舍诸。 嚣从其言，遂立庙邑东，祀高祖、太宗、世宗。
现代文：虽然简陋没有物质设备，神明不会离开这里的。 隗嚣听从其言，就在邑东立庙，祭祀高祖、太宗、世宗。
English: Although it is a humble place with no material facilities, the deities do not leave here, and the worshippers obey their words and build a temple in the eastern part of the town to worship Gaozu, Taizong, and Shizong.

古文：嚣等皆称臣执事，史奉璧而告。
现代文：隗嚣等都称臣执事，祝史手捧玉璧以告神。
English: They all claim to be minister deacons, and wish the historian to hold the jewel in his hand to tell the god.

古文：祝毕，有司穿坎于庭，牵马操刀，奉盘错鍉，遂割牲而盟。
现代文：祝完，各职能官员往来于庭，有的牵马操刀，有的端着盘子勺子，于是杀牲而盟。
English: After the congratulation, all functional officials went back and forth in the court, some holding horses and swords, some carrying plates and spoons, and then killing animals.

古文：曰： 凡我同盟三十一将，十有六姓，允承天道，兴辅刘宗。
现代文：盟道： 计盟誓的共三十一位将领，一十六姓，顺承天道，兴兵辅佐刘宗。
English: Mengdao: A total of 31 generals, 16 surnames, who swore the oath, followed the heavenly way and assisted Liu Zong.

古文：如怀奸虑，明神殛之。
现代文：如有那个心怀不轨，神明主流灭他。
English: If there is someone with an evil heart, the gods will destroy him.

古文：高祖、文皇、武皇，俾坠厥命，厥宗受兵，族类灭亡。 有司奉血鍉进，护军举手揖诸将军曰： 鍉不濡血，歃不入口，是欺神明也，厥罚如盟。 既而薶血加书，一如古礼。
现代文：高祖、文皇、武皇，使他坠命，宗室遭到血洗，族类灭亡。 官员们奉着装有牲血的勺前进，护军们举着手揖诸将军说： 勺子不污血，如果歃血不入口，就是欺骗神明，按盟誓处罚他。 就这样把牲血涂在嘴上，盟约上，完全照古礼进行。
English: Gaozu, Emperor Wen, Emperor Wu, had him killed, the family was washed in blood, and the tribe was destroyed. The officials marched with a spoon filled with animal blood, and the guards held up their handkerchiefs to the generals and said, "The spoon is not stained with blood, if the blood does not enter the mouth, it is deceiving the gods and punishing him according to the oath." In this way, the blood of the animal was smeared on the mouth, on the covenant, and it was carried out completely according to the ancient ritual.

古文：事毕，移檄告郡国曰：
现代文：仪式结束，发出文书通告各郡国说：
English: At the end of the ceremony, a notice was issued to the counties, saying:

古文：汉复元年七月己酉朔。
现代文： 汉复元年七月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of the first month of July in the first year of the Han Dynasty was the Day of Self-Flagellation.

古文：己巳，上将军隗嚣、白虎将军隗崔、左将军隗义、右将军杨广、明威将军王遵、云旗将军周宗等，告州牧、部监、郡卒正、连率、大尹、尹、尉队大夫、属正、属令：故新都侯王莽，慢侮天地，悖道逆理。鸩杀孝平皇帝，篡夺其位。
现代文：已巳日，上将军隗嚣、白虎将军隗崔、左将军隗义、右将军杨广、明威将军王遵、云旗将军周宗等，以檄文告各州牧、部监、郡卒正、连率、大尹、尹、尉队大夫、属正、属令：原新都侯王莽，侮辱怠慢天地，悖于道，逆于理，毒杀孝平皇帝，篡夺皇位。
English: On the same day, Shang General Yan Han, White Tiger General Yan Cui, Left General Xing Yi, Right General Yang Guang, Ming Wei General Wang Zun, and Yunqi General Zhou Zong, etc. sent a message to the provincial pastors, department supervisors, county officers, company leaders, senior officers, officers, and subordinate orders: the former new capital, Prince Wang Mang, insulted and neglected heaven and earth, went against the way, went against reason, poisoned Emperor Xiaoping, and usurped the imperial throne.

古文：矫托天命，伪作符书，欺惑众庶，震怒上帝。
现代文：假托天命，伪作符书，胡说他应当取代汉帝，欺惑百姓，震怒上天。
English: He pretended to be the Mandate of Heaven, forged a book of characters, said that he should replace the Han Emperor, deceived the people, and provoked the wrath of heaven.

古文：反戾饰文，以为祥瑞。
现代文：乖张暴戾以粉饰伪文，作为吉祥的符瑞。
English: Perverse and violent, it embellishes the pseudo-text as an auspicious sign.

古文：戏弄神祇，歌颂祸殃。
现代文：胡言乱语戏弄神祗，歌颂祸殃。
English: Nonsense and gibberish, mocking the gods and singing the praises of evil.

古文：楚、越之竹，不足以书其恶。
现代文：楚、越之竹虽多，也不足以尽书其罪恶。
English: Although Chu and Yue have a lot of bamboo, it is not enough to fully write down their sins.

古文：天下昭然，所共闻见。
现代文：天下的人对他的所作所为无不耳闻目睹。
English: People all over the world have heard and witnessed what he has done.

古文：今略举大端，以喻使民。
现代文：现在略举几个大的方面，以晓喻吏民。
English: Now I would like to briefly mention a few major aspects for the understanding of officials and the public.

古文：盖天为父，地为母，祸福之应，各以事降。
现代文：天为父，地为母，对于祸福，分别用相应的时间予以感应。
English: Heaven is the father, the earth is the mother, and for calamity and blessing, respectively, with the corresponding time to be induced.

古文：莽明知之，而冥昧触冒，不顾大忌，诡乱天术，援引史传。
现代文：王莽明知天人感应的道理，但他却冥顽不灵故意冒犯，不顾忌讳，每有灾祸，他都援引史传进行歪曲解释，粉饰自己的罪行。
English: Wang Mang clearly knows the principle of divine inspiration, but he still stubbornly deliberately offends, disregarding taboos. Whenever there is a calamity, he cites historical legends to distort the explanation and whitewash his crimes.

古文：昔秦始皇毁坏谥法，以一二数欲至万世，而莽下三万六千岁之历，言身当尽此度。
现代文：以前秦始皇毁坏谥法，在他活着时就自称始皇帝，以后一代接一代传下去，想要世代称帝直至万世。王莽步秦始皇的后尘，颁下三万六千年的历法，并声称王氏政权在这些年内将世代相传。
English: In the past, Qin Shihuang destroyed the lunar calendar, and when he was alive, he called himself the First Emperor, and passed it down from generation to generation, wanting to be called emperor for all time. Wang Mang followed in the footsteps of Qin Shihuang and issued a 36,000-year calendar, and claimed that Wang's regime would be passed down from generation to generation within these years.

古文：循亡秦之轨，推无穷之数。
现代文：沿着亡秦的轨迹，推出无穷的历数。
English: Following the trajectory of the late Qin Dynasty, an infinite number of calendars were introduced.

古文：是其逆天之大罪也。
现代文：这是他逆天的大罪。
English: This was his great sin against heaven.

古文：分裂郡国，断截地络。
现代文：王莽分裂郡国、割断疆界，更名天下田为王田。
English: Wang Mang split the county and cut off the border, and renamed Tian Tian as Wang Tian.

古文：田为王田，卖买不得。规锢山泽，夺民本业。
现代文：禁止买卖。规定把名山大泽都禁锢起来，夺走百姓以渔猎为生的本业。
English: The sale and purchase of goods was prohibited. The famous mountains and lakes were to be cordoned off, depriving the people of their livelihoods as fishermen and hunters.

古文：造起九庙，穷极土作。
现代文：滥造九庙，极其靡费奢侈。
English: Nine temples were built indiscriminately, at great expense and extravagance.

古文：发冢河东，攻劫丘垄。
现代文：把河东的冢墓都挖掉，掠夺丘垄。
English: Dig up the skull tombs in the east of the river and plunder the ridges.

古文：此其逆地之大罪也。
现代文：这是他逆地的大罪。
English: This is his great crime against the land.

古文：尊任残贼，信用奸佞，诛戮忠正，复按口语，赤车奔驰，法冠晨夜，冤系无辜，妄族众庶。
现代文：尊任残贼，信用奸佞，诛戮忠良正直的人们，制造口实，围有赤帷的车奔驰于道，戴着法冠的官吏晨夜捉拿无辜，动不动把百姓的家族统统杀掉。
English: Honorable ruffians, confidence tricksters, killers of good and honest people, fabricators of lies, chariots with red cloaks speeding along the roads, officials wearing the crown of the Law arresting the innocent in the morning and at night, killing the families of the people at every turn.

古文：行炮格之刑，除顺时之法，灌以醇醯，袭以五毒。
现代文：用残忍的焚烧刑法烧死良民，废除过去顺时的法令，以醇醯裂五毒。
English: They used the cruel criminal law of incineration to burn the good people to death, abolished the laws and regulations of the past, and cracked the five poisons with alcohol.

古文：政令日变，官名月易，货币岁改，吏民昏乱，不知所从，商旅穷窘，号泣市道。
现代文：政令天天变动，官名一个月一个样，货币年年改换，吏民错，不知所从，商人旅客穷困窘迫，在市道上号啕大哭。
English: Government decrees change every day, official names are the same every month, currency changes every year, officials and people make mistakes, they don't know what to do, merchants and travelers are poor and distressed, and they cry loudly on the city road.

古文：设为六管，增重赋敛，刻剥百姓，厚自奉养，苞苴流行，财入公辅，上下贪贿，莫相检考，民坐挟铜炭，没入钟官，徒隶殷积，数十万人，工匠饥死，长安皆臭。
现代文：设六管的法令，增重赋税，剥削百姓，饱中私囊以自肥，贿赂公行，财富没入三公和辅相，根本无人检查考察。百姓坐罪铸钱，以铁锁锁颈，没入钟官为奴，囚徒、奴隶囚聚在一起，多达数十万人，工匠饿死，长安城中都能闻到尸臭。
English: Six-pronged decrees were set up, taxes were increased, the people were exploited, private pockets were fattened with self-enrichment, bribes were paid to officials, wealth disappeared into the three public and auxiliary sectors, and there was no one at all to inspect and investigate. The people made money by committing crimes, locked their necks with iron locks, enslaved the bell-ringer, prisoners and slaves gathered together, up to hundreds of thousands, craftsmen starved to death, and the stench of dead bodies could be smelled in Chang'an City.

古文：既乱诸夏，狂心益悖，北攻强胡，南扰劲越，西侵羌戎，东摘濊貊。使四境之外，并入为害，缘边之郡，江海之濒，涤地无类。
现代文：已搞乱了中国，其狂妄之心更加肆虐，北攻强胡，南扰动劲越，西侵羌戎，东扰貊，使四面的邻国，并入边境为患，边界的郡县、江海之边，惨遭劫难人都死光了。
English: It has already disrupted China, and its arrogance is even more rampant. The north attacks Qianghu, the south disturbs more vigorously, the west invades Qiang Rong, and the east disturbs Qiang Rong. It has caused the neighboring countries on all sides to be merged into the border, and the counties and counties on the border and the side of the river have all died.

古文：故攻战之所败，苛法之所陷，饥馑之所夭，疾疫之所及，以万万计。
现代文：所以在王莽的虐政下战争中死伤的人，暴戾刑法下横遭陷害的人，冻死饿死的人，疾病瘟疫所夺走的人，以万万计。
English: Therefore, there are tens of thousands of people who were killed and injured in the war under the tyrannical rule of Wang Mang, people who were framed under the criminal law of violence, people who froze to death and starved to death, and people who were taken away by disease and plague.

古文：其死者则露尸不掩，生者则奔亡流散，幼孤妇女，流离系虏。
现代文：死者暴尸野外得不到掩埋，生者奔亡流散，幼孤妇女流离被虏掠。
English: The bodies of dead ruffians cannot be buried in the open, the living are scattered, and orphaned young women are abducted.

古文：此其逆人之大罪也。是故上帝哀矜，降罚于莽，妻子颠殒，还自诛刈。
现代文：这是他逆人的大罪。 所以上天哀怜百姓，对王莽进行惩罚，几个儿子都被他自己杀了，妻子也被他气死。
English: This was his great crime against the people. Therefore, Heaven took pity on the people and punished Wang Mang. He killed several of his sons, and his wife was also killed in his rage.

古文：大臣反据，亡形已成。
现代文：大臣起来反叛他，他灭亡的形势已经形成了。
English: His ministers are rebelling against him, and the stage is set for his downfall.

古文：大司马董忠、国师刘歆、卫将军王涉，皆结谋内溃，司命孔仁、纳言严尤、秩宗陈茂，举众外降。
现代文：大司马董忠、国师刘歆、卫将军王涉都联合起来从内部瓦解；司命孔仁、纳言严尤、秩宗陈茂在外面举众投降。
English: The grand secretary Ma Dongzhong, the national teacher Liu Xuan, and the general of the imperial guard Wang Wanzhong united to disintegrate from within; the secretary of life Kong Ren, Nagan Yan Yu, and Chichizong Chen Mao surrendered outside.

古文：今山东之兵二百余万，已平齐、楚，下蜀、汉，定宛、洛，据敖仓，守函谷，威命四布，宣风中岳。
现代文：今山东之兵二百余万，已经平定了齐、楚、下蜀、汉，安定了宛、洛，据敖仓，守函关，威命四布，宣威名于中岳。
English: At present, there are more than two million soldiers in Shandong, and they have already pacified Qi, Chu, Lower Shu and Han, stabilized Wan and Luo, and, according to Kamakura, guarded Hanzhong Pass, with great prestige and fame in Zhongyue.

古文：兴灭继绝，封定万国，遵高祖之旧制，修孝文之遗德。有不从命，武军平之。
现代文：复兴汉室继承刘嗣，封定万国，遵照高祖的旧有制度，修复孝文的传统德政，如有那个敢不从命，就用武力平定。
English: Revive the Han family to succeed Liu Zhi, seal all nations, follow the old system of Gao Zu, restore the traditional virtue of filial piety, and if there is anyone who dares to disobey, use force to quell it.

古文：驰命四夷，复其爵号。
现代文：派遣使节到四方邻国，恢复他们原来的爵号。
English: Send envoys to the four neighboring countries and restore their original titles.

古文：然后还师振旅，橐弓卧鼓。
现代文：然后再还师整顿部队，把弓箭、金鼓都收藏起来。
English: Then he returned to the division to reorganize the troops and collect the bows and arrows and golden drums.

古文：申命百姓，各安其所，庶无负子之责。
现代文：特申令百姓，各安其所，安居乐业，庶几不辜负自己的责任。 
English: I hereby order the common people to live and work safely in their respective places, and to live up to their responsibilities.

古文：嚣乃勒兵十万，击杀雍州牧陈庆。
现代文：隗嚣于是带兵十万，击杀雍州牧陈庆。
English: He then led a hundred thousand soldiers to kill the Yongzhou herdsman Chen Qing.

古文：将攻安定。
现代文：准备进攻安定。
English: Be ready to attack.

古文：安定大尹王向，莽从弟平阿侯谭之子也，威风独能行其邦内，属县皆无叛者。
现代文：安定大尹王向，是王莽堂弟平阿侯王谭的儿子，威风颇能风行于安定一邦之内，属县没有反叛他的。
English: Yin Wangxiang, the Prince of Anding, was the son of Wang Mang's cousin, Ping Ahou Wang Tan. He was very influential in the State of Anding, and his county did not rebel against him.

古文：嚣乃移书于向，喻以天命，反复诲示，终不从。
现代文：隗嚣于是写信给王向，以天命晓谕他，反复教诲指示，王向始终不从。
English: He then wrote to Wang Xiang, telling him about the Mandate of Heaven and instructing him repeatedly, but Wang Xiang always refused to obey.

古文：于是进兵虏之，以徇百姓，然后行戮，安定悉降。
现代文：于是进兵将他俘虏，宣示百姓，然后把他杀掉，安定悉数投降。
English: So the marching soldiers took him prisoner, announced to the people, and then killed him, and the stable surrendered in full.

古文：而长安中亦起兵诛王莽。
现代文：这时长安城中有人起兵杀了王莽。
English: At this time, someone in Chang'an City raised an army and killed Wang Mang.

古文：嚣遂分遣诸将徇陇西、武都、金城、武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌，皆下之。
现代文：隗嚣于是分遣诸将夺取陇西、武都、金城、武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌，都攻了下来。
English: Therefore, he rallied and dispatched generals to seize Shaanxi, Wudu, Jincheng, Wuwei, Zhangye, Jiuquan, and Dunhuang, all of which were attacked.

古文：更始二年，遣使征嚣及崔、义等。
现代文：更始二年，遣使征召隗嚣及隗崔、隗义等。
English: At the beginning of the next two years, envoys were sent to call up Yan Rong, Yan Cui, and Yan Yi.

古文：嚣将行，方望以为更始未可知，固止之，嚣不听。
现代文：隗嚣准备朝见更始，方望以为更始前途还不可知，坚决阻止，隗嚣不听。
English: The clamor is ready to see a new beginning in the morning, the party hopes that the future of the new beginning is still unknown, resolutely prevent it, and do not listen to the clamor.

古文：望以书辞谢而去，曰：
现代文：方望写信辞谢而去，说：
English: Fangfang wrote a letter of resignation and left, saying:

古文：足下将建伊、吕之业，弘不世之功，而大事草创，英雄未集。
现代文： 将军将像伊尹、吕尚一样建立开国的功业，弘扬非一世所常有的功绩，而现在大事还在草草创立之时，英雄豪杰还没有集中起来。
English: Like Yi Yin and Lushan, the general will establish the cause of the founding of the country and carry forward the extraordinary achievements of the first generation. But now, when the great events are still in the process of being created, the heroes and heroines have not yet gathered.

古文：以望异域之人，疵瑕未露，欲先崇郭隗，想望乐毅，故钦承大旨，顺风不让。
现代文：我方望是异郡的人，缺点过失还没有暴露出来，本想效法郭隗之事燕昭王，以便能吸引乐毅那样的大英雄并归到将军麾下，所以当初你聘请我时，我顺风而来没有推辞。
English: We are from a different county, and our shortcomings and faults have not yet been exposed. Originally, we wanted to emulate Guo Xuan's story of Yan Zhao Wang, so that we could attract a great hero like Le Yi and come under the general's command. Therefore, when you hired me, I came with the wind and did not refuse.

古文：将军以至德尊贤，广其谋虑，动有功，发中权，基业已定，大勋方缉。
现代文：将军以至高的德行尊重贤才，广泛采纳其谋虑，行动有功绩，发兵能中要害，现在基业已定，辅弼的大功勋正在成就之中。
English: The general respected the sages with the highest virtue, widely adopted their advice, acted with merit, and sent troops to the key areas. Now the foundation has been set, and the great feats of the auxiliary troops are in the process of achievement.

古文：今俊乂并会，羽翮并肩，望无耆考之德，而猥托宾客之上，诚自愧也。
现代文：今俊杰贤才并集，羽翼已经丰满，我方望没有高于常人的德才，而愧列宾客的上首，实在是惭愧得很。
English: Now that the young, the outstanding and the talented are gathered together, and their wings are already full, we do not expect any higher than ordinary people's virtues, and we are ashamed to be the first among the guests.

古文：虽怀介然之节，欲絜去就之分，诚终不背其本，贰其志也。
现代文：我虽怀耿介的节气，想衡量辞职与留职的所宜，我是始终如一不会背弃自己的本心，另怀异志的。
English: Although I cherish the spirit of Geng Kai and want to weigh the merits of resigning and staying in office, I will never betray my original intention and cherish different aspirations.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：范蠡收责句践，乘偏舟于五湖；舅犯谢罪文公，亦逡巡于河上。
现代文：范蠡助勾践灭吴后自收其罪责，乘扁舟泛于五湖之上；晋文公的舅舅子犯在随文公返国途中，也在河上停了下来，向文公谢罪请求辞去。
English: After Fan Shuxu co-ordinated the extermination of Wu, he accepted his guilt and took a boat across the five lakes; the uncle of Jin Wengong also stopped on the river on his way back to the country with Wengong, and asked Wengong Xie to resign.

古文：夫以二子之贤，勒铭两国，犹削迹归愆，请命乞身，望之无劳，盖其宜也。
现代文：以范蠡、子犯二人的贤德，在越国和晋国的史书上都留下了功名，还归罪于自己请求削迹回乡，我方望没有什么功劳，辞职是很适宜的。
English: With the virtue of Fan Yu and Zi Guan, both of them have left their names in the history books of Yue and Jin countries. They also blame themselves for requesting to return to their hometowns. We believe that there is no merit, and it is very appropriate to resign.

古文：望闻乌氏有龙池之山，微径南通，与汉相属，其傍时有奇人，聊及闲暇，广求其真。
现代文：我听说乌氏县有龙池山，小路南通，与汉相连，那旁边时常有奇人异士，闲暇时，可广求其真。
English: I heard that Wu County has Longchi Mountain and Nantong Road, which are connected to Han, and there are often strange people there. In my spare time, I can search for the truth.

古文：愿将军勉之。
现代文：愿将军勉之。
English: Let the general urge him on.

古文：嚣等遂至长安，更始以为右将军，崔、义皆即旧号。
现代文：隗嚣等于是来到长安，更始以他为右将军，隗崔、隗义仍维持原来称号。
English: He came to Chang'an, and at the beginning he was the right general, while Gui Cui and Gui Yi still maintained their original titles.

古文：其冬，崔、义谋欲叛归，嚣惧并祸，即以事告之，崔、义诛死。
现代文：当年冬天，隗崔、隗义计议谋叛更始北归，隗嚣害怕祸及自己，即将此事告之更始，隗崔、隗义被杀。
English: In the winter of that year, Gong Cui and Gong Yi plotted to start a rebellion and return to the north. They were so afraid of harming themselves that they announced the start of the matter, and Gong Cui and Gong Yi were killed.

古文：更始感嚣忠，以为御史大夫。
现代文：更始感到隗嚣忠于他，就封他为御史大夫。
English: At the beginning of his reign, he felt that his vassals were loyal to him, so he appointed him to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：明年夏，赤眉入关，三辅扰乱。
现代文：第二年夏，赤眉入关，三辅扰乱。
English: In the summer of the second year, the Red Eyebrows entered the pass, and the three auxiliaries were disturbed.

古文：流闻光武即位河北，嚣即说更始归政于光武叔父国三老良，更始不听。
现代文：传言光武已即位于河北，隗嚣便向更始建议把政权移交给光武叔父国三老刘良，更始不听。
English: Rumors spread that Guangwu was already in Hebei Province, and the clamor began to suggest that the regime should be handed over to Liu Liang, Guangwu's uncle and one of the Three Elders of the State, but he did not listen.

古文：诸将欲劫更始东归，嚣亦与通谋。
现代文：诸将领想劫持更始东归，隗嚣也参与了这个谋划。
English: The generals wanted to return to the east after the hijacking, and Yan Yan also participated in this plan.

古文：事发觉，更始使使者召嚣，嚣称疾不入，因会客王遵、周宗等勒兵自守。
现代文：事情暴露后，更始派人召见隗嚣，隗嚣称有病不去，因而与部下王遵、周宗率军自守。
English: After the affair was exposed, he initially sent someone to summon Yanran. Yanran said that he was ill and could not go, so he and his subordinates Wang Zun and Zhou Zong led the army to defend themselves.

古文：更始使执金吾邓晔将兵围嚣，嚣闭门拒守；至昏时，遂溃围，与数十骑夜斩平城门关，亡归天水。
现代文：更始派执金吾邓晔率军包围隗嚣，隗嚣关门拒守；到黄昏时，守不住溃围了，隗嚣与数十骑乘夜斩平城门关，逃命回到天水。
English: At the beginning of the new year, Emperor Jingu and Emperor Deng Jun led an army to encircle Yanran, and Yanran closed the gate and refused to defend; at dusk, unable to defend, the siege was broken, and Yanran and dozens of horsemen leveled the city gate at night and fled back to Tianshui.

古文：复招聚其众，据故地，自称西州上将军。
现代文：再招聚他的旧部，占据原来的地盘，自称西州上将军。
English: He gathered his old troops again, occupied the original site, and called himself the general of the Western Province.

古文：及更始败，三辅耆老士大夫皆奔归嚣。
现代文：等到更始失败，三辅的耆老士大夫都逃奔到天水来归附于隗嚣。
English: After the initial failure, all the senior doctors of Sanfu fled to Tianshui to join the hustle and bustle.

古文：嚣素谦恭爱士，倾身引接为布衣交。
现代文：隗嚣素来廉恭爱士，尽可能引见名士以为布衣之交。
English: He has always been a lover of virtue, and whenever possible, he introduces celebrities as his friends.

古文：以前王莽平河大尹长安谷恭为掌野大夫，平陵范逡为师友，赵秉、苏衡、郑兴为祭酒，申屠刚、杜林为持书，杨广、王遵、周宗及平襄人行巡、阿阳人王捷、长陵人王元为大将军，杜陵、金丹之属为宾客。
现代文：以前王莽平河大尹长安谷恭，被任为掌野大夫，平陵范逡任为师友，赵秉、苏衡、郑兴为祭酒，申屠刚、杜林为持书，杨广、王遵、周宗及平襄人行巡、河阳人王捷、长陵人王元为大将军，杜陵、金丹之属为宾客。
English: In the past, Wang Mang Pinghe Da Yin, Chang An Gu Gong, was appointed as the field doctor, Pingling Fan Qi was appointed as the mentor, Zhao Bing, Su Heng, Zheng Xing as the sacrificial wine, Shen Tu Gang, and Du Lin as the book holder, Yang Guang, Wang Zun, Zhou Zong, and Pingxiang people as the patrol, Kheyang people Wang Jie, and Changling people Wang Yuan as the general, and Du Ling and Jintan were the guests.

古文：由此名震西州，闻于山东。
现代文：由此名震西州，威名闻于山东。
English: As a result, Xizhou is famous and Shandong is famous.

古文：建武二年，大司徒邓禹西击赤眉，屯云阳，禹裨将冯愔引兵叛禹，西向天水，嚣逆击，破之于高平，尽获辎重。
现代文：建武二年，大司徒邓禹西击赤眉，屯云阳。邓禹裨将冯忄音引兵叛离邓禹，西向天水。隗嚣迎击，破冯忄音于高平，缴获全部辎重。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, Deng Yuxi, the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar of the Great Scholar.

古文：于是禹承制遣使持节命嚣为西州大将军，得专制凉州、朔方事。
现代文：于是邓禹秉承皇帝意旨派遣专使持节命隗嚣为西州大将军，得以专制凉州、朔方政事。
English: As a result, Deng Yu, adhering to the emperor's will, dispatched an envoy to be the general of Xizhou, and was able to dictate the political affairs of Liangzhou and Shuo Fang.

古文：及赤眉去长安。欲西上陇，嚣遣将军杨广迎击，破之，又追败之于乌氏、泾阳间。
现代文：等到赤眉去长安，想西上陇，隗嚣派将军杨广迎击，破赤眉，又追击败赤眉于乌氏、泾阳间。
English: When the Red Eyebrows went to Chang'an and wanted to go westward, Yang Guang, a general, was sent to meet the attack, broke the Red Eyebrows, and chased and defeated the Red Eyebrows between Wushi and Shenyang.

古文：嚣既有功于汉，又受邓禹爵，署其腹心，议者多劝通使京师。
现代文：隗嚣既有功于汉，又接受了邓禹的爵封，得以任命心腹，议者多劝他通使京师。
English: Gong Han not only contributed to the Han Dynasty, but also accepted Deng Yu's knighthood, and was able to appoint a confidant. Many people advised him to send an envoy to Beijing.

古文：三年，嚣乃上书诣阙。
现代文：三年，隗嚣就上书到京师。
English: Three years later, he was accepted as a teacher in Beijing.

古文：光武素闻其风声，报以殊礼，言称字，用敌国之仪，所以慰藉之良厚。
现代文：光武素来听到他的美德、声誉，就以特殊礼节报他，叫他时称字，用国宾的仪礼，安慰荐藉至深且厚。
English: Ever since Guangwu heard of his virtues and reputation, he has reported to him with special etiquette, calling him by name, using the etiquette of a state guest, and giving him deep and profound encouragement.

古文：时，陈仓人吕鲔拥众数万，与公孙述通，寇三辅。
现代文：这时陈仓人吕鲔拥众数万，与公孙述相通，侵犯三辅。
English: At this time, tens of thousands of Chen Cang's followers, including Lv Ying, who were in communication with his father-in-law and son-in-law, invaded Sanfu.

古文：嚣复遣兵佐征西大将军冯异击之，走鲔，遣歙上状。
现代文：隗嚣再次派兵帮助征西大将军冯异进击，将吕鲔赶走，遣使上书报告。
English: Gong Han sent troops again to help Feng Yixin, the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, to advance, drive Lv Xuan away, and send him to write a report.

古文：帝报以手书曰：
现代文：帝客气地用手书回复说：
English: The emperor politely replied in handwriting:

古文：慕乐德义，思相结纳。
现代文： 爱慕你的德义，想与你结纳。
English: I admire your virtue and want to be united with you.

古文：昔文王三分，犹服事殷。
现代文：以前周文王三分天下有其二，还服侍殷商。
English: In the past, Zhou Wenwang was second to none in the world, and he also served the merchants.

古文：但弩马铅刀，不可强扶。
现代文：但驽马钝刀，不可勉强扶持而用。
English: However, you should not use a blunt knife to forcefully support the horse.

古文：数蒙伯乐一顾之价，而苍蝇之飞，不过数步，即托骥尾，得以绝群。
现代文：我几次受到了伯乐声价十倍的惠顾，苍蝇只能飞数步之远，但如果附在骥尾上，就可以超过群蝇了。
English: On several occasions I have been patronised by cranes that cost ten times the price of a cormorant. Flies can only fly a few steps, but if they are attached to the appendix, they can outrun the swarm of flies.

古文：隔于盗贼，声问不数。
现代文：你我被阻于盗贼，不能经常问候。
English: You and I are held up by thieves and can't say hello very often.

古文：将军操执款款，扶倾救危，南距公孙之兵，北御羌胡之乱，是以冯异西征，得以数千百人踯躅三辅。微将军之助，则咸阳已为他人禽矣。
现代文：将军操守忠厚有礼，扶持倾倒解救危困，南拒公孙述的兵马，北御羌胡的乱寇，是以冯异西征，得以数千百人踯躅于三辅，如果没有将军的帮助，那么咸阳早已落入贼兵之手了。
English: The generals were loyal and courteous, supported and relieved the crisis, the south refused the soldiers and horses described by Gongsun, and the North's raiders were led by Feng Yixing, allowing thousands of people to stay in Sanfu. If there was no help from the generals, then Xianyang would have already fallen into the hands of the robbers.

古文：今关东寇贼，往往屯聚，志务广远，多所不暇，未能观兵成都，与子阳角力。
现代文：现在关东的寇贼，往往屯聚，志在求得广远，没有闲暇，所以没有在成都阅兵，与公孙述斗力。
English: Nowadays, the bandits in Kanto tend to gather together, aspire to be far and wide, and have no leisure, so there is no military parade in Chengdu, and they talk about their fighting power with their grandchildren.

古文：如令子阳到汉中、三辅，愿因将军兵马，鼓旗相当。
现代文：如果公孙述侵犯汉中、三辅，我很想借用将军军马，与他一决胜负。
English: If Gongsun Su invades Hanzhong and Sanfu, I would very much like to borrow the general's horse and fight him to a draw.

古文：傥肯如言，蒙天之福，即智士计功割地之秋也。
现代文：如能这样，那就是蒙老天赐福，也就是智士计功割地论功行赏的时候了。
English: If this can be done, it will be a blessing from God, and it will be the time for the wise men to reward their efforts.

古文：管仲曰； 生我者父母，成我者鲍子。 自今以后，手书相闻，勿用傍人解构之言。
现代文：管仲说过 ：生我的是父母，助我成事的是鲍叔。 自今以后，你我之间可用手书互相沟通，不要轻信旁人挑拨离间的谣言。 
English: Guanzhong said, "My parents are the ones who gave birth to me, and Uncle Bao is the one who helped me accomplish things. From now on, you and I can communicate with each other by handwriting, and don't believe the rumors that others are trying to sow discord.

古文：自是恩礼愈笃。
现代文：从此以后光武对他恩礼更加隆重。
English: Since then, Guangwu has been more generous to him.

古文：其后公孙述数出兵汉中，遣使以大司空扶安王印绶授嚣。
现代文：其后公孙述几次出兵汉中，遣使以大司空扶安王印绶授隗嚣。
English: After that, Gongsun made several military expeditions to Hanzhong and sent an envoy with the title of Daizi Ku Fuan Wang Yingzhu to suppress the rebellion.

古文：嚣自以与述敌国，耻为所臣，乃斩其使，出兵击之，连破述军，以故蜀兵不复北出。
现代文：隗嚣认为自己曾经与述是敌国，感到做他的臣是可耻的，就斩了来使，出兵攻击，连破公孙述军，所以蜀兵不再北出。
English: He arrogantly thought that he had once been an enemy country with Shu, and felt that it was shameful to be his vassal, so he cut off the envoy, sent troops to attack, and even broke the Gongsun Shu army, so the Shu soldiers no longer went north.

古文：时，关中将帅数上书，言蜀可击之状，帝以示器，因使讨蜀，以效其信。
现代文：这时关中将帅几次上书，说蜀攻击的情状，帝将这些意见转示隗嚣，并要他出兵讨蜀，以考验其可否信用。
English: At this time, Guan Zhongzheng Shuai wrote several times, saying that Shu attacked the situation, the emperor expressed these opinions, and asked him to send troops to fight Shu to test whether he could be trusted.

古文：器乃遣长史上书，盛言三辅单弱，刘文伯在边，未宜谋蜀。
现代文：隗嚣就遣长史上书，极言三辅兵力单弱，又有卢芳在旁边，不宜伐蜀。
English: There is a lot of hullabaloo about the history of the expeditionary force, and it is said that the three auxiliary forces are weak, and Lu Fang is next to them, and it is not appropriate to attack Shu.

古文：帝知嚣欲持两端，不愿天下统一，于是稍黜其礼，正君臣之仪。
现代文：光武知隗嚣想脚踩两边船，不愿天下统一，于是稍稍降低对隗嚣的礼遇，正君臣礼仪。
English: Guangwu knew that Yanran wanted to step on both sides of the boat, and did not want to unify the world, so he slightly lowered the courtesy to Yanran, the etiquette of the ruler and the subject.

古文：初，嚣与来歙、马援相善，故帝数使歙、援奉使往来，劝令入朝，许以重爵。
现代文：起初，隗嚣与来歙、马援相好，所以帝几次派来歙、马援奉使往来，劝隗嚣入朝以重爵相许。
English: At first, Yanran was friendly with Laiwu and Ma'an, so the emperor sent Laiwu and Ma'an envoys several times to persuade Yanran to enter the imperial court with the promise of a high rank.

古文：嚣不欲东，连遣使深持谦辞，言无功德，须四方平方，退伏闾里。
现代文：隗嚣不愿归东，连连遣使带着深表谦辞的奏章入见，说自己没有功德，要等到四方平定，再告退回乡。
English: He did not want to return to the East, and repeatedly sent envoys with a deeply humble speech, saying that he had no merit, that he had to wait until the four sides were pacified, and then return to his hometown.

古文：五年，复遣来歙说嚣遣子入侍，嚣闻刘永、鼓宠皆已破灭，乃遣长子恂随歙诣阙。以为胡骑校尉，封镌羌侯。
现代文：五年，帝再次派来歙说服隗嚣派儿子入侍，隗嚣听说刘永、彭宠都已经破灭，就派遣长子隗恂随来歙到京晋谒，被封为胡骑校尉，封镌羌侯。
English: In the fifth year, the emperor once again sent Gao to persuade Gao Han to appoint his son as an attendant. When Gao Han heard that Liu Yong and Peng Jiao had both been defeated, he sent his eldest son Gao to accompany Gao to Beijing and Jinshan, where he was named Hu Jia lieutenant and given the title of Gao Hou.

古文：而嚣将王元、王捷常以为天下成败未可知，不愿专心内事。
现代文：而隗嚣将领王元、王捷常常以为天下成败还是未知数，不愿一心一意归顺光武。
English: But the tumultuous generals Wang Yuan and Wang Jie often thought that the success or failure of the world was still unknown, and they were unwilling to follow Guangwu wholeheartedly.

古文：元遂说嚣曰： 昔更始西都，四方响应，天下喁喁，谓之太平。
现代文：王元就对隗嚣说： 过去更始西都长安，四方响应，天下景仰归向，说是天下太平了。
English: Wang Yuan said to the hubbub: In the past, the western capital was Chang'an, the four parties responded, the world admired and turned to, saying that the world was peaceful.

古文：一旦败坏，大王几所厝。
现代文：一旦更始失败，大王几乎没有安身之所。
English: Once the revolution fails, the great king has almost no place to stay.

古文：今南有子阳，北有文伯，江湖海岱，王公十数，而欲牵儒生之说，弃千乘之基，羁旅危国，以求万全，此循覆车之轨，计之不可者也。
现代文：现在南有公孙述，北有卢芳，江湖海带，有张步、董宪等王公十多位各据一方，而想迁就马援的意见，放弃千乘的基业，寄居作客于危险的国度，以求万全，这是循着覆车的轨道而进，不是好计啊。
English: At present, there are more than a dozen princes such as Gongsun Su in the south, Lu Fang in the north, Jianghu Belt in the north, and Zhangbu and Dong Xian in the east, but they want to give in to Ma Yuan's opinion, give up the inheritance of Qianren, and live as a guest in a dangerous country to seek perfection. This is following the track of the covered wagon. It is not a good plan.

古文：今天水完富，士马最强，北收西河、上郡，东收三辅之地，案秦旧迹，表里河山。
现代文：现在天水完整富裕，兵马最为强盛，北攻西河、上郡，东收三辅之地，按照秦的旧迹，外山内河互为表里。
English: Now the sky and water are complete and rich, the soldiers and horses are the most powerful, the north attacks the West River, the upper county, and the east receives the three auxiliary places, according to the ancient relics of Qin, the outer mountain and river are inside each other.

古文：元请以一丸泥为大王东封函谷关，此万世一时也。
现代文：王元请以少数兵力为大王扼守险要函谷关，这是万世一时的良机。
English: Wang Yuan asked to use a small number of troops to protect the great king from the danger of Hakodate Pass. This is a golden opportunity.

古文：若计不及此，且畜养士马，据隘自守，旷日持久，以待四方之变，图王不成，其弊犹足以霸。
现代文：如果现在不能采用此计，那么暂时畜养兵马，据险自守，坚持下去，以等待四方的变化，即使图王不成，退一步也足以称霸一方。
English: If this strategy cannot be adopted at this time, then temporarily raise the troops and horses, as far as possible, persist in waiting for the changes of the four sides, even if the king of the map is not achieved, a step back is enough to dominate one side.

古文：要之，鱼不可脱于渊，神龙失势，即还与蚯蚓同。 嚣心然元计，虽遣子入质，犹负其险厄，欲专方面，于是游士长者，稍稍去之。
现代文：总之，鱼是不能脱离深水的，神龙失去了依托，就与蚯蚓没有两样了。 隗嚣心里赞成王元的计划，虽然派遣了儿子入朝当了人质，还是想凭藉其地理条件的险要，自己独霸一方。于是一些游士长者，逐渐离开了他。
English: In short, the fish cannot get out of the deep water, the divine dragon has lost its support, and it is no different from the dragonfly. Yan Yan agreed with Wang Yuan's plan in his heart, although he sent his son to the imperial court and became a hostage, he still wanted to dominate one side with the help of his geographical conditions. Therefore, some of the wanderer elders gradually left him.

古文：六年，关东悉平。
现代文：六年，关东都平定了。
English: In six years, the whole of Kanto was pacified.

古文：帝积苦兵间，以嚣子内侍，公孙述远据边陲，乃谓诸将曰： 且当置此两子于度外耳。 因数腾书陇、蜀，告示祸福。
现代文：帝因久苦兵事，以隗嚣有儿子作为内侍，公孙述远据边陲，于是对诸将说： 暂时把这两个小子搁置在一边吧。 因此几次传书隗嚣和公孙述，告以祸福。
English: Because the emperor had been in the army for a long time, he had a son as an attendant, and his son-in-law and son-in-law were far away on the frontier, so he said to the generals: Let's put these two boys aside for the time being.

古文：嚣宾客、掾史多文学生，每所上事，当世士大夫皆讽诵之，故帝有所辞答，尤加意焉，嚣复遣使周游诣阙，先到冯异营，游为仇家所杀。
现代文：隗嚣的宾客、掾史多是文学士，每次上书言事，当世士大夫都朗读背诵，所以帝有所辞答，他们尤为重视。隗嚣再次派遣使者周游到京，先到冯异营，周游被仇家所杀。
English: Gong Han's guests, most of whom were scholars of literature, read aloud and recited the emperor's speech every time they delivered a speech, so they paid special attention to the emperor's words and answers. Gong Han again sent emissaries to travel around Beijing, first to Feng Ying, and they were killed by enemies.

古文：帝遣卫尉铫期持珍宝缯帛赐嚣，期至郑被盗，亡失财物。
现代文：帝派遣卫尉铫期带着珍宝缯帛赏赐隗嚣，铫期到郑遇到盗，珍宝财物都被盗走了。
English: The emperor dispatched a guard to Zheng with precious treasures to reward the clamor. Zheng encountered thieves, and the precious treasures and property were all stolen.

古文：帝常称嚣长者，务欲招之，闻而叹曰： 吾与隗嚣事欲不谐，使来见杀，得赐道亡。 
现代文：帝常称隗嚣为长者，想方设法想把他招来，听到消息后叹道： 我与隗嚣的事很不顺利，他派来的使者被杀，我赐给他的财物也在路上被盗光了。 
English: The emperor often referred to Gongran as an elder and tried his best to win him over. After hearing the news, he sighed, "Things did not go well between me and Gongran. The envoy he sent was killed, and the belongings I gave him were stolen on the way.

古文：会公孙述遣兵寇南郡，乃诏嚣当从天水伐蜀，因此欲以溃其心腹。
现代文：恰逢公孙述遣兵侵犯南郡，光武就下诏书令隗嚣从天水伐蜀，想以此来分化瓦解其心腹。
English: Coinciding with Gongsun's dispatch of troops to invade Nan County, Guangwu issued an edict ordering the clamor to cut down Shu from Tianshui, hoping to use this to differentiate and disintegrate his henchmen.

古文：嚣复上言： 白水险阻，栈阁绝败。 又多设支阂。
现代文：隗嚣再次上书说： 白水地势十分险阻，山路悬险，栈木为道。 又多方强调困难。
English: Gong Hanren once again submitted a letter saying: The whitewater terrain is very dangerous, the mountain road is dangerous, and the trestle is a road.

古文：帝知其终不为用，叵欲讨之。
现代文：帝知隗嚣终不肯为他所用，于是便想加以讨伐。
English: Di Zhixuan finally refused to be used by him, so he wanted to fight against him.

古文：遂西幸长安，遣建威大将军耿弇等七将军从陇道伐蜀，先使来歙奉玺书喻旨。
现代文：就西到长安，派遣建威大将军耿等七将军从陇道伐蜀，先派来歙奉玺书晓谕隗嚣。
English: To the west, in Chang'an, he sent seven generals, including General Jian Wei and Geng, to attack Shushou from the Shushou Road. They were sent to Shushou first.

古文：嚣疑惧，即勒兵，使王元据陇坻，伐木塞道，谋欲杀歙。歙得亡归。
现代文：隗嚣疑惧，即率兵相拒，使王元据陇坻，砍下树木堵塞道路，想杀掉来歙，来歙逃归。
English: He was so suspicious that he led his soldiers to oppose each other, so that Wang Yuan was captured, cut down trees to block the road, wanted to kill the enemy, and the enemy fled.

古文：诸将与嚣战，大败，各引退。
现代文：诸将与隗嚣战，大败，各引兵退走。
English: All of them will be defeated in the fierce battle, and all of them will withdraw.

古文：嚣因使王元、行巡侵三辅，征西大将军冯异、征虏将军祭遵等击破之。
现代文：隗嚣因此派王元、行巡侵掠三辅，被征西大将军冯异、征虏将军祭遵等击破。
English: Therefore, he sent Wang Yuan and the three auxiliary troops to invade and plunder, but they were defeated by the general of the Western Conquest Feng Yi and the general of the Western Conquest Zong Zun.

古文：嚣乃上疏谢曰： 吏人闻大兵卒至，惊恐自救，臣嚣不能禁止。
现代文：隗嚣于是上书谢罪说： 部下听说大兵猝到，惊恐自救，臣隗嚣不能禁止。
English: He then sent a letter to Xie Sin, saying, "My subordinates heard that the soldiers had suddenly arrived, and panicked to save themselves.

古文：兵有大利，不敢废臣子之节，亲自追还。昔虞舜事父，大杖则走，小杖则受。
现代文：所获战利品，不敢废臣子之节，亲自追还，以前虞舜事父，父以大杖责打他时他逃避开，父以小杖打他时就让他打。
English: He did not dare to give up the spoils of war, and he personally chased after his father to return them. In the past, when his father beat him with a big stick, he ran away, but when his father beat him with a small stick, he let him beat him.

古文：臣虽不敏，敢忘斯义。
现代文：我虽然不敏，不敢忘记这个礼义。
English: Although I am not sensitive, I dare not forget this courtesy.

古文：今臣之事，在于本朝，赐死则死，加刑则刑。
现代文：现在我的事，全在本朝发落，要杀就杀，要加刑则加刑。
English: Now, all of my affairs have begun and ended this morning. If I want to kill, I will kill, and if I want to be punished, I will be punished.

古文：如遂蒙恩，更得洗心，死骨不朽。 有司以嚣言慢，请诛其子恂，帝不忍，复使来歙至氵幵，赐嚣书曰： 昔柴将军与韩信书云： 陛下宽仁，诸侯虽有亡叛而后归，辄复位号，不诛也。
现代文：如果蒙恩宽赦，更得洗心革面，则死骨不朽。 官吏们以隗嚣出言傲慢，请求把他儿子隗恂杀掉，帝不忍心，再派来歙到，以书信赐隗嚣说： 以前柴将军与韩信书说 ：陛下宽仁，诸侯虽有叛变后又回来的，还是恢复他们的位号，不加杀害。 
English: If he is pardoned and has a change of heart, then his bones will be immortal. The officials arrogantly asked for his son to be killed, but the emperor could not bear it and sent them to kill him again, saying in a letter: In the past, General Chai and Han Xin said in a letter: Your Majesty, although the princes have returned after the rebellion, they will restore their ranks without killing them.

古文：以嚣文吏，晓义理，故复赐书。
现代文：以你隗嚣是个文官，懂得义理，所以赐书给你。
English: With your arrogance, you are a civil servant, you understand the principles of justice, so I will give you a book.

古文：深言则似不逊，略言则事不决。
现代文：说得清楚一点，显得不够客气，说少了事情又难于决断。
English: To put it more clearly would be impolite, to say less would make it difficult to decide.

古文：今若束手，复遣恂弟归阙庭者，则爵禄获全，有浩大之福矣。
现代文：你现在如果住手，像过去送你儿子隗恂到我这儿来一样，那么爵禄将全获得，有大福可享。
English: If you now desist from sending your son to me, as you did in the past, you will receive the full reward and enjoy great happiness.

古文：吾年垂四十，在兵中十岁，厌浮语虚辞。
现代文：我年快四十，在军中十年，讨厌那些浮语虚辞。
English: I'm almost forty years old, I've been in the army for ten years, and I hate those empty words.

古文：即不欲，勿报。 嚣知帝审其诈，遂遣使称臣于公孙述。
现代文：你如果不愿意，就不要回报了。 隗嚣知道帝已经看出他的奸诈，于是派遣使者向公孙述称臣。
English: If you don't want to, you don't have to reciprocate. Knowing that the emperor had seen through his treachery, he sent an envoy to tell his grandson-in-law what he had done.

古文：明年，述以嚣为朔宁王，遣兵往来，为之援势。
现代文：第二年，公孙述以隗嚣为朔宁王，遣兵往来，作声援态势。
English: In the second year, Gongsun described himself as the king of Shao Ning, and sent troops to and from the capital to show solidarity.

古文：秋，嚣将步骑三万侵安定，至阴槃，冯异率诸将拒之。
现代文：秋，隗嚣率步兵骑兵三万，侵犯安定，到达阴，冯异率诸将抵抗。
English: In the autumn, 30,000 infantry and cavalry rushed forward, violating stability, arriving in the shade, and Feng Yixing led the resistance.

古文：嚣又令别将下陇，攻祭遵于氵幵，兵并无利，乃引还。
现代文：隗嚣又令别的将领下陇，攻击祭遵于，都不利，于是退兵而还。
English: The clamor also caused other generals to be defeated, and it was not good for them to attack and obey, so they withdrew and fought back.

古文：帝因令来歙以书招王遵，遵乃与家属东诣京师，拜为太中大夫，封向义侯。
现代文：帝因令来歙以书招王遵，王遵就与家属东到京师，被拜为太中大夫，封为向义侯。
English: Wang Zun and his family went east to Beijing to study, and he was worshipped as the Grand Physician and given the title of Xiang Yi Hou.

古文：遵字子春，霸陵人也。
现代文：王遵字子春，霸陵人。
English: Wang Zunzi Zichun, tyrant.

古文：徒以人思旧主，先君蒙汉厚恩，思效万分耳。 又数劝嚣遣子入侍，前后辞谏切甚，嚣不从，故去焉。
现代文：父为上郡太守。王遵年少时就为人豪侠，有辩才，虽然是与隗嚣一起举兵，但时常有归汉的意向。又多次劝隗嚣派遣儿子入朝侍奉，前后对隗嚣辞谏很恳切，隗嚣不从，所以王遵离隗嚣而归顺光武。
English: Wang Zun's father was the governor of Shang County. At a young age, Wang Zun was a heroic man, with a talent for debate. Although he raised an army together with Yanran, he often had the intention of returning to Han. He also repeatedly persuaded Yanran to send his son to serve in the imperial court. He was very earnest about Yanran's words before and after, but Yanran did not follow, so Wang Zun left Yanran and returned to Shun Guangwu.

古文：八年春，来歙从山道袭得略阳城。
现代文：八年春，来歙从山道袭取了略阳城。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Laiwu attacked Liaoyang City from the mountain road.

古文：嚣出不意，惧更有大兵，乃使王元拒陇坻，行巡守番须口，王孟塞鸡头道，牛邯军瓦亭，嚣自悉其大众围来歙。
现代文：出于隗嚣意外，隗嚣害怕更有大兵，就派王元拒守陇坻，行巡守番须口，王孟塞鸡头道，牛邯驻军瓦亭，隗嚣自率大军围来歙。
English: Due to the accident of Yanran and fear of more soldiers, Yanran sent Wang Yuan to refuse to guard Yanran, and went on a patrol to guard Fansukou, Wang Mengsai Jitou Road, and Niulong's garrison tile pavilion, while Yanran led his army to surround Yanran.

古文：公孙述亦遣其将李育、田弇助器攻略阳，连月不下。
现代文：公孙述也派遣将领李育、田弇助隗嚣攻略阳，连月不能攻下。
English: According to his grandson, he also sent generals Li Yu and Tian Yuxu to conquer Yang, but they were unable to do so for months.

古文：亲乃率诸将西征之，数道上陇，使王遵持节监大司马吴汉留屯于长安。
现代文：帝于是率领诸将西征，数路兵马齐向陇进伐，使王遵持节监大司马吴汉留屯于长安。
English: The emperor then led the generals to march westward, and several armies marched towards Shandong, forcing Wang Zunji to stay in Chang'an with the chief inspector of the festival, Ma Wu Han.

古文：遵知嚣必败灭，而与牛邯旧故，知其有归义意，以书喻之曰：
现代文：王遵知隗嚣必将败灭，而他与牛邯是旧交，知道他有归汉的思想，就写信晓谕他说：
English: King Zun knew that Yanran would certainly be defeated, and he was old friends with Niu Yao. Knowing that he had thoughts of returning to Han, he wrote a letter to him saying:

古文：遵与隗王歃盟为汉，自经历虎口，践履死地，已十数矣。
现代文： 王遵与隗王歃血结盟为汉，自此历虎口，经死地绝境，已十数次了。
English: Wang Zun made an alliance with Zhai Wang Shixing and became a Han. Since then, he has been through the tiger's mouth and the dead end more than a dozen times.

古文：于时周洛以西无所统壹，故为王策，欲东收关中，北取上郡，进以奉天人之用，退以惩外夷之乱。
现代文：当时周洛以西，没有统一，所以为隗王出谋划策，想东收关中，北取上郡，进以奉天意人心，退以惩外夷之乱。
English: At that time, there was no unification in the west of Zhou Luo, so he made a plan for the king of Qi, thinking that the east should take back the middle of Guanzhong, the north should take up the county, the east should follow the will of heaven, and the west should punish the rebellion of the barbarians.

古文：数年之间，冀圣汉复存，当挈河陇奉旧都以归本朝。
现代文：数年之间，希望圣汉复存，当献河陇之地奉旧部以归顺本朝。
English: In a few years, it is hoped that the holy city of Han will be restored, and the land of Dangken Hoan will return to the old government to submit to this dynasty.

古文：生民以来，臣人之势，未有便于此时者也。
现代文：自有生民以来，臣人的形势，没有比现在更便利的了。
English: Since there have been people, the situation of subjects has never been more convenient than it is now.

古文：而王之将吏，群居穴处之徒，人人抵掌，欲为不善之计。
现代文：而隗王的将吏，多是些穴居野处不识时务之徒，人人抵掌而谈，想为不轨之计。
English: On the other hand, most of the generals of the Warlord were cavemen who did not know the current affairs, and everyone talked with their hands clasped, thinking it was a bad plan.

古文：遵与孺卿日夜所争，害几及身者，岂一事哉！
现代文：我与你日夜所争，祸害几乎降到我们身上的，难道只有一事吗？
English: Is there a cause whereon I meddle with thee day and night, and where evil is nigh unto us?

古文：前计抑绝，后策不从，所以吟啸扼腕，垂涕登车。
现代文：前计遭到拒绝，后来的策划又不肯听从，所以仰天长啸扼腕叹息，流着眼泪登车而去。
English: The previous plan was rejected, and the later plan refused to listen, so I sighed and sighed and boarded the train with tears.

古文：幸蒙封拜，得延论论，每及西州之事，未尝敢忘孺卿之言。
现代文：幸蒙封拜为太中大夫，得以职司议论，每想到西州的事，未尝敢忘记你过去所说的话。
English: I am fortunate to have been given the honor of serving as the First Vice-Minister of Health, which has allowed me to engage in professional discussions. Whenever I think of Saizhou, I dare not forget what you said in the past.

古文：今车驾大众，已在道路，吴、耿骁将，云集四境，而孺卿以奔离之卒，距要厄，当军冲，视其形势何如哉？
现代文：现在御驾亲征，车驾大众已在道途，吴汉、耿等勇将，云集四境，而你以奔离的兵卒，拒守瓦亭要隘，当汉军攻击的要冲，看双方的形势怎样呢？
English: Now you are driving your own enlistment, the driving public is already on the road, Wu Han, Geng and other brave generals are gathering in all directions, and you, as a soldier who is running away, refuse to defend the watchtower, and when the Chinese army attacks, see what the situation is on both sides?

古文：夫智者睹危思变，贤者泥而不滓，是以功名终申，策画复得。
现代文：聪明的人看到了危险就应想到应变，贤俊的人能出污泥而不染，是以功名终于得以伸展，策划终于复得。
English: A clever person should think of contingency when he sees the danger, and a wise person can get out of the mud without getting stained. It is due to his merits that he was finally able to expand, and planning that he was finally able to recover.

古文：故夷吾束缚而相齐，黥布杖敛以归汉，去愚就义，功名并著。
现代文：所以管仲被缚送而成齐相，黥布仗剑而归汉王，弃愚诚而就义举，功名并著。
English: Therefore, Guanzhong was bound and sent away to become a peer, fought with cloth and sword and returned to the Han king, abandoned foolishness and raised to righteousness, and achieved fame.

古文：今孺卿当成败之际，遇严兵之锋，可为怖栗。
现代文：你现在正处在成败的十字路口，遇到的是强兵劲旅的锋芒，是非常可怕的。
English: You are now at the crossroads of success and failure, encountering the sharp edge of the mighty army, it is very scary.

古文：宜断之心胸，参之有识。
现代文：应赶快下定决心作出决断，与有识之士共同参讨。 
English: We should quickly make up our minds to make a decision and discuss it with people with insight.

古文：邯得书，沉吟十余日，乃谢士众，归命洛阳，拜为太中大夫。
现代文：牛邯得书，思考了十多天，终于作出决断，于是拜谢士众，归顺洛阳，被拜为太中大夫。
English: After more than ten days of deliberation, he finally made a decision, and then he bowed to the priests, surrendered to Luoyang, and was worshiped as the Grand Physician.

古文：于是嚣大将十三人，属县十六，众十众万，皆降。
现代文：这样一来，隗嚣的大将十三人，一十六个属县，十多万士众，都不战而降。
English: As a result, thirteen generals, sixteen subordinate counties, and more than one hundred thousand soldiers all surrendered without a fight.

古文：王元入蜀求救，嚣将妻子奔西域，从杨广，而田弇、李育保上邽。
现代文：王元入蜀求救，隗嚣带领妻子奔西城，跟从杨广，而田、李育保上圭阝。
English: Wang Yuan entered Shu to ask for help, leading his wife to rush to Xicheng, following Yang Guang, while Tian and Li Yubo went to Guizhou.

古文：诏告嚣曰： 若束手自诣，父子相见，保无他也。
现代文：帝以诏书晓示隗嚣说： 如束手自来，则父子相见，可保无事。
English: The emperor said in his imperial edict: If the hands are tied, the father and son will meet, and nothing will happen.

古文：高皇帝云： 横来，大者王，小者侯。
现代文：高皇帝说： 田横回来，大的封王，小的封侯。 
English: Emperor Gao said: Tian Heng came back, the great vassal, the small vassal.

古文：若遂欲为黥布者，亦自任也。 嚣终不降。
现代文：如果你想像黥布一样必不归降，那也随你的便。 隗嚣终不肯降。
English: If you want to be like a cocoon and refuse to back down, that's up to you.

古文：于是诛其子恂，使吴汉与征南大将军岑彭围西城，耿弇与虎牙大将军盖延围上邽。
现代文：于是光武杀了他儿子隗恂，使吴汉与征南大将军岑彭围西城，耿与虎牙大将军盖延围上圭阝。
English: As a result, Guangwu killed his son Yan, so that Wu Han and the Southern Expeditionary Army General Yan Peng surrounded the West City, and Geng and the Tiger's Tooth Army General Gai Yan surrounded Shanggui.

古文：车驾东归。
现代文：光武东归。
English: Mitsutake returned to the east.

古文：月余，杨广死，嚣穷困。
现代文：月余，杨广死，隗嚣更加日暮途穷。
English: After a month, Yang Guang died, and the clamor became more desperate.

古文：其大将王捷别在戎丘，登城呼汉军曰： 为隗王城守者，皆必死无二心！愿诸军亟罢，请自杀以明之。 遂自刎颈死。
现代文：其大将王捷别在戎丘，登上城楼向汉军喊话说： 为隗王守城的将士，都是明知必死而无二心，愿你们赶快停止攻城，请让我用自杀来证明我说的话。 于是自刎而死。
English: His general, Wang Jiebei, was on the embankment, climbed the tower and shouted to the Chinese troops: "The soldiers who are guarding the city for the King of Sheba know that they will die, and they have no second thoughts. I wish you would stop attacking the city as soon as possible. Please let me prove my words by committing suicide." So he hanged himself and died.

古文：数月，王元、行巡、周宗将蜀救兵五千余人，乘高卒至，鼓噪大呼曰： 百万之众方至！ 汉军大惊，未及成陈，元等决围，殊死战，遂得入城，迎嚣归冀。
现代文：数月，王元、行巡、周宗等率领蜀救兵五千多人，乘高处猝至，击鼓大呼道： 百万大军刚到！ 汉军大惊，没有来得及排开阵势，王元等冲破城围，拼死力战，得以进城，迎隗嚣回冀。
English: For several months, Wang Yuan, Xing Jun, Zhou Zong, and others led more than 5,000 Shu rescuers, taking the high ground to suddenly arrive, beating drums and shouting: The million-strong army has just arrived! The Han army was shocked and did not have time to line up the formation, Wang Yuan and others broke through the city perimeter, fought desperately, and were able to enter the city and meet the clamor.

古文：会吴汉等食尽退去，于是安定、北地、天水、陇西复反为嚣。
现代文：恰好吴汉等因粮尽退去，于是安定、北地、天水、陇西又反过来归隗嚣。
English: It just so happened that Wu and Han retreated due to the shortage of grain, so Anping, Hebei, Tianshui, and Shaanxi in turn returned to Han.

古文：九年春，嚣病且饿，出城餐糗糒，恚愤而死。
现代文：九年春，隗嚣又病又饿，出城熬大豆与米饭为食，终于忿恨而死。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Yanran, sick and hungry, went out of the city to boil soybeans and rice for food, and finally died of resentment.

古文：王元、周宗立嚣少子纯为王。
现代文：王元、周宗立隗嚣少子隗纯为王。
English: Wang Yuan and Zhou Zongli ruled the country, and the younger son, Zou Chun, became king.

古文：明年，来歙、耿弇、盖延等攻破落门，周宗、行巡、苛宇、赵恢等将纯降。
现代文：第二年，来歙、耿、盖延等攻破落门，周宗、行巡、苟宇、赵恢等带着隗纯投降。
English: In the second year, Lai Yong, Geng, Gai Yan and others broke through the gate, and Zhou Zong, Xing Jun, Gou Yu, Zhao Huai and others surrendered with Zou Chun.

古文：宗、恢及诸隗分徙京师以东，纯与巡、宇徙弘农。
现代文：周宗、赵恢及诸隗分别迁徙到京师以东，隗纯与行巡、苟宇迁到弘农。
English: Zhou Zong, Zhao Huai and Zhu Xi migrated to the east of Beijing respectively, while Zou Jun and Xing Jun and Guo Yu moved to Hongnong.

古文：唯王元留为蜀将。
现代文：只有王元留为蜀将。
English: Only Wang Yuan remained as Shu general.

古文：及辅威将军臧宫破延岑，元举众诣宫降。
现代文：等到辅威将军臧宫破延岑，王元带众人向臧宫投降。
English: Wang Yuan and his men surrendered to the general Fu Wei after the palace was destroyed.

古文：元字惠孟，初拜上蔡令，迁东平相，坐垦田不实，下狱死。
现代文：王元字惠孟，投降后初拜上蔡县令，后迁为东平相，以垦田不实之罪下狱死。
English: Wang Yuanzhe Huimeng, after surrendering, first bowed to the order of Cai County, later moved to Dongping, and died in prison for the crime of being untruthful.

古文：牛邯字孺卿，狄道人。有勇力才气，雄于边垂。
现代文：牛邯字孺卿，狄道人，有勇力才气，称雄于边疆。
English: Niu Xuan Zi Jianqing, a man of the Tao of Dido, has courage and talent, and is a hero in the frontier.

古文：及降，大司徒司直杜林、太中大夫马援并荐之，以为护羌校尉，与来歙平陇右。
现代文：归汉后，大司徒司直杜林、太中大夫马援都推荐他，因此做了护羌校尉，与来歙一起平定了陇右。
English: After returning to the Han Dynasty, he was recommended by the grand master and disciple Shizhong Durin and the grand vice-minister and doctor Ma Yuan. Therefore, he was made a guard lieutenant, and together with Lai Ying, he leveled the right bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：十八年，纯与宾客数十骑亡入胡，至武威，捕得，诛之。
现代文：十八年，隗纯与宾客数十骑准备逃亡入胡，至武威，被捕捉，杀了。
English: In 18 years, Hao Chun and dozens of guests prepared to flee into Hu, to Wuwei, were captured and killed.

古文：论曰：隗嚣援旗纠族，假制明神，迹夫创图首事，有以识其风矣。
现代文：史官评论道：隗嚣举旗聚族，立高祖、孝文庙以假神明，考他创图首事时，可以看到他的风采啊。
English: The historian commented, "When he was the first to create a map, his style could be seen as he rallied the people to raise the flag and set up a temple to a false god.

古文：终于孤立一隅，介于大国，陇坻虽隘，非有百二之势，区区两郡，以御堂堂之锋，至使穷庙策，竭征徭，身殁众解，然后定之。
现代文：后来终于孤立一隅，介于汉蜀之间，陇坻虽然险要，终非具有两万人抗百万人之势，以区区陇西、天水两郡，来抗光武堂堂之师，以至智穷力竭，徭役赋税空乏，终于身死部众瓦解，然后才得以平定。
English: Later, it was finally isolated in a corner, between Han and Shu, and although it was close, it did not have the strength of 20,000 people to resist a million people. It took two counties, Shaanxi and Tianshui, to resist the teachers of Guangwu, so that the wisdom was exhausted, the tax collection was empty, and finally the dead were disintegrated, and then it was pacified.

古文：则知其道有足怀者，所以栖有四方之桀，士至投死绝亢而不悔者矣。
现代文：可见他的道行确有值得怀念的地方，这是四方雄杰纷纷奔集于他的麾下，士卒忠诚不二死守自刎而不悔的原因。
English: It can be seen that there is indeed something worth remembering about his deeds. This is the reason why the heroes of the four quarters have gathered under his command, and why the soldiers are loyal and do their best to defend themselves without regret.

古文：夫功全则誉显，业谢则衅生，回成丧而为其议者，或未闻焉。
现代文：功名，声誉也就显赫起来，事业凋谢了，各种罪过都会产生，事之成败在天不在人，能打破这个论断的，或许还没有听到过呢。
English: Accomplishments and reputations also rise to prominence, undertakings wither away, all kinds of sins can occur, and the success or failure of a matter is in the hands of the gods. Anyone who can break this judgment has probably never heard of it.

古文：若嚣命会符运，敌非天力，虽坐论西伯，岂多嗤乎？
现代文：如果隗嚣的命运能与符运相合，所遇到的对手又不是光武这样天授的劲敌，那么把隗嚣与历史上的西伯相提并论，难道可以多加嗤笑吗？
English: If the fate of Xuan Han can coincide with the signs of fortune, and the opponent encountered is not a natural rival such as Guangwu, then comparing Xuan Han with Xibe in history, can we laugh more?

古文：公孙述字子阳，扶风茂陵人也。
现代文：公孙述字子阳，扶风茂陵人，哀帝时，以父保任为郎。
English: His great-grandson, Zhu Ziyang, a native of Fufeng and Muryang, took his father, Bao Ren, as his son when he mourned the death of the emperor.

古文：哀帝时，以父任为郎，后父仁为河南都尉，而述补清水长。
现代文：后来父公孙仁为河南都尉，公孙述就补为清水县长。公孙仁以公孙述年少，派遣门下掾随他到任。
English: Later, his father, Gongsun Ren, was the governor of Henan Province, and Gongsun Suru became the governor of Shimizu County. Gongsun Ren, who was younger than Gongsun Suru, sent a disciple to follow him to the post.

古文：仁以述年少，遣门下掾随之官，月余，掾辞归，白仁曰： 述非待教者也。 后太守以其能，使兼摄五具，政事修理，奸盗不发，郡中谓有鬼神。
现代文：月余，掾辞归，向公孙仁说： 公孙述不是等待教导的人。 后来太守以述为能，使他兼摄五县，结果这五个县政事修理，奸盗不再发生了，郡中说有了鬼神。
English: At the end of the month, he resigned and said to Gongsun Ren, "Gongsun Ren is not a person who is waiting to be taught." Later, the Taishu took advantage of Gongsun Ren and made him photograph five counties at the same time. As a result, the government affairs in these five counties were repaired, thefts and robberies no longer occurred, and the county said that there were ghosts and gods.

古文：王莽天凤中，为导江卒正，居临邛，复有能名。
现代文：王莽天凤中，为导江卒正，住在临邛，也享有能名。
English: Wang Mang, a member of the Heavenly Phoenix, was a river pilot, lived in Linyi, and also enjoyed fame.

古文：及更始立，豪杰各起其县以应汉，南阳人宗成自称： 虎牙将军 ，入略汉中；又商人王岑亦起兵于雒县，自称 定汉将军 ，杀王莽庸部牧以应成，众合数万人。
现代文：等到更始即位，豪杰们各在所在的县起兵响应，南阳人宗成自称 虎牙将军 ，侵入汉中；又有商人王岑也起兵于洛县，自称 定汉将军 ，杀了王莽庸部牧以响应宗成，众合数万人。
English: By the time of the enthronement of Emperor Hezekiah, the heroes had each raised an army in their respective counties to respond. The Nanyang man Zongcheng, calling himself General Huya, invaded Hanzhong; the merchant Wang Hui also raised an army in Luo County, calling himself General Dinghan, and killed Wang Mangyongbu Mu in response to Zongcheng, bringing together tens of thousands of people.

古文：述闻之，遣使迎成等。
现代文：公孙述听说，就派遣使者迎接宗成等。
English: According to his grandson, when he heard about this, he sent an envoy to meet Zongcheng.

古文：成等至成都，虏掠暴横。
现代文：宗成等到成都，虏掠暴虐。
English: From Zongcheng to Chengdu, plunder and tyranny.

古文：述意恶之，召县中豪桀谓曰： 天下同苦新室，思刘氏久矣，故闻汉将军到，驰迎道路。
现代文：公孙述很厌恶，于是召集县中豪杰对他们说： 天下同苦于王莽新室，思想刘氏很久了，所以一听到汉将军到，我就派人驰去迎接。
English: Gongsun Shuxu was disgusted, so he called together the heroes of the county and said to them: The whole world is suffering from Wang Mang's new house, and has been thinking about Liu for a long time, so as soon as I heard that General Han arrived, I sent someone to meet him.

古文：今百姓无辜而妇子系获，室屋烧燔，此寇贼，非义兵也。
现代文：现在百姓无辜而妇女儿童都成了俘虏，百姓的家室房屋都遭焚烧，这是寇贼，不是义兵。
English: Now the innocent people, women and children have become captives, people's homes have been burned, this is a bandit, not a volunteer.

古文：吾欲保郡自守，以待真主。诸卿欲并力者即留，不欲者便去。 豪桀皆叩头曰： 愿效死。 述于是使人诈称汉使者自东方来，假述辅汉将军、蜀郡太守兼益州牧印绶。
现代文：公孙述于是使人诈称汉使者从东方来了，命公孙述暂时代理辅汉将军、蜀郡太守兼益州牧印绶。
English: Gongsun then made people falsely claim that the Han emissaries had come from the East, and ordered Gongsun to temporarily become a Han general, the governor of Shu County, and the governor of Yizhou.

古文：乃选精兵千余人，西击成等。
现代文：就选精兵千余人，向西攻击宗成等人。
English: More than a thousand elite soldiers were selected to attack Zongcheng and others to the west.

古文：比至成都，众数千人，遂攻成，大破之。
现代文：等到达成都，发展到数千人，于是对宗成发起攻击，大破宗成。
English: By the time they reached the capital, they had grown to several thousand people, so they launched an attack on Zongcheng and defeated him.

古文：成将垣副杀成，以其众降。
现代文：宗成将领垣副杀了宗成，率众向公孙述投降。
English: Zongcheng killed Zongcheng and led the people to surrender to Gongsun.

古文：二年秋，更始遣柱功侯李宝、益州刺史张忠，将兵万余人徇蜀、汉。
现代文：二年秋，更始遣柱功侯李宝、益州刺史张忠，率领兵众万余人侵掠蜀、汉。
English: In the autumn of the second year, Li Bao, a meritorious general, and Zhang Zhong, a statesman from Yizhou, led more than ten thousand soldiers to invade and plunder Shu and Han.

古文：述恃其地险众附，有自立志，乃使其弟恢于绵竹击宝、忠，大破走之。
现代文：公孙述依靠蜀地地势险要，民众归附，有自立为王的意志，就派他弟弟公孙恢，在绵竹攻击李宝、张忠，大破宝、忠并将他们赶走。
English: Gongsun said that he relied on the fact that the situation in Shu was precarious, that the people had become attached to him, and that he had the will to become king, so he sent his brother Gongsun Wei to attack Li Bao, Zhang Zhong, Dabaobao, and Zhong in Mianzhu and drive them away.

古文：由是威震益部。
现代文：由此以后公孙述威震益部。
English: As a result, Gongsun Shuwei's fortune increased tremendously.

古文：功曹李熊说述曰： 方今四海波荡，匹夫横议。
现代文：功曹李熊对公孙述说： 现在四海汹涌不安，平民百姓肆意议论。
English: Gong Cao Li Xiong said to Gong Sun: Now the four seas are turbulent and uneasy, and the common people are talking freely.

古文：将军割据千里，地什汤、武，若奋威德以投天隙，霸王之业成矣。
现代文：将军割据千里，地方十倍于过去的汤武，如能奋威德以投合天时，就可以成就霸王的事业了。
English: The general is separated by thousands of miles, ten times the area of the past Tangwu. If he can use his strength to win the day, he can achieve the cause of the overlord.

古文：宜改名号，以镇百姓。 述曰： 吾亦虑之，公言起我意。 于是自立为蜀王，都成都。
现代文：应改名号，以镇抚百姓。 公孙述说： 我也考虑过，你的话启发了我。 于是自立为蜀王，定都在成都。
English: He should change his name to appease the people. Gongsun said, "I also considered it, your words inspired me, so I decided to become the King of Shu and stay in Chengdu."

古文：蜀地肥饶，兵力精强，远方士庶多往归之，邛、笮君长皆来贡献。
现代文：蜀地肥沃富饶，兵力精强，远方的士民多去归附，西南的小国邛、笮的国王，都来贡献。
English: Shu is fertile and bountiful, and its military strength is strong. Many scholars and citizens from far away have come to attach themselves to it, and the kings of the small countries in the southwest, such as Shandong and Fujian, have all come to contribute.

古文：李熊复说述曰： 今山东饥馑，人庶相食；兵所屠灭，城邑丘墟。
现代文：李熊再向公孙述说道： 现在山东饥馑，人庶相食；遭到兵灾的屠灭，城邑都成了丘墟。
English: Li Xiong then recounted to his great-grandson: Shandong is now starving, people are eating each other; cities have been destroyed by military disasters, and towns have become ruins.

古文：蜀地沃野千里，土壤膏腴，果实所生，无谷而饱。
现代文：蜀地沃野千里，土壤肥腴，果实所生，虽不耕种也可饱腹。
English: There are thousands of miles of fertile fields in Shu Di, the soil is fertile, and fruits are produced, although they are not cultivated, they can also be eaten.

古文：女工之业，覆衣天下。
现代文：女工纺织之业，衣服可以覆盖天下。
English: In the textile industry of female workers, clothes can cover the world.

古文：名材竹干，器构之饶，不可胜用，又有鱼、盐、铜、银之利，浮水转漕之便。
现代文：名贵木材竹干，器械之富饶，取之不尽用之不竭。又有鱼盐铜银之利，浮水转漕运输之便。
English: The bamboo trunk is made of precious wood, the equipment is rich and inexhaustible. There are also the benefits of fish salt, copper and silver, and the floating water transfer tank is convenient for transportation.

古文：北据汉中，杜褒、斜之险；东守巴郡，拒扞关之口；地方数千里，战士不下百万。
现代文：北面据有汉中，阻塞褒、斜的险要；东面扼守巴郡，拒扌干关之口；地方数千里，战士不下百万。
English: In the north, there is the Han Middle Kingdom, blocking the critical points of Bo and Xiang; in the east, there is the Ba County, blocking the mouth of Yinggan Pass; there are thousands of places, and there are no less than a million soldiers.

古文：见利则出兵而略地，无利则坚守而力农。
现代文：见到有利时机则出兵而扩大地盘，无利则坚守而从事于农业。
English: If they see a favorable opportunity, they will send troops to expand the territory, if not, they will stick to it and engage in agriculture.

古文：东下汉水以窥秦地，南顺江流以震荆、杨。
现代文：东面可下汉水以窥秦地，南面顺着江流以震荆、扬。
English: In the east, you can go down the Han River to see the Qin Dynasty, and in the south, you can follow the river to see the Jingjing and Yang.

古文：所谓用天因地，成功之资。
现代文：所谓拥有天时地利等一切成功的条件。
English: So-called having all the conditions for success, such as the right time and place.

古文：今君王之声，闻于天下，而名号未定，志士孤疑，宜即大位，使远人有所依归。 述曰： 帝王有命，吾何足以当之？ 熊曰： 天命无常，百姓与能。
现代文：现在你蜀王的声名，已闻于天下，而名号未定，有志之士在狐疑观望，应当即大位，使远方之人有所依归。 公孙述说： 帝王是天命所归，我怎么能承当得起呢？ 李熊说： 天命没有一定的，老百姓归附能者，能者承当起使命，你还怀疑什么呢！ 
English: Now the fame of your Shu Wang has been known to the world, but the name is undecided, and people with aspirations are watching suspiciously, it should be a great position, so that people from afar have something to rely on. Gongsun said: The emperor is the destiny of heaven, how can I bear it? Li Xiong said: The destiny of heaven is not certain, the people belong to those who can, and those who can undertake the mission, what else do you doubt?

古文：能者当之，王何疑焉！ 述梦有人语之曰： 八厶子系，十二为期。 觉，谓其妻曰： 虽贵而祚短，若何？ 妻对曰： 朝闻道，夕死尚可，况十二乎！ 会有龙出其府殿中，夜有光耀，述以为符瑞，因刻其掌，文曰 公孙帝 。
现代文：公孙述梦见有人对他说： 八厶子系，十二为期。 醒来后对妻子说： 虽然贵极但祚短，如何？ 妻说： 早晨听到了道，晚上死了还可以哩，何况十二呢！ 恰巧有龙出于府殿中，夜间有光芒耀眼，公孙述以为这是符瑞，因而在掌心写着： 公孙帝。 
English: Gongsun recounted a dream in which someone said to him, "I'm a descendant of eight siblings, and I'm twelve years old." After waking up, he said to his wife, "Even though I'm extremely valuable, I'm short, so what?" His wife said, "I heard the sermon in the morning, but it's okay to die at night, let alone at twelve!" A dragon happened to come out of the palace, and at night there was a dazzling light. Gongsun said that he thought it was a mirage, so he wrote "Gongsun Emperor" on the palm of his hand.

古文：建武元年四月，遂自立为天子，号成家。色尚白。
现代文：建武元年四月，就自立为天子，号成家，尚白色。
English: In April of the first year of the Jianwu era, he declared himself the son of heaven and became a monk. He was white.

古文：建元曰龙兴元年。
现代文：建立年号为龙兴元年。
English: The year of establishment is the first year of Longxing.

古文：以李熊为大司徒，以其弟光为大司马，恢为大司空。
现代文：以李熊为大司徒，以其弟公孙光为大司马，公孙恢为大司空。
English: With Li Xiong as the chief disciple, with his brother Gongsun Guang as the chief disciple, and Gongsun Wei as the chief disciple.

古文：改益州为司隶校尉，蜀郡为成都尹。
现代文：改益州为司隶校尉，蜀郡为成都尹。
English: Yi County was renamed Sili County and Shu County was renamed Chengdu Yin County.

古文：越巂任贵亦杀王莽大尹而据郡降。
现代文：越巂任贵也杀了王莽大尹而占据其郡以降公孙述。
English: Yue Xuan Ren Gui also killed Wang Mang Dayin and occupied his county, after which Gongsun Zhao was mentioned.

古文：述遂使将军侯丹开白水关，北守南郑；将军任满从阆中下江州，东据扞关。
现代文：述就使将军侯丹开白水关，北守南郑；将军任满从阆中下江州，东据扌干关。
English: It is said that General Hou Dan opened Bai Shui Pass, with Nan Zheng guarding the north; the general was appointed from the middle of the Yunnan Province to the lower Yunnan Province, and from the east to the Yunnan Province.

古文：于是尽有益州之地。
现代文：于是所有益州之地尽归公孙述所有。
English: As a result, all the land of Yishuo was owned by his son-in-law.

古文：自更始败后，光武方事山东，未遑西伐。
现代文：自从更始败后，光武正忙于山东事务，没有来得及西伐。
English: Since the initial defeat, Guangwu was busy with Shandong affairs and did not have time to go to the West.

古文：关中豪杰吕鲔等往往拥众以万数，莫知所属，多往归述，皆拜为将军。
现代文：关中豪杰吕鲔等往往拥有兵众达万，不知归属，多往归公孙述，述都拜他们为将军。
English: Guanzhong heroes such as Lv Ying often had as many as ten thousand soldiers, and they did not know where they belonged. Most of them went to their grandsons, who worshiped them as generals.

古文：遂大作营垒，陈车骑，肄习战射，会聚兵甲数十万人，积粮汉中，筑宫南郑。
现代文：于是大作营垒，陈车骑，肆习战射，会聚兵甲数十万人，在汉中积聚粮食，在南郑修筑宫殿。
English: As a result, he made a great camp, rode a chariot, practiced shooting, gathered hundreds of thousands of soldiers, accumulated grain in Hanzhong, and built a palace in Nan Zheng.

古文：又造十层赤楼帛兰船。
现代文：又造十层赤楼帛兰船。
English: It also built a ten-storey red-roofed lantern boat.

古文：多刻天下牧守印章，备置公卿百官。
现代文：多刻天下牧守的印章，备置公卿百官。
English: The seal of the world's shepherd is engraved many times, and hundreds of court nobles and officials are set aside.

古文：使将军李育、程乌将数万众出陈仓，与吕鲔徇三辅。
现代文：使将军李育、程乌率领数万军众出陈仓，与吕鲔侵犯三辅。
English: He ordered the generals Li Yu and Cheng Wu to lead tens of thousands of troops out of Chencang and invade Sanfu with Lv Ying.

古文：三年，征西将军冯异击鲔、育于陈仓，大败之，鲔、育奔汉中。
现代文：三年，征西大将军冯异攻击吕鲔、李育于陈仓，大败鲔、育，鲔、育逃奔汉中。
English: In the third year, Feng Yi, the general of the Western Conquest, attacked Lv Ying and Li Yu in Chen Cang, and defeated Lv Ying, Yu Ying, and Yu Ying and fled to Han.

古文：五年，延岑、田戎为汉兵所败，皆亡入蜀。
现代文：五年，延岑、田戎被汉兵打败，岑、戎军等都逃亡入蜀。
English: In the fifth year, Yancheng and Tian Rong were defeated by the Chinese soldiers, and the troops of Yancheng and Rong fled to Shu.

古文：岑字叔牙，南阳人。
现代文：延岑字叔牙，南阳人。
English: Uncle Tooth from Yancheng, Nanyang people.

古文：始起据汉中，又拥兵关西，所在破散，走至南阳，略有数县。
现代文：开始起兵时据有汉中，又拥兵关西，关西破散了，又走到南阳，占有数县。
English: At the beginning of the uprising, there were Han soldiers in the middle, and soldiers in Kansai, Kansai was scattered, and went to Nanyang, occupying several counties.

古文：戎，汝南人。初起兵夷陵，转寇郡县，众数万人。
现代文：田戎，汝南人，初起兵于夷陵，转而侵掠郡县，发展到数万人。
English: Tian Rong, a native of southern Ryukyu, first raised an army in Yiling, then invaded and plundered counties, growing to tens of thousands.

古文：岑、戎并与秦丰合，丰俱以女妻之。
现代文：延岑、田戎都与秦丰会合，秦丰都以女儿嫁给岑、戎为妻。
English: Yan Xuan and Tian Rong both met with Qin Feng, and Qin Feng married his daughter to Yan and Rong as his wife.

古文：及丰败，故二人皆降于述。
现代文：后来秦丰失败，岑、戎都向公孙述投降。
English: Later, Qin Feng was defeated, and Gong and Eun both surrendered to Gongsun Su.

古文：述以岑为大司马，封汝宁王，戎翼江王。
现代文：公孙述以延岑为大司马，封汝宁王，封田戎为翼江王。
English: According to his great-grandson, Yan Xun was the grand steward, Fu Runing the king, and Fu Tian Rong the king of the Yangtze River.

古文：六年，述遣戎与将军任满出江关，下监沮、夷陵间，招其故众，因欲取荆州诸郡，竟不能克。
现代文：六年，公孙述派遣田戎与将军任满出江关，下临沮、夷陵间，招其故众，因而想攻取荆州诸郡，但没能攻克。
English: In the sixth year, Gongsun Su dispatched Tian Rong and the general Ren Man to leave Jiangguan, and went down to Shushi and Yiling to recruit his old followers, and therefore wanted to conquer the counties of Jingzhou, but failed to conquer.

古文：是时，述废铜钱，置铁官钱，百姓货币不行。
现代文：这时，公孙述废除铜钱，置铁官以铸钱，百姓手中的货币不能流通。
English: At this time, Gongsun Zhou abolished copper money and set iron officials to mint money. The money in the hands of the people could not circulate.

古文：蜀中童谣言曰： 黄牛白腹，五铢当复。 好事者窃言王莽称 黄，述自号 白 ，五铢钱，汉货也，言天下并还刘氏。
现代文：蜀中童谣说： 黄牛白腹，五铢当复。 好事的人们窃窃私语说王莽称 黄 ，公孙述自号 白 ，五铢钱，是汉货，说天下当并还刘氏。
English: The children's rhyme in Shuzhong said: "The yellow cow is white-bellied, and the five yuans are to be paid back." People who do good things whisper that Wang Mang is called Huang, his grandchild says his name is Bai, and the five yuans are Chinese goods. They say the whole world is to be paid back and pay back the Liu clan.

古文：述亦好为符命鬼神瑞应之事，妄引谶记。
现代文：公孙述也喜好为符命鬼神瑞应的事，荒谬地引用谶记。
English: Gwangsun also likes to talk about things that are in accordance with the fate of ghosts and gods, and absurdly quotes from the records.

古文：以为孔子作《春秋》，为赤制而断十二公，明汉至平帝十二代，历数尽也，一姓不得再受命。
现代文：以为孔子作春秋，为赤制而断十二公，说明了汉高帝至汉平帝已经过十二代，历数已完了，一姓不得再受命为帝。
English: He thought that Confucius was the spring and autumn, and that the red system was the beginning of the twelve princes, which showed that there had been twelve generations from Emperor Han Gao to Emperor Hanping, and that the calendar had ended, and one surname could no longer be appointed as the emperor.

古文：又引《录运法》曰： 废昌帝，立公孙。 《括地象》曰： 帝轩辕受命，公孙氏握。 《援神契》曰： 西太守，乙卯金。 谓西方太守而乙绝卯金也。五德之运，黄承赤而白继黄，金据西方为白德，而代王氏，得其正序。又自言手文有奇，及得龙兴之瑞。
现代文：又引录运法说： 废昌帝，立公孙。 括地象说： 帝轩辕受命，公孙氏握。 援神契说： 西太守，乙卯金。 说西方太守而轧绝卯金刘氏。五德之运，黄承赤而白继黄，金据西方为白德，而代王氏，得到正序。又自己说手纹有奇，得以建元龙兴之瑞。
English: He also quoted the following about the movement of fortune: Emperor Wuchang was dethroned, and a grandson of the emperor was appointed; the elephant said: Emperor Xuan Zang received the order, and the grandson of the emperor held it; the divine assistance agreement said: West Taizhou, the second Jin; said West Taizhou, and killed the Liu clan of Jin; the movement of the Five Virtues, Huang was the successor of the Red, and Bai was the successor of the Yellow; Jin was the successor of the West, and Bai was the successor of the Wang clan, and received the right order; and he himself said that his handprints were strange, and he was able to build the

古文：数移书中国，冀以感动众心。
现代文：几次将这些东西移书中国，希望以此惑动众心。
English: Several times these things were sent to China in the hope of winning hearts and minds.

古文：帝患之，乃与述书曰： 图谶言 公孙 ，即宣帝也。
现代文：光武忧虑，就写信给公孙述说： 图谶上讲的 公孙 ，就是宣帝。
English: Concerned, Guangwu wrote a letter to his grandson saying, "The grandson pictured above is Emperor Xuan.

古文：代汉者当涂高，君岂高之身邪？
现代文：代汉的是当涂高，你难道是当涂高吗？
English: The representative of Han is Dangtu Gao, are you Dangtu Gao?

古文：乃复以掌文为瑞，王莽何足效乎！
现代文：你以掌纹为瑞，王莽有什么可以效法的呢！
English: You use the palm print as a rhyme, what can Wang Mang do to follow suit!

古文：君非吾贼臣乱子，仓卒时人皆欲为君事耳，何足数也。
现代文：你不是我的乱臣贼子，仓卒时人人都想当上皇帝，不足责备。
English: You are not my ruffian son-in-law, when everyone wants to be emperor in a hurry, there is not enough blame.

古文：君日月已逝，妻子弱小，当早为定计，可以无忧。
现代文：你日月已逝，妻子儿女弱小，应当早为定计，可以无忧。
English: Your sun and moon have passed away, and your wife and children are weak and small. You should have made up your mind as early as possible, so that you could be free from worry.

古文：天下神器，不可力争，宜留三思。 署曰 公孙皇帝 。
现代文：天子的帝位，是不可力争的，应当三思。 署名 公孙皇帝 。
English: The throne of the Son of Heaven is not up for grabs, and one should think twice.

古文：述不答。
现代文：公孙述不作答复。
English: Gongsun did not reply.

古文：明年，隗嚣称臣于述。
现代文：第二年，隗嚣向公孙述称臣。
English: In the second year, he arrogantly told his grandson that he was a courtier.

古文：述骑都尉平陵人荆邯见东方将平，兵且西向，说述曰：
现代文：公孙述的骑都尉平陵人荆邯看到东方将平，汉兵将向西征讨，就对公孙述说：
English: Seeing that the East would be leveled and the Han soldiers would march to the West, the cavalry captain of Pingling, Jing Qi, told Gongsun:

古文：兵者，帝王之大器，古今所不能废也。
现代文： 兵，这是帝王的重要武器，古今都不能废除的。
English: Soldiers, this is an important weapon of the emperor, which cannot be abolished from ancient times to the present.

古文：昔秦失其守，豪桀并起，汉祖无前人之迹，立锥之地，起于行阵之中，躬自奋击，兵破身困者数矣。
现代文：以前秦失其守，豪杰并起。汉高帝起于布衣，没有前人的业迹，没有立锥之地，起兵于行伍之中，亲自奋击，队伍被打败自身遭到围困多次。
English: In the past, Qin lost its defense, and great heroes arose at the same time. Emperor Han Gao arose in Buyi, without the deeds of his predecessors, without a place to stand, he raised an army in the middle of the procession, personally fought, the team was defeated, and he himself was besieged many times.

古文：然军败复合，创愈复战。
现代文：然而军败后又复合，遭创伤愈合后又投入战斗。
English: However, after the military defeat, he relapsed and went into battle again after his wounds had healed.

古文：何则？前死而成功，逾于却就于灭亡也。
现代文：这样看来，在死境中奋斗倒能成功，在空隙中爬行倒靠近灭亡了。
English: In this way, the struggle in the death can be successful, and crawling in the gap is close to death.

古文：隗嚣遭遇运会，割有雍州，兵强士附，威加山东。
现代文：隗嚣遇到了绝好的机会，割据了雍州，兵强士附，威加山东。
English: The hustle and bustle met with an excellent opportunity, and settled in Yongzhou, with a strong military, and Weiga Shandong.

古文：遇更始政乱，复失天下，众庶引领，四方瓦解。
现代文：遇更始政乱，又失去了天下，百姓引颈而望，四方趋于瓦解。
English: In the event of another political turmoil, the world would be lost again, the people would be looking over their shoulders, and the four parties would tend to collapse.

古文：嚣不及此时推危乘胜，以争天命，而退欲为西伯之事，尊师章句，宾友处士，偃武自戈，卑辞事汉，喟然自以文王复出也。
现代文：隗嚣不在这时趁着危机乘胜奋起，以争天命，而是退身想为西伯的事业，尊郑兴等为章句之师，与方望等处士结为宾友，偃武事息干戈，以自卑之辞事汉，喟然自以为是文王再世。
English: At this time, Gong Han did not take advantage of the crisis to take advantage of the victory and rise up to fight for the fate of heaven, but retreated and wanted to be the cause of Xibe, respect Zheng Xing as the teacher of the chapter and verse, and make friends with Fang Fang and other officials, and fight in the war, and use inferiority to talk about Han, and thought that he was the reincarnation of King Wen.

古文：令汉帝释关陇之忧，专精东伐，四分天下而有其三；使西州豪杰咸居心于山东，发间使，招携贰，则五分而有其四；若举兵天水，必至沮溃，天水既定，则九分而有其八。
现代文：这样就使汉帝消除了关陇之忧，得以专门精心策划东伐事宜，四分天下而有其三；使西州的豪杰们都存心于山东，派来歙，马援等为使者，说服王遵、郑兴、杜林、牛邯等相次归顺了光武，那么天下五分而汉有其四了；如果在天水举兵反汉，必遭溃败，天水既定，则天下九分而汉有其八了。
English: In this way, the Han Emperor eliminated the fear of the Guanzhong, and was able to specifically and carefully plan the matters of the Eastern Expedition, so that the world was divided into four and there were three; so that the heroes of Xizhou were all focused on Shandong, and sent to Shandong, Ma Yuan, etc. as envoys to persuade Wang Zun, Zheng Xing, Du Lin, Niulong, etc. to surrender to Guangwu in succession, then the world was divided into five and Han was divided into four; if troops were raised against Han in Tianshui, they would be defeated, and Tianshui was established, then the world was divided into nine and

古文：陛下以梁州之地，内奉万乘，外给三军，百姓愁困，不堪上命，将有王氏自溃之变。
现代文：陛下以梁州之地，内部要奉万乘之尊，外部要给三军以给养，担子压在百姓身上，百姓愁困，不堪承受上面的命令，将有像王莽一样从内部崩溃的危险。
English: Your Majesty, in the land of Liangzhou, you have to worship Wanxiang inside, and you have to feed the three armies outside. The burden is on the people. The people are distressed, unable to bear the orders from above, and will be in danger of collapsing from within like Wang Mang.

古文：臣之愚计，以为宜及天下之望未绝，豪杰尚可招诱，急以此时发国内精兵，令田戎据江陵，临江南之会，倚巫山之固，筑垒坚守，传檄吴、楚，长沙以南必随风而靡。
现代文：我的愚计，以为应当趁天下还没有完全绝望，豪杰还可以招诱的时机，发国内精兵，命令田戎据江陵，临江南人、物会集之地，倚仗巫山的牢固，筑垒坚守，传檄文到、楚，长沙以南必随风而披靡。
English: I foolishly thought that I should take advantage of the fact that the world had not yet completely despaired, and that the heroes could still be lured, to send domestic elite soldiers, to order Tian Rong, to the Ganges, to the south of the river, to the place where things would gather, to rely on the firmness of Wushan, to build fortifications and hold fast, to spread the message to Chu, and to the south of Changsha, I would be invincible with the wind.

古文：令延岑出汉中，定三辅，天水、陇西拱手自服。
现代文：命令延岑出汉中，定三辅，天水、陇西拱手自服。
English: The order was issued in Han, and Ding Sanfu, Tianshui, and Shaanxi obeyed.

古文：如此，海内震摇，冀有大利。
现代文：这样，海内震摇，对我们大为有利。 
English: In this way, the shaking of the sea is very beneficial to us.

古文：述以问群臣。
现代文：公孙述问群臣。
English: The great-grandson questioned the ministers.

古文：博士吴柱曰： 昔武王伐殷，先观兵孟津，八百诸侯不期同辞，然犹还师以待天命。
现代文：博士吴柱说： 以前周武王伐殷，先在孟津检阅部队，八百诸侯异口同声拥护，而武王认为时机还不成熟，还是还师以等待天命。
English: Dr. Wu Zhu said: In the past, Zhou Wu Wang Fayin first reviewed the troops in Mengjin, and eight hundred princes supported him with one voice. However, King Wu believed that the time was not yet ripe, so he waited for the fate of the world.

古文：未闻无左右之助，而欲出师千里之外，以广封疆者也。
现代文：没有听到过无左右之助，而要出师千里之外，以扩大地盘的。 
English: I have never heard of anyone who does not need help, but wants to go thousands of miles away to expand his territory.

古文：邯曰： 今东帝无尺土之柄，驱乌合之众，跨马陷敌，所向辄平。
现代文：荆邯说： 现在的汉帝原来并无尺土的权柄，驱乌合之众，跨马杀敌，所向披靡。
English: Jing Yao said: The current Han emperor originally did not have the authority of a ruler, drove the rabble, killed the enemy on horseback, and was invincible.

古文：不亟乘时与之分功，而坐谈武王之说，是效隗嚣欲为西伯也。 述然邯言，欲悉发北军屯士及山东客兵，使延岑、田戎分出两道，与汉中诸将合兵并势。
现代文：不赶快趁现时与他争夺天下，而坐谈什么武王的说教，这是仿效隗嚣想为西伯罢了。 公孙述同意荆邯意见，准备将北军屯士及山东客兵都发动起来，使延岑、田戎分兵两道，与汉中各将领把兵马势力合并起来。
English: Instead of taking advantage of the current situation to compete with him for the world, and sit down to talk about what King Wu's sermon is, this is just an imitation of the hustle and bustle to be Xibe. Gongsun Su agreed with Jing Yao's opinion and prepared to mobilize the Northern Army soldiers and Shandong guest soldiers, so that the soldiers from Yancheng and Tian Rong and the generals from Hanzhong would combine their forces.

古文：蜀人及其弟光以为不宜空国千里之外，决成败于一举，固争之，述乃上。
现代文：蜀人和他弟弟公孙况以为不应当空国千里之外，决成败于一举，坚决争持，公孙述于是停止。
English: Shu and his younger brother, Gongsun Qu, thought that it was not right to fly thousands of miles away from the country. They were determined to succeed or fail in one fell swoop, and they argued resolutely. Gongsun Qu then stopped.

古文：延岑、田戎亦数请兵立功，终疑不听。
现代文：延岑、田戎也多次请兵出战立功，公孙述终于疑惑不听。
English: Yancheng and Tian Rong also repeatedly invited soldiers to fight and made great contributions, but their sons-in-law were suspicious and did not listen.

古文：述性苛细，察于小事。
现代文：公孙述喜苛求细枝末节，斤斤计较小事。
English: Gongsun said that he likes to be exacting in his pursuit of details, and that he does not care too much about minor things.

古文：敢诛杀而不见大体，好改易郡县官名。
现代文：敢诛杀而不识大体，喜欢更改郡县的官名。
English: Dare to fight and kill without knowing the general situation, like to change the official name of the county.

古文：然少为郎，习汉家制度，出入法驾，鸾旗旄骑，陈置陛戟，然后辇出房闼。
现代文：然而年青时做过郎，学着汉家制度，出入仿效汉天子法驾，銮旗旄骑，陈置陛戟，然后车驾才出房闼。
English: However, when he was young, he acted as a henchman, learned the Han family system, went in and out to imitate the law of Han Tianzi, carried the flag and rode, displayed his majesty, and then drove out of the house.

古文：又立其两子为王，食犍为、广汉各数县。
现代文：又立他的二子为王，食犍为、广汉各数县。
English: He also set up his two sons as kings, and appointed Shifu as the ruler of several counties in Guanghan.

古文：群臣多谏，以为成败未可知，戎士暴露，而遽王皇子，示无大志，伤战士心。
现代文：群臣多规谏，以为成败还不可知，军队暴露在外，又急于封儿子为王，表现出没有大志，挫伤战士的心。
English: The courtiers were overcautious, thinking that success or failure was not yet known, the army was exposed, and they were eager to make their son king, showing no ambition and frustrating the hearts of the soldiers.

古文：述不听。
现代文：公孙述不听。
English: The great-grandson did not listen.

古文：唯公孙氏得任事，由此大臣皆怨。
现代文：只有他公孙一家一姓的能够当官掌权，由此大臣们都埋怨不迭。
English: Only members of his grandchild's family can hold power, and ministers are complaining about this.

古文：八年，帝使诸将攻隗嚣，述遣李育将万余人救嚣。
现代文：八年，帝使诸将进攻隗嚣，公孙述派遣李育率领万余人救隗嚣。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor sent generals to attack Ganran, and Gongsun sent Li Yu to lead more than 10,000 people to rescue Ganran.

古文：嚣败，并没其军，蜀地闻之恐动。
现代文：隗嚣失败，李育也全军覆没。蜀地听到消息惊恐震动。
English: The clamor failed, and Li Yu's entire army was wiped out. Shu heard the news with shock and horror.

古文：述惧，欲安众心。
现代文：公孙述害怕，想安定众心。
English: Gongsun said that he was afraid and wanted to calm everyone's hearts.

古文：成都郭外有秦时旧仓，述改名白帝仓，自王莽以来常空。
现代文：成都郭外有秦时旧仓，述改名为白帝仓，自王莽以来常常空着。
English: Outside Chengdu Guo, there is an old warehouse from the Qin Dynasty, which was renamed Bai Di Cang, and has often been empty since Wang Mang.

古文：述即诈使人言白帝仓出谷如山陵，百姓空市里往观之。
现代文：公孙述便使人诈称白帝仓出谷如山陵一般，百姓倾城空市前往观看。
English: According to his great-grandson, people were deceived into thinking that the White Emperor's Cangding Valley was like a mountain mausoleum, and people flocked to the empty market to watch.

古文：述乃大会群臣，问曰： 白帝仓竟出谷乎？ 皆对言 无 。
现代文：述于是大会群臣，问道： 白帝仓竟然出了谷吗？ 群臣都说： 没有。 
English: He then described the general assembly of ministers and asked: Did the Emperor's storehouse actually go out of the valley? The ministers all said: No.

古文：述曰： 讹言不可信，道隗王破者复如此矣。 俄而嚣将王元降，述以为将军。
现代文：述道： 讹言不可信，传言隗嚣已破灭也是一样。 不久嚣将王元降蜀，述以王元为将军。
English: Narrator: The rumor is not to be believed, just as the rumor that Wang Yuan had been demoted to the rank of general.

古文：明年，使元与领军环安拒河池，又遣田戎及大司徒任满、南郡太守程汎将兵下江关，破威虏将军冯骏等，拔巫及夷陵、夷道，因据荆门。
现代文：明年，使王元与领军环安拒守河池，又遣田戎及大司徒任满、南郡太守程汛率军下江关，攻破汉威虏将军冯骏等，攻占巫及夷陵、夷道，因而据守荆门。
English: In the next year, Wang Yuan and the leading army of Huan'an refused to defend Hechi, and sent Tian Rong and Daishi Tuo to complete their term of office, and led the army of Nan County Daju Cheng Yu to go down to Jiangguan, defeated Han Wei Rui General Feng Yu and others, captured Wuxi and Yiling and Yidu, and thus defended Jingmen.

古文：十一年，征南大将军岑彭攻之，满等大败，述将王政斩满首降于彭。
现代文：十一年，征南大将军岑彭发起进攻，任满等大败，述将王政斩任满首级向岑彭投降。
English: In the eleventh year, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Zhou Peng, launched an attack, and after a great defeat, he surrendered to Zhou Peng.

古文：田戎走保江州。
现代文：田戎走保江州。
English: Tian Rong went to Baojiangzhou.

古文：城邑皆开门降。彭遂长驱至武阳。
现代文：各城邑都开门向岑彭投降，岑彭就长驱到达武阳。
English: All the cities and towns opened their doors and surrendered to Nie Peng, and Nie Peng drove all the way to Wuyang.

古文：帝及与述书，陈言祸福，以明丹青之信。
现代文：光武帝就写信给公孙述，陈述祸福，以表明君无戏言。
English: Emperor Guangwu wrote a letter to his grandson-in-law, stating the calamities and blessings, to show that he had nothing to say.

古文：述省书叹息，以示所亲太常常少、光禄勋张隆。
现代文：公孙述看信省悟叹息，给亲信太常常少、光禄勋张隆看。
English: Gongsun said that he sighed when he looked at the letter and realized that he had given too little to his close confidants and too much to the honorable Zhang Long.

古文：降、少皆劝降。
现代文：隆、少都劝公孙述投降。
English: Takashi and Shodo urged their grandsons to surrender.

古文：述曰： 废兴命也。
现代文：公孙述说： 兴与废都是命运。
English: Gongsun said, "Both success and failure are a matter of fate.

古文：岂有降天子哉！ 左右莫敢复言。
现代文：哪里有投降的天子呢！ 左右的人就不敢再讲话了。
English: Where is the son of God who surrenders? People on both sides no longer dare to speak.

古文：中郎将来歙急攻王元、环安，安使刺客杀歙；述复令刺杀岑彭。
现代文：汉中郎将来歙急攻王元、环安，环安派刺客杀了来歙；公孙述又命令刺杀岑彭。
English: Hanzhong Lang suddenly attacked Wangyuan and Huanan in the future, and Huanan sent assassins to kill Lai Ying; Gongsun Shu also ordered the assassination of Yipeng.

古文：十二年，述弟恢及子婿史兴并为大司马吴汉、辅威将军臧宫所破，战死。
现代文：十二年，公孙述的弟弟公孙恢和子婿史兴都被大司马吴汉、辅威将军臧宫所攻破，战死。
English: In the twelfth year, Gongsun Shu's younger brother Gongsun Huai and his son-in-law Shi Xing were both defeated by the grand secretary Ma Wuhan and the general Fu Wei and died in battle.

古文：自是将帅恐惧，日夜离叛，述虽诛灭其家，犹不能禁。
现代文：从此将帅恐惧，日夜离叛，公孙述虽然杀其全家，还是不能禁止。
English: From then on, Zhao Shuai was afraid, and he was a renegade day and night. Although he killed his entire family, he could not be banned.

古文：帝必欲降之，乃下诏喻述曰： 往年诏书比下，开示恩信，勿以来歙、岑彭受害自疑。
现代文：光武帝必欲公孙述投降，就下诏书晓喻公孙述道： 往年诏书频下，开导并示以恩信，不要以来歙、岑彭受害而自疑。
English: Emperor Guangwu must have wanted Gongsun Sui to surrender, so he issued an edict to let Gongsun Sui know: In previous years, the edict was frequently issued to enlighten and show gratitude, so don't doubt yourself because you and Gongpen suffered.

古文：今以时自诣，则家族完全；若迷惑不喻，委肉虎口，痛哉奈何！
现代文：现在只要如期归降，就可保证家族完全；假使迷惑不悟，那等于把肉送进虎口，可痛又有什么办法呢！
English: Now, as long as you surrender on time, you can ensure that your family is complete; if you are confused and do not understand, it is tantamount to sending meat into the mouth of the tiger, but what can you do!

古文：将帅疲倦，吏士思归，不乐久相屯守，诏书手记，不可数得，朕不食言。 述终无降意。
现代文：你的将帅疲倦，吏士们都想回家，不愿意继续屯守下去，诏书手记，不可数得，我是不食言的。 公孙述终无降意。
English: Your generals and admirals are tired, your magistrates want to go home, they don't want to stay any longer, there are too many copies of the edict to count, I won't go back on my word.

古文：九月，吴汉又破斩其大司徒谢丰、执金吾袁吉，汉兵遂守成都。
现代文：九月，吴汉又破斩其大司徒谢丰、执金吾袁吉，汉兵进驻成都。
English: In September, Wu Han defeated his chief disciple, Xie Feng, and his deputy, Kingu Yuanji, and the Han soldiers were stationed in Chengdu.

古文：述谓延岑曰： 事当奈何！ 岑曰： 男儿当死中求生，可坐穷乎！
现代文：公孙述对延岑说： 现在怎么办呢？ 岑说： 男儿应当在死中求生，怎能坐着等死呢！
English: His great-grandson said to Yan Xuan, "What should we do now?" Yan Xuan said, "Men should live in death, how can they sit and wait for death!"

古文：财物易聚耳，不宜有爱。 述乃悉散金帛，募敢死士五千余人，以配岑于市桥，伪建旗帜，鸣鼓挑战，而潜遣奇兵出吴汉军后，袭击破汉。
现代文：财物是容易聚敛的，不应当吝惜。 公孙述就将金帛全数拿出来，募得敢死队五千多人，在市桥以配合延岑，假装建立旗帜，鸣鼓挑战，暗地里却派遣奇兵绕到吴汉军后面，袭击攻破吴汉军。
English: According to Gongsun, he took out the entire number of gold ingots and recruited a death squad of more than five thousand people, pretending to set up a banner and beating a drum to challenge in the city bridge with the cooperation of Yan Xuan, but secretly sent a strange soldier to go around the back of the Wuhan army and attack and defeat the Wuhan army.

古文：汉堕水，缘马尾得出。
现代文：吴汉坠落水中，抓着马尾巴得以出水。
English: Wu Han fell into the water and was able to get out of the water by grabbing the horse's tail.

古文：十一月，臧宫军至咸门。
现代文：十一月，臧宫军到咸门。
English: In November, the palace army arrived at the Haman Gate.

古文：述视占书，云 虏死城下 ，大喜，谓汉等当之。
现代文：公孙述看到占卦上说 虏死城下 。大喜，认为吴汉等当死城下。
English: His great-grandson said that he was overjoyed when he saw that Zhan Gua said that Rui would die outside the city. He thought that Wu Han and others should die outside the city.

古文：乃自将数万人攻汉，使延岑拒宫。
现代文：于是亲自率领数万人攻吴汉，使延岑拒臧宫。
English: As a result, he personally led tens of thousands of people to attack Wuhan, causing Yancheng to refuse the imperial palace.

古文：大战，岑三合三胜。
现代文：大战，延岑三合三胜。
English: In the great war, Yancheng's three-in-three victory.

古文：自旦及日中，军士不得食，并疲，汉因令壮士突之，述兵大乱，被刺洞胸，堕马。
现代文：从清晨到日中，军士吃不到粮食，都很疲乏，吴汉命令壮士突击，公孙述兵士大乱，公孙述胸部中枪坠落马下。
English: From the early morning to the middle of the day, the sergeants could not eat food and were very tired. Wu Han ordered the strong men to attack. Gongsun said that the soldiers were in chaos. Gongsun said that he was shot in the chest and fell under the horse.

古文：左右舆入城。
现代文：左右以车将公孙述救入城内。
English: They used cars to rescue Gongsun into the city.

古文：述以兵属延岑，其夜死。
现代文：公孙述把兵交延岑，晚上就死了。
English: Gongsun Su surrendered his soldiers to Yan Rong and died in the evening.

古文：明旦，岑降吴汉。
现代文：次日晨，延岑向吴汉投降。
English: In the morning of the next day, Yanqi surrendered to Wu Han.

古文：乃夷述妻子，尽灭公孙氏，并族延岑。
现代文：吴汉就杀了公孙述妻子，把公孙氏全都杀尽，并把延岑全族都杀了。
English: Wu Han then killed Gongsun Su's wife, killed the entire Gongsun clan, and killed the entire Yan family.

古文：遂放兵大掠，焚述宫室。
现代文：又纵兵大掠，焚烧公孙述宫室。
English: In addition, the soldiers carried out a large-scale raid and burned Gongsun Shuguang's palace.

古文：帝闻之怒，以谴汉。
现代文：光武听到发怒，谴责吴汉。
English: Hearing this, Guangwu flew into a rage and denounced Wu Han.

古文：又让汉副将刘尚曰： 城降三日，吏人从服，孩儿老母，口以万数，一旦放兵纵火，闻之可为酸鼻！
现代文：又责让吴汉副将刘尚说： 城降三日，吏人都服从，孩儿老母，有万数人口，一旦纵兵放火，听到了都叫人酸鼻！
English: He also ordered Wu Han's vice-general Liu Shang to say: "The city fell for three days, the officials all obeyed, children and mothers, there are tens of thousands of people, once the soldiers set fire, they all have a sour nose when they hear it!

古文：尚宗室子孙，尝更吏职，何忍行此？
现代文：你刘尚的宗室子孙，也曾经历过吏职，怎么忍心做这种事？
English: You, Liu Shang's son-in-law and grandson, have also experienced official positions. How can you bear to do such a thing?

古文：仰视天，俯视地，观放麑啜羹，二者孰仁？
现代文：仰视天，俯视地，看看秦西巴放鞧归其母与乐羊啜子之羹，哪一个更仁呢？
English: Look up at the sky, look down at the ground, and see if Qin Xiba has given his donkey to his mother or his sheep to his son. Which one is more benevolent?

古文：良失斩将吊人之义也！ 
现代文：很是失去斩将而吊其民人的道义了。 
English: It has lost the moral authority to hang its own people.

古文：初，常少、张隆劝述降，不从，并以忧死。
现代文：起初，常少、张隆劝公孙述降汉，述不从，常少与张隆都忧郁而死。
English: At first, Chang Shao and Zhang Long advised Gongsun to abjure the Han Dynasty, but he refused to do so, and both Chang Shao and Zhang Long died of depression.

古文：帝下诏追赠少为太常，隆为光禄勋，以礼改葬之。
现代文：光武下诏书追赠常少为太常，张隆为少禄勋，以太常和光禄勋的仪礼改葬他俩。
English: In the imperial edict issued by Guangwu, the posthumous award of Changshao was changed to Taizhong, Zhang Long to Shao Rukun, and the ceremony of Taizhong and Guangrukun was changed to bury them both.

古文：其忠节志义之士，并蒙旌显。
现代文：凡是忠节志义的人士，都受到了表彰和显扬。
English: All those who are loyal to the festival have been commended and promoted.

古文：程乌、李育以有才干，皆擢用之。
现代文：程乌、李育因有才干，都提拔使用。
English: Cheng Wu and Li Yu were promoted because of their talents.

古文：于是西土咸悦，莫不归心焉。
现代文：于是西土都感到高兴，没有不归心的。
English: As a result, both the West and the East felt happy and did not hesitate to return.

古文：论曰：昔赵佗自王番禺，公孙亦窃帝蜀汉，推其无他功能，而至于后亡者，将以地边处远，非王化之所先乎？
现代文：史家评论道：以前赵佗因汉初天下未定自立为南越王，公孙述也窃取帝位于蜀汉，推想他没有别的功能，而到最后才灭亡，难道是由于地处边远，因得以苟安于一隅吗？
English: The historian commented, "Previously, Zhao Qian was not determined to become the king of South Vietnam because of the beginning of the Han Dynasty. His grandson also stole the imperial seat in Shuhan, inferring that he had no other function, and finally died. Was it because of the remote location, because he was able to rest in a corner?

古文：述虽为汉吏，无所冯资，徒以文俗自憙，逐能集其志计。
现代文：公孙述虽为汉吏，并没有什么大的凭借资本，徒以文俗自喜，就能实现他的志愿和计谋。
English: Although Gongsun Su was a Han official, he did not have much capital to rely on. He was content with literature and customs, and was able to realize his will and strategy.

古文：道未足而意有余，不能因隙立功，以会时变，方乃坐饰边幅，以高深自安，昔吴起所以惭魏侯也。
现代文：道不足而意有余，不能乘隙立功，以观时变，而是坐守边缘，以高深自安，这就和以前魏侯欣喜于河山之固，吴起对他说，国家巩固在德不在险一样的啊。
English: The way is not enough, but the intention is more than enough. It is not possible to take advantage of the gap to make a contribution, to observe the changes of the times, but to sit on the edge, with a high and deep self-assurance. This is the same as the Wei Hou rejoiced in the rivers and mountains. Wu Qi told him that the consolidation of the country is not in danger in Germany.

古文：及其谢臣属，审废兴之命，与夫泥首衔玉者异日谈也。
现代文：等到他谢臣属，坚持兴废是命运而不肯投降，与孙皓泥首面缚降王氵睿、许男面缚衔璧见楚子，就不可同日而语了。
English: Wait until he thanks his subordinates, insists that prosperity and waste are destiny and refuses to surrender, and meets with Sun Yat-sen, face-to-face with Sun Yat-sen, face-to-face with Wang Zhenrui, and face-to-face with Xu Nian, he will not be able to speak the same language.

