古文：斩衰何以服苴？
现代文：斩衰丧服为什么要使用直麻做的首续和腰带呢？
English: Why use the straight hemp for the neckline and waistband of the mourning dress?

古文：苴，恶貌也，所以首其内而见诸外也。
现代文：因为宜麻颜色黛黑，非常难看，所以用它来把内心的悲哀表现在服饰上面。
English: Because the color black is very ugly, it is used to express inner sadness in clothing.

古文：斩衰貌若苴，齐衰貌若枲，大功貌若止，小功、缌麻容貌可也，此哀之发于容体者也。
现代文：穿斩衰丧服的人，其脸色深黑，就像直麻一样；穿齐衰丧服的人，其脸色浅黑，就像棠麻一样；穿大功丧服的人，其神情呆板；穿小功、绍麻丧服的人，其神情和平赏差不多。
English: Those who wear the mourning clothes of the dead, their faces are dark black, just like the straight hemp; those who wear the mourning clothes of the dead, their faces are light black, just like the tangle hemp; those who wear the mourning clothes of the dead, their expressions are stiff; those who wear the mourning clothes of the dead of the dead of the dead of the dead of the dead of the dead, their expressions are almost peaceful.

古文：斩衰之哭，若往而不反；齐衰之哭，若往而反；大功之哭，三曲而偯；小功缌麻，哀容可也。
现代文：这是悲哀表现在脸色、神情上的不同。穿斩衰丧服者的哭声，一口气哭下去，直到上气不接下气；穿齐衰丧服者的哭声，虽是一口气地哭下去，但上气还可以接着下气；穿大功丧胆者的哭声，听起来是时高时低，尾声从容；穿小功、绍麻丧服者的哭声，只要做出有悲哀的表情就可以了。
English: This is the difference in the expression of sadness in the face and facial expression. The cry of those who wear the uniform of death and decay, cry in one breath, until they are out of breath; the cry of those who wear the uniform of death and decay, although they cry in one breath, but the breath can be followed by the breath; the cry of those who wear the uniform of courage and courage, sounds high and low, and the ending is calm; the cry of those who wear the uniform of death and decay, as long as they make a sad expression.

古文：此哀之发于声音者也。
现代文：这是悲哀表现在哭声上的不同。
English: It's the difference in how sadness manifests itself in crying.

古文：斩衰，唯而不对；齐衰，对而不言；大功，言而不议；小功缌麻，议而不及乐。
现代文：居丧之中在和他人交谈时，如果是斩衰之丧，那就只发出 唯唯 的声音而不回答别人的问话；如果是齐衰之丧，那就可以回答别人的问话，但不可主动问人；如果是大功之丧，那就可以主动问人，但不可以发表议论；如果是小功、绍麻之丧，那就可以发表议论，但还不可谈笑风生。
English: When conversing with others in the midst of mourning, if it is the death of a great man, then only the voice of a great man should be uttered without answering the questions of others; if it is the death of a great man, then you can answer the questions of others, but you should not take the initiative to ask people; if it is the death of a great man, then you can take the initiative to ask people, but you should not make a discussion; if it is the death of a small man, then you can make a discussion, but you should not make jokes.

古文：此哀之发于言语者也。
现代文：这是不同程度的悲哀在饮食上的表现。
English: This is a manifestation of varying degrees of sadness in the diet.

古文：斩衰，三日不食；齐衰，二日不食；大功，三不食；小功缌麻，再不食；士与敛焉，则壹不食。
现代文：穿斩衰丧服的人，三天不进食；穿齐衰丧服的人，两天不进食；穿大功丧服的人，一天不进食；穿小功、绍麻丧服的人，两顿不吃任何东西。
English: Those who wear the mourning clothes for the dead do not eat for three days; those who wear the mourning clothes for the dead do not eat for two days; those who wear the mourning clothes for the dead do not eat for one day; those who wear the mourning clothes for the dead do not eat anything for two meals.

古文：故父母之丧，既殡食粥，朝一溢米，莫一溢米；齐衰之丧，疏食水饮，不食菜果；大功之丧，不食酰酱；小功缌麻，不饮醴酒。
现代文：士人如果去帮助小敛，则暂停吃一顿。所以父母之丧，既殡以后，只喝稀粥，早上吃一溢米，晚上吃一溢米；而齐衰之丧在既殡以后，可以吃粗米饭和喝水，但不可以吃蔬菜瓜果；大功之丧在既殡以后，虽然可以吃蔬菜瓜果，但还不可以吃醋酱一类的调料；小功、绍麻之丧在既殡以后，虽然可以吃醋酱一类的调料，但还不可以喝甜酒。
English: Therefore, after the funeral of parents, only drink gruel, eat a bowl of rice in the morning, and eat a bowl of rice in the evening; while after the funeral of Qi Wei, you can eat coarse rice and drink water, but you can't eat vegetables and fruits; after the funeral of Da Gong, although you can eat vegetables and fruits, you can't eat condiments such as vinegar sauce; after the funeral of Xiao Gong and Shaoma, although you can eat condiments such as vinegar sauce, you can't drink sweet wine.

古文：此哀之发于饮食者也。
现代文：这是悲哀在饮食方面表现出来的不同。
English: It's the difference that grief makes in diet.

古文：父母之丧，既虞卒哭，疏食水饮，不食菜果；期而小祥，食菜果；又期而大祥，有酰酱；中月而禫，禫而饮醴酒。
现代文：为父母服丧，在虞祭、卒哭之后，就可以吃粗米饭和喝水，但还不可以吃蔬果瓜菜；满一周年时举行小祥之祭，此后就可以吃蔬果瓜菜；满两周年时举行大祥之祭，此后就可以吃醋酱一类的调料；大祥以后间隔一个月举行谭祭，谭祭之后就可以喝甜酒。
English: For parents in mourning, after the Yu Festival and the crying, you can eat coarse rice and drink water, but you can't eat fruits and vegetables; when the first anniversary is held, you can eat fruits and vegetables; when the second anniversary is held, you can eat condiments such as vinegar sauce; after the auspicious, the Tan Festival is held every month, and you can drink sweet wine after the Tan Festival.

古文：始饮酒者先饮醴酒。始食肉者先食干肉。
现代文：开始饮酒时，要先饮甜酒；开始吃肉时，要先吃干肉。
English: When you start drinking alcohol, you should first drink sweet wine; when you start eating meat, you should first eat dry meat.

古文：父母之丧，居倚庐，寝苫枕块，不说绖带；齐衰之丧，居垩室，芐翦不纳；大功之丧，寝有席，小功缌麻，床可也。
现代文：为父母守丧，孝子要住在倚庐里，睡在草苫上，拿土块当枕头，睡觉时也不脱首绖和腰带；居齐衰之丧，就要住在奎室里，睡在剪齐了边却没有扎缘的蒲席上；为大功亲属服丧，睡觉的时候就可以睡在席子上；为小功、绍麻亲属服丧，像平常那样睡在床上也是可以的。
English: For the funeral of parents, the filial son should live in the mortuary, sleep on the straw mat, take the soil as a pillow, and do not take off the headdress and belt when sleeping; for the funeral of the deceased, he should live in the Kui room, sleep on the cushion that is not tied when it is cut; for the funeral of relatives with great merits, he can sleep on the mat when sleeping; for the funeral of relatives with small merits, it is also possible to sleep on the bed as usual.

古文：此哀之发于居处者也。
现代文：这是悲哀表现在居处方面的不同。
English: It's a difference in the way that grief manifests itself in the home.

古文：父母之丧，既虞卒哭，柱楣翦屏，芐翦不纳；期而小祥，居垩室，寝有席；又期而大祥，居复寝；中月而禫，禫而床。
现代文：居父母之丧，在虞祭、卒哭之后，就可以把搭建倚庐时所用的卧地之媚用柱子支起来，遮盖倚庐的草苫也可以稍加修剪，睡觉所用的草苫也可以换成剪齐了边却还没有扎缘的蒲席；满一周年时举行小祥之祭，此后就可以搬到奎室里去住，睡觉也可以使用席子；满两周年时举行大祥之祭，此后就可以搬到自己的寝室去住；再隔一个月举行樟祭，樟祭以后就可以像平常那样睡在床上。
English: At the time of the death of a parent, after the yakitori ceremony and the crying ceremony, it is possible to prop up the sleeping place used to build the couch with a pillar. The grass that covers the couch can also be trimmed a little, and the bed can be replaced with a cushion that has been trimmed but has not been tied; at the first anniversary of the festival, the small Xiang festival is held, after which you can move to the Kui room to live, and you can also use the mat to sleep; at the second anniversary of the festival, you can move to your own bedroom to live; another month after the festival, you can sleep in bed as usual after the festival

古文：斩衰三升，齐衰四升、五升、六升，大功七升、八升、九升，小功十升、十一升、十二升，缌麻十五升去其半，有事其缕、无事其布曰缌。
现代文：做斩衰丧服所用的布是三升。做齐衰丧服所用的布，有四升的，有五升的，有六升的。做大功丧服所用的布，有七升的，有八升的，有九升的。做小功丧服所用的布，有十升的，有十一升的，有十二升的。做绍麻丧服所用的布，其经线的缕数是十五升布的一半，线缕经过加工，织成布后捶洗时不再加灰，这样的布就叫做绍布。
English: The cloth used for mourning clothes is three liters. The cloth used for mourning clothes has four liters, five liters, and six liters. The cloth used for mourning clothes has seven liters, eight liters, and nine liters. The cloth used for mourning clothes has ten liters, eleven liters, and twelve liters. The cloth used for mourning clothes has half the number of warp threads of a fifteen-liter cloth. The warp threads have been processed, and no ash is added when washing after weaving into a cloth. Such a cloth is called a mourning cloth.

古文：此哀之发于衣服者也。
现代文：这是悲哀表现在衣服方面的不同。
English: It's the difference in the way that grief manifests itself in clothing.

古文：斩衰三升，既虞卒哭，受以成布六升、冠七升；为母疏衰四升，受以成布七升、冠八升。
现代文：斩衰所用的布是三升，但在虞祭、卒哭以后，其受服所用的布就是六升，丧冠所用的布就是七升。为母亲穿的孝服所用的布是四升，但在虞祭、卒哭以后，其受服所用的布就是七升，丧冠所用的布就是八升。
English: The cloth used for decapitation is three liters, but after the yakitori, the yakitori, the cloth used for receiving the yakitori is six liters, and the cloth used for the crown is seven liters. The cloth used for the filial piety dress worn by the mother is four liters, but after the yakitori, the yakitori, the cloth used for receiving the yakitori is seven liters, and the cloth used for the crown is eight liters.

古文：去麻服葛，葛带三重。
现代文：虞祭、卒哭之后，男子要去掉麻腰带而换成葛腰带，葛腰带是用四股线拧制而成。
English: After the Yu Festival and the crying, the men have to take off the hemp belt and replace it with the kudzu belt. The kudzu belt is made of four strands of thread.

古文：期而小祥，练冠縓缘，要绖不除，男子除乎首，妇人除乎带。
现代文：满一周年时举行小祥之祭，此后就可以改戴练冠，中衣也可以换成练衣，并且领子上带有浅红色的镶边，但男子的葛腰带还不能除掉。男子除丧是从首经开始，妇人除丧是从腰带开始。
English: On the first anniversary, a small auspicious festival is held, after which the practice crown can be changed, the tunic can be changed into a practice dress, and the collar has a light red border, but the man's gecko belt cannot be removed. The man's mourning begins with the first sutra, and the woman's mourning begins with the belt.

古文：男子何为除乎首也？
现代文：男子为什么要先除首续呢？
English: Why do men have to go first?

古文：妇人何为除乎带也？
现代文：妇人为什么要先除腰带呢？
English: Why did the woman take off her girdle first?

古文：男子重首，妇人重带。
现代文：因为首续在男子的丧服中最为重要，而腰带在妇人的丧服中最为重要。
English: Because sequins are most important in men's funeral attire, and belts are most important in women's funeral attire.

古文：除服者先重者，易服者易轻者。又期而大祥，素缟麻衣。
现代文：除去丧服的时候，先要除去最为重要的部位；正服重丧，又遭轻丧，需要为轻丧改变丧服的时候，那就只能改变较轻的部位。
English: When removing mourning clothes, the most important parts should be removed first; when mourning clothes are heavily mourned and lightly mourned, and it is necessary to change mourning clothes for light mourning, then only the lighter parts can be changed.

古文：中月而禫，禫而纤，无所不佩。
现代文：满两周年时举行大祥之祭，此后孝子就可以头戴用白色生绢所制的冠，冠缘又用白绩镶边，身穿麻衣。
English: On the second anniversary, a great auspicious festival is held, after which the filial son can wear a crown made of white ginger on his head, the crown rim is edged with white feathers, and he is dressed in linen.

古文：易服者何？为易轻者也。斩衰之丧，既虞卒哭，遭齐衰之丧，轻者包，重者特。既练，遭大功之丧，麻葛重。
现代文：再隔一个月举行谭祭，樟祭以后就可以戴用黑经白纬的布所制的冠，无论什么装饰也都可以佩带。正服重丧，又遭轻丧，为轻丧而改变重丧之服，为什么要改变重丧较轻的部位呢？
English: A month later, the Tan Festival is held. After the wreath-laying ceremony, you can wear a crown made of black warp and white weft cloth, no matter what kind of decoration you can wear. The formal dress is mourned, and it is mourned lightly, and the mourning clothes are changed for light mourning, why change the lighter part of the mourning?

古文：齐衰之丧，既虞卒哭，遭大功之丧，麻葛兼服之。斩衰之葛，与齐衰之麻同；齐衰之葛，与大功之麻同；大功之葛，与小功之麻同；小功之葛，与缌之麻同，麻同则兼服之。
现代文：既然有此相同，那就可以既服前丧的葛，又服后丧的麻。兼服麻葛时要遵循的原则是，对于丧服的重要部位，仍服前丧的葛，而对于丧服的次要部位妥则改为后丧的麻。
English: Since there is such a similarity, it is possible to serve both the pre-mourning kudzu and the post-mourning hemp. The principle to be followed when serving both the pre-mourning kudzu and the post-mourning hemp is that for the important parts of the mourning clothes, the pre-mourning kudzu is still served, and for the secondary parts of the mourning clothes, the post-mourning hemp is served.

