古文：肝满、肾满、肺满皆实，即为肿。
现代文：肺的脉象壅滞，则喘息而两胁胀满。肝的脉象壅滞，则两胁胀满，睡卧时惊惕不安，小便不利。
English: If the pulse of the lungs is sluggish, it is wheezing and the diaphragm is swollen. If the pulse of the liver is sluggish, the diaphragm is swollen, it is alarmed and uneasy when sleeping, and it is unfavorable to urinate.

古文：肺之雍，喘而两胠满；肝雍，两胠满，卧则惊，不得小便；肾雍，脚下至小腹满，胫有大小，髀胻大跛，易偏枯。
现代文：肾的脉象壅滞，则从胁下至小腹部胀满，两侧小腿粗细不同，患侧从臀部至小腿或肿大、或短缩，容易得 偏枯 。
English: If the pulse of the kidney is stagnant, the abdomen will be swollen from the lower abdomen to the lower abdomen, the thickness of the calf on both sides will be different, and the affected side from the buttocks to the calf will be swollen or shortened, and it will be easy to become dehydrated.

古文：心脉满大，癎、瘛、筋挛。
现代文：心的脉象满、大，发生癫痫、抽搐及筋脉拘挛等症。
English: The pulse of the heart is full and large, and epilepsy, convulsions and myocardial spasm occur.

古文：肝脉小急，癎、瘛、筋挛。
现代文：肝的脉象小、急，发生癫痫、抽搐和筋脉拘挛。
English: The pulse of the liver is small and rapid, and epilepsy, convulsions and myocardial infarction occur.

古文：肝脉骛暴，有所惊骇，脉不至若瘖，不治自己。
现代文：肝的脉象急疾而暴乱，是由于受到了突然的惊吓，如果按不到脉搏或突然出现失音的，不需治疗，待其气通即可恢复。
English: The pulse of the liver is rapid and violent, due to a sudden shock. If there is no pulse or a sudden loss of sound, there is no need for treatment, and the breath can be restored.

古文：肾脉小急，肝脉小急，心脉小急，不鼓皆为瘕。
现代文：肾、肝、心三脏的脉象均小、急、沉，皆当发为 瘕 。
English: The pulse of the three organs of kidney, liver and heart are small, rapid and heavy, all of which should be.

古文：肾肝并沉为石水，并浮为风水，并虚为死，并小弦欲惊。
现代文：肾和肝的脉象，均见沉脉，为 石水 ；均见浮脉，为 风水 ；均见虚脉，为死症；均见小、弦，将要发生惊厥。
English: The pulse images of the kidney and the liver all show the sinking vein, which is the stone water; both show the floating vein, which is the feng shui; both show the imaginary vein, which is the death disease; both show the small and the string, which will cause convulsions.

古文：肾脉大急沉，肝脉大急沉，皆为疝。
现代文：肾和肝的脉象，大、急、沉，均为 疝 。
English: The pulse of the kidney and liver, large, rapid, and deep, are all.

古文：心脉搏滑急为心疝，肺脉沉搏为肺疝。
现代文：心的脉象搏动急疾流利，为 心疝 ；肺的脉象沉而搏击于指下，为 肺疝 。
English: The pulsation of the heart is rapid and fluent, which is palpitation; the pulse of the lungs is slow and beats under the finger, which is palpitation.

古文：三阳急为瘕，三阴急为疝。二阴急为癎厥，二阳急为惊。
现代文：太阳经的脉象急疾，为 瘕 ；太阴经的脉象急疾，为 疝 ；少阴经的脉象急疾，为 痫厥 ；阳明经的脉象急疾，为 惊厥 。
English: The pulse of the solar eclipse is ; the pulse of the lunar eclipse is ; the pulse of the lunar eclipse is ; the pulse of the lunar eclipse is ; the pulse of the solar eclipse is ; the pulse of the solar eclipse is ; the pulse of the lunar eclipse is ; the pulse of the lunar eclipse is ; the pulse of the lunar eclipse is ; the pulse of the lunar eclipse is ; and the pulse of the solar eclipse is.

古文：脾脉外鼓，沉为肠澼，久自已。
现代文：脾的脉象见沉而又有向外鼓动之象，是痢疾患者，日久必然自愈。
English: The pulse of the spleen seems to be depressed, but it also seems to be agitating outwardly. It is a dysentery patient, and it will inevitably heal itself over time.

古文：肝脉小缓为肠澼，易治。
现代文：肝的脉象小、缓，是痢疾患者，容易治愈。
English: The pulse of the liver is small and slow, it is dysentery patients, easy to cure.

古文：肾脉小搏沉为肠澼，下血，血温、身热者死。
现代文：肾的脉象小、搏、沉，是痢疾患者伴有便血的，若血热发烧，为预后不良的死症。
English: The pulse of the kidney is small, throbbing, and heavy. It is dysentery patients with bloody stools. If the blood fever is feverish, it is a fatal disease with poor prognosis.

古文：心肝澼亦下血，二脏同病者，可治；其脉小沉濇为肠澼，其身热者死，热见七日死。
现代文：心、肝二脏的脉象都有病，又是痢疾患者伴有便血的，如果是两脏顺证的可以治疗；若其脉都出现小、沉、涩的痢疾患者，兼有发烧症状，预后多不良，如连续发烧七天以上则死。
English: If the pulse of the heart, liver and two viscera are all diseased, and the dysentery patient is accompanied by blood in the stool, if the two viscera are incidental, it can be treated; if the dysentery patient's pulse is small, heavy and astringent, and both have fever symptoms, the prognosis is mostly poor, and if the fever lasts for more than seven days, it will die.

古文：胃脉沉鼓涩，胃外鼓大，心脉小坚急，皆鬲偏枯，男子发左，女子发右，不瘖舌转可治，三十日起；其从者瘖，三岁起；年不满二十者，三岁死。
现代文：胃的脉象沉而应指涩，或者浮而应指大，以及心脉象小、坚、急，都属气血隔塞不通，当病偏枯半身不遂。若男子发病在左侧，女子发病在右侧，说话正常，舌体转动灵活，可以治疗，经过三十天可以痊愈。若男子发病在右侧，女子发病在左侧，不能发出声音的，需要三年才能痊愈；如果患者年龄不满二十岁，此为禀赋不足，不出三年就要死亡。
English: The pulse of the stomach is like a sinking and should be referred to as astringent, or a floating and should be referred to as large, and the pulse of the heart is like small, firm, and rapid, are all qi and blood septum obstruction, when the disease is withered, the body is incomplete. If the man's onset is on the left side, the woman's onset is on the right side, the speech is normal, the tongue is flexible, it can be treated, and it can be cured after 30 days. If the man's onset is on the right side, the woman's onset is on the left side, if the patient cannot make a sound

古文：脉至而搏，血衂，身热者死；脉来悬钩浮为常脉。
现代文：脉来搏指有力，病见 血衄 ，身体发热，死证；若是脉来悬、钩、浮的，则是失血的常见脉象。
English: The pulse is strong, the disease is bloody, the body is feverish, the death certificate; if the pulse is hanging, hooked, floating, it is a common pulse symptom of blood loss.

古文：脉至如喘，名曰暴厥。
现代文：脉来喘急，突然昏厥，病名叫 暴厥 ，暴厥发病时不能言语。
English: Sudden fainting, shortness of breath, sudden fainting, the disease is called violent convulsions, and speech is not possible when violent convulsions occur.

古文：暴厥者，不知与人言，脉至如数，使人暴惊，三四日自已；脉至浮合，浮合如数，一息十至以上，是经气予不足也，微见九、十日死。
现代文：脉来如数，得之突然受到惊吓，经过三四天就会自行恢复。脉来浮、合，像数脉一样急疾，一呼一吸跳动十次以上，这是十二经脉的气均已不足的现象，从开始见到这种脉象起，在第九日与第十日之间就要死亡。
English: The pulses come and go, they come and go, they are as urgent as the number of pulses, they beat more than ten times in one breath, this is a phenomenon of the twelve meridians being insufficient. From the beginning of seeing this pulse, between the ninth and tenth day, you will die.

古文：脉至如火薪然，是心精之予夺也，草干而死。
现代文：脉来如薪火燃烧一样盛大，这是心脏的精气已经虚失，至野草干枯的时候就要死亡。
English: The pulse is as grand as the burning of a bonfire, which is the essence of the heart has been lost, and it will die when the weeds dry up.

古文：脉至如散叶，是肝气予虚也，木叶落而死。
现代文：脉来如散落的树叶，浮泛无根，这是肝脏精气虚极，至树木落叶的时候就要死亡。
English: The veins are like scattered leaves, floating without roots. This is the false end of the liver essence, and the trees will die when the leaves fall.

古文：脉至如省客，省客者脉塞而鼓，是肾气予不足也，悬去枣华而死。脉至如丸泥，是胃精予不足也，榆荚落而死。
现代文：脉来如省客，省客的脉象是指：初来时脉搏充盈、旋即鼓动而去、时有时无，这是肾脏的精气不足，在枣树的花开花落时节，就会死亡。脉来如泥丸，坚强短涩，这是胃的精气不足，在榆荚枯落的时候就要死亡。
English: The pulse of a sparrow is like that of a sparrow. The pulse of a sparrow is like that of a crane: when it first arrives, the pulse is full, then it swings and swings away, and sometimes it is absent. This is a lack of the essence of the kidney, and when the flowers of the jujube tree bloom, it will die. The pulse of a sparrow is like a mud ball, strong and short. This is a lack of the essence of the stomach, and it will die when the cocoon withers.

古文：脉至如横格，是胆气予不足也，禾熟而死。
现代文：脉来如有横木在指下，长而坚硬，这是胆的精气不足，到稻谷成熟的时候，就要死亡。
English: If there is a cross-beam under the finger, long and hard, this is a lack of gall, and when the rice is ripe, it will die.

古文：脉至如弦缕，是胞精予不足也，病善言，下霜而死；不言，可治。
现代文：脉来紧急如弦、细小如缕，是胞脉的精气不足，若患者反多言语，是真阴亏损而虚阳外现，在下霜时，就会死亡；若患者静而不言，则可以治疗。
English: The pulse is as urgent as a chord, as small as a wisp, it is the lack of essence of the pulse. If the patient is anti-verbal, it is the loss of yin and the appearance of yang. If it is frosty, it will die. If the patient is silent, it can be treated.

古文：脉至如交漆，交漆者左右傍至也，微见三十日死。
现代文：脉来如交漆，交漆的脉象是指：犹如绞漆的左右旁流，无中通一贯之象，是循中而上的冲任脉绝的脉象，所以从开始见到这种脉象起三十日就会死亡。
English: The veins come like crossed lacquer, and the pulse image of crossed lacquer means: just like the left and right side streams of twisted lacquer, there is no consistent image in the middle, it is a pulse image that follows the middle and up, so it will die thirty days from the beginning of seeing this pulse image.

古文：脉至如涌泉，浮鼓肌中，太阳气予不足也，少气味，韭英而死。
现代文：脉来如泉水上涌，浮而有力，鼓动于肌肉中，这是足太阳膀胱的精气不足，症状是呼吸气短，到品尝韭菜花的时候就要死亡。
English: The veins come up like spring water, buoyant and powerful, beating in the muscles. This is the deficiency of the essence of the foot, the sun, the bladder, the symptom is shortness of breath, and you will die when you taste the amaranth flowers.

古文：脉至如颓土之状，按之不得，是肌气予不足也，五色先见黑，白垒发死。
现代文：脉来如倾颓的腐士，重按则无，这是肌气精气不足，若五色诊先见到黑色，到开白色花的蓬蘽发芽的时候，就要死亡。
English: The vein is like a rotten corpse, and there is no heavy pressure, which is a lack of qi and essence. If the five-color clinic sees black first, when the white flower buds, it will die.

古文：脉至如悬雍，悬雍者，浮揣切之益大，是十二俞之予不足也，水凝而死。
现代文：脉至如悬雍，悬雍的脉象是指：浮短孤悬、有上无下、浮取揣摩则愈觉其大、按之益大、与筋骨相离，这是十二俞的精气不足，故在结冰的时候就要死亡。
English: The pulse is like a hanging yang, the pulse of the hanging yang means: the floating yang is short and isolated, there is no top and bottom, the floating yang is more and more aware of its size, the pushing yang is larger, and it is separated from the sinews and bones. This is the lack of the essence of the twelve yang, so when it freezes, it will die.

古文：脉至如偃刀，偃刀者，浮之小急，按之坚大急，五脏菀热，寒热独并于肾也，如此其人不得坐，立春而死。
现代文：脉来如偃刀，偃刀的脉象是指：浮取小、急；重按坚、大、急，这是五脏郁热，寒热交并于肾脏，如果这样的病人不能坐起，至立春时就要死亡。
English: The pulse is like a scythe, the pulse of the scythe refers to: floating small, rapid; heavy pressing hard, large, rapid, this is the five viscera fever, cold and heat in the kidney, if such a patient can not sit up, it will die in the spring.

古文：脉至如丸滑，不直手，不直手者，按之不可得也，是大肠气予不足也，枣叶生而死。
现代文：脉来如弹丸滑利，按之不直手，不直手的脉象是指：重按不可得，这是大肠的精气不足，在枣树叶生的时候就要死亡。
English: The pulse is as smooth as a projectile, if you do not press it with your right hand, the pulse of the wrong hand means: do not press it again, this is the lack of essence of the large intestine, it will die when the leaves of the jujube tree are born.

古文：脉至如华者，令人善恐，不欲坐卧，行立常听，是小肠气予不足也，季秋而死。
现代文：脉来如草木之花，其人易发惊恐，坐卧不宁，不论行走或站立时都要偷听别人的谈话，这是小肠的精气不足，到晚秋的时候就要死亡。
English: The veins are like the flowers of plants and trees. People are prone to panic attacks, restless when sitting or lying down, and have to eavesdrop on other people's conversations when walking or standing. This is a deficiency of the small intestine's essence, which will lead to death by late autumn.

