古文：吴昌裔汪纲陈宓王霆
现代文：吴昌裔，字季永，中江人。
English: Wu Chang origin, surnamed Ji Yong, from Zhongjiang.

古文：吴昌裔，字季永，中江人。蚤孤，与兄泳痛自植立，不肯逐时好，得程颐、张载、朱熹诸书，辄研绎不倦。
现代文：小的时候就失去父亲，他和哥哥吴泳下决心自立，不肯追逐当时的学术风气，得到程颐、张载、朱熹的书，就不知疲倦地研究。
English: When he lost his father at a young age, he and his brother Wu Yong made up their minds to be self-reliant and refused to follow the academic culture of the time. When they obtained books by Cheng Yu, Zhang Zai and Zhu Xi, they studied them tirelessly.

古文：嘉定七年举进士，闻汉阳守黄干得熹之学，往从之。
现代文：嘉定七年吴昌裔被推举参加进士考试，听说汉阳守臣黄干得到朱熹的传授，就去跟他学习。
English: In the seventh year of Jiading, Wu Changxiong was elected to participate in the entrance examination. Hearing that Huang Gan, the Hanyang governor, was taught by Zhu Xi, he went to study with him.

古文：调闽中尉。
现代文：吴昌裔调任为闽中尉。
English: Wu Changxiong was transferred to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：利路转运使曹彦约闻其贤，俾司籴场。
现代文：利路转运使曹彦约听说他贤德，就让他管理买粮的事。
English: When Cao Yan, the general manager of Li Lu Transportation Company, heard about his virtues, he asked him to manage the purchase of grain.

古文：时岁饥，议籴上流，昌裔请发本仓所储数万而徐籴以偿，从之。
现代文：当时发生饥荒，决定到长江上游去买粮，吴昌裔请求先用本仓所储的数万石粮食赈济灾民，然后再慢慢地买粮补上缺额，被采纳。
English: At that time, a famine occurred, and it was decided to go to the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to buy grain. Wu Changzhi requested to first use the tens of thousands of kilos of grain stored in this warehouse to help the victims of the disaster, and then slowly buy grain to make up the shortfall, which was accepted.

古文：调眉州教授。
现代文：吴昌裔调任眉州教授。
English: Wu Changxiong was transferred to Meizhou as a professor.

古文：眉士故尚苏轼学，昌裔取诸经为之讲说，祠周惇颐及颢、颐、载、熹，揭《白鹿洞学规》，仿潭州释奠仪，簿正祭器，士习丕变。
现代文：眉州的士大夫原来崇尚苏轼的学说，吴昌裔拿来各种经典给他们讲解，祭祀周敦颐及程颢、程颐、张载、朱熹，公布《白鹿洞学规》，效仿潭州对他们祭奠的礼仪，确定祭祀的器物，士风大大地改变了。
English: The scholar-officials of Meizhou originally advocated the doctrine of Su Shi, Wu Changzhi brought various classics to explain to them, sacrificed Zhou Dun Dun and Cheng Yao, Cheng Yao, Zhang Zai, Zhu Yao, published the "White Deer Cave Study Rules," followed the etiquette of Tanzhou to pay tribute to them, and determined the sacrificial objects. The scholarly style has changed greatly.

古文：制置使崔与之荐之，改知华阳县。
现代文：制置使崔与之向朝廷推荐他，他改为华阳县知县。
English: Cui and others recommended him to the imperial court, and he changed his county of residence to Huayang County.

古文：修学宫，来四方士，斥羡钱二十万缗，买良田备旱。
现代文：在华阳县他修建学校，招徕各地的读书人，废除羡钱二十万缗，买良田防备旱灾。
English: In Huayang County, he built a school, recruited readers from all over the country, abolished the envious money of 200,000 baht, and bought good fields to prevent droughts.

古文：通判眉州，著《苦言》十篇，虑蜀甚悉。
现代文：吴昌裔担任眉州通判，写了《苦言》十篇，考虑蜀地的事十分全面。
English: Wu Changxiong served as the general judge of Meizhou, wrote ten "Grievances," and considered the affairs of Shu very comprehensively.

古文：摄郡事，御军有纪律。
现代文：他主管眉州政事，用法纪治理军队。
English: He is in charge of the political affairs of Meizhou and uses law and discipline to govern the army.

古文：寻权汉州，故事比摄官，奉馈皆如真，昌裔命削其半。
现代文：不久他为权汉州，按惯例相当于知州，领知州的俸禄，吴昌裔命令削去一半俸禄。
English: Soon he became the ruler of Hanzhou, which by convention is equivalent to the salary of Zhizhou, the leading province of Zhizhou. Wu Changxiong ordered that half of the salary be cut.

古文：核兵籍，兴社仓，郡政毕举。
现代文：吴昌裔核实兵籍，兴办社仓，汉州的政事颇有起色。
English: Wu Chang's descendants verified their military registration, established warehouses, and the political situation in Hanzhou improved considerably.

古文：兴元帅赵彦呐议东纳武仙，西结秦、巩，人莫敢言，昌裔独奋笔力辨其非。
现代文：兴元统帅赵彦呐决定东面接纳武仙投降，西面连结秦、巩二州，人们不敢反对，吴昌裔独自奋笔疾书，极力争辩，认为赵彦呐的决定不对。
English: Xing Field Marshal Zhao Yannan decided to accept the surrender of Wuxian in the east and link Qin and Gong Erzhou in the west. People did not dare to oppose it. Wu Changxiong wrote a book on his own and argued that Zhao Yannan's decision was wrong.

古文：未几，武仙败，二州之民果叛。
现代文：不久，武仙失败，秦、巩二州的人也反叛。
English: Soon, Wuxian was defeated, and the people of Qin and Gong Erzhou also rebelled.

古文：端平元年，入为军器监簿，改将作监簿。改太常少卿。
现代文：端平元年，吴昌裔入朝担任军器监簿，改为将作监簿，他又改任太常少卿。
English: In the first year of Duanping, Wu Changxiong entered the imperial court to serve as the inspector of military equipment, but he was changed to the inspector, and he was reappointed to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：徐侨于人少许可，独贤之。
现代文：徐侨很少肯定别人，只认为吴昌裔贤德。
English: Xu Qiao rarely affirms others, but only believes that Wu Chang is a virtuous person.

古文：兼皇后宅教授，昌裔以祖宗旧典无以职事官充者，力辞，改吴、益王府教授。
现代文：吴昌裔兼皇后宅教授，他以祖宗时规定，不用担当实际职务的官员充当皇后宅教授为理由，极力推辞，朝廷就改任他为吴、益王府教授。
English: Wu Chang's descendant and professor of the Empress's residence, he strongly refused to resign, citing the regulations of the time of his ancestor as the reason for not requiring the official in charge of the actual duties to serve as a professor of the Empress's residence, and the imperial court appointed him as a professor of the Wu and Yizhuang royal residences.

古文：转对，首陈六事，其目曰： 天理未纯，天德未健，天命未敕，天工未亮，天职未治，天讨未公。 凡君臣之纲，兄弟之伦，举世以为大戒而不敢言者，皆痛陈之。
现代文：百官轮次奏对时，他首先陈述六件事，它们的条目是 ：天理的发扬没有纯大，天德的运行没有健旺，天命没有得到修正，天工没有得到辅助，天职没有得到治理，天讨还不公平。 凡是君臣的关系，兄弟的次序，天下人认为最大忌讳而不敢说的，吴昌裔都全面地加以陈述。
English: When the hundred officials played their parts, he first stated six things, the items of which were: the development of heavenly law was not pure and great, the operation of heavenly law was not vigorous, the destiny was not corrected, the heavenly work was not assisted, the heavenly duty was not governed, and the heavenly punishment was not fair. All the relationships between princes and ministers, the order of brothers, the people of the world considered the biggest taboo and dared not say, and the Wu Chang descendants were comprehensively stated.

古文：至于边臣玩令，陟罚无章，尤拳拳焉。
现代文：至于边疆的守臣玩弄法令，提升和惩罚没有章法，吴昌裔讲的特别恳切。
English: As for the frontier guards playing with the law, there are no rules for promotion and punishment. Wu Changxiong spoke very earnestly.

古文：拜监察御史，弹劾无所避，且曰： 今之朝纲果无所挠乎？
现代文：吴昌裔被任命为监察御史，他弹劾时没有什么回避，并且说 ：现在朝廷的法度纪律果然没被什么所扰乱吗？
English: Wu Changxiong was appointed as the inspector of imperial history. He did not shy away from the impeachment, and said: Is the legal discipline of the imperial court really not disturbed by anything?

古文：言及亲故则为之留中，言及私昵则为之讫了，事有窒碍则节帖付出，情有嫌疑则调停寝行。
现代文：弹劾到亲戚故旧时就把劾奏他们的奏章留在宫中，不批示，不交议，弹劾到自己宠幸的人时就替他们了结，事情有阻碍的，就公布出去，有疑点的情况则进行调解停止执行。
English: When the impeachment reaches relatives, they will leave the record of the impeachment to their relatives in the palace, without instructions or discussion. When the impeachment reaches their favorite people, they will finish it for them. If there is an obstacle, they will announce it. If there is a doubt, they will mediate to stop the execution.

古文：今日迁一人，曰存近臣之体，明日迁一人，曰为远臣之劝。
现代文：今天提升一个人，说是对身边大臣的体恤，明天提升一个人，说是对京城以外的大臣的劝勉。
English: To promote a person today is said to be sympathetic to the ministers around him, and to promote a person tomorrow is said to be an exhortation to the ministers outside the capital.

古文：屈风宪之精采，徇人情之去留，士气销耎，下情壅滞，非所以纠正官邪，助国脉也。 
现代文：委屈御史台的精神和风采，官员的罢斥和留用都曲从人情，士气消退，下面的情况被阻滞，这不能纠正官吏的过失，有助于国家的兴盛。 
English: The spirit and demeanor of those who have wronged the historical platform, the expulsion and retention of officials are all based on human feelings, morale is fading, and the situation below is blocked. This can not correct the mistakes of officials, but contribute to the prosperity of the country.

古文：台臣故事，季诣狱点检。
现代文：按台臣的惯例，台谏官每季度到监狱中去视察和处理案件。
English: According to the practice of the Taishin, officials from the Taishin go to the prison every quarter to inspect and deal with cases.

古文：时有争常州田万四千亩，平江亦数百亩，株逮百余人，视其牍，乃赵善湘之子汝櫄、汝榟也，州县不敢决，昌裔连疏劾罢之。
现代文：这时有一个争夺常州一万四千亩土地的案子，平江也有数百亩土地的争诉案，株连了一百多人，看案卷材料，才知道是赵善湘的儿子赵汝木熏、赵汝梓是主犯，州、县都不敢裁决，吴昌裔连续上书弹劾罢免赵善湘。
English: At this time, there was a case of competing for 14,000 mu of land in Changzhou, and there was also a case of competing for hundreds of mu of land in Pingjiang, involving more than 100 people. It was only after reading the materials of the case file that it was known that Zhao Ruxuan, the son of Zhao Shanxiang, and Zhao Ruzi were the main offenders. The state and the county did not dare to make a ruling, and the Wu Chang descendants continuously submitted a letter of impeachment to remove Zhao Shanxiang.

古文：冬洊雷，春大雨雪，昌裔居斋宫秉烛草疏，凡上躬缺失，宫庭嬖私，庙堂除授，皆以为言。
现代文：冬天打雷，春天下大雨雪，吴昌裔在皇帝斋祀的地方点着蜡烛起草奏疏，凡是皇上的过失，宫廷的宠幸，朝廷官员的任用，都写在上面。
English: Thunder in winter, heavy rain and snow in spring, Wu Changxiong lit a candle in the emperor's place of worship to draft the record, and all the emperor's faults, the court's favors, and the appointment of court officials were written on it.

古文：又言： 将帅方命，女宠私谒，旧党之用，边疆之祸，皆此阴类。 且曰： 今大昕坐朝，间有时不视事之文；私第谒假，或有时不入堂之报。
现代文：吴昌裔又说： 将帅违犯和抗拒命令，受宠的女子以私事谒见请托，又起用旧党，边疆的祸患，都是阴暗的方面。 他还说 ：现在陛下在黎明时就在朝堂上处理政事，有时候不看事情的情况介绍；私人的拜见请托，有时候不告诉政府。
English: Wu Changxiong also said: General Shuai's violations and defiance of orders, the favored woman's request for a private meeting, the use of the old party, and the scourge of the frontier are all dark aspects. He also said: Now His Majesty is dealing with political affairs in the court at dawn, sometimes without looking at the situation of the matter; private visits, please, sometimes without telling the government.

古文：上有耽乐慆逸之渐，下无协恭和衷之风。
现代文：上面逐渐沉溺于享乐、安逸，下面没有同心协力的风气。
English: Above, people gradually indulge in pleasure and comfort. Below, there is no spirit of concerted effort.

古文：内则嬖御怀私，为君心之蠹；外则子弟寡谨，为朝政之累。
现代文：内有宠臣怀着私心，是君心的蛀虫；外有贵戚子弟缺乏谨慎，是朝政的祸害。
English: A self-interested favorite within is a cankerworm in the heart of the prince; a lack of caution on the part of a noble relative without is a scourge to court politics.

古文：游言噂沓，宠赂章闻，欲《箫》、《勺》大和，得乎？ 
现代文：流言杂沓，私宠和贿赂很明显，想让上下像乐器箫、勺那样和谐，能行吗？ 
English: Rumors, favoritism and bribery are obvious, but is it possible to make the upper and lower levels as harmonious as musical instruments such as the gong and spoon?

古文：又念蜀事阽危，条四事以进：实规橅，审功赏，访军实，储帅才。
现代文：吴昌裔又惦念蜀地的事面临危险，列举了四件事进献给皇上：一是充实防御敌人的规模，二是慎重地奖赏有功的人，三是寻求武器、粮食等军用物资，四是储备具有统帅才能的人材。
English: Wu Changxiong also mentioned that the affairs of Shu were in danger, and listed four things to present to the emperor: one is to enrich the scale of defense against the enemy, the second is to carefully reward those who have meritorious deeds, the third is to seek weapons, grain and other military supplies, and the fourth is to reserve personnel with commanding talents.

古文：时有果、阆州守臣逃遁而进职，有知遂宁李炜父子足迹不至边庭而受赏，偾军之赵楷、弃城之朱扬祖皆不加罚；又帅臣赵彦呐年老智衰，其子淫刑黩货，士卒不用命，安癸仲耻遭抨弹，经营复用，欲起谪籍以代帅垣，昌裔皆抗疏弹击。
现代文：当时有果、阆二州的守臣在敌人进攻时逃走了却得到晋升，有遂宁知府李炜父子没去边疆而因此受到奖赏，使全军覆灭的赵楷、放弃城池逃跑的朱扬祖都不加以惩罚；还有统帅赵彦呐年老智衰，他的儿子践踏刑法、贪财，士卒不听从命令，安癸仲认为自己遭到抨击和弹劾是可耻的事，就想办法被重新起用，又想从被贬的地位上来代替统帅，吴昌裔对这些都上疏进行弹劾攻击。
English: At that time, there were some achievements. There was a retainer of the two states of Suining who escaped during the enemy's attack but was promoted. There was a father and son of the Suining prefectural government, Li Xun, who did not go to the frontier and was rewarded for it. Zhao Kai, who destroyed the whole army, and Zhu Yangzu, who abandoned the city and fled, were not punished. There was also the commander Zhao Yannan, who was old and weak. His son trampled on criminal law, greed, and did not obey orders. An Yizhong thought that he had been criticized and impeached was a shameful thing. He tried to be re

古文：又历言三边之事曰： 今朝廷之上，百辟晏然，言论多于施行，浮文妨于实务。
现代文：吴昌裔又多次讲三边的事说 ：如今朝廷之上，百官晏然，言论的事比施行的事多，多余的条文妨碍实际事务。
English: Wu Changxiong also repeatedly talked about the three sides of things, saying: Nowadays, there are hundreds of officials in the imperial court, there are more things to say than to do, and superfluous provisions hinder practical affairs.

古文：后族王宫之冗费，列曹坐局之常程，群工闲慢之差除，诸道非泛之申请，以至土木经营，时节宴游，神霄祈禳，大礼锡赉，藻饰治具，无异平时。
现代文：皇后的亲族和王府的不必要的费用，各官署办公的常法，对职务清简官员的任命，各道不正常的申请，以至土木工程的修建，各个时节的宴饮游乐，在神霄宫的祭祀，国家举行大典礼时的赏赐，修饰姿容和置办饮食供张的器具，都和平时一样。
English: The unnecessary expenses of the relatives of the empress and the royal palace, the normal operation of various government departments, the appointment of officials to streamline duties, the abnormal applications of various departments, as well as the construction of civil engineering projects, the banquets and entertainment of various seasons, the sacrifices at Shenxiao Palace, the rewards when the country held a grand ceremony, the appearance of grooming and the purchase of equipment for eating and drinking, are all the same as usual.

古文：至于治兵足食之方，脩车备马之事，乃缺略不讲。 且援靖康之敝，痛哭言之。
现代文：至于练兵和使粮食丰裕的方法，修战车和准备战马的事，却废弃不讲。 吴昌裔还援引靖康时的衰败，痛哭着讲了这些。
English: As for the methods of training soldiers and making grain plentiful, the repair of chariots and the preparation of war horses, they were abandoned and not talked about.Wu Changxiong also cited the decline of Jingkang and talked about them with tears.

古文：出为大理少卿，屡疏引去，不许。
现代文：吴昌裔被免去台谏官，担任大理少卿，他多次上疏辞官，皇上不允许。
English: Wu Changxiong was removed from the Taiwanese eunuch and served as Dali Shaoqing. He repeatedly resigned from the eunuch, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：会杜范再入台，击参政李鸣复，谓昌裔与范善，必相为谋者，数谗之，以权工部侍郎出参赞四川宣抚司军事。
现代文：正赶上杜范再次担任台谏官，攻击参知政事李鸣复，有人认为吴昌裔与杜范友好，他们一定互相勾结，就多次诬陷吴昌裔，吴昌裔就以工部侍郎的身份出朝担任参赞四川宣抚司军事。
English: Just in time for Du Fan to serve as Taiwan's eunuch again, he attacked Li Mingfu, a political advisor to the prefectural governor. Some people thought that Wu Changxiong was friendly with Du Fan and that they must have colluded with each other, so they repeatedly framed Wu Changxiong. Wu Changxiong went to the imperial court to serve as counselor of the Sichuan Propaganda Department of the Military.

古文：人曰： 此李纲救太原也。
现代文：有人说 ：这是李纲救太原的事。
English: Some people said, "This is about Li Gang saving Taiyuan."

古文：太原不可救，特以纲主战，故出之耳。 昌裔曰： 君命也，不可不亟行。 慷慨褛襆被出关，忽得疾，中道病甚，帝闻之，授秘阁修撰，改嘉兴府。
现代文：太原不能救，只因为李纲主张与金人作战，所以才让他出朝而已。 
English: Taiyuan could not be saved, and it was only because Li Gang advocated fighting the Jin people that he was allowed to go to the imperial court.

古文：昌裔曰： 吾以疾不能归救父母，上负圣恩，下负此心，若舍远就近，舍危就安，人其谓我何？ 辞至四五，而言者以避事论矣。
现代文：吴昌裔说： 皇上的命令，不能不立即执行。 他就慷慨地用包袱包好被子出关，他突然得病，在中途病情更重，皇上听说后，授予他秘阁修撰的官职，改到嘉兴府去任职。吴昌裔说 ：我因病不能回四川去救父母，在上辜负了皇上的恩德，在下辜负了我的这片心，如果舍弃远方到近处，舍弃危险到安全的地方，人们将怎样看待我？ 他推辞了四、五次，而议论他的人说他逃避事情。
English: Wu Changxiong said, "The emperor's order cannot but be carried out immediately." He generously packed his luggage with a quilt and left the customs. He suddenly fell ill, and his condition worsened in the middle of the journey. After the emperor heard about it, he awarded him the official post of secret cabinet and transferred him to Jiaxing. Wu Changxiong said, "I can't go back to Sichuan to save my parents because of my illness. On the one hand, I have betrayed the emperor's kindness, and on the other hand, I have betrayed my heart. If I abandon the far to the near, abandon danger to a safe place, how will people

古文：改赣州，辞，以右文殿修撰主管鸿庆宫。
现代文：吴昌裔改到赣州任职，他推辞，朝廷就让他以右文殿修撰的身份主管鸿庆宫。
English: Wu Changxiong was transferred to Bozhou, but he refused, so the imperial court made him head of the Hongqing Palace as the editor of the Right Text.

古文：迁浙东提刑，辞，改知婺州。
现代文：吴昌裔升为浙东提刑，他推辞，改为婺州知州。
English: Wu Changxiong was sentenced to East Zhejiang Province, but he refused and was instead sentenced to Zhangzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：婺告旱，民日夜望之，乃不忍终辞，减驺从供帐，遣僚佐召邑令周行阡陌，蠲粟八万一千石、钱二十五万缗有奇。
现代文：婺州向朝廷报告旱灾，那里的老百姓日夜盼他去，他就不忍心推辞，他减去侍从和帷帐前去上任，派属官召来县令走遍田间巡视旱情，免去老百姓的粟米八万一千石、钱二十五万缗有零的赋税。
English: Zhangzhou reported the drought to the imperial court. The people there were waiting for him to go day and night, and he could not bear to refuse. He went to his post minus his attendants and curtains, sent officials to summon the county magistrate to inspect the drought conditions in the fields, and exempted the people's millet of 81,000 koku and money of 250,000 baht with zero tax.

古文：加集英殿修撰，卒，以宝章阁待制致仕。
现代文：吴昌裔被加官为集英殿修撰，他去世，以宝章阁待制的身份辞官。
English: Wu Changxiong was promoted to the post of compiler of the imperial rescript, and after his death, he was appointed to the post as a member of the cabinet of honor.

古文：昌裔刚正庄重，遇事敢言，典章多所闲习。
现代文：吴昌裔刚正庄重，遇事敢于讲话，十分熟悉典章制度。
English: Wu Changxiong is upright and dignified, dares to speak in times of trouble, and is very familiar with the disciplinary system.

古文：尝辑至和、绍兴诸臣奏议本末。名《储鉴》。
现代文：曾辑录至和、绍兴年间各个官员的奏议原委，书名叫《储鉴》。
English: The original record of the petitions of various officials during the He and Shaoxing dynasties was compiled by the committee, and the book was called the "Reserve Book."

古文：又会粹周、汉以至宋蜀道得失，兴师取财之所，名《蜀鉴》。
现代文：又会粹从周、汉代直到宋代蜀地的得失，出兵作战和取得财物的地方，书名叫《蜀鉴》。
English: From the Zhou and Han dynasties to the Song Dynasty, the gains and losses of Shu, the places where soldiers were sent to fight and where property was acquired, are also listed in the book called "Shu Jian."

古文：有奏议、《四书讲义》、《乡约口义》、《诸老记闻》、《容台议礼》、文集行于世。
现代文：他有奏议、《四书讲义》、《乡约口义》、《诸老记闻》、《容台议礼》、文集在世间流行。
English: He has written the essays, "Four Lectures," "Hometown Stories," "Historical Records," "Rongdai Speeches," and his literary works are popular in the world.

古文：初，昌裔与徐清叟、杜范一日并入台，皆天下正士，四方想闻风采，人至和《三谏诗》以侈之。
现代文：当初，吴昌裔和徐清叟、杜范同一天担任台谏官，他们都是天下正直的人，人们都想听见他们为官的风采，有的人甚至和《三谏诗》来宣传他们。
English: At first, Wu Changzhi and Xu Qingyao and Du Fan served as Taiwanese eunuchs on the same day. They were all honest people, and people wanted to hear their official demeanor. Some people even promoted them with "Three Hundred Poems."

古文：然才七阅月以迁，故莫不惋惜云。
现代文：但才担任七个月的台谏，吴昌裔就被调走，所以没有不替他惋惜的。
English: However, Wu Changxiong was transferred after only seven months in office, so there is nothing but regret for him.

古文：后谥忠肃。
现代文：后来吴昌裔的谥号是 忠肃 。
English: Later, the nickname of Wu Changzhi was Zhong Su.

古文：汪纲，字仲举，黟县人，签书枢密院勃之曾孙也。
现代文：汪纲，字仲举，黟县人。是签书枢密院汪勃的曾孙。
English: Wang Gang (Chinese: 汪纲; pinyin: Zhongji; born in Jixian County) was the great-grandson of Wang Bo, a signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：以祖任入官，淳熙十四年中铨试，调镇江府司户参军。
现代文：汪纲因祖辈的官任而当官，淳熙十四年，铨试合格后，他被调为镇江府司户参军。
English: Wang Gang became an official due to his ancestors' official positions. In the 14th year of the Chunxi Dynasty, after passing the imperial examination, he was transferred to Zhenjiang Prefecture to join the army.

古文：马大同镇京口，强毅自任，纲言论独不诡随。
现代文：马大同镇守京口，他刚强坚定，自以为是，汪纲的言论不放肆谲诈，又不追逐潮流。
English: He is strong and firm, self-righteous, and Wang Gang's speech is not presumptuous and blackmailing, and does not chase the trend.

古文：议者欲以两淮铁钱交子行于沿江，廷议令大同倡率行之，纲贻书曰： 边面行铁钱，虑铜宝泄于外耳。
现代文：议政的人想使两淮的铁钱交子在沿江地区推行，朝廷议论决定让马大同首先实行，汪纲给马大同写信说： 边境行使铁钱，恐怕铜钱会流失到境外。
English: The deliberators wanted to promote the iron money exchange between the two Huai in the riverside areas. The imperial court deliberated and decided to let Ma Datong implement it first. Wang Gang wrote to Ma Datong, saying: If the border exercises iron money, I am afraid that the copper money will be lost abroad.

古文：私铸盛行，故钱轻而物重。
现代文：私铸钱的风气盛行，所以钱轻物重。
English: The custom of privately minting money prevails, so money is light and heavy.

古文：今若场务出纳不以铁钱取息，坚守四色请买旧制，冶铸定额不求余羡，重禁以戢私铸，支散边戍与在军中半者无异，不以铁钱准折，则淮民将自便之，何至以敝内郡邪？ 大同始悟。
现代文：现在如果场务出纳不按铁钱收息，坚持四色请买的旧制度，铸钱的定额不图多，严格禁止私铸，交给边境的戍兵和在军中士兵各一半，没有区别，不以铁钱为标准折算，那么两淮百姓将自行方便，何必使内地受破坏呢？ 马大同才醒悟。
English: Now, if the cashier does not collect interest on the basis of iron money, adheres to the old system of four colors and please buy, the quota of minting money is not too much, strictly prohibits private minting, and gives half to the border soldiers and soldiers in the army, there is no difference, and does not use iron money as the standard conversion, then the two Huai people will be convenient on their own, why should the inland be damaged? Ma Datong only woke up.

古文：试湖南转运司，又中，纲笑曰： 此岂足以用世泽物耶？ 乃刻意问学，博通古今，精究义理；覃思本原。
现代文：汪纲参加湖南转运司考试合格，他笑着说： 这哪能为世所用，对事物有益呢？ 于是就专心学习，博古通今，深入研究义理，深思义理的本原。
English: Wang Gang passed the examination of Hunan Transportation Department. He said with a smile: "How can this be used for the world and be beneficial to things?" So he concentrated on studying.

古文：调桂阳军平阳县令，县连溪峒，蛮蜒与居，纲一遇以恩信。
现代文：汪纲被调为桂阳军平阳县令，平阳县和溪峒相连，蛮芐也居住在县里，汪纲一律对他们讲究恩信。
English: Wang Gang was transferred to the top of the Guiyang Army as the commander of Pingyang County. Pingyang County is connected to Xi'an, and the barbarians also live in the county. Wang Gang was always grateful to them.

古文：科罚之害既三十年，纲下车，首白诸台，罢之。
现代文：科罚为害已三十年了，汪纲刚到任，就告诉各部门，罢去科罚。
English: It's been 30 years since disciplinary punishment has been harmful. As soon as Wang Gang took office, he told all departments to abolish disciplinary punishment.

古文：桂阳岁贡银二万九千余两，而平阳当其三分之二。
现代文：桂阳每年向朝廷贡银二万九千多两，而平阳县承担其中的三分之二。
English: Guiyang contributed more than 29,000 taels of silver to the imperial court every year, and Pingyang County bore two-thirds of it.

古文：纲谓向者银矿坌发价轻，故可勉以应，今地宝已竭，市于他郡，其价倍蓰，愿力请痛蠲损之。
现代文：汪纲说过去县中银矿多，价格贱，所以能勉强应付，现在储备已枯竭，到别的地方去买银，价格增了好几倍，希望能极力请求免除它。
English: Wang Gang said that in the past, there were many silver mines in the county and the price was low, so he could barely cope. Now that the reserves have been depleted, he went to buy silver elsewhere, and the price has increased several times. He hoped to make a strong request to exempt it.

古文：岁饥，旁邑有曹伍者，群聚恶少入境，强贷发廪，众至千余，挟界头、牛桥二砦兵为援，地盘踞万山间，前后令未尝一涉其境，不虞纲之至也，相率出迎。
现代文：发生饥荒，邻县有一伙同伴，招集了一些恶少来到平阳县，强行借贷，打开粮仓，有一千多人，他们挟持界头、牛桥二寨的士兵为应援，盘踞在万山之间，前后的县令不曾到过这里，不料汪纲来到后，他们相继出来迎接。
English: When the famine occurred, there was a group of companions from the neighboring counties. They gathered a number of villains to come to Pingyang County, forcibly borrowed money, and opened grain silos. There were more than a thousand people. They took the soldiers at the border and two villages in Niuqiao as reinforcements, and entrenched themselves between the mountains. The county magistrates before and after had never been here. Unexpectedly, after Wang Gang came, they came out one after another to welcome him.

古文：纲已夙具酒食，令之曰： 汝何敢乱，顺者得食，乱者就诛。 夜宿砦中，呼砦官诘责不能防守状，皆皇恐伏地请死，杖其首恶者八人，发粟振粜，民赖以安。
现代文：汪纲早已准备好酒食，命令他们说： 你们怎敢作乱，顺从的给吃食，作乱的斩杀。 汪纲晚上住在寨中，叫来寨官责问他们不能防守的罪状，寨官都惶恐地伏在地上请死，汪纲杖责其中的八名首恶，拿出粮食赈济灾民，百姓赖以安定。
English: Wang Gang had already prepared the wine and food, and ordered them: "How dare you create a disturbance? If you obey, you will be fed, if you create a disturbance, you will be killed." Wang Gang stayed in the village at night, and called the village officials to ask them about the crimes they could not defend. The village officials all lay down on the ground in fear and asked to die. Wang Gang's staff accused eight of them of being the chief evils, and took out grain to help the victims of the disaster. The people depended on it for stability.

古文：改知金坛县，亲嫌，更弋阳县。
现代文：汪纲改为金坛县知县，处理政事因避亲嫌，改为弋阳县知县。
English: Wang Gang was changed to Jintan County Zhixian, and the handling of political affairs was changed to Fenyang County Zhixian due to avoiding relatives.

古文：父义和为侍御史主管佑神观。
现代文：他父亲汪义和为侍御史主管佑神观。
English: His father, Wang Yihe, was the head of the history department of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：寻丁父丧，服除，知兰溪县，决擿如神。
现代文：不久汪纲遭父丧，他除去丧服后，任兰溪县知县，处理政事决断如神。
English: Soon after, Wang Gang's father passed away. After removing his mourning clothes, he was appointed as the prefect of Lanxi County, handling political affairs and making decisions like a god.

古文：岁旱，郡倚办劝分，纲谓劝分所以助义仓，一切行之，非所谓安富恤贫也，愿假常平钱为粜本，使得循环迭济。
现代文：发生了旱灾，州希望县劝说人们有无相济，汪纲认为让人们有无相济是助义仓的，如果所有的事都这样，不是所谓的安抚富人，抚恤贫民，他希望借常平钱为买卖粮食的本钱，使得循环接济。
English: There was a drought, the prefecture hoped that the county would persuade people to help each other. Wang Gang believed that helping people to help each other was to help the charity warehouse. If all things were like this, it would not be the so-called appeasing the rich and subsidizing the poor. He hoped to borrow Changping money as the capital of grain trading and make it circular.

古文：又躬劝富民浚筑塘堰，大兴水利，饿者得食其力，全活甚众。
现代文：他又亲自劝富人修筑塘堰，大兴水利，饥饿的人得以出力养活自己，活命的很多。
English: He also personally persuaded rich people to build dams and improve water conservancy. Hungry people were able to feed themselves, and many survived.

古文：郡守张抑及部使者列纲为一道荒政之冠。
现代文：郡守张抑和部使者把汪纲列为一道救灾有成绩的第一位。
English: The county governor Zhang Yan and the envoy of the Ministry of Civil Affairs ranked Wang Gang as the first with achievements in disaster relief.

古文：以言去，邑人相率投轨直其事，纲力止之。
现代文：汪纲因言事被罢官，县里人相继向上级投书说明他的事，汪纲极力阻止他们。
English: Wang Gang was removed from office for his speech. People in the county wrote to their superiors one after another to explain what had happened to him. Wang Gang tried his best to stop them.

古文：继知太平县，主管两浙转运司文字，未赴，罹内艰，擢监行在左藏西库。
现代文：接着汪纲为太平县知县，主管两浙转运司文字，还没到任，遭母丧，提升他为监行在左藏西库。
English: Next, Wang Gang was appointed as the head of the Taiping County Zhixian and the head of the Zhejiang Transportation Department of the People's Republic of China. He had not yet arrived at the post, but his mother passed away, and he was promoted as the supervisor of the bank in the western part of Tibet.

古文：属金人杀其主允济自立，遣使来告袭位，议者即欲遣币，纲言： 使名不逊，当止之境上，姑命左帑视例计办，或且留京口总司，令盱眙谕之曰： 纪年名节，皆犯先朝避忌，岁币乃尔前主所增，今既易代，当复隆兴、大定之旧。
现代文：接着金人杀了他们的国主允济自立为帝，派使臣来告已袭位，议政的人就想给金人岁币，汪纲说： 使臣的名份不够级，应该把他阻止在边境，暂且命令左藏库视惯例办，或暂时留在京口总司，让盱眙守臣告诉他说： 纪年名节，都犯了先朝的避讳，岁币是你们以前的国主增加的，现在已经换了国主，应该恢复隆兴、大定时的旧额。 
English: Wang Gang said: The title of the envoy is not high enough, he should be stopped at the border, temporarily order the left bank to be handled according to the usual practice, or temporarily stay in the general manager of Beijing, and let Zou Shoucheng tell him: The name day of the year has violated the taboo of the previous dynasty, the year coin was increased by your former sovereign, now the sovereign has changed, it should be restored to the old amount of prosperity and big time.

古文：俟此议定，而后正旦、生辰之使可遣。
现代文：等这些议定后，可派正旦、生辰使。
English: After these agreements are reached, the official envoy and the personal envoy can be dispatched.

古文：迟以岁月，吾择边将葺城堡，简军实，储峙糗粮，使沿边屹然有不可犯之势，听其自相攻击，然后以全力制其后。 庙堂韪之。
现代文：这样推迟时间，我们选边将、修城堡，核对军额，储备粮草，使沿边屹然有不可侵犯之势，让金人自相攻击，然后我们以全力控制他的后方。 
English: By delaying the time in this way, we will choose a commander, build a castle, check the number of troops, reserve grain and grass, so that there is an inviolable situation along the edge, let the Kim people attack each other, and then we will control his rear with all our might.

古文：提辖东西库，又干办诸司审计司。
现代文：皇上认为他说的对。汪纲为提辖东西库，又为干办诸司审计司。
English: The emperor thought he was right. Wang Gang was put in charge of the East and West Library, and was also in charge of the Audit Department.

古文：以选知高邮军，陛辞，言： 扬、楚二州当各屯二万人，壮其声势，而以高邮为家计砦。
现代文：据他的才能被任命为高邮军知军，他辞别皇上时说： 扬、楚二州应该各屯二万人，以壮大声势，而以高邮军为家计寨。
English: According to his talent, he was appointed as the governor of the Gaoyou Army. When he said goodbye to the emperor, he said: Yang and Chu two states should have 20,000 people in each township, with strong and loud momentum, and with the Gaoyou Army as a home base.

古文：高邮三面阻水，湖泽奥阻，戎马所不能骋，独西南一路直距天长，无险可守，乃去城六十里随地经画，或浚沟堑，或备设伏，以扼其冲。 又虑湖可以入淮，招水卒五千人造百艘列三砦以戒非常。
现代文：高邮三面依水，湖泽深险，敌人的战马不能驰骋，只西南面直通天长，无险可守，可在离城六十里的地方根据地形筹划，或疏通沟渠、堑壕，或设下埋伏，以扼守冲要。 他又担心由湖可以进入淮河，就招水兵五千人造一百艘船陈列在三寨以备紧急。
English: Gaoyou is surrounded by water on three sides, the lake is deep and dangerous, the enemy's horses cannot gallop, only the southwest side has direct access to Tianlang, there is no danger to defend, it can be planned according to the terrain at a distance of sixty miles from the city, or dredge ditches and trenches, or set up ambushes to guard the key. He was also worried that he could enter the Huaihe River from the lake, so he recruited five thousand sailors to build one hundred ships and display them in Sanzhai in case of emergency.

古文：兴化民田滨海，昔范仲淹筑堰以障写卤，守毛泽民置石〈石达〉函管以疏运河水势，岁久皆坏，纲乃增修之。
现代文：兴化百姓的土地滨海，从前范仲淹修堤堰来阻挡盐碱，守臣毛泽民安放石函管来疏导运河的水势，年头多了都已毁坏，汪纲就加以增修。
English: The coastal land of the people of Xinghua, the dike weir built by the former Fan Zhong to block salt and alkali, and the stone channel pipe installed by the vassal Mao Zedong to divert the water potential of the canal, have all been destroyed over the years, and Wang Gang has repaired them.

古文：部使者闻于朝，增一秩，提举淮东常平。
现代文：部使者把汪纲做的这些向朝廷做了汇报，汪纲被提升一级，担任提举淮东常平。
English: The emissary of the ministry reported to the imperial court what Wang Gang had done, and Wang Gang was promoted to the first level and served as the promotion of Huaidong Changping.

古文：淮米越江有禁，纲念 淮民有警则室庐莫保，岁凶则转徙无归，丰年可以少苏，重以苛禁，自分畛域，岂为民父母意哉！
现代文：宋禁止两淮米越过江南，汪纲念及 两淮百姓在有边警时连房屋都保不住，遇到灾年就辗转流浪，没有归处，丰年可以稍微缓解一下，朝廷又严加限制，分划出疆界，这难道是为民父母的本意吗？
English: Song forbade the two Huai-Mis to cross the south of the Yangtze River, and Wang Gang thought about the two Huai-Mis. When there are border police, the people of the two Huai-Mis can't even keep their houses. When they encounter a disaster year, they wander around and have no place to return. In a good year, they can relax a little. The imperial court also imposed strict restrictions and delineated boundaries. Is this the original intention for the people's parents?

古文：请下金陵籴三十万以通淮西之运，京口籴五十万以通淮东之运。 又言： 两淮之积不可多，昇、润之积不可少。
现代文：希望拿出金陵买粮的本钱三十万去淮西买米，京口买粮的本钱五十万去淮东买米 。又说： 两淮积蓄粮食不能多，升、润积蓄粮食不可少。
English: It is hoped that Jinling will take out 300,000 capital to buy grain and go to Huaixi to buy rice, and Beijing will take out 500,000 capital to buy grain and go to Huaidong to buy rice. It is also said that the two Huai can not store more grain, and the L and Run can not store less grain.

古文：平江积米数百万，陈陈相因，久而红腐，宜视其收贮近久，取饷辇下百司、诸军。
现代文：平江积米数百万，都是年压一年的，时间长了就腐烂了，应该看米储藏时间的长、短，把它们运到各部门、各军中。
English: The Pingjiang River contains millions of tons of rice, which are stored for one year at a time. If they are stored for a long time, they will rot. It is necessary to look at the long and short storage time of rice, and transport them to various departments and armies.

古文：江上岁餫当至京者，贮之京口、金陵转漕。
现代文：沿江地区每年应往京城运的粮食，贮藏在京口、金陵再漕运到京城。
English: The grain that should be transported to Beijing every year in the riverside areas is stored in Jingkou and Jinling and then transported to Beijing.

古文：两淮、中都诸仓，亦当广籴以补其数。 
现代文：两淮、中都各粮仓，也应该多买粮以补充数量。 
English: Liahuai and Zhongdu grain silos should also buy more grain to supplement the quantity.

古文：制置使访纲备御孰宜先，纲言： 淮地自昔号财赋渊薮，西有铁冶，东富鱼稻，足以自给。
现代文：制置使向汪纲询问储粮和守御谁应在先，汪纲说： 沿淮地区自古就号称财赋繁盛，西面有铁冶，东面盛产鱼、稻，足以自给。
English: Wang Gang was asked who should be the first to stockpile and protect grain. Wang Gang said: The Huaihai region has been known for its prosperity since ancient times. There is iron and steel in the west, and plenty of fish and rice in the east, which is sufficient for self-sufficiency.

古文：淮右多山，淮左多水，足以自固。
现代文：淮右山多，淮左水多，足以自固。
English: There are more mountains on the right and more water on the left, which is sufficient for self-consolidation.

古文：诚能合两淮为一家，兵财通融，声势合一，虽不假江、浙之力可也。
现代文：如果真能把两淮合为一家，兵财通融，声势合一，即使不借助江、浙的力量也可以。
English: If it is really possible to combine the two Huai into one family, the military and financial integration, and the sound potential integration, even if it does not use the power of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, it can be done.

古文：祖宗盛时，边郡所储足支十年；庆历间，中山一镇尚百八十万石。
现代文：祖宗盛世时，边郡的储备足够十年开销；庆历年间，中山一镇储粮就有一百八十万石。
English: When the ancestors were in their prime, the reserves of the border county were enough for ten years of expenses; during the celebration year, the grain reserves of Zhongshan Town amounted to one million eight hundred thousand koku.

古文：今宜上法先朝，令商旅入粟近塞，而算请钱货于京师。
现代文：现在应该仿效先朝，让商人把米运到边塞，而到京城去领取钱、货。
English: Now we should follow the example of the previous government, and let the merchants transport the rice to the border, and then go to the capital to receive the money and goods.

古文：入粟拜爵，守之以信，则输者必多，边储不患不丰。
现代文：把米运到边境就封给爵位，对商人讲求信誉，那么运米的人一定多，边境的储备不怕不充裕。
English: If you transport rice to the border, you will be given a title of nobility, and merchants will seek credibility, so there must be a lot of people transporting rice, and the reserves at the border are not afraid to be insufficient.

古文：州郡禁兵本非供役，乃就粮外郡耳，今不为战斗用，乃使之共力役，缓急戍守，专倚大军，指日待更，不安风土，岂若土兵生长边地，坟墓室家，人自为守邪？
现代文：州郡的禁兵本不是用来使役的，只是让他们到外郡来解决军粮，现在不把他们用于战斗中，而让他们承担力役，国家遇到紧急情况，边境驻守，专靠大军，规定更换的日期，也不习惯边郡的水土风情，哪如土兵生长在边郡，坟墓家产都在边郡，让土兵自己守卫家乡呢？
English: The forbidden soldiers of the state and county were originally not used for military service, but only let them go to the outlying counties to solve the military food. Now they are not used in combat, but let them bear the forced service. When the country is in an emergency, the border is stationed, relying on the large army, the date of replacement is set, and they are not used to the water and soil customs of the outlying counties. What if the soldiers grow in the outlying counties, the graves and household goods are in the outlying counties, and let the soldiers guard their hometown by themselves?

古文：当精择伉壮，广其尺籍，悉隶御前军额，分擘券给以助州郡衣粮之供，大率如山阳武锋军制，则边面不必抽江上之戍，江上不必出禁闱之师。
现代文：应该在当地精选强壮，扩大军籍，让他们都隶属于御前军额，分券给他们来帮助州郡解决衣服粮草的供应，大致如山阳武锋军的规制，这样边境不必抽调防守长江的戍兵，防守长江不必调京城的守军。
English: It is necessary to select strong local people, expand the military ranks, make them all subordinate to the imperial army, and give them vouchers to help the state and county solve the supply of clothes, grain and grass, roughly like the regulation of the Sanyang Wukong Army, so that the border does not have to draw soldiers to defend the Yangtze River, and the defense of the Yangtze River does not have to adjust the defenders of Beijing.

古文：生券更番，劳费俱息。 
现代文：这样发给生券支付戍守的费用，就省去了行军的劳苦和养兵的费用。 
English: In this way, the issuance of birth certificates to pay the expenses of the stay-behind, saved the labor of marching and the cost of raising soldiers.

古文：时有献言制司广买荒田开垦，以为营田，纲以为 荒瘠之地不难办，而工力、水利非久不可，弃产欺官，良田终不可得，耗费公帑，开垦难就。
现代文：当时有人向制司建议多买荒田开垦，作为营田，汪纲认为 ：荒瘠的土地不难处理，只是与它相关的工力、水利不长久不行，放弃生产来欺骗官府，最终得不到良田，耗费公家的财物，开垦也难成功。
English: At that time, some people suggested to the construction company to buy more wasteland for reclamation. As a camp, Wang Gang thought: wasteland is not difficult to deal with, but the manpower and water conservancy associated with it are not long-term, abandon production to deceive the government, and ultimately fail to obtain good fields, consume public property, and reclamation is also difficult to succeed.

古文：曷若劝民尽耕闲田，甽浍堙塞则官为之助，变瘠为沃，使民有余蓄。
现代文：不如劝老百姓开垦耕种闲田，那些有水沟或淤塞的地方官府帮助排解，变瘠田为沃土，使百姓有余。
English: It would be better to persuade the common people to reclaim and cultivate idle fields, and the local government to help solve those with ditches or blockages, and turn the ploughed fields into fertile soil, so that the people have enough.

古文：晁错入粟之议，本朝便籴之法，在其中矣。 制司知其无益，乃止。
现代文：晁错入粟的建议，本朝便籴的方法，都包含在其中了。 制司知道这没好处，就停止了。
English: The suggestion of mistyping the poppy seeds, the method of writing notes this morning, were all included in it. The production company knew it was no good and stopped.

古文：淮东煮盐之利，本居天下半，岁久敝滋，盐本日侵，帑储空竭，负两总司五十余万，亭户二十八万，借拨于朝廷五十万，又会饷所复盐钞，旧制弗许商人预供贴钞钱，盐司坐是窘不能支。
现代文：淮东的盐产量和收益，本来占全国的一半，年头久了就滋生了弊病，煮盐的本钱日益减少，国家府库也空竭，欠两总司五十多万，亭户二十八万，向朝廷借拨五十万，又赶上饷所恢复使用盐钞，旧制规定不许商人预支贴钞钱，盐司因此窘困不能支付。
English: The salt production and income of Huaidong, which originally accounted for half of the country's total, bred maladies over the years. The cost of cooking salt was decreasing day by day, and the state treasury was also depleted. It owed more than 500,000 yuan to two general departments, 280,000 yuan to kiosks, 500,000 yuan to the imperial court, and resumed the use of salt banknotes when it caught up with the mint. The old system did not allow merchants to advance money, so the salt department was unable to pay.

古文：纲抉擿隐伏，凡虚额无实，诡为出内，飞走移易，事制曲防，课乃更羡。
现代文：汪纲挑出暗中流失的部分，凡是虚报数额的、诈称出纳的、不入帐的、事关堤防的，都收税并增加了收入。
English: Wang Gang singled out the part of the secret loss, and all the false amounts, fraudulent cashiers, non-accounts, and those related to the dike were taxed and increased income.

古文：既尽偿所负，又赢金三十万缗，为桩办库，以备盐本之阙。
现代文：这样既把欠款还上了，又有了三十万缗的赢余，汪纲把赢余作为桩办库的钱，用来防备盐本缺乏的时候。
English: In this way, the arrears were repaid, and there was a surplus of 300,000 baht. Wang Gang used the surplus as money to build a warehouse, to be used to prevent a shortage of salt.

古文：添置新灶五十所，诸场悉视乾道旧额三百九十万石，通一千三百万缗，课官吏之殿最。
现代文：汪纲又添置新的煮盐处所五十个，各盐场都按乾道时的旧额三百九十万石，总共一千三百万缗，考核官吏的政绩。
English: Wang Gang also added 50 new salt boiling places, and each salt farm was valued at 3.9 million koku, a total of 13 million baht, according to the old amount when the road was dry, to assess the political performance of officials.

古文：纲约己率下，辞台郡之互馈，独增场官奉以养其廉。
现代文：汪纲严于律己，给属下做表率，他反对台郡间互相馈赠的风气，只增加盐场官吏的俸禄以使他们廉洁。
English: Wang Gang was a strict disciplinarian and set an example for his subordinates. He opposed the custom of mutual gifts between counties, and only increased the salary of salt officials to make them honest.

古文：擢户部员外郎、总领淮东军马财赋。
现代文：汪纲升为户部员外郎、总领淮东军马财赋。
English: Wang Gangsheng became the eunuch of the household department and the leader of the Huaidong army.

古文：时边面多生券，山东归附月饷钱粮，以缗计增三十有三万，米以石计增六万，真、楚诸州又新招万弩手，皆仰给总所，而浙西盐利积负至七十余万缗，诸州漕运不以时至。
现代文：当时边境生券很多，山东归附者每月的钱饷、粮饷，钱增加了三十三万缗，米增加了六万石，真、楚等州又新招万弩手，给养全靠总所，而浙西煮盐的收益还积欠至七十多万缗，各州的漕运物资也不按时到达。
English: At that time, there were a lot of border birth certificates, and the monthly income of Shandong's vassals included money, grain and money increased by 330,000 baht, and rice increased by 60,000 koku. Zhen, Chu and other states also recruited thousands of workers, and the supply and maintenance were entirely dependent on the head office. Meanwhile, the income of West Zhejiang's boiled salt still accumulated to more than 700,000 baht, and the materials transported by the states did not arrive on time.

古文：纲核名实，警稽慢，区画处分，饷事赖以不乏。
现代文：汪纲考核名实，警告滞慢，分别处理，给饷的事才得以进行。
English: Wang Gang assessed the name and reality, warned of slowness, dealt with separately, and only then could the matter be carried out.

古文：移疾乞闲，得直秘阁、知婺州，改提点浙东刑狱，皆屡辞不得请。
现代文：汪纲因病请求闲居，被任命为直秘阁、婺州知州，改为提点浙东刑狱，他都多次推辞不被允许。
English: Due to illness, Wang Gang requested to stay idle. He was appointed as the direct secretary of Zhengzhou, Zhangzhou and Zhizhou, and was transferred to the East Zhejiang Penitentiary. He was not allowed to refuse several times.

古文：虑囚，至婺，有奴挟刃欲戕其主，不遇而杀其子，瞒谰妄牵连，径出斩之。
现代文：为讯察记录囚犯的罪状，汪纲到婺州，有个奴仆持刀要杀他的主人，没遇到主人就杀了主人的儿子，诬妄之言，胡乱牵连，就直接斩了他。
English: In order to investigate and record the crimes of the prisoners, Wang Gang went to Zhangzhou. There was a slave with a knife who wanted to kill his master. Without meeting the master, he killed the master's son. He was directly beheaded because of his false words and unreasonable implication.

古文：释衢囚之冤者。
现代文：汪纲放了衢州有冤情的囚犯。
English: Wang Gang released the prisoners who had grievances in Zhangzhou.

古文：台盗钟百一非共盗，尉觊赏，躐申制司，纲谓： 治盗虽尚严，岂得锻炼傅会以成其罪邪？ 于是得减死。
现代文：台州盗钟百一不是与人合盗，州尉贪图奖赏，越级申报给制司，汪纲说：处罚盗贼虽然应该严厉，哪能罗织罪名，穿凿附会而构成他的罪状呢？ 于是钟百一免死。
English: The Taizhou thief Zhong Shiyi did not steal with others. The governor was greedy for rewards and over-reported to the system department. Wang Gang said: Although the punishment of the thief should be severe, how can he fabricate a crime and form his crime by joining a gang? Therefore, Zhong Shiyi was spared death.

古文：祷雨龙瑞宫，有物蜿蜒朱色，盘旋坛上者三日。
现代文：汪纲在龙瑞宫祈雨，有个红色的东西呈蜿蜒状，在祭坛上盘旋了三天。
English: Wang Gang prayed for rain at Long Rui Palace. There was a red thing with a meandering shape that hovered over the altar for three days.

古文：纲曰： 吾欲雨而已，毋为异以惑众。 言未竟，雷雨大至，岁以大熟。
现代文：汪纲说 ：我只是求雨而已，不想做出什么奇事来蛊惑众人。 话还没说完，就雷雨大作，当年获得了大丰收。
English: Wang Gang said, "I'm just praying for rain, I don't want to do anything miraculous to bewitch people. Before I finished speaking, there was a thunderstorm, and we had a bumper harvest that year.

古文：进直焕章阁、知绍兴府、主管浙东安抚司公事兼提点刑狱。
现代文：汪纲升为直焕章阁、绍兴府知府、主管浙东安抚司公事兼提点刑狱。
English: Wang Gang was promoted to Zhihuang Zhangge, the governor of Shaoxing Prefecture, and the head of the East Zhejiang Pacification Division.

古文：访民瘼，罢行尤切。
现代文：他访察百姓疾苦，罢去的弊政特别切实。
English: He visited the people's sufferings, and the removal of the bad government was particularly effective.

古文：萧山有古运河，西通钱塘，东达台、明，沙涨三十余里，舟行则胶。
现代文：萧山有古运河，西通钱塘，东达台、明二州，有三十多里的浅滩，船走到那儿就搁浅。
English: There are ancient canals in Xiaoshan, Qiantang in the west, Datai in the east, and Erzhou in the north. There are more than 30 miles of shoals, and the ship will run aground when it gets there.

古文：乃开浚八千余丈，复创闸江口，使泥淤弗得入，河水不得泄，于涂则尽甃以达城闉。
现代文：汪纲就疏导水路八千多丈，又建江口的水闸，使淤泥不能进来，河水不能流出，沿途都是井以达城门外的曲城。
English: Wang Gang dredged the more than eight-thousand-meter-long channel, and built a sluice at the mouth of the river, so that the silt could not enter and the river water could not flow out. Along the way, all the wells reached the city of curves outside the city gate.

古文：十里创一庐。名曰 施水 ，主以道流。
现代文：十里盖一屋，名叫 施水 ，负责河道。
English: A ten-story building, called Shi Shui, is responsible for the river.

古文：于是舟车水陆，不问昼夜暑寒，意行利涉，欢欣忘勚。
现代文：于是水路、陆路的船和车，不管昼夜寒暑，任意行走十分便利，人们高兴得都忘了劳苦。
English: As a result, boats and cars on waterways and land routes, regardless of day and night, cold and hot, are very convenient to walk at will, and people are so happy that they forget their toil.

古文：属邑诸县濒海，而诸暨十六乡濒湖，荡泺灌溉之利甚博，势家巨室率私植埂岸，围以成田，湖流既束，水不得去，雨稍多则溢入邑居，田闾浸荡。
现代文：属下各县临海，而诸暨十六乡临湖，荡、泺灌溉，获利十分丰富，豪强大族一般都在岸边私自植树，围成私田，湖面缩小，水流不出去，雨稍多就流到县、乡中，房屋、土地都被淹没。
English: The counties under its jurisdiction border the sea, while Zhuji and 16 townships border the lake, and are irrigated with irrigation. The profits are very rich. The powerful and powerful families generally plant trees on the shore themselves and surround themselves with private fields. The lake surface shrinks, the water flow does not go out, and a little more rain flows into the counties and townships. Houses and land are flooded.

古文：濒海藉塘为固，堤岸易圮，咸卤害稼，岁损动数十万亩，蠲租亦万计。
现代文：临海地区靠池塘来避免水灾，但堤岸易坏，盐碱损害庄稼，每年损失达数十万亩，免除租税也以万计。
English: The coastal areas rely on ponds to avoid floods, but the embankments are perishable, and salt and alkali damage crops, with annual losses reaching hundreds of thousands of mu, and tens of thousands of tax exemptions.

古文：以纲言，诏提举常平司发田园，奇援巧请，一切峻却，而湖田始复；郡备缗钱三万专备修筑，而海田始固。
现代文：因汪纲上奏，朝廷下诏提举常平司挖开豪族私围的田，严格杜绝那些情况，这样才恢复了湖田；郡准备钱三万缗，专门用来修堤岸，这样海田才牢固。
English: As a result of Wang Gang's report, the imperial court issued an edict recommending Changping to dig up the fields that were privately owned by the powerful clans and strictly put an end to those situations. Only in this way could the lake fields be restored. The county prepared 30,000 baht of money specifically to repair the embankment, so that the sea fields would be strong.

古文：纲谓： 是邦控临海道，密拱都畿，而军籍单弱。 乃招水军，刺叉手，教习甚专，不令他役。
现代文：汪纲说 ：这个地方控扼海道，拱卫都城近畿，但军事力量薄弱。 于是招水军、叉手，专门训练，不让他们服别的力役。
English: Wang Gang said, "This place controls a narrow sea route, and is an arch-defensive capital city of Kinki, but its military strength is weak. Therefore, the recruiting troops, the forklift operators, are specially trained, and they are not allowed to serve other duties.

古文：创营千余间，宽整坚密，增置甲兵，威声赫然。
现代文：建了一千多间营房，营房宽敞、整齐、坚固、密集，增加士兵，有了赫赫声威。
English: More than a thousand barracks have been built, the barracks are spacious, neat, strong and dense, and the number of soldiers has increased.

古文：兼权司农卿，寻直龙图阁，因任。
现代文：汪纲兼权司农卿，不久为直龙图阁，仍任原官职。
English: Wang Gang concurrently held the post of Minister of Agriculture, and was soon promoted to Zhaolong Tu Ge, still holding his original post.

古文：理宗即位，诏为右文殿修撰，加集英殿修撰，复因任，又加宝谟阁待制。
现代文：理宗即位后，诏命他为右文殿修撰，加官为集英殿修撰，仍任原官职，又加为宝谟阁待制。
English: After Emperor Rizong ascended to the throne, the emperor ordered him to be assigned to the Umen-den, and he was also assigned to the Shuei-den. He still held his original official position, but he was also assigned to the Hōmokaku.

古文：宝庆三年大水，纲发粟三万八千余、缗钱五万振之，蠲租六万余石，捐瘠顿苏，无异常岁。
现代文：宝庆三年发大水，汪纲调发米三万八千多石、钱五万缗赈灾，免去租税六万多石，灾民得到了缓解，与平常年景一样。
English: In the three years of floods in Baoqing, Wang Gang transferred more than 38,000 kilos of rice and 50,000 yuan to alleviate the disaster, and exempted more than 60,000 kilos of tax. The victims of the disaster have been alleviated, as in normal years.

古文：越有经总制窠名四十一万，其中二十五，则绍兴以来虚额也，前后帅惧负殿，以修奉欑宫之资伪增焉。
现代文：东南有经总制款目四十一万，其中二十五万，是绍兴以来的虚额，前后任职的统帅怕政绩列为下等，就用修建、祭祀皇陵的资金偷着增补。
English: Southeastern has a total budget of 410,000 yuan, of which 250,000 yuan is fake since Shaoxing. The generals who have served before and after are afraid of their political achievements being classified as inferior, so they use the funds for the construction and sacrifice of the imperial mausoleum to secretly supplement it.

古文：纲谓： 负殿之责小，罔上之罪大 。
现代文：汪纲说： 政绩是下等的罪责小，欺骗皇上的罪责大。 
English: Wang Gang said, "Political achievement is a minor offense, but deceiving the emperor is a major offense.

古文：摭其实以闻。
现代文：汪纲就据实向朝廷汇报。
English: Wang Gang truthfully reported to the imperial court.

古文：诏免九万五千缗，而宿敝因是著明矣。
现代文：朝廷下诏免去九万五千缗，而旧弊因此显明了。
English: The Imperial edict exempted ninety-five thousand mon, and the old evils were thus revealed.

古文：绍定元年，召赴行在，纲入见，言： 臣下先利之心过于徇义，为身之计过于谋国，媮惰退缩，奔竞贪黩，相与为欺，宜有以转移之。 帝曰： 闻卿治行甚美，越中民力如何？ 对曰： 去岁水潦，诸暨为甚，今岁幸中熟，十年之间，千里晏安，皆朝廷威德所及，臣何力之有。 权户部侍郎。
现代文：绍定元年，汪纲被召到行在，他拜见皇上说 ：臣下先谋利的心超过了殉义，为自己的富贵做打算超过了为国出谋划策，偷惰退缩，争求名利，贪婪，互相欺骗，应该扭转这种局面。 皇上说： 听说你的政绩很美，越中民力怎样？ 汪纲答 ：去年水涝，诸暨最严重，今年幸好是一般年成，十年之间，千里安定，这都是朝廷威德所致形成的，我有什么能力。 汪纲为权户部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Shao Ding Dynasty, Wang Gang was called to visit the emperor, and he said to the emperor: "The vassals' desire to seek profits ahead of martyrdom, planning for their own wealth is more important than planning for the country, laziness, shrinking back, striving for fame and fortune, greed, and deceiving each other, and this situation should be reversed." The emperor said: "I heard that your political achievements are very beautiful, how is the people's power in Viet Nam?" Wang Gang replied: "Last year's floods were the most serious, but this year is fortunately a normal year, and there is a thousand miles of stability between the ten years

古文：越数月，上章致仕，特畀二秩，守户部侍郎，仍赐金带。
现代文：过了几个月，他上书辞官，朝廷特别给他升官两级，他在户部侍郎的职位上退休，仍赐给他金带。
English: A few months later, he was promoted to the post of dictionary officer. The Imperial Court gave him a special two-level promotion. He retired from the post of household attendant, but still gave him a gold belt.

古文：卒，越人闻之多堕泪，有相率哭于寺观者。
现代文：汪纲去世，越人听说后大多流下眼泪，有相继到寺观去哭祭他的。
English: After hearing of Wang Gang's death, many Viets shed tears and went to the temple to mourn him.

古文：纲学有本原，多闻博记，兵农、医卜、阴阳、律历诸书，靡不研究；机神明锐，遇事立决。
现代文：汪纲学有本源，博闻强记，兵农、医卜、阴阳、律历各种书籍，没有不研究的；神机妙算，十分敏锐，遇事当机立断。
English: Wang Gang's study has its origin, and he has read and memorized many books on soldiers and peasants, medicine, yin and yang, and the lunar calendar. There is no book that he has not studied. He is very astute and makes decisions quickly.

古文：在越佩四印，文书山积，而能操约御详，治事不过二十刻，公庭如水。
现代文：在越担任四种官职，文书堆积如山，他却能掌握大概，处理具体事务，他处理事务不超过二十刻，他的府衙清白如水。
English: In Vietnam, he held four official positions, and the paperwork piled up like a mountain, but he was able to grasp the general and deal with specific matters. He dealt with matters no more than twenty minutes, and his government documents were as clear as water.

古文：卑官下吏，一言中理，慨然从之。
现代文：地位低的小官，只要有一句话符合道理，他都慨然采纳。
English: A low-ranking minor official, as long as there is a sentence that is reasonable, he will wholeheartedly adopt it.

古文：为文尤长于论事，援据古今，辨博雄劲。
现代文：汪纲做文尤其善于论事，援古据今，辩博雄劲。
English: Wang Gang is particularly good at arguing in his writings, and his arguments have been vigorous since ancient times.

古文：服用不喜奢丽，供帐车剩，虽敝不更。所著有《恕斋集》、《左帑志》、《漫存录》。
现代文：他穿的用的都不喜好奢华，与他官职相称的仪仗车马等，即使坏了他也不换掉。他著有《恕斋集》、《左帑志》、《漫存录》。
English: He doesn't like luxury in his clothes, and he doesn't replace ceremonial chariots and horses that are commensurate with his official position, even if they are broken. He is the author of "Ju Saishu," "Zuo Zizhi" and "Manchukuo."

