古文：初十日晨起，问沈翁，犹未归。
现代文：初十日早晨起床，打听沈翁，仍未归来。
English: On the morning of the 10th day of the first month, I got up, inquired about Shen Weng, and he still hadn't returned.

古文：兰宗具饭，更作饼食。
现代文：兰宗备好饭，另外做饼子来吃了。
English: Lan Zong prepared a good meal, and also made cakes to eat.

古文：余取纸为狮林四奇诗畀之。
现代文：我取来纸作了狮子林四奇诗送给他。
English: I took a piece of paper and made a lion, forest, four wonders poem to give to him.

古文：水帘、翠壁、侧树、灵泉。
现代文：见顾仆不到，我疑心去查问他。
English: Seeing that Gu's servant was not there, I hesitated to question him.

古文：见顾仆不至，余疑而问之。兰宗曰： 彼知君即下，何以复上？ 而余心犹怏怏不释，待沈翁不至，即辞兰宗下。
现代文：兰宗说： 他知道先生就要下去，为何再上来？  可我心里仍然快快不乐放不下心，等不到沈翁，立即辞别兰宗下山。
English: Lanzong said, "He knows that his master is about to descend, so why does he want to climb up again? However, I still can't put my heart at ease. I can't wait for Shen Weng to leave, so I immediately bid farewell to Lanzong and leave the mountain."

古文：才下，见一僧仓皇至，兰宗尚随行，讯其来何以故。
现代文：才下走，见一个和尚仓皇来到。兰宗还随行，询问他来是为什么事。
English: Just before he left, he saw a monk arrive in a hurry. Lanzong was also accompanying him and asked him why he had come.

古文：曰： 悉檀长老命来候相公者。 
现代文：说： 悉檀寺的长老命令前来迎候相公的。 
English: He said: "The elders of Siddhanthi ordered us to come and greet him.

古文：余知仆逋ｂū逃亡矣。
现代文：我心知仆人逃走了。
English: I knew in my heart that my servant had run away.

古文：再讯之。曰： 长老见尊使负包囊往大理，询和光，疑其未奉相公命，故使余来告。 
现代文：再次询问和尚，他说： 长老见贵使背着包袱前去大理，询问和光，怀疑他未奉相公的命令，因而派我来报告。 
English: He asked the monk again, and he said, "The elders thought it was a good idea for you to go to Dali with a burden on your back, to inquire about He Guang, suspecting that he was not following the orders of his father-in-law, so they sent me to report.

古文：余固知其逃也，非往大理也。
现代文：我本来就知道他逃跑了，不是去大理。
English: I knew he had run away, not to Dali.

古文：遂别兰宗，同僧亟下。
现代文：于是告别兰宗，同和尚急忙下山。
English: So he bade farewell to Lanzong and hurried down the mountain with the monk.

古文：五里，过兰那寺前幻住庵东，又下三里，过东西两涧会处，抵悉檀，已午。
现代文：五里，经过兰那寺前幻住庵东边，又下走三里，经过东西两条山涧会合之处，抵达悉檀寺，已是中午。
English: It was already noon when I reached Siddan-ji Temple after walking five miles, passing the east side of the hallucinatory hermitage in front of Lanna-ji Temple, and walking three miles further down, passing the meeting point of the two mountains, east and west.

古文：启箧而现，所有尽去。
现代文：打开箱子来看，所有东西全都不见了。
English: When I opened the box, everything was gone.

古文：体极、弘辨欲为余急发二寺僧往追，余止之，谓： 追或不能及。
现代文：体极、弘辨打算为我急速派遣两个寺中的僧人去追，我止住了他们，说道： 追或许追不上。
English: I stopped them, saying, "I may not be able to catch up with them," as Koban was about to send two monks from the temple after me.

古文：及亦不能强之必来。
现代文：追上他也不能强迫他一定回来。
English: You can't chase him down and force him to come back.

古文：亦听其去而已矣。 
现代文：也只能听任他离开而已了。 
English: He had no choice but to let him go.

古文：但离乡三载，一主一仆，形影相依，一旦弃余于万里之外，何其忍也！
现代文：只是离开家乡三年，一主一仆，形影相依，一旦在万里之外抛弃了我，为何这样狠心呀！
English: It's just that I've been away from home for three years, one master and one servant, dependent on each other. Once they abandoned me thousands of miles away, why are they so cruel!

古文：十一日余心忡忡。
现代文：十一日我忧心忡仲。
English: On the 11th day, I was worried.

古文：又云，象之极大而肥者乃有之，百千中不能得一，其象亦象中之王也。
现代文：体极担心我忧伤，命令他侄子及纯白陪我到藏经楼诸处散步。有个圆通庵的僧人妙行，在藏经楼前读经，烹茶布果。纯白把象黄念珠给我看。
English: He was extremely worried about my sadness and ordered his nephew and Pure White to accompany me on a walk around the Sutra Hall. A monk from the Yangtong Monastery did a wonderful job, reading the scriptures in front of the Sutra Hall and cooking tea and fruits. Pure White showed me the Elephant Yellow prayer beads.

古文：坐楼前池上征迦叶事，取《藏经》中与鸡山相涉者，摘一二段录之。始知《经》言 迦叶守衣入定，有四石山来合 ，即其事也，亦未尝有鸡足名。
现代文：坐在楼前的水池上访询逛叶的事迹，取来藏经楼中与鸡足山相关的书，摘取一二段把它们抄录下来，这才知道佛经所说的 迎叶守护佛衣坐禅，有四座石山飞来合拢 ，就是这里的事了，也未曾有鸡足山的名字。
English: Sitting on the pool in front of the building, I inquired about the history of visiting leaves, took the books related to Chicken Foot Mountain from the library, extracted one or two paragraphs and copied them down. Only then did I know that the Buddhist sutra said, "Greet the leaves, protect the robe of Buddha, and meditate. There are four stone mountains flying to close. This is what happened here, and there has never been a name for Chicken Foot Mountain."

古文：又知迦叶亦有三，惟迦叶波名为摩诃迦叶。
现代文：又知道迎叶也有三个，只有迎叶波名字是摩诃迎叶。
English: I also know that there are three Yingye, but only the Yingye wave name is Mabou Yingye.

古文： 摩诃 ，大也，余皆小迦叶耳。
现代文： 摩诃 ，是大的意思，其余全是小迎叶而已。
English: Capricorn, means big, the rest are just small leaves.

古文：是晚，鹤庆史仲自省来。
现代文：这天晚上，鹤庆史仲文恰好从省城来。
English: That evening, Zhe Qingshi Zhongwen happened to come from the provincial capital.

古文：史乃公子，省试下第未通过归，登山自遣。十二日妙行来，约余往游华严，谓华严有老僧野池，乃月轮之徒，不可不一晤，向以坐关龛中，以未接颜色为怅。
现代文：十二日妙行来，约我去游华严寺，说是华严寺有位老和尚野池，是月轮的徒弟，不可不见一面，从前因为在关闭的佛盒中坐禅，所以未能接近他的容貌，为之帐恨。
English: On the twelfth day of my trip, I was invited to visit Huayan Temple. It was said that there was an old monk at Huayan Temple, named Yuchi, who was a disciple of the Moon Wheel. I couldn't help but see his face. Because I had been meditating in a closed Buddhist box, I couldn't get close to his face, and I resented him for that.

古文：昔余以岁首过华严，其徒俱出，无从物色。
现代文：从前我在岁首路过华严寺，他的徒弟全外出了，无法找到。
English: Once upon a time, when I passed Huayan Temple on New Year's Eve, all of his disciples had gone out and could not be found.

古文：余时时悼月公无后，至是而知尚有人，亟饭而行。
现代文：我时时悲伤月轮公无后人，到此时才知道还有人，急忙吃完饭上路。
English: I was sad all the time that there was no successor to the moon cycle. It was only at this time that I knew that there were still people. I hurriedly finished my meal and went on my way.

古文：和光亦从。
现代文：和光也跟随去。
English: Wako also followed.

古文：西一里，逾东中界溪，即为迎祥寺，于是涉中支界矣。
现代文：往西一里，越过东面支峰与中间支峰分界的溪水，就是迎祥寺，从这里起进入巾间支峰界内了。
English: One mile to the west, the stream that crosses the boundary between the eastern branch peak and the middle branch peak is Yingxiao Temple, and from here it enters the boundary between the branches.

古文：又一里余，南逾锁水阁下流水登坡，于是涉中支脊矣。
现代文：又走一里多，向南越过锁水阁下游的溪水登坡，于是到了中间支峰的山脊上了。
English: After another mile or so, I climbed south over the stream where I swam, and reached the ridge of the middle spur.

古文：西北溯脊一里，过息阴轩。
现代文：往西北溯山脊行一里，路过息阴轩。
English: Walk northwest along the ridge for one mile and you will pass Xiyin Xuan.

古文：又循瀑布上流，西北行里余，渡北来之溪，于是去中支涉西支界矣。
现代文：又沿瀑布的上游，往西北行一里多，渡过北来的溪流，在这里离开中间的支峰进入西面支峰界内了。
English: I also walked along the upper reaches of the waterfall, more than a mile to the northwest, crossing the stream coming from the north, where I left the middle branch and entered the western branch boundary.

古文：又北里余，西涉一峡溪，再上一西来小支之嘴，登之西北行。
现代文：又向北一里多，往西涉过一条峡谷中的溪水，再上登一条西来小支脉的山嘴，登上它后往西北行。
English: Another mile or more to the north, wading through a stream in a canyon to the west, then climbing to the top of a small tributary to the west, climbing it and then heading northwest.

古文：一里，又西度亭桥，桥下水为华严前界水，上下俱有桥，而此其下流之渡桥。
现代文：一里，又向西越过一座亭桥，桥下的水是华严寺前面分界的水流，上下游都有桥，而此处是渡过它下游的桥。
English: One mile further west, a pavilion bridge is crossed. The water flowing under the bridge is the boundary water flow in front of Hua Yan Temple. There are bridges upstream and downstream, and here is the bridge that crosses it downstream.

古文：内峡中有池一圆，近流水而不混，亦龙潭类也。
现代文：桥内峡中有一个圆形水池，接近流水却不相混，也是龙潭一类。
English: There is a circular pool in the bridge gorge. It is close to the flowing water but does not mix with it. It is also a type of dragon pool.

古文：由溪南向西北行，于是涉西支脊矣。
现代文：由溪南向西北行，于是跋涉西面支峰的山脊了。
English: From the south of Xi'an to the northwest, I trudged along the ridge of the western peak.

古文：半里，乃入华严寺。
现代文：半里，便进入华严寺。
English: After half a mile, you will enter Hua Yan Temple.

古文：寺东向，踞西支大脊之北，创自月潭，以其为南京人，又称为南京庵。
现代文：寺院向东，高踞在西面支峰主脊的北面，创始于月潭，由于他是南京人，又称为南京庵。
English: The temple faces east, and the stilt is on the north side of the main ridge of the west peak. It was founded in Yuetan, and because he was from Nanjing, it is also known as Nanjing An.

古文：至月轮而光大之，为鸡山首刹，慈圣太后赐《藏》贮之。
现代文：到月轮扩大了它，成为鸡足山的首要佛寺，慈圣太后赐给《藏经》贮藏在寺中。
English: By the time of the moon cycle, it had expanded to become the main Buddhist temple on Jiu Foot Mountain, and the "Zangjing" given by the Empress Dowager Cixi was stored in the temple.

古文：后毁于火，野池复建，规模虽存，而《法藏》不可复矣。
现代文：后来毁于火灾，野池重新修建，规模虽然保存下来，但《法藏》不可恢复了。
English: Later, it was destroyed by fire, and the field pond was rebuilt. Although the scale was preserved, the "Law Collection" could not be restored.

古文：野池年七十余，历侍山中诸名宿，今老而不忘先德，以少未参学，掩关静阅，孜孜不倦，亦可取也。
现代文：野池年龄七十多岁，逐一伺候过山中有名望的前辈，如今老来不忘先人的功德，因为少年时未探究过学间，掩上门门静心读书，孜孜不倦，也是值得赞许。
English: At the age of more than 70, Noike has served the famous predecessors in the mountains one by one. Nowadays, he never forgets the merits of his predecessors, because he did not explore the school when he was a boy, he closed the door and studied hard. He is also worthy of praise.

古文：闻余有修葺《鸡山志》之意，以所录《清凉通传》假余，其意亦善。
现代文：听说我有修撰《鸡足山志》的意图，把所抄录的《清凉通传》借给我，他的用意也很好。
English: I heard that I had the intention of writing "Chicken Foot Mountain Chronicle" and lent me the transcribed "Cool Passing," and his intention was also very good.

古文：下午将别，史君闻余在，亦追随至。
现代文：下午即将告别，史君听说我在这里，也追随而来。
English: In the afternoon, we are about to say goodbye. Shi Jun heard that I was here, so he followed me.

古文：余恐归途已晚，遂别之，从别路先返，以史有舆骑也。
现代文：我担心归去途中已太晚，于是辞别野池，从别的路先返回去，因为史君有轿子、坐骑。
English: I was worried that I would be too late on my way back, so I said goodbye to Yuchi and returned from another road, because Shikun had a palanquin and a horse.

古文：出寺，西北由上流渡桥，四里，连东北逾三涧，而至其东界之支，即圣峰、燃灯之支垂也。
现代文：出寺后，往西北由上游过桥，四里，接连向东北越过三条山涧，然后来到那东面的支峰，这就是圣峰燃灯寺下垂的支峰了。
English: After leaving the temple, I walked northwest from upstream and crossed the bridge. I walked four miles and successively crossed three ridges to the northeast, and then came to the eastern spur, which is the sagging spur of the Sacred Peak Lantern Temple.

古文：又一里，东下至其尽处，有寺中悬，是为天竺寺。
现代文：又走一里，向东下到它的尽头处，有寺院悬在中央，这是天竺寺。
English: Walk another mile, down to the east to its end, there is a temple hanging in the middle, this is Tianzhu Temple.

古文：其北涧自仰高亭峡中下，其南涧又从西支东谷屡坠而下者，夹圣峰之支，东尽于此。
现代文：它北边的山涧自仰高亭的峡中流下来，它南边的山涧又是从西面支峰东边的山谷屡次坠落下流的，夹住圣峰的支脉，东边在此到了尽头。
English: The mountain stream on its north side flows down from the gorge of Yanggaoting, and the mountain stream on its south side repeatedly flows down from the valley on the east side of the west peak, clamping the branch of the sacred peak. The east side ends here.

古文：王十岳《游纪》以圣峰为中支，误矣。
现代文：《王十岳游纪》把圣峰作为中间的支峰，错了。
English: "King of the Ten Mountains" is wrong to regard the sacred peak as the middle peak.

古文：由其垂度北峡小桥，于是又涉中支之西界。
现代文：由它的下垂处越过北峡中的小桥，于是又进入中间支峰的西界。
English: From its sagging point, it crosses the small bridge in the North Gorge, and then enters the western boundary of the middle spur.

古文：循北麓而东，半里，两过南下小水，乃首传寺前左右流也。
现代文：沿北麓往东走，半里，两次跨过南下的小溪，是首传寺前方左右两侧的溪流。
English: Walking east along the northern foot, for half a mile, the stream that crosses the south twice is the stream on both sides of the front of Shuchuan Temple.

古文：其南峡中始辟为畦，有庐中央，是为大觉菜圃。
现代文：它南边峡中开始开垦为田地，有房屋在中央，这是大觉寺的菜园。
English: In the middle of the gorge on its southern edge, fields have begun to be cultivated, and there are houses in the center. This is the vegetable garden of Daikyo-ji Temple.

古文：从其左北转，半里，逾支脊，连横过法华、千佛、灵源三庵，是皆中脊下垂处。
现代文：从它左边向北转，半里，越过支峰的山脊，一连横着走过法华庵、千佛庵、灵源庵三座寺庵，这里全是中间的山脊下垂之处。
English: From its left, turn north, half a mile, over the ridge of the branch peak, and walk across the three temples and hermitages of the Dharma hermitage, the thousand Buddha hermitage, and the Lingyuan hermitage. Here are all the places where the ridge sags in the middle.

古文：半里，北逾锁水阁下流，即大觉寺矣，仍东随大路一里，过西竺寺前，上圆通庵，观 灯笼花树 。
现代文：半里，向北越过锁水阁的下游，就到大觉寺了。仍往东顺大路走一里，经过西竺寺前，登上圆通庵，观赏灯笼花树。
English: Half a mile to the north, across the lower reaches of the lock water pavilion, you will arrive at Daikyo-ji Temple. Still, walk one mile to Dongshun avenue, pass in front of Saiho-ji Temple, climb to the round-tree hermitage, and enjoy the lanterns and flowers.

古文：其树叶细如豆瓣，根大如匏瓠，花开大如山茱萸，中红而尖，蒂俱绿，似灯垂垂。
现代文：这种树的树叶细如豆瓣，树根大如葫芦，花开大如山茱英，中间红但花尖花蒂全是绿色的，似灯笼样低低下垂着。
English: The leaves of this tree are as thin as watermelons, the roots are as large as gourds, the flowers are as large as dogwoods, the middle is red but the flower tips are all green, hanging low like a lantern.

古文：余从永昌刘馆见其树，末见其花也。
现代文：我在永昌刘家书馆见过这种树，未见过它的花。
English: I have seen this tree in Yongchang Liu Jia Library, but I have never seen its flowers.

古文：此庵为妙行旧居，留瀹茗乃去。
现代文：此庵是妙行的旧居，留下烹茶喝后才离开。
English: This hermitage is the former home of Myoko, who left to make tea before leaving.

古文：一里，由迎祥寺北渡涧，仍去中界而入东支界。
现代文：一里，由迎祥寺北边渡过山涧，仍离开中间支峰的界内进入东面支峰界内。
English: One mile, from the north side of Yingxiao Temple, cross the ridge, still leave the middle branch peak and enter the eastern branch peak.

古文：溯水而北，过龙泉庵、五华庵。
现代文：溯涧水往北走，经过龙泉庵、五华庵。
English: Follow the stream to the north, passing Longquan Temple and Wuhua Temple.

古文：五华今名小龙潭，乃悉檀大龙潭之上流。大龙潭已涸为深壑，乃小龙潭犹汇为下流。
现代文：五华庵如今名叫小龙潭，是悉檀寺大龙潭的上游，大龙潭已干涸为深壑，小龙潭竟然仍积着水往下流。
English: Wuhua'an is now called Xiaolongtan. It is the upstream of Siddan Temple's Dalongtan. Dalongtan has dried up and is deep, but Xiaolongtan still has water flowing downstream.

古文：余屡欲探之，至是强二僧索之五华后坡。
现代文：我多次想去探寻它，到此时强迫二位僧人到五华庵的后坡去找它。
English: I wanted to explore it many times, and at this time I forced two monks to go to the back slope of Wuhua Monastery to look for it.

古文：见水流淙淙，分注悉檀右，而坡道上跻，不见其处。
现代文：只见水流涂涂，分散注入悉檀寺右侧，可沿坡上的路上登，不见它所在之处。
English: You can only see the current of water smeared and dispersed into the right side of Siddan Temple. You can climb up along the road on the slope, but you can't see where it is.

古文：二僧以日暮劝返，比还，寺门且闭矣。
现代文：二位僧人用天晚劝我返回去，等回来时，寺门将要关闭了。
English: The two monks spent the whole day and night persuading me to go back. When I came back, the temple gate would be closed.

古文：是夜，与史君对谈复吾斋头。
现代文：这天夜里，在复吾的书斋与史君交谈。
English: That night, I had a conversation with Shikun in Fogo's study.

古文：史君留心渊岳，谈大脊自其郡西金凤哨岭南过海东，自五龙坝、水目寺、水盘铺，过易门、昆阳之南，而包省会者，甚悉。
现代文：史君留心山川，谈起大山脊自他府中西境金凤哨岭往南经过洱海东面，自五龙坝、水目寺、水盘铺，经过易门县、昆阳州的南部，而后包围省会的山脉，非常熟悉。
English: Shi Jun paid attention to the mountains and rivers, and talked about the great ridge from the west-central part of his prefecture, Jinfeng Sentinel, southward through the eastern part of the Bohai Sea, from the Wulong Dam, Suime Temple, Suibanpu, through the southern part of Yimen County and Kunyang Prefecture, and then the mountains surrounding the provincial capital, very familiar.

古文：且言九鼎山前梁王山西腋之溪，乃直南而下白崖、迷渡者，其溪名山溪。
现代文：并且说到九鼎山前梁王山西侧的溪流，是一起往南下流到白崖站、迷渡的，此溪名叫山溪。
English: Moreover, it is said that the stream on the west side of Liangwang Mountain in front of Jiuding Mountain flows southward to Baiya Station and is difficult to cross. This stream is called Shanxi.

古文：后人分凿其峡，引之洱海，则此溪又一水两分矣。
现代文：后代人分流凿断它流经的山峡，把它引进洱海，那么此溪又是一条溪水分为两条支流了。
English: Subsequent generations chopped off the mountain gorge through which it flowed and introduced it to the Bohai Sea, so this stream is again a stream divided into two tributaries.

古文：果尔，则清华洞之脉，又自梁王东转南下，而今凿断之者。
现代文：果然这样，那清华洞的山脉，又自梁王山东边转向南下延，是今天凿断之处。
English: Sure enough, the mountains of Qinghua Cave, stretching from the eastern side of Liangwang Mountain to the south, is the place where today's quarry is located.

古文：余初谓其脊自九鼎西坠，若果有南下白崖之溪，则前之所拟，不大误战？
现代文：我当初认为那条山脊自九鼎山往西下坠，如果有往南下流到白崖站的溪流，那么从前我估量的，不大错了！
English: I initially thought that the ridge from Jiuding Mountain fell down to the west. If there is a stream flowing south to Baiya Station, then my previous estimate is not wrong!

古文：目前之脉，经杖履之下如此，故知讲求不可乏人也。
现代文：眼前的山脉，经我扶杖漫游之下还如此，因而真不可缺少议论探究的人呀！
English: The mountains in front of me, under my walking stick, are still like that, so it's really indispensable to talk about people who are exploring!

古文：史君谓生平好搜访山脉，每被人晒ｓｈěｎ，讥笑，不敢语人，邂逅遇余，其心大快。
现代文：史君说起生平喜爱搜寻访求山脉，每每被人讥笑，不敢告诉人，邂逅间遇上我，他的心里非常痛快。
English: Shi Jun said that in his life, he loved to search and visit mountains. He was often ridiculed and did not dare to tell anyone. When he met me, his heart was very happy.

古文：然余亦搜访此脊，几四十年，至此而后尽，又至此而遇一同心者，亦奇矣。
现代文：不过我也搜寻访求此条山脊，几乎四十年，到此时才完结，又到此地然后才遇见一个同心的人，也是奇迹呀！
English: But I also searched and visited this ridge for almost forty years, and it's only now that I've finished, and it's only here that I've met a kindred spirit, and it's a miracle!

古文：夜月甚明，碧宇如洗，心骨俱彻！
现代文：夜间月亮十分明亮，澄碧的天宇如洗涤过一般，心骨全都明彻透了！
English: At night, the moon is very bright, the clear sky is as if it has been washed, and the bones of the heart are all crystal clear!

古文：十三日史君为悉檀书巨扁同 匾 ，盖此君夙以临池书法擅名者，而诗亦不俗。
现代文：十三日史君为悉檀寺写了巨匾，原来这位先生是向来以擅长书法出名的人，而且诗也不俗。
English: On the 13th, Shikun wrote a colossal poem for Siddan-ji Temple. It turns out that this gentleman has always been famous for being good at calligraphy, and his poetry is also good.

古文：复相与剧谈。
现代文：再次互相畅谈。
English: Talk to each other again.

古文：既午，舆人催就道，史恳余同游九重崖，横狮林、旃擅而西，宿罗汉壁，明日同一登绝顶作别。
现代文：午后，轿夫催着上路，姓史的恳切邀请我一同去游九重崖，向西横过狮子林、旎檀林，住宿在罗汉壁，明天一同登一次绝顶告别。
English: In the afternoon, the driver urged me to get on the road. The driver, surnamed Shi, earnestly invited me to go swimming with him to the Nine-Storied Cliff, to go west across the Lion Forest and the Sandalwood Forest, to stay at the Lohan Wall, and to climb to the very top together tomorrow to say goodbye.

古文：余从之。
现代文：我听从了他。
English: I listened to him.

古文：遂由悉檀东上坡，半里，过天池静室，六里而过河南止足师静室。
现代文：于是由悉檀寺东边上坡，半里，经过天池的静室，六里后经过河南止足禅师的静室。
English: So I walked uphill from the east side of Siddan Temple, half a mile, past the still room of Tianchi, and six miles later, past the still room of Henan Zhifu Zen Master.

古文：更北上里余，直蹑危崖下，是为德充静室。
现代文：再向北上走一里多，一直踩着危崖下走，这是德充的静室。
English: Then walk northward for more than a mile, stepping on the cliff all the way down. This is Dejong's quiet room.

古文：德充为复吾高足，复吾与史君有乡曲之好，故令其徒引游此室，而自从西路上罗汉壁，具饭于西来寺，以为下榻地。
现代文：德充是复吾的高足弟子，复吾与史君有乡亲的情谊，所以命令他徒弟领路来游此处静室，然后自此从西路上罗汉壁，在西来寺备好饭菜，用为住宿之地。
English: Dechong was a disciple of Fogo Gaofu, and Fogo and Shijun had a hometown friendship, so he ordered his apprentice to lead the way to visit the seclusion room here, and then from the west road to Luo Hanbi, prepare meals in Xilai Temple, and use it as a place to stay.

古文：此室当九重崖之中，为九重崖最高处，室乃新构而洁，其后危岩之半，有洞中悬，可缘木而上。
现代文：此处静室正当九重崖的中心，是九重崖的最高处，静室是新建的而且整洁，它后方危崖的半中腰，有山洞悬在中央，可以沿着树上登。
English: Here, the quiet room is right in the center of the nine-story cliff. It is the highest point of the nine-story cliff. The quiet room is newly built and tidy. It is halfway up the cliff behind it. There is a cave hanging in the middle. You can climb up the tree.

古文：余昔闻之，不意追随，首及于此。
现代文：我从前听说过它，不料跟随别人游山，首先到达此地。
English: I had heard of it before, but I followed others hiking in the mountains and arrived here first.

古文：余仰眺丛木森霄，其上似有洞门仿佛。
现代文：我仰面眺望，丛林森森入云霄，山崖上仿佛像有洞口。
English: I look up and see the jungle stretching into the sky, and the cliffs seem to have openings.

古文：时史君方停憩不前，余即蹑险以登。
现代文：此时史君正好停下休息不再前走，我立即踏着险阻上登。
English: At this time, Shijun just stopped to rest and no longer walked forward. I immediately stepped on the obstacle and climbed up.

古文：初虽无径，既得引水之木，随之西行，半里，又仰眺洞当在上，复蹑险以登。
现代文：最初虽然没有路径，遇到引水的木槽后，顺着它往西行，半里，又仰面眺望，山洞应当在上方，又踏着险阻上登。
English: At first, although there was no path, after encountering a wooden trough for water diversion, I followed it westward for half a mile, and then looked up, the cave should be above, and then climbed up the perilous obstacle.

古文：初亦无径，半里，既抵岩下，见一木倚崖直立，少斫级痕以受趾，遂揉木升崖。
现代文：起初也没有路径，半里，抵达危崖下后，见一棵树紧靠危崖直立，稍微有砍凿过台阶的痕迹以便承受脚掌，于是攀着树枝上登危崖。
English: At first, there was no path. Half a mile later, after reaching the bottom of the cliff, he saw a tree standing upright close to the cliff, with slight signs of steps having been cut to support the soles of the feet, so he climbed up the branches to reach the cliff.

古文：凡数悬其级，始及木端，而石级亦如之，皆危甚。
现代文：一共悬空越过几层树枝，才到达树梢，而石崖上的台阶也如此，全危险极了。
English: They had to climb over several layers of branches to reach the treetops, and the steps on the cliff were just as dangerous.

古文：足之力半寄于手，手之力亦半无所寄，所谓凭虚御风，而实凭无所凭，御无所御也。
现代文：脚的力量一半寄托在手上，手的力量也是一半无所寄托，这是所谓的凭靠虚空驾御山风了，可实际上凭靠又无所凭靠，驾御也无所驾御。
English: Half of the power of the foot rests on the hand, and half of the power of the hand rests on nothing. This is the so-called relying on the void to control the mountain wind, but in fact, relying on nothing and relying on nothing, there is no control.

古文：洞门正南向，上下皆削壁，中嵌一门，高丈五，阔与深亦如之，而旁无余隙。
现代文：洞口向正南，上下全是陡削的石壁，中间嵌入一个洞口，高一丈五，宽处与深处也如此，可四旁没有其余的缝隙。
English: The mouth of the cave faces due south, and there are steeply cut stone walls all up and down. A hole is embedded in the middle, which is one and a half meters high. The width and depth are also the same, but there are no remaining gaps on all sides.

古文：中有水自顶飞洒，贮之可供一人餐，憩之亦仅受一人榻，第无余隙，恐不免风雨之逼。
现代文：洞中有水从洞顶飞洒下来，把水贮存起来可供一个人饮用，在这里憩息也仅能放下一个人的床，只是没有其余的空隙，恐怕免不了风雨的逼迫了。
English: There is water flying down from the top of the cave, storing the water for a person to drink, and only a person's bed can be placed here for rest. However, there is no remaining space, and I am afraid that we cannot avoid the persecution of wind and rain.

古文：然临之无前，近则香木坪之岭已伏于下，远则五龙坝之障正横于南，排沙、观音箐诸山层层中错，各献其底里深藏不易显现的地方而无余蕴焉。
现代文：不过在洞内临眺一望无际，近处是香木抨的山岭已低伏在下方，远处则是五龙坝的山峰正横在南面，排沙、观音著诸山层层交错在中间，各自呈献出它们深藏的地方而没有剩下的深奥之处了。
English: However, in the cave, there is an endless view. Nearby is the mountain range of Xiangmu Bao, which has been lying low below. In the distance is the mountain peak of Wulongba, which is lying to the south. The mountains of Dechangsa and Guanyin are interlaced in the middle, each presenting their deeply hidden places, and there is no remaining profound place.

古文：久之，闻室中呼声，乃下。
现代文：很久，听见静室中的呼叫声，这才下来。
English: After a long time, I heard a shout in the quiet room, and then I came down.

古文：又随引水木而东过一栈，观水所出处，乃一巨石下。
现代文：又顺着引水的木槽往东走过一处栈道，观看泉水流出之处，是在一块巨石下。
English: I also walked along a wooden trough to draw water to the east, passing a boardwalk. The place where I watched the spring water flow out was under a boulder.

古文：甫出，即刳木引之西注，此最上层之水也；其下一二丈，又出一水，则复吾之徒引入静室；其下又出一水，则一衲轩引之。
现代文：刚流出来，就用挖空的树把水引向西流，这是最上层的水；它下方一二丈，又涌出一处泉水，复吾的徒弟把水引入静室；它的下边又涌出一处泉水，一袖轩把水引去。
English: As soon as the water came out, he used a hollowed-out tree to divert the water to the west stream. This was the uppermost water; one or two stories below it, another spring gushed forth, and Fuguo's apprentice brought the water into the still room; below it, another spring gushed forth, and a cascade led the water away.

古文：连出三级，皆一峡坳，虽穴异而脉必潜通，其旁分而支引者，举岩中皆藉之矣。
现代文：一连涌出三层，全在一个峡坳中，虽然泉眼的位置不同可脉胳必定暗中相通，那往旁边分支引流的水，是整座山崖之中全仰仗的。
English: Three layers gush forth in succession, all in one gorge. Although the location of the spring is different, the veins must be secretly connected. The water that branches off to the side is all supported by the entire mountain cliff.

古文：既下室中，啜茶果，复继以饼饵，乃随下层引水之木，西一里入一衲轩。
现代文：下到静室中后，吃了茶水果子，又继之以糕饼，于是顺着下层引水的木槽，向西一里进入一钠轩。
English: After going down to the middle of the quiet room, I ate tea and fruit, followed by cakes, so I followed the wooden trough that brought water from the lower level and went one mile west into a soda fountain.

古文：延眺久之，又茶而行。
现代文：抬头眺望了很久，文喝了茶上路。
English: After looking up for a long time, Wen drank tea and went on his way.

古文：西一里，过向所从登顶之坡。
现代文：往西一里，经过先前来时登顶的山坡。
English: One mile to the west, past the hillside where I had previously reached the summit.

古文：横而西，路渐隘，或盘坡嘴，或过峡坳，皆乱砾垂脊，而中无滴水，故其地不能结庐，遂成莽径。
现代文：横向西，路渐变窄，有时绕过坡嘴，有时走过峡坳，全是乱石块垂下山脊，峡中没有滴水，所以这个地方不能建屋，便成了满是草丛的小径。
English: Sideways to the west, the road gradually narrows, sometimes bypassing the crest of the slope, sometimes walking through the gorge, all of which are disorderly stones hanging down the ridge, there is no dripping water in the gorge, so this place cannot be built, and it has become a path full of grass.

古文：二里余，峡拗中有一巨木，横偃若桥。
现代文：二里多，峡坳中有一棵巨树，横倒着好似桥梁。
English: For more than two miles, there is a huge tree in the gorge, lying on its side like a bridge.

古文：又西二里，乃践坡转嘴而上，过野愚静室。
现代文：又向西二里，便踏着山坡绕着山嘴上登，经过野愚的静室。
English: Another two miles to the west, they climbed up the hillside around the mouth of the mountain, passing the Wild Fool's quiet room.

古文：又半里，上至白云静室。
现代文：又走半里，上到白云的静室。
English: He walked another half-mile and arrived at Baiyun's quiet room.

古文：白云固留，以日暮而去，白云随过体极静室而别。
现代文：白云坚决挽留，由于天晚便离开了，白云跟着走过体极的静室才告别。
English: Baiyun resolutely stayed behind. Since he left late in the day, Baiyun walked through the quiet room until he said goodbye.

古文：西半里，过一宗静室。
现代文：往西半里，经过一宗的静室。
English: Half a mile to the west, past a family's still room.

古文：傍水又蹑坡半里，逾望台南突之脊，于是瞑色已来，月光渐耀。
现代文：傍着水流又爬坡半里，越过望台向南突的山脊，到这里暮色已经来临，月光渐渐照耀起来。
English: I climbed half a mile alongside the current, over the ridge that juts south of the lookout, and here the twilight had come, and the moonlight gradually shone.

古文：里余，两过望台西坳之水，又一里，南盘旃檀岭，乃西过罗汉壁东垂，皆乘月而行也。
现代文：一里多，两次越过望台西面山坳的水流，又走一里，向南绕过旎檀岭，于是往西走过罗汉壁的东垂，都是乘着月色前行的。
English: For more than a mile, they twice crossed the water flow of the mountain stream west of the watchtower, and walked another mile to the south, bypassing the Sundan Mountains, and then walked west across the eastern slope of the Luohan Wall, all of them riding on the moonlight.

古文：又稍盘嘴而上半里，是为慧心静室，此幻空碧云寺前南突之坡也。
现代文：又慢慢绕过山嘴上走半里，这是慧心的静室，此地是幻空碧云寺前往南突的山坡。
English: And slowly walk half a mile around the top of the mountain, this is the quiet room of wisdom, here is the hillside of the phantom sky Biyun Temple to the south.

古文：余昔与慧心别于会灯寺，访之不值，今已半载余，乃乘月叩扉。
现代文：我从前与慧心在会灯寺分别，拜访他没遇上，至今已是半年多，于是乘着月光叩开门。
English: I used to be separated from Huixin at Huiguang Temple. I haven't visited him for more than half a year, so I took advantage of the moonlight to open the door.

古文：出茗酌于月下，甚适。
现代文：慧心拿出茶在月光下饮，十分适意。
English: Huixin took out the tea and drank it in the moonlight. It was very pleasant.

古文：此地去复吾先期下榻处尚三里，而由此西下度管，暗不可行，慧心乃曳杖为指迷。
现代文：此地离复吾事先约定的住宿处还有三里，可由此向西下走越过山著，黑得不能走，慧心于是拖着手杖为我指点迷途。
English: It was still three miles from the accommodation I had agreed on in advance, and I could walk westwards through the mountains. It was too dark to walk, so Wisdom dragged her cane to show me the way.

古文：半里，度而上，又半里，登坡，与碧云大路合，见月复如前，慧心乃别去。
现代文：半里，横越而上，又走半里，登坡，与碧云寺来的大路会合，见月光又如先前一样，慧心这才告别离去。
English: Half a mile, across and up, another half a mile, uphill, meeting the main road coming from Biyun Temple. Seeing the moonlight, it was the same as before, and only then did Wisdom say goodbye and leave.

古文：又西一里，过一静室，乃盘嘴北向蹑坡，则复吾使人遍呼山头矣。
现代文：又一里，路过一处静室，就绕着山嘴向北登坡，就见复吾派人在山头遍处呼叫了。
English: After another mile, I passed a quiet room and climbed around the mountain to the north. I saw the Fugu people shouting all over the mountain.

古文：又一里，入西来寺。
现代文：又一里，进入西来寺。
English: After another mile, I entered Sairaiji Temple.

古文：寺僧明空他出，其弟三空，余向所就餐者，闻之，自其静庐来迎。
现代文：寺中僧人明空出门去其他地方，他的弟子三空，是从前我们一起就餐的人，听见声音，从他的静室出来迎接。
English: His disciple Sankaku, who had been dining with us, heard the voice and came out of his seclusion room to greet us.

古文：复吾知吾辈喜粥，为炊粥以供。
现代文：复吾知道我们这帮人喜欢喝粥，为此煮了粥献上来。
English: Fugu knew that our group liked to drink porridge, so he cooked porridge and offered it to us.

古文：久不得此，且当行陟之后，吸之明月之中，不啻仙掌金茎矣。
现代文：很久没吃到过此等东西，况且正当行走上登之后，在明月之夜喝到，如同仙掌金茎一般。
English: It's been a long time since I've eaten anything like this, and what's more, after a proper walk up the mountain, I drank it on a clear moonlit night, just like a cactus.

古文：十四日三空先具小食，馒后继以黄黍之糕，乃小米所蒸，而柔软更胜于糯粉者。
现代文：十四日三空先准备了小吃，馒头之后是黄黍做的糕，是用小米蒸制的，但柔软更胜过糯米粉做的。
English: On the 14th day of the 3rd month, snacks were prepared first. After the steamed buns, there was a cake made of yellow bean paste. It was steamed with millet, but it was softer than glutinous rice flour.

古文：乳酪、椒油、葼油、梅醋，杂沓而陈，不丰而有风致。
现代文：乳酪、辣椒油、鸡萝油、梅子醋，杂乱地陈放着，不丰盛但颇有风味。
English: The cheese, chili oil, chicken radish oil, and plum vinegar were left out in a jumble, not rich but quite flavorful.

古文：盖史君乃厥兄明空有约而来。
现代文：原来史君是与他的师兄明空有约而来的。
English: Originally, Shikun had an appointment with his older brother, Akira.

