古文：既弑厉公，栾武子使智武子、彘恭子如周迎悼公。
现代文：在杀害晋厉公以后，栾武子派荀罃、士鲂到周都迎接晋悼公。
English: After the killing of Jin Li Gong, Zang Wuzi sent Zou and Shi Zou to Zhou to welcome Jin Li Gong.

古文：庚午，大夫逆于清原。
现代文：庚午那天，大夫们都到清原去迎接。
English: On the day of Geng's birthday, the doctors all went to Qingyuan to meet him.

古文：公言于诸大夫曰： 孤始愿不及此，孤之及此，天也。
现代文：晋悼公对大夫们说： 我本来没想到能有今天，现在即位为君，这是天命。
English: Jin Weikong said to the doctors, "I never thought I would see this day, you are now enthroned, this is the will of heaven.

古文：抑人之有元君，将禀命焉。
现代文：臣民所以要拥立贤明的国君，想来就是为了接受国君的命令。
English: The reason why the subjects should support the wise sovereign is to receive the sovereign's orders.

古文：若禀而弃之，是焚谷也；其禀而不材，是谷不成也。
现代文：假如接受了命令又不听从，那就好比把谷子烧掉；如果得到的命令不合理，那好比谷子没有成熟。
English: If you receive an order and do not obey it, it is like burning the corn; if you receive an unreasonable order, it is like the corn is not ripe.

古文：谷之不成，孤之咎也；成而焚之，二三子之虐也。
现代文：谷子没有成熟，那是寡人的罪过；谷子成熟了却将它烧掉，那就是你们的暴虐了。
English: If the grain is not ripe, it is someone else's fault; if the grain is ripe and you burn it, that is your tyranny.

古文：孤欲长处其愿，出令将不敢不成，二三子为令之不从，故求元君而访焉。
现代文：我想长久地维持君位，发号施令不敢不成熟，你们大家发布命令百姓不听从，所以要求助于明君。
English: I want to maintain my position for a long time, and I dare not give orders prematurely. You all issued orders that the people did not obey, so I asked Ming Jun for help.

古文：孤之不元，废也，其谁怨？
现代文：寡人如果不成器，被废除君位的话，那又能怨谁呢？
English: If only a few people fail to make the grade and the monarchy is abolished, who can be blamed?

古文：元而以虐奉之，二三子之制也。
现代文：如果国君贤明而你们暴虐地对待他，那就是你们太专横了。
English: If the prince is wise and you are cruel to him, it is because you are tyrants.

古文：若欲奉元以济大义，将在今日；若欲暴虐以离百姓，反易民常，亦在今日。
现代文：如果想拥立贤君以成大义，就在今天；如果想施行暴虐使百姓离散，颠倒百姓事奉国君的常法，也在今天。
English: If you want to support a wise ruler to achieve great righteousness, it is today; if you want to carry out tyranny to disperse the people and reverse the normal law of the people serving the sovereign, it is also today.

古文：图之进退，愿由今日。 
现代文：你们好好图谋一下，是尊奉我为国君还是废黜我，今天都由你们决定。 
English: You should think hard about whether to honor me as the sovereign or dethrone me. Today, it is up to you to decide.

古文：大夫对曰： 君镇抚群臣而大庇荫之，无乃不堪君训而陷于大戮，以烦刑、史，辱君之允令，敢不承业。 
现代文：大夫们回答说： 国君安抚群臣而且大力保护我们，只怕我们不能很好地接受国君的训令，从而陷于犯罪而被处死，以至于麻烦法官、史官来为我们定罪记过，有辱国君的信令。我们怎敢不受命奉事呢？ 
English: The doctors answered: "The sovereign pacifies his ministers and protects us vigorously, lest we should not accept the sovereign's command well, and thus fall into crime and be put to death, so that we should trouble the judges and historians to convict us, and write down a signal insulting to the sovereign. How dare we not be ordered to serve?

古文：乃盟而入。
现代文：于是就订结盟约，进入了国都。
English: So they made an alliance and entered the capital.

古文：辛巳，朝于武宫。
现代文：辛巳那天，悼公到武公庙朝祭。
English: On that fateful day, mourners went to the morning festival at the Wukong Temple.

古文：定百事，立百官，育门子，选贤良，兴旧族，出滞赏，毕故刑，赦囚系，宥闲罪，荐积德，逮鳏寡，振废淹，养老幼，恤孤疾，年过七十，公亲见之，称曰王父，敢不承。
现代文：议定国家大事，任命百官，培育大夫的嫡子，选用贤良，提拔旧臣的子孙，补赏前朝的有功之臣，停止过去的刑罚，大赦囚犯，对嫌疑犯予以宽免，录用积德的人，救济鳏夫寡妇，起用被废黜不用的贤才，抚养老人儿童，抚恤孤儿残疾，年过七十的老人，悼公亲自接见，敬称他们为王父，那些老人们都乐于服从命令。
English: They agreed on major national events, appointed hundreds of officials, nurtured the legitimate sons of doctors, selected the virtuous, promoted the children of former ministers, rewarded the meritorious ministers of the former dynasty, suspended past punishments, pardoned prisoners, pardoned suspects, recruited virtuous people, assisted widows and widowers, employed the talents that were not used by the deposed, raised old people and children, supported orphans with disabilities, and old people over the age of seventy, received the mourners in person, and respectfully called them the king's father. Those old people are willing to obey orders.

