古文：己卯正月初一日在鸡山狮子林莘野静室。
现代文：己卯年正月初一日在鸡足山狮子林萃野的静室。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, I was in the quiet room of the lion forest of Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：是早天气澄澈，旭日当前。
现代文：这天早晨空气澄澈，旭日当空升起。
English: On this morning, the air is clear and the rising sun rises in the sky.

古文：余平明起，礼佛而饭，乃上隐空、兰宗二静室。
现代文：我天亮起床，拜佛后吃饭，于是上隐空、兰宗两处静室。
English: I got up early in the morning, worshipped Buddha and then had dinner, so I went to two seclusion rooms, Shangkeng and Lanzong.

古文：又过野愚静室，野愚已下兰宗处。
现代文：又拜访野愚的静室，野愚己经到兰宗那里去了。
English: They also visited Noguchi's seclusion room, and Noguchi went to see Lanzong.

古文：遂从上径平行而西，入念佛堂，是为白云师禅栖之所，狮林开创首处也。
现代文：就从上面的小路往西平行，进入念佛堂，这是白云法师坐禅居住的地方，为狮子林首先开创的静室。
English: From the path above, go west parallel and enter the Nembutsu Hall, which is the place where Baiyun Mage lives and meditates, and is the first quiet room created by Lion Forest.

古文：先是有大力师者，苦行清修，与兰宗先结静其下，后白云结此庐与之同栖，乃狮林最中，亦最高处。
现代文：早先有大力法师苦心修行，和兰宗先在下面建静室，后来白云法师建筑此屋和他们居住在一起，是狮子林最正中，也是最高的地方。
English: In the early days, there was a vigorous mage who practiced hard, and he and Lan Zong first built a quiet room below. Later, Baiyun Mage built this house and they lived together. It is the most central and highest place in the lion forest.

古文：其地初无泉，以地高不能刳木ｋū把树木剖开挖空以引。
现代文：这里最初没有泉水，因地势高而不能用剖开的树木引水。
English: At first, there was no spring here, and because of the high terrain, it was not possible to divert water with cut trees.

古文：二师积行通神，忽一日，白云从龛后龙脊中垂间，劖石得泉。
现代文：二位法师积德感通神灵，忽然有一天，白云法师从石屋背后龙脊正正下垂的中间，凿石得到泉水。
English: The two sorcerers had the virtue of being able to communicate with the gods. Suddenly, one day, Baiyun sorcerer chiseled a stone to get spring water from the middle of the dragon's ridge behind the stone house.

古文：其事甚异，而莫之传。
现代文：这事很神奇，但没有谁宣传。
English: It's amazing, but no one is talking about it.

古文：余入龛，见石脊中峙为崖，崖左有穴一龛，高二尺，深广亦如之。
现代文：我进人石屋，看到石脊峙立在正中形成崖壁，崖壁左部有一个石洞，二尺高，深度宽度也相同。
English: I entered the stone house and saw the stone ridge standing in the middle to form a cliff wall. On the left of the cliff wall there is a stone cave, two feet high, with the same depth and width.

古文：穴外石倒垂如檐，泉从檐内循檐下注，檐内穴顶中空，而水不从空处溢，檐外崖石峭削，而水不从削处坠，倒注于檐，如贯珠垂玉。
现代文：洞外石壁倒垂，如同屋檐，泉水从檐内顺檐往下流，檐内洞顶是中空的，但水没有从中空处溢出来，檐外崖石陡峭，但水没有从峭壁上坠落，而是倒流于檐内，如联珠成串、玉水垂落。
English: The stone walls outside the cave are hanging down, like eaves, and the spring water flows down from inside the cave. The top of the cave inside the cave is hollow, but the water does not overflow from the middle of the space. The cliff outside the cave is steep, but the water does not fall from the cliff, but flows back inside the cave, like beads in a string, jade water hanging down.

古文：穴底汇方池一函，旁皆菖蒲茸茸，白云折梅花浸其间，清冷映人心目。
现代文：洞底汇成一汪方池，旁边都是茸茸的营蒲，白云法师折了梅花枝泡在其中，清心高洁，映人心目。
English: The bottom of the cave merges into a large square pool, next to which are the shaggy yakitori, and Baiyun Mage breaks a plum blossom branch to soak in it. It is pure and clean, reflecting the human eye.

古文：余攀崖得之以为奇，因询此龙脊中垂，非比两腋，何以泉从其隆起处破石而出？
现代文：我攀崖得以看见这一切，认为神奇，就询问龙脊正正下垂，不和两旁相连，为什么泉水会从隆起处穿石而出？
English: I climbed the cliff to see all this, thought it was amazing, and asked the dragon's ridge is sagging, not connected to the sides, why does the spring water come out from the embankment through the stone?

古文：白云言： 昔年剜石得之，至今不绝。 
现代文：白云说： 从前凿石便找到水，至今不断。 
English: Baiyun said, "Once upon a time, water was found by chiseling stones, and this has continued to this day.

古文：余益奇之。
现代文：我更加惊奇。
English: I was even more surprised.

古文：后遇兰宗，始征询问其详。
现代文：后来遇到兰宗，才问其详情。
English: Later, when I met Lanzong, I asked him for more details.

古文：乃知天神供养之事，佛无诳语，而昔之所称卓锡、虎跑，于此得其征矣。
现代文：于是知道天神供养的事，佛门没有班语，而从前所传说的卓锡泉、虎跑泉，从这里得到了印证。
English: As a result, it was known that the matter of the offering of the gods, the Buddhist gate did not have a banner language, and the formerly legendary Zhuoxi Spring and Tiger Run Spring were confirmed from here.

古文：龛前编柏为栏，茸翠环绕，若短屏回合。
现代文：石屋前编柏树枝为栏杆，毛茸茸的绿色环绕，像矮屏风曲折接合。
English: In front of the stone house, the branches of the braided cypress trees form a railing, surrounded by fluffy greenery, twisted and joined like a low screen.

古文：白云迎余茶点，且指余曰： 此西尚有二静室可娱，乞少延憩，当瀹ｙｕè烹煮山蔬以待也。 余从之。
现代文：石阶前的绣墩草，又圆又高像重叠而成，在上面结枷跌坐，蒲团、锦垫都比不上。石屋很狭窄，前面盖有松棚，正在供佛、举行拜忏仪式。白云法师用茶点迎接我，并指着对我说： 这西边还有两处静室可以消遣，请稍微多休息一会，让我煮山里的蔬菜来招待。 我听从了。
English: The embroidered rushes in front of the stone steps are round and tall, like overlapping cucumbers, on which yokes are tied and sat, and neither futons nor cushions can be compared. The stone house is very narrow, with a pine shed in front, and they are offering Buddha and holding a confession ceremony. Baiyun Mage greeted me with tea, and pointed to me and said: There are two quiet rooms on the west side that can be used for recreation. Please rest a little longer, and let me cook vegetables from the mountains to entertain you. I obeyed.

古文：西过竹间。见二僧坐木根曝背，一引余西入一室。
现代文：往西从竹林中穿过，看见二位僧人坐在树根上晒背，一僧带我往西进人一处静室。
English: Walking west through the bamboo forest, I saw two monks sitting on the roots of a tree, sunning their backs. One monk led me west into a seclusion room.

古文：其室三楹，乃新辟者，前甃石为台，势甚开整，室之轩几，无不精洁，佛龛花供，皆极精严，而不见静主。
现代文：静室分为三间，是新建的，室前用石砌成台，地势十分开阔整齐，室中的栏杆几案，无一不精致整洁，佛完和供奉的花，都极其精巧庄严，但没见静室主人。
English: The seclusion room is divided into three rooms and is newly built. The front of the room is made of stone blocks, the terrain is very open and tidy, the railings in the room are several cases, all of which are refined and neat, and the Buddha and the flowers offered are extremely delicate and solemn, but the owner of the seclusion room is not seen.

古文：询之，曰： 白云龛礼忏司鼓者是。 
现代文：询问，回答说： 白云石屋中拜忏仪式的司鼓就是。 
English: Asked, replied: Baiyun stone house in the worship of the confessional ceremony of the Drum Master is.

古文：余谓此僧甚朴，何以有此？
现代文：我认为此僧十分质朴，怎么能有此静室？
English: I think this monk is very simple, how can he have this seclusion room?

古文：乃从其侧又上一龛，额曰 标月 ，而门亦扃。
现代文：于是从旁边又上一间石屋，门额名 标月 ，但门也关着。
English: So another stone house was built next to it, with the name 标月 on the door, but the door was also closed.

古文：乃返过白云而饭。
现代文：就返回去拜访白云法师，然后吃饭。
English: They went back to visit Baiyun Mage and then had dinner.

古文：始知其西之精庐，即悉檀体极师所结，而司鼓僧乃其守者。
现代文：才知道那西边的精致房舍、就是悉檀寺体极法师所建的，而司鼓的僧人只是守屋人。
English: It was only then that I realized that the exquisite building on the west side was built by the head monk of Siddan-ji Temple, and that the monks who played the drums were only the keepers of the house.

古文：饭后，又从念佛堂东上，蹑二龛。
现代文：饭后，又从念佛堂往东上，登上二间石屋。
English: After dinner, we walked east from the Buddhist memorial hall and climbed up to two stone houses.

古文：其一最高，几及岭脊，但其后纯崖无路，其前则旋 崖层叠，路宛转循之，就崖成台，倚树为磴，山光悬绕，真如蹑鹫岭而上也。
现代文：其中一间位置最高，几乎到岭脊，只是背后完全是山崖而无路，前面则环形的崖壁层层叠叠，道路宛转沿崖走，就着崖修成台，靠着树建为梯，山色悬空盘绕，真像踩着灵鸳山而上。
English: One of them is the highest, almost to the ridge, but behind it is a complete cliff and there is no road. In front, the ring-shaped cliff walls are stacked on top of each other. When walking along the cliff to turn the road, it is built into a platform along the cliff, built as a ladder against the trees, and suspended in the air, really like stepping on a coffin.

古文：龛前一突石当中，亦环倚为台，其龛额曰 雪屋 ，为程还笔，号二游，昆明人，有才艺。
现代文：石屋前一块石突立在正中，也环靠为台，石屋的扁额是 雪屋 ，为程还的手笔，而屋门也关着。
English: In front of the stone house, a block of stone protrudes in the middle, and is also surrounded by a platform. The flat front of the stone house is a snow house, which is Cheng's handwriting, and the door is also closed.

古文：而门亦扃。盖皆白云礼忏诸静侣也。
现代文：大概众静侣都去参加白云法师的拜忏仪式了。
English: Probably all the couples have gone to participate in Baiyun Mage's confession ceremony.

古文：又东稍下，再入野愚室，犹未返，因循其东攀东峡。
现代文：又往东逐渐下，再进入野愚的静室，野愚还没回来，于是沿静室东攀登东峡谷。
English: He gradually went down to the east again, and then entered the Wild Fool's quiet room. The Wild Fool had not yet returned, so he climbed along the quiet room east to the East Canyon.

古文：其峡自顶下坠，若与九重崖为分堑者。
现代文：峡谷从顶上往下坠，好像和九重崖形成分堑。
English: The canyon plunges down from the top, seeming to break away from the cliff.

古文：顶上危岩叠叠，峡东亘岩一支，南向而下，即悉檀寺所倚之支也。
现代文：顶上陡岩层叠，峡谷东面横伸出一支山岩，向南延伸而下，就是悉檀寺所靠的支脉。
English: Steep rocks are stacked on the top, and a mountain rock protrudes from the east side of the canyon, extending southward, which is the branch supported by Siddan-ji Temple.

古文：其东即九重崖静室，而隔此峰峡，障不可见。
现代文：东边就是九重崖静室，被此峰和峡谷阻挡，不能看见。
English: To the east is the quiet room of the Jiu Jiao cliff, blocked by this peak and canyon, and cannot be seen.

古文：余昔自一衲轩登顶，从其东攀岩隙直上，惟此未及经行，乃攀险陟之。
现代文：我过去从一钠轩登顶，从轩东攀援岩缝直上，只有这里没来得及经行，于是涉险攀登。
English: In the past, I climbed to the top from the south side of the ridge, and from the east side of the ridge I climbed straight up to the rock crevice, but I didn't have time to go through here, so I risked climbing.

古文：路渐穷，抵峡中，则东峰石壁峻绝，峡下聩壑崩悬，计其路，尚在其下甚深。
现代文：道路渐渐穷尽，抵达峡谷中，则东峰的石壁陡峻到极点，峡谷往下倒塌、深壑崩溃悬空，估计道路还在下面很深的地方。
English: The road is gradually exhausted, and when it reaches the canyon, the stone wall of the east peak is steep to the extreme, the canyon collapses downwards, the abyss collapses and hangs in the air, and it is estimated that the road is still deep below.

古文：乃返从来径，过帘泉翠壁下，再入兰宗庐。知兰宗与野愚俱在玄明精舍，往从之。
现代文：于是返回顺来路走，经过帘泉翠壁下，又进入兰宗的住房 知道兰宗和野愚都在玄明的精舍，就去找他们。
English: So he walked back along the same route, passing under the curtain spring and the green wall, and then entered Lanzong's house. Knowing that Lanzong and the wild fool were both in Xuanming's house, he went to find them.

古文：玄明者，寂光之裔孙也。
现代文：玄明是寂光寺继承衣钵的弟子。
English: Genmei is a disciple of Jakko-ji Temple who inherited the cloak.

古文：其庐新结，与兰宗静室东西相望，在念佛堂之下，莘野山楼之上。
现代文：他的居室新近建成，和兰宗的静室东西相望，在念佛堂之下、苹野的山楼之上。
English: His newly built living room, which faces Lanzong's quiet room from east to west, is located under the Buddhist memorial hall and on top of the mountain tower in Pingye.

古文：阁名雨花，为野愚笔。诸静侣方坐啸其中，余至，共为清谈瀹茗煮茶。
现代文：我前此多次从静舍旁边经过，因翠枝掩映，都没有发现；现在听从兰宗的徒弟指点，才得以找到，是小阁，窗格疏阔，云明雪朗，极其清静雅致。众静侣正坐在阁中闲谈吟咏，我到后，一起泡茶清谈。
English: I had passed by the hermitage many times before, but couldn't find it because it was obscured by greenery; now, I was able to find it by following the instructions of Lanzong's apprentice. It was a small pavilion, with a spacious window, snow-capped clouds, and extremely quiet and elegant. Many quiet couples were sitting in the pavilion and chatting. After I arrived, we made tea together and talked.

古文：日既昃，野愚辈乃上探白云，余乃下憩莘野楼。
现代文：太阳偏西以后，野愚他们才上去探望白云法师，我就下萃野的山楼休息。
English: After the sun moved westward, the wild fools went up to visit Baiyun Mage, and I went down to the mountain tower to rest.

古文：薄暮，兰宗复来，与谈山中诸兰若寺庙的另一称谓缘起，并古德佛教徒对先辈的尊称遗迹，日暮不能竟。初二日饭于莘野，即再过兰宗，欲竟所徵，而兰宗不在。
现代文：快到傍晚时，兰宗又来，和我谈论山中众寺庙的缘起，以及佛门先辈的遗迹，到天黑还没谈完。初二日在萃野这里吃过饭，立即又去拜访兰宗，想听完他所收集的旧事，但兰宗不在。
English: Towards evening, Lanzong came again, and talked to me about the origins of the temples in the mountains, and the remains of the Buddhist ancestors, and did not finish talking until it was dark. I had dinner here in Miyakino on the first two days, and immediately went to visit Lanzong again, wanting to listen to the old things he had collected, but Lanzong was not there.

古文：爱玄明雨花阁精洁，再过之，仍瀹茗剧谈。
现代文：喜爱玄明的雨花阁精致洁净，又去拜访，仍然泡茶畅谈。
English: He likes the refined and clean Yuhua Pavilion, visits again, and still makes tea and chats.

古文：遂扶筇杖西一里，过望台岭。
现代文：于是拄着邓竹杖往西走一里，经过望台岭。
English: So he walked one mile to the west, holding a Deng bamboo cane, and passed through Wang Tai Ling.

古文：此岭在狮林之西，盖与旃檀岭为界者，亦自岭脊南向而下，即大觉寺所倚之冈也，自狮杯西陟其岭，即可望见绝顶西悬，故以 望 名。
现代文：此岭在狮子林之西，是与旎檀岭分界的山，也从岭脊向南延伸下去，就是大觉寺所傍靠的冈，从狮子林西登上望台岭，就可以远看到绝顶悬在西边，所以用 望 作名。
English: This ridge is in the west of the Lion Forest, and is the mountain that separates it from the Sunda Ridge. It also extends southward from the ridge ridge, which is the hill next to the Daikyo Temple. From the west of the Lion Forest to the top of the Lookout Ridge, you can see the peak hanging in the west, so it is named after the lookout.

古文：与其西一岭，又夹壑为坞，诸静室缘之，层累而下，是为旋旃檀岭。
现代文：望台岭和其西边的一座岭，又夹着沟壑形成山坞，众静室顺着坞，层层叠叠往下分布，这就是旗檀岭。
English: The lookout ridge and a ridge on its west side, together with a gully, form a dock, and the quiet rooms follow the dock and are distributed downwards in layers. This is Qiantangling.

古文：先是鸡山静室，只分三处，中为狮子林，西为罗汉壁，东为九重崖，而是岭在狮林、罗汉壁之间，下近于寂光，故寂光诸裔，又开建诸庐，遂继三而为四焉。
现代文：早先鸡足山的静室只分为三处，中间是狮子林，西边是罗汉壁，东边是九重崖，而梅檀岭在狮子林、罗汉壁之间，下面靠近寂光寺，所以寂光寺的众后代弟子又开辟、建成众静室，于是接三处静室之后成为第四处。
English: In the early days, there were only three seclusion rooms on Jiu Foot Mountain. In the middle was the Lion Forest, on the west was the Luohan Wall, and on the east was the Nine-Storied Cliff. On the other hand, Meidanling was between the Lion Forest and the Luohan Wall, and below it was close to Jakuang Temple. Therefore, the descendants of the disciples of Jakuang Temple opened and built more seclusion rooms. After three seclusion rooms, it became the fourth place.

古文：盖其诸庐在峡间，东为望台岭，西为旃檀岭，此岭又与罗汉壁为界者，又自岭脊南向而下，即寂光寺所倚之支也，是为中支。
现代文：众静室所在的峡谷中，东边为望台岭，西边为旗檀岭，此岭又和罗汉壁分界，又从岭脊往南伸下去，就是寂光寺所傍靠的支脉，这是中支。
English: In the canyon where the Zongjing Room is located, the east side is the Wang Tai Ridge, and the west side is the Qiantan Ridge. This ridge is also the boundary with the Luo Han Wall, and it extends southward from the ridge. It is the branch that Jakuang Temple is adjacent to. This is the middle branch.

古文：盖罗汉壁之东，回崖自岭脊分隤南下，既结寂光，由其前又南度东转，为观音阁、息阴轩，峙为瀑布东岭，于是又度脊而南，为牟尼庵，又前突为中岭，若建标于中，而大士阁倚其端，龙潭、瀑布二水其下，一山之脉络，皆以兹为绾毂ｗｎｇǔ控扼路口云。
现代文：罗汉壁的东边，迂回的崖壁顺岭脊分裂往南伸下去，建盖寂光寺后，朝前又往南延伸转向东，建有观音阁、息阴轩，峙立为瀑布东岭，于是又越脊往南，为牟尼庵，又往前突起为中岭，像在正中建立标志，而大士阁傍靠在边缘上，龙潭、瀑布两股水流在山下交汇，一座山的脉络，都是以此为凑集点。
English: On the east side of the Luohan Wall, the circuitous cliff wall Shunling Ridge splits and extends to the south. After the construction of Shiguang Temple, it extends southward and turns eastward. There are Guanyin Pavilion and Xiyin Pavilion, standing as the waterfall East Ridge. Then the ridge goes south, is Munian, and protrudes forward as the middle ridge. It is like building a sign in the middle, while the side of Dasgak leans on the edge. Longtan and the waterfall are two streams converging at the bottom of the mountain. The veins of a mountain are all concentrated at this point.

古文：逾望台岭西三里，由诸庐上盘壑而西三里，又盘岭而南北转一里，北崖皆插天盘云，如列霞绡，而西皆所谓罗汉壁也。
现代文：越过望台岭往西三里，顺众静室边盘绕壑谷往西走三里，又盘绕岭往南走，转北一里，北边的山崖都是插向天际，白云环绕，如罩彩色轻纱罗列，而西边都是所谓的罗汉壁。
English: Cross the Wangfujing Mountains and walk west for three miles, walk west for three miles along the Shunzhongjing Room, walk south around the mountains and turn north for one mile. The cliffs on the north side are all inserted into the sky, surrounded by white clouds, like a row of colored gauze, while the west side is the so-called Luohan Wall.

古文：东自旃檀岭，西至仰高亭峡，倒插于众壑之上，当其东垂之褶ｚｈě折叠者，幻空师结庐处也。
现代文：壁东边起自旗檀岭，西边到仰高亭峡谷，倒插于众壑谷之上，位于壁东边的折迭处，是幻空法师建的房舍。
English: On the east side of the wall, it stretches from Qidanling, on the west side to Yanggaoting canyon, and on the other side, it is inserted on top of Zhuozhu valley. At the folding point on the east side of the wall, it is a house built by a phantom sky wizard.

古文：真武阁倚壁足，其下曲径纵横，石级层叠，师因分箐为篱，点石为台，就阁而憩焉。
现代文：真武阁靠在壁足，阁下曲折的小路纵横，石阶层层叠叠，法师沿着裂开的警沟筑篱笆，点石为台，就着阁居住。
English: Zhenwu Pavilion is located at the foot of the wall. You will find winding paths, stone layers stacked on top of each other. The mages built a fence along the cracked police ditch, using the stones as a platform, and lived in the pavilion.

古文：其下诸徒辟为丛林，今名碧云者也。
现代文：阁下面众弟子开辟为寺院，是现在的碧云寺。
English: His disciples built a temple under the pavilion, which is now the Biyun Temple.

古文：余前已访幻空返，忆阁间有陈郡侯天工诗未录，因再过录之。
现代文：我在前已经拜访过幻空师，返回后，回忆起阁中陈郡侯的诗没有录，于是又去拜访而录诗。
English: I had already visited the illusionist before, and after returning, I recalled that there was no record of Chen Guanzhong's poem in the cabinet, so I went to visit him again and recorded a poem.

古文：师复款谈甚久，出果饷之榻间。
现代文：法师又恳谈了很久，取出果子在榻间款待。
English: The sorcerer had a long talk with him, took out the fruit and entertained him on the bed.

古文：阁两旁俱有静室旁通，皆其徒所居，而无路达西来寺，必仍下碧云。
现代文：阁两旁都有静室通着，都是法师徒弟的居室，但没有路通西来寺，必须仍然下到碧云寺。
English: On both sides of the pavilion, there are still rooms leading to it, all of which are the living rooms of the mage's apprentices, but there is no way to the Xilai Temple, so you still have to go down to the Biyun Temple.

古文：由山门西盘崖坡，又一里半，北上半里，抵壁足，则陕西僧明空所结庵也，今名西来寺北京、陕西、河南三僧，俱以地名，今京、陕之名几并重。
现代文：从山门往西绕崖坡，又走一里半，往北上半里，到达壁脚，则是陕西僧人明空所建的庵，如今名西来寺。北京、陕西、河南三位僧人，都是以地方作僧名，现在北京僧、陕西僧的名声几乎并重。
English: From the mountain gate to the west, around the cliff slope, another mile and a half, and to the north, half a mile, to reach the foot of the wall, is the hermitage built by the Shaanxi monk Mingku, now known as Xilai Temple. Beijing, Shaanxi, and Henan three monks, are all named after places. Now the reputation of Beijing monks and Shaanxi monks is almost equal.

古文：以余品之，明空犹俗僧也。
现代文：由我来品评他们，明空还是一般的僧人。
English: It is up to me to judge them, whether they are empty-headed or ordinary monks.

古文：其名之重，以张代巡凤翮同乡，命其住持绝顶迦叶殿，而沐府又以中和山铜殿移而畀之，故声誉赫然。
现代文：他的名声这样重，是因为他是代理巡按张凤翩的同乡，张命他为绝顶迎叶殿住持，而沐府又把中和山铜殿迁移来送给他，所以声誉显赫。
English: His reputation is so important because he is a fellow countryman of Zhang Fengliao, the deputy of Zhang Fengliao, Zhang ordered him to be the abbot of the Yingye Temple, and the Mu government moved the Zhonghe Mountain Bronze Temple to give it to him, so his reputation is outstanding.

古文：然在顶而与河南僧不协，在西来而惟知款接朝山男妇，其识见犹是碧云诸徒流等，不可望幻空后尘也。
现代文：然而在绝顶与河南僧不和，在西来寺却只知道接待朝山的男男女女，他的见识还只是碧云寺众徒弟那一流的，与幻空法师望尘莫及。
English: However, at the very top he did not get along with the monks from Henan Province, while at Xilai Temple he only knew how to receive men and women from Asayama. His insight was only as first-class as that of the disciples at Biyun Temple, and was no match for the phantom sky mage.

古文：然其寺后倚绝壁，云幕霞标比喻高远，屏拥天际，巍峭大观，此为第一。
现代文：然而此寺背靠绝壁，白云为幕，彩霞为标，屏障般地拥在天际，巍峨陡峭的大观，这里就是第一。
English: However, this temple is backed by a cliff, white clouds as a curtain, colorful haze as a standard, barrier-like in the sky, towering steep panorama, here is the first.

古文：寺西有万佛阁，石壁下有泉一方，嵌崖倚壁，深四五尺，阔如之，潴水中涵，不盈不涸。
现代文：寺西有万佛阁，石壁下有一方泉水，靠壁嵌进崖中，有四五尺深，宽也相同，其中涵着的积水，不溢不枯。
English: On the west side of the temple is the Ten Thousand Buddhas Pavilion. There is a spring under the stone wall. It is embedded into the cliff by the wall. It is four or five feet deep and the width is the same. The accumulated water contained in it does not overflow and does not dry out.

古文：万峰之上，纯石之间，汇此一脉，固奇，但不能如白云龛之有感而出，垂空而下，为神异耳。
现代文：万峰之上，纯粹的崖石之中，汇积出这水脉，本来就奇特，只是不能像白云完的水那样有感而出，垂空而下，那是神奇啊。
English: Above the peaks, in the midst of pure cliff stones, this vein of water pours out, which is strange in the first place, but it can't come out with the same feeling as water after a white cloud, and it hangs down into the sky. That's amazing.

古文：观其水色，不甚澄澈，寺中所餐，俱遥引之西峡之上，固知其益不如白云也。
现代文：观看水色，不十分清澈，寺中所吃的水，都是从远处西峡谷引上来的，因此知道此水更加比不上白云完的泉水。
English: Watch the water color, not very clear, the water eaten in the temple is brought up from the distant West Canyon, so know that this water is even less than the spring water of Baiyun.

古文：寺东有三空静室，亦倚绝壁。
现代文：寺东有三空的静室，也是傍靠绝壁。
English: To the east of the temple, there are three empty seclusion rooms, also close to the cliff.

古文：三空与明空俱陕人，为师兄弟，然三空颇超脱有道气，留余饭其庐，已下午矣。
现代文：三空和明空都是陕西人，为师兄弟，但三空人很超脱，有道气，留我在他屋里吃饭，已经是下午了。
English: Sankuan and Mingkuan are both from Shaanxi Province and are my teachers and brothers, but Sankuan is very detached and moralistic. He let me stay in his house for dinner. It was already afternoon.

古文：自西来寺东至此，石壁尤竦峭，寺旁崖迸成洞，其中崆峒，僧悉以游骑填驻其中，不可拦入，深为怅恨。
现代文：从西来寺东到这里，石壁尤其高耸陡峭，寺旁边的崖石裂成洞，空空的，僧人全用来关游客的马，不能进洞游览，深感不痛快，不满意。
English: From the west to the east of the temple to here, the stone wall is particularly high and steep. The cliff next to the temple is broken into a cave, empty. The monks are all used to close the tourists' horses, and they cannot enter the cave for sightseeing. I feel deeply unhappy and dissatisfied.

古文：又有峡自顶剖洼而下，若云门剑壁，嵌隙于中，亦为伟观。
现代文：又有峡谷从顶上剖开洼地而下，像云门剑壁，缝隙镶嵌于其中，也很壮观。
English: There are also canyons that cut through the depression from the top, like the Cloud Gate and the Sword Wall, with gaps embedded in them, which are also spectacular.

古文：僧取薪于顶，俱自此隙投崖下，留为捷径，不能藉为胜概也。
现代文：僧人到顶上取柴，都从这条缝隙投到崖下，留着作为捷径，不能凭借为佳境。
English: When the monks went to the top to fetch firewood, they threw it down the cliff from this crevice, keeping it as a shortcut. It cannot be relied on as a good location.

古文：既饭，复自寺西循崖而去，二里，崖尽而为峡，即仰高亭之上也。
现代文：吃过饭，又从寺西沿崖而去，二里，崖尽头处成为峡谷，就是仰高亭之上。
English: After eating, I walked along the cliff from the west side of the temple. After two miles, the end of the cliff became a canyon, just above the Yanggao Pavilion.

古文：先是余由绝顶经此下，遂从大道入迦叶寺，不及从旁岐东趋罗汉壁，然自迦叶寺回眺崖端，一径如线痕，众窦如云盖，心甚异之，故不惮其晚，以补所未竟。
现代文：在此之前我从绝顶经过这里而下，就顺大路进迎叶寺，来不及顺旁边的岔路往东赶到罗汉壁，而从迎叶寺回头眺望崖端，一条小路如同线痕，众多的洞穴如在云间，心中十分惊异，所以不怕天晚，去补游所没游完的地方。
English: Before that, I went down from the peak here, and went along the main road to Yingye Temple. It was too late to take the side road to the east to get to the Rohan Wall, but looking back from Yingye Temple to the cliff edge, a path was like a line trace, and many caves were like in the clouds. My heart was very surprised, so I was not afraid of the sunset, and went to make up for the places I had not finished swimming.

古文：然其上崖石虽飞嵌空悬，皆如华首之类，无可深入者。
现代文：然而上面虽然崖石飞嵌悬空，却都和华首门之类相同，没有可以深入的。
English: However, although the cliffs and rocks above are suspended in the air, they are all the same as the Huashu Gate and the like, and there is nothing to go deeper into.

古文：乃返，从西来、碧云二寺前，东过旃檀，仍入狮林，至白云龛下，寻玄明精舍。
现代文：于是返回，从西来、碧云二寺之前，往东经过旎檀林，仍然进入狮子林，到白云的石屋下，找玄明的精舍。
English: So he returned, from the west, before the two temples of Biyun, to the east, through the sandalwood forest, still into the lion forest, to the stone house of Baiyun, to find the house of Xuanming.

古文：误入其旁，又得一龛，则翠月师之庐也。
现代文：误从精舍旁边进去，又看到一间石屋，则是翠月法师的居室。
English: By mistake, he went in next to the hermitage and saw a stone house, which turned out to be the living room of Mage Tsuigetsu.

古文：悉檀法眷。前环疏竹，右结松盖为亭，亦萧雅有致，乃少憩之。
现代文：前面环绕着疏朗的竹子，右边用松树建盖为亭，也清雅有致，于是稍作休息。
English: The front is surrounded by sparse bamboo, and the right side is covered with pine trees as a pavilion, which is also elegant and elegant, so take a break.

古文：遂还宿莘野楼，已暮矣。
现代文：到返回萃野楼去住宿时，天已经黑了。
English: It was already dark when we returned to our accommodation at Miyanoro.

古文：初三日晨起，饭。
现代文：初三日早晨起床，吃饭。
English: On the morning of the third day of the first month, I got up and ate.

古文：荷行李将下悉檀，兰宗来邀，欲竟山中未竟之旨，余乃过其庐，为具盒具餐，遍征山中故迹。
现代文：担着行李准备下悉檀寺，兰宗来邀请，想讲完山中没讲完的事迹，我于是到他居室拜访，他为我准备了果盒及饭食，讲遍了山中故迹。
English: Carrying my luggage, I prepared to go down to Shidanzi Temple. Lanzong invited me, wanting to finish telling the unfinished stories in the mountains, so I went to visit him in his living room. He prepared a fruit box and meals for me, and told me all about the ancient stories in the mountains.

古文：既午，有念诚师造其庐，亦欲邀过一饭。
现代文：午后，念诚法师来兰宗的居室访问，也准备邀请过去吃饭。
English: In the afternoon, Nencheng Mage came to visit Lanzong's living room, also preparing to invite him to dinner.

古文：兰宗乃辍所炊，同余过念诚。
现代文：兰宗于是停止做饭，和我一同拜访念诚。
English: So Lanzong stopped cooking and came with me to visit Niancheng.

古文：路经珠帘翠壁下，复徙倚久之。
现代文：道路从珠帘翠壁下经过，又移步傍靠了很久。
English: The road passed under the pearly curtain of green walls, and we walked alongside it for a long time.

古文：盖兰宗所结庐之东，有石崖傍峡而起，高数十丈，其下嵌壁而入，水自崖外飞悬，垂空洒壁，历乱纵横，皆如明珠贯索。
现代文：兰宗建的静室东边，有石崖傍着峡谷而起，高数十丈，下面崖壁嵌进去，水顺崖外飞悬，垂空洒向崖壁，纷乱纵横，完全如同绳索联贯的明珠。
English: On the east side of the quiet room built by Lan Zong, there is a stone cliff rising next to the canyon, dozens of meters high, with the cliff wall embedded below, the water flying along the cliff, the sky sprinkling towards the cliff wall, the chaos is vertical and horizontal, completely like a pearl connected by a rope.

古文：余因排帘入嵌壁中，外望兰宗诸人，如隔雾牵绡，其前树影花枝，俱飞魂濯魄，极罨映之妙。
现代文：我于是排开水帘进入凹嵌的壁中，往外看兰宗等人，如隔着云雾，绕着轻纱，瀑布前的树影花枝，都令人魂魄飞腾凡明净，极尽掩映之妙。
English: I then opened the curtain of water to enter the inlaid wall, and looked out at Lanzong and others, such as through the clouds, around the light yarn, the shadow of the tree branches in front of the waterfall, all of which are soul-stirring and clear, and very good at hiding.

古文：崖之西畔，有绿苔上翳，若绚彩铺绒，翠色欲滴，此又化工之点染，非石非岚，另成幻相者也。
现代文：崖的西半边，有青苔覆盖在上面，像铺着绚丽多彩的绒毯，翠色欲滴，这又是大自然创造的精致染品，既非石崖，又非山林中的雾气，形成又一种幻景。
English: The western half of the cliff is covered with moss, like a colorful velvet blanket, and the emerald color is dripping. This is a delicate dye created by nature. It is neither a cliff nor a mist in the forest, forming another kind of illusion.

古文：崖旁山木合沓，琼枝瑶干，连幄成阴，杂花成彩。
现代文：山崖边树木缤纷繁多，琼枝玉干，连幌成阴，杂花成彩。
English: There are many colorful trees on the edge of the mountain cliff, including Qiong Zhi Yujian, Lianhoro, and Zhengcai.

古文：兰宗指一木曰： 此扁树，曾他见乎？ 
现代文：兰宗指着一棵树说： 这是扁形树，其它地方曾见过吗？ 
English: Lan Zong pointed to a tree and said, "This is a flat-shaped tree. Have you seen it anywhere else?"

古文：盖古木一株，自根横卧丈余，始直耸而起，横卧处不圆而扁，若侧石偃路旁，高三尺，而厚不及尺，余初疑以为石也，至是循视其端，乃信以为树。
现代文：原来是一棵古树，从根开始横卧一丈多，才直耸起来，横卧的那一段不圆却扁，像石块侧躺在路旁，有三尺高，而厚度不到一尺，我当初怀疑是石，到这时顺着看它的上端，才相信是树。
English: It turned out to be an ancient tree. From the root, it was lying more than a foot tall before it stood upright. The lying part was not round but flat, like a stone lying on the side of the road. It was three feet high, but less than a foot thick. At first, I suspected it was a stone, but when I looked at its upper end, I believed it was a tree.

古文：盖石借草为色，木借石为形，皆非故质矣。
现代文：石壁借草作颜色，树木借石作形状，都不是原来的模样了。
English: Stone walls borrow grass for color, trees borrow stone for shape, neither of which is the original appearance.

古文：东半里，饭于念诚庐。
现代文：往东半里，到念诚的居室吃饭。
English: Half a mile to the east, to Nenshin's living room for dinner.

古文：别兰宗，南向下之字曲，半里，又入义轩庐。
现代文：和兰宗告别，往南下 之 字形的弯，半里，又进入义轩的居室。
English: Saying goodbye to Lanzong, I walked southward along the zigzag curve for half a mile, and then entered Yixuan's room.

古文：义轩，大觉之派，新构静室于此，乃狮林之东南极处也。
现代文：义轩是大觉寺一派，新近在这里建盖静室，位置在狮子林的东南尽头处。
English: Yixuan is a branch of Dajue Temple. Recently, a meditation room was built here, located at the southeast end of the lion forest.

古文：其上为念诚庐，最上为大静室，即野愚所栖，是为东支。
现代文：上面是念诚的居室，最上面是大静室，就是野愚所居住的地方，这里为东支。
English: Above is Nenshin's living room, and at the top is the large quiet room, the place where the wild fool lived. This is the east branch.

古文：莘野楼为西南极处，其上为玄明精舍，最上为体极所构新庐，是为西支。
现代文：萃野的山楼在西南边尽头处，上面是玄明的精舍，最上面是体极所新建的居室，这是西支。
English: The mountain tower of Tsuchino is at the end of the southwest side. Above it is the residence of Genmei, and at the top is the newly built living room of Taiji, which is the west branch.

古文：而珠帘之崖，当峡之中，傍峡者为兰宗庐，其上为隐空庐，最上为念佛堂，即白云师之庐也，是为中支。
现代文：而珠帘翠壁，位于峡谷正中，紧靠峡谷的是兰宗的居室，上面为隐空的居室，最上面是念佛堂，就是白云的居室，这是中支。
English: The beaded curtain wall is located in the middle of the canyon. Next to the canyon is Lanzong's room, above it is the hidden room, and at the top is the Buddhist memorial hall, which is Baiyun's room. This is the middle branch.

古文：其间径转崖分，缀一室即有一室之妙，其盘旋回结，各各成境，正如巨莲一朵，瓣分千片，而片片自成一界，各无欠缺也。
现代文：其间路转崖分，点缀一处静室就有一室之妙，静室盘旋着来回建筑，各自形成境界，正像一朵巨大的莲花，花瓣分成千片，而片片都自成一个境界，各自都没有欠缺。
English: In the meantime, the road turns into a cliff, and the decoration of a quiet room has a room wonder. The quiet room spirals back and forth to the building, each forming a boundary, just like a huge lotus flower, the petals are divided into a thousand pieces, and the pieces are all in a realm of their own, each one is not lacking.

古文：从义轩庐又南向 之 字下，一里余，过天香静室。天香，幻住庵僧也，其年九十，余初上觅莘野庐，首过此问道者。
现代文：从义轩的居室又往南作 之 字形下，一里多，经过天香的静室，天香是幻住庵的僧人，有九十岁，我当初上去找苹野的住处，首先经过这里问路。
English: From Yixuan's living room, I walked more than a kilometer to the south, passing Tian Xiang's seclusion room. Tian Xiang is a ninety-year-old monk who lives in a phantom hermitage. When I first went to look for Pingye's residence, I first asked for directions here.

古文：又南一里，过幻住庵，其西即兰陀寺也，分陇对衡，狮林之水，界于左右，而合于其下焉。
现代文：又往南一里，经过幻住庵，庵西就是兰陀寺，分陇平行相对，狮子林的水，分流于左右，而汇合于其下。
English: Another mile to the south, past the hallucinatory hermitage, west of the hermitage is the Lando Temple, with the fork parallel to the opposite, the water of the lion forest, diverging on the left and right, but converging under it.

古文：又南下一里余，二水始合，渡之即为大乘庵。
现代文：又往南下一里多，二股水才汇合，渡过去就是大乘庵。
English: Further south, more than a kilometer, the two streams meet, and the crossing is the Daijyo-an.

古文：由涧南东向循之，半里，水折而南，复逾涧东南下，一里，过无我、无息二庵。
现代文：从沟涧南岸往东沿沟涧走，半里，水转南流，又越过沟涧往东南下，一里，经过无我、无息二庵。
English: From the south bank of the gully to the east along the gully, half a mile, the water turns southward, and then crosses the gully to the southeast, one mile, passing through the no-self, no-satisfaction two-an.

古文：其下即为小龙潭、五花庵，已在悉檀寺右廓之外，而冈陇间隔。
现代文：下面就是小龙潭、五花庵，已在悉檀寺右墙之外，但间隔着冈陇。
English: Below is Xiaolongtan and Wuhua'an, which are already outside the right wall of Siddan Temple, but separated by a ridge.

古文：复逾涧南过迎祥寺，乃东向随涧行，一里，抵寺西虎砂，即前暗中摸索处也。
现代文：又越过沟涧往南经过迎祥寺，于是向东顺沟涧行，一里，到寺西边的虎砂，就是以前在黑暗中摸索的地方。
English: Then I crossed the gully to the south, passing Yingxiao Temple, so I walked east along the gully for one mile, to the tiger sand on the west side of the temple, which is where I used to grope in the dark.

古文：其支自兰陀南来，至迎祥转而东，横亘于悉檀寺之前，东接内突龙砂兜黑龙潭于内，为悉檀第一重案。
现代文：此支脉从兰陀寺向南伸来，到迎祥寺转向东延伸，横贯于悉檀寺之前，东接突起于内的龙砂，围绕黑龙潭于内，是悉檀寺第一重案山。
English: This branch extends from Lando Temple to the south, and turns to the east at Yingxiao Temple. It runs across the front of Siddan Temple, east to the dragon sand protruding inside, and around the Black Dragon Pool inside. It is the first major mountain of Siddan Temple.

古文：其内则障狮林之水，东向龙潭；其外则界旃檀之水，合于龙潭下流，而脉遂止于此焉。
现代文：其内则阻住狮子林的水，向东流入龙潭；其外则分界旗檀林的水，在龙潭下游汇合，而支脉就延伸到此为止。
English: Within it, the water of the Lion Forest flows eastward into the Longtan; outside it, the water of the Demarcation Flag Danglin converges in the lower reaches of the Longtan, and the branch extends here.

古文：于是又北逾涧半里，入悉檀寺，与弘辨诸上人相见，若并州故乡焉。
现代文：于是又往北越过沟涧走半里，进入悉檀寺，与弘辨等上人相见，像并州故乡的人一样。
English: So he walked half a mile north across the gully and entered Siddan Monastery, where he met with gurus such as Hongban, just like the people in his hometown of Bozhou.

古文：前同莘野乃翁由寺入狮林，寺前杏花初放，各折一枝携之上；既下，则寺前桃亦缤纷，前之杏色愈浅而繁，后之桃靥更新而艳，五日之间，芳菲乃尔。
现代文：以前同萃野的父亲从悉檀寺进狮子林，寺前的杏花刚刚开放，各人折了一枝带上去；下来后，则寺前的桃花也缤纷开放，在前开的杏花颜色益发浅而繁，后开的桃花容颜更加新而艳，五天之中，竟有如此芳菲。
English: Previously, the father of the same field entered the lion forest from Siddan-ji Temple. The apricot flowers in front of the temple had just opened, and each person folded a branch to take it up. After coming down, the peach blossoms in front of the temple were also colorful and open. The color of the apricot flowers in front of the temple became lighter and more abundant, and the peach blossoms behind the temple had a more fresh and bright appearance. In five days, there was such beauty.

古文：睹春色之来天地，益感浮云之变古今也。
现代文：目睹天地间春色的来临，越发感到古今事物的变幻不定。
English: Witnessing the coming of spring between heaven and earth, I feel more and more that things of the past and present are changeable.

古文：初四日饭于悉檀，即携杖西过迎祥、石钟二寺。
现代文：初四日在悉檀寺吃过饭，就携带拐杖往西经过迎祥、石钟二寺。
English: After eating at Siddan-ji Temple on the first four days, I carried my crutches west past Yingxiang and Shi Zhong two temples.

古文：共二里，于石钟、西竺之前，逾涧而南，即前山所来大道也。
现代文：一共走二里，在石钟寺、西竺寺之前，越过沟涧往南走，就是前山通来的大路。
English: We walked a total of two miles. Before reaching Shi Zhong Temple and Xidi Temple, we crossed the gully to the south, which is the main road leading to Qianshan.

古文：余前自报恩寺后渡溪分道，误循龙潭溪而上，不及过大士阁出此，而行李从此来。
现代文：我以前从报恩寺后渡过溪水分路，误沿龙潭溪而上，来不及经过大士阁走出此地，而行李却顺此过来。
English: I used to cross the creek waterway from the back of the Boonji Temple and mistakenly went up the Longtan Creek. It was too late to go out of this place through the Daishi Pavilion, but the luggage came along.

古文：顾仆言大士阁后有瀑甚奇，从此下不远，从之，即逾脊。
现代文：顾仆说大士阁后有很奇妙的瀑布，从这里下去不远，听他的话，就翻越山脊。
English: Gu's servant said that there was a very strange waterfall behind the Daishi Pavilion, not far from here. Listening to his words, I climbed over the ridge.

古文：脊甚狭而平，脊南即瀑布所下之峡，脊北即石桥所下之涧，脊西自息阴轩来，过此南突而为牟尼庵，尽于大士阁者也。
现代文：山脊很狭窄但平坦，脊南就是瀑布流下去的峡谷，脊北就是石桥下面的沟涧，山脊从西边的息阴轩伸来，经过这里往南突起为牟尼庵，到大士阁结束。
English: The ridge is very narrow but flat. South of the ridge is the canyon where the waterfall flows down. North of the ridge is the gully under the stone bridge. The ridge extends from the west side of Siyin Xuan, passes through here and protrudes to the south as Munian, and ends at Dashi Pavilion.

古文：脊南大路从东南循岭，观瀑亭倚之。
现代文：脊南大路从东南顺岭走，观瀑亭傍靠着路。
English: Take Jiannan Road from Southeast Shunling. The waterfall viewing pavilion is next to the road.

古文：瀑布从西南透峡，玉龙阁跨之。
现代文：瀑布从西南穿过峡谷，玉龙阁横跨在瀑布上。
English: The waterfall crosses the canyon from the southwest, and the Jade Dragon Pavilion straddles the waterfall.

古文：由观瀑亭对崖瞰瀑布从玉龙阁下隤降，坠崖悬练，深百余丈，直注峡底，峡逼箐深，俯视不能及其麓。
现代文：从观瀑亭对面的崖上俯瞰瀑布从玉龙阁之下散落，悬空的银练坠在崖端，深一百多丈，直注峡谷底，峡谷狭窄，著沟深陷，俯视不到崖麓。
English: Looking down from the cliff opposite the waterfall viewing pavilion, the waterfall is scattered from under the Jade Dragon Pavilion, the suspended silver drill falls on the cliff edge, more than a hundred feet deep, directly into the bottom of the canyon, the canyon is narrow, deeply sunk in the ditch, and the foot of the cliff cannot be seen.

古文：然踞亭俯仰，绝顶浮岚，中悬九天，绝崖隤雪，下嵌九地，兼之霁色澄映，花光浮动，觉此身非复人间，天台石梁，庶几又向昙花亭上来也。
现代文：然而坐在亭中俯仰，绝顶云雾飘浮，悬在九天之中，绝崖积雪坠落，嵌入九地之下，再加上雨后清澈的天色映衬，花光浮动，觉得此时自己如在蓬莱仙境。天台山石梁，有的从昙花亭边伸来。
English: However, sitting in the pavilion, the highest cloud floating, hanging in the middle of the nine days, the snow falling from the cliff, embedded under the nine lands, coupled with the clear sky after the rain, the flowers floating, I felt like I was in the Penglai fairyland.

古文：时余神飞玉龙阁，遂不及南下问大士阁之胜，于是仍返脊，南循峡端共一里，陟瀑布之上，登玉龙。
现代文：此时我的思绪飞到玉龙阁，就来不及南下过间大士阁的胜境，于是仍然返回山脊，往南沿峡谷口共走了一里，攀到瀑布之上，登上玉龙阁。
English: At this time, my thoughts flew to the Jade Dragon Pavilion, and I did not have time to go south to the victory of the Daishi Pavilion, so I still returned to the ridge, walked a mile south along the mouth of the canyon, climbed above the waterfall, and ascended the Jade Dragon Pavilion.

古文：其阁跨瀑布上流，当两山峡口，乃西支与中支二大距凑拍处，水自罗汉华严来，至此隤空下捣。
现代文：玉龙阁横跨瀑布上游，位于两座山之间的峡谷口，是鸡足山三距中的西支与中支二大距聚结处，水从罗汉壁、华严寺流来，到这里悬空坠落，往下冲捣。
English: Yulong Pavilion straddles the upper reaches of the waterfall and is located at the mouth of the canyon between two mountains. It is the junction of the west branch and the middle branch of the middle branch of the three-span Chicken Foot Mountain. Water flows from Luohan Wall and Huayan Temple, where it falls from the sky and rushes down.

古文：此一阁正如石梁之横翠，鹊桥之飞空，惜无居人，但觉沓然有花落水流之想。
现代文：此玉龙阁正像石桥横跨青山，鹊桥飞越天空，可惜没有居住的人，只感到沉寂得令人生出落花流水的想法。
English: This Jade Dragon Pavilion is just like a stone bridge across the Qingshan Mountains, and a bamboo bridge flying across the sky. Unfortunately, people who do not live there only feel the silence that gives rise to the idea of flowers and water.

古文：阁为扬冷然师孔所题，与观瀑亭俱为蒋宾川尔弟所建。
现代文：阁名为杨冷然师孔所题写，与观瀑亭都是宾川知州蒋尔弟所建。
English: The name of the pavilion was inscribed by Yang Lengran Shikong, and both the pavilion and the waterfall viewing pavilion were built by Binchuan Zhizhou Jiang Erdi.

古文：有一碑卧楼板，偃踞而录之。
现代文：有一块碑卧在楼板上，蹲伏着录碑文。
English: There is a tablet lying on the floorboard, crouching to record the inscription.

古文：遂沿中支一里，西上息阴轩。
现代文：于是沿中支走一里，往西上息阴轩。
English: So he walked one mile along the middle branch and went westward to Siyinxuan.

古文：从其左北逾涧，又北半里，入大觉寺，叩遍周老师。
现代文：顺轩左往北越过沟涧，又往北走半里，进入大觉寺，叩拜遍周老师。
English: Shun Xuan left to the north across the gully, walked half a mile to the north, entered the Dajue Temple, and bowed to Teacher Hen Zhou.

古文：师为无心法嗣，今年届七十，齿德两高，为山中之耆宿ｑí年高而有道德学问的人。
现代文：遍周师继承无心师的衣钵，今年满七十，年龄、德行都高，是山中年高而有道德学问的人。
English: Master Huan Zhou inherits the mantle of the unintentional teacher. He is 70 years old this year, with high age and virtue. He is a senior and moral scholar in the mountains.

古文：余前与之期以新旦新年往祝，而狮林迟下，又空手而前，殊觉怏怏。
现代文：我先前和他约定在新年时去祝寿，但从狮子林下来迟了，又空手前来，特别感到不安。
English: I had previously agreed with him to go to celebrate his birthday at the New Year, but I felt particularly uneasy when I was late coming down from the lion forest and came back empty-handed.

古文：师留餐于东轩。轩中水由亭沼中射空而上，沼不大，中置一石盆，盆中植一锡管，水自管倒腾空中，其高将三丈，玉痕一缕，自下上喷，随风飞洒，散作空花。
现代文：法师留我在东轩吃饭，轩中有水从亭池中向上射入天空，池不大，中间放着一个石盆，盆中插一根锡管，水顺锡管倒腾于空中，水高将近三丈，一缕玉痕，从下向上喷射，随风飞洒，散落为空中之花。
English: The mage left me to have dinner in Dongxuan. In Dongxuan, there was water shooting up into the sky from the pavilion pool. The pool was small, with a stone basin in the middle. A tin pipe was inserted in the basin, and the water flowed from the tin pipe into the air. The water was nearly three meters high, and a ray of jade was sprayed from the bottom to the top. It flew with the wind and scattered as flowers in the air.

古文：雁宕小龙湫下，昔有双剑泉，其高三尺，但彼则自然石窍，后为人斫窍而水不涌起。
现代文：以前观赏时很惊奇，就怀疑，虽然锡管插在池中，必定和池水没有关系，何况既然能倒喷三丈高，为什么不超出三丈以外？
English: In the past, I was very surprised when watching, and I suspected that although the tin pipe was inserted in the pool, it must have nothing to do with the pool water. Moreover, since it can spray three feet high, why not exceed three feet?

古文：是气泄之验也。余昔候黄石斋于秣陵，见洪武门一肆盒中，亦有水上射，中有一圆物如丸，跳伏其上，其高止三尺，以物色黄君急，不及细勘，当亦此类也。既饭，录碑于西轩。轩中山茶盛开，余前已见之，至是折一技。
现代文：这里肯定另有一股水源，其高度和这喷水相同，那股水往下朝这里坠落，所以再从这里往上喷，就只能到此高度为止，其埋藏的机关应在池底，不是池水能够从下往上喷射。到此时询问，果然是轩左有三丈多高的山崖，水顺崖坠落，用锡管接住，接水处有三丈高，所以倒射而出也一样高，锡管沿地下埋了数十丈，才从池中竖起，锡管一丝气都不泄漏，所以能如此喷发。吃过饭，在西轩录碑。轩中山茶盛开，我在前已看见了，这次折了一枝。
English: There must be another water source here, the height of which is the same as this spray. That water falls downwards towards here, so it can only be sprayed upwards from here up to this height. Its buried organ should be at the bottom of the pool. It is not the pool water that can be sprayed upwards from below. At this time, I inquired. It was indeed the cliff to the left of Xuan Zu that was more than three stories high. The water fell down the cliff and was caught by a tin pipe. The water was caught at a height of three stories, so the backwash was just as high. The tin pipe was buried dozens of feet underground before it was erected from

古文：别遍周，西半里，过一桥，又北上坡一里，入寂光寺。
现代文：和遍周告别，往西半里，过一座桥，又往北上坡一里，进入寂光寺。
English: Saying goodbye to Henchu, I walked half a mile to the west, crossed a bridge, and walked one mile uphill to the north, entering Jakuang Temple.

古文：寺住持先从遍周东轩同餐，至此未返。
现代文：寺中的住持刚才一起在遍周的东轩用餐，到此时还没回来。
English: The abbot of the temple had just dined together at the Dongxuan restaurant, which is all over the city, and had not returned by this time.

古文：余录碑未竟，瞑色将合，携纸已罄，乃返悉檀。
现代文：我还没录完碑，夜色即将来临，携带的纸已经用完，于是返回悉檀寺。
English: I hadn't finished recording the monument, night was approaching, and I had run out of paper to carry, so I returned to Siddanji.

古文：又从大觉东一探龙华、西竺二寺，日暮不能详也。
现代文：又顺大觉寺东探访了一下龙华寺、西竺寺，夭黑不能详细看了。
English: I also visited Longhua Temple and Xidi Temple on the east side of Shundaijie Temple. It was too dark to see them in detail.

