古文：耶律陈家奴，字绵辛，懿祖弟葛剌之八世孙。
现代文：耶律陈家奴，字绵辛，懿祖之弟葛剌的第八世孙。
English: Ye Lu Chen Jia Nu, the eighth generation grandson of Ge Zhuang, the younger brother of the founder.

古文：重熙中，补牌印郎君。
现代文：重熙年间，补为牌印郎君。
English: During the Reign of King Heung Hee, Sui was known as "Pai Inro-kun."

古文：坐直日不至，降本班。
现代文：因当值之日未到，降为本班。
English: Due to the fact that the day of the shift did not arrive, he was relegated to this class.

古文：会帝猎，陈家奴逐鹿围内，鞭之二百。
现代文：适逢兴宗皇上出猎，陈家奴在围场内逐鹿，被鞭打二百。
English: When Emperor Xingzong went hunting, Chen Jiannu chased a deer in the paddock and was whipped 200 times.

古文：时耶律仁先荐陈家奴健捷比海东青鹘，授御盏郎君。
现代文：当时耶律仁先荐举说陈家奴雄健而敏捷，可与海东青鹘相比拟，皇上授之御盏郎君。
English: At that time, Yerujin first recommended that Chen Jia Nong was strong and agile, comparable to the East Sea youth, and the Emperor awarded him the title of prince.

古文：历鹰坊、尚厩、四方馆副使，改徒鲁古皮室详稳。
现代文：历任鹰坊、尚厩、四方馆副使，改任徒鲁古皮室详稳。
English: Successive vice-envoys of Yingfang, Shangmai, and Shifang Pavilion were appointed to the office of Tu Lu Gupi.

古文：会太后生辰，进诗献驯鹿，太后嘉奖，赐珠二琲，杂彩二百段。兄撒钵卒，陈家奴闻讣，不告而去。
现代文：适逢太后生辰，陈家奴进献诗篇和驯鹿，太后嘉许并给予奖励，赐给宝珠二王非，杂彩丝绸二百段，其兄撒钵去世，陈家奴听到凶信，没有禀告便离去了。
English: On the occasion of the birthday of the Empress Dowager, Chen Jia Nu presented poems and reindeer, and the Empress Dowager commended and rewarded him. He was given the Pearl of Great Price, 200 pieces of variegated silk, and his brother, Saju, passed away. When Chen Jia Nu heard the ominous letter, he left without an obituary.

古文：帝怒，鞭之。
现代文：皇上发怒，鞭打了他。
English: The emperor got angry and whipped him.

古文：清宁初，累迁右夷离毕。
现代文：清宁初，累迁为右夷离毕。
English: At the beginning of the Qing and Ning Dynasties, the right-wing barbarians left the area.

古文：适帝与燕国王射鹿俱中，王时年九岁，帝悦，陈家奴应制进诗。
现代文：适逢道宗皇上与燕国王射鹿均射中了，燕国王时年九岁，皇上大喜，陈家奴应制命进献了诗篇。
English: When Emperor Daozong and King Yan both shot deer, King Yan was nine years old, the emperor was overjoyed, and Chen Jiannu was ordered to present a poem.

古文：帝喜，解衣以赐。
现代文：皇上高兴，解下衣服赐给他。
English: The emperor was pleased and gave him the robe.

古文：后皇太子废，帝疑陈家奴党附，罢之。
现代文：后来皇太子被废，皇上怀疑陈家奴党附于太子，罢免其职。
English: Later, the crown prince was abolished, and the emperor suspected that Chen Jianu's party was attached to the crown prince and dismissed him.

古文：时西北诸部寇边，以陈家奴为乌古部节度使行军都监，赐甲一属、马二匹，讨诸部，擒其酋送于朝。
现代文：当时西北诸部侵扰边境，皇上任命陈家奴为乌古部节度使行军都监，赐给甲一属、马二匹，讨伐诸部，擒获其酋长送至朝廷。
English: At that time, the northwestern provinces were invading the border, and the emperor appointed Chen Jia Nong as the governor of the ancient provinces to supervise the march of the troops, and gave A a tribe and two horses to fight against the provinces, and captured their chiefs and sent them to the imperial court.

古文：侦候者见马踪，意寇至，陈家奴遣报元帅，耶律爱奴视之曰： 此野马也！ 
现代文：侦候人员见到马的踪迹，认为是敌人来了，陈家奴派人报告元帅，耶律爱奴看了看说： 此乃野马！ 
English: When the scouts saw the horse's tracks, they thought that the enemy had arrived. Chen Jiannu sent someone to report to the marshal. Jeru Ainu looked at it and said, "This is a wild horse!"

古文：将出猎，贼至，爱奴战殁。
现代文：准备出猎，敌人来了，爱奴战死。
English: Prepare to go hunting, the enemy is coming, love your slave and die in battle.

古文：有司诘按，陈家奴不伏，诏释之。
现代文：有司查究讯问，陈家奴不伏罪，诏令释免之。
English: After investigation and interrogation by the Division of Criminal Investigation, Chen Jia Nu did not plead guilty and was released by imperial edict.

古文：由是感激，每事竭力。
现代文：因此感动愤激，凡事都尽心竭力。
English: Therefore, he was moved with indignation and did his best in everything.

古文：后诸部复来侵，陈家奴率兵三往，皆克，边境遂宁。
现代文：后来诸部再度进犯，陈家奴率兵三次前往讨伐，都获得胜利，边境因此得到了安宁。
English: Later, the various departments attacked again, and Chen Jia Nu led the troops to go to the crusade three times, all of which were successful, and the border was thus pacified.

古文：以老告归，不从。
现代文：因年老告辞返乡，皇上不从。
English: Due to his old age, he returned home, but the emperor did not follow his advice.

古文：道宗崩，为山陵使，致仕。年八十卒。
现代文：道宗皇上崩逝，陈家奴担任山陵使。辞官，年八十去世。
English: Emperor Daozong passed away, and Chen Jia Nu served as the envoy to the imperial mausoleum. He died at the age of 80.

