古文：孝昭皇帝，武帝少子也。
现代文：汉昭帝，是汉武帝的小儿子。
English: Han Zhao Di, is the youngest son of Han Wu Di.

古文：母曰赵婕妤，本以有奇异得幸，及生帝，亦奇异。
现代文：母亲是赵婕妤，因为有奇异之气得宠，生昭帝的时候，也有奇异之处。
English: His mother was Zhao Yao, who was favored because of her eccentricity. When Emperor Zhao was born, there were also eccentricities.

古文：语在《外戚传》。武帝末，戾太子败，燕王旦、广陵王胥行骄嫚，后元二年二月上疾病，遂立昭帝为太子，年八岁。
现代文：武帝末年，戾太子刘据被废，燕王刘旦、广陵王刘胥都行为骄慢，后元二年二月武帝病重，遂立昭帝为太子，时年八岁。
English: At the end of Emperor Wu's reign, the crown prince Liu Zheng was deposed, and both Yan Wang Liu Dan and Guangling Wang Liu Xuan behaved arrogantly. Emperor Wu fell seriously ill in February of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, and Emperor Zhao was crowned crown prince at the age of eight.

古文：以侍中奉车都尉霍光为大司马大将军，受遗诏辅少主。
现代文：任侍中奉车都尉霍光为大司马大将军，受武帝遗诏辅佐少主。
English: Lieutenant Ho Kwang, who served as an aide-de-camp, was promoted to the rank of major general by Emperor Wu.

古文：明日，武帝崩。戊辰，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙。
现代文：次日武帝驾崩，二月十五日，太子继皇帝位，祭奠高祖祠庙。
English: The next day, Emperor Wu passed away, and on February 15th, the crown prince succeeded to the throne. A memorial service was held at the Gao Ancestral Temple.

古文：帝姊鄂邑公主益汤沐邑，为长公主，共养省中。
现代文：昭帝姐姐鄂邑公主增封汤沐邑，尊为长公主，供养在皇宫中。
English: Emperor Zhao's sister, Princess Om'eop, was awarded the title of Tang Mu'eop, and was respected as the eldest princess, and was provided for in the imperial palace.

古文：大将军光秉政，领尚书事，车骑将军金日磾、左将军上官桀副焉。
现代文：大将军霍光主持国政，领尚书事，车骑将军金日磾、左将军上官桀为其副。
English: General Huo Guang presided over state affairs, leading Shang Shuxing, with General Kim Il Sung riding on a chariot, and General Zuo Shang Guanzhang as his deputy.

古文：夏六月，赦天下。
现代文：夏六月，赦天下罪人。
English: In the summer of June, the sinners of the world will be pardoned.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于东方。
现代文：秋七月，东方空中出现彗星。
English: In autumn and July, a comet appeared in the eastern sky.

古文：济北王宽有罪，自杀。
现代文：济北王刘宽有罪，自杀。
English: Liu Kuan, the king of North Jeju, was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：赐长公主及宗室昆弟各有差。追遵赵婕妤为皇太后，起云陵。
现代文：赏赐长公主及宗室兄弟有差等，追赠赵婕妤为皇太后，并为她修建云阳陵墓。
English: He rewarded the eldest princess and her half-brother, posthumously made Zhao Yao the empress dowager, and built the Yunyang Mausoleum for her.

古文：冬，匈奴入朔方，杀略吏民。
现代文：冬季，匈奴侵入朔方，杀掠吏民百姓。
English: In winter, the Xiongnu invaded the Shuo side and killed and plundered the officials and people.

古文：发军屯西河，左将军桀行北边。
现代文：朝廷发兵屯于西河，左将军上官桀巡视北部边疆。
English: The imperial court sent troops to the West River, and General Zuo was sent to patrol the northern border.

古文：始元元年春二月，黄鹄下建章宫太液池中。公卿上寿。
现代文：始元元年春季二月，黄鹄栖息于建章宫太液池中，公卿以为是祥瑞的象征，祝皇帝万寿无疆。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, in February, Huang Qi roosted in the pond of the Jianzhang Palace. The nobles thought it was a symbol of auspiciousness, and wished the emperor eternal life.

古文：赐诸侯王、列侯、宗室金钱各有差。
现代文：赐各侯王、列侯、宗室的金钱，有差等。
English: Give each lord, vassal, and family money, there are differences.

古文：已亥，上耕于钩盾弄田。
现代文：三月二十三日，昭帝学耕于钩盾田。
English: On March 23rd, Shao Tei Xue began to farm in the Hook Shield Field.

古文：益封燕王、广陵王及鄂邑长公主各万三千户。
现代文：加封燕王、广陵王与鄂邑长公主各一万三千户。
English: In addition, there are 13,000 households in Yan Wang, Guangling Wang and Omur First Princess.

古文：夏，为太后起园庙云陵。
现代文：夏季，为太后起园庙云陵。
English: In summer, the gardens, temples and mausoleums of the empress dowager are in full bloom.

古文：益州廉头、姑缯、牂柯谈指、同并二十四邑皆反。
现代文：益州所属的廉头、姑缯、牂柯的谈指、同并二十四邑皆反。
English: Twenty-four counties in Yishu, including Liantou, Guzheng, and Shinko, are opposed to the merger.

古文：遣水衡都尉吕破胡募吏民及发犍为、蜀郡奔命击益州，大破之。
现代文：朝廷派水衡都尉吕破胡召募吏民并征发犍为、蜀郡的精勇士卒立即开赴益州前线，大破叛军。
English: The imperial court sent the captain of the water balance, Lü Bahu, to call for the recruitment of officials and citizens and to collect and issue the cheques. The elite warriors of Shu County immediately went to the front line in Yizhou and defeated the rebel army.

古文：有司请河内属冀州，河东属并州。
现代文：主管行政区划部门奏请河内归属冀州，河东归属并州。
English: The competent administrative division department requested that Hanoi belong to Jizhou and that Hedong belong to the merged province.

古文：秋七月，赦天下，赐民百户牛、酒。
现代文：秋季七月，大赦天下，赐百姓每百户一头牛及酒。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a general amnesty, and the people were given one cow and wine for every hundred households.

古文：大雨，渭桥绝。
现代文：下大雨，山洪冲断渭桥。
English: Torrential rain, flash floods break through the bridge.

古文：八月，齐孝王孙刘泽谋反，欲杀青州刺史隽不疑，发觉，皆伏诛。
现代文：八月，齐孝王孙刘泽谋反，意图杀害青州刺史隽不疑，被发觉，都被诛。
English: In August, Qi Xiao Wang Sun Liu Ze plotted a rebellion, intending to kill Qingzhou Zhi Shi without a doubt, was discovered, and they were all arrested.

古文：迁不疑为京兆尹，赐钱百万。
现代文：升辒不疑为京兆尹，赏钱百万。
English: There is no doubt that Jing Zhaoyun will be promoted, and he will be rewarded with one million yuan.

古文：九月丙子，车骑将军日磾薨。
现代文：九月二日，车骑将军金日石单去世。
English: On September 2, Cavalry General Kim Il-sung passed away.

古文：闰月，遣故廷尉王平等五人持节行郡国，举贤良，问民所疾苦、冤、失职者。
现代文：闰十月，朝廷派故廷尉王平等五人持符节巡行郡国，察举贤良，调查民间疾苦及冤案、失职等事宜。
English: In leap October, the imperial court sent five men, including the late imperial lieutenant Wang Rongji, to parade through the county on the festival day, to inspect the virtuous, investigate the hardships and grievances of the people, and investigate matters such as dereliction of duty.

古文：冬，无冰。
现代文：冬季温暖没有结冰。
English: The winter was warm and did not freeze.

古文：二年春正月，大将军光、左将军桀皆以前捕斩反虏重合侯马通功封，光为博陆侯，桀为安阳侯。
现代文：二年春季正月，大将军霍光、左将军上官桀都以捕斩反虏重合侯马通有功加封。霍光为博陆侯，上官桀为安阳侯。
English: In the spring of the first month of the second year, the great general Huo Guang and the left general Shang Guan Yu both had the merit of adding the seal with the capture and counter-capture. Huo Guang was Bo Lu Hou, and Shang Guan Yu was Anyang Hou.

古文：以宗室毋在位者，举茂才刘辟强、刘长乐皆为光禄大夫，辟强守长乐卫尉。
现代文：从不在位的宗室中，举荐刘辟强、刘长乐都为光禄大夫，辟强为长乐宫卫尉。
English: Among the family members who have never been enthroned, Liu Biqiang and Liu Changle were recommended as Guanglu doctors, and Biqiang was appointed as the guard of Changle Palace.

古文：三月，遣使者振贷贫民毋种、食者。
现代文：三月，派使者赈贷无种子与粮食的贫民。
English: In March, an emissary was sent to lend money to the seedless and grain-poor.

古文：秋八月，诏曰： 往年灾害多，今年蚕、麦伤，所振贷种、食勿收责，毋令民出今年田租。 
现代文：秋季八月，下诏说： 往年灾害多，今年蚕麦伤，所赈贷的种子、粮食不予收债，并免去今年田租。 
English: In the autumn of August, the following edict was issued: Due to the many disasters in previous years, this year's silkworms and wheat were injured, the seeds and grain loaned would not be collected, and this year's field rent would be waived.

古文：冬，发习战射士诣朔方，调故吏将屯田张掖郡。
现代文：冬季，调遣习射士到朔方，派前曾有官职的吏将屯田于张掖郡。
English: In winter, shooters were dispatched to the Shuo side, and officials who had held government posts before were sent to settle in Zhangye County.

古文：三年春二月，有星孛于西北。
现代文：三年春三月，西北空出现彗星。
English: In March of the spring of the third year, a comet appeared in the northwest sky.

古文：秋，募民徙云陵，赐钱、田、宅。
现代文：秋，召募民户迁入云陵，并赐钱与田宅。
English: In the autumn, people were recruited to move into Yunling, and were given money and farmhouses.

古文：冬十月，凤皇集东海，遣使者祠其处。
现代文：冬季十月，凤凰集于东海，派使者到集凤地进行祈祷。
English: In the winter of October, the phoenixes gathered in the East China Sea and sent emissaries to the phoenix gathering place to pray.

古文：十一月壬辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月初一日，发生日偏食。
English: On the first day of November, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：四年春三月甲寅，立皇后上官氏。
现代文：四年春三月二十五日，立皇后上官氏。
English: On the 25th day of March in the spring of the fourth year, the title of Empress Shangguan was established.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：辞讼在后二年前，皆勿听治。
现代文：辞讼在武帝后元二年前的，都自行撤销。
English: Two years before Emperor Wu's abdication, all the resignations were revoked.

古文：夏六月，皇后见高庙。
现代文：夏季六月，皇后祭祀高祖庙。
English: In summer, in June, the empress holds a ritual at the Gaozhu Temple.

古文：赐长公主、丞相、将军、列侯、中二千石以下及郎吏、宗室钱、帛各有差。
现代文：赐长公主、丞相、将军、列侯、中二千石以下及郎、吏、宗室钱币，有所差别。
English: There is a difference in the amount of money given to the eldest princess, the prime minister, the general, the vassal, the junior vassal with less than 2,000 koku, the vassal, the official, and the family.

古文：徙三辅富人云陵，赐钱，户十万。
现代文：迁移三辅富户到云陵，赏钱，每户十万钱。
English: Relocate the three rich households to Yunnan, reward money, 100,000 yuan per household.

古文：秋七月，诏曰： 比岁不登，民匮于食，流庸未尽还，往时令民共出马，其止勿出。
现代文：秋季七月，下诏说： 由于近年年成不好，粮食缺乏，外流人口未能全返故里，过去曾令民供出马，现停止执行。
English: In the autumn of July, the following edict was issued: "Due to the poor harvest in recent years and the lack of grain, the outflow population has not been able to return to their hometowns in full. In the past, the people were asked to contribute to the war effort, but this has now been suspended.

古文：诸给中都官者，且减之。 
现代文：对于向京师各官府所供给的马匹，皆减少数量。 
English: The number of horses supplied to various government offices in Beijing has been reduced.

古文：冬，遣大鸿胪田广明击益州。
现代文：冬，派大鸿胪田广明击益州反叛。
English: In the winter, he sent the great giant, Xingtian Guangming, to fight against the rebels in Yizhou.

古文：廷尉李种坐故纵死罪弃市。
现代文：廷尉李种因犯故意纵容罪律而被处决。
English: Lieutenant Li Zheng was executed for the crime of deliberately conniving.

古文：五年春正月，追尊皇太后父为顺成侯。
现代文：五年春季正月，追赠皇太后之父为顺成侯。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year, the father of the dowager empress was Shun Cheng Hou.

古文：夏阳男子张延年诣北阙，自称卫太子，诬罔，要斩。
现代文：夏阳男子张延年到北阙，自称为卫太子，以诬罔罪，腰斩。
English: Zhang Yan, a man from Xiayang, went to Beilun and called himself Wei Taizi. He was beheaded for the crime of false accusation.

古文：夏，罢天下亭母马及马弩关。
现代文：夏，撤销天下诸亭养母马及马高五尺六寸、弩十石不允出关的禁令。
English: In the summer, the ban on breeding mares and horses with a height of five feet and six inches and a weight of less than ten stone was revoked.

古文：六月，封皇后父骠骑将军上官安为桑乐侯。
现代文：六月，封皇后父骠骑将军上官安为桑乐侯。
English: In June, the queen's father, the general Xing Jie, was promoted to the post of Sang Le Hou.

古文：诏曰： 朕以眇身获保宗庙，战战栗栗，夙兴夜寐，修古帝王之事，诵《保傅传》、《孝经》、《论语》、《尚书》，未云有明。
现代文：诏书说： 朕以薄德而继承大统，战战兢兢，早起晚睡，学习古代圣帝贤王的治理天下的论述，朕自通《保傅传》，而对《论语》、《尚书》、《孝经》还尚未融会贯通。
English: The imperial edict said: I have inherited the Great Reign with a weak virtue, I am wary, I get up early and go to bed late, I study the discussion of the governance of the world of the ancient holy emperors and kings, I am fluent in the "Biography of Bao Fu," but I have not yet integrated the "Analects," "Shang Shu" and "Filial Piety."

古文：其令三辅、太常举贤良各二人，郡国文学高第各一人。
现代文：现令三辅、太常举贤良各二人，郡国文学高第各一人。
English: Currently, the Third Assistant Minister and the First Vice-Minister of Education are to nominate two virtuous persons each, and the first-year students of the County Literature High School are to nominate one person each.

古文：赐中二千石以下至吏、民爵，各有差。 
现代文：赐中二千石以下至吏民爵级，有所差等。 
English: From the middle class of less than 2,000 koku to the rank of bureaucrat, there is a difference.

古文：罢儋耳、真番郡。
现代文：撤销儋耳、真番二郡。
English: Two counties of Min'er and Zhenban were revoked.

古文：秋，大鸿胪广明、军正王平击益州，斩首捕虏三万余人，获畜产五万余头。
现代文：秋季，大鸿胪田广明、军正王平平定益州反叛，斩首及俘虏三万余人，缴获牲畜五万余头。
English: In the autumn, the great nobles Putian Guangming and Junzheng Wang Ping crushed the Dingyizhou rebellion, beheaded and captured more than 30,000 people, and seized more than 50,000 heads of livestock.

古文：六年春正月，上耕于上林。
现代文：六年春正月，昭帝自耕于上林。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, Zhao Di began to cultivate his own land in Shanglin.

古文：二月，诏有司问郡国所举贤良、文学民所疾苦。议罢盐、铁、榷酤。
现代文：二月，诏有司问郡国所荐举的贤良文学，向他们调查了解民间疾苦，决定终止盐、铁、酒的专卖权、专利权。
English: In February, the prefectural government decided to terminate the monopoly and patent rights of salt, iron and alcohol.

古文：栘中监苏武前使匈奴，留单于庭十九岁乃还，奉使全节，以武为典属国，赐钱百万。
现代文：木多中监苏武，武帝时曾出使匈奴，被匈奴拘禁十九年方回，不辱使命，坚持汉节，任命苏武为典属国，赐钱一百万。
English: Emperor Wu sent an envoy to the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu detained him for nineteen years. He did not dishonor his mission, adhered to the Han Dynasty, appointed Suwu as a vassal state, and gave him one million yuan.

古文：夏，旱，大雩，不得举火。
现代文：夏季，发生干旱，举行祭祀求雨，令民间暂不举火以抑阳助阴。
English: In the summer, when there is a drought, a ritual is held to pray for rain, so that the people temporarily do not light fires to suppress the sun and help the yin.

古文：秋七月，罢榷酤官，令民得以律占租，卖酒升四钱。
现代文：秋七月，免去酒类专卖官吏，令民按规定交租。卖酒一升交税四钱。
English: In the autumn and July, the liquor monopoly officials were removed and the people were ordered to pay rent according to regulations. The tax for selling one liter of liquor was four yuan.

古文：以边塞阔远，取天水、陇西、张掖郡各二县置金城郡。
现代文：鉴于边塞阔远，取天水、陇西、张掖郡各二县设置金城郡。
English: In view of the vast expanse of the border, two counties each from Tianshui, Shaanxi and Zhangye counties were set up as Jincheng County.

古文：诏曰： 钩町侯毋波率其君长、人民击反者，斩首捕虏有功。其立毋波为钩町王。
现代文：昭帝下诏说： 钩町侯毋波率领其将士人民平定反叛，斩首捕虏有功，现封毋波为钩町王。
English: Emperor Zhao issued an edict saying: Hook Town lord Nezhaoba led his soldiers and people to quell the rebellion, beheading the captives. Nezhaoba is now the king of Hook Town.

古文：大鸿胪广明将率有功，赐爵关内侯，食邑。 
现代文：大鸿胪田广明将军指挥平叛有功，赐封关内侯，食封邑。 
English: General Taihong Putian Guangming commanded the successful counter-rebellion, granted the fief of Guanzhong, and the food fief.

古文：元凤元年春，长公主共养劳苦，复以蓝田益长公主汤沐邑。
现代文：元凤元年公元前年春季，长公主的供养甚为菲薄，再增加蓝田为她的汤沐邑。
English: In the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：泗水戴王前甍，以毋嗣，国除。后宫有遗腹子爰，相、内史不奏言，上闻而怜之，立爰为泗水王。
现代文：泗水戴王已去世，因无子，其封国被撤销，泗水王后宫有遗腹子刘火爰，该国的相、内史因不如实上奏，昭帝得知后甚为怜悯，就封火爰为泗水王。
English: King of Surabaya had passed away, and because he had no son, his state was revoked. The palace of King of Surabaya had a posthumous son, Liu Huayu, and the country's history and internal history were not well documented. Emperor Zhao was very compassionate after learning this, and he sealed Huayu as King of Surabaya.

古文：相、内史皆下狱。
现代文：泗水相及内史因不如实反映情况而被判入狱。
English: Surabaya's water minister and chief historian were jailed for misrepresenting the situation.

古文：三月，赐郡国所选有行义者涿郡韩福等五人帛，人五十匹，遣归。
现代文：三月，赏赐郡国所选有行义的涿郡的韩福等五人帛，每人五十匹，送回原里。
English: In March, the county government rewarded five people, including Hanfu of Handan County, who had performed acts of righteousness, with fifty cows each, and sent them back to their hometowns.

古文：诏曰： 朕闵劳以官职之事，其务修孝、弟以孝乡里。
现代文：下诏说： 朕不忍劳役韩福等以官职之事，希望他们谨修孝悌行义以为乡里楷模。
English: The next edict said: I can't bear to work for Hanfu and other officials, and I hope that they will be filial piety and righteousness as a model in the village.

古文：令郡、县常以正月赐羊、酒。
现代文：通知郡县每年正月赐他们以羊酒进行慰问。
English: Notify the county to give them sheep wine every New Year's Day for condolences.

古文：有不幸者赐衣被一袭，祠以中牢。 
现代文：对其中去世的赐衣、被一套，并以猪羊进行祭奠。 
English: For those who died, they were given a robe and a set of bedclothes, and pigs and sheep were sacrificed.

古文：武都氐人反，遣执金吾马适建、龙额侯韩增、大鸿胪广明将三辅、太常徒，皆免刑击之。
现代文：武都氐人造反，朝廷派执金吾马适建、龙额侯韩增、大鸿胪田广明率领三辅、太常的刑徒免去他们的罪刑，出击反叛。
English: The military government fomented an artificial rebellion, and the imperial court sent the three subordinates led by the executioner Jin Wuma Shijian, Longyuhou Han Zeng, and the great hero Xingtian Guangming, and the convicts of Taizang were pardoned of their crimes and went out to rebel.

古文：秋七月乙亥晦，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：秋季七月三十日，先出现日偏食，后出现日全食。
English: On the 30th of July in autumn, a partial solar eclipse will occur first, followed by a total solar eclipse.

古文：八月，改始元为元凤。
现代文：八月，改始元年号为元凤年号。
English: In August, the name of the first year was changed to the year of the phoenix.

古文：九月，鄂邑长公主、燕王旦与左将军上官桀、桀子票骑将军安、御史大夫桑弘羊皆谋反，伏诛。
现代文：九月，鄂邑长公主、燕王刘旦与左将军上官桀、桀子骠骑将军上官安、御史大夫桑弘羊等谋反，俱被诛。
English: In September, the eldest princess of Omura, the king of Yan, Liu Dan, conspired with the left general Shang Guanjun, the son of a general riding on a donkey Shang Guan'an, and the chief historian Kuang Hongyang, and were all executed.

古文：初，桀、安父子与大将军光争权，欲害之，诈使人为燕王旦上书言光罪。
现代文：原先，桀、安父子与大将军霍光争权，想加害于霍光，就诈使人以燕王旦之名上书朝廷 揭发 霍光的罪名。
English: Originally, Zhai, An and their son were in a power struggle with General Huo Guang. In order to harm Huo Guang, they tricked someone into writing to the imperial court in the name of Yan Wangdan to expose Huo Guang's crimes.

古文：时上年十四，觉其诈。
现代文：此时昭帝年十四岁，发觉其诈。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhao was fourteen years old and discovered his deception.

古文：后有谮光者，上辄怒曰： 大将军国家忠臣，先帝所属，敢有谮毁者，坐之。 
现代文：后又有人诬告霍光，昭帝大怒道： 大将军国家忠臣，受先帝重托，敢有诬告者，定要问罪。 
English: Later, another person falsely accused Huo Guang. Emperor Zhao was furious and said, "The general is a loyal subject of the state, entrusted by the former emperor. Anyone who dares to make a false accusation must be punished."

古文：光由是得尽忠。
现代文：霍光由此得以竭尽忠诚。
English: As a result, Huo Guang was able to be loyal to the end.

古文：语在燕王、霍光《传》。
现代文：其事记在燕王、霍光传中。
English: The matter is recorded in Yan Wang and Huo Guang Chuan.

古文：冬十月，诏曰： 左将军安阳侯桀、票骑将军桑乐侯安、御史大夫弘羊皆数以邪枉干辅政，大将军不听，而怀怨望，与燕王通谋，置驿往来相约结。
现代文：冬季十月，昭帝下诏说： 左将军安阳侯桀、骠骑将军桑乐侯安、御史大夫弘羊都屡以邪曲干预朝政，大将军不从其说，他们就心怀不满，阴与燕王勾结，设专使往来结成叛党。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Zhao issued the following edict: Left General Anyang Houyi, Cavalry General San Le Houyi, and Grand Historian Hongyang repeatedly intervened in the imperial government with evil tricks. When the great generals did not follow their advice, they were dissatisfied and colluded with Yan Wang to set up special envoys to form a rebel party.

古文：燕王遣寿西长、孙纵之等赂遗长公主、丁外人、谒者杜延年、大将军长史公孙遗等，交通私书，共谋令长公主置酒，伏兵杀大将军光，征立燕王为天子，大逆毋道。
现代文：燕王派寿西长、孙纵之等贿赂长公主，丁外人、谒者杜延年、大将军长史公孙遗等，传递密书，共同策划让长公主设酒宴请大将军霍光，乘机用伏兵将其杀死。随后征立燕王为天子，实为大逆不道。
English: Yan Wang sent Shuxi Chang and Sun Zongzhi to bribe the eldest princess, Du Yan Nian, a foreigner and a scoundrel, and the great general, Shigong Sun Yi, to pass on secret documents, jointly planning to let the eldest princess hold a wine banquet to invite the great general, Huo Guang, and kill him with an ambush. Subsequently, Yan Wang was enlisted as a heavenly son, which was really a great treason.

古文：故稻田使者燕仓先发觉，以告大司农敞，敞告谏大夫延年，延年以闻。
现代文：经稻田使者燕仓首先发觉，迅速报告大司农杨敞，杨敞急告谏大夫杜延年，延年急奏明皇帝。
English: After the rice field messenger Yan Cang first discovered, he quickly reported to the chief farmer Yang Cang, Yang Cang urgently reported to the doctor Du Yan Nian, and Yan Nian urgently reported to the emperor.

古文：丞相征事任宫手捕斩桀，丞相少史王寿诱将安入府门，皆已伏诛，吏民得以安。
现代文：丞相征事任宫亲手捕斩上官桀，丞相少史王寿诱上官安入府门，一起诛杀，吏民才得以转危为安。
English: The minister of justice and conscription, Ren Gong, personally captured and beheaded the high-ranking official, and the minister of justice and minor historian, Wang Shou, lured the high-ranking official, An, into the gate of the government, and together they fought and killed him. Only then were the officials and the people able to turn the corner and find peace.

古文：封延年、仓、宫、寿皆为列侯。 
现代文：为此封杜延年、任宫、王寿为列侯。 
English: For this reason, Du Yan Nian, Ren Gong, and Wang Shou were made vassals.

古文：又曰： 燕王迷惑失道，前与齐王子刘泽等为逆，抑而不扬，望王反道自新，今乃与长公主及左将军桀等谋危宗庙。王及公主皆自伏辜。其赦王太子建、公主子文信及宗室子与燕王、上官桀等谋反父母同产当坐者，皆免为庶人。
现代文：诏书又说： 燕王利令智昏，前与齐王子刘泽等为逆，当时对其罪行抑而不扬，是希望他能改过自新，今乃与长公主及左将军桀等阴谋危害宗庙，燕王及长公主皆已伏法，现赦免燕王太子，长公主子文信及宗室子参与燕王、上官桀等谋反的直系当连坐的，都免予刑戮，皆废为平民。
English: The imperial edict also said: Yan Wang Li's adventurism has made him stupid, and he was opposed to Qi Prince Liu Ze and others. At that time, he did not denounce his crimes, hoping that he would reform. Now, he is conspiring with the eldest princess and General Zuo to endanger the ancestral temple. Yan Wang and the eldest princess have all committed crimes, and now they are pardoning Prince Yan Wang, the eldest princess Zi Wenshin and the sire's son, who participated in the rebellion of Yan Wang, Shangguan Zou and other direct descendants. They are all exempted from punishment, and they are all abolished as civilians.

古文：其吏为桀等所诖误，未发觉在吏者，除其罪。 
现代文：其部属受上官桀等欺蒙而被裹胁参加叛逆，但没有具体事实在案的，都免予刑事处分。 
English: His subordinates, who were deceived and coerced into participating in the rebellion, but without any specific facts on file, were all exempted from criminal punishment.

古文：二年夏四月，上自建章宫徙未央宫，大置酒。
现代文：二年夏季四月，昭帝从建章宫迁入未央宫，大宴群臣。
English: In the summer of April of the second year, Emperor Zhao moved from Jianzhang Palace to Weiyang Palace, and a large banquet was held for the courtiers.

古文：赐郎从宫帛，及宗室子钱，人二十万。
现代文：赐郎从官帛，赐宗室子钱，每人二十万。
English: He gave money to his son-in-law, who was a government official, and to his son-in-law's son-in-law, to the amount of 200,000 yen each.

古文：吏民献牛、酒者赐帛，人一匹。
现代文：吏民献纳牛酒的赐帛，每人一匹。
English: The officials and the people offered oxen and wine as a gift, and each person got one ox.

古文：六月，赦天下。
现代文：六月，大赦天下。
English: In June, there was a general amnesty.

古文：诏曰： 朕闵百姓未赡，前年减漕三百万石。
现代文：下诏说： 朕怜悯百姓不足，前年减省转漕三百万石。
English: The following edict said: I have not been compassionate enough to the people. The previous year, we reduced the reserves by three million koku.

古文：颇省乘舆马及苑马，以补边郡三辅传马。
现代文：适当节省自乘舆马及苑马，来补充三辅及边郡驿马。
English: appropriately economize on self-riding horses and horses to supplement the three auxiliary and border county horses.

古文：其令郡国毋敛今年马口钱，三辅、太常郡得以叔、粟当赋。 
现代文：现令郡国不得收取今年马口钱，三辅、太常应允许在交税时，菽、栗可以当赋钱。 
English: The county government is now ordered not to collect this year's horse-mouth money, and Sanfu and Taichang should be allowed to pay taxes, and cormorants and chestnuts can be used as money.

古文：三年春正月，泰山有大石自起立，上林有柳树枯僵自起生。
现代文：三年春季正月，泰山有大石自行起立，上林苑有柳树枯萎又重新长出绿叶。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year, there were large stones on Mount Tai that stood up on their own, and willow trees withered and regrew green leaves in Shanglin Court.

古文：罢中牟苑赋贫民。
现代文：免去中牟苑穷困户的税收。
English: exempt the poor households in Zhongmu Yuan from paying taxes.

古文：诏曰： 乃者民被水灾，颇匮于食，朕虚仓廪，使使者振困乏。
现代文：下诏说： 前段时间百姓遭遇水灾，口粮甚为困难，朕调出国库粮食，派专人赈济困难户。
English: The next edict said: Some time ago, the people suffered from floods, and food rations were very difficult. I transferred grain from the national treasury and sent a special person to help the poor households.

古文：其止四年毋漕。
现代文：现再免去第四年应上交的漕粮。
English: Now, the fourth year's grain due is waived.

古文：三年以前所振贷，非丞相、御史所请，边郡受牛者勿收责。 
现代文：三年以前所发放的赈贷，出自朕亲自所赐，边郡受犁牛的屯田徙民不交债款。 
English: The loans issued three years ago were given by me personally, and the migrants in the border counties who were forced to accept the yakitori did not pay their debts.

古文：夏四月，少府徐仁、廷尉王平、左冯翊贾胜胡皆坐纵反者，仁自杀，平、胜胡皆要斩。
现代文：夏四月，少府徐仁、廷尉王平、左冯翊贾胜胡都犯有纵容反叛之罪，徐仁自杀，王平、贾胜胡都腰斩。
English: In the summer of April, the minor prefect Xu Ren, courtier Wang Ping, and Zuo Fengjun Jia Sheng Hu all committed the crime of condoning rebellion, Xu Ren committed suicide, and Wang Ping and Jia Sheng Hu were beheaded.

古文：冬，辽东乌桓反，以中朗将范明友为度辽将军，将北边七郡，郡二千骑击之。
现代文：冬，辽东乌桓反。派中郎将范明友为度辽将军，率领北边七郡卒二千骑前往平定。
English: In winter, Liaodong rebelled against Wu Huan. He sent Zhong Lang to make Fan Mingyou the general of Du Liao, and he led 2,000 cavalrymen from seven counties in the north to subdue Du Liao.

古文：四年春正月丁亥，帝加元服，见于高庙。
现代文：四年春正月初二日，昭帝加元冠，参谒高祖庙。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, Zhao Di and Yuan Guan visited Gaozhu Temple.

古文：赐诸侯王、丞相、大将军、列侯、宗室下至吏、民金、帛、牛、酒各有差。
现代文：赐各侯王、丞相、大将军、列侯、宗室下至吏民金帛及牛酒，各有差等。
English: He gave gold ingots and oxen's wine to each of the princes, ministers, generals, vassals, and to the officials and commoners down to the line of the family.

古文：赐中二千石以下及天下民爵。毋收四年、五年口赋。
现代文：赐中二千石以下及天下臣民爵级，停止交纳第四年、第五年的人口赋。
English: For those with less than 2,000 koku and those with the title of nobility, the payment of the fourth and fifth year's population endowment will be suspended.

古文：三年以前逋更赋未入者，皆勿收。令天下酺五日。
现代文：三年以前更赋未交的，都免交。下令天下欢宴五天。
English: Three years ago, he ordered that all debts that had not yet been paid would be waived, and the whole world was to celebrate for five days.

古文：甲戌，丞相千秋薨。
现代文：二月二十一日，丞相田千秋去世。
English: On February 21, Vice-Minister of Justice Chiharu Tanaka passed away.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 度辽将军明友前以羌骑校尉将羌王、侯、君、长以下击益州反虏，后复率击武都反氐，今破乌桓，斩虏获生，有功。
现代文：夏季四月，昭帝下诏说： 度辽将军明友以任羌骑校尉时率领羌王侯君长以下出击益州反虏，后又率领羌军出击武都反氐，今破乌桓，斩俘甚众，有功。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Zhao issued the following edict: When General Du Liao Mingyou was appointed as a cavalry captain, he led the troops of the princes and princes of Yizhou to attack the rebels in Yizhou. Later, he led the rebel army to attack the rebels in Wudu. Now, he has defeated Wuhuan and killed many prisoners, which is a great achievement.

古文：其封明友为平陵侯。
现代文：特封明友为平陵侯。
English: The special fief of Myotomo goes to Hiranyakko.

古文：平乐监傅介子持节使，诛斩楼兰王安，归首县北阙，封义阳侯。 
现代文：平乐监傅介子持节出使，诛斩不服汉朝的楼兰王安，将其首级悬挂北阙，现封为义阳侯。 
English: The overseer of Pingle, Fu Kaizi, sent an envoy on the same day to cut off the head of Loulan Wang'an, who refused to submit to the Han Dynasty. His head was hung on the North Pagoda, and is now enshrined as the Prince of Yiyang.

古文：五月丁丑，孝文庙正殿火，上及群臣皆素服。发中二千石将五校作治，六月成。
现代文：五月，孝文庙正殿发生火灾，昭帝及群臣都穿素服，派中二千石带领五校士卒进行复修，六日竣工。
English: In May, a fire broke out in the main hall of the Xiaowen Temple. Emperor Zhao and his courtiers all wore plain clothes and sent a middle-ranking official of 2,000 koku to lead five school officials to carry out the renovation, which was completed on the 6th.

古文：太常及庙令、丞、郎吏皆劾大不敬，会赦，太常轑阳侯德免为庶人。
现代文：太常及朝令丞郎均以渎职问罪，适逢大赦，太常辽阳侯德免罪为平民。
English: Both Taizhang and Cha Rongjong were charged with dereliction of duty, coinciding with the amnesty, and Taizhang Liaoyang Houde was exonerated as a civilian.

古文：六月，赦天下。
现代文：六月，大赦天下。
English: In June, there was a general amnesty.

古文：五年春正月，广陵王来朝，益国万一千户，赐钱二千万，黄金二百斤，剑二，安车一，乘马二驷。
现代文：五年春正月，广陵王进都朝拜，增封其国一千户，赐钱二千万、黄金二百斤、剑二柄、安车一辆、乘马八匹。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Guangling Wangjin paid homage to the capital, increased the number of households in his country by one thousand, and gave twenty million yuan in money, two hundred catties of gold, two swords, a carriage, and eight horses.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：夏，大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：六月，发三辅及郡国恶少年吏有告劾亡者，屯辽东。
现代文：六月，派遣三辅及各郡的青少年罪犯因告发而逃亡的人去屯戍辽东。
English: In June, juvenile delinquents from Sanfu and other counties who had escaped due to denunciation were sent to Liaodong Juvenile Detention Center.

古文：秋，罢象郡，分属郁林、牂柯。
现代文：秋季，撤销象郡，分属于玉林、牂柯郡。
English: In autumn, Xiang County was revoked and divided into Yulin County and Shenke County.

古文：冬十一月，大雷。
现代文：冬季，十一月，打雷。
English: Winter, November, thunder.

古文：十二月庚戌，丞相薨。
现代文：十二月初六日，丞相王欣去世。
English: On the 6th day of early December, Prime Minister Wang Xin passed away.

古文：六年春正月，募郡国徒筑辽东玄菟城。
现代文：六年春正月，招募郡国犯人筑辽东玄菟城。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, county-level prisoners were recruited to build East Liaoning's Xuanzang City.

古文：夏，赦天下。
现代文：夏，赦免天下罪人。
English: In summer, there is a general amnesty.

古文：诏曰： 夫谷贱伤农，今三辅、太常谷减贱，其令以叔粟当今年赋。 
现代文：下诏说： 大凡谷贱则伤农，今三辅、太常各地粮价下跌，特令各地可以用粮食作赋钱交纳。 
English: The next edict said: The low price of grain in Dafang Valley will hurt farmers. Now that grain prices have fallen in Sanfu and Taichang regions, all regions are ordered to use grain as money to pay.

古文：右将军张安世宿卫忠谨，封富平侯。
现代文：右将军张安世忠诚谨慎执行肃卫，封为富平侯。
English: Zhang Anshi, the right-hand general, loyally and prudently carried out the solemn guard and was named Fuping.

古文：乌桓复犯塞，遣度辽将军范明友击之。
现代文：乌桓再次侵犯边塞，派度辽将军范明友领兵追击。
English: Wu Huan once again invaded the border fortress and sent Liao general Fan Mingyou to lead the troops in pursuit.

古文：元平元年春二月，诏曰： 天下以农、桑为本。
现代文：元平元年春二月，昭帝下诏书说： 天下以农桑为本。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of the Yuan and Ping Dynasties, Emperor Zhao issued an edict saying, "The whole world is based on the agrarian mulberry."

古文：日者省用，罢不急官，减外徭，耕、桑者益众，而百姓未能家给，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：前段曾经节省开支，裁减冗员，减少额外赋徭，于是从事农桑的人数增加，但百姓仍不能自给自足，朕深感不安。
English: In the previous paragraph, we have saved expenses, reduced redundancies, and reduced extra subsidies. As a result, the number of people engaged in agricultural mulberry has increased, but the people are still unable to be self-sufficient. I am deeply worried.

古文：其减口赋钱。 
现代文：现决定减去口赋钱。 
English: Now it has been decided to subtract the subsidies.

古文：有司奏请减什三，上许之。
现代文：有司奏请减免十分之三，皇上同意。
English: The Emperor agreed to a reduction of three-tenths of a staff.

古文：甲申晨，有流星，大如月，众星皆随西行。
现代文：二月十七日，晨有流星，大如月，众星随流星西行。
English: On February 17th, a meteor, as big as the moon, appeared in the morning. Many stars followed the meteor westward.

古文：夏四月癸未，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：夏四月十七日，昭帝逝世于未央宫。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, Emperor Zhao died in Weiyang Palace.

古文：六月壬申，葬平陵。
现代文：六月七日，葬于平陵。
English: On June 7, he was buried in Pingling.

古文：赞曰：昔周成以孺子继统，而有管、蔡四国流言之变。
现代文：班固评论：昔日周成王以孺子继承大统，而有管、蔡四国流言，诬蔑摄政辅幼主的周公。
English: Ban Gu's comment: In the past, Zhou Cheng Wang used a mule to inherit the throne, but there were rumors that he was in charge of the four provinces, and that he slandered Zhou Gong, the regent's younger brother.

古文：孝昭幼年即位，亦有燕、盍、上官逆乱之谋。
现代文：昭帝幼年继帝位，亦有燕、盍、上官谋逆，诋毁摄政辅幼主的霍光。
English: Emperor Zhao succeeded to the throne at a young age, and there were also Yan, Zou, and senior officials who plotted against and slandered the regent and assistant to the young lord, Huo Guang.

古文：成王不疑周公，孝昭委任霍光，各因其时以成名，大矣哉！
现代文：成王不疑周公，昭帝委任霍光。君臣都能各在自己人的时代而成名，这都了不起啊！
English: Zhou Gong became king without any doubt, and Emperor Zhao appointed Huo Guang. Monarchs and ministers can each become famous in their own era, which is remarkable!

古文：承孝武奢侈余敝师旅之后，海内虚耗，户口减半，光知时务之要，轻徭薄赋，与民休息。
现代文：昭帝承汉武帝好大喜功、穷兵黩武之后，国内经济萧条，人口减少一半，而霍光能突出当务之急，轻徭薄赋，与民休息。
English: After Emperor Zhao succeeded Emperor Han Wudi's great feats of valor and military exploits, the domestic economy was depressed, and the population was reduced by half. However, Emperor Huo Guangneng highlighted the urgent tasks, treated them lightly, and rested with the people.

古文：至始元、元凤之间，匈奴和亲，百姓充实。
现代文：至始元、元凤年间，外与匈奴和亲，内使百姓充实。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan and Yuanfeng dynasties, the outside world made peace with the Xiongnu, and the inside world enriched the people.

古文：举贤良、文学，问民所疾苦，议盐、铁而罢榷酤，尊号曰 昭 ，不亦宜乎！
现代文：并推举贤良文学，询问民间疾苦，罢除盐铁酒类专卖，不与民争利，谥号为 昭 ，是十分恰当的啊！
English: And it is very appropriate to promote virtuous literature, inquire about folk diseases, abolish the salt and iron liquor monopoly, do not compete with the people for profits, and the nickname is Zhao!

