古文：世宗世宗孝和庄宪皇帝，讳阮，小字兀欲。
现代文：世宗孝和庄宪皇帝，名阮，乳名兀欲。
English: Emperor Shizong Xiao and Emperor Zhuangxian, their names are Ruan and Niu.

古文：让国皇帝长子，母柔贞皇后萧氏。
现代文：让国皇帝耶律倍长子，母为柔贞皇后萧氏。
English: The eldest son of Emperor Ye Liubai of Zhang Guo, his mother was Empress Zhuozhen Xiao.

古文：帝仪观丰伟，内宽外严，善骑射，乐施予，人望归之。
现代文：世宗仪表壮实魁梧，内心宽厚，外表威严，擅长骑射，喜欢施舍，人心归附。
English: Shizong's appearance is sturdy and burly, his heart is generous, his appearance is majestic, he is good at riding and shooting, he likes to give alms, and his heart is attached.

古文：太宗爱之如子。
现代文：太宗喜欢他就像自己儿子一样。
English: Taizong likes him like his own son.

古文：会同九年，从伐晋。
现代文：会同九年，随从太宗讨伐晋。
English: In the ninth year of Huitong, he followed Taizong to fight Jin.

古文：大同元年二月，封永康王。
现代文：大同元年春二月，封永康王。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of Datong, he was named Yongkang Wang.

古文：夏四月丁丑，太宗崩于栾城。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，太宗崩逝于栾城。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of summer, Taizong passed away in Shicheng.

古文：戊寅，梓宫次镇阳，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：二十三日，梓宫驻于镇阳，即皇帝位于柩前。
English: On the 23rd, the Zi Palace was stationed in Zhenyang, that is, the emperor was in front of the capital.

古文：甲申，次定州，命天德、朔古、解里等护梓宫先赴上京。
现代文：二十九日，驻于定州，命天德、朔古、解里等人护送梓宫先到上京。
English: On the 29th, stationed in Dingzhou, he ordered Tiande, Shuo Gu, Ge Li and others to escort Zi Gong to go to Beijing first.

古文：太后闻帝即位，遣太弟李胡率兵拒之。
现代文：太后听说皇上即位，派太弟李胡率兵前来拒战。
English: When the empress dowager heard that the emperor had ascended to the throne, she sent her brother Li Hu to lead an army to oppose the war.

古文：六月甲寅朔，次南京，五院夷离堇安端、详稳刘哥遣人驰报，请为前锋；至泰德泉，遇李胡军，战败之。
现代文：六月初一，驻于南京，五院夷离堇安端、详稳刘哥派人飞驰而来，请求作为前锋；到泰德泉，遭遇李胡军队，击败之。
English: On the first day of June, stationed in Nanjing, Liu Ge, a member of the Fifth Precinct who had been exiled from the An end of the Warring States Period, sent a person to come to the front to plead for help; he encountered Li Hu's army at Taidequan and defeated it.

古文：上遣郎君勤德等诣两军谕解。
现代文：皇上派郎君勤德等人前往两军阵前晓谕调解。
English: The emperor sent his son-in-law, Emperor Gongde, and others to the front of the two armies to mediate.

古文：秋闰七月，次潢河，太后、李胡整兵拒于横渡，相持数日。
现代文：秋闰七月，驻于潢河，太后、李胡整顿兵马拒战于横渡，相持数日。
English: In the autumn of July, stationed in Luohe, the Empress Dowager and Li Hu rectified the soldiers and horses refused to fight in Hengduan, and held out for several days.

古文：用屋质之谋，各罢兵趋上京。
现代文：后采用屋质的谋策，各自休兵到上京去。
English: After that, they adopted the strategy of rooftop quality, and each of them took leave of absence to go to Tokyo.

古文：既而闻太后、李胡复有异谋，迁于祖州。诛司徒划设及楚补里。
现代文：不久皇上得知太后、李胡有反心，将他们迁到祖州；诛杀司徒划设及楚补里。
English: Not long after, the emperor learned that the empress dowager and Li Hu had a grudge against him, and moved them to Zuzhou; he ordered the killing of Szu and Chu.

古文：八月壬午朔，尊母萧氏为皇太后，以太后族剌只撒古鲁为国舅帐，立详稳以总焉。
现代文：八月初一，尊母萧氏为皇太后，以太后族人剌只撒古鲁为国舅帐，设立详稳以总揽其事。
English: On the first day of August, the revered mother Xiao became the empress dowager, and the ethereal posterity of the tribe named Zhaozagulu as the uncle of the country, setting up a detailed and stable system to deal with the matter.

古文：以崇德宫户分赐翼戴功臣，及北院大王洼、南院大王吼各五十，安抟、楚补各百。
现代文：将崇德宫民户分赐给辅佐拥戴的有功之臣，又赐给北院大王耶律洼、南院大王耶律吼各五十户，安抟、楚补各百户。
English: The people's households of the Chongde Palace will be given to the meritorious vassals supported by the assistant, and will also be given to the Great King of the Northern Court, Yeruda, and the Great King of the Southern Court, Yerudo, fifty households each, and one hundred households each in Anhui and Chu.

古文：的鲁、铁剌子孙先以非罪籍没者归之。
现代文：的鲁、铁剌子孙先前因莫须有之罪被籍没之家产给予归还。
English: The children and grandchildren of Lu and Tiejun, who were previously registered as having no family property due to groundless crimes, were given back their property.

古文：癸未，始置北院枢密使，以安抟为之。
现代文：初二，开始设置北院枢密使，由安抟担任。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, the position of Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan was established, and An Qi assumed the post.

古文：九月壬子朔，葬嗣圣皇帝于怀陵。
现代文：九月初一，安葬嗣圣皇帝于怀陵。
English: On the first day of September, the holy emperor was buried in Huairing Mausoleum.

古文：丁卯，行柴册礼，群臣上尊号曰天授皇帝。
现代文：十六日，行柴册礼，群臣奉上尊号曰天授皇帝。
English: On the 16th day, a firecracker ceremony was held, and the group of courtiers were given the honorific title of "Tianzhu Emperor."

古文：大赦，改大同元年为天禄元年。
现代文：大赦天下，改大同元年为天禄元年。
English: The world was amnestied, and the first year of the Taedong era was changed to the first year of the Tianlu era.

古文：追谥皇考曰让国皇帝。
现代文：追谥皇考为让国皇帝。
English: Emperor Go-Shirakawa was the first emperor to abdicate.

古文：以安端主东丹国，封明王，察割为泰宁王，刘哥为惕隐，高勋为南院枢密使。
现代文：任命安端为东丹国主，封明王，以察割为泰宁王，刘哥为惕隐，高勋为南院枢密使。
English: He appointed Anduan as the ruler of Dongdan, Fu Ming as the king, Icahuar as the king of Tainin, Liu Ge as Ti Yin, and Gao Xun as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：二年春正月，天德、萧翰、刘哥、盆都等谋反。
现代文：天禄二年春正月，天德、萧翰、刘哥、盆都等谋反。
English: In the first month of the second year of Tian Lu, Tian De, Xiao Han, Liu Ge, and Bon all plotted to rebel.

古文：诛天德，杖萧翰，迁刘哥于边，罚盆都使辖戛斯国。
现代文：诛杀天德，杖击萧翰，迁刘哥于边地，罚盆都出使辖戛斯国。
English: He killed Tiande, beat Xiaohan with a cane, moved Liu Ge to the outskirts, and sent out the punishment basin to govern Gansu Province.

古文：汉主刘知远殂，子承祐立。
现代文：汉主刘知远崩殂，子刘承佑继立。
English: Han master Liu Zhiyuan passed away and was succeeded by his son Liu Chengyou.

古文：夏四月庚辰朔，南唐遣李朗、王祚来慰且贺，兼奉蜡丸书，议攻汉。
现代文：夏四月初一，南唐派李朗、王祚前来安慰并且祝贺即位，同时奉上蜡丸书信，协商进攻汉。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent Li Lang and Wang Qi to comfort and congratulate the enthronement, and at the same time sent a wax ball letter to negotiate the attack on Han.

古文：秋七月壬申，皇子贤生。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，皇子耶律贤出生。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Prince Yeruxian was born.

古文：冬十月壬午，南京留守魏王赵延寿薨，以中台省右相牒〈虫葛〉为南京留守，封燕王。
现代文：冬十月初七，南京留守魏王赵延寿逝世，任命中台省右相牒虫葛为南京留守，封燕王。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the winter, Zhao Yanshou, the Wei king who stayed in Nanjing, passed away, and Wu Ge, the right-hand man of Zhongtai Province, was appointed as the king who stayed in Nanjing.

古文：十一月，驻跸彰武南。
现代文：十一月，车驾暂驻于彰武南。
English: In November, the vehicle was temporarily stationed in Zhangwunan.

古文：三年春正月，萧翰及公主阿不里瘐反，翰伏诛，阿不里庾死狱中。
现代文：三年春正月，萧翰及公主阿不里谋反，萧翰被诛杀，阿不里病死于监牢中。
English: In the first month of the third year of Spring, Xiao Han and Princess Aburi plotted a rebellion. Xiao Han was beaten to death, while Aburi died of illness in prison.

古文：庚申，肆赦。
现代文：十六日，宽赦罪人。
English: On the sixteenth day, he pardoned the guilty.

古文：内外官各进一阶。
现代文：内外官员各加升一级官位。
English: Foreign and domestic officials will be promoted one level higher.

古文：夏六月戊寅，以敞史耶律胡离轸为北院大王。
现代文：夏六月初六，任命敞史耶律胡离轸为北院大王。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：己卯，惕隐颓昱封漆水郡王。
现代文：初七，惕隐颓昱被封为漆水郡王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Ti Jingyao was crowned the king of Urushi County.

古文：秋九月辛丑朔，召群臣议南伐。
现代文：秋九月初一，召集群臣商议南伐。
English: On the first day of the autumn and the first day of September, a group of courtiers were summoned to discuss the Southern Expedition.

古文：冬十月，遣诸将率兵攻下贝州高老镇，徇地邺都、南宫、堂阳，杀深州刺史史万山，俘获甚众。
现代文：冬十月，派遣诸将率兵攻下贝州高老镇，征战于邺都、南宫、堂阳，杀深州刺史史万山，俘获甚众。
English: In the winter of October, he dispatched generals and soldiers to capture the town of Gaolao in Bozhou, to fight in Shidu, Nangu, and Doyang, to kill tens of thousands of people in Shenshu, and to capture many people.

古文：四年春二月辛未，泰宁王察割来朝，留侍。
现代文：四年春二月初三，泰宁王察割前来朝见，被留下来侍卫皇上。
English: On the third day of the second month of the fourth year of spring, Taining Wang Chaguan came to see the emperor and was left to guard the emperor.

古文：是月，建政事省。
现代文：同月，建立政事省。
English: In the same month, the Ministry of Political Affairs was established.

古文：三月戊戌朔，南唐遣赵延嗣、张福等来贺南征捷。
现代文：三月初一，南唐派赵延嗣、张福等前来祝贺南征获胜。
English: On the first day of March, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent Zhao Yanji, Zhang Fu and others to congratulate the Southern Expedition on its victory.

古文：秋九月乙丑朔，如山西。
现代文：秋九月初一，到山西。
English: Autumn, the first day of September, to Shanxi.

古文：冬十月，自将南伐，攻下安平、内丘、束鹿等城，大获而还。
现代文：冬十月，亲自率军南伐，攻下安平、内丘、束鹿等城，获得许多物品后回师。
English: In the winter of October, he personally led the army to the southward, captured Anping, Neiqiu, Sokga and other cities, and obtained many items before returning to the division.

古文：是岁，册皇后萧氏。
现代文：这一年册立皇后萧氏。
English: This was the year of the enthronement of Empress Xiao.

古文：五年春正月癸亥朔，如百泉湖。
现代文：五年春正月初一，到百泉湖。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, I went to Lake Baizhen.

古文：汉郭威弑其主自立，国号周，遣朱宪来告。
现代文：汉郭威弑其主自立为帝，国号周，派朱宪前来报告。
English: Hanguo sent Zhu Xian to report that his master had declared himself emperor and named the country Zhou.

古文：即遣使致良马。
现代文：皇上当即派使者给郭威送去良马。
English: The emperor immediately sent an envoy to Guo Wei to send good horses.

古文：汉刘崇自立于太原。
现代文：汉刘崇在太原自立为帝。
English: Han Liu Chong became emperor in Taiyuan.

古文：二月，周遣姚汉英、华昭胤来，以书辞抗礼，留汉英等。
现代文：二月，周派姚汉英、华昭胤前来，因为书信言辞行对等之礼，扣留汉英等人。
English: In February, Zhou sent Yao Han Ying and Hua Zhaotian to detain Han Ying and the others because they had left a letter and reciprocated.

古文：夏五月壬戌朔，太子太傅赵莹薨，辍朝一日，命归葬于汴。
现代文：夏五月初一，太子太傅赵莹逝世，停止上朝一日，下令将他归葬于汴。
English: On the first day of May in summer, Prince Taifu Zhao Ying passed away, and ordered that he be buried in Shao.

古文：诏州县录事参军、主簿委政事省铨注。
现代文：诏令将州县录事参军、主簿官职的任免权委托给政事省。
English: The imperial edict delegated the power to appoint and remove officials from the state and county records to join the army and the main records to the Ministry of Political Affairs.

古文：六月辛卯朔，刘崇为周所攻，遣使称，乞援，且求封册。即遣燕王牒〈虫葛〉、枢密使高勋册为大汉神武皇帝。
现代文：六月初一，刘崇为周所攻，派使者称侄，请求援助，并且请求封册，皇上当即派燕王牒虫葛、枢密使高勋册封刘崇为大汉神武皇帝。
English: On the first day of June, Liu Chong was attacked by Zhou and sent an envoy to praise his nephew, request assistance, and request the record to be sealed. The emperor immediately sent Yan Wang Zhaozhuge and Privy Envoy Gao Xunjun to crown Liu Chong as the Great Han Emperor Shenwu.

古文：南唐遣蒋洪来，乞举兵应援。
现代文：南唐派蒋洪前来，请求举兵声援汉。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty sent Jiang Hong to request that troops be raised to support Han.

古文：是夏，清暑百泉岭。
现代文：这年夏，消夏于百泉岭。
English: This summer, spend the summer in Baishenling.

古文：九月庚申朔，自将南伐。
现代文：九月初一，亲自统兵南伐。
English: On the first day of September, he personally led the Southern Expedition.

古文：壬戌，次归化州祥古山。
现代文：初三，驻扎于归化州祥古山。
English: Junior three, stationed in the naturalization state Xianggushan.

古文：癸亥，祭让国皇帝于行宫。
现代文：初四，祭祀让国皇帝于行宫。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor Janggu was sacrificed in the palace.

古文：群臣皆醉，察割反，帝遇弑，年三十四。
现代文：群臣都喝醉了，察割反叛，皇上被害，年三十四岁。
English: The courtiers were all drunk, they rebelled and the emperor was killed, he was thirty-four years old.

古文：应历元年，葬于显州西山，陵曰显陵。
现代文：应历元年，下葬于显州西山，陵墓曰显陵。
English: In the first year of the calendar, he was buried in Xianzhou Xishan, and the mausoleum is called Xianling.

古文：二年，谥孝和皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：二年，谥曰孝和皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: In the second year, Emperor Xiaowa and Emperor Shizong were enthroned.

古文：统和二十六年七月，加谥孝和庄宪皇帝。
现代文：统和二十六年七月，加谥为孝和庄宪皇帝。
English: In July of the 26th year of the Heian and Joseon dynasties, Camille became Emperor Xiaowazhuangxian.

