古文：祭法：有虞氏禘黄帝而郊喾，祖颛顼而宗尧。
现代文：祭祀的规定：有虞氏筛祭时以黄帝配享，郊祭时以禘喾配享，宗庙之祭以撷项为祖，以帝尧为宗。
English: The rules of the sacrificial rites: when there is a screen festival of the Yu clan, the Yellow Emperor will be shared, when there is a suburb festival, the imperial scepter will be shared, the festival of the ancestral temple will take the imperial scepter as the ancestor, and the imperial scepter as the ancestor.

古文：夏后氏亦禘黄帝而郊鲧，祖颛顼而宗禹。
现代文：夏后氏筛祭时也以黄帝配享，郊祭时以鲸配享，宗庙之祭以撷项为祖，以禹为宗。
English: Xia Guo's sieve festival is also shared with the Yellow Emperor, the suburb festival is shared with the whale, and the ancestor of the ancestral temple is the ancestor of the ancestor of the ancestor of the ancestor of the ancestor.

古文：殷人禘喾而郊冥，祖契而宗汤。
现代文：殷人谛祭时以禘喾配享，郊祭时以冥配享，宗庙之祭以契为祖，以汤为宗。
English: When it comes to the Yin Ren Ji Festival, people enjoy it with a bowl, when it comes to the Suburban Festival, they enjoy it with a bowl, and when it comes to the ancestral temple festival, people enjoy it with a bowl and soup.

古文：周人禘喾而郊稷，祖文王而宗武王。
现代文：周人谛祭时以禘喾配享，郊祭时以后授配享，宗庙之祭以文王为祖，以武王为宗。
English: At the Zhou Renji Festival, the imperial edict is distributed, and at the Suburban Festival, the imperial edict is distributed later. At the ancestral temple festival, King Wen is the ancestor, and King Wu is the patriarch.

古文：燔柴于泰坛，祭天也；瘗埋于泰折，祭地也；用骍犊。
现代文：在泰坛上架柴焚烧祭品，这是祭天之礼。在泰折挖坑掩埋祭品，这是祭地之礼。祭天和祭地，都用赤色牛犊作牺牲。
English: Setting firewood on the Thai altar to burn offerings is a rite of sacrifice to the heavens. Digging a pit to bury offerings at the Thai altar is a rite of sacrifice to the land. Both the sacrificed heaven and the sacrificed land are sacrificed with a red bull calf.

古文：埋少牢于泰昭，祭时也；相近于坎坛，祭寒暑也。
现代文：把少牢埋到泰昭坛上，这是祭四时之礼。在坑里或在坛上攘祈，这是祭司寒司暑之神。 
English: It is a four-hour ritual to bury the young man on the Taizhao Altar. To pray in the pit or on the altar is to pray to the priest, the god of cold and heat.

古文：王宫，祭日也；夜明，祭月也；幽宗，祭星也；雩宗，祭水旱也；四坎坛，祭四时也。
现代文：日坛是祭日之所，月坛是祭月之所，星坛是祭星之所，水旱坛是祭水旱之神之所。东西南北四方的坑和坛，是祭四方之神之所。
English: The sun altar is the place of the festival, the moon altar is the place of the sacrifice of the moon, the star altar is the place of the sacrifice of the star, the water and drought altar is the place of the sacrifice of the god of water and drought.

古文：山林、川谷、丘陵，能出云为风雨，见怪物，皆曰神。
现代文：一切山林、川谷、丘陵，只要它能吞云吐雾，兴风作雨，出现异常现象，就把它叫做神。
English: All mountains, forests, valleys, and hills, as long as they can swallow clouds and spew fog, make wind and rain, and have abnormal phenomena, they are called gods.

古文：有天下者，祭百神。诸侯在其地则祭之，亡其地则不祭。
现代文：天子应遍祭天下的名山大川；诸侯只祭自己境内的名山大川，如果丧失了国土，也就不用祭了。
English: The Son of Heaven should sacrifice famous mountains and rivers all over the world. Princes should only sacrifice famous mountains and rivers within their own territory. If they lose their land, there will be no need for sacrifice.

古文：大凡生于天地之间者，皆曰命。
现代文：总的说来，凡是生活在天地之间的东西都叫做有生命。
English: Generally speaking, anything that lives between heaven and earth is called living.

古文：其万物死，皆曰折；人死，曰鬼；此五代之所不变也。
现代文：其中，万物之死都叫 折 ，人死则叫 鬼 。这是五代以来都没有什么改变的。
English: Among them, the death of all things is called 折, and the death of a person is called 鬼. This has not changed since the fifth generation.

古文：七代之所以更立者：禘、郊、宗、祖；其余不变也。
现代文：七代以来有所变化的只是谛祭、郊祭、宗祭、祖祭的对象有所不同，其他方面并没有什么改变。
English: The only thing that has changed since the seventh generation is that the objects of the deity festival, suburb festival, family festival, and ancestor festival are different, but other aspects have not changed.

古文：天下有王，分地建国，置都立邑，设庙祧坛墠而祭之，乃为亲疏多少之数。
现代文：普天之下只有一个天子，于是分九州之地，建诸侯之国，为公卿设都，为大夫置色，还普遍设立庙、桃、坛、掸来祭祀祖先，并按照关系的远近来决定祭祀的次数和规格。
English: There is only one heavenly son under the whole heaven, so the land of Kyushu was divided, a country of princes was built, a capital was set up for the nobles, a color was set for the doctors, and temples, peach trees, altars, and niches were generally set up to worship ancestors, and the number and specifications of the sacrifices were determined according to the proximity of the relationship.

古文：是故：王立七庙，一坛一墠，曰考庙，曰王考庙，曰皇考庙，曰显考庙，曰祖考庙；皆月祭之。远庙为祧，有二祧，享尝乃止。去祧为坛，去坛为墠。坛墠，有祷焉祭之，无祷乃止。去墠曰鬼。
现代文：所以天子设立七庙和一坛一掸：即父庙、祖父庙、曾祖庙、高祖庙、始祖庙，以上五庙皆每月祭祀一次；高祖以上的远祖之庙叫做桃，天子有两个桃，只是每季祭祀一次；桃中的远祖迁出，则在坛上祭祀；坛上的远祖迁出，则在弹上祭祀；对于迁到坛掸上的远祖神主，只是在有所祈祷时才加以祭祀，无所祈祷就不祭祀；从掸上迁出的远祖叫做鬼，除非遇上谛恰，通常就不祭了。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven established seven temples and one altar and one coffin: that is, the father temple, the grandfather temple, the great-grandfather temple, the great-great-grandfather temple, and the great-great-grandfather temple. The above five temples are all sacrificed once a month; the temple of the great-great-grandfather is called the peach, and the Son of Heaven has two peaches, but it is only sacrificed once a season; the great-great-grandfather in the peach is sacrificed on the altar when he moves out; the great-great-grandfather on the altar is sacrificed on the springboard when he moves out; for the great-great-

古文：诸侯立五庙，一坛一墠。曰考庙，曰王考庙，曰皇考庙，皆月祭之；显考庙，祖考庙，享尝乃止。去祖为坛，去坛为墠。坛墠，有祷焉祭之，无祷乃止。去墠为鬼。
现代文：诸侯设立五庙和一坛一掸：即父庙、祖父庙、曾祖庙，以上三庙每月祭祀一次；其高祖庙、始祖庙，每季祭祀一次；从始祖庙中迁出的神主在坛上祭祀，从坛上迁出的远祖神主在掸上祭祀；对于迁到坛掸上的远祖神主，有所祈祷就祭祀，否则就不祭祀；从掸上迁出的远祖叫做鬼，除非遇上啼拾，通常是不祭的。
English: Princes set up five temples and one altar and one niche: that is, the father temple, the grandfather temple, and the great-grandfather temple. The above three temples are sacrificed once a month; their high ancestor temple and the ancestor temple are sacrificed once a season; the god moved from the ancestor temple is sacrificed on the altar, and the distant ancestor god moved from the altar is sacrificed on the niche; for the distant ancestor god moved to the niche, if there is a prayer to sacrifice, it will not be sacrificed; the distant ancestor moved from the niche is called a ghost, and it is usually not sacrificed unless it is picked up.

古文：大夫立三庙二坛，曰考庙，曰王考庙，曰皇考庙，享尝乃止。显考祖考无庙，有祷焉，为坛祭之。去坛为鬼。
现代文：大夫设立三庙二坛：即父庙、祖父庙、曾祖庙，此三庙每季祭祀一次；大夫的高祖、始祖无庙，如果有事向他们祈祷，就在坛上祭之，从坛上迁出的远祖叫做鬼。
English: The doctor set up three temples and two altars: that is, the father temple, the grandfather temple, and the great-grandfather temple. These three temples are worshiped once a season; the doctor's great-grandfather and ancestor have no temple. If you have something to pray to them, you should offer it on the altar. The distant ancestor who moved out from the altar is called a ghost.

古文：适士二庙一坛，曰考庙，曰王考庙，享尝乃止。皇考无庙，有祷焉，为坛祭之。去坛为鬼。
现代文：嫡士设立二庙一坛：即父庙、祖父庙，此二庙每季祭祀一次；其曾祖无庙，如果有事向曾祖祈祷，就在坛上祭之；从坛上迁出的曾祖以上的远祖叫做鬼。
English: Heirs set up two temples and one altar: that is, the father's temple and the grandfather's temple. These two temples are worshiped once a quarter; their great-grandfathers do not have a temple, and if there is anything to pray to the great-grandfather, it is offered on the altar; the distant ancestors of the great-grandfathers and above who moved out of the altar are called ghosts.

古文：官师一庙，曰考庙。王考无庙而祭之，去王考曰鬼。
现代文：官师只立一庙，即父庙；其祖父无庙，如果要祭，就在父庙祭之；祖父以上的祖先死了叫做鬼。
English: An official only built one temple, that is, his father's temple; his grandfather did not have a temple, so if he wanted to hold a festival, he would do so at his father's temple; ancestors older than his grandfather who died were called ghosts.

古文：庶士庶人无庙，死曰鬼。
现代文：普通的士和庶人没有资格立庙，他们的父祖死了就叫做鬼。
English: Ordinary tax collectors and commoners are not qualified to build temples. When their ancestors die, they are called ghosts.

古文：王为群姓立社，曰大社。
现代文：天子为天下百姓所立的社，叫大社。
English: The shrine established by the Son of Heaven for the people of the world is called Taisha.

古文：王自为立社，曰王社。
现代文：天子为自己立的社，叫王社。
English: The society which the Son of God established for Himself is called the Royal Society.

古文：诸侯为百姓立社，曰国社。诸侯自立社，曰侯社。
现代文：诸侯为国内百姓所立的社，叫国社；诸侯为自己立的社，叫侯社。
English: The shrine established by the lords for the people of the country is called the national shrine; the shrine established by the lords for themselves is called the lords' shrine.

古文：大夫以下，成群立社曰置社。
现代文：大夫以下不自立社，而与同里之民共立一社，叫置社。
English: Doctors and their subordinates do not form a self-sustaining society, but join with their fellow villagers to form a society, called a koto-sha.

古文：王为群姓立七祀：曰司命，曰中溜，曰国门，曰国行，曰泰厉，曰户，曰灶。
现代文：天子为天下百姓祭祀七个与人们日常生活密切相关的神，即司命之神，中露之神，国门之神、国行之神，泰厉之神，户神，灶神。
English: For the sake of the people of the world, the heavenly sons offer sacrifices to seven gods that are closely related to people's daily lives, namely, the god of life, the god of the middle dew, the god of the gate of the country, the god of the journey to the country, the god of Tai Li, the god of the door, and the god of the hearth.

古文：王自为立七祀。
现代文：天子也为自己祭祀上述七神。
English: The Son of Heaven also sacrificed to the above-mentioned seven gods for himself.

古文：诸侯为国立五祀，曰司命，曰中溜，曰国门，曰国行，曰公厉。
现代文：诸侯为国内百姓祭祀五个与人们日常生活密切相关的神，即司命之神，中露之神，国门之神，国行之神，公厉之神。
English: Princes and lords offered sacrifices to five gods that were closely related to people's daily lives, namely the god of life, the god of the middle dew, the god of the gate of the country, the god of the state, and the god of justice.

古文：诸侯自为立五祀。
现代文：诸侯也为自己祭祀上述五神。
English: Princes also worshipped the above-mentioned five gods for themselves.

古文：大夫立三祀：曰族厉，曰门，曰行。
现代文：大夫祭祀三个与人们日常生活密切相关的神，即族厉之神，门神，路神。
English: Dafu worship three gods closely related to people's daily lives, namely the god of the tribe, the god of the gate, and the god of the road.

古文：适士立二祀：曰门，曰行。
现代文：嫡士祭祀二神，即门神，路神。
English: The patriarchs worshipped two gods, namely the god of the gate and the god of the road.

古文：庶士、庶人立一祀，或立户，或立灶。
现代文：普通的士和普通百姓只祭一个与生活密切相关的神，或祭户神，或祭灶神。
English: Ordinary tax collectors and ordinary people only worship a god that is closely related to their lives, or a god of the house, or a god of the hearth.

古文：王下祭殇五：适子、适孙、适曾孙、适玄孙、适来孙。
现代文：对于未成年而死的嫡系子孙，天子可以往下祭到五代，即嫡子、嫡孙、嫡曾孙、嫡玄孙、嫡来孙。
English: For the legitimate descendants who died as minors, the heavenly son can be offered down to the fifth generation, that is, the legitimate son, legitimate grandson, legitimate great-grandson, legitimate great-great-grandson, and legitimate great-great-grandson.

古文：诸侯下祭三，大夫下祭二，适士及庶人，祭子而止。
现代文：对于未成年而死的嫡系子孙，诸侯可以下祭三代，即嫡子、嫡孙、嫡曾孙；大夫可以下祭二代，即嫡子、嫡孙；嫡士和庶民，只祭到嫡子就停止了。
English: For the legitimate children and grandchildren who died as minors, the lords can make offerings to the third generation, that is, the legitimate son, the legitimate grandson, and the legitimate great-grandson; the doctors can make offerings to the second generation, that is, the legitimate son, the legitimate grandson; the legitimate scholars and the common people, only the offering to the legitimate son will be stopped.

古文：夫圣王之制祭祀也：法施于民则祀之，以死勤事则祀之，以劳定国则祀之，能御大菑则祀之，能捍大患则祀之。
现代文：圣王制定祭祀的原则：凡是被百姓树立为榜样的就祭祀，凡是因公殉职的就祭祀，凡是为安邦定国建有功劳的就祭祀，凡是能为大众防止灾害的就祭祀，凡是能救民于水火的就祭祀。
English: The holy king formulated the principle of sacrifice: All those who were set up as an example by the people should be sacrificed, all those who died in the line of duty should be sacrificed, all those who built the country with merit should be sacrificed, all those who can prevent disasters for the public should be sacrificed, and all those who can save the people from water and fire should be sacrificed.

古文：是故厉山氏之有天下也，其子曰农，能殖百谷；夏之衰也，周弃继之，故祀以为稷。
现代文：所以当厉山氏统治天下的时候，他有一个儿子叫农，能够指导人民种植百谷；到了夏代衰亡之时，周人的始祖弃能够继承农的未竟之业，所以被后人奉为樱神来祭祀。
English: Therefore, when the Lishan clan ruled the world, he had a son named Nongcun, who was able to guide the people to plant a hundred grains; when the Xia Dynasty fell, the ancestors of Zhou people were able to inherit the unfinished business of the farmers, so they were worshiped as cherry gods by later generations.

古文：共工氏之霸九州岛也，其子曰后土，能平九州岛，故祀以为社。
现代文：当共工氏称霸九州的时候，他有一个儿子叫后土，能够区划九州的风土，使人民各得其所，所以被人当作社神来祭祀。
English: When the Kokugo clan dominated Kyushu, he had a son named Houchi, who was able to divide Kyushu's culture and make the people have their own place, so he was worshipped as a social god.

古文：帝喾能序星辰以着众；尧能赏均刑法以义终；舜勤众事而野死。鲧鄣洪水而殛死，禹能修鲧之功。黄帝正名百物以明民共财，颛顼能修之。契为司徒而民成；冥勤其官而水死。汤以宽治民而除其虐；文王以文治，武王以武功，去民之菑。
现代文：帝誉能根据星辰的运行画定四时，使人民的劳动与休息各有定时；帝尧能尽量使刑法公正，为、民表率；帝舜为操劳国事而死于他乡；鲸治理洪水，大功未成而被杀死；夏禹能完成父亲未竟之业；黄帝能给各种事物都取个合适的名称，使人民贵贱有别，都可取用山泽的物产；撷顶能进一步完善黄帝的事业；契作为司徒在教化人民方面成绩卓著；冥烙尽职守，死在他的工作岗位上；商汤能对待人民宽厚，除暴安良；文王以其文治，武王以其武功，为人民除去封这个祸害。
English: According to the movement of the stars, Emperor Reverend Sun Yat-sen could set the four o'clock, so that the people's labor and rest had a fixed time; Emperor Qianlong could make the criminal law as fair as possible, for the people's standard rate; Emperor Qianlong died in his hometown for the sake of national affairs; the whale managed the flood, but was killed before the great work was done; Xia Yu could complete the unfinished business of his father; the Yellow Emperor could give a suitable name to all kinds of things, so that the people had different values and could use the products of the mountains and lakes; Shanting could further improve the cause of the Yellow Emperor

古文：此皆有功烈于民者也。
现代文：上述诸人，都是为人民建功立业的人，所以被人们当作神来祭祀。
English: All of the above-mentioned people are people who have made contributions to the people, so they are worshiped as gods.

古文：及夫日月星辰，民所瞻仰也；山林川谷丘陵，民所取材用也。
现代文：此外还有日、月、星辰之神，人民赖以区分四时，安排农事；还有山林、川谷、丘陵之神，人民赖以取得各种生产生活资料。
English: In addition, there are the gods of the sun, moon and stars, on which the people rely to tell the time and arrange agricultural affairs; there are also the gods of the mountains, valleys and hills, on which the people rely to obtain various means of production and living.

古文：非此族也，不在祀典。
现代文：不属于此类情况的，就不会被人们当作神灵来祭祀了
English: If they were not, they would not be worshipped as gods.

