古文：○韩擒虎弟僧寿洪韩擒，字子通，河南东垣人也，后家新安。
现代文：○韩擒虎韩擒虎，字子通，河南东垣人，后迁居到新安。
English: ○ Han Bingtao Han Bingtao was born in Donggakjin, Henan Province, and later moved to Xian.

古文：父雄，以武烈知名，仕周，官至大将军、洛虞等八州刺史。
现代文：他的父亲韩雄，以勇猛有气节而闻名，在北周做官，官职到大将军、洛阳、虞州等八州刺史。
English: His father, Han Xiong, was famous for his bravery and valor. He was an official in Northern Zhou and served in eight states, including General, Luoyang, and Yuzhou.

古文：擒少慷慨，以胆略见称，容貌魁岸，有雄杰之表。
现代文：韩擒虎年少时，粗犷豪迈，以有胆识和谋略而著称，体貌魁梧伟岸，有一副英雄豪杰的仪表。
English: When he was young, Han Xunhu was rugged and brave. He was known for his courage and strategy. He was a big man with a heroic appearance.

古文：性又好书，经史百家皆略知大旨。
现代文：他又喜欢读书，经书、史书、百家之言都略知大旨。
English: He also likes to read, is well-versed in a subset of the history of the classics, and is able to grasp the gist of each school's doctrine.

古文：周太祖见而异之，令与诸子游集。
现代文：周太祖看见他后认为他很独特，就让他与太子们一起游玩。
English: Zhou Taizu saw him and thought he was very unique, so he let him play with the princes.

古文：后以军功，拜都督、新安太守，稍迁仪同三司，袭爵新义郡公。
现代文：后来，因为立了军功，授官职为都督，新安太守，慢慢地提升到仪同三司，世袭新义郡公。
English: Later, because of his military merit, he was promoted to the post of the new governor of An, the new governor of An, and gradually promoted to the third division of the ceremony, the hereditary governor of Sinui County.

古文：武帝伐齐，齐将独孤永业守金墉城，擒说下之。
现代文：武帝攻打齐国，齐将独孤永业镇守金墉城，韩擒虎说服他投降。
English: Emperor Wu attacked the State of Qi, and the State of Qi was left alone to defend the city of Jinliao. Han Zhihu persuaded him to surrender.

古文：进平范阳，加上仪同，拜永州刺史。
现代文：进军平定范阳，他又被加授上仪同，授官职为永州刺史。
English: When he marched into Pingding and Fanyang, he was awarded the title of Shang Yi Tong and the post of Yongzhou historian.

古文：陈人逼光州，擒以行军总管击破之。
现代文：陈国军队逼进光州城，韩擒虎以行军总管之职打败了他们。
English: The troops of Chen Guo forced their way into Gwangju City, and Han Bingtao defeated them as the commander-in-chief.

古文：又从宇文忻平合州。
现代文：又跟从宇文忻平定合州。
English: He also followed in the footsteps of Uwen Zangping Ding Hezhou.

古文：高祖作相，迁和州刺史。
现代文：高祖作丞相后，他为合州刺史。
English: After Gao Zu became chancellor, he wrote a history of Hezhou.

古文：陈将甄庆、任蛮奴、萧摩诃等共为声援，频寇江北，前后入界。
现代文：陈国将领甄庆、任蛮奴、萧摩诃等互相声援，多次侵犯江北，先后侵入北周边界。
English: Chen Guo generals Zhenqing, Ren Wanzhu, Xiao Maqi and others supported each other, repeatedly invaded the northern part of the Yangtze River, and successively invaded the northern perimeter border.

古文：擒屡挫其锋，陈人夺气。
现代文：韩擒虎多次挫败他们的锐气，使陈国士气大丧。
English: Han Xunhu repeatedly defeated their spirit, causing Chen Guo's morale to plummet.

古文：开皇初，高祖潜有吞并江南之志，以擒有文武才用，夙著声名，于是拜为庐州总管，委以平陈之任，甚为敌人所惮。
现代文：隋文帝开皇初年，文帝暗中怀有吞并江南的志向，认为韩擒虎有文武之才，平素很有名气，于是就授他为庐州总管，委韩擒虎以平定陈国的重任，很是叫敌人惧怕。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Sui Wen, Emperor Wen secretly harbored the ambition of annexing the south of the Yangtze River. He believed that Han Xunhu was talented in literature and martial arts and was very famous. Therefore, he awarded him as the chief administrator of Zhangzhou and entrusted Han Xunhu with the important task of pacifying Chen Guo, which was very frightening to the enemy.

古文：及大举伐陈，以擒为先锋。擒率五百人宵济，袭采石，守者皆醉，擒遂取之。
现代文：等到大规模攻打陈国，以韩擒虎为先锋，他率领五百士卒夜里渡江，袭击采石，守城的陈军都醉了，韩擒虎于是就攻取了它。
English: After the large-scale attack on Chen Guo, with Han Xunhu as the vanguard, he led five hundred soldiers to cross the river at night and attacked the quarry. Chen's troops defending the city were drunk, and Han Xunhu then captured it.

古文：进攻姑熟，半日而拔，次于新林。
现代文：进攻姑苏，半天时间就攻了下来，紧接着又夺取了新林。
English: They attacked Gusu, took half a day to take it, and then took Xinlin.

古文：江南父老素闻其威信，来谒军门，昼夜不绝。
现代文：江南的老百姓平常听到他的威名、信誉，都来军门拜见他，昼夜不断。
English: When the common people in southern Jiangsu heard of his prestige and credibility, they all came to the military gate to pay homage to him, day and night.

古文：陈人大骇，其将樊巡、鲁世真、田瑞等相继降之。
现代文：陈国人非常害怕，他们的将领樊巡、鲁世真、田瑞等陆续投降了韩擒虎。
English: The people of Chen were very afraid, and their generals, such as Gong Jun, Lu Shizhen, and Tian Rui, successively surrendered to Han Xuanhu.

古文：晋王广上状，高祖闻而大悦，宴赐群臣。
现代文：晋王杨广把这些情况奏报给高祖，高祖听后非常高兴，大摆宴席犒赏群臣。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, reported these circumstances to Gaozu, who was very happy to hear this and held a grand banquet to reward his ministers.

古文：晋王遣行军总管杜彦与擒合军，步骑二万，陈叔宝遣领军蔡徵守硃雀航，闻擒将至，众惧而溃。
现代文：晋王派遣行军总管杜颜与韩擒虎会合，步兵和骑兵达两万人。这时，陈叔宝派领军蔡征镇守朱雀航，听说韩擒虎将到，众士兵因害怕韩擒虎而溃逃。
English: The king of Jin dispatched the general manager of the march, Du Yan, to meet with Han Zhiguo, and the infantry and cavalry reached twenty thousand. At this time, Chen Shubao sent the leader of the army, Cai Zheng, to guard the town of Suzakhang. Hearing that Han Zhiguo would arrive, the soldiers fled in fear of Han Zhiguo.

古文：任蛮奴为贺若弼所败，弃军降于擒。
现代文：任蛮奴被贺若弼战败，丢下军队向韩擒虎投降。
English: Ren the barbarian was defeated by He Ruoqi and left his army to surrender to Han Yuhu.

古文：擒以精骑五百，直入硃雀门。
现代文：韩擒虎以精锐的骑兵五百人直攻朱雀门。
English: Han Xunhu led 500 elite cavalrymen to directly attack the Suzaku Gate.

古文：陈人欲战，蛮奴捴之曰： 老夫尚降，诸君何事！ 
现代文：陈国士兵打算迎战，任蛮奴指着他们说： 我尚且投了降，你们还干什么！ 
English: The soldiers of Chen planned to go to war, but the barbarians pointed at them and said, "Even though I have surrendered, what are you still doing!

古文：众皆散走。
现代文：大家都纷纷溃散逃走。
English: Chen Jun left in a hurry.

古文：遂平金陵，执陈主叔宝。
现代文：于是平定金陵，活捉陈国国君陈叔宝。
English: Jinling was pacified and Chen Shubao was captured.

古文：时贺若弼亦有功。
现代文：当时贺若弼也有一部分功劳。
English: At that time, Horakado also had a part of the credit.

古文：乃下诏于晋王曰： 此二公者，深谋大略，东南逋寇，朕本委之，静地恤民，悉如朕意。
现代文：于是皇帝就下诏对晋王说： 这两个人，深谋大略，在东南防备侵犯之敌，我本委任他们，平定东南，安抚百姓，一切都跟我想的一样。
English: Then the emperor issued an edict to the king of Jin, saying, "These two men have thought out a plan to defend the southeast from the encroaching enemy. I have appointed them to pacify the southeast and pacify the people. Everything is just as I thought.

古文：九州不一，已数百年，以名臣之功，成太平之业，天下盛事，何用过此！
现代文：九州不统一，已经有几百年了，凭他们这些名臣的功劳，来完成太平盛世的大业，天下大事，还有什么能超过这些呢？
English: It has been hundreds of years since Kyushu was not unified. With the merits of these famous ministers, they have accomplished the great cause of peace and prosperity, the world's great events. What else can surpass these?

古文：闻以欣然，实深庆快。
现代文：听到这情况感到很欣慰，实在是很高兴。
English: I'm delighted to hear that, I'm absolutely delighted.

古文：平定江表，二人之力也。 
现代文：平定江南，是这两个人的力量啊！ 
English: It is the power of these two people to pacify the south of the Yangtze River!

古文：赐物万段。
现代文：于是赏赐绢帛万段。
English: As a result, the star was awarded 10,000 dan.

古文：又下优诏于擒、弼曰： 申国威于万里，宣朝化于一隅，使东南之民俱出汤火，数百年寇旬日廓清，专是公之功也。
现代文：随后又下诏对韩擒虎、贺若弼二人说： 你们扬国威于万里之外，宣扬教化于江南一隅，使东南百姓从水深火热中摆脱出来，几百年的敌人十来天的时间就清除干净，这只是你们的功劳啊。
English: He then issued an edict to Han Xinghu and He Ruoqi, saying, "You have promoted national dignity thousands of miles away, preached enlightenment in one corner of the south of the Yangtze River, freed the southeastern people from the depths of the fire, and cleared away the enemies of hundreds of years in about ten days. This is just your merit.

古文：高名塞于宇宙，盛业光于天壤，逖听前古，罕闻其匹。
现代文：你们高高的名声塞于宇宙，昌盛的大业显耀于天地，远听前世古人之事，很少与你们能够匹敌。
English: Your lofty reputation is enshrined in the universe, and your prosperous great cause shines in heaven and earth. Listening to the ancients of the past, few can match you.

古文：班师凯入，诚知非远，相思之甚，寸阴若岁。 
现代文：军队凯旋，知道为期不远了，我很想念你们，度日如年。 
English: The army has made a triumphant return, and I know that the deadline is not far away. I miss you very much, and every day feels like a year.

古文：及至京，弼与擒争功于上前，弼曰： 臣在蒋山死战，破其锐卒，擒其骁将，震扬威武，遂平陈国。
现代文：等到回到京城，贺若弼和韩擒虎在皇上面前争功，贺若弼说： 我在蒋山殊死作战，打败敌人精锐的部队，活捉敌人的勇将，威风大振，于是平定陈国。
English: When he returned to the capital, He Ruoqi and Han Xunhu fought for glory in front of the emperor. He Ruoqi said: I fought to the death on Mount Jiang, defeated the enemy's elite troops, captured the enemy's brave generals alive, and gained great prestige, so I pacified Chen Guo.

古文：韩擒略不交阵，岂臣之比！ 
现代文：韩擒虎并不怎么与敌人交锋，怎么能与我的功劳相比！ 
English: Han Xunhu did not fight with the enemy very much, how can it be compared to my achievement!

古文：擒曰： 本奉明旨，令臣与弼同时合势，以取伪都。弼乃敢先期，逢贼遂战，致令将士伤死甚多。
现代文：韩擒虎说： 我奉晋王的指示，让我和你的军队合在一起，来攻打陈国都城，你贺若弼竟敢在我前面冒险出兵，一遇到贼人就展开战斗，致使将士们死伤很多。
English: Han Xunhu said: I was instructed by the King of Jin to let me and your army come together to attack the capital city of Chen. How dare you risk sending troops ahead of me and start fighting as soon as you encounter thieves, causing many soldiers to be killed and injured.

古文：臣以轻骑五百，兵不血刃，直取金陵，降任蛮奴，执陈叔宝，据其府库，倾其巢穴。
现代文：我带领精锐的骑兵五百人，武器不沾血，就攻下金陵，使任蛮奴投降，捉住陈叔宝，占据他们的府库，把他们的巢穴都倾覆了。
English: I led five hundred light cavalry, soldiers without blood, directly took Jinling, surrendered to the barbarians, captured Chen Shubao, occupied the treasury of Chen Guo, and destroyed their lair.

古文：弼至夕，方扣北掖门，臣启关而纳之。
现代文：贺若弼到晚上，方才叩响北掖门，我打开城门接纳他。
English: It was not until the evening that He Ruoqi knocked on the north gate, and I opened the gate to receive him.

古文：斯乃救罪不暇，安得与臣相比！ 
现代文：他连补救罪过都来不及，怎能与我相比！ 
English: He hasn't even had time to atone for his sins, how can he be compared to me!

古文：擒本名豹，平陈之际，又乘青骢马，往反时节与歌相应，至是方悟。
现代文：皇上说： 你们两个都应授予特殊功勋。 于是升任韩擒虎为上柱国，赏赐绢物八千段。
English: The emperor said, "Both of you should be awarded special merits," so Han Xunhu was promoted to be the top pillar country and was awarded eight thousand rupees in stolen goods.

古文：其后突厥来朝，上谓之曰： 汝闻江南有陈国天子乎？ 
现代文：后来有司揭发韩擒虎放纵士兵，淫污陈宫，因犯这罪状不对他加封爵邑。以后，突厥来朝拜，皇上对他们说： 你们听说江南有陈国天子吗？ 
English: Later, a Turkic envoy came to Chang'an to meet the imperial court, and Emperor Sui Wen said to him: Have you heard of Chen Guotianzi from the south of the Yangtze River?

古文：对曰： 闻之。 
现代文：他们回答说： 听说过。 
English: The pearler freely admits: I've heard it all.

古文：上命左右引突厥诣擒前，曰： 此是执得陈国天子者。 
现代文：于是皇上让侍从领突厥使臣到韩擒虎面前，说： 这就是捉获陈国天子的人。 
English: So the emperor asked his attendants to bring the Turkic envoys to Han Xunhu and said: "This is the man who captured Chen Guo Tianzi."

古文：擒厉然顾之，突厥惶恐，不敢仰视，其有威容如此。
现代文：韩擒虎狠狠地看了他们一眼，他们非常恐惧，不敢抬头看他，他就是这样威风凛凛。
English: Han Yanhu gave them a fierce look. They were so scared that they did not dare to look up at him. He was so dignified.

古文：别封寿光县公，食邑千户。
现代文：另外封他为寿光县公，食邑一千户。
English: In addition, he was given the title of Shouguang County official, with a thousand households in Shouguang.

古文：以行军总管屯金城，御备胡寇，即拜凉州总管。
现代文：以行军总管的身份屯兵驻守金城，防备胡寇来犯，随之又授凉州总管之职。
English: When Zhou Qi heard of Wang Yuwenxian, he admired him very much and hired him to be his secretary.

古文：俄征还京，上宴之内殿，恩礼殊厚。
现代文：不久，韩擒虎被皇上征召回到京城，皇上在内殿设宴款待，恩礼很厚。
English: Soon after, Han Xinghu was summoned by the emperor to return to the capital. The emperor held a banquet in the inner hall, and the emperor was very grateful.

古文：无何，其邻母见擒门下仪卫甚盛，有同王者，母异而问之。
现代文：不久，他邻边的老妇人看见他的门下仪仗很盛大，同王宫一样，老妇人感到奇怪便问他们。
English: After a while, an old woman who lived next to him saw that there was as much pomp and ceremony at his door as at the king's palace. She was surprised and asked them about it.

古文：其中人曰： 我来迎王。 
现代文：他们中间有人回答说： 我来迎接大王。 
English: And one of them said, I am come down to see the king.

古文：忽然不见。
现代文：忽然不见了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：又有人疾笃，忽惊走至擒家曰： 我欲谒王。 
现代文：又有人病得很厉害，恍恍忽忽地走到韩擒虎家里说： 我想拜见大王。 
English: There was another person who was very ill and walked to Han Xunhu's house in a daze and said, "I want to see the great king."

古文：以功加位金紫光禄大夫，领郡如故。
现代文：左右的人问道： 什么王？ 回答说： 阎罗王。 
English: The people around him asked: What king? He answered: King of Hell.

古文：俄而万昌弟仲通复叛，又诏洪讨平之。
现代文：韩擒虎的手下侍从想打他，韩擒虎制止他们说： 我生前做到了上柱国，死后能做阎罗王，这已很满足了。 因此生病，几天就死了。
English: Han Shih-hu's servants wanted to beat him, but Han Shih-hu stopped them, saying, "I have achieved Shangzhu Kingdom in my lifetime, and after I die, I can be the King of Hell, which is very satisfying.

古文：师未旋，遇疾而卒，时年六十三。
现代文：死时五十五岁。
English: He was fifty-five when he died.

古文：○贺若弼
现代文：○贺若弼
English: ○Herakozan

古文：贺若弼，字辅伯，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：贺若弼字辅伯，河南洛阳人。
English: He Ruoqi Zi Fu Bo, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：父敦，以武烈知名，仕周为金州总管，宇文护忌而害之。
现代文：他的父亲贺敦，因勇武刚烈而闻名，在北周时任金州总管，宇文护因嫉妒他的才能而陷害他。
English: His father, Hetun, was famous for his bravery and valor. He was the governor of Jinzhou at the time of the Northern Zhou Dynasty. Uwenwoo was jealous of his talent and set him up.

古文：临刑，呼弼谓之曰： 吾必欲平江南，然此心不果，汝当成吾志。
现代文：临刑时，贺敦把若弼叫到跟前对他说： 我决心平定江南，但是此志不能实现，你应成就我的志愿。
English: At the time of his execution, Hetun called Jiaojuan forward and said to him: I am determined to pacify the south of the Yangtze River, but this aspiration cannot be realized. You should fulfill my will.

古文：且吾以舌死，汝不可不思。 
现代文：我是因为不慎言而死，你不可不深思。 
English: I died because of my careless words. You must think deeply.

古文：因引锥刺弼舌出血，诫以慎口。
现代文：于是用锥子把若弼的舌头刺出了血，告诫他说话要谨慎。
English: So he pricked the young toad's tongue with a skewer to draw out the blood and warned him to be careful what he said.

古文：弼少慷慨有大志，骁勇便弓马，解属文，博涉书记，有重名于当世。
现代文：若弼年轻时慷慨激昂，胸有大志，骁勇无敌，射箭骑马技巧娴熟，通晓撰文，博览群书，在当时很出名。
English: When he was young, he was impassioned, ambitious, invincible, skilled in archery and horseback riding, well-versed in writing, and well-read. He was very famous at that time.

古文：周齐王宪闻而敬之，引为记室。
现代文：周齐王宇文宪听到后很敬重他的才干，选拔他为记室。
English: After hearing this, Zhou Qi Wang Yuwen Xian highly respected his talent and selected him as a recorder.

古文：未几，封当亭县公，迁小内史。
现代文：不久，封为当亭县公，升迁为小内史。
English: Soon, he was given the title of Dangting County official and promoted to the position of Xiaonai Shi.

古文：周武帝时，上柱国乌丸轨言于帝曰： 太子非帝王器，臣亦尝与贺若弼论之。 
现代文：周武帝时，上柱国乌丸轨对武帝说： 太子不是帝王之才，我也曾跟贺若弼议论过他。 
English: At the time of Emperor Zhou Wudi, the upper pillar state of Wumaru said to Emperor Wudi: The prince is not the talent of the emperor, I have also talked about him with Horatio.

古文：帝呼弼问之，弼知太子不可动摇，恐祸及己，诡对曰： 皇太子德业日新，未睹其阙。 
现代文：武帝唤若弼问及此事，若弼知道太子之位不可动摇，恐怕祸及自己，就违心地对武帝说： 皇太子的德望一天比一天高，我没有发现他的过错。 
English: Emperor Wudi called out, "If you ask me about this, if you know that the position of the crown prince is unshakable, I'm afraid it will be a disaster for you. Against my will, I said to Emperor Wudi, "The dignity of the crown prince is getting higher and higher every day. I didn't find any fault with him.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：武帝听后默然不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：弼既退，轨让其背己，弼曰： 君不密则失臣，臣不密则失身，所以不敢轻议也。 
现代文：若弼退出后，乌丸轨责备他背叛自己，若弼回答说： 君王做事不密就失去臣子；臣子做事不密就丧失生命，所以不敢随便议论。 
English: If he did not withdraw, Uzumaru railed at him for betraying him. If he did, Uzumaru replied, "A king loses a vassal if he does not work closely; a vassal loses his life if he does not work closely, so I dare not speak freely."

古文：及宣帝嗣位，轨竟见诛，弼乃获免。
现代文：等到宣帝继位，乌丸轨终究被杀，若弼却得以免罪。
English: By the time Emperor Xuancheng succeeded to the throne, Emperor Wu was finally killed, but Emperor Ruo was exonerated.

古文：寻与韦孝宽伐陈，攻拔数十城，弼计居多。拜寿州刺史，改封襄邑县公。
现代文：不久他与韦孝宽一起攻打陈国，攻克了数十座城，其中若弼攻下的最多，这样他官拜寿州刺史，改封为襄邑县公。
English: Soon, he and Wei Xiaokuan attacked Chen Province together and conquered dozens of cities, of which Ruoqi conquered the most. In this way, he paid homage to the history of Shoushou and changed his title to Xiangyi County.

古文：高祖为丞相，尉迥作乱鄴城，恐弼为变，遣长孙平驰驿代之。
现代文：高祖担任北周丞相时，尉迟迥在邺城反叛，高祖恐怕若弼有变，就派长孙平乘驿马去替代了他。
English: When Gaozu served as the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, his second-in-command rebelled in Shicheng. Gaozu was afraid that if there was a change, he would send his eldest son, Sun Ping, to replace him.

古文：高祖受禅，阴有并江南之志，访可任者。
现代文：高祖称帝以后，心中就有吞并江南之志，寻找可担大任之人。
English: After Gao Zu was proclaimed emperor, he had a dream of annexing the southern part of the Yangtze River and was looking for someone who could take on the great responsibility.

古文：高颎曰： 朝臣之内，文武才干，无若贺若弼者。 
现代文：高赹说： 朝臣之中，有文武全才的没有能比得上贺若弼。 
English: Gao Yao said, "Among the courtiers, there is no one who is literate and well-versed in martial arts who can match He Ruo Yao.

古文：高祖曰： 公得之矣。 
现代文：高祖说： 你推荐对了人。 
English: Gaozu said: You have recommended the right person.

古文：于是拜弼为吴州总管，委以平陈之事，弼忻然以为己任。
现代文：于是拜贺若弼为吴州总管，委托他以平陈之事，若弼欣然接受并以此为己任。
English: Therefore, Bai He, the governor of Wuzhou, entrusted him with the matter of Ping Chen, which he gladly accepted and took it as his duty.

古文：与寿州总管源雄并为重镇。
现代文：他与寿州总管源雄同为军事重镇的长官。
English: He and the governor of Shoushu, Geng Xiong, guarded the border at the same time.

古文：弼遗雄诗曰： 交河骠骑幕，合浦伏波营，勿使骐驎上，无我二人名。 
现代文：若弼曾赠诗给源雄： 交河有骠骑将军的帐幕，合浦有伏波将军的军营，不要让麒麟阁上，没有我们二人的名号。 
English: If Min had given a poem to Geng Xiong: Cross the river and you will find the general's tent, and in Hapu you will find General Fubo's camp, do not let Kirin's pavilion be without the names of the two of us.

古文：献取陈十策，上称善，赐以宝刀。
现代文：若弼进献十条攻陈之策，皇上称赞不已，赐给他宝刀。
English: The emperor was full of praise for Jakucho's presentation of ten strategies for attacking Chen, and gave him a precious sword.

古文：开皇九年，大举伐陈，以弼为行军总管。
现代文：开皇九年，大规模攻陈，高祖任命若弼担任行军总管。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, a large-scale attack on Chen, Gao Zu appointed Ruo Jia as the general manager of the march.

古文：将渡江，酹酒而咒曰： 弼亲承庙略，远振国威，伐罪吊民，除凶翦暴，上天长江，鉴其若此。
现代文：准备渡江时，若弼酹酒发誓说： 我亲承皇上旨意，远振国威，讨伐罪人，慰问百姓，剪除残暴。悠悠苍天，浩浩长江，请为我作证。
English: When preparing to cross the river, he swore: "I will personally carry out the emperor's will, strengthen the national prestige, fight criminals, console the people, and eliminate brutality. Heaven and earth, vast Yangtze River, please testify for me."

古文：如便福善祸淫，大军利涉；如事有乖违，得葬江鱼腹中，死且不恨。 
现代文：如果扬善抑祸，大军就能顺利过江；如果事与愿违，就葬身鱼腹之中，死而无怨。 
English: If good prevails over evil, a large army can successfully cross the river; if things do not go according to plan, they will be buried in the belly of the fish and die without regret.

古文：先是，弼请缘江防人每交代之际，必集历阳。
现代文：当初，若弼请求派遣沿长江防务之兵在办理换防之时，一定要先聚集在历阳。
English: At first, if the Yangtze requested to send soldiers along the Yangtze River for defense, they must first gather in Liyang when changing defenses.

古文：于是大列旗帜，营幕被野。陈人以为大兵至，悉发国中士马。
现代文：于是士兵广列旗帜，营幕遍野，陈国认为是隋朝的大军到了，就调动国中全部兵马准备迎敌。
English: As a result, the soldiers arrayed their banners and camp tents all over the countryside. Chen Guo believed that the great army of the Sui Dynasty had arrived, so he mobilized all the soldiers and horses in the country to prepare to meet the enemy.

古文：既知防人交代，其众复散。
现代文：后知这只是驻军换防，陈国集聚的人马又散开了。
English: Later, it became clear that the soldiers defending the Yangtze River were changing their positions, and Chen Jun was demobilized again.

古文：后以为常，不复设备。
现代文：陈军习以为常，不再加以防备。
English: After that, it's just a matter of getting used to it and not taking any precautions.

古文：及此，弼以大军济江，陈人弗之觉也。
现代文：到这时，若弼派大军横渡长江，陈国的军队一点也没有察觉。
English: At this time, if Zhai sent a large army across the Yangtze River, Chen Guo's army did not notice at all.

古文：袭陈南徐州，拔之，执其刺史黄恪。
现代文：若弼偷袭陈国的南徐州，攻下此城，活捉了刺史黄恪。
English: The Sui army first attacked the southern Xuzhou of Chen Guo, conquered it in one fell swoop, and captured the assassin Shi Huang Ke.

古文：军令严肃，秋毫不犯。有军士于民间沽酒者，弼立斩之。
现代文：若弼的部队军令严肃，秋毫无犯，如发现军士到民间买酒的，若弼立即将他斩首。
English: If his troops had a serious military order, they would not commit any crimes. If they found a sergeant buying alcohol from a civilian, they would immediately behead him.

古文：进屯蒋山之白土冈，陈将鲁达、周智安、任蛮奴、田瑞、樊毅、孔范、萧摩诃等以劲兵拒战。田瑞先犯弼军，弼击走之。
现代文：若弼屯兵驻扎在蒋山的白土岗上，陈将鲁达、周智安、任蛮奴、田瑞、樊毅、孔范、萧摩诃等用强兵抵挡，田瑞先进攻若弼的军队，若弼打跑了他。
English: When Ruojun's troops were stationed on a white earthen post on Mount Jiang, Chen sent Luda, Zhou Zhian, Ren Bannu, Tian Rui, Zou Yi, Kong Fan, Xiao Maqi and other strong soldiers to resist. Tian Rui advanced to attack Ruojun's army, and Ruojun beat him and ran away.

古文：鲁达等相继递进，弼军屡却。
现代文：鲁达等将轮番进攻，若弼的军队屡屡退却。
English: Luda and the others will attack in turn, while Wakatsuki's army repeatedly retreats.

古文：弼揣知其骄，士卒且惰，于是督厉将士，殊死战，遂大破之。
现代文：若弼估计到其将领骄横，其士卒懈怠之时，就督促勉励将士，拼死作战，于是大败陈军。
English: If he estimated that his generals were arrogant and his soldiers were slack, he would urge and encourage his soldiers to fight to the death, and then he would defeat Chen's army.

古文：麾下开府员明擒摩诃至，弼命左右牵斩之。摩诃颜色自若，弼释而礼之。
现代文：部下开府员明擒拿到萧摩诃，若弼命令左右推出斩首，可是摩诃神情自若，若弼放了他并且以礼相待。
English: Xiao Maqian was taken by his subordinate, the head of the prefectural government, who ordered Xiao Maqian to be beheaded. However, Maqian was self-assured and treated Xiao Maqian with courtesy.

古文：从北掖门而入。时韩擒已执陈叔宝，弼至，呼叔宝视之。
现代文：若弼的军队从北掖门进入城内，当时韩擒虎已经捉到了陈叔宝，若弼到时，叫来陈叔宝观看。
English: When Han Xunhu's army entered the city from the North Gate, Han Xunhu had already captured Chen Shubao. When Han Xunhu arrived, he called Chen Shubao to watch.

古文：叔宝惶惧流汗，股忄栗再拜。
现代文：叔宝恐惶得汗流满面，两腿战战去给若弼下拜。
English: Uncle Bao was so scared that he was sweating profusely. He bowed his head with both legs.

古文：弼谓之曰： 小国之君，当大国卿，拜，礼也。
现代文：若弼对他说： 小国的国君向大国的大臣下拜，是礼节。
English: Jokowi said to him: It is a courtesy for the ruler of a small country to bow to the minister of a big country.

古文：入朝不失作归命侯，无劳恐惧。 
现代文：到了我朝还不失做一个归命侯，不要害怕。 
English: Don't be afraid to enter my morning as a suitor.

古文：既而弼恚恨不获叔宝，功在韩擒之后，于是与擒相询，挺刃而出。
现代文：若弼怨恨自己没有擒住叔宝，功在韩擒虎之后，于是同韩擒虎互相责骂，以致拔刀相向。
English: If you hold a grudge against yourself for not capturing your uncle's treasure, and the gong is after Han Xuanhu, then you and Han Xuanhu will scold each other, so that you will draw your swords against each other.

古文：上闻弼有功，大悦，下诏褒扬，语在《韩擒传》。
现代文：皇上听到若弼有功，很高兴，下诏褒扬他，这记在《韩擒虎传》中。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear that Ruo Jiao had made great contributions, and issued a decree to praise him, which is recorded in "The Legend of Han Jiao the Tiger."

古文：晋王以弼先期决战，违军命，于是以弼属吏。
现代文：晋王因为若弼在事先决战，违反军令，于是把若弼交给属下处分。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, thought that he had fought a decisive battle with Chen Jun ahead of time and defied the military order, so he handed him over to the officials in charge of military law to be dealt with.

古文：上驿召之，及见，迎劳曰： 克定三吴，公之功也。 命登御坐，赐物八千段，加位上柱国，进爵宋国公，真食襄邑三千户，加以宝剑、宝带、金甕、金盘各一，并雉尾扇、曲盖，杂彩二千段，女乐二部，又赐陈叔宝妹为妾。拜右领军大将军，寻转右武候大将军。
现代文：皇上让人乘驿马召他来，见面时，亲自迎接并慰劳他，说： 攻取三吴，是你的功劳。 皇上叫他登上御座，赐给若弼缣帛八千段，授官上柱国，加封宋国公，食邑三千户，赐给他宝剑、宝带、金雍瓦、金盘各一个，和雉尾扇、曲盖，杂采二千段，女乐二部，还赐陈叔宝的妹妹给他做妾，让他担任右领军大将军，不久拜为右武侯大将军。
English: The emperor summoned him on a horse and carriage, and when they met, he greeted and consoled him in person, saying, "It is to your credit that you conquered Sanwu. The emperor called him to ascend the throne, gave him eight thousand rupees, conferred the title of Shangzhu Guo, added the title of Song Guo Guo, and fed three thousand households. He gave him a sword, a treasure belt, a golden yongwa, and a golden plate, and a fan and a cover, two thousand rupees, and two pieces of female music. He also gave Chen Shubao's sister to be his concubine, and let him serve as the right leader

古文：弼时贵盛，位望隆重，其兄隆为武都郡公，弟东为万荣郡公，并刺史、列将。
现代文：若弼在当时贵极一时，官高位重，其兄贺隆封为武都郡公，其弟贺东封为万荣郡公，同时担任刺史、列将之职。
English: At that time, he was extremely wealthy and held high-ranking positions. His elder brother, He Longfeng, was the governor of Wudu County, and his younger brother, He Dongfeng, was the governor of Wanying County. They also held the posts of scribe and general.

古文：弼家珍玩不可胜计，婢妾曳绮罗者数百，时人荣之。
现代文：他家中珍宝古玩不计其数，穿绮罗的婢妾有几百人，当时的人以此为荣。
English: Let him ascend to the throne, reward him with eight thousand pieces of goods, add the seal of Shangzhuo, and give him the title of Prince of Song, give him three thousand households in Xiangyur food village, and give him Chen Shubao's sister as his concubine, and also make him the right leader of the army.

古文：弼自谓功名出朝臣之右，每以宰相自许。
现代文：贺若弼自认为功名在群臣之上，常常以宰相自居。
English: He believed that his achievements were superior to those of his courtiers, and often referred to himself as the prime minister.

古文：既而杨素为右仆射，弼仍为将军，甚不平，形于言色，由是免官，弼怨望愈甚。
现代文：不久杨素担任右仆射，但若弼仍是将军，很感不平，形于言表，因此被免去官职，若弼不满就更深了。
English: Soon after, Yang Su, who was still a general, was relieved of his post, which made him even angrier.

古文：后数年，下弼狱，上谓之曰： 我以高颎、杨素为宰相，汝每倡言，云此二人惟堪啖饭耳，是何意也？ 
现代文：数年以后，若弼下狱，高祖对他说： 我让高赹、杨素担任宰相，你总是扬言说他们两个仅仅能吃饭罢了，是什么意思？ 
English: A few years later, Gao Zu said to Gao Yu if Gao Yu was sent to prison: I asked Gao Yu and Yang Su to serve as prime ministers. You always threatened that the two of them would only be able to eat. What do you mean?

古文：弼曰： 颎，臣之故人，素，臣之舅子，臣并知其为人，诚有此语。 
现代文：若弼说： 高赹，是我的朋友；杨素，是我的舅子，我知道他们的为人，的确说过这样的话。 
English: He replied: Gao Yao, is my old friend; Yang Su, is my uncle's son. I know who they are, and I really said those words.

古文：公卿奏弼怨望，罪当死。
现代文：大臣启奏若弼怨恨大，按罪当死。
English: The Minister of the Court of Chancery reported that He Ruoqi had a grudge against the imperial court and had committed a capital crime.

古文：上惜其功，于是除名为民。
现代文：皇上爱惜他曾有功，只是免官为庶民。
English: The emperor regretted that he had been meritorious, but dismissed him as a commoner.

古文：岁馀，复其爵位。
现代文：一年多后，恢复其爵位。
English: More than a year later, his knighthood was restored.

古文：上亦忌之，不复任使，然每宴赐，遇之甚厚。
现代文：高祖也猜忌他，不再任用他，然而每当高祖设宴有所赏赐时，给他的赏赐很多。
English: Emperor Wen had already shunned him and no longer appointed him to positions, yet he was still treated with great courtesy at every banquet.

古文：开皇十九年，上幸仁寿宫，宴王公，诏弼为五言诗，词意愤怨，帝览而容之。
现代文：开皇十九年，高祖驾临仁寿宫，宴请王公大臣，下诏让若弼作五言诗，他作的诗蕴含愤怨之情，高祖看后宽容了他。
English: In the 19th year of the Emperor's reign, Gao Zu drove to Renshou Palace, held a banquet for the prince and minister, and issued an edict to let Ruo Yao write a five-character poem. The poem he wrote contained resentment, but Gao Zu tolerated him after reading it.

古文：尝遇突厥入朝，上赐之射，突厥一发中的。
现代文：若弼曾经遇到突厥使者入朝，高祖赐突厥人射箭，突厥人一射就射中了靶子。
English: If you have ever encountered a Turkic emissary to the North, Gao Zu gave the Turks arrows to shoot, and the Turks hit the target as soon as they shot.

古文：上曰： 非贺若弼无能当此。 
现代文：高祖说： 除了贺若弼没有人能像他这样善射。 
English: Gaozu said, "Except for Horakado, no one can shoot as well as him."

古文：于是命弼。弼再拜祝曰： 臣若赤诚奉国者，当一发破的。如其不然，发不中也。 
现代文：于是叫若弼来射箭，若弼拜了两拜祝愿说： 我若是赤诚为国的人，就应当一射就中靶子，如果不是这样，就射不中。 
English: So he called for the eunuch to come and shoot arrows, and the eunuch bowed twice and made a wish, saying, "If I am a true patriot, I should be able to hit the target with one shot. If I am not, I will not be able to hit the target."

古文：既射，一发而中。
现代文：结果一射就中了靶子。
English: As a result, one shot hit the target.

古文：上大悦，顾谓突厥曰： 此人天赐我也！ 
现代文：皇上很高兴，回过头对突厥人说： 这个人，是上天赐给我的！ 
English: He Ruoqian later said to Gao Ruo: The crown prince did not listen to what I said.

古文：炀帝之在东宫，尝谓弼曰： 杨素、韩擒、史万岁三人，俱称良将，优劣如何？ 
现代文：炀帝还在东宫当太子时，曾经对若弼说： 杨素、韩擒虎、史万岁三个人都是良将，相比之下谁优谁劣呢？ 
English: When Emperor Xuan was still crown prince in the East Palace, he once said to Ruo Ruo: Yang Su, Han Xunhu, Shi Wanling, the three of them are all good generals. In comparison, who is better and who is worse?

古文：弼曰： 杨素是猛将，非谋将；韩擒是斗将，非领将；史万岁是骑将，非大将。 
现代文：若弼回答说： 杨素是员猛将，不是谋将；韩擒虎是员战将，不是统帅之将；史万岁是马上将领，不是大将才。 
English: Jokowi replied: Yang Su is a fierce general, not a strategist; Han Xinghu is a warlord, not a general; Shi Wan Lian is a commander, not a general.

古文：太子曰： 然则大将谁也？ 
现代文：太子说： 那么大将是谁呢？ 
English: Prince Yang Guang asked: Then who is the general?

古文：弼拜曰： 唯殿下所择。 
现代文：若弼拜后说： 只有靠殿下抉择了。 
English: He bowed his head and said, "It is up to Your Imperial Highness to choose."

古文：弼意自许为大将。
现代文：若弼的意思是自己是大将。
English: What he means is that he wants to be a general.

古文：及炀帝嗣位，尤被疏忌。
现代文：等到炀帝继位后，他更加被皇上疏远猜忌。
English: After Emperor Yang Guang ascended the throne, he became even more alienated and taboo.

古文：大业三年，从驾北巡，至榆林。
现代文：大业三年，若弼跟随皇上到北方巡视，到了榆林。
English: Three years into the great undertaking, Ruo Yao followed the emperor on a tour of the north and arrived in Yulin.

古文：帝时为大帐，其下可坐数千人，召突厥启民可汗飨之。
现代文：炀帝设了一个很大的帐篷，那帐篷下可坐几千人，召见了突厥启民可汗并设宴款待。
English: Emperor Qian set up a large tent, under which several thousand people could sit, summoned the Turkic Qin khan and held a banquet.

古文：弼以为大侈，与高颎、宇文弼等私议得失，为人所奏，竟坐诛，时年六十四。
现代文：若弼认为这样太浪费，同高赹、宇文弼等人私下议论皇上过失。被人奏明皇上，最后因这事被杀，时年六十四岁。
English: If she thought it was too wasteful, she privately discussed the emperor's fault with Gao Yao, Uwen Yao and others. She was reported to the emperor, and was finally killed for this, at the age of sixty-four.

