古文：刘龙子郭纯王燧唐同泰胡延庆朱前疑宁王安禄山白铁余李庆远刘玄佐张祜大安寺王使君刘崇龟李延召成都丐者薛氏子秦中子李全皋文处子
现代文：刘龙子郭纯王燧唐同泰胡延庆朱前疑宁王安禄山白铁余李庆远刘玄佐张祜大安寺王使君刘崇龟李延召成都丐者薛氏子秦中子李全皋文处子
English: Liu Longzi, Guochun Wang, Zhi Tang, Tong Tai, Hu Yanqing, Zhu Qian, Qining, Wang Anlu, Shan Baitie, Yu Li, Qingyuan, Liu Xuan, Zhang Ye, Da'an Temple, Wang Envoy, Liu Chongke, Li Yan Zhao, Chengdu Beggar, Xue Shi Zi, Qin Zhongzi, Li Quanzhang, Wen Zhenzi

古文：刘龙子
现代文：刘龙子
English: Liu Longzi

古文：唐高宗时，有刘龙子妖言惑众。
现代文：唐高宗时，有个叫刘龙子的人妖言惑众。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tang Gao, there was a man named Liu Longzi who bewitched the public.

古文：作一金龙头藏袖中，以羊肠盛蜜水，绕击之。
现代文：他制作一个金龙头藏在衣服袖子里，龙头后面套上一段装入蜂蜜水的羊肠子。
English: He made a golden faucet hidden in his sleeve, and put a piece of sheep's intestine filled with honey water behind the faucet.

古文：每聚众，出龙头，言圣龙吐水，饮之百病皆差。
现代文：每到人多的地方，刘龙子便从袖口里露出金龙头，对人们说他这只神龙能从嘴中往外吞水，喝了后百病都能治好。
English: Whenever he went to a crowded place, Liu Longzi would reveal a golden dragon head from his cuff, telling people that this divine dragon could swallow water from his mouth and cure all kinds of diseases after drinking it.

古文：遂转羊肠水于龙口中出，与人饮之，皆罔云病愈。
现代文：说完，他转动羊肠，于是蜂蜜水就从金龙口中流出来。喝了蜂蜜水的人，都谎说自己身上的病痊愈了。
English: When he had said this, he twisted the intestines of the sheep, and honey-water flowed out of the mouth of the golden dragon. Those who drank the honey-water lied and said that their illnesses had been cured.

古文：施舍无数。遂起逆谋，事发逃窜。
现代文：刘龙子白送人喝了一些后，就起了坑骗人的坏心，用这种方法骗取了许多钱物。后来，事情败露后他逃走了。
English: After Liu Longzi Bai sent someone away to drink some, he had a bad heart to deceive people, and used this method to deceive a lot of money and goods. Later, after the matter was revealed, he fled.

古文：捕访擒获，斩之于市，并其党十余人。
现代文：最终还是被官府查访捉获，拉到街市口斩首示众。连同他的同党，一共斩首了十多个人。
English: In the end, he was caught by a government inspection and dragged to the entrance of the market to behead people. Together with his accomplices, he beheaded more than ten people in total.

古文：郭纯
现代文：郭纯
English: Guo Chun

古文：东海孝子郭纯丧母，每哭则群乌大集。
现代文：东海郡有个叫郭纯的孝子死了母亲后，每次哭母都有许多鸟雀来到他跟前。
English: In Donghai County, there was a filial son named Guo Chun. After his mother died, many birds and finches came to him every time he cried for his mother.

古文：使检有实，旌表门闾。
现代文：官府派人来察验，确实是这样。
English: The government sent an official to investigate and found that this was indeed the case, so they petitioned the emperor to raise a banner of praise at the gate.

古文：后讯，乃是孝子每哭，即撒饼于地，群乌争来食之。
现代文：于是，官府为这位孝子立牌坊，用来表彰他这一族人。后来得到消息，原来是这位孝子每次哭母前，在地上撒上饼子，因此群鸟都争着来拣吃。
English: As a result, the government erected a plaque for the filial son to commend him as a member of the tribe. Later, it was reported that the filial son used to scatter biscuits on the ground every time he cried, which made the birds scramble to pick them up.

古文：其后数如此，乌闻哭声以为度，莫不竞凑。
现代文：经过多次训练后，形成了条件反射。群鸟一听到这位孝子的哭声，又以为有饼子吃了呢，没有不飞落下来寻找饼子吃的。
English: After many times of training, a conditioned reflex was formed. As soon as the birds heard the crying of the filial son, they thought that they had eaten the cake, and they flew down to look for the cake to eat.

古文：非有灵也。
现代文：不是孝子感动了上天令灵啊！
English: It wasn't the filial son who moved God's spirit!

古文：王燧
现代文：王燧
English: Wang Yao

古文：河东孝子王燧家，猫犬互乳其子。
现代文：河东孝子王燧家里，猫与狗互挽着脯乳它们的崽。
English: In the home of Prince Xiao Zi Wang of Hedong Province, cats and dogs hold each other's tails to suckle their young.

古文：州县上言，遂蒙旌表。
现代文：州县得知这一情况后向上呈报，于是王燧得到了官府的表彰。
English: After the prefectural government learned of this situation, it reported it to the higher authorities, and Wang Wei received a commendation from the government.

古文：乃是猫犬同时产子，取猫儿置犬窠中，取犬子置猫窠内。
现代文：其实是他家的猫与狗同时生崽，他将猫崽放在狗窝里，又将狗崽放在猫窝里，互相吃惯了奶，习以为常了。
English: In fact, his family's cat and dog both had ringworm at the same time. He put the cat's louse in the dog's kennel and the dog's louse in the cat's kennel. They got used to each other's milk and took it for granted.

古文：饮贯其乳，遂以为常，殆不可以异论也。
现代文：完全不可以认为是异常的表现。由此可以知道，所谓的连理树、合欢瓜、麦分岐、禾同穗，都是这样长出来的。
English: This is not at all to be regarded as an abnormal manifestation. From this, it can be known that the so-called Lianli tree, Huan melon, wheat branch, and straw-like spike have all grown up in this way.

古文：自知连理木、合欢瓜、麦分歧、禾同穗，触类而长，实繁其徒，并是人作，不足怪焉。
现代文：象这样的事情确实有许多，都是人工制造出来的，一点也不值得奇怪。
English: There are indeed many things like this, all of which are man-made and not at all surprising.

古文：唐同泰
现代文：唐同泰
English: Tang Dongtai

古文：唐同泰于洛水得白石紫文，云圣母临水，永昌帝业。
现代文：唐同泰在洛水中得到一块白色石头，上面镌有紫色的文字，是圣母临水，永昌帝业八个字。
English: Tang Tongtai got a white stone in Luoshui, with purple words embroidered on it. It is the Virgin Mary facing the water, and the eight characters of Yongchang Empire.

古文：进之，授五品果毅，置永昌县。
现代文：唐同泰将这块白石进献给皇上，被授与五品果毅统管府兵，并且在这地方设立永昌县。
English: Tang Tongtai presented this white stone to the emperor, was awarded five prizes, and established Yongchang County in this place.

古文：乃是将石凿作字，以紫石末和药嵌之。
现代文：其实，唐同泰先在白石上凿刻上字，再用紫色的石末和药嵌在字上面。
English: In fact, Tang Tongtai first chiseled the words on the white stone, and then used purple stone powder and medicine to embed the words on top.

古文：后并州文水县于谷中得一石，还如此，有武兴字，改文水为武兴县。
现代文：后来，并州文水县有人在山谷中得到一块石头，也是这样，上面有武兴两个字。于是改文水为武兴县。
English: Later, someone in Wenshui County, Yizhou Province, got a stone in the valley, also in this way, with the two characters of Wuxing on it. Therefore, Wenshui was changed to Wuxing County.

古文：自是往往作之，后知其伪，不复采用，乃止。
现代文：从自，常常有人这样作假。后来，知道都是人工伪造的，官府不再采用了，才制止住了这股不正的风气。
English: Later, when it became known that they were all artificial forgeries, the government stopped using them, thus putting an end to this dishonest trend.

古文：胡延庆
现代文：胡延庆
English: Hu Yanqing

古文：襄州胡延庆得一龟，以丹漆书其腹曰：天子万万年。
现代文：襄州有个叫胡延庆的人得到一只乌龟，用丹漆在乌龟的肚腹上写上天子万万年六个字，并将这只乌龟进献给朝廷。
English: In Xiangzhou, a man named Hu Yanqing obtained a turtle, wrote the words "Ten Thousand Years" on the turtle's belly with red paint, and presented the turtle to the imperial court.

古文：以进之，凤阁侍郎李昭德以刀刮之并尽。奏请付法，则天曰：此非恶心也。
现代文：凤阁侍郎李昭德用刀将乌龟肚腹上的字都刮掉了，并上奏武则天皇后，用法律来制裁胡延庆。武则天回答说：这样做并不是什么坏心啊。
English: Fengge waiter Li Zhaode used a knife to scratch off all the characters on the turtle's belly, and appealed to Empress Wu Zetian to use the law to sanction Hu Yanqing. Wu Zetian replied: "It is not a bad intention to do so."

古文：舍而不问。
现代文：于是将这件事丢在一边，不再过问。
English: Not to be traced.

古文：朱前疑
现代文：朱前疑
English: Zhu Qianxuan

古文：则天好祯祥，拾遗朱前疑说梦云：则天头白更黑，齿落更生。
现代文：武则天崇尚吉祥的征兆。拾遗朱前疑说他作了一个梦，梦见了武则天白头发变成了黑头发，牙齿掉落后又生长出新的牙齿来。
English: Wu Zetian believed in auspicious signs. Zhu Qian suspected that he had a dream in which he saw Wu Zetian's white hair turn black, and new teeth grow after his teeth had fallen out.

古文：即授都官郎中。
现代文：当即就被则天女皇授予了都官郎中。
English: He was immediately awarded the title of "Minister of the Capital" by the Empress Zetian.

古文：司刑寺系三百余人，秋分后，无计可作。乃于内狱外罗墙角边，作圣人迹长五尺。
现代文：司刑寺里关押了三百多名囚犯。秋分过后，没有什么事情可做，这些犯人中有人在内狱外侧墙角边，作成圣人的脚印，长五尺。
English: After the autumn equinox, when there was little to do, some of the more than three hundred prisoners held in the Executioner's Temple made the saint's five-foot-long footprints in a corner of the wall outside the inner prison.

古文：至夜半，众人一时大叫。
现代文：到了半夜，这些囚犯一齐大喊大叫。
English: By midnight, the prisoners were shouting in unison.

古文：内使推问，对云：昨夜有圣人见，身长三丈，面作金色。
现代文：内监推问他们出了什么事？回答说：昨天半夜有一位圣人出现在内狱院子里，身高三丈，脸似涂金。
English: The inspector asked them what had happened and they replied: "At midnight last night, a holy man appeared in the inner yard of the prison. He was three meters tall and his face looked like it was painted with gold.

古文：云： 汝等并冤枉，不须忧虑。
现代文：这位圣人对我们说： 你们都是冤枉的，不用忧虑。
English: The saint said to us: You are all innocent, do not worry.

古文：天子万年，即有恩赦放汝。
现代文：天子能活一万岁，会马上施恩大赦你们的。
English: If the Son of Heaven can live for ten thousand years, He will immediately grant you amnesty.

古文：把火照视，见有巨迹。即大赦天下，改为大足元年。
现代文：内监用火把照着看地上，果然见到有圣人的巨大脚印，就把这件事上奏给武则天女皇。则天女皇立即大赦天下的囚犯，并改之为大足元年。
English: The supervisor looked at the ground with a torch and saw the saint's huge footprints. He reported the matter to Empress Wuzetian. Empress Wuzetian immediately granted amnesty to all prisoners and changed the date to the first year of the Taifu era.

古文：宁王
现代文：宁王
English: Ning Wang

古文：宁王尝猎于鄠县界，搜林，忽见草中一柜，扃钥甚固。
现代文：宁王有一次在鄠县山中狩猎，搜索树林，忽然看见草丛中有一只柜子，关闭锁得特别牢固。
English: Ning Wang was once hunting in the mountains of Yixian County, searching the woods, when he suddenly saw a cabinet in the bushes. It was locked very tightly.

古文：命发视之，乃一少女也。
现代文：宁王让人将这只柜子打开一看，柜子里装的是一位妙龄少女。宁王询问她从哪里来的？
English: Ning Wang let people open the cabinet to have a look. The cabinet contained a young girl. Ning Wang asked where she came from?

古文：询其所自，女言姓莫氏，父亦曾仕。
现代文：少女言说自己姓莫，父亲也曾任过官职。
English: The girl said that her surname was Mo and that her father had once held a government post.

古文：昨夜遇一火贼，贼中二人是僧，因劫某至此。
现代文：昨天晚上遇到一伙盗贼，将她抢劫到这里。
English: Last night, she was confronted by a group of thieves who robbed her here.

古文：含嚬上诉，冶态横生。
现代文：盗贼中有两个还是和尚。
English: Two of the thieves are still monks.

古文：王惊悦之，遂载以后乘。时方生猎一熊，置柜中，如旧锁之。
现代文：这位少女娥眉微蹙地向宁王诉说此事，妖冶之态不断变化，面部表情非常丰富，宁王见了非常惊异喜悦。于是将这位少女放在后车中，运回府里。当时正好猎到一只活熊，就将这只活熊放在柜子里，原样锁好。
English: The girl told Ning Wang about this with a twitch of her eyebrows, her demeanor was constantly changing, her facial expressions were very rich, and Ning Wang was very surprised and delighted. So he put the girl in the back of the car and transported her back to the house. At that time, he happened to catch a live bear, so he put the live bear in the cabinet and locked it as it was.

古文：值上方求极色，王以莫氏衣冠子女，即日表上之，且具所由。上令充才人。
现代文：这时正赶上玄宗皇帝下诏天下，搜求极端美丽的女子。宁王就将很有教养、深明礼仪的莫氏女进献玄宗皇帝，并上表言明她的来历，玄宗皇帝将莫氏女封为才人。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to search the world for extremely beautiful women. King Ning presented the well-educated Mo woman with profound etiquette to Emperor Xuanzong, and stated her origin. Emperor Xuanzong named the Mo woman as a talented person.

古文：经三日，京兆府奏：鄠县食店，有僧二人，以万钱独赁房一日夜。
现代文：三天后，京兆府上报玄宗皇上说：鄠县一家旅店，来了两个和尚，用一万钱包租了一个房间住了一天一宿，说是作法事。
English: Three days later, Emperor Xuanzong was reported in the Beijing News to have said, "Two monks came to a hotel in Jixian County and rented a room for one day and one night with a 10,000-won purse, saying it was a ritual.

古文：言作法事，唯舁一柜入店中。
现代文：这两个和尚只抬着一只大柜来到旅店。
English: The two monks came to the inn carrying only a large chest.

古文：夜深，腷膊有声。店主怪日出不启门，撤户视之，有熊冲人走去。
现代文：当晚夜深，只听到和尚包住的屋子里腷膊有声，似乎有人在厮斗，店主感到很奇怪。到了大天时亮还不见两个和尚开门出来，店主让伙计打开门看看，有一只熊从屋中冲着伙计走过来。
English: Late that night, the owner of the store felt very strange when he only heard the sound of hand-shaking in the room where the monk was hiding, as if someone was fighting. At dawn, the two monks did not open the door, and the store owner asked the employee to open the door to see if there was a bear coming from the room towards the employee.

古文：二僧已死，体骨悉露。
现代文：两个和尚已死在屋里，浑身让熊撕咬得露出骨头。
English: Two monks lay dead inside, their bodies ripped open by the bear.

古文：上知之，大笑。
现代文：玄宗皇帝知道这件事情后，高兴得大声笑了。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong learned of this, he laughed out loud with joy.

古文：书报宁王，大哥善能处置此僧也。
现代文：马上写封信告诉宁王，说：大哥真有好办法处置这两个和尚啊！
English: Immediately write a letter to tell Ning Wang, saying: Big brother really has a good way to deal with these two monks!

古文：莫氏能为新声，当时号莫才人啭。
现代文：莫氏女能唱流行的新曲。当时宫中都称她为歌星莫才人。
English: Mo's daughter could sing popular new songs. At that time, the palace called her a singing star.

古文：安禄山
现代文：安禄山
English: Anlu Mountain

古文：玄宗幸爱安禄山，呼禄山为子。
现代文：唐玄宗非常宠爱安禄山，叫安禄山为义子。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty loved Anlu Mountain very much and called Anlu Mountain his son-in-law.

古文：尝于便殿与杨妃同宴坐，禄山每就见，不拜玄宗而拜杨妃。
现代文：一次，玄宗赏赐安禄山在便殿与杨贵妃坐在一桌上吃饭。安禄山每次回京朝见，不拜玄宗而拜杨贵妃。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Xuanzong rewarded An Lushan with sitting at a table with Empress Yang Guifei for dinner in the hall. Every time Emperor Xuanzong saw Empress Yang Guifei in the morning, An Lushan did not bow to Emperor Xuanzong but bowed to Empress Yang Guifei.

古文：因顾问曰：此胡不拜我而拜妃子，意何在也？
现代文：玄宗皇帝问安禄山：你这个胡儿不拜我而拜贵妃，是什么意思？
English: Emperor Xuanzong asked An Lushan, "What do you mean by not bowing to me, but bowing to your empress?

古文：禄山对云：臣胡家，只知有母，不知有父故也。
现代文：安禄山回答说：我是胡人，只知道有母亲，不知道有父亲啊！
English: An Lushan replied, "I am a Hu person, I only know that I have a mother, but I don't know that I have a father!

古文：笑而舍之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝听后笑着让安禄山走了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong laughed and let Anlu Mountain go.

古文：禄山丰肥大腹，帝尝问曰：此胡腹中何物，其大乃尔。
现代文：安禄山身体肥胖、大腹便便。玄宗皇帝有一次问安禄山：你这胡儿肚子里装的是什么东西，这样大啊？
English: Emperor Xuanzong once asked Anlu Shan, "What is that big thing in your belly?"

古文：禄山应声对曰：臣腹中更无他物，唯赤心耳。
现代文：安禄山回答说：我肚子里没有别的东西，只有对父皇的一颗忠心啊！
English: An Lushan replied, "I have nothing else in my stomach but my loyalty to my father, the emperor!

古文：以其言诚，而益亲善之。
现代文：安禄山因为他表面会说奉承话，而日益得到玄宗皇帝的宠幸。
English: An Lushan, because he would say flattering things on the surface, was increasingly favored by Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：白铁余
现代文：白铁余
English: Bai Tie Yu

古文：白铁余者，延州嵇胡也，左道惑众。
现代文：白铁余，是延州嵇山的一位胡人，用旁门左道迷惑人们。
English: Bai Tieyu is a Hu person from Lushan, Yanzhou, who uses side doors and left lanes to confuse people.

古文：先于深山中埋一铜佛像柏树之下，经数年，草生其上。
现代文：起初，白铁余在深山里的一株柏树下面埋了一尊铜佛像。
English: At first, Bai Tieyu buried a bronze Buddha statue under a cypress tree deep in the mountains.

古文：诒乡人曰：吾昨夜山下过，见有佛光。
现代文：过了几年，埋铜像的地方荒草丛生，已经看不出来掩埋的痕迹了，他欺骗乡人们说：我昨天晚上从山下经过，看见山中有佛光出现。
English: After a few years, the place where the bronze statue was buried was overgrown with weeds, and the traces of the burial were no longer visible. He deceived the villagers by saying: I passed under the mountain last night and saw Buddha's light appear in the mountain.

古文：于是卜日设斋，以出圣佛。
现代文：于是，他卜算了一个吉日，设斋祭，来请出这尊圣佛。
English: Therefore, he calculated an auspicious day and set up a fasting festival to invite this holy Buddha.

古文：及期，集数百人，命于非所藏处劚，不得。
现代文：到了这一天，白铁余召集了好几百人到山中。他先让人在不是埋铜像的地方挖掘，没有得到佛像。
English: On this day, Bai Tieyu gathered several hundred people to the mountain. He first asked people to dig in the place where the bronze statue was not buried, and did not get the Buddha statue.

古文：则诡曰：诸人不至诚布施，佛不可见。
现代文：他欺骗人们说：大家不诚心意地布施钱财，是见不到圣佛的。
English: He deceived people by saying, "If everyone gives money without sincerity, they will not be able to see the holy Buddha."

古文：是日，男女挣施舍百余万。
现代文：于是，当天就有男男女女争抢着布施一百多万钱给圣佛。
English: As a result, on that day there were men and women competing to give more than a million dollars to the holy Buddha.

古文：即于埋处劚之，得其铜像。
现代文：白铁余这回让人在他埋佛像的柏树下面挖掘，挖到了他埋进地里的铜佛像。
English: This time, Bai Tieyu had someone dig under the cypress tree where he had buried the Buddha statue, and they dug up the bronze Buddha statue that he had buried in the ground.

古文：乡人以为圣人，远近相传，莫不欲见。
现代文：乡人们认为白铁余是圣人，远近相传，没有人不想见到他的。
English: The villagers believe that Baitieyu is a saint, passed down from generation to generation, and no one wants to see him.

古文：宣言曰：见圣佛者，百病即愈。
现代文：白铁余发出话说：见到圣佛的人，包你百病都能根除。
English: Bai Tieyu uttered the words: "Whoever sees the holy Buddha, all your diseases can be eradicated."

古文：余遂左计数百里老小士女皆就之。
现代文：于是，白铁余用欺骗的手法，使方圆几百里之内的老少男女都来看视圣佛。
English: As a result, Bai Tieyu used deceitful methods to make all men and women within a radius of several hundred miles come to see the holy Buddha.

古文：乃以绀紫红绯黄绫，为袋数十重，盛佛像。
现代文：他用绀、紫、红、绯、黄绫缝制成袋子，有几十重，将铜佛盛入袋中。
English: He sewed dozens of bags with satin, purple, red, indigo and yellow satin, and put the bronze Buddha into the bag.

古文：人来观者去其一重，一回布施，获千万，乃见其像。
现代文：有人来观看佛像，去掉一重袋子就得施舍一次钱。
English: If someone comes to see the Buddha statue, they have to give money once to get rid of a heavy bag.

古文：如此矫伪一二年，乡人归伏，遂作乱。
现代文：从一个观看者的手中就能得到上千万的布施钱，这个人才能观看到佛像。
English: From the hands of one viewer, tens of millions of alms money can be obtained, and this person can only see the Buddha statue.

古文：自称光王，署置官属，设长吏，为患数年。
现代文：白铁余用这种手段骗人骗了一二年，乡人们都归伏他，于是他自称光王，独霸一方。他设置官衙，封任长吏，在延州嵇山一代作乱了好几年。
English: Baitieyu used this method to deceive people for a year or two, and the villagers all surrendered to him, so he called himself the king of light, dominating one side. He set up government posts, appointed officials, and caused chaos in the Lushan generation in Yanzhou for several years.

古文：命将军程务挺讨斩之。
现代文：后来，朝迁命令将军程务挺讨伐他，将白铁余捕获斩首。
English: Later, Emperor Qianlong ordered General Cheng Mu Ting to fight against him and capture Bai Tie Yu and behead him.

古文：李庆远
现代文：李庆远
English: Li Qingyuan

古文：中郎李庆远狡诈轻险。
现代文：中郎李庆远，为人狡诈轻躁奸险。
English: The middle brother, Li Qingyuan, is a cunning, frivolous and treacherous person.

古文：初事皇太子，颇得出入。
现代文：他刚刚事奉皇太子时，很能上窜下跳出入宫门禁中。
English: When he had just begun to serve the crown prince, he was very good at jumping up and down to get into the palace gate.

古文：暂时出外，即恃威权。
现代文：有时到外面去，就显示他的威势权力。
English: Sometimes when he goes outside, he shows his power and authority.

古文：宰相以下，咸谓之要人。
现代文：因此，宰相以下的官员们，都称呼他为要人。
English: As a result, officials from the prime minister down call him an important person.

古文：宰执方食即来，诸人命坐，即遣一人门外急唤云：殿下见召。
现代文：每到吃饭时，李庆远刚刚坐下没吃几口，李庆远就暗中派一个人在门外喊：太子殿下召见李中郎！
English: Every meal time, Li Qingyuan just sat down and did not eat a few bites, Li Qingyuan secretly sent a person outside the door to shout: His Royal Highness the Crown Prince summoned Li Zhonglang!

古文：匆忙吐饭而去。
现代文：李庆远急忙将嘴里的饭吐出来去见太子。
English: Li Qingyuan hurriedly spat out the rice in his mouth to see the prince.

古文：诸司皆如此计，请谒嘱事。
现代文：李庆远对各个部门，都用这种办法。
English: Li Qingyuan used this method for all departments.

古文：卖官鬻狱，所求必遂焉。东宫后稍稍疏之。
现代文：不论是谁请求见到他，托付他办事，以及买卖官职、花钱减刑，凡是求他办的事情，一定都能办到。太子后来渐渐疏远了李庆远。
English: No matter who asked to see him, entrusted him with affairs, as well as buying and selling official positions, spending money to reduce his sentence, he would certainly be able to do everything he was asked to do. The prince later gradually alienated Li Qingyuan.

古文：仍潜入仗内，食侍官之饭。
现代文：一次，李庆远偷偷进入卫士的住所，偷吃了卫士们的饭菜。
English: Once, Li Qingyuan secretly entered the guards' residence and stole the guards' meals.

古文：晚出外，腹痛大作。犹诈云：太子赐瓜，咽之太多，以致斯疾。
现代文：晚上外出，突然肚子痛得难以忍受，他还跟人们夸说是太子赏赐给他一只瓜，吃得太多了，以致于将肚子吃疼了。
English: When he went out at night, he suddenly had an unbearable stomach ache. He also boasted to people that the crown prince had given him a melon as a reward, and that he had eaten so much that his stomach hurt.

古文：须臾霍乱。
现代文：过了不一会儿，李庆远上吐下泻。
English: After a while, Li Qingyuan vomited and had diarrhea.

古文：吐出卫士所食粗米饭，及黄臭韭济狼藉。
现代文：吐出来卫士们吃的粗米饭，以及黄臭变质的韭菜等，吐得满地都是。
English: They spit out the coarse rice that the guards had eaten, as well as the yellow-smelling, spoiled leeks, etc. They spit all over the ground.

古文：凡是小人得宠，多为此状也。
现代文：凡是小人得宠，多数都是这种样子！
English: Whenever a villain gains favor, most of them look like this!

古文：刘玄佐
现代文：刘玄佐
English: Liu Xuanzu

古文：汴州相国寺，言佛有汗流。
现代文：汴州相国寺，传言说有尊佛像身上有汗流出来。
English: According to a rumor, the statue of Buddha at the Shokoku-ji Temple in Zhangzhou is sweating profusely.

古文：节度使刘玄佐遽命驾，自持金帛以施。
现代文：节度使刘玄佐立即亲自到相国寺，亲自将金帛等物布施给这尊佛像。
English: The festival made Liu Xuanzu immediately go to the Shogoku Temple in person and personally give the gold brooch and other items to the Buddha statue.

古文：日中，其妻亦至。
现代文：这天中午，刘玄佐的妻子也亲自到相国寺来布施。
English: At noon that day, Liu Xuanzu's wife also came to Shogoku-ji Temple in person to give alms.

古文：明日复起斋场。
现代文：第二天，又建造了斋祭的道场。
English: The next day, they built a dojo for the festival.

古文：由是将吏商贾，奔走道路，唯恐输货不及。
现代文：于是，文武官员、商贾士人，都争先恐后地前来相国寺，唯恐来不及布施。
English: As a result, civil and military officials, merchants, and scholars all scrambled to come to Shokoku-ji Temple, fearing that they would not have time to give alms.

古文：因令官为簿书，以籍所入。
现代文：刘玄佐命令节度府派出官员带着帐簿去相国寺，收取布施。
English: Liu Xuanzuo ordered the Sedo Prefecture to send officials with account books to Shogoku-ji Temple to collect donations.

古文：十日乃闭寺，曰：佛汗止矣。
现代文：并将所有的布施都收归节度府所有。十天以后关闭了相国寺，发告示说这尊佛像停止流汗了。
English: Ten days later, Shokoku-ji Temple was closed and a notice was issued saying that the Buddha statue had stopped sweating.

古文：得钱巨万，以瞻军资。
现代文：十天之内共收得布施许多万，刘玄佐将这笔钱款作为军费使用了。
English: Within ten days, he received tens of thousands of dollars in donations, and Liu Xuanzuo used the money as military expenses.

古文：张祜
现代文：张祜
English: Zhang Ye

古文：进士崔涯、张祜下第后，多游江淮。
现代文：进士崔涯、张祜落第后，经常在江淮一带游走。
English: After the junior scholars Cui Lai and Zhang Ye fell to the second place, they often wandered around the Jianghuai River.

古文：常嗜酒，侮谑时辈。或乘其饮兴，即自称豪侠。
现代文：经常聚众饮酒，侮辱戏谑当时有名望的人；或者乘着酒兴，自称为江湖上的豪侠。
English: They often gather in large groups to drink alcohol, insult and make fun of people who were famous at the time; or they take advantage of their drinking to call themselves the heroes of the country.

古文：二子好尚既同，相与甚洽。
现代文：这两个人的喜好崇尚相同，因此相处得特别融洽。
English: The two men's tastes are similar, so they get along particularly well.

古文：崔尝作侠士诗云：太行岭上三尺雪，崔涯袖中三尺铁。
现代文：崔涯曾经写首赞颂侠士的诗。诗是这样的：太行岭上三尺雪，崔涯袖中三尺铁。
English: Cui Lai once wrote a poem in praise of chivalry. The poem goes like this: Three feet of snow on Taihang Ridge, three feet of iron in Cui Lai's sleeve.

古文：一朝若遇有心人，出门便与妻儿别。
现代文：一朝若遇有心人，出门便与妻儿别。
English: If you meet someone in the morning, say goodbye to your wife and children when you go out.

古文：由是往往传于人口曰：崔张真侠士也。
现代文：从此，常常可以从人们的口中听到：崔涯、张祜是真正的豪侠啊！
English: Since then, we can often hear from people's mouths: Cui Ya and Zhang Ye are real heroes!

古文：是此人多设酒馔待之，得以互相推许。
现代文：凡是这样说的人，往往都是经常摆设酒宴款待崔涯、张祜的人。他们之间互相推崇赞许。
English: Those who say so are often the same people who often host banquets for Cui Jia and Zhang Ye. They admire and praise each other.

古文：后张以诗上盐铁使，授其子漕渠小职，得堰名冬瓜。
现代文：后来，张祜给管理盐铁的官吏书赠一首赞美诗。这位盐铁使在漕渠上授予他儿子一个小官职，负责冬瓜这一段堤堰的管理工作。
English: Later, Zhang Qian gave a hymn to the official in charge of the salt iron. The salt iron official gave his son a minor official position on the canal, responsible for the management of the winter melon section of the dam.

古文：或戏之曰：贤郎不宜作此职。
现代文：有人戏谑张祜说：你的儿子不应该任这么小的职务啊！
English: Some people joked with Zhang Ye, saying, "Your son shouldn't hold such a small post!"

古文：张曰：冬瓜合出祜子。
现代文：张祜自我解嘲地说：冬瓜就应该产生张祜的儿子！
English: Zhang Ye self-deprecatingly said: the winter melon should produce Zhang Ye's son!

古文：戏者相与大哂。
现代文：戏谑他的人听了这样的回答后，相望着大笑不止。
English: His detractors looked at each other and burst out laughing when they heard the answer.

古文：岁余，薄有资力。
现代文：过了一年多，张祜家积攒了一点资产。
English: After more than a year, Zhang Ye's family has accumulated a little bit of assets.

古文：一夕，有非常人妆束甚武，腰剑手囊。
现代文：一天晚上，来了一位身穿夜行衣的人，全身武侠打扮，腰间悬挂一柄宝剑，手中拎着一只行囊。
English: One evening, a man dressed in a nightgown arrived, dressed as a martial artist, with a sword hanging from his waist and a knapsack in his hand.

古文：囊中贮一物，流血殷于外。
现代文：囊里盛着一件东西，有血洇出囊外边。
English: There was an object in the bag and blood was coming out of the bag.

古文：入门谓曰：此非张侠士居也？
现代文：来人进入屋门后问：这儿不是张侠士的住处吗？
English: A man came to the door and asked, "Isn't this where Zhang Xicheng lives?"

古文：曰：然。
现代文：张祜回答说：是的。
English: The general said yes.

古文：揖客甚谨。
现代文：非常恭谨地让这个人进屋落坐。
English: Very respectfully, let this person come in and sit down.

古文：既坐，客曰：有一仇人之恨，十年矣，今夜获之。
现代文：来人说：我有一个仇家，此仇已结十年了。今夜我将他杀死了，报了这段怨仇。
English: The man said, "I had an enemy for ten years, and I killed him tonight to settle the score."

古文：喜不能已，因指囊曰：此其首也。
现代文：边说边高兴得不能自已，指着行囊接着说：这里面装的就是这位仇人的首级啊！
English: While talking, he was so happy that he could not contain himself. Pointing to the travel bag, he went on to say: "It contains the head of this enemy!"

古文：问张曰：有酒店否？
现代文：又问张祜：这儿有酒店吗？
English: He also asked Zhang Ye: Is there a hotel here?

古文：命酒饮之。
现代文：请张大侠打些酒，我们一块儿喝一杯好吗？
English: Zhang Daxia, please make some wine. Can we have a drink together?

古文：饮讫曰：去此三四里有一义士，予欲报之。
现代文：喝完酒，来人说：离这儿三四里地有一位义士，我想报答他对我的大恩。
English: After drinking the wine, the man said, "There is a righteous man three or four miles from here, and I want to repay his great kindness to me."

古文：若济此夕，则平生恩仇毕矣。
现代文：如果今晚上能报答了我的这位恩人，那么，我平生恩、仇两件大事就都算处理完了。
English: If I can repay my benefactor tonight, then I will have dealt with the two major events in my life.

古文：闻公气义，能假予十万缗否？
现代文：听说张大侠非常讲义气，能不能借我十万缗钱？
English: I heard that Zhang Daxia is very loyal. Can you lend me 100,000 baht?

古文：立欲酧之。
现代文：我用完之后马上还给你。
English: I'll give it back to you as soon as I've used it up.

古文：是予愿毕，此后赴蹈汤火，誓无所惮。
现代文：我的这两件夙愿都完成后，今后张大侠就是让我赴汤蹈火，我决没有什么顾及的了。
English: After my two long-cherished wishes have been fulfilled, Zhang Daxia will let me go through thick and thin in the future, and I will never consider anything else.

古文：张深喜其说，且不吝啬。
现代文：我平生再没有什么遗憾的事情啦！
English: I have no more regrets in my life!

古文：即倾囊烛下，筹其缣素中品之物，量而与焉。
现代文：于是将行囊连同里面的人头留下，便离开了张祜家，约定好报完恩后马上返回来。
English: So he left the bag with the head inside, and left Zhang Ye's house, agreeing to return immediately after reporting the favor.

古文：客曰：快哉，无所恨也！遂留囊首而去，期以却回。
现代文：待到这位来人离开张家后，到了约定回来的时间却没有回来。
English: After waiting for the visitor to leave the Zhang family, he did not return at the agreed time.

古文：既去，及期不至。五鼓绝声，杳无踪迹。
现代文：张祜一直等到外面报夜的敲完五鼓了，还是一点踪影也没有。
English: Zhang Qian waited until the evening paper finished beating the five drums outside, but there was still no trace.

古文：又虑囊首彰露，以为己累。
现代文：张祜考虑到一旦行囊中的人头让人发现了，会连累自己的。
English: Zhang Yao took into account that once the head in the bag was found, it would implicate himself.

古文：客且不来，计无所出，乃遣家人开囊视之，乃豕首也。
现代文：况且这位深夜来客又不按约回来，实在没有什么好办法啦，只好让家中的仆人将行囊打开看看，原来里面装的是一只猪头。
English: Moreover, this late-night visitor did not return as agreed, and there was really nothing to be done about it. The servant of the family had to open the bag to see what was inside, which turned out to be a pig's head.

古文：由是豪侠之气顿衰矣。
现代文：从此，张祜的豪侠精神立时没有啦。
English: From then on, Zhang Ye's heroic spirit immediately disappeared.

古文：大安寺
现代文：大安寺
English: Daianji Temple

古文：唐懿宗用文理天下，海内晏清。
现代文：唐懿宗用文治理国家，注重休养生息、发展生产，因此海内清平，国泰民安。
English: Tang Yanzong used literature to govern the country, focusing on recuperation, growth and development of production. As a result, the sea was peaceful and the country and people were safe.

古文：多变服私游寺观。
现代文：懿宗多次改穿便装扮作普通人，游览寺院、道观。
English: Shizong changed his clothes several times and dressed up as an ordinary person, visiting temples and Taoism.

古文：民间有奸猾者，闻大安国寺，有江淮进奏官寄吴绫千匹在院。
现代文：一次，有一伙狡猾奸诈的人，听说大安国寺院中，寄放着江淮进奏官进献给朝廷的吴绫一千匹。
English: On one occasion, a group of cunning and treacherous people heard that in a temple in the State of Da'an, there were a thousand horses of Wu Xuan, which had been presented to the imperial court by the Emperor of China.

古文：于是暗集其群，就内选一人肖上之状者，衣上私行之服，多以龙脑诸香薰裛，引二三小仆，潜入寄绫之院。
现代文：他们暗中串联谋划，挑选出一个长相很象懿宗皇帝的人，穿上皇上私游时穿的衣服扮成皇上，并用龙脑等多种香料熏染衣服，带着二三个小仆人来到大安国寺寄放吴绫的院落中。
English: They secretly plotted in tandem, selected a person who looked very much like Emperor Shanzong, dressed up in the clothes worn by the emperor during his private tour, dressed up as the emperor, and smeared the clothes with a variety of spices such as tarragon, and brought two or three small servants to the courtyard of Da'an Guo Temple where Wu Gan was kept.

古文：其时有丐者一二人至，假服者遗之而去。
现代文：当时有一二个乞丐来到院中，假扮皇上的这个贼人分给他们一些钱后打付他们离开这里。
English: At that time, one or two beggars came to the hospital, and the thief, pretending to be the emperor, gave them some money and paid them to leave.

古文：逡巡，诸色丐求之人，接迹而至，给之不暇。假服者谓院僧曰：院中有何物，可借之。
现代文：过了一会儿，各种各样的乞丐接连不断地来到院中向假扮皇上的人行乞讨。这个假扮的贼人施舍不过来，对寺院的僧人说：寺院里有什么东西，暂借我用用。
English: After a while, various beggars kept coming to the hospital to beg from the person pretending to be the emperor. The impersonating thief could not afford to give alms, so he said to the monks of the temple: "There is something in the temple, let me borrow it for a while."

古文：僧未诺间，小仆掷眼向僧。
现代文：僧人没有立即答应，假扮的小仆人向僧人递眼色，暗示是皇上微服私访。
English: The monk did not immediately agree, and the disguised little servant winked at the monk, implying that the emperor was paying a private visit.

古文：僧惊骇曰：柜内有人寄绫千匹，唯命是听。
现代文：僧人无比惊惶恐惧，连连说：寺院柜里有他人寄放的吴绫一千匹，听候吩咐。
English: The monk was extremely alarmed and frightened, and kept saying, "There are a thousand gourds in the temple cupboard, which were sent by others, and they are waiting for orders."

古文：于是启柜，罄而给之。
现代文：于是，假扮的皇上命令打开柜子，将一千匹绫都施舍给了那些乞丐。
English: So the pretended emperor ordered the cupboard to be opened and a thousand donkeys were given to the beggars.

古文：小仆谓僧曰：来日早，于朝门相见，可奉引入内，所酧不轻。
现代文：假扮的小仆人对僧人说：明天早晨，在朝门相见。我奉皇上之命引导你进入宫内，不会少还给你的。
English: The little servant in disguise said to the monk: "Tomorrow morning, I will meet you at the imperial gate. I will guide you into the palace by the order of the emperor, and I will not give you less."

古文：假服者遂跨卫而去。
现代文：说完，服侍假皇帝骑上驴背，扬长而去。
English: Having said this, the servant of the false emperor mounted the donkey and rode away.

古文：僧自是经日访于内门，杳无所见，方知群丐并是奸人之党焉。
现代文：第二天从早到晚，大安国寺的僧人都在宫门边等候寻找，连个人影都没等着。这才知道昨日在寺院借绫的皇上和那些乞讨的乞丐，都是奸人贼党假扮的啊！
English: The next day, from morning to night, the monks of Da'an National Temple waited by the palace gate, not even waiting for a shadow. It was only then that they knew that the emperor who borrowed money from the temple yesterday, and the beggars who were begging, were all traitors!

古文：王使君
现代文：王使君
English: King Envoy

古文：王凝侍郎案察长沙日，有新授柳州刺使王某者，不知何许人，将赴所任。
现代文：侍郎王凝在长沙查处期间，有位新近授任的柳州刺史王某人，不知道他是哪地方的人，在赴任途中经过长沙时，请求拜见王凝。
English: During Wang Rong's investigation in Changsha, a newly appointed Liuzhou official, who did not know where he was from, asked to see Wang Rong when he was passing through Changsha on his way to work.

古文：抵于湘川。
现代文：王凝得知后，先请他跟僚属们一块饮酒。
English: After Wang Rong learned of this, he first invited him to have a drink with his colleagues.

古文：谒凝。凝召预宴于宾佐。王启凝云：某是侍郎诸从子侄，合受拜。
现代文：席间，这位王刺史对王凝说：我本是侍郎你的几个堂侄中的一位，今天应该受小侄一拜。
English: During the meal, this Wang Zishi said to Wang Geng: I am one of your cousins, and today I should bow to my nephew.

古文：凝遽问云：既是吾族，小名何也。
现代文：王凝立刻问他：既然是我族上的人，请问你小名叫什么？
English: Wang Rong immediately asked him: Since you are from my tribe, what is your nickname?

古文：答曰：名通郎。
现代文：王某人回答说：侄子小名通郎。
English: Someone replied, "His nephew, Komyo no Michiro."

古文：凝乃谓左右曰：促召郎君来。
现代文：王凝对手下人说：快召唤我的儿子来。
English: Wang Rong said to his subordinate: Quickly summon my son.

古文：逡巡，其子至。
现代文：不一会儿，王凝的儿子被召来了。
English: Soon after, Wang Rong's son was summoned.

古文：凝诘曰：家籍中有通郎者乎？
现代文：王凝问儿子：我们王家户册上有通郎这个名字吗？
English: Wang Geng asked his son, "Does the name Tong Lang appear in our royal household register?"

古文：其子沉思少顷，乃曰：有之，合是兄矣。
现代文：王凝儿子沉思一会儿，回答道：有这个人，应当是我的哥哥。
English: Wang Xun's son pondered for a moment and replied, "If there is such a person, he must be my brother."

古文：凝始命邀王君，则受以从侄之礼。
现代文：王凝这才正式邀请这位王某人，并且接受了他以堂侄的礼数的参拜。
English: It was only then that Wang Neng formally invited this Wang someone and accepted his visit as the courtesy of a cousin.

古文：因从容问云：前任何官？
现代文：王凝随便问王某人：这之前你任的是什么官职？
English: Wang Jing casually asked Wang Someone: What official position did you hold before this?

古文：答曰：昨罢职北海盐院，旋有此授。
现代文：王某人回答说：这之前刚刚辞去北海盐院的官职，紧接着就授小侄柳州刺史。
English: A certain Wang replied that he had just resigned from the Beihai Salt Institute, and immediately conferred the title of Liuzhou Sashishi on his young nephew.

古文：凝闻之，不悦。
现代文：王凝听了很是不高兴，立即起身告辞。
English: Wang Geng was very unhappy to hear this and immediately got up to leave.

古文：既退，凝复召其子谓曰：适来王君，资历颇杂，的非吾之枝叶也。
现代文：又将儿子叫到跟前，说：刚才来的这个姓王的，他的资历很是复杂，确实不是我们王家族人。
English: He also called his son to his side and said: "This man with the surname Wang, who has just arrived, has very complex qualifications and is definitely not a member of our Wang family.

古文：遽征属籍，寻其派，乃有通郎，已于某年某日物化矣。
现代文：说完，立即取出王家户册，查找分枝族系，确实有位堂侄叫通郎，但是已在某年某日死去了。
English: Having said that, I immediately took out the Wang family register and looked up the branch family line. There was indeed a great-nephew named Tong Lang, but he died on a certain day in a certain year.

古文：凝睹之怒。
现代文：王凝看了后，很是生气。
English: Wang Rong was very angry after watching it.

古文：翌日，厅内备馔招之。
现代文：第二天，在厅堂上准备好了酒宴招待这位王某人。
English: The next day, a banquet was prepared in the hall for the king.

古文：王君望凝，欲屈膝。
现代文：王某人来了后，看到王凝就要下跪参拜。
English: After someone came to Wang, seeing Wang Rong, he would kneel down to worship.

古文：忽被二壮士挟而扶之，鞠躬不得。
现代文：忽然被两位身强力壮的仆夫左右拉住，扶他站起来，不能鞠躬。
English: Suddenly, he was grabbed from side to side by two able-bodied servants, who helped him to his feet, preventing him from bowing.

古文：二壮士退，乃命坐与餐。
现代文：王凝上前对王某人说：你不是我们王家宗族的人。
English: Wang Jing stepped forward and said to someone: "You are not from our royal family.

古文：复谓之曰：当今清平之代，此后不可更乱入人家也。
现代文：昨天错误地接受你的参拜，现在我奉还给你。说完，如数回拜王某。二位仆人退下，王凝让这位王某人入坐就餐，又对他说：当今天下清平，国泰民安。以后不可以再随便认宗。
English: Yesterday, I mistakenly accepted your visit, and now I am returning it to you. To finish, let's say you pay homage to a certain king several times. The two servants step back, and Wang Ge lets this certain king sit down to dinner, and then says to him, "Today, the country is at peace, and the people are safe. In the future, you can no longer casually claim descent."

古文：在庭吏卒悉笑。
现代文：在场的官员和办事人员听了后，都嗤笑不已。
English: The officials and clerks present burst out laughing.

古文：王君惭赧，饮食为之不下。
现代文：这位王某人满脸羞愧，酒菜也吃不下去。
English: The king was so ashamed that he couldn't eat or drink anything.

古文：斯须，踟躇而出。
现代文：只坐了一会儿，就局促不安地告辞走了。
English: He only sat there for a moment, then left uneasily.

古文：刘崇龟
现代文：刘崇龟
English: Liu Chongke

古文：刘崇龟以清俭自居，甚招物论。
现代文：刘崇龟平素以清廉节俭自居，很是招到众人的议论。
English: Liu Chongke has always presented himself as a clean and frugal person, which has attracted a lot of people's discussion.

古文：尝召同列餐苦荬饆饠。
现代文：他曾经召请同僚到他家吃苦荬菜和包馅的面食饽饽。
English: He once summoned colleagues to his home to eat bitter leeks and stuffed pasta dumplings.

古文：朝士有知其矫，乃潜问小苍头曰：仆射晨餐何物？
现代文：朝中的官员中有人知道刘崇龟故意这样作给人看，于是偷偷问他家的小伙夫：仆射今天早晨吃的是什么啊？
English: One of the officials of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party knew that Liu Chongkui deliberately did this to be seen by others, so he secretly asked the young man of his family: What did Puchei eat this morning?

古文：苍头实对：食泼生。
现代文：小伙夫如实告诉他：我家相公早晨吃的是烹煮肉。
English: The young man told him truthfully: My father-in-law ate boiled meat in the morning.

古文：朝中闻而哂之。
现代文：朝中官员们听到这件事后，都讥笑他。
English: When officials from North Korea and China heard about this, they all laughed at him.

古文：及镇番方，京国亲之贫乏者，俟其濡救。
现代文：待到刘崇龟外放岭南为镇守一方的封疆大吏，京城中有些穷亲戚想沾光等待他的接济。
English: By the time Liu Chongkui was appointed governor of Lingnan, some poor relatives in the capital wanted to wait for his help.

古文：但画《荔枝图》。自作赋以遗之。
现代文：他只画了一幅《荔枝图》，亲自在上面题写《赋》一篇，回送这位京城里的穷亲戚。
English: He only drew a "Lychee Map" and personally inscribed "Fu" on it to send back to this poor relative in Beijing.

古文：后卒于岭表，归葬，经渚宫，家人鬻海珍珠翠于市。
现代文：后来，刘崇龟病死在岭南任上。在归葬途中路过湖北江陵时，他的家人在市上出卖南海的珍珠、翡翠。
English: Later, Liu Chongke died of illness in Lingnan. When passing through Jiangling in Hubei Province on the way to his funeral, his family sold South Sea pearls and jade in the market.

古文：为当时所鄙。
现代文：当时人得知这件事后，越加鄙视他啦。
English: When people found out about this, they despised him even more.

古文：李延召
现代文：李延召
English: Li Yanzhao

古文：王蜀将王宗俦帅南梁日，聚粮屯师。
现代文：五代时，前蜀王氏王朝的将领王宗俦统帅南梁期间，搜聚粮草，发动士卒屯垦。
English: In the fifth generation, during the time of the commander Nan Liang, the general Wang Zongqi of the former Shu Wang Dynasty, he gathered grain and grass and sent soldiers to settle down.

古文：日兴工役，凿山刊木，略不暂停。
现代文：每天都让兵卒做工服役。凿山开路，砍伐树木，一刻也不停歇。
English: Every day, soldiers were put to work. They chiseled mountains to open roads and cut down trees, never stopping for a moment.

古文：运粟泛舟，军人告倦。
现代文：还让士兵撑船运送粮食，全军上下都叫苦不叠。
English: He also had soldiers paddle boats to transport grain, and the whole army was in an uproar.

古文：岷峨之人，酷好释氏。
现代文：岷峨一带的百姓民众，酷爱佛教。
English: The people of Saga love Buddhism.

古文：军中皆右执凶器，左秉佛书。
现代文：军中所有的人，都右手拿着兵器，左手拿着佛经。
English: All the people in the army carry weapons in their right hands and Buddhist scriptures in their left hands.

古文：诵习之声，混于刁斗。
现代文：读诵佛经的声音，跟巡更通报时辰的刁斗声混在一起。
English: The sound of Buddhist sutras being recited mingled with the crackling of bells to announce the time of the patrol.

古文：时有健卒李延召，继年役于三泉黑水以来，采斫材木，力竭形枯，不任其事。
现代文：当时，有一个体魄健壮的兵卒叫李延召，连年来在三泉黑水服役，采伐木材，劳累得身体枯瘦如柴，精疲力竭，已经砍伐不动木材了。
English: At that time, there was a strong-willed soldier named Li Yanzhao, who had been serving in Sanyuan Black Water for years, harvesting timber. He was so exhausted that his body was as thin as wood, exhausted, and had already cut immobile timber.

古文：遂设诈陈状云：近者得见诸佛如来，乘舆跨象，出入岩崖之中，飞升松柏之上。
现代文：于是，他设计欺骗王宗俦，说：我最近见到了如来佛，或乘坐车舆，或骑在大象上，在山崖绝壁上行走，或在松柏树上飞腾。
English: So he devised a plan to deceive Wang Zongyao, saying: I recently saw the Buddha, or rode in a chariot, or rode on an elephant, walked on a cliff, or soared over a pine tree.

古文：如是之报甚频，某虽在戎门，早归释教。
现代文：李延召频繁地上报这样的事情，而且还说：我虽然身在军门，心却早就皈依了释教佛门。
English: Li Yanzhao frequently reported such things to the authorities, and also said: Although I am in the military, my heart has long been converted to Buddhism.

古文：以其课诵至诚，是有如此感应。
现代文：因为我每天诵读佛经，这种真诚感动了诸位神佛，才使他们现身让我看见。
English: Because I recite Buddhist sutras every day, this sincerity has moved all the gods and Buddhas, only to make them appear for me to see.

古文：今乞蠲兵籍，截足事佛。
现代文：我现在乞求长官取消我的军籍，截取我一只脚，让我事奉佛主吧。
English: I am now begging my superiors to cancel my military status, amputate one of my feet, and let me serve the Lord Buddha.

古文：俾将来希证无上之果。
现代文：使我将来能修成无上至高的境界。
English: So that in the future I can cultivate to the highest realm.

古文：宗俦判曰：虽居兵籍，心在佛门。
现代文：王崇俦在李延召报送的申请书上批示道：虽然身在军籍，却心在佛门。
English: On the application submitted by Li Yanzhao, Wang Chongyao wrote: Although I am in the military, my heart is in Buddhism.

古文：修心于行伍之间，达理于幻泡之外。
现代文：修心在行伍之间，达理于虚幻无常之外。
English: Cultivate the mind between the lines, and be able to reason beyond the illusory and impermanent.

古文：归心而依佛氏，截足以事空王。
现代文：决心皈依佛教，情愿截足以事奉从未见过的佛主。
English: He decided to convert to Buddhism and was eager to serve the Lord Buddha, whom he had never seen before.

古文：壮哉貔貅，何太猛利！
现代文：豪壮啊兵士，何必这么凶暴残忍啊！
English: Brave soldier, why must you be so savage and cruel!

古文：大愿难阻，真诚可嘉。
现代文：你这样的宏大志向难以阻拦，你的真诚事佛理应嘉奖。
English: Such a grand ambition is hard to stop, and your sincerity should be commended.

古文：准状付本军，除落名氏。
现代文：特此批准这份申请，请交付该兵士所在部队，除掉他的军籍。
English: This request is hereby granted, and the soldier is to be turned over to his unit and removed from active duty.

古文：仍差虞侯，监截一足讫，送真元寺收管洒扫。
现代文：并差派管理山泽的虞侯就地截去该兵士的一只脚，然后送往真元寺收管，让他在寺中洒扫庭院，侍奉佛主。
English: He also sent the governor of Yamazawa to amputate one of the soldier's feet on the spot, and then sent him to Shingen-ji Temple to collect the money, so that he could sweep the courtyard in the temple and serve the Buddha.

古文：延召比欲矫妄免其役，及临断足时，则怖惧益切。
现代文：李延召本来是想用这种欺骗的办法，逃脱掉劳役之苦，待到真的要砍去他的一只脚时，则非常恐惧。
English: Li Yanzhao originally wanted to use this deception to escape the hardships of labor, but when he really wanted to cut off one of his feet, he was very afraid.

古文：于是迁延十余日，哀号宛转，避其锋芒。
现代文：拖延了十多天，又哭又闹，不让虞侯截砍他的脚。
English: He delayed for more than ten days, crying and making a fuss, to prevent the magistrate from amputating his foot.

古文：宗俦闻之，大笑而不罪焉。
现代文：王宗俦听到这一消息后，哈哈大笑，并不追究李延召的欺骗罪过。
English: After hearing this news, Wang Zongyao laughed out loud and did not pursue Li Yanzhao for the crime of deception.

古文：成都丐者
现代文：成都丐者
English: Beggars in Chengdu

古文：成都有丐者诈称落泊衣冠。
现代文：成都有一个乞丐，伪称自己是潦倒落魄的读书人，用来骗人。
English: There is a beggar in Chengdu who pretends to be a down-and-out reader to deceive people.

古文：弊服褴缕，常巡成都市鄽。
现代文：这个乞丐通身穿着破败褴缕的衣服，经常在成都集市间游走。
English: The beggar, dressed all in rags, often wanders around the markets in Chengdu.

古文：见人即展手希一文云：失坠文书，求官不遂。
现代文：见人就将手中的一篇文章展示让人看，说：我丢失了任职的文书，才当不上官了。
English: When he sees someone, he shows them an article in his hand and says: "I lost my official document, so I can't be an official."

古文：人皆哀之，为其言语悲嘶，形容憔悴。
现代文：人们听了他这悲悲切切的话语，看到他那憔悴的容颜，都非常同情可怜他。
English: People listened to his mournful words and looked at his gaunt face with great sympathy and pity.

古文：居于早迁桥侧。
现代文：这个乞丐住在成都早迁桥旁边。
English: This beggar lives next to Chengdu Early Relocation Bridge.

古文：后有势家，于所居旁起园亭，欲广其池馆，遂强买之。
现代文：后来，一个很有权势的人家，在他居住的旁边建造起一座园亭，想再扩大地面修建池塘馆舍，就强行买下了他居住的这块地皮。
English: Later, a very powerful family built a garden pavilion next to where he lived, and wanted to expand the ground to build a pond pavilion, so they forcibly bought the land where he lived.

古文：及辟其圭窦，则见两间大屋，皆满贮散钱。计数千万。邻里莫有知者。
现代文：待到扒倒这个乞丐外面破败的门洞后，见里面两间大屋中到处都装满了各种钱币，估计能有好几千万，附近的邻居没有一家知道他有这么多钱。
English: After knocking down the hole in the beggar's dilapidated front door, he saw that the two large houses inside were filled with all kinds of coins, estimated to be tens of millions. None of the nearby neighbors knew that he had so much money.

古文：成都人一概呼求事官人为乞措大。
现代文：于是，全成都市的人，都呼求在官府任职的家里人辞官不作而当行乞的落魄读书人。
English: As a result, people all over Chengdu are calling for their family members who work in government offices to quit their jobs and become beggars.

古文：薛氏子
现代文：薛氏子
English: Xue Ershi

古文：有恭氏二子野居伊阙。
现代文：有薛家兄弟二人居住在伊阙的郊野。
English: Two brothers of the Xue family live in the countryside of Ili.

古文：先世尝典大郡，资用甚丰。
现代文：兄弟俩的先人曾经在大都市担任过官职，因此，家中很是富有。
English: The brothers' forefathers once held government posts in big cities, so the family is very rich.

古文：一日，木阴初盛，清和届候。
现代文：草木茂盛的初夏里的一天，天气晴朗，忽然有人敲薛家哥俩的院门。
English: One day in early summer, when the grass was lush and the weather was fine, someone suddenly knocked on the courtyard door of the Xue brothers.

古文：偶有叩扉者，启关视之，则一道士也。
现代文：开门一看，原来门外站着一位道士，脚下穿着草鞋，脸上白髯如雪，气质清古不凡。
English: When I opened the door, I saw a Taoist priest standing outside the door. He was wearing straw sandals, his face was as white as snow, and his temperament was ancient and extraordinary.

古文：草履雪髯，气质清古，曰：半途病渴，幸分一杯浆。
现代文：道士说：我云游的路途上身患疾病口渴，施主请施舍给贫道一杯水喝。
English: The Taoist said, "I am ill and thirsty on my journey. Please give me a glass of water to drink."

古文：二子延入宾位。
现代文：薛家兄弟二人将这位道士请入厅堂入座，待为宾客。
English: The two Xue brothers invited the Taoist into the hall and sat down as guests.

古文：雅谈高论，深味道腴。
现代文：这位道士坐下后，谈吐高雅，议论深奥，深谙道家的哲理。
English: After the Taoist sat down, he spoke with elegance and profundity, and was well versed in the philosophy of Taoism.

古文：又曰：某非渴浆者。
现代文：过了一会儿，道士又说：我并不是因为渴了来讨碗水喝的。
English: After a while, the priest said, "I didn't come to ask for a bowl of water because I was thirsty.

古文：杖藜过此，气色甚佳。
现代文：我拄着拐杖经过这里，发现你这儿有祥瑞之气。
English: I passed by here on crutches and found that you have a cheerful spirit here.

古文：自此东南百步，有五松虬偃在疆内否？
现代文：从你家院落往东南走一百步，是不是有五株松树长在那儿？
English: If you walk a hundred paces southeast from your courtyard, will there be five pine trees growing there?

古文：曰：某之良田也。
现代文：薛家兄弟回答说：那是我家的田地。
English: Brother Xue replied, "That is my family's field.

古文：道士愈喜，因屏人曰：此下有黄金百斤，宝剑二口。
现代文：道士听了后更加欢喜，让兄弟二人屏退家中仆人，说：你家的那五株松树下埋藏着黄金百两，宝剑二口。
English: After listening to this, the Taoist priest was even more delighted. He asked the two brothers to show their servants around the house and said, "Under the five pine trees in your house are buried one hundred taels of gold and two swords."

古文：其气隐隐，浮张翼间。
现代文：这两样宝物发出的宝气，悬浮在张翼一带的空中。
English: The precious gas emitted by these two treasures is suspended in the air around Zhang Ying.

古文：张翼洛之分野，某寻之久矣。
现代文：张翼乃是洛阳与伊阙的分界线，我寻找了好久才找到你们这里啊！
English: Zhangye is the dividing line between Luoyang and Yili. It took me a long time to find you here!

古文：黄金可以分赠亲属甚困者。
现代文：这样吧，百两黄金你们兄弟可以分送给贫困的亲友。
English: Well then, your brothers can distribute the hundred and two gold coins to their poor relatives and friends.

古文：其龙泉自佩，当位极人臣。
现代文：其中的一口宝剑，你们兄弟佩带身边，可保你们位极人臣。
English: One of these swords, carried by your brothers, will secure you a very high position.

古文：某亦请其一，效斩魔之术。
现代文：另外一口宝剑赏给贫道，用它来降妖除魔。你们看如何？
English: Another piece of the sword is given to the beggar, who uses it to exorcise demons. What do you think?

古文：二子大惊异，道士曰：命家僮役客辈，悉具畚钎，候择日发土。则可以目验矣。
现代文：薛家兄弟二人听后很是惊异。道士说：让你家中的童仆和雇用的工匠，都准备好畚箕，锹钎等挖泥运土的工具，等候我选个吉日好挖土取出这两宗宝物，你们兄弟俩就可以亲眼看到贫道是不是在这信口胡诌。
English: The two Xue brothers were very surprised to hear this. The Taoist priest said, "Have your household servants and hired craftsmen prepare tools such as hoes and ploughs to dig up and transport the soil, and wait for me to choose a good day to dig up and remove these two treasures. Then you two brothers can see with your own eyes whether the poor road is lying here."

古文：然若无术以制，则逃匿黄壤，不复能追。
现代文：但是，如果不施用法术制住它们，这两宗宝物没等挖掘出来就会土遁逃走，再也追找不到了。
English: However, if you don't cast a spell to stop them, the two treasures will escape from the mound before they can be excavated, and you won't be able to find them again.

古文：今俟良宵，剪方为坛，用法水噀之，不能遁矣。
现代文：等到今天晚上，划一块方地作法坛，贫道口含法水喷洒埋藏宝物的地面，它们就不能逃盾了。
English: Wait until this evening, draw a square to make a Dharma altar, and sprinkle the ground of the buried treasure with Dharma water at the mouth of the impoverished road, and they cannot escape.

古文：且戒僮仆，无得泄者。
现代文：一定要告戒你家的童子仆人，且不可泄露机密。
English: Be sure to warn your family's boy servants, and do not divulge secrets.

古文：问其结坛所须，曰：微潶三百尺，赤黑索也。
现代文：薛家二兄弟问道士设法坛都需用什么东西？道士说：请准备微纆三百尺，就是赤黑的绳索。
English: The two Xue brothers asked the Taoist priest what they should use to make the altar. The Taoist priest said, "Please prepare 300 feet of red and black rope."

古文：随方色采缣素甚多，洎几案炉香裀褥之具。
现代文：布置法坛需要很多的彩色细绢，还有小凳、桌案、香炉、褥垫等物。
English: The layout of the Dharma altar requires a lot of colorful rugs, as well as small stools, table cases, incense burners, cushions and other things.

古文：且曰：某非利财者，假以为法。
现代文：说到这里，道士看看薛家二兄弟，接着说：我不是假作法坛来骗取你的钱财的人啊，请你们兄弟放心。
English: At this point, the Taoist priest looked at the two brothers of the Xue family and continued: "I am not a person who pretends to be a Dharma altar to defraud you of money. Please rest assured, brothers.

古文：又用祭膳十座，酒茗随之。
现代文：对啦，还需要祭祀神灵用的供膳十座。酒、茶，都准备好。
English: That's right, we still need ten sets of food for the gods. Wine and tea are ready.

古文：器皿以中金者。
现代文：祭膳用的器皿必须是含有一半以上黄金的金器。
English: The utensils used for the sacrificial meal must be gold utensils containing more than half gold.

古文：二子则竭力经营。
现代文：薛家二兄弟遵照道士的要求，竭尽全力去准备。
English: The two brothers of the Xue family did their best to prepare according to the requirements of the Taoist.

古文：尚有所缺，贷于亲友。
现代文：还有缺少的物件，就向亲友求贷。
English: If there is still a shortage of properties, they turn to relatives and friends for loans.

古文：又言：某善点化之术，视金银如粪土，常以济人之急为务。
现代文：道士又说：贫道擅长点石成金之术，视金银就象看粪土一样。经常周济一些贫困人，帮助他们解决紧急的困难。
English: The Taoist also said, "Poor Tao is good at the art of turning stones into gold. He regards gold and silver as if they were dung. He often gives money to some poor people to help them solve their urgent difficulties."

古文：今有囊箧寓太微宫，欲以暂寄。
现代文：现在，贫道有一些箱子包裹存放在太微宫，想暂时寄放在你们这儿，怎么样？
English: Now, the poor devils have some boxes and parcels stored in Taimiao Palace, and would like to temporarily store them here, how about it?

古文：二子许诺。即召人负荷而至，巨笈有四，重不可胜，缄鐍甚严，祈托以寄。
现代文：二兄弟听后高兴地答应了，立即让家中仆人将这些箱子、包裹运回来。一共有四只巨大的箱子，每只箱子都重得搬不动。而且上锁贴封条，极为严细。
English: On hearing this, the two brothers happily agreed, and immediately had the family's servants take the boxes and parcels back. There were a total of four huge boxes, each of which was too heavy to carry, and they were locked and sealed very tightly.

古文：旋至吉日，因大设法具于五松间，命二子拜祝讫。
现代文：很快到了道士选定的吉日。道士在五株松树那儿搭设法坛，让薛家二兄弟跪拜法坛前面，祝祈神灵保佑降福。
English: The auspicious day chosen by the Taoist soon arrived. The Taoist set up an altar near the five pine trees, and made the two brothers of the Xue family kneel in front of the altar and pray for the blessing of the gods.

古文：亟令返居，闭门以俟，且戒无得窥隙。
现代文：之后，道士立即让他们回到家中，关闭门户等待。而且一定不得向法坛这边偷看。
English: After that, the Taoist immediately asked them to go back home, close the gate and wait, and they must not peek over the side of the Dharma altar.

古文：某当效景纯散发衔剑之术，脱为人窥，则祸立至。
现代文：道士说：贫道将效仿景纯法师披散头发、口中刁着宝剑的法术，如果有人偷看，就会立刻遭至灾祸。
English: The moralist said, "Poor Tao will follow the example of the pure sorcerer Jing, who wears his hair loose and carries a sword in his mouth. If someone sneaks a look, disaster will strike immediately."

古文：俟行法毕，当举火相召。
现代文：待到贫道法事作完了，当以举火为号招唤你们。
English: Wait until the Dharma work for the destitute has been completed, and then invite them to light the fire.

古文：可率僮仆，备畚钎来，及夜而发之。冀得静观至宝也。
现代文：你们见到火光后，就可以带领家童仆夫，拿着畚箕、锹铲等工具，连夜挖掘，你们兄弟俩就在旁边静观财宝吧。
English: When you see the light of the fire, you can lead your children and servants, with picks, shovels and other tools, to dig overnight, and you two brothers can watch the treasure.

古文：二子依所教。自夜分危坐，专望烛光，杳不见举。
现代文：两兄弟觉得事情有变，急忙来到五株松下，只见杯盘狼藉，到处都是吃过的饭菜。
English: The two brothers felt that things had changed, and hurried to Wuzhu Panasonic, only to find their plates and glasses in disarray, with eaten food everywhere.

古文：不得已，辟户觇之，默绝影响。步至树下，则掷杯覆器，饮食狼藉。采缣器皿，悉已携去。
现代文：而且，他们兄弟俩为道士准备的布设法坛的用品五色细绢，以及盛装祭膳用的金器，都被道士携逃一空。
English: Moreover, all the supplies for the cloth altar prepared by the two brothers for the Taoist priest, including the five-colored brocade, as well as the gold utensils used to hold the sacrificial meal, were taken away by the Taoist priest.

古文：轮蹄之迹，错于其所。
现代文：只见车轮与牲畜的蹄印布满地上。
English: The tracks of the wheels and the hooves of the animals could be seen all over the ground.

古文：疑用微纆束固以遁。
现代文：三百尺赤黑绳索也不见了，一定是用它捆绑细绢、金器等东西了。
English: Three hundred feet of red and black rope was also missing, and it must have been used to tie up things such as fine ploughshares and gold objects.

古文：因发所寄之笈，瓦砾实中。
现代文：回到家中，两兄弟让家人赶快打开道士寄存的四只大箱子，里面盛的全是瓦砾。
English: Back home, the two brothers asked their families to quickly open the four large boxes stored by the Taoists, which were full of rubble.

古文：自此家产甚困，失信于人。
现代文：从这以后，薛家两兄弟家道败落，一贫如洗，而且在亲朋好友那里再也没有信誉了。
English: Since then, the Xue brothers have fallen into poverty and no longer have any credibility among their friends and relatives.

古文：惊愕忧惭，默不得诉。
现代文：两兄弟又惊又感又忧又愧，一言不发地吃了这个大哑巴亏。
English: The two brothers were shocked, saddened, worried and ashamed, and ate this big dumb loser without a word.

古文：秦中子
现代文：秦中子
English: Qin Zhongzi

古文：秦川富室少年有能规利者藏镪巨万。
现代文：在秦川，有一家富有的少年，擅长经营获利，家中藏钱巨万。
English: In Qinchuan, there is a rich boy who is good at running a profitable business and has a huge amount of money hidden at home.

古文：一日逮夜，有投书于其户者，仆执以进。
现代文：一天晚上，有封书信扔在这位少年家院内，仆人取回来给少年。
English: One night, a letter was left at the boy's home, and a servant retrieved it for him.

古文：少年启封，则蒲纸加蜡，昧墨斜翰，为其先考所遗者。
现代文：少年打开信封，看是蒲草纸上面用蜡油缄封的，用毛笔斜着写在黑暗无光的信纸上，是他死去的父亲写给他的信。
English: The boy opened the envelope and saw that it was a letter written to him by his dead father, sealed with wax on papyrus and written diagonally with a brush on dark, dull paper.

古文：曰：汝之获利，吾之冥助也。
现代文：信上说：你能获得这么多的利，是我在阴间帮助你的。
English: The letter said: "I am the one who will help you in the underworld to get as much profit as you can.

古文：今将有大祸，然吾已请於阴骘矣。
现代文：现在将有大祸降临你头上，但是我已经在阴间请求保佑你了。
English: Now you are about to suffer a great disaster, but I have prayed to the underworld to protect you.

古文：汝及朔旦，宜斋躬洁服，出于春明门外逆旅。备缣帛，随其年，三十有五。
现代文：你可以等到下月初一，躬敬地实行斋戒，穿上整洁的衣服，到春明门外的一家客店，准备好细绢，随着年份计算，需用三十五匹。
English: You can wait until the first day of the next month, respectfully practice fasting, put on neat clothes, go to an inn outside the Spring Gate, and prepare a fine yakitori, which takes thirty-five horses, depending on the year.

古文：俟夜分往灞水桥，步及石岸，见黄衣者即置于前，礼祝而退，灾当可免。
现代文：等到黑夜降临后，前往灞水桥，步行到达石岸边，看见一个身穿黄衣服的人，就将三十五匹细绢放在这个人面前，行礼祀祝然而退回去，灾祸就可以免除了。
English: Wait until nightfall, go to the Surabaya Water Bridge, walk to the stone shore, see a person wearing yellow clothes, put thirty-five fine horses in front of this person, make a ritual and wish to go back, and the disaster can be avoided.

古文：或无所遇，即挈缣以归，急理家事，当为窜计。
现代文：如果什么人也没有遇到，你带着细绢赶快回到家中，料理好家事，赶快离家出走。
English: If you don't meet anyone, you should quickly return home with a fine broom, do the housework, and quickly run away from home.

古文：祸不旋踵矣。
现代文：这样，灾祸不会转着脚跟随你去的。
English: That way, misfortune won't follow you around.

古文：少年捧书大恐。
现代文：少年看后，手捧书信惊恐万分。
English: After the boy looked at it, he held the letter in his hand and panicked.

古文：合室素服而泣，专志朔旦。
现代文：全家人身着素服，抱头哭泣。什么也不做了，专心等待下月初一这一天的到来。
English: The whole family, dressed in plain clothes, hugged their heads and cried. They didn't do anything, but waited for the first day of the next month.

古文：则舍弃他事，弹冠振衣，止于春明门外，矜严不寐。
现代文：到了下月初一这天，少年打扫干净帽子上、衣服上的灰尘，带着三十五匹细绢，来到春明门外的旅店旁边，庄严地恭候在那里，一点不敢走神。
English: On the first day of the next month, the boy cleaned the dust off his hat and clothes, and took thirty-five fine horses to the inn outside the Spring Gate. He waited there solemnly, not daring to take his mind off things.

古文：恭俟夜分，乃从一仆乘一马，驰往灞桥，唯恐无所睹。
现代文：恭候到夜间，带着一个仆人骑着一匹马，驰往灞桥。一路上唯恐到桥边什么人也遇不到。
English: He waited until nightfall, and with a servant on horseback, he rode to the Long Bridge. He was afraid that he would not meet anyone on the way to the bridge.

古文：至则果有一物，形质诡怪，蓬头黄衣，交臂束膝，负柱而坐，俯首以寐。
现代文：来到灞桥，果然看见有一个人，形态诡怪，头发蓬乱，身着黄衣，两臂交叉着抱住两膝，靠着桥柱坐在那儿，低头打盹儿。
English: When I came to Handan Bridge, I saw a man with a strange shape, unkempt hair, wearing a yellow coat, sitting there with his arms crossed, hugging his knees, leaning against the bridge pillar, nodding his head.

古文：少年惊喜，捧缣于前，祈祝设拜，不敢却顾，疾驱而回。
现代文：少年见了非常惊喜，双手捧着细绢走上前，将细绢放在这个人的身边，祈祝下拜，转身离去，驱马急驰而归，连头都不敢回一下。
English: The boy was very surprised to see this. He stepped forward with his hands holding the fine reed, placed the fine reed next to the man, bowed down in prayer, turned around and left, driving the horse at high speed. He did not even dare to look back.

古文：返辕相庆，以为幸免矣。
现代文：在回家的路上，少年高兴地庆贺见到了这位穿黄衣服的人，免去了一场大灾祸。
English: On his way home, the boy happily congratulated the man in yellow for saving him from a big disaster.

古文：独有仆夫疑其不直。
现代文：唯独跟少年同去的仆人不大相信这件事。
English: However, the servant who went with the boy did not quite believe it.

古文：曾未逾旬，复有掷书者。
现代文：没过一旬，又有人向少年院里投掷书信。
English: Not long after, another letter was thrown at the juvenile home.

古文：仆夫立擒之，乃邻宇之导青襟者。
现代文：同去的那位仆人立即出去将投信人捉获，一看，原来是邻居家的一个读书人。
English: The servant who went with him immediately went out to catch the letter writer. At first glance, it turned out to be a reader from a neighbor's house.

古文：启其缄札，蒲蜡昧墨如初。
现代文：打开信缄，蒲纸蜡封，黑暗的信纸，都象上次一样。
English: Open the letterhead, the brown paper wax seal, the dark letter paper, all the same as before.

古文：词曰：汝灾甚大，曩之寿帛，祸源未塞。宜更以缣三十五，重置河梁。
现代文：信上写的是：你的灾祸非常大，上次送去寿帛，并没有免去祸源，还应再带三十五匹细绢，重新放在灞桥河岸边。
English: The letter said: Your misfortune is very great. The last time you sent a donkey to Shouye, it did not avoid the source of the misfortune. You should also bring another thirty-five fine donkeys and put them back on the bank of the Qiaoqiao River.

古文：其家则状始末，诉于官司。
现代文：这位少年将这件事情上告到官府那里，陈述始末缘由。
English: The boy reported the matter to the authorities, stating the cause.

古文：诘问具伏，遂置于法。
现代文：官府审问那位邻家的读书人，他一一招认，伏法。
English: The government interrogated the neighbor, a reader, and he confessed to everything.

古文：时李常侍丛为万年令，讼牒数年尚在。
现代文：当时常待李丛任万年县县令，是他一手经办的这个案子。
English: At that time, Li Congren was often asked to be the county magistrate, and he handled this case single-handedly.

古文：李全皋
现代文：李全皋
English: Li Quanzhang

古文：护军李全皋，罢淮海监临日，寓止于开元寺。
现代文：护军李全皋，辞去淮海监那天，暂时居住在开元寺中。
English: Li Quanzhang, a military escort, temporarily lived in Kaiyuan Temple on the day he resigned as Huaihai Supervisor.

古文：以朝廷艰梗，未获西归。
现代文：因为朝廷阻难，没能得到允许回到他西部老家。
English: He was not allowed to return to his hometown in the west because of the obstruction of the imperial court.

古文：一旦，有小校引一道人，云能通炉火之事，全皋乃延而礼之，自此与之善。
现代文：一天，有一位小校引荐一位道人来见李皋。这位道人说他通晓用炉炼金的秘法，李全皋听了后以礼相待，从此两人关系日渐友善。
English: One day, a small school introduced a Taoist to Li Quanzhang. The Taoist said that he knew the secret of using a furnace to make gold. Li Quanzhang listened and treated him with courtesy. Since then, the relationship between the two has become increasingly friendly.

古文：一日语及黄白之事，道人曰：唯某颇能得之。
现代文：一天谈到用炉炼金的事情，道人说：只有贫道我擅长这种密法。
English: One day, talking about the use of the furnace to make money, Taoist said: "I am good at this kind of Tantra only when I am poor."

古文：可求一铁鼎，容五六升以上者，黄金二十余两为母，日给水银药物，大候足而换之。
现代文：你可以寻找到一只铁鼎，能装五六升以上那么大的，再拿来黄金二十多两做母本，每天往鼎里加添水银等药物，待火候炼足了再更换。
English: You can find an iron ring, which can hold more than five or six liters of wax, and then take more than two dozen gold to make the base, add mercury and other drugs to the ring every day, and then replace it when it is ready.

古文：莫穷岁月，终而复始。李甚喜其说，顾囊有金带一条，可及其数，以付道人。
现代文：不要计算什么时候能炼好这一炉，终而复始，一直炼下去，你就会得到无穷无尽的黄金啊。李全皋听后大喜，看看自己行囊中有金带一条，大约有二十多两重，交给了道士。
English: Don't calculate when you can refine this furnace, go back to the beginning and keep refining, and you will get endless gold. Li Quanzhang was overjoyed when he heard this and saw that he had a gold band in his bag, about twenty-two times heavier, which he handed over to the Taoist.

古文：诸药既备。周火之日后，日躬自看验。
现代文：又将炼金所需要的水银等药物准备齐全，一并交给了道士。开炉升火后，每天李全拜都亲自到炉边验看。
English: He also prepared all the mercury and other medicines needed for gold refining and handed them over to the Taoist priest. After the furnace was lit, Li Zhenbai personally went to the furnace to inspect it every day.

古文：居数日微倦，乃令家人亲爱者守之。
现代文：过了几天后，他感到有些厌倦了，就让他的家中仆人或者信得过的人代替他去炉前看守。
English: After a few days, he felt a little tired, so he asked his servant or a trusted person to stand guard in front of the stove.

古文：日数既满，斋沐而后开视，黄金烂然，的不虚也。
现代文：待到炼满预定的天数后，斋戒沐浴换上洁净的衣服，打开鼎盖验看，只见满鼎金黄灿然一片，确实不假啊！
English: After waiting for the predetermined number of days to be completed, fasting, bathing, changing into clean clothes, opening the lid and inspecting it, only to see it full of gold, truly not fake!

古文：李拜而信之。
现代文：李全皋拜谢道士，相信了他的炼金法术。
English: Li Quanzhang worshipped Xie Daoist and believed in his alchemy.

古文：三日之内，添换有征。
现代文：三天之内，就可以添换取出一些炼出来的黄金。
English: Within three days, some of the refined gold can be exchanged.

古文：一旦道人不来，药炉一切如旧。
现代文：但是就在这关键时刻，那位道士有一天了没有来到炉前。药炉的一切象原先一样，照旧添火炼烧。
English: But just at this critical moment, that Taoist did not come to the furnace for one day. Everything in the medicine furnace was added to the fire and burned as before.

古文：疑骇之际，俄经再宿。
现代文：又过了一宿，依然不见道士的踪影。
English: After another night, still no trace of the Taoist monk.

古文：久待讶其不至，不得已，启炉视之，不见其金矣。
现代文：李全皋非常奇怪着急，不得已，他自己打开鼎盖一看，鼎中置放的黄金母本，都不见了。
English: Li Quanzhang was in a very strange hurry. As a last resort, he opened the lid and saw that the golden book, which had been placed in the middle of the lid, was gone.

古文：事及导引小校，代填其金而止。
现代文：因为这位道士是那个小校引荐来的。于是，小校将自己的黄金拿出来补给了李全皋，才算了结这件事。
English: Because this Taoist was recommended by the school, so the school took out its own gold and gave it to Li Quanzhang to settle the matter.

古文：道人绝无踪迹。
现代文：那位自称会炼金的道士，再也没有见到他的踪影。
English: The self-proclaimed alchemist was never seen again.

古文：文处子
现代文：文处子
English: Wen Zhenzi

古文：有处子姓文，不记其名，居汉中。
现代文：有一个姓文的处士，不记得他叫什么名字啦，居住在汉中。
English: There was a clerk surnamed Wen, I can't remember his name, who lived in Hanzhong.

古文：常游两蜀侯伯之门，以烧炼为业。
现代文：这位文处士，经常来往于两蜀侯伯等权贵之家，以炼金为职业。
English: This clerk of documents, who often went back and forth between two aristocratic families such as Shu Hou Bo, made alchemy his profession.

古文：但留意于炉火者，咸为所欺。
现代文：但凡想要通过炼金发财的人，都受过这位文处士的诈骗。
English: But anyone who wants to get rich through alchemy has been cheated by this clerk.

古文：有富商李十五郎者，积货甚多。
现代文：有位富商叫李十五郎，积聚的财产很多。
English: There was a wealthy merchant named Li Jugong Lang, who had accumulated a lot of property.

古文：为文所惑，三年之内，家财罄空。
现代文：被文处士迷惑住了，用他给开炉炼金，三年之内，将家财全都败光。
English: Intrigued by the clerk, he used him to open the furnace to make money, and within three years, all the family's wealth was lost.

古文：复为识者所诮，追而耻之，以至自经。
现代文：而且还遭到熟人的讥讽，后悔莫及，终于悬梁自尽了。
English: Moreover, he was also ridiculed by his acquaintances and, unable to regret it, he finally committed suicide.

古文：又有蜀中大将，屯兵汉中者，亦为所惑。
现代文：还有一位蜀中的大将军，屯兵在汉中，也被文处士所迷惑。
English: There was also a great general in Shu, whose troops were in Hanzhong, who was also fooled by the literary agent.

古文：华阳坊有成太尉新造一第未居，亦其空静。
现代文：华阳坊有位成太尉，新建造一座府第还没有住进去人。
English: Huayangfang has a rank of captain, and a newly built prefecture has not yet been lived in.

古文：遂求主者，赁以烧药。
现代文：文处士说这座宅院空静，适于炼金。
English: The clerk said that the house was quiet and suitable for refining.

古文：因火发焚其第，延及一坊，扫地而静。
现代文：于是，这位大将军就向主人将它租赁来用以烧药炼金。不慎失火，将整座宅第烧为平地，而且火势蔓延整条华阳坊，烧毁整整一条街。
English: As a result, the great general leased it from the owner to be used for burning medicine and refining gold. An accidental fire broke out, burning the entire mansion to the ground, and the fire spread throughout Huayangfang, burning down an entire street.

古文：文遂夜遁，欲向西取桑林路，东趋斜谷，以脱其身。
现代文：文处士连夜逃走，出城后想向西取道桑林路，再向东到斜谷，以逃脱官府的追捕。
English: The clerk fled during the night. After leaving the city, he wanted to escape the pursuit of the government by going west to Sanlin Road and then east to the valley.

古文：出门便为猛虎所逐，不得西去，遂北入王子山溪谷之中。
现代文：但是，他一出城门就被一只猛虎追逐，西去不得，向北逃入王子山溪谷中。
English: However, as soon as he left the city gate, he was chased by a fierce tiger. Unable to go west, he fled north into the valley of Mount Oji.

古文：其虎随之，不离跬步。
现代文：这只老虎一直追逐他到这里，一点不离。
English: This tiger has been chasing him all the way here, never leaving.

古文：既窘迫，遂攀枝上一树，以带自缚于乔柯之上。
现代文：文处士无计可施，攀枝爬到一株树上，用带子将自己绑缚在树干上。
English: There was nothing the clerk could do. He climbed up a tree and tied himself to the trunk with a belt.

古文：其虎绕树咆哮。
现代文：虎绕着树转圈，边转边咆哮。
English: The tiger circled around the tree, growling as it went.

古文：及晓，官司捕逐者及树下，虎乃徐去。
现代文：到天明，官府听到虎叫声赶到这株树下，虎才离去。
English: At dawn, the government heard the tiger's roar and rushed to the tree. The tiger then left.

古文：遂就树擒之，斩于烧药之所。
现代文：于是，文处士在树上被擒获，带回市里，在他烧药炼金的地方被折首示众。
English: As a result, the clerk was caught in a tree, brought back to the city, and his head was broken in public at the place where he burned medicine to make money.

