古文：万章问曰： 敢问交际何心也？ 
现代文：万章问： 冒昧地请问与人相交会合，用哪种心思？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked: If you dare to meet with people, what kind of mind should you use?

古文：孟子曰： 恭也。 
现代文：孟子说： 恭恭敬敬就行了。 
English: Mencius said, "Just be respectful."

古文：曰： 却之却之为不恭，何哉？ 
现代文：万章说： 一次又一次地拒绝就是不恭敬，这是为什么？ 
English: Wan Zhang said, "Refusing again and again is disrespectful. Why is that?"

古文：曰： 尊者赐之，曰 其所取之者，义乎，不义乎 ，而后受之，以是为不恭，故弗却也。 
现代文：孟子说： 尊贵的人赏赐的，就说： 我收取这个东西，是最佳行为方式吗？或者不是最佳行为方式呢？ 然后再接受，这是不恭敬的，所以不要拒绝。 
English: Mencius said, "If you are given something by a respected person, you should say, 'Is it the best way for me to receive this thing, or is it not the best way?' and then accept it. This is not respectful, so don't refuse it."

古文：曰： 请无以辞却之，以心却之，曰 其取诸民之不义也 ，而以他辞无受，不可乎？ 
现代文：万章说： 请问我们不在口头上拒绝，而只是在心里拒绝，心想： 这东西取自于民众不是用最佳行为方式。 而用其它借口不接受，难道不可以吗？ 
English: Wan Zhang said, "Please, let's not reject it verbally, but only reject it in our hearts, thinking, 'Isn't it possible to take this thing from the people with the best behavior, and not accept it with other excuses?

古文：曰： 其交也以道，其接也以礼，斯孔子受之矣。 
现代文：孟子说： 人与人的交往有一定的道路，人与人的相互接受也要遵循社会行为规范，这就是孔子也接受礼物的原因。 
English: Mencius said: There is a certain way for people to interact with each other, and the mutual acceptance between people should also follow the norms of social behavior. This is why Confucius also accepted gifts.

古文：万章曰： 今有御人于国门之外者，其交也以道，其馈也以礼，斯可受御与？ 曰： 不可。
现代文：万章说： 如果现在国门外有个靠打家劫舍为生的强盗，他以正当理由送礼，按礼节赠送，这样也可以接受他抢来的东西吗？ 孟子说： 不可以接受。
English: Wanzhang said, "If there is a robber outside the country who makes a living by robbing people's homes, and he gives gifts for legitimate reasons and according to etiquette, is it acceptable to accept the things he has robbed?" Mencius said, "It is not acceptable."

古文：康诰曰： 杀越人于货，闵不畏死，凡民罔不譈。 
现代文：《康诰》上说： 杀人而掠夺财物，强悍不怕死，凡是人民没有不憎恶的。 
English: "Kangyu" said: killing and plundering belongings, strong and not afraid of death, there is nothing that the people do not abhor.

古文：是不待教而诛者也。
现代文：这种人不必等待教育就可以诛杀他。
English: Such a man does not need to wait for education before he can fight and kill.

古文：殷受夏，周受殷，所不辞也。
现代文：殷从夏接受这条法规，周又从殷接受这条规，这是他们所不愿意更改的。
English: Yin accepted this regulation from Xia, and Zhou accepted this regulation from Yin, which they did not want to change.

古文：于今为烈，如之何其受之？ 
现代文：如今这种杀人越货的现象愈演愈烈，如何能接受这种馈赠呢？ 
English: How can we accept such a gift in the face of the murderous excesses that are on the rise?

古文：曰： 今之诸侯取之于民也，犹御也。
现代文：万章说： 如今的诸侯们所取的都是人民的，就好像是抵御人民。
English: Wanzhang said: Today's princes have taken everything from the people, as if they were resisting the people.

古文：苟善其礼际矣，斯君子受之，敢问何说也？ 
现代文：如果善于用社会行为规范来会合，这些君子也接受，请问这有什么说法呢？ 
English: If they are good at using social norms to meet, these gentlemen also accept, what does this say?

古文：曰： 子以为有王者作，将比今之诸侯而诛之乎？
现代文：孟子说： 你以为有圣王兴起，就会对现在的诸侯们一律加以诛杀吗？
English: Mencius said, "Do you think that if a holy king arose, he would fight and kill all the current princes?

古文：其教之不改而后诛之乎？
现代文：还是经过教育仍不悔改再去诛杀？
English: Or are they still unrepentant after education and go on to fight and kill?

古文：夫谓非其有而取之者盗也，充类至义之尽也。
现代文：所谓不属于自己的东西而去巧取豪夺的叫强盗，这是从高度抽象的角度考虑的。
English: The so-called robber who steals something that does not belong to him is considered from a highly abstract point of view.

古文：孔子之仕于鲁也，鲁人猎较，孔子亦猎较。
现代文：并不是把他看成是真的强盗。孔子在鲁国当官的时候，鲁国人玩争夺猎物的游戏，孔子也参加玩这种游戏。
English: He did not see him as a real robber. When Confucius was in power in Lu, the people of Lu played a game of competing for prey, and Confucius also took part in this game.

古文：猎较犹可，而况受其赐乎？ 
现代文：争夺猎物尚且可以，何况于接受他们的赏赐？ 
English: Is it even possible to compete for prey, let alone accept their rewards?

古文：曰： 然则孔子之仕也，非事道与？ 
现代文：万章说： 那么孔子之所以当官，不是为了从事人生的道路吗？ 
English: Wan Zhang said, "So, the reason why Confucius became an official was not to pursue the path of life?

古文：曰： 事道也。 
现代文：孟子说： 他是在从事人生的道路。 
English: Mencius said: He is engaged in the path of life.

古文： 事道奚猎较也？ 
现代文：万章说： 从事人生的道路还要去争夺猎物吗？ 
English: Wan Zhang said, "Do you still want to compete for prey on the road of life?

古文：曰： 孔子先簿正祭器，不以四方之食供簿正。 
现代文：孟子说： 孔子先用文书籍册规正祭祀仪式上用的器物，不用四方献来的食物供祭祀改变文书籍册规正之用。 
English: Mencius said: Confucius first used the objects used in the ritual of correcting the book of records to correct the book of records, and did not use the food offered by the four parties for the ritual of correcting the book of records.

古文：曰： 奚不去也？ 
现代文：万章说： 那么孔子为什么不离去呢？ 
English: Wanzhang said, "Then why doesn't Confucius leave?"

古文：曰： 为之兆也。兆足以行矣，而不行，而后去，是以未尝有所终三年淹也。
现代文：孟子说： 他是为了兆民，兆民足以有所行为，而国君不行为，而后他才离去，所以他没有在一个地方淹留过三年。
English: Mencius said, "He is for the sake of trillions of people. The trillions of people are enough to do something, but the sovereign does not act, and then he leaves, so he has not stayed in one place for three years.

古文：孔子有见行可之仕，有际可之仕，有公养之仕也。
现代文：孔子有时见到道可行而可以出来当官，有时可以会合时可以当官，有时因国君养贤而当官。
English: Confucius sometimes saw that the way was feasible and could come out to be an official, sometimes he could be an official when he could meet, and sometimes he was an official because the king was a virtuous man.

古文：于季桓子，见行可之仕也；于卫灵公，际可之仕也；于卫孝公，公养之仕也。 
现代文：对季桓子，是道可行才当官；对卫灵公，是为了会合其意才当官；对卫孝公，是因为国君养贤才当官。 
English: For Qu Huan Zi, he became an official because his way was feasible; for Wei Ling Gong, he became an official in order to meet his wishes; for Wei Xiaogong, he became an official because the king raised a wise man.

