古文：弼少有大志，膂力过人。
现代文：李弼，字景和，陇西成纪人。他少年时胸怀大志，臂力超过常人。
English: Li Qian, also known as Zijinghe, was born in Shaanxi Province. When he was a boy, he had great ambitions and his arm strength exceeded that of an ordinary person.

古文：属魏乱，谓所亲曰： 大太夫生世，会须履锋刃，平寇难，以取功名，安能碌碌依阶以求仕。 
现代文：魏朝动乱，他对亲人说： 大丈夫生在世上，应该脚踩锋刃，平定敌寇，以博取功名，怎能碌碌无为，按部就班地去追求官位呢？ 
English: When the Wei Dynasty was in turmoil, he said to his relatives: "If you are born into the world, you should step on the sharp edge, subdue the enemy, and win fame. How can you do nothing and pursue the official position step by step?

古文：初为别将，从尔硃天光西讨，破赤水蜀，以功封石门县伯。
现代文：他最初任别将，跟从尔朱天光西讨，攻破赤水蜀，因立功被封为石门县伯。
English: At first, he was appointed to be a general, and he followed Zhu Tianguang westward and defeated Chishui Shu, and he was awarded the title of Shihmen County Mayor for his meritorious service.

古文：又与贺拔岳讨万俊丑奴、万俊道洛、王庆云，皆破之。贼咸畏之曰： 莫当李将军前也。 
现代文：他又与贺拔岳一起讨伐万俟丑奴、万俟道洛、王庆云，敌兵都一一被他荡平，敌人都畏惧他，说： 不要阻挡在李将军的军队前面呀！ 
English: Together with He Batyue, he also fought against Wanlu Ugly Bastard, Wanlu Douluo, and Wang Qingyun. The enemy soldiers were all flattened by him, and the enemies were afraid of him, saying, "Don't stand in front of General Li's army!"

古文：及天光赴洛，弼隶侯莫陈悦，征讨屡有克捷。
现代文：尔朱天光奔赴洛阳，李弼隶属侯莫陈悦，征讨敌兵屡次获胜。
English: Le Zhu Tianguang rushed to Luoyang, Li Wei was subordinate to Hou Mo Chen Yue, and repeatedly won the victory in recruiting enemy soldiers.

古文：及悦害贺拔岳，周文帝自平凉讨悦。
现代文：侯莫陈悦害死贺拔岳，宇文泰自平凉率军讨伐侯莫陈悦。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue caused the death of He Baturu, and Uwentai led the army to fight Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：弼谏悦，令解兵谢之。
现代文：李弼劝说侯莫陈悦解散军队，前去谢罪。
English: Li Yao persuaded Hou Mo Chen Yue to disband the army and go to Xie Sin.

古文：悦惶惑，计无所出。
现代文：侯莫陈悦惶惑不定，无所适从。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue was bewildered and at a loss.

古文：弼知悦必败。
现代文：李弼知道他必定失败。
English: Li Yao knew that he would fail.

古文：周文帝至，悦乃弃秦州南出，据险以自固。
现代文：宇文泰大军一到，他便放弃秦州，领兵南进，占据险要以自我保固。
English: As soon as Uventhai's army arrived, he abandoned Qinzhou and led his troops southward, taking advantage of the situation to secure himself.

古文：是日，弼密通于周文，许背悦。
现代文：这一天，他秘密与宇文泰联系，答应背叛侯莫陈悦。
English: On this day, he secretly contacted Yu Wentai and promised to betray Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：至夜，弼乃勒所部，云悦欲向秦州，命皆装束。
现代文：入夜，他命令所部将士，说侯莫陈悦想回秦州去，命大家收拾行李。
English: At nightfall, he ordered the officers of the headquarters, saying that Hou Mo Chen Yue wanted to go back to Qinzhou, and ordered everyone to pack their bags.

古文：弼妻，悦之姨也，时为悦所亲委，众咸信之，人皆散走。
现代文：他的妻子，是侯莫陈悦的姨，这时他仍被侯莫陈悦所信任，所以，众人都相信他说的话，将士们都准备背起行李散走。
English: His wife was Hou Mo Chen Yue's aunt. At that time, he was still trusted by Hou Mo Chen Yue, so everyone believed what he said. The generals were all ready to pack up and leave.

古文：弼慰辑之，遂拥以归周文。
现代文：他安抚和慰问大家，便带着军队归顺了宇文泰。
English: He comforted and consoled everyone, and then he and his army surrendered to Uwentai.

古文：悦由此败。
现代文：侯莫陈悦失去了主要兵力，因此失败。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue lost his main force and was defeated.

古文：周文谓曰： 公与吾同心，天下不足平也。 
现代文：宇文泰对他说： 你与我同心合力，天下不愁平定不了。 
English: Uwentai said to him, "If you and I work together as one, the world will not be able to be pacified."

古文：大统初，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：西魏大统初年，他被封为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and the title of General of the Three Departments.

古文：从平窦泰，斩获居多。周文以所乘骓马及泰所著牟甲赐弼。
现代文：跟随宇文泰平定窦泰，斩获甚多，宇文泰把自己骑的那匹苍白间杂的马和窦泰的盔甲赐给他。
English: He gained a lot by following Uwentai and defeating Dou Tai. Uwentai gave him the pale horse he rode and Dou Tai's armor.

古文：又从平弘农。与齐神武战于沙苑，弼军为敌所乘。
现代文：他又跟从宇文泰平定弘农，与齐神武帝高欢战于沙苑。
English: He also followed Uwen Tai in defeating Ding Hongnong and fought against Qi Shenwu in the Battle of Sha Yuan.

古文：弼将其麾下九十骑横截之，贼分为二，因大破之。
现代文：他率军在战场的右侧，而左侧的军队因遭受敌人袭击失利。他率领所部九十名骑兵横插过去，截击敌兵，敌兵被一分为二，因而被打得大败。
English: He led the army on the right side of the battlefield, while the army on the left side was defeated by the enemy attack. He led the ninety cavalrymen of the headquarters to cut across and intercept the enemy soldiers. The enemy soldiers were divided into two and thus were defeated.

古文：以功进爵赵郡公。
现代文：他因立功被晋封爵位为赵郡公。
English: He was promoted to the peerage of Zhao County for his meritorious service.

古文：四年，从周文东讨洛阳，弼为前驱。
现代文：大统四年，又跟随宇文泰向东进攻洛阳，他任先锋。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, he followed Yu Wentai to attack Luoyang in the east, and he served as the vanguard.

古文：东魏将莫多娄贷文率众至谷城，弼倍道而前进，遣军士鼓噪，曳柴扬尘。
现代文：东魏将领莫多娄贷文率众到达谷城，李弼率军加速前进，派军士大声呐喊，用树枝扬起地上的尘土。
English: The Eastern Wei general Modo Guiwen led the crowd to arrive in Gucheng, Li Jun led the army to accelerate forward, sent the sergeant to shout loudly, and used the branches to raise the dust on the ground.

古文：贷文以为大军至，遂走。
现代文：莫多娄贷文认为西魏大军到来，便不战而退。
English: Modo believed that the West Wei army was coming, so he retreated without a fight.

古文：弼追斩贷文，传首大军。
现代文：李弼挥军追杀，斩杀贷文，将他的首级传示大军。
English: Li Yu waved the army to chase and kill, cut off the loan, and sent his head to the army.

古文：翌日，又从周文与齐神武战河桥，身被七创，遂为所获，阳陨绝于地，睨其傍有马，因跃上得免。
现代文：第二天，他随宇文泰与高欢在河桥大战，身受七处创伤，被敌人俘获。他假装昏倒在地上，偷眼看见旁边有一匹马，立即跳上马逃跑。
English: The next day, he fought alongside Yu Wentai and Gao Huan in the Battle of the River Bridge. He received seven wounds and was captured by the enemy. He pretended to faint on the ground, stole a glance at a horse next to him, and immediately jumped on the horse to escape.

古文：历位司空、太保、柱国大将军。
现代文：以后，历任司空、太保、柱国大将军。
English: Later, successively held the posts of Sikyu, Taibo, and Jolkoku taisho.

古文：废帝元年，赐姓徒何氏。
现代文：废帝元年，朝廷赐他姓徒河氏。
English: In the first year of the former emperor, the imperial court gave him the surname Tuhe.

古文：六官建，拜太傅、大司徒。
现代文：文官制度建立，他被封为太傅、大司徒。
English: The civil servant system was established, and he was named Taifu (太傅) and Daishitou (大司徒).

古文：及晋公护执政，朝之大事，皆与于谨及弼等参议。
现代文：晋公宇文护执掌朝政，朝中的大事都与他和于谨商议。
English: Jin Gong Uwen Guo was in charge of the imperial government, and major events in the imperial court were discussed with him and Yu Zhen.

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，除太师，进封赵国公，邑万户，前后赏赐巨万。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，兴周去魏，封他为太师，晋爵位为赵国公，食邑一万户，朝廷前后赏赐给他的东西价值一万之巨。
English: Emperor Xiaohui ascended to the throne, Xing Zhou went to Wei, he was given the title of Grand Master, the title of Prince of Zhao, 10,000 households, and the value of the things given to him by the imperial court was 10,000.

古文：弼每征讨，朝受命，夕便引路，略不问私事，亦未尝宿于家。
现代文：他每次征讨，都是早晨受命，晚上便出发，从不过问个人私事，也不曾在家里住宿过。
English: Each time he was sent on a mission, he received his orders in the morning and set out in the evening. He never asked about personal matters, nor did he stay overnight at home.

古文：兼性沈雅，有深识，故能以功名终。
现代文：加上他性情沉稳优雅，卓有见识，所以能以功名告终。
English: In addition, his temperament is calm, elegant and insightful, so he can end up with fame.

古文：薨于位，明帝即日举哀，比葬，三临其丧。发卒穿冢，给大路、龙旗，陈军至墓。谥曰武。
现代文：在职位上去世，周明帝当天就为他举哀。埋葬的时候，三次亲临葬所，并赐给他大辂车、龙旗，从住宅到墓地都陈列兵卒，谥号为武。
English: When he died in office, Zhou Mingdi mourned for him on the same day. When he was buried, he visited the funeral home three times in person, and gave him a carriage and a dragon flag. From the residence to the cemetery, soldiers were displayed. His nickname was Wu.

古文：密字法主，蒲山公宽之子也。
现代文：不久，追封他为魏国公，又配飨魏文帝的庙庭。李密字法主，蒲山公李宽的儿子。
English: Soon after, he was named the Prince of Wei, and was also given the title of the Temple Garden of Emperor Weiwen. He was the son of Li Mi Zi, the head priest of Li Mi Zi, and the son of Li Guang, the Prince of Busan.

古文：才兼文武，志气雄远，少袭爵蒲山公。
现代文：他文武兼备，志向雄迈高远，少年时就继承了蒲山公的封号。
English: He was well-versed in both literature and martial arts, and aspired to be a great man. When he was a boy, he inherited the title of Busan Prince.

古文：养客礼贤，无所爱吝。与杨玄感为刎颈交。
现代文：李密收养宾客，接纳贤士，毫不吝惜钱财，与杨玄感结下生死之交。
English: Li Mi adopted guests, received sages, spared no money, and forged a life-and-death friendship with Yang Xuanxin.

古文：后更折节耽学，尤好兵书，谓皆在口。
现代文：后来，又强自克制，沉湎于学习之中，尤其喜好读兵书，口中不停地在朗诵。
English: Later, he had strong self-restraint and devoted himself to study. He especially liked to read military books and recited them incessantly.

古文：师事国子助教包恺，受史记、汉书。
现代文：拜国子助教包恺为老师，学习《史记》、《汉书》。
English: Baikunzi assistant teacher Baojun became a teacher, studying "History" and "Chinese Classics."

古文：恺门徒皆出其下。
现代文：包恺的学生们都不如李密。
English: The students in Baodi are not as good as Li Mi.

古文：大业初，授亲卫大都督，以疾归。
现代文：大业初年，他被朝廷授予亲卫大都督，因为身体有病，回家休养。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was awarded the title of Great Protector by the imperial court, but because he was ill, he went home to recuperate.

古文：及玄感有逆谋，召密，令与弟玄挺赴黎阳，以为谋主。
现代文：杨玄感密谋叛乱时，曾经召请李密，让他与自己的弟弟杨玄挺一起到黎阳，当作主谋共同计议。
English: When Yang Xuan Xuan was plotting a rebellion, he once summoned Li Mi and asked him to go to Liyang with his brother Yang Xuan Ting as the mastermind.

古文：密进三计曰： 今天子远在辽外，公长驱入蓟，直扼其喉，前有高丽，退无归路，不战而禽，此计上也。
现代文：李密谈了三种计策，说： 现在天子远在辽东领兵攻打高丽，您率兵长驱直入，攻下蓟州，直扼隋军的咽喉。前面有高丽，后面的退路被断绝，不战就可以把炀帝擒获，这是上计啊。
English: Li Mi talked about three strategies, saying: Now the Son of Heaven is far away in Liaodong leading an army to attack Goryeo, you and your commander will drive straight in, capture Bozhou, and cut the throat of the Sui army. There is Goryeo in front, and the escape route behind is cut off. You can capture the emperor without a fight. This is the best plan.

古文：又关中四塞，卫文升不足为意，今率众务早入西，万全之势，此计中也。
现代文：关中四面高山阻隔，驻守在那里的卫文升不值得介意。现在率领人马早日西进入关，可保万无一失，这是中计。
English: Guanzhong is surrounded by high mountains on all four sides, and Wei Wensheng, who is stationed there, is not worth minding. Now leading the troops to enter Guanzhong in the west as early as possible, can be guaranteed without fail, this is the middle plan.

古文：若随近先向东都，以引岁月，此计之下也。 
现代文：如果先就近攻打东都洛阳，因而又延误了时间，这是计中的下策。 
English: If Luoyang, the eastern capital, is attacked first, and the time is delayed as a result, this is the next step in the plan.

古文：玄感曰： 公下计乃上策矣。
现代文：杨玄感却说： 您的下计实则是上计呀。
English: Yang Xuanxuan, however, said, "Your lower calculation is actually the upper calculation."

古文：今百官家口并在东都，若不取之，安能动物？
现代文：现在满朝官员的家属都住在东都，如果不早日攻取，怎么能动摇他们呢？
English: Now the families of officials of the Manchu Dynasty all live in Dongdu. If we don't capture it soon, how can we shake them?

古文：且经城不拔，何以示威？ 
现代文：况且经过的城池而不攻下，怎么能显示我们的威力？ 
English: Besides, how can we show our power if we pass by a castle without taking it?

古文：密计不行。
现代文：李密的意见没有被采纳。
English: Li Mi's opinion was not adopted.

古文：玄感既至东都，自谓功在朝夕。
现代文：杨玄感率军攻打东都，认为很快就可以成功。
English: Yang Xuan led the army to attack Dongdu, believing that it would soon be successful.

古文：及获韦福嗣，既非同谋，设筹皆持两端。
现代文：他收取的韦福嗣，和他并不同心同德，出的主意往往模棱两可。
English: Wei Fuzhi, whom he received, was not of the same mind as him, and his ideas were often ambiguous.

古文：玄感后使作檄文，固辞不肯。
现代文：杨玄感让韦福嗣写讨伐隋炀帝的檄文，他坚决推辞，不肯起草。
English: Yang Xuanxuan asked Wei Fuxi to write a memorial for the defeat of the Sui and Qian Dynasties, but he refused to do so.

古文：密揣知其情，请斩之。玄感不从。
现代文：李密了解到情况，请求将他斩首，杨玄感又不答应。
English: When Li Mi learned of the situation, he asked to be beheaded, but Yang Xuanxuan did not agree.

古文：密退谓所亲曰： 楚公好反而不欲胜，吾属今为虏矣。 
现代文：李密回来对所亲近的人说 ：杨玄感造反而又不想获得胜利，我们将要成为俘虏了。 
English: Li Mi came back and said to those close to him: Yang Xuanxuan, on the contrary, does not want to win, we are going to become prisoners.

古文：后玄感将西入，福嗣晚亡归东都。
现代文：后来，杨玄感准备西入关中，韦福嗣却逃归东都。
English: Later, Yang Xuanxuan was preparing to enter the West Gate, but Wei Fuzhi fled to the East.

古文：时李雄劝玄感速称尊号，玄感以问密，密以为不可。
现代文：当时，李雄劝杨玄感赶快立号称帝，杨玄感征求李密的意见，李密认为不能这样。
English: At that time, Li Xiong advised Yang Xuanquan to quickly proclaim himself emperor. Yang Xuanquan solicited Li Mi's opinion. Li Mi thought this was unacceptable.

古文：玄感笑而止。
现代文：杨玄感笑了笑而制止了称帝的建议。
English: Yang Xuanxuan smiled and stopped the suggestion of praising the emperor.

古文：及宇文述、来护等军且至，玄感谓密计将安出。密曰： 元弘嗣统强兵于陇右，今可扬言其反，遣使迎公，因此入关，可得绐众。 
现代文：宇文述、来护儿等率隋军将要赶到，杨玄感问李密下一步的计策，李密曰： 元弘嗣统领强大的军队驻扎在陕西陇山之右，现在可以制造舆论，说他要谋反，派使者来迎接您，借此入关，可以笼络将士。 
English: The Sui army is about to arrive, and Yang Xuan sensed Li Mi's next move and asked him about it. Li Mi said: Yuan Hongzhi commanded a powerful army stationed on the right side of Mount Lushan in Shaanxi, and now he can create public opinion, saying that he is going to rebel and send an envoy to meet you. By doing so, he can enter the pass and entice soldiers.

古文：玄感遂用密谋号令。
现代文：杨玄感便根据李密的计谋号令全军。
English: Yang Xuanxuan then ordered the whole army to march according to Li Mi's plan.

古文：西至陕县，围弘农不拔，西至阌乡，追兵至，玄感败。
现代文：向西进入陕县，攻打弘农，久久不能拿下。又西入阌乡，隋军追来，杨玄感失败。
English: He went westward into Shaanxi, attacked Hongnong, and was unable to take it for a long time. He also went westward into Xingxiang, pursued by the Sui army, and Yang Xuan sensed defeat.

古文：密间行入关，与玄感从叔询相随，匿冯翊询妻家。
现代文：李密偷偷进入关中，与杨玄感的叔父杨询一起，藏在冯翊杨询妻子的娘家。
English: Li Mi secretly entered Guanzhong, and together with Yang Xuanxuan's uncle, Yang Zhen, hid in the daughter's house of Feng Xuan's wife, Yang Zhen.

古文：寻为邻人告，被捕，与其党俱送帝所。
现代文：不久为邻人告发被捕，与他的同伙一起被送到隋炀帝那里。
English: He was soon arrested for denouncing his neighbors and sent to the Sui Dynasty together with his accomplices.

古文：在途，与其众谋逃。
现代文：押送途中，李密与其他人密谋逃跑。
English: While being escorted, Li Mi conspired with others to escape.

古文：其徒多金，密令出示使者曰： 吾等死日，此金留付公，幸用相瘗，其余即皆报德。 
现代文：他们这些人身上带着许多金钱，李密让拿出来给押送的人看，并说： 我们都在等着死日的到来，这些金钱送给你，希望用来埋葬我们，剩余的作为对你恩德的报答。 
English: They were carrying a lot of money. Li Mijan took it out and showed it to the escort, saying: "We are all waiting for the day of our death. I am giving you this money in the hope that it will be used to bury us, and the rest as a reward for your kindness."

古文：使者利金，遂相许。
现代文：押送的人贪图金钱，便满口答应。
English: The escort, greedy for money, readily agreed.

古文：及出关，密每夜宴饮。
现代文：等到出了潼关，李密每夜都设宴饮酒。
English: By the time he reached the pass, Li Mi was holding a banquet and drinking alcohol every night.

古文：行次邯郸，夜宿村中，密等七人皆穿墙而遁。与王仲伯亡抵平原贼帅郝孝德，孝德不甚礼之。
现代文：走到邯郸，晚上住在一个村庄中，李密等七人翻墙逃跑，他与王仲伯一起逃到平原盗贼首领郝孝德那里，郝孝德对他们不甚欢迎。
English: He walked to Handan and stayed in a village at night. Li Mi and seven others escaped by climbing over the wall. He and Wang Zhongbo fled to Handan Xiaode, the leader of the Plain Thieves. Handan Xiaode did not welcome them.

古文：备遭饥馑，削树皮而食之。
现代文：他们备受饥饿，只好剥树皮充饥。
English: They were so hungry that they had to peel the bark off trees to satisfy their hunger.

古文：仲伯潜归天水。
现代文：王仲伯潜逃到天水。
English: Wang Zhongbo fled to Tianshui.

古文：密诣淮阳，舍于村中，变姓名称刘智远，聚徒教授。
现代文：李密来到淮阳，住在乡村中，改变姓名叫刘智远，收几个学生教他们读书。
English: Li Mi came to Huaiyang, lived in the countryside, changed his name to Liu Zhiyuan, and took in several students to teach them to read.

古文：经数月，郁郁不得志，为五言诗，诗成，泣下数行。
现代文：经过数月，因郁郁不得志，写下一首五言诗，诗写好后，流下数行热泪。
English: After several months, depressed and discouraged, he wrote a five-character poem. After the poem was written, he shed a few lines of tears.

古文：时人有怪之，以告太守赵他，下县捕之。
现代文：有人感到奇怪，报告给太守赵他，太守下令让县里去逮捕他。
English: Some people felt strange, reported to the governor Zhao, and the governor ordered the county to arrest him.

古文：密亡抵其妹夫雍丘令丘君明。君明从子怀义后告之，密得遁去，君明竟坐死。
现代文：李密赶忙逃到他的妹夫雍丘县令丘君明那里，丘君明的侄子丘怀义后来又告发了他，他逃跑了，丘君明却坐罪被处死。
English: Li Mi hurriedly fled to his brother-in-law, Yongqiu County's Lingqiu Junming. Qiu Huaiyi, Qiu Junming's nephew, later denounced him. He fled, but Qiu Junming was executed.

古文：密投东郡贼帅翟让，乃因王伯当以策干让。
现代文：李密又投奔东郡义军领袖翟让，通过王伯当向翟让出谋划策。
English: Li Mi also ran to the Dong County rebel leader, Xuan Zhan, and through Wang Bodang, he made a proposal to Xuan Zhan.

古文：遣说诸小贼，所至辄降，让始敬焉，召与计事。
现代文：派人游说小股义军，被劝说的人都归顺了翟让，翟让开始看重了他，叫他同自己一起讨论重大问题。
English: He sent people to lobby the small-share rebels, and the people who were persuaded all submitted to Yuanzhang. Yuanzhang began to attach importance to him and asked him to discuss major issues with him.

古文：密以兵众无粮，劝让直趣荥阳，休兵馆谷，然后争利。
现代文：李密看到人马众多而缺少粮草，便劝翟让攻打荥阳，让军队休息，积蓄粮秣，然后与隋军争夺天下。
English: When Li Mi saw that there were a lot of people and horses but a shortage of grain and grass, he advised Zou to give up attacking Fenyang, let the army rest, accumulate grain and straw, and then compete with the Sui army for the world.

古文：让从之，乃掠下荥阳。
现代文：翟让听从了他的建议，便攻下荥阳。
English: Shujang listened to his advice and captured Shiyang.

古文：太守郇王庆及通守张须陀以兵讨让。让数为须陀败，将远避之。
现代文：太守郇王杨庆和通守张须陀带兵讨伐翟让，翟让几次被张须陀打败，准备向别处逃跑。
English: Yang Qing, the governor-general of Yunnan, and Zhang Suda, the general-in-charge of Yunnan, led an army to fight against Yujang. Yujang was defeated several times by Zhang Suda and prepared to flee elsewhere.

古文：密劝让列阵以待，密以奇兵掩击，大破之，斩须陀于阵。
现代文：李密劝翟让摆开阵势等待敌兵，他亲率一支奇兵袭击隋军、把敌人打得大败，在阵前斩杀了张须陀。
English: Li Mi advised Zhai to wait for the enemy soldiers to take up positions. He personally led a special force to attack the Sui army, defeated the enemy, and killed Zhang Suda before the battle.

古文：让于是令密建牙，别统所部。
现代文：翟让于是命李密树起军旗，另外统率一支部队。
English: He then ordered Li Mishu to raise the military flag and lead another army.

古文：复说让以廓清天下为事，令掩据兴洛仓，发粟以振穷乏。
现代文：李密又劝说翟让把廓清隋军，夺取天下当成第一要事，攻取兴洛仓，发放粮食以救济贫苦百姓。
English: Li Mi also persuaded Zou to let the Qing and Sui armies take the lead, seize the world as the first important thing, capture Xingluo Cang, and distribute grain to relieve the poor people.

古文：于是兴让以义宁元年春出阳城，北逾方山，自罗口袭兴洛仓，破之，开仓振百姓。
现代文：于是，他同翟让于义宁元年春从阳城出发，向北越过方山，从罗口进攻兴洛仓，一举拿下，打开粮仓，赈济百姓。
English: Therefore, in the spring of the first year of the year, he and his comrade Zhang Yining set out from Yangcheng, crossed Fangshan to the north, attacked Xingluo Cang from Luokou, took it in one fell swoop, opened the granary, and helped the people.

古文：越王侗遣武贲郎将刘长恭讨密。
现代文：越王杨侗派武贲郎将刘长恭进讨李密。
English: King of Yue, Yang Hui, sent Wu Han Lang to bring Liu Chang Gong in to deal with Li Mi.

古文：密一战破之，长恭仅以身免。
现代文：李密一仗将他打败，刘长恭侥幸逃脱。
English: Li Mi defeated him in one battle, but Liu Changgong was lucky to escape.

古文：让于是推密为主。
现代文：翟让于是推举李密为义军领袖。
English: He then promoted Li Mi as the leader of the rebel army.

古文：密城洛口周回四十城以居之。
现代文：李密在洛口建立一座周长四十里的城堡以便驻守。
English: Li Mi built a castle with a circumference of forty miles in Lokou in order to garrison it.

古文：让上密号为魏公，设坛场即位，称元年。
现代文：翟让为李密送上魏公的称号，并建立坛场请他即位，称为元年。
English: He gave Li Mi the title of Prince of Wei, and set up an altar to invite him to ascend the throne, known as the first year.

古文：以房彦藻为左长史，邴元真为右长史，杨德方为左司马，郑德韬为右司马。
现代文：李密命房彦藻为左长史，邴元真为右长史，杨德方为左司马，郑德韬为右司马。
English: Li Mi's son Fusangxiao is the left-long history, Yu Yuanzheng is the right-long history, Yang Defang is the left-long history, Zheng Dejun is the right-long history.

古文：拜让为司徒，封东郡公。
现代文：拜翟让为司徒，封为东郡公。
English: He was given the title of the East County magistrate.

古文：长白山贼孟让掠东郡，烧丰都市而归。
现代文：长白山义军孟让攻打东都，焚烧丰都市归来。
English: Meng Zhan, the Changbai Mountain rebel army, attacked Dongdu and burned the city of Fengdu before returning.

古文：密攻下巩县，获县长柴孝和，拜为护军。
现代文：李密又攻下巩县，俘获县令柴孝和，授给他护军的官职。
English: Li Mi also conquered Gong County, captured the county commander Chai Xiaohe, and gave him the official post of military escort.

古文：武贲郎将裴仁基以武牢归密，密因遣仁基与孟让袭破回洛仓，据之。
现代文：隋将武贲郎将裴仁基献出武牢关归顺李密，李密便派裴仁基与孟让打破了回洛仓，并占据了它。
English: The Sui Dynasty ordered Takehiro to give Pei Renki to Li Mi, who then sent Pei Renki and Meng Zhan to break into Huilokang and occupy it.

古文：俄而德韬、德方俱死，笔以郑颋为左司马，郑虔象为右司马。
现代文：不久，郑德韬、杨德方战死，李密又命郑廷页为左司马，郑虔象为右司马。
English: Soon after, Zheng Deyu and Yang Defang were killed in battle, and Li Mi also ordered Zheng Tingzhe to be the left secretary and Zheng Qianxiang to be the right secretary.

古文：柴孝和说密令裴仁基守回洛，翟让据洛口，身率精锐，西袭长安，不然他人我先。
现代文：柴孝和劝说李密：让裴仁基守护回洛仓，翟让占据洛口仓，您亲自率领精锐部队，向西攻打长安。否则，别人会抢在我们前面。
English: Chai Xiaohwa persuaded Li Mi: Let Pei Renji guard back to Lokang, let him occupy Lokuchang, you personally lead the elite troops to attack Chang'an in the west. Otherwise, others will be ahead of us.

古文：密曰： 此诚上策，然我之所部并山东人，既见未下洛阳，恐不肯西入。 
现代文：李密说 ：这实在是上等的计策，只是我的部属都是山东人，看见未攻下洛阳，恐怕不肯西进。 
English: Li Mi said: This is really a superior strategy, but my subordinates are all from Shandong. If they see that Luoyang has not been conquered, I am afraid they will not go west.

古文：孝和请间行观隙，乃与数十骑至陕县，贼归之者万余人。
现代文：柴孝和请求让他悄悄到西面了解情况，李密让他带领十个骑兵到陕县，归附他的竟有一万多人。
English: Chai Xiaohe asked him to quietly go to the west to understand the situation, Li Mi asked him to lead ten cavalry to Shaanxi, and more than ten thousand people joined him.

古文：密时兵锋甚锐，每入苑与官军连战。
现代文：李密的军队当时锋芒正锐，经常在东都洛阳附近与官军作战。
English: At that time, Li Mi's army was very sharp and often fought with the government army near the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：会密为流矢所中，卧于营内，东都出兵击之，密众大溃，弃回洛仓归洛口。
现代文：适逢李密被流箭射中，躺在军营中休息，东都的官兵出来袭击，他的部队溃散，放弃回洛仓回到洛口。
English: When Li Mi was hit by a stray arrow and was lying in a military camp for a rest, the officers and soldiers of Dongdu came out to attack, his troops dispersed, gave up and returned to Lokang and Lokou.

古文：孝和之众闻密败，各分散而去，孝和轻骑归密。
现代文：柴孝和的部队听说李密兵败，各自解散而去，柴孝和骑马归来。
English: When Chai Xiaohe's troops heard that Li Mi had been defeated, they disbanded and left. Chai Xiaohe returned on horseback.

古文：炀帝遣王世充率江淮劲卒五万讨密，败之。孝和溺洛水，密甚伤之。
现代文：隋炀帝派王世充率江淮劲旅五万人讨伐李密，将李密打败，柴孝和在洛口淹死，李密十分伤心。
English: The Emperor of the Sui Dynasty sent Wang Shichong to lead the Jianghuai Strong Brigade of fifty thousand people to fight against Li Mi. Li Mi was defeated, and Chai Xiao He drowned in Lokou. Li Mi was very sad.

古文：世充营于洛西，与密相拒百余日。
现代文：王世充驻扎在洛口西，与李密的军队相持一百多天。
English: Wang Shichong was stationed in the west of Lokuch and held out against Li Mi's army for more than a hundred days.

古文：武阳郡丞元宝藏、黎阳贼帅李文相、洹水贼帅张升、清河贼帅赵君德、平原贼帅郝孝德并归密，共袭破黎阳仓，据之。
现代文：武阳郡丞元宝藏、黎阳贼兵首领李文相、洹水贼兵首领张升、清河贼兵首领赵君德、平原贼兵首领郝孝德相继投奔李密，一起攻破黎阳仓，并占领了它。
English: Zhu Rongyuan of Wuyang County, Li Wenxiang, the leader of the Liyang bandits, Zhang Sheng, the leader of the Lishui bandits, Zhao Junde, the leader of the Qinghe bandits, and Zou Xiaode, the leader of the Plains bandits, successively went to Li Mi, broke through the Liyang warehouse together, and occupied it.

古文：周法明举江、黄之地以附密。
现代文：隋将周法明将长江与黄河之间的土地献给李密表示归顺。
English: The Sui Dynasty ordered Zhou Farming to offer the land between the Yangtze River and the Yellow River to Li Mi as a gesture of submission.

古文：齐郡贼帅徐圆朗、任城大侠徐师仁、淮阳太守赵他等前后款附以千百数。
现代文：齐郡的贼兵首领徐园朗、任城的豪杰徐师仁、淮阳太守赵他等人也都先后归附，人数加起来成千上万。
English: The leader of the bandits in Qi County, Xu Yuanlang, the hero of the city, Xu Shiren, the governor of Huaiyang, Zhao, and others have also been attached successively, adding up to thousands of people.

古文：翟让所部王儒信劝让为太宰，总众务以夺密权。
现代文：翟让的部将王儒信劝翟让任百官之长的大冢宰，统领所有的事务以夺回李密的权力。
English: Wang Ruxin, the subordinate minister, advised him to relinquish his position as grand secretary of the chief of the hundred officials and take charge of all affairs in order to regain Li Mi's power.

古文：兄宽复谓让曰： 天子止可自作，安得与人？
现代文：翟让的哥哥翟宽也对翟让说 ：天子只可以自己去做，怎么能让给别人？
English: Zou Jang's brother, Zou Kuan, also said to Zou Jang: "The Son of Heaven can only do it himself, how can he give it to others?

古文：汝若不作，我当为之。 
现代文：你如果不愿意，我可以当皇帝。 
English: If you don't want to, I can be emperor.

古文：密闻，恶之。
现代文：李密听说后，十分厌恶。
English: After hearing this, Li Mi was very disgusted.

古文：会让拒世充，军退数百步，密与单雄信等赴之，世充败走。
现代文：恰巧翟让与王世充对阵，军队后退了几百步，李密与单雄信等率兵增援，王世充败退。
English: It just so happened that Yu Zhen and Wang Shicheng went toe-to-toe, the army retreated several hundred paces, Li Mi and Shan Xiongxin led reinforcements, and Wang Shicheng retreated in defeat.

古文：让欲乘胜破其营，会日暮，固止之。
现代文：翟让想乘胜攻破隋军大营，天色已晚，李密阻止了他。
English: Xuan Zang wanted to take advantage of the victory to break through the Sui army camp, but it was too late, Li Mi stopped him.

古文：明日，让与数百人至密所，欲为宴乐。
现代文：第二天，翟让带数百人到李密的住所，李密想为他设宴庆贺。
English: The next day, Zou Zhan brought hundreds of people to Li Mi's residence. Li Mi wanted to hold a banquet for him to celebrate.

古文：其所将左右各就食，诸门并设备，让不觉。
现代文：他带领的将士都被分散到各处吃饭，所有的门口也都派人警备，翟让却没有觉察。
English: The soldiers he led were scattered all over the place to eat, and guards were posted at all the entrances, but they did not notice.

古文：密引让入坐，令让射。引满将发，密遣壮士蔡建自后斩之。
现代文：李密领翟让入坐，让翟让射箭，翟让拉满弓将要引发，李密派壮士蔡建从后面将他斩杀。
English: Li Mi led Zhuge Zhan to sit down, Zhuge Zhan to shoot arrows, Zhuge Zhan to draw a bow, and Zhuge Zhan sent the strong man Cai Jian to kill him from behind.

古文：遂杀其兄宽及儒信等，从者亦有死焉。
现代文：又杀害了他的哥哥翟宽和王儒信等人，跟随他来的人也有被杀的。
English: He also killed his brother Zou Kuan, Wang Ruxin and others, and those who followed him were also killed.

古文：让部将徐世勋为乱兵所斫，中重创，密止之，仅得免。
现代文：翟让的部将徐世责力被乱兵砍伤，伤势十分严重，李密阻止，才免于一死。
English: The retreating commander, Xu Shileili, was seriously wounded by the soldiers, and only after Li Mi intervened was he spared from death.

古文：雄信等皆叩头求哀，密并释而慰之。
现代文：单雄信等人都叩头哀求，李密都予以释放并慰问他们。
English: Shan Xiongxin and others all bowed down and begged, and Li Mi released them and consoled them.

古文：于是诣让营，遣王伯当、邴元真、单雄信等告以杀让意，令世勋、雄信、伯当分统其众。
现代文：于是他来到翟让的大营，让王伯当、邴元真、单雄信等告诉大家为什么要杀翟让，派徐世责力、单雄信、王伯当分别统领翟让的军队。
English: So he came to the general camp of Xujan, asked Wang Bodang, Xing Yuanzhen, and Shan Xiongxin to tell everyone why they wanted to kill Xujan, and sent Xu Shili, Shan Xiongxin, and Wang Bodang to lead the army of Xujan separately.

古文：世充夜袭仓城，密拒破之，斩武贲郎将费青奴。
现代文：王世充利用晚上攻打仓城，李密坚守，将敌人打败，杀死武贲郎将费青奴。
English: Wang Shichong used the night to attack Cangcheng, Li Mi held out, defeated the enemy, and killed Wu Yulang and Fei Qingnu.

古文：世充复营洛北，于洛水构浮桥，悉众击密。
现代文：王世充又在洛北建立营垒，在洛水上架设浮桥，率全部人马攻打李密。
English: Wang Shichong also set up a camp in the north of Luo, erected a pontoon bridge on the Luo River, and led all the men to attack Li Mi.

古文：密拒之，不利而退。
现代文：李密与隋军抗拒，因失利退却。
English: Li Mi and the Sui army resisted and retreated in defeat.

古文：世充因薄其城下，密击之，大溃，争桥，桥陷，溺水者数万人。
现代文：王世充因而得以进至义军的城下，李密率军袭击，隋军溃败，争渡浮桥，桥塌陷，落水者数万人。
English: As a result, Wang Shicheng was able to enter the city of the rebel army, Li Mi led the army to attack, the Sui army was defeated, the pontoon bridge was disputed, the bridge collapsed, and tens of thousands of people fell into the water.

古文：武郎将杨威、王辨、霍世举、刘长恭梁德重、董智通等皆没于阵。
现代文：武贲郎将杨威、王辨、霍世举、刘长恭、梁德重、董智通等人阵亡。
English: Wu Yulang led Yang Wei, Wang Ben, Huo Shiju, Liu Changgong, Liang Dezhong, Dong Zhitong and others to their deaths.

古文：世充仅而获免，不敢还东都，遂走河阳。
现代文：王世充仅幸免于一死，不敢回到东都，便逃向河阳。
English: Wang Shichong only survived one death, and did not dare to return to the eastern capital, so he fled to Heyang.

古文：其夜大雪，余众死亡殆尽。
现代文：这一夜天降大雪，剩余的士卒死亡殆尽。
English: Heavy snow fell that night, and all the remaining taxi drivers died.

古文：密乃修金墉故城居之，众三十余万，攻上春门。
现代文：李密便整修金墉的故城驻守，率众十余万，攻打东都洛阳的上春门。
English: Li Mi then repaired the old city of Jinyu and stationed there, leading more than 100,000 people to attack the Shangchun Gate of Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：留守韦津出战，被执。
现代文：东都留守韦津带兵出战，被抓获。
English: Dongdu stayed behind in Weijin to lead the troops into battle and was captured.

古文：其党劝密即尊号，密不许。
现代文：部将劝李密称帝，李密不同意。
English: The minister advised Li Mi to proclaim himself emperor, but Li Mi did not agree.

古文：及义师围东都，密出军争之，交绥而退。
现代文：李世民、李建成率领的义师围攻东都洛阳时，李密派军队与义师争夺，又互相安抚，然后撤退。
English: When Yishi led by Li Shimin and Li Jiancheng besieged the eastern capital Luoyang, Li Mi sent troops to compete with Yishi, pacify each other, and then retreat.

古文：俄而宇文化及弑逆，自江都北指黎阳，密拒之。
现代文：不久，宇文化及杀死隋炀帝，自江都向北攻打黎阳，李密率军抵御。
English: Soon after, Emperor Sui and Emperor Wu were assassinated, and Li Yang was attacked from the north along the Yangtze River. Li Mi led the army to defend against the attack.

古文：会越王侗称尊号，遣使授密太尉、尚书令、东南道大行台、行军元帅、魏国公，令先平化及，然后入朝辅政。
现代文：这时，越王杨侗称帝，派使者授予李密太尉、尚书令、东南道大行台、行军元帅、魏国公，命他先平定宇文化及，然后到朝廷辅政。
English: At this time, the king of Yue, Yang Pi, proclaimed himself emperor and sent an envoy to award Lieutenant Li Mi, Shang Shuling, the Southeast Highway, the Marching Marshal, and Wei Guogong, ordering him to first pacify Dingwu Culture and then go to the imperial court to assist the government.

古文：化及至黎阳，徐世勋守仓城不下。
现代文：宇文化及率军到黎阳，徐世责力坚守仓城，宇文化及久攻不下。
English: U Bunka and his army went to Liyang, while Xu Shibei was responsible for holding onto Cangcheng, which U Bunka and his army were unable to conquer for a long time.

古文：密共化及隔水语，密数之曰： 卿本匈奴阜隶破野头耳，父与兄弟皆受隋恩，岂容躬行杀虐？
现代文：李密与宇文化及隔着河水对话，李密数落他说： 你本是多奴族的奴隶中破野头这一支的人，父亲与兄弟都受隋朝的恩德，怎么能恣意杀戮？
English: Li Mi had a dialogue with Yu Qun and across the river, Li Mi said to him: You are originally a member of the Do Nu tribe of slaves, whose father and brother were both favored by the Sui Dynasty. How can you kill arbitrarily?

古文：今若速来归义，尚可全后嗣。 
现代文：现在如果速来归顺，还可保全你的后代。 
English: If you quickly surrender now, you can still save your descendants.

古文：化及默然，俯仰良久，乃嗔目大言曰： 共你论相杀事，何须作书传雅语！ 
现代文：宇文化及默然不语，时而低头，时而仰首，思忖许久，便瞪着眼睛大声说： 我和你讨论攻战杀伐的事，何必说些书本上文绉绉的话！ 
English: U Bunka was silent, bowed his head from time to time, looked up from time to time, thought for a long time, then stared into his eyes and said loudly: I'm discussing the matter of attacking and killing with you, why don't you say something that's not in the book!

古文：密谓从者曰： 化及庸懦如此，忽欲图帝王，吾当折杖驱之。 
现代文：李密对随从的人说： 宇文化及如此庸俗浅薄，忽然想谋取帝王的宝座，我当拿根棍子将他赶跑。 
English: Li Mi said to his entourage: "Since Yu Cultura is so vulgar and shallow, he suddenly wants to seek the throne of the emperor. I should take a stick and chase him away."

古文：知其粮且尽，在伪与之和。
现代文：李密知道他的粮食将要吃完，便假装跟他讲和。
English: Li Mi knew that his food was about to run out, so she pretended to make peace with him.

古文：化及大喜，恣其兵食，冀密馈之。
现代文：宇文化及十分高兴，让士兵放开量大吃，希望李密能送给他粮食。
English: Yu Wenjun was very happy and let the soldier eat a large amount of food, hoping that Li Mi could give him grain.

古文：会密下有人获罪，亡投之，具言密情。
现代文：恰巧李密部下有人犯罪，逃到宇文化及那里，将李密的真实意图说出。
English: Coincidentally, one of Li Mi's subordinates committed a crime and fled to Uculture, where he revealed Li Mi's true intentions.

古文：化及大怒，又食尽，与密战于童山下。
现代文：宇文化及大怒，但粮食已经吃完，便与李密在童山下展开大战。
English: Yu Kunming was furious, but he had already finished eating the grain, so he started a big fight with Li Mi under Tongshan Mountain.

古文：自辰达酉，密中流矢，顿于汲县。
现代文：从早晨直打到天黑，李密被流矢射中，驻在汲县。
English: From morning until dusk, Li Mi was caught in the crossfire and stationed in Kumi County.

古文：化及掠汲郡，北趣魏县，以辎重留于东郡，遣其刑部尚书王轨守之。
现代文：宇文化及攻掠汲郡，向北直趋魏县。宇文化及将辎重放在东郡，派他的刑部尚书王轨守卫。
English: U Bun Hwa and his troops attacked and plundered Ku County, heading straight north to Wei County. U Bun Hwa placed his focus on Dong County, and sent his criminal department, Shang Shu, to guard the king's route.

古文：轨以郡降，密以轨为滑州总管。
现代文：王轨献出东郡，向李密投降，李密命王轨为滑州总管。
English: Wang Le presented Dong County and surrendered to Li Mi. Li Mi appointed Wang Le as the governor of Slanting.

古文：密引兵而西，遣记室参军李俭朝于东都，执弑帝人于弘达以献越王侗。
现代文：李密率兵西进，派记室参军李俭到东都朝拜越王杨侗，献上杀死隋炀帝的凶手于弘达。
English: Li Mi led the soldiers westward, sent the record office to join the army, and Li Jian went to the eastern capital to pay homage to the king of Yue, Yang Hui, and presented the murderer of the Sui and Qin Emperors, Yu Hongda.

古文：侗以俭为司农少卿，使召密入朝。
现代文：杨侗任李俭为司农少卿，并派李俭召李密入朝。
English: Yang Xuan appointed Li Jian as Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture and sent Li Jian to summon Li Mi to the imperial court.

古文：密至温县，闻世充已杀元文都、卢楚等，乃归金墉城。
现代文：李密行至温县，听说王世充已杀死元文都、卢楚等人，便回到金墉城。
English: After Li Mi went to Wen County, he heard that Wang Shichong had killed Yuan Wentu, Lu Chu and others, so he returned to Jinlun City.

古文：世充既擅要权，乃厚赐将士。
现代文：王世充专擅权力后，重赏将士。
English: After Wang Shichong gained power, he rewarded generals.

古文：时密兵少衣，世充乏食，乃请交易。
现代文：这时，李密的军队缺少衣服穿，而王世充的部队没有粮食吃，便请求同李密交易。
English: At this time, Li Mi's army lacked clothes to wear, while Wang Shichong's troops had no food to eat, so they asked to trade with Li Mi.

古文：邴元真等各求私利，遽劝密，密许焉。
现代文：李密的部下邴元真等人贪求私利，劝李密同意。
English: Li Mi's subordinates such as Yan Yuanzhen were greedy for self-interest and persuaded Li Mi to agree.

古文：初东都绝粮，人归密者日有数百，至此得食，降人益少。
现代文：李密答应了。原先东都绝粮，向李密投降的人每天有几百人。这时有了粮食吃，投降的人越来越少。
English: Li Mi agreed. Originally, there was no food in Dongdu, and there were several hundred people who surrendered to Li Mi every day. At this time, there was food to eat, and fewer and fewer people surrendered.

古文：密悔而止。
现代文：李密后悔而停止了交易。
English: Li Mi regretted and stopped trading.

古文：密虽据仓，无府库，兵数战不赏，又厚抚初附兵，于是众心渐怨。
现代文：李密虽然占有粮食，却没有府库，将士多次战斗而得不到赏赐。对于新投降来的人，待遇却特别优厚。因而，大家心里渐生怨忿。
English: Although Li Mi possessed grain, he did not have a treasury, and his soldiers had fought many times without being rewarded. For those who had recently surrendered, the treatment was particularly generous. As a result, resentment gradually arose in everyone's hearts.

古文：时邴元真守洛口仓，性贪鄙。
现代文：当时，邴元真把守洛口仓，性情贪婪卑鄙。
English: At that time, Xuan Yuan was guarding the Luokou warehouse, and he was greedy and despicable.

古文：宇文温每谓密曰： 不杀元真，公难未已。 密不答。
现代文：宇文温常对李密说： 不杀邴元真，您的祸害就不会排除。 
English: Uwen Wen often said to Li Mi: If you don't kill Xuan Yuanzhen, your evil will not be eliminated.

古文：而元真知之，谋叛。
现代文：李密听后并不答话。邴元真听说后，阴谋叛变。
English: After hearing this, Li Mi did not reply. After hearing this, Xuan Yuanzhen plotted a mutiny.

古文：杨庆闻而告密，密因疑焉。
现代文：杨庆发觉后告诉了李密，李密才开始怀疑邴元真。
English: After Yang Qing found out and told Li Mi, Li Mi began to suspect Yu Yuanzhen.

古文：会世充悉众来战，密留王伯当守金墉，自就偃师，北阻芒山以待之。
现代文：王世充率全队前来寻战，李密留王伯当守护金墉城，自己率军抵达偃师，向北凭借邙山扎下营寨，等待王世充的军队。
English: Wang Shichong led the whole team to come to fight, Li Miliu Wang Bo took the lead in guarding Jinyuan City, and led his own army to arrive at Jinyuan Division, and went north to the Jinyuan Mountains to set up camp, waiting for Wang Shichong's army.

古文：世充令数百骑度御河，密遣裴行俨等逆之。
现代文：王世充命数百名骑兵渡过御河，李密派裴行俨等人迎战。
English: Wang Shih devoted his life to crossing the Ohe River with hundreds of cavalry, while Li Mi sent Pei Xingyao and others to meet the battle.

古文：会日暮，行俨、孙长乐、程咬金等骁将十数人皆重创，密甚恶之。
现代文：适逢天黑，裴行俨、孙长乐、程齿尧金等骁将十多人都受了重伤，李密心情十分恶劣。
English: In the dark of night, more than ten generals including Pei Xingyao, Sun Changle, Cheng Jian and Jin were seriously injured, and Li Mi was in a very bad mood.

古文：世充夜潜，诘朝而阵，密方觉之。
现代文：王世充乘夜偷渡，天明已摆好阵势，李密才发觉。
English: Wang Shicheng sneaked across the border at night. By dawn, he had set up his position, but Li Mi found out about it.

古文：狼狈出战，败绩，驰向洛口。
现代文：他匆忙带队接仗，被打败，逃向洛口。
English: He hastily led his troops into battle, was defeated, and fled to Lokou.

古文：世充夜围偃师，守将郑颋为其部下，翻城而降世充。
现代文：王世充又连夜包围偃师，偃师守将郑廷页被他的部下说动，献城投降了王世充。
English: Wang Shichong encircled Jiu Division again overnight. Jiu Division's commander, Zheng Tingzhe, was persuaded by his subordinates to surrender the city to Wang Shichong.

古文：密将入洛口仓城，元真已遣人引世充。
现代文：李密即将进入洛口仓城，邴元真已派人与王世充勾结。
English: Li Mi is about to enter Lokuchu Cangcheng. Yu Yuanzhen has sent someone to collude with Wang Shicheng.

古文：密阴知之，不发其事，欲待世充兵半度洛水，然后击之。
现代文：李密暗中知道了这个情况，故意密而不发，想等王世充的军队一半渡过洛水，然后乘其立脚未稳再发起进攻。
English: Li Mi secretly knew about this situation and deliberately kept silent, wanting to wait for half of Wang Shichong's army to cross the Luoshui River, and then take advantage of its unstable footing to launch an attack.

古文：密候骑不时觉，比将出战，世充军悉已济。
现代文：李密派去侦察的骑兵却没有弄清情况。等到将要出战时，王世充的军队已全部渡过洛水。
English: The cavalry sent by Li Mi to reconnoiter did not find out the situation. By the time they were about to go to war, Wang Shichong's army had all crossed the Luoshui River.

古文：密引骑而遁，元真以城降世充。
现代文：李密骑马逃跑，邴元真献城投降。
English: Li Mi fled on horseback, and Xuan Yuanzhen surrendered the city.

古文：密众渐离，将如黎阳。人或曰： 杀翟让之际，徐世勋几死，其心安可保？ 
现代文：李密的军队渐渐离散，他将要到达黎阳，有人说： 杀翟让的时候，徐世责力也几乎被杀。
English: Li Mi's army was gradually dispersing, and he was about to reach Liyang. Some people said: "When he was killed, Xu Shileili was almost killed."

古文：密乃止。时王伯当弃金墉城，保河阳，密自武牢济，归之。
现代文：现在他的刀伤还未痊愈，他的心难道可以保证不反叛吗？ 李密便不再去黎阳。这时，王伯当放弃金墉城，退保河阳，李密自武牢关渡过黄河，去投奔他。
English: Now that his knife wound has not yet healed, can his heart guarantee that he will not rebel? Li Mi will no longer go to Liyang. At this time, Wang Bodang abandoned Jinyuan City and withdrew to Heyang. Li Mi crossed the Yellow River from Wudong Prison to join him.

古文：谓曰： 久苦诸君，我今日自刎以谢众。 
现代文：李密对众人说： 长时间劳苦大家，我今天自尽以向诸位谢罪。 
English: Li Mi said to the crowd: "You all have worked hard for a long time. I am trying my best to express my gratitude to you today.

古文：众皆泣，莫能仰视。
现代文：大家都俯首哭泣，不能仰视。
English: Everyone was bowing their heads and crying, unable to look up.

古文：密复曰： 诸君幸不相弃，当共归关中。密身虽愧无功，诸君必保富贵。 
现代文：李密又说： 幸得各位不嫌弃我，我们应一起投奔关中的唐军，我虽然没有为唐军建立功勋，但各位一定能得到富贵。 
English: Li Mi also said, "Fortunately, you don't hate me. We should all join the Tang army in Guanzhong. Although I haven't built up any merits for the Tang army, you will definitely get rich and famous."

古文：其府掾柳燮曰： 明公与长安宗族，有畴昔之遇，虽不陪起义，然阻东都，断隋归路，使唐国不战而得京师，此公之功也。 
现代文：他的魏公府属员柳燮说 ：您与长安的皇室李氏宗族，过去有着相同的经历。虽然没有和他们一道起义，然而，阻隔东都洛阳的隋军不能西顾，断绝了隋朝的退路，使唐国不怎么费力作战就夺取了隋朝的京师，这便是您的功劳啊！ 
English: His Wei Gongfu subordinate Liu Wei said: You and the royal family of Chang'an, the Li clan, had the same experience in the past. Although you did not revolt with them, however, the Sui army, which blocked the eastern capital Luoyang, could not go west, cut off the retreat of the Sui Dynasty, and caused Tang to seize the Beijing division of the Sui Dynasty without much effort. This is your achievement!

古文：众咸曰： 然。 
现代文：众人都说 ：是这样！ 
English: And all the people said, So be it.

古文：密遂归朝，封邢国公，拜光禄卿。
现代文：李密便归顺唐朝，被封为邢国公，授给光禄卿的官职。
English: Li Mi then submitted to the Tang Dynasty, was named the Duke of Shandong, and was given the official position of Guangluqing.

古文：寻奉使出关安抚，至熊州而逃叛，见杀。
现代文：不久，奉朝廷之命出关安抚，走到熊州叛唐逃跑，被杀害。
English: Soon after, he was ordered by the imperial court to go out to pacify Guanzhong. He went to Xiongzhou to escape from the Tang Dynasty and was killed.

古文：宇文贵，字永贵，其先昌黎大棘人也，徙居夏州。
现代文：宇文贵，字永贵，他的祖先为昌黎大棘人，徙居夏州。
English: Yu Wengui, also known as Yonggui, his ancestor was a great thorn in the side of Changli, who migrated to Xiazhou.

古文：父莫豆干，保定中，以贵勋追赠柱国大将军、少傅、夏州刺史、安平郡公。
现代文：他的父亲莫豆干因他的功勋，在保定时被朝廷追赠为柱国大将军、少傅、夏州刺史、安平郡公。
English: His father, Mozu Gan, was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Pillar of State, Young Master of the Forbidden City, Prince of Xiazhou and Anping County by the imperial court in Baoding due to his meritorious service.

古文：贵母初孕贵，梦老人抱一子授之曰： 赐尔是子，俾寿且贵。 
现代文：他的母亲怀孕时，梦见一位老人抱着一个孩子送给她，说： 赐给你这个孩子，他将来会使你长寿和富贵。 
English: When his mother was pregnant, she dreamed that an old man gave her a child in his arms, saying: "Give you this child, he will make you long-lived and rich in the future."

古文：及生，形类所梦，故以永贵字之。
现代文：生下来之后，样子和梦中的孩子长得很像，所以，用永贵作他的字。
English: After he was born, he looked very similar to the child in his dream, so he was given the name Yonggui.

古文：贵少从师受学，尝辍书叹曰： 男兒当提剑汗马以取公侯，何能为博士也！ 
现代文：他从小跟着老师读书，曾放下书本感叹说 ：男儿应当提着宝剑，骑着马纵横疆场，以博取公侯的封爵，怎么能去当文学博士呢？ 
English: He grew up reading with his teacher. He once put down his books and lamented: "Boys should carry a sword, ride a horse across the fields, and win the title of prince. How can I become a doctor of literature?"

古文：魏正光末，破六韩拔陵围夏州，刺史源子邕婴城固守，以贵为统军。
现代文：魏正光末年，破六韩拔陵围攻夏州，刺史源子邕据城坚守，命宇文贵为统军。
English: In the last years of Wei Zhengguang, he broke the siege of the Six Han Kingdoms and besieged Xiazhou. He ordered Yu Wengui to lead the unified army.

古文：后从尔硃荣禽葛荣于滏口，加别将。
现代文：后来，他跟随尔朱荣在滏口擒获葛荣，被加封为别将。
English: Later, he followed Er Zhu Rong in conquering Ge Rong in Hekou and was awarded the title of General.

古文：又从元天穆平邢杲，转都督。
现代文：他又跟随元天穆平定邢杲，转任为都督。
English: He also followed Yuan Tianmu in suppressing Dingwu and was transferred to the post of governor-general.

古文：元颢入洛，贵率乡兵从尔硃荣有功，封革融县侯。
现代文：元颢率南军占据洛阳，他率领乡兵跟着尔朱荣作战有功，被封为革融县侯。
English: Yuanzhang led the Southern Army to occupy Luoyang. He led the local soldiers to fight with Er Zhu Rong and was awarded the title of He Rong County Marquis.

古文：除郢州刺史，入为武卫将军、关内大都督。
现代文：他还被任命为郢州刺史，进入朝廷任武卫将军、门合内大都督。
English: He was also appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, entered the imperial court as General Wuwei, and became the grand governor of Menghe.

古文：从魏孝武西迁，进爵化政郡公。
现代文：跟随孝武帝入关西迁，被晋爵为化政郡公。
English: He moved to the Kansai region with Emperor Xiaowu and was raised to the peerage as the lord of Kasei County.

古文：贵善骑射，有将帅才。
现代文：他善于骑马射箭，有将帅才能。
English: He is good at horseback riding and archery, and has the talent of a general.

古文：周文帝又以宗室，甚亲委之。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰又因为他是宗室亲属，对他十分信任。
English: In addition, because Zhou Wen Diyu is a relative of the imperial family, Wentei trusts him very much.

古文：大统初，与独孤信入洛阳。
现代文：西魏大统初年，他与独孤信进入洛阳。
English: In the first year of the Western Wei Dynasty, he and Du Guoxin entered Luoyang.

古文：东魏颍州长史贺若统据颍川来降，东魏遣将尧雄、赵育、是云宝率众二万攻颍川。
现代文：东魏颍州长史贺若统献颍川投降，东魏派将领尧雄、赵育、是云宝率众两万进攻颍川。
English: The governor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Shi Heruo, offered the surrender of Li River, and the Eastern Wei faction generals, Li Xiong, Zhao Yu and Ye Yunbao, led a crowd of 20,000 to attack Li River.

古文：贵自洛阳率步骑二千救之，军次阳翟。雄等去颍川四十里，东魏行台任祥又率众四万，将与雄合。
现代文：他率二千人马从洛阳出发，前去救援。行至阳翟，东魏大军距颍川仅四十里，东魏的行台任祥又率四万之众，准备与尧雄等部会合。
English: He led two thousand horses from Luoyang to go to the rescue. When he went to Yangshuo, the Eastern Wei army was only forty miles away from Shichuan, and the Eastern Wei army was led by Ren Xiang with forty thousand people, preparing to meet with Shixiong and other departments.

古文：诸将咸以彼众我寡，不可争锋。
现代文：宇文贵的部将都认为敌众我寡，力量悬殊太大，不可与敌兵争锋。
English: The generals of Umengui all believed that the enemy was few and far between, and that the disparity in strength was too great to compete with the enemy soldiers.

古文：贵曰： 若贺若一陷，吾辈坐此何为？ 
现代文：他说 ：如果贺若统守不住颍川，我们坐在这里有什么用呢？ 
English: He said, "If Herakuto can't protect Hachikawa, what's the use of us sitting here?"

古文：遂入颍川。
现代文：便进入颍川。
English: He then entered the Shukawa River.

古文：雄等稍进，贵率千人背城为阵，与雄合战。
现代文：尧雄等人领军向前推进，宇文贵率领一千兵士背靠城池，布下军阵，与尧雄交战。
English: Shao Xiong and others led the army forward, and Wu Wengui led a thousand soldiers to back up against the castle, spread out the army, and fought with Shao Xiong.

古文：贵马中流矢，乃短兵步斗，雄大败轻走，赵育于是降。任祥闻雄败，遂不敢进。
现代文：他的马被流矢射中，便与敌人短兵步斗，尧雄大败退却，赵育因此投降，任祥听到尧雄失败的消息，不敢再向前靠近。
English: His horse was hit by a stray arrow, and he fought a short battle with the enemy. Shao Xiong was defeated and retreated. As a result, Zhao Yu surrendered. When Ren Xiang heard the news of Shao Xiong's defeat, he did not dare to approach any further.

古文：贵乘胜逼祥，败之。
现代文：宇文贵乘胜率军逼攻任祥，将他打败。
English: Uwengui took advantage of the victory rate of the army to attack Ren Xiang and defeat him.

古文：是云宝亦降。
现代文：是云宝也向宇文贵投降。
English: It was Yunbao who also surrendered to Wu Wengui.

古文：师还。
现代文：军队便撤还。
English: The troops then withdrew.

古文：魏文帝在天游园，以金卮置侯上，令公卿射中者即赐之。
现代文：魏文帝在天游园把一只金制的酒器放在箭靶上，对公卿们说，谁射中了就把金酒器赐给谁。
English: Emperor Weiwen put a golden goblet on an arrow target in Tianyuan Garden and told the nobles that whoever hit it would be given a golden goblet.

古文：贵一发而中。帝笑曰： 由基之妙，正当尔耳。 进侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：宇文贵一箭射中，朝廷晋封他为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Umengui was hit by an arrow, and the imperial court promoted him to the position of chamberlain, cavalry general, and Kaifu-gi and Sanji.

古文：十六年，迁中外府左长史，进位大将军。
现代文：大统十六年，他又迁任为中外府左长史，晋位为大将军。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was transferred to the post of Chugai-fu Zuochangshi and promoted to the rank of general.

古文：宕昌王梁弥定为宗人獠甘所逐，来奔。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥定被同族的人獠甘驱逐，投奔西魏。
English: Liang Yading, the king of the Tang and Chang dynasties, was expelled by his compatriots, the Qigang, and fled to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：又有羌酋傍乞铁忽，因梁定反后，据有渠株川，拥隶数千家，与渭州人郑五丑同反。
现代文：另有羌族首领傍乞铁忽，因为梁人山定反叛以后，占据渠株川，拥有奴隶数千家，与渭州人郑五丑一同造反。
English: In addition, the leader of the Yao people begged for mercy, because after the rebellion of Liang Ren Shan Ding, he occupied Quzhu River, owned thousands of slaves, and rebelled together with Zheng Wugou from Zhangzhou.

古文：周文令贵与豆卢宁、史宁讨之，贵等禽斩铁忽及五丑，史宁又别击獠甘破之。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰命宇文贵与豆卢宁、史宁率兵进讨。宇文贵等人抓获傍乞铁忽和郑五丑，并将他们斩首。
English: Zhou Wen Di and Wu Wentai ordered Wu Wengui to lead troops to have a discussion with Dou Luning and Shi Ning. Wu Wengui and the others captured the beggars, Qu and Zheng Wugou, and beheaded them.

古文：乃纳弥定，并于渠株川置岷州。
现代文：史宁打败獠甘，西魏接纳了梁弥定，并在渠株川设置岷州。
English: Shining defeated Hegang, the Western Wei accepted Liang Yading, and set up Zhangzhou in Quzhu River.

古文：朝廷重功，遂于粟坂立碑，以纪其绩。
现代文：朝廷重视宇文贵等人的功绩，便在粟坂树立石碑，以记述他们的业绩。
English: The Imperial Court attached great importance to the exploits of Uwengui and others, and erected a stone monument in Awasaka to record their achievements.

古文：废帝三年，诏贵代尉迟迥镇蜀。
现代文：废帝三年，朝廷下诏命宇文贵代替尉迟镇守蜀地。
English: Three years after the dethronement of the emperor, the imperial court issued an edict ordering Uwengui to take the place of Ip Chi in the defense of Shu.

古文：时隆州人开府李光易反于盐亭，攻围隆州；而隆州人李拓亦聚众反，开府张道应之。
现代文：这时，隆州人开府李光易在盐亭举兵反叛朝廷，围攻隆州；隆州人李拓也聚众造反，开府张道响应。
English: At this time, Li Guangyi, the governor of Longzhou, raised an army in Yan Ting to rebel against the imperial court and besieged Longzhou; Li Tuo, the governor of Longzhou, also gathered a crowd to rebel, and Zhang Dao, the governor of Longzhou, responded.

古文：贵乃命开府叱奴与牧隆州，又令开府成亚击拓及道降之，并送京师。
现代文：宇文贵便命开府叱奴兴救援隆州，又命开府成亚进攻李拓和张道，李、张二人投降，将他们送往京师。
English: Yu Wengui then ordered Kaifu Renu Xing to rescue Longzhou, and also ordered Kaifu Chengya to attack Li Tuo and Zhang Dao. Li and Zhang surrendered and sent them to Beijing Division.

古文：除益州刺史，未就拜小司徒。
现代文：朝廷命宇文贵为益州刺史，拜为小司徒。
English: The imperial court ordered Umengui to write the history of Yizhou and worship Xiao Si.

古文：先是蜀人多劫盗，贵乃召任侠杰健者署为游军二十四部，令其督捕，由是颇息。
现代文：原先，蜀地盗贼很多，他便招募任侠尚性的豪杰勇士，署理游军二十四部，命他们抓捕盗贼，蜀地因此宁静。
English: Originally, there were many thieves in Shu, so he recruited heroic warriors of chivalry and modesty, acting as the 24th detachment of the marching army, and ordered them to catch the thieves. As a result, Shu was peaceful.

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，进位柱国，拜御正中大。
现代文：孝闵帝即位建周，他被晋位为柱国，拜受御正中大夫。
English: Emperor Xiaoyan ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the pillar state, and became a high-ranking middle-ranking doctor.

古文：武成初，与贺兰祥讨吐谷浑。
现代文：武成初年，他与贺兰祥一起进讨吐谷浑。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he and Helan Xiang went to Tujugun together.

古文：军还，进封许国公、邑万户，旧爵回封一子。
现代文：大军返回后，他又被晋封为许国公、邑万户。过去的爵位回封给一个儿子。
English: After the return of the large army, he was also promoted to the title of Xu Guogong and Urmanzhu. The previous title was returned to a son.

古文：迁大司空，行小冢宰，历大司徒，迁太保。
现代文：又迁任为大司空，任小冢宰。历任大司徒，迁任为太保。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of Daishi-ku, and appointed to the position of Kobuzai. Successive Daishi-tsu were transferred to the position of Taibo.

古文：贵好音乐，耽奕棋，留连不倦。
现代文：他喜好音乐，尤喜爱下棋，对此流连不知疲倦。
English: He loved music, especially chess, which he played tirelessly.

古文：然好施爱士，时人颇以此称之。
现代文：也喜好施舍，爱护读书人，人们因此称赞他。
English: He was also fond of giving alms and loved to read, for which he was praised.

古文：保定末，使突厥，迎皇后。
现代文：保定末年，他出使突厥，去迎接皇后。
English: In the last years of Baoding, he sent an envoy to Turkey to meet the empress.

古文：忻字仲乐，幼而敏慧，为童兒时，与群辈戏，辄为部伍，进止行列，无不用命者。
现代文：天和二年，回到张掖，去世。朝廷赠封他为太傅，谥号为穆。宇文忻，字仲乐，宇文贵的第二子。他从小敏捷聪慧，儿童时，与同辈小儿游戏，常为部伍，排列进止，没有不听他指挥的。
English: In 1902, he returned to Zhangye and passed away. The imperial court granted him the title of Taifu, and his posthumous name was Mu. He was the second son of Wu Wenyi, also known as Zhongle, and Wu Wengui. He was agile and clever from an early age, and when he was a child, he played with his peers, often as a member of the group, lining up and stopping, and there was no one who did not listen to his command.

古文：年十二，能左右驰射，骁捷若飞。
现代文：十二岁便能骑在马上向左右两边射箭，骁勇迅捷，有如飞的一般。
English: At the age of twelve, he was able to ride on a horse and shoot arrows to the left and right. He was so brave and swift that he could fly.

古文：恆谓所亲曰： 自古名将，唯以韩、白、卫、霍为美谈，吾察其行事，未足多尚，使与仆并时，不令竖子独擅高名。 
现代文：他常对亲近的人说： 自古以来的名将，惟有韩信、白起、卫青、霍去病被传为美谈。我观察他们的事迹，不值得过多地崇尚。如果让我与他们生在同时，决不让这些人独自拥有很高的声望。 
English: He often said to those close to him, "Since ancient times, only Han Xin, Bai Qi, Wei Qing, and Huo Deyi have been praised as great generals. I observe their deeds and do not deserve too much admiration. If I were to be born at the same time as them, I would never let these people have a high reputation on their own.

古文：年十八，从周齐王宪讨突厥，以功拜仪同三司，赐爵兴固县公。
现代文：十八岁，便跟随周齐王宇文宪进讨突厥，因立功被封为仪同三司，赐爵为兴国县公。
English: At the age of eighteen, he followed Zhou Qi Wang Yuwen Xian to fight against the Turks, and for his meritorious service, he was awarded the title of Jidong Sanji, and given the title of Xingguo County.

古文：韦孝宽以忻骁勇，请与镇玉壁，以战功加开府，进爵化政郡公。
现代文：韦孝宽因他骁勇善战，请求朝廷派他与自己一起镇守玉壁。他由于作战有功，被加封为开府，晋爵为化政郡公。
English: Because of his bravery and skill in battle, Wei Xiaokuan asked the imperial court to send him to guard the Jade Wall together with himself. Due to his distinguished service in battle, he was awarded the title of Kaifu and promoted to the peerage as the governor of Huazheng County.

古文：从武帝攻拔晋州。齐后主亲总兵，六军惮之，欲旋。
现代文：他随从武帝攻打晋州，齐后主亲自率兵对抗，周军震骇，准备退兵。
English: He followed Emperor Wu to attack Jinzhou. After the battle, the lord himself led the troops to fight. The Zhou army was shocked and prepared to retreat.

古文：忻谏曰： 以陛下之圣武，乘敌人之荒纵，何往而不克？
现代文：宇文忻劝谏说 ：凭着陛下您的圣明英武，趁着齐主的荒淫放纵，何愁无往而不胜？
English: Uwen Zang advised him, "With your majesty's wisdom and military prowess, and taking advantage of your lord's licentious indulgence, what is there to worry about?

古文：若齐人更得令主，君臣协力，未易平也。 
现代文：如果齐国再换一个好的君主，君臣同心协力，就不易平定了。 
English: If the state of Qi were to be replaced by another good monarch, and the monarchs and courtiers made a concerted effort, it would not be easy to pacify it.

古文：帝从之，乃战，遂大克。
现代文：武帝听从他的意见，双方交战，周军大获全胜。
English: Emperor Wu listened to his advice, the two sides fought, and the Zhou army won a complete victory.

古文：及帝攻陷并州，先胜后败。
现代文：武帝攻陷并州，先胜后败。
English: Emperor Wu invaded and annexed the prefecture, winning first and losing later.

古文：帝为贼所窘，挺身而遁。
现代文：武帝被齐军进逼，抽身逃跑，很多将领劝武帝撤军还朝。
English: Emperor Wu was forced by the Qi army to retreat and flee, and many generals advised Emperor Wu to withdraw and return to the court.

古文：诸将多劝帝还，忻勃然曰： 破城士卒轻敌，微有不利，何足为怀？
现代文：宇文忻听了勃然大怒，说： 攻城的士兵轻敌，小有不利，何足为虑？
English: After listening to this, Uwen Yao became furious and said, "The soldiers who besieged the city are light-footed. They are at a disadvantage. What are they worried about?

古文：今破竹形已成，奈何弃之而去！ 
现代文：今天破竹的形势已经形成，怎么能弃之而去？ 
English: Today's unprecedented situation has been formed, how can we abandon it?

古文：帝纳其言，明日复战，拔晋阳。
现代文：武帝采纳了他的建议，第二天又与齐军交战，攻克晋阳。
English: Emperor Wu accepted his suggestion, and the next day he fought against the Qi army and conquered Jinyang.

古文：齐平，进位大将军。
现代文：北齐被荡平，他被晋位为大将军。
English: Beiqi was flattened, and he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：寻与乌丸轨破陈将吴明彻于吕梁，进位柱国，除豫州总管。
现代文：不久，他与乌丸轨一起在吕梁打败陈将吴明彻，被晋位为柱国，任徐州总管。
English: Not long after, he defeated Chen general Wu Mingcher in Luliang together with Wu Marugorou, and was promoted to pillar state, serving as the general manager of Xuzhou.

古文：隋文帝龙潜时，与忻情好甚协，及为丞相，恩顾弥隆。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚没有当皇帝时，与宇文忻感情十分融洽。杨坚当了宰相，对他礼遇甚为优隆。
English: When Emperor Yang Jian of Sui and Wen dynasties was not the emperor, he was on very good terms with Uwen Hui. When Yang Jian became the prime minister, he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：尉迟迥作乱，以忻为行军总管，隋韦孝宽击之。
现代文：尉迟迥举兵作乱，杨坚命他任行军总管，随韦孝宽前去攻打。
English: The lieutenant delayed to raise an army to create a disturbance, and Yang Jian ordered him to be the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, and to go ahead with Wei Xiaokang to attack.

古文：时兵顿河阳，帝令高颎驰驿监军，与颖密谋进取者，唯忻而已。
现代文：当时君主驻扎在河阳，朝廷派高赹骑快马赶去任监军，与高赹密谋进取方略的，只有宇文忻一个人。
English: At that time, the monarch was stationed in Kheyang. The imperial court sent Gao Gan on a fast horse to supervise the army, and only Uwen Gan conspired with Gao Gan.

古文：迥遣子惇盛兵武陟，忻击走之。
现代文：尉迟迥派儿子尉迟陈兵武陟，宇文忻派兵将他赶走。
English: Lt. Lai sent his son Lt. Lai Chen to drive him away, and Uwen sent his soldiers to chase him away.

古文：进临相州，迥遣精甲三千伏野马冈，忻以五百骑袭之，斩获略尽。
现代文：周军进至相州，尉迟迥派精锐三千人埋伏在野马冈，宇文忻派五百骑兵袭击，将叛军斩获殆尽。
English: Zhou's army marched into Xiangzhou. Li Shizhen sent 3,000 elite troops to ambush Zhou at Mustang Hill, while Uwen Hui sent 500 cavalry to attack and completely annihilate the rebels.

古文：进至草桥，迥又拒守，忻以奇兵破之，直趋鄴下。
现代文：他挥军进至草桥，尉迟迥又派兵把守，他用奇兵打败守桥敌兵，率军直趋邺下。
English: He waved his army into the grass bridge, and sent soldiers to guard it. He defeated the enemy soldiers guarding the bridge with his special soldiers, and led the army straight under the bridge.

古文：迥背城结阵，大战，官军不利。
现代文：尉迟迥背城布下战阵，双方激战，官军失利。
English: The two sides fought fiercely, and the government army was defeated.

古文：时鄴城士庶观战者数万人，忻谓左右曰： 事急矣，吾当以权道破之。 
现代文：这时，邺城的缙绅百姓观战的有数万人，宇文忻对周围的人说 ：事情十分紧急，我要用诡诈的权术打破敌兵。 
English: At this time, there were tens of thousands of people watching the battle, and Uwen Zang said to the people around him: "The situation is very urgent, I will use cunning tactics to break the enemy soldiers."

古文：于是时观者走之，转相腾籍，声如雷霆。
现代文：于是用箭射杀观战的百姓，这些人争相逃命，喊叫声有如雷霆一般。
English: So they shot the people watching the battle with arrows, and these people ran for their lives, shouting like thunder.

古文：忻乃传呼曰： 贼败矣 。
现代文：他便命人传谕将士，大声呼喊： 敌人失败了！ 
English: He then ordered someone to preach to the soldiers, shouting loudly: The enemy has failed!

古文：众复振，齐力急击之，迥军大败。
现代文：将士们重新振作，合力急速进攻，尉迟迥的军队失败。
English: The generals were reinvigorated and joined forces for a rapid attack. The lagging army was defeated.

古文：及平鄴，以功迁上柱国。
现代文：邺城被平定，他因立功迁任上柱国。
English: Shicheng was subdued, and he was transferred to Shangzhu Province for his service.

古文：文帝谓 尉迟迥倾山东之众，连百万之师，公举无遗算，策无全阵，诚天下英杰也。 
现代文：杨坚对他说 ：尉迟迥倾尽山东的人马，联络百万军队，你举措没有失误，计谋不顾忌一阵的得失，实在是天下的英雄豪杰。 
English: Yang Jian said to him: "You have devoted all the manpower and horses of Shandong to liaise with a million troops. You have made no mistakes in your measures, and have not hesitated to gain or lose for a while. You are truly a hero of the world.

古文：进封英国公。
现代文：晋封他为英国公。
English: He was created a Duke of England.

古文：自是每参帷幄，出入卧内，禅代之际，忻有力焉。
现代文：从此，他常参与朝廷大事的运筹，出入于杨坚的卧室。隋受禅代周，他颇为有功。
English: From then on, he often took part in the planning of important events at the imperial court, and went in and out of Yang Jian's bedroom.

古文：后拜右领军大将军，宠顾弥重。
现代文：后来，他被封为右领军大将军，受隋文帝的宠顾更重。
English: Later, he was named the right-hand leading army general, and was even more favored by the Sui Emperor.

古文：忻解兵法，驭戎齐整，当时六军有一善事，虽非忻建，在下辄相谓曰： 此必英公法也。 
现代文：他精通兵法，治军威严整肃，当时全军中只要有一件好事，虽然和他没有关系，下面的将士一定互相传说 ：这一定是英国公实行的办法。 
English: He was well versed in the art of war, and his command of the army was dignified and orderly. At that time, if there was only one good thing in the whole army, although it had nothing to do with him, the following soldiers must have told each other: This must be the method of British public practice.

古文：其见推服如此。
现代文：他就是这样被部下所钦佩。
English: This is how he is admired by his subordinates.

古文：后改封祀国公。
现代文：后来，朝廷又改封他为杞国公。
English: Later, the imperial court changed his title to the Duke of Shandong.

古文：上尝欲令忻击突厥，高颍曰： 忻有异志，不可委以大兵。 
现代文：隋文帝曾经想让他进攻突厥，高赹劝阻，说： 宇文忻对朝廷有二心，不可以交给他大批军队。 
English: Emperor Sui Wen once wanted him to attack the Turks, but Gao Gan dissuaded him, saying: "Uwen Kun has two hearts for the imperial court, and it is not permissible to give him a large number of troops.

古文：乃止。
现代文：隋文帝便停止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：忻既佐命功臣，频经将领，甚有威名，上由是微忌之，以谴去官。
现代文：宇文忻成为辅助朝廷的功臣，多次担任重要的将领，威名很重，隋文帝因此多少有些嫉妒他，寻找借口免去他的官职。
English: Yu Wenzhong became a hero of the auxiliary court, served as an important general for many times, and his prestige was very high. Therefore, the Sui Emperor somewhat envied him and looked for an excuse to remove him from his official post.

古文：与梁士彦昵狎，数相往来。
现代文：他与梁士彦关系密切，不断来往。
English: He has a close relationship with Liang Shih-han and has been in constant contact with him.

古文：士彦时亦怨望，阴图不轨。
现代文：士彦这时也有许多牢骚，图谋不轨。
English: At this time, Shihiko also had a lot of grumbling and scheming.

古文：忻谓士彦曰： 帝王岂有常乎？
现代文：宇文忻对他说 ：帝王难道能永远由一人一姓去做吗？
English: Uwen Zang said to him: Can the emperor always be done by one person?

古文：撰《东都图记》二十卷、《明堂图议》二卷、《释疑》一卷，见行于世。
现代文：我们互相扶持也可以当。你在蒲州举兵起事，我一定响应，两支人马力量差不多，然后联合一起，天下就可以夺取。 
English: We can support each other. If you raise an army in Puzhou, I will certainly respond. The strength of the two armies is almost the same. Then, if they unite, they can conquer the whole country.

古文：长子儒童，游骑尉。
现代文：他们的阴谋泄露，被处死，全家都被抄没入官。
English: Their plot was discovered, they were executed, and their entire family was expropriated.

古文：少子温，起部承务郎。侯莫陈崇，字尚乐，代武川人也。
现代文：侯莫陈崇，字尚乐，代地武川人。
English: Hou Mo Chen Chong, also known as Shang Le, was born in Takekawa.

古文：其先魏之别部，居库斛真水。
现代文：他的祖先是北魏的别部，居住在库斛真水。
English: His ancestor was from another part of the Northern Wei Dynasty and lived in Cangzhou, Kuanzhen.

古文：祖元，以良家子镇武川，因家焉。
现代文：祖父侯莫陈元，以清白人家子弟的身份镇守武川，因而在那里安家。
English: His grandfather, Hou Mo Chen Yuan, guarded the town of Wuchuan as a son of a Qing white family, and thus settled there.

古文：父兴，殿中将军、羽林监，后以崇著勋，追赠柱国、太保、清河郡公。
现代文：他的父亲侯莫陈兴任殿中将军、羽林监，后来因为侯莫陈崇功勋卓著，被朝廷追赠为柱国、太保、清河郡公。
English: His father, Hou Mo Chen Xing, was a general in the palace and an inspector of forests. Later, because of Hou Mo Chen's distinguished service, he was posthumously awarded by the imperial court as a pillar state, grand tutor, and Qinghe County official.

古文：崇少骁勇，善驰射，谨悫少言。
现代文：侯莫陈崇从小骁勇善战，工于骑马射箭。
English: Hou Mo Chen Chong has been brave and good at fighting since childhood. He is good at riding and archery.

古文：年十五，随贺拔岳与尔硃荣征葛荣。
现代文：十五岁时，随贺拔岳与尔朱荣征讨葛荣。
English: At the age of fifteen, he followed He Batyue and Er Zhu Rong to fight Ge Rong.

古文：后从岳入关，破赤水蜀。
现代文：后来跟随贺拔岳西入潼关，攻破赤水蜀。
English: Later, he followed He Badu west into Shaoguan, and broke through Chishui Shu.

古文：又从岳力战，破万俟丑奴。
现代文：又跟贺拔岳拼力作战，打败万俟丑奴。
English: He also fought hard with He Baduyue to defeat the ugly bastard.

古文：崇与轻骑逐北，至泾州长坑及之。贼未成列，崇单骑入贼中，于马上生禽丑奴，遂大破之。
现代文：他率轻骑向北追赶敌兵，到泾州长坑赶上，敌兵没有来得及布阵，他单人独骑冲入敌群，在马上将万俟丑奴生擒活拿，把敌兵彻底消灭。
English: He led a light cavalry to the north to chase the enemy soldiers and caught up with them in the long pit. The enemy soldiers did not have time to set up their lines. He single-handedly rushed into the enemy group and immediately captured the ugly bastard alive, completely eliminating the enemy soldiers.

古文：封临泾县侯。
现代文：因功被封为泾县侯。
English: He was awarded the title of County Commissioner of Min County for his achievements.

古文：及岳为侯莫陈悦所害，崇与诸将同谋迎周文帝。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦谋害，他与诸将共同商议迎接周文帝宇文泰。
English: He Baduyue was murdered by Hou Mo Chen Yue, and he and the generals jointly discussed welcoming Zhou Wendi Yu Ventai.

古文：文帝至军，原州刺史史归犹为悦守。
现代文：宇文泰来到军中，原州刺史史归仍为侯莫陈悦守卫州城。
English: When Uwentai came to the army, Wonju Jishi Shigu was still Hou Mo Chen Yue guarding Weizhou City.

古文：周文遣崇袭归，直到城下，即据城门。
现代文：宇文泰派他攻打州城。他直接来到城下，立即占据城门。
English: Uven Tai sent him to attack the state capital. He came directly under the city and immediately occupied the city gate.

古文：时李远兄弟在城内，先知崇来，中外鼓澡，伏兵悉起，遂禽归斩之。
现代文：这时，李远兄弟也在城内，预先知道他要到来，里应外合，一起呐喊，伏兵四处突起，便活捉史归，并将他斩首。
English: At this time, Li Yuan's brothers were also in the city. They knew in advance that he was coming. They shouted together, and ambushes sprang up everywhere. They captured Shi Gui alive and beheaded him.

古文：以崇行原州事，仍从平悦，别封广武县伯。
现代文：朝廷命侯莫陈崇代理原州刺史，仍跟随宇文泰攻打侯莫陈悦，被封为广武县伯。
English: The imperial court appointed Hou Mo Chen Chong as the agent of the original state assassin, still followed Yu Wentai to attack Hou Mo Chen Yue, and was awarded the title of Guangwu County Count.

古文：累迁仪同三司，改封彭城郡公。
现代文：多次升迁，官至仪同三司，改封为彭城郡公。
English: He was promoted several times. He rose to the third division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was given the title of Pengcheng County official.

古文：从禽窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，战河又另讨平稽胡，累战皆有功，进位柱国大将军。
现代文：他随大军活捉窦泰，收复弘农，克复沙苑，争夺河桥，又讨平稽胡，屡立战功，晋位为柱国大将军。
English: With his large army, he captured Dou Tai alive, recovered Hong Nong, recovered Sha Yuan, fought for the river bridge, and fought to level Qin Hu. He repeatedly made war exploits and was promoted to the general of pillar country.

古文：六官建，拜大司空。
现代文：文官制度建立，他被封为大司空。
English: The civil service system was established, and he was given the title of Daishi Ku.

古文：周孝闵践阼，进封梁国公，加太保。
现代文：孝闵帝登基立周，封他为梁国公，加太保衔。
English: Emperor Xiaozhong ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of Liang Guogong, and the title of Jia Tai Bao.

古文：历大宗伯、大司徒。
现代文：又历任大宗伯，大司徒。
English: In addition, successive grand patriarchs, grand patriarchs.

古文：保定三年，从武帝幸原州。
现代文：保定三年，他跟随武帝到原州。
English: After three years in Baoding, he followed Emperor Wu to Wonju.

古文：时帝夜还京师，窃怪其故。
现代文：这时武帝夜晚赶回京师，人们都私下议论，感到很奇怪。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu rushed back to Beijing in the evening, and people were talking in private, feeling very strange.

古文：崇谓所亲人常升曰： 吾比日闻卜筮者言，晋公今年不利，车驾今忽夜还，不过是晋公死耳。 
现代文：侯莫陈崇对他所亲近的人常升说 ：我前几日听占卜的人说，晋公宇文护今年有灾殃。天子今天忽然连夜回京，不过是处死宇文护罢了。 
English: Hou Mo Chen Chong said to his close friend Chang Sheng, "I heard a few days ago that a soothsayer said that there would be a calamity for Jin Gong Uwengu this year. The heavenly son suddenly returned to Beijing overnight today, but only to execute Uwengu.

古文：于是皆传之。
现代文：于是，人们纷纷互相传说。
English: As a result, people began to tell each other stories.

古文：或有发其事者，帝集诸公卿于大德殿责崇，崇惶惧谢罪。
现代文：有人告发其事，武帝在大德殿召集所有的公卿大臣斥责他，他惶恐畏惧，连声谢罪。
English: Someone reported the matter, and Emperor Wu summoned all the nobles and ministers to Daede Hall to reprimand him. He was so frightened that he even apologized.

古文：其夜，护遣使将兵就崇宅，逼令自杀。
现代文：这天夜里，宇文护派兵到他家里，逼迫他自杀。
English: That night, Uwen Rong sent soldiers to his home to force him to commit suicide.

古文：葬礼如常仪，谥曰躁。
现代文：葬礼按照正常的礼仪，谥号为躁。
English: The funeral was conducted in accordance with normal etiquette.

古文：赠使持节、太保、同华等二十州诸军事、同州刺史，谥曰忠。
现代文：宇文护被诛杀，又给他改谥号为庄闵。王谦，字赦万，太原人。父亲王雄，因功被封为柱国大将军，晋爵为武威郡公。去世后谥号为忠。
English: Wu Wenguo was beaten to death, and his posthumous name was changed to Zhuangzhuang. Wang Qian, the Chinese character for forgiveness, was from Taiyuan. His father, Wang Xiong, was awarded the title of General of Zhuang Province and the title of Duke of Wuwei County for his achievements. After his death, his posthumous name was Zhong.

古文：子谦。谦字敕万，性恭谨，无他才能，以父功封安乐县伯。
现代文：王谦性情恭顺谨慎，没有突出的才能。因为父亲的功劳被封为安乐县伯。
English: Wang Qian was obedient and cautious, with no outstanding talent. Because of his father's merits, he was awarded the title of Anle County magistrate.

古文：保定二年，父雄封庸国公，以武威郡公回封谦，安乐伯回封第三弟震。
现代文：保定二年，他的父亲王雄被封为庸国公，把武威郡公的爵号回封给他，他的安乐县伯回封给三弟王震。
English: In the second year of Baoding, his father Wang Xiong was named Yang Guogong, and the title of the Duke of Wuwei County was given back to him, and his Anle County was given back to his third brother Wang Zhen.

古文：雄死，朝议以谦父殒行阵，特加殊宠，授柱国大将军，袭爵庸国公。
现代文：王雄战死，朝廷议论认为他的父亲死在战场上，应特加封赏。于是，命他为柱国大将军，继承庸国公的封爵。
English: Wang Xiong died in battle, and the imperial court argued that his father died on the battlefield and should be specially rewarded. Therefore, he was appointed as the general of Zhu Guoda, inheriting the knighthood of Yang Guoguang.

古文：建德五年，武帝东征，谦力战，进位上柱国。
现代文：建德五年，武帝东征，王谦随从，率军奋力作战，被晋封为上柱国。
English: In the five years of Jiande, Emperor Wu's Eastern Expedition, Wang Qian followed, led the army to fight hard, and was promoted to the top pillar country.

古文：六年，授益州总管十八州诸军事。
现代文：建德六年，朝廷命他为益州总管、十八州诸军事。
English: In the sixth year of Jiande, the imperial court appointed him as the chief administrator of Yizhou and the military of eighteen states.

古文：及宣帝崩，隋文帝辅政，以梁睿为益州总管。
现代文：周宣帝驾崩，隋文帝杨坚辅助朝政，派梁睿任益州总管。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhou Xuan, Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty assisted the imperial government and appointed Liang Rui as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：时谦使司录贺若昂奉表诣阙。
现代文：这时，他派司录贺若昂奉奏书到达京城。
English: At this time, he sent his secretary, He Ruoang, to Beijing to deliver the book.

古文：昂还，具陈京师事。
现代文：贺若昂回来后，详细陈述京城中的情况。
English: After returning, Herao Aung gave a detailed account of the situation in Beijing.

古文：谦以父子受国恩，将图匡复，遂举兵，署置官司。
现代文：王谦因父子同受北周的恩惠，不满意杨氏专政，想图谋匡扶社稷，便兴兵起事。
English: Wang Qian was dissatisfied with Yang's dictatorship because both he and his son were favored by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and he wanted to conspire to support the socialists, so he raised an army.

古文：总管长史乙弗虔、益州刺史达奚惎劝谦凭险观变。
现代文：自己设置官署，总管长史乙弗虔、益州刺史达奚其心劝他凭借蜀地的险要，坚守以观时变。
English: He set up his own government office, and the chief administrators, Shi Yifuqian and Yizhou Zhi Shida, advised him to rely on the strategic location of Shu and adhere to the principle of observing changes in time.

古文：隆州刺史高阿那肱为谦画三策曰： 公亲率精锐，直指散关，蜀人知公有勤王之节，必当各思效命，此上策也；出兵梁、汉，以顾望天下，此中策也；坐守剑南，发兵自卫，此下策也。 
现代文：隆州刺史高阿那肱为他筹划三策，说 ：你亲自率领精锐部队，直捣散关，蜀人知道你有勤王的义举，一定争相效命，这是上策；出兵进向梁、汉，以观望天下，这是中策；坐守剑南，拥兵自卫，这是下策。 
English: Gao Ananyan, the Longzhou scribe, planned three strategies for him, saying: You personally lead the elite troops, directly attack and disperse the Guan, the Shu people know that you have a good deed of loyalty to the king, and must compete with each other to succeed, this is the best strategy; send troops to Liang and Han to watch the world, this is the middle strategy; guard the south of Jian, support the soldiers to defend themselves, this is the next strategy.

古文：谦参用其中下之策。
现代文：王谦采用了他的中策和下策。
English: Wang Qian adopted his middle and lower strategies.

古文：梁睿未至大剑，谦先遣兵镇始州。
现代文：梁睿还没有来到大剑，王谦先派兵镇守始州。
English: Liang Rui had not yet arrived in Dagian when Wang Qian first sent soldiers to defend Shizhou.

古文：隋文帝即以睿为行军元帅，便发利、凤、文、秦、成诸州兵讨之。
现代文：杨坚便命梁睿为行军元帅，征调利州、凤州、文州、秦州、成州等州的兵马讨伐。
English: Yang Jian then ordered Liang Rui to be the marching marshal, and sent soldiers and horses to fight in Lizhou, Fengzhou, Wenzhou, Qinzhou, Chengzhou and other states.

古文：谦所署柱国达奚惎、高阿那肱、大将军乙弗虔、杨安、任峻、侯翕、景孱等众号十万，尽锐攻利州，总管、楚国公豆卢勣拒战将四旬。
现代文：王谦任命的柱国达奚其心、高阿那肱、大将军乙弗虔、杨安、任峻、侯翕、景孱等率众号称十万，猛烈攻打别州，北周总管、楚国公豆卢责力坚守将近四十天。
English: The pillar states appointed by Wang Qian, including Dazhong Qixin, Gao Ananyuan, General Yifu Qian, Yang An, Ren Jun, Hou Qi, and Jing Qi, led by the famous 100,000, fiercely attacked other states, and the head of the Northern Zhou, and the public bean of Chu, Lu Wei, held out for nearly forty days.

古文：惎等诸军闻睿将至，众遂溃。
现代文：达奚其心等人听说梁睿率军即将到来，便溃退而去。
English: After hearing that Liang Rui and his army were about to arrive, Dazhong Qixin and others retreated.

古文：谦所署大将军苻子英攻巴州，又为刺史吕珍所破。
现代文：王谦任命的大将军苻子英进攻巴州，又被刺史吕珍打败。
English: The general Zou Ziying, who was appointed by Wang Qian, attacked Bazhou and was defeated by the assassin Shi Ruzhen.

古文：睿乘其弊，纵兵深入。
现代文：梁睿乘机纵兵深入。
English: Liang Rui took the opportunity to go deeper.

古文：棋、虔密遣使诣睿，请为内应以赎罪。
现代文：达奚其心、乙弗虔派人秘密到梁睿那里，请求作为内应以将功折罪。
English: In desperation, Yifu Qian secretly sent someone to Liang Rui to ask him to take the blame.

古文：谦不知惎、虔之反己也，并令守成都。
现代文：王谦不知道他们已经背叛自己，仍让他们一起守卫成都。
English: Wang Qian did not know that they had betrayed themselves, but still let them guard Chengdu together.

古文：谦先无筹略，且所任用多非其才，及闻睿兵奄至，惶惧计无所出，乃自率众逆战，又以惎、虔之子为左右军。
现代文：王谦本无谋略，而且任用的人也多非其才，一听说梁睿率大军到来，一个个惶恐不安，毫无办法。他只有亲自率军作战，命达奚其心、乙弗虔为左右军。
English: Wang Qian did not have a strategy, and the people he appointed were mostly not very talented. When he heard that Liang Rui had arrived with a large army, everyone panicked and was helpless. He had to lead the army in battle himself, his life was in his heart, and Yifu Qian was the left and right army.

古文：行数十里，左右军皆叛，谦奔新都，县令王宝执而斩之，傅首京师。
现代文：行进数十里，左右军都发生叛变。他率余部奔往新都，县令王宝将他捉拿并杀死，将头送到京城。
English: After marching dozens of miles, both the left and right armies mutinied. He led the rest of the army to the new capital, where he was captured and killed by the county magistrate Wang Bao, who sent him to the capital.

古文：惎、虔以成都降。
现代文：达奚其心、乙弗虔献出成都投降周军。
English: With a heavy heart, Yifu Qian surrendered Chengdu to the Zhou army.

古文：隋文帝以惎、虔首谋，令杀之于蜀市。
现代文：杨坚认为他们都是首谋，命在蜀地街市将他们杀死。
English: Yang Jian believed that they were the masterminds and ordered to kill them in Shu Di Street Market.

古文：余众并散。
现代文：其余部众都被解散。
English: The rest of the congregation was dismissed.

古文：阿那肱寻亦被诛。
现代文：高阿那肱不久也被诛杀。
English: Gao Anaxun was also killed soon after.

