古文：孝武皇帝，景帝中子也，母曰王美人。年四岁立为胶东王。
现代文：孝武皇帝刘彻，是景帝的次子。母亲是王美人，四岁的时候被立为胶东王。
English: Emperor Xiaowu, Liu Che, was the second son of Emperor Jing. His mother was Wang Bijin. At the age of four, he was made the King of Jiaodong.

古文：七岁为皇太子，母为皇后。
现代文：七岁被立为皇太子，其母被立为皇后。
English: At the age of seven, he was made crown prince, and his mother was made empress.

古文：十六岁，后三年正月，景帝崩。
现代文：十六岁，景帝后三年正月，景帝驾崩。
English: At the age of sixteen, in the first month of the third year after Emperor Jing, Emperor Jing passed away.

古文：甲子，太子即皇帝位，尊皇太后窦氏曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：正月二十七日，太子继皇帝位，尊皇太后窦氏为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, the prince succeeded the emperor, the revered empress dowager Dou became the great empress dowager, and the empress became the empress dowager.

古文：三月，封皇太后同母弟田蚡、胜皆为列侯。
现代文：三月，封皇太后同母弟田虫分、田胜均为列侯。
English: In March, the empress dowager's maternal half-brothers, Tanimushibun and Tasho, were made princes.

古文：建元元年冬十月，诏丞相、御史、列侯、中二千石、二千石、诸侯相举贤良方正直言极谏之士。
现代文：建元元年冬十月，诏令丞相、御史、列侯、中二千石、二千石、诸侯相国推举贤良方正直言极谏之人。
English: In the winter and October of the first year of the Jianyuan era, the Emperor issued an edict to the chancellor, the minister of history, the vassals, the vassals of 2,000 koku, the vassals of 2,000 koku, and the vassals of the vassals of 2,000 koku, and the vassals of the vassals of 2,000 koku.

古文：丞相绾奏： 所举贤良，或治申、商、韩非、苏秦、张仪之言，乱国政，请皆罢。 
现代文：丞相卫绾上奏： 所推举贤良，若是陈说申不害、商鞅、韩非、苏秦、张仪的言论，淆乱国政，请一律罢去。 
English: Vice-Minister of the Central Military Commission: The candidates are all good, but if Chen says that Shen is not harmful, or if the speeches of Shang Hui, Han Fei, Su Qin, and Zhang Yi are confusing and disrupting national politics, please dismiss them all.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇上同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：春二月，赦天下。赐民爵一级。
现代文：春二月，赦天下，赏赐人民爵一级。
English: In the spring of February, he was pardoned and awarded a first-class people's peerage.

古文：年八十复二算，九十复甲卒。
现代文：对年满八十岁的免除全家二口人的赋税，年满九十的免除全家甲卒一一一革车之赋。
English: Two members of a family over the age of 80 will be exempt from paying taxes, and those over the age of 90 will be exempt from paying taxes.

古文：行三铢钱。
现代文：发行三铢钱。
English: Issuance of three yuan coins.

古文：夏四月己巳，诏曰： 古之立孝，乡里以齿，朝廷以爵，扶世导民，莫善于德。
现代文：建元元年夏季四月初九日，下诏说： 按照古代立的规矩，乡里以年纪为尊，朝廷以爵位为重，治国教民，要把德行置于显著地位。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month in the summer of the first year of Jianyuan, the following edict was issued: In accordance with the rules established in ancient times, the countryside should respect seniority, the imperial court should place importance on peerage, and the government and the people should place virtue in a prominent position.

古文：然即于乡里先耆艾，奉高年，古之道也。
现代文：可以说在乡里注重尊重长者，奉养高年，这是自古以来的道理。
English: It can be said that in the countryside, people pay attention to respecting the elderly and nurturing the elderly, which has been a principle since ancient times.

古文：今天下孝子、顺孙愿自竭尽以承其亲，外迫公事，内乏资财，是以孝心阙焉，朕甚哀之。
现代文：今日天下的孝子顺孙愿意尽心尽力以赡养自己的长辈，然而，外迫于公事，内乏于资财，因此显得好像孝心缺失了，朕深为同情。
English: Today, the filial sons and daughters of the world are willing to do their best to support their elders, however, they are forced to work outside and lack resources inside, so it seems that filial piety is missing, I deeply sympathize.

古文：民年九十以上，已有受鬻法，为复子若孙，令得身帅妻妾遂其供养之事。 
现代文：百姓年届九旬以上，朝廷已有给米粟做粥饭的制度。现增加免除其子或其孙的徭役，使得他们可以带领妻子履行其供养老人之责。 
English: The Imperial Court already has a system for making rice porridge for people over ninety years old. Now, it is increasing the exemption of their sons or grandsons from serving, so that they can lead their wives to fulfill their responsibility of providing for the elderly.

古文：五月，诏曰： 河海润千里。其令祠官修山川之祠，为岁事，曲加礼。 
现代文：五月，下诏说： 河海润泽千里，可令祠官修建山川之祠，祭祀岁以为常，祭礼也要有所加益。 
English: In May, the following edict was issued: The rivers and seas have been softened by thousands of miles, and ancestral hall officials can be ordered to build ancestral halls in mountains and rivers.

古文：赦吴、楚七国帑输在官者。
现代文：赦免七国之乱中其首犯妻子没入为官家奴婢的罪，予以遣返。
English: He pardoned his wife, who was the first offender in the Seven Kingdoms War, for the crime of being a servant of the government, and repatriated her.

古文：秋七月，诏曰： 卫士转置送迎二万人，其省万人。
现代文：秋七月，下诏说： 宫廷卫士去故置新常达二万人，省去万人。
English: In the autumn of July, the following edict was issued: The number of palace guards to be transferred to new posts will be increased to 20,000, and 10,000 people will be saved.

古文：罢苑马，以赐贫民。 
现代文：开放朝廷养马之苑，以赐贫民放牧采樵。 
English: The imperial horse-breeding farm was opened to give the poor an opportunity to graze and harvest horses.

古文：议立明堂。
现代文：议定建立帝王宣明政教的明堂。
English: They agreed to establish Emperor Xuanming's Ming Hall for politics and religion.

古文：遣使者安车蒲轮，束帛加璧，征鲁申公。
现代文：派遣使者用安稳舒适的车辆奉布帛与宝玉征召鲁申公。
English: Send an envoy to summon Rushen using a safe and comfortable vehicle.

古文：二年冬十月，御史大夫赵绾坐请毋奏事太皇太后，及郎中令王臧皆下狱，自杀。
现代文：二年冬十月，御史大夫赵绾犯 请不向太皇太后奏事 之罪，与郎中令王臧都下狱，自杀。
English: In October of the winter of the second year, the imperial historian Zhao Jun committed the crime of not reporting to the Grand Empress Dowager, and he and his brother-in-law Wang Xi both went to prison and committed suicide.

古文：丞相婴、太尉蚡免。
现代文：丞相窦婴、太尉田虫分被免职。
English: Vice-Minister Dou Yu and Second-Lieutenant Tian Shubun were dismissed.

古文：春二月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。夏四月戊申，有如日夜出。
现代文：春二月初一，日偏食。夏四月二十四日，黑夜如同白昼。
English: On the first day of the second month of spring, there is a partial solar eclipse, and on the 24th day of the 4th month of summer, the night is as bright as day.

古文：初置茂陵邑。
现代文：开始设置茂陵邑。
English: The establishment of Morye-eup began.

古文：三年春，河水溢于平原，大饥，人相食。
现代文：三年春，黄河水泛滥于平原，大饥，人相食。
English: In the spring of the third year, the Yellow River flooded the plains, causing great famine and cannibalism.

古文：赐徙茂陵者户钱二十万，田二顷。
现代文：赐迁移到茂陵的住户钱二十万、田二顷。
English: The residents who moved to Muryeong were given 200,000 yuan and two hectares of land.

古文：初作便门桥。
现代文：修建从长安跨渭水到茂陵的便门桥。
English: Construction of the Benmen Bridge from Chang'an across Surabaya to Muling.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于西北。
现代文：秋七月，有彗星出现于西北。
English: In July, the comet appeared in the northwest.

古文：济川王明坐杀太傅、中傅废迁防陵。
现代文：济川王刘明犯了杀太傅、中傅之罪被废，迁徙到防陵。
English: Liu Ming, the king of Jichuan, was dethroned for the crime of killing Taifu and Zhongfu, and was moved to the tomb.

古文：未至，闽越走，兵还。九月丙子晦，日有蚀之。四年夏，有风赤如血。
现代文：闽越兵围困东瓯，东瓯向汉廷告急，皇上派中大夫严助持令征调驻会稽军，浮海以救东瓯。兵未到，闽越退走。九月二日，日偏食。四年夏，有风卷起滚滚红尘其色如血。
English: On September 2, a partial solar eclipse occurred. In the summer of the fourth year, a wind rolled up red dust, the color of which was like blood.

古文：六月，旱。秋九月，有星孛于东北。
现代文：六月，大旱，秋九月，彗星在东北方出现。
English: In June, the drought, autumn and September, the comet appeared in the northeast.

古文：五年春，罢三铢钱，行半两钱。
现代文：五年春，废三铢钱，发行半两钱。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the three-baht coin was scrapped and the half-two-baht coin was issued.

古文：置《五经》博士。
现代文：设置《五经》博士。
English: Set up the "Five Classics" PhD.

古文：夏四月，平原君薨。
现代文：夏四月，皇帝外祖母平原君去世。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor's grandmother, Pingyuan, passed away.

古文：五月，大蝗。
现代文：五月，发生大的蝗灾。
English: In May, a large locust plague occurred.

古文：秋八月，广川王越、清河王乘皆薨。
现代文：秋八月，广川王刘越、清河王刘乘皆去世。
English: In autumn and August, Liu Yue, the king of Guangchuan, and Liu Rong, the king of Qinghe, both died.

古文：六年春二月乙未，辽东高庙灾。
现代文：六年春二月初三日，辽东高祖庙火灾。
English: On the third day of early February in the spring of the sixth year, the fire broke out in the ancestral temple of Liaodong University.

古文：夏四月壬子，高园便殿火。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，高园便殿失火。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of summer, the toilet hall of Gaoyuan High School caught fire.

古文：上素服五日。
现代文：皇上着素服五日自责。
English: The emperor scolded himself for wearing plain clothes for five days.

古文：五月丁亥，太皇太后崩。
现代文：五月二十六日，太皇太后去世。
English: On May 26, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：秋八月，有星孛于东方，长竟天。
现代文：秋八月，彗星出现于东方，时长竟天。
English: In autumn and August, the comet appeared in the east, and it lasted for a long time.

古文：闽越王郢攻南越。遣大行王恢将兵出豫章、大司农韩安国出会稽击之，未至，越人杀郢降，兵还。
现代文：闽越王郢攻南越，朝廷派大行王恢领兵出豫章、大司农韩安国领兵出会稽，准备还击。兵未到，越人杀郢投降，王、韩等收兵回。
English: When the Vietcong attacked South Vietnam, the imperial court sent the Grand Marshal Wang Hui to lead the troops out of Yuzhang, and the Chief of the General Staff of the People's Commissariat of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Han An to lead the troops to meet the enemy and prepare to fight back. Before the soldiers arrived, the Vietcong killed and surrendered, and the king, Han and others withdrew.

古文：元光元年冬十一月，初令郡国举孝廉各一人。
现代文：元光元年冬十一月，开始令郡国推举孝廉各一人。
English: In the winter of November of the first year of the Genko era, the prefectural government began to nominate one person each to succeed Takamori.

古文：卫尉李广为骁骑将军屯云中，中尉程不识为车骑将军屯雁门，六月罢。
现代文：卫尉李广为骁骑将军屯兵云中，中尉程不识为车骑将军屯兵雁门，六月收兵。
English: Guardsman Li Guang was a cavalry general stationed in Yunzhong, and Lieutenant Cheng was a cavalry general stationed in Yanmen. They were both conscripted in June.

古文：夏四月，赦天下，赐民长子爵一级。复七国宗室前绝属者。
现代文：夏四月，赦天下，赏赐民长子爵一级，恢复七国宗室因受七国反之罪而绝属的族籍。
English: In the summer of April, he pardoned the whole world, awarded the first rank of viscount to the chief of the people, and restored the nationality of the ancestral family of the seven countries because of the crime of the seven countries.

古文：五月，诏贤良曰： 朕闻昔在唐、虞，画像而民不犯，日月所烛，莫不率俾。
现代文：五月，诏贤良说： 朕听说昔日唐虞之世，只用罪衣以象征五刑而民不能犯法律，日月所照，莫不臣服。
English: In May, Zhao Xianliang said, "I heard that in the past Tang and Yu dynasties, people could not break the law, but only used the sin garment to symbolize the five punishments.

古文：周之成、康，刑错不用，德及鸟兽，教通四海，海外肃慎，北发渠搜，氐羌徠服；星辰不孛，日月不蚀，山陵不崩，川谷不塞；麟、凤在郊薮，河、洛出图书。
现代文：周朝成王康王时代，刑律放置不用，盛德及于鸟兽，教化通行四海。海外肃慎来朝，北方渠搜供役，氐羌归服；星辰无彗，日月不蚀，山陵不崩，川谷不塞；麒麟凤凰游于郊野，黄河洛水涌现图书。
English: In the era of King Kang of the Zhou Dynasty, the criminal law was not used, virtue prevailed in birds and beasts, and enlightenment spread to the four seas. Overseas prudence came to the DPRK, the northern canal was searched for service, and it was returned to service; the stars had no comets, the sun and the moon did not eclipse, the mountains did not collapse, and the valleys were not blocked; the Kirin phoenix swam in the countryside, and the Yellow River was flooded with books.

古文：呜乎，何施而臻此与！
现代文：呵呵！普施德泽才能出现如此的盛世啊！
English: Hehe! It took a Przedec to create such a prosperous world!

古文：今朕获奉宗庙，夙兴以求，夜寐以思，若涉渊水，未知所济。
现代文：今朕有幸继承大统，早起以求，静夜以思，若望洋兴叹，不知怎样才能达到彼岸。
English: Now I have the privilege of inheriting the great tradition, getting up early to seek, thinking quietly at night, looking at the ocean and sighing, I don't know how to reach the other side.

古文：猗与伟与！
现代文：美好啊！伟大啊！
English: It's beautiful! It's great!

古文：何行而可以章先帝之洪业休德，上参尧、舜，下配三王！
现代文：通过那些行动而发扬光大先帝的大业与美德，以上参尧舜，下配三王。
English: Through those actions and carry forward the great cause and virtue of the great forefathers, the above-mentioned three kings and the following three kings.

古文：朕之不敏，不能远德，此子大夫之所睹闻也，贤良明于古今王事之体，受策察问，咸以书对，著之于篇，朕亲览焉。 
现代文：朕禀性愚钝，德不能及远，这是各位大夫所熟知的。贤良之士明了古今王事的兴衰，受策察问，都请用文字写好，编辑成册，让朕阅览。 
English: It is well known to all doctors that I am stubborn and stupid, and that virtue cannot be far away. Wise men understand the rise and fall of ancient and modern kings, and when they are questioned, please write it down in writing, edit it into a book, and let me read it.

古文：于是董仲舒、公孙弘等出焉。
现代文：于是董仲舒、公孙弘等脱颖而出了。
English: As a result, Dong Zhongshu, Gongsun Hong and others stood out.

古文：秋七月癸未，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月三十日，日偏食。
English: A partial solar eclipse will occur on the 30th of July.

古文：二年冬十月，行幸雍，祠五畴。
现代文：二年冬十月，皇上到雍地，祠祀五帝。
English: In October of the winter of the second year, the emperor went to Yongdi, and the ancestral hall enshrined five emperors.

古文：春，诏问公卿曰： 朕饰子女以配单于，金币文绣赂之甚厚，单于待命加曼，侵盗亡已。
现代文：春，下诏问公卿说： 朕曾装饰美女以配匈奴单于，金币文绣赏赐甚厚，而单于承诏之后表现傲慢，侵掠不已。
English: In the spring, he asked the court noble: "I once decorated a beautiful woman to match the Xiongnu single, and the gold coin embroidery was highly rewarded, but after the signing of the edict, the single showed arrogance and plundered.

古文：边境被害，朕甚闵之。
现代文：边境被害，朕深感不安。
English: I am deeply disturbed by the border damage.

古文：今欲举兵攻之，何如？ 
现代文：今想发兵攻讨，众卿以为如何？ 
English: Now you want to send troops to attack, what do you think?

古文：大行王恢建议宜击。
现代文：大行王恢建议应该出击。
English: Da Xing Wang Wei suggested that they should attack.

古文：夏六月，御史大夫韩安国为护军将军，卫尉李广为骁骑将军，太仆公孙贺为轻车将军，大行王恢为将屯将军，太中大夫李息为材官将军，将三十万众屯马邑谷中，诱致单于，欲袭击之。
现代文：夏六月，御史大夫韩安国为护军将军，卫尉李广为骁骑将军，大仆公孙贺为轻车将军，大行王恢为将屯将军，大中大夫李息为材官将军，将三十万众屯马邑谷中，想引诱单于进塞，出其不意地发起攻击。
English: In the summer of June, Grand Historian Han An Guo was the escort general, Guard Lieutenant Li Guang was the cavalry general, Great Servant Gong Sun He was the light vehicle general, Da Xing Wang Wei was the general of the general camp, and Senior Middle School Teacher Li Xi was the general of the material officer. They wanted to lure 300,000 people into the valley and launch a surprise attack.

古文：单于入塞，觉之，走出。
现代文：单于入塞后，发觉有异立即退出。
English: After plugging in, if any abnormalities are found, immediately exit.

古文：六月，军罢。
现代文：六月，收兵。
English: In June, the troops were withdrawn.

古文：将军王恢坐首谋不进，下狱死。
现代文：将军王恢犯了 首谋不进 之罪，下狱而死。
English: General Wang Hui committed the crime of being the ringleader of the plot and died in prison.

古文：秋九月，令民大酺五日。
现代文：秋九月，下令全国饮酒五日以慰农。
English: In autumn and September, he ordered the whole country to drink alcohol for five days to comfort farmers.

古文：三年春，河水徙，从顿丘东南流入勃海。
现代文：三年春，黄河道迁移，从顿丘东南流入渤海。
English: In the spring of the third year, the Yellow River migrated and flowed into the Bohai Sea from the southeast of Dongqiu.

古文：夏五月，封高祖功臣五人后为列侯。
现代文：夏五月，封高祖功臣五人后为列侯。
English: In the summer of May, the last five meritorious vassals of Gao Zu were made lords.

古文：河水决濮阳，泛郡十六。发卒十万救决河。起龙渊宫。
现代文：黄河在濮阳决口，淹没达十六郡，调士卒十万堵口救灾，起龙渊宫。
English: At the mouth of the Yellow River in Fenyang, up to 16 counties were flooded, and the adjuster sent 100,000 people to the mouth for disaster relief, and the Longyuan Palace was built.

古文：四年冬，魏其侯窦婴有罪，弃市。
现代文：四年冬，魏其侯窦婴有罪，被诛悬首示众。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, Wei Qihou Dou Ying was found guilty and was publicly beheaded.

古文：春三月乙卯，丞相蚡薨。
现代文：春三月十七日，丞相虫分去世。
English: On the 17th day of the third month in the spring, Prime Minister Mushibu passed away.

古文：夏四月，陨霜杀草。
现代文：夏四月，严霜冻坏庄稼。
English: In the summer of April, severe frost damaged crops.

古文：五月，地震。赦天下。
现代文：五月，地震，赦天下。
English: In May, an earthquake shook the world.

古文：五年春正月，河间王德薨。
现代文：五年春正月，河间王德去世。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Spring, Kawama Wangde passed away.

古文：夏，发巴、蜀治南夷道。又发卒万人治雁门阻险。
现代文：夏，征发巴蜀徭役修建南夷大道，又调动士卒万人修建雁门关隘。
English: In the summer, Ba Shuxuan was conscripted to build Nanyi Avenue, and tens of thousands of soldiers were mobilized to build the Yanmen Pass.

古文：秋七月，大风拔木。
现代文：秋七月，大风拔树。
English: In autumn and July, trees are uprooted by high winds.

古文：乙巳，皇后陈氏废。捕为巫蛊者，皆枭首。
现代文：七月十四日，皇后陈氏被废，逮捕煽惑人心扰乱朝纲的巫蛊，都斩首。
English: On July 14, Empress Chen was dethroned, and the Wusong who had been arrested for inciting the people and disturbing the imperial order were all beheaded.

古文：八月，螟。
现代文：八月，螟灾。
English: In August, disaster relief began.

古文：征吏民有明当世之务、习先圣之术者，县次续食，令与计偕。
现代文：征召吏民中有明白当时之务、深懂先圣之术的人到京都对策，沿途乡县供应饮食费用。
English: Among the officials and commoners who were conscripted, there were those who understood the current affairs and had a deep understanding of the ancient sacred art, and they went to Kyoto to make countermeasures, and the townships and counties along the way supplied the cost of meals.

古文：六年冬，初算商车。
现代文：令各郡国上簿计使作为他们来京的领队。六年冬，开始向商贾车船征税。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, he began to collect taxes from merchants, wagons and ships.

古文：春，穿漕渠通渭。
现代文：春，开凿运粮的漕渠通于渭水。
English: In the spring, a canal was dug to transport grain to Surabaya.

古文：匈奴入上谷，杀略吏民。遣车骑将军卫青出上谷，骑将军公孙敖出代，轻车将军公孙贺出云中，骁骑将军李广出雁门。
现代文：匈奴侵入上谷掠杀百姓，皇上派车骑将军卫青兵出上谷，骑将军公孙敖兵出代，轻骑将军公孙贺出云中，骁骑将军李广出雁门。
English: The Xiongnu invaded the upper valley and plundered the people. The emperor sent a car to ride the general guards and young soldiers out of the upper valley, the riding general Gongsun He to ride the soldiers, the light riding general Gongsun He to ride out of the clouds, and the riding general Li Guang to ride out of the wild goose gate.

古文：青至龙城，获首虏七百级。
现代文：卫青至龙城，斩获敌人七百首级。
English: From Weiqing to Longcheng, he captured 700 enemy heads.

古文：广、敖失师而还。
现代文：公孙敖与李广因指挥失误战败而归。
English: Gongsun Yao and Li Guang were defeated due to command errors.

古文：诏曰： 夷狄无义，所从来久。间者匈奴数寇边境，故遣将抚师。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 夷狄背信弃义，由来已久，往日匈奴多次侵犯边境，所以派遣将领指挥前线将士迎敌，古代兵法是出则治兵，入则振旅。
English: The Emperor's edict said: It has been a long time since the barbarians betrayed their faith and abandoned righteousness. In the past, the Xiongnu repeatedly violated the border, so they sent generals to command the front line soldiers to meet the enemy. The ancient method of warfare is to go out for war and to go in for war.

古文：古者治兵振旅，因遭虏之方入，将吏新会，上下未辑。代郡将军敖、雁门将军广所任不肖，校尉又背义妄行，弃军而北，少吏犯禁。
现代文：此次出兵，因匈奴突然入侵，我军将士新会，上下尚不协调，而兵出代郡的将军公孙敖、兵出雁门的将军李广的部属素质低劣，校尉又违命盲动，以致弃军而逃，小吏犯禁。
English: Due to the sudden invasion of the Huns, there was no coordination between the upper and lower echelons of the new association of soldiers and officers of our army, and the subordinates of the general Gong Sun Yat, who sent soldiers to represent the county, and the general Li Guang, who sent soldiers to the wild goose gate, were of inferior quality. The captain also violated orders and moved blindly, so that he abandoned the army and fled, and minor officials were banned.

古文：用兵之法：不勤不教，将率之过也；教令宣明，不能尽力，士卒之罪也。
现代文：用兵之法，不重视加强战备与提高士气，是主将的过失；在已经三令五申，而不能尽力作战，是士卒的罪过。
English: It is the fault of the commander-in-chief not to attach importance to strengthening combat readiness and improving morale; it is the fault of the soldiers not to be able to fight to the best of their ability after being ordered to do so.

古文：将军已下廷尉，使理正之，而又加法于士卒，二者并行，非仁圣之心。
现代文：将军已交付廷尉，按法论罪，如果对一般士卒也要绳以军法，使将军与士卒并罚，那就不是仁圣之心。
English: The general has been handed over to a courtier to be tried according to the law. If the general and the general's soldiers are also punished according to the military law, it is not a merciful heart.

古文：朕闵众庶陷害，欲刷耻改行，复奉正义，厥路亡由。
现代文：朕同情普通士卒受到牵连，要是他们想立功赎罪、重新杀敌卫国，也就没有条件和机会了。
English: I sympathize with the ordinary people who are implicated. If they want to make meritorious deeds to atone for their sins and re-slay the enemy and defend the country, they will have no conditions and opportunities.

古文：其赦雁门、代郡军士不循法者。 
现代文：因此赦免雁门、代郡两军中的犯有一般违纪错误的士卒。 
English: Therefore, he pardoned the soldiers of the two armies of the Wild Goose Gate and the Substitute County who committed general violations of discipline.

古文：夏，大旱，蝗。
现代文：夏，发生大旱灾，发生蝗灾。
English: In summer, droughts and locust plagues occur.

古文：六月，行幸雍。
现代文：六月，巡幸雍地。
English: In June, they toured the highlands.

古文：秋，匈奴盗边。遣将军韩安国屯渔阳。
现代文：秋，匈奴盗掠边境，皇上派将军韩安国屯兵渔阳。
English: In autumn, the Xiongnu plundered the border, and the emperor sent a general to Han'an to garrison Yuyang.

古文：元朔元年冬十一月，诏曰： 公卿大夫，所使总方略，壹统类，广教化，美风俗也。
现代文：朔元年冬十一月，下诏说： 公卿大夫，其任务是制定方针战略，统一行动措施，宣传朝廷德政，转变社会风气。
English: In the winter of November of the first year of the Shuo era, the following edict said: "Dr. Gongqing, your task is to formulate policies and strategies, unify actions and measures, propagandize the imperial politics, and transform the social ethos.

古文：夫本仁祖义，褒德禄贤，劝善刑暴，五帝、三王所由昌也。
现代文：而以仁义为基准，来褒扬有德之士，启用贤良之材，激扬从善之风，惩治不法之徙，这是五帝三王之所以昌盛的经验。
English: And taking benevolence and righteousness as the benchmark, praising virtuous people, using virtuous people, inspiring good manners, and punishing illegal migration, this is the experience of the Five Emperors and Three Kings.

古文：朕夙兴夜寐，嘉与宇内之士臻于斯路。
现代文：朕朝思暮想希望和天下有志之士共同走上这条康庄大道。
English: I hope to walk this Kangzhuang Avenue with the world's aspirants.

古文：故旅耆老，复孝敬，选豪俊，讲文学，稽参政事，祈进民心，深诏执事，兴廉举孝，庶几成风，绍休圣绪。
现代文：所以加惠耆老，优待孝弟，选拔豪俊，讲习文学，共商建国大计，祈求能符民望，多次诏令主事官员，提倡并推举孝廉，以至蔚为风气，以继承五帝三王的美业。
English: Therefore, it is the custom to give preferential treatment to the elderly, treat the filial brothers favorably, select the heroic young men, study literature, discuss the grand plan for the founding of the country, pray that they can live up to the people's expectations, repeatedly appoint the leading officials, advocate and promote the filial children, and so on, so as to inherit the five emperors and three kings.

古文：夫十室之邑，必有忠信；三人并行，厥有我师。
现代文：在十室之邑，必有忠信；三人并行，必有我师。
English: In a city of ten mansions, there must be loyalty; three abreast, there must be my teacher.

古文：今或至阖郡而不荐一人，是化不下究，而积行之君子雍于上闻也。
现代文：而今日全郡之中竟无一贤良上荐于朝廷，这是朝廷的教化没有进行深入地贯彻，而具有孝廉之贤的君子行谊就被埋没了。
English: Today, not a single virtuous person in the county has been recommended to the imperial court. This is because the imperial court did not carry out in-depth indoctrination, and the virtuous gentlemanly conduct of filial piety was buried.

古文：二千石官长纪纲人伦，将何以佐朕烛幽隐，劝元元，厉蒸庶，崇乡党之训哉？
现代文：二千石官是主管诏令推行与人才推举的，如此将何以辅佐朕以了解下情，关心百姓，激励众民，树立尊老重贤的社会风气呢？
English: The 2,000-koku official is responsible for the implementation of the edict and the selection of talents, so how will he assist us to understand the situation, care about the people, inspire the people, and establish a social ethos of respect for the elderly?

古文：且进贤受上赏，蔽贤蒙显戮，古之道也。
现代文：何况进贤受上赏，蔽贤受惩罚，这是古代的原则。
English: What's more, it was an ancient principle that those who promoted virtue would be rewarded and those who suppressed it would be punished.

古文：其与中二千石、礼官、博士议不举者罪。 
现代文：我请中二千石、礼官、博士讨论对不举贤良的郡县官吏应治以何罪？ 
English: I invite middle school students of 2,000 koku, etiquette officers, and doctors to discuss what crime should be punished for county officials who do not promote virtue.

古文：有司奏议曰： 古者，诸候贡士，壹适谓之好德，再适谓之贤贤，三适谓之有功，乃加九锡；不贡士，壹则黜爵，再则黜地，三而黜，爵、地毕矣。
现代文：专司官吏奏议说： 在古代，诸侯贡人才于朝，首次举得其人称为好德，二次举得其人称为贤明，三次举得其人称为有功，朝廷对他进行崇高的奖赏；诸侯不向朝廷贡才，第一次贬爵，第二次削地，第三次爵地俱削了。
English: "In ancient times, if a feudal lord paid tribute to the imperial court, the imperial court would give him a high reward. If the feudal lord did not pay tribute to the imperial court, he would be demoted to a peerage for the first time, his lands would be reduced for the second time, and his lands would be reduced for the third time.

古文：夫附下罔上者死，附上罔下者刑；与闻国政而无益于民者斥；在上位而不能进贤者退，此所以劝善黜恶也。
现代文：勾结于下而欺罔君上的处死，谗媚于上而欺罔臣民的加刑，参与国政而不能造福于民的弃逐，身居要津而不能进荐贤才的退位，这就是劝善而贬恶的措施。
English: The death penalty for colluding with the lower ranks to cheat the sovereign, the increased punishment for flattering the upper ranks to cheat the subjects, the banishment of those who participate in state affairs but fail to benefit the people, and the abdication of those who live in important positions but fail to recommend the wise, are all measures to persuade the good and discourage the evil.

古文：今诏书昭先帝圣绪，令二千石举孝廉，所以化元元，移风易俗也。
现代文：今日诏书要求发扬先代帝王的举贤选能的传统，令郡守县令推举孝廉贤才，是为了教化人民，移风易俗。
English: Today's imperial edict calls for carrying forward the tradition of the previous emperor's tradition of selecting the best from the best, and ordering the county governors to select the most virtuous from the most virtuous, in order to enlighten the people and change customs.

古文：不举孝，不奉诏，当以不敬论。
现代文：对于那些对举贤诏令置若罔闻的官吏，当以不遵朝命论。
English: For those government officials who turn a deaf ear to the edict to promote meritocracy, the theory of not following the dictates of the dynasty should be put forward.

古文：不察廉，不胜任也，当免。 
现代文：不能培养与发现贤才，就是不能胜任其职，应该罢免。 
English: If it is unable to cultivate and discover talents, it is incompetent and should be dismissed.

古文：奏可。
现代文：此奏被采纳。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：十二月，江都王非薨。
现代文：十二月，江都王刘非去世。
English: In December, the king of Jiangdu, Liu Fei, passed away.

古文：春三月甲子，立皇后卫氏。
现代文：春三月十三日，立皇后卫氏。
English: On March 13th in the spring, Empress Wei was enthroned.

古文：诏曰： 朕闻天地不变，不成施化；阴阳不变，物不畅茂。
现代文：下诏说： 朕听说天地不变，施化不成；阴阳不变，物不畅茂。
English: The next edict said: "I have heard that heaven and earth do not change, and that it is not possible to bring about transformation; that the yin and yang do not change, and that things do not flourish.

古文：《易》曰 通其变，使民不倦 。
现代文：《易》说： 因势变通，人民的精神才会振作。 
English: "Yi" said: The spirit of the people will only be invigorated when the situation changes.

古文：《诗》云 九变复贯，知言之选 。
现代文：《诗》说： 通天地之变而不失道，择善而从。 
English: "Poetry" says: go through the changes of heaven and earth without losing the way, choose good and follow.

古文：朕嘉唐、虞而乐殷、周，据旧以鉴新。
现代文：朕欣赏唐虞而乐观殷周，愿汲取历史的经验教训以为借鉴。
English: I appreciate Tang Yu and am optimistic about Yin Zhou. I am willing to learn from the lessons of history.

古文：其赦天下，与民更始。
现代文：现在大赦天下，与民更始。
English: Now it is time for a general amnesty and a fresh start with the people.

古文：诸逋贷及辞讼在孝景后三年以前，皆勿听治。 
现代文：有的犯了罪畏罪逃亡及久欠官物而被起诉，事出在孝景帝三年以前的，都免予处理。 
English: Some of them were prosecuted for committing the crime of fleeing and long-term arrears of official documents, but they were all exempted from handling because the incident occurred three years before the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：秋，匈奴入辽西，杀太守；入渔阳、雁门，败都尉，杀略三千余人。
现代文：元朔元年秋季，匈奴侵入辽西，杀辽西太守；又侵入渔阳、雁门，打败都尉，杀掠三千余人。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Xiongnu invaded western Liao and killed the governor of western Liao; they also invaded Yuyang and Yanmen, defeated the captain, and killed and plundered more than three thousand people.

古文：遣将军卫青出雁门，将军李息出代，获首虏数千级。
现代文：遣将军卫青出雁门，将军李息出代，斩获敌首数千级。
English: He sent General Wei Qing out of the Wild Goose Gate and General Li Xi to replace him, and captured thousands of enemy heads.

古文：东夷薉君南闾等口二十八万人降，为苍海郡。
现代文：东夷秽君南闾等率臣民二十八万人归顺于汉，设立苍海郡。
English: The 280,000 subjects of the Eastern Barbarians, led by Nanzhao, submitted to the Han Dynasty and established Canghai County.

古文：鲁王馀、长沙王发皆薨。
现代文：鲁王刘余、长沙王刘发都去世。
English: Lu King Liu Yu and Changsha King Liu Fa both passed away.

古文：二年冬，赐淮南王、菑川王几杖，毋朝。
现代文：二年冬季，赏赐淮南王、菑川王几杖，免朝。
English: In the winter of the second year, the king of Huainan and the king of Luochuan were awarded a few sticks and were exempted from the imperial court.

古文：春正月，诏曰： 梁王、城阳王亲慈同生，愿以邑分弟，其许之，诸侯王请与子弟邑者，朕将亲览，使有列位焉。 
现代文：春正月，下诏说： 梁王、城阳王是我的同胞兄弟，愿以食邑封二弟，请二弟接受。各侯王要为自己的子弟请封食邑的朕将亲自审阅名单，使其有列侯之位。 
English: In the first month of spring, he issued the following edict: "King Liang and King Chengyang are my fellow countrymen and brothers. I am willing to offer the title of prince to my second brother, and I ask my second brother to accept it. I will personally review the list of princes who want to offer the title of prince to their sons, so that they can have the title of prince."

古文：于是籓国始分，而子弟毕侯矣。
现代文：于是原来的藩国又划分为一些食邑，侯王子弟全部封侯了。
English: As a result, the original domain was divided into a number of food towns, and all of the prince's younger brothers were made princes.

古文：匈奴入上谷、渔阳、杀略吏民千余人。
现代文：匈奴入上谷、渔阳，杀掠吏民千余人。
English: The Xiongnu entered Shanggu, Yuyang, and killed and plundered more than a thousand people.

古文：遣将军卫青、李息出云中，至高阙，遂西至符离，获首虏数千级。收河南地，置朔方、五原郡。
现代文：朝廷派将军卫青、李息兵出云中，到高阙，接着兵到符离，斩获敌首数千级，收复河南地，设置朔方、五原郡。
English: The imperial court sent the generals Wei Qing and Li Xibei out of the clouds, to Gaocheng, and then the soldiers went to Fuyi, captured thousands of enemy heads, recovered Henan, and set up the Shuo side and Wuhuan County.

古文：三月乙亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On March 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏，募民徙朔方十万口。
现代文：夏季，招募民众移徙朔方郡十万人。
English: In the summer, 100,000 people were recruited to migrate to Shuofang County.

古文：又徙郡国豪杰及訾三百万以上于茂陵。
现代文：又迁移郡国上层人士及资产在三百万以上的民户到茂陵。
English: In addition, the county's upper-class people and more than three million private households with assets moved to Mouling.

古文：秋，燕王定国有罪，自杀。
现代文：秋季，燕王定国有罪，自杀。
English: In autumn, Yan Wang Dingguo was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：三年春，罢苍海郡。
现代文：三年春季，废除苍海郡建制。
English: In the spring of the third year, the establishment of Canghai County was abolished.

古文：三月，诏曰： 夫刑罚所以防奸也，内长文所以见爱也。以百姓之未洽于教化，朕嘉与士大夫日新厥业，祗而不解。
现代文：三月，下诏说： 刑罚是用以防止作奸犯科的，尊崇文德是为了显示重才爱才的；当今百姓尚未陶冶于教化，朕乐于与士大夫日新汉家帝业，恭谨不懈。
English: In March, the following edict was issued: "Punishment is used to prevent the commission of crimes and misdemeanors, and the veneration of literature and ethics is to show the importance of talent and love of talent; today's people have not yet cultivated in enlightenment, I am happy to work with scholars and scholars in the imperial cause of the Han Dynasty, and I will be respectful and tireless.

古文：其赦天下。 
现代文：可赦天下。 
English: Now he intends to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：夏，匈奴入代，杀太守；入雁门，杀略千余人。
现代文：夏季，匈奴侵入代，杀太守。侵入雁门，杀掠百姓千余人。
English: In the summer, the Xiongnu invaded and killed the Tai Shou, invaded the Wild Goose Gate, and killed and plundered more than a thousand people.

古文：六月庚午，皇太后崩。
现代文：六月初二日，皇太后驾崩。
English: On June 2nd, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：秋，罢西南夷，城朔方城。
现代文：秋季，免除对西南夷的征讨，筑朔方城。
English: In autumn, exempted from the conquest of the Southwest Yi, build a square city.

古文：令民大酺五日。
现代文：下令全国臣民饮酒五天以慰民。
English: Ordered all subjects to drink alcohol for five days to console the people.

古文：四年冬，行幸甘泉。
现代文：四年冬季，巡幸到甘泉。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, they went on a tour to Ganquan.

古文：夏，匈奴入代、定襄、上郡，杀略数千人。
现代文：夏季，匈奴入代、定襄、上郡，杀掠数千人。
English: In the summer, the Xiongnu raided and killed thousands of people in the counties of Rongdai, Dingxiang, and Shangxun.

古文：五年春，大旱。
现代文：五年春，发生大旱灾。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, a major drought occurred.

古文：大将军卫青将六将军兵十余万人出朔方、高阙，获首虏万五千级。
现代文：大将军卫青率领六名将军及士兵十余万人在朔方、高阙出塞，斩获匈奴首级一万五千余。
English: General Wei Qing led six generals and more than one hundred thousand soldiers in the Shuo side and Gaocheng out of the fortress, and won more than fifteen thousand first-class Huns.

古文：夏六月，诏曰： 盖闻导民以礼，风之以乐。今礼坏乐崩，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：夏六月，下诏说： 曾闻教导人民以礼，陶冶人民以乐，当今礼坏乐崩，朕甚为惋惜。
English: In the summer of June, he issued the following edict: I am very sorry that I once heard that we should teach the people with etiquette and cultivate the people with fun, but today etiquette is bad and fun is dead.

古文：故详延天下方闻之士，咸荐诸朝。其令礼官劝学，讲议洽闻，举遗举礼，以为天下先。
现代文：所以广引博闻有道之士，集会于京都，由礼官主持讲学，广征博引，举遗漏之文，兴被坏之礼，以为天下榜样。
English: Therefore, they gathered in Kyoto and had a lecture presided over by the etiquette officer, and they thought that they were setting an example for the whole world.

古文：太常其议予博士弟子，崇乡党之化，以厉贤材焉。 
现代文：太常官应考虑将参加此次学礼的有道之士置为博士弟子，这既可以崇教化于乡里，又可以奖励贤才。 
English: The chief magistrate should consider appointing the moralists who participated in this ceremony as doctoral disciples, which can not only promote education in the countryside, but also reward talents.

古文：丞相弘请为博士置弟子员，学者益广。
现代文：丞相公孙弘奏请为博士设置弟子生员，学礼的人愈多了。
English: Minister of Education and Culture, Dr. Sun Hongso, please set up disciples and students for the doctor, and there are more and more people studying etiquette.

古文：秋，匈奴入代，杀都尉。
现代文：秋季，匈奴入代，杀都尉。
English: In the autumn, the Xiongnu came to power and killed the captain.

古文：六年春二月，大将军卫青将六将军兵十余万骑出定襄，斩首三千余级。
现代文：年春二月，大将军卫青率领六名将军及士兵十余万骑出定襄，斩敌首三千余级。
English: In the spring and February of the year, General Wei Qing led six generals and more than 100,000 soldiers to ride out of Dingxiang and cut off more than 3,000 enemy heads.

古文：还，休士马于定襄、云中、雁门。
现代文：回师，兵马在定襄、云中、雁门等地休整。
English: After the division returned, the soldiers and horses rested in Dingxiang, Yunzhong, Ganmen and other places.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：夏四月，卫青复将六将军绝幕，大克获。
现代文：夏季四月，卫青再次率六名将军及士兵到达匈奴南界沙漠，大获全胜。
English: In the summer of April, Wei Qing once again led six generals and soldiers to the desert on the southern border of the Huns, and won a complete victory.

古文：前将军赵信军败，降匈奴。
现代文：前将军赵信军败，降匈奴。
English: Former general Zhao Xin's army was defeated and surrendered to the Huns.

古文：右将军苏建亡军，独自脱还，赎为庶人。
现代文：右将军苏建部队溃散，只身逃回，赎罪为平民。
English: The right general of the Soviet construction troops broke up and fled back alone, atoning for the civilians.

古文：六月，诏曰： 朕闻五帝不相复礼，三代不同法，所由殊路而建德一也。
现代文：六月，下诏说： 朕听说五帝不沿用过去的陈规，三代不相袭前代的法度，他们所处的历史时代发生了变化而建立的德政却是一致的。
English: In June, the next emperor said: I have heard that the five emperors do not follow the old rules of the past, and the three generations do not follow the laws of the previous generation. The historical era they are in has changed, but the German government they established is consistent.

古文：盖孔子对定公以徠远，哀公以论臣，景公以节用，非期不同，所急异务也。
现代文：昔日孔子对鲁定公以 远悦近求 ，对鲁哀公以 政在选贤 ，对齐景公以 政在节财 ，这不是要求不同，而是具体情况决定当务之急。
English: In the past, Confucius asked Lu Ding Gong for far and near pleasure, Lu Aigong for politics in selecting sages, and Qi Jing Gong for politics in saving money. This is not a different requirement, but the specific situation determines the urgency.

古文：今中国一统而北边未安，朕甚悼之。
现代文：今中国一统而北边未安。朕甚为怀念。
English: Now China is unified, but the north is not safe. I miss it very much.

古文：日者大将军巡朔方，征匈奴，斩首虏万八千级，诸禁锢及有过者，咸蒙厚赏，得免、减罪。
现代文：前时大将军卫青巡行朔方，征伐匈奴，斩敌首一万八千级，一些被囚禁及犯有罪过的，都分沐前线胜利之赏，得以免罪减罪。
English: Some time ago, General Wei Qing marched to the Shuo side, conquered the Xiongnu, and cut off 18,000 enemy heads. Some prisoners and criminals were awarded the front-line victory reward, and were exonerated and commuted.

古文：今大将军仍复克获，斩首虏万九千级，受爵赏而欲移卖者，无所流貤。
现代文：今大将军又一次战绩辉煌，斩敌首一万九千级，此次主动受爵赏而欲移卖的，如不按差次就不得流行。
English: Now the great general has once again achieved a brilliant record, cutting the enemy's head by nineteen thousand levels. This time, if he wants to be awarded a knighthood and wants to sell it, he must not be popular if he does not press the difference.

古文：其议为令。 
现代文：可据此制定法规。 
English: Regulations can be made accordingly.

古文：有司奏请置武功赏官，以宠战士。
现代文：分管武功的官员奏请皇上设置武功赏官，以奖励战士。
English: The official in charge of martial arts asked the emperor to set up a martial arts reward officer to reward soldiers.

古文：元狩元年冬十月，行幸雍，祠五畴。获白麟，作《白麟之歌》。
现代文：元狩元年冬十月，御驾至雍，祭祀五帝，获得白麒麟，作《白麟之歌》。
English: In the winter of October of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he traveled to Yong, worshiped the Five Emperors, and obtained a white unicorn, writing "Song of the White Unicorn."

古文：十一月，淮南王安、衡山王赐谋反，诛。
现代文：十一月，淮南王刘安、衡山王刘赐谋反，被处死。
English: In November, Huainan King Liu An and Hengshan King Liu Zhi conspired to rebel and were executed.

古文：党与死者数万人。
现代文：处死的党羽有几万人。
English: Tens of thousands of party cadres were executed.

古文：十二月，大雨雪，民冻死。
现代文：十二月，大雨雪，平民冻死。
English: In December, heavy rain and snow, civilians froze to death.

古文：夏四月，赦天下。
现代文：夏四月，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：丁卯，立皇太子。
现代文：夏季四月二十一日，立皇太子。
English: On the 21st of April in the summer, the crown prince was appointed.

古文：赐中二千石爵右庶长，民为父后者一级。
现代文：赐中二千石爵右庶长，赐继其父后为家长的爵一级。
English: He was given the 2,000-koku peerage as the second-highest-ranking member of the imperial family, and the first-class peerage as the head of the family after his father.

古文：诏曰： 朕闻咎繇对禹，曰在知人，知人则哲，惟帝难之。
现代文：下诏说： 朕闻皋陶对禹，首在知人，能知人的才是贤哲，圣如尧帝还认为知人甚难。
English: The next edict said: I have heard that the Tao is opposite to God, the first is to know people, and those who can know people are sages. Saint Rudolph the Great also believed that it is very difficult to know people.

古文：盖君者，心也，民犹支体，支体伤则心憯怛。
现代文：大凡君王是心脏，人民如同肢体，肢体受伤则心脏痛悼。
English: The great king is the heart, the people are like limbs, and when the limbs are injured, the heart mourns.

古文：日者淮南、衡山修文学，流货赂，两国接壤，怵于邪说，而造篡弑，此朕之不德。
现代文：前时淮南王与衡山王修讲文学，交流货币，两国接壤，诱于邪说，而起篡逆之心，这反映了朕的无德。
English: At that time, King Huainan and King Hengshan were engaged in literature and currency exchange, and the two countries shared a border. They were seduced by evil doctrines and had the spirit of usurpation. This reflected their lack of virtue.

古文：《诗》云： 忧心惨惨，念国之为虐。 
现代文：《诗》说： 忧心惨惨，悼念国家发生灾难。 
English: "Poetry" said: Sorrowful and miserable, mourning the disaster of the country.

古文：已赦天下，涤除与之更始。
现代文：已赦免天下，涤除余毒而弃旧图新。
English: He has pardoned the whole world, purged the remaining poison and abandoned the old image.

古文：朕嘉孝弟、力田，哀夫老眊、孤、寡、鳏、独或匮于衣食，甚怜愍焉。
现代文：朕奖励孝悌力田，关心老耄孤寡鳏独，对于缺衣少食者，甚为同情。
English: I reward filial piety, care for the old, the lonely and the lonely, and have great sympathy for those who lack clothing and food.

古文：其遣谒者巡行天下，存问致赐。
现代文：现派专使巡行天下，进行慰问与赏赐。
English: A special envoy has been dispatched to travel around the world to offer condolences and rewards.

古文：曰： 皇帝使谒者赐县三老、孝者帛，人五匹；乡三老、弟者、力田帛，人三匹；年九十以上及鳏、寡、孤、独帛，人二匹，絮三斤；八十以上米，人三石。
现代文：诏说：皇帝派专使赐县三老、孝子布帛，每人五匹；乡三老、爱幼者、力田者帛，每人二匹，絮三斤；八十以上，米每人三石。蒙冤失其常业，专使要报告上级解决。
English: The imperial edict said: The emperor sent a special envoy to give the county elders and filial sons cloth ponchos, five ponchos each; the town elders, those who love children, and those who work in the fields, two ponchos each, three pounds; and those over eighty, three stones of rice each. Having been unjustly deprived of their regular occupation, the special envoy should report to the higher level for resolution.

古文：有冤失职，使者以闻。县、乡即赐，毋赘聚。  
现代文：县乡要即时就地赏赐，无须进行形式主义的会聚而延误赏期。 
English: Counties and townships should reward immediately on the spot, without the need for formalistic meetings and delaying the reward period.

古文：五月乙巳晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：五月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On May 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：匈奴入上谷，杀数百人。
现代文：匈奴侵入上谷，杀数百人。
English: The Huns invaded the upper valley and killed hundreds of people.

古文：春三月戊寅，丞相弘薨。
现代文：春三月初八日，丞相公孙弘去世。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of spring, the prime minister Sunhiro passed away.

古文：遣骠骑将军霍去病出陇西，至皋兰，斩首八千余级。
现代文：派骠骑将军霍去病兵出陇西，至皋兰山，斩敌首八千余级。
English: He sent his cavalry general Huo to escort the sick soldiers out of Shaanxi to Mount Qilian, and killed more than eight thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：夏，马生余吾水中。
现代文：夏，马生于余吾水中。
English: In summer, horses are born in Yuwashu.

古文：南越献驯象、能言鸟。
现代文：南越献上驯象、能言鸟。
English: South Vietnam presented tamed elephants and talking birds.

古文：将军去病、公孙敖出北地二千余里，过居延，斩首虏三万余级。
现代文：将军霍去病、公孙敖出北地二千余里，兵过居延，斩敌首三万余级。
English: General Huo went sick, Gongsun Rong traveled more than two thousand miles to the north, extended his troops, and cut off more than thirty thousand enemy heads.

古文：匈奴入雁门，杀略数百人。
现代文：匈奴入雁门，杀掠数百人。
English: The Xiongnu entered the Wild Goose Gate and killed and plundered hundreds of people.

古文：遣卫尉张骞、郎中令李广皆出右北平。
现代文：遣卫尉张骞、郎中令李广都领兵出右北平。
English: Quartermaster Zhang Ye and Lieutenant Colonel Li Guangdu led the troops out of the right Beiping.

古文：广杀匈奴三千余人，尽亡其军四千人，独身脱还，及公孙敖、张骞皆后期，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：李广杀匈奴三千余人，而自己的军队四千人都溃亡，只身逃回，与公孙敖、张骞都不是按期到达，当斩，赎罪为平民。
English: Li Guang killed more than three thousand Xiongnu, while his own army of four thousand were killed, and he fled back alone. He, Gongsun Yao, and Zhang Yao did not arrive on schedule, and they were executed as civilians to atone for their sins.

古文：江都王建有罪，自杀。
现代文：江都王刘建有罪，自杀。
English: Liu Jian, the king of Jiangdu, was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：胶东王寄薨。
现代文：胶东王刘寄去世。
English: Jiaodong Wang Liu Ying passed away.

古文：秋，匈奴昆邪王杀休屠王，并将其众合四万余人来降，置五属国以处之。
现代文：秋，匈奴昆邪王杀休屠王，并率其众四万余人来降，设五属国以进行安置。
English: In the autumn, the Xiongnu king Kunzang killed the retired king Tuo, and led more than forty thousand people to come down and set up five vassal states for resettlement.

古文：以其地为武威、酒泉郡。
现代文：以其地为武威、酒泉郡。
English: His hometown is Wuwei, Jiuquan County.

古文：三年春，有星孛于东方。
现代文：三年春，彗星出现于东方。
English: In the spring of the third year, the comet appeared in the east.

古文：夏五月，赦天下。
现代文：夏五月，赦天下。
English: In the summer of May, there was a general amnesty.

古文：立胶东康王少子庆为六安王。
现代文：立胶东康王少子庆为六安王。
English: Li Jia Dong Kang Wang Shao Zi Qing is the King of Lu'an.

古文：封故相哈萧何曾孙庆为列侯。
现代文：封故丞相萧何曾孙萧庆为列侯。
English: He made the late prime minister Xiao He's great-grandson Xiao Qing a vassal.

古文：秋，匈奴入右北平、定襄，杀略千余人。
现代文：秋，匈奴入侵右北平、定襄，杀掠数千人。
English: In autumn, the Xiongnu invaded Right Beiping and Dingxiang, killing and plundering thousands of people.

古文：遣谒者劝有水灾郡种宿麦。举吏民能假贷贫民者以名闻。
现代文：派专使劝导受水灾的郡县种冬小麦，推举吏民能宽宥与关心贫民的名单上报朝廷。
English: Send special envoys to advise counties and counties affected by floods to grow winter wheat, and nominate officials and people who can forgive and care for the poor to be reported to the imperial court.

古文：减陇西、北地、上郡戍卒半。
现代文：裁减陇西、北地、上郡戍卒的一半。
English: Reduce the number of officers in Shaanxi, Hubei and Shangxian counties by half.

古文：发谪吏穿昆明池。
现代文：派有罪而罚役的吏员开凿昆明池以习水战。
English: The officials who punished the guilty were sent to dig a pond in Kunming to practice water fights.

古文：四年冬，有司言关东贫民徙陇西、北地、西河、上郡、会稽凡七十二万五千口，县官衣食振业，用度不足，请收银、锡造白金及皮币以足用。
现代文：四年冬，专管官员上报说关东贫民迁移到陇西，北地、西河、上郡、会稽的共七十二万五千口，县官要供其衣食与组织生产，用度不足请求收银锡造白金币及造白鹿皮币以足国用。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, the officials in charge reported that the poor people in Guandong had migrated to Shaanxi. There were a total of 725,000 households in Beidai, Xihe, Shangxian and Hefei. The county officials had to provide them with food and clothing and organize production.

古文：初算缗钱。春，有星孛于东北。
现代文：开始实行对商人及手工业者的货值收取千分之二十至四十的赋税即算缗钱制。春，有彗星出现于东北。
English: In the spring, a comet appeared in the northeast of the country.

古文：夏，有长星出于西北。
现代文：元狩四年夏季，有长星出现在西北。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of the Genkari era, a long star appeared in the northwest.

古文：大将军卫青将四将军出定襄，将军去病出代，各将五万骑。
现代文：大将军卫青率领四将军兵出定襄，将军霍去病出代，各领五万骑兵。
English: General Wei Qing led the four generals and soldiers out of Dingxiang, General Huo went to the sick to represent, each leading fifty thousand cavalry.

古文：步兵踵军后数十万人。
现代文：步兵随骑兵之后数十万人。
English: Hundreds of thousands of infantry followed the cavalry.

古文：青至幕北围单于，斩首万九千级，至阗颜山乃还。
现代文：卫青到漠北围困单于王，斩首一万九千级。到阗颜山回师。
English: Wei Qing went to the north of the desert, besieged Shan Yu Wang, and beheaded him with nineteen thousand grades. He returned to his division in Yan Shan.

古文：去病与左贤王战，斩获首虏七万余级，封狼居胥山乃还。
现代文：霍去病与匈奴左贤王战，斩敌首七万余级。在狼居胥山刻石纪功而回。
English: He went to fight against the Hun Zuoxian Wang, and cut off more than seventy thousand enemy heads. He returned with great success in the Wolf Village of Lushan Rock Carving.

古文：两军士死者数万人。
现代文：两军战死者数万人。
English: Tens of thousands of people from both armies died in the war.

古文：前将军广、后将军食其皆后期。广自杀，食其赎死。
现代文：前将军李广、后将军食其都未能按期到达阵地，李广自杀，食其赎回死罪。
English: The former general Li Guang and the later general Li Zhicheng both failed to reach their positions on schedule. Li Guang committed suicide to atone for the death penalty.

古文：五年春三月甲午，丞相李蔡有罪，自杀。
现代文：五年春三月十一，丞相李蔡有罪，自杀。
English: On March 11 of the spring of the fifth year, Minister of Justice Li Cai was convicted and committed suicide.

古文：天下马少，平牡马，匹二十万。
现代文：天下马少，平牡马价提高到二十万钱。
English: There are fewer horses in the world, so the average stallion price has increased to 200,000 yuan.

古文：罢半两钱，行五铢钱。
现代文：废半两钱，发行五铢钱。
English: Waste half a two-yen coin, issue five-yen coin.

古文：徙天下奸猾吏民于边。
现代文：迁徙天下奸滑吏民到边疆居住。
English: The most corrupt officials and people in the world have migrated to live in the border areas.

古文：六年冬十月，赐丞相以下至吏二千石金，千石以下至乘从者帛，蛮夷锦各有差。
现代文：六年冬十月，赏赐丞相以下至吏二千石金，赏赐千石以下至乘从者帛，赐蛮夷以锦有差等。
English: In the winter and October of the sixth year, 2,000 koku of gold was awarded to officials from the chancellor on down, 1,000 koku of gold was awarded to those who followed the emperor, and the barbarians were given gold and silver.

古文：雨水亡冰。
现代文：冬季降雨无冰雪。
English: In winter, there is no snow or ice.

古文：夏四月乙巳，庙立皇子闳为齐王，旦为燕王，胥为广陵王。
现代文：夏四月二十九日，在宗庙立皇子闳为齐王、旦为燕王、胥为广陵王。
English: On the 29th day of the 4th month of the summer, in the ancestral temple, the princes were set up as the king of Qi, the king of Yan and the king of Guangling.

古文：初作诰。
现代文：开始作封拜王侯的策文一一诰。
English: He began to write a collection of poems in homage to the prince.

古文：六月，诏曰： 日者有司以币轻多奸，农伤而未众，又禁兼并之涂，故改币以约之。
现代文：六月，下诏说： 前时专管官员认为钱币贱而物价贵，给奸邪以可乘之机，弃农而从商者多，又为了抑制贫富悬殊，所以改革币制以检约奸邪与兼并。
English: In June, the next imperial edict said: "Previously, the officials in charge thought that coins were cheap and expensive, which gave the evil spirits an opportunity to take advantage of. Many people abandoned farming and became merchants. In order to curb the disparity between the rich and the poor, the monetary system was reformed to check the evil spirits and mergers.

古文：稽诸往古，制宜于今。
现代文：这是汲取历史的经验所制订的适合于当前的货币政策。
English: This is a monetary policy that draws on historical experience and is suitable for the current situation.

古文：废期有月，而山泽之民未谕。
现代文：而废半两钱的禁期一年有余，偏远地区百姓却仍不明告示之意。
English: However, the ban period for the waste of half a yuan and two yuan is more than a year, but the people in remote areas still do not know the meaning of the notice.

古文：夫仁行而从善，义立则俗易，意奉宪者所以导之未明与？
现代文：上行良政下就应该从善，上应民望下就可以风从，而当前币制受阻，是地方官吏的宣传引导不够明确呢？
English: When a good government is on the rise, it should be guided by virtue. When a good government is on the rise, it should be guided by virtue. When a good government is on the rise, it should be guided by virtue. When a good government is on the rise, it should be guided by virtue. When a good government is on the rise, it should be guided by virtue.

古文：将百姓所安殊路，而挢虔吏因乘势以侵蒸庶邪？
现代文：还是百姓的理解不同，让那些妄托上命的奸邪之辈得以乘机侵犯百姓利益呢？
English: Or is the people's understanding different, so that those traitors who are entrusted with their lives can take advantage of the opportunity to infringe on the interests of the people?

古文：何纷然其扰也！
现代文：为何如此的纷纷扰扰！
English: Why so many interruptions!

古文：今遣博士大等六人分循行天下，存问鳏、寡、废、疾，无以自振业者贷与之。
现代文：现派遣博士大等六人分别循行于天下，访问鳏寡废疾，对无法自谋职业的给于赈贷。
English: At present, six people from doctoral universities have been dispatched to travel around the world, visit widows and widowers, and give loans to those who are unable to work for themselves.

古文：谕三老、孝弟以为民师，举独行之君子，征诣行在所。
现代文：诏谕三老、孝悌为民之师，推举品行高洁的君子，应征到皇上所在。
English: The emperor decreed that the three elders and filial piety should be the teachers of the people, and that the gentlemen with high moral standards should be drafted to the emperor's place.

古文：朕嘉贤者，乐知其人。
现代文：朕尊重贤者，乐于知道他们的情况。
English: I respect sages and like to know about them.

古文：广宣厥道，士有特招，使者之任也。
现代文：要广宣一条原则，即对于有殊才异行之士可以特招，这是循行使者的责任。
English: It is the responsibility of the practitioner to widely publicize the principle that those with exceptional talent can be specially recruited.

古文：详问隐处亡位及冤失职、奸猾为害、野荒治苛者，举奏。
现代文：要详细查问被埋没而不任用、蒙冤屈而失其常业的人，对于奸滑为害，田野荒芜与苛政害民的人与事，要举奏于朝廷。
English: It is necessary to inquire in detail about those who were buried and not appointed, those who were wronged and lost their regular jobs, and to report to the imperial court about the people and things that were harmed by treachery, desertification of fields, and harsh government that harmed the people.

古文：郡国有所以为便者，上丞相、御史以闻。 
现代文：郡国认为可以方便于民的一些意见，要报告丞相、御史斟酌。 
English: The county government considers that some opinions that can be convenient for the people should be reported to the prime minister and the governor for consideration.

古文：秋九月，大司马骠骑将军去病薨。
现代文：秋九月，大司马骠骑将军霍去病去世。
English: In the autumn and September, General Ho, the commander of the horse cavalry, fell ill and died.

古文：元鼎元年夏五月，赦天下，大酺五日。
现代文：元鼎元年夏五月，赦天下，下令全国欢饮五日以慰民。
English: In the summer and May of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he pardoned the whole country and ordered the whole country to drink for five days to comfort the people.

古文：得鼎汾水上。
现代文：得鼎于汾水之上。
English: It is located above Surabaya.

古文：济东王彭离有罪，废徙上庸。
现代文：济东王彭离有罪，废徙于上庸。
English: The king of Jidong, Peng Rong, was found guilty and banished to Shangyong.

古文：二年冬十一月，御史大夫张汤有罪，自杀。
现代文：二年冬十一月，御史大夫张汤有罪，自杀。
English: In November of the winter of the second year, the goshi doctor Zhang Tang was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：十二月，丞相青翟下狱死。
现代文：十二月，丞相庄青翟下狱死。
English: In December, the chancellor, Zhuang Qingyao, died in prison.

古文：春，起柏梁台。
现代文：元鼎二年春，起柏梁台。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the park-and-beam platform was built.

古文：三月，大雨雪。
现代文：三月，大雨雪。
English: Heavy rain and snow in March.

古文：夏，大水，关东饿死者以千数。
现代文：夏，发大水，关东饿死的达千人。
English: In the summer, when there was a lot of water, up to a thousand people starved to death in Kanto.

古文：秋九月，诏曰： 仁不异远，义不辞难，今京师虽未为丰年，山林、池泽之饶与民共之。
现代文：秋九月，下诏说： 远近如一为仁，不惮艰险为义。今日京师虽不是丰收之年，而山林池泽的财富资源应与人民共同开采。
English: In the autumn and September, the following edict was issued: "Far and near are equal for benevolence, and hardship and danger are not to be feared. Although today is not a year of abundant harvest in Beijing, the wealth and resources of the mountains, forests, ponds and lakes should be mined together with the people."

古文：今水潦移于江南，迫隆冬至，朕惧其饥寒不活。
现代文：当前水涝之灾移向江南，隆冬即至，朕担忧江南人民饥寒交迫。
English: The current flood disaster is moving to the south of the Yangtze River. Midwinter is coming. I am worried about the people in the south of the Yangtze River who are hungry and cold.

古文：江南之地，火耕水耨，方下巴、蜀之粟致之江陵，遣博士中等分循行，谕告所抵，无令重困。
现代文：江南地区，火耕水耨，即时调巴蜀粮食集于江陵，派博士中等分别到各地检查，告知灾民蜀粮已到，以宽解他们的愁困。
English: In the south of the Yangtze River, the fire-cultivation-water-melting, instant-adjustment-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain-grain

古文：吏民有振救饥民免其厄者，具举以闻。 
现代文：凡吏民在赈饥救灾有突出成绩的，要将其事迹详报朝廷。 
English: All officials and people who have made outstanding achievements in famine relief and disaster relief should report their deeds in detail to the imperial court.

古文：三年冬，徙函谷关于新安。以故关为弘农县。
现代文：三年冬，迁函谷关于新安，原关址为弘农县。
English: In the winter of the third year, Hanyang Valley was relocated to Xin'an. The original site of the pass was in Hongnong County.

古文：十一月，令民告缗者以其半与之。
现代文：十一月，下令凡揭发偷漏赋税的人以其应缴的一半进行奖赏。
English: In November, it ordered that anyone who exposed tax evasion would be rewarded with half of the tax due.

古文：正月戊子，阳陵园火。
现代文：元鼎三年春季，阳陵园发生火灾。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, a fire broke out in the Yangling Garden.

古文：夏四月，雨雹，关东郡国十余饥，人相食。
现代文：夏季四月，下冰雹，关东十几个郡国发生饥荒，发生人吃人的事情。
English: In the summer of April, when hail fell, famine and cannibalism occurred in more than a dozen counties in the Kanto region.

古文：常山王舜薨。子嗣立，有罪，废徙房陵。
现代文：常山王刘舜去世，子孛攵继立，有罪，废徙于房陵。
English: The king of Changshan, Liu Bei, died, and his son, Guan Zili, was found guilty and was banished to the imperial mausoleum.

古文：四年冬十月，行幸雍，祠五畴。赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒。
现代文：四年冬十月，巡幸至雍，祭祀五帝畤，赏赐男民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒若干。
English: In October of the winter of the fourth year, he went on a pilgrimage to Yong, worshiped the Five Emperors, and was awarded a first-class baronetcy, a hundred cows for a woman, and some wine.

古文：行自夏阳，东幸汾阴。
现代文：从夏阳出发到达汾阴。
English: Departing from Xiayang and arriving at Suyin.

古文：十一月甲子，立后土祠于汾阴脽上。
现代文：十一月八日，建立后土祠于汾阴东岸。
English: On November 8th, an earthen shrine was built on the east coast of Suyin.

古文：礼毕，行幸荥阳。
现代文：礼毕，行幸到荥阳。
English: All right, let's go to Shenyang.

古文：还至洛阳，诏曰： 祭地翼州，瞻望河、洛，巡省豫州，观于周室，邈而无祀。
现代文：从洛阳回都，下诏说： 祭后土于冀州，瞻望黄河洛水，巡察于豫州，观周朝的旧址，周庙已久绝祭祀了。
English: From Luoyang back to the capital, the next edict said: After the festival, the soil in Jizhou, overlooking the Yellow River Luoshui, inspection in Yuzhou, viewing the old site of the Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Temple has long been extinct.

古文：询问耆老，乃得孽子嘉。
现代文：询问当地耆老，访得周朝后代姬嘉。
English: After inquiring with the local elders, they visited the Zhou dynasty descendant Ji Jia.

古文：其封嘉为周子南君，以奉周祀。 
现代文：现封嘉为周子南君，以继承周的祭祀。 
English: He is now known as Zhou Zi Nanjun, and has inherited Zhou's sacrificial rites.

古文：春二月，中山王胜薨。
现代文：春二月，中山王刘胜去世。
English: In the spring of February, the king of Zhongshan, Liu Sheng, passed away.

古文：夏，封方士栾大为乐通侯，位上将军。
现代文：夏，封方术之士栾大为乐通侯，位上将军。
English: In the summer, Fongfang's magicians were all great connoisseurs of music, and they were promoted to the rank of general.

古文：六月，得宝鼎后土祠旁。
现代文：六月得鼎于后土祠旁。
English: In June, it reached its peak next to the Houdu Shrine.

古文：秋，马生渥洼水中。
现代文：秋，据说马生渥洼水中。
English: In autumn, horses are said to be born in the water.

古文：作《宝鼎》、《天马》之歌。
现代文：作《宝鼎》、《天马》之歌志庆。
English: He composed the songs of "Bao Ding" and "Tianma."

古文：立常山宪王子商为泗水王。
现代文：立常山宪王子刘商为泗水王。
English: Standing on the top of Changshan Mountain, Prince Liu Shang is the king of water.

古文：五年冬十月，行幸雍，祠五畴。
现代文：五年冬十月，行幸到雍，祭祀五帝？
English: In October of the winter of the fifth year, did you go to Yong to worship the Five Emperors?

古文：遂逾陇，登空同，西临祖厉河而还。
现代文：接着越过陇山，登空同山，西到祖厉河而返。
English: Then he crossed Lushan Mountain, climbed the same mountain, and returned west to Zuli River.

古文：十一月辛巳朔旦，冬至。
现代文：十一月初一日，冬至，立泰？
English: The first day of the first month of November, the winter solstice, the rise of Mount Tai?

古文：立泰畤于甘泉。
现代文：于甘泉县。
English: In Gamcheon County.

古文：天子亲郊见，朝日夕月。
现代文：天子亲自祭祀，早晨向东拜日，晚上向西南拜月。
English: The heavenly son himself performed the sacrifice, worshipping the sun in the east in the morning and the moon in the southwest in the evening.

古文：诏曰： 朕以眇身托于王侯之上，德未能绥民，民或饥寒，故巡祭后土以祈丰年。冀州隹壤乃显文鼎，获荐于庙。
现代文：下诏说：朕以细末之身讠乇于王侯之上，德未能安民，民难免于饥寒，所以巡查后土以祈求丰年，在冀州后土祠旁发现文鼎，得献于祖庙。
English: The next edict said: "I am a prince with a thin body, and I am unable to keep the people safe, and the people are not exempt from hunger and cold. Therefore, I inspected Houdu to pray for a good year. I found the Wen Ding next to the Houdu Shrine in Jizhou and dedicated it to the ancestral temple.

古文：渥洼水出马，朕其御焉。
现代文：渥洼水出马，为朕所御用。
English: Water from the Woda River flows to the horse, and it is used by me.

古文：战战兢兢，惧不克任，思昭天地，内惟自新。
现代文：战战兢兢，深恐力不胜任，要想昭明天地之德，必须不断自省更新。
English: Trembling, deeply afraid of incompetence, if you want to show tomorrow's virtue, you must constantly self-reflect and update.

古文：《诗》云： 四牡翼翼，以征不服。 
现代文：《诗》说： 四马并驾齐驱，以征不服之地！ 
English: "Poetry" says: Four horses go side by side to conquer the unconquerable land!

古文：亲省边垂，用事所极。
现代文：我在巡狩边陲时，所到之处也必行祭礼。
English: When I am on a hunting trip, there is always a festival wherever I go.

古文：望见泰一，修天文禅。
现代文：望见泰一，修天文坛。
English: Taichi Mochimi, repairing the astronomical observatory.

古文：辛卯夜，若景光十有二明。《易》曰： 先甲三日，后甲三日。 
现代文：十一月十一夜，若日光十分明朗，《易》说： 先甲三日应自新，后甲三日自叮咛。 
English: On the night of November 11th, if the sunlight is very bright, "Yi" said: The first three days should be renewed, and the last three days should be renewed.

古文：朕甚念年岁未咸登，饬躬斋戒，丁酉，拜祝于郊。 
现代文：朕甚念今年没有全面丰收，就严肃斋戒，在后甲三日丁酉，举行郊祭以感谢天赐光明。
English: I am very sorry that we did not have a full harvest this year, so I will seriously fast, and on the third day of the second lunar month, I will hold a suburb festival to thank God for the light.

古文：夏四月，南越王相吕嘉反，杀汉使者及其王、王太后。
现代文：夏季四月，南越王相吕嘉反，杀死汉朝派驻南越使者及南越王、王太后。
English: In the summer of April, the king of South Vietnam, Lyu Jiaban, killed the envoy sent to South Vietnam by the Han Dynasty, as well as the king and queen mother of South Vietnam.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：丁丑晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：四月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On April 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：秋，蛙、虾蟆斗。
现代文：秋，青蛙、蟆互斗。
English: In autumn, frogs and toads fight with each other.

古文：遣伏波将军路博德出桂阳，下湟水；楼船将军杨仆出豫章，下浈水；归义越侯严为戈船将军，出零陵，下离水；甲为下濑将军，下苍梧。
现代文：遣伏波将军路博德兵出桂阳，下湟水，楼船将军杨仆出豫章，下浈水，归义越侯严为弋船将军，出零陵，下淮水，甲为下濑将军，下苍梧，都领罪人出征，江淮以南以大战船载十万人。
English: General Lu Bo De led troops from Guiyang to Shimonoseki, General Yang Pei led troops from Yuzhang to Shimonoseki, General Gui Yue Guo Yan led troops from Shimonoseki to Shimonoseki, General Ru Bo De led troops from Shimonoseki to Shimonoseki, General Lu Bo De led troops from Guiyang to Shimonoseki, General Yang Pei led troops from Yuzhang to Shimonoseki, General Gui Yue Guo Yan led troops from Shimonoseki to Shimonoseki, General A led troops from Shimonoseki to Shimonosek

古文：皆将罪人，江、淮以南楼船十万人，越驰义侯遗别将巴、蜀罪人，发夜郎兵，下牂柯江，咸会番禺。
现代文：越驰义侯遗别将巴蜀罪人，征发夜郎兵，下？柯江，俱会于番禺。
English: Yueqi Yihou bequeathed the criminals of Bashu, conscripted the soldiers of Yelang, and went down to Kejiang. The club will meet in Panyu.

古文：九月，列侯坐献黄金酎祭宗庙不如法夺爵者百六人，丞相赵周下狱死。
现代文：九月，列侯因犯献奠祭宗庙的黄金色恶而数不足之罪被削爵为民者一百六十人，丞相赵周纠责不力被下狱死。
English: In September, 160 feudal lords were demoted to the status of commoners for committing the crime of insufficient number of gold-colored yakitori at the memorial service of the ancestral temple, and the chancellor Zhao Zhou was sentenced to death.

古文：乐通侯栾大坐诬罔要斩。
现代文：乐通侯栾大犯造谣惑众欺君罔上之罪被腰斩。
English: The great criminal Le Tong Hou Yi was beheaded for the crime of fabricating rumors, deceiving the public, and deceiving the emperor.

古文：西羌众十万人反，与匈奴通使，攻故安，围枹罕。
现代文：西羌众十万人反，与匈奴通使交结，兵攻故安，围困木包四千县。
English: Hundreds of thousands of people in Xidi rebelled, met with the Hun envoy, attacked the old peace, and besieged 4,000 counties in Mubo.

古文：匈奴入五原，杀太守。
现代文：匈奴亦侵入五原，杀死汉朝太守。
English: The Xiongnu also invaded the Five Plains and killed the Han Dynasty's ruler.

古文：六年冬十月，发陇西、天水、安定骑士及中尉、河南、河内卒十万人，遣将军李息、郎中令徐自为征西羌，平之。
现代文：六年冬十月，征发陇西、天水、安定骑兵及京都卫年、河南、河内士卒十万人，派将军李息、郎中令徐自为征讨西羌，平定了。
English: In October of the winter of the 6th year, 100,000 soldiers from Shaanxi, Tianshui, and Anping Cavalry Corps, as well as soldiers from Kyoto, Henan, and Hanoi, were sent to conquer Xidi. General Li Xi and his lieutenant Xu were sent to conquer Xidi, and the battle was settled.

古文：行东，将幸缑氏，至左邑桐乡，闻南越破，以为闻喜县。
现代文：东巡，将临缑氏县，驾到左邑县桐乡，闻报南越叛军已被打败而喜悦，就改此地为 闻喜 县。
English: The East Patrol drove from Linyi County to Tongxiang, Zuoying County. They were happy to hear that the South Vietnamese rebels had been defeated, so they changed the name of the county to Wensi County.

古文：春，至汲新中乡，得吕嘉首，以为获嘉县。
现代文：春季，驾至汲县新中乡，得知越叛相吕嘉已被斩首，就改此地为 获嘉 县。
English: In the spring, when he drove to Xinzhong Township, Kyu County, and learned that the Vietnamese traitor Lujia had been beheaded, he changed this place to Huojia County.

古文：驰义侯遣兵未及下，上便令征西南夷，平之。
现代文：驰义侯遗兵尚未撤，皇上即令他移师征西南夷，平定了越地。
English: Before the remaining soldiers of the Prince of Chigi withdrew, the emperor ordered him to transfer his division to conquer the southwestern part of Yunnan, and the land of Yunnan was leveled.

古文：遂定越地，以为南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、交阯、九真、日南、珠厓、儋耳郡。
现代文：于是越地平定，划为南海、苍梧、玉林、合浦、交趾、九真、日南、珠奎、儋耳九郡。
English: As a result, Yueqi was divided into nine counties: Nanhai, Cangwu, Yulin, Hepu, Jiaozi, Jiuzhen, Nichinan, Zhukui and Er.

古文：定西南夷，以为武都、牂柯、越巂、沈黎、文山郡。
现代文：西南夷平定后，划为武都？柯、越辒、沈黎、文山五郡。
English: After the subjugation of the southwestern barbarians, it was divided into the five counties of Wudu, Ke, Yuexuan, Shenli and Wenshan.

古文：秋，东越王馀善反，攻杀汉将、吏。
现代文：秋，东越王余善反，攻杀汉朝将吏。
English: In the autumn, the king of Dongyue, Yu Sheng, rebelled and attacked and killed Han Dynasty generals.

古文：遣横海将军韩说、中尉王温舒出会稽，楼船将军杨仆出豫章击之。
现代文：朝廷派横海将军韩说、中尉王温舒兵出会稽、楼船将军杨仆兵出豫章，共击东越王。
English: The imperial court sent General Han across the sea, Lieutenant Wang Wenshu and General Yang Bu to attack Dongyue Wang.

古文：又遣浮沮将军公孙贺出九原，匈河将军赵破奴出令居，皆二千余里，不见虏而还。
现代文：又派浮沮将军公孙贺兵出九原、匈河将军赵破奴兵出会居，都远征二千余里，不见匈奴兵马而回。
English: He also sent the general of the Bu Di, Gongsun He, and the general of the Xiong He, Zhao Banu, both of whom went on an expedition of more than two thousand miles and returned without seeing the Xiongnu soldiers.

古文：乃分武威、酒泉地置张掖、敦煌郡，徙民以实之。
现代文：于是分武、酒泉部分地区设置敦煌、张掖郡，迁徒内地人民充实其地。
English: As a result, Dunhuang and Zhangye counties were set up in some areas of Wenwu and Jiuquan, and the people from the inland who migrated enriched their lands.

古文：元封元年冬十月，诏曰： 南越、东瓯咸伏其辜，西蛮、北夷颇未辑睦。朕将巡边垂，择兵振旅，躬秉武节，置十二部将军，亲帅师焉。 
现代文：元封元年冬十月，皇上下诏说： 南越叛相、东瓯叛王俱已伏罪，然而南蛮北夷还未心悦诚服，朕准备巡边陲，挥兵振旅，亲秉武节，设置十二部将军，自为统帅。 
English: In the winter and October of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor issued an imperial edict, saying: "The South Vietnamese rebels and the Eastern Han rebels have already committed crimes, but the South Vietnamese and Northern Han rebels have not yet sincerely confessed. I am preparing to patrol the border, wave the troops, and hold the martial arts festival, set up twelve generals, and be the commander.

古文：行自云阳，北历上郡、西河、五原，出长城，北登单于台，至朔方，临北河。
现代文：从云阳出发，北经上郡、西河、五原，出长城，北登单于，到朔方，临北河。
English: Starting from Yunyang, the north goes through Shang County, West River, Wuhuan, out of the Great Wall, north of Denman, to Shuofang, bordering the North River.

古文：勒兵十八万骑，旌旗径千余里，威震匈奴。
现代文：率兵十八万骑，旌旗延绵千余里，威震匈奴。
English: He led an army of 180,000 horsemen, and his banner stretched for more than a thousand miles, terrifying the Huns.

古文：遣使者告单于曰： 南越王头已县于汉北阙矣。
现代文：派使者告诉单于说： 南越反王头已悬于汉廷北阙了。
English: An emissary was sent to tell Thanh Nhu: The anti-royal head of South Vietnam has been hanging in the North Tower of Hanting.

古文：单于能战，天子自将待边；不能，亟来臣服。何但亡匿幕北寒苦之地为！ 
现代文：单于如能接战，天子亲自领兵严阵等于边廷；单于如不能战，应迅来臣服，何必逃亡躲藏在漠北寒苦的地区呢！ 
English: Just because if he can fight, the Son of Heaven will personally lead the troops in a strict formation equal to the frontier court; just because if he can't fight, he should quickly surrender, why should he run away and hide in the cold regions of the desert north!

古文：匈奴詟焉。
现代文：匈奴为之慑服。
English: The Xiongnu are terrified by it.

古文：还，祠黄帝于桥山，乃归甘泉。
现代文：回师，祭黄帝于桥山，继而回到甘泉。
English: He went back to his teacher, worshipped the Yellow Emperor in Qiaoshan, and then returned to Ganquan.

古文：东越杀王馀善降。
现代文：东越臣民杀死叛王余善来归顺于汉。
English: East Vietnamese subjects killed the traitor King Yu Son to submit to Han.

古文：诏曰： 东越险阻反复，为后世患，迁其民于江、淮间。 
现代文：武帝下诏说： 东越地势险阻而人多反复，可能贻将来之患，迁徙其民到江淮之区居住。 
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict saying, "Dongyue is in a precarious situation and has a large number of people. It may be a problem in the future for its people to migrate and live in the area of the Yangtze River and Huai River.

古文：遂虚其地。
现代文：于是将当地居民尽皆迁出。
English: As a result, all the local residents were moved out.

古文：春正，行幸缑氏。
现代文：春季正月，驾临缑氏县。
English: It's the first month of spring, and I'm driving through Jinshi County.

古文：诏曰： 朕用事华山，至于中岳， 获駮麃，见夏后启母石。
现代文：下诏说： 朕祭祀西岳华山，又祭中岳嵩山，获得食虎猛兽马交？见到夏后启之母涂山氏所化之石。
English: The next edict said: "I will offer sacrifices to the West Yue Huashan, and also to the Middle Yue Songshan, and obtain the tiger-eating beast horse? See the stone that the mother of Xiaoqi, the Tu Shan clan, turned into.

古文：翌日，亲登嵩高，御史乘属，在庙旁吏卒咸闻呼万岁者三。登礼罔不答。
现代文：次晨亲登嵩峰，御史及随从官属以及在庙旁吏卒都听到山鸣谷应三呼万岁 之声，山神对朕有礼朕岂能不答？
English: The next morning, the relatives climbed Mount Song, and the prefect and his attendants, as well as the officials at the side of the temple, all heard the voice of Sanming Valley calling for long life. The mountain god is polite to me, can I not answer?

古文：其令祠官加增太室祠，禁无伐其草木。
现代文：现令祠官扩大太室祠的规模，禁止采伐附近草木。
English: The ancestral hall official has now been ordered to expand the size of the Taimuro ancestral hall and prohibit the felling of nearby plants and trees.

古文：以山下户三百为之奉邑，名曰崇高，独给祠，复亡所与。 
现代文：以山下三百户作为嵩山的奉邑，名为崇高，只供给祠祀所需，免除其他赋役。 
English: Taking the three hundred households at the foot of the mountain as the offering villages of Songshan, named Sublime, they only supply what is needed for ancestral shrines and are exempt from other obligations.

古文：行，遂东巡海上。
现代文：继续巡行，东至于渤海。
English: The parade continued east to the Bohai Sea.

古文：夏四月癸卯，上还，登封泰山，降坐明堂。
现代文：夏四月初七日，皇上从泰山之巅下来，设坛以崇封泰山，下至东北麓明堂。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor descended from the top of Mount Tai, set up a altar to venerate Mount Tai, and descended to the northeast foot of Myeongdong.

古文：诏曰： 朕以眇身承至尊，兢兢焉惟德菲薄，不明于礼乐，故用事八神，遭天地况施，著见景象，屑然如有闻。
现代文：下诏说： 朕以渺小之身承至尊之位，深惧德行菲薄，不明于礼乐，所以祭祀八方的天神地祗。幸遇天地的赐予，在嵩山见到奇异景象，倏忽间闻呼 万岁 之声。
English: The following edict says: I, with my small stature, hold the supreme position. I am deeply afraid that my virtue is feeble, and I am not known for my music. Therefore, I offer sacrifices to the eight angels of heaven and earth. Fortunately, I was blessed with the gift of heaven and earth, and I saw a strange scene in Songshan Mountain, and I heard the voice of "long live!" from time to time.

古文：震于怪物，欲止不敢，遂登封泰山，至于梁父，然后升禅肃然。
现代文：受到这种异象的震动，不敢中止自己的祭祀活动，于是登封五岳之首泰山，又祭梁父山，然后筑坛于肃然山。
English: Shaken by this vision, he did not dare to stop his sacrificial activities, so he ascended Mount Tai, the head of the Five Mountains, and also sacrificed Mount Liangzhi, and then built a altar on Mount Sooran.

古文：自新，嘉与士大夫更始，其以十月为元封元年。
现代文：朕将从此励志自新，与士大夫再作美好的开始。可以十月为元封之年。
English: From now on, I will refresh myself and make a good start with the scholar-doctor. October can be the year of Yuanfeng.

古文：行所巡至，博、奉高、蛇丘、历城、梁父，民田租逋赋、贷，已除。
现代文：凡所行经之地，如博、奉高、蛇丘、历城、梁父等地，人民所欠的租赋，一律豁免。
English: The rent owed by the people in all the places where the pilgrimage is made, such as Bo, Bonggao, Shekou, Licheng, Liangbei and other places, will be exempted.

古文：加年七十以上孤、寡帛，人二匹。
现代文：赏赐年七十岁以上的孤寡老人布帛，每人二匹。
English: Rewarding the lonely elderly over the age of seventy with two horses each.

古文：四县无出今年算。
现代文：四县不出今年的人丁税。
English: Four counties will not pay this year's poll tax.

古文：赐天下民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒。 
现代文：赐天下民爵一级，女子每百户牛酒若干。 
English: Give the world a first-class citizen, and every hundred female households will receive a certain amount of cattle wine.

古文：行自泰山，复东巡海上，至碣石。
现代文：皇上从泰山登程，再东巡海上，到达碣石县。
English: The emperor embarked from Mount Taishan, and then went on an eastward sea patrol to arrive in Shishi County.

古文：自辽西历北边九原，归于甘泉。
现代文：从辽东经过北边九原，回到甘泉。
English: From Liaodong through the northern nine plains, back to Ganquan.

古文：秋，有星孛于东井，又孛于三台。
现代文：秋，有彗星出现于东井星区，又有彗星出现在三台星区。
English: In the autumn, a comet appeared in the eastern constellation, and another comet appeared in the southern constellation.

古文：齐王闳薨。
现代文：齐王闵去世。
English: Qi Wangyao passed away.

古文：春，幸缑氏，遂至东莱。
现代文：春驾临缑氏，随后到东莱。
English: Spring came to Linyi, and then to Donglai.

古文：夏四月，还祠泰山。
现代文：夏四月，归途中祭泰山。
English: In the summer, in April, on the way back, there is a festival at Mount Tai.

古文：至瓠子，临决河，命从臣将军以下皆负薪塞河堤，作《瓠子之歌》。
现代文：到瓠子堤，视察黄河决口，命令从臣凡将军以下都背驮草袋树枝投入截流堵口工程，作《瓠子之歌》。
English: He went to the Hanzi Embankment, inspected the Yellow River's outlet, and ordered all the officials from General Fan down to carry reed bags of branches to be used in the project of blocking the outlet, to make "Song of the Hanzi."

古文：赦所过徙，赐孤、独、高年米，人四石。
现代文：赦免所经过之地的罪犯，赏赐孤独老人粮米，每人四石。
English: He pardoned the criminals of the land he passed through, and rewarded the lonely old people with grain and rice, four stone per person.

古文：还，作甘泉通天台、长安飞廉馆。
现代文：回朝，建造甘泉通天台、长安飞廉馆。
English: He returned to China and built the Ganquantong rooftop and the Chang'an Fei Liang Museum.

古文：朝鲜王攻杀辽东都尉，乃募天下死罪击朝鲜。
现代文：朝鲜王攻杀辽东都尉，于是招募天下犯有死罪的犯人出击朝鲜以立功赎罪。
English: The king of Korea killed the captain of Liaodong, so he recruited the world's criminals who had committed capital crimes to attack North Korea to atone for their sins.

古文：六月，诏曰： 甘泉宫内中产芝，九茎连叶。
现代文：六月，下诏说： 甘泉宫内产灵芝瑞草，九茎连叶。
English: In June, the following edict was issued: Ganquan Palace produced Ganoderma lucidum, nine stems with leaves.

古文：上帝博临，不异下房，赐朕弘休。
现代文：上天光彻天下，普照幽隐，赐朕以洪福。
English: Let the light of heaven shine throughout the world, illumine the hidden and obscure, and bestow on me abundant blessings.

古文：其赦天下，赐云阳都百户牛、酒。 
现代文：现大赦天下，赏赐云阳都百户牛酒若干。 
English: The current emperor has pardoned the whole world, and has awarded several hundred households in Yunyang with cow wine.

古文：作《芝房之歌》。
现代文：作《芝房之歌》。
English: Song of the Lawn.

古文：秋，作明堂于泰山下。
现代文：秋，在泰山之麓建造明堂。
English: In the autumn, Myeongdong was built at the foot of Mount Tai.

古文：遣楼船将军杨仆、左将军荀彘将应募罪人击朝鲜。又遣将军郭昌、中郎将卫广发巴、蜀兵平西南夷未服者，以为益州郡。
现代文：派遣楼船将军杨仆、左将军荀彘率领应募罪人出击朝鲜，又派将军郭昌、中郎将卫广领巴蜀兵平定西南夷中尚未臣服的部族，在此设立益州郡。
English: He dispatched the general of the block ship, Yang Bu, and the general of the left ship, Zou, to lead the criminals to be recruited to attack Korea, and also sent the general Guo Chang and Zhong Lang to subdue the tribes that had not yet been subjugated in the southwestern Yizhong and establish Yizhou County.

古文：三年在，作角抵戏，三百里内皆观。
现代文：三年春，作角抵之戏，三百里内都来观看。
English: In the spring of the third year, the play was a hit, and people from as far away as 300 miles came to watch.

古文：夏，朝鲜斩其王右渠降，以其地为乐浪、临屯、玄菟、真番郡。
现代文：夏，朝鲜臣民斩其王右渠而降附于汉，汉廷以其地为乐浪、临屯、玄菟、真番郡。
English: In the summer, the Korean subjects abdicated their sovereignty to the Han Dynasty, and Hanting took its lands as Le Lang, Lintun, Xuanzang, and Zhenbang counties.

古文：楼船将军杨仆坐失亡多免为庶民，左将军荀彘坐争功弃市。
现代文：楼船将军杨仆犯有士卒损失逃亡甚多之罪罢官为庶民，左将军荀彘犯有恃功争赏之罪被斩首示众。
English: The general of the houseboat, Yang Pei, was found guilty of causing a great deal of loss to soldiers and fleeing, and was dismissed as a commoner. The general of the left, Zou, was found guilty of competing for rewards and was beheaded in public.

古文：秋七月，胶西王端薨。
现代文：秋七月，胶西王端去世。
English: In autumn and July, Jiaoxi Wangduang passed away.

古文：武都氐人反，分徙酒泉郡。
现代文：武都氐人反，分迁于酒泉郡。
English: Wu Du rebelled and moved to Jiuquan County.

古文：四年冬十月，行幸雍，祠五畴。
现代文：四年冬十月，帝行幸至雍，祭祀五帝。
English: In October of the winter of the fourth year, the emperor traveled to Yong, and the five emperors were worshiped.

古文：通回中道，遂北出萧关，历独鹿，鸣泽，自代而还，幸河东。
现代文：修通回中大道，帝由此道北出萧关，经过独鹿、鸣泽，从代回都，驾幸河东。
English: After repairing and returning to Zhongyang Road, the emperor went from Xiaoguan to the north of the road, passed through Doklu and Mingze, and from the capital to the east of the river.

古文：春三月，祠后土。
现代文：春三月，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, after the spring festival, the earth god is no longer worshipped.

古文：诏曰： 朕躬祭后土地祇，见光集于灵坛，一夜三烛。
现代文：下诏说： 朕亲祭后土地祗，见神光集于灵坛，一夜间三次显现。
English: The following edict says: After the offering of my relatives, the earth trembled, and I saw the divine light gathered at the altar, appearing three times in one night.

古文：幸中都宫，殿上见光。
现代文：朕在中都宫，殿上也有华光灿烂。
English: I am in the Zhongdu Palace, and the palace is also resplendent.

古文：其赦汾阴、夏阳、中都死罪以下，赐三县及杨氏皆无出今年租赋。 
现代文：为此特赦免汾阴、夏阳、中都死罪以下，赏赐以上三县及杨氏县今年都不缴纳租赋。 
English: To this end, he specifically pardoned Suyin, Xiayang and Zhongdu for less than the death penalty, and rewarded the above three counties and Yang's County for not paying rent this year.

古文：夏，大旱，民多曷死。
现代文：夏，大旱，民多中暑而死。
English: Summer, drought, more people die of heatstroke.

古文：秋，以匈奴弱，可遂臣服，乃遣使说之。
现代文：秋，认为匈奴势弱，可以乘势使其归顺，就派使前往导说。
English: In the autumn, believing that the Huns were weak and could be made to surrender, he sent an envoy to explain the situation.

古文：单于使来，死京师。
现代文：单于派使者来，病死于长安。
English: However, he died of illness in Chang'an after sending an envoy.

古文：匈奴寇边，遣拔胡将军郭昌屯朔方。
现代文：匈奴入寇边塞，汉廷派拔胡将军郭昌屯兵于朔方。
English: The Xiongnu entered the besieged city, and the Han Dynasty sent Hu's general, Guo Chang, to lead the troops to the Shuo side.

古文：五年冬，行南巡狩，至于盛唐，望祀虞舜于九嶷。登灊天柱山，自寻阳浮江，亲射蛟江中，获之。
现代文：五年冬，到南方巡狩，行到南郡盛唐县，望祀舜于九嶷山，登临天柱山，从浔阳登舟巡江，亲射蛟于江中，并获得蛟。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, he went on a hunting tour to the south, and traveled to Shengtang County, Nan County. He hoped to shoot quail in Jiuquan Mountain, climbed Tianzhu Mountain, went on a river cruise from Shenyang, shot quail in the river, and obtained quail.

古文：舳舻千里，薄枞阳而出，作《盛唐枞阳之歌》。
现代文：船队千里不绝，从枞阳县出发，作《盛唐枞阳之歌》。
English: The fleet traveled thousands of miles, starting from Poyang County, to make "The Song of Poyang in the Tang Dynasty."

古文：遂北至琅邪，并海，所过，礼祠其名山大川。
现代文：随后北至琅笽，直到海滨。经过之处对当地名山大川都进行礼祠。
English: Then, the procession went north to the estuary, until it reached the seashore. Everywhere the procession passed, the local famous mountains and rivers were honored with shrines.

古文：春三月，还至泰山，增封。
现代文：春三月，归程经泰山，对泰山加封。
English: In the spring of March, the return journey passed through Mount Tai, and Mount Tai was sealed.

古文：甲子，祠高祖于明堂，以配上帝，因朝诸侯王、列侯，受郡国计。
现代文：三月二十一日，祠汉高祖于明堂，以配享于上天。因时召见各侯王列侯，受郡国所上簿计。
English: On March 21st, the ancestor of the Ancestral Hall of the Han Dynasty, Gao Zu, ascended to heaven in the Ming Hall. At that time, all princes were summoned and recorded by the county government.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 朕巡荆、扬、辑江、淮物，会大海气，以合泰山。
现代文：夏四月，下诏说： 朕巡幸荆、扬，祭祀江淮，会合海神之气，共致于泰山。
English: In the summer of April, the following edict was issued: "I will make a pilgrimage to Jing and Yang, offer sacrifices to Jianghuai, and meet the sea god's spirit, all of which will take place on Mount Tai.

古文：上天见象，增修封禅。
现代文：上天显示灵象，朕增修封禅之仪。
English: The heavens show the spirit image, and I add the ceremony of sealing the zen.

古文：其赦天下。所幸县毋出今年租赋，赐鳏、寡、孤、独帛，贫穷者粟。 
现代文：现在赦天下，所经过之县，不出今年租赋，赏赐鳏寡孤独以布帛，赐贫苦人以粮食。 
English: Now forgive the whole world, the counties you pass through, do not come out of this year's rent, reward the lonely with cloth, and give the poor with grain.

古文：还幸甘泉，郊泰畴。
现代文：于是驾幸甘泉，郊祭泰山神。
English: As a result, the Suburban Festival of the god of Mount Tai was held.

古文：大司马大将军青薨。
现代文：大司马、大将军卫青去世。
English: Senior General Ma and General Wei Qing passed away.

古文：初置刺史部十三州。
现代文：开始设置刺史部十三州。
English: Began to set up the stabbing history department in thirteen states.

古文：名臣文武欲尽，诏曰： 盖有非常之功，必待非常之人，故马或奔踶而致千里，士或有负俗之累而立功名。
现代文：名臣文武青黄不继，皇上下征贤诏说： 大凡要建立非常之功的，必须等待非常之人，所以好踢蹋的马有的可日行千里，被世俗讥论的人有的可能建功立业。
English: The eminent minister Wenwu Qinghuang did not succeed, and the emperor issued an edict to recruit sages and sages, saying: "If you want to build a great achievement, you must wait for a great person. Therefore, some horses that are good at kicking can travel thousands of miles in a day, and some people who are ridiculed by the world may build a great achievement.

古文：夫泛驾之马，跅驰之士，亦在御之而已。
现代文：那些难驯之马与不羁之士，只要制御得当就可以让其有所作为。
English: Those unruly horses and unruly men can make a difference as long as they are properly controlled.

古文：其令州、郡察吏、民有茂材、异等可为将、相及使绝国者。 
现代文：现在命令州郡考察吏民中有才华超群的可以为将相及出使异国的人选。 
English: It is now ordered that the prefectures and counties should inspect the officials and people to find the most talented candidates who can be sent to foreign countries.

古文：六年冬，行幸回中。
现代文：六年冬，巡幸于回中。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, the parade came to the middle school.

古文：春，作首山宫。
现代文：春，作首山宫。
English: Spring, as the first mountain palace.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，行幸河东，祭祀后土。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：诏曰： 朕礼首山，昆田出珍物，化或为黄金。
现代文：诏书说： 朕恭礼首山，因为山下昆田出珍物，有的化为黄金。
English: The edict said: "I salute the first mountain, because the mountains of Kunden produce precious things, some of which turn into gold.

古文：祭后土，神光三烛。
现代文：祭后土，神光三次显现。
English: After the festival, the divine light appeared three times.

古文：其赦汾阴殊死以下，赐天下贫民布、帛，人一匹。 
现代文：现赦免汾阴县死罪以下罪犯，赏赐天下贫苦人民布帛，每人一匹。 
English: He has now pardoned the criminals of Shouyin County who committed crimes punishable by death or less, and rewarded the poor people of the world with cloth ponchos, one for each person.

古文：益州、昆明反，赦京师亡命令从军，遣拔胡将军郭昌将以击之。
现代文：益州、昆明地方发生反叛。皇上赦免京都亡命犯罪的人令其从军，派遣拔胡将军郭昌领兵平叛。
English: A rebellion broke out in the provinces of Yizhou and Kunming. The emperor pardoned the criminal exiles from Kyoto, ordered them to join the army, and dispatched General Guo Chang to lead the troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：夏，京师民观角抵于上林平乐馆。
现代文：夏，京都人民观看角抵之戏于上林平乐馆。
English: In the summer, the people of Kyoto watch the drama of the arrival of the horns at the Shorinpei Concert Hall.

古文：秋，大旱，蝗。
现代文：秋，大旱，蝗灾。
English: Autumn, drought, locusts.

古文：太初元年冬十月，行幸泰山。
现代文：太初元年冬十月，行幸泰山。
English: In the winter of October in the early 1900s, he visited Mount Tai.

古文：十一月甲子朔旦，冬至，祀上帝于明堂。
现代文：十一月初一日，冬至，祭祀上帝于明堂。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the winter solstice, there will be a sacrifice to God in Myodo.

古文：乙酉，柏梁台灾。
现代文：十一月二十三日，柏梁台发生火灾。
English: On November 23rd, a fire broke out in Bai Liang Tai.

古文：十二月，禅高里，祠后土。
现代文：十二月，祭泰山下的高里山，祀后土祠。
English: In December, the festival is held on Mount Gaoli under Mount Tai, at the Houdu Shrine.

古文：东临勃海，望祠蓬莱。
现代文：东临渤海，望祭蓬莱。
English: To the east is the Bohai Sea, and the festival is held in Penglai.

古文：春，还，受计于甘泉。
现代文：春还京都，受诸州簿计于甘泉宫。
English: Spring has returned to Kyoto, arriving at Gansen-gu Shrine by the count of the states.

古文：二月，起建章宫。
现代文：二月，起建章宫。
English: In February, the construction of Zhang Palace began.

古文：夏五月，正历，以正月为岁首。色上黄，数用五，定官名，协音律。
现代文：夏五月，订正历法，以正月为岁首，以黄为上色，印文用正字，统一官名，协调音律。
English: Summer and May, revised calendar, with the New Year's Day as the beginning of the year, with yellow as the color, printing with orthographic characters, unified official names, harmonized musical rhythms.

古文：遣因杅将军公孙敖筑塞外受降城。
现代文：派遣因木于将军公孙敖筑塞外受降城。
English: The troops were dispatched to accept the fall of the city from the outside of the fortress built by the general Gongsun Qian.

古文：秋八月，行幸安定。遣贰师将军李广利发天下谪民西征大宛。
现代文：秋八月，巡幸安定县，派贰师将军李广利征发天下流放戍边的罪人西征大宛。
English: In the autumn and August, he was on a tour of Xingxing and Anning counties. He sent the general Li Guangli to collect and send the criminals who had been exiled from the world to Xizhengdaewan.

古文：蝗从东方飞至敦煌。
现代文：蝗虫从东方飞至敦煌。
English: Locusts fly from the East to Dunhuang.

古文：二年春正月戊申，丞相庆薨。
现代文：二年春正月，丞相石庆去世。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the chancellor Shi Qing passed away.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，皇上行幸至河东，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：令天下大酺五日，膢五日，祠门户，比腊。
现代文：下令天下饮酒为欢五天，祈祷五日，祭祀祠庙，其规格与腊祭相同。
English: The world was ordered to drink alcohol for five days of rejoicing, five days of prayer, and five days of offering sacrifices to temples. The specifications were the same as for the Wax Festival.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 朕用事介山，祭后土，皆有光应。其赦汾阴、安邑殊死以下。 
现代文：夏四月，下诏说： 朕祭祀介山，祈福后土，都有灵光感应，现赦免汾阴、安邑死囚以下罪犯。 
English: In the summer of April, he issued the following edict: "I have made offerings to Mount Jie and prayed for the blessing of the hinterland, both of which are inspired by spiritual light. I am now pardoning the criminals from the death row of Jieyin and Anyi.

古文：五月，籍吏民马补车骑马。
现代文：五月，登记吏民马匹，以补足车骑用马。
English: In May, officials and citizens were required to register their horses.

古文：秋，蝗。
现代文：秋，蝗灾。
English: In autumn, a locust plague occurs.

古文：遣浚稽将军赵破奴二万骑出朔方击匈奴，不还。
现代文：派浚稽将军赵破奴二万骑出朔方出击匈奴，全军覆没。
English: General Zhao Bonu sent 20,000 cavalrymen to attack the Xiongnu, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：冬十二月，御史大夫儿宽卒。
现代文：冬十二月，御史大夫儿宽去世。
English: In the winter of December, Dr. Mishi passed away.

古文：三年春正月，行东巡海上。
现代文：三年春正月，皇上东行巡于海上。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, the Emperor went on a tour to the east by sea.

古文：夏四月，还，修封泰山，禅石闾。
现代文：夏四月，归途中，修封泰山，设祭于石闾山。
English: In the summer of April, on the way back, Mount Tai was repaired, and a festival was held on Mount Shikotsu.

古文：遣光禄勋徐自为筑五原塞外列城，西北至卢朐，游击将军韩说将兵屯之。
现代文：派光禄勋徐自为筑五原塞外列城，西北至卢朐山，游击将军韩说领兵驻守。
English: He sent Guanglu Xiu to build the Wuhuan fortress outside the city, northwest to Lushan, and the guerrilla general Han said that he would lead the troops.

古文：强弩都尉路博德筑居延。
现代文：强弩都尉路博德筑居延城。
English: Lu Bode, a strong-willed captain, lives in Yancheng.

古文：秋，匈奴人定襄、云中，杀略数千人，行坏光禄诸亭、障；又入张掖、酒泉，杀都尉。
现代文：秋，匈奴入侵定襄、云中，杀掠数千人，破坏光禄勋所筑城的亭障；又进入张掖、酒泉，杀死都尉。
English: In autumn, the Xiongnu invaded Dingxiang and Yunzhong, killed and plundered thousands of people, and destroyed the pavilion built by Guanglu; they also entered Zhangye and Jiuquan, and killed the captain.

古文：四年春，贰师将军广利斩大宛王首，获汗血马来。作《西极天马之歌》。
现代文：四年春，贰师将军李广利斩大宛王首级，获千里汗血马，朝廷作《西极天马之歌》以志庆。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Heian period, the general Li Guangli was awarded the first rank of the Grand Prince, and was awarded a thousand miles of sweat and blood, and the imperial court made "Song of the West Pole Heavenly Horse" to celebrate.

古文：秋，起明光宫。
现代文：秋，起光明宫。
English: In autumn, the Komyo-gu Shrine is lit up.

古文：冬，行幸回中。
现代文：冬，行幸于回中。
English: In winter, the procession ends in the middle of the round.

古文：徙弘农都尉治武关，税出入者以给关吏、卒食。
现代文：迁弘农都尉在武关设税卡，收取出入关税以供给关吏及守关士卒生活所需。
English: Qian Hongnong Duifang set up a tax card in Wuguan and collected the entry and exit tariffs to provide the customs officers and customs officers with the necessities of life.

古文：天汉元年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畴。
现代文：天汉元年春正月，皇上驾临甘泉，郊祭泰山。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Heian period, the emperor came to Ganquan, the suburb of Mount Tai.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，驾临河东，祭祀后土。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：匈奴归汉使者，使使来献。
现代文：匈奴送还汉使，并派使者前来朝献。
English: The Xiongnu sent back the Han envoys and sent emissaries to present gifts to the emperor.

古文：夏五月，赦天下。
现代文：夏五月，大赦天下。
English: In the summer of May, there was a general amnesty.

古文：秋，闭城门大搜。发谪戍屯五原。
现代文：秋，关闭城门大搜越法度而挥霍浪费的人，对犯罪者发配戍守五原边境。
English: In the autumn, the city gate was closed for a large-scale search for people who exceeded the law and squandered money, and the criminals were assigned to guard the Wuhuan border.

古文：二年春，行幸东海。还幸回中。
现代文：二年春，行幸东海，回幸回中。
English: In the spring of the second year, he went on a trip to the East China Sea and came back to the middle school.

古文：夏五月，贰师将军三万骑出酒泉，与右贤王战于天山，斩首虏万余级。
现代文：夏五月，贰师将军领三万骑兵出酒泉，与匈奴右贤王战于天山，斩敌首一万余级。
English: In the summer of May, General Zou led 30,000 cavalry out of Jiuquan and fought against the Hun Uxian Wang in Tianshan, decapitating more than 10,000 enemy troops.

古文：又遣因杅将军出西河，骑都尉李陵将步兵五千人出居延北，与单于战，斩首虏万余级。
现代文：又派遣因木于将军出西河，骑都尉李陵将步兵五千人出居延北，与单于交战，斩敌首一万余级。
English: He also dispatched General Ying Mu Yu to the West River, and Cavalry Lieutenant Li Ling led five thousand infantrymen to Yanbei, and fought with Shan Yu, decapitating more than ten thousand enemy.

古文：陵兵败，降匈奴。
现代文：李陵兵败，降于匈奴。
English: Li Ling was defeated and fell to the Huns.

古文：秋，止禁巫祠道中者。
现代文：秋，禁止百姓巫觋在道路中祠祭。
English: In the autumn, the people were forbidden to gather in the middle of the road for the ancestral hall festival.

古文：大搜。
现代文：大搜巫蛊。
English: A large-scale search for witches and wizards is underway.

古文：渠黎六国使使来献。
现代文：西域渠黎六国派使者前来朝献。
English: Envoys from six countries in the western region of the Canal du Liban came to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：泰山、琅邪群盗徐勃等阻山攻城，道路不通。遣直指使者暴胜之等衣绣衣、杖斧分部逐捕。刺史、郡守以下皆伏诛。
现代文：泰山、琅笽群盗徐勃等据山自守攻陷城邑，道路不通，派遣直指使者暴胜之等人身着法衣手持斧钺分头追捕，凡刺史郡守以下的官吏剿盗不力者都处死。
English: Mount Tai, the bandit Xu Bo, and others defended themselves against the mountain and besieged the town. The road was impassable. They sent an envoy named Wu Shengzhu to hunt down the bandits in full ceremonial dress, armed with axes and hoes. Any officials below the county governor who were unable to stop the bandits were put to death.

古文：冬十一月，诏关都尉曰： 今豪杰多远交，依东方群盗。其谨察出入者。 
现代文：冬十一月，下诏对关都尉说： 今日豪家悍民多互相交结，附从东方群盗，要对出入关内外的人严加查询。 
English: In the winter of November, the next emperor said to the governor of Guan: Today, the rich and powerful people are mostly intertwined with each other, and they are attached to the Eastern bandits. Strict inquiries should be made about people entering and leaving Guan.

古文：三年春二月，御史大夫王卿有罪，自杀。
现代文：三年春三月，御史大夫王卿有罪，自杀。
English: In March of the spring of the third year, Wang Qing, a doctor of history, was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：初榷酒酤。
现代文：首次规定酒类官卖。
English: For the first time, the sale of alcohol by government officials was stipulated.

古文：三月，行幸泰山，修封，祀明堂，因受计。
现代文：三月，行幸泰山，祭祀隆重，在明堂举行仪式，因时受各地簿计。
English: In March, the auspicious Mount Tai was celebrated with a grand sacrificial rite, and a ceremony was held in the Ming Hall, so it was recorded in the books of all regions.

古文：还幸北地，祠常山，瘗玄玉。
现代文：回朝时行幸北地，祭祀常山，埋下一块黑玉。
English: When he returned to Japan, he went to visit Hokkechi, made a sacrifice to Jozan, and buried a piece of black jade.

古文：夏四月，赦天下。
现代文：夏四月，赦免天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：行所过毋出田租。
现代文：对行经之地免除一年田赋。
English: The land where the sutra is recited is exempt from the one-year rice field allotment.

古文：秋，匈奴入雁门，太守坐畏愞弃市。
现代文：秋，匈奴侵入雁门关，雁门太守犯有畏敌不前之罪处斩。
English: In autumn, the Xiongnu invaded the Gate of the Wild Goose, and the Gate of the Wild Goose was beheaded for the crime of fearing the enemy.

古文：四年春正月，朝诸侯王于甘泉宫。发天下七科谪及勇敢士，遣贰师将军李广利将六万骑、步兵七万人出朔方，因杅将军公孙敖万骑、步兵三万人出雁门，游击将军韩说步兵三万人出五原，强弩都尉路博德步兵万余人与贰师会。
现代文：四年春正月，各侯王在甘泉宫朝见汉武帝，征发天下犯有各种罪过愿意自赎的及勇敢之士，派贰师将军李广利领六万骑兵，七万步兵出朔方，派因木于将军公孙敖领一万骑兵，三万步兵出雁门关，派游击将军韩说领步兵三万人出五原，派强弩将军都尉路博德领步兵一万余人与贰师将军会师。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the princes went to see Emperor Hanwu in the morning at Ganquan Palace. They conscripted and dispatched all the brave people who had committed various sins and were willing to redeem themselves. They sent general Li Guangli to lead 60,000 cavalrymen and 70,000 infantrymen to the Yangshuo side. They sent general Gongsun Rong to lead 10,000 cavalrymen and 30,000 infantrymen to the Yanmen Pass. They sent guerrilla general Han Xie to lead 30,000 infantrymen to the Wuhuan side. They also sent general Lu Bode to lead more than 10,000 infantrymen to join forces with general Rong's division.

古文：广利与单于战余吾水上连日，敖与左贤王战不利，皆引还。
现代文：李广利将军与匈奴王单于战于余吾水滨数日，公孙敖将军与匈奴左贤王交战失利，都收兵回朝。
English: General Li Guangli and the Xiongnu Wang Shan fought for a few days at Yuwu Waterfront, and General Gongsun Rong and the Xiongnu Zuoxian Wang lost the battle, and both withdrew to the North.

古文：夏四月，立皇子髆为昌邑王。
现代文：夏四月，立皇子髆为昌邑王。
English: In the summer of April, the crown prince was crowned the king of Chang'e.

古文：秋九月，令死罪入赎钱五十万减死一等。
现代文：秋九月，下令死罪交纳五十万赎金，可减死一等。
English: In autumn and September, the death penalty was ordered to pay a ransom of 500,000 yuan, which could be reduced to the first degree.

古文：太始元年春正月，因杅将军敖有罪，要斩。
现代文：太始元年，因木于将军公孙敖有罪，腰斩。
English: In the first year of the Taishi era, he was beheaded for being guilty of treason against the general Gongsun Qi.

古文：徙郡、国吏民豪桀于茂陵、云陵。
现代文：迁移郡国间的吏民豪杰于茂陵、云阳。
English: The outstanding officials and citizens who migrated between counties and countries were in Murying and Yunyang.

古文：夏六月，赦天下。
现代文：夏六月，赦免天下罪人。
English: In the summer of June, the sinners of the world will be pardoned.

古文：二年春正月，行幸回中。
现代文：二年春正月，帝行巡回中。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, the emperor was on a tour.

古文：三月，诏曰： 有司议曰，往者朕郊见上帝，西登陇首，获白麟以馈宗庙，渥洼水出天马，泰山见黄金，宜改故名。
现代文：三月，下诏说： 根据有关官员的建议，前一段朕郊祭上天，西登陇首山，获得白麒麟以献于祖庙，渥洼水出天马，泰山出现自然黄金，应表祥瑞而改旧法。
English: In March, the next imperial edict said: According to the suggestions of the relevant officials, the former section of the suburb was dedicated to heaven, the west ascended the Shishou Mountain, the white unicorn was dedicated to the ancestral temple, the water of the Wowa River was released from the heavens, and the natural gold appeared on Mount Tai. The old law should be changed to show auspiciousness.

古文：今更黄金为麟趾褭蹏以协瑞焉。 
现代文：今改黄金为麟足马蹄云形以符合祥瑞之征。 
English: Now change the gold to a cloud-shaped unicorn's foot and hoof to match the sign of auspiciousness.

古文：因以班赐诸侯王。秋，旱。
现代文：因而按爵级为序赐各侯王以麟足马蹄金。秋，旱灾。
English: Therefore, according to the order of the peerage, the lords and queens were given gold horseshoes. Autumn, drought.

古文：九月，募死罪人赎钱五十万减死一等。
现代文：九月，招募犯下死罪的交纳赎罪金五十万可以减死一等。
English: In September, it was announced that anyone who commits a capital crime and pays a ransom of 500,000 yuan will be given a first-class death sentence.

古文：御史大夫杜周卒。
现代文：御史大夫杜周去世。
English: Dr. Du Zhou passed away.

古文：三年春正月，行幸甘泉宫，飨外国客。
现代文：三年春正月，皇帝行幸到甘泉宫，举行宴会招待外国宾客。
English: In the first month of the third year of Spring, the emperor traveled to Ganquan Palace and held a banquet to invite foreign guests.

古文：二月，令天下大酺五日。
现代文：二月，下令天下欢饮五日。
English: In February, he decreed a five-day drinking binge.

古文：行幸东海，获赤雁，作《朱雁之歌》。
现代文：皇帝巡幸东海，获得赤雁一只，作《赤雁之歌》。
English: The emperor toured the East China Sea and obtained a red goose to write "The Song of the Red Goose."

古文：幸琅邪，礼日成山。
现代文：驾幸琅笽，在成山拜日。
English: On a trip to Chengshan to worship the sun.

古文：登之罘，浮大海。山称万岁。
现代文：登芝罘山，乘船游于大海，岸边山谷间有呼 万岁 之声。
English: Climbing Lushan Mountain, taking a boat to swim in the sea, and the sound of whistling in the valleys along the shore.

古文：冬，赐行所过户五千钱，鳏、寡、孤、独帛，人一匹。
现代文：冬，赏赐所经过的地方每户五千钱，鳏寡孤独每人布帛一匹。
English: In winter, reward the places you pass through with five thousand coins per household, and the widows and widowers will each receive one horse.

古文：四年春三月，行幸泰山。
现代文：四年春三月，皇帝巡幸泰山。
English: In March of the spring of the fourth year, the emperor went on a tour of Mount Tai.

古文：壬午，祀高祖于明堂，以配上帝，因受计。
现代文：三月二十五日，在明堂祭祀高祖皇帝，以配享于上天，因时接受各郡国上交的簿计。
English: On March 25th, the Emperor Gaozhu was sacrificed in the Ming Hall to enjoy the blessings of heaven. Therefore, the bookkeeping submitted by each county and state was accepted.

古文：癸未，祀孝景皇帝于明堂。甲申，修封。
现代文：二十六日，在明堂祭祀孝景皇帝。二十七日，修封泰山。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Xiao Jing was worshipped in the Ming Hall. On the 27th, Mount Tai was repaired.

古文：丙戌，禅石闾。
现代文：二十九日，祭石闾山。
English: On the 29th, the Ishizuchiyama festival is held.

古文：夏四月，幸不其，祠神人于交门宫，若有乡坐拜者。作《交门之歌》。
现代文：夏四月，驾临东莱县，在交门宫祭祀海上神人，隐约可见神在虚无缥缈间向祠坐而拜之像。皇帝作《交门之歌》。
English: In the summer of April, when he arrived in Donglai County, he offered a sacrifice to the sea godman at the Jiaomen Palace. The image of the god sitting and worshiping the shrine in the middle of nothingness was faintly visible. The emperor wrote "Song of the Jiaomen."

古文：夏五月，还幸建章宫，大置酒，赦天下。
现代文：夏五月，还都驾临建章宫，大设酒筵，赦天下罪人。
English: In the summer and May, they all came to build the Zhang Palace, set up a large wine cellar, and forgave the sinners of the world.

古文：秋七月，赵有蛇从郭外入邑，与邑中蛇群斗孝文庙下，邑中蛇死。
现代文：秋七月，赵地有蛇从城外入城内，与城内蛇群斗于孝文帝庙下，城内的蛇被斗死。
English: In autumn and July, a snake from outside the city entered the city of Zhao and fought with a group of snakes from inside the city under the Xiaowen Temple. The snake was killed in the fight.

古文：冬十月甲寅晦，日有蚀之。十二月，行幸雍，祠五畴，西至安定、北地。
现代文：冬十月三十日，日偏食。十二月，皇帝驾临雍地，祭祀五帝，并西巡至安定、北地。
English: In winter, on October 30th, the sun was partially eclipsed. In December, the emperor came to Yongdi to offer sacrifices to the five emperors, and toured westward to Ding'an and northward.

古文：征和元年春正月，还，行幸建章宫。
现代文：征和元年春正月，御驾回都，驾至建章宫。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the reign of Confucius, he drove back to the capital and drove to the Jianzhang Palace.

古文：三月，赵王彭祖薨。
现代文：三月，赵王彭祖去世。
English: In March, Zhao Wang Peng Zu passed away.

古文：冬十一月，发三辅骑士大搜上林，闭长安城门索，十一日乃解。
现代文：冬十一月，调动三辅骑兵大搜上林苑，关闭长安城门进行索查奸人，十一日方解禁。
English: In the winter of November, the Three Auxiliary Cavalrymen were mobilized to conduct a large-scale search of Shanglinyuan and close the Chang'an City Gate to investigate the traitors. The ban was lifted on the 11th.

古文：巫蛊起。
现代文：巫蛊事起。
English: It all started with witchcraft.

古文：二年春正月，丞相贺下狱死。
现代文：二年春正月，丞相贺下狱死。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the chancellor He Zeng died in prison.

古文：夏四月，大风发屋、折木。
现代文：夏四月，狂风拔屋折树。
English: In the summer in April, the strong winds uprooted trees.

古文：闰月，诸邑公主、阳石公主皆坐巫蛊死。
现代文：二年闰五月，卫皇后之女诸邑公主、阳石公主都因牵涉到犯巫蛊之罪而被赐死。
English: In leap May of the second year, the daughters of Empress Wei, Princess Zhuyi and Princess Yangshi, were both sentenced to death for their involvement in the crime of witchcraft.

古文：夏，行幸甘泉。
现代文：夏，驾到甘泉。
English: Summer, drive to Amaizumi.

古文：秋七月，按道侯韩说、使者江充等掘蛊太子宫。壬午，太子与皇后谋斩充，以节发兵与丞相刘屈氂大战长安，死者数万人。
现代文：秋七月，按道侯韩说、使者江充等在太子宫中发掘埋在地下的木偶，七月九日，太子与皇后见江充挟隙栽赃就想杀掉他，太子下令调兵与丞相刘屈牦大战于长安，双方死者数万人。
English: In the autumn and July, according to Hou Han, the emissary Jiang Cheng and others excavated the puppets buried underground in the prince's womb. On July 9, the prince and the queen saw Jiang Cheng planting a trap and wanted to kill him. The prince ordered the deployment of troops to fight with the prime minister Liu Quqian in Chang'an. Tens of thousands of people died on both sides.

古文：庚寅，太子亡，皇后自杀。
现代文：七月十七日，太子逃亡，皇后自杀。
English: On July 17, the crown prince fled and the empress committed suicide.

古文：初置城门屯兵。更节加黄旄。
现代文：开始在首都城门驻扎士卒，在符节上加黄旄以区别于太子的兵符。
English: He began to station his soldiers at the gates of the capital, adding a yellow star to the emblem to distinguish it from the prince's.

古文：御史大夫暴胜之、司直田仁坐失纵，胜之自杀，仁要斩。
现代文：御史大夫暴胜之、司直田仁犯有纵过失察之罪，胜之自杀，田仁腰斩。
English: Goshi daifu Takeshi Tsurukatsu and Shinao Tanehito were guilty of negligence, Takeshi committed suicide and Tanehito was beheaded.

古文：八月辛亥，太子自杀于湖。
现代文：八月初八日，太子自杀于湖县。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, the crown prince committed suicide in Hulunbuir County.

古文：癸亥，地震。
现代文：八月二十日，地震。
English: On the 20th, an earthquake.

古文：九月，立赵敬肃王子偃为平干王。
现代文：九月，立赵敬肃王子偃为干王。
English: In September, Zhao Keisui, the Prince of Zhou, was appointed as the King of Gan.

古文：匈奴入上谷、五原，杀略吏民。
现代文：匈奴侵入上谷、五原，杀掠当地吏民。
English: The Xiongnu invaded the upper valley and the Five Plains, killing and plundering local officials and people.

古文：三年春正月，行幸雍，至安定、北地。
现代文：三年春正月，驾临于雍，至安定、北地。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, he arrived in Yong, to stability, the north.

古文：匈奴入五原、酒泉，杀两都尉。
现代文：匈奴侵入五原、酒泉，杀死两都尉。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Wuhuan and Jiuquan, killing two captains.

古文：三月，遣贰师将军广利将七万人出五原，御史大夫商丘成二万人出西河，重合侯马通四万骑出酒泉。
现代文：三月，派贰师将军李广利领七万人兵出五原，御史大夫商丘成领二万人兵出西河，重合侯马通领四万骑兵出酒泉。
English: In March, he sent general Li Guangli to lead 70,000 soldiers out of Wuyuan, Shangqiu Cheng to lead 20,000 soldiers out of Xihe, and Houma Tong to lead 40,000 cavalry out of Jiuquan.

古文：成至浚稽山与虏战，多斩首。
现代文：商丘成兵到浚稽山与敌接战，斩首甚多。
English: Shangqiu soldiers went to Junchi Mountain to fight with the enemy, and many were beheaded.

古文：通至天山，虏引去，因降车师。
现代文：马通兵至天山，匈奴退走，乘势征服了车师。
English: Horse soldiers to Tianshan, the Xiongnu retreated, taking advantage of the situation to conquer the coachmen.

古文：皆引兵还。
现代文：商、马二将都收兵回朝。
English: Shang and Ma both withdrew their troops back to the North.

古文：广利败，降匈奴。
现代文：李广利兵败，降于匈奴。
English: Li Guangli was defeated and fell to the Huns.

古文：六月，丞相屈氂下狱要斩，妻枭首。
现代文：六月，丞相刘屈牦因其妻作巫蛊被株连入狱腰斩，其妻斩首。
English: In June, the prime minister, Liu Quanzhang, was imprisoned and beheaded for his wife's witchcraft, and his wife was also beheaded.

古文：秋，蝗。
现代文：秋，发生蝗灾。
English: In autumn, a locust plague occurs.

古文：九月，反者公孙勇、胡倩发觉，皆伏辜。
现代文：九月，公孙勇、胡倩谋反被查觉，都处死。
English: In September, Gongsun Yong and Hu Yaotong were found to be plotting a rebellion and were both executed.

古文：四年春正月，行幸东莱，临大海。
现代文：四年春正月，驾临至东莱，并观沧海。
English: In the first month of spring in the fourth year, he came to Donglai and observed the sea of Cangzhou.

古文：二月丁酉，陨石于雍，二，声闻四百里。
现代文：二月初三日，陨石落在雍地，其声闻四百里。
English: On the third day of early February, a meteorite fell in the Yangtze River and was heard 400 miles away.

古文：三月，上耕于巨定。
现代文：三月，皇上亲耕于钜完。
English: In March, the emperor himself finished cultivating the land.

古文：还幸泰山，修封。
现代文：归途中登泰山，修封。
English: On his way back, he climbed Mount Tai and repaired the seal.

古文：庚寅，祀于明堂。
现代文：三月二十六日，在明堂举行祭祀。
English: On March 26th, a memorial service was held at Myodo.

古文：癸巳，禅石闾。
现代文：二十九日，祭石闾山。
English: On the 29th, the Ishizuchiyama festival is held.

古文：夏六月，还幸甘泉。
现代文：夏六月，回到甘泉。
English: In the summer of June, I returned to Ganquan.

古文：秋八月辛酉晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋八月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: In autumn, on August 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：后元元年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畴，遂幸安定。
现代文：后元元年春正月，驾至甘泉，郊祭泰山之神，随后驾临安定。
English: After the first month of spring in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he drove to Ganquan, the suburb festival of the god of Mount Tai, and then drove to Ding'an.

古文：昌邑王髆薨。
现代文：昌邑王髆去世。
English: Changyi Wang Yao passed away.

古文：二月，诏曰： 朕郊见上帝，巡于北边，见群鹤留止，以不罗罔，靡所获献。
现代文：二月，下诏说： 朕郊祭时见上天灵光，巡狩北边，见群鹤栖息，当时不是网罗捕杀之期，就没进行弋猎。
English: In February, the next imperial edict said: "During the suburb festival, I saw the heavenly spirit light, patrolled the north side, and saw a group of cranes roosting. At that time, it was not the time for trapping and killing, so I did not hunt.

古文：荐于泰畴，光景并见。
现代文：祭祀泰山祠时，灵光及神影并现。
English: When worshipping at the Taishan Shrine, the spirit light and the divine shadow appear simultaneously.

古文：其赦天下。 
现代文：因此赦天下罪人。 
English: Now he intends to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：夏六月，御史大夫商丘成有罪，自杀。
现代文：夏六月，御史大夫商丘成有罪自杀。
English: In the summer of June, the doctor of history, Shangqiu Cheng, committed suicide.

古文：侍中仆射莽河罗与弟重合侯通谋反，侍中驸马都尉金日磾、奉车都尉霍光、骑都尉上官桀讨之。
现代文：侍中仆射莽何罗与弟重合侯马通谋反，侍中驸马都尉金日石单、奉车都尉霍光、骑都尉上官桀合兵征讨。
English: The chamberlain's manservant, Sho Meng He Luo, and his younger brother, Hou Ma, conspired to rebel, and the chamberlain's steward, Captain Kim Il Shik, Captain Ho Kwong, and the captain of the cavalry, enlisted together.

古文：秋七月，地震，往往涌泉出。
现代文：秋七月，地震，时见岩浆涌出。
English: In autumn and July, there are earthquakes, and sometimes you can see magma gushing out.

古文：二年春正月，朝诸侯王于甘泉宫，赐宗室。
现代文：二年春正月，各侯王在甘泉宫朝皇上，皇上赏赐宗室。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, all the lords and princes presented gifts to the Imperial Family at the Emperor's residence, Gansu Palace.

古文：二月，行幸盩厔五柞宫。
现代文：二月，驾临周至县五柞宫。
English: In February, Zhou arrived at the county's Wuyi Palace.

古文：乙丑，立皇子弗陵为皇太子。
现代文：二月十二日，立皇子弗陵为皇太子。
English: On February 12, Prince Fulin was appointed crown prince.

古文：丁卯，帝崩于五柞宫，入殡于未央宫前殿。
现代文：十四日，武帝驾崩于五柞宫。入殡于未央前殿。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Wu passed away at the Palace of the Five Emperors. He was buried in the front hall of the Palace of the Five Emperors.

古文：三月甲申，葬茂陵。
现代文：三月初二日，葬于茂陵。
English: On March 2nd, he was buried in Mureung.

古文：赞曰：汉承百王之弊，高祖拨乱反正，文、景务在养民，至于稽古礼文之事，犹多阙焉。
现代文：班固评论：汉朝始建于群雄逐鹿的动乱时期，汉高祖拨乱反正，文帝景帝把休养生息作为首务，对于稽古礼文的文治事业，还缺乏建树。
English: Ban Gu commented: The Han Dynasty was founded in a period of turmoil in which men were chasing deer. The ancestors of the Han Dynasty put the turmoil right. Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing took the rest and recuperation as the top priority. There is still a lack of construction for the civil affairs of practicing ancient rituals.

古文：孝武初立，卓然罢黜百家，表章《六经》。遂畴咨海内，举其俊茂，与之立功。
现代文：汉武帝初期，毅然罢黜百家，独崇儒术，兼谋众人，举荐贤才，给他们以立功建业之机。
English: In the early days of Emperor Hanwu, he resolutely ousted hundreds of families, exclusively revered Confucianism, and concurrently conspired with everyone to recommend talents and give them the opportunity to build a career.

古文：兴太学，修郊祀，改正朔，定历数，协音律，作诗乐，建封禅，礼百神，绍周后，号令文章，焕焉可述。
现代文：兴太学，修郊祀，改正朔，定历数，协音律，作诗乐，建封禅，礼百神，继承周朝之后，号令文章，焕然可述。
English: Xingtaigaku, renovating suburban shrines, correcting the lunar calendar, fixing the number of days in the lunar calendar, harmonizing melodies, composing poetry and music, founding Zen, worshiping hundreds of deities, inheriting the Zhou Dynasty, and writing proclamations can all be described in detail.

古文：后嗣得遵洪业，而有三代之风。
现代文：继承祖先洪业，而有夏商周三代帝王之风范。
English: Heirs to his ancestor Hongye, but with the demeanor of the third generation of emperors, Xia Shang.

古文：如武帝之雄材大略，不改文、景之恭俭以济斯民，虽《诗》、《书》所称，何有加焉！
现代文：以汉武帝这样的雄才大略，如不改文景的恭俭以置苍生于衤壬席之上，就是《诗》、《书》上所称道的帝王也是不能超过他的。
English: With such a great talent as Emperor Hanwu, if you do not change the gentleness of the landscape and place the birth of Heaven on the throne, the emperor praised in "Poetry" and "Book" cannot surpass him.

