古文：上古之世，人民少而禽兽众，人民不胜禽兽虫蛇。
现代文：在上古时代，人口稀少，鸟兽众多，人民受不了禽兽虫蛇的侵害。
English: In ancient times, the population was sparse, there were many birds and beasts, and the people could not bear the infringement of animals and beasts, insects and snakes.

古文：有圣人作，构木为巢以避群害，而民悦之，使王天下，号曰有巢氏。
现代文：这时候出现了一位圣人，他发明在树上搭窝棚的办法，用来避免遭到各种伤害；人们因此很爱戴他，推举他来治理天下，称他为有巢氏。
English: At this time there appeared a sage, who invented the method of building a shelter in a tree to avoid various injuries; people therefore loved him very much, elected him to rule the world, and called him Mr. Nest.

古文：民食果蓏蚌蛤，腥臊恶臭而伤害腹胃，民多疾病。
现代文：当时人民吃的是野生的瓜果和蚌蛤，腥臊腐臭，伤害肠胃，许多人得了疾病。
English: At that time, the people ate wild melons and berries, which had a foul and rancid smell and hurt their stomachs. Many people got sick.

古文：有圣人作，钻燧取火以化腥臊，而民说之，使王天下，号之曰燧人氏。
现代文：这时候又出现了一位圣人，他发明钻木取火的方法烧烤食物，除掉腥臊臭味；人们因而很爱戴他，推举他治理天下，称他为隧人氏。
English: At this time, another sage appeared, he invented the method of drilling firewood to grill food and remove the musty smell; people loved him very much, elected him to govern the world, and called him Mr. Tunnel Man.

古文：中古之世，天下大水，而鲧、禹决渎。
现代文：到了中古时代，天下洪水泛滥，鲧和他的儿子禹先后负责疏通河道，排洪治灾。
English: In the Middle Ages, the world was flooded, and Zou and his son Yu were successively responsible for dredging rivers, draining floods, and controlling disasters.

古文：近古之世，桀、纣暴乱，而汤、武征伐。
现代文：近古时代，夏桀和殷纣的统治残暴昏乱，于是商汤和周武王起兵讨伐。
English: In recent ancient times, the rule of Xia Yao and Yin Yao was violent and chaotic, so Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu raised an army to fight.

古文：今有构木钻燧于夏后氏之世者，必为鲧、禹笑矣；有决渎于殷、周之世者，必为汤、武笑矣。
现代文：如果到了夏朝，还有人用在树上搭窝棚居住和钻木取火的办法生活，那一定会被鲧、禹耻笑了；如果到了殷周时代，还有人要把挖河排洪作为要务的话，那就一定会被商汤、武王所耻笑。
English: If, in the Summer Dynasty, there were still people living in tree-sheds and using firewood, they would be ridiculed and laughed at; if, in the Yin and Zhou Dynasty, there were still people digging rivers and draining floods, they would be laughed at by Shang Tang and King Wu.

古文：然则今有美尧、舜、汤、武、禹之道于当今之世者，必为新圣笑矣。
现代文：既然如此，那么在今天要是还有人推崇尧、舜、禹、汤、武王的政治并加以实行的人，定然要被现代的圣人耻笑了。
English: That being the case, if there are still people today who advocate and practice the politics of Yu, Tang and King Wu, they will surely be laughed to scorn by modern sages.

古文：是以圣人不期修古，不法常可，论世之事，因为之备。
现代文：因此，圣人不期望照搬古法，不死守陈规旧俗，而是根据当前社会的实际情况，进而制定相应的政治措施。
English: Therefore, the sage does not expect to copy the ancient law and stick to the old customs, but to formulate corresponding political measures according to the actual situation of the current society.

古文：宋有人耕田者，田中有株，兔走触株，折颈而死，因释其耒而守株，冀复得兔，兔不可复得，而身为宋国笑。
现代文：有个宋人在田里耕作；田中有一个树桩，一只兔子奔跑时撞在树桩上碰断了脖子死了。从此这个农人便放下手中的农具，守在树桩旁边，希望再捡到死兔子。他当然不可能再得到兔子，自己倒成了宋国的一个笑话。
English: A Song man was working in his field. There was a stump in the middle of the field. A rabbit ran into the stump, broke its neck and died. From then on, the farmer put down his farm tools and stood next to the stump, hoping to find another dead rabbit. Of course, he couldn't get another rabbit, and he became a joke in Song.

古文：今欲以先王之政，治当世之民，皆守株之类也。
现代文：现在假使还要用先王的政治来治理当代的民众，那就无疑属于守株待兔之类的人了。
English: If we were to use the politics of the past king to govern the people of today, we would undoubtedly be like people waiting for the rabbit to jump out of the hat.

古文：古者丈夫不耕，草木之实足食也；妇人不织，禽兽之皮足衣也。
现代文：在古代，男人不用耕种，野生的果实足够吃的；妇女不用纺织，禽兽的皮足够穿的。
English: In ancient times, men did not have to cultivate, and wild fruits were enough to eat; women did not have to weave, and animal skins were enough to wear.

古文：不事力而养足，人民少而财有余，故民不争。
现代文：不用费力而供养充足。人口少而财物有余，所以人们之间用不着争夺。
English: It does not take much effort to provide enough food. The population is small and there are more than enough goods, so there is no need for people to compete with each other.

古文：是以厚赏不行，重罚不用，而民自治。
现代文：因而不实行厚赏，不实行重罚，而民众自然安定无事。
English: As a result, there is no heavy reward, no heavy punishment, and the people are naturally stable.

古文：今人有五子不为多，子又有五子，大父未死而有二十五孙。
现代文：现在人们养有五个儿子并不算多，每个儿子又各有五个儿子，祖父还没有死就会有二十五个孙子。
English: Nowadays, it is not a big deal for people to have five sons, and each son has five sons. A grandfather will have twenty-five grandchildren before he dies.

古文：是以人民众而财寡，事力劳而供养薄，故民争，虽倍赏累罚而不免于乱。
现代文：因此，人口多了，而财物缺乏；费尽力气劳动，还是不够吃用。所以民众互相争夺，即使加倍地奖赏和不断地惩罚。
English: Therefore the people are multiplied, and the goods are scarce; neither is there sufficient to eat, neither is there sufficient to drink; wherefore the people strive one with another, to double the reward and to redouble the punishment.

古文：尧之王天下也，茅茨不翦，采椽不斫；粝粢之食，藜藿之羹；冬日麑裘，夏日葛衣；虽监门之服养，不亏于此矣。
现代文：结果仍然免不了要发生混乱。尧统治天下的时候，住的是没经修整的茅草房，连栋木椽子都不曾刨光；吃的是粗粮，喝的是野菜汤；冬天披坏小鹿皮，夏天穿着麻布衣。就是现在看门奴仆的生活，也不比这差。
English: The result is still bound to be chaos. When the baboons ruled the world, they lived in unimproved thatched huts, not even the wooden rafters were scraped; they ate coarse grains and drank vegetable soup; in winter they wore bad fawn skins, and in summer they wore linen clothes. The life of the current janitorial servants is no worse than this.

古文：禹之王天下也，身执耒臿以为民先，股无胈，胫不生毛，虽臣虏之劳，不苦于此矣。
现代文：禹统治天下的时候，亲自拿着锹锄带领人们干活，累得大腿消瘦，小腿上的汗毛都磨没了，就是奴隶们的劳役也不比这苦。
English: When Yu ruled the world, he personally took a plow to lead people to work. He was so tired that his thighs were emaciated and the hair on his calves was worn away. Even the labor of slaves was not as hard as this.

古文：以是言之，夫古之让天子者，是去监门之养，而离臣虏之劳也，古传天下而不足多也。
现代文：这样说来，古代把天子的位置让给别人，不过是逃避看门奴仆般的供养，摆脱奴隶样的繁重苦劳罢了；所以把天下传给别人也并不值得赞美。
English: In this way, in ancient times, giving the position of the Son of Heaven to others was nothing more than escaping the gatekeeper-like maintenance and getting rid of the slave-like heavy labor; therefore, it is not worthy of praise to pass on the world to others.

古文：今之县令，一日身死，子孙累世絜驾，故人重之。
现代文：如今的县令，一旦死了，他的子孙世世代代总有高车大马，所以人们都很看重。
English: Today's county magistrate, once he dies, his children and grandchildren will always have expensive cars and horses for generations, so people are very concerned.

古文：是以人之于让也，轻辞古之天子，难去今之县令者，薄厚之实异也。
现代文：因此，人们对于让位这件事，可以轻易地辞掉古代的天子，却难以舍弃今天的县官；原因即在其间实际利益的大小很不一样。
English: Therefore, people can easily give up the ancient gods for the matter of giving way, but it is difficult to give up today's county officials; the reason is that the size of the actual benefits is very different.

古文：夫山居而谷汲者，膢腊而相遗以水；泽居苦水者，买庸而决窦。
现代文：居住在山上要到谷底打水的人，逢年过节用水作为礼品互相赠送；居住在洼地饱受水涝灾害的人，却要雇人来挖渠排水。
English: People who live in the mountains and have to go to the bottom of the valley to fetch water give each other water as gifts every year. People who live in the lowlands and are plagued by floods have to hire people to dig canals for drainage.

古文：故饥岁之春，幼弟不饷；穰岁之秋，疏客必食。
现代文：所以在荒年青黄不接的时候，就连自己的幼弟来了也不肯管饭；在好年成的收获季节，即使是疏远的过客也总要招待吃喝。
English: Therefore, when the barren youth does not answer, even his own younger brother refuses to take care of the meal; in the harvest season of a good year, even the estranged passers-by always have to be invited to eat and drink.

古文：非疏骨肉，爱过客，多少之实异也。
现代文：不是有意疏远自己的骨肉而偏爱过路的客人，而是因为存粮多少的实际情况不同。
English: It is not that they deliberately alienate their own flesh and blood and prefer passing guests, but because the actual situation of how much grain is stored is different.

古文：是以古之易财，非仁也，财多也；今之争夺，非鄙也，财寡也。
现代文：因此，古人轻视财物。并不是因为仁义，而是由于财多；今人互相争夺，并不是因为卑鄙，而是由于财少。
English: For this reason the ancients despised riches, not because they were virtuous, but because they had too much of them; modern men fight each other, not because they are mean, but because they have too little.

古文：轻辞天子，非高也，势薄也；重争士橐，非下也，权重也。故圣人议多少、论薄厚为之政。
现代文：古人轻易辞掉天子的职位，并不是什么风格高尚，而是因为权势很小；今人争夺官位或依附权势，也不是什么品德低下，而是因为权大势重。所以圣人要衡量财物多少、权势大小的实况制定政策。
English: The ancients who easily resigned from the position of the son of heaven did not have a noble style, but because they had little power; the people today who compete for office or cling to power do not have a low moral character, but because they have a lot of power. Therefore, sages should measure the amount of wealth and the size of power to formulate policies.

古文：故罚薄不为慈，诛严不为戾，称俗而行也。
现代文：刑罚轻并不是仁慈，刑罚重并不是残暴，适合社会状况行动就是了。
English: A light punishment is not benevolence, a heavy punishment is not cruelty, but an action suited to the social situation.

古文：故事因于世，而备适于事。
现代文：因此，政事要根据时代变化，措施要针对社会事务。
English: Therefore, political affairs should be based on the changes of the times, and measures should be targeted at social affairs.

古文：古者文王处丰、镐之间，地方百里，行仁义而怀西戎，遂王天下。
现代文：古代周文王地处丰、镐一带，方圆不过百里，他施行仁义的政策感化了西戎。进而统治了天下。
English: In ancient times, King Zhou Wen was located in the Feng and Yao regions, only a hundred miles in circumference. He implemented a benevolent policy and influenced Xi Rong. He then ruled the world.

古文：徐偃王处汉东，地方五百里，行仁义，割地而朝者三十有六国。
现代文：徐偃王统治着汉水东面的地方，方圆有五百里，他也施行仁义的政策，有三十六个国家向他割地朝贡。
English: King Xu Rong ruled the area east of the Han River, with a radius of 500 miles. He also implemented a policy of benevolence and righteousness. Thirty-six countries paid tribute to him.

古文：荆文王恐其害己也，举兵伐徐，遂灭之。
现代文：楚文王害怕徐国会危害到自己，便出兵伐徐灭了徐国。
English: King Chu Wen was afraid that Xu would harm himself, so he sent troops to invade and destroy Xu.

古文：故文王行仁义而王天下，偃王行仁义而丧其国，是仁义用于古不用于今也。
现代文：所以周文王施行仁义得了天下，而徐偃王施行仁义却亡了国；这证明仁义只适用于古代而不适用于今天。
English: Therefore, the benevolence of King Zhou Wen won the world, while the benevolence of King Xu Xi lost the country; this proves that benevolence is only applicable to ancient times but not to today.

古文：故曰：世异则事异。
现代文：所以说；时代不同了，政事就会随之不同。
English: Therefore, when times are different, politics will be different.

古文：当舜之时，有苗不服，禹将伐之。舜曰： 不可。
现代文：在舜当政的时候，苗族不驯服，禹主张用武力去讨伐，舜说： 不行。
English: When Yu was in power, the Miao people refused to be tamed, and Yu advocated using force to fight them. Yu said, "No."

古文：上德不厚而行武，非道也。 
现代文：我们推行德教还不够深就动用武力，不合乎道理。 
English: It is unreasonable for us to use force when we have not carried out moral education deeply enough.

古文：乃修教三年，执干戚舞，有苗乃服。
现代文：于是便用三年时间加强德教，拿着盾牌和大斧跳舞，苗族终于归服了。
English: As a result, they spent three years strengthening moral education, dancing with shields and axes, and the Miao people finally submitted.

古文：共工之战，铁铦矩者及乎敌，铠甲不坚者伤乎体。是干戚用于古不用于今也。
现代文：到了共工打仗的时候，武器短的会被敌人击中，销甲不坚固的便会伤及身体；这表明拿着盾牌和大斧跳舞的德政方法只能用于古代而不能用于当今。
English: When the time comes for the co-workers to fight, the short weapons will be hit by the enemy, and the weak armor will hurt the body; this shows that the German method of dancing with shields and axes can only be used in ancient times and cannot be used today.

古文：故曰：事异则备变。
现代文：所以说：情况变了，措施也要跟着改变。
English: Therefore, it is said that the situation has changed, and the measures should also be changed.

古文：上古竞于道德，中世逐于智谋，当今争于气力。
现代文：上古时候人们在道德上竞争高下，中古时候人们在智谋上角逐优劣，当今社会人们在力量上较量输赢。
English: In ancient times, people competed in morality. In medieval times, people competed in wisdom. In today's society, people compete in strength.

古文：齐将攻鲁，鲁使子贡说之。
现代文：齐国准备进攻鲁国，鲁国派子贡去说服齐人。
English: The State of Qi was preparing to attack the State of Lu. The State of Lu sent tribute to persuade the people of Qi.

古文：齐人曰： 子言非不辩也，吾所欲者土地也，非斯言所谓也。 
现代文：齐人说： 你的话说得不是不巧妙，然而我想要的是土地，不是你所说的这套空话。 
English: Qi said, "Your words are not unskillful, but what I want is land, not this empty talk you are talking about."

古文：遂举兵伐鲁，去门十里以为界。
现代文：于是出兵攻打鲁国，把齐国的国界推进到距鲁国都城只有十里远的地方。
English: As a result, he sent troops to attack Lu and pushed the national border of Qi to a place only ten miles away from the capital city of Lu.

古文：故偃王仁义而徐亡，子贡辩智而鲁削。
现代文：所以说徐偃王施行仁义而徐亡了国，子贡机智善辩而鲁失了地。
English: Therefore, it is said that King Xu Rong practiced benevolence and righteousness, but lost the country, while Zigong was witty and eloquent, but lost the country.

古文：以是言之，夫仁义辩智，非所以持国也。
现代文：由此说来，仁义道德、机智善辩之类，都不是用来保全国家的正道。
English: Therefore, benevolence, righteousness, morality, wit, and good argumentation are not used to preserve the country's righteous path.

古文：去偃王之仁，息子贡之智，循徐、鲁之力使敌万乘，则齐、荆之欲不得行于二国矣。
现代文：如果当初抛弃徐偃王的仁义，不用子贡的巧辩，而是依靠徐、鲁两国的实力，去抵抗有万辆兵车的强敌，那么齐、楚的野心也就不会在这两个国家里得逞了。
English: If they had abandoned the benevolence and righteousness of King Xu Xi and relied on the strength of the two countries of Xu and Lu to resist the strong enemy with ten thousand chariots, then the ambitions of Qi and Chu would not have succeeded in these two countries.

古文：夫古今异俗，新故异备。
现代文：古今社会风俗不同，新旧政治措施也不一样。
English: Ancient and modern social customs are different, and new and old political measures are also different.

古文：如欲以宽缓之政，治急世之民，犹无辔策而御駻马，此不知之患也。
现代文：如果想用宽大和缓的政策去治理剧变时代的民众，就好比没有缰绳和鞭子却要去驾驭烈马一样，这就会产生不明智的祸害。
English: If you want to use a lenient and gentle policy to govern the people in the era of upheaval, it is like trying to drive a wild horse without reins and whips, which will produce unwise disasters.

古文：今儒、墨皆称先王兼爱天下，则视民如父母。
现代文：现在，儒家和墨家都称颂先王，说他们博爱天下一切人，就如同父母爱子女一样。
English: Now, both Confucianists and Mohists praise the former king, saying that they love all people in the world, just as parents love their children.

古文：何以明其然也？
现代文：用什么证明先王如此呢？
English: How do you know that?

古文：曰： 司寇行刑，君为之不举乐；闻死刑之报，君为流涕。 
现代文：他们说： 司寇执行刑法的时候，君主为此停止奏乐；听到罪犯被处决的报告后，君主难过得流下眼泪。 
English: They said: The monarch was moved to stop the music when a constable was enforcing the criminal law; the monarch was moved to tears by reports of criminals being executed.

古文：此所举先王也。
现代文：这就是他们所赞美的先王。
English: This is the first king whom they praise.

古文：夫以君臣为如父子则必治，推是言之，是无乱父子也。
现代文：如果认为君臣关系能像父子关系一样，天下必能治理得好，由此推论开去，就不会存在父子之间发生纠纷的事了。
English: If you think that the relationship between monarch and subject can be like the relationship between father and son, the world will be able to govern well, and from this deduction, there will be no dispute between father and son.

古文：人之情性莫先于父母，皆见爱而未必治也，虽厚爱矣，奚遽不乱？
现代文：从人类本性上说，没有什么感情能超过父母疼爱子女的，然而大家都一样疼爱子女，家庭却未必就和睦。君主即使深爱臣民，何以见得天下就不会发生动乱呢？
English: From the point of view of human nature, there is no emotion that can surpass the love of parents for their children. However, everyone loves their children equally, but the family is not necessarily harmonious. Even if the monarch loves his subjects deeply, how can he see that there will be no unrest in the world?

古文：今先王之爱民，不过父母之爱子，子未必不乱也，则民奚遽治哉？
现代文：何况先王的爱民不会超过父母爱子女，子女不一定不背弃父母，那么民众何以就能靠仁爱治理好呢？
English: Moreover, the former king's love for the people would not exceed the love of parents for their children, and children would not necessarily betray their parents, so how could the people rely on benevolence to govern well?

古文：且夫以法行刑，而君为之流涕，此以效仁，非以为治也。
现代文：再说按照法令执行刑法，而君主为之流泪；这不过是用来表现仁爱罢了，却并非用来治理国家的。
English: Moreover, the execution of the criminal law according to the law, for which the monarch sheds tears, is but an act of charity, and not of government.

古文：夫垂泣不欲刑者，仁也；然而不可不刑者，法也。
现代文：流泪而不想用刑，这是君主的仁爱；然而不得不用刑，这是国家的法令。
English: To shed tears without wishing to inflict punishment is the benevolence of the sovereign; but to have to inflict punishment is the decree of the state.

古文：先王胜其法，不听其泣，则仁之不可以为治亦明矣。
现代文：先王首先要执行法令，并不会因为同情而废去刑法，那么不能用仁爱来治理国家的道理也就明白无疑了。
English: First of all, the late king had to enforce the law, and he did not abolish the criminal law out of sympathy, so it was clear that the country could not be governed by benevolence.

古文：且民者固服于势，寡能怀于义。
现代文：况且人们一向就屈服于权势，很少能被仁义感化的。
English: Moreover, people have always succumbed to power and can rarely be influenced by benevolence.

古文：仲尼，天下圣人也，修行明道以游海内，海内说其仁、美其义而为服役者七十人。
现代文：孔子是天下的圣人，他修养身心，宣扬儒道，周游列国，可是天下赞赏他的仁、颂扬他的义并肯为他效劳的人才七十来个。
English: Confucius is a saint of the world. He cultivated his mind and body, preached Confucianism, and traveled around the world. However, the world appreciated his benevolence, praised his righteousness, and was willing to serve him.

古文：盖贵仁者寡，能义者难也。
现代文：可见看重仁的人少，能行义的人实在难得。
English: It can be seen that there are few people who value benevolence, and those who can do righteousness are really rare.

古文：故以天下之大，而为服役者七十人，而仁义者一人。
现代文：所以天下这么大，愿意为他效劳的只有七十人，而倡导仁义的只有孔子一个。
English: Therefore, there are only seventy people in the world who are willing to serve him, and Confucius is the only one who advocates benevolence.

古文：鲁哀公，下主也，南面君国，境内之民莫敢不臣。
现代文：鲁哀公是个不高明的君主，面南而坐，统治鲁国，国内的人没有敢于不服从的。
English: Lu Aigong was an incompetent monarch. He sat facing south and ruled Lu. No one in the country dared to disobey him.

古文：民者固服于势，诚易以服人，故仲尼反为臣而哀公顾为君。
现代文：民众总是屈服于权势，权势也确实容易使人服从；所以孔子反倒做了臣子，而鲁哀公却成了君主。
English: The people always submit to authority, and authority is indeed easy to make people obey; so Confucius, on the contrary, became a vassal, while Lu Aigong became a monarch.

古文：仲尼非怀其义，服其势也。
现代文：孔子并不是服从于鲁哀公的仁义，而是屈服于他的权势。
English: Confucius did not submit to Lu Aiguo's benevolence and righteousness, but succumbed to his power.

古文：故以义则仲尼不服于哀公，乘势则哀公臣仲尼。
现代文：因此，要讲仁义，孔子就不会屈服于哀公；要讲权势，哀公却可以使孔子俯首称臣。
English: Therefore, if you want to talk about benevolence and righteousness, Confucius will not succumb to public mourning; if you want to talk about power and influence, public mourning can make Confucius bow his head and call himself a minister.

古文：今学者之说人主也，不乘必胜之势，而务行仁义则可以王，是求人主之必及仲尼，而以世之凡民皆如列徒，此必不得之数也。
现代文：现在的学者们游说君主，不是要君主依靠可以取胜的权势，而致力于宣扬施行仁义就可以统治天下；这就是要求君主一定能像孔子那样，要求天下民众都像孔子门徒。这在事实上是肯定办不到的。
English: Today's scholars are lobbying the monarch, not to rely on the power that can win, but to devote themselves to promoting and implementing benevolence and righteousness so that they can rule the world; this is to require the monarch to be able to be like Confucius, and to require the people of the world to be like Confucius's disciples. In fact, this is definitely impossible.

古文：今有不才之子，父母怒之弗为改，乡人谯之弗为动，师长教之弗为变。
现代文：现在假定有这么一个不成材的儿子，父母对他发怒，他并不悔改；乡邻们加以责备，他无动于衷；师长教训他，他也不改变。
English: Now, suppose there is such an incompetent son. His parents are angry with him, but he does not repent; the neighbors scold him, but he does not care; the teacher teaches him, but he does not change.

古文：夫以父母之爱、乡人之行、师长之智，三美加焉，而终不动，其胫毛不改。
现代文：拿了父母的慈爱、乡邻的帮助、师长的智慧这三方面的优势同时加在他的身上，而他却始终不受感动，丝毫不肯改邪归正。
English: He took the three advantages of his parents' love, the help of his neighbors, and the wisdom of his teachers and applied them to himself. However, he was never moved and refused to be reformed.

古文：州部之吏，操官兵，推公法，而求索奸人，然后恐惧，变其节，易其行矣。
现代文：直到地方上的官吏拿着武器，依法执行公务，而搜捕坏人的时候，他这才害怕起来，改掉旧习，变易恶行。
English: It was only when local officials took up arms and carried out their duties in accordance with the law, while searching for and arresting bad people, that he became afraid, changed his old habits, and became prone to evil deeds.

古文：故父母之爱不足以教子，必待州部之严刑者，民固骄于爱、听于威矣。
现代文：所以父母的慈爱不足以教育好子女，必须依靠官府执行严厉的刑法；这是由于人们总是受到慈爱就娇纵，见到威势就屈服的缘故。
English: Therefore, parents' love is not enough to educate their children well, and they must rely on the government to enforce strict criminal laws; this is because people are always pampered by love and yield to pressure.

古文：故十仞之城，楼季弗能逾者，峭也；千仞之山，跛牂易牧者，夷也。
现代文：因此，七丈高的城墙，就连善于攀高的楼季也不能越过，因为太陡；千丈高的大山，就是瘸腿的母羊也可以被赶上去放牧，因为坡度平缓。
English: Therefore, the seven-storey-high city wall, even if it is good at climbing, can not be crossed, because it is too steep; the high mountain, that is, the lame ewe can also be driven up to graze, because the slope is gentle.

古文：故明王峭其法而严其刑也。
现代文：所以明君总要严峻立法并严格用刑。
English: Therefore, the Ming and Qin dynasties always had to enact severe legislation and strictly enforce punishments.

古文：布帛寻常，庸人不释；铄金百镒，盗跖不掇。
现代文：十几尺布帛，一般人见了也舍不得放手；熔化着的百镒黄金，即使是盗跃也不会伸手去拿。
English: A dozen feet of cloth, the average person sees and is reluctant to let go; melted hundred ounces of gold, even if it is stolen, will not reach out to get it.

古文：不必害，则不释寻常；必害手，则不掇百溢。
现代文：不一定受害的时候，十几尺的布帛也不肯丢掉；肯定会烧伤手时，就是百镒黄金也不敢去拿。
English: When he is not sure to be harmed, he is not willing to throw away a dozen feet of cloth; when he is sure to burn his hands, he does not dare to take even a hundred ounces of gold.

古文：故明主必其诛也。
现代文：所以明君一定要严格执行刑罚。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun must strictly enforce the punishment.

古文：是以赏莫如厚而信，使民利之；罚莫如重而必，使民畏之；法莫如一而固，使民知之。
现代文：因此，施行奖赏最好是丰厚而且兑，使人们有所贪图；进行刑罚最好严厉而且肯定，使人们有所畏惧；法令最好是一贯而且固定，使人们都能明白。
English: Therefore, it is best to give rewards that are rich and satisfying, so that people are greedy; punishments that are harsh and certain, so that people are afraid; and laws that are consistent and fixed, so that people can understand.

古文：故主施赏不迁，行诛无赦，誉辅其赏，毁随其罚，则贤、不肖俱尽其力矣。
现代文：所以君主施行奖赏不随意改变，执行刑罚不轻易赦免，对受赏的人同时给予荣誉，对受罚的人同时给予谴责。这样一来，不管贤还是不贤的人，都会尽力而为了。
English: Therefore, the reward of the monarch is not arbitrarily changed, the execution of the punishment is not easily pardoned, and the person who receives the reward is also honored, and the person who receives the punishment is also condemned. In this way, whether they are virtuous or not, they will do their best.

古文：今则不然。
现代文：现在却不是这样。
English: That is no longer the case.

古文：其有功也爵之，而卑其士官也；以其耕作也赏之，而少其家业也；以其不收也外之，而高其轻世也；以其犯禁罪之，而多其有勇也。
现代文：正是因为他有功劳才授予他爵位的，却又鄙视他做官；因为他从事耕种才奖赏他，却又看不起他经营家业；因为他不肯为公干事才疏远他，却又推祟他不羡慕世俗名利；因为他违犯禁令才给他定罪，却又称赞他勇敢。
English: They knighted him for his merits, but despised him for his office; they rewarded him for his cultivation, but despised him for his family business; they alienated him for his refusal to be a public officer, but reproached him for not desiring worldly fame and gain; they condemned him for his violation of the ban, but praised him for his bravery.

古文：毁誉、赏罚之所加者，相与悖缪也，故法禁坏而民愈乱。
现代文：是毁是誉，是赏是罚。执行起来竞如此自相矛盾；所以法令遭到破坏，民众更加混乱。
English: Whether to destroy or to honor, whether to reward or to punish, the execution is so contradictory; therefore, the law is destroyed, and the people are more confused.

古文：今兄弟被侵，必攻者，廉也；知友辱，随仇者，贞也。
现代文：现在假如自己的兄弟受到侵犯就一定帮他反击的人，被认为是正直；知心的朋友被侮辱就跟随着去报仇的人，被认为是忠贞。
English: Now, if one's brother is wronged, the one who will help him fight back is considered honest; if one's intimate friend is insulted, the one who will follow him to revenge is considered loyal.

古文：廉贞之行成，而君上之法犯矣。
现代文：这种正直和忠贞的风气形成了，而君主的法令却被冒犯了。
English: This culture of honesty and loyalty was created, and the monarch's edict was defied.

古文：人主尊贞廉之行，而忘犯禁之罪，故民程于勇，而吏不能胜也。
现代文：君主推崇这种忠贞正直的品行，却忽视了他们违犯法令的罪责，所以人们敢于逞勇犯禁，而官吏制止不住。
English: The monarch praises this kind of loyalty and honesty, but ignores their culpability for violating the law, so people dare to break the ban, and officials can't stop them.

古文：不事力而衣食，谓之能；不战功而尊，则谓之贤。
现代文：对于不从事耕作就有吃有穿的人说他有本事；对于没有军功就获得官爵的人，说他有才能。
English: For those who do not engage in farming and have enough to eat and wear, he said that he has the ability; for those who have received a peerage without military service, he said that he has the talent.

古文：贤能之行成，而兵弱而地荒矣。
现代文：这种本事和才能养成了，就会导致国家兵力衰弱、土地荒芜了。
English: If this ability and talent is cultivated, it will lead to the weakening of the national military and the desertification of the land.

古文：人主说贤能之行，而忘兵弱地荒之祸，则私行立而公利灭矣。
现代文：君主赞赏这种本事和才能，却忘却兵弱地荒的祸害；结果谋私的行为就会得逞，而国家的利益就要落空。
English: The sovereign, while he admires this skill and ability, forgets the evils of a weak army; and the result is that private interests triumph, and the interests of the state are frustrated.

古文：儒以文乱法，侠以武犯禁，而人主兼礼之，此所以乱也。
现代文：儒家利用文献扰乱法纪，游侠使用武力违犯禁令，而君主却都要加以礼待，这就是国家混乱的根源。
English: Confucianism uses literature to disrupt the legal discipline, the ranger uses force to violate the ban, but the monarch has to be treated with courtesy. This is the root cause of the country's chaos.

古文：夫离法者罪，而诸先生以文学取；犯禁者诛，而群侠以私剑养。
现代文：犯法的本该判罪，而那些儒生却靠着文章学说得到任用；犯禁的本该处罚，而那些游侠却靠着充当刺客得到豢养。
English: Those who violated the law should have been convicted, but those Confucian scholars were appointed by virtue of the article doctrine; those who violated the ban should have been punished, but those rangers were supported by acting as assassins.

古文：故法之所非，君之所取；吏之所诛，上之所养也。
现代文：所以，法令反对的，成了君主重用的；官吏处罚的，成了权贵豢养的。
English: Therefore, those who objected to the decree became important to the monarch; those who were punished by officials became important to the nobility.

古文：法、趣、上、下，四相反也，而无所定，虽有十黄帝不能治也。
现代文：法令反对和君主重用，官吏处罚和权贵豢养，四者互相矛盾，而没有确立一定标准，即使有十个黄帝，也不能治好天下。
English: Opposing decrees and reusing monarchs, punishing officials and nurturing dignitaries, these four contradict each other, but without establishing a certain standard, even if there are ten yellow emperors, they cannot cure the world.

古文：故行仁义者非所誉，誉之则害功，工文学者非所用，用之则乱法。
现代文：因此，那些施行宣扬仁义的人，不是应当称誉的人，称誉他们会妨害耕战之事；对于从事文章学术的人不应当加以任用，如果任用了，就会破坏法治。
English: Therefore, those who carry out the propaganda of benevolence and righteousness are not people who should be praised, and if they are praised, they will interfere with the ploughing and fighting; those who are engaged in writing and scholarship should not be appointed, and if they are appointed, they will undermine the rule of law.

古文：楚之有直躬，其父窃羊，而谒之吏。令尹曰： 杀之！ 以为直于君而曲于父，报而罪之。
现代文：楚国有个叫直躬的人，他的父亲偷了人家的羊，他便到令尹那儿揭发，令尹说： 杀掉他： 认为他对君主虽算正直而对父亲却属不孝。
English: There was a man in the state of Chu who was called Zhi Mu. His father had stolen a sheep from someone's house. He went to Ling Yin and told him about it. Ling Yin said, "Kill him." He thought that although he was honest with the sovereign, he was being disloyal to his father.

古文：以是观之，夫君之直臣，父之暴子也。
现代文：结果判了他死罪。由此看来，君主的忠臣倒成了父亲的逆子。
English: As a result, he was sentenced to death. From this point of view, the loyal subject of the monarch turned out to be his father's son.

古文：鲁人从君战，三战三北。仲尼问其故，对曰： 吾有老父，身死莫之养也。 
现代文：鲁国有个人跟随君土去打仗，屡战屡逃；孔子向他询问原因，他说： 我家中有年老的父亲，我死后就没人养活他了。 
English: Confucius asked him why. He said, "I have an old father in my family, and when I die, there will be no one to support him.

古文：仲尼以为孝，举而上之。
现代文：孔子认为这是孝子，便推举他做丁官。
English: Confucius considered him to be a filial son and promoted him to the highest rank.

古文：以是观之，夫父之孝子，君之背臣也。
现代文：由此看来。父亲的孝子恰恰是君主的叛臣。
English: From this point of view, the father's filial son is precisely the monarch's traitor.

古文：故令尹诛而楚奸不上闻，仲尼赏而鲁民易降北。
现代文：所以令尹杀了直躬，楚国的坏人坏事就没有人再向上告发了；孔子奖赏逃兵鲁国人作战就要轻易地投降逃跑。
English: Therefore, if Yin killed Zhiming, the bad people and bad things in Chu would not be reported to the emperor; if Confucius rewarded the deserters of the Lu people to fight, they would easily surrender and escape.

古文：上下之利，若是其异也，而人主兼举匹夫之行，而求致社稷之福，必不几矣。
现代文：君臣之间的利害得失是如此不同，而君主却既赞成谋求私利的行为。又想求得国家的繁荣富强，这是肯定没指望的。
English: The interests of princes and ministers are so different from each other, and it is certainly hopeless for the monarch to approve of the act of seeking self-interest, while at the same time seeking the prosperity and strength of the country.

古文：古者苍颉之作书也，自环者谓之私，背私谓之公，公私之相背也，乃苍颉固以知之矣。
现代文：古时候，苍颉创造文字，把围着自己绕圈子的叫做 私 。与 私 相背的叫做 公 。公和私相反的道理，是苍颉就已经知道了的。
English: In ancient times, the heron created words, calling the circle around itself I. The opposite of me is called public. The opposite of public and private is already known to the heron.

古文：今以为同利者，不察之患也，然则为匹夫计者，莫如修行义而习文学。
现代文：现在还有人认为公私利益相同，这是犯了没有仔细考察的错误。那么为个人打算的话，没有什么比修好仁义、熟悉学术的办法更好了。
English: There are still people who think that public and private interests are the same, which is a mistake made without careful consideration. Then, for an individual, there is nothing better than to fix benevolence and righteousness and be familiar with academic methods.

古文：行义修则见信，见信则受事；文学习则为明师，为明师则显荣：此匹夫之美也。
现代文：修好仁义就会得到君主信任。得到君主信任就可以做官；熟悉学术就可以成为高明的老师。成了高明的老师就会显荣。对个人来说。这是最美的事了。
English: If you cultivate benevolence and righteousness, you will gain the monarch's trust. If you gain the monarch's trust, you can become an official; if you are familiar with academia, you can become a skilled teacher. If you become a skilled teacher, you will be honored. For an individual, this is the most beautiful thing.

古文：然则无功而受事，无爵而显荣，为有政如此，则国必乱，主必危矣。
现代文：然而没有功劳的就能做官。没有爵位就能显荣，形成这样的政治局面。国家就一定陷入混乱，君主就一定面临危险了。
English: However, without merit, one can become an official. Without a title, one can become famous. Such a political situation is formed. The country is bound to fall into chaos, and the monarch is bound to face danger.

古文：故不相容之事，不两立也。
现代文：所以，互不相容的事情，是不能并存的。
English: Therefore, things that are mutually incompatible cannot coexist.

古文：斩敌者受赏，而高慈惠之行；拔城者受爵禄，而信廉爱之说；坚甲厉兵以备难，而美荐绅之饰；富国以农，距敌恃卒，而贵文学之士；废敬上畏法之民，而养游侠私剑之属。
现代文：杀敌有功的人本该受赏，却又崇尚仁爱慈惠的行为；攻城大功的人本该授予爵禄。却又信奉兼爱的学说：采用坚固的铠甲、锋利的兵器来防备战乱，却又提倡宽袍大带的服饰；国家富足靠农民。打击敌人靠士兵，却又看重从事于文章学术事业的儒生；不用那些尊君守法的人，而去收养游侠刺客之类的人。
English: People who have killed enemies should be rewarded, but they also advocate benevolent and benevolent behavior; people who have made great achievements in attacking cities should be awarded knighthoods. But they also believe in the doctrine of love: using solid armor and sharp weapons to prevent war, but advocating the clothing of wide robes and large belts; the country's wealth depends on farmers. Fighting the enemy by soldiers, but they also value Confucianism engaged in the academic career of articles; do not use those who respect the monarchs and abide by the law, but adopt people such as ranger assassins.

古文：举行如此，治强不可得也。
现代文：如此理政，要想使国家太平和强盛足不可能的。
English: It is impossible to make the country too peaceful and prosperous if the government is run like this.

古文：国平养儒侠，难至用介士，所利非所用，所用非所利。
现代文：国家太平的时候收养儒生和游侠，危难来临的时候要用披坚执锐的士兵；国家给予利益的人并不是国家所要用的人而国家所要用的人又得不到任何好处。
English: When the country is at peace, it adopts Confucians and rangers, and when danger comes, it must use soldiers who are stubborn; the people who are given benefits by the state are not the people the state wants to use, and the people the state wants to use do not get any benefits.

古文：是故服事者简其业，而于游学者日众，是世之所以乱也。
现代文：结果从事耕战的人荒废了自己的事业，而游侠和儒生却一天天多了起来，这就是社会陷于混乱的原因所在。
English: As a result, those engaged in ploughing and fighting have laid waste to their businesses, while the number of rangers and Confucians has increased day by day. This is the reason why society has fallen into chaos.

古文：且世之所谓贤者，贞信之行也；所谓智者，微妙之言也。
现代文：况且社会上所说的贤。是指忠贞不欺的行为；所说的智，是指深奥玄妙的言辞。
English: Moreover, in society, the word "virtue" refers to loyalty and non-deceitful behavior; the word "wisdom" refers to profound and subtle words.

古文：微妙之言，上智之所难知也。
现代文：那些深奥玄妙的言辞，就连最聪明的人也难以理解。
English: Those profound and mysterious words are difficult for even the most intelligent people to understand.

古文：今为众人法，而以上智之所难知，则民无从识之矣。
现代文：现在制定民众都得遵守的法令，却采用那些连最聪明的人也难以理解的言辞，那么民众就无从弄懂了。
English: Now they make laws that the people must obey, but they use language that the wisest of men cannot understand, so that the people do not understand.

古文：故糟糠不饱者不务粱肉，短褐不完者不待文绣。
现代文：所以，连糟糠都吃不饱的人，是不会追求精美饭菜的；连粗布短衣都穿不上的人，是不会期望华丽衣衫的。
English: Therefore, people who can't even eat enough of junk food won't pursue fine food; people who can't even wear coarse cloth shorts won't expect gorgeous clothes.

古文：夫治世之事，急者不得，则缓者非所务也。
现代文：治理社会事务，如果紧急的还没有办好，那么可从缓的就不必忙着去办。
English: In the governance of social affairs, if the urgent matters have not been handled well, then there is no need to be busy with the urgent matters.

古文：今所治之政，民间之事，夫妇所明知者不用，而慕上知之论，则其于治反矣。
现代文：现在用来治理国家的政治措施，凡属民间习以为常的事。或普通人明知的道理不加采用，却去期求连最聪明的人都难以理解的说教，其结果只能是适得其反了。
English: The political measures now used to govern the country are all things that are taken for granted by the people, or the ordinary people do not adopt the well-known principles, but expect to be preached to, which is difficult for even the most intelligent people to understand. The result can only be counterproductive.

古文：故微妙之言，非民务也。
现代文：所以那些深奥玄妙的言辞，并不是人民所需要的。
English: Therefore, those esoteric words are not what the people need.

古文：若夫贤良贞信之行者，必将贵不欺之士；不欺之士者，亦无不欺之术也。
现代文：至于推崇忠贞信义的品行。必将尊重那些诚实不欺的人；而诚实不欺的人，也没有什么使人不行欺诈的办法。
English: As for the virtues of loyalty and faithfulness, those who are honest and do not deceive will certainly be respected; and those who are honest and do not deceive, there is no way to prevent them from cheating.

古文：布衣相与交，无富厚以相利，无威势以相惧也，故求不欺之士。
现代文：平民之间彼此交往，没有大宗钱财可以互相利用，没有大权重势可以互相威胁。所以才要寻求诚实不欺的人。
English: Civilians interact with each other, there is no large amount of money that can be used mutually, there is no great power that can threaten each other. Therefore, it is necessary to seek people who are honest and not deceitful.

古文：今人主处制人之势，有一国之厚，重赏严诛，得操其柄，以修明术之所烛，虽有田常、子罕之臣，不敢欺也，奚待于不欺之士？
现代文：如今君主处于统治地位，拥有整个国家的财富，完全有条件掌握重赏严罚的权力，可以运用法术来观察和处理问题；那么即使有田常、子罕一类的臣子也是不敢行欺的，何必寻找那些诚实不欺的人呢？
English: Nowadays, the monarch is in the dominant position, has the wealth of the whole country, is fully qualified to grasp the power of reward and punishment, and can use magic to observe and deal with problems; then, even if there are courtiers such as Tian Chang and Zi Han, they dare not cheat, why should we look for those who are honest and do not cheat?

古文：今贞信之士不盈于十，而境内之官以百数，必任贞信之士，则人不足官。
现代文：现今的忠贞信义之十不满十个。而国家需要的官吏却数以百计；如果一定要任用忠贞信义之士。
English: Today, the number of loyal and faithful people is less than ten, but the country needs hundreds of officials; if it is necessary to appoint loyal and faithful people.

古文：人不足官，则治者寡而乱者众矣。
现代文：那么合格的人就会不敷需要；合格的人不敷需要，那么能够把政事治理好的官就少，而会把政事搞乱的官就多了。
English: If there are not enough qualified people, then there will be a shortage of qualified people; if there are not enough qualified people, then there will be fewer officials who can manage political affairs well, and more officials who will mess up political affairs.

古文：故明主之道，一法而不求智，固术而不慕信，故法不败，而群官无奸诈矣。
现代文：所以明君的治国方法，在于专实行法治，而不寻求有智的人；牢牢掌握使用官吏的权术。而不欣赏忠信的人。这样，法治就不会遭到破坏而官吏们也不敢胡作非为了。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun's method of governing the country is to exclusively implement the rule of law, without seeking intelligent people; firmly grasp the power of using officials. without appreciating loyal people. In this way, the rule of law will not be destroyed and officials will not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：今人主之于言也，说其辩而不求其当焉；其用于行也，美其声而不责其功。
现代文：现在君主对于臣下的言论。喜欢悦耳动听而不管是否恰当；对于臣下的行事，仅欣赏他的名声而不责求做出成效。
English: The speech of the sovereign to his subjects is now pleasing to the ear, whether it be proper or not; and to the actions of his subjects, his reputation is admired, but no effect is desired.

古文：是以天下之众，其谈言者务为辨而不周于用，故举先王言仁义者盈廷，而政不免于乱；行身者竞于为高而不合于功，故智士退处岩穴，归禄不受，而兵不免于弱，政不免于乱，此其故何也？
现代文：因此天下很多人说起话来总是花言巧语，却根本不切合实用，结果弄得称颂先王、高谈仁义的人充满朝廷，而政局仍不免于混乱；立身处世的人竞相标榜清高，不去为国家建功立业。结果有才智的人隐居山林，推辞俸禄而不接受，而兵力仍不免于削弱。兵力不免于削弱。政局不免于混乱，这究竟是怎么造成的呢？
English: As a result, many people around the world always use rhetoric, but it is not practical at all. As a result, the imperial court is filled with people who praise the former king and talk about benevolence and righteousness, but the political situation is still chaotic; people who live in the world compete to be clean and do not want to build a career for the country. As a result, talented people live in seclusion in the mountains and refuse to accept the salary, but the military strength is still inevitably weakened. The military strength is inevitably weakened. The political situation is inevitably chaotic. How did this happen?

古文：民之所誉，上之所礼，乱国之术也。
现代文：因为民众所称赞的，君主所优待的，都是些使国家混乱的做法。
English: For all the praises of the people, and all the honours of the prince, are but the means of disordering the state.

古文：今境内之民皆言治，藏商、管之法者家有之，而国贫，言耕者众，执耒者寡也；境内皆言兵，藏孙、吴之书者家有之，而兵愈弱，言战者多，被甲者少也。
现代文：现在全国的民众都在谈论如何治国，每家每户都藏有商鞅和管仲的法典，国家却越来越穷，原因就在于空谈耕作的人太多，而真正拿起农具种地的人太少。全国的民众都在谈论如何打仗，每家每户都藏有孙子和吴起的兵书，国家的兵力却越来越弱；原因就在于空谈打仗的人太多而真正穿起铠甲上阵的人太少。
English: At present, the people all over the country are talking about how to govern the country, and every household has a code of conduct for business and management, but the country is getting poorer and poorer. The reason is that there are too many people who talk about farming, but too few people actually pick up agricultural tools to farm. The people all over the country are talking about how to fight, and every household has a military record of Sun Tzu and Wu Zhi, but the country's military strength is getting weaker and weaker; the reason is that there are too many people who talk about fighting wars, but too few people actually wear armor and go into battle.

古文：故明主用其力，不听其言；赏其功，伐禁无用。
现代文：所以明君只使用民众的力量，不听信高谈阔论；奖赏人们的功劳，坚决禁止那些无用的言行。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun only uses the power of the people, does not listen to lofty talk; rewards people's merits, and resolutely prohibits those useless words and deeds.

古文：故民尽死力以从其上。
现代文：这样民众就会拼命为君主出力。
English: In this way, the people will work hard for the monarch.

古文：夫耕之用力也劳，而民为之者，曰：可得以富也。
现代文：耕种是需要花费气力吃苦耐劳的事情。而民众印愿意去干，因为他们认为可以由此得到富足。
English: Farming is a labour-intensive business, and Indians are willing to do it because they believe they can get rich from it.

古文：战之事也危，而民为之者，曰：可得以贵也。
现代文：打仗是十外危险的事情。而民众却愿意去于。因为他们认为可以出此获得显贵。
English: War is a very dangerous business, but people are willing to go into it because they think they can get something out of it.

古文：今修文学，习言谈，则无耕之劳而有富之实，无战之危而有贵之尊，则人孰不为也？
现代文：如今只要擅长文章学术，能说会道。
English: Nowadays, as long as you are good at academic writing, you can speak well.

古文：是以百人事智而一人用力。
现代文：无需有耕种的劳苦就可以获得富足的实惠。
English: The benefits of affluence can be obtained without the toil of farming.

古文：事智者众，则法败；用力者寡，则国贫：此世之所以乱也。
现代文：无需冒打仗的危险便可以得到尊贵的官爵，那么人们谁不乐意这样干呢？结果就出现了一百个人从事于智力活动，却只有一个人致力于耕战事业的状况。
English: Who would not be glad to obtain a noble title without risking war? The result is a situation in which a hundred men are engaged in intellectual activities, but only one is devoted to the cause of war.

古文：故明主之国，无书简之文，以法为教；无先王之语，以吏为师；无私剑之捍，以斩首为勇。
现代文：从事于智力活动的人多了，法治就要遭到破坏；致力于耕战事业的人少了，国家就会变得贫穷。这就是社会所以混乱的原因。
English: If there are more people engaged in intellectual activities, the rule of law will be destroyed; if there are fewer people dedicated to the cause of farming and warfare, the country will become poor. This is the reason why society is chaotic.

古文：是境内之民，其言谈者必轨于法，动作者归之于功，为勇者尽之于军。
现代文：因此，在明君的国家里，不用有关学术的文献典籍。而以法令为教本；禁绝先王的言论，而以官吏为老师；没有游侠刺客的凶悍，而只以杀敌立功为勇敢。
English: Therefore, in the country of Emperor Ming, academic literature and classics are not used. Instead, laws and regulations are used as a textbook; the speech of the former king is banned, but officials are used as teachers; there is no fierce ranger assassin, but only killing the enemy is brave.

古文：是故无事则国富，有事则兵强，此之谓王资。
现代文：这样，国内民众的一切言论都必须遵循法令，让劳动人民去做农耕之事；让勇士们全部到军队中去服务。正因如此。
English: In this way, all the statements of the domestic people must follow the law, let the working people do farming; let the warriors all go to the army to serve. That's why.

古文：既畜王资而承敌国之釁，超五帝侔三王者，必此法也。
现代文：太平时期国家就富足，战争时期兵力就强盛，这便奠定了称王天下的资本。既拥有称王天下的资本，又善于利用敌国的弱点；建立超过五帝、赶上三王的功业，一定得采用这种办法。
English: In times of peace, the country is rich, and in times of war, the military is strong, which has laid the foundation for the world's capital. It has the world's capital, and it is good at exploiting the weaknesses of the enemy country; to build more than five emperors and catch up with three kings, this method must be used.

古文：今则不然，士民纵恣于内，言谈者为势于外，外内称恶，以待强敌，不亦殆乎！
现代文：现在却不是这样。
English: That is not the case now.

古文：故群臣之言外事者，非有分于从衡之党，则有仇雠之忠，而借力于国也。
现代文：儒士、游侠在国内恣意妄为，纵横家在国外大造声势。内外形势尽行恶化，就这样来对付强敌。不是太危险了吗？所以那些谈论外交问题的臣子们，不是属于合纵或连衡中的哪一派，就是怀有借国家力量来报私仇的隐衷。所谓合纵。
English: Confucians and rangers act arbitrarily at home, while tyrants and tyrants make a lot of noise abroad. The situation at home and abroad has deteriorated as much as possible, and this is how to deal with a strong enemy. Isn't it too dangerous? Therefore, those courtiers who talk about diplomatic issues either belong to one of the factions in the coalition or the coalition, or they harbor the secret desire to use the power of the state to avenge their personal vendettas. The so-called coalition.

古文：从者，合众弱以攻一强也；而衡者，事一强以攻众弱也：皆非所以持国也。
现代文：就是联合众多弱小国家去攻打一个强大国家；所谓连衡，就是依附于一个强国去攻打其他弱国。这都不是保全国家的好办法。
English: It is to unite many weak countries to attack a strong country; the so-called linkage is to rely on a strong country to attack other weak countries. This is not a good way to preserve the country.

古文：今人臣之言衡者，皆曰： 不事大，则遇敌受祸矣。 
现代文：现在那些主张连衡的臣子都说： 不依附大国，一遇强敌就得遭殃。 
English: Now, those courtiers who advocate even-handedness all say: If you don't rely on a great power, you will be doomed in the event of a strong enemy.

古文：事大未必有实，则举图而委，效玺而请兵矣。
现代文：侍奉大国不一定有什么实际效应，倒必须先献出本国地图，呈上政府玺印，这样才得以请求军事援助。
English: Serving a great power does not necessarily have any practical effect, but you must first present a map of your country and submit a government stamp, so that you can request military assistance.

古文：献图则地削，效玺则名卑，地削则国削，名卑则政乱矣。事大为衡，未见其利也，而亡地乱政矣。
现代文：国家就削弱了；声望降低。政治上就混乱了。侍奉大国实行连衡。还来不及看到什么好处，却已丧失了国土，搞乱了政治。
English: The state is weakened; its prestige is diminished; there is political chaos; it serves the great powers in a balancing act; and before it can see any benefit, it has lost its territory and disrupted its politics.

古文：人臣之言从者，皆曰： 不救小而伐大，则失天下，失天下则国危，国危而主卑。 
现代文：那些主张合纵的臣子都说： 不救援小国去进攻大国，就失了各国的信任；失去了各国的信任，国家就面临危险；国家面临危险。君主地位就降低了。 
English: All those courtiers who advocated unification said: If you do not rescue small countries and attack big countries, you will lose the trust of all countries; if you lose the trust of all countries, the country will face danger; if the country faces danger, the status of the monarch will be reduced.

古文：救小未必有实，则起兵而敌大矣。
现代文：援救小国不一定有什么实惠可言。倒要起兵去和大国为敌。
English: There may not be any real benefit in rescuing small countries, but it is necessary to raise an army to fight against the big countries.

古文：救小未必能存，而交大未必不有疏，有疏则为强国制矣。
现代文：援救小国未必能使它保存下来。而进攻大国未必就不失误一有失误，就要被大国控制了。
English: Rescuing a small country may not be able to preserve it, and attacking a large country may not be without mistakes. If there is a mistake, it will be controlled by a large country.

古文：出兵则军败，退守则城拔。
现代文：出兵的话，军队就要吃败仗；退守的话，城池就会被攻破。
English: If soldiers are sent out, the army will be defeated; if they retreat, the castle will be breached.

古文：救小为从，未见其利，而亡地败军矣。
现代文：援救小国实行合纵。还来不及看到什么好处，却已使国土被侵吞，军队吃败仗。
English: It is too late to see any benefits, but the country has been invaded and the army defeated.

古文：是故事强，则以外权士官于内；救小，则以内重求利于外。
现代文：所以，侍奉强国，只能使那些搞连衡的人凭借外国势力在国内捞取高官；援救小国，只能使那些搞合纵的人凭借国内势力从国外得到好处。
English: Therefore, serving a powerful country can only enable those who engage in balancing to obtain high-ranking officials in the country by means of foreign forces; rescuing a small country can only enable those who engage in conciliation to obtain benefits from abroad by means of domestic forces.

古文：国利未立，封土厚禄至矣；主上虽卑，人臣尊矣；国地虽削，私家富矣。
现代文：国家利益没有确立起来，而臣下倒先把封地和厚禄都弄到手了。尽管君主地位降低了，而臣下反而抬高了；尽管国家土地削减了，而私家却变富了。
English: The national interest was not established, but the vassals got hold of the fiefs and plentiful income first. Although the monarch's status was reduced, the vassals were elevated; although the state's land was reduced, the private sector became rich.

古文：事成，则以权长重；事败，则以富退处。
现代文：事情如能成功纵横家们就会依仗权势长期受到重用；事情失败的话，纵横家们就会凭借富有引退回家享福。
English: If the matter is successful, the crooks will rely on the power to be reused for a long time; if the matter fails, the crooks will retire home with wealth and enjoy happiness.

古文：人主之于其听说也于其臣，事未成则爵禄已尊矣；事败而弗诛，则游说之士孰不为用缯缴之说而侥幸其后？
现代文：君主如果听信臣下的游说，事情还没办成就已给了他们很高的爵位俸禄，事情失败得不到处罚；那么，那些游说之士谁不愿意用猎取名利的言辞不断去进行投机活动呢？
English: If the monarch listens to the lobbying of his subjects, if the matter has not been accomplished, he has already given them a high knighthood and salary, and if the matter fails, he will not be punished; then, who are those lobbyists who do not want to continue to speculate with the rhetoric of hunting fame and fortune?

古文：故破国亡主以听言谈者之浮说。
现代文：所以国破君亡局面的出现，都是因为听信了纵横家的花言巧语造成的。
English: Therefore, the emergence of the situation of the country's collapse and the death of the monarch was caused by listening to the rhetoric of the vertical and horizontal families.

古文：此其故何也？
现代文：这是什么缘故呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：是人君不明乎公私之利，不察当否之言，而诛罚不必其后也。
现代文：这是因为君主分不清公私利益，不考察言论是公正确，事败之后也没有坚决地实行处罚。
English: This is because the monarch does not distinguish between public and private interests, does not consider whether the speech is fair and correct, and does not resolutely impose punishment after the defeat.

古文：皆曰： 外事，大可以王，小可以安。 
现代文：纵横家们都说： 进行外交活动，收效大的可以统一天下，收效小的也可以保证安全。 
English: People from all walks of life say: When conducting diplomatic activities, the most effective can unify the world, while the least effective can ensure security.

古文：夫王者，能攻人者也；而安，则不可攻也。
现代文：所谓统一天下，提的是能够打败别国；所谓保证安全，指的是本国不受侵犯。
English: The so-called "unification" refers to the ability to defeat other countries; the so-called "guarantee of security" refers to the inviolability of the country.

古文：强，则能攻人者也；治，则不可攻也。
现代文：兵强就能打败别国。国安就不可能被人侵犯。
English: A strong military can defeat other countries, and national security cannot be violated.

古文：治强不可责于外，内政之有也。
现代文：而国家的强盛和安定并不能通过外交活动取得，只能靠搞好内政。
English: However, the country's prosperity and stability cannot be achieved through diplomatic activities, but only by doing a good job in domestic affairs.

古文：今不行法术于内，而事智于外，则不至于治强矣。鄙谚曰： 长袖善舞，多钱善贾。 
现代文：现在不在国内推行法术，却要一心在外交上动脑筋。就必然达不到国家安定富强的目的了。民间谚语说： 长袖善舞，多钱善贾。 
English: Now, instead of promoting magic in the country, we should concentrate on diplomacy. Otherwise, we will inevitably fail to achieve the goal of a stable, prosperous and strong country. A folk proverb says: "Long sleeves are good for dancing, but a lot of money is good for the country."

古文：此言多资之易为工也。
现代文：这就是说，物质条件越好越容易取得功效。
English: That is to say, the better the material conditions, the easier it is to obtain efficacy.

古文：故治强易为谋，弱乱难为计。
现代文：所以国家安定强盛，谋事就容易成功；国家衰弱混乱，计策就难以实现。
English: Therefore, if the country is stable and strong, it is easy to succeed in planning; if the country is weak and chaotic, it is difficult to implement the strategy.

古文：故用于秦者，十变而谋希失；用于燕者，一变而计希得。
现代文：所以用于秦国的计谋，即使改变十次也很少失败；用于燕国的计谋，即使改变一次也很难成功。
English: Therefore, for the strategy of Qin, even if it is changed ten times, it rarely fails; for the strategy of Yan, even if it is changed once, it is difficult to succeed.

古文：非用于秦者必智，用于燕者必愚也，盖治乱之资异也。
现代文：这并不是被秦国任用的人智慧必高，被燕国任用的人脑子必笨，而是因为这两个国家的治乱条件大不相同。
English: This is not because the people appointed by Qin must be highly intelligent, and the people appointed by Yan must be stupid, but because the conditions for managing chaos in these two countries are very different.

古文：故周去秦为从，期年而举；卫离魏为衡，半岁而亡。
现代文：所以西周背弃秦国参予合纵，只一年工夫就被吞灾了；卫国背离魏国参与连衡，仅半年工夫就被消灭了。
English: Therefore, Western Zhou abandoned Qin to participate in the War of Attrition, and was swallowed up in just one year; the defense of the country deviated from Wei to participate in the war of succession, and was eliminated in just half a year.

古文：是周灭于从，卫亡于衡也。
现代文：这就是说合纵灭了西周，连衡亡了卫国。
English: That is to say, the alliance destroyed the Western Zhou Dynasty, and the alliance destroyed the Qing Dynasty.

古文：使周、卫缓其从衡之计，而严其境内之治，明其法禁，必其赏罚，尽其地力以多其积，致其民死以坚其城守，天下得其地则其利少，攻其国则其伤大，万乘之国莫敢自顿于坚城之下，而使强敌裁其弊也，此必不亡之术也。
现代文：假使西周和卫国不急于听从合纵连横的计谋，而将国内政治严加整顿，明定法律禁令，信守赏罚制度，努力开发土地来增加积累，使民众拼死去坚守城池；那么别的国家夺得他们的土地吧，好处不多。而进攻这个国家吧，伤亡很大。拥有万乘兵车的大国不敢自我拖累在坚城之下，从而促使强敌自己去衡量其中的害处，这才是保证本国必然不会灭亡的办法。
English: If Xi Zhou and the defenders of the country are not eager to listen to the stratagems of the conspirators, but strictly rectify the domestic politics, clearly stipulate the laws and prohibitions, abide by the reward and punishment system, strive to develop land to increase accumulation, and make the people fight to the death to hold on to the city; then other countries should seize their land, there is not much benefit. And if they attack this country, there will be a lot of casualties. A big country with a large number of military vehicles does not dare to drag itself under a strong city, thus prompting a strong enemy to measure the harm. This is the way to ensure that the country will not perish.

古文：舍必不亡之术而道必灭之事，治国者之过也。
现代文：丢掉这种必然不会亡国的办法，却去搞势必会招致亡国的事情，这是治理国家的人的过错。
English: It is the fault of those who govern the country to throw away this method, which will certainly not lead to the downfall of the country, and to engage in things that will inevitably lead to the downfall of the country.

古文：智困于内而政乱于外，则亡不可振也。
现代文：外交努力陷于困境，内政建设陷于混乱，那么国家的灭亡就无法挽救了。
English: If the diplomatic efforts are in a difficult situation and the internal affairs construction is in a mess, then the country's demise cannot be saved.

古文：民之故计，皆就安利如辟危穷。
现代文：人们的习惯想法，都是追求安逸和私利而避开危险和穷苦。
English: People's habitual thoughts are the pursuit of comfort and self-interest and the avoidance of danger and poverty.

古文：今为之攻战，进则死于敌，退则死于诛，则危矣。
现代文：如果让他们去打仗。前进会被敌人杀死，后退要受军法处置，就处于危险之中了。
English: If they are allowed to go to war, if they advance they will be killed by the enemy, if they retreat they will be subject to military law, and they will be in danger.

古文：弃私家之事而必汗马之劳，家困而上弗论，则穷矣。
现代文：放弃个人的家业，承受作战的劳苦，家里有困难而君主不予过问，就置于穷困之中了。
English: To give up one's family business, to endure the toil of war, to have difficulties at home and the monarch not to ask, is to be placed in poverty.

古文：穷危之所在也，民安得勿避？
现代文：穷困和危险交加，民众怎能不逃避呢？
English: Faced with poverty and danger, how can people not flee?

古文：故事私门而完解舍，解舍完则远战，远战则安。
现代文：所以他们投靠私门贵族，求得免除兵役，兵役免除了就可以远离战争，远离战争也就可以得到安全了。
English: Therefore, they relied on private nobles to seek exemption from military service. If they were exempt from military service, they could stay away from the war, and they could be safe away from the war.

古文：行货赂而袭当涂者则求得，求得则私安，私安则利之所在，安得勿就？
现代文：用钱财贿赂当权者就可以达到个人欲望，欲望一旦达到也就得到了实际利益。平安有利的事情明摆在那里，民众怎能不去追求呢？
English: By bribing those in power with money and property, one can achieve one's personal desires, and once one's desires are achieved, one also obtains actual benefits. The things that are conducive to peace are clearly there, so how can the people not pursue them?

古文：是以公民少而私人众矣。
现代文：这样一来，为公出力的人就少了，而依附私门的人就多了。
English: As a result, there are fewer people who contribute to the public, and more people who depend on the private sector.

古文：夫明王治国之政，使其商工游食之民少而名卑，以寡趣本务而趋末作。
现代文：明君治理国家的政策，总是要使工商业者和游手好闭的人尽量减少。而且名位卑下；以免从事农耕的人少而致力于工商业的人多。
English: The policy of the Ming and Qing dynasties in governing the country was always to minimize the number of industrialists and businessmen and idlers, and to lower their status, so that there would be fewer people engaged in agriculture and more people engaged in industry and commerce.

古文：今世近习之请行，则官爵可买；官爵可买，则商工不卑也矣。
现代文：现在社会上向君主亲近的侍臣行贿托情的风气很流行，这样官爵就可以用钱买到；官爵可以用钱买到，那么工商业者的地位就不会低贱了。
English: The custom of bribing and cajoling courtiers who are close to the monarch is now very popular in society, so that peerages can be bought with money; peerages can be bought with money, so that the status of industrialists and businessmen will not be low.

古文：奸财货贾得用于市，则商人不少矣。
现代文：投机取巧非法获利的活动可以在市场上通行，那么商人就不会少了。
English: Speculative and illegal profit-making activities can be carried out in the market, so there will be no shortage of merchants.

古文：聚敛倍农而致尊过耕战之士，则耿介之士寡而高价之民多矣。
现代文：他们搜括到的财富超过了农民收入的几倍，他们获得的尊贵地位也远远超过从事耕战的人，结果刚正不阿的人就越来越少，而经营商业的人就越来越多。
English: The wealth they gathered exceeded the income of farmers by several times, and they also gained a higher status than those engaged in farming and warfare. As a result, there are fewer and fewer upright people, and more and more people engaged in business.

古文：是故乱国之俗：其学者，则称先王之道以籍仁义，盛容服而饰辩说，以疑当世之法，而贰人主之心。
现代文：因此，造成国家混乱的风气是：那些著书立说的人，称引先王之道来宣扬仁义道德；讲究仪容服饰而文饰巧辩言辞，用以扰乱当今的法令，从而动摇君主的决心。
English: Therefore, the culture that causes the chaos of the country is: those who write books and say that they preach the way of the king to promote benevolence and morality; pay attention to the appearance and dress, but the literary and skillful rhetoric is used to disrupt the current laws and thus shake the determination of the monarch.

古文：其言古者，为设诈称，借于外力，以成其私，而遗社稷之利。
现代文：那些纵横家们，弄虚作假，招摇撞骗，借助于国外势力来达到私人目的，进而放弃了国家利益。
English: Those unscrupulous people have resorted to trickery, swindling, and using foreign forces to achieve their private goals, thereby abandoning national interests.

古文：其带剑者，聚徒属，立节操，以显其名，而犯五官之禁。
现代文：那些游侠刺客，聚集党徒，标榜气节，以图显身扬名，结果触犯国家禁令。
English: Those Ranger-Assassins gathered party members, advertised the festival, tried to make a name for themselves, and as a result violated the national ban.

古文：其患御者，积于私门，尽货赂，而用重人之谒，退汗马之劳。
现代文：那些逃避兵役的人，大批依附权臣贵族，肆意行贿，而借助于重臣的请托，逃避从军作战的劳苦。
English: Those who evaded military service, a large number of them depended on dignitaries and aristocrats, bribed freely, and with the help of senior officials, evaded the hardships of fighting in the army.

古文：其商工之民，修治苦窳之器，聚弗靡之财，蓄积待时，而侔农夫之利。
现代文：那些工商业者，制造粗劣器具，积累奢侈资财。囤积居奇，待机出售，希图从农民身上牟取暴利。
English: Those industrialists and businessmen, manufacturing shoddy equipment, amassing extravagant capital, hoarding, selling on standby, hoping to make windfall profits from farmers.

古文：此五者，邦之蠹也。
现代文：上述这五种人，都是国家的蛀虫。
English: The above-mentioned five types of people are all the maggots of the country.

古文：人主不除此五蠹之民，不养耿介之士，则海内虽有破亡之国，削灭之朝，亦勿怪矣。
现代文：君主如果不除掉这五种像蛀虫一样的人，不广罗刚直不阿的人，那么。天下即使出现破败沦亡的国家，地削名除的朝廷，也不足为怪了。
English: If the monarch does not get rid of these five kinds of maggot-like people, not the broad and upright people, then it is not surprising that even if there is a ruined and ruined country in the world, the imperial court that has been removed from the name is not surprising.

