古文：鹤庆，唐时名鹤川，南诏置谋统郡。
现代文：鹤庆，唐朝时名叫鹤川，南诏在此设置谋统郡。
English: Zheqing, known as Zhechuan during the Tang Dynasty, is where Nanzhao set up Mottori County.

古文：元初，置鹤州。
现代文：元朝初年，在此设置鹤州。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Cangzhou was established here.

古文：至元中，升鹤庆府，寻改为路。
现代文：至元中年，鹤州升为鹤庆府，不久改为鹤庆路。
English: By the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, Hezhou was elevated to Heqing Prefecture, and soon changed to Heqing Road.

古文：洪武中，大军平云南，分兵拔三营、万户砦，获伪参政宝山帖木儿等六十七人。
现代文：洪武中年，大军平定云南时，分兵攻拔了三营、万户砦，俘获伪参政宝山帖木儿等六十七人。
English: In the middle of Hongwu's life, when the great army conquered Yunnan, a detachment of soldiers stormed three battalions and the Wanyu Fort, and captured 67 people, including the pseudo-serving politician Baoshan Timur.

古文：置鹤庆府，以土官高隆署府事。
现代文：朝廷设置鹤庆府，派土官高隆掌管府中事务。
English: The imperial court set up Heqing Prefecture and sent local official Gao Long to be in charge of the affairs of the prefecture.

古文：十七年以董赐为知府、高仲为同知、赐子节为安宁知州、杨权为剑川知州。
现代文：十七年朝廷任命董赐为知府，高仲为同知，董赐的儿子董节为安宁的知州，杨奴为剑川知州。
English: In the seventeenth year, the imperial court appointed Dong Zhi as governor, Gao Zhong as Tong Zhi, Dong Zhi's son Dong Jie as Anning Chizhou, and Yang Nu as Jianchuan Chizhou.

古文：赐率其属来朝，贡马及方物，诏赐冠带并织金文绮、布帛、钞锭。
现代文：董赐率领其属下前来京城朝觐，向皇帝贡献马和土产，皇帝下诏给他们赏赐冠带、织金文绮、布帛和钱钞。
English: Dong Cai led his subordinates to the capital for a pilgrimage, offering horses and local products to the emperor. The emperor issued an edict to reward them with crown belts, woven gold brooches, cloth brooches and banknotes.

古文：十八年以赐为云南前卫世袭指挥佥事。
现代文：十八年朝廷任命董赐为云南前卫的世袭指挥佥事。
English: In the 18th year, the imperial court appointed Dong Zhi as the hereditary conductor of the Yunnan avant-garde.

古文：赐，安宁州人，世为酋长。
现代文：董赐，是安宁州人氏，世代都是当地的酋长。
English: Dong Cai is a member of the Anningzhou clan and has been a local chief for generations.

古文：大军入滇，率众来降，复从军讨贼有功，故与子节并有世袭知府、知州之命。
现代文：朝廷所派的大军进入云南后，他率领众人前来投降，又跟随官军讨伐贼人有功，所以朝廷任命他和他的儿子董节分别为世袭的知府、知州。
English: After the large army sent by the imperial court entered Yunnan, he led the people to surrender, and also followed the official army to fight against thieves. Therefore, the imperial court appointed him and his son Dong Jie as hereditary prefectures and prefectures respectively.

古文：及赐来朝，以父子俱受显荣，无以仰报，子幼冲，不达政治，乞还父子所授官，而自为安宁知州。
现代文：等董赐前来朝觐时，认为自己父子俩都接受了显著的荣耀，无以报答皇帝，自己的儿子年幼冲动，对政治不通达，所以请求将朝廷授予我们的官职归还给皇上，自己去安宁州担任知州。
English: When Dong Zi came to the imperial court, he thought that both his father and son had received significant glory and could not repay the emperor, and his son was young and impulsive and did not understand politics, so he requested that the official position granted to us by the court be returned to the emperor, and he went to Anningzhou to serve as a prefectural governor.

古文：帝曰： 尔能绥靖边鄙，授尔官以酬尔勋。
现代文：皇帝说 ：你们有能力使边疆地区安宁和睦，授予你们官职是对你们的功勋的酬谢。
English: The emperor said, "You have the ability to bring peace and harmony to the border regions. Awarding you an official post is a reward for your merits."

古文：今辞尊居卑，奈何？ 
现代文：现今你们辞去尊贵的官位而甘愿屈居卑下的职位，叫我怎么办呢？ 
English: What shall I do with you, now that you have given up your dignified station for a humbler one?

古文：命颍国公傅友德及诸大臣议之。
现代文：命令颍国公傅友德及各位大臣讨论这件事。
English: He ordered the Minister of Public Security, Fu Youde, and other ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：皆以赐既有功，不可听其辞，而节之官则可免。
现代文：大臣们都认为既然董赐有功劳，就不能听任他辞去官职，至于董节的官职可以免去。
English: The ministers all agreed that since Mr. Dong had made a great contribution, he should not be allowed to resign from his post. As for Mr. Dong, he could be relieved of his post.

古文：乃改赐明威将军云南前卫世袭指挥佥事，谕曰： 云南前卫密迩安宁，特命尔是职。
现代文：于是皇帝便将对董赐的任命改为明威将军云南前卫世袭指挥佥事，并对董赐说： 云南前卫与安宁最近，所以特地任命你这个职务。
English: As a result, the emperor changed the appointment of Dong Zhi to Mingwei General Yunnan Avant-garde Hereditary Command Anecdote, and said to Dong Zi: Yunnan avant-garde and tranquility are recent, so I specially appointed you to this post.

古文：尔其绥辑远人，以安边鄙，其毋再辞。 
现代文：你应当绥抚边远地区的人民，使边疆地区和睦、安宁，希望你不要再推辞了。 
English: You should caress the people in remote areas and make the border areas harmonious and peaceful. I hope you will not refuse again.

古文：二十年，剑川土官杨奴叛。大理卫指挥郑祥讨之，斩八十余人，杨奴遁。
现代文：二十年，剑川的土官杨奴反叛，大理卫的指挥郑祥前去讨伐，斩杀了八十多人，杨奴逃跑了。
English: Twenty years ago, Yang Nu, the local official of Jianchuan, rebelled, and Zheng Xiang, the commander of Daliwei, went to fight and killed more than eighty people. Yang Nu fled.

古文：未几，还剑川，复聚蛮为乱，祥复以兵击斩之。
现代文：不久，杨奴回到剑川，又聚集蛮人作乱，郑祥又带兵出击。
English: Soon after, Yang Nu returned to Jianchuan and gathered barbarians to make trouble, and Zheng Xiang led troops to attack.

古文：二十四年置鹤庆卫。
现代文：二十四年朝廷设置了鹤庆卫。
English: In 1924, the imperial court set up Tsuru Qingwei.

古文：三十年改鹤庆府为军民府。
现代文：三十年将鹤庆府改为军民府。
English: It has been 30 years since Heqing Prefecture was changed to Civil-Military Prefecture.

古文：永乐十五年，顺州知州王义言： 沾被圣化三十余年，声教所郕，言语渐通，子弟亦有俊秀，请建学教育。 
现代文：永乐十五年，顺州的知州王义上奏说： 我们这里接受朝廷的圣化已经有三十多年了，风声教化所至，言语也渐渐通了，蛮族子弟中也开始有了俊秀之才，请求朝廷在此建立学校施行教育。 
English: In the 15th year of Yongle, Chizhou Wang Yi ascended to the throne in Shunzhou and said: We have been receiving the sanctification of the imperial court for more than 30 years. The wind of enlightenment has arrived, the language has gradually become clear, and the barbarian children have begun to have talents. I request the imperial court to establish a school to carry out education here.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：正统二年，副使徐训奏鹤庆土知府高伦与弟纯屡逞凶恶，屠戮士庶，与母杨氏并叔宣互相贼害。
现代文：正统二年，副使徐训上奏说鹤庆土知府高伦与他的弟弟高纯屡次逞凶屠杀百姓，与母亲杨氏和叔叔高宣互相残害。
English: In the second year of orthodoxy, the vice-envoy Xu Xun reported that the governor of Heking Prefecture, Gao Lun, and his brother Gao Chun had repeatedly killed people, and had killed each other with their mother Yang and uncle Gao Xuan.

古文：敕黔国公沐昂谕使输款，如恃强不服，即调军擒捕。
现代文：皇帝让黔国公沐昂派人去说服他们接受官府的处理，如果恃强不服，则马上调军队将他们逮捕。
English: The emperor asked Muang, the Duke of Shan, to send someone to persuade them to accept the government's treatment, and if they stubbornly refused, the army would be immediately dispatched to arrest them.

古文：五年复敕昂等曰： 比闻土知府高伦妻刘氏同伦弟高昌等，纠集罗罗、麽些人众，肆行凶暴。
现代文：五年皇帝又对沐昂说 ：近来听说土知府高伦的妻子刘氏与高伦的弟弟高昌等人，纠集了罗罗人和么些人，公开施行凶暴。
English: In the fifth year, the emperor also said to Muang, "Recently, I heard that Liu, the wife of Galen, the governor of the province, and Galen's brother Gaochang, and others, have gathered the Luo and Luo people to openly carry out violence.

古文：事发，不从逮讯。
现代文：事情被揭发后，他们不听从官府对他们的审讯。
English: After the affair was exposed, they did not listen to the government's interrogation of them.

古文：敕至，即委官至彼勘实，量调官军擒捕首恶，并逮千户王蕙及高宣等至京质问。 
现代文：我的敕谕一到，你可立即委派官员到他们那里去调查审核实际情况，适当调遣官军逮捕首恶分子，并将千户王蕙及高宣等逮到京城来接受质问。 
English: As soon as my edict arrives, you can immediately assign officials to them to investigate and verify the actual situation, appropriately dispatch officers and men to arrest the ringleaders, and arrest Qianhu Wangya and Gao Xuan to Beijing to be questioned.

古文：八年，鹤庆民杨仕洁妻阿夜珠告伦谋杀其子，复命法司移文勘验。
现代文：八年，鹤庆的百姓杨仕洁的妻子阿夜珠控告高伦谋杀她的儿子，朝廷又命令司法机构下文调查该事。
English: Eight years later, the wife of Yang Shijie, a citizen of Heqing, accused Gao Lun of murdering her son, and the court ordered the judiciary to investigate the matter further.

古文：已而大理卫千户奏报，伦擅率军马欲谋害亲母，又称其母告伦不孝及私敛民财，多造兵器，杀戮军民，支解枭令等罪。
现代文：不久大理卫千户上奏说，高伦擅自率领人马想谋害亲生母亲，他的母亲控告高伦犯有对母亲不孝顺、私自收敛百姓的财物、造了很多武器、屠杀军士和百姓、曲意理解朝廷的命令等罪。
English: Not long after, Dali Wei sent a report to Chihou saying that Gao Lun wanted to kill his own mother by leading a group of people without permission. His mother accused Gao Lun of being unfilial to his mother, collecting people's belongings without permission, making a lot of weapons, slaughtering soldiers and civilians, and interpreting the orders of the imperial court.

古文：遂敕黔国公沐晟等勘覆。
现代文：皇帝于是命令黔国公沐晟等前去调查后申报情况上来。
English: The emperor then ordered the Grand Duke Muxun to investigate and report the situation.

古文：及奏至，言伦所犯皆实，罪应死。
现代文：黔国公等人调查后上奏说高伦所犯的罪行都是事实，按法律应当处死。
English: After the investigation, Shan Guokong and others said that the crimes committed by Gao Lun were all facts and should be executed according to the law.

古文：伦复屡诉，因与叔宣争袭，又与千户王蕙争娶妾，以致挟仇诬陷。
现代文：高伦又屡次上诉辩解说他是与叔叔高宣争夺官位承袭权，又与千户王蕙争夺妾，以致他们挟仇诬陷他。
English: Gao Lun also repeatedly appealed, arguing that he was competing with his uncle Gao Xuan Rong for the right to inherit the official position, and competing with Qianhu Wang Yao for the concubine, so that they framed him.

古文：所勘杀死，皆病死及强盗拒捕之人。
现代文：黔国公调查的那些被杀死的人，都是病死或是他们做强盗又拒捕而被杀的。
English: Those who were killed, according to the investigation, died of illness or were killed because they were robbers and resisted arrest.

古文：伦母杨亦诉伦无不孝，实由宣等陷害。
现代文：高伦的母亲亦说所谓高伦不孝顺，实际上是高宣等人的陷害。
English: Gao Lun's mother also said that Gao Lun's so-called lack of filial piety was actually a frame-up by Gao Xuan and others.

古文：复敕晟及御史严恭确访。
现代文：皇帝又让沐晟和御史严恭前去确切调查此事。
English: The emperor also asked Mu Rong and Gu Shi Yan Gong to investigate the matter further.

古文：既而奏当伦等皆伏诛。
现代文：不久他们上奏说高伦等人都应当伏法被诛。
English: Soon after, they issued a statement saying that Gao Rong and others should be arrested.

古文：高氏族人无可继者，帝命于流官中择人，以绥远蛮。
现代文：高氏家族中没有人可承袭官职，皇帝便让当地官员在流官中挑选一个人来管理当地的事务，以便安抚边远地区的蛮族人。
English: Since no one in the Gao family could succeed to a government post, the emperor asked local officials to select a person from the ranks of officials to manage local affairs in order to appease the barbarians in remote areas.

古文：乃擢泸州知府林遒节为知府。
现代文：于是泸州知府林遒节被提升为鹤庆府的知府。
English: As a result, Linfen, the prefecture of Zhangzhou, was promoted to the prefecture of Heqing.

古文：鹤庆之改流官自此始。
现代文：鹤庆由土官转改为流官统治的历史从此开始。
English: The history of Heqing's transition from a local official to the rule of a high-ranking official began from here.

古文：武定，南诏三十七部之一。
现代文：武定，是南诏三十七部之一。
English: Wuding is one of the 37 provinces of Nanzhao.

古文：宋淳熙间，大理段氏以阿历为罗武部长。
现代文：宋朝淳熙年间，大理的段氏让阿历担任罗武部的部长。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the Duan clan of Dali made Ali the minister of Luwu.

古文：三传至矣格，当元世祖时，为北部土官总管。
现代文：阿历的部长职务传了三代到矣格时，正好是元朝元世祖当政，矣格被封为北部土官总管。
English: When the ministerial post of Ah Li was passed down to Yige for three generations, it was just when the Yuan Dynasty was in power, and Yuge was appointed as the chief land officer of the north.

古文：至元七年改武定路，置南甸县。
现代文：元朝至元七年，此地改为武定路，设置了南甸县。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, this place was changed to Wuding Road, and Nandian County was established.

古文：洪武十四年，云南下，武定女土官商胜首先归附。
现代文：洪武十四年，官军进入云南，武定的女土官商胜首先归附朝廷。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, the imperial army entered Yunnan. Shang Sheng, a female local official from Wuding, was the first to be annexed by the imperial court.

古文：十五年改为武定军民府，以胜署府事。
现代文：十五年武定路被改为武定军民府，让商胜掌管该府事务。
English: Fifteen years later, Wuding Road was renamed Wuding Military and Civilian Government, and Shang Sheng was put in charge of the government's affairs.

古文：十六年，胜遣人来朝，贡马。
现代文：十六年，商胜派人前来京城朝贡，向皇帝献贡马。
English: In 166, Shang Sheng sent people to pay tribute to the emperor in Beijing.

古文：诏赐胜诰命、朝服及锦币、钞锭。
现代文：皇帝下诏给商胜颁赐诰命和朝服，赏赐给她锦币、钱钞。
English: The emperor issued an edict to award Shang Sheng with a long life and a royal robe, and gave her gold coins and banknotes.

古文：十七年以和曲土官豆派为知州。
现代文：十七年任命和曲土官豆派为知州。
English: It's been seventeen years since the appointment of the Wagu Potato Official Bean Pie to Chishu.

古文：二十一年发内帑，令于武定、德昌、会川诸处，市马三千匹。
现代文：二十一年朝廷从国库中拿出金帛，派人到武定、德昌、会川等地购买马三千匹。
English: In 1921, the imperial court took out gold ingots from the national treasury and sent people to Wuding, Dechang, Huichuan and other places to buy 3,000 horses.

古文：宣德元年，元谋县故土知县吾忠子政来朝。
现代文：宣德元年，元谋县已故土知县吾忠的儿子吾政前来京城朝觐。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the son of the late Uchu County, Duchi County, Motomachi County, came to the capital for the imperial court.

古文：正德二年四月，武定雨雹，溪水涨，决堤坏田，陨霜露杀麦。
现代文：正德二年四月，武定地区下雨降冰雹，溪水暴涨，冲决了堤坝毁坏了农田，天又降霜冻死了麦子。
English: In April of the second year of Zhengde, rain and hail fell in the Wuding area, the stream water soared, the dam was broken, the farmland was destroyed, and the weather was frosty and the wheat died.

古文：七月废武定所属之南甸县改隶和曲州，石旧县改隶禄劝州。
现代文：七月，朝廷将武定所属的南甸县改为隶属于和曲州，石旧县改为隶属于禄劝州。
English: In July, the imperial court changed Nandian County, which belonged to Wuding, to be subordinate to Hequ County, and Shigu County to be subordinate to Luzhu County.

古文：三年，土知府凤英以从征功，进秩右参政，仍知府事，请赐金带，部议不可。
现代文：三年，土知府凤英因跟随官军从征有功，进官秩为右参政，仍让他掌管知府事务。他请求朝廷给他赏赐金腰带，礼部讨论认为不行。
English: In the third year, Feng Ying, the governor of Tochifu, still let him take charge of the affairs of the governor's office because he had the merit of following the government army from recruitment to promotion, and the promotion rank was the right to participate in politics. He asked the court to reward him with a gold belt, but the ceremonial department thought it was not possible.

古文：帝以英有军功，给之。
现代文：而皇帝认为凤英有功劳，可以给。
English: But the emperor thought that Feng Ying had merit and could be given.

古文：明年，英贡马谢恩，赐如例。
现代文：第二年，凤英向皇帝进献贡马以感谢皇帝的恩典，皇帝又按惯例给他赏赐。
English: The next year, Feng Ying presented a tribute horse to the emperor to thank the emperor's grace, and the emperor rewarded him with a horse according to the usual practice.

古文：嘉靖七年，土舍凤朝文作乱。杀同知以下官吏，劫州印，举兵与寻甸贼安铨合犯云南府，抚臣以闻。
现代文：嘉靖七年，土舍凤朝文叛乱，杀死了同知以下的官吏，抢劫走了州府的官印，带兵与寻甸的贼人安铨一起侵犯云南府。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Tuoshe Feng rebelled against the imperial edict, killed officials who were less than his acquaintance, robbed the official seal of the state capital, and led soldiers to invade Yunnan together with the thief An Xun, who was looking for money.

古文：时安铨未平，朝文复起，滇中大扰。
现代文：抚按大臣将此事报告朝廷。此时正好安铨之乱还未平息，凤朝文又起来作乱，于是云南大受骚扰。
English: Fuzhang minister reported the matter to the imperial court. At this time, the Anhui Rebellion had not yet subsided, and the Fengchowen rose again to make trouble, so Yunnan was greatly harassed.

古文：诏以右都御史伍文定为兵部尚书，提督云、贵、川、湖军务，调四镇土汉官军讨贼。
现代文：皇帝下诏任命右都御史伍文定为兵部尚书，领导监督云南、贵州、四川、湖广的军务，调拨四镇的土兵和汉兵讨伐贼人。
English: Under the Emperor's edict, Wu Wen, the Governor of the Right Capital, was appointed as the Secretary of the Military Department, leading and supervising the military affairs of Yunnan, Guizhou, Sichuan and Hunan, and dispatching the local soldiers and Chinese soldiers from the four towns to fight against the bandits.

古文：五月，黔国公沐绍勋疏言： 臣奉命会同巡抚等调发官军，分道剿抚。
现代文：五月，黔国公沐绍勋上疏说 ：我奉命与巡抚官等人调拨官军，分路向叛贼进剿、招抚。
English: In May, the Grand Duke of Shan State, Mu Shao Xun, said: I have been ordered to dispatch the official army with the governor and others, and to go to the traitors and entice them.

古文：诸贼抗逆，执留所遣官军二人，所调集各土舍，又重自疑畏。
现代文：叛贼违抗，扣留了我们所派去招抚他们的官军二人，这样，所调拨来的各土舍，又重新怀疑官军的能力，畏惧叛贼。
English: The traitors disobeyed and detained the two officers and men we had sent to appease them. As a result, all the villages we had transferred to again doubted the ability of the officers and men and feared the traitors.

古文：臣谨以便宜榜示，先给冠带，待后奏请承袭，众始感奋。
现代文：我小心地按照便宜行事的原则出示榜文，封给他们官职，发给他们冠带，说待我上奏朝廷以后再让他们正式承袭官位，众人才开始振奋起来。
English: I was careful to follow the principle of acting cheaply in presenting the nomination papers, awarding them official positions, handing them crowns and sashes, and telling them to officially inherit official positions after I appealed to the imperial court, and the talents began to cheer up.

古文：于二月进兵，击斩强贼十余人，贼奔回武定。
现代文：于是我们二月进兵，拦击斩杀了强敌十多人，叛贼逃回武定。
English: So we entered the army in February, intercepted and killed more than ten strong enemies, and the traitors fled back to Wuding.

古文：乞敕部授臣方略，俾获便宜行事，并宥各土舍往罪，凡有功者，俱许承袭，作其敌忾之气。 
现代文：请求皇上下诏给兵部，给我指明全盘的计划和策略，允许我见机行事，并宽恕各土舍以往的罪行，凡是此次立有功劳的，都允许他们承袭官职，使他们对叛贼有共同的愤恨。 
English: Ask the emperor to issue an imperial edict to the military department, to show me the overall plan and strategy, to allow me to act opportunistically, and to forgive the past crimes of the various houses, and to allow those who have meritorious achievements this time to inherit official positions, so that they have a common resentment against the traitors.

古文：帝纳之，赐敕奖励。
现代文：皇帝采纳了沐绍勋的建议，下诏给剿贼的官军给予奖励。
English: The emperor adopted the suggestion of Mu Shaoxun and issued an edict to reward the official army of thieves.

古文：贼既败归，其党稍散。
现代文：叛贼遭受失败后，其党徒稍有溃散。
English: After the defeats suffered by the traitors, there was a slight scattering of their followers.

古文：初，朝文绐其众，谓武定知府凤诏母子已戮，朝廷且尽剿武定蛮众。
现代文：当初，凤朝文欺骗他手下的众人，说武定知府凤诏母子俩都被朝廷杀戮了，朝廷还要全部剿灭武定的蛮族人。
English: At first, Feng Chaowen deceived the people under his command, saying that Wuding chifu Feng Zhao and his mother had both been killed by the imperial court, and that the imperial court wanted to exterminate all barbarians in Wuding.

古文：至是，凤诏同其母率众自会城往，蛮民相顾错愕，咸投凤诏降。
现代文：此时凤诏和他的母亲率领手下人从会城前往武定，蛮族百姓看见后都大为惊愕，全向凤诏投降了。
English: At this time, Feng Zhao and his mother led their subordinates from Huicheng to Wuding. When the barbarian people saw this, they were greatly surprised and all surrendered to Feng Zhao.

古文：朝文计无所出，绝普渡而走，官兵追及，复败之。
现代文：凤朝文无计可施，穿过普渡逃走，官兵追上他，又将其打败。
English: Feng Chaowen had no choice but to flee across the Purdu River. Officers and soldiers caught up with him and defeated him again.

古文：朝文率家奴数人，取道沾益州，奔至东川之汤郎箐，为追兵所及，磔死。
现代文：凤朝文率领家奴数人，经过逖益州，逃到东川的汤郎箐，被官兵追及，车裂而死。
English: Feng Chaowen led several of his family slaves, passed through Minyizhou, and fled to Tang Langtao in Dongchuan. He was chased by officers and soldiers, and died in a car crash.

古文：铨众犹盛，遁据寻甸故巢，列寨数十。
现代文：安铨的势力还较盛，他逃跑到寻甸老巢，环列寨子数十个。
English: An Xun's power was still relatively strong. He fled to the old nest of Xuan Dian and encircled dozens of stockades.

古文：官兵分哨夹攻之，诸寨先后破，乃并力攻拔其必古老巢。
现代文：官兵分成几哨向他们夹破，先后攻破各寨，于是合力攻拔了安铨的老巢必古。
English: The officers and soldiers divided into several posts and broke through to them, successively breaking through each village, so they joined forces to attack the old nest of Anhui Bigu.

古文：铨奔东川，入芒部，为土舍禄庆所执，贼平。
现代文：安铨逃奔到东川，进入芒部，被土舍禄庆捆绑了起来，于是叛贼都被平定了。
English: An Xun fled to the East River, entered the Mangbu, and was tied up by Tu Xie Lu Qing, so the traitors were all subdued.

古文：是役也，生擒渠贼千余人，斩首二千九百余级，俘获男妇千二百余，抚散蛮党二万有奇，夺器械牛马无算。
现代文：这一仗，官军生擒了叛贼大小首领一千多人，斩杀了二千九百多人，俘虏了男女共一千二百多人，招抚蛮族党徒二万多，缴获兵器、牛马等无法计算。
English: In this battle, the government army captured more than a thousand leaders of the rebels, big and small, killed more than 2,900 people, captured a total of more than 1,200 men and women, enticed more than 20,000 barbarian party members, and seized weapons, cattle and horses.

古文：捷闻，铨、朝文皆枭示，籍其产，家属戍边。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷后，朝廷命令将安铨、凤朝文斩首示众，籍没他们的家产，他们的家属被发配到边疆去戍守边关。
English: After the news of the victory reached the imperial court, the imperial court ordered the heads of An Rong and Feng Chaowen to be beheaded for public display, their family property to be confiscated, and their family members to be sent to the frontier to guard the border.

古文：十六年命土知府瞿氏掌印。
现代文：十六年，朝廷命令土知府瞿氏掌管武定府的官印。
English: Sixteen years later, the imperial court ordered the Tochifu Shinshi clan to take control of the official seal of Wudingfu.

古文：初，府印自洪武以来俱掌于土官，正德间有司议以畀流官同知，土知府职专巡捕、征粮而已。
现代文：原先，府中的官印从洪武年间以来都掌管在土官手中，正德年间有关机构讨论后将府中的官印交给流官同知掌管，土知府的职守就是专门负责巡捕和征粮。
English: Originally, the official seal of the prefecture was in the hands of the local officials since the Hongwu era. After discussions between the relevant agencies during the Zhengde era, the official seal of the prefecture was handed over to the local officials. The duties of the prefecture were specifically responsible for patrolling and collecting grain.

古文：及凤诏死，瞿氏以母袭子官，所辖四十七马头阿台等，数请以印属瞿氏。
现代文：待到凤诏一死，瞿氏以凤诏母亲的身份承袭了儿子的官职，管辖四十七马头的阿台等地，屡次请求朝廷将府中官印交由她掌管。
English: After Feng Zhao's death, Ms. Zou, as Feng Zhao's mother, took over her son's official position, governing the 47-horse-head Atai region and other places, and repeatedly requested the imperial court to put the government's official seal under her control.

古文：吏部覆言，系旧例，宜如其请，从之。
现代文：吏部答复说，按照洪武年间的旧例，应同意她的请求，皇帝就照办了。
English: The officials replied that in accordance with the old practice during the Hongwu era, the emperor should agree to her request and did so.

古文：四十二年，瞿氏老，举凤诏妻索林自代。
现代文：四十二年，瞿氏年老，自己推举凤诏的妻子索林代理自己的职务。
English: Forty-two years later, in his old age, he appointed Feng Zhao's wife, Solin, to take over his duties.

古文：比索林袭，遂失事姑礼。
现代文：等到索林承袭了官职以后，便对婆婆失礼。
English: After Solin took office, he was rude to his mother-in-law.

古文：瞿氏大恚，乃收异姓儿继祖入凤氏宗，挟其甥婿贵州水西土舍安国亨、四川建昌土官凤氏兵力，欲废索林，以继祖嗣。
现代文：瞿氏大为愤怒，于是收留异姓儿子继祖进入凤氏家族，倚仗着她的外甥女婿贵州水西的土舍安国亨、四川建昌的土官凤氏的兵力，想废除索林，让继祖承袭官职，结果没有成功。
English: The Min clan was very angry, so they took in her son and step-grandfather with different surnames into the Feng family. Relying on the troops of her nephew and son-in-law, An Guoheng, a local official in west Guizhou, and Feng, a local official in Jianchang, Sichuan, they wanted to abolish the Solin and let the step-grandfather inherit the official position. The result was not successful.

古文：不克，乃具疏自称为索林囚禁，令继祖诣阙告之。
现代文：瞿氏便写上疏章，自称自己被索林所囚禁，让继祖到朝廷上告。
English: Mr. Zou then wrote an epitaph, claiming that he had been imprisoned by Solin, and asked his step-grandfather to appeal to the imperial court.

古文：继祖归，诈称受朝命袭职，驱目兵逼夺府印。
现代文：继祖回来后，施诈声称自己已经接受朝廷的任命，承袭了瞿氏的官职，带兵去逼夺索林手中的府官印。
English: After the step-grandfather returned, Shifu claimed that he had accepted the appointment of the imperial court, inherited the official post of the Shun clan, and led the troops to forcefully seize the prefectural seal in the hands of Solin.

古文：索林抱印奔会城，抚按官谕解之。
现代文：索林抱着官印逃到会城，抚按官对她劝解了一番。
English: Solin fled to the capital with the official seal in her arms, and the magistrate tried to reason with her.

古文：索林归武定，视事如故，而复听继祖留瞿氏所，于是妇姑嫌隙益甚。
现代文：索林回到武定后，依然照旧管理府中事务，又听任继祖留在瞿氏的家中，于是婆婆与媳妇之间的嫌隙就更深。
English: After Solin returned to Wuding, he still managed the affairs of the government as before, and also allowed his step-grandfather to stay at the family home of Mr. Zou, so the rift between his mother-in-law and his daughter-in-law became even deeper.

古文：索林谋诛继祖，事泄，继祖遂大发兵围府，行劫和曲、禄劝等州县，杀伤调至土官王心一等兵。
现代文：索林密谋想诛杀继祖，事情败露后，继祖便发大军包围了武定府，抢劫了和曲、禄劝等州县，杀伤了调到这里的土官王心一。
English: Solin plotted to kill his step-grandfather. After the affair was exposed, his step-grandfather sent a large army to surround Wudingfu, robbed the provinces and counties of Hequ and Luoshu, and killed the local official Wang Xin, who had been transferred here.

古文：索林复抱印走云南，巡抚曹忭下令收印，逮其左右郑竤系狱，令瞿氏暂理府事；贷继祖，责其自新。
现代文：索林又抱着府印逃到云南，巡抚曹忭下令收缴她的府印，将她的左右手郑立宏逮捕入狱，命令瞿氏暂时处理府中事务，宽恕了继祖的罪行，责成他悔过自新。
English: Solin also fled to Yunnan with the seal of the prefectural government in her arms. The procurator Cao Jun ordered to confiscate her seal of the prefectural government, arrest her right-hand man Zheng Lihong and put him in prison, ordered Mr. Zou to temporarily handle the affairs of the prefectural government, forgave his stepfather's crime, and ordered him to repent and reform.

古文：四十四年添设府通判一员。
现代文：四十四年，朝廷在武定府添设府通判一员。
English: In 1944, the Imperial Court added a prefectural magistrate to Wuding Prefecture.

古文：四十五年筑武定新城成，巡抚吕光洵遣郑竤回府复业。
现代文：四十五年，修筑了武定府新城，巡抚吕光洵派郑立宏回武定府执掌旧业。
English: In 45 years, the new city of Wudingfu was built, and the inspector Lv Guangya sent Zheng Lihong back to Wudingfu to take charge of the old business.

古文：郑竤者，前为索林谋杀继祖者也。
现代文：郑立宏，就是以前与索林一起想谋杀继祖的那个人。
English: Zheng Lihong is the one who wanted to murder his step-grandfather together with Solin.

古文：继祖执而杀之，纠众攻新城。
现代文：他一回到武定，继祖就将他捆绑起来杀了，并率领众人攻打新城。
English: As soon as he returned to Wuding, his stepfather tied him up and killed him, and led the people to attack the new city.

古文：临安通判胡文显督百户李鳌、土舍王德隆往援，至鸡溪子隘，遇伏，鳌及德隆俱死。
现代文：临安通判胡文显督促百户李鳌、土舍王德隆前去援救，到鸡溪子隘时遭埋伏，李鳌、王德隆都战死。
English: Lin'an Tong sentenced Hu Wenxian to urge the leader of the hundred households, Li Xuan, and the landowner, Wang Delong, to go to the rescue. When they arrived at Jixiazi Pass, they were ambushed, and Li Xuan and Wang Delong were killed in the battle.

古文：佥事张泽督寻甸兵二千余驰救，亦败，泽及千户刘裕被执。
现代文：佥事张泽也带领寻甸的军队二千多人前去救援，亦被打败，张泽和千户刘裕被俘。
English: Anecdotally, Zhang Ze also led the army of more than two thousand people in search of Dian to rescue, and was also defeated. Zhang Ze and Qianhu Liu Yu were captured.

古文：镇巡官促诸道兵并进，逼继祖东山寨，围之。
现代文：镇巡官敦促各道的军队一同进剿，将继祖逼到东山寨包围起来。
English: The town inspector urged the troops of all provinces to advance together and force the step-grandfather to surround Dongshan Zhai.

古文：继祖惧，携泽及索林走照姑。已，复杀泽。
现代文：继祖害怕了，带着张泽和索林逃到照姑，不久又杀死张泽。
English: The stepfather got scared, took Zhang Ze and Solin and fled to Zhaogu, and soon killed Zhang Ze.

古文：官军追之急，由直勒渡过江，趋四川，依东川妇家阿科等。
现代文：官军追赶很急，继祖便从真勒渡过江，奔向四川，投靠东川岳父母家。
English: The government army was in a hurry to catch up, so the step-grandfather crossed the river from Zhenle and rushed to Sichuan to stay with Dongchuangyu's parents.

古文：巡按刘思问以状闻，敕云南、四川会兵讨贼。
现代文：巡按刘思问听到以上情况后，命令云南、四川一起会兵讨伐贼人。
English: After hearing the above situation, patrolman Liu Siqian ordered Yunnan and Sichuan to join forces to fight the loggers.

古文：初，继祖之走东川也，土官凤氏与之通。
现代文：原先，继祖之所以逃向东川，是因为土官凤氏与他有往来。
English: Originally, the reason why the stepfather fled to Higashikawa was because the local official, the Feng clan, had dealings with him.

古文：已而见滇、蜀官军与土舍禄绍先等兵皆会，乃背继祖，发卒七千人来援，继祖益穷。
现代文：现在看到云南、四川的官军与土舍禄绍先等人的军队都会合在一起，凤氏便背叛继祖，发士兵七千人来支援官军，继祖的处境更加穷促。
English: Now, seeing that the official army of Yunnan and Sichuan would be united with the army of Tu Xie, Lu Shao and others, the Feng clan betrayed the step-grandfather and sent seven thousand soldiers to support the official army. The step-grandfather's situation was even more desperate.

古文：贼帅者色赴绍先营降，斩继祖以献。
现代文：继祖手下的首领者色跑到禄绍先的军营里投降，将继祖的头颅献给官军。
English: The leader of the stepfather's men ran to the military camp in Lushaoshan to surrender, and presented the stepfather's head to the government army.

古文：姚县土官高继先复擒其余党，姚安府同知高钦及第钧，谋主赵士杰等皆伏诛。
现代文：姚县的土官高继先又擒捉了继祖的余党，姚安府的同知高钦、高钦的弟弟高钧以及主要谋士赵士杰等人都伏法被杀。
English: Gao Jie, the local official of Yao County, successively captured the Yu Party of his stepfather, Gao Qin, Gao Qin's younger brother, and Zhao Shijie, the main strategist of Yao An Prefecture, were killed.

古文：守臣议改设流官，犹不欲绝凤氏，授索林支属凤历子思尧经历，给庄百余。
现代文：守卫大臣讨论是否在武定设流官统治，朝廷还不想断绝凤氏，给索林的支系亲属凤历的儿子凤思尧授予经历官职，让他管辖一百多个村庄。
English: The Minister of Defense discussed whether to establish a line of officials to rule in Wuding. The court did not want to cut off the Feng clan, and awarded the son of Feng Li, a branch relative of Solin, Feng Siyu, an experienced official position, allowing him to govern more than a hundred villages.

古文：凤历以不得知府怨望，阴结四川七州及水西宣慰安国亨谋作乱。
现代文：凤历因朝廷没授予他知府职位对朝廷产生怨恨情绪，暗地里勾结四川七个州和水西的宣慰安国亨图谋作乱。
English: Feng Li harbored resentment against the imperial court for not awarding him the post of prefectural governor, and secretly colluded with seven provinces in Sichuan and the province of Anhui in an attempt to stir up trouble.

古文：流官知府刘宗寅遣谕之，不听，遂聚众称思尧知府，夜袭府城。
现代文：流官知府刘宗寅派人劝谕他，他不听，还聚集众人称凤思尧为知府，夜里袭击武定府的府城。
English: Liu Zongyin, the governor of Liaoyang, sent someone to advise him, but he did not listen. He also gathered people to call Feng Siyu the governor, and attacked the capital city of Wuding at night.

古文：城中严备不能入，退屯鲁墟。
现代文：他们看到城内严密防守不能进入时，便退兵驻扎在鲁墟。
English: When they saw that they could not enter the tightly guarded city, they withdrew and stationed themselves in the ruins.

古文：宗寅夜出兵，砍其营，贼溃，追至马刺山，擒凤历，伏诛。
现代文：刘宗寅夜间出兵，杀进敌人的军营，乱贼溃逃。刘宗寅带人追到马剌山，活捉了凤历，将他按法处决。
English: Liu Zongyin sent troops at night, killed the enemy's military camp, and the bandits fled. Liu Zongyin and his men chased them to Malang Mountain, captured Feng Li alive, and executed him according to the law.

古文：万历三十五年，继祖侄阿克久徙金沙江外，贼党郑举等诱阿克作乱，阴结江外会川诸蛮，直陷武定，大肆劫掠。
现代文：万历三十五年，继祖的侄子阿克长久迁居在金沙江外，贼人郑举等诱骗阿克作乱，暗地里勾结金沙江外会川的各蛮族人，攻陷武定，大肆抢劫。
English: Thirty-five years have passed. The stepfather's nephew, Ake, has been living outside the Jinsha River for a long time. The thief Zheng He and others have tricked Ake into creating a disturbance, secretly colluding with various barbarians in the Huichuan outside the Jinsha River to invade Wuding and loot.

古文：连破元谋、罗次诸城，索府印。
现代文：他们还接连攻破元谋、罗次等城，索讨武定府的官印。
English: They also successively broke through the cities of Yuanmou and Luoji, and sought the official seal of Wudingfu.

古文：会流官知府携印会城，不能得。贼以无印难号召，劫推官，请冠带、印信。
现代文：此时正好流官知府将官印带到会城去了，得不到，他们便以没有官印无法号召百姓为由，劫持推官，请求朝廷发给他们冠带和印信。
English: At this time, it just so happened that the government officials and governors brought the official seal to the meeting city. When they couldn't get it, they kidnapped the magistrate on the grounds that they couldn't call the people without the official seal, and asked the court to give them the crown and seal.

古文：镇抚以兵未集，惧，差人以府印授之。
现代文：镇抚官因为大军没有集结，害怕他们，便派人将武定府的官印授予他们。
English: The town magistrate was afraid of them because the large army had not yet assembled, so he sent someone to confer the official seal of Wudingfu on them.

古文：时武定凤朝文叛，铨与之合，久之伏诛，事详前传。
现代文：他们退入武定府，立阿克为知府。镇抚官调集了土兵之后，分五路进剿，先后攻克了武定、元谋、罗次、禄丰、嵩明等州县，将阿克及其同党抓送到京城，在闹市中将他们车裂而死。
English: They retreated to Wudingfu and established Ake as the prefectural capital. After the town marshal mobilized the local soldiers, they marched into Wuding in five directions, successively conquered Wuding, Yuanmou, Luoji, Lufeng, Songming and other prefectures and counties, arrested Ake and his party and sent them to Beijing, where they were killed in a car accident in the middle of the city.

古文：丽江，南诏蒙氏置丽水节度。
现代文：武定府平定之后，全都设置流官来统治该地区。丽江，南诏的蒙氏在此设置丽水节度。
English: After the subjugation of Wuding Prefecture, all officials were set up to rule the region. In Lijiang, the Meng Clan of Nanzhao set up the Lishui Festival.

古文：宋时麽些蛮蒙醋据之。
现代文：宋朝，么些蛮人蒙醋占领了该地。
English: During the Song Dynasty, some savages occupied the area.

古文：元初，置茶罕章宣慰司。
现代文：元朝初年，在此设置茶罕章宣慰司。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Chakanzhang Xuanliao Division was established here.

古文：至元中，改置丽江路军民总管府，后改宣抚司。
现代文：至元中年，朝廷将茶罕章宣慰司改设为丽江路军民总管府，后来又改为宣抚司。
English: In the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, the Imperial Court changed the name of the Tea Ceremony and Consolation Division to the Lijiang Road Military and Civil Administration, and later it was changed to the Consolation Division.

古文：洪武十五年置丽江府。
现代文：洪武十五年朝廷在此设置丽江府。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, the imperial court set up Lijiang Prefecture here.

古文：十六年，蛮长木德来朝贡马，以木德为知府，罗克为兰州知州。
现代文：十六年，蛮族酋长木德前来京城朝觐，向皇帝进献贡马。朝廷任命木德为知府，罗克为兰州的知州。
English: Sixteen years later, the barbarian chieftain Mude came to the capital for a pilgrimage and presented a tribute horse to the emperor. The court appointed Mude as the prefecture and Rok as the prefecture of Lanzhou.

古文：十八年，巨津土酋阿奴聪叛，劫石门关，千户浦泉战死。
现代文：十八年，巨津的土著酋长阿奴聪叛乱，抢劫石门关，千户浦泉战死。
English: In the 18th year, Anucong, the indigenous chief of Gotsu, rebelled, robbed Shimen Pass, and Chihouraizumi died in battle.

古文：吉安侯陆仲亨率指挥李荣、郑祥讨之，贼战败，遁入山谷，捕获诛之。
现代文：吉安侯陆仲亨率指挥李荣、郑祥前去讨伐，叛贼战败后逃进山谷，官军将他们捕获后诛杀了。
English: Ji'an marquis Lu Zhongheng led the command of Li Rong and Zheng Xiang to go to the crusade. After the defeat of the rebels, they fled into the valley. The government army captured them and killed them.

古文：时木德从征，又从西平侯沐英征景东、定边，皆有功，予世袭。
现代文：此时木德跟随陆仲亨出征讨伐阿奴聪，后又跟随西平侯沐英征讨景东、定边，都立有功劳，朝廷允许他的官职可以世袭。
English: At this time, Mude followed Lu Zhongheng to fight Anu Cong, and later followed Xiping Hou Mu Ying to fight Jingdong and Dingbian, both of which were meritorious, and the court allowed his official position to be hereditary.

古文：二十四年，木德死，子初当袭。
现代文：二十四年，木德死亡，他的儿子木初继承其父的官职。
English: Twenty-four years later, Mude died, and his son Mucu succeeded his father's official post.

古文：初守巨津州石门关，与西番接境。
现代文：木初原先守卫在巨津州的石门关，与西番的地境接壤。
English: Originally, Kihatsu guarded Ishimen Pass in Otsu Prefecture, which shares a border with the western part of the prefecture.

古文：既袭职，英请以初弟亏为千夫长，代守石门，从之。
现代文：木初承袭其父亲的职位后，沐英便请求朝廷任命木初的弟弟木亏为千夫长，代理木初守卫石门，皇帝同意了。
English: After Muxu inherited his father's position, Mu Ying requested the court to appoint Muxu's younger brother, Muxu, as the chief of the thousand, acting as Muxu's guardian of the Stone Gate. The emperor agreed.

古文：二十六年十月，西平侯沐春奏，丽江土民每岁输白金七百六十两，皆麽些洞所产，民以马易金，不谙真伪，请令以马代输，从之。
现代文：二十六年十月，西平侯沐春上奏说，丽江的百姓每年向朝廷输送白金七百六十两，这些白金都是么些洞出产的，当地百姓拿马去换白金，不知道辨别真假，受骗上当了也不知道，所以请求朝廷允许当地百姓直接以马匹输送朝廷。
English: In October of the 26th year, Xiping marquis Mu Chun reported that the people of Lijiang sent 7602 pieces of platinum to the imperial court every year. These platinum were all produced by some holes. The local people went to exchange platinum, not knowing how to distinguish between true and false, and did not know if they were deceived, so they asked the imperial court to allow the local people to directly transport the imperial court with horses.

古文：三十年改为丽江军民府，从春请也。
现代文：皇帝同意。三十年朝廷听从沐春的请求，将丽江府改为丽江军民府。
English: The emperor agreed. For thirty years, the imperial court listened to Mu Chun's request and changed Lijiang Prefecture to Lijiang Military and People's Government.

古文：永乐十六年，检校庞文郁言，本府及宝山、巨津、通安、兰州四州归化日久，请建学校，从之。
现代文：永乐十六年，检校庞文郁上奏说，本军民府与宝山、巨津、通安、兰州四个州归顺朝廷接受中原的风声教化已经很久了，请求朝廷在这些地方建立学校。
English: In the 16th year of Yongle, the inspector of schools, Pang Wenyu, made a report saying that it had been a long time since the people's government of our army and the four states of Baoshan, Jiujin, Tongan and Lanzhou had submitted to the court to accept the influence of the Central Plains, and requested the court to establish schools in these places.

古文：宣德五年，丽江府奏浪沧江寨蛮者保等聚众劫掠。
现代文：皇帝也同意了。宣德五年，丽江府上奏说澜沧江寨子里的蛮族人者保聚集众人进行抢劫。
English: The emperor also agreed. In the 5th year of Xuande, the Lijiang prefectural government reported that the barbarians in the Lancang River stockade had gathered to rob people.

古文：黔国公沐晟委官抚谕，不服，部议再行招抚。
现代文：黔国公沐晟委派官员前去招抚劝谕他们，他们不听，兵部讨论后让他们再去招抚。
English: They did not listen, and after discussion with the military department, they were allowed to go and try again.

古文：已，兰州土官罗牙等奏，者保拒命，请发兵讨之。
现代文：不久，兰州的土官罗牙等人上奏，说者保拒绝听从朝廷的命令，请求发兵讨伐他们。
English: Before long, Lanzhou's local official, Luo Ya, and others raised their voices, saying that Zhe Bao refused to obey the orders of the imperial court, and requested that troops be sent to fight them.

古文：帝命黔国公及云南三司相机行，勿缘细故激变蛮民。
现代文：皇帝命令黔国公和云南的三司相机行事，不要因一点小小的缘故造成蛮族人大批造反。
English: The emperor ordered the Duke of Yunnan and the Three Cameras of Yunnan to act, and not to cause a large number of barbarians to rebel for a small reason.

古文：正统五年，赐知府木森诰命，加授大中大夫资治少尹，以征麓川功也。
现代文：正统五年，皇帝对知府木森颁发封官的诏令，因他征讨麓川有功另外授予他大中大夫资治少尹的官衔。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, the emperor issued a decree to ban the prefectural governor Misen, and because of his contribution to the conquest of the Luchuan River, he was also awarded the official title of Senior Middle Doctor Zizhi Shao Yin.

古文：成化十一年，知府木嵚奏，鹤庆千夫长赵贤屡纠群贼越境杀掠，乞调旁卫官军擒剿，命移知守臣计画。
现代文：成化十一年，知府木风山钦上奏，说鹤庆的千夫长赵贤屡次纠集一大群贼人越过地界前来杀人抢劫，请求朝廷调遣旁边卫所的官军来擒拿进剿他们。
English: In the eleventh year of Chenghua, the prefect of Mufeng Mountain, Qin Shang, said that Zhao Xian, the chief of thousands in Heqing, repeatedly gathered a large group of thieves to cross the land boundary to kill and rob, and asked the court to dispatch the government army of the nearby nursing station to capture and imprison them.

古文：嘉靖三十九年，知府木高进助殿工银二千八百两，诏加文职三品服色，给诰命。
现代文：朝廷命令将该奏章移交给当地的守卫大臣去计划。嘉靖三十九年，知府木高向朝廷进献助殿的工银二千八百两，皇帝下诏给他加赐文职三品官的官服，颁发诰命。
English: In the 39th year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, Governor Mogao presented a donation of 2,800 taels of silver and gold to the imperial court. The emperor gave him the official uniform of a civil servant of the third grade, and awarded him the posthumous title.

古文：四十年又进木植银二千八百两，诏进一级，授亚中大夫，给诰命。
现代文：四十年木高又向朝廷进献卖树木的银子二千八百两，皇帝下诏再给他进升一级官阶，授予他亚中大夫的官衔，颁发诰命给他。
English: Forty years later, Mogao donated 2,800 taels of silver to the imperial court for the sale of trees. The emperor then gave him a promotion to the first rank, awarded him the official title of Asian Middle Doctor, and gave him the imperial command.

古文：万历三十一年，巡按御史宋兴祖奏： 税使内监杨荣欲责丽江土官退地，听采。
现代文：万历三十一年，巡按御史宋兴祖上奏说 ：税使内监杨荣想责成丽江土官退出土地，听凭官府的分封。
English: In the 31st year of the lunar calendar, Song Xingzu, the inspector-general of history, made a report: Yang Rong, the tax inspector, wanted to order the Lijiang local officials to withdraw from the land and obey the allocation of the government.

古文：窃以丽江自太祖令木氏世官，守石门以绝西域，守铁桥以断吐蕃，滇南藉为屏藩。
现代文：我私下里认为丽江自从明太祖让木氏在此世代为官以来，他们守卫石门关断绝了西域人的侵扰，守卫铁桥隔断了吐蕃人的掠夺，滇南全靠他们的守卫作为安全的屏障。
English: Privately, I think that since Lijiang's Ming Taizu made the Mu clan officials in this generation, they have guarded the stone gate to cut off the intrusion of Westerners, guarded the iron bridge to cut off the plunder of the Tubo people, and the south of Fujian has relied on their guards as a safe barrier.

古文：今使退地听采，必失远蛮之心。
现代文：现在让他们退出土地听凭官府的分封，必然会丧失边远地区蛮人对朝廷的忠心。
English: Now let them withdraw from the land and submit to the government's allocation of land, and they will inevitably lose the loyalty of the barbarians in remote areas to the imperial court.

古文：即令听谕，已使国家岁岁有吐藩之防；倘或不听，岂独有伤国体。 
现代文：退出土地之后，即使他们听从朝廷的指令，国家每年都要防备吐蕃的侵扰，倘或不听朝廷的指令，则不仅仅是对国体的一种损害了。 
English: After withdrawing from the land, even if they follow the instructions of the imperial court, the country must guard against the invasion of the Tibetan mastiff every year. If they do not listen to the instructions of the imperial court, it is not only a damage to the national body.

古文：疏上，事得寝。
现代文：这个奏章上交朝廷后，退地之事就不再提了。
English: After this musical score was submitted to the Imperial Court, the matter of leaving the country was no longer mentioned.

古文：三十八年，知府木增以征蛮军兴，助饷银二万余两，乞比北胜土舍高光裕例，加级。
现代文：三十八年，知府木增因向征讨蛮族的官军支助饷银二万多两，向朝廷请求按北胜土舍高光裕的例子，给他加封官级。
English: In the 38th year, the prefectural governor, Muzeng, requested the imperial court to give him an official rank, following the example of Gao Guangyu of Beishentushe, because of the support of more than 20,000 taels of silver to the government army to fight the barbarians.

古文：部覆赐三品服色，巡按御史劾其违越，请夺新恩，从之。
现代文：兵部答复赏赐给他三品官的官服。巡按御史弹劾他，说他有违越朝廷成命的行为，请求取消对他三品官官服的赏赐，朝廷同意了。
English: The Ministry of the Armed Forces responded by awarding him the official uniform of a three-ranked officer. The inspector impeached him, saying that he had violated the order of the imperial court, and requested that the award of his three-ranked official uniform be canceled. The court agreed.

古文：四十七年，增复输银一万助辽饷。
现代文：四十七年，木增又向朝廷输送银子一万两，支助戍守辽阳的官军购买粮饷。
English: In 47, Muzeng sent another ten thousand taels of silver to the imperial court to support the government army defending Liaoyang in purchasing grain.

古文：泰昌元年，录增功，赏白金表里，其子懿及舍目各赏银币有差。
现代文：泰昌元年，朝廷记录下木增的功劳，给他赏赐白金制的表里，还给他的儿子木懿和手下的舍目各按等级差别赏赐银币。
English: In the first year of the Taichang era, the imperial court recorded Muzeng's merits and rewarded him with a platinum watch, and also rewarded his son Muxuan and his subordinates with silver coins according to the difference in rank.

古文：天启二年，增以病告，加授左参政致仕。
现代文：天启二年，木增因病向朝廷告老，朝廷给他加授左参政的官衔后准许他辞官在家。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, Mu Zeng died of old age due to illness, and the court gave him the official title of left-wing participation in politics and allowed him to resign from his post at home.

古文：五年，特给增诰命，以旌其忠。
现代文：五年，皇帝特地给木增颁布诰命，以表扬他对朝廷的忠心。
English: Five years later, the emperor issued a special edict to commend Muzeng for his loyalty to the imperial court.

古文：云南诸土官，知诗书好礼守义，以丽江木氏为首云。
现代文：有人说云南各土官中，既懂诗书又好守礼义的，以丽江木氏为第一位。
English: Some people say that among the local officials in Yunnan, the Lijiang Mu clan is the first one who knows poetry and is good at observing etiquette.

古文：元江，古西南夷极边境，曰惠笼甸，又名因远部。
现代文：元江，是古代西南夷所居的最边远之地，称为惠笼甸，又叫因远部。
English: The Yuanjiang River is the most remote place inhabited by the ancient Southwest Yi people, known as Huiguadian, also known as Yingyuan.

古文：南诏蒙氏以属银生节度，徙白蛮苏、张、周、段等十姓戍之。又开威远等处，置威远〈目夹〉。
现代文：南诏的蒙氏将该地交给银生节度管辖，把白蛮中的苏、张、周、段等十大姓迁来戍守该地，还开拓了威远等地，设置威远目炎。
English: The Meng clan of Nanzhao placed the area under the jurisdiction of the Yin Sheng Festival, and moved ten major surnames such as Su, Zhang, Zhou, and Duan from the Bai Man Middle Kingdom to guard the area. They also opened up areas such as Wei Yuan and set up Wei Yuan Mei Yan.

古文：后和泥侵据其地。
现代文：后来和泥人侵扰并占据了该地。
English: Later, the mud people invaded and occupied the area.

古文：宋时，侬智高之党窜居于此，和泥又开罗槃甸居之，后为麽些、徒蛮、阿僰诸部所据。
现代文：宋朝时，侬智高的党徒流窜到该地居住，和泥人又开放了罗甸让他们居住，后来，这些地方被么些、徒蛮、阿覺等部落所占据。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Nong Zhi Gao's party and foot soldiers came to live in the area, and the mud people opened up Rhodian for them to live in. Later, these places were occupied by some tribes, such as the Futuan and the Akaku.

古文：元时内附。
现代文：元朝时，他们归顺元朝廷。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, they submitted to the Yuan court.

古文：至元中，置元江万户府。
现代文：至元年间，朝廷设置了元江万户府。
English: During the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court set up the Yuanjiang Wanyu Prefecture.

古文：后于威远更置元江路，领罗槃、马笼等十二部，属临安、广西、元江等处宣慰司。
现代文：后来在威远改设为元江路，统领罗、马笼等十二个部落，隶属于临安、广西、元江等地的宣慰司。
English: Later, it was changed to Yuanjiang Road in Weiyuan, leading twelve tribes such as Luo and Ma cage, and belonging to the Xuanliao Division in Lin'an, Guangxi, Yuanjiang and other places.

古文：洪武十五年改元江府。
现代文：洪武十五年，明朝廷在此设置元江府。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, the Ming court set up the Yuanjiang Prefecture here.

古文：十七年，土官那直来朝贡象，以那直为元江知府，赐袭衣冠带。
现代文：十七年，土官那直来朝觐时向皇帝贡献大象，皇帝便任命那直为元江府知府，赏赐官服和冠带给他。
English: In the seventeenth year, the local official Na Na came to the imperial court and presented an elephant to the emperor. The emperor then appointed Na Na as the governor of Yuanjiang, and gave him an official uniform and a crown.

古文：十八年置因远罗必甸长官司隶之，以土酋白文玉为副长官。
现代文：十八年又设因远罗必甸长官司，让其隶属于元江府，任命当地的酋长白文玉为长官司副长官。
English: In 18 years, the Chief Magistrate's Office of Inyuanlopidian was set up, which was subordinated to Yuanjiang Prefecture, and the local chief Bai Wenyu was appointed as the Deputy Chief Magistrate.

古文：二十年遣经历杨大用往元江等府练兵，时百夷屡为边患，帝欲发兵平之故也。
现代文：二十年朝廷派遣经历杨大用到元江等府去训练军队，因为此时百夷族屡次在边疆地区作乱，皇帝想发兵平定他们。
English: After twenty years of being sent by the imperial court, Yang Dada was sent to Yuanjiang and other prefectures to train the army, because at this time, the Baiyi people repeatedly rioted in the border areas, and the emperor wanted to send troops to quell them.

古文：二十六年置元江府儒学。
现代文：二十六年朝廷在元江府设置儒学学校。
English: In 1926, the imperial court set up a Confucian school in Yuanjiang Prefecture.

古文：二十七年，知府那荣及白文玉等来朝贡。
现代文：二十七年，知府那荣和白文玉等人前来京城朝觐，向皇帝进贡。
English: In the 27th year, prefectural governors Narong and Bai Wenyu and others came to the capital for a pilgrimage to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：永乐三年，荣复入朝贡。
现代文：永乐三年那荣又来京城朝觐献贡物。
English: In the third year of Yongle, Naren came to the capital for a pilgrimage to offer tribute.

古文：帝厚加赐予，遂改为元江军民府，给之印信。
现代文：皇帝给予他优厚的赏赐，于是将元江府改为元江军民府，授予他元江军民府的印信。
English: The emperor gave him a generous reward, so he changed the Yuanjiang Prefecture to the Yuanjiang Army and People's Government, and awarded him the seal of the Yuanjiang Army and People's Government.

古文：荣请躬率兵及馈运，往攻八百，帝嘉劳之。
现代文：那荣请求皇帝允许他亲自率领军队，装载着粮食，前去攻打八百。皇帝嘉奖犒劳了他。
English: Narong asked the emperor to allow him to personally lead an army, loaded with grain, to attack the eight hundred. The emperor rewarded him.

古文：元江府又奏，石屏州洛夹桥，每岁江水冲坏，止令本府修理，民不堪，乞命石屏州协治，从之。
现代文：元江府又上奏，说石屏州的洛夹桥，每年都被暴涨的江水冲坏，如果只让本元江府独自修理，恐怕百姓不堪负担，请求朝廷命令石屏州协助我们一起治理。
English: The Yuanjiang prefecture appealed again, saying that the Luo Ji Bridge in Shiping Prefecture is washed away by the surging river water every year. If only the Yuanjiang prefecture is allowed to repair it alone, I am afraid that the people will not be able to bear the burden, and requested the court to order Shiping Prefecture to help us manage it together.

古文：九年，那荣率头目人等来朝，贡马及金银器，赐予如例。
现代文：皇帝同意了。九年，那荣率领手下的头目前来京城朝觐，向皇帝贡献马和金银器，皇帝按以前的惯例给予他们赏赐。
English: The emperor agreed. In the ninth year, Narong led the heads of his subordinates to the capital for a pilgrimage, offering horses and gold and silver to the emperor. The emperor rewarded them according to the previous practice.

古文：十二年，故土知府那直子那邦入贡方物。
现代文：十二年，已故的土知府那直的儿子那邦也入京向朝廷贡献土产。
English: In the twelfth year, Nagon, the son of the late Tochifu Nanao, also came to the capital to contribute local produce to the imperial court.

古文：宣德五年，黔国公沐晟奏，元江土知府那忠，被贼刀正、刀龙等焚其廨宇及经历印信。今获刀龙、刀洽赴京，乞如永乐故事，发辽东安置，以警边夷，从之。
现代文：宣德五年，黔国公沐晟上奏，说元江的土知府那忠的官邸房舍和经历印信被贼人刀正、刀龙等焚毁了，现今刀龙、刀洽已被抓获押送到京城，请求朝廷按永乐年间的处理方法，将他们发配安置到辽东，以警告边疆地区的夷人。
English: In the 5th year of the Xuande Emperor's reign, the ruler of the State of Shandong issued a proclamation, saying that the official residence of the provincial governor of the Yuanjiang River, the official residence of the provincial governor of Shandong Province, and the official seal of the provincial governor of Shandong Province had been burned down by the thieves, including the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the swordsmen, the sw

古文：命礼部铸印给之。
现代文：皇帝同意。朝廷又让礼部重新将印信铸好送给元江府的那忠。
English: The emperor agreed. The imperial court also asked the Ministry of Ceremonies to re-cast the seal letter and send it to Na Zhong of the Yuanjiang Prefecture.

古文：正统元年，因远罗必甸长官司遣人来朝贡马。
现代文：正统元年，因远罗必甸长官司派人来京城朝觐，向皇帝献贡马。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, because of the distant Lopudian, the chief magistrate sent people to the capital for a pilgrimage to offer tribute horses to the emperor.

古文：正德二年以那端袭土知府。
现代文：正德二年，那端承袭了土知府的职位。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, that side inherited the post of governor.

古文：嘉靖二十五年，土舍那鉴杀其侄土知府那宪，夺其印，并收因远驿印记。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年，土舍那鉴杀死了侄子土知府那宪，夺取了知府印，并没收了因远驿的印记。
English: In the 25th year of Jiajing, Tushan Nakan killed his nephew, Tuchifu Nakan, seized the seal of the prefectural government, and confiscated the seal of Yingyuan.

古文：巡抚应大猷以闻，命镇巡官发兵剿之。
现代文：巡抚应大猷将此事上奏朝廷，朝廷命令镇巡官发兵前去进剿。
English: The governor, Ying Daxuan, reported the matter to the imperial court, which ordered the town's inspector to send troops to the town.

古文：二十九年，那鉴惧，密约交蛮武文渊谋乱。
现代文：二十九年，那鉴有所畏惧，暗地里约好交趾的蛮人武文渊图谋叛乱。
English: In the 29th year, he was afraid, and secretly conspired with the barbarian Wu Wenyuan, who was a good friend of his, to plot a rebellion.

古文：抚按官胡奎、林应箕，总兵官沐朝弼以闻，请以副使李维、参政胡尧时督兵剿之，制可。
现代文：抚按官胡奎、林应箕和总兵官沐朝弼联合向朝廷上奏此事，请求朝廷派副使李维、参政胡尧时督兵围剿他们，朝廷下诏同意。
English: Fuyang officials Hu Kui and Lin Yingtao and General of the Army Mu Zhaojong jointly reported the matter to the imperial court, requesting the imperial court to send deputy envoy Li Wei and political advisor Hu Zhaojing to encircle them, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：那鉴益纵兵攻掠村寨。
现代文：那鉴益发纵容军队攻打抢劫元江府的村寨。
English: That policy allowed the army to attack and loot villages in Yuanjiang.

古文：沐朝弼与巡抚石简调武定、北胜、亦佐等土、汉兵，分五哨。
现代文：沐朝弼和巡抚石简调遣武定、北胜、亦佐的土兵和汉兵，分成五个哨。
English: Mu Zhaojun and the patrolman Shi Jian dispatched the local soldiers and Chinese soldiers from Wuding, Beisheng and Yiza, and divided them into five posts.

古文：调兵既集，朝弼与简驻临安，分部进兵。破木龙寨，降甘庄，贼势渐蹙。
现代文：所调拨的军队集结以后，沐朝弼和石简驻扎在临安，分部进兵，攻破了木龙寨，降服了甘庄，贼人的气势才有所收敛。
English: After the mobilized troops were assembled, Mu Zhaohui and Shi Jian were stationed in Lin'an, and the detachment marched in, broke through the wooden dragon village, and conquered Ganzhuang. Only then did the thieves' momentum subside.

古文：那鉴遣经历张维及生儒数人诣南羡监督王养浩所乞降。
现代文：那鉴便派遣经历张维和几个儒生到南羡监督王养浩的居所，请求投降。
English: Nakan then dispatched the experienced Zhang Wei and several Confucian scholars to the residence of Wang Yanghao, the Nansen supervisor, to request his surrender.

古文：时左布政徐樾以督饷至南羡，樾迂暗，闻维言，谓鉴诚计穷，乃约翼日今鉴面缚出城来降。
现代文：此时左布政徐木越因监督粮饷到达南羡。徐木越人比较迂拙，听了张维的话后，认为那鉴已确实计穷，无地可走，便约定第二天让那鉴自己反捆双手出城投降。
English: At this time, Zuo Bu Zheng and Xu Mu Yue arrived in Nan En due to the supervision of grain. Xu Mu Yue was rather clumsy. After listening to Zhang Wei's words, he thought that Na Jian was really poor and had no place to go, so he agreed to let Na Jian go out of the city the next day with his hands tied.

古文：左右咸谓夷诈不可信，樾不听，如期亲率百人往城下受降。
现代文：他的左右都说夷人奸诈不可轻信，但徐木越不听，按期带一百人到城下接受那鉴投降。
English: Both his right and left said that the treachery of the barbarians could not be trusted, but Xu Mu did not listen and took a hundred people to the city to accept the surrender.

古文：鉴纵象马夷兵突出冲之，樾及左右皆死。
现代文：那鉴便纵容大象、战马和夷人士兵冲出来厮杀，徐木越和他的左右都被袭击而死。
English: Na Jian then allowed elephants, war horses and barbarian soldiers to rush out to fight and kill, and Xu Muxue and his left and right were attacked and killed.

古文：巡按赵炳然以闻，并参朝弼、简及养浩等失事罪。
现代文：巡按赵炳然将此事上报朝廷，并弹劾沐朝弼、石简和王养浩有失事之罪。
English: The inspector Zhao Yulan reported the matter to the imperial court and impeached Mu Zhaohui, Shi Jian and Wang Yaohao for causing the accident.

古文：帝降敕切责，褫简职，养浩等各住俸，克期捕贼赎罪。
现代文：皇帝降旨责究，褫夺了石简的官职，王养浩等人停止给俸禄，要他们限期捕获贼人赎罪。
English: The emperor issued an order to investigate and punish, and took away Shi Jian's official post. Wang Yanghao and others stopped giving him a salary, and asked them to catch the thief within a time limit to atone for the crime.

古文：朝弼与简乃督集五哨兵，环元江而壁。令南羡哨督兵渡江攻城，选路通哨、甘庄哨各精卒二千佐之。
现代文：沐朝弼便与石简集结了五哨军队，沿着元江驻扎，命令南羡哨督兵渡过江去攻城，又从路通哨、甘庄哨各挑选精兵二千人协助他们。
English: Mu Zhaohui and Shi Jian then assembled the Five Sentinel Army, stationed along the Yuan River, ordered Nan En sentry to cross the river to attack the city, and selected two thousand elite soldiers from the Loutong Sentinel and Ganzhuang Sentinel to assist them.

古文：那鉴知二哨精卒悉归南羡，潜遣兵象乘虚冲路通哨。
现代文：那鉴了解到路通哨、甘庄哨的精兵都已调到南羡哨，便悄悄地派遣军队和战象乘虚袭击路通哨。
English: After learning that the elite soldiers of the Putong sentry post and Ganzhuang sentry post had all been transferred to the Nanxian sentry post, Na Can quietly dispatched troops and war elephants to attack the Putong sentry post.

古文：官兵不意贼至，仓猝烧营走。
现代文：官军没料到贼人会突然到来，仓猝烧毁营房而逃。
English: The government troops did not expect the thieves to suddenly arrive, and they hastily burned down the barracks and fled.

古文：监督郝维岳奔入甘庄哨，甘庄亦大溃，督哨李维亦遁，惟余南羡逼城而军。
现代文：监督郝维岳逃进甘庄哨，甘庄也大溃，监督该哨的李维也逃跑了，只留下南羡哨在城前与贼人对阵。
English: Supervisor Xing Wei Yue fled into the Ganzhuang outpost, and Ganzhuang was also defeated. Supervisor of the outpost, Li Wei, fled, leaving only the South Envy outpost to fight against the thieves in front of the city.

古文：武定女土官瞿氏、宁州土舍禄绍先、广南侬兵头目陆友仁咸恨那鉴戕主夺嫡，誓死不退。
现代文：武定的女土官瞿氏、宁州土舍禄绍先、广南侬人头目陆友仁都痛恨那鉴杀死主人夺取嫡亲的官位，誓死不退兵。
English: Wuding's land steward's wife, the Zou clan, Ningzhou's land steward, Lu Shaoxian, and the leader of the Nong people in Guangnan, Lu Youren, all hated Na Jian for killing his master and seizing the official position of his legitimate relative, and vowed not to withdraw from the army.

古文：督哨王养浩因激奖之，翼日鼓噪攻城，贼大败，闭门不出。
现代文：督哨王养浩因此激励他们，第二天他们敲着鼓大声呼喊着攻城，贼人大败，闭门不出战。
English: The next day, they beat drums and shouted loudly to attack the city. The thieves were defeated and did not fight behind closed doors.

古文：官兵围之，鉴乞降。官兵惩徐樾之败，不应。
现代文：官军将他们包围起来，那鉴乞求投降，官军吸取了徐木越的教训，不答应他。
English: The government army encircled them, and Nakan begged for surrender. The government army learned the lesson of Xu Muxue and did not agree to his request.

古文：城中析屋而爨，斗米银三四钱。
现代文：城内的贼人将屋子拆了当柴烧，一斗米要卖三四钱银子，物资已很缺乏。
English: Thieves in the city have torn down the house to use as firewood. A barrel of rice sells for three or four silver coins, and there is already a shortage of materials.

古文：时瘴毒起，大兵乃复撤，期秋末征之，朝弼以事闻。
现代文：这时该地区的瘴气已经起来，官军为避瘴气的侵染就撤兵了，约定秋末再来征讨那鉴。
English: At this time, the radon gas in the area had already risen, and the government army withdrew in order to avoid radon gas contamination, and agreed to come back in the late autumn to collect radon.

古文：帝定二哨失事诸臣罪，行抚臣厚赏瞿氏、禄绍先、陆友仁等，敕朝弼会同新抚臣鲍象贤鸠兵讨贼。
现代文：沐朝弼将此事上奏朝廷，皇帝裁定了两个哨失事各臣的罪责，派抚臣厚赏瞿氏、禄绍先、陆友仁等人，敕命沐朝弼会同新到任的抚臣鲍象贤聚兵讨伐贼人。
English: Mu Zhaohui reported the matter to the imperial court, and the emperor adjudicated the culpability of the ministers involved in the two sentry accidents, and sent the Fuxiong Hou to reward the Shun clan, Lu Shaosen, Lu Youren and others, and the newly arrived Fuxiong Bao Xiangxian gathered soldiers to fight against the thieves.

古文：三十二年，象贤至镇，调集土、汉兵七万人，广集粮运，克期分哨进剿元江，为必取计。
现代文：三十二年，鲍象贤到达镇所，调集土兵和汉兵七万人，广泛征集粮饷，限期分哨进剿元江府，做必定取胜的打算。
English: In thirty-two years, Bao Xiangxian arrived at the town hall, mobilized seventy thousand soldiers from both China and Japan, extensively collected grain, and sent out a sentry to enter Yuyuanjiangfu for a limited period of time, with the intention of winning.

古文：那鉴惧，伏药死。
现代文：那鉴害怕了，喝药自杀。
English: Afraid, she took pills and committed suicide.

古文：象贤檄百户汪辅入城，抚谕其众，擒其贼首，及戕土官那宪之阿捉，杀布政徐樾之光龙、光色等，皆斩首以献。
现代文：鲍象贤便传文书给百户汪辅，让他进城安抚百姓，捉拿贼人首领，将杀害土官那宪的阿提和杀死布政徐木越的光龙、光色等人全部斩首。
English: Bao Xiangxian then sent a letter to Wang Fu of the Hundred Households, asking him to enter the city to appease the people, capture the leader of the thieves, and behead Atti, who killed the local official Naxian, and Guanglong and Guangsi, who killed Bu Zheng and Xu Muxue.

古文：鉴子恕输所占那旂、封銮等村寨，并出所掠镇沅府印，纳象十二只，输屡岁逋赋。
现代文：那鉴的儿子那恕将原先占领的郡、封銮等村寨献出来，将原先掠夺去的镇沅府的府印也还回来，还交纳大象十二只，将几年来拖欠的赋税也全部交齐。
English: Nakan's son, Nambu, gave back the counties, fiefs, and other villages and hamlets that he had previously occupied, returned the seal of Zhenya Prefecture that he had previously plundered, paid twelve elephants, and paid all the taxes that had been in arrears for several years.

古文：象贤命官民推那氏当立者，众举前土官那端从孙从仁。
现代文：鲍象贤命令当地的官员和百姓将那氏家族中可继承官位的人推举出来，众人推举了前土官那端的从孙那从仁。
English: Bao Xiangxian ordered the local officials and people to nominate a person from the Na family who could inherit the official position, and everyone nominated the former local official, Sun Na Congren.

古文：象贤疏言其状，请废恕，贷其死，命从仁暂统其众，加汪辅以千户职，从之。
现代文：鲍象贤上疏说明了该地的情况，请求朝廷废除那恕的官职，赦免他的死罪，让那从仁暂时管理该地的事务，加封汪辅为千户。皇帝都同意了。
English: Bao Xiangxian explained the situation of the place in detail, and asked the court to abolish the official position of Nanzhu, pardon his capital crime, let Nanzhu temporarily manage the affairs of the place, and add Wang Fu to the thousand households. The emperor agreed.

古文：万历十三年以元江土舍那恕招降车里功，许袭祖职，赏银币。
现代文：万历十三年，因元江土舍那恕在招降车里方面有功劳，朝廷允许他承袭祖先的官职，并赏赐给他银币。
English: In the 13th year of Wanli, the court allowed him to inherit his ancestor's official post and awarded him silver coins for his service in recruiting and demoting soldiers.

古文：领长官司一，曰因远罗必甸。
现代文：元江府统领有一个长官司，叫因远罗必甸。
English: The ruler of the Yuanjiang Prefecture had a chief magistrate named Yingyuan Luo Bidian.

古文：永昌，古哀牢固。
现代文：麓川、平缅，元朝时全隶属于缅甸。缅甸，是古代朱波的所在地。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, Luchuan and Pingmeng were all part of Myanmar. Myanmar was the location of ancient Zhubo.

古文：汉武帝时，置不韦县。
现代文：南宋宁宗时期，缅甸、波斯等国向朝廷进献白象，从此才有了缅甸之名。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty of Emperor Ningzong, Myanmar, Persia and other countries presented white elephants to the imperial court, hence the name Myanmar.

古文：东汉置澜沧郡，寻改永昌郡。
现代文：缅甸在云南的西南方，离京城最远，与八百国、占城接壤。
English: Myanmar is in the south-west of Yunnan, farthest from Beijing, bordering eight hundred countries and occupied cities.

古文：唐属姚州，后为南诏蒙氏所据，历段氏、高氏皆为永昌府。
现代文：缅甸有城郭室屋，人都居住在楼上，该地盛产大象和马。
English: In Myanmar, there is a castle-like Muroya, where people live upstairs. The area is rich in elephants and horses.

古文：元初，于永昌立三千户所，隶大理万户府。
现代文：元朝时缅甸最为强盛。元朝曾派使者去招抚他们，他们开始向朝廷入贡。
English: Myanmar was at its most powerful during the Yuan dynasty, which sent emissaries to woo them, and they began to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：至元间置永昌州，寻为府，隶大理路，置金齿等处宣抚司治。洪武十五年定云南，立金齿卫。
现代文：洪武六年朝廷派遣使者田俨、程斗南、张礻韦、钱允恭带着皇帝的诏书去谕告他们。使者们到安南，呆了二年，因道路受阻不通，无法到达。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, the imperial court sent envoys, Tian Qi, Cheng Dunan, Zhang Weiwei, and Qian Yungong, with the emperor's edict to warn them. The envoys stayed in Annan for two years, but were unable to reach it because the roads were blocked.

古文：以元云南右丞观音保为金齿指挥使，赐姓名李观。
现代文：皇帝下诏召他们回来，结果只有田俨回来了，其余的都死在路途上。
English: The emperor issued an edict summoning them to return. As a result, only Tian Xuan returned, and the rest died on the way.

古文：十六年，永昌州土官申保来朝，诏赐锦二匹、织金文绮二匹、衣一袭及鈒花银带、鞾袜。
现代文：十五年，朝廷派大军攻下云南，进而又攻取大理和金齿。平缅与金齿两地地境相连，当地蛮族人思伦发听说明朝大军还要南进，感到害怕，于是向朝廷投降。
English: In the fifteenth year, the imperial court sent a large army to conquer Yunnan, and then went on to conquer Dali and Jingu. The two territories of Pingmai and Jingu are connected. The local barbarian Si Lun heard that the North Korean army was going south, and he was afraid, so he surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：十七年以申保为永昌府同知。
现代文：朝廷就在平缅设置宣慰使司，任命思伦发为宣慰使。
English: The imperial court set up a consolation envoy office in Pingmai and appointed Si Lunfa as consolation envoy.

古文：四月，金齿土官段惠遣把事及其子弟来贡，赐绮帛钞有差。
现代文：十七年八月，思伦发派遣刀令孟向朝廷献土产，并上缴元朝廷授予他的宣慰使司的官印。
English: In August of the seventeenth year, Xilun dispatched a sword to order Meng to offer local produce to the imperial court, and to hand over the official seal of the consolation envoy granted to him by the imperial court.

古文：置施甸长官司，以土酋阿干为副长官，赐冠带。
现代文：皇帝下诏将平缅宣慰使司改为平缅军民宣慰使司，并赏赐给思伦发朝服、冠带、织金文丝绸和钱钞。
English: The emperor issued an edict to change the title of the Ambassador of the People's Republic of China to the Ambassador of the People's Republic of China to the People's Republic of China, and rewarded Silun with a royal robe, a sash, gold-woven silk and money.

古文：十八年置金齿卫指挥使司。
现代文：不久又将平缅军民宣慰使司改为麓川平缅军民宣慰使司。
English: Soon after, he changed the name of the Chinese-Myanmar Military and People's Consolation Envoy to the Chinese-Myanmar Military and People's Consolation Envoy to Lukawa.

古文：二十年，遣使谕金齿卫指挥储杰、严武、李观曰： 金齿远在边徼，土民不遵礼法。
现代文：麓川与平缅境土相连，元朝时将两地分别设置两个路以统领当地的百姓，现在思伦发派使者向朝廷献贡物，朝廷便命令思伦发兼而统领麓川之地。十八年，思伦发造反，率领众人侵犯景东。都督冯诚率兵拦击，正好遇上天降大雾，突然与叛军遭遇，双方接战官军失利，千户王升战死。
English: The Luchuan River is connected to the territory of Burma. In the Yuan Dynasty, two roads were set up in each of the two places to govern the local people. Now, Sirun sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered Sirun to also govern the Luchuan River. In 18 years, Sirun rebelled and led the people to invade Jingdong. The governor Feng Cheng led the troops to intercept, just met the sky-falling fog, suddenly encountered the rebel army, both sides lost the official army, and Senju Wang Sheng died in battle.

古文：尔指挥李观处事宽厚，名播蛮中，为诸蛮所爱。
现代文：二十年皇帝下敕谕给西平侯沐英等人说 ：近来御史李原名从平缅归来，他说蛮族人情况诡谲莫辨，一定会成为边疆的祸患。
English: Twenty years later, the emperor issued an imperial edict to Xiping Marquis Mu Ying and others, saying, "Recently, Imperial Historian Li Yuanmei returned from Pingmai. He said that the barbarians were in a precarious situation and would surely become a scourge on the frontier.

古文：然其下多恃功放恣，有乖军律，故特命杰、武辅之。
现代文：等到朝廷的令符一到，你们即可在金齿、楚雄、品甸和澜沧江中道修筑堡垒，深挖城池，加固营栅，多购置火铳做守卫的准备。敌人来，不要轻易与他们接战。
English: As soon as the imperial decree arrives, you can build fortresses in Jinzu, Chuxiong, Pingtian and the middle of the Lancang River, dig deep, strengthen the camp gate, and purchase more fire rafts to prepare for the guard. If enemies come, don't fight them easily.

古文：观之宽，可以绥远；杰、武之严，可以驭下。
现代文：而且，以往每年有人到百夷族人地区去，大多贪图他们的财物，不顾事理，结果被蛮族人笑话。
English: Moreover, in the past, some people went to the Bai people's areas every year, and most of them coveted their belongings, regardless of the reason, and as a result, they were ridiculed by the barbarians.

古文：敕至，其整练诸军，以观外变。 二十三年罢永昌府，改金齿卫为军民指挥使司。
现代文：从现在开始不允许一个人到平缅去，即使文书来往也要小心应对，不要疏忽。 
English: From now on, no one will be allowed to go to Myanmar. Even if there is correspondence, it should be handled carefully and not neglected.

古文：时西平侯沐英言，永昌居民鲜少，宜以府卫合为军民使司，从之。
现代文：第二年，思伦发诱骗各蛮族人入侵马龙他郎甸的摩沙勒寨。沐英派遣都督宁正将他们击败，斩下敌人首级一千五百多个。
English: In the second year, Silonfa tricked the barbarians into invading Moshale Village in Malong Tarang. Mu Ying dispatched the governor Ning Zheng to defeat them, beheading more than fifteen hundred of the enemy.

古文：置凤溪长官司，以永昌府通判阿凤为长官。
现代文：思伦发便倾巢而出，号称三十万人，战象百余头，进犯定边府，想报摩沙勒寨之仇，而新近依附他的各蛮族都愿为他出力。
English: Silenus flew out of the nest, boasting three hundred thousand men and more than a hundred war elephants, and attacked the border city, wanting to avenge Mosalla, and the barbarians who had recently attached themselves to him were willing to do their best for him.

古文：二十四年置永平卫。
现代文：沐英挑选三万军队急速赶到定边府，贼人排列象阵与官军搏斗。
English: Mu Ying selected thirty thousand troops to rush to Dingbianfu, and the thieves lined up like a phalanx to fight the government army.

古文：永乐元年，赐金齿土官百户汪用钞一百锭、彩币四表里，以西平侯沐晟遣用招安罕的法，故赏之。
现代文：沐英则排列弓弩手对准目标射击，并派人突入阵中大声呼叫。贼人的战象大多受伤，蛮族人中也有较多人被箭矢射中而死，于是蛮族人的气焰稍有收敛。第二天，沐英带领将士，添置更多的火枪和神机箭，轮番射击，战象逃奔，贼人大败。
English: Mu Ying, on the other hand, lined up archers to aim and shoot, and sent people to rush into the battle and shout loudly. Most of the thieves' war elephants were injured, and more people were killed by arrows and arrows among the barbarians, so the barbarians' pride was slightly restrained. The next day, Mu Ying led the soldiers, added more muskets and magic arrows, took turns shooting, the war elephants fled, and the thieves were defeated.

古文：洪熙元年，金齿军民指挥司及腾冲守御千户所等土官贡马，赐钞币。
现代文：官军直捣贼人屯驻的寨子，斩获敌人首级三万多个，降服士卒一万多人。
English: The government army directly attacked the stockade where the bandits were stationed, and captured more than 30,000 of the enemy's first-class soldiers and more than 10,000 demoted soldiers.

古文：宣德五年设金齿军民指挥使司腾冲州，置土知州一员。
现代文：敌人的战象射死了一半，活捉了三十七头。思伦发逃走了。
English: Half of the enemy's war elephants were shot dead, and thirty-seven were captured alive. Xilongfa fled.

古文：时腾冲守御所土官副千户张铭言，其地远在极边，麓川宣慰思任发不时侵扰，乞设州治。
现代文：此捷报传到朝廷后，皇帝派遣使者告诉沐英将军队移到景东附近驻扎下来屯田耕作，加固堡垒以等待大军，不要轻易接受敌人的投降。二十二年，思伦发派遣把事招纲等人来说： 以往叛逆的图谋，都是由于把事刀厮郎、刀厮养鼓动的结果。现乞求朝廷赦免我的死罪，我们愿意向朝廷输送贡赋。 
English: After this successful report reached the imperial court, the emperor sent an envoy to tell Mu Ying to move the army to the vicinity of Jingdong, to settle down and cultivate the occupied fields, to strengthen the fortress to wait for the large army, and not to accept the enemy's surrender easily. In 22 years, Si Lunfa sent a message to Zhizhuang Guan and others, saying: In the past, the rebellious plots were all the result of instigating and instigating. Now I am begging the imperial court to pardon my capital crime, and we are willing to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：帝从之，即以铭为腾冲知州。
现代文：云南地区的守卫大臣将此事上报朝廷。
English: The Minister of Defense of Yunnan Province reported the matter to the Imperial Court.

古文：八年置腾冲州库扛关、库刀关、库勒关、古涌二关。
现代文：朝廷便派遣通政司经历杨大用带着皇帝的敕谕去见思伦发，要他重修做臣子的礼节，全部偿还前日开战所消耗的军费，才能免除问罪之师。
English: The imperial court then sent the Secretary of State for Political Affairs, the experienced Yang Dajian, with the emperor's edict to see Si Lunfa, asking him to re-establish the etiquette of being a courtier, and to fully reimburse the military expenses consumed the day before the war began, in order to absolve the inquisitor.

古文：先是，腾冲州奏，本州路通麓川、缅甸诸处，人民逃徙者多，有误差发贡献。
现代文：思伦发听从命令，以象、马、白金、土产等物向朝廷入贡谢罪，杨大用还让思伦发献出叛逆首领刀厮郎等一百三十七人，于是平缅的叛乱平定了。从此，他们每三年来京城朝觐献贡一次。二十七年思伦发来朝觐皇帝，进献贡马、象、土产。
English: Silonfa obeyed the order and paid tribute to the imperial court with elephants, horses, platinum, local products, etc. Yang Dajian also asked Silonfa to sacrifice 137 people, including the rebel leader, Daguerre, and thus the rebellion of the Burmese was quelled. From then on, they paid tribute once every three years at the imperial court. In the 27th year, Silonfa came to the imperial court to offer tribute horses, elephants, and local products.

古文：旧四百夫长隶腾冲千户所，其库扛关等五处，皆军民兼守。
现代文：之后，皇帝派遣京卫千户郭均英前往平缅，给思伦发赏赐公服、幞头、金带和象笏。
English: After that, the emperor dispatched Guo Junying, the commander of the Beijing Military Region, to Pingmai, and rewarded Xilun with official clothes, a steamed bun, a gold belt and an elephant saddle.

古文：今四百夫已隶本州，止州民守之。
现代文：二十八年，缅国国王派使者来说，百夷族人屡次带兵侵入他们的国境内掠夺财物。
English: In the 28th year, the king of Burma sent an envoy to say that the Bai people had repeatedly invaded their country with soldiers to plunder their property.

古文：乞于五处置巡检司，以土军尹黑、张保、李辅、郭节等为巡检。
现代文：第二年，缅国使者又来诉说遭受百夷人入侵。皇帝派遣行人李思聪等出使到缅国和百夷。
English: The following year, envoys from Burma came to report that they had been invaded by the Baiyi people. The emperor dispatched Li Sicong and other emissaries to Burma and Baiyi.

古文：正统二年以非额革之。
现代文：思伦发听到皇帝的诏令，俯伏着谢罪，愿意罢兵不再入侵邻国。
English: When Siren heard the emperor's edict, she prostrated herself in thanksgiving and agreed to stop invading neighboring countries.

古文：嘉靖元年复设永昌军民府。
现代文：正好碰到他手下的部长刀干孟叛乱，李思聪便以朝廷的威德劝谕他手下的部众，叛乱者稍有退缩。
English: Just as the rebellion of his subordinate Minister Jian Gan Meng occurred, Li Sicong advised his subordinates with the wisdom of the imperial court, and the rebels retreated slightly.

古文：领州一、县二。其长官司二，曰施甸，曰凤溪。新化，本马龙、他郎二甸，阿僰诸部蛮据之。
现代文：思伦发想倚仗朝廷的使者来使他的部下顺服，于是强行挽留李思聪，拿大象、马、金宝来贿赂他。李思聪都劝说退了回去。
English: Shulun thought of relying on the emissary of the imperial court to make his subordinates obey, so he forcibly detained Li Sicong and bribed him with elephants, horses and gold. Li Sicong was persuaded to retreat.

古文：元宪宗时内附，立为二千户所，隶宁州万户府。至元间，以马龙等甸管民官并于他郎甸，置司，隶元江路。
现代文：李思聪回来后详细叙述当地的山川、人物、风俗和道路，撰写成《百夷传记》进献给皇帝，皇帝褒奖他。
English: After Li Sicong returned, he described in detail the local mountains and rivers, people, customs and roads, and wrote a "Biography of Baiyi" dedicated to the emperor. The emperor praised him.

古文：洪武初，改名马龙他郎甸长官司，直隶云南布政司。后升为新化州。
现代文：原先，平缅地区的习俗并不喜好佛教。有从云南来的僧人到达该地后，善做因果报应之说，思伦发便信仰了佛教。
English: Originally, the customs of the Binhai-Myanmar region did not favor Buddhism. After a monk from Yunnan arrived in the region, he believed in Buddhism.

古文：十七年以普赐为马龙他郎甸副长官。宣德八年，故长官普赐弟土舍普宁等来朝，贡马，赐钞币。
现代文：又有金齿地区的士卒逃过来，能造火硫、火炮，思伦发对他们的技能非常感兴趣，帮他们系上金带，让他们与僧人一样，地位都高于各部落长。刀干孟等人不服，于是率领属下的人反叛，进攻腾冲。
English: There were also soldiers from the Jintao region who escaped and were able to make fire, brimstone, and artillery. Shilunfa was very interested in their skills and helped them tie a gold belt, so that they, like the monks, had a higher status than the tribal chiefs. Dagang Meng and others were not satisfied, so he led his subordinates to rebel and attack Tengchong.

古文：八月，黔国公沐晟奏，摩沙勒寨万夫长刀瓮及弟刀眷纠蛮兵侵占马龙他郎甸长官司衙门，杀掠人民，请遣都督同知沐昂讨之。
现代文：思伦发率其家人逃到云南，西平侯沐春将他们遣送到京城。皇帝怜悯他，任命沐春为征南将军，何福、徐凯为副将军，率领云南、四川各卫所的军队前去讨伐刀干孟。
English: Shulun led his family to flee to Yunnan, and Xi Ping marquis Mu Chun sent them to Beijing. The emperor took pity on him and appointed Mu Chun as the general to conquer the south, and He Fu and Xu Kai as vice-generals to lead the armies of the Yunnan and Sichuan sanitariums to fight against the sword of Meng.

古文：帝命遣人抚谕，但得刀瓮，毋扰平民。
现代文：皇帝又将思伦发送回去，让他驻扎在潞江上，招抚他手下的群众，并赏赐给他黄金一百两、白金一百五十两、钱钞五百锭。
English: The emperor also sent Xilun back, let him stay on the Lijiang River, to appease the masses under his command, and rewarded him with one hundred taels of gold, one hundred and fifty taels of platinum, and five hundred taels of banknotes.

古文：正统二年，晟等奏瓮不服招抚，请调附近官土兵，令都督昂剿捕。帝以蛮众仇杀乃其本性，可仍抚谕之，事遂不竟。
现代文：皇帝又对沐春说 ：思伦发是走投无路才归顺于我明朝廷的，你应当用军队将他送回去。到云南时，你可先派人去劝谕刀干孟，让他不要执迷不悟，还是罢兵将主人迎接回去好。倘或他不听，则声讨他的罪行，讨伐他。 
English: The emperor also said to Mu Chun, "If Xulunfa surrendered to the Ming court when he was cornered, you should use the army to send him back. When you arrive in Yunnan, you can first send someone to advise Xuan Gan Meng, so that he does not become obsessed and does not understand, or it is better to send troops to welcome his master back. If he does not listen, denounce his crimes and fight him.

古文：其地有马龙诸山，居摩沙勒江右。
现代文：此时的刀干孟已经赶跑了思伦发后，也害怕朝廷对他用兵，于是派人到西平侯那里，请求允许他向朝廷入贡。
English: At this time, Dagang Meng had already chased away Shilun, and he was also afraid that the court would use soldiers against him, so he sent someone to Xiping Hou to request permission to pay tribute to the court.

古文：两岸束隘如峡，地势极险，故改州以镇之。威远，唐南诏银生府地，旧为濮落杂蛮所居。
现代文：沐春将此上报朝廷。三十一年，沐春上奏说 ：刀干孟想假借我朝廷的军威来抵抗忽都，他所说的要向朝廷入贡不可相信。 
English: Mu Chun reported this to the imperial court. In 311, Mu Chun reported to the imperial court: "Tou Gan Meng wants to use the military might of my imperial court to resist Kudu, and what he says about paying tribute to the imperial court cannot be believed.

古文：大理时，为百夷所据。元至元中，置威远州。
现代文：皇帝派人告诉沐春说 ：边远地区的蛮族人确实也有很诡诈的，不妨暂时同意他的请求，审度具体事宜，不要丧失时机。 
English: The emperor sent someone to tell Mu Chun that the barbarians in the outlying areas were indeed very cunning. He might as well agree to his request for the time being, examine the specific matters, and not lose the opportunity.

古文：洪武十五年平云南后，改威远蛮棚府为威远州。
现代文：沐春便把思伦发送到金齿，派人去劝谕刀干孟，让他把主人接回去，刀干孟不听。
English: Mu Chun then sent Xilun to Jinzu and sent someone to persuade Dagang Meng to take his master back, but Dagang Meng would not listen.

古文：三十五年，以土官刀算党为威远知州。
现代文：沐春便派左军都督何福、瞿能等人，带五千人马前去讨伐。官军翻过高良公山，直捣南甸，大破贼人，杀死刀名孟，斩杀许多敌人。
English: Mu Chun then sent the Left Army, including the governors He Fu and He Neng, with five thousand horsemen, to fight. The government army rolled over the Gaoliang Mountains, directly attacked Nandian, smashed the thieves, killed the famous sword Meng, and killed many enemies.

古文：永乐二年，算党为车里所掳，夺其地，命西平侯谕之，乃还算党并侵地。
现代文：回兵时又攻击景罕寨。景罕寨凭借地势高险坚守，攻不下来，此时官军的粮食和兵器都已用完，贼人的气势便更加嚣张。
English: When the soldiers returned, they attacked Jinghan Village. Jinghan Village, by virtue of its high-risk terrain, could not be attacked. At this time, the government army had run out of food and weapons, and the power of the thieves became even more arrogant.

古文：三年，算党进象马方物谢，颁降敕谕金字红牌，赐之金带、织金文绮、袭衣及银钞、锦币。
现代文：何福派人向沐春告急，沐春率领五百骑兵前去救援，乘夜赶到潞江，在第二天天刚亮就去渡河。
English: He Fook sent people to Mu Chun for help. Mu Chun led five hundred cavalrymen to the rescue, rushed to the Li River at night, and crossed the river at first light the next day.

古文：二十二年，土官刀庆罕等来朝，贡马及方物，赐庆罕钞八十锭，纻丝、罗纱，及头目以下，皆有加。
现代文：五百骑兵昼夜兼程，所经过的地方尘土蔽天。贼人没料到大军会突然到来，又惊又怕，于是被官军攻入，大败而逃。官军又乘胜袭击崆峒寨，贼人连夜逃走。
English: Five hundred cavalrymen traveled day and night, and the places they passed through were covered with dust. The thieves did not expect the sudden arrival of a large army, they were shocked and afraid, so they were invaded by the government army, defeated and fled. The government army also attacked the village with victory, and the thieves fled overnight.

古文：宣德三年，刀庆罕遣头目招刚、刀著中等来贡，赐予如例，就令赍敕及织金纻丝、纱罗赐之，仍给信符、勘合底簿。
现代文：刀干孟派人来请求投降，朝廷认为他很狡诈，命令沐春等机会再征讨他。
English: Dagang Meng sent a man to request surrender. The court thought he was very cunning and ordered Mu Chun to take another opportunity to solicit him.

古文：八年，威远州奏其地与车里接境，累被各土官劫掠，播孟实当要冲，乞置巡检司，以把事刘禧为巡检，从之。
现代文：不久沐春病亡，刀干孟竟然不投降。朝廷又命令都督何福前去讨伐，不久，活捉刀干孟，将其带到京城。
English: Soon after, Mu Chun died of illness, and Toukan Meng refused to surrender. The imperial court also ordered the governor He Fu to go to fight, and soon he caught Toukan Meng alive and brought him to the capital.

古文：正统二年，土知州刀盖罕遣人贡马及银器，赐彩币等物，并以新信符给之。
现代文：思伦发至此才回到平缅，过了一年便死了。永乐元年，思伦发的儿子散朋来京城朝觐，向皇帝献贡马。皇帝赏赐给他绒锦、织金文的丝绸、纱罗，给他的随从赏赐钱钞。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Susumu's son, Sanpo, came to the capital for a pilgrimage and presented a tribute horse to the emperor. The emperor rewarded him with brocade, gold-woven silk, and saros, and rewarded his attendants with money.

古文：正统六年给威远土知州刀盖罕金牌，命合兵剿麓川叛寇，以捷闻。
现代文：二年皇帝又派遣宦官张勤等到麓川颁布敕赐。麓川、平缅、木邦、孟养都派人前来朝贡，皇帝各给他们赏赐钱币。
English: In the second year, the emperor sent eunuch Zhang Qin to Lukawa to announce the gift. Lukawa, Pingmen, Mupang, and Mengyang all sent people to pay tribute, and the emperor rewarded them with coins.

古文：敕曰： 叛寇思任发侵尔境土，胁尔从逆。
现代文：此时麓川平缅宣慰使思行发派遣头目刀门赖向朝廷诉说孟养、木邦屡次侵犯他们的地境。
English: At this time, Fumiko Kawahira, who had been sent to the imperial court by the commander of the expeditionary force sent by the emperor to console the emperor, told the imperial court that Meng Yao and Mokang had repeatedly encroached on their territory.

古文：尔母招曩猛能秉大义，效忠朝廷，悉出金赀，分赉头目。
现代文：礼部请求将孟养、木邦派来向朝廷献贡的使节交付司法机关，以正他们侵犯邻境的罪行。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies requested that the envoys sent by Meng Yao and Mokang to pay tribute to the imperial court be handed over to the judicial authorities in order to rectify their crimes of encroaching on neighboring territories.

古文：尔母子躬擐甲胄，贾勇杀贼，斩其头目派罕，追逐余贼过江，溺死数千，斩首数百，得其战舰战象，仍留兵守贼所据江口地。
现代文：皇帝认为蛮族人之间互相攻夺是常事，抓他们一二个人顶罪，也不足以革去他们的风俗，况且现在是非曲直还不明了，便急急忙忙抓其使节顶罪，会失去边远地区的人心。
English: The emperor thought that it was common for barbarians to attack each other, and that arresting one or two of them would not be enough to eradicate their customs. Moreover, now that the rights and wrongs were still unknown, he hurried to arrest his envoys and would lose the hearts of people in remote areas.

古文：忠义卓然，深足嘉尚。今特升尔正五品，授奉政大夫、修正庶尹，封尔母为太宜人，俱锡诰命、银带及彩币表里，酬尔母子勋劳。陶孟、刀孟经等亦赐赉有差。
现代文：于是，皇帝便让西平侯前去劝谕他们，再派遣员外郎左缉出使到八百国，又让左缉给麓川平缅的宣慰颁赐冠带和袭衣。永乐五年，隶属于麓川、平缅军民宣慰使司的孟外的头目刀发孟前来朝觐，向皇帝进献大象和金器，散朋也来进献贡马，皇帝分别给他们赏赐钱币。六年，思行发向朝廷进献贡马和土产，向皇帝谢恩。
English: As a result, the emperor asked Xi Ping Hou to go and advise them, and then sent an envoy to the Eight Hundred Kingdoms. He also asked Zuo He to present a crown and a coat of arms to the condolences of Fuchuan Pingmai. In Yongle five years, the leader of Meng Wai, who was subordinate to the condolences of Fuchuan and Pingmai soldiers and people, came to the imperial court to present elephants and gold to the emperor, and the scattered friends also came to present tribute horses, and the emperor rewarded them with coins. Six years later, Si Xing sent tribute horses and local products to the imperial court to thank the emperor.

古文：尔宜益勉忠义，以副朕怀。 时西南诸部多相仇杀，所给金牌、信符，烧毁不存。景泰六年，刀盖罕、随乃吾等来朝贡，因命其管属本州人民，复给与金牌、信符、织金文绮，赐敕谕遣之。
现代文：皇帝给他赏赐金牌和信符。黔国公沐晟上奏说： 麓川、平缅所隶属的孟外、陶孟，是土官刀发孟的领地，被头目刀薛孟所侵占，请求朝廷命令思行发劝谕刀薛孟归还所侵之地。 
English: The emperor rewarded him with a gold medal and a token. The Grand Duke of the State of Shandong, Mu Xuan, said in his report: Luochuan, Mengwai and Tao Meng, to which Pingmeng belongs, are the territories of the local officials of the sword Meng, which were occupied by the leader of the sword Xue Meng, and requested the imperial court to order the thought and action to issue an exhortation to the sword Xue Meng to return the invaded land.

古文：成化元年，威远州土舍刀朔罕遣头目刀昔思贡象马并金银器，赐予如例。
现代文：皇帝同意了。七年，思行发前来进贡，皇帝派遣宦官云仙等带着皇帝的敕谕，给他赏赐织金文绮和纱罗。
English: The emperor agreed. In the seventh year, Shigehata came to pay tribute, and the emperor sent eunuchs such as Yunxian with the emperor's edict to reward him with woven gold and saros.

古文：其俗勇健，男女走险如飞。境内有河，汲水练炭上即成盐。
现代文：云仙等人到麓川时，思行发没有举行郊迎礼，云仙责备了他。
English: When Yun Xian and others came to Luchuan, Si Xingfa did not hold a welcoming ceremony, and Yun Xian reproached him.

古文：无秤斗，以篓计多寡量之。
现代文：思行发惶恐不安，于九年派遣刀门奈前来朝廷进贡谢罪。
English: Thinking and acting with trepidation and anxiety, in the ninth year he sent the sword Mennai to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：北胜，唐贞元中，南诏异牟寻始开其地，名北方〈目夹〉，徙瀰河白蛮及罗落、麽些诸蛮，以实其地，号成偈〈目夹〉，又改名善巨郡。
现代文：皇帝宽恕了他，仍命令设宴犒劳刀门奈，并派人给思行发赏赐文锦、织金丝和纱罗。十一年，思行发请求让他的弟弟思任发代理自己的官职，皇帝同意了。
English: The emperor forgave him, but still ordered a banquet to be held for him, and sent someone to reward Si Xingfa with brocade, woven gold thread and saros. In the eleventh year, Si Xingfa asked his brother Si Renfa to act as his official, and the emperor agreed.

古文：宋时，大理段氏改为成纪镇。
现代文：思任发派遣头目刀弄发向朝廷贡献六头大象、一百匹马和金银器皿等物，感谢皇帝的恩德。
English: Si Renfa dispatched the head of the sword to the imperial court to contribute six elephants, one hundred horses and gold and silver utensils, etc., to thank the emperor for his kindness.

古文：元初，内附。至元中，置施州，寻改北胜州。
现代文：二十年，思任发派遣使者奉表到朝廷献贡，并替自己侵略南甸州的行为向朝廷谢罪。
English: Twenty years later, Sireen sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court, and apologized to the imperial court for his act of invading Nandian Prefecture.

古文：后为府，隶丽江路军民宣抚司。洪武十五年改为州，隶鹤庆府，后属澜沧卫。
现代文：皇帝派遣宦官云仙带着赏赐品和敕谕去见思任发，劝戒思任发以后不要再侵略别人了。
English: The emperor sent the eunuch Yun Xian with gifts and an edict to see Siyuan Fa, and advised him not to invade others after Siyuan Fa.

古文：永乐五年，土官百夫长杨克即牙旧来贡马，赐钞币。
现代文：洪熙元年，仁宗皇帝派宦官段忠、徐亮到麓川，告诉当地官员仁宗已经即皇帝位。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, Emperor Renzong sent eunuchs Duanzhong and Xu Liang to Luchuan to inform local officials that Emperor Renzong had been enthroned.

古文：宣德四年，土判官高琳子瑛来贡方物，请袭父职。十年，土知府高瑛来朝贡，赐钞币。
现代文：宣德元年，皇帝派使者谕告西南地区的夷族人，还因麓川土官忠于职守勤于向朝廷献贡，分别按他们的级别等差赏赐锦绮。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the emperor sent an envoy to inform the Yi people in the southwestern region that because the Luochuan local officials were loyal to their duties and diligent in paying tribute to the imperial court, they would be rewarded with brocade respectively according to their rank.

古文：正统七年，以北胜州直隶云南布政司，设流官吏目一员，以州蛮苦于澜沧卫官军侵渔也。
现代文：此时，麓川、木邦之间因争夺地界，而各向朝廷诉说此事，皇帝派使者劝谕他们，让他们各自安守本府地界，不要侵越出去。
English: At this time, because of the dispute over the territorial boundaries between the Luchuan and the Mupang, each of them reported the matter to the imperial court, and the emperor sent an envoy to advise them that they should each keep the territorial boundaries of their own prefectures and not cross them.

古文：万历四十八年，北胜州土同知高世懋死，异母弟世昌袭。
现代文：黔国公沐晟上奏说，麓川军民宣慰使司属下的思陀甸火头曲此作乱，请求朝廷发兵讨伐。
English: Guo Guoguang was reported to have said that Shida Dian Huadu Qu, a subordinate of Guo Guoguang, had caused the disturbance and requested the imperial court to send troops to fight against it.

古文：其族侄兰妄称世昌奸生，讼之官，不听。
现代文：皇帝命令暂时先招抚他们。朝廷又听从宣慰刀暗发的上奏，在麓川平缅宣慰使司所管辖的大店地设置驿丞一员，让土人刀捧怯担任此职务。
English: The emperor ordered to placate them for the time being. The imperial court also listened to the insinuation of the consolation sword, and set up a member of the Jurchen in the large store area under the jurisdiction of the foot of the Sichuan Pingmen Consolation Envoy, and let the native sword bearer take this position.

古文：世昌惧逼，走丽江避之。
现代文：三年，云南的三司上奏，说麓川宣慰使思任发侵夺了南甸州的土地，请求朝廷发兵问罪。
English: In the third year, Yunnan's three superintendents appealed to the court, saying that Luchuan Xuan Yue had forced Siyan Fa to invade the land of Nandian Prefecture, and requested the court to send troops to investigate the crime.

古文：寻还至澜沧，宿客舍，兰围而纵火，杀其家七十余人，发其祖父墓，自称钦授把总，大掠。
现代文：皇帝命令沐晟会同三司、巡抚将此事详细上报朝廷，并敕谕思任发，要他保境安民，不得侵夺邻近州府的疆土，陷于恶逆行为之中，否则以滋生恶逆罪追究。
English: The emperor ordered Mu Ronghui, together with the three departments and the governor, to report the matter in detail to the imperial court, and ordered him to protect the territory and the people, not to encroach on the territory adjacent to the state capital, and not to fall into the act of treason, otherwise he would be investigated for the crime of breeding treason.

古文：丽江知府木增请讨之，谓法纪弁髦，尾大不掉，不治将有隐忧。
现代文：沐晟认为思任发侵夺南甸、腾冲疆土的罪行不可宽恕，请求调拨五万官军和诸土兵讨伐他。皇帝认为交趾、四川正在用兵，百姓负担很重，没有得到休息，因此对思任发应再行招抚劝谕的办法。
English: Mu Xi thought that Shiren Fa's crime of invading and seizing the territory of Nandian and Tengchong was unforgivable, and asked for the allocation of fifty thousand government troops and soldiers from all over the country to fight him. The emperor believed that soldiers were being used in Kota and Sichuan, and the people were heavily burdened and did not get any rest. Therefore, Shiren Fa should be advised again.

古文：上官嘉其义，调增率其部进剿，获兰枭之。
现代文：实在不得已后，再调拨云南的土官军和木邦宣慰的诸蛮族军队进剿。
English: As a last resort, the local government army from Yunnan and the barbarian troops from the country of Mu were sent in.

古文：湾甸，蛮名细〈目夹〉。元中统初，内附，属镇康路。
现代文：八年皇帝派宦官云仙带着敕令到麓川，给思任发赏赐钱币和物品，劝谕他不要与木邦再去争夺地界、互相厮杀了。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor sent the eunuch Yun Xian to Luchuan with the imperial edict. He rewarded Shiren with coins and goods, and advised him not to compete with Mubang for territory and kill each other.

古文：洪武十七年置湾甸县。永乐元年三月设湾甸长官司，以西平侯沐晟奏地近麓川，地广人稠故也。
现代文：正统元年，思任发上奏说他所管辖的地区，遭受木邦的侵扰，百姓稀少，无法筹集赋税和差役银钱。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Sireen sent a report to the emperor saying that the areas under his jurisdiction were subject to the intrusion of the wooden state, the people were scarce, and it was impossible to raise taxes and fines.

古文：寻仍改为湾甸州，以土官刀景发为知州，给印章、金牌并置流官吏目一员。
现代文：皇帝便免除了麓川平缅军民宣慰司所欠的差发银子二千五百两。户部认为这样做不妥，皇帝还是加以特别蠲免了。原先，洪武年间官军攻克平定云南，只有百夷部落的酋长思伦发没有顺服，后来他被手下的头目所驱逐后，便跑到京城来诉说。
English: The emperor then waived the 2,500 taels of silver owed by Fuchu Chuanping, the Burmese army and people's consoler. The household department thought that this was not appropriate, but the emperor still gave a special pardon. Originally, when the government army conquered Yunnan during the Hongwu era, only the chief of the Baiyi tribe, Si Lunfa, did not obey. Later, after he was expelled by the leader of his men, he ran to Beijing to complain.

古文：四年，帝以湾甸道里险远，每岁朝贡，令自今三年一贡，著为令。
现代文：朝廷任命他为麓川平缅军民宣慰使司的宣慰，让他回麓川居住。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the consoler of the consoler of the consoler of the consoler of the Burmese army and the consoler of the Burmese army and the consoler of the Burmese army and the consoler of the consul of the consul of the consul of the consul of the consul of the consul of the consul of the consul of the consul of the consul.

古文：如庆贺、谢恩之类，不拘此例。六年，刀景发遣人来朝，贡马及方物，赐钞币。
现代文：后来将其地划分出来，设置了孟养、木邦、孟定三个府，将它们隶属于云南；又设置潞江、干崖、大侯、湾甸四个长官司，将它们归属于金齿。
English: Later, it was divided into three prefectures: Mengyeong, Mubang and Mengding, which were subordinated to Yunnan; and four prefectures: Minjiang, Ganjia, Dagu and Wandian, which were subordinated to Jingu.

古文：七年，刀景发子景悬等来朝，贡马，赐予如例。
现代文：永乐元年将孟养、木邦两个府升为宣慰司。孟养宣慰刀木旦与邻境的人因仇杀而死，缅甸便乘机吞并了孟养。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Mengyang and Mupang were both promoted to the position of Consolation Division. Mengyang consoled the people of Mutan and neighboring countries who died as a result of revenge killings, and Myanmar took the opportunity to annex Mengyang.

古文：宣德八年以土官刀景项弟景办法继兄职。
现代文：不久，缅甸宣慰新加斯又被木邦宣慰所杀。此时思伦发已死，他的儿子思行发袭承职位，不久也死了。
English: Soon after, Burmese Xuanjie Xingas was killed by Mupang Xuanjie. At this time, Si Lunfa had already died, and his son Si Xingfa inherited the position and died soon after.

古文：州有流官吏目一员。
现代文：思伦发的次子思任发承袭了麓川宣慰的官职。
English: Si Renfa, the second son of Si Renfa, inherited the official post of Lukawa Xuan Rong.

古文：州邻木邦、顺宁，日以侵削。
现代文：他比他的父兄更加狡猾，朝廷所征收的差役金银，他不按时缴纳，朝廷还优加宽待他。
English: He was more cunning than his father and brother. He did not pay the gold and silver levied by the court on time, and the court treated him more leniently.

古文：成化五年，湾甸州土官舍人景拙法遣使刀胡猛等来朝，贡象马并金银器，赐宴并衣服彩币有差。
现代文：碰上缅甸宣慰被人所杀时，思任发便乘机侵犯缅甸，想全部收复思氏家族原有的故地，于是举兵侵扰边境，侵略孟定府和湾甸等州，对当地人民进行烧杀掠夺。南甸的知州刀贡罕也上奏，说麓川侵夺了他所管辖的罗卜思庄等二百七十八个村子。
English: When confronted with the killing of Xuancheng in Myanmar, Shirenfa took the opportunity to invade Myanmar, and wanted to recover all the original ancestral lands of the Shishi family, so he raised an army to invade the border, invaded the states of Mengdingfu and Wangdian, and burned and plundered the local people. Nandian's Chizhou sword Gonghan also played, saying that Luochuan invaded 278 villages such as Lop Shizhuang under his jurisdiction.

古文：万历十一年，土官景宗真率弟宗材导木邦叛贼罕虔入寇姚关，宗真死于阵，擒宗材斩之。
现代文：在这种情况下，沐晟上奏说： 思任发几年来连续侵夺了孟定、南甸、干崖、腾冲、潞江、金齿等地的土地，擅自任命头目刀珍罕、土官早亨等人，让他们帮助他施行侵略，其背叛朝廷的形象已经颇为显著。近来他又去侵略金齿，气势很猖獗。
English: Under these circumstances, Mu Rong said: Si Renfa has continuously invaded and seized the lands of Mengding, Nandian, Dry Cliff, Tengchong, Minjiang, Jinzu and other places for several years, and has appointed leaders such as Dao Zhenhan and local official So Heng without authorization to help him carry out the invasion. The image of his betrayal of the imperial court has become quite obvious. Recently, he went to invade Jinzu, and the momentum is very rampant.

古文：景真子幼，贷死，降为州判官。
现代文：我们已派遣各卫所的骑兵和步兵到金齿去守卫。请求调遣大军前去进剿讨伐他们。 
English: We have sent cavalry and infantry from our garrisons to guard the Golden Tooth, and request that a large force be brought forward to engage them.

古文：后从讨猛廷瑞有功，复旧职。湾甸地多瘴。
现代文：皇帝命令挑选将领，朝廷大臣推举右都督方政、都督佥事张荣前往云南，协同当地镇守官右都督沐昂率兵讨伐。
English: The emperor ordered the selection of generals, and the ministers of the imperial court nominated the right governor Fang Zheng and the governor Anji Zhang Rong to go to Yunnan to fight with the local town guard officer, the right governor Muang.

古文：有黑泉，涨时，飞鸟过之辄堕。
现代文：思任发正向朝廷修贡，希望以此来缓和朝廷的大军，沐晟居然相信了他，没有率大军渡江。
English: Sireenfa was paying tribute to the imperial court, hoping to appease the imperial army in this way. However, Moo Ye believed him and did not lead the army across the river.

古文：镇康，蛮名石〈目夹〉，本黑僰所居。
现代文：思任发便派遣一万多人夺取潞江，沿着江造船三百艘，想攻取云龙，又将甸顺、江东等处的残余守军全部杀死。
English: Sireen sent more than ten thousand people to seize the Lijiang River, built three hundred ships along the river, wanted to capture Yunlong, and killed all the remaining defenders in Dianshun and the east of the river.

古文：元中统初，内附。
现代文：皇帝因贼人的势力一天比一天大，责怪沐晟玩弄贼寇养成祸患。
English: As the power of the bandits grew day by day, the emperor blamed Mu Xuan for playing with the bandits and nurturing them into a disaster.

古文：至元十三年立镇康路军民总管府，领三甸。
现代文：此时方政也到军中报到，想出战，沐晟不同意。
English: At this time, Fang Zheng also reported to the army and wanted to go to war, but Mu Xi did not agree.

古文：洪武十五年，改为镇康府，十七年改为州。
现代文：方政造船想把军队渡过去，沐晟又不答应。
English: Fang Zheng Shipbuilding wanted to ferry the troops across, but Mucao did not agree.

古文：永乐二年遣官颁信符及金字红牌于镇康州。
现代文：方政对此不胜愤慨，便独自率领自己的部队与贼军将领缅简接战，攻破贼人的旧大寨。贼人逃奔到景罕，指挥唐请又将贼人打败。
English: Fang Zheng was very indignant about this, so he led his own troops to fight against the general of the thief army, Myan Jian, and broke through the old fortress of the thieves. The thieves fled to Jinghan, and the commander, Tang, defeated the thieves again.

古文：七年以湾甸同知曩光为知州。
现代文：他们又追击贼人到达高黎共山下，共斩杀贼人三千多。
English: They also chased the bandits to the foot of the Gaoli Mountains and killed more than 3,000 bandits.

古文：初，镇康地隶湾甸，曩光请增设署所，故有是命。
现代文：于是他们乘胜追击，在上江逼住了思任发。上江，是贼军驻扎的重地。
English: As a result, they took advantage of their victory to pursue and force Sireen from Shangjiang. Shangjiang is the main area where the thief army is stationed.

古文：九年以中官徐亮使西南蛮，曩光阻道，诏责之，至是，遣人来朝谢罪。十四年，镇康州长官司遣人贡马，赐钞币。
现代文：方政长途攻战，疲惫不堪，向沐晟求援。沐晟对方政不听自己的节制而擅自渡江作战很愤怒，不派兵支援方政。
English: Fang Zheng fought a long way and was exhausted, so he asked for help from Muxi. Muxi was very angry that Fang Zheng did not listen to his own restraint and crossed the river without permission, and did not send troops to support Fang Zheng.

古文：二十一年，知府刀孟广来朝，贡马。
现代文：时间一长，又只派少量军队前往，并且这少量援军到夹象石时又不前进了。
English: After a long time, only a small number of troops were sent, and this small number of reinforcements did not advance when they reached the stone.

古文：宣德三年赐镇康州土目刀门渊等钞币有差。
现代文：方政他们追击贼人到达空泥，才知道沐晟不来救援。贼人用象战冲击官军，官军被歼灭，方政战死。
English: Fang Zheng and his men chased the bandits until they reached empty mud, only to find out that Muxun could not come to their rescue. The bandits attacked the official army with elephants, the official army was annihilated, and Fang Zheng was killed in the battle.

古文：成化五年，知州刀门戛遣使贡马及金银器，赐予如例，及妻。
现代文：沐晟听到失败的消息后，请求朝廷再增添军队。
English: After hearing the news of the defeat, Mu Xun asked the court to increase the number of troops.

古文：镇康后亦为木邦、顺宁所侵削。隆庆间，知州闷坎者，罕虔妻以女，因附虔归缅。
现代文：皇帝派遣使者前来责备沐晟为何不进兵援救方政，同时又征调湖广的官军三万一千五百人、贵州的官军一万人、四川的官军八千五百人，由吴亮、马翔统领，到达云南，听从沐晟的节制，并敕令沐晟预先筹备粮食。沐晟对自己的罪过很害怕，不久便暴死了。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to reproach Mu Xuan why he did not enter the army to rescue Fang Zheng. At the same time, he conscripted 31,500 troops from Hukang, 10,000 troops from Guizhou, and 8,500 troops from Sichuan, led by Wu Liang and Ma Xiang, and arrived in Yunnan. He listened to Mu Xuan's restraint, and ordered Mu Xuan to prepare grain in advance. Mu Xuan was very afraid of his own sin, and soon died violently.

古文：坎败死，其弟闷恩归义。恩死，子闷枳袭，木邦思礼诱之归缅，不从。
现代文：此时，思任发便益发骄横，进犯景东，剽掠孟定，杀死了大侯知州刀奉汉等一千多人，攻破孟赖等寨子，孟琏长官司等地都向他投降了。
English: At this time, he became arrogant, attacked Jingdong, plundered Mengding, killed more than a thousand people, including the grand vassal Zhizhou Tebonghan, broke through the fortress of Menglai, and the chief magistrate of Menglai surrendered to him.

古文：天启二年，木邦兵据喳哩江，枳奔姚关，守备遣官抚之，乃退。大侯，蛮名孟祐，百夷所居。
现代文：这样，思任发便派人向朝廷进贡，献上大象、马、金银器皿等，又致书给云南的总兵官，说 ：开始是潞江安抚司的线旧法邀我替他报仇，后来线旧法诬告我入侵他的辖地，致使朝廷大军压境，使我惶恐无地。
English: In this way, Sireen sent people to pay tribute to the imperial court, presenting elephants, horses, gold and silverware, etc. He also sent a letter to the commander-in-chief of Yunnan, saying: At first, the line of the Lijiang River pacifier invited me to avenge him, and later the line of the old law falsely accused me of invading his jurisdiction, causing the imperial army to suppress the border, making me fearless.

古文：元中统初内附，属麓川路。
现代文：现今我想派使者到朝廷谢罪，请求您替我奏报朝廷。 
English: Now I would like to send an envoy to the Imperial Court to apologize and ask you to report to the Imperial Court on my behalf.

古文：洪武二十四年置大侯长官司。
现代文：皇帝降敕答应赦免思任发的罪行。
English: The emperor abdicated and promised to pardon Si Ren's crimes.

古文：永乐二年颁给信符、金字红牌。
现代文：这时，刑部侍郎何文渊上疏，请求朝廷停止在麓川用兵，皇帝将该疏章交朝廷大臣讨论。
English: At this time, He Wenyuan, the attendant of the Department of Justice, requested the Imperial Court to stop using soldiers in Luchuan, and the Emperor submitted the order to the Minister of the Imperial Court for discussion.

古文：三年，大侯长官司长官刀奉偶遣子刀奉董贡马及银器，赐钞币。
现代文：对此，皇帝身边的兵部尚书王骥和英国公张辅等人，都认为 麓川背叛朝廷作恶，必须诛杀，应另外挑选将领，操练兵马，讨伐他们以昭示正义。
English: In response to this, the Emperor's close military aides, such as Shangshu Wangjun and the British official Zhang Fu, all believed that Lukawa had betrayed the imperial court and committed evil, and that it was necessary to fight and kill him. The generals should be selected separately, the soldiers and horses should be drilled, and they should be fought to demonstrate justice.

古文：六年，长官刀奉偶遣弟不纳狂来贡，赐予如例。
现代文：如果思任发及早自己悔罪，应自己反绑双手到军门前投降，由朝廷来裁定他的生命安全。 
English: If he repents too early, he should tie his hands behind his back and surrender in front of the military gate, and the court will decide his life safety.

古文：宣德四年升大侯长官司为大侯州，以土官刀奉汉为知州。时刀奉汉奏： 大侯蛮民复业者多，岁纳差发银二百五十两。
现代文：皇帝同意这个意见。不久，侍讲刘球又请求朝廷按何文渊的提议在麓川息兵。兵部答复说征讨麓川，朝廷已有成命，不能更改。
English: The emperor agreed with this opinion. Soon after, Liu Qulong, the courtier, asked the imperial court to send troops to Luchuan according to He Wenyuan's proposal. The military department replied that the Luchuan had already been ordered by the imperial court and could not be changed.

古文：湾甸、镇康二长官民少，岁纳差发银各百两，永乐中俱升为州，乞援二州例。 
现代文：并将此上报皇帝。正统六年，朝廷任命定西伯蒋贵为平蛮将军，都督李安、刘聚为副将军，让兵部尚书王骥总督云南的军事事务，集合了各道的军队十五万人前去讨伐思任发。
English: Six years later, the imperial court appointed Ding Xi Bo Jiang Gui as the general of the army, the governor Li An and Liu Ju as the deputy generals, and let the military affairs of the military department Shang Shu Wang Wei, the governor of Yunnan, gather the army of 150,000 people from all walks of life to fight against Sima Fa.

古文：帝谕吏部曰： 大侯民多复业，亦其长官善抚绥也，宜增秩旌之。 
现代文：此时思任发派贼军将领刀令道等十二人，率领三万多人马，战象八十头，抵达大侯州，想夺取景东和威远两地。
English: At this time, Shiren sent twelve people, including the general of the Kleptocratic Army, who led more than thirty thousand horses, eighty war elephants, and arrived at Dahuozhou, hoping to seize Jingdong and Weiyuan.

古文：故有是命。八年，大侯州入贡，遣内官云仙往抚之，并赐锦绮有差。
现代文：王骥将抵达金齿时，思任发派人向王骥请求投降。王骥接受了，暗地里命令各位将领分路进兵。右参将冉保从东路攻打细甸、湾甸的水寨，进入镇康，直奔孟定。王骥和蒋贵从中路到达上江，驻兵腾冲。
English: When Wang Xizhe arrived at Jinzu, Sireen sent a person to Wang Xizhe to request him to surrender. Wang Xizhe accepted, and secretly ordered the generals to lead the troops in different directions. The right-hand man led Ran Bao to attack the villages of Xiedian and Wangdian from the east, enter Zhenkang, and go straight to Mengding. Wang Xizhe and Jiang Gui reached the Shangjiang River from the middle, and stationed troops there.

古文：正统三年，土官刀奉汉子刀奉送来贡，命赍敕并织金文绮绒锦诸物，赐刀奉汉并及其妻。初，奉汉令把事傅永瑶来朝，贡马，奏欲与木邦宣慰罕门法共起土兵十万，协同征剿麓川，乞赐金牌、信符，以安民心。特赐之，复降敕嘉奖。
现代文：左参将宫聚从下江占领夹象石。到了约定的期限，官军发起总攻。贼人严密防守，火铳、弓弩和飞石像雨点般落下来。
English: Zuo Zeng gathered the palace from the lower river and occupied it like a stone. When the agreed time limit was reached, the government army launched a general attack. The thieves were closely guarded, and the flints, crossbows and flying stones fell like raindrops.

古文：七年，敕刀奉汉子刀奉送袭大侯知州，赐冠带、印章、彩段表里，以奉送能率土兵助讨麓川也。
现代文：第二天，官军乘风焚烧贼人的寨栅，大火彻夜不息。官军经过奋力战斗，攻下了上江寨，斩杀了刀放戛父子，生擒了刀孟项，前后共斩下敌人耳朵五万多只。
English: The next day, the government army took advantage of the wind to burn the thieves' stockade, and the fire continued throughout the night. After fighting hard, the government army captured the Shangjiang stockade, killed the father and son of Gao Fang and Meng Xiang, and cut off more than 50,000 ears of the enemy.

古文：十一年，大侯知州奉外法等贡银器、象马，赐彩币、衣服有差。
现代文：捷报上奏给了皇帝。七年，王骥率兵渡过下江，打通了高黎贡山的道路。到腾冲时，留下都督李安带兵守卫。
English: The report of the victory was reported to the emperor. For seven years, Wang Xi and his soldiers crossed the Lower River and opened the road to Gaoligong Mountain. When they reached Tengchong, he left the governor Li An to lead the soldiers to guard.

古文：十二年敕赐大侯州奉敬法、刀奉送等并其妻彩币，命来使赍与之。
现代文：王骥从南甸出发到罗卜思庄，前军抵达杉木笼。这时思任发率领两万多人占领高山，设立坚固的村寨，把守军连环成七个营，首尾互相呼应。
English: Wang Qian set out from Nandian to Lop Shizhuang, and the front army arrived at the cedar cage. At this time, Shirenfa led more than 20,000 people to occupy the high mountains, set up a solid village, and linked the defenders into seven battalions, echoing each other.

古文：万历中，土目奉学婿于顺宁知府猛廷瑞，后巡抚陈用宾诬奏廷瑞与学反状，廷瑞斩奉学首以献，学兄赦守大侯如故。
现代文：王骥派宫聚、刘聚分左右两翼攀缘到岭上，王骥率领中军从横向攻击贼人，贼人逃跑。官军进驻马鞍山，直捣贼人的寨子。
English: Wang Yao sent Gongju and Liu Ju to climb the ridge on the left and right wings. Wang Yao led the Chinese army to attack the thieves from the side, and the thieves fled. The government army entered Ma'anshan and directly attacked the thieves' stockade.

古文：子奉先与其族舍猛麻、奉恭争杀抗命，次年讨平之，改为云州，设流官。
现代文：贼人的寨子两面靠江，周围三十里全都立起了寨栅开凿了战堑，官军无法进入，而贼人可从小道悄悄地出兵绕到马鞍山后袭击官军。
English: Both sides of the thief's stockade are by the river, and all the surrounding thirty miles have erected a fence and dug battlements. The government army cannot enter, but the thief can quietly send troops from the trail to Ma'anshan and then attack the government army.

古文：澜沧，元为北胜州地。洪武中，属鹤庆府。
现代文：王骥告戒中军不要动摇，命令指挥方瑛率领精锐骑兵六千突然杀入贼人的寨子，斩杀敌人数百，又将贼人的象阵诱入圈套打败。
English: Wang Xi told the Chinese army not to waver, and ordered the commander Fang Ying to lead the elite cavalry of six thousand suddenly into the thief's stockade, kill hundreds of enemies, and lure the thief's elephant into a trap to defeat.

古文：二十八年置澜沧卫。
现代文：而从东路出发的官军，集合了木邦的人马，招降了孟通各寨。
English: However, the government army, which set out from Donglu, gathered the people and horses of Mupang and subdued the villages of Mengtong.

古文：二十九年于州南筑城，置今卫司。领北胜、浪渠、永宁三州。
现代文：元江的同知杜凯等人也率领车里和大侯的蛮族军队五万人，招降了孟琏长官司，并攻破乌木弄、戛邦等寨子，斩获敌人首级二千三百多个。
English: Dukai, a friend of Yuanjiang, and others also led the barbarian army of 50,000 people of Cheli and Dajuang, invited Meng Yao to surrender, and broke through the fortresses such as Ebony, Kanbang, and captured more than 2,300 enemy heads.

古文：永乐四年以永宁州升为府。正统七年以北胜州直隶布政司，今卫只领州一。
现代文：于是官军一齐在麓川集结，守住西峨渡，百军齐发，又放火焚烧敌人的营寨，贼人被打死烧死的不计其数。
English: As a result, the government army gathered together at the foot of the river, defended West Eadow, sent out hundreds of troops, and set fire to the enemy's camp. Countless thieves were killed and burned.

古文：弘治十一年，福建布政李韶以前任云南参议，知土俗事宜，上疏言四事。一谓澜沧卫与北胜州同一城，地域广远，与四川建昌西番野番相通。
现代文：思任发父子三人带着妻子儿女几个人，从小路渡江，逃奔到孟养。官军搜集到了原先朝廷颁发给他们的虎符、金牌、信符、宣慰司印和他们掠夺来的腾冲千户印等印信三十二枚。麓川平定了。捷报传到朝廷，皇帝命令撤军。此时的思任发败逃到孟养，又遭木邦宣慰的袭击，被追击着过了金沙江，逃向孟广。缅甸宣慰卜剌当也起兵攻击思任发。
English: The three sons and father of Shirenfa, with their wives, children and a few others, crossed the river from a small road and fled to Mengyang. The government army collected thirty-two seal letters, including the tiger emblem, gold medal, letter, and seal of consolation, which were originally issued to them by the court, and the seal of a thousand households in Tengchong, which they had plundered. The Luka River was leveled. The good news was reported to the court, and the emperor ordered the withdrawal of the army. At this time, Shirenfa fled to Mengyang, and was attacked by Mubang Xuancheng. He was chased across the J

古文：迩年西番土舍章輗等倚恃山险，招服野番千余家为庄户，遂致各番生拗，动辄杀人，州官无兵不能禁止。
现代文：皇帝下诏命给木邦、缅甸宣慰说，如果他们能捉住思任发，将他献给朝廷，即将麓川之地交给他管辖。不久，思任发被缅甸人抓住，缅甸人以此向朝廷要地。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to comfort the states of Mu and Burma, saying that if they could capture Sireen Fa and present him to the imperial court, they would give him jurisdiction over the land of Luchuan. Soon, Sireen Fa was captured by the Burmese, and the Burmese used this to demand land from the imperial court.

古文：卫官大废军政，恬不加意。
现代文：思任发的儿子思机发穷困之至，请求来京城朝觐，向皇帝谢罪。
English: The son of Si Renfa was so poor that he asked to come to the capital for a pilgrimage to express his gratitude to the emperor.

古文：又姚安府、大罗卫、宾川州地方有贼穴六七，军民受害。
现代文：他先派他的弟弟思招赛进京入贡，皇帝命令将他遣送回云南安置。思机发窥探到朝廷大军已经回去了，便想恢复对麓川的统治，占据了麓川并出兵侵扰邻府。
English: He first sent his younger brother Shizhesai to Beijing to pay tribute, and the emperor ordered him to be sent back to Yunnan for resettlement. Shizhesi spied that the imperial army had returned, and he wanted to restore his rule over Luochuan, occupied Luochuan and sent troops to invade neighboring provinces.

古文：请添设兵备副使于澜沧卫城，以姚安、大罗、宾川、鹤丽、大理、洱海、景东诸府州卫所，皆令属之。
现代文：于是皇帝又命令王骥、蒋贵等人统领大军再次征讨麓州。王骥率领军队到金齿，思机发派遣头目刀笼肘带着他的儿子一起到王骥的军门前请求投降。
English: Therefore, the emperor also ordered Wang Qian, Jiang Gui and others to lead a large army to once again conquer Luzhou. Wang Qian led the army to Jinzu, and thought of sending the leader of the army, Guan Yu, together with his son, to the front of Wang Qian's army to ask for surrender.

古文：于野番则用抚流民法，于贼巢则用立保甲法，朝夕经理，则内外寇患皆可弭矣。因从其议，设兵备副使一员于澜沧城。麓川、平缅，元时皆属缅甸。
现代文：王骥派人至缅甸索讨思任发，缅甸佯装答应而实际上并不遣送过来。王骥到腾冲，与蒋贵、沐昂将军队分成五个营进兵，缅甸人也集结了军队准备对付官军。王骥本想乘大军在此攻打他们，但一看到缅甸的军队人数多气势也盛，不容易攻下来，还可能多一个像麓川那样的敌人，于是宣称犒劳军队，命令蒋贵悄悄地将缅甸人的数百艘船焚烧掉，进而又进军逼迫他们交出思任发。
English: Wang Hui sent people to Burma to inquire about Srirangam, but Burma pretended to agree but did not actually send them. Wang Hui went to Tengchong and, together with Chiang Kai and Muang, divided the army into five battalions and marched in. The Burmese also assembled an army to prepare to fight the government army. Wang Hui originally wanted to attack them here with a large army, but as soon as he saw that the Burmese army was large and powerful and not easy to attack, and that there might be one more enemy like Fuchuan, he declared that he would reward the troops for their hard work, ordered Chiang Kai to quietly burn hundreds of Burm

古文：缅甸，古朱波地也。宋宁宗时，缅甸、波斯等国进白象，缅甸之名自此始。
现代文：缅甸坚持要执行皇帝以前下达的诏令，一定要将麓川划归给他们才交出思任发。
English: Myanmar insisted on the implementation of the imperial edict previously issued by the emperor, and it must be assigned to them before handing over the Luchuan.

古文：缅在云南之西南，最穷远。
现代文：同时又以思机发已与他们为仇来替自己辩解。王骥便带兵到者兰，直捣思机发的巢穴。
English: At the same time, he justified himself by saying that the Thinker had become an enemy of them. Wang Yao then led his soldiers to Zhelan, straight to the Thinker's lair.

古文：与八百国、占城接境。有城郭室屋，人皆楼居，地产象马。
现代文：思机发逃走了，俘虏了他的妻子儿子和部属，设立了陇川宣慰司之后，王骥就回去了。
English: After he seized the opportunity to escape, captured his wife, son, and subordinates, and established the Xuanchuan Xuanliao Division, Wang Xuan went back.

古文：元时最强盛。元尝遣使招之，始入贡。
现代文：而此时思机发窃据了孟养，对朝廷顽固不服，一如既往。
English: At this time, Meng Yang thought of stealing the opportunity and stubbornly refused to accept the imperial court, as always.

古文：洪武六年遣使田俨、程斗南、张祎、钱允恭赍诏往谕。
现代文：十一年，缅甸才开始把思任发和他的妻子儿女三十二人送交到云南。思任发在途中绝食，即将死亡。千户王政便把他的首级斩下来，派人送往京城。
English: It was eleven years before Myanmar began to send Sireen Fa and his thirty-two wives and children to Yunnan. Sireen Fa went on a hunger strike on the way and was about to die. Chihou Wang Zheng then cut off his head and sent someone to Beijing.

古文：至安南，留二年，以道阻不通。有诏召之，惟俨还，余皆道卒。
现代文：他的儿子思机发屡次乞求投降，派头目刀孟永等向朝廷献贡物和金银，说经过朝廷派兵征讨，我们已没有地方可逃避死亡了，乞求朝廷宽恕我们的余生。其言词很悲哀。
English: His son Si Jiefa repeatedly begged for surrender. The leader of the faction, Jiao Meng Yong, offered tribute and gold and silver to the imperial court, saying that after the imperial court sent soldiers to solicit, we had no place to escape death, and begged the imperial court to forgive us for the rest of our lives. His words were very sad.

古文：十五年，大兵下云南，进以大理，下金齿。平缅与金齿壤地相接，土蛮思伦发闻之惧，遂降。
现代文：皇帝命令接受他的贡物，对总兵官沐斌和参赞军务侍郎杨宁等人说，朝廷已经宽免思机发不死，你们将今后怎样治理麓川的长远规划上报上来。皇帝亦将宽免思机发不死之罪的决定通知了他本人。
English: The emperor ordered to accept his tribute, and said to the general officer Mu Bin and the military aide Yang Ning, the imperial court has pardoned him, and you will report the long-term plan for how to govern the Luchuan River in the future. The emperor also informed him of the decision to pardon him.

古文：因置平缅宣慰使司，以纶发为宣慰使。十七年八月，伦发遣刀令孟献方物，并上元所授宣慰使司印。
现代文：十二年，总兵官黔国公沐斌上奏说 ：我派千户明庸带着皇上的敕令去招抚思机发，他因前番派去上贡的弟弟思招赛没有回来，所以对朝廷有所疑惧，不敢出来。
English: In the twelfth year, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Japanese Army, 国公沐斌上奏, said: "I sent thousand households Mingyong with the Emperor's edict to seduce and seduce, he did not return because of his brother, 招赛, who was sent to pay tribute, so he was suspicious of the imperial court and did not dare to come out.

古文：诏改平缅宣慰使为平缅军民宣慰使司，并赐伦发朝服、冠带及织金文绮、钞锭。寻改平缅军民宣慰使司为麓川平缅军民宣慰使司。
现代文：近来缅甸人因思机发掠夺他们的牛马和金银器，想进兵攻打麓川。我们讨论后请求朝廷派人分别谕告木邦、缅甸各宣慰司，让他们集结蛮族军队，限期过江，分道讨伐思机发。
English: After our discussion, we requested the Imperial Court to send a person to separately inform the Mongolian and Burmese consul generals that they should assemble barbarian troops, cross the river within a time limit, and go their separate ways to fight against the Burmese.

古文：麓川与平缅连境，元时分置两路以统其所部，至是以伦发遣使贡，命兼统麓川之地。
现代文：我们则率领官军一万人驻扎在腾冲，以助长他们的声势。贼人四面受敌，则必被擒获。 皇帝同意了。
English: We, on the other hand, led 10,000 officers and men stationed in Tengchong to encourage them. If a thief is attacked from all sides, he is sure to be caught. The emperor agreed.

古文：十八年，伦发反，率众寇景东。都督冯诚率兵击之，值天大雾，猝遇寇，失利，千户王升战死。
现代文：不久，朝廷任命思机发的弟弟思招赛为头目，颁给他冠带、每月的粮食和房屋，受锦衣卫管束，他手下的从人都让他们驯养大象以供役使。此前，思招赛被安置在云南，他的党徒中有人想作乱，于是皇帝便把他安置在京城，希望以他来招徕思机发。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Shizhu Xie's younger brother, Shizhu Xie, as the leader. He was given a crown sash, monthly food rations, and a house. He was under the supervision of the palace guards, and his subordinates were told to tame elephants to serve the emperor. Previously, Shizhu Xie had been placed in Yunnan, but some of his party members wanted to start a riot, so the emperor placed him in Beijing, hoping to use him to recruit Shizhu Xie.

古文：二十年，敕谕西平侯沐英等曰： 近御史李原名归自平缅，知蛮情诡谲，必为边患。
现代文：皇帝既然已经命令云南出兵进剿思机发，等到沐斌等人到达腾冲，监督各军追捕思机发时，思机发最终还是不出来，悄悄地躲藏在孟养，派他的手下人前来进贡。
English: Since the emperor had already ordered Yunnan to send troops to invade Shijiazhuang, when Mu Bin and others arrived in Tengchong to supervise the pursuit of Shijiazhuang, Shijiazhuang finally did not come out, quietly hiding in Mengyang and sending his men to pay tribute.

古文：符到，可即于金齿、楚雄、品甸及澜沧江中道，葺垒深池，以固营栅，多置火铳为守备。
现代文：朝廷答应他宽免他的死罪，他还是不出来。沐斌因春天瘴气发作，江水上涨无法渡河，粮食也已缺乏，便带兵回去了。
English: The imperial court promised to pardon him of his capital crime, but he still could not come out. Due to a bad breath attack in the spring, Mu Bin was unable to cross the river due to the rising river water, and there was already a shortage of food, so he took the soldiers back.

古文：寇来。
现代文：皇帝因沐斌出师无功，便又命令兵部尚书靖远伯王骥总督军务，都督同知宫聚佩戴平蛮将军印，率领南京、云南、湖广、四川、贵州的官军和土军共十三万人前去讨伐思机发。到此，王骥已是三征麓川了。皇帝秘密地谕告王骥说 ：万一思机发远逃，则先捉拿刀变蛮，扫平他们的巢穴。如果他们逃入缅甸，缅甸人庇护他们，也可相机擒拿他们。要让蛮族人知道害怕，大军不是白白出来的。 
English: Since Mu Bin's efforts were fruitless, the emperor also ordered the military department Shang Shuxu Jingyuan Bo Wang Qi, the military governor, the governor and the court to wear the seal of the barbarian general, and led the official army and the Turkish army of Nanjing, Yunnan, Hukang, Sichuan and Guizhou, a total of 130,000 people, to fight the barbarians. At this point, Wang Qi was already in the third expedition. The emperor secretly told Wang Qi: In the event that the barbarians flee far away, first catch the knife to become barbarians and sweep their nests. If they escape into Myanmar, the Burmese will shelter them, and the

古文：勿轻与战。又以往岁人至百夷，多贪其财货，不顾事理，贻笑诸蛮。
现代文：皇帝又敕谕沐斌，军事上的事全要与王骥一同商量后再行动。皇帝又敕谕木邦、缅甸、南甸、干崖、陇川等宣慰司，要他们整顿军队、准备好战船、积聚粮草以等待朝廷的调度。
English: The emperor also ordered Mubin that all military matters should be discussed with Wang Yao before taking action. The emperor also ordered the consul generals of Mubang, Burma, Nandian, Dry Cliff, and Li River to reorganize the army, prepare warships, and accumulate grain and grass to wait for the dispatch of the imperial court.

古文：继今不许一人往平缅，即文移亦慎答之，毋忽。 明年，伦发诱群蛮入寇马龙他郎甸之摩沙勒寨。
现代文：十四年，王骥率领各位将领在腾冲会师，在干崖造船出发，到南牙山时弃舟步行，抵达沙坝，又造船从水路到金沙江。思机发在江的西岸埋下寨栅坚守。
English: In the 14th year, Wang Qi led the generals to meet the division in Tengchong, set off from the shipbuilding in the dry cliff, abandoned the boat and walked when he reached the South Yashan Mountain, arrived at the sand dam, and built a ship from the waterway to the Jinsha River.

古文：英遣都督宁正击破之，斩首千五百余级。伦发悉举其众，号三十万，象百余，寇定边，欲报摩沙勒之役，新附诸蛮皆为尽力。英选师三万亟趋至，贼列象阵搏战。
现代文：大军顺流下到管屯，碰到木邦、缅甸两个宣慰带兵十余万也排列在沿江两岸，缅甸准备了二百多艘船做浮桥渡送军队，大家合力攻破了思机发的栅寨，缴获了谷子四十多万石。大军吃饱以后，锐气大增。
English: The large army went down the river to Guandong, encountered Mubang, Myanmar, and the two consolations with more than 100,000 soldiers also lined up on both sides of the river. Myanmar prepared more than two hundred ships to make pontoons to ferry the army. Everyone worked together to break through the imaginative fence and captured more than 400,000 kilos of grain. After the large army had eaten enough, the spirit increased greatly.

古文：英列弩注射，突阵大呼，象多伤，其蛮亦多中矢毙，蛮气稍缩。
现代文：思机发带领手下众人到达鬼哭山，在两个山峰上修筑大寨子，在两翼修筑两个寨子，又筑七个小寨，绵延达一百多里。官军分路齐进，都将这些寨子攻克了，斩杀和俘虏了贼人无数。
English: He took the opportunity to lead his men to the Devil's Crying Mountain, built a large stockade on the two peaks, built two stockades on the two wings, and built seven small stockades, stretching for more than a hundred miles. The official army advanced in parallel, conquered these stockades, and killed and captured countless thieves.

古文：次日，英率将士，益置火枪、神机箭，更番射，象奔，贼大败。
现代文：思机发、思卜发又逃奔了。此时朝廷的军队经过孟养到达孟那。
English: Shih Chih-fa and Shib-fa ran away again. At this time, the imperial army passed through Mengyang and reached Mengna.

古文：捣其寨，斩首三万余级，降卒万余人。象死者半，生获三十有七。
现代文：孟养在金沙江西面，离麓川有一千多里远，当地各部落对官军的到来都很受震慑，说： 自古以来汉人没有渡过金沙江的，现今朝廷的军队到达这里，真是天朝的威风啊！ 
English: Meng Yao is on the west side of the Jinsha River, more than a thousand miles away from the Lugu River. Local tribes are very shocked by the arrival of the official army, saying: Since ancient times, the Han people have not crossed the Jinsha River, but now the imperial court's army has arrived here. It is really the might of the Heavenly Dynasty!

古文：伦发遁，以捷闻。帝遣使谕英移师逼景东屯田，固垒以待大军集，勿轻受其降。
现代文：王骥回兵后，思机发的部下众人又拥戴思任发的小儿子思禄，占据孟养作乱。
English: After Wang Yao returned to the army, all the subordinates of Si Jingfa also supported the youngest son of Si Renfa, Silo, and occupied Meng Yao.

古文：二十二年，伦发遣把事招纲等来言： 往者逆谋，皆由把事刀厮郎、刀厮养所为。
现代文：王骥等人考虑到军队连续作战很疲劳，贼人又不可能一下子消灭，便与思禄订约，允许土目管理当地各蛮族人，在孟养像以前一样居住并统治该地，在金沙江上立石为界，发誓说 ：只有等石头烂了，江水枯了，你才能渡过江来。 
English: Wang Yao and others, considering that the army was very tired from continuous fighting and that the bandits could not be eliminated all at once, signed a contract with Sulu, allowing the local tribes to manage the local barbarians, to live and rule the land in Mengyang as before, to set up a stone boundary on the Jinsha River, and swore: You can only cross the river when the stone is rotten and the river is dry.

古文：乞贷死，愿输贡赋。 
现代文：思禄也畏惧朝廷的大军，便听从了王骥的安排，表示遵守誓约。
English: Siroku was also afraid of the imperial army, so he obeyed Wang Yao's arrangement and said that he would abide by the oath.

古文：云南守臣以闻。
现代文：于是大军便班师回朝。
English: As a result, the large army returned to the imperial court.

古文：乃遣通政司经历杨大用赍敕往谕思伦发修臣礼，悉偿前日兵费，庶免问罪之师。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，皇帝特地到宗庙里去祝祷。景泰元年，云南总兵官沐瞞上奏说： 缅甸宣慰已经擒住了思机发，还把思卜发放回了孟养，恐怕缅甸人又会将思机发居为奇货，向朝廷要挟。
English: The news of the victory reached the imperial court, and the emperor made a special trip to the ancestral temple to offer his prayers. In the first year of King Taejo, Yunnan's military commander Mu Ke said in his report: "The Burmese consul has already seized the Scepter, and has also sent the Scepter back to Meng Yeung. I am afraid that the Burmese will again treat the Scepter as a rare commodity and threaten the imperial court."

古文：伦发听命，遂以象、马、白金、方物入贡谢罪，大用并令献叛首刀厮郎等一百三十七人，平缅遂平。自是，三年每来朝贡。二十七年，伦发来朝，贡马、象、方物。
现代文：不如我们缓一缓此事，听任他们自己将其献出来为好。 
English: It would be better for us to postpone the matter and let them present it themselves.

古文：已，遣京卫千户郭均英往赐思伦发公服、幞头、金带、象笏。
现代文：皇帝同意。五年，缅甸人又来讨索旧地，左参将胡志等谕告他们，将银戛等处的土地划归他们。
English: The emperor agreed. Five years later, the Burmese came to reclaim the old land, and Zuo Jian told them about Ho Chi and other edicts, and assigned the land in Yin Cao and other places to them.

古文：二十八年，缅国王使来言，百夷屡以兵侵夺其境。
现代文：他们便将思机发和他的妻子儿女六人送到金沙江村子里，胡志等人就把思机发等人用槛关着送到京城。南宁伯毛福寿将此上报给朝廷，朝廷便在京城里诛杀了思机发。
English: They then sent Shih Chih-fa and his six wives and children to the village of Tsuen in the Jinsha River, while Ho Chi and the others took Shih Chih-fa and the others to the capital, locking them up with a bar. Nanning Bamao Fushu reported this to the imperial court, which then killed Shih Chih-fa in the capital.

古文：明年，缅使复来诉。
现代文：七年，思任发的儿子思卜发上奏说： 我的父兄犯法，而当时我年幼无知。
English: Seven years ago, Si Renfa's son, Si Bufa, made a report saying: "My father and brother broke the law, and I was young and ignorant at the time.

古文：帝遣行人李思聪等使缅国及百夷。
现代文：现今不敢做父兄那样违法的事，对朝廷的法律甚为畏惧。
English: Nowadays, they do not dare to do anything illegal like their father and brother, and they are very afraid of the laws of the imperial court.

古文：思伦发闻诏，俯伏谢罪，愿罢兵。适其部长刀干孟叛，思聪听朝廷威德谕其部众，叛者稍退。
现代文：现准备了差发银子五百两、大象三头、马六匹和其他土产，派使者前来进贡，只希望天皇帝您能哀怜我们。 
English: Now we have prepared five hundred taels of silver, three elephants, six horses and other native products, and have sent an envoy to pay tribute. We only hope that you, heavenly emperor, will have pity on us.

古文：思伦发欲倚使者服其下，强留之，以象、马、金宝为赂，思聪谕却之。
现代文：皇帝便给他敕谕，劝他不要学其父兄所为，并给他、他的妻子和使者各按等级赏赐锦币和钞币。
English: The emperor then gave him an edict, advising him not to follow in the footsteps of his father and brother, and rewarded him, his wife, and the emissary with gold coins and banknotes according to their ranks.

古文：归述其山川、人物、风俗、道路之详，为《百夷传纪》以进，帝褒之。
现代文：成化元年，总兵官沐瓒等人认为思任发的孙子思命发到京城后不能让他久留，因为他是叛逆贼人的遗孽，请求朝廷将他发配到沿海的登州卫去，每个月给他二石米。皇帝同意这个提议，于是麓川便灭亡了。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the general officer Mu Xi and others believed that the grandson of Shirenfa, Shimenfa, could not be allowed to stay for a long time after he was sent to Beijing, because he was the remains of a traitorous thief. He asked the court to send him to the coastal city of Dengzhouwei and give him two kilos of rice every month. The emperor agreed to this proposal, and Luochuan was destroyed.

古文：初，平缅俗不好佛。有僧至自云南，善为因果报应之说，伦发信之。
现代文：在此之前，麓川初次被平定时，朝廷将其土地分出来设立了陇川宣抚使司，任命恭项为宣抚使。
English: Prior to this, when the Luchuan River was first pacified, the imperial court allocated its land and established the Luchuan Envoy Office, appointing Gongxiang as the envoy.

古文：又有金齿戍卒逃入其境，能为火硫、火炮之具，伦发喜其技能，俾系金带，与僧位诸部长上。
现代文：恭项，是以前麓川的部落酋长，因首先归顺朝廷并替朝廷效力，立有功劳，朝廷便命令在麓川的故地开设宣抚使司。不久，当地的头目曩涣等人又来归顺朝廷，并表示愿意替朝廷捕贼效力。
English: Gongxiang, the former tribal chieftain of Luchuan, was the first to submit to the imperial court and work for the imperial court, and was so meritorious that the imperial court ordered the establishment of an envoy office in the former place of Luchuan. Soon, local leaders such as Zou came to submit to the imperial court again, and expressed their willingness to work for the imperial court to catch thieves.

古文：刀干孟等不服，遂与其属叛，攻腾冲。
现代文：朝廷命令他们回去守卫本土，一旦立有功劳，则立即加封。
English: The imperial court ordered them to go back and guard the mainland, and if they were found to be meritorious, they were immediately sealed.

古文：已，头目曩涣等复来归，愿捕贼自效。帝命还守本土，有功，即加叙。诸凡来归者视此例。遂以刀歪孟为本司同知，刀落曩为副使，陇帚为佥事，俱赐冠带，从宣抚恭项请也。恭项子恭立来贡，给赐如例，并授恭立为长史。
现代文：诸凡来归顺朝廷的蛮人都按此对待。于是朝廷听从了宣抚恭项的请求，任命刀歪孟为本宣抚使司的同知，刀落曩为副使，陇吊为佥事，都给他们赐予冠带。恭项的儿子恭立前来京城朝贡，皇帝也按惯例给以赏赐，并授予恭立为长史。
English: All the barbarians who came to submit to the imperial court were treated in this way. So the imperial court listened to the request of Xuan Fu and Qian Xiang, appointed Xuan Fu and Qian Xiang to be the main envoys, Xuan Fu and Qian Xiang to be the deputy envoys, and Qian Xiang to be the anecdote, and gave them the crown belt. Qian Xiang's son, Qian Li, came to the capital to pay tribute, and the emperor also gave him a reward according to the usual practice, and awarded Qian Li for a long history.

古文：未几，陇川宣抚失印，请再给。
现代文：不久，陇川宣抚将官印丢失了，请求朝廷再给一个。
English: Soon after, Shukawa Shinsuke lost his official seal and asked the Imperial Court for another one.

古文：帝责恭项以不能宣扬国威，反失印，罪应不宥，姑从宽颁。
现代文：皇帝责备恭项不能以此宣扬国威，反而把官印给丢失了，此罪本来不应该宽恕，姑念他们是边远地区的蛮族人，所以从宽处理给他们再颁一个官印。
English: The emperor reproached Qiang Xiang for not being able to promote national prestige in this way, but instead lost the official seal. This crime should not have been forgiven, considering that they were barbarians in remote areas, so he treated them leniently and gave them another official seal.

古文：时板蹇据者蓝寨，侵扰陇川，百夫长刀门线、刀木立进兵围之，斩板蹇等二十三人。
现代文：此时板蹇占领了者蓝寨，侵扰陇川，百夫长刀门线、刀木立进兵包围了者蓝寨，斩杀了板蹇等二十三人。
English: At this time, the bandits occupied Lanzhai, invaded Lu River, and the centurions of the Longsword Gate Line and the Sword and Wood Column surrounded the bandits of Lanzhai, and killed twenty-three people including the bandits.

古文：命赐有功者皆为冠带把事，并赉织金文绮。
现代文：皇帝命令给有功的人都赐封冠带把事，并赏赐给他们织金文绮。
English: The emperor ordered that those who had meritorious deeds should be awarded with crowns and sashes, and that they should be rewarded with woven gold brooches.

古文：正统十一年，木邦宣慰罕盖发来求麓川故地。
现代文：正统十一年，木邦宣慰罕盖发来索求麓川的故地。
English: In the eleventh year of orthodoxy, Mokpo Xuan Jie sent Han Gai to ask for the former location of the Luchuan River.

古文：有司以已设陇川宣抚司，建官分管，以孟止地予之，报可。
现代文：有关机构认为该地已经设置了陇川宣抚司，设立了官员分别管理，就不应当再全归回去，将孟止那个地方划归木邦就可以了。
English: The relevant agencies believe that the place has been set up by the Xuchuan Publicity and Relief Department, and officials have been set up to manage it separately, so it should not be returned in its entirety, and the place in Mengzhi can be classified as Mubang.

古文：十二年敕谕恭项，言： 比者，总兵奏尔与百夫长刀木立相仇杀，人民怀怨，欲谋害尔父子。
现代文：该意见上报朝廷后，皇帝同意了。十二年，皇帝敕谕给恭项说： 近来，总兵上奏说你与百夫长刀木立互相仇杀，致使人民怀怨，想谋害你们父子。
English: After this opinion was reported to the imperial court, the emperor agreed. In the twelfth year, the emperor sent an imperial edict to Qiang Xiang, saying: Recently, the general reported that you and the centurion Qiu Muli were fighting each other, causing the people to harbor grudges and want to kill your father and son.

古文：今迁尔于云南，俾不失所，且遣官护尔家属完聚，其体悯恤，无怀疑惧。 
现代文：现今将你迁到云南，不是让你流离失所，还派官员护送你的家属到云南跟你团聚，完全是体恤怜悯你，你不要有疑忌猜惧。 
English: Now, moving you to Yunnan is not to displace you, but to send officials to escort your family members to Yunnan to reunite with you. It is entirely out of sympathy and pity for you. You should not be suspicious.

古文：既而总兵官言： 陇川致乱，皆由恭项暴杀无辜，刻虐蛮人。
现代文：不久总兵官上奏说 ：陇川的动乱，完全是由于恭项残暴地杀害无辜，刻意虐待蛮族人引起的。
English: Not long after, the commander-in-chief reported: "The turmoil in Luochuan was entirely caused by the brutal killing of innocents and the deliberate mistreatment of barbarians.

古文：同知刀歪孟为蛮众信服，乞安置项于别卫，以刀歪孟代。 
现代文：同知刀歪孟为蛮族群众所信服，请求朝廷将恭项安置到别的卫所，让刀歪孟代替恭项的职务。 
English: The barbarian masses were convinced by Tongzhi Xiangmeng and requested the imperial court to relocate Xiangmeng to another sanatorium and let Xiangmeng take the place of Xiangmeng.

古文：帝以恭项来归，屈法宥之，命于曲靖安置，并遣敕往谕。
现代文：皇帝认为恭项前来归顺朝廷，不能完全按法律来苛求他，应宽恕他，便命令将恭项安置到曲靖，并派遣使者到曲靖带着敕谕去说明此事。
English: The emperor thought that he should pardon Gongxiang because he came to submit to the imperial court and he could not punish him completely according to the law, so he ordered that Gongxiang be placed in Qujing and sent an envoy to Qujing with an encyclical to explain the matter.

古文：景泰七年，陇川宣抚多外闷遣人贡象、马及金银器皿、方物，赐彩币、袭衣如例。
现代文：景泰七年，陇川宣抚多外闷派人向朝廷进献大象、马和金银器皿、土产，皇帝按惯例给他赏赐采币和袭衣。
English: In the seventh year of King Taejo's reign, King Seonjo sent many foreigners to the court to present elephants, horses, gold and silverware, and local products. The emperor rewarded him with coins and clothes according to the usual practice.

古文：仍命赍敕赐之，以多外闷初修朝贡故也。
现代文：因为多外闷是第一次来向朝廷献贡，所以皇帝还专门派人带着敕谕到陇川去赏赐他。
English: Because it was the first time for Dogaizhong to pay tribute to the imperial court, the emperor specially sent someone to reward him with an encyclical to Shichuan.

古文：成化十九年，以陇川宣抚司多歪孟子亨法代职。
现代文：成化十九年，陇川宣抚司多歪孟的儿子亨法代理了多外闷的职务。
English: In the 19th year of Chenghua, Heng Fa, the son of Tongchuan Xuan Fu Shi and Tongchuan Meng, took over the duties of Tongchuan Xuan Fu.

古文：初，陇川与木邦相邻，争地仇杀，构兵不息。
现代文：当初，陇川与木邦相邻，两地为争夺土地而互相仇杀，构兵不息。
English: At the beginning, Shibukawa was adjacent to Mokpo, and the two regions fought against each other for land, forming armies incessantly.

古文：嘉靖中，土舍多鲸刃兄自袭，下镇巡官按问，伏辜，还职兄子多参。
现代文：嘉靖年间，土舍多鲸杀死了兄长自己承袭了官职。朝廷让镇巡官去调查审讯此事，多鲸伏罪，将官职还给了兄长的儿子多参。
English: During the Jiajing Dynasty, the prince killed his elder brother and took over the official post himself. The court ordered the town inspector to investigate and investigate the matter, and the official post was returned to the elder brother's son, Duoshan.

古文：诏贳其罪，并戒木邦罕孟毋得复党鲸争职。
现代文：皇帝下诏赦免了多鲸的罪行，并敕谕给木邦的罕孟，告诫他不要再与多鲸结党去争夺职位了。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict pardoning Duowhale's crime, and also sent an edict to Han Meng of Mubang, warning him not to form a faction with Duowhale to compete for a post.

古文：万历初，缅甸莽瑞体叛，来招陇川宣抚多士宁，士宁不从。
现代文：万历初年，缅甸的莽端体背叛朝廷，前来招抚陇川宣抚多士宁，要多士宁与他一起叛乱。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, a Burmese despot betrayed the imperial court and came to court Shukawa to persuade Doshinin to join him in rebellion.

古文：其记室岳凤者，江西抚州人，黠而多智，商于陇川，士宁信任之，妻以妹。
现代文：多士宁不愿意。
English: Toshinin doesn't want to go.

古文：凤曲媚士宁，阴夺其权，与三宣六慰各土舍罕拔等歃血盟，诱士宁往摆古，归附缅酋。
现代文：多士宁手下的记室名叫岳凤，是江西抚州人。他人很狡猾又足智多谋，在陇川经商，多士宁很信任他，将自己的妹妹嫁与他为妻。岳凤曲意讨好多士宁，暗地里在夺取多士宁的权力，与三宣六慰的各士舍罕拔等人歃血为盟，诱骗多士宁到摆古去归附缅甸的酋长。
English: Yue Feng, the clerk of Doshining, was from Fuzhou, Jiangxi Province. He was very cunning and resourceful. He was doing business in Luochuan. Doshining trusted him very much and married his sister to him. Yue Feng was trying to please Doshining. He was secretly trying to seize Doshining's power. He was in a blood-soaked alliance with Sheshan Prabhu and others, who had been consoled by the Three Prophets and Six Consolations, to trick Doshining into joining the Burmese chieftain in Yinggu.

古文：阴使其子曩乌鸩士宁并杀其妻女，夺印投缅，受缅伪命，代士宁为宣抚。
现代文：暗地里他又指使他的儿子曩乌用毒酒毒死多士宁并杀死多士宁的妻子儿女，夺取官印投奔缅甸，接受缅甸酋长的任命，代替多士宁为陇川宣抚。
English: Secretly, he also ordered his son Zhou Wu to poison Doshining with poisoned wine and kill Doshining's wife and children, seize the official seal and flee to Myanmar, accept the appointment of the Burmese chief, and replace Doshining as Xuanfu of the Xuchuan.

古文：及瑞体死，子应里嗣，凤父子臣服之。
现代文：莽瑞体死后，他的儿子莽应里即位，岳凤父子俩都以臣子的礼节服侍莽应里。
English: After the death of Meng Rui, his son Meng Yingli ascended to the throne. Both Yue Feng and his son served Meng Yingli with the courtesy of a courtier.

古文：诱败官军，献士宁母胡氏及亲族六百余人于应里，尽杀之，多氏之宗几尽。
现代文：岳凤父子引诱并打败前来讨伐的官军，把多士宁的母亲胡氏和多氏的亲族六百多人都绑去献给应里，且全部将他们杀死，多氏宗族几乎被他们灭绝了。
English: Yue Feng and his son lured and defeated the government army that came to fight, and they tied up Doshinin's mother, the Hu clan, and more than six hundred of the clan's relatives, and sacrificed them to He Li, and killed them all. The multi-clan clan was almost exterminated by them.

古文：初，凤之附于缅也，为瑞体招诸部，拒中国，伤官军，逆势浸成，缅深倚之。
现代文：当初，岳凤归附缅甸时，替莽端体招抚各部落，抗拒中央朝廷，伤害并打败官军，使叛逆局面终于形成并稳定下来，岳凤为此出了大力，缅甸人是很依赖他的。
English: At the beginning, when Yue Feng was annexed to Myanmar, Yue Feng, on behalf of the reckless leader, attracted the tribes, resisted the central court, hurt and defeated the official army, so that the rebellious situation was finally formed and stabilized. Yue Feng made great efforts for this, and the Burmese were very dependent on him.

古文：久之，以缅不足恃。
现代文：时间一长以后，他认为缅甸也不足以作为依靠。
English: In the long run, he believes that Myanmar is not enough to rely on.

古文：而邓川土知州何钰，凤友婿也，初使人招凤，凤执使献缅。
现代文：邓川的土知州何钰，是岳凤的连襟。他开始时派人去招抚岳凤，岳凤把该使者抓起来献给了缅甸。
English: Dengchuan's Tochi Prefecture, He Ying, is Yue Feng's brother-in-law. He initially sent someone to woo Yue Feng, and Yue Feng captured the messenger and gave him to Myanmar.

古文：及是，钰复开示百方，与之盟誓。
现代文：到此，何钰又将各方面的情况都开示给他，并与他盟誓。
English: At this point, He Zhen also told him all aspects of the situation and swore with him.

古文：时官军亦大集，诸将刘綎、邓子龙各率劲师至，环壁四面。
现代文：此时朝廷的大军也已集结，各位将领刘纟廷、邓子龙等也各率领精锐军队到达了，将陇川四面围了起来。
English: At this time, the imperial court's army had also gathered, and generals Liu Bingding, Deng Zilong, etc. also led elite troops to arrive, and surrounded the Min River on all sides.

古文：凤惧，乃令妻子及部曲来降。
现代文：岳凤感到有所畏惧，便让他的妻子儿女和手下人出来向官军投降。
English: Yue Feng felt a little afraid, so he asked his wife, children and subordinates to come out and surrender to the government army.

古文：綎责令献金牌、符印及蛮莫、猛密地。乃以送凤妻子还陇川为名，分兵趋沙木笼山，先据其险，而自领大兵驰入陇川。
现代文：刘纟廷责令他献出以前朝廷给多士宁的金牌、符印和蛮莫、猛密两个地方，并以护送岳凤的妻子儿女回陇川为名，分兵向沙木、笼山进发，首先占据了险要之地，自己则率领大军进入陇川。
English: Liu Qingting ordered him to present the gold medal and seal that the imperial court had previously given to Toshining, as well as the two places of Brute Mo and Mengmi, and in the name of escorting Yue Feng's wife and children back to the Lugu River, the detachment of soldiers went to Shamu and Cageshan, and first occupied the critical place, while he led the army into the Lugu River.

古文：凤度无可脱，遂诣军门降。
现代文：岳凤考虑之后觉得已无法逃脱，便到刘纟廷的军门前投降。
English: After thinking about it, Yue Feng felt that she could no longer escape, so she surrendered in front of Liu Bingting's gate.

古文：綎复率兵进缅，缅将先遁，留少兵陇川，綎攻之，凤子曩乌亦降，綎乃携凤父子往攻蛮莫，蛮莫贼知凤降，驰报应里，发兵图陇川。
现代文：刘纟廷又带兵向缅甸进军，缅甸将领事先已经逃跑了，只留少量军队在陇川。刘纟廷一向缅军进攻，岳凤的儿子曩乌也来投降。刘纟廷便催促岳凤父子俩去攻打蛮莫。蛮莫贼人知道岳凤已经投降官军，飞马报告给莽应里，让他出兵袭击陇川。
English: Liu Qingting also led troops to march into Burma. The Burmese generals had already fled in advance, leaving only a small number of troops in Liuchuan. Liu Qingting had been attacking the Burmese army, and Yue Feng's son, Zhou Wu, also surrendered. Liu Qingting then urged Yue Feng and his sons to attack Mawangmo. The Mawangmo thieves knew that Yue Feng had surrendered to the official army. Fei Ma reported to Mawang Yingli and asked him to send troops to attack Liuchuan.

古文：綎乘机掩杀，贼窘，乞降，缚缅人及象马来献。
现代文：刘纟廷乘机掩杀进蛮莫，贼人处境困窘，请求投降，将缅甸人绑缚起来和大象、马一起献给官军。
English: Liu Qingting took the opportunity to cover up the killing of Xuan Mo, the thief was in a difficult situation, asked for surrender, tied up the Burmese and presented them to the official army together with elephants and horses.

古文：遂招抚孟养贼，贼将乘象走，追获之。
现代文：官军于是又招抚孟养的贼人。贼人的将领已乘着大象逃走，官军追击又将其抓获。
English: The government army then recruited Meng Yao's bandits. The general of the bandits had fled on an elephant, and the government army chased and captured him.

古文：复移师围孟琏，生擒其魁，陇川平。
现代文：官军又移师包围了孟琏，活捉了孟琏贼人的魁首，于是陇川被平定了。
English: The government army also moved its division to encircle Mengye and captured the leader of Mengye's bandits alive. As a result, Beichuan was pacified.

古文：献俘于朝，帝为告谢郊庙，时万历十二年九月也。
现代文：刘纟廷等将俘虏献给朝廷，皇帝为此特地到郊庙里祝祷并感谢祖先。此时正是万历十二年九月。
English: Liu Bingding and others dedicated the captives to the imperial court, for which the emperor went to a suburban temple to pray and thank his ancestors. This was in September of the twelfth year of Wanli.

古文：逾年复铸陇川宣抚司及孟定府印，升孟密安抚为宣抚司。
现代文：过了一年朝廷又重新铸造陇川宣抚司和孟定府的官印，将孟密安抚司升为宣抚司。
English: A year later, the imperial court re-minted the official seal of the Xuchuan Propaganda and Reassurance Department and the Mengding Prefecture, and promoted the Mengmi Reassurance Department to the Propaganda and Reassurance Department.

古文：添设安抚司二，曰蛮莫，曰耿马；长官司二，曰孟琏，曰孟养；千户所二，一居姚关，一居孟淋砦，皆名之曰镇安；并铸印记，建大将行署于蛮莫。
现代文：同时，朝廷又增设了蛮莫和耿马两个安抚司；增设了孟琏和孟养两个长官司；增添了姚关和孟淋砦两个千户所，并命名为镇安；在蛮莫建立大将行署。
English: At the same time, the imperial court also set up two pacification departments in Ranmo and Gengma; set up two administrative departments in Mengqi and Mengyang; added two thousand households in Yaoguan and Menglin Fort, and named it Zhen'an; and set up the General Administration Office in Ranmo.

古文：从云南巡抚刘世曾之议也。
现代文：朝廷为这些新设机构都铸造了印信和印记。这是听从了云南巡抚刘世曾的提议的结果。
English: The imperial court minted letters and stamps for these newly established institutions, which was the result of listening to the proposal of Yunnan Governor Liu Shizeng.

古文：于是，多士宁之子思顺袭陇川宣抚使。
现代文：于是，多士宁的儿子多思顺承袭了陇川宣抚使的官职。
English: As a result, Doshinin's son, Dosisun, succeeded to the post of Shukawa's envoy.

古文：二十九年，莽应里分道入犯，一入遮放、芒市，一入腊撒蛮颡，一入杉木笼，并出陇川。
现代文：万历二十九年，莽应里分几路进犯。一路进犯遮放、芒市；一路进犯腊撒的蛮桑页；一路进犯杉木笼，并向陇川出击。
English: In the 29th year of Wanli, Meng Yingli attacked in several ways. All the way to attack the shielding, Meng Shi; all the way to attack the barbaric mulberry leaves of Lhasa; all the way to attack the cedar cage, and to attack the Li River.

古文：多思顺不敌，奔猛卯。
现代文：多思顺不敌莽应里，逃奔到猛卯。
English: More thoughtful than reckless, he fled to Mengwu.

古文：缅初以猛卯同知多俺为向导，寇东路。
现代文：缅甸人开始时是以猛卯同知多俺为向导，向东路进犯的。
English: At the beginning, the Burmese used Mengwu Tongchidao as a guide to attack the eastern route.

古文：至是大军遣木邦罕钦擒多俺杀之。
现代文：多思顺逃奔到猛卯后，官军便派遣木邦的罕钦活捉了多俺，并将他杀了。
English: After Dosisun fled to Mengwu, the government army sent Hanqin from Mubang to capture Dosisun alive and kill him.

古文：未几，思顺死，蛮莫思正乘丧袭陇川，据其妻罕氏。
现代文：不久，多思顺死亡，莫的多思正乘着办丧事之机袭击陇川，占有了多思顺的妻子罕氏。
English: Not long after, Doushun died, and Mo Doushun was taking advantage of the opportunity to carry out the funeral to attack Suechuan and take possession of Doushun's wife, Han.

古文：三十五年，思顺子安民以守将索赂，叛入缅。
现代文：三十五年，多思顺的儿子多安民因是守将却索取贿赂，结果背叛朝廷进入缅甸。
English: Thirty-five years ago, Doan Min, the son of Do Sisun, asked for a bribe because he was a military commander. As a result, he betrayed the imperial court and entered Burma.

古文：已而缅听抚，遣安民归。
现代文：不久缅甸又听从了朝廷的招抚，把多安民遣送回来。
English: Not long after, Myanmar heeded the court's entreaty and repatriated the Doan people.

古文：安民久据蛮湾，桀骜甚，署永腾参将周会遣二指挥袭之，败绩。
现代文：多安民长期占据蛮湾，性格异常桀骜不驯。官府命永腾参将周会派两个指挥去袭击他，都被他打败。
English: Doanmin has occupied the Wild Bay for a long time, and his character is extremely rebellious. The government ordered Yong Tengsang to send two commanders to attack him, and they were both defeated by him.

古文：王师亟讨，其族人挟其弟多安靖诛之以献。
现代文：朝廷准备派大军前去征讨，多安民的族人要挟他的弟弟多安靖杀死他献给官府。
English: The imperial court was preparing to send a large army to conquer it, and the people of the Doan people threatened his brother, Doan Jing, to kill him and present him to the government.

古文：时安靖尚幼，势孤，诏俟其长给之印。
现代文：此时多安靖年纪尚幼小，势力也很孤单。皇帝下诏说等多安靖长大了再将官印交给他。
English: At this time, Doan Jing was still young and powerless. The emperor issued an edict saying that he would wait until Doan Jing grew up before giving him the official seal.

古文：安民弟安邦治亦附缅，后寄居蛮莫。
现代文：多安民的弟弟多安邦也依附于缅甸，后来寄居在蛮莫。
English: Doan Min's younger brother, Doan Bang, was also attached to Myanmar and later lived in Mon Mo.

古文：其地有马安、摩黎、罗木等山，极险峻，麓川之所恃为巢穴者也。
现代文：蛮莫境内有马安、摩黎、罗木等山，地势极为险峻，是麓川人倚作巢穴的地方。
English: There are mountains such as Ma'an, Mori, and Luo Mu in the territory of Sanmo. The terrain is extremely steep, and it is a place where the people of Fuchuan make their nests.

