古文：柳世隆，字彦绪，河东解人也。
现代文：柳世隆字彦绪，彦绪人。
English: Yanagi Shitaka, also known as Hikoso and Hikosohito.

古文：祖凭，冯翊太守。
现代文：祖父柳凭，曾任冯翊太守。
English: His grandfather, Liu Biao, was once the governor of Fenghuang.

古文：父叔宗，早卒。
现代文：父柳叔宗。早逝。
English: His father, Liu Shuzong, died young.

古文：世隆少有风器。伯父元景，宋大明中为尚书令，独赏爱之，异于诸子。
现代文：世隆年轻时就有风采气度，伯父名元景，在宋大明年间任尚书令，特别赏识他宠爱他，超过了对自己的几个儿子。
English: When Shilong was young, he had a graceful demeanor. His uncle, Mengyuanjing, was appointed as Shang Shuling during the Song Dynasty. He especially appreciated him and favored him more than his own sons.

古文：言于孝武帝，得召见。帝曰： 三公一人，是将来事也。 
现代文：向孝武帝推荐世隆，得到召见，孝武帝说： 你做到三公是将来必然的事。 
English: He recommended Shilong to Emperor Xiaowu. When he was summoned, Emperor Xiaowu said, "It is inevitable that you will achieve the three noble truths in the future."

古文：海陵王休茂为雍州，辟世隆为迎主簿。
现代文：海陵王佐茎治壅姐，召坐笔为迎主簿。
English: The sister of the king of Hailing, Sasuke Chihiro, calls for a pen to be used as a welcome book.

古文：除西阳王抚军法曹行参军，出为虎威将军、上庸太守。
现代文：任酉旦旺抚军法曹行参军，出京任虎威将军、上庸太守。
English: He was appointed as the legal officer of the Shantang and Wangfujing troops, joined the army, and went to Beijing to serve as General Huwei and Shangyong Taishu.

古文：帝谓元景曰： 卿昔以虎威之号为随郡，今复以授世隆，使卿门世不绝公也。 
现代文：皇上对亘量说： 你往年凭虎威的称号治随塑，现在再把这个称号授给世隆，让你们家代代都有公爵。 
English: The emperor said to Wang Quan, "In the past, you used the title of "Tiger King" to rule the country. Now, bestow this title on Shilong, so that your family will have dukes for generations to come.

古文：元景为景和所杀，世隆以在远得免。
现代文：元景被景和杀了，世隆因为在外地而幸免。
English: Yuanjing was killed by Jinghe, Shilong was spared because he was out of town.

古文：泰始初，诸州反叛，世隆以门祸获申，事由明帝，乃据郡起兵，遣使应朝廷。
现代文：泰始初年各州反叛，世隆因为家族的冤屈靠旦嘘得到昭雪，就在郡起兵，派使者报告朝廷表示响应。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the states rebelled. Shilong, because of his family's grievances, relied on a lie to get justice. He raised an army in the county and sent an envoy to report to the imperial court to express his response.

古文：弘农人刘僧驎亦聚众应之。
现代文：至炉人刘僧鳞也聚众响应。
English: To the furnace man Liu Sangqiu also gathered a crowd to respond.

古文：收合万人，奄至襄阳万山，为孔道存所破，众皆奔散，仅以身免，逃藏民间，事平乃出。
现代文：聚集万人，一起前进到塞屋的姜山，被孔道在打败，人都逃散，他一人幸免于难，隐藏在民间，乱事平定了才出来。
English: He gathered tens of thousands of people and marched together to Jiangshan in Jiaoya. He was defeated by Kong Dao, and everyone fled. He was the only one who survived, hiding among the people, and only came out when the chaos had been settled.

古文：还为尚书仪曹郎，明帝嘉其义心，发诏擢为太子洗马，出为宁远将军、巴西梓潼太守。
现代文：回朝任尚书仪曹郎，明帝嘉奖他的忠义，下诏升他为太子洗马，出京任宁远将军、巴酉挂违太守。
English: He returned to the imperial court as the secretary of Shang Shouyi, and Emperor Ming commended him for his loyalty. He was promoted to crown prince by imperial edict, and went to Beijing as the general of Ningyuan. Baju was hanged for disobeying the emperor.

古文：还为越骑校尉，转建平王镇北谘议参军，领南泰山太守，转司马、东海太守，入为通直散骑常侍。
现代文：回京后任越骑校尉，转任建平王镇北谘议参军，领南泰山太守，转任司马、东海太守，入京为通直散骑常侍。
English: After returning to Beijing, he served as a Viet Cavalry Captain, transferred to the Northern Advisory Council of Jianping Wang Town to join the army, led the South Taishan Governor, transferred to the Sima and the East China Sea Governor, and entered Beijing as a Tsunzhi Sanzhijishi.

古文：寻为晋熙王安西司马，加宁朔将军。
现代文：不久任晋熙王安西司马，加宁朔将军。
English: He was soon appointed as the king of Jinxi, Ansisima, and the general of Ganingshuo.

古文：时世祖为长史，与世隆相遇甚欢。
现代文：当时世但是长史，他与世坠交情很好。
English: At that time, he had a long history, and he had a good relationship with the world.

古文：太祖之谋渡广陵也，令世祖率众下，同会京邑，世隆与长流萧景先等戒严待期，事不行。
现代文：塞担计划渡庐陆，命世狙带人马顺水而下，在京邑会合，世竖和长流参军芦基先等警戒等待时机，计划没有成功。
English: The plan was not a success. The plan was to sail to the mainland, take people and horses along the water, meet in Beijing, and wait for the opportunity to join the army, and the plan did not succeed.

古文：是时朝廷疑惮沈攸之，密为之防，府州器械，皆有素蓄。
现代文：这时朝廷怀疑畏惧沈攸之，秘密进行戒备，府州的武器，平常都有积蓄。
English: At this time, the imperial court suspected and feared Shen Youzhi, secretly carried out the alert, Fuzhou weapons, usually have savings.

古文：世祖将下都，刘怀珍白太祖曰： 夏口是兵冲要地，宜得其人。 
现代文：世祖将下京都，刘怀趁对立担说： 夏旦是军事重地，应选适当的人镇守。 
English: The ancestor will go to Kyoto, Liu Huai took advantage of the opposition to say: Xia Dan is a military important place, the appropriate person should be selected to guard the town.

古文：太祖纳之，与世祖书曰： 汝既入朝，当须文武兼资人与汝意合者，委以后事，世隆其人也。 
现代文：太祖采纳了这个意见，给世祖写信说： 你既然入朝，要选个文武兼备又和你意见相合的人，把以后的事托付给他，世隆就是合适人选。 
English: The great-grandfather accepted this opinion and wrote to the grandfather saying: Since you have entered the imperial court, you should choose a person who is both literate and armed and who agrees with you, and entrust him with future matters. Shilong is the right person.

古文：世祖举世隆自代。
现代文：世祖荐世隆自代。
English: The ancestor recommended Shilong from generation to generation.

古文：转为武陵王前军长史、江夏内史、行郢州事。
现代文：后转任武陵王前军长史、江夏内史、行郢州事。
English: Later, he was transferred to Wuling Wang Qianjun Changshi, Jiangxia Inner History, and Xingye County Affairs.

古文：升明元年冬，攸之反，遣辅国将军中兵参军孙同、宁朔将军中兵参军武宝、龙骧将军骑兵参军朱君拔、宁朔将军沈惠真、龙骧将军骑兵参军王道起三万人为前驱，又遣司马冠军刘攘兵领宁朔将军外兵参军公孙方平、龙骧将军骑兵参军朱灵真、沈僧敬、龙骧将军高茂二万人次之，又遣辅国将军王灵秀、丁珍东、宁朔将军中兵参军王弥之、宁朔将军外兵参军杨景穆二千匹骑分兵出夏口，据鲁山。
现代文：升明元年冬，沈攸反叛，派辅国将军中兵参军孙同、宁朔将军中兵参军武宝、龙骧将军骑兵参军朱君拔、宁朔将军沈惠真、笼骧将军骑兵参军王道起率三万人作前锋，又派司马冠军刘攘兵领宁朔将军外兵参军公孙方平、龙骧将军骑兵参军朱灵真、沈僧敬、龙骧将军高茂率二万人马随后跟进，又派辅国将军王灵秀、丁珍东、宁朔将军中兵参军王弥之、宁朔将军外兵参军杨景穆统率二千骑兵分兵出夏口，占据鲁山。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Shen You rebelled and sent the auxiliary general soldiers to join the army Sun Tong, the Ningshuo general soldiers to join the army Wu Bao, the Longjing general cavalry soldiers to join the army Zhu Junba, the Ningshuo general Shen Huizhen, the Nongshuo general cavalry soldiers to join the army Wang Dao, with a starting rate of 30,000 as the vanguard, and also sent the Sima champion Liu Jiao soldiers to lead the Ningshuo general foreign soldiers to join the army Gongsun Fangping, the Longjing general cavalry soldiers to join the army Zhu Lingzhen, Shen So Jing,

古文：攸之乘轻舸从数百人先大军下住白螺洲，坐胡床以望其军，有自骄色。
现代文：攸之乘着快船领敷百人在大军前面驻扎于白螺洲，坐在胡床上望着他的军队，面带自得之色。
English: Yau Zhi took a fast boat and led a hundred men to be stationed in front of the large army in Bai Naushou. He sat on a goose bed and looked at his army with a self-satisfied expression.

古文：既至郢，以郢城弱小不足攻，遣人告世隆曰： 被太后令，当暂还都。
现代文：已到郢城，认为旦啦力量弱小不值得攻打，派人告诫世隆说： 奉太后命令，要暂时回京都。
English: Having arrived at Shicheng, he thought that it was not worth attacking if the force was too weak, so he sent someone to warn Shiro, saying, "I have been ordered by the Empress Dowager to temporarily return to Kyoto.

古文：卿既相与奉国，想得此意。 
现代文：你既是共同辅国，应想得到这其中的意思。 
English: As a co-subsidiary country, you should get the meaning of this.

古文：世隆使人答曰： 东下之师，久承声问。郢城小镇，自守而已。 
现代文：世隆派人回覆说： 东下的大军，早就承蒙你照顾，郢城是个小城，衹不过能自保而已。 
English: Shilong sent a reply saying, "The large army moving eastward has long been taken care of by you. Lucheng is a small city, but it can only protect itself.

古文：攸之将去，世隆遣军于西渚挑战，攸之果怒，令诸军登岸烧郭邑，筑长围攻道，顾谓人曰： 以此攻城，何城不克！ 
现代文：攸之要离开，世隆派兵到西渣挑战，土蝗果然发怒，令众军上岸烧了外城，筑起工事来进攻，他看着身边人说： 凭这样的强大实力来攻城，什么城攻不破! 
English: Yue Zhi wanted to leave, Shilong sent troops to challenge Xi Jia, and the locusts got angry and made the troops go ashore, burn the outer city, and build up construction to attack. He looked around and said: With such a strong strength to attack the city, what city can not be broken!

古文：昼夜攻战，世隆随宜拒应，众皆披却。
现代文：日夜攻城，世坠随机应变进行抵抗，敌众都败退了。
English: They attacked the city day and night, Shihang randomly resisted, and the enemy retreated.

古文：世祖初下，与世隆别，曰： 攸之一旦为变，焚夏口舟舰沿流而东，则坐守空城，不可制也。
现代文：世祖当初回京时，与世隆辞别，说： 牧之一旦作乱，如果烧了夏旦的船只沿江束下，就会坐守空城，不可遏制了。
English: When Shizuo returned to Beijing, he said goodbye to Shiro, saying, "If I start a riot one day, if I burn the ships of Shadan along the river, I will be sitting guarding the empty city. I can't be contained."

古文：虽留攻城，不可卒拔。
现代文：即便留下来让他们攻城，也不能一时攻下。
English: Even if you stay and let them attack the city, you can't capture it all at once.

古文：卿为其内，我为其外，乃无忧耳。 
现代文：你为内应，我为外援，就不担心了。 
English: If you are for domestic aid and I am for foreign aid, then there is no need to worry.

古文：至是，世祖遣军主桓敬、陈胤叔、苟元宾等八军据西塞，令坚壁以待贼疲。
现代文：到这时世担派军主担塑、睫凰赵、苞五宾等八军据守西塞，命坚守等待贼众疲惫。
English: At this time, the world sent eight armies, including the main army, Shaping, Mianhuangzhao, and Zou Wubin, to defend Xisai and wait for the thieves to get tired.

古文：虑世隆危急，遣腹心胡元直潜使入郢城通援军消息，内外并喜。
现代文：他怕世隆危急，派心腹胡元直偷偷地到郢城诵报援军的消息，内外都很高兴。
English: Fearing that Shilong was in danger, he sent his confidant Hu Yuanzhi to secretly go to Lucheng to recite the news of the reinforcements. Both inside and outside were very happy.

古文：尚书符曰：
现代文：还写封信给他说：
English: He also wrote to him:

古文：沈攸之出自垅亩，寂寥累世，故司空沈公以从父宗荫，爱之若子，羽翼吹嘘，得升官次。
现代文：沈攸之平民出身，几代人都默默无闻。故司空沈公以叔父的关系，爱之如子，为他吹嘘，才得了官。
English: Shen You's birth as a commoner went unnoticed for several generations. Therefore, it was only by boasting of his unclely relationship and his love for his son that Siku Sheng became an official.

古文：景和昏悖，猜畏柱臣，而攸之凶忍，趣利乐祸，请衔诏旨，躬行反噬。
现代文：景和帝昏庸，猜忌重臣，而攸之凶恶残忍，又逐利乐祸，得到诏旨，便反口咬人。
English: Jing and the emperor are dim-witted, suspicious of the chief minister, while Yue is vicious and cruel, and pursues profit and pleasure, and when he gets the edict, he bites back.

古文：又攸之与谭金、童泰壹等暴宠狂朝，并为心膂，同功共体，世号 三侯 ，当时亲昵，情过管、鲍。仰遭革运，凶党惧戮，攸之反善图全，用得自免。
现代文：又有一事，攸之和谭金、童泰壹等人因狂暴得宠，都是心腹，同一类型，世人称为 三侯 。其交往亲密如同管仲和鲍叔牙，遭逢变革时，凶徒惧怕诛杀，攸之为了求得保全自己而翻脸，因而自己得免于祸。
English: Another thing is that Yuanzhi and Tanjin, Tongtai1 and others who are favored for their violence are all confidants, the same type, known to the world as the three princes. Their relationship is as close as Guanzhong and Baozhuya. When confronted with change, the criminals are afraid to fight and kill. Yuanzhi turned his face in order to protect himself, so he was spared from disaster.

古文：既杀从父，又虐良朋，虽吕布贩君，郦寄卖友，方之斯人，未足为酷。
现代文：已杀死叔父，又虐待好友。即使像吕布那样出卖主人，像郦寄那样出卖朋友，比起这个人，那还算不得残酷。
English: He had killed his uncle and abused his best friend. Even if he betrayed his master like Lü Bu and his friend like Mei Ying, it would not be cruel compared to this man.

古文：泰始开辟，网漏吞舟，略其凶险，取其搏噬，故阶乱获全，因祸兴福。
现代文：泰始帝即位之初，宽大无比，忽视了他的凶险，衹取他能反击丁政敌，所以他因乱得到保全，因祸得福。
English: At the beginning of his reign, Emperor Taishi was extremely generous, ignored his perilous danger, and took advantage of his ability to fight back against Ding's political enemies, so he was protected by chaos and blessed by misfortune.

古文：攸之禀性空浅，躁而无谋。浓湖土崩，本非己力；彭城、下邳，望旗宵遁，再弃王师，久应肆法。值先帝宥其回溪之耻，冀有封崤之捷，故得幸会推迁，频烦显授，内端戎禁，外绥万里。
现代文：攸之性格虚伪浅薄，急躁无谋，浓湖溃败，本不是他自己的力量强，在彭城、下邳，看到战旗就连夜逃走，两次丢了大军私自逃跑，早应论以军法，正是先帝原谅他在回溪的耻辱，希望他还有封崤一样的胜利，所以才能侥幸得到升迁，连连授予显赫的职权，对内掌管禁军，对外管理万里。
English: Yuanzhi's character was hypocritical, shallow, hasty and reckless. The defeat of the thick lake was not his own strength. In Pengcheng and Jiaozuo, when he saw the battle flag, he fled overnight. Twice he lost a large army and ran away. It is time to talk about military law. It was the former emperor who forgave him the shame of Huixi. I hope he still has the same victory as the seal. That is why he was able to get a promotion by chance. He was repeatedly granted prominent powers, controlling the forbidden army internally and managing thousands of miles externally.

古文：圣去鼎湖，远颁顾命，托寄崇深，义感金石。
现代文：圣主驾崩时，远颁顾命，委托重任，寄予厚望，情义能感动金石。
English: When the saint passed away, he gave his life, entrusted heavy responsibilities, and placed high hopes on Jinshi. Jinshi was moved by his feelings.

古文：而攸之始奉国讳，喜形于颜，普天同哀，己以为庆。
现代文：但攸之一听到先帝驾崩，就喜形于色，在整个国家都沉浸在哀痛中的时候，他却自以为喜。
English: However, once he heard that the former emperor had passed away, he was overjoyed. While the entire country was immersed in sorrow, he thought he was happy.

古文：累登蕃岳，自郢迁荆。
现代文：屡次担任方面大员，从郢迁荆。
English: He has repeatedly served as a member of the Provincial Party Committee, and has been transferred from Xing to Jing.

古文：晋熙王以皇弟代镇，地尊望重，攸之断割候迎，肆意陵略。
现代文：晋熙王凭着皇弟的资格前去继任，地位名望很高，攸之既不候迎，又肆意地掠夺。
English: King Jinxi succeeded to the throne as the younger brother of the emperor. His status and reputation were very high, and he was neither welcomed nor plundered.

古文：料择士马，简算器械，权拨精锐，并取自随。郢城所留，十不遗一。
现代文：清点兵马、器械，选拔精锐，由自己带走，留在郢城的不到十分之一。
English: Less than one-tenth of the soldiers, horses, and equipment were taken away by themselves, leaving less than one-tenth of the city.

古文：专恣卤夺，罔顾国典。
现代文：专横恣肆，无视国法。
English: Arbitrary and capricious, ignoring the law of the land.

古文：践荆已来，恒用奸数，既怀异志，兴造无端。
现代文：到荆州以后，常施奸谋，既怀异心，无端私立法规。
English: After arriving in Jingzhou, he often plotted treachery, harbored heresy, and arbitrarily made laws.

古文：乃蹙迫群蛮，骚扰山谷，扬声讨伐，尽户上丁；蚁聚郭邑，伺国衰盛，从来积年，求不解甲。遂四野百县，路无男人，耕田载租，皆驱女弱。
现代文：又逼迫蛮族各部落骚扰山谷，他扬言讨伐，尽量招兵，蚁聚城郊，等待国力衰弱的机会，有很多年兵不解甲，全境之内路上看不到男人，种田交租，都靠妇女。
English: He also forced the barbarian tribes to harass the valley. He threatened a crusade and tried to recruit soldiers. Ants gathered on the outskirts of the city, waiting for the opportunity to weaken the national strength. There were many soldiers who did not disarm, men could not be seen on the roads within the whole territory, and women were needed to pay rent for farming.

古文：自古酷虐，未闻于此。
现代文：自古以来的残酷暴虐的例子中，没听说有这样厉害的。
English: In the annals of cruelty and brutality, nothing like it has ever been heard of.

古文：昔岁桂阳内，宗庙阽危。
现代文：往年桂阳王叛乱，朝廷危急。
English: In previous years, King Guiyang rebelled, and the imperial court was in a critical situation.

古文：攸之任官上流，兵强地广，勤王之举，实宜悉行；裁遣羸弱，不满三千，至郢州禀受节度，欲令判否之日，委罪晋熙。
现代文：攸之在上游镇守，兵强地广，实应立即起兵勤王。可是他衹选派老弱人马，不到三千，到郢州接受指挥，想如果追究罪责时，就把责任推给晋熙王。
English: However, he chose to send less than three thousand old and weak soldiers to Zhangzhou to receive command, thinking that if he was held accountable, he would shift the blame to King Jinxi.

古文：招诱剑客，羁绊行侣，窜叛入境，辄加拥护，逋亡出界，必遣穷追。
现代文：收买剑客武士，阻止行人。因叛变而流窜入境的就加以保护，逃跑出境的定派人穷追。
English: He bribed samurai swordsmen and stopped pedestrians. He protected those who fled into the country as a result of the mutiny, and hunted down those who fled out of the country.

古文：视吏若雠，遇民如草，峻太半之赋，暴参夷之刑，鞭棰国士，全用虏法。一人逃亡，阖宗捕逮。
现代文：视朝廷官员如仇人，看待百姓像小草。征收一大半的钱物为赋税，用野蛮的酷刑。鞭挞贤士采用北虏的法律，一人逃跑逮捕全族。
English: Regard the imperial officials as enemies, treat the people like grass. Collect more than half of the money and goods as taxes, use barbaric torture. Whip the sages using the laws of the North, one person escapes and arrests the whole family.

古文：皇朝赦令，初不遵奉，旷荡之泽，长隔彼州，人怀怨望，十室而九。
现代文：皇上的赦令从不执行，朝廷的浩荡恩泽永远到不了那裹。人们镶有怨愤的，十家就有九家。
English: The emperor's pardon order is never carried out, and the vast grace of the imperial court can never reach there. If people are filled with resentment, there are nine families out of ten.

古文：今乃举兵内侮，奸回外炽，斯实恶熟罪成之辰，决痈溃疽之日。
现代文：现在竟然起兵作乱，奸谋暴露，遣确是恶贯满盈的时候，是拔除这个癣疽的时候。
English: It is time to root out this gangrene, now that it has gone so far as to raise an army to create turmoil and expose the evil plot.

古文：幕府过荷朝寄，义百常愤，董御元戎，龚行天罚。
现代文：各幕府蒙朝廷大恩，怀着百倍义愤，统率大军，代上天讨伐罪人。
English: Each shogunate received a great favor from the imperial court, and with a hundredfold righteous indignation, led a large army to fight sinners on behalf of heaven.

古文：今遣新除使持节督郢州司州之义阳诸军事平西将军郢州刺史闻喜县开国侯黄回、员外散骑常侍辅国将军骁骑将军重安县开国子军主王敬则、屯骑校尉长寿县开国男军主王宜与、屯骑校尉陈承叔、右军将军葛阳县开国男彭文之、骠骑行参军振武将军邵宰，精甲二万，冲其首旆。
现代文：现派新任使持节郢州司州的义阳诸军事平西将军郢州刺史闻喜县开国侯黄回、员外散骑常侍辅国将军骁骑将军重安县开国子军主王敬则、屯骑校尉长寿听开国男军主王宜与、屯骑校尉陈承叔、右军将军葛阳县开国男彭文之、骠骑行参军振武将军邰宰率精兵二万人，作为前锋。
English: The newly-appointed envoys are now sent to hold the festival, the Yiyang military of the Yizhou Division of the State, the Pingxi General of the State, the Shishi of the State, the Huang Hui of the County of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the State of the

古文：又遣散骑常侍游击将军湘南县开国男吕安国、持节宁朔将军越州刺史孙昙瓘、屯骑校尉宁朔将军崔慧景、宁朔将军左军将军新亭侯任候伯、龙骧将军虎贲中郎将尹略、屯骑校尉南城令曹虎头、辅国将军骁骑将军萧顺之、新除宁朔将军游击将军下邳县开国子垣崇祖等，舳舻二万，骆驿继迈。
现代文：又派散骑常侍游击将军湘南县开国男吕安国、持节宁朔将军越州刺史孙昙罐、屯骑校尉宁朔将军崔慧景、宁朔将军左军将军新亭侯任候伯、龙骧将军虎贲中郎将尹略、屯骑校尉南城令曹虎头、辅国将军骁骑将军萧顺之、新任宁朔将军游击将军下邳县开国子垣崇祖等人，带领战舰二万，陆续出发。
English: He also dispatched the cavalier-in-waiting, the guerrilla general Lu An Guo, the founding son of Shonan County, the long-serving Ningshuo general Yue Zhou Shi Sun Qian Can, the cavalry colonel Ningshuo general Cui Hui Jing, the general of the left army of Ningshuo general Xinting Hou Ren Huo Bo, the long-serving cavalry captain Nancheng commander Cao Houtou, the adjutant general, the cavalry general Xiao Shun Zhi, the newly appointed Ningshuo general, the guerrilla general of the lower part of Shonan

古文：又遣屯骑校尉苟元宾、抚军参军郭文考、抚军中兵参军程隐俊、奉朝请诸袭光等，轻艓一万，截其津要。
现代文：又派屯骑校尉苟元宾、抚军参军郭文考、抚军中兵参军程隐俊、奉朝请诸袭光等人，率领快船一万只，截断渡口要道。
English: He also sent the cavalry lieutenant Gou Yuanbin, the military attaché of Fuzhou, Guo Wenkao, the military attaché of Fuzhou, the military attaché of Fuzhou, Cheng Yinjun, the military attaché of Fuzhou, the military attaché of Fuzhou, and others to lead 10,000 fast boats to cut off the main road of the ferry.

古文：骁骑将军周盘龙、后将军成买、辅国将军王敕勤、屯骑校尉王洪范等，铁骑五千，步道继进，先据陆路，断其走伏。
现代文：骁骑将军周盘龙、后将军成买、辅国将军王来勤、屯骑校尉王洪范等人，率骑兵五千，从陆路跟进，先占据陆路，截断他们的逃路。
English: The cavalry general Zhou Panlong, the rear admiral Chengmai, the auxiliary general Wang Laiqin, the cavalry lieutenant Wang Hongfan and others, led by five thousand cavalry, followed from the land route, occupied the land route first, and cut off their escape route.

古文：持节、督雍梁二州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡诸军事、征虏将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史、襄阳县开国侯、新除镇军将军张敬儿，志节慷慨，卷甲樊、邓，水步俱驰，破其巢窟。
现代文：持节、督雍梁二州以及郢州的竟陵和司州的随郡诸军事、征虏将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史、襄阳县开国侯、新任镇军将军张敬儿，斗志昂扬，尽率樊、邓两地人马，水陆并进，攻破他们的老巢。
English: The military, the conscript generals, the Ningban lieutenant, the Yongzhou prince, the founding prince of Xiangyang County, and the newly appointed township army general Zhang Jing'er, who held the festival, the governor of Yongliang and the two prefectures as well as the Jingling in Zhangzhou and the Suizhong in Jizhou, marched forward to break through their nests.

古文：持节、督司州诸军事、征虏将军、司州刺史、领义阳太守、范阳县侯姚道和，义烈梗概，投袂方隅，风驰电掩，袭其辎重。
现代文：持节、督司州诸军事、征虏将军、司州刺史、领义阳太守、范阳县侯姚道和，忠烈慷慨，挥袖而起，如风驰电掣，袭击他们的辎重。
English: Ji Jie, the military governor of Zhoushu, the conscript general, the governor of Zhoushu, the governor of Yiyang, and the governor of Fanyang County, Hou Yao Daohe, are loyal and generous, and they rise up like the wind and lightning, attacking their heavy burdens.

古文：万里建旍，四方飞旆，莫不总率众师，云翔雷动。人神同愤，远迩并心。
现代文：四面八方万里战旗飘飘，无不率领军队而来，如云掩如雷霆震怒，人神共愤，远近同心。
English: In all directions, thousands of battle flags flutter, all leading the army to come, like clouds, like thunder and fury, people and gods are indignant, far and near are the same.

古文：今皇上圣明，将相仁爱，约法三章，宽刑缓赋，年登岁阜，家给人足，上有惠民之泽，下无乐乱之心。
现代文：今皇上圣明，将相仁爱，约法三章，宽刑罚薄赋税，年成好，家家富足，皇上有恩惠百姓之实，百姓无作乱之心。
English: Now the emperor is a saint, he will be benevolent and loving to each other, there will be three chapters of the law, the punishment will be lenient and the tax will be light, the year will be good, the family will be rich, the emperor will have the grace of the people, and the people will not have the heart to make trouble.

古文：攸之不识天时，妄图大逆，举无名之师，驱雠怨之众，是以朝野审其易取，含识判其成禽。
现代文：攸之不明天时，妄想乱国，发动没有正义的军队，指挥着心裹有怨气的人众，因此朝廷内外都清楚知道这种叛军是容易击破的，有见识的人断定他将被擒拿。
English: Since he has no idea of the future, has delusions of overthrowing the country, has raised an army without justice, and commands a people whose hearts are filled with bitterness, it is clear both inside and outside the court that this rebel army is easy to defeat, and people with insight are certain that he will be arrested.

古文：彼土士民，罹毒日久，今复相逼迫，投赴锋刃。
现代文：那地方的军民受他毒害的时间久，现在又逼迫他们奔向刀枪之下。
English: He has long poisoned the military and civilian population of that region, and now he is forcing them to run toward the sword and gun.

古文：交战之日，兰艾难分，去就在机，望思先晓。无使一人迷疑，而九族就祸也。
现代文：战斗时，好坏难分，是离开还是留下，希望早些觉醒，不要使得一个人被迷惑，九族受到牵连。
English: When fighting, it is difficult to distinguish between good and bad, whether to leave or stay, I hope to wake up earlier, do not let one person be confused, and the nine tribes be implicated.

古文：弘宥之典，有如皎日。
现代文：原谅宽大的恩典，正像光明的太阳。
English: The tolerance of the court is as clear as the sun.

古文：郢城既不可攻，而平西将军黄回军至西阳，乘三层舰，作羌胡伎，溯流而进。
现代文：郢城既然不能攻下，而平西将军黄回的军队到了西阳，乘着三层的大舰，按羌胡的技术逆流前进。
English: Since Lucheng could not be captured, the army led by Pingxi General Huang Hui arrived in Xiyang, riding on a three-tiered large ship and advancing against the current according to the technology of Yabu.

古文：攸之素失人情，本逼以威力，初发江陵，已有叛者，至是稍多。
现代文：攸之平常对人没有恩情，一向是用武力逼迫，刚从江陵出发时已经有叛逃的，到这时渐渐多了。
English: Yuanzhi usually had no mercy on people, and always used force to persecute them. When he first set out from Gangneung, there were already defectors, but by this time there were gradually more.

古文：攸之日夕乘马历营抚慰，而去者不息。
现代文：攸之夜骑马到各营安抚，但开小差的还是不断。
English: On the night of Yue, he rode to each battalion to pacify them, but the desertions continued.

古文：攸之大怒，召诸军主曰： 我被太后令，建义下都，大事若克，白纱帽共著耳；如其不振，朝廷自诛我百口，不关余人。
现代文：攸之大怒，召来众军主说： 我奉太后的命令，以大义束下京都，大事如果能成功，白纱帽咱们都有得戴了；如果这次不成功，朝廷自然是杀我家百口，与其他的人无关。
English: Enraged, Yuasa summoned all the generals and said, "I have received an order from the Empress Dowager to take control of Kyoto in the name of justice. If this great undertaking succeeds, we will all have to wear white caps. If it does not succeed this time, the Imperial Court will naturally kill 100 members of my family, and it will have nothing to do with anyone else.

古文：比军人叛散，皆卿等不以为意。
现代文：近来军士逃散，都怪你们不负责任。
English: Recently, officers and men have been defecting in droves, and it's all because you haven't done your best.

古文：我亦不能问叛身，自今军中有叛者，军主任其罪。 
现代文：我也不能责罚已逃的人，从今天起军中如果有叛逃的，由军主来担当罪责。 
English: I can't chase them down one by one. From today, the army sergeant fled, and the army commander took the blame.

古文：于是一人叛，遣十人追，并去不反。
现代文：于是一人逃跑，派十个人去追，结果都不回来。
English: So one of them ran away and sent ten men after him, but none of them came back.

古文：莫敢发觉，咸有异计。
现代文：没有人敢报告，都有另外的打算。
English: No one dares to report it, they all have other plans.

古文：刘攘兵射书与世隆许降，世隆开门纳之。
现代文：刘攘压用箭把信射给世坠同意投降，要世隆开城放他进去。
English: Liu Shaoqin used an arrow to shoot a letter to Shiling, agreeing to surrender and asking Shilong to open the city and let him in.

古文：攘兵烧营而去，火起乃觉。
现代文：噩基烧了营帐离开，大火烧起来才知道。
English: Nightingale burned the camp and left, only to be discovered when the fire was out.

古文：攸之怒，衔须咀之。
现代文：攸之发怒，口衔胡须咒骂他。
English: Yuasa's anger boils over and he curses him with his whiskers.

古文：收攘兵兄子天赐、女婿张平虑斩之。
现代文：捉到了攘兵哥哥的儿子天赐、女婿张平虑杀了。
English: He caught the son of his brother-in-arms, Heaven's Gift, and killed his son-in-law, Zhang Pingxian.

古文：军旅大散。
现代文：军队大量逃散。
English: The army fled in large numbers.

古文：攸之渡鲁山岸，犹有数十匹骑自随。
现代文：攸之渡江到鲁山岸，还有几十个人跟髓。
English: You cross the river to the bank of Lushan, and dozens of people follow you.

古文：宣令军中曰： 荆州城中大有钱，可相与还取，以为资粮。 
现代文：他向军队发令说： 荆州城中有很多钱财，可以一同去拿来，作为军资粮草。 
English: He issued an order to the troops, saying: There is a lot of money in Jingzhou City, you can go and get it together, as military supplies.

古文：郢城未有追军，而散军畏蛮抄，更相聚结，可二万人，随攸之，将至江陵，乃散。
现代文：郢城没有追兵，散军怕蛮族攻击，又集结在一起，共有二万人，跟着攸之，将到江陵，就逃散了。
English: There was no pursuit in Lucheng, and the scattered troops, fearing barbarian attacks, gathered together again, a total of twenty thousand people, and then fled to Gangneung.

古文：世隆乃遣军副刘僧驎道追之。
现代文：世隆派军副刘僧辚从路上追击。
English: Seirong sent his deputy Liu Son Gung to chase them down the road.

古文：攸之已死，征为侍中。
现代文：攸之死后，世隆被召为侍中。
English: After the death of Yuasa, Shiro was called to be an attendant.

古文：仍迁尚书右仆射，封贞阳县侯，邑二千户。
现代文：又升任尚书右仆射，封为贞阳县侯，食邑二千户。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Shangshu Yuhudu Sha, and was named the lord of Zhengyang County, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：出为左将军、吴郡太守，加秩中二千石。
现代文：出京任左将军、吴郡太守，增加俸禄到二千石。
English: He was appointed General of the Left and Governor of Wu County, and his salary was increased to 2,000 koku.

古文：丁母忧。
现代文：因守母丧回家。
English: Every mother's death is sad.

古文：太祖践阼，起为使持节、都督南豫司二州诸军事、平南将军、南豫州刺史，进爵为公。
现代文：太祖登位时，起用他为使持节、都督南豫州司州两州诸军事、平南将军、南豫州刺史，晋升为公爵。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he was appointed as the envoy, the military governor of South Yuzhou, the military governor of the two states, the general of Pingnan and the historian of South Yuzhou, and was promoted to the duke.

古文：上手诏与司徒褚渊曰： 向见世隆毁瘠过甚，殆欲不可复识，非直使人恻然，实亦世珍国宝也。 
现代文：皇上下手韶给司徒褚渊说： 以前看到世隆太瘦弱，几乎不能再认识他了，不仅使人伤心，他实在也是国家的珍宝。 
English: The Emperor and Empress gave the bracelet to Stubbs and said, "When I saw Shilong before, he was so thin and frail that I could hardly recognize him anymore. This not only made me sad, but he is truly a national treasure.

古文：渊答曰： 世隆至性纯深，哀过乎礼。
现代文：褚渊回答说： 世隆很孝顺，哀伤超过了礼仪。
English: Gongyuan replied, "Shirong is very filial, and his grief exceeds the etiquette.

古文：事陛下在危尽忠，丧亲居忧，杖而后起，立人之本，二理同极。加荣增宠，足以厉俗敦风。 
现代文：对陛下能在危难中尽忠，守母丧尽孝尽哀，忠与孝逭两项作人之本都到了极致，不仅个人可以增加荣耀，而且可以移风易俗。 
English: For His Majesty to be able to be loyal in the face of adversity, to be able to mourn the loss of his mother, and to be able to be both loyal and filial are the ultimate qualities of a person. Not only can individuals increase their glory, but they can also change their customs.

古文：建元二年，进号安南将军。
现代文：建元二年，进号为安南将军。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, he was promoted to General Annan.

古文：是时虏寇寿阳，上敕世隆曰： 历阳城大，恐不可卒治，正宜断隔之，深为保固。
现代文：这时北虏侵犯寿阳，皇上命令世隆： 历阳城大，最怕不能很快治理好，正应把它隔断，好好坚守。
English: At this time, the Northern Ruthenians invaded Shouyang, and the emperor ordered Shilong: Liyang is a big city, and it is most afraid that it cannot be governed well soon. It should be cut off and well defended.

古文：处分百姓，若不将家守城，单身亦难可委信也。 
现代文：对待百姓，如果不让他们带家守城，单身在城裹难以相信他。 
English: If you don't let them take their families to defend the city, it's hard to believe him when he's single.

古文：寻又敕曰： 吾更历阳外城，若有贼至，即勒百姓守之，故应胜割弃也。 
现代文：接着又指示： 我增加历阳的外城，如果敌人攻来，就令百姓守卫，也应胜过被敌人占去。 
English: Then he instructed: I will increase the outlying towns of Liyang, and if the enemy attacks, I will have the people guard them, and they should also prevail over being occupied by the enemy.

古文：垣崇祖既破虏，上欲罢并二豫，敕世隆曰： 比思江西萧索，二豫两办为难。
现代文：垣崇祖已打败北虏，皇上想合并南北豫州，命令世隆： 近来想到江西情况不好，两个豫州也不好处理。
English: Emperor Qianlong wanted to merge North and South Henan, and ordered Shilong: Recently, I thought that the situation in Jiangxi Province was not good, and the two Henan Provinces were not easy to handle.

古文：议者多云省一足一于事为便。
现代文：谈论时多数主张撤掉一个合并到另一个上，办事方便。
English: During the discussion, the majority advocated that one should be removed and merged into the other to make things easier.

古文：吾谓非乃乖谬。
现代文：我想这也不蜡。
English: I don't think it's wax either.

古文：卿以为云何？
现代文：你认为怎样?
English: What do you think?

古文：可具以闻。 
现代文：可详细告诉我。 
English: You can tell me in detail.

古文：寻授后将军、尚书右仆射，不拜。
现代文：接着授予他为后将军、尚书右仆射，他没接受。
English: He was then given the post of rear admiral, but he did not accept.

古文：世隆性爱涉猎，启太祖借秘阁书，上给二千卷。
现代文：世隆爱读书，向太祖请求借秘阁藏书，皇上赐二千卷。
English: Shilong loved to read and asked his great-grandfather to lend him some books from his private library. The emperor gave him two thousand volumes.

古文：三年，出为使持节、督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、安北将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：三年，出京任使持节、督南宠兖徐青冀五州军事、安北将军、南兖州刺史。
English: Three years later, he went to Beijing and was appointed as the envoy of the Jisi Festival, the governor of the five military provinces of the South, the general of the North, and the governor of the South.

古文：江北畏虏寇，搔动不安。
现代文：江北害怕北虏进犯，骚动不安。
English: Jiangbei was afraid of the North Korean invasion and was uneasy about the turmoil.

古文：上敕世隆曰： 比有北信，贼犹治兵在彭城，年已垂尽，或当未必送死。
现代文：皇上命令世隆说： 近来有北方的消息说，贼首还在彭城练兵，现在已到年末，或许不一定来送死。
English: The emperor ordered Shilong to say, "Recently, there is news from the north that the thief's head is still training soldiers in Pengcheng. Now that it is the end of the year, it may not necessarily be sent to death.

古文：然豺狼不可以理推，为备或不可懈。
现代文：但是豺狼的本性不能以理来推测，故防备不能松懈。
English: But the nature of the jackal cannot be deduced by reason, so the guard cannot be relaxed.

古文：发民治之，无嫌。若作三千人食者，已有几米？
现代文：那城池并不险峻，因而应设关卡，使城离金城三十丈正好，征用百姓修筑，不要怕。假定用三千人，又能食用多少呢?
English: That city is not precipitous, so checkpoints should be set up so that the city is exactly 30 heights away from the Golden City. Don't be afraid to requisition the people to build it. Assuming it takes three thousand people, how much can it eat?

古文：可指牒付信还。民间若有丁多而细口少者，悉令戍，非疑也。 
现代文：可把牒文交给信使带回，民间如有成年男子多但小孩少的家庭，全都征用戍守，不要迟疑。 
English: You can give the ultimatum to the messenger and bring it back. If there are more adult men but fewer children in the family, all of them will be requisitioned. Don't hesitate.

古文：又敕曰： 昨夜得北使启，钟离间贼已渡淮，既审送死，便当制加剿扑。
现代文：又命令： 昨夜得到北使奏报，钟离一带的贼寇已渡过进。既然侦知他们确是要来送死，就当剿灭。
English: He also ordered: Last night, we received a report from the Northern Envoy that the bandits in the vicinity of Zhongli have crossed over. Since we have discovered that they really want to send us to death, we should annihilate them.

古文：卿好参候之，有急令诸小戍还镇，不可贼至不觉也。
现代文：你好好筹划这事，有紧急情况就命令小股戍守部队集结到城裹防守，不要敌人来了还不知道。
English: You should plan this matter well, and if there is an emergency, order the small detachment of garrison troops to assemble to defend the city. Don't know if the enemy is coming.

古文：贼既过淮，不容迩退散，要应有处送死者，定攻寿阳，吾当遣援军也。 
现代文：敌人既然渡过淮水，不能让他们这样白白回去，要狠狠地惩治这些来送死的，如果他们攻打画腥，我会派遣援军。 
English: Since the enemy has crossed the Huai River, we can't let them go back for nothing. We must severely punish those who sent them to their deaths. If they attack the Qiaohai, I will send reinforcements.

古文：又遣军助世隆，并给军粮。
现代文：又派军队支援世隆，并发运军粮。
English: It also sent troops to support Shilong and transported military food.

古文：虏退，上欲土断江北，又敕世隆曰： 吕安国近在西，土断郢、司二境上杂民，大佳，民始无惊恐。
现代文：北虏退去后，皇上准备在江北实行土断法，又指示世隆说： 吕安国近日在西边土断郢、司两州境内的流动人，效果很好，百姓几乎没有惊慌。
English: After the retreat of the Northern Hordes, the emperor prepared to implement the law of land separation in the north of the Yangtze River, and also instructed Shilong to say: Recently, Lu'an has broken the land barrier in the west and separated the floating people in the territory of the two states. The effect is very good, and the people are hardly panicked.

古文：近又令垣豫州断其州内，商得崇祖启事，已行竟，近无云云，殊称前代旧意。
现代文：近日又令垣豫州在州内实行土断，刚得到宋担的奏报，已经实行完毕，近来没有异常情况，特别说明这是前代就有的老规矩。
English: Recently, Lingqi Yuzhou has also implemented the land cut in the state, and has just received the report from Song Tan. The implementation has been completed, and there have been no abnormal conditions recently. It is particularly clear that this is an old rule from the previous generation.

古文：卿视兖部中可行此事不？若无所扰，春便就手也。 
现代文：你看在兖蛆能否施行这事，如果没有惊扰，春季你就动手做吧。 
English: See if you can do it in the spring if there are no surprises.

古文：其见亲委如此。
现代文：他被信任到了这种程度。
English: He was trusted to that extent.

古文：世祖即位，加散骑常侍。
现代文：世祖即位，加官散骑常侍。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascends the throne, and the officials and equestrian attendants leave.

古文：世隆善卜，别龟甲，价至一万。
现代文：世隆善于占卜，置办的龟甲，价值达一万钱。
English: Shilong is good at divination. The tortoise shell he bought is worth 10,000 yuan.

古文：永明建号，世隆题州斋壁曰 永明十一年 ，谓典签李当曰： 我不见也。 
现代文：永明建元时，世隆在州裹斋壁上写着 永明十一年 。对典签李党说： 我是看不到的。 
English: At the time of Yongming Jianyuan, Shilong wrote "11th year of Yongming" on the state-wrapped prayer wall. To the signature, Li Dang said: I can't see it.

古文：入为侍中、护军将军，迁尚书右仆射，领太子右率，雍州大中正，不拜，改授散骑常侍，尚书左仆射，中正如故。
现代文：入京为侍中、护军将军，升尚书右仆射，领太子右率，雍州大中正，他辞谢了。改授散骑常侍，尚书左仆射，中正的职务不变。
English: He entered Beijing as an attendant and escort general, was promoted to Shangshu right servant and shot, led the prince to the right, and Yongzhou University junior high school, he resigned. He was re-awarded as a horseback riding attendant, Shangshu left servant and shot, and the position of the junior high school did not change.

古文：湘州蛮动，遣世隆以本官总督伐蛮众军，仍为使持节、都督湘州诸军事、镇南将军、湘州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：湘州蛮族骚乱，派世隆本官总督讨蛮诸军。仍为使持节、都督湘州诸军事、镇南将军、翅州刺史，常侍一职不变。
English: When the Hunan barbarians rioted, Shilong sent his own official, the governor, to fight the barbarian army. He is still the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Hunan, the general of Zhenan, and the historian of Yingzhou, and his position as a regular attendant remains unchanged.

古文：世隆至镇，以方略讨平之。
现代文：世隆到任，以其方略平定了骚乱。
English: When Shillong took office, he managed to quell the unrest.

古文：在州立邸治生，为中丞庾杲之所奏，诏原不问。
现代文：在州裹建官邸置产业，被中丞庾杲之弹劾，皇上下诏不予追究。
English: He built an official residence and property in the state and was impeached by the middle-ranking general, but the emperor did not pursue the matter.

古文：复入为尚书左仆射，领卫尉，不拜。
现代文：后又入京任尚书左仆射，领卫尉，他未接受。
English: After that, he entered Beijing as the second-in-command of the Imperial Guards, but he did not accept.

古文：仍转尚书令。
现代文：又转任尚书令。
English: He was also transferred to Shang Shuling.

古文：世隆少立功名，晚专以谈义自业。
现代文：世隆年轻时建立功名，晚年专门以谈论玄理为事。
English: When he was young, Shilong made a name for himself. In his later years, he devoted himself to talking about metaphysics.

古文：善弹琴，世称柳公双璅，为士品第一。
现代文：会弹琴，世人称堑险的琴艺是读书人中的第一等。
English: Can play the piano, the world is said to be the first among readers.

古文：常自云马槊第一，清谈第二，弹琴第三。
现代文：他自己常说兵马第一，清谈第二，弹琴第三。
English: He himself often said that soldiers and horses come first, plain talk second, and playing the piano third.

古文：在朝不干世务，垂帘鼓琴，风韵清远，甚获世誉。
现代文：在朝不参与政务，衹是垂帘弹琴而已，风度气韵清淡致远，很得世人称誉。
English: In the morning, he did not participate in government affairs, but only played the piano. His demeanor was light and far-reaching, and he was highly praised by the world.

古文：以疾逊位，改授侍中，卫将军，不拜，转左光禄大夫，侍中如故。
现代文：因病辞职，改授侍中，卫将军，不受，转任左光禄大夫，侍中职务不变。
English: He resigned due to illness and was re-assigned to the position of Vice-Admiral of the Imperial Guard, but was not accepted. He was transferred to the position of Doctor of the Left Hand, and his position as Vice-Admiral of the Imperial Guard remained unchanged.

古文：九年，卒，时年五十。
现代文：九年，去世，终年五十岁。
English: He died nine years later, at the age of fifty.

古文：诏给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱一十万，布三百匹，蜡三百斤。
现代文：皇上下诏赐给少府置办的棺材，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱十万，布三百匹，蜡三百斤。
English: The coffin given to the young prefect by the emperor's edict, one set of court dress, one set of clothes, 100,000 yuan, 300 pieces of cloth, and 300 pounds of wax.

古文：又诏曰： 故侍中左光禄大夫贞阳公世隆，秉德居业，才兼经纬。
现代文：又下诏： 原侍中、左光禄大夫贞阳公世隆，依品德高尚从政，有经天纬地的才能。
English: He also issued the following edict: Zhengyang Gongsirong, a former chambermaid and doctor of the Left Guanglu School, is a person of high moral character who has been in politics and has the ability to travel across the world.

古文：少播清微，长弘美誉。
现代文：年轻时就传出好名声，年纪大了更是美名远扬。
English: When you're young, you have a good reputation, and when you're older, you're even more famous.

古文：入参内禁，出赞西牧，专寄郢郊，克挫巨猾，超越前勋，功著一代。
现代文：入朝任职，出京到西边治理地方，特别是在郢城外，挫败很狡猾的攸之，超过以前的功臣，功劳在当代很显著。
English: He served in the imperial court, went to Beijing to govern the western regions, especially outside the city of Handan, and defeated a very cunning warlord, surpassing the previous heroes, and his achievements are very significant in the contemporary era.

古文：及总任方州，民颂宽德，翼教崇闼，朝称元正。
现代文：到总管州郡时，百姓颂扬他的宽厚仁德，辅佐教化，在朝中可说是首位。
English: When he became the head of Guanzhou County, the people praised his generous benevolence and assistance to education, which was the first in the history of the dynasty.

古文：忠谟嘉猷，简于朕心，雅志素履，邈不可逾。
现代文：忠谋良策，合我的心意，向来志趣清淡心性高速，人不可及。
English: I am loyal and make good plans that suit my heart. I have always had a light heart and a high-speed mind, which is unattainable by others.

古文：将登铉味，用燮鸿化，奄至薨殒，震恸良深。赠司空，班剑三十人，鼓吹一部，侍中如故。
现代文：正要授予他三公高位，协理宏大的教化，却突然逝世，我深感悲伤震惊。追赠为司空，赐给班剑仪仗三十人，鼓吹一部，侍中职依旧。
English: I was deeply saddened and shocked when he suddenly passed away, just as he was about to be awarded the high rank of the Three Princes and the grand enlightenment of the co-principal. He was posthumously awarded the title of Siku, given the ceremonial sword of thirty people, preached a part, and the position of attendant was still the same.

古文：谥曰忠武。 
现代文：谧号忠武。 
English: His posthumous name was Tadatake.

古文：上又敕吏部尚书王晏曰： 世隆虽抱疾积岁，志气未衰，冀医药有效，痊差可期。不谓一旦便为异世，痛怛之深，此何可言。
现代文：皇卜又敕命吏部尚书王晏： 世隆虽然多年抱病，但志气没衰退，本希望医药有效，痊愈有曰，没想到一时就离开人世，深切的悲痛怎么说得尽。
English: Shang Shu Wang Yao, the official of the imperial edict and the official of the imperial edict: Although Shilong had been ill for many years, his morale had not declined. He had hoped that the medicine would be effective and he would be cured. One day, he did not expect to leave the world at once. How can I express my deep sorrow?

古文：其昔在郢，诚心夙悃，全保一蕃，勋业克著。寻准契阔，增泣悲咽。
现代文：他往年在郢城时，早就忠心耿耿，全力保卫朝廷，勋劳卓著，不想就离开了我们，更增人悲伤。
English: When he was in Lucheng in previous years, he had already been loyal and devoted to defend the imperial court with all his strength. He did an outstanding job. He left us without wanting to, which made us even sadder.

古文：卿同在情，亦当无已已耶！ 
现代文：你是相同情怀，也应是没有尽头的悲伤! 
English: You are the same feelings, should also be no end of sadness!

古文：世隆晓数术，于倪塘创墓，与宾客践履，十往五往，常坐一处。
现代文：世隆通晓术数，在倪塘与宾客寻址时，一次又一次，常坐在一个地方。
English: Shilong understands the art of numbers, and often sits in one place again and again when addressing guests in Niitang.

古文：及卒，墓正取其坐处焉。
现代文：等到他死后，坟墓正是选在他常坐的地方。
English: When he died, the grave was chosen to be the place where he used to sit.

古文：著《龟经秘要》二卷行于世。
现代文：其所著《龟经秘要》二卷流传世间。
English: His two-volume "Secrets of the Kame-kyo" has been passed down to the world.

古文：长子悦，早卒。
现代文：他的长子柳悦，死得早。
English: His eldest son, Liu Yue, died early.

古文：张瑰，字祖逸，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：张瓖，字祖逸，吴郡吴地人。
English: Zhang Qian, also known as Zu Yat, is a native of Wu County, Wuxi.

古文：祖裕，宋金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父名裕，曾任宋的金紫光禄大夫。
English: His grandfather was famous and once served as the Song Dynasty's Jin Zi Guanglu doctor.

古文：父永，右光禄大夫。晓音律，宋孝武问永以太极殿前钟声嘶，永答 钟有铜滓 。
现代文：父亲张丞，任右光禄大夫，通晓音乐，宋孝武帝问张永太极殿的前钟为何声音嘶哑，张永回答说是钟裹有铜渣。
English: Zhang Yong's father, Zhang Rong, was a doctor of Uguanglu and a connoisseur of music. Emperor Song Xiaowu asked Zhang Yong why the front bell of the Taiji Hall was hoarse. Zhang Yong replied that the bell was covered with copper slag.

古文：乃扣钟求其处，凿而去之，声遂清越。
现代文：于足敲着钟找到有渣的地方去掉渣，声音便清脆悠扬了。
English: By striking the bell with the foot to find the place where there is slag and remove the slag, the sound becomes crisp and melodious.

古文：瑰解褐江夏王太尉行参军，署外兵，随府转为太傅五官，为义恭所遇。迁太子舍人，中书郎，骠骑从事中郎，司徒右长史。
现代文：强蔓出仕任红夏至太尉行参军，部署外卫，随王府转任太傅五官。被江夏王盏恭宠遇，升为太子舍人，中书郎，骠骑从事中郎，司徒右长史。
English: Qiangman was promoted from the position of Red Xia to the position of Taifu to join the army, deployed as a foreign guard, and transferred to the position of Taifu five officials with the royal court. He was treated with respect by Jiang Xia Wangyan, and was promoted to the position of Prince's concubine, middle school teacher, middle school teacher engaged in horseback riding, and Szu U Changshi.

古文：初，永拒桂阳贼于白下，溃散，阮佃夫等欲加罪，太祖固申明之，瑰由此感恩自结。
现代文：起初，张永在白下抵抗桂阳的叛贼，被打败了，阮佃夫等要处罚他，拉邑坚持为他辩解，噩噩因此感恩追随左担。
English: At first, Zhang Yong resisted the traitors of Guiyang under the guise of white, and was defeated. Nguyn Văn and others wanted to punish him, while Lău Văn insisted on defending him. As a result, Đng Văn was grateful to the left shoulder.

古文：转通直散骑常侍，骁骑将军。
现代文：后转任通直散骑常侍，骁骑将军。
English: After that, he was transferred to the position of Tsuchida Sanzhiyori no Tsuneishi, Shoko no Shogun.

古文：遭父丧，还吴持服。
现代文：适逢父亲死，回吴服丧。
English: When his father died, he went back to Wu to mourn.

古文：升明元年，刘秉有异图，弟遐为吴郡，潜相影响。
现代文：升明元年，刘秉有贰心，他弟弟刘遐治吴郡，暗地通消息。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Liu Bing had an evil heart, and his brother, Liu Bingzhi, secretly communicated with Wu County.

古文：因沈攸之事起，聚众三千人，治攻具。
现代文：趁着沈攸之事发，也聚集了三千人马，置办进攻器械。
English: Taking advantage of Shen You's incident, they also gathered three thousand horses to purchase offensive equipment.

古文：太祖密遣殿中将军卞白龙令瑰取遐。
现代文：太祖密派殿中将军卞白龙令张瓖擒住刘遐。
English: Emperor Taizong sent the palace general Zou Bailong to order Zhang to arrest Liu Bei.

古文：诸张世有豪气，瑰宅中常有父时旧部曲数百。
现代文：张氏的人世代都有豪侠气概，张坏的家裹常有父亲的老部下数百人。
English: All generations of the Zhang family have a heroic spirit. Zhang Bao's family often has hundreds of his father's subordinates.

古文：遐召瑰，瑰伪受旨，与叔恕领兵十八人入郡，与防郡队主强弩将军郭罗云进中斋取遐，遐逾窗而走，瑰部曲顾宪子手斩之，郡内莫敢动者。
现代文：刘遐召见张瓖，张瓖假装听从旨意，与叔叔张恕带十八个人进郡，与防守郡的队主强弩将军郭罗云直到内堂擒刘遐，刘遐跳窗逃跑，张瓖的部下顾宪子斩了他，郡裹没有人敢动。
English: Liu Ye summoned Zhang Ye, Zhang Ye pretended to obey the order, and he and his uncle Zhang Shou took eighteen people into the county, and defended the county with the team leader Qiang Ye's general Guo Luoyun until Liu Ye jumped out of the window to escape, Zhang Ye's subordinates Gu Xianzi cut him, and no one dared to move in the county.

古文：献捷，太祖以告领军张冲，冲曰： 瑰以百口一掷，出手得卢矣。 
现代文：报告了胜利的消息，主担把这情况告诉领军亟过，亟韭说： 亟瓖凭着百来号人奋力一击，一出手就胜了。 
English: After reporting the news of the victory, the leader told the situation to the leading troops, saying, "With the efforts of hundreds of people, one blow, one shot will win."

古文：即授辅国将军、吴郡太守，封瑰义成县侯，邑千户。
现代文：当即授予辅国将军、吴郡太守的职务，封张壤为义成县侯，食邑千户。
English: He was immediately awarded the post of general of the auxiliary province and governor of Wu County, Zhangye County was named the county seat of Yicheng County, and thousands of households were provided with food.

古文：太祖故以嘉名锡之。
现代文：左担特别用好的名称赐给他。
English: The left shoulder was specially given a good name.

古文：除冠军将军、东海东莞二郡太守，不拜。
现代文：授予他冠军将军、东海东莞二郡的太守，他辞谢不受。
English: He was awarded the title of champion general and the governor of two counties of Dongguan in the East China Sea, and he did not accept his resignation.

古文：建元元年，增邑二百户。
现代文：建元元年，增食邑二百户。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, there were 200 households in Zengshui.

古文：寻改封平都。
现代文：接着改封平都。
English: It was then renamed Pingdu.

古文：迁侍中，加领步兵校尉。
现代文：升任侍中，加领步兵校尉。
English: He was promoted to Samurai Junior Officer and given the additional rank of Infantry Captain.

古文：二年，迁都官尚书，领校尉如故。
现代文：二年，升都官尚书，领校尉的职务未变。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to captain, but his position as captain remained unchanged.

古文：出为征虏将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：出京任征虏将军、吴兴太守。
English: Wu Xing, the governor-general, went to Beijing as a conscript general.

古文：三年，乌程令顾昌玄有罪，瑰坐不纠，免官。明年，为度支尚书。
现代文：三年，岛崔令顾昌玄有罪，张堕因为没惩治他而获罪，免除官职，第二年，任度支尚书。
English: In the third year, Gu Changxuan, the chief of Shima Cui Ling, was found guilty, Zhang Pei was found guilty of not punishing him and was relieved of his official duties, and in the second year, he was appointed to the position.

古文：世祖即位，为冠军将军、鄱阳王北中郎长史、襄阳相、行雍州府州事，随府转征虏长史。
现代文：世担即位，任冠军将军、鄱阳王北中郎长史、襄陨相、行壅丛府州事，又随王府转任征虏长史。
English: The world leader ascended to the throne, and was appointed champion general, the king of Shanyang, the king of Beichuan, the ruler of Changshi, the minister of meteorology, the governor of Xingyuan, and the governor of Congfu. He was also transferred to the position of the conqueror of Changshi with the royal court.

古文：四年，仍为持节、督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、辅国将军、雍州刺史，寻领宁蛮校尉。
现代文：四年，又升为持节、督雍梁南北秦四州旦泌的童堡塱业的瞳登军事、辅国将军、雍州刺史，接着又领宁蛮校尉。
English: In the fourth year, he was promoted to the military, the general of the auxiliary state, the Yongzhou chief historian, and then the captain of Ningban.

古文：还为左民尚书，领右军将军，迁冠军将军、大司马长史。
现代文：回京任左民尚书，领右军将军，升冠军将军、大司马长史。
English: He returned to Beijing as Zuomin Shangshu, the general leading the right army, the general who was promoted to champion, and the grand secretary Ma Changshi.

古文：十年，转太常。自陈衰疾，愿从闲养。明年，转散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
现代文：十年，转任太常，他自己上表说明体弱多病，希望休养，第二年，转任散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
English: Ten years later, he was transferred to the position of Taijō, and he himself wrote a letter explaining that he was weak and sickly and hoped to recuperate. The following year, he was transferred to the position of Sanzhōi-no-sōji, and became a doctor.

古文：顷之，上欲复用瑰，乃以为后将军、南东海太守，秩中二千石，行南徐州府州事，又行河东王国事。
现代文：不久，皇上想再启用张瓖，就任他为后将军、南墓鉴太守，俸禄二千石，行南徐州府州事，又行回宋王藩国事。
English: Not long after, the emperor wanted to re-instate Zhang Xuan, and he was appointed as the next general and the governor of the Southern Tomb, with a salary of two thousand koku, and went to the state affairs of the Southern Xuzhou Prefecture, and then went back to the state affairs of the Song Wang Domain.

古文：到官，复称疾，还为散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
现代文：他到任后，又称病，回京任散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
English: After his arrival, also known as illness, he returned to Beijing to serve as a horseback riding attendant and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：郁林即位，加金章紫绶。
现代文：郁林即帝位，加金章紫绶带。
English: Yulin is the imperial throne, and the gold and purple ribbon are added.

古文：隆昌元年，给亲信二十人。
现代文：隆昌元年，赐给亲随二十人。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, it was given to 20 members of his entourage.

古文：郁林废，朝臣到宫门参承高宗，瑰托脚疾不至。
现代文：郁林被废除，朝臣们到宫门朝见高宗，张瑰推说脚有病没去。
English: Yu Lin was abolished, the courtiers went to the palace gate to see Gao Zong, but Zhang Jiu did not go, saying that his feet were ill.

古文：海陵立，加右将军。
现代文：海陵玉立，加右将军。
English: Hailing Yuling, General Gao Yu.

古文：高宗疑外蕃起兵，以瑰镇石头，督众军事。
现代文：高宗疑外蕃起兵，派张瑰镇守石头，督众军事。
English: Gao Zong suspected that outsiders had raised an army and sent Zhang Jizhen to guard the stone and supervise the military.

古文：瑰见朝廷多难，遂恒卧疾。
现代文：张瑰看到朝廷多难，就常常卧病。
English: When Zhang Jiu saw how difficult it was for the imperial court, she often became ill.

古文：建武元年，转给事中、光禄大夫，亲信如故。
现代文：建武元年，转任给事中、光禄大夫，像以前一样被信任。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was reassigned to a middle-ranking doctor, Guanglu, and was trusted as before.

古文：月加给钱二万。
现代文：每月给钱二万。
English: The monthly payment is up to twenty thousand.

古文：二年，虏盛，诏瑰以本官假节督广陵诸军事、行南兖州事，虏退乃还。
现代文：二年，北虏势大，诏令张壕凭原职假节督广陵诸军事、行南兖州事，敌人退了才回京。
English: In the second year, when the Northern Rebellion was in full swing, Emperor Zhao ordered Zhang Jiao to take advantage of his leave as the festival governor of Guangling to go to the south for military affairs. The enemy retreated before returning to Beijing.

古文：瑰居室豪富，伎妾盈房，有子十余人，常云 其中要应有好者 。
现代文：张瑰家裹豪富，艺伎侍妾满房，有十多个儿子，他常说 这裹面应有优秀的 。
English: Zhang Juxi was born into a wealthy family, with a house full of geisha attendants and concubines, and had more than ten sons. He often said that this mask should be excellent.

古文：建武末，屡启高宗还吴，见许。
现代文：建武末年。多次奏请区要求回县，被批准。
English: In the last years of Jianwu, he repeatedly requested the district to return to the county, which was approved.

古文：优游自乐。
现代文：他优游自得。
English: He is a happy camper.

古文：或有讥瑰衰暮畜伎，瑰曰： 我少好音律，老而方解。
现代文：有人讥讽张瓖年老体弱还养艺伎，张瓖说： 我年轻时喜爱音乐，到老了才能理解。
English: Some people mocked Zhang Ye for being old and frail and still raising geisha. Zhang Ye said: I loved music when I was young, but I can't understand it until I'm old.

古文：平生嗜欲，无复一存，唯未能遣此处耳。 
现代文：干生的爱好都丢了，衹是不能丢掉这一种罢了。 
English: I've lost all my hobbies, but I can't lose this one.

古文：高宗疾甚，防疑大司马王敬则，以瑰素著干略，授平东将军、吴郡太守，以为之备。
现代文：高宗病重，猜忌大司马王敬则，因张坏一向有才干谋略，就授予他平束将军、吴郡太守，作为防备。
English: Gao Zong was seriously ill, and he suspected that the chief secretary, Ma Wang Jing, was plotting against him. Since Zhang Bao had always been a talented strategist, he awarded him with the title of General of Pingzhu and Governor of Wu County as a precaution.

古文：及敬则反，瑰遣将吏三千人迎拒于松江，闻敬则军鼓声，一时散走，瑰弃郡逃民间。
现代文：等到敬则反叛时，张瓖派将吏三千人在查逛抗敌，听到堑创进军的鼓声，都一起逃散了，张壁丢了郡府逃到民间。
English: When Jing Ze rebelled, Zhang Ye sent three thousand officers to check on and resist the enemy, and when they heard the drums of Xu Chuang's invasion, they all fled together. Zhang Bei lost the county seat and fled to the people.

古文：事平，瑰复还郡，为有司所奏，免官削爵。
现代文：乱事平定后，张瓖再回郡府，被官员弹劾，被免除官职，削去爵位。
English: After the turmoil was settled, Zhang Ye returned to the county government, was impeached by officials, was relieved of his official duties, and was stripped of his knighthood.

古文：永元初，为光禄大夫。
现代文：永元初年，任光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Yongyuan, he was appointed as Guanglu doctor.

古文：寻加前将军，金章紫绶。
现代文：接着加前将军，金章紫绶。
English: Next, the former general was awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon.

古文：三年，义师下，东昏假瑰节，戍石头。义师至新亭，瑰弃城走还宫。
现代文：三年，义师束下时，束昏赐给张瓖节杖，守互玺球，义师到塞晅时，退塑弃城逃回宫中。
English: In the third year, when Yishi passed away, he gave Zhang Yixing the scepter to guard the ball. When Yishi came to Saiyuan, he abandoned the city and fled back to the palace.

古文：梁初复为光禄。
现代文：梁朝初年又任光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty, he was also appointed as Guanglu Doctor.

古文：天监四年卒。
现代文：死于天监四年。
English: He died in prison four years later.

古文：史臣曰：文以附众，武以立威，元帅之才，称为国辅。
现代文：史臣曰：以文服众，以武立威，具有元帅之才，可称为国家的大臣。
English: Shichen said: to be literate, to have military prowess, to have the talent of a marshal, can be called the minister of the country.

古文：沈攸之十年治兵，白首举事，荆楚上流，方江东下。斯驱除之巨难，帝王之大敌。
现代文：沈攸之十年练兵，到头发白了才发动叛乱，在荆楚上流，正顺江东下，这真是须要扫除的大祸患，是帝王的大敌。
English: Shen You's ten years of military training, until his hair turned white, he launched a rebellion. In the upper reaches of the Jingchu, he was going down the east side of the river. This is really a big disaster that needs to be eliminated. It is the great enemy of the emperor.

古文：柳世隆势居中夏，年浅位轻，首抗全师，孤城挑攻，临埤授策，曾无汗马。勍寇乖沮，力屈于高墉；乱辙争先，降奔郢路。陆逊之破玄德，不是过也。
现代文：柳世隆占据中原要地，年纪轻，职务低，首次统率全军，凭藉孤城向敌人挑战，临阵授计，竟没费多少力气就力克强敌，在高垒前敌人的力量用尽了，争先恐后地逃散，奔降在郢州路上，陆逊大败窒嘘，也不过如此。
English: Liu Shilong occupied an important place in the Central Plains. He was young and had a low position. He led the whole army for the first time. He challenged the enemy with the help of a lonely city. He made a plan on the spot, but it didn't take much effort to defeat the strong enemy. The enemy's strength was exhausted in front of the high barrier, and they scrambled to escape. They ran down on the Zhangzhou Road. Lu Xun suffered a great defeat.

古文：及世道清宁，出牧内佐，体之以风素，居之以雅德，固兴家之盛美也。
现代文：等到世道清平安宁，出京治理州郡，入京辅佐朝廷，以风度素雅作为标范，以高雅的德行处世，本是兴盛家业的美事。
English: Waiting for the world to become more peaceful, going to Beijing to govern the prefectures, entering Beijing to assist the imperial court, taking elegance as a model, and leading the world with elegant virtue, is a beautiful thing for the prosperity of the family business.

古文：赞曰：忠武匡赞，实号兼资。
现代文：赞曰：柳世隆匡扶社稷，实是文武兼备。
English: Yan Xilong said: "Yan Xilong is a scholar and a warrior.

古文：庙堂析理，高垒搴旗。
现代文：在朝中能论治国之道，在军中能高举战旗。
English: In the DPRK, they can discuss the way of governing the country, and in the army, they can hold high the battle flag.

古文：游艺善术，安弦拂龟。义成祚土，功立帝基。
现代文：擅长艺术，又善于术数，弹琴占卜，退基因建功帝基而被封赐土邑。
English: He was good at art, and also good at counting, playing the piano and divination, and he was given the title of doi (feudal lord) after he renounced his genes and established a merit-based imperial foundation.

