古文：北冥有鱼，其名为鲲。
现代文：北海里有一条鱼，它的名字叫鲲。
English: There is a fish in the North Sea, and its name is the cod.

古文：鲲之大，不知其几千里也。
现代文：鲲非常巨大，不知道有几千里。
English: The dragonfly is very huge, I don't know how many thousands of miles long it is.

古文：化而为鸟，其名为鹏。
现代文：鲲变化成为鸟，它的名字就叫做鹏。
English: The dragonfly changes into a bird, and its name is called Peng.

古文：鹏之背，不知其几千里也。怒而飞，其翼若垂天之云。
现代文：鹏的脊背，也不知道有几千里长；当它振动翅膀奋起直飞的时候，翅膀就好像挂在天边的云彩。
English: Peng's dorsal fin is thousands of miles long, and when it vibrates its wings to take off and fly straight, its wings are like clouds hanging at the edge of the sky.

古文：是鸟也，海运则将徙于南冥。
现代文：这只鸟，大风吹动海水的时候就要迁徙到南方的大海去了。
English: This bird migrates to the southern ocean when the sea is agitated by strong winds.

古文：南冥者，天池也。
现代文：南方的大海是一个天然的大池子。
English: The sea to the south is a large natural pool.

古文：《齐谐》者，志怪者也。
现代文：《齐谐》这本书，是记载一些怪异事情的书。
English: The book "Harmony" is a record of some strange things.

古文：《谐》之言曰： 鹏之徙于南冥也，水击三千里，抟扶摇而上者九万里，去以六月息者也。 
现代文：书上记载： 鹏往南方的大海迁徙的时候，翅膀拍打水面，能激起三千里的浪涛，环绕着旋风飞上了九万里的高空，乘着六月的风离开了北海。 
English: It is recorded in the book: When Peng migrated to the southern sea, his wings beat on the surface of the water, which could stir up waves of three thousand miles, flew around the cyclone to a height of ninety thousand miles, and left the North Sea with the June wind.

古文：野马也，尘埃也，生物之以息相吹也。
现代文：像野马奔腾一样的游气，飘飘扬扬的尘埃，活动着的生物都因为风吹而运动。
English: The swirling air like a galloping wild horse, the fluttering dust, the moving creatures are all moving because of the wind.

古文：天之苍苍，其正色邪？
现代文：天空苍苍茫茫的，难道就是它本来的颜色吗？
English: Is the sky's vast expanse its true color?

古文：其远而无所至极邪？
现代文：它的辽阔高远也是没有尽头的吗？
English: Is there no end to its vastness and height?

古文：其视下也，亦若是则已矣。
现代文：鹏往下看的时候，看见的应该也是这个样子。
English: When Peng looks down, what he sees should also look like this.

古文：且夫水之积也不厚，则其负大舟也无力。
现代文：如果聚集的水不深，那么它就没有负载一艘大船的力量了。
English: If the gathered water is not deep, then it does not have the power to carry a large ship.

古文：覆杯水于坳堂之上，则芥为之舟。置杯焉则胶，水浅而舟大也。
现代文：在堂前低洼的地方倒上一杯水，一棵小草就能被当作是一艘船，放一个杯子在上面就会被粘住，这是水浅而船却大的原因。
English: Pour a glass of water in a low-lying place in front of the hall, and a small grass can be regarded as a boat. If you put a cup on top, it will be stuck. This is the reason why the water is shallow but the boat is big.

古文：风之积也不厚，则其负大翼也无力。
现代文：如果聚集的风不够强大的话，那么负载一个巨大的翅膀也就没有力量了。
English: If the gathering wind isn't strong enough, there's no power to load a giant wing.

古文：故九万里则风斯在下矣，而后乃今培风；背负青天而莫之夭阏者，而后乃今将图南。
现代文：因此，鹏在九万里的高空飞行，风就在它的身下了，凭借着风力，背负着青天毫无阻挡，然后才开始朝南飞。
English: Therefore, Peng flew at an altitude of ninety thousand miles, the wind was right under him, with the wind, carrying the blue sky unimpeded, and then began to fly southward.

古文：蜩与学鸠笑之曰： 我决起而飞，抢榆枋而止，时则不至，而控于地而已矣，奚以之九万里而南为？ 
现代文：蝉和小斑鸠讥笑鹏说： 我们奋力而飞，碰到榆树和檀树就停止，有时飞不上去，落在地上就是了。何必要飞九万里到南海去呢？ 
English: The cicada and the small pied flycatcher sneered at Peng and said, "We fly as hard as we can, but when we hit the eucalyptus and the sandalwood, we stop. Sometimes we can't fly and just land on the ground. Why do we need to fly ninety thousand miles to the South China Sea?

古文：适莽苍者，三餐而反，腹犹果然；适百里者，宿舂粮；适千里者，三月聚粮。
现代文：到近郊去的人，只带当天吃的三餐粮食，回来肚子还是饱饱的；到百里外的人，要用一整夜时间舂米准备干粮；到千里外的人，要聚积三个月的粮食。
English: People who go to the suburbs only bring the same day's three-meal grain and come back with a full stomach; people who go a hundred miles away have to spend the whole night preparing dry grain; people who go a thousand miles away have to accumulate three months of grain.

古文：之二虫又何知！
现代文：蝉和小斑鸠这两只小虫、鸟又知道什么呢。
English: What do the two small insects, the cicada and the lesser spotted warbler, and the bird know?

古文：小知不及大知，小年不及大年。
现代文：小智比不上大智，短命比不上长寿。
English: Small wisdom is not as good as great wisdom, short life is not as good as long life.

古文：奚以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道是这样的呢？
English: How can you be so sure?

古文：朝菌不知晦朔，蟪蛄不知春秋，此小年也。
现代文：朝生暮死的菌类不知道是一天。春生夏死、夏生秋死的寒蝉，不知道一年的时光，这就是短命。
English: Fungi that are born in the morning and die in the evening do not know that it is a day. Chiggers that are born in the spring and die in the summer and die in the summer and fall do not know the time of the year, which is short-lived.

古文：楚之南有冥灵者，以五百岁为春，五百岁为秋；上古有大椿者，以八千岁为春，八千岁为秋，此大年也。
现代文：楚国的南方有一种大树，它把五百年当作一个春季，五百年当作一个秋季。上古时代有一种树叫做大椿，它把八千年当作一个春季，八千年当作一个秋季，这就是长寿。
English: There is a big tree in the south of Chu that regards five hundred years as a spring and five hundred years as an autumn. In ancient times, there was a tree called the big camellia that regards eight thousand years as a spring and eight thousand years as an autumn. This is longevity.

古文：而彭祖乃今以久特闻，众人匹之，不亦悲乎！
现代文：可是彭祖到如今还是以年寿长久而闻名于世，人们与他攀比，岂不可悲可叹！
English: However, Peng Zu is still famous for his long life in the world, and people compare themselves to him. Isn't that pitiful!

古文：汤之问棘也是已：穷发之北，有冥海者，天池也。
现代文：商汤问棘的话也是这样的： 在草木不生的极远的北方，有个很深的大海，那就是天池。
English: Shang Tang's words about thorns are also like this: In the far north, where there are no plants or trees, there is a very deep sea, and that is Tianchi.

古文：有鱼焉，其广数千里，未有知其修者，其名为鲲。
现代文：里面有条鱼，它的身子有几千里宽，没有人知道它有多长，它的名字叫做鲲。
English: Inside there is a fish, its body is thousands of miles wide, no one knows how long it is, its name is dragonfly.

古文：有鸟焉，其名为鹏，背若泰山，翼若垂天之云，抟扶摇羊角而上者九万里，绝云气，负青天，然后图南，且适南冥也。
现代文：有一只鸟，它的名字叫做鹏。鹏的背像泰山，翅膀像天边的云；借着旋风盘旋而上九万里，超越云层，背负青天，然后向南飞翔，将要飞到南海去。
English: There is a bird whose name is Peng. Peng's back is like Mount Tai, and his wings are like the clouds at the edge of the sky. With the help of a whirlwind, he flies up to ninety thousand miles, transcends the clouds, carries the blue sky on his back, and then flies south, and will fly to the South China Sea.

古文：斥鴳笑之曰： 彼且奚适也？
现代文：小泽里的麻雀讥笑鹏说： 它要飞到哪里去呢？
English: The sparrow in Ozeri scoffed at Peng and said, "Where is it going to fly?

古文：我腾跃而上，不过数仞而下，翱翔蓬蒿之间，此亦飞之至也，而彼且奚适也？ 
现代文：我一跳就飞起来，不过数丈高就落下来，在蓬蒿丛中盘旋，这也是极好的飞行了。而它还要飞到哪里去呢？  
English: As soon as I jump, I'm flying, but when I fall several feet, I'm hovering in the scrub, which is also an excellent flight. And where does it fly to?

古文：此小大之辩也。
现代文：这就是小和大的不同了。
English: That's the difference between small and large.

古文：故夫知效一官，行比一乡，德合一君，而征一国者，其自视也，亦若此矣。
现代文：所以，那些才智能胜任一官的职守，行为能够庇护一乡百姓的，德行能投合一个君王的心意的，能力能够取得全国信任的，他们看待自己，也像上面说的那只小鸟一样。
English: Therefore, those who are intelligent enough to perform the duties of an official, whose behavior can protect the people of a town, whose virtue can meet the wishes of a king, and whose ability can gain the trust of the whole country, they also see themselves like the bird mentioned above.

古文：而宋荣子犹然笑之。
现代文：而宋荣子对这种人加以嘲笑。
English: But Song Rongzi ridiculed this kind of person.

古文：且举世誉之而不加劝，举世非之而不加沮，定乎内外之分，辩乎荣辱之境，斯已矣。
现代文：宋荣子这个人，世上所有的人都称赞他，他并不因此就特别奋勉，世上所有的人都诽谤他，他也并不因此就感到沮丧。他认定了对自己和对外物的分寸，分辨清楚荣辱的界限，就觉得不过如此罢了。
English: As for Song Rongzi, all the people in the world praised him, but he did not work hard for it. All the people in the world slandered him, but he did not feel depressed because of it. He determined the balance between himself and the outside world, and clearly distinguished the boundaries of honor and dishonor, and felt that it was nothing more than that.

古文：彼其于世，未数数然也。虽然，犹有未树也。
现代文：他对待人世间的一切，都没有拼命去追求。
English: He did not desperately pursue everything in the world.

古文：夫列子御风而行，泠然善也，旬有五日而后反。彼于致福者，未数数然也。
现代文：即使如此，他还是有未达到的境界。列子乘风而行，飘然自得，驾轻就熟。十五天以后返回；他对于求福的事，没有拼命去追求。
English: Even so, he still has unattained realm. Lets go with the wind, self-satisfied, easy to drive. Returned after fifteen days; he did not pursue the pursuit of happiness.

古文：此虽免乎行，犹有所待者也。
现代文：这样虽然免了步行，还是有所凭借的。
English: Although I don't have to walk this way, I can still get by.

古文：若夫乘天地之正，而御六气之辩，以游无穷者，彼且恶乎待哉！
现代文：倘若顺应天地万物的本性，驾驭着六气的变化，遨游于无穷的境地，他还要凭借什么呢？
English: If he conforms to the nature of heaven and earth and all things, controls the changes of the six qi, and travels in an infinite state, what else can he rely on?

古文：故曰：至人无己，神人无功，圣人无名。
现代文：所以说：修养最高的人能任顺自然、忘掉自己，修养达到神化不测境界的人无意于求功，有道德学问的圣人无意于求名。
English: Therefore, it is said that a person with the highest cultivation can let nature take its course and forget himself, a person who has cultivated to the level of deification has no intention of seeking merits, and a saint with moral learning has no intention of seeking fame.

古文：尧让天下于许由，曰： 日月出矣，而爝火不息，其于光也，不亦难乎！
现代文：尧打算把天下让给许由，说： 太阳月亮都出来了，可是小小的炬火还在燃烧不熄；它要跟太阳和月亮的光亮相比，不是很难吗？
English: "The sun and the moon have come out, but the small torch is still burning; isn't it difficult to compare it with the brightness of the sun and the moon?

古文：时雨降矣，而犹浸灌，其于泽也，不亦劳乎！
现代文：季雨及时降下，可是还在不停地浇水灌地；如此费力的人工灌溉对于整个大地的润泽，不显得徒劳吗？
English: The monsoon rains have fallen in time, but they are still constantly watering and irrigating the land; isn't such laborious artificial irrigation in vain for the moisture of the whole earth?

古文：夫子立而天下治，而我犹尸之，吾自视缺然。请致天下。 
现代文：先生如能居于国君之位天下一定会获得大治，可是我还空居其位；我自己越看越觉得能力不够，请允许我把天下交给你。 
English: If you, sir, were able to occupy the position of the sovereign, the world would surely be greatly improved. However, I am still occupying that position. The more I look at myself, the more I feel that I am not capable enough. Please allow me to hand over the world to you.

古文：许由曰： 子治天下，天下既已治也，而我犹代子，吾将为名乎？名者，实之宾也，吾将为宾乎？
现代文：许由回答说： 你治理天下，天下已经获得了大治，而我却还要去替代你，我将为了名声吗？ 名 是 实 所派生出来的次要东西，我将去追求这次要的东西吗？
English: Hui Yu replied: You rule the world, the world has already achieved great prosperity, but I still want to replace you, will I be for fame? Name is a secondary thing derived from reality, will I pursue what I want this time?

古文：鹪鹩巢于深林，不过一枝；偃鼠饮河，不过满腹。
现代文：鹪鹩在森林中筑巢，不过占用一棵树枝；鼹鼠到大河边饮水，不过喝满肚子。
English: The partridge makes its nest in the forest, but takes up only one branch; the weasel goes to the river to drink, but gets a bellyful of cucumbers.

古文：归休乎君，予无所用天下为！
现代文：你还是打消念头回去吧，天下对于我来说没有什么用处啊！
English: You might as well give up the idea and go back, the world is of no use to me!

古文：庖人虽不治庖，尸祝不越樽俎而代之矣。 
现代文：厨师即使不下厨，祭祀主持人也不会越俎代庖的！ 
English: Even if the chef doesn't cook, the officiant won't overstep the mark!

古文：肩吾问于连叔曰： 吾闻言于接舆，大而无当，往而不反。
现代文：肩吾向连叔求教： 我从接舆那里听到谈话，大话连篇没有边际，一说下去就回不到原来的话题上。
English: I asked Uncle Lian for advice: I heard the conversation from the receptionist. There was no limit to the amount of big talk, and once it was over, I couldn't get back to the original topic.

古文：吾惊怖其言犹河汉而无极也，大有径庭，不近人情焉。 连叔曰： 其言谓何哉？ 
现代文：我十分惊恐他的言谈，就好像天上的银河没有边际，跟一般人的言谈差异甚远，确实是太不近情理了。 连叔问： 他说的是些什么呢？ 
English: I was very alarmed by his words. It was as if there was no limit to the Milky Way in the sky. It was very different from ordinary people's speech, and it was really too unreasonable. Uncle Lian asked: What did he say?

古文： 曰 藐姑射之山，有神人居焉。肌肤若冰雪，绰约若处子；不食五谷，吸风饮露；乘云气，御飞龙，而游乎四海之外；其神凝，使物不疵疠而年谷熟。 
现代文：肩吾转述道： 在遥远的姑射山上，住着一位神人，皮肤润白像冰雪，体态柔美如处女，不食五谷，吸清风饮甘露，乘云气驾飞龙，遨游于四海之外。他的神情那么专注，使得世间万物不受病害，年年五谷丰登。
English: Shoulder to shoulder, I relayed: On the distant Gushan Mountain, there lived a god-man, his skin as white as ice and snow, his body as soft as a virgin's, he did not eat grain, he breathed fresh air and drank nectar, he rode the clouds to fly dragons, and he wandered beyond the four seas. His look was so focused that he made everything in the world immune to disease, and his grain supply increased year by year.

古文：吾以是狂而不信也。 
现代文：我认为这全是虚妄之言，一点也不可信。 连叔听后说： 是呀！
English: I thought it was all nonsense and not credible at all.After listening to it, Uncle Lian said, "Yes!

古文：连叔曰： 然，瞽者无以与乎文章之观，聋者无以与乎钟鼓之声。
现代文：对于瞎子没法同他们欣赏花纹和色彩，对于聋子没法同他们聆听钟鼓的乐声。
English: For the blind, there is no way to appreciate patterns and colors with them, and for the deaf, there is no way to listen to the music of bells and drums with them.

古文：岂唯形骸有聋盲哉？
现代文：难道只是形骸上有聋与瞎吗？
English: Is it just the skeleton that is deaf and blind?

古文：夫知亦有之。
现代文：思想上也有聋和瞎啊！
English: There are also deaf and blind in thought!

古文：是其言也，犹时女也。
现代文：这话似乎就是说你肩吾的呀。
English: It sounds like you're talking about me.

古文：之人也，之德也，将旁礴万物以为一，世蕲乎乱，孰弊弊焉以天下为事！
现代文：那位神人，他的德行，与万事万物混同一起，以此求得整个天下的治理，谁还会忙忙碌碌把管理天下当成回事！
English: That god-man, his virtue, mixed with all things, in order to obtain the governance of the whole world, who would be busy with the management of the world!

古文：之人也，物莫之伤，大浸稽天而不溺，大旱金石流、土山焦而不热。
现代文：那样的人呀，外物没有什么能伤害他，滔天的大水不能淹没他，天下大旱使金石熔化、土山焦裂，他也不感到灼热。
English: Such a man, nothing external can harm him, great waters cannot drown him, great droughts can melt gold and stone, scorch the earth and mountains, and he does not feel the heat.

古文：是其尘垢粃糠，将犹陶铸尧舜者也，孰肯以物为事！ 
现代文：他所留下的尘埃以及瘪谷糠麸之类的废物，也可造就出尧舜那样的圣贤人君来，他怎么会把忙着管理万物当作己任呢！ 
English: The dust he leaves behind, and the waste products such as straw, can also create saints and sages like straw, so how can he be busy managing all things as his own responsibility!

古文：宋人资章甫而适诸越，越人断发文身，无所用之。
现代文：有个宋国人采购了一批帽子到越国去卖，越人的风俗是剪断长发，身刺花纹，帽子对他们毫无用处。
English: A man from the Song Dynasty purchased a batch of hats to sell in Yue. The Yue people's custom is to cut off their long hair and tattoo their bodies. Hats are of no use to them.

古文：尧治天下之民，平海内之政。往见四子藐姑射之山，汾水之阳，窅然丧其天下焉。
现代文：尧治理好天下的百姓，安定了海内的政局，到姑射山上、汾水北面，去拜见四位得道的高士，不禁怅然若失，忘记了自己居于治理天下的地位。
English: He governed the people of the world well and stabilized the political situation at home and abroad. When he went to Gushan Mountain, north of Surabaya, to visit four high-ranking scholars, he could not help but feel lost and forgot his position in governing the world.

古文：惠子谓庄子曰： 魏王贻我大瓠之种，我树之成而实五石。
现代文：惠子对庄子说： 魏王赠送我大葫芦的种子，我将它培植起来后，结出的果实有五石容积。
English: Hui Zi said to Zhuo Zi: The king of Wei gave me the seeds of a large gourd. After I cultivated it, the resulting fruit had a volume of five stones.

古文：以盛水浆，其坚不能自举也。
现代文：用大葫芦去盛水浆，可是它的坚固程度承受不了水的压力。
English: A large gourd is used to hold the slurry, but it is not strong enough to withstand the pressure of the water.

古文：剖之以为瓢，则瓠落无所容。
现代文：把它剖开做瓢也太大了，没有什么地方可以放得下。
English: If you cut it open to make a cocoon, it would be too big and there would be nowhere to put it.

古文：非不呺然大也，吾为其无用而掊之。 
现代文：这个葫芦不是不大呀，我因为它没有什么用处而砸烂了它。 
English: This gourd is not small. I smashed it because it was of no use.

古文：庄子曰： 夫子固拙于用大矣。
现代文：庄子说： 先生实在是不擅长使用大的东西啊！
English: Zhuo Zi said: Teacher is really not good at using big things!

古文：宋人有善为不龟手之药者，世世以洴澼絖为事。
现代文：宋国有一善于调制不皲手药物的人家，世世代代以漂洗丝絮为职业。
English: In Song Dynasty, there was a family of people who were good at concocting hand sanitizers. For generations, rinsing silk floss was their profession.

古文：客闻之，请买其方百金。
现代文：有个游客听说了这件事，愿意花百金的高价购买他的药方。
English: A tourist heard about it and offered to buy his prescription at a high price.

古文：聚族而谋之曰： 我世世为洴澼絖，不过数金。今一朝而鬻技百金，请与之。 
现代文：全家人聚集在一起商量： 我们世世代代在河水里漂洗丝絮，所得不过数金，如今一下子就可卖得百金。还是把药方卖给他吧。 
English: The whole family gathered together to discuss: We have been washing silk floss in the river for generations, earning only a few dollars, but now we can sell a hundred dollars at once. Let's sell him the recipe.

古文：客得之，以说吴王。
现代文：游客得到药方，来游说吴王。
English: Tourists get prescriptions and come to lobby Wu Wang.

古文：越有难，吴王使之将。冬，与越人水战，大败越人，裂地而封之。
现代文：正巧越国发难，吴王派他统率部队，冬天跟越军在水上交战，大败越军，吴王划割土地封赏他。
English: It just so happened that Yue Guo was in trouble. King Wu sent him to lead the troops. In winter, he fought with the Yue army on the water, defeated the Yue army, and King Wu rewarded him with land.

古文：能不龟手一也，或以封，或不免于洴澼絖，则所用之异也。
现代文：能使手不皲裂，药方是同样的，有的人用它来获得封赏，有的人却只能靠它在水中漂洗丝絮，这是使用的方法不同。
English: Some people use it to get a reward, while others can only rely on it to rinse the lint in water, which is a different method of use.

古文：今子有五石之瓠，何不虑以为大樽而浮乎江湖，而忧其瓠落无所容？
现代文：如今你有五石容积的大葫芦，怎么不考虑用它来制成腰舟，而浮游于江湖之上，却担忧葫芦太大无处可容？
English: Now that you have a large gourd with a volume of five stone, why not consider using it to make a waist boat, while floating above the rivers and lakes, but worry that the gourd is too big to accommodate?

古文：则夫子犹有蓬之心也夫！ 惠子谓庄子曰： 吾有大树，人谓之樗。
现代文：看来先生你还是心窍不通啊！ 惠子又对庄子说： 我有棵大树，人们都叫它 樗 。
English: It seems you still don't know what you're talking about, sir! Keiko said to Zhuangzi again, "I have a big tree, and people call it the maple tree.

古文：其大本臃肿而不中绳墨，其小枝卷曲而不中规矩。
现代文：它的树干却疙里疙瘩，不符合绳墨取直的要求，它的树枝弯弯扭扭，也不适应圆规和角尺取材的需要。
English: However, its trunk is crooked and does not meet the requirements for straightening rope ink, and its branches are crooked and twisted, and do not meet the needs of compasses and protractors.

古文：立之涂，匠者不顾。
现代文：虽然生长在道路旁，木匠连看也不看。
English: Although it grows next to the road, the carpenter does not even look at it.

古文：今子之言，大而无用，众所同去也。 
现代文：现今你的言谈，大而无用，大家都会鄙弃它的。 
English: Now your talk is great, but useless, and everyone will despise it.

古文：庄子曰： 子独不见狸狌乎？
现代文：庄子说： 先生你没看见过野猫和黄鼠狼吗？
English: Zhuangzi said: Sir, haven't you ever seen a wildcat and a weasel?

古文：卑身而伏，以候敖者；东西跳梁，不避高下；中于机辟，死于罔罟。
现代文：低着身子匍伏于地，等待那些出洞觅食或游乐的小动物。一会儿东，一会儿西，跳来跳去，一会儿高，一会儿低，上下窜越，不曾想到落入猎人设下的机关，死于猎网之中。
English: Hunched low to the ground, waiting for the small animals that come out of the cave to forage or play. One moment east, one moment west, jumping around, one moment high, one moment low, jumping up and down, never thinking of falling into the trap set by the hunter and dying in the net.

古文：今夫斄牛，其大若垂天之云。此能为大矣，而不能执鼠。
现代文：再有那斄牛，庞大的身体就像天边的云；它的本事可大了，不过不能捕捉老鼠。
English: Then there is the snail, whose huge body is like a cloud at the edge of the sky; it is very good at what it does, but it cannot catch mice.

古文：今子有大树，患其无用，何不树之于无何有之乡，广莫之野，彷徨乎无为其侧，逍遥乎寝卧其下。
现代文：如今你有这么大一棵树，却担忧它没有什么用处，怎么不把它栽种在什么也没有生长的地方，栽种在无边无际的旷野里，悠然自得地徘徊于树旁，优游自在地躺卧于树下。
English: Now you have such a big tree, but you are worried that it is of no use. Why not plant it in a place where nothing grows, plant it in the boundless wilderness, wander around the tree with ease, and lie comfortably under the tree.

古文：不夭斤斧，物无害者，无所可用，安所困苦哉！ 
现代文：大树不会遭到刀斧砍伐，也没有什么东西会去伤害它。虽然没有派上什么用场，可是哪里又会有什么困苦呢？ 
English: A tree cannot be cut down with a knife and axe, and nothing can harm it. Although it has not been put to any use, where can there be any hardship?

