古文：《中山经》薄山之首，曰甘枣之山。
现代文：中央第一列山系：薄山山系之首座山，叫做甘枣山。
English: The first row of mountains in the center: the first mountain of the Bo Mountains, called Mount Amazake.

古文：共水出焉，而西流注于河。
现代文：共水从这座山发源，然后向西流入黄河。
English: The common water originates from this mountain and then flows westward into the Yellow River.

古文：其上多杻木，其下有草焉，葵本而杏叶，黄华而荚实，名曰箨，可以已懵。
现代文：山上有茂密的杻树。山下有一种草，葵菜一样的茎干杏树一样的叶子，开黄色的花朵而结带荚的果实，名称是箨，人吃了它可以治愈眼睛昏花。
English: There is a kind of grass at the foot of the mountain, the stem of which is like that of sunflower, the stem is like that of almond, the leaves are like that of almond, the flowers are yellow and the fruit is strawberry, the name is strawberry. If you eat it, it can cure your eyes.

古文：有兽焉，其状如囗鼠而文题，其名曰㔮，食之已瘿。
现代文：山中还有一种野兽，形状像鼠而额头上有花纹，名称是，吃了它的肉就能治好人脖子上的赘瘤。
English: There is also a beast in the mountains, shaped like a rat and with a pattern on its forehead, the name of which is, eating its meat can cure the warts on a good man's neck.

古文：又东二十里，曰历儿之山，其上多囗，多杤木，是木也，方茎而员叶，黄华而毛，其实如拣，服之不忘。
现代文：再往东二十里，有一座历儿山，山上有茂密的橿树，还有茂密的杤树，这种树木，茎干是方形的而叶子是圆形的，开黄色花而花瓣上有绒毛，果实像楝树结的果实，人服用它可以增强记忆而不忘事。
English: Twenty miles further east, there is a Lier Mountain. On the mountain, there are lush eucalyptus trees, and there are also lush eucalyptus trees. These trees have square stems and round leaves, yellow flowers with fluff on the petals, and fruits like eucalyptus fruits. People can take it to enhance memory and not forget things.

古文：又东十五里，曰渠猪之山，其上多竹，渠猪之水出焉，而南流注于河。
现代文：再往东十五里，有一座渠猪山，山上有茂盛的竹子。渠猪水从这座山发源，然后向南流入黄河。
English: Fifteen miles to the east, there is a mountain of canal pigs, with lush bamboo on the mountain. The water of the canal pigs originates from this mountain, and then flows south into the Yellow River.

古文：其中是多豪鱼，状如鲔，赤喙尾赤羽，可以已白癣。
现代文：水中有很多豪鱼，形状像一般的鲔鱼，但长着红嘴巴和带羽毛的红尾巴，人吃了它的肉就能治愈白癣病。
English: There are many giant fish in the water. They are shaped like common carp, but have a red mouth and a red tail with feathers. If you eat its meat, you can cure puerperal fever.

古文：又东三十五里，曰葱聋之山，其中多大谷，是多白垩，黑、青、黄垩。
现代文：再往东三十五里，有一座葱聋山，山中有许多又深又长的峡谷，到处是白垩土，还有黑垩土、青垩土、黄垩土。
English: Thirty-five miles further east, there is a barren mountain. There are many deep and long canyons in the mountains. There is chalk earth everywhere, as well as black earth, green earth, and yellow earth.

古文：又东十五里，曰涹山，其上多赤铜，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往东十五里，有一座涹山，山上有丰富的黄铜，山北面盛产铁。
English: Fifteen miles further east, there is a Lushan Mountain. The mountain is rich in brass, and the north side of the mountain is rich in iron.

古文：又东七十里，曰脱扈之山。
现代文：又往东七十里，有一座脱扈山。
English: Seventy miles to the east, there is a mountain called Mount Debauched.

古文：有草焉，其状如葵叶而赤华，荚实，实如棕荚，名曰植褚，可以已癙，食之不眯。
现代文：山中有一种草，形状像葵菜的叶子而是红花，结的是带荚的果实，果实的荚像棕树的果荚，名称是植楮，可以用它治愈精神抑忧症，而服食它就能使人不做恶梦。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains. It is shaped like the leaves of sunflower, but it is a red flower. It bears fruits with stalks. The fruit stalks look like the palm tree's fruit stalks. The name is phylloxera. It can be used to cure mental depression, and eating it can prevent people from having nightmares.

古文：又东二十里，曰金星之山，多天婴，其状如龙骨，可以已痤。
现代文：再往东二十里，有一座金星山，山中有很多天婴，形状与龙骨相似，可以用来医治痤疮。
English: Twenty miles further east, there is a Venus Hill. In the mountain there are many celestial babies, similar in shape to the keel, which can be used to treat acne.

古文：又东七十里，曰泰威之山。
现代文：再往东七十里，有一座泰威山。
English: Seventy miles further east is Mount Taiwei.

古文：其中有谷，曰枭谷，其中多铁。
现代文：山中有一道峡谷叫做枭谷，那里盛产铁。
English: There is a canyon in the mountains called Shizuku Valley, which is rich in iron.

古文：又东十五里，曰囗谷之山。其中多赤铜。
现代文：再往东十五里，有一座橿谷山，山中有丰富的黄铜。
English: Fifteen miles further east, there is a mountain called Shibuya Mountain, which is rich in brass.

古文：又东百二十里，曰吴林之山，其中多囗草。
现代文：再往东一百二十里，有一座吴林山，山中生长着茂盛的兰草。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further east, there is a Wu Lin Mountain, with lush orchids growing in the mountains.

古文：又北三十里，曰牛首之山。
现代文：再往北三十里，有一座牛首山。
English: Thirty miles further north, there is a mountain called Ushibucho.

古文：有草焉，名曰鬼草，其叶如葵而赤茎，其秀如禾，服之不忧。
现代文：山中生长着一种草，名称是鬼草，叶子像葵菜叶却是红色茎干，开的花像禾苗吐穗时的花絮，服食它就能使人无忧无虑。
English: There is a kind of grass growing in the mountains. Its name is ghost grass. The leaves look like sunflower leaves, but they are red stems. The flowers open like the flowers of a sprouting seedling. Eating it can make people carefree.

古文：劳水出焉，而西流注于囗水，是多飞鱼，其状如鲋鱼，食之已痔衕。
现代文：劳水从这座山发源，然后向西流入潏水，水中有很多飞鱼，形状像一般的鲫鱼，人吃了它的肉就能治愈痔疮和痢疾。
English: The mountain is the source of the Laowu River, which flows westward into the Sui River. There are many flying fish in the water, which are shaped like common carp, and eating its meat can cure hemorrhoids and dysentery.

古文：又北四十里，曰霍山，其木多楮。
现代文：再往北四十里，有一座霍山，这里到处是茂密的构树。
English: Forty miles further north, there is a Huo Mountain, which is full of dense trees.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狸，而白尾有鬣，名曰朏朏，养之可以已忧。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的野猫，却长着白尾巴，脖子上有鬃毛，名称是胐胐，人饲养它就可以消除忧愁。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary wild cat, but with a long white tail and bristles on its neck. Its name is the lynx. If you keep it, you can get rid of your sadness.

古文：又北五十二里，曰合谷之山，是多薝棘。
现代文：再往北五十二里，有一座合谷山，这里到处是薝棘。
English: Fifty-two miles further north, there is a mountain called Heitan Mountain, which is full of thorns.

古文：又北三十五里，曰阴山，多砺石、文石。
现代文：再往北三十五里，有一座阴山，多的是粗磨石、色彩斑斓的漂亮石头。
English: Thirty-five miles further north, there is a gloomy mountain, mostly coarse grindstone, beautiful stone with bright colors.

古文：少水出焉，其中多雕棠，其叶如榆叶而方，其实如赤菽，食之已聋。
现代文：少水从这座山发源。山中有茂密的雕棠树，叶子像榆树叶却呈四方形，结的果实像红豆，服食它就能治愈人的耳聋病。
English: This mountain is the source of scarce water. There are dense carved trees in the mountains, the leaves are square like eucalyptus leaves, and the fruits are like red beans. Eating it can cure people's deafness.

古文：又东北四百里，曰鼓镫之山，多赤铜。
现代文：再往东四百里，有一座鼓镫山，有丰富的黄铜。
English: Four hundred miles further east, there is a mountain of gongs, rich in brass.

古文：有草焉，名曰荣草，其叶如柳，其本如鸡卵，莨之已风。
现代文：山中有一种草，名称是荣草，叶子与柳树叶相似，根茎与鸡蛋相似，人吃了它就能治愈风痹病。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains. Its name is Rong Cao. The leaves are similar to willow leaves, and the rhizome is similar to an egg. If you eat it, you can cure yourself of typhoid fever.

古文：凡薄山之首，白甘枣之山至于鼓镫之山，凡十五山，六千六百七十里。
现代文：总计薄山山系之首尾，自甘枣山起到鼓镫山止，一共十五座山，途经六千六百七十里。
English: In total, there are fifteen mountains at the beginning and end of the thin mountain range, from Ganjaozan Mountain to Gushan Mountain, covering a distance of 6,670 miles.

古文：历儿、冢也，其祠礼：毛，太牢之具，县以吉玉。
现代文：历儿山，是诸山的宗主，祭祀宗主山山神：在毛物中，用猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲作祭品，再悬挂上吉玉献祭。
English: Lielshan is the ancestor of all mountains, and the ancestor of the gods of the mountains is worshiped: in the wool, pigs, cattle, and sheep are used as the three sacrifices, and then hung on the yakitori.

古文：其余十三者，毛用一羊，县婴用桑封，瘗而不糈。
现代文：祭祀其余十三座山的山神，在毛物中用一只羊作祭品，再悬挂上祀神玉器中的藻珪献祭，祭礼完毕把它埋入地下而不用米祀神。
English: To worship the mountain gods of the remaining thirteen mountains, a sheep is used as a sacrifice in a woolen cloth, and then a sea bream offering in a sacred jade vessel is hung. After the ceremony, it is buried underground without using rice to worship the gods.

古文：桑封者，桑主也，方其下而锐其上，而中穿之加金。
现代文：所谓藻珪，就是藻玉，下端呈长方形而上端有尖角，中间有穿孔并加上金饰物。
English: The so-called sea bream is a sea bead, the lower end is rectangular and the upper end has sharp corners, in the middle there are perforations and gold ornaments.

古文：《中次二经》注山之首，曰煇诸之山，其上多桑，其兽多闾麋，其鸟多鹖。
现代文：中央第二列山系：济山山系之首座山，叫做辉诸山，山上有茂密的桑树，山中的野兽大多是山驴和麋鹿，而禽鸟大多是鹖鸟。
English: The second mountain range in the center: the first mountain of the Jishan Mountain Range is called Huizhishan. There are dense mulberry trees on the mountain. The wild animals in the mountains are mostly mountain donkeys and elk, and the birds are mostly ostriches.

古文：又西南二百里，曰发视之山，其上多金玉，其下多砥砺。
现代文：再往西南二百里，有一座发视山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下多出产磨石。
English: Two hundred miles further to the southwest, there is a hair-raising mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, while the lower part of the mountain produces more grinding stones.

古文：即鱼之水出焉，而西流注于伊水。
现代文：即鱼水从这座山发源，然后向西流入伊水。
English: That is to say, the fish water originates from this mountain, and then flows westward into the Yishui River.

古文：又西三百里，曰豪山，其上多金玉而无草木。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座豪山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石而没有花草树木。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a high mountain, rich in metal minerals and jade, but without flowers and trees.

古文：又西三百里，曰鲜山，多金玉，无草木，鲜水出焉，而北流注于伊水。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座鲜山，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，但不生长花草树木。鲜水从这座山发源，然后向北流入伊水。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a fresh mountain, rich in metal minerals and jade, but without flowers and trees. Fresh water springs from this mountain and then flows north into the Yishui River.

古文：其中多鸣蛇，其状如蛇而四翼，其音如磬，见则其邑大旱。
现代文：水中有很多鸣蛇，形状像一般的蛇却长着四只翅膀，叫声如同敲磐的声音，在哪个地方出现那里就会发生大旱灾。
English: There are a lot of singing snakes in the water. They are shaped like ordinary snakes but have four wings. Their calls are like the sound of breaking rocks. Wherever they appear, there will be a major drought.

古文：又西三百里，曰阳山，多石，无草木。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座阳山，到处是石头，没有花草树木。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a mountain called Yangshan, which is full of stones and devoid of plants and trees.

古文：阳水出焉，而北流注于伊水。
现代文：阳水从这座山发源，然后向北流入伊水。
English: Yangshui originates from this mountain, and then flows north into Yishui.

古文：其中多化蛇，其状如人面而豺身，鸟翼而蛇行，其音如叱呼，见其邑大水。
现代文：水中有很多化蛇，形状是人的面孔却长着豺一样的身子，有禽鸟的翅膀却像蛇一样地爬行，发出的声音如同人在呵斥，在哪个地方出现那里就会发生水害。
English: There are many vipers in the water. They have the shape of a human face but a body like a dragonfly. They have the wings of a bird but crawl like a snake. They make a sound like a person shouting. Wherever they appear, there will be water damage.

古文：又西二百里，曰昆吾之山，其上多赤铜。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座昆吾山，山上有丰富的赤铜。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a Kunwu Mountain, which is rich in red copper.

古文：有兽焉，其状如彘而有角，其音如号，名曰蠪蚔，食之不眯。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的猪却长着角，发出的声音如同人号啕大哭，名称是蠪蚳，吃了它的肉就会使人不做恶梦。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary pig but with horns, the sound it makes is like a human trumpet wailing. Its name is the baboon. Eating its meat will prevent people from having nightmares.

古文：又西百二十里，曰葌山。
现代文：再往西一百二十里，有一座葌山。
English: A hundred and twenty miles to the west, there is a mountain of reeds.

古文：葌水出焉，而北流注于伊水，其上多金玉，其下多青雄黄。
现代文：葌水从这座山发源，然后向北流入伊水。山上盛产金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产石青、雄黄。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain, and then flows north into the Yishui River. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and the mountain is rich in stone blue and yellow.

古文：有木焉，其状如棠而赤时，名曰芒草，可以毒鱼。
现代文：山中有一种树木，形状像棠梨树而叶子是红色的，名称是芒草，能够毒死鱼。
English: There is a species of tree in the mountains, shaped like a pear tree and with red leaves, called the mangosteen, which can poison fish.

古文：又西一百五十里，曰独苏之山，无草木而多水。
现代文：再往西一百五十里，有一座独苏山，这里没有花草树木而到处是水流。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a single Su Mountain, where there are no flowers and trees, but water flows everywhere.

古文：又西一百五十里，曰蔓渠之山，其上多金玉，其下多竹箭。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座蔓渠山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下到处是小竹丛。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a mountain of vines. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and there are small bamboo thickets everywhere under the mountain.

古文：伊水出焉，而东流注于洛。
现代文：伊水从这座山发源，然后向东流入洛水。
English: The mountain is the source of the Yishui River, which flows eastward into the Luoshui River.

古文：有兽焉，其名曰马腹，其状如人面虎身，其音如婴儿，是食人。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，名称是马腹，形状是人一样的面孔虎一样的身子，发出的声音如同婴儿啼哭，是能吃人的。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, its name is the horse belly, its shape is a human-like face, a tiger-like body, and it makes a sound like a baby crying. It can eat people.

古文：凡济山之首，自煇诸之山至于蔓渠之山，凡九山，一千六百七十里，其神皆人面而鸟身。
现代文：纵观济山山系首尾，从辉诸山开始到蔓渠山为止，总共有九座山，途经一千六百七十里。诸山山神都长着人的脸孔、鸟的身体。
English: Looking at the Jishan mountain range from end to end, there are a total of nine mountains from the beginning of the Huizhou Mountains to the end of the Cangdu Mountains, with a total distance of 1670 miles. All the mountains and gods have human faces and bird bodies.

古文：祠用毛，用一吉玉，投而不糈。
现代文：祭祀山神的方式是：用有毛的生物作为祭品，以及一块吉玉，一起投进山谷，祭祀时不用精米。
English: The way to worship the mountain gods is to use a furry creature as a sacrifice, and a lucky stone, and throw it into the valley together. There is no need to polish the rice during the sacrifice.

古文：《中次三经》萯山之首，曰敖岸之山，其阳多㻬琈之玉，其阴多赭、黄金。
现代文：中央第三列山系：萯山山系之首座山，叫做敖岸山，山南面多出产㻬琈玉，山北面多出产赭石、黄金。
English: The third row of mountains in the center: the first mountain in the Lushan Mountain Range is called Lushan Mountain. The southern face of the mountain produces more jade, and the northern face of the mountain produces more zircon and gold.

古文：神熏池居之。
现代文：天神熏池住在这里。
English: Tenjin Keki Pond lives here.

古文：是常出美玉。
现代文：这座山还常常生出美玉来。
English: The mountain also often produces gems.

古文：北望河林，其状如茜如举。
现代文：从山上向北可以望见奔腾的黄河和葱郁的丛林，它们的形状好像是茜草和榉柳。
English: From the mountain, the rushing Yellow River and lush jungle can be seen to the north, their shapes seeming to be rushes and willows.

古文：有兽焉，其状如白鹿而四角，名曰夫诸，见则其邑大水。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的白鹿却长着四只角，名称是夫诸，在哪个地方出现那里就会发生水灾。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary white deer, but with four horns. Its name is Fuzhu. Wherever it appears, there will be floods.

古文：又东十里，曰青要之山，实惟帝之密都。
现代文：再往东十里，有一座青要山，确实是天帝的密都。
English: Another ten miles to the east, there is a Qingyao Mountain, which is indeed the secret capital of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：北望河曲，是多驾鸟。
现代文：从青要山上向北可以望见黄河的弯曲处，这里有许多野鹅。
English: From Qingya Mountain, the bend of the Yellow River can be seen to the north. There are many wild geese here.

古文：南望墠渚，禹父之所化，中多仆累、蒲卢。
现代文：从青要山向南可以望见墠渚，是大禹的父亲鲧变化成为黄熊的地方，这里有很多蜗牛、蒲卢。
English: From Qingyaoshan to the south, you can see Longjing Beach, the place where Dayu's father Longjing turned into a yellow bear. There are many yaks and bulu here.

古文：䰠武罗司之，其状人面而豹文，小要而白齿，而穿耳以囗，其鸣如鸣玉。
现代文：山神武罗掌管着这里，这位山神的形貌是人的面孔却浑身长着豹子一样的斑纹，细小的腰身洁白的牙齿，而且耳朵上穿挂着金银环，发出的声音像玉石碰击作响。
English: The mountain god Burao is in charge here. This mountain god has a human face but leopard-like stripes all over his body, a small waist, white teeth, and gold and silver rings on his ears. The sound he makes is like the sound of jade.

古文：是山也，宜女子。
现代文：这座青要山，适宜女子居住。
English: This blue mountain is suitable for women to live in.

古文：畛水出焉，而北流注于河。
现代文：畛水从这座山发源，然后向北流入黄河。
English: Surabaya water springs from this mountain and then flows north into the Yellow River.

古文：其中有鸟焉，名曰鴢，其状如凫，青身而朱目赤尾，食之宜子。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，名称是鴢，形状像野鸭子，青色的身子却是浅红色的眼睛深红色的尾巴，吃了它的肉就能使人多生孩子。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains. Its name is the cormorant. It is shaped like a wild duck, but its blue body has light red eyes and a dark red tail. Eating its meat can make people have more children.

古文：有草焉，其状如葌，而方茎黄华赤实，其本如藁木，名曰荀草，服之美人色。
现代文：山中生长着一种草，形状像兰草，却是四方形的茎干黄色的花朵、红色的果实，根部像藁本的根，名称是荀草，服用它就能使人的肤色洁白漂亮。
English: There is a kind of grass growing in the mountains. It is shaped like an orchid, but it has a square stem, yellow flowers, red fruits, and a root like the root of a paperback. It is called valerian. Taking it can make a person's complexion white and beautiful.

古文：又东十里，曰騩山，其上有美枣，其阴有㻬琈之玉。
现代文：再往东十里，有一座騩山，山上盛产味道甜美的枣子，山北阴面还盛产㻬琈玉。
English: Another ten miles to the east, there is a Lushan Mountain. The mountain is rich in sweet-tasting jujube, and the northern shadow of the mountain is also rich in jade.

古文：正回之水出焉，而北流注于河。
现代文：正回水从这座山发源，然后向北流入黄河。
English: Backwaters originate from this mountain and then flow north into the Yellow River.

古文：其中多飞鱼，其状如豚而赤文，服之不畏雷，可以御兵。
现代文：水中生长着许多飞鱼，形状像小猪却浑身是红色斑纹，吃了它的肉就能使人不怕打雷，还可以辟兵器。
English: Many flying fish grow in the water. They are shaped like piglets but have red markings all over their bodies. If you eat its meat, you will not be afraid of thunder and you will be able to dodge weapons.

古文：又东四十里，曰宜苏之山，其上多金玉，其下多蔓居之木。
现代文：再往东四十里，有一座宜苏山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有繁茂的蔓荆。
English: Another forty miles to the east, there is a Yi Su Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and there are lush cranes under the mountain.

古文：滽滽之水出焉，而北流注于河，是多黄贝。
现代文：滽滽水从这座山流出，然后向北流入黄河，水中有很多黄色的贝。
English: Yellow water flows from this mountain and then flows north into the Yellow River. There are many yellow shells in the water.

古文：又东二十里，曰和山。其上无草木而多瑶碧。实惟河之九都。
现代文：再往东二十里，有一座和山，山上不生长花草树木而到处是瑶、碧一类的美玉，确实是黄河中的九条水源所汇聚的地方。
English: Twenty miles further to the east, there is a mountain called "Watashan." On the mountain, flowers and trees do not grow, but there are beautiful gems such as oaks and cypresses everywhere. It is indeed the place where the nine water sources of the Yellow River converge.

古文：是山也，五曲，九水出焉，合而北流注于河，其中多苍玉。
现代文：这座山盘旋回转了五层，有九条水从这里发源，然后汇合起来向北流入黄河，水中有很多苍玉。
English: The mountain rotates five times. Nine streams of water originate from here, and then join together to flow north into the Yellow River. There are a lot of jade in the water.

古文：吉神泰逢司之，其状如人而虎尾，是好居于萯山之阳，出入有光。
现代文：吉神泰逢主管这座山，他的形貌像人却长着虎一样的尾巴，喜欢住在萯山向阳的南面，出入时都有闪光。
English: Yixin Taifeng is in charge of this mountain. He looks like a man but has a tiger-like tail. He likes to live in the south of Lushan facing the sun, and there are flashes of light when he goes in and out.

古文：泰逢神动天地气也。
现代文：泰逢这位吉神能兴起风云。
English: When this auspicious god can arise, a storm will come.

古文：凡萯之首，自敖岸之山至于和山，凡五山，四百四十里。
现代文：总计萯山山系之首尾，自敖岸山起到和山止，一共五座山，途经四百四十里。
English: In total, there are five mountains at the beginning and end of the Lushan Mountain System, from the Lushan Mountain to the end of the mountain, a total of 440 miles.

古文：其祠：泰逢、熏池、武罗皆一牡羊副，婴用吉玉。
现代文：祭祀诸山山神：泰逢、熏池、武罗三位神都是把一只公羊劈开来祭祀，祀神的玉器要用吉玉。
English: Sacrifices are made to all the mountain gods: the three gods of Taifeng, Xianchi and Wuro are all sacrificed by splitting a ram, and the jade vessels used to worship the gods are made of jade.

古文：其二神用一雄鸡瘗之。
现代文：其余二位山神是用一只公鸡献祭后埋入地下。
English: The other two mountain gods were buried underground after being sacrificed with a rooster.

古文：糈用稌。
现代文：祀神的米用稻米。
English: Rice is used to worship the gods.

古文：《中次四经》釐山之首，曰鹿蹄之山，其上多玉，其下多金。
现代文：中央第四列山系：釐山山系之首座山，叫做鹿蹄山，山上盛产玉，山下盛产金。
English: The fourth row of mountains in the center: the first mountain of the Lushan Mountains, called Mount Shukou. The top of the mountain is rich in jade, and the bottom is rich in gold.

古文：甘水出下，而北流注于洛，其中多泠石。
现代文：甘水从这座山发源，然后向北流入洛水，水中有很多汵石。
English: Sweet water springs from this mountain and then flows north into the Luoshui River, which is full of ocher stones.

古文：西五十里，曰扶猪之山，其上多礝石。
现代文：往西五十里，有一座扶猪山，山上到处是礝石。
English: Fifty miles to the west, there is a mountain called Fuxi Mountain. The mountain is full of flints.

古文：有兽焉，其状如貉而人目，其名曰䴦。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像貉却长着人的眼睛，名称是。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a skull but with human eyes, its name is.

古文：虢水出焉，而北流注于洛，其中多礝石。
现代文：虢水从这座山发源，然后向北流入洛水，水中有很多礝石。
English: The mountain is the source of the Luoshui River, which flows north into the Luoshui River. The Luoshui River contains a lot of rocks.

古文：又西一百二十里，曰厘山，其阳多玉，其阴多蒐。
现代文：再往西一百二十里，有一座厘山，山南面有很多玉石，山北面有茂密的茜草。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further west, there is a mountain, the south side of the mountain has a lot of jade, and the north side of the mountain has dense rushes.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛。苍身，其音如婴儿，是食人，其名曰犀渠。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的牛，全身青黑色，发出的声音如同婴儿啼哭，是能吃人的，名称是犀渠。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary cow, all black and blue, making a sound like a baby crying, it can eat people, its name is Rhino.

古文：滽滽之水出焉，而南流注于伊水。
现代文：滽滽水从这座山发源，然后向南流入伊水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and then flows south into Ise.

古文：有兽焉，名曰𤢺，其状如獳犬而有鳞，其毛如彘鬣。
现代文：这里还有一种野兽，名称是，形状像獳犬却全身有鳞甲，长在鳞甲间的毛像猪鬃一样。
English: There is also a beast here, the name of which is, shaped like a mastiff but with scales all over its body, and hair growing between the scales like bristles.

古文：又西二百里，曰箕尾之山，多楮，多涂石，其上多㻬琈之玉。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座箕尾山，有茂密的构树，盛产涂石，山上还有许多㻬琈玉。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a Shanwei Mountain, with dense trees, rich in coated stones, and many orbs on the mountain.

古文：又西二百五十里，曰柄山，其上多玉，其下多铜。
现代文：再往西二百五十里，有一座柄山，山上盛产玉，山下盛产铜。
English: Two hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a handle mountain. The top of the mountain is rich in jade and the bottom of the mountain is rich in copper.

古文：滔雕之水出焉，而北流注于洛。
现代文：滔雕水从这座山发源，然后向北流入洛水。
English: The torrent of water originates from the mountain and then flows north into the Luoshui River.

古文：其中多羬羊。
现代文：山中有许多羬羊。
English: There are a lot of mountain goats in the mountains.

古文：有木焉，其状如樗，其叶如桐而荚实，其名曰茇，可以毒鱼。
现代文：山中还有一种树木，形状像臭椿树，叶子像梧桐叶而结出带荚的果实，名称是茇，是能毒死鱼的。
English: There is another kind of tree in the mountains. It is shaped like a camellia tree and its leaves are like the leaves of the sycamore tree, and it produces a fruit with gills. The name of the fruit is gill. It can poison fish.

古文：又西二百里，曰白边之山，其上多金玉，其下多青雄黄。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座白边山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产石青、雄黄。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a white-bordered mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and the lower part of the mountain is rich in stone blue and yellow.

古文：又西二百里，曰熊耳之山，其上多漆，其下多棕。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座熊耳山，山上是茂密的漆树，山下是茂密的棕树。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a Bear's Ear Mountain. On the mountain, there are lush sumac trees, and under the mountain, there are lush palm trees.

古文：浮濠之水出焉，而西流注于洛，其中多水玉，多人鱼。
现代文：浮濠水从这座山发源，然后向西流入洛水，水中有很多水晶石，还有很多人鱼。
English: The mountain is the source of the Floating Water, which flows westward into the Luo Water. There are many crystal stones in the water, and many fish.

古文：有草焉，其状如苏而赤华，名曰葶䔭，可以毒鱼。
现代文：山中有一种草，形状像苏草而开红花，名称是葶苎，是能毒死鱼的。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains. It is shaped like the primrose and has red flowers. Its name is the cormorant. It can poison fish.

古文：又西三百里，曰牡山，其上多文石，其下多竹箭竹䉋，其兽多㸲牛、羬羊，鸟多赤鷩。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座牡山，山上到处是色彩斑斓的漂亮石头，山下到处是竹箭、竹之类的竹丛。山中的野兽以牛、羬羊最多，而禽鸟以赤鷩最多。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a male mountain. On the mountain, there are beautiful, colorful stones everywhere, and under the mountain, there are bamboo arrows and bamboo-like bamboo clumps everywhere. The wild animals in the mountain are mostly cattle and sheep, and the birds are mostly red kites.

古文：又西三百五十里，曰讙举之山。
现代文：再往西三百五十里，是讙举山。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles to the west, there is the mountain of Zhifu.

古文：雒水出焉，而东北流注于玄扈之水，其中多马肠之物。
现代文：雒水从这座山发源，然后向东北流入玄扈水。玄扈山中生有很多马肠这样的怪物。
English: Surabaya water originates from this mountain, and then flows into the northeast of Xuanbai water. There are many monsters such as horse intestines in Xuanbai Mountain.

古文：此二山者，洛间也。
现代文：在讙举山与玄扈山之间，夹着一条洛水。
English: Between Zouhuishan and Xuanluishan, there is a river of Luo water.

古文：凡釐山之首，自鹿蹄之山至于玄扈之山，凡九山，千六百里七十里。
现代文：总计厘山山系之首尾，自鹿蹄山起到玄扈山止，一共九座山，途经一千六百七十里。
English: In total, there are nine mountains at the end of the Lishan mountain range, from Mount Jiu to Mount Xuanliao, covering a distance of 1,670 miles.

古文：其神状皆人面兽身。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是人的面孔而兽的身子。
English: The shapes of the gods of the mountains are human faces and animal bodies.

古文：其祠之，毛用一白鸡，祈而不糈，以采衣之。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只白色鸡献祭，祀神不用米，用彩色帛把鸡包裹起来。
English: To worship the mountain god, a white chicken is sacrificed in wool. To worship the god, no rice is used, and the chicken is wrapped in a colorful cocoon.

古文：《中次五经》薄山之首，曰苟床之山，无草木，多怪石。
现代文：中央第五列山系：薄山山系之首座山，叫做苟林山，不生长花草树木，到处是奇形怪状的石头。
English: The fifth row of mountains in the center: the first mountain of the Buxan Mountains, called Golinshan, does not grow flowers and trees, and is full of strangely shaped stones.

古文：东三百里，曰首山，其阴多榖柞，其草多莱芫，其阳多㻬琈之玉，木多槐。
现代文：往东三百里，有一座首山，山北面有茂密的构树、柞树，这里的草以草、芫华居多。山南面盛产㻬琈玉，这里的树木以槐树居多。
English: Three hundred miles to the east, there is a first mountain. On the north side of the mountain, there are dense coniferous trees and eucalyptus trees. Here, the grass is mostly grass and eucalyptus. On the south side of the mountain, there is an abundance of jade, and the trees here are mostly eucalyptus trees.

古文：其阴有谷，曰机谷，多䲦鸟，其状如录，食之已垫。
现代文：这座山的北面有一峡谷，叫做机谷，峡谷里有许多鸟，形状像猫头鹰却长着三只眼睛，还有耳朵，发出的声音如同鹿鸣叫，人吃了它的肉就会治好湿气病。
English: On the north side of the mountain there is a canyon called Machine Valley. In the canyon there are many birds, shaped like an owl but with three eyes and ears, making a sound like a deer singing. If you eat its meat, you will be cured of dampness.

古文：又东三百里，曰县斸之山。
现代文：再往东三百里，县斸山。
English: Three hundred miles further east, Lushan County.

古文：无草木，多文石。
现代文：没有花草树木，到处是色彩斑斓的石头。
English: There are no flowers or trees, only colourful stones everywhere.

古文：又东三百里，曰葱聋之山。
现代文：再往东三百里，葱聋山。
English: Three hundred miles further east, the mountains are barren.

古文：无草木，多玤石。
现代文：没有花草树木，到处是玤石。
English: There are no flowers or trees, and there is rubble everywhere.

古文：东北五百里，曰条谷之山。
现代文：再往东北五百里，条谷山。
English: Five hundred miles to the northeast, Mount Jotani.

古文：其木多槐、桐，其草多芍药、虋冬。
现代文：树木大多是槐树和桐树，而草大多是芍药、门冬草。
English: Most of the trees are eucalyptus and paulownia, while most of the grasses are euphorbia and winter savory.

古文：又北十里，曰超山。
现代文：再往北十里，超山。
English: Ten miles further north, it's too mountainous.

古文：其阴多苍玉，其阳有井，冬有水而夏竭。
现代文：山北盛产苍玉，山南有一眼水泉，冬天有水夏天干枯。
English: The northern part of the mountain is rich in corundum, while the southern part of the mountain has a small water spring. In winter, there is water, but in summer, the water dries up.

古文：又东五百里，曰成候之山。
现代文：再往东五百里，成侯山。
English: Another five hundred miles to the east is Chenghou Mountain.

古文：其上多櫄木，其草多芃。
现代文：山上是茂密的櫄树，草以秦艽居多。
English: The mountains are covered with thick eucalyptus trees, and the grass is mostly chenopod grass.

古文：又东五百里，曰朝歌之山。谷多美垩。
现代文：再往东五百里，朝歌山。山谷里盛产优良垩土。
English: Five hundred miles further east is Mount Asaka. The valley is rich in high-quality rammed earth.

古文：又东五百里，曰槐山。
现代文：再往东五百里，槐山。
English: Five hundred miles further east, Lushan.

古文：谷多金、锡。
现代文：山谷里盛产金和锡。
English: The valley is rich in gold and tin.

古文：又东十里，曰历山。
现代文：再往东十里，历山。
English: Another ten miles to the east is Leshan.

古文：其木多槐，其阳多玉。
现代文：树大多是槐树，山南盛产玉石。
English: Most of the trees are eucalyptus, and Shannan is rich in jade.

古文：又东十里，曰尸山。
现代文：再往东十里，尸山。
English: Ten miles further east, a mountain of corpses.

古文：多苍玉，其兽多麖。
现代文：到处是苍玉，野兽以麖居多。
English: There are emeralds everywhere, and most of the wild animals live in huts.

古文：尸水出焉，南流注于洛水，其中多美玉。
现代文：尸水从此发源，向南流入洛水，水中多优良玉石。
English: The corpse water originates from here and flows south into the Luoshui River. The water is full of fine jade.

古文：又东十里，曰良馀之山。
现代文：再往东十里，良余山。
English: Another ten miles to the east is Mount Ryoyu.

古文：其上多榖、柞，无石。
现代文：山上有茂密的构树和柞树，没有石头。
English: The mountains are covered with dense conifers and eucalyptus trees, and there are no rocks.

古文：馀水出于其阴，而北流注于河；乳水出于其阳，而东南流注于洛。
现代文：余水从良余山北麓流出，后向北流入黄河；乳水从良余山南麓流出，后向东南流入洛水。
English: Residual water flows out from the northern foot of Liangyu Mountain, and then flows northward into the Yellow River; milk water flows out from the southern foot of Liangyu Mountain, and then flows southeastward into Luoshui.

古文：又东南十里，曰蛊尾之山。
现代文：再往东南十里，蛊尾山。
English: Another ten miles to the southeast is Mount Shanwei.

古文：多砺石、赤铜。
现代文：盛产粗磨石、黄铜。
English: It is rich in coarse grindstone and brass.

古文：龙馀之水出焉，而东南流注于洛。
现代文：龙余水从此发源，后向东南流入洛水。
English: The remaining water of the dragon originates from here, and then flows into the southeast of Luoshui.

古文：又东北二十里，曰升山，其木多榖、柞、棘，其草多藷藇、蕙，多寇脱。
现代文：再往东北二十里，升山。树木多是构树、柞树、酸枣树。草多是山药、惠草、寇脱草。
English: Another twenty miles to the northeast, Mount Ascent. The trees are mostly conifers, eucalyptus, and jujube trees. The grasses are mostly yam, euphorbia, and koto weed.

古文：黄酸之水出焉，而北流注于河，其中多璇玉。
现代文：黄酸水从此发源，后向北流入黄河，水中多璇玉。
English: The yellow acid water originates from here, and then flows northward into the Yellow River. There are a lot of zircons in the water.

古文：又东十二里，曰阳虚之山。多金。临于玄扈之水。
现代文：再往东二十里，阳虚山。盛产金，临近玄扈水。
English: Twenty miles to the east, Yanghak Mountain, rich in gold, is close to Xuanwanshui.

古文：凡薄山之首，自苟林之山至于阳虚之山，凡十六山，二千九百八十二里。
现代文：总计薄山山系之首尾，自苟林山起到阳虚山，共十六座山，二千九百八十二里。
English: In total, there are 16 mountains, totaling 2982 li, at the head and tail of the Hushan Mountain Range, from Golin Mountain to Yanghu Mountain.

古文：升山，冢也，其祠礼：太牢，婴用吉玉。首山，䰠也，其祠用稌、黑牺、太牢之具、蘗酿，干舞，置鼓，婴用一璧。
现代文：升山，是诸山的宗主，祭祀升山山神的典礼：在毛物中用猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲作祭品，祀神的玉器要用吉玉。首山，是神灵显应的大山，祭祀首山山神用稻米、整只黑色皮毛的猪、牛、羊、美酒；手持盾牌起舞，摆上鼓并敲击应和；祀神的玉器用一块玉璧。
English: Shoushan is the ancestor of all mountains, and the ceremony of sacrificing Shoushan deities: the three sacrificial animals of pigs, cattle and sheep are used in the wool as a sacrifice, and the jade vessels to worship the gods should be made of auspicious jade. Shoushan is a large mountain that corresponds to the appearance of the gods, and rice, a whole black-furred pig, cow, sheep and wine are used to sacrifice Shoushan deities; they dance with shields in their hands, put on drums and strike a chord; the jade vessels to worship the gods use a piece of jade.

古文：尸水，合天也，肥牲祠之，用一黑犬于上，用一雌鸡于下，一牝羊，献血，婴用吉玉，采之，飨之。
现代文：尸水，是上通到天的，要用肥壮的牲畜作祭品献祭；用一只黑狗作祭品供在上面，用一只母鸡作祭品供在下面，杀一只母羊，献上血。祀神的玉器要用吉玉，并用彩色帛包装祭品，请神享用。
English: The water of the dead goes up to heaven, and fattened cattle are used for sacrifices; a black dog is used as a sacrifice on the top, a hen is used as a sacrifice on the bottom, a ewe is slaughtered and blood is offered. The jade objects used to worship the gods are made of jade, and the sacrifices are wrapped in colorful cocoons, and the gods are invited to enjoy them.

古文：《中次六经》缟羝山之首，曰平缝之山。南望伊、洛，东望榖城之山。无草木，无水，多沙石。
现代文：中央第六列山系缟羝山山系，首座山平逢山，向南可望见伊水和洛水，向东可望见谷城山，这座山没有花草树木和水，到处是沙子石头。
English: The sixth row of mountains in the center is the Lushan Mountain Range. The first mountain is flat, and can be seen to the south as Yizhu and Luoshu, and to the east as Gu Cheng Mountain. This mountain has no flowers, plants, trees or water, and is full of sand and stones.

古文：有神焉，其状如人而二首，名曰骄虫，是为螫虫，实惟蜂蜜之庐，其祠之：用一雄鸡，禳而勿杀。
现代文：山中有一山神，像人却长着两个脑袋，叫做骄虫，是所有螫虫的首领，也是一切蜂类动物的归宿之处。祭祀这位山神，用一只公鸡作祭品，在祈祷后放掉而不杀。
English: There is a mountain god in the mountains, who resembles a man but has two heads. He is called Proud Worm. He is the leader of all aphids and the home of all bee-like animals. To worship this mountain god, a rooster is used as a sacrifice. After a prayer, it is released without being killed.

古文：西十里，曰缟羝之山。
现代文：再往西十里，缟羝山。
English: Ten miles further west is Mount Lushan.

古文：无草木，多金、玉。
现代文：没有花草树木，盛产金属矿物和玉石。
English: There are no flowers or trees, but it is rich in metals, minerals and jade.

古文：又西十里，曰廆山。
现代文：再往西十里，廆山。
English: Ten miles further west is Mount Lushan.

古文：其阴多㻬琈之玉，其阴有谷焉，名曰雚谷，其木多柳、楮。
现代文：山上盛产㻬浮玉。阴面有一道峡谷，叫做雚谷，树木大多是柳树、构树。
English: There is a valley on the other side of the mountain, called Shibuya Valley, where most of the trees are willows and conifers.

古文：其中有鸟焉，状如山鸡而长尾，赤如丹火而青喙，名曰鸰，其名自呼，服之不眯。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，像野鸡却拖着一条长长的尾巴，身上通红如火却是青色嘴巴，名称是鸰，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音，吃了它能使人不做恶梦。
English: There is a bird in the mountains that looks like a pheasant, but it has a long tail. Its body is red as fire, but its mouth is blue. Its name is the quail. The call it emits is the pronunciation of its name. If you eat it, you will not have nightmares.

古文：交觞之水出于其阳，而南流注于洛；俞随之水出于其阴，而北流注于榖水。
现代文：交觞水从此座山的南麓流出，后向南流入洛水；俞随水从此座山的北麓流出，后向北流入谷水。
English: Cross-flowing water flows out from the southern foot of this mountain, and then flows southward into the Luo water; flowing water flows out from the northern foot of this mountain, and then flows northward into the valley water.

古文：又西三十里，曰瞻诸之山。
现代文：再往西三十里，瞻诸山。
English: Thirty miles further west, you can see the mountains.

古文：其阳多金，其阴多文石。
现代文：山南面盛产金属矿物，山北面盛产带有花纹的石头。
English: The southern side of the mountain is rich in metal minerals, and the northern side is rich in stones with patterns.

古文：㴬水出焉，而东南流注于洛；少水出其阴，而东流注于榖水。
现代文：㴬水从此发源，后向东南流入洛水；少水从此座山的北麓流出，后向东流入谷水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from here, and then flows southeast into Luoshui. Less water flows from the northern foot of this mountain, and then flows east into Guisui.

古文：又西三十里，曰娄涿之山，无草木，多金、玉。
现代文：再往西三十里，娄涿山。没有花草树木，盛产金属矿物和玉石。
English: Another thirty miles to the west, Lushan. There are no flowers or trees, but it is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：瞻水出于其阳，而东流注于洛；陂水出于其阴，而北流注于榖水，其中多茈石、文石。
现代文：瞻水从此的南麓流出，后向东流入洛水；陂水从此的北麓流出，后向北流入谷水，水中多紫色的石头和带花纹石头。
English: Gaze water flows out from the southern foot of this, and then flows into Luo water to the east; brackish water flows out from the northern foot of this, and then flows into the valley water to the north, with purple stones and patterned stones in the water.

古文：又西四十里，曰白石之山。
现代文：再往西四十里，白石山。
English: Another forty miles to the west is Mount Shiroishi.

古文：惠水出于其阳，而南流注于洛，其中多水玉；涧水出于其阴，西北流注于榖水，其中多麋石、栌丹。
现代文：惠水从此的南麓流出，后向南流入洛水，水中有很多水晶石。涧水从此的北麓流出，向西北流入谷水，水中多画眉石、黑丹沙。
English: Huishui flows out from the southern foot of this, and then flows southward into Luoshui, with a lot of crystal stones in the water. Xunshui flows out from the northern foot of this, and flows northwest into Guishui, with a lot of eyebrow stones and black sand in the water.

古文：又西五十里，曰榖山，其上多榖，其下多桑。
现代文：再往西五十里，谷山。山上是茂密的构树，山下是茂密的桑树。
English: Another fifty miles to the west, Taniyama. On the mountain is a dense coniferous tree, and under the mountain is a dense mulberry tree.

古文：爽水出焉，而西北流注于榖水，其中多碧绿。
现代文：爽水从此发源，后向西北流入谷水，水中多孔雀石。
English: The fresh water originates from here and then flows northwest into the valley water, which is rich in malachite.

古文：又西七十二里，曰密山。
现代文：再往西七十二里，密山。
English: Seventy-two miles further west, there is a dense mountain range.

古文：其阳多玉，其阴多铁。
现代文：山南盛产玉，山北盛产铁，没有花草树木。
English: Shannan is rich in jade, Shanbei is rich in iron, and there are no flowers and trees.

古文：豪水出焉，而南流注于洛。其中多旋龟，其状如鸟而鳖尾，其音如判木。
现代文：豪水从此发源，后向南流入洛水，水中多旋龟，像鸟一样的头而鳖尾，发出的声音好像劈木头声。
English: The torrential water started from here, and then flowed south into the Luoshui River. In the water, there were many tortoises with bird-like heads and tails, and the sound they made was like splitting wood.

古文：无草木。又西百里，曰长石之山。
现代文：再往西一百里，长石山。
English: A hundred miles further west, Mount Nagaishi.

古文：无草木，多金、玉。
现代文：没有花草树木，盛产金属矿物和玉石。
English: There are no flowers or trees, but it is rich in metals, minerals and jade.

古文：其西有谷焉，名曰共谷，多竹。
现代文：西面有一道峡谷，叫做共谷，生长许多竹子。
English: To the west, there is a canyon called Gonggu, where a lot of bamboo grows.

古文：共水出焉，西南流注于洛，其中多鸣石。
现代文：共水从此发源，向西南流入洛水，水中多产鸣石。
English: The common water originates from here and flows to the southwest into the Luoshui River, which produces a lot of vermiculite.

古文：又西一百四十里，曰傅山。
现代文：再往西一百四十里，傅山。
English: A hundred and forty miles further west is Mount Fu.

古文：无草木，多瑶碧。
现代文：没有花草树木，到处是瑶、碧之类的美玉。
English: There are no flowers or trees, and everywhere there are beautiful things like ferns and cypresses.

古文：厌染之水出于其阳，而南流注于洛，其中多人鱼。
现代文：厌染水从此的南麓流出，后向南流入洛水，水中多人鱼。
English: Disgusting water flows out from the southern foot of this, and then flows south into the Luo water. There are many fish in the water.

古文：其西有林焉，名曰墦冢。
现代文：此山的西面有一片树林，叫做墦冢。
English: On the western side of the mountain there is a grove of trees called the Cucumber.

古文：榖水出焉，而东流注于洛，其中多珚玉。
现代文：谷水从此流出，后向东南流入洛水，水中多珚玉。
English: The valley water flows out from here, and then flows southeast into the Luoshui River. There are many jade balls in the water.

古文：又西五十里，曰橐山，其木多樗，多备木，其阳多金、玉，其阴多铁，多萧。
现代文：再往西五十里，橐山。树木大多是臭椿树，还有很多备树，山南盛产金属矿物和玉石，山北盛产铁，还有茂密的萧草。
English: Another fifty miles to the west, Lushan. The trees are mostly stinkhorn camellias, and there are many trees. Shannan is rich in metal minerals and jade, Shannbei is rich in iron, and there is also dense rush grass.

古文：橐水出焉，而北流注于河。
现代文：橐水从此发源，后向北流入黄河。
English: Surabaya's water originates from here and flows northward into the Yellow River.

古文：其中多脩辟之鱼，状如黾而白喙，其音如鸱，食之已白癣。
现代文：水中多脩辟鱼，像一般的蛙却长着白色嘴巴，发出的声音如同鹞鹰鸣叫，人吃了它能治愈白癣病。
English: There are many paddlefish in the water, but it looks like an ordinary frog with a white mouth. The sound it makes is like a vulture singing. If you eat it, it can cure paddlefish disease.

古文：又西九十里，常烝之山。
现代文：再往西九十里，常烝山。
English: Another ninety miles to the west is Mount Tokoname.

古文：无草木，多垩。
现代文：没有花草树木，有多种颜色的垩土。
English: There are no flowers or trees, and the rammed earth is multi-coloured.

古文：潐水出焉，而东北流注于河，其中多苍玉。
现代文：潐水从此发源，后向东北流入黄河，水中多苍玉。
English: Surabaya's water originates from here and then flows into the Yellow River to the northeast, with more jade in the water.

古文：菑水出焉，而北流注于河。
现代文：菑水从此发源，后向北流入黄河。
English: Surabaya's water originates from here and flows northward into the Yellow River.

古文：又西九十里，曰夸父之山。
现代文：再往西九十里，夸父山。
English: Another ninety miles to the west is Mount Kuafu.

古文：其木多棕、楠，多竹箭。其兽多㸲牛、羬羊，其鸟多鷩。其阳多玉，其阴多铁。
现代文：树木以棕树和楠木树最多，还有茂盛的小竹丛，山中的野兽，以㸲牛、羬羊最多，而禽鸟以赤鷩最多，山南盛产玉，山北盛产铁。
English: The largest number of trees are palm trees and camphor trees, and there are also lush small bamboo thickets. The largest number of wild animals in the mountains are yaks and yaks, and the largest number of birds are red kites. Shannan is rich in jade, and Shanbei is rich in iron.

古文：其北有林焉，名曰桃林，是广员三百里，其中多马。
现代文：这座山北面有一片树林，叫做桃林，这片树林方圆三百里，林子里有很多马。
English: On the north side of this mountain there is a grove of trees, called the peach grove. This grove is three hundred li in circumference, and there are many horses in the forest.

古文：湖水出焉，而北流注于河，其中多珚玉。
现代文：湖水从这座山发源，然后向北流入黄河，水中多出产珚玉。
English: The water of the lake originates from this mountain, and then flows north into the Yellow River. The water produces more emeralds.

古文：又西九十里，曰阳华之山。
现代文：再往西九十里，阳华山，山南盛产金属矿物和玉石，山北盛产石青、雄黄。
English: Another ninety miles to the west, Yanghuashan, Shannan is rich in metal minerals and jade, and Shanbei is rich in stone blue and yellow.

古文：其阳多金、玉，其阴多青雄黄，其草多藷藇，多苦辛，其状如橚，其实如瓜，其味酸甘，食之已疟。
现代文：山中草以山药最多，还有茂密的苦辛草，形状像楸木，结的果实像瓜，味道是酸中带甜，人服食它就能治愈疟疾。
English: The most common mountain herbs are yams, and there is also a dense bitter grass, shaped like a birch tree, with fruit like a melon, the taste is sweet and sour, and people can cure malaria by eating it.

古文：杨水出焉，而西南流注于洛，其中多人鱼。
现代文：杨水从此发源，后向西南流入洛水，水中有很多人鱼。
English: The Yangshui River originates from here, and then flows southwest into the Luoshui River. There are many mermaids in the water.

古文：门水出焉，而东北流注于河，其中多玄䃤。
现代文：门水从此发源，后向东北流入黄河，水中有很多黑色磨石。
English: The Gate Water originates from here and then flows into the Yellow River to the northeast. There are many black grindstones in the water.

古文：𦁎姑之水出于其阴，而东流注于门水，其上多铜。
现代文：姑水从阳华山北麓流出，后向东流入门水，姑水两岸山间有丰富的铜。
English: Gugu water flows out from the northern foot of Yanghuashan, and then flows eastward into the gateway water. There is abundant copper between the mountains on both sides of Gugu water.

古文：门水出于河，七百九十里入雒水。
现代文：从门水到黄河，流经七百九十里后注入雒水。
English: From the Gate Water to the Yellow River, it flows for seven hundred and ninety miles, after which it is infused with reed water.

古文：凡缟羝山之首，自平缝之山至于阳华之山，凡十四山，七百九十里。
现代文：总计缟羝山山系之首尾，自平逢山起到阳华山，共十四座山，七百九十里。
English: The total length of the Lushan Mountain Range, from Pingfeng Mountain to Yanghua Mountain, is 14 mountains and 790 miles.

古文：岳在其中，以六月祭之，如诸岳之祠法，则天下安宁。
现代文：有大山岳在这一山系中，在每年六月祭祀它，一如祭祀其它山岳的方法，那么天下就会安宁。
English: There is a great mountain in this mountain range, and if it is worshipped every June, as other mountains are worshipped, there will be peace in the world.

古文：《中次七经》苦山之首，曰休与之山。
现代文：中央第七列山系苦山山系，首座山叫做休与山。
English: The seventh row of mountains in the center is called the Bitter Mountains, and the first mountain is called Mount Xiu.

古文：其上有石焉，名曰帝台之棋，五色而文，其状如鹑卵。帝台之石，所以祷百神者也，服之不蛊。
现代文：山上有一种石子，是神仙帝台的棋，它们有五种颜色并带着斑纹，形状与鹌鹑蛋相似，是用来祷祀百神的，人佩带上它就会不受邪毒之气侵染。
English: There is a kind of stone on the mountain, which is the divine emperor's chess, they have five colors and have stripes, the shape is similar to a quail's egg, it is used to pray to the hundreds of gods, and people wearing it will not be infected by evil spirits.

古文：有草焉，其状如蓍，赤叶而本丛生，名曰夙条，可以为簳。
现代文：休与山还有一种草，像一般的蓍草，红色的叶子而根茎连结丛生在一起，名称是夙条，可以用来做箭杆。
English: There is also a kind of grass in the mountains, like the common reed grass, with red leaves and roots connected and clumped together, called reed, which can be used to make arrow shafts.

古文：东三百里，曰鼓钟之山。帝台之所以觞百神也。
现代文：再往东三百里，鼓钟山，神仙帝台正在此演奏钟鼓之乐而宴会诸位天神的。
English: Three hundred miles further east, on the Drum and Bell Mountain, the Divine Emperor is playing the music of the bell and drum and giving a banquet to the gods.

古文：有草焉，方茎而黄华，员叶而三成，其名曰焉酸，可以为毒。
现代文：山中有一种草，方形的茎干上开着黄花朵，圆形的叶子重叠为三层，名称是焉酸，可以用来解毒。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, with yellow flowers blooming on a square stem and three layers of overlapping round leaves. It is called enate, and can be used to detoxify.

古文：其上多砺，其下多砥。
现代文：山上多出产粗磨石，山下多出产细磨石。
English: Coarse grinding stones are produced more on the mountain, while fine grinding stones are produced more down the mountain.

古文：又东二百里，曰姑媱之山。帝女死焉，其名曰女尸，化为䔄草，其叶胥成，其华黄，其实如菟丘，服之媚于人。
现代文：再往东二百里，姑媱山，天帝的女儿就死在这座山，她的名字叫女尸，死后化成了䔄草，叶子都是一层一层的，花儿是黄色的，果实与菟丝子的果实相似，女子服用了就能使她漂亮而讨人喜爱。
English: Two hundred miles further east, on Mount Gu, the daughter of the Heavenly Emperor died on this mountain. Her name was the Female Corpse. After her death, she turned into a thistle. The leaves are layer upon layer, the flowers are yellow, and the fruit is similar to the fruit of the silk worm. If taken by a woman, it can make her beautiful and lovable.

古文：又东二十里，曰苦山。
现代文：再往东二十里，苦山。
English: Twenty miles further east, Mount Kuching.

古文：有兽焉，名曰山膏，其状如逐，赤如丹火，善詈。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，名称是山膏，像普通的小猪，身上红得如同丹火，喜欢骂人。
English: There is a kind of beast in the mountains. Its name is the mountain yakitori. It looks like an ordinary piglet, and its body is as red as fire. It likes to curse people.

古文：其上有木焉，名曰黄棘，黄华而员叶，其实如兰，服之不字。
现代文：山上有一种树木，名称是黄棘，黄色花而圆叶子，果实与兰草的果实相似，女人服用了它就不生育孩子。
English: There is a kind of tree on the mountain, the name is yellow thorn, yellow flowers and round leaves, the fruit is similar to the orchid fruit. Women who take it will not bear children.

古文：有草焉，员叶而无茎，赤华而不实，名曰无条，服之不瘿。
现代文：山中又有一种草，圆圆的叶子而没有茎干，开红色花却不结果实，名称是无条，服用了它就能使人的脖子不生长肉瘤。
English: There is another kind of grass in the mountains. It has round leaves but no stem. It has red flowers but no fruit. Its name is no-strip. If you take it, you can prevent sarcomas from growing on your neck.

古文：又东二十七里，曰堵山。神天愚居之，是多怪风雨。
现代文：再往东二十七里，堵山，神人天愚住在这里，所以这座山上时常刮起怪风下起怪雨。
English: Twenty-seven miles to the east, there is a mountain. Gods, men, and fools live here, which is why strange winds and rain often blow on this mountain.

古文：其上有木焉，名曰天匾，方茎而葵状。服者不㖶。
现代文：山上生长着一种树木，名称是天匾，方方的茎干而像葵菜形状，服用了它就能使人吃饭不噎住。
English: There is a kind of tree growing on the mountain. It is called the celandine. The square stem is shaped like a sunflower. If you eat it, you will not be able to hold back from eating.

古文：又东五十二里，曰放皋之山。
现代文：再往东五十二里，放皋山。
English: Fifty-two miles to the east, there is Lushan Mountain.

古文：明水出焉，南流注于伊水，其中多苍玉。
现代文：明水从此发源，向南流入伊水，水中多苍玉。
English: From here, the source of the Ming Water flows south into the Yishui, and there are more jade in the water.

古文：有木焉，其叶如槐，黄华而不实，其名曰蒙木，服之不惑。
现代文：山中有一种树木，叶子与槐树叶相似，开黄色花却不结果实，名称是蒙木，服用了它就能使人不糊涂。
English: There is a kind of tree in the mountains, the leaves are similar to eucalyptus leaves, yellow flowers bloom but do not bear fruit, the name is Mengmu, taking it can make people not confused.

古文：有兽焉，其状如蜂，枝尾而反舌，善呼，其名曰文文。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像蜜蜂，长着分叉的尾巴和倒转的舌头，喜欢呼叫，名称是文文。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a bee, with a forked tail and an upturned tongue, which likes to call, and its name is Wenwen.

古文：又东五十七里，曰大蜚之山。多㻬琈之玉，多麋玉。
现代文：再往东五十里，是座大蜚山，盛产㻬琈玉、麋玉。
English: Another fifty miles to the east is a large neodymium mountain, rich in neodymium and boron.

古文：有草焉，其状叶如榆，方茎而苍伤，其名曰牛伤，其根苍文，服者不厥，可以御兵。
现代文：山中有一种草，叶子与榆树叶相似，方方的茎干上长满刺，名称是牛伤，根茎上有青色斑纹，服用了它就能使人不得昏厥病，还能辟兵器。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, the leaves are similar to eucalyptus leaves, the square stem is full of thorns, the name is ox wounds, the rhizome has blue markings, taking it can prevent people from fainting and can also repel weapons.

古文：其阳狂水出焉，西南流注于伊水，其中多三足龟，食者无大疾，可以已肿。
现代文：狂水从这座山的南麓流出，向西南流入伊水，水中有很多长着三只脚的龟，吃了它的肉就能使人不生大病，还能消除痈肿。
English: The torrential water flows from the southern foot of the mountain and flows southwest into the Yishui River. There are many three-legged turtles in the water, and eating its meat can prevent people from getting seriously ill and eliminate abscesses.

古文：又东七十里，曰半石之山，其上有草焉，生而秀，其高丈余，赤叶赤华，华而不实，其名曰嘉荣，服之者不霆。
现代文：再往东七十里，半石山。山上长着一种草，一出土就结子实，高一丈多，红色叶子红色花，开花后不结子实，名称是嘉荣，服用它就能使人不畏惧霹雳雷响。
English: Seventy miles further east, half a stone mountain. There is a kind of grass growing on the mountain. As soon as it is unearthed, it will bear fruit. It is a lot taller, with red leaves and red flowers. After flowering, it will not bear fruit. Its name is Jia Rong. Taking it can make people not be afraid of thunder and lightning.

古文：来需之水出于其阳，而西流注于伊水，其中多鯩鱼，黑文，其状如鲋，食者不睡。
现代文：来需水从半石山南麓流出，后向西流入伊水，水中生长着很多鯩鱼，浑身长满黑色斑纹，形状像普通的鲫鱼，人吃了它的肉不感觉瞌睡。
English: The fresh water flows out from the southern foot of the half-rock mountain, and then flows westward into the Yishui River. A lot of eels grow in the water. They are full of black markings and are shaped like ordinary eels. People do not feel sleepy after eating its meat.

古文：合水出于其阴，而北流注于洛，多鰧鱼，状如鳜，居逵，苍文赤尾，食者不痈，可以为瘘。
现代文：合水从半石山北麓流出，然后向北流入洛水，水中生长着很多䲢鱼，形状像一般的鳜鱼，隐居水底洞穴，浑身青色斑纹却拖着一条红尾巴，人吃了它不患痈肿病，还可以治好瘘疮。
English: The confluent water flows out from the northern foot of the half-rock mountain, and then flows northward into the Luo water. There are many eels growing in the water, shaped like ordinary eels, secluded underwater caves, blue stripes all over the body but dragging a red tail. People who eat it do not suffer from abscess disease, and can also cure acne.

古文：又东五十里，曰少室之山，百草木成囷。
现代文：再往五十里，少室山，各种花草树木丛集像圆的谷仓。
English: Fifty miles further, in Shomuroyama, all kinds of flowers, plants and trees are clustered like a round barn.

古文：其上有木焉，其名曰帝休，叶状如杨，其枝五衢，黄华黑实，服者不怒。
现代文：山上有一种树木，名称是帝休，叶子的形状与杨树叶相似，树枝相互交叉着伸向四方，开黄色花结黑色果实，服用了它就能使人心平气和不恼怒。
English: There is a kind of tree on the mountain, the name of which is Diju, the shape of the leaves is similar to that of poplar leaves, the branches intersect each other and extend to the four directions, blooming yellow flowers and black fruits. Taking it can make people calm and not angry.

古文：其上多玉，其下多铁。
现代文：山上盛产玉石，山下盛产铁。
English: The upper mountains are rich in jade, while the lower mountains are rich in iron.

古文：休水出焉，而北流注于洛，其中多鱼帝鱼，状如蜼而长距，足白而对，食者无蛊疾，可以御兵。
现代文：休水从此发源，后向北流入洛水，水中有很多鱼，形状像猕猴却有长长的像公鸡一样的爪子，白白的足趾而相对着，人吃了它的肉就没了疑心病，还能辟兵器。
English: Since then, the water has been flowing northward into the Luo River. There are many fish in the water. They are shaped like macaques but have long, rooster-like claws, with white toes facing each other. If you eat its meat, you will not have heart disease and will be able to wield weapons.

古文：又东三十里，曰泰室之山。
现代文：再往东三十里，泰室山。
English: Thirty miles further east, Mount Taimuro.

古文：其上有木焉，叶状如梨而赤理，其名曰栯木，服者不妒。
现代文：山上有一种树木，叶子的形状像梨树叶却有红色纹理，名称是栯木，人服用了它就没了嫉妒心。
English: There is a kind of tree on the mountain, the leaves are shaped like pear leaves but have a red texture, the name is birch, people have no jealousy when they take it.

古文：有草焉，其状如，白华黑实，泽如蘡薁，其名曰草，服之不昧。
现代文：山中还有一种草，形状像苍术或白术，开白色花结黑色果实，果实的光泽就像野葡萄，名称是䔄草，服用了它就能使人的眼睛明亮不昏花。
English: There is also a kind of grass in the mountains, shaped like a grasshopper or a white grasshopper, with white flowers and black fruits, the luster of the fruit is like wild grapes, the name is valerian, taking it can make people's eyes bright and not dull.

古文：上多美石。
现代文：山上还有很多漂亮的石头。
English: There are many beautiful stones on the mountain.

古文：又北三十里，曰讲山，其上多玉，多柘，多柏。
现代文：再往北三十里，是座讲山，山上盛产玉石，有很多的柘树、许多的柏树。
English: Thirty miles further north, there is a mountain, the mountain is rich in jade, there are many eucalyptus trees and many cypress trees.

古文：有木焉，名曰帝屋，叶状如椒，反伤赤实，可以御凶。
现代文：山中有一种树木，名称是帝屋，叶子的形状与花椒树叶相似，长着倒勾刺而结红色果实，可以辟凶邪之气。
English: There is a kind of tree in the mountain, the name is Imperial House, the shape of the leaves is similar to the leaves of the pepper tree, with barbs and red fruits, which can ward off evil.

古文：又北三十里，曰婴梁之山，上多苍玉，錞于玄石。
现代文：再往北三十里，婴梁山，山上盛产苍玉，而苍玉都附着在黑色石头上面。
English: Thirty miles further north, Baby Liang Mountain, the mountain is rich in corundum, and corundum is attached to the black stone.

古文：又东三十里，曰浮戏之山。
现代文：再往东三十里，浮戏山。
English: Another thirty miles to the east is Mount Floating Theater.

古文：有木焉，叶状如樗而赤实，名曰亢木，食之不蛊，汜水出焉，而北流注于河。
现代文：山中有一种树木，叶子的形状像臭椿树叶而结红色果实，名称是亢木，人吃了它可以驱虫辟邪。汜水从此发源，后向北流入黄河。
English: There is a kind of tree in the mountains. The leaves are shaped like camellia leaves and bear red fruit. The name is camellia tree. When eaten, it can drive away insects and evil spirits. This is the source of Surabaya water, which then flows north into the Yellow River.

古文：其东有谷，因名曰蛇谷，上多少辛。
现代文：在浮戏山的东面有一道峡谷，因峡谷里有很多蛇而取名叫蛇谷，峡谷上面还多产细辛。
English: There is a canyon on the east side of Mount Float. It is called Snake Valley because there are a lot of snakes in the canyon. There are also a lot of mushrooms in the canyon.

古文：又东四十里，曰少陉之山。
现代文：再往东四十里，少陉山。
English: Another forty miles to the east, Shaoqian Mountain.

古文：有草焉，名曰草，叶状如葵，而赤茎白华，实如蘡薁，食之不愚。
现代文：山中有一种草，名称是草，叶子形状与葵菜叶相似，又是红色的茎干白色的花，果实很像野葡萄，服食了它就能使人增长智慧而不笨拙。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, the name is grass, the leaf shape is similar to that of sunflower leaves, and it is a red stem with white flowers. The fruit is very similar to wild grapes. Eating it can make people grow wiser and not clumsy.

古文：器难之水出焉，而北流注于役水。
现代文：器难水从此发源，后向北流入役水。
English: This is the source of the hard water, which then flows north into the service water.

古文：又东南十里，曰太山。
现代文：再往东南十里，太山。
English: Another ten miles to the southeast is Mount Tai.

古文：有草焉，名曰梨，其叶状如荻而赤华，可以已疽。
现代文：山里有一种草，名称是梨，叶子的形状像蒿草叶而开红色花，可以用来治疗痈疽。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, the name is pear, the leaves are shaped like eucalyptus leaves and have red flowers, which can be used to treat gangrene.

古文：太水出于其阳，而东南注于役水；承水出于其阴，而东北流注于役。
现代文：太水从这座山的南麓流出，后向东南流入役水；承水从这座山的北麓流出，后向东北流入役水。
English: The shallow water flows out from the southern foot of the mountain and then flows into the service water to the southeast; the receiving water flows out from the northern foot of the mountain and then flows into the service water to the northeast.

古文：又东二十里，曰末山，上多赤金。
现代文：再往东二十里，末山，山上到处是黄金。
English: Twenty miles further east, at the end of the mountain, there is gold everywhere on the mountain.

古文：末水出焉，北流注于役。
现代文：末水从此发源，向北流入役水。
English: This is the source of the last water, which flows north into the service water.

古文：又东二十五里，曰役山，上多白金，多铁。
现代文：再往东二十五里，役山，山上有丰富的白银和铁。
English: Twenty-five miles further east, there is Yanshan, a mountain rich in silver and iron.

古文：役水出焉，北流注于河。
现代文：役水从此发源，向北流入黄河。
English: This is the source of the waste water, which flows north into the Yellow River.

古文：又东三十五里，曰敏山。
现代文：再往东三十五里，敏山。
English: Thirty-five miles further east is Minshan Mountain.

古文：上有木焉，其状如荆，白华而赤实，名曰葪柏，服者不寒。
现代文：山上生长着一种树木，形状与牡荆相似，开白色花朵而结红色果实，名称是蓟柏，吃了它的果实就能使人不怕寒冷。
English: There is a kind of tree growing on the mountain, similar in shape to the peony, with white flowers and red fruits. It is called the juniper, and eating its fruit can make people not afraid of the cold.

古文：其阳多王雩琈之玉。
现代文：敏山南盛产㻬琈玉。
English: The southern part of Minshan Mountain is rich in the production of jade.

古文：又东三十里，曰大騩之山，其阴多铁、美玉、青垩。
现代文：再往东三十里，大騩山，山北盛产铁、优质玉石、青色垩土。
English: Thirty miles further east, Mount Dabaoshan and the northern part of the mountain are rich in iron, high-quality jade and blue rammed earth.

古文：有草焉，其状如蓍而毛，青华而白实，其名曰，服之不夭，可以为腹病。
现代文：山中有一种草，形状像蓍草却长着绒毛，开青色花而结白色果实，名称是，人服食了它就能不夭折而延年益寿，还可以医治肠胃上的各种疾病。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, shaped like a thistle but with long fluff, with blue flowers and white fruits. The name is, if you eat it, you will not die young but live longer, and you can also cure various diseases of the stomach.

古文：凡苦山之首，自休与之山至于大騩之山，凡十有九山，千一百八十四里。
现代文：总计苦山山系之首尾，自休与山起到大騩山，共十九座山，一千一百八十四里。
English: In total, there are nineteen mountains in the Kushan mountain range, stretching from the end of the Kushan mountain range to the end of the Daxi mountain range, with a total length of 1,184 li.

古文：其十六神者，皆豕身人面。
现代文：其中有十六座山的山神，形貌都是猪的身子而人的面孔。
English: Among them, there are 16 mountain deities with pig bodies and human faces.

古文：其祠：毛牷用一羊羞，婴用一藻玉瘗。
现代文：祭祀这些山神：在毛物中用一只纯色的羊献祭，祀神的玉器用一块藻玉而在祭祀后埋入地下。
English: Sacrifices were made to these mountain gods: a pure-coloured sheep was sacrificed in the wool, and a piece of seaweed was used in a jade vessel to worship the gods, which was then buried underground after the sacrifice.

古文：苦山、少室、太室皆冢也，其祠之：太牢之具，婴以吉玉。
现代文：苦山、少室山、太室山都是诸山的宗主。祭祀这三座山的山神：在毛物中用猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲作祭品，在祀神的玉器中用吉玉。
English: Mt. Kuchiyama, Mt. Shomuroyama, and Mt. Tamuroyama are the patriarchs of all the mountains. The mountain gods of these three mountains are worshiped: pigs, cattle, and sheep are used as the three sacrificial animals in the woolen offerings, and auspicious jewels are used in the jade vessels used to worship the gods.

古文：其神状皆人面而三首。
现代文：这三个山神的形貌都是人的面孔却长着三个脑袋。
English: The three mountain gods all have human faces but three heads.

古文：其余属皆豕身而人面也。
现代文：另外那十六座山的山神都是猪的身子而人的面孔。
English: In addition, the deities of the 16 mountains are pigs with human faces.

古文：《中次八经》荆山之首，曰景山，其上多金玉，其木多杼檀。
现代文：中央第八列山系荆山山系，首座山叫做景山。山上盛产金属矿物和玉石，树木以柞树和檀树最多。
English: The eighth row of mountains in the center is the Jingshan mountain system, and the first mountain is called Jingshan. The mountains are rich in metal minerals and jade, and the most trees are eucalyptus and sandalwood.

古文：雎水出焉，东南流注于江，其中多丹粟，多文鱼。
现代文：雎水从这座山发源，向东南流入江水，水中有很多粟粒大小的丹沙，还生长着许多有彩色斑纹的鱼。
English: Surabaya water flows from the source of this mountain to the southeast into the river. There are many millet-sized sedges in the water, and many fish with colorful stripes are also growing.

古文：东北百里，曰荆山，其阴多铁，其阳多赤金，其中多牦牛，多豹虎，其木多松柏，其草多竹，多橘櫾。
现代文：再往东北一百里，荆山。山北面有丰富的铁，山南面有丰富的黄金，山中多犛牛、豹子和老虎，树木多是松树和柏树，花草多是丛生的小竹子、橘子树和柚子树。
English: A hundred miles further to the northeast is Mount Jing. The northern side of the mountain is rich in iron ore, and the southern side is rich in gold. There are many yaks, leopards and tigers in the mountains. The trees are mostly pines and cypresses, and the flowers and plants are mostly clusters of small bamboo, orange trees and yuzu trees.

古文：漳水出焉，而东南流注于雎，其中多黄金，多鲛鱼，其兽多闾麋。
现代文：漳水从这座山发源，然后向东南流入雎水，水中盛产黄金，并生长着很多鲨鱼。
English: Surabaya springs from the mountain and flows southeast into the Surabaya River, which is rich in gold and teeming with sharks.

古文：又东北百五十里，曰骄山，其上多玉，其下多青雘，其木多松柏，多桃枝钩端。
现代文：再往东北一百五十里，骄山。山上有丰富的玉石，山下有丰富的青雘，树木多是松树、柏树、桃枝和钩端一类的丛生小竹子。
English: A hundred and fifty miles to the north-east, there are towering mountains. On the mountains there is an abundance of jade, under the mountains there is an abundance of barley, and the trees are mostly pines, cypresses, peach branches and small bamboo clusters such as hook ends.

古文：神围处之，其状如人面。羊角虎爪，恒游于雎漳之渊，出入有光。
现代文：神仙鼉围居住在这座山中，形貌像人而长着羊一样的角，虎一样的爪子，常常在雎水和漳水的深渊里畅游，出入时都有闪光。
English: Immortal deities live in this mountain. They look like humans but have horns like sheep and claws like tigers. They often swim in the abysses of Surabaya and Surabaya, and there are flashes of light when they go in and out.

古文：又东北百二十里，曰女几之山，其上多玉，其下多黄金，其兽多豹虎，多闾麋麖麂，其鸟多白鷮，多翟，多鸩。
现代文：再往东北一百二十里，女几山。山上盛产玉石，山下盛产黄金，野兽多是豹子和老虎，还有许多的山驴、麋鹿、麖、麂。禽鸟以白鷮、长尾巴野鸡和鸩鸟。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further to the northeast, there are several mountains. The upper mountains are rich in jade, and the lower mountains are rich in gold. The beasts are mostly leopards and tigers, and there are many mountain donkeys, elk, lynx, and roe deer. The birds are egrets, long-tailed pheasants, and ostriches.

古文：又东北二百里，曰宜诸之山，其上多金玉，其下多青雘。
现代文：再往东北二百里，宜诸山。山上盛产金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产青雘。
English: Two hundred miles to the northeast, there are mountains. The mountains are rich in metal minerals and jade, and the mountains are rich in indigo.

古文：洈水出焉，而南流注于漳，其中多白玉。
现代文：洈水从此发源，后向南流入漳水，水中有很多白色玉石。
English: Surabaya Water originates from here, and then flows south into Surabaya Water. There are many white boulders in the water.

古文：又东北三百五十里，曰纶山，其木多梓楠，多桃枝，多柤粟橘櫾，其兽多闾麈麢。
现代文：再往东北二百里，纶山。山中多是梓树、楠木树、丛生的桃枝竹、柤树、栗子树、橘子树、柚子树。野兽多是山驴、麈、羚羊、㚟。
English: Two hundred miles further to the northeast is Mount Lushan. In the mountains, there are mostly yew trees, camphor trees, clumps of peach-branched bamboo, camphor trees, chestnut trees, orange trees, and yuzu trees. Most of the wild animals are mountain donkeys, donkeys, antelopes, and baboons.

古文：又东二百里，曰陆危阝之山，其上多王雩琈之玉，其下多垩，其木多杻橿。
现代文：再往东二百里，陆䣀山。山上盛产㻬琈玉，山下盛产各色的垩土，树木多是杻树和橿树。
English: Two hundred miles further east, Lushan Mountain. The top of the mountain is rich in loess, and the bottom of the mountain is rich in all colors of loess. The trees are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus.

古文：又东百三十里，曰光山，其上多碧，其下多木。
现代文：再往东一百三十里，光山。山上到处有碧玉，山下到处流水。
English: A hundred and thirty miles further east is Mount Guangshan. There are jasper all over the mountain, and water flows everywhere under the mountain.

古文：神计蒙处之，其状人身而龙首，恒游于漳渊，出入必有飘风暴雨。
现代文：神仙计蒙居住在这座山里，人身龙头，常常在漳水的深渊里畅游，出入时一定有旋风急雨相伴随。
English: Immortal beings live in this mountain, often swimming in the abyss of Surabaya, accompanied by cyclones and torrential rains.

古文：又东百五十里，曰岐山，其阳多赤金，其阴多白珉，其上多金玉，其下多青雘，其林多樗。
现代文：再往东一百五十里，岐山。山南盛产黄金，山北盛产白色珉石，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有丰富的青雘，树木多是臭椿树。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further east is Qishan. The southern part of the mountain is rich in gold, the northern part of the mountain is rich in white ocher, the mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, the mountain is rich in barley, and the trees are mostly camellias.

古文：又东百三十里，曰铜山，其上多金银铁，其木多榖、柞、柤、栗、橘、櫾，其兽多犳。又东北一百里，曰美山，其兽多兕牛，多闾麈，多豕鹿，其上多金，其下多青雘。
现代文：神仙涉鼉就住在这座山里，人身而方形面孔和三只脚。再往东一百三十里，铜山。山上有丰富的金、银、铁。树木多是构树、柞树、柤树、栗子树、橘子树、柚子树。林中野兽成群，尤其身形像豹，却没有豹纹的豹子。东北一百里，美山。山野兽以兕、野牛最多，又有很多山驴、麈，还有许多野猪、鹿，山上多出产金，山下多出产青雘。
English: A hundred and thirty miles to the east is Copper Mountain. The mountains are rich in gold, silver, and iron. The trees are mostly conifers, birches, eucalyptus, chestnuts, orange trees, and yuzu trees. The beasts in the forest are in groups, especially the leopards, which are shaped like leopards but do not have leopard stripes. One hundred miles to the northeast is Mount Beauty. The most common mountain beasts are donkeys and bison, and there are also many mountain donkeys and donkeys, as well as many wild boars and deer. The mountains produce more gold, and the mountains produce more blue herons.

古文：又东北百里，曰大尧之山，其木多松柏，多梓桑，多机，其草多竹，其兽多豹虎麢。
现代文：再往东北一百里，大尧山。树木多是松树、柏树、梓树、桑树和机木树。草大多是丛生的小竹子。野兽多是豹子、老虎、羚羊、麢羊。
English: A hundred miles further north-east, the Dafeng Mountains. The trees are mostly pine, cypress, eucalyptus, mulberry and cypress trees. The grass is mostly clumps of small bamboo. The beasts are mostly leopards, tigers, antelope and ewe.

古文：又东北三百里，曰灵山，其上多金玉，其下多青雘，其木多桃李梅杏。
现代文：再往东北三百里，灵山。山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产青雘，树木多是桃树、李树、梅树、杏树。
English: Three hundred miles to the northeast, Lingshan. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, the mountain is rich in artemisia, and the trees are mostly peach trees, plum trees, plum trees, and almond trees.

古文：又东北七十里，曰龙山，上多寓木，其木多碧，其下多赤锡，其草多桃枝钩端。
现代文：再往东北七十里，龙山。山上到处是寄生树，还盛产碧玉，山下有丰富的红色锡土。草多是桃枝、钩端之类的小竹丛。
English: Seventy miles to the northeast is Longshan. The mountain is full of parasitic trees, and is also rich in jasper, and there is rich red tin soil under the mountain. The grass is mostly small bamboo bushes such as peach branches and hook ends.

古文：又东南五十里，曰衡山，上多寓木榖、柞，多黄垩白垩。
现代文：再往东南五十里，衡山。树木多是寄生树、构树、柞树，还盛产黄色垩土、白色垩土。
English: Another fifty miles southeast, Hengshan. The trees are mostly parasitic trees, coniferous trees, and eucalyptus trees, and also rich in yellow loam soil and white loam soil.

古文：又东南七十里，曰石山，其上多金，其下多青雘，多寓木。
现代文：再往东南七十里，石山。山上多出产金，山下有丰富的青雘，还有许多寄生树。
English: Seventy miles to the southeast is Ishiyama. On the top of the mountain there is a lot of gold production, under the mountain there is an abundance of barley, and there are many parasitic trees.

古文：又南百二十里，曰若山，其上多王雩琈玉，多赭，多邽石，多寓木，多柘。
现代文：再往南一百二十里，若山。山上盛产㻬琈玉、赭石、封石，树木多是寄生树、柘树。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further south is Mount Wakayama. The mountains are rich in ochre, flint, and sealing stones, and the trees are mostly parasitic trees and eucalyptus.

古文：又东南一百二十里，曰彘山，多美石，多柘。
现代文：再往东南一百二十里，彘山。有很多漂亮的石头，树木多是柘树。
English: A hundred and twenty miles to the southeast is Lushan Mountain. There are many beautiful stones, and the trees are mostly eucalyptus.

古文：又东南一百五十里，曰玉山，其上多金玉，其下多碧铁，其木多柏。
现代文：再往东南一百五十里，玉山。山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有丰富的碧玉、铁，树木多是柏树。
English: A hundred and fifty miles to the southeast is Jade Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and the mountain is rich in jasper and iron. The trees are mostly cypresses.

古文：又东南七十里，曰灌山，其木多檀，多邽石，多白锡。
现代文：再往东南七十里，讙山。树木多是檀树，还盛产封石，又多出产白色锡土。
English: Seventy miles further south-east, Lushan. The trees are mostly sandalwood, and they also produce a lot of sealing stone, and more white tin soil.

古文：郁水出于其上，潜于其下，其中多砥砺。
现代文：郁水从这座山顶上发源，潜流到山下，水中有很多磨石。
English: The lush water springs from the top of the mountain and flows under the mountain. There are many millstones in the water.

古文：又东北百五十里，曰仁举之山，其木多榖、柞，其阳多赤金，其阴多赭。
现代文：再往东北一百五十里，仁举山。树木多是构树和柞树，山南面有丰富的黄金，山北面盛产赭石。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further to the northeast is Mount Rinpoche. The trees are mostly conifers and eucalyptus. The southern side of the mountain is rich in gold, and the northern side of the mountain is rich in zircon.

古文：又东五十里，曰师每之山，其阳多砥砺，其阴多青雘，其木多柏，多檀，多柘，其草多竹。
现代文：再往东五十里，师每山。山南盛产磨石，山北盛产青雘，树木多是柏树、檀树、柘树。草多是丛生的小竹子。
English: Another fifty miles to the east, every mountain is different. The southern part of the mountain is rich in grinding stones, and the northern part of the mountain is rich in green alder. The trees are mostly cypress, sandalwood, and eucalyptus. The grass is mostly clumps of small bamboo.

古文：又东南二百里，曰琴鼓之山，其木多榖、柞、椒、柘，其上多白珉，其下多洗石，其兽多豕鹿，多白犀，其鸟多鸩。
现代文：再往东南二百里，琴鼓山。树木多是构树、柞树、椒树、柘树，山上盛产白色珉石，山下盛产洗石，这里的野兽以野猪、鹿最多，还有许多白色犀牛，而禽鸟大多是鸩鸟。
English: Another two hundred miles to the southeast is Qinqul Mountain. The trees are mostly conifers, eucalyptus, pepper trees, and eucalyptus. The mountain is rich in white flint, and the mountain is rich in washed stone. The wild animals here are mostly wild boar and deer, and there are many white rhinoceroses, while the birds are mostly ostriches.

古文：凡荆山之首，自景山至琴鼓之山，凡二十三山，二千八百九十里。
现代文：总计荆山山系之首尾，自景山起到琴鼓山，共二十三座山，二千八百九十里。
English: In total, there are 23 mountains in the Jingshan mountain range, from Jingshan to Qinqiu Mountain, with a total length of 2890 miles.

古文：其神状皆鸟身而人面。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是鸟的身子而人的面孔。
English: The shapes of the deities of the mountains and hills are the bodies of birds with human faces.

古文：其祠：用一雄鸡祈瘗，用一藻圭，糈用稌。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只公鸡祭祀后埋入地下，并用一块藻圭献祭，祀神的米用稻米。
English: Sacrifices to the mountain deities: a rooster is sacrificed in its feathers and buried in the ground, a piece of seaweed is used as a sacrifice, and rice is used to worship the deities.

古文：骄山，冢也，其祠：用羞酒少牢祈瘗，婴毛一璧。
现代文：骄山，是诸山之宗主。祭祀骄山山神：用进献的美酒和猪、羊来祭祀而后埋入地下，在祀神的玉器中用一块玉璧。
English: The proud mountain is the ancestor of all mountains. How to worship the proud mountain god: Use the wine, pigs, and sheep that have been offered to make a sacrifice and then bury it underground, and use a piece of jade in the jade vessel used to worship the god.

古文：《中次九经》岷山之首，曰女几之山，其上多石涅，其木多杻橿，其草多菊。
现代文：中央第九列山系岷山山系，首座山叫做女几山，山上盛产石涅，树木多是杻树、橿树。花草多是野菊、苍术和白术。
English: The ninth row of mountains in the center is the Lushan mountain range. The first mountain is called Mengji Mountain. The mountains are rich in stone, and the trees are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus. The flowers and plants are mostly wild chrysanthemum, grasshopper and white.

古文：洛水出焉，东注于江，其中多雄黄，其兽多虎豹。
现代文：洛水从这座山发源，向东流入长江。山里到处有雄黄，野兽多是老虎、豹子。
English: Luoshui flows from the source of this mountain and flows into the Yangtze River to the east. The mountains are full of majestic animals, most of which are tigers and leopards.

古文：又东北三百里，曰岷山。
现代文：再往东北三百里，岷山。
English: Another three hundred miles to the northeast, Lushan.

古文：江水出焉，东北流注于海，其中多良龟，多鼍，其上多金玉，其下多白珉，其木多梅棠，其兽多犀象，多夔牛，其鸟多翰鷩。
现代文：长江从岷山发源，向东北流入大海，水中生长着许多优良的龟，还有许多鼍。山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产白色珉石。树木多是梅树和海棠树。野兽多是犀牛、大象和夔牛。禽鸟多是白翰鸟和赤鷩鸟。
English: The Yangtze River originates from the Lushan Mountains and flows into the sea to the northeast. Many excellent turtles grow in the water, as well as many dragonflies. The mountains are rich in metal minerals and jade, and the mountains are rich in white zircon. The trees are mostly plum trees and begonias. The animals are mostly rhinoceroses, elephants and snails. The birds are mostly white hummingbirds and red starlings.

古文：又东北一百四十里，曰崃山，江水出焉，东流注于江。
现代文：再往东北一百四十里，崃山。江水从这座山发源，向东流入长江。
English: A hundred and forty miles to the northeast is Mount Lushan, the source of the river that flows eastward into the Yangtze River.

古文：其阳多黄金，其阴多麋麈，其木多檀柘，其草多韭，多药、空夺。
现代文：山南面盛产黄金，山北面野兽多是麋鹿和麈，树木多是檀树和柘树，花草多是野薤菜、野韭菜、白芷和寇脱。
English: The south side of the mountain is rich in gold, and the north side of the mountain is rich in wild animals such as elk and roe deer, trees such as sandalwood and eucalyptus, and flowers and plants such as wild leek, wild leek, egret and koto.

古文：又东一百五十里，曰崌山。
现代文：再往东一百五十里，崌山。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further east is Mount Lushan.

古文：江水出焉，东流注于大江，其中多怪蛇，多鱼，其木多楢、杻，多梅、梓，其兽多夔牛麢犀兕。
现代文：江水从这座山发源，向东流入长江，水中生长着许多怪蛇，还有很多䲀鱼。树木多是楢树、杻树、梅树与梓树。野兽多是夔牛、羚羊、㚟、犀牛、兕。
English: The water of the river originates from this mountain and flows eastward into the Yangtze River. Many strange snakes grow in the water, as well as many eels. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, eucalyptus, plum and eucalyptus. The beasts are mostly snails, antelopes, toads, rhinoceroses and centipedes.

古文：有鸟焉，状如鸮而赤身白首，其名曰窃脂，可以御火。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，像一般的猫头鹰却是红色的身子白色的脑袋，名称是窃脂，人饲养它可以辟火。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains. It looks like an ordinary owl, but it has a red body and a white head. Its name is the egret. People keep it to ward off fire.

古文：又东三百里，曰高梁之山，其上多垩，其下多砥砺，其木多桃枝钩端。
现代文：再往东三百里，高梁山。山上盛产垩土，山下盛产磨石，草木多是桃枝竹和钩端竹。
English: Three hundred miles further east, Mount Gaoliang. The top of the mountain is rich in rammed earth, the bottom of the mountain is rich in grinding stone, and the plants and trees are mostly peach branch bamboo and hook end bamboo.

古文：有草焉，状如葵而赤华、荚实白柎，可以走马。
现代文：山中生长着一种草，形状像葵菜却是红色的花朵、带荚的果实、白色的花萼，给马吃了它就能使马跑得快。
English: There is a kind of grass growing in the mountains. It is shaped like a sunflower, but it has red flowers, berries with stalks, and white calyxes. If you feed it to a horse, it will make the horse run fast.

古文：又东四百里，曰蛇山，其上多黄金，其下多垩，其木多栒，多橡章，其草多嘉荣、少辛。
现代文：再往东四百里，蛇山。山上盛产黄金，山下盛产垩土，树木多是栒树和豫章树。花草多是嘉荣、细辛。
English: Four hundred miles further east, Snake Mountain. The top of the mountain is rich in gold, the bottom of the mountain is rich in loess, the trees are mostly eucalyptus and yuanzhang trees. The flowers and plants are mostly jia Rong and fine spice.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狐，而白尾长耳，名犭也狼，见则国内有兵。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的狐狸，却长着白尾巴和长耳朵，名称是狼，在哪个国家出现哪个国家就会有战争。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary fox, but with a white tail and long ears, called a wolf, in which country there will be a war.

古文：又东五百里，曰鬲山，其阳多金，其阴多白珉。
现代文：再往东五百里，鬲山。山南盛产金，山北盛产白色珉石。
English: Five hundred miles further east, Lushan. Shannan is rich in gold, and Shanbei is rich in white zircon.

古文：蒲薨鸟之水出焉，而东流注于江，其中多白玉，其兽多犀象熊罴，多猨蜼。
现代文：蒲鹳水从此发源，后向东流入长江，水中有很多白色玉石。野兽多是犀牛、大象、熊、罴、猿猴和长尾猿。
English: The river flows eastward into the Yangtze River. There are many white jade stones in the water. The animals are mostly rhinoceroses, elephants, bears, baboons, monkeys and apes.

古文：又东北三百里，曰隅阳之山，其上多金玉，其下多青雘，其木多梓桑，其草多茈。
现代文：再往东北三百里，隅阳山。山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有丰富的青雘，树木多是梓树和桑树。草多是紫草。
English: Three hundred miles further to the northeast is Mount Sumiyang. The mountain is rich in metallic minerals and jade, and there is an abundance of indigo at the foot of the mountain. The trees are mostly azaleas and mulberry trees, and the grass is mostly comfrey.

古文：徐水出焉，东流注于江，其中多丹粟。
现代文：徐水从这座山发源，向东流入长江，水中有许多粟粒大小的丹沙。
English: Slow water flows from the source of this mountain to the east into the Yangtze River, and there are many millet-sized sediments in the water.

古文：又东二百五十里，曰岐山，其上多白金，其下多铁。其木多梅梓，多杻楢。
现代文：再往东二百五十里，岐山。山上有丰富的白银，山下有丰富的铁，树木多是梅树、梓树、杻树和楢树。
English: Two hundred and fifty miles further east, Qishan. The mountains are rich in silver ore, the mountains are rich in iron, and the trees are mostly plum trees, eucalyptus trees, eucalyptus trees and eucalyptus trees.

古文：減水出焉，东南流注于江。
现代文：减水从这座山发源，向东南流入长江。
English: Reduced water flows from the source of this mountain to the southeast into the Yangtze River.

古文：又东三百里，曰勾檷之山，其上多玉，其下多黄金，其木多栎柘，其草多芍药。
现代文：再往东三百里，勾祢山。山上盛产玉石，山下盛产黄金，树木多是栎树和柘树。花草多是芍药。
English: Another three hundred miles to the east, Mount Kokei. The top of the mountain is rich in jade, the bottom of the mountain is rich in gold, the trees are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus. The flowers and plants are mostly medicinal herbs.

古文：又东一百五十里，曰风雨之山，其上多白金，其下多石涅，其木多棷椫，多杨。
现代文：再往东一百五十里，风雨山。山上盛产白银，山下盛产石涅，树木多是棷树、椫树和杨树。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further east, Fengyu Mountain. The mountain is rich in silver, and the mountain is rich in stone. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, eucalyptus and poplar.

古文：宣余之水出焉，东流注于江，其中多蛇。
现代文：宣余水从这座山发源，向东流入长江，水中多水蛇。
English: The Xuan Remaining Water originates from this mountain and flows into the Yangtze River to the east. There are many water snakes in the water.

古文：其兽多闾麋，多麈豹虎，其鸟多白鷮。
现代文：野兽多是山驴、麋鹿、麈、豹子、老虎。禽鸟多是白鷮。
English: Most of the wild animals are mountain donkeys, mule deer, roe deer, leopards and tigers. Most of the birds are egrets.

古文：又东北二百里，曰玉山，其阳多铜，其阴多赤金，其木多豫章楢杻，其兽多豕鹿麢，其鸟多鸩。
现代文：再往东二百里，玉山。山南盛产铜，山北盛产黄金，树木多是豫章树、楢树、杻树。野兽多是野猪、鹿、羚羊、㚟。禽鸟多是鸩鸟。
English: Two hundred miles further east is Yushan. The south of the mountain is rich in copper, the north of the mountain is rich in gold. The trees are mostly yuanzhang trees, eucalyptus trees, and eucalyptus trees. The wild animals are mostly wild boar, deer, antelope, and ostriches. The birds are mostly ostriches.

古文：又东一百五十里，曰熊山。
现代文：再往东一百五十里，熊山。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further east, Mount Kumazawa.

古文：有穴焉，熊之穴，恒出神人。
现代文：山中有一洞穴，是熊的巢穴，也时常有神人出入。
English: There is a cave in the mountain, which is a bear's lair, and it is also frequented by divine beings.

古文：夏启而冬闭；是穴也，冬启乃必有兵。
现代文：洞穴一般是夏季开启而冬季关闭；就是这个洞穴，如果冬季开启就一定发生战争。
English: Caves are usually open in the summer and closed in the winter; in this particular cave, if it was open in the winter, there would have been a war.

古文：其上多白玉，其下多白金，其林多樗柳，其草多寇脱。
现代文：山上多出产白色玉石，山下多出产白银。树木多是臭椿树和柳树。花草多是寇脱草。
English: White jade is mostly produced on the mountain, and silver is mostly produced below the mountain. The trees are mostly camellias and willows. The flowers and plants are mostly grasses.

古文：又东一百四十里，曰騩山，其阳多美玉赤金，其阴多铁，其木多桃枝荆芭。
现代文：再往东一百四十里，騩山。山南盛产美玉黄金，山北盛产铁。草木多是桃枝竹、牡荆树、枸杞树。
English: A hundred and forty miles further east is Mount Lushan. The southern part of the mountain is rich in jade and gold, and the northern part of the mountain is rich in iron. Most of the plants are peach-branch bamboo, bauhinia, and eucalyptus.

古文：又东二百里，曰葛山，其上多赤金，其下多瑊石，其木多柤栗橘櫾楢杻，其兽多麢，其草多嘉荣。
现代文：再往东二百里，葛山。山上盛产黄金，山下盛产瑊石，树木多是柤树、栗子树、橘子树、柚子树、楢树、杻树。野兽多是羚羊和㚟。花草多是嘉荣。
English: Another two hundred miles to the east, Ge Shan. The mountain is rich in gold, and the mountain is rich in flint. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, chestnut tree, orange tree, yuzu tree, eucalyptus tree, and eucalyptus tree. The animals are mostly antelope and donkey. The flowers and plants are mostly Jialong.

古文：又东一百七十里，曰贾超之山，其阳多黄垩，其阴多美赭，其木多柤栗橘櫾，其中多龙脩。
现代文：再往东一百七十里，贾超山。山南盛产黄色垩土，山北盛产精美赭石，树木多是柤树、栗子树、橘子树、柚子树，草多是龙须草。
English: A hundred and seventy miles further east is Jia Chaoshan. The south of the mountain is rich in yellow ramie soil, and the north of the mountain is rich in exquisite ramie stone. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, chestnut tree, orange tree, yuzu tree, and the grass is mostly gentian.

古文：凡岷山之首，自女几山至于贾超之山，凡十六山，三千五百里。其神状皆马身而龙首。
现代文：总计岷山山系之首尾，自女几山起到贾超山，共十六座山，三千五百里，诸山山神的形貌都是马的身子而龙的脑袋。
English: In total, the first and last of the Lushan Mountain Range, from the Jiaqia Mountains to the Jia Chao Mountains, a total of sixteen mountains, three thousand five hundred miles, the shape of the mountains and gods are the body of a horse and the head of a dragon.

古文：其祠：毛用一雄鸡瘗。糈用稌。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只公鸡作祭品埋入地下，祀神的米用稻米。
English: To worship the mountain gods, a rooster is buried in the ground as a sacrifice, and rice is used to worship the gods.

古文：文山勾檷、风雨、騩之山，是皆冢也，其祠之：羞酒，少牢具，婴毛一吉玉。
现代文：文山、勾祢山、风雨山、騩山，是诸山的宗主。祭祀这几座山的山神：进献美酒，用猪、羊作祭品，在祀神的玉器中用一块吉玉。
English: Mount Wenshan, Mount Gokei, Mount Fengyu and Mount Lushan are the patriarchs of the mountains. The mountain gods of these mountains are worshipped: fine wine is offered, pigs and sheep are used as offerings, and a lucky stone is used in the jade vessels used to worship the gods.

古文：熊山，席也，其祠：羞酒，太牢具，婴毛一璧。
现代文：熊山，是诸山的首领。祭祀这个山神：进献美酒，用猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲作祭品，在祀神的玉器中用一块玉璧。
English: Mount Kumayama is the leader of all the mountains. To worship this mountain god: offer fine wine, make a sacrifice of pigs, cattle, and sheep, and use a piece of jade in the jade vessel used to worship the god.

古文：干儛，用兵以禳；祈，璆冕舞。
现代文：手拿盾牌舞蹈，为了禳除战争灾祸；祈求福祥，就穿戴礼服并手持美玉而舞蹈。
English: Dance with shield in hand, in order to eradicate the scourge of war; pray for good luck, wear a dress and dance with a ball in hand.

古文：《中次经》之首，曰首阳之山，其上多金玉，无草木。
现代文：中央第十列山系，首座山叫首阳山。山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，没有花草树木。
English: In the 10th row of mountains in the center, the first mountain is called Shouyang Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, but there are no flowers and trees.

古文：又西五十里，曰虎尾之山，其木多椒椐，多封石，其阳多赤金，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往西五十里，虎尾山。树木多是花椒树、椐树。到处有封石，山南有丰富的黄金，山北有丰富的铁。
English: Another fifty miles to the west, Mt. Huwei. The trees are mostly pepper trees and eucalyptus trees. There are sealing stones everywhere, the south of the mountain is rich in gold, and the north of the mountain is rich in iron.

古文：又西南五十里，曰繁缋之山，其木多楢杻，其草多枝勾。
现代文：再往西南五十里，繁缋山。树木多是楢树和杻树，草多是桃枝、钩端之类的小竹丛。
English: Another fifty miles to the southwest, there are lush mountains. The trees are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus, and the grass is mostly small bamboo bushes such as peach branches and hook tips.

古文：又西南二十里，曰勇石之山，无草木，多白金，多水。
现代文：再往西南二十里，勇石山。没有花草树木，有丰富的白银，到处流水。
English: Another twenty miles to the southwest, Yongshi Mountain. There are no flowers, plants or trees, there is an abundance of silver, and water flows everywhere.

古文：又西二十里，曰复州之山，其木多檀，其阳多黄金。
现代文：再往西二十里，复州山。树木多是檀树。山南面有丰富的黄金。
English: Twenty miles further west, Fuzhou Mountain. The trees are mostly sandalwood. There is abundant gold in the southern part of the mountain.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸮，而一足彘尾，其名曰跂踵，见则其国大疫。又西三十里，曰楮山，多寓木，多椒椐，多柘，多垩。
现代文：再往西五十里，涿山。
English: Another fifty miles to the west, Lushan.

古文：又西二十里，曰又原之山，其阳多青雘，其阴多铁，其鸟多雊鹆。又西五十里，曰涿山，其木多榖、柞、杻，其阳多㻬琈之玉。
现代文：树木多是构树、柞树、杻树。山南盛产㻬琈玉。
English: The trees are mostly conifers, eucalyptus, and birch. Shannan is rich in emeralds.

古文：又西七十里，曰丙山，其木多梓檀，多弞杻。
现代文：再往西七十里，丙山。树木多是梓树、檀树、弞杻树。
English: Seventy miles to the west is Mount B. The trees are mostly azusa, sandalwood and eucalyptus.

古文：凡首阳山之首，自首山至于丙山，凡九山，二百六十七里。
现代文：总计首阳山山系之首尾，自首阳山起到丙山止，共九座山，二百六十七里。
English: The total length of the Shouyang Mountain Range, from Shouyang Mountain to Mount He, is nine mountains and 267 li.

古文：其神状皆龙身而人面。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是龙的身子而人的面孔。
English: The shapes of the deities of the mountains are the bodies of dragons with human faces.

古文：其祠之：毛用一雄鸡瘗，糈用五种之糈。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只公鸡献祭后埋入地下，祀神的米用五种粮米。
English: The mountain god is worshipped: a rooster is sacrificed in wool and then buried in the ground, and five kinds of grain rice are used to worship the god.

古文：堵山，冢也，其祠之：少牢具，羞酒祠，婴毛一璧瘗。
现代文：堵山，是诸山的宗主，祭祀这个山神：用猪、羊二牲作祭品，进献美酒来祭祀，在玉器中用一块玉璧，祀神后埋入地下。
English: Tozan, the lord of all the mountains, made sacrifices to this mountain deity: pigs and sheep were used as offerings, fine wine was offered as a sacrifice, a piece of jade was used in a jade vessel, and the deity was buried underground.

古文：騩山，帝也，其祠羞酒，太牢其；合巫祝二人儛，婴一璧。
现代文：騩山，是诸山的首领，祭祀騩山山神要进献美酒，用猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲作祭品；让女巫师和男祝师二人一起跳舞，在玉器中用一块玉璧来祭祀。
English: Lushan, is the leader of the mountains. To worship the god of Lushan Mountain, it is necessary to offer fine wine, and make a sacrifice of pigs, cattle, and sheep; let the witch and the male celebrant dance together, and use a piece of jade in the jade to make a sacrifice.

古文：《中次一十一山经》荆山之首，曰翼望之山。
现代文：中央第十一列山系荆山山系之首座山，翼望山。
English: The first mountain in the Central Eleven Mountain Ranges of the Jing Mountain Range, Yingwang Mountain.

古文：湍水出焉，东流注于济；贶水出焉，东南流注于汉，其中多蛟。
现代文：湍水从此发源，向东流入济水；贶水从此发源，向东南流入汉水，水中多蛟。
English: Surabaya's water originates from here and flows eastward into Jishui; Surabaya's water originates from here and flows southeastward into Hanshui. There is a lot of cadmium in the water.

古文：其上多松柏，其下多漆梓，其阳多赤金，其阴多珉。
现代文：树木多是松树和柏树，山下树木多是漆树和梓树，山南盛产黄金，山北盛产珉石。
English: The trees are mostly pines and cypresses, and the trees at the foot of the mountain are mostly sumac and cypress. The southern part of the mountain is rich in gold, and the northern part of the mountain is rich in ocher.

古文：又东北一百五十里，曰朝歌之山。
现代文：再往北一百五十里，朝歌山。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further north is Mount Asaka.

古文：潕水出焉，东南流注于荥，其中多人鱼。
现代文：潕水从此发源，向东南流入荥水，水中多人鱼。
English: Surabaya Water originates from here and flows into Surabaya Water to the southeast. There are many fish in the water.

古文：其上多梓柟，其兽多麢麋。
现代文：树木多是梓树、楠木。野兽多是羚羊、麋鹿。
English: Most of the trees are azaleas and camphor trees. Most of the wild animals are antelope and elk.

古文：有草焉，名曰莽草，可以毒鱼。
现代文：山中有一种草，名称是莽草，能够毒死鱼的。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, called mung grass, which can poison fish.

古文：又东南二百里，曰帝囷之山，其阳多㻬琈之玉，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往东南二百里，帝囷山。山南面有丰富的㻬琈玉，山北面有丰富的铁。
English: Another two hundred miles to the southeast, Mount Teide. The southern side of the mountain is rich in jade, and the northern side is rich in iron.

古文：帝囷之水出于其上，潜于其下，多鸣蛇。
现代文：帝囷水从这座山顶上发源，潜流到山下，水中有很多长着四只翅膀的鸣蛇。
English: The Imperial Spring Water originates from the top of the mountain and flows under the mountain. There are many four-winged singing snakes in the water.

古文：又东南五十里，曰视山，其上多韭。
现代文：再往东南五十里，视山。山上到处是野韭菜。
English: Another fifty miles to the southeast, Mt. Tozai. Wild leeks grow everywhere on the mountain.

古文：有井焉，名曰天井，夏有水，冬竭。
现代文：山中有一口井，叫做天井，夏天有水，冬天枯竭。
English: There is a well in the mountains, called the Ceiling, which has water in the summer and dries up in the winter.

古文：其上多桑，多美垩金玉。
现代文：山上有茂密的桑树，还有丰富的优良垩土、金属矿物、玉石。
English: The mountains are covered with thick mulberry trees and rich in fine rammed earth, metallic minerals and jade.

古文：又东南二百里，曰前山，其木多槠，多柏，其阳多金，其阴多赭。
现代文：再往东南二百里，前山。树木多是槠树、柏树，山南面盛产金，山北面盛产赭石。
English: Two hundred miles further southeast, Qianshan. The trees are mostly eucalyptus and cypress. The southern face of the mountain is rich in gold, and the northern face of the mountain is rich in zircon.

古文：又东南三百里，曰丰山。
现代文：再往东南三百里，丰山。
English: Another three hundred miles to the southeast is Fengshan.

古文：有兽焉，其状如蝯，赤目、赤喙、黄身，名曰雍和，见则国有大恐。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像猿猴，却长着红眼睛、红嘴巴、黄色的身子，名称是雍和，上古的恐慌之神，在哪个国家出现那个国家里就会发生大恐怖。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ape, but with red eyes, a red mouth, and a yellow body. Its name is Yonghe, the ancient god of panic. In any country, there will be great terror.

古文：神耕父处之，常游清泠之渊，出入有光，见则其国为败。
现代文：神仙耕父住在这座山里，常常在清泠渊畅游，出入时都有闪光，在哪个国家出现那个国家就要衰败。
English: The Immortal Cultivator lives in this mountain and often swims in the Clear Abyss. There are flashes of light when he goes in and out. Whichever country appears, that country will decline.

古文：有九钟焉，是知霜鸣。
现代文：山川之神，旱神，没有固定的祠礼。
English: There is no fixed shrine rite for the god of mountains and rivers, the god of drought.

古文：其上多金，其下多榖、柞、杻、橿。
现代文：这座山还有九口钟，这些钟对霜很敏感，它们都应和霜的降落而鸣响。山上有丰富的金，山下有茂密的构树、柞树、杻树、橿树。
English: The mountain also has nine bells, which are sensitive to frost, and they all chime with the fall of the frost. There is abundant gold on the mountain, and under the mountain there are dense trees, eucalyptus, eucalyptus, eucalyptus.

古文：又东北八百里，曰兔床之山，其阳多铁，其木多藇其草多鸡谷，其本如鸡卵，其味酸甘，食者利于人。
现代文：再往东北八百里，兔床山，山南面有丰富的铁，树木多是槠树和芧树。花草多是鸡谷草，它的根茎像鸡蛋似的，味道是酸中带甜，服食它是对人的身体有益的。
English: Eight hundred miles further to the northeast, there is a rich source of iron in the south of the mountain, the trees are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus. The flowers and plants are mostly chickweed, its rhizome is like an egg, the taste is sweet and sour, and it is beneficial to the human body.

古文：又东六十里，曰皮山，多垩，多赭，其木多松柏。
现代文：再往东六十里，皮山。
English: Sixty miles further east is Mount Pizan.

古文：又东六十里，曰瑶碧之山，其木多梓柟，其阴多青雘，其阳多白金。
现代文：有大量的垩土、赭石。树木多是松树和柏树。再往东六十里，瑶碧山。树木多是梓树和楠木树，山北阴面盛产青雘，山南面盛产白银。
English: There is a large amount of rammed earth and flint. The trees are mostly pines and cypresses. Sixty miles to the east, there are azure mountains. The trees are mostly azaleas and camphor trees. The north side of the mountain is rich in indigo, and the south side of the mountain is rich in silver.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如雉，恒食蜚，名曰鸩。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的野鸡，常吃蜚虫，名称是鸩。
English: There is a bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary pheasant, which often eats aphids. Its name is the cormorant.

古文：又东四十里，曰支离之山。
现代文：非前文的鸠鸟，无毒的。再往东四十里，支离山。
English: Not the aforementioned ostrich, non-poisonous. Another forty miles to the east, offshoot of Mt.

古文：济水出焉，南流注于汉。
现代文：淯水从这座山发源，向南流入汉水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and flows south into Hanshui.

古文：有鸟焉，其名曰婴勺，其状如鹊，赤目、赤喙、白身，其尾若勺，共鸣自呼。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，名称是婴勺，形状像普通的喜鹊，却长着红眼睛、红嘴巴、白色的身子，尾巴与酒勺的形状相似，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains. Its name is baby spoon. It is shaped like an ordinary magpie, but it has red eyes, a red mouth, a white body, and a tail similar to the shape of a wine spoon. The cry it emits is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：多牜乍牛，多羬羊。
现代文：野兽多是㸲牛、羬羊。
English: Most of the wild animals are yaks and yaks.

古文：又东北五十里，曰秩之山，其上多松柏机柏。
现代文：再往东北五十里，祑簓山。树木多是松树、柏树、桤树、桓树。
English: Another fifty miles to the northeast, Lushan. The trees are mostly pine, cypress, eucalyptus, and camphor trees.

古文：又西北一百里，曰堇理之山，其上多松柏，多美梓，其阴多丹雘，多金，其兽多豹虎。
现代文：再往西北一百里，堇理山。树木多是松树、柏树和梓树，山北阴盛产青雘、金。野兽多是豹子和老虎。
English: A hundred miles to the northwest is Mount Qili. The trees are mostly pines, cypresses, and azaleas. The northern part of the mountain is rich in alfalfa and gold. The animals are mostly leopards and tigers.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鹊，青身白喙，白目白尾，名曰青耕，可以御疫，其鸣自叫。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的喜鹊，却是青色的身子白色的嘴巴，白色的眼睛白色的尾巴，名称是青耕，人饲养它可以辟瘟疫，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a bird in the mountains, shaped like a common magpie, but with a blue body, white mouth, white eyes, and white tail. Its name is the blue-throated plover. If you keep it, it can ward off the plague. The call it emits is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：又东南三十里，曰依轱之山，其上多杻橿，多苴。
现代文：再往东南三十里，依轱山。树木多是杻树、橿树和柤树。
English: Another thirty miles to the southeast, nestled in the Lushan Mountains. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, eucalyptus and eucalyptus.

古文：有兽焉，其状如犬，虎爪有甲，其名曰獜，善駚，食者不风。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的狗，长着老虎一样的爪子而身上又有鳞甲，名称是獜，擅长跳跃腾扑，吃了它的肉就能使人不患风痹病。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary dog, with claws like a tiger and scales on its body. It is called a baboon. It is good at jumping and prancing, and eating its meat can prevent people from suffering from rheumatism.

古文：又东南三十五里，曰即谷之山，多美玉，多玄豹，多闾麈，多麢。
现代文：再往东南三十五里，即谷山。盛产玉石，有很多黑豹，野兽多是山驴和麈、羚羊和㚟。
English: Thirty-five miles further south-east is Taniyama. It is rich in jade and has many black leopards. The wild animals are mostly mountain donkeys and donkeys, antelopes and baboons.

古文：其阳多珉，其阴多青雘。
现代文：山南阳面盛产珉石，山北阴面盛产青雘。
English: The sunny side of Shannan is rich in vermiculite, and the shady side of Shanbei is rich in lime.

古文：又东南四十里，曰鸡山，其上多美梓，多桑，其草多韭。
现代文：再往东南四十里，鸡山。树木多是梓树、桑树。花草多是野韭菜。
English: Another forty miles to the southeast is Jishan. The trees are mostly azaleas and mulberries. The flowers and plants are mostly wild leeks.

古文：又东南五十里，曰高前之山，其上有水焉，甚寒而清，帝台之浆也，饮之者不心痛。
现代文：再往东南五十里，高前山。这座山上有一条溪水，非常冰凉而又特别清澈，是神仙帝台所用过的浆水，饮用了它就能使人不患心痛病。
English: Another fifty miles to the southeast is Mount Gaomae. On this mountain there is a stream, very cold and exceptionally clear. It is the spring water used by the mythical Emperor Tai, and drinking it can prevent people from suffering from heart disease.

古文：其上有金，其下有赭。
现代文：山上有丰富的金，山下有丰富的赭石。
English: On the mountain there is an abundance of gold, and under the mountain there is an abundance of ocher.

古文：又东南三十里，曰游戏之山，多杻、橿、榖，多玉，多封石。
现代文：再往东南三十里，游戏山。
English: Thirty miles to the southeast is Game Mountain.

古文：又东南三十五里，曰从山，其上多松柏，其下多竹。
现代文：树木多是杻树、橿树、构树。还有丰富的玉石、封石。再往东南三十五里，从山。树木多是松树、柏树和竹丛。
English: The trees are mostly eucalyptus, eucalyptus, and coniferous trees. There are also abundant cobbles and sealing stones. Thirty-five miles to the southeast, from the mountains. The trees are mostly pine trees, cypress trees, and bamboo bushes.

古文：从水出于其上，潜于其下，其中多三足鳖，枝尾，食之无蛊疫。
现代文：从水由这座山顶上发源，潜流到山下，水中有很多三足鳖，长着叉开的尾巴，吃了它的肉就能使人不患疑心病。
English: From the water that springs from the top of the mountain and trickles down to the bottom of the mountain, there are many three-legged tadpoles in the water, with forked tails, and eating its meat can prevent people from suffering from heart disease.

古文：又东南三十里，曰婴石垔之山，其上多松柏，其下多梓櫄。
现代文：再往东南三十里，婴䃌山。山上多是松树、柏树，山下多是梓树、櫄树。
English: Another thirty miles to the south-east is the Infant Mountain. On the mountain there are mostly pine trees and cypress trees, and at the foot of the mountain there are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus trees.

古文：又东南三十里，曰毕山。
现代文：再往往东南三十里，毕山。
English: Then it's often thirty miles southeast, with mountains all around.

古文：帝苑之水出焉，东北流注于视，其中多水玉，多蛟。
现代文：帝苑水从此发源，向东北流入瀙水，水中多水晶石和蛟。
English: Since then, the source of the Imperial Garden Water has flowed to the northeast into the Surabaya Water, which is mostly made up of crystal stones and gourds.

古文：其上多㻬琈之玉。
现代文：山上有丰富的㻬琈玉。
English: The mountains are rich in ores.

古文：又东南二十里，曰乐马之山。
现代文：再往东南二十里，乐马山。
English: Another twenty miles to the southeast is Mount Lemass.

古文：有兽焉，其状如彙，赤如丹火，其名曰犭戾，见则其国大疫。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的刺猬，全身赤红如丹火，名称是，在哪个国家出现那个国家里就会发生大瘟疫。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a common hedgehog, all red as a beetle, the name is, in which country there will be a great plague in that country.

古文：又东南二十五里，曰山，视水出焉，东南流注于汝水，其中多人鱼，多蛟，多颉。
现代文：再往东南二十五里，葴山。瀙水从此发源，向东南流入汝水，水中有很多人鱼、蛟和颉。
English: Twenty-five miles further south-east is Mount Lushan. The source of the Lushui River flows south-east into the Yushui River. There are many mermaids, dragonflies and tadpoles in the water.

古文：又东四十里，曰婴山，其下多青雘，其上多金玉。
现代文：再往东四十里，婴山。山下有丰富的青雘，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Another forty miles to the east is Baby Mountain. Beneath the mountain there is an abundance of barley, and on the mountain there is an abundance of metal minerals and jade.

古文：又东三十里，曰虎首之山，多苴椆椐。
现代文：再往东三十里，虎首山。树木多是柤树、椆树、椐树。
English: Another thirty miles to the east, Mount Tohu. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, eucalyptus, eucalyptus.

古文：又东二十里，曰婴侯之山，其上多封石，其下多赤锡。
现代文：再往东二十里，婴矦山。山上多出产封石，山下多出产红色锡土。
English: Another twenty miles to the east, the Infant Mountain. The mountain produces more sealing stone, and the mountain produces more red tin soil.

古文：又东五十里，曰大孰之山。
现代文：再往东五十里，大孰山。
English: Another fifty miles to the east is Mount Daxu.

古文：杀水出焉，东北流注于视水，其中多白垩。
现代文：杀水从这座山发源，向东北流入瀙水，沿岸到处是白色垩土。
English: From the source of this mountain, the floodwater flows northeast into the floodplain, and the coast is full of white floodplain soil.

古文：又东四十里，曰卑山，其上多桃李苴梓，多累。
现代文：再往东四十里，卑山。树木多是桃树、李树、柤树、梓树和紫藤树。
English: Forty miles further east, Bishan. The trees are mostly peach trees, plum trees, eucalyptus trees, eucalyptus trees and wisteria trees.

古文：又东三十里，曰倚帝之山，其上多玉，其下多金。
现代文：再往东三十里，倚帝山。山上有丰富的玉石，山下有丰富的金。
English: Another thirty miles to the east, Mount Yidishan. There is rich jade on the mountain, and there is rich gold under the mountain.

古文：有兽焉，状如鼣鼠，白耳白喙，名曰狙如，见则其国有大兵。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像鼣鼠，长着白耳朵白嘴巴，名称是狙如，在哪个国家出现那个国家里就会发生大战争。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a mole, with white ears and a white mouth, and its name is the bull's-eye. In whichever country it appears, there will be a big war in that country.

古文：又东三十里，曰鲵山，鲵水出于其上，潜于其下，其中多美垩。
现代文：再往东三十里，鲵山。鲵水从这座山顶上发源，潜流到山下，这里有很多优良垩土。
English: Thirty miles further east, there is Lushan. The water of Lushan originates from the top of this mountain and flows under the mountain. There is a lot of fine loam soil here.

古文：其上多金，其下多青雘。
现代文：山上有丰富的金，山下有丰富的青雘。
English: On the mountain there is an abundance of gold, and at the foot of the mountain there is an abundance of barley.

古文：又东三十里，曰雅山。
现代文：再往东三十里，雅山。
English: Thirty miles further east is Mount Yashan.

古文：澧水出焉，东流注于视水，其中多大鱼。
现代文：澧水从这座山发源，向东流入瀙水，水中有很多大鱼。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and flows eastward into Surabaya. There are many big fish in the water.

古文：其上多美桑，其下多苴，多赤金。
现代文：山上有茂密的优良桑树，山下有茂密的柤树，这里还多出产黄金。
English: On the mountain there are dense, fine mulberry trees, and at the foot of the mountain there are dense birch trees. There is also a lot of gold produced here.

古文：又东五十五里，曰宣山。
现代文：再往东五十里，宣山。
English: Fifty miles further east is Mount Xuanxuan.

古文：沦水出焉，东南流注于视水，其中多蛟。
现代文：沦水从此发源，向东南流入瀙水，水中有很多蛟。
English: This is the source of the watershed, which flows into the Bohai River to the southeast. There are a lot of dragonflies in the water.

古文：其上有桑焉，大五十尺，其枝四衢，其叶大尺余，赤理黄华青柎，名曰帝女之桑。
现代文：山上有一种桑树，树干合抱有五十尺粗细，树枝交叉伸向四方，树叶方圆有一尺多，红色的纹理、黄色的花朵、青色的花萼，名称是帝女桑。
English: There is a kind of mulberry tree on the mountain, the trunk is fifty feet thick, the branches cross and stretch out in all directions, the leaves are more than a foot square, red texture, yellow flowers, blue calyx, the name is Princess Mulberry.

古文：又东四十五里，曰衡山，其上多青雘，多桑，其鸟多雊鹆。
现代文：再往东四十五里，衡山。山上盛产青雘，还有茂密的桑树。禽鸟多是八哥。
English: Another forty-five miles to the east, Hengshan. The mountains are rich in artemisia, as well as dense mulberry trees. Most of the birds are starlings.

古文：又东四十里，曰丰山，其上多封石，其木多桑，多羊桃，状如桃而方茎，可以为皮张。
现代文：再往东四十里，丰山。山上多出产封石，树木多是桑树，还有大量的羊桃，形状像一般的桃树却是方方的茎干，可以用它医治人的皮肤肿胀病。
English: Forty miles further east, Fengshan. The mountain produces more sealing stones, the trees are mostly mulberry trees, and there are a large number of peaches. The shape is like an ordinary peach tree, but the stem is square. It can be used to treat people's skin swelling disease.

古文：又东七十里，曰妪山，其上多美玉，其下多金，其草多鸡谷。
现代文：再往东七十里，妪山。山上盛产优良玉石，山下盛产金。花草多是鸡谷草。
English: Seventy miles further east, Lushan. The mountains are rich in fine jade, and the mountains below are rich in gold. The flowers and plants are mostly broom grass.

古文：又东三十里，曰鲜山，其木多楢杻苴，其草多冬，其阳多金，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往东三十里，鲜山。树木多是楢树、杻树、柤树。花草多是蔷薇，山南阳面有丰富的金，山北阴面有丰富的铁。
English: Another thirty miles to the east, fresh mountains. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, eucalyptus, eucalyptus. The flowers and plants are mostly roses. The sunny side of the south of the mountain is rich in gold and the shady side of the north of the mountain is rich in iron.

古文：有兽焉，其状如膜大，赤喙、赤目、白尾，见则其邑有火，名曰犭多即。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像膜犬，长着红嘴巴、红眼睛、白尾巴，在哪个地方出现那里就会有火灾，名称是即。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a film dog, with a red mouth, red eyes and a white tail. Wherever it appears, there will be fire, hence the name.

古文：又东三十里，曰章山，其阳多金，其阴多美石。
现代文：再往东三十里，章山。山南阳面多出产金，山北阴面多出产漂亮的石头。
English: Thirty miles further east, Zhangshan. The sunny side of Shannan produces more gold, while the shady side of Shannbei produces more beautiful stones.

古文：皋水出焉，东流注于澧水，其中多脃石。
现代文：皋水从这座山发源，向东流入澧水，水中有许多脃石。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and flows eastward into Surabaya. There are many ocher stones in the water.

古文：又东二十五里，曰大支之山，其阳多金，其木多榖、柞，无草木。
现代文：再往东二十五里，大支山。山南阳面有丰富的金。树木多是构树和柞树，不生长草。
English: Twenty-five miles further east, the Dajishan Mountains. The sunny southern face of the mountain is rich in gold. The trees are mostly conifers and eucalyptus, and no grass grows.

古文：又东五十里，曰区吴之山，其木多苴。
现代文：再往东五十里，区吴山。树木多是柤树。
English: Fifty miles further east, the district of Wushan. Most of the trees are eucalyptus.

古文：又东五十里，曰声匈之山，其木多榖，多玉，上多封石。
现代文：再往东五十里，声匈山。树木多是构树，到处是玉石，山上还盛产封石。
English: Another fifty miles to the east, Mt. Shengxiong. The trees are mostly conifers, and there is jade everywhere. The mountain is also rich in sealing stones.

古文：又东五十里，曰大騩之山，其阳多赤金，其阴多砥石。
现代文：再往东五十里，大騩山。山南阳盛产黄金，山北阴盛产细磨石。
English: Another fifty miles to the east is Mount Dafu. The south of the mountain is rich in gold, and the north of the mountain is rich in fine grinding stones.

古文：又东十里，曰踵臼之山，无草木。
现代文：再往东十里，踵臼山。不生长花草树木。
English: Ten miles further east, Mount Usu is at its foot. No flowers or trees grow there.

古文：又东北七十里，曰历石之山，其木多荆芑，其阳多黄金，其阴多砥石。
现代文：再往东北七十里，历石山，树木多是牡荆和枸杞，山南阳盛产黄金，山北阴盛产细磨石。
English: Seventy miles further to the northeast, Lishishishan Mountain, the trees are mostly bauhinia and alder, Shannan Yang is rich in gold, Shanbei Yin is rich in fine grinding stones.

古文：有兽焉，其状如貍，而白首虎爪，名曰梁渠，见则其国有大兵。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像野猫，却长着白色的脑袋老虎一样的爪子，名称是梁渠，在哪个国家出现那个国家里就会发生大战争。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a wild cat, but with a white head and claws like a tiger. Its name is Liang Qu, and if it appears in any country, there will be a big war in that country.

古文：又东南一百里，曰求山。
现代文：再往东南一百里，求山。
English: Go another hundred miles southeast and look for mountains.

古文：求水出于其上，潜于其下，中有美赭。
现代文：求水从这座山顶上发源，潜流到山下，这里有很多优良赭石。
English: From the top of the mountain, the source of the water flows to the bottom of the mountain, where there are many fine ocher stones.

古文：其木多苴，多。
现代文：树木多是柤树，还有矮小丛生的䉋竹。
English: Most of the trees are eucalyptus, and there are also small clusters of camphor bamboo.

古文：其阳多金，其阴多铁。
现代文：山南阳面有丰富的金，山北阴面有丰富的铁。
English: The southern sunny side of the mountain is rich in gold, and the northern shady side is rich in iron.

古文：又东二百里，曰丑阳之山，其上多椆椐。
现代文：再往东二百里，丑阳山。树木多是椆树和椐树。
English: Two hundred miles further east, Mount Ugyang. The trees are mostly eucalyptus and camphor trees.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如乌而赤足，名曰鸟只鵌，可以御火。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的乌鸦却长着红色爪子，名称是鵌，人饲养它可以辟火。
English: There is a bird in the mountains, shaped like a common crow but with red claws. Its name is the cormorant, and it can be kept as a fire escape.

古文：又东三百里，曰奥山，其上多柏杻橿，其阳多㻬琈之玉。
现代文：再往东三百里，奥山。树木多是松树、杻树、橿树，山南阳面盛产㻬琈玉。
English: Three hundred miles further east, Okuyama. The trees are mostly pine, eucalyptus, and birch, and the sunny side of the mountain is rich in emeralds.

古文：奥水出焉，东流注于视水。
现代文：奥水从此发源，向东流入瀙水。
English: The source of the Oku-mizu River flows eastward into the Surabaya River.

古文：又东三十五里，曰服山，其木多苴，其上多封石，其下多赤锡。
现代文：再往东三十五里，服山。树木多是柤树，山上有丰富的封石，山下多出产红色锡土。
English: Thirty-five miles further east, Fushan. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, there are abundant sealing stones on the mountain, and the lower part of the mountain produces more red tin.

古文：又东百十里，曰杳山，其上多嘉荣草，多金玉。
现代文：再往东三百一十里，杳山。花草多是嘉荣草，还有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: 310 miles further east, Lushan. Most of the flowers and plants are Jia Rong grass, and there are also abundant metal minerals and jade.

古文：又东三百五十里，曰几山，其木多楢檀杻，其草多香。
现代文：再往东三百五十里，凡山。树木多是楢树、檀树、杻树。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further east, there are mountains everywhere. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, sandalwood and eucalyptus.

古文：有兽焉，其状如彘，黄身、白头、白尾，名曰闻豕粦，见则天下大风。
现代文：草类主要是各种香草。山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的猪，却是黄色的身子、白色的脑袋、白色的尾巴，名称是闻膦，一出现天下就会刮起大风。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary pig, but with a yellow body, a white head, and a white tail. Its name is Wenshan. Whenever it appears, a strong wind will blow across the world.

古文：凡荆山之首，自翼望之山至于几山，凡四十八山，三千七百三十二里。
现代文：总计荆山山系之首尾，自翼望山起到凡山，四十八座山，三千七百三十二里。
English: The total length of the Jingshan mountain range, from the Yingwang Mountain to the Fanzhan Mountain, is 48 mountains and 3732 miles.

古文：其神状皆彘身人首。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是猪的身子而人的头。
English: The shapes of the deities of the mountains and hills are pig bodies with human heads.

古文：其祠：毛用一雄鸡祈，瘗用一珪，糈用五种之精。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中用一只公鸡来祭祀后而埋入地下，在祀神的玉器中用一块玉珪献祭，祀神的米用黍、稷、稻、粱、麦五种粮米。
English: To worship the mountain deities: a rooster was sacrificed in wool and then buried in the ground, a piece of jade was used in a jade vessel to worship the deities, and five kinds of rice were used to worship the deities.

古文：禾山，帝也，其祠：太牢之具，羞瘗，倒毛；用一璧，牛无常。堵山、玉山冢也，皆倒祠，羞毛少牢，婴毛吉玉。
现代文：禾山，是诸山的首领。祭祀禾山山神：在毛物中用猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲作祭品，进献后埋入地下，而且将牲畜倒着埋；在祀神的玉器中用一块玉璧献祭，但也不必三牲全备。堵山、玉山，是诸山的宗主，祭祀后都要将牲畜倒着埋掉，进献的祭祀品是用猪、羊，在祀神的玉器中要用一块吉玉。
English: He Shan, is the leader of the mountains. To worship He Shan, the deity of the mountains: the three animals of pigs, cattle, and sheep are used as a sacrifice in the wool, buried in the ground after the offering, and the animals are buried upside down; a piece of jade is used as a sacrifice in the jade vessel to worship the god, but the three animals do not have to be fully prepared. He Shan, Yushan, is the patriarch of the mountains, and the animals are buried upside down after the sacrifice. The sacrificial offering is made of pigs and sheep, and a jade bead is used in the jade vessel to worship the god.

古文：《中次十二经》洞庭山之首，曰篇遇之山，无草木，多黄金。
现代文：中央第十二列山系洞庭山山系，首座山是篇遇山。这里不生花草树木，蕴藏着丰富的黄金。
English: The 12th row of mountains in the center is the Dongting Mountains, and the first mountain is the Henan Mountains. There are no flowers or trees here, but there is a lot of gold.

古文：又东南五十里，曰云山，无草木。
现代文：再往东南五十里，云山。不生长花草树木。
English: Another fifty miles to the southeast, Yunshan. Flowers and trees do not grow.

古文：有桂竹，甚毒，伤人必死，其上多黄金，其下多㻬琈之玉。
现代文：但有一种桂竹，毒性特别大，枝叶刺着人就必死。山上盛产黄金，山下盛产㻬琈玉。
English: However, there is a kind of Katsura bamboo, which is particularly toxic, and if you are stung by its branches and leaves, you will die. The mountains are rich in gold, and the mountains are rich in emeralds.

古文：又东南一百三十里，曰龟山，其木多榖、柞、椆、椐，其上多黄金，其下多青雄黄，多扶竹。
现代文：再往东南一百三十里，龟山。树木多是构树、柞树、椆树、椐树，山上盛产黄金，山下盛产石青、雄黄，还有很多扶竹。
English: A hundred and thirty miles to the southeast, Kameyama. The trees are mostly conifers, eucalyptus, eucalyptus, eucalyptus. The mountain is rich in gold, the mountain is rich in stone blue, male yellow, and there are many bamboo.

古文：又东七十里，曰丙山，多筀竹，多黄金铜铁，无木。
现代文：再往东七十里，丙山。有茂密的桂竹，还有丰富的黄金、铜、铁，但没有树木。
English: Seventy miles further to the east, there is Mount C. It is covered with lush osmanthus and rich in gold, copper and iron, but there are no trees.

古文：又东南五十里，曰风伯之山，其上多金玉，其下多痠石文石，多铁，其木多柳杻檀楮。
现代文：再往东南五十里，风伯山。山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产痠石、色彩斑斓的漂亮石头，还盛产铁。树木多是柳树、杻树、檀树、构树。
English: Another fifty miles to the southeast is Fengbo Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and the lower part of the mountain is rich in zircon, beautiful stones with bright colors, and also rich in iron. The trees are mostly willow, eucalyptus, sandalwood, and conifers.

古文：其东有林焉，名曰莽浮之林，多美木鸟兽。
现代文：在山东面有一片树林，叫做莽浮林，其中有许多的优良树木和禽鸟野兽。
English: In the eastern part of Shandong Province, there is a grove of trees called Meng Fuxing Forest, in which there are many fine trees and birds and beasts.

古文：又东一百五十里，曰夫夫之山，其上多黄金，其下多青雄黄，其木多桑楮，其草多竹、鸡鼓。
现代文：再往东一百五十里，夫夫山。山上多出产黄金，山下多出产石青、雄黄。树木多是桑树、构树。花草多是竹子、鸡谷草。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further east, Mount Fufu. On the top of the mountain, more gold is produced, and below the mountain, more stone blue and yellow. The trees are mostly mulberry and coniferous trees. The flowers and plants are mostly bamboo and broom grass.

古文：神于儿居之，其状人身而身操两蛇，常游于江渊，出入有光。
现代文：神仙于儿居住在这儿，形貌是人身手握两条蛇，常常游玩于长江水的深渊中，出没时都有闪光。
English: Immortal Yu'er lives here, with the appearance of a human hand holding two snakes. He often plays in the abyss of the Yangtze River, and there are flashes of light when he appears.

古文：又东南一百十里，曰洞庭之山，其上多黄金，其下多银铁，其木多柤梨橘櫾，其草多葌、蘪芜芍药芎藭。
现代文：再往东南一百二十里，洞庭山。山上盛产黄金，山下盛产银和铁。树木多是柤树、梨树、橘子树、柚子树。花草多是兰草、蘪芜、芍药、芎等香草。
English: A hundred and twenty miles to the southeast is Dongting Mountain. The top of the mountain is rich in gold, and the bottom of the mountain is rich in silver and iron. The trees are mostly eucalyptus, pear tree, orange tree, and yuzu tree. The flowers and plants are mostly orchids, thistles, thistles, thistles and other herbs.

古文：帝之二女居之，是常游于江渊。
现代文：天帝的两个女儿住在这座山里，她俩常在长江水的深渊中游玩。
English: Tiandi's two daughters live in this mountain, and they often swim in the abyss of the Yangtze River.

古文：澧沅之风，交潇湘之渊，是在九江之间，出入必以飘风暴雨。
现代文：从澧水和沅水吹来的清风，交会在幽清的湘水渊潭上，这里正是九条江水汇合的中间，她俩出入时都有旋风急雨相伴随。
English: The clear winds blowing from Surabaya and Surabaya meet at the secluded Xiangshui Yuanyuan Lake, which is the middle of the confluence of nine rivers. Both of them are accompanied by cyclones and torrential rain when they go in and out.

古文：是多怪神，状如人而载蛇左右手操蛇。
现代文：洞庭山中还住着很多怪神，形貌像人而身上绕着蛇，左右两只手也握着蛇。
English: Many strange gods still live in the Dongting Mountains. They are shaped like humans with snakes around their bodies, and they also hold snakes in their right and left hands.

古文：多怪鸟。
现代文：这里还有许多怪鸟。
English: There are also many strange birds.

古文：又东南一百八十里，曰暴山，其木多棕楠荆芑竹箭菌，其上多黄金玉，其下多文石铁，其兽多麋鹿就。
现代文：再往东南一百八十里，暴山。树木多是棕树、楠木树、牡荆树、枸杞树和竹子、箭竹、䉋竹、箘竹，山上盛产黄金、玉石，山下盛产彩色花纹的漂亮石头、铁。野兽多是麋鹿、鹿、麂。
English: A hundred and eighty miles to the southeast, the Wu Mountains. The trees are mostly palm trees, camphor trees, bauhinia trees, eucalyptus trees and bamboo, arrow bamboo, camphor bamboo, camphor bamboo. The mountains are rich in gold and jade, and the mountains are rich in beautiful stone and iron with colorful patterns. The wild animals are mostly elk, deer, and marten.

古文：又东南二百里，曰即公之山，其上多黄金，其下多㻬琈之玉，其木多柳杻檀桑。有兽焉，其状如龟，而白身赤首，名曰蛫，是可以御火。
现代文：禽鸟多是鹫鹰。
English: Most of the birds are vultures.

古文：又东南一百五十九里，有尧山，其阴多黄垩，其阳多黄金，其木多荆芑柳檀，其草多藷藇。
现代文：树木多是柳树、杻树、檀树、桑树。山中生长着一种野兽，形状像一般的乌龟，却是白身子红脑袋，名称是蛫，人饲养它可以辟火。再往东南一百五十九里，尧山。山北阴面盛产黄色垩土，山南阳面盛产黄金，树木多是牡荆树、枸杞树、柳树、檀树。草多是山药、苍术或白术。
English: Most of the trees are willow, eucalyptus, sandalwood and mulberry. A beast grows in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary turtle, but it is a white-bodied redhead, its name is the eucalyptus, and it can be bred to start a fire. A hundred and fifty-nine miles to the southeast is Mount Lushan. The northern shadow of the mountain is rich in yellow eucalyptus, and the southern sun is rich in gold. The trees are mostly bauhinia, eucalyptus, willow and sandalwood. The grass is mostly yam, chenopodium or chenopodium.

古文：又东南一百里，曰江浮之山，其上多银砥砺，无草木，其兽多豕鹿。
现代文：再往东南一百里，江浮山。山上盛产银、磨石。没有花草树木，野兽多是野猪、鹿。
English: A hundred miles further south-east, there are the Jofu Mountains. The mountains are rich in silver and grinding stones. There are no flowers, plants or trees, and most of the animals are wild boars and deer.

古文：又东二百里，曰真陵之山，其上多黄金，其下多玉，其木多榖、柞、柳、杻，其草多荣草。
现代文：再往东二百里，真陵山。山上多出产黄金，山下多出产玉石。树木多是构树、柞树、柳树、杻树。草多是可以医治风痹病的荣草。
English: Two hundred miles further to the east is Mount Zhenling. The top of the mountain produces more gold than jade, and the bottom of the mountain produces more jade. The trees are mostly conifers, eucalyptus, willow, and eucalyptus. The grass is mostly verdure, which can cure wind and palsy.

古文：又东南一百二十里，曰阳帝之山，多美铜，其木多橿杻檿楮，其兽多麢麝。
现代文：野兽多是羚羊和麝香鹿。
English: Most of the animals are antelope and musk deer.

古文：又南九十里，曰柴桑之山，其上多银，其下多碧，多泠石赭，其木多柳、芑、楮、桑，其兽多麋鹿，多白蛇飞蛇。
现代文：再往南九十里，柴桑山。山上盛产银，山下盛产碧玉，到处是柔软如泥的汵石、赭石。树木多是柳树、枸杞树、楮树、桑树。野兽多是麋鹿、鹿、白色蛇、飞蛇。
English: Ninety miles further south, the Chai Mulberry Mountains. The top of the mountain is rich in silver, the bottom of the mountain is rich in jasper, and there are soft as mud flints and flints everywhere. The trees are mostly willows, elms, birches, and mulberries. The beasts are mostly elk, deer, white snakes, and flying snakes.

古文：又东二百三十里，曰荣余之山，其上多铜，其下多银，其木多柳芑，其虫多怪蛇怪虫。
现代文：再往东二百三十里，荣余山。山上盛产铜，山下盛产银。树木多是柳树、枸杞树。虫类多是怪蛇、怪虫。
English: Another two hundred and thirty miles to the east, Rongyu Mountain. The mountain is rich in copper, and the mountain is rich in silver. The trees are mostly willows and eucalyptus. The insects are mostly strange snakes and insects.

古文：凡洞庭山之首，自篇遇之山至于荣余之山，凡十万山，二千八百里。
现代文：总计洞庭山山系之首尾，自篇遇山起到荣余山，共十五座山，二千八百里。
English: The total length of the Dongting Mountains mountain range, from Zhenshan to Rongyushan, is fifteen mountains and twenty-eight hundred miles.

古文：其神状皆鸟身而龙首。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是鸟的身子龙的脑袋。
English: The shapes of all the mountain deities are birds with dragon heads.

古文：其祠：毛用一雄鸡、一牝豚刏，糈用稌。
现代文：祭祀山神：在毛物中宰杀一只公鸡、一头母猪作祭品，祀神的米用稻米。
English: Sacrifices to the mountain gods: a rooster and a sow are slaughtered in the wool as offerings, and rice is used to worship the gods.

古文：凡夫夫之山、即公之山、尧山、阳帝之山皆冢也，其祠：皆肆瘗，祈用酒，毛用少牢，婴毛一吉玉。
现代文：凡夫夫山、即公山、尧山、阳帝山，都是诸山的宗主，祭祀这几座山的山神：都要陈列牲畜、玉器而后埋入地下，祈神用美酒献祭，在毛物中用猪、羊二牲作祭品，在祀神的玉器中要用吉玉。
English: Fufufu Mountain, that is, Gongshan Mountain, Lushan Mountain, and Yangdi Mountain, are the patriarchs of all mountains, and the mountain gods of these mountains are worshiped: they must display livestock and jade objects and then bury them in the ground, pray for the gods to sacrifice with fine wine, use pigs and sheep in the wool to make sacrifices, and use lucky jade in the jade objects to worship the gods.

古文：洞庭、荣余山神也，其祠：皆肆瘗，祈酒太牢祠，婴用圭璧十五，五采惠之。
现代文：洞庭山、荣余山，是神灵显应之山，祭祀这二位山神：都要陈列牲畜、玉器而后埋入地下，祈神用美酒及猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲献祭，祀神的玉器要用十五块玉圭十五块玉璧，用青、黄、赤、白、黑五样色彩绘饰它们。
English: Dongting Mountain and Rongyu Mountain are the mountains where the gods appear, and these two mountain gods are worshiped: they must display livestock and jade vessels and then bury them underground, and pray to the gods with wine and pigs, cattle and sheep. The jade vessels for worshiping the gods should be made of fifteen pieces of jade and fifteen pieces of jade, and they should be painted with blue, yellow, red, white and black.

古文：右中经之山志，大凡百九十七山，二万一千三百七十一里。
现代文：上述中山十二列山，共计一百九十七山，二万一千三百七十一里。
English: The above-mentioned twelve mountains of Zhongshan, a total of one hundred and ninety-seven mountains, 21,371 li.

古文：大凡天下名山五千三百七十，居地，大凡六万四千五十六里。
现代文：所有天下名山，共五千三百七十座，可居住的有六万四千五十六里。
English: Of all the world's famous mountains, there are a total of 5,370, of which 64,566 are habitable.

