古文：嵩高山北有大穴，莫测其深，百姓岁时游观。
现代文：嵩高山的北面有一个很大的洞穴，人们不知道它有多深，百姓们一年四季都来这里游玩观赏。
English: There is a big cave on the north side of the Song Gaoshan. People don't know how deep it is. People come here all year round to play and watch.

古文：晋初，尝有一人误堕穴中。
现代文：晋代初期的时候，曾经有一个人不慎掉进这个洞穴之中。
English: In the early Jin Dynasty, a man accidentally fell into the cave.

古文：同辈冀其傥不死，投食于穴中。
现代文：同辈们都希望他能够活下去，就向洞穴里投放食物。
English: His peers, hoping he would survive, dropped food into the cave.

古文：坠者得之，为寻穴而行。
现代文：掉进洞穴里的人得到了食物，就为了探寻出口而沿着洞穴行走。
English: The man who fell into the cave was given food and began to walk along the cave in search of a way out.

古文：计可十余日，忽然见明。
现代文：大约走了十来天，忽然出现了光明。
English: After walking for about ten days, a light suddenly appeared.

古文：又有草屋，中有二人，对坐围棋。局下有一杯白饮。
现代文：又看见一座草屋，屋中有二个人对坐着下围棋，棋盘的下面放着一杯白色的饮料。
English: He also saw a grass hut, in which two people were sitting opposite each other playing a game of Go, with a glass of white drink underneath the board.

古文：坠者告以饥渴，棋者曰： 可饮此。 遂饮之，气力十倍。
现代文：掉进洞穴的人向他们诉说了自己又饥又渴的情况，下棋的人说： 你可以喝了这杯饮料。 掉进洞穴的人于是喝下了饮料，气力猛增了十倍。
English: The man in the cave told them how hungry and thirsty he was, and the chess player said, "You can have this drink," and the man in the cave drank it and became ten times stronger.

古文：棋者曰： 汝欲停此否？ 坠者不愿停。
现代文：下棋的人问道： 你想在这里留下来吗？ 
English: The chess player asked: Do you want to stay here?

古文：棋者曰： 从此西行，有天井，其中多蛟龙。
现代文：掉进洞穴的人表示不愿意留下来。下棋的人就说： 从这里向西走，有一个天井，井里有很多蛟龙。
English: The man who fell into the cave did not want to stay, so the chess player said, "Go west from here, there is a ceiling, and there are many dragons in the well."

古文：但投身入井，自当出。
现代文：但只要你投身走进井里，自然就会走出去。
English: But as long as you throw yourself into the well, you will naturally go out.

古文：若饿，取井中物食。 坠者如言，半年许，乃出蜀中。
现代文：如果你饿了，就取井里的东西来吃。 掉进洞穴的人按照下棋的人所说的而行，经过半年左右，果然从蜀地走出来了。
English: If you are hungry, take something from the well to eat.The man who fell into the cave did as the chess player said, and after about half a year, he came out of Shu.

古文：归洛下，问张华，华曰： 此仙馆大夫。所饮者，玉浆也，所食者，龙穴石髓也。 
现代文：他回到洛阳，就这事去请教广武县侯张华，张华说： 你见到的是仙馆里的二位神仙，你喝的是玉液琼浆，吃的是蛟龙洞穴里的石钟乳。 
English: He returned to Luoyang to consult Zhang Hua, the lord of Guangwu County, about this matter. Zhang Hua said: What you saw were two immortals in a hall of immortals, what you drank was jade juice, and what you ate was stone bell milk from a dragon's cave.

古文：会稽剡县民袁相、根硕二人猎，经深山重岭甚多，见一群山羊六七头，逐之。
现代文：会稽剡县乡民袁相、根硕二个人打猎，经过了很多深山峻岭，发现了约有六七只的一群山羊，就追了过去。
English: Yuan Xiang and Genshuo, two villagers from Huiqi County, went hunting. They passed through many deep mountains and found a group of about six or seven goats and chased them.

古文：经一石桥，甚狭而峻。
现代文：经过一座石桥，既非常狭窄又很险峻。
English: Over a stone bridge, very narrow and very steep.

古文：羊去，根等亦随渡，向绝崖。
现代文：山羊过桥而去，根硕二人也随之追过桥去，追到了一处绝壁悬崖。
English: The goat ran away across the bridge, and the two men chased it across the bridge until they reached a precipitous cliff.

古文：崖正赤，壁立，名曰赤城。
现代文：悬崖是鲜红色的，像陡峭的墙壁一样耸立，名称叫做赤城山。
English: The cliffs are bright red and rise like sheer walls. They are called the Akagi Mountains.

古文：上有水流下，广狭如匹布，剡人谓之瀑布。
现代文：悬崖顶上有水流而下，其宽窄就好像一匹布，剡县的人称之为瀑布。
English: There is water flowing down from the top of the cliff, and its width and narrowness are like a cloth. People in Handan County call it a waterfall.

古文：羊径有山穴如门，豁然而过。
现代文：山羊经过的小径上有一个像大门一样的山洞，他们心中一亮就奔了过去。
English: On the path through which the goats passed, there was a cave that looked like a gate. They ran through it as soon as they could.

古文：既入，内甚平敞，草木皆香。
现代文：一走进山洞，发现洞内非常平坦宽敞，草木都散发着芳香气味。
English: As soon as I walked into the cave, I found that the cave was very flat and spacious, and the plants exuded an aromatic smell.

古文：有一小屋，二女子住其中，年皆十五六，容色甚美，著青衣。
现代文：洞内有一间小屋，小屋中住着两个女子，年龄都在十五、六岁，容貌姿色都非常美丽，身穿青色服饰。
English: Inside the cave there is a small hut, in which two women live, both aged fifteen and six, very beautiful in appearance and dress, wearing blue clothing.

古文：一名莹珠，一名洁玉。
现代文：她们一个名叫莹珠，另一个名叫洁玉。
English: One of them is named Yingzhu and the other is named Jieyu.

古文：见二人至，忻然云： 早望汝来。 遂为室家。
现代文：她们看见根硕二人到来，欣喜地说： 早就盼望着你们的到来。 
English: When they saw the two newcomers, they said with joy, "We have been looking forward to your arrival for a long time."

古文：忽二女出行，云复有得婿者，往庆之。
现代文：于是，他们就结成了夫妻。忽然有一天，两个女子要外出，说有其他姐妹也得到了夫婿，要去给她们贺喜。
English: So they became husband and wife. Suddenly, one day, the two women wanted to go out and said that there were other sisters who had also got husbands, and they wanted to congratulate them.

古文：曳履于绝岩上行，琅琅然。
现代文：她们在绝壁悬崖上拖着鞋行走，脚步声很清脆。
English: They shuffle along the sheer cliff face, their footsteps crisp.

古文：二人思归，潜去归路。
现代文：根硕二人思念家乡想回去，就偷偷地踏上了回家的路。
English: The two of them miss their hometown and want to go back, so they secretly set out on their way home.

古文：二女已知，追还，乃谓曰： 自可去。 乃以一腕囊与根等，语曰： 慎勿开也。 于是乃归。
现代文：两个女子得知后返身追了上来，就对他们说： 你们自当可以离开。 于是，她们就把手腕上的一个香囊赠送给根硕二人，嘱咐他们： 小心别打开它。 于是他们就回到了家。
English: When the two women heard of this, they ran after them and said to them, "You may go away," and they gave the two men a sachet of perfume on their wrists and told them, "Be careful not to open it," and they returned home.

古文：后出行，家人开视其囊，囊如莲花，一重去，一重复，至五盖，中有小青鸟，飞去。
现代文：后来根硕外出，家里人把他的香囊打开了来看。香囊像莲花的花瓣，剥去一层又一层，直到第五层，囊中有只小青鸟飞了出去。
English: Later, when he went out, his family opened his sachet to take a look. The sachet looked like the petals of a lotus flower, peeling off layer after layer, until on the fifth layer, a little blue bird flew out of the sachet.

古文：根还知此，怅然而已。
现代文：根硕回到家里知道了此事，懊悔不已。
English: When he got home and found out what had happened, he was filled with remorse.

古文：后根于田中耕，家依常饷之，见在田中不动，就视，但有壳如蝉蜕也。
现代文：后来根硕在田中耕种，家里人像往常一样给他送饭来，只见他在田中动也不动。走近一看，但见他只剩下像蝉蜕一样的躯壳了。
English: Later, Gensho was farming in the field, and his family brought him food as usual, only to find him motionless in the field. When he got closer, he saw that all that was left of him was a shell like a cicada.

古文：荥阳人，姓何，忘其名，有名闻士也。
现代文：荥阳县有一个姓何的人，不知道他的名字叫什么，是一个有名望的人士。
English: There is a man surnamed He in Shenyang County. I don't know what his name is, but he is a famous person.

古文：荆州辟为别驾，不就，隐遁养志。
现代文：荆州的长官征请他任别驾从事史官职，他不就任，反而隐居起来修身养志。
English: The governor of Jingzhou conscripted him to take up the post of historian, but he did not take up the post. Instead, he went into seclusion to cultivate himself.

古文：常至田舍，人收获在场上。
现代文：他经常到田间和农家，看人们在院坝上收获粮食。
English: He often goes to the fields and farmhouses to see people harvesting grain on the courtyard dam.

古文：忽有一人，长丈余，萧疏单衣，角巾，来诣之。
现代文：有一天，忽然有一个高约一丈的人，身穿稀稀落落的单衣，头戴棱角冠巾。
English: One day, all of a sudden, there was a man who was about the same height, wearing a loose-fitting singlet and a square-cornered headscarf.

古文：翩翩举其两手，并舞而来，语何云： 君曾见 韶舞 不？
现代文：这个人来到这里，轻轻地举起自己的双手跳起舞来。这个人对他说道： 你曾经见过《韶舞》没有？我跳的就是《韶舞》。 
English: This man came here and danced lightly with his hands up. This man said to him: Have you ever seen Breakdance? I danced Breakdance.

古文：此是 韶舞 。 且舞且去。何寻逐，径向一山，山有穴，才容一人。
现代文：这个人一边跳舞一边离开，他跟着这个人追去，径直追到一座山上。山上有一个洞穴，只能容一个人通过。
English: The man left while dancing, and he followed the man, straight to a mountain, where there was a cave that only one person could pass through.

古文：其人即入穴，何亦随之入。
现代文：这个人叫他进洞去，他便跟着进入了洞穴。
English: The man told him to go into the cave and he followed him into the cave.

古文：初甚急，前辄闲旷，便失人，见有良田数十顷。何遂垦作，以为世业。
现代文：开始时洞内很狭窄，越往前走就越开阔宽敞，这个人就突然消失了。他看见这里有数十公顷良田，于是就在这里开垦耕种，作为世世代代的事业。
English: At first, the cave was very narrow, but the further he went, the more open and spacious it became. The man suddenly disappeared. He saw that there were dozens of hectares of good fields here, so he started farming here as a business for generations.

古文：子孙至今赖之。
现代文：他的子孙至今还定居在这里耕作生活。
English: His descendants still live and farm here.

古文：晋太元中，武陵人捕鱼为业。
现代文：晋朝太元年间，武陵郡有一个以打鱼为生的人。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, there was a man in Wuling County who made a living by catching fish.

古文：缘溪行，忘路之远近，忽逢桃花林，夹岸数百步，中无杂树，芳华鲜美，落英缤纷。
现代文：有一天他摇船沿着溪河逆流而行，不知不觉船行走了很远的路，忽然间遇到一处桃花林，在两岸数百步之中没有其它树木。鲜艳美丽芳香的桃花林，刚刚绽放的花朵五彩缤纷。
English: One day, he rocked the boat and went against the current along the stream. Unknowingly, the boat traveled a long way and suddenly encountered a peach blossom forest. There were no other trees for hundreds of steps on both sides of the river. The peach blossom forest was bright, beautiful and fragrant, and the flowers that had just bloomed were colorful.

古文：渔人甚异之。复前行，欲穷其林。
现代文：打鱼人非常惊奇，又摇着船向前行走，想要寻找到桃花林的尽头。
English: The fisherman was very surprised, and he rocked the boat and walked forward, trying to find the end of the peach blossom forest.

古文：林尽水源，便得一山。
现代文：走出桃花林的尽头来到溪河的源头处，就看见一座山。
English: When you come out of the end of the peach blossom forest to the source of the stream, you will see a mountain.

古文：山有小口，彷佛若有光。
现代文：山脚下有一个小洞，洞内仿佛还有光亮。
English: There is a small cave at the foot of the mountain, and it seems that there is still light inside the cave.

古文：便舍舟，从口入。
现代文：打鱼人就走下小船，从小洞口钻了进去。
English: The fisherman got out of the boat and went down a small hole.

古文：初极狭，才通人。
现代文：起初洞内非常狭窄，刚好能容纳一个人通过。
English: At first, the cave was very narrow, just enough to allow one person to pass through.

古文：复行数十步，豁然开朗，土地旷空，屋舍俨然。
现代文：又向前走了数十步，忽然就变得开阔明亮了。
English: He walked a few dozen steps further, and suddenly it became wide open and bright.

古文：有良田、美池、桑竹之属。阡陌交通，鸡犬相闻。
现代文：这里面有宽阔的土地，整齐的房屋，还有肥沃的良田、美丽的池塘、桑和竹之类的树林；田地间的小路纵横交错，听得见鸡鸣狗叫。
English: There is wide land, neat houses, and fertile good fields, beautiful ponds, forests such as mulberry and bamboo; paths criss-cross between the fields, and chickens can be heard chirping.

古文：男女衣著，悉如外人。黄发垂髫，并怡然自乐。
现代文：这里的男男女女所穿的衣服与外面的人一样，大人小孩个个喜悦快乐。
English: The men and women here wear the same clothes as those outside, and the adults and children are all happy.

古文：见渔人，大惊，问所从来，具答之。
现代文：他们看见打鱼人，非常惊讶，问他是从哪里来的？
English: They were very surprised to see the fisherman and asked him where he came from.

古文：便要还家，为设酒杀鸡作食。
现代文：打鱼人一一作了回答。他们就邀请打鱼人到他们的家里作客，摆酒杀鸡做饭招待他。
English: The fishermen answered one by one, and they invited the fisherman to their home as a guest, offering him wine and food.

古文：村中人闻有此人，咸来问讯。
现代文：村里的人得知有打鱼人到来，纷纷前来问候打听。
English: When the people in the village learned that a fisherman had arrived, they came to inquire.

古文：自云先世避秦难，率妻子邑人至此绝境，不复出焉，遂与外隔。
现代文：他们说自己的祖先在秦朝的时候为了躲避战乱，带领妻子、儿女以及同乡人寻到这个与外界隔绝的地方，从此再也没有出去过，于是就与外界隔绝了。
English: They said that their ancestors, in order to escape the war during the Qin Dynasty, led their wives, children and fellow villagers to this isolated place, and never went out again, so they were cut off from the outside world.

古文：问今是何世，乃不知有汉，无论魏晋。
现代文：他们问打鱼人现在是什么朝代，根本就不知道有过汉朝，更不用说知道魏朝、晋代了。
English: When they asked the fisherman what dynasty he was from, he didn't even know that there was a Han dynasty, let alone the Wei and Jin dynasties.

古文：此人一一具言所闻，皆为叹惋。
现代文：打鱼人把这些都一一告诉给他们听，他们都为之感叹惋惜。
English: The fisherman told them all this, and they all felt sorry for him.

古文：余人各复延至其家，皆出酒食。
现代文：村里的其他人又各自邀请打鱼人到家中，都拿出酒菜来招待他。
English: Other people in the village also invited the fisherman to their homes, and they all brought out wine and food to invite him.

古文：停数日，辞去。
现代文：逗留了几天后，打鱼人告辞离开。
English: After staying for a few days, the fisherman said goodbye and left.

古文：此中人语云： 不足为外人道也。 既出，得其船，便扶向路，处处志之。
现代文：村里的人对他说： 不要把这里的情况告诉给外人。 打鱼人走出山洞，找到自己的小船，就顺着来时的路，一一留下了标记。
English: The villagers said to him, "Don't tell anyone about this place," and the fisherman went out of the cave, found his boat, and followed the path he had come in.

古文：及郡，乃诣太守，说如此。
现代文：打鱼人回到武陵，就到太守那里说了这事。
English: When the fisherman returned to Wuling, he went to the governor and told him about it.

古文：太守刘歆，即遣人随之往，寻向所志，不复得也。
现代文：太守刘歆立即派人跟随打鱼人前去查探，寻找回来时所作的标记，却再也找不到了。
English: Governor Liu Wei immediately sent someone to follow the fisherman to investigate and look for the mark made when he returned, but he could no longer find it.

古文：南阳刘驎之，字子骥，好游山水。
现代文：南阳郡有一个人叫刘驎之，字子骥，喜欢游山玩水。
English: In Nanyang County, there is a man named Liu Xizhi, who likes hiking and playing in the water.

古文：尝采药至衡山，深入忘反。
现代文：他曾经有一次到衡山去采药，深入山中却忘记了返回的路。
English: He once went to Hengshan Mountain to collect medicine, but he forgot the way back when he was deep in the mountains.

古文：见有一涧水，水南有二石囷，一闭一开。
现代文：他在一个山谷中看见一条溪流，溪流南岸有二座用石头修筑的圆形粮仓，一座门关着、一座门开着。
English: He saw a stream in a valley, and on the south bank of the stream there were two circular stone granaries, one with a closed door and one with an open door.

古文：水深广，不得渡。
现代文：溪流水又深河面又宽，无法渡过去。
English: The water of the stream is deep and wide, and it is impossible to cross.

古文：乃相谓曰： 可试如水中看何由尔？ 一人便以笠自障，入穴，穴才容人。
现代文：他想要回去，却迷了路，好在遇到一个为做弓箭来砍伐树木的人，问明路径，才得以回到家。
English: He wanted to go back, but lost his way, but was able to find his way home when he met a man who was cutting down trees to make bows and arrows.

古文：行数十步，便开明朗，然不异世间。平乐县有山临水，岩间有两目，如人眼，极大，瞳子白黑分明，名为 目岩 。始兴机山东有两岩，相向如鸱尾。石室数十所。
现代文：听有的人说，圆形粮仓中所储藏的都是神仙配制的灵丹妙药以及各种其他东西，刘驎之就想重新去寻找，但却再也不知道在什么地方了。始兴县的机山之东耸立着两座山崖，两山崖相对而立就好像屋脊上的鸱尾，山崖上有数十间石屋。
English: After hearing some people say that all that was stored in the circular granary was magic potion and various other things prepared by the gods, Liu Xizhi wanted to search again, but he no longer knew where. East of Jiushan Mountain in Shixing County, there are two cliffs. The two cliffs stand opposite each other like appendages on the roof. There are dozens of stone houses on the cliff.

古文：经过皆闻有金石、丝竹之响。
现代文：只要人们从这里经过，都能够听见各种乐器演奏的音乐声。
English: As long as people pass by here, they can hear the music played by various musical instruments.

古文：中宿县有贞女峡。
现代文：在中宿县有一个贞女峡。
English: In Nakajuku County, there is a chaste maiden gorge.

古文：峡西岸水际有石如人影，状似女子。是曰 贞女 。
现代文：峡西岸的江边伫立着一块石头，其形状像人一样，其相貌酷似一个女子，因此取名叫 贞女 。
English: On the western shore of the canyon, there is a rock standing by the river. It is shaped like a human and looks like a woman, which is why it is called the Virgin.

古文：父老相传，秦世有女数人，取螺于此，遇风雨昼昏，而一女化为此石。
现代文：有一个传说在这里世代相传：秦朝的时候，有几个女子到这里来捡拾水螺，突遇暴风骤雨，顿时天昏地暗，而其中的一个女子就变化成了这块石头。
English: There is a legend that has been passed down from generation to generation here: During the Qin Dynasty, several women came here to pick up snails. When a storm suddenly hit, the sky suddenly turned dark, and one of the women turned into this stone.

古文：临城县南四十里有盖山，百许步有姑舒泉。
现代文：距离临城县之南四十里的地方有一座盖山，距离盖山百余步之处有一个舒姑泉。
English: Forty miles south of Lincheng County, there is a covered mountain, and more than a hundred paces away from the covered mountain, there is a Shu Gu spring.

古文：昔有舒女，与父析薪于此泉。女因坐，牵挽不动，乃还告家。
现代文：相传从前有一个舒姓的女子，她与父亲一道在泉所在的地方砍柴，她因为坐在地上歇息，却再怎么拉也拉不动了，她的父亲就回去告诉家里人。
English: According to legend, there was once a woman surnamed Shu who, together with her father, was chopping wood at the place where the spring was located. Because she was sitting on the ground to rest, she couldn't pull it any more, so her father went back to tell the family.

古文：比还，唯见清泉湛然。
现代文：等到家人再回到这里时，只见她所坐之处变成了一股清泉流出。
English: When the family returned, the place where she was sitting had turned into a spring.

古文：女母曰： 吾女好音乐。 乃作弦歌，泉涌洄流，有朱鲤一双，今人作乐嬉戏，泉故涌出。
现代文：她的母亲说： 我的女儿喜爱音乐。 于是就弹起乐器歌唱，而泉水就不断旋转着涌出来，泉水里还有一对红鲤鱼翩翩起舞。现在，人们在这里奏乐歌唱嬉戏，泉水还仍然会不断涌出来。
English: "My daughter loved music," her mother said, "so she would play and sing, and the spring would swirl and gush, and there would be a pair of red herrings dancing in the spring, and now people play music and sing and play, and the spring still gushes."

