古文：羊欣羊玄保沈演之江夷江秉之
现代文：羊欣字敬元，泰山南城人。曾祖羊忱，是晋朝的徐州刺史。祖父羊权，为黄门郎。
English: Yang Xin, also known as Jing Yuan, was from Nancheng, Taishan. His great-grandfather, Yang Zhen, was a historian of Xuzhou in the Jin Dynasty. His grandfather, Yang Quan, was Huang Men Lang.

古文：欣少靖默，无竞于人，美言笑，善容止。
现代文：父亲羊不疑，为桂阳太守。羊欣少年时性格沉静，与人无争，言笑很美，善饰容貌。
English: His father, Sheep, was no doubt the governor of Guiyang. As a young boy, Sheep Xin had a quiet personality, never quarreled with others, had a beautiful smile, and was good at decorating his face.

古文：泛览经籍，尤长隶书。
现代文：广泛阅读经书典籍，尤其擅长于隶书。
English: Reads a wide range of classics, and is particularly good at the book of rules.

古文：父不疑爲乌程令，欣年十二。
现代文：父亲羊不疑担任乌程令时，羊欣十二岁。
English: Yang Xin was 12 years old when her father, Yang Doubtless, assumed the post of Wucheng.

古文：时王献之爲吴兴太守，甚知爱之。
现代文：当时王献之为吴兴太守，十分了解和喜爱他。
English: At that time, Wang Xianzhong was the governor of Wu Xing, and he knew and loved him very much.

古文：欣尝夏月着新绢裙昼寝，献之入县见之，书裙数幅而去。
现代文：羊欣曾经在夏天穿一件新绢裙白天睡觉，王献之到县里来见到了他，在他的衣裙上写了几幅字便走了。
English: Yang Xin used to wear a new pleated skirt in the summer to sleep during the day. Wang Xianzhi came to the county to see him, wrote a few words on his skirt and left.

古文：欣书本工，因此弥善。
现代文：羊欣的书法本来就很好，由此以后，就更加出色了。
English: Yang Xin's calligraphy was originally very good, and since then, it has become even more outstanding.

古文：起家辅国参军，府解还家。
现代文：他最初做官是担任辅国参军，军府撤销以后又回到家中。
English: He first joined the army as an auxiliary officer, but returned home after the military government was abolished.

古文：隆安中，朝廷渐乱，欣优游私门，不复进仕。
现代文：隆安时期，朝廷渐渐出现动乱，羊欣在家里悠闲自得，不再出来做官。
English: During the Longan period, the imperial court was gradually in turmoil, and Yang Xin was content to relax at home and no longer came out to work as an official.

古文：会稽王世子元显每使书扇，常不奉命。
现代文：会稽王的世子司马元显常常让他书写扇子，他常常不写。
English: Sima Yuanxian, the descendant of the chief auditor, often asked him to write a fan, but he often did not.

古文：元显怒，乃以爲其后军府舍人。
现代文：司马元显很生气，便让羊欣做他的后军府舍人。
English: Sima Yuanxian was very angry, so he asked Yang Xin to be his post-military governor.

古文：此职本用寒人，欣意貌恬然，不以高卑见色，论者称焉。
现代文：这个职务本来是用贫寒人充当的，羊欣则态度安详，不因为职位的高贵和低下而显示于外表，舆论非常称赞。
English: This position was originally held by a poor person, but Yang Xin is calm and does not show the nobility and lowliness of the position on the outside. Public opinion is very praiseworthy.

古文：尝诣领军谢混，混拂席改服然后见之。
现代文：他曾经去拜访领军谢混，谢混拂净席子、换上衣服，然后才出来见他。
English: He once went to visit the leader Xie Ming, Xie Ming wiped the seat clean, changed clothes, and then came out to see him.

古文：时混族子灵运在坐，退告族兄瞻曰： 望蔡见羊欣，遂改席易衣。 
现代文：当时谢混的同族侄子谢灵运在座，退下来以后他告诉给同族的兄长谢瞻说： 望蔡因为要会见羊欣，于是就改了席子，换了衣服。 
English: At that time, Xie Ming's nephew Xie Lingyun was present. After he withdrew, he told his brother Xie Zhan: "Because Wang Cai wanted to meet Yang Xin, he changed his seat and clothes.

古文：欣由此益知名。
现代文：羊欣从此更加出名了。
English: Since then, Yang Xin has become even more famous.

古文：桓玄辅政，以欣爲平西主簿，参豫机要。
现代文：桓玄辅佐朝政，以羊欣为平西主簿，参与机要工作。
English: Kuan Xuan's assistant in the imperial court, with Yang Xin as his main accountant in the west of the country, participated in the work.

古文：欣欲自疏，时漏密事。
现代文：羊欣想要自求疏远，便不时地泄露机密。
English: Yang Xin wants to distance herself from others, so she divulges secrets from time to time.

古文：玄觉其此意，愈更重之，以爲楚台殿中郎。
现代文：桓玄觉察到了他的这个意向，却更加重视他，让他担任楚台殿中郎。
English: Kuan Xuan sensed this intention of his, but he paid more attention to him, and made him serve as the Chutai Palace's middle son.

古文：谓曰： 尚书政事之本，殿中礼乐所出。
现代文：对他说： 尚书是政事的根本，殿中是礼乐的出处。
English: He said to him, "The Shangshu is the foundation of government affairs, and the palace is the source of ceremonial music.

古文：卿昔处股肱，方此爲轻。 
现代文：您从前处于辅助地位，和现在比较起来要显得轻些了。 
English: You've been in a supporting role before, and it's a lot lighter than it is now.

古文：欣就职少日，称病自免，屏居里巷十馀年。
现代文：羊欣就职不多日子，就称说有病自己免掉了职务，避开众人隐居在家里十余年。
English: Not long after taking office, Yang Xin claimed that she had been relieved of her duties due to illness, and avoided everyone to live in seclusion at home for more than ten years.

古文：义熙中，弟徽被知于武帝，帝谓谘议参军郑鲜之曰： 羊徽一时美器，世论犹在兄后。 
现代文：义熙时期，他的弟弟羊徽被宋武帝所赏识，武帝对咨议参军郑鲜之说： 羊徽是当代的美才，但是世人的评论仍然在他哥哥之后。 
English: During the Yixi period, his younger brother Yang Hui was appreciated by Emperor Songwu. Emperor Wu said to Zheng Xianzhi, who was a member of the advisory council: Yang Hui is a contemporary beauty, but the world's comments are still after his brother.

古文：即板欣补右军刘藩司马。
现代文：于是就任命羊欣为右军刘藩的司马。
English: As a result, he appointed Yang Xin as the leader of the right-wing Liu clan.

古文：后爲新安太守，在郡四年，简惠着称。
现代文：后来他做了新安太守，在郡中工作了四年，以宽简仁惠著称。
English: Later, he became the new governor of An County, worked in the county for four years, and was known for his leniency and benevolence.

古文：除临川王义庆辅国长史，庐陵王义真车骑谘议参军，并不就。
现代文：又任命他为临川王刘义庆辅国长史、庐陵王刘义真车骑咨议参军，都没有就任。
English: He also appointed him as Liu Yijing, the governor of Linchuan, and Liu Yizhen, the governor of Fuling, to join the army, but neither of them took office.

古文：文帝重以爲新安太守。
现代文：文帝重新让他担任新安太守。
English: Emperor Wen reappointed him as the new governor of An.

古文：在郡十三年，乐其山水，尝谓子弟曰： 人生仕宦至二千石，斯可矣。 
现代文：在郡中工作了十三年，很喜欢那里的山水，他曾经对子弟说： 人生做官能到二千石，这也就可以了。 
English: He worked in Guizhong for 13 years and liked the landscape there very much. He once said to his son: Life can be done up to 2,000 kilos, and that's fine.

古文：及是便怀止足。
现代文：到这时候他已经感到满足。
English: By this time he was satisfied.

古文：转义兴太守，非其好也。
现代文：调任义兴太守，则并非他的爱好。
English: To be transferred to the position of Yixing Daju was not his hobby.

古文：顷之，称病笃免归。
现代文：不久，称说病重免官还家。
English: Soon after, he said he was seriously ill and returned home.

古文：除中散大夫。
现代文：被任命为中散大夫。
English: He was appointed as a Zhongshan doctor.

古文：素好黄、老，常手自书章。
现代文：羊欣平素喜爱黄帝、老子学说，常常手抄他们的言论。
English: Yang Xin always loved the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, and often copied their sayings by hand.

古文：有病不服药，饮符水而已。
现代文：他有了病不吃药，只饮符水。
English: He does not take medicine when he is ill and only drinks water.

古文：兼善医术，撰药方数十卷。
现代文：兼擅医术，撰写了《药方》数十卷。
English: He was also good at medicine and wrote dozens of volumes of "Pharmacopoeia."

古文：欣以不堪拜伏，辞不朝觐，自非寻省近亲，不妄行诣。
现代文：羊欣因为不能忍受跪拜，推辞不去上朝进见，除非是看望近亲，不乱拜访。
English: Because Yang Xin could not bear to kneel, she refused to go to the court to visit, unless it was to visit a close relative, she would not visit indiscriminately.

古文：行必由城外，未尝入六门。
现代文：行路必定要走城外，不曾进过六门。
English: If you want to travel, you must go outside the city, and never enter the Six Gates.

古文：武帝、文帝并恨不识之。
现代文：武帝、文帝都很遗憾没能认识他。
English: Both Emperor Wu and Emperor Wen regretted not being able to meet him.

古文：元嘉十九年卒。
现代文：元嘉十九年去世。
English: Yuan Jia passed away in 19th year.

古文：弟徽字敬猷，时誉多欣，位河东太守，卒。羊玄保，泰山南城人也。
现代文：羊玄保，泰山南城人。
English: Yang Xuanbao, from Taishan Nancheng.

古文：祖楷，晋尚书都官郎。
现代文：祖父羊楷，是晋朝的尚书都官郎。
English: His grandfather, Yang Kai, was a disciple of Shang Shudu of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父绥，中书侍郎。
现代文：父亲羊绥，是中书侍郎。
English: His father, Yang Jie, was a chancellery clerk.

古文：玄保初爲宋武帝镇军参军，少帝景平中，累迁司徒右长史。
现代文：羊玄保开始担任宋武帝的镇军参军，少帝景平年间，逐步升迁为司徒右长史。
English: Yang Xuanbao began to serve as the town army of Emperor Songwu to join the army, and during the reign of the young emperor Jingping, he was gradually promoted to the role of Stou Yu Changshi.

古文：府公王弘甚知重之，谓左长史庾登之、吏部尚书王准之曰： 卿二贤明美朗诣，会悟多通，然弘懿之望,故当共推羊也。 
现代文：卫将军王弘对他十分器重，曾对左长史庾登之、吏部尚书王准之说： 你们二位贤士聪明俊朗，很多东西可以会悟通达，然而宽弘美好的声望，自然应当共同推重羊君。 
English: Wang Hong, the general of the Imperial Guard, held him in high esteem. He once said to Shi Xudeng, the left-hand commander, and Shang Shu Wang Jun, the head of the administrative department: "You two sages are clever and handsome, and you can understand and do a lot of things. However, because of Wang Hong's good reputation, it is natural that you should jointly promote Yang Jun.

古文：顷之，入爲黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久，入朝担任黄门侍郎。
English: Soon after, he entered the imperial court as a Yellow Gate chamberlain.

古文：善弈棋，品第三。
现代文：羊玄保善于下棋，品第居第三。
English: Yang Xuanbao is good at playing chess, ranking third.

古文：文帝亦好弈，与赌郡，玄保戏胜，以补宣城太守。
现代文：文帝也好下棋，和他用郡官做赌注，结果羊玄保战胜，所以便让他补任了宣城太守。
English: Emperor Wen also liked to play chess, and he made a bet with a county official. As a result, Yang Xuanbao won, so he made him fill in as the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：先是刘式之爲宣城立吏人亡叛制，一人不禽，符伍里吏送州作部；能禽者赏位二阶。
现代文：在此以前刘式之为宣城订立了官吏对付叛逃的政策，一个人如果不能抓到，就以公文通知伍、里的官吏扭送州郡的有关部门，能抓到此人的人赏官位二级。
English: Prior to this, Liu Shiguang and Xuancheng had established a policy to deal with defection by officials. If a person could not be caught, they would notify the officials in the army and the navy to send them to the relevant departments in the prefecture and county. Those who could catch the person would be rewarded with a second-level official rank.

古文：玄保以爲非宜，陈之曰： 臣伏寻亡叛之由，皆出于穷逼。
现代文：羊玄保认为这样做很不恰当，议论道： 臣探讨叛逃的缘由，都是出于极端的逼迫。
English: Yang Xuanbao thought that it was very inappropriate to do so, and said: The reason for the minister to explore the reasons for defection is due to extreme persecution.

古文：今立殊制，于事爲苦。
现代文：现在订立了特殊的政策，对于现实十分苛苦。
English: Now a special policy has been established, which is very hard on reality.

古文：又寻此制施一邦而已，若其是邪，则应与天下爲一；若其非邪，亦不宜独行一郡。 
现代文：又考虑这个政策仅只是在一个地区实施，如果它是正确的，则应该与天下统一起来；如果它是不正确的，那就也不应该在一个郡中单独实行。 
English: Also consider that this policy is only implemented in one region, if it is correct, it should be unified with the whole country; if it is not correct, it should not be implemented in one county alone.

古文：由此制停。
现代文：从此诏令停止那项政策。
English: The policy was henceforth discontinued by royal decree.

古文：历丹阳尹，会稽太守，太常，吴郡太守。
现代文：他曾历任丹阳尹、会稽太守、太常、吴郡太守。
English: He had successively served as Danyang Yin, Clerk of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, Supreme People's Procuratorate, and Supreme People's Procuratorate of Wu County.

古文：文帝以玄保廉素寡欲，故频授名郡。
现代文：文帝因为羊玄保廉洁朴素没有贪欲，所以频频地安排他在名郡任职。
English: Emperor Wen frequently arranged for Yang Xuanbo to work in famous counties because he was incorruptible, simple and had no greed.

古文：爲政虽无殊绩，而去后常必见思。
现代文：为政虽然没有特殊的治绩，而离开以后通常一定被人思念。
English: Although there is no special achievement for politics, it is usually missed after leaving.

古文：不营财利，産业俭薄。
现代文：他不经营钱财利益，家产俭省微薄。
English: He does not manage money and interests, and his family is frugal and thrifty.

古文：文帝尝曰： 人仕宦非唯须才，亦须运命。
现代文：文帝曾经说： 一个人做官不仅必须要有才干，也必须要有运气。
English: Emperor Wen once said: To be an official, one must not only have talent, but also luck.

古文：每有好官缺，我未尝不先忆羊玄保。 
现代文：每次有了好的官位出缺，我不曾不先想起羊玄保。 
English: Every time there is a vacancy for a good post, I never fail to think of Yang Xuanbao.

古文：元凶弑立，以爲吏部尚书，领国子祭酒。
现代文：元凶劭弑君自立，让他做吏部尚书，兼任国子祭酒。
English: The original murderer, Zou Jun, became independent, and let him work as a clerk, and also served as the head of the national children's festival.

古文：及孝武入伐，朝士多南奔，劭集群僚，横刀怒曰： 卿等便可去矣。 
现代文：到了孝武帝入京讨伐，朝中人士大多向南逃走，刘劭把官员们全部召集过来，横握钢刀愤怒地说： 你们都可以走了。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowu entered Beijing, most of the North Korean and Chinese people fled to the south. Liu Ye called all the officials together and angrily said, "You can all leave."

古文：衆并惧莫敢言。
现代文：大家都很害怕，没有人敢说话。
English: Everyone was scared, no one dared to speak.

古文：玄保容色不异，徐曰： 臣其以死奉朝。 
现代文：羊玄保面不改色，慢慢地说道： 臣愿意以死报效朝廷。 
English: Yang Xuan did not change his expression and slowly said: "The vassal is willing to die to repay the imperial court."

古文：劭爲解。
现代文：刘劭因此而缓和下来。
English: As a result, Liu Ye calmed down.

古文：孝武即位，爲金紫光禄大夫，以谨敬见知。
现代文：孝武帝即位，任命他为金紫光禄大夫，以谨慎恭敬受到重视。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, he appointed him as the Golden Purple and Gold Doctor, and he was highly regarded for his prudence and respect.

古文：大明五年，加散骑常侍、特进。
现代文：大明五年，升任散骑常侍、特进。
English: In the 5th year of the Daming era, he was promoted to Sangi (free-riding) regular attendant and special promotion.

古文：玄保自少至老，谨于祭奠，四时珍新未得祠荐者，口不妄尝。
现代文：羊玄保从少年到老年，对祭奠非常谨慎，四季的珍奇新鲜出产，凡是没有经过祭献的，自己决不先尝。
English: From youth to old age, Yang Xuanbao is very cautious about offering sacrifices. The four seasons produce rare and fresh products, and he will never taste anything that has not been sacrificed.

古文：卒，諡曰定子。
现代文：死后，追加谥号为定子。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was changed to Stator.

古文：子戎少有才气，而轻薄少行检，语好爲双声。
现代文：羊戎说： 官家狭窄，令人讨厌，要再加宽八分。 
English: Yang Rong said, "The official residence is narrow and obnoxious. It needs to be widened by another eight minutes."

古文：江夏王义恭尝设斋，使戎布床，须臾王出，以床狭，乃自开床。
现代文：江夏王笑着说： 卿哪里是只善于双声，乃是一位善辩之士哩。 
English: Jiang Xia Wang smiled and said: Sir, you are only good at doublespeak, but you are a good debater.

古文：戎曰： 官家恨狭,更广八分, 王笑曰： 卿岂唯善双声,乃辩士也, 文帝好与玄保棋,尝中使至，玄保曰： 今日上何召我邪？ 戎曰： 金沟清泚，铜池摇扬，既佳光景，当得剧棋。 玄保常嫌其轻脱，云 此儿必亡我家 。位通直郎，坐与王僧达谤时政赐死。
现代文：文帝好与羊玄保下棋，有一次一个宫使前来，羊玄保说： 今天皇上为什么要召见我？ 羊戎说： 金沟清浅，铜池碧波，光景美好，该是下棋。 羊玄保常常嫌他轻狂，说 这孩子一定会毁掉我家 。羊戎官居通直郎，因为与王僧达一道毁谤当朝政治，被赐命自杀。
English: Emperor Wen liked to play chess with Yang Xuanbao. Once, a palace envoy came to Yang Xuanbao, who said, "Why does the emperor want to see me today?" Yang Rong said, "The gold ditch is shallow, the copper pond is blue, the scenery is beautiful, it should be a game of chess." Yang Xuanbao often thought he was frivolous and said that this child would definitely destroy my home. Yang Rong's official, Tong Nairoo, was given life for committing suicide because he slandered the politics of the day together with Wang Sangda.

古文：死后，孝武帝引见玄保，玄保谢曰： 臣无日磾之明，以此上负。 
现代文：死后，孝武帝引见羊玄保，羊玄保谢罪说： 臣没有金日石单的明察，因此辜负了皇上。 
English: After his death, Emperor Xiaowu introduced Yang Xuanbo to Yang Xuanbo Xie Sin, who said, "The vassal didn't have a clear view of the Golden Sun Stone, so he failed the emperor.

古文：上美其言。
现代文：皇上很赞美他的话。
English: The Emperor praised his words.

古文：戎二弟，文帝并赐名曰咸、曰粲，谓玄保曰： 欲令卿二子有林下正始馀风。 
现代文：羊戎有两个弟弟，文帝一起赐名叫羊咸、羊粲，对羊玄保说： 希望能让你的两个儿子有正始时代的林下余风。 
English: Yang Rong has two younger brothers, both of whom were given the names Yang Xian and Yang Xuan by Emperor Wen. He said to Yang Xuan Bao, "I hope I can give your two sons a taste of life in the forest in the primeval times."

古文：玄保既善棋，而何尚之亦雅好其事。
现代文：羊玄保善于下棋，而何尚之也极爱这种游戏。
English: Yang Xuanbao is good at playing chess, and he loves this game very much.

古文：吴郡褚胤年七岁便入高品，及长，冠绝当时。
现代文：吴郡的褚胤七岁时便进入了高品级，等他长大，为当时的冠军。
English: At the age of seven, Wu County's Yu Yan entered the high grade, and when he grew up, he became the champion at that time.

古文：胤父荣期与臧质同逆，胤应从诛。
现代文：褚胤的父亲褚荣期与臧质一同叛逆，褚胤应当随从杀死。
English: Yu Tian's father, Yu Rongji, rebelled together with Yu Xi, and Yu Tian should be killed along with him.

古文：何尚之固请曰： 胤弈棋之妙，超古冠今。
现代文：何尚之坚持请求说： 褚胤下棋的高妙，超过古代，冠于当今。
English: He Shangzhi insisted on the request and said: Yu Yan's skill in playing chess surpasses that of ancient times and is second only to that of today.

古文：夷美风仪，善举止，历任以和简着称。出爲湘州刺史，加散骑常侍，未之职，卒。
现代文：魏韜违犯了法令，因为才高而获赦免，父亲被杀儿子宽大处理，这种例子很多。
English: There are many examples such as Wei Wei violated the law and was pardoned because he was tall, and a father was killed and his son was treated leniently.

古文：遗令薄敛，蔬奠务存俭约。
现代文：特请给予他一个活命，使一种奇异的技艺不致断绝。 
English: Please give him a chance to live, so that this extraordinary art will not die out.

古文：子湛。湛字徽深，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：结果没有得到批准，当时的人对此十分惋惜。江湛字徽深，守丧以孝顺闻名。
English: The result was not approved, which was greatly regretted by the people at the time. Jiang Zhan had a deep character and was known for his filial piety.

古文：爱文义，善弹棋鼓琴，兼明算术。
现代文：喜爱文义，善于弹棋鼓琴，兼明算术。
English: He likes literature and logic, is good at playing chess and drums, and knows arithmetic.

古文：爲彭城王义康司徒主簿、之盛，人竞求自昵，唯湛自疏，固求外出，乃以爲武陵内史。
现代文：担任彭城王刘义康的司徒主簿、太子中舍人。司空檀道济为他的儿子求娶江湛的妹妹，没有答应，刘义康下了指示，又不听从。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, had him as his steward and chief steward. Sikuantang Daoji asked Jiang Zhan's sister to marry his son, but she did not agree. Liu Yikang gave instructions, but did not follow them.

古文：随王诞爲北中郎将、南徐州刺史，以湛爲长史、南东海太守，委以政事。
现代文：当时的人们推重他的立有志向。刘义康兴盛，人们都争着自求交好，只有江湛自己疏远，坚决要求外出，于是让他做了武陵内史。随王刘诞担任北中郎将、南徐州刺史，以江湛为长史、南东海太守，把政治事务委托给他。
English: At that time, people emphasized his ambition to stand up. Liu Yikang was flourishing, and people were competing to make friends. Only Jiang Zhan distanced himself and insisted on going out, so he let him do the internal history of Wuling. With Wang Liu Xizhong, he served as the commander of the North, the governor of South Xuzhou, with Jiang Zhan as the long history and the governor of the South East China Sea, and entrusted the political affairs to him.

古文：元嘉二十五年，征爲侍中，任以机密。
现代文：元嘉二十五年，被征为侍中，让他担任机密工作。
English: In the 25th year of Yuan Jia, he was enlisted as a chamberlain, and he was assigned to a confidential job.

古文：迁左卫将军。
现代文：调任左卫将军。
English: Transferred to the post of General of the Left Division.

古文：时改选学职，以太尉江夏王义恭领国子祭酒，湛领博士。
现代文：当时更改选任学校官员，由太尉江夏王刘义恭兼任国子祭酒，江湛兼任博士。
English: At that time, the election of school officials was changed, with Lieutenant Jiang Xia Wang Liu Yigong concurrently serving as the son of the country, and Jiang Zhan concurrently serving as a doctor.

古文：转吏部尚书。
现代文：转任吏部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the Rikibu Shosho.

古文：家甚贫，不营财利，饷馈盈门，一无所受。
现代文：他家里十分贫寒，不经营财利，馈赠财物的人挤满门槛，可是他一点也不接受。
English: His family was very poor and did not engage in financial gain. People who gave gifts of wealth crowded the threshold, but he did not accept them at all.

古文：无兼衣馀食，尝爲上所召，遇澣衣，称疾经日，衣成然后起。
现代文：他没有双套衣服和多余的粮食，曾经有一次被皇上召见，正遇上洗衣服，他便自称有病挨了一两天，衣服干了，然后才起身。
English: He did not have two sets of clothes and extra food. Once, when he was summoned by the emperor and was washing his clothes, he said that he had been ill for a day or two, and his clothes were dry before he got up.

古文：牛饿，御人求草，湛良久曰： 可与饮。 
现代文：有一次牛饿了，驾车人找他要草，江湛过了好大一阵才说： 可以让它喝水。 
English: Once, when the cow was hungry, the driver asked him for some grass. After a long time, Jiang Zhan said, "You can let it drink water."

古文：在选职颇有刻核之讥，而公平无私，不受请谒，论者以此称焉。
现代文：在选录人才的职位上，对他颇有考核苛严的讥讽，但他公平无私，不接受请客送礼，谈论者因此对他非常称赞。
English: In his position as a talent scout, there was a lot of judgmental mockery of him, but he was fair and selfless and did not accept gifts from guests, so the talkers praised him very much.

古文：初，上大举北侵，举朝谓爲不可，唯湛赞成之。
现代文：起初，皇上大举北侵，全朝廷的人都认为不可以这样做，只有江湛赞成他。
English: At first, the emperor invaded the north in a big way. All the people in the imperial court thought it was wrong to do so. Only Jiang Zhan agreed with him.

古文：及魏太武至瓜步，以湛兼领军，军事处分，一以委焉。
现代文：等魏太武帝到了瓜步，让江湛兼任领军，军事处置，全部委任给他。
English: When Emperor Wei Taiwu arrived in Guapu, he allowed Jiang Zhan to be the leader of the army, and all military affairs were entrusted to him.

古文：魏遣使求昏，上召太子劭以下集议。
现代文：魏朝派遣使者前来求婚，皇上召太子刘劭以下的人集中讨论。
English: The Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to propose marriage, and the emperor summoned Prince Liu Ye and his entourage for intensive discussions.

古文：衆并谓宜许，湛谓许之无益。
现代文：众人都说应该答应，江湛认为答应了没有什么益处。
English: Many people said that he should agree, but Jiang Zhan thought that there was no benefit in agreeing.

古文：劭怒谓湛曰： 今三王在阨，讵宜苟执异议。 
现代文：刘劭生气地对江湛说： 现在三位王爷被困在那边，怎么能够随便地坚持异议。 
English: Liu Ye angrily said to Jiang Zhan: Now that the three princes are trapped over there, how can they casually persist in their dissent?

古文：声色甚厉。
现代文：声色十分严厉。
English: His voice was very stern.

古文：坐散俱出，劭使班剑及左右推排之，殆于倾倒。
现代文：散会以后大家都出去了，刘劭让自己的仪仗和随从推挤他，差点摔倒。
English: After the meeting broke up, everyone went out. Liu Yao let himself be pushed and jostled by his entourage, and almost fell down.

古文：劭后宴集，未尝命湛，上乃爲劭长子伟之娉湛第三女，欲以和之。
现代文：刘劭后来宴集，没有邀请江湛，皇上便为刘劭的长子刘伟之代聘江湛的第三个女儿为婚，想以此来使他们和解。
English: When Liu Bei later held a banquet and did not invite Jiang Zhan, the emperor arranged for Liu Bei's eldest son Liu Wei to marry Jiang Zhan's third daughter in order to reconcile the two.

古文：上将废劭，使湛具诏草。
现代文：皇上即将废除刘劭，让江湛撰写诏书的草稿。
English: The emperor was about to abolish Liu Bei and let Jiang Zhan write the draft of the edict.

古文：劭之入弑，湛直上省，闻叫乃匿傍小屋。
现代文：刘劭入宫杀害皇帝，江湛正在上省值勤，听到叫声便藏在旁边的小屋里。
English: Liu Bei entered the palace and killed the emperor. Jiang Zhan was on duty in Shang Province. When he heard the shouting, he hid in a nearby hut.

古文：劭遣求之，舍吏紿云 不在此 。
现代文：刘劭派人找他，舍中的官吏骗他们说 不在这里 。
English: Liu Ye sent someone to look for him, but the officials in the house lied and said he was not there.

古文：兵即杀舍吏,乃得见湛。
现代文：兵士杀了舍中的官吏，才见到了江湛。
English: The soldiers killed the officials in the house, and only then did they see Jiang Zhan.

古文：湛据窗受害，意色不桡。
现代文：江湛靠着窗户被害，神色不屈。
English: Jiang Zhan leaned against the window, aggrieved, his expression unyielding.

古文：五子恁、恕、憼、愻、法寿皆见杀。
现代文：五个儿子江恁、江恕、江敬心、江孙心、江法寿都被杀死。
English: His five sons, Jiang Yu, Jiang Shun, Jiang Jingxin, Jiang Sunxin, and Jiang Fazhou, were all killed.

古文：元舅吴平侯萧劢名重当世，特所锺爱，谓曰： 尔神采英拔，后之知名，当出吾右。 及长，笃学有文辞。
现代文：起初，江湛家里多次见到怪异现象，在尚未遇难的前不几天，他所睡的床上忽然有几斗血。孝武帝即位，追赠为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，谥号为忠简公。江总字总持，七岁而成为孤儿，住在他的外公家。幼年聪明敏捷，具有淳厚的性情。大舅吴平侯萧劢在当时名气很大，对他特别钟爱，对他说： 你神采英拔，以后出名，当会在我以上。 长大后，刻苦学习，富有文采。
English: At first, Jiang Zhan's family saw strange phenomena many times. A few days before he was killed, there were suddenly several pools of blood on the bed he was sleeping on. Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, posthumously given the titles of Dr. Zuo Guanglu, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and the nickname was Zhong Jian Gong. Jiang Zongzhang, seven years old, became an orphan and lived at his grandfather's house. He was smart and agile at a young age, with a straightforward temperament. His great-uncle Wu Pinghou Xiao Wei was very famous at the time, and he was particularly fond of him, saying to him: You

古文：仕梁爲尚书殿中郎。
现代文：在梁朝做官担任尚书殿中郎。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, he served as the vice-chancellor of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：武帝撰正言始毕，制述怀诗，总预同此作。
现代文：武帝撰写《正言》刚完，作《述怀诗》，江总参与了此诗的写作。
English: Emperor Wu had just finished writing the "Motto" when he composed the "Recollection Poem." Jiang Zong took part in the writing of this poem.

古文：帝览总诗，深见嗟赏。
现代文：皇帝看了江总的诗，深表赞赏。
English: The emperor read Jiang Zong's poem and expressed deep appreciation.

古文：转侍郎。
现代文：转任侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain.

古文：尚书仆射范阳张缵、度支尚书琅邪王筠、都官尚书南阳刘之遴并高才硕学，总时年少有名，缵等雅相推重，爲忘年友会。
现代文：尚书仆射范阳人张缵、度支尚书琅笽人王筠、都官尚书南阳人刘之遴都是高才博学，江总当时年少有名，张缵等对他非常推重，成为忘年朋友。
English: Shangshu's servant, Fanyang's Zhang Ye, Duzhi's Shangshu's Wang Ye, and Nanyang's Liu were all highly talented and erudite. Jiang Zong was young and famous at that time, and Zhang Ye and others placed great importance on him and became year-end friends.

古文：之遴尝酬总诗，深相钦挹。
现代文：刘之遴曾经写诗酬答江总，对他深深推尊。
English: Liu Zhichuan once wrote a poem in praise of the general of the Yangtze River, and deeply respected him.

古文：累迁太子中舍人。
现代文：逐步升迁为太子中舍人。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of the prince's middle son.

古文：侯景寇建邺，诏以总权兼太常卿，守小庙。
现代文：侯景贼兵侵犯建邺，诏令由江总临时兼任太常卿，守卫小庙。
English: Houjing's bandits invaded Jianye, and Jiang Zemin was temporarily appointed to the post of Taizhongqing to guard the small temple.

古文：台城陷，避难会稽郡，憩于龙华寺，乃制修心赋。
现代文：台城沦陷以后，在会稽郡避难，在龙华寺休息，于是写成《修心赋》。
English: After the fall of Taichung, he took refuge in Hui County and rested at Longhua Temple, whereupon he wrote "The Spirit of Cultivation."

古文：总第九舅萧勃先据广州，又自会稽往依焉。
现代文：江总的第九舅萧勃先占据了广州，他又从会稽前去归依。
English: General Jiang's ninth uncle, Xiao Bo, first occupied Guangzhou, and then he went to convert from the Jurchen front.

古文：及元帝平侯景，征爲始兴内史。
现代文：后来元帝平了侯景，征他为始兴内史。
English: Later, the former emperor purged Houjing and appointed him as the head of the internal history department.

古文：会魏克江陵，不行，自此流寓岭南积岁。
现代文：正赶上魏朝攻陷了江陵，没有成行，从此流寓岭南多年。
English: Just in time for the Wei Dynasty to conquer Jiangling, it did not make the trip, and has been living in the south of Lingling for many years.

古文：陈天嘉四年，以中书侍郎征还。
现代文：陈朝天嘉四年，被征还担任中书侍郎。
English: In the fourth year of Chen Chaotian Jia, he was also conscripted to serve as a junior secretary.

古文：累迁左户尚书，转太子詹事。
现代文：逐步升任左户尚书，转任太子詹事。
English: He was gradually promoted to Sadou Shosho, and then to Prince Zhanji.

古文：总性宽和温裕，尤工五言七言，溺于浮靡。
现代文：江总性格宽和温存，尤其擅长五言七言诗，流于浮靡。
English: Jiang's overall personality is broad and warm-hearted, especially good at five-syllable and seven-syllable poems.

古文：及爲宫端，与太子爲长夜之饮，养良娣陈氏爲女，太子亟微行游总家，宣帝怒免之。
现代文：后来成为宫中幕僚，和太子进行长夜的宴饮，收养了太子的良娣为女儿，太子屡次换上便装到江总家里去，宣帝发怒而免去了他的职务。
English: Later, he became a palace staff member, had long-night feasts with the prince, and adopted the prince's daughter, Liang Yao. The prince changed his clothes several times and went to Jiang Zemin's home. Emperor Xuan became angry and relieved him of his duties.

古文：后又历侍中、左户尚书。
现代文：后来又历任侍中、左户尚书。
English: Later, he was succeeded by Sadou Shoshu, who served as a junior chamberlain.

古文：后主即位，历吏部，尚书仆射，尚书令，加扶。
现代文：后主即位，历任吏部、尚书仆射、尚书令，加赐扶持人。
English: After the enthronement of the Lord, the successors of Li Bu, Shang Shufu Shi, and Shang Shuling were granted supporters.

古文：既当权任宰，不持政务，但日与后主游宴后庭，多爲艳诗，好事者相传讽翫，于今不绝。
现代文：当权任补相以后，不主持政务，只是日夜与后主在后庭中游宴，写了很多艳诗，喜欢的人相传讽诵玩赏，至今不绝。
English: After being appointed by the authorities, he did not preside over government affairs, but dined with his wife in the middle of the backyard day and night, wrote a lot of beautiful poems, and liked to read and play with people, which has continued to this day.

古文：唯与陈暄、孔范、王瑳等十馀人，当时谓之狎客。
现代文：只是与陈暄、孔范、王誾等十几人交好，当时称他们为狎客。
English: However, he was friends with more than a dozen people, including Chen Qi, Kong Fan, and Wang Qi. At that time, he called them clients.

古文：由是国政日颓，纲纪不立，有言之者，辄以罪斥之，君臣昏乱，以至于灭。
现代文：由此国政日益衰颓，纲纪不能树立，有提出不同意见的，便定为罪名加以贬斥，君臣昏乱，以致灭亡。
English: As a result, the country's politics became more and more decadent, and a political program and legal code could not be established. If someone tried to dissuade him, he would be reprimanded with a crime, and the emperor would be confused with his subjects and fall into ruin.

古文：祯明三年，陈亡入隋，拜上开府。
现代文：祯明三年，陈朝灭亡，入了隋朝，封为上开府。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Chen Dynasty died out and was succeeded by the Sui Dynasty. It was given the title of Shangkaifu.

古文：开皇十四年，卒于江都，年七十六。
现代文：开皇十四年，死在江都，年龄七十六岁。
English: In the fourteenth year of the Emperor's reign, he died in Jiangdu at the age of seventy-six.

古文：其爲自序云： 太建之时，权移群小，谄嫉作威，屡被摧黜，奈何命也。 
现代文：他写的《自序》中说： 太建时期，权力移到了一群小人的手中，谄媚嫉妒，大肆作威，屡次遭到打击罢免，有什么办法呢，这是命运。 
English: He wrote in his "Self-Introduction": During the Taijian period, power was transferred into the hands of a group of villains. They were envious, arrogant, and were repeatedly defeated and dismissed. What can we do? This is fate.

古文：识者讥其言迹之乖。
现代文：有识者讥笑他的言行乖谬。
English: The learned sneer at the absurdity of his words and deeds.

古文：有文集三十卷。
现代文：著有文集三十卷。
English: Thirty volumes of the anthology have been handed down to posterity.

