古文：何铸，字伯寿，余杭人。
现代文：何铸字伯寿，余杭人。
English: He casts the character "Boshou" and Yuhang people.

古文：登政和五年进士第，历官州县，入为诸王宫大小学教授、秘书郎。
现代文：政和五年进士及第，历任州县官，入朝任诸王宫大小学教授、秘书郎。
English: Zheng He was promoted to the first and second rank in five years, successively served as a prefectural and county official, and was appointed to the imperial palace as a professor and secretary.

古文：御史中丞廖刚荐铸操履劲正，可备拾遗补阙之选。
现代文：御史丞廖刚推荐何铸操履正直，可备拾遗补阙选用。
English: Liao Gang, the chief historian, recommended that the casting operation should be honest, and it can be used to pick up the leftovers.

古文：即命对。
现代文：即命他对策。
English: Immediate countermeasures.

古文：铸首陈： 动天之德莫大于孝，感物之道莫过于诚。
现代文：何铸首先陈述 ：感动上天的道德莫过于孝，感动物的道德莫过于诚。
English: He first said, "There is no morality that moves heaven more than filial piety, and there is no morality that moves animals more than sincerity."

古文：诚孝既至，则归梓宫于陵寝，奉两宫于魏阙，绍大业，复境土，又何难焉。 帝嘉纳之。
现代文：诚孝既至，那么徽宗棺椁就会归于陵寝，奉两宫于魏阙，继承大业，恢复故地，又有什么困难呢？ 皇帝嘉奖采纳。
English: Once the filial piety has been achieved, then the coffin of Huizong will be returned to the tomb, and the two palaces will be given to Wei Wei, and the great cause will be inherited, and the hometown will be restored. What are the difficulties? The emperor's commendation was adopted.

古文：拜监察御史，寻迁殿中侍御史。
现代文：拜任监察御史，不久迁任殿中侍御史。
English: He was appointed inspector of history, and was soon transferred to the position of chamberlain of the palace.

古文：上疏论： 士大夫心术不正，徇虚以掠名，托名以规利。言不由中而首尾向背，行险自售而设意相倾者，为事君之失。
现代文：上章论说： 士大夫心术不正，徇虚以博取名声，托名以谋取私利，言不由衷而首尾背向，行险自售而设计倾轧，为事奉君主之失。
English: The last chapter said: The scholar-official's mind is not right, he is vain to gain fame, he uses his name to seek personal gain, he does not speak from the heart but goes against everything, he takes risks by selling himself and devises schemes, which is the loss of serving the monarch.

古文：怀险巇之谋，行刻薄之政，轻儇不庄，慢易无礼者，为行己之失。
现代文：怀着险恶的计谋，施行刻薄的政治，轻浮不端，傲慢无礼的，为自己品行之失。
English: With sinister designs, practising mean politics, frivolous, impertinent, insolent, and unprincipled.

古文：乞大明好恶，申饬中外，各务正其心术，毋或欺诞。 盖有所指也。
现代文：请求明白好恶，申饬中外，各自务求正心术，不要有所欺诈怪诞。 这些话大概意有所指。
English: The request to clarify likes and dislikes, to declare oneself at home and abroad, and to strive for sincerity and not to be deceptive and grotesque. These words probably mean something.

古文：时迁温州诸宫殿神像于湖州，有司迎奉，所过骚然。
现代文：当时将温州诸宫殿神像迁往湖州，有关部门奉迎，所过之地骚扰民众。
English: At that time, the statues of gods in the palaces of Wenzhou were moved to Huzhou, and the relevant departments followed suit, harassing the people wherever they passed.

古文：铸言： 孝莫大于宁神，宁神莫大于得四海之欢心。
现代文：何铸说： 孝莫大于宁神，宁神莫大于得到四海之内民众的欢心。
English: He Ji said: There is no greater filial piety than Ning Sheng, and there is no greater Ning Sheng than winning the hearts of the people in the four seas.

古文：浙东旱荒，若加勤动，恐道路怨咨。
现代文：浙东旱灾，如果再加以骚扰，恐怕民众怨咨。
English: The drought in eastern Zhejiang, if it is further harassed, I am afraid the public will be resentful.

古文：乞务从简约，不得过为骚扰。 疏奏，其事遂已。
现代文：请务从简约，不得过于骚扰。 奏章上报后，此事于是停止。
English: Please keep it to a minimum and don't be too intrusive. After the report, the matter was closed.

古文：擢右谏议大夫。
现代文：擢升右谏议大夫。
English: Promoted to the post of doctor of right maxillofacial surgery.

古文：论： 中兴之功，在于立志，天下之事济与否，在于思与不思。
现代文：他说 ：中兴宋室的关键，在于立志，天下之事能否成功，关键在于想与不想。
English: He said: The key to the ZTE Song Room lies in determination. The key to whether the world can succeed lies in whether you want to or not.

古文：愿陛下事无大小，精思熟虑，求其至当而行。
现代文：希望陛下事无大小，精思熟虑，求其十分恰当然后实行。
English: I hope that His Majesty will consider everything carefully and appropriately and then implement it.

古文：如是，则事无过举矣。 寻拜御史中丞。
现代文：这样，事情就会没有不当。 不久任御史中丞。
English: In this way, things will not be improper.

古文：先是，秦桧力主和议，大将岳飞有战功，金人所深忌，桧恶其异己，欲除之，胁飞故将王贵上变，逮飞系大理狱，先命铸鞫之。
现代文：早先，秦桧力主和议，大将岳飞屡立战功，被金朝所深深忌恨，秦桧厌恶岳飞异己，想除掉他，胁迫岳飞原来的部将王贵上告岳飞叛变，逮捕岳飞囚禁在大理寺监狱，先命令何铸审讯。
English: Early on, Qin Hui tried to make peace with Yuefei. General Yuefei had repeatedly distinguished himself in battle and was deeply hated by the Kim dynasty. Qin Hui detested Yuefei as a dissident and wanted to get rid of him. He coerced Wang Gui, Yuefei's former subordinate, to accuse Yuefei of mutiny, arrested Yuefei and imprisoned him in Dali Temple Prison. He first ordered that Yuefei be put on trial.

古文：铸引飞至庭，诘其反状。
现代文：何铸将岳飞召到庭中，质问他反叛的罪状。
English: He called Yuefei to the court and questioned him about the charge of rebellion.

古文：飞袒而示之背，背有旧涅 尽忠报国 四大字，深入肤理。
现代文：岳飞脱下衣服将背部给他看，背上有原来刺下的 尽忠报国 四个大字，深入皮肤之中。
English: Yuefei took off his clothes and showed him his back. On his back, there were the four big characters of "loyalty to the country" that he had originally stabbed, deep into the skin.

古文：既而阅实俱无验，铸察其冤，白之桧。
现代文：接着查证都没有证据，何铸觉察到岳飞冤枉，报告秦桧。
English: After the investigation, there was no evidence. He found that Yuefei had wronged him and reported to Qin Yu.

古文：桧不悦曰： 此上意也。 铸曰： 铸岂区区为一岳飞者，强敌未灭，无故戮一大将，失士卒心，非社稷之长计。 桧语塞，改命万俟卨。飞死狱中，子云斩于市。
现代文：秦桧不高兴地说： 这是皇上的意思。 何铸说 ：我难道仅仅是为了一个岳飞吗？强敌未灭，无故杀一大将，会失去士卒心，不是国家的长久计策。 秦桧无言以对，改令万俟审理，岳飞死于狱中，儿子岳云被斩于集市上。
English: Qin Yu was displeased and said, "This is the emperor's intention." He Jiao said, "Am I just doing this for the sake of one Yuefei? A strong enemy is not extinguished, and killing a great general for no reason will lose the hearts of the soldiers, and is not a long-term strategy of the state." Qin Yu was speechless and changed the trial to Wanlu, Yuefei died in prison, and his son Yueyun was beheaded in the market.

古文：桧衔铸。
现代文：秦桧对何铸怀恨在心。
English: Qin Yu harbored a grudge against He Jiuxu.

古文：时金遣萧毅、邢具瞻来议事，桧言： 先帝梓宫未反，太后銮舆尚迁朔方，非大臣不可祈请。 乃以铸为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事为报谢使。
现代文：当时金朝派萧毅、邢具瞻前来议和，秦桧说 ：先帝棺椁没返，太后鸾舆还在北方，不派大臣难以祈请回来。 于是任命何铸为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事作为报谢使到金朝。
English: At that time, the Kim dynasty sent Xiao Yi and Ya Guzhang to negotiate peace, and Qin Yu said: the former emperor's coffin has not returned, the empress dowager Ya Myou is still in the north, it is difficult to pray for her to return without sending a minister. Therefore, he appointed He Ji as a Duanming Palace scholar and a signatory of the Privy Council as a messenger of thanks to the Kim dynasty.

古文：铸曰： 是行犹颜真卿使李希烈也，然君命不可辞。 既返命，桧讽万俟卨使论铸私岳飞为不反，欲窜诸岭表，帝不从，止谪徽州。
现代文：何铸说 ：这次远行如同颜真卿出使李希烈，但是君命不能推辞。 回来复命后，秦桧指使万俟弹劾何铸包庇岳飞认为他没有反叛，想把他流放到岭表，高宗没有答应，只将他贬谪到徽州。
English: He Ji said: This long journey is like Yan Zhenqing sent Li Xilai, but the king's order cannot be refused. After returning and receiving the order, Qin Yu instructed Wan Xuan to impeach He Ji to protect Yue Fei, believing that he had not rebelled, and wanted to exile him to Ling table. Gao Zong did not agree, and only relegated him to Huizhou.

古文：时有使金者还，言金人问铸安在，曾用否。
现代文：当时有人出使金朝回来，说金朝询问何铸在哪里，是否被任用。
English: At that time, someone sent an envoy to Kim Jong-un to come back, saying that Kim Jong-un was inquiring about the whereabouts of He Jiu and whether he had been appointed.

古文：于是复使知温州。
现代文：于是朝廷又使他知温州。
English: As a result, the imperial court also made him aware of Wenzhou.

古文：未几，以端明殿学士提举万寿观兼侍读，召赴行在，力辞。
现代文：不久，以端明殿学士身份提举万寿观兼侍读，召赴朝廷，何铸极力推辞。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a Duanmingden scholar to promote the concept of longevity and attend school. He was summoned to the imperial court, but he refused.

古文：乃再遣使金，使事秘而不传。
现代文：于是再派他出使金朝，使命秘而不传。
English: He then sent him on a secret mission to the Kim dynasty.

古文：既归报，帝复许以大用，又力请祠，除资政殿学士、知徽州。
现代文：回来之后，高宗复许以重用。何铸又极力请求奉祠，任资政殿学士、知徽州。
English: After his return, Gao Zongfu allowed him to use it for other purposes. He also strongly requested to be assigned to an ancestral shrine, to be appointed as a scholar of the Palace of Succession, and to be assigned to the State of Chihuahua.

古文：居数月，提举江州太平兴国宫。
现代文：过了数月，提举江州太平兴国宫。
English: A few months later, Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace was raised to the top.

古文：卒，年六十五。
现代文：去世，时年六十五岁。
English: He died at the age of sixty-five.

古文：铸孝友廉俭。
现代文：何铸仁孝友爱廉洁节俭。
English: What kind of benevolence, filial piety and frugality.

古文：既贵，无屋可居，止寓佛寺。
现代文：显贵之后，无屋可居，只能寄居在佛寺中。
English: After eminence, there is no house to live in, only to live in a Buddhist temple.

古文：其辨岳飞之冤，亦人所难。
现代文：他为岳飞辩冤，也是人们难以做到的。
English: He defended Yuefei, which is also difficult for people to do.

古文：然绍兴己未以后，遍历台谏，所论如赵鼎、李光、周葵、范冲、孙近诸人，未免迎望风旨，议者以此少之。
现代文：但绍兴九年以后，他遍历台谏官，所弹劾的如赵鼎、李光、周葵、范仲、孙近等人，不免迎合秦桧旨意，议论者以此看不起他。
English: However, after nine years in Shaoxing, he visited all the eunuchs in Taiwan, and the impeached eunuchs, such as Zhao Ding, Li Guang, Zhou Kui, Fan Zhong, Sun Chien and others, inevitably catered to Qin Hui's will, and the commentators looked down on him.

古文：至于慈宁归养，梓宫复还，虽铸祈请之力，而金谋盖素定矣。
现代文：至于慈宁归善，棺椁复还，虽有何铸祈请之力，但却是金朝素定的计谋。
English: As for the return of Zi Ning to goodness, the return of the coffin and coffin, although there is some power of casting prayers, but it is a well-established strategy of the Kim dynasty.

古文：先是，金诸将皆已厌兵欲和，难自己发，故使桧尽室航海而归，密有成约。
现代文：早先，金朝众将都已厌兵欲和，但难于由自己发起，因此让秦桧全家航海归来，秘密定有约定。
English: Earlier, all the generals of the Kim dynasty were tired of war and peace, but it was difficult to initiate by themselves, so they let Qin Yu's whole family return by sea, and there was a secret agreement.

古文：绍兴以后，我师屡捷，金欲和益坚。
现代文：绍兴以后，宋军屡次获胜，金朝想和更加坚定。
English: After Shaoxing, the Song army repeatedly won, and the Kim dynasty became more and more determined.

古文：至是，遣铸衔命，盖桧之阴谋，以铸尝争岳飞之狱，而飞竟死，使金知之而其议速谐也。
现代文：到这时，遣何铸衔命出使，大概是秦桧的阴谋，因何铸曾经争论岳飞冤狱，而岳飞最终死去，让金朝知道而和议能够迅速达成。
English: At this time, it was probably a conspiracy of Qin Hui to send the envoy of He Jizhong, because He Jizhong had argued about the unjust imprisonment of Yuefei, and Yuefei eventually died, so that the Kim dynasty knew and the peace talks could be quickly reached.

古文：铸死四十余年，谥通惠，其家辞焉。
现代文：何铸死后四十多年，谥号 通惠 ，家属辞谢。
English: More than forty years after Ho Chi Minh's death, his nickname, Tong Hui, has been retired by his family.

古文：嘉定初，改谥恭敏。
现代文：嘉定初年，改谥号为 恭敏 。
English: In the first year of Jiading, he changed his surname to Gongmin.

