古文：乐舜白玉琯师延师旷师涓楚怀王咸阳宫铜人隋文帝唐太宗
现代文：乐舜白玉琯师延师旷师涓楚怀王咸阳宫铜人隋文帝唐太宗
English: Emperor Wu of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Wen of the Tang Dynasty and Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty

古文：卫道弼曹绍夔裴知古李嗣真宋沇王仁裕李师诲
现代文：卫道弼曹绍夔裴知古李嗣真宋沇王仁裕李师诲
English: Wei Dao, Cao Shao, Pei Zhi, Gu Li, Zi Zhen, Song Zi, Wang Renyu, Li Shi Lu

古文：琴玙璠乐刘道强赵后马融杨秀李勉张弘靖董庭兰蔡邕
现代文：琴玙璠乐刘道强赵后马融杨秀李勉张弘靖董庭兰蔡邕
English: Liu Daoqiang, Zhao Houma Rong, Yang Xiu, Li Mian, Zhang Hongjing, Dong Ting, Lan Caiyi

古文：于頔韩皋王中散
现代文：于頔韩皋王中散
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty

古文：瑟阮咸
现代文：瑟阮咸
English: Ser Nguyen Xam

古文：乐
现代文：乐
English: Rejoice

古文：舜白玉琯
现代文：舜白玉琯
English: White Jade

古文：舜之时，西王母来献白玉琯。
现代文：舜帝时，西王母来献白玉琯。
English: At the time of Emperor Qian, the West Queen Mother came to present the White Jade Urn.

古文：汉章帝时，零陵文学奚景于冷道舜祠下得笙白玉琯。知古以玉为琯，后乃易之以竹为琯耳。
现代文：汉章帝时，零陵儒生奚景在冷道舜祠下得到一笙白玉琯，才知道古时候用玉做成琯，后来换用竹子来作琯了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng, Ziling Ruzheng Jiajing obtained a white jade bowl under the Cold Road Jiaosi, only to learn that jade was used to make bowls in ancient times, and later bamboo was used to make bowls.

古文：夫以玉作音，故神人和，凤凰仪也。
现代文：用白玉做乐器，才能引得神仙来和奏。凤凰来作伴。
English: If you use white jade as a musical instrument, you will be able to attract immortals to play harmonies and phoenixes to accompany you.

古文：师延
现代文：师延
English: Shi Yan from

古文：师延者，殷之乐工也。
现代文：师延，殷朝的乐工。自庖皇以来。
English: Shi Yan, a musician of the Yin Dynasty. Since the reign of Emperor Qianlong.

古文：自庖皇以来，其世遵此职。
现代文：历朝历代他家世袭这个职务。
English: His family has held this position for generations.

古文：至师延精述阴阳，晓明象纬，终莫测其为人。
现代文：到了师延能够精确地讲述出阴阳之声，判明内函的象纬之意，人们始终也不了解师延这个人。
English: When Shi Yan was able to accurately tell the voice of yin and yang, and the meaning of the inner letter was found out, people still did not understand Shi Yan as a person.

古文：世载辽绝，而或出或隐。
现代文：他历经的世代久远，时而出世时而隐没。
English: He has been around for generations, appearing and disappearing from time to time.

古文：在轩辕之世，为司乐之官。
现代文：在轩辕氏时，师延是司乐的官员。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanwu, Shi Yan was an official of Sile.

古文：及乎殷时，总修三皇五帝之乐。抚一弦之琴，则地祗皆升。吹玉律，则天神俱降。
现代文：到了殷商时他全面修编了三皇五帝时的乐章，已经达到了弹拔一弦琴，就能让地神都出来听；吹玉琯，引来天神都降临凡世。
English: When he arrived at Yin Shang, he comprehensively revised the music of the Three Kings and Five Emperors. He had already reached the point where he could play a stringed lute and make the gods of the earth come out to listen; blow a gong and attract the gods of heaven to descend to the mortal world.

古文：当轩辕之时，已年数百岁，听众国乐声，以审世代兴亡之兆。
现代文：师延在轩辕氏时代，已经有数百岁了。他能从听各国的乐声中审度出世代兴亡的预兆。
English: Shi Yan was already hundreds of years old in the era of Xuanzang, and he could judge the signs of the rise and fall of generations from listening to the music of various countries.

古文：至夏末，抱乐器以奔殷。
现代文：到了夏朝末年，他抱着乐器投奔殷商。
English: At the end of the summer dynasty, he ran to Yin Shang with his musical instruments.

古文：而纣淫于声色，乃拘师延于阴宫之内，欲极刑戮。
现代文：然而到殷纣王时，由于对王浸淫于声色之中，将师延幽拘在阴宫中，准备处以极刑。
English: However, when it came to King Yin, because of his lust for the king, he imprisoned his teacher Yan Yu in the underworld and prepared to punish him with capital punishment.

古文：师延既被囚絷，奏清商流徵调角之音。司狱者以闻于纣，犹嫌曰：此乃淳古远乐，非余可听悦也。
现代文：师延在阴宫中奏清商流徵调角等雅乐，看守阴宫的狱卒已在纣王宫里听到过，于是厌烦地说：这些都是很久以前的淳朴的乐音，不是我们这样的人可以享受的啊！
English: In the underworld, Shiyan plays courtly music such as "Clear Merchant Flow" and "Summoning Angle," which the guards of the underworld have already heard in the palace of the King of Sheba, so they say wearily: "These are simple musical sounds from a long time ago, not for people like us to enjoy!"

古文：犹不释。
现代文：不释放他。
English: Without releasing him.

古文：师延乃更奏迷魂淫魄之曲，以欢修夜之娱，乃得免炮烙之害。
现代文：师延又奏迷魂淫魄的靡靡之音，用这种音乐来表现修夜的欢娱，使看守他的狱吏们听得神迷心荡，他乘机逃出来，免去了受炮烙这种刑罚。
English: Shi Yan also played the enchanting and lascivious mournful sound, using this music to express the joy of repairing the night, so that the prison guards who were guarding him could hear the enchantment, and he took the opportunity to escape, avoiding the punishment of being burned by artillery.

古文：闻周武王兴师，乃越濮流而逝。
现代文：在逃亡的途中，师延听说周武王兴师伐纣，于是他在涉过濮水时沉没水中了。
English: On the way to escape, Shi Yan heard that Zhou Wu Wang Xing's division was cutting straw, so he waded through the straw and sank in the water.

古文：或云，其本死于水府。
现代文：有人说师延死在水府里。
English: Some people say that Shi Yan died in Mizufu.

古文：故晋卫之人镌石铸金图画以象其形，立祠不绝矣。
现代文：因此，晋国、卫国的民众镌石铸金刻画上师延的图象，不断有人为师延立祠供奉他。
English: As a result, the people of the Jin and Wei dynasties carved images of Guru Yan in ochre and gold, and shrines were constantly built to worship him.

古文：师旷
现代文：师旷
English: Shi Kuo

古文：师旷者，或云出于晋灵之世。
现代文：师旷这个人，有人说出生在晋灵公时代，任掌管乐的官员。
English: Some people say that Shi Ku, who was born in the era of Jin Ling Gong, was an official in charge of music.

古文：以主乐官，妙辩音律，撰兵书万篇，时人莫知其原裔，出没难详也。
现代文：他辨识音律的能力很高，还撰写过兵书一万篇。当时的人都不知道他祖居在那儿，他的家世出身也很难查询。
English: He had a high ability to identify musical rhythms, and he also wrote ten thousand military books. At that time, people didn't know where his ancestors lived, and it was difficult to find out where he came from.

古文：晋平公时，以阴阳之学，显于当世。
现代文：到了晋平公时，师旷因为精通阴阳学而闻名于世人。
English: By the time of Jin Ping Gong, Shiguang was famous in the world for his mastery of Yin and Yang.

古文：乃薰目为瞽，以绝塞众虑。
现代文：为了杜绝世人的疑虑，他将自己眼睛薰瞎。
English: In order to dispel the doubts of the world, he blinded his own eyes.

古文：专心于星算音律，考钟吕以定四时，无毫厘之异。
现代文：师旷专心研究星相、计算和音律，考证黄钟大吕来定四时，没有一点差错。
English: Shi Ku concentrated on studying the constellations, calculations and musical rhythms, and examined Huang Zhongdai Lv to determine the four o'clock, and there was no mistake.

古文：春秋不记师旷出于何帝之时。
现代文：史书上没有记述师旷出生在哪朝哪代。
English: The history books do not record which dynasty or generation Shigu was born into.

古文：旷知命欲终，乃述《宝符》百卷。
现代文：师旷知道自己寿命将要终结了，于是著述了《宝符》一书，共一百卷。
English: Shiguang knew that his life was coming to an end, so he wrote the book "Treasure," a total of one hundred volumes.

古文：至战国分争，其书灭绝矣。
现代文：这部书传到战国时，在战乱中湮灭了。
English: When this book reached the Warring States, it was destroyed in the turmoil of war.

古文：晋平公使师旷奏清徵，师旷曰：清徵不如清角也。
现代文：晋平公让师旷演奏清徵给他听。师旷说：清徵不如清角好听啊。
English: Prince Jinping asked Shimeki to play "Qingzheng" for him to listen to. Shimeki said: "Qingzheng is not as good as Qingjiao."

古文：公曰：清角可得闻乎？
现代文：平公问：清角很好听么？
English: Ping Gong asked: Is the clear horn a good sound?

古文：师旷曰：君德薄，不足听之，听之将恐败。
现代文：师旷答：国君你的德行薄，不能够听它啊。非要听，恐怕会给你带来败运的。
English: Shirakawa: Your virtue is weak, you can't listen to it. If you have to listen to it, I'm afraid it will bring you bad luck.

古文：公曰：寡人老矣，所好者音，愿遂听之。
现代文：平公说：我已经老朽了。平生我最喜爱的就是音律，就让我听一回清角吧。
English: Tairako said, "I'm getting old. My favorite thing in life is music, so let me listen to the clear horn once."

古文：师旷不得已而鼓。
现代文：师旷不得已就鼓奏了清角给平公听。
English: As a last resort, Shigeyaki played a clear horn for Pinggong to hear.

古文：一奏之，有云从西北方起；再奏之，大风至，大雨随之。
现代文：刚开始演奏，有彤云从西北方向的天空中涌出。继续演奏下去，狂风刮来了，随着下起了大雨。
English: At the very beginning of the performance, there were clouds of hail pouring out of the sky in the north-west direction. As the performance continued, a strong wind blew in, accompanied by heavy rain.

古文：掣帷幕，破俎豆，堕廊瓦。
现代文：刮坏了帐幔，刮得案上放置的盛肉器具摔碎一地。同时，将廊上的房瓦都掀落在地上。
English: He scraped the broken curtain, causing the meat-serving utensil placed on the case to fall to the ground. At the same time, the tiles on the porch all fell to the ground.

古文：坐者散走；平公恐惧，伏于廊室。
现代文：围坐听乐的王公大臣都惊恐地逃散了，晋平公吓得匍匐在廊室。
English: The princes and ministers who were sitting around listening to the music fled in fright, and Prince Jinping was left terrified in the hallway.

古文：晋国大旱，赤地三年，平公之身遂病。
现代文：于是，晋国大旱三年，赤地千里，晋平公也从此一病不起。
English: As a result, after three years of drought in Jin Province and thousands of miles of red earth, Jin Ping Gong has been ill ever since.

古文：师涓
现代文：师涓
English: 師

古文：师涓者出于卫灵公之世。
现代文：师涓，出世在卫灵公时代。
English: Shi Yan, was born in the Wei Ling Gong era.

古文：能写列代之乐，善造新曲，以代古声，故有四时之乐。
现代文：他能记谱各个朝代的乐曲，还能创造新的乐曲，用来替代古曲。他曾谱写过表现四时的乐曲。
English: He was able to record the music of various dynasties and create new music to replace the old music. He once composed a piece of music to express four o'clock.

古文：春有《离鸿》、《去雁》、《应苹》之歌；夏有《明晨》、《焦泉》、《朱华》、《流金》之调；秋有《商飚》、《白云》、《落叶》、《吹蓬》之曲；冬有《凝河》、《流阴》、《沉云》之操。
现代文：表现春天的有《离鸿》、《去雁》、《应苹》等新曲；表现夏天的有《明晨》、《焦泉》、《朱华》、《流金》等新曲；表现秋天的有《商飚》、《白云》、《落叶》、《吹蓬》等新曲；表现冬天的有《凝河》、《流阴》、《沉云》等新曲。
English: New songs such as "Leaving Hong Kong," "Going to the Wild Geese" and "Asking for Apples" are performed in spring; new songs such as "Morning," "Chaos Spring," "Zhuhua" and "Flowing Gold" are performed in summer; new songs such as "Merchant," "White Cloud," "Falling Leaves" and "Blowing Poncho" are performed in autumn; and new songs such as "Merging River," "Flowing Shade" and "Sinking Cloud" are performed in winter.

古文：此四时之声，奏于灵公，公沉湎心惑，忘于政事。
现代文：师涓将自己谱写的表现四时的新曲演奏给卫灵公听。灵公听了后久久沉湎于新曲中心神迷乱，竟然忘却了料理国家政务。
English: Shi Hao played the four-hour new piece he had composed for Wei Linggong. After listening to it, Wei Linggong was so engrossed in the new piece that he even forgot to attend to the affairs of state.

古文：蘧伯玉谏曰：此虽以发扬气律，终为沉湎靡曼之音，无合于风雅，非下臣宜荐于君也。
现代文：蘧伯玉规谏灵公说：师涓谱写的四时新曲虽然发扬了气律的特色，但是这些新曲都是听了让人心神迷乱的靡靡之音，跟风雅等古曲有本质的区别，不适宜下臣推荐演奏给国君听的啊。
English: Zou Bo Yuping Xing Gong said: Although the four o'clock new pieces composed by the master Zou have carried forward the characteristics of the temperament, these new pieces are all listening to the bewildering sound, which is essentially different from the ancient pieces such as style and elegance. It is not suitable for the subordinate to recommend the performance to the sovereign.

古文：灵公乃去新声而亲政务，故卫人美其化焉。
现代文：于是，卫灵公再不听四时新曲又重新料理国事了。因此，卫国臣民都赞美卫灵公。
English: As a result, the Duke of Wei Ling no longer listened to the four o'clock new music and began to prepare national affairs again. Therefore, the subjects of the State of Wei all praised the Duke of Wei Ling.

古文：师涓悔其违于雅颂，失为臣之道，乃退而隐迹。
现代文：师涓对于自己违背雅颂等古曲清新古朴的风格而谱写靡靡之音的四时新曲非常悔恨，认为这是丧失了作为良臣的操守，于是退隐不知去向。
English: Shifu was very remorseful about the fact that he went against the fresh and simple style of ancient songs such as the Song of Songs and composed a four-hour new song with a sweeping sound. He thought that this was a loss of ethics as a good minister, so he retreated and did not know where to go.

古文：伯玉焚其乐器于九达之衢，恐后世传造焉。
现代文：蘧伯玉在通达九方的闹市街口焚毁了师涓制作的所有乐器和谱写的新曲，惟恐后来的人们制造传播这些乐件和曲子。
English: Zou Bo-yu burned all the musical instruments and new songs composed by his master Zou Bo-yu at the entrance to the bustling city of Jiuquan, fearing that later people would make and spread these musical pieces and tunes.

古文：其歌曲湮灭，世代辽远，唯纪其篇目之大意也。
现代文：师涓所谱写的新曲也随着时间的流逝而湮灭了。世代太久远了。到今天，师涓当年谱写的新曲早已失传了，只记录下它的一些篇目及大概意思而已。
English: With the passage of time, the new piece composed by Shi Yan also disappeared. The generation is too long ago. To this day, the new piece composed by Shi Yan that year has long been lost, and only some of its contents and general meaning have been recorded.

古文：楚怀王
现代文：楚怀王
English: Chu Huai Wang

古文：洞庭之山浮于水上，其下金堂数百间，帝女居之。
现代文：洞庭有山浮在水上，水下面有金子造的堂馆数百间，相传是尧帝的两个女儿娥皇与女英住在这里。
English: In Dongting, there is a mountain floating on the water, and hundreds of halls made of gold under the water. It is said that Emperor Qian's two daughters, Empress E and Empress Ye, lived here.

古文：四时闻金石丝竹之声彻于山顶。
现代文：一年四季春、夏、秋、冬，都能听到篌、管、笙、箫奏出的优美的乐声响彻山顶。
English: Throughout the year, in spring, summer, autumn and winter, you can hear the beautiful music played by gongs, pipes, cymbals and gongs resounding across the mountaintop.

古文：楚怀王之时，与群才赋诗于水湄。
现代文：楚怀王时，怀王和群臣在洞庭水边饮酒吟诗。
English: When Chu Huai Wang, Huai Wang and his courtiers were drinking and chanting poetry by the water in Dongting.

古文：故云，潇湘洞庭之乐，听者令人难老，虽《咸池》《萧韶》不能比焉。
现代文：因此有人说：潇湘洞庭的仙乐，能让听到它的人不老，古时候的《咸池》、《萧韶》等雅乐也不能相比。
English: Therefore, some people say: the celestial music of Xiao Xiang Dongting can make people who listen to it never grow old, and the classical music such as "Hamchi" and "Xiao Yu" in ancient times cannot be compared.

古文：每四仲之节，王尝绕山以游宴。各举四仲之气，以为乐章。
现代文：因此，每到四仲节日，楚怀王都与群臣绕山游宴，不同的时节演奏不同的乐章。
English: Therefore, every Shizhong Festival, King Chu Huai would have a banquet with his ministers around the mountain, playing different pieces of music in different seasons.

古文：惟仲春律中夹钟，乃作轻流水之诗，宴于山南。
现代文：唯有在演奏仲春节律的乐章时，中间夹入金钟如水轻流。一边听着这优美的音乐，一边在山南饮酒作乐。
English: Only when playing the middle of the spring rhythm, the golden bell in the middle is like a light stream. While listening to this beautiful music, I drank alcohol in Shannan to make music.

古文：时中蕤宾，乃作《皓露》《秋霜》之曲。
现代文：当时正是初夏五月，却演奏《皓露》、《秋霜》等曲子，曲中藏着冷硬肃杀之气。
English: At that time, it was the beginning of summer in May, but they were playing songs such as "Dew" and "Autumn Frost," and there was a cold and stern spirit in the songs.

古文：其后怀王好进奸雄，群贤逃越。
现代文：此后，楚怀王喜欢重用奸雄之辈，贤良的人都离他远去。
English: After that, King Chu Huai liked to make heavy use of treacherous men, and all the wise men left him.

古文：屈平以忠见斥，隐于沅澧之间。
现代文：只有上大夫屈原苦苦劝谏楚怀王，却遭到怀王的贬斥被流放，隐没在沅水、澧水一带。
English: Only the head doctor, Qu Yuan, tried hard to persuade the king of Chu and Huai, but he was rebuked by the king of Huai and was exiled, disappearing in the area of Surabaya and Surabaya.

古文：王迫逐不已，乃赴清冷之渊。
现代文：楚怀王不断地迫害屈原。屈原悲愤绝望投入清冷的汩罗江中溺死。
English: King Chu Huai constantly persecuted Qu Yuan, who drowned in the cold Mino River out of grief and despair.

古文：楚人思慕之，谓之水仙。
现代文：楚国民众思慕屈原，称他为水仙。
English: All the people of Chu admired Qu Yuan and called him Narcissus.

古文：咸阳宫铜人
现代文：咸阳宫铜人
English: Tongren of Xianyang Palace

古文：秦咸阳宫中有铜人十二枚，坐高皆三五尺。列在一筵上，琴筑竽笙，各有所执。皆组绶华采，俨若生人。
现代文：秦咸阳宫有铜人十二枚，坐着约高三五尺，并排坐在一领大席上，手中各自捧着琴、筑、竽、笙等各种乐器，身上披着华丽的宽大绶带，栩栩如生，跟活人相差无几。
English: In Qin Xianyang Palace, there are twelve bronze figures, sitting about thirty-five feet high, sitting side by side on a large seat, each holding a variety of musical instruments such as a piano, zhu, gong, gong, etc. In their hands, they are wearing gorgeous wide ribbons. They are lifelike and are almost the same as living people.

古文：筵下有铜管，上口高数尺。其一管空，内有绳大如指。
现代文：席下有根铜管，管的上口高数尺，其中一根管子中空，里面放进去象手指头那么粗的绳子。
English: There is a copper pipe under the seat, the upper end of the pipe is several feet high, one of the pipes is hollow, and a rope as thick as a finger is placed inside.

古文：使一人吹空管，一人纽绳，则琴瑟竽筑皆作，与真乐不异。
现代文：让一个人吹那根空管，再让一个人拉动管中的绳子，这时铜人手中的乐器就会一齐舞动发出音响，跟真乐器一样。
English: Let a person blow the empty pipe, and then let a person pull the rope in the pipe, and then the musical instrument in the hands of the bronze man will dance together and make sound, just like a real musical instrument.

古文：隋文帝
现代文：隋文帝
English: Sui Emperor Wen Zong

古文：隋文帝开皇十四年，于翟泉获玉磬十四。
现代文：隋文帝开皇十四年，在翟泉得到玉磬十四只，文帝将它们悬挂在庭院。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Sui Wen, Emperor Wen obtained 14 jade figurines from Huanquan. Emperor Wen hung them in the courtyard.

古文：悬之于庭，有二素衣神人来击之，其声妙绝。
现代文：有两个身着白衣的神人来击玉磬，奏出绝妙的乐曲。
English: Two divine beings dressed in white came to strike the cymbals and played a wonderful piece of music.

古文：唐太宗
现代文：唐太宗
English: Tang Taizong

古文：唐太宗留心雅正，励精文教。
现代文：唐太宗很重视标准规范，想振兴文化教育事业。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang attaches great importance to standards and norms, and wants to revitalize cultural and educational undertakings.

古文：及命太常卿祖孝孙正宫商，起居郎吕才习音韵，协律郎张文收考律吕。
现代文：于是，就命令太常卿祖孝孙校正宫商，起居郎吕才研习音韵，协律郎张文收考证律吕。
English: As a result, he ordered the Grand Councilor Zu Xiaosun to correct the palace merchants, the courtier Lv Cai to study the phonology, and the procurator Zhang Wen to take the examination of Lv.

古文：平其散滥，为之折衷。
现代文：让他们删去那些芜杂散滥的，整理出标准规范的音律。
English: Let them cut out the clutter and sort out the standard chords.

古文：作降神乐，为九功舞，天下靡然向风矣。
现代文：于是，整理编制出来降神的乐曲，九功舞蹈，很快在国内传播开了。
English: As a result, the arranged and compiled sacred music, the Nine Merits Dance, soon spread throughout the country.

古文：初孝孙以梁陈旧乐杂用吴楚之音，周齐旧乐多涉胡戎之伎，于是斟酌南北，考以古音，而作大唐雅乐。以十二律，各顺其月，旋相为宫。
现代文：初时，祖孝孙认为江南梁、陈等地的乐曲多掺杂着吴、楚的小调，北方周、齐一带的乐曲多用的是胡戎的伎艺。于是他悉心探索北南乐曲的不同风格，再参考古乐曲，创作了大唐雅乐，以着十二律，各顺其月，以序为宫，叫旋宫。
English: At the beginning, Zu Xiaosun thought that the music of Liang and Chen in the south of the Yangtze River was mostly mixed with the minor tunes of Wu and Chu, while the music of Zhou and Qi in the north was mostly using the tricks of Hu Rong. So he carefully explored the different styles of music in the north and south, and then referred to the ancient music to create the Great Tang Dynasty classical music, with twelve rhythms, each according to its month, with the order as the palace, called the whirling palace.

古文：按《礼记》云，大乐与天地同和。
现代文：按《礼记》上的：伟大的乐曲与天地相和。
English: According to "The Book of Rites": great music harmonizes with heaven and earth.

古文：《诗序》云，太平之音安以乐，其政和。故制十二和之乐，合三十曲八十四调。
现代文：《诗经》序上说：太平时代的音乐以安定为乐曲的题旨，他的政事就通和，因此又创作编制了十二和的乐曲，共三十曲八十四调。
English: In the introduction to the "Book of Poems," it is said that the theme of music in the Taiping era was stability, and his political affairs were harmonious. Therefore, he created and compiled twelve harmonious pieces, a total of thirty pieces of eighty-four tones.

古文：祭环丘以黄钟为宫，方泽以大吕为宫，宗庙以太簇为宫。
现代文：祭奠天地以黄钟为宫，祭奠大泽以大吕为宫，祭奠宗庙以太簇为宫。
English: Dedicate heaven and earth to the Yellow Bell as the palace, Dedicate Osawa to the Great Lu as the palace, and Dedicate the Aether Cluster of the Imperial Temple as the palace.

古文：五郊迎享，则随月用律为宫。
现代文：至于一年四季在五郊祭迎五帝祈求丰年时，就随月用律为宫。
English: As for the festivals held in the five suburbs throughout the year to welcome the five emperors and pray for a prosperous year, the palace is used according to the lunar calendar.

古文：初，隋但用黄钟一宫，唯扣七钟。余五虚悬而不扣。
现代文：起初，隋朝的乐官只用黄钟一宫，扣七钟，余下的五钟悬在那里不扣。
English: At first, the music officials of the Sui Dynasty only used a palace of yellow bells, with seven bells, and the remaining five bells hung there without being clamped.

古文：及孝孙造旋宫之法，扣钟皆遍，无复虚悬矣。
现代文：到了祖孝孙创造旋宫之法后，十二钟都扣，再没有悬在那里不扣的了。
English: After the ancestors and children created the method of twisting the palace, the twelve bells were all buckled, and there was no longer anything hanging there without being buckled.

古文：时张文收善音律，以萧吉乐谱未甚详悉，取历代沿革，截竹为十二律吹之，备尽旋宫之义。
现代文：当时，张文收非常通晓音律，认为肖吉所制的乐谱不怎么详细，他研究考查了历代的音律沿革，截取竹管制成十二律来吹，用来标志十二旋宫。
English: At that time, Zhang Wenjui was very familiar with musical notation and thought that the musical notation made by Xiao Ji Rong was not very detailed. He studied and examined the history of musical notation throughout the ages. He took a bamboo flute and blew it into twelve rhythms to mark the twelve-rotation palace.

古文：太宗又召文收于太常，令与孝孙参定雅乐。
现代文：唐太宗又召张文收在太常卿祖孝孙手下工作，让他协助祖孝孙审定雅乐。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang also called Zhang Wencai to work under Emperor Taizong's grandson Zu Xiaozhong, and asked him to help Zu Xiaozhong validate the elegant music.

古文：太乐古钟十二，俗号哑钟，莫能通者。
现代文：太乐古钟十二，人称哑钟，没有人能通晓演奏它的办法。
English: There are twelve bells in the ancient clock of Tai Le, known as the dumb bell, and no one knows how to play it.

古文：文收吹律调之，声乃畅彻。知音乐者咸伏其妙，授协律郎。
现代文：张文收用吹律调它，发出的声音才畅彻悦耳，通晓音乐的行家们都佩服他的技艺高超。
English: Zhang Wen collected and tuned it with a blowing rhythm, and the sound emitted was so pleasant that music connoisseurs all admired his superb skills.

古文：及孝孙卒，文收始复采三礼，更加厘革，而乐教大备矣。
现代文：张文收被太宗授与协律郎的官职。待到太常卿祖孝孙过世后，张文收开始又采集祭祀天、地、宗庙的乐曲，进行仔细地删改、整理、编纂，终于使乐教完备了。
English: Zhang Wencai was awarded the official post of the conciliator by Emperor Taizong. After the death of Emperor Taizong's ancestor and grandson, Zhang Wencai began to collect music for the worship of heaven, earth, and the ancestral temple, and carefully edited, edited, and compiled, and finally made the music education complete.

古文：又润州曾得玉磬十二以献。
现代文：又润州曾掘地得到玉磬十二只献上。
English: In addition, Renzhou once excavated and obtained twelve jade cormorants to present.

古文：张率更叩其一曰：晋某岁所造也。
现代文：张率更扣击其中的一只说：此磬是晋时某岁制造。
English: One of them said: "This yakitori was made a year ago in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：是岁闰月，造磬者法月数，当有十三个，缺其一，宜如黄钟东九尺掘。
现代文：这年闰月，造磬人按照月份制的，应当有十三只，现在还缺少一只。应当在取出黄钟的地方东边九尺再挖，一定会找到缺少的那只的。
English: This leap month, according to the lunar calendar, there should be thirteen cranes, but one is still missing. They should dig nine feet to the east of the place where the yellow bell was taken out, and they will surely find the missing one.

古文：必得焉。求之，如言所得。又贞观中，景云见，河水清。
现代文：人们按照他指示的地方去挖掘，果然又挖出一只磬来。又唐贞观年间，天上有祥瑞的景云出现，地上黄河水变清了。
English: People followed his instructions to dig, and a dragonfly was unearthed. During the reign of Emperor Zheng of Tang, auspicious clouds appeared in the sky, and the water of the Yellow River became clear.

古文：张率更制为《景云河清歌》，名曰燕乐，今元会第一奏是也。
现代文：张率更写了一首《景云河清歌》，名为《燕乐》，今天元会第一个演奏的就是这首歌。
English: Zhang Rui also wrote a "Jingyun River Song," called "Yanle," which is the first song to be performed today.

古文：又太宗之平刘武周，河东士庶歌舞于道，军人相与作秦王破阵乐之曲。后编乐府云。
现代文：又唐太宗平定刘武周的叛乱后，河东的百姓当道载歌载舞来庆贺。军士们争相演奏秦王所作的古歌《破阵子》。后来，乐官将这首古歌编入《乐府》。
English: After Emperor Taizong of Tang quelled the rebellion of Liu Wuzhou, the people of Hedong sang and danced to celebrate. The soldiers competed to play the ancient song "Broken Times" made by King Qin. Later, the music officer compiled this ancient song into "Music Palace."

古文：又《破阵乐》，被甲持戟，以象战事。
现代文：又《破阵乐》演奏时，军士披戴铠甲，手执戟矛，边歌边舞，用来象征征战冲杀的场面。
English: In addition, when "Breaking the Line" is played, the sergeant is wearing armor, holding a spear, and singing and dancing, which is used to symbolize the scene of rushing into battle.

古文：《庆善乐》，长袖曳屣，以象文德。
现代文：《庆善乐》演奏时则人们随着乐曲舞动长袖、踢腿曳屣，用来象征文德昌盛的景象。
English: When "Glorious Music" is played, people dance in long sleeves, kicking and shuffling along with the music, which is used to symbolize the prosperity of Wende.

古文：郑公见奏《破阵乐》，则俯而不视；《庆善乐》，则玩之不厌。
现代文：郑公一听到奏《破阵乐》时，就低下头不看；奏《庆善乐》时，则百看不厌。
English: As soon as Zheng Gong heard the "Broken Band Music" being played, he bowed his head and did not look at it; when the "Celebration Music" was played, he could not get tired of it.

古文：卫道弼曹绍夔
现代文：卫道弼曹绍夔
English: Wei Dao and Cao Shaoqi

古文：乐工卫道弼，天下莫能以声欺者。
现代文：乐工卫道弼，是个普天下没有人能够用声律来骗他的人。
English: Musician Wei Daojun is a person who no one in the world can deceive him with vocal rhythms.

古文：曹绍夔与道弼皆为太乐，合享北郊。
现代文：曹绍夔与卫道弼都是执管声律的官员。
English: Cao Shaoqin and Wei Daojun were both officials in charge of enforcing the law.

古文：御史怒绍夔，欲以乐不和为罪。
现代文：有一年冬祭北郊，曹绍夔不知因为什么事由得罪了御史大员。这位御史大员以乐律不和为由治曹绍夔的罪。
English: One year, in the northern suburb of the Winter Festival, Cao Shaoqi, for some unknown reason, offended the Grand Historian. The Grand Historian punished Cao Shaoqi's crime on the grounds that the music was out of tune.

古文：杂扣钟磬声，使夔闻，召之无误者，由是反叹伏。
现代文：于是他乱敲钟、磬，召曹绍夔来辨识音律，曹绍夔没有一个音听差了，这样，反让这位御史大为赞赏佩服。
English: So he knocked on the bells and gongs, and summoned Cao Shaoqi to identify the musical rhythms. Cao Shaoqi did not miss a single note. In this way, he was greatly admired by the chief historian.

古文：洛阳有僧，房中磬子夜辄自鸣。
现代文：洛阳有一僧人，他房中有一石磬每天半夜时就自己鸣响。
English: There is a monk in Luoyang who has a stone gong in his room that chimes every day at midnight.

古文：僧以为怪，惧而成疾。
现代文：僧人感到怪异，惧恐成病。
English: The monk felt strange and was afraid of getting sick.

古文：求术士，百方禁之，终不能已。
现代文：到处请术士，千方百计地用符咒制服石磬，让它别在自鸣了，始终未见成效。
English: Magicians were called in everywhere, and every effort was made to use spells and incantations to subdue the stalagmite, so that it would stop chirping, but to no avail.

古文：夔与僧善，来问疾，僧具以告。
现代文：僧人虽然不信曹绍夔的话，但还是希望他能治住妖磬，仍然在第二天摆上一桌酒席招待他。
English: Although the monk did not believe Cao Shaoqi's words, he still hoped that he could cure the sorcerer and invited him to a banquet the next day.

古文：俄击斋钟，复作声。绍夔笑曰：明日可设盛馔，当为除之。僧虽不信绍夔言，冀其或效，乃具馔以待之。
现代文：曹绍夔吃罢酒宴，从怀中取出一把锉，将僧人室中的石磬锉了几个地方，这以后石磬再也不自鸣了。
English: Cao Shaoqi skipped the banquet, took out a shovel from his arms, and shoveled the stone in several places in the monk's room. After this, the stone shovel would no longer be self-satisfied.

古文：夔食迄，出怀中锉，鑪磬数处而去，其声遂绝。僧苦问其所以，夔云：此磬与钟律合，击彼此应。
现代文：僧人苦苦问询曹绍夔为什么他锉一锉，石磬就不自鸣了？曹绍夔告诉他：石磬的鸣声跟斋屋中的钟声的音律相合，你敲钟磬就发声相和，就是这个道理啊。
English: The monk painstakingly asked Cao Shaoqi why, when he rang the bell, the stone gong did not chime? Cao Shaoqi told him: The chime of the stone gong is in tune with the chime of the bells in the rectory. If you ring the bell gong, the sound will be in harmony. That is the reason.

古文：僧大喜，其疾亦愈。
现代文：僧人听后大喜，他的病也很快就痊愈了。
English: The monk was overjoyed to hear this, and his illness soon went away.

古文：裴知古
现代文：裴知古
English: Pei Zhiguo

古文：裴知古奏乐，谓元行冲曰：金石谐和，当有吉庆之事，其在唐室子孙耳。其月，中宗即位。
现代文：这种吉庆的事情应在唐宗室中。就在他说这些话的当月，武则天去世，中宗李显即位，恢复大唐国号。
English: This auspicious event should be in the Tang dynasty. In the same month that he said these words, Wu Zetian died, and Li Xian of the Chinese dynasty ascended the throne and restored the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：又裴知古
现代文：又裴知古
English: and Pei Zhiguo

古文：知古直太常，路逢乘马者。闻其声，窃言曰：此人即当堕马。
现代文：裴知古去太常官衙，途中遇见一个骑马的人，听听他的声音，私下说：这个人立即就会从马上摔下来。
English: Pei Zhigu went to the Taizhong Guanzhong, on the way he met a rider, listened to his voice, and said in private: This person will immediately fall off the horse.

古文：好事者随而观之，行未半坊，马惊殆死。
现代文：有好奇的人随在那个骑马人的后面观察，行不到半条街，马受惊吓跳起将那个骑马人摔死在地上。
English: Curious onlookers followed behind the rider and watched as, less than halfway down the street, the horse reared up in fright and threw the rider to his death.

古文：又尝观人迎妇，闻妇珮玉声曰：此妇不利姑。
现代文：又有一次，裴知古观看一家娶亲，他听了听新娘身上珮玉的响声，说：这位新娘剋婆婆。
English: On another occasion, Pei Zhigu watched a family get married. He listened to the sound of the bride's wedding band and said, "This bride is wearing her mother-in-law."

古文：是日姑有疾，竟亡。
现代文：就在这同一天，她婆婆果然患病死了。
English: On the same day, her mother-in-law died of illness.

古文：善于摄生，开元十二年，年百岁而卒。李嗣真
现代文：裴知古善养生，唐玄宗开元十二年去世，享年一百岁。李嗣真
English: Pei Zhi Gu had a good health. Tang Xuan Zong died at the age of 100 in the 12th year of the 1st century. Li Shizhen

古文：唐朝承周隋离乱，乐悬散失，独无徵音，国姓所缺，知者不敢言达其事。
现代文：李唐王朝建国初时，由于经历了周、隋的战争离乱，悬挂的钟、磬等乐件散失，缺少徵音，知道这件事的人不敢向朝廷说。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the Li Tang Dynasty, due to the chaos of the Zhou and Sui wars, the hanging bells, gongs and other musical pieces were lost, and there was a lack of audition. People who knew about this did not dare to tell the court.

古文：天后末，御史大夫李嗣真密求之不得，一旦秋爽，闻砧声者在今弩营，是当时英公宅。
现代文：则天女皇末年，御史大夫李嗣真暗中寻找没有得到。一个秋高气爽的白日，听到有砧声从今弩营中传来，跟徵音相似。
English: In the last years of the Empress Tenmei's life, the Imperial Historian Li Shizhen searched in secret and found nothing. On a crisp autumn day, he heard a beeping sound coming from the camp, similar to the call for applications.

古文：又数年，无由得之。
现代文：但是，当时这地方是英国公徐家的宅院，过了好几年都没有缘由得到。
English: However, at that time, this place was the residence of the British royal family, and after several years, there was no reason to get it.

古文：其后徐业反，天后潴其宫。
现代文：后来，徐敬业起兵反叛则天武后，武则天放水淹没他的府第。
English: Later, after Xu Jingye rebelled against Zetian Wu, Zetian Wu flooded his capital.

古文：嗣真乃求得丧车一镡，入振之于东南隅，果有应者。
现代文：李嗣真找到丧车一辆短剑一柄。进入徐府内，在东南边敲地寻找，果然有回应声。
English: Li Shizhen found a funeral car, a dagger and a staff. Entering Xu Prefecture, he knocked on the ground in the southeast to look for it, and there was indeed a response.

古文：遂掘之，得石一段，裁为四具，补乐悬之缺。
现代文：掘开地面，得到一石。李嗣真将这段石头裁成四具悬乐，补上了乐悬所缺的徵音。
English: After digging up the ground, he obtained a stone. Li Sizhen cut this piece of stone into four pieces of suspended music, and filled in the missing consonants.

古文：后享宗庙郊天，挂簨簴者，乃嗣真所得也。
现代文：这以后，凡举行郊祭，悬挂的簨簴，就是李嗣真补上的啊。
English: After this, whenever a suburb festival is held, the hanging urns, that's when Li Zhi really made up for it.

古文：宋沇
现代文：宋沇
English: Song Tao

古文：宋沇为太乐令，知音近代无比。
现代文：太乐令宋沇，在辨识音律方面，近代人没有谁能超过他。
English: When it comes to recognizing musical rhythms, no one in modern times can surpass Song Tao.

古文：太常久亡徵调，沇考钟律得之。
现代文：太常缺少徵调已经很久了。宋沇考查钟律得到了。
English: It has been a long time since there was a shortage of tuning. Song Xi has obtained the rule of the bell.

古文：沇为太常丞，尝一日早于光宅佛寺待漏，闻塔上风铎声，倾听久之。
现代文：宋沇任太常丞后，有一天早晨在光宅佛寺等待上朝的时辰，听到塔上风铎响声。
English: One morning, after the enthronement of Emperor Song of Song, he was waiting for the sunrise at the Gwangju Buddhist Temple, when he heard the sound of the wind on the pagoda.

古文：朝回，复止寺舍。
现代文：早朝归来，走到光宅佛寺又停下来。
English: I came back in the early morning, walked to the Kōtaku Buddhist Temple and stopped again.

古文：问寺主僧曰：上人塔铃，皆知所自乎？
现代文：进寺问主持僧：上面悬挂的塔铃，都知道是从哪里得来的么？
English: Entering the temple, he asked the presiding monk: Do you know where the tower bells hanging above came from?

古文：曰：不能知。
现代文：僧人答：不知道。
English: The monk replied: I don't know.

古文：沇曰：其间有一是古制。
现代文：宋沇说：其中有一个塔铃是古代制做的。
English: Song Tao said: One of the tower bells was made in ancient times.

古文：某请一登塔，循金索，试历扣以辨之，可乎？
现代文：请让我登上塔顶，沿着上边的铁索，试着扣动几下听听可以吗？
English: Please let me climb to the top of the tower, follow the iron rope above, and try to pull a few buttons to listen, okay?

古文：僧初难后许，乃扣而辨焉。
现代文：主持僧起初犹豫，后来还是答应他的要求了。
English: The head monk hesitated at first, but later agreed to his request.

古文：在寺之人，即言往往无风自摇，洋洋有闻，非此耶。
现代文：于是宋沇登上塔顶，扣动塔铃听音辨识。寺内的僧人纷纷说道：塔上的风铃常常无风自己摇动，发出的响声，非常好听。
English: So Song Tao climbed to the top of the pagoda and rang the bell to listen and identify the sound. The monks in the temple said one after another: The wind chimes on the pagoda often shake themselves without wind, and the sound they make is very pleasant to listen to.

古文：沇曰：是耳。
现代文：不象你扣动发出的这种声音。宋沇说：是的。
English: It's not like the sound you make when you press the button. Song Tao said, "Yes."

古文：必因祠祭，考本悬钟而应之。固求摘取而观之，曰：此沽洗之编钟耳，请旦独掇于僧庭。
现代文：心想：僧人说的这种现象，一定是在祭祀祖庙时，扣乐悬编钟时，这边寺塔上有相同音律的编钟发出响声共鸣。因此一定要摘下塔上的风铃观察一下。于是对僧人说：这个风铃是沽洗编钟，请单独将它取下来放在院里。
English: I thought to myself: This phenomenon that the monk is talking about must have happened during the ancestral temple worship, when the wind chimes were suspended from the bell tower, and the chimes on this side of the temple tower, which had the same melody, resonated loudly. Therefore, I must take down the wind chime on the tower and observe it. So I said to the monk: This wind chime is the purification chime, please take it down separately and place it in the courtyard.

古文：归太常，令乐工与僧同临之。
现代文：宋沇回到太常府衙，让乐工和僧人一块亲临现场观看。
English: Song Tao returned to Tai Chang Fu Monastery and asked the musicians and monks to come to the site to watch.

古文：约其时，彼扣本悬，此果应，遂购而获焉。
现代文：约定好时间，太常府衙那边扣动悬挂的编钟，寺院中的这个沽洗编钟果然应和。
English: A good time was agreed upon, and the hanging chimes on the other side of the Great Hall of the People were rung, and this baptismal chime in the temple did indeed chime.

古文：又曾送客出通化门，逢度支运乘。
现代文：于是将它向寺院买下来，放回太常本悬处。
English: So he bought it from the temple and put it back in its usual place.

古文：驻马俄顷，忽草草揖客别。
现代文：又有一次，宋沇送客人出通化门，遇到掌管财务的度支运乘，上马稍许，忽然匆忙作揖告别。
English: On another occasion, when Song Tao was escorting a guest out of the Tonghua Gate, he encountered the attendant in charge of finance, got on his horse, and suddenly made a hasty farewell.

古文：乃随乘行，认一铃，言亦编钟也。
现代文：待度支使运乘走后，宋沇又悄悄地跟随在后面，又认得一铃，说这只铃也是失去的编钟。
English: After waiting for the courier to leave, Song Tao quietly followed behind, and recognized a bell, saying that this bell was also a lost chime.

古文：他人但觉镕铸独工，不与众者埒，莫知其余。
现代文：别人只觉得这只铃铸造的技艺很独道，与众不同，别的就看不出来了。
English: Others only think that the technique of casting this bell is very unique and different, and they can't see anything else.

古文：乃配悬，音形皆合其度。
现代文：待到配悬在原有的编钟间，才看出来不论是外形还是发音都符合。奇怪吗？
English: It wasn't until it was suspended between the original chimes that it became clear that both the shape and the sound matched. Is that strange?

古文：异乎，此亦识徵在金奏者与。
现代文：这正是识徵的人在演奏编钟的人之中啊！
English: That's what it's like to be in the middle of people playing chimes!

古文：王仁裕
现代文：王仁裕
English: Wang Renyu

古文：晋都洛下，丙申年春。
现代文：丙申年春天，在晋国都城洛下。
English: In the spring of the year of Yin and Yang, in the capital city of Jin, Luo.

古文：翰林学士王仁裕夜直，闻禁中蒲牢，每发声，如叩项脑之间。
现代文：翰林学士王仁裕值宿，听到宫中的蒲牢里，常常有声响传出来，象敲膀颈与脑袋之间。
English: Wang Renyu, a scholar of Hanlin, was on duty and heard that in the palace prison, there were often noises coming out, like knocking between the neck and the head.

古文：其钟忽撞作索索之声，有如破裂，如是者旬余。
现代文：乐悬上的编钟忽然碰撞发出索索的声音，象破裂了似的。
English: The chimes on the belfry suddenly collided and made a swooshing sound, as if they had broken.

古文：每与同职默议，罔知其何兆焉。
现代文：这种响声出现了十多天。王仁裕每当和同仁悄悄议论这件事时，都不知道这是什么征兆。
English: This noise occurred for more than ten days. Wang Renyu did not know what kind of sign it was whenever he quietly discussed the matter with his colleagues.

古文：其年中春，晋帝果幸于梁汴。石渠金马，移在雪宫，迄今十三年矣。
现代文：这年仲春，晋帝果然迁都汴梁，将石渠阁里的藏书和金马移在雪宫，到今天已经十三年了。
English: In the spring of this year, Emperor Jin successfully moved the capital to Jialiang, and moved the collection of books and gold horses in the stone canal pavilion to the Snow Palace. It has been thirteen years to this day.

古文：索索之兆，信而有徵。
现代文：索索之声，就是征兆啊。
English: The sound of the reed is an omen.

古文：李师诲
现代文：李师诲
English: Li Shizhen

古文：此石流转到安邑李甫宅中。李师诲，是绘画番马李渐的孙子，任潞州刘从谏的从事。
现代文：李师诲，是绘画番马李渐的孙子，任潞州刘从谏的从事。
English: Li Shizhen is the grandson of the famous painter Li Qian, who was engaged by Liu Conglu of Zhangzhou.

古文：得知刘从谏图谋不轨，于是就隐居在黎城山中。
现代文：得知刘从谏图谋不轨，于是就隐居在黎城山中。
English: When he learned that Liu Zeng was plotting evil, he went into seclusion in the Licheng Mountains.

古文：刘从谏反叛被平息后，朝廷嘉奖李师诲，升迁他到除县任县宰。
现代文：刘从谏反叛被平息后，朝廷嘉奖李师诲，升迁他到除县任县宰。
English: After Liu Conglu's rebellion was quelled, the imperial court commended Li Shizhen and promoted him to the post of county governor.

古文：李师诲曾在一位穿衲衣的僧人那里，得到陨石一片。
现代文：李师诲曾在一位穿衲衣的僧人那里，得到陨石一片。
English: Li Shizhen once received a piece of meteorite from a monk wearing a robe.

古文：那个僧人说：一次，他早起行走在蜀道上，看见有一颗流星坠落在前边。
现代文：那个僧人说：一次，他早起行走在蜀道上，看见有一颗流星坠落在前边。
English: The monk said: Once, he got up early and was walking on Shu Road when he saw a meteor fall in front of him.

古文：掘地，挖出这片陨石，如断磬。
现代文：掘地，挖出这片陨石，如断磬。
English: Digging in the ground, digging out this piece of meteorite, like a broken plow.

古文：陨石的右端雕刻一个狻猊头，也象磬，有孔，穿丝带的地方还很光滑呢。
现代文：陨石的右端雕刻一个狻猊头，也象磬，有孔，穿丝带的地方还很光滑呢。
English: The right end of the meteorite is carved with a skull, also like a skull, with holes, and the place where the ribbon is worn is still very smooth.

古文：这大概是天上有神人奏乐乐器坏了掉到地上的吧！
现代文：这大概是天上有神人奏乐乐器坏了掉到地上的吧！
English: This is probably a divine being in the sky playing a musical instrument that has broken and fallen to the ground!

古文：这块陨石后来流传到安邑李甫家。
现代文：这块陨石后来流传到安邑李甫家。
English: The meteorite was later passed down to Li Fu's family in Anyi.

古文：琴
现代文：琴
English: The Koto

古文：玙璠乐秦咸阳宫有琴长六尺，安十三弦，二十六徽。
现代文：玙璠乐秦咸阳宫藏着一架古琴，长六尺，安着十三根琴弦。用二十六根绳索系着。
English: In the Qin Xianyang Palace, there is an ancient six-foot-long qin with thirteen strings and twenty-six ropes.

古文：皆七宝饰之，铭曰玙璠之乐。刘道强
现代文：整架琴都镶嵌着金、银、琉璃、砾磲、玛瑙、珍珠、玫瑰宝石等七宝，上面铭刻有玙璠二字，这架琴就叫玙璠乐。刘道强
English: The whole piano is inlaid with gold, silver, glass, gravel, agate, pearls, rose gems and other treasures, and the word "乐" is inscribed on it. This piano is called "乐." Liu Daoqiang

古文：齐人刘道强善弹琴，能作单凫寡鹤之弄。
现代文：齐国人刘道强弹得一手好琴。他能在琴上弹奏出单只野凫与失去伴侣的白鹤绕空飞翔、鸣声凄绝的形象来。
English: Liu Daoqiang, a native of Qi Province, plays a good hand of the piano. He can play a single wild grasshopper on the piano and a white crane that has lost its partner flying around the sky, with a terrible singing sound.

古文：听者皆悲，不能自摄。
现代文：听他弹琴的人，被他弹奏的琴声所感染，都不能自制。
English: People who listen to him play the piano, are infected by the sound of his playing, and cannot control themselves.

古文：赵后
现代文：赵后
English: Empress Zhao

古文：赵后有宝琴曰凤凰，皆以金玉隐起为龙凤螭鸾，古贤烈女之象。
现代文：赵后有一架宝琴，叫凤凰。琴上面都是用金、玉等珠宝镶嵌，暗起的龙、凤、螭、鸾，及古代贤、烈女子的图象。
English: Queen Zhao had a Baoqin, called Fenghuang. The top of the instrument was inlaid with gold, jade, and other jewels, with images of dragons, phoenixes, dragonflies, dragonflies, and ancient sages and strong women.

古文：亦善为《归凤》《送远》之操焉。马融
现代文：赵后还弹得一手好琴，尤其善于弹奏《时凤》、《送远》等曲。马融
English: Zhao Hou also played a good hand of the piano, especially good at playing "Time Phoenix," "Farewell" and other songs.

古文：马融历二郡两县，政务无为，事从其约。
现代文：马融曾在二郡二县为官，没有什么政绩，办事也跟常人一样。
English: Ma Rong had served as an official in two counties in two counties. He had no political achievements, and he acted like an ordinary person.

古文：在武都七年，南郡四年，未尝按论刑杀一人。
现代文：他在武都任职七年，在南郡任职四年，从未按照刑律上的规定处死过一个人。
English: He served seven years in Wudu and four years in Nan County, and never executed a person in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Law.

古文：性好音乐，善鼓琴吹笛。
现代文：马融生性爱好音乐，鼓一手好琴吹一管好笛。
English: Ma Rongsheng is fond of music. He plays the drums, the piano and the flute well.

古文：每气出蜻蜊相和。
现代文：每当他鼓琴吹笛时，都引来蟋蟀相和。
English: Whenever he played the flute on the koto, he brought harmony and harmony.

古文：杨秀
现代文：杨秀
English: Yang Xiu

古文：隋文帝子蜀王秀，尝造千面琴，散在人间。
现代文：隋文帝的儿子蜀王杨秀，曾经制作一架千面琴，散失在民间。
English: Shu Wang Yang Xiu, the son of Sui Emperor Wen, once made a thousand-faced qin, which was lost among the common people.

古文：李勉
现代文：李勉
English: Comrade Li Tsuen

古文：唐汧公李勉好雅琴，尝取桐梓之精者，杂缀为之，谓之百衲琴。
现代文：唐汧国公李勉喜爱雅琴，曾经选用最好的桐木和梓木，将它们砍碎再重新拼合在一块儿，制成琴，取名叫百衲琴，镶嵌蜗壳为标志。
English: Li Mian, the ruler of the Tang Dynasty, loved the yakitori. He once selected the best paulownia and azusa logs, chopped them up, and then reassembled them to make a piano, called the hundred-harp, with the inlaid gourd shell as its logo.

古文：用蜗壳为徵，共间三面尤绝异，通谓之响泉韻磬。弦一上，可十年不断。
现代文：这架琴的三面尤其绝异，人们都称它为响泉韻磬，上一次弦，十年不断。
English: The three sides of this piano are particularly extraordinary. People call it a sonorous fountain rhyme, the last string, ten years.

古文：又勉又取漆筒为之，多至数百张，求者与之。
现代文：又李勉又用漆筒作琴，作了几百张，谁向他要琴，他都给。
English: He also used a lacquer tube to make hundreds of pianos, and he would give them to anyone who asked for one.

古文：有绝代者，一名响泉，一名韻磬，自宝于家。
现代文：在这几百张琴中，出了两张绝代好琴，一张名叫响泉，一张名叫韻磬，自家珍藏起来。
English: Out of these hundreds of pianos, two exceptionally good pianos came out, one named Xingquan and one named Yunqin, which were treasured by the family.

古文：又京中又以樊氏、路氏琴为第一。
现代文：又在京都长安，樊家、路家制作的琴堪称第一。
English: And in Kyoto's Chang'an district, the guitars made by the Shinsha and Loke families are the best.

古文：路氏有房太尉石枕，损处惜而不治。
现代文：路家藏有房太尉石枕一具，枕上有一处破损了可惜不能修复过来。
English: Lu Jia's family owns a stone pillow belonging to the house's captain. Unfortunately, one part of the pillow is damaged and cannot be repaired.

古文：蜀中雷氏斫琴，常自品第。
现代文：蜀中雷家制的琴，常常是自己品评它的好坏、优劣。
English: Shu Zhonglei's home-made guitars are often judged by themselves as good or bad, superior or inferior.

古文：上者以玉徽，次者以宝徽，又次者以金螺蚌徽。
现代文：上品琴镶玉作标志，较好的琴镶宝石作标志，较差的镶金螺蚌壳作标志。
English: A high-quality lyre inlaid with jade serves as a symbol, a better lyre inlaid with precious stones serves as a symbol, and a poorer lyre inlaid with a gold screw shell serves as a symbol.

古文：张弘靖
现代文：张弘靖
English: Zhang Hongjing

古文：张相弘靖夜会名家，观郑宥调二琴至切。
现代文：宰相张弘靖一天夜晚拜会有名的琴师郑宥，观看郑宥给二张琴调音。
English: One night, Prime Minister Zhang Hongjing paid a visit to the famous pianist Zheng Yu, and watched Zheng Yu tune two pianos.

古文：各置一榻，动宫则宫应，动角则角应。
现代文：调宫则宫应，调角则角应，稍微不准确，就不应。
English: The palace should be adjusted, the angle should be adjusted, and if it is slightly inaccurate, it should not be.

古文：稍不切，乃不应。宥师董庭兰，尤善汎声、祝声。
现代文：郑宥的老师董庭兰，尤其善长弹奏和声与祝声。
English: Zheng Yu's teacher, Dong Tinglan, is particularly good at playing harmonies and cheers.

古文：董庭兰
现代文：董庭兰
English: Dong Tinglan

古文：响泉、韻磬，本落樊泽司徒家，后在珠崖宅，又在张彦远宅，今不知流落何处。
现代文：响泉、韻磬二琴原本落在司徒樊泽家，后又落在珠崖宅，又落在张彦远宅，现在不知流落在谁家。
English: The two pianos, the sonorous fountain and the rhyme-and-chant organ, originally resided in the family of Stutthof, then in the house of Zhuya, then in the house of Zhang Yanyuan, and now I don't know whose house they are in.

古文：弹琴近代称贺若夷、甘党。
现代文：琴弹得最好的人，在近代应该说是坝若夷与甘党。
English: In modern times, the people who are the best at playing the koto are said to be Damraoi and Gantou.

古文：前有董庭兰、陈怀古。
现代文：这以前有董庭兰、陈怀古。
English: This was previously done by Dong Tinglan and Chen Huaigu.

古文：怀能況祝二家声，谓大小胡笳也。
现代文：怀古能用况、祝二家的技法弹琴，谓大、小胡笳。
English: Huai Guo can play the piano with the two techniques of using the situation and wishing, which is called the big and small hoo hoo.

古文：萧古亦善琴，云胡笳第四头。
现代文：萧古也善弹琴，叫做胡笳第四头。
English: Xiao Gu is also good at playing the piano, and is known as the fourth head of the Chinese harp.

古文：犯无射商，遂用其音为萧氏九弄。
现代文：犯无射商，于是采用他的音律谱成萧氏九曲。
English: He did not have a record dealer, so he used his musical notation to compose nine of Shaw's songs.

古文：蔡邕
现代文：蔡邕
English: Cai Xuan

古文：蔡邕在陈留，其邻人有以酒食召邕。
现代文：蔡邕在陈留时，邻人请蔡邕去他家赴酒宴。
English: While Cai Qi was staying in Chen, a neighbor invited Cai Qi to go to his house for a wine banquet.

古文：比往而酒会已酣焉，客有弹琴者。
现代文：等到蔡邕去时邻家酒宴正酣，客人中间有人弹琴。
English: By the time Cai Ye left, the neighboring wine banquet was in full swing, and someone was playing the piano among the guests.

古文：邕至门，潜听之曰：嘻，以乐召我而有杀心，何也？
现代文：蔡邕走到门口，悄悄听琴声，自语：嘻！用琴声召唤我怎么琴声里却流露出杀机呢这是为什么？
English: Cai Qi walked to the door, quietly listened to the sound of the harp, and said to himself: "Hip! How can I be summoned by the sound of the harp, but the sound of the harp reveals a killing machine? Why is that?

古文：遂返。将命者告主人，主人遽自追而问其故。
现代文：弹琴的这位客人知道后，向蔡邕解释说：我刚才弹琴时，看见一只螳螂悄悄爬向一只鸣蝉，而蝉又将离去。
English: After learning this, the piano-playing guest explained to Cai Xuan: "When I was playing the piano just now, I saw a cockroach quietly crawling towards a chirping cicada, while the cicada was about to leave.

古文：邕具以告。琴者曰：我向鼓弦，见螳螂方向鸣蝉，蝉将去，螳螂为之一前一却。
现代文：螳螂与蝉，一个向前一个后去，我心里恐怕螳螂扑不到蝉，不自觉间将这种心绪在琴声中流露出来。
English: The cockroach and the cicada go forward and backward one by one. In my mind, I'm afraid the cockroach can't catch the cicada. Unconsciously, this mood is revealed in the sound of the harp.

古文：吾心唯恐螳螂之失蝉也，此岂为杀心而声者乎。邕叹曰：此足以当之矣。
现代文：这真的不是心怀杀你的想法而用琴声表现出来。蔡邕听了后，说：从这件事情上足可以看出你是一个当之无愧的琴师啊！
English: It really wasn't my intention to kill you, and it showed in my playing. After listening, Cai Ye said, "From this matter, I can see that you are a well-deserved pianist!"

古文：于頔
现代文：于頔
English: Yu Zhen

古文：于司空頔常令客弹琴。其嫂知音，听于帘下。
现代文：司空于頔常让客人弹琴，于頔的嫂子懂得音律，立于门帘里边听。
English: The steward, Ku Yuxuan, often lets guests play the piano, and Yu Yuxuan's sister-in-law, who knows the melody, stands inside the door curtain and listens.

古文：叹曰：三分之中，一分筝声，二分琵琶声。无本色韻。
现代文：一次，一位客人弹琴，于頔的嫂子听了后，叹惜地说：三分之中，一分是筝声，二分是琵琶声，就是缺少琴声的本来韻色。
English: On one occasion, a guest played the piano, and after listening to it, Yu Yao's sister-in-law said with regret: "Of the three parts, one part is the sound of the kite, and the second part is the sound of the lute, which is the lack of the original melody of the sound of the piano."

古文：韩皋
现代文：韩皋
English: Han Zheng

古文：韩皋生知音律。
现代文：太保韩皋精通音律。
English: Taibo Han Mi is well-versed in musical notation.

古文：尝观弹琴，至《止息》，叹曰：妙哉，稽生之为是也。
现代文：一次观客人弹琴，观到《止息》一曲时，韩皋大声赞许地喊：妙啊！
English: On one occasion, while watching a guest play the piano and a piece from "Breathless," Han Yan exclaimed approvingly, "How wonderful!

古文：其当晋魏之际，其音主商。
现代文：这不是当年中散大夫嵇叔夜创制的《止息》名曲吗？
English: Isn't this the "Breathless" famous song created by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in the middle of the year?

古文：商为秋声，秋也者，天将摇落肃杀，其岁之晏乎。
现代文：嵇叔夜生当魏、晋交替之际。《止息》一曲是商调，商是为秋声。秋，一岁的后半年。金风一起，天萧地瑟，草枯木谢，一片肃杀之气。
English: On the occasion of the alternation of Wei and Jin dynasties, Uncle Gong was born at night. The song "Stop Breathing" is a business tune, and the business is for the autumn sound. Autumn, the second half of the year. Together with the golden wind, the sky is gloomy, the grass is dry and the trees are dead, and there is a spirit of subjugation.

古文：又晋承金运之声也，此所以知魏之季，而晋将代之也。
现代文：另外，晋承金运之声，由此可知曹魏已到王朝之末，将被晋所取代。
English: In addition, Jin's successor Jin Yun's voice, from which it can be known that Cao Wei has reached the end of the dynasty and will be replaced by Jin.

古文：慢其商弦，以宫同音，是臣夺君之义也。
现代文：乐曲中商弦转慢，以宫同音，喻臣夺君的意思。
English: In the music, the merchant strings turn slowly, with the same tone as the palace, which means that the vassal takes the king.

古文：此所以知司马氏之将篡也。
现代文：由此可知司马氏将篡魏以代之。
English: From this, it can be seen that Sima will usurp Wei to replace it.

古文：司马懿受魏明帝顾托，后返有篡夺之心。自诛曹爽，逆节弥露。
现代文：司马懿受魏明帝曹睿顾托，后来反生篡夺之心，从诛杀曹爽起，便露出叛逆篡位的野心。
English: Sima Yao received Cao Rui and Gu Tuo from Wei Ming Emperor. Later, he became anti-birth and anti-usurpation. From the time he killed Cao Shuang, he showed his ambition to usurp the throne.

古文：王陵都督扬州，谋立楚王彪。
现代文：王陵督扬州，想立楚王曹彪，不成。
English: Yangzhou, the governor of the royal mausoleum, wanted to establish the king of Chu, Cao Biao, but failed.

古文：母丘俭、文钦、诸葛诞，前后相继为扬州都督，咸有匡扶魏室之谋，皆为懿父子所杀。
现代文：毋立俭、文钦、诸葛诞三人先后都任过扬州都督，都有匡复曹魏的举动，事情败露后都被司马氏所杀害。
English: Bo Lijian, Wenqin and Zhuge Zheng, all three of whom had successively served as Yangzhou's governor, all supported Cao Wei's move, and were all killed by the Sima clan after the affair was exposed.

古文：叔夜以扬州故广陵之地，彼四人者，皆魏室文武大臣，咸散败于广陵，故名其曲为广陵散。
现代文：嵇康以扬州古为广陵之地，上述四人都是曹魏的文武大臣，又都先后在广陵事败身亡，因此将他亲手所写的抒发胸中郁愤之气的琴曲命题为《广陵散》，《止息》一曲是其中的一支。
English: Yan Kang took Yangzhou Ancient as the place of Guangling. The above-mentioned four were the ministers of literature and martial arts of Cao Wei, and all of them were defeated and died in Guangling successively. Therefore, the piano piece that he wrote with his own hand to express the depressed mood in his chest was named "Guangling San," and the "Breathless" piece was one of them.

古文：言魏氏散亡，自广陵始也。
现代文：说的是曹魏散亡自广陵始啊。
English: It says that the fall of Cao Wei began with Guangling.

古文：《止息》者，晋虽暴兴，终止急于此也。
现代文：至于《止息》一曲是《广陵散》组曲的末篇，喻有司马氏虽然由在广陵屠杀曹魏忠臣开始了他们篡位的逆举，但是他们也终将会覆灭在这里的。
English: As far as the "Ceasefire" piece is the final piece of the "Guanling San" suite, it is said that although the Sima clan began their usurpation by slaughtering Cao Wei's loyal vassals in Guangling, they will eventually perish here.

古文：其哀愤戚惨痛迫切之音，尽在于是。
现代文：嵇叔夜胸中郁积的哀、愤、戚、惨、痛迫之切的心绪，都化为音律在这组乐曲中宣泄出来。
English: The pent-up feelings of grief, anger, sympathy, misery, and anguish in his heart are all transformed into musical rhythms and released in this set of music.

古文：永嘉之乱，是其应乎。
现代文：曲中司马氏兴于广陵、衰于广陵的寓意，后来的晋怀帝永嘉之乱也应验了。
English: In the song, the implication that the Sima clan flourished in Guangling and declined in Guangling, and the later rebellion of Emperor Jianhuai Yongjia also came true.

古文：叔夜撰此，将贻后代之知音者，且避晋祸，所以托之鬼神也。
现代文：嵇叔夜撰写这组古曲，既是为了留给后来的知音，也是为了避过司马氏对他的迫害。因此，假托鬼神。
English: This set of ancient pieces was composed by Gong Shuyuan in order to leave it to his later friends, as well as to avoid Sima's persecution of him. Therefore, it is a fake ghost.

古文：皋之于音，可谓至矣。
现代文：从上述理论看，韩皋对音律的钻研与深刻理解，可谓已经到了极致啊！
English: Judging from the above theory, Han Min's in-depth study and deep understanding of musical rhythms can be said to have reached the extreme!

古文：王中散
现代文：王中散
English: Wang Zhongsan

古文：唐乾符之际，黄巢盗据两京，长安士大夫避地北游者多矣。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年间，农民起义军黄巢攻陷长安、洛阳两座京城。长安城中的达官贵人及知识分子有很多人都离京北去躲避战乱。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianfu of the Tang Dynasty, the peasants' revolutionary army of Huang Chao captured the two capital cities of Chang'an and Luoyang. Many dignitaries and intellectuals in Chang'an left Beijing and the north to escape the war.

古文：时有前翰林待诏王敬傲，长安人。能棋善琴，风骨清峻。
现代文：当时有个前翰林待诏，叫王敬傲，长安人氏，能奕围棋尤善弹琴，体貌清俊不凡。
English: At that time, there was a former Hanlin, called Wang Jing Ao, from Chang'an, who was particularly good at playing the piano and was exceptionally handsome.

古文：初自蒲坂历于并。
现代文：王敬傲离开京城长安后，起初由蒲坂去并州。
English: After Wang Jing'an left the capital Chang'an, he initially went from Busan to Anhui Province.

古文：并帅郑从谠，以相国镇汾晋。
现代文：并州军统帅郑从谠以相国的身份镇守汾晋。
English: And the commander-in-chief of the state army, Zheng Conglu, took the position of a brother-in-arms to guard Jiaojin.

古文：傲谒之，不见礼。
现代文：王敬傲前去拜见他，遭到冷遇，又去邺州。
English: Wang Jing Ao went to see him, received a cold reception, and went back to Ganzhou.

古文：后又之邺，时罗绍戚新立，方抚士卒，务在战争。
现代文：正值罗绍戚刚刚立足，抚慰兵士，志在剿灭农民起义军，因此接纳了王敬傲。
English: At a time when the Roshakhi had just established a foothold, comforting soldiers and aspiring to annihilate the peasant insurgents, he accepted Wang Jingxuan.

古文：敬傲在邺中数岁。
现代文：王敬傲在邺州旅居数年。
English: Wang Jing'an lived in Zhangzhou for several years.

古文：时李山甫文笔雄健，名著一方。
现代文：当时李山甫也在邺州，以文笔雄健而闻名，寓居在道观中。
English: At that time, Li Shanfu was also in Ganzhou, famous for his powerful writing, living in the Taoist Confucianism.

古文：适于道观中，与敬傲相遇。
现代文：还有个李处士也善弹琴。一次，王敬傲与李处士一同去道观中拜访李山甫。
English: There was also a Mr. Li who was also good at playing the piano. Once, Wang Jing'an and Mr. Li went to visit Mr. Li Shanfu at the Taoist School.

古文：又有李处士亦善抚琴，山甫谓二客曰：幽兰绿水。可得闻乎？
现代文：李山甫问他们二人：听说二位都善弹琴，古有《幽兰绿水》一曲，可听说过吗？
English: Li Shanfu asked the two of them: I heard that both of you are good at playing the piano, and there is an ancient song "Yulan Lvushui." Have you heard of it?

古文：敬傲即应命而奏之，声清韻古。感动神。
现代文：王敬傲听了后，当即弹奏一曲，声清韻古，感动鬼神。
English: After listening to Wang Jing'an, he immediately played a piece of music with a clear and ancient rhyme, which moved the spirits.

古文：曲终。敬傲潜然返袂云：忆在咸通，王庭秋夜，供奉至尊之际，不意流离于此也。
现代文：一曲终了，王敬傲神色凄然，抖抖衣袖，说：想当初在咸通年间，一个秋日的夜晚，应圣上诏请，在宫庭供奉，弹琴给圣上与王公贵人听。
English: At the end of the piece, Wang Jing Ao was overcome with emotion, shaking his sleeves, and said, "I would like to recall that during the reign of Emperor Xiantong, on an autumn evening, I was asked by the saint to perform a service in the palace courtyard and play the piano for the saint and the prince.

古文：李处士亦为《白鹤》之操。
现代文：谁想到今天却流落到这里啊。
English: Who would have thought that today they would have ended up here.

古文：山甫援毫抒思，以诗赠曰，幽兰绿水耿清音，叹息先生枉用心。
现代文：慨叹一番后，李处士也弹奏了一曲《白鹤》，李山甫援笔醮墨，凝思片刻，当场挥毫，写诗一首送赠王敬傲：幽兰绿水耿清音，叹息先生柱用心。
English: After lamenting for a while, Officer Li also played a piece of "White Crane." Li Shanfu helped pen and ink, pondered for a moment, waved it on the spot, and wrote a poem to give to Wang Jing Ao: Yu Lan green water Geng Qingyin, sigh Mr. pillar heart.

古文：世上几时曾好古，人前何必苦沾襟。
现代文：世上几时曾好古，人前何必苦沾襟。
English: The world has been around for a long time, so why be bitter in front of others.

古文：余句未成。山甫亦自黯然，悲其未遇也。王生因别弹一曲，坐客弥加悚敬，非寻常之品调。
现代文：尾句还未写完，李山甫也早已神色黯然，悲怜他怀才不遇王敬傲又弹奏了另外一支曲子，坐上的客人们听后，越发敬重他。都认为王敬傲的琴艺绝非寻常的品调。
English: The last sentence was not yet finished, and Li Shanfu was already looking gloomy. Pitying that he could not meet Wang Jing'ao, he played another piece. After listening, the seated guests respected him more and more. They all thought that Wang Jing'ao's piano skills were absolutely unusual.

古文：山甫遂命酒停弦，各引满数杯，俄而玉山俱倒。
现代文：于是，李山甫命人上菜斟酒，让大家连饮数杯，以表敬慕。稍许，全坐的人都醉倒了。
English: As a result, Li Shanfu ordered someone to serve the dishes and pour the wine, so that everyone could drink several glasses at a time and admire the table. After a while, everyone sitting down was drunk.

古文：洎酒醒，山甫方从客问曰：向来所操者何曲，他处未之有也。
现代文：醒酒后，李山甫跟客人们一块询问王敬傲：你一向弹奏的都是什么曲子啊？怎么我们在别处没有听见过呢？
English: After sobering up, Li Shanfu asked Wang Jing Ao together with the guests: What kind of music have you always played? How come we haven't heard it anywhere else?

古文：王生曰：某家习正音，奕世传受。
现代文：王敬傲回答说：我们家操练的正宗琴曲，奕棋也是世传。
English: Wang Jing'an replied, "The authentic qin music practiced by our family and the game of heiqi are also passed down from generation to generation.

古文：自由德顺以来，待诏金门之下，凡四世矣。
现代文：自德顺以来，侍诏皇门已经四世。
English: Since Deshun, there have been four generations of imperial chamberlains.

古文：其常所操弄，人众共知。
现代文：这些琴曲经常在皇宫里弹奏，人所共知。
English: These pieces are well known and are often played in the palace.

古文：唯嵇中散所受伶伦之曲，人皆谓绝于洛阳东市，而不知有传者。
现代文：这是魏时中散大夫嵇康所传下的伶伦古曲，人们都说此曲跟嵇大夫一块灭绝在洛阳东市，而不知道还有传播的后人。
English: This is an ancient Qilian melody passed down by the Wei Dynasty's Dr. Zi Kang. People say that this melody died out with Dr. Zi in the eastern city of Luoyang, but they don't know if it was passed down to later generations.

古文：余得自先人，名之曰《广陵散》也。
现代文：我也是自先人那儿世代传学下来的，曲名叫《广陵散》。
English: I am also a descendant of generations of predecessors, and my song is called "Guangling San."

古文：山甫早疑其音韻，殆似神工，又见王生之说，即知古之《广陵散》，或传于世矣。
现代文：李山甫早就怀疑王敬傲弹奏的不是一般的琴曲，好象只有神人才能作出这种妙音。现在听王敬傲这么一说，就知道也许真的是《广陵散》乐曲传于今世呢。
English: Li Shanfu had long suspected that Wang Jing'an was not playing an ordinary piece of music, as if only a divine person could produce such a wonderful sound. Now, hearing Wang Jing'an say this, we know that it may really be the "Guangling San" music that has been passed down to this world.

古文：遂成四韻，载于诗集。
现代文：于是写成四韻的一首诗。该诗载在《李山甫诗集》中。
English: As a result, he wrote a poem with four rhymes, which was included in the Li Shanfu Poetry Collection.

古文：今山甫集中，只标李处士，盖写録之误耳。
现代文：现在见到的《山甫诗集》，这首诗标的是李处士，大概是误写。
English: The "Collection of Sanpo's Poems" that we see now, this poem is attributed to Li Zhenshi, probably by mistake.

古文：由是李公常目待诏为王中散也。
现代文：从此，在李山甫的心目中，常常将侍诏的王敬傲视为王中散。
English: From then on, in Li Shanfu's mind, he often regarded Wang Jing'ao, the imperial chamberlain, as Wang Zhong's subordinate.

古文：王生后又游常山，是时节帅王镕年在幼龄，初秉戎钺。方延多士，以广令名。
现代文：王敬傲后来又出游常山，正值节度使卫镕年少气壮，初掌兵权延集多方人士用来传播他的令名。
English: Wang Jing'an later traveled to Changshan. The timing of the trip coincided with the festival, which made Wei Xuan look young and vigorous. When he first assumed military power, many people gathered to spread his name.

古文：时有李夐郎中、莫又玄秘书、萧珦员外、张道古、并英儒才学之士，咸自四集于文华馆。
现代文：当时就有李夐郎中、莫又玄秘书、萧珦员外、张道古及诸多英才，都从四方集聚在文华馆。
English: At that time, there were Li Yulang Junior High School, Mo Yue Xuan Secretary, Xiao Xuan Clerk, Zhang Daogu and many talents, all gathered in the Wenhua Pavilion from the four directions.

古文：故待诏之琴棋，亦见礼于宾榻。
现代文：因此，王敬傲的琴技与棋艺也受到了礼遇。
English: Therefore, Wang Jing Ao's piano skills and chess skills were also treated with courtesy.

古文：岁时供给，莫不丰厚。
现代文：对他的生活用度，按照时令的变化及时供给，都很丰厚。
English: For his living expenses, according to the seasonal changes in the timely supply, are very rich.

古文：王或命挥弦动轸，必大加锡遗焉。
现代文：而且每当卫镕召请他献艺时，事后都赏给他很多礼品。
English: Moreover, whenever Wei Xuan called him to perform, he was given many gifts afterwards.

古文：在常山十数年，甚承礼遇。
现代文：在常山这十几年，王敬傲很受卫镕的礼遇。
English: In the past ten years in Changshan, Wang Jing'an has been treated with great courtesy by the guards.

古文：敬傲每戴危冠，着高屐，优游啸咏而已。
现代文：他经常头戴峨冠，脚着高屐，悠闲地吟诗唱曲。
English: He often wears a crown on his head and stilts on his feet, leisurely chanting and singing.

古文：冬月亦葛巾单衣，体无绵纩，日醺酣于市，人咸怪异之。
现代文：就是在天寒地冻的冬天，他也只穿单衣，系葛巾，通体不见绵纩，整日在街市上喝得醉熏熏的，市人都用怪异的目光看着他。
English: Even in the freezing winter, he only wore a singlet, wore a georgette scarf, and his whole body was not wrinkled. He was drunk all day in the street market, and the townspeople looked at him with strange eyes.

古文：闻昭宗返正，辞归帝里，后不知所终。
现代文：后来，传来昭宗归都长安的消息，王敬傲辞别常山重归帝里，这以后就不知他的下落了。
English: Later, news came that Zhaozong had returned to the capital Chang'an, and Wang Jing'ao said goodbye to Changshan and returned to the imperial court. After that, his whereabouts were unknown.

古文：敬傲又能衣袖中剪纸为蜂蝶，举袂令飞，满于四座，或入人之襟袖，以手揽之，即复于故所也。
现代文：王敬傲还能在衣袖中剪纸为蜂蝶，举袖让它们飞出来，飘满四座，或入襟袖，或落入人手，少许，又都回到他的袖子里。
English: Wang Jing'an can also cut paper in his sleeve for bee butterflies, lift the sleeve to let them fly out, float over four seats, or into the sleeve, or fall into the hands of others, a little, and they all return to his sleeve.

古文：常时咸疑有神仙之术。
现代文：当时人们都疑心王敬傲会神仙的法术。
English: At that time, people were suspicious of the magic of Wang Jinghao's immortals.

古文：张道古与相善，每钦其道艺，曾著《王逸人传》，为此也。
现代文：张道古跟王敬傲很要好，经常对他的为人与技艺表示钦敬。他曾著有《王逸人传》，就是为了表达他对王敬傲的倾慕。
English: Zhang Daogu was very close to Wang Jing'ao and often expressed admiration for his personality and skills. He once wrote "The Biography of Wang Yiren" to express his admiration for Wang Jing'ao.

古文：道古名睍，博字。
现代文：张道古名睍，知识广博，尤其通晓古文。
English: Zhang Dao was a famous scholar in ancient times, with extensive knowledge, especially of ancient texts.

古文：善古文，读书万卷，而不好为诗。
现代文：但是他读书破万卷，却不好写诗。
English: But he is a prodigious reader, but he is not good at writing poetry.

古文：曾在张楚梦座上，时久旱，忽大雨，众宾皆喜而詠之。
现代文：他在张楚梦座上任事时，时逢久旱，忽降大雨，众宾客都高兴地聚在一起写诗歇咏。
English: When he took office at the Zhang Chumeng Theater, there was a long drought and a sudden heavy rain, and all the guests happily gathered together to write poems.

古文：道古最后方成绝句曰：亢旸今已久，喜雨自云倾。
现代文：张道古最后才写成一首五言绝句，诗是这样的：亢旸今已久，喜雨自云倾。
English: Zhang Daogu finally wrote a five-sentence poem. The poem is as follows: It's been a long time since I've been here, and the rain is falling from the clouds.

古文：一点不斜去，极多时下成。
现代文：一点不斜去，极多时下成。
English: It doesn't tilt at all, and most of the time it's down.

古文：坐客重其文学之名，而哂其诗之拙也。
现代文：众宾客听了他的诗后，虽然素常很看重他文才，却都讽笑他这首诗写得太拙劣了。
English: After listening to his poem, all the guests, although they usually valued his literary talent, laughed at him for writing the poem so poorly.

古文：瑟
现代文：瑟
English: Surrey

古文：卢中丞迈有宝瑟四，各值数十万。
现代文：中丞卢迈藏有四只宝瑟，每只瑟都价值数十万钱。
English: There are four treasure serpents in the possession of Chujo Rumai, each of which is worth hundreds of thousands of dollars.

古文：有寒玉、石磬、响泉、和至之号。
现代文：四只宝琴分别叫：寒玉、石磬、响泉、和至。阮咸
English: The four Baojin are respectively named: the Cold Stone, the Stone Urn, the Loud Spring, and the Wind.

古文：阮咸元行冲宾客为太常少卿时，有人于古墓中得铜物似琵琶而身正圆，莫有识者。
现代文：元行冲任太常少卿时，有人在古墓中掘得一个铜物状似琵琶而呈正圆形，没有人能认出它到底是什么。
English: At the time of Yuan Xing's appointment as Taizang Shaoqing, someone dug up a copper object in an ancient tomb that resembled a lute and was round. No one could identify what it was.

古文：元视之曰：此阮咸所造乐也。
现代文：元行冲看了后，说：这件东西是古人阮咸制作的乐器啊。
English: After looking at it, Yuan Xing rushed over and said, "This thing is a musical instrument made by the ancient man Ruan Xian."

古文：乃令匠人改以木，为声清雅，今呼为阮咸者是也。
现代文：于是命人依照铜物的形伏、构造，用木仿造。制作出来后，试着弹奏，声音清雅，非常悦耳。今天叫阮咸的乐器就是这种物件。
English: Therefore, he ordered someone to imitate the shape and structure of the brass and make it with wood. After it was made, he tried to play it, and the sound was elegant and very pleasant to the ear. The musical instrument called Nguyen Hanh today is this kind of object.

古文：又晋书称阮咸善弹琵琶。
现代文：又《晋书》上称阮咸善弹琵琶。
English: Also, "Jin Shu" said that Nguyen Ham Son played the lute.

古文：后有发咸墓者，得琵琶以瓦为之。
现代文：后人发掘阮咸墓，掘出一只琵琶，是用泥瓦作的。
English: Later generations excavated Nguyen Hanh's tomb and unearthed a lute made of mud bricks.

古文：时人不识，以为于咸墓中所得，因名阮咸。
现代文：当时的人都不认识，认为是从阮咸墓中得到的，因此命名它为阮咸。
English: At that time, people did not know it, and thought that it was obtained from the tomb of Nguyen Xuan, so it was named Nguyen Xuan.

古文：近有能者不少，以琴合调，多同之。
现代文：近来。有许多人都能弹奏这种乐器，用琴合调伴奏，多数时候都是跟其它乐器共同使用。
English: Recently, many people have been able to play this instrument, accompanied by a harmonium, and most of the time it is used together with other instruments.

