古文：王璹魏靖杨再思金坛王丞韩朝宗韦延之张质郑洁
现代文：王璹魏靖杨再思金坛王丞韩朝宗韦延之张质郑洁
English: Wang Zhi, Wei Jing, Yang Rethinking, Golden Altar, Wang Zheng, Han Dynasty, Zong Wei Yan, Zhang Jie, Zheng Jie

古文：王璹
现代文：王璹
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐尚书刑部郎中宋行质，博陵人也。
现代文：唐朝尚书刑部郎中宋行质是博凌人，不信佛。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Shang Shuxu's Minister of Justice, Song Xingguo, was a polytheist who did not believe in Buddhism.

古文：性不信佛，有慢谤之言。永徽二年五月病死。
现代文：有诽谤神佛的言词 唐高宗永徽二年五月病死。
English: Tong Gaozong died of illness in May of the second year of Yonghui.

古文：至六月九日，尚书都官令吏王璹暴死，经二日而苏。
现代文：到六月九日时，尚书都官令吏王璹暴死，两天后又苏醒。
English: By June 9th, Wang Xi, an official of the General Office of the People's Government of the People's Republic of China, died violently. Two days later, he woke up.

古文：言初死之时，见四人来云，官府追汝。
现代文：他说初死时，看见四个人来对他说，官府追你。
English: He said that when he first died, he saw four people come to him and say, "The government is after you."

古文：璹随行，入一大门。见厅事甚壮。西间有一人坐，形容肥黑。
现代文：王璹便跟他们走了，进入一个大门，厅内陈设壮观，西间坐一人，形体肥胖，面容黑。
English: Wang Yao followed them and entered a gate. The interior of the hall was magnificently decorated. There was one person sitting in the west, with a fat body and a dark face.

古文：东间有一僧坐，与官相当。
现代文：东间坐一僧人，像官一样，都面向北。
English: A monk sits in the east, like an official, both facing north.

古文：皆面向北，各有床几案褥。侍童二百许人，或冠或弁，皆美容貌。
现代文：各间都有床、几、桌、被褥等，侍童有二百多人，戴着皮革做的帽子，容貌都很美。
English: Each room has a bed, a table, a table, bedding, etc. There are more than two hundred attendants, wearing leather hats, and they are all beautiful.

古文：阶下有吏执文案。
现代文：阶下有吏拿着文案。
English: A lower-ranking official came out with the copy.

古文：有一老人，著枷被缚，立东阶下。
现代文：有一个老人，戴着枷被绑着，站在东面阶下。
English: There was an old man, shackled and bound, standing at the foot of the east steps.

古文：璹至庭，亦已被缚。
现代文：王璹到庭时也被绑着。
English: Wang Yao was also tied up when he arrived at the court.

古文：吏执纸笔问璹曰： 贞观十八年，在长安佐史之日，因何改李须达籍？ 
现代文：吏拿着纸笔问王璹： 贞观十八年，你在长安任佐史的时候，为什么给李须达改簿籍？
English: Holding a pen and paper, the official asked Wang Qi: In the eighteenth year of Zhenguan, when you were the assistant of Chang'an history, why did you change the books of Li Suda?

古文：答曰： 璹前任长安佐史，贞观十六年转选。至十七年，蒙授司农寺府史。十八年改籍，非璹罪也。 
现代文：王璹回答： 我以前任过长安佐史，贞观十六年转选后进入朝中，到贞观十七年，蒙皇上恩典授我司农寺府史，十八年改籍不是我的罪过。 
English: Wang Yao answered: I used to be the head of the Anza History Department, and after I was elected to Zhenguan in the 16th year, I entered the imperial court. In the 17th year of Zhenguan, the emperor graciously granted me the position of the head of the Agricultural and Temple History Department. It was not my fault that I changed my nationality in the 18th year.

古文：厅上大官，读其辞辨，顾谓东阶下老囚曰： 何因妄诉耶？ 
现代文：厅上的大官听了王璹的辩辞，回头对东阶下的老囚说，为什么要诬告？ 
English: After listening to Wang Xi's defense, the senior official in the courtroom turned to the old prisoner on the east steps and said, "Why make a false accusation?

古文：囚曰： 须达年实未至，由璹改籍，加须达年，岂敢妄耶？ 
现代文：老囚说： 须达年龄实在没到，由于让王璹改了薄籍，增加了须达的年龄，我怎敢诬告。 
English: The old prisoner said: "I'm really not old enough to reach the age limit. How dare I make a false accusation because Wang Yao changed his birth certificate and increased the age limit.

古文：璹云： 至十七年改任告身见在，请追验之。 
现代文：王璹说： 贞观十七年改任文告现在还在，请派人查验。
English: Wang Yao said: The announcement of Zhenguan's 17th year of appointment is still there, please send someone to check it.

古文：官呼领璹者三人，解璹缚，将取告身。
现代文：大官呼叫三人领王璹，解了绑绳，去取文告。
English: The dignitary called the three leaders, untied the ropes, and went to get a message.

古文：既至，大官自读之，谓老囚曰： 他改任分明，汝无理。 
现代文：取回后大官读过，对老囚说，他改任的事很清楚，你没理。 
English: After retrieving it, the senior official read it and said to the old prisoner that he knew very well about the change of post and that you were being unreasonable.

古文：令送老囚出门外。
现代文：便派人送老囚出门外。
English: He then sent someone to escort the old prisoner out of the door.

古文：门外昏暗有城，城上皆有女墙，似是恶处。
现代文：门外很昏暗，有一座城，城上都有矮墙。像个凶地方。
English: Outside the door it was very dark. There was a city with low walls all over it. It looked like a violent place.

古文：大官因书案上。谓璹曰： 汝无罪。放汝去。 
现代文：大官依靠在书案上，对王璹说： 你没罪，放你回去。 
English: The senior official relied on the case file and said to Wang Xi, "You are not guilty, let you go back."

古文：璹辞拜，吏引璹至东阶，拜辞。僧印璹臂曰： 好去。 
现代文：王璹拜谢告辞，小吏领王璹到东阶去拜辞，僧人在王璹臂上印了一个印记说，好好走吧。
English: Wang Yao bowed and said goodbye. The minor official led Wang Yao to the east steps to bow. The monk stamped a mark on Wang Yao's arm and said, "Let's go."

古文：吏引璹出，东南行，度三重门，皆勘视臂印，然后出。
现代文：小吏领王璹出去往东南走，过三重门，都查验臂上的印记然后才出来。
English: Wang Yao, the leader of the petty officials, went out to the southeast, passed through the three-level gate, and checked the mark on his arm before coming out.

古文：至四门，门甚壮大，重楼朱粉，三户并开，状如城门，守卫严切。又验印，听出门。
现代文：走到第四道门，门很高大，各层楼都涂着红粉，三个门一齐开着，形状像城门，守卫严密，又检验印记。
English: I walked to the fourth gate. The gate was very tall, and each floor was painted with red powder. The three gates were open at the same time. They were shaped like city gates, closely guarded, and stamped with inspection marks.

古文：东南行数十步，闻有人从后唤璹，璹回顾，见郎中宋行质，面色惨黑，色如湿地，露头散腰，著故绯袍，头发短垂，如胡人者，立於厅事阶下，有吏主守之。
现代文：验后出门往东走了几十步，听有人从后边叫王璹，王璹回头看，是刑部郎中宋行质，面色惨黑，像潮湿的土地。光着头没系腰带，穿着旧红色袍子，头发短而下垂，像胡人。站在大厅阶下，有差吏看守。
English: After the examination, he went out and walked a few dozen steps to the east, listening to someone call Wang Yao from behind. Wang Yao looked back and saw that he was Song Xingjian, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, with a gloomy face, like a wet land. He was bareheaded without a belt, wearing an old red robe, his hair was short and drooping, like a goose. He was standing at the bottom of the hall steps, guarded by police officers.

古文：西近城，有一大木牌，高一丈二尺许。大书牌曰： 此是勘当过王人。 
现代文：西城边有一大木牌，高一丈二尺多，大牌上写着： 这里是检查当过大官的人。 
English: On the western edge of the city, there is a large wooden sign, more than two feet high, which reads: This is a check on people who have been high officials.

古文：其字大方尺余，甚分明。
现代文：每个字一尺见方，特别清楚。
English: Each word is one shaku square, so it's very clear.

古文：厅上有床座几案，如官府者，而无人坐。
现代文：厅上有床、椅、几、桌，好象官府，但没有人坐。
English: There are beds, chairs, tables and desks in the hall, like a government office, but no one is sitting.

古文：行质见璹悲喜，云： 汝何故得来？ 
现代文：宋行质见王璹又悲又喜，说： 你为什么事来的？ 
English: Song Xing witnessed Wang Yao's sorrow and joy, and said, "Why did you come here?

古文：璹曰： 官追，勘问改籍，无事放还。 
现代文：王璹说： 是官府追来的，查问改簿籍的事，没有事放我回去。 
English: Wang Yao said: It was the government that chased me. They asked me about changing the books and records, but they didn't let me go back.

古文：行质捉其两手，谓璹曰： 吾被官责问功德簿，吾平生无受此困苦，加之饥渴寒苦不可说，君可努力至我家，急语令作功德也。 
现代文：行质握住王璹的两手对王璹说： 我是被官府追来责问功德簿的事，我平生没受过这样的苦，饥饿寒冷没法说，你要努力到我家，马上告诉他们积功德。 
English: He grasped Wang Yao's two hands and said to Wang Yao: "I was chased by the government to ask about the book of merits. I have never experienced such suffering in my life. I can't say I'm hungry or cold. You should make an effort to come to my home and immediately tell them to accumulate merits."

古文：如是殷勤数四嘱之，璹乃辞去。行数十步，又呼璹还。未及言，厅上有官人来坐。怒璹曰： 我方勘事，如何人辄至囚处。 
现代文：这样殷勤的嘱咐再三，王璹最后辞别而去，走了几十步，又叫王璹回来，没等说话，厅上有官来了，怒斥王璹： 我们刚查完这个事，你怎么能擅自到囚犯的地方。 
English: After repeated such courteous instructions, Wang Yao finally said goodbye and left, walking a few dozen steps. Wang Yao was called back again. Before he could speak, an official came to the office and angrily rebuked Wang Yao: We have just finished investigating this matter, how can you go to the prisoner's place without permission.

古文：使卒搭其耳，推令去。
现代文：叫士卒抓王璹的耳朵，推他走。
English: Tell the officers to grab Wang Yao's ear and push him away.

古文：璹走，又至一门，门吏曰： 汝被搭耳，耳当聋，吾为汝却其中物。 
现代文：又到一门，门吏说： 你被抓了耳朵，耳能聋，我为你去掉耳中的东西。 
English: At the next gate, the doorkeeper said, "You have been caught with your ear, you are deaf, I will remove what is in your ear."

古文：因以手挑其耳，耳中鸣，乃验印放出。
现代文：他便用手掏他的耳朵，耳中鸣响，又验印记放他出去。
English: So he put out his hand and pulled out his ear, and there was a ringing in it. He also put a mark on it and let him go.

古文：门外黑如漆，璹不知所在，以手模西及南，皆是墙壁，唯东无障碍，而暗不可行。
现代文：门外漆黑，王璹不知在哪里，用手摸西和南都是墙壁，唯有东面没有障碍，却黑暗没法走。
English: It was pitch black outside the door. Wang Yao didn't know where he was. He felt the walls to the west and south with his hand, but there were no obstacles to the east, but he couldn't walk in the dark.

古文：立待少时，见向者追璹之吏从门来，曰： 君尚能待我，甚善。可乞我钱一千。 
现代文：站着等了一会儿，看见以前追捕的小吏从门中来，说： 你还能等我，很好，请给我一千钱。 
English: After standing and waiting for a while, he saw the bailiff he had chased earlier come through the door and say, "You can still wait for me. That's great. Please give me a thousand bucks."

古文：璹因愧谢曰： 依命。 
现代文：王璹很感谢他，说可以。
English: Wang Yao thanked him very much and said yes.

古文：吏曰： 吾不用铜钱，欲得白纸钱，期十五日来取。 
现代文：小吏说： 我不用铜钱，想要白纸钱，等十五天后来取。 
English: The petty official said, "I don't need copper money. I want white paper money. I'll wait fifteen days and then take it."

古文：璹许，因问归路。
现代文：王璹允许了，又问了回去的路。
English: Wang Yao allowed it and asked the way back.

古文：吏曰： 但东行二百步，有墙穿破见明，可推倒，即至君家。 
现代文：吏说，向东走二百步，有墙穿破就看到光明，可以推倒墙，就到了你家。
English: The magistrate said, "Walk two hundred paces to the east. If you break through a wall, you will see the light. If you knock down the wall, you will arrive at your home."

古文：璹如言，已至所居隆政坊南门矣。于是归家。
现代文：王璹按他说的办，已经到了他住的隆政坊南门，于是回家。
English: According to his instructions, Wang Yao arrived at the south gate of Longzhengfang, where he lived, and then went home.

古文：见人坐泣，入户而苏。
现代文：看见人们坐着哭，进了门后便苏醒过来。
English: She saw people sitting and crying, and woke up after entering the door.

古文：至十五日，璹忘与钱，明日复病，困绝。见吏来怒曰： 君果无行，期与我钱，遂不与，今复将汝。 
现代文：到了十五天，王璹忘了给送钱，第二天又犯病，气绝，看见小吏来愤怒地说，你果然没有德行，答应给我钱，又不给了，再把你带走。 
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang Yao forgot to send the money. The next day, he fell ill again and was exhausted. When he saw the petty official, he angrily said, "You really have no virtue. You promised to give me money, and then you didn't give it, and then you were taken away."

古文：因即驱行，出金光门，令入坑。
现代文：立即驱赶他，出了金光门，叫他进坑。
English: They immediately drove him out of the Golden Gate and told him to go to the pit.

古文：璹拜谢百余，遂即放归，又苏。
现代文：王璹拜谢了百多次，才把他放回来，又苏醒了。
English: Wang Yao thanked him a hundred times before he let him back in and woke up again.

古文：璹告家人，买纸百张，作钱送之。
现代文：王璹告诉家里人，买了一百张纸，剪成钱送去。
English: Wang Yao told his family members that he had bought a hundred pieces of paper, cut them into money and sent them.

古文：明日，璹又病困，复见吏曰： 君幸能与我钱，而钱不好。 
现代文：第二天，王璹又病了，又见到了那小吏，小吏说： 有幸你能给我钱，但钱不好。 
English: The next day, Wang Yao fell ill again and saw the petty official again. The petty official said, "Fortunately, you can give me money, but the money is not good."

古文：璹辞谢，请更作，许之。又苏。
现代文：王璹又辞谢，请求重作，小吏允许，又苏醒了。
English: Wang Yao thanked him again and asked for a repeat performance. The minor official allowed it, and he woke up again.

古文：至二十日，璹令用钱，别买白纸作钱，并酒食。
现代文：到二十天，王璹叫人用钱另买了白纸作钱，并备了酒食，在隆政坊西渠水上烧了。
English: Twenty days later, Wang Yao asked someone to use money to buy white paper to make money, and prepared wine and food, and burned it on the water in the west canal of Longzhengfang.

古文：魏靖，钜鹿人，解褐武城尉。
现代文：立即感到身轻体健，又像过去一样。魏靖钜鹿人魏靖，任官武城尉。
English: He immediately felt lighter and healthier, just as he had in the past. Wei Jing Wei Jing, who was from the Deer people, was appointed to the post of Wucheng lieutenant.

古文：时曹州刺史李融，令靖知捕贼。贼有叔为僧，而止盗赃。靖案之，原其僧。
现代文：当时曹州刺吏李融令魏靖捕盗贼，此贼有叔当和尚，为他窝赃，魏靖查究后赦免了和尚。
English: At that time, Li Rong, the assassin of Caozhou, ordered Wei Jing to catch the thief. The thief had an uncle who was a monk, and hid for him. After the investigation, Wei Jing pardoned the monk.

古文：刺史让靖以宽典，自案之。
现代文：刺史李融责备魏靖用刑太宽，他自己亲自查办，和尚供认了他曾引导盗贼藏匿。
English: Li Rong blamed Wei Jing for using too broad a punishment. He personally investigated the case, and the monk confessed that he had led the thief into hiding.

古文：僧辞引伏，融令靖杖杀之。载初二年夏六月，靖会疾暴卒，权殓已毕，将冥婚男女，故未果葬。
现代文：李融命令魏靖打死和尚。武周则天后载初二年夏六月，魏靖得病暴死，暂时入殓，为了和他已死的表妹举行冥婚，所以没有下葬。
English: Li Rong ordered Wei Jing to beat the monk to death. Wu Zhou had Wei Jing put to death in the summer of June in the first year of the second lunar month. Wei Jing died of a sudden illness and was temporarily imprisoned. In order to hold a secret marriage with his dead cousin, he was not buried.

古文：经十二日。
现代文：经过十二天，魏靖又活了。
English: After twelve days, Wei Jing came back to life.

古文：靖活，呻吟棺中，弟侄俱走。
现代文：他在棺材中呻吟，弟弟和侄都吓跑了。
English: He moaned in his coffin, scaring his brother and nephew away.

古文：其母独命斧开棺，以口候靖口，气微暖。久之目开，身肉俱烂。
现代文：他母亲叫人用斧子开棺，口对口引气，他呼出的气渐温热，后来眼也睁开了，身上的肉都烂了。
English: His mother had the coffin opened with an axe and breathed into him mouth-to-mouth. His breath became warm and warm, and then his eyes opened and his flesh rotted away.

古文：徐以牛乳乳之，既愈，言初死，经曹司，门卫旗戟甚肃。引见一官，谓靖何为打杀僧，僧立于前，与靖相论引。
现代文：只能慢慢地喂些牛奶，痊愈后，说他初死时，经过地府，门卫执旗执戟很威严，领他见一个官，问魏靖为什么要打死和尚，和尚就站在面前，和魏靖辩论。
English: He could only slowly feed him some milk. After he recovered, he said that when he died for the first time, he passed through the Underworld Palace. The doorkeepers were very dignified, holding banners and shields. They took him to an official and asked Wei Jing why he wanted to kill a monk. The monk stood in front of him and argued with Wei Jing.

古文：僧辞穷。官谓靖曰： 公无事，放还。 
现代文：和尚理亏词穷，官对魏靖说： 你没事了，放你回去。 
English: The monk was at a loss for words, and the official said to Wei Jing: You're all right, let you go back.

古文：左右曰： 肉已坏。 
现代文：左右随从说： 他的肉已经烂了。 
English: His followers on both sides said, "His flesh is rotten."

古文：官令取药，以纸裹之，曰： 可还他旧肉。 
现代文：官叫人取药，用纸包裹着，说： 可以还他旧肉。 
English: The official called someone to fetch the medicine, wrapped it in paper, and said, "You can give him back his old meat."

古文：既领还，至门闻哭声，惊惧不愿入，使者强引之。
现代文：立即领他回去，至门口听见哭声，他很惊惧不愿进去。
English: They immediately took him back, and when they heard crying at the door, he was so frightened that he didn't want to go in.

古文：及房门，使者以药散棺中，引靖臂推入棺，颓然不复觉矣。
现代文：使者强领他到了房门，使者又把药撒在棺中，拉他的胳臂推进棺材中，突然间没有知觉，便活了。
English: The messenger forcibly led him to the door of the room, the messenger sprinkled the medicine in the coffin, pulled his arm into the coffin, and suddenly he was unconscious and alive.

古文：既活，肉蠹烂都尽，月余日知故。
现代文：肉几乎都烂了，一个多月后便和原来一样。
English: The meat is almost all rotten, and after more than a month it is the same as before.

古文：初到宅中，犬马鸡鹅悉鸣，当有所见矣。
现代文：初到宅院，狗、马、鸡、鹅都叫起来，它们可能看见了什么。
English: When they first arrived at the house, the dogs, horses, chickens and geese all cried out that they might have seen something.

古文：杨再思
现代文：杨再思
English: Yang Jieshi

古文：有黄衣吏持簿至。唱再思罪云，如意元年，默啜陷瀛檀等州，国家遣兵赴救少，不敌。有人上书谏，再思违谏遣行，为默啜所败，杀千余人。大足元年，河北蝗虫为灾，烝人不粒。
现代文：唐中宗神龙元年，中书令杨再思死，同日中书供膳也死，同被地府差役领到阎王那里。阎王问再思： 在生时为什么有那么多罪状？这么多，怎么能赎回来？ 再思说： 我确实无罪。 阎王令取册簿来，一会儿，有黄衣吏拿簿来，读再思的罪状说，武周如意元年，东突厥后朝可汗默啜攻陷瀛、檀等州，国家派少部士兵去救援，抵抗不了入侵者，有人就此事上书进谏，杨再思违背谏言派兵前行，被默啜所败，被杀千余人；武周时大足元年，河北发生蝗虫灾害，很多人吃不到一粒米。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Shenlong in the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the Chinese emperor ordered Yang Zhaisi to die. On the same day, the book and the meal also died, and both were led to the king of hell by the local government officials. The king of hell asked Zhaisi: Why were there so many crimes in his lifetime? So many, how can I redeem them? Zhaisi said: I am indeed not guilty. The king of hell ordered the book to be taken, and in a moment, a yellow-clothed official came to take the book, and read the crime of Zhaisi, saying that Wu Zhou was right. In the first year

古文：再思为相，不能开仓赈给，至令百姓流离，饿死者二万余人。宰相燮理阴阳，再思刑政不平，用伤和气，遂令河南三郡大水，漂溺数千人。
现代文：再思身为宰相，不能开仓赈济灾民，使百姓流离失所，饿死两万余人；宰相应该调和谐理天时地利，再思法令不平，大伤平和之气，便使得河南三郡大水，淹死数千人。
English: Rethinking that as prime minister, he could not open a warehouse to help the victims of the disaster, displaced the people, and starved more than 20,000 people to death; the prime minister should adjust the balance of heaven and earth, rethink the laws and regulations, and seriously hurt the spirit of peace, causing the three counties of Henan to flood, drowning thousands of people.

古文：如此者凡六七件，示再思，再思再拜伏罪。
现代文：这样的罪状六七件，给再思看，看后再三叩拜认罪。
English: There are six or seven such charges, so let's think about them, and after reading them, knock and plead guilty again and again.

古文：忽有手大如床，毛鬣可畏，攫再思。指间血流，腾空而去。
现代文：忽然有一只手像床那样大，长毛很可怕，抓再思，手指间流血，腾空而去。
English: Suddenly, there was a hand as big as a bed, the long hair was terrible, scratching and thinking, bleeding between the fingers, and flying away.

古文：王问供膳，何得至此。
现代文：阎王问中书供膳，为什么到这里？
English: 阎王问中書供膳, why did you come here?

古文：所由对云，欲问其人，云，无过，宜放回。
现代文：差役回答说，要想问他本人。阎王说，无过错，应放回。
English: The officer replied that he wanted to question him personally. Yan Wang said that he was not at fault and should be released.

古文：供膳既活，多向人说其事。为中宗所闻，召问，具以实对。中宗命列其事迹於中书厅记之云。
现代文：供膳便活了，多次向人说这件事，被唐中宗李显听到，召供膳去问，他据实回答，唐中宗命令把这件叫中书厅记载下来。
English: When Li Xian, a member of the Tang dynasty's Central Committee, was summoned to ask about the matter, he answered truthfully that the Tang dynasty's Central Committee had ordered the Central Library to record the matter.

古文：金坛王丞
现代文：金坛王丞
English: Jin Tan Wang Rong

古文：开元末，金坛县丞王甲，以充纲领户税在京，於左藏库输纳。忽有使者至库所云，王令召丞。甲仓卒随去。
现代文：唐玄宗开元末年，金坛县丞王甲，因管理运送贡品和税收而到京城，他正在左藏库中输出纳入时，忽然有使者到库房说，阎王命令召县丞，王甲仓促随去。
English: At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Jia, the county magistrate of Jintan County, went to Beijing to manage the delivery of tributes and taxes. When he was exporting and incorporating into the left repository, an emissary suddenly came to the repository and said that the king of hell ordered to summon the county magistrate, and Wang Jia hurriedly followed.

古文：出城行十余里，到一府署。入门，闻故左常侍崔希逸语声。
现代文：出城走了十多里，到了一处官府，进门听到已死去的左常侍崔希逸的语声。
English: I walked more than ten miles out of the city, arrived at a government office, entered the door and heard the voice of the deceased Left Attendant, Cui Xiyi.

古文：王与希逸故三十年，因问门者，具知所以。
现代文：王甲与希逸有三十年故交，因此问看门的人，便都知道了全部事由。
English: Wang Jia and Xi Yat have been friends for 30 years, so when they asked the doorman, they knew the whole story.

古文：求为通刺，门者入白。
现代文：求看门的通报，看门人进去说了。
English: I asked the doorman for an announcement, and the doorman came in and said.

古文：希逸问此人何在，遽令呼入，相见惊喜。
现代文：希逸问此人在哪？便急忙叫他进去，二人相见惊喜。
English: Xi Yat asked where this person was? and then hurriedly called him to come in. The two were surprised to see each other.

古文：谓甲曰： 知此是地府否？ 
现代文：希逸对王甲说： 知道这是地府不？ 
English: Xiyi said to Wang Jia: Do you know that this is the underworld?

古文：甲始知身死，悲感久之。
现代文：王甲才知自己身死，悲伤了很久。
English: It took Wang Jia a long time to realize that he was dead.

古文：复问曾见崔翰否？翰是希逸子。
现代文：希逸又问见到崔翰了没有，崔翰是希逸的儿子。
English: Xi Yat also asked if she had seen Cui Han. Cui Han is Xi Yat's son.

古文：王云： 入城已来，为开库司，未暇至宅。 
现代文：王甲说：进入京城后就忙碌库中事务，没有时间到你家。 
English: Wang Jia said: After entering the capital, I was busy with things in the library, and I didn't have time to go to your house.

古文：希逸笑曰： 真轻薄士。 
现代文：希逸笑说，你真是一轻薄自己的人，生死都没改变。
English: Xi Yiyi said with a smile, "You are really a light-hearted person, and you haven't changed in life or death."

古文：以死生易怀，因问其来由。王云： 适在库中，随使至此，未了其故。 
现代文：又问他怎么来的，王甲说： 我正在库中，随使到了这里，不知原因。 
English: Wang Jia also asked him how he got here. Wang Jia said, "I was in the storeroom. An attendant sent me here. I don't know why."

古文：有顷，外传王坐。崔令传语白王云： 金坛王丞，是己亲友，计未合死。事了，愿早遣。时热，恐其舍坏。 
现代文：过了一会儿，外面传话阎王已入座，崔希逸便叫人传话告诉阎王说， 金坛王丞是我的亲友，计算他不应该死，事完后，愿早送他回去，天热，恐怕他的身体腐烂。
English: After a while, word came from outside that Yan Wang had already taken his seat. Cui Xiyi sent a message to Yan Wang, saying, "Jintan Wang Rong is my relative and friend. I think he should not die. After the event, I would like to send him back early. It's hot, I'm afraid his body will rot."

古文：王引入，谓甲曰： 君前任县丞受赃相引。 
现代文：王甲被领进去，阎王对王甲说，你的前任县丞说你贪赃才把你带到这里。
English: Wang Jia was led inside, and Yan Wang said to Wang Jia, "Your former county magistrate said you were greedy, and that's why he brought you here."

古文：见丞着枷，坐桐树下。
现代文：看见前县丞戴着枷，坐在院中树下。
English: I saw the former county magistrate wearing shackles and sitting under a tree in the courtyard.

古文：问云： 初不同情，何故见诬？ 
现代文：王甲问他，我们的情况不同，你为什么诬告我？ 
English: Wang Jia asked him, our situations are different, why are you making false accusations against me?

古文：丞言受罪辛苦，权救仓卒。
现代文：县丞说受罪太苦，想办法解救自己，仓促说出了你。
English: The county magistrate said that it was too hard to suffer the crime, and he tried to find a way to save himself, and hastily said you.

古文：王云： 若不相关，即宜放去。 
现代文：阎王说： 若和他没关系，就应放他回去。 
English: Yan Wang said, "If he has nothing to do with it, then he should be allowed to return."

古文：出门，诣希逸别。希逸云： 卿已得还，甚善。
现代文：出门后到崔希逸处告别，希逸说：你已经能回去了，很好。
English: After leaving home, she went to say goodbye to Cui Xiyi. Cui Xiyi said: "You have been able to go back, that's great.

古文：传语崔翰，为官第一莫为人作枉，后自当之，取钱必折今生寿。每至月朝十五日，宜送清水一瓶，置寺中佛殿上，当获大福。 
现代文：你告诉崔翰，为官第一件事是别冤枉别人，以后自己适当而为，贪不义财必然折寿，每到初一、十五，用一瓶清水置寺中佛殿上，就能得到大福。 
English: You tell Cui Han that the first thing for an official is not to wrong others, and to act appropriately in the future. Greed and ill-gotten wealth will inevitably shorten one's life. On the first and fifteenth day of the first month, you can use a bottle of clear water to place it on the temple's Buddha hall, and you will receive great blessings.

古文：甲问此功德云何，逸云： 冥间事，卿勿预知，但有福即可。 
现代文：王甲问这种功德叫什么意思，希逸说： 阴间的事，你不要预先知道，只要有福就行。 
English: Wang Jia asked what the meaning of this merit was, and Xiyi said: "You should not know the things of the underworld in advance, as long as you are blessed."

古文：言毕送出，至其所，遂活。
现代文：说完送出王甲，王甲到家便活了。
English: After saying that, Wang Jia was sent out. When Wang Jia got home, he was still alive.

古文：韩朝宗
现代文：韩朝宗
English: Han Chaozong

古文：天宝中，万年主簿韩朝宗，尝追一人来迟，决五下。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间，万年主簿韩朝宗，曾经追捕一人来晚，打了五板子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Han Chaozong, the main book of the year, once chased a person who came late and hit five boards.

古文：将过县令，令又决十下。
现代文：见过县令又打了十板子。
English: Once I saw the county magistrate, I was hooked.

古文：其人患天行病而卒。
现代文：这人因得了流行病而死亡。
English: The man died as a result of the epidemic.

古文：后於冥司下状，言朝宗。
现代文：后来他到冥府中去告状，说到了韩朝宗。
English: Later, he went to the Hadefu Middle School to file a complaint and talked about Han Chaozong.

古文：宗遂被追至，入乌颈门极大。
现代文：朝宗便被冥府追到，进了一个黑大门。
English: Asamune was chased by Hades and entered a black gate.

古文：至中门前，一双桐树。门边一阁，垂帘幕。窥见故御史洪子舆坐，子舆曰：韩大何为得此来？ 
现代文：到中门前，有两棵梧桐树，门边还有一阁，挂着帘幕，能看见死去的御史洪子舆坐在那里。子舆说： 韩大为什么到这来啦？ 
English: In front of the middle gate, there are two sycamore trees, and there is also a canopy next to the door, with a curtain hanging. You can see the deceased Hong Zi Mei sitting there. Zi Mei said: Why did Han Da come here?

古文：朝宗云： 被追来，不知何事。 
现代文：朝宗说： 被追来也不知什么事。 
English: Asamune said, "I don't know anything about being chased."

古文：子舆令早过大使。
现代文：子舆叫他早些去见大使。
English: His daughter told him to go to see the ambassador earlier.

古文：入屏墙，见故刑部尚书李乂。朝宗参见。
现代文：进了屏墙，见到死去的刑部尚书李偁，朝宗上前参拜。
English: After entering the screen wall, he saw the dead head of the Department of Criminal Law, Shangshu Li Yao, and Asamune came forward to pay his respects.

古文：云： 何为决杀人？ 
现代文：李又说，为什么打死人？
English: Li also said, "Why do you beat people to death?

古文：朝宗诉云： 不是朝宗打杀，县令重决，因患天行病自卒。非朝宗过。 
现代文：朝宗诉说： 不是我打死的，是县令判重了，又因患流行病自己死的，不是我的过错。 
English: Asamune said: I didn't kill him, it was the county ordinance that was too harsh, and it wasn't my fault that he died of an epidemic.

古文：又问县令决汝，何牵他主簿？
现代文：又问： 县令打的你，为什么牵连到他主簿？
English: He also asked, "You were beaten by the county magistrate, why are you involved in his ledger?

古文：朝宗无事，然亦县丞，悉见例皆受行杖。 
现代文：朝宗没事，但他也是县官，按贯例都要受杖刑。
English: Asamune is fine, but he is also a prefectural official and, as usual, will be punished with the cane.

古文：亦决二十，放还。
现代文：打了二十下，放他回去。
English: Twenty strokes and let him go.

古文：朝宗至晚始苏，脊上青肿。疼痛不复可言，一月已后始可。
现代文：朝宗到晚上才苏醒，脊背上又青又肿，痛的不能说话，一月后才完全恢复。
English: He did not wake up until the evening, his back was blue and swollen, he could not speak for pain, and he did not fully recover until a month later.

古文：於后巡检坊曲，遂至京城南罗城。
现代文：后来他在民间巡视时，到了京城南罗城。
English: Later, when he was on a people's inspection tour, he came to Nanla, Beijing.

古文：有一坊，中一宅，门向南开，宛然记得追来及吃杖处。
现代文：在一个居民区中有一宅院，门向南开，记得好像被追去受杖刑的地方，这宅院已无人居住。
English: In a residential area there is a house, the door opens to the south, I remember it as if I was being chased to the place of caning, this house is no longer inhabited.

古文：其宅空无人居，问人，云，此是公主凶宅，人不敢居。
现代文：问别人，说是公主的凶宅，人们不敢住。
English: Ask anyone and they'll tell you it's the murder house of a princess. People don't dare to live there.

古文：乃知大凶宅，皆鬼神所处，信之。
现代文：才知道这是大凶宅，都是鬼神住的地方，他相信了。
English: Only then did he know that this was a murderer's house, a place where ghosts and gods lived, and he believed it.

古文：韦延之
现代文：韦延之
English: Wei Yanzhi

古文：睦州司马韦延之，秩满，寄居苏州嘉兴。
现代文：睦州司马韦延之，任满之后，曾寄居在苏州的嘉兴。
English: Sima Wei Yan from Mutsu Province lived in Jiaxing, Suzhou, after his term of office ended.

古文：大历八年，患痢疾。
现代文：唐代宗大历八年得了痢疾。
English: In the eighth year of the Tang Dynasty, he contracted dysentery.

古文：夏月独寐厅中，忽见二吏云： 长官令屈。 
现代文：夏天时他独自睡在厅中。忽然看见两个小吏说，长官命令你委屈一下。
English: In the summer he was sleeping alone in the hall. Suddenly he saw two clerks and said, "The superintendent ordered you to do something wrong."

古文：延之问：长官为谁？ 
现代文：延之问： 长官是谁？ 
English: Question from Nobuyuki: Who is the boss?

古文：吏云： 奉命追公，不知其他。
现代文：吏说： 奉命抓你，别的事不知道。 
English: The official said: "I was ordered to arrest you, I don't know anything else.

古文：延之疑是鬼魅，下地欲归。
现代文：延之怀疑他们是鬼类便下地要回去。
English: Suspecting that they were ghosts, Yan Zhi immediately wanted to go back.

古文：吏便前持其袂，云：追君须去，还欲何之？ 
现代文：小吏便上前拉住他的袖子说： 抓你就必须去，为什么往回走？ 
English: The petty officer then came forward, tugged at his sleeve and said: "If you catch him, you have to go. Why go back?

古文：延之身在床前，神乃随出，去郭，复不见陂泽，但是陆路。
现代文：延之身体虽然仍在床前，魂却随着去了。走出城，看不见池塘，都是陆路。
English: Although his body was still in front of the bed, his soul went with it. When he went out of the city, he couldn't see the pond, it was all overland.

古文：行数十里，至一所，有府署。吏将延之过大使，大使传语领过判官。吏过延之。
现代文：走了数十里，到了一个有官署的地方，小吏带延之去见大使，大使传话叫去见判官，小吏便领延之去见判官。
English: After walking dozens of miles, they arrived at a place with a government office. The petty official took Yan to see the ambassador, the ambassador sent a message to the judge, and the petty official took Yan to see the judge.

古文：判官襕笏下阶敬肃甚谨，因谓延之曰： 有人论讼，事须对答。 
现代文：判官穿长袍执笏板走下台阶，很严肃地对延之说： 有人告你，有些事须要你来回答。 
English: Wearing a robe and holding a chopping board, the judge walked down the steps and said to Yan Zhi very seriously, "Someone has accused you, and there are things you need to answer for."

古文：乃令典领於司马对事。
现代文：便令主管领韦延之去对答。
English: The supervisor then ordered Wei Yanzhi to go and answer.

古文：典引延之至房，房在判官厅前，厅如今县令厅。有两行屋，屋间悉是房，房前有斜眼格子，格子内板床坐人。
现代文：主管领延之到了一个房，房在判官厅前，厅像现在的县令厅，有两栋屋，屋里都是房间，房间前有斜眼格子，格子内的板床上坐着人。
English: The supervisor led Yan Zhi to a room. The room was in front of the magistrate's office. The office was like the current county magistrate's office. There were two buildings, both of which were rooms. There was a lattice in front of the room, and a person was sitting on a board bed inside the lattice.

古文：典令延之坐板床对事。
现代文：主管叫延之坐在板床上对事。
English: The supervisor told Yan Zhi to sit on the board bed and face the matter.

古文：须臾，引囚徒六七人，或枷或锁或露首者，至延之所。
现代文：一会儿，领来六七个囚徒，有的戴枷，有的戴锁，有的光头，到延之在的地方。
English: In a little while he brought six or seven prisoners, some in chains, some in irons, and some with their heads shaved, to the place where the donkey lay.

古文：典云： 汝所论讼韦司马取钱，今冥献酬自直也。 
现代文：主管说： 你们状告韦司马索取过你们的钱财，今天冥府中就要把这个案子搞清楚。 
English: The supervisor said, "You have sued West Massow for taking your money. Today, the Netherworld is going to figure out this case."

古文：问云： 所诉是谁？ 
现代文：他问囚徒： 你们告的是谁？ 
English: He asked the prisoners: Who are you accusing?

古文：曰：是韦冰司马，实不识此人。 
现代文：囚徒说： 是韦冰司马，实在不认识这个人。 
English: The prisoner said: It's Wei Bing Sima, I really don't know this person.

古文：典便贺司马云： 今得重生。 
现代文：主管便向司马祝贺说： 你现在可以重生了。 
English: The supervisor congratulated Sima and said, "You can be reborn now."

古文：甚喜。
现代文：很高兴。
English: I'm very happy.

古文：乃引延之至判官所，具白，判官亦甚相贺，处分令还，白大使放司马回。
现代文：便领延之到判官处，把方才的经过说了，判官也为延之祝贺，判处他回去。告诉大使放司马回去。
English: He took Yan to the magistrate's office and told him what had happened. The magistrate congratulated Yan and ordered him to go back. He told the ambassador to let Sima go back.

古文：典复领延之至大使厅，大使已还内，传语放韦司马去，遣追韦冰。
现代文：主管又领延之到大使厅，大使已回内室，传话放韦司马回去。又派人去追捕韦冰。
English: The supervisor also led Yan to the ambassador's office, the ambassador had already returned to the inner room, and sent a message to Wei Sima to go back. He also sent someone to chase Wei Bing.

古文：须臾。绿衫吏把案来，呵追吏，何故错追他人。各决六十，流血被地，令便送还。
现代文：一会儿，穿绿衣的官吏拿着案卷过来，呵斥追捕吏，为什么错追捕了人，各打六十板，血流遍地。令马上送回延之。
English: After a while, a green-clad official came over with a case file, yelling at the pursuing officers, "Why did you chase the wrong person? They each got sixty boards, and blood flowed all over the ground. Send them back immediately."

古文：延之曰： 欲见向后官职。 
现代文：延之说： 我想看看我以后还能任什么官职。 
English: "I want to see what kind of official position I can hold in the future," said Nobuyuki.

古文：吏云： 何用知之？ 
现代文：吏说： 不用知道。 
English: The official said: "I don't need to know."

古文：延之苦请。吏开簿，延之名后，但见白纸，不复有字。
现代文：延之苦苦请求，吏便打开簿子，延之名后边，只见白纸，没有字。
English: At Yan Zi's painstaking request, the officials opened the book. Behind Yan Zi's name, there was only white paper, with no writing.

古文：因尔遂出。
现代文：于是延之便出来了。
English: Therefore, Nobuyuki came out.

古文：行百余步，见吏拘清流县令郑晋客至，是延之外甥。
现代文：走了百余步，看到吏拘捕清流县令郑晋客到这，他是延之外甥。
English: After walking more than a hundred paces, he saw the arresting officers detaining Qingliu County's order Zheng Jinke, who was Yan's nephew.

古文：延之问： 汝何故来？ 
现代文：延之问： 你为什么被抓来？ 
English: Yan Zhi asked: Why were you arrested?

古文：答曰： 被人见讼。 
现代文：答道： 被人告了。 
English: Answer: The defendant has been sued.

古文：晋客亦问延之云，何故来。
现代文：晋客也问延之： 你什么原因来？ 
English: The new customers also asked Yan Zhi: What is your reason for coming?

古文：延之云： 吾错被追，今得放还。 
现代文：延之说： 我被错抓了，现在放回。 
English: "I was arrested by mistake, and now I'm being released," said Enshi.

古文：晋客称善数四，欲有传语，吏拘而去，意不得言，但累回顾云： 舅氏千万。 
现代文：晋客不断说好，想叫延之传话，但被吏带走，心里的话没有说出，屡次回头看，说： 舅父保重。 
English: Jinka kept saying yes, wanting to get Yan to pass on the message, but he was taken away by the officials and did not say what was on his mind. He repeatedly looked back and said, "Take care, uncle."

古文：延之至舍乃活。问晋客，云： 死来五六日。 
现代文：延之回家便活了，打听郑晋客，说死了五六天了。
English: When Yan Zhi got home, he was still alive. When he asked Zheng Jincai, he said that he had been dead for five or six days.

古文：韦冰宅住上元，即以延之重生其明日韦冰卒。
现代文：韦冰家住在上元，在延之重生的第二天韦冰死了。
English: Wei Bing's family lived in Shangyuan. The day after Yan Zi's rebirth, Wei Bing died.

古文：张质
现代文：张质
English: Zhang Jian

古文：张质者，猗氏人，贞元中明经。授亳州临涣尉。
现代文：张质是猗氏地方的人，唐德宗贞元年间以明经中举，授官亳州临涣尉。
English: Zhang Quan was a local of the Qin Dynasty. During the reign of Emperor Dezong in the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Quan was awarded the title of the Ming Dynasty's middle-ranking official and the highest-ranking official of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：到任月余，日暮，见数人持符来追，其仆亦持马俟於阶下，乘马随之出县门。县吏列坐门下，略无起者。
现代文：到任一月多的一天傍晚，看见很多人拿着符来追他，他的仆人也牵马在阶下等着，他便骑马随着出了县衙的门，县里的官吏们都坐在门前，没有起来的。
English: On the evening of the day after he took office in January, he saw many people chasing him with banners. His servants were also waiting at the foot of the steps with horses. He rode out of the gate of the county government. The officials of the county were sitting in front of the gate and did not get up.

古文：质怒曰： 州司暂追，官不遽废，人吏敢无礼耶？ 
现代文：张质生气说： 州里暂时追捕我，我的官职不能马上废掉，你们这些小官怎么敢这样无礼？ 
English: Zhang Guozhong said angrily, "The state is persecuting me for the time being. My official position cannot be abolished immediately. How dare you petty officials be so rude?"

古文：人亦不顾。
现代文：人们仍然无动于衷。
English: People remain indifferent.

古文：出数十里，至一柏林，使者曰： 到此宜下马。 
现代文：走出数十里到了柏树林，使者说，到这应该下马。
English: After walking dozens of miles to the cypress forest, the messenger said that he should dismount at this point.

古文：遂步行百余步，入城，直北有大府门，署曰： 北府。 
现代文：便步行了百多步，进了城，北面有大府门，署名 北府 。
English: He walked more than a hundred steps and entered the city. To the north, there was the Daifu Gate, signed Beifu.

古文：入府，径西有门，题曰 推院 ，吏士甚众。
现代文：往西有门，题名 推院 。官吏士卒很多。
English: To the west, there is a gate with the title "Tsui-in." There are many officials and scholars.

古文：门人曰： 临涣尉张质。 
现代文：守门人叫： 临涣尉张质。 
English: The gatekeeper called out, "Linyi Lieutenant Zhang Xiao."

古文：遂入。
现代文：他便进去了。
English: And he went in.

古文：见一美须髯衣绯人，据案而坐，责曰： 为官本合理人，因何曲推事，遣人枉死？ 
现代文：见一个穿红衣的美髯公靠着案桌坐着。斥责的问： 为官本是懂道理的人，因为什么不能正确处理事情，以致使人冤枉而死？ 
English: He saw a beautiful young lady in a red dress sitting at a desk. He asked reproachfully, "Officials are people who understand reason. Why can't things be handled correctly, so that people die unjustly?"

古文：质被捽抢地。呼曰： 质本任解褐得，到官月余，未尝推事。 
现代文：张质被推倒地上，呼叫： 我任官到现在才一个月，没曾处理案件。 
English: Zhang Qian was pushed to the ground, shouting: I've only been in office for a month, and I haven't handled any cases.

古文：又曰： 案牍分明，诉人不远。府命追勘，仍敢言欺。 
现代文：红衣人又说： 案卷很清楚，告状的人又不远，上面下令追查，你还敢欺骗本官。 
English: The man in red also said: The case file is very clear, the person who filed the complaint is not far away, and the investigation was ordered from above. How dare you deceive this official.

古文：取枷枷之。
现代文：用枷锁上。
English: Put him in chains.

古文：质又曰： 诉人既近，请与相见。 
现代文：张质又说： 告状的人既然在这，我要和他见面。 
English: Zhang Qian also said: Since the plaintiff is here, I want to meet him.

古文：曰： 召冤人来。 
现代文：红衣人说： 把受冤人召来。 
English: The man in red says: Call the wronged.

古文：有一老人眇目，自西房出，疾视质曰： 此人年少，非推某者。 
现代文：有一老人瞎了一只眼从西房走出，很快的看了一眼张质，说： 这个人年轻，不是那个办案的人。 
English: An old man, blind in one eye, came out of the west wing, quickly glanced at Zhang Qi and said, "This man is young, he is not the one handling the case."

古文：仍刺录库检猗氏张质，贞元十七年四月二十七日上临涣尉。
现代文：便命令录库检视猗氏张质的案卷，是贞观十七年四月二十七日任临涣尉。
English: He then ordered the court to examine the case file of Mr. Zou Zhang, who was appointed as Linyi lieutenant on April 27, 17th.

古文：又检诉状被屈事，又牒阴道亳州。其年三月，临涣见任尉年名，如已受替，替人年名，并受上月日。
现代文：又查看诉状中被冤屈的事实，又下文书去阴府中的亳州查阅下列事实：那年三月，到临涣任尉者的年龄、姓名，如果已更替，更替人的年龄、姓名，以及替任月日。
English: He also checked the facts that were wronged in the complaint, and sent a document to the underworld of Luzhou to check the following facts: in March of that year, the age and name of the person appointed to Linyi, and if it has been replaced, the age and name of the replacement person, as well as the date of replacement.

古文：得牒，其年三月，见任尉江陵张质，年五十一。贞元十一年，四月十一日任，十七年四月二十一日受替。
现代文：文书回来了，那年三月任尉的是江陵的张质，年龄五十一岁，于贞元十一年四月十一日任，十七年四月二十一日受替。
English: The document came back. The lieutenant appointed in March of that year was Zhang Qian from Jiangling. He was fifty-one years old. He was appointed on April 11th in the eleventh year of the Zhengyuan and was replaced on April 21st in the seventeenth year.

古文：替人猗氏张质，年四十七。
现代文：替职的人是猗氏张质，年龄四十七岁。
English: The replacement is a 47-year-old man named Zhang Qian of the Zou clan.

古文：检状过。判官曰： 名姓偶同，遂不审勘。
现代文：核查后，判官说： 因为姓名相同，便不再审查了。
English: After verification, the judge said: Because the name is the same, it will no longer be reviewed.

古文：本典决十下，改追正身。 
现代文：本主管打十板，改捕正犯。
English: The supervisor gave him a ten-point reprimand, and the arrest of the main offender was changed.

古文：执符者复引而回，若行高山，坠于岩下，如梦觉，乃在柏林中，伏于马项上。两肋皆痛，不能自起，且不知何处。
现代文：执符者又领张质回去，好像走在高山上，掉在山下，如梦初醒，仍然在柏树林中，趴在马脖上，两肋痛的直不起身，而且不知现在何处。
English: The bearer also led Zhang Qi back, as if walking on a high mountain, falling under the mountain, like a dream awakening, still in the cypress forest, lying on the horse's neck, unable to stand up straight with pain in both ribs, and not knowing where he is now.

古文：隐隐闻樵歌之声，知其有人，遂大呼救命。
现代文：隐隐约约听到砍柴人的歌声，知道这里有人，便大呼救命。
English: I vaguely heard the woodcutter's song and knew someone was here, so I yelled for help.

古文：樵人来，惊曰： 县失官人及马，此非耶？ 
现代文：砍柴人来了，吃惊地说： 县里丢失了当官的和马，这不是吗？ 
English: When the woodcutter came, he was surprised and said, "Isn't it true that the county has lost its magistrate and horse?

古文：竞来问，质不能对。扶正其身，策以送归县。
现代文：都来问，张质不能回答，大家把他身子扶正，赶着马送回县里。
English: They all came to ask questions, but Zhang Qian could not answer. They all helped him to stand up and sent him back to the county on a horse.

古文：质之马为鬼所取，仆人不知。
现代文：张质的马被鬼牵走，仆人不知道。
English: The taut horse is led away by a ghost, unbeknownst to the servants.

古文：寻求不得者，已七日矣。
现代文：县宰怀疑张质初到任，对下属官吏太严，官吏很怨恨他把他杀了。
English: The county head suspected that Zhang Qian was too strict with subordinate officials when he first took office, and the officials resented him so much that they killed him.

古文：质归，憩数日，方能言，然神识遂阙。
现代文：那夜坐在门前的和守门值宿的官吏，都被监禁起来，已经七天了，还没找到。张质回来后休息了数日才能说话，然而神智已经不佳。
English: The official who was sitting in front of the door that night and the official who was on duty guarding the door, both of whom were imprisoned, have not been found for seven days. After Zhang Qie returned, he took a few days off to speak, but his sanity was already poor.

古文：郑洁
现代文：郑洁
English: Zheng Jie

古文：郑洁，本荣阳人，寓於寿春郡，尝以假摄丞尉求食。
现代文：郑洁，本是荣阳人。寓居在寿春郡，曾经代理县丞县尉谋生。
English: Zheng Jie, originally from Rongyang, lived in Shuchun County and once worked as a deputy county magistrate.

古文：婚李氏，则善约之犹子也。
现代文：与李氏婚配，他是善约的侄子。
English: Married to Mr. Li, he is a kind-hearted nephew.

古文：洁假摄停秩，寄迹安丰之里。开成五年，四月中旬，日向暮，李氏忽得心痛疾，乃如狂言，拜於空云： 且更乞。 须臾间而卒，唯心尚暖耳。
现代文：郑洁停职，寄居安丰。唐文宗开成五年四月中旬傍晚，李氏忽然心痛，说狂话，向空中边拜边说： 乞求。 片刻而死，唯有心窝尚温热。
English: In the evening of mid-April in the fifth year of Tang Wenzong's reign, Li suddenly had a heartache, spoke nonsense, bowed to the sky and said: "Beg." He died in an instant, but his heart was still warm.

古文：一家号恸，呼医命巫。竟无效者，唯备死而已。
现代文：全家人悲痛哭叫，找医生找巫婆，都无效果，只能为她准备后事而已。
English: The whole family cried out in grief, looking for a doctor to find a witch, all to no avail, they could only prepare for her after-effects.

古文：至五更，鸡鸣一声，忽然回转，众皆惊捧。
现代文：到五更天，鸡叫一声，竟忽然回转，众人吃惊地抱着她。
English: At five o'clock in the morning, the rooster crowed and suddenly turned around, and everyone hugged her in surprise.

古文：良久，口鼻间觉有嘘吸消息。
现代文：良久。口鼻才有呼吸。
English: It takes a long time for the mouth and nose to breathe.

古文：至明，方语云，鬼两人，把帖来追。
现代文：到天亮才能说话，她说，有两个鬼，拿着帖子追她。
English: She couldn't speak until dawn, she said, as two ghosts chased her with the post.

古文：初将谓州县间，犹冀从容。
现代文：开始以为到州或到县，希望没有什么大事。
English: At first, I thought it was just a matter of going to the state or county, and hoped it was nothing serious.

古文：而俄被使人曳将，怕惧，行亦不觉甚难。
现代文：一会儿便被使者拉着走，有些害怕，走路时也不觉太难。
English: After a while, I was pulled along by the messenger. I was a little scared, but I didn't find it too difficult to walk.

古文：至一城郭，引入，见一官人，似曹官之辈。又领入曹司，聆读元追之由。
现代文：到了一座城郭，被领进去，见到一个官人，像州郡的曹官，又领进曹官的官署，听他宣读追捕的理由。
English: Arriving at a castle, he was led inside, where he saw an official, like a state or county sergeant, and was then led into the sergeant's office to listen to him read out the reasons for the pursuit.

古文：云，某前生姓刘，是丈夫，有妻曰马氏。马氏悍戾，刘乃杀而剔其腹，令马氏无五脏，不可托生。
现代文：说我前生姓刘，是个男的，有妻子马氏，她性情凶狠不讲理，刘便杀了她，剖腹取出五脏，叫她不能托生。
English: He said my maiden name was Liu. He was a man, and he had a wife named Ma. She had a fierce and unreasonable temperament. Liu killed her, cut open her abdomen and took out her five internal organs, so that she could not give birth.

古文：所诉者马母。
现代文：告状者是马母。
English: The plaintiff is a horse mother.

古文：某便告本司云： 居欲得马氏托生，即放某回。尽平生所有，与作功德，为计即可也。
现代文：李氏便问曹司说： 要想让马氏能托生，立刻放我回去，我尽平生所有的财物为她做功德，这个办法是可行的。
English: Mr. Li then asked Cao Si, "If you want Ms. Ma to be able to give birth, then let me go back immediately, and I will do my best to do my best for her, this method is feasible."

古文：若今追某，徒置于无间狱，亦何裨於马氏哉？ 
现代文：若是现在把我捕来，白占用一间狱房，对马氏也没有什么好处。 
English: If I were to be arrested now and occupy a prison cell for nothing, it would not be good for Mr. Ma.

古文：本司云： 此则自辨之。 
现代文：曹司说，这事你们自己去辩论去。
English: Cao Si said, "You should discuss this matter among yourselves."

古文：须臾，马氏者到。李恐马氏无礼，遂对官人云： 何得如此狡毒？ 李具以私中之言对之。
现代文：一会儿马氏到，李氏害怕马氏对她无理，便对官人说，不要这样狠毒，李氏又把对曹司说的话说了一次。
English: After a while, Mr. Ma arrived, and Ms. Li was afraid that Mr. Ma was unreasonable to her, so she said to the official, "Don't be so cruel." Ms. Li repeated what she said to Cao Si.

古文：官人问马氏曰，何如。
现代文：官人问马氏说，怎么样？
English: The officials asked Mr. Ma, "How's it going?

古文：马氏曰： 冤系多年，别罪受毕，合归生路无计，伏取裁断？
现代文：马氏说： 冤枉这么多年，各种罪都受过，想托生又没办法，我听你们的裁判。 
English: Mr. Ma said: I have been wronged for so many years, I have suffered all kinds of crimes, and there is nothing I can do to save my life. I will listen to your judgment.

古文：李氏又云： 且请检某算寿几何，若未合来，即请依前说。若合命尽，伏听处分。 
现代文：李氏又说： 请检视一下我的阳寿还有多少？若是没到寿限，就请按我前边说的办；若是我的寿命已尽，我听从处分。 
English: Mr. Li also said, "Please check how much of my life is left. If my life is not up to the limit, please do as I said before; if my life is over, I will obey the punishment."

古文：官人云： 灼然有理。 
现代文：官人说： 很有道理。 
English: The official said, "It makes sense."

古文：遂召司命。须臾，一主者抱案入来。云： 李未合来，昨追时已检讫。 
现代文：便召来司命官，一会儿，一个掌管司命者抱着案卷进来，说： 李还不应该来，昨天追捕时已查验过。 
English: The coroner was summoned, and a moment later, a person in charge of the coroner's office came in holding the case file and said, "Li shouldn't have come yet, it was already checked during the manhunt yesterday."

古文：须臾更检，检出，捧呈官云： 更有十八年合在人间。 
现代文：马上便检，检出后捧给官人说： 还有十八年留在人间。 
English: He immediately checked his stool, and after checking it, he gave it to the official and said: "I still have eighteen years left on this earth.

古文：本司云： 且令随衙勘责，夜则放归耳。 
现代文：本司说： 暂且让她随衙听查，晚上就放她回去。 
English: The department said, "Let her stay with us for the time being, and let her go back in the evening."

古文：彼处欲夜，所司放出，似梦而归也。
现代文：这里快黑夜了，被所司放出。像做了个梦似的回来了。
English: It's getting dark here, I've been let out by the warden. I've come back like I've had a dream.

古文：自是人间日暮，追使即来，鸡鸣即放回，如常矣。
现代文：从此，人间日落时，追使就来了，鸡叫就放回，如此已成常例。
English: Since then, it has become a common practice that when the sun sets in the human world, the pursuers come and the crowing chickens are released.

古文：郑虽贫苦，百计祇待来使。
现代文：郑家虽然贫苦，却千方百计来接待来使。
English: Although the Zheng family was poor, they did everything they could to welcome and serve them.

古文：三五日后，使人惭谢郑曰： 百味之物，深所反侧，然不如赐茶浆水粥耳，茶酒不如赐浆水。
现代文：三五天后，使人惭愧地感谢郑洁说： 各种味道的东西都尝过了，不太喜欢了，不如给些茶浆、稀粥，茶酒不如浆水。
English: Three or five days later, Zheng Jie said, "I've tasted all kinds of delicious things, but I don't like them very much. It's better to give some tea syrup and gruel. Tea wine is not as good as syrup."

古文：又贫居易辨。 
现代文：这是贫苦家容易办到的。 
English: This is easy for poor families to do.

古文：自是每晚则备浆水及粥，纸钱三五张。
现代文：以后每晚都准备浆水和粥，纸钱三五张。
English: From then on, I prepared starch syrup and porridge every night, and three to five pieces of paper money.

古文：月十日后，每来皆语言商议，出拔李氏。
现代文：十天后，每次来都和他商议，怎样救出李氏。
English: Ten days later, every time I visited him, I discussed with him how to rescue Mr. Li.

古文：李氏初每归来，并不敢言。
现代文：李氏最初每次回来，不敢说什么。
English: At first, Mr. Li did not dare to say anything every time he came back.

古文：自使人同和，兼许微说冥间事。
现代文：自从使人和她比较和气，才稍微说点阴间的事。
English: It was only after the envoy had made his peace with her that he said a few words about the underworld.

古文：常言人罪之重者，无如枉法杀人而取金帛。
现代文：常说人最重的罪，就是枉法杀人而获取别人的财物。
English: It is often said that man's gravest sin is to kill someone without just cause and acquire another person's property.

古文：又曰： 布施者。不必造佛寺，不如先救骨肉间饥寒。如有余，即分锡类。更有余，则救街衢间也。其福最大。 
现代文：又说若想布施，不必造佛寺，应该先解救骨肉间的饥寒，如有余，就分赐给别人，更有余，就解救那些沿街乞讨的人，这样做福最大。
English: He also said that if you want to give alms, you don't have to build a Buddhist temple, you should first relieve the hunger and cold among the flesh and blood. If you have more, give it to others, and if you have more, rescue those who are begging along the street. This is the greatest blessing.

古文：郑君兼凭问还往间一人寿命官爵。 回报云： 此人好受金帛，今被折寿，已欲尽矣。
现代文：郑洁有时也问朋友的寿命和官职的事，回答说： 如果这人好接受别人的财物，现在就折寿，已经要寿尽了。
English: Zheng Jie sometimes asked her friend about his longevity and official position, and replied: "If this person is willing to accept other people's property, then he is already nearing the end of his life.

古文：然更有一官。如能改，即得终此秩。若踵前，则不离任矣。 
现代文：但还有一个官职，如果变坏了，马上就终止他俸禄，若是还和以前一样，就不能离任。
English: But there is one post that, if it goes bad, will immediately terminate his salary, and if it remains the same, he will not be able to leave.

古文：又云： 每烧钱财，如明旦欲送钱与某神祇，即先烧三十二张纸钱，以求五道，其神祇到必获矣。
现代文：又说，每次烧纸钱，如果白天想送给某位神灵，先烧三十二张纸钱，以求天、人、畜、地狱、饿鬼五道。
English: He also said that every time you burn paper money, if you want to give it to a certain god during the day, first burn thirty-two pieces of paper money to pray for heaven, people, animals, hell, and hungry ghosts.

古文：如寻常烧香，多不达。
现代文：那位神灵必定能得到。像平常时烧香，多半得不到。
English: That god must be able to get. As usual when burning incense, most likely not.

古文：如是春秋祭祀者，即不假告报也。其烧时，辄不得就地，须以柴或草荐之，从一头以火爇，不得搅碎其钱即不破碎，一一可达也。 
现代文：如果是春秋祭祀时，就不用先告知五道，但不能就地烧，须要用柴草垫上，从一头开始点燃，不用棍棒搅碎，这钱就不破碎，都可以送到了。 
English: If it is a spring and autumn sacrifice, you do not need to inform the five deities first, but you cannot burn it on the spot. You must use a firewood cushion to ignite it from one end, and you do not need to smash it with a stick. The money will not be broken and can be sent to you.

古文：至八月中，李却回，忽喜曰： 已有计可脱矣。 
现代文：到八月中，李氏回来忽然高兴地说： 已有办法可以脱身了。 
English: By mid-August, Mr. Li returned, suddenly happy to say: There is a way out.

古文：郑询之，曰： 奈何，然须致纸钱三五万，令他行下可矣。 
现代文：郑洁问她，她说： 怎么办？要送去三五万钱，才能让他行文下达。 
English: Zheng Jie asked her, and she said: "What should I do? I have to send three hundred and fifty thousand yuan to get him to send the document."

古文：郑乃求於还往，一邑官吏并知之，共与同力，依言救之。
现代文：郑洁就求助于有交往的人，一城的官吏全知道了，和他共同努力，按他所说的去救助。
English: Zheng Jie turned to people he had contacts with. All the officials in the city knew, and they worked with him to rescue him as he said.

古文：后数日。方肯说。
现代文：几天以后，李氏才肯说出那个办法。
English: It took a few days for Mr. Li to come up with that solution.

古文：因云： 冥司又有剔五脏而杀人者，冥司勘覆未毕，且取彼五脏，置诸马氏腹，令托生矣。 
现代文：她说： 冥府又有剔五脏杀人的，审理还没结束，将来可以取那个人的五脏放到马氏的肚里，就能让她托生了。 
English: She said, "In the underworld, there are people who kill people by picking out their five internal organs. The trial is not over yet. In the future, it will be possible to take that person's five internal organs and put them in Mr. Ma's stomach, and then she will be able to give birth."

古文：自是追呼稍稀，或十日方一去。
现代文：从此以后对她的追呼放松了，有时十天才去一次。
English: Since then, I have relaxed my pursuit of her, sometimes only going once every ten days.

古文：但云： 磨勘文案未毕，所言受罪亦不见，其余但拷问科决而已。 
现代文：只是说： 审理文案还没办完，那个应受罪的人也没看见，其余的人也就是拷问判决罢了。 
English: He just said: The trial documents have not been completed, the person who should be punished has not been seen, and the rest of the people are just questioning the verdict.

古文：又尝言当邑某坊曲某姓名人，合至某月日卒，至时更无差谬。又郑君自云： 某即合得摄安丰尉。 
现代文：又曾说城里某街某人，到某月某日死，到时毫无差错。还有郑洁自己说： 我能得到代理安丰尉的位置。 
English: He also said that someone in a certain street in the city would die on a certain day of a certain month, and there would be no mistake at the time. And Zheng Jie himself said: I can get the position of acting Lieutenant Anfeng.

古文：至明年正月三日，果为崔中丞邀摄安丰县尉，皆其妻素知之。
现代文：到了明年正月初三，果然被崔中丞邀请去代理安丰县尉，这都是他妻子知道的。
English: On the third day of the first month of the next year, he was indeed invited by Cui Zhongxiao to act as the lieutenant of Anfeng County, which was known to his wife.

古文：自正月已后，更免其追呼矣。
现代文：自正月以后，便免去了来追呼的事。
English: Since the beginning of the year, they have been exempted from coming to call.

古文：郑君自有记录四十余纸，此略而言也。
现代文：郑洁自己有记录四十余页，在此，只是简略的说说而已。
English: Zheng Jie himself has a record of more than forty pages. Here, it is only a brief description.

