古文：老子曰： 至治之极，邻国相望，鸡狗之声相闻，民各甘其食，美其服，安其俗，乐其业，至老死不相往来。 
现代文：老子说： 天下大治达到极致的时候，虽然邻近的国家互相望得见，鸡鸣狗吠之声互相听得到，而各国人民却都以自家的饮食最甘美，自己的服装最漂亮，安于乡里的习俗，喜爱自己所事行业，直至老死也不相互往来。 
English: Lao Tzu said: "When the world reaches its climax, although neighboring countries can see each other, and the sound of chickens chirping and dogs barking can be heard by each other, the people of all countries are the sweetest with their own food, their own clothes are the most beautiful, they are satisfied with the customs of the countryside, they love their own industries, and they do not interact with each other until they die of old age.

古文：必用此为务，輓近世涂民耳目，则几无行矣。
现代文：到了近世，如果还要按这一套去办事，那就等于堵塞人民的耳目，几乎是无法行得通。
English: In modern times, if we still follow this set of rules, it is tantamount to blocking the people's ears and eyes, and it is almost impossible to work.

古文：太史公曰：夫神农以前，吾不知已。
现代文：太史公说：神农氏以前的事情，我不知道了。
English: Tai Shikong said: I don't know what happened to Shennong before.

古文：至若诗书所述虞夏以来，耳目欲极声色之好，口欲穷刍豢之味，身安逸乐，而心夸矜埶能之荣。
现代文：至于像《诗》《书》所记述的虞、夏以来的情况，则是耳目要极尽音乐、女色的美好，嘴巴要尝尽各种肉食美味，安身在放荡淫乐之中，心里夸耀着权势的荣华。
English: As for the situation since the summer, as described in "Poetry" and "Book," the ears and eyes should fully enjoy music and the beauty of women, the mouth should taste all kinds of meat delicacies, settle in debauchery and lewdness, and boast the glory of power in the heart.

古文：使俗之渐民久矣，虽户说以眇论，终不能化。
现代文：用这种恶俗去侵染百姓已经很久了。即使用老子美妙的理论挨家挨户地劝说开导，终究不能使他们感化。
English: It has been a long time since the people have been infected with this evil custom. Even if they use the wonderful theory of Laozi to persuade and enlighten people from door to door, they will not be able to influence them.

古文：故善者因之，其次利道之，其次教诲之，其次整齐之，最下者与之争。
现代文：所以最好的办法是顺其自然，其次是因势利导，再其次是教诲他们，又其次是整顿他们的行为，最下等的方法是和他们相争。
English: Therefore, the best way is to go with the flow, the next is to be guided by snobbery, the next is to teach them, the next is to rectify their behavior, and the lowest method is to compete with them.

古文：夫山西饶材、竹、穀、纑、旄、玉石；山东多鱼、盐、漆、丝、声色；江南出棻、梓、姜、桂、金、锡、连、丹沙、犀、玳瑁、珠玑、齿革；龙门、碣石北多马、牛、羊、旃裘、筋角；铜、铁则千里往往山出釭置：此其大较也。
现代文：崤山以西盛产木材、竹子、楮木、野麻、旄牛尾、玉石；崤山以东多有鱼、盐、漆、丝、美女；江南出产楠木、梓树、生姜、桂花、金、锡、铅、朱砂、犀牛、玳瑁、珠子、象牙兽皮；龙门、碣石山以北地区盛产马、牛、羊、毡裘、兽筋兽角；铜和铁则分布在周围千里远近，山中到处都是，有如棋子满布。
English: West of Mount Lushan is rich in timber, bamboo, camphor, wild hemp, yakitori, and jade; east of Mount Lushan is rich in fish, salt, lacquer, silk, and beautiful women; south of the Yangtze River is rich in camphor trees, yakitori trees, ginger, osmanthus, gold, tin, lead, cinnabar, rhinoceros, gourds, beads, and ivory hides; north of Longmen and Mount Lushan is rich in horses, cattle, sheep, yakitori, and animal sinews; copper and iron are distributed thousands of miles around, and

古文：皆中国人民所喜好，谣俗被服饮食奉生送死之具也。
现代文：这是关于各地物产分布的大致情况。这些都是中国人民所喜好的，习用的穿着、饮食、养生、送死之物。
English: This is the general situation of the distribution of products in various regions. These are the things that the Chinese people like to wear, eat, take care of, and take care of.

古文：故待农而食之，虞而出之，工而成之，商而通之。
现代文：所以，人们要靠农民耕种，取得食物，要虞人进山开采、渔夫下水捕捉，获得物品，要靠工匠制造，取得器具，要靠商人贸易，流通货物。
English: Therefore, people must rely on farmers to cultivate and obtain food, on wealthy people to go into the mountains to mine, on fishermen to catch and obtain goods, on craftsmen to manufacture and acquire utensils, and on merchants to trade and distribute goods.

古文：此宁有政教发徵期会哉？
现代文：这难道还需要官府发布政令，征发百姓，限期会集吗？
English: Does this really require the government to issue a decree, solicit people, and set a deadline?

古文：人各任其能，竭其力，以得所欲。
现代文：人们都凭自己的才能，竭尽自己的力量，来满足自己的欲望。
English: People rely on their own talents and do their best to satisfy their desires.

古文：故物贱之徵贵，贵之徵贱，各劝其业，乐其事，若水之趋下，日夜无休时，不召而自来，不求而民出之。
现代文：所以，低价的货物能够高价出售，高价的货物能够低价购进。人们各自努力经营自己的本业，乐于从事自己的工作，就像水从高处流向低处那样，日日夜夜没有休止的时候，不用招唤便会自动前来，不用请求便会生产出来。
English: Therefore, low-priced goods can be sold at a high price, and high-priced goods can be purchased at a low price. People work hard to run their own businesses and are happy to do their own work. Just as water flows from high to low, when there is no rest day and night, they will come automatically without invitation, and they will be produced without request.

古文：岂非道之所符，而自然之验邪？
现代文：这难道不是符合规律而得以自然发展的证明吗？
English: Isn't this proof that it can develop naturally in accordance with the law?

古文：周书曰： 农不出则乏其食，工不出则乏其事，商不出则三宝绝，虞不出则财匮少。 财匮少而山泽不辟矣。
现代文：《周书》里说： 农民不种田，粮食就会缺乏；工匠不做工生产，器具就会缺少；商人不做买卖，吃的、用的和钱财这三种宝物就会隔绝不通；虞人不开发山泽，资源就会短缺，资源匮乏了，山泽就不能进一步开发了。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: "If farmers do not farm, there will be a shortage of grain; if craftsmen do not work and produce, there will be a shortage of equipment; if merchants do not do business, the three treasures of food, use and money will be cut off; if wealthy people do not develop the mountains and lakes, resources will be in short supply; if resources are scarce, the mountains and lakes can not be further developed.

古文：此四者，民所衣食之原也。
现代文：农、工、商、虞这四个方面，是人民衣食的来源。
English: The four aspects of agriculture, industry, commerce and finance are the source of people's food and clothing.

古文：原大则饶，原小则鲜。上则富国，下则富家。
现代文：来源大则富裕，来源小则贫困；来源广大，对上可以使国家富强，对下可以使家庭富足。
English: If the source is large, it is rich, if small, it is poor; if the source is broad, it can make the country rich and strong, and it can make the family rich.

古文：贫富之道，莫之夺予，而巧者有馀，拙者不足。
现代文：或贫或富，没有谁能剥夺或施予，但机敏的人总是财富有余，而愚笨的人却往往衣食不足。
English: Whether poor or rich, no one can deprive or give, but the smart people always have more wealth, while the stupid people are often short of food and clothing.

古文：故太公望封於营丘，地潟卤，人民寡，於是太公劝其女功，极技巧，通鱼盐，则人物归之，繦至而辐凑。
现代文：所以，姜太公被封在营丘时，那里本来多是盐碱地，人烟稀少，于是姜太公便鼓励妇女致力于纺织刺绣，极力提倡工艺技巧，又让人们把鱼类、海盐返运到其他地区去，结果别国的人和财物纷纷流归于齐国，就像绳索相接，络绎不绝，就像车辐集聚在车毂似的，从四面八方汇拢到那里。
English: Therefore, when Jiang Taigong was sealed in Yingqiu, it was originally mostly saline and sparsely populated, so Jiang Taigong encouraged women to devote themselves to textile embroidery, vigorously promoted craft skills, and allowed people to return fish and sea salt to other regions. As a result, people and property from other countries have flowed to Qi Province, like ropes connected, endless, like car beams gathered in carriages, converging there from all directions.

古文：故齐冠带衣履天下，海岱之间敛袂而往朝焉。
现代文：所以，齐国因能制造冠带衣履供应天下所用，东海、泰山之间的诸侯们便都端正衣服前往齐国朝拜。
English: Therefore, since Qi was able to manufacture cap and gown and supply them to the world, the lords between the East Sea and Mount Tai all dressed up and went to Qi to pay homage.

古文：其後齐中衰，管子修之，设轻重九府，则桓公以霸，九合诸侯，一匡天下；而管氏亦有三归，位在陪臣，富於列国之君。
现代文：后来，齐国中途衰落，管仲重新修治姜太公的事业，设立管理财政的九个官府，使齐桓公得以称霸，多次以霸主身份会合诸侯，使天下政治得到匡正；而管仲本人也有了三归台，官位虽只是陪臣，却比各国的君主还要富有。
English: Later, when the State of Qi declined halfway, Guanzhong repaired the cause of Jiang Taigong, set up nine government offices to manage the finances, so that Qi Huan could dominate, and repeatedly met with princes as the overlord to rectify the world's politics. Guanzhong himself also returned to the throne three times. Although his official position was only a vassal, he was richer than the monarchs of various countries.

古文：是以齐富彊至於威、宣也。
现代文：从此，齐国富强，一直延续到威王、宣王的时代。
English: Since then, Qi has been prosperous and strong, and has continued to the era of King Wei and King Xuan.

古文：故曰： 仓廪实而知礼节，衣食足而知荣辱。 
现代文：所以说： 仓廪充实从而知道礼节，衣食丰足从而知晓荣辱。 
English: Therefore, it is said: the barn is full so that the etiquette is known, and the food and clothing are plentiful so that the honor and disgrace are known.

古文：礼生於有而废於无。
现代文：礼产生于富有，而废弃于贫穷。
English: Virtue is born in wealth and dies in poverty.

古文：故君子富，好行其德；小人富，以適其力。
现代文：因此，君子富有了，就喜好去做仁德之事；平民百姓富有了，就会去做他们力所能及的事。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman is rich, he likes to do the most benevolent things; when a commoner is rich, he will do what he can.

古文：渊深而鱼生之，山深而兽往之，人富而仁义附焉。
现代文：江河深，鱼就会生活其中；山林深，野兽就在那里藏身；人富有了，仁义就会附益于他。
English: If a river is deep, fish will live in it; if a mountain is deep, beasts will hide there; if a man is rich, benevolence will benefit him.

古文：富者得埶益彰，失埶则客无所之，以而不乐。
现代文：富有者得了势越发显赫，失了势，依附于他的宾客也便无处容身，因此心情不快。
English: When a rich man gains power, he becomes more and more conspicuous; when he loses power, his guests, who are dependent on him, have nowhere to go and are therefore unhappy.

古文：夷狄益甚。
现代文：夷狄那里，这种情况更为突出。
English: At Yidi, the situation is even more pronounced.

古文：谚曰： 千金之子，不死於市。 
现代文：谚语说： 家有千金的人，不会犯法受刑死于闹市。 
English: A proverb says: A man who has a lot of money in his family will not commit a crime, be punished and die in the city.

古文：此非空言也。
现代文：这不是空话。
English: These are not empty words.

古文：故曰： 天下熙熙，皆为利来；天下攘攘，皆为利往。 
现代文：所以说： 天下之人，熙熙攘攘，都是为利而来，为利而往。 
English: Therefore, he said: People around the world, bustling, are all coming for profit and going for profit.

古文：夫千乘之王，万家之侯，百室之君，尚犹患贫，而况匹夫编户之民乎！
现代文：那些拥有千辆兵车的君王，享有万户封地的诸侯，占有百室封邑的大夫。尚且担心自己会贫穷，何况编入户籍的普通百姓呢！
English: Those kings with a thousand chariots, lords with ten thousand fiefs, doctors with a hundred fiefs, and yet they are afraid of being poor, not to mention the ordinary people who are registered!

古文：昔者越王勾践困於会稽之上，乃用范蠡、计然。
现代文：从前，越王勾践被围困在会稽山上，于是任用范蠡、计然。
English: Once upon a time, Yue Wang Gochan was besieged on the Hechi Mountain, so he appointed Fan Ye and Zhenran.

古文：计然曰： 知斗则修备，时用则知物，二者形则万货之情可得而观已。故岁在金，穰；水，毁；木，饥；火，旱。
现代文：善于将时与用二者相对照，那么各种货物的供需行情就能看得很清楚。所以，岁在金时，就丰收；岁在水时，就歉收；岁在木时，就饥馑；岁在火时，就干旱。
English: If you are good at comparing the time with the use, then you can clearly see the supply and demand of various goods. Therefore, when the year is in gold, there will be a bumper harvest; when the year is in water, there will be a poor harvest; when the year is in wood, there will be famine; when the year is in fire, there will be drought.

古文：旱则资舟，水则资车，物之理也。
现代文：旱时，就要备船以待涝；涝时，就要备车以待旱，这样做符合事物发展的规律。
English: When it is dry, it is necessary to prepare the boat to wait for the storm; when it is stormy, it is necessary to prepare the car to wait for the drought. This is in line with the law of the development of things.

古文：六岁穰，六岁旱，十二岁一大饥。
现代文：一般说来，六年一丰收，六年一干旱，十二年有一次大饥荒。
English: Generally speaking, there is a bumper harvest every six years, a drought every six years, and a major famine every 12 years.

古文：夫粜，二十病农，九十病末。
现代文：出售粮食，每斗价格二十钱，农民会受损害；每斗价格九十钱，商人要受损失。
English: If grain is sold at twenty dollars a barrel, the farmer will suffer; if it is sold at ninety dollars a barrel, the merchant will suffer.

古文：末病则财不出，农病则草不辟矣。
现代文：商人受损失，钱财就不能流通到社会；农民受损害，田地就要荒芜。
English: If merchants suffer losses, money and wealth cannot circulate to society; if farmers suffer losses, their fields will become barren.

古文：上不过八十，下不减三十，则农末俱利，平粜齐物，关市不乏，治国之道也。
现代文：粮价每斗价格最高不超过八十钱，最低不少于三十钱，那么农民和商人都能得利。粮食平价出售，并平抑调整其他物价，关卡税收和市场供应都不缺乏，这是治国之道。
English: The grain price per barrel should be no more than 80 yuan at the highest, and no less than 30 yuan at the lowest, so that farmers and businessmen can make a profit. Grain should be sold at parity, and other prices should be adjusted smoothly. There is no shortage of customs tax and market supply. This is the way to govern the country.

古文：积著之理，务完物，无息币。
现代文：至于积贮货物，应当务求完好牢靠，没有滞留的货币资金。
English: As for the stored goods, it should be ensured that they are intact and reliable, and there are no lingering monetary funds.

古文：以物相贸易，腐败而食之货勿留，无敢居贵。
现代文：买卖货物，凡属容易腐败和腐蚀的物品不要久藏，切忌冒险囤居以求高价。
English: When buying and selling goods, do not keep items that are prone to corruption and corrosion for a long time. Do not risk living in a cramped space in order to get a high price.

古文：论其有馀不足，则知贵贱。贵上极则反贱，贱下极则反贵。
现代文：研究商品过剩或短缺的情况，就会懂得物价涨跌的道理。物价贵到极点，就会返归于靠；物价靠到极点，就要返归于贵。
English: Study the situation of surplus or shortage of commodities, and you will understand the reason for the rise and fall of prices. If the price is too high, it will return to the low; if the price is too low, it will return to the high.

古文：贵出如粪土，贱取如珠玉。
现代文：当货物贵到极点时，要及时卖出，视同粪土；当货物靠到极点时，要及时购进，视同珠宝。
English: When the goods are extremely expensive, they should be sold in time and regarded as dung; when the goods are extremely expensive, they should be purchased in time and regarded as jewelry.

古文：财币欲其行如流水。 
现代文：货物钱币的流通周转要如同流水那样。 
English: The circulation turnover of commodity coins should be like that of running water.

古文：修之十年，国富，厚赂战士，士赴矢石，如渴得饮，遂报彊吴，观兵中国，称号 五霸 。
现代文：勾践照计然策略治国十年，越国富有了，能用重金去收买兵士，使兵士们冲锋陷阵，不顾箭射石击，就像口渴时求得饮水那样，终于报仇雪耻，灭掉吴国，继而耀武扬威于中原，号称 五霸 之一。
English: After ten years of ruling the country according to a well-planned strategy, the Yue State became rich and was able to bribe soldiers with heavy money, causing the soldiers to charge into battle, regardless of arrows and stones, as if they were thirsty for drinking water. Finally, they avenged their shame and wiped out the State of Wu, and then showed off their military prowess in the Central Plains, known as one of the Five Dynasties.

古文：范蠡既雪会稽之耻，乃喟然而叹曰： 计然之策七，越用其五而得意。
现代文：范蠡既已协助越王洗雪了会稽被困之耻，便长叹道： 计然的策略有七条，越国只用了其中五条，就实现了雪耻的愿望。
English: After helping Yue Wang wash away the shame of being trapped in the auditorium, Fan Ye sighed for a long time: There are seven deliberate strategies, and Yue Guo only used five of them to realize the wish of snow shame.

古文：既已施於国，吾欲用之家。 
现代文：既然施用于治国很有效，我要把它用于治家。 
English: Since applying it to governing the country is very effective, I want to apply it to governing my family.

古文：乃乘扁舟浮於江湖，变名易姓，適齐为鸱夷子皮，之陶为硃公。
现代文：于是，他便乘坐小船漂泊江湖，改名换姓，到齐国改名叫鸱夷子皮，到了陶邑改名叫朱公。
English: As a result, he took a small boat to wander the rivers and lakes, changed his name, changed his surname, changed his name to Qi Province, and changed his name to Zhu Gong in Taoyuan.

古文：硃公以为陶天下之中，诸侯四通，货物所交易也。
现代文：朱公认为陶邑居于天下中心，与各地诸侯国四通八达，交流货物十分便利。
English: Zhu Gong believed that the city of Taoyuan was at the center of the world, and it was well connected with various provinces and principalities, and it was very convenient to exchange goods.

古文：乃治产积居。与时逐而不责於人。
现代文：于是就治理产业，囤积居奇，随机应变，与时逐利，而不责求他人。
English: As a result, the management of the industry, hoarding, random contingency, and opportunistic, without blaming others.

古文：故善治生者，能择人而任时。
现代文：所以，善于经营致富的人，要能择用贤人并把握时机。
English: Therefore, a person who is good at managing and getting rich should be able to choose a wise person and seize the opportunity.

古文：十九年之中三致千金，再分散与贫交疏昆弟。
现代文：十九年期间，他三次赚得千金之财，两次分散给贫穷的朋友和远房同姓的兄弟。
English: During the nineteen years, he earned a fortune three times, twice distributed to poor friends and distant brothers of the same surname.

古文：此所谓富好行其德者也。
现代文：这就是所谓君子富有便喜好去做仁德之事了。
English: This is the so-called gentleman who is rich and likes to do benevolent things.

古文：後年衰老而听子孙，子孙脩业而息之，遂至巨万。
现代文：范蠡后来年老力衰而听凭子孙，子孙继承了他的事业并有所发展，终致有了巨万家财。
English: Later, when Fan Qi was old and feeble, he depended on his children and grandchildren. His children and grandchildren inherited his business and developed it, eventually making a huge fortune.

古文：故言富者皆称陶硃公。
现代文：所以，后世谈论富翁时，都称颂陶朱公。
English: Therefore, when future generations talk about rich people, they all praise Tao Zhu Gong.

古文：子赣既学於仲尼，退而仕於卫，废著鬻财於曹、鲁之间，七十子之徒，赐最为饶益。
现代文：子贡曾在孔子那里学习，离开后到卫国做官，又利用卖贵买贱的方法在曹国和鲁国之间经商，孔门七十多个高徒之中，端木赐最为富有。
English: Zigong had studied under Confucius. After leaving China, he became an official in the Northern Wei Dynasty. He also traded between Cao and Lu using the method of buying low and selling high. Of the more than seventy high disciples of Confucius, Taoki was the richest.

古文：原宪不厌糟糠，匿於穷巷。
现代文：孔子的另一位高徒原宪穷得连糟糠都吃不饱，隐居在简陋的小巷子里。
English: Another high disciple of Confucius, Yuan Xian, was so poor that he couldn't even eat enough scraps and lived in seclusion in a humble alley.

古文：子贡结驷连骑，束帛之币以聘享诸侯，所至，国君无不分庭与之抗礼。
现代文：而子贡却乘坐四马并辔齐头牵引的车子，携带束帛厚礼去访问、馈赠诸侯，所到之处，国君与他只行宾主之礼，不行君臣之礼。
English: Zigong, on the other hand, rode in a chariot drawn by four horses side by side, carrying bundles of rich gifts to visit and give gifts to lords. Wherever he went, the sovereign and he only performed the gift of the guest, not the gift of the sovereign.

古文：夫使孔子名布扬於天下者，子贡先後之也。
现代文：孔子名扬天下的原因，是因为有子贡在人前人后辅助他。
English: The reason why Confucius is famous all over the world is because he was assisted by Zi Gong.

古文：此所谓得埶而益彰者乎？
现代文：这就是所谓得到形势之助而使名声更加显著吧？
English: That's what you call a reputation enhanced by circumstance, isn't it?

古文：白圭，周人也。
现代文：白圭是东周人。
English: Bai Gui is from Eastern Zhou.

古文：当魏文侯时，李克务尽地力，而白圭乐观时变，故人弃我取，人取我与。
现代文：当魏文侯在位的时候，李克正致力于开发土地资源，而白圭却喜欢观察市场行情和年景丰歉的变化，所以当货物过剩低价抛售时，他就收购；当货物不足高价索求时，他就出售。
English: When Wei Wenhou was in power, Li Ke was committed to the development of land resources, while Bai Gui liked to observe market conditions and changes in the economic situation. Therefore, when there was a surplus of goods and they were sold at a low price, he bought them; when there was a shortage of goods and they were demanded at a high price, he sold them.

古文：夫岁孰取穀，予之丝漆；茧出取帛絮，予之食。
现代文：谷物成熟时，他买进粮食，出售丝、漆；蚕茧结成时，他买进绢帛绵絮，出售粮食。
English: When the grain is ripe, he buys grain and sells silk and lacquer; when the cocoon is formed, he buys cocoons and sells grain.

古文：太阴在卯，穰；明岁衰恶。
现代文：他了解，太岁在卯位时，五谷丰收；转年年景会不好。
English: He understands that when the emperor is in abdication, there will be a bumper harvest; the turn of the year will be bad.

古文：至午，旱；明岁美。
现代文：太岁在午宫时，会发生旱灾；转年年景会很好。
English: If you are too old at the time of the winter solstice, there will be a drought; if you are too young at the time of the spring solstice, there will be a drought.

古文：至酉，穰；明岁衰恶。
现代文：太岁在酉位时，五谷丰收；转年年景会变坏。
English: If you are too old at the time of harvest, you will have a bumper harvest; if you are too young at the turn of the year, you will have a bad year.

古文：至子，大旱；明岁美，有水。
现代文：太岁在子位时，天下会大旱；转年年景会很好，有雨水。
English: If you are too old at the time of the child, the world will have a big drought; the turn of the year will be very good, with rain.

古文：至卯，积著率岁倍。
现代文：太岁复至卯位时，他囤积的货物大致逃比往年多上一倍。
English: By the time he was reinstated as abbot, his hoard of goods had more than doubled compared to previous years.

古文：欲长钱，取下穀；长石斗，取上种。
现代文：要增长钱财收入，他便收购质次的谷物；想要使每斗每石粮食的重量增加，他便去买上等的谷物。
English: To increase his income, he buys inferior grain; to increase the weight of each bushel of grain, he buys superior grain.

古文：能薄饮食，忍嗜欲，节衣服，与用事僮仆同苦乐，趋时若猛兽挚鸟之发。
现代文：他能不讲究吃喝，控制嗜好，节省穿戴，与雇用的奴仆同甘共苦，捕捉赚钱的时机就像猛兽猛禽捕捉食物那样迅捷。
English: He can not pay attention to eating and drinking, control hobbies, save on clothing, share the hardships with the hired servants, and catch the opportunity to make money as quickly as the beast of prey catches food.

古文：故曰： 吾治生产，犹伊尹、吕尚之谋，孙吴用兵，商鞅行法是也。
现代文：因此他说： 我干经商致富之事，就像伊尹、吕尚筹划谋略，像孙子、吴起运用兵法，像商鞅推行变法那样。
English: Therefore, he said: I am doing business to get rich, just like Yi Yin and Lushang to plan strategies, like Sun Zi and Wu Qi to use military methods, and like merchants to promote change.

古文：是故其智不足与权变，勇不足以决断，仁不能以取予，彊不能有所守，虽欲学吾术，终不告之矣。 
现代文：所以，如果一个人的智慧不足以随机应变，勇气不足以果敢决断，仁德不能够正确取舍，强健不能够有所坚守，虽然他想学习我的经商致富之术，我终究不会教给他的。 
English: Therefore, if a person's wisdom is not enough to be flexible, courage is not enough to be decisive, benevolence is not enough to make the right choice, and strength is not enough to stick to something, although he wants to learn my business skills, I will not teach him.

古文：盖天下言治生祖白圭。
现代文：因而，天下人谈论经商致富之道都效法白圭。
English: As a result, people all over the world talk about how to get rich in business and follow the example of Bai Gui.

古文：白圭其有所试矣，能试有所长，非苟而已也。
现代文：白圭大概是有所尝试，尝试而能有所成就，这不是随随便便就可以做到的。
English: Bai Gui probably tried something, tried and was able to achieve something, this is not something that can be done casually.

古文：猗顿用盬盐起。
现代文：猗顿是靠经营池盐起家。
English: Huitong started its business by handling pond salt.

古文：而邯郸郭纵以铁冶成业，与王者埒富。
现代文：而邯郸郭纵以冶铁成就家业，其财富可与王侯相比。
English: However, even though Zeng Guo used metallurgical iron to achieve his family business, his wealth can be compared to that of a prince.

古文：乌氏倮畜牧，及众，斥卖，求奇缯物，间献遗戎王。
现代文：乌氏县有位名倮的人经营畜牧业，等到牲畜繁殖众多之时，便全部卖掉，再购求各种奇异之物和丝织品，暗中献给戎王。
English: There was a famous person in Wushi County who ran a cattle ranch. When the number of livestock multiplied, he sold them all and bought all kinds of strange things and silk fabrics, secretly dedicated to King Rong.

古文：戎王什倍其偿，与之畜，畜至用谷量马牛。
现代文：戎王以十倍于所献物品的东西还赠给他，送他牲畜，牲畜多到以山谷为单位来计算牛马的数量。
English: And the king rewarded him ten times as much as he had given him, and gave him livestock, so much so that the number of cattle and horses could be counted in the valley.

古文：秦始皇帝令倮比封君，以时与列臣朝请。
现代文：秦始皇诏令乌氏倮的地位与封君同列，按规定时间同诸大臣进宫朝拜。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang decreed that the status of Wu Shijie was the same as that of a vassal, and he went to the palace to worship with the ministers according to the prescribed time.

古文：而巴寡妇清，其先得丹穴，而擅其利数世，家亦不訾。
现代文：而巴郡寡妇清的先祖自得到朱砂矿，竟独揽其利达好几代人，家产也多得不计其数。
English: However, the ancestors of the Ba County widow Qing have been profiting from the cinnabar mine for several generations, and their family assets are countless.

古文：清，寡妇也，能守其业，用财自卫，不见侵犯。
现代文：清是个寡妇，能守住先人的家业，用钱财来保护自己，不被别人侵犯。
English: Qing is a widow, able to protect the family business of her ancestors, using money to protect herself from being violated by others.

古文：秦皇帝以为贞妇而客之，为筑女怀清台。
现代文：秦始皇认为她是个贞妇而以客礼对待她，还为她修筑了女怀清台。
English: Qin Shihuang believed that she was a chaste woman and treated her with courtesy. He also built a women's palace for her.

古文：夫倮鄙人牧长，清穷乡寡妇，礼抗万乘，名显天下，岂非以富邪？
现代文：乌氏倮不过是个边鄙之人，畜牧之长，巴郡寡妇清是个穷乡僻壤的寡妇，却能和拥有万辆兵车的国君分庭抗礼，名扬天下，这难道不是依赖他们的财富吗？
English: Wu Shizhen is nothing more than a marginal person, the head of animal husbandry, and Baguire Widow Qing is a widow from a poor rural area, but she can compete with the sovereign who owns 10,000 chariots, and become famous around the world. Isn't this dependent on their wealth?

古文：汉兴，海内为一，开关梁，弛山泽之禁，是以富商大贾周流天下，交易之物莫不通，得其所欲，而徙豪杰诸侯彊族於京师。
现代文：汉朝兴起，天下统一，便开放关卡要道，解除开采山泽的禁令，因此富商大贾得以通行天下，交易的货物无不畅通，他们的欲望都能满足，汉朝政府又迁徙豪杰、诸侯和大户人家到京城。
English: With the rise of the Han Dynasty and the unification of the country, the important checkpoints were opened and the ban on mining the mountains and lakes was lifted. As a result, rich merchants were able to travel around the world, the goods they traded were all smooth, and their desires could be satisfied. The Han Dynasty government also moved heroes, princes and big households to Beijing.

古文：关中自汧、雍以东至河、华，膏壤沃野千里，自虞夏之贡以为上田，而公刘適邠，大王、王季在岐，文王作丰，武王治镐，故其民犹有先王之遗风，好稼穑，殖五穀，地重，重为邪。
现代文：关中地区从汧、雍二县以东至黄河、华山，膏壤沃野方圆千里。从有虞氏、夏后氏实行贡赋时起就把这里划为上等田地，后来公刘迁居到邠，周太王、王季迁居岐山，周文王兴建丰邑，周武王治理镐京，因而这些地方的人民仍有先王遗风，喜好农事，种植五谷，以土地为重，把做坏事看得很严重。
English: The Guanzhong area stretches for thousands of miles from the eastern counties of Handan and Yongyi to the Yellow River and Mount Huashan, with fertile soil and fertile fields. It was designated as a high-grade field from the time of the tribute of the Yu and Xia clans. Later, King Liu moved to Handan, King Zhou and Wang Ji moved to Qishan, King Zhou Wen built Fengyi, and King Zhou Wu governed Handan. As a result, the people in these places still have the legacy of the previous king, like farming, plant grain, focus on land, and take doing bad things very seriously.

古文：及秦文、缪居雍，隙陇蜀之货物而多贾。
现代文：直到秦文公、德公、穆公定都雍邑，这里地处陇、蜀货物交流的要道，因而有很多商人。
English: Until Qin Wenguang, Deguang and Mu Gongding all settled in Yongyi, it was an important route for the exchange of goods between Shu and Qin, so there were many merchants.

古文：献公徙栎邑，栎邑北卻戎翟，东通三晋，亦多大贾。
现代文：秦献公迁居栎邑，栎邑北御戎狄，东通三晋，也有许多大商人。
English: Qin Xian Gong moved to Lop County, Lop County, Beigu Rong Di, Dongtong Sanjin, and there are also many big businessmen.

古文：昭治咸阳，因以汉都，长安诸陵，四方辐凑并至而会，地小人众，故其民益玩巧而事末也。
现代文：秦孝公和秦昭襄王治都咸阳，汉朝藉此做为都城；长安附近的诸陵，四面八方的人、物辐凑集中于此，地方很小，人口又多，所以当地百姓越来越玩弄奇巧，从事工商之类的末业。
English: Qin Xiaogong and Qin Zhaoxiang Wang governed the capital of Xianyang, and the Han Dynasty used it as the capital city; the mausoleums near Chang'an, people and goods from all over the world are concentrated here. The place is small and the population is large, so the local people are increasingly playing tricks and engaging in the final business of industry and commerce.

古文：南则巴蜀。
现代文：关中地区以南则有巴郡、蜀郡。
English: To the south of Guanzhong area, there are Ba County and Shu County.

古文：巴蜀亦沃野，地饶卮、姜、丹沙、石、铜、铁、竹、木之器。
现代文：巴蜀地区也是一片沃野，盛产栀子、生姜、朱砂、石材、铜、铁和竹木之类的器具。
English: The Bashu region is also a fertile field, rich in products such as hazelnuts, ginger, cinnabar, stone, copper, iron and bamboo.

古文：南御滇僰，僰僮。
现代文：南边抵御滇、僰，僰地多出僮仆。
English: The south side resisted hail and sleet, and there were more hailstorms in the hail area.

古文：西近邛笮，笮马、旄牛。
现代文：西边邻近邛、笮，笮地出产马和旄牛。
English: On the west side, horses and yakitori are produced in the vicinity of Yunnan, Shandong, and Fujian.

古文：然四塞，栈道千里，无所不通，唯襃斜绾毂其口，以所多易所鲜。
现代文：然而巴蜀地区四周闭塞，靠栈道千里，与关中无处不通，唯有褒、斜两个山谷通道控扼其口，勾联四方道路，用多余之物来交换短缺之物。
English: However, the Bashu region is blocked on all sides, with thousands of miles of boardwalks and no access to anywhere in Guanzhong. The only way is to control the two valley channels of Bao and Di, connect the four roads, and use the surplus to exchange the shortage.

古文：天水、陇西、北地、上郡与关中同俗，然西有羌中之利，北有戎翟之畜，畜牧为天下饶。
现代文：天水、陇西、北地和上郡与关中风俗相同，而西面有羌中的地利，北面有戎狄的牲畜，畜牧业居天下首位。
English: Tianshui, Shaanxi, Hebei and Shangguan have the same customs as Guanzhong, while the west has the land of Yuzhong, and the north has the livestock of Yongdi. Animal husbandry ranks first in the world.

古文：然地亦穷险，唯京师要其道。
现代文：可是这里地势险要，只有京城长安控制它的通道。
English: However, the terrain here is precarious, and only the capital Chang'an controls its passage.

古文：故关中之地，於天下三分之一，而人众不过什三；然量其富，什居其六。
现代文：所以，整个关中之地占天下三分之一，人口也不过占天下十分之三；然而估算这里拥有的财富，却占天下十分之六。
English: Therefore, the entire Guanzhong area accounts for one-third of the world, and the population accounts for only three-tenths of the world; however, the estimated wealth owned here accounts for six-tenths of the world.

古文：昔唐人都河东，殷人都河内，周人都河南。
现代文：古时，唐尧定都河东晋阳，殷人定都河内殷墟，东周定都河南洛阳。
English: In ancient times, the Tang Dynasty's capital was located in Jinyang, east of the river; the Shang Dynasty's capital was located in Yinxu, Hanoi; and the Eastern Zhou Dynasty's capital was located in Luoyang, Henan.

古文：夫三河在天下之中，若鼎足，王者所更居也，建国各数百千岁，土地小狭，民人众，都国诸侯所聚会，故其俗纤俭习事。
现代文：河东、河内与河南这三地居于天下的中心，好像鼎的三个足，是帝王们更迭居住的地方，建国各有数百年乃至上千年，这里土地狭小，人口众多，是各国诸侯集中聚集之处，所以当地民俗为小气俭省，熟悉世故。
English: The three provinces of Hedong, Hanoi and Henan are located in the center of the world. They are like the three legs of a tripod. They are the places where emperors have lived in succession. The founding of each country has lasted for hundreds or even thousands of years. The land here is small and the population is large. It is the place where the princes of various countries gather. Therefore, the local folk customs are frugal and familiar with the world.

古文：杨、平阳陈西贾秦、翟，北贾种、代。
现代文：杨与平阳两邑的民众，向西可到秦和戎狄地区经商，向北可到种、代地区经商。
English: The people of Yang and Pingyang can do business in the Qin and Yongdi regions to the west, and in the Zong and Dai regions to the north.

古文：种、代，石北也，地边胡，数被寇。
现代文：种、代在石邑以北，其地邻近匈奴，屡次遭受掠夺。
English: It was located in the north of Shifu, close to the Xiongnu, and was repeatedly plundered.

古文：人民矜懻忮，好气，任侠为奸，不事农商。
现代文：人民崇尚强直、好胜，以扶弱抑强为己任，不愿从事农商诸业。
English: The people advocate being straightforward and competitive, take it as their duty to help the weak and suppress the strong, and do not want to engage in agriculture and commerce.

古文：然迫近北夷，师旅亟往，中国委输时有奇羡。
现代文：但因邻近北方夷狄，军队经常往来，中原运输来的物资，时有剩余。
English: However, due to the proximity of the northern Yidi, the army often comes and goes, and the materials transported from the Central Plains are sometimes surplus.

古文：其民羯羠不均，自全晋之时固已患其僄悍，而武灵王益厉之，其谣俗犹有赵之风也。
现代文：当地人民强悍而不务耕耘，从三家尚未分晋之时就已经对其慓悍感到忧虑，而到赵武灵王时就更加助长了这种风气，当地习俗仍带有赵国遗风。
English: The local people are strong-willed but not industrious, and they have been worried about the three families being strong-willed since they have not yet been divided into Jin, and when Zhao Wuling became king, he further promoted this style. Local customs still carry the legacy of Zhao.

古文：故杨、平阳陈掾其间，得所欲。
现代文：所以杨和平阳两地的人民经营驰逐于其间，能得到他们所想要的东西。
English: As a result, the people of Yang and Hepingyang have been able to get what they want.

古文：温、轵西贾上党，北贾赵、中山。
现代文：温、轵地区的人民向西可到上党地区经商，向北可到赵、中山一带经商。
English: People in Wen and Handan regions can do business in Shangdang region in the west, and in Zhao and Zhongshan regions in the north.

古文：中山地薄人众，犹有沙丘纣淫地馀民，民俗懁急，仰机利而食。
现代文：中山土地贫瘠，在沙丘一带还有纣王留下的殷人后代，百姓性情急躁，仰仗投机取巧度日谋生。
English: The land in Zhongshan is barren, and there are descendants of the Yin people left behind by the Zou King in the dunes. The people are impatient and rely on speculation to make a living.

古文：丈夫相聚游戏，悲歌慷慨，起则相随椎剽，休则掘冢作巧奸冶，多美物，为倡优。
现代文：男子们常相聚游戏玩耍，慷慨悲歌，白天纠合一起杀人抢劫，晚上挖坟盗墓、制作赝品、私铸钱币；多有美色男子，去当歌舞艺人。
English: The men often get together to play games, sing sad songs, murder and rob during the day, and at night they dig graves, steal tombs, make fake goods, and mint coins. Many beautiful men go to be singers and dancers.

古文：女子则鼓鸣瑟，跕屣，游媚贵富，入後宫，遍诸侯。
现代文：女子们常弹奏琴瑟，拖拉着鞋子，在权贵富豪中游走献媚，有的被纳入后宫，遍及各地诸侯。
English: The women often played the lyre, dragged their shoes, and courted the rich and powerful. Some of them were taken into the harem and spread throughout the various provinces.

古文：然邯郸亦漳、河之间一都会也。
现代文：然而邯郸也是漳水、黄河之间的一个都市。
English: However, Handan is also a city between Surabaya and the Yellow River.

古文：北通燕、涿，南有郑、卫。
现代文：北通燕、涿，南有郑、卫。
English: In the north, there are Yan and Yao, and in the south, there are Zheng and Wei.

古文：郑、卫俗与赵相类，然近梁、鲁，微重而矜节。
现代文：郑、卫两地的风俗和赵相类似，不过地近梁、鲁，百姓稍微庄重些，而且注重节操。
English: The customs of Zheng and Wei are similar to those of Zhao, but they are closer to Liang and Lu, and the people are slightly more solemn and pay more attention to discipline.

古文：濮上之邑徙野王，野王好气任侠，卫之风也。
现代文：卫元君从濮上之邑帝丘迁徙到野王，野王地区的百姓喜好斗气，任侠为奸，有卫国的遗风。
English: Emperor Wei Yuanjun migrated from the Imperial Hill in the town of Jiaxiang to Yanwang. The people in the Yanwang area like to fight and have a tradition of defending the country.

古文：夫燕亦勃、碣之间一都会也。
现代文：燕国故都蓟也是渤海、碣石山之间的一个都市。
English: The former capital of Yan'an is also a city located between the Bohai Sea and Shishishan Mountain.

古文：南通齐、赵，东北边胡。
现代文：南面通齐、赵，东北面与胡人交界。
English: To the south is the border between Qi and Zhao, and to the northeast is the border with the Hu people.

古文：上谷至辽东，地踔远，人民希，数被寇，大与赵、代俗相类，而民雕捍少虑，有鱼盐枣栗之饶。
现代文：从上谷到辽东一带，地方遥远，人口稀少，屡次遭受侵扰，民俗大致与赵、代地区相似，而百姓敏捷凶悍，缺少思虑，当地盛产鱼、盐、枣、栗。
English: From the upper valley to the Liaodong area, the place is remote, sparsely populated, and has been repeatedly invaded. The folk customs are roughly similar to those in the Zhao and Dai regions, and the people are agile and fierce, lacking consideration. The local area is rich in fish, salt, dates, and chestnuts.

古文：北邻乌桓、夫馀，东绾秽貉、朝鲜、真番之利。
现代文：北面邻近乌桓、夫余，东面处于控扼秽貊、朝鲜、真番的有利地位。
English: In the north, it is close to Wuhuan and Fuyu, and in the east, it is in a favorable position to control Zhuozhuang, North Korea and Zhenbang.

古文：洛阳东贾齐、鲁，南贾梁、楚。
现代文：洛阳东去可到齐、鲁经商，南去可到梁、楚经商。
English: Luoyang can go east to Qi and Lu to do business, and south to Liang and Chu to do business.

古文：故泰山之阳则鲁，其阴则齐。
现代文：所以泰山南部是鲁国故地，北部是齐国故地。
English: Therefore, the southern part of Mount Tai is the ancestral place of Lu, and the northern part is the ancestral place of Qi.

古文：齐带山海，膏壤千里，宜桑麻，人民多文采布帛鱼盐。
现代文：齐地被山海环抱，方圆千里一片沃土，适宜种植桑麻，人民多有彩色丝稠、布帛和鱼盐。
English: It is surrounded by the mountains and the sea, and has a fertile land for thousands of miles around. It is suitable for growing mulberry, and the people mostly have colorful silk, cloth and fish salt.

古文：临菑亦海岱之间一都会也。
现代文：临淄也是东海与泰山之间的一个都市。
English: Linyi is also a city between the East Sea and Mount Tai.

古文：其俗宽缓阔达，而足智，好议论，地重，难动摇，怯於众斗，勇於持刺，故多劫人者，大国之风也。
现代文：当地民俗宽容豁达，而又足智多谋，爱发议论，乡土观念很重，不易浮动外流，怯于聚众斗殴，而敢于暗中伤人，所以常有劫夺别人财物的事情，这是大国的风尚。
English: Local folk customs are tolerant and open-minded, but they are also resourceful, talkative, and have strong local ideas. They are not easily swayed by external influences. They are afraid to gather and fight, but dare to hurt people secretly. Therefore, there are often robberies of other people's property, which is the fashion of big countries.

古文：其中具五民。
现代文：这里士、农、工、商、贾五民俱备。
English: There are five kinds of people here: workers, farmers, industrialists, merchants, and farmers.

古文：而邹、鲁滨洙、泗，犹有周公遗风，俗好儒，备於礼，故其民龊龊。
现代文：而邹、鲁两地滨临洙水、泗水，还保存着周公的遗风，民俗喜好儒术，礼仪完备，所以当地百姓小心拘谨。
English: In contrast, the coastal areas of Binlin, Surabaya and Surabaya in Shandong and Shandong Provinces still preserve the legacy of Zhou Gong, the folk customs like Confucianism, and the etiquette is complete, so the local people are careful and prudent.

古文：颇有桑麻之业，无林泽之饶。
现代文：颇多经营桑麻产业，而没有山林水泽的资源。
English: There is a lot of business in the mulberry industry, but there are no resources from the mountains, forests and streams.

古文：地小人众，俭啬，畏罪远邪。
现代文：土地少，人口多，人们节剑吝啬，害怕犯罪，远避邪恶。
English: The land is small, the population is large, people are stingy, afraid of crime, and shun evil.

古文：及其衰，好贾趋利，甚於周人。
现代文：等到衰败之时，人们爱好经商追逐财利，比周地之人还要厉害。
English: Until the time of decline, people like to do business and chase money, even more than the people of Zhou.

古文：夫自鸿沟以东，芒、砀以北，属巨野，此梁、宋也。
现代文：从鸿沟以东，芒山、砀山以北，直到巨野，这是过去梁、宋的故地。
English: From the east of the chasm, from the north of Mangshan and Lushan, to the giant field, this is the hometown of Liang and Song in the past.

古文：陶、睢阳亦一都会也。
现代文：陶邑、睢阳也是都会。
English: Taoyuan and Shenyang are also big cities.

古文：昔尧作成阳，舜渔於雷泽，汤止于亳。
现代文：以前，唐尧兴起于成阳，虞舜在雷泽打过鱼，商汤曾定都于毫。
English: In the past, the Tang Dynasty flourished in Chengyang, the Yu Dynasty fished in Reze, and the Shang Dynasty broth was made in Zhao.

古文：其俗犹有先王遗风，重厚多君子，好稼穑，虽无山川之饶，能恶衣食，致其蓄藏。
现代文：这里的民俗还存有先王遗风，宽厚庄重，多有君子，喜好农耕稼穑，虽然没有富饶的山河物产，人们却能省吃俭用，以求得财富的积蓄。
English: The folk customs here still retain the legacy of the previous kings. They are generous and dignified, and there are many gentlemen who like to farm. Although there is no rich mountain and river products, people can save money to save money.

古文：越、楚则有三俗。
现代文：越、楚地带有西楚、东楚和南楚三个地区的不同风俗。
English: Yue and Chu have different customs from West Chu, East Chu and South Chu.

古文：夫自淮北沛、陈、汝南、南郡，此西楚也。
现代文：从淮北沛郡到陈郡、汝南、南郡，这是西楚地区。
English: From Huaibei County to Chen County, Runan County and Nan County, this is the West Chu region.

古文：其俗剽轻，易发怒，地薄，寡於积聚。
现代文：这里民俗慓悍轻捷，容易发怒，土地贫瘠，少有财物的积聚。
English: The folk customs here are fierce and nimble, easy to anger, the land is barren, and there is little accumulation of wealth.

古文：江陵故郢都，西通巫、巴，东有云梦之饶。
现代文：江陵原为楚国国都，西通巫县、巴郡，东面又有云梦，物产富饶。
English: Gangneung was originally the capital of the State of Chu, with Wuxian and Ba County to the west, and Yunmeng to the east. It is rich in products.

古文：陈在楚夏之交，通鱼盐之货，其民多贾。
现代文：陈在楚、夏交接之处，流通鱼盐货物，居民多为商人。
English: At the junction of Chu and Xia in Chen, fish salt goods circulate, and most residents are merchants.

古文：徐、僮、取虑，则清刻，矜己诺。
现代文：徐、僮、取虑一带的居民清廉苛严，信守承诺。
English: The residents in the areas of Xu, Handan, and Zhucheng are scrupulously clean and keep their promises.

古文：彭城以东，东海、吴、广陵，此东楚也。
现代文：彭城以东，包括东海、吴、广陵一带，这是东楚地区。
English: East of Pengcheng, including the areas of Donghai, Wu and Guangling, this is the Dongchu region.

古文：其俗类徐、僮。
现代文：这里风俗与徐、僮一带相似。
English: The customs here are similar to those in the areas around Xu and Handan.

古文：朐、缯以北，俗则齐。
现代文：朐、缯以北，民俗则与齐地相似。
English: To the north of  and, the folk customs are similar to those in Qi.

古文：浙江南则越。
现代文：浙江以南风俗与越地相同。
English: The customs south of Zhejiang are the same as those in Viet Nam.

古文：夫吴自阖庐、春申、王濞三人招致天下之喜游子弟，东有海盐之饶，章山之铜，三江、五湖之利，亦江东一都会也。
现代文：吴地从吴王阖闾、楚春申君和汉初吴王刘濞招致天下喜好游说的子弟以来，东面有丰富的海盐，以及章山的铜矿，三江五湖的资源，也是江东的一个都市。
English: Since Wu invited the world's favorite lobbyists from King Wu of Wu, King Chu Chun Shun and King Liu of Wu at the beginning of the Han Dynasty, there is abundant sea salt in the east, as well as the copper mine of Zhangshan, the resources of the three rivers and five lakes, and it is also a city in the east of the river.

古文：衡山、九江、江南、豫章、长沙，是南楚也，其俗大类西楚。
现代文：衡山、九江、江南、豫章、长沙一带是南楚地区。这里风俗与西楚地区相类似。
English: Hengshan, Jiujiang, the south of the Yangtze River, Yuzhang and Changsha are the South Chu regions, where customs are similar to those in the West Chu region.

古文：郢之後徙寿春，亦一都会也。
现代文：楚国郢都失守后，迁都寿春，寿春也是一个都市。
English: After losing the capital of Chu, the capital was moved to Shouchun. Shouchun is also a city.

古文：而合肥受南北潮，皮革、鲍、木输会也。
现代文：而合肥县南有长江，北有淮河，是皮革、咸鱼、木材汇聚之地。
English: However, Hefei County has the Yangtze River to the south and the Huai River to the north. It is a place where leather, salted fish and wood converge.

古文：与闽中、干越杂俗，故南楚好辞，巧说少信。
现代文：因与闽中、于越习俗混杂，所以南楚居民善于辞令，花言巧语，少用信用。
English: Due to the mixture of customs with those in the middle of Yunnan and in Vietnam, the residents of Nanchu are good at rhetoric, flowery language, and rarely use credit.

古文：江南卑湿，丈夫早夭。
现代文：江南地区地势地下，气候潮湿，男子寿命不长。
English: In the south of the Yangtze River, the terrain is subterranean, the climate is humid, and men do not live long.

古文：多竹木。
现代文：盛产竹木。
English: It is rich in bamboo.

古文：豫章出黄金，长沙出连、锡，然堇堇物之所有，取之不足以更费。
现代文：豫章出产黄金，长沙出产铅、锡。但矿产蕴藏量极为有限，开采所得不足以抵偿支出费用。
English: Yuzhang produces gold, and Changsha produces lead and tin. However, the mineral reserves are extremely limited, and the mining income is not enough to cover the expenses.

古文：九疑、苍梧以南至儋耳者，与江南大同俗，而杨越多焉。
现代文：九疑山、苍梧以南至儋耳一带，与江南风俗大体相同，其中混杂着许多杨越风俗。
English: The customs of Jiuzhishan, south of Cangwu and the area around Jiu'er are generally the same as those in the south of the Yangtze River, with many Yang Yue customs mixed in.

古文：番禺亦其一都会也，珠玑、犀、玳瑁、果、布之凑。
现代文：番禺也是当地的一个都市，是珠玑、犀角、玳瑁、水果、葛布之类的集中地。
English: Panyu is also a local city, and is a concentration of pearl oysters, rhinoceros horns, clams, fruits, and comb fabric.

古文：颍川、南阳，夏人之居也。
现代文：颍川、南阳是原夏朝人居住之地。
English: Lugu River and Nanyang are the places where the original Xia Dynasty people lived.

古文：夏人政尚忠朴，犹有先王之遗风。
现代文：夏人为政崇尚忠厚朴实，仍然有先王的遗风。
English: Xia people are loyal and simple in politics, and there is still the legacy of the former king.

古文：颍川敦愿。
现代文：颍川人敦厚老实。
English: The people of Hechuan are honest and hardworking.

古文：秦末世，迁不轨之民於南阳。
现代文：秦朝末年，曾经迁徙不法之民到南阳。
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, there was a migration of illegals to Nanyang.

古文：南阳西通武关、郧关，东南受汉、江、淮。
现代文：南阳西通武关、郧关，东南面临汉水、长江、淮水。
English: Nanyang is connected to Wuguan and Shaoguan in the west, and faces the Han River, Yangtze River and Huai River in the southeast.

古文：宛亦一都会也。
现代文：宛也是一个都市。
English: It is also a city.

古文：俗杂好事，业多贾。
现代文：当地民俗混杂，好事。多以经商为业。
English: Local folk customs are mixed, which is a good thing. They mostly do business.

古文：其任侠，交通颍川，故至今谓之 夏人 。
现代文：居民以抑强扶弱为己任，与颍川地区相交往，所以直到现在还被称做 夏人 。
English: Residents take it as their duty to suppress the strong and support the weak, and interact with the Lugu River area, so until now they have been called Xia Ren.

古文：夫天下物所鲜所多，人民谣俗，山东食海盐，山西食盐卤，领南、沙北固往往出盐，大体如此矣。
现代文：天下物产各地不均，有少有多，民间习俗各有不同，山东地区吃海盐，山西地区吃池盐，岭南和大漠以北本来也有许多地方出产盐，情况大体如此。
English: The world's production of salt varies from place to place, from small to large, and folk customs vary from place to place. In Shandong, sea salt is eaten, in Shanxi, pond salt is eaten, and in Lingnan and north of the Great Desert, salt is also produced in many places. This is generally the case.

古文：总之，楚越之地，地广人希，饭稻羹鱼，或火耕而水耨，果隋蠃蛤，不待贾而足，地埶饶食，无饥馑之患，以故呰窳偷生，无积聚而多贫。
现代文：总而言之，楚越地区，地广人稀，以稻米为饭，以鱼类为菜，刀耕火种，水耨除草，瓜果螺蛤，不须从外地购买，便能自给自足。地形有利，食物丰富，没有饥馑之患，因此人们苟且偷生，没有积蓄，多为贫穷人家。
English: All in all, the Chuyue area is sparsely populated, with rice for meals, fish for dishes, slash-and-burn farming, watering, weeding, and harvesting melons and fruits, and can be self-sufficient without having to buy from other places. The terrain is favorable, food is abundant, and there is no famine. Therefore, people are living on the sly, have no savings, and are mostly poor.

古文：是故江淮以南，无冻饿之人，亦无千金之家。
现代文：所以，江淮以南既无挨饿受冻之人，也无千金富户。
English: Therefore, south of the Yangtze River and Huai River, there are neither starving nor freezing people, nor are there wealthy households.

古文：沂、泗水以北，宜五穀桑麻六畜，地小人众，数被水旱之害，民好畜藏，故秦、夏、梁、鲁好农而重民。
现代文：沂水、泗水以北地区，适合种植五谷桑麻，饲养六畜，地少人多，屡次遭受水旱灾害，百姓喜好积蓄财物，所以秦、夏、梁、鲁地区勤于农业而重视劳力。
English: The areas north of Surabaya and Surabaya are suitable for planting five-grain mulberry, raising six livestock, with fewer people and more land, and have repeatedly suffered from floods and droughts. The people like to accumulate wealth, so the Qin, Xia, Liang and Lu regions are diligent in agriculture and attach importance to labor.

古文：三河、宛、陈亦然，加以商贾。
现代文：三河地区以及宛、陈等地也是这样，再加上经商贸易。
English: This is also the case in the Mikawa region, as well as in places such as Wan and Chen, in addition to doing business and trade.

古文：齐、赵设智巧，仰机利。
现代文：齐、赵地区的居民聪明灵巧，靠投机求财利。
English: The residents of Qi and Zhao regions are clever and dexterous, and seek financial gain through speculation.

古文：燕、代田畜而事蚕。
现代文：燕、代地区的居民能种田、畜牧，且以养蚕为业。
English: Residents of Yan and Dai regions can grow crops and raise livestock, and their main occupation is raising silkworms.

古文：由此观之，贤人深谋於廊庙，论议朝廷，守信死节隐居岩穴之士设为名高者安归乎？
现代文：由此看来，贤能之人在朝廷上出谋划策，论辩争议，守信尽节及隐居深山之士自命清高，保全名声，他们究竟都是为着什么呢？
English: From this point of view, what are the reasons for the wise men to make suggestions at the imperial court, argue disputes, keep their word, and the people who live in seclusion in the mountains to keep themselves clean and preserve their reputation?

古文：归於富厚也。
现代文：都是为了财富。
English: All for the sake of wealth.

古文：是以廉吏久，久更富，廉贾归富。
现代文：因此，为官清廉就能长久做官，长久了就会更加富有；商人买卖公道，营业发达，就能多赚钱而致富。
English: Therefore, if you are a clean official, you can be an official for a long time, and if you are an official for a long time, you will be richer; if you are a businessman, you can buy and sell fairly, and if your business is developed, you can make more money and get rich.

古文：富者，人之情性，所不学而俱欲者也。
现代文：求富，是人们的本性，不用学习就都会去追求。
English: It is the nature of people to seek wealth, and they will pursue it without learning.

古文：故壮士在军，攻城先登，陷阵卻敌，斩将搴旗，前蒙矢石，不避汤火之难者，为重赏使也。
现代文：所以，壮士在军队中，打仗时攻城先登，遇敌时冲锋陷阵，斩将夺旗，冒着箭射石击，不避赴汤蹈火，艰难险阻，是因为重赏的驱使。
English: Therefore, the strong man in the army, the first to attack the city during the war, the charge when the enemy is trapped, the flag will be captured, the arrows will be shot, the fire will not be avoided, and the difficulties will be driven by the reward.

古文：其在闾巷少年，攻剽椎埋，劫人作奸，掘冢铸币，任侠并兼，借交报仇，篡逐幽隐，不避法禁，走死地如骛者，其实皆为财用耳。
现代文：那些住在乡里的青少年，攻击剽掠，椎杀活埋，逼人作奸，盗掘坟墓，私铸钱币，伪托侠义，侵吞霸占，借助同伙图报私仇，在幽暗隐蔽的地方抢夺钱财，逐杀人命，不避法律禁令，跑在死路上却像快马奔驰似地朝前赶的，其实都是为了钱财罢了。
English: Those young people who live in the countryside, attack and plunder, kill and bury alive, force people to commit treason, rob graves, secretly mint money, fake chivalry, embezzle and occupy, take revenge with the help of accomplices, rob money in dark and hidden places, kill people, do not avoid legal prohibitions, run on the dead road but rush forward like a fast horse, are actually just for money.

古文：今夫赵女郑姬，设形容，揳鸣琴，揄长袂，蹑利屣，目挑心招，出不远千里，不择老少者，奔富厚也。
现代文：如今赵国、郑国的女子，梳妆打扮，修饰容貌，弹着琴瑟，舞动长袖，踩着轻便舞鞋，用眼挑逗，用情意勾引，出外不远千里，不择年少投靠男人，也是为财利而奔忙。
English: Nowadays, women in Zhao and Zheng Provinces dress up, beautify their appearance, play the piano, dance in long sleeves, step on light dancing shoes, tease with their eyes, seduce with affection, travel thousands of miles, rely on men regardless of age, and are also busy for financial gain.

古文：游闲公子，饰冠剑，连车骑，亦为富贵容也。
现代文：游手好闲的贵族公子，帽子宝剑装饰讲究，外出时车辆马匹成排结队，也是为了显示富贵。
English: Idle aristocrats, with elaborate decorations on their hats and swords, line up their cars and horses when they go out, also to show off their wealth.

古文：弋射渔猎，犯晨夜，冒霜雪，驰阬谷，不避猛兽之害，为得味也。
现代文：猎人渔夫，起早贪黑，冒着霜雪，奔跑在深山峡谷，不躲避蒙受的伤害，为的是获得各种野味。
English: The hunter-fisherman, greedy for the dark, rises early, braves the frost and snow, runs in the deep mountain canyons, does not avoid the injuries he suffers, in order to obtain various wild game.

古文：博戏驰逐，斗鸡走狗，作色相矜，必争胜者，重失负也。
现代文：进出赌场，斗鸡走狗，个个争得面红耳赤，争相夸耀，必定要争赢斗胜的，是因为将输赢看得很重。
English: In and out of the casino, the cockfighting lackeys, all of them are fighting red-faced, competing to boast, and they must fight to win, because they attach great importance to winning and losing.

古文：医方诸食技术之人，焦神极能，为重糈也。
现代文：医生方士及各种靠技艺谋生的人，劳神过度，极尽其能，是为了得到丰厚报酬。
English: Doctors, fortune-tellers, and people of all kinds who earn a living by their skills, are overworked and do their best in order to get rich rewards.

古文：吏士舞文弄法，刻章伪书，不避刀锯之诛者，没於赂遗也。
现代文：官府吏士，舞文弄墨，私刻公章，伪造文书，不避斫脚杀头，这是由于他们沉陷在他人的贿赂馈赠之中。
English: The bureaucrats and officials of the government, those who danced with ink, privately engraved official seals, forged documents, and did not shy away from stamping their feet and beheading, this was because they were immersed in the bribes and gifts of others.

古文：农工商贾畜长，固求富益货也。
现代文：至于农、工、商、贾储蓄增殖，原本就是为了谋求增添个人的财富。
English: As for the increase in the savings of farmers, workers, merchants and farmers, it was originally to seek to increase personal wealth.

古文：此有知尽能索耳，终不馀力而让财矣。
现代文：如此绞尽脑汁，用尽力量地索取，终究是为了不遗余力地争夺财物。
English: After all, to rack one's brains and exhaust one's strength to obtain money is to spare no effort to compete for property.

古文：谚曰： 百里不贩樵，千里不贩籴。 
现代文：谚语说： 贩柴的不出一百里，贩粮的不出一千里。 
English: A proverb says: The seller of firewood is never more than a hundred miles away, the seller of grain is never more than a thousand miles away.

古文：居之一岁，种之以穀；十岁，树之以木；百岁，来之以德。
现代文：在一个地方居住一年，就要种植谷物；居住十年，就要栽种树木；居住百年，就应招来德行。
English: If you live in a place for a year, you should plant grain; if you live for ten years, you should plant trees; if you live for a hundred years, you should cultivate virtue.

古文：德者，人物之谓也。
现代文：所谓德，就是人的才德名望和财物。
English: The so-called virtue is a person's talent, reputation and wealth.

古文：今有无秩禄之奉，爵邑之入，而乐与之比者。命曰 素封 。
现代文：现在有些人，没有官职俸禄或爵位封地收入，但生活欢乐富有，可与有官爵者相比，被称做 素封 。
English: Nowadays, some people who do not have official salary or peerage fiefdom income, but have a happy and rich life, can be compared with those who have official peerage, and are called suo-fu.

古文：封者食租税，岁率户二百。
现代文：有封地的人享受租税，每户每年缴纳的租税是二百钱。
English: People with fiefs enjoyed tax privileges, and the annual tax paid by each household was up to 200 yuan.

古文：千户之君则二十万，朝觐聘享出其中。
现代文：享有千户的封君，每年租税收入可达二十万钱，朝拜天子、访问诸侯和祭祀馈赠，都要从其中支出。
English: The fukun, who enjoyed the privilege of ruling over a thousand households, had an annual tax income of up to 200,000 yuan, from which expenses had to be made for worshiping the emperor, visiting princes, and making offerings.

古文：庶民农工商贾，率亦岁万息二千，百万之家则二十万，而更徭租赋出其中。
现代文：普通百姓如农、工、商、贾，家有一万钱，每年利息可得二千钱，拥有一百万钱的人家，每年利息可得二十万，而更徭租赋的费用都从其中支出。
English: Ordinary people, such as farmers, workers, merchants, and farmers, have ten thousand dollars, and can earn two thousand dollars in interest every year. People with one million dollars can earn two hundred thousand dollars in interest every year, and even the rent and fee expenses are paid from it.

古文：衣食之欲，恣所好美矣。
现代文：这种人家，就能随心所欲地吃喝玩乐了。
English: With this kind of family, you can eat, drink and have fun as you please.

古文：故曰陆地牧马二百蹄，牛蹄角千，千足羊，泽中千足彘，水居千石鱼陂，山居千章之材。
现代文：所以说陆地牧马五十匹，养牛一百六、七十头，养羊二百五十只，草泽里养猪二百五十口，水中占有年产鱼千石的鱼塘，山里拥有千棵成材的大树。
English: Therefore, it is said that there are fifty horses on the land, one hundred and sixty or seventy cattle, two hundred and fifty sheep, two hundred and fifty pigs in the grassland, a fish pond with an annual fish production of a thousand stones in the water, and a thousand large trees in the mountains.

古文：安邑千树枣；燕、秦千树栗；蜀、汉、江陵千树橘；淮北、常山已南，河济之间千树萩；陈、夏千亩漆；齐、鲁千亩桑麻；渭川千亩竹；及名国万家之城，带郭千亩亩锺之田，若千亩卮茜，千畦姜韭：此其人皆与千户侯等。
现代文：安邑有千株枣树；燕、秦有千株栗子树；蜀郡、汉水、江陵地区有千株橘树；淮北、常山以南和黄河、济水之间有千株楸树；陈、夏有千亩漆树；齐、鲁有千亩桑麻；渭川有千亩竹林；还有名扬国内、万户人家的都城，郊外有亩产一钟的千亩良田，或者千亩栀子、茜草，千畦生姜、韭菜：诸如此类的人，其财富都可与千户侯的财富相等。
English: There are a thousand jujube trees in An'yun; a thousand chestnut trees in Yan and Qin; a thousand orange trees in Shu County, Hanshui and Jiangling; a thousand eucalyptus trees in Huaibei, south of Changshan and between the Yellow River and Jishui; a thousand mu of lacquer trees in Chen and Xia; a thousand mu of mulberry in Qi and Lu; a thousand mu of bamboo forest in Lu River; and a thousand mu of good farmland with an output of one ton per mu in the suburbs of the well-known domestic capital city of a million households, or a thousand mu of hazelnuts, madder, ginger and amaranth

古文：然是富给之资也，不窥市井，不行异邑，坐而待收，身有处士之义而取给焉。
现代文：然而这些成为富足的资本，人们不用到市上去察看，不用到外地奔波，坐在家中即可不劳而获，身有处士之名，而取用丰足。
English: However, these have become rich capital. People do not have to go to the market to inspect, do not have to travel to other places, they can sit at home and get it without any effort. With the name of a clerk, they can get plenty.

古文：若至家贫亲老，妻子软弱，岁时无以祭祀进醵，饮食被服不足以自通，如此不惭耻，则无所比矣。
现代文：至于那些贫穷人家，父母年老，妻子儿女瘦弱不堪，逢年过节无钱祭祀祖宗鬼神、赠人路费、聚集饮食，吃喝穿戴都难以自足，如此贫困，还不感到羞愧，那就没有什么可比拟的了。
English: As for those poor families, their parents are old, their wives and children are emaciated, and they have no money to offer sacrifices to ancestor ghosts and gods, to give people travel expenses, to gather food, and to eat, drink, and wear are difficult to be self-sufficient, so poor, but do not feel ashamed, then there is nothing to compare.

古文：是以无财作力，少有斗智，既饶争时，此其大经也。
现代文：所以，没有钱财只能出卖劳力，稍有钱财便玩弄智巧，已经富足便争时逐利，这是常理。
English: Therefore, it is common sense that if you have no money, you can only sell your labor. If you have a little money, you will play cleverly. If you are already rich, you will fight for profits.

古文：今治生不待危身取给，则贤人勉焉。
现代文：如今谋求生计，谁能不冒生命危险，即可取得所需物品，那就应受到贤人的鼓励。
English: Those who can earn a living without risking their lives should be encouraged by the sages.

古文：是故本富为上，末富次之，奸富最下。
现代文：所以，靠从事农业生产而致富为上，靠从事商工而致富次之，靠玩弄智巧、甚至违法而致富是最低下的。
English: Therefore, getting rich by engaging in agricultural production is the highest, getting rich by engaging in commerce and industry is the second, and getting rich by playing clever and even breaking the law is the lowest.

古文：无岩处奇士之行，而长贫贱，好语仁义，亦足羞也。
现代文：没有深居山野不肯做官的隐士之行，而长期处于贫靠地位，妄谈仁义，也足以值得羞愧了。
English: It is enough to be ashamed not to have lived as a hermit deep in the mountains and fields who refused to be an official, but to have been poor and dependent for a long time, and to talk nonsense about benevolence and righteousness.

古文：凡编户之民，富相什则卑下之，伯则畏惮之，千则役，万则仆，物之理也。
现代文：凡是编户的百姓，对于财富比自己多出十倍的人就会低声下气，多出百倍的就会惧怕人家，多出千倍的就会被人役使，多出万倍的就会为人奴仆，这是事物的常理。
English: It is the common sense of things that all the people who are accountants will be submissive to those who have ten times more wealth than themselves, a hundred times more will be afraid of others, a thousand times more will be used by others, and a thousand times more will be slaves.

古文：夫用贫求富，农不如工，工不如商，刺绣文不如倚市门，此言末业，贫者之资也。
现代文：要从贫穷达到富有，务农不如做工，做工不如经商，从事技术精湛的刺绣织锦等手工生产，不如当街开店做生意，这里所说的经商末业，是穷人致富凭借的手段。
English: To get from poverty to wealth, farming is not as good as working, working is not as good as doing business, engaging in skilled embroidery and other handicraft production, it is not as good as opening a shop on the street to do business. The final business mentioned here is a means for the poor to get rich.

古文：通邑大都，酤一岁千酿，醯酱千瓨，浆千甔，屠牛羊彘千皮，贩穀粜千锺，薪稾千车，船长千丈，木千章，竹竿万个，其轺车百乘，牛车千两，木器魨者千枚，铜器千钧，素木铁器若卮茜千石，马蹄躈千，牛千足，羊彘千双，僮手指千，筋角丹沙千斤，其帛絮细布千钧，文采千匹，榻布皮革千石，漆千斗，糵麹盐豉千荅，鮐千斤，鲰千石，鲍千钧，枣栗千石者三之，狐龂裘千皮，羔羊裘千石，旃席千具，佗果菜千锺，子贷金钱千贯，节駔会，贪贾三之，廉贾五之，此亦比千乘之家，其大率也。
现代文：在交通发达的大都市，每年酿一千瓮酒，一千缸醋，一千甔饮浆，屠宰一千张牛羊猪皮，贩卖一千钟谷物，一千车柴草，总长千丈的船只，一千株木材，一万棵竹竿，一百辆马车，一千辆牛车，一千件涂漆木器，一千钧铜器，一千担原色木器、铁器及染料，二百匹马，二百五十头牛，一千只猪羊，一百个奴隶，一千斤筋角、丹砂，一千钧绵絮、细布，一千匹彩色丝绸，一千担粗布、皮革，一千斗漆，一千瓶酒曲、盐豆豉，一千斤鲐鱼、鮆鱼，一千石小杂鱼，一千钧腌咸鱼，三千石枣子、粟子，一千件狐貂皮衣，一千石羔羊皮衣，一千条毛毡毯，以及一千种水果蔬菜，还有一千贯放高利贷的资金，促成牲畜交易的掮客或贪心的商人获利十分之三，廉正的商人获利十分之五，这一类人也可与千乘之家相比，这是大概的情况。
English: In a large city with developed transportation, every year a thousand barrels of wine are brewed, a thousand jars of vinegar, a thousand jars of drinking syrup, a thousand skins of cattle, sheep and pigs are slaughtered, a thousand bales of grain are sold, a thousand carts of firewood, ships of a total length of a thousand feet, a thousand trees, ten thousand bamboo poles, a hundred horse-drawn carriages, a thousand ox-drawn carts, a thousand pieces of lacquered woodware, a thousand pieces of copperware, a thousand loads of primary-colored woodware, ironware and dyes, two hundred horses, two hundred and fifty cattle,

古文：佗杂业不中什二，则非吾财也。
现代文：至于其他杂业，如果利润不足十分之二，那就不是我说的好的致富行业。
English: As for other miscellaneous industries, if the profit is less than two-tenths of a percent, it is not what I call a good industry for getting rich.

古文：请略道当世千里之中，贤人所以富者，令後世得以观择焉。
现代文：请让我简略说明当代千里范围内那些贤能者之所以能够致富的情况，以便使后世的人得以考察选择。
English: Let me give a brief account of the circumstances under which those of ability within a thousand miles of the present day have been able to become rich, in order that posterity may examine the choice.

古文：蜀卓氏之先，赵人也，用铁冶富。
现代文：蜀地卓氏的祖先是赵国人，靠冶铁致富。
English: Shu Zhuo's ancestors were from Zhao, and made their fortune in iron smelting.

古文：秦破赵，迁卓氏。卓氏见虏略，独夫妻推辇，行诣迁处。
现代文：秦国击败赵国时，迁徙卓氏，卓氏被虏掠，只有他们夫妻二人推着车子，去往迁徙地方。
English: When Qin defeated Zhao, the Zhuo family migrated. The Zhuo family was plundered, and only the two of them pushed the car to go to the place of migration.

古文：诸迁虏少有馀财，争与吏，求近处，处葭萌。
现代文：其他同时被迁徙的人，稍有多余钱财，便争着送给主事的官吏，央求迁徙到近处，近处是在葭萌县。
English: Other people who were moved at the same time, with a little extra money, competed to give it to the officials in charge, and begged to move to the vicinity, which was in Qimeng County.

古文：唯卓氏曰： 此地狭薄。吾闻汶山之下，沃野，下有蹲鸱，至死不饥。
现代文：只有卓氏说： 葭萌地方狭小，土地瘠薄，我听说汶山下面是肥沃的田野，地里长着大芋头，形状象蹲伏的鸱鸟，人到死也不会挨饿。
English: Only Mr. Zhuo said, "The Qimeng area is small and the land is thin. I heard that there is a fertile field under the Wenshan Mountain. There is a large taro growing in the field, shaped like a crouching ostrich. People will not starve to death.

古文：民工於市，易贾。 
现代文：那里的百姓善于交易，容易做买卖。 
English: The people there are good at trading and easy to do business with.

古文：乃求远迁。致之临邛，大喜，即铁山鼓铸，运筹策，倾滇蜀之民，富至僮千人。
现代文：于是就要求迁到远处，结果被迁移到临邛，他非常高兴，就在有铁矿的山里熔铁铸械，用心筹划计算，财势压倒滇蜀地区的居民，以至富有到奴仆多达一千人。
English: So he asked to be moved to a distant place. As a result, he was moved to Linyi. He was very happy. He melted iron casting machinery in the mountains where there were iron mines. He planned and calculated with all his heart. His financial power overwhelmed the residents of the Anshu region, and he became rich enough to have as many as a thousand servants.

古文：田池射猎之乐，拟於人君。
现代文：他在田园水池尽享射猎游玩之乐，可以比得上国君。
English: He enjoyed shooting and hunting in the rural pond as much as possible, which can be compared to the king.

古文：程郑，山东迁虏也，亦冶铸，贾椎髻之民，富埒卓氏，俱居临邛。
现代文：程郑是从太行山以东迁徙来的降民，也经营冶铸业，常把铁器制品卖给西南地区少数民族，他的财富与卓氏相等，与卓氏同住在临邛。
English: Cheng Zheng is a descendant who migrated from the east of Taihang Mountain. He also runs a metallurgical foundry and often sells ironware products to ethnic minorities in the southwest. His wealth is equal to that of Zhuo, and he lives with Zhuo in Linyi.

古文：宛孔氏之先，梁人也，用铁冶为业。
现代文：宛县孔氏的先祖是梁国人，以冶铁为业。
English: The ancestors of the Kong family in Wan County were from Liang Province and were engaged in iron smelting.

古文：秦伐魏，迁孔氏南阳。
现代文：秦国攻伐魏国后，把孔氏迁到南阳。
English: After Qin conquered Wei, he moved the Kong clan to Nanyang.

古文：大鼓铸，规陂池，连车骑，游诸侯，因通商贾之利，有游闲公子之赐与名。
现代文：他便大规模地经营冶铸业，并规划开辟鱼塘养鱼，车马成群结队，并经常游访诸侯，借此牟取经商发财的便利，博得了游闲公子乐施好赐的美名。
English: He then operated a large-scale metallurgical foundry, and planned to open a fish pond to raise fish. He drove horses and carriages in groups, and often visited the provinces to take advantage of the convenience of doing business and making a fortune. He gained a reputation as a playboy.

古文：然其赢得过当，愈於纤啬，家致富数千金，故南阳行贾尽法孔氏之雍容。
现代文：然而他赢利很多，大大超出施舍花费的那点钱，胜过吝啬小气的商人，家中财富多达数千金，所以，南阳人做生意全部效法孔氏的从容稳重和举止大方。
English: However, he made a lot of profit, far exceeding the little money spent on charity, better than stingy and stingy businessmen. His family's wealth amounted to thousands of dollars. Therefore, the people of Nanyang all followed Kong's calm, steady and generous behavior when doing business.

古文：鲁人俗俭啬，而曹邴氏尤甚，以铁冶起，富至巨万。
现代文：鲁地民俗节俭吝啬，而曹邴氏尤为突出，他靠冶铁起家，财富多达几万钱。
English: Ludi folk customs are thrifty and miserly, and the Cao Wei clan is particularly prominent. He started his family by smelting iron, and his wealth amounts to tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：然家自父兄子孙约，俯有拾，仰有取，贳贷行贾遍郡国。
现代文：然而，他家父兄子孙都遵守这样的家规：低头抬头都要有所得，一举一动都要不忘利。
English: However, his parents, siblings, and descendants all abide by this family rule: every head down and every head up must have something to gain, and every move must be profitable.

古文：邹、鲁以其故多去文学而趋利者，以曹邴氏也。
现代文：他家租赁、放债、做买卖遍及各地。由于这个缘故，邹鲁地区有很多人丢弃儒学而追求发财，这是受曹邴氏的影响。
English: Because of this, many people in the Jilu region abandoned Confucianism in pursuit of wealth, which was influenced by Cao Wei.

古文：齐俗贱奴虏，而刀间独爱贵之。
现代文：齐地风俗是鄙视奴仆，而刀间却偏偏重视他们。
English: The Chidi custom is to despise servants, while the Katama value them.

古文：桀黠奴，人之所患也，唯刀间收取，使之逐渔盐商贾之利，或连车骑，交守相，然愈益任之。
现代文：凶恶狡猾的奴仆是人们所担忧的，唯有刀间收留使用，让他们追逐渔盐商业上的利益，或者让他们乘坐成队的车马，去结交地方官员，并且更加信任他们。
English: The vicious and cunning slaves were feared only when they were used as mercenaries to pursue commercial interests in salt, or when they rode in caravans to befriend local officials and gain their trust.

古文：终得其力，起富数千万。
现代文：刀间终于获得他们的帮助，致富达数千万钱。
English: Between the knives, he finally got their help and became rich to the tune of tens of millions of dollars.

古文：故曰 宁爵毋刀 ，言其能使豪奴自饶而尽其力。
现代文：所以有人说： 与其出外求取官爵，不如在刀家为奴 ，说的就是刀间能使豪奴自身富足而又能为他竭尽其力。
English: Therefore, some people said: "Instead of going abroad to seek a peerage, it is better to be a slave in the sword family," that is, the sword family can make the hero himself rich and can do his best for him.

古文：周人既纤，而师史尤甚，转毂以百数，贾郡国，无所不至。
现代文：周地居民原本就很吝啬，而师史尤为突出，他以车载货返运赚钱，车辆数以百计，经商于各郡诸侯之中，无所不到。
English: The residents of the surrounding area were originally very stingy, and Shi Shi was particularly prominent. He made money by returning goods by car. There were hundreds of vehicles, and he could do business in all counties and among the princes.

古文：洛阳街居在齐秦楚赵之中，贫人学事富家，相矜以久贾，数过邑不入门，设任此等，故师史能致七千万。
现代文：洛阳道处齐、秦、楚、赵等国的中心，街巷的穷人在富家学做生意，常以自己在外经商时间长相互夸耀，屡次路过乡里也不入家门。因能筹划任用这样的人，所以师史能致富达七千万钱。
English: Luoyang Province is located in the center of Qi, Qin, Chu, Zhao and other countries. The poor people in the streets and lanes learn to do business from the rich. They often boast to each other that they have been doing business for a long time. They often pass through the countryside and do not enter their homes. Because they can plan to appoint such people, they can become rich up to 70 million yuan.

古文：宣曲任氏之先，为督道仓吏。
现代文：宣曲任氏的先祖，是督道仓的守吏。
English: The ancestors of the Xuanqu Ren clan were the keepers of Doku Dokang.

古文：秦之败也，豪杰皆争取金玉，而任氏独窖仓粟。
现代文：秦朝败亡之时，豪杰全都争夺金银珠宝，而任氏独自用地窖储藏米粟。
English: At the time of the fall of the Qin Dynasty, the great heroes were all competing for gold, silver and jewels, while Ren used the cellar to store rice poppy alone.

古文：楚汉相距荥阳也，民不得耕种，米石至万，而豪杰金玉尽归任氏，任氏以此起富。
现代文：后来，楚汉两军相持于荥阳，农民无法耕种田地，米价每石涨到一万钱，任氏卖谷大发其财，豪杰的金银珠宝全都归于任氏，任氏因此发了财。
English: Later, the two armies of Chu and Han were at loggerheads in Shenyang, farmers were unable to cultivate their fields, the price of rice rose to 10,000 yuan per stone, the Ren family made a fortune by selling grain, and the gold and silver jewelry of the heroes all belonged to the Ren family, so the Ren family made a fortune.

古文：富人争奢侈，而任氏折节为俭，力田畜。
现代文：一般富人都争相奢侈，而任氏却屈己从人，崇尚节俭，致力于农田畜牧。
English: The average rich person strives for luxury, but Mr. Ren submits to others, advocates frugality, and is dedicated to farming and animal husbandry.

古文：田畜人争取贱贾，任氏独取贵善。
现代文：田地、牲畜，一般人都争着低价买进，任氏却专门买进贵而好的。
English: Ordinary people compete to buy land and livestock at low prices, but the Ren clan only buys expensive but good products.

古文：富者数世。
现代文：任家数代都很富有。
English: His family has been wealthy for generations.

古文：然任公家约，非田畜所出弗衣食，公事不毕则身不得饮酒食肉。
现代文：但任氏家约规定，不是自家种田养畜得来的物品不穿不吃，公事没有做完自身不得饮酒吃肉。
English: However, the Ren family covenant stipulates that they do not wear or eat items that are not from their own farm, and they are not allowed to drink alcohol or eat meat until they have completed their duties.

古文：以此为闾里率，故富而主上重之。
现代文：以此做为乡里表率，所以他富有而皇上也尊重他。
English: He used this as an example in the village, so he was rich and the emperor also respected him.

古文：塞之斥也，唯桥姚已致马千匹，牛倍之，羊万头，粟以万锺计。
现代文：边疆地区开拓之际，只有桥姚取得马千匹，牛二千头，羊一万只，粟以万钟计算。
English: When the frontier regions were being developed, only Qiao Yao obtained a thousand horses, two thousand cattle, ten thousand sheep, and ten thousand millet.

古文：吴楚七国兵起时，长安中列侯封君行从军旅，赍贷子钱，子钱家以为侯邑国在关东，关东成败未决，莫肯与。
现代文：吴楚七国起兵反叛汉朝中央朝廷时，长安城中的列侯封君要从军出征，需借贷有息之钱，高利贷者认为列侯封君的食邑都国均在关东，而关东战事胜负尚未决定，没有人肯把钱贷给他们。
English: When the seven kingdoms of Wuchu rebelled against the central court of the Han Dynasty, the feudal lords of Chang'an wanted to go to war and needed to borrow money with interest. The usurers believed that the feudal lords' capital cities were all in Kanto, but the outcome of the war in Kanto had not yet been decided, and no one was willing to lend them money.

古文：唯无盐氏出捐千金贷，其息什之。
现代文：只有无盐氏拿出千金放贷给他们，其利息为本钱的十倍。
English: Only Mr. Mu Xian took out thousands of yuan to lend to them, and the interest was ten times the cost.

古文：三月，吴楚平，一岁之中，则无盐氏之息什倍，用此富埒关中。
现代文：三个月后，吴楚被平定。一年之中，无盐氏得到十倍于本金的利息，以此富致与关中富豪相匹敌。
English: Three months later, Wu Chu was subdued, and within a year, Mr. Wu Shi had earned ten times the interest on the principal, making him as rich as the richest man in Guanzhong.

古文：关中富商大贾，大抵尽诸田，田啬、田兰。
现代文：关中地区的富商大贾，大都是姓田的那些人家，如田啬、田兰。
English: Most of the wealthy merchants in the Guanzhong area are people with the surname Tian, such as Tian Zhen and Tian Lan.

古文：韦家栗氏，安陵、杜杜氏，亦巨万。
现代文：还有韦家栗氏、安陵和杜县的杜氏，家产也达万万钱。
English: There are also the Wei family of chestnuts, the Anling family and the Du family of Du County, whose family assets also amount to tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：此其章章尤异者也。
现代文：以上这些人都是显赫有名、与众不同的人物。
English: All of these people are prominent, well-known and distinctive figures.

古文：皆非有爵邑奉禄弄法犯奸而富，尽椎埋去就，与时俯仰，获其赢利，以末致财，用本守之，以武一切，用文持之，变化有概，故足术也。
现代文：他们都不是有爵位封邑、俸禄收入或者靠舞文弄法、作靠犯科而发财致富的，全是靠推测事理，进退取舍，随机应变，获得赢利，以经营商工末业致富，用购置田产从事农业守财，以各种强有力的手段夺取一切，用法律政令等文字方式维持下去，变化多端大略如此，所以是值得记述的。
English: None of them had a title of nobility, a fiefdom, a salary income, or made a fortune by means of dancing and writing, or by means of criminal science. All of them made a profit by speculating on things, taking advantage of advances and retreats, taking advantage of random contingencies, making a profit by running businesses and industries, protecting their wealth by purchasing farmland, seizing everything by various powerful means, and maintaining it by means of laws and decrees. The changes are roughly the same, so it is worth describing.

古文：若至力农畜，工虞商贾，为权利以成富，大者倾郡，中者倾县，下者倾乡里者，不可胜数。
现代文：至于那些致力于农业、畜牧、手工、山林、渔猎或经商的人，凭籍权势和财利而成为富人，大者压倒一郡，中者压倒一县，小者压倒乡里，那更是多得不可胜数。
English: As for those who devote themselves to agriculture, animal husbandry, handicrafts, mountain forests, hunting and fishing or business, those who become rich by virtue of their power and financial interests, the big ones overwhelm a county, the middle ones overwhelm a county, and the small ones overwhelm the countryside, are even more numerous.

古文：夫纤啬筋力，治生之正道也，而富者必用奇胜。
现代文：精打细算、勤劳节俭，是发财致富的正路，但想要致富的人还必须出奇制胜。
English: Careful budgeting, hard work and thrift are the right way to get rich, but those who want to get rich must also win by surprise.

古文：田农，掘业，而秦扬以盖一州。
现代文：种田务农是笨重的行业，而秦杨却靠它成为一州的首富。
English: Farming is a cumbersome industry, but Qin Yang has become the richest man in the state thanks to it.

古文：掘冢，奸事也，而田叔以起。
现代文：盗墓本来是犯法的勾当，而田叔却靠它起家。
English: Grave robbing was originally a criminal activity, but Uncle Tian started his business with it.

古文：博戏，恶业也，而桓发用富。
现代文：赌博本来是恶劣的行径，而桓发却靠它致富。
English: Gambling is an inherently evil activity, yet Kanfa became rich from it.

古文：行贾，丈夫贱行也，而雍乐成以饶。
现代文：行走叫卖是男子汉的卑鄙行业，而雍乐成却靠它发财。
English: Peddling is a despicable profession for a man, but Yong Lecheng has made a fortune from it.

古文：贩脂，辱处也，而雍伯千金。
现代文：贩卖油脂是耻辱的行当，而雍伯靠它挣到了千金。
English: Selling grease is a shameful business, but Yongbo made a lot of money from it.

古文：卖浆，小业也，而张氏千万。
现代文：卖水浆本是小本生意，而张氏靠它赚了一千万钱。
English: Selling the syrup was a small business, but Mr. Zhang made 10 million yuan from it.

古文：洒削，薄技也，而郅氏鼎食。
现代文：磨刀本是小手艺，而郅氏靠它富到列鼎而食。
English: Sharpening knives is a small craft, but Mr. Zou has become rich by it.

古文：胃脯，简微耳，浊氏连骑。
现代文：卖羊肚儿本是微不足道的事，而浊氏靠它富至车马成行。
English: Selling mutton belly was a trivial matter, but Mr. Zou became so rich from it that he was able to travel by horse and carriage.

古文：马医，浅方，张里击锺。
现代文：给马治病是浅薄的小术，而张里靠它富到击钟佐食。
English: It is a shallow trick to cure a horse, but Zhang Li relies on it to become rich.

古文：此皆诚壹之所致。
现代文：这些人都是由于心志专一而致富的。
English: These people all got rich by being single-minded.

古文：由是观之，富无经业，则货无常主，能者辐凑，不肖者瓦解。
现代文：由此看来，致富并不靠固定的行业，而财货也没有一定的主人，有本领的人能够集聚财货，没有本领的人则会破败家财。
English: From this point of view, getting rich does not depend on a fixed industry, and there is no certain owner of the goods. Those who have the ability can accumulate goods, and those who do not have the ability will ruin their family wealth.

古文：千金之家比一都之君，巨万者乃与王者同乐。
现代文：有千金的人家可以比得上一个都会的封君，有巨万家财的富翁便能同国君一样的享乐。
English: A family with a lot of money can be compared to an urban feudal lord, and a rich man with a huge fortune can enjoy the same pleasures as a sovereign.

古文：岂所谓 素封 者邪？
现代文：这是否所谓的 素封 者？
English: Is this the so-called "Suffolk"?

古文：非也？
现代文：难道不是吗？
English: Isn't it?

