古文：梁士彦子刚梁默梁士彦，字相如，安定乌氏人也。
现代文：○梁士彦梁士彦字相如，定安乌氏人。
English: ○Liang ShihongLiang Shihong's name is the same as Liang Shihong's, and he is from the Ding'an Wu clan.

古文：少任侠，不仕州郡。
现代文：年少时行侠仗义，不愿在州郡做官。
English: When he was young, he was chivalrous and did not want to work as an official in the county.

古文：性刚果，喜正人之是非。
现代文：性情刚烈果敢，喜欢评判别人的是非曲直。
English: He has a strong and courageous temperament, and likes to judge the rights and wrongs of others.

古文：好读兵书，颇涉经史。
现代文：好读兵书，并涉猎经史。
English: He is good at reading military books and dabbling in history.

古文：周世以军功拜仪同三司。
现代文：北周时凭军功拜为仪同三司。
English: At the time of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the military service was worshipped as a ceremony with three divisions.

古文：武帝将有事东夏，闻其勇决，自扶风郡守除九曲镇将，进位上开府，封建威县公，齐人甚惮焉。
现代文：周武帝将要与东夏作战，听说梁士彦勇敢果决，便把他从扶风任上郡守提升为九曲镇将，进位上开府，封为建威县公，北齐人对他非常畏惧。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu was going to fight against the Eastern Xia, and when he heard that Liang Shihang was brave and decisive, he promoted him from Fufeng County Warden to Jiuqu Town Warden, promoted him to Shangkaifu, and made him the official of Jianwei County. The people of North Qi were very afraid of him.

古文：寻迁熊州刺史。
现代文：不久，调任熊州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Kumashu chief historian.

古文：后从武帝拔晋州，进位柱国，除使持节、晋绛二州诸军事、晋州刺史。
现代文：后来随周武帝攻下晋州，进位柱国，拜官使持节，晋、绛二州诸军事，晋州刺史。
English: Later, Emperor Zhou conquered Jinzhou, promoted it to the status of a pillar state, made it an official holiday, and the military of the two states of Jin and Qin were formed, and Jinzhou made history.

古文：及帝还后，齐后主亲总六军而围之。独守孤城，外无声援，众皆震惧，士彦慷慨自若。
现代文：周武帝回京后，齐后主高纬亲自统领六军围困晋州，梁士彦孤军死守晋州，外无援兵，军心震恐，但他仍慷慨自若。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wu returned to Beijing, Emperor Gaozhu personally led the Six Armies to besiege Jinzhou. Liang Shih-yan's lone army defended Jinzhou, with no outside reinforcements. The army was shocked, but he was still generous and self-confident.

古文：贼尽锐攻之，楼堞皆尽，城雉所存，寻仞而已。
现代文：齐后主调集所有精锐部队攻打，城楼全部被摧毁，城墙仅剩下七、八尺高了。
English: After the battle, the lord mobilized all the elite troops to attack, all the towers were destroyed, and the city wall was only seven or eight feet high.

古文：或短兵相接，或交马出入。
现代文：双方将士有时短兵相接，有时兵马相交冲进杀出。
English: The soldiers of both sides sometimes ran into each other, and sometimes the soldiers and horses ran into and out of each other.

古文：士彦谓将士曰： 死在今日，吾为尔先！ 
现代文：梁士彦看形势危急，便对将士们说： 看来今天要战死在这里了，那就让我作你们的表率吧！ 
English: Seeing that the situation was critical, Liang Shihang said to the soldiers: It looks like we are going to die here today, so let me be your leader!

古文：于是勇烈齐奋，呼声动地，无不一当百。
现代文：于是将士们勇烈奋发，喊杀声惊天动地，无不以一当百。
English: As a result, everyone excitedly rose to their feet, shouting loudly, all in unison.

古文：齐师少却。
现代文：齐军渐渐退却。
English: The Qi army gradually retreated.

古文：乃令妻妾军民子女，昼夜修城，三日而就。
现代文：梁士彦趁机命令自己的妻妾、城中军民和儿童一道日夜抢修城防，三天就修复了城墙。
English: Liang Shihang took the opportunity to order his wife and concubine, the soldiers and civilians in the city, and the children to work together day and night to repair the city defenses, and the city wall was repaired in three days.

古文：帝率六军亦至，齐师解围，营于城东十余里。
现代文：周武帝也在这时率大军赶到，齐军于是解围，撤退到城东十余里的地方安营扎寨。
English: Zhou Wudi also arrived at this time with a large army, and the Qi army then relieved the siege and retreated to a place more than ten miles east of the city to set up camp.

古文：士彦见帝，持帝须而泣曰： 臣几不见陛下！ 
现代文：梁士彦拜见周武帝，抚摸着周帝胡须，流着泪说： 我差一点见不到陛下了！ 
English: Liang Shiyan paid his respects to Emperor Zhou, stroked Emperor Zhou's beard, and said with tears streaming down his face: I almost didn't get to see Your Majesty!

古文：帝亦为之流涕。
现代文：武帝也泪流满面。
English: Emperor Wu also burst into tears.

古文：时帝以将士疲倦，意欲班师。
现代文：当时，周武帝认为将士们已十分疲惫，想要班师。
English: At that time, Zhou Wudi thought that the soldiers were very tired and wanted a teacher.

古文：士彦叩马谏曰： 今齐师遁，众心皆动，因其惧也而攻之，其势必举。 
现代文：梁士彦拉住马缰劝谏说： 现在北齐军队遁逃，军心动摇，趁着他们的畏惧心理而乘胜追击，一定能够大获全胜。 
English: Liang Shihyan took hold of Ma Jun to persuade him, saying: Now the North Qi army is fleeing, the military spirit is shaken, take advantage of their fear psychology and take advantage of the victory to pursue, we will surely be able to win a great victory.

古文：帝从之，大军遂进。
现代文：武帝采纳了他的建议，派大军大举进发。
English: Emperor Wu accepted his suggestion and sent a large army to attack.

古文：帝执其手曰： 余之有晋州，为平齐之基。
现代文：武帝握着梁士彦的手说： 我现在拥有晋州，是平定齐国的基地。
English: Emperor Wu held Liang Shih-yan's hand and said, "I now own Jinzhou, which is the base for pacifying Qi.

古文：若不固守，则事不谐矣。
现代文：如果不巩固晋州，事情就不好办了。
English: If we don't consolidate Jinzhou, things won't go well.

古文：朕无前虑，惟恐后变，善为我守之。 
现代文：我不担心前线，只怕后方发生变故。你替我好好守住它。 
English: I'm not worried about the front line, I'm only afraid of what might happen behind it. You keep it safe for me.

古文：及齐平，封郕国公，进位上柱国、雍州主簿。
现代文：等到平定齐国后，封他为成阝国公，进位上柱国、雍州主簿。
English: After the pacification of Qi, he was given the title of Chengyu Guo, promoted to Shangju Guo and Yongzhou Guo.

古文：宣帝即位，除东南道行台、使持节、徐州总管、三十二州诸军事、徐州刺史。
现代文：周宣帝即位后，任命他为东南道行台、使持节、徐州总管、三十二州诸军事、徐州刺史。
English: After Zhou Xuandi ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the governor of Southeast Dao, the envoy of the festival, the governor of Xuzhou, the military of the 32 states, and the historian of Xuzhou.

古文：与乌丸轨擒陈将吴明彻、裴忌于吕梁，别破黄陵，略定淮南地。
现代文：他与乌丸轨一起在吕梁擒捉了陈将吴明彻、裴忌。又率军攻下黄陵，平定了淮河以南的地方。
English: Together with Wu Marule, he captured the Chen generals Wu Mingche and Pei Bo in Luliangye. He also led the army to capture Huangling and leveled the area south of the Huai River.

古文：高祖作相，转亳州总管、二十四州诸军事。
现代文：隋高祖杨坚作相时，他改任亳州总管、二十四州诸军事。
English: When Yang Jian, the forefather of Sui Gao, was the prime minister, he was appointed as the general manager of Zhangzhou and the military leader of 24 states.

古文：尉迥之反也，以为行军总管，从韦孝宽击之。
现代文：这时尉迟迥发动叛乱，朝廷任命他为行军总管，随韦孝宽出征平叛。
English: At this time, the lieutenant delayed to launch a rebellion, the court appointed him as the general manager of the march, and he went out with Wei Xiaokang to fight the rebellion.

古文：至河阳，与迥军相对。
现代文：到河阳，与叛军对峙。
English: He went to Heyang and confronted the rebels.

古文：令家僮梁默等数人为前锋，士彦以其徒继之，所当皆破。
现代文：梁士彦命令家僮梁默等数人作为先锋，自己带部属跟随而进。
English: Liang Shihang ordered several people such as Jiayu Liangmo to be the vanguard, and he and his subordinates followed.

古文：乘胜至草桥，迥众复合，进战，大破之。
现代文：大军所向披靡，乘胜追击到草桥，尉迟迥又纠合自己的部队抵抗，梁士彦率部进击，大败叛军。
English: The great army was invincible, and pursued the victory to the grass bridge. The lieutenant delayed and entangled the resistance of his own troops. Liang Shihang led the attack and defeated the rebels.

古文：及围鄴城，攻北门而入，驰启西门，纳宇文忻之兵。
现代文：等到围住邺城，从北门攻入，又驰马打开西门，放宇文忻部入城。
English: They waited until they had encircled Lucheng, broke in through the north gate, opened the west gate on horseback, and let Uwen Xibe into the city.

古文：及迥平，除相州刺史。
现代文：平定尉迟迥叛乱后，又授官相州刺史。
English: After reaching the rank of lieutenant, he was determined to be appointed as the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：高祖忌之，未几，征还京师，闲居无事。
现代文：高祖猜忌他，没多久，把他调回京师。他在家闲居，无事可做。
English: Gao Zu suspected him and soon transferred him back to the Beijing Division. He was idle at home, with nothing to do.

古文：自恃元功，甚怀怨望，遂与宇文忻、刘昉等谋作乱。
现代文：他自恃功高，心怀怨恨，和宇文忻、刘日方等人图谋反叛。
English: He prided himself on his achievements, harbored resentment, and plotted a rebellion with Yu Wenyi, Liu Yifang, and others.

古文：将率僮仆，于享庙之际，因车驾出，图以发机。
现代文：打算率领僮仆，在宗庙祭祀之前，趁高祖车驾出来之时，图谋起事。
English: He planned to lead his retainers to take advantage of the time when Gao Zu's chariot came out before the ancestral temple ceremony to plot an uprising.

古文：复欲于蒲州起事，略取河北，捉黎阳关，塞河阳路，劫调布以为牟甲，募盗贼以为战士。
现代文：又想在蒲州起兵，攻取黄河以北的地方，拿下黎阳关，阻断河阳要道，拦截朝廷征调的布帛去做军需，招募流寇来充当兵士。
English: He also wanted to raise an army in Puzhou, capture the area north of the Yellow River, take down the Liyang Pass, block the key road to Heyang, intercept the courier sent by the imperial court to do military supplies, and recruit robbers to serve as soldiers.

古文：其甥裴通豫知其谋而奏之。
现代文：他外甥裴通事先知道他们谋反的事而上奏高祖。
English: His nephew, Pei Tong, knew in advance that they were plotting a rebellion and played the role of Gaozu.

古文：高祖未发其事，授晋州刺史，欲观其意。
现代文：高祖没有宣扬这事，任命梁士彦为晋州刺史，想观察他的动静。
English: Gaozu did not publicize this, but appointed Liang Shih-yan as the prefect of Jinzhou and wanted to observe his movements.

古文：士彦欣然谓昉等曰： 天也！ 
现代文：梁士彦高兴地对刘日方等人说： 这是天赐良机啊！ 
English: Shihiko happily told Liu Bei and the others, "This is God's will!

古文：又请仪同薛摩兒为长史，高祖从之。
现代文：又请求高祖让仪同薛摩儿做长史，高祖答应了他。
English: Gao Zu also asked Gao Zu to let Yi make a long history with Xue Mo'er, and Gao Zu agreed.

古文：后与公卿朝谒，高祖令左右执士彦、忻、昉等于行间，诘之曰： 尔等欲反，何敢发此意？ 
现代文：梁士彦后与众公卿一起朝见高祖，高祖令卫士从官列中把梁士彦、宇文忻、刘日方等抓了起来，责问他们说： 你们这些人图谋反叛，怎么敢产生这种想法？ 
English: After that, Liang Shih-yan and all the nobles went to see Gao Zu in the morning. Gao Zu ordered the guards to arrest Liang Shih-yan, Wu Wen-tao, Liu Yifang and others from the ranks of officials, and scolded them: "You people are plotting to rebel. How dare you have such an idea?"

古文：仕周，致位开府。
现代文：梁士彦等起初还不认罪。
English: Liang Shihang and others initially pleaded not guilty.

古文：开皇末，以行军总管从杨素北征突厥，进位大将军。汉王谅之反也，复以行军总管从杨素讨平之，加授柱国。
现代文：当时恰好薛摩儿被押到了，于是当廷对质。薛摩儿把谋反的经过全部讲了出来。并说： 他的二儿子梁刚流泪苦苦劝谏他不要谋反，三儿子叔谐却说： 作猛兽就要作兽中之王。  梁士彦听后，脸色骤变，回头对薛摩儿说： 是你杀了我啊！ 
English: At that time, it just so happened that Xue Mo'er was pushed to the spot, so he was confronted by the court. Xue Mo'er told the whole story of the conspiracy, and said: His second son, Liang Gang, shed tears and painstakingly advised him not to conspire, but his third son, Zhu Xi, said: To be a ferocious beast is to be the king of beasts. After hearing this, Liang Shiyan's face suddenly changed, and he turned back to Xue Mo'er and said: You killed me!

古文：大业五年，从炀帝征吐谷浑，遇贼力战而死，赠光禄大夫。
现代文：于是伏法被杀，终年七十二岁。
English: As a result, Fufa was killed, aged seventy-two.

古文：○宇文忻
现代文：○宇文忻
English: ○Uwenso

古文：宇文忻，字仲乐，本朔方人，徙京兆。
现代文：宇文忻，字仲乐，本是朔方人，迁居京兆。
English: Uwen Zang, also known as Zhong Le, was originally from Shuofang and moved to Beijing.

古文：祖莫豆于，魏安平公。
现代文：祖父莫豆于，是北周的安平公。
English: Mozuyu's grandfather was Anping Gong of Northern Zhou.

古文：父贵，周大司马、许国公。
现代文：父亲宇文贵，是北周的大司马、许国公。
English: His father, Wu Wengui, was the grand steed of the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the prince of Xu Province.

古文：忻幼而敏慧，为兒童时，与群辈游戏，辄为部伍，进止行列，无不用命，有识者见而异之。
现代文：宇文忻年幼时很聪明，儿童与小孩们玩耍时，就作打仗的游戏，前进、停止、排队，无不服从他的命令。有认识他的人，见了游戏，感到很惊奇。
English: When he was young, Uwenwen was very clever. When children played with other children, they would play war games. They would advance, stop, and line up without disobeying his orders. Some people who knew him were surprised when they saw the games.

古文：年十二，能左右驰射，骁捷若飞。
现代文：十二岁时，能骑马奔驰，左右射箭，骁勇敏捷，奔驰如飞。
English: At the age of twelve, he was able to ride on a horse and shoot arrows to the left and right. He was so brave and swift that he could fly.

古文：恆谓所亲曰： 自古名将，唯以韩、白、卫、霍为美谈，吾察其行事，未足多尚。
现代文：他常对所亲近的人说： 自古名将，只有韩信、白起、卫青、霍去病成为美谈，但我考察他们的行事，不足以崇尚。
English: He often said to those close to him: Since ancient times, only Han Xin, Baiqi, Wei Qing and Huo Dexia have become famous, but I look at their actions and it is not enough to worship them.

古文：若使与仆并时，不令竖子独擅高名也。 
现代文：假如他们与我同时，我不会让这些小子独擅高名。 
English: If they were my age, I wouldn't let these guys get away with it.

古文：其少小慷慨如此。
现代文：他年青时就是如此慷慨。
English: He was so generous when he was young.

古文：年十八，从周齐王宪讨突厥有功，拜仪同三司，赐爵兴固县公。
现代文：十八岁，他随北周齐王宇文宪讨伐突厥有功，拜授仪同三司，赐给兴固县公的爵位。
English: At the age of eighteen, he followed the Northern Zhou Qi Wang Yuwen constitutional crusade against the Turks, and was awarded the title of Xinggu County.

古文：韦孝宽之镇玉壁也，以忻骁勇，请与同行。
现代文：韦孝宽镇守玉壁时，因宇文忻骁勇善战，请求与他同行。
English: When Wei Xiaokang was guarding the Jade Wall, he asked Yu Wenxuan to accompany him because of Yu Wenxuan's bravery in battle.

古文：屡有战功，加位开府、骠骑将军，进爵化政郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：他屡有战功，升任开府、骠骑将军，增加爵位到化政郡公，食邑二千户。
English: He repeatedly distinguished himself in the war, was promoted to the post of Kaifu (governor-general) and Shunkei (general of cavalry), and his title was increased to Kasei-gun-ko (governor of Kasei-gun), and he served more than 2,000 households.

古文：从武帝伐齐，攻拔晋州。
现代文：跟随周武帝讨伐北齐，攻拔晋州。
English: He followed Zhou Wudi in the campaign against Northern Qi and invaded Jinzhou.

古文：齐后主亲驭六军，兵势甚盛，帝惮之，欲旋师。
现代文：北齐后主亲自统帅六军，气势很大，周武帝很害怕，想撤军。
English: After the Northern Qi, the lord personally commanded the Six Armies, with great momentum. Emperor Zhou Wu was very afraid and wanted to withdraw.

古文：忻谏曰： 以陛下之圣武，乘敌人之荒纵，何往不克！
现代文：宇文忻劝告说： 凭着陛下的圣明英武，乘着敌军的骄纵，哪里不能攻克？
English: Uwen Zang advised: With your majesty's wisdom and bravery, and with the enemy's arrogance, where can't you conquer?

古文：若使齐人更得令主，君臣协力，虽汤、武之势，未易平也。
现代文：假如齐人另外得到好主子，君臣协力，即使是商汤、周武那样的势力，也不易平定他们了。
English: If the Qi people were to get a good master and the cooperation of the princes and ministers, even if they had the power of Shang Tang and Zhou Wu, it would not be easy to subdue them.

古文：今主暗臣愚，兵无斗志，虽有百万之众，实为陛下奉耳。 
现代文：现在齐国主上昏暗，臣下愚笨，兵无斗志，即使有百万之众，实际上只是送给陛下罢了。 
English: Now that Qi's sovereign is dim-witted, his vassals are stupid, and his soldiers have no fighting spirit, even if there are millions of people, it is actually just a gift to His Majesty.

古文：帝从之，战遂大克。
现代文：周武帝听从他的计谋，与敌交战，于是大获全胜。
English: Zhou Wudi followed his advice and fought with the enemy, and won a great victory.

古文：及帝攻陷并州，先胜后败，帝为贼所窘，左右皆歼，帝挺身而遁，诸将多劝帝还。
现代文：等到周武帝攻陷并州时，先胜后败，武帝被齐军围逼，近臣们都被杀死了，武帝独自一人逃走，诸将大多劝武帝撤军。
English: By the time Emperor Zhou Wudi conquered and annexed the state, he had experienced both victory and defeat. Emperor Wudi was besieged by the Qi army, his close vassals were all killed, Emperor Wudi fled alone, and most of the generals advised Emperor Wudi to withdraw.

古文：忻勃然而进曰： 自陛下克晋州，破高纬，乘胜逐北，以至于此。
现代文：宇文忻勃然大怒，进言武帝说： 自从陛下攻克晋州，打败高纬，乘胜进军，追击逃亡之敌，这才到这一步。
English: Yu Wenzhong flew into a rage, and said to Emperor Wu: "Since Your Majesty conquered Jinzhou, defeated Gaowei, marched into the army with victory, and pursued the fleeing enemy, this is only the first step.

古文：致令伪主奔波，关东响振，自古行兵用师，未有若斯之盛也。
现代文：致使伪主齐后主到处奔波，关东响应振动，自古以来用兵打仗，没有像这次这样影响重大的。
English: As a result, the pseudo-master and his followers rushed everywhere, and Kanto responded to the vibration. Since ancient times, soldiers have been used to fight wars, and there has never been such a significant impact as this time.

古文：昨日破城，将士轻敌，微有不利，何足为怀。
现代文：昨日破城时，将士轻敌，只有一点小小的不利，何必挂在心上？
English: When we broke through the city yesterday, our soldiers treated the enemy with contempt. We only had a small disadvantage, so why should we care?

古文：丈夫当死中求生，败中取胜。
现代文：男子汉大丈夫，应该死里求生，败中求胜。
English: A good man should survive death and win in defeat.

古文：今者破竹，其势已成，奈何弃之而去？ 
现代文：现在破竹之势已成，为什么弃敌而去？ 
English: Now that the impossible has been accomplished, why abandon the enemy?

古文：帝纳其言，明日复战，遂拔晋阳。
现代文：武帝接受他的意见，次日复战，于是攻拔晋阳。
English: Emperor Wu accepted his opinion, resumed the war the next day, and then attacked Jinyang.

古文：及齐平，进位大将军，赐物千段。
现代文：等到平定北齐，他升任大将军，赏赐布帛上千段。
English: After the pacification of North Qi, he was promoted to the rank of general and was awarded a thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：寻与乌丸轨破陈将吴明彻于吕梁，进位柱国，赐奴婢二百口，除豫州总管。
现代文：不久与乌丸轨在吕梁击破陈国将领吴明彻，他升任柱国，赏赐奴婢二百口，升任豫州总管。
English: Soon after, he defeated Wu Mingche, the general of Chen, with the Wu Maru Rail in Luliang. He was promoted to the pillar state, awarded two hundred slaves, and promoted to the general manager of Yuzhou.

古文：高祖龙潜时，与忻情好甚协，及为丞相，恩顾弥隆。
现代文：隋高祖在北周为官时，与宇文忻感情很好，为丞相后，对宇文忻照顾更多。
English: When Sui Gaozu was an official in Northern Zhou, he had a good relationship with Uwen Hui. After he became the prime minister, he took more care of Uwen Hui.

古文：尉迥作乱，以忻为行军总管，从韦孝宽击之。
现代文：尉迟迥作乱造反，高祖任宇文忻为行军总管，跟随韦孝宽杀敌。
English: Gao Zu appointed Wu Wenyi as the commander-in-chief of the march, and followed Wei Xiaokang to kill the enemy.

古文：时兵屯河阳，诸军莫敢先进。
现代文：当时官军屯驻河阳，诸军没有敢先前进的。
English: At that time, the government troops were stationed in Hayao, and the troops did not dare to advance first.

古文：帝令高颎驰驿监军，与颎密谋进取者，唯忻而已。
现代文：高祖令高赹前来监军，与高赹密谋进军的，只有宇文忻而已。
English: Gao Zu ordered Gao Yao to supervise the army, and only Uwen Yao conspired with Gao Yao to march into the army.

古文：迥遣子惇，盛兵武陟，忻先锋击走之。
现代文：尉迟迥派其儿子尉，重兵把守武陟，宇文忻为先锋，打跑了尉迟。
English: Ye Xizhi sent his son, Ye, with heavy troops to guard Wuyuan, and Uwen Ye as the vanguard. Ye Xizhi ran away.

古文：进临相州，迥遣精甲三千伏于野马冈，欲邀官军。
现代文：进而逼近相州，尉迟迥派精甲三千埋伏于野马冈，想伏击官军。
English: Then, approaching Sangju, Ip Chi Kung sent 3,000 armored soldiers to ambush Mustang Hill, hoping to ambush the government army.

古文：忻以五百骑袭之，斩获略尽。
现代文：宇文忻派五百骑兵袭击他们，差不多把他们杀死、俘虏光了。
English: Uwen Yao sent five hundred cavalry to attack them, and almost killed and captured all of them.

古文：进至草桥，迥又拒守，忻率奇兵击破之，直趋鄴下。
现代文：进军到草桥，尉迟迥又拒守，宇文忻率奇兵击破他们，一直追赶到邺下。
English: They marched to Caoqiao, but the soldiers delayed and refused to defend themselves. The extraordinary soldiers led by Uwen Yao defeated them and chased them all the way to Xiamen.

古文：迥背城结阵，与官军大战，官军不利。
现代文：尉迟迥背靠邺城布阵，与官军大战，官军不利。
English: After a long delay, the officers set up a line of battle with their backs to the city of Handan. In the big battle with the government army, the government army was at a disadvantage.

古文：时鄴城士女观战者数万人，忻与高颎、李询等谋曰： 事急矣，当以权道破之。 
现代文：当时邺城士兵观战的有几万人。宇文忻与高赹、李询谋划说： 事情紧急，当用权宜之计破敌。 
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of soldiers in Lucheng watching the battle. Uwen Zang, together with Gao Zang and Li Zhan, planned and said: "The matter is urgent, and we should use expedient measures to defeat the enemy."

古文：于是击所观者，大嚣而走，转相腾藉，声如雷霆。
现代文：于是攻击那些观战的人，他们叫嚷着逃走，转而互相践踏，叫声如雷。
English: They then attacked the onlookers, who ran away screaming, before trampling each other and shouting.

古文：忻乃传呼曰： 贼败矣！ 
现代文：宇文忻于是呼叫说： 贼人败走了啊！ 
English: Uwen Zang then shouted loudly: The traitors have failed!

古文：众军复振，齐力急击之，迥军大败。
现代文：众将士振作起来，齐力拼命攻击，尉迟迥大败。
English: The generals cheered up and made a concerted effort to attack desperately, but were defeated.

古文：及平鄴城，以功加上柱国，赐奴婢二百口，牛马羊万计。
现代文：等到平定邺城以后，因功劳大他被封为上柱国，赏给他奴婢二百口，牛马羊数以万计。
English: After the siege of Lucheng was pacified, he was awarded the title of Shangzhuo for his great service. He was given 200 slaves and tens of thousands of cattle, horses and sheep.

古文：高祖顾谓忻曰： 尉迥倾山东之众，运百万之师，公举无遗策，战无全阵，诚天下之英杰也。 
现代文：隋高祖回头对宇文忻说： 尉迟迥倾山东之众，运百万之师，您用计没有遗漏之策，作战没有全敌之阵，实在是天下的英雄豪杰啦！ 
English: Sui Gaozu looked back and said to Yu Wenyi, "You are the leader of the Shandong people, the leader of millions of people, you have not missed any strategy, there is no all-out battle, you are truly a hero of the world!

古文：进封英国公，增邑三千户。
现代文：他被晋封为英国公，增加食邑三千户。
English: He was made a Knight of the Realm, adding 3,000 households.

古文：自是以后，每参帷幄，出入卧内，禅代之际，忻有力焉。
现代文：从此以后，每每参加谋划，出入于高祖卧室之中，周隋禅代之际，宇文忻大有功劳。
English: Since then, every time he took part in the planning and went in and out of Gao Zu's bedroom, on the occasion of the Zhou-Sui Zen Dynasty, Uwen Zang was greatly meritorious.

古文：后拜右领军大将军，恩顾弥重。
现代文：后来他被拜授为右领大将军，恩宠更重。
English: Later, he was given the title of General of the Right Division, which was an even greater honor.

古文：忻妙解兵法，驭戎齐整，当时六军有一善事，虽非忻所建，在下辄相谓曰： 此必英公法也。 
现代文：宇文忻精通兵法，治军严整，当时六军中只要有一个好办法，即使不是宇文忻所提出来的，部下也会说： 这一定是英公的办法。 
English: At that time, as long as there was a good method among the six armies, even if it was not proposed by Uwen Hui, his subordinates would say: This must be the method of Yinggong.

古文：其见推服如此。
现代文：他就是这样被人推重佩服。
English: This is how he is admired by his subordinates.

古文：后改封巳国公。
现代文：后来改封为杞国公。
English: Later, his title was changed to the Duke of Shikoku.

古文：上尝欲令忻率兵击突厥，高颎言于上曰： 忻有异志，不可委以大兵。 
现代文：皇上曾想让他率兵攻打突厥，高赹对皇上说： 宇文忻有异志，不可委以重兵。 
English: The emperor once wanted him to lead an army to attack the Turks, and Gao Wei said to the emperor: "Uwen Hui has a different vision and cannot be entrusted with heavy troops."

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：忻既佐命功臣，频经将领，有威名于当世。
现代文：宇文忻既是佐命功臣，常任将领，有威名于当代。
English: Uwenshun was not only a hero of the Satsuma era, but also a permanent general with a prestigious reputation in the contemporary world.

古文：上由是微忌焉，以谴去官。
现代文：皇上因此略略有些戒惧之心，因此找了个由头让他丢了官。
English: As a result, the emperor was a little wary, so he found a way to make him lose his post.

古文：忻与梁士彦昵狎，数相往来，士彦时亦怨望，阴图不轨。
现代文：宇文忻与梁士彦亲昵，数相往来，梁士彦当时也有些怨恨，图谋不轨。
English: Uwen Zang was close to Liang Shih-yan and they had a number of contacts. Liang Shih-yan also held some grudges at the time and plotted against him.

古文：忻谓士彦曰： 帝王岂有常乎？
现代文：宇文忻对梁士彦说： 帝王难道有一定吗？
English: Uwen Zang said to him: Can the emperor always be done by one person?

古文：相扶即是。
现代文：有人扶持他，就是帝王了。
English: If someone supports him, he is an emperor.

古文：公于蒲州起事，我必从征。
现代文：您在蒲州造反，我肯定征讨。
English: If you rebel in Puzhou, I'll definitely go after you.

古文：两阵相当，然后连结，天下可图也。 
现代文：两阵相对，然后相连，天下可以谋取了。 
English: Two opposing forces, and then connected, the world can seek and win.

古文：谋泄伏诛，年六十四，家口籍没。
现代文：计谋外泄被杀，当时六十四岁。家人都被籍没为奴。
English: He was 64 years old when he was killed for exposing the plot. His entire family was enslaved.

古文：忻兄善，弘厚有武艺。
现代文：宇文忻兄宇文善，忠厚而有武艺。
English: Uwensen's brother, Uwensen, is loyal and skilled in martial arts.

古文：仕周，官至上柱国、许国公。
现代文：仕北周，做官到上柱国、许国公。
English: He served in the Northern Zhou, and became an official in Shangzhu and Xu provinces.

古文：高祖受禅，遇之甚厚，拜其子颖为上仪同。
现代文：隋高祖受北周禅让后，对他很好，封他的儿子宇文颖为上仪同。
English: Sui Gao Zu was very kind to him after he accepted the offer of Northern Zhou Zen, and made his son, Wu Wenying, a member of the imperial court.

古文：及忻诛，并废于家。
现代文：等到宇文忻被杀，宇文善家父子都被废为庶民。
English: By the time Uwen Zang was killed, both Uwen Zengjia and his son had become commoners.

古文：善未几卒。
现代文：宇文善不久死去。
English: Umonzon died soon after.

古文：颖至大业中为司农少卿。
现代文：宇文颖到大业中，任司农少卿。
English: In the middle of his career, Yu Wenying was appointed to the post of Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：及李密逼东都，叛归于密。
现代文：等到李密逼近东都洛阳时，他背叛隋朝，投奔李密。
English: When Li Mi approached the eastern capital Luoyang, he betrayed the Sui Dynasty and joined Li Mi.

古文：忻弟恺，别有传。
现代文：宇文忻弟宇文恺，另有传。
English: He was the younger brother of Uwenshun Uwenshun, according to another legend.

古文：○王谊
现代文：○王谊
English: ○ Royal friendship

古文：王谊，字宜君，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：王谊字宜君，河南洛阳人。
English: Wang Yiyi is a native of Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：父显，周凤州刺史。
现代文：父亲王显，北周凤州刺史。
English: His father, Wang Xian, was a historian of Northern Zhou and Fengzhou.

古文：谊少慷慨，有大志，便弓马，博览群言。
现代文：王谊年青时，慷慨有大志，善习弓马，博览群书。
English: When Wang Yi was young, he was generous and ambitious, good at archery and horsemanship, and read a lot of books.

古文：周闵帝时，为左中侍上士。
现代文：周闵帝时，他任左中侍上士。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhou Enlai, he held the position of Zuozhongzi Shosifu.

古文：时大冢宰宇文护执政，势倾王室，帝拱默无所关预。
现代文：那时大冢宰宇文护执政，势倾王室，闵帝拱手沉默而已，什么都不能管。
English: At that time, Dajie Yufenguo was in power, the royal family was powerful, and the emperor was silent, and he could not control anything.

古文：有朝士于帝侧微为不恭，谊勃然而进，将击之。其人惶惧请罪，乃止。
现代文：有朝士在闵帝身边，对皇上略有不恭，王谊勃然大怒，上前要杀他，这个人连忙请罪，王谊才罢。
English: There was a courtier at the emperor's side, who was a little disrespectful to the emperor. Wang Yi was furious and wanted to kill him. This man quickly pleaded guilty. Wang Yi was the only one.

古文：自是朝士无敢不肃。
现代文：从此以后，朝士没有谁敢对闵帝不恭谨的。
English: From then on, no Asashi dared to be disrespectful to Emperor Shun.

古文：岁余，迁御正大夫。
现代文：一年多以后，升任御正大夫。
English: More than a year later, he was promoted to the post of Imperial Chief Physician.

古文：丁父艰，毁瘁过礼，庐于墓侧，负士成坟。
现代文：遭父丧，哀毁过礼，在父亲坟墓边搭草房，自己背土成坟。
English: He mourned his father's death, mourned and mourned, built a hayloft next to his father's grave, and dug his own grave.

古文：岁余，起拜雍州别驾，固让，不许。
现代文：过了一年多，拜授雍州别驾，他坚辞不受，但闵帝不准他不当官。
English: After more than a year, he was awarded the title of Yongzhou Beidou. He was adamant that he would not accept it, but Emperor Qian did not allow him to become an official.

古文：武帝即位，授仪同，累迁内史大夫，封杨国公。
现代文：周武帝即位后，授他仪同之职，逐步升迁为内史大夫，封为杨国公。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wu ascended to the throne, he was given the same position as Yi, and was gradually promoted to the position of doctor of internal history, and was named Yang Guogong.

古文：从帝伐齐，至并州，帝既入城，反为齐人所败，左右多死。
现代文：跟随武帝讨伐北齐，来到并州，武帝入城，反被齐人打败，近臣大多战死。
English: He followed Emperor Wu to fight against the Northern Qi and came to Anhui Province. Emperor Wu entered the city, but was defeated by the Qi people. Most of his close vassals died in the battle.

古文：谊率麾下骁雄赴之，帝赖以全济。
现代文：王谊率领麾下骁勇善战者赴难，武帝得以保全。
English: Wang Yi led his subordinates, who were brave and good fighters, to the disaster, and Emperor Wu Rong was saved.

古文：时帝以六军挫衄，将班师。谊固谏，帝从之。
现代文：当时武帝因为六军受挫，将要班师回朝，王谊努力劝阻，武帝听从了他的计谋。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was frustrated with the Six Armies and wanted to return the division to the imperial court. Wang Yi tried to dissuade him, and Emperor Wu followed his advice.

古文：及齐平，授相州刺史。
现代文：等到平定北齐后，授他为相州刺史。
English: After he had pacified Northern Qi, he was awarded the title of "Sangzhou Sashimi Historian."

古文：未几，复征为大内史。
现代文：不久，又征他为大内史。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the post of Dainai historian.

古文：汾州稽胡为乱，谊率兵击之。
现代文：汾州的稽胡造反，王谊率兵打击他。
English: Wang Yi led an army to fight against the rebellion of Ji Hu in Zhangzhou.

古文：帝弟越王盛、谯王俭虽为总管，并受谊节度。
现代文：武帝弟越王宇文盛、谯王宇文俭虽任总管，但都受王谊节制。
English: Although Emperor Wu's younger brothers, Yue Wang Yu Wensheng and Zou Wang Yu Wensheng, were the chief administrators, they were all under Wang Yi's command.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他就是这样被看重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：及平贼而还，赐物五千段，封一子开国公。
现代文：等到平定反贼回京，赏赐布匹五千段，封一个儿子作开国公。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he was rewarded with five thousand pieces of cloth and one of his sons was made the founding father.

古文：帝临崩，谓皇太子曰： 王谊社稷臣，宜处以机密，不须远任也。 
现代文：武帝快崩驾时，对皇太子说： 王谊是国家大臣，应把他放在机密位置，不必让他到远处为官。 
English: When Emperor Wu was on the verge of death, he said to the crown prince: Wang Yi is the minister of state, he should be placed in a confidential position, there is no need for him to go far away to be an official.

古文：皇太子即位，是为宣帝。
现代文：皇太子即位，这就是周宣帝。
English: The crown prince's accession to the throne, this is Zhou Xuandi's return.

古文：惮谊刚正，出为襄州总管。
现代文：他怕王谊刚正，让他当了襄州总管。
English: He was afraid of Wang Yi Gangzheng, so he made him the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：及高祖为丞相，转为郑州总管。
现代文：等到隋高祖任丞相，他转任郑州总管。
English: When Sui Gaozu was appointed chancellor, he was transferred to the post of the governor of Zhengzhou.

古文：司马消难举兵反，高祖以谊为行军元帅，率四总管讨之。
现代文：司马消难举兵造反，高祖任王谊为行军元帅，率领四个总管讨伐他。
English: Sima Qishan raised an army to rebel, Gao Zu appointed Wang Yi as a marching marshal, and led four chief officers to fight him.

古文：军次近郊，消难惧而奔陈。
现代文：官军到近郊，司马消难害怕而逃奔陈国。
English: When the government army arrived in the suburbs, Sima was afraid and fled to Chen Province.

古文：于时北至商洛，南拒江淮，东西二千余里，巴蛮多叛，共推渠帅兰雒州为主。
现代文：于是，北至商、洛，南到江、淮，东西两千多里，巴蛮大多背叛，一起推渠帅兰雒州为主。
English: As a result, from the north to Shang and Luo, and from the south to Jiang and Huai, more than two thousand miles from east to west, most of the barbarians betrayed and pushed the Shuai-Lancang-Changzhou together.

古文：雒州自号河南王，以附消难，北连尉迥。
现代文：雒州自称为河南王，以归附司马消难，北面连接尉迟迥。
English: Zhangzhou claimed to be the king of Henan Province, with the aim of annexing Sima and eliminating difficulties, and connecting the north with the south.

古文：谊率行军总管李威、冯晖、李远等分讨之，旬月皆平。
现代文：王谊率领行军总管李威、冯晖、李远等分路讨伐，上十个月全部讨平。
English: Wang Yi led the marchers, including the general managers Li Wei, Feng Wei, and Li Yuan, in a separate road crusade, and in the last ten months, all of them were leveled.

古文：高祖以谊前代旧臣，甚加礼敬，遣使劳问，冠盖不绝。
现代文：高祖因王谊是前代旧臣，对他非常尊敬，派人慰问他，路上车盖络绎不绝。
English: Gao Zu was a former vassal due to his friendship with the king. He was highly respected, and people were sent to console him. There was a constant stream of wagons on the road.

古文：以第五女妻其子奉孝，寻拜大司徒。
现代文：让自己的第五个女儿嫁给他的儿子王奉孝，不久拜他为大司徒。
English: Let his fifth daughter marry his son, Wang Fengxiao, and soon worshiped him as the eldest disciple.

古文：谊自以与高祖有旧，亦归心焉。
现代文：王谊也因与高祖有旧交，也归心于高祖。
English: Wang Rong also has an old friendship with Gao Zu, and also confides in Gao Zu.

古文：及上受禅，顾遇弥厚，上亲幸其第，与之极欢。
现代文：等到高祖受北周禅让，对他更加礼遇，高祖亲自来到他的府第，与他极尽欢乐。
English: When Gaozu received more courtesy from Bei Zhou Zen, Gaozu came to his capital in person and had a lot of fun with him.

古文：太常卿苏威立议，以为户口滋多，民田不赡，欲减功臣之地以给民。
现代文：太常卿苏威提议，认为户口增多，田地太少，想减少功臣的封地以给百姓。
English: Tai Changqing Su Wei proposed that the number of hukou should be increased, as there were too few fields, and he wanted to reduce the fiefs of meritorious vassals and give them to the people.

古文：谊奏曰： 百官者，历世勋贤，方蒙爵土，一旦削之，未见其可。
现代文：王谊上奏道： 文武百官，都是历代的功勋贤人，这才被赏赐爵土。一旦削了他们的爵土，未见其可行之处。
English: Wang Yuisao reported: The hundreds of officials of the imperial court are all meritorious and wise men of several generations. The land was only given to them by the imperial court. Once it is taken away, I don't see any benefit.

古文：如臣所虑，正恐朝臣功德不建，何患人田有不足？ 
现代文：我担心的是，朝中大臣的功德不能得到表彰，何必担心人民田地不足？ 
English: What I am worried about is that the merits of the ministers of the DPRK and China cannot be commended, so why worry about the shortage of people's fields?

古文：上然之，竟寝威议。
现代文：皇上以为然，未采纳苏威的建议。
English: The emperor thought otherwise and did not accept Su Wei's suggestion.

古文：开皇初，上将幸岐州。谊谏曰： 陛下初临万国，人情未洽，何用此行？ 
现代文：开皇初，皇上将巡幸岐州，王谊劝告说： 陛下刚刚君临万国，民情还未融洽，为什么要有此行？ 
English: At the beginning of the reign of the emperor, the emperor will make a tour of Qizhou, and Wang Xi advised: His Majesty has just reigned over the world, the people's conditions are not yet harmonious, why do you have this trip?

古文：上戏之曰： 吾昔与公位望齐等，一朝屈节为臣，或当耻愧。
现代文：皇上开玩笑说： 我过去与你地位、声望相同，你一朝屈节为臣，或许以此为羞耻。
English: The emperor joked, "I used to have the same status and reputation as you, but once you became a vassal, perhaps you were ashamed of it.

古文：是行也，震扬威武，欲以服公心耳。 
现代文：这次巡幸，是想扬扬威武，想以此让你心里服气罢了。 
English: The purpose of this inspection tour is to show off their military prowess in order to convince you.

古文：谊笑而退。
现代文：王谊笑笑退下。
English: Wang Yi laughs and listens, then retreats.

古文：寻奉使突厥，上嘉其称旨，进封郢国公。
现代文：不久奉命出使突厥，皇上夸奖他称职，封他为郢国公。
English: Soon he was ordered to send an envoy to Turkey. The emperor praised him for his competence and made him the prince of his country.

古文：未几，其子奉孝卒。
现代文：不久，他儿子王奉孝去世。
English: Soon after, his son Wang Fengxiao passed away.

古文：逾年，谊上表，言公主少，请除服。
现代文：过了一年，王谊上表说，公主年少，请除丧服。
English: After a year, Wang Yi said on the table that the princess was young, please remove the mourning clothes.

古文：御史大夫杨素劾谊曰： 臣闻丧服有五，亲疏异节，丧制有四，降杀殊文。
现代文：御史大夫杨素弹劾王谊说： 我听说丧服有五，亲疏不同；丧制有四，降杀也很不同。
English: Wang Yi was impeached by the chief historian Yang Su, who said: I have heard that there are five kinds of mourning clothes, which are different from each other; there are four kinds of mourning system, and the death penalty is also different.

古文：王者之所常行，故曰不易之道也。
现代文：这是君王所常推行的办法，所以说是不能变易的公道。
English: The sons of heaven should also observe it, so it is said to be an unchangeable etiquette.

古文：是以贤者不得逾，不肖者不得不及。
现代文：因此，贤人不能超过，不肖的也不能不及。
English: Therefore, a wise man cannot exceed it, and a handsome man cannot fall short of it.

古文：而仪同王奉孝既尚兰陵公主，奉孝以去年五月身丧，始经一周，而谊便请除释。
现代文：而仪同王奉孝，既与兰陵公主婚配，奉孝在去年五月去世，刚刚一年，但王谊便请求除丧。
English: However, Wang Fengxiao, who was married to Princess Lanling, died in May last year, just one year ago, but Wang Yi requested that the funeral be cancelled.

古文：窃以虽曰王姬，终成下嫁之礼，公则主之，犹在移天之义。
现代文：我私下以为，公主虽是王姬，但终因成了下嫁之礼， 公 道则 主 之，就好比是天经地义。
English: Privately, I thought that even though the princess was a princess, it was only natural that she would eventually become a commoner, and justice would prevail.

古文：况复三年之丧，自上达下，及期释服，在礼未详。然夫妇则人伦攸始，丧纪则人道至大，苟不重之，取笑君子。
现代文：何况三年的服丧期，从上到下，到时就除丧服，在礼仪虽未详细记载，但夫妻是人伦之始，丧失配偶是人道中最大的事，如不重视，就会取笑于君子。
English: Not to mention the three-year mourning period, from top to bottom, at which time the mourning clothes are removed. Although the etiquette is not recorded in detail, husband and wife are the beginning of human relations. The loss of a spouse is the greatest thing in humanity. If you do not pay attention, you will make fun of a gentleman.

古文：故钻燧改火，责以居丧之速；朝祥暮歌，讥以忘哀之早。
现代文：所以钻燧改火，责备他居丧太短；早上遭丧，晚上就唱歌，嘲笑他忘哀太早。
English: Therefore, asking mourners to drill wood to make fire is to criticize their short time of mourning; morning mourning and evening singing is ironic to forget mourning and grief too early.

古文：然谊虽不自强，爵位已重，欲为无礼，其可得乎？
现代文：虽然王谊不是要自己无礼，而且他爵位又很高，他想做无礼之事，怎么行呢？
English: Although the king's friendship is not self-respecting, but the peerage is very high, how can it be done if you want to promote things that are improper?

古文：乃薄俗伤教，为父则不慈；轻礼易丧，致妇于无义。
现代文：他鄙薄风俗有伤教化，为父则不慈；轻视礼教和丧礼，把媳妇搞到无义的地步。
English: He trivialized customs, damaged etiquette, and, as the father of the deceased, was not merciful; he despised etiquette, changed the mourning system, and caused his daughter-in-law to fall into injustice.

古文：若纵而不正，恐伤风俗，请付法推科。 
现代文：如若放纵他而不加纠正，恐怕有伤风俗，请将他交有关部门治罪。 
English: If you indulge him without correcting him, I'm afraid you'll offend customs. Please turn him over to the relevant authorities for prosecution.

古文：有诏勿治，然恩礼稍薄。
现代文：有诏书说不治他的罪，但皇上对他的恩宠和礼遇稍稍差一点了。
English: There was an imperial edict saying that he would not be punished for his crime, but the emperor's grace and courtesy to him was a little less than perfect.

古文：谊颇怨望。
现代文：王谊颇有些怨恨。
English: There is quite a bit of resentment towards Wangfei.

古文：或告谊谋反，上令案其事。
现代文：有人告王谊谋反，皇上下令查验其事。
English: Someone accused Wang Yi of plotting a rebellion, and the emperor ordered to investigate the matter.

古文：主者奏谊有不逊之言，实无反状。
现代文：主持调查的上奏说，他只说了些不该说的话，实在没有造反的证据。
English: The person who reported him said that he had spoken disrespectfully of the imperial court, but that he had not actually taken any actions to rebel.

古文：上赐酒而释之。
现代文：皇上赏他酒喝，然后放了他。
English: The emperor rewarded him with a drink and then released him.

古文：于时上柱国元谐亦颇失意，谊数与相往来，言论丑恶。
现代文：这时上柱国元谐也很失意，王谊多次与他来往，言论不恭。
English: At this time, Guo Yuanhong, the upper pillar, was also very disappointed. Wang Yi had been in contact with him many times, and his speech was disrespectful.

古文：胡僧告之，公卿奏谊大逆不道，罪当死。
现代文：胡僧告了他。公卿大臣们上奏说王谊大逆不道，其罪该死。
English: The monks denounced him. The nobles and ministers made a report saying that the king's friendship was treasonous and his crime was worthy of death.

古文：上见谊，怆然曰： 朕与公旧为同学，甚相怜愍，将奈国法何？ 
现代文：皇上看见王谊，悲怆地说： 我与你过去是同学，很同情你，但拿国法怎么办呢？ 
English: The emperor saw Wang You and said sadly, "I used to be a classmate with you, and I sympathize with you, but what about the country's laws?

古文：于是下诏曰： 谊，有周之世，早豫人伦，朕共游庠序，遂相亲好。
现代文：于是下诏说： 王谊，在北周时代，很早就参予政治，我和他一起读书，两人关系很好。
English: Then he said: Wang Yi, in the era of Northern Zhou, participated in politics very early. I studied with him, and the two of us have a good relationship.

古文：然性怀险薄，巫觋盈门，鬼言怪语，称神道圣。
现代文：但他性格刻薄，巫道盈门，尽说怪话，装神弄鬼。
English: However, he has a mean personality, dabbles in witchcraft, says strange things, and pretends to be a ghost.

古文：朕受命之初，深存诫约，口云改悔，心实不悛。
现代文：我刚当皇帝时，曾告诫过他，他口里虽说改悔，心里实际上不肯改。
English: When I first became emperor, I warned him that although he said he had repented, his heart would not change.

古文：乃说四天正神道，谊应受命，书有谊谶，天有谊星，桃、鹿二川，岐州之下，岁在辰巳，兴帝王之业。
现代文：于是他说根据四天王神道，他王谊应受命当天子，还说书上有王谊当天子的灵谶，天上有他王谊的星象，他要在桃、鹿二川，在岐州之下，在辰巳年，兴帝王之业。
English: Then he said that according to the Four Heavenly Kings Shinto, his kingship should be ordered to the son of that day. He also said that the book has the coffin of the son of the king of that day, and the stars of his kingship are in the sky. He will carry out the emperor's career in Peach, Deer and Futagawa, under Qizhou, and in the year of the tiger.

古文：密令卜问，伺殿省之灾。
现代文：他还密令卜问，窥伺朝廷火灾。
English: He secretly ordered people to tell fortunes, spied on disasters in the imperial court, and sought opportunities to become emperor.

古文：又说其身是明王，信用左道，所在诖误，自言相表，当王不疑。
现代文：还说他就是明君。他信任旁门左道，说他一定会当帝王。这样的人，如果赦免他，或许以后会造反。
English: He also said that he was Ming Jun. He trusted everyone and said that he would definitely become emperor. If such a person pardoned him, he might rebel in the future.

古文：此而赦之，将或为乱，禁暴除恶，宜伏国刑。 上复令大理正赵绰谓谊曰： 时命如此，将若之何！ 
现代文：禁止暴乱，除掉险恶，他应服刑！ 皇上又令大理正赵绰对王谊说： 你的命如此，怎么办呢？ 
English: He should serve his sentence! The emperor also ordered Dali Zheng Zhao to say to Wang Yi: Your life is like this, what should you do?

古文：于是赐死于家，时年四十六。
现代文：于是赐他死在家中，死时四十六岁。
English: So he was allowed to die at home, at the age of 46.

古文：○元谐
现代文：○元谐
English: ○original harmony

古文：元谐，河南洛阳人也，家代贵盛。
现代文：元谐，河南洛阳人，世世代代富贵显赫。
English: Genghis, a native of Luoyang, Henan Province, was wealthy and prominent for generations.

古文：谐性豪侠，有气调。
现代文：元谐生性豪爽，有气节，有风度。
English: The original harmony has a splendid character, has a temperament, and has a demeanor.

古文：少与高祖同受业于国子，甚相友爱。
现代文：年少时与隋高祖一起在国子监读书，非常友爱。
English: When he was young, he and Sui Gaozu went to school together in Guozhiming. They were very friendly.

古文：后以军功，累迁大将军。
现代文：后因军功，升任大将军。
English: He was later promoted to the rank of general for his military service.

古文：及高祖为丞相，引致左右。
现代文：等到高祖任北周丞相，召他为近臣。
English: He waited until Gao Zu was appointed Minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty and called him a close vassal.

古文：谐白高祖曰： 公无党援，譬如水间一堵墙，大危矣。
现代文：元谐对高祖说： 你没朋友相帮，就像洪水里的一堵墙，太危险了！
English: Gundotra said to Gaozu, "If you don't have friends to help you, you're like a wall in a flood. It's too dangerous!"

古文：公其勉之。 
现代文：请您注意努力啊！ 
English: Please pay attention and work hard!

古文：尉迥作乱，遣兵寇小乡，令谐击破之。
现代文：尉迟迥作乱造反，派兵进犯小乡，高祖派元谐打败了他们。
English: Gaozhou sent troops to invade the small town, and Gaozhou's faction defeated them.

古文：及高祖受禅，上顾谐笑曰： 水间墙竟何如也？ 
现代文：等到高祖受北周禅让，皇上对元谐笑着说： 水里的墙到底怎么样？ 
English: When Gao Zu accepted Northern Zhou Zen's offer, the emperor said to Yuan with a wry smile: What is the wall in the water like?

古文：于是赐宴极欢。
现代文：于是赏赐酒宴，极尽欢乐。
English: And they made a great feast, and were very merry.

古文：进位上大将军，封乐安郡公，邑千户。
现代文：元谐升任上大将军，封乐安郡公，食邑千户。
English: Motonori was promoted to Shodai Shogun, given the title of Leian County Governor, and became the ruler of a thousand households in Shokui.

古文：奉诏参修律令。
现代文：奉诏参加修改律令。
English: He signed the edict to participate in the revision of the ritsuryo.

古文：时吐谷浑寇凉州，诏谐为行军元帅，率行军总管贺娄子干、郭竣、元浩等步骑数万击之。
现代文：当时吐谷浑进犯凉州，皇上下诏任元谐为行军元帅，率行军总管贺娄子干、郭竣、元浩等步兵、骑兵几万反击敌人。
English: At that time, Tuyuhun marched into Liangzhou, and the emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Yuan Rong as the marshal of the march. He led the head of the march, He Zhigang, Guo Jun, Yuan Hao, and tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to counterattack the enemy.

古文：上敕谐曰： 公受朝寄，总兵西下，本欲自宁疆境，保全黎庶，非是贪无用之地，害荒服之民。
现代文：皇上告谕元谐说： 您受朝廷委派，总领雄兵向西挺进，本欲自保边境，保全百姓，并非贪图他人疆土，祸害远方人民。
English: The emperor told Yuan Huan: You were appointed by the imperial court to lead the soldiers to advance to the west. Your original intention was to secure the border and protect the people, not to covet other people's territory and harm the people far away.

古文：王者之师，意在仁义。
现代文：王者的军队，旨在推行仁义。
English: The king's army aims to promote benevolence and righteousness.

古文：浑贼若至界首者，公宜晓示以德，临之以教，谁敢不服也！ 
现代文：吐谷浑贼人若到边界，您应晓以德义，给以教导，谁敢不顺服？ 
English: If a thief comes to the border, you should teach him virtue and righteousness. Who would dare to disobey?

古文：时贼将定城王钟利房率骑三千渡河，连结党项。
现代文：当时贼将定城王钟利房率骑兵三千渡过黄河，连结党项。
English: At that time, the thieves crossed the Yellow River with three thousand cavalry led by Dingcheng Wang Zhongli and linked the party.

古文：谐率兵出鄯州，趣青海，邀其归路。
现代文：元谐率兵出鄯州，赶到青海，切断了他的归路。
English: Yuan Harmony led his soldiers out of Bozhou and rushed to Qinghai, cutting off his way back.

古文：吐谷浑引兵拒谐，相遇于丰利山。
现代文：吐谷浑率兵抵抗元谐，相遇于丰利山。
English: Hun and his soldiers from Tugu resisted the Yuanharmony and met in the Fengli Mountains.

古文：贼铁骑二万，与谐大战，谐击走之。
现代文：贼人骑兵二万，与元谐大战，元谐打败了他们。
English: Twenty thousand Thieves and Cavalrymen went to war with the Yuan Dynasty, and the Yuan Dynasty defeated them.

古文：贼驻兵青海，遣其太子可博汗以劲骑五万来掩官军。谐逆击，败之，追奔三十余里，俘斩万计，虏大震骇。
现代文：贼人驻兵青海，派太子可博汗率骑兵五万掩袭官军，元谐迎头痛击，打败他们，并追击三十多里，斩杀、生擒数以万计，贼人十分惊恐。
English: The bandits stationed their troops in Qinghai and sent Prince Cobo Khan and his cavalry of fifty thousand to ambush the government troops. The Yuan Dynasty met them head-on, defeated them, and chased them for more than thirty miles, killing and capturing tens of thousands of them. The bandits were very frightened.

古文：于是移书谕以祸福，其名王十七人、公侯十三人各率其所部来降。
现代文：元谐于是派人送上书信，晓以利害，吐谷浑名王十七人、公侯十三人，各率所部来降。
English: Motoharu then sent someone to deliver a letter, and knowing the stakes, seventeen kings and thirteen dukes of Tukoku Hunmyo came down from all directions.

古文：上大悦，下诏曰： 褒善畴庸，有闻前载，谐识用明达，神情警悟，文规武略，誉流朝野。
现代文：皇上十分高兴，下诏书说： 褒奖才士贬抑庸人，有闻于前代。元谐有见识，很机敏，文韬武略，誉满朝野。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and the next imperial edict said: "It is best to praise the talented and disparage the mediocre, which was known in the previous generation. He was well-spoken, insightful, very astute, well-spoken and well-spoken, and was well-respected in the court and in the country."

古文：申威拓土，功成疆埸，深谋大节，实简朕心。
现代文：申张国威，开拓疆土，其深谋远虑和高尚气节，真是很符合我的心意。
English: Zhang Guowei's claim to expand the territory, his foresight and noble spirit, are really in line with my heart.

古文：加礼延代，宜隆赏典。可柱国，别封一子县公。 
现代文：应该予以礼遇，并赏及后人，现封元谐为柱国，另封一子为县公。 
English: They should be treated with courtesy, and their descendants should be rewarded. The current Emperor Yuan He is a pillar state, and his son is a prefectural governor.

古文：谐拜宁州刺史，颇有威惠。
现代文：元谐拜受宁州刺史，很有恩威。
English: It is a great honor to have been received by the history of Ningzhou.

古文：然刚愎，好排诋，不能取媚于左右。
现代文：但他刚愎自用，好排斥人，不能得到高祖近侍的欢心。
English: However, he is stubborn and self-serving, and is good at excluding people. He cannot win the favor of Gao Zu's close attendants.

古文：尝言于上曰： 臣一心事主，不曲取人意。 
现代文：他曾对皇上说： 我一心一意侍奉皇上，不讨他人欢心。 
English: He once said to the emperor: I serve the emperor with all my heart and soul, and do not please others.

古文：上曰： 宜终此言。 
现代文：皇上说： 应该始终坚持这么做。 
English: The emperor said, "This should always be done."

古文：后以公事免。
现代文：后因公事免职。
English: He was later relieved of his duties.

古文：时上柱国王谊有功于国，与谐俱无任用，每相往来。
现代文：当时上柱国王谊有功于国，与元谐一样，都被免职，二人每每互相往来。
English: At that time, Shangbai King Friendship was of great benefit to the country. Like Yuan Xie, they were both dismissed from their posts, and the two of them were constantly in contact with each other.

古文：胡僧告谐、谊谋反，上按其事，无逆状，上慰谕而释之。
现代文：胡僧告元谐、王谊谋反，皇上调查此事，并无谋反证据，皇上安慰并放了他。
English: The Emperor investigated the matter and found no evidence to the contrary. The Emperor consoled him and released him.

古文：未几，谊伏诛，谐渐被疏忌。
现代文：不久，王谊被杀，元谐渐渐被疏远猜忌。
English: Soon after, Wang Yi was killed, and Yuan Xian was gradually alienated and mistrusted.

古文：然以龙潜之旧，每预朝请，恩礼无亏。
现代文：但因元谐是高祖登基前的朋友，所以每每请他上朝，皇上对他的恩典和礼遇并无亏损。
English: However, since Genghis was a friend of Emperor Gaozhu before he ascended the throne, whenever he was invited to the imperial court, the emperor did not lose his grace and courtesy.

古文：及上大宴百僚，谐进曰： 陛下威德远被，臣请突厥可汗为候正，陈叔宝为令史。 
现代文：一次皇上大宴百官，元谐进言说： 陛下恩威远播，我请求让突厥可汗作侯正，让陈叔宝当令史。 
English: At a grand imperial banquet of a hundred officials, the emperor said in a harmonious manner: Your Majesty, your grace is spreading far and wide. I request that the Turkic khan be made the lord of the manor and that Chen Shubao be made history.

古文：上曰： 朕平陈国，以伐罪吊人，非欲夸诞取威天下。
现代文：皇上说： 我平定陈国，以讨伐罪人，安慰人民，并不是想耀武扬威于天下。
English: The emperor said, "I didn't want to show off my military prowess to the world when I pacified Chen Province, fought sinners, and consoled the people.

古文：公之所奏，殊非朕心。
现代文：你的奏请，很不符合我的本意。
English: What you have asked me to play is not at all to my liking.

古文：突厥不知山川，何能警候！
现代文：突厥人不知山川地理，怎能封侯！
English: The Turks don't know the geography of mountains and rivers, how can they have a feudal lord!

古文：叔宝昏醉，宁堪驱使！ 
现代文：陈叔宝昏然如醉，怎么能驱使他为国效力？ 
English: Chen Shubao was so drunk, how could they force him to serve the country?

古文：谐默然而退。
现代文：元谐默默而退。
English: The original harmony retreated without a word.

古文：后数岁，有人告谐与从父弟上开府滂、临泽侯田鸾、上仪同祁绪等谋反。
现代文：几年后，有人告元谐和他的从父弟上开府元滂、临泽侯田鸾、上仪同祁绪等人谋反。
English: A few years later, someone accused Yuan Huan of plotting a rebellion with his father and younger brothers, Shangkaifu Yuan Rong, Linze Hou Tian Rong, Shangyi Tong Rongxu and others.

古文：上令案其事。
现代文：皇上下令调查此事。
English: The emperor ordered an investigation into the matter.

古文：有司奏： 谐谋令祁绪勒党项兵，即断巴蜀。
现代文：有关部门上奏说： 元谐谋划让祁绪率党项兵，准备切断巴、蜀道路。
English: The relevant departments reported that: the original harmonious plan was to let Xiangxu lead the party soldiers and prepare to cut off the Ba and Shu roads.

古文：时广平王雄、左仆射高颎二人用事，谐欲谮去之，云： 左执法星动已四年矣，状一奏，高颎必死。 
现代文：当时广平王杨雄、左仆射高赹二人掌权，元谐想用谗言赶走他们。他说： 左执法星动已经四年了，一上奏章，高赹必死无疑。 
English: At that time, Yang Xiong, the king of Guangping, and Gao Yao, his left-hand man, were in power, and Yuan Xian wanted to drive them away with insults. He said: "It has been four years since the left-hand law enforcement movement, and Gao Yao will undoubtedly die as soon as he signs the document."

古文：又言： 太白犯月，光芒相照，主杀大臣，杨雄必当之。 
现代文：又说： 太白犯月，光芒相照，这征候主杀大臣，杨雄必当应征被杀。 
English: He also said: The moon is too white, and the light is too bright. This indicates that the prime minister is to be killed. Yang Xiong should be enlisted and killed.

古文：谐尝与滂同谒上，谐私谓滂曰： 我是主人，殿上者贼也。 
现代文：元谐曾与元滂一起拜见皇上，元谐私下对元滂说： 我是主人，殿上的那个人是贼。 
English: Motohide once visited the emperor together with Motohide, and Motohide privately said to Motohide: I am the master, that man in the palace is a thief.

古文：因令滂望气，滂曰： 彼云似蹲狗走鹿，不如我辈有福德云。  
现代文：让元滂望气，元滂说： 他的云气好像是蹲狗走鹿，不如我们的云气有福有德。  
English: So he asked Yuan Zheng to look at the king's qi. Yuan Zheng said: The cloud of qi above the emperor is like a crouching dog and a running deer, while the cloud of qi above us is a symbol of both merit and perfection.

古文：上大怒，谐、滂、鸾、绪并伏诛，籍没其家。
现代文：皇上大怒，元谐、元滂、元鸾、元绪一并被杀，并没收家财，令其家人为奴。
English: The emperor was enraged, and killed Motoharu, Motohiro, Motohiro, Motohiro, and Motohiro, confiscated the family's wealth, and enslaved his family.

古文：○王世积
现代文：○王世积
English: ○ Wang Shizhe

古文：王世积，阐熙新渼人也。
现代文：王世积，阐熙新渼人。
English: Wang Shizhe, the star of the new film.

古文：父雅，周使持节、开府仪同三司。
现代文：父亲王雅，北周国的使持节、开府仪同三司。
English: His father, Wang Ya, was in charge of the Northern Zhou Envoys' Day, the opening ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：世积容貌魁岸，腰带十围，风神爽拔，有杰人之表。
现代文：王世积容貌魁伟，腰带十围，神情清爽，风标过人，有英雄豪杰的仪表。
English: Wang Shizhe has a majestic appearance, a ten-circumference belt, a fresh look, an excellent weather vane, and the appearance of a hero.

古文：在周有军功，拜上仪同，封长子县公。
现代文：在北周，有军功，授为上仪同，封爵为长子县公。
English: In the north of Zhou, there is military merit, awarded to Shang Yi Tong, knighted for the eldest son of the county.

古文：高祖为丞相，尉迥作乱，从韦孝宽击之，每战有功，拜上大将军。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，尉迟迥造反，世积随韦孝宽讨伐尉迟迥，每次作战均有战功，授为上大将军。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he rebelled against Wei Xiaoguang. He followed Wei Xiaoguang to fight against Wei Xiaoguang. He was awarded the title of Senior General for his distinguished service in every battle.

古文：高祖受禅，进封宜阳郡公。
现代文：高祖受北周禅让后，晋封世积为宜阳郡公。
English: After Gao Zu was ceded by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was promoted to be the governor of Yiyang County.

古文：高颎美其才能，甚善之。
现代文：高赹赞赏他的才干，对他很好。
English: Gao Gan appreciated his talent and treated him well.

古文：尝密谓颎曰： 吾辈俱周之臣子，社稷沦灭，其若之何？ 
现代文：世积曾秘密对高赹说： 我们都是周朝的臣子，国家沦陷，我们怎么办？ 
English: Shizeki once said to Gao Yu in secret: We are all subjects of the Zhou Dynasty, the country has fallen, what should we do?

古文：颎深拒其言。
现代文：高赹深深地拒听这类话。
English: Gao Rong deeply refused to listen to such words.

古文：未几，授蕲州总管。
现代文：不久，世积授为蕲州总管。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the chief administrator of Zhangzhou.

古文：平陈之役，以舟师自蕲水趣九江，与陈将纪瑱战于蕲口，大破之。
现代文：在平定陈国的战争中，他率水军从蕲水奔赴九江，与陈国将领纪王真大战于蕲口，大破陈军。
English: In the war to pacify Chen Province, he led the navy from Surabaya to Jiujiang, and fought with the general of Chen Province, Ji Wangzhen, in Hekou, defeating the Chen army.

古文：既而晋王广已平丹阳，世积于是移书告谕，遣千金公权始璋略取新蔡。
现代文：继而晋王杨广已平定丹阳，王世积于是送信到各地，告谕陈将投降，并派千金公权始璋攻占新蔡。
English: Subsequently, the Jin king Yang Guang had already subdued Danyang, so Wang Shizhi sent a message to all parts of the country, announcing that Chen would surrender, and sent Qianjin Gongquan to begin the conquest of Xin Cai.

古文：陈江州司马黄偲弃城而遁，始璋入据其城。
现代文：陈国的江州司马黄亻思弃城逃走，权始璋入据其城。
English: Jiangzhou Sima Huangyao of Chen Guo abandoned the city and fled, and Quan Shihuang entered the city.

古文：世积继至，陈豫章太守徐璒、庐陵太守萧廉、浔阳太守陆仲容、巴山太守王诵、太原太守马颋、齐昌太守黄正始、安成太守任瓘等，及鄱阳、临川守将，并诣世积降。
现代文：王世积跟着来了。陈国的豫州太守徐王登、庐陵太守萧廉、浔阳太守陆仲容、巴山太守王诵、太原太守马廷页、齐昌太守黄正始、安成太守任馞等，以及鄱阳、临川的守将，都到王世积处投降。
English: Wang Shizhe followed. Xu Wangden, the governor of Yuzhou in the State of Chen, Xiao Lian, the governor of Fuling, Lu Zhongrong, the governor of Shenyang, Wang Xie, the governor of Bashan, Ma Tingzhe, the governor of Taiyuan, Huang Zhengxi, the governor of Qichang, Ren Zhe, the governor of Ancheng, and the governors of Shenyang and Linchuan all surrendered to Wang Shizhe.

古文：以功进位柱国、荆州总管，赐绢五千段，加之宝带，邑三千户。
现代文：世积因功升任柱国、荆州总管，赐绢帛五千段，外加宝带，食邑三千户。
English: For his merits, Shizeki was promoted to the post of pillar state and the general manager of Jingzhou. He was awarded five thousand dan, plus a treasure belt, and three thousand households in food villages.

古文：后数岁，桂州人李光仕作乱，世积以行军总管讨平之。
现代文：几年后，桂州人李光仕造反，王世积以行军总管身份，讨平了他们。
English: A few years later, Li Guang from Guizhou staged a rebellion, and Wang Shizhe, as the head of the march, defeated them.

古文：上遣都官员外郎辛凯卿驰劳之。
现代文：皇上派都官员外郎辛凯卿去慰劳他。
English: The emperor sent his son-in-law, Lord Shinki, an official of the capital, to console him.

古文：及还，进位上柱国，赐物二千段。
现代文：回京后，世积升任上柱国，赐物二千段。
English: After returning to Beijing, Shizeki was promoted to Shoshu no kuni, receiving a gift of two thousand dan.

古文：上甚重之。
现代文：皇上很看重他。
English: The Emperor thinks highly of him.

古文：世积见上性忌刻，功臣多获罪，由是纵酒，不与执政言及时事。
现代文：王世积见皇上生性刻薄、猜忌，功臣大多无故被治罪，因此纵酒，不与宰相说什么时事。
English: Wang Shizhe saw that the emperor was born with a caustic and suspicious nature, and most meritorious soldiers were punished for no reason. Therefore, he drank a lot and did not discuss current affairs with the prime minister.

古文：上以为有酒疾，舍之宫内，令医者疗之。
现代文：皇上以为他有酒疾，让他住在宫中，让御医为他看病。
English: The emperor thought he had an alcohol problem, so he let him live in the palace and let his doctor see him.

古文：世积诡称疾愈，始得就第。
现代文：王世积假装说病已治好了，才得以出宫回府。
English: Wang Shizhe pretended that his illness had been cured before he was able to leave the palace and return to the capital.

古文：及起辽东之役，世积与汉王并为行军元帅，至柳城，遇疾疫而还。
现代文：发起辽东战争时，王世积与汉王杨谅都是行军元帅，到了柳城，因病而还。
English: When the Liaodong War was initiated, Wang Shizhe and Han Wang Yangren were both marching marshals. When they arrived at Liucheng, they had to return home due to illness.

古文：拜凉州总管，令骑士七百人送之官。
现代文：授为凉州总管，让七百骑士送他到任。
English: He was awarded the post of the chief administrator of Liangzhou and had seven hundred knights escort him to his post.

古文：未几，其亲信安定皇甫孝谐有罪，吏捕之，亡抵世积。世积不纳，由是有憾。
现代文：不久，他的亲信、安定人皇甫孝谐有罪，官吏追捕他，他逃到王世积那里，世积不留他，因此他们心中有些不舒服。
English: Soon after, his close friend and confidant, Emperor Fuhong, was found guilty, and the officials pursued him. He fled to Wang Shizhe, but Wang Shizhe would not let him stay, so they felt a little uneasy.

古文：孝谐竟配防桂州，事总管令狐熙。
现代文：皇甫孝谐后来被流放到桂州，侍奉总管令狐熙。
English: Empress Dowager Xiaojin was later exiled to Guizhou, where she served as the chief steward of Emperor Jixi.

古文：熙又不之礼，甚困穷，因徼幸上变，称： 世积尝令道人相其贵不，道人答曰： 公当为国主。 
现代文：令狐熙对他又不好，因此十分穷困。皇甫孝谐于是邀功于皇上，而对皇上说： 王世积曾让道人为他看相，看看以后会不会大贵。道人说： 您应当皇帝。 
English: Emperor Xixi did not treat him well, and as a result, he was very poor. Therefore, the emperor's filial piety invited the emperor to make a contribution, and said to the emperor: Wang Shizhe once let Tao people look at him to see if he would be great in the future. Tao people said: You should be emperor.

古文：谓其妻曰： 夫人当为皇后。 
现代文：对他妻子说： 夫人要当皇后。 
English: To his wife he said, "Madame wants to be queen."

古文：又将之凉州，其所亲谓世积曰： 河西天下精兵处，可以图大事也。 
现代文：另外，他要到凉州去时，他的亲信对他说： 河西是天下出精兵的地方，可以干大事。 
English: In addition, when he wanted to go to Liangzhou, his close friends said to him: Hexi is the place where the world's best soldiers come from, and they can do great things.

古文：世积曰： 凉州土旷人稀，非用武之国。  
现代文：世积说： 凉州地大人少，不是用武之地。  
English: Shizeki said: There are few adults in Liangzhou, it is not a place to use force.

古文：由是被征入朝，按其事。
现代文：世积因此被调入朝，调查此事。
English: Shizeki was therefore transferred to the North to investigate the matter.

古文：有司奏： 左卫大将军元旻、右卫大将军元胄、左仆射高颎，并与世积交通，受其名马之赠。 
现代文：有关部门上奏： 左卫大将军元、右卫大将军元胄，左仆射高赹，都与世积来往，受到他赠送的名马。 
English: Relevant departments played up: the Left Guard General Yuan, the Right Guard General Yuan Zhuo, and the Left Servant Sho Gao, all had dealings with Shizeki and were given famous horses by him.

古文：世积竟坐诛，旻、胄等免官，拜孝谐为上大将军。
现代文：世积竟然被杀，元、元胄被免职。授皇甫孝谐为上大将军。
English: Shizeki was actually killed, and Yuan and Yuan Xi were dismissed from their posts. Emperor Fengxian was awarded the title of Senior General.

古文：○虞庆则
现代文：○虞庆则
English: ○Gyu Qingzhe

古文：虞庆则，京兆栎阳人也。本姓鱼。其先仕于赫连氏，遂家灵武，代为北边豪杰。
现代文：虞庆则是京兆栎阳人，本姓鱼，他的祖上曾辅佐赫连氏，于是在灵武安家，世代都是北方的豪杰。
English: Yu Qing is from Jingzhaoyang, his family name is Yu. His ancestor was an aide of the Sokheren clan, so he is from the Lingwuan family, and all generations are heroes of the north.

古文：父祥，周灵武太守。
现代文：父亲虞祥，曾任北周灵武太守。
English: His father, Xiang, was appointed Lingwu governor-general during the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：庆则幼雄毅，性倜傥，身长八尺，有胆气，善鲜卑语，身被重铠，带两鞬，左右驰射，本州豪侠皆敬惮之。
现代文：庆则小时候就雄健刚毅，性情倜傥，身高八尺，有胆略有气概，擅长讲鲜卑话。他常常身披沉重的铠甲，腰带两革建，骑马疾驰，左右开弓，非常英武，本州豪侠都敬畏他。
English: When he was a child, Qing Zexu was a man of great strength and fortitude. He had a good temperament, was eight feet tall, had a bit of courage, and was good at speaking vulgarities. He often wore heavy armor, wore a double-breasted belt, galloped on horseback, and bowed left and right. He was very brave, and the local heroes were in awe of him.

古文：初以弋猎为事，中便折节读书，常慕傅介子、班仲升为人。
现代文：起初他以射猎为业，中途便转变志向而去读书，敬慕傅介子、班仲升的为人。
English: At first, he took up shooting as his profession, but halfway through he changed his mind and went to school. He admired Fu Kaizi and Ban Zhongsheng.

古文：仕周，释褐中外府行参军，稍迁外兵参军事，袭爵沁源县公。
现代文：在北周开始做官时，任中外府行参军，不久提升为外兵参军事，承袭爵位沁源县公。
English: When he began to work as an official in the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was appointed to join the army in foreign provinces, and soon he was promoted to join the military as a foreign soldier, inheriting the peerage of Xinyuan County.

古文：宣政元年，授仪同大将军，除并州总管长史。
现代文：宣政元年，授位仪同大将军，升为并州总管长史。
English: In the first year of the promulgation of the Constitution, the investiture ceremony was the same as that of the general, and he was promoted to the post of the provincial governor.

古文：二年，授开府。
现代文：二年，授为开府。
English: Two years later, he was awarded the title of Kaifu.

古文：时稽胡数为反叛，越王盛、内史下大夫高颎讨平之。
现代文：当时稽胡多次叛乱，越王宇文盛、内史下大夫高赹领兵征讨，平息了叛乱。
English: At that time, there were many rebellions in Jihu. Yuwen Sheng, the king of Yue, and Gao Yao, the doctor of history, led the troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：将班师，颎与盛谋，须文武干略者镇遏之。
现代文：班师回京前，高赹和越王宇文盛谋划，要文武双全的主将镇守。
English: Before the team returned to Beijing, Gao Zhen and Yue Wang Yu Wensheng planned to have the master of both literature and martial arts guard the town.

古文：表请庆则，于是即拜石州总管。
现代文：于是上表皇上，推荐虞庆则镇守原稽胡处。皇上于是即刻拜庆则为石州总管。
English: As a result, the emperor recommended Yu Qingzhe as the town guard of the original Qihu office. The emperor then immediately appointed Bai Qingzhe as the general manager of Shishu.

古文：甚有威惠，境内清肃，稽胡慕义而归者八千余户。
现代文：虞庆则很有威信，又能施恩于民，所管辖的境内太平无事，秩序井然，稽胡人因敬慕他的仁义而来归顺的，有八千多户。
English: Yu Qing, on the other hand, had great prestige and was able to show grace to the people. The territory under his jurisdiction was peaceful and orderly, and there were more than eight thousand households that came to submit to him because they admired his benevolence.

古文：开皇元年，进位大将军，迁内史监、吏部尚书、京兆尹，封彭城郡公，营新都总监。
现代文：开皇元年，庆则进位为大将军，升为内史监、吏部尚书、京兆尹，封为彭城郡公，任营建新都总监。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, Qing Zetian was promoted to the rank of general, and was promoted to the supervisor of internal history, the director of the personnel department, and Jing Zhaoyun. He was appointed the governor of Pengcheng County and the director of the construction of the new capital.

古文：二年冬，空厥入寇，庆则为元帅讨之。
现代文：二年冬，突厥侵入境内骚扰，庆则以元帅的身份征讨。
English: In the winter of the second year, the Turks invaded and harassed the territory, and Qing Zi was recruited as a marshal.

古文：部分失所，士卒多寒冻，堕指者千余人。
现代文：部队被分割，离开了营地，很多士兵受寒冷侵袭，手指被冻掉的有一千多人。
English: Part of the army lost their camp, many soldiers suffered from cold and frostbite, and more than a thousand people froze their fingers and toes.

古文：偏将达奚长儒率骑兵二千人别道邀贼，为虏所围，甚急，庆则案营不救。
现代文：偏将达奚长儒率领二千多骑兵，从另外一条道路拦截敌兵，被敌兵围困，情况很危急。
English: General Dajian Changru led more than two thousand cavalry, intercepted the enemy soldiers from another road, and was besieged by the enemy soldiers, the situation was very critical.

古文：由是长儒孤军独战，死者十八九。
现代文：庆则却按兵不动，不予救援，因此达奚长儒孤军奋战，战死的人有十分之八九。
English: As a result, Changru fought alone, and nine out of ten died in battle.

古文：上不之责也。寻迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：皇上没有追究庆则的责任，不久又升他为尚书右仆射。
English: The emperor did not investigate the responsibility of Qing Zi, and soon promoted him to the position of Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：后突厥主摄图将内附，请一重臣充使，于是上遣庆则诣突厥所。
现代文：后来突厥国主摄图想归附隋朝，请求隋派遣一个重臣充当使者，于是皇上派遣庆则出使突厥。
English: Later, the head of the Turkic state wanted to be annexed to the Sui dynasty and asked the Sui to send a senior official to act as an envoy, so the emperor sent Qing Zetu to send an envoy to the Turks.

古文：摄图恃强，初欲亢礼，庆则责以往事，摄图不服。
现代文：摄图自恃势力强大，开始想与隋朝分庭抗礼，庆则拿突厥过去的事来责备他们，摄图仍不服。
English: He thought he was powerful and wanted to fight against the Sui Dynasty, but Qing blamed the Turks for the past. He was still not satisfied.

古文：其介长孙晟又说谕之，摄图及弟叶护皆拜受诏，因即称臣朝贡，请永为籓附。
现代文：翻译长孙晟又向摄图陈说利害，摄图和他的弟弟叶护终于跪拜着接受了隋朝的诏书，称臣朝贡，请求永远作为附属国。
English: The translator, the elder Sun Yat-sen, also expressed his interest to the emperor, and the emperor and his younger brother Ye You finally bowed down and accepted the edict of the Sui Dynasty, calling it a tribute and requesting to be a dependent country forever.

古文：初，庆则出使，高祖敕之曰： 我欲存立突厥，彼送公马，但取五三匹。 
现代文：当初，庆则出使突厥，高祖告谕他说： 我想保全突厥，如果他们送马给你，只取三、五匹就够了。 
English: At first, Qing Zexu sent an envoy to the Turks. Gaozhu told him: "I want to protect the Turks. If they send you horses, it is enough to take only three or five horses."

古文：摄图见庆则，赠马千匹，又以女妻之。
现代文：摄图见到庆则，赠给他一千匹马，又将女儿嫁给庆则作妻子。
English: He met Qing Zexu, presented him with a thousand horses, and married his daughter to Qing Zexu as his wife.

古文：上以庆则勋高，皆无所问。
现代文：皇上因为庆则功高，就没有追究他什么。
English: The Emperor did not hold him to account because he was a highly meritorious person.

古文：授上柱国，封鲁国公，食任城县千户。诏以彭城公回授第二子义。
现代文：授他上柱国，封为鲁国公，赐邑任城县千户，并且下诏书将彭城公这一爵位回授给他的第二个儿子虞义。
English: He gave him the title of Shangzhu Guo, the title of Prince of Lu, the title of Count of Chengxian, and the title of Prince of Pengcheng to his second son Yuyi.

古文：高祖平陈之后，幸晋王第，置酒会群臣。
现代文：高祖平定陈朝之后，巡幸晋王府，摆酒宴请群臣。
English: After Gaozhu had subdued the Chen Dynasty, he made a tour of the palace of the Jin Dynasty and held a wine banquet for the courtiers.

古文：高颎等奉觞上寿，上因曰： 高颎平江南，虞庆则降突厥，可谓茂功矣。 
现代文：高赹等人手捧酒杯为高祖祝寿。高祖于是说： 高赹平定长江以南，虞庆则使突厥来降，可以说都立下了大功劳啊！ 
English: Gao Yao and others held a wine glass in their hands to wish Gao Zu a happy birthday. Gao Zu then said: Gao Yao pacified the south of the Yangtze River, and Yu Qing made the Turks come down. It can be said that they both did a great service!

古文：杨素曰： 皆由至尊威德所被。 
现代文：大将杨素说： 都是因为您威德之光的照耀啊！ 
English: Yang Su said, "This is all the result of the Emperor's supreme power.

古文：庆则曰： 杨素前出兵武牢、硖石，若非至尊威德，亦无克理。 
现代文：庆则说： 杨素以前出兵武牢、硖石，如果没有您的威德，也没有攻克的道理。 
English: Yu Qing said: Yang Su had previously sent troops to Wudang and Shanshi, and if it were not for the emperor's heavenly power and virtue, there would be no way to win.

古文：遂与互相长短。
现代文：于是就与杨素互相揭短。
English: As a result, he and Yang Su cut each other down to size.

古文：御史欲弹之，上曰： 今日计功为乐，宜不须劾。 
现代文：御史想弹劾他们，高祖说： 今天是论功之日，应该高兴，不应该弹劾。 
English: History wants to impeach them, Gaozu said: Today is the day of merit, we should be happy, we should not impeach.

古文：上观群臣宴射，庆则进曰： 臣蒙赉酒食，令尽乐，御史在侧，恐醉而被弹。 
现代文：高祖观看群臣行令饮酒，庆则进言说： 承蒙皇上赐给酒食，今天我应该尽情欢乐，但御史在旁，我怕喝醉了而被弹劾。 
English: Gaozu watched the group of courtiers ordering the drinking of alcohol. Qing Zetian said, "Thanks to the Emperor's gift of food and drink, today I should enjoy myself to the fullest, but with the Emperor by my side, I am afraid of being impeached for being drunk.

古文：上赐御史酒，因遣之出。
现代文：高祖赐酒给御史，就此令他出去。
English: Gaozhu gave Mishi wine and told him to go out.

古文：庆则奉觞上寿，极欢。
现代文：庆则捧着酒杯为高祖祝寿，大家都很高兴。
English: Yu Qing is holding a glass of wine to celebrate the birthday of Emperor Wen, and is particularly happy.

古文：上谓诸公曰： 饮此酒，愿我与诸公等子孙常如今日，世守富贵。 
现代文：高祖对群臣说： 喝了这杯酒，愿我与你们及你们的子孙能够常如今日，世世代代与富贵相守。 
English: Gao Zu said to his courtiers: "After drinking this cup of wine, may I and you and your descendants be able to keep company with the rich and noble, as we do today, for generations to come."

古文：九年，转为右卫大将军，寻改为右武候大将军。
现代文：开皇九年，虞庆则转任右卫大将军，不久又改为右武侯大将军。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, Yu Qing was transferred to the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, and soon he was transferred to the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：开皇十七年，岭南人李贤据州反，高祖议欲讨之。
现代文：开皇十七年，岭南人李贤占据本州造反，高祖想征讨他。
English: In the seventeenth year of Emperor Gaozong's reign, Li Xian, a native of Lingnan, rebelled and occupied Honshu. Gaozong wanted to conquer him.

古文：诸将二三请行，皆不许。高祖顾谓庆则曰： 位居宰相，爵乃上公，国家有贼，遂无行意，何也？ 
现代文：诸将中有几个人请求前行，皇上都没有答应，却对庆则说： 你位居宰相，爵位为上公，今国家有叛贼作乱，竟没有出征的意思，为什么呢？ 
English: Several of the generals asked to go ahead, but the emperor did not agree, but he said to Qing Zi: You are the prime minister, your title is Shang Gong, and now there are traitors in the country, but you have no intention of going to war. Why?

古文：庆则拜谢恐惧，上乃遣焉。为桂州道行军总管，以妇弟赵什柱为随府长史。
现代文：庆则下拜谢罪，诚惶诚恐，皇上于是派遣他去征讨，封为桂州道行军总管，任命他的妻弟赵什柱为随府长史。
English: Qing Zexu confessed his sins and was sincerely afraid, so the emperor sent him to solicit, appointed him as the chief marshal of Guizhou Province, and appointed his brother-in-law Zhao Shizhu as the governor of Guizhou Province.

古文：什柱先与庆则爱妾通，恐事彰，乃宣言曰： 庆则不欲此行。 
现代文：什柱先前曾与庆则的爱妾私通，害怕此事败露，就扬言说： 庆则不愿意去岭南征讨。 
English: Shizhu had previously had a love affair with Qingzhe's mistress. Fearing that the affair would be exposed, he threatened: "Qingzhe is not willing to go to Lingnan to fight.

古文：遂闻于上。
现代文：这话被皇上听到了。
English: This was heard by the Emperor.

古文：先是，朝臣出征，上皆宴别，礼赐遣之。
现代文：在此之前，朝中大臣出征，皇上都设宴饯行，尽礼赐物后再送他出征。
English: Prior to this, when a minister from either side of the Korean peninsula went to the front, the emperor would host a banquet and send him on his way after giving him a gift.

古文：及庆则南讨辞上，上色不悦，庆则由是怏怏不得志。
现代文：等到庆则讨伐岭南辞别皇上时，皇上满脸不高兴，庆则因此郁郁不得志。
English: When Qing Zexu went to Lingnan to bid farewell to the emperor, the emperor was not happy, and Qing Zexu was depressed.

古文：暨平贤，至潭州临桂镇，庆则观眺山川形势，曰： 此诚险固，加以足粮，若守得其人，攻不可拔。 
现代文：平定了李贤后，庆则到潭州的临桂镇，眺望这里的山川地势，感慨地说： 这里的地势的确险要牢固，再加上有足够的粮食，如果用可靠的将领把守这个地方，就不会被攻破。 
English: After defeating Li Xian, Qing Zetang went to Lin Gui Town in Tanzhou, looked at the mountain and river topography here, and said with emotion: The terrain here is indeed very solid, and there is enough grain. If this place is guarded by reliable generals, it will not be broken.

古文：然性奢华，以骆驼负函盛水养鱼而自给。十一年，或告孝仁谋图不轨，遂诛之。
现代文：于是派什柱骑着快马到京城向皇上奏事，观察皇上的脸色。什柱到了京城，却禀告庆则谋反。皇上派人调查验证，庆则因此被杀。
English: So he sent Shizhu riding a fast horse to the capital to report to the emperor and observe the emperor's face. When Shizhu arrived in the capital, he accused Qing Ze of plotting a rebellion. The emperor sent someone to investigate and verify, and Qing Ze was killed as a result.

古文：其弟澄道，东宫通事舍人，坐除名。
现代文：皇上授什柱为柱国。
English: A pillar country is one to which the Emperor confers the title of Shizhu.

古文：○元胄
现代文：○元胄
English: ○Gangnam Style

古文：元胄，河南洛阳人也，魏昭成帝之六代孙。
现代文：元胄是河南洛阳人，西魏昭成帝的第六代子孙。
English: Yuanzhang is from Luoyang, Henan Province, and is the sixth generation descendant of the Western Wei Emperor Zhaocheng.

古文：祖顺，魏濮阳王。
现代文：祖父元顺，西魏的濮阳王。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Shun, was the Wei Dynasty's Fengyang King.

古文：父雄，武陵王。
现代文：父亲元雄，武陵王。
English: His father, Motoyo, was knighted by King Muryo.

古文：胄少英果，多武艺，美须眉，有不可犯之色。
现代文：元胄小时候就英勇果敢，练就了多种武艺，美髯虎须，看上去凛然不可侵犯。
English: When he was a boy, Yuan Xuan was heroic and decisive, proficient in many martial arts, handsome, quite dignified, and inviolable.

古文：周齐王宪见而壮之，引致左右，数从征伐。
现代文：北周齐王宇文宪一见他，就把他当作壮士，招到自己的身边。
English: As soon as the Northern Zhou King Yuwen Xian saw him, he treated him as a strong man and invited him to his side.

古文：官至大将军。
现代文：元胄多次跟随齐王出征打仗，官至大将军。
English: Yuan Zang followed King Qi to war many times and rose to the rank of general.

古文：高祖初被召入，将受顾托，先呼胄，次命陶澄，并委以腹心，恆宿卧内。
现代文：高祖刚被征召进朝廷，将被周宣帝托付后事，高祖先叫元胄，其次才叫陶澄，将他们一起当作心腹之人，常常住在高祖的卧室内。
English: Gao Zu had just been conscripted into the imperial court and was to be entrusted by Zhou Xuan Di with the succession. Gao's ancestor was called Yuan Shao, and his second name was Tao Cheng. They were regarded as confidants and often lived together in Gao Zu's bedroom.

古文：及为丞相，每典军在禁中，又引弟威俱入侍卫。
现代文：高祖当了丞相后，元胄主管宫廷中的禁卫军，又引弟弟元威入宫当侍卫。
English: By the time Sui Emperor Wen was appointed chancellor, Yuan Shao had been in charge of the imperial army, and he also introduced his brother Yuan Wei to join the palace guards.

古文：周赵王招知高祖将迁周鼎，乃要高祖就第。赵王引高祖入寝室，左右不得从，唯杨弘与胄兄弟坐于户侧。
现代文：周赵王宇文招得知高祖将要取北周而代之，于是就邀请高祖到自己的府中，赵王将高祖引进卧室内，左右侍从不得跟随，只有杨弘和元胄兄弟坐在门边。
English: Zhou Zhao Wang Yuwenzhu learned that Gaozu was going to take the place of Bei Zhou, so he invited Gaozu to his palace. Zhao Wang brought Gaozu into the bedroom, and the attendants on his right and left were not allowed to follow. Only Yang Hong and the Geng brothers sat by the door.

古文：赵王谓其二子员、贯曰： 汝当进瓜，我因刺杀之。 
现代文：赵王对他的两个儿子宇文员和宇文贯说： 你们进室内去献瓜，我趁机将他刺杀。 
English: Zhao Wang said to his two sons, U Clerk and U Wenjun, "You go inside to offer melons. I will take the opportunity to assassinate him."

古文：及酒酣，赵王欲生变，以佩刀子刺瓜，连啖高祖，将为不利。
现代文：饮酒正酣时，赵王想突起事变，拿所佩带的刀切瓜，不断地让高祖吃瓜，将要刺杀高祖。
English: When he was drunk, Zhao Wang wanted to provoke an incident. He took the knife he was wearing to cut the melon, and kept asking Gao Zu to eat the melon. He was going to assassinate Gao Zu.

古文：胄进曰： 相府有事，不可久留。 
现代文：元胄进屋说： 丞相，府中有急事，您不能在这里多呆了。 
English: Entering the Yuan Dynasty: There is something going on at the prime minister's office, so I can't stay long.

古文：赵王诃之曰： 我与丞相言，汝何为者！ 
现代文：赵王大声喝斥说： 我和丞相谈心，你是干什么的？ 
English: Zhao Wang shouted loudly, "I'm having a heart-to-heart talk with the prime minister. What are you doing?

古文：叱之使却。胄瞋目愤气，扣刀入卫。
现代文：赵王想把元胄喝斥走，元胄瞪圆双眼，怒气冲冲，握刀闯入内室。
English: Zhao Wang wanted to yell at and drive away Yuan Qi, but Yuan Qi stared at him with his eyes wide open, his anger flaring, and he broke into the inner room with a knife.

古文：赵王问其姓名，胄以实对。赵王曰： 汝非昔事齐王者乎？
现代文：赵王问他叫什么名字，元胄照实回答了，赵王恍然说： 你不是以前跟随齐王的吗？
English: Zhao Wang asked him what his name was, and Yuan Shao answered truthfully. Zhao Wang suddenly said, "Didn't you used to follow Qi Wang?"

古文：诚壮士也！ 
现代文：的确是壮士啊！ 
English: What a hero!

古文：因赐之酒，曰： 吾岂有不善之意邪？
现代文：于是赐酒给他喝，并且温和地说： 我哪里有什么不好的意图呢？
English: So he gave the wine to Yuan Shao and said, "Can I have any ill will?

古文：卿何猜警如是！ 
现代文：你何必如此猜测我警惕我？ 
English: Why are you so suspicious and alert!

古文：赵王伪吐，将入后閤，胄恐其为变，扶令上坐，如此者再三。
现代文：不一会儿，赵王假装呕吐，准备进入后门，元胄怕他又有诡计，急忙走过去扶住赵王，使他坐入席中的上位，象这样做了几次。
English: After a while, Zhao Wang pretended to vomit and prepared to enter the back door. Yuan Xuan, fearing that he had another trick, hurried over to hold Zhao Wang and make him sit in the upper part of the seat. He did this several times.

古文：赵王称喉干，命胄就厨取饮，胄不动。
现代文：后来，赵王声称自己口渴，命令元胄到厨房中去取茶，元胄不动。
English: Zhao Wang pretended that his throat was dry to drink. The life source went to the kitchen to fetch water, but the life source did not move.

古文：会滕王逌后至，高祖降阶迎之，胄与高祖耳语曰： 事势大异，可速去。 
现代文：不久，恰逢滕王宇文荄到来，高祖亲自走下台阶迎接他，元胄趁机对高祖耳语： 情况很不妙，您一定要快点离开这儿。 
English: Soon, coinciding with the arrival of Teng Wang Yuwenqi, Gaozu personally walked down the steps to meet him. Yuan Qi took the opportunity to whisper to Gaozu: The situation is very bad, you must leave here quickly.

古文：高祖犹不悟，谓曰： 彼无兵马，复何能为？ 
现代文：高祖还是没有明白，对他说： 他又没有兵马，能把我怎么样？ 
English: Gaozu still didn't understand, and said to him, "He doesn't have soldiers and horses, so what can he do to me?

古文：胄曰： 兵马悉他家物，一先下手，大事便去。
现代文：元胄说： 兵马都是他们的，一先下手，大事就完了。
English: Motohiro said, "The soldiers and horses are all his family's property. Once he starts, things will not go well."

古文：胄不辞死，死何益耶？ 
现代文：我虽然不怕死，但死又有什么益处呢？ 
English: I'm not afraid of death, but what good is it?

古文：高祖复入坐。胄闻屋后有被甲声，遽请曰： 相府事殷，公何得如此？ 
现代文：高祖又进室中坐下，元胄听见屋后有披铁甲的声音，于是立即请高祖说： 相府事急，你怎能如此久坐？ 
English: Gao Zu entered the room again and sat down. Yuan Xuan heard the sound of someone wearing an iron armor coming from behind the house, so he immediately asked Gao Zu to say, "There is an urgent matter at the palace, how can you sit for so long?"

古文：因扶高祖下床，趣而去。
现代文：于是扶高祖下床，急促地离去。
English: Fu Gaozu then got out of bed and left in a hurry.

古文：赵王将追之，胄以身蔽户，王不得出。
现代文：赵王将要追赶高祖，元胄用身体挡住屋门，使赵王不能出来追赶。
English: Zhao Wang is about to chase Gao Zu. Yuan Qi blocks the door with his body so that Zhao Wang can't chase him.

古文：高祖及门，胄自后而至。
现代文：高祖到达相府，元胄也回来了。
English: Gaozu arrived at the prime minister's residence, and Yuan Shao also returned.

古文：赵王恨不时发，弹指出血。
现代文：赵王将手指敲得出了血，悔恨自己没有抓住时机发动事变。
English: Zhao Wang regretted that he didn't get into trouble at the time, and his finger started bleeding.

古文：及诛赵王，赏赐不可胜计。
现代文：后来高祖杀了赵王，给予元胄的赏赐数也数不清。
English: By the time King Zhao was killed, Emperor Wen had given Yuan Shao countless gifts.

古文：高祖受禅，进位上柱国，封武陵郡公，邑三千户。拜左卫将军，寻迁右卫大将军。
现代文：高祖受禅登上帝位，元胄升为上柱国，封为武陵郡公，食邑三千户，授左卫将军，不久又升右卫大将军。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of Zen, and Yuan Shao ascended to Shangzhuang, and was named the governor of Wuling County, with 3,000 households, and was awarded the title of General of the Left Division, and was soon promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：高祖从容曰： 保护朕躬，成此基业，元胄功也。 
现代文：高祖闲谈时说： 保护我的安全，成就这番基业，这是元胄的功劳啊！ 
English: Gao Zu said casually: "Protecting my safety and achieving this foundation, this is the merit of the Yuan Dynasty!"

古文：后数载，出为豫州刺史，历亳、淅二州刺史。
现代文：几年以后，元胄出任豫州刺史，历任亳州、淅州刺史。
English: A few years later, Yuan Zheng became the governor of Yuzhou Province, and successively the governor of Zhangzhou Province and Zhangzhou Province.

古文：时突厥屡为边患，朝廷以胄素有威名，拜灵州总管，北夷甚惮焉。
现代文：当时突厥多次骚扰边疆，朝廷因为元胄一向有威名，授给他灵州总管的职务，北方部族很害怕他。
English: At this time, the Turks repeatedly violated the border. The imperial court thought that Yuan Shao was very prestigious and appointed Yuan Shao as the governor of Lingzhou. The northern barbarians were very afraid of him.

古文：后复征为右卫大将军，亲顾益密。
现代文：后来征召回朝任右卫大将军，高祖对他更加亲密。
English: Later, Gaozu was conscripted back to the imperial court as a grand marshal of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and Gaozu became even closer to him.

古文：尝正月十五日，上与近臣登高，时胄下直，上令驰召之。及胄见，上谓曰： 公与外人登高，未若就朕胜也。 
现代文：曾经有一个正月十五，高祖和贴身近臣登高赏月，当时元胄在值班，皇上下命令用快马把他招来，见到元胄，皇上对他说： 你与别人登高赏月，比不上和我一起登高好！ 
English: Once upon a time, on the fifteenth day of the first month of the year, Gaozu and a close retainer of his climbed to the top of the mountain to admire the moon. At that time, Yuan Shao was on duty, and the emperor ordered him to come with a fast horse. When he saw Yuan Shao, the emperor said to him, "If you climb to the top of the mountain to admire the moon with others, it is better than climbing with me!"

古文：赐宴极欢。
现代文：设宴招待，极其高兴。
English: A banquet given by one's relatives is a time of great joy.

古文：晋王广每致礼焉。
现代文：晋王杨广常常向他致礼。
English: The Jin king Yang Guang often gave him gifts.

古文：房陵王之废也，胄豫其谋。
现代文：房陵王被废，元胄参与了谋划。
English: Fangling Wang was abolished, and Yuan Zang participated in the planning.

古文：上正穷治东宫事，左卫大将军元旻苦谏，杨素乃谮之。
现代文：当时皇上正在追究处理东宫的事情，左卫大将军元竁苦苦劝谏皇上不要废黜太子，杨素于是进谗言诬陷元竁。
English: At that time, the emperor was investigating the matter of dealing with the East Palace. Geng Yao, the general of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, went to great lengths to persuade the emperor not to dethrone the crown prince. Yang Su then made a false accusation against Geng Yao.

古文：上大怒，执旻于仗。
现代文：皇上很愤怒，拘留了元竁。
English: The emperor was very angry and detained Yuan Shao.

古文：胄时当下直，不去，因奏曰： 臣不下直者，为防元旻耳。 
现代文：元胄此时值班时间已到，应该下班，但他没去，对皇上上奏说： 我不离开您，是为了防备元竁罢了。 
English: At this time, Yuan Xuan's duty time had arrived, and he should have left work, but he did not go, and said to the Emperor: I will not leave you, it is just to prevent Yuan Xuan.

古文：复以此言激怒上，上遂诛旻，赐胄帛千匹。
现代文：又以这话激怒皇上，于是皇上杀了元竁，奖给元胄一千匹丝绸。
English: This further enraged the emperor, who killed Yuan Shao and rewarded him with a thousand silks.

古文：蜀王秀之得罪，胄坐与交通，除名。
现代文：后来蜀王杨秀获罪，元胄因为和他有来往，被除去了官名。
English: Later, Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, was found guilty, and Yuan Xuan was stripped of his official title because he had dealings with him.

古文：炀帝即位，不得调。
现代文：炀帝即位，元胄得不到调迁。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, but Yuan Shao could not be transferred.

古文：时慈州刺史上官政坐事徙岭南，将军丘和亦以罪废。
现代文：当时慈州刺史上官政因事获罪被流放到岭南，将军丘和也因罪被废去官职。
English: At this time, the government of Cizhou Province was involved in an incident in history and moved to Lingnan. General Qiu He was also deposed for his crime.

古文：胄与和有旧，因数从之游。胄尝酒酣谓和曰： 上官政壮士也，今徙岭表，得无大事乎？ 
现代文：元胄与丘和有老交情，于是经常和他往来，元胄曾经与丘和一起喝酒，喝到兴头上，说： 上官政是壮士啊！现在被发配到岭外，不会生事吧？ 
English: Yuan Zheng had an old friendship with Youka, so he often visited him. Yuan Zheng used to drink with Youka and drank to his heart's content, saying: "The upper government is a strong man! Now he has been sent to Lingwai, won't he cause trouble?"

古文：因自拊腹曰： 若是公者，不徒然矣。 
现代文：于是自己捂着心说： 我假如是你，不会白白地这样罢了。 
English: He rubbed his stomach and said, "People like this Shao Gong will not be able to get away with anything.

古文：和明日奏之，胄竟坐死。
现代文：丘和第二天将元胄的话启奏皇上，元胄竟因为这件事被杀了头。
English: Yau and the next day played the words of Yuan Shikai to Emperor Zhisheng, and Yuan Shikai was actually sentenced to death.

古文：于是征政为骁卫将军，拜和代州刺史。
现代文：于是皇上封上官政为骁卫将军，授给丘和代州刺史的职务。
English: As a result, the emperor made Kansei a general of the Imperial Guards, and gave him the posts of Iuka and Daishu Sashishi.

