古文：三十日平明饭，出独山州北隘门，西北向循西界山行。
现代文：三十日黎明吃饭，出了独山州北隘门，向西北沿西面一列山前行。
English: At dawn on the 30th, after eating, I went out of the North Pass Gate of Doushanzhou and headed northwest along the west side of the mountain.

古文：六里，有小水亦自西坡东注，涉之。
现代文：六里路，有条小溪也是从西面山坡向东流注，涉过小溪。
English: At Liuli Road, there is also a stream flowing from the western slope of the mountain to the east, wading through the stream.

古文：又北二里，北坞渐穷，山脊自东界西度南转，乃路转东北，涧中小水北流。
现代文：又往北二里，北面山坞渐渐到了尽头，山脊自东面一列山向西延伸后往南转，而路转向东北，山涧中的小溪向北流。
English: Another two miles to the north, the dock on the north side gradually came to an end, the ridge extended westward from a line of mountains on the east and turned south, while the road turned northeast, and the stream in the mountains flowed north.

古文：渡涧，循东界山腋间东北上，又二里，有水溢路旁石穴间，甚冽寒冷。
现代文：渡过山涧，沿东面一列山的山腰之间向东北上行，又走二里，有水从路旁石穴中溢出，十分清冽。
English: After crossing the ridge, I drove up to the northeast along the eastern slope of a mountain range. After another two miles, water overflowed from a roadside stone pit, and it was very clear.

古文：是岭由东南度西北，乃祖山，从其东北分裂众枝：其直东而去者，为黎平、平崖之脊；东南分枝而下者，为荔波、罗城之派；西北分枝而下者，度此稍北，即西转南走而环于独山之西，度鸡公岭而南，为蛮王、多灵之派。
现代文：从此处攀登石瞪向东北上岭，雨暴降。
English: From here, I climbed up the rock face to the Northeast Upland, and it rained heavily.

古文：独山州南二十里，有山尖起，立于众山之中，是名独山，州之所以得名也。又东北行山峡间，乃下。
现代文：一里半，向北登上岭隘。此岭由东南延向西北，是祖山，从祖山东北面分裂为群山支脉：那正东而去的，是黎平、平崖的山脊；往东南分支而下的，是荔波、罗城的支脉；向西北分支而下的，延过此地稍往北，马上由西转向南走而后环绕于独山州的西边，延过鸡公岭再往南，是蛮王峰、多灵山的支脉。又往东北行走在山峡之间，于是下走。
English: A mile and a half to the north, climb the ridge. This ridge extends from the southeast to the northwest, is the ancestral mountain, from the northeast side of the ancestral mountain is divided into mountain branches: that is the east, is the ridge of Liping and Pingyao; branching down to the southeast, is the branch of Libo and Luocheng; branching down to the northwest, extending slightly northward through this place, immediately turning from the west to the south and then encircling the west side of Doushanzhou, extending southward through Jigongling, is the branch of the barbarian king peak, Dorling Mountain. And walking to the northeast

古文：共二里，有涧自东谷走深崖中，两崖石壁甚逼，涧嵌其间甚深，架石梁其上，为深河桥。
现代文：共行二里，有条山涧自东面山谷奔流到深崖中，两旁山崖的石壁十分狭窄，山涧深嵌在石壁之间非常深，架了一座石桥在山涧之上，是深河桥。
English: For two miles, there is a mountain stream running from the eastern valley to the deep cliff. The stone walls of the cliffs on both sides are very narrow, and the mountains are deeply embedded between the stone walls. A stone bridge is built on top of the mountains, it is a deep river bridge.

古文：过桥，复跻崖而上。
现代文：过了桥，再次登崖壁而上。
English: Crossed the bridge and climbed up the cliff again.

古文：登岭而北，有小水自东北泻石崖而下，涉之，复升岭，共一里，遂由峡中北行。
现代文：登上岭头往北走，有条小溪自东北倾泻到石崖之下，涉过小溪，再次登岭，共一里，便经由峡中往北行。
English: After climbing to the top of the ridge and walking north, a stream from the northeast poured down to the bottom of the cliff, waded through the stream, ascended the ridge again, a total of one mile, and then traveled north through the middle of the gorge.

古文：又二里，乃下，东北行壑中。
现代文：又是二里，这才下行，往东北前行在壑谷中。
English: It's another two miles, and then it's downhill, heading northeast in Shibuya.

古文：有村在东山下，由其前少转西北，共二里，有溪自东北来，渡之。
现代文：有个村庄在东山下，由村前稍转向西北，共二里，有溪水自东北流来，渡过溪水。
English: There is a village at the foot of the east mountain, slightly turning from the front of the village to the northwest, a total of two miles, with streams flowing from the northeast and crossing the streams.

古文：溯其西岸，东北逾岭二里，一水自东北来，一水自西北来，东北者较大。
现代文：溯溪流西岸走，向东北越岭二里，一条溪水自东北流来，七条溪水自西北流来，来自东北的水流较大。
English: Trace the west bank of the stream and go two miles over the ridge to the northeast. One stream flows from the northeast, seven streams flow from the northwest, and the water flow from the northeast is larger.

古文：于是涉西北水，缘中支山而上，东北三里而登其冈。
现代文：于是涉过西北流来的溪水，沿中间的支脉上山，往东北行三里便登上这座山冈。
English: So he waded through the stream flowing from the northwest, up the mountain along the middle branch, three miles to the northeast, and climbed up this mountain.

古文：饭于冈上。
现代文：在冈上吃了饭。
English: We had dinner on the hill.

古文：乃稍下，又北逾岭而下夹坞中。
现代文：于是稍稍下走，又向北越岭后下到狭窄的山坞中。
English: So I walked down a little bit, and then headed north over the ridge and down to the narrow dock.

古文：共三里，又上，有溪自南峡北向下坠深潭，潭小而高，此西北小溪之源也。
现代文：共三里路，又上山，有溪流自南边的山峡中向北下坠到深潭之中，潭小但地势却很高，此潭就是西北小溪的源头了。
English: A total of three miles, and then up the mountain, there is a stream from the southern canyon to the north to fall into a deep pool. The pool is small but the terrain is high. This pool is the source of the northwest stream.

古文：又北逾岭下一里半，下度深壑中，有涧自西南峡中来，至此东向四转，此东北个溪之源也。
现代文：又往北越岭下行一里半，下来穿越在深深的壑谷之中，有涧水自西南方峡中流来，到此处由东转向西去，这是东北小溪的源头了。
English: Another mile and a half down the North Yue Ridge, down through the deep reed valley, there is reed water flowing from the middle of the Southwest Gorge, here from east to west, this is the source of the Northeast Creek.

古文：涉之，西南登岭。
现代文：涉过山涧，向西南登岭。
English: Wading through the mountains, climbing up the ridge to the southwest.

古文：半里而上，循岭半西南行。
现代文：上走半里，沿山岭半中腰向西南行。
English: Walk half a mile up and half a mile down along the ridge to the southwest.

古文：二里，过兔场，西出嘉坑关。
现代文：二里，路过兔场，往西出了嘉坑关。
English: After two miles, I passed the rabbit farm and went west out of Jiaheng Pass.

古文：随小水西下，由夹中行五里，两夹山多石崖突兀独立高耸，路侧有泉涌穴出。
现代文：顺小溪西下，经峡中行五里，夹在两旁的山多半是突兀的石崖，路侧有泉水从洞穴中涌出。
English: Down the creek to the west, five miles through the gorge, the mountains sandwiched between the two sides are mostly jagged cliffs, and there are springs gushing out of the caves on the side of the road.

古文：又西二里，水坠南峡去，路逾北坳上，有寨在东冈之巅。
现代文：文向西走二里，溪水坠入南面的峡谷中流去，路越到北边的山坳上，有个寨子在东面山冈的冈顶。
English: Wen walked two miles to the west, the stream fell into the canyon in the south and flowed away. The road went over the mountains in the north, and there was a stockade at the top of the mountain in the east.

古文：由其西北度脊，南北俱有洼中坠，环塍为田，直抵其底，水皆自底西向透石穴者也。
现代文：经寨子西北方越过山脊，南北两面都有中央下陷的洼地，田埂环绕辟为农田，一直抵达洼地底部，流水都是从洼底向西透过石穴泄去的。
English: After crossing the ridge in the northwest of the stockade, there are depressions with central depressions on both the north and south sides. The fields are surrounded by farmland and reach the bottom of the depression. Flowing water leaks from the bottom of the depression to the west through the stone hole.

古文：于是山开南北洋，中有大溪自北而南，是为横梁。
现代文：又向西越岭走一里，出了隘口，隘口上方石骨嶙峋棱角陡峭，全作出喷云绽花的姿态。又往西北下到峡中，一里，转向西，半里，向西出了峡谷，这里是独山州与胡家司的分界处。
English: Another mile to the West Yuegling, out of the pass, above the pass, the angle of the stone skeleton is steep, all making the attitude of spraying clouds and flowers. Another mile to the northwest to the middle of the gorge, one mile, turn to the west, half a mile, out of the canyon to the west, here is the demarcation between Doku Shan State and Hu Jia Si.

古文：循溪东转南半里，抵南崖。
现代文：到这里山势分开，南北十分开阔，中间有条大溪自北流往南，这是横梁。
English: At this point, the mountains are separated, the north and south are very open, and there is a large stream in the middle that flows from north to south. This is the crossbeam.

古文：崖下有卖粉指当地常见的米粉一类食品为饷者，以盐少许易而餐之。随溪南岸西行，道路开整，不复以蜀道为苦。
现代文：沿着溪东面转向南半里，到达南边的山崖。崖下有个卖粉的人，用少许盐换粉吃了。顺溪流南岸向西行，道路开阔平整，不再有蜀道之行的苦恼了。
English: Along the east side of the stream, turn south half a mile and reach the cliff on the south side. Under the cliff, there is a seller of powder, who used a little salt to exchange for powder. Go west along the south bank of the stream, the road is open and flat, and there is no longer the suffering of the Shu Road.

古文：溪北有崇庙在高树间，人家田陇，屡屡从断岸而出。
现代文：溪北有座高大的寺庙在高高的树丛间，人家和田垄，屡屡从对岸截断树丛显露出来。
English: In the north of Hebei Province, there is a tall temple among the tall trees. People's homes and fields have been repeatedly cut off from the opposite bank.

古文：共六里，过坞里村。
现代文：共走六里，路过坞里村。
English: We walked a total of six miles and passed the dockyard village.

古文：又西一里，其水南曲，乃西渡之。
现代文：又往西一里，溪水向南弯曲，子是向西渡溪。
English: Another mile to the west, the stream bends to the south, and the child crosses the stream to the west.

古文：从溪西岸南行，半里，为邛母村。
现代文：从溪流西岸往南行，半里，是邓母村。
English: Half a mile south of the west bank of the stream is Dengmu Village.

古文：从村前西转，坞复东西开。
现代文：从村前向西转，山坞再次呈东西向分开。
English: Turning west from the front of the village, the dock is again separated in an east-west direction.

古文：而其村重缀冈阜，瓦舍高耸，想亦胡家司之族目也。
现代文：而这里的村庄一层层点缀在冈阜之上，瓦房高耸，想来也是胡家司的族人头目的住所。
English: And the villages here are dotted one on top of the other in Gifu, with high-rise tile houses, which is also the residence of the head of the Hu family.

古文：西二里，其水北曲，复西渡之。
现代文：向西二里，溪水向北弯去，又一次向西渡过溪流。
English: Two leagues to the west, the stream bends to the north, and again we cross the stream to the west.

古文：又西北一里，其水西曲，又北渡之。
现代文：又往西北行一里，溪水向西弯曲，又向北渡溪。
English: Another mile to the northwest, the stream bends to the west, and then turns north into the creek.

古文：从北岸悬崖西行一里半，有水自西来会，乃麦冲河也。
现代文：从北岸的悬崖上向西行一里半，有水流自西方流来相会，这便是麦冲河了。
English: A mile and a half westward from the cliff on the north bank, there is a stream coming from the west to meet, which is the Mai Chong River.

古文：即溯河西行二里，入麦冲堡南隘门而宿。
现代文：随即溯河向西行二里，进入麦冲堡的南隘门便住下。
English: Then he immediately followed the river two miles to the west, entered the southern gate of Meicheng Fortress, and settled down.

古文：是晚雷雨大作，彻夜不止。
现代文：这天晚上雷雨大作，整夜不停。
English: That evening, thunderstorms rolled in, and they didn't stop all night.

古文：四月初一日平明起，雨渐止。
现代文：四月初一日黎明起床，雨渐渐停了。
English: I got up at dawn on the first day of April, and the rain gradually stopped.

古文：饭间，闻其西有桃源洞，相去五里，须秉炬深入，中多幡盖缨络布幔与丝带之物。
现代文：吃饭时，听说这里西边有个桃源洞，相距五里路，必须举着火把才能深入，洞中有很多似播旗伞盖缨络之类的东西。
English: During the meal, I heard that there is a peach source cave to the west of here, five miles away, and you have to hold a torch to get deep into it. There are a lot of things in the cave that look like flags, umbrellas, and so on.

古文：觅主人导之不得，曰： 第往关上，可西往也。 
现代文：找房主人导游，不愿意，只说： 只管前往关上，可以往西去。 
English: Unwilling to look for a tour guide for the owner of the house, he only said: Just go to the gate, you can go west.

古文：遂北向出隘门，溯溪东岸行。
现代文：于是向北出了隘门，溯溪流东岸行。
English: So I went out of the narrow gate to the north and followed the east bank of the stream.

古文：忽石壁涌起岸东，势极危削，溪漱之南，路溯之北，咫尺间，上倚穹崖，下循迅派指激流，神骨俱竦。
现代文：忽然石壁在岸东耸起，山势极为险要陡削，溪流冲刷着石壁的南面，路溯溪流往北去，咫尺之间，头上依傍着弯隆的山崖，脚下沿着迅急的水流，置身其中感到十分恐惧。
English: All of a sudden, the cliff rose up on the east side of the shore. The mountain was very close to the precipice. The stream washed the south side of the cliff. I followed the stream to the north. Within a few feet, I was leaning against the steep cliff on my head, and at my feet I was following the swift current. I felt very afraid of being caught up in it.

古文：三里，转入东坞，其北有小峰立路隅，当麦冲河南下之冲，有岩北向，日观音洞。
现代文：三里路，转入东面的山坞，坞北有座小峰立在路侧，正当麦冲河南下的要冲，有个岩洞向北，叫观音洞。
English: Sanli Road, turn into the dock on the east, there is a small peak standing on the side of the road to the north of the dock, just as the Mai Chong River is about to rush south, there is a rock cave to the north, called Guanyin Cave.

古文：又北半里，曰麦冲关。
现代文：又往北行半里，叫麦冲关。
English: Another half-mile to the north is called Mui Chongguan.

古文：问所谓桃源洞者，正在其直西大峰之半，相望不出四里外。
现代文：打听所说叫桃源洞的地方，正在此地正西大山峰的半山腰，相望不超出四里之外。
English: When I inquired about the place called Taoyuan Cave, it was in the mid-mountain area of the west peak, not more than four miles away from each other.

古文：关之东有真武阁，南向正与观音洞门对。
现代文：麦冲关的东边有个真武阁，面向南方正与观音洞洞口相对。
English: On the east side of Mai Dangguan, there is a real pavilion, facing south and opposite the mouth of Guanyin Cave.

古文：乃停行李于阁中，觅火炬于僧，将往探之。
现代文：于是把行李停放在真武阁中，向僧人找来火把，将要前去探察此洞。
English: So he parked his luggage in the pavilion, asked the monks for torches, and prepared to explore the cave.

古文：途遇一老者，曰： 此洞相去不远。
现代文：途中遇到一位老人，说： 此洞相距不远。
English: On the way, he met an old man who said, "This cave is not far from here.

古文：但溪水方涨，湍急不可渡，虽有导者不能为力，而况漫试乎？ 
现代文：但溪水正好暴涨，水流湍急无法渡过去，即使有向导也无能为力，何况漫无目的地去探路呢？ 
English: But the stream just bursts, the current is too fast to cross, and even with a guide there is nothing you can do, let alone aimlessly trying to find your way?

古文：余乃废然而返，取行李西南越而下，抵河东岸。
现代文：我只好失望而返，取了行李向西南穿越而下，抵达河的东岸。
English: Disappointed, I returned, picked up my luggage and headed southwest across the river to the east bank.

古文：溯之北，共一里，有溪自西北山腋来，路从东北山腋上，遂与麦冲河别。
现代文：溯河往北走，共一里，有条溪水自西北方山侧流来，路从东北方山腰上行，便与麦冲河分手。
English: Walking north along the river, a total of one mile, there is a stream flowing from the northwest side of the mountain, and the road goes up from the northeastern mountainside, and then breaks up with the Mai Chong River.

古文：当坡路潦小水塘迹间，有泉泛泛从下溢起，孔大如指，以指探之，皆沙土随指而溷ｈùｎ混浊，指去而复溢成孔，乃气机所动，而水随之，非有定穴也。
现代文：在坡路积水处，有泉水泊泪从地下溢出，泉眼大如手指，用手指伸进泉眼，都是沙土，随着手指插进去水就变混浊了，指头抽出便又溢成孔洞，这是气体上升的机理使沙土流动，而泉水随着气体冒出来，没有固定的洞穴。
English: At the place where water accumulates on the slope, there is a spring that overflows from the ground. The spring is as big as a finger. When you stick your finger into the spring, it is all sand. When you stick your finger in, the water becomes cloudy. When you pull your finger out, it overflows into a hole. This is the mechanism of rising gas that causes the sand to flow, and the spring water emerges with the gas. There is no fixed cave.

古文：一里，转上后峡，遂向东入。
现代文：一里路，转上后山山峡，就向东入峡。
English: Take the one-mile road, turn onto the back mountain gorge, and enter the gorge to the east.

古文：又一里，峡更东去，路复从北峡上。
现代文：又走一里，峡谷进一步向东延去，路又从北面山峡上走。
English: After walking another mile, the canyon stretched further eastward, and the road went up the mountain canyon from the north.

古文：脊东西乱水交流，犹俱下麦冲者，又东一里，转而北，有坞南北开洋，其底甚平，犁而为田，此处已用牛耕，不若六寨以南之用概橇矣。
现代文：此处石峰嶙峋，延伸而过的山脊十分狭窄。越过狭窄的山脊往北下到山坞中，覆盖着田垄充盈在坞中的，小麦青青荞麦熟，全是粉色的花簇翠色的绿浪，从此地起便不再有粤西荒芜的状态了。
English: At this point, there is a rocky peak and a very narrow ridge extending past it. After crossing the narrow ridge and descending to the north to the dock, it is covered with fields full of ridges in the dock, the wheat is ripe, the buckwheat is ripe, and the flowers are all pink. From here, there is no longer a state of desolation in western Guangdong.

古文：波耕水耨ｎòｕ，盈盈其间，水皆从崖坡泻下，而不见有浍浚人工挖的田间沟渠之迹。
现代文：山脊东西两面水流杂乱交流，仍然全是下流进麦冲河的水流。又往东行一里，转向北，有个山坞南北开阔，坞底十分平坦，犁为田地，波耕水褥，流水湮澄充盈在田野间，流水皆是从山崖斜坡上流泻而下，却不见有人工开挖沟渠的痕迹。
English: The water flow between the east and west sides of the ridge is disorderly, and it is still all the downstream water flow into the Mai Chong River. Another mile to the east, turning to the north, there is a dock that is open from north to south, the dock bottom is very flat, the dock is a field, the wave is water, the running water is clear and full in the fields, the running water is flowing down from the cliff slope, but there are no traces of man-made ditches.

古文：二里，有村颇盛，倚西峰下，曰普林堡。
现代文：二里路，有个村庄十分兴盛，紧靠在西峰之下，叫普林堡。
English: Two miles down the road, there is a thriving village just below the western peak, called Prienburg.

古文：又北一里，逾岭而上石峰，复度峡而下，转而东，平行石岭间。
现代文：又往北一里，越岭后登上石峰，再越过山峡而下，转向东，平缓行走在石岭之间。
English: Another mile to the north, after crossing the ridge, climb up the stone peak, then cross the gorge down, turn to the east, and walk smoothly between the stone ridge.

古文：一里东下，盘窝中有小石峰如阜，盘托而出，路从之，经窝东入峡。
现代文：向东下行一里，盘状的山窝中有座小石峰圆圆的如像土阜，圆盘般地托地而出，路经由这座石峰，经过山窝东边进入峡谷。
English: One mile to the east, there is a small round stone peak in a disk-shaped mountain hollow, like a soil, and it protrudes from the ground like a disk. The road passes through this stone peak, passes the eastern side of the mountain hollow and enters the canyon.

古文：一里，复北向升岭，一里，遂逾土脊之上。
现代文：一里路，再次向北登岭，一里，终于翻越到土脊之上。
English: One mile further north to the ridge, one mile, and finally over the ridge.

古文：此脊当为老龙之干，西自大、小平伐来，东过谷蒙、包阳之间，又东过此，东南抵独山州北，又东为黎平、平崖之脊，而东抵兴安，南转分水龙王庙者也。
现代文：此条山脊应当是主峰的主干，由西面大、小平伐延来，往东延过谷蒙、包阳之间，又向东经过此地，往东南抵达独山州北面，又往东形成黎平、平崖的山脊，而后向东到达兴安县，往南转向分水岭龙王庙。
English: This ridge should be the main trunk of the main peak, extending from the west of the large and small Pingfa, to the east of the valley between Meng and Baoyang, and passing through this place to the east, to the southeast to reach the north of Duxanzhou, and to the east to form the ridge of Liping and Pingyao, and then to the east to reach Xingan County, and to the south to turn to the watershed Longwang Temple.

古文：越脊北下，峡壁甚隘。
现代文：越过土脊向北下行，峡壁非常狭窄。
English: The canyon wall is very narrow as you descend over the ridge to the north.

古文：一里，下行峡中，有水透西南峡来入，北随峡去，渡之，傍涧西涯行。
现代文：一里路，下来行走在峡谷中，有涧水穿过西南的山峡前来流入峡中，向北随着峡谷流去，渡过山涧，傍着山涧西岸走。
English: One mile down, walking in the canyon, there is rushing water coming through the southwest canyon and flowing into the canyon, flowing north along the canyon, crossing the ridge, and walking along the west coast of the ridge.

古文：有岐路溯水西南峡，则包阳道，通平浪、平洲六洞者也。
现代文：有岔路溯流通往西南的峡中，是去包阳的道路，通往平浪司、平洲六洞司。
English: In the gorge to the southwest, there is a winding road, which is the road to Baoyang, leading to Pinglangsi and Pingzhou Liudongsi.

古文：随水东北行峡中，又三里，转而东，其峡渐开，有村在南山间，曰下石堡。
现代文：顺涧水往东北行走在峡中，又是三里，转向东，此峡渐渐开阔起来，有个村庄在南山山间，叫下石堡。
English: Walking along the Bohai River to the northeast, I found myself in the canyon for another three miles. Turning east, the canyon gradually widened. There was a village in the mountains of Nanshan called Shimoishi Castle.

古文：又北二里，过一巨石桥，涧从桥下西北坠深峡中而去；路别之，东北逾岭。
现代文：又往北行二里，过了一座巨型石桥，山涧从桥下向西北坠入深峡中流去；路离开了山涧，向东北越岭。
English: Another two miles to the north, over a huge stone bridge, the hawthorn fell from the bridge to the northwest into the middle of the deep gorge; the road left the hawthorn and crossed the ridge to the northeast.

古文：升降二重，又二里，越岭下，则东南山坞大开，大溪自西北破峡出，汤汤东去，是曰大马尾河。
现代文：上上下下两重山，又走二里路，越过岭下山，则见东南方向山坞十分开阔，有大溪自西北冲破山峡流出，浩浩荡荡东去，这叫大马尾河。
English: After climbing up and down the two mountains, and walking two miles, crossing the ridge and descending the mountain, you will see the southeast direction of the mountain dock is very open, and there is a large stream from the northwest breaking through the mountain gorge and flowing out. It is called the Great Mawei River.

古文：以暴涨难渡，由溪南循山崖东行，溪流直捣崖足。
现代文：由于溪水暴涨难以渡河，便由溪南顺山崖东行，溪流径直冲捣着崖脚。
English: Due to the difficulty of crossing the river due to the rapid rise of the stream water, they went east from the south of Hunan along the mountain cliff, and the stream rushed straight to the foot of the cliff.

古文：一里，东抵堡前，观诸渡者，水涌平胸，不胜望洋之恐。
现代文：一里，往东到达堡垒前边，观看众人渡水，溪水汹涌齐胸，禁不住生出望洋兴叹的恐惧。
English: One mile to the east, in front of the fortress, watching the crowd crossing the water, the rushing stream, I couldn't help but feel a sense of awe.

古文：坐久之，乃解衣泅水而渡，从北岸东向行。水从东南峡去，别之，乃东北逾岭而下，共三里，东渡小马尾河。
现代文：坐了很久，这才脱衣泅水而渡。从北岸向东行，溪水从东南方的峡谷中流去，离开溪流，于是向东北越岭后下走，共行三里，向东渡过小马尾河。
English: After sitting for a long time, I undressed and walked across the water. I walked from the north bank to the east, the stream water flowed from the canyon in the southeast, leaving the stream, so I walked to the northeast across the ridge and down, a total of three miles, and crossed the Little Pony River to the east.

古文：复东北升岭，一里半，越岭脊东下。
现代文：又向东北登岭，一里半路，越过岭脊向东下岭。
English: It also climbs the ridge to the northeast, a mile and a half, and crosses the ridge ridge to the lower ridge to the east.

古文：一里半，出山峡，山乃大开，成南北坞，东西两界，列山环之，大河汤汤流其间，自北而南。
现代文：一里半，走出山峡，山势于是十分开阔，形成南北向的山坞，东西两边，群山环绕着它，大河浩浩森森流于坞间，自北流往南。
English: A mile and a half, out of the gorge, the mountain is then very open, forming a north-south dock, east and west, mountains surround it, large rivers flow between the docks, from north to south.

古文：溯溪西岸，循西界山北行一里，路旁即有水自西峡东向入溪，涉之。
现代文：溯溪流西岸走，沿西面一列山向北行一里，路旁马上有水流自西边峡谷中向东流入溪中，涉过溪流。
English: Following the west bank of the stream, I walked one mile north along a line of mountains on the west side. Right next to the road, there was water flowing from the west canyon to the east into the stream, wading through the stream.

古文：又北二里，有石梁跨一西来溪上，度之。
现代文：又往北二里，有座石桥跨在一条自西边流来的溪水上，过了桥。
English: Another two miles to the north, a stone bridge spans over a stream flowing from the west and crosses the bridge.

古文：从梁端循峡西入，是为胡家司，即都匀长官司也，以名同本郡，故别以姓称。
现代文：从桥头沿峡谷向西进去，那是胡家司，就是都匀长官司了，因为名称与本府相同，故而用姓氏称呼它以示区别。
English: Entering from the bridgehead along the canyon to the west, that is Hu Jia Si, that is Duyun Chang Guan Si, because the name is the same as the main government, so it is called by the surname to show the difference.

古文：又北一里，有村在西山崖上，曰黄家司，乃其副也。
现代文：又向北走一里，有村庄在西边山崖上，叫黄家司，是胡家司的副长官。
English: Another mile to the north, there is a village on the western cliff, called Huang Jia Si, is the deputy chief of Hu Jia Si.

古文：又北行田塍间五里，度西桥。
现代文：又往北行走在田野间五里，过了西桥。
English: Walk north again for five miles between fields, passing the West Bridge.

古文：又北半里，入小西门，是为都匀郡城。
现代文：又向北半里，进入小西门，这是都匀府城。
English: Another half-mile to the north, enter the Small West Gate, which is the capital city of Duyun.

古文：宿逆旅，主人家为沈姓，亦江西人。
现代文：住宿在旅店中，店主人姓沈，也是江西人。
English: They stayed in a hotel. The owner of the hotel, surnamed Shen, was also from Jiangxi.

古文：初二日晨起，作书投都匀司尊张，勉行，四川人，乃散步东入郡堂，堂乃西向蟒山者。
现代文：初二日早晨起床，写信送给都匀府知府张大人，于是散着步往东走入府衙大堂，大堂是坐西对着蟒山的建筑物。
English: On the morning of the second day of the first month, I got up and wrote a letter to Mr. Zhang, the governor of Duyun Prefecture, so I walked eastward into the hall of the prefectural government. The hall is a building facing Shaoshan in the west.

古文：又东上东山麓，谒圣庙。
现代文：又向东爬上东山山麓，拜渴了孔庙。
English: He also climbed eastward to the foot of Dongshan Mountain to visit the Confucius Temple.

古文：见有读书庑东者，问南皋邹总宪戍都时遗迹。
现代文：见有个在东厢房读书的人，打听南皋人邹总宪戌守都匀时的遗迹。
English: I saw a person reading in the east wing room, inquiring about the relics of the time when the people of Nanxun and the general government were in control of Duyun.

古文：曰： 有书院在东门内。 
现代文：回答说： 有个书院在东门内。 
English: He replied: There is a college inside the east gate.

古文：问《郡志》。
现代文：询问《都匀府志》。
English: Inquire about "Touyunfushi."

古文：其友归取以示甚略而不详，即大、小马尾之水，不书其发源，并不书其所注，其他可知。
现代文：他的朋友回家取来给我看，《府志》十分简略而不详备，就如大、小马尾河，不记它们的发源地，而且不写明它们流向什么地方，其他内容可想而知。
English: His friend took it home and showed it to me. "Fu Zhi" is very concise and not detailed, just like the Dai and Xiaomao Rivers, without remembering their place of origin, and without specifying where they flow to. Other contents can be imagined.

古文：载都八景，俱八寸三分帽子，非此地确然特出之奇也。
现代文：记载都匀的八景，全是些八寸三分的帽子，不是此地确实特出的奇观。
English: The eight scenic spots that are uniformly recorded are all eight-inch-three-point hats, and are not the truly outstanding wonders of this place.

古文：此地西门大溪有新架石梁，垒石为九门甚整，横跨洪流，乃不取此，何耶？
现代文：此地西门外大溪上有座新架的石桥，用石块垒砌成九个桥拱，非常整齐，横跨在滔滔洪水上，竟然不取此景，为什么呢？
English: Here, there is a newly built stone bridge on the creek outside the West Gate. It is made of stone blocks and has nine arches. It is very neat and spans over the torrential flood. Why is this scene not taken?

古文：都匀郡城东倚东山，西瞰大溪。
现代文：都匀府城东面紧靠东山，西边俯瞰大溪。
English: The eastern side of Duyun prefectural capital is close to Dongshan, while the western side overlooks Daxi.

古文：有高冈自东山西盘，而下临溪堑；溪自北来，西转而环其东。
现代文：有座高高的山冈自东山向西盘绕，而下临溪水流经的深堑；溪水自北面流来，向西转后又环绕到它的东边。
English: There is a high hill that winds from the east to the west, and a deep ravine through which the water of the lower stream flows; the stream flows from the north, turns to the west, and then circles around to its east.

古文：城圆亘冈上，南北各一门，西有大小二门，东门偏于山之南。
现代文：城墙呈圆形横亘在山冈上，南北各有一道城门，西面有一大一小两道门，东门偏在山的南面。
English: The city wall is circular and stretches across the hill. There is a gate to the north and south, a large door and a small door to the west, and the east gate is on the south side of the mountain.

古文：城后环东山之巅，其上有楼，可以舒眺。
现代文：城后环绕着东山的山顶，山顶上有高楼，可以纵目远眺。
English: The back of the city is surrounded by the peak of Higashiyama. There are tall buildings on the top of the mountain, which can be seen far and wide.

古文：郡西对蟒山，为一郡最高之案，郡治、文庙俱向之。
现代文：府城西面对着蟒山，蟒山是全府最高的山峰，府衙、文庙都朝向它。
English: The west of the prefecture faces Mount Lushan, which is the highest mountain in the prefecture, and the prefectural government and the Wen Temple are facing it.

古文：其南峰旁耸，有梵宇在其上，须拾级五里而上，以饭后雨作不及登。
现代文：它的南峰在侧边耸起，有佛寺在峰上，必须沿台阶逐级走五里才能上去，因为饭后下雨来不及上登。
English: Its southern peak rises on the side, there is a Buddhist temple on the peak, you have to walk five miles along the steps to go up, because it rains after dinner.

古文：谓之 蟒 者，以峰头有石脊，蜿蜒如巨蛇。
现代文：把它称之为 蟒 的原因，是由于峰顶有石头山脊，蜿蜿蜒蜒如巨蛇。
English: The reason it's called a ridge is because the top of the peak has a rocky ridge that winds like a giant snake.

古文：今志改为龙山。
现代文：现在写的志书改称为龙山。
English: The book I'm writing now will be called Longshan.

古文：九龙洞，在城东十里。
现代文：九龙洞，在城东面十里。
English: Kowloon-dong, ten miles east of the city.

古文：按《一统志》有都匀洞，在都匀长官司东十里，前门北向，后门南向，当即此洞。
现代文：据《一统志》，有个都匀洞，在都匀长官司东面十里，前洞口向北，后洞口向南，应当就是此洞。
English: According to "Izongzhi," there is a Duyun cave, ten miles east of the Duyun Chief Magistrate's Office, with the front cave opening to the north and the back cave opening to the south, which should be this cave.

古文：今志称为仙人洞二，下注云： 一在城东，一在城西。 
现代文：志书称都匀有两个仙人洞，下面的注文说： 一个在城东，一个在城西。 
English: According to the book, there are two fairy caves, the following order: one in the east of the city, one in the west.

古文：殊觉愦愦。
现代文：觉得非常混乱。
English: I felt very confused.

古文：水府庙，在城北梦遇山，大溪南下横其前，一小溪西自蟒山北直东来注。
现代文：水府庙，在城北的梦遇山，大溪向南下流横在庙前，一条小溪自西边蟒山的北面一直往东流注而来。
English: Shuifu Temple, in the north of the city of Mengyuan Mountain, a large stream flows southward across the temple, and a small stream flows eastward from the north side of Lushan Mountain on the west side.

古文：下有白衣阁，倚崖悬危壁上，凭临不测。
现代文：下面有座白衣阁，紧依山崖悬在危壁之上，高高濒临着不测之深渊。
English: Below, there is a white coat pavilion, clinging to the cliff and hanging over the dangerous wall, high and on the verge of the abyss.

古文：上有梵音洞，西向为门。
现代文：上边有个梵音洞，向西辟为门洞。
English: There is a Sanskrit chanting cave on the upper side and a doorway to the west.

古文：洞无他致，止云其中有石佛自土中出者为异耳。
现代文：洞中无其他别致之处，只是听说洞中有尊石佛自土中生出来的事较为奇异罢了。
English: There is nothing else unique about the cave, except that it is said that a stone statue of Buddha was born from the earth in the cave, which is rather strange.

古文：初三日下午自都匀起身，二十里，文德宿。
现代文：初三日下午从都匀动身，二十里，住宿在文德。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the first day, I set off from Duyun, twenty miles, and stayed in Wende.

古文：初四日三十里，麻哈州。
现代文：初四日三十里路，到麻哈州。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, I drove 30 miles to Mahahashtra.

古文：又十里，干溪宿。
现代文：又走十里，在干溪住下。
English: He walked another ten miles and settled down in the dry creek.

古文：初五日十里，麻哈大堡。
现代文：初五日十里，到麻哈大堡。
English: The first five days, ten miles, to the Maha Castle.

古文：又十里，于坝哨。
现代文：又行十里，到干坝哨。
English: Another ten miles to the dry dam post.

古文：又十五里，平越卫。
现代文：又行十五里，到平越卫。
English: Another fifteen miles to Ping Yue Wei.

古文：初六日歇平越。
现代文：初六日在平越歇息。
English: On the 6th day of the first lunar month, it will rest in Pingyue.

古文：初七日宿店。
现代文：初七日住宿在客店中。
English: The first seven nights will be spent in a guest house.

古文：初八日雇贵州夫行，至崖头宿。
现代文：初八日雇贵州的挑夫上路，到崖头住下。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he hired a porter from Guizhou to go on the road and live at the cliff.

古文：初九日新添饭，至杨宝宿。
现代文：初九日在新添卫吃饭，到杨宝山住下来。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he had dinner in Xintianwei and stayed in Yangbaoshan.

古文：初十日龙里歇。
现代文：初十日到了龙里停歇。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it stopped in Longli.

古文：十一日二十里，至鼓角。
现代文：十一日行二十里，到达鼓角。
English: Eleven days and twenty miles later, we arrived in Drum Horn.

古文：三十里，至贵州。
现代文：又走三十里，到贵州。
English: I walked another thirty miles to Guizhou.

古文：十二日止贵州。
现代文：十二日停在贵州。
English: On the 12th, it stopped in Guizhou.

古文：游古佛洞。
现代文：游了古佛洞。
English: swam through the ancient Buddha cave.

古文：十三日止贵州，寓吴慎所家。
现代文：十三日停在贵州，寄住在吴慎所家中。
English: On the 13th, they stopped in Guizhou and stayed at Wu Shensho's home.

古文：十四日晨饭于吴，遂出司南门，度西溪桥，西南向行。
现代文：十四日清晨在吴家吃过饭，于是出了省城南门，走过西溪桥，向西南方行。
English: On the morning of the 14th, after having dinner at Wu's house, he left the south gate of the provincial capital, walked across the Xixi Bridge, and headed southwest.

古文：桥下水涌流两崖石间，冲突甚急，南来大溪所不及也。
现代文：五里路，有条溪水自西边山谷中流来，往东注入南来的大溪；有座石桥跨在溪上，叫做太子桥。桥下溪水涌流在两岸石崖之间，冲激奔突很是湍急，水势是南来的大溪赶不上的。
English: Wuli Road, there is a stream that flows from the middle of the valley on the west side and flows into the south stream to the east; there is a stone bridge across the stream, called the Prince Bridge. Under the bridge, the stream gushes between the stone cliffs on both sides, the rush is very fast, and the water potential is beyond the reach of the south stream.

古文：度桥，溯南来大溪又西南三里，有一山南横，如列屏于前，大溪由其东腋北出，路从其西腋南进。
现代文：过了桥，溯南来的大溪又往西南行三里，有一座山在南边横着，如屏风排列在前方，大溪由它的东侧往北流出去，路从它的西侧向南前进。
English: After crossing the bridge, the stream that came from the south went southwest for another three miles. There was a mountain on the south side, like a screen in front. The stream flowed north from its east side, and the road went south from its west side.

古文：又南行峡间二里，历东山之嘴，曰岜堰塘，其西南有双峰骈起，其东即屏列山之侧也。
现代文：又向南行走在山峡之间有二里，经过东山的山嘴，名叫屺堰塘，它的西南方有两座山峰双双耸起，它的东面就是那座似屏风排列之山的侧面了。
English: Walking south again, there are two miles between the canyons, passing through the East Mountain's promontory, called Shuyantang. There are two peaks rising in the southwest of it, and the east side of it is the side of the mountain that looks like a screen.

古文：又三里，过双骈东麓而出其南，渐闻溪声遥沸，东望屏列之山，南迸成峡，溪形复自南来捣峡去，即出其东北腋之上流矣；第路循西界山椒山巅，溪沿东界峰麓，溯行而犹未觌面觌音ｄí觌面也即是见面之意耳。又南二里，始见东溪汪然，有村在东峰之下，曰水边寨。
现代文：又走三里，过了双双并立之峰的东麓而后到达它的南边，渐渐听到远处溪水的沸腾声，东望那屏风样排列的山，南面迸裂成峡谷，溪水的流势又自南流来冲捣山峡而去，这就是流出此山东北侧那条大溪的上游了；但只是道路顺着西边一列山的山顶走，溪水沿着东面山峰的峰麓流，逆溪而行却仍未见面而已。又往南二里，这才见到东方有溪水水势浩大，有个村庄在东峰之下，叫水边寨。
English: I walked another three miles, passed the eastern foot of the two parallel peaks, and then reached the south side of it. Gradually, I heard the boiling sound of the stream in the distance. Looking east, I saw the mountains arranged like a screen, and the south side was split into a canyon. The flow of the stream also came from the south stream to rush the mountain gorge, which is the upstream of the large stream that flows out of the northeast side of the mountain. But I only walked along the top of a mountain in the west, and the stream flowed along the foot of the mountain peak in the east, going against the stream, but I still didn't see it. I went two miles

古文：又南三里，曰大水沟，有一二家在路侧，前有树可憩焉。
现代文：又向南三里，叫大水沟，有一两户人家在路旁，前边有树可在下面休息。
English: Another three miles south, called the big ditch, there are one or two houses on the side of the road, and there are trees in front to rest under.

古文：又南渐升土阜，遂东与大溪隔。
现代文：又向南慢慢爬上土阜，于是东面与大溪相隔。
English: Then it slowly climbed southward to the soil, so it was separated from the large stream in the east.

古文：已从岭上平行，五里，北望双骈，又三分成笔架形矣。
现代文：随即从岭上平缓前行，五里，北望双双并列的山峰，又分为三岔变成笔架的形状了。
English: After that, I walked slowly from the ridge. Wuli and Beibang, two mountain peaks side by side, were divided into three ridges and became the shape of a pen holder.

古文：南行土山峡中，又一里，出峡。
现代文：往南行走在土山峡谷中，又行一里，出了峡口。
English: Walking south in the Tsuchiyama canyon, I walked another mile and reached the mouth of the canyon.

古文：稍折而东，则大溪自西南峡中来，至此东转，抵乐峰下，乃折而北去。
现代文：略微折向东，就有大溪自西南方峡谷中流来，到此处往东转，流到东峰之下，便折向北流去。
English: Turning slightly to the east, there is a large stream flowing from the middle of the southwest canyon, turning to the east here, flowing under the east peak, and then turning to the north.

古文：有九巩同 拱 巨石梁，南北架溪上，是为华仡佬桥。
现代文：有座九拱巨石桥，呈南北向架在溪上，这是华伤佬桥。
English: There is a nine-arched stone bridge spanning the stream in a north-south direction. This is the Glorious Bridge.

古文：乃饭于桥南铺肆中。
现代文：于是在桥南的店铺中吃了饭。
English: So I ate at a restaurant in the south of the bridge.

古文：遂南向循东峰之西而行，皆从士坂升陟，路坦而宽。
现代文：随即向南沿着东峰的西麓而行，都是从土坡向上爬，道路又平坦又宽敞。
English: Then I walked south along the west foot of the east peak, climbing up from the dirt slope. The road was flat and spacious.

古文：盖东西两界，俱层峰排闼，而此冈中横其间为过脉，不崚而坦，其南即水南下矣，是云独木岭。
现代文：九里路，见到道路通往中间的山冈，路东的流水既已向东北坠到山峡下面，路西之水又往西北注入坑谷中去，对此现象心里边很奇怪。略略走上冈头，就见路东山著密林环绕，有一户人家位于山等之中，房门朝西面临大路，有三四个人歇息在岩石旁，因而拄着拐杖与他们一同休息，原来这座山冈已是南北两面的分水岭了。
English: Jiuli Road, see the road leading to the middle of the mountain, the east of the road has fallen to the northeast to the bottom of the canyon, and the west of the road has been injected into the valley to the northwest. This phenomenon is very strange. Slightly walk up the hill, you will see the east of the road surrounded by dense forest. There is a house in the mountains, the door faces west facing the highway. Three or four people rest next to the rock, so they rest with them on crutches. Originally, this mountain has been the watershed between the north and south.

古文：或曰头目岭。昔金筑司在西界尖峰下，而此为头目所守处。从岭南下，依东界石山行。
现代文：大体上东西两面，全是层层峰峦似门扉样排列，而此冈横在东西两列山中间成为过渡的山脉，山势不高而且平缓，它南面的水流即往南下流了，这里叫独木岭。从岭上往南下行，靠着东面的石山走。
English: In general, on the east and west sides, there are all layers of peaks arranged like a doorway, and this hill lies in the middle of the east and west mountains and becomes a transitional mountain range. The mountain is not high and flat. The water flow on its south side flows southward. Here it is called Dokubo Ridge. Go south from the ridge and walk along the east side of the stone mountain.

古文：五里，复升土岭，渐转东南，岭头有一洼中坠。
现代文：五里，又爬土岭，逐渐转向东南，岭头有一块中央一陷的洼地。
English: After five miles, it climbed a ridge and gradually turned to the southeast. At the top of the ridge, there was a depression with a depression in the middle.

古文：从其东又南向而上，共二里，乃下。
现代文：从洼地东边又向南而上，共二里路，于是下走。
English: From the east side of the depression, I walked up to the south, a total of two miles, and then walked down.

古文：一里，则有溪自西北峡中出，至此东转，石梁跨之，是为青崖桥。
现代文：一里，便有溪水自西北峡中流出，到此处向东转，石桥跨在溪上，这是青崖桥。
English: After one mile, there is a stream flowing out of the northwest gorge. At this point, it turns to the east, and a stone bridge spans the stream. This is Qingya Bridge.

古文：水从桥下东抵东界山，乃东南注壑去，经定番州而南下泗城界，入都泥江者也，于是又出岭南矣。
现代文：溪水从桥下往东抵达东面一列山下，就向东南注入壑谷中去，是流经定番州而后南下洒城境内，流入都泥江的溪流，从那里又流出岭南了。
English: The stream water flows from under the bridge to the east, reaches the foot of a mountain to the east, and then flows to the southeast into the valley. It flows through Banzhou and then southward into the territory of the city, and flows into the stream of the Du Di River, from where it flows out of Lingnan.

古文：度桥而南，半里，入青崖城之北门。
现代文：过桥往南走，半里路，进入青崖城的北债。
English: Cross the bridge to the south, walk half a mile, and enter the northern bonds of Qingya City.

古文：其城新建，旧纡而东，今折其东隅而西就尖峰之上，城中颇有瓦楼阛阓焉。
现代文：这座城新近修建过，旧城墙绕向东去，今天把城东角折向西就着尖峰上面修筑，城中瓦盖的楼房和街市很多。
English: This city has been newly built. The old city wall went around to the east. Today, the east corner of the city is turned to the west and built on top of a spike. There are many tile-roofed buildings and markets in the city.

古文：是日晴霁竟日，夜月复皎。
现代文：这一天终日晴朗，夜里月亮又皎洁明亮。
English: The day was clear all day, and the moon was bright and clear at night.

古文：青崖屯属贵州前卫，而地则广顺州所辖。
现代文：青崖屯隶属于贵州前卫，可地方上却归广顺州管辖。
English: Qingyaotun belongs to Guizhou Avant-garde, but it is under the jurisdiction of Guangzhou Shunzhou.

古文：北去省五十里，南去定番州三十五里，东北去龙里六十里，西南去广顺州五十里。
现代文：北面距省城五十里，南边距定番州三十五里，东北方距龙里司六十里，西南方距广顺州五十里。
English: The north side is 50 miles from the provincial capital, the south side is 35 miles from Pingzhou, the northeast is 60 miles from Longlis, and the southwest is 50 miles from Guangshun.

古文：有溪自西北老龙脊发源，环城北东流南转。
现代文：有溪流自西北的主峰山脊发源，环绕过城北往东流后向南转去。
English: A stream originates from the main peak ridge in the northwest, flows eastward around the north of the city, and then turns south.

古文：是贵省南鄙要害，今添设总兵常驻武官驻扎其内。
现代文：这是贵州省城南郊的要害之地，现今增设了总兵官驻扎在城内。
English: This is a key location on the southern outskirts of the city in Guizhou Province. Now, an additional general officer is stationed in the city.

