古文：庄宗光圣神闵孝皇帝，其先本号硃邪，盖出于西突厥，至其后世，别自号曰沙陀，而硃邪为姓。
现代文：庄宗光圣神闵孝皇帝，其先祖号朱邪，是西突厥的一支，至后世，自号沙陀族，以朱邪为姓。
English: Emperor Zhuangzongguang Shengxian of Zhuangzongguang, whose ancestor's surname was Zhuye, was a member of the West Turkic tribe, who called themselves the Shado tribe and took Zhuye as their surname.

古文：唐德宗时，有硃邪尽忠者，居于北庭之金满州。
现代文：唐德宗时，有个人叫朱邪尽忠，居住在北庭的金满州。
English: When Tang Dezong was alive, there was a man named Zhu Yazhongzhong, who lived in Jinmanzhou, Beibei.

古文：贞元中，吐蕃赞普攻陷北庭，徙尽忠于甘州而役属之。
现代文：贞元中，吐蕃赞普攻占北庭，迁移尽忠全族到甘州受吐蕃奴役。
English: In the reign of Zhenyuan, Tubo Zampu conquered the Northern Court and moved the whole family to Gansu to be enslaved by Tubo Zampu.

古文：其后赞普为回鹘所败，尽忠与其子执宜东走。赞普怒，追之，及于石门关。尽忠战死，执宜独走归唐，居之盐州，以隶河西节度使范希朝。
现代文：后来吐蕃赞普被回鹘打败，尽忠与其子执宜东走，吐蕃赞普大怒下令追赶，在石门关尽忠战死，执宜走脱归唐，住在盐州，隶属于河西节度使范希朝。
English: Later, Tubo Zampu was defeated by Hui Zang, and Duan Zhong and his son Duan Yi went east. Tubo Zampu angrily ordered a chase, and Duan Zhong died in the battle at Shimen Pass. Duan Yi escaped to Tang, lived in Yanzhou, and was subordinate to the Hexi Festival of Fan Xi Dynasty.

古文：希朝徙镇太原，执宜从之，居之定襄神武川之新城。
现代文：范希朝移镇太原，执宜跟随迁居到定襄神武川的新城。
English: Fan Xi moved to the town of Taiyuan in the morning, and Xing Yi followed him to the new town of Jingshang Shembuchuan.

古文：其部落万骑，皆骁勇善骑射，号 沙陀军 。
现代文：他的部落有战士万骑，都很骁勇，善于骑射，号 沙陀军 。
English: His tribe had warriors who rode horses, were very brave, good at riding and shooting, and called themselves the Shatou Army.

古文：执宜死，其子曰赤心。
现代文：执宜死，其子名赤心。
English: Xing Yi died, and his son was named Chakxin.

古文：懿宗咸通十年，神策大将军康承训统十八将讨庞勋于徐州，以硃邪赤心为太原行营招讨沙、陀三部落军使。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通十年，神策大将军康承训统十八将到徐州讨伐庞勋，用朱邪赤心为太原行营招讨沙陀三部落军使。
English: In the tenth year of Tang Xizong's reign, the great general Kang Chengxun and 18 generals went to Xuzhou to fight Pang Xun, and used Zhu Yaxi to recruit the envoys of the three tribes of Sata for the Taiyuan campaign.

古文：以从破勋功，拜单于大都护、振武军节度使，赐姓名曰李国昌，以之属籍。
现代文：因打败庞勋有功，唐封其为单于大都护、振武军节度使，赐姓名李国昌。
English: Because of his achievement in defeating Pang Xun, he was given the name Li Guochang by the Tang Dynasty for being the sole guardian of the capital and the military commander of the Spring Festival.

古文：沙陀素强，而国昌恃功益横恣，懿宗患之。
现代文：沙陀族发展壮大，李国昌恃功骄横，唐懿宗视为祸患。
English: The Shado tribe developed and grew strong, Li Guochang was proud of his achievements, and the Tang Yizong sect was regarded as a scourge.

古文：十三年，徙国昌云州刺史、大同军防御使，国昌称疾拒命。
现代文：咸通十三年，下令迁移李国昌为云州刺史、大同军防御使，国昌称病拒绝接受命令。
English: In the thirteenth year of Hamdang, Li Guochang was ordered to relocate to Yunnan as a historian and a defense envoy of the Datong Army. Guochang refused to accept the order, saying that he was ill.

古文：国昌子克用，尤善骑射，能仰中双凫，为云州守捉使。
现代文：国昌子克用，非常善于骑射，能仰面射中双水鸟，封为云州守捉使。
English: Guo Changzi was very good at riding and shooting, and was able to shoot a waterfowl on his backside. He was appointed as a Yunnan guard and catcher.

古文：国昌已拒命，克用乃杀大同军防御使段文楚，据云州，自称留后。
现代文：国昌已抗拒唐朝命令，克用便杀大同军防御使段文楚，占据云州，自称留后。
English: Guochang had already resisted the order of the Tang Dynasty. He killed the defense commander of the Datong Army, Duan Wenchu, and occupied Yunnan, claiming to stay behind.

古文：唐以太仆卿卢简方为振武节度使，会幽、并兵讨之。
现代文：唐朝用太仆卿卢简方为振武节度使，会合幽州、并州军去讨伐。
English: The Tang Dynasty used Lu Jianfang, the eunuch minister, as the envoy of Zhenwu Jiedu, to gather Yuzhou and the state army to go to the crusade.

古文：简方行至岚州，军溃，由是沙陀侵掠代北，为边患矣。
现代文：行军至岚州，士兵溃散，从此，沙陀族侵掠代北，成为唐朝边患。
English: The army marched to Bozhou, and the soldiers scattered. From then on, the Shado tribe invaded and plundered the north of the country, becoming a problem for the Tang Dynasty.

古文：明年，僖宗即位，以谓前太原节度使李业遇沙陀有恩，而业已死，乃以其子钧为灵武节度使、宣慰沙陀六州三部落使，以招缉之。
现代文：乾符一年，僖宗即位，因为前太原节度使李业对沙陀族有恩，业已死，封其子钧为灵武节度使、宣慰沙陀六州三部落使，施行招安。
English: In the following year, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne. Because Li Ye, who had been kind to the Shatou people before the Taiyuan Festival, had died, Emperor Taizong appointed his son Yao as the Lingwu Festival Envoy and the Xuanjie Shatou Six-State Three-Tribe Envoy to bring peace.

古文：拜克用大同军防御使。
现代文：封克用为大同军防御使。
English: Feng Ke served as the Datong Army's defense envoy.

古文：居久之，国昌出击党项，吐浑赫连鐸袭破振武。
现代文：后来，李国昌出兵袭击党项，吐浑赫连铎袭破振武。
English: Later, Li Guochang sent troops to attack the party, and Tu Hunh Lien attacked and defeated Zhenwu.

古文：克用闻之，自云州往迎国昌，而云州人亦闭关拒之。
现代文：李克用听到消息，从云州去接应国昌，而云州人闭关不让他们进城。
English: Li Ke used to hear the news and went from Yunnan to meet Guochang, but the Yunnan people closed the gate and did not let them enter the city.

古文：国昌父子无所归，因掠蔚、朔间，得兵三千，国昌入保蔚州，克用还据新城。
现代文：国昌父子无所归，就在蔚州、朔州间抢掠为生，得兵三千，国昌入据蔚州，克用还据新城。
English: Guochang and his son had nowhere to go, so they made a living by robbing and pillaging between Ulshu and Shuozhou, gaining three thousand soldiers. Guochang entered Ulshu, and Guoyong returned to Xincheng.

古文：僖宗乃拜鐸大同军使，以李钧为代北招讨使，以讨沙陀。
现代文：僖宗封赫连铎为大同军使，用李钧为代北招讨使，讨伐沙陀军。
English: Zongzong appointed Hereng Yao as the envoy of Datong Army, and used Li Yao as the envoy of Northern Recruitment to fight the Shatou Army.

古文：乾符五年，沙陀破遮虏军，又破苛岚军，而唐兵数败，沙陀由此益炽，北据蔚、朔，南侵忻、代、岚、石，至于太谷焉。
现代文：乾符五年，沙陀破遮虏军，又破岢岚军，唐兵屡败，沙陀由此更加强盛，北据蔚、朔，南侵忻、代、岚、石，兵至太谷。
English: In the 5th year of Kianpu, Satao defeated the Qajar army and the Han army. The Tang soldiers were repeatedly defeated, and Satao prospered even more. The north invaded Wei, Shuo, and the south invaded Yunnan, Dai, Shan, and Shishi, and the soldiers reached Taiyuan.

古文：广明元年，招讨使李琢会幽州李可举、云州赫连鐸击沙陀，克用与可举相拒雄武军。其叔父友金以蔚、朔州降于琢，克用闻之，遽还。
现代文：广明元年，招讨使李琢会同幽州李可举、云州赫连铎进击沙陀族，克用与可举在雄武军对峙，其叔父友金以蔚州、朔州归降李琢，克用闻讯，立即回军。
English: In the first year of the Guangming Dynasty, Li Tuo Hui, together with Yuzhou Li Kezhu and Yunnan Herenqin, was invited to attack the Shado tribe. Ke used and Kezhu confronted the Xiongwu army. His uncle and friend Jin used Ulshu and Shuozhou to bring down Li Tuo. When Kezhu heard the news, he immediately returned to the army.

古文：可举追至药兒岭，大败之，琢军夹击，又败之于蔚州。沙陀大溃，克用父子亡入达靼。
现代文：可举追到药儿岭，大败沙陀军，李琢出兵夹击，又在蔚州大败克用军，沙陀军大溃败，李克用父子逃亡鞑靼。
English: Li Taku defeated the Shatian army in the Battle of Yaliling, defeated the Shatian army in the Battle of Ulju, defeated the Shatian army in the Battle of Ulju, defeated the Shatian army in the Battle of Ulju, and used his father and son to escape from Tartary.

古文：克用少骁勇，军中号曰 李鸦兒 ；其一目眇，及其贵也，又号 独眼龙 ，其威名盖于代北。
现代文：克用少年骁勇，军中号称 李亚鸟儿 ，一只眼睛瞎了，人们又称他 独眼龙 ，威名响震代北。
English: He was known as Li Yajiao in the army, and he was blind in one eye. People also called him the one-eyed dragon, and his fame spread far and wide.

古文：其在达靼，久之，郁郁不得志，又常惧其图己，因时时从其群豪射猎，或挂针于木，或立马鞭，百步射之辄中，群豪皆服以为神。
现代文：他在鞑靼日久，郁闷不得志，又常常害怕鞑靼人谋害自己，因此时常跟随鞑靼贵族射猎，或者挂针木上，或立马鞭，百步之外射之百发百中，鞑靼贵族佩服，以为是神。
English: He lived in Tartary for a long time, depressed and discouraged, and often afraid of the Tartars plotting to kill him. Therefore, he often followed the Tatar aristocrats to shoot, or hung a needle on a needle, or a horse whip, and shot a hundred times a hundred times a hundred steps away. The Tatar aristocrats admired him and thought he was a god.

古文：黄巢已陷京师，中和元年，代北起军使陈景思发沙陀先所降者，与吐浑、安庆等万人赴京师，行至绛州，沙陀军乱，大掠而还。
现代文：黄巢已经攻下京城，中和元年，代北起军使陈景思率沙陀降兵与吐浑、安庆等士兵万人赴援京城，走到绛州，沙陀军乱，大肆抢掠而还。
English: Huang Chao had already captured the capital city. In the middle of the 19th century and the first year of the 20th century, Chen Jingshi led the north-rising army to send thousands of soldiers to aid the capital city, including soldiers from Tubun and Anqing. They went to Bozhou, where the Shatou army was in chaos, and they looted and plundered a lot.

古文：景思念沙陀非克用不可将，乃以诏书召克用于达靼，承制以为代州刺史、雁门以北行营节度使。
现代文：景思认为沙陀军若不用李克用为将就无法统率，就用诏书到鞑靼召回克用，任命他为代州刺史、雁门以北行营节度使。
English: Jingsi thought that the Shatian army would not be able to lead if they did not use Li Kegui, so he used an edict to recall Kegui to Tartary and appointed him as the official envoy to Daizhou and the north of Ganmen.

古文：率蕃汉万人出石岭关，过太原，求发军钱。
现代文：率蕃汉万人出石岭关，经过太原，要求发给军费。
English: He led tens of thousands of Han people out of Shilingguan, through Taiyuan, and demanded that military expenses be paid.

古文：节度使郑从谠与之钱千缗、米千石，克用怒，纵兵大掠而还。
现代文：节度使郑从谠给他钱千缗，米千石，克用大怒，纵兵抢掠而回。
English: The festival made Zheng Conglu give him thousands of money and thousands of rice, and he returned with great anger and plundered soldiers.

古文：二年十一月，景思、克用复以步骑万七千赴京师。
现代文：中和二年十一月，景思、克用率步骑一万七千人赴援京城。
English: In November of the second year of the Sino-Japanese War, 17,000 people, led by King Si and King Ge, rode to the aid of the capital.

古文：三年正月，出于河中，进屯乾坑。
现代文：中和三年正月，路过河中，进屯乾坑。
English: In the first month of the middle and third years, passing through the middle of the river, entering the dry pit.

古文：巢党惊曰： 鸦兒军至矣！ 
现代文：黄巢军惊呼： 亚鸟儿军到了！ 
English: The Yellow Nest Army exclaims: The Asian Bird Army has arrived!

古文：二月，败巢将黄鄴于石堤谷；三月，又败赵璋、尚让于良田坡，横尸三十里。
现代文：二月，在石阝是谷打败巢将黄邺的军队；三月，又在良田坡大败巢将赵璋、尚让军，横尸三十里。
English: In February, he defeated the troops of Huang Qi, the general of the Nest, in Shek Kip Shek Valley; in March, he defeated the troops of Zhao Qi and Shang Zhan, the general of the Nest, in Liang Tian Po, and left them dead for thirty miles.

古文：是时，诸镇兵皆会长安，大战渭桥，贼败走入城，克用乘胜追之，自光泰门先入，战望春宫升阳殿，巢败，南走出蓝田关。
现代文：当时唐各镇兵马会师长安，渭桥大战，巢军败入城内，克用乘胜追击，自光泰门先入，又在望春宫升阳殿交战，巢兵败，向南退出蓝田关。
English: At that time, the Tang Towns' Terracotta Warriors and Horses Club Division Chang'an, the Battle of Long Bridge, the Nest Army was defeated and entered the city, and used the victory to pursue. Since Guangtaimen entered first, it also fought in the Wangchun Palace's Rising Sun Hall. The Nest Army was defeated and withdrew southward from Lantian Pass.

古文：京师平，克用功第一。
现代文：收复京城，克用功居第一。
English: The recovery of the capital, Beijing, ranks first in the list of achievements.

古文：天子拜克用检校司空、同中书门下平章事、河东节度使，以国昌为雁门以北行营节度使。
现代文：唐天子封克用检校司空、同中书门下平章事、河东节度使，用国昌为雁门以北行营节度使。
English: Tang Emperor Fong Ke used Kuang as the inspector of the school, Zhuang Ping as the inspector of the school gate, Hedong as the inspector of the festival, and Guochang as the inspector of the festival north of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：十月，国昌卒。
现代文：十月，国昌死。
English: In October, Guochang died.

古文：十一月，遣其弟克修攻昭义孟方立，取其泽、潞二州。
现代文：十一月，派其弟克修进攻昭义孟方立，夺取泽、潞二州。
English: In November, he sent his younger brother, Keshu, to attack Mengfangli in Shouyi and seize the two provinces of Ze and Handan.

古文：方立走山东，以邢、洺、磁三州自别为昭义军。
现代文：方立退到山东，以邢、氵名、磁三州自称昭义军。
English: Fang Li retreated to Shandong and called himself the Shouyi Army with the names of Zou, Zoumei, and Zeng Sanzhou.

古文：黄巢南走至蔡州，降秦宗权，遂攻陈州。
现代文：黄巢南走至蔡州，秦宗权投降，遂进攻陈州。
English: Huang Chao marched south to Caizhou, Qin surrendered, and then attacked Chenzhou.

古文：四年，克用以兵五万救陈州，出天井关，假道河阳，诸葛爽不许，乃自河中渡河。
现代文：四年，克用率兵五万救陈州，出天井关，借道河阳，诸葛爽不许，只得从河中渡河。
English: In four years, he led fifty thousand soldiers to rescue Chenzhou. They had to cross the river from the middle of the river.

古文：夜，酒罢，克用醉卧，伏兵发，火起，侍者郭景铢灭烛，匿克用床下，以水醒面而告以难。
现代文：夜，喝完酒，克用醉卧时，伏兵齐发，大火烧起，侍者郭景铢把烛吹灭，将克用藏在床下，用水冲脸使其酒醒后告诉他大难临头。
English: At night, after drinking wine, when Keren was drunk and lying down, the ambush began, the fire burned, the waiter Guo Jingyao blew out the candle, hid Keren under the bed, washed his face with water to wake him up, and told him that a great disaster was imminent.

古文：会天大雨灭火，克用得从者薛铁山、贺回鹘等，随电光，缒尉氏门出，还军中。
现代文：恰好天下大雨使大火熄灭，克用和随从薛铁山、贺回鹘等人乘电光，用绳子拴住人，从尉氏门墙上放下去回到军中。
English: It just so happened that heavy rain around the world extinguished the fire, and Ge Ying and his followers, including Xue Tieshan and He Huiqi, used electric lights to tie people up with ropes and lowered them down from the wall of the gate to return to the army.

古文：七月，至于太原，讼其事于京师，请加兵于汴，遣弟克修将兵万人屯于河中以待。
现代文：七月，回到太原，把这事告到京城，请朝廷派兵攻汴，并叫弟弟克修率兵万人在河中等待。
English: In July, he returned to Taiyuan, reported the matter to the capital, asked the court to send troops to attack, and asked his brother Keshu to lead the soldiers and wait in the river.

古文：僖宗和解之，用破巢功，封克用陇西郡王。
现代文：僖宗出面和解，因破巢有功，封克用为陇西郡王。
English: Xizong came forward to reconcile, and because of the success of breaking the nest, Feng Ke used it as the king of Shaanxi County.

古文：光启元年，河中王重荣与宦者田令孜有隙，徙重荣兗州，以定州王处存为河中节度使，诏克用以兵护处存之镇。
现代文：光启元年，河中王重荣与宦官田令孜有矛盾，迁移王重荣镇兖州，任命定州王处存为河中节度使，下诏命李克用调兵保护王处存赴镇。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, there was a conflict between Wang Chong Rong and the eunuch Tian Lingzhe in the middle of the river. Wang Chong Rong's town was moved to Bozhou, and Dingzhou Wang Shizhu was appointed as the envoy of the middle of the river, and Li Ke was ordered to protect Wang Shizhu by sending troops to the town.

古文：重荣使人绐克用曰： 天子诏重荣，俟克用至，与处存共诛之。 
现代文：重荣使人欺骗克用说 ：天子下诏给重荣，等李克用至，与处存一齐杀掉。 
English: Shige Rong tricked people into using it, saying, "God will give Shige Rong the order, and when Li Ke uses it, it will be killed together with all the others."

古文：因伪为诏书示克用曰： 此硃全忠之谋也。 
现代文：并造假诏书给李克用看，说： 这都是朱全忠的计谋。 
English: He also made a fake imperial edict and showed it to Li Ke, saying, "This is all Zhu Quanzhong's trickery."

古文：克用信之，八上表请讨全忠，僖宗不许，克用大怒。
现代文：克用相信了，八次上表请求讨伐朱全忠，僖宗不许，克用大怒。
English: Kegui believed him, and eight times he asked the emperor to attack Zhu Quanzhong, but the emperor would not allow it. Kegui was furious.

古文：重荣既不肯徙，僖宗遣邠州硃玫、凤翔李昌符讨之。
现代文：重荣既不肯迁移，僖宗派州朱玫、凤翔李昌符去讨伐。
English: Chong Rong refused to relocate, and the Jurchen sect sent Zhu Mei and Feng Xiang Li Changfu to fight.

古文：克用反以兵助重荣，败玫于沙苑，遂犯京师，纵火大掠。
现代文：克用反而派兵帮助王重荣，在沙苑打败朱玫，进攻京城，纵火抢掠。
English: On the contrary, Kegui sent troops to help Wang Chongrong, defeated Zhu Mei in Shayuan, attacked the capital, and committed arson and looting.

古文：天子出居于兴元，克用退屯河中。
现代文：唐天子出居兴元，克用退兵住河中。
English: Tang Tianzi went to live in Xingyuan, while Kegui retired to live in Hezhong.

古文：硃玫亦反以兵追天子，不及，得襄王煴，迫之称帝，屯于凤翔。
现代文：朱玫反而派兵追赶唐天子，没有赶上，遇襄王，迫他称帝，兵驻凤翔。
English: On the contrary, Zhu Mei sent soldiers to chase Tang Tianzi, but they did not catch up. When they met King Xiang, they forced him to proclaim himself emperor, and the soldiers stationed themselves at Fengxiang.

古文：僖宗念独克用可以破玫而不能使也，当破黄巢长安时，天下兵马都监杨复恭与克用善，乃遣谏议大夫刘崇望以诏书召克用，且道复恭意，使进兵讨玫等。
现代文：僖宗认识到只有李克用能打败朱玫，可是无法调动他，想到当初在长安击败黄巢时，天下兵马都监杨复恭与克用关系好，于是派谏议大夫刘崇望下诏书给李克用，说明是杨复恭的意思，请他进兵讨伐朱玫等。
English: Xizong realized that only Li Kegui could defeat Zhu Mei, but he could not mobilize him. He remembered that when he defeated Huang Chao in Chang'an, Yang Fucong, the world's military governor, had a good relationship with Kegui. Therefore, he sent Liu Chongwang, the doctor of the imperial edict, to Li Kegui, explaining that it was the meaning of Yang Fucong, and asked him to enter the army to fight Zhu Mei.

古文：克用阳诺而不行。
现代文：克用假意答应而不肯行动。
English: He made false promises and refused to act.

古文：明年，孟方立死，其弟迁立。
现代文：第二年，孟方立死，弟迁立。
English: The following year, Meng Fangli died, and his younger brother Miao Li.

古文：大顺元年，克用击破孟迁，取邢、洺、磁三州，乃遣安金俊攻赫连鐸于云州。
现代文：大顺元年，克用击破孟迁，夺取邢、氵名、磁三州，派安金俊到云州攻赫连铎。
English: In the first year of Dashun, Kecheng broke through the Mengqian, captured the three states of Quzhou, Xiamen, and Zhengzhou, and sent An Jinjun to Yunnan to attack Lianyungang.

古文：幽州李匡威救鐸，战于蔚州，金俊大败。
现代文：幽州李匡威救铎，在蔚州大败安金俊。
English: Yuzhou's Li Kuangwei saved, but in Ulshu he was defeated by An Jinjun.

古文：于是匡威、鐸及硃全忠皆请因其败伐之。
现代文：于是匡威、铎及朱全忠都请求朝廷乘机讨伐李克用。
English: As a result, Kong Wei, Zou and Zhu Quanzhong all requested the imperial court to take the opportunity to fight Li Ke.

古文：昭宗以克用破黄巢功高，不可伐，下其事台、省四品官议，议者多言不可。
现代文：昭宗认为克用破巢功高不可伐，就叫台、省四品以上官商议此事，多数大臣认为不可伐。
English: Zhaozong believed that it was impossible to defeat the enemy by breaking the nest, so he called Taiwan and provincial officials to discuss the matter, and most ministers believed that it was impossible.

古文：宰相张浚独以谓沙陀前逼僖宗幸兴元，罪当诛，可伐。
现代文：宰相张浚独以沙陀逼僖宗逃到兴元，罪该杀，应当讨伐。
English: The prime minister, Zhang Jundu, used the satraps to force Xizong to flee to Xingyuan. The crime should be punished.

古文：军容使杨复恭，克用所善也，亦极谏以为不可，昭宗然之，诏谕全忠等。
现代文：军容使杨复恭与克用友善，亦极力劝谏，认为不可伐，昭宗很同意，就下诏书劝谕朱全忠等人。
English: Junrong made Yang Fuqiong be friendly with Keren, and also strongly advised him that he should not be defeated. Shozong agreed, and issued an imperial edict to advise Zhu Quanzhong and others.

古文：全忠阴赂浚，使持其议益坚，昭宗不得已，以浚为太原四面行营兵马都统，韩建为副使。
现代文：全忠背地里重赂张浚，使他坚持要求讨伐，昭宗不得已，用张浚为太原四面行营兵马都统，韩建为副使。
English: Quanzhong secretly bribed Zhang Jun to insist on a crusade, and, as a last resort, Zhaozong sent Zhang Jun to Taiyuan to command the troops and horses, with Han Jian as deputy envoy.

古文：是时，潞州将冯霸叛降于梁，梁遣葛从周入潞州。
现代文：当时，潞州冯霸叛降归附梁，梁派葛从周进驻潞州。
English: At that time, Zhangzhou Fengba rebelled and surrendered to Liang, and Liang sent Ge from Zhoujin to reside in Zhangzhou.

古文：唐以京兆尹孙揆为昭义军节度使，克用遣李存孝执揆于长子，又遣康君立取潞州。
现代文：唐派京兆尹孙揆为昭义军节度使，克用派李存孝在长子捉住孙揆，又派康君立攻夺潞州。
English: The Tang Dynasty sent Jing Zhao, Yin, and Sun Yat-sen as envoys to the Shao Yi Army, while the Qing Dynasty sent Li Cunxiao to capture Sun Yat-sen's eldest son, and sent Kangjunli to conquer Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月，浚及克用战于阴地，浚军三战三败，浚、建遁归。
现代文：十一月，张浚在阴地被李克用打得三战三败，张浚、韩建逃回。
English: In November, Zhang Jun was defeated three times in three battles by Li Ke, and Zhang Jun and Han Jian fled back.

古文：克用兵大掠晋、绛，至于河中，赤地千里。
现代文：克用军在晋、绛、河中大肆抢掠，赤地千里。
English: The Khmer Rouge troops looted and plundered extensively in Jin, Shan, and Hechu, covering thousands of kilometers.

古文：克用上表自诉，其辞慢侮，天子为之引咎，优诏答之。
现代文：克用上表自诉，词语傲慢带有侮辱性，唐天子表示歉疚，下诏好言抚慰。
English: K used the above form to make a private complaint. The words "arrogant" and "insulting" were used. Tang Tianzi expressed his remorse and made a good speech to comfort him.

古文：二年二月，复拜克用河东节度使、陇西郡王，加检校太师兼中书令。
现代文：大顺二年二月，再封克用为河东节度使、陇西郡王，加检校太师兼中书令。
English: In February of the second year of Dashun, Zafeng Ke used to be the Hedong Festival envoy, the king of Shaanxi County, the superintendent of schools and the middle school secretary.

古文：四月，攻赫连鐸于云州，围之百余日，鐸走吐浑。
现代文：四月，克用到云州进攻赫连铎，包围一百多天，赫连铎逃往吐浑。
English: In April, the KMT used Yunnan Province to attack Helianthus and besieged it for more than a hundred days. Helianthus fled to Tuban.

古文：八月，大搜于太原，出晋、绛，掠怀、孟，至于邢州，遂攻王镕于镇州。
现代文：八月，在太原大抢掠，经过晋、绛二州，又对怀、孟、邢州进行大抢掠，并到镇州攻打王。
English: In August, he carried out large-scale looting in Taiyuan, went through the two prefectures of Jin and Shandong, carried out large-scale looting in Huai, Meng and Zhangzhou, and went to Zhenzhou to attack Wang.

古文：克用栅常山西，以十余骑渡滹沱觇敌，遇大雨，平地水深数尺。
现代文：克用立栅常山西边，率十余骑渡过滹沱河去观察敌人阵地，天下大雨，平地水深数尺。
English: On the west side of the Standing Grate Changshan Mountain, he led more than ten riders to cross the Li River to observe the enemy's position. It was raining heavily and the water was several feet deep on the flat land.

古文：李匡威救镕，克用还军邢州。
现代文：敌人发觉来攻打，克用藏到树林中，祷告他的马说： 我若世世代代能据有太原的话，马不嘶叫。 
English: When the enemy came to attack, he hid in the forest and prayed to his horse: "If I can live up to Taiyuan's words for generations to come, the horse will not neigh."

古文：景福元年，王镕攻邢州，李存信、李嗣勋等败镕于尧山。二月，会王处存攻镕，战于新市，为镕所败。
现代文：马恰好没有嘶叫得以躲过。前军李存孝已夺取临城，进攻元氏。李匡威出兵救王。二月，会合王处存进攻王，在新市被王打败。
English: The horse managed to escape without a whimper. The former army of Li Cunxiao had already captured Lincheng and attacked the Yuan Dynasty. Li Kuangwei sent troops to save Wang. In February, King Hui attacked Wang and was defeated by Wang in Xinshi.

古文：八月，李匡威攻云州，以牵克用之兵，克用潜入于云州，返出击匡威，匡威败走。
现代文：八月，李匡威攻云州，牵制克用兵力，克用偷偷地到云州反击打得匡威大败逃走。
English: In August, Li Kuangwei launched an attack on Yunnan to contain Kegui's forces. Kegui secretly counterattacked in Yunnan, causing Kuangwei to suffer a crushing defeat and flee.

古文：十月，李存孝以邢州叛。
现代文：十月，李存孝在邢州叛变。
English: In October, Li Cunxiao rebelled in Zhangzhou.

古文：二年，存孝求援于王镕，克用出兵井陉击镕，且以书招镕，而急攻其平山，镕惧，遂与克用通和，献帛五十万匹，出兵助攻邢州。
现代文：景福二年，存孝向王求援，克用出兵井陉进攻王，又紧急进攻平山，王害怕，于是与克用讲和，献绸缎五十万匹，出兵帮助克用攻邢州。
English: In the second year of Gingfu, Cunxiao appealed to the king for help, and the king was afraid of Cunxiao's attack on Jing Province and emergency attack on Pingshan. Therefore, the king made peace with Cunxiao, offered half a million silk reeds, and sent troops to help Cunxiao attack Zhangzhou.

古文：乾宁元年三月，执存孝，杀之。
现代文：乾宁元年三月，捉住李存孝杀掉。
English: In March of the first year of Qianning, Li Cunxiao was caught and killed.

古文：冬，攻幽州，李匡俦弃城走，追至景城，见杀，以刘仁恭为留后。
现代文：冬天攻幽州，李匡俦弃城而逃，追到景城杀掉，用刘仁恭为留后。
English: In winter, they attacked Yuzhou. Li Kuang abandoned the city and fled. They chased him to Jingcheng and killed him, leaving Liu Rengong behind.

古文：二年，河中王重盈卒，其诸子珂、珙争立，克用请立珂，凤翔李茂贞、邠宁王行瑜、华州韩建请立珙。
现代文：乾宁二年，河中王重盈死，他的儿子珂、珙争立，克用请立珂，凤翔李茂贞、宁王行瑜、华州韩建请立珙。
English: In the second year of Qianning, King Chung-ying of Hecheng died. His sons Ke and Yao competed for the position. Ke used to ask Ke to take the position. Fengxiang Li Maozhen, Ning Wang Xingyu, and Huazhou Han Jian asked Yao to take the position.

古文：昭宗初两难之，乃以宰相崔胤为河中节度使，既而许克用立珂。
现代文：昭宗很为难，就决定以宰相崔胤为河中节度使，后又答应克用的要求立珂为节度使。
English: Akimune was in a difficult situation, so he decided to appoint Prime Minister Choi In as the festival envoy to the Middle Kingdom, and later he agreed to Kegon's request to appoint Ke as the festival envoy.

古文：茂贞等怒，三镇兵犯京师，闻克用亦起兵，乃皆罢去。
现代文：茂贞等怒，三镇兵联合攻京城，听到克用也起兵前来才都退兵而去。
English: Maozhen was so angry that the soldiers of the three towns jointly attacked the capital. When they heard that Kegui had also raised an army, they all withdrew.

古文：六月，克用攻绛州，斩刺史王瑶。
现代文：六月，克用攻占绛州，斩刺史王瑶。
English: In June, the KMT captured Zhangzhou and assassinated Shi Wangyao.

古文：瑶，珙弟，助珙以争者。
现代文：瑶是珙弟，帮助珙争位。
English: You are my younger brother, help me fight for the first place.

古文：七月，至于河中，同州王行约奔于京师，阳言曰： 沙陀十万至矣！ 
现代文：七月，克用到河中，同州王行约跑到京城大造谣言说 ：沙陀军十万到了！ 
English: In July, Kegui went to the river, and Wang Xing from Tongzhou went to Beijing to spread the rumor that the Shatou army had arrived by the hundred thousand.

古文：谋奉天子幸邠州，茂贞假子阎圭亦谋劫幸凤翔，京师大乱，昭宗出居于石门。
现代文：阴谋胁迫唐天子去州，茂贞养子阎圭也阴谋劫天子去凤翔，京师大乱，昭宗出居石门。
English: Conspiracy to coerce Tang Tianzi to go to Shizhou, Mao Zhen's adopted son Yan Gui also plotted to kidnap Tianzi to go to Fengxiang, the Great Scholar's Revolt in Beijing, and Zhaozong's emigration to Shimen.

古文：克用军留月余不进，昭宗遣延王戒丕、丹王允兄事克用，且告急。
现代文：克用军滞留一个多月不肯进兵，昭宗派延王戒丕、丹王允以兄长礼事克用，并告急。
English: The Khmer troops stayed for more than a month and refused to march in, so the Shoshins sent Yan Wang Kaisheng and Dan Wang Yun to persuade the Khmer troops with their elder brother's courtesy, and they were in a hurry.

古文：八月，克用进军渭桥，以为邠宁四面行营都统。
现代文：八月，克用进军到渭桥，任宁四面行营都统。
English: In August, Kegong marched into Fenqiao, and the four sides of Renning marched together.

古文：昭宗还京师。
现代文：昭宗回到京城。
English: Akimune returned to Kyoto.

古文：十一月，克用击破邠州，王行瑜走至庆州，见杀。
现代文：十一月，克用攻破州，王行瑜逃到庆州被杀。
English: In November, when the KMT invaded Gyeongju, Wang Xingyu fled to Gyeongju and was killed.

古文：克用还军云阳，请击茂贞，昭宗慰劳克用，使与茂贞解仇以纾难，拜克用 忠正平难功臣 ，封晋王。
现代文：克用回师云阳，请求进攻李茂贞，昭宗劝慰克用，要他与李茂贞解仇以缓和矛盾，赐克用 忠正平难功臣 ，封晋王。
English: Kegui went back to his teacher Yunyang and asked him to attack Li Maozhen. Zhaozong consoled Kegui and asked him to resolve the conflict with Li Maozhen and grant Kegui the title of King of Jin.

古文：是时，晋军渭北，遇雨六十日，或劝克用入朝，克用未决，都押衙盖寓曰： 天子还自石门，寝未安席，若晋兵渡渭，人情岂复能安？
现代文：当时，晋军驻渭北，恰遇连阴雨六十天，有人劝克用入朝，克用犹豫不决，都押衙盖寓说 ：天子从石门回京，寝未安席，倘若晋兵渡过渭水进京城，人们怎么会安心？
English: At that time, the Jin army was stationed in the north of Shandong, and it happened to be rainy for sixty days. Some people advised Ke Ying to go to the North, and Ke Ying hesitated, but they all said: "The Son of Heaven returned to Beijing from Shimen, and he did not sleep peacefully. If the Jin soldiers crossed Shishui and entered Beijing, how would people be at ease?

古文：勤王而已，何必朝哉？ 
现代文：我们为的是勤王，何必要入朝呢？ 
English: We are devoted to the king, so why do we need to enter the imperial court?

古文：克用笑曰： 盖寓犹不信我，况天下乎！ 
现代文：克用笑着说： 盖寓都不相信我是勤王，何况天下人啊？ 
English: K said with a smile, "No one believes that I am a diligent person, let alone a man of the world."

古文：乃收军而还。
现代文：于是收兵回师。
English: As a result, the troops were withdrawn back to the division.

古文：三年正月，昭宗复以张浚为相，克用曰： 此硃全忠之谋也。 
现代文：乾宁三年正月，昭宗重新用张浚为相，克用说： 这是朱全忠的阴谋！ 
English: In the first month of the third year of the Qianning era, Zhaozong once again used Zhang Jun as an example, and Ke used to say: This is Zhu Quanzhong's plot!

古文：乃上表曰： 若陛下朝以浚为相，则臣将暮至阙廷！ 
现代文：于是上表说： 若陛下早晨用浚为相，那么我晚上就到京城！ 
English: So the table said: "If Your Majesty chooses to dredge in the morning, then I will go to the capital in the evening!"

古文：京师大恐，浚命遽止。
现代文：京师震恐，任张浚为相的活动立刻停止了。
English: The Beijing division trembled with fear, and the activity of allowing Zhang Jun to be a phase was immediately stopped.

古文：硃全忠之攻兗、郓也，克用遣李存信假道魏州以救硃宣等。存信屯于莘县，军士侵掠魏境，罗弘信伏兵攻之，存信败走洺州。
现代文：朱全忠进攻兖、郓二州，克用派李存信借道魏州去救朱宣等人，存信驻屯莘县，军士抢掠魏地，罗弘信伏兵攻打，李存信败走到氵名州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong attacked Yunnan and Shandong provinces, while Kegui sent Li Cunxin to rescue Zhu Xuan and others via Wei Province. Cunxin was stationed in Tuen Mun County, while the sergeants plundered Wei Province, and Luo Hongxin ambushed and attacked the soldiers. Li Cunxin was defeated and went to Shennai Province.

古文：克用自将击魏，战于洹水，亡其子落落。
现代文：克用亲率大军攻打魏州，洹水一战，失去儿子落落。
English: He used his relatives to lead a large army to attack Weizhou, fought a battle with Surabaya, and lost his son.

古文：六月，破魏成安、洹水、临漳等十余邑。
现代文：六月，攻破魏的成安、洹水、临漳等十九座城邑。
English: In June, nineteen cities and towns including Cheng'an, Lishui and Linyi in the Wei Dynasty were conquered.

古文：十月，又败魏人于白龙潭，进攻观音门，全忠救至，乃解。
现代文：十月，又在白龙潭打败魏军，进攻观音门，朱全忠来救援，方才解围而去。
English: In October, Zhu Quanzhong defeated the Wei army in Bailongtan and attacked Guanyin Gate. Zhu Quanzhong came to the rescue, but only after the siege was lifted did he leave.

古文：四年，刘仁恭叛晋，克用以兵五万击仁恭，战于安塞，克用大败。
现代文：乾宁四年，刘仁恭叛晋，克用派兵五万攻打刘仁恭，安塞一战，克用被打败。
English: In the four years of Qianning, Liu Rengong rebelled against Jin, and Kegui sent fifty thousand soldiers to attack Liu Rengong. In the Battle of Ansai, Kegui was defeated.

古文：光化元年，硃全忠遣葛从周攻下邢、洺、磁三州。
现代文：光化元年，朱全忠派葛从周攻下邢、氵名、磁三州。
English: In the first year of the Guanghua Dynasty, Zhu Quanzhong sent Ge from Zhou to conquer the three states of Jie, Sheng, and Zheng.

古文：克用遣周德威出青山口，遇从周于张公桥，德威大败。
现代文：克用派周德威率兵出青山口，在张公桥与葛从周军遭遇，周德威被打得大败。
English: Kecheng sent Zhou Dewei and his troops out of Qingshan Pass, and they encountered Ge Cong's troops at Zhang Gong Bridge. Zhou Dewei was soundly defeated.

古文：冬，潞州守将薛志勤卒，李罕之据潞州，叛附于硃全忠。
现代文：冬天，潞州守将薛志勤死，李罕之占据潞州，叛晋归附朱全忠。
English: In the winter, Xue Zhi, the governor of Zhangzhou, died, Li Hanzhi occupied Zhangzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong took over.

古文：二年，全忠遣氏叔琮攻破承天军，又破辽州，至于榆次，周德威败之于洞涡。
现代文：光化二年，朱全忠派氏叔琮攻占承天军，又占辽州，进兵榆次，周德威在洞涡打败氏叔琮。
English: In the second year of the Gwanghwa era, Zhu Quanzhong sent his uncle Jie to take over the army of Zheng Tian, and also occupied Liaozhou. Zhou Dewei defeated his uncle Jie in Dongwu.

古文：秋，李嗣昭复取泽、潞。
现代文：秋天，李嗣昭夺回泽、潞二州。
English: In autumn, Li Shizhao recaptured Zhejiang and Shandong.

古文：三年，嗣昭败汴军于沙河，复取洺州，硃全忠自将围之，嗣昭走，至青山口，遇汴伏兵，嗣昭大败。
现代文：光化三年，嗣昭在沙河打败汴军，夺回氵名州，朱全忠亲率大军包围氵〗名州，嗣昭退兵到青山口，遇伏兵被打得大败。
English: In the third year of the Gwanghwa era, Tsuchisho defeated the Shan army in Shahe and recaptured Shanmeizhou. Zhu Quanzhong and his relatives led a large army to surround Shanmeizhou. Tsuchisho retreated to Aoyamaguchi, and the ambushed soldiers were defeated.

古文：秋，嗣昭取怀州。
现代文：秋天，嗣昭夺取怀州。
English: In autumn, Tsuchisho captured Waizhou.

古文：是岁，汴人攻镇、定，镇、定皆绝晋以附于硃全忠。
现代文：这年，汴军攻镇、定，镇、定都和晋断绝关系而归附朱全忠。
English: That year, the Wei army attacked Zhen and Ding, and Zhen and Ding severed ties with Jin and were annexed by Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：天复元年，全忠封梁王。
现代文：天复元年，朱全忠被封为梁王。
English: In the first year after the restoration of the emperor, Zhu Quanzhong was named the King of Liang.

古文：梁攻下晋、绛、河中，执王珂以归。
现代文：梁王攻下晋、绛、河中，捉住王珂才回师。
English: Liang Wang conquered Jin, Handan and Hechu, and captured Wang Kecai to return to his division.

古文：晋失三与国，乃下意为书币聘梁以求和。
现代文：晋丢掉三个与己友好的势力，只得写信给梁表示愿意求和。
English: Jin lost three friendly powers and had to write to Liang to express his willingness to sue for peace.

古文：梁王以为晋弱可取，乃曰： 晋虽请盟，而书辞慢。 
现代文：梁王认为晋已削弱，可以乘胜夺取它，就说 ：晋虽请求盟好，但信中话语傲慢。 
English: King Liang thought that Jin was already weakened and could take advantage of the victory to seize it, so he said: Although Jin asked for a good alliance, the words in the letter were arrogant.

古文：因大举击晋。
现代文：因而大举攻晋。
English: As a result, they made a big push for promotion.

古文：四月，氏叔琮入天井，张文敬入新口，葛从周入土门，王处直入飞狐，侯言入阴地。
现代文：四月，氏叔琮进据天井，张文敬到新口，葛从周到土门，王处直到飞狐，侯言到阴地。
English: In April, Ujichu entered the ceiling, Zhang Wenjing to the new entrance, Ge from Zhou to the earth gate, Wang from the king to the flying fox, and Houyan to the underworld.

古文：叔琮取泽、潞，其别将白奉国破承天军，辽州守将张鄂、汾州守将李瑭皆迎梁军降，晋人大惧。
现代文：叔琮夺取泽、潞，部将白奉国破承天军，辽州守将张鄂、汾州守将李瑭都投降梁军，晋人大惊。
English: Shuxuan captured Zhe and Handan, commander Bai Bongguo defeated the Heaven's Army, Liaozhou's commander Zhang E and Handan's commander Li Xi both surrendered to Liang's army, and the Jin people were shocked.

古文：会天大雨霖，梁兵多疾，皆解去。
现代文：恰好天下大雨，梁兵很多人得病，都只得退兵。
English: It just so happened that there was heavy rain all over the country, and many Liang soldiers fell ill and had to leave the army.

古文：五月，晋复取汾州，诛李瑭。
现代文：五月，晋兵夺回汾州，杀死李瑭。
English: In May, Jin soldiers recaptured Zhangzhou and killed Li Yong.

古文：六月，周德威、李嗣昭取慈、隰。
现代文：六月，周德威、李嗣昭夺回慈、隰二州。
English: In June, Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao recaptured Cixi and Handan.

古文：二年，进攻晋、绛，大败于蒲县，梁军乘胜破汾、慈、隰三州，遂围太原。
现代文：天复二年，进攻晋、绛，在蒲县被梁军打得大败，梁军乘胜破汾、慈、隰三州，包围太原。
English: In the second year of Tianfu, he attacked Jin and Lu, and was soundly defeated by Liang's army in Pu County. Liang's army took advantage of the victory to break through the three states of Lu, Ci and Lu, and encircle Taiyuan.

古文：克用大惧，谋出奔云州，又欲奔匈奴，未决，梁军大疫，解去，周德威复取汾、慈、隰三州。
现代文：克用大惊，打算出奔云州，又想逃奔匈奴，犹豫未决。梁兵流行大瘟疫，只得解围而去，周德威又夺回汾、慈、隰三州。
English: Shocked, Ge planned to leave for Yunnan, and also wanted to escape from the Xiongnu, but hesitated. Liang soldiers were plagued by a great plague, and had to leave the encirclement, and Zhou Dewei recaptured the three provinces of Yunnan, Cixi, and Yunnan.

古文：四年，梁迁唐都于洛阳，改元曰天祐。
现代文：天复四年，梁王强迫唐天子迁都洛阳，改元天祐。
English: Four years after Tianfu, King Liang forced Tang Tianzi to move the capital to Luoyang, changing it to Yuan Tianyu.

古文：克用以谓劫天子以迁都者梁也，天祐非唐号，不可称，乃仍称天复。
现代文：克用认为劫天子强迫迁都是梁王所为，天祐不能算唐朝年号，不肯称，于是仍然称天复年号。
English: Kegui believed that the forced relocation of Tianzi was all the work of Liang Wang. Tianyu could not be counted as the Tang Dynasty era name, and refused to call it, so it was still called the Tianfu era name.

古文：五年，会契丹阿保机于云中，约为兄弟。
现代文：天复五年，克用与契丹阿保机在云中相会，约为兄弟。
English: Five years later, he and Khitan Aboki met in the clouds and became like brothers.

古文：六年，梁攻燕沧州，燕王刘仁恭来乞师。
现代文：天复六年，梁军攻打燕的沧州，燕王刘仁恭派人到晋请求援兵。
English: Six years later, Liang's army attacked Yan's Cangzhou, and Yan's king, Liu Rengong, sent someone to Jin to request reinforcements.

古文：克用恨仁恭反覆，欲不许，其子存勖谏曰： 此吾复振之时也。
现代文：克用恨刘仁恭反复无常，不想答应，其子存勖劝说： 这是我们重新振兴的好时机。
English: He hated Liu Renkong's capriciousness and did not want to agree, but his son Cunxu persuaded him: This is a good time for us to revitalize.

古文：今天下之势，归梁者十七八，强如赵、魏、中山，莫不听命。
现代文：现在天下形势，归附梁王的已占十之七、八，比较强大的赵、魏、中山都俯首听命。
English: At present, the situation in the world is that the number of those who have been attached to Liang Wang has accounted for seven or eight out of ten, and the relatively powerful Zhao, Wei and Zhongshan are all bowing their heads and obeying orders.

古文：是自河以北，无为梁患者，其所惮者惟我与仁恭耳，若燕、晋合势，非梁之福也。
现代文：黄河以北都成梁的势力，与梁为敌者现在只剩下我们与刘仁恭了，倘若燕、晋联合，对梁来说是很不利的。
English: The forces north of the Yellow River have all become Liang's. The only enemies of Liang now are us and Liu Rengong. If Yan and Jin unite, it will be very unfavorable for Liang.

古文：夫为天下者不顾小怨，且彼常困我而我急其难，可因以德而怀之，是谓一举而两得，此不可失之机也。 
现代文：争天下的人不计较小怨，而且刘仁恭多次对不起我们而我们却救其急难，以德报怨，真是一举两得，这是不可失掉的好机会啊！ 
English: Those who fight for the world do not care about minor grievances, and Liu Rengong has apologized to us many times, but we have saved his life. To repay the grudge with virtue is really a one-two punch. This is a good opportunity that must not be lost!

古文：克用以为然，乃为燕出兵攻破潞州，梁围乃解去，以李嗣昭为潞州留后。
现代文：克用觉得说的很对，于是为燕出兵攻下潞州，迫使梁解围而去，晋任李嗣昭为潞州留后。
English: Kegui thought what he said was right, so he sent troops to capture Bozhou for Yan, forced Liang to leave to relieve the siege, and promoted Li Shizhao to stay in Bozhou.

古文：七年，梁兵十万攻潞州，围以夹城。
现代文：天复七年，梁兵十万进攻潞州，筑夹城包围。
English: Seven years later, Liang's army of one hundred thousand attacked Zhangzhou and encircled the city.

古文：遣周德威救潞州，军于乱柳。
现代文：晋派周德威救潞州，驻军于乱柳。
English: Jin dispatched Zhou Dewei to rescue Bozhou and stationed troops in Ranyu.

古文：冬，克用疾，是岁，梁灭唐，克用复称天祐四年。
现代文：冬天，克用病。同年，梁灭唐，克用仍称天祐四年。
English: In the winter, Ke Ying fell ill. In the same year, Liang Zhaotang, Ke Ying was still known as the fourth year of Tianyu.

古文：五年正月辛卯，克用卒，年五十三。
现代文：天祐五年正月十九日，克用死，年五十三岁。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, Kegui died at the age of 53.

古文：子存勖立，葬克用于雁门。
现代文：子存勖即位，葬克用于雁门。
English: Zi Cun Rong ascended to the throne, and Funke was used for the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：呜呼，世久而失其传者多矣，岂独史官之缪哉！
现代文：唉！时间久了，失传的事很多，这不仅是史官的错啊！
English: Alas! Time has passed, many things have been lost, and this is not only the fault of historians!

古文：李氏之先，盖出于西突厥，本号硃邪，至其后世，别自号曰沙陀，而以硃邪为姓，拔野古为始祖。
现代文：李氏的先祖，出自西突厥，本号朱邪，至后世，自号沙陀，而以朱邪为姓，拔野古是沙陀族的始祖。
English: The ancestors of the Li clan, from West Turkistan, called themselves Zhuye, and in later generations, they called themselves Shado, and took Zhuye as their surname. The Bago were the ancestors of the Shado people.

古文：其自序云：沙陀者，北庭之碛也，当唐太宗时，破西突厥诸部，分同罗、仆骨之人于此碛，置沙陀府，而以其始祖拔野古为都督；其传子孙，数世皆为沙陀都督，故其后世因自号沙陀。
现代文：他们自己说：沙陀，就是北庭的沙漠的意思，唐太宗时打败西突厥各部，把同罗、仆骨两部安排在北庭沙漠，设置沙陀府，以其始祖拔野古为都督，其子孙世代为沙陀都督，所以后来就自称沙陀族。
English: They themselves said: Shatou, which means the desert of Beiting, when Emperor Tang Taijun defeated the Western Turkic tribes, he placed Tonglu and Hubei in the Beiting desert, set up Shatou Prefecture, with his ancestor Baju as governor and his descendants as Shatou governors, so later they called themselves Shatou people.

古文：然予考于传记，其说皆非也。
现代文：但是从传记上查找不到这种说法。
English: However, this statement cannot be found in the biography.

古文：夷狄无姓氏，硃邪，部族之号耳，拔野古与硃邪同时人，非其始祖，而唐太宗时，未尝有沙陀府也。
现代文：少数民族没有姓氏，朱邪是部族的名号，拔野古与朱邪是同时人，并非沙陀始祖，而唐太宗时也没有设置过沙陀府。
English: Ethnic minorities do not have surnames, Zhuzhe is the name of the tribe, Baju and Zhuzhe are contemporaries, not the ancestors of Shado, and the Tang Taizong did not set up Shadofu.

古文：唐太宗破西突厥，分其诸部，置十三州，以同罗为龟林都督府，仆骨为金微都督府，拔野古为幽陵都督府，未尝有沙陀府也。
现代文：唐太宗打败西突厥，把他们各部分置十三州，以同罗为龟林都督府，仆骨为金微都督府，拔野古为幽陵都督府，没有沙陀都督府。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang defeated the Western Turks and placed each part of them at the top of the thirteen prefectures, with Tongluo as the Turtle Forest prefectural capital, Hubei as the Jinwei prefectural capital, Bago as the Yuling prefectural capital, and no Shado prefectural capital.

古文：当是时，西突厥有铁勒，延陀、阿史那之类为最大；其别部有同罗、仆骨、拔野古等以十数，盖其小者也；又有处月、处密诸部，又其小者也。
现代文：当时，西突厥有铁勒、延陀、阿史冉阝几部为最大；其他有同罗、仆骨、拔野古等十九部是比较小的；还有处月、处密等部，就更小了。
English: At that time, the West Turkic had several parts, such as Tille, Yanda, and Ashirankulam, which were the largest; the other nineteen parts, such as Tongluo, Hubei, and Bafangou, were relatively small; and there were also parts such as Wuzhizhong and Wuzhimizhong, which were even smaller.

古文：硃邪者，处月别部之号耳。
现代文：朱邪是处月另一部的称号。
English: Zhu Ying is the title of the second part of the month.

古文：太宗二十二年，已降拔野古，其明年，阿史那贺鲁叛。
现代文：太宗二十二年，拔野古已降，又一年，阿史冉阝贺鲁叛乱。
English: In the 22nd year of Taizong's reign, Battanoko had fallen, and in the following year, Ashiranzhong Heru rebelled.

古文：至高宗永徽二年，处月硃邪孤注从贺鲁战于牢山，为契苾何力所败，遂没不见。
现代文：到高宗永徽二年，处月、朱邪、孤注跟随贺鲁在牢山一战中被契何力打败，以后不知去向。
English: In the second year of Gaozong Yonghui, Zhengyue, Zhu Zhe and Guozhu followed Heru and were defeated by He He in the First Battle of Leshan. They did not know where to go next.

古文：后百五六十年，宪宗时，有硃邪尽忠及子执宜见于中国，而自号沙陀，以硃邪为姓矣。
现代文：过了一百五六十年，唐宪宗时有朱邪尽忠及子执宜到了中原地区，自号沙陀，以朱邪为姓。
English: One hundred and fifty-six years later, Zhu Yazhenzhong and his son Cui Yi arrived in the Central Plains, calling themselves Shado and taking Zhu Yazhen as their surname.

古文：盖沙陀者，大碛也，在金莎山之阳，蒲类海之东，自处月以来居此碛，号沙陀突厥，而夷狄无文字传记，硃邪又微不足录，故其后世自失其传。
现代文：所谓沙陀，是大沙漠的意思，在金莎山之南，蒲类海之东，自处月以来居此地，而少数民族无文字记载，朱邪又不闻名没有写入史册，所以后世失传了。
English: The so-called Shado, meaning the great desert, is located in the south of the Jinsha Mountains and the east of the Pudong Sea. It has been here since ancient times, but there are no written records of ethnic minorities, and the Zhuye evil is not well known and has not been written into the history books, so it has been lost to posterity.

古文：至尽忠孙始赐姓李氏，李氏后大，而夷狄之人遂以沙陀为贵种云。
现代文：到尽忠孙被赐姓李，李氏势力后来壮大了，少数民族人就以为沙陀是天生的贵种了。
English: When his loyal grandson was given the surname of Li, the power of the Li clan later grew, and ethnic minorities thought that Shatou was a born noble.

