古文：孝元皇后，王莽姑也。
现代文：孝元皇后，是王莽的姑妈。
English: Empress Xiaoyuan is Wang Mang's aunt.

古文：莽自谓黄帝之后，其《自本》曰：黄帝姓姚氏，八世生虞舜。
现代文：王莽自称是黄帝的后代，他自述世系的《自本》中说： 黄帝姓姚，其八代孙为虞舜。
English: Wang Meng claimed to be a descendant of the Yellow Emperor. He said in his "self-written" account of his lineage: The Yellow Emperor's family name was Yao, and his eight-generation grandson was Yu Yu.

古文：舜起妫汭，以妫为姓。
现代文：舜兴起于妈水的弯曲处，就把嫣作为自己的姓。
English: He was born at the bend of the Mam Shui River, and took the surname of Zou as his own.

古文：至周武王封舜后妫满于陈，是为胡公，十三世生完。
现代文：到周武王的时候，将舜的后代嫣满封在陈这个地方，造就是胡公，又传到第十三代生下陈完。
English: By the time of King Zhou Wu, the descendants of the dragonfly were completely sealed in this place in Chen. The creation was Hu Gong, and it was passed down to the thirteenth generation after Chen was born.

古文：完字敬仲，奔齐，齐桓公以为卿，姓田氏。
现代文：陈完字敬仲，逃到齐国，齐桓公拜他为卿，姓田。
English: After Chen finished writing the word "Jiezhong," he fled to Qi Province, where Qi Kuan publicly worshiped him as a lord, and changed his surname to Tian.

古文：十一世，田和有齐国，二世称王，至王建为秦所灭。
现代文：到了第十一代，田和控制了齐国，又传了两代开始称王，传到齐王田建时，齐国被秦国灭掉了。
English: By the eleventh generation, Tian and Qin had gained control of Qi. Two more generations passed on and began to claim the throne. When Tian Jian, the king of Qi, passed on, Qi was destroyed by Qin.

古文：项羽起，封建孙安为济北王。
现代文：项羽起兵，封齐王田建的孙子田安为济北王。
English: Xiang Yu raised an army, and Tian An, the grandson of Tian Jian, the King of Qi, became the King of Jibei.

古文：至汉兴，安失国，齐人谓之 王家 ，因以为氏。
现代文：汉朝兴起以后，田安失去了封国，齐人称他为 王家 ，就把王作为自己的姓。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, Tian'an lost its fiefdom, and the Qi people called him Wang Jia, so he took Wang as his surname.

古文：文、景间，安孙遂字伯纪，处东平陵，生贺，字翁孺。
现代文：文帝、景帝的时候，王安的孙子王遂字伯纪，居住在束平陵，王遂生了王贺，字翁孺。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, Wang An's grandson, Wang Sui Zhi Bo Ji, lived in Sokping Mausoleum. Wang Sui gave birth to Wang He, also known as Wang Weng.

古文：为武帝绣衣御史，逐捕魏郡群盗坚卢等党与，及吏畏懦逗留当坐者，翁孺皆纵不诛。
现代文：翁孺是武帝的绣衣御史，他捉拿魏郡的强盗坚卢等人的同党，以及胆小怯懦停滞不前应当治罪的官吏，翁孺全都放了他们，没有严惩。
English: Weng Li was Emperor Wu's empress dowager. He arrested Wei County bandit Jian Lu and other party members, as well as officials who should have been punished for their timidity and cowardice. Weng Li released them all without severe punishment.

古文：它部御史暴胜之等奏杀二千石，诛千石以下，及通行饮食坐连及者，大部至斩万余人，语见《酷吏传》。
现代文：而其他的御史如暴胜之等人则是奏请诛杀二千石的官吏，一千石以下的官吏更是任凭他们处置，还有那些有来往而受牵连的人，严重的甚至会杀掉上万人，这些都记载在《酷吏传》裹。
English: While other imperial histories, such as that of Wu Xuan Zhi, recorded that officials of 2,000 koku were invited to fight and kill, while officials of less than 1,000 koku were left to their own devices, as well as those who had dealings with each other and were implicated. In severe cases, even tens of thousands of people were killed. All of this is recorded in "The Biography of a Cruel Official."

古文：翁孺以奉使不称免，叹曰： 吾闻活千人者有封子孙，吾所活者万余人，后世其兴乎！ 
现代文：翁孺由于奉命执行任务不合皇上的心意而被免官，就感叹说： 我听说救活一千人，子孙便能得到封赏，我救活的有一万多人，难道是后代将要兴旺了吗！ 
English: Weng Yao, who was dismissed from his post because he was ordered to carry out a task that was not in line with the emperor's wishes, lamented: I heard that if you save the lives of a thousand people, your descendants will receive a reward. I have saved the lives of more than ten thousand people. Is it the future generations that will prosper?

古文：翁孺既免，而与东平陵终氏为怨，乃徙魏郡元城委粟里，为三老，魏郡人德之。
现代文：翁孺罢官后，和束平陵终氏结下怨仇，就迁到魏郡元城委粟里，做了三老，魏郡人非常感激他。
English: After Weng Yao resigned from his post, he and Sok Ping Ling finally settled a grudge and moved to Maoli of Wei County Yuancheng Committee, and became the third elder. The people of Wei County are very grateful to him.

古文：元城建公曰： 昔春秋沙麓崩，晋史卜之，曰： 阴为阳雄，土火相乘，故有沙麓崩。
现代文：元城建公说： 昔日春秋时沙麓崩塌，晋国太史进行占卜，说： 阴盛阳衰，土火相争，因此沙麓崩塌。
English: Yuancheng Jiangong said: In the past spring and autumn, when the sand foot collapsed, Jin Guo Taishi performed divination, saying: Yin Sheng Yang Sheng, earth and fire compete, so the sand foot collapsed.

古文：后六百四十五年，宜有圣女兴。 
现代文：六百四十五年以后，将会有贤德女子出现。
English: After six hundred and forty-five years, virtuous women will appear.

古文：其齐田乎！今王翁孺徙，正真其地，日月当之。
现代文：大概是齐田氏一族吧，现在王翁孺正好迁到这个地方，时间也和卜辞相符。
English: It's probably the Zida clan. Wang Wengyao has just moved to this place, and the timing also matches the prophecy.

古文：元城郭东有五鹿之虚，即沙鹿地也。
现代文：元城的东面有五鹿的废墟，就是沙鹿旧址。
English: On the east side of Yuancheng, there are the ruins of Wolu, that is, the former site of ShaLu.

古文：后八十年，当有贵女兴天下 云。
现代文：八十年后，王家会有贵女兴于天下。 
English: Eighty years later, the royal family will have a noblewoman in the world.

古文：翁孺生禁，字稚君，少学法律长安，为廷尉史，本始三年，生女政君，即元后也。
现代文：王翁孺生了王禁，字稚君，年轻时在长安学习法律，做了廷尉史。本始三年，生下女儿政君，也就是元后。
English: Wang Wengjun gave birth to Wang Zhenru, also known as Zhaojun. When he was young, he studied law in Chang'an and became a courtier. In the first three years, he gave birth to his daughter Zhengjun, also known as Empress Yuan.

古文：禁有大志，不修廉隅，好酒色，多取傍妻，凡有四女八男；长女君侠，次即元后政君，次君力，次君弟；长男凤孝卿，次曼元卿，谭子元，崇少子，商子夏，立子叔，根稚卿，逢时委卿，唯凤、崇与元后政君同母。
现代文：王禁胸怀大志，不拘小节，沉湎酒色，纳了许多妾，一共有四个女儿八个儿子：大女儿君侠，二女儿就是元后政君，三女儿君力，小女儿君弟；大儿子王凤字孝卿，二儿子王曼字元卿，又有王谭字子元，王崇字少子，王商字子夏，王立字子叔，王根字稚卿，王逢时字季卿。衹有王凤、王崇和元后政君是同母所生。
English: Wang Guanzhong had a great ambition, no matter how small, drank heavily, and had many concubines. He had a total of four daughters and eight sons: the eldest daughter, Junxia; the second daughter, Yuan Hou Zhengjun; the third daughter, Junli; the youngest daughter, Jun's younger brother; the eldest son, Wang Feng Zi Xiaoqing; the second son, Wang Man Zi Yuanqing; the third son, Wang Tan Zi Yuanqing; the youngest son, Wang Shang Zi Xiaqing; the third son, Wang Li Ziying; the fourth son, Wang Gen Zi Zhuangqing; and the fifth son, Wang Feng Zi Zhuang

古文：母，適妻，魏郡李氏女也。
现代文：他们的母亲是正妻，魏郡李氏的女儿。
English: Their mother is the legal wife, the daughter of the Wei County Li family.

古文：后以妒去，更嫁为河内苟宾妻。
现代文：后来因为妒嫉被休，又改嫁为河内苟宾的妻子。
English: Later, because of jealousy, she was dismissed and remarried to the wife of Hanoi's favorite.

古文：初，李亲任政君在身，梦月入其怀。
现代文：当初，李氏怀着政君时，梦到月亮扑入腹中。
English: At first, when Li was pregnant with Zhengjun, she dreamed of the moon falling into her belly.

古文：及壮大，婉顺得妇人道。
现代文：等到政君长大了，性情柔顺，谨守妇道。
English: When Masakimi grows up, she will have a gentle disposition and be careful to follow the women's way.

古文：尝许嫁未行，所许者死。
现代文：曾经许配了人家，还没有出嫁，对方就死了。
English: Once someone was betrothed, but before they got married, the other person died.

古文：后东平王聘政君为姬，未入，王薨。
现代文：后来，束乎王聘娶政君为姬妾，政君还没有进宫，束平王也去世了。
English: Later, King Sukeharu married King Sejong as his concubine. King Sejong had not yet entered the palace, and King Sukehira also passed away.

古文：禁独怪之，使卜数者相政君， 当大贵，不可言。 
现代文：王禁觉得奇怪，就请术士给政君相面，说是 贵不可言。 
English: Wang Han thought it was strange, so he invited a sorcerer to meet the ruler, saying that he was too valuable.

古文：禁心以为然，乃教书，学鼓琴。
现代文：王禁心裹也认为是这样，就教女儿读书，学习弹琴。
English: Wang Jianxin also thought so, so he taught his daughter to read and learn to play the piano.

古文：五凤中，献政君，年十八矣，入掖庭为家人子。
现代文：五凤年问，献政君入宫，当时她已经十八岁了，在掖庭做家人子。
English: In the year of the five phoenixes, Dedication to the Emperor entered the palace. At that time, she was already eighteen years old and was a family child in the Summer Palace.

古文：岁余，会皇太子所爱幸司马良娣病，且死，谓太子曰： 妾死非天命，乃诸娣妾良人更祝诅杀我。 
现代文：一年多以后，正好皇太子宠爱的司马良娣生病，将死之际，她对太子说： 我死并非是由于天意，而是你的姬妾们行祝诅之术害死了我。 
English: More than a year later, just as Sima Liangyao, the favorite of the crown prince, fell ill and was about to die, she said to the prince: My death was not due to the will of heaven, but your concubines killed me by performing the magic of blessing and cursing.

古文：太子怜之，且以为然。
现代文：太子怜惜她，也认为是这样。
English: The prince felt sorry for her and thought so, too.

古文：及司马良娣死，太子悲恚发病，忽忽不乐，因以过怒诸娣妾，莫得进见者。
现代文：等到司马良娣死后，太子悲痛得生了病，闷闷不乐，就把怒气发泄到众姬妾身上，没有人能得到他的召见。
English: After Sima Liangyao's death, the prince became ill with grief and sullen, and he vented his anger on his concubines. No one was able to see him.

古文：久之，宣帝闻太子恨过诸娣妾，欲顺适其意，乃令皇后择后宫家人子可以虞侍太子者，政君与在其中。
现代文：遇了一段时间，孝宣帝听说太子痛恨众姬妾，就打算顺着他的心意，让皇后挑选后宫裹能够令太子高兴的家人子，政君就在其中。
English: After a while, Emperor Xiaoxuan heard that the prince hated all the concubines, so he planned to follow his heart and let the queen choose a family member who could make the prince happy. The politician was among them.

古文：及太子朝，皇后乃见政君等五人，微令旁长御问知太子所欲。
现代文：等到太子前来朝拜的时候，皇后叫出政君等五个人，暗中派身旁的长御询问太子喜欢哪一个。
English: When the crown prince came to pay homage, the empress called out five people, including the prime minister, and secretly sent a high-ranking courtier to ask the prince which one he preferred.

古文：太子殊无意于五人者，不得已于皇后，强应曰： 此中一人可。 
现代文：太子本来对造五个人毫无兴趣，又不便拂了皇后的美意，就勉强回答说： 其中一人还可以。 
English: The prince had no interest in making five people, and the inconvenience offended the queen's beauty, so he reluctantly replied: "One of them is fine."

古文：是时政君坐近太子，又独衣绛缘诸于，长御即以为是。
现代文：当时政君坐在太子附近，又独自穿着红边的宽大上衣，长御以为太子说的是她。
English: At the time, the regent was sitting near the prince and was wearing a large red-bordered blouse. The head of state thought the prince was talking about her.

古文：皇后使侍中杜辅、掖庭令浊贤交送政君太子宫，见丙殿。得御幸，有身。
现代文：皇后派侍中杜辅、掖庭令浊贤将政君送进太子宫中，在丙殿被太子召见，得到御幸，就怀了身孕。
English: The empress sent her attendants, Du Su and Yu Ni, and ordered Yu Xian to carry the prince into the womb. She was summoned by the prince in Hall C, and after receiving the blessing, she became pregnant.

古文：先是者，太子后宫娣妾以十数，御幸久者七八年，莫有子，及王妃一幸而有身。
现代文：原先，太子后宫的姬妾有十几人，长期御幸有七八年的，却没有人生育，到了王妃却得到一次御幸便怀孕了。
English: Originally, there were more than a dozen concubines in the prince's harem, and they were blessed with long-term happiness for seven or eight years, but they did not have children. However, when the princess received a blessing, she became pregnant.

古文：甘露三年，生成帝于甲馆画堂，为世適皇孙。
现代文：甘露三年，在甲馆画堂生下成帝，是当世的嫡长皇孙。
English: Three years after the birth of Emperor Nijo, Emperor Nijo was born in the painting hall of Hall A. He was the eldest grandson of the current emperor.

古文：宣帝爱之，自名曰骜，字太孙，常置左右。
现代文：宣帝很喜欢这个孙子，亲自为他取名为刘骛，字太孙，常常把他带在自己身边。
English: Emperor Xuan loved this grandson very much. He personally named him Liu Xuan, which means great-grandson, and often took him with him.

古文：后三年，宣帝崩，太子即位，是为孝元帝。
现代文：三年后，宣帝去世，太子即位，就是孝元帝。
English: Three years later, Emperor Xuan died, and the crown prince ascended the throne as Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：立太孙为太子，以母王妃为婕妤，封父禁为阳平侯。
现代文：册立太孙为太子，封太子的母亲王妃为婕妤，封王婕妤的父亲王禁为阳平侯。
English: The great-grandson was named the crown prince, the crown prince's mother, the princess, was named the empress dowager, and the father of the empress dowager, Wang Han, was named the prince of Yangping.

古文：后三日，婕妤立为皇后，禁位特进，禁弟弘至长乐卫尉。
现代文：三天之后，册立王婕妤为皇后，王禁被赐给特进位，王禁的弟弟王弘做到长乐卫尉。
English: Three days later, Wang Xi was crowned empress, Wang Huan was given a special promotion, and Wang Huan's younger brother Wang Hong was made an officer of the Changle Guards.

古文：永光二年，禁薨，谥曰顷侯。
现代文：永光二年，王禁死去，谧号为顷侯。
English: In the second year of Yongguang, Wang Huan died, and his nickname was Hao Hou.

古文：长子凤嗣侯，为卫尉侍中，皇后自有子后，希复进见。
现代文：大儿子王凤继承侯爵，任卫尉侍中。皇后自从生下儿子之后，很少被元帝召见。
English: The eldest son, Wang Feng, succeeded him as marquis and was appointed as an attendant of the guard. Since the queen gave birth to her son, she was rarely summoned by the Yuan Emperor.

古文：太子壮大，宽博恭慎，语在《成纪》。
现代文：太子长大后，宽厚通达，恭敬谨慎，这些都记载在《成帝纪》里。
English: After the prince grew up, he was generous and open-minded, respectful and prudent, all of which are recorded in the "Chronicle of Emperor Chengdu."

古文：其后幸酒，乐燕乐，元帝不以为能。
现代文：后来太子好酒贪杯，宴饮取乐，元帝认为他没有才能。
English: Later, the crown prince was fond of drinking and feasting, and Emperor Yuan believed that he had no talent.

古文：而傅昭仪有宠于上，生定陶共王。
现代文：而傅昭仪得到皇帝宠爱，生下定陶共王。
English: Fu Zhaoyi, on the other hand, was favored by the emperor and gave birth to King Ding Tao.

古文：王多材艺，上甚爱之，坐则侧席，行则同辇，常有意欲废太子而立共王。
现代文：共王多才多艺，元帝非常喜欢他，吃饭时让他坐在身边，出行时又让他和自己同乘一辆辇车，常常打算废掉太子改立共王。
English: Emperor Yuan liked him very much. He let him sit next to him at meals and let him ride in a carriage with him when traveling. He often planned to replace the crown prince with Emperor Gongwang.

古文：时凤在位，与皇后、太子同心忧惧，刺侍中史丹拥右太子，语在《丹传》。
现代文：当时王凤在朝廷居官，和皇后、太子一同担心此事，幸好侍中史丹拥护太子，这件事记载在史丹的本传裹。
English: At that time, Wang Feng was an official at the imperial court, and he was worried about the matter together with the empress and the prince. Fortunately, the attendant Stan supported the prince, and this matter is recorded in Stan's biography.

古文：上亦以皇后素谨慎，而太子先帝所常留意，故得不废。
现代文：元帝也觉得皇后一向谨慎，而太子又是先帝所器重的，因此没有废掉太子。
English: Emperor Yuan also felt that the empress had always been prudent, while the prince was important to the former emperor, so he did not abolish the prince.

古文：元帝崩，太子立，是为孝成帝。
现代文：元帝去世，太子即位，就是孝成帝。
English: When Emperor Yuan died and the crown prince ascended to the throne, he became Emperor Xiaocheng.

古文：尊皇后为皇太后，以凤为大司马大将军领尚书事，益封五千户。
现代文：尊封皇后为皇太后，任命王凤为大司马大将军领尚书事，加封五千户封邑。
English: He honored the empress as the empress dowager, appointed Wang Feng as the grand secretary of the grand marshal to lead the official correspondence, and sealed more than five thousand households.

古文：王氏之兴自凤始。
现代文：王家的兴旺从王凤开始。
English: The prosperity of the royal family began with Wang Feng.

古文：又封太后同母弟崇为安成侯，食邑万户。
现代文：又封太后的同母弟弟王崇为安成侯，食邑一万户。
English: In addition, Wang Chong, the younger brother of the same mother of the empress dowager, was given the title of Ancheng Hou, with 10,000 households in the food village.

古文：凤庶弟谭等皆赐爵关内侯，食邑。
现代文：王凤的庶弟王谭等人都赐爵关内侯，封赏食邑。
English: Wang Feng's half-brother, Wang Tan, and others were all given the title of Duke of Guanai and awarded food townships.

古文：其夏，黄雾四塞终日。
现代文：这年夏天，终日黄雾满天。
English: This summer, the sky was full of yellow fog all day.

古文：天子以问谏大夫杨兴、博王驷胜等，对皆以为： 阴盛侵阳之气也。
现代文：成帝询问谏大夫杨兴、博士驷胜等人，他们的回答都认为 这是由于阴气太盛，侵害阳气。
English: Chengdi asked Dr. Zou Yang Xing, Dr. Zou Sheng and others, and they all answered that it was because the yin was too strong, infringing on the yang.

古文：高祖之约也，非功臣不侯，今太后诸弟皆以无功为侯，非高祖之约，外戚未曾有也，故天为见异。 
现代文：高祖当年约誓，不是功臣不能封侯，现在太后的那些弟弟都没有功劳却封了侯，违背了高祖的约定，外戚裹从来没出现过这种情况，所以上天为之呈现出异象。 
English: Gao Zu vowed that year that it was not a meritorious subject that could not be knighted, but now the younger brothers of the empress dowager have no merit but have been knighted, in violation of Gao Zu's agreement. This has never happened with a maternal relative, so it is a sign from heaven.

古文：言事者多以为然。
现代文：进谏的人都认为是这样。
English: Everyone who enters the cocoon thinks this is the case.

古文：凤于是惧，上书辞谢曰： 陛下即位，思慕谅闇，故诏臣凤典领尚书事，上无以明圣德，下无以益政治。
现代文：王凤就害怕了，上书辞官，说： 陛下继承皇位，一心守丧，就命我代领尚书事，我对上不能显扬圣王的德行，对下不能对政治有所裨益。
English: Wang Feng was afraid, so he wrote a letter to the dictionary, saying, "Your Majesty, having succeeded to the throne, and being intent on mourning, has ordered me to take charge of the bookkeeping. I cannot show the virtue of a saintly king to those above me, and I cannot be beneficial to politics to those below me.

古文：今有茀星天地赤黄之异，咎在臣凤，当伏显戮，以谢天下。
现代文：现在天地发生了灾异现象，责任出在我身上，应当伏法就戮，以谢天下之人。
English: Now, a calamitous phenomenon has occurred in heaven and earth. The responsibility falls on me. I should obey the law and die to thank the people of the world.

古文：今谅门闇已毕，大义皆举，宜躬亲万机，以承天心。 
现代文：现在陛下孝期已满，深明大义，应亲自处理国政，以顺承天意。 
English: Now that His Majesty's period of filial piety has come to an end, He is well aware of the great justice, and He should personally handle the affairs of state in order to obey the will of Heaven.

古文：因乞骸骨辞职。
现代文：于是请求退职还乡。
English: He then asked to return to his hometown.

古文：上报曰： 朕承先帝圣绪，涉道未深，不明事情，是以阴阳错缪，日月无光，赤黄之气，充塞天下。
现代文：成帝回覆他说： 朕继承先帝的事业，涉世不深，不懂道理，因此阴阳错乱，月无光，黄色的浓雾遍布天下。
English: Emperor Cheng replied to him, "I have inherited the cause of the previous emperor. I am not deeply involved in the world and do not understand the truth. Therefore, the yin and yang are disordered, the moon has no light, and the yellow fog is all over the world.

古文：咎在朕躬，今大将军乃引过自予，欲上尚书事，归大将军印绶，罢大司马官，是明朕之不德也。
现代文：罪责在朕自己，现在大将军把过失揽到自己身上，打算交付尚书事，归还大将军的印绶，解除大司马的官职，这分明显示出我没有德行。
English: The blame lies with me. Now the general is trying to shift the blame onto himself. He plans to hand over Shang's records, return the general's seal, and dismiss the grand secretary. This clearly shows that I am not virtuous.

古文：朕委将军以事，诚欲庶几有成，显先祖之功德。
现代文：朕把事务委派给将军，确实是希望做出一番成就，弘扬先祖的功德。
English: When I delegate matters to the generals, it is indeed with the hope of making some achievements and promoting the merits of our ancestors.

古文：将军其专心固意，辅朕之不逮，毋有所疑。 
现代文：将军请安下心来，辅助朕做不到的地方，不要疑心。 
English: General, please calm down, assist me where I cannot, and do not be suspicious.

古文：后五年，诸吏散骑安成侯崇薨，谥曰共侯。
现代文：五年后，诸吏散骑安成侯王崇去世，谧号为共侯。
English: Five years later, Wang Chong, the Prince of Ancheng, died. His posthumous name was Gonghou.

古文：有遗腹子奉世嗣侯，太后甚哀之。
现代文：王崇有个遣腹子叫王奉世，继承了侯位，太后非常哀伤。
English: Wang Chong had an illegitimate son named Wang Bongxing, who inherited the marital status. The empress dowager was very sad.

古文：明年，河平二年，上悉封舅谭为平阿侯，商成都侯，立红阳侯，根曲阳侯，逢时高平侯。
现代文：第二年，也就是河平二年，成帝将舅舅们全都封为侯，王谭为平阿侯，王商为成都侯，王立为红阳侯，王根为曲阳侯，王逢时为高平侯。
English: In the second year, that is, the second year of Heping, Emperor Chengdu made all of his uncles into princes. Wang Tan became the prince of Ping'a, Wang Shang became the prince of Chengdu, Wang Li became the prince of Hongyang, Wang Gen became the prince of Quyang, and Wang Fengshi became the prince of Gaoping.

古文：五人同日封，故世谓之 五侯 。
现代文：五个人在同一天封侯，因此人们称他们为 五侯 。
English: Five people were knighted on the same day, so people called them the Five Knights.

古文：太后同产唯曼蚤卒，余毕侯矣。
现代文：太后的同父兄弟衹有王曼早死，其余的都封了侯。
English: Wang Man, the stepbrother of the empress dowager, died early, and the rest were married off.

古文：太后母李亲，苟氏妻，生一男名参，寡居。
现代文：太后的母亲李亲，是苟氏的妻子，生了一个儿子名叫苟参，李亲寡居家中。
English: The mother of the empress dowager, Li Jian, the wife of Mr. Gou, gave birth to a son named Gou San. Li Jian lived at home as a widow.

古文：顷侯禁在时，太后令禁还李亲。
现代文：顷侯王禁在世时，太后令王禁接回李亲。
English: When Prince Wang Can was still alive, the empress dowager ordered Wang Can to take back Li Xuan.

古文：太后怜参，欲以田蚡为比而封之。
现代文：太后又很可怜苟参，打算按当年田盼的待遇封赏他。
English: The empress dowager was also very sympathetic, intending to reward him in accordance with the treatment of Tian Ran.

古文：上曰： 封田氏，非正也。 
现代文：成帝说： 昔日封赏田氏，是不正确的。 
English: Emperor Cheng said, "It is incorrect to say that the emperor once rewarded the Tian clan.

古文：以参为侍中水衡都尉。
现代文：就让苟参做了侍中水衡都尉。
English: So he made Gosan an officer of the court, Captain Mizuhira.

古文：王氏子弟皆卿、大夫、侍中、诸曹，分据势官满朝廷。
现代文：王氏家族的子弟们都是卿大夫侍中一类的官，分别占据了各个要害部门，遍布朝廷。
English: The sons of the Wang family were all officials of the same rank as the Lord Chamberlain, occupying various key departments throughout the imperial court.

古文：大将军凤用事，上遂谦让无所颛。
现代文：大将军王凤掌握大权，成帝凡事谦让，不敢自行其是。
English: The great general Wang Feng wields great power, and the emperor is always modest and does not dare to do things his own way.

古文：左右常荐光禄大夫刘向少子歆通达有异材。
现代文：左右近臣常常推荐光禄大夫刘向的小儿子刘歆，说他明达博识，才能出众。
English: His close advisers on both sides often recommended Liu Qi, the youngest son of Liu Xiang, the doctor of Guanglu, saying that he was intelligent and knowledgeable and could be outstanding.

古文：上召见歆，诵读诗赋，甚说之，欲以为中常侍，召取衣冠。
现代文：成帝召见刘歆，让他诵读诗赋，非常高兴，打算让他做中常侍，命人取来衣帽。
English: Emperor Cheng summoned Liu Bei, asked him to recite poems, was very happy, planned to make him a middle attendant, and ordered someone to fetch the cap.

古文：临当拜，左右皆曰： 未晓大将军。 
现代文：就要拜官的时候，左右都说： 不知大将军是否同意。 
English: When it comes to bowing to officials, both sides say: I don't know if the general will agree.

古文：上曰： 此小事，何须关大将军？ 
现代文：成帝说： 遣等小事，还需要问大将军吗？ 
English: Emperor Cheng said, "Do you still need to ask the general about minor matters such as the dispatch of troops?

古文：左右叩头争之。
现代文：左右叩头坚持这么做。
English: The left and right sycophants insist on doing so.

古文：上于是语凤，凤以为不可，乃止。
现代文：成帝就告诉了王凤，王凤认为不可以，就衹得作罢。
English: Emperor Cheng told Wang Feng. Wang Feng thought it was unacceptable, so he had to give up.

古文：其见惮如此。
现代文：成帝忌惮王凤竟然到了如此地步。
English: Emperor-in-waiting Wang Feng has come to such a pass.

古文：上即位数年，无继嗣，体常不平。
现代文：成帝即位数年，没有子嗣，身体又常常不舒服。
English: Emperor Cheng has been on the throne for several years, has no children, and is often unwell.

古文：定陶共王来朝，太后与上承先帝意，遇共王甚厚，赏赐十倍于它王，不以往事为纤介。
现代文：定陶共王前来朝见，太后和成帝顺着先帝的心意，厚待共王，赏赐的东西是其他诸侯王的十倍，并不把过去那些几乎废掉太子的过节放在心裹。
English: Ding Tao and the princes came to see the emperor. The empress dowager and Emperor Cheng followed the wishes of the former emperor and treated the princes well. The rewards were ten times that of other princes. They did not care about the past transgressions that had almost eliminated the princes.

古文：共王之来朝也，天子留，不遣归国。
现代文：共王来朝见后，成帝把他留在京师，不让他回封国。
English: After the king of the Communists came to see the emperor, Emperor Cheng kept him in Beijing and did not allow him to return to the country.

古文：上谓共王： 我未有子，人命不讳，一朝有它，且不复相见。
现代文：成帝对共王说： 我至今没有儿子，而人命无常又不可讳言，一旦发生了变故，我们将不能相见了。
English: Emperor Cheng said to Emperor Gong: I have no son so far, and human life is impermanent and cannot be concealed. In the event of a change, we will not be able to see each other.

古文：尔长留侍我矣！ 
现代文：你就长留在京师陪着我吧！ 
English: Just stay in Beijing and stay with me!

古文：其后，天子疾益有瘳，共王因留国邸，旦夕侍上，上甚亲重。
现代文：后来成帝的病加重，共王就住在宫中，日夜服侍成帝，成帝对他非常亲近倚重。
English: Later, Emperor Cheng's illness worsened, and the co-emperors lived in the palace, serving Emperor Cheng day and night, and Emperor Cheng was very close to him.

古文：大将军凤心不便共王在京师，会日蚀，凤因言： 日蚀，阴盛之象，为非常异。
现代文：大将军王凤认为共王留在京师对自己不利，正赶上发生了食，工凤就说： 日食是阴气太盛造成的现象，是不同寻常的灾异。
English: The great general Wang Feng thought that it was disadvantageous for the king to stay in Beijing. Just as the eclipse occurred, Gong Feng said: The solar eclipse is a phenomenon caused by too much gloom. It is an unusual disaster.

古文：定陶王虽亲，于礼当奉藩在国。
现代文：定陶王虽然是至亲，按礼制还是应当奉守封国。
English: Although King Jento is a close relative, he is still expected to follow the rules of etiquette.

古文：今留侍京师，诡正非常，故天见戒。
现代文：现在留在京师侍奉陛下，违逆正道，破坏常规，因此上天显示异象给予告诫。
English: Now he is staying in Beijing to serve His Majesty. He has gone against the right path and broken the rules. Therefore, Heaven has shown him a vision and given him a warning.

古文：宜遣王之国。 
现代文：应当让定陶王回封国去。 
English: King Ding Tao should be allowed to return to the country.

古文：上不得已于凤而许之。
现代文：成帝没有办法，就只好答应了。
English: Emperor Cheng had no choice but to agree.

古文：共王辞去，上与相对涕泣而决。
现代文：共王临走的时候，成帝和他面对面挥泪而别。
English: When the co-emperor was about to leave, Emperor Chengdu broke up with him face-to-face in tears.

古文：京兆尹王章素刚直敢言，以为凤建遣共王之国非是，乃奏封事言日蚀之咎矣。
现代文：京兆尹王章生性刚直，敢于直言，他认为王凤建议让共王回封国是不对的，就用密奏上书给成帝，论述日食的罪责在谁。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Wang Zhang was born with an upright nature and dared to speak out. He thought that Wang Feng's suggestion to let the co-rulers return to the country was wrong, so he used secret music to write a letter to Emperor Cheng, discussing who was to blame for the solar eclipse.

古文：天子召见章，延问以事，章对曰： 天道聪明，佑善而灾恶，以瑞异为符效。
现代文：成帝召见王章，询问这件事，王章回答说： 上天是圣明的，保佑良善，惩罚邪恶，通过祥瑞和灾异的天象作为验证。
English: Emperor Cheng summoned Wang Zhang to inquire about the matter, and Wang Zhang replied: Heaven is holy, blesses the good, punishes the evil, and is verified by auspicious and disastrous celestial phenomena.

古文：今陛下以未有继嗣，引近定陶王，所以承宗庙，重社稷，上顺天心，下安百姓。
现代文：现在陛下因没有后嗣，亲近定陶王，以此延续宗庙，以社稷为重，对上顺应天意，对下安抚百姓。
English: Now, since His Majesty has no heirs, he is close to King Ding Tao, in order to continue the ancestral temple, to place importance on the community, to obey the will of Heaven above, and to appease the people below.

古文：此正义善事，当有祥瑞，何故致灾异？
现代文：这是符合道义的好事，应当有吉祥符瑞降临，如何会引出灾异？
English: This is a moral good deed, there should be auspicious signs, how can it lead to disaster?

古文：灾异之发，为大臣颛政者也。
现代文：灾异的出现，是由于大臣专政。
English: The emergence of the disaster is due to the ministerial dictatorship.

古文：今闻大将军猥归日蚀之咎于定陶王，建遣之国，苟欲使天子孤立于上，颛擅朝事以便其私，非忠臣也。
现代文：如今听说大将军竞滥将日食的罪责推到定陶王身上，建议遣他回归封国，是想把陛下孤立于上，自己专权擅政以满足私欲，这不是忠臣所为。
English: Now I have heard that the generals are competing to blame the eclipse of the sun on King Ding Tao, suggesting that he should be sent back to the feudal state. They want to isolate his majesty from the rest of the world and exercise their own power to satisfy their own desires. This is not the act of a loyal subject.

古文：且日蚀，阴侵阳、臣颛君之咎，今政事大小皆自凤出，天子曾不一举手，凤不内省责，反归咎善人，推远定陶王。
现代文：况且日食的发生，是由于阴气侵犯阳气，臣子专君主之权的罪过造成的，现在国家事务无论大小都由王凤决断，皇上不能有任何作为，王凤不反省自己的过失，反而归咎于好人，推到定陶王身上。
English: Moreover, the occurrence of the solar eclipse was caused by the sin of the Yin infringing the Yang, the right of the vassal monarch. Now, state affairs, no matter how big or small, are decided by Wang Feng. The emperor cannot do anything. Wang Feng does not reflect on his own mistakes, but blames the good people and pushes them onto King Ding Tao.

古文：且凤诬罔不忠，非一事也。
现代文：况且王凤诬陷他人，不忠不义，并非衹是这一件事。
English: Moreover, Wang Feng slandering others, being unfaithful and unjust, is not a trivial matter.

古文：前丞相乐昌侯商本以先帝外属，内行笃，有威重，位历将相，国家柱石臣也，其人守正，不肯诎节随凤委曲，卒用闺门之事为凤所罢，身以忧死，众庶愍之。
现代文：前丞相乐昌侯王商本是先帝的外戚，德行笃厚，素有威望，职位列在将军和丞相，是国家重臣，为人坚守止义，不肯放弃节操迎合王凤，终于因为闺门内事被王凤罢免，忧惧而死，百姓都很怜悯他。
English: The former prime minister, Lechang Hou Wang Shangben, was a relative of the former emperor. He was a man of great virtue and prestige. His position was listed among the generals and prime ministers. He was the chief minister of the state. He was a man who adhered to justice and did not want to give up the principle of pandering to Wang Feng. Finally, he was dismissed by Wang Feng because of the domestic affairs of his girlfriend. He died of fear, and the people pitied him.

古文：又凤知其小妇弟张美人已尝适人，于礼不宜配御至尊，托以为宜子，内之后宫，苟以私其妻弟。
现代文：而且王凤知道他的妾的妹妹张美人曾经嫁过人，按礼制不能再服侍天子，王凤却以她宜于生育为托词，把她送进后宫，想为他的妻子的妹妹弄到好处。
English: Moreover, Wang Feng knew that his concubine's younger sister, Zhang Meiren, had once been married, and according to the etiquette, she could no longer serve the Son of Heaven. However, Wang Feng used her fertility as an excuse to send her to the harem in order to benefit his wife's younger sister.

古文：闻张美人未尝任身就馆也。
现代文：听说张美人未曾怀孕去外舍生产。
English: It was heard that Zhang Meiren had never been pregnant before giving birth in a surrogate home.

古文：且羌胡尚杀首子以荡肠正世，况于天子而近已出之女也！
现代文：羌胡之类的夷狄尚且杀掉第一个儿子以保证血统纯正，何况作为天子怎么能亲近已嫁过的女子！
English: A barbarian like Yan Hu would even kill the first son to ensure a pure bloodline, and how could a son of heaven get close to a woman who was already married!

古文：此三者皆大事，陛下所自见，足以知其余，及它所不见者。
现代文：这三条都是大事，陛下自己能够看到，由此完全可以推知其余的事，以及那些看不到的事。
English: These three are the great things, which your majesty can see for himself, and from which it is possible to deduce the rest, as well as those which cannot be seen.

古文：凤不可令久典事，宜退使就第，选忠贤以代之。 
现代文：王凤这样的人不能让他长期执政，应当让他退归府第，另外选择忠诚贤明的臣子来代替他。 
English: A person like Wang Feng cannot be allowed to rule for a long time. He should be allowed to return to the palace, and a loyal and wise courtier should be chosen to replace him.

古文：自凤之白罢商后遣定陶王也，上不能平。
现代文：自从王凤建议罢免王商后来又遣定陶王回封国，成帝心裹愤慨不满。
English: Since Wang Feng proposed to dismiss Wang Shang and later sent Tao Wang back to the country, Emperor Cheng's heart was filled with resentment and dissatisfaction.

古文：及闻章言，天子感寤，纳之，谓章曰： 微京兆尹直言，吾不闻社稷计！
现代文：等到听了王章的话，成帝有所感悟，就采纳了王章的意见，对王章说： 若没有京兆尹直言进谏，我都听不到这样的国家大计！
English: After listening to Wang Zhang's words, Emperor Cheng Rong was impressed. He adopted Wang Zhang's opinion and said to Wang Zhang: "If it weren't for Jing Zhaoyun's forthright speech, I wouldn't have heard of such a grand national plan!"

古文：且唯贤知贤，君试为朕求可以自辅者。 
现代文：况且衹有贤明的人才能了解贤明的人，你试着给我找几个能够辅佐朝政的人。 
English: Moreover, only a wise person can understand a wise person. Try to find me a few people who can assist the government.

古文：于是章奏封事，荐中山孝王舅琅邪太守冯野王 先帝时历二卿，忠信质直，知谋有余。
现代文：于是王章以密奏上书，推荐中山孝王的舅舅琅邪太守冯野王 先帝时位列二卿，忠诚正直，很有智谋。
English: Therefore, Wang Zhang secretly wrote a letter, recommending Zhongshan Xiaowang's uncle, the evil king Feng Ye Wang, who was ranked second in the previous emperor's time. He was loyal, honest, and very clever.

古文：野王以王舅出，以贤复人，明圣主乐进贤也。 
现代文：冯野王作为孝王的舅舅出任外官，又因为贤德被召回，正可以显示出圣明的君主喜欢任用贤者 。
English: As the uncle of Emperor Xiaowang, Feng Ye Wang served as foreign minister, and was recalled because of his virtue, which just goes to show that the holy monarch likes to appoint wise men.

古文：上自为太子时数闻野王先帝名卿，声誉出凤远甚，方倚欲以代凤。
现代文：成帝在做太子时，就多次听说冯野王是先帝的名臣，声誉远在王凤之上，就打算让他代替王凤。
English: When Emperor Cheng was crown prince, he heard many times that Feng Ye Wang was a famous minister of the previous emperor, and his reputation was far above Wang Feng, so he planned to let him replace Wang Feng.

古文：初，章每召见，上辄辟左右。
现代文：当初，王章每次被召见时，成帝就屏退左右。
English: At first, every time Wang Zhang was summoned to a meeting, Cheng Di flinched.

古文：时太后从弟长乐卫尉弘子侍中音独侧听，具知章言，以语凤。
现代文：当时太后的堂弟、长乐卫尉王弘的儿子侍中王音却偷听了他们的谈话，全部知道了王章的计谋，就告诉了王凤。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager's cousin, the equerry Wang Yin, the son of the Changle Guardsman Wang Hong, overheard their conversation, knew all about Wang Zhang's plot, and told Wang Feng.

古文：凤闻之，称病出就第，上疏乞骸骨，谢上曰： 臣材驽愚戆，得以外属兄弟七人封为列侯，宗族蒙恩，赏赐无量。
现代文：王凤听了之后，就称病回到府第，上疏请求辞职回乡，向皇上告辞说： 我为人愚笨驽钝，而能够以外戚兄弟七人封为列侯，家族蒙受皇恩，得到无数的赏赐。
English: After listening to Wang Feng, he claimed to be ill and returned to the capital. Shang So asked him to resign and return to his hometown. He said to the emperor: I am a stupid and dull person, but I can make seven relatives and brothers princes. My family has received royal grace and received countless rewards.

古文：辅政出入七年，国家委任臣凤，所言辄听，荐士常用。
现代文：辅佐朝政七年，皇上委我以重任，有人进言我就听纳，推荐贤士我常常任用。
English: As an aide to the imperial government for seven years, I have been entrusted with important responsibilities by the Emperor's Council. I listen to anyone's advice, and I often appoint recommended sages.

古文：无一功善，阴阳不调，灾异数见，咎在臣凤奉职无状，此臣一当退也。
现代文：没有一件事做得好，致使阴阳不和，灾异屡次出现，祸根就在于我任职没有功绩，这是我应当引退的第一个原因。
English: Nothing has been done well, resulting in discord between yin and yang, and disasters have repeatedly occurred. The root cause is that I have no merit in my post, which is the first reason why I should retire.

古文：《五经》传记，师所诵说，咸以日蚀之咎在于大臣非其人，《易》曰 折其右肱 ，此臣二当退也。
现代文：《五经》记载以及经师所说，都把日食的罪责归到任用的大臣不合适上，《易》裹说 折断了右臂，这是我应当引退的第二个原因。
English: The "Five Classics" record and what the scribes said all blamed the eclipse on the unsuitability of the appointed minister. "Yi" Wai said, "I broke my right arm. This is the second reason why I should retire."

古文：河平以来，臣久病连年，数出在外，旷职素餐，此臣三当退也。
现代文：河平年间以来，我连年生病，多次在家养病，不理政务，徒受秩禄，这是我应当引退的第三个原因。
English: Since the Heping era, I have been ill for years on end. I have repeatedly nursed my illness at home, neglected government affairs, and received my salary in vain. This is the third reason why I should retire.

古文：陛下以皇太后故不忍诛废，臣犹自知当远流放，又重自念，兄弟宗族所蒙不测，当杀身靡骨死辇毂下，不当以无益之故有离寝门之心，诚岁余以来，所苦加侵，日日益甚，不胜大愿，愿乞骸骨，归自治养，冀赖陛下神灵，未埋发齿，期月之间，幸得瘳愈，复望帷幄，不然，必置沟壑。
现代文：陛下因为皇太后的缘故，不忍心将我废免，我也自知应当流放到远方，衹是心中又想，我的家族蒙受的圣恩无法计算，应当勤勉王事，不惜粉身碎骨，不能因为自己没用就生出离开皇上的念头。这一年多来，确实病痛加重，一天比一天严重，愿望也难以实现，衹求辞职回乡，自行养病，希望仰仗陛下的神明，幸而不死，一月之间，能够病愈，再见到陛下，否则，一定埋于地下。
English: Your Majesty, for the sake of the Empress Dowager, did not have the heart to dismiss me. I also knew that I should be exiled to a faraway place. But in my heart, I also thought that the grace my family had received was incalculable, that I should be diligent in royal duties, that I should not break my bones, and that I should not give birth to the idea of leaving the Emperor because I was useless. For more than a year, my illness has indeed worsened, becoming more serious day by day, and my wish is also difficult to realize. I begged to resign and return to my hometown, to recover from my illness on my own, hoping to rely

古文：臣以非材见私，天下知臣受恩深也；以病得全骸骨归，天下知臣被恩见哀，重巍巍也。
现代文：我没有才能却得到陛下宠爱，天下人都知道我蒙受了深厚的皇恩；我因病辞职回乡，天下人都知道我被陛下哀怜而降恩，皇恩浩荡。
English: I have no talent, but I have been favored by His Majesty. The whole world knows that I have received profound royal grace; I resigned due to illness and returned to my hometown. The whole world knows that I was pitied by His Majesty and was given grace, and the royal grace is abundant.

古文：进退于国为厚，万无纤介之议。
现代文：我退归乡里对国家大有好处，不会引起什么议论。
English: My return to my hometown is of great benefit to the country and will not cause any controversy.

古文：唯陛下哀怜！ 
现代文：请陛下可怜我！ 
English: Your Majesty, have pity on me!

古文：其辞指甚哀，太后闻之为垂涕，不御食。
现代文：文辞非常哀切，太后听说之后为他哭泣，吃不下饭。
English: The words were very sad, and when the empress heard about it, she cried for him and couldn't eat.

古文：上少而亲倚凤，弗忍废，乃报凤曰： 朕秉事不明，政事多阙，故天变娄臻，咸在朕躬。
现代文：成帝从小就倚重王凤，不忍心将他罢免，就回覆王凤说： 朕不善于理政，处理国政有很多缺漏的地方，所以上天屡次出现灾异，这都是朕的责任。
English: Emperor Cheng had relied on Wang Feng since he was a child. He could not bear to dismiss him, so he replied to Wang Feng, saying: I am not good at governance. There are many shortcomings in handling state affairs. Therefore, disasters have repeatedly occurred in heaven. This is all my responsibility.

古文：将军乃深引过自予，欲乞骸骨而退，则朕将何向焉！
现代文：将军却把过失都揽到自己身上，打算辞职归乡，那么朕将要依靠谁呢？
English: But the general has taken the blame on himself and plans to resign and return home. So who am I going to rely on?

古文：《书》不云乎？ 公毋困我 。务专精神，安心自持，期于亟廖，称朕意焉。 
现代文：《书经》上不是说过吗？ 您不要远去，使我陷入困境，一定要打起精神，安下心来，克制自己，希望病能够马上痊愈，朕也就满意了。 
English: Isn't it said in the "Shu Jing" that you shouldn't go far away and let me get into trouble, you must cheer up, calm down, restrain yourself, and hope that the disease can be cured immediately, and I will be satisfied.

古文：于是凤起视事。
现代文：于是王凤又起而主政。
English: As a result, Wang Feng rose to power again.

古文：上使尚书劾奏章： 知野王前以王舅出补吏，而私荐之，欲令在朝阿附诸侯；又知张美人体御至尊，而妄称引羌胡杀子荡肠，非所宜言。 
现代文：成帝派尚书弹劾王章的罪过，说： 知道冯野王先前作为孝王的舅舅而出京任职，却私下荐举他，是想让在朝的大臣依附诸侯王；又知道张美人侍奉皇上，却乱引羌胡之人杀掉第一个孩子以纯正血统的事，这不是作臣子的应当说的话。 
English: Emperor Cheng sent Shang Shu to impeach Wang Zhang for his crime, saying: "Knowing that Feng Ye Wang had previously served as the uncle of Prince Xiao Wang in Beijing, but privately recommended him, he wanted to make the ministers in the court adhere to the princes; and knowing that Zhang Meiren served the emperor, but the man with the messy beard killed the first child with pure blood, this is not what a vassal should say.

古文：遂下章吏。
现代文：就把王章交给法官审讯。
English: Wang Zhang was handed over to the judge for interrogation.

古文：廷尉致其大逆罪，以为 比上夷狄，欲绝继嗣之端；背畔天子，私为定陶王。 
现代文：廷尉给王章定下大逆不道的罪名，认为 把皇上与夷狄相比，想断绝皇上的后嗣；背叛皇上，私下裹为定陶王打算。 
English: The courtier accused Wang Zhang of high treason, saying that he compared the emperor to a barbarian and wanted to cut off the emperor's heir; he betrayed the emperor and secretly planned to become King Ding Tao.

古文：章死狱中，妻子徙合浦。
现代文：王章死在狱裹，妻子儿女被流放到合浦。
English: Wang Zhang died in prison, and his wife and children were exiled to Hapu.

古文：自是公卿见凤，侧目而视，郡国守相、刺吏皆出其门。
现代文：从此大臣们见到王凤，都不敢正视，郡国的地方官员都是他的亲信。
English: Since then, ministers have not dared to look Wang Feng in the eye when they meet him. Local officials in the county are all his cronies.

古文：又以侍中太仆音为御史大夫，列于三公。
现代文：又封侍中太仆王音为御史大夫，位列三公。
English: In addition, Wang Yin, the attendant of the middle eunuch, was appointed to the position of goshi taifu, which is one of the three highest ranks.

古文：而五侯群弟，争为奢移，赂遗珍宝，四面而至；后廷姬妾，各数十人，僮奴以千百数，罗钟馨，舞郑女，作倡优，狗马驰逐；大治第室，起土山渐台，洞门高廊阁道，连属弥望。
现代文：而封为列侯的五个弟弟，竞相挥霍浪费，贿赂赠送所得的珍宝，源源不断，后庭的姬妾，每家都有几十名，奴仆则是成百上千，敲钟击磬，美女起舞，观看杂技，声色犬马；大修府第，建起假山高台，门重重相对，廊阁幽深，连绵不绝，望不到尽头。
English: But the five younger brothers, who were made lords of the manor, competed with each other in squandering and wasting, and the bribes and gifts of the treasures they received continued to flow. There were dozens of concubines in each family's backyard, and hundreds of slaves. They rang bells, danced with beautiful women, watched acrobatics, and made the sounds of dogs and horses. They overhauled the palace, built a rockery, and the doors were stacked on top of each other. The galleries were deep and continuous, and there was no end in sight.

古文：百姓歌之曰： 五侯初起，曲阳最怒，坏决高都，连竟外杜，土山渐台西白虎。 
现代文：老百姓为他们唱着歌谣说： 五侯刚刚发迹的时候，曲阳侯最强，毁坏高都作殿，又衍及外杜一带，土山渐台高耸，如同皇帝的白虎殿。 
English: The common people sang a ballad for them, saying: When the Five Princes were just beginning to make their mark, Quyang Prince was the strongest, and he destroyed the High Capital and made it into a palace, and also extended to the Outer Du region, and the soil mountains gradually rose higher and higher, just like the Emperor's White Tiger Palace.

古文：其奢僣如此。
现代文：他们居然奢侈僭越到这种地步。
English: They've gone to such extravagant lengths.

古文：然皆通敏人事，好士养贤，倾财施予，以相高尚。
现代文：但这些人都精通人情世故，喜欢蓄养贤士，把钱财都花费在这方面，以显示自己并不卑俗。
English: But these people are well-versed in the ways of the world, like to cultivate sages, and spend money and resources in this area to show that they are not vulgar.

古文：凤辅政凡十一岁。
现代文：王凤辅佐朝政一共十一年。
English: Wang Fengfu assisted the imperial government for a total of eleven years.

古文：阳朔三年秋，凤疾，天子数自临问，亲执其手，涕泣曰： 将军病，如有不可言，平阿侯谭次将军矣。 
现代文：阳朔三年秋，王凤病重，成帝多次亲自去他家探视，拉着他的手，哭着说： 将军病重，如果一旦不行了，就让平阿侯王谭代替将军。 
English: In the autumn of the third year of the Yangshuo era, Wang Feng was seriously ill. Emperor Chengdu personally visited his home many times, took his hand and cried: "The general is seriously ill. If he can't do it, let Ping Ahou Wang Tan replace the general."

古文：凤顿首泣曰： 谭等虽与臣至亲，行皆奢僣，无以率导百姓，不如御史大夫音谨敕，臣敢以死保之。 
现代文：王凤叩头，流着眼泪说： 王谭等人虽然是我最近的亲人，却崇尚奢靡，无法为天下百姓的表率，比不上御史大夫王音谨慎，我愿以死相荐。 
English: Wang Feng bowed his head and said with tears streaming down his face: Although Wang Tan and others are my closest relatives, they advocate extravagance and cannot set an example for the people of the world. They are not as prudent as Wang Yin, the Imperial Historian. I would recommend them to my death.

古文：及凤且死，上疏谢上，复固荐音自代，言谭等五人必不可用。
现代文：等到王凤死的时候，上疏辞谢皇上，还是坚持推荐王音代替自己，说王谭等五个人一定不能重用。
English: When Wang Feng died, he still insisted on recommending Wang Yin to replace himself, saying that Wang Tan and the other five people must not be reused.

古文：天子然之。
现代文：成帝同意了。
English: Emperor Cheng agreed.

古文：初，谭倨，不肯事凤，而音敬凤，卑恭如子，故荐之。
现代文：当初，王谭倨傲不逊，不肯侍奉王凤，而王音敬重王凤，态度谦卑就像儿子对待父亲，所以王凤举荐了他。
English: At first, Wang Tan Jian was arrogant and refused to serve Wang Feng, while Wang Yin respected Wang Feng and treated him humbly like a son treats his father, so Wang Feng recommended him.

古文：凤薨，天子临吊赠宠，送以轻车介士，军陈自长安至渭陵，谥曰敬成侯。
现代文：王凤死后，成帝亲自前去凭吊以示恩宠，赠给王家轻车武士，送葬时军兵从长安一直排列到渭陵，谧号为敬成侯。
English: After Wang Feng's death, Emperor Cheng personally went to present a light chariot to the royal family as a token of his grace. During the funeral, the soldiers were lined up from Chang'an to Fuling. His posthumous name was Jing Cheng Hou.

古文：子襄嗣侯，为卫尉。
现代文：王凤的儿子王襄继承侯爵，任卫尉。
English: Wang Feng's son, Wang Xiang, succeeded him as marquis and was appointed captain of the guard.

古文：御史大夫音竟代凤为大司马车骑将军，而平阿侯谭位特进，领城门兵。
现代文：御史大夫王音终于代替王凤做了大司马车骑将军，而平阿侯王谭被赐位特进，统领守城的军队。
English: Wang Yin, the chief historian, finally replaced Wang Feng as the general in charge of chariots and cavalry, while Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan was given the position of special envoy to lead the army defending the city.

古文：谷永说谭，令让不受城门职，由是与音不平，语在《永传》。
现代文：谷永劝说王谭，让他不要接受守城门的职务，从此对王音不满，这件事记载在《谷永传》。
English: Gu Yong persuaded Wang Tan not to accept the position of guarding the city gate, and from then on he was dissatisfied with Wang Yin. This event is recorded in the "Legend of Gu Yong."

古文：音既以从舅越亲用事，小心亲职，岁余，上下诏曰： 车骑将军音宿卫忠正，勤劳国家，前为御史大夫，以外亲宜典兵马，入为将军，不获宰相之封，朕甚慊焉！
现代文：王音以堂舅的身份超越至亲掌管政事，小心谨慎，亲自治理政事，过了一年多，成帝下韶说： 车骑将军王音在宫中任职，忠诚纯正，为国事操劳，原来是御史大夫，作为外亲应掌管军队，又做了将军，没能获得宰相的封赏，朕非常遗憾！
English: After more than a year, Emperor Cheng said: Cavalry General Wang Yin served in the palace, loyal and pure, and worked hard for national affairs. Originally, he was a military historian. As a maternal relative, he should have been in charge of the army, and he became a general. I am very sorry that I could not get the reward of the Prime Minister!

古文：其封音为安阳侯，食邑与五侯等，俱三千户。 
现代文：封王音为安阳侯，封邑和五侯一样，都是三千户。 
English: Fong Wangyin is Anyang Hou, and Fongyi is the same as Wuhou, both are three thousand households.

古文：初，成都侯商尝病，欲避暑，从上借明光宫，后又穿长安城，引内澧水注第中大陂以行船，立羽盖，张周帷，辑濯越歌。
现代文：当初，成都侯王商得了病，想去避暑，就向皇上借明光宫。后来又穿过都城长安，把澧水引入家中大池以行船，树起翠羽装饰的伞盖，设置帷帐，令撑船的人唱起越歌。
English: At first, Chengdu merchant Hou Wang got sick and wanted to take a summer vacation, so he borrowed the Mingguang Palace from the emperor. Later, he passed through the capital Chang'an, brought the salty water into the large pond at home to sail, erected the umbrella cover decorated with green feathers, set up the curtain, and made the boatmen sing the Vietnamese song.

古文：上幸商第，见穿城引水，意恨，内衔之，未言。
现代文：成帝临幸王商的府第，看到他穿遇长安城引水，非常生气，衹是心中忌恨，没有说出来。
English: When Emperor Chengzong visited the residence of the merchant Linh Xuan Wang and saw him carrying water to Chang'an City, he was very angry, but he did not speak out because of his hatred.

古文：后微行出，过曲阳侯第，又见园中土山渐台似类白虎殿。
现代文：后来微服出行，路过曲阳侯家，又看到庭园中的土山渐台和白虎殿类似。
English: Later, when traveling in micro-clothing, I passed by Qu Yang Hou's house and saw that the soil mound in the garden was similar to the White Tiger Hall.

古文：于是上怒，以让车骑将军音。
现代文：于是皇上大怒，责备车骑将军王音。
English: As a result, the emperor flew into a rage and rebuked the chariot and cavalry general Wang Ying.

古文：商、根兄弟欲自黥、劓谢太后。
现代文：王商、王根兄弟打算自己在脸上刺字、割鼻子向太后谢罪。
English: Wang Shang and Wang Gen brothers plan to write on their faces and cut their noses to express their gratitude to the empress dowager.

古文：上闻之大怒，乃使尚书责问司隶校尉、京兆尹： 知成都侯商擅穿帝城，决引澧水，曲阳侯根骄奢僣上，赤墀青琐，红阳侯立父子臧匿奸猾亡命，宾客为群盗，司隶、京兆皆阿纵不举奏正法。 
现代文：成帝听说后更为愤怒，就派尚书责问司隶校尉、京兆尹 明知成都侯王商擅自穿过京城，引入澧水，曲阳侯王根骄侈无度，府第用度僭越帝王，石阶漆成红色，门上镂刻着青色图纹，红阳侯王立父子窝藏亡命之徒，门客是强盗，司隶、京兆尹却纵容他们，不肯上奏以正刑法。 
English: When Emperor Cheng heard of this, he was even more furious. He sent Shang Shu to interrogate the lieutenant-colonel Sisli and Jing Zhaoyun. He knew that the merchants of the prince of Chengdu had crossed the capital city without permission and had brought in the water of the Ganges, that the prince of Quyang was arrogant, that the prince of Fudi had used the imperial title to usurp the emperor, that the stone steps were painted red, and the blue patterns were engraved on the door, that the prince of Hongyang and his son were hiding fugitives, and that their customers were robbers. However, Sisli and Jing Zhaoyun indulged them and

古文：二人顿首省户下。
现代文：两人叩头，回家反省。
English: The two bowed their heads and went home to reflect.

古文：又赐车骑将军音策书曰： 外家何甘乐祸败，而欲自黥、劓，相戮辱于太后前，伤慈母之心，以危乱国！
现代文：又赐给车骑将军王音一道文书说： 外戚家族哪裹有甘心败落的，却要自己施行黥刑劓刑，在太后面前受此刑辱，使慈母之心受到伤害，以祸乱国家！
English: He also gave a document to the cavalry general Wang Yin, saying: "What kind of relative family has willingly fallen, but wants to carry out the torture themselves, and suffer this humiliation in front of the empress dowager, so that the mother's heart is hurt, and the country is ruined!

古文：外家宗族强，上一身寝弱日久，今将一施之。
现代文：外戚家族强盛，皇上长期以来势力越来越弱，现在要动用刑罚了。
English: His maternal family is powerful, but the emperor's power has been getting weaker and weaker for a long time. Now he wants to use punishment.

古文：君其召诸侯，令待府舍。 
现代文：你把那些列侯召集起来，在你家等候韶命。 
English: Gather the lords together, and wait in thy house for the battle.

古文：是日，诏尚书奏文帝时诛将军薄昭故事。
现代文：这一天，又下韶令尚书上奏文帝时诛杀将军薄昭的旧事。
English: On this day, the imperial edict was issued again, ordering Shang to write about the old story of assassinating General Bo Zhao during the reign of Emperor Wen.

古文：车骑将军音藉槁请罪，商、立、根皆负斧质谢。
现代文：车骑将军王音坐在草垫上，请求得到惩罚，王商、王立、王根都背着斧子来请求治罪。
English: The cavalry general Wang Yin sat on a straw mat and asked for punishment. Wang Shang, Wang Li, and Wang Gen all carried axes to ask for punishment.

古文：上不忍诛，然后得已。
现代文：成帝不忍心诛杀他们，就此作罢。
English: Emperor Cheng could not bear to fight and kill them, so he stopped.

古文：久之，平阿侯谭薨，谥曰安侯，子仁嗣侯。
现代文：过了一段时间，平阿侯王谭去世，谧号为安侯，儿子王仁继承侯位。
English: After a period of time, Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan died, his nickname was An Hou, and his son Wang Ren succeeded to the throne.

古文：太后怜弟曼蚤死，独不封，曼寡妇渠供养东宫，子莽幼孤不及等比，常以为语。
现代文：太后怜惜弟弟王曼早死，单单没能封侯，王曼的寡妻渠又侍奉自己，儿子王莽年幼丧父，不能和别人相比，就常常在成帝面前提及他。
English: The empress dowager regretted the early death of her brother Wang Man, who was not able to become a prince. Wang Man's widowed wife also served herself. Wang Man's son Wang Mang lost his father at a young age and could not be compared with others, so she often mentioned him in front of Emperor Chengdu.

古文：平阿侯谭、成都侯商及在位多称莽者。
现代文：平阿侯王谭、成都侯王商和一些做官的人都称赞王莽。
English: Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan, Chengdu Hou Wang Shang and some officials all praised Wang Mang.

古文：久之，上复下诏追封曼为新都哀侯，而子莽嗣爵为新都侯。
现代文：后来，成帝又下诏追封王曼为新都哀侯，他的儿子王莽继承爵位为新都侯。
English: Later, Emperor Cheng also issued an edict to enthrone Wang Man as the new capital, and his son Wang Mang inherited the title of the new capital.

古文：后又封太后姊子淳天长为定陵侯。
现代文：后来又封太后姐姐的儿子淳于长为定陵侯。
English: Later, the son of the empress dowager's sister, Jun Yuchang, was appointed as the governor of Dingling.

古文：王氏亲属，侯者凡十人。
现代文：王氏家族亲属中，一共有十个人封侯。
English: Among the relatives of the Wang family, a total of ten people were ennobled.

古文：上悔废平阿侯谭不辅政而薨也，乃复进成都侯商以特进，领城门兵，置幕府，得举吏如将军。
现代文：成帝后悔罢用平阿侯王谭，没能辅佐朝政就死了，就又赐给成都侯王商特进的称号，让他统领守城的军队，设置幕府，能像将军那样举荐官吏。
English: Emperor Cheng regretted the dismissal of Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan, who died without being able to assist the government. He also gave the title of Chengdu Hou Wang Shang Tejin to him, so that he could command the army defending the city, set up the shogunate, and recommend officials like a general.

古文：杜邺说车骑将军音令亲附商，语在《邺传》。
现代文：杜邺劝说车骑将军王音去亲近王商，这件事记载在《杜邺传》裹。
English: Cuckoo persuaded the chariot and cavalry general Wang Yin to get close to Wang Shang, which was recorded in "Cuckoo's Tale."

古文：王氏爵位日盛，唯音为修整，数谏正，有忠节，辅政八年，薨。
现代文：王氏家族的官爵越来越高，衹有王音讲究法度，屡次直言相劝，有忠臣之品德，辅佐政事八年，去世了。
English: The official ranks of the Wang family are getting higher and higher. Wang Ying, who was a stickler for the law, repeatedly gave forthright advice, had the character of a loyal subject, assisted the government for eight years, and passed away.

古文：吊赠如大将军，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：成帝像对待王凤那样亲自前去凭吊，赠以荣宠，谧号为敬侯。
English: Emperor Cheng, as he did with Wang Feng, personally went to the hanging, presented him with honor and favor, and gave him the title of respect.

古文：子舜嗣侯，为太仆侍中。
现代文：王音的儿子王舜继承侯位，做太仆侍中。
English: Wang Yin's son, Wang Yao, succeeded to the title of marquess and became a servant of the emperor.

古文：特进成都侯商代音为大司马卫将军，而红阳侯立位特进，领城门兵。
现代文：特进成都侯王商代替王音做大司马卫将军，赐给红阳侯王立特进的职位，让他统领守城军队。
English: Wang Shang, the prince of Chengdu, replaced Wang Yin as the general of Mawei, and gave the position of Wang Litjin, the prince of Hongyang, to lead the army guarding the city.

古文：商辅政四岁，病乞骸骨，天子悯之，更以为大将军，益封二千户，赐钱百万。
现代文：王商辅佐朝政四年，病重，请求辞官，成帝怜惜他，加封为大将军，加赏二千户，赏钱一百万。
English: Wang Shangfu, who had been an aide to the imperial government for four years, was seriously ill and asked to be relieved of his post. Emperor Cheng took pity on him and made him a grand general, with a bonus of 2,000 households and a reward of one million yuan.

古文：商薨，吊赠如大将军故事，谥曰景成侯，子况嗣侯。
现代文：王商去世，成帝按大将军的旧制亲自凭吊，赠以荣宠，谧号为景成侯，王商的儿子王况继承侯爵。
English: When Wang Shang died, Emperor Cheng personally pardoned him according to the old system of grand generals, bestowed him with honors and favors, and gave him the title of Jing Cheng Hou. Wang Shang's son Wang Jiao succeeded him as marquis.

古文：红阳侯立次当辅政，有罪过，语在《孙宝传》。
现代文：红阳侯王立按顺序应当入朝辅政，但犯过罪作罢，这件事记载在《孙宝传》裹。
English: According to the order, Hongyang marquis Wang Li was supposed to enter the auxiliary government, but he committed a crime and quit, which was recorded in "Sun Bao Biography."

古文：上乃废立，而用光禄勋曲阳侯根为大司马票骑将军，岁余益封千七百户。
现代文：成帝就放弃了王立，任命光禄勋曲阳侯王根为大司马骠骑将军，一年多后又增加了一千七百户为封邑。
English: Emperor Cheng abandoned Wang Li, and appointed Wang Gen, the Guanglu Honoured Quyang Marquis, as the General of Horse Cavalry. More than a year later, he added another 1,700 households as fiefs.

古文：高平侯逢时无材能名称，是岁薨，谥曰戴侯，子买之嗣侯。
现代文：高平侯王逢时没有才能，也没有名气，这一年去世，谧号为戴侯，儿子王买之继承侯爵。
English: Gaoping marquis Wang Fengji had no talent and no fame. He died in the same year. His nickname was Dai Hou, and his son Wang Mai Rong inherited the title of marquis.

古文：绥和元年，上即位二十余年无继嗣，而定陶共王已薨，子嗣立为王。
现代文：到了绥和元年，成帝即位已二十多年还没有后嗣，而定陶共王已经去世，儿子继承王位。
English: By the first year of the Sino-Japanese War, Emperor Cheng had been on the throne for more than twenty years and had no heir, while King Ding Tao had died and his son had succeeded to the throne.

古文：王祖母定陶傅太后重赂遗票骑将军根，为王求汉嗣，根为言，上亦欲立之，遂征定陶王为太子。
现代文：定陶王的祖母定陶傅太后用厚礼贿赂骠骑将军王根，希望把定陶王立为太子，王根就替她说话，成帝也打算立定陶王，就召他入京册立为太子。
English: King Ding Tao's grandmother, the Empress Dowager Ding Tao Fu, bribed the general Wang Gen with a generous gift, hoping to establish King Ding Tao as the prince, and Wang Gen spoke for her. Emperor Cheng also planned to establish King Ding Tao, and called him to enter the capital register to become the prince.

古文：时根辅政五岁矣，乞骸骨，上乃益封根五千户，赐安车驷马，黄金五百斤，罢就第。
现代文：这时王根辅佐朝政已经五年了，请求辞官回乡，成帝就给王根的封邑增加了五千户，赏赐他安车驷马，黄金五百斤，罢官回其府第。
English: At this time, it had been five years since Wang Genfu assisted the imperial government, and he requested the retired official to return to his hometown. Emperor Cheng gave Wang Genfu an additional five thousand households in his fiefdom, rewarded him with a horse-drawn carriage and five hundred kilos of gold, and sent the retired official back to his hometown.

古文：先是，定陵侯淳于长以外属能谋议，为卫尉侍中，在辅政之次。
现代文：先前定陵侯淳于长作为外戚能够出谋划策，做了卫尉侍中，处于辅佐朝政的位置上。
English: Previously, as a maternal relative, Dingling Hou Junyuchang was able to make plans and suggestions, and he was made an attendant of the guards, and was in the position of an assistant to the government.

古文：是岁，新都侯莽告长伏罪与红阳侯立相连，长下狱死，立就国，语在《长传》。
现代文：这年，新都侯王莽告发淳于长的往日之罪，曾和红阳侯王立勾结，淳于长被关进监狱而死，王立回到封地，这件事记载在《淳于长传》里。
English: In this year, Wang Mang, the new capital lord, accused Chun Yuchang of his past crimes. He had colluded with Wang Li, the Hongyang lord. Chun Yuchang was imprisoned and died, and Wang Li returned to the fief. This event is recorded in "Chun Yuchang Biography."

古文：故曲阳侯根荐莽以自代，上亦以为莽有忠直节，遂擢莽从侍中骑都尉光禄大夫为大司马。
现代文：所以曲阳侯王根推荐王莽代替自己，成帝也认为王莽忠诚正直，就把王莽从侍中骑都尉光禄大夫提升为大司马。
English: Therefore, Quyang marquis Wang Gen recommended Wang Mang to replace him, and Emperor Cheng also believed that Wang Mang was loyal and honest, so he promoted Wang Mang from the equerry and cavalry captain Guanglu Daifu to the grand steed.

古文：岁余，成帝崩，哀帝即位。
现代文：过了一年多，成帝去世，哀帝即位。
English: More than a year later, Emperor Chengdi died, and Empress Dowager Cixi ascended the throne.

古文：太后诏莽就第，避帝外家。
现代文：太后下诏让王莽辞官回家，因皇帝的外戚而回避。
English: The empress dowager ordered Wang Mang to return home, but he refused because he was a relative of the emperor.

古文：哀帝初优莽，不听。
现代文：哀帝开始优待王莽，不肯答应。
English: The emperor began to treat Wang Mang favourably and refused to agree.

古文：莽上书固乞骸骨而退。
现代文：王莽上书坚持要辞官引退。
English: Wang Mang insisted in his resignation letter that he wanted to retire.

古文：上乃下诏曰： 曲阳侯根前在位，建社稷策。
现代文：哀帝就下韶说： 曲阳侯王根在职期间，曾有治国安邦之策。
English: Emperor Ai said, "During the tenure of Quyang Prince Wang Gen, there was a policy of governing the country peacefully.

古文：侍中太仆安阳侯舜往时护太子家，导朕，忠诚专一，有旧恩。
现代文：侍中太仆安阳侯王舜过去照顾太子家，开导朕，忠诚没有贰心，有旧的恩情。
English: In the past, the eunuch Anyang Hou Wangyu took care of the prince's family and enlightened me. He was loyal and kind-hearted, and had old feelings of gratitude.

古文：新都侯莽忧劳国家，执义坚固，庶几与为治，太皇太后诏休就第，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：新都侯王莽为国事操劳，坚持正义，有希望能辅佐我治理国家，太皇太后下韶让他退休回家，朕非常惋惜。
English: Xindu Hou Wang Mang worked hard for national affairs, insisted on justice, and hoped to assist me in governing the country. I am very sorry that the Empress Dowager ordered him to retire and return home.

古文：其益封根二千户，舜五百户，莽三百五十户。
现代文：加封王根二千户封邑，王舜五百户，王莽三百五十户。
English: In addition, 2,000 households in Wanggen, 500 households in Wangye, and 350 households in Wangmen were added.

古文：以莽为特进，朝朔望。 
现代文：赐给王莽特进之位，朔日望入宫朝见。 
English: Wang Mang was given the position of special promotion, and he hoped to enter the palace to meet the emperor.

古文：又还红阳侯立京师。
现代文：又让红阳侯王立回到京师。
English: He also allowed Hongyang Hou Wangli to return to Beijing.

古文：哀帝少而闻知五氏骄盛，心不能善，以初立，故优之。
现代文：哀帝很年轻，却听说王氏家族骄横贵盛，心裹不高兴，因为刚刚登基，所以表示优待他们。
English: Emperor Ai was very young, but he heard that the Wang family was arrogant and opulent, and he was not happy, because he had just ascended to the throne, so he showed them preferential treatment.

古文：内怀奸邪，欲管朝政，推亲近吏主簿张业以为尚书，蔽上壅下，内塞王路，外交藩臣，骄奢僣上，坏乱制度，案根骨肉至亲，社稷大臣，先帝弃天下，根不悲哀思慕，山陵未成，公聘取故掖庭女乐五官殷严、王飞君等，置酒歌舞，捐忘先帝厚恩，背臣子义。
现代文：一个月之后，司隶校尉解光上奏说： 曲阳侯王根家族势力强大，身份尊贵，三代执掌大权，五位将军把持政事，天下人附炎趋势献媚讨好。王根贪婪邪僻，敛财无数，胡作非为，大修府第，府中建起假山，设置两处市场，殿前台阶漆成红色，门上镂刻着青色花纹；游玩打猎时，让跟从的奴仆身披钟甲，手拿弓箭，排列成步兵的样子；他住宿在皇上的离宫，由水衡都尉为他们提供各种用品，派老百姓修路，百姓对这种差役叫苦连天。王根内心邪恶不正，打算控制朝政，推举亲近的官吏主簿张业任尚书，蒙蔽圣上的视听，堵塞臣下的进言，对内遏止成就王业之路，对外结交诸侯王，骄横奢侈，超越名分。破坏制度。王根本是先帝的至亲，国家重臣，先帝去世后，王根却没有悲哀思念先帝之情，先帝的陵墓还没有建起，他就公然聘娶以前掖庭歌舞伎五官殷严、王飞君等人，大摆酒宴，纵情歌舞，抛弃了先帝对他的深厚恩德，违背了身为臣子应遵守的礼义。
English: A month later, Captain Sili explained the situation as follows: Quyang Lord Wang Gen's family is powerful and distinguished, three generations have held power, five generals have held political power, and people around the world have followed the trend of flattery and flattery. Wang Gen is greedy and eccentric, he has amassed countless wealth, he has committed many crimes, he has overhauled the palace, built a rockery in the middle of the palace, and set up two markets. The steps in front of the palace are painted red, and a blue pattern is engraved on the door. When he goes hunting, he has his servants dress in armor and hold bows and arrows,

古文：及根兄子成都侯况幸得以外亲继父为列侯侍中，不思报厚恩，亦聘取故掖庭贵人以为妻，皆无人臣礼，大不敬不道。 
现代文：而王根哥哥的儿子成都侯王况有幸能以外戚的身份继承父亲做了列侯侍中，却不思念报答深厚的皇恩，也聘娶了原掖庭的贵人为妻，他们都没有人臣的礼法，公然犯上，大逆不道。 
English: However, Wang Gen's elder brother's son, Chengdu Prince Wang Quan, was fortunate enough to succeed his father as a distant relative and became a prince's equerry, but he did not think about repaying the profound royal grace, and he also married a noblewoman from the former imperial court. They did not have the etiquette of a subject, and they openly committed high treason.

古文：于是天子曰： 先帝遇根、况父子，至厚也，今乃背忘恩义！ 
现代文：因此哀帝说： 先帝对待王根和王况父子，恩德深重，现在他们却背弃了恩义！ 
English: Therefore, Lai Di said: The previous emperor treated Wang Gen and Wang Zhou, father and son, with deep gratitude, but now they have betrayed their gratitude!

古文：以根尝建社稷之策，遣就国。
现代文：因为王根曾经帮助哀帝为太子，让他回到封地。
English: Because Wang Gen had once helped to make Emperor Ai the crown prince, allowing him to return to his fiefdom.

古文：免况为庶人，归故郡。
现代文：把王况免官为庶人，返回原籍。
English: He dismissed Wang Quan as a commoner and returned to his hometown.

古文：根及况父商所荐举为官者，皆罢。
现代文：王根和王况父王商推举做官的那些人，全都被罢官了。
English: Wang Gen and Wang Zhou's father Wang Shangru, all of whom had been promoted to official positions, were dismissed from their posts.

古文：后二岁，傅太后、帝母丁姬皆称尊号。
现代文：两年后，傅太后、哀帝的母亲丁姬分别被尊为太皇太后和皇太后。
English: Two years later, Empress Dowager Fu and Emperor Ai's mother Ding Ji were honored as the Grand Empress Dowager and Empress Dowager respectively.

古文：有司奏： 新都侯莽前为大司马，贬抑尊号之议，亏损孝道，及平阿侯仁臧匿赵昭仪亲属，皆就国。 
现代文：有司上奏说： 新都侯王莽先前做大司马，抑制加封尊号的提议，有损于孝道，又有平阿侯王仁窝藏趟昭仪的亲属，这两个人都应当迁回封地。 
English: Some superintendents said: Wang Mang, the prince of the new capital, had previously been the chief steward, suppressing the proposal to add the honorary title, which was detrimental to filial piety, and Wang Ren, the prince of Ping'a, harbored relatives of Zhaoyi, both of whom should move back to the fief.

古文：天下多冤王氏。
现代文：天下很多人都替王氏感到冤枉。
English: Many people around the world feel wronged on Wang's behalf.

古文：谏大夫杨宣上封事言： 孝成皇帝深惟宗庙之重，称述陛下至德以承天序，圣策深远，恩德至厚。
现代文：谏大夫杨宣密奏上书说： 孝成皇帝考虑到国家的大计，称赞陛下的高尚道德而让陛下继承皇位，先帝谋略深远，恩德极厚。
English: Dr. Yang Xuanmi said in his letter: Emperor Xiaocheng considered the country's grand plan, praised His Majesty's high morals and allowed His Majesty to succeed to the throne. The former emperor had a far-reaching strategy and was extremely benevolent.

古文：惟念先帝之意，岂不欲以陛下自代，奉承东宫哉！
现代文：想到先帝的心意，难道不是想让陛下代替自己，供养太后吗！
English: If you think about the Emperor's intentions, wouldn't he have wanted His Majesty to provide for the Empress Dowager in his place?

古文：太皇太后春秋七十，数更忧伤，敕令亲属引领以避丁、傅。
现代文：太皇太后已经七十高龄，屡次经历伤心的变故，下令自己的亲属自行退让以避开丁、傅二家。
English: The empress dowager, who was already seventy years old, repeatedly experienced heartbreaking events and ordered her relatives to give way to avoid the two families of Ding and Fu.

古文：行道之人为之陨涕，况于陛下，时登高远望，独不渐于延陵乎！ 
现代文：行路之人都会为此落泪，何况对于陛下，如果登高远望，难道就不愧对延陵的先帝吗！ 
English: People on the road will shed tears for this, and what's more, for His Majesty, if you climb high and look far, isn't it worthy of the former emperor of Yanling?

古文：哀帝深感其言，复封商中子邑为成都侯。
现代文：哀壶被他的话深深地打动了，又封王商的二儿子王邑为盛都侯。
English: Sorrowful Jug was deeply moved by his words, and he also named the merchant's second son, Wang Bi, as the mayor of Shengdu.

古文：元寿元年，日蚀。
现代文：元寿元年，发生了日食。
English: In the first year of Yuan Shou, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：贤良对策多讼新都侯莽者，上于是征莽及平阿侯仁还京师侍太后。
现代文：贤明善良的大臣和儒生应诏陈述政见时，大都为新都侯王莽鸣不平，于是哀帝就召王莽和平阿侯王仁返回京师侍奉太后。
English: When the wise and virtuous ministers and Confucian scholars presented their political views in response to the edict, most of them were dissatisfied with the new capital lord Wang Mang, so the emperor called Wang Mang Heping and lord Wang Ren to return to Beijing to serve the empress dowager.

古文：曲阳侯根薨，国除。
现代文：曲阳侯王根去世，封国被废除。
English: Wang Gen, the lord of Quyang, died, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：明年，哀帝崩，无子，太皇太后以莽为大司马，与共征立中山王奉哀帝后，是为平帝。
现代文：第二年，哀帝去世，没有儿子，太皇太后任命王莽为大司马，和他一同召中山王为哀帝之后，就是平帝。
English: The following year, after Emperor Aye died without a son, Empress Dowager Cixi appointed Wang Mang as grand steward, and together with him summoned King Zhongshan as Emperor Aye, and then Emperor Ping.

古文：帝年九岁，当年被疾，太后临朝，委政于莽，莽颛威福。
现代文：平帝衹有九岁，那年还生了病，就由太后临朝听政，将朝政托付给王莽，王莽就仗势弄权，擅作威福。
English: When Emperor Pingyao was nine years old, he was still ill that year, so the Empress Dowager Lin listened to the government and entrusted the government to Wang Mang. Wang Mang took advantage of the situation to gain power and arrogantly behaved like a tyrant.

古文：红阳侯立莽诸父，平阿侯仁素刚直，莽内惮之，令大臣以罪过奏遣立、仁就国。
现代文：红阳侯王立是王莽的叔父，平阿侯王仁一向刚直，王莽心中忌惮他们，就指使大臣捏造罪名奏请让王立、王仁回到封地。
English: Wang Li, the Prince of Hongyang, was Wang Mang's uncle, and Wang Ren, the Prince of Ping'a, had always been upright. Wang Mang feared them in his heart, so he ordered the minister to fabricate a crime and ask Wang Li and Wang Ren to return to the fief.

古文：莽日诳耀太后，言辅政致太平，群臣奏请尊莽为安汉公。
现代文：王莽终日欺骗太后，说自己辅佐朝政使天下太平，大臣们上奏请求尊封王莽为安汉公。
English: Wang Mang deceived the empress dowager all day long, saying that he was an assistant to the government to make the world peaceful. The ministers appealed to the emperor to honor Wang Mang as the Prince of Anhan.

古文：后遂遣使者迫守立、仁令自杀。赐立谥曰荒侯，子柱嗣，仁谥曰刺侯，子术嗣。
现代文：后来王莽就派使者逼迫王立、王仁自杀，赐给王立谧号为荒侯，由他的儿子王柱继承侯位，赐给王仁谧号为剌侯，由他的儿子王术继承侯位。
English: Later, Wang Mang sent an envoy to persecute Wang Li and Wang Ren to commit suicide, and gave Wang Li the title of barbarian marquis, and his son Wang Zhu to inherit the title of marquis, and gave Wang Ren the title of barbarian marquis, and his son Wang Jiu to inherit the title of marquis.

古文：是岁，元始三年也。
现代文：造一年，是元始三年。
English: Built in one year, it is three years old.

古文：明年，莽风群臣奏立莽女为皇后。
现代文：第二年，王莽暗示群臣奏请册立他的女儿为皇后。
English: The following year, Wang Mang hinted to his courtiers to petition for his daughter to be crowned empress.

古文：又奏尊莽为宰衡，莽母及两太子皆封为列侯，语在《莽传》。
现代文：又奏请尊封王莽为宰衡，王莽的母亲和两个儿子都被封为列侯，这些事记载在《王莽传》。
English: Wang Mang's mother and two sons were both made princes, and these events are recorded in "The Biography of Wang Mang."

古文：莽既外一群臣，令称已功德，又内媚事旁侧长御以下，赂遗以千万数。
现代文：王莽对外控制了大臣们的言行，让他们称颂自己的功德，对内又巴结太后身旁长御以下的侍者，贿赂她们的钱财成千上万。
English: Outwardly, Wang Mang controlled the words and deeds of the ministers, letting them praise their own merits, and inside, he pandered to the waitresses next to the empress dowager, bribed them with tens of thousands of money.

古文：白尊太后姊妹君侠为广恩君，君力为广惠君，君弟为广施君，皆食汤沐邑，日夜共誉莽。
现代文：又禀告太后封她的姐妹君侠为广恩君，君力为广惠君，君弟为广施君，都赏赐了食邑，她们一天到晚在太后面前一起赞扬王莽。
English: She also told the empress dowager that her sisters, Junxia (君侠) for Guang Enjun (广恩君), JunLi (君力) for Guang Hui (广惠君) and JunDi (君弟) for Guang Shijun (广施君), had all been rewarded with food and wine. They praised Wang Mang together in front of the empress dowager all day long.

古文：莽又知太后妇人厌居深宫中，莽欲虞乐以市其权，乃令太后四时车驾巡狩四郊，存见孤寡贞妇。
现代文：王莽又知道太后作为妇人，厌恶久居深宫的生活，就打算取乐太后以换来更大的权力，就让太后在四时乘着车马巡游京城四郊，问候孤儿寡妇和贞洁的女子。
English: Wang Mang also knew that the empress dowager, as a woman, disliked the life of living in the palace for a long time, so he planned to make fun of the empress dowager in exchange for greater power, and let the empress dowager ride a carriage and horse at four o'clock to patrol the four suburbs of Beijing, greeting orphans, widows and chaste women.

古文：春幸茧馆，率皇后、列侯夫人桑，遵霸水而祓除；夏游御宿、鄠、杜之间；秋历东馆，望昆明，集黄山宫；冬飨饮飞羽，校猎上兰，登长平馆，临泾水而览焉。
现代文：春天临幸茧馆，率领皇后和列侯的夫人种植桑树，在霸水边祈福除灾；夏季游玩于笋宿、鄂、杜之间；秋季游束馆，远望昆明，聚集在黄山宫；冬季在飞羽殿设宴饮酒，在上兰围猎，登上长平馆，到泾水沿岸游览风光。
English: In the spring, he led the empress and the wife of the vassal lord to plant mulberry trees at the Guanzhong Pavilion, and prayed for good luck and disaster relief at the edge of the watershed; in the summer, he played between the Xizhu, E, and Du; in the fall, he visited the Yuzu Pavilion, looked far and wide at Kunming, and gathered at the Huangshan Palace; in the winter, he held a banquet and drank alcohol at the Fei Yu Hall, hunted around Shanglan, boarded the Changping Pavilion, and toured the scenery along the coast of Surabaya.

古文：太后所至属县，辄施恩惠，赐民钱、帛、牛、酒，岁以为常。
现代文：太后每经过属县，就要大施恩惠，赏赐百姓钱帛牛酒，逐渐形成了习惯。
English: Every time the empress dowager passed through a county, she would do great favors and reward the people with money, yakitori, and wine, which gradually became a habit.

古文：太后从容言曰： 我始入太子家时，见于丙殿，至今五六十岁尚颇识之。 
现代文：太后容色和缓地说： 我刚刚进太子家的时候，在丙殿被召见，到今天已经五六十年了，还能记得当时的情景。 
English: The empress dowager slowly said, "When I had just entered the prince's household, I was summoned to see him in Hall C. It has now been fifty or sixty years, but I can still remember the scene at that time.

古文：莽因曰： 太子宫幸近，可一往游观，不足以为劳。 
现代文：王莽就说： 太子的宫殿就在附近，可前去游玩，没有什么麻烦的。 
English: Wang Mang said, "The prince's palace is nearby, you can go there to play, there is no problem.

古文：于是太后幸太子宫，甚说。
现代文：因此太后临幸太子的宫殿，非常高兴。
English: Therefore, the Empress Dowager was very happy to visit the Prince's palace.

古文：太后旁弄儿病在外舍，莽自亲侯之。
现代文：太后身边的弄儿得了病，住在外舍，王莽亲自去问候他。
English: Wang Mang himself went to greet the Queen Mother's illegitimate son, who had fallen ill and was living in an outhouse.

古文：其欲得太后意如此。
现代文：王莽迎合太后的心意达到了如此地步。
English: Wang Mang's pandering to the Empress Dowager has reached such a level.

古文：平帝崩，无子，莽征宣帝玄孙选最少者广戚侯子刘婴，年二岁，托以卜相为最吉。
现代文：平帝去世，没有子嗣，王莽召宣帝最年幼的玄孙、广戚侯的儿子刘婴，衹有两岁，假托他占卜的卦象最为吉祥。
English: When Emperor Ping died without an heir, Wang Mangzhao summoned Emperor Xuan's youngest great-great-grandson, Prince Guangxi's son Liu Jiao, who was two years old. The fortunetelling elephant he used for divination was the most auspicious.

古文：乃风公卿奏请立婴为孺子，令宰衡安汉公莽践祚居摄，如周公傅成王故事。
现代文：就暗示大臣们奏请立刘婴为孺子，让宰衡安汉公王莽暂居皇帝之位，处理政事，就像周公辅佐成王的故事。
English: He insinuated that the ministers should invite Liu Jiao to be the executioner, and let Zai Heng An Han Gong Wang Meng temporarily occupy the emperor's throne and deal with political affairs, just like the story of Zhou Gongfu Suo Cheng Wang.

古文：太后不以为可，力不能禁，于是莽遂为摄皇帝，改元称制焉。
现代文：太后认为不可以这样做，但凭自己的力量又无法阻止，因此王莽就做了摄政皇帝，更改年号，行使皇帝的权力。
English: The empress dowager thought that it was not allowed to do so, but she could not stop it by her own power, so Wang Mang became the regent emperor, changed the year, and exercised the power of the emperor.

古文：俄而宗室安众侯刘崇及东郡太守翟义等恶之，更举兵欲诛莽。
现代文：不久宗室安众侯刘崇和束郡太守翟义等人厌恶王莽，相继起兵要诛杀他。
English: Soon after, Liu Chong, the head of the An family, and Shunyi, the eunuch of Sok County, detested Wang Mang and raised an army to fight and kill him.

古文：太后闻之，曰： 人心不相远也。
现代文：太后听到这个消息，说： 人们所想的都差不多。
English: When the Queen Mother heard the news, she said: "People are all thinking the same thing.

古文：我虽妇人，亦知莽必以是自危，不可。 
现代文：我虽然是个妇人，也知道王莽一定会担心自己的安危，不能如此。 
English: Although I am a woman, I also know that Wang Mang must be worried about his own safety. This cannot be the case.

古文：其后，莽遂以符命自立为真皇帝，先奉诸符瑞以白太后，太后大惊。
现代文：后来，王莽就利用符命自立为真皇帝，先奉上那些祥瑞的征兆以禀告太后，太后大惊。
English: Later, Wang Mang used the charms to establish himself as the true emperor. He first sent those auspicious signs to inform the empress dowager, who was shocked.

古文：初，汉高祖入咸阳至霸上，秦王子婴降于轵道，奉上始皇玺。
现代文：当初，汉高祖进入咸阳到了霸上，秦王子婴在轵道亭投降，送上秦始皇的国玺。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gaozhu entered Xianyang and arrived in Baxian. Emperor Qin's infant prince surrendered at the Shandao Pavilion and was presented with the imperial scepter of the First Emperor of Qin.

古文：及高祖诛项籍，即天子位，因御服其玺，世世传受，号曰汉传国玺，以孺子未立，玺臧长乐宫。
现代文：等到高祖诛灭了项籍，即位做了天子，就亲自佩带着这块国玺，代代相传，号称为漠传国玺。因为孺子还没有即位，传国玺就收藏在长乐宫。
English: When Gao Zuanzhang extinguished the records and ascended to the throne as the Son of Heaven, he personally wore this imperial scepter, which was passed down from generation to generation. It was called the "Imperial Scepter." Since Gao Zuanzhang had not yet ascended to the throne, the Imperial Scepter was stored in the Changle Palace.

古文：及莽即位，请玺，太后不肯授莽。
现代文：等到王莽即位，要传国玺，太后不肯给他。
English: When Wang Mang ascended the throne, he wanted to pass on the imperial scepter, but the empress dowager refused to give it to him.

古文：莽使安阳侯舜谕指。
现代文：王莽指使安阳侯王舜向太后传达其意。
English: Wang Mang instructed Anyang marquis Wang Yao to convey his intention to the empress dowager.

古文：舜素谨敕，太后雅爱信之。
现代文：王舜一向谨慎周到，太后平时很喜爱信任他。
English: Wang Yao has always been cautious and thoughtful, and the empress dowager likes to trust him.

古文：舜既见，太后知其为莽求玺，怒骂之曰： 而属父子宗族蒙汉家力，富贵累世，既无以报，受人孤寄，乘便利时，夺取其国，不复顾恩义。
现代文：王舜拜见太后，太后知道他是为王莽求传国玺而来，就发怒骂他说： 你们这些人父子家族蒙受汉家的恩泽，世代得到富贵，不但不报答，接受了托孤的任务，却乘机会夺取他人国家，不再顾念恩义。
English: Wang Yao bowed to see the empress dowager. The empress dowager knew that he had come to ask Wang Mang to pass down the title of empress dowager, and she scolded him angrily, saying, "You people, whose father and son families have been favored by the Han family, who have been rich and noble for generations, not only do you not repay them, but you accept the task of caring for orphans, but you take the opportunity to seize other people's countries, and you no longer care about gratitude.

古文：人如此者，狗猪不食其余，天下岂有而兄弟邪！
现代文：像这样的人，猪狗不如，天下怎么会有你们这样的兄弟！
English: People like this are worse than pigs and dogs, how can there be brothers like you in the world!

古文：且若自以金匮符命为新皇帝，变更正朔服制，亦当自更作玺，传之万世，何用此亡国不详玺为，而欲求之？
现代文：况且自己利用金匮符命做了新皇帝，更改了历法和服饰车马制度，也就应当自己制作国玺，传之万代，为什么还要这方亡国而不吉祥的传国玺，而来求得呢？
English: Moreover, he made himself a new emperor with the help of the golden scarab, changed the calendar and the dress, chariot and horse system, and should also make his own national emblem, passed down for thousands of generations. Why did he want this side of the ruined country and not the auspicious national emblem, to come and get it?

古文：我汉家老寡妇，旦暮且死，欲与此玺俱葬，终不可得！ 
现代文：我是汉家的老寡妇，快要死了，想和这方传国玺一同下葬，你们最终拿不到它！ 
English: I am an old Han widow who is about to die, and I want to be buried together with this imperial banner. You will not get it in the end!

古文：太后因涕泣而言，旁侧长御以下皆垂涕。
现代文：太后一边哭泣一边说，身旁长御以下的侍者都掉了眼泪。
English: The empress dowager was crying as she said this, and the waiters next to her, including the chief steward, were in tears.

古文：舜亦悲不能自止，良久乃仰谓太后： 臣等已无可言者。
现代文：王舜也抑制不住自己的悲伤，过了很久才抬起头来对太后说： 我们这些人已经无话可说了。
English: Wang Yao also could not control his sadness. It took him a long time to look up and say to the empress dowager: "We people have nothing more to say."

古文：莽必欲得传国玺，太后宁能终不与邪！ 
现代文：王莽一定要得到传国玺，太后难道能始终不给他吗？ 
English: Wang Mang must get the Imperial Regalia. Can the Empress Dowager refuse to give it to him?

古文：太后闻舜语切，恐莽欲胁之，乃出汉传国玺，投之地以授舜，曰： 我老已死，如而兄弟，今族灭也！ 
现代文：太后听到王舜说得恳切，惟恐王莽胁迫自己，就拿出传国玺，扔在地上给王舜，说： 我年老已经要死了，像你们兄弟这样，王氏一门就要灭族了！ 
English: When the empress dowager heard Wang Yao's earnest words, she feared that Wang Yao would force himself on her, so she took out the imperial edict and threw it on the ground to Wang Yao, saying, "I am about to die of old age, and just like your brothers, the Wang family is about to be exterminated!"

古文：舜既得传国玺，奏之，莽大说，乃为太后置酒未央宫渐台，大纵众乐。
现代文：王舜拿到了传国玺，献给王莽，王莽大喜，就为太后在未央宫的渐台摆酒设宴，纵情取乐。
English: Wang Meng was overjoyed to receive the Imperial Regalia, which was dedicated to Wang Meng, and he held a banquet for the empress dowager at the Maoyang Palace.

古文：莽又欲改太后汉家旧号，易其玺绶，恐不见听，而莽疏属王谏欲谄莽，上书言： 皇天废去汉而命立新室，太皇太后不宜称尊号，当随汉废，以奉天命 。
现代文：王莽又想改变太后的汉朝封号，更换她的玺绶，又怕她不同意，王莽的远房同宗王谏想奉承王莽，上书说： 上天废掉汉而建立新室，太皇太后不能再为尊号，应当随着汉室一同废掉，以顺应天命。 
English: Wang Mang also wanted to change the Han Dynasty seal name of the empress dowager and replace her imperial title, but he was afraid that she would not agree. Wang Mang's distant cousin, the same dynasty as Wang Mang, wanted to flatter Wang Mang and wrote a letter saying: Heaven abolished the Han Dynasty and established a new family. The empress dowager can no longer be a honorary title. It should be abolished together with the Han Dynasty, in order to comply with the fate of heaven.

古文：莽乃车驾至东宫，亲以其书白太后。
现代文：王莽就乘坐车马到了东宫，亲自把这份奏章的内容禀告给太后。
English: Wang Mang took a horse-drawn carriage to the East Palace and personally delivered the obituary to the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后曰： 此言是也！ 
现代文：太后说： 这话说得对！ 
English: The Empress Dowager said: That's right!

古文：莽因曰： 此悖德之臣也，罪当诛！ 
现代文：王莽就说： 这是无德臣子，他犯的罪过应当处以死刑！ 
English: Wang Mang said, "This is an unprincipled vassal, and the crime he committed should be punished by death!"

古文：于是冠军张永献符命铜璧，文言 太皇太后当为新室文母太皇太后。 
现代文：因此冠军张永又献上刻着符命的铜璧，上面的文字是 太皇太后当为新室文母太皇太后 。
English: Therefore, the champion Zhang Yong also presented a bronze gem engraved with a life symbol, the above text is that the Empress Dowager should be the new mother of the Empress Dowager.

古文：莽乃下诏曰： 予视群公，咸曰 休哉！
现代文：王莽就下诏说： 我拿给群臣看，都说 真美啊！
English: Wang Mang then issued an edict saying, "When I showed it to my courtiers, they all said how beautiful it was!

古文：其文字非刻非画，厥性自然 。予伏念皇天命予为子，更命太皇太后为 新室文母太皇太后 ，协于新、故交代之际，信于汉氏。
现代文：上面文字不是刻的也不是画的，自然天成，我自忖上天以天命让我做天子，又以天命封太皇太后为 新室文母太皇太后 ，既与新旧朝代交替相合，又不亏待漠氏。
English: The above text is neither carved nor painted, it is a natural result of nature. I believe that it is God's destiny for me to become the son of God, and it is also God's destiny to make the Empress Dowager Shinshitsu the Empress Dowager Shinshitsu, which coincides with the alternation of the old and new dynasties, and does not treat the Mo clan unfairly.

古文：哀帝之代，世传行诏筹，为西王母共具之祥，当为历代母，昭然著明。
现代文：哀帝的时候，民间盛行传递筹策，为西王母供奉酒食，这正是太皇太后应当成为改朝换代的国母的征兆。
English: At the time of mourning for the emperor, it was popular for people to pass on plans and offer wine and food to the Western Queen Mother. This is exactly the sign that the great empress dowager should become the mother of the country to change the dynasty.

古文：于祗畏天命，敢不钦承！
现代文：我服从天命，哪裹敢不顺从！
English: How dare I disobey my destiny!

古文：谨以令月吉日，亲率群公诸侯卿士，奉上皇太后玺绂，以当顺天心，光于四海焉。 
现代文：特意选择了吉利的月份和期，亲自率领公卿大臣，敬奉上皇太后的玺绶，以顷应天意，昭示天下。 
English: He deliberately chose the auspicious month and period, personally led the court nobles and ministers, and reverently presented the imperial edict to the empress dowager, responding to the will of heaven and proclaiming it to the world.

古文：太后听许。
现代文：太后接受了王莽的建议。
English: The empress dowager accepted Wang Mang's suggestion.

古文：莽于是鸩杀王谏，而封张永为贡符子。
现代文：王莽就用毒酒杀死王谏，封张永为贡符子。
English: Wang Mang then used poisoned wine to kill Wang Yao, sealing Zhang Yong as a tribute.

古文：初，莽为安汉公时，又谄太后，奏尊元帝庙为高宗，太后晏驾后当以礼配食云。
现代文：当初，王莽做安汉公的时候，向太后献媚，奏请尊奉元帝的庙号为高宗，等太后去世以后便可以依照礼法配享于元帝庙。
English: At first, when Wang Mang was Anhan, he flattered the empress dowager and asked her to honor the temple name of the Yuan Emperor as Gaozong. After the death of the empress dowager, it could be enjoyed in the Yuan Emperor's temple according to the etiquette.

古文：及莽改号太后为新室文母，绝之于汉，不令得体元帝。
现代文：等到王莽将太后的尊号改为新室文母，和汉朝断绝丁关系，不想让她配享元帝。
English: Wait until Wang Mang changes the honorary title of the empress dowager to the new "Chambermaid," and breaks off the ding relationship with the Han Dynasty, not wanting her to share the Yuan Emperor.

古文：堕坏孝元庙，更为文母太后起庙，独置孝元庙故殿以为文母篹食堂，既成，名曰长寿宫。
现代文：就毁坏了孝元皇帝的寝庙，重新给文母太后修建寝庙，特地把孝元庙原来的正殿作为文母设宴用餐之地，建成之后，命名为长寿宫。
English: He destroyed the Emperor Xiaoyuan's sleeping temple and rebuilt a sleeping temple for the empress dowager, and specially used the original main hall of the Xiaoyuan Temple as a place for the empress dowager to hold banquets and dinners. After it was completed, it was named the Longevity Palace.

古文：以太后在，故未谓之庙。
现代文：因为太后健在人世，所以没有称为庙。
English: Because the empress dowager is still alive, it is not called a temple.

古文：莽以太后好出游观，乃车驾置酒长寿宫，请太后。
现代文：王莽因为太后喜欢出来游玩观光，就在长寿宫设摆酒席，用车驾请太后前去。
English: Wang Mang, because the empress dowager liked to go sightseeing, set up a wine table in the Longevity Palace and invited the empress dowager to go by car.

古文：既至，见孝元庙废彻涂地，太后惊，泣曰： 此汉家宗庙，皆有神灵，与何治而坏之！
现代文：太后到达之后，看到孝元庙破败景象，不堪入目，大为震惊，哭着说： 这是汉家的宗庙，都有神灵保佑，和你毫不相干，为什么毁坏了它！
English: After the empress dowager arrived, she was shocked to see the dilapidated state of the Xiaoyuan Temple, which was unbearable to look at. She cried and said, "This is the ancestral temple of the Han family, it is blessed by gods, and it has nothing to do with you. Why did you destroy it!

古文：且使鬼神无知，又何用庙为！
现代文：况且若是鬼神没有知觉，又何必建造寝庙呢！
English: Moreover, if ghosts and gods are not conscious, why build a sleeping temple?

古文：如令有知，我乃人之妃妾，岂宜辱帝之堂以陈馈食哉！ 
现代文：如果鬼神有知，我作为先帝的妃妾，怎么可以辱没了先帝的庙堂而为我陈列祭品呢！ 
English: If ghosts and gods know, how can I, as the former emperor's concubine, humiliate the former emperor's temple and display sacrifices for me!

古文：私谓左右曰： 此人嫚神多矣，能久得晁乎！ 
现代文：就私下裹对左右侍者说： 这个人屡屡轻慢神灵，哪裹能够长久地得到保佑啊！ 
English: He said privately to the waiters on either side of him, "This man has repeatedly scorned the gods. How can he be blessed for long?"

古文：饮酒不乐而罢。
现代文：这次饮酒也就不欢而散。
English: This drinking session also ended in disappointment.

古文：自莽篡位后，知太后怨恨，求所以媚太后无不为，然愈不说。
现代文：王莽自从篡位以后，知道太后心中怨恨，就想尽了一切办法去奉承太后，然而太后却越来越不高兴了。
English: Wang Mang, since usurping the throne, knew the resentment in the heart of the empress dowager, and tried his best to flatter the empress dowager, but the empress dowager became more and more unhappy.

古文：莽更汉家黑貂，著黄貂，又改汉正朔伏腊日。
现代文：王莽更改了漠家侍中穿黑貂的制度，侍中都身着黄貂，又改变了汉家正朔之和伏腊日的日期。
English: Wang Mang changed the system of wearing black satin for the attendants of the Mo family, the attendants were all wearing yellow satin, and changed the dates of the Han family's Zhengshuo and Fula days.

古文：太后令其官属黑貂，至汉家正腊日，独与其左右相对饮酒食。
现代文：太后让自己的手下人都身穿黑貂，每到汉朝的元旦和腊曰，就特意和身边的侍者对坐饮酒食以示不忘汉朝。
English: The empress dowager had her servants dress in black, and every New Year's Day in the Han Dynasty, she would drink and eat with the waiters around her to show that she had not forgotten the Han Dynasty.

古文：太后年八十四，建国五年二月癸丑崩。
现代文：太后八十四岁那年，也就是在建国五年二月癸丑逝世。
English: The empress dowager passed away at the age of 84, that is, in February of the fifth year of the founding of the Republic.

古文：三月乙酉，合葬渭陵。
现代文：三月乙酉，和元帝合葬于渭陵。
English: He died in March and was buried with Emperor Yuan in Fuling.

古文：莽诏大夫扬雄作诔曰： 太阴之精，沙麓之灵，作合于汉，配元生成。 
现代文：王莽下诏让大夫扬雄写成祭文说： 太阴之精，沙麓之灵，天合于汉，配元生成。 
English: Wang Mang issued an edict to have the doctor Yang Xiong write a ritual saying: the essence of the yin and yang, the spirit of the sand, the heaven and the Han, and the generation of the elements.

古文：著其协于元城沙麓。
现代文：显示出她正与元城沙麓相合。
English: It shows that she is converging with the sand dunes of Yuancheng.

古文：太阴精者，谓梦月也。
现代文：太阴之精，是说太后乃梦月而生。
English: The essence of the Great Yin is that the Empress Dowager was born from a dream.

古文：太后崩后十年，汉兵诛莽。
现代文：太后谢世十年后，汉兵诛灭了王莽。
English: Ten years after the death of Empress Dowager Xie, the Han soldiers annihilated Wang Mang.

古文：初，红阳侯立就国南阳，与诸刘结恩，立少子丹为中山太守。
现代文：当初，红阳侯王立回到封地南阳，和那些刘氏子弟结下恩情，王立的小儿子王丹做了中山太守。
English: At the beginning, Wang Li, the lord of Hongyang, returned to his fief of Nanyang, and formed an alliance with those sons and brothers of the Liu clan. Wang Li's youngest son, Wang Dan, became the governor of Zhongshan.

古文：世祖初起，丹降，为将军，战死。
现代文：世祖光武帝刚刚起兵的时候，王丹归降他做了将军，作战而死。
English: When the ancestor Emperor Guangwu had just raised an army, Wang Dan surrendered; he became a general and died in battle.

古文：上闵之，封丹子泓为武桓侯，至今。
现代文：世祖非常怜悯他，就封他的儿子王泓为武桓侯，这个爵位一直传到现在。
English: The ancestor felt very sorry for him, so he made his son Wang Yao the Prince of Wuhu, a title that has been passed down to this day.

古文：司徒掾班彪曰：三代以来，《春秋》所记，王公国君，与其失世，稀不以女宠。
现代文：司徒掾班彪说：自从三代以来，《春秋》所记载的，王公、国君，他们灭亡的原因，很少有不是因为受宠爱的女子造成的。
English: "Since the three dynasties, the reasons for the demise of kings and emperors, as recorded in the Spring and Autumn Annals, were rarely not caused by a beloved woman," said Szeto Pan Biao.

古文：汉兴，后妃之家吕、霍、上官，几危国者数矣。
现代文：汉代兴起之后，后妃的家族吕氏、霍氏、上官氏，好几次险些倾危国家。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, the empress dowager's family, the Lü clan, the Huo clan, and the Shangguan clan, nearly brought the country to its knees several times.

古文：及王莽之兴，由孝元后历汉四世为天下母，飨国六十余载，群弟世权，更持国柄，五将十侯，卒成新都。
现代文：等到王莽兴起，是由于孝元后经历了汉朝四代天子，母仪天下，在位六十多年，她的弟弟们相继掌权，把持朝政，一共封了五个将军，十名列侯，终于由新都侯王莽实现了野心。
English: Wang Mang's rise to prominence was due to the fact that Xiaoyuan had experienced four generations of sons and daughters of the Han Dynasty, mother and daughter, and had reigned for more than 60 years. Her brothers successively took power and controlled the imperial government. A total of five generals and ten princes were appointed. Finally, Wang Mang's ambition was realized by the new capital.

古文：位号已移于天下，而元后卷卷犹握一玺，不欲以授莽，妇人之仁，悲夫！
现代文：朝代都已经改变了，可是元后还忠心耿耿手握一方传国玺，不想交给王莽，妇人之仁，真是可悲啊！
English: The dynasties have all changed, but the emperors and empresses were still loyal, holding the imperial scepter in their hands, not wanting to hand it over to Wang Mang, the benevolence of women, how sad!

