古文：贾耽丁约瞿道士王卿衡山隐者梅真君
现代文：贾耽丁约瞿道士王卿衡山隐者梅真君
English: Jia Tan Ding, Jiao Wei, Taoist Wang Qing, Hengshan hermit Meizhen

古文：贾耽唐相国贾耽，滑州节度使，常令造鹿皮衣一副，既成，选一矫捷官健，操书缄付之曰： 汝往某山中，但荆棘深处即行，觅张尊师送此书，任汝远近。 
现代文：不久，做成了，挑选一名行动轻捷的健儿。拿出一封已经封了口的书信交给他说： 你去某山中，往荆棘很深的地方走，寻找张尊师送这封信，不管你走多远。 
English: After a while, he selected a nimble-footed athlete, took out a sealed letter and handed it to him: "Go to a certain mountain, go to a place where the thorns are very deep, and look for Zhang Rongshi to deliver this letter, no matter how far you go.

古文：使者受命，挈粮而去，甚惶惑。
现代文：使者接受了命令，提着干粮走了，他心里很疑惑害怕。
English: The messenger accepted the order and went away with the grain. He was confused and afraid.

古文：入山约行百余里，荆棘深险，无不备历。
现代文：进山后大约走了一百多里，荆棘深险，都经历过了。
English: After entering the mountain, I walked more than a hundred miles, and I experienced the thorns and dangers.

古文：至一峰，半腰中石壁耸拔，见二道流棋次。
现代文：最后来到一座山峰，半山腰石壁高耸挺拔，看见两个道士正在下棋。
English: Finally, he came to a mountain peak, halfway up the side of the mountain, and saw two Taoists playing a game of chess.

古文：使者遂拜道流曰： 贾相公使来。 
现代文：使者就拜见道士说： 贾相公派我来送信。 
English: The messenger went to see the Taoist and said: Jia Xiang Gong sent me to send a message.

古文：开书大笑，遂作报书一曰： 传语相公早归，何故如此贪着富贵！ 
现代文：道士打开信，看后大笑。于是作了一封答复的书信，并说： 传话给贾相公早归，为什么还这样贪恋富贵。 
English: The Taoist opened the letter and laughed out loud after reading it. He then wrote a letter in reply, saying, "I sent a message to Jia Xianggong to return early. Why are you still so greedy for wealth?

古文：使者赍书而返。
现代文：使者怀里揣着书信返回。
English: The messenger returned with the letter in his arms.

古文：贾公极喜，厚赏之。亦不知其故也。
现代文：贾公非常高兴，厚赏了使者，使者也不知道其中的缘故。
English: Jia Gong was very happy and rewarded the messenger generously. The messenger did not know the reason.

古文：又尝令一健卒，入枯井中取文书，果得数轴，皆道书也。
现代文：贾公又曾经派一个健儿，下到枯井中取文书，果然得到了几轴，都是道书。
English: Jia Gong also once sent a journeyman to go down to a dry well to fetch documents, and he actually obtained several scrolls, all of which were Taoist scriptures.

古文：遂遣十余人写，才毕，有道士突入，呼贾公姓名叫骂曰： 争敢偷书！ 
现代文：于是，派十多个人抄写，刚刚完毕。有一个道士突然闯入，呼着贾公姓名叫骂说： 你怎么敢偷书？ 
English: As a result, more than ten people were sent to copy it, and it was just finished. A Taoist suddenly broke in, called out Jia Gong's name, cursed and said: How dare you steal a book?

古文：贾公逊谢。
现代文：贾公谦逊地道歉。
English: Jia Gong humbly apologized.

古文：道士曰复持去。
现代文：道士说： 再放回去。 
English: The Taoist said: Put it back again.

古文：郑州仆射陂东有一浮图，乃遣使赍牒牒州，于此浮图内取一白鸦，遂令掩之。
现代文：郑州仆射坡上有一座佛塔，贾公就派遣使者怀里揣着公文通牒郑州，在这座佛塔内取一个白鸦，取后把佛塔封闭。
English: There is a pagoda on the slope of the Zhengzhou Pagoda. Jia Gong sent an envoy to Zhengzhou with a document in his arms. He took a white crow from the pagoda and closed the pagoda.

古文：果得，以笼送，亦不知何故。
现代文：果然获得了，用笼子送给贾公，也不知道是什么缘故。
English: I got it, and I gave it to Jia Gong in a cage, I don't know why.

古文：贾公谪仙，事甚众，此三篇尤明显者也。丁约
现代文：贾公是被贬谪的仙人，他的事迹很多，这三件事是尤其明显的。丁约
English: Jia Gong was a demeaned sage, and his deeds are many. These three things are particularly obvious. Ding Youhu

古文：唐大历中，有韦行式为西州采访使。
现代文：唐大历年间，常行式做西州采访使。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, he was a regular traveling envoy to Xizhou.

古文：有侄曰子威，年及弱冠，聪敏温克，耽玩道书，溺惑神仙修炼之术。
现代文：聪明机敏，温和谦敬。沉浸在观赏道书上，沉溺着迷于神仙修炼之术。
English: Smart and alert, gentle and humble. Immersed in the viewing of Taoist books, obsessed with the art of cultivating immortals.

古文：有步卒丁约者，执厮役于部下，周旋恪勤，未尝少怠，子威颇私之。
现代文：有一个叫丁约的步兵，在他的部下执劳役供使唤。丁约在子威周围侍奉，谨慎勤劳，不曾有一点懈怠。所以子威和偏爱他。
English: There was a foot soldier named Ding You, who performed labor service for his subordinates. Ding You served around Zi Wei, was careful and diligent, and never slacked a bit. Therefore, Zi Wei and favored him.

古文：一日辞气惨栗，云欲他适。
现代文：一天，丁约的言辞气度凄惨悲伤，说要到别的地方去。
English: One day, Ding You's tone was sad and he said he wanted to go somewhere else.

古文：子威怒曰： 籍在军中，焉容自便。 
现代文：子威怒道： 你是有军籍的，怎么能容你自己随便。 
English: Zi Wei angrily said: You are a military man, how can you allow yourself to do whatever you want.

古文：丁曰： 去计已果，不可留也；然某肃勤左右，二载于兹，未能忘情，思有以报。
现代文：丁约说： 我要离开这里，打算已定，不可能留下我的，然而，我恭敬地在你左右待候你，至今已经二年了，不能忘了我们之间的感情，想有所报答。
English: Ding You said: I want to leave here, the plan is set, it is impossible to leave me, however, I have been waiting for you respectfully around you for two years now, I cannot forget the feelings between us, I want to repay you.

古文：某非碌碌求食者，尚萦俗间耳。
现代文：我可不是庸庸碌碌的乞求吃喝的人，还环绕在世俗中间。
English: I am not a mediocre beggar begging for food and drink, still surrounded by the mundane.

古文：有药一粒，愿以赠别，此非能长生，限内无他恙矣。 
现代文：我有药一粒，愿意用它赠别。这药不能长生，但吃了它，在寿命限定之内是不会有别的病的。 
English: I have a piece of medicine, and I am willing to give it away. This medicine can't last forever, but if you eat it, you won't have any other diseases within your lifetime.

古文：因褫衣带内，得药类粟，以奉子威。
现代文：于是解下衣带，从里面拿出一粒药，类似谷粒，把它进献给子威。
English: So he undid his belt, took out a grain of medicine, similar to a grain of grain, and gave it to Zi Wei.

古文：又谓曰： 郎君道情深厚，不欺暗室，终当弃俗，尚隔两尘。 
现代文：又对子威说： 公子的道义情理深厚，心地光明，暗中不做坏事，最终应当抛弃尘俗，但还要相隔两尘。 
English: He also said to Zi Wei: A noble son's moral sense is profound, his heart is bright, and he does not do bad things in secret. In the end, he should abandon the world, but he should also separate the two.

古文：子威曰： 何谓两尘？ 
现代文：子威说： 什么叫两尘？ 
English: Zi Wei said: What is two dusts?

古文：对曰： 儒谓之世，释谓之劫，道谓之尘，善坚此心，亦复遐寿。五十年近京相遇，此际无相讶也。 
现代文：丁约回答说： 儒教说它是世，佛教说它是劫，道教说它是尘，善于坚持向道意念也是可以长寿的，五十年后我们京城附近相遇。到那时候再见了我，不要惊讶。 
English: Ding You replied, "Confucianism says it is the world, Buddhism says it is doom, Taoism says it is dust. If you are good at adhering to Taoist thoughts, you can live a long life. Fifty years later, we will meet near Beijing. Don't be surprised to see me again at that time.

古文：言讫而出。
现代文：说完就出去走了。
English: After saying this, he went out.

古文：子威惊愕，亟命追之，已不及矣。
现代文：子威惊愕，急忙命人去追赶他，已经追不上了。
English: Surprised, Zi Wei hurriedly ordered someone to chase after him, but he could not catch up.

古文：主将以逃亡上状，请落兵籍。
现代文：主将用逃亡之名向上级陈述，请求削去他的军籍。
English: The captain will report to his superiors as a fugitive and ask to be demoted.

古文：尔后子威行思坐念，留意寻访，竟亡其踪。
现代文：这以后，子威对丁约是走路思考，坐下想念，留意寻访，终究还是没有他的踪迹。
English: After this, Zi Wei walked and thought about Ding You, sat down and missed him, paid attention to the search, but in the end there was no trace of him.

古文：后擢明经第，调数邑宰。
现代文：后来子威考上明经，几次调迁，做过几个县的县令。
English: Later, Zi Wei was admitted to the Ming Dynasty, transferred several times, and served as the county magistrate of several counties.

古文：及从心之岁，毛发皆鹤，时元和十三年也。将还京辇，夕于骊山旅舍，闻通衢甚喧，询其由，曰： 刘悟执逆贼李师道下将校至阙下。 
现代文：等到了七十岁，眉毛头发都雪白了。当时是元和十三年，子威将要回京城，一天晚上，住在骊山的旅馆中，听到大街上非常喧哗，询问店家是什么原因。店家说： 刘悟捉拿逆贼李师道的部下将校送到朝廷去。
English: When he was seventy years old, his eyebrows and hair had turned white. It was the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, and Zi Wei was about to return to Beijing. One night, while staying at a hotel in Lushan, he heard a lot of noise on the street and asked the clerk what was the reason. The clerk said: Liu Wou caught the traitor Li Shidao's subordinate officers and sent them to the imperial court.

古文：步出视之，则兵仗严卫，桎梏累累。
现代文：子威走出店门，到街上去看。就见军兵拿着武器防护森严。
English: Zi Wei walked out of the shop door and went to the street to look. He saw soldiers with weapons and strict protection.

古文：其中一人，乃丁约也。
现代文：用镣铐锁着的罪犯连续不断。
English: The criminals, chained with chains, continue to sing.

古文：反接双臂，长驱而西，齿发强壮，无异昔日。
现代文：其中有一个人，就是丁约，双臂被反绑在背后，一直往西走去。丁约身体强壮，和过去相比，没有什么不同。
English: One of them, Ding You, was walking west with his arms tied behind his back. Ding You is physically strong, no different from before.

古文：子威大奇之。
现代文：子威对此感到太奇怪。
English: Zi Wei felt very strange about this.

古文：百千人中，惊认之际，丁已见矣。
现代文：就在子威千百人中，惊奇地看丁约的时候，丁约已经看见子威了。
English: In the midst of hundreds of Ziwei people, when they looked at Ding You in surprise, Ding You had already seen Ziwei.

古文：微笑遥谓曰： 尚记临邛别否？
现代文：他微笑着向子威打招呼说： 还记得临邛相别吗？
English: He greeted Zi Wei with a smile and said, "Do you remember Linyi's farewell?

古文：一瞬五十年矣，幸今相见，请送至前驿。 
现代文：转眼之间，五十年了，很幸运，我们今天能够相见，请你送我到前面的驿站。 
English: In the blink of an eye, fifty years have passed. We are very lucky to be able to meet today. Please take me to the station ahead.

古文：须臾到滋水驿，则散絷于廊舍，开一窍以给食物。
现代文：不一会儿，到了滋水驿站，就把丁约等分散拘禁在厢房的屋子里，只开一个小洞，用它来给食物。
English: Soon after arriving at Shizuizuoka Station, they detained Ding Youcong and the others in a small room, opening only a small hole and using it to feed them.

古文：子威窥之，俄见脱置桎梏，覆之以席，跃自窦出，与子威携手上旗亭，话阔别之恨，且叹子威之衰耄。
现代文：子威窥视丁约，一会儿，看见丁约脱去脚镣手铐，放在一边，用席子盖上它。从小洞跳出，和子威手拉手上了旗亭。叙说阔别的遗憾，并且叹息子威的衰老。
English: Zi Wei peered at Ding Rong. After a while, he saw Ding Rong take off his shackles and handcuffs, put them aside, and cover them with a mat. He jumped out of the small hole, and hand-in-hand with Zi Wei, climbed up the flagpole. They talked about the regret of parting, and lamented the aging of Zi Wei.

古文：子威谓曰： 仙兄既有先见之明，圣朝奄宅天下，何为私叛臣耶？ 
现代文：子威对丁约说： 仙兄既然有先见之明，圣朝覆盖天下，为什么偏要投靠叛逆呢？ 
English: Zi Wei said to Ding You: Since Brother Immortal has foresight and the Holy Dynasty covers the whole world, why should he rely on rebellion?

古文：丁曰： 言之久矣，何逃哉！
现代文：丁约说： 说它话就长了，我现在也不是要逃走。
English: Ding You said, "It's too long to say, I don't want to run away now."

古文：蜀国暌辞，岂不云近京相遇，慎勿多讶乎？ 
现代文：在四川告别时，难道不是说了在靠近京师的地方相遇，千万不要惊奇吗。 
English: When saying goodbye in Sichuan, didn't you say that you would meet in a place close to Beijing, so don't be surprised?

古文：又问曰： 果就刑否？ 
现代文：子威又问他说： 你果真打算服刑吗？ 
English: Zi Wei also asked him: Do you really plan to serve your sentence?

古文：对曰： 道中有尸解、兵解、水解、火解，寔繁有徒。
现代文：丁约回答说： 道中有尸解、兵解、水解、火解，大有人在。
English: Ding You replied, "There are corpses, soldiers, water and fire on the road, and there are a lot of people.

古文：稽康、郭璞，皆受戕害；我以此委蜕耳。异韩彭与粪壤并也。
现代文：稽康、郭璞，都受杀害，我用这个方法，也不过象蝉丢弃它所脱的皮罢了，不同于韩彭成为粪土。
English: Jie Kang and Guo Jie were both killed, and by using this method, I am just like a cicada discarding the skin it has shed. Unlike Han Peng, it becomes excrement.

古文：某或思避，自此而逃，孰能追也？ 
现代文：我若想躲开，从这里逃出去，谁能追上我呀！ 
English: If I try to run away, to get out of here, who will catch me?

古文：他问不对，唯云须笔。
现代文：子威再问别的，他不回答，只说他需要笔。
English: Zi Wei asked another question, but he did not answer, only saying that he needed a pen.

古文：子威搜书囊而进。
现代文：子威从书袋中找出笔赠送给他，就逊谢着接受了。
English: Zi Wei took out a pen from his book bag and gave it to him. He gratefully accepted it.

古文：亦愧领之。威曰： 明晨法场寓目，岂蜕于此乎？ 
现代文：子威说： 明天早晨法场看你，难道你就在这脱掉肉体吗？ 丁约说： 不是。
English: Zi Wei said, "Tomorrow morning, the court will see you, will you take off your body here?" Ding You said, "No."

古文：丁曰： 未也，夕当甚雨，不克行刑，两昼雨止，国有小故。
现代文：今天晚上必定下大雨，明天不能够行刑。过了两天大雨停止了，朝廷又有小的事故。
English: Heavy rain is certain to fall this evening, and executions will not be possible tomorrow. Two days later, the heavy rain stopped, and there was another minor accident at the Imperial Court.

古文：十九日天限方及。君於此时，幸一访别。 
现代文：十九那天上天规定的限期才到，在这个时候，希望你去看望告别。 
English: On the 19th day, the deadline set by heaven arrived. At this time, I hope you will visit to say goodbye.

古文：言讫还馆，复自穴入，荷校以坐。
现代文：说完回到馆舍，又从小洞进去，戴上刑具而坐。
English: After saying this, he returned to the guesthouse, entered again through the small hole, put on the torture device and sat down.

古文：子威却往温泉，日已晡矣，风埃忽起，夜中果大雨澍。
现代文：子威却去温泉，太阳西下，已经是下午三时至五时了。忽然刮起大风，尘土弥漫天空，夜里果然大雨如注。
English: Zi Wei, however, went to the hot spring. The sun was setting, and it was already between 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. Suddenly, a strong wind blew, dust filled the sky, and it rained heavily during the night.

古文：迟明，泥及骭，诏改日行刑。
现代文：天快亮的时候，泥水淹到小腿。下诏改日行刑。
English: When it was nearly dawn, muddy water flooded up to his calf. The next day, the execution was postponed.

古文：两宿方霁，则王姬有薨于外馆者，复三日不视朝。
现代文：待雨过天晴，本来可以行刑了，但又有一位王姬在外面死了，皇帝又三天不视朝。
English: After the rain had passed, the execution could have been carried out, but another Wang Ji died outside, and the emperor ignored the court for three more days.

古文：果至十九日，方献庙巡廛，始行大戮。
现代文：果然到十九那天皇帝才上朝巡鄽，批准执行死刑。
English: It was not until the 19th day that the emperor went to the court and approved the execution of the death penalty.

古文：子威是日饭仆饱马，吉旦往棘围候焉。亭午间，方号令回，观者不啻亿兆众矣，面语不辨，寸步相失，俘囚才至，丁已志焉，遥目子威，笑颔三四。
现代文：子威这天让仆人吃饱了饭，喂饱了马，早早地去法场的外边等候，正午的时候，号炮刚响，围观的人成千上万，面对面说话辨不清，离得很近也会失散。俘虏的囚徒刚到，丁约已经有标记，在那里遥望子威。笑着点三四次头。
English: On this day, Zi Wei let his servants eat their fill of rice and feed their horses, and went early to wait outside the court. At noon, the cannon just sounded, and there were thousands of onlookers. They could not distinguish what they were saying face-to-face, and when they were very close, they would disperse. The captured prisoners had just arrived, and Ding You had already been marked, and he was watching Zi Wei from afar. He smiled and nodded his head three or four times.

古文：及挥刃之际，子威独见断笔。霜锋倏忽之次，丁因跃出，而广众之中，蹑足以进，又登酒肆，其言如蜀。
现代文：等到刽子手挥刀砍杀的时候，子威只见砍断了笔，在刀锋闪烁之中，丁约就跳出来了，在广大的众人当中，抬脚往前走。他们又登上酒店，他的话还象在蜀一样。
English: When the executioner swung the knife to kill, Zi Wei only saw the pen cut off. In the flashing of the blade, Ding You jumped out, among the vast number of people, and walked forward. They boarded the hotel again, and his words were still like in Shu.

古文：脱衣换觞，与威对饮。
现代文：脱掉衣服换来大杯，与子威相对畅饮。
English: Take off your clothes to get a large cup, and drink with Zi Wei.

古文：云： 某自此游适矣；勉于奉道，犹隔两尘，当奉候于昆仑石室矣。 
现代文：丁约说： 我从此就到处痛快地游荡了，望你勤勉奉道，再过两世，我必定在昆仑石室等候你。 
English: Ding You said, "Since then, I have wandered everywhere happily. I hope you will diligently practice the Way. In another two lifetimes, I will surely wait for you in the Kunlun Stone Room."

古文：言讫。下旗亭，冉冉西去，数步而灭。
现代文：说完，下了旗亭，冉冉向西走去，走了不几步就消逝了。
English: Having said this, he left the pavilion and ran westwards, disappearing after just a few steps.

古文：瞿道士
现代文：瞿道士
English: Taoist

古文：黄尊师修道于茅山，法箓绝高，灵应非一。
现代文：黄尊师在茅山修道，法术符箓非常高超，求神问卜，十分灵验的事不止一椿。
English: Huang Zongshi was a monk in Mao Shan. He was very good at spells and incantations. He was very good at more than one thing.

古文：弟子瞿道士，年少，不甚精恳，屡为黄师所笞。
现代文：有个徒弟瞿道士，年纪轻，不太精心诚恳，多次被黄尊师责罚。
English: There was a young disciple of Taoism who was not very diligent and sincere. He was punished many times by Master Huang.

古文：草堂东有一小洞，高八尺，荒蔓蒙蔽，似蛇虺所伏。
现代文：草堂东面有一个小洞，洞高八尺，荒芜不堪，草蔓遮蔽，好像是毒蛇隐藏的地方。
English: To the east of the hayloft there is a small hole, eight feet high, deserted and overgrown, as if it were a place for a poisonous snake to hide.

古文：一日瞿生又怠惰，为师所棰，逡巡避杖，遂入此洞。
现代文：一天，瞿生又懒惰，被黄师用鞭子打了，为了躲避挨打，就进了这个洞。
English: One day, he was lazy and lazy. He was beaten with a whip by Master Huang. In order to avoid being beaten, he went into this hole.

古文：黄公惊异，遣去草搜索，一无所有。
现代文：黄师惊奇诧异，派人排除草蔓进去搜索，什么也没有看见。
English: Surprised and astonished, Master Huang sent someone to remove the weeds and search inside, but saw nothing.

古文：食顷方出，持一棋子，曰： 适观棋时，人留餐见遗，此秦人棋子也。 
现代文：大约过了吃顿饭的工夫，瞿道士从里面出来了，手里拿着一个棋子，并说： 刚才看下棋的时候，人家留我吃饭，赠送给我的，这是秦人的棋子。 
English: After about an hour of eating the meal, the Taoist monk came out from inside, holding a chess piece in his hand, and said: "Just now, when I was watching a game of chess, someone kept me for dinner and gave it to me. This is the Qin people's chess piece."

古文：黄公方怪之，尚意其狐狸所魁，亦不甚信。
现代文：黄公十分惊疑这件事，还怀疑他是被狐狸精迷住了，也不太信。
English: Huang Gong was very surprised by this matter. He also suspected that he had been bewitched by the fox spirit and did not quite believe it.

古文：茅山世传仙府，学道者数百千，皆宗黄公，悉以为德业阶品，寻合上升。
现代文：世人传说茅山是仙府，学道的人成百上千，都尊奉黄尊师，全都认为黄尊师的德业阶品很高，不久应当上天成仙。
English: The world has a legend that Maoyan is a place of immortality. There are hundreds of thousands of people who have studied the Tao, and they all respect and worship Huang Rongshi. They all believe that Huang Rongshi has a high level of virtue, and that he will soon ascend to heaven and become an immortal.

古文：每至良辰，无不瞻望云鹤。
现代文：所以，每到良辰，没有不抬头远望云鹤的。
English: Therefore, at every good hour, there is no one who does not look up and see the cranes.

古文：明年八月望夜，天气晴肃，月光如昼；中宵云雾大起，其云五色，集于牖间，仙乐满庭，复有步虚之声。
现代文：下一年的八月十五日夜晚，天气晴朗，月光如同白天；半夜云雾大起，那云是五色的，逐步集中在窗户和门中间，仙乐充满庭院，又有步虚之声。
English: On the night of August 15th of the following year, the weather was fine and the moonlight was as bright as day; in the middle of the night, the fog rose, the cloud was five-colored, gradually concentrated in the middle of the windows and doors, the fairy music filled the courtyard, and there was the sound of footsteps.

古文：弟子皆以为黄公上仙之期至矣，遽备香火。
现代文：弟子都认为黄尊师升仙的期限到了，急速准备香火。
English: The disciples all thought that the time limit for Huang Rongshi's ascension to heaven had come, and they quickly prepared incense.

古文：黄公沐浴朝服，以候真侣。
现代文：黄尊师沐浴，穿着上官服，来等候仙侣，将要天亮，雾烟渐渐散去。
English: Yellow Venerable Teacher bathed, dressed in his official robes, and waited for the celestial couple. As dawn approached, the haze gradually dispersed.

古文：将晓，氛烟渐散，见瞿生乘五色云，自东方出在庭中，灵乐鸾鹤，弥漫空际，于云间再拜黄公曰： 尊师即当来，更务修造，亦不久矣。 
现代文：看见瞿道士乘五色云，从东方出现在庭院中，灵乐鸾鹤弥漫天空。瞿道士在云间再拜黄公说： 尊师马上应当来，再致力于修行造就，也不久了。 
English: Seeing Gong Taoist riding on the five-colored clouds, appearing in the courtyard from the east, and the spiritual music of the cranes filling the sky, Gong Taoist bowed to Huang Gong in the clouds and said, "Your revered teacher should come right away, and devote himself to cultivating, and it won't be long."

古文：复与诸徒诀别，乘风遂去，渐远不见，隐隐犹闻众乐之音。
现代文：又和诸弟子告别，就乘风离去了，渐渐远了，以至不见。但隐隐约约还能听到各种音乐的声音。
English: After bidding farewell to his disciples, he was carried away by the wind and gradually became so far away that he could not be seen. However, he could vaguely hear the sounds of various kinds of music.

古文：金陵父老，每传此事。
现代文：金陵的父老乡亲，常常传说这件事。
English: Local people in Jinling often talk about it.

古文：王卿
现代文：王卿
English: Wang Xing

古文：唐真元年中，郢中有酒肆王卿者，店近南郭，每至节日，常有一道士过之，饮讫出郭而去。
现代文：唐贞元年间，郢中有一个酒店的主人叫王卿，他的酒店靠近南边的外城。每逢到节日，经常有一个道士经过这里，喝完酒出外城离开这里。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the owner of a hotel in Handan was named Wang Qing. His hotel was near the southern outskirts of the city. Every festival, a Taoist priest would often pass by here, drink wine and leave the city.

古文：如是数年。后因道士复来，卿遂结束潜行，寻之数里。道士顾见，大惊曰： 何来？ 
现代文：如此几年，后来由于道士又来了，王卿就装束打扮一下，偷偷地跟在道士后边走了，走了几里，道士回头看见了王卿，很震惊地说： 你为什么来？ 
English: After several years of this, when the Taoist came again, Wang Ching dressed up and secretly followed the Taoist for a few miles. When the Taoist looked back and saw Wang Ching, he was shocked and said, "Why did you come?"

古文：卿乃礼拜，愿神人许为仆使。
现代文：王卿于是行礼参拜，并表示希望道士能允许他当神仙的仆人。
English: Wang Qing then went to pay homage and expressed the hope that the Taoist would allow him to become a servant of the immortal.

古文：道士固辞，卿固随之。
现代文：道士坚决推辞，王卿坚持跟随他。
English: The Taoist resolutely refused, and Wang Qing insisted on following him.

古文：每过涧壑，或高阔丈余，道士逾越，轻举而过。
现代文：每逢过山涧，有的高、宽一丈多，道士越过时，轻而一举就过去了。
English: Every time I go over the mountains, some are taller, some are wider, and some are taller than I am. When Taoists pass the time, they pass easily.

古文：卿轻踵之，亦能渡也。
现代文：王卿随便跟随它，也能渡过去。
English: Wang Xing followed it casually and was able to cross over.

古文：行数十里，一岩高百余丈。道士腾身而起。
现代文：走几十里，遇到一个险峻的山崖，高有一百多丈，道士腾身而起上去了。
English: After walking for dozens of miles, he came across a steep cliff, more than a hundred meters high, and the Taoist monk stood up and went up.

古文：卿不能登，遂哀求礼拜。
现代文：王卿登不上去，于是行礼参拜，苦苦哀求。
English: Wang Qing could not climb up, so he went to pray and begged for help.

古文：道士自上谓曰： 汝何苦从我？
现代文：道士从上面对王卿说： 你何必这样辛苦地跟随我，你自己快回去。
English: The Taoist priest said to Wang Qing from above, "Why do you have to follow me so hard? You should go back quickly."

古文：自速归；不尔，坐受困踬也。 
现代文：不这样，即将遭受困厄。 
English: Otherwise, we will be in trouble.

古文：卿曰： 前所渡险阻，皆赖尊师命；今却归无路，必死矣。愿见救护。 
现代文：王卿说： 以前所渡过的艰难险阻，都依靠尊师的命令，现在退回去没有路可走，我必定得死了，希望神仙见死相救，予以保护。 
English: Wang Qing said, "All the hardships and obstacles that I have gone through in the past depended on the orders of my revered teacher. Now there is no way to go back. I must die. I hope that the immortals will save me and protect me.

古文：道士垂手岩下，令卿举手闭目，跃身翕飞，已至岩上。
现代文：道士把手伸到岩下，让王卿举起手，闭上眼睛。王卿只觉得身子跳起来一收缩，就飞到石崖上了。
English: The moralist put his hand under the rock and asked Wang Qing to raise his hand and close his eyes. Wang Qing only felt his body jump up and shrink, and then he flew to the rock cliff.

古文：上则平旷烟景，不类人间。
现代文：石崖上面平坦、空旷，一派烟水苍茫的景色，不象是人世间。
English: Above the cliff, the landscape is flat and empty, with a vast expanse of smoke and water. It doesn't look like the real world.

古文：又从行十余里，至道士舍。
现代文：又跟道士走了十多里，来到道士的房舍，门庭整洁肃穆。
English: He also walked more than ten miles with the Taoist and arrived at the Taoist's house. The courtyard was neat and solemn.

古文：门庭整肃，止卿于舍外草间。谓曰： 汝且止此，吾为汝送饭食。候便令汝得见天师。 
现代文：道士让王卿躲在房舍外的草丛间，并且对他说： 你暂且住在这，我给你送饭，等方便的时候，让你见到天师。 
English: The Taoist priest told Wang Qing to hide in the bushes outside the building, and said to him: You stay here for the time being, I will bring you food, and when it is convenient, let you see the heavenly teacher.

古文：卿潜草间。道士三日每送饭食，亦皆充足。
现代文：王卿藏在草丛里，道士每逢三天送一次饭食，也都充足。
English: Wang Qing hid in the bushes, and the Taoists sent him food once every three days, which was also sufficient.

古文：后一日，忽见天师出门，杖策，道士四五人侍从。
现代文：后来，有一天，忽然看见天师出门，手扶拐杖，有四五个道士跟从侍候。
English: Later, one day, he suddenly saw the heavenly teacher leaving the house, holding a cane in his hand, with four or five priests and attendants.

古文：天师形状瑰伟，眉目疏朗。
现代文：天师身体奇异雄伟眉毛疏展，双目明朗。
English: Tenshi's body is strangely majestic, his eyebrows are sparse and his eyes are clear.

古文：道士私招卿，令于道左礼谒。
现代文：道士偷偷招呼王卿出来，让他在道路旁边礼拜谒见天师。
English: The spiritualist secretly called Wang Qing out and asked him to pay homage to the heavenly teacher on the side of the road.

古文：天师惊曰： 汝何因得至此？ 
现代文：天师吃惊地说： 你因为什么能到这里来。 
English: The celestial master was surprised and said, "Why did you come here?"

古文：卿方谓说。
现代文：王卿说了。
English: Wang Xing said.

古文：诸道士曰： 此人谨厚，恐堪役使，可且令守灶。 
现代文：诸位道士说： 这个人谨慎厚道，恐怕能够役使，可以暂且让他守灶。 
English: All of you Taoists say: This man is prudent and kind, I'm afraid he can be useful, you can let him keep the stove on for the time being.

古文：天师令且收之，遂延卿入院，至厨下。
现代文：天师命令暂且收下他。于是引导王卿进入院内，来到厨下。
English: The heavenly teacher ordered him to be admitted for the time being. He then led Wang Qing into the courtyard and came to the kitchen.

古文：见一大灶，下燃火，上有铁筒，闭盖数重。
现代文：王卿看见有一个大灶，灶下正烧着火，灶上面有一个铁筒，闭封着掩盖了好几层。
English: Wang Xing saw a large stove. A fire was burning under the stove, and there was an iron cylinder on top of the stove, which was sealed and covered several layers.

古文：道士令卿守灶，专看之，不得妄视，令失坠。
现代文：道士让王卿守灶，专门看着它，不能胡乱看，使它失掉。
English: The Taoist asked Wang Qing to guard the stove, specifically looking at it, not to look at it randomly, so that it would be lost.

古文：余道士四人，或汲水采药，蒸曝造食，以供天师。
现代文：其余四个道士，有的打水采药，有的蒸晒作饭，来供应天师。
English: The remaining four Taoists, some fetching water and medicine, some steaming and cooking, came to supply the heavenly teacher.

古文：夜亦令卿卧厨下守火。
现代文：夜里也让王卿躺在厨下看守火。
English: At night, Wang Ching was also made to lie under the kitchen and keep an eye on the fire.

古文：经六七日，都不见人来看视釜中物者。
现代文：经过六七天，都不见人来看视釜中物。
English: After six or seven days, no one came to see what was in the kettle.

古文：后一日，卿无何窃开窥药。
现代文：后来，有一天，王卿没有什么事，偷偷地开筒看药。
English: Later, one day, Wang Qing had nothing to do, and secretly opened a bottle of medicine.

古文：忽见一白兔，从铁筒中走出，騞然有声。
现代文：忽然看见一只白兔，从铁筒中跑出，有象刀劈开物的声音。
English: Suddenly, he saw a white rabbit running out of the iron cylinder, and heard the sound of an elephant knife splitting things.

古文：道士曰： 药已失矣！ 
现代文：道士说： 药已经失掉了。 
English: The moralist said: The medicine has been lost.

古文：竟来窥看，惶惧失色。
现代文：其他的人都小心谨慎地来看，个个惶惧失色。
English: The others looked on cautiously, their faces pale with fear.

古文：须臾，天师大怒曰： 何忽引俗人来，令失药。 
现代文：不一会儿，天师大怒说： 为什么忽然引俗人来，让他失掉了药。 
English: After a while, the heavenly teacher said angrily, "Why did you suddenly bring a layman here and make him lose his medicine?"

古文：俄召前道士责辱，欲鞭之。
现代文：一会儿召见以前那个道士，责备辱骂，要用鞭子打他。
English: After a while, he summoned the former Taoist priest, scolded him for insulting him, and wanted to beat him with a whip.

古文：道士叩头，请却擒觅。
现代文：道士叩头，请求把药寻找回来。
English: He bowed to the Taoist priest and asked him to find the medicine.

古文：道士数人，于庭施香禹步。
现代文：几个道士，在庭院中焚香禹步。
English: Several Taoist monks are burning incense in the courtyard.

古文：道士二人，变成白鹤，冲天而飞。食顷，鹤已擒得白兔来，令投釜中，固济炼之。
现代文：两个道士变成白鹤，冲天飞去，过了大约一顿饭的工夫，鹤已经擒获白兔归来，让人把它投进釜中，坚持炼成它。
English: The two Taoists turned into white cranes and flew into the sky. After about one meal, the cranes had captured the white rabbit and returned, and the people threw it into the kettle and insisted on refining it.

古文：天师令速逐俗人遣归。
现代文：天师命令快赶走俗人，派人送他回去。
English: The heavenly teacher gave the order to quickly drive away the layman and send someone to take him back.

古文：道士遂领出曰： 卿几误我，卿心未坚，可且归去。 
现代文：道士于是领着王卿出来说： 你几乎误了我，你的心没有坚定，可以暂且回去。 
English: The spiritualist then led Wang Qing out and said: You almost missed me, your heart is not firm, you can go back for the time being.

古文：遂引送至高岩下，执手而别。 后二十年，于汾州市中相见耳。 
现代文：就引送王卿到高岩下，拱手告别，并约定二十年后在汾州街市上相见。
English: He escorted Wang Qing to Gaoyan, bade him farewell, and agreed to meet him at the Zhangzhou Street Market in twenty years.

古文：卿复寻路归，数日方至郭，已经年。
现代文：王卿又寻路回来，几天后才到外城。已经过了一年了。
English: Wang Xing found his way back again, only to arrive in the outer city a few days later. A year had already passed.

古文：遂为道士。
现代文：以后，王卿就当了道士。
English: After that, Wang Qing became a Taoist.

古文：十余年后，游太原，竟不知当有所遇否。
现代文：十多年以后，游太原，竟不知他到底遇到了什么没有。
English: More than ten years later, Yu Taiyuan did not know what had happened to him.

古文：衡山隐者
现代文：衡山隐者
English: Hengshan hermit

古文：衡山隐者，不知姓名。
现代文：衡山隐者，人们都不知道他的姓名。
English: Hengshan hermit, people do not know his name.

古文：数因卖药，往来岳寺寄宿。
现代文：因为他多次卖药，往来都在岳寺住宿。
English: Because he sold drugs many times, he always stayed at Gakuji.

古文：或时四五日无所食，僧徒怪之。
现代文：有时他四五天也不吃什么，寺里的僧徒都觉得他很奇怪。
English: Sometimes he wouldn't eat anything for four or five days, and the monks in the temple thought he was very strange.

古文：复卖药至僧所。寺众见不食，知是异人，敬接甚厚。
现代文：后来他又卖药到僧舍住宿，寺里众人见他仍不吃饭，知道他是一个异人。迎接很恭敬，也很看重。
English: Later, he also sold medicine to the monks' lodgings. When the people in the temple saw that he was still not eating, they knew that he was a stranger. They greeted him with great respect and valued him highly.

古文：会乐人将女诣寺，其女有色，众欲取之。
现代文：衡山隐者听说乐人的女儿要嫁人，便邀请僧人一同去看。
English: When the Hengshan hermit heard that the entertainer's daughter was getting married, he invited the monk to watch the wedding.

古文：父母求五百千，莫不引退。
现代文：衡山隐者看了很喜欢，要娶她。
English: Hengshan hermit liked it very much and wanted to marry her.

古文：隐者闻女嫁，邀僧往看，喜欲取之，仍将黄金两挺，正二百两，谓女父曰： 此金直七百贯，今亦不论。 
现代文：于是，送黄金两根，正好是二百两，并对女儿的父亲说： 这些金子值七百贯，现在也不论多少了。 
English: So he gave her two pieces of gold, exactly two hundred taels, and said to her father, "This gold is worth seven hundred drams, and it doesn't matter how much it is now.

古文：付金毕将去，乐师时充官，便仓卒使别。
现代文：衡山隐者付完金子就要领着妻子离去，乐师当时充官，不能停留，便仓促分别了。
English: After Hengshan hermit paid the gold, he was about to leave with his wife. The musician was on duty at the time and couldn't stay, so they hastily separated.

古文：隐者示其所居，云： 去此四十余里，但至山当知也。 
现代文：衡山隐者告诉他的住处说： 离这四十多里，只要遇到山就必定知道了。 
English: Hengshan hermit told his place of residence and said: "It is more than forty miles away, as long as you encounter a mountain, you will definitely know.

古文：女父母事毕忆女，乃往访之。
现代文：女儿的父母事毕，想念女儿，就前去看望她。
English: Thinking of their daughter, the girl's parents went to visit her.

古文：正见朱门崇丽，扣门，隐者与女俱出迎接。
现代文：正好看见红漆大门高耸华丽，上前扣门，衡山隐者和女儿都出来迎接。
English: Just saw the red lacquer door towering and gorgeous, the front door, Hengshan hermit and his daughter came out to greet.

古文：初至一食，便不复饥。留连五六日，亦不思食。
现代文：开始到这里吃了一顿饭，就不再饿了，留连了五六天，也不想吃饭。
English: When I first came here and had a meal, I wasn't hungry anymore. I stayed for five or six days and didn't want to eat.

古文：父母将还，隐者以五色箱，盛黄金五挺赠送，谓父母曰： 此间深邃，不复人居，此后无烦更求也。 
现代文：女儿的父母将要回去，衡山隐者用五色箱，盛黄金五根赠送，并对岳父母说： 这里深沉，不适于人居住。从此以后，就不要再来了。 
English: The parents of the daughter were about to return, and the Hengshan hermit presented them with a five-colored box containing five pieces of gold, and said to the parents-in-law: "This place is deep and not suitable for human habitation. From now on, don't come here again."

古文：其后父母重往，但见山草，无复人居，方知神仙之窟。
现代文：那以后女儿的父母又去了，只见山和草，不再有人居住。才知道这里是神仙居住的洞穴。
English: After that, the parents of the daughter went there again, only to see mountains and grass, with no one living there anymore. Only then did they know that this was a cave inhabited by immortals.

古文：梅真君
现代文：梅真君
English: Mei Zhenjun

古文：汝阴人崔景唐，家甚富。
现代文：汝阴人崔景唐，家里非常富有。
English: You Yin people Cui Jing Tang, the family is very rich.

古文：尝有道士，自言姓梅，来访崔。
现代文：曾经有一个道士，自己说姓梅，来拜访崔景唐。
English: Once, a Taoist monk, who said his surname was Mei, came to visit Cui Jingtang.

古文：崔客之数月。
现代文：崔景唐以客待他，长达几个月。
English: Cui Jing Tang entertained him as a guest for several months.

古文：景唐市得玉鞍，将之寿春，以献节度使高审思，谓梅曰： 先生但居此，吾将诣寿春，旬月而还，使儿侄辈奉事，无所忧也。 
现代文：崔景唐买得一个玉鞍，将要到寿春去，把它献给节度使高审思。他对梅君说： 先生只管在这住下去，我将要到寿春，十天半月就回来，让儿侄辈来奉事，不要有什么忧虑。 
English: Cui Jingtang bought a jade saddle and will go to Shouchun to dedicate it to the festival of high-level thinking. He said to Mei Jun: Sir, just live here, I will go to Shouchun and come back in ten and a half days, let my sons and nephews come to serve, don't have any worries.

古文：梅曰： 吾乃寿春人也，将此访一亲知，比将还矣，君其先往也。
现代文：梅君说： 我是寿春人，到这里来拜访一个亲友，也就要回去了。你先去吧！
English: Mei said, "I am Shouharu, and I came here to visit a relative and friend, and I am also going back. You go first!"

古文：久居于此，思有以奉报。
现代文：我长期居住在这儿，想有所进献，以表报答。
English: I've lived here for a long time and I want to give something back.

古文：君家有水银乎？ 
现代文：你家有水银吗？ 
English: Do you have mercury at home?

古文：曰： 有。 
现代文：崔景唐回答说： 有。 
English: And he said, I have.

古文：即以十两奉之。
现代文：马上就拿十两来，双手捧着送给梅君。
English: He immediately took a dozen or two and gave them to Mei Jun, holding them in his hands.

古文：梅乃置鼎中，以水银炼之，少久即成白银矣。
现代文：梅君就放在鼎中，来炼这水银。不久就成白银了。
English: Mei Jun was placed in the middle of the ring to refine the mercury, and it soon turned into silver.

古文：因此与景唐曰： 以此为路粮，君至寿春，可于城东访吾家也。 
现代文：于是把它送与崔景唐说： 用这些做路费。你到寿春，可在城东询问我家。 
English: So he gave it to Cui Jingtang and said, "Use these for travel expenses. When you come to Shuchun, you can ask my family in the east of the city."

古文：即与景唐分路而去。
现代文：完后，就与崔景君分路而行。
English: After that, they parted ways with Cui Jingjun.

古文：景唐至寿春，即诣城东，访梅氏。
现代文：崔景唐到寿春，就到城东寻访梅氏家，寻访了几天也没找到。
English: When Cui Jingtang arrived in Shouchun, he went to the east of the city to look for Mei's house. After several days of searching, he did not find it.

古文：数日不得。村人皆曰： 此中无梅家，亦无为道士者；唯淮南岳庙中，有梅真君像。
现代文：村人都说： 这里没有梅家，也没有当道士的，只有淮南岳庙中，有梅真君像，能不能是这呢？ 
English: The villagers all said: There is no Mei family here, and there is no one who is a Taoist. Only in Huainan Yue Temple, there is a statue of Mei Zhenjun. Could it be this one?

古文：得非此耶？ 如其言访之，果梅真君矣。
现代文：崔景唐按照村人的话去寻找，果然是梅真君。
English: Cui Jingtang followed the villagers' words to search, and it was indeed Mei Zhenjun.

古文：自后竟不复遇。
现代文：从这以后竟没有再相遇。
English: We haven't seen each other since.

