古文：十年春，王正月，公败齐师于长勺。
现代文：十年春天，周历正月，庄公在长勺将齐军打败。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Zhuang Gong defeated the Qi army in the Long Spoon.

古文：二月，公侵宋。
现代文：二月，庄公率军攻打宋国。
English: In February, Zhuang Gong led an army to attack Song.

古文：三月，宋人迁宿。
现代文：三月，宋军连夜迁移。
English: In March, the Song army moved overnight.

古文：夏六月，齐师、宋师次于郎。
现代文：夏季六月，齐师、宋师驻扎在朗地。
English: In the summer, in June, the armies of Qi and Song were stationed in Langdian.

古文：公败宋师于乘丘。
现代文：庄公在乘丘将宋军打败。
English: Zhuang Gong defeated the Song army at the top of the hill.

古文：秋九月，荆败蔡师于莘，以蔡侯献舞归。
现代文：秋季九月，楚国在莘地击败蔡军，俘虏了蔡侯献舞回国。
English: In the autumn of September, Chu defeated Cai's army in Handan, captured Cai Hou and brought him back to the country.

古文：冬十月，齐师灭谭。
现代文：冬季十月，齐国灭掉谭国。
English: In the winter of October, Qi wiped out Tan.

古文：谭子奔莒。
现代文：谭子逃到了莒国。
English: Tan Zi fled to Shan State.

古文：十年春，齐师伐我。
现代文：鲁庄公十年的春天，齐国军队攻打我们鲁国。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of Luzhong, the Qigong army attacked our Luzhong.

古文：公将战，曹刿请见。
现代文：鲁庄公将要迎战。曹刿请求拜见鲁庄公。
English: Lord Luzhuang is about to go to war. Cao Pi asks to see Lord Luzhuang.

古文：其乡人曰： 肉食者谋之，又何间焉。 
现代文：他的同乡说： 当权的人自会谋划这件事，你又何必参与呢？ 
English: His fellow villager said: "The people in power will plan this themselves, so why should you get involved?

古文：刿曰： 肉食者鄙，未能远谋。 
现代文：曹刿说： 当权的人目光短浅，不能深谋远虑。 
English: Cao Wei said: People in power are short-sighted and cannot think ahead.

古文：乃入见。
现代文：于是入朝去见鲁庄公。
English: So he went to the court to see Prince Luzhuang.

古文：问何以战。
现代文：曹刿问： 您凭借什么作战？ 
English: Cao Wei asked: What do you rely on to fight?

古文：公曰： 衣食所安，弗敢专也，必以分人。 
现代文：鲁庄公说： 衣食养生的东西，我从来不敢独自专有，一定把它们分给身边的大臣。 
English: Lu Zhuang Gong said: I would never dare to have exclusive rights to food, clothing and health care. I would definitely share them with the ministers around me.

古文：对曰： 小惠未徧，民弗从也。 
现代文：曹刿回答说： 这种小恩小惠不能遍及百姓，老百姓是不会顺从您的。 
English: Cao Pi replied, "This kind of small favor cannot be extended to the people. The people will not obey you.

古文：公曰： 牺牲玉帛，弗敢加也，必以信。 
现代文：鲁庄公说： 祭祀用的猪牛羊和玉器、丝织品等祭品，我从来不敢虚报夸大数目，一定对上天说实话。 
English: Lu Zhuang Gong said, "I would never dare to exaggerate the number of sacrificial pigs, cattle and sheep, jade objects, silk fabrics and other sacrificial items. I would always tell the truth to Heaven.

古文：对曰： 小信未孚，神弗福也。 
现代文：曹刿说： 小小信用，不能取得神灵的信任，神灵是不会保佑您的。 
English: Cao Pi said, "A little trust is not enough to gain the trust of the gods, and the gods will not bless you."

古文：公曰： 小大之狱，虽不能察，必以情。 
现代文：鲁庄公说： 大大小小的诉讼案件，即使不能一一明察，但我一定根据实情。 
English: Lu Zhuanggong said: In large and small litigation cases, even if I can't inspect them one by one, I must proceed according to the facts.

古文：对曰： 忠之属也，可以一战。
现代文：曹刿回答说： 这才尽了本职一类的事，可以打一仗。
English: Cao Pi replied, "This is the first time I have done my duty, and I can fight a battle."

古文：战则请从。 
现代文：如果作战，请允许我跟随您一同去。 
English: If you fight, let me go with you.

古文：公与之乘。战于长勺，公将鼓之。刿曰： 未可。 
现代文：到了那一天，鲁庄公和曹刿同坐一辆战车，在长勺和齐军作战。鲁庄公将要下令击鼓进军。曹刿说： 现在不行。 
English: On that day, Lu Zhuang and Cao Pi rode together in a chariot to fight against the Qi army. Lu Zhuang was about to give the order to march with drums. Cao Pi said, "Not now."

古文：齐人三鼓，刿曰： 可矣。 
现代文：等到齐军三次击鼓之后。曹刿说： 可以击鼓进军了。 
English: After waiting for the Qi army to beat the drums three times, Cao Pi said, "It is time to beat the drums and march into the army."

古文：齐师败绩。
现代文：齐军大败。
English: The Qi army was soundly defeated.

古文：公将驰之。
现代文：鲁庄公又要下令驾车马追逐齐军。
English: Lu Zhuang Gong also ordered the driving horse to chase the Qi army.

古文：刿曰： 未可。 
现代文：曹刿说： 还不行。 
English: Cao Wei said, "Not yet."

古文：下视其辙，登轼而望之，曰： 可矣。 
现代文：说完就下了战车，察看齐军车轮碾出的痕迹，又登上战车，扶着车前横木远望齐军的队形，这才说： 可以追击了。 
English: After saying this, he got off the chariot, inspected the traces of the wheels of the Qi army, and then boarded the chariot, leaning on the crossbar in front of the chariot and looking at the formation of the Qi army from afar. Only then did he say: We can pursue.

古文：遂逐齐师。
现代文：于是追击齐军。
English: So they chased the Qi army.

古文：既克，公问其故。对曰： 夫战，勇气也。
现代文：第二次击鼓士兵们的士气就开始低落了，第三次击鼓士兵们的士气就耗尽了。
English: The morale of the second drumming soldiers began to sink, and the morale of the third drumming soldiers was exhausted.

古文：一鼓作气，再而衰，三而竭。
现代文：他们的士气已经消失而我军的士气正旺盛，所以才战胜了他们。
English: The first beating of the drum can boost morale, the second beating of the drum will weaken morale, and the third beating of the drum will deplete morale.

古文：彼竭我盈，故克之。夫大国难测也，惧有伏焉。
现代文：像齐国这样的大国，他们的情况是难以推测的，怕他们在那里设有伏兵。
English: In a big country like Qi, it's hard to know what's going on, because they might have ambushes there.

古文：吾视其辙乱，望其旗靡，故逐之。 
现代文：后来我看到他们的车轮的痕迹混乱了，望见他们的旗帜倒下了，所以下令追击他们。 
English: Then I saw that their wheel tracks were jumbled, and I saw that their flag was down, so I gave the order to chase them.

古文：夏六月，齐师、宋师次于郎。
现代文：夏季，六月，齐国和宋国的军队驻扎在郎地。
English: In the summer, in June, the armies of Qi and Song were stationed in Langdian.

古文：公子偃曰： 宋师不整，可败也。
现代文：公子偃说： 宋军的军容不整齐，可以打败他。
English: Gongzi Yao said: The Song Army's army is not neat and tidy, it can defeat him.

古文：宋败，齐必还，请击之。 
现代文：宋军败了，齐军必然回国。请您攻击宋军。 
English: The Song army has been defeated, and the Qi army will inevitably return to China. Please attack the Song army.

古文：公弗许。
现代文：庄公不同意。
English: Song Xianggong did not agree.

古文：自雩门窃出，蒙皋比而先犯之。公从之，大败宋师于乘丘。
现代文：公子偃从雩门私自出击，把马蒙上老虎皮先攻宋军，庄公领兵跟着进击，在乘丘把宋军打得大败。
English: Gongzi Zou made a private attack from the gate, and attacked the Song army first with his horse covered with a tiger skin. Zhuang Gong led the soldiers to attack, and defeated the Song army at Chengdu Hill.

古文：齐师乃还。
现代文：齐军也就回国了。
English: The Qi army also returned to China.

古文：蔡哀侯娶于陈，息侯亦娶焉。
现代文：蔡哀侯在陈国娶妻，息侯也在陈国娶妻。
English: Cai Yehou married a wife in Chen Province, and his son-in-law also married a wife in Chen Province.

古文：息妫将归，过蔡。
现代文：息妫出嫁时路过蔡国。
English: She passed by Cai Guo when she was getting married.

古文：蔡侯曰： 吾姨也。 
现代文：蔡侯说： 她是我妻子的姊妹。 
English: Cai Hou said: She is my wife's sister.

古文：止而见之，弗宾。
现代文：留下来见面，不很礼貌。
English: It's not very polite to stay and meet.

古文：息侯闻之，怒，使谓楚文王曰： 伐我，吾求救于蔡而伐之。 
现代文：息侯听到这件事，发怒，派人对楚文王说： 请您假装进攻我国，我向蔡国求援，您就可以攻打它。 
English: On hearing this, Sihou became angry and sent a messenger to King Chu Wen saying, "Please pretend to attack our country. I will ask Cai Guo for help, and you can attack it."

古文：楚子从之。
现代文：楚文王同意。
English: King Chu Wen agreed.

古文：秋九月，楚败蔡师于莘，以蔡侯献舞归。
现代文：秋季九月，楚国在莘地击败蔡军，俘虏了蔡侯献舞回国。
English: In the autumn of September, Chu defeated Cai's army in Handan, captured Cai Hou and brought him back to the country.

古文：齐侯之出也，过谭，谭不礼焉。
现代文：齐侯逃亡在外的时候，经过谭国，谭国人对他很不礼貌。
English: When Qi Hou was on the run, he passed through Tan Guo, and the people of Tan Guo were very rude to him.

古文：及其入也，诸侯皆贺，谭又不至。
现代文：等到他回国，诸侯都去祝贺，谭国又没有人去。
English: When he returned to China, all the princes went to congratulate him, but no one from Tan went.

古文：冬，齐师灭谭，谭无礼也。
现代文：冬季，齐军就灭亡了谭国，这是由于谭国没有礼貌。
English: In winter, the Qi army destroyed the Tan Kingdom, because the Tan Kingdom had no manners.

古文：谭子奔莒，同盟故也。
现代文：谭子逃亡到莒国，这是因为两国同盟的缘故。
English: Tan Zi fled to Shan State because of the alliance between the two countries.

