古文：起柔兆困敦，尽强圉赤备若五月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起柔兆困敦，尽强圉赤备若五月，共一年。隋炀帝大业十二年
English: It has been one year since the Emperor Sui and the Empress Dowager Sui died, and the Emperor Sui and the Empress Dowager

古文：大业十二年丙子，公元六一六年
现代文：春季，正月，元旦大朝会，各地朝集使未到的有二十余郡。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, and New Year's Day, there are more than 20 counties that have not yet reached the grand morning assembly.

古文：春，正月，朝集使不至者二十馀郡，始议分遣使者十二道发兵讨捕盗贼。
现代文：朝廷中开始商议分别派遣使者到十二道发兵讨捕盗贼。
English: The imperial court began to discuss sending emissaries to the twelve provinces to send troops to catch the thieves.

古文：诏毘陵通守路道德集十郡兵数万人，于郡东南起宫苑，周围十二里，内为十六离宫，大抵仿东都西苑之制，而奇丽过之。
现代文：炀帝下诏命毗陵通守路道德汇集十郡之兵几万人，在毗陵郡城东南营建宫苑，方圆十二里；苑内有十六所离宫，大都模仿东都西苑的规制，但在新颖华丽方面还要超过西苑。
English: Emperor Qian gave the order to gather tens of thousands of soldiers from ten counties to build a palace garden in the southeast of the city of Viling County, with a circumference of twelve miles. There are sixteen palaces in the garden, most of which imitate the regulation of the West Garden of the East Capital, but in terms of novelty and splendor, they surpass the West Garden.

古文：又欲筑宫于会稽，会乱，不果成。
现代文：炀帝还打算在会稽建造宫苑，正逢各地造反，未能建成。
English: Emperor Xuan also planned to build a palace garden in Caijing, but it was not built due to the rebellion in various regions.

古文：三月，上巳，帝与群臣饮于西苑水上，命学士杜宝撰《水饰图经》，采古水事七十二，使朝散大夫黄衮以木为之，间以妓航、酒船，人物自动如生，钟磬筝瑟，能成音曲。
现代文：三月，上巳节，炀帝与群臣在西苑水上宴饮。他命令学士杜宝撰写《水饰图经》，收集古代七十二个关于水的故事；让朝散大夫黄衮依故事用木头制成，间杂着乐妓的船只、酒船，木制的人物能动，栩栩如生，钟磬筝瑟，都能发出音乐曲调。
English: In March, on the Day of the Snake, Emperor Qian and his courtiers feasted on the water in the West Garden. He ordered the scholar Du Bao to write the "Water Decoration Picture Book" and collect seventy-two ancient stories about water; let the Choshan doctor Huang Xuan follow the stories made of wood, mixed with the ships of the prostitutes, the wine ships, the wooden characters are dynamic and lifelike, and the chimes can emit musical tunes.

古文：己丑，张金称陷平恩，一朝杀男女万馀口；又陷武安、钜鹿、清河诸县。
现代文：己丑，张金称攻陷平恩县，一个早晨就杀死男女万余人。他又攻陷武安、钜鹿、清河各县。
English: As an example, Zhang Jin claimed to have invaded Ping'an County, killing more than 10,000 men and women in one morning. He also invaded Wu'an, Menglu, and Qinghe counties.

古文：金称比诸贼尤残暴，所过民无孑遗。
现代文：张金称比其他的盗贼更为残暴，他率部所过之处，人迹全无。
English: Zhang Jin said that he was more brutal than other thieves, and that there was no trace of him anywhere he went.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，大业殿西院火。帝以为盗起，惊走，入西苑，匿草间，火定乃还。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁巳，大业殿西院起火，炀帝以为盗贼来了，逃入西苑，藏在草丛里，火熄灭后才出来。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Si, the West Courtyard of Daye Hall caught fire. Emperor Xuan thought that thieves had come, fled into the West Courtyard, hid in the grass, and only came out after the fire was extinguished.

古文：帝自八年以后，每夜眠恒惊悸，云有贼，令数妇人摇抚，乃得眠。
现代文：炀帝从大业八年以来每天夜里都睡不安稳，常常惊悸而醒，说有贼，必得命几个妇人摇抚才能入睡。
English: Emperor Xuan slept uneasily every night for the past eight years, often waking with a start, saying that if there was a thief, he would have to be caressed by several women before he could fall asleep.

古文：癸亥，历山飞别将甄翟儿众十万寇太原，将军潘长文败死。
现代文：癸亥，历山飞的部将甄翟儿率众十万人攻打太原，将军潘长文兵败身亡。
English: Zeng Hai, the commander of Leshanfei, Zhen Yuer led hundreds of thousands of people to attack Taiyuan, and General Pan Changwen was defeated and killed.

古文：五月，丙戌朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：五月，丙戌朔，出现日食，是日全食。
English: In May, a solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse, occurred.

古文：壬午，帝于景华宫征求萤火，得数斛，夜出游山，放之，光遍岩谷。
现代文：壬午，炀帝在景华宫征求萤火虫，征得了几斛萤火虫，在夜里游山，把萤火虫放出来，其光亮遍及山谷。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, Emperor Xizong solicited fireflies at the Jinghua Palace. He obtained several bunches of fireflies, and toured the mountains at night to release the fireflies. The glow of the fireflies spread throughout the valley.

古文：帝问侍臣盗贼，左翊卫大将军宇文述曰： 渐少。 
现代文：炀帝向侍臣询问盗贼的情况，左翊卫大将军宇文述说： 逐渐减少。
English: Emperor Qian inquired about the situation of the thieves to the courtier, and General Zuo Wei Uwen said: Gradually reduced.

古文：帝曰： 比从来少几何？ 
现代文：崐 炀帝说： 比过去少多少？ 
English: Xi Jinping said: How much less than in the past?

古文：对曰： 不能什一。 
现代文：宇文述回答： 不及过去的十分之一。 
English: Yu Wenshu replied: Less than one-tenth of the past.

古文：纳言苏威引身隐柱，帝呼前问之，对曰： 臣非所司，不委多少，但患渐近。 
现代文：纳言苏威躲在柱子后面，炀帝把苏威叫到座前问他，苏威回答： 我不是管这方面的官员，不清楚有多少盗贼，但贼患距京越来越近。 
English: Nagon Suwei hid behind a pillar. Emperor Zhou called Suwei to the front and asked him. Suwei replied, "I am not in charge of officials in this area. I don't know how many thieves there are, but the thieves are getting closer and closer to Beijing."

古文：帝曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：炀帝问： 为什么这么说呢？ 
English: Hao Di asked: Why did you say that?

古文：威曰： 他日贼据长白山，今近在汜水。
现代文：苏威说： 过去盗贼只占据长白山，如今已近在汜水。
English: Su Wei said: In the past, thieves only occupied Changbai Mountain, but now they are close to Surabaya.

古文：且往日租赋丁役，今皆何在！
现代文：况且往日的租贼丁役现在又在什么地方呢？
English: Moreover, where is the former tenant thief Ding Yi now?

古文：岂非其人皆化为盗乎！
现代文：这难道不是人们都变成盗贼了吗？
English: Hasn't this turned people into thieves?

古文：比见奏贼皆不以实，遂使失于支计，不时剪除。
现代文：近来看到上奏的贼情都不是实情，于是措施失当，对盗贼不能及时地加以剿灭。
English: Recently, we have seen that the rumours of theft are not true, so the measures are inappropriate and the thieves cannot be eliminated in a timely manner.

古文：又昔在雁门，许罢征辽，今复征发，贼何由息！ 
现代文：还有，以前在雁门时，已经许诺停止征伐辽东，现在又征发士兵，盗贼怎么能够平息？ 
English: Moreover, in the past at the time of the Wild Goose Gate, they had promised to stop the conquest of Liaodong, and now they are conscripting soldiers, how can the thieves be calmed down?

古文：帝不悦而罢。
现代文：炀帝听了不高兴，就作罢了。
English: Sejong was not happy and gave up.

古文：寻属五月五日，百僚多馈珍玩，威独献《尚书》。或谮之曰： 《尚书》有《五子之歌》，威意甚不逊。 
现代文：不久到了五月五日，百官中很多人都上贡珍玩之物，唯独苏威献上《尚书》，有人诋毁苏威说： 《尚书》中有《五子之歌》，苏威的含意很不恭敬。 
English: Soon, on May 5th, many of the hundreds of officials paid tribute to the rare toy, except for Su Wei, who presented the "Song of the Five Sons." Some people slandered Su Wei, saying: "The Song of the Five Sons" is in the "Song of the Five Sons." The meaning of Su Wei is very disrespectful.

古文：帝益怒。
现代文：炀帝更加生气。
English: As a result, Emperor Guangwu became increasingly angry.

古文：顷之，帝问威以伐高丽事，威欲帝知天下多盗，对曰： 今兹之役，愿不发兵，但赦群盗，自可得数十万。遣之东征，彼喜于免罪，争务立功，高丽可灭。 
现代文：过不久，炀帝向苏威询问征伐高丽的事情，苏威想让炀帝了解天下有很多盗贼的情况，就回答说： 现在征辽之事，但愿不要发兵，只要赦免群盗，自然可以得到几十万人，派他们去东征，这些人对被赦免罪过感到高兴，会竞相立功，高丽就可以被平灭。 
English: Soon after, Emperor Zhou asked Su Wei about the conquest of Korea. Su Wei wanted to let Emperor Zhou know that there were many thieves in the world, so he replied: Now it's about the conquest of Liao, I hope you don't send troops. As long as you pardon a group of thieves, you can naturally get hundreds of thousands of people and send them to the East. These people are happy about being pardoned and will compete to do their best. Korea can be leveled.

古文：帝不怿。
现代文：炀帝不高兴，苏威就退了出来。
English: Gao Di was very unhappy after listening.

古文：威出，御史大夫裴蕴奏曰： 此大不逊！天下何处有许多贼！ 
现代文：御史大夫裴蕴奏道： 这太不恭敬了！天下哪里有许多盗贼？ 
English: "This is so disrespectful! How many thieves are there in the world?"

古文：帝曰： 老革多奸，以贼胁我！欲批其口，且复隐忍。 
现代文：炀帝说： 这老家伙极为奸佞，拿盗贼来吓唬我，我想打他嘴巴，暂且再忍耐一下。 
English: Emperor Zou said, "This old fellow is extremely treacherous. He is using thieves to scare me. I want to punch him in the mouth. Please be patient for a while."

古文：蕴知帝意，遣河南白衣张行本奏： 威昔在高阳典选，滥授人官；畏怯突厥，请还京师。 
现代文：裴蕴知道炀帝的心意，就让河南平民张行本上奏说： 苏威从前在高阳掌管挑选官员之事时，他滥授官职，畏惧突厥，要求返回京师。 
English: Knowing Emperor Xuan's intentions, Pei Yun had a Henan commoner make a written report: When Su Wei was in charge of selecting officials in Gaoyang, he abused his official duties, feared the Turks, and demanded to return to Beijing.

古文：帝令按验，狱成，下诏数威罪状，除名为民。
现代文：炀帝命人进行审查验证，构成罪状，于是炀帝下诏历数苏威的罪状，将他除名为民。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered a person to conduct a review and verification, which constituted a crime, so Emperor Xuan decreed Su Wei's crime and removed him as a citizen.

古文：后月馀，复有奏威与突厥阴图不轨者，事下裴蕴推之，蕴处威死。
现代文：一个多月后，又有人奏报苏威与突厥暗中勾结图谋不轨，此事交由裴蕴追究法办，裴蕴判苏威死刑。
English: More than a month later, another person reported that Su Wei and Turk secretly colluded and plotted. The matter was referred to Pei Yun to investigate and prosecute. Pei Yun sentenced Su Wei to death.

古文：威无以自明，但摧谢而已。
现代文：苏威无法为自己申辩，只是非常伤感地谢罪而已。
English: Unable to defend himself, Su Wei only apologized in a very sad way.

古文：帝悯而释之，曰： 未忍即杀。 
现代文：炀帝怜悯苏威就将他释放，说： 不忍心就杀他。 
English: Emperor Qian took pity on Su Wei and released him, saying, "If you can't bear it, kill him."

古文：遂并其子孙三世皆除名。
现代文：把苏威的子孙三代都除名为民。
English: The three generations of Su Wei's descendants were removed from the name of the people.

古文：秋，七月，壬戌，济景公樊子盖卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬戌，济景公樊子盖去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, Jijing Gong Zizigai passed away.

古文：江都新作龙舟成，送东都；守文述劝幸江都，帝从之。右候卫大将军酒泉赵才谏曰： 今百姓疲劳，府藏空竭，盗贼蜂起，禁令不行，愿陛下还京师，安兆庶。 
现代文：江都新制造的龙舟完工，送到东都。宇文述劝炀帝巡游江都，右候卫大将军酒泉人赵才劝阻说： 如今百姓疲惫劳苦，国库空竭，盗贼蜂起，禁令不行，希望陛下返回京师，安抚天下百姓。 
English: The newly-made dragon boats in Jiangdu were completed and sent to Dongdu. Wu Wenshu advised Emperor Qian to make a tour of Jiangdu, and Zhao Cai, the Jiuquan man, dissuaded him by saying, "Nowadays, the people are tired and weary, the treasury is exhausted, the thieves are rising up, and the ban is no good. I hope that His Majesty will return to Beijing to appease the people of the world."

古文：帝大怒，以才属吏，旬日，意解，乃出之。
现代文：炀帝勃然大怒，把赵才交司吏处治，过了十天，炀帝才平息了怒气，将赵才放出。
English: Emperor Qian flew into a rage and handed Zhao Cai over to the officials for punishment. After ten days, Emperor Qian calmed his anger and released Zhao Cai.

古文：朝臣皆不欲行，帝意甚坚，无敢谏者。
现代文：朝中的大臣都不想让炀帝出行，但炀帝去江都之意非常坚决，没有敢于进谏的人。
English: The ministers of the dynasty did not want Emperor Gong to travel, but Emperor Gong was very determined to go to the Yangtze River, and no one dared to follow him.

古文：建节尉任宗上书极谏，即日于朝堂杖杀之。
现代文：建节尉任宗上书极力劝谏，当天就在朝堂上被用杖打死。
English: Jian Jie was beaten to death with a cane in the morning hall on the same day.

古文：甲子，帝幸江都，命越王侗与光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、检校民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫天逸、右司郎卢楚等总留后事。
现代文：甲子，炀帝驾临江都，他命令越王杨侗与光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、检校民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸、右司郎卢楚等人共同负责留守东都之事。
English: When Emperor Yao drove to the capital of Jiangxi Province, he ordered the king of Yue, Yang Jie, to be jointly responsible for the affairs of staying in the eastern capital, together with the doctor of Guanglu, Duan Da, the prefectural governor, Yuan Wentu, the inspector of schools, Shang Shu Weijin, the general of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, Wang Fu Mu Yat, and the right-hand man, Lu Chu.

古文：津，孝宽之子也。
现代文：韦津是韦孝宽的儿子。
English: Wei Tian is the son of Wei Xiaokang.

古文：帝以诗留别宫人曰： 我梦江都好，征辽亦偶然。 
现代文：炀帝以诗向宫人留别： 我梦江都好，征辽亦偶然。 
English: Emperor Xuan wrote a poem to say goodbye to his courtiers: I like both the Yangtze River and the Liao River.

古文：奉信郎崔民象以盗贼充斥，于建国门上表谏；帝大怒，先解其颐，然后斩之。
现代文：奉信郎崔民象以盗贼充斥全国为由，在建国门上表劝阻江都之行，炀帝勃然大怒，先摘掉崔民象的下巴，然后将他处死。
English: On the grounds that thieves had infested the whole country, Fengxin's brother, Cui Minxiang, went to the front gate of the founding of the country to dissuade him from going to Jiangdu. Emperor Qian flew into a rage, first removing Cui Minxiang's chin, and then executing him.

古文：戊辰，冯翊孙华举兵为盗。
现代文：戊辰，冯翊郡人孙华举兵为盗。
English: Sun Hua, a resident of Wucheng, Fengye County, raised an army to commit the theft.

古文：虞世基以盗贼充斥，请发兵屯洛口仓，帝曰： 卿是书生，定犹恇怯。 
现代文：虞世基以盗贼充斥请求炀帝派兵屯驻在洛口仓，炀帝说： 你是书生，必定还是恐惧畏缩。 
English: Using the example of being full of thieves, Yu Shiji asked Emperor Xuan to station troops in Lokuchang. Emperor Xuan said, "You are a scholar, you must still be afraid.

古文：戊辰，车驾至巩。敕有司移箕山、公路二府于仓内，仍令筑城以备不虞。
现代文：戊辰，炀帝到达巩县，命令有关部门将箕山、公路二府移到洛口仓内，并命令修筑城池以备不测。
English: When Emperor Wu arrived in Gong County, he ordered the relevant departments to move Lushan and the two prefectures of the highway to Lokuchang, and ordered the construction of the castle pond to prepare for any eventuality.

古文：至汜水，奉信郎王爱仁复上表请还西京，帝斩之而行。
现代文：炀帝到达汜水，奉信郎王爱仁后又上表请求炀帝反回西京，炀帝杀死王爱仁又继续南行。
English: Emperor Zhao arrived at Surabaya. After receiving the letter from Wang Airen, he sent a request to Emperor Zhao to return to Xijing. Emperor Zhao killed Wang Airen and continued to travel south.

古文：至梁郡，郡人邀车驾上书曰： 陛下若遂幸江都，天下非陛下之有！ 
现代文：他到达梁郡，梁郡有人半路拦阻车驾上书说： 陛下若是一定要巡游江都，天下就将不是陛下的了！ 
English: He arrived in Liang County. Someone in Liang County stopped the car halfway and wrote a letter saying: "If Your Majesty is determined to tour Jiangdu, the world will no longer belong to Your Majesty!"

古文：又斩之。
现代文：炀帝又将上书人杀崐死。
English: Emperor Qian then had the sender of the letter killed.

古文：是时李子通据海陵，左才相掠淮北，杜伏威屯六合，众各数万；帝遣光禄大夫陈稜将宿卫精兵八千讨之，往往克捷。
现代文：这时，李子通占据海陵，左才相劫掠淮北，杜伏威屯兵于六合，他们各自拥有部众几万人。炀帝派光禄大夫陈棱率领宿卫精兵八千人去讨伐各路盗贼，连连取胜。
English: At this time, Li Zi Tong occupied Hailing, Zuo Cai Xiang plundered Huaibei, and Du Fu Wei sent troops to Liuhe, each of whom had tens of thousands of troops. Emperor Qian sent Guanglu Doctor Chen Ren to lead eight thousand guardsmen to fight against thieves on all roads, and won consecutive victories.

古文：八月，乙巳，贼帅赵万海众数十万，自恒山寇高阳。
现代文：八月，乙巳，贼帅赵万海率领部众几十万人，从恒山进犯高阳。
English: In August, at the stroke of midnight, the thief-commander Zhao Wanhai led hundreds of thousands of people to invade Gaoyang from Hengshan.

古文：冬，十月，己丑，许恭公宇文述卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，己丑，许恭公宇文述去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Ji Jiu, Xu Gong Gong Yu Wenshu passed away.

古文：初，述子化及、智及皆无赖。化及事帝于东宫，帝宠昵之，及即位，以为太仆少卿。
现代文：当初，宇文述的儿子宇文化及、宇文智及都是无赖之徒，宇文化及曾在东宫侍奉炀帝，炀帝对他宠信亲昵。炀帝即位，任命宇文化及为太仆少卿。
English: At first, Uwensu's sons, U Bunka and U Wensu, were ruffians. U Bunka and U Wensu had served Emperor Shun in the East Palace, and Emperor Shun was fond of him. When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he appointed U Bunka and U Wensu as his servants.

古文：帝幸榆林，化及、智及冒禁与突厥交市，帝怒，将斩之，已解衣辫发，既而释之，赐述为奴。
现代文：炀帝巡视榆林时，宇文化及和宇文智及违犯禁令与突厥人做买卖，炀帝发怒，要杀掉他们，已经把他们的衣服剥下来头发披散开，随即，炀帝又释放了他们，将他们赐给宇文述为奴仆。
English: When Emperor Gong inspected Yulin, Yu Wenzhi and Yu Wenzhi and others violated the ban and traded with the Turks. Emperor Gong was angry and wanted to kill them. He had already stripped off their clothes and spread their hair. Immediately, Emperor Gong released them and gave them to Yu Wenzhi as slaves.

古文：智及弟士及，以尚主之故，常轻智及，唯化及与之亲昵。
现代文：宇文智及的弟弟宇文士及，因为娶了公主的缘故，常常看不起宇文智及，只有宇文化及和他亲近。
English: Uwenshi and his younger brother, Uwenshi and, because he married a princess, often looked down on Uwenshi and, only Uwenshi and was close to him.

古文：述卒，帝复以化及为右屯卫将军，智及为将作少监。
现代文：宇文述去世，炀帝又任命宇文化及为右屯卫将军，宇文智及为将作少监。
English: After the death of Wu Wenshu, Emperor Qian appointed Wu Qianlin as the General of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, and Wu Wenzhi as the Junior Inspector.

古文：李密之亡也，往依郝孝德，孝德不礼之；又入王薄，薄亦不之奇也。
现代文：李密逃亡，去投奔郝孝德。郝孝德对李密不以礼相待，李密又去投奔王薄，王薄也不把他作为特殊人物看待。
English: Li Mi fled and went to work for Gao Xiaode. Gao Xiaode did not treat Li Mi with courtesy, Li Mi went to work for Wang Bo, and Wang Bo did not regard him as a special person.

古文：密困乏，至削树皮而食之，匿于淮阳村舍，变姓名，聚徒教授。
现代文：李密困顿匮乏，到了剥树皮吃的地步。他隐藏在淮阳郡的村舍里，改换姓名，聚徒教书。
English: Li Mi was so destitute that he had to peel tree bark to eat. He hid in a village house in Huaiyang County, changed his name, and gathered disciples to teach.

古文：郡县疑而捕之，密亡去，抵其妹夫雍丘令丘君明。
现代文：郡县的官员怀疑他并去抓捕他，李密逃走，到他妹夫雍丘县令丘君明家。
English: County officials suspected him and went to arrest him. Li Mi fled to the home of his brother-in-law, Lingqiu Junming, in Yongqiu County.

古文：君明不敢舍，转寄密于游侠王秀才家，秀才以女妻之。
现代文：丘君明不敢留李密住下，就把李密转送到游侠王秀才家藏匿。王秀才把自己的女儿嫁给李密。
English: Qiu Junming did not dare to keep Li Mi, so he sent Li Mi to the home of the ranger Wang Xiucai to hide. Wang Xiucai married his daughter to Li Mi.

古文：君明从侄怀义告其事，帝令怀义自赍敕书与梁郡通守杨汪相知收捕。
现代文：丘君明的堂侄丘怀义向官府告发了这件事，炀帝命令丘怀义亲自把敕书送交梁郡通守杨汪，让他去收捕李密等人。
English: Qiu Huaiyi, a cousin and nephew of Qiu Junming, reported the incident to the government. Emperor Qian ordered Qiu Huaiyi to personally deliver the document to Yang Wang, the general overseer of Liang County, so that he could arrest Li Mi and others.

古文：汪遣兵围秀才宅，适值密出外，由是获免，君明、秀才皆死。
现代文：杨汪派兵包围了王秀才家，正好李密外出，因而幸免，丘君明、王秀才都被官府处死。
English: Yang Wang sent soldiers to surround Wang Xiucai's house. Li Mi happened to be out, so he was spared. Qiu Junming and Wang Xiucai were both executed by the government.

古文：韦城翟让为东都法曹，坐事当斩。
现代文：韦城人翟让是东都的法曹，因为犯罪该当被处死。
English: Wei Cheng people are the legal experts of Dongdu, because the crime should be put to death.

古文：狱吏黄君汉奇其骁勇，夜中潜谓让曰： 翟法司，天时人事，抑亦可知，岂能守死狱中乎！ 
现代文：狱吏黄君汉认为翟让骁勇不寻常，于是在夜里悄悄对翟让说： 翟法司，天时人事，也许是可以预料的，哪能在监狱里等死呢？ 
English: Huang Junhan, the warden, thought it was unusual for him to be so brave, so he quietly said to him in the middle of the night: "Your Honour, things happen all the time, maybe it's to be expected. How can you die in prison?

古文：让惊喜叩头曰： 让，圈牢之豕，死生唯黄曹主所命！ 
现代文：翟让又惊又喜，说： 我翟让，是关在圈里的猪，生死只能听从黄曹主的吩咐了。 
English: Surprised and delighted, Xuan Zang said, "I, Xuan Zang, am a pig locked in a pen. I can only obey the command of the Yellow God in life and death."

古文：君汉即破械出之。让再拜曰： 让蒙再生之恩则幸矣，奈黄曹主何！ 
现代文：黄君汉当即给翟让打开枷锁，翟让再三拜谢说： 我蒙受您的再生之恩得以幸免，但黄曹主您怎么办呢？ 
English: Huang Junhan immediately opened the shackles for Yu Zhen. Yu Zhen repeatedly said, "I was spared by the grace of your rebirth, but Lord Huang, what are you going to do?"

古文：因泣下。
现代文：于是流下泪来。
English: And cry.

古文：君汉怒曰： 本以公为大丈夫，可救生民之命，故不顾其死以奉脱，奈何反效儿女子涕泣相谢乎！
现代文：黄君汉发怒道： 我本以为你是个大丈夫，可以拯救黎民百姓，所以才冒死来解救你，你怎么却象儿女子弟一样以涕泪来表示感谢呢？
English: Huang Junhan said angrily, "I thought you were a hero who could save the people of Li, that's why I risked my life to save you. How can you show your gratitude with tears like a little girl?"

古文：君但努力自免，勿忧吾也！ 
现代文：你就努力设法逃脱吧，不要管我了！ 
English: Just try to get away, leave me alone!

古文：让遂亡命于瓦岗为群盗，同郡单雄信，骁健，善用马槊，聚少年往从之。
现代文：于是翟让逃亡到瓦岗为盗。与他同郡的单雄信，骁勇矫健，擅长骑马使矛，他招集年轻人去投奔翟让。
English: As a result, Xuan Zhan fled to Wagang to commit theft. Together with his county colleague, Shan Xiongxin, Xuan Zhan was brave and agile, and was good at riding horses and using spears. He recruited young people to join Xuan Zhan.

古文：离狐徐世勣家于卫南，年十七，有勇略，说让曰： 东郡于公与勣皆为乡里，人多相识，不宜侵掠。
现代文：离狐人徐世家在卫南，十七岁，有勇有谋，他劝说翟让： 东郡对于您和我都是乡里，那里的人大都认识，不宜去侵犯抢掠他们。
English: Seventeen-year-old Xu Shijia, a member of the Fox Family, was in the south of Wei Province. He was brave and resourceful. He persuaded Zou Zhan: Dong County is a rural area for you and me. Most people there know each other. It is not appropriate to invade and plunder them.

古文：荥阳、梁郡，汴水所经，剽行舟、掠商旅，足以自资。 
现代文：荥阳、梁郡，是汴水流经的地方，我们抢劫行船，掠夺商人旅客，就足以自给。 
English: Fenyang and Liang County are the places through which Surabaya water flows. We rob the ships and plunder the merchants and passengers, which is enough for self-sufficiency.

古文：让然之，引众入二郡界，掠公私船，资用丰给，附者益众，聚徒至万馀人。
现代文：翟让同意他的建议，于是就率众进入荥阳、梁郡的境界，抢掠公私船只，因此供给充裕，来归附的人越来越多，徒众达一万余人。
English: Xuan Zhan agreed to his suggestion, so he led the crowd into the border of Xiangyang and Liang County to loot public and private ships. As a result, there was plenty of supply, and more and more people came to join, reaching more than 10,000 people.

古文：时又有外黄王当仁、济阳王伯当、韦城周文举、雍丘李公逸等皆拥众为盗。
现代文：时又有外黄王当仁、济阳王伯当、韦城周文举、雍丘李公逸等皆拥众为盗。
English: At the same time, Wa Huang Wang Dangren, Jiyang Wang Baotang, Wei Cheng Zhou Wenju, Yongqiu Li Gongyi and others all stole from the public.

古文：李密自雍州亡命，往来诸帅间，说以取天下之策，始皆不信。
现代文：李密自雍州亡命，往来诸帅间，说以取天下之策，始皆不信。
English: From the time of Li Mi's death in Yongzhou, he went back and forth between all the great generals, saying that he would take the world's best strategy. At first, no one believed him.

古文：久之，稍以为然，相谓曰： 斯人公卿子弟，志气若是。
现代文：久之，稍以为然，相谓曰： 斯人公卿子弟，志气若是。
English: After a long time, I've come to the conclusion that it's better to be the son of a nobleman, if that's your ambition.

古文：今人人皆云杨氏将灭，李氏将兴。
现代文：今人人皆云杨氏将灭，李氏将兴。
English: Now everyone knows that the Yang clan will perish and the Li clan will prosper.

古文：吾闻王者不死。斯人再三获济，岂非其人乎！ 
现代文：翟让很高兴，渐渐信任李密，与他商议事情。
English: Yuanzhang was very happy, and gradually trusted Li Mi and discussed things with him.

古文：由是渐敬密。密察诸帅唯翟让最强，乃因王伯当以见让，为让画策，往说诸小盗，皆下之。让悦，稍亲近密，与之计事，密因说让曰： 刘、项皆起布衣为帝王。今主昏于上，民怨于下，锐兵尽于辽东，和亲绝于突厥，方乃巡游扬、越，委弃东都，此亦刘、项奋起之会也。以足下雄才大略，士马精锐，席卷二京，诛灭暴虐，隋氏不足亡也！ 让谢曰： 吾侪群盗，旦夕偷生草间，君之言者，非吾所及也。 
现代文：李密趁机劝翟让说： 刘邦、项羽都出身平民而作了帝王，如今上面是皇帝昏庸，下面是百姓怨愤，精锐兵力都在辽东丧失了，突厥也断绝了和亲的关系，炀帝还在巡游扬、越一带，丢弃了东都，现在也是刘邦、项羽之辈奋起的机会。以您的雄才大略，兵马的精良，可以席卷东西二京，诛灭暴君，隋氏完全可以灭掉！ 翟让向李密推辞说： 我辈身为群盗，旦夕都在草丛之间偷生，你所说的，不是我辈所能想到的。 
English: Li Mi took the opportunity to persuade Zou Jian: Liu Bang and Xiang Yu were both born commoners and became emperors. Today, the emperor is dim and mediocre on the top, and the people are resentful on the bottom. The elite troops have been lost in Liaodong, and the Turks have also broken off the relationship of friendship. Emperor Zou is still cruising around Yang and Yue, and has abandoned Dongdu. Now is also an opportunity for Liu Bang and Xiang Yu to rise up. With your great talent and excellent soldiers and horses, you can sweep the two capitals, annihilate the tyrant, and completely eliminate the Sui clan! Zou J

古文：会有李玄英者，自东都逃来，经历诸贼，求访李密，云 斯人当代隋家 。
现代文：正好有个叫李玄英的人从东都逃来，经过了各部盗贼，以求访李密，并说： 此人当替代隋家坐天下。 
English: It just so happened that a man named Li Xuanying fled from Dongdu and passed through all the thieves to visit Li Mi, and said: This man should replace the Sui family to sit in the world.

古文：人问其故，玄英言： 比来民间谣歌有《桃李章》曰： 桃李子，皇后绕扬州，宛转花园里。
现代文：别人问他缘故，李玄英说： 近来民间有一叫《桃李章》的歌谣，歌谣唱道： 桃李子，皇后绕扬州，宛转花园里。
English: When others asked him the reason, Li Xuanying said: Recently, there is a folk song called "Peach and Plum Chapter." The song sings: "Peach and plum, the queen goes around Yangzhou, to the garden."

古文：勿浪语，谁道许！ 
现代文：勿浪语，谁道许！ 
English: Don't gossip, who gives a damn!

古文： 桃李子 ，谓逃亡者李氏之子也；皇与后，皆君也； 宛转花园里 ，谓天子在扬州无还日，将转于沟壑也； 莫浪语，谁道许 者，密也。 
现代文： 桃李子 ，是说逃亡的人是李氏之子；皇与后都是君主； 宛转花园里 指的是天子在扬州不会有回来的日子了，将会死无葬身之地； 莫浪语，谁道许 是密的意思。 
English: "Peach and plum" means that the fugitive is the son of the Li clan; the emperor and empress are monarchs; "turning to the garden" refers to the day when the heavenly son will not come back in Yangzhou, and will die without a place to bury him; in Moro language, "who dares" means secret.

古文：既与密遇，遂委身事之。
现代文：不久他遇到李密，于是就投靠李密。
English: Soon after, he met Li Mi, so he joined Li Mi.

古文：前宋城尉齐郡房彦藻，自负其才，恨不为时用，预于杨玄感之谋。变姓名亡命，遇密于梁、宋之间，遂与之俱游汉、沔，遍入诸贼，说其豪杰；还日，从者数百人，仍为游客，处于让营。
现代文：原宋城县尉齐郡人房玄藻，自恃自己的才学，恨自己不能为当政的人所赏识任用，他曾参与过杨玄感的谋乱，后来改名换姓逃亡，在梁郡、宋城之间遇见了李密，于是就和李密遍游汉、沔之地，遍访各部贼帅，游说其中的豪杰之士。从汉、沔之地返回来的时候，跟从他们的有几百人，他们仍作为游客，留在翟让的营寨内。
English: Originally from Songcheng County, the lieutenant of Qi County, Xuan Zhao, prided himself on his own talent and hated that he could not be appreciated and appointed by the people in power. He had participated in Yang Xuan Kan's conspiracy, later changed his name and fled. He met Li Mi between Liang County and Songcheng, so he and Li Mi traveled all over Han and Shao, visited all the ministries and lobbied the heroes among them. When they returned from Han and Shao, they were followed by several hundred people. They still stayed as tourists in the camp of Xuan Zhan.

古文：让见密为豪杰所归，欲从其计，犹豫未决。
现代文：翟让看见豪杰们都归附李密，想采纳李密的建议，但仍犹豫不决。
English: When he saw that the great heroes were all loyal to Li Mi, he wanted to adopt Li Mi's suggestion, but he still hesitated.

古文：有贾雄者，晓阴阳占候，为让军师，言无不用。
现代文：有个叫贾雄的人，通晓阴阳占卜，他是翟让的军师，翟让对他是言听计从。
English: There is a man named Jia Xiong, who is familiar with yin and yang divination. He is Yu Zhen's military instructor, and Yu Zhen listens to him.

古文：密深结于雄，使之托术数以说让；雄许诺，怀之未发。会让召雄，告以密所言，问其可否，对曰： 吉不可言。 
现代文：李密与贾雄结为深交。他让贾雄假借占卜之术去劝说翟让，贾雄答应了，想好了主意但还没说出来，正好翟让召见贾雄，把李密的建议告诉贾雄，问他是否可以采纳，贾雄回答： 吉不可言。 
English: Li Mi and Jia Xiong became close friends. He asked Jia Xiong to use divination to persuade Zhen Zhen, Jia Xiong agreed, thought of a good idea but did not say it. It just so happened that Zhen Zhen summoned Jia Xiong, told Jia Xiong about Li Mi's suggestion, and asked if he could accept it. Jia Xiong replied: "No way."

古文：又曰： 公自立恐未必成，若立斯人，事无不济。 
现代文：又说： 您自立为王恐怕未必能成功，要是拥立此人，事情就没有办不成的。 
English: He also said, "You may not be able to succeed as a king on your own, but if you support this person, things will not be impossible.

古文：让曰： 如卿言，蒲山公当自立，何来从我？ 
现代文：翟让说： 象你说的那样，蒲山公应当自立，为什么他又来投奔我呢？ 
English: Hujang said: As you said, Busan Gong should be self-reliant, why did he come to me?

古文：对曰： 事有相因。所以来者，将军姓翟，翟者，泽也，蒲非泽不生，故须将军也。 
现代文：贾雄回答： 有些事是有相互联系的，李密所以来投奔你，是因为将军您姓翟，翟是泽的意思。蒲草非泽则不生，所以崐他需要将军您。 
English: Jia Xiong replied: Some things are interrelated. That's why Li Mi came to you, because the general's surname is,  is the meaning of Ze. If the grass is not Ze, it will not grow, so he needs you to be the general.

古文：让然之，与密情好日笃。
现代文：翟让认为贾雄的话很对，他与李密的交情日益密切。
English: Hao Jang thought that Jia Xiong's words were right, and his friendship with Li Mi became increasingly close.

古文：密因说让曰： 今四海糜沸，不得耕耘，公士众虽多，食无仓禀，唯资野掠，常苦不给。若旷日持久，加以大敌临之，必涣然离散。未若先取荥阳，休兵馆谷，待士马肥充，然后与人争利。 
现代文：李密就劝翟让说： 如今国内沸腾，百姓不得耕耘，您兵马虽多，但吃粮没有仓储，只靠外出抢掠，常常苦于供给不足，若是旷日持久，加之大敌临头，部众必然会离散，不如先攻取荥阳，休兵取食仓储之粮，待兵强马壮，然后再与他人争夺利益。 
English: Li Mi advised Zhang Rongzhang: "Nowadays, the country is boiling, and the people are not allowed to farm. Although you have a lot of soldiers and horses, there is no storage for grain. You only rely on going out to loot, and often suffer from supply shortages. If it is protracted, and the great enemy is approaching, the subordinates will inevitably disperse. It is better to first capture Fenyang, leave the army to take the grain stored for food, wait for the army to be strong, and then compete with others for profits.

古文：让从之，于是破金堤关，攻荥阳诸县，多下之。
现代文：翟让听从了他的意见，率军攻破了金堤关，进而攻打荥阳郡各县，大多数县城都被攻破。
English: Shujang listened to his advice and led the army to break through the Golden Dike, and then attacked the counties of Shiyang County, and most of the county towns were broken.

古文：荥阳太守郇王庆，弘之子也，不能讨，帝徙张须陁为荥阳通守以讨之。
现代文：荥阳太守郇王杨庆是杨弘的儿子，不能率军讨伐翟让，炀帝调张须陀为荥阳通守去讨伐翟让。
English: King Yang Qing, the governor of Shenyang, was the son of Yang Hong. He was unable to lead the army to fight against Zhang Zhen, so Emperor Shen transferred Zhang Suda as the governor of Shenyang to fight against Zhang Zhen.

古文：庚戌，须陁引兵击让，让向数为须陁所败，闻其来，大惧，将避之。
现代文：庚戌，张须陀率兵进击翟让，翟让从前几次都被张须陀所击败，他听到张须陀来，大为恐惧，打算避开张须陀。
English: Gyeongbokgung, Zhang Suda led an army to attack Yeojang. Yeojang had been defeated by Zhang Suda several times before. When he heard Zhang Suda coming, he was very afraid and planned to avoid Zhang Suda.

古文：密曰： 须陁勇而无谋，兵又骤胜，既骄且狠，可一战擒也。
现代文：李密说： 张须陀有勇无谋，他的军队又屡次取胜，既骄傲又凶狠，可以一仗就把张须陀擒住。
English: Li Mi said: Zhang Suda is brave and reckless. His army has repeatedly won victories. He is both proud and ferocious. He can capture Zhang Suda in a single battle.

古文：公但列陈以待，密保为公破之。 
现代文：您只要摆好阵势等待官军，我保证为您打败官军。 
English: All you have to do is set up your position and wait for the government army. I promise to defeat the government army for you.

古文：让不得已，勒兵将战，密分兵千馀人伏于大海寺北林间。
现代文：翟让不得已，率兵准备交战，李密分出一千余士兵埋伏在大海寺北面的树林里。
English: As a last resort, Zhai conceded and led his troops to prepare for battle. Li Mi dispatched more than a thousand soldiers to lie in ambush in the woods to the north of Daihai Temple.

古文：须陁素轻让，方陈而前，让与战，不利，须陁乘之，逐北十馀里；密发伏掩之，须陁兵败。
现代文：张须陀素来轻视翟让，他将军队列成方阵前进。翟让与张须陀交战，战败，张须陀追击败兵十余里，李密发动伏兵掩杀官军，张须陀兵败。
English: Zhang Suda had always despised Xuan Zang, and he advanced his army in a square formation. Xuan Zang fought with Zhang Suda and was defeated, Zhang Suda chased the defeated soldiers for more than ten miles, Li Mi launched an ambush to cover up the official army, and Zhang Suda was defeated.

古文：密与让及徐世勣、王伯当合军围之，须陁溃围出；左右不能尽出，须陁跃马复入救之，来往数四，遂战死。
现代文：李密与翟让以及徐世、王伯当等合兵一处将张须陀包围。张须陀突破重围，但他的部将没能全冲出包围，张须陀又跃马冲入包围圈去救援，这样来回几次，张须陀战死。
English: Li Mi, together with Xuan Zhan, Xu Shiyi, Wang Bodang and other soldiers, surrounded Zhang Suta at one place. Zhang Suta broke through the encirclement, but his troops could not all break out of the encirclement, and Zhang Suta jumped into the encirclement to rescue them. After several rounds of this, Zhang Suta died in battle.

古文：所部兵昼夜号哭，数日不止，河南郡县为之丧气。
现代文：他所部士兵昼夜号哭，几天不止，黄河以南的郡县都为之沮丧。
English: The soldiers of his division cried day and night, and for more than a few days, the counties south of the Yellow River were depressed.

古文：鹰扬郎将河东贾务本为须陁之副，亦被伤，帅馀众五千馀人奔梁郡，务本寻卒。
现代文：鹰扬郎将河东人贾务本是张须陀的副将，也受了伤，他率领剩下的五千多人逃到梁郡，贾务本不久也去世了。
English: He led the remaining more than five thousand people to flee to Liang County. Jia Wuben, a person from the east of the river who was Zhang Suda's vice-general, was also injured. Jia Wuben also died soon after.

古文：诏以光禄大夫裴仁基为河南道讨捕大使，代领其众，徙镇虎牢。
现代文：炀帝诏命光禄大夫裴仁基为河南讨捕大使，替代张须陀统领他的部下，迁到虎牢镇守。
English: Emperor Gongzhao ordered the Guanglu doctor Pei Renji to be the ambassador of Henan to arrest, replace Zhang Suda to lead his subordinates, and move to the tiger prison.

古文：让乃令密建牙，别统所部，号薄山公营。
现代文：翟让于是命李密建立自己的营署，单独统帅自己的部众，号称蒲山公营。
English: He then ordered Li Mi to set up his own battalion, and to single-handedly command his subordinates, known as the Busan Public Battalion.

古文：密部分严整，凡号令士卒，虽盛夏，皆如背负霜雪。
现代文：李密管理部众纪律严明，凡是号令士卒，虽然是在盛夏，士卒们似背上负有霜雪般的寒意。
English: Li Mi's management team is highly disciplined, and they always follow orders. Although it is the height of summer, the officers seem to have a frosty chill on their backs.

古文：躬服俭素，所得金宝，悉颁赐麾下，由是人为之用。
现代文：李密衣着节俭朴素，获得的金宝，全都颁赐给了部下，因此人们都愿为他效力。
English: Li Mi dressed frugally and plainly, and all the gold and treasures he had won were given to his subordinates, so people were willing to work for him.

古文：麾下士卒多为让士卒所陵辱，以威约有素，不敢报也。
现代文：他部下的士卒很多人被翟让的部众欺辱，但因为李密管束严格，无人敢进行报复。
English: Many of his subordinates were bullied by their subordinates, but no one dared to retaliate because of Li Mi's strict control.

古文：让谓密曰： 今资粮粗足，意欲还向瓦岗，公若不往，唯公所适，让从此别矣。 
现代文：翟让对李密说： 如今军资粮食大致够用，我打算返回瓦岗，您若是不去，那就随你所便了，我从此就与你分手了。 
English: Hao Jang said to Li Mi, "Nowadays, the military funds and grain are more or less sufficient. I plan to return to Wa Gang. If you don't go, it's up to you. I'll break up with you from now on."

古文：让帅辎重东引，密亦西行至康城，说下数城，大获资储。
现代文：翟让带着辎重向东而去，李密也向西来到康城，劝降了几座城池，获得了大量的军资粮食。
English: Xuan Zhan went to the east with a heavy load, Li Mi also came to Kangcheng in the west, persuaded several cities to surrender, and obtained a large amount of military grain.

古文：让寻悔，复引兵从密。
现代文：不久，翟让就后悔了，他又率兵来跟随李密。
English: Soon, Xuan Zhan regretted it, and he led his troops to follow Li Mi.

古文：鄱阳贼帅操师乞自称元兴王，建元始兴，攻陷豫章郡，以其乡人林士弘为大将军。
现代文：鄱阳的贼帅操师乞自称元兴王，建年号始兴。他率兵攻陷了豫章郡，任命同乡林士弘为大将军。
English: The handsome thief from Shenyang called himself King Yuanxing. He led his army to invade Yuzhang County and appointed his countryman Lin Shihong as the general.

古文：诏治书侍御史刘子翊将兵讨之。
现代文：炀帝下诏命治书侍御史刘子翊率兵前去讨伐操师乞。
English: Emperor Qian issued an edict ordering Liu Ziqi, the attendant of Zhi Shi, to lead an army to go and fight and beg for a teacher.

古文：师乞中流矢死，士弘代统其众，与子翊战于彭蠡湖，子翊败死。
现代文：操师乞中流矢而死，林士弘替代他统帅部众。林士弘与刘子翊在彭蠡湖交战，刘子翊战败身亡。
English: Lin Shihong replaced him as commander-in-chief. Lin Shihong and Liu Zixuan fought in Penghu Lake, and Liu Zixuan was defeated and died.

古文：士弘兵大振，至十馀万人。
现代文：林士弘军威大振，兵力达到十余万人。
English: Lin Shih-hong's military power was greatly shaken, reaching more than one hundred thousand soldiers.

古文：十二月，壬辰，士弘自称皇帝，国号楚，建元太平；遂取九江、临川、南康、宜昌等郡，豪杰争杀隋守令，以郡县应之。
现代文：十二月，壬辰，林士弘自称皇帝，国号楚，建年号太平。于是林士弘又攻取九江、临川、南康、宜春等郡，各地豪杰竞相杀死隋朝的郡守县令，以整个郡县来响应林士弘。
English: In December, in Renchen, Lin Shihong called himself emperor, the country name Chu, and the founding year name Taiping. So Lin Shihong also captured counties such as Jiujiang, Linchuan, Nankang, and Yichun, and heroes from all over the country competed to kill the county governor of the Sui Dynasty, and responded to Lin Shihong with the entire county.

古文：其地北自九江，南及番禺，皆为所有。
现代文：北自九江、南到番禺的广大地域都为林士弘所据有。
English: The vast areas from Jiujiang in the north to Panyu in the south are owned by Lin Shihong.

古文：诏以右骁卫将军唐公李渊为太原留守，以虎贲郎将王威、虎牙郎将高君雅为之副，将兵讨甄翟儿，与翟儿遇于雀鼠谷。
现代文：炀帝下诏任命右骁卫将军唐公李渊为太原留守，任命虎贲郎将王威，虎牙郎将高君雅为李渊的副将，率兵讨伐甄翟儿。
English: Emperor Qian Zhao appointed the right guard general Tang Gong Li Yuan to stay behind in Taiyuan, and appointed the general Wang Wei and the general Gao Junya to be Li Yuan's vice generals, leading the troops to fight against Zhen Ye.

古文：渊众才数千，贼围渊数匝；李世民将精兵救之，拔渊于万众之中，会步兵至，合击，大破之。
现代文：在雀鼠谷与甄翟儿遭遇，李渊才有几千人，而贼军包围李渊有好几重。李世民率领精兵救援李渊，将李渊从万众之中救出来，正好李渊步兵赶到，两军合击，大破甄翟儿。
English: In the encounter with Zhen Yuer in the Sparrow Mouse Valley, Li Yuan only had a few thousand people, while the thief army surrounded Li Yuan several times. Li Shimin led the elite soldiers to rescue Li Yuan and rescued Li Yuan from the masses. Just as Li Yuan's infantry arrived, the two armies clashed and defeated Zhen Yuer.

古文：帝疏薄骨肉，蔡王智积每不自安，及病，不呼医，临终，谓所亲曰： 吾今日始知得保首领没于地矣！ 
现代文：炀帝对骨肉亲人都疏远、刻薄，蔡王杨智积常常感到不安，他患了病，不请医生治病，临终时对他的亲人说： 我今天才知道能够保全脑袋而死于地下！ 
English: Emperor Qian was distant and mean to his relatives. Cai Wang Yang Zhizhu was often uneasy. When he fell ill, he did not ask a doctor to treat him. On his deathbed, he said to his relatives: I only knew today that I could save my head and die underground!

古文：张金称、郝孝德、孙宣雅、高士达、杨公卿等寇掠河北，屠陷郡县；隋将帅败亡者相继，唯虎贲中郎将蒲城王辩、清河郡丞华阴杨善会数有功，善会前后与贼七百余战，未尝负败。
现代文：张金称、郝孝德、孙宣雅、高士达、杨公卿等抢掠河北，攻陷郡县，隋朝的将帅相继败亡，只有虎贲中郎将蒲城人王辩、清河郡丞华阴人杨善会几次立功。杨善会前后与贼人交战七百余次，没有战败过。
English: Zhang Jin said that Zou Xiaode, Sun Xuanya, Gao Shida, Yang Gongqing and others plundered Hebei and captured counties, and the generals of the Sui Dynasty were defeated one after another. Only the middle son of Tigress, Wang Dian from Putian, and Yang Shanhui from Huayin in Qinghe County, made several contributions. Yang Shanhui fought with thieves more than seven hundred times before and after, and was never defeated.

古文：帝遣太仆卿杨义臣讨张金称。金称营于平恩东北，义臣引兵直进抵临清之西，据永济渠为营，去金称营四十里，深沟高垒，不与战。
现代文：炀帝派遣太仆卿杨义臣讨伐张金称，张金称在平恩县东北方向扎营，杨义臣率兵直抵临清县的西面，依据永济渠扎营，距张金称的营地有四十里，深沟高垒，不与张金称交战。
English: Emperor Xuan dispatched Yang Yixin to fight against Zhang Jin, Zhang Jin said that he would camp in the northeast direction of Ping'an County, Yang Yixin led the troops directly to the west of Linqing County, camped according to Yongji Canal, forty miles away from Zhang Jin's camp, deep ditch high bastion, and did not fight with Zhang Jin.

古文：金称日引兵至义臣营西，义臣勒兵擐甲，约与之战，既而不出。
现代文：张金称每天率兵到杨义臣营地的西面讨战，杨义臣穿戴铠甲率领着士兵，与张金称约定交战，但又不出战。
English: Zhang Jin said that he led his soldiers to the west side of Yang Yichen's camp every day to fight. Yang Yichen, wearing armor, led the soldiers, and Zhang Jin said that they agreed to fight, but did not fight.

古文：日暮，金称还营，明旦，复来；如是月馀，义臣竟不出。
现代文：直至天色将晚，张金称只好率军返回营地，第二天一早再来，这样过了一个来月，杨义臣竟然没有出战。
English: Until it was too late, Zhang Jin said that he had no choice but to lead the army back to the camp and come back early the next morning. After a month, Yang Yichen did not go to war.

古文：金称以为怯，屡逼其营詈辱之。义臣乃谓金称曰： 汝明旦来，我当必战。 
现代文：张金称以为杨义臣怯战，几次逼近他的营地辱骂他，杨义臣对张金称说： 你明天早晨来，我一定与你交战。 
English: Zhang Jin said that he thought Yang Yichen was afraid of war, and several times he approached his camp and insulted him. Yang Yichen said to Zhang Jin: Come tomorrow morning, I will definitely fight with you.

古文：金称易之，不复设备。
现代文：张金称因此轻敌，不再提防。
English: Zhang Jin said that as a result, the enemy was taken lightly and he no longer had to be on guard.

古文：义臣简精骑二千，夜自馆陶济河，伺金称离营，即入击其累重。
现代文：杨义臣挑选精锐骑兵两千人，乘夜从馆陶渡河，趁张金称率兵离开营地，即进入张的营地袭击他的家属和辎重。
English: Yang Yichen selected two thousand elite cavalrymen, crossed the river from Guantao by night, and took advantage of Zhang Jinwei to leave the camp, that is, to enter Zhang's camp to attack his family members and baggage.

古文：金称闻之，引兵还，义臣从后击之，金称大败，与左右逃于清河之东。
现代文：张金称听到这个消息，率兵返回，杨义臣从后面袭击，张金称大败，仅与身边的人逃到清河郡东。
English: Zhang Jin said that he heard the news and returned with his soldiers. Yang Yichen attacked from behind. Zhang Jin said that he was defeated and fled to the east of Qinghe County with only those around him.

古文：月馀，杨善会讨擒之。吏立木于市，悬其头，张其手足，令仇家割食之；未死间，歌讴不辍。
现代文：一个多月后，杨善会讨伐并抓住了张金称，官吏在闹市中立一根木柱，将张金称的头悬吊起来，展开他的手足，让与他有仇的人割食其肉。张金称没死时，还不停地唱。
English: More than a month later, Yang Shanhui fought against and caught Zhang Jinsheng, and the officials hung Zhang Jinsheng's head from a wooden pillar in the middle of the city, spread out his limbs, and let his enemies eat his flesh. When Zhang Jinsheng was not dead, he kept singing.

古文：诏以善会为清河通守。
现代文：炀帝下诏任命杨善会为清河通守。
English: Emperor Qian issued an edict appointing Yang Shenghui as the governor of Qinghe.

古文：涿郡通守郭绚将兵万馀人讨高士达。
现代文：涿郡通守郭绚率领一万余人讨伐高士达。
English: Guo Hua, the governor of Tong County, led more than 10,000 people to fight against Gao Shida.

古文：士达自以才略不及窦建德，乃进建德为军司马，悉以兵授之。
现代文：高士达自认为才能谋略不如窦建德，于是就提拔窦建德为军司马，并把兵权交给了他。
English: Gao Shida thought that his ability to strategize was not as good as Dou Jiande's, so he promoted Dou Jiande to the military secretary and handed over the military power to him.

古文：建德请士达守辎重，自简精兵七千人拒绚，诈为与士达有隙而叛，遣人请降于绚，愿为前驱，击士达以自效。
现代文：窦建德请高士达看守辎重，自己挑选精兵七千人抗击郭绚。他假称与高士达有矛盾而背叛了他，派人向郭绚请求投降，表示愿作郭绚的前锋，进攻高士达来立功赎罪。
English: Dou Jiande asked Gao Shida to guard Zou Chong, and he selected seven thousand elite soldiers to fight against Guo Huan. He pretended to have a conflict with Gao Shida and betrayed him, sent a person to Guo Huan to request surrender, and expressed his willingness to be Guo Huan's striker and attack Gao Shida to make a contribution to atone for his sins.

古文：绚信之，引兵随建德至长河，不复设备。
现代文：郭绚相信了窦建德，率兵跟随窦建德到长河县，也不再防备他。
English: Guo Huan believed Dou Jiande and led his soldiers to follow Dou Jiande to Changhe County. They were no longer able to defend themselves against him.

古文：建德袭之，杀虏数千人，斩绚首，献士达，张金称馀众皆归建德。
现代文：窦建德突然袭击郭绚，杀获几千人，斩郭绚的首级献给高士达。张金称的余部也都归附了窦建德。
English: Dou Jiande suddenly attacked Guo Huan, killed several thousand people, and cut off Guo Huan's head and dedicated it to Gao Shida. Zhang Jin said that the rest of the head also belonged to Dou Jiande.

古文：杨义臣乘胜至平原，欲入高鸡泊讨之。
现代文：杨义臣乘胜进军到平原，打算进入高鸡泊讨伐窦建德。
English: Yang Yichen took advantage of the victory and marched into the plain, intending to enter Gaoji Po to fight Dou Jiande.

古文：建德谓士达曰： 历观隋将，善用兵者无如义臣。今灭张金称而来，其锋不可当。请引兵避之，使其欲战不得，坐费岁月，将士疲倦。然后乘间击之，乃可破也。
现代文：窦建德对高士达说： 我观察了不少隋将，善于用兵的莫过于杨义臣了，如今他灭掉了张金称乘胜而来，锐不可挡，请您率兵避开他，让他欲战不得，耗费时间，将士疲劳厌倦，然后我们再乘机袭击他，杨义臣才能被攻破，否则，恐怕您不是他的对手。 
English: Dou Jiande said to Gao Shida: I have observed many Sui generals. There is no one who is better at using soldiers than Yang Yichen. Now that he has eliminated Zhang Jin, he says that he has come to win and is unstoppable. Please lead your soldiers to avoid him, make him want to fight, consume time, and make his soldiers tired. Then we will take the opportunity to attack him. Yang Yichen can only be defeated. Otherwise, I am afraid you are not his opponent.

古文：不然，恐非公之敌。 士达不从，留建德守营，自帅精兵逆击义臣，战小胜，因纵酒高宴。
现代文：高士达不听，他留下窦建德守营，自己率领精兵迎击杨义臣，取得小胜后，就纵酒畅饮。
English: Gao Shida did not listen, he left Dou Jiande to defend the camp, and led his elite soldiers to fight against Yang Yichen. After winning a small victory, he drank a lot.

古文：建德闻之曰： 东海公未有破敌，遽自矜大，祸至不久矣！ 
现代文：窦建德听到后说： 东海公未能将敌打败就骄傲自大，灾祸不久就要到了。 
English: After hearing this, Dou Jiande said: Donghaigong became arrogant when he failed to defeat the enemy, and the calamity will come soon.

古文：后五日，义臣大破士达，于陈斩之，乘胜逐北，趣其营，营中守兵皆溃。
现代文：五天后，杨义臣大破高士达，在阵前将高士达杀死，乘胜追击，直逼他的营地。
English: Five days later, Yang Yichen defeated Gao Shida, killed Gao Shida before the battle, and pursued him to his camp.

古文：建德与百馀骑亡去，至饶阳，乘其无备，攻陷之，收兵，得三千馀人。
现代文：营中的守军都溃散奔逃，窦建德仅和百余骑兵逃走，到了饶阳县，乘饶阳县没有防备，攻陷饶阳，收集兵卒三千人。
English: The defenders in the battalion scattered and fled, and Dou Jiande fled with only a hundred cavalrymen. He went to Raoyang County, took Raoyang County unprepared, captured Raoyang, and gathered three thousand soldiers.

古文：义臣既杀士达，以为建德不足忧，引去。
现代文：杨义臣杀死了高士达，认为窦建德已不足为患，就率兵离去。
English: Yang Yichen killed Gao Shida and thought that Dou Jiande was no longer a threat, so he led his soldiers away.

古文：建德还平原，收士达散兵，收葬死者，为士达发丧，军复大振，自称将军。
现代文：窦建德返回平原，收集高士达所部的散兵，收集安葬死者，为高士达发丧，军威又重新大振。窦建德自称将军。
English: Dou Jiande returned to the plain, collected the scattered soldiers from Gao Shida's headquarters, collected the dead for burial, mourned for Gao Shida, and regained his military prestige. Dou Jiande called himself a general.

古文：先是，群盗得隋官及士族子弟，皆杀之，独建德善遇之。由是隋官稍以城降之，声势日盛，胜兵至十馀万人。
现代文：原先，群盗抓住隋官及士族子弟都杀掉，唯独窦建德很好地对待他们，因此隋官中有些人就举城投降他，窦建德声势日渐浩大，拥有精兵十余万。
English: Originally, the bandits caught the Sui officials and the sons and sons of the warrior class and killed them, but Dou Jiande treated them well. Therefore, some of the Sui officials surrendered to him. Dou Jiande's reputation is becoming more and more powerful, with more than 100,000 elite soldiers.

古文：内史侍郎虞世基以帝恶闻贼盗，诸将及郡县有告败求救者，世基皆抑损表状，不以实闻，但云： 鼠窃狗盗，郡县捕逐，行当殄尽，愿陛下勿以介怀。 
现代文：内史侍郎虞世基因为炀帝厌恶听到贼盗的情况，所以诸将及各地郡县告败求救的表奏，虞世基都把它们加以删改处理，不据实上报，只说： 鼠窃狗盗之徒，郡县官吏搜捕追逐，快要被彻底消灭了。希望陛下不要放在心上！ 
English: Yu Shiji, the keeper of the imperial archives, was disgusted by Emperor Xian's hearing about the situation of the thieves, so he had the generals and counties from all over the country announce their defeat and cry for help. Yu Shiji had them all edited and reworked, and instead of reporting the truth, he only said: "The rat-snatching dog thieves, the county officials searching for and chasing them, are about to be completely eliminated. I hope His Majesty doesn't take it to heart!"

古文：帝良以为然，或杖其使者，以为妄言，由是盗贼遍海内，陷没郡县，帝皆弗之知也。
现代文：炀帝很以为然，有时还用杖责打据实报告的使者，以为说的都是谎话。因此盗贼遍布海内，攻陷郡县，炀帝都不知道。
English: Emperor Xuan was very impressed, and sometimes used his cane to beat the messenger who had reported the truth, thinking that everything he said was a lie. Therefore, the thieves spread all over the sea and attacked counties, and Emperor Xuan did not even know about it.

古文：杨义臣破降河北贼数十万，列状上闻，帝叹曰： 我初不闻，贼顿如此，义臣降贼何多也！ 
现代文：杨义臣击败并收降河北的贼人几十万，他把情况写表上奏炀帝，炀帝看后感叹道： 我原来没听说盗贼到如此地步，杨义臣降服的贼怎么这样多？ 
English: Yang Yichen defeated and subdued hundreds of thousands of thieves in Hebei. He wrote the situation on a table and presented it to Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan looked at it and lamented: I had not heard of thieves to such an extent. How did Yang Yichen subjugate so many thieves?

古文：世基对曰： 小窃虽多，未足为虑。义臣克之，拥兵不少，久在阃外，此最非宜。 
现代文：虞世基回答： 小贼虽然多，但不足为虑，杨义臣击败小贼，却拥兵不少，将帅久在朝廷之外，这样是最不适宜的。 
English: Yu Shiji replied: Although there are many petty thieves, they are not enough to worry about. Yang Yichen defeated the petty thieves, but he has a lot of soldiers. He will be away from the imperial court for a long time. This is the most inappropriate.

古文：帝曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：炀帝说： 你说的是。 
English: Emperor Gao said: Just as you said.

古文：遽追义臣，放散其兵，贼由是复盛。
现代文：于是派人追回杨义臣，遣散他的士兵，盗贼因此又重新强盛起来。
English: So they sent someone to recapture Yang Yichen and disband his soldiers. As a result, the thieves became strong again.

古文：治书侍御史韦云起劾奏： 世基及御史大夫裴蕴职典枢要，维持内外，四方告变，不为奏闻。贼数实多，裁减言少，陛下既闻贼少，发兵不多，众寡悬殊，往皆不克，故使官军失利，贼党日滋。
现代文：治书侍御史韦云起参劾道： 虞世基和御史大夫裴蕴职掌机密枢要，掌管国家内外大事，现在四方告急，却不上报，盗贼的数量实际上已经很多了，他们将奏表修改删减报说贼少，陛下既然听说贼少，发兵也就不多，因此双方力量众寡悬殊，去征讨往往不能取胜，因此使官军失利，而贼党却日益增多。
English: Shi Weiyun, the chief secretary, began to protest: Yu Shiji and Dr. Pei Yun, who are in charge of confidential matters, in charge of domestic and foreign affairs, are now in a hurry, but they do not report it. The number of thieves has actually increased. They will amend the report form to say that there are fewer thieves. Since Your Majesty has heard that there are fewer thieves, there are not many soldiers sent. Therefore, the strength of both sides is very small. It is often impossible to win. Therefore, the envoys' army has failed, but the thieves' party is increasing.

古文：请付有司结正其罪。 
现代文：请将他们二人交付有关部门追究处理他们的罪过。 
English: Please hand the two of them over to the relevant departments to investigate and deal with their crimes.

古文：大理卿郑善果奏： 云起诋訾名臣，所言不实，非毁朝政，妄作威权。 
现代文：大理卿郑善果奏道： 韦云起诋毁诬蔑国家重臣，他所说的都不是实话，他诽谤诋毁朝政，妄自作威专权。 
English: Zheng Zengguo, the chief justice, said: Wei Yunjie slandered and slandered the chief minister of the country. What he said was not true. He slandered and slandered the government of the DPRK and arrogated to himself the power of dictatorship.

古文：由是左迁云起为大理司直。
现代文：因此炀帝将韦云起降为大理司直。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuan demoted Wei Yun to Dali Sizhi.

古文：帝至江都，江、淮郡官谒见者，专问礼饷丰薄，丰则超迁丞、守，薄则率从停解。
现代文：炀帝到了江都，凡江、淮各郡官员谒见的，炀帝专问进献礼品的多少崐。礼多则越级升迁郡丞、县守，礼少的则恣肆地黜免官职。
English: When Emperor Xizong arrived at the capital of Jiangsu Province, he asked the officials of the counties of Fanjiang and Huaihe how many gifts they had received. Those with more courtesy were promoted to county magistrate and county governor, while those with less courtesy were dismissed from their posts.

古文：江都郡丞王世充献铜镜屏风，迁通守；历阳郡丞赵元楷献异味，迁江都郡丞。
现代文：江都郡丞王世充进献铜镜屏风，升为通守；历阳郡丞赵元楷进献珍奇美味，升为江都郡丞。
English: Wang Shicheng, the governor of Jiangdu County, presented a bronze mirror screen and was promoted to the position of general; Zhao Yuankai, the governor of Liyang County, presented a rare delicacy and was promoted to the governor of Jiangdu County.

古文：由是郡县竞务刻剥，以充贡献。
现代文：因此郡县官吏竞相对百姓肆意盘剥，以充实进献之物。
English: As a result, county and prefectural officials compete with each other to exploit the people in order to enrich the offerings.

古文：民外为盗贼所掠，内为郡县所赋，生计无遗；加之饥馑无食，民始采树皮叶，或捣稾为末，或煮土而食之，诸物皆尽，乃自相食；而官食犹充牣，吏皆畏法，莫敢振救。
现代文：百姓外受盗贼的抢掠，内受郡县官吏课贼的逼迫，生计无着，加上饥馑无食，百姓开始采剥树皮、树叶充饥，有的人将稻草杆捣成碎末为食，有的煮土吃，各种能吃的东西都吃光了，就互相吃人。而官府仓库中的粮食还是充裕如初，官吏们畏惧刑法，不敢取粮救济饥民。
English: The people were robbed by thieves on the outside, and persecuted by county and county officials and thieves on the inside. They had no means of livelihood, and they were starving. The people began to strip bark and leaves to satisfy their hunger. Some people pounded straw into powder to eat, and some boiled soil to eat. When they ran out of everything they could eat, they ate each other. Meanwhile, the grain in the government warehouses was still as abundant as before. The officials were afraid of the criminal law and did not dare to take grain to help the hungry.

古文：王世充密为帝简阅江淮民间美女献之，由是益有宠。
现代文：王世充还秘密为炀帝挑选江淮民间的美女来进献，因此更加得到炀帝的宠信。
English: Wang Shichong also secretly selected Jianghuai folk beauties for Emperor Xizong to present, thus gaining even more favor from Emperor Xizong.

古文：河间贼帅格谦拥众十馀万，据豆子卤亢，自称燕王，帝命王世充将兵讨斩之。
现代文：河间郡贼帅格谦拥有部众十余万人，占据豆子殷，自称燕王。炀帝命王世充率兵讨伐格谦并将他杀死。
English: Ge Qian, the handsome thief of Kawama County, owned more than one hundred thousand people, occupied Beanzi Yin, and called himself the King of Swallows. The Emperor ordered Wang Shichong to lead soldiers to fight Ge Qian and kill him.

古文：谦将勃海高开道收其馀众，寇掠燕地，军势复振。
现代文：格谦的部将勃海人高开道收集余部，侵掠燕地，军势又振兴起来。
English: Ge Qian's troops led the Bohai people to open a high road to collect the rest, invade and plunder Yan's land, and the army was revitalized.

古文：初，帝谋伐高丽，器械资储，皆积于涿郡；涿郡人物殷阜，屯兵数万。
现代文：当初，炀帝策划征伐高丽，隋军的器械和军资贮备都积存在涿郡。涿郡人口、物产殷实丰富，屯驻有几万隋军。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gao planned to invade Korea, and the Sui army's equipment and military reserves were all accumulated in Gao County. The population and goods of Gao County were rich and abundant, and there were tens of thousands of Sui troops stationed there.

古文：又，临朔宫多珍宝，诸贼竞来侵掠；留守官虎贲郎将赵什住等不能拒，唯虎贲郎将云阳罗艺独出战，前后破贼甚众，威名日重，什住等阴忌之。
现代文：另外，临朔宫里有很多珍宝，各地的贼寇竟相来侵掠。留守官虎贲郎将赵什住等人无法抵御，只有虎贲郎将云阳人罗艺独自出战，前后击败的贼人很多，罗艺的威望日重，赵什住等人暗中嫉妒罗艺。
English: In addition, there are a lot of precious treasures in the Linshaku Palace, and thieves and robbers from all over the country have come to plunder them. The remaining officials, such as Tigranor, could not resist Zhao Shizhu, and others. Only Tigranor sent Luo Yi, a person from Yunyang, to fight alone. There are many thieves who have been defeated before and after. Luo Yi's prestige is increasing, and Zhao Shizhu and others are secretly jealous of Luo Yi.

古文：艺将作乱，先宣言以激其众曰： 吾辈讨贼数有功，城中仓库山积，制在留守之官，而莫肯散施以济贫乏，将何以劝将士！ 
现代文：罗艺将要造反，他先广泛宣传以激怒他的部众，他说： 我们讨贼几次立功，城中的仓库里粮食堆积如山，都掌握在留守官员手中，但是不肯散施一点以救济贫苦困乏的百姓，将来靠什么勉励将士！ 
English: Luo Yiyi was about to rebel. He first widely publicized the news to enrage his subordinates. He said, "We have rewarded the thieves several times. There is a mountain of grain piled up in the warehouse in the city. It is all in the hands of the officials who stayed behind. However, they are not willing to distribute a bit of relief to the poor and needy people. In the future, what will they rely on to encourage the soldiers?"

古文：众皆愤怨。
现代文：大家都极为愤怒怨恨。
English: Everyone is very angry and bitter.

古文：军还，郡丞出城候艺，艺因执之，陈兵而入。
现代文：罗艺率军回城，郡丞出城迎侯罗艺，罗艺将郡丞抓起来，排着队列入城。
English: Luo Yi led the army back to the city. The county magistrate went out of the city to meet Luo Yi. Luo Yi arrested the county magistrate and lined up to enter the city.

古文：什住等惧，皆来听命，乃发库物以赐战士，开仓廪以赈贫乏，境内咸悦；杀不同己者勃海太守唐祎等数人，威振燕地，柳城、怀远并归之。
现代文：赵什住等人恐惧了，都前来听命。
English: Zhao Shizhu and the others were terrified and came to obey.

古文：艺黜柳城太守杨林甫，改郡为营州，以襄平太守邓暠为总管，艺自称幽州总管。
现代文：于是罗艺分发仓库里的物资以赏赐战士，打开粮仓以赈济贫苦困顿的百姓。涿郡境内都服从罗艺，罗艺杀掉不同自己一起造反的勃海太守唐等数人，威振燕地，柳城、怀远都归附了罗艺。罗艺废黜柳城太守杨林甫，改郡为营州，任命襄平太守邓为总管，罗艺自称幽州总管。
English: As a result, Luo Yi distributed the materials in the warehouse to reward the soldiers, and opened the granary to help the poor and destitute people. The territory of Luo County all obeyed Luo Yi. Luo Yi killed several people such as Bo Hai Taishou Tang, who rebelled together with Luo Yi, and Wei Zhen Yan Di, Liucheng, and Huaiyuan were all attached to Luo Yi. Luo Yi deposed Liucheng Taishou Yang Linfu, changed the county to Yingzhou, and appointed Xiangping Taishou Deng as the general manager. Luo Yi claimed to be the general manager of Yuzhou.

古文：突厥数寇北连。
现代文：突厥人几次侵犯隋帝国的北部边境。
English: The Turks invaded the northern border of the Sui Empire several times.

古文：诏晋阳留守李渊帅太原道兵与马邑太守王仁恭击之。
现代文：炀帝下诏命晋阳留守李渊率领太原道军队与马邑太守王仁恭抗击突厥。
English: Emperor Yao decreed that Li Yuan, who remained in Jinyang, should lead the Taiyuan troops and Wang Rengong, the governor of Ma'iyu, to fight against the Turks.

古文：时突厥方强，两军众不满五千，仁恭患之。
现代文：这时突厥正处于强盛时期，太原道及马邑郡两处隋军不满五千人，王仁恭忧虑兵少。
English: At this time, the Turks were at the height of their power. The two Sui armies in Taiyuan Road and Mayi County were less than five thousand, and Wang Rengong was worried about the small number of soldiers.

古文：渊选善骑射者二千人，使之饮食舍止一如突厥，或与突厥遇，则伺便击之，前后屡捷，突厥颇惮之。
现代文：李渊挑选善于骑射的士卒二千人，让这些隋军士兵饮食起居完全同突厥人一样，隋军骑兵与突厥人相遇时，就伺机袭击突厥人，这样前后屡次获胜，突厥人颇怕李渊。
English: Li Yuan selected two thousand cavalrymen who were good at riding and shooting, and let these Sui soldiers eat and live exactly the same as the Turks. When the Sui cavalry met the Turks, they waited for an opportunity to attack the Turks. In this way, they repeatedly won. The Turks were quite afraid of Li Yuan.

古文：义宁元年丁丑，公元六一七年春，正月，右御卫将军陈稜讨杜伏威，伏威帅众拒之。
现代文：隋恭帝义宁元年春季，正月，右御卫将军陈棱讨伐杜伏威，杜伏威率部众抗击官军。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Sui Emperor Yining, Chen Ren, the right guard general, fought against Du Fuwei, and Du Fuwei led the troops to resist the official army.

古文：稜闭壁不战，伏威遗以妇人之服，谓之 陈姥 。
现代文：陈棱紧壁营垒，不出来交战，杜伏威送给他妇人的衣服，称他为 陈姥 。
English: Chen Ren tightly fortified the walls and did not come out to fight. Du Fuwei gave him a woman's dress and called him Chen Grandma.

古文：稜怒，出战，伏威奋出，大破之，稜仅以身免。
现代文：陈棱发怒，率军出战，杜伏威率军奋力攻击，大破官军，陈棱仅只身逃脱。
English: Chen Ren flew into a rage and led his army into battle. Du Fuwei led his army in a fierce attack and defeated the official army. Chen Ren only escaped by himself.

古文：伏威乘胜破高邮，引兵据历阳，自称总管，以辅公祏为长史，分遣诸将徇属县，所至辄下，江淮间小盗争附之。
现代文：杜伏威乘胜攻破了高邮，率兵占据了历阳，自称总管，任命辅公为长史，分派各崐位将领攻取江都郡所属各县，大军所到之处，城池都被攻破，江淮地区的小盗争相归附杜伏威。
English: Du Fuwei took advantage of the victory to break through Gaoyang, led the troops to occupy Liyang, claimed to be the general manager, appointed Fu Gong as the long-term leader, and assigned the three generals to attack the counties belonging to Jiangdu County. Wherever the large army went, the cities were broken, and the petty thieves in the Jianghuai region competed to belong to Du Fuwei.

古文：伏威常选取死之士五千人，谓之 上募 ，宠遇甚厚，有攻战，辄令上募先击之，战罢阅视，有伤在背者即杀之，以其退而被击故也。
现代文：杜伏威常常挑选敢死之士五千人，称之为 上募 ，对这支队伍极为宠信，待遇优厚。凡有战斗，就命令 上募 先进行攻击，战罢审查将士，凡背上有伤的就处死，认为他背部被击伤是后退的缘故。
English: When there is a battle, he orders the recruits to attack first; when there is a battle, he reviews the soldiers; when there is a wound in the back, he puts them to death, thinking that the wound in the back was caused by retreating.

古文：所获资财，皆以赏军。士有战死者，以妻、妾徇葬。
现代文：凡所缴获的军资财物，都用来赏赐军队，将士有战死的，杜伏威就用死者的妾殉葬。
English: All the captured military resources and property were used to reward the army, and some soldiers were killed in battle, and Du Wei used the dead man's concubine to bury him.

古文：故人自为战，所向无敌。
现代文：因此杜伏威的军队人自为战，所向无敌。
English: Therefore, the soldiers of Duvois fought for themselves and were invincible.

古文：丙辰，窦建德为坛于乐寿，自称长乐王，置百官，改元丁丑。
现代文：丙辰，窦建德在乐寿县设坛，自称长乐王，设置百官，改年号丁丑。
English: Bing Chen, Dou Jiande set up a altar in Leju County, claimed to be the king of Changle, set up a hundred officials, and changed the year to Ding Jiu.

古文：辛巳，鲁郡贼帅徐圆朗攻陷东平，分兵略地，自琅邪以西，北至东平，尽有之，胜兵二万馀人。
现代文：辛巳，鲁郡贼人徐圆朗攻陷东平，他分兵攻占土地，从琅邪以西，北到东平的地域都为徐圆朗所有，拥有精兵两万余人。
English: Soon after, the Lu County thief Xu Yuanlang invaded Dongping, and he divided his army to conquer the land. The area from the west of Yuya to the north of Dongping was all owned by Xu Yuanlang, with more than 20,000 elite soldiers.

古文：卢明月转掠河南，至于淮北，众号四十万，自称无上王；帝命江都通守王世充讨之。世充与战于南阳，大破之，斩明月，馀众皆散。
现代文：卢明月转掠河南，到达淮北，拥有的部众号称四十万，自称无上王。炀帝命令江都通守王世充率兵讨伐卢明月，王世充在南阳与卢明月交战，大破卢明月，斩了卢明月，其余的部众都溃散了。
English: Lu Mingyue raided Henan and arrived in Huaibei, claiming to have 400,000 followers and claiming to be the supreme king. Emperor Qian ordered Wang Shichong to lead the troops to fight Lu Mingyue. Wang Shichong fought with Lu Mingyue in Nanyang, defeated Lu Mingyue and cut off Lu Mingyue, and the remaining followers dispersed.

古文：二月，壬午，朔方鹰扬郎将梁师都杀郡丞唐世宗，据郡，自称大丞相，北连突厥。
现代文：二月，壬午，朔方鹰扬郎将梁师都杀死郡丞唐世宗，占据朔方郡，自称大丞相，向北勾结突厥。
English: In February, at noon, Sok Fang Ying Yang Lang killed the county magistrate Tang Shizong and occupied Sok Fang County. He claimed to be the grand chancellor and allied with the Turks to the north.

古文：马邑太守王仁恭，多受货赂，不能振施。
现代文：马邑太守王仁恭，收受了许多财物贿赂，但他却不对百姓赈济施舍。
English: Wang Rengong, the governor of Ma'e, received many bribes, but he did not give alms to the people.

古文：郡人刘武周，骁勇喜任侠，为鹰扬府校尉。
现代文：马邑郡人刘武周骁勇，喜好侠义之举，他是鹰扬府校尉。
English: Liu Wu Zhou Xinyong, a native of Ma'i County, is fond of chivalry. He is a lieutenant of Yingyang Prefecture.

古文：仁恭以其土豪，甚亲厚之，令帅亲兵屯阁下。
现代文：王仁恭因为刘武周是当地的土豪，对他非常亲近信任，令他率领亲兵驻防在太守官署。
English: Because Liu Wuzhou was a local local strongman, Wang Renkong trusted him very closely and ordered him to lead his soldiers to garrison the Imperial Guard Office.

古文：武周与仁恭侍儿私通，恐事泄，谋作乱，先宣言曰： 今百姓饥馑，僵尸满道，王府君闭仓不赈恤，岂为民父母之意乎！ 
现代文：刘武周与王仁恭的侍女私通，他恐怕事情泄露，就图谋作乱，先扬言说： 如今百姓饥馑，僵尸满道，而王府君关闭粮仓不肯赈济抚恤百姓，这难道是为民父母应作的吗？ 
English: Liu Wuzhou was having an affair with Wang Rengong's maid. Fearing that the affair would be exposed, he plotted to start a riot. First, he threatened: "Nowadays, the people are starving, the streets are full of zombies, and Wangfujun is shutting down grain silos and refusing to subsidize the people. Is this something that should be done for the people's parents?

古文：众皆愤怒。
现代文：大家都极为愤怒。
English: Everyone was very angry.

古文：武周称疾卧家，豪杰来候问，武周椎牛纵酒，因大言曰： 壮士岂能坐待沟壑！今仓粟烂积，谁能与我共取之？ 
现代文：刘武周称病躺在家里，当地豪杰都来问候，刘武周杀牛置酒大摆宴席，并夸口说： 壮士怎么能坐以待毙，如今仓里的粮食腐烂堆积，谁能和我一起去取粮？ 
English: Liu Wuzhou said that he was ill and lying at home. Local heroes came to greet him. Liu Wuzhou slaughtered cattle and set up a grand banquet, and boasted: "How can a strong man sit still, now the grain in the warehouse is rotting and piling up. Who can go with me to get grain?

古文：豪杰皆许诺。
现代文：在场的豪杰都许诺共往。
English: The heroes present all promised to go together.

古文：己丑，仁恭坐听事，武周上谒，其党张万岁等随入，升阶，斩仁恭，持其首出徇，郡中无敢动者。
现代文：己丑，王仁恭正坐在厅堂处理政事，刘武周上堂谒见，刘的党羽张万岁等人随刘武周入厅堂，登上台阶杀死王仁恭，持王仁恭的首级出来示众。郡内无人敢动。
English: Wang Rengong was sitting in the hall dealing with political affairs, Liu Wuzhou came to the hall for an audience, Liu's followers Zhang Wanling and others followed Liu Wuzhou into the hall, climbed the steps to kill Wang Rengong, and held Wang Rengong's head to demonstrate to the public. No one in the county dared to move.

古文：于是开仓以赈饥民，驰檄境内属城，皆下之，收兵得万馀人。
现代文：于是刘武周开粮仓赈济饥民，在马邑郡所属各城驰马发布檄文，各城都降附了刘武周，共收得兵马一万余人。
English: As a result, Liu Wuzhou opened a granary to feed the hungry, and issued an imperial edict on horseback in each city belonging to Ma'i County. Each city surrendered to Liu Wuzhou, and a total of more than 10,000 soldiers and horses were collected.

古文：武周自称太守，遣使附于突厥。
现代文：刘武周自称太守，派遣使者向突厥表示归附。
English: Liu Wuzhou claimed to be the emperor and sent emissaries to the Turks.

古文：李密说翟让曰： 今东都空虚，兵不素练；越王冲幼，留守诸官政令不壹，士民离心。
现代文：李密劝说翟让： 现在东都空虚，军队平时又都没有训练，越王杨侗崐年幼，留守的诸位官员政令不一，士民离心。
English: Li Mi persuaded Yu to give up: Dongdu is now empty, the army has not been trained in peacetime, Yue Wang Yangjun is young, the officials left behind have different government orders, and the scholars and the people are distracted.

古文：段达、元文都，暗而无谋。以仆料之，彼非将军之敌。
现代文：段达、元文都愚昧而无谋略，以我来看，他们不是将军的对手。
English: Both Danda and Yuanwen are stupid and have no strategy. From my point of view, they are no match for the general.

古文：若将军能用仆计，天下可指麾而定也。 
现代文：要是将军能用我的计策，天下可以挥手而定。 
English: If the general can use my strategy, the world can wave its hand.

古文：乃遣其党裴叔方觇东都虚实，留守官司觉之，始为守御之备，且驰表告江都。
现代文：于是派遣他的党羽裴叔方去侦探东都的虚实，留守东都的官员觉察到了这一情况，开始作防卫的准备，并且驰马送奏表去江都报告炀帝。
English: So he sent his henchman Pei Shifang to investigate the truth and falsehood of Dongdu. The officials left behind in Dongdu noticed this situation, began to prepare for defense, and galloped to the Yangtze River to report to Emperor Xizong.

古文：密谓让曰： 事势如此，不可不发。
现代文：李密对翟让说： 事情已经到了这个地步，我军不能不行动了。
English: Li Mi said to Yu Zhan, "Things have reached this stage, our army cannot but act.

古文：兵法曰： 先则制于己，后则制于人。 
现代文：兵法云： 先动手则争取主动，后动手则受人挟制。 
English: The law of war: If you act first, try to take the initiative; if you act later, be held back by others.

古文：今百姓饥馑，洛口仓多积粟，去都百里有馀，将军若亲帅大众，轻行掩袭，彼远未能救，又先无豫备，取之如拾遗耳。
现代文：如今百姓饥馑，洛口仓有很多积存的粮食，离东都有百余里，将军要是亲率大军，轻装前进，掩杀袭击，他们因路远无法救援，事先又无防备，取洛口仓就象拾丢在地上的一件东西一样容易，等对方知道消息，我们已经得手了。
English: Nowadays, the people are starving. The Lokuchang has a lot of stored grain, and it is more than a hundred miles away from the east. If the general leads a large army and advances lightly, covering up the attack, they cannot be rescued because of the distance, and they are unprepared in advance. Taking the Lokuchang is as easy as picking up a thing thrown on the ground. As long as the other side knows the news, we have succeeded.

古文：比其闻知，吾已获之，发粟以赈穷乏，远近孰不归附！
现代文：发放粮食以赈济贫苦的百姓，远近之人谁不归附我们呢？
English: Who is there, near or far, who will not be drawn to us?

古文：百万之众，一朝可集，枕威养锐，以逸待劳。纵彼能来，吾有备矣。
现代文：百万之众，一个早晨就可以召集到。我们依恃所得的威风，养精畜锐，以逸待劳，纵然东都派军队来，我们也有防备了。
English: A million men can be mustered in a single morning, and with the prestige we have earned, with the cattle we have raised, with the labor we have performed, even if the East should send an army, we are prepared.

古文：然后檄召四方，引贤豪而资计策，选骁悍而授兵柄，除亡隋之社稷，布将军之政令，岂不盛哉！ 
现代文：然后我们就传布檄文号召四方响应，引用豪杰贤士，听取他们的谋略，挑选骁勇强悍之将才，授以兵权，推翻隋朝，颁布将军的政令，难道这不是一件盛举吗？ 
English: Then we disseminated the imperial edict to call for the four-party response, quoted the heroes and sages, listened to their strategies, selected the brave and strong generals, granted military power, overthrew the Sui Dynasty, and promulgated the general's decree. Isn't this a grand event?

古文：让曰： 此英雄之略，非仆所堪；惟君之命，尽力从事，请君先发，仆为后殿。 
现代文：翟让说： 这是英雄的韬略，不是我所能承担的，我只是听命于您，尽力办事，请您先行进发，我作殿后。 
English: Hujang said, "This is a hero's stratagem. It is not something I can undertake. I am only obeying your orders and doing my best. Please go ahead of me and I will follow.

古文：庚寅，密、让将精兵七千人出阳城北，逾方山，自罗口袭兴浴仓，破之；开仓恣民所取，老弱襁负，道路相属。
现代文：庚寅，李密、翟让率领精兵七千人出阳城北，越过方山，从罗口袭击并攻破了兴洛仓，打开粮仓听任百姓取粮，取粮的老弱妇孺，在路上接连不断。
English: Geng Yin, Li Mi, and Xuan Zhan led seven thousand elite soldiers to the north of Yangcheng, crossed Fangshan, attacked and breached Xingluo Cang from Luokou, opened the granary to let the people take grain, and the old and weak women and children who took grain were on the road one after another.

古文：朝散大夫时德睿以尉氏应密，前宿城令祖君彦自昌平往归之。
现代文：朝散大夫时德睿以尉氏县响应李密，前宿城令祖君彦从昌平去归附李密。
English: When Dr. Chosan Shidrei responded to Li Mi with Jo's County, Maeshuku Castle ordered Zu Junyan to go from Changping to join Li Mi.

古文：君彦，珽之子也，博学强记，文辞赡敏，著名海内，吏部侍郎薛道衡尝荐之于高祖，高祖曰： 是歌杀斛律明月人儿邪？
现代文：祖君彦是祖的儿子，他学问渊博记忆力强，文辞丰富，且思路敏捷，在国内很有名气。吏部侍郎薛道衡曾经把他推荐给文帝，文帝说： 是用歌谣杀了斛律明月那个人的儿子吗？
English: Zu Junyan is the son of Zu. He is well-known in China for his profound knowledge, strong memory, rich vocabulary, and quick thinking. Xue Daoheng, an attendant of the cadre department, once recommended him to Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen said: Did you use songs to kill the son of the man of the bright moon?

古文：朕不须此辈！ 
现代文：我不要这样的人！ 
English: I don't want people like that!

古文：炀帝即位，尤疾其名，依常调选东平书佐，检校宿城令。
现代文：炀帝即位，尤为厌恶祖君彦的名声，按常规将祖君彦调选为东平郡的书佐，检校宿城令。
English: When Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, he was particularly disgusted with Zu Junyan's reputation, and according to the usual procedure, he selected Zu Junyan as the secretary of Dongping County, and ordered him to check in at the school.

古文：君彦自负其才，常郁郁思乱。
现代文：祖君彦很自负能才，常常郁闷不快想着作乱。
English: Zukimihiko is very conceited, and often thinks about causing trouble in a depressed and unhappy way.

古文：密素闻其名，得之大喜，引为上客，军中书檄，悉以委之。
现代文：李密很早就知道他的名声，得到后大喜，将他视为上宾，军中的案卷文书、檄文等，全都委托他办理。
English: Li Mi had known his reputation for a long time and was overjoyed to have him as a guest of honor. He was entrusted with handling all of the army's files, documents, and documents.

古文：越王侗遣虎贲郎将刘长恭、光禄少卿房崱帅步骑二万五千讨密。
现代文：越王杨侗派遣虎贲郎将刘长恭，光禄少卿房率领步兵骑兵两万五千人去讨伐李密。
English: King of Yue, Yang Hui, dispatched Tigress Liu Chang Gong and Guanglu Shaoqing Fang to lead 25,000 infantry and cavalry to fight against Li Mi.

古文：时东都人皆以密为饥贼盗米，乌合易破，争来应募，国子三馆学士及贵胜亲戚皆来从军，器械修整，衣服鲜华，旌旗钲鼓甚盛。
现代文：当时东都人都以为李密是饥饿的抢米盗贼，只是一伙乌合之众，容易击破，都争相来应募，国子、太学、四门三馆的学士以及贵胄勋戚都来从军。官军器械完备整齐，衣服鲜明华美，旌旗钲鼓极为壮观。
English: At that time, the people of Dongdu thought that Li Mi was a hungry rice robber, just a group of rabble, easy to break, all competing to apply for recruitment. The sons of the country, the great scholars, the bachelors of the four gates and three halls, and the relatives of the noblemen all came to join the army. The official military equipment was complete and tidy, the clothes were bright and gorgeous, and the flag and drum were extremely spectacular.

古文：长恭等当其前，使河南讨捕使裴仁基等将所部兵自汜水西入以掩其后，约十一日会于仓城南，密、让具知其计。
现代文：刘长恭等人率兵在前，让河南讨捕大使裴仁基军率所部自汜水进入兴洛仑以掩杀李密军后部，约好十一日在兴洛仓城南面会合。李密、翟让完全了解他们的意图。
English: Liu Changgong and others led the troops in front, let the Henan Anti-Arrest Ambassador Pei Renji's army and the headquarters of the army enter Xinglolun from Xingshui to cover the rear of Li Mi's army, and met in the south of Xingluo Cang on the 11th. Li Mi and Xuan Zhan fully understood their intentions.

古文：东都兵先至，士卒未朝食，长恭等驱之渡洛水，陈于石子河西，南北十馀里。
现代文：东都的官军先到，士兵们还没吃早饭，刘长恭等人就驱赶他们渡过洛水，在石子河西列阵，阵南北长十余里。
English: The official army of Dongdu arrived first, and the soldiers had not yet eaten breakfast, so Liu Changgong and others drove them across Luoshui and lined up in the west of Shizihe, the line was more than ten miles long from north to south.

古文：密、让选骁雄，分为十队，令四队伏横岭下以待仁基，以六队陈于石子河东。
现代文：李密、翟让挑选骁勇强壮之士分作十队，令其中的四队埋伏在横岭下等待裴仁基，其余的六队在石子河以东列阵。
English: Li Mi and Zou had ten teams of brave and strong men selected, four of which lay in wait for Pei Renji at the foot of the ridge, while the remaining six lined up east of the Shizi River.

古文：长恭等见密兵少，轻之。
现代文：刘长恭等人见李密的军队人少，就很轻视他们。
English: When Liu Changgyong and others saw that Li Mi's army was small, they despised them.

古文：让先接战，不利，密帅麾下横冲之。
现代文：翟让先率兵与隋军交战，交战不利，李密即率所部横冲隋军，隋兵饥饿疲惫，于是被打得大败。
English: Zhai let the vanguard soldiers fight with the Sui army, the battle was unfavorable, Li Mi immediately led the headquarters to rampage the Sui army, the Sui soldiers were hungry and tired, so they were defeated.

古文：隋兵饥疲，遂大败，长恭等解衣潜窜得免，奔还东都，士卒死者什五六。
现代文：刘长恭等人脱掉衣服潜逃才得以幸免逃回东都，隋军士卒死伤十之五六。
English: Liu Changgyong and others had to take off their clothes and abscond before they were able to escape back to Dongdu. Sui sergeants were killed and injured at a rate of one in ten.

古文：越王侗释长恭等罪，慰抚之。
现代文：越王杨侗赦免了刘长恭等人的罪过，慰问安抚了他们。
English: Yang Hui, the King of Yue, pardoned the sins of Liu Changgong and others, and comforted them.

古文：密、让尽收其辎重器甲，威声大振。
现代文：李密、翟让将隋军的辎重、器械、铠甲全部缴获，因而威名大振。
English: Li Mi and Xuan Zang captured all the baggage, equipment and armor of the Sui army, and thus gained great prestige.

古文：让于是推密为王，上密号为魏公；庚子，设坛场，即位，称元年，大赦。
现代文：于是翟让推举李密为主，给李密上尊号为魏公。庚子，设坛场，李密即位，称元年，大赦天下。
English: As a result, Gongzheng let Li Mi be chosen as the main, and gave Li Mi the honorific title of Wei Gong. Geng Zi, set up the altar, Li Mi ascended to the throne, called the first year, and was pardoned by the world.

古文：其文书行下，称行军元帅府；其魏公府置三司、六卫，元帅府置长史以下官属。
现代文：李密向下颁发的公文书信等，署名为行军元帅府。魏公府设置三司、六卫，元帅府设置长史以下的官属。
English: Li Mi issued official documents such as letters, signed by the marching marshal's office. Wei Gongfu set up three divisions and six guards, and marshal's office set up officials below Long Shi.

古文：拜翟让为上柱国、司徒、东郡公，亦置长史以下官，减元帅府之半；以单雄信为左武候大将军，徐世勣为右武候大将军，各领所部；房彦藻为元帅左长史，东郡邴元真为右长史，杨德方为左司马，郑德韬为右司马，祖君彦为记室，其馀封拜各有差。
现代文：李密授翟让为上柱国、司徒、东郡公，东郡公府也设置长史以下的官属，数目比元帅府减少一半。任命单雄信为左武候大将军，徐世为右武候大将军，各自统领自己的部队。房彦藻被任命为元帅左长史，东郡人邴元真为右长史，杨德方为左司马，郑德韬为右司马，祖君彦为记室，其余的人封爵拜官各有等次。
English: Li Mijun assigned the posts of Shangzhu Guo, Szeto, and Dong Guo Gong, and Dong Guo Gongfu also set up officials below Long Shi, the number was reduced by half compared to the Marshal's Office. Appointed Shan Xiongxin as General Zuo Wu Hou, and Xu Shi as General Zuo Wu Hou, each of whom commanded their own troops. Fang Yixiao was appointed as Marshal Zuo Chang Shi, Dong Guo's person Nie Yuanzhen as Right Long Shi, Yang Defang as Left Sima, Zheng Dejun as Right Sima, Zu Junyan as Keeper, and the rest of the people were knighted and promoted to

古文：于是赵、魏以南，江、淮以北，群盗莫不响应，孟让、郝孝德、王德仁及济阴房献伯、上谷王君廓、长平李士才、淮阳魏六儿、李德谦、谯郡张迁、魏郡李文相、谯郡黑社、白社、济北张青特、上洛周北洮、胡驴贼等皆归密。
现代文：于是赵、魏以南，江、淮以北地区的群盗莫不响应。孟让、郝孝德、王德仁以及济阴人房献伯，上谷人王君廓，长平人李士才，淮阳人魏六儿、李德谦，谯郡人张迁，魏郡人李文相，谯郡的黑社、白社，济北人张青特，上洛人周比洮、胡驴贼等都归附李密。
English: As a result, the bandits in the areas south of Zhao and Wei and north of Jiang and Huai did not fail to respond. Meng Zhan, Zou Xiaode, Wang Deren, as well as the people of Jilin Province, the people of Shangguan Province, the people of Wang Junku, the people of Changping Province, the people of Huaiyang Province, Wei Liuer, Li Deqian, the people of Zhang County, the people of Wei County, Li Wensiang, the people of Heixa and Bai She, the people of Jibei Province, Zhang Qingte, the people of Shanglao Province, Zhou Biyao, the people of

古文：密悉拜官爵，使各邻其众，置百营簿以领之。
现代文：李密对他们全部封官授爵，让他们各自统领本部人马，设置百营簿来总管他们。
English: Li Mi knighted all of them, let them each command their own headquarters, and set up a centenary book to manage them.

古文：道路降者不绝如流，众至数十万。
现代文：前来归降的人络绎不绝如流水一般，李密的部众达几十万人。
English: The stream of people who came to surrender was incessant, and Li Mi's followers numbered hundreds of thousands.

古文：乃命其护军田茂广筑洛口城，方四十里而居之，密遣房彦藻将兵东略地，取安陆、汝南、淮安、济阳，河南郡县多陷于密。
现代文：于是李密命令护军田茂广修筑洛口城，方圆四十里，李密住在城内。他派房彦藻率兵向东攻占城池，取下安陆、汝南、淮安、济阳，河南的郡县大多为李密所攻取。
English: Li Mi then ordered his bodyguard, Tian Maoguang, to build the city of Luokou, 40 miles in circumference, where Li Mi lived. He sent Fang Yanmao and his soldiers to the east to capture the city, taking Anlu, Runan, Huai'an, and Jiyang. Most of the counties in Henan were captured by Li Mi.

古文：雁门郡丞河东陈孝意与虎贲郎将王智辩共讨刘武周，围其桑干镇。
现代文：雁门郡丞河东人陈孝意与虎贲郎将王智辩共同讨伐刘武周，包围他的桑干镇。
English: Chen Xiaoyi, the governor of Ganmen County and a man from the east of the river, and Tigress jointly sent Wang Zhiyan to fight Liu Wuzhou and encircle his Sangkang Town.

古文：壬寅，武周与突厥合兵击智辩，杀之；孝意奔还雁门。
现代文：壬寅，刘武周与突厥人合兵攻击并杀死了王智辩，陈孝意逃回雁门。
English: Ren Yin, Liu Wuzhou and the Turks attacked and killed Wang Zhifen. Chen Xiaoyi wanted to escape back to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：三月，丁卯，武周袭破楼烦郡，进取汾阳宫，获隋宫人，以赂突厥始毕可汗；始毕以马报之，兵势益振，又攻陷定襄。突厥立武周为定杨可汗，遗以狼头纛。
现代文：三月，丁卯，刘武周袭击攻取了楼烦郡，并夺取了汾阳宫，俘获宫中的宫人，用她们去贿赂突厥的始毕可汗。始毕可汗以马回报刘武周，刘武周兵势越发强盛，又攻陷定襄，突厥封刘武周为定杨可汗，赠给他狼头旗。
English: In March, Dingwu and Liu Wuzhou attacked and captured Loudui County, and captured the Shenyang Palace, captured the palace people in the palace, and used them to bribe the Turkic Shi Bi Khan. Shi Bi Khan returned Liu Wuzhou with a horse, Liu Wuzhou's army became more and more powerful, and attacked Dingxiang. The Turks named Liu Wuzhou as Dingyang Khan and presented him with the wolf's head flag.

古文：武周即皇帝位，立妻沮氏为皇后，改元天兴。
现代文：刘武周即皇帝位，立妻子沮氏为皇后，改年号为天兴。
English: Liu Wuzhou became emperor, his wife Shouji became empress, and the era name was changed to Tianxing.

古文：以卫士杨伏念为尚书左仆射，妹婿同县苑君璋为内史令。
现代文：任命卫士杨伏念为尚书左仆射，妹婿与武周同县的苑君璋为内史令。
English: He appointed Yang Fuxian, a guard, as Shang Shushi's right-hand man, and his brother-in-law and Wu Zhou's son-in-law from the same county, Yuan Junyao, as the secretary of internal history.

古文：武周引兵围雁门，陈孝意悉力拒守，乘间出击武周，屡破之；既而外无救援，遣间使诣江都，皆不报。
现代文：刘武周率兵包围雁门，陈孝意全力拒守，同时还乘机出击刘武周，几次击败刘军。不久因为外无救援之兵，陈孝意派密使去江都告急，但都没有回音。
English: Liu Wuzhou and his soldiers surrounded the Wild Goose Gate, and Chen Xiaoyi tried his best to defend it. At the same time, he also took the opportunity to attack Liu Wuzhou and defeated Liu's army several times. Soon, because there were no rescue soldiers outside, Chen Xiaoyi sent an envoy to the Yangtze River to express his urgency, but there was no response.

古文：孝意誓以必死。旦暮向诏敕库俯伏流涕，悲动左右。
现代文：陈孝意誓以必死的决心守卫雁门，每日早晚向存放皇帝诏敕的府库跪拜流泪，他的悲痛感动了身边的人。
English: Chen Xiao vowed to guard the Wild Goose Gate with a death-defying determination. Every morning and evening, he would kneel and shed tears before the treasury where the emperor's imperial rescript was kept. His grief moved those around him.

古文：围城百馀日，食尽，校尉张伦杀孝意以降。
现代文：刘武周围城百余日，城中粮尽，校尉张伦杀陈孝意向刘武周投降。
English: Liu Wu surrounded the city for more than a hundred days, the city ran out of food, Lieutenant Zhang Lun killed Chen Xiao and intended to surrender to Liu Wu Zhou.

古文：梁师都略定雕阴、弘化、延安等郡，遂即皇帝位，国号梁，改元永隆。
现代文：梁师都攻占了雕阴、弘化、延安等郡，就即皇帝位，国号梁，改年号为永隆。
English: Liang Shidu conquered Zheyin, Honghua, Yan'an and other counties, that is, the imperial throne, the country name Liang, and the year name was changed to Yonglong.

古文：始毕遗以狼头纛，号为大度毘伽可汗。
现代文：始毕可汗赠以狼头大旗，并赠以大度毗伽可汗的称号。
English: Shi Bi Khan presented him with a wolf-headed banner and the title of Dadu Viga Khan.

古文：师都乃引突厥居河南之地，攻破盐川郡。
现代文：梁师都勾结突厥人占据河南之地，攻破盐川郡。
English: Liang Shidu colluded with the Turks to occupy the land of Henan, and conquered Yanchuan County.

古文：左翊卫蒲城郭子和坐事徙榆林。
现代文：左翊卫蒲城人郭子和，犯罪被流放到榆林。
English: Zuoying guards Guo Zi, a citizen of Pu, who was exiled to Yulin for committing a crime.

古文：会郡中大饥，子和潜结敢死士十八人攻郡门，执郡丞王才，数以不恤百姓，斩之，开仓赈施。
现代文：正逢榆林郡遇大饥荒，郭子和暗地结交了敢死之士十八人进攻郡门，抓住郡丞王才，历数他不体恤百姓疾苦的罪状，将王才处死，开仓赈济百姓。
English: At the time of the great famine in Yulin County, Guo Zi and others secretly made friends with eighteen men who were willing to die to attack the county gate, seize the county magistrate Wang Cai, accuse him of not sympathizing with the sufferings of the people, put Wang Cai to death, and open a warehouse to help the people.

古文：自称永乐王，改元丑平。
现代文：郭子和自称永乐王，改年号丑平。
English: Guo Zi and the self-proclaimed Yongle King changed their name to Ug Ping.

古文：尊其父为太公，以其弟子政为尚书令，子端、子升为左右仆射。
现代文：崐尊他父亲为太公，任命他弟弟郭子政为尚书令，郭子端、郭子升为左右仆射。
English: He respected his father as the grand duke and appointed his brother Guo Zizheng as Shang Shuling, Guo Zidang and Guo Zizang as the left and right courtiers.

古文：有二千馀骑，南连梁师都，北附突厥，各遣子为质以自固。
现代文：他拥有两千余名骑兵，南面勾结梁师都，北面依附突厥，两边各送一个儿子作为人质以巩固自己的势力。
English: He had more than two thousand cavalrymen. To the south, he allied with Liang Shidu, to the north, he was attached to the Turks. Each side sent a son as a hostage to consolidate their power.

古文：始毕以刘武周为定杨天子，梁师都为解事天子，子和为平杨天子；子和固辞不敢当，乃更以为屋利设。
现代文：始毕可汗封刘武周为定杨天子，梁师都为解事天子，郭子和为平杨天子，郭子和再三辞谢，不敢接受，于是始毕改封他为屋利设。
English: At first, the Khan named Liu Wuzhou as Ding Yang Tianzi, Liang Shi as Qian Qianzi, Guo Zi as Ping Yang Tianzi, Guo Zi repeatedly declined to accept, so he changed his name to Ya Li.

古文：汾阴薛举，侨居金城，骁勇绝伦，家赀巨万，交结豪杰，雄于西边，为金城府校尉。
现代文：汾阴人薛举，侨居于金城，他骁勇无比，有万贯家财，好交结豪杰之士，称雄于西部边地，是金城府校尉。
English: Xue Jiu, a native of Jinyin, lived in Jincheng. He was extremely brave, had a vast family fortune, was good at making friends with heroes, and was famous in the western borderlands. He was a lieutenant of Jincheng Prefecture.

古文：时陇右盗起，金城令郝瑗募兵得数千人，使举将而讨之。
现代文：当时陇右盗贼风起，金城令郝瑗招募兵丁约有几千人，派薛举率领去讨伐盗贼。
English: At that time, there was an outbreak of right-wing thieves, and Jincheng ordered him to recruit about several thousand soldiers, and sent Xue He to lead them to fight the thieves.

古文：夏，四月，癸未，方授甲，置酒飨士。举与其子仁果及同党十三人，于座劫瑗发兵，囚郡县官，开仓赈施。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸未，募兵刚授以兵器，金城府摆设酒宴犒劳将士，薛举和他的儿子薜仁果及同党十三人，在座位上胁迫郝瑗发兵，把郡县官员监禁起来，并开仓赈济百姓。
English: In the summer, in April, in the middle of the night, just after the recruitment of soldiers and the awarding of weapons, the Jincheng government held a wine banquet to reward the hard-working soldiers. Xue Jiu, his son Yan Renga and thirteen party members coerced the soldiers at their seats, imprisoned the county officials, and opened a warehouse to help the people.

古文：自称西秦霸王，改元秦兴。
现代文：薜举自称西秦霸王，改年号秦兴。
English: He called himself the overlord of the Western Qin Dynasty and changed his name to Qin Xing.

古文：以仁果为齐公，少子仁越为晋公，招集群盗，掠官牧马。
现代文：他封薛仁果为齐公，封恭仁果为齐公，幼子薛仁越为晋公，招集群盗，抢掠官府的牧马。
English: He named Xue Rengguo as Qi Gong, named Gong Rengguo as Qi Gong, and named his youngest son Xue Rengyue as Jin Gong. He gathered a group of thieves and robbed the government's horse ranch.

古文：贼帅宗罗睺帅众归之，以为义兴公。
现代文：贼帅宗罗率部众归附了他，被封为义兴公。
English: Thief-commander Zongluo and his followers joined him, and he was given the title of Yixing.

古文：将军皇甫绾将兵一万屯枹罕，举选精锐二千人袭之，遂克枹罕。
现代文：将军皇甫绾率兵一万人驻扎在罕，薛举挑选精兵二千人袭击皇甫绾。
English: General Huo Fuxi led ten thousand soldiers stationed in Han, and Xue Jiu selected two thousand elite soldiers to attack Huo Fuxi.

古文：岷山羌酋钟利俗拥众二万归之，举兵大振。
现代文：岷山羌人酋长钟利俗率领部众二万人归附薛举，薛举兵势大振。
English: Lushan Shitan chief Zhong Lixu led the 20,000 people to join Xue Qiu, and Xue Qiu's army was greatly strengthened.

古文：更以仁果为齐王，领东道行军元帅，仁越为晋王，兼河州刺史，罗睺为兴王，以副仁果；分兵略地，取西平、浇河二郡。
现代文：他改封薛仁果为齐王，领东道行军元帅之衔；薛仁越为晋王，兼任河州刺史；宗罗为兴王，作薛仁果的副将。薛举分兵攻掠土地，攻取了西平、浇河二郡。
English: He renamed Xue Rengguo as the King of Qi, leading the host marching with the rank of marshal; Xue Rengyue as the King of Jin, concurrently serving as the governor of Hezhou; Zongluo as the King of Xing, serving as the vice-commander of Xue Rengguo.

古文：未几，尽有陇西之地，众至十三万。
现代文：不久，陇西都为薛举占有，他拥有部众达十三万。
English: Soon, all of Shaanxi Province was in Xueju's possession, and he owned as many as one hundred and thirty thousand slaves.

古文：李密以孟让为总管、齐郡公，己丑夜，让帅步骑二千入东都外郭，烧掠丰都市，比晓而去。
现代文：李密任命孟让为总管，封他为齐郡公。己丑，夜里，孟让率领步骑兵二千人进入东都外城，焚烧抢掠丰都市，到拂晓时才离去。
English: Li Mi appointed Meng Zhen as the chief administrator and named him the governor of Qi County. He was ugly. At night, Meng Zhen led 2,000 infantry and cavalry into the outer city of Dongdu, burned and looted Fengcheng, and only left at dawn.

古文：于是东京居民悉迁入宫城，台省府寺皆满。
现代文：于是东京居民都迁入宫城，台、省、府各衙署都住满了人。
English: As a result, all Tokyo residents moved to Miyagi, and every post office in Taiwan, the provinces, and the prefectures were filled with people.

古文：巩县长柴孝和、监察御史郑颋以城降密，密以孝和为护军，颋为右长史。
现代文：巩县长柴孝和、监察御史郑举城投降李密，李密任命柴孝和为护军，郑为右长史。
English: Gong County Governor Chai Xiaohe and Supervisor Zheng Zhucheng surrendered to Li Mi. Li Mi appointed Chai Xiaohe as the escort, and Zheng as the right-hand governor.

古文：裴仁基每破贼，得军资，悉以赏士卒，监军御史萧怀静不许，士卒怨之；怀静又屡求仁基长短，劾奏之。
现代文：裴仁基每次击败贼军所缴获的军资全部赏赐给士卒。监军御史萧怀静反对这样做，士卒们都怨恨萧怀静。萧怀静又屡次搜罗裴仁基的过失上奏弹劾他。
English: Pei Renji rewarded the soldiers with all the captured military resources each time he defeated the bandits. The supervisor of the army, Shi Xiao Huaijing, opposed this, and the soldiers all resented Xiao Huaijing. Xiao Huaijing repeatedly found fault with Pei Renji and impeached him.

古文：仓城之战，仁基失期不至，闻刘长恭等败，惧不敢进，屯百花谷，固垒自守，又巩获罪于朝。
现代文：洛口仓城之战，裴仁基误期未到，他听说刘长恭等人被打败，惧怕李密而不敢前进，就屯兵于百花谷，加固营垒自守，但又害怕被朝廷治罪。
English: At the Battle of Cangcheng in Lokuchou, Pei Renki did not arrive on time. He heard that Liu Changgong and others had been defeated, and he was afraid of Li Mi and did not dare to advance. He stationed troops in Baika Valley, fortified the camp and defended himself, but he was afraid of being punished by the court.

古文：李密知其狼狈，使人说之，啖以厚利。
现代文：李密知道裴仁基进退两难的狼狈处境，就派人劝说他投降，并以厚利来诱惑他。
English: Li Mi knew that Pei Renji was in a dilemma, so he sent someone to persuade him to surrender, and tempted him with a fat profit.

古文：贾务本之子闰甫在军中，劝仁基降密，仁基曰： 如萧御史何？ 
现代文：贾务本的儿子贾闰甫在裴军中，他劝裴仁基投降李密，裴仁基说： 萧御史怎么办？ 
English: Jia Yuefu, the son of Jia Yubin, was in Pei's army. He advised Pei Renji to surrender to Li Mi. Pei Renji said, "What about Xiao Mi Shi?

古文：闰甫曰： 萧君如栖上鸡，若不知机变，在明公一刀耳。 
现代文：贾闰甫说： 萧君就象栖身在树枝上的鸡，如果他不知道随机应变，就在于您的一刀了。 
English: Jia Liufu said: Xiao Jun is like a chicken perched on a branch. If he doesn't know how to adapt, it's up to you.

古文：仁基从之，遣闰甫诣密请降。
现代文：裴仁基采纳了贾闰甫的建议，派他去向李密请降。
English: Pei Renji accepted Jia Liufu's suggestion and sent him to ask Li Mi to step down.

古文：密大喜，以闰甫为元帅府司兵参军，兼直记室事，使之复命，遗仁基书，慰纳之，仁基还屯虎牢。
现代文：李密大喜，任命贾闰甫为元帅府司兵参军，兼直记室事，派他回去向裴仁基复命，并带给裴仁基书信，对他表示抚慰，接受他的归附。裴仁基退回仍驻军虎牢。
English: Li Mi was overjoyed and appointed Jia Liufu as the secretary of the marshal's office to join the army, and also the direct secretary of the office, and sent him back to reply to Pei Renki, and brought a letter to Pei Renki, expressing comfort to him and accepting his return. Pei Renki returned to the military tiger prison.

古文：萧怀静密表其事，仁基知之，遂杀怀静，帅其众以虎牢降密。
现代文：萧怀静秘密上表奏报此事，裴仁基知道了，就杀死萧怀静，率领他的部众以虎牢城向李密投降。
English: Xiao Huaijing secretly submitted a report on the matter. When Pei Renji found out, he killed Xiao Huaijing and led his subordinates to surrender to Li Mi at the Tiger's Lair.

古文：密以仁基为上柱国、河东公；仁基子行俨，骁勇善战，密亦以为上柱国、绛郡公。
现代文：李密封裴仁基为上柱国、河东公；裴仁基的儿子裴行俨骁勇善战，李密也封他为上柱国、绛郡公。
English: Li Jie designated Pei Renji as Shangju Guo and the governor of Hedong; Pei Renji's son, Pei Xingyong, fought bravely and well, and Li Mi also designated him as Shangju Guo and the governor of Shixian.

古文：密得秦叔宝及东阿程咬金，皆用为骠骑。
现代文：李密得到了秦叔宝和东阿人程咬金，都任命为骠骑。
English: Li Mi got Qin Shubao and Donga Rencheng to bite gold, and both were appointed as leading riders.

古文：选军中尤骁勇者八千人，分隶四骠骑以自卫，号曰内军，常曰： 此八千人足当百万。 
现代文：李密挑选军中特别骁勇的士兵八千人，分别隶属于四骠骑作为自已的侍卫队，号称 内军 。他常说： 这八千人足以抵挡百万人。 
English: Li Mi selected eight thousand of the most courageous soldiers in the army, each of whom was subordinated to four horsemen as his own bodyguard, known as the Inner Army. He often said: These eight thousand are enough to resist a million people.

古文：咬金后更名知节。
现代文：程咬金后来改名为程知节。
English: Cheng Ji Jin later changed its name to Cheng Ji Festival.

古文：罗士信、赵仁基皆帅众归密，密署为总管，使各统所部。
现代文：罗士信、赵仁基都率领各自的部众来归附李密，李密任命他们为总管，让他们各自统帅本部人马。
English: Both Luo Shixin and Zhao Rongji led their respective subordinates to join Li Mi. Li Mi appointed them as the general manager and let them each command the headquarters.

古文：癸巳，密遣裴仁基、孟让帅二万余人袭回洛东仓，破之；遂烧天津桥，纵兵大掠。
现代文：癸巳，李密派遣裴仁基、孟让率领二万余人袭击并攻取了回洛的东仓，烧毁了天津桥，纵兵大肆抢劫。
English: At that time, Li Mi dispatched Pei Renji and Meng Zhan to lead more than 20,000 people to attack and capture Dongcang in Huiluo, burned Tianjin Bridge, and looted extensively.

古文：东都出兵击之，仁基等败走，密自帅众屯回洛仓。
现代文：东都派兵出击，裴仁基等人被击败逃走，李密亲自率领部众屯驻于回洛仓。
English: Dongdu sent troops to attack, Pei Renji and others were defeated and fled, Li Mi personally led the troops stationed in Huilokang.

古文：东都兵尚二十馀万人，乘城击柝，昼夜不解甲。
现代文：当时东都还有兵力二十余万，士兵们昼夜不解铠甲，在城上敲击梆子巡逻。
English: At that time, Dongdu still had an army of more than 200,000 soldiers, and the soldiers patrolled the city day and night with their armor on.

古文：密攻偃师、金墉，皆不克；乙未，还洛口。
现代文：李密进攻偃师、金墉都未能攻克。乙未，李密返回洛口。
English: Li Mi's attack failed to conquer the Shao Division and the Jin Dynasty. Soon after, Li Mi returned to Luokou.

古文：东都城内乏粮，而布帛山积，至以绢为汲绠，然布以爨。
现代文：东都城内缺粮，但是布帛堆积如山，以至于用绢作汲水的绳子，用布烧火煮饭。
English: There was a shortage of grain in the eastern capital, but mountains of cloth were piled up, so much so that people used reeds as ropes to draw water and cooked rice over cloth fires.

古文：越王侗使人运回洛仓米入城，遣兵五千屯丰都市，五千屯上春门，五千屯北邙山，为九营，首尾相应，以备密。
现代文：越王杨侗派人把回洛仓的粮米运入城内，派五千士兵驻扎在丰都市，五千兵驻扎在上春门，五千兵驻扎在北邙山，分为九营，首尾相应，以防备李密的袭击。
English: Yang Pi, the king of Yue, sent people to transport the grain and rice back to Luocang into the city, and sent five thousand soldiers stationed in Fengshi, five thousand soldiers stationed in Shangchun Gate, and five thousand soldiers stationed in Beilun Mountain, divided into nine battalions, corresponding to the beginning and end, in order to prevent Li Mi's attack.

古文：丁酉，房献伯陷汝阴，淮阳太守赵陁举郡降密。
现代文：丁酉，房献伯攻陷汝阴，淮阳太守赵举郡向李密投降。
English: Ding Xuan, Fang Xianbo invaded Ruyin, and Zhao Jiu County, the governor of Huaiyang, surrendered to Li Mi.

古文：己亥，密帅众三万复据回洛仓，大修营堑以逼东都；段达等出兵七万拒之。
现代文：己亥，李密率领部众三万人又占据回洛仓，大规模修筑营壕以逼近东都。段达等率七万隋军抗击李密。
English: In Ji Hai, Li Mi led 30,000 people to occupy back Luocang and built large-scale trenches to approach Dongdu. Duan Da led 70,000 Sui troops to resist Li Mi.

古文：辛丑，战于仓北，隋兵败走。
现代文：辛丑，两军在回洛仓的北面交战，隋军大败退走。
English: Sin ugly, the two armies clashed on the north side of Huilokang, and the Sui army was defeated and retreated.

古文：丁未，密使其幕府移檄郡县，数炀帝十罪，且曰： 罄南山之竹，书罪无穷；决东海之波，流恶难尽。 
现代文：丁未，李密让他的幕府向各郡县发布檄文，历数炀帝的十大罪状，并说： 即使把南山的竹子都做成竹简，也写不完他的罪恶；放开东海的波涛，也洗刷不尽他的罪恶。 
English: In the meantime, Li Mi had his shogunate issue an imperial edict to all counties, enumerating the emperor's ten major offenses, and said: Even if all the bamboo in the Nanshan Mountains were made into bamboo strips, it would not be enough to write down his sins; if the waves of the East Sea were released, it would not be enough to wash away his sins.

古文：祖君彦之辞也。
现代文：这是祖君彦的手笔。
English: The above is the conclusion of Zukimihiko's article.

古文：赵王侗遣太常丞元善达间行贼中，诣江都奏称： 李密有众百万，围逼东都，据洛口仓，城内无食。若陛下速还，乌合必散；不然者，东都决没。 
现代文：越王杨侗派太常丞元善达穿越贼军辖地到江都向炀帝奏报： 李密拥众百万，包围进逼东都，占据了洛口仓，东都城内已经没有粮食了，要是陛下迅速返回东都，李密的乌合之众必然会溃散，否则东都一定会陷落。 
English: King of Yue, Yang Pi, sent Tai Changzheng Yuan Shanda across the territory under the jurisdiction of the invaders to the Yangtze River to report to Emperor Qian: Li Mi has gathered millions of people, encircled and forced the Eastern Capital, occupied Lokuchang, and there is no more grain in the Eastern Capital. If His Majesty returns to the Eastern Capital quickly, Li Mi's rabble will surely be dispersed, otherwise the Eastern Capital will surely fall.

古文：因歔欷呜咽，帝为之改容。
现代文：说着就欷呜咽哭泣起来。炀帝也为之改容。
English: He began to whimper and cry as he spoke. Emperor Xuan also changed his appearance.

古文：虞世基进曰： 越王年少，此辈诳之。若如所言，善达何缘来至！ 
现代文：虞世基进言道： 越王年轻，这些人诳骗他，要是象他所说的那样，元善达怎么能来到这里呢？ 
English: Yu Shiji chimed in, "Yue Wang is young, these people deceived him. If it was as he said, how could Yuan Shanda come here?"

古文：帝乃勃然怒曰： 善达小人，敢廷辱我！ 
现代文：于是炀帝勃然大怒，骂道： 元善达这个小人敢在朝廷上侮辱我！ 
English: Then Emperor Gao flew into a rage and cursed, "This villain, Yuan Shanda, dares to insult me in court!

古文：因使经贼中向东阳催运，善达遂为群盗所杀。
现代文：于是派元善达经过贼人境地到东阳去催运粮食，元善达就被群盗杀死。
English: So he sent Yuan Shengda to Dongyang to transport grain through the thief's position. Yuan Shengda was killed by the thieves.

古文：是后人人杜口，莫敢以贼闻。
现代文：此后人人都不再开口，不敢向炀帝报告贼情。
English: After that, no one dared to open their mouths and report the theft to Emperor Xuan.

古文：世基容貌沉审，言多合意，特为帝所亲爱，朝臣无与为比；亲党凭之，鬻官卖狱，贿赂公行，其门如市。由是朝野共疾怨之。
现代文：虞世基长得相貌深沉稳重，说话大都迎合炀帝的心意，特别受到炀帝的亲近喜爱，朝中大臣无人能与他相比。他的亲朋党羽凭借他的势力，卖官买狱，贿赂公行，其家门庭若市，因此朝野上下对虞世基都极为痛恨怨愤。
English: Yu Shiji had a deep and steady face, and his speech mostly catered to the wishes of Emperor Shun. He was especially loved by Emperor Shun, and no other minister in the dynasty could compare to him. With his power, his relatives and friends were able to buy officials, bribe officials, and his family was prosperous. As a result, the government and the people all hated and resented Yu Shiji.

古文：内史舍人封德彝托附世基，以世基不闲吏务，密为指画，宣行诏命，谄顺帝意。群臣表疏忤旨者，皆屏而不奏。鞫狱用法，多峻文深诋，论功行赏，则抑削就薄。
现代文：内史舍崐人封德彝阿附虞世基，因为虞世基不熟悉为官的要务，就秘密地替他筹划，如何传布实施皇帝的诏命，如何迎逢顺从炀帝的心意，群臣的表奏有偏离违背皇帝旨意的，都屏弃不上报；审理案件、实施刑法，大多引用严峻苛细的条文，刻意诋毁；凡是论功行赏，则极力抑制贬低。
English: According to the internal history, Yu Shiji, who was not familiar with the important duties of an official, secretly planned for Yu Shiji, how to spread and implement the emperor's edict, how to meet and obey the emperor's will, and the performance of the ministers deviated from the emperor's will, all of which were rejected and not reported; the trial of cases and the implementation of criminal law mostly quoted severe and harsh provisions, deliberately discrediting; whenever it was about the reward of merit, they tried their best to restrain and belittle.

古文：故世基之宠日隆而隋政益坏，皆德彝所为也。
现代文：因此虞世基日益得到炀帝的宠信，而隋帝国的政治日益弛废腐败，这都是由于封德彝所做所为。
English: Therefore, Yu Shiji was increasingly favored by Emperor Xuan, while the politics of the Sui Empire became increasingly corrupt. This was all due to the actions of Feng Dejun.

古文：初，唐公李渊娶于神武肃公窦毅，生四男，建成、世民、玄霸、元吉；一女，适太子千牛备身临汾柴绍。
现代文：当初，唐公李渊娶了神武肃公窦毅的女儿为妻，窦氏生了四个儿子：李建成、李世民、李玄霸、李元吉；一个女儿，嫁给太子千牛备身临汾人柴绍。
English: At the beginning, Tang Gong Li Yuan married the daughter of Shenwu Suhong Dou Yi as his wife. Dou gave birth to four sons: Li Jiancheng, Li Shimin, Li Xuanba, Li Yuanji; one daughter, married to Prince Qianniu Bei, Linyi people Chai Shao.

古文：世民聪明勇决，识量过人，见隋室方乱，阴有安天下之志，倾身下士，散财结客，咸得其欢心。
现代文：李世民为人聪明、勇猛、果断、有见识，胆量过人。他看到隋王室正处于混乱之中，就暗中怀有要安定天下的抱负。他礼贤下士，散发资财以结交宾客，赢得了大家的爱戴拥护。
English: Li Shimin was a clever, brave, decisive, insightful and courageous man. He saw that the Sui royal family was in chaos and secretly harbored the ambition to stabilize the world. He was a courteous corporal, distributing wealth to make friends with guests, and won everyone's love and support.

古文：世民娶右骁卫将军长孙晟之女；右勋卫长孙顺德，晟之族弟也，与右勋侍池阳刘弘基，皆避辽东之役，亡命在晋阳，依渊，与世民善。
现代文：李世民娶了右骁卫将军长孙晟的女儿为妻。右勋卫长孙顺德是长孙晟的族弟，他和右勋侍池阳人刘弘基都逃避辽东的征役，逃亡在晋阳投靠了李渊，他们二人与世民要好。
English: Li Shimin married the daughter of the Right Honor Guard General, the Elder Sun Yat-sen. The Right Honor Guard General, the Elder Sun Shunde, was the younger brother of the Elder Sun Yat-sen. He and the Right Honorable Attendant, Liu Hongji, fled the conscription in Liaodong and joined Li Yuan in Jinyang. Both of them were friendly with the world.

古文：左亲卫窦琮，炽之孙也，亦亡命在太原，素与世民有隙，每以自疑；世民加意待之，出入卧内，琮意乃安。
现代文：左亲卫窦琮是窦炽的孙子，他也逃亡在太原，因平时与李世民不和，常常自己生疑。李世民特别加意对待他，他可以随意在府上出入走动，窦琮的疑心才消除。
English: Zuo Xianwei Dou Yao is Dou Yao's grandson. He also fled to Taiyuan. Due to the discord with Li Shimin in ordinary times, he often doubted himself. Li Shimin treated him with special care. He could enter and leave the house at will, and Dou Yao's suspicion was eliminated.

古文：晋阳宫监猗氏裴寂，晋阳令武功刘文静，相与同宿，见城上烽火，寂叹曰： 贫贱如此，复逢乱离，将何以自存！ 
现代文：晋阳宫监猗氏县人裴寂，晋阳令武功人刘文静，二人住在一起，看着城上的烽火，裴寂叹息道： 贫贱到如此地步，又赶上世事离乱，靠什么得以保全呢？ 
English: Jinyang Palace overseer Pei Jia, a native of Jinshi County, and Liu Wenzhing, a military hero of Jinyang, lived together. Looking at the bonfire on the city, Pei Jia sighed: Poor to such an extent, and caught up with the chaos of the world, what can we rely on to be preserved?

古文：文静笑曰： 时事可知，吾二人相得，何忧贫贱！ 
现代文：刘文静笑道： 形势是可以预知的，我们二人很投合，何必忧虑贫贼？ 
English: Liu Wenjing said with a smile: The situation is predictable. The two of us are very compatible. Why worry about being a pauper?

古文：文静见李世民而异之，深自结纳，谓寂曰： 此非常人，豁达类汉高，神武同魏祖，年虽少，命世才也。 
现代文：刘文静看到李世民，很惊异他的才能，就和李世民结为深交。他对裴寂说： 李世民不是一般人，性格豁达如汉高祖刘邦一类，神态威武魏武帝曹操，年纪虽轻，将是通世之大才。 
English: Liu Wenjing saw Li Shimin and was surprised by his talent, so he became close friends with Li Shimin. He said to Pei Jing: Li Shimin is not an ordinary person, his character is open-minded, like the Han Gao ancestor Liu Bang, the appearance is powerful Wei Emperor Cao Cao, although he is young, he will be a great talent in the world.

古文：寂初未然之。
现代文：裴寂开始并未对刘文静的话在意。
English: At first, Pei Jia did not care about Liu Wenzhing's words.

古文：文静坐与李密连昏，系太原狱，世民就省之。
现代文：刘文静因犯有与李密通婚的罪，被关在太原的监狱里。
English: Liu Wenjing was locked up in a prison in Taiyuan for the crime of marrying Li Mi.

古文：文静曰： 天下大乱，非高、光之才，不能定也。 
现代文：李世民去探望他，刘文静说： 天下大乱，没有汉高祖、汉光武帝那样的才能是不能安定天下的。 
English: Li Shimin went to visit him, and Liu Wenzhing said: The world is in turmoil. Without the talent of Han Gao Zu and Han Guangwu Emperor, the world cannot be stable.

古文：世民曰： 安知其无，但人不识耳。
现代文：李世民说： 怎么知道没有这样的人？
English: Li Shimin said: How do you know that there is no such person?

古文：我来相省，非儿女子之情，欲与君议大事也。
现代文：只是人们看不出来罢了。我来探望您，不是出于儿女情长，而是打算和您商议大事。您有什么谋划吗？ 
English: It's just that people can't see it. I've come to visit you, not out of love for my children, but to discuss important matters with you. Do you have any plans?

古文：计将安出？ 文静曰： 今主上南巡江、淮，李密围逼东都，群盗殆以万数。
现代文：刘文静说： 如今皇帝上南方巡游江、淮，李密包围逼近东都，群盗大概得以万来计算。
English: Liu Wenjing said, "Nowadays, the emperor is on a southern tour of the Yangtze River and the Huai River, surrounded by Li Mi and approaching Dongdu, and the bandits can probably be counted in tens of thousands.

古文：当此之际，有真主驱驾而用之，取天下如反掌耳。
现代文：在这个时候，若有真天子驱使驾御这些人，夺取下天易如反掌。
English: At this time, if there is a true heavenly son to drive these people, it is easy to seize the next heaven.

古文：太原百姓皆避盗入城，文静为令数年，知其豪杰，一旦收集，可得十万人，尊公所将之兵复且数万，一言出口，谁敢不从！
现代文：太原百姓为躲避盗贼都搬入城内，我作了几年县令，了解其中的豪杰之士，一旦把他们收拢来，可得到十万人。您父亲所率领的军队又有几万人，一言出口，谁敢不服从！
English: The people of Taiyuan moved into the city to escape the thieves. I served as a county magistrate for several years and got to know the heroes among them. Once I gathered them together, I could get a hundred thousand people. The army led by your father has tens of thousands of people. Say one word, who dares disobey!

古文：以此乘虚入关，号令天下，不过半年，帝业成矣。 
现代文：以此兵力乘虚入关，号令天下，不过半年，帝王之业就可以成功。 
English: With this military force, he can take advantage of the situation and call the world, but in half a year, the emperor's business can be successful.

古文：世民笑曰： 君言正合我意。 
现代文：李世民笑道： 的话正合我的心意。 
English: Li Shimin said with a smile, "Your words are exactly what I want.

古文：乃阴部署宾客，渊不之知也。
现代文：于是他就暗中布署宾客，李渊不知道这些事。
English: So he secretly assigned guests, and Li Yuan didn't know about it.

古文：世民恐渊不从，犹豫久之，不敢言。
现代文：李世民怕李渊不答应，犹豫了很久，不敢向李渊说。
English: Li Shimin was afraid that Li Yuan would not agree, so he hesitated for a long time and did not dare to tell Li Yuan.

古文：渊与裴寂有旧，每相与宴语，或连日夜。
现代文：李渊和裴寂有旧谊，二人常常在一起宴饮交谈，有时昼夜相连。
English: Li Yuan and Pei Shou have an old friendship. The two often dine together and talk, sometimes day and night.

古文：文静欲因寂关说，乃引寂与世民交。
现代文：刘文静想崐让裴寂为他们向李渊说通关节，于是就引见裴寂和李世民结交。
English: Liu Wenzhing wanted to persuade Pei Zh for them to talk to Li Yuan, so he introduced Pei Zh and Li Shimin to make friends.

古文：世民出私钱数百万，使龙山令高斌廉与寂博，稍以输之，寂大喜，由是日从世民游，情款益狎。
现代文：李世民拿出自己的私房钱几百万，让龙山令高斌廉与裴寂玩赌，渐渐输给裴寂，裴寂非常高兴，由此每天与世民在一起交游往来，情谊日深。
English: Li Shimin took out several million of his own private money and asked Longshan to order Gao Binlian to gamble with Peizhang. He gradually lost to Peizhang. Peizhang was very happy. As a result, he interacted with Shimin every day, and their friendship deepened.

古文：世民乃以其谋告之，寂许诺。
现代文：李世民把自己的意图告诉裴寂，裴寂许诺劝说李渊。
English: Li Shimin told Peizhang of his intention, and Peizhang promised to persuade Li Yuan.

古文：会突厥寇马邑，渊遣高君雅将兵与马邑太守王仁恭并力拒之；仁恭、君雅战不利，渊恐并获罪，甚忧之。
现代文：正逢突厥人侵犯马邑，李渊派高君雅率兵与马邑太守王仁恭同力抗击突厥人。王仁恭、高君雅与突厥交战不利，李渊怕一起被治罪，非常忧虑。
English: Just as the Turks invaded Ma'e, Li Yuan sent Gao Junya to lead the troops and Ma'e's governor Wang Rengong to fight the Turks together. Wang Rengong and Gao Junya were not good at fighting with the Turks, and Li Yuan was very worried because he was afraid that they would be punished together.

古文：世民乘间屏人说渊曰： 今主上无道，百姓困穷，晋阳城外皆为战场。大人若守小节，下有寇盗，上有严刑，危亡无日。不若顺民心，兴义兵，转祸为福，此天授之时也。 
现代文：李世民乘机屏去左右的人劝说李渊： 如今主上昏庸无道，百姓困顿贫穷，晋阳城外都成了战场，大人要是恪守小节，但下有流寇盗贼，上有严刑峻法，您的危亡就要来到了，不如顺应民心，兴起义兵，转祸为福，这是上天授予的时机。 
English: Li Shimin took the machine screen to persuade Li Yuan from the people around him: Nowadays, the Lord is dull and dull, the people are poor and poor, and the outskirts of Jinyang have become a battlefield. If adults abide by the rules, but there are roving robbers and thieves, there are severe punishments, and your peril is coming. It is better to comply with the people's hearts and raise up volunteers to turn misfortune into blessing. This is the opportunity granted by heaven.

古文：渊大惊曰： 汝安得为此言，吾今执汝以告县官！ 
现代文：李渊大吃一惊说： 你怎么说这种话，我现在就将你抓起来向国家告发！ 
English: Li Yuan was taken aback and said, "How dare you say such a thing, I'll arrest you right now and report you to the state!"

古文：因取纸笔，欲为表。
现代文：说着就取来纸笔，要写状表。
English: As he spoke, he fetched a pen and paper and asked for a writing form.

古文：世民徐曰： 世民观天时人事如此，故敢发言；必欲执告，不敢辞死！ 
现代文：世民慢慢地说： 我观察天时人事到了如此地步，才敢说这样的话如果一定要告发我，我不敢辞死！ 
English: The world's people slowly said: I have observed that the world's people have reached such a stage that I dare to say such a thing. If you must denounce me, I dare not die!

古文：渊曰： 吾岂忍告汝，汝慎勿出口！ 
现代文：李渊说： 我哪里忍心告发你，你要谨慎，不要随便说！ 
English: Li Yuan said, "I don't have the heart to report you, you should be careful and not say anything!

古文：明日，世民复说渊曰： 今盗贼日繁，遍于天下，大人受诏讨贼，贼可尽乎？
现代文：第二天，李世民又劝李渊： 如今盗贼日益增多，遍布天下，大人受诏讨贼，可贼讨得尽吗？
English: The next day, Li Shimin also advised Li Yuan: Nowadays, the number of thieves is increasing day by day, and they are all over the world. Adults are ordered to catch the thieves, but can the thieves catch them all?

古文：要之，终不免罪。
现代文：总而言之，最后还是不免获罪。
English: All in all, he was eventually convicted.

古文：且世人皆传李氏当应图谶，故李金才无罪，一朝族灭。
现代文：而且世人都传说李氏当应验图谶，所以李金才无罪却在一个早晨被灭族了。
English: Moreover, the world has a legend that the Li clan should fulfill the test, so Li Jincai was not guilty but was exterminated in the morning.

古文：大人设能尽贼，则功高不赏，身益危矣！
现代文：大人要是能将贼剿灭尽，那么功高也不会受奖，而您自己会更危险了啊！
English: If an adult can exterminate all the thieves, then he will not receive a merit award, and you yourself will be in more danger!

古文：唯昨日之言，可以救祸，此万全之策也，愿大人勿疑！ 
现代文：只有昨天的话可以使您避祸，这是万全之策，希望大人不要疑虑。 
English: Only yesterday's words can save you from disaster. This is the best way. I hope adults don't have any doubts.

古文：渊乃叹曰： 吾一夕思汝言，亦大有理。今日破家亡躯亦由汝，化家为国亦由汝矣！ 
现代文：李渊叹息说： 我一夜都在考虑你的话，你说的很是有理，今天就是家破人亡也由你，变家为国也由你啦！ 
English: Li Yuan sighed and said, "I have been thinking about your words all night. What you said is very reasonable. Today, it is up to you to break up the family, and it is up to you to change the family into a country!"

古文：先是，裴寂私以晋阳宫人侍渊，渊从寂饮，酒酣，寂从容言曰： 二郎阴养士马，欲举大事，正为寂以宫人侍公，恐事觉并诛，为此急计耳。
现代文：原先，裴寂私下用晋阳的宫人侍奉李渊，李渊和裴寂一起饮酒，饮至酒意正浓，裴寂从容地说： 二郎暗地招兵买马，发举义旗办大事。正是因为这样我私自让宫女侍奉您，恐怕事情败露出来，一起获罪被诛杀，为此才定下这应急之计。
English: Originally, Peizhang privately served Li Yuan with the palace staff of Jinyang. Li Yuan and Peizhang drank together until the wine was strong. Peizhang said calmly: Jiro secretly recruited soldiers and horses, raised a banner of righteousness to carry out major events. It is precisely because of this that I let the palace maidservant serve you, I am afraid that the matter will be revealed, and they will be convicted and killed together. This is why I set up this emergency plan.

古文：众情己协，公意如何？ 
现代文：大家的意向已以经协同，现在您意下如何？ 
English: Everyone's intentions have been coordinated, now what do you think?

古文：渊曰： 吾儿诚有此谋，事已如此，当复奈何，正须从之耳。 
现代文：李渊说： 我儿子确有这个图谋，事情已经如此，又能怎样呢？正是应当听从他的意见。 
English: Li Yuan said: My son does indeed have this plot, things are already like this, so what can be done? It is his opinion that should be followed.

古文：帝以渊与王仁恭不能御寇，遣使者执诣江都。
现代文：炀帝认为李渊与王仁恭不能抵御突厥的进犯，派使者来要将他们押往江都。
English: Emperor Yao thought that Li Yuan and Wang Rengong could not resist the Turkish attack and sent an envoy to escort them to Jiangdu.

古文：渊大惧。世民与寂等复说渊曰： 今主昏国乱，尽忠无益。偏裨失律，而罪及明公。事已迫矣，宜早定计。
现代文：李渊大为恐惧，李世民与裴寂等又劝说李渊： 如今主上昏聩，国家动乱，为隋朝尽忠没有好处，本来是将佐们出战失利，却牵连到您，事情已经迫在眉睫，应该早些定大计。
English: Li Yuan was greatly afraid, and Li Shimin and Pei Jia and others also persuaded Li Yuan: Nowadays, the master is dizzy, the country is in turmoil, and it is no good to be loyal to the Sui Dynasty. Originally, it would have been a defeat for Zameng to go to war, but it has involved you. The matter is imminent, and it is necessary to make a plan earlier.

古文：且晋阳士马精强，宫监蓄积巨万，以兹举事，何患无成！
现代文：况且晋阳军队兵强马壮，宫监积蓄的军资财物巨万，以此起兵，还怕不成功吗？
English: Moreover, the soldiers of the Jinyang army are strong and powerful, and the military resources and property accumulated by the palace overseer are huge. Is it afraid of failure to raise an army with this?

古文：代王幼冲，关中豪杰并起，未知所附，公若鼓行而西，抚而有之，如探囊中之物耳。
现代文：代王年幼，关中豪杰风起造反，但不知归附于谁，您要是大张旗鼓地向西进军，招抚他们并且使他们归附，这就如探囊取物一样容易。
English: When the king-in-waiting was young, the great men of Guanzhong rebelled, but you didn't know who to side with. If you marched to the west with great fanfare, coaxed them and made them side with you, it would be as easy as searching for lost property.

古文：奈何受单使之囚，坐取夷灭乎！ 
现代文：为什么要受一个使者的监禁，坐等被杀戮呢？ 
English: Why should you be imprisoned by a messenger and wait to be killed?

古文：渊然之，密部勒，将发；会帝继遣使者驰驿赦渊及仁恭，使复旧任，渊谋亦缓。
现代文：李渊认为这话很对，就秘密布署准备。将举事时，恰好炀帝又派来使者驰马驿站传命赦免李渊和王仁恭，让他们官复原职。李渊他们起兵的计划也就缓行。
English: Li Yuan believed this to be true and secretly made preparations. Just as the event was about to take place, Emperor Qian sent an envoy to the Horse Guards Station to pardon Li Yuan and Wang Rengong and reinstate them as officials. Li Yuan's plan to raise an army was also delayed.

古文：渊之为河东讨捕使也，请大理司直夏侯端为副。
现代文：李渊任河东讨捕使时，他请求大理司直夏候端作他的副手。
English: When Li Yuan was appointed as the envoy of Hedong Trapping Expedition, he asked Dali's secretary, Zhao Xia, to be his deputy.

古文：端，详之孙也，善占候及相人，谓渊曰： 今玉床摇动，帝座不安，参墟得岁，必有真人起于其分，非公而谁乎！
现代文：夏候端是夏候详的孙子，他善于占卜天象以及给人相面。他对李渊说： 如今玉床星座摇动，帝座星不安定，岁星居参宿的位置，必有真人起于晋地。不是您还能是谁呢？
English: Xia Houduan is the grandson of Xia Houzhu, he is good at divining the constellations and giving people a face to face. He said to Li Yuan: Nowadays, the constellation of the Jade Bed is shaking, the constellation of the Empire is unstable, and the year star is in the position of the Betelgeuse, there must be a real person in Jin. Who else could you be?

古文：主上猜忍，尤忌诸李，金才既死，公不思变通，必为之次矣。 
现代文：主上猜忌残忍，尤其猜忌诸李姓，李金才已经死了，您不想着变通，必然是李金才第二呵。 
English: Above all, beware of cruelty, especially beware of the surname Zhu Li. Li Jincai is already dead, you don't want to be flexible, it must be Li Jincai second.

古文：渊心然之。
现代文：李渊心里很同意这一说法。
English: Li Yuan heartily agrees with this statement.

古文：乃留守晋阳，鹰扬府司马太原许世绪说渊曰： 公姓在图箓，名应歌谣；据五郡之兵，当四战之地，举事则帝业可成，端居则亡不旋踵；唯公图之。 
现代文：到他留守晋阳时，鹰扬府司马太原人许世绪劝说李渊： 您的姓氏应在图谶上，名字应验歌谣，您手握五郡之兵，身处四面应战之地，起兵举事则可成帝业，端坐不动则指日可亡，您好好想一想吧！ 
English: When he was staying in Jinyang, Xu Shixu, the Sima Taiyuan of Yingyang Prefecture, persuaded Li Yuan: Your surname should be on the picture frame, your name should correspond to the song, you hold the soldiers of the five counties in your hand, you are in a place where you have to fight on all sides, raising an army can become an imperial cause, and sitting still means death. Think about it!

古文：行军司铠文水武士彟、前太子左勋卫唐宪、宪弟俭皆劝渊举兵。
现代文：行军司铠文水人武士，前太子左勋卫唐宪，唐宪的弟弟唐俭都劝说李渊起兵。
English: Li Yuan was persuaded to take up arms by the marching officer, the scholar and sailor, the former prince Zuo Wei Tang Xian, and Tang Xian's younger brother, Tang Jian.

古文：俭说渊曰： 明公北招戎狄，南收豪杰，以取天下，此汤、武之举也。 
现代文：唐俭说： 您北面招抚戎狄，南面收招豪杰，以此来取天下，这是商汤和周武王的壮举。 
English: Tang Jian said, "In the north, you recruit soldiers, and in the south, you recruit heroes, in order to take over the world. This is the feat of Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu.

古文：渊曰： 汤、武非所敢拟，在私则图存，在公则拯乱。
现代文：李渊说： 商汤、周武不是我敢比的，我从私处讲是要图存，从公处讲是要拯救动乱之世，你暂且先注意一下言行，我要考虑考虑。 
English: Li Yuan said: Shang Tang and Zhou Wu are not comparable to me. From my personal point of view, I want to survive, and from the public point of view, I want to save the turbulent world. You should first pay attention to your words and deeds. I want to consider.

古文：卿姑自重，吾将思之。 宪，邕之孙也。
现代文：唐宪是唐邕的孙子。
English: Tang Xian was the grandson of Tang Xuan.

古文：时建成、元吉尚在河东，故渊迁延未发。
现代文：当时李建成、李元吉还在河东，所以李渊延迟而不能决定。
English: At that time, Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji were still in Hedong, so Li Yuan was delayed and could not decide.

古文：刘文静谓裴寂曰： 先发制人，后发制于人。何不早劝唐公举兵，而推迁不已！
现代文：刘文静对裴寂说： 先发制人，后发制于人，您为何不早劝唐公起兵，却推迟拖延不已？
English: Liu Wenzhing said to Pei Zh: First strike at the enemy, then strike at the enemy. Why didn't you advise Tang Gong to raise an army earlier, but delayed and delayed?

古文：且公为宫监，而以宫人侍客，公死可尔，何误唐公也！ 
现代文：况且您身为宫监，却用宫人侍奉宾客，您死也就罢了，为什么要误了唐公呢？ 
English: Moreover, you are the palace supervisor, but you use palace staff to serve guests. You would just die. Why did you miss Tang Gong?

古文：寂甚惧，屡趣渊起兵。
现代文：裴寂极为恐惧，屡次催促李渊起兵。
English: Peizhang was extremely afraid and repeatedly urged Li Yuan to raise an army.

古文：渊乃使文静诈为敕书，发太原、西河、雁门、马邑民年二十已上五十已下悉为兵，期岁暮集涿郡，击高丽，由是人情恟々，思乱者益众。
现代文：李渊就让刘文静诈作敕书，征发太原、西河、雁门、马邑等地年在二十岁以上、五十岁以下的人全部当兵，规定年底在涿郡集结，去攻打高丽。因此人心慌慌，策划造反的人越来越多。
English: Li Yuan asked Liu Wenzhing to fraudulently make a proclamation to conscript all people over the age of 20 and under the age of 50 in Taiyuan, Xihe, Ganmen, and Mayi, and to gather them at the end of the year to attack Goryeo. As a result, people panicked and more and more people plotted to rebel.

古文：及刘武周据汾阳宫，世民言于渊曰： 大人为留守，而盗贼窃据离宫，不早建大计，祸今至矣！ 
现代文：到刘武周占据了汾阳宫，李世民对李渊说： 大人身为留守，而盗贼窃据离宫，如果不早定大计，灾祸今天就要到来了。 
English: When Liu Wuzhou occupied the Shenyang Palace, Li Shimin said to Li Yuan, "The adults are staying behind, but the thieves have left the palace. If you don't make a plan early, the disaster will come today."

古文：渊乃集将佐谓之曰： 武周据汾阳宫，吾辈不能制，罪当族灭，若之何？ 
现代文：于是李渊召集将领僚佐，对他们说： 刘武周占据汾阳宫，我们却不能制止，论罪该当灭族，怎么办？ 
English: So Li Yuan called together his generals and adjutants and said to them: Liu Wuzhou is occupying the Senyang Palace, but we can't stop him. The crime should be extermination. What should we do?

古文：王威等皆惧，再拜请计。
现代文：王威等人都很害怕，再三拜谢请求定计。
English: Wang Wei and others were very scared and repeatedly asked for a fixed amount.

古文：渊曰： 朝廷用兵，动止皆禀节度。
现代文：李渊说： 朝廷用兵，行止进退都要向上级禀报，受上级控制。
English: Li Yuan said: The use of soldiers by the imperial court and the advance and retreat must be reported to the superiors and controlled by the superiors.

古文：今贼在数百里内，江都在三千里外，加以道路险要，复有他贼据之；以婴城胶柱之兵，当巨猾豕突之势，必不全矣。
现代文：如今贼人在数百里之内，江都在三千里之外，加以道路险要，还有别的盗贼盘踞，靠着据城以守和拘泥不知变通之兵，以抵抗狡诈与狂奔乱窜之盗贼，必然无法保全。
English: Now the thieves are within a few hundred miles, and the river is three thousand miles away, and the roads are treacherous, and there are other thieves entrenched, and relying on the city to guard and the soldiers who do not know how to be flexible to resist the cunning and the thieves who are running wild, it is inevitable that it cannot be preserved.

古文：进退维谷，何为而可？ 
现代文：我们现在是进退维谷，怎么办才好？ 
English: We are now in a precarious situation. What should we do?

古文：威等皆曰： 公地兼亲贤，同国休戚，若俟奏报，岂及事机；要在平贼，专之可也。 
现代文：王威等人都说： 您的地位又是宗亲又是贤士，同国家命运休戚相关，要是等着奏报，哪里赶得上时机；要是平灭盗贼，专权也是可以的。 
English: Wang Wei and others all said: Your status is that of a great-grandparent and a wise man, and you are closely related to the fate of the country. If you wait for the report, you can catch the opportunity; if you quell the thieves, you can also have exclusive power.

古文：渊阳若不得已而从之者，曰： 然则先当集兵。 
现代文：李渊佯装不得已而听从的样子，说： 既然这样就应当先征集军队。 
English: Li Yuan, pretending to obey out of necessity, said, "In that case, we should conscript the army first."

古文：乃命世民与刘文静、长孙顺德、刘弘基等各募兵，远近赴集，旬日间近万人，仍密遣使召建成、元吉于河东，柴绍于长安。
现代文：于是他命令李世民与刘文静、长孙顺德、刘弘基等人各自募兵。远远的百姓投奔汇集，十天之内有近万人应募。李渊秘密派人去河东召李建成、李元吉，去长安召柴绍。
English: Therefore, he ordered Li Shimin, Liu Wenzhing, his eldest son Shunde, Liu Hongji and others to recruit soldiers individually. People from far away rushed to gather, and within ten days nearly ten thousand people were recruited. Li Yuan secretly sent people to Hedong to recruit Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji, and to Chang'an to recruit Chai Shao.

古文：王威、高君雅见兵大集，疑渊有异志，谓武士彟曰： 顺德、弘基皆背征三侍，所犯当死，安得将兵！ 
现代文：王威、高君雅看到李渊大肆招兵，怀疑李渊有不轨之图，就对武士说：崐 长孙顺德、刘弘基二人都是逃避征役亡命的三侍之官，罪该处死，怎么能统兵？ 
English: Wang Wei and Gao Junya saw Li Yuan's large-scale recruitment of soldiers and suspected that Li Yuan had an evil plan, so they said to the samurai:  The eldest grandson Shunde and Liu Hongji are both officers of the Three Servants who escaped conscription and died. The crime is punishable by death, so how can they lead the soldiers?

古文：欲收按之。
现代文：他们打算把长孙顺德、刘弘基收审。
English: They plan to put the eldest grandson Shunde and Liu Hongji on trial.

古文：士彟曰： 二人皆唐公客，若尔，必大致纷纭。 
现代文：武士说： 这两个人都是唐公的宾客，若是那样做，必然会引起大的纠纷。 
English: The samurai said, "These two are guests of Tang Gong, if they do that, it will inevitably cause a big dispute.

古文：威等乃止。
现代文：王威等人于是就作罢。
English: So Wang Wei and the others gave up.

古文：留守司兵田德平欲劝威等按募人之状，士彟曰： 讨捕之兵，悉隶唐公，威、君雅但寄坐耳，彼何能为！ 
现代文：留守司兵田德平想劝王威等人调查招募兵丁的情况，武士说： 讨捕之兵，全都隶属于唐公，王威、高君雅只是寄身在唐公这里罢了，他们能管什么呢？ 
English: The left-behind officer, Deping Tian, wanted to persuade Wang Wei and others to investigate the situation of recruiting soldiers. The samurai said, "The soldiers to be captured are all subordinate to Tang Gong. Wang Wei and Gao Junya are just staying here with Tang Gong. What can they control?

古文：德平亦止。
现代文：田德平也作罢。
English: Tian Deping also no longer mentioned the matter.

古文：晋阳乡长刘世龙密告渊云： 威、君雅欲因晋祠祈雨，为不利。 
现代文：晋阳乡长刘世龙密告李渊说： 王威、高君雅想去晋祠祈雨，这样做是不利的。 
English: Liu Shilong, the head of Jinyang Township, tipped off Li Yuan, saying, "Wang Wei and Gao Junya want to go to the Jin Temple to pray for rain. It is not good to do so.

古文：五月，癸亥夜，渊使世民伏兵于晋阳宫城之外。
现代文：五月，癸亥夜里，李渊派李世民率兵埋伏在晋阳宫城的外面。
English: In May, on the night of the Chinese New Year, Li Yuan sent Li Shimin and his soldiers to lie in ambush outside the palace city of Jinyang.

古文：甲子旦，渊与威、君雅共坐视事，使刘文静引开阳府司马胙城刘政会入立庭中，称有密状。
现代文：甲子早晨，李渊与王威、高君雅坐在一起处理政务，刘文静引着开阳府司马胙城人刘政会进来立在厅堂上，声称有密事报告。
English: In the early morning, Li Yuan and Wang Wei and Gao Junya sat together to deal with government affairs. Liu Wenzhing led Liu Zhengkai, the secretary of Koyang Prefecture, to come in and stand in the hall, claiming to have a secret report.

古文：渊目威等取状视之，政会不与，曰： 所告乃引留守事，唯唐公得视之。 
现代文：李渊用眼睛示意王威等人取状纸看，刘政会不给，说： 告发的是副留守的事，只有唐公才能看。 
English: Li Yuan gestured with his eyes for Wang Wei and the others to take the paper and read it, but Liu Zhengkai would not give it to them, saying, "I'm reporting on the deputy's absence, and only Tang Gong can read it."

古文：渊阳惊曰： 岂有是邪！ 
现代文：李渊佯作吃惊地说： 难道有这样的事？ 
English: Li Yuan said in surprise: Is there really such a thing?

古文：视其状，乃云： 威、君雅潜引突厥入寇。 
现代文：他看了状子才说： 王威、高君雅暗中勾引突厥人入侵。 
English: Only after reading the notice did he say: Wang Wei, Gao Junya secretly lured the Turks to invade.

古文：君雅攘袂大诟曰： 此乃反者欲杀我耳！ 
现代文：高君雅捋起衣袖大骂道： 这是造反的人要杀我。 
English: Gao Junya rolled up his sleeves and cursed loudly: This is a rebel who wants to kill me.

古文：时世民已布兵塞衢路，文静因与刘弘基、长孙顺德等共执威、君雅系狱。
现代文：这时李世民已经在大路上布满了军队，刘文静就和刘弘基、长孙顺德等人一起将王威、高君雅抓起来投进监狱。
English: At this time, Li Shimin had already filled the highway with troops, and Liu Wenzhing, together with Liu Hongji, the eldest son Shunde and others, arrested Wang Wei and Gao Junya and threw them into prison.

古文：丙寅，突厥数万众寇晋阳，轻骑入外郭北门，出其东门。
现代文：丙寅，突厥几万兵马侵犯晋阳，其轻骑从外城北门进入，从东门出去。
English: When the Turks invaded Jinyang with tens of thousands of soldiers and horses, the light cavalry entered from the north gate of the outer city and left from the east gate.

古文：渊命裴寂等勒兵为备，而悉开诸城门，突厥不能测，莫敢进。
现代文：李渊命令裴寂等人率兵防备，而把各城门都打开，突厥人不知虚实，不敢进入。
English: Li Yuan ordered Peizh and others to lead the troops to be prepared, and opened all the gates. The Turks did not know the truth and did not dare to enter.

古文：众以为威、君雅实召之也，渊于是斩威、君雅以徇。
现代文：大家都以为确实是王威、高君雅把突厥人招来的，于是李渊将二人处死，悬首示众。
English: Everyone thought that it was really Wang Wei and Gao Junya who invited the Turks, so Li Yuan executed the two men and displayed their heads.

古文：渊部将王康达将千馀人出战，皆死，城中恟惧。
现代文：李渊的部将王康达率领一千余人出战，全部战死，城中人心惊惶。
English: Li Yuan's general, Wang Kanda, led more than a thousand men into battle, all of whom were killed. The people in the city were terrified.

古文：渊夜遣军潜出城，旦则张旗鸣鼓自他道来，如援军者；突厥终疑之，留城外二日，大掠而去。
现代文：李渊在夜里派军队悄悄出城，早晨则张旗呜鼓从别的道路上开来，好象是援军来到了一样。突厥人始终疑惑，在城外逗留了两天，大肆抢掠而去。
English: Li Yuan sent troops out of the city quietly at night, and in the morning they came from other roads with banners and drums, as if reinforcements had arrived. The Turks were always suspicious and stayed outside the city for two days, looting and pillaging.

古文：炀帝命监门将军泾阳宠玉、虎贲郎将霍世举将关内兵援东都。
现代文：炀帝命令监门将军泾阳人庞玉、虎贲郎将霍世举率领关内兵救援东都。
English: Emperor Qian ordered the warden general Shenyang people Pangyu and Kogoro to lead the Guan soldiers to rescue Dongdu.

古文：柴孝和说李密曰： 秦地山川之固，秦、汉所凭以成王业者也。
现代文：柴孝和劝说李密： 秦地山川险固，秦、汉正是凭借着它建立帝王之业的。
English: Chai Xiaohua persuaded Li Mi: Qin's land was full of mountains and rivers, and Qin and Han relied on it to establish the emperor's career.

古文：今不若使翟司徒守洛口，裴柱国守回洛，明公自简精锐西袭长安。
现代文：现在不如派翟司徒守卫洛口，裴柱国守卫回洛，您亲自挑选精锐向西袭击长安，京师既攻下，基业则巩固，兵势则更强盛。
English: Now, it is better to send the scholars to guard the entrance to Luokou, and Baizhu to guard the way back to Luokou. You should personally select the elite to attack Chang'an in the west. Once the Beijing division is captured, the foundation will be consolidated, and the army will be stronger.

古文：既克京邑，业固兵强，然后东向以平河、洛，传檄而天下定矣。
现代文：然后再挥师向东平定河、洛地区，传布檄文，天下就平定了。
English: Then, he sent his army eastward to the Dinghe and Luo regions to spread the message, and the country was pacified.

古文：方今隋失其鹿，豪杰竞逐，不早为之，必有先我者，悔无及矣！ 
现代文：如今隋王室已失去了它的基业，天下豪杰竞相逐鹿，您不早些举事，必定有先于我们动手的人，到那时，后悔就来不及了！ 
English: Now that the Sui royal family has lost its foundation, the world's heroes are competing to chase deer. If you don't do something sooner, there must be someone who will do it before us. By then, it will be too late to regret it!

古文：密曰： 此诚上策，吾亦思之久矣。
现代文：李密说： 这的确是上策，我也考虑好久了。
English: Li Mi said, "This is indeed the best strategy, and I have been considering it for a long time.

古文：但昏主尚存，从兵犹众，我所部皆山东人，见洛阳未下，谁肯从我西入！
现代文：但是隋朝的昏君还在，追随他的兵马还很多，我的部下都是潼关以东人士，看到洛阳没有攻下，谁肯跟我向西进军？
English: But the Emperor of the Sui Dynasty was still alive, and there were still many soldiers and horses following him. My subordinates were all from the east of Shaoguan. Seeing that Luoyang had not been conquered, who would march west with me?

古文：诸将出于群盗，留之各竞雌雄，如此，则大业隳矣。 
现代文：各位将领都出身草莽盗贼，留在这里就会互相争一雌雄。这样，大业就会失败。 
English: The generals are all born as reckless thieves. If they stay here, they will fight with each other. In this way, the great cause will fail.

古文：孝和曰： 然则大军既未可西上，仆请间行观衅。 
现代文：柴孝和说： 既然大军不能西进，我请求潜行去窥伺官军的间隙，以便乘机进攻。 
English: Chai Takakazu said, "Since the large army cannot advance westward, I request you to sneak around and spy on the gaps between the government troops so that you can attack when the time comes.

古文：密许之。
现代文：李密应允了。
English: Li Mi agreed.

古文：孝和与数十骑至陕县，山贼归之者万馀人。
现代文：柴孝和与几十名骑兵到了陕县，山中的盗贼归附的有一万余人。
English: Chai Xiaohua and dozens of cavalrymen arrived in Shaanxi, and more than ten thousand people were attached to the thieves in the mountains.

古文：时密兵锋甚锐，每入苑，与隋兵连战。
现代文：当时李密军队的兵势甚猛，常常攻入东都西苑与隋兵交战。
English: At that time, Li Mi's army was very strong, often entering Dongdu Xiyuan to fight with Sui soldiers.

古文：会密为流矢所中，卧营中。
现代文：恰好这时崐李密被流箭射中，躺在营中养伤。
English: Just at this time, Gong Li Mi was shot by a stray arrow and lay in the camp to recover.

古文：丁丑，越王侗使段达与庞玉等夜出兵，陈于回洛仓西北。密与裴会基出战，达等大破之，杀伤太半，密乃弃回洛，奔洛口。
现代文：丁丑，越王杨侗派段达和庞玉等人乘夜出兵，在回洛仓西北列阵，李密与裴仁基率兵出战，段达等人大破李密军，杀伤大半人马。李密只好放弃回洛，奔往洛口。
English: Ding Gou, Yue Wang, Yang Pi sent Danda and Pang Yu and others to take the night to send troops, and they lined up in the northwest of Hui Locang. Li Mi and Pei Renji led the troops to fight. Danda and others defeated Li Mi's army, killing more than half of the soldiers. Li Mi had to give up Hui Loco and rushed to Lokou.

古文：宠玉、霍世举军于偃师，柴孝和之众闻密退，各散去。
现代文：庞玉、霍世举在偃师驻兵，柴孝和的部众听到李密败退，就各自溃散。
English: Pang Yu and Huo Shih held a garrison in the Shun division. When the troops of Chai Xiaohe heard that Li Mi had been defeated and retreated, they dispersed.

古文：孝和轻骑归密，杨德方、郑德韬皆死。
现代文：柴孝和轻骑回到李密军中，杨德方、郑德韬都死了。
English: Chai Xiao and Xiao Jie returned to Li Mi's army, while Yang Defang and Zheng Deyao both died.

古文：密以郑颋为左司马，荥阳郑乾象为右司马。
现代文：李密任命郑为左司马，荥阳人郑乾象为右司马。
English: Li Mi appointed Zheng as the left secretary, and Zheng Qianxiang from Shenyang as the right secretary.

古文：李建成、李元吉弃其弟智云于河东而去，吏执智云送长安，杀之。
现代文：李建成、李元吉将他们的弟弟李智云丢弃在河东而离去，当地的官吏抓住李智云送到长安处死。
English: Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji abandoned their younger brother Li Zhiyun in Hedong and left. Local officials caught Li Zhiyun and sent him to Chang'an to be executed.

古文：建成、元吉遇柴绍于道，与之偕行。
现代文：李建成、李元吉在路上遇到柴绍，与他同行。
English: Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji met Chai Shao on the road and went with him.

