古文：◎太祖一太祖开天行道肇纪立极大圣至神仁文义武俊德成功高皇帝，讳元璋，字国瑞，姓朱氏。先世家沛，徙句容，再徙泗州。
现代文：明太祖开天行道肇纪立极大圣至神仁文义武俊德成功高皇帝，讳元璋，字国瑞，姓朱。先世家住沛，后迁徙句容，再迁到泗州。
English: Emperor Gao of the Ming Dynasty, the founder of heaven and earth, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, the founder of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：父世珍，始徙濠州之钟离。生四子，太祖其季也。
现代文：其父名世珍，开始从泗州迁至濠州的钟离，生有四子，太祖是老四。
English: His father was a world-renowned scholar who moved from Bozhou to Zhongli in Bozhou. He had four sons, and his grandfather was the fourth.

古文：母陈氏，方娠，梦神授药一丸，置掌中有光，吞之，寤，口余香气。
现代文：其母姓陈，刚怀孕，梦见神授药一丸，放在手掌中闪闪发光，吞服惊醒，口中还残留着香气。
English: Her mother, surnamed Chen, was newly pregnant. She dreamed that God had given her a pill, which glistened in the palm of her hand. She swallowed it and woke up with the aroma still lingering in her mouth.

古文：及产，红光满室。
现代文：朱元璋出生的时候，红光满室，此后夜间多次有光芒射起。
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang was born, the room was filled with red light. Since then, the room has been illuminated many times at night.

古文：自是夜数有光起，邻里望见，惊以为火，辄奔救，至则无有。
现代文：邻里看到后，惊慌以为着火，便奔相救援，赶到后却什么也没有。
English: After the neighbors saw it, they panicked and thought it was on fire, so they rushed to the rescue, but when they arrived, there was nothing.

古文：比长，姿貌雄杰，奇骨贯顶。志意廓然，人莫能测。
现代文：朱元璋长大后，姿貌雄杰，奇骨贯顶，志意廓达，人莫能测。
English: After Zhu Yuanzhang grew up, his appearance was outstanding, his extraordinary bones penetrated to the top, his aspiration was high, and no one could measure him.

古文：至正四年，旱蝗，大饥疫。
现代文：至正四年大旱，蝗灾蔓延，饥荒瘟疫横行。
English: In the last four years, there has been a severe drought, locust plagues have spread, and famine and plague are rampant.

古文：太祖时年十七，父母兄相继殁，贫不克葬。
现代文：太祖当时只有十七岁，父母兄长相继死去，家里贫困无法将他们安葬。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was only seventeen years old. His parents and older brothers died one after another, and the poverty of the family made it impossible to bury them.

古文：里人刘继祖与之地，乃克葬，即凤阳陵也。
现代文：他的邻居刘继祖让出一片地才得以安葬，此即凤阳陵。
English: His neighbor, Liu Jizou, had to give up a piece of land for his burial, which is the Fengyang Mausoleum.

古文：太祖孤无所依，乃入皇觉寺为僧。
现代文：太祖孤身无所依靠，便入皇觉寺削发为僧。
English: With no one to rely on, Taizu entered Hokke-ji Temple and became a monk.

古文：逾月，游食合肥。道病，二紫衣人与俱，护视甚至。病已，失所在。
现代文：过了一月，游食合肥，路上身患重病，有两个穿紫衣的人和他一起，关心照顾十分周到，病愈，却不知二紫衣人去向。
English: After one month, a traveler from Hefei was seriously ill on the road. Two people in purple were with him. They were very thoughtful and caring. After the illness, they did not know where the two people in purple were going.

古文：凡历光、固、汝、颍诸州三年，复还寺。
现代文：太祖游历光、固、汝、颍各州三年，后又返回皇觉寺。
English: The great-grandfather traveled to the provinces of Guangxi, Guizhou, Shandong and Yunnan for three years, and then returned to Hwanggeoksa Temple.

古文：当是时，元政不纲，盗贼四起。
现代文：当时，元朝政纪无纲，盗贼四起。
English: At that time, the Yuan Dynasty had no discipline, and thieves were rampant.

古文：刘福通奉韩山童假宋后起颍，徐寿辉僣帝号起蕲，李二、彭大、赵均用起徐，众各数万，并置将帅，杀吏，侵略郡县，而方国珍已先起海上。
现代文：刘福通奉韩山童假借宋朝之后起兵颍州，徐寿辉称帝起兵于蕲州，李二、彭大、赵均用起兵于徐地，各率众数万，设置将帅，杀戮官吏，攻占郡县，而方国珍则早在海上起兵。
English: Liu Futong raised an army in Bozhou after pretending to be Han Shandong on behalf of the Song Dynasty, Xu Shouhui said that the emperor raised an army in Bozhou, Li Er, Peng Da and Zhao all raised an army in Xudi, each with tens of thousands, set up generals, killed officials and occupied counties and counties, while Fang Guozhen started an army at sea as early as possible.

古文：他盗拥兵据地，寇掠甚众。
现代文：其他一些盗贼都拥兵据地，占山为王，寇掠百姓。
English: Some other thieves all have strongholds, occupy mountains as kings, and plunder the people.

古文：天下大乱。
现代文：一时天下大乱。
English: Suddenly, the whole world was in turmoil.

古文：十二年春二月，定远人郭子兴与其党孙德崖等起兵濠州。
现代文：元朝至正十二年春二月，定远人郭子兴与孙德崖等同伙起兵濠州。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the spring and February of the 12th year of the Zheng, Guo Zixing, a person from Dingyuan, and Sun Deya and other accomplices set out for Bozhou.

古文：元将彻里不花惮不敢攻，而日俘良民以邀赏。
现代文：元朝将领彻里不花害怕不敢进攻，便每日抓良民邀赏。
English: General Cheri of the Yuan Dynasty was not afraid to attack, and he invited people to reward him for catching good people every day.

古文：太祖时年二十四，谋避兵，卜于神，去留皆不吉。乃曰： 得毋当举大事乎？ 
现代文：太祖时年二十五岁，为逃避兵荒，问卜于神，去留皆不吉利，就说 ：难道应该谋反举事吗？ 
English: My great-grandfather was twenty-five years old at the time. In order to escape the war, he prayed to God and said, "Should I rebel?"

古文：卜之吉，大喜，遂以闰三月甲戌朔入濠见子兴。
现代文：一卜则吉，大喜，于是四月十五到濠州见郭子兴。
English: He was overjoyed and went to see Guo Zixing in Ganzhou on April 15.

古文：子兴奇其状貌，留为亲兵。战辄胜，遂妻以所抚马公女，即高皇后也。
现代文：子兴见其外貌形状十分惊奇，留下作为亲兵，每战必胜，于是将抚养的马公之女许配给他，此即后来的高皇后。
English: Zi Xing was very surprised to see her appearance and shape, and he left her as his personal soldier, who would win every battle, so he betrothed Ma Gong's daughter to him, who later became the Queen of Gao.

古文：子兴与德崖龃龉，太祖屡调护之。
现代文：郭子兴和孙德崖不和，太祖多次从中调和。
English: Guo Zixing and Sun Deya were at odds, and Taizu reconciled them many times.

古文：秋九月，元兵复徐州，李二走死，彭大、赵均用奔濠，德崖等纳之。
现代文：秋九月，元兵收复徐州，李二逃亡他乡而死，彭大、赵均用投奔濠州，孙德崖等收留。
English: In autumn and September, the Yuan soldiers recovered Xuzhou, Li Ermo fled his hometown and died, Peng Da and Zhao both went to Quzhou, and Sun Deya and others stayed.

古文：子兴礼大而易均用，均用怨之。
现代文：郭子兴礼待彭大而对赵均另眼相待，赵均用心生怨气。
English: Guo Zixing treated Peng Da with courtesy, but treated Zhao Jun differently. Zhao Jun's intention was to arouse resentment.

古文：德崖遂与谋，伺子兴出，执而械诸孙氏，将杀之。
现代文：孙德崖于是与之合谋，等郭子兴外出之时，将其抓住捆绑交于孙氏，准备处死。
English: Sun Deya then conspired with him, and when Guo Zixing went out, he grabbed him, tied him up and handed him over to Sun, ready to be executed.

古文：太祖方在淮北，闻难驰至，诉于彭大。
现代文：此时太祖正在淮北，闻难赶回告诉彭大。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather was in Huaibei, and it was difficult for him to rush back to tell Peng Da.

古文：大怒，呼兵以行，太祖亦甲而拥盾，发屋出子兴，破械，使人负以归，遂免。
现代文：彭大大怒，率兵而行，太祖亦披甲戴盾，冲进屋内救出子兴，给他松绑，让人将其背回，郭子兴幸免于难。
English: Peng flew into a rage and led the soldiers away. Grandfather also put on armor and a shield and rushed into the house to rescue Zixing. He untied him and had someone carry him back. Guo Zixing survived.

古文：是冬，元将贾鲁围濠。
现代文：这年冬天，元将贾鲁围濠州。
English: In the winter of that year, the former general Jialu besieged Bozhou.

古文：太祖与子兴力拒之。
现代文：太祖和郭子兴拼力抵抗。
English: Taizu and Guo Zixing struggled to resist.

古文：十三年春，贾鲁死，围解。
现代文：至正十三年春，贾鲁死，濠州围解。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Taisho era, Jialu died, and Zhangzhou was encircled.

古文：太祖收里中兵，得七百人。
现代文：太祖回故里招兵七百人。
English: My great-grandfather went back to his hometown and recruited 700 soldiers.

古文：子兴喜，署为镇抚。
现代文：郭子兴十分高兴，提升太祖为镇抚。
English: Guo Zixing was very happy and promoted his great-grandfather to the post of governor.

古文：时彭、赵所部暴横，子兴弱，太祖度无足与共事，乃以兵属他将，独与徐达、汤和、费聚等南略定远。
现代文：这时彭、赵所率部众暴横无理，郭子兴孱弱无力，太祖考虑不足与他们共事，便交兵于他将，独自与徐达、汤和、费聚等人向南经营定远。
English: At this time, Peng and Zhao led the violent and unreasonable crowd, Guo Zixing was weak and powerless, and Taizu considered it insufficient to work with them, so he sent troops to him, and independently operated with Xu Da, Tang He, Fei Ju and others to the south.

古文：计降驴牌寨民兵三千，与俱东。夜袭元将张知院于横涧山，收其卒二万。
现代文：用计降服驴牌寨民兵三千，一起向东，夜袭元将张知院于横涧山，收其兵士二万。
English: Three thousand donkey-branded Zhai militiamen surrendered with the meter, and they went east together. They attacked the former general Zhang Zhiyin in Hengyaoshan at night, and collected twenty thousand soldiers.

古文：道遇定远人李善长，与语，大悦，遂与俱攻滁州，下之。
现代文：道遇定远人李善长，与之交谈后大喜，便一起攻取滁州。
English: He met Li Shanchang, a man from Dingyuan. After talking with him, he was overjoyed and they went to conquer Zhangzhou together.

古文：是年，张士诚据高邮，自称诚王。
现代文：这年张士诚占据高邮，自称诚王。
English: This year, Zhang Shicheng occupied Gaoyou and called himself King Cheng.

古文：十四年冬十月，元丞相脱脱大败士诚于高邮，分兵围六合。
现代文：至正十四年冬十月，元朝丞相脱脱大败张士诚于高邮，分兵包围六合。
English: In the winter and October of the 14th year of the Taisho era, the former imperial chancellor Zhang Shicheng was defeated at Gaoyou, and his troops surrounded Liuhe.

古文：太祖曰： 六合破，滁且不免。 
现代文：太祖说： 六合破，滁州也难免。 
English: The great-grandfather said: If Liuhe is broken, Zhangzhou will inevitably be broken.

古文：与耿再成军瓦梁垒，救之。力战，卫老弱还滁。
现代文：与耿再成军自瓦梁垒前往援救，奋力而战，护卫年老体弱者回滁州。
English: With Geng Zensheng's army, they went to rescue from the shingle wall, fought hard, and escorted the elderly and infirm back to Zhangzhou.

古文：元兵寻大至，攻滁，太祖设伏诱败之。
现代文：元兵随后蜂拥而来，进攻滁州，太祖设下埋伏诱败元兵。
English: The former soldiers then flocked to attack Zhangzhou, and Taizu set up an ambush to lure the former soldiers.

古文：然度元兵势盛且再至，乃还所获马，遣父老具牛酒谢元将曰： 守城备他盗耳，奈何舍巨寇戮良民？ 
现代文：考虑到元兵士气正旺，一定会卷土重来，于是归还所获马匹，派父老备牛、酒酬谢元将说 ：守城在于防备盗贼，为何舍下大盗而来杀害良民。 
English: Considering that the ex-soldier was in high spirits and would surely make a comeback, he returned the horses he had won and sent his father to prepare cattle and wine for him. General Xie said: The defense of the city is to guard against thieves, why abandon the great thieves to kill good people.

古文：元兵引去，城赖以完。
现代文：元兵由此退去，滁州得以保全。
English: As a result, the Yuan soldiers retreated and Zhangzhou was preserved.

古文：脱脱既破士诚，军声大振，会中谗，遽解兵柄，江淮乱益炽。
现代文：脱脱攻破张士诚，君威声望大振，却中谗言，解失兵权，江、淮更加混乱。
English: Zhang Shicheng was overthrown and defeated, the prestige of the emperor was greatly enhanced, but he was slandered, and he lost his military power, and Jiang and Huai were even more confused.

古文：十五年春正月，子兴用太祖计，遣张天祐等拔和州，檄太祖总其军。
现代文：至正十五年春正月，郭子兴采用太祖计谋，派张天等攻拔和州，命太祖总领部队。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of the Taisho era, Guo Zixing adopted his great-grandfather's stratagem and sent Zhang Tian and others to attack He Prefecture, ordering his great-grandfather to lead the troops.

古文：太祖虑诸将不相下，秘其檄，期旦日会厅事。
现代文：太祖思量诸将不分上下，便秘藏令符，等待第二天会事厅再说。
English: The great-grandfather thought about the differences between the upper and lower ranks, hid the order, and waited for the next day's meeting hall to speak.

古文：时席尚右，诸将先入，皆踞右。太祖故后至，就左。
现代文：当时席位崇尚右边，诸将先入，皆踞坐右边，太祖故意后到坐左边。
English: At that time, the right side of the seat was advocated, and everyone sat on the right side, and the great ancestor deliberately sat on the left side.

古文：比视事，剖决如流，众瞠目不能发一语，始稍稍屈。
现代文：等到讨论军事，太祖剖析决论如流，众将瞠目结舌不能发一言，始稍屈服。
English: Wait until the military is discussed, the great-grandfather analysis and decision-making are in full swing, the crowd will be stunned and unable to say a word, and begin to give in a little.

古文：议分工甓城，期三日。
现代文：讨论分工筑城，期限三天。
English: A three-day deadline has been set for discussing the division of labour for building the city.

古文：太祖工竣，诸将皆后。
现代文：太祖完工，诸将皆迟。
English: When the great-grandfather finished, all the generals were late.

古文：于是始出檄，南面坐曰： 奉命总诸公兵，今甓城皆后期，如军法何？ 
现代文：于是太祖拿出命令文书，面南而坐说： 奉命总管诸位兵马，今筑城都未按期完成，按军法该如何处置？ 
English: Then the great-grandfather took out the order document, sat facing south and said: "By order of the commander-in-chief, all soldiers and horses, the construction of the city is not completed on schedule, according to military law, how should it be dealt with?

古文：诸将皆惶恐谢。乃搜军中所掠妇女纵还家，民大悦。
现代文：诸将惶恐称罪，于是太祖令将军中所掠妇女释放回家，民众大为感动。
English: The generals panicked and pleaded guilty, so the great-grandfather ordered the general to release the captured women to go home, and the people were greatly moved.

古文：元兵十万攻和，拒守三月，食且尽，而太子秃坚、枢密副使绊住马、民兵元帅陈野先分屯新塘、高望、鸡笼山以绝饷道。
现代文：这时元兵十万进攻和州，守军据守三月，粮饷殆尽，而太子秃坚、枢密副使绊住马、民兵元帅陈聎先分别屯踞新塘、高望、鸡笼山以断绝粮道。
English: At this time, a hundred thousand Yuan soldiers attacked He Prefecture, the defenders held out for three months, and the grain supply was exhausted, while Prince Bald Jian, the vice-minister of the privy council, and the militia marshal Chen Yuxian separately occupied Xintang, Gaowang, and Qiguishan to cut off the grain supply.

古文：太祖率众破之，元兵皆走渡江。
现代文：太祖率众击破元兵，元兵皆渡江逃走。
English: Taizu led the crowd to defeat the former soldiers, and the former soldiers all fled across the river.

古文：三月，郭子兴卒。
现代文：三月，郭子兴死。
English: In March, Guo Zixing died.

古文：时刘福通迎立韩山童子林儿于亳，国号宋，建元龙凤。
现代文：这时刘福通迎立韩山童子韩林儿于亳州，定国号宋，建元龙凤。
English: At this time, Liu Futong welcomed Han Lin Er, the son of Han Shan, to Luzhou, Ding Guo Xiang, and Jian Yuan Longfeng.

古文：檄子兴子天叙为都元帅，张天祐、太祖为左右副元帅。
现代文：任命郭子兴子郭天叙为都元帅，张天、太祖为左右副元帅。
English: Appointed Guo Zixing's son Guo Tianxu as the capital marshal, Zhang Tian and Taizu as the left and right deputy marshals.

古文：太祖慨然曰： 大丈夫宁能受制于人耶？ 遂不受。
现代文：太祖感叹说 ：大丈夫能受制于人吗？ 于是不受。
English: The great-grandfather sighed and said, "Is it okay to be controlled by others? So I don't accept it."

古文：然念林儿势盛，可倚藉，乃用其年号以令军中。
现代文：然而考虑韩林儿势盛可以依靠，便用其年号以号令军中。
English: However, considering that Han Lin Er's momentum could be relied on, he used his year name to command the army.

古文：夏四月，常遇春来归。
现代文：夏四月，常遇春前来投奔归顺。
English: In the summer and April, it often happens that the spring comes to rush to Guishun.

古文：五月，太祖谋渡江，无舟。
现代文：五月，太祖想渡江，无船。
English: In May, Taizu wanted to cross the river, but there was no boat.

古文：会巢湖帅廖永安、俞通海以水军千艘来附，太祖大喜，往抚其众。
现代文：恰逢巢湖水帅廖永安、俞通海以水军千艘前来投奔，太祖大喜，前往安抚众军。
English: It coincided with the arrival of Liao Yong'an, the commander of the Chaohu Lake, and Shantonghai with a thousand ships of the navy. The great-grandfather was overjoyed and went to pacify the troops.

古文：而元中丞蛮子海牙扼铜城闸、马场河诸隘，巢湖舟师不得出。
现代文：但元中丞蛮子海牙扼守铜城闸、马场河诸关隘，巢湖舟师无路可出。
English: However, the former Vice-Commander in Chief, the barbarian Hague, held the gates of the Copper City and the Horse Farm River, and there was no way out for the Lake Chaohu boatmen.

古文：忽大雨，太祖喜曰： 天助我也！ 
现代文：忽然天降大雨，太祖高兴说 ：天助我啊。 
English: Suddenly, heavy rain fell from the sky, and the great-grandfather happily said, "Heaven help me."

古文：遂乘水涨，从小港纵舟还。因击海牙于峪溪口，大败之，遂定计渡江。
现代文：于是乘水涨从小巷放舟奔出，乘机击海牙于峪溪口，大败元兵，于是定计渡江。
English: As a result, he took advantage of the rising water to launch a boat from the alley, took the opportunity to hit the Hague at the mouth of the Wei River, defeated the Yuan soldiers, and then planned to cross the river.

古文：诸将请直趋集庆。
现代文：诸将请求直捣集庆。
English: The generals will ask for a straight-up celebration.

古文：太祖曰： 取集庆必自采石始。
现代文：太祖说 ：要取集庆必须从采石开始。
English: The great-grandfather said, "To have a gathering celebration, you must start with quarrying."

古文：采石重镇，守必固，牛渚前临大江，彼难为备，可必克也。 
现代文：采石重镇，守备必然牢固，牛渚前临大江，元兵难以防备，可以率先攻克。 
English: The quarry is important, the defense must be solid, the cattle are approaching the big river, the Yuan soldiers are difficult to guard, and they can take the lead in conquering.

古文：六月乙卯，乘风引帆，直达牛渚。
现代文：六月初一，乘风引帆，直达牛渚。
English: On the first day of June, the wind was used to guide the sails all the way to Ushi Nagisa.

古文：常遇春先登，拔之。
现代文：常遇春先到，一举攻克。
English: They often arrive early in the spring and take over in one fell swoop.

古文：采石兵亦溃。
现代文：采石元兵也溃逃。
English: The quarrymen also fled.

古文：缘江诸垒悉附。
现代文：沿江诸垒全部归顺。
English: All the forts along the river surrendered.

古文：诸将以和州饥，争取资粮谋归。
现代文：诸将因和州饥荒，争先夺取资粮准备回归。
English: Due to the famine in He Prefecture, they will scramble for resources and grain to prepare for their return.

古文：太祖谓徐达曰： 渡江幸捷，若舍而归，江东非吾有也。 
现代文：太祖对徐达说： 渡江侥幸成功，若舍弃而归，江东就非我等所有。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Xu Da: The crossing of the river was a fluke success. If we give up and return, the east of the river will not be all for us.

古文：乃悉断舟缆，放急流中，谓诸将曰： 太平甚近，当与公等取之。 
现代文：于是斩断船缆，将船放到急流中，对诸将说： 太平较近，我与诸位合力攻取。 
English: So he cut the ship's cable, put the ship into the rapids, and said to the generals: Peace is near, I will work with you to win it.

古文：遂乘胜拔太平，执万户纳哈出。
现代文：于是乘胜攻拔太平，抓获万户纳哈出。
English: As a result, they took advantage of the victory to invade Taiping and captured 10,000 households.

古文：总管靳义赴水死，太祖曰： 义士也 ，礼葬之。
现代文：总管靳义赴水而死，太祖赞叹： 真是一个义士。 以礼安葬。
English: The chief steward, Zou Yi, went to the water to die, and the great-grandfather was full of praise: What a righteous man. He was buried with honors.

古文：揭榜禁剽掠。
现代文：张榜严禁剽掠。
English: It is strictly forbidden to loot and pillage.

古文：有卒违令，斩以徇，军中肃然。
现代文：有士兵违令，斩首示众，军中肃然。
English: A soldier disobeyed orders and beheaded a man in front of the crowd. The army was stunned.

古文：改路曰府。
现代文：改路为府。
English: Change the route to the prefecture.

古文：置太平兴国翼元帅府，自领元帅事，召陶安参幕府事，李习为知府。
现代文：设太平兴国翼元帅府，自领元帅事，召陶安参谋幕府事，李习为知府。
English: He set up the Taiping Xingguo Wing Marshal's Office, led the marshal's office himself, summoned Tao An, the staff officer of the shogunate, and Li Xi as the prefect.

古文：时太平四面皆元兵。
现代文：当时太平四面都是原名。
English: At that time, Taiping was the original name for all four sides.

古文：右丞阿鲁灰、中丞蛮子海牙等严师截姑孰口，陈野先水军帅康茂才以数万众攻城。
现代文：右丞阿鲁灰、中丞蛮子海牙等率众堵截姑孰口，陈聎先的水军统帅康茂才率数万人攻城。
English: The right-hand man, Aru Hai, and the middle-ranking man, Brute Hague, led the crowd to block the mouth of the canal, and the commander of the navy, Kang Maocai, led tens of thousands of people to attack the city.

古文：太祖遣徐达、邓愈、汤和逆战，别将潜出其后，夹击之，擒野先，并降其众，阿鲁灰等引去。
现代文：太祖遣徐达、邓愈、汤和正面迎战，另派将士潜入其后，前后夹击，擒陈聎先并且降其部众，阿鲁灰等引退而去。
English: Emperor Taizu sent Xu Da, Deng Yu, Tang He to meet the battle head-on, and sent other generals to sneak in behind him, attack back and forth, beat Chen Xuan first and demote his subordinates, Aru Hai and others retired.

古文：秋九月，郭天叙、张天祐攻集庆，野先叛，二人皆战死，于是子兴部将尽归太祖矣。
现代文：秋九月，郭天叙、张天进攻集庆，陈聎先背叛。二人皆战死，于是郭子兴部将尽归太祖指挥。
English: In the autumn and September, Guo Tianxu and Zhang Tian attacked Jiaqing, and Chen Yuxian betrayed them. Both of them died in the battle, so Guo Zi Xingbu returned to the command of the great ancestor.

古文：野先寻为民兵所杀，从子兆先收其众，屯方山，与海牙掎角以窥太平。
现代文：野先不久被民兵杀死，从子兆先收其散兵，屯据方山，和海牙形成掎角，窥视太平。
English: Not long after, Nosen was killed by the militia. He gathered his scattered soldiers from Zizhao first, set up camp at Fangshan, and formed an angle with The Hague, peering into the peace.

古文：冬十二月壬子，释纳哈出北归。
现代文：冬十二月初一，释放纳哈出北归。
English: On the first day of winter in December, Naha was released to return to the north.

古文：十六年春二月丙子，大破海牙于采石。
现代文：至正十六年春二月二十五日，大破海牙于采石。
English: On the 25th day of February in the spring of the 16th year of the Taihei era, the great city of The Hague was founded in a quarry.

古文：三月癸未，进攻集庆，擒兆先，降其众三万六千人，皆疑惧不自保。
现代文：三月三日，进攻集庆，活捉陈兆先，降其众三万六千人，皆疑惑害怕不能自保。
English: On March 3, they attacked the festival, captured Chen Zhaoxian alive, and killed 36,000 people, all of whom were suspicious and afraid that they could not protect themselves.

古文：太祖择骁健者五百人入卫，解甲酣寝达旦，众心始安。
现代文：太祖挑选骁健者五百人入卫，解甲酣寝达旦，众心才安。
English: The great-grandfather selected five hundred able-bodied men to enter the imperial guard, and they were all relieved of their armor and slept soundly. Everyone's heart was at ease.

古文：庚寅，再败元兵于蒋山。
现代文：三月十日，再败元兵于蒋山。
English: On March 10, the Yuan soldiers were defeated again in Jiangshan.

古文：元御史大夫福寿，力战死之，蛮子海牙遁归张士诚，康茂才降。
现代文：元御史大夫福寿力战而死，蛮子海牙逃跑归附张士诚，康茂才投降。
English: Former Imperial Historian Dr. Fu Shouli died in the battle, the escape of the barbarian Hague was attributed to Zhang Shicheng, and Kang Mao only surrendered.

古文：太祖入城，悉召官吏父老谕之曰： 元政氵卖扰，干戈蜂起，我来为民除乱耳，其各安堵如故。
现代文：太祖入城，召集官吏父老告谕说 ：元朝政治腐败，干戈蜂起，我来是为民除乱，请各位安于职守。
English: The great-grandfather entered the city, called together officials and elders, and announced, "The Yuan Dynasty was politically corrupt, and there was an uprising against the Kuomintang. I have come to remove the disturbance for the people. Please remain at your posts."

古文：贤士吾礼用之，旧政不便者除之，吏毋贪暴殃吾民。 
现代文：贤士我以礼贤相待，旧政不适者一律改掉，官吏不要贪婪残暴殃及百姓。 
English: I will treat sages with courtesy and virtue. All those who are not suitable for the old regime will be removed. Officials should not be greedy and cruel to the people.

古文：民乃大喜过望。
现代文：百姓大喜过望。
English: The people were overjoyed.

古文：改集庆路为应天府，辟夏煜、孙炎、杨宪等十余人，葬御史大夫福寿，以旌其忠。
现代文：太祖改集庆路为应天府，征召夏煜、孙炎、杨宪等十余人，葬御史大夫福寿以表彰其忠。
English: The great-great-grandfather reorganized Qinglu as Yingtianfu, and conscripted more than ten people, including Xia Jun, Sun Yan, and Yang Xian, to bury the imperial historian Dr. Fu Shou in recognition of his loyalty.

古文：当是时，元将定定扼镇江，别不华、杨仲英屯宁国，青衣军张明鉴据扬州，八思尔不花驻徽州，石抹宜孙守处州，其弟厚孙守婺州，宋伯颜不花守衢州，而池州已为徐寿辉将所据，张士诚自淮东陷平江，转掠浙西。
现代文：当时，元将定定扼住镇江，别不华、杨仲英屯扎宁国，青衣军张明鉴占据扬州，八思尔不花驻守徽州，石抹宜孙守处州，其弟厚孙守婺州，宋伯颜不花守衢州，而池州已经被徐寿辉据有，张士诚自淮东攻陷平江后，转而侵掠浙西。
English: At that time, Geng Zong will definitely hold Zhenjiang, Be Buhua, Yang Zhongying will occupy Zanning, Zhang Mingjian of the Qing Yi Army will occupy Yangzhou, Ba Si Er will be stationed in Huizhou, Shima Yi Sun will be stationed in Zhanzhou, his brother Hou Sun will be stationed in Ganzhou, Song Boyan will be stationed in Ganzhou, and Chizhou has been owned by Xu Shouhui. Zhang Shicheng will invade West Zhejiang after invading Pingjiang from East Huai.

古文：太祖既定集庆，虑士诚、寿辉强，江左、浙右诸郡为所并，于是遣徐达攻镇江，拔之，定定战死。
现代文：太祖既定集庆，考虑到张士诚、徐寿辉势力强大，江左、浙右各郡已为他们所吞并，于是派徐达进攻镇江，获胜，定定战死。
English: Considering that Zhang Shicheng and Xu Shouhui were powerful and that counties on the left and right sides of the Yangtze River had been annexed by them, he sent Xu Da to attack Zhenjiang, won the battle and died in the battle.

古文：夏六月，邓愈克广德。
现代文：夏六月，邓愈攻克广德。
English: In the summer of June, Deng Yu conquered Guangde.

古文：秋七月己卯，诸将奉太祖为吴国公。
现代文：秋七月初一，诸将拥太祖称吴国公。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, all generals will have their ancestors called Wu Guogong.

古文：置江南行中书省，自总省事，置僚佐。
现代文：设江南行中书省，自己总领省事，设僚协助。
English: He set up a book ministry in the south of the Yangtze River, with himself as the head of the ministry and his colleagues as assistants.

古文：贻书张士诚，士诚不报，引兵攻镇江。
现代文：送文书给张士诚，张士诚不给回话，带兵进攻镇江。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent the document to Zhang Shicheng, but Zhang Shicheng did not reply, and led the troops to attack Zhenjiang.

古文：徐达败之，进围常州，不下。
现代文：徐达率兵将其击败，进而围常州，没有攻下。
English: Xu Da and his soldiers defeated it, and then surrounded Changzhou, but failed to capture it.

古文：九月戊寅，如镇江，谒孔子庙。
现代文：九月初一，太祖到镇江，拜谒孔子庙。
English: On the first day of September, Taizu went to Zhenjiang to visit the Confucius Temple.

古文：遣儒士告谕父老，劝农桑，寻还应天。
现代文：派儒士告知父老，勤于农桑。不久太祖回到应天。
English: He sent a Confucian scholar to tell his father that he should be diligent in farming mulberry. Soon, his grandfather returned to Yingtian.

古文：十七年春二月，耿炳文克长兴。
现代文：至正十七年春二月，耿炳文攻克长兴。
English: In the spring and February of the 17th year of the Taisho era, Geng Xianwen conquered Changxing.

古文：三月，徐达克常州。
现代文：三月，徐达攻克常州。
English: In March, Xu Da conquered Changzhou.

古文：夏四月丁卯，自将攻宁国，取之，别不华降。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，太祖亲率兵攻克宁国，别不华投降。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the great-grandfather led the troops to attack Kening Province, and Beibuhua surrendered.

古文：五月，上元、宁国、句容献瑞麦。
现代文：五月，上元、宁国、句容献瑞麦。
English: In May, Shangyuan, Ningguo, and Zhulong offered rice and barley.

古文：六月，赵继祖克江阴。
现代文：六月，赵继祖攻克江阴。
English: In June, Zhao Jizu conquered Jiangyin.

古文：秋七月，徐达克常熟。
现代文：秋七月，徐达攻克常熟。
English: In autumn and July, Xu Da conquered Changshu.

古文：胡大海克徽州，八思尔不花遁。
现代文：胡大海攻克徽州，八思尔不花逃走。
English: Hu Haihai invaded Kehuizhou, and the Eight Immortals fled.

古文：冬十月，常遇春克池州，缪大亨克扬州，张明鉴降。
现代文：冬十月，常遇春攻克池州，缪大亨攻克扬州，张明鉴投降。
English: In winter and October, it often happens that Chizhou is conquered by Chun, Yangzhou is conquered by Miao Tycoon, and Zhang Mingjian surrenders.

古文：十二月己丑，释囚。
现代文：十二月二十日，释放囚犯。
English: On December 20th, the prisoners were released.

古文：是年，徐寿辉将明玉珍据重庆路。
现代文：这年，徐寿辉将领明玉珍占据重庆路。
English: In this year, Xu Shouhui led the Ming Dynasty to occupy Chongqing Road.

古文：十八年春二月乙亥，以康茂才为营田使。
现代文：至正十八年春二月初七，任命康茂才为营田使。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the 18th year of the Spring, Kang Maocai was appointed as Yingtan envoy.

古文：三月己酉，录囚。
现代文：三月十一日，审查囚犯。
English: On March 11th, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：邓愈克建德路。
现代文：邓愈攻克建德路。
English: Deng Yu conquered the Jiande Road.

古文：夏四月，徐寿辉将陈友谅遣赵普胜陷池州。
现代文：夏四月，徐寿辉部将陈友谅派遣赵普胜攻陷池州。
English: In the summer of April, Xu Shouhui sent Zhao Pusheng to invade Chizhou.

古文：是月，友谅据龙兴路。
现代文：当月，友谅占据龙兴路。
English: In the same month, Yu Peng occupied Longxing Road.

古文：五月，刘福通破汴梁，迎韩林儿都之。
现代文：五月，刘福通攻破汴梁，迎立韩林儿，以汴梁为其首都。
English: In May, Liu Futong broke through Huliang and ushered in Hanlin'er, with Huliang as its capital.

古文：初，福通遣将分道四出，破山东，寇秦晋，掠幽蓟，中原大乱，太祖故得次第略定江表。
现代文：当初，福通遣将分四处出击，攻破山东，寇秦、晋，掠幽、蓟，中原大乱，太祖由此有机会安定长江沿岸的一些地方。
English: At the beginning, Fortunato dispatched generals to attack in four directions, defeating Shandong, Qoqin, Jin, Xiaoyu, Shao, and the Central Plains Rebellion, which gave Taizu the opportunity to stabilize some places along the Yangtze River.

古文：所过不杀，收召才隽，由是人心日附。
现代文：所过之地从不乱杀无辜，收召才俊，由此人心日益归附。
English: He never indiscriminately killed innocent people in the places he passed through, and he recruited talented people. As a result, the hearts of the people were increasingly attached to him.

古文：冬十二月，胡大海攻婺州，久不下，太祖自将往击之。
现代文：冬十二月，胡大海攻婺州，长久不克，太祖自任统帅率兵前往。
English: In the winter of December, Hu Hai attacked Bozhou, but was defeated for a long time. Taizu led his troops as commander-in-chief.

古文：石抹宜孙遣将率车师由松溪来援，太祖曰： 道狭，车战适取败耳。 
现代文：石抹宜孙遣将率车师由松溪前来援助，太祖说： 道路狭窄，车战是自取失败。 
English: Shi Masti Yisun sent a general with a driver from Songxi to come to his aid. Taizu said, "The road is narrow, and the car battle was a self-inflicted defeat.

古文：命胡德济迎战于梅花门，大破之，婺州降，执厚孙。
现代文：命胡德济迎战于梅花门，大破元兵，婺州投降，厚孙被活捉。
English: Hu Deji was ordered to fight at the Meihua Gate, defeated the Yuan soldiers, Zhangzhou surrendered, and the great-grandson was captured alive.

古文：先一日，城中人望见城西五色云如车盖，以为异，及是乃知为太祖驻兵地。
现代文：前一日，婺州城中人们望见城西有五色云犹如车盖，感动很奇怪，后来才知道是太祖驻兵之地。
English: The day before, people in the city of Zhangzhou saw a five-colored cloud like a car cover in the west of the city. They were strangely moved, and only later did they know that it was the place where the ancestors were stationed.

古文：入城，发粟振贫民，改州为宁越府。
现代文：太祖入城，散发粮食赈救贫民，改婺州为宁越府。
English: The great-grandfather entered the city, distributed grain to help the poor, and changed Bozhou to Ningyue Prefecture.

古文：辟范祖干、叶仪、许元等十三人分直讲经史。
现代文：征召范祖干、叶仪、许元等十三人，讲经书历史。
English: Thirteen people, including Fan Zukan, Ye Yi, and Xu Yuan, were called up to lecture on the history of scriptures.

古文：戊子，遣使招谕方国珍。
现代文：二十四日，遣使招谕方国珍。
English: On the 24th, Fang Guozhen was summoned.

古文：十九年春正月乙巳，太祖谋取浙东未下诸路。戒诸将曰： 克城以武，戡乱以仁。
现代文：至正十九年春正月十二日，太祖谋取浙东，未能攻下各路，他告诫各位将领说： 攻城以武力，治乱以仁义。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the 19th year of the Heian period, the great-grandfather set out to conquer eastern Zhejiang, but failed to conquer all roads. He admonished the generals: to attack the city by force, to control chaos by benevolence.

古文：吾比入集庆，秋毫无犯，故一举而定。
现代文：我们入集庆，秋毫无犯，故一举而定。
English: We are entering the festival, and there is no crime in the autumn, so it all depends.

古文：每闻诸将得一城不妄杀，辄喜不自胜。
现代文：每每听到各位将领攻得一城不妄自乱杀，就喜不自胜。
English: Every time I hear that your generals have conquered a city without killing each other, I can't help but rejoice.

古文：夫师行如火，不戢将燎原。
现代文：军队行动如火，不控制就将成燎原之势。
English: Military action is in full swing. Without control, it will turn into a battlefield.

古文：为将能以不杀为武，岂惟国家之利，子孙实受其福。 
现代文：为将能够以不杀人而起到武力征服的作用，难道仅是于国有利，实际是为子孙造福啊。 
English: In order to be able to conquer by force without killing, is it only beneficial to the country, but actually for the benefit of future generations?

古文：庚申，胡大海克诸暨。
现代文：十七日，胡大海攻陷诸暨。
English: On the 17th, Hu Haihai invaded Zhuji.

古文：是月，命宁越知府王宗显立郡学。
现代文：当月，命令宁越知府王宗显设立郡学。
English: That month, he ordered Wang Zongxian, the governor of Ningyue Prefecture, to establish a county school.

古文：三月甲午，赦大逆以下。
现代文：三月初二，赦免大逆之罪以下罪犯。
English: On March 2nd, the following criminals were pardoned for the crime of high treason.

古文：丁巳，方国珍以温、台、庆元来献，遣其子关为质，不受。
现代文：二十六日，方国珍以温、台、庆元来贡献，派其子关为人质，太祖不受。
English: On the 26th, Fang Guozhen contributed with Wen, Tai and Qingyuan, and sent his son Guan as a hostage, which was not accepted by Taizu.

古文：夏四月，俞通海等复池州。
现代文：夏四月，俞通海等收复池州。
English: In the summer of April, Shantonghai and others recovered Chizhou.

古文：时耿炳文守长兴，吴良守江阴，汤和守常州，皆数败士诚兵。
现代文：当时耿炳文守长兴，吴良守江阴，汤和守常州，都数次击败士诚兵。
English: At that time, Geng Bingwen, the governor of Changxing, Wu Liang, the governor of Jiangyin, and Tang He, the governor of Changzhou, all defeated Shicheng soldiers several times.

古文：太祖以故久留宁越，徇浙东。
现代文：太祖因事久留宁越，巡行浙东。
English: The great-grandfather stayed in Ningyue for a long time due to the matter, and went on a parade in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：六月壬戌，还应天。
现代文：六月初，还应天。
English: At the beginning of June, it was also cloudy.

古文：秋八月，元察罕帖木儿复汴梁，福通以林儿退保安丰。
现代文：秋八月，元将察罕帖木儿收复汴梁，刘福通与韩林儿退保安丰。
English: In autumn and August, the former general Cahan Timur recaptured Qilian, and Liu Futong and Han Lin'er retreated to Baofeng.

古文：九月，常遇春克衢州，擒宋伯颜不花。
现代文：九月，常遇春攻克衢州，活捉宋伯颜不花。
English: In September, it often happens that spring invades Luzhou, and Song Boyan is captured alive.

古文：冬十月，遣夏煜授方国珍行省平章，国珍以疾辞。
现代文：冬十月，派遣夏煜授予方国珍行省平章，国珍以病辞去。
English: In the winter of October, he sent Xia Yao to award Fang Guozhen with the Provincial Medal of the People's Republic of China, but Guozhen resigned due to illness.

古文：十一月壬寅，胡大海克处州，石抹宜孙遁。
现代文：十一月十三日，胡大海攻陷处州，石抹宜孙逃走。
English: On November 13th, Hu Hai attacked and occupied Zhouzhou, and Shima Yishun fled.

古文：时元守兵单弱，且闻中原乱，人心离散，以故江左、浙右诸郡，兵至皆下，遂西与友谅邻。
现代文：这时元朝守兵单弱，听到中原大乱，人心离散，因此江左、浙右诸郡，兵至皆克，于是西部与友谅相邻。
English: At this time, the Yuan Dynasty's soldiers were weak. Hearing of the Central Plains Rebellion, people's hearts were scattered. As a result, soldiers from counties to the left and right of the Yangtze River and Zhejiang Province were scattered all over the country. As a result, the western part of the country was adjacent to Yuyuan.

古文：二十年春二月，元福建行省参政袁天禄以福宁降。
现代文：至正二十年春二月，元朝福建行省参政袁天禄以福宁投降。
English: In the spring and February of the 20th year of the Taisho era, Yuan Tianlu, who had been a member of the provincial government of Fujian during the Yuan Dynasty, surrendered to Fu Ning.

古文：三月戊子，征刘基、宋濂、章溢、叶琛至。
现代文：三月初一，征召刘基、宋濂、章溢、叶琛到任。
English: On the first day of March, Liu Ji, Song Jun, Zhang Yue and Ye Jun were called up for duty.

古文：夏五月，徐达、常遇春败陈友谅于池州。
现代文：夏五月，徐达、常遇春在池州击败陈友谅。
English: In the summer of May, Xu Da and Changyu Chun defeated Chen Youjun in Chizhou.

古文：闰月丙辰，友谅陷太平，守将朱文逊，院判花云、王鼎，知府许瑗死之。
现代文：闰六月十日四日，陈友谅攻陷太平，守将朱文逊、院判花云、王鼎、知府许瑗战死。
English: On the 4th day of leap June 10th, Chen Youxuan led the attack on Taiping, and the guards Zhu Wensong, Inban Huayun, Wang Ding, and Governor Xu Xi were killed in the battle.

古文：未几，友谅弑其主徐寿辉，自称皇帝，国号汉，尽有江西、湖广地，约士诚合攻应天，应天大震。
现代文：不久，陈友谅杀其主徐寿辉，自称皇帝，国号汉，尽占江西、湖广之地。并约张士诚合攻应天，应天大震。
English: Soon after, Chen Youzheng killed his master Xu Shouhui, claimed to be the emperor and called himself Han, and occupied all of Jiangxi and Hunan. He also agreed with Zhang Shicheng to invade Yingtian and cause a great earthquake.

古文：诸将议先复太平以牵之，太祖曰： 不可。
现代文：诸将商议先收复太平来牵制，太祖说： 不可。
English: The generals discussed restoring peace first to contain the situation, but Taizu said, "No."

古文：彼居上游，舟师十倍于我，猝难复也。 
现代文：他们占居上游，舟师十倍于我，很难收复。 
English: They occupy the upper reaches, ten times more than me, and it is difficult to recover.

古文：或请自将迎击，太祖曰： 不可。
现代文：有人请求太祖自己亲率人马迎击，太祖说： 不可。
English: Someone asked the great-grandfather to personally lead his men and horses to meet the attack. The great-grandfather said: "No."

古文：彼以偏师缀我，而全军趋金陵，顺流半日可达，吾步骑急难引还，百里趋战，兵法所忌，非策也。 
现代文：他们以小股部队牵制我，而大部队直趋金陵，顺流半天可达，我们步兵骑兵很难及时返回，百里趋战，兵法所忌，这不是良策。 
English: They are holding me back with small units, while the main force is heading straight for Jinling, half a day's distance downstream. It is difficult for our infantry and cavalry to return in time. It is forbidden by the laws of war to go a hundred miles to fight. This is not a good strategy.

古文：乃驰谕胡大海捣信州牵其后，而令康茂才以书绐友谅，令速来。
现代文：于是飞马告知胡大海准备进攻信州牵制其后，令陈友谅故友康茂才送书信给陈友谅，让他速来进攻。
English: So Pegasus told Hu Haihai to prepare an attack on Shinshu to delay it, and then ordered Chen Youyuan's old friend Kang Mao to send a letter to Chen Youyuan, asking him to attack immediately.

古文：友谅果引兵东。
现代文：友谅果然带兵东进。
English: As expected, Tomodome marched east with his army.

古文：于是常遇春伏石灰山，徐达阵南门外，杨璟屯大胜港，张德胜等以舟师出龙江关，太祖亲督军卢龙山。
现代文：于是常遇春设伏石灰山，徐达布阵南门外，杨瞡屯扎大胜港，张德胜等以水军出龙江关，太祖亲自督军卢龙山。
English: As a result, it often happened that in the spring, he set up Fuxi Lime Mountain, Xu Dabo outside the south gate of the front, Yang Zhaotun in Dasheng Port, Zhang Desheng and others with the navy out of the Longjiang Pass, and the great ancestor personally commanded the army of Lu Longshan.

古文：乙丑，友谅至龙湾，众欲战，太祖曰： 天且雨，趣食，乘雨击之。 
现代文：二十三日，友谅到龙湾，众欲迎战，太祖说： 天快下雨了，你们赶快吃饱饭，然后乘雨迎击。 
English: On the twenty-third day, the friends went to Longwan, and everyone wanted to fight. Grandfather said: It's about to rain, you should eat your fill quickly, and then take advantage of the rain to fight.

古文：须臾，果大雨，士卒竞奋，雨止合战，水陆夹击，大破之，友谅乘别舸走。
现代文：不久，果然大雨，将士竞奋，雨停合战，水陆夹击，大败陈友谅，陈友谅乘小船逃走。
English: Soon, it rained heavily, the soldiers competed, the rain stopped the battle, the water and land clamped, the big defeat Chen You Yue, Chen You Yue fled by boat.

古文：遂复太平，下安庆，而大海亦克信州。
现代文：于是收复太平，攻下安庆，胡大海亦攻克信州。
English: As a result, Taiping was recovered, Anqing was conquered, and Shinshu was also conquered by Hu Haihai.

古文：初，太祖令茂才绐友谅，李善长以为疑。
现代文：当初，太祖令康茂才向陈友谅暗传书信，李善长深为不解。
English: At first, Emperor Taizong ordered Kangmao to secretly deliver a letter to Chen Youpeng, which puzzled Li Shanzhong.

古文：太祖曰： 二寇合，吾首尾受敌，惟速其来而先破之，则士诚胆落矣。 
现代文：太祖说： 二寇联合，我首尾受敌，只有让友谅先来，全力击败他，那么张士诚就闻风丧胆了。 
English: The great-grandfather said: "Two robbers united, I was defeated by the enemy, only let the friend come first and defeat him with all my strength, then Zhang Shicheng would be discouraged.

古文：已而士诚兵竟不出。
现代文：后来张士诚果然没有出兵。
English: Later, Zhang Shicheng did not send troops.

古文：丁卯，置儒学提举司，以宋濂为提举，遣子标受经学。
现代文：二十五日，设儒学提举司，任命宋濂为提举，遣子朱标学习经学。
English: On the 25th, the Confucianism Promotion Division was set up, Song Xi was appointed as the promotion, and Zhu Biao was sent to study the classics.

古文：六月，耿再成败石抹宜孙于庆元，宜孙战死，遣使祭之。
现代文：六月，耿再成在庆元击败石抹宜孙，宜孙战死，太祖遣使祭奠。
English: In June, Geng Zaicheng defeated Yi Sun in Qingyuan. Yi Sun died in the battle, and his great-grandfather sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋九月，徐寿辉旧将欧普祥以袁州降。
现代文：秋九月，徐寿辉旧将欧普祥献袁州投降。
English: In autumn and September, Xu Shouhui surrendered to Yuanzhou.

古文：冬十二月，复遣夏煜以书谕国珍。
现代文：冬十二月，再次派夏煜送书晓谕方国珍。
English: In the winter of December, Xia Yao once again sent a letter to Fang Guozhen.

古文：二十一年春二月甲申，立盐茶课。
现代文：至正二十一年春二月初二，设立盐茶课税。
English: On the second day of the second month of the spring of the 21st year of the Taisho era, a tax on salt tea was established.

古文：己亥，置宝源局。
现代文：十七日，设立宝源局。
English: On the 17th, the Treasure Bureau was established.

古文：三月丁丑，改枢密院为大都督府。
现代文：三月二十六日，改枢密院为大都督府。
English: On the 26th of March, the Privy Council was changed to the Grand Governor's Office.

古文：元将薛显以泗州降。
现代文：元朝将领薛显率泗州投降。
English: The Yuan Dynasty general Xue Xian led Bozhou to surrender.

古文：戊寅，国珍遣使来谢，饰金玉马鞍以献。
现代文：二十七日，方国珍派使者贡献金玉马鞍前来感谢。
English: On the 27th, Fang Guozhen sent an emissary to offer a golden saddle to express his gratitude.

古文：却之曰： 今有事四方，所需者人材，所用者粟帛，宝玩非所好也。 
现代文：太祖推拒说： 当今正是经营四方之时，所需的是人才，所用的是衣食，宝玩不是我所喜好的。 
English: The great-grandfather refused, saying, "Today is the time for the management of Shifang, what is needed is talent, what is used is food and clothing, and treasure is not my favorite.

古文：秋七月，友谅将张定边陷安庆。
现代文：秋七月，陈友谅部将张定边攻陷安庆。
English: In the autumn and July, Chen Youyou's troops captured Zhang Dingbian and Anqing.

古文：八月，遣使于元平章察罕帖木儿。
现代文：八月，遣使去元朝平章察罕帖木儿处。
English: In August, an envoy was sent to the headquarters of the Yuan Dynasty's Taira no shosho chakhan chomei.

古文：时察罕平山东，降田丰，军声大振，故太祖与通好。
现代文：当时察罕平山东，降田丰，军威大振，所以太祖与之通好。
English: At that time, Chahan Ping Shandong, Deng Tian Feng, and the military power were strong, so the great ancestor was friendly with them.

古文：会察罕方攻益都未下，太祖乃自将舟师征陈友谅。
现代文：恰好察罕正攻益都不下，太祖就亲率水陆军征讨陈友谅。
English: Just when it seemed that all was going well, the great-grandfather personally led the army and navy to recruit Chen Youyong.

古文：戊戌，克安庆，友谅将丁普郎、傅友德迎降。
现代文：二十日，攻克安庆，陈友谅部将丁普郎、傅友德投降。
English: On the 20th, after conquering Anqing, Chen Youjun's subordinates Ding Puro and Fu Youde surrendered.

古文：壬寅，次湖口，追败友谅于江州，克其城，友谅奔武昌。
现代文：二十四日，到湖口，追击陈友谅于江州，攻克其城，陈友谅逃奔武昌。
English: On the 24th, he went to Hukou, chased Chen Youxuan in Jiangzhou, conquered his city, and Chen Youxuan fled to Wuchang.

古文：分徇南康、建昌、饶、蕲、黄、广济，皆下。
现代文：分道巡行南康、建昌、饶、蕲、黄、广济，所到皆克。
English: The parade will pass through Nankang, Jianchang, Rao, Handan, Huanglong and Guangji, and will eventually arrive at Gaike.

古文：冬十一月己未，克抚州。
现代文：冬十一月十二日，攻克抚州。
English: On the 12th day of the 11th month of winter, Fuzhou was conquered.

古文：二十二年春正月，友谅江西行省丞相胡廷瑞以龙兴降。
现代文：二十二年春正月，友谅江西行省丞相胡廷瑞率龙兴投降。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 22nd year, Hu Tingrui, Minister of Jiangxi Province, led Longxing to surrender.

古文：乙卯，如龙兴，改为洪都府。
现代文：八日，到龙兴，改名洪都府。
English: On the 8th, it was moved to Longxing and renamed Hongdu Prefecture.

古文：谒孔子庙。
现代文：拜谒孔子庙。
English: Visit the Confucius Temple.

古文：告谕父老，除陈氏苛政，罢诸军需，存恤贫无告者，民大悦。
现代文：诏告父老百姓，废除陈氏苛政，罢免各种军需，抚恤贫穷无靠者，百姓非常高兴。
English: The people were very happy to see the proclamation to the people, the abolition of Chen's harsh regime, the dismissal of all kinds of military paymasters, and the support of the poor and helpless.

古文：袁、瑞、临江、吉安相继下。
现代文：袁、瑞、临江、吉安相继攻下。
English: Yuan, Rui, Linjiang and Jian were successively captured.

古文：二月，还应天。
现代文：二月，回应天。
English: February, response day.

古文：邓愈留守洪都。
现代文：邓愈留守洪都。
English: Deng Yu stayed in Hongdu.

古文：癸未，降人蒋英杀金华守将胡大海，郎中王恺死之，英叛降张士诚。
现代文：十七日，降人蒋英杀害金华守将胡大海，郎中王恺也死于其难，蒋英叛降张士诚。
English: On the 17th, the renegade Chiang Ying killed the governor of Jinhua, Hu Haiya, and his son-in-law, Wang Yao, also died in the battle. Chiang Ying's renegade was Zhang Shicheng.

古文：处州降人李祐之闻变，亦杀行枢密院判耿再成反，都事孙炎、知府王道同、元帅朱文刚死之。
现代文：处州投降来的李之听说蒋英反叛，也杀行枢密院判耿再成而反，都事孙炎、知府王道同、元帅朱文刚皆死。
English: Li Zhi, who had come from Zhuzhou to surrender, heard that Jiang Ying had rebelled, and he also rebelled against the Privy Council's decision to execute Geng Zengcheng. Sun Yan, Governor Wang Daotong, and Marshal Zhu Wengang all died.

古文：三月癸亥，降人祝宗、康泰反，陷洪都，邓愈走应天，知府叶琛、都事万思诚死之。是月，明玉珍称帝于重庆，国号夏。
现代文：当月，明玉珍在重庆称帝，国号夏。
English: That month, Ming Yuzhen was crowned emperor in Chongqing, and the country was named Xia.

古文：夏四月己卯，邵荣复处州。
现代文：夏四月初四，邵荣收复处州。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the summer, Shao Rong recovered Zhouzhou.

古文：甲午，徐达复洪都。
现代文：十九日徐达收复洪都。
English: On the 19th, Xu Da recovered Hongdu.

古文：五月丙午，朱文正、赵德胜、邓愈镇洪都。
现代文：五月初二，朱文正、赵德胜、邓愈镇守洪都。
English: On the second day of May, Zhu Wenzheng, Zhao Desheng, and Deng Yu were sent to guard Hongdu.

古文：六月戊寅，察罕以书来报，留我使人不遣。
现代文：六月五日，察罕修书来报，留我使者不准返回。
English: On June 5th, it was reported that my envoy was not allowed to return.

古文：察罕寻为田丰所杀。
现代文：不久察罕被田丰杀害。
English: Not long after, Chahan was killed by Tian Feng.

古文：秋七月丙辰，平章邵荣、参政赵继祖谋逆，伏诛。
现代文：秋七月十三日，平章邵荣、参政赵继祖准备谋反，被杀。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, Pingzhang Shao Rong and Zhao Jizu, who were involved in politics, were preparing to rebel and were killed.

古文：冬十二月，元遣尚书张昶航海至庆元，授太祖江西行省平章政事，不受。
现代文：冬十二月，元朝派尚书张昶航海到庆元，授太祖江西行省平章政事，太祖没有接受。
English: In the winter of December, the Yuan Dynasty sent Shangshu Zhang Jie to sail to Qingyuan to grant the great-grandfather Jiangxi Province Pingzhang government affairs, but the great-grandfather did not accept.

古文：察罕子扩廓帖木儿致书归使者。
现代文：察罕子扩廓帖木儿致信归还使者。
English: Tamerlane sends a letter back to the envoy.

古文：二十三年春正月丙寅，遣汪河报之。
现代文：二十三年春正月二十五日，派汪河回信扩廓帖木儿。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the first month of the spring of the year twenty-three, Wang He sent a reply to Zangke Timur.

古文：二月壬申，命将士屯田积谷。
现代文：二月一日，命令将士屯田积累谷物。
English: On February 1, he ordered the soldiers to accumulate grain in Tonden.

古文：是月，友谅将张定边陷饶州。
现代文：当月，陈友谅将张定边攻陷饶州。
English: In the same month, Chen Youyuan led Zhang Dingbian to invade Raozhou.

古文：士诚将吕珍破安丰，杀刘福通。
现代文：张士诚将吕珍攻破安丰，杀死刘福通。
English: Zhang Shicheng defeated Lu Zhen and killed Liu Futong.

古文：三月辛丑，太祖自将救安丰，珍败走，以韩林儿归滁州，乃还应天。
现代文：三月一日，太祖亲率人马救援安丰，吕珍败走，因韩林儿到滁州，于是回应天。
English: On March 1, the great-grandfather personally led the rescue of Anfeng, and Lü Zhen was defeated. Because Han Lin Er went to Zhangzhou, he responded to Tian.

古文：夏四月壬戌，友谅大举兵围洪都。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，陈友谅大举进兵包围洪都。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Chen Youxuan sent a large number of soldiers to encircle Hongdu.

古文：乙丑，诸全守将谢再兴叛，附于士诚。
现代文：二十六日，诸全守将谢再兴叛变，归附张士诚。
English: On the 26th, Zhuquan commander Xie Zaoxing mutinied and joined Zhang Shicheng.

古文：五月，筑礼贤馆。
现代文：五月修建礼贤馆。
English: In May, the Hall of Reverence was built.

古文：友谅分兵陷吉安，参政刘齐、知府朱叔华死之。陷临江，同知赵天麟死之。陷无为州，知州董会死之。
现代文：陈友谅分兵攻陷吉安，参政刘齐、知府朱叔华被杀；攻陷临江，同知赵天麟被杀；攻陷无为州，知州董曾被杀。
English: Chen Youyuan's detachment invaded Ji'an and killed Liu Qi, a politician, and Zhu Shuhua, a prefect; invaded Linjiang and killed Zhao Tianlin, a friend; invaded Wuzhou and killed Zhizhou Dong Zeng.

古文：秋七月癸酉，太祖自将救洪都。
现代文：秋七月初六，太祖亲征救援洪都。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Taizu personally led the rescue of Hongdu.

古文：癸未，次湖口，先伏兵泾江口及南湖觜，遏友谅归路，檄信州兵守武阳渡。
现代文：十六日，到湖口，先设伏兵在泾江口和南湖觜，遏制陈友谅归路，令信州兵守武阳渡。
English: On the 16th, when he arrived at the mouth of the lake, he first set up an ambush at the mouth of the Minjiang River and the Nanhu Pass, to deter Chen Youjun from returning, and ordered the Xinzhou soldiers to guard Wuyang Pass.

古文：友谅闻太祖至，解围，逆战于鄱阳湖。
现代文：陈友谅听说太祖兵到，解围洪都，在鄱阳湖迎战太祖。
English: Chen Youyuan heard that Emperor Taizu's soldiers had arrived, lifted the siege of Hongdu, and met Emperor Taizu at Poyang Lake.

古文：友谅兵号六十万，联巨舟为阵，楼橹高十余丈，绵亘数十里，旌旗戈盾，望之如山。
现代文：陈友谅大军号称六十万，联接巨舟为阵，楼橹高十余丈，连续数十里不断，旌旗戈矛，望之如山。
English: Chen Youzhen's army is reputed to be 600,000 strong, connected by giant boats, towering more than ten stories high, stretching for dozens of miles, waving banners and spears, and looking like a mountain.

古文：丁亥，遇于康郎山，太祖分军十一队以御之。
现代文：二十日，两军相遇于康郎山，太祖将军队分为十一个队抵御。
English: On the 20th, the two armies met at Kang Lang Mountain, and Taizu divided the army into eleven teams to resist.

古文：戊子，合战，徐达击其前锋，俞通海以火炮焚其舟数十，杀伤略相当。
现代文：二十一日，两军交战，徐达击其前锋，俞通海用火炮焚烧友谅船数十艘，双方伤亡大致相当。
English: On the twenty-first day, the two armies engaged in battle. Xu Daru attacked his vanguard, and Shantong Hai used artillery to burn dozens of friendly ships. The casualties on both sides were roughly equal.

古文：友谅骁将张定边直犯太祖舟，舟胶于沙，不得退，危甚，常遇春从旁射中定边，通海复来援，舟骤进，水涌太祖舟，乃得脱。
现代文：陈友谅骁将张定边直冲太祖船来，太祖船搁于沙中，不能后退，甚是危险。常遇春从旁以箭射中张定边，通海也前来援助，由于船骤然而进，带动水涌，太祖坐船才得以脱险。
English: Chen Youxuan pushed Zhang Dingbian straight towards the ancestor ship. The ancestor ship was anchored in the sand and could not move back, which was very dangerous. Often in the spring, Zhang Dingbian was hit by arrows from the side, and Tonghai also came to help. Due to the sudden advance of the ship and the surge of water, the ancestor was able to escape by boat.

古文：己丑，友谅悉巨舰出战，诸将舟小，仰攻不利，有怖色。
现代文：二十二日，陈友谅率大船倾巢出战，而诸将则船小，仰攻极为不利，一个个面有惧色。
English: On the 22nd, Chen Youzhen led a large ship to go to war, while the generals were small, and the attack was extremely unfavorable, and they were afraid of each other.

古文：太祖亲麾之，不前，斩退缩者十余人，人皆殊死战。
现代文：太祖亲自指挥，仍然不敢前进，于是斩杀退缩者十余人，大家皆殊死奋战。
English: Taizu personally commanded, but still did not dare to advance, so he killed more than ten people who retreated, and everyone fought to the death.

古文：会日晡，大风起东北，乃命敢死士操七舟，实火药芦苇中，纵火焚友谅舟。
现代文：到下午三时左右，东北风大起，于是命令敢死队乘七艘战船，用芦苇叶包上火药，纵火焚烧陈友谅船队。
English: Around three o'clock in the afternoon, the northeasterly wind picked up, so he ordered a death squad to board seven warships, wrap gunpowder in reed leaves, and set fire to Chen Youjun's fleet.

古文：风烈火炽，烟焰涨天，湖水尽赤。
现代文：风烈火猛，烟焰涨天，湖水一片红色。
English: The wind is fierce, the smoke billows into the sky, and the lake turns red.

古文：友谅兵大乱，诸将鼓噪乘之，斩首二千余级，焚溺死者无算，友谅气夺。
现代文：陈友谅军队由此大乱，诸将呐喊乘势攻击，斩杀二千多人，汉军被烧死淹死者不计其数，陈友谅气势顿消。
English: As a result, Chen Youku's army was in chaos. The generals shouted and attacked, killing more than two thousand people. Countless Han soldiers were burned to death and drowned. Chen Youku's power disappeared immediately.

古文：辛卯，复战，友谅复大败。
现代文：二十四日，双方再次开战，陈友谅再度大败。
English: On the 24th, the two sides went to war again, and Chen Youxuan suffered another crushing defeat.

古文：于是敛舟自守，不敢更战。
现代文：于是收舟自守，不敢再战。
English: As a result, they retreated to protect themselves and did not dare to fight again.

古文：壬辰，太祖移军扼左蠡，友谅亦退保渚矶。
现代文：二十五日，太祖移军扼住左蠡，陈友谅退保渚矶。
English: On the 25th, Taizu's army moved in and captured Zuoying, and Chen Youxiong was forced to retreat to Nagisa.

古文：相持三日，其左、右二金吾将军皆降。
现代文：相持三天，其左、右两位金吾将军都投降太祖。
English: They held each other for three days, after which the two generals, Kingo on the left and Kingo on the right, both surrendered to Taizu.

古文：友谅势益蹙，忿甚，尽杀所获将士。
现代文：陈友谅势力更加窘迫，甚为忿怒，将所获将士全部杀掉。
English: Chen Youyuan's forces were even more embarrassed and very angry, and killed all the soldiers they had captured.

古文：而太祖则悉还所俘，伤者傅以善药，且祭其亲戚诸将阵亡者。
现代文：而太祖则全部归还所俘之人，对受伤的给予好药，且奠祭其阵亡的亲戚将士。
English: On the other hand, Taizu returned all the captives, gave good medicine to the injured, and offered a sacrifice to his relatives who died in the war.

古文：八月壬戌，友谅食尽，趋南湖觜，为南湖军所遏，遂突湖口。
现代文：八月二十六日，陈友谅粮尽，奔向南湖觜，被南湖守军遏制，于是向湖口突围。
English: On August 26th, Chen Youzhen ran out of food and rushed to the South Lake. He was stopped by the South Lake defenders, so he broke through to the lake's mouth.

古文：太祖邀之，顺流搏战，及于泾江。
现代文：太祖半路拦截，顺流与之搏战，直到泾江。
English: Taizu intercepted it halfway and fought it downstream until it reached the Lijiang River.

古文：泾江军复遮击之，友谅中流矢死。
现代文：泾江军又以遮盖之势进攻，陈友谅中乱箭而死。
English: The Minjiang Army attacked again with a covering force, and Chen Youyong was killed in the crossfire.

古文：张定边以其子理奔武昌。
现代文：张定边和陈友谅子陈理逃回武昌。
English: Zhang Dingbian and Chen Yu's adopted son Chen Li fled back to Wuchang.

古文：九月，还应天，论功行赏。
现代文：九月，太祖率大军回应天，论功行赏。
English: In September, the great ancestor led a large army to respond to the heavens and reward the meritorious deeds.

古文：先是，太祖救安丰，刘基谏不听。
现代文：当初，太祖救援安丰，刘基劝阻不听。
English: At first, Taizu tried to rescue Anfeng, but Liu Ji dissuaded him from listening.

古文：至是谓基曰： 我不当有安丰之行。使友谅乘虚直捣应天，大事去矣。
现代文：现在对刘基说： 我救援安丰之时，如果陈友谅乘虚直捣应天，天下大势就难预料了。
English: Now I say to Liu Ji: When I was rescuing Anfeng, if Chen You Yuzhen took advantage of the situation, it would be difficult to predict the general trend of the world.

古文：乃顿兵南昌，不亡何待。
现代文：但陈友谅屯兵南昌，不亡何待。
English: However, Chen Youyou is a veteran of Nanchang, and he will not die.

古文：友谅亡，天下不难定也。 
现代文：陈友谅一死，天下就不难定了。 
English: Once Chen Youyuan dies, the world will be stable.

古文：壬午，自将征陈理。
现代文：十六日，太祖亲征陈理。
English: On the 16th, the great-great-grandfather personally selected Chen Li.

古文：是月，张士诚自称吴王。
现代文：当月，张士诚自称吴王。
English: That month, Zhang Shicheng called himself Wu Wang.

古文：冬十月壬寅，围武昌，分徇湖北诸路，皆下。
现代文：冬十月七日，进围武昌，分道巡行湖北各路，皆克。
English: In winter, on October 7th, they entered Wuchang and marched along all roads in Hubei Province.

古文：十二月丙申，还应天，常遇春留督诸军。
现代文：十二月初一，回应天，常遇春留督各军。
English: On the first day of December, in response to the day, the armies of the Spring Retainer are often encountered.

古文：二十四年春正月丙寅朔，李善长等率群臣劝进，不允。
现代文：至正二十四年正月初一，李善长等率群臣劝进，太祖不受。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twenty-fourth year of the Heian period, Li Shanzhong and other vassals urged him to go ahead, but Taizu did not accept.

古文：固请，乃即吴王位。
现代文：一再请求，太祖才即吴王位。
English: He repeatedly requested that the Great Ancestor should succeed to the throne of Wu.

古文：建百官。
现代文：设置百官。
English: Set up a hundred officials.

古文：以善长为右相国，徐达为左相国，常遇春、俞通海为平章政事，谕之曰： 立国之初，当先正纪纲。
现代文：任命李善长为右相国，徐达为左相国，常遇春、俞通海为平章政事，告诫他们说 ：立国之初，应该首先正纪纲。
English: He appointed Li Shanchang as the right minister of state, Xu Daru as the left minister of state, and Changyu Chun and Yan Tonghai as the political affairs of Pingzhang, and admonished them: At the beginning of the founding of the country, we should first correct the discipline.

古文：元氏暗弱，威福下移，驯至于乱，今宜鉴之。 
现代文：元朝暗弱，威福下移，以至于大乱，今天应引以为鉴。 
English: The Yuan Dynasty was weak and feeble, and Wei and Fu moved downwards to the point of chaos. This should be taken as a lesson for today.

古文：立子标为世子。
现代文：立子朱标为世子。
English: The eldest son, Zhu Bei, became the heir.

古文：二月乙未，复自将征武昌，陈理降，汉、沔、荆、岳皆下。
现代文：二月初一，太祖再次亲征武昌，陈理投降，汉、沔、荆、岳都被收复。
English: On the first day of February, Taizu personally conquered Wuchang again, Chen Li surrendered, and Han, Yao, Jing, and Yue were all recovered.

古文：三月乙丑，还应天。
现代文：三月初一，班师回应天。
English: On the first day of March, the class teacher responded.

古文：丁卯，置起居注。庚午，罢诸翼元帅府，置十七卫亲军指挥使司，命中书省辟文武人材。
现代文：三日，修起居注，六日，罢诸翼元帅府，设十七卫亲军指挥使司，命中书省征召文武人才。
English: On the third day, the residence note was established, and on the sixth day, the marshal's office was set up, the 17th Guards Corps commanding officer was set up, and the Ministry of Education and Culture was ordered to recruit literary and military talents.

古文：夏四月，建祠，祀死事丁普郎等于康郎山，赵德胜等于南昌。
现代文：夏四月，建祠堂，祭祀丁普郎等于康郎山，在南昌祭祀赵德胜等。
English: In the summer of April, the ancestral hall was built, and the worship of Ding Puro was equal to that of Kang Rongshan, and the worship of Zhao Desheng in Nanchang.

古文：秋七月丁丑，徐达克卢州。
现代文：秋七月十六日，徐达攻克庐州。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, Xu Da attacked and conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：戊寅，常遇春徇江西。
现代文：十七日，常遇春前往江西。
English: On the 17th, Changyu Chun left for Jiangxi.

古文：八月戊戌，复吉安，遂围赣州。
现代文：八月初七，收复吉安，于是包围赣州。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, they recovered Ji'an, and then encircled Zhangzhou.

古文：达徇荆、湘诸路。
现代文：徐达巡行荆、湘各路。
English: Xu Da marched through Jing and Hunan provinces.

古文：九月甲申，下江陵，夷陵、潭、归皆降。
现代文：九月二十四日，攻下江陵，夷陵、潭、归皆降。
English: On September 24th, Jiangling was captured, and Yiling, Tan and others all surrendered.

古文：冬十二月庚寅，达克辰州，遣别将下衡州。
现代文：冬十二月初一，徐达攻克辰州，派别将直下衡州。
English: On the first day of winter in December, Xu Da attacked Chenzhou, and the faction would go straight to Hengzhou.

古文：二十五年春正月己巳，徐达下宝庆，湖湘平。
现代文：至正二十五年春正月初十，徐达攻下宝庆，湖湘平定。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the 25th year, Xu Da conquered Baoqing, and Hunan was pacified.

古文：常遇春克赣州，熊天瑞降。遂趋南安，招谕岭南诸路，下韶州、南雄。
现代文：常遇春攻克赣州，熊天瑞投降，于是直赴南安，招抚晓谕岭南各路，收复韶州、南雄。
English: He often encountered the spring offensive to conquer Bozhou, and Xiong Tianrui surrendered, so he went straight to Nan'an, solicited and guided all roads in southern Lingnan, and recovered Bozhou and Nanxiong.

古文：甲申，如南昌，执大都督朱文正以归，数其罪，安置桐城。
现代文：二十五日，抵南昌，捉拿大都督朱文正回应天，数落其罪，然后将其安置桐城。
English: On the 25th, he arrived in Nanchang, arrested the grand governor Zhu Wenzheng in response to the day, convicted him, and then placed him in Tongcheng.

古文：二月己丑，福建行省平章陈友定侵处州，参军胡深击败之，遂下浦城。
现代文：三十日，福建行省平章陈友定侵略处州，参军胡深将他击败，收复浦城。
English: On the 30th, Pingzhang Chen Youding from Fujian Province invaded Zhouzhou, and Hu Sheng, who joined the army, defeated him and recovered Pucheng.

古文：丙午，士诚将李伯升攻诸全之新城，李文忠大败之。
现代文：二月十七日，张士诚将李伯日升进攻诸全的新城，李文忠大败之。
English: On February 17th, Zhang Shicheng attacked Li Bo Risheng in Zhuquan's new city, and Li Wenzhong was soundly defeated.

古文：夏四月庚寅，常遇春徇襄、汉诸路。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，常遇春巡行襄、汉各路。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the Spring Festival parade is often held along the roads of Xiang and Han.

古文：五月乙亥，克安陆。
现代文：六月七日，攻克安陆。
English: On June 7th, Anlu was conquered.

古文：己卯，下襄阳。
现代文：十一日，攻下襄阳。
English: On the 11th, they captured Yangyang.

古文：六月壬子，朱亮祖、胡深攻建宁，战于城下，深被执，死之。
现代文：七月十四日，朱亮祖、胡深进攻建宁，战于城下，胡深被抓杀害。
English: On July 14, Zhu Liangzu and Hu Sheng attacked Jianning and fought under the castle. Hu Sheng was captured and killed.

古文：秋七月，令从渡江士卒被创废疾者养之，死者赡其妻子。
现代文：秋七月，太祖命令对自渡江以来受伤残废的和生病的给予给养，对牺牲的赡养其妻子。
English: In the autumn of July, Taizu ordered that the injured, crippled and sick since crossing the river should be supported, and the wife of the victim should be supported.

古文：九月丙辰，建国子学。
现代文：九月初一，建立国子学。
English: On the first day of September, Kuniko-gaku was established.

古文：冬十月戊戌，下令讨张士诚。
现代文：冬十月十四日，下令讨伐张士诚。
English: In winter, on October 14th, he ordered a crackdown on Zhang Shicheng.

古文：是时，士诚所据，南至绍兴，北有通、泰、高邮、淮安、濠、泗，又北至于济宁。
现代文：这时，张士诚所占有之地，南到绍兴，北有通、泰、高邮、淮安、濠、泗，北到济宁。
English: At this time, the land occupied by Zhang Shicheng extended south to Shaoxing, north to Yutong, Tai, Gaoyou, Huai'an, Handan and Handan, and north to Jining.

古文：乃命徐达、常遇春等先规取淮东。
现代文：于是命徐达、常遇春等先规划谋取淮东。
English: As a result, the plan to seek Huaidong was made ahead of time, often in the spring.

古文：闰月，围泰州，克之。
现代文：闰月，包围泰州，顺利攻克。
English: Leap month, encircle Taizhou, successfully conquer.

古文：十一月，张士诚寇宜兴，徐达击败之，遂自宜兴还攻高邮。
现代文：十一月，张士诚进攻宜兴，徐达击败他，于是从宜兴回头进攻高邮。
English: In November, Zhang Shicheng attacked Yixing. Xu Da defeated him, so he returned from Yixing to attack Gaoyou.

古文：二十六年春正月癸未，士诚窥江阴，太祖自将救之，士诚遁，康茂才追败之于浮子门。
现代文：至正二十六年春正月初一，张士诚侵犯江阴，太祖亲征援救，士诚逃走，康茂才追击到浮子门将其击败。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the 26th year of Spring, Zhang Shicheng invaded Jiangyin, the great-grandfather himself called for help, Shicheng fled, and Kangmao chased him to the Floating Gate and defeated him.

古文：太祖还应天。
现代文：太祖返回应天。
English: The great-grandfather returns to the heavens.

古文：二月，明玉珍死，子升自立。
现代文：二月，明玉珍死，其子明日升自立。
English: In February, Ming Yuzhen died, and her son, Ming Sheng, became independent.

古文：三月丙申，令中书严选举。
现代文：三月十四日，太祖令中书严格选举。
English: On March 14th, Emperor Taizu ordered a strict election.

古文：徐达克高邮。
现代文：徐达攻克高邮。
English: Xu Da conquered Gaoyou.

古文：夏四月乙卯，袭破士诚将徐义水军于淮安，义遁，梅思祖以城降。
现代文：夏四月初四，袭破张士诚将徐义水军于淮安，徐义逃走，梅思祖以城投降。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhang Shicheng defeated Xu Yi's naval force in Huai'an, Xu Yi fled, and Meizu surrendered the city.

古文：濠、徐、宿三州相继下，淮东平。
现代文：濠、徐、宿三州相继收复，淮东平定。
English: Handan, Xu, and Shu three provinces were successively recovered, and Huaidong was pacified.

古文：甲子，如濠州省墓，置守冢二十家，赐故人汪文、刘英粟帛。置酒召父老饮，极欢，曰： 吾去乡十有余年，艰难百战，乃得归省坟墓，与父老子弟复相见。
现代文：十三日，太祖到濠州省墓，设守冢二十家，赐故人汪文、刘英粟帛，设酒招待父老宴饮极欢，太祖说： 我离乡有十几年，艰难征战，才得以回归省察坟墓，与父老兄弟再次相见。
English: On the 13th day, the great-grandfather went to the provincial tomb of Zhangzhou, set up a garrison of twenty families, gave the deceased Wang Wen and Liu Ying Maojun, and set up a wine to invite his father to a banquet. The great-grandfather said: I have been away from home for more than ten years, and it was a difficult campaign before I was able to return to inspect the tomb and meet my father and brothers again.

古文：今苦不得久留欢聚为乐。
现代文：今天恨不能久留与大家欢聚为乐。
English: I can't wait to spend time with all of you today and enjoy being together.

古文：父老幸教子弟孝弟力田，毋远贾，滨淮郡县尚苦寇掠，父老善自爱。 
现代文：父老应教子弟忠孝勤农，不要远出经商，滨淮各郡县尚苦于寇掠，父老请多自爱。 
English: Parents should teach their children to be loyal, filial and diligent farmers, and not to go far away to do business. Counties and counties along the coast are still suffering from piracy. Parents, please love yourself more.

古文：令有司除租赋，皆顿首谢。
现代文：命令官府免除租赋，皆磕头感谢。
English: He ordered the government to waive the rent, and everyone was so grateful.

古文：辛未，徐达克安丰，分兵败扩廓于徐州。
现代文：二十日，徐达攻克安丰，分兵击败扩廓于徐州。
English: On the 20th, Xu Da attacked Anfeng, and the detachment defeated the outpost in Xuzhou.

古文：夏五月壬午，至自濠。
现代文：五月初一，自濠回应天。
English: On the first day of May, the self-proclaimed response day.

古文：庚寅，求遗书。
现代文：九日，征求散遗书籍。
English: On the 9th, the scattered books were solicited.

古文：秋八月庚戌，改筑应天城，作新宫钟山之阳。
现代文：秋八月初一，改筑应天城，在钟山的南面修建新宫。
English: On the first day of autumn and August, the castle was rebuilt and a new palace was built on the south side of the bell tower.

古文：辛亥，命徐达为大将军，常遇春为副将军，帅师二十万讨张士诚。
现代文：二日，任命徐达为大将军，常遇春为副将军，率师二十万讨伐张士诚。
English: On the second day, Xu Da was appointed as the general, and Changyu Chun as the vice-general, leading 200 thousand people to fight against Zhang Shicheng.

古文：御戟门誓师曰： 城下之日，毋杀掠，毋毁庐舍，毋发丘垄。
现代文：在出征誓师时，太祖说： 城下之日，不要杀掠，不要焚烧房屋，不要挖掘坟墓祠堂。
English: When he went out to take the oath, the great-grandfather said: On the day of the siege, do not kill or plunder, do not burn houses, and do not dig tombs and shrines.

古文：士诚母葬平江城外，毋侵毁。 
现代文：张士诚母亲葬在平江城外，不要侵犯毁坏。 
English: Zhang Shicheng's mother is buried outside Pingjiang City. Please do not disturb or damage it.

古文：既而召问达、遇春，用兵当何先。
现代文：然后召问徐达、常遇春，用兵以何为先。
English: Then he asked Xu Da and Changyu Chun what the first use of troops should be.

古文：遇春欲直捣平江。
现代文：常遇春想直捣平江。
English: People often want to go straight to Pingjiang in spring.

古文：太祖曰： 湖州张天骐、杭州潘原明为士诚臂指，平江穷蹙，两人悉力赴援，难以取胜。
现代文：太祖说 ：湖州张天骐、杭州潘原明是张士诚的手臂，平江穷蹙，两人全力前往救援，难以取胜。
English: Grandfather said: Zhang Tianyao from Huzhou and Pan Yuanming from Hangzhou are Zhang Shicheng's arm, Pingjiang is poor, the two of them go all out to rescue, it is difficult to win.

古文：不若先攻湖州，使疲于奔命。羽翼既披，平江势孤，立破矣。 
现代文：不如先攻湖州，使之疲于奔命，羽翼既破，平江势单力薄，可以一举而破。 
English: It would be better to attack Huzhou first, so that it would be exhausted from running for its life, its wings would be broken, and the Pingjiang River would be weak from a single force, and could be broken at one stroke.

古文：甲戌，败张天骐于湖州，士诚亲率兵来援，复败之于皂林。
现代文：二十五日，在湖州击败张天琪，张士诚亲自率兵援救，又再败于皂林。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Tianqi was defeated in Huzhou, and Zhang Shicheng personally led the troops to rescue, and was defeated again in Saurin.

古文：九月乙未，李文忠攻杭州。
现代文：九月十六日，李文忠攻杭州。
English: On September 16, Li Wenzhong attacked Hangzhou.

古文：冬十月壬子，遇春败士诚兵于乌镇。
现代文：冬十月三日，常遇春在乌镇击败士诚兵。
English: On the 3rd of October in winter, Changyu defeated Shichenghei in Wuzhen in spring.

古文：十一月甲申，张天骐降。
现代文：十一月六日，张天琪投降。
English: On November 6, Zhang Tianqi surrendered.

古文：辛卯，李文忠下余杭，潘原明降，旁郡悉下。
现代文：十三日，李文忠攻下余杭，潘原明投降，旁边各郡都收复。
English: On the 13th, Li Wenzhong captured Yuhang, Pan Yuanming surrendered, and all other counties were recovered.

古文：癸卯，围平江。
现代文：十五日，包围平江。
English: On the 15th, they encircled Pingjiang.

古文：十二月，韩林儿卒。
现代文：十二月韩林儿死。
English: Han Lin Er passed away in December.

古文：以明年为吴元年，建庙社宫室，祭告山川。
现代文：以明年为吴元年，建庙社宫室，祭告山川。
English: In the next year, the first year of the Wu Dynasty, a temple was built in the palace of the shrine, and the mountains and rivers were celebrated.

古文：所司进宫殿图，命去雕琢奇丽者。
现代文：所司进献宫殿图，命去掉雕琢奇丽的。
English: The director-general presented a map of the palace, removing the intricate carvings.

古文：是岁，元扩廓帖木儿与李思齐、张良弼构怨，屡相攻击，朝命不行，中原民益困。
现代文：这年，元朝扩廓帖木儿与李思齐、张良弼构怨，多次互相攻击，朝命不行，中原百姓更加困苦不堪。
English: In this year, the Yuan Dynasty expanded its territory, and Tamerlane and Li Siqi and Zhang Liangyao feuded and attacked each other many times. The imperial command was not enough, and the people of Central Plains suffered even more.

古文：二十七年春正月戊戌，谕中书省曰： 东南久罹兵革，民生凋敝，吾甚悯之。
现代文：至正二十七年春正月二十一日，谕中书省说： 东南久遭兵祸，民生凋敝，我甚是同情。
English: On the twenty-first day of the first month of the spring of the 27th year of the Taisho era, the Ministry of Education and Culture said in an edict: "Southeastern China has long suffered from the scourge of war, and the people's livelihood has withered. I am very sympathetic.

古文：且太平、应天诸郡，吾渡江开创地，供亿烦劳久矣。
现代文：况且太平、应天各郡是我渡江后的开创之地，供应烦劳已很长时间了。
English: Moreover, the counties of Taiping and Yingtian are the places where I started after crossing the river, and it has been a long time since I had to work hard to supply them.

古文：今比户空虚，有司急催科，重困吾民，将何以堪。
现代文：现在户口空虚，官府急催科税，重困吾民，将何以承担。
English: Now that the hukou is empty, the government is urgently pushing for a science tax, which will burden our people.

古文：其赐太平田租二年，应天、镇江、宁国、广德各一年。 
现代文：免除太平田租二年，应天、镇江、宁国、广德各一年。 
English: Taiping rent will be exempted for two years, and Yingtian, Zhenjiang, Ningguo and Guangde will be exempted for one year each.

古文：二月丁未，傅友德败扩廓将李二于徐州，执之。三月丁丑，始设文武科取士。
现代文：二月一日，傅友德在徐州击败并活捉扩廓将李二。三月一日，始设立文、武科取士。
English: On February 1st, Fu Youde defeated and captured the general Li Er alive in Xuzhou. On March 1st, he began to set up Wen and Wukes.

古文：夏四月，方国珍阴遣人通扩廓及陈友定，移书责之。
现代文：夏四月，方国珍密派人串通扩廓和陈友定，移书责之。
English: In the summer of April, Fang Guozhenmi sent someone to collude with Chen Youding and transfer the responsibility.

古文：五月己亥，初置翰林院。
现代文：五月二十四日，初次设置翰林院。
English: On May 24th, the Hanlin Academy was set up for the first time.

古文：是月，以旱减膳素食，复徐、宿、濠、泗、寿、邳、东海、安东、襄阳、安陆及新附地田租三年。
现代文：当月，因旱灾减膳素食，免徐、宿、濠、泗、寿、邳、东海、安东、襄阳、安陆及新归附地田租三年。
English: In the same month, due to the drought, the diet was reduced to vegetarian food, and the land rent of Xu, Shuku, Shun, Shun, Shou, Shun, Donghai, Andong, Yangyang, Anlu and the newly annexed land was exempted for three years.

古文：六月戊辰，大雨，群臣请复膳。
现代文：六月二十三日，大雨，群臣请恢复膳食。
English: On June 23rd, after a heavy rain, the courtiers were asked to resume their meals.

古文：太祖曰： 虽雨，伤禾已多，其赐民今年田租。 
现代文：太祖说 ：虽然下雨，但伤害禾稼已很多，免除百姓今年田租。 
English: The great-grandfather said: Although it is raining, there has been a lot of damage to the crops, exempting the people from the field rent this year.

古文：癸酉，命朝贺罢女乐。
现代文：二十八日，命朝贺罢女乐。
English: On the 28th, it was time for morning greetings and dancing.

古文：秋七月丙子，给府州县官之任费，赐绮帛，及其父母妻长子有差，著为令。
现代文：秋七月初二日，赐给府州县官任费，赐衣帛给其父母妻子长子各有别，著为令。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the prefectural and county officials were given the appointment fee, and their parents, wives, and eldest sons were given the clothing allowance.

古文：己丑，雷震宫门兽吻，赦罪囚。
现代文：十五日，雷震宫门兽吻，大赦罪囚。
English: On the 15th, there was an animal kiss at the gate of Lei Zhen Gong, and prisoners were amnestied.

古文：庚寅，遣使责方国珍贡粮。
现代文：十六日，遣使责成方国珍贡粮。
English: On the 16th, he sent an envoy to ask the Chinese side to donate grain.

古文：八月癸丑，圜丘、方丘、社稷坛成。
现代文：八月九日，圜丘、方丘、社稷坛成。
English: On August 9th, Mengqiu, Fangqiu, and Shifangyuan were completed.

古文：九月甲戌，太庙成。
现代文：九月一日，太庙成。
English: On September 1, Taimiao was completed.

古文：朱亮祖帅师讨国珍。
现代文：朱亮祖率师讨方国珍。
English: Zhu Liang's ancestors led the way to fight Fang Guozhen.

古文：戊寅，诏曰： 先王之政，罪不及孥。
现代文：五日，太祖下诏说： 先王之政，罪不及孥。
English: On the fifth day, the great-great-grandfather issued an edict saying, "The former king's government is guilty of less than nothing.

古文：自今除大逆不道，毋连坐。 
现代文：从今以后除大逆不道，不要连坐。 
English: From now on, unless you are a traitor, do not sit together.

古文：辛巳，徐达克平江，执士诚，吴地平。
现代文：九月八日，徐达攻克平江，活捉张士诚，吴地平定。
English: On September 8th, Xu Da conquered the Pingjiang River and captured Zhang Shicheng and Wu Pingding alive.

古文：戊戌，遣使致书于元主，送其宗室神保大王等北还。
现代文：二十五日，遣使送书给元朝皇帝，送其宗室神保大王等北还。
English: On the 25th, the envoy sent a book to the emperor of the Yuan Dynasty, and sent it to his ancestral home, Jinbo Daowang, and so on.

古文：辛丑，论平吴功，封李善长宣国公，徐达信国公，常遇春鄂国公，将士赐赉有差。
现代文：二十八日，论平吴功劳，封李善长宣国公，徐达信国公，常遇春鄂国公，将士奖赐有别。
English: On the 28th, on the merits of Pingwu, Li Shanchang Xuan Guo Guo, Xu Dashong Guo Guo Guo, and often Chunhu Guo Guo Guo, will be awarded.

古文：朱亮祖克台州。
现代文：朱亮祖攻克台州。
English: Zhu Liangzu conquered Taizhou.

古文：癸卯，新宫成。
现代文：三十日，新宫落成。
English: On the 30th, the new palace was completed.

古文：冬十月甲辰，遣起居注吴琳、魏观以币求遗贤于四方。
现代文：冬十月初一，派起居注吴琳、魏观以币求遗贤于四方。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Wu Lin and Wei Guan were sent to live in the four directions to solicit money from the dead.

古文：丙午，令百官礼仪尚左。
现代文：初三，令百官礼仪崇尚左边。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the etiquette of a hundred officials is advocated on the left.

古文：改李善长左相国，徐达右相国。
现代文：改李善长左相国，徐达右相国。
English: Li Shanchang will be promoted to the position of left consort and Xu Da to the position of right consort.

古文：辛亥，祀元臣余阙于安庆，李黼于江州。
现代文：十二日，祭祀元臣余阙于安庆，李黼于江州。
English: On the 12th, the memorial services for Yuancheng Yuzhen were held in Anqing, and for Li Zhen in Jiangzhou.

古文：壬子，置御史台。
现代文：十三日，设御史台。
English: On the 13th, the Imperial History Museum was established.

古文：癸丑，汤和为征南将军，吴祯副之，讨国珍。
现代文：十四日，汤和为征南将军，吴祯为副，讨伐方国珍。
English: On the 14th, Tang He became the general of the Southern Expedition, and Wu Xi became the vice-general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：甲寅，定律令。
现代文：十五日，制定律令。
English: On the 15th, the regulation was enacted.

古文：戊午，正郊社、太庙雅乐。
现代文：十九日，正郊社、太庙雅乐。
English: On the 19th, Zhengjiao Shrine and Taimiao Noble Music will begin.

