古文：胡僧祐徐文盛杜掞兄岸弟幼安兄子龛阴子春
现代文：胡僧佑字愿果，南阳冠军人。从小勇敢果断，有用兵的才干。
English: Hu Monk Yu Zi Jian Guo, Nanyang champion. Brave and decisive from a young age, with the talent of a soldier.

古文：胡僧祐，字愿果，南阳冠军人。少勇决，有武干。仕魏至银青光禄大夫，以大通二年归国，频上封事，高祖器之，拜假节、超武将军、文德主帅，使戍项城。城陷，复没于魏。
现代文：在魏国出仕，官至银青光禄大夫，他在大通二年回归京城，频频上呈封事，高祖很器重他，授为假节、超武将军、文德主帅，派他去戍守项城。项城被攻陷，胡僧佑又沦落到魏。
English: He returned to Beijing in the second year of Datong, and frequently appeared in official matters. Gao Zu held him in high esteem, bestowing him with the titles of "False Festival," "Superb General," and "Major General of Wende," and sent him to defend Xiangcheng. Xiangcheng was conquered, and Hu Xiangyou was once again reduced to Wei.

古文：中大通元年，陈庆之送魏北海王元颢入洛阳，僧祐又得还国，除南天水、天门二郡太守，有善政。
现代文：中大通元年，陈庆之送魏北海王元颢去洛阳，胡僧枯又得以回归京城，被授为南天水、天门二郡太守，在为官的地方都留下了好的政绩。
English: In the first year of Zhongdaxu, Chen Qingzhi sent Wei Beihai Wang Yuanjun to Luoyang, and Hu Zengkang was able to return to Beijing. He was awarded as the governor of the two counties of South Tianshui and Tianmen, and left a good political record in all the places where he was an official.

古文：性好读书，不解缉缀。然每在公宴，必强赋诗，文辞鄙俚，多被嘲谑，僧祐怡然自若，谓己实工，矜伐愈甚。
现代文：胡僧枯生性喜欢读书，但不通晓写诗作文，然而每次在朝廷宴会上，胡僧佑一定勉力赋诗，诗句文辞鄙俗，常常被人嘲弄讥笑，胡僧佑欢悦如常，认为自己的诗实在作得精巧。
English: Hu Zeng likes to read books, but he does not know how to write poetry composition. However, every time at the imperial banquet, Hu Zengyou must work hard to compose poems, the poetry is vulgar, and he is often mocked and ridiculed. Hu Zengyou is happy as usual, and thinks that his poems are really exquisite.

古文：晚事世祖，为镇西录事参军。
现代文：自负夸耀就更加厉害。胡僧佑晚年事奉世祖，任镇西录事参军。
English: Boasting is even more powerful. In his later years, Hu Xiangyou served his ancestor and joined the army.

古文：侯景乱，西沮蛮反，世祖令僧祐讨之，使尽诛其渠帅，僧祐谏，忤旨下狱。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，西沮蛮也反叛，世祖命胡僧棺去讨伐西沮蛮，命胡僧祜把蛮人的酋长和头领全都诛除，胡僧佑进谏，因为违背世祖的旨意而被关入狱中。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Houjing, Xi Deshimaru also rebelled. The patriarch ordered the coffin of Hu Son to go and fight against Xi Deshimaru. He ordered the coffin of Hu Son to eliminate all the chiefs and leaders of the barbarians. The coffin of Hu Son was put in prison for violating the will of the patriarch.

古文：大宝二年，侯景寇荆陕，围王僧辩于巴陵，世祖乃引僧祐于狱，拜为假节、武猛将军，封新市县侯，令赴援。
现代文：大实二年，侯景进犯荆陕，在巴陵包围了王僧辩，世祖于是从狱中传唤胡僧佑，授他为假节、武猛将军，封为新市县侯，令他赶去援助王僧辩。
English: In the 2nd year of Daxi, Houjing invaded Jing and Shaanxi, and surrounded Wang Sofen in Baling. The patriarch then summoned Hu Soyou from prison, awarded him the title of "False Section" and "Mighty General," and made him the county magistrate of Xincheng, and ordered him to rush to the aid of Wang Sofen.

古文：僧祐将发，谓其子曰： 汝可开两门，一门拟硃，一门拟白。
现代文：胡僧佑将要出发的时候，对自己的儿子说： 你可以开设两座门，一座门备办成朱门，一座门备办成白门。
English: When Hu Xiangyou was about to leave, he said to his son: You can open two doors. One door can be made into a red door, and the other into a white door.

古文：吉则由硃门，凶则由白门。吾不捷不归也。 
现代文：吉就由朱门进家，凶就由白门进家，我不取胜就不回家。 
English: Good luck enters the house through the red door, bad luck enters the house through the white door. If I don't win, I won't go home.

古文：世祖闻而壮之。
现代文：世祖听到胡僧佑这番话，感到他勇壮可嘉。
English: When the patriarch heard these words from Hu Xiangyou, he felt that he was very brave.

古文：至杨浦，景遣其将任约率锐卒五千，据白塔，遥以待之。
现代文：胡僧枯率军到杨浦，派遣手下将领任钩率领五千名精锐士卒，据守自堡，远远地等着胡僧佑军来交战。
English: Hu Zengkun led the army to Yangpu, dispatched his subordinates to lead the troops and led five thousand elite soldiers, guarded from the fort, and waited for Hu Zengkun's army to come to fight.

古文：僧祐由别路西上，约谓畏己而退，急追之，及于南安芊口，呼僧祐曰： 吴儿，何为不早降？
现代文：胡僧佑由另外的道路向西前进，任约认为他们是害怕自己而退兵，于是率军急忙去追击他们，在南安芊口追上了胡僧枯，任约喊着胡僧佑说： 吴儿，为什么不早早投降?
English: Hu Zengyou advanced westward by a different route. Ren You thought that they were afraid of themselves and withdrew, so he led the army to chase them in a hurry. He caught up with Hu Zengyou at the mouth of Nan'an Pass. Ren You shouted to Hu Zengyou, "Wu Er, why don't you surrender early?"

古文：走何处去。 
现代文：要逃到什么地方去? 
English: Where do you want to go?

古文：僧祐不与之言，潜引却，至赤砂亭，会陆法和至，乃与并军击约，大破之，擒约送于江陵。侯景闻之遂遁。
现代文：胡僧佑不舆他答话，暗暗引军退却，到了赤砂亭，适逢陆法和率军来到，胡僧佑于是和陆法和两军并力攻击任约，大破任约军，活捉任约送往江陵，侯景听到任约被擒的消息就率军逃跑了。
English: Hu Xiangyou did not listen to his answer and secretly led his army to retreat. When they arrived at the Red Sand Pavilion, Lu Fa and his army arrived. Hu Xiangyou and Lu Fa and their army jointly attacked Ren Yotang, defeated Ren Yotang, captured Ren Yotang alive and sent him to Gangneung. When Hou Jing heard the news that Ren Yotang had been captured, he led his army to flee.

古文：世祖以僧祐为侍中、领军将军，征还荆州。
现代文：世祖就授胡僧佑为侍中、领军将军，把他征召回荆州。
English: The ancestor then promoted Hu Xiangyou to attendant and general leading the army, and called him back to Jingzhou.

古文：承圣二年，进为车骑将军、开府仪同三司，余悉如故。
现代文：承圣二年，胡僧佑升任为车骑将军、开府仪同三司，其他职位全都不变。
English: In the second year of his ordination, Hu Xiangyou was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the keeper of the imperial rescript and the three departments, and all other positions remained unchanged.

古文：西魏寇至，以僧祐为都督城东诸军事。
现代文：西魏敌寇来犯，世祖命胡僧佑为都督城束诸军事。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, when the enemy corsairs invaded, the ancestor ordered Hu Sangyu to be the military governor of the city.

古文：魏军四面起攻，百道齐举，僧祐亲当矢石，昼夜督战，奖励将士，明于赏罚，众皆感之，咸为致死，所向摧殄，贼莫敢前。
现代文：魏军四面发起进攻，许多股部队同时出击。胡僧佑亲自冒着箭矢磐石，昼夜督战指挥，奖励将士，赏罚严明，士卒都被他感动，都愿意为他拼死杀敌。
English: The Wei army launched an attack on all sides, and many units attacked at the same time. Hu Zengyou personally risked arrows and rocks, commanded the battle day and night, rewarded the soldiers, and rewarded and punished them severely. The soldiers were moved by him and were willing to fight and kill the enemy for him.

古文：俄而中流矢卒，时年六十三。
现代文：胡僧佑所到之处，那襄的敌寇就被摧毁消灭，没有一个敌寇再敢上前进攻。
English: Wherever Hu Xiangyou went, the enemy bandits were destroyed and eliminated, and none of the enemy bandits dared to advance and attack.

古文：世祖闻之，驰往临哭。
现代文：不久胡僧佑被流箭射中而死，死时六十三岁。世祖听到遣消息，驰马赶往城东哭吊。
English: Soon after, Hu Xiangyou was shot by a stray arrow and died at the age of sixty-three. When the patriarch heard the news, he rushed to the east of the city to cry.

古文：于是内外惶骇，城遂陷。
现代文：于是朝廷内外都惶恐骇怕，城最终被攻陷。
English: As a result, both inside and outside the imperial court were terrified, and the city was eventually captured.

古文：徐文盛，字道茂，彭城人也。
现代文：徐文盛字道茂，彭城人。
English: Xu Wensheng is a native of Pengcheng.

古文：世仕魏为将。
现代文：他家世代在魏做官，担任将领。
English: Generations of his family served as officials and generals in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父庆之，天监初，率千余人自北归款，未至道卒。
现代文：徐文盛之父徐庆之，在天监初年，率领一千余人来投诚归顺，但还未到达，途中就死了。
English: Xu Wensheng's father, Xu Qingzhi, led more than a thousand people to surrender in the first year of Tianjing, but he died on the way before he arrived.

古文：文盛仍统其众，稍立功绩，高祖甚优宠之。
现代文：徐文盛继续统领手下的一千余人马，渐渐立下了许多功劳，高祖对他很是优待宠爱。
English: Xu Wensheng continued to lead more than a thousand people and horses under his command, and gradually made a lot of achievements. Gao Zu was very fond of him.

古文：大同末，以为持节、督宁州刺史。
现代文：大同末年，高祖授任徐文盛为持节、督宁州刺史。
English: At the end of the year of Datong, Gao Zu appointed Xu Wensheng to hold the festival and supervise the history of Ningzhou.

古文：先是，州在僻远，所管群蛮不识教义，贪欲财贿，劫篡相寻，前后刺史莫能制。
现代文：徐文盛任职以前，宁州因为地处僻远，管辖的群蛮不懂教化礼义，衹是贪图钱财，抢劫争夺接连不断，前后担任刺史的人没有谁能制止。
English: Before Xu Wensheng took office, because Ningzhou was far away, the people under his jurisdiction did not understand the etiquette of enlightenment. They were greedy for money and robbed one after another. There was no one who could stop them.

古文：文盛推心抚慰，示以威德，夷獠感之，风俗遂改。
现代文：徐文盛推心置安抚存恤，既示以威，又施以德，夷僚都被他感化，宁州风俗于是发生改变。
English: Xu Wensheng set his heart on appeasing and saving the shirt, both showing dignity and showing virtue. He influenced the barbarians, and Ningzhou customs changed accordingly.

古文：太清二年，闻国难，乃召募得数万人来赴。
现代文：太清二年，徐文盛听说国家发生祸乱，于是招募将士，他率领招募到的敷万人赶来救援。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Xu Wensheng heard that there was a disaster in the country, so he recruited soldiers. He led the recruited 10,000 people to come to the rescue.

古文：世祖嘉之，以为持节、散骑常侍、左卫将军、督梁、南秦、沙、东益、巴、北巴六州诸军事、仁威将军、秦州刺史，授以东讨之略。
现代文：世祖嘉赏他的忠义，授任他为持节、散骑常侍、左卫将军、督梁南秦沙束益巴北巴六州诸军事、仁威将军、秦州刺史，把向东进讨的方略交付他。
English: The founder appreciated his loyalty, and appointed him as the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Northern Qin, the commander of the Southern Qin, the commander

古文：于是文盛督众军东下，至武昌，遇侯景将任约，遂与相持。
现代文：于是徐文盛督领众军沿江而下向东进讨，到武昌，遇上侯景的将领任约，徐文盛于是和任约对垒相持很久。
English: As a result, Xu Wensheng led the army down the river and marched eastward to Wuchang, where he met the general leading the appointment of Houjing. Xu Wensheng then held out against the appointment for a long time.

古文：久之，世祖又命护军将军尹悦、平东将军杜幼安、巴州刺史王珣等会之，并受文盛节度。
现代文：世祖又命护军将军尹悦、平束将军杜幼安、巴州刺史王殉等人率军和徐文盛会师，要他们都听从徐文盛调度指挥。
English: The founder also ordered the army led by the general Yin Yue, the general Du Yu'an, and the general Ba Zhou Zhishi Wang Jie, as well as the division led by Xu Wensheng, to obey the command of Xu Wensheng.

古文：击任约于贝矶，约大败，退保西阳。文盛进据芦洲，又与相持。
现代文：徐文盛等人在贝矶攻击任约，任约大败，退兵据守西阳，徐文盛进军占据芦洲，又舆任约相持。
English: Xu Wensheng and others attacked Renjo in Beiji, Renjo suffered a crushing defeat, retreated to defend Xiyang, Xu Wensheng marched into and occupied Luzhou, and held out against Renjo.

古文：侯景闻之，乃率大众西上援约，至西阳。
现代文：侯景听到逭消息，就率领大军逆江而上西进援救任约，也到达西阳。
English: When Hou Jing heard the bad news, he led a large army against the river to the west to rescue Ren, and also arrived in Xiyang.

古文：文盛不敢战。
现代文：徐文盛不敢出战。
English: Xu Wensheng did not dare to fight.

古文：诸将咸曰： 景水军轻进，又甚饥疲，可因此击之，必大捷。 
现代文：他手下众将都说： 侯景的水军轻率进军，军士又很饥饿疲劳，可以乘遣机会进击他们，一定获得大捷。 
English: The generals under his command all said, "Hou Jing's navy marches rashly, and the sergeants are very hungry and tired. We can take advantage of the opportunity to attack them, and we will surely achieve great success."

古文：文盛不许。
现代文：徐文盛不答应。
English: Xu Wensheng did not agree.

古文：文盛妻石氏，先在建鄴，至是，景载以还之。文盛深德景，遂密通信使，都无战心，众咸愤怨。
现代文：徐文盛之妻石氏，原先在建邺，在遣时候，侯景用船载着石氏送回徐文盛那儿，徐文盛深深感激侯景，于是派出使者和侯景秘密来往，全无交战的打算，他手下的将领都愤怒且怨恨。
English: Shi, the wife of Xu Wensheng, was originally in Jianye. At the time of his departure, Hou Jing sent Shi back to Xu Wensheng by boat. Xu Wensheng was deeply grateful to Hou Jing, so he sent an envoy and Hou Jing secretly. There was no intention of war, and his generals were angry and resentful.

古文：杜幼安、守簉等乃率所领独进，与景战，大破之，获其舟舰以归。
现代文：杜幼安、宋遥等于是率领自己手下的部队单独挺进，舆侯景交战，大破侯景军，缴获侯景的船舰归来。
English: Du Yu'an and Song Yao led their own troops to advance alone, and fought against Houjing, defeated Houjing's army, and captured Houjing's ship.

古文：会景密遣骑从间道袭陷郢州，军中凶惧，遂大溃。
现代文：正逢侯景秘密派遣骑兵从小道袭击郢州，郢州被攻陷，徐文盛军中恐惧不安，于是全军溃败。
English: Just when Hou Jing secretly dispatched cavalry to attack Zhangzhou from the trail, Zhangzhou was captured, and Xu Wensheng's army was afraid and uneasy, so the whole army was defeated.

古文：文盛奔还荆州，世祖仍以为城北面都督。
现代文：徐文盛逃回荆州，世祖于是命徐文盛为城北面都督。
English: Xu Wensheng fled back to Jingzhou, and the patriarch then appointed Xu Wensheng as the governor of the northern part of the city.

古文：又聚赃污甚多，世祖大怒，下令责之，数其十罪，除其官爵。
现代文：徐文盛又贪脏纳贿，聚敛财物很多，世祖十分生气，下令惩处徐文盛，列举他的十条罪状，削除他的官爵。
English: Xu Wensheng was also greedy in accepting bribes and amassing a lot of wealth. The ancestor was very angry and ordered to punish Xu Wensheng, list his ten crimes, and remove his official title.

古文：文盛既失兵权，私怀怨望，世祖闻之，乃以下狱。
现代文：徐文盛丢失兵权以后，心怀怨恨，世祖知道后，就把徐文盛囚入狱中。
English: After Xu Wensheng lost his military power, he harbored resentment. When the patriarch learned of this, he imprisoned Xu Wensheng.

古文：时任约被擒，与文盛同禁。
现代文：当时任约也被擒获，舆徐文盛关押在同一个地方。
English: At that time, Ren Rong was also arrested, and Meng Xu Wensheng was detained in the same place.

古文：文盛谓约曰： 汝何不早降，令我至此。 
现代文：徐文盛对任约说： 你为什么不早些投降，现在害得我被关在这个地方。 
English: Xu Wensheng said to Ren You: Why didn't you surrender earlier, now I'm stuck in this place.

古文：约曰： 门外不见卿马迹，使我何遽得降？ 
现代文：任约说： 我军营门外见不到你的马蹄痕迹，叫我怎么投降。 
English: Ren You said: I can't see your hoofprints outside the gate of my camp, how can I surrender?

古文：文盛无以答，遂死狱中。
现代文：徐文盛无话可答，最终死在狱中。
English: Xu Wensheng had nothing to say and eventually died in prison.

古文：杜掞，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：杜掞，京兆杜陵人。
English: Cuckoo, the star of the Beijing Zodiac.

古文：其先自北归南，居于雍州之襄阳，子孙因家焉。
现代文：他的祖先从北方归顺南朝，居住在雍州的襄阳，后代子孙就在那裹安家了。
English: His ancestors from the north submitted to the Southern Dynasty and lived in Yangyang, Yongzhou, and their descendants settled there.

古文：祖灵启，齐给事中。
现代文：杜则的祖父杜灵启，齐时任给事中。
English: Du Ze's grandfather, Du Lingqi, was in charge at the time.

古文：父怀宝，少有志节，常邀际会。
现代文：杜期的父亲杜怀宝，从小有志气、有节操，常常遇上好的机遇。
English: Du Huaibao's father, Du Huaibao, was ambitious and disciplined from an early age, and often met with good opportunities.

古文：高祖义师东下，随南平王伟留镇襄阳。
现代文：高祖率领声讨东昏侯的义军顺江束下，杜怀宝跟随南平王萧伟留下来镇守襄阳。
English: Gao Zu led the rebel army that protested against the dwindling number of princes in Shunjiang, and Du Huai Bao followed the Nanping King Xiaowei to stay and defend Xiangyang.

古文：天监中，稍立功绩，官至骁猛将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：丢监年间，杜怀宣功劳渐渐增多，官职提升到骁猛将军、梁州刺史。
English: During the years of imprisonment, Du Huaixuan's merits gradually increased, and he was promoted to the post of fierce general and Liangzhou chief historian.

古文：大同初，魏梁州刺史元罗举州内附，怀宝复进督华州。
现代文：大同初年，魏梁州刺史元罗率州归附，杜怀宝又进督华州。
English: In the first year of Datong, Wei, Liangzhou, Zhishi, Yuanluo and other provinces were annexed, and Du Huabao became the governor of Huazhou.

古文：值秦州所部武兴氐王杨绍反，怀宝击破之。
现代文：正逢秦州所属亘边区王握钮韭反叛，丝怀宜率军击溃扰叁眯。
English: At the same time, Wang Shizhong of Wangyan District, which belonged to Qinzhou, rebelled, and Si Huaiyi led the army to crush the rebellion.

古文：五年，卒于镇。
现代文：太同五年，杜怀实死在任职的地方。
English: In the same year, Du Huaixi died in his place of duty.

古文：掞即怀宝第七子也。
现代文：杜则就是杜怀实的第七个儿子。
English: Du Ze is the seventh son of Du Huai Si.

古文：幼有志气，居乡时以胆勇称。
现代文：他从小有志气，在家乡素以胆气和勇武著称。
English: He was ambitious from a young age and was known in his hometown for his courage and bravery.

古文：释褐庐江骠骑府中兵参军。
现代文：初出仕为官任庐江骠骑府中兵参军。
English: For the first time, officers and soldiers from the Lijiang Yangtze River Cavalry Corps joined the army.

古文：世祖临荆州，仍参幕府，后为新兴太守。
现代文：世祖治理荆州，杜助依然为幕府参军，后来任堑兴太守。
English: Shizu governed Jingzhou, Dusuke still joined the army for the shogunate, and later became the governor of Yuxing.

古文：太清二年，随岳阳王来袭荆州，世祖以与之有旧，密邀之。掞乃与兄岸、弟幼安、兄子龛等夜归于世祖，世祖以为持节、信威将军、武州刺史。
现代文：太清二年，杜掞跟随岳阳王来袭荆州，世祖因为舆杜则早有情谊，就秘密地约请杜期归附自己，杜掞于是和兄长杜岸、弟弟幼安幼安、兄长之子拄鑫等人趁夜投归世塑，世祖授丝巫为持节、信威将军、武州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Du Juan followed King Yueyang to attack Jingzhou. The ancestor secretly invited Du Ji to join him because he had a long-standing friendship with Du. Du Juan, his brother Du Guan, his brother Yu'an, his brother's son Yu Xin, and others took advantage of the night to reincarnate. The ancestor conferred on Du Ji the title of "Holding Festival," "General of Faith," and "History of Wuzhou."

古文：俄迁宣毅将军，领镇蛮护军、武陵内史，枝江县侯，邑千户。
现代文：不久迁任宣毅将军，领镇蛮护军、武陵内史，封为枝江县侯，食邑千户。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of General Xuan Yi, leading the town's barbarian guards and the history of Wuling, and was made the lord of the county of Yijiang, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：令随王僧辩东讨侯景。
现代文：世祖命杜则跟随王僧辩东进征讨侯景。
English: The ancestor ordered Du to follow Wang Sofen eastward to fight against Houjing.

古文：至巴陵，会景来攻，数十日不克而遁。
现代文：率军到巴陵，正遇上候景来进攻，候景攻了敷十天，不能取胜就逃跑了。
English: He led his army to Baling and was about to attack when disaster struck. The storm lasted for ten days, and when he couldn't win, he fled.

古文：加侍中、左卫将军，进爵为公，增邑五百户。
现代文：杜勋加侍中、左卫将军，爵号进为公，增加食邑五百户。
English: Du Xun was promoted to the rank of middle-ranked attendant and general of the Left Division, and his title was promoted to the rank of general. Five hundred households of food villages were increased.

古文：仍随僧辩追景至石头，与贼相持横岭。
现代文：杜勋继续跟随王僧辩追击候景，直追到石头，在槿岭舆叛贼相持。
English: Du Xun continued to follow Wang Sangyan to chase the waiting scene, straight to the stone, and the traitors held each other in the ridge.

古文：及战，景亲率精锐，左右冲突，掞从岭后横截之，景乃大败，东奔晋陵，掞入据城。
现代文：到双方交战的时候，侯景亲自率领精锐士卒，左冲右突，杜掞从岭后冲出，拦腰截杀候景军，候景于是大败，向东逃到晋陵，杜则占据石头城。
English: When the two sides engaged in battle, Hou Jing personally led the elite soldiers, left and right, and Dujuan rushed out from the back of the ridge to intercept and kill the Jing army. The Jing army was then defeated and fled east to Jinling, while Du occupied Stone City.

古文：景平，加散骑常侍、持节、督江州诸军事、江州刺史，增邑千户。
现代文：侯景叛乱平定后，杜剀加散骑常侍、持节、督江州诸军事、江州刺史，增加食邑千户。
English: After the suppression of the rebellion of Houjing, Du Rong and his horsemen, his attendants, his soldiers, the governor of Jiangzhou, and the historian of Jiangzhou, increased the number of households with food.

古文：是月，齐将郭元建攻秦州刺史严超远于秦郡，王僧辩令掞赴援。
现代文：这个月，齐将郭元建在秦郡进攻秦州刺史严超远，王僧辩命杜掞赶去救援，陈霸也从咖睦率军舆丝欧阳合。
English: This month, Qi sent Guo Yuanjian to Qin County to attack Qin State, which was too far away. Wang Xiang ordered Du Xi to rush to the rescue, and Chen Ba also led the army from Qamdo to Ouyang.

古文：陈霸先亦自欧阳来会，与元建大战于士林，霸先令强弩射，元建众却。掞因纵兵击，大破之，斩首万余级，生擒千余人，元建收余众而遁。
现代文：他们在元建与士林大战。陈霸先命令用强弩齐射，元建军退却，杜掞乘机挥兵攻击，大败郭元建军，斩杀一万余人，活捉一千余人。建收拾残兵逃跑了。
English: They were at war with Shilin in Yuanjian. Chen Baxian ordered a powerful salvo to be fired, Yuanjian's army retreated, Du Kun took the opportunity to attack, defeated Guo Yuanjian's army, killed more than ten thousand people, and captured more than one thousand people alive. Jian collected the remnants and fled.

古文：时世祖执王琳于江陵，其长史陆纳等遂于长沙反，世祖征掞与王僧辩讨之。
现代文：这时世祖在执王琳于江陵，手下长史陆纳等人于是在长沙反叛，世祖征召杜掞与王僧辩一起征讨。
English: At this time, Shizhu was in charge of Wang Lin in Jiangling, and his subordinates Chang Shi Luna and others rebelled in Changsha. Shizhu conscripted Du Juan and Wang Sangye to fight together.

古文：承圣二年，及纳等战于车轮，大败，陷其二垒，纳等走保长沙，掞等围之。
现代文：承圣二年，人在车轮交战，大败，攻陷了其两座营垒，史陆纳等人逃往长沙固守，杜掞等人包围了。
English: In the second year of the consecration, the people fought at the wheel, were defeated, and two of their camps were captured. Sluna and others fled to Changsha to defend themselves, and Du Wei and others were surrounded.

古文：后纳等降，掞又与王僧辩西讨武陵王于硖口，至即破平之。
现代文：后来史陆纳等人投降，杜掞又与王僧辩一起西进征讨武陵王，军队赶到，立即就击溃叛军，平定叛乱。
English: Later, Sluna and others surrendered, and Du Xi and Wang Sangye marched west to fight King Wuling. When the army arrived, they immediately defeated the rebels and quelled the rebellion.

古文：于是旋镇，遘疾卒。
现代文：于是旋镇，染病而死。
English: As a result, Zhouzhen fell ill and died.

古文：诏曰： 掞，京兆旧姓，元凯苗裔。家传学业，世载忠贞。
现代文：世担下韶说： 杜掞是京兆的世族，元凯的后代子孙，家学相传，世代忠贞。
English: The person in charge of the world said: Du Xi is a member of the world of Jing Zhao, a descendant of Yuan Kai, passed down from generation to generation, and has been loyal for generations.

古文：自驱传江渚，政号廉能。推毂浅原，实闻清静。
现代文：自从征召在江两岸作官，被称道为施政干练廉明；在浅原拜为将帅，天下因此而平静。
English: Since he was conscripted to work as an official on both sides of the river, he has been praised as a capable and honest politician; in Asahara, he is worshipped as a general, and the world is calm as a result.

古文：奄致殒丧，恻怆于怀。
现代文：突然间损丧，我悲伤凄恻，哀痛难平。
English: His death was sudden and saddening.

古文：可赠车骑将军，加鼓吹一部。
现代文：可以赠车骑将军，加鼓吹一部。
English: You can get a free ride on the general, plus a part of the propaganda.

古文：谥曰武。 
现代文：赠谧为武。 
English: He was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：掞兄弟九人，兄嵩、岑、旂、岌、嶷、巘、岸及弟幼安，并知名当世。
现代文：杜掞兄弟共有九人，兄长杜嵩、杜岑、杜旂、杜岌、杜嶷、杜巘、杜岸以及弟弟幼安、在当代都很出名。
English: There are a total of nine cuckoo brothers. The elder brother, Du Song, Cuckoo, Cuckoo, Cuckoo, Cuckoo, Cuckoo, Cuckoo, and the younger brother, Young An, are all famous in the present day.

古文：岸，字公衡。
现代文：杜岸字公衡。
English: Dugan's character is fair and balanced.

古文：少有武干，好从横之术。
现代文：从小就有军事才干，喜欢合纵连横游说之术。
English: He has had military talent since childhood and likes the art of lobbying.

古文：太清中，与掞同归世祖，世祖以为持节、平北将军、北梁州刺史，封江陵县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：太清年间，杜岸和杜勋一同归依世祖，世祖授杜岸为持节、平北将军、北梁州刺史，封为江陵县侯，食邑一千户。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Dugan and Du Xun both converted to the ancestor, and the ancestor awarded Dugan the title of Jishu, the general of Pingbei, the governor of Beiliangzhou, the lord of Gangneung County, and a thousand households in Shiyi.

古文：岸因请袭襄阳，世祖许之。
现代文：杜岸就请求准许自己率兵袭取襄阳，世祖准许了。
English: Dugan requested permission to lead his soldiers to attack Xiangyang, and the patriarch gave his permission.

古文：岸乃昼夜兼行，先往攻其城，不克。岳阳至，遂走依其兄巘于南阳，巘时为南阳太守。
现代文：杜岸于是日夜兼程，先去进攻襄阳城，未攻克，岳阳王赶来了，岳阳于是逃往依附其兄杜巘，杜巘当时任南阳太守。
English: Dugan then traveled day and night, first attacking Xiangyang City, but failing to conquer it, King Yueyang arrived, and Yueyang then fled to join his brother Dujuan, who was then the governor of Nanyang.

古文：岳阳寻遣攻陷其城，岸及巘俱遇害。
现代文：岳阳不久就派兵攻陷其城，杜岸和他的兄长杜蝎一同被杀害。
English: Yueyang soon sent troops to attack the city, and Dugan was killed along with his brother Du Qiao.

古文：幼安性至孝，宽厚，雄勇过人。
现代文：杜幼安生性最为孝敬，待人宽厚，勇武过人。
English: Du Yu'an was born with the most filial piety, treated people generously, and was extremely brave.

古文：太清中，与兄掞同归世祖，世祖以为云麾将军、西荆州刺史，封华容县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：左渣年间，杜幼安与其兄杜掞一同归附世祖，世祖授他为云麾将军、西荆州刺史，封为华容县侯，食邑一千户。
English: During the Zuo Jia years, Du Yu'an and his brother Du Yao were attached to the ancestor. The ancestor awarded him the title of General of Yunnan, the history of West Jingzhou, and the title of Huarong County, with a thousand households.

古文：令与平南将军王僧辩讨河东王誉于长沙，平之。
现代文：世祖命他与平南将军王僧辩一道去长沙征讨河东王誉，平息了叛乱。
English: The patriarch ordered him to go to Changsha with the Pingnan general Wang Sangyan to fight for the honor of the King of Hedong and quell the rebellion.

古文：又命率精甲一万，助左卫将军徐文盛东讨侯景。
现代文：世狙又命杜幼安率领一万精兵，协助左卫将军徐文盛东进征讨候景。
English: The world also ordered Du Yu'an to lead ten thousand elite soldiers to assist the left guard general Xu Wensheng to march east to discuss the situation.

古文：至贝矶，遇景将任约来逆，遂与战，大败之。斩其仪同叱罗子通、湘州刺史赵威方等，传首江陵。
现代文：到达贝矶，正遇上候景的将领任约越来迎战，于是就和任钓交战，大败，斩杀伪官仪同叱罗子通、湘州刺史赵威方等人，把首级送往江陵。
English: Arriving at Beijie, the general in charge of Yowei, who was facing the expected situation, came to meet the battle, so he fought with Ren Ying, suffered a great defeat, killed the pseudo-officials with the scourge of Luo Zi Tong, the Hunan assassin Zhao Wei Fang and others, and sent the head to Gangneung.

古文：乃进军大举，因与景相持。
现代文：于是进军直到去，与候景相持。
English: So they marched until they got there, holding out against the weather.

古文：别攻武昌，拔之。
现代文：另外派人攻打武昌，拔之。
English: In addition, they sent people to attack Wuchang and take it.

古文：景渡芦洲上流以压文盛等，幼安与众军攻之，景大败，尽获其舟舰。
现代文：候景从芦洲上游渡辽以进逼徐文盛等人，幼安与其他各路人马一齐攻击侯景，侯景大败，把船舰全都缴获。
English: When Houjing sailed from the upper reaches of Luzhou to Liao'ai and forced Xu Wensheng and others to advance, Yu'an attacked Houjing together with other people from all walks of life. Houjing was defeated and all the ships were captured.

古文：会景密遣袭陷郢州，执刺史方诸等以归，人情大骇，徐文盛由汉口遁归，众军大败，幼安遂降于景。景杀之，以其多反覆故也。
现代文：正逢侯景秘密派兵袭击并攻陷坚业，抓获坚业刺史芦左盏等人带回来。徐文盛、军心骇怕惊慌，徐文盛由汉口逃回去，各路人马都大败，杜幼安于是向候景投降，候景因为噬反覆无常，就把杜幼安杀了。
English: At the same time, Hou Jing secretly sent soldiers to attack and capture Jianye, and captured Jianye's assassin, Shu Zuoqian, and others, and brought them back. Xu Wensheng and the army were terrified and panicked, Xu Wensheng fled back from Hankou, and all the people were defeated. Du Yu'an then surrendered to Houjing. Because Houjing was unstable, he killed Du Yu'an.

古文：龛，掞第二兄岑之子。
现代文：杜龛是杜掞第二个哥哥杜岑之子。
English: Cuckoo is the son of Cuckoo's second brother, Cuckoo.

古文：少骁勇，善用兵，亦太清中与诸父同归世祖，世祖以为持节、忠武将军、郧州刺史，中庐县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：年轻时就很骁健勇猛，善于用兵，他也是在太清年间与伯父叔父们一同归附世祖，世祖授他为持节、忠武将军、郧州刺史，封为中庐县侯，食邑一千户。
English: When he was young, he was very vigorous and brave, and good at using soldiers. He also joined his uncles and uncles to join his ancestors during the Taiqing Dynasty. The ancestors awarded him the title of holding the festival, the general of the loyal army, and the history of Zhangzhou, and he was awarded the title of the lord of Zhongli County, with a thousand households.

古文：与叔幼安俱随王僧辩讨河东王，平之。
现代文：叔父杜幼安一同跟随王增峦征讨回墓王，平定了叛乱。
English: Uncle Du Yu'an followed Wang Zengqi to fight back the tomb king and quelled the rebellion.

古文：又随僧辩下，继徐文盛军至巴陵，闻侯景袭陷郢州，西上将至，乃与僧辩等守巴陵以待之。
现代文：又跟随王僧辩沿江而下，继徐文盛军之后到达巴陵，听说侯景袭击攻陷郢州，正逆江而上，向西进军，将要来到巴陵，杜宠就和王僧辩等人守住巴陵等待侯景来攻。
English: He also followed Wang Sangye down the river and arrived in Baling after Xu Wensheng's army. He heard that Hou Jing attacked and captured Zhangzhou, and was marching west against the river and was going to come to Baling. Du Ji and Wang Sangye and others guarded Baling and waited for Hou Jing to attack.

古文：景至，围之数旬，不克而遁。
现代文：侯景到巴陵，围攻了数十天，不能攻克，随后就逃跑了。
English: Hou Jing went to Baling, besieged it for dozens of days, failed to conquer it, and then fled.

古文：迁太府卿、安北将军、督定州诸军事、定州刺史，加通直散骑常侍，增邑五百户。
现代文：杜宠迁任太府卿、安北将军、督定州诸军事、定州刺史，加授通直散骑常侍，增加食邑五百户。
English: Du Zhaojin was transferred to the posts of Taifuqing, Anbei general, military governor of Dingzhou Province, and historian of Dingzhou Province, and the number of his attendants was increased to 500 households.

古文：仍随僧辩追景至江夏，围其城。
现代文：杜龠继续跟随王僧辩追击侯景直至江夏，围攻江夏城。
English: Du Juan continued to follow Wang Sangyan to pursue Hou Jing to Jiangxia, and besieged Jiangxia City.

古文：景将宋子仙弃城遁，龛追至杨浦，生擒之。
现代文：侯景手下将领宋子仙弃城逃跑，杜宠追到杨浦，活捉了宋子仙。
English: Hou Jing's general Song Zisen abandoned the city and ran away. Du Cai chased him to Yangpu and captured Song Zisen alive.

古文：大宝三年，众军至姑孰，景将侯子鉴逆战，龛与陈霸先、王琳等率精锐击之，大败子鉴，遂至于石头。
现代文：大实三年，各路大军到达姑孰，侯景手下将领侯子鉴迎战，杜宠与陈霸先、王琳等人率领精锐士卒进击，大败侯子鉴，于是大军到达石头。
English: In the third year of Daxi, all the armies reached Guzheng. Hou Jing's subordinates led the general Hou Zi Jian to meet the battle, and Du Zi and Chen Baxian, Wang Lin and others led the elite soldiers to attack, and defeated Hou Zi Jian, so the army reached the stone.

古文：景亲率其党会战，龛与众军奋击，大破景，景遂东奔。
现代文：侯景亲自率领他的叛军会战，杜宠与各路人马齐心奋击，大破侯景叛军，侯景于是向东逃跑。
English: Hou Jing personally led his rebel army into battle, and Du Zhaotong and all the people of Ma Qi fought hard to defeat Hou Jing's rebel army. Hou Jing then fled to the east.

古文：论功为最，授平东将军、东扬州刺史，益封一千户。
现代文：考察军功，杜宠为上等，于是授为平束将军、束扬州刺史，增加食邑一千户。
English: After examining the military exploits, Du Zhaotong was ranked as the best, so he was awarded the title of General of Hirazuka and the title of General of Yangzhou, increasing the number of food villages by one thousand.

古文：承圣二年，又与王僧辩讨陆纳等于长沙，降之。
现代文：承圣二年，杜宠又与王僧辩到长沙征讨陆纳等人，迫使陆纳等人投降。
English: In the second year of his consecration, Du Ji and Wang Zeng went to Changsha to fight Lu Na and others, forcing Lu Na and others to surrender.

古文：又征武陵王于西陵，亦平之。
现代文：又到西陵征讨武陵王，也平息了叛乱。
English: He also went to Xiling to subjugate King Wuling and quelled the rebellion.

古文：后江陵陷，齐纳贞阳侯以绍梁嗣，以龛为震州刺史、吴兴太守。
现代文：后江陵被攻陷，齐国把贞阳侯送来让他继承梁国帝位。贞阳侯登上帝位后，授杜宠为震州刺史、吴兴太守。
English: After the fall of Jiangling, the State of Qi sent Zhengyang Hou to succeed Liang Guo to the throne. After Zhengyang Hou ascended to the throne, he bestowed Du favor on Zhenzhou Shishi and Wu Xing, the de facto ruler of Zhenzhou.

古文：又除镇南将军、都督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史、溧阳县侯，给鼓吹一部。又加散骑常侍、镇东大将军。
现代文：又授为镇南将军、都督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史、溧阳县侯，给鼓吹一部；又加授散骑常侍、镇束大将军。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Zhennan General, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, the military governor of South Henan Province, and the military governor of South Henan Province.

古文：会陈霸先袭陷京师，执王僧辩杀之。
现代文：正逢陈霸先袭击攻陷京城，抓住王僧辩杀了。
English: Just at the right time, Chen Baxian attacked and captured the capital, and he caught and killed Wang Sangye.

古文：龛，僧辩之婿也，为吴兴太守。
现代文：杜宠是王僧辩的女婿，担任吴兴太守。
English: Du Zhaotong was the son-in-law of Wang Sofen and served as Wu Xing's regent.

古文：以霸先既非贵素，兵又猥杂，在军府日，都不以霸先经心；及为本郡，每以法绳其宗门，无所纵舍，霸先衔之切齿。
现代文：他认为陈霸先既不是出身贵家世族，手下兵士又杂乱不齐，在处理军务的时候，全不把陈霸先放在心上，到治理本郡事务的时候，每每以法纪处置陈霸先同宗之人，没有宽赦。陈霸先对此恨得咬牙切齿。
English: He believed that Chen Baxian was not from a noble family, and the soldiers under his command were disorganized. When dealing with military affairs, he did not take Chen Baxian to heart at all. When it came to managing the affairs of the county, he always dealt with people of the same clan as Chen Baxian with legal discipline, and there was no forgiveness. Chen Baxian hated this.

古文：及僧辩败，龛乃据吴兴以距之，遣军副杜泰攻陈蒨于长城，反为蒨所败。
现代文：到王僧辩被害之后，杜宠就据守吴兴抵御陈霸先，并派遣自己统军副手杜泰到长城进攻陈蓓，杜泰反被陈蓿打败。
English: After Wang Sangye was killed, Du Zhi defended Wu Xing against Chen Baxian, and sent his vice-commander of the unified army, Du Tai, to the Great Wall to attack Chen Qi. Du Tai was defeated by Chen Qi.

古文：霸先乃遣将周文育讨龛，龛令从弟北叟出距，又为文育所破，走义兴，霸先亲率众围之。
现代文：陈霸先于是派遣手下将领周文育征讨杜宠，杜宠命堂弟杜北叟出战，又被周文育打败，他于是逃往义兴，陈霸先亲自率军包围他们。
English: Chen Baxian then sent his subordinate general Zhou Wenyu to recruit and fight Du Qiao. Du Qiao's cousin, Du Beibei, went to war and was defeated by Zhou Wenyu. He then fled to Yixing. Chen Baxian personally led an army to encircle them.

古文：会齐将柳达摩等袭京师，霸先恐，遂还与齐人连和。
现代文：正逢齐国将领柳达摩等人袭击京城，陈霸先害怕了，于是回京城与齐人讲和。
English: At the same time, the Qi generals Liu Damo and others attacked Beijing. Chen Baxian was afraid, so he returned to Beijing to make peace with the Qi people.

古文：龛闻齐兵还，乃降，遂遇害。
现代文：杜宠听说齐军返国，才投降，于是被杀。
English: When Du Zhaotong heard that the Qi army had returned to China, he surrendered and was killed.

古文：阴子春，字幼文，武威姑臧人也。
现代文：阴子春字幼文，武威姑臧人。
English: Yin Zi Chun Zi Juwen, Wu Wei Gu Xuan Ren.

古文：晋义熙末，曾祖袭，随宋高祖南迁，至南平，因家焉。
现代文：晋义熙末年，阴子春曾祖父阴袭，随宋高祖南迁，到南平，就在那儿安家。
English: At the end of the Jin and Yixi dynasties, Yin Zichun's great-grandfather moved south with Song Gao Zu to Nanping, where he settled down.

古文：父智伯，与高祖邻居，少相友善，尝入高祖卧内，见有异光成五色，因握高祖手曰： 公后必大贵，非人臣也。
现代文：阴子春之父阴智伯，与高祖相邻而居，两人从小就非常友好。阴智伯曾经进入高祖卧室，见到室中呈现出五色的奇异光彩，他就握住高祖的手说： 你以后一定非常显贵，不再是做臣子。
English: Yin Zhi Bo, the father of Yin Zichun, lived next to Gao Zu, and the two had been very friendly since childhood. Yin Zhi Bo once entered Gao Zu's bedroom and saw the five-colored strange luster in the room. He held Gao Zu's hand and said: You must be very distinguished in the future, no longer a vassal.

古文：天下方乱，安苍生者，其在君乎！ 
现代文：天下正处在动乱之中，安定百姓的，恐怕就是你吧! 
English: The world is in turmoil, and I'm afraid you are the one who has to stabilize the people!

古文：高祖曰： 幸勿多言。 
现代文：高祖说： 希望你不要多说。 
English: Gaozu said, "I hope you don't talk too much."

古文：于是情好转密，高祖每有求索，如外府焉。
现代文：于是两个人交情日益深厚，高祖每每有所需求，就在阴智伯那儿取用，如同在家外的仓库取用。
English: As a result, the friendship between the two grew deeper and deeper. Whenever Gao Zu had a need, he would get it from Yin Zhi Bo, just like getting it from the warehouse outside his home.

古文：及高祖践阼，官至梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：到高祖登上帝位之后，阴智伯官职升迁到梁、秦二州刺史。
English: After Gao Zu ascended to the throne, Yin Zhi was promoted to Liang and Qin Erzhou.

古文：子春，天监初，起家宣惠将军、西阳太守。
现代文：子春，天监初年，阴子春被从家中征召出来任宣惠将军、西阳太守。
English: In the first year of Zichun's imprisonment, Yin Zichun was summoned from his home to serve as the general of Xuan Hui and the governor of Xiyang.

古文：普通中，累迁至明威将军、南梁州刺史；又迁信威将军、都督梁、秦、华三州诸军事、梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：普通年间，阴子春屡经升迁为明威将军、南梁州刺史；又迁任信威将军、都督凿台茎三州诸军事、梁秦二州刺史。
English: During the ordinary years, Yin Zichun was repeatedly promoted to Ming Wei General and Southern Liangzhou Military Historian; he was also transferred to General Xin Wei, the military governor of the three states and Liang Qin, the military historian of the two states.

古文：太清二年，讨峡中叛蛮，平之。
现代文：太清二年，阴子春征讨叛乱的蛮民，平定了叛乱。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Yin Zichun led a campaign against the rebellious barbarians and quelled the rebellion.

古文：征为左卫将军，又迁侍中。
现代文：征召为左卫将军，又迁为侍中。
English: He was conscripted as a General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and transferred to the position of a chamberlain.

古文：属侯景乱，世祖令子春随领军将军王僧辩攻邵陵王于郢州，平之。
现代文：正值侯景叛乱，世祖命阴子春跟随领军将军王僧辩到郢州征讨邵陵王，平定了郢州。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Houjing, Shizuchun Shizuchun followed the leading general Wang Sangye to Bozhou to recruit Shaoling Wang, and leveled Bozhou.

古文：又与左卫将军徐文盛东讨侯景，至贝矶，与景遇，子春力战，恒冠诸军，频败景。
现代文：又与左卫将军徐文盛一道东进征讨侯景，到达贝矶，与侯景相遇，阴子春奋力作战，战功常常居于众军之首，屡次打败侯景。
English: In addition, together with the left guard general Xu Wensheng, he marched east to fight against Houjing, reached Beige, and met with Houjing. He fought hard in the spring, and his war exploits were often at the head of the army. He repeatedly defeated Houjing.

古文：值郢州陷没，军遂退败。
现代文：正值郢州被攻陷，大军于是败退。
English: At the same time, Zhangzhou was invaded and the army was defeated and retreated.

古文：大宝二年，卒于江陵。
现代文：大实二年，阴子春在江陵去世。
English: In the second year of Daxi, Yin Zichun passed away in Gangneung.

古文：孙颢，少知名。
现代文：孙颢，从小就出名。
English: Sun Yat-sen has been famous since childhood.

古文：释褐奉朝请，历尚书金部郎。
现代文：初出仕即任奉朝请，担任尚书金部郎。
English: On his first day of service, he was assigned to the Imperial Household Agency, and served as the Shosho Kaneburo.

古文：后入周。
现代文：阴颢后来归附周。
English: Yinqi was later annexed by Zhou.

古文：撰《琼林》二十卷。
现代文：他撰写了《琼林》二十卷。
English: He wrote 20 volumes of "Jonathan."

古文：史臣曰：胡僧祐勇干有闻，搴旗破敌者数矣；及捐躯殉节，殒身王事，虽古之忠烈，何以加焉。
现代文：史臣曰：胡僧祐军事才能早已著称，拔敌旗破敌阵，屡立战功；以致为保住气节献出生命，为王事而死，即使是古代的忠烈之士，又有什么超过他的呢。
English: Shichen said, "Husangyu's military ability has long been famous. He has raised the enemy flag, broken the enemy's line, and repeatedly made war exploits. So much so that he gave his life to preserve his dignity and died for the king's cause. Even if he was a loyal warrior in ancient times, what would surpass him?

古文：徐文盛始立功绩，不能终其成名，为不义也。
现代文：徐文盛最初立下功绩，但不能最终保住已有的名声，这是不义。
English: It is unfair that Xu Wensheng initially made achievements, but could not ultimately maintain the existing reputation.

古文：杜掞识机变之理，知向背之宜，加以身屡典军，频殄寇逆，勋庸显著，卒为中兴功臣。义哉！
现代文：杜勋懂得机变的道理，知道向背的适当选择；再加上自己屡次主管军队，频频歼灭叛逆，功勋卓著，最终成为梁室中兴的功臣，真是具有道义啊!
English: Du Xun understood the principle of flexibility and knew the proper choice of the opposite direction; coupled with his repeated leadership of the army, frequent annihilation of rebellion, outstanding achievements, and eventually became the hero of Liangshu ZTE, it was really moral!

