古文：鲍子都杨素郭元振狄仁杰敬昭道吴保安
现代文：鲍子都杨素郭元振狄仁杰敬昭道吴保安
English: Baozidu Yang Su Guo Yuan Zhen Di Ren Jie Jing Zhao Dao Wu Jian

古文：鲍子都
现代文：鲍子都
English: Baozidu is rising

古文：魏鲍子都，暮行于野，见一书生，卒心痛。子都下马，为摩其心。
现代文：魏国的鲍子都有一天傍晚在荒野行走，遇到一位书生突然发作心脏疼痛，鲍子都下马为书生按摩心脏。
English: Bao Zi of Wei was walking in the wilderness one evening when he met a scholar who had a sudden attack of heart pain. Bao Zi dismounted and massaged the scholar's heart.

古文：有顷，书生卒。
现代文：不一会儿，书生就死了。
English: A short while later, the student died.

古文：子都视其囊中，有素书一卷，金十饼。乃卖一饼，具葬书生，其余枕之头下，置素书于腹旁。
现代文：鲍子都看到书生的口袋里有一册兵书和十个金饼，他便卖了一个金饼，用所卖的钱将书生安葬了，并将剩下的九个金饼枕到书生的头下，兵书放到书生的肚子旁边。
English: Bao Zi saw that there was a book of soldiers and ten gold cakes in Shousheng's pocket, so he sold one gold cake, buried Shousheng with the money he sold, and put the remaining nine gold cakes under Shousheng's head and the book of soldiers next to Shousheng's stomach.

古文：后数年，子都于道上，有乘骢马者逐之。
现代文：几年以后，鲍子都在路上发现有一个骑一匹黑白相杂的马的人追赶他。
English: A few years later, Bao Zi found a man riding a black and white horse chasing him on the road.

古文：既及，以子都为盗，固问儿尸所在。
现代文：等到那人追上他以后，说他是强盗。那人还问鲍子都他儿子的尸体哪去了。
English: When the man caught up with him, he called him a robber and asked him where his son's body was.

古文：子都具言，于是相随往。开墓，取儿尸归，见金九饼在头下，素书在腹旁，举家感子都之德义。由是声名大振。
现代文：鲍子都将当时的情况说了，带领那个人来到书生的墓前，挖开坟墓将书生的尸体取出来，看到九个金饼扔在书生的头下枕着，兵书还在书生的身旁放着。书生的全家都非常感谢鲍子都的大仁大义，从此鲍子都名声也响了起来。
English: Bao Zi told everyone about the situation at the time, led the man to Shousheng's grave, dug up the grave and took out Shousheng's body, saw nine gold cakes thrown under Shousheng's head and pillow, and Shousheng's army book was still next to Shousheng. Shousheng's whole family was very grateful to Bao Zi Du for his great benevolence, and from then on, Bao Zi Du's reputation also rose.

古文：杨素
现代文：杨素
English: Yang Su

古文：陈太子舍人徐德言之妻，后主叔宝之妹，封乐昌公主，才色冠绝。
现代文：陈朝太子舍人徐德言的妻子是后主叔宝的妹妹乐昌公主，才貌极为出色。
English: The wife of Xu Deyan, Chen's son-in-law, was Princess Lechang, the younger sister of Emperor Bao. She was extremely talented.

古文：德言为太子舍人，方属时乱，恐不相保，谓其妻曰：以君之才容，国亡必入权豪之家，斯永绝矣。
现代文：徐德言当太子舍人这个时候，正赶上陈朝衰败，时局很乱的时期，无法保证国家和个人的安全。徐德言对妻子说：以你的才华和容貌，如果国家灭亡了，你一定会流落到有权有势的富豪人家，我们可能会永远分离。
English: At this time, when the crown prince passed away, Xu Deyan was just catching up with the period when the Chen Dynasty was in decline and the situation was very chaotic, unable to guarantee the security of the country and individuals. Xu Deyan said to his wife: With your talent and appearance, if the country perishes, you will certainly fall into the family of powerful and influential rich people, and we may be separated forever.

古文：傥情缘未断，犹冀相见，宜有以信之。
现代文：倘若我们的缘分没断，还能相见，应该有一个信物。
English: If our fate is not broken and we can still see each other, there should be a token.

古文：乃破一镜，各执其半。
现代文：于是徐德言折断一面铜镜，夫妻两人各拿一半。
English: So Xu Deyan broke a bronze mirror, and the couple each took half.

古文：约曰：他日必以正月望卖于都市，我当在，即以是日访之。
现代文：他又同妻子约定说：将来你一定要在正月十五那天将镜片在街上出售，如果我见到了，就会当天去找你。
English: He also made an agreement with his wife: In the future, you must sell the lenses on the street on the fifteenth day of the first month. If I see you, I will look for you that day.

古文：及陈亡，其妻果入越公杨素之家，宠嬖殊厚。
现代文：等到陈朝灭亡了，他的妻子果然流落到越公杨素的家里，杨素对他非常宠爱。
English: After the fall of the Chen dynasty, his wife was indeed exiled to the home of Yang Su, the Duke of Yue. Yang Su was very fond of him.

古文：德言流离辛苦，仅能至京。
现代文：徐德言流离失所，好不容易才来到京城。
English: Xu Deyan was displaced and finally came to Beijing.

古文：遂以正月望访于都市。有苍头卖半镜者，大高其价，人皆笑之。
现代文：他于正月十五这天到市场上寻找，果然有一个仆人模样的老头出售一片一半的镜子，而且要价非常高，人们都嘲笑他。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month, he went to the market to look for it, and sure enough, there was an old man who looked like a servant selling half a mirror, and the asking price was very high, and people laughed at him.

古文：德言直引至其居，予食，具言其故，出半镜以合之。
现代文：徐德言将老人带到自己的住处，给老头吃饭，讲述了自己的经历。
English: Xu Deyan took the old man to his home, gave him a meal, and recounted his own experience.

古文：乃题诗曰：镜与人俱去，镜归人不归。无复嫦娥影，空留明月辉。
现代文：拿出自己那一半镜子和老头卖的那半镜子合在一起，并在镜子上题了一首诗：镜子和人都离我而去，如今镜子回来人却未归，镜子上已映不出嫦娥的倩影，只能反射出一片月光。
English: He took out his half of the mirror and the half of the mirror sold by the old man, put them together, and inscribed a poem on the mirror: "The mirror and everyone left me, but now the mirror has returned, but no one has returned. Chang'e's shadow is no longer reflected on the mirror, only a piece of moonlight is reflected."

古文：陈氏得诗，涕泣不食。素知之，怆然改容。即召德言，还其妻，仍厚遗之。
现代文：陈朝的乐昌公主陈氏看到题诗以后，哭哭啼啼地不肯吃饭，杨素了解情况以后也非常伤感，派人将徐德言找来，决定将妻子还给他，并送给他们许多钱物。
English: After seeing the poem, Chen, the princess of Lechang of the Chen Dynasty, cried and refused to eat. Yang Su was also very sad after understanding the situation. He sent someone to find Xu Deyan and decided to return his wife to him, and gave them a lot of money and goods.

古文：闻者无不感叹，仍与德言陈氏偕饮，令陈氏为诗曰：令日何迁次，新官对旧官。笑啼俱不敢，方验作人难。
现代文：听说这件事的人没有不赞叹的。杨素设酒宴为徐德言和陈氏饯行，并叫陈氏也作了一首诗：今天是什么特殊的日子，新丈夫面对旧丈夫，哭也不是笑也不是，这才知道作人的艰难。
English: Yang Su held a banquet for Xu Deyan and Chen Shiyuan, and asked Chen Shiyuan to write a poem: "What a special day today is, the new husband faces the old husband, neither crying nor laughing, this is how difficult it is to be a man."

古文：遂与德言归江南，竟以终老。
现代文：然后陈氏和徐德言回到江南，一直到白头偕老。
English: Then Mr. Chen and Xu Deyan returned to the south of the Yangtze River, all the way to Baotou.

古文：郭元振
现代文：郭元振
English: Guo Yuanzhen

古文：郭元振，年十六，入太学。薛稷、赵彦昭为友。
现代文：郭元振十六岁就上了大学，与薛稷、赵彦昭结交成朋友。
English: Guo Yuanzhen went to college at the age of 16 and became friends with Xue Yao and Zhao Yan Zhao.

古文：闻公家信至，颇能相济否？公即命以车一时载去，略无留者，亦不问姓氏，深为薛赵所诮。
现代文：一次他家里来人，给他带来四十万文钱，作为他上学吃饭等的费用。忽然有一个穿着丧服的人敲开门对他说：我有五代亲人没有安葬在一起，分别埋在不同的地方，如今想一齐迁到元振便叫来人将自己家里携来的钱全都用车子拉走了，自己一点也没留，也不问那人的姓名。薛稷和赵彦昭嘲笑他。
English: One time, someone from his family brought him 400,000 yuan to pay for his school fees and meals. Suddenly, a man in mourning clothes knocked on the door and said to him, "I have five generations of relatives who were not buried together, but were buried separately in different places. Now, I want to move to Yuan Zhen together, so I asked the person to take all the money from my family by car. I didn't keep any for myself, and I didn't ask the person's name. Xue Yao and Zhao Yan Zhao laughed at him.

古文：元振怡然曰：济彼大事，亦何诮焉。
现代文：郭元振却愉快地说：资助别人办理大事，有什么可嘲笑的！
English: Guo Yuanzhen, however, said happily: What is there to laugh at in financing others to handle major events!

古文：其年粮绝，竟不成举。
现代文：郭元振当年因为没有钱用，竟没有参加科举考试。
English: Guo Yuanzhen didn't take part in the imperial examinations that year because he didn't have enough money.

古文：狄仁杰
现代文：狄仁杰
English: Di Renjie

古文：狄仁杰，太原人，为府法曹参军。
现代文：狄仁杰是太原人，担任府法曹参军。
English: Di Renjie is a native of Taiyuan. He joined the army as a prefectural law enforcement officer.

古文：时同僚郑崇资，母老且病，当充使绝域。
现代文：同他在一起共事的官员郑崇资的母亲年老多病，朝廷派郑崇资出使极为边远的国家。
English: The mother of Zheng Chongzhi, an official who worked with him, was old and sickly. The imperial court sent Zheng Chongzhi to an extremely remote country.

古文：仁杰谓曰：太夫人有危亟之病，而公远使，岂可贻亲万里之泣乎？
现代文：狄仁杰对郑崇资说：老太太病重，而你要远行。怎么可以让母亲留在离你万里之遥的地方哭泣呢？
English: Di Renjie said to Zheng Chongzhi, "The old lady is seriously ill, and you want to travel far away. How can you let your mother cry in a place thousands of miles away from you?

古文：乃请代崇资。
现代文：于是请求上级让自己代替郑崇资出使。
English: He then asked his superiors to send him as a substitute for Zheng Chongzhi.

古文：敬昭道
现代文：敬昭道
English: Keisho-dori Street

古文：敬昭道为大理评事。
现代文：敬昭道是中央审判机关大理寺的评事。
English: Jing Zhao Dao is a critic of the central judicial organ, Dali Temple.

古文：延和中，沂有反者，诖误四百余人。
现代文：延和年间，沂州有个人造反，欺骗裹挟了四百多人。
English: During the Yanhe period, there was a man-made rebellion in Zhangzhou, deceiving more than four hundred people.

古文：将隶司农事，未即路，系在州狱。
现代文：朝廷准备将这些人作为奴隶去开荒种地，在没有押送之前，便关在州府的监狱里。
English: The imperial court was preparing to send these people as slaves to open wasteland, and before they were escorted, they were locked up in the state capital's prison.

古文：昭道据赦文而免之。
现代文：敬昭道根据朝廷赦免的公文将这些人的罪行减免释放了。
English: According to the official document of the Imperial Court's pardon, Jing Zhao Dao released these people with remission of their crimes.

古文：时宰切责大理，奈何赦反人家口？
现代文：宰相责问大理寺为什么将造反的人免罪释放。
English: The prime minister asked the Dali Temple why the rebels were released without charge.

古文：大理卿及正等失色，引昭道，执政怒而责之。
现代文：大理寺的长官非常惊慌，对敬昭道说：宰相生气斥责我们了！
English: The superintendent of Dali Temple was very alarmed and said to Jing Zhao: "The prime minister is angry and rebuked us!

古文：昭道曰：赦文云见禁囚徒，反者系在州狱，此即见禁也。
现代文：敬昭道说：赦免的公文叫关押罪犯，现在造反的人仍然关押州府的监狱里，这就是执行了关押罪犯的命令。
English: Jing Zhao said: The official document of the pardon called for the detention of criminals. Now the rebels are still detained in the prison of the state capital. This is the execution of the order to detain criminals.

古文：反覆诘难，至于五六，执政无以夺之，诖误者悉免。
现代文：上级反复核查了五六次，宰相也无法裁决，被欺骗裹挟的人终究还是被赦免了。
English: The superiors repeatedly checked five or six times, and the prime minister could not decide, but the person who was deceived and entrapped was eventually pardoned.

古文：昭道迁监察御史。
现代文：敬昭道后来改任监察御史。
English: Keisho Michi was later appointed to the post of inspector general of history.

古文：又先是夔州征人舒万福等十人，行次巴陵，渡滩溺死。
现代文：有从夔州招募的兵士舒万福等十个人，走到巴陵，渡江的时候全都被淹死了。
English: Ten people, including Shu Wanfu, a soldier recruited from Zhangzhou, walked to Baling and were all drowned when crossing the river.

古文：昭道因使巴渝，至万年驿，梦此十人祈哀，至于再三。
现代文：敬昭道因为公事去巴渝，中途到了万年驿站，他晚上梦见这十个人反复哀求他，向他诉苦。
English: Jing Zhao went to Bayu for business and arrived at the railway station halfway. In the evening, he dreamed that these ten people repeatedly begged him and complained to him.

古文：乃召驿吏问之，吏对如所梦。
现代文：他把驿吏找来询问。驿吏所介绍的情况和他所做的梦一样。
English: He called the magistrate in for questioning, and the magistrate told him the same story as his dream.

古文：昭道即募善游者，出其尸，具洒肴以酹之。
现代文：敬昭道便雇佣了一些会游泳的人，把这十个人的尸体捞了出来。
English: Jing Zhao hired some swimmers to fish out the bodies of the ten people.

古文：观者莫不歔欷。
现代文：他还准备了酒菜，举行了祭奠仪式，围观的人都感动得哭了。
English: He also prepared food and wine and held a memorial ceremony, which moved the onlookers to tears.

古文：乃移牒近县，备槥椟，归之故乡。
现代文：然后敬昭道又写信给附近的县衙，让他们买了简易的棺材送来，将这十个人的尸体装进去返回家乡安葬。
English: Then, Jing Zhao also wrote to the nearby county magistrate, asking them to buy a simple coffin and send it to him, so that he could pack the bodies of the ten people and return to his hometown for burial.

古文：征人闻者，无不感仰。
现代文：被招募的兵士们知道了，没有不感激佩服的。
English: The soldiers who were recruited knew it, and they couldn't help but be grateful and impressed.

古文：吴保安
现代文：吴保安
English: Wu Jianbo

古文：吴保安，字永固，河北人，任遂州方义尉。
现代文：吴保安的字叫永固，是河北人，官职是河北方义县尉。
English: Wu Jian's Chinese name is Yonggu. He is from Hebei Province, and his official title is Lieutenant of Yixian County, Hebei Province.

古文：其乡人郭仲翔，即元振从侄也。
现代文：他家乡的郭仲翔是元振的堂侄。
English: Guo Zhongxiang from his hometown is a cousin of Yuan Zhen.

古文：仲翔有才学，元振将成其名宦。
现代文：郭仲翔很有才学，元振想帮助他当官。
English: Guo Zhongxiang is very talented, and Yuan Zhen wants to help him become an official.

古文：会南蛮作乱，以李蒙为姚州都督，帅师讨焉。
现代文：南方的少数民族作乱，朝廷派李蒙为姚州都督，率领军队前去讨伐。
English: Ethnic minorities in the south rioted, and the imperial court sent Li Meng as the governor of Yaozhou to lead the army to fight.

古文：蒙临行，辞元振。元振乃见仲翔，谓蒙曰：弟之孤子，未有名宦。
现代文：李蒙出发之前向元振辞行，元振将郭仲翔推荐给李蒙说：这是我弟弟的独生子，还没有官职。
English: Prior to Li Meng's departure, he submitted his resignation to Yuan Zhen. Yuan Zhen recommended Guo Zhongxiang to Li Meng, saying, "This is my brother's only son, and he has no official position yet.

古文：子姑将行，如破贼立功，某在政事，当接引之，俾其縻薄俸也。
现代文：我想让他跟着你，如果能够杀敌立功，我会在朝廷想办法提拔他，让他去提任个不重要的职务。
English: I want him to follow you. If I can kill the enemy and make a contribution, I will find a way to promote him in the court and let him be appointed to an unimportant post.

古文：蒙诺之。仲翔颇有干用，乃以为判官，委之军事。
现代文：李蒙答应了，郭仲翔很有才干，被聘任为判官，帮助李蒙处理军务。
English: Li Meng agreed. Guo Zhongxiang was very talented and was hired as an adjudicator to help Li Meng deal with military affairs.

古文：至蜀，保安寓书于仲翔曰：幸共乡里，籍甚风猷。虽旷不展拜，而心常慕仰。
现代文：到了蜀郡，吴保安写信给郭仲翔说：有幸和你是同乡，知道你品德高尚，虽然平时没有结交，但是心中对你一直很仰慕。
English: After arriving in Shu County, Wu Baoan wrote a letter to Guo Zhongxiang saying, "I am fortunate to be a fellow villager with you, and I know that you are of high moral character. Although I have not made friends with you in ordinary times, I have always admired you in my heart.

古文：吾子国相犹子，慕府硕才。
现代文：宰相对待你如同亲生儿子，你又有当官的才能。
English: The prime minister treats you like his own son, and you have the talent to be an official.

古文：果以良能，而受委寄。李将军秉文兼武，受命专征，亲绾大兵，将平小寇。以将军英勇，兼足下才能，师之克殄，功在旦夕。
现代文：如今宰相安排你去那里，李蒙将军文武兼备，接受命令出征，亲自率领大军，必然能剿灭作乱的小股敌人，以李蒙将军的英勇，加上你的才能，出师打败敌人，很短的时间就会成功。
English: Now, the Prime Minister has arranged for you to go there. General Li Meng is well-equipped with both culture and military skills. He has received orders to go to war and personally lead a large army. He will certainly be able to annihilate small groups of enemies who are in turmoil. With the bravery of General Li Meng and your talent, you will defeat the enemy and succeed in a very short time.

古文：保安幼而嗜学，长而专经。才乏兼人，官从一尉。僻在剑外，地迩蛮陬。乡国数千，关河阻隔。
现代文：我从小爱好读书，长大考取了功名，才学不比别人差，可只做了一个县尉，又是在很偏僻荒凉的地区，离家几千里，有重重关山阻隔。
English: I loved to read since I was a child, and when I grew up, I got a merit in the entrance examination, so I'm no worse at learning than others, but I only made a county lieutenant, and it was in a very remote and desolate area, thousands of miles away from home, surrounded by mountains.

古文：况此官已满，后任难期。
现代文：况且我的任期已满。下一个职务不知道什么时候才能任命。
English: Moreover, my term of office has expired. I don't know when I will be appointed to my next position.

古文：以保安之不才，厄选曹之格限。更思微禄，岂有望焉？
现代文：以我的才学，却因为受到选拔官员的办法的限制，再想求得晋级升官，怎么能有希望。
English: How can I hope to be promoted and promoted with my talent, but because I am limited by the method of selecting officials.

古文：将归老丘园，转死沟壑。
现代文：将来只好回归农舍，老死田园了。
English: In the future, they will have to return to the farmhouse and die of old age.

古文：侧闻吾子，急人之忧，不遗乡曲之情，忽垂特达之眷。使保安得执鞭弭，以奉周旋。录及细微，薄沾功效。
现代文：听说你急人之难，重视同乡的感情，希望能伸出援助的手，保举我去军中服务，跟随你的左右，记录下战绩细节，沾你们一份功劳。
English: I heard that you are in a desperate situation, that you value the feelings of your fellow countrymen, and that you hope to lend a helping hand, to ensure that I go to serve in the army, to follow you around, to record the details of your record, and to get a share of your credit.

古文：承兹凯入，得预末班。是吾子丘山之恩，即保安铭镂之日。非敢望也，愿为图之。
现代文：等到胜利凯旋的时候，能够封赏到一个最小的官职，便是你对我高山一样的恩情，也是我刻骨铭心值得纪念的日子，不敢抱有太大的希望，但我要努力争取。
English: Waiting until the time of victory and triumph, to be able to award a prize to the smallest official position is your gratitude to me like a mountain, and it is also a memorable day for me. I dare not hold out too much hope, but I will work hard to win.

古文：唯照其款诚，而宽其造次，专策驽蹇，以望招携。
现代文：仅表示我的恳切心情，请原谅我的唐突。特意写了这封信送去，以求得你的提携。
English: I am only expressing my sincere feelings, please forgive my abruptness. I wrote this letter specifically to ask for your cooperation.

古文：仲翔得书，深感之。
现代文：郭仲翔接到吴宝安的信以后，很受感动。
English: After receiving Wu Baoan's letter, Guo Zhongxiang was very moved.

古文：即言于李将军，召为管记。
现代文：便向李蒙将军请示，决定任用吴宝安为管记。
English: He then asked General Li Meng for instructions and decided to appoint Wu Bao'an as the secretary.

古文：未至而蛮贼转逼，李将军至姚州，与战破之。乘胜深入，蛮覆而败之。
现代文：吴宝安还没有赶到，敌人就迎了上来。李蒙将军率兵达姚州，于敌兵交战将敌兵打败，大军乘胜追击，深入敌人腹地。
English: Before Wu Bao'an arrived, the enemy came to meet him. General Li Meng led the troops to Dayao Prefecture, fought with the enemy soldiers and defeated them. The large army took advantage of the victory to pursue and penetrate deep into the enemy's hinterland.

古文：李身死军没，仲翔为虏。
现代文：敌人又杀了回来。将朝廷的军队打败，李蒙将军战死，军队也被消灭了，郭仲翔被敌军俘虏。
English: The enemy killed him again. The imperial army was defeated, General Li Meng was killed, the army was destroyed, and Guo Zhongxiang was captured by the enemy.

古文：蛮夷利汉财物，其没落者，皆通音耗，令其家赎之，人三十匹。
现代文：敌人想要换取汉族的东西，被俘的人员，都可以和家里通信，让家里人拿东西往回赎，每人需要三十匹绢来换。
English: If the enemy wants to exchange something of the Han nationality, the captured personnel can all communicate with their families, and let the family members take things for ransom. Each person needs thirty yaks to exchange.

古文：保安既至姚州，适值军没，迟留未返。
现代文：吴保安赶到姚州，正是前方军队战败的时候，便滞留在姚州。
English: Wu Jian rushed to Yaozhou, just when the front army was defeated, he stayed in Yaozhou.

古文：而仲翔于蛮中，间关致书于保安曰：永固无恙。
现代文：郭仲翔在敌人的押解过程中给吴保安写信说：你近来平安吧？
English: Guo Zhongxiang wrote a letter to Wu Baozhong in the process of being escorted by the enemy, saying: Have you been safe recently?

古文：顷辱书未报，值大军已发。深入贼庭，果逢挠败。李公战没，吾为囚俘。假息偷生，天涯地角。顾身世已矣，念乡国窅然。
现代文：你的来信还没来得及回复，军队就出发了，深入到敌人的巢穴，被敌人打败，李蒙将军阵亡，我成了俘虏，忍辱偷生，远在天涯地角，感叹自己的遭遇，想到家乡是多么的遥远。
English: Before I had time to reply to your letter, the army set out, went deep into the enemy's lair, was defeated by the enemy, General Li Meng was killed, I became a prisoner, endured humiliation and lived secretly, far away in the corners of the world, lamenting my own suffering, thinking about how far away my hometown is.

古文：才谢钟仪，居然受絷。身非箕子，且见为奴。
现代文：才谢过钟仪，居然被拘禁；不是箕子，却被迫成为奴隶。
English: It was only after he thanked Zhongyi that he was actually detained; he was not a mule, but he was forced to become a slave.

古文：海畔牧羊，有类于苏武；宫中射雁，宁期于李陵。
现代文：在湖边放羊，很像当年的苏武。希望有人像宫中射雁的故事一样，将我像李陵一样救回去。
English: Herding sheep by the lake is very much like the Suwu of that year. I hope someone will rescue me like Li Ling, just like the story of shooting geese in the palace.

古文：吾自陷蛮夷，备尝艰苦。肌肤毁剔，血泪满地。生人至艰，吾身尽受。以中华世族，为绝域穷囚。
现代文：我自从身陷敌方，饱尝艰苦，身体遭受摧残，血泪流得像池水一样多，人生的艰难，我都受尽了，我是显贵的家庭出身，却成为极远地域的囚徒。
English: Since I was trapped by the enemy, I have suffered hardships, my body has been devastated, my blood and tears have flowed as much as a pool of water. I have suffered all the hardships of life. I come from a noble family, but I have become a prisoner in a very distant region.

古文：日居月诸，暑退寒袭。
现代文：暑去寒来，岁月流逝。
English: From hot to cold, the years go by.

古文：思老亲于旧国，望松槚于先茔。忽忽发狂，腷臆流恸，不知涕之无从。行路见吾，犹为伤愍。
现代文：思念亲属，想念家乡，精神难以控抑住，经常发狂，烦闷悲痛，眼泪流尽，别人在路上见了我的模样，都会可怜。
English: I miss my relatives, I miss my hometown, my spirit is difficult to control and suppress, I often go crazy, I am bored and sad, my tears run out, others see my appearance on the road and feel sorry for me.

古文：吾与永固，虽未披款，而乡思先达，风味相亲。想睹光仪，不离梦寐。
现代文：我与你虽然没见过面，但是同乡的感情已经把我们连在一起。情趣相投，很想见到你的风采，经常睡觉梦见你。
English: Although I haven't met you, the feelings of being a fellow countryman have brought us together. We share the same interests, would love to see your style, and often go to sleep dreaming of you.

古文：昨蒙枉问，承间便言。李公素知足下才名，则请为管记。
现代文：当时李蒙将军问起你，我介绍了你的情况，李蒙将军历来知道你的才学和名声，同意聘请你为管记。
English: At that time, General Li Meng inquired about you, I introduced your situation, General Li Meng has always known your talent and reputation, and agreed to hire you as a manager.

古文：大军去远，足下来迟。乃足下自后于戎行，非仆遗于乡曲也。
现代文：大军走远了，你来迟了，这是因为大军走以后你才赶到，不是我丢下你这个同乡。
English: The great army has gone far away, and you have come late. This is because you arrived after the great army had left. I did not abandon you, my fellow countryman.

古文：足下门传余庆，无祚积善。果事期不入，而身名并全。
现代文：你祖上有德，上天保佑，没有赶上这场战事，得以保全性命和名声。
English: By the grace of God, your ancestor had the virtue not to catch up with this war, so that he could preserve his life and reputation.

古文：向若早事麾下，同幕府，则绝域之人，与仆何异？吾今在厄，力屈计穷。
现代文：如果你早到李蒙将军麾下效力，同我一起参谋军事，会同我一样成为极远地域的囚徒。我今天在这里，力气用尽，毫无办法。
English: If you had served under General Li Meng earlier and joined me as a military staff officer, you would have become a prisoner in a faraway place like me. I am here today, exhausted and helpless.

古文：而蛮俗没留，许亲族往赎。
现代文：而敌人的规矩是允许亲友来赎人。
English: But the enemy's rule is to allow relatives and friends to redeem people.

古文：以吾国相之侄，不同众人，仍苦相邀，求绢千匹。
现代文：我因为是宰相的侄儿，不同于其他人，所以被严加看护，必须拿一千匹绢来赎。
English: Because I am the prime minister's nephew, unlike the others, I am under strict supervision, and I have to take a thousand donkeys to be ransomed.

古文：此信通闻，仍索百缣。
现代文：就是此信发出的时候，仍需要一百匹缣。
English: Even when this letter was sent, a hundred mules were still needed.

古文：愿足下早附白书，报吾伯父。宜以时到，得赎吾还。使亡魂复归，死骨更肉，唯望足下耳。
现代文：请你早一点将我的信送交我伯父，早一点来把我赎回去，使我的身体和灵魂能一起回到故乡。
English: Send early my letter to my uncle, and come early to redeem me, that I may return to my native land, body and soul.

古文：今日之事，请不辞劳。若吾伯父已去庙堂，难可咨启，即愿足下，亲脱石父，解夷吾之骖，往赎华元，类宋人之事。济物之道，古人犹难。
现代文：如果我的伯父上朝去了，难以通报见面，便请你做石父，将我从苦役中解救出来，使我能像春秋时的大夫华元一样逃脱归去。帮助援救人的事情，从古以来都是很难办的。
English: If my uncle has gone to the East and it is difficult to inform me of his arrival, then I would like to ask you to be my stone father, to rescue me from hard labor, so that I can escape and return like Doctor Hua Yuan in the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：以足下道义素高，名节特著，故有斯请，而不生疑。
现代文：因为你的道德高尚，大仁大义，声名响亮，所以才请你帮忙，丝毫不怀疑你的品质人格。
English: I only asked for your help because of your high morals, benevolence, and reputation. I have no doubt about your character.

古文：若足下不见哀矜，猥同流俗，则仆生为俘囚之竖，死则蛮夷之鬼耳。
现代文：如果你不怜悯，同世俗一样袖手旁观，则我只能生是战俘奴隶，死是少数民族地区的鬼了，还有什么指望？
English: If you do not show mercy and stand by like the world, then I can only be born a prisoner of war and die a ghost in an ethnic minority area. What hope is there?

古文：更何望哉！
现代文：拜托你了，不要使我的希望落空。
English: Please, don't get my hopes up.

古文：已矣吴君，无落吾事。保安得书，甚伤之。时元振已卒，保安乃为报，许赎仲翔。
现代文：吴保安接到信以后很着急，这时元振已经死了吴保安为了报答朋友的信任，决定设法赎回郭仲翔。
English: After receiving the letter, Wu Baoan was very anxious. At that time, Yuan Zhen had already died. In order to repay his friend's trust, Wu Baoan decided to try to redeem Guo Zhongxiang.

古文：仍倾其家，得绢二百匹往。因住巂州，十年不归。经营财物，前后得绢七百匹，数犹未至。
现代文：他变卖了所有家产，买了二百匹绢前往南方，到达巂州，十年不回家，在那里做买卖，而后共得到七百匹绢，仍然没有凑够一千匹绢的数目。
English: He sold all of his family's possessions, bought two hundred donkeys, traveled to the south, arrived in Zhangzhou, did not return home for ten years, did business there, and then got a total of seven hundred donkeys, still not enough to make up the number of one thousand donkeys.

古文：保安素贫窭，妻子犹在遂州。贫赎仲翔。遂与家绝。
现代文：吴宝安的家历来贫穷。妻子仍然在遂州，吴宝安为了赎郭仲翔，毅然和家里断绝了来往。
English: Wu Baoan's family has always been poor. His wife is still in Suizhou. In order to redeem Guo Zhongxiang, Wu Baoan resolutely cut off contact with his family.

古文：每于人有得，虽尺布升粟，皆渐而积之。
现代文：每当做买卖有一点收入，那怕只是一尺布，一升米，也积攒起来。
English: Whenever there is a little income from doing business, even if it's just a foot of cloth or a liter of rice, it accumulates.

古文：后妻子饥寒，不能自立。其妻乃率弱子，驾一驴，自往泸南，求保安所在。
现代文：后来他妻子挨饿受冻，没有办法独立生活下去，便带着幼小的儿子，骑着一头毛驴，前往泸南来找吴保安。
English: Later, his wife was starving and freezing, unable to live independently, so she took her young son, riding a donkey, to the south of Fujian to find Wu Baoan.

古文：于途中粮尽，犹去姚州数百。
现代文：在途中钱花光了，离姚州还有几百里地，她没有办法。
English: She ran out of money on the way, and she still had hundreds of miles to go before she could reach Yaozhou.

古文：其妻计无所出，因哭于路左，哀感行人。
现代文：便坐在路旁哭了起来。过路的人都替他悲伤。
English: And he sat down by the roadside and wept, and all who passed by were sorry for him.

古文：时姚州都督杨安居乘驿赴郡，见保安妻哭，异而访之。妻曰：妾夫遂州方义尉吴保安，以友人没蕃，丐而往赎，因住姚州。弃妾母子，十年不通音问。
现代文：姚州都督杨安居沿着驿道去州府，看见吴保安的妻子在哭，奇怪地过去询问，吴保安的妻子说：我的丈夫是遂州方义县尉吴保安，因为朋友被困在南方少数民族地区，所以设法去赎人，来到姚州，抛弃我们母子，十年不通音讯。
English: Yang Anju, the governor of Yaozhou, walked along the main road to the state capital. He saw Wu Anju's wife crying and strangely went over to inquire. Wu Anju's wife said: My husband is Wu Anju, the lieutenant of Suizhou Fangyi County. Because my friend was trapped in the southern ethnic minority areas, I tried to ransom him. He came to Yaozhou, abandoned our mother and son, and did not communicate for ten years.

古文：妾今贫苦，往寻保安。粮乏路长，是以悲泣。
现代文：我如今贫困，去寻找吴保安，钱花光了路还很远，所以悲伤地哭起来。
English: I'm poor now, and it's a long way to go to find Wu Baozhong after I've spent all my money, so I started to cry with sadness.

古文：安居大奇之。谓曰：吾前至驿，当候夫人，济其所乏。
现代文：杨安居非常惊奇地说：我到前面的驿站等你，资助你路费。
English: Yang Anju was very surprised and said, "I'll wait for you at the station in front and subsidize your travel expenses."

古文：既至驿，安居赐保安妻钱数千，给乘令进。
现代文：等到他们来到驿站，杨安居给了吴保安妻子几千文钱，并安排车马送她继续向前走。
English: When they arrived at the station, Yang Anju gave Wu Baojin's wife several thousand yuan and arranged for a carriage to take her onward.

古文：安居驰至郡，先求保安见之，执其手升堂。谓保安曰：吾常读古人书，见古人行事，不谓今日亲睹于公。
现代文：杨安居到了州府，立即将吴保安找来，握着他的手来到堂上坐下，对他说：我常读古人的书，佩服古人做事，没想到亲眼见到了你的仁义行为。
English: Yang Anju arrived at the state capital, immediately found Wu Baojun, shook his hand, came to the hall to sit down, and said to him: I often read the books of the ancients, admire the ancients to do things, I did not expect to see your benevolent act with my own eyes.

古文：何分义情深，妻子意浅，捐弃家室，求赎友朋，而至是乎？吾见公妻来，思公道义，乃心勤伫，愿见颜色。
现代文：但也不必只顾及朋友的情义而抛弃妻子，去赎朋友，也不要这样做，我遇到你的妻子，想到你的道义，心中敬佩，想和你见面。
English: But you don't have to abandon your wife just to appease your friends, nor do you have to redeem your friends. When I meet your wife, I think of your morality, admire you in my heart, and want to meet you.

古文：吾今初到，无物助公。且于库中假官绢四百匹，济公此用。
现代文：我今天刚到，没有东西给你，便从仓库中借四百匹绢。资助你办这件事。
English: I just got here today, and I don't have anything for you, so I'm going to borrow four hundred mules from the warehouse and help you with this.

古文：待友人到后，吾方徐为填还。
现代文：等到朋友回来以后，我再慢慢地偿还所借的绢。
English: After waiting for my friend to return, I slowly paid back the borrowed money.

古文：保安喜，取其绢，令蛮中通信者持往。
现代文：吴保安很高兴，取了绢，派人前往少数民族地区赎人，又过了二百天才将郭仲翔赎回来。
English: Wu Baoan was very happy, took the money and sent someone to the ethnic minority area to redeem the person. It took another 200 days to redeem Guo Zhongxiang.

古文：向二百日而仲翔至姚州，形状憔悴，殆非人也。方与保安相识，语相泣也。安居曾事郭尚书，则为仲翔洗沐，赐衣装，引与同坐，宴乐之。
现代文：郭仲翔来到姚州，衣衫褴褛，面容憔悴，不像个人的样子，他和吴保安见面以后，痛哭了一场，杨安居手下的郭尚书带郭仲翔洗了澡，换了衣服，然后坐下来喝酒吃饭。
English: Guo Zhongxiang came to Yaozhou, his clothes were ragged, his face was gaunt, and he did not look like an individual. After he met with Wu Baoan, he cried hard. Yang Anju's Guo Shangshu took Guo Zhongxiang to take a shower, changed his clothes, and then sat down to drink and eat.

古文：安居重保安行事，甚宠之。于是令仲翔摄治下尉。
现代文：杨安居敬重吴保安的行为，对他非常好，于是让郭仲翔当了他所管辖地区的一名县尉。
English: Yang Anju's act of respecting Wu Jianbao was very good for him, so he let Guo Zhongxiang become a county lieutenant in the area under his jurisdiction.

古文：仲翔久于蛮中，且知其款曲，则使人于蛮洞市女口十人，皆有姿色。
现代文：郭仲翔在少数民族地区呆的时间很长，知道那里的详细情况，派人到那里的部落买来十名少女，个个长得都很美丽。
English: Guo Zhongxiang has spent a long time in ethnic minority areas, knows the details of the situation there, and sent people to the tribe there to buy ten girls, all of whom are very beautiful.

古文：既至，因辞安居归北，且以蛮口赠之。
现代文：买来以后，他辞别杨安居要回北方去，将十名少女送给杨安居作为酬谢。
English: After buying it, he said goodbye to Yang Anju and wanted to go back to the north. He gave ten girls to Yang Anju as a reward.

古文：安居不受曰：吾非市井之人，岂待报耶？
现代文：杨安居不接受说：我不是世俗小人，不要报答。
English: Yang Anju did not accept and said: I am not a worldly villain, do not repay.

古文：钦吴生分义，故因人成事耳。
现代文：只是因为敬佩吴保安的仁义，所以才帮助他办成这件事。
English: It was only because he admired Wu Baozhong's benevolence that he helped him to accomplish this.

古文：公有老亲在此，且充甘膳之资。
现代文：你有亲人在北方，将她们换成养家的费用吧。
English: If you have relatives in the north, exchange them for the cost of raising a family.

古文：仲翔谢曰：鄙身得还，公之恩也。微命得全，公之赐也。
现代文：郭仲翔感谢地说：我能够回来，是你的恩情，小命得以保留，是你赏给我的。
English: Guo Zhongxiang said gratefully: "It is your grace that I can come back. It is your gift that I can keep my life.

古文：翔虽瞑目，敢忘大造。
现代文：郭仲翔就是死了，也不敢忘记你的再生之德。
English: Even if Guo Zhongxiang died, he would not dare to forget your virtue of rebirth.

古文：但此蛮口，故为公求来。
现代文：但是这些少数民族少女，是专门为你买来的。
English: But these ethnic minority girls were bought especially for you.

古文：公今见辞，翔以死请。
现代文：你今天推辞，我要以死请求你接受。
English: If you refuse today, I will beg you to accept it.

古文：安居难违，乃见其小女曰：公既频繁有言，不敢违公雅意。
现代文：杨安居没有办法，看着十名少女中最小的一个说：你既然一再请求，不敢违背了你的好意。
English: Yang Anju had no choice but to look at the youngest of the ten girls and say: Since you have repeatedly asked, I dare not go against your good intentions.

古文：此女最小，常所钟爱。
现代文：这个女子最小，我很喜欢。
English: This girl is the smallest. I like her.

古文：今为此女，受公一小口耳。
现代文：今天为了这个女子，接受你的赠送。
English: Today, for the sake of this woman, I accept your gift.

古文：因辞其九人。
现代文：辞退了其余的九个人。
English: The remaining nine were dismissed.

古文：而保安亦为安居厚遇，大获资粮而去。
现代文：吴保安因为得到杨安居的帮助，也得到一大笔钱财回北方去了。
English: Because of Yang Anju's help, Wu Baoan also received a large sum of money and went back to the north.

古文：仲翔到家，辞亲凡十五年矣。却至京，以功授蔚州录事叅军，则迎亲到官。
现代文：郭仲翔回到家，已经离开亲人十五年了，他到了京城，因为有功劳被任命为蔚州录事参军，将母亲也接到蔚州，任期满了的时候，他母亲死了。
English: Guo Zhongxiang returned home, having been away from his relatives for fifteen years. He arrived in Beijing, because he was appointed to the Ulshu Record to join the army for meritorious service. He also brought his mother to Ulshu. When his term was over, his mother died.

古文：葬毕，因行服墓次，乃曰：吾赖吴公见赎，故能拜职养亲。今亲殁服除，可以行吾志矣。
现代文：他安葬了母亲，守孝期满以后说：我被吴保安赎回来，所以才能担任官职奉养母亲，如今母亲死了，守孝已满，我可以去办我想办的事去了。
English: He buried his mother, and after the period of filial piety expired, he said: I was redeemed by Wu Bao, so I could serve as an official to support my mother. Now that my mother is dead and the period of filial piety has expired, I can go and do what I want to do.

古文：乃行求保安。
现代文：然后他便去找吴保安。
English: He then went to find Wu Bao.

古文：而保安自方义尉选授眉州彭山丞。仲翔遂至蜀访之。保安秩满，不能归，与其妻皆卒于彼，权窆寺内。
现代文：而吴保安从方义县尉又被任命为眉州彭山丞，郭仲翔便赶往蜀郡，吴保安任期满了以后，没有能够返回家乡，夫妻两人都死在彭山，埋葬在当地。
English: However, Wu Jianbo was appointed as Meizhou Peng Shanzhen from Fangyi County Lieutenant, and Guo Zhongxiang rushed to Shu County. After Wu Jianbo's term of office was over, he was not able to return to his hometown. Both husband and wife died in Pengshan and were buried there.

古文：仲翔闻之，哭甚哀。因制衰麻，环珮加杖，自蜀郡徒跣，哭不绝声。至彭山，设祭酹毕，乃出其骨，每节皆墨记之，盛于练囊。
现代文：郭仲翔非常悲伤，制做了丧服，带着环麻丧杖，从蜀郡开始光着脚，一路哭着来到彭山，设酒菜祭奠完毕，将吴保安的骨头挖出来，每一节都用墨标上序号数字，以免重新安葬时遗失，然后装到口袋里。
English: Guo Zhongxiang was very sad. He made the funeral clothes, took the ringworm caduceus, started barefoot from Shu County, cried all the way to Pengshan, set up the wine and vegetable offering, dug out the bones of Wu Baoan, and marked the serial number on each section with ink, so as not to lose it when re-buried, and then put it in his pocket.

古文：又出其妻骨，亦墨记贮于竹笼。
现代文：又将吴保安的妻子的骨头也挖出来，也做上标记以后装到竹笼里。
English: They also dug out the bones of Wu Baozhong's wife, marked them and put them in a bamboo cage.

古文：而徒跣亲负之，徒行数千里，至魏郡。
现代文：他光着脚，亲自背着两个人的骨头，徒步走了几千里，来到魏郡。
English: Barefoot and carrying the bones of two people on his back, he walked thousands of miles on foot to Wei County.

古文：保安有一子，仲翔爱之如弟。于是尽以家财二十万，厚葬保安。仍刻石颂美。
现代文：吴保安有一个儿子，郭仲翔对他如同对待自己的弟弟，他花费二十万文钱，隆重安葬了吴保安夫妻，并立了一块石碑记录功德。
English: Wu Baoan had a son, Guo Zhongxiang treated him like his own brother. He spent 200,000 yuan to give Wu Baoan and his wife a grand funeral, and erected a stone monument to record his merits.

古文：仲翔亲庐其侧，行服三年。
现代文：郭仲翔搭了一间茅屋，亲自在坟旁守孝三年。
English: Guo Zhongxiang built a thatched cottage and personally guarded the tomb for three years.

古文：既而为岚州长史，又加朝散大夫。
现代文：过后他被任命为岚州长史，又改任朝散大夫。
English: After that, he was appointed as the governor of Shandong Province, and then he was appointed as the doctor of Asan Province.

古文：携保安子之官，为娶妻，恩养甚至。
现代文：他还提携吴保安的儿子当了官，并给他娶了媳妇，对其关怀备至。
English: He also helped Wu Baozhong's son to become an official and married him a daughter-in-law, showing great concern for him.

古文：仲翔德保安不已。
现代文：郭仲翔感激吴保安的心情始终不减。
English: Guo Zhongxiang's gratitude to Wu Jianbo remains undiminished.

古文：天宝十二年，诣阙，让朱绂及官子保安之子以报。
现代文：天宝十二年，他赴皇帝的殿庭，请求将自己的官职让给吴保安的儿子接任，官员们都很敬佩他。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianbao, he went to the emperor's court and requested that his official post be given to Wu Baozheng's son to take over. The officials all admired him.

古文：时人甚高之。初，仲翔之没也，赐蛮首为奴。
现代文：当初，郭仲翔被敌兵抓住，送给少数民族的首领作奴隶。
English: At first, Guo Zhongxiang was captured by enemy soldiers and sent to the leader of an ethnic minority as a slave.

古文：其主爱之，饮食与其主等。
现代文：主人很喜欢他，让他和主人吃一样的饭。
English: His master liked him very much and let him eat the same meal as his master.

古文：经岁，仲翔思北，因逃归。追而得之，转卖于南洞。洞主严恶，得仲翔，苦役之，鞭笞甚至。仲翔弃而走，又被逐得，更卖南洞中。其洞号菩萨蛮，仲翔居中经岁，因厄复走，蛮又追而得之，复卖他洞。
现代文：一年以后，郭仲翔想念北方，逃跑后被抓了回来，就卖到另一个部落的首领洞主，洞主凶恶，让郭仲翔干重活，用鞭子打他，郭仲翔逃跑，又被抓回来就卖到另一个部落，这个洞主绰号叫菩萨蛮，郭仲翔呆了一年以后，再次逃走，又被追上抓了回来，又被转卖给另一个洞主。
English: A year later, Guo Zhongxiang missed the north, escaped, was caught and returned, and was sold to the leader of another tribe, the cave owner. The cave owner was vicious, made Guo Zhongxiang do heavy work, beat him with a whip, Guo Zhongxiang escaped, was caught again and sold to another tribe. This cave owner was nicknamed Bodhisattva, Guo Zhongxiang stayed for a year, fled again, was caught and returned, and was resold to another cave owner.

古文：洞主得仲翔，怒曰：奴好走，难禁止邪？
现代文：这个洞主见到郭仲翔生气地说：你好逃跑，难以看住。
English: When the owner of the cave saw Guo Zhongxiang, he said angrily, "Good luck escaping, you're hard to catch."

古文：乃取两板，各长数尺，令仲翔立于板，以钉自足背钉之，钉达于木。
现代文：他叫人拿来两块木板，每块长数尺，命令郭仲翔站在两块木板中间，用钉子钉上，脚背上的钉子深达木头里面。
English: He asked someone to bring two pieces of wood, each several feet long, and ordered Guo Zhongxiang to stand in the middle of the two pieces of wood and nail them. The nails on the soles of his feet reached deep into the wood.

古文：每役使，常带二木行。
现代文：每当干活，必须带着木板一起走。
English: Whenever I work, I have to take the plank with me.

古文：夜则纳地槛中，亲自锁闭。
现代文：晚上被关在地牢，洞主亲自开门上锁。
English: He was locked in a dungeon at night, and the owner of the dungeon opened and locked the door himself.

古文：仲翔二足，经数年疮方愈。
现代文：郭仲翔脚上的疮伤，经过许多年才好。
English: The wound on Guo Zhongxiang's foot took many years to heal.

古文：木鏁地槛，如此七年，仲翔初不堪其忧。
现代文：这样过了七年，郭仲翔已经无法再继续忍受。
English: After seven years of this, Guo Zhongxiang could no longer bear it.

古文：保安之使人往赎也，初得仲翔之首主。展转为取之，故仲翔得归焉。
现代文：吴保安派人去赎他，先找到他的第一个主人，然后辗转寻找，才使郭仲翔回归中原。
English: Wu Baoan sent someone to ransom him, first to find his first master, and then to search for him, before Guo Zhongxiang could return to the Central Plains.

