古文：伍子胥者，楚人也，名员。
现代文：伍子胥，楚国人，名员。
English: Wu Zixuan, a native of Chu, is a famous member.

古文：员父曰伍奢。员兄曰伍尚。
现代文：伍员的父亲叫伍奢，伍员的哥哥叫伍尚。
English: The soldier's father is named Wu Shuang, and the soldier's brother is named Wu Shang.

古文：其先曰伍举，以直谏事楚庄王，有显，故其後世有名於楚。
现代文：他的祖先叫伍举，因为侍奉楚庄王时刚直谏诤而显贵，所以他的后代子孙在楚国很有名气。
English: His ancestor's name was Wuju, and because he was so dignified and upright when he served the King of Chu, his descendants are very famous in Chu.

古文：楚平王有太子名曰建，使伍奢为太傅，费无忌为少傅。
现代文：楚平王的太子叫建，楚平王任命伍奢做他的太傅，任命费无忌做他的少傅。
English: King Chuping's prince was named Jian. King Chuping appointed Wu Shuo as his daifu, and appointed Fei Niu as his shoofu.

古文：无忌不忠於太子建。
现代文：费无忌对太子建不忠心。
English: He did not hesitate to be disloyal to the crown prince.

古文：平王使无忌为太子取妇於秦，秦女好，无忌驰归报平王曰： 秦女绝美，王可自取，而更为太子取妇。 
现代文：平王派无忌到秦国为太子建娶亲。因为秦女长相姣美，无忌就急忙赶回来报告平王说： 那位女子是位绝代美人，大王可以自己娶了他，再给太子另外娶个妻子。 
English: Because the Qin woman was very beautiful, he hurried back to report to the king: "That woman is a great beauty. The king can marry her himself, and then give the prince another wife."

古文：平王遂自取秦女而绝爱幸之，生子轸。更为太子取妇。
现代文：平王就自己娶了秦女，极度地宠爱她，生了个儿子叫轸，另外给太子建娶了妻。
English: King Hei himself married a Qin woman, loved her very much, had a son named Yao, and married a wife for Prince Jian.

古文：无忌既以秦女自媚於平王，因去太子而事平王。
现代文：费无忌用秦国美人向楚平王献媚以后，就趁机离开了太子去侍奉平王。
English: After using the beauty of Qin to flatter King Chuping, Fei took the opportunity to leave the prince to serve King Ping.

古文：恐一旦平王卒而太子立，杀己，乃因谗太子建。
现代文：又担心有一天平王死了，太子建继位会杀了自己，就极力诋毁太子建。
English: He was also worried that one day after the death of King Ping, Crown Prince Jian would kill himself, so he tried his best to defame Crown Prince Jian.

古文：建母，蔡女也，无宠於平王。
现代文：太子建的母亲，是蔡国人，不得楚平王的宠爱。
English: Prince Jian's mother, a native of Cai Guo, was a favorite of King Chuping.

古文：平王稍益疏建，使建守城父，备边兵。
现代文：平王也越来越疏远太子建，派太子建驻守城父，防守边疆。
English: King Hei also became more and more estranged from Prince Jian, and sent Prince Jian to garrison the city and defend the border.

古文：顷之，无忌又日夜言太子短於王曰： 太子以秦女之故，不能无怨望，原王少自备也。
现代文：不久，费无忌又没日没夜地在平王面前说太子建的坏话，他说： 太子因为秦女的原因，不会没有怨恨情绪，希望大王自己稍微防备一些。
English: Not long after, he went to great lengths to speak ill of the Crown Prince Jian in front of King Ping day and night. He said, "The Crown Prince will not be without resentment because of the Qin woman. I hope the Great King will be a little more careful."

古文：自太子居城父，将兵，外交诸侯，且欲入为乱矣。 
现代文：自从太子驻守城父以后，统率着军队，对外和诸侯交往，他是准备进入都城作乱了。 
English: Ever since the prince had been stationed in the capital, leading the army and interacting with the princes, he had been preparing to enter the capital and cause trouble.

古文：平王乃召其太傅伍奢考问之。
现代文：楚平王就把他的太傅伍奢召回来审问。
English: King Chuping summoned his great-great-grandson back for questioning.

古文：伍奢知无忌谗太子於平王，因曰： 王独柰何以谗贼小臣疏骨肉之亲乎？ 
现代文：伍奢知道费无忌在平王面前说了太子的坏话，因此说： 大王怎么能仅仅凭拨弄事非的小人之臣的坏话，就疏远骨肉至亲呢？ 
English: Wu Shuo knew that it was not safe to speak ill of the prince in front of King Ping, so he said: How can the great king alienate his flesh and blood relatives just because of the bad words of a petty vassal?

古文：无忌曰： 王今不制，其事成矣。王且见禽。 
现代文：费无忌说： 大王现在不制止，他们的阴谋就要得逞，大王将要被逮捕了！ 
English: Fai could not help but say: If the emperor does not stop them now, their plot will succeed, and the emperor will be arrested!

古文：於是平王怒，囚伍奢，而使城父司马奋扬往杀太子。
现代文：于是平王发怒，把伍奢囚禁起来，同时命令城父司马奋扬去杀太子建。
English: As a result, King Ping became enraged and imprisoned Wuxia, at the same time ordering the city father Sima Fenyang to kill Prince Jian.

古文：行未至，奋扬使人先告太子： 太子急去，不然将诛。 
现代文：还没走到，奋扬派人提前告诉太子： 太子赶快离开，否则就会被杀死了。 
English: Before they arrived, Tenyang sent someone to tell the prince in advance: "The prince should leave immediately, otherwise he will be killed."

古文：太子建亡奔宋。
现代文：于是太子建逃到宋国去了。
English: So Prince Jian fled to Song.

古文：无忌言於平王曰： 伍奢有二子，皆贤，不诛且为楚忧。
现代文：费无忌对平王说： 伍奢有两个儿子，都很贤能，不杀掉他们，将成为楚国的祸害。
English: He said to King Ping, "Wu Shu has two sons, both of whom are very capable. If you don't kill them, you will become the scourge of Chu."

古文：可以其父质而召之，不然且为楚患。 
现代文：可以用他父亲作人质，把他们召来，不这样将成为楚国的后患。 
English: He can use his father as a hostage and call them, otherwise he will become a problem for the state of Chu.

古文：王使使谓伍奢曰： 能致汝二子则生，不能则死。 
现代文：平王就派使臣对伍奢说： 能把你两个儿子叫来，就能活命，不叫来，就处死。 
English: King Hei sent an envoy to Wusang and said, "If you can bring your two sons, you will live, but if you don't, you will die."

古文：伍奢曰： 尚为人仁，呼必来。员为人刚戾忍卼，能成大事，彼见来之并禽，其势必不来。 
现代文：伍奢说： 伍尚为人宽厚仁慈，叫他，一定能来；伍员人桀骜不训，忍辱负重，能成就大事，他知道来了一块被擒，势必不来。 
English: Wu Shuang said, "Wu Shang is a generous and benevolent person, so he will definitely be able to come. Military personnel are not trained, endure humiliation and burden, and can achieve great things. He knows that if a piece of bedding comes, he will definitely not come.

古文：王不听，使人召二子曰： 来，吾生汝父；不来，今杀奢也。 
现代文：平王不听，派人召伍奢两个儿子，说： 来，我使你父亲活命；不来，现在就杀死伍奢。 
English: But King Hephaestus would not listen. He sent for Cush's two sons and said, "Come, let me save the life of your father. If not, kill Cush now."

古文：伍尚欲往，员曰： 楚之召我兄弟，非欲以生我父也，恐有脱者後生患，故以父为质，诈召二子。
现代文：伍尚打算前往，武员说： 楚王召我们兄弟，并不打算让我们父亲活命，担心我们逃跑，产生后患，所以，用父亲作人质，欺骗我们。
English: Wu Shang planned to go, and the warrior said: King Chu summoned our brothers, but he did not intend to let our father live. He was worried that we would run away and cause trouble, so he used our father as a hostage to deceive us.

古文：二子到，则父子俱死。
现代文：我们一到，就要和父亲一块处死。
English: As soon as we arrive, we will be executed together with my father.

古文：何益父之死？
现代文：对父亲的死有什么好处呢？
English: What good would it do for my father to die?

古文：往而令雠不得报耳。
现代文：去了，就叫我们报不成仇了。
English: If he goes, we won't be able to get back at him.

古文：不如奔他国，借力以雪父之耻，俱灭，无为也。 
现代文：不如逃到别的国家去，借助别国的力量洗雪父亲的耻辱。一块去死，没有意义呀。 
English: It would be better to flee to another country and use the power of another country to wash the shame of my father. There is no point in dying together.

古文：伍尚曰： 我知往终不能全父命。
现代文：伍尚说： 我知道去了最后也不能保全父亲的性命。
English: Wu Shang said, "I knew that going there would not save my father's life in the end.

古文：然恨父召我以求生而不往，後不能雪耻，终为天下笑耳。 
现代文：可是只恨父亲召我们是为了求得生存，要不去，以后又不能洗雪耻辱，终会被天下人耻笑。 
English: However, we only hate our father for calling us in order to survive. If we don't go, we won't be able to wash off the shame in the future, and will eventually be ridiculed by the world.

古文：谓员： 可去矣！汝能报杀父之雠，我将归死。 
现代文：对伍员说： 你可以逃走，你能报杀父之仇，我将要就身去死。 
English: He told the soldiers: "You can escape, you can avenge my father's death, I'm just going to die."

古文：尚既就执，使者捕伍胥。伍胥贯弓执矢乡使者，使者不敢进，伍胥遂亡。
现代文：伍尚接受逮捕后，使臣又要逮捕伍子胥，伍子胥拉满了弓，箭对准使者，使者不敢上前，伍子胥就逃跑了。
English: After Wu Shang accepted the arrest, the envoy also wanted to arrest Wu Zi Yao. Wu Zi Yao drew his bow and aimed his arrow at the envoy. The envoy did not dare to advance, and Wu Zi Yao fled.

古文：闻太子建之在宋，往从之。
现代文：他听说太子建在宋国，就前去追随他。
English: When he heard that the crown prince was being built in Song, he went to follow him.

古文：奢闻子胥之亡也，曰： 楚国君臣且苦兵矣。 
现代文：伍奢听说子胥逃跑了，说： 楚国君臣将要苦于战火了。 
English: When Wu Shuo heard that Zi Yao had fled, he said: The princes and ministers of Chu will suffer from the war.

古文：伍尚至楚，楚并杀奢与尚也。
现代文：伍尚来到楚都，楚平王就把伍尚和伍奢一块杀害了。
English: When Wu Shang came to Chu, King Chu Ping killed Wu Shang and Wu Cao together.

古文：伍胥既至宋，宋有华氏之乱，乃与太子建俱奔於郑。
现代文：伍子胥到宋国以后，正好遇上宋国华氏作乱，就和太子建一同逃到郑国去。
English: After Wu Zixuan arrived in Song, he just happened to meet the Hua clan in Song, and he and Prince Jian fled to Zheng.

古文：郑人甚善之。
现代文：郑国君臣对他们很友好。
English: Zheng Guo Junchen was very friendly to them.

古文：太子建又適晋，晋顷公曰： 太子既善郑，郑信太子。太子能为我内应，而我攻其外，灭郑必矣。灭郑而封太子。 
现代文：太子建又前往晋国，晋顷公说： 太子既然跟郑国的关系友好，说明郑国信任太子，太子要能给我们作内应，我们从外面进攻，一定能灭掉郑国，灭掉郑国后，就把它分封给太子。 
English: Prince Jian also went to Jin. Jin Hao Gong said, "Since Prince Jian has a friendly relationship with Zheng, it means that Zheng trusts Prince Jian. If Prince Jian can give us an internal response, and we attack from the outside, we will surely be able to destroy Zheng. After destroying Zheng, we will assign it to Prince Jian.

古文：太子乃还郑。
现代文：于是太子回到郑国。
English: So the prince returned to Zheng.

古文：事未会，会自私欲杀其从者，从者知其谋，乃告之於郑。
现代文：举事的时机还没成熟，正赶上太子因为个人私事打算杀掉一个跟随他的人，而这个人知道他的计划，就把它告诉了郑国。
English: The time for action was not yet ripe, just as the crown prince was about to kill a follower of his because of a personal matter, and this person knew his plan and told it to Zheng Guo.

古文：郑定公与子产诛杀太子建。
现代文：郑定公和子产杀死了太子建。
English: Zheng Ding Gong and Zifang killed Prince Jian.

古文：建有子名胜。
现代文：太子建有个儿子叫胜。
English: Prince Jian has a son named Sheng.

古文：伍胥惧，乃与胜俱奔吴。
现代文：事发后伍子胥害怕，就和胜一同逃奔吴国。
English: After the incident, Wu Zixuan was afraid and fled to Wu with Sheng.

古文：到昭关，昭关欲执之。伍胥遂与胜独身步走，几不得脱。
现代文：到了昭关，昭关的官兵要捉拿他们，于是，伍子胥和胜各自只身徒步逃跑，差一点无法脱身。
English: When they arrived at Shoguan, the officers and soldiers of Shoguan wanted to capture them, so Wu Zixuan and Sheng each fled on foot, almost unable to escape.

古文：追者在後。
现代文：追兵在后。
English: The pursuers are behind.

古文：至江，江上有一渔父乘船，知伍胥之急，乃渡伍胥。
现代文：伍子胥逃到江边，江上有一个渔翁乘着船，知伍子胥很危急，就渡伍子胥过江。
English: Wu Zixuan fled to the river. There was a fisherman on the river with a boat. Knowing that Wu Zixuan was in danger, he waded across the river.

古文：伍胥既渡，解其剑曰： 此剑直百金，以与父。 
现代文：伍子胥过江后，解下随身带的宝剑说： 这把剑价值百金，把它送给你老人家。 
English: After Wu Zi crossed the river, he unsheathed the sword he had brought with him and said, "This sword is worth a hundred gold, give it to your old man."

古文：父曰： 楚国之法，得伍胥者赐粟五万石，爵执珪，岂徒百金剑邪！ 
现代文：渔翁说： 按照楚国的法令，抓到伍子胥的人，赏给粮食五万石，封给执珪的爵位，难道是仅仅值百金的宝剑吗？ 
English: The fisherman said, "According to the laws of the State of Chu, a man who catches a wuzihong is rewarded with 50,000 koku of grain, and a title of nobility is bestowed on the keeper of the wuzihong. Isn't it just a sword worth a hundred gold coins?"

古文：不受。
现代文：不肯接受。
English: He refused to accept it.

古文：伍胥未至吴而疾，止中道，乞食。
现代文：伍子胥还没逃到吴国京城，就生病了，只能在中途停下来，乞讨饭食。
English: Before Wu Zixuan fled to the capital city of Wu, he fell ill and had to stop halfway to beg for food.

古文：至於吴，吴王僚方用事，公子光为将。
现代文：到达吴国都城时，吴王僚刚刚当权执政，公子光做将军。
English: When he arrived at the capital city of Wu, Wu Wangliang had just taken power, and he was only a general.

古文：伍胥乃因公子光以求见吴王。
现代文：伍子胥就通过公子光的关系求见吴王。
English: Wu Zixuan sought to see the king of Wu through the relationship between the prince and the light.

古文：久之，楚平王以其边邑锺离与吴边邑卑梁氏俱蚕，两女子争桑相攻，乃大怒，至於两国举兵相伐。
现代文：过了很久，楚平王因为楚国边邑钟离和吴国边邑卑梁氏都养蚕，两地的女子为争采桑叶相互撕打，就大发雷霆，以致于两国起兵相互攻打。
English: After a long time, King Chuping was furious because both the Zhongli and Beiliang families in the border towns of Chu and Wu had raised silkworms, and the women of the two places tore and beat each other to compete in harvesting mulberry leaves, so that the two countries raised troops to fight each other.

古文：吴使公子光伐楚，拔其锺离、居巢而归。
现代文：吴国派公子光攻打楚国，攻克了楚国的钟离、居巢就回去了。
English: The State of Wu sent the prince Guang to attack the State of Chu, and after he conquered the State of Chu, he left the nest and went back.

古文：伍子胥说吴王僚曰： 楚可破也。原复遣公子光。 
现代文：伍子胥劝说吴王僚说： 楚国是可以攻破的，希望再派公子去攻打楚国。 
English: Wu Zixuan persuaded Wu Wangliang, saying, "Chu Province can be invaded, and I hope you will send your nobles to attack Chu Province."

古文：公子光谓吴王曰： 彼伍胥父兄为戮於楚，而劝王伐楚者，欲以自报其雠耳。
现代文：公子光对吴王说： 那伍子胥的父兄被楚国杀死，劝大王攻打楚国，是为了报他的私仇。
English: Prince Ziguang said to King Wu, "Wu Ziguang's father and brother were killed by the State of Chu. I advised the Great King to attack the State of Chu in order to avenge him.

古文：伐楚未可破也。 
现代文：攻打楚国未必可以打败它呀。 
English: If you attack Chu, you may not be able to defeat it.

古文：伍胥知公子光有内志，欲杀王而自立，未可说以外事，乃进专诸於公子光，退而与太子建之子胜耕於野。
现代文：伍子胥知道公子光在国内有野心，想杀死吴王僚而自立为君，这种情况下不可以用对外的军事行动劝说他，就向公子光推荐了专诸，而自己则离开朝廷，和太子建的儿子胜到乡下种地去了。
English: Knowing that Prince Guang had ambitions at home and wanted to kill Wu Wangliang and establish himself as king, Wu Ziqi could not use external military operations to persuade him in this case. He recommended Zongzhu to Prince Guang, while he left the imperial court and went to farmland in the countryside with Prince Jian's son Sheng.

古文：五年而楚平王卒。
现代文：五年以后，楚平王死了。
English: Five years later, King Chuping died.

古文：初，平王所夺太子建秦女生子轸，及平王卒，轸竟立为後，是为昭王。
现代文：当初，平王从太子建那儿夺来的秦国美女生了一个儿子叫轸，等平王一死，轸竟然继平王即位，这就是昭王。
English: At first, the beautiful woman from Qin who was taken from Prince Jian by King Ping gave birth to a son named Zhao. When King Ping died, Zhao actually succeeded King Ping to the throne. This was King Zhao.

古文：吴王僚因楚丧，使二公子将兵往袭楚。
现代文：吴王僚趁着楚国办丧事，派烛庸、盖余二公子领兵袭击楚国。
English: Wu Wangli took advantage of the funeral held by the State Council of Chu to send Zengyong and Gui Yu to lead the troops to attack Chu.

古文：楚发兵绝吴兵之後，不得归。
现代文：楚国出兵切断了吴国军队的后路，使吴军不能回国。
English: Chu dispatched troops to cut off the rear of the Wu army, so that the Wu army could not return home.

古文：吴国内空，而公子光乃令专诸袭刺吴王僚而自立，是为吴王阖庐。
现代文：吴国国内空虚，公子光就命令专诸暗杀了吴王僚，自立为王，这就是吴王阖庐。
English: In the emptiness of the interior of the State of Wu, Prince Guang ordered all the officials to assassinate the ministers of the King of Wu and to become the king himself. This was the beginning of the King of Wu.

古文：阖庐既立，得志，乃召伍员以为行人，而与谋国事。
现代文：阖庐自立以后，愿望实现了，就召回伍员，官拜为行人，和他共同商议国家大事。
English: After he became independent, his wish came true, he recalled the soldiers, treated the officials as pedestrians, and discussed national affairs with them.

古文：楚诛其大臣郤宛、伯州犁，伯州犁之孙伯嚭亡奔吴，吴亦以嚭为大夫。
现代文：楚国杀了它的大臣嚭宛、伯州犁，伯州犁的孙子伯嚭逃到吴国，吴国也任命伯嚭做了大夫。
English: Chu killed its ministers Xuan and Bozhou, and Bozhou's grandson Bozhou fled to Wu. Wu also appointed Bozhou as a doctor.

古文：前王僚所遣二公子将兵伐楚者，道绝不得归。後闻阖庐弑王僚自立，遂以其兵降楚，楚封之於舒。
现代文：先前，吴王僚派遣攻打楚国的两位公子，后路被切断不能回国，后来听说阖庐杀死吴王僚自立为王的消息，于是带领着军队，投降了楚国，楚国把舒地封给了他们。
English: Previously, Wu Wangli dispatched two princes to attack Chu, and they were cut off from returning home. Later, they heard the news that Zhai had killed Wu Wangli and declared himself king, so they led the army and surrendered Chu, and Chu gave them Shudi.

古文：阖庐立三年，乃兴师与伍胥、伯嚭伐楚，拔舒，遂禽故吴反二将军。
现代文：阖庐自立为王的第三年，就发动军队和伍子胥、伯嚭攻打楚国，占领了舒地，捉住了原来背叛吴国的两个将军。
English: In the third year of his independence as king, he launched an army with Wu Zixuan and Bo Xuan to attack Chu, occupied Shudi, and captured the two generals who had originally betrayed Wu.

古文：因欲至郢，将军孙武曰： 民劳，未可，且待之。 
现代文：因而阖庐想乘胜进兵郢都，将军孙武说： 百姓已经很疲惫了，不可以再继续了，暂切等待时机吧。 
English: Therefore, he wanted to take advantage of the victory to enter the capital. General Sun Wu said: The people are already very tired, it is impossible to continue, let's wait for the right time.

古文：乃归。
现代文：就收兵回国了。
English: They withdrew and returned to their country.

古文：四年，吴伐楚，取六与灊。
现代文：阖庐四年，吴国攻打楚国，夺取了六地和灊地。
English: Thirty-four years ago, the State of Wu attacked the State of Chu and seized the Six Provinces and the Yunnan Province.

古文：五年，伐越，败之。
现代文：阖庐五年，吴国攻打越国，并打败了它。
English: Thirty-five years ago, Wu attacked Yue and defeated it.

古文：六年，楚昭王使公子囊瓦将兵伐吴。
现代文：阖庐六年，楚昭王派公子囊瓦领兵攻打吴国。
English: Thirty-six years later, King Chu Zhao sent his son Zeng Wa to lead an army to attack Wu.

古文：吴使伍员迎击，大破楚军於豫章，取楚之居巢。
现代文：吴国派伍子胥迎战，在豫章打败了楚国的军队，夺取了楚国的居巢。
English: Wu State sent Wu Ziqi to meet the battle, defeated the army of Chu State in Yuzhang, and seized the nest of Chu State.

古文：九年，吴王阖庐谓子胥、孙武曰： 始子言郢未可入，今果何如？ 
现代文：阖庐九年，吴王阖庐对子胥、孙武说： 当初你们说郢都不可攻入，现在的情形怎么样呢？ 
English: In the thirty-ninth year, King Wu said to Zi Zi and Sun Wu: At the beginning, you said that you could not invade Yunnan. What is the situation now?

古文：二子对曰： 楚将囊瓦贪，而唐、蔡皆怨之。
现代文：子胥、孙武回答说： 楚国将军囊瓦贪财，唐国和蔡国都怨恨他。
English: Zixuan and Sun Wu replied: The general of Chu was greedy for money. Both Tang and Cai states resented him.

古文：王必欲大伐之，必先得唐、蔡乃可。 
现代文：大王一定要大规模地进攻楚国的话，必须先要得到唐国和蔡国的帮助才行。 
English: If the Great King must attack Chu on a large scale, he must first get the help of Tang and Cai.

古文：阖庐听之，悉兴师与唐、蔡伐楚，与楚夹汉水而陈。
现代文：阖庐听从了他们的意见，出动了全部军队和唐国、蔡国共同攻打楚国，和楚国军队在汉水两岸列兵对阵。
English: He listened to their opinions and dispatched the entire army to attack Chu together with Tang and Cai, and the soldiers on both sides of the Han River faced off against the Chu army.

古文：吴王之弟夫概将兵请从，王不听，遂以其属五千人击楚将子常。子常败走，奔郑。
现代文：吴王的弟弟夫概带领着军队请求相随出征，吴王不答应，夫概就用自己属下五千人攻击楚将子常，子常战败逃跑，直奔郑国。
English: Wu Wang's younger brother, Fuchu, led the army and requested to accompany the expedition. Wu Wang did not agree, so Fuchu attacked Chu general Zichang with five thousand of his subordinates. Zichang was defeated and fled, heading straight for Zheng.

古文：於是吴乘胜而前，五战，遂至郢。
现代文：于是，吴军乘胜挺进，经过五次战役，就打到了郢都。
English: As a result, the Wu army advanced with victory, and after five battles, they reached Shantou.

古文：己卯，楚昭王出奔。
现代文：己卯日，楚昭王出逃。
English: On the same day, Chu Zhaowang fled.

古文：庚辰，吴王入郢。
现代文：第二天，吴王进入郢都。
English: The next day, King Wu entered Shandong.

古文：昭王出亡，入云梦；盗击王，王走郧。
现代文：楚昭王出逃后，来到了云梦；在这里昭王遭到强盗的袭击，又逃到郧地。
English: After Chu Zhao Wang fled, he came to Yunmeng; here, Zhao Wang was attacked by robbers and fled to Xuanchi.

古文：郧公弟怀曰： 平王杀我父，我杀其子，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：郧公斗辛的弟弟斗怀说： 平王杀死了我们的父亲，我们杀死他的儿子，不也可以吗？ 
English: Du Huai, the younger brother of Du Xin, said, "Hei Wang killed our father, so we can kill his son, can't we?"

古文：郧公恐其弟杀王，与王奔随。
现代文：郧公担心他的弟弟杀死昭王，就和昭王一块逃到随地。
English: Fearing that his younger brother had killed Zhao Wang, Zeng Gong fled with Zhao Wang to Zhili.

古文：吴兵围随，谓随人曰： 周之子孙在汉川者，楚尽灭之。 
现代文：吴兵包围了随地，对随地人说： 在汉水流域的周朝子孙，被楚国全部消灭了。 
English: The Wu soldiers surrounded Xizhi and said to the Xizhi people: The descendants of the Zhou Dynasty in the Han River basin have all been wiped out by the State of Chu.

古文：随人欲杀王，王子綦匿王，己自为王以当之。
现代文：随人要杀昭王，王子綦把他藏起来，自己冒充昭王来搪塞他们。
English: People wanted to kill Shao Wang, but the prince hid him and pretended to be Shao Wang to thwart them.

古文：随人卜与王於吴，不吉，乃谢吴不与王。
现代文：随人算了一卦，卦象表明把昭王交给吴军，不吉利，就谢绝吴国，没有交出昭王。
English: The attendant calculated a riddle, and the riddle seemed to indicate that Zhao Wang would be handed over to the Wu army, which was not auspicious, so he renounced the State of Wu and did not hand over Zhao Wang.

古文：始伍员与申包胥为交，员之亡也，谓包胥曰： 我必覆楚。 
现代文：当初，伍子胥和申包胥是至交的朋友，伍子胥逃跑时，对包胥说： 我一定要颠覆楚国。 
English: At first, Wu Zixuan and Shen Baojun were close friends. When Wu Zixuan ran away, he said to Baojun, "I must subvert the state of Chu."

古文：包胥曰： 我必存之。 
现代文：包胥说： 我一定要保存楚国。 
English: Bao Wei said: I must preserve the state of Chu.

古文：及吴兵入郢，伍子胥求昭王。既不得，乃掘楚平王墓，出其尸，鞭之三百，然後已。
现代文：等到吴兵攻进郢都，伍子胥搜寻昭王，没有找到，就挖开楚平王的坟，拖出他的尸体，鞭打了三百下才停手。
English: When Wu's soldiers entered Shendu, Wu Zixuan searched for King Zhao. When he couldn't find him, he dug up King Chuping's grave, dragged out his body, and flogged him 300 times before he stopped.

古文：申包胥亡於山中，使人谓子胥曰： 子之报雠，其以甚乎！
现代文：申包胥逃到山里，派人去对伍子胥说： 您这样报仇，太过份了！
English: Shen Baojun fled to the mountains and sent someone to say to Wu Zixuan, "This revenge of yours is too much!

古文：吾闻之，人众者胜天，天定亦能破人。
现代文：我听说： 虽然人多可以胜天，但天公降怒也能毁灭人。 
English: I heard: Although many people can conquer the heavens, the gods' wrath can also destroy people.

古文：今子故平王之臣，亲北面而事之，今至於僇死人，此岂其无天道之极乎！ 
现代文：您原来是平王的臣子，亲自称臣侍奉过他，如今弄到侮辱死人的地步，这难道不是丧天害理到极点了吗！ 
English: You used to be a vassal of King Ping, and you claimed to have served him as a vassal, but now you have gone so far as to insult the dead. Isn't this the height of wickedness?

古文：伍子胥曰： 为我谢申包胥曰，吾日暮途远，吾故倒行而逆施之。 
现代文：伍子胥对来人说： 你替我告诉申包胥说： 我年事已高，已到了日暮途穷的地步。因为报仇心切，我要逆情背理地行动。  
English: Wu Zixuan said to the stranger: Tell Shen Baozhuan for me: I am old and have reached the point of poverty. Because I am eager for revenge, I will act contrary to the situation.

古文：於是申包胥走秦告急，求救於秦。秦不许。
现代文：于是申包胥跑到秦国去报告危急情况，向秦国求救，秦国不答应。
English: So Shen Baodi ran to Qin to report the critical situation and asked Qin for help, but Qin did not agree.

古文：包胥立於秦廷，昼夜哭，七日七夜不绝其声。
现代文：申包胥站在秦国的朝廷上，日夜不停地痛哭，他的哭声七天七夜没有中断。
English: Shen Baozhen stood in the court of the Qin Dynasty and wept bitterly day and night. His cries did not stop for seven days and seven nights.

古文：秦哀公怜之，曰： 楚虽无道，有臣若是，可无存乎！ 
现代文：秦哀公同情他，说： 楚王虽然是无道昏君，有这样的臣子，能不保存楚国吗？ 
English: Qin Aigong sympathized with him and said, "Although King Chu is a senseless and dim-witted prince, with such a vassal, can we not preserve the state of Chu?

古文：乃遣车五百乘救楚击吴。
现代文：就派遣了五百辆战车拯救楚国，攻打吴国。
English: He dispatched five hundred chariots to save Chu and attack Wu.

古文：六月，败吴兵於稷。
现代文：六月间，在稷地打败吴国的军队。
English: In June, he defeated the army of the State of Wu in Handan.

古文：会吴王久留楚求昭王，而阖庐弟夫概乃亡归，自立为王。
现代文：正赶上吴王长时间地留在楚国寻找楚昭王，阖庐的弟弟夫概逃回国内，自立为王。
English: Just in time for King Wu to stay in Chu for a long time in search of King Chu Zhao, his younger brother and husband fled back to the country and became king.

古文：阖庐闻之，乃释楚而归，击其弟夫概。
现代文：阖庐听到这个消息，就弃楚国赶回去，攻打他的弟弟夫概。
English: Upon hearing this news, Yao abandoned Chu and rushed back to attack his younger brother, Fuchu.

古文：夫概败走，遂奔楚。
现代文：夫概兵败，跑到楚国。
English: Her husband was defeated and fled to Chu.

古文：楚昭王见吴有内乱，乃复入郢。封夫概於堂谿，为堂谿氏。
现代文：楚昭王见吴国内部发生变乱，又打回郢都，把堂谿封给夫概，叫做堂谿氏。
English: When King Chu Zhao saw that there was turmoil in the interior of Wuxi, he returned to the capital of Yunnan and gave the fief of Tonglu to his brother-in-law. They were called the Tonglu clan.

古文：楚复与吴战，败吴，吴王乃归。
现代文：楚国再次和吴军作战，打败吴军，吴王就回国了。
English: Chu once again fought against the Wu army, defeated the Wu army, and the King of Wu returned to China.

古文：後二岁，阖庐使太子夫差将兵伐楚，取番。
现代文：又过了两年，阖庐派太子夫差领兵攻打楚国，夺取番地。
English: Two more years passed, and the prince sent his troops to attack Chu and capture the village.

古文：楚惧吴复大来，乃去郢，徙於鄀。
现代文：楚国害怕吴国军队再次大规模地进攻，就离开郢城，迁都鄀邑。
English: Chu was afraid of another large-scale attack by Wu's army, so it left Ye and moved its capital to Ye.

古文：当是时，吴以伍子胥、孙武之谋，西破彊楚，北威齐晋，南服越人。
现代文：在这个时候，吴国用伍子胥、孙武的战略，向西打败了强大的楚国，向北威镇齐国、晋国，向南降服了越国。
English: At this time, Wu used the strategy of Wu Zixuan and Sun Wu to defeat the powerful Chu to the west, Qi and Jin to the north, and Yue to the south.

古文：其後四年，孔子相鲁。
现代文：夫差攻楚取番以后四年，孔子出任鲁国国相。
English: Four years after he took office, Confucius became the minister of state of Lu.

古文：後五年，伐越。
现代文：又过了五年，吴军攻打越国。
English: Five years later, the Wu army attacked Yue.

古文：越王勾践迎击，败吴於姑苏，伤阖庐指，军卻。
现代文：越王勾践率兵迎战，在姑苏打败吴军，击伤了吴王阖庐的脚趾，吴军撤兵。
English: Yue Wang Gochun led his troops into battle, defeated the Wu army in Gusu, wounded the toe of Wu Wang Yao, and the Wu army withdrew.

古文：阖庐病创将死，谓太子夫差曰： 尔忘勾践杀尔父乎？ 
现代文：阖庐创伤恶化，很严重，快要死的时候对太子夫差说： 你会忘掉勾践杀死你的父亲吗？ 
English: The trauma worsened, it was very serious, and when he was about to die, he said to the crown prince: Will you forget the plot to kill your father?

古文：夫差对曰： 不敢忘。 
现代文：夫差回答说： 不敢忘记。 
English: The husband replied, "I dare not forget."

古文：是夕，阖庐死。
现代文：当天晚上，阖庐就死了。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zou died.

古文：夫差既立为王，以伯嚭为太宰，习战射。
现代文：夫差继位吴王以后，任用伯嚭做太宰，操练士兵。
English: After Fu Zha succeeded to the throne of King Wu, he appointed Bo Xun as Dazai to train soldiers.

古文：二年後伐越，败越於夫湫。越王勾践乃以馀兵五千人栖於会稽之上，使大夫种厚币遗吴太宰嚭以请和，求委国为臣妾。吴王将许之。
现代文：二年后攻打越国，在夫湫打败越国的军队，越王勾路就带着残兵败将栖息在会稽山上，派大夫文种用重礼赠送太宰嚭请求媾和，把国家政权托付给吴国，甘心做吴国的奴仆。
English: Two years later, he attacked Yue, defeated Yue's army at Fuxi, and Yue Wanghaklu, with the remnants of his defeated army, settled on Huiqi Mountain. He sent Dr. Wenzong to present Dazai with a heavy gift to request peace, entrusted the national power to Wu, and was willing to be a slave of Wu.

古文：伍子胥谏曰： 越王为人能辛苦。今王不灭，後必悔之。 
现代文：吴王准备答应越国的请求，伍子胥规劝说： 越王勾践这个能能吃苦耐劳，现在大王如果不一举歼灭他，将来一定会后悔。 
English: Wu Wang was ready to agree to Yue Guo's request, and Wu Ziqian persuaded him: Yue Wang can bear the hardships and endure the hardships. If the great king does not annihilate him in one fell swoop now, he will surely regret it in the future.

古文：吴王不听，用太宰嚭计，与越平。
现代文：吴王不听伍子胥的规劝，而采纳了太宰嚭的计策，和越国议和。
English: Wu Wang did not listen to Wu Zixuan's persuasion, but adopted Dazai Zixuan's strategy and negotiated with Yue Guo.

古文：其後五年，而吴王闻齐景公死而大臣争宠，新君弱，乃兴师北伐齐。
现代文：和越国议和之后第五年，吴王听说齐景公死了，大臣们争权夺利，新立的国君软弱，就出动军队向北攻打齐国。
English: In the fifth year after negotiating peace with Yue, King Wu heard that King Qi had died, that ministers were vying for power and profit, and that the new sovereign was weak, so he dispatched troops to the north to attack Qi.

古文：伍子胥谏曰： 勾践食不重味，吊死问疾，且欲有所用之也。
现代文：伍子胥规劝说： 勾践一餐没有两味荤菜，哀悼死去的、慰问有病的，将打算有所作为。
English: Wu Ziqian advised and persuaded: If you practice a meal without two-flavor stew, mourn the dead, and comfort the sick, you will be able to make a difference.

古文：此人不死，必为吴患。
现代文：这个人不死，一定是吴国的祸患。
English: If this man does not die, he must be the scourge of the State of Wu.

古文：今吴之有越，犹人之有腹心疾也。
现代文：现在吴国有越国在身边，就像得了心腹疾病。
English: Now that Wu Guo and Yue Guo are around, it's like I've got a disease of the heart.

古文：而王不先越而乃务齐，不亦谬乎！ 
现代文：大王不先铲除越国却一心致力攻打齐国，不是很荒谬的吗？ 
English: Isn't it absurd that the Great King is bent on attacking Qi without first eradicating Yue?

古文：吴王不听，伐齐，大败齐师於艾陵，遂威邹鲁之君以归。
现代文：吴王不听伍子胥的规劝，攻打齐国。在艾陵把齐国军队打得大败，于是慑服了邹国和鲁国的国君而回国。
English: King Wu did not listen to Wu Zixuan's exhortation and attacked Qi. He defeated the Qi army in Ailing, and then he defeated the kings of Shan and Lu and returned to China.

古文：益疏子胥之谋。
现代文：从此，就越来越少地听从伍子胥的计谋了。
English: From then on, they listened less and less to Wu Zixuan's stratagems.

古文：其後四年，吴王将北伐齐，越王勾践用子贡之谋，乃率其众以助吴，而重宝以献遗太宰嚭。
现代文：此后四年，吴王北打算北上攻打齐国，越王勾践采用子贡的计谋，就带领着他的人马帮助吴国作战，把贵重的宝物敬献给太宰嚭。
English: In the following four years, Wu Wangbei planned to go north to attack Qi, and Yue Wang Guo, using the strategy of paying tribute, led his men to help Wu in the war and presented the precious treasure to Dazai.

古文：太宰嚭既数受越赂，其爱信越殊甚，日夜为言於吴王。
现代文：太宰嚭多次接受了越国的贿赂。越来越喜欢并信任越王，没日没夜地在吴王面前替越王说好话。
English: Dazai Yan accepted bribes from Yue Guo many times. He liked and trusted Yue Wang more and more, and spoke well of Yue Wang in front of King Wu day and night.

古文：吴王信用嚭之计。
现代文：吴王总是相信和采纳太宰嚭的计谋。
English: King Wu always believed in and adopted Dazai Yao's stratagems.

古文：伍子胥谏曰： 夫越，腹心之病，今信其浮辞诈伪而贪齐。
现代文：伍子胥规劝吴王说： 越国，是心腹大患，现在相信那虚饰浮夸狡诈欺骗之词，贪图攻伐齐国的功劳。
English: Wu Ziqi advised the king of Wu, saying, "Yue is a great danger to your heart and soul. Now you believe in the false, pompous, cunning, and deceitful words, and covet the honor of attacking Qi.

古文：破齐，譬犹石田，无所用之。
现代文：即使攻克齐国，也只是占领了一块石田，丝毫没有用处。
English: Even if we were to conquer Qi, it would only be the occupation of a piece of stony ground, which would be of no use at all.

古文：且盘庚之诰曰： 有颠越不恭，劓殄灭之，俾无遗育，无使易种于兹邑。 
现代文：况且《盘庚之诰》上说： 有破坏礼法，不恭王命的就要彻底割除灭绝他们，使他们不能够传宗接代，不要让他们在这个城邑里把好人影响坏了。 
English: Moreover, "Pan Geng's Edict" said: "Those who have broken the etiquette and disobeyed the king's order shall be completely cut off and exterminated, so that they will not be able to pass on the lineage, and do not let them ruin the influence of good people in this city."

古文：此商之所以兴。
现代文：这就是商朝兴盛的原因。
English: This is the reason for the prosperity of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：原王释齐而先越；若不然，後将悔之无及。 
现代文：希望大王放弃齐国，先攻打越国；如不这样，今后悔恨也来不及了。 
English: It is hoped that the great king will give up Qi and attack Yue first; otherwise, it will be too late for regret in the future.

古文：而吴王不听，使子胥於齐。
现代文：吴王不听伍子胥的劝告，还派他出使齐国。
English: King Wu did not listen to Wu Zixuan's advice and sent him to Qi.

古文：子胥临行，谓其子曰： 吾数谏王，王不用，吾今见吴之亡矣。汝与吴俱亡，无益也。 
现代文：子胥临行前，对他儿子说： 我屡次规劝大王，大王不听。我现在看到吴国的末日了，你和吴国一毁灭，是没有意义的事情。 
English: Before Zi Yan left, he said to his son: "I have repeatedly advised the great king, but the great king did not listen. I now see the end of the State of Wu. It is meaningless for you and the State of Wu to be destroyed at once.

古文：乃属其子於齐鲍牧，而还报吴。
现代文：就把他的儿子托付给齐国的鲍牧，而返回吴国向吴王报告。
English: He entrusted his son to Bao Mu of Qi and returned to Wu to report to King Wu.

古文：吴太宰嚭既与子胥有隙，因谗曰： 子胥为人刚暴，少恩，猜贼，其怨望恐为深祸也。
现代文：吴国太宰嚭和伍子胥早就有了嫌隙，就趁机在吴王面前说他的坏说： 伍子胥为人强硬凶恶，没有情义，猜忌狠毒，他的怨恨恐怕要酿成深重的灾难。
English: The Empress Dowager of the State of Wu and Wu Zixuan had a grudge against each other for a long time, so she took the opportunity to speak ill of him in front of the King of Wu, saying, "Wu Zixuan is a tough and ferocious man, devoid of sentiment, suspicious and vicious, and his grudge is likely to bring about a serious disaster."

古文：前日王欲伐齐，子胥以为不可，王卒伐之而有大功。子胥耻其计谋不用，乃反怨望。
现代文：前次大王要攻打齐国，伍子胥认为不可以，大王终于发兵并且取得了重大的胜利，子胥因自己计谋没被采用感到羞耻，反而产生了怨恨情绪。
English: The last time the great king wanted to attack Qi, Wu Zixuan thought it was unacceptable. The great king finally sent troops and achieved a major victory. Zixuan felt ashamed because his strategy was not adopted, but resentment arose.

古文：而今王又复伐齐，子胥专愎彊谏，沮毁用事，徒幸吴之败以自胜其计谋耳。
现代文：如今大王又要再次攻打齐国，伍子胥又独断固执，强行谏阻，败坏、诋毁大王的事业，只希望吴国战败来证明自己的计谋高明。
English: Now the great king wants to attack Qi again, and Wu Zixuan is stubborn and obstinate, forcibly obstructing, corrupting, and slandering the great king's cause. He only hopes that Wu will be defeated to prove his clever strategy.

古文：今王自行，悉国中武力以伐齐，而子胥谏不用，因辍谢，详病不行。
现代文：现在大王亲自出征，出动全国的武装力量攻打齐国，而伍子胥的劝谏不被采纳，因此就中止上朝，假装有病不随大王出征。
English: Now the great king himself went to war, dispatched the armed forces of the whole country to attack Qi, and Wu Zixuan's advice was not accepted, so he stopped going to the court, pretending to be ill and not going to war with the great king.

古文：王不可不备，此起祸不难。
现代文：大王不可不戒备，这是很容易引起祸端的。
English: The great king must be on his guard, for this can easily lead to disaster.

古文：且嚭使人微伺之，其使於齐也，乃属其子於齐之鲍氏。
现代文：况且我派人暗中探查，他出使齐国，就把他的儿子托付给齐国的鲍氏。
English: Moreover, I sent someone to investigate secretly. He sent an envoy to Qi, and entrusted his son to the Bao clan of Qi.

古文：夫为人臣，内不得意，外倚诸侯，自以为先王之谋臣，今不见用，常鞅鞅怨望。
现代文：做人臣子，在国内不得意，就在外依靠诸侯，自己认为是先王的谋臣，现在不被信用，时常郁郁不乐，产生怨恨情绪。
English: As a courtier, he was not satisfied at home, so he relied on the lords abroad. He thought of himself as the former king's adviser, but now he was not trusted. He was often depressed and unhappy, and resentment arose.

古文：原王早图之。 
现代文：希望大王对这件事早日想办法。 
English: I hope the king will find a solution to this matter as soon as possible.

古文：吴王曰： 微子之言，吾亦疑之。 
现代文：吴王说： 没有你这番话，我也怀疑他了。 
English: King Wu said, "Without your words, I would have doubted him."

古文：乃使使赐伍子胥属镂之剑，曰： 子以此死。 
现代文：就派使臣把属镂宝剑赐给伍子胥，说： 你用这把宝剑自杀。 
English: So he sent an envoy to give Wu Zixuan his sword and said, "Use this sword to kill yourself."

古文：伍子胥仰天叹曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：伍子胥仰望天空叹息说： 唉！
English: Wu Zixuan looked up at the sky, sighed and said, "Alas!

古文：谗臣嚭为乱矣，王乃反诛我。
现代文：谗言小人伯嚭要作乱，大王反来杀我。
English: He said that the villain, Bo Xilou, was going to start a riot, but the king came to kill me.

古文：我令若父霸。
现代文：我使你父亲称霸。
English: I put your father in charge.

古文：自若未立时，诸公子争立，我以死争之於先王，几不得立。
现代文：你还没确定为王位继承人时，公子们争着立为太子，我在先王面前冒死相争，几乎不能得到太子的位职。
English: When you were still undecided as the heir to the throne, nobles were vying to become crown prince, and I risked my life in front of the former king, barely able to get the position of crown prince.

古文：若既得立，欲分吴国予我，我顾不敢望也。然今若听谀臣言以杀长者。 
现代文：你立为太子后，还答应把吴国分一部分给我，我却不存在你报答的希望，可现在你竟听信谄媚小人的坏话来杀害长辈。 
English: After you became the crown prince, you promised to give me a part of Wu Province, but I have no hope of your return, but now you are listening to the evil words of a charming villain to kill the elders.

古文：乃告其舍人曰： 必树吾墓上以梓，令可以为器；而抉吾眼县吴东门之上，以观越寇之入灭吴也。 
现代文：于是告诉他亲近的门客说： 你们一定要在我的坟墓上种植梓树，让它长大能够做棺材。挖出我的眼珠悬挂在吴国都城的东门楼上，来观看越寇怎样进入都城，灭掉吴国。 
English: So he told his close followers: "You must plant a horse chestnut tree on my grave, so that it can grow up to make a coffin. Dig out my eyeballs and hang them on the east gate of the capital of Wu, to see how the Vietcong entered the capital and destroyed Wu.

古文：乃自刭死。吴王闻之大怒，乃取子胥尸盛以鸱夷革，浮之江中。
现代文：于是自刎而死，吴王听到这番话，大发雷霆，就把伍子胥的尸体装进皮革袋子里，漂浮在江中。
English: So he hanged himself and died. When King Wu heard this, he flew into a rage. He put Wu Zixuan's body in a leather bag and floated it in the river.

古文：吴人怜之，为立祠於江上，因命曰胥山。
现代文：吴国人同情他，在江边给他修建了祠堂，因此，把这个地方命名叫胥山。
English: The people of Wu sympathized with him and built a shrine for him by the river. Therefore, this place was named Shaoshan.

古文：吴王既诛伍子胥，遂伐齐。
现代文：吴王杀了伍子胥后，就攻打齐国。
English: After King Wu killed Wu Zihong, he attacked Qi.

古文：齐鲍氏杀其君悼公而立阳生。
现代文：齐国鲍氏杀了他们的国君悼公辅佐阳生作国君。
English: The Bao clan of Qi killed their sovereign and mourned the death of the sovereign's aide Sayang Sheng.

古文：吴王欲讨其贼，不胜而去。
现代文：吴王打算讨伐鲍氏，可是，还没有取得胜利就撤兵回去了。
English: King Wu planned to fight the Baos, but withdrew his troops before achieving victory.

古文：其後二年，吴王召鲁卫之君会之橐皋。
现代文：此后二年，吴王召集鲁国、卫国的国君在橐皋会盟。
English: In the following two years, King Wu convened the princes of the State of Lu and the State of Wei to form the League.

古文：其明年，因北大会诸侯於黄池，以令周室。
现代文：第二年，就势北上，在黄池大会诸侯，来号令周天子。
English: In the second year, he marched northward, and at the great assembly of lords in Huangchi, he summoned Zhou Tianzi.

古文：越王勾践袭杀吴太子，破吴兵。
现代文：这时，越王勾践袭击吴国，杀死吴国的太子，打败了吴国军队。
English: At this time, Yue Wang Guochun attacked Wu, killed the prince of Wu, and defeated the Wu army.

古文：吴王闻之，乃归，使使厚币与越平。
现代文：吴王听到这个消息，就回国了，派出使者用丰厚贵重的礼物和越国议和。
English: When King Wu heard the news, he returned to China and sent an envoy to negotiate a peace treaty with Yue with rich and valuable gifts.

古文：後九年，越王勾践遂灭吴，杀王夫差；而诛太宰嚭，以不忠於其君，而外受重赂，与己比周也。
现代文：过后九年，越王勾践终于灭掉吴国，杀死吴王夫差，又杀了太宰嚭，因为他不忠于他的国君，接受外国的贵重贿赂，私下亲近越国。
English: Nine years later, King Gochang of Yue finally annihilated the State of Wu, killed King Fuchai of Wu, and killed Dazaifu, because he was not loyal to his sovereign, accepted valuable bribes from foreign countries, and was secretly close to the State of Yue.

古文：伍子胥初所与俱亡故楚太子建之子胜者，在於吴。
现代文：当初与伍子胥一起逃亡的楚太子建的儿子居住在吴国。
English: The son of Chu Taizi Jian, who initially fled with Wu Zixuan, lives in Wu.

古文：吴王夫差之时，楚惠王欲召胜归楚。
现代文：吴王夫差在位的时候，楚惠王要召胜回到楚国。
English: When Wu Wangfuchai was on the throne, King Chu Hui wanted to call Sheng Rong back to Chu.

古文：叶公谏曰： 胜好勇而阴求死士，殆有私乎！ 
现代文：叶公规劝说： 胜爱好勇武而暗中寻访敢死的勇士，大概有私心！ 
English: Ye Gongxi advised: "If you are fond of martial arts and secretly search for brave warriors who are willing to die, you are probably selfish!"

古文：惠王不听。遂召胜，使居楚之边邑鄢，号为白公。
现代文：惠王不听他的进谏，终于把胜召回来，让他居住在楚国的边邑鄢。号称白公。
English: Hui Wang did not listen to his advice and finally called Sheng back and let him live in the border town of Chu. He was known as Bai Gong.

古文：白公归楚三年而吴诛子胥。
现代文：白公回楚国三年后，吴王杀了伍子胥。
English: Three years after Bai Gong returned to Chu, King Wu killed Wu Zi Yao.

古文：白公胜既归楚，怨郑之杀其父，乃阴养死士求报郑。
现代文：白公胜回楚国不久，怨恨郑国杀死他的父亲，于是暗地里收养敢死的勇士向郑国报仇。
English: Soon after Bai Gongsheng returned to Chu, he resented Zheng Guo for killing his father, so he secretly adopted a death-defying warrior to take revenge on Zheng Guo.

古文：归楚五年，请伐郑，楚令尹子西许之。
现代文：回到楚国五年，请求楚王攻打郑国，楚国令尹子西答应了他的要求。
English: After returning to Chu for five years, he asked the King of Chu to attack Zheng. The King of Chu, Yin Zixi, agreed to his request.

古文：兵未发而晋伐郑，郑请救於楚。楚使子西往救，与盟而还。
现代文：可是，还没发兵而晋国已经出兵攻打郑国，郑国派人到楚国请求救援，楚王派子西前往救郑，和郑国订立了盟约才回国。
English: However, before sending troops, Jin had already sent troops to attack Zheng, Zheng sent people to Chu to request rescue, King Chu sent his son Xi to rescue Zheng, and Zheng signed a treaty before returning home.

古文：白公胜怒曰： 非郑之仇，乃子西也。 
现代文：白公胜发怒说： 我的仇敌不是郑国，我的仇敌是子西！ 
English: Bai Gongsheng said angrily: My enemy is not Zheng Guo, my enemy is Zixi!

古文：胜自砺剑，人问曰： 何以为？ 
现代文：白公胜亲自磨砺宝剑，有人问他： 用它干什么？ 
English: Bai Gongsheng personally sharpened the sword. Someone asked him: What do you use it for?

古文：胜曰： 欲以杀子西。 
现代文：白公胜回答说： 要用它杀死子西。 
English: Bai Gongsheng replied, "I want to use it to kill Zixi."

古文：子西闻之，笑曰： 胜如卵耳，何能为也。 
现代文：子西听到这件事，笑着说： 白公胜如同鸟蛋，能有什么作为！ 
English: When Zixi heard this, he smiled and said: Bai Gongsheng is like a bird's egg, what can he do!

古文：其後四岁，白公胜与石乞袭杀楚令尹子西、司马子綦於朝。
现代文：此后四年，白公胜和石乞在朝廷上突然刺杀了令尹子西及司马子綦。
English: Four years later, Bai Gongsheng and Shi Qian suddenly assassinated Ling Yin Zixi and Sima Zixuan in the imperial court.

古文：石乞曰： 不杀王，不可。 
现代文：石乞说： 不杀掉楚惠王，不行。 
English: Shi Qian said: It is impossible without killing King Chu Hui.

古文：乃劫王如高府。
现代文：于是，把楚惠王劫持到高府。
English: As a result, King Chu Hui was abducted to Gaofu.

古文：石乞从者屈固负楚惠王亡走昭夫人之宫。
现代文：石乞的随从屈固背负着楚惠王逃到昭夫人住的宫室。
English: The stone mendicant's attendant, Kengo, fled with King Chu Hui on his back to the palace where Lady Zhao lived.

古文：叶公闻白公为乱，率其国人攻白公。
现代文：叶公听说白公胜作乱，带领着他封地的人攻打白公胜。
English: Ye Gong heard that Bai Gongsheng made a disturbance, and led the people of his fief to attack Bai Gongsheng.

古文：白公之徒败，亡走山中，自杀。
现代文：白公胜一伙人战败，白公胜逃到山里自杀了。
English: Bai Gongsheng's group was defeated, and Bai Gongsheng fled to the mountains and committed suicide.

古文：而虏石乞，而问白公尸处，不言将亨。
现代文：石乞被俘，审问他白公胜的尸首在哪里，不说出来就要把他煮死。
English: Shi Qian was captured and interrogated about the whereabouts of Bai Gongsheng's body. If he didn't tell, he would be boiled to death.

古文：石乞曰： 事成为卿，不成而亨，固其职也。 
现代文：石乞说： 事情成功了就做卿相，不成功就被煮死，本来是应尽的职分。 
English: Shi Qian said, "If the matter is successful, you will be made the prime minister, but if it is not successful, you will be boiled to death. It is a duty that should be fulfilled.

古文：终不肯告其尸处。
现代文：最终不肯说出白公胜尸首在什么地方。
English: In the end, he refused to say where Bai Gongsheng's body was.

古文：遂亨石乞，而求惠王复立之。
现代文：于是，把石乞煮死了。找回楚惠王，再立他为国君。
English: Therefore, he boiled the stone mendicant to death. He retrieved King Chu Hui and reinstated him as the sovereign.

古文：太史公曰：怨毒之於人甚矣哉！
现代文：太史公说：怨毒对于人类来说实在是太厉害了！
English: Taishigong said, "Resentment is really too strong for human beings!"

古文：王者尚不能行之於臣下，况同列乎！
现代文：国君尚且不能和臣子结下怨毒，何况地位相同的人呢！
English: The sovereign cannot bear a grudge against a vassal, let alone a person of the same status!

古文：向令伍子胥从奢俱死，何异蝼蚁。
现代文：假使伍子胥追随他的父亲伍奢一起死去，和蝼蚁又有什么区别。
English: What is the difference between a woodcreeper and an ant if the woodcreeper dies with its father the woodcreeper?

古文：弃小义，雪大耻，名垂於後世，悲夫！
现代文：放弃小义，洗雪重大的耻辱，让名声流传后世。可悲啊！
English: Give up petty righteousness, wash away the great shame, and let the reputation be passed on to future generations. Pathetic!

古文：方子胥窘於江上，道乞食，志岂尝须臾忘郢邪？
现代文：当伍子胥在江边困窘危急的时候，在路上沿途乞讨的时候，他的心志难道曾经有片刻忘掉郢都的仇恨吗？
English: When Wu Zixuan was in dire straits on the edge of the river, when he was begging along the way, did his mind ever forget the hatred of the capital for a moment?

古文：故隐忍就功名，非烈丈夫孰能致此哉？
现代文：所以，克制忍耐，成就功名，不是刚正有气性的男子，谁能达到这种地步呢！
English: Therefore, the restraint of patience, the achievement of merit, is not just a man with temperament, who can reach this level!

古文：白公如不自立为君者，其功谋亦不可胜道者哉！
现代文：白公如果不自立为王，他的功业和谋略恐怕是说也说不完啊！
English: If Bai Gong does not become the king independently, his exploits and stratagems will probably be too much to tell!

