古文：起屠维大荒落，尽上章敦牂，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋海西公太和四年
English: It lasted for a total of two years. Emperor Jinhai and Empress Dowager Xi were married for four years.

古文：海西公下太和四年春，三月，大司马温请与徐、兗二州刺史郗愔、江州刺史桓冲、豫州刺史袁真等伐燕。初，愔在北府，温常云： 京口酒可饮，兵可用。 
现代文：春季，三月，大司马桓温请求与徐兖二州刺史郗、江州刺史桓冲、豫州刺史袁真等讨伐前燕。当初，郗在京口的北府时，桓温经常说： 京口酒可饮，兵可用。 
English: In the spring, in March, the Grand Master Ma Huan Wen requested to fight against the former Yan with the two states of Xuzhou, Jiangsu, and Yuzhou. At the beginning, when Yan was in the northern capital of Beijing, Huan Wen often said: "Beijing wine can be drunk, soldiers can be used."

古文：深不欲愔居之；而愔暗于事机，乃遗温笺，欲共奖王室，请督所部出河上。
现代文：对郗身居北府深为不满。而郗却不识时务，还给桓温写去信，想要共同辅佐王室，请求督领自己的部队渡越黄可北上。
English: He was deeply dissatisfied with Shun living in Beifu. However, Shun was not aware of the current affairs, and he also wrote a letter to Kuan-Wen, wanting to jointly assist the royal family and requesting him to lead his troops to cross the Yellow River and go north.

古文：愔子超为温参军，取视，寸寸毁裂，乃更作愔笺，自陈非将帅才，不堪军旅，老病，乞闲地自养，劝温并领己所统。
现代文：郗的儿子郗超是桓温的参军，拿来信看过后，便把信撕碎，重新改写了一封，信中诉说自己不是将帅之才，不能胜任军旅重任，而且年老多病，请求找一个悠闲的地方休养，劝说桓温把郗自己的部队一并统领。
English: Zou's son, Zou Chao, was the one who joined the army. After reading the letter, he tore it up and rewrote a new one. In the letter, he said that he was not a good general, that he was not able to carry out the heavy responsibilities of the army, and that he was old and sick. He asked to find a leisurely place to recuperate, and persuaded Huan Wen to put Zou in charge of his own troops.

古文：温得笺大喜，即转愔冠军将军、会稽内史，温自领徐、兗二州刺史。
现代文：桓温见信后大喜过望，当即把郗调任为冠军将军、会稽内史。桓温自己兼任徐、兖二州刺史。
English: After seeing the letter, Kuan Wen was overjoyed and immediately appointed Zou as the champion general and the internal history of the association. Kuan Wen himself also served as the history of Xu and Zou in the two states.

古文：夏，四月，庚戌，温帅步骑五万发姑孰。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚戌，桓温率领步、骑兵五万人从姑孰出发。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Xuan, led by Huan Wen, and fifty thousand cavalrymen set out from Gushan.

古文：甲子，燕主暐立皇后可足浑氏，太后从弟尚书令豫章公翼之女也。
现代文：甲子，前燕国主慕容立可足浑氏为皇后，她是太后的堂弟尚书令豫章公可足浑翼的女儿。
English: She was the daughter of Shang Shuling Yu Zhang Gong Ke Futunwu, a cousin of the empress dowager.

古文：大司马温自兗州伐燕。
现代文：大司马桓温从兖州出发讨伐前燕。
English: Daishi Ma Kan-Wen set out from Bozhou to fight against Zengyan.

古文：郗超曰： 道远，汴水又浅，恐漕运难通。 
现代文：郗超说： 路途遥远，汴水又浅，恐怕运送粮食的水道难以畅通。 
English: Zou Chao said: The distance is far, the water is shallow, and I am afraid that the waterway for transporting grain is difficult to clear.

古文：温不从。
现代文：桓温没有听从。
English: Kan-Wen did not listen.

古文：六月，辛丑，温至金乡，天旱，水道绝，温使冠军将军毛虎生凿巨野三百里，引汶水会于清水。
现代文：六月，辛丑，桓温抵达金乡，因为天旱，水路断绝，桓温让冠军将军毛虎生在钜野开凿三百里水路，引来汶水会合于清水。
English: In June, Xinwu and Kuanwen arrived in Jinxiang. Because of the drought, the waterway was cut off. Kuanwen asked the champion general Mao Huo Sheng to dig a three-hundred-mile waterway in the wilderness and bring the water from Wenchuan to Qingshui.

古文：虎生，宝之子也。
现代文：毛虎生是毛宝的儿子。
English: Mao Torsen is the son of Mao Bao.

古文：温引舟师自清水入河，舳舻数百里。
现代文：桓温带领水军从清水进入黄河，船只绵延数百里。
English: Kan'en led the navy from Shimizu into the Yellow River, and the ships stretched for hundreds of miles.

古文：郗超曰： 清水入河，难以通运。
现代文：郗超说： 从清水进入黄河，运输难以畅通。
English: Zou Chao said: It is difficult to transport goods smoothly from Qingshui into the Yellow River.

古文：若寇不战，运道又绝，因敌为资，复无所得，此危道也。
现代文：如果敌人不与我们交战，运输通道又断绝，只能靠着敌人的积蓄来作给养，那又会一无所得，这是危险的办法。
English: If the enemy does not fight us, and the transport routes are cut off, and we can only rely on the enemy's savings for supplies, then we will get nothing. This is a dangerous approach.

古文：不若尽举见众直趋鄴城，彼畏公威名，必望风逃溃，北归辽、碣。
现代文：不如让现有部队全部径直开向邺城，他们害怕您的威赫名声，一定会闻风溃逃，北归辽东、碣石。
English: It is better to let all the existing troops go straight to Liaocheng, they are afraid of your reputation, they will definitely flee, and return to Liaodong and Shanshi.

古文：若能出战，则事可立决。
现代文：如果他们能出来迎战，那么事情就可以立见分晓。
English: If they can come out fighting, then things can be sorted out.

古文：若欲城鄴而守之，则当此盛夏，难为功力。百姓布野，尽为官有，易水以南必交臂请命矣。
现代文：如果他们想盘踞邺城固守，那么值此盛夏之时，难以进行行动，百姓遍布各地，全都为官府所控制，易水以南的人一定会恭敬地向我们请求指令。
English: If they want to entrench and hold the city, then at this time of high summer, it is difficult to carry out operations, the people are all over the place, all controlled by the government, and the people south of Yishui will respectfully ask us for instructions.

古文：但恐明公以此计轻锐，胜负难必，欲务持重，则莫若顿兵河、济，控引漕运，俟资储充备，至来夏乃进兵；虽如赊迟，然期于成功而已。
现代文：只是怕明公您认为此计虽说锋锐但欠稳妥，胜负难定，而想一定要持有万全之策，那就不如停兵于黄河、济水，控制水路运输，等到储备充足，到明年夏天再进军。虽说拖延了时间，然而这只是期望必定成功而已。
English: It's just that I'm afraid it's clear that you think this plan, although it's sharp, is not stable, and victory or defeat is difficult to determine, and if you want to have a perfect plan, it's better to stop the troops in the Yellow River and Jishui, control the waterway transportation, wait until the reserves are sufficient, and then march into next summer. Although the time has been delayed, it's just a hope that it will be successful.

古文：舍此二策而连军北上，进不速决，退必愆乏。
现代文：舍此二策而让绵延百里的军队北上，进不能迅速取胜，退则必然导致差错与粮晌匮乏。
English: To abandon these two measures and let the hundred-mile-long army go northward, advance can not win quickly, retreat will inevitably lead to mistakes and food shortages.

古文：贼因此势以日月相引，渐及秋冬，水更涩滞。
现代文：敌人顺应这种形势和我们周旋时日，渐渐地就到了秋冬季节，水路更加难以畅通。
English: The enemy is adapting to this situation and playing games with us. Gradually, we have reached the autumn and winter season, and the waterway is even more difficult to keep clear.

古文：且北土早寒，三军裘褐者少，恐于时所忧，非独无食而已。 
现代文：而且北方寒冷较早，三军将士穿皮衣冬装的很少，恐怕到那时所忧虑的，就不仅仅是没有粮食了。 
English: Moreover, it gets cold earlier in the north, and few soldiers of the three armies wear fur coats and winter clothes. I am afraid that by that time, what they are worried about is not just the lack of food.

古文：温又不从。
现代文：桓温又没有听从。
English: Again, Kanon did not listen.

古文：温遣建威将军檀玄攻湖陆，拔之，获燕宁东将军慕容忠。
现代文：桓温派建威将军檀玄攻打湖陆，攻了下来，擒获了前燕宁东将军慕容忠。
English: Kuan Wen sent Jian Wei's general, Dang Xuan, to attack Hulun, and captured the former Yanningdong's general, Murong Zhong.

古文：燕主暐以下邳王厉为征讨大都督，帅步骑二万逆战于黄墟，厉兵大败，单马奔还。
现代文：前燕国主慕容任命下邳王慕容历为征讨大都督，率领二万步、骑兵在黄墟迎战，慕容厉的部队大败，他本人只身匹马逃了回去。
English: The former lord of Yan, Murong, appointed the king of the Lower Yunnan, Murong, to be the grand governor of the conquest. He led twenty thousand paces, and the cavalry faced the battle in Huangxu. Murong Li's troops were defeated, and he himself fled back with only his horse.

古文：高平太守徐翻举郡来降。
现代文：高平太守徐翻带领全郡向东晋投降。
English: Emperor Gaoping's eunuch Xu Rong led the whole county to surrender to the East Jin Dynasty.

古文：前锋邓遐、硃序败燕将傅颜于林渚。
现代文：前锋邓遐、朱序在林渚打败了前燕将领傅颜。
English: Forwards Deng Qian and Zhu Zhu defeated former Yan general Fu Yan in Linzhu.

古文：复遣乐安王臧统诸军拒温，臧不能抗；乃遣散骑常侍李凤求救于秦。
现代文：慕容又派乐安王慕容臧统领众军抵抗桓温，慕容臧抵抗不住，就派散骑常侍李凤去向前秦求救。
English: Murong also sent Murong Yao, the King of Le'an, to lead the troops to resist Kuan Wen. Murong Yao could not resist and sent Li Feng, a knight-errant, to Qin to ask for help.

古文：秋，七月，温屯武阳，燕故兗州刺史孙元帅其族党起兵应温。
现代文：秋季，七月，桓温驻扎在武阳，前燕过去的兖州刺史孙元率领他的亲族同党起兵响应桓温，桓温抵达枋头。
English: In the autumn, in July, Kuan Wen was stationed in Wuyang, and Sun Yuan, the former Yan Zhaozhou, led his relatives and party members to raise an army in response to Kuan Wen, and Kuan Wen arrived in Shantou.

古文：温至枋头，及太傅评大惧，谋奔和龙。
现代文：慕容及太傅慕容评十分恐惧，谋划要逃奔到和龙。
English: Mu Rong and Taifu Mu Rong were very afraid and planned to flee to Hailong.

古文：吴王垂曰： 臣请击之；若其不捷，走未晚也。 
现代文：吴王慕容垂说： 我请求去攻打他们。如果不能取胜，再逃奔也不晚。 
English: King Murong of Wu said, "I beg you to attack them. If you can't win, it's not too late to run away."

古文：乃以垂代乐安王臧为使持节、南讨大都督，帅征南将军范阳王德等众五万以拒温。
现代文：慕容于是任命慕容垂代替乐安王慕容臧为使持节、南讨大都督，率领征南将军范阳王慕容德等兵众五万人去抵御桓温。
English: Murong then appointed Murong Trai to replace Le'an King Murong Tuo as the envoy to hold the festival, the south to fight the great governor, and led the southern general Fan Yang Wang Murong De and other fifty thousand soldiers to resist Kuan Wen.

古文：垂表司徒左长史申胤、黄门侍郎封孚、尚书郎悉罗腾皆从军。
现代文：慕容垂上表，让司徒左长史申胤、黄门侍郎封孚、尚书郎悉罗腾全都跟随部队一同前往。
English: Murong hung up his watch, and let the commander of the Left Division of the Sittu, Shi Shenyin, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, Fufu, and the commander of the Right Division of the Yellow Gate, Shang Shuro and Loten, all go with the troops.

古文：胤，钟之子；孚，放之子也。
现代文：申胤是申钟的儿子；封孚是封放的儿子。
English: Shin-Tin is the son of Shin-Chung; Fufu is the son of Fufang.

古文：又遣散骑侍郎乐嵩请救于秦，许赂以虎牢以西之地。
现代文：慕容又派散骑侍郎乐嵩去前秦请求救援，许诺把虎牢以西的地域送给他们。
English: Murong also sent his horseman-servant Le Cong to Qian Qin to ask for help, promising to give them the area west of the Tiger's Lair.

古文：秦王坚引群臣议于东堂，皆曰： 昔桓温伐我，至灞上，燕不我救。今温伐燕，我何救焉！
现代文：前秦王苻坚召郡臣到东堂商议，群臣们都说： 过去桓温讨伐我们，到达灞上，燕国不救援我们；如今桓温讨伐燕国，我们为什么要救援！
English: Former Qin King Yan Jian called county officials to the East Hall for discussion, and the ministers all said: In the past, Huan Wen fought us, and when we arrived at Huan Shang, Yan Guo did not rescue us; now, Huan Wen is fighting Yan Guo, why should we rescue them!

古文：且燕不称籓于我，我何为救之！ 
现代文：而且燕国不向我们称藩，我们为什么要去救他！ 
English: Moreover, Yan's country does not call us a clan, why should we go to save him!

古文：王猛密言于坚曰： 燕虽强大，慕容评非温敌也。
现代文：王猛悄悄地对苻坚进言说： 燕国虽然强大，但慕容评不是桓温的对手。
English: Wang Meng quietly said to Yu Jianjin: Although Yan's country is powerful, Murong Huan is no match for Kanwen.

古文：若温举山东，进屯洛邑，收幽、冀之兵，引并、豫之粟，观兵崤、渑，则陛下大事去矣。
现代文：如果桓温占据了整个崤山以东地区，进军驻扎在洛邑，收揽幽州、冀州的兵力，调来并州、豫州的粮食，在崤谷、渑池炫耀兵威，那么陛下统一天下的大业就全完了。
English: If Kuan Wen occupied the entire area east of Lushan, marched into Luoyang, garnered troops from Yuzhou and Jizhou, brought in grain from Anhui and Yuzhou, and showed off his military prowess in Shugu and Dianchi, then His Majesty's great cause of unification would be completely over.

古文：今不如与燕合兵以退温；温退，燕亦病矣，然后我承其弊而取之，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：眼下不如与燕国汇合兵力来打退桓温。桓温撤退以后，燕国也就精疲力竭了，然后我们乘着他的疲惫而攻取他，不是很好的事情吗！ 
English: Right now, it's better to join forces with Yan Guo to beat back Kuan Wen. After Kuan Wen's retreat, Yan Guo was exhausted, and then we took advantage of his exhaustion to attack him. Isn't that a good thing!

古文：坚从之。
现代文：苻坚听从了王猛的意见。
English: Yan Jian followed Wang Meng's advice.

古文：八月，遣将军苟池、洛州刺史邓羌帅步骑二万以救燕，出自洛阳，军至颍川；又遣散骑侍郎姜抚报使于燕。
现代文：八月，苻坚派将军苟池、洛州刺史邓羌率领步、骑兵二万人去救援前燕，从洛阳出发，到颍川后驻扎。又派散骑侍郎姜抚出使前燕报告。
English: In August, Zou Jian sent 20,000 cavalrymen to rescue Qian Yan, led by General Guo Chi and Deng Yao, the governor of Luoyang. They set out from Luoyang and camped at the back of the Li River. Zou Jian also sent his cavalry servant, Lang Jiang, to report to Qian Yan.

古文：以王猛为尚书令。
现代文：任命王猛为尚书令。
English: Appointed Wang Meng as Shang Shuling.

古文：太子太傅封孚问于申胤曰： 温众强士整，乘流直进，今大军徒逡巡高岸，兵不接刃，未见克殄之理，事将何如？ 
现代文：太子太傅封孚问申胤说： 桓温兵众强壮整齐，顺流直下，如今大军只在高岸上徘徊，兵不交锋，看不到取胜的迹象，事情将会怎样呢？ 
English: Prince Taifu Fongfu asked Shinyin, "Kuanwen's soldiers are strong and neat, and they go straight down the river. Now the army is only wandering on the high bank, the soldiers do not fight, and there is no sign of victory. What will happen?

古文：胤曰： 以温今日声势，似能有为。然在吾观之，必无成功。
现代文：申胤说： 以桓温今天的声势，似乎能有所作为，然而在我看来，肯定不会成就功业。
English: Shin Yin said: With the momentum of Huan Wen today, it seems that he can make a difference, but in my opinion, he will certainly not achieve his mission.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：晋室衰弱，温专制其国，晋之朝臣未必皆与之同心。
现代文：晋室衰微软弱，桓温专擅国家的权力，晋王室的朝臣未必都与他同心同德。
English: The Jin court was weak and feeble, and Huan Wen was an expert at wielding state power, and the courtiers of the Jin royal family were not necessarily all of the same mind as him.

古文：故温之得志，众所不愿也，必将乖阻以败其事。
现代文：所以桓温的得志，是众人所不愿看到的，他们必将从中阻挠以败坏他的事业。
English: Therefore, many people do not want to see Kuan-Wen's ambition to succeed, and they will certainly try to obstruct it in order to ruin his career.

古文：又，温骄而恃众，怯于应变。
现代文：再有，桓温倚仗着军队人数众多而骄傲，不善于应变。
English: Furthermore, Kuan-Wen was proud of his large army and was not good at adapting to change.

古文：大众深入，值可乘之会，反更逍遥中流，不出赴利，欲望持久，坐取全胜；若粮廪愆悬，情见势屈，必不战自败，此自然之数也。 
现代文：大军深入以后，正值有机可乘的时候，他反而让部队在中途徘徊，不出击争取胜利，指望相持下去，坐取全胜。如果运输误期，粮食断绝，衰落的威势就会如实地显露出来，肯定是不战自败，这是当然之理。 
English: After the large army had advanced, when there was a window of opportunity, he instead let the troops linger in the middle, not attacking for victory, hoping to hold on and win a complete victory. If the transportation is delayed, the grain is cut off, and the power of decline will be truthfully revealed, it will certainly be a defeat without a fight, which is a matter of course.

古文：温以燕降人段思为乡导，悉罗腾与温战，生擒思。
现代文：桓温让前燕投降过来的人段思作向导，悉罗腾与桓温交战，活捉了段思。
English: Kuan-Wen let Duan-Si, who had surrendered to Qian-Yan, act as his guide. Si-Luo-Teng fought with Kuan-Wen and captured Duan-Si alive.

古文：温使故赵将李述徇赵、魏，腾又与虎贲中郎将染干津击斩之，温军夺气。
现代文：桓温让赵国的旧将李述带兵巡行过去的赵、魏之地，悉罗腾又与虎贲中郎将染干津攻击并斩杀了他。桓温军队的士气低落。
English: The morale of Kuan Wen's army was low after Kuan Wen sent Li Su, the former general of Zhao, to lead his troops on a parade past Zhao and Wei, and Si Luo Teng and Zhong Lang of Tigress attacked and killed Zeng Ganzin.

古文：初，温使豫州刺史袁真攻谯、梁，开石门以通水运，真克谯、梁而不能开石门，水运路塞。
现代文：当初，桓温让豫州刺史袁真攻打谯郡、梁国，开辟石门以使水运之路畅通，袁真攻克了谯郡、梁国，但没能开通石门，水运之路堵塞。
English: At the beginning, Kuan Wen had Yuan Zhen, the famous statesman of Yuzhou, attack Lu County and Liang Province, and open the stone gate to make the water transport route smooth. Yuan Zhen conquered Lu County and Liang Province, but failed to open the stone gate, and the water transport route was blocked.

古文：九月，燕范阳王德帅骑一万、兰台治书侍御史刘当帅骑五千屯石门，豫州刺史李邽帅州兵五千断温粮道。
现代文：九月，前燕范阳王慕容德率领骑兵一万人、兰台侍御史刘当率领骑兵五千人驻扎在石门，豫州刺史李率领本州士兵五千为截断桓温运粮的通道。
English: In September, the former Yan Fanyang King Mu Rongde led 10,000 cavalrymen, the Lantai attendant Liu Dang led 5,000 cavalrymen stationed in Shimen, and the Yuzhou governor Li Shishi led 5,000 Honshu soldiers to cut off the channel for transporting grain from Huanwen.

古文：当，佩之子也。
现代文：刘当是刘佩的儿子。
English: Liu Dang is Liu Pei's son.

古文：德使将军慕容宙帅骑一千为前锋，与晋兵遇。宙曰： 晋人轻剽，怯于陷敌，勇于乘退，宜设饵以钓之。 
现代文：慕容德派将军慕容宙率领骑兵一千人作为前锋，与东晋的军队相遇，慕容宙说： 晋人轻浮急躁，害怕攻入敌阵，勇于乘退追击，应该设诱饵以使他们上钩。 
English: Murong De sent General Murong Cao to meet the Eastern Jin army, leading 1,000 cavalrymen as the vanguard. Murong Cao said, "The Jin people are frivolous and hasty, afraid of breaking into the enemy's lines, and daring to pursue by retreating. We should set a bait to hook them.

古文：乃使二百骑挑战，分馀骑为三伏。
现代文：于是就让二百骑兵前去挑战，其他骑兵则分别埋伏在三处。
English: So he sent two hundred horsemen to challenge them, while the other horsemen lay in ambush in three different places.

古文：挑战者兵未交而走，晋兵追之；宙帅伏以击之，晋兵死者甚众。
现代文：去挑战的骑兵未交战就退逃，晋兵追击，慕容宙率领埋伏的骑兵展开攻击，晋兵战死的很多。
English: The challenging cavalrymen fled without engaging in battle, the Jin soldiers pursued, Murong led the ambushed cavalry to attack, and many Jin soldiers died in battle.

古文：温战数不利，粮储复竭，又闻秦兵将至，丙申，焚舟，弃辎重、铠仗，自陆道奔还。
现代文：桓温交战屡屡失利，粮食储备又已空竭，又听说前秦的军队将要到来，丙申，焚烧了舟船，丢弃了装备、武器，从陆路向回逃奔。
English: After repeated defeats in battles at Kuanwen, depleted grain reserves, and hearing that the former Qin army was about to arrive, they burned their boats, abandoned their equipment and weapons, and fled back by land.

古文：以毛虎生督东燕等四郡诸军事，领东燕太守。
现代文：任命毛虎生督察东燕等四郡的各种军务，兼任东燕太守。
English: Mao Hu Sheng was appointed as an inspector of various military affairs in four counties including Dongyan and concurrently served as the governor of Dongyan.

古文：温自东燕出仓垣，凿井而饮，行七百馀里。
现代文：桓温从东燕出了仓垣，一路上掘井饮水，走了七百多里。
English: From Dongyan, Kuan Wen went out of Kuragaki, digging wells to drink water along the way, and walked more than seven hundred miles.

古文：燕之诸将争欲追之，吴王垂曰： 不可。温初退惶恐，必严设警备，简精锐为后拒，击之未必得志，不如缓之。
现代文：前燕的众将领都争着要追击桓温，吴王慕容垂说： 不行，桓温刚刚溃退，惊恐未定，一定会严加戒备，选择精锐士兵来殿后，攻击他未必能遂愿，不如暂缓一下。
English: The generals of the former Yan were all vying to pursue Kuan Wen, and Wu Wang Murong said: No, Kuan Wen has just retreated, he is terrified and undecided, he will certainly be on high alert, after choosing elite soldiers to come to the palace, attacking him may not be able to fulfill his wish, it is better to postpone.

古文：彼幸吾未至，必昼夜疾趋；俟其士众力尽气衰，然后击之，无不克矣。 
现代文：他庆幸我们没有追上，一定会昼夜急行，等他的士兵们力量耗尽，士气衰落，然后再去攻击它，攻无不克。 
English: He's glad we didn't catch up, and he's going to speed ahead day and night, until his soldiers are exhausted and demoralized, and then he's going to attack it, no holds barred.

古文：乃帅八千骑徐行蹑其后。
现代文：于是慕容垂就率领八千骑兵跟在桓温的后边慢慢前进。
English: As a result, Murong Du led eight thousand cavalry and slowly advanced behind Kuan Wen.

古文：温果兼道而进。
现代文：桓温果然兼程行进。
English: Kan'en did indeed march part of the way.

古文：数日，垂告诸将曰： 温可击矣。 
现代文：过了几天，慕容垂告诉众将领说： 可以攻打桓温了。 
English: A few days later, Murongtang told the generals, "It's time to attack Kuanwen."

古文：乃急追之，及温于襄邑。
现代文：于是就迅速追击，在襄邑追上了桓温。
English: So he quickly chased after it and caught up with Kuan-Wen in Yang-eup.

古文：范阳王德先帅劲骑四千伏于襄邑东涧中，与垂夹击温，又破之，死者复以万计。
现代文：范阳王慕容德先率领精锐骑兵四千人埋伏在襄邑东面的山涧中，与慕容垂夹击桓温，桓温大败，被斩首三万多人。
English: Fan Yang Wang Murongde first led 4,000 elite cavalrymen to ambush in the mountains east of Xiangyuan. Together with Murong, they clamped down on Huanwen. Huanwen was defeated and more than 30,000 people were beheaded.

古文：孙元遂据武阳以拒燕，燕左卫将军孟高讨擒之。
现代文：前秦人苟池在谯郡迎击桓温，又攻破了他，战死的兵众又数以万计。孙元乘机占据了武阳以与前燕抵抗，前燕左卫将军孟高讨伐并擒获了他。
English: Former Qin general Zeng Guoqi met and defeated Kuan Wen in Ying County, and tens of thousands of soldiers died in the battle. Sun Yuan took the opportunity to occupy Wuyang to resist former Yan, and former Yan Zuwei general Meng Gao fought and captured him.

古文：冬，十月，己巳，大司马温收散卒，屯于山阳。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙巳，大司马桓温收拢溃散的士兵，驻扎在山阳。
English: In the winter, in October, at the eleventh hour, Major Ma Huanwen gathered the scattered soldiers and stationed them in Shanyang.

古文：温深耻丧败，乃归罪于袁真，奏免真为庶人；又免冠军将军邓遐官。
现代文：桓温对遭受失败深感耻辱，于是就把罪过归咎于袁真，奏请黜免袁真为庶人，还奏请罢免冠军将军邓遐的官职。
English: Guan Wen was deeply humiliated by the defeat, so he blamed Yuan Zhen for the crime, petitioned for Yuan Zhen to be pardoned as a commoner, and petitioned for the removal of champion general Deng Qian from his post.

古文：真以温诬己，不服，表温罪状，朝廷不报。
现代文：袁真认为桓温诬陷自己，不服，于是就进上表章陈述桓温的罪行。朝廷没有回音。
English: Yuan Zhen thought that Kuan Wen had framed him and was not satisfied, so he went to the capital to report Kuan Wen's crime. There was no response from the imperial court.

古文：真遂据寿春叛，降燕，且请救；亦遣使如秦。
现代文：袁真于是便占据寿春反叛，投降了前燕，而且请求前燕救援，也派遣使者去到了前秦。
English: Yuan Zhen then occupied Shouchun rebellion, surrendered to Qian Yan, and asked for Qian Yan's rescue, and also sent an envoy to Qian Qin.

古文：温以毛虎生领淮南太守，守历阳。
现代文：桓温任命毛虎生兼任淮南太守，戌守历阳。
English: Kuan Wen appointed Mao Hu Rong as the governor of Huainan and the governor of Liyang.

古文：燕、秦既结好，使者数往来。
现代文：前燕、前秦缔结友好关系后，使者便频繁往来。
English: After the former Yan Dynasty and the former Qin Dynasty established friendly relations, the envoys frequently visited each other.

古文：燕散骑侍郎太原郝晷、给事黄门侍郎梁琛相继如秦。
现代文：前燕散骑侍郎郝晷、给事黄门侍郎梁琛相继到前秦。
English: The former Yan Zanzhong riding attendant Lang Zi and the Yellow Gate attendant Liang Zi successively came to the former Qin Dynasty.

古文：晷与王猛有旧，猛接以平生，问晷东方之事。
现代文：郝晷与王猛有旧交，王猛和他叙说往事，向他询问东边的事情。
English: Zhai had an old friendship with Wang Meng. Wang Meng told him about the past and asked him about things in the east.

古文：晷见燕政不修而秦大治，知燕将亡，阴欲自托于猛，颇泄其实。
现代文：郝晷看到前燕朝政混乱而前秦天下大治，暗中想依附于王猛，于是便泄露了很多实情。
English: Seeing the political chaos of the former Yan Dynasty and the great rule of the former Qin Dynasty, Zou secretly wanted to cling to Wang Meng, so he leaked a lot of facts.

古文：琛至长安，秦王坚方畋于万年，欲引见琛，琛曰： 秦使至燕，燕之君臣朝服备礼，洒扫宫庭，然后敢见。
现代文：梁琛抵达长安，前秦王苻坚正在万年打猎，要把梁琛带到这里见面。梁琛说： 秦国的使者到了燕国，燕国的君主臣下都穿好朝服，备好礼仪，打扫干净宫庭，然后才敢见面。
English: Liang Jian arrived in Chang'an. The former Qin king Jian Jian was hunting for a thousand years and wanted to bring Liang Jian here to meet him. Liang Jian said: The Qin emissary arrived in Yan, and the monarchs and vassals of Yan all put on the royal robes, prepared the etiquette, and cleaned the palace garden before they dared to meet.

古文：今秦王欲野见之，使臣不敢闻命！ 
现代文：如今秦王要在郊野会见我，使臣不敢听命！ 
English: Now King Qin wants to meet me in the countryside, the envoys dare not obey!

古文：尚书郎辛劲谓琛曰： 宾客入境，惟主人所以处之，君焉得专制其礼！
现代文：尚书郎辛劲对梁琛说： 宾客入境，只能是客随主便，你怎么能专断别人的礼仪呢！
English: Shang Shulang said angrily to Liang Qi: Guests entering the country can only be guests at their own discretion. How can you dictate other people's etiquette?

古文：且天子称乘舆，所至曰行在所，何堂居之有！
现代文：况且天子称为乘舆，所到的地方叫行在所，哪里有固定的居所呢！
English: Moreover, the Son of Heaven is called "Riding on My Back," and the place he goes to is called "Walking in the Place," where is his fixed abode?

古文：又，《春秋》亦有遇礼，何为不可乎！ 
现代文：再有，《春秋》当中也有路途相遇的礼节，又有什么不可以的呢！ 
English: In addition, "Spring and Autumn" also has the etiquette of meeting on the road, and what is not allowed!

古文：琛曰： 晋室不纲，灵祚归德，二方承运，俱受明命。
现代文：梁琛说： 晋室纲纪混乱，神明的赐福归于有道，秦、燕二国继承天运，全都接受了神明的赐命。
English: Liang Qi said: The Jin dynasty was in disarray, the blessing of the gods was attributed to the Tao, and the Qin and Yan dynasties inherited the heavenly fortune, and all of them accepted the god's command.

古文：而桓温猖狂，窥我王略，燕危秦孤，势不独立，是以秦主同恤时患，要结好援。
现代文：然而桓温猖狂无忌，窥视我们的王土，如果燕国遭受危险，秦国必然孤立，势必难以独立于世，所以秦国的主上和我们一样对时患感到忧虑，相邀结为友好，互相支援。
English: However, there is no reason why Kuan Wen should not be rampant, peering into our royal land. If Yan's country is in danger, Qin will inevitably be isolated, and it will be difficult to be independent from the world. Therefore, the lord of Qin is just as worried about the current crisis as we are, and we are invited to be friendly and support each other.

古文：东朝君臣，引领西望，愧其不竞，以为邻忧，西使之辱，敬待有加。
现代文：我们燕国的君主臣下，翘首西望，深为燕国软弱、给邻国带来忧虑而惭愧，秦国的使臣前来辱见，我们都十分尊敬地对待他。
English: We, the monarchs and vassals of Yan, bow our heads and look to the west, deeply ashamed of the weakness of Yan and the worries it has brought to its neighbors. The ambassador of Qin came to see us, and we all treated him with great respect.

古文：今强寇既退，交聘方始，谓宜崇礼笃义以固二国之欢；若忽慢使臣，是卑燕也，岂修好之义乎！
现代文：如今强敌已经后退，我们的交往刚刚开始，照我看应该崇尚礼仪，笃行大义，以加强两国的友好关系。如果忽视慢待使臣，就是看不起燕国，这难道是友好的象征吗？
English: Now that the strong enemy has retreated, our exchanges have just begun. In my opinion, we should advocate etiquette and practice righteousness in order to strengthen the friendly relations between the two countries. If we neglect to treat envoys with courtesy, we are looking down on Yan Guo. Is this a symbol of friendship?

古文：夫天子以四海为家，故行曰乘舆，止曰行在。
现代文：天子以四海为家，所以天子出行叫乘舆，停留叫行在。
English: Tianzi takes the four seas as his home, so when Tianzi travels, he calls it "taking me" and when he stays, he calls it "going."

古文：今寓县瓜裂，天光分曜，安得以乘舆、行在为言哉！
现代文：如今天下分裂，天光分照二国，怎么能以乘舆、行在作为托辞呢！
English: If there is a split today, and the light of heaven shines on the two countries, how can they use the differences in opinion and action as an excuse?

古文：礼，不期而见曰遇；盖因事权行，其礼简略，岂平居容与之所为哉！
现代文：根据礼制，事先没有约定而偶然相见称为遇。因为这是顺便行事，所以礼节简略，难道是平常闲居在家时所应该遵奉的吗！
English: According to the etiquette, a chance meeting without prior agreement is called a chance meeting. Because this is a casual act, the etiquette is simple. Is it something that should be followed when you are usually idle at home?

古文：客使单行，诚势屈于主人；然苟不以礼，亦不敢从也。 
现代文：使者只身单行，威势确实低于主人，但是假若不以礼相待，也不敢从命。 
English: The messenger goes alone, his authority is indeed lower than that of his master, but if he does not treat others with courtesy, he will not dare to carry out his orders.

古文：坚乃为之设行宫，百僚倍位，然后延客，如燕朝之仪。
现代文：于是，苻坚就为梁琛设置行宫，让众多的官吏奉陪，然后才请客人前来，就像前燕的礼仪一样。
English: As a result, Yu Jian set up a traveling palace for Liang Qi, let numerous officials accompany him, and then invited guests to come, just like the etiquette of the former Yan.

古文：事毕，坚与之私宴，问： 东朝名臣为谁？ 
现代文：事情结束以后，苻坚又为梁琛摆设私宴，问道： 燕国以贤能著称的臣下是谁？ 
English: After the matter was over, Xuan Jian again held a private banquet for Liang Xuan and asked: Who was the famous and virtuous vassal of Yan?

古文：琛曰： 太傅上庸王评，明德茂亲，光辅王室；车骑大将军吴王垂，雄略冠世，折冲御侮；其馀或以文进，或以武用，官皆称职，野无遗贤。 
现代文：梁琛说： 太傅上庸王慕容评，是有完美德性与才能的亲属，光大、辅佐王室；车骑大将军吴王慕容垂，勇武和谋略冠世，抗击敌人抵御外侮；其他人有的以文才进身，有的以武略被用，官吏全都称职，民间没有被遗漏的贤能人才。 
English: Liang Zhe said: Taifu Shangyong Wang Murongping is a relative with perfect virtue and talent, brilliant and assisting the royal family; Cavalry General Wu Wang Murongting is the world's best in bravery and strategy, resisting the enemy and resisting foreign attacks; others have been promoted with literary talent, and some have been used with military strategy. The officials are all competent, and the people are not omitted.

古文：琛从兄弈为秦尚书郎，坚使典客馆琛于弈舍。
现代文：梁琛的堂哥梁奕是前秦的尚书郎，苻坚让他主管接待来客，他让梁琛住在梁奕的馆舍里。
English: Liang Yi's cousin Liang Yi was Shang Shulang of the former Qin Dynasty. Yu Jian put him in charge of receiving guests, and he let Liang Yi live in Liang Yi's mansion.

古文：琛曰： 昔诸葛瑾为吴聘蜀，与诸葛亮惟公朝相见，退无私面，余窃慕之。
现代文：梁琛说： 过去诸葛瑾为吴国出使蜀国，与诸葛亮只在办公事的朝堂上见面，退下朝堂后就没有个人的接触，我私下里对此非常敬慕。
English: Liang Wei said: In the past, Zhuge Liang was sent by Zhuge Liang to Shu for the State of Wu. Zhuge Liang and Zhuge Liang only met in the morning hall for office work. After leaving the morning hall, there was no personal contact. I privately admire this very much.

古文：今使之即安私室，所不敢也。 
现代文：如今我出使秦国就把我安置在私人的馆舍居住，这是我所不敢接受的。 
English: Now that I have been sent by Qin to live in a private residence, I dare not accept it.

古文：乃不果馆。
现代文：于是就没有居住。
English: As a result, there is no housing.

古文：弈数来就邸舍，与琛卧起，闲问琛东国事。
现代文：梁奕多次来到梁琛居住的馆舍，与梁琛共同起居，间或也向他询问前燕的事情。
English: Liang Yi repeatedly came to Liang Yao's residence, lived with him, and occasionally asked him about Qian Yan.

古文：琛曰： 今二方分据，兄弟并蒙荣庞，论其本心，各有所在。
现代文：梁琛说： 如今秦、燕二国分据，你我则同时在二国蒙受荣誉和宠信，然而要论本心，则各有向往。
English: Liang Yao said, "Nowadays, Qin and Yan have been divided into two countries, and you and I have received honor and favor in the two countries at the same time. However, when it comes to our true hearts, we each have a yearning.

古文：琛欲言东国之美，恐非西国之所欲闻；欲言其恶，又非使臣之所得论也。
现代文：梁琛我想说燕国的好处，恐怕不是秦国人所想听的；你想让我说燕国的坏处，又不是使臣所应该说的。
English: Liang Qi, I'm afraid that what I want to say about the benefits of Yan Guo is not what the people of Qin want to hear. You want me to talk about the bad points of Yan Guo, which is not what an envoy should say.

古文：兄何用问为！ 
现代文：哥哥你还用得着问我吗？ 
English: Brother, do you still need to ask me?

古文：坚使太子延琛相见。
现代文：苻坚派太子去邀请梁琛见面。
English: Yu Jian sent the prince to invite Liang Qi to meet.

古文：秦人欲使琛拜太子，先讽之曰： 邻国之君，犹其君也；邻国之储君，亦何以异乎！ 
现代文：前秦人想让梁琛对太子行拜礼，事先含蓄地暗示他说： 邻国的君主，就像自己的君主一样；邻国的太子，又有什么不同呢！ 
English: Former Qin people wanted Liang Xuan to pay homage to the prince, implicitly suggesting in advance that he say: The monarch of a neighboring country is just like their own monarch; the prince of a neighboring country, what's the difference!

古文：琛曰： 天子之子视元士，欲其由贱以登贵也。
现代文：梁琛说： 天子的儿子被视同于一般士人，希望他能由低贱进升到高贵。
English: Liang Qi said: The son of the Son of Heaven is regarded as an ordinary scholar, and it is hoped that he can rise from the lowly to the noble.

古文：尚不敢臣其父之臣，况它国之臣乎！
现代文：他自己尚且不敢以他父亲的臣下作为臣下，何况是别国的臣下呢！
English: He himself does not dare to treat his father's vassals as vassals, let alone the vassals of other countries!

古文：苟无纯敬，则礼有往来，情岂忘恭，但恐降屈为烦耳。 
现代文：假如是真诚的恭敬，则礼尚往来，内心岂能忘记恭敬，只是怕屈身降格惹出许多麻烦来。 
English: If it is sincere respect, then the courtesy is still reciprocated, and the heart can not forget the respect, but I am afraid of bending down and causing a lot of trouble.

古文：乃不果拜。
现代文：梁琛最终也没有对太子行拜礼。
English: In the end, Liang Wei did not pay homage to the crown prince.

古文：王猛劝坚留琛，坚不许。
现代文：王猛劝苻坚留下梁琛，苻坚没有同意。
English: Wang Meng advised Yu Jian to stay in Liangyao, but Yu Jian did not agree.

古文：燕主暐遣大鸿胪温统拜袁真使持节、都督淮南诸军事、征南大将军、扬州刺史，封宣城公。
现代文：前燕国主慕容派大鸿胪温统授予袁真使持节、都督淮南诸军事、征南大将军、扬州刺史，封为宣城公。
English: The former lord of Yan Province, Mu Rong, sent the Great Hungarians, Wei and Wen, to award Yuan Zhen with the Festival of Military Achievement, the military governor of Huainan Province, the general of the Southern Expedition, and the history of Yangzhou, and he was named Xuancheng.

古文：统未逾淮而卒。
现代文：结果温统没过淮河就死了。
English: As a result, Wen Tong died before crossing the Huai River.

古文：吴王垂自襄邑还鄴，威名益振，太傅评愈忌之。
现代文：吴王慕容垂从襄邑返回邺城，威武的名声越发高涨，太傅慕容评也更加忌恨他。
English: When King Murong of Wu returned to Lucheng from Xiangyuan, his reputation for military prowess was on the rise, and the Taifu Murong also hated him even more.

古文：垂奏： 所募将士忘身立效，将军孙盖等摧锋陷陈，应蒙殊赏。 
现代文：慕容垂上奏章说： 所招募的将士舍生忘死，建立战功，将军孙盖等人冲锋陷阵，应该受到特殊的奖赏。 
English: Murong Zhuangzhang said: The recruited soldiers have sacrificed their lives, established military exploits, and General Sun Gai and others have stormed the front, and should receive special rewards.

古文：评皆抑而不行。
现代文：慕容评全都压着不办。
English: The Murong appraisal is all pressured and not done.

古文：垂数以为言，与评廷争，怨隙愈深。
现代文：慕容垂多次陈说，与慕容评在朝廷争论，结果二人的怨恨隔阂更加深重。
English: Murong Du repeatedly stated that he and Murong Han argued in the imperial court, and as a result, the resentment and estrangement between the two became even deeper.

古文：太后可足浑氏素恶垂，毁其战功，与评密谋诛之。
现代文：太后可足浑氏历来厌恶慕容垂，诋毁他的战功，与慕容评密谋要杀掉他。
English: The Empress Dowager Kofutsu Hunshi has always disliked Murongdiao, slandered his war exploits, and conspired with Murongdiao to kill him.

古文：太宰恪之子楷及垂舅兰建知之，以告垂曰： 先发制人，但除评及乐安王臧，馀无能为矣。 
现代文：太宰慕容恪的儿子慕容楷以及慕容垂的舅舅兰建知道此事，便告诉了慕容垂，并说： 先发制人，只要除掉慕容评及乐安王慕容臧，其他的人就无能为力了。 
English: Murong Kai, the son of Dazaifu Murong Ke, and Lan Jian, Murong Tie's uncle, knew about this, so they told Murong Tie and said, "Let's strike first. As long as we get rid of Murong Ji and Le An Wang Murong Yao, the others will be powerless."

古文：垂曰： 骨肉相残而首乱于国，吾有死而已，不忍为也。 
现代文：慕容垂说： 骨肉互相残杀而带头在国家作乱，我只有一死而已，不忍心那样干。 
English: Murongdiao said, "I only have one life to live, and I can't bear to live like that.

古文：顷之，二人又以告，曰： 内意已决，不可不早发。 
现代文：过了不久，这俩人又来报告，说： 可足浑氏已经下了决心，不能不早动手了。 
English: After a short while, the two men came again to report, saying, "But Mr. Fuhun has already made up his mind, and we must start early."

古文：垂曰： 必不可弥缝，吾宁避之于外，馀非所议。 
现代文：慕容垂说： 如果一定不能消除隔阂的话，我宁愿到外边去躲避他们，其余的不是所要商议的。 
English: Murongtie said, "If the estrangement cannot be eliminated, I would rather go outside to avoid them. The rest is not up for discussion."

古文：垂内以为忧，而未敢告诸子。
现代文：慕容垂内心里十分忧虑，而又没敢告诉儿子们。
English: Deep inside, Murong Du was very worried, but she did not dare to tell her sons.

古文：世子令请曰： 尊比者如有忧色，岂非以主上幼冲，太傅疾贤，功高望重，愈见猜邪？ 
现代文：长子慕容令恭敬地问道： 您近来好像面有忧色，难道不是因为主上年幼，太傅妒忌贤能，您功高望重，越来越被猜忌吗？ 
English: Murongling, the eldest son, respectfully asked, "You seem to have a gloomy face recently. Isn't it because the Lord is young, Taifu is jealous of your ability, your achievements are highly respected, and you are increasingly suspected?"

古文：垂曰： 然。
现代文：慕容垂说： 是这样。
English: Murong Diao said: That's right.

古文：吾竭力致命以破强寇，本欲保全家国，岂知功成之后，返令身无所容。
现代文：我竭尽全力，不惜生命打败了强敌，本来是想保全宗族与国家，岂知功业成就以后，反而使得自己无容身之处。
English: I did my best and risked my life to defeat the powerful enemy. Originally, I wanted to preserve my clan and country. However, after the accomplishment of my career, I made myself homeless.

古文：汝既知吾心，何以为吾谋？ 
现代文：你既然了解我的心思，将怎样为我谋划？ 
English: Since you know my heart, how will you plan for me?

古文：令曰： 主上暗弱，委任太傅，一旦祸发，疾于骇机。
现代文：慕容令说： 主上昏庸而懦弱，将重任交给太傅，一旦灾祸发生，就会苦于猝不及防。
English: Murong Rong said: The lord is dim-witted and cowardly, and entrusts the important task to the daifu. Once the disaster occurs, he will suffer from being caught off guard.

古文：今欲保族全身，不失大义，莫若逃之龙城，逊辞谢罪，以待主上之察，若周公之居东，庶几可以感寤而得还，此幸之大者也。
现代文：如今想要保全宗族与自身，又不失大义，不如逃到龙城，以恭顺的言辞谢罪，等待主上的明察，就像当年周公居东一样，也许主上能够有所感而觉悟，使您得以返还，如能这样，则是大幸。
English: Now, if you want to preserve your clan and yourself, without losing your great righteousness, it is better to flee to Longcheng, apologize for your sins with obedient words, and wait for the Lord's discernment. Just like when Zhou Gong lived in the East, perhaps the Lord can feel and realize, so that you can return. If you can do so, it will be a great blessing.

古文：如其不然，则内抚燕、代，外怀群夷，守肥如之险以自保，亦其次也。 
现代文：如果主上不这样做，您则可以对内安抚燕、代之地，对外怀柔群夷部族，坚守肥如之险以自我保全，这也是等而次之的办法。 
English: If the master does not do so, you can appease the Yan, the place of generation, and the tribe of the tribe, and adhere to the risk of fatness to self-preservation. This is also a method of one after another.

古文：垂曰： 善！ 
现代文：慕容垂说： 好！ 
English: Murong Zhu said: Good!

古文：十一月，辛亥朔，垂请畋于大陆，因微服出鄴，将趋龙城。
现代文：十一月，辛亥朔，慕容垂请求到大陆打猎，因此换上便装出了邺城，准备到龙城去。
English: In November, Xinhaishuo, Murongdiao requested to go hunting on the mainland, so he changed his clothes and prepared to go to Longcheng.

古文：至邯郸，少子麟，素不为垂所爱，逃还告状，垂左右多亡叛。
现代文：到达邯郸后，小儿子慕容麟因为慕容垂平时不喜欢他，跑回去告了状，慕容垂周围的人大多都逃跑背叛。
English: After arriving in Handan, Murong Lin's youngest son ran back to report him because Murong Tie did not like him. Most of the people around Murong Tie ran away and betrayed him.

古文：太傅评白燕主暐，遣西平公强帅精骑追之，及于范阳。
现代文：太傅慕容评把此事告诉了前燕国主慕容，并派西平公慕容强率领精锐骑兵追赶，到范阳后追了上去。
English: Taifu Murong told the matter to the former Yan sovereign Murong, and sent Xiping Gong Murong Qiang to lead the elite cavalry to catch up, and after reaching Fanyang, he caught up.

古文：世子令断后，强不敢逼。
现代文：长子慕容令在慕容垂后面掩护，所以慕容强也不敢逼近。
English: The eldest son, Murong, ordered to take cover behind Murong Zhuang, so Murong Qiang did not dare to approach.

古文：会日暮，令谓垂曰： 本欲保东都以自全，今事已泄，谋不及设。
现代文：这时正好太阳落山，慕容令对慕容垂说： 本来想守住东都龙城以自我保全，如今事情已经泄露，计谋来不及实施了。
English: At this time, just as the sun was setting, Murong Ling said to Murong Diao: Originally, I wanted to hold Dongdu Longcheng for self-preservation, but now things have leaked out, and the plan is too late to be implemented.

古文：秦主方招延英杰，不如往归之。 
现代文：前秦国主正在广招英杰，不如前去归附他。 
English: The former Qin sovereign was recruiting heroes, so it's better to go ahead and join him.

古文：垂曰： 今日之计，舍此安之！ 
现代文：慕容垂说： 如今来谋划，舍此还能去哪里呢！ 
English: Murongtie said, "Let's plan now. Otherwise, where can we go?"

古文：乃散骑灭迹，傍南山复还鄴，隐于赵之显原陵。
现代文：于是他们就遣散骑兵，消灭痕迹，沿着南山又返回了邺城，隐藏在后赵主石虎的显原陵。
English: So they disbanded the cavalry, wiped out the traces, and returned to Lucheng along the Nanshan Mountain, hiding in the Xianyuan Mausoleum of the late Zhao Shihu.

古文：俄有猎者数百骑四面而来，抗之则不能敌，逃之则无路，不知所为。
现代文：不一会儿，有数百名骑着马打猎的人从四面奔来。抵抗，显然无法匹敌；逃跑，又无路可走，不知道该怎么办。
English: In a few moments, hundreds of hunters on horseback were coming from all directions. There was no way to resist, obviously; there was no way to escape, and I didn't know what to do.

古文：会猎者鹰皆飞扬，众骑散去。
现代文：恰好这时打猎人捕猎的老鹰全都飞走了，骑马打猎的人们也就散走了。
English: Just then, all the eagles that were hunting the hunters flew away, and the hunters on horseback dispersed.

古文：垂乃杀白马以祭天，且盟从者。
现代文：慕容垂于是便杀掉了白马以祭祀上天，而且和跟随他的人对天盟誓。
English: Murongdeli then killed the white horse as a sacrifice to the heavens, and swore to the heavens with his followers.

古文：世子令言于垂曰： 太傅忌贤疾能，构事以来，人尤忿恨。
现代文：长子慕容令向慕容垂进言说： 太傅嫉贤妒能，自从谋划杀掉您以来，人们对他尤其愤恨。
English: The eldest son, Murong Ling, said to Murong Diao, "Taifu is jealous and envious. Ever since he plotted to kill you, people have been especially angry with him.

古文：今鄴城之中，莫知尊处，如婴儿之思母，夷、夏同之。
现代文：如今邺城里的民众，没有人知道您的去向，他们想念您就像婴儿想念母亲一样，夷、夏百姓全都心有此情。
English: Now, the people in Lucheng, no one knows where you are going. They miss you like a baby misses its mother. The people of Yi and Xia all have this feeling in their hearts.

古文：若顺众心，袭其无备，取之如指掌耳。
现代文：如果能顺应民心，乘慕容评毫无防备对他进行袭击，擒获他易如翻掌。
English: If you can conform to the people's will, take advantage of Mu Rongping to attack him unprepared, it will be easy to capture him.

古文：事定之后，革弊简能，大匡朝政，以辅主上，安国存家，功之大者也。
现代文：事情成功以后，革除弊害，选拔贤能，大力整顿朝政，用以辅佐主上，安定国家，保全宗族，这是大功大德。
English: After the success of the matter, it is a great merit to eliminate the ills, select the talents, and vigorously rectify the court politics to assist the lord, stabilize the country, and preserve the clan.

古文：今日之便，诚不可失，愿给骑数人，足以办之。 
现代文：如今这样的有利时机，实在不可丧失。愿您调给我骑兵数人，就足以办成此事。 
English: Now is not the time to lose an opportunity like this. If you will send me a few cavalrymen, that will be enough to do the job.

古文：垂曰： 如汝之谋，事成诚为大福，不成悔之何及！
现代文：慕容垂说： 像你这样的计谋，事情如能成功，确实是大福，如果不成，后悔怎么来得及？
English: Murong Diao said: With a strategy like yours, if things can succeed, it is indeed a great blessing. If things don't work out, how can there be time for regret?

古文：不如西奔，可以万全。 
现代文：不如向西逃奔，可以万无一失。 
English: It's better to flee to the west, it's safer.

古文：子马奴潜谋逃归，杀之而行。
现代文：慕容垂儿子的马夫暗中谋划要逃跑回去，慕容垂杀掉了他们开始西行。
English: Murongpiao's son Maf secretly plotted to escape back, Murongpiao killed them and they began to head west.

古文：至河阳，为津吏所禁，斩之而济。
现代文：到河阳后，被管理渡口的官吏挡住了，慕容垂杀掉了官吏后渡过了河。
English: After arriving in Hayang, he was blocked by the officials managing the ferry port. Murong killed the officials and crossed the river.

古文：遂自洛阳与段夫人、世子令、令弟宝、农、隆、兄子楷、舅兰建、郎中令高弼俱奔秦，留妃可足浑氏于鄴。
现代文：于是慕容垂和段夫人、长子慕容令、慕容令的弟弟慕容宝、慕容农、慕容隆、哥哥的儿子慕容楷、舅舅兰建、郎中令高弼全都从洛阳逃奔到前秦，妃可足浑氏被留在邺城。
English: As a result, Murong Tie and his wife Duan, his eldest son Murong Ling, Murong Ling's younger brother Murong Bao, Murong Nong, Murong Long, his brother's son Murong Kai, his uncle Lan Jian, and his second-in-command Gao Ya all fled from Luoyang to Qian Qin, while Fei Ke and the Ashun clan remained in Lucheng.

古文：乙泉戌主吴归追及于閺乡，世子令击之而退。
现代文：戍卫乙泉的首领吴归追到乡，长子慕容令将他击退。
English: Wu Gui, the leader of the defenders of Yiquan, chased him to the township, where his eldest son, Murong, ordered him to retreat.

古文：初，秦王坚闻太宰恪卒，阴有图燕之志，惮垂威名，不敢发。
现代文：当初，前秦王苻坚听说太宰慕容恪去世，暗中怀有图谋前燕的想法，只是因为惧怕慕容垂的威武名声，才没敢发兵。
English: At first, when the former Qin King Yu Jian heard of the death of Dazai Murong, he secretly harbored the idea of plotting against the former Yan. It was only because he was afraid of Murong's powerful reputation that he did not dare to send troops.

古文：及闻垂至，大喜，郊迎，执手曰： 天生贤杰，必相与共成大功，此自然之数也。
现代文：等到听说慕容垂来到后，十分高兴，亲自到郊外迎接，拉着慕容垂的手说： 上天降于人世的贤杰，一定会相互携手共同成就大的功业，这是天然的气数。
English: When he heard that Murong Tie was coming, he was very happy and went to the suburbs to meet him in person. He took Murong Tie's hand and said, "The sages who have descended from heaven to earth will surely work together to accomplish great feats. This is the natural number of qi.

古文：要当与卿共定天下，告成岱宗，然后还卿本邦，世封幽州，使卿去国不失为子之孝，归朕不失事君之忠，不亦美乎！ 
现代文：眼下重要的是与您共同平定天下，在泰山上告慰上天，然后把您的故国归还给您，世代封居幽州，使您离开故国不失掉作为儿子的孝顺，归依朕下也不失掉事奉君主的忠诚，不也是很好的事情吗！ 
English: What's important right now is to work together with you to pacify the world, to comfort the heavens on Mount Tai, and then to return your homeland to you, to live in Yuzhou for generations, so that you leave your homeland without losing your filial piety as a son, and do not lose your loyalty to serve the monarch by obeying me. Isn't it a good thing!

古文：垂谢曰； 羁旅之臣，免罪为幸。本邦之荣，非所敢望！ 
现代文：慕容垂谢罪说： 寄居他人的臣下，能被免罪就是大幸，世居故国的殊荣，不是我所敢企望的！ 
English: Murong said gratefully, "It is a great fortune to be exonerated from the crime of being a sojourner among other people's subjects. The honor of living in one's homeland is not something I dare to hope for!

古文：坚复爱世子令及慕容楷之才，皆厚礼之，赏赐巨万，每进见，属目观之。
现代文：苻坚又爱惜长子慕容令以及慕容楷的才能，全都给他们以厚重的礼遇，赏赐数万，每当他们进见，苻坚都注目端详他们。
English: Zou Jian also cherished the talents of his eldest son, Murong Ling, as well as Murong Kai, all of whom were treated with great courtesy and rewarded with tens of thousands. Whenever they came into view, Zou Jian paid close attention to them.

古文：关中士民素闻垂父子名，皆向慕之。
现代文：关中的士人百姓历来知道慕容垂父子的名声，全都向往倾慕他们。
English: The people of Guanzhong have always known the fame of Murongdiao's father and son, and all yearn to admire them.

古文：王猛言于坚曰： 慕容垂父子，譬如龙虎，非可驯之物，若借以风云，将不可复制，不如早除之。 
现代文：王猛对苻坚进言说： 慕容垂父子，就像龙虎，不是能够驯服驾驭的人，如果他们得到风云际会的机会，那将无法控制，不如尽早把他们除掉。 
English: Wang Meng said to Hao Jian, "Mulongli father and son, like dragons and tigers, are not people who can be tamed and controlled. If they get the opportunity to meet, they will not be able to control, it is better to get rid of them as soon as possible.

古文：坚曰： 吾方收揽英雄以清四海，奈何杀之！
现代文：苻坚说： 我正要招揽各路英雄以廓清四海，为什么要杀掉他们！
English: Yu Jian said: I am about to recruit heroes from all walks of life to clear the four seas, why kill them!

古文：且其始来，吾已推诚纳之矣。匹夫犹不弃言，况万乘乎！ 
现代文：况且他们刚刚到来，我已经诚心诚意地接纳了他们，庶民百姓尚不食言，何况是万乘之君呢！ 
English: Moreover, they have just arrived, I have accepted them wholeheartedly, the common people have not broken their word, let alone the Prince of Manchuria!

古文：乃以垂为冠军将军，封宾徒侯，楷为积弩将军。
现代文：于是苻坚任命慕容垂为冠军将军，封为宾徒侯，任命慕容楷为积弩将军。
English: As a result, Yu Jian appointed Murong Diao as the champion general, Bintu Hou, and Murong Kai as the general of Jiechuan.

古文：燕魏尹范阳王德素与垂善，及车骑从事中郎高泰等，皆坐免官。
现代文：前燕魏尹范阳王慕容德平素与慕容垂关系很好，还有车骑从事中郎高泰，全都坐罪被免官。
English: Former Yan Wei, Yin Fan, Yang Wang, Murong De and Murong Diao had a very good relationship, and there was also a middle-ranking official, Gao Tai, who was engaged in riding. All of them were exonerated.

古文：尚书右丞申绍言于太傅评曰： 今吴王出奔，外口籍籍，宜征王僚属之贤者显进之，粗可消谤。 
现代文：尚书右丞申绍向太傅慕容评进言说： 如今吴王出走，外边的人议论纷纷，应该征召吴王僚属中的贤明者给予破格提升，大致可以消除人们的指责。 
English: Shang Shuyuan Shenshao gave a speech to the grand tutor Mu Rongping, saying, "Now that King Wu has left, people outside are talking about it, and it is necessary to recruit the wise men of King Wu's clan to give them extraordinary promotion, which can roughly eliminate people's criticisms.

古文：评曰： 谁可者？ 
现代文：慕容评说： 谁可以呢？ 
English: Murong commented: Who can do it?

古文：绍曰： 高泰其领袖也。 
现代文：申绍说： 高泰是他们的代表。 
English: Shen Shao said: Gao Tai is their representative.

古文：乃以泰为尚书郎。
现代文：于是任命高泰为尚书郎。
English: So he appointed Gao Tai as Shang Shuro.

古文：泰，瞻之从子；绍，胤之兄也。
现代文：高泰是高瞻的侄子；申绍是申胤的儿子。
English: Gao Tai is the nephew of Gaozhan; Shen Shao is the son of Shen Yin.

古文：秦留梁琛月馀，乃遣归。
现代文：前秦挽留了梁琛一个多月，才让他返回。
English: Mr. Qin detained Mr. Liang for more than a month before allowing him to return.

古文：琛兼程而进，比至鄴，吴王垂已奔秦。
现代文：梁琛兼程赶路，等到抵达邺城时，吴王慕容垂已经出走前秦。
English: Liang Qiancheng hurried on his way. By the time he arrived in Lucheng, Wu Wang Murongtai had already left Qian Qin.

古文：琛言于太傅评曰： 秦人日阅军旅，多聚粮于陕东。以琛观之，为和必不能久。
现代文：梁琛对太傅慕容评进言说： 秦国人每天检阅军队，在陕城以东储备了许多粮食，照我看来，与他们的和好一定不会长久。
English: Liang Yao said to the Taifu Murong, "The Qin people review the army every day and have stored a lot of grain east of Shaanxi City. In my opinion, the reconciliation with them will not last long.

古文：今吴王又往归之，秦必有窥燕之谋，宜早为之备。 
现代文：如今吴王又前去归附了他们，秦国一定会有窥视燕国的打算，应该及早防备。 
English: Now King Wu has gone to annex them again. Qin will definitely have plans to spy on Yan, and should be prepared in advance.

古文：评曰： 秦岂肯受叛臣而败和好哉！ 
现代文：慕容评说： 秦国怎么肯接受背叛之臣而败坏我们的和好呢！ 
English: Murong commented: How could Qin accept a traitorous vassal and ruin our reconciliation?

古文：琛曰： 今二国分据中原，常有相吞之志。
现代文：梁琛说： 如今二国分别占据着中原，一直有互相吞并的志向。
English: Liang Wei said: Nowadays, the two countries occupy the Central Plains separately, and have always had the ambition of annexing each other.

古文：桓温之入寇，彼以计相救，非爱燕也。
现代文：桓温入侵的时候，他们是有自己的打算前来救援，并不是爱护燕国。
English: When Kuanwen invaded, they had their own intention to come to the rescue, not to protect Yan Province.

古文：若燕有衅，彼岂忘其本志哉！ 
现代文：如果燕国出现灾祸，他们岂能忘记本来的志向呢！ 
English: If a calamity occurs in Yan's country, will they be able to forget their original aspiration?

古文：评曰： 秦主何如人？ 
现代文：慕容评说： 秦国主是一个什么样的人？ 
English: Murong commented: What kind of person is the Qin sovereign?

古文：琛曰： 明而善断。 
现代文：梁琛说： 明达而且善于决断。 
English: Liang Jun said: He is intelligent and good at making decisions.

古文：问王猛，曰： 名不虚得。 
现代文：慕容评又问王猛如何，梁琛说： 名不虚传。 
English: Murong Rong also asked Wang Meng how he was, and Liang Qi said: The name is not fake.

古文：评皆不以为然。
现代文：慕容评对这样的说法全都不以为然。
English: The Murong Review does not agree with this statement at all.

古文：琛又以告燕主暐，暐亦不然之。
现代文：梁琛又把这些告诉了前燕国主慕容，慕容也不以为然。
English: Liang Jun also told this to Murong, the former ruler of Yan, and Murong was not impressed.

古文：以告皇甫真，真深忧之，上疏言： 苻坚虽聘问相寻，然实有窥上国之心，非能慕乐德义，不忘久要也。
现代文：又告诉了皇甫真，皇甫真对此深感忧虑，上疏说： 苻坚虽然不断派使者前来访问，但实际上却怀有窥探我国之心，他不是向往于道德大义，也不是不会忘记平时的和好之约的。
English: He also told Emperor Fuzhen that Emperor Fuzhen was deeply worried about this, and Shang Zuo said: Although He Jian constantly sent emissaries to visit, he actually harbored the desire to spy on the heart of our country. He did not yearn for morality and righteousness, nor would he forget the usual peace treaty.

古文：前出兵洛川，及使者继至，国之险易虚实，彼皆得之矣。
现代文：由于以前他出兵洛川，以及使者的相继抵达，我们国家地形的险易，兵力的虚实，他已经都知道了。
English: Because he had previously sent troops to Luochuan, as well as the arrival of envoys one after another, he already knew the dangers of our country's terrain and the strength of our troops.

古文：今吴王垂又往从之，为其谋主；伍员之祸，不可不备。
现代文：如今吴王慕容垂又前去归附，作为他的主谋，春秋时楚国的伍员带领吴国的军队攻入楚国那样的祸患，不能不防。
English: Now, King Mu Rongtai of Wu has once again advanced to annexation. As his mastermind, he cannot help but prevent the calamity that occurred in the Spring and Autumn Period, when the soldiers of the State of Chu led the army of Wu into the State of Chu.

古文：洛阳、太原、壶关，皆宜选将益兵，以防未然。 
现代文：洛阳、太原、壶关，都应该选择将领，增加兵力，以防患于未然。 
English: Luoyang, Taiyuan, and Kuguan should all choose generals and increase their forces to prevent problems in advance.

古文：暐召太傅评谋之，评曰： 秦国小力弱，恃我为援；且苻坚庶几善道，终不肯纳叛臣之言，绝二国之好。
现代文：慕容召来太傅慕容评商量此事，慕容评说： 秦国国小力弱，还要靠我们作为后援。而且苻坚大体上还能以友好的态度与邻国交往，最终也不会采纳叛臣的意见，断绝两国的和好。
English: Mu Rong called in Taifu Mu Rong to discuss the matter, and Mu Rong commented: Qin is a small and weak country, and it needs our support. Moreover, Yan Jian can generally interact with neighboring countries in a friendly manner, and in the end he will not adopt the opinions of traitors and break off the reconciliation between the two countries.

古文：不宜轻自惊扰以启寇心。 
现代文：我们不应该轻举妄动，自我惊扰，以启发他们的进犯之心。 
English: We should not act rashly and frighten ourselves in order to inspire their aggression.

古文：卒不为备。
现代文：前燕最终没作防备。
English: In the end, Maeyan didn't take any precautions.

古文：秦遣黄门郎石越聘于燕，太傅评示之以奢，欲以夸燕之富盛。
现代文：前秦派黄门郎石越访问前燕，太傅慕容评向他显示自己的奢豪，想以此炫耀前燕的富裕程度。
English: The former Qin Dynasty sent Huangmen Lang Shi Yue to visit the former Yan, and Taifu Murong Yao showed him his luxury to show off the former Yan's wealth.

古文：高泰及太傅参军河间刘靖言于评曰： 越言诞而视远，非求好也，乃观衅也。
现代文：高泰以及太傅参军河间人刘靖向慕容评进言说： 石越嘴里说着荒诞之词，眼睛窥视远方，不是来寻求和好的，而是来观察祸患的。
English: Gao Tai and Liu Jing, a member of the Taifu who joined the army, commented to Murong: Shi Yue's mouth said absurd words, his eyes peered into the distance, not to seek reconciliation, but to observe the disaster.

古文：宜耀兵以示之，用折其谋。
现代文：应该炫耀兵力让他看，用以挫败他的阴谋。
English: He should be given a show of force to thwart his plot.

古文：今乃示之以奢，益为其所轻矣。 
现代文：如今却向他显示奢豪，这就更被他所轻视了。 
English: Now they are showing him luxury, and he despises it all the more.

古文：评不从。
现代文：慕容评没有听从。
English: Mu Rongping did not listen.

古文：泰遂谢病归。
现代文：高泰于是就称病辞谢回去了。
English: Gao Tai then called in sick.

古文：是时太后可足浑氏侵桡国政，太傅评贪昧无厌，货赂上流，官非才举，群下怨愤。
现代文：这时太后可足浑氏干涉扰乱国家的政事，太傅慕容评贪得无厌，财货贿赂流入上层，官员不按才能选拔，群臣百官一片怨恨愤怒。
English: At this time, the Empress Dowager could interfere with the Huns to disrupt the country's political affairs, the Emperor Murong was insatiably greedy, wealth and bribery flowed into the upper echelons, officials were not selected according to their talents, and the courtiers and officials were full of resentment and anger.

古文：尚书左丞申绍上疏，以为： 守宰者，致治之本。
现代文：尚书左丞申绍上疏，认为： 郡县地方官吏，是实现天下大治的根本。
English: Shangshu Zuorong Shenshuo Shangsuo, believes: County and local officials are fundamental to the realization of world governance.

古文：今之守宰，率非其人，或武人出于行伍，或贵戚生长绮纨，既非乡曲之选，又不更朝廷之职。加之黜陟无法，贪惰者无刑罚之惧，清修者无旌赏之劝。是以百姓困弊，寇盗弃斥，纲颓纪紊，莫相纠摄。
现代文：如今的地方官，大约都是任非其人，有的武臣就出自军队，有的贵戚就生长于富贵人家，既不是经由乡里选举，又曾经历朝廷的职务，再加上提升黜免毫无准则，贪婪懒惰者没有遭受刑罚的畏惧，清廉勤勉者没有获得奖赏的激励，所以百姓穷困凋弊，坏人盗贼充斥，政纲颓废，法度紊乱，没有人能互相监督震慑。
English: Today's local officials are almost all unqualified people. Some military officers come from the military, and some noble relatives grew up in rich and noble families. They were not elected through the countryside, but also experienced the duties of the imperial court. In addition, there is no standard for promotion and exemption. The greedy and lazy are not afraid of punishment, and the honest and diligent are not motivated by rewards. Therefore, the people are impoverished, the bad guys are full of thieves, the political program is decadent, the legal system is disorderly, and no one can supervise and deter each other.

古文：又官吏猥多，逾于前世，公私纷然，不胜烦扰。
现代文：再加上官吏冗多，超过前代，公私纠葛，不胜其烦。
English: In addition, there are too many bureaucrats, more than the previous generation, and the public-private entanglement is too troublesome.

古文：大燕户口，数兼二寇，弓马之劲，四方莫及；而比者战则屡北，皆由守宰赋调不平，侵渔无已，行留俱窘，莫肯致命故也。
现代文：大燕国的户数人口，数量相当于晋朝、秦国之和，武器战马的精良强劲，天下没有谁能比，然而近来屡战屡败，这全都是由于地方官吏征调赋税不公平，侵吞渔肉无休无止，出征的和留下的全都窘困，没有人肯舍生战斗的缘故。
English: The number of households in Dayan's country is equal to the sum of the population of Jin and Qin dynasties, and the weapons and war horses are excellent and powerful. There is no one in the world who can match them. However, recently there have been repeated defeats in battles. This is all due to the unfair taxation of local officials, the endless consumption of fish and meat, the difficulties of those who go to war and those who stay behind, and the fact that no one is willing to fight.

古文：后宫之女四千馀人，僮侍厮役尚在其外，一日之费，厥直万金。
现代文：朝廷后宫的嫔妃有四千多人，童仆、侍者、奴隶、差役尚不包括在内，一天的费用，就值万金。
English: There are more than four thousand concubines in the imperial harem, not including servants, waiters, slaves, and attendants. The cost of one day is worth a million dollars.

古文：士民承风，竞为奢靡。
现代文：官吏百姓顺承这种风气，竞相奢侈浪费。
English: Government officials and ordinary people follow this tradition, competing in extravagance and waste.

古文：彼秦、吴僭僻，犹能条治所部，有兼并之心，而我上下因循，日失其序。
现代文：秦国僭越封号，晋朝偏居一隅，尚且能有条不紊地治理国家，怀有兼并天下之心，而我们却上行下效因循陋习，越来越失去秩序。
English: While the Qin and Jin dynasties were able to rule the country in an orderly manner and had the ambition of annexing the whole world, we have been following bad habits and losing order more and more.

古文：我之不修，彼之愿也。
现代文：我们的混乱，正是他们的愿望。
English: Our chaos is exactly what they want.

古文：谓宜精择守宰，并官省职，存恤兵家，使公私两遂，节抑浮靡，爱惜用度，赏必当功，罚必当罪。
现代文：我认为应该精心选择地方长官，裁撤冗官冗职，安抚士兵的家属，使公私双方都遂心顺意，抑止浮华靡费，珍惜支出费用，奖赏一定与功劳相称，刑罚一定与罪行相当。
English: I believe that local governors should be carefully selected, redundant officials should be removed, the families of soldiers should be appeased, both public and private parties should be satisfied, extravagant expenses should be prevented, expenses should be cherished, rewards must be commensurate with merits, and punishments must be commensurate with crimes.

古文：如此，则温、猛可枭，二方可取，岂特保境安民而已哉！
现代文：如此则桓温、王猛可以斩杀，晋朝、秦国也可以攻取，岂只是保全国境安定百姓而已！
English: In this way, Kuan-Wen and Wang-Meng can be killed, Jin Dynasty and Qin State can also be conquered, isn't it just a matter of securing the country's borders and stabilizing the people!

古文：又，索头什翼犍疲病昏悖，虽乏贡御，无能为患；而劳兵远戍，有损无益。
现代文：再有，索头人拓跋什翼犍老朽昏庸，虽然很少贡奉，但也没有能力作乱，而我们却劝勉士兵远征戍卫，这有损无益。
English: Furthermore, the Sokoto people are old and feeble, and although they rarely pay tribute, they have no ability to make trouble, but we encourage soldiers to go on an expedition to defend, which is useless.

古文：不若移于并土，控制西河，南坚壶关，北重晋阳，西寇来则拒守，过则断后，犹愈于戌孤城守无用之地也。 
现代文：不如将兵力调至并州，控制西河，在南面使壶关得以坚固，在北面使晋阳得到加强，西边的敌人来犯，则可以抵御防守，路过，则可以断其后路，这也胜于保卫孤城戍守无用之地。 
English: It is better to transfer troops to the annexed prefectures, control the West River, make Kuguan strong in the south, and strengthen Jinyang in the north. If the enemy comes from the west, it can resist the defense, and if it passes by, it can cut off its back way. This is also better than defending a lonely city and holding a useless place.

古文：疏奏，不省。
现代文：奏疏进上，没有回音。
English: There's no chorus.

古文：辛丑，丞相昱与大司马温会涂中，以谋后举；以温世子熙为豫州刺史、假节。
现代文：辛丑，丞相司马昱和大司马桓温在涂中会面，共同商量以后的行动。任命桓温的长子桓熙为豫州刺史、假节。
English: Xinxiu, the chancellor, Sima Qian, and the grand secretary, Ma Huanwen, met in Tuizhong to discuss future actions, and appointed Huanwen's eldest son, Huanxi, as the Henzhou history and festival.

古文：初，燕人许割虎牢以西赂秦。晋兵既退，燕人悔之，谓秦人曰： 行人失辞。
现代文：当初，前燕人许诺把虎牢以西的地域割送给前秦，东晋的军队撤退以后，前燕人反悔了，对前秦人说： 那是派去的使者言辞失当。
English: At first, the former Yan people promised to cede the area west of the Tiger's Lair to the former Qin. After the Eastern Jin's army withdrew, the former Yan people repented and said to the former Qin people: That was a misstatement of the messenger sent.

古文：有国有家者，分灾救患，理之常也。 
现代文：有国有家的人，分担灾难救助祸患，这是常理。 
English: It is common sense for people with state-owned assets to share the burden of disaster relief.

古文：秦王坚大怒，遣辅国将军王猛、建威将军梁成、洛州刺史邓羌帅步骑三万伐燕。
现代文：前秦王苻坚勃然大怒，派辅国将军王猛、建威将军梁成、洛州刺史邓羌率领步、骑兵三万人讨伐前燕。
English: The former Qin king, Qian Jian, flew into a rage and sent the auxiliary generals Wang Meng, Jian Wei general Liang Cheng, and Luozhou statesman Deng Qi to lead the way, and 30,000 cavalrymen to fight against Qian Yan.

古文：十二月，进攻洛阳。
现代文：十二月，进军攻打洛阳。
English: In December, they marched to attack Luoyang.

古文：大司马温发徐、兗州民筑广陵城，徙镇之。
现代文：大司马桓温征派徐州、兖州的百姓建筑广陵城，他迁往那里镇守。
English: Grand Master Ma Huanwen conscripted the people of Xuzhou and Zhangzhou to build Guangling City, and he moved there to be the town guard.

古文：时征役既频，加之疫疠，死者什四五，百姓嗟怨。
现代文：当时征调劳役已经很频繁，再加上瘟疫流行，死亡的人有十之四五，百姓们慨叹怨恨。
English: At that time, the recruitment and transfer of laborers was already very frequent, coupled with the plague epidemic, 45 out of every 10 people died, and the people sighed with resentment.

古文：秘书监太原孙盛作《晋春秋》，直书时事；大司马温见之，怒，谓盛子曰： 枋头诚为失利，何至乃如尊君所言！
现代文：秘书监孙盛著《晋春秋》，真实地记述了当时的事情。大司马桓温见到后很愤怒，对孙盛的儿子说： 在枋头确实是失利了，但哪至于像你父亲所说的那样！
English: Secretary-supervisor Sun Sheng wrote "Jin Chunqiu," a true account of the events of the time. Daishi Ma Huanwen was very angry when he saw it, and said to Sun Sheng's son: It was indeed a defeat in Shantou, but what about as your father said!

古文：若此史遂行，自是关君门户事！ 
现代文：如果这部史书最终流行开来，自然是有关你家门户的事情！ 
English: If this history book eventually catches on, it's bound to be about your front door!

古文：其子遽拜谢，请改之。
现代文：孙盛的儿子急忙叩拜谢罪请求修改。
English: Sun Sheng's son hurriedly prostrated himself and begged for a revision.

古文：时盛年老家居，性方严，有轨度，子孙虽斑白，待之愈峻。
现代文：当时孙盛年老居家，性格方正严肃，做事严守规矩准则，子孙们虽然也已头发半白，但孙盛对待他们却更为严厉。
English: At that time, Sun Sheng was an old man living at home. His character was serious and he strictly followed the rules and regulations. Although his children and grandchildren were also gray-haired, Sun Sheng treated them more severely.

古文：至是诸子乃共号泣稽颡，请为百口切计。
现代文：到这时，儿子们便一起痛哭叩首，请求他为整个家族百口人的生命着想。
English: At this time, the sons cried together and bowed their heads, asking him to think about the lives of the entire family of a hundred people.

古文：盛大怒，不许，诸子遂私改之。
现代文：孙盛勃然大怒，没有答应。儿子们于是就私下做了修改。
English: Sun Sheng flew into a rage and did not agree. The sons then made changes in private.

古文：盛先已写别本，传之外国。
现代文：孙盛在此前已另外抄写了一部，并已传送到了其他国家。
English: Sun Sheng had previously made another copy and sent it to other countries.

古文：及孝武帝购求异书，得之于辽东人，与见本不同，遂两存之。
现代文：到东晋孝武帝求购珍本图书时，从辽东人手中得到了这部抄本，与当时所见的版本不同，于是二者并存。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty went to Liaodong to purchase rare books, he received this copy from the people of Liaodong. It was different from the version seen at that time, so the two coexisted.

古文：海西公下太和五年
现代文：太和五年
English: The Year of the Dragon

古文：春，正月，己亥，袁真以梁国内史沛郡硃宪及弟汝南内史斌阴通大司马温，杀之。
现代文：春季，正月，己亥，袁真因为梁国内史沛郡人朱宪以及弟弟汝南内史朱斌暗通大司马桓温，把他们杀掉。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, in Ji Hai, Yuan Zhen killed Liang Guozhong, Zhu Xian, a native of Shibei County, and his younger brother, Runan Neishi, Zhu Bin, because they had secretly communicated with the chief secretary, Ma Huanwen.

古文：秦王猛遗燕荆州刺史武威王筑书曰： 国家今已塞成皋之险，杜盟津之路，大驾虎旅百万，自轵关取鄴都，金墉穷戍，外无救援，城下之师，将军所监，岂三百弊卒所能支也！ 
现代文：前秦王猛给前燕荆州刺史武威王慕容筑去信，说： 秦国如今已占据了成皋的险关，切断了盟津的通道，秦王劲旅百万，从轵关攻取邺都，金墉城困厄戍守，外无救援，城下的军队，将军您也看到了，岂是你三百疲惫兵卒所能应付的！ 
English: The former Qin King Meng sent a letter to the former Yanjing Zhou stabber Shwuei Wang Murong, saying: Qin has now occupied the dangerous pass of Chenghuang, cut off the passage of Mengjin, Qin King vigorously traveled millions, captured Shuguang from Shuguang, Jinqiao City was trapped, and there was no rescue outside, the army under the city, the general You also saw, is that what your three hundred tired soldiers can cope with!

古文：筑惧，以洛阳降，猛陈师受之。
现代文：慕容筑十分害怕，将洛阳献出投降了前秦，王猛带领着部队列阵接受慕容筑投降。
English: Murongzhu was very afraid and surrendered Luoyang to the former Qin. Wang Meng led the troops to accept Murongzhu's surrender.

古文：燕卫大将军乐安王臧城新乐，破秦兵于石门，执秦将杨猛。
现代文：前燕卫大将军乐安王慕容臧驻守新乐城，他在石门攻破了前秦的军队，抓获了前秦将领杨猛。
English: The former Yan Wei general Le'an Wang Murongjun was stationed in Xinle City. He defeated the former Qin army at the Stone Gate and captured the former Qin general Yang Meng.

古文：王猛之发长安也，请慕容令参其军事，以为乡导。
现代文：王猛发兵长安的时候，请慕容令参与军事行动，让他们作为向导。
English: When Wang Meng sent troops to Chang'an, he asked Murong Rong to participate in military operations and let them serve as guides.

古文：将行，造慕容垂饮酒，从容谓垂曰： 今当远别，卿何以赠我，使我睹物思人？ 
现代文：将要出发。时，慕容令到慕容垂那里喝酒，不慌不忙地对慕容垂说： 值此远别之时，赠送我点什么东西呢？以使我见物思人。 
English: When they were about to set out, Murong Ye went to Murong Tie for a drink. He said to Murong Tie calmly, "In this time of far away, can you give me something as a gift? So that I can meet a thoughtful person."

古文：垂脱佩刀赠之。
现代文：慕容垂解下佩刀赠送给了他。
English: Murong lowered his sword and presented it to him.

古文：猛至洛阳，赂垂所亲金熙，使诈为垂使者，谓令曰： 吾父子来此，以逃死也。
现代文：王猛抵达洛阳以后，贿赂慕容垂的亲信金熙，让他装作慕容垂的使者，对慕容令说： 我们父子来到这里，是因为要逃避一死。
English: After Wang Meng arrived in Luoyang, he bribed Jin Xi, a close confidant of Murongdeli, to pretend to be a messenger of Murongdeli, saying to Murongdeli: Our father and son came here because they wanted to escape death.

古文：今王猛疾人如仇，谗毁日深；秦王虽外相厚善，其心难知。
现代文：如今王猛憎恨我们如同仇敌，谗言诋毁日益深重，秦王虽然表面上对我们仁厚友善，但内心难知。
English: Nowadays, Wang Meng hates us like an enemy, and the slander is becoming more and more serious. Although King Qin is benevolent and friendly to us on the surface, it is difficult to know his heart.

古文：丈夫逃死而卒不免，将为天下笑。
现代文：大丈夫逃避死难而最终却不能幸免，将被天下人耻笑。
English: If a man escapes death but is not spared in the end, he will be ridiculed by the world.

古文：吾闻东朝比来始更悔悟，主、后相尤。
现代文：我听说燕朝近来开始翻然悔悟，国主、王后相互自责过错，我现在要返回燕国，所以派使者去告诉你。
English: I have heard that the Yan Dynasty has recently begun to repent. The sovereign and the queen are blaming each other for their mistakes. I now want to return to the Yan Kingdom, so I am sending an envoy to tell you.

古文：吾今还东，故遣告汝；吾已行矣，便可速发。 
现代文：我已经上路了，你有机会也可以迅速出发。 
English: I'm on my way, and you have the opportunity to leave quickly.

古文：令疑之，踌躇终日，又不可审覆。
现代文：慕容令对此十分怀疑，整整一天犹豫不决，但又无法去核实。
English: Murong Rong is very suspicious of this, hesitating for a whole day, but unable to verify it.

古文：乃将旧骑，诈为出猎，遂奔乐安王臧于石门。
现代文：于是就带领着他过去的随从，谎称外出打猎，逃到石门，投奔乐安王慕容臧。
English: So he led his former followers, falsely claiming to be out hunting, fled to Shimen, and joined Murongwu, the King of Le'an.

古文：猛表令叛状，垂惧而出走，及蓝田，为追骑所获。
现代文：王猛上表陈述慕容令叛逃的罪行，慕容垂因为害怕也出逃了。逃至蓝田，被追赶的骑兵擒获。
English: Wang Meng went to the front to report the crime of ordering Murong to defect, but Murong Du also fled out of fear. He fled to Lantian and was captured by the pursuing cavalry.

古文：秦王坚引见东堂，劳之曰： 卿家国失和，委身投朕。
现代文：前秦王苻坚在东堂召见他，安慰他说： 你因为自家、朝廷争斗，委身投靠于朕。
English: Former Qin King He Jian summoned him in the East Hall and comforted him, saying, "You have committed yourself to me because of the struggle between your family and the imperial court.

古文：贤子心不忘本，犹怀首丘，亦各其志，不足深咎。
现代文：贤人心不忘本，仍然怀念故土，这也是人各有志，不值得深咎。
English: Wise people do not forget this, and still miss their homeland. This is also because everyone has their own aspirations, and it is not worthy of deep condemnation.

古文：然燕之将亡，非令所能存，惜其徒入虎口耳。
现代文：然而燕国行将灭亡，不是慕容令所能拯救的，可惜的只是他白白地进了虎口而已。
English: However, Yan's country is about to perish, and it is not Murong Ling who can save it, but it is a pity that he has entered the tiger's mouth for nothing.

古文：且父子兄弟，罪不相及，卿何为过惧而狼狈如是乎！ 
现代文：况且父子兄弟，罪不株连，你为什么过分惧怕而狼狈到如此地步呢！ 
English: Moreover, brothers and fathers, why are you so afraid and perplexed?

古文：待之如旧。
现代文：苻坚对待慕容垂同过去一样。
English: Hao Jian treated Murong Zhuo in the same way as before.

古文：燕人以令叛而复还，其父为秦所厚，疑令为反间，徙之沙城，在龙都东北六百里。
现代文：前燕人因为慕容令是背叛后而又返回，他的父亲又被前秦所厚待，便怀疑他是派回来的奸细，把他迁徙到沙城，此地在龙都东北六百里处。
English: The former Yan people suspected that he was a spy sent back by the former Qin Dynasty because his father had been treated well by the former Qin Dynasty, and moved him to Shacheng, 600 miles northeast of Longdu.

古文：臣光曰：昔周得微子而革商命，秦得由余而霸西戎，吴得伍员而克强楚，汉得陈平而诛项籍，魏得许攸而破袁绍。
现代文：臣司马光曰：过去周朝得到了微子而革殷商之命，秦朝得到了由余而称霸西戎，吴国得到了伍员而攻克强楚，汉朝得到了陈平而诛杀项籍，魏国得到了许攸而大破袁绍。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: In the past, the Zhou Dynasty obtained the order of micro-child and overthrew Yin Shang, the Qin Dynasty obtained the order of dominating Xi Rong from Yu, the State of Wu obtained the order of warrior and defeated Qiang Chu, the Han Dynasty obtained the order of Chen Ping and defeated Xiang Shan, and the State of Wei obtained the order of Xu You and defeated Yuan Shao.

古文：彼敌国之材臣，来为己用，进取之良资也。
现代文：那些敌国的贤能之臣，投奔过来后以为己用，这是进攻取胜的良好凭借。
English: Those able-bodied courtiers of the enemy country, after rushing over, thought it was for their own use. This is a good basis for attacking and winning.

古文：王猛知慕容垂之心久而难信，独不念燕尚未灭，垂以材高功盛，无罪见疑，穷困归秦，未有异心，遽以猜忌杀之，是助燕为无道而塞来者之门也，如何其可哉！
现代文：王猛知道慕容垂的心时间一久就难以信任，偏偏不考虑燕国尚未消灭，慕容垂因为才能杰出、功勋卓著，无罪而被怀疑，穷困无路，才归依秦国，并没有异端之心，而竟要因为猜忌杀害他，这是帮助燕国施行无道而向投奔者关闭门户，这怎么能行呢！
English: Wang Meng knew that Mu Rongtai's heart would be difficult to trust for a long time, regardless of the fact that Yan's country had not yet been destroyed. Mu Rongtai was suspected because of his outstanding talent, outstanding achievements, and innocence. He had no choice but to convert to Qin because he was poor. He did not have a heretical heart, but he had to kill him because of suspicion. This was to help Yan's country enforce the lawless and close the door to those who fled. How could this be done?

古文：故秦王坚礼以收燕望，亲之以尽燕情，宠之以倾燕众，信之以结燕心，未为过矣。
现代文：所以秦王苻坚以礼对待慕容垂，用以招揽燕国人的期望，亲近慕容垂，用以断绝燕国对他的情义，宠爱慕容垂，用以吸引燕国的百姓，信任慕容垂，用以结交燕国人的心，这些都不过分。
English: Therefore, Qin King Yu Jian treated Mu Rongtai with courtesy, used it to attract the expectations of Yan people, got close to Mu Rongtai, used it to sever the feelings of Yan country towards him, favored Mu Rongtai, used it to attract the people of Yan country, trusted Mu Rongtai, and used it to make friends with the hearts of Yan people, all of which were not excessive.

古文：猛何汲汲于杀垂，至乃为市井鬻卖之行，有如嫉其宠而谗之者，岂雅德君子所宜为哉！
现代文：王猛为什么要一心想着杀慕容垂，竟然干出了市井叫卖者的欺骗勾当，就像嫉妒别人得宠进而就用谗言加以诋毁的人一样，这难道是具有高尚道德的君子应该干的事情吗！
English: Why did Wang Meng want to kill Mu Rongtai with all his heart, and he actually carried out the deceitful act of soliciting sellers from the market, just like a person who is jealous of other people's favor and then slanders them with slander, is this something that a gentleman with high morals should do?

古文：乐安王臧进屯荥阳，王猛遣建威将军梁成、洛州刺史邓羌击走之；留羌镇金墉，以辅国司马桓寅为弘农太守，代羌戍陕城而还。
现代文：前燕乐安王慕容臧进军驻扎在荥阳，王猛派建威将军梁成、洛州刺史邓羌打跑了他，留下邓羌镇守金墉，任命辅国司马桓寅为弘农太守，代替邓羌戍守陕城，然后王猛返回。
English: Former Yanle'an King Murongjun marched into the army and was stationed in Fenyang. Wang Meng sent General Jianwei Liangcheng and Luozhou Governor Deng Yao to beat him away, leaving Deng Yao as the town guard of Jinlu, and appointed Auxiliary State Secretary Ma Huan Yin as the deputy governor of Hongnong, replacing Deng Yao as the governor of Shaanxi, and then Wang Meng returned.

古文：秦王坚以王猛为司徒，录尚书事，封平阳郡侯。
现代文：前秦王苻坚任命王猛为司徒，录尚书事，封为平阳郡侯。
English: Wang Meng was appointed as an attendant by the former Qin King Yu Jian, recorded in the records, and appointed as the marquis of Pingyang County.

古文：猛固辞曰： 今燕、吴未平，戎车方驾，而始得一城，即受三事之赏，若克殄二寇，将何以加之！ 
现代文：王猛固执地辞让，说： 如今燕、晋尚未平定，战车正在行驶，刚刚攻下了一城，我就接受了三公这样的奖赏，如果攻克了燕、晋二敌，那将再怎样奖赏呢！ 
English: Wang Meng stubbornly refused to concede, saying: Today, Yan and Jin are not yet subdued, the chariot is moving, I just conquered a city, I accepted the reward of the three kings, if I conquered Yan and Jin's two enemies, what reward would it be!

古文：坚曰： 苟不暂抑朕心，何以显卿谦光之美！
现代文：苻坚说： 朕假如不暂时有所让步，何以显示出你谦虚风范的光彩！
English: Yu Jian said, "If I don't make some temporary concessions, how can I show the brilliance of your modest demeanor!

古文：已诏有司权听所守；封爵酬庸，其勉从朕命！ 
现代文：我已诏令有关部门暂且就保持你现在的职位，至于赐封爵位，是酬劳战功，你就勉为其难服从朕的决定吧！ 
English: I have ordered the relevant departments to keep you in your current position for the time being. As for the granting of a knighthood, it is a reward for labor and war service, so you should reluctantly obey my decision!

古文：二月，癸酉，袁真卒。
现代文：二月，癸酉，袁真去世。
English: Yuan Zhen passed away in February.

古文：陈郡太守硃辅立真子瑾为建威将军，豫州刺史，以保寿春，遣其子乾之及司马爨亮如鄴请命。
现代文：陈郡太守朱辅拥立袁真的儿子袁瑾为建威将军、豫州刺史，以保全寿春，派他的儿子朱乾之及司马亮到邺城请求指令。
English: Zhu Yu, the governor of Chen County, appointed Yuan Zhen, the son of Yuan Zhen, as the general of Jianwei and the historian of Yuzhou to protect Shuchun, and sent his sons Zhu Qianzhi and Sima Liang to Lucheng to request instructions.

古文：燕人以瑾为扬州刺史，辅为荆州刺史。
现代文：前燕人任命袁瑾为扬州刺史，朱辅为荆州刺史。
English: Former Yan people appointed Yuan Qi as Yangzhou chief historian, and Zhu Fu as Jingzhou chief historian.

古文：三月，秦王坚以吏部尚书权翼为尚书右仆射。
现代文：三月，前秦王苻坚任命吏部尚书权翼为尚书右仆射。
English: In March, the former Qin King Yu Jian appointed Shang Shuxuan as the right-hand man of Shang Shuxuan.

古文：夏，四月，复以王猛为司徒，录尚书事；猛固辞，乃止。
现代文：夏季，四月，又任命王猛为司徒，录尚书事。王猛坚决推辞，这才作罢。
English: In the summer, in April, Wang Meng was also appointed as a disciple, records show. Wang Meng firmly refused, and this was the last straw.

古文：燕、秦皆遣兵助袁瑾，大司马温遣督护竺瑶等御之。
现代文：前燕、前秦全都派兵帮助袁瑾，大司马桓温派督护竺瑶等抵御他们。
English: The former Yan Dynasty and the former Qin Dynasty all sent troops to help Yuan Shao, and the Grand Master Ma Huanwen sent officials to protect Yuan Shao from them.

古文：燕兵先至，瑶等与战于武丘，破之。
现代文：前燕的军队先到达，竺瑶等与他们在武丘交战，攻破了他们。
English: Qian Yan's army arrived first, and Yan fought with them at Wu Qiu and defeated them.

古文：南顿太守桓石虔克其南城。
现代文：南顿太守桓石虔攻下了寿春的南城。
English: Nantong Governor Huan Shikian captured the southern city of Shuchun.

古文：石虔，温之弟子也。
现代文：桓石虔是桓温弟弟的儿子。
English: Kuan Shikken is the son of Kuan Wen's younger brother.

古文：秦王坚复遣王猛督镇南将军杨安等十将步骑六万以伐燕。
现代文：前秦王苻坚又派王猛督领镇南将军杨安等十名将领的步、骑兵六万人讨伐前燕。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian also sent Wang Mengdu to lead Zhennan General Yang An and other ten generals, as well as sixty thousand cavalry to fight against Qian Yan.

古文：慕容令自度终不得免，密谋起兵，沙城中谪戍士数千人，令皆厚抚之。
现代文：慕容令自己推测最终也不能免祸，密谋起兵反叛。沙城中被贬谪来戍守的士卒有数千人，慕容令全都优厚地安抚他们。
English: Murong ordered himself to surmise that eventually he would not be able to avoid disaster, and he plotted to raise an army to rebel. There were thousands of soldiers who had been demoted to guard in Shacheng, and Murong ordered to pacify them all.

古文：五月，庚午，令杀牙门孟妫。城大涉圭惧，请自效。
现代文：五月，庚午，慕容令杀掉了衙门官孟妫，任城大职的涉圭害怕了，自动请求效忠。
English: In the afternoon of May, Murong ordered the killing of Meng Yao, the gatekeeper of the imperial court. Wuzhong Gui, who held the position of city magistrate, was afraid and automatically asked for loyalty.

古文：令信之，引置左右。
现代文：慕容令相信了他，把他安置在自己身边。
English: Murong Rong believed him and placed him by his side.

古文：遂帅谪戍士东袭威德城，杀城郎慕容仓，据城部署，遣人招东西诸戍，翕然皆应之。
现代文：于是慕容令便率领被贬谪戍守沙城的士卒东进，袭击威德城，杀掉了城郎慕容仓，占据沙城，部署兵力，派人征召驻扎在东西各处的戍卒，他们全都欣然响应。
English: As a result, Murong Rong led the soldiers who were demoted and guarded Shacheng eastward, attacked Weide City, killed the mayor Murong Cang, occupied Shacheng, deployed troops, and sent people to recruit soldiers stationed in all parts of the east and west, and they all gladly responded.

古文：镇东将军勃海王亮镇龙城，令将袭之；其弟麟以告亮，亮闭城拒守。
现代文：镇东将军勃海王慕容亮镇守龙城，慕容令准备袭击他。他的弟弟慕容麟将这一消息告诉了慕容亮，慕容亮紧闭城门抵御固守。
English: Murong Liang, the general of the east of the town, guarded Longcheng, and Murong ordered to prepare to attack him. His brother Murong Lin told this news to Murong Liang, and Murong Liang closed the gate tightly to resist the defense.

古文：癸酉，涉圭因侍直击令，令单马走，其党皆溃。
现代文：癸酉，涉圭利用当班侍卫的机会攻击慕容令，慕容令只身匹马逃走，他的同党全都溃散。
English: In the meantime, Tsuchigui took advantage of the opportunity to attack Murongling while he was on duty as an attendant. Murongling fled on horseback, and all of his party members scattered.

古文：涉圭追令至薛黎泽，擒而杀之，诣龙城白亮。
现代文：涉圭追赶慕容令到薛黎泽，擒获并斩杀了他，然后到龙城向慕容亮报告。
English: Guan Gui chased Murong Liang to Xue Lizhe, captured and killed him, and then went to Longcheng to report to Murong Liang.

古文：亮为之诛涉圭，收令尸而葬之。
现代文：慕容亮为此杀了涉圭，收拾了慕容令的尸体后安葬了。
English: To this end, Murongliang killed Shigui, collected Murongliang's body, and buried it.

古文：六月，乙卯，秦王坚送王猛于灞上，曰： 今委卿以关东之任，当先破壶关，平上党，长驱取鄴，所谓 疾雷不及掩耳 。
现代文：六月，乙卯，前秦王苻坚在灞上为王猛送行，说： 如今把关东的重任委托给你，你应当先攻破壶关，平定上党，长驱直入夺取邺城，此所谓 迅雷不及掩耳 。
English: In June, the former Qin King Jie Jian sent Wang Meng off on the raft, saying, "Now that the important task of Guandong has been entrusted to you, you should first break through Jiu Guan, subdue the upper party, and drive straight into the capture of Shicheng. This so-called thunderbolt can't cover your ears."

古文：吾当亲督万众，继卿星发，舟车粮运，水陆俱进，卿勿以为后虑也。 
现代文：我要亲自督帅数以万计的兵众，紧随你星夜出发，车船运粮，水陆并进，你不必再有后顾之忧。 
English: I will personally supervise tens of thousands of soldiers, follow you on your starry night departure, transport grain by car and ship, advance by land and sea, and you will no longer have to worry about the future.

古文：猛曰： 臣杖威灵，奉成算，荡平残胡，如风扫叶，愿不烦銮舆亲犯尘雾，但愿速敕所司部置鲜卑之所。 
现代文：王猛说： 臣仰仗您的声威，遵奉您的成熟的计划，涤荡残胡，如风扫落叶，愿不必麻烦您的车乘亲自披尘出征，只愿您能尽快命令有关部门预先安排好鲜卑的官府。 
English: Wang Meng said: "Your minister relies on your prestige, follows your mature plan, and sweeps away debris like the wind sweeps away fallen leaves. I hope that you do not have to trouble your driver to go to the battlefield in person. I only hope that you can order the relevant departments to arrange the government offices in advance as soon as possible.

古文：坚大悦。
现代文：苻坚听后十分高兴。
English: Yu Jian was very happy after listening to the song.

古文：秋，七月，癸酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸酉朔，出现日食。
English: Autumn, July, new moon, solar eclipse.

古文：秦王猛攻壶关，杨安攻晋阳。
现代文：前秦王猛攻打壶关，杨安攻打晋阳。
English: Former Qin King stormed Jugguan, Yang An attacked Jinyang.

古文：八月，燕主暐命太傅上庸王评将中外精兵三十万以拒秦。
现代文：八月，前燕国主慕容命令太傅上庸王慕容评统率宫廷内外的精兵三十万人以抵抗前秦。
English: In August, the former Yan sovereign Murong ordered Taifu Shangyong Wang Murong to lead 300,000 elite soldiers inside and outside the court to resist the former Qin.

古文：暐以秦寇为忧，召散骑侍郎李凤、黄门侍郎梁琛、中书侍郎乐嵩问曰： 秦兵众寡何如？
现代文：慕容对前秦的进犯深以为忧，召来散骑侍郎李凤、黄门侍郎梁琛、中书侍郎乐嵩问道： 秦国的兵力到底有多少？
English: Murong was deeply worried about the invasion of the former Qin Dynasty. He summoned the horseback riding attendant Li Feng, the Yellow Gate attendant Liang Qi, and the Chinese book attendant Le Tak and asked: How many troops does the Qin Dynasty have?

古文：今大军既出，秦能战乎？ 
现代文：如今大军已经出发，秦国能够交战吗？ 
English: Now that the great army has set out, can Qin fight?

古文：凤曰： 秦国小兵弱，非王师之敌；景略常才，又非太傅之比，不足忧也。 
现代文：李凤说： 秦国国小兵弱，不是国王军队的对手；王猛是一般的人，又无法与太傅相比，不值得忧虑。 
English: Li Feng said: The small soldiers of Qin are weak and are no match for the king's army; Wang Meng is an ordinary person, and cannot be compared to Taifu, and is not worth worrying about.

古文：琛、嵩曰： 胜败在谋，不在众寡。
现代文：梁琛、乐嵩说： 胜败在于谋略，不在兵力多寡。
English: Liang Zhen and Le Song said: Victory or defeat depends on strategy, not on the number of troops.

古文：秦远来为寇，安肯不战！
现代文：秦国远道而来进犯，怎么肯不交战呢！
English: Qin came all the way from afar to invade, how could he not fight!

古文：且吾当用谋以求胜，岂可冀其不战而已乎！ 
现代文：再说我们应当用谋略以求胜，怎么能希望他仅仅不交战就行了呢！ 
English: Besides, we should use strategy to win, how can we expect him not to fight!

古文：暐不悦。
现代文：慕容不高兴。
English: Murong is not happy.

古文：王猛克壶关，执上党太守南安王越，所过郡县，皆望风降附，燕人大震。
现代文：王猛攻克壶关，抓获了上党太守南安王慕容越，所经过的郡县，全都闻风归附投降。前燕人十分震惊。
English: Wang stormed Kechuguan and captured the high-ranking party official, the governor of Nan'an, Wang Murong Yue. All the counties he passed through surrendered. The former Yan people were very shocked.

古文：黄门侍郎封孚问司徒长史申胤曰： 事将何如？ 
现代文：黄门侍郎封孚问司徒长史申胤说： 事情将会如何？ 
English: Huangmen's chamberlain, Feng Fu, asked the head monk, Shi Shenyin: "What will happen?

古文：胤叹曰： 鄴必亡矣，吾属今兹将为秦虏。
现代文：申胤叹息道： 邺城必定灭亡，我们如今将要被秦国俘虏了。
English: Shin Yin sighed, "Fengcheng will surely perish, and now we are about to be captured by Qin."

古文：然越得岁而吴伐之，卒受其祸。
现代文：然而越国占有岁星，吴国讨伐他们，最终还是要自食其祸。
English: However, the Yue State occupied the Year Star, and the Wu State fought against them, and eventually had to suffer the consequences.

古文：今福德在燕，秦虽得志，而燕之复建，不过一纪耳。 
现代文：如今福气与道德在燕国，秦国虽然一时得地志，但燕国的复兴，不会超过十二年。 
English: Today, the blessings and morality are in Yan's country. Although Qin won a place in history, the revival of Yan's country will not last more than twelve years.

古文：大司马温自广陵帅众二万讨袁瑾；以襄城太守刘波为淮南内史，将五千人镇石头。
现代文：大司马桓温从广陵出发率领二万兵众讨伐袁瑾，任命襄城太守刘波为淮南内史，统领五千人镇守石头。
English: Major General Ma Huanwen led 20,000 soldiers from Guangling to fight against Yuan Shao, appointed Liu Bo, the governor of Xiangcheng, as the governor of Huainan, and led 5,000 people to guard the stone.

古文：波，隗之孙也。
现代文：刘波是刘隗的孙子。
English: Liu Bo is the grandson of Liu Ye.

古文：癸丑，温败瑾于寿春，遂围之。
现代文：癸丑，桓温在寿春打败了袁瑾，于是就包围了他。
English: Ugly as it is, Kuan Wen defeated Yuan Shao in Shuchun, and then surrounded him.

古文：燕左卫将军孟高将骑兵救瑾，至淮北，未渡，会秦伐燕，燕召高还。
现代文：前燕左卫将军孟高统领骑兵救援袁瑾，到达淮河以北，尚未渡河，恰逢前秦讨伐前燕，前燕便召孟高返回。
English: Former Yan Zuwei General Meng Gao led the cavalry to rescue Yuan Shao, reached the north of the Huai River, but had not yet crossed the river, which coincided with the former Qin's attack on the former Yan. The former Yan then called Meng Gao to return.

古文：广汉妖贼李弘，诈称汉归义侯势之子，聚众万馀人，自称圣王，年号凤凰。
现代文：广汉的妖贼李弘，诈称是汉归义侯李势的儿子，聚集了兵众一万多人，自称圣王，定年号为凤凰。
English: Li Hong, the traitor of Guanghan, falsely claimed to be the son of Han Gui Yi Hou, Li Xiang, and gathered more than ten thousand soldiers. He claimed to be a holy king, and his given name was Fenghuang.

古文：陇西人李高，诈称成主雄之子，攻破涪城，逐梁州刺史杨亮。
现代文：陇西人李高，诈称是成国主李雄的儿子，攻破了涪城，驱逐了梁州刺史杨亮。
English: Li Gao from Shaanxi, who fraudulently claimed to be the son of the lord of Chengguo, Li Xiong, broke through the city of Shicheng and expelled Yang Liang from Liangzhou.

古文：九月，益州刺史周楚遣子琼讨高，又使琼子梓潼太守飏讨弘，皆平之。
现代文：九月，益州刺史周楚派儿子周琼讨伐李高，又派周琼的儿子梓潼太守周讨伐李弘，把他们全都平定。
English: In September, the governor of Yizhou Province, Zhou Chu, sent his son Zhou Qiong to fight Li Gao, and Zhou Qiong's son, Zishan Taizhou, to fight Li Hong, and they were all defeated.

古文：秦杨安攻晋阳，晋阳兵多粮足，久之未下。
现代文：前秦杨安攻打晋阳，晋阳兵多粮足，久攻不下。
English: Former Qin Yang'an attacked Jinyang. Jinyang soldiers had more food and could not be attacked for a long time.

古文：王猛留屯骑校尉苟长戍壶关，引兵助安攻晋阳。
现代文：王猛留下屯骑校尉苟长戍守壶关，自己带兵帮助杨安攻打晋阳。
English: Wang Meng left the cavalry colonel Gou Changjun to guard Juguan, and led his own troops to help Yang An attack Jinyang.

古文：为地道，使虎牙将军张蚝帅壮士数百潜入城中，大呼斩关，纳秦兵。
现代文：他们挖了地道，让虎牙将军张蚝率领勇士数百人潜入城中，大声呼喊着冲破了关卡，接秦兵入城。
English: They dug a tunnel and let the tiger-toothed general Zhang Ye lead hundreds of warriors to sneak into the city, shouting loudly to break through the checkpoint and receive the Qin soldiers into the city.

古文：辛巳，猛、安入晋阳，执燕并州刺史东海王庄。
现代文：辛巳，王猛、杨安进入晋阳城，抓获了前燕并州刺史东海王慕容庄。
English: Soon after, Wang Meng and Yang An entered Jinyang City and captured the former Yanbei and Shizhou of Donghai Wang Murong Village.

古文：太傅评畏猛，不敢进，屯于潞川。
现代文：太傅慕容评惧怕王猛，不敢继续前进，驻扎在潞川。
English: Taifu Murong commented that he was afraid of Wang Mengru and did not dare to move forward, so he was stationed in Luochuan.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥，猛留将军武都毛当戍晋阳，进兵潞川，与慕容评相持。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛亥，王猛留下将军武都人毛当戍守晋阳，自己进军潞川，与慕容评相对峙。
English: In the winter, October, Xinhai, Wang Meng left the general Wu Du people Mao Dang to defend Jinyang, and himself marched into Shichuan, confronting Murong Han.

古文：壬戌，猛遣将军徐成觇燕军形要，期以日中；及昏而返，猛怒，将斩之。
现代文：壬戌，王猛派将军徐成去侦察前燕军队的布阵要略，要求他日到中天时返回，而他到了黄昏时分才回来。
English: At the same time, Wang Meng sent General Xu Cheng to inspect the layout of the front Yan army and asked him to return at noon, but he did not return until dusk.

古文：邓羌请之曰： 今贼众我寡，诘朝将战；成，大将也，宜且宥之。 
现代文：王猛大怒，要把他杀掉。邓羌向王猛请求说： 如今敌众我寡，明天一早将要开战。徐成是大将，应该姑且宽恕他。 
English: Wang Meng flew into a rage and wanted to kill him. Deng Xuan pleaded with Wang Meng, saying, "Today, we have few enemies, and tomorrow morning we will go to war. Xu Cheng is a general, and we should forgive him.

古文：猛曰： 若不杀成，军法不立。 
现代文：王猛说： 如果不杀掉徐成，军法就无法确立。 
English: Wang Meng said: If Xu Cheng is not killed, the Military Law cannot be established.

古文：羌固请曰： 成，羌之郡将也，虽违期应斩，羌愿与成效战以赎之。 
现代文：邓羌坚持请求说： 徐成是我邓羌本郡的将领，虽然说延误了期限应该斩首，但邓羌愿意和徐成一起效力决战以赎罪。 
English: Deng Yu insisted on his request, saying: Xu Cheng is the general of my county, Deng Yu. Although he said that the deadline should be beheaded, Deng Yu is willing to work with Xu Cheng in the decisive battle to atone for his sins.

古文：猛弗许。
现代文：王猛不同意。
English: Wang Meng disagreed.

古文：羌怒，还营，严鼓勒兵，将攻猛。
现代文：邓羌大怒，回到军营，急促地敲响战鼓，率领着士兵，将要攻打王猛。
English: Deng Rong was furious. He returned to the military camp, hastily beat the war drums, and led the soldiers to attack Wang Meng.

古文：猛问其故，羌曰： 受诏讨远贼；今有近贼，自相杀，欲先除之！ 
现代文：王猛询问邓羌这样做的缘故，邓羌说： 我们接受诏令讨伐远敌，现在却有近敌一味地要自相残杀，我想要先把他除掉！ 
English: Wang Meng asked Deng Wei why he did this. Deng Wei said: We accepted the imperial decree to fight distant enemies, but now there is a close enemy who just wants to kill each other. I want to get rid of him first!

古文：猛谓羌义而有勇，使语之曰： 将军止，吾今赦之。 
现代文：王猛赞扬邓羌仗义而又勇敢，派人去告诉他说： 将军别这样干了，我现在赦免徐成。 
English: Wang Meng praised Deng Qianjun for being righteous and brave, and sent someone to tell him: "General, don't do this, I am now pardoning Xu Chenghuang."

古文：成既免，羌诣猛谢。
现代文：徐成获免以后，邓羌去到王猛那里谢罪。
English: After Xu Cheng was pardoned, Deng Wei went to Wang Meng to apologize.

古文：猛执其手曰： 吾试将军耳，将军于郡将尚尔，况国家乎！吾不复忧贼矣！ 
现代文：王猛拉着他的手说： 我这是考验将军罢了，将军对本郡的将领尚且如此，何况是对国家呢，我不再忧虑敌人了！ 
English: Wang yanked his hand and said, "I'm just testing the general. The general is still the same to the generals of this county, let alone the country. I'm no longer worried about the enemy!"

古文：太傅评以猛悬军深入，欲以持久制之。
现代文：太傅慕容评认为王猛孤军深入，想用持久对峙的办法来制服他。
English: Mu Rong thought that Wang Meng's lone army was deeply entrenched, and he wanted to use a lasting confrontation to subdue him.

古文：评为人贪鄙，鄣固山泉，鬻樵及水，积钱帛如丘陵；士卒怨愤，莫有斗志。
现代文：慕容评为人贪婪鄙俗，命令封山禁泉，自己则贩柴卖水，从中渔利，积攒的钱帛堆积如山，士卒们都怨恨愤慨，没有人心怀斗志。
English: Murong was judged to be greedy and vulgar. He ordered the mountains to be sealed off and the springs to be banned. He sold firewood and water to make a profit. The money he had accumulated piled up like a mountain. The soldiers were resentful and indignant. No one had a fighting spirit.

古文：猛闻之，笑曰： 慕容评真奴才，虽亿兆之众不足畏，况数十万乎！
现代文：王猛听说后笑着说： 慕容评真是个奴才，就是有亿兆兵众也不值得害怕，何况只有数十万呢！
English: After hearing this, Wang Meng smiled and said, "Murong Huan is really a minion. Even if there are hundreds of trillions of soldiers, they are not worth being afraid of, let alone only hundreds of thousands!

古文：吾今兹破之必矣。 
现代文：我今天在这儿打败他是肯定的了。 
English: I'm going to beat him here today for sure.

古文：乃遣游击将军郭庆帅骑五千，夜从间道出评营后，烧评辎重，火见鄴中。
现代文：于是就派游击将军郭庆率领五千骑兵，趁夜顺着小路出现在慕容评军营的后面，焚烧了他的轻重装备，火光在邺城中都能看到。
English: So they sent the guerrilla general Guo Qing to lead five thousand cavalrymen, and took advantage of the night to appear behind the Murong Huan military camp along the path, and burned his light and heavy equipment. The flames can be seen in the city.

古文：燕主暐惧，遣侍中兰伊让评曰： 王，高祖之子也，当以宗庙社稷为忧，奈何不抚战士而榷卖樵水，专以货殖为心乎！
现代文：前燕国主慕容十分害怕，派侍中兰伊责备慕容评说： 你是高祖慕容的儿子，应当为宗庙国家担忧，为什么不安抚战士反而贩柴卖水，只执迷于钱财呢！
English: The former lord of Yan, Murong, was very afraid. He sent an attendant, Zhong Lan Yi, to reproach Murong and said: You are the son of Gaozu Murong, you should be worried about the ancestral temple country, why don't you appease the soldiers, but sell firewood and water, and only be obsessed with money!

古文：府库之积，朕与王共之，何忧于贫！
现代文：府库里的积蓄，朕与你共享，哪里有什么贫穷可忧虑！
English: The savings in the treasury, I share with you, where there is no poverty to worry about!

古文：若贼兵遂进，家国丧亡，王持钱帛欲安所置之！ 
现代文：如果敌人最终进占，家国全都灭亡，你拥有钱帛又想往哪里放呢！ 
English: If the enemy eventually invades and occupies, and the whole country is destroyed, where do you want to put the money you have?

古文：乃命悉以其钱帛散之军士，且趋使战。
现代文：于是就命令把他的钱帛全部发给军中士兵，而且督促他出战。
English: So he ordered that all his money be given to the soldiers in the army, and urged him to go to war.

古文：评大惧，遣使请战于猛。
现代文：慕容评十分害怕，派使者去和王猛请战。
English: Murong Han was very afraid and sent an envoy to invite Wang Meng to fight.

古文：甲子，猛陈于渭源而誓之曰： 王景略受国厚恩，任兼内外，今与诸君深入贼地，当竭力致死，有进无退，共立大功，以报国家。
现代文：甲子，王猛在渭源布开战阵并告诫士兵们说： 我王猛接受了国家的厚恩，肩负朝廷内外的重任，如今与诸君深入敌境，应当竭尽全力，殊死战斗，有进无退，共立大功，以报效国家。
English: Wang Meng, the eldest son, went into battle at Luguangbu and admonished the soldiers, saying, "I, Wang Meng, have accepted the generous grace of the state, shouldered the heavy responsibilities both inside and outside the court, and now I am deep in the enemy territory with you. I should do my best, fight to the death, advance and retreat, and make great contributions to repay the country.

古文：受爵明君之朝，称觞父母之室，不亦美乎！ 
现代文：凯旋后接受贤明君主的封爵，在父母面前举杯庆祝，不也是很美妙的事情吗！ 
English: Isn't it a wonderful thing to receive a knighthood from the wise monarch after his triumphant return, and to raise a glass in celebration in front of his parents!

古文：众皆踊跃，破釜弃粮，大呼竞进。
现代文：兵众全都踊跃争先，破釜弃粮，高声呼喊着竞相前进。
English: The soldiers all eagerly raced ahead, breaking pots and throwing away grain, shouting loudly and racing forward.

古文：猛望燕兵之众，谓邓羌曰： 今日之事，非将军不能破勍敌。成败之机，在兹一举，将军勉之！ 
现代文：王猛望见前燕的兵力众多，对邓羌说： 今天的战事，非将军不能攻破强大的敌人，成败的关键，在此一举，将军为此尽力吧！ 
English: Wang Meng looked at Qian Yan's large number of troops and said to Deng Yao: In today's war, no general can defeat the powerful enemy, the key to success or failure. In this one move, the general should do his best!

古文：羌曰： 若能以司隶见与者，公勿以为忧。 
现代文：邓羌说： 如果能委任我以司隶校尉的话，您不必为此担心。 
English: Deng Yao said, "If you can appoint me as Lieutenant Sisli, you don't have to worry about it.

古文：猛曰： 此非吾所及也，必以安定太守、万户侯相处。 
现代文：王猛说： 这不是我所能做到的。我一定任命你为安定太守、万户侯。 
English: Wang Meng said, "This is not something I can do. I will definitely appoint you as the Prince of Stability and the Prince of Ten Thousand Households."

古文：羌不悦而退。
现代文：邓羌不高兴，退走了。
English: Unhappy, Deng Wei retreated.

古文：俄而兵交，猛召羌，羌寝弗应。
现代文：不一会儿，双方军队交战，王猛召唤邓羌，邓羌沉默不答应。
English: Soon after, the two armies clashed. Wang Meng summoned Deng Yu, but Deng Yu remained silent.

古文：猛驰就许之，羌乃大饮帐中，与张蚝、徐成等跨马运矛，驰赴燕陈；出入数四，旁若无人，所杀伤数百。
现代文：王猛驰马跑到邓羌身边，答应了委任他为司隶校尉的要求，邓羌于是就在军帐中畅怀大饮，然后与张蚝、徐成等跨上战马，挥舞战矛，奔向前燕军阵。四番出入，旁若无人，杀伤数百人。
English: Wang Mengqi ran to Deng Yu's side and agreed to the request to appoint him as the first lieutenant of Sili. Deng Yu then had a big drink in the military account, and then, with Zhang Yu and Xu Cheng, mounted the warhorse, waved the spear, and ran forward to the Yan army formation. The fourth entry and exit, if there was no one around, killed and injured hundreds of people.

古文：及日中，燕兵大败，俘斩五万馀人，乘胜追击，所杀及降者又十万馀人，评单骑走还鄴。
现代文：到中午时分，前燕军大败，被俘获斩首的有五万多人，前秦军乘胜追击，前燕被斩杀和投降的又有十万多人。慕容评只身匹马逃回邺城。
English: By noon, the former Yan army was defeated and more than 50,000 people were captured and beheaded, the former Qin army chased after the victory, and more than 100,000 people were killed and surrendered to the former Yan. Murong Han fled back to Lucheng on horseback.

古文：崔鸿曰：邓羌请郡将以挠法，徇私也；勒兵欲攻王猛，无上也；临战豫求司隶，邀君也。
现代文：崔鸿曰：邓羌为本郡将领求情而扰乱军法，这是枉徇私情；想要率兵攻打王猛，这是目中无上；临战先要求委任司隶校尉，这是邀官求赏。
English: Cui Hong said, "Deng Yao's asking for the county's generals and disrupting the military law is an act of selfishness; his wanting to lead the troops to attack Wang Meng is beyond reproach; his asking for the appointment of the captain of the brigade before the battle is an invitation for a reward.

古文：有此三者，罪孰大焉！
现代文：有这三种行为，还有比这些更大的罪吗！
English: With these three actions, is there a greater sin than these?

古文：猛能容其所短，收其所长，若驯猛虎，驭悍马，以成大功。
现代文：王猛能容忍他的短处，利用他的长处，有如驯服猛虎，驾驭烈马，终成大功。
English: Wang Meng can tolerate his shortcomings and make use of his strengths, just like taming a fierce tiger and driving a fierce horse, and finally achieving great success.

古文：《诗》云： 采葑采菲，无以下体。 
现代文：《诗经》曰： 蔓菁萝收进门，难道要叶不要根。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If a cranberry is gathered into the door, should it have leaves or roots?"

古文：猛之谓矣。
现代文：说的就是王猛啊！
English: That's Wang Mengwu!

古文：秦兵长驱而东，丁卯，围鄴。
现代文：前秦的军队长驱东进，丁卯，包围了邺城。
English: The commander of the former Qin army drove eastward, Dingwu, and encircled Fucheng.

古文：猛上疏称： 臣以甲子之日，大歼丑类。
现代文：王猛上疏称： 臣在甲子那天，痛歼敌人。
English: Wang Mengjia said: On the day of Kozi, the vassal defeated the enemy.

古文：顺陛下仁爱之志，使六州士庶，不觉易主，自非守迷违命，一无所害。 
现代文：顺承陛下仁爱的心志，使六州之内的官吏百姓，在不知不觉中就改换了君主，除非执着迷误，违背命令的人，对官吏百姓一无伤害。 
English: Obeying His Majesty's benevolent spirit, the officials and people in the six states were able to change the monarch unknowingly. Except for those who persistently erred and disobeyed orders, there was no harm to the officials and people.

古文：秦王坚报之曰： 将军役不逾时，而元恶克举，勋高前古。
现代文：前秦王苻坚回复王猛说： 将军此次出战时间没超过三月，而首恶元凶已被攻克，功高前古。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian replied to Wang Meng, saying: The general did not go to war for more than three months this time, and the main culprit has been conquered, and his achievement is unprecedented.

古文：朕今亲帅六军，星言电赴。
现代文：朕现在亲自率领六军，星夜启程，火速赶赴。
English: I am now personally leading the Six Armies, leaving at nightfall and rushing to the scene.

古文：将军其休养将士，以待朕至，然后取之。 
现代文：将军可以让士兵休整一下，等朕赶到以后，再攻取邺城。 
English: The general can let the soldiers rest for a while, wait for me to arrive, and then capture the city.

古文：猛之未至也，鄴帝剽劫公行，及猛至，远近贴然。
现代文：王猛还没有抵达的时候，邺城周围有人公然抢劫，等王猛来到后，远近秩序井然。
English: When Wang Meng had not yet arrived, there were people around Lucheng openly looting. After Wang Meng arrived, everything was in order.

古文：号令严明，军无私犯，法简政宽，燕民各安其业，更相谓曰： 不图今日复见太原王！ 
现代文：王猛军令严明，部队秋毫无犯。他又简化法律，放宽政令，前燕的百姓安居乐业，都互相称颂说： 没想到今天又见到了太原王慕容恪！ 
English: Wang Meng's military orders were strict, and the troops committed no crimes. He also simplified the laws and relaxed the decrees, and the people of Qianyan lived and worked in peace, all praising each other and saying: I didn't expect to see King Murong of Taiyuan again today!

古文：猛闻之，叹曰： 慕容玄恭信奇士也，可谓古之遗爱矣！ 
现代文：王猛听到这话后，感叹地说： 慕容恪真是不同寻常的人，可以称得上是具有古代遗留下来的仁爱风范啊！ 
English: After hearing this, Wang Meng said with a sigh: Murong Ke is really an unusual person, who can be said to have the benevolent demeanor left over from ancient times!

古文：设太牢以祭之。
现代文：于是便设置太牢来祭奠他。
English: So they set up a watchtower to commemorate him.

古文：十一月，秦王坚留李威辅太子守长安，阳平公融镇洛阳，自帅精锐十万赴鄴，七日而至安阳，宴祖父时故老。
现代文：十一月，前秦王苻坚留下李威辅佐太子守卫长安，让阳平公苻融镇守洛阳，自己率领十万精锐士兵奔赴邺城，七天后抵达了安阳，宴请祖父、父亲时的故旧相识。
English: In November, the former Qin King Yu Jian left Li Wei Wei, the prince's aide, to guard Chang'an, and let Yang Ping, the Prince of Luoyang, take the lead in guarding Luoyang. He led a hundred thousand elite soldiers to Lucheng, and arrived in Anyang seven days later. He held a banquet for his grandfather and father.

古文：猛潜如安阳谒坚，坚曰： 昔周亚夫不迎汉文帝，今将军临敌而弃军，何也？ 
现代文：王猛悄悄地来到安阳谒见苻坚，苻坚说： 过去周亚夫不迎接汉文帝，如今将军面对敌人而抛下部队，为什么呢？ 
English: Wang Meng quietly came to Anyang to see Zou Jian. Zou Jian said: In the past, Zhou Yafu did not greet the Han Emperor, but now the general faces the enemy and abandons the troops. Why?

古文：猛曰： 亚夫前却人主以求名，臣窃少之。
现代文：王猛说： 周亚夫不迎接汉文帝是为了求取名声，我私下里很看不起他。
English: Wang Meng said: Zhou Yafu did not greet Emperor Hanwen in order to gain fame. I secretly despise him.

古文：且臣奉陛下威灵，击垂亡之虏，譬如釜中之鱼，何足虑也！
现代文：而且我承奉陛下的声威，攻击行将灭亡的敌虏，就像釜中抓鱼，哪里值得多虑！
English: Moreover, I obey the voice of His Majesty, attacking the dying enemy, like catching fish in a kettle, where it is worth worrying!

古文：监国冲幼，鸾驾远临，脱有不虞，悔之何及！
现代文：太子年幼留守，君王乘远行，万一有不测，后悔莫及！
English: The young prince stays behind, the monarch travels far away. In the unlikely event of a mishap, there is nothing to regret!

古文：陛下忘臣灞上之言邪！ 
现代文：陛下忘记了臣在灞上所说的话了吗！ 
English: Your Majesty, have you forgotten what your vassal said on the raft?

古文：初，燕宜都王桓帅众万馀屯沙亭，为太傅评后继，闻评败，引兵屯内黄。
现代文：当初，前燕宜都王慕容桓率领一万多兵众驻扎在沙亭，作为太傅慕容评的后继部队，听说慕容评失败后，他带兵移驻内黄。
English: At first, the former Yan Yi capital king Murong Huan led more than ten thousand soldiers stationed in Shating, as the successor force of Taifu Murong Hui. After hearing that Murong Hui had failed, he moved his troops to Neihuang.

古文：坚使邓羌攻信都。
现代文：苻坚派邓羌攻打信都。
English: Su Jian sent Deng Yu to attack Xindu.

古文：丁丑，桓帅鲜卑五千奔龙城。
现代文：丁丑，慕容桓率领五千鲜卑人逃奔龙城。
English: Ding Yuxi and Murong Huan led five thousand peasants to flee to Longcheng.

古文：戊寅，燕散骑侍郎馀蔚帅扶馀、高句丽及上党质子五百馀人，夜，开鄴北门，纳秦兵，燕主暐与上庸王评、乐安王臧、字襄王渊、左卫将军孟高、殿中将军艾朗等奔龙城。
现代文：戊寅，前燕散骑侍郎余蔚率领王百多扶馀、高句丽及上党的人质，趁夜打开邺城北门让前秦的军队进入，前燕国主慕容与上庸王慕容评、乐安王慕容臧、定襄王慕容渊、左卫将军孟高、殿中将军艾朗等逃奔龙城。
English: Wu Yin, the former Yan Zanzhong riding attendant Yu Wei, led by Wang Baiduo Fuyu, Goguryeo and Shang Party's hostages, took advantage of the night to open the north gate of Shicheng to let the former Qin army enter. The former Yan ruler Murong and Shangyong Wang Murong Han, Le'an King Murong Yao, Dingxiang King Murong Yuan, Left Guard General Meng Gao, and Middle Palace General Ai Lang fled to Longcheng.

古文：辛巳，秦王坚入鄴宫。
现代文：辛巳，前秦王苻坚进入邺城的王宫。
English: Suddenly, the former Qin King He Jian entered the royal palace in Fucheng.

古文：慕容垂见燕公卿大夫及故时僚吏，有愠色。
现代文：慕容垂见到前燕的公卿大夫及过去的僚属官吏后，面有怒色。
English: Murong Liu was angry when he saw the former Yan's court noble doctor and his former subordinate officials.

古文：高弼言于垂曰： 大王凭祖宗积累之资，负英杰高世之略，遭值迍阨，栖集外邦。
现代文：高弼向慕容垂进言说： 大王依靠祖宗积累的成果，具有英明杰出的才能，遭遇挫折，滞留外域。
English: Gao Yao gave advice to Murong Du, saying: The great king relied on the achievements accumulated by his ancestors, had brilliant and outstanding talents, suffered setbacks, and stayed in foreign countries.

古文：今虽家国倾覆，安知其不为兴运之始邪！
现代文：如今虽然宗族国家倾覆，怎么知道这不是中兴之运的开始呢！
English: Today, although the clan state has been overthrown, how do we know that this is not the beginning of ZTE's fortune!

古文：愚谓国之旧人，宜恢江海之量，有以慰结其心，以立覆篑之基，成九仞之功，奈何以一怒捐之？愚窃为大王不取也！ 
现代文：我认为对国家的故旧元老，应该具有江海那样的宽广肚量，这样才能安慰取得大家的心，以奠定光复的基础，成就宏大的功业，为什么因愤怒而抛弃他们，我私下里认为大王的态度不足取。 
English: I think that for the country's former elders, they should have a broad stomach like the rivers and seas, so that they can comfort and win the hearts of everyone to lay the foundation for restoration and achieve great achievements. Why did they abandon them out of anger? I secretly think that the attitude of the great king is not enough.

古文：垂悦，从之。
现代文：慕容垂高兴了，听从了他的意见。
English: Murong Du was pleased and followed his advice.

古文：燕主暐之出鄴也，卫士犹千馀骑，既出城，皆散，惟十馀骑从行；秦王坚使游击将军郭庆追之。
现代文：前燕国主慕容逃出邺城的时候，尚有一千多骑兵侍卫，等到出城以后，他们全都逃散，只有十多个骑兵跟随。前秦王苻坚让游击将军郭庆追击他们。
English: When the former lord of Yan, Murong, escaped from Lucheng, there were still more than a thousand cavalry guards. After they left the city, they all fled, with only more than ten cavalry following. The former Qin king, Yu Jian, let the guerrilla general, Guo Qing, chase them.

古文：时道路艰难，孟高扶侍暐，经护二王，极其勤瘁，又所在遇盗，转斗而前。
现代文：当时道路艰难，孟高搀扶侍奉慕容，还要跑前跑后地保护乐安王慕容臧和定襄王慕容渊，竭尽辛劳。
English: At that time, the road was difficult. Meng Gaoqi served Murong as an attendant, and he had to run back and forth to protect Le'an King Murongqi and Dingxiang King Murongyuan. He did his best.

古文：数日，行至福禄，依冢解息，盗二十馀人猝至，皆挟弓矢，高持刀与战，杀伤数人。
现代文：再加上途中遇上强盗，只得边打边走。几天以后，走到福禄，靠着坟墓休息时，有二十多个强盗突然来到，全都手持弓箭，孟高挥刀与他们搏斗，杀死杀伤了数人。
English: A few days later, when he went to Fulu and rested by the grave, more than twenty robbers suddenly came, all armed with bows and arrows. Meng Gao fought them with a sword, killing and injuring several people.

古文：高力极，自度必死，乃直前抱一贼，顿击于地，大呼曰： 男儿穷矣！ 
现代文：孟高疲劳至极，自觉得必死无疑，于是就冲上前去抱住一个强盗，把他打倒在地，大喊道： 男儿完了！ 
English: Meng Gao was extremely tired and felt that his death was inevitable, so he rushed forward to hug a robber, knocked him to the ground and shouted: The man is finished!

古文：馀贼从帝射高，杀之。
现代文：其他强盗从旁边向孟高射击，射死了他。
English: Other robbers shot Menggao from the side, killing him.

古文：艾朗见高独战，亦还趋贼，并死。
现代文：艾朗看到孟高独自搏斗，也返回来冲向强盗，一并被射死了。
English: When Aylan saw Menggao fighting alone, he also returned to rush the robber and was shot dead.

古文：失马步走，郭庆追及于高阳，部将巨武将缚之，曰： 汝何小人，敢缚天子！ 
现代文：慕容失去了马匹，只好步行，郭庆在高阳追上了他，部将巨武正要把他捆绑起来，慕容说： 你是哪里的小人，胆敢捆绑天子！ 
English: Murong lost his horses, so he had to walk. Guo Qing caught up with him in Gaoyang. The commander, Kuowu, was about to tie him up. Murong said, "What a rascal you are, daring to tie up the Son of Heaven!"

古文：武曰： 我受诏追贼，何谓天子！ 
现代文：巨武说： 我接受诏令追击盗贼，什么叫天子！ 
English: The giant said: I accept the edict to pursue the thief, what a son of heaven!

古文：执以诣秦王坚。
现代文：于是就押着他到了前秦王苻坚那里。
English: So they took him to the former Qin King He Jian.

古文：坚诘其不降而走之状，对曰： 狐死首丘，欲归死于先人坟墓耳。 
现代文：苻坚责问慕容为什么不投降而逃跑，慕容回答说： 狐狸要死在自己的洞穴，我想归葬于先人的墓地罢了。 
English: Zou asked Murong why he did not surrender and run away. Murong replied, "The fox wants to die in his cave. I just want to be buried in the cemetery of my ancestors."

古文：坚哀而释之，令还宫，帅文武出降。
现代文：苻坚为他感到悲哀，释放了他，命令他返回王宫，率领文武大臣出来投降。
English: Yu Jian felt sorry for him, released him, ordered him to return to the palace, and led the Minister of Culture and Military Affairs to surrender.

古文：称孟高、艾朗之忠于坚，坚命厚加敛葬，拜其子为郎中。
现代文：慕容向苻坚称颂孟高、艾朗的忠诚，苻坚命令对他们加以厚葬，提升他们的儿子为郎中。
English: Murong praised Meng Gao and Ailang's loyalty to Zou Jian. Zou Jian ordered that they be given a grand funeral and promoted their son to be Zou Jian's henchman.

古文：郭庆进至龙城，太傅评奔高句丽，高句丽执评，送于秦。
现代文：郭庆继续前进，抵达龙城，太傅慕容评逃奔到高句丽，高句丽拘捕了慕容评，把他送到前秦。
English: Guo Qing continued to move forward and arrived in Longcheng. Taifu Murong Hui fled to Goguryeo. Goguryeo arrested Murong Hui and sent him to Qian Qin.

古文：宜都王桓杀镇东将军勃海王亮，并其众，奔辽东。
现代文：宜都王慕容桓杀掉了镇东将军勃海王慕容亮，吞并了他的兵众，逃奔辽东。
English: King Muronghan of Yidu killed the Zhendong general Bo Hai Wang Murongliang, absorbed his soldiers, and fled to Liaodong.

古文：辽东太守韩稠，先已降秦，桓至，不得入，攻之，不克。
现代文：辽东太守韩稠，此前已经投降了前秦，慕容桓来到后，没能进入。攻打韩稠，没有攻克。
English: Liaodong's grand marshal, Han Cong, had already surrendered to the former Qin, and after Murong Huan arrived, he was unable to enter. Han Cong was attacked, but not defeated.

古文：郭庆遣将军硃嶷击之，桓充众单走，嶷获而杀之。
现代文：郭庆派将军朱嶷攻打慕容桓，慕容桓丢下兵众只身逃跑，朱嶷擒获并斩杀了他。
English: Guo Qing sent General Zhu Xi to attack Murong Huan. Murong Huan left his soldiers and ran away. Zhu Xi caught him and killed him.

古文：诸州牧守及六夷渠帅尽降于秦，凡得郡百五十七，户二百四十六万，口九百九十九万。
现代文：各州州牧、太守以及六夷首领全都向前秦投降，前秦共得到一百五十七郡，二百四十六万户，九百九十九万人。
English: All the prefectural governors, governors-general, and leaders of the Six Dynasties all surrendered to the former Qin. The former Qin gained a total of 157 counties, 2.46 million households, and 9.99 million people.

古文：以燕宫人、珍宝分赐将士。
现代文：苻坚将前燕的宫女、珍宝分别赏赐给众将士。
English: Yu Jian gave the former Yan's concubine and precious treasure to the generals.

古文：下诏大赦曰： 朕以寡薄，猥承休命，不能怀远以德，柔服四维，至使戎车屡驾，有害斯民，虽百姓之过，然亦朕之罪也。
现代文：下达大赦诏令称： 朕以寡薄之德，辱承尊命，不能以道义安抚远方的民众，以怀柔征服天下，以致于使战车屡屡出征，有害于百姓，虽然这是百姓的过错，然而也是朕的罪行。
English: The amnesty edict said: "I acted with poor morals, dishonored the honorable life, could not pacify the distant people with morality, and conquered the world with gentleness, so that the chariot repeatedly went to war, harming the people. Although this was the fault of the people, it was also my crime.

古文：其大赦天下，与之更始。 
现代文：现在大赦天下，与百姓一起从头开始。 
English: Now it is time for a general amnesty and to start again from scratch together with the people.

古文：初，梁琛之使秦也，以侍辇苟纯为副。
现代文：当初，梁琛出使前秦的时候，以侍辇苟纯作为副手。
English: At the beginning, when Liang Xuan sent an envoy to the former Qin Dynasty, he took the attendant Zang Guochun as his deputy.

古文：琛每应对，不先告纯；纯恨之，归，言于燕主暐曰： 琛在长安，与王猛甚亲善，疑有异谋。 
现代文：梁琛每逢应酬对答，不事先告诉苟纯，苟纯很忌恨他，回来后告诉前燕国主慕容说： 梁琛在长安，与王猛非常亲密友好，我怀疑他有反叛的图谋。 
English: Whenever Liang Zheng received an invitation, he would not inform Guo Chun in advance. Guo Chun hated him very much. After returning, he told the former master of Yan, Murong, saying: Liang Zheng is in Chang'an, and he is very close and friendly with Wang Meng. I suspect that he has a plan to rebel.

古文：琛又数称秦王坚及王猛之美，且言秦将兴师，宜为之备。
现代文：梁琛又多次称赞前秦王苻坚及王猛的美善，而且说前秦将要起兵，对此应该防备。
English: Liang Qi also praised the virtues of the former Qin kings He Jian and Wang Meng many times, and said that the former Qin would raise an army, which should be guarded against.

古文：已而秦果伐燕，皆如琛言，乃疑琛知其情。
现代文：此后前秦果然讨伐前燕，全都和梁琛所说的一样，慕容便怀疑梁琛知道实情。
English: After that, Qian Qin did indeed fight Qian Yan, and everything was the same as what Liang Jun said. Murong suspected that Liang Jun knew the truth.

古文：及慕容评败，遂收琛系狱。
现代文：等慕容评失败以后，就将梁琛逮捕下狱。
English: After the failure of Mu Rong's evaluation, Liang Qi was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：秦王坚入鄴而释之，除中书著作郎，引见，谓之曰： 卿昔言上庸王、吴王皆将相奇材，何为不能谋画，自使亡国？ 
现代文：前秦王苻坚进入邺城后释放了他。授职中书著作郎，召见时对他说： 你过去就上庸王慕容评、吴王慕容垂全都是不同寻常的将相之才，为什么不能出谋划策，情愿让国家灭亡？ 
English: Former Qin King Qian Jian released him after he entered Shicheng. When he was summoned to see the author of the book on the conferment of office, he said to him: In the past, you were on the Shangyang King Murong Hui and the Wu King Murong Tui, all of which were unusual talents. Why can't you come up with a plan and would rather let the country perish?

古文：对曰： 天命废兴，岂二人所能移也！ 
现代文：梁琛回答说： 天命的废兴，难道是这两个人所能改变的！ 
English: Liang Juan replied: Is it possible for these two people to change the fate of heaven?

古文：坚曰： 卿不能见几而作，虚称燕美，忠不自防，返为身祸，可谓智乎？ 
现代文：苻坚说： 你没能洞察燕国危机的征兆而有所作为，还虚称燕国的美善，忠诚不能保全自己，反而招来灾祸，这能说是明智吗？ 
English: Yu Jian said: Can it be said to be wise that you failed to see the signs of the crisis in Yan Guo and made some achievements, and also falsely claimed that Yan Guo was good, and that loyalty could not save oneself, but instead brought disaster?

古文：对曰： 臣闻 几者动之微，吉凶之先见者也。 
现代文：梁琛回答说： 我听说： 所谓征兆，是运动中的隐微苗头，是吉凶的事先表现。 
English: Liang Zhe replied: I have heard that: The so-called signs are the subtle signs in the movement, and are the advance manifestations of good and evil.

古文：如臣愚暗，实所不及。
现代文：像我这般愚昧，实在无法洞察。
English: As stupid as I am, I really can't see it.

古文：然为臣莫如忠，为子莫如孝，自非有一至之心者，莫能保忠孝之始终。
现代文：然而作为臣下，没有什么能与忠诚相比，作为儿子，没有什么能与孝顺相比，自己没有一贯之心的人，没有谁能始终保持忠和孝。
English: However, as a vassal, nothing can compare to loyalty, as a son, nothing can compare to filial piety, and no one who does not have a consistent heart can always maintain loyalty and filial piety.

古文：是以古之烈士，临危不改，见死不避，以徇君亲。
现代文：所以古代的刚强之士，临危不改变初衷，见死不加以逃避，以此来殉身君主、父母。
English: Therefore, the strong people in ancient times did not change their original intention when they were in danger, and did not run away when they saw death, in order to sacrifice themselves as monarchs and parents.

古文：彼知几者，心达安危，身择去就，不顾家国，臣就使知之，尚不忍为，况非所及邪！ 
现代文：那些了解征兆的人，心知安危，便身择去留，不再顾及宗族国家，我即使知道征兆，尚且不忍心去做，何况了解征兆还是力不能及的呢！ 
English: Those who understand the signs, knowing that they are safe, choose to stay, no longer considering the clan country. Even if I know the signs, I still can't bear to do it, let alone understand the signs!

古文：坚闻悦绾之忠，恨不及见，拜其子为郎中。
现代文：苻坚听说了悦绾的忠诚，只遗憾没能见到他，授予他的儿子郎中职务。
English: Huan Jian heard about Yue Yao's loyalty, but regretted not being able to meet him, and gave his son the position of tutor.

古文：坚以王猛为使持节、都督关东六州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、冀州牧，镇鄴，进爵清河郡侯，悉以慕容评第中之物赐之。
现代文：苻坚任命王猛为使持节、都督关东六州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、冀州牧，镇守邺城，进升爵位为清河郡侯，将慕容评宅第中的东西全都赐给了他。
English: Yu Jian appointed Wang Meng as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the six states of Guandong, the general of the cavalry, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, and the Jizhou pastoral, the town guard of Lucheng, and the promotion to the peerage as the lord of Qinghe County, and gave him everything in the Murong appraisal house.

古文：赐杨安爵博平县侯；以邓羌为使持节、征虏将军、安定太守，赐爵真定郡侯；郭庆为持节、都督幽州诸军事、幽州刺史，镇蓟，赐爵襄城侯。
现代文：赐封杨安博平县侯爵位。任命邓羌为使持节、征虏将军、定安太守，赐封真定郡侯爵位。任命郭庆为持节、都督幽州诸军事、幽州刺史，镇宁蓟城，赐封襄城侯爵位。
English: Yang An was given the title of marquess of Boping County, Deng Yao was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the conscript general, and the governor of Ding'an, and was given the title of marquess of Zhending County, Guo Qing was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Yuzhou, the military governor of Yuzhou, the historian of Yuzhou, the town of Ningbo, and was given the title of marquess of Xiangcheng.

古文：其馀将士封赏各有差。
现代文：对其余将士的赐封奖赏各有等差。
English: For the rest of the soldiers, the awards and rewards are equally different.

古文：坚以京兆韦钟为魏郡太守，彭豹为阳平太守；其馀州县牧、守、令、长，皆因旧而授之。
现代文：苻坚任命京兆人韦钟为魏郡太守，彭豹为阳平太守，其余州县的牧、守、令、长，全都根据过去的人选加以任命。
English: Yu Jian appointed Wei Zhong, a man from Beijing and Zhejiang Province, as the governor of Wei County, Peng Bao as the governor of Yangping County, and the pastors, governors, deputies, and mayors of the remaining counties were all appointed according to the previous candidates.

古文：以燕常山太守申绍为散骑侍郎，使与散骑侍郎京兆韦儒俱为绣衣使者，循行关东州郡，观省风俗，劝课农桑，振恤穷困，收葬死亡，旌显节行，燕政有不便于民者，皆变除之。
现代文：任命前燕的常山太守申绍为散骑侍郎，让他和散骑侍郎京兆人韦儒一起作为绣衣使者，巡视关东州郡，观察风俗民情，劝勉农耕蚕桑，赈济抚恤贫困，收敛安葬死者，表彰节义行为，前燕的政令有不利于百姓的，全都加以修改、废除。
English: He appointed Qian Yan's Changshan daimyo, Shen Shao, as his horseback riding attendant, and let him and his horseback riding attendant, Jing Zhao's Wei Ru, together as embroidered messengers, patrol Guandong County, observe the customs and people's conditions, encourage farmers to cultivate silkworms, help the poor, restrain the burial of the dead, and commend acts of righteousness. If any of Qian Yan's decrees were unfavorable to the people, they would all be amended and abolished.

古文：十二月，秦王坚迁慕容及燕后妃、王公、百官并鲜卑四万馀户于长安。
现代文：十二月，前秦王苻坚把慕容以及前燕的王后、妃嫔、王公、百官连同四万多户鲜卑人，一起迁移到了长安。
English: In December, the former Qin king Jie Jian moved Murong and the former Yan's queens, concubines, princes, and officials, along with more than 40,000 Xianbei families, to Chang'an.

古文：王猛表留梁琛为主簿，领记室督。
现代文：王猛上表请求留下梁琛任主簿，兼记室督。
English: Wang Meng made a request at the table to retain Liang Qi as the chief accountant, and also as the chief clerk.

古文：它日，猛与僚属宴，语及燕朝使者，猛曰： 人心不同。
现代文：有一天，王猛和僚属聚宴，说到了燕朝的使者，王猛说： 人心不同。
English: One day, Wang Meng and his colleagues were at a banquet, and when talking about the envoys of the Yan Dynasty, Wang Meng said: People's hearts are different.

古文：昔梁君至长安，专美本朝；乐君但言桓温军盛；郝君微说国弊。 
现代文：过去梁琛到了长安，专门美化自己的朝廷；乐嵩只说桓温的军队强盛；郝晷暗地里说到了国家的弊端。 
English: In the past, Liang Xuan came to Chang'an, specifically to beautify his own court; Le Song only said that Huan Wen's army was strong; and secretly talked about the country's drawbacks.

古文：参军冯诞曰： 今三子皆为国臣，敢问取臣之道何先？ 
现代文：参军冯诞说： 如今这三人全都成了前秦的国臣，敢问您任用臣下的策略，应该优先考虑谁？ 
English: Feng Xuanru, who joined the army, said: Nowadays, these three have all become the former Qin's state ministers. I dare to ask you about the strategy of appointing vassals. Who should be given priority?

古文：猛曰： 郝君知几为先。 
现代文：王猛说： 郝晷能洞察隐微的征兆，应该优先。 
English: Wang Meng said: "Being able to discern subtle signs should be a priority.

古文：诞曰： 然则明公赏丁公而诛季布也。 
现代文：冯诞说： 然而汉高祖刘邦却奖赏丁公而要诛杀季布。 
English: Feng Xuan said: However, Liu Bang, the founder of the Han Dynasty, rewarded Ding Gong and wanted to kill Ji Bu.

古文：猛大笑。
现代文：王猛大笑。
English: Wang Meng laughed loudly.

古文：秦王坚自鄴如枋头，宴父老，改枋头为永昌，复之终世。
现代文：前秦王苻坚从邺城到枋头，宴请父老，把枋头改称永昌，终世免除该地的赋税劳役。
English: Former Qin King Qian Jian traveled from Qincheng to Shantou to hold a banquet for his father and grandfather. He renamed Shantou as Yongchang and exempted it from taxes and labor service for life.

古文：甲寅，至长安，封慕容为新兴侯；以燕故臣慕容评为给事中，皇甫真为奉车都尉，李洪为驸马都尉，皆奉朝请。
现代文：甲寅，苻坚抵达长安，封慕容为新兴侯，任命前燕旧臣慕容评为给事中，皇甫真为奉车都尉，李洪为驸马都尉，全都给予他们在春、秋朝见天子的资格。
English: A Yin, Xuan Jian arrived in Chang'an, the new marquis was given the title of Murong, the former Yan's old vassal Murong was appointed as the new marquis, Wang Fuzhen was given the title of Fengche Duifeng, and Li Hong was given the title of Shenma Duifeng, all of which gave them the right to see the emperor in the spring and autumn.

古文：李邽为尚书，封衡为尚书郎，慕容德为张掖太守，燕国平睿为宣威将军，悉罗腾为三署郎。
现代文：任命李为尚书，封衡为尚书郎，慕容德为张掖太守，燕国人平睿为宣威将军，悉罗腾为三署郎。
English: Li was appointed as Shangshu, Fengheng as Shangshuro, Murongde as Zhangye governor, Yan Guozhong Pingrui as Xuanwei general, and Si Luoteng as Sanjunlang.

古文：其馀封授各有差。
现代文：对其他人的赐封任命各有等差。
English: There is an equal difference in the conferment and appointment of other people.

古文：衡，裕之子也。
现代文：封衡是封裕的儿子。
English: Feng Heng is the son of Feng Yu.

古文：燕故太史黄泓叹曰： 燕必中兴，其在吴王乎！
现代文：前燕过去的太史黄泓叹息道： 燕朝一定能中兴，大概是在吴王慕容垂了！
English: Former Yan's past Taishi Huang Qi sighed: Yan's dynasty will certainly be able to rejuvenate, probably in Wu Wang Murong!

古文：恨吾老，不及见耳！ 
现代文：遗憾的是我已年老，来不及看到了！ 
English: Unfortunately, I am too old to see it!

古文：汲郡赵秋曰： 天道在燕，而秦灭之。不及十五年，秦必复为燕有。 
现代文：汲郡人赵秋说： 天道在燕，用不了十五年，秦国必定又为燕国所有。 
English: Zhao Qiu, a resident of Gu County, said: The way of heaven is in Yan, it will not take fifteen years, and Qin will definitely be owned by Yan.

古文：慕容桓之子凤，年十一，阴有复仇之志。鲜卑、丁零有气干者，皆倾身与之交结。
现代文：慕容桓的儿子慕容凤，年龄十一，暗中怀有复仇之志，鲜卑、丁零有才干的人全都俯身与他结交。
English: Murongfeng, the eleven-year-old son of Muronghuan, secretly harbors a desire for revenge, and everyone who is humble and talented bows down to befriend him.

古文：权翼见而谓之曰： 儿方以才望自显，勿效尔父不识天命！ 
现代文：权翼见到后对慕容凤说： 小儿正以才能名望自我显露，不要效法你父亲不识天命！ 
English: After seeing this, Quan Ying said to Murong Feng: Children are revealing themselves with talent and fame, don't follow your father's example of not knowing the fate of the world!

古文：凤厉色曰： 先王欲建忠而不遂，此乃人臣之节；君侯之言，岂奖劝将来之义乎！ 
现代文：慕容凤脸色严厉地说： 先父想建立忠诚而没能遂愿，这是作为人臣的节操；你所说的话，难道是奖掖后辈的意思吗！ 
English: Murongfeng looked stern and said, "My father wanted to establish loyalty, but he couldn't fulfill his wish. This is the discipline of a vassal. Is what you said meant to reward the younger generation?"

古文：翼改容谢之，言于秦王坚曰： 慕容凤忼慨有才器，但狼子野心，恐终不为人用耳。 
现代文：权翼脸色一变称谢离开，向前秦王苻坚进言说： 慕容凤慷慨而有才能与气度，只是豺狼之子不可驯服，恐怕最终也不会被人所用。 
English: Guo Ying changed his countenance and thanked him for leaving, and said to the former Qin King Yu Jian: Murong Feng is generous and has talent and grace, but the son of a wolf cannot be tamed, and I am afraid that he will not be used by people in the end.

古文：秦省雍州。
现代文：前秦取消了雍州建制。
English: The former Qin Dynasty abolished the Yongzhou system.

古文：是岁，仇池公杨世卒，子纂立，始与秦绝。
现代文：这一年，仇池公杨世去世，儿子杨纂继位，开始与前秦绝交。
English: In the same year, Prince Yang Shih of Quchi died, and his son Yang Zuo succeeded him, and began to break off diplomatic relations with the former Qin Dynasty.

古文：叔父武都太守统与之争国，起兵相攻。
现代文：杨纂的叔父武都太守杨统与杨纂争夺封国，互相起兵攻打。
English: Yang Tong's uncle Wu Du Taishu Yang Tong and Yang Tong fought for the fiefdom and attacked each other.

