古文：杜牧天峤游人谭铢周匡物王播朱庆余唐宣宗温庭筠李商隐刘瑑郑畋司空图高蟾
现代文：杜牧天峤游人谭铢周匡物王播朱庆余唐宣宗温庭筠李商隐刘瑑郑畋司空图高蟾
English: Zhu Qingyu Tang Xuan Zong Wen Tingjie Li Shangyin Liu Qian Zheng, Zhou Kuang, Tang Xuan Zong, Tang Xuan Zong

古文：杜牧
现代文：杜牧
English: Dumu town

古文：唐白居易初为杭州刺史，令访牡丹花。
现代文：唐时期，白居易在杭州当刺史，派人去寻找牡丹花。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Bai Juyi sent people to look for peony flowers in Hangzhou.

古文：独开元寺僧惠澄近于京师得之。始植于庭，栏门甚密，他处未之有也。
现代文：独有开元寺的僧人惠澄在京师得到，开始在庭院栽植，周围的栏杆很密，别的地方都没有。
English: The monk Keicho, who is unique to Kaiyuan Temple, obtained the bamboo shoots in Beijing and began to plant them in the courtyard. The railings around the garden are very dense, and they are not found anywhere else.

古文：时春景方深，惠澄设油幕覆其上。牡丹自此东越分而种之也。
现代文：当时已是春生时间，惠澄用油布搭小棚覆的花上，牡丹花从此才开始在杭州种植。
English: At that time, it was already spring time, and Huicheng used oilcloth to cover the flowers on the shed, and the peony flowers began to be planted in Hangzhou.

古文：会徐凝从富春来，未知白，先题诗曰：此花南地知难种，渐愧僧闲用意栽。
现代文：这时，正巧徐凝从富春来，没有先打招呼先题了一首诗：此花南地知难种，惭愧僧闲用意栽。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Xu Geng came from Fuchun and wrote a poem without first saying hello: This flower is difficult to grow in the south, and I am ashamed that I planted it idly.

古文：海燕解怜频睥睨，胡蜂未识更徘徊。
现代文：海燕解怜频睥睨，胡蜂未识更徘徊。
English: The peregrine falcon frequently glares to dispel pity, and the wasp lingers in ignorance.

古文：虚生芍药徒劳妒，羞杀玫瑰不敢开。
现代文：虚生芍药徒劳妒，羞杀玫瑰不敢开。
English: Vain begets vain envy, and shame dares not open the rose.

古文：唯有数苞红幞在，含芳只待舍人来。
现代文：唯有数包红幞在，含芳只待舍人来。
English: Only a few packets of red snapper are there, and the aromatic ones are just waiting to be picked.

古文：白寻到寺看花，乃命徐同醉而归。
现代文：白居易这时也到开元寺云赏花，看到徐凝便让他一起喝酒后再回去。
English: Bai Juyi also went to Kaiyuan Temple to enjoy the flowers, and when he saw Xu Jie, he asked him to have a drink with him before going back.

古文：时张祜榜舟而至，甚若疏诞。
现代文：这时张祜也坐船来了，表现的很放荡。
English: At this time, Zhang Ye also came by boat, acting very debauched.

古文：然张徐二生未之习隐，各希首荐焉。
现代文：张祜与徐凝二人都想参加科举考试。都希望得到白居易的举荐。
English: Zhang Yu and Xu Jing both want to take the entrance examination. Both hope to get Bai Juyi's recommendation.

古文：白曰：二君论文，若廉白之斗鼠穴，胜负在于一战也。
现代文：白居易说，你们二位这次的文章，就象廉颇和白起相斗一样，胜负在此一战。
English: Bai Juyi said, the two of you writing this article, just like Renpo and Baiqi fighting each other, will win or lose in this battle.

古文：遂试《长剑依天外》赋，《余霞散成绮》诗，试讫解送，以凝为元，祜次之。
现代文：便为他们出了《长剑倚天外赋》、《余霞散成绮诗》两个题目。考完后送到京中，徐凝第一，张祜第二。
English: They were given two questions, "Long Sword Leaning on the Outside" and "Yu Xia Xuancheng's Poetry." After the exam, they were sent to Beijing Middle School, where Xu Geng was first and Zhang Xuan was second.

古文：张曰：祜诗有地势遥尊岳，河流侧让关。
现代文：张祜说，我的诗中的地势遥尊岳，河流侧让开。
English: Zhang Ye said that the terrain in my poem is far away from Mt. Zongzong, and the side of the river should move away.

古文：多士以陈后主日月光天德，山河壮帝居。此徒有前名矣。
现代文：很多读书人认为陈后主的日月光天德，山河壮帝居，也是空有前名。
English: Many readers think that the sun, moon, light and virtue of Queen Chen, the mountains and rivers, the strong imperial residence, are also empty names.

古文：又祜题金山寺诗曰：树影中流见，钟声两岸闻。虽綦毋潜云。塔影挂青汉，钟声和白云。此句未为佳也。白又以祜宫词，四句之中皆数对，何足奇乎？然无徐生云，今古长如白练飞，一条界破青山色。
现代文：张祜题写的《金山寺》诗中有树影中流见，钟声两岩闻的句子，虽然綦毋潜有塔影挂青汉，钟志和白云的句子，这句子也不算好，白居易又说到张祜的宫体诗，四句都挺工整，这没有什么奇异的寺方，他没有徐凝今古长如白练飞，一条界破青山色这样走了。
English: In the poem "Jinshan Temple" inscribed by Zhang Ye, there is a sentence about seeing trees in the shadows and hearing bells on two rocks. Although there is no potential tower shadow hanging over Qinghan, the sentence about bells and white clouds, this sentence is not good. Bai Juyi also mentioned Zhang Ye's palace poem. All four sentences are quite well-crafted. There is nothing strange about this temple. He did not slow down. He is now as long as Bai Rongfei. A boundary has been broken.

古文：李尝谓白为嗫嚅公，闻者皆笑。乐天之名稍减矣。白曰：李直木吾之猘子也，其锋不可当。
现代文：李宗林曾说白居易是个爱唠叨的老头，大家听后笑了，白居易的名声稍微受点损伤，白居易说：李直木象条咬我的疯狗，相当厉害。
English: Li Zonglin once said that Bai Juyi was a garrulous old man, and everyone laughed after listening. Bai Juyi's reputation was slightly damaged. Bai Juyi said: Li Naoki is like a mad dog that bites me, quite badly.

古文：后杜牧守秋浦，与张祜为诗酒之友，酷吟祜宫词。亦知钱塘之岁，白有非祜之论，尝不平之。
现代文：后来，杜牧到秋浦时，和张祜成为诗酒之交，他非常喜欢张祜的言论，很为张祜不平，他为了提高张祜的声誉，曾写过两首诗。
English: Later, when Dumu went to Qiu Pu, he became friends with Zhang Ye in poetry. He was very fond of Zhang Ye's speech and was very displeased with Zhang Ye. In order to improve Zhang Ye's reputation, he once wrote two poems.

古文：乃为诗二道以高之曰：谁人得似张公子，千首诗轻万户侯。
现代文：诗中有谁人得假张公子，千首诗轻万户侯。
English: In the poem, who is the real Zhang Junzi? A thousand poems are worth a thousand princes.

古文：又云：如何故国三千里，虚唱歌词满六宫。
现代文：和如何故国三千里，虚唱歌词满六宫的句子。
English: And how the motherland is three thousand miles away, the lyrics of the virtual song are full of sentences of the six palaces.

古文：张诗曰：故国三千里，深宫二十年。
现代文：张祜的诗：故国三千里，深宫三十年。
English: Zhang Ye's poem: Three thousand miles from home, thirty years in the depths of the palace.

古文：一声何满子，双泪落君前。
现代文：一声何满子，双泪落君前。
English: With a cry of "What a man!" tears fell down in front of him.

古文：此为祜得意之语也。
现代文：这是张祜最满意的作品。
English: This is Zhang Ye's most satisfying work.

古文：李杜已下，盛言其美者，欲以荀异于白而曲成于张也。
现代文：李宗林和杜牧身旁的人，都很称赞。都不同意白居易对张祜的评价，而赞扬张祜。
English: Li Zonglin and the people around Du Mu are very praiseworthy. They all disagree with Bai Juyi's evaluation of Zhang Xuan and praise Zhang Xuan.

古文：故牧又著论，言近有元白者，喜为谣言亵语，鼓扇浮嚣。吾恨方在下位，未能以法治之。
现代文：杜牧也写文章评论说，元稹和白居易的诗，多为谣词浪调，轻浮之作，我就是职位在他以下，不能和他较量。
English: Dumu also wrote an article commenting that the poems of Yuan Xuan and Bai Juyi are mostly rumors, rhymes, and frivolous works. I am a position below him and cannot compete with him.

古文：斯亦敷佐于祜耳。
现代文：杜牧这也是为了提高张祜的声誉。
English: Dumoulin: This is also to enhance Zhang Ye's reputation.

古文：天峤游人
现代文：天峤游人
English: Tianqi Youren

古文：麻姑山，山谷之秀，草木多奇。
现代文：麻姑山，山谷秀丽，草木多奇。
English: Mt. Magu, the valley is beautiful, the plants are strange.

古文：有邓先客至延康，四五代为国道师，而锡紫服。洎死，自京归葬是山，云是尸解也。
现代文：邓先客藉延康，他家四五代都是道士，穿紫衣，到他死时，由京城运回麻姑山安葬。
English: Deng Xiangke was a disciple of Yan Kang, and four or five generations of his family were Taoists, wearing purple robes. When he died, he was transported from Beijing to Mount Magu for burial.

古文：后来观其所刺。无复为文。且邓氏之名，因斯稍减矣。诗曰：鹤老芝田鸡在笼，上清那与俗尘同。
现代文：忽然有一少年，在这题了一绝，他没有题写姓名，只说是天峤游人。后来人们看到他写的诗，也就再没有题诗的了，邓氏的名声，也逐渐渐弱，他的诗是：鹤老芝田鸡在笼，上清那与俗尘同。
English: Suddenly, there was a young boy who wrote a poem about it. He did not write his name, but only said that he was a traveler. Later, people saw the poem he wrote, so there was no longer a poem, and Deng's reputation gradually weakened. His poem was: Crane old chicken in a cage, Shangqing that is the same as ordinary dust.

古文：既言白日升仙去，何事人间有殡宫。
现代文：既言白日升仙去，何事人间有殡宫。
English: As the saying goes, nothing is better than a funeral home.

古文：谭铢
现代文：谭铢
English: 谭

古文：真娘者，吴国之佳人也，比于钱唐苏小小。
现代文：真娘，是吴国中的美人，好比钱塘的苏小小。
English: A true maiden is a beauty in the middle of the State of Wu, just like Su Xiao Xiao from Qiantang.

古文：死葬吴宫之侧。行客感其华丽，竞为诗题于墓树，栉比鳞臻。
现代文：她死后葬在吴宫旁侧，过往行人墨客有感于真娘的华丽美艳，在她墓前树上提了很多诗。
English: After her death, she was buried next to the Wu Palace. Passing passers-by were impressed by the gorgeous beauty of the true daughter and wrote many poems on the tree in front of her grave.

古文：有举子谭铢者，吴门之秀士也，因书一绝。后之来者，睹其题处，稍息笔矣。
现代文：有个叫谭铢的举人，他是吴地的一位才子，他题写了一首绝句，以后再来的人，看到他那首诗，便不再写了。
English: There was a poet named Tan Xuan, who was a talented person in Wu Di. He inscribed a last sentence, and people who came later saw his poem and stopped writing.

古文：诗曰：武丘山下冢累累，松柏萧条尽可悲。
现代文：他的诗的是：武丘山下冢累累，松柏萧条尽可悲。
English: His poem is: Wuqiu Mountain is full of weeds, and the pine and cypress trees are sadly depressed.

古文：何事世人偏重色，真娘墓上独题诗。
现代文：何事世人偏重色，真娘墓上独题诗。
English: What the world is more interested in, is a poem on the grave of the real daughter.

古文：周匡物
现代文：周匡物
English: Zhou Hongmeng

古文：周匡物字几本，漳州人。
现代文：周匡物，字几本，漳州人氏。
English: Zhou Kuang thing, a few words, Zhangzhou people.

古文：唐元和十二年，王播榜下进士及第。时以歌诗著名。
现代文：唐宪宗元和十二年时在王播榜下进士及第，当时他的诗歌很有名气。
English: In the twelfth year of Tang Xian Zongyuan, he was promoted to the first rank in the Wang Bo list. At that time, his poetry was very famous.

古文：初周以家贫，徒步应举，落魄风尘，怀刺不偶。路经钱塘江，乏僦船之资，久不得济，乃于公馆题诗云：万里茫茫天堑遥，秦皇底事不安桥。
现代文：最初的时候，周家很贫苦，去应举时都是徒步往返，正是落魄风尘，怀才不遇的时候，坐船都没有钱，等了很久也过不去钱塘江，他回到公馆题了一首诗：万里茫茫无堑遥，秦皇底事不安桥。
English: In the beginning, the Zhou family was very poor. When they had to go to school, they had to walk there and back. It was a bleak time. When they did not meet anyone, they did not have money to take a boat. After waiting for a long time, they could not cross the Qiantang River. He returned to the mansion and wrote a poem: "Thousands of miles away, the Qin Emperor is not worried about the bridge."

古文：钱塘江口无钱过，又阻西陵两信潮。
现代文：钱塘江口无钱过，又阻西陵两信潮。
English: The Qiantang estuary has no money to pass through, and the two letter tides of Xiling are blocked.

古文：郡牧出见之，乃罪津吏。
现代文：郡官看到诗后，怪罪摆渡的小吏。
English: When the county magistrate saw the poem, he blamed the delivery boy.

古文：至今天下津渡，尚传此诗讽诵。舟子不敢取举选人钱者，自此始也。
现代文：到现在各地的渡口都传诵这首诗，摆渡人不收应举人的船费是从这开始的。
English: To this day, this poem is recited at ferry ports all over the country. It was here that the ferrymen began to refuse to collect the fare from passengers.

古文：王播
现代文：王播
English: Wang Biao

古文：唐王播少孤贫，尝客扬州惠照寺木兰院，随僧斋食。后厌怠，乃斋罢而后击钟。
现代文：唐朝尚书左仆射平章事王播，少年时孤苦贫穷。曾经在扬州惠照寺木兰院客居，跟随僧人吃斋饭，后来逐渐厌烦他，怠慢他，吃完饭后敲钟。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man in the Tang Dynasty, Sha Pingzhang, was a lonely and poor young man. He once lived as a guest at the Mulan Academy of Yangzhou Huizhou Temple, and followed the monks to eat meals. Later, he gradually got tired of him, neglected him, and rang the bell after eating.

古文：后二纪，播自重位，出镇是邦，因访旧游。向之题名，皆以碧纱罩其诗。播继以二绝句曰：三十年前此院游，木兰花发院新修。
现代文：二十四年后，王播当了大官，成为镇守淮南的节度使，他重游旧地，看到他写的诗都用绿纱罩上了，王播写了两首绝句：三十年前此院游，木兰花发院新修。
English: Twenty-four years later, Wang Huan became a high-ranking official and became the festival envoy of the town guard of Huainan. He revisited the old place and saw that the poems he wrote were covered with green gauze. Wang Huan wrote two final sentences: Thirty years ago, this courtyard tour, magnolia flower hair hospital newly repaired.

古文：如今再到经行处，树老无花僧白头。
现代文：如今再到径行处，树老无花僧白头。
English: Now, back at the trailhead, the tree is bare.

古文：上堂未了各西东，惭愧闻黎饭后钟。
现代文：上堂未了各西东，惭愧闻黎饭后钟。
English: We didn't get to the hall before everyone else, and I was ashamed to hear the bell ringing after dinner.

古文：三十年来尘扑面，如今始得碧纱笼。
现代文：三十年来尘扑面，如今始得碧纱笼。
English: Thirty years of dust on the face, and now it's starting to bloom.

古文：朱庆余
现代文：朱庆余
English: Zhu Qingyu

古文：唐朱庆余遇水部郎中张籍知音，索庆余新旧篇什数通，吟改只留二十六章。籍置于怀抱而推赞之。
现代文：唐时，朱庆余遇见水部员外郎张藉后，二人成为知音。张藉把庆余的很多新旧作品要去，经过他吟诵修改后，只留二十六篇，张籍把些作品带在身边，经常向别人推荐和赞扬。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, after Zhu Qingyu met Zhang Xuan, a member of the Ministry of Water Affairs, the two became friends. Zhang Xuan took many of Qingyu's old and new works to go, and after he recited and revised them, he only kept twenty-six. Zhang Qi took some of the works with him and often recommended and praised them to others.

古文：时人以籍重名，无不缮录讽咏，遂登科第。
现代文：当时人们认为张藉很喜欢重视好作品，也都抄录背诵。
English: At that time, people thought that Zhang Rong liked to attach importance to good works and also copied and recited them.

古文：初庆余尚为谦退，作《闺意》一篇，以献张曰：洞房昨夜停红烛，待晓堂前拜舅姑。
现代文：宋庆余在科考中登科及第，开始时宋庆余还很谦虚，他作一首《闺意》，献给张籍，诗是：洞房昨夜停红烛，待晓堂前拜舅姑。
English: At the beginning, Song Qingyu was still very modest. He composed a poem "Girlfriend," dedicated to Zhang Qi. The poem was: "The bride's house stopped the red candle last night, and waited for the dawn to bow to her aunt."

古文：妆罢低声问夫婿，画眉深浅入时无。
现代文：妆罢低声问夫婿，画眉深浅入时无。
English: I asked my husband-in-law in a low voice whether I should stop wearing makeup.

古文：籍酬之曰：越女新妆出镜心，自知明艳更沈吟。
现代文：张藉也酬答了他一首：越女新妆出镜新，自知明艳更沉吟。
English: Zhang Rong also replied to him with a poem: "The more a woman wears new makeup, the more radiant she looks, and the more subdued she is."

古文：齐绔未足人间贵，一曲菱歌敌万金。
现代文：齐绔未足人间贵，一曲菱歌敌万金。
English: It is a precious treasure of the world to be able to sing together.

古文：由是朱之诗名，流入四海内矣。
现代文：由此，宋庆余诗名大振，到处流传。
English: As a result, Song Qingyu's famous poem "Da Zhen" was widely circulated.

古文：唐宣宗
现代文：唐宣宗
English: Tang Xuan Zong

古文：唐宣宗朝，前进士陈玩等三人应博士宏词，所司考定名第及诗赋论。上于延英殿诏中书舍人李藩等问曰：凡考试之中，重用字如何？藩对曰：赋忌偏枯庸杂，论失褒贬是非，诗则缘题落韵，其间重用文字，乃是庶几，亦作有常例也。又曰：孰诗重用字？
现代文：诗则要求切题押韵。这里的重用字也许差不多，但也有破例的。皇上又问：谁的诗重用字了？
English: Poems, on the other hand, require rhymes that are to the point. The repeated words here are probably similar, but there are exceptions. The Emperor also asked: Whose poem uses repeated words?

古文：对曰：钱起湘灵鼓瑟诗云：善抚云和瑟，常闻帝子灵。
现代文：回答说，钱起的《湘灵鼓瑟》诗中写道：善鼓云和瑟，常闻帝子灵。
English: He replied that Qianqi's poem "Xiangling Drummer" wrote: "Good drumming is good, and it is common to hear the Emperor's spirit.

古文：冯夷空自舞，楚客不堪听。
现代文：冯夷空自舞，楚客不堪听。
English: Feng Yikang is dancing by himself, Chu Ke is not listening.

古文：逸韵谐金石，清音发杳冥。
现代文：逸韵谐金石，清音发杳冥。
English: The rhyme is harmonious and the pronunciation is clear.

古文：苍梧来怨慕，白芷动芳馨。
现代文：苍梧来怨慕，白芷动芳馨。
English: The gray wolf comes to resent, the egret stirs the fragrance.

古文：流水传湘浦，悲风过洞庭。
现代文：流水传湘浦，悲风过洞庭。
English: Flowing water passes through Xiangpu, and the sad wind passes through Dongting.

古文：曲终人不见，江上数峰青。
现代文：曲终人不见，江上数峰青。
English: There is no one at the end of the song, and several peaks on the river are blue.

古文：中有二不字。
现代文：他的这首诗中，用了两个不字。
English: In his poem, he uses two infinitives.

古文：上曰：钱起虽重用字，他诗似不及起。
现代文：皇上说，钱起虽然重用了字。别人的诗都不如他。
English: The emperor said that although Qianqi made heavy use of words, other people's poems were not as good as his.

古文：虽谢眺云： 洞庭张乐地，潇湘帝子游。
现代文：虽然谢眺有首诗：洞庭张乐地，潇湘帝子游。
English: Although Xie Qian has a poem: Dongting Zhang Ludi, Xiao Xiang Teizi You.

古文：云去苍梧远，水还江汉流 之篇。无以比也。
现代文：云去苍梧远，水还江汉流。这篇也没法比。
English: The clouds are far away, the water is still flowing. This article is also incomparable.

古文：其宏词诗重用字者登科。
现代文：这次宏词科考试中，重用字者登科及第。
English: In this macro lexicology exam, those who reused words entered the exam in the first and second place.

古文：起诗便付史选。
现代文：钱起的诗被收入《史选》。
English: Qian Zhui's poem was included in "Selected Histories."

古文：又唐宣宗
现代文：又唐宣宗
English: and Tang Xuan Zong

古文：宣宗因重阳，赐宴群臣，有御制诗。其略去：欵塞旋征骑，和戎委庙贤。
现代文：唐宣宗在重阳节那天，赐宴招待群臣。宣宗作了一首诗：疑塞旋征骑，和戎委庙贤。
English: On the day of the Double Ninth Festival, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty gave a banquet to invite a group of ministers. Xuanzong composed a poem: "Doubting, halting, and riding, and the military committee is wise."

古文：倾心方倚注，叶力共安边。
现代文：倾心方倚注，协力共安边。
English: Focus on the people you care about, and work together for mutual benefit.

古文：宰臣以下应制皆和。
现代文：满朝大臣都作了和诗。
English: All through the reign of the emperor, ministers composed Japanese poems.

古文：上曰：宰相魏谟诗最出，其两联云：四方无事去，神豫抄秋来。
现代文：皇上说，宰相魏谟的诗最好，其中有两联：四方无事去，神豫抄秋来。
English: The emperor said that the poem of the chancellor Weimar was the best, in which there were two couplets: There is nothing to do in the four directions, and God has come in the autumn.

古文：八水寒光起，千山霁色开。
现代文：八水寒光起，千山霁色开。
English: At dusk, the mountains are ablaze with color.

古文：上嘉赏久之。魏蹈舞拜谢，群僚耸视，魏有德色，极欢而罢。
现代文：皇上很赞赏，魏谟也手舞足蹈地拜谢，群臣们都高看一眼，魏谟也很感激，大家尽欢而散。
English: The emperor was very appreciative, and Weymouth danced and bowed in thanks. The courtiers all looked up, and Weymouth was also very grateful. Everyone left happily.

古文：温庭筠
现代文：温庭筠
English: Wen Tingyao

古文：唐温庭筠字飞卿，旧名岐。
现代文：唐时，温庭筠，字飞卿，旧名岐。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wen Tingyu, Zi Feiqing, the former Mingqi.

古文：与李商隐齐名，时号温李。
现代文：当时和诗人李商隐齐名，被人们称为温李。
English: At that time, he was as famous as the poet Li Shangyin and was known as Wen Li.

古文：才思艳丽，工于小赋。每入试，押官韵作赋。
现代文：他擅长号小赋，才思敏捷，用词美艳美丽。每次考试，按规定韵作赋。
English: He is good at small fu, quick-witted, and beautiful with words. Every exam, he makes fu according to the rules.

古文：凡八叉手而八韵成。多为邻铺假手，号曰救数人也。
现代文：他只需要叉八次手而八韵作成，速度很快，他经常为邻座的考生代作文章，人们送他外号救数人。
English: He only needs to make eight handshakes and eight rhymes. He is very fast. He often writes essays for the candidates sitting next to him. People have nicknamed him for saving several people.

古文：而士行有缺，搢绅薄之。
现代文：由于他不严格约束自己的言行，所以受到一些有身分的人的轻视。
English: Because he does not strictly control his words and deeds, he is despised by some people of status.

古文：李义山谓曰：近得一联句云，远比赵公，三十六年宰辅，未得偶句。
现代文：李义山对他说，我近来作了一联：远比赵公，三十六军宰辅。没有得到偶句。
English: Li Yishan said to him, "I recently composed a couplet: "Far superior to Zhao Gong, deputy commander of the Thirty-Six Army." I didn't get the coincidence.

古文：温曰：何不云，近同部令，二十四考中书。
现代文：温庭筠说，你怎么不对：近同郭令，二十四考中书。
English: Wen Tingyao said, "What's wrong with you? You are nearly the same as Guo Ling, and you have passed the 24th examination.

古文：宣宗尝试诗，上句有金步摇，未能对，遣求进士对之。庭筠乃以玉条脱续也。宣宗赏焉。
现代文：唐宣宗曾写有金步摇的句子，未能对出下句。收进士们对，温庭筠以玉条脱对上了，宣宗很赞赏。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty once wrote a sentence with a "golden step," but he couldn't get the next sentence right. The scholars were right, but Emperor Wenzhong got it right with a "jade bar," which was greatly appreciated by Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：又药有名白头翁，温以苍耳子对。
现代文：又有一药名白头翁，温庭筠以苍耳子为对，这样类似情况很多。
English: There is also a drug called Paektuon, and the counterpart of Wintergreen is Cang Erzi, so there are many similar cases.

古文：他皆此类也。宣帝爱唱菩萨蛮词，丞相令狐绹假其修撰，密进之，戒令勿他泄，而遽言于人，由是疏之。温亦有言云：中书内坐将军。讥相国无学也。
现代文：宣宗爱唱《菩萨蛮》词，丞相令狐绹叫温庭筠代他撰词。并告诉温不要泄露此事，温庭均却把这事说了，因此令狐绹便疏远了他，温庭筠也说过，中书省内坐将军，是讥讽那些宰相们没学问。
English: Xuan Zong loved to sing the words of "Bodhisattva" and the prime minister ordered the fox to call on Wen Tingtao to write the lyrics for him. He also told Wen not to leak the matter, but Wen Tingtao said the same thing, which alienated him from the fox. Wen Tingtao also said that the generals sitting in the Central Literature Department were mocking those prime ministers for their lack of knowledge.

古文：宣皇好微行，遇于逆旅，温不识龙颜，傲然而诘之曰：公非长史司马之流耶？
现代文：宣宗喜欢微服出行，有一次遇上了温庭均，温不认识皇帝，很傲慢地追问皇上说：你是长史司马之流的大官吗？
English: Xuan Zong liked to travel in micro-clothing. Once he met Wen Tingjun. Wen did not know the emperor. He asked the emperor very arrogantly, saying, "Are you a high-ranking official of the Long Shi Sima school?"

古文：帝曰：非也。
现代文：皇帝说，不是。
English: No, said the Emperor.

古文：又白：得非大参簿尉之类耶？
现代文：温又问，那你是大参簿尉之类的吧？
English: Wen asked again, "So you're a senior bookkeeper or something?"

古文：帝曰：非也。
现代文：皇上说，不是。
English: No, said the Emperor.

古文：谪为坊城尉。
现代文：因此，把温庭筠贬为坊城尉。
English: Therefore, Wen Tingyu was demoted to the rank of Fangcheng lieutenant.

古文：其制词曰：死门以德行为先，文章为末。尔既德行无取，文章何以补焉。
现代文：皇帝在诏书中说：读书人应以器德为重，文章为末，你这样的人，品德不可取，文章再好也是弥补不上的。
English: In his edict, the emperor said, "Readers should place importance on the quality of writing, not on the content. People like you are not good at writing, and no matter how good your writing is, it cannot make up for it.

古文：徒负不羁之才，罕有适时之用。竟流落而死也。
现代文：温庭筠负有不羁之才，没有得到机遇用他，最后竟流落而死。
English: Atsutomine was endowed with unbridled talent, did not get the opportunity to use it, and finally died.

古文：豳国公杜悰自西川除淮海，庭筠诣韦曲林氏林亭，留诗云：卓氏炉前金线柳，隋家堤畔锦帆风。
现代文：豳国公杜悰从西川调到淮海，温庭筠到了韦曲的林亭，写了一首诗：卓氏炉前金线柳，随家堤畔锦帆风。
English: Du Qun, Duke of Shandong, was transferred from the West River to the Huaihai Sea, and Wen Tingjun went to Lin Ting, Wei Qu, and wrote a poem: Zhuo's hearth is lined with golden willows, and the breeze along the banks of the dike is like a sail.

古文：贪为两地行霖雨，不见池莲照水红。
现代文：贪为两地行霖雨，不见池莲照水红。
English: Due to the rain in both places, the pond lilies are not bright red.

古文：豳公闻之，遗绢千匹。
现代文：豳公看到后，赏他绢布一千匹。
English: After seeing this, the Duke of Yan rewarded him with a thousand horses.

古文：吴兴沈徽云：温曾于江淮为亲槚楚，由是改名庭筠。
现代文：吴兴的沈徽说：温庭筠曾在江淮一带当过老师，因此改名庭筠。
English: Wu Xing's Shenhui said: Wen Tingyao once worked as a teacher in the Jianghuai area, so he changed his name to Tingyao.

古文：翌日，于帘前请庭筠曰：向来策名者，皆是文赋托于学士。
现代文：每年科举考试时，他常为人代作文章。侍郎沈询主持的一次考试中，为温庭筠单设了一个座位，不和其他考生相邻。
English: During the annual imperial examinations, he often wrote essays on behalf of others. During an examination presided over by the chamberlain Shen Ying, a seat was set aside for Wen Tingjun alone, not adjacent to other candidates.

古文：某今岁场中，并无假托，学士勉旃。
现代文：第二天，在帘前请温庭筠说：以前那些应举考试的人，都是托你代作诗文，我这次的考场上，没有人托你吧。希望你自我勉励吧。
English: The next day, in front of the curtain, I asked Wen Tingyao to say: In the past, those who had to take the exam asked you to write poems on their behalf. This time, no one asked you. I hope you will work hard.

古文：因遣之，由是不得意也。
现代文：把温庭筠打发走了，由此，更加不得意。
English: The fact that he sent Atsushi away made it all the more disappointing.

古文：李商隐
现代文：李商隐
English: Li Shangyin

古文：唐李商隐字义山，为彭阳公令狐楚从事。
现代文：唐时，李商隐，字义山。他在彭阳公令狐楚手下当从事。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Li Shangyin lived in Yishan. He worked under Pengyang Gongling Xuchu.

古文：彭阳之子绹，继有韦平之拜，假疏商隐，未尝展分。
现代文：彭阳公的儿子是令狐绹，自韦平拜在他的门下后，有些疏远李商隐。使他也无法施展自己的才华。
English: Pengyang Gong's son was Ling Xuchang. Since Wei Ping was under his tutelage, Li Shangyin was somewhat estranged from him, which made him unable to use his talent.

古文：重阳日。商隐诣宅，于厅事上留题。其略云：十年泉下无消息，九日樽前有所思。
现代文：重阳节那天，李商隐到他的家，在大厅上题了一首诗：十年泉下无消息，九日樽前有所思。
English: On the day of the Chung Yeung Festival, Li Shangyin went to his home and inscribed a poem in the hall: "For ten years, there has been no news from the spring, but on the ninth day, there is something to think about."

古文：郎君官重施行马，东阁无因许再窥。
现代文：郎君官重施行马，东阁无因许再窥。
English: With the reinstatement of his father-in-law, there is no reason not to revisit the East Pavilion.

古文：相国睹之，惭怅而已。乃扃闭此厅，终身不处也。
现代文：丞相令狐绹读过之后，颇感惭愧、怅然，于是把那个大厅锁起来了，再也没用过。
English: After the chancellor ordered the fox to read it, he was quite ashamed and shocked, so he locked the hall and never used it again.

古文：刘瑑
现代文：刘瑑
English: Liu Xuan

古文：唐刘瑑字子全。幼苦学，能属文，才藻优赡。
现代文：唐朝的刘瑑，字子全，幼年时就苦学，文章写得好，才思敏捷，词藻丰富。
English: Liu Ye of the Tang Dynasty was a complete writer. He studied hard at a young age, wrote well, was quick-witted, and had a rich vocabulary.

古文：大中初，为翰林学士。
现代文：唐宣宗大中初年时为翰林院学士。
English: He was a bachelor of Hanlin Academy in the first year of Tang Xuan Zong University.

古文：是时新复河湟，边上戎事稍繁。
现代文：当时刚刚收复了河湟一带的疆土，边境上战事频繁。
English: At that time, the territory around Hebei had just been recovered, and there were frequent battles on the border.

古文：会院中诸学士或多请告，瑑独当制。一日近草诏百函，笔不停缀，词理精当。
现代文：这时候，翰林院的学士们都请求去了边境，只有刘瑑一人起草文件，一天要起草一百多件诏书，笔总是不停，然而文章却是条理精当，词句妥贴。
English: At this time, all the bachelors of Hanlin Academy requested to go to the border. Only Liu Wei drafted the document. He had to draft more than a hundred edicts a day. The pen was always incessant, but the article was well organized and the words were appropriate.

古文：夜艾，帝复召至御前，令草喻天下制。
现代文：天亮时，皇帝把他召到面前，让他起草一份《喻天下制》。
English: At dawn, the emperor summoned him to his presence and asked him to draw up a copy of "Tu Tian Zhe Si."

古文：瑑濡毫抒思，顷刻而告就。迟明召对，帝大嘉赏。因而面赐金紫之服。
现代文：他润笔构思，一会儿写完了，天亮时告诉了皇上，皇帝大加赞赏，当面赐他金紫衣。
English: He rubbed his pen on the idea, wrote it down in a few moments, and told the emperor about it at dawn. The emperor was very appreciative and gave him a gold and purple robe in person.

古文：瑑以文学受知，不数年，卒至大用。
现代文：刘瑑以他的文章而知名，没几年，升为重要的官职。
English: Liu Wei, known for his articles, was promoted to an important post within a few years.

古文：其告喻制曰：自昔皇王之有国也，何尝不文以守成，武以集事，参诸二柄，归于大宁。
现代文：他起草的那份《喻天下制》是这样写的：自从当年皇帝建国以来，都是以文守业，以武卫国，只有这两项齐备，国家才能安宁。
English: The copy of "Metaphysics of the State" that he drafted was written as follows: Since the founding of the country by the emperor of that year, it has been based on the principle of keeping the law and defending the country by force of arms. Only when these two things are in place can the country be at peace.

古文：朕猥荷丕图，思弘景业。
现代文：继承大业以来，常常想到弘道至景龙年间的大乱，时常警惕。
English: Since inheriting the great cause, I have often thought of the great turmoil between Hongdao and Jinglong, and I am always vigilant.

古文：朝廷下议，皆亦听其直词。尽以不生边事为永图，且守旧地为明理。
现代文：四年多来，每当想到宽广辽阔的河湟疆土，在天宝末年，边境少数民族乘国内多难，无力抵抗之机，纵马进犯，接近京郊，将近十年。
English: For more than four years, whenever I think of the vast expanse of the Hebei territory, in the last years of Tianbao, the border ethnic minorities took advantage of the difficulties in the country and the inability to resist the opportunity to attack, close to the outskirts of Beijing, for nearly ten years.

古文：荏苒于是，收复无由。今者天地储祥，祖宗垂瑑，将士等栉沐风雨，暴露效野。
现代文：从那时到现在，将近一百年了，在这期间，当官的贡献自己的才能，竭心尽力，朝廷中的大事，也能听取下面的直谏，都是为了保卫国家的疆土，使边境永保安宁。时间渐渐过去，失去的土地仍然没有收复。
English: From then until now, nearly a hundred years have passed, during which the officials have contributed their talents and made every effort, the major events in the court, and the direct orders from below, are all to defend the country's territory and keep the border safe and peaceful. Time has passed, and the lost land has still not been recovered.

古文：披荆榛而刀斗夜严，出豺狼而穹庐晓破。
现代文：现在是天地呈祥，祖宗保佑，将士们栉风沐雨，露宿郊野，披斩暂棘，昼夜防守，赶走豺狼，收复失地。
English: Now is the auspicious time in heaven and earth, blessed by the ancestors, the generals are braving the wind and rain, camping in the countryside, overcoming temporary difficulties, defending day and night, driving away the jackals, and recovering the lost land.

古文：动皆如意，古无与京。念此诚勤，宜加宠赏。
现代文：行动听从皇帝的旨意，是自古以来无法比的，每当想到将士们忠诚、勤勉的时候，应该给予奖赏。
English: The act of obeying the emperor's will has been incomparable since ancient times. Whenever we think of soldiers who are loyal and diligent, we should reward them.

古文：词不多载。
现代文：词赋不便再多写它了。
English: It's not worth writing about it any more.

古文：郑畋
现代文：郑畋
English: Zheng Wei

古文：马嵬佛堂，杨妃缢所。迩后才士经过，赋咏以道其幽怨者，不可胜纪。
现代文：马嵬坡佛堂，是杨贵妃缢死的地方，以后许多文人墨客经过这里时，都题诗作赋，抒发自己的幽怨心情，有很多很多。
English: Ma'anpo Buddhist Temple is the place where Yang Guifei died. Later, when many writers and artists passed by here, they all wrote poems to express their resentment.

古文：皆以翠翘香钿，委于尘泥，红凄碧怨，令人伤悲。虽调苦词清，无逃此意也。
现代文：其内容多是怜香惜玉，语调凄怨，令人悲伤。虽然有的在遣词造句上，下过一番苦功夫，但其内容也逃不出这个意思。
English: Most of the content is sentimental, with a plaintive, mournful tone. Although some of the words and sentences have been painstakingly composed, the content cannot escape this meaning.

古文：丞相郑畋为凤翔从事日，题诗曰：肃宗回马杨妃死，云雨虽亡日月新。
现代文：丞相郑畋当年在凤翔当从事的时候，曾题过一首诗：肃宗回马杨妃死，云雨虽亡日月新。
English: When he was engaged in Fengxiangdan that year, the prime minister Zheng He once wrote a poem: Su Zong Hui Ma Yangfei died, although it was cloudy and rainy, her death was new every day.

古文：终是圣朝天子事，景阳宫井又何人。
现代文：终是圣朝天子事，景阳宫井又何人。
English: In the end, it is a matter of the Holy Son of Heaven, Jingyang Miyai and others.

古文：观者以为真辅国之句
现代文：读过这首诗的人都认为，这才是真正关心国家大事的诗作。
English: People who have read this poem think that this is a poem that really cares about national affairs.

古文：司空图
现代文：司空图
English: Skytree from above

古文：唐晋国公裴度讨淮西，题名于华岳庙之阙门。
现代文：唐时，晋国公裴度征讨淮西时，把他的名字题写在华岳庙的阙门上。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Baidu, the prince of Jin, was soliciting Huaxi, he inscribed his name on the gate of Huayu Temple.

古文：后司空图题诗纪之曰：岳前大队赴淮西，从此中原息战鼙。
现代文：后来司空图为了纪念此事，题诗一首：岳前大队赴淮西，从此中原息战鼙。
English: Later, in order to commemorate this event, Siku Tu wrote a poem: Yuezen Battalion went to Huaxi, and since then, Zhongyuan has been at war.

古文：石阙莫教苔藓上，分明认取晋公题。
现代文：石阙莫教苔藓上，分明认取晋公题。
English: Shi Hao can not teach moss, clearly recognize Jin Gongzai.

古文：高蟾
现代文：高蟾
English: Takatsuki

古文：唐高蟾诗思虽清，务为奇险，意疏理寡，实风雅之罪人。
现代文：唐时，高蟾的诗，思路虽然清新，但在形式上追求奇险，寓意疏淡，内涵寡薄，是诗坛上的罪人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Gao Yao's poems, although the ideas were fresh, pursued the form of adventure, the implication was weak, and the connotation was thin. Gao Yao was a sinner on the poetry altar.

古文：薛能谓人曰：倘见此公，欲赠其掌。
现代文：诗人薛能曾对人说过，我若是见到高蟾，一定赏他几个耳光子。
English: The poet Xue Neng once said to someone that if I saw Gao Yao, I would definitely give him a few slaps.

古文：然而落第诗曰：天上碧桃和露种，日边红杏倚云栽。
现代文：然而高蟾的《落第诗》：天上碧桃和露种，日边红杏倚云栽。
English: However, Gao Gan's "Ladhi Poem": the sky is peach and dew, and the sun is red apricot.

古文：芙蓉生在秋江上，不向东风怨未开。
现代文：芙蓉生在秋江上，不向东风怨未开。
English: Hibiscus was born on the Aki River, and never complained to the east wind.

古文：盖守寒素之分，无躁竞之心，公卿间许之。
现代文：这诗中所表现出的安于本分，毫无胁肩谄笑的媚态，不卑不亢的精神，得到了一些公卿的赞许。
English: The spirit of being at ease with one's duty, not being coy or sneaky, and not being unworthy, which is shown in this poem, has won the approval of some nobles.

古文：先是胡曾有诗云：翰苑何曾休嫁女，文昌早晚罢生儿。
现代文：先是胡曾有诗：翰苑何曾休嫁女，文昌早晚罢生儿。
English: First, there is a poem by Hu Zeng: Han Yuan once divorced his wife, and Wen Chang had a child.

古文：上林新桂年年发，不许平人折一枝。
现代文：上林新桂年年发，不许平人折一枝。
English: Shanglin New Gui is issued every year, and ordinary people are not allowed to fold a branch.

古文：罗隐亦多怨刺，当路子弟忌之，由是蟾独策名也。
现代文：罗隐也多有指责，一些子弟也很忌恨他。然而高蟾却独独考中。
English: Luo Yin also had a lot of criticism, and some of his children also hated him. However, Gao Yao was in the middle of the examination.

古文：前辈李贺歌篇，逸才奇险。
现代文：前辈李贺的诗，想象奇特，有人曾说他的诗没有一定的章法。
English: The poetry of Li He, a predecessor, has a peculiar imagination. Some people once said that his poetry did not have a certain style.

古文：虽然，尝疑其无理。杜牧有言：长吉若使稍加其理，即奴仆命骚人可也。
现代文：杜牧说过，长吉若是按一定形式去写诗，那么一般的奴仆也能成为诗人了。
English: Dumu said that if Changji wrote poems according to a certain form, then an ordinary servant could also become a poet.

古文：是知通论不相远也。
现代文：这样的认识和大家的评论是差不多的。
English: This understanding and everyone's comments are almost the same.

