古文：周穆王周灵王王子乔方丈山昆吾山汉太上皇汉武帝轻玉罄李夫人吉光裘西毒国桂宫西胡渠王汉宣帝刘表
现代文：周穆王周灵王王子乔方丈山昆吾山汉太上皇汉武帝轻玉罄李夫人吉光裘西毒国桂宫西胡渠王汉宣帝刘表
English: Zhou Mu Wang, Zhou Ling Wang, Prince Qiao, Abbot of Mount Kunwu, Mountain Han, Empress Dowager of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, Light Jade of the Li Dynasty, Lady Jiguang of the Jiu Dynasty, Poisoned Guo Gui Palace, West Hucu King of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Xuan of the Han Dynasty, Liu Watch

古文：周穆王周穆王时，西戎献玉杯，光照一室。
现代文：周穆王周穆王时，西戎国进献一只玉杯。这只玉杯发出的光，能将满室照亮。
English: In the reign of King Zhou Mu, the kingdom of Si Rong presented a jade cup. The light emitted by this jade cup could illuminate an entire room.

古文：置杯于中庭，明日水满。
现代文：将玉杯放在庭院中，第二天就能出现满满一杯的水。
English: If you place a jade cup in the courtyard, a full cup of water will appear the next day.

古文：杯香而甘美，斯仙人之器也。
现代文：这只玉杯能发散出甘美的香气，是一只仙人的器皿啊！
English: This jade cup can emit a sweet aroma, it is a celestial vessel!

古文：周灵王
现代文：周灵王
English: Zhou Lingwang

古文：周灵王二十三年起昆阳台。
现代文：周灵王二十三年，修造成昆阳台。
English: In the 23rd year of King Zhou Ling's reign, the Kunyang Terrace was built.

古文：渠胥国来献玉骆驼高五尺，琥珀凤凰高六尺，火齐镜高三尺，暗中视物如昼，向镜则影应声。
现代文：有渠胥国的使臣来朝贺，进献一尊玉石骆驼，五尺高。
English: Some envoys from Goguryeo came to pay their respects, presenting a five-foot-tall jade camel.

古文：周人见之如神。灵王末，不知所之。
现代文：周灵王死后，这些神物都不知道哪里去了。
English: After the death of King Zhou Ling, these sacred objects did not know where to go.

古文：王子乔
现代文：王子乔
English: Prince Joe

古文：王子乔墓在京陵，战国时，有人盗发之。
现代文：周灵王的太子乔的陵墓，在周室皇陵内。战国时，有盗墓人将它挖开。
English: The mausoleum of Zhou Ling Wang's Prince Qiao is in the Zhou imperial mausoleum. During the Warring States period, a grave robber dug it up.

古文：都无见，惟有一剑悬在圹中。
现代文：墓里面什么也没有，只有一柄宝剑悬挂在墓穴中。
English: There was nothing inside the tomb, only a sword hanging in the tomb.

古文：欲取而剑作龙虎之声，遂不敢近。
现代文：盗墓人想将宝剑取走，宝剑立即发出龙吟虎啸的声音，吓得盗墓人不敢取。
English: The grave robber wanted to take the sword away, but the sword immediately emitted the sound of dragons chanting and tigers howling. The grave robber was so scared that he did not dare to take it.

古文：俄而径飞上天。
现代文：过了一会儿，宝剑自己飞上天去。
English: After a while, the sword flew into the sky on its own.

古文：《神仙经》云：真人去世，多以剑代。
现代文：《神仙经》上说：真人仙世以后，多数都用剑来替代他葬入坟墓。
English: "The Immortal Classic" says: After the Immortal Age, most people used a sword to replace him and buried him in a grave.

古文：五百年后，剑亦能灵化。
现代文：过了五百年，代葬的宝剑也能得道升仙。
English: After five hundred years, the buried sword can also be elevated to the realm of immortality.

古文：此其验也。
现代文：王子乔墓中的这柄宝剑，就是一个证明啊。
English: This sword in Prince Joe's tomb is proof of that.

古文：方丈山
现代文：方丈山
English: Mount Hojo

古文：方丈山一名峦稚。
现代文：方丈山，又名峦稚。
English: Mount Hojo, also known as Mt.

古文：东有龙场千里，玉瑶为林。
现代文：山东面有龙场千里，龙场上长着玉瑶林。
English: In the east of Shandong, there are thousands of dragon farms, with jade forests growing on the dragon farms.

古文：龙常斗此处，膏血如流水。
现代文：龙经常在这里争斗，膏血流得象水一样。
English: Dragons often fight here, and blood flows like water.

古文：膏色黑者，著地坚凝如漆，而有紫光，可为宝器。
现代文：流在地上呈黑色，凝固后坚硬如漆，泛着紫光，可用它来做宝器。
English: Flowing on the ground is black, solidified and hard as paint, covered with purple light, it can be used to make a treasure.

古文：昆吾山
现代文：昆吾山
English: Mount Kunwu

古文：昆吾山，其下多赤金，色如火。
现代文：昆吾山，山里面埋藏着丰富的赤金，颜色如火。
English: Kunwushan, rich red gold is buried in the mountain, the color is like fire.

古文：昔黄帝伐蚩尤，陈兵于此地。掘深百丈，犹未及泉，惟见火光如星。
现代文：从前黄帝征伐蚩尤，在这里驻扎军队，向地下挖了一百多丈深，也没有找到泉水，只见里面有东西象火星一样闪闪发光。
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor conquered and garrisoned Yuyu, and stationed his army here. He dug more than a hundred meters deep into the ground, but did not find a spring. Instead, he saw something inside that shone like the planet Mars.

古文：地中多丹，炼石为铜。
现代文：昆吾山的地底下多丹矿。将丹矿石采上来，可以炼出铜。
English: The underground Dodan mine in Mount Kunwu. Copper can be extracted from the ore.

古文：铜色青而利，泉色赤。
现代文：铜的颜色是青色的，非常坚利。
English: The colour of copper is blue and it is very hard.

古文：山草木皆劲利，土亦刚而精。
现代文：这里的泉水都是红色的，山上的草木都长得有劲而且坚利。山上的土刚硬、精沉。
English: The springs here are all red, the plants on the mountain are vigorous and strong, and the soil on the mountain is hard and dense.

古文：至越王句践，使工人以白牛马祠昆吾之神。
现代文：到了战国时期，越王勾践派工匠带着白牛、白马上山，去祭祀昆吾神。
English: During the Warring States period, King Gojang of Yue sent craftsmen with white oxen and white horses up the mountain to worship the god Kunw.

古文：采金铸之，以成八剑。
现代文：之后，开采山中的矿石，经过冶炼，铸成八只宝剑。
English: After that, the ore in the mountain was mined, smelted and cast into eight swords.

古文：一名掩日，以之指日则光昼暗。
现代文：第一只宝剑叫掩日，用它指着太阳，太阳光立即暗下来。
English: The first sword is called "Covering the Sun" and is used to point at the sun, which immediately goes dark.

古文：金阴物也，阴盛则阳灭。二名断水，以之划水，开而即不合。
现代文：金，是阴物，阴盛则阳灭，第二只宝剑叫断水，用它划水，立即将水划开，不能合上。
English: Gold is yin, yin is sheng and yang is death. The second sword is called water breaking. Use it to draw water and immediately draw the water apart. It cannot be closed.

古文：三名转魄，以之指月，则蟾兔为之侧转。
现代文：第三只宝剑叫转魄，用它指向月亮，月亮上面的金蟾和玉兔随着它转动。
English: The third sword is called the turning point, and it is used to point at the moon, and the gold dragonfly and the jade rabbit on the moon rotate with it.

古文：四名悬翦，飞鸟游虫，遇触其刃，如斩截焉。
现代文：第四只宝剑叫悬翦，飞鸟游虫碰上它，立即被折成两断。
English: The fourth sword is called the Hanging Kite. When a bird or insect bumps into it, it is immediately broken in two.

古文：五名惊鲵，以之泛海，则鲸鲵为之深入。
现代文：第五只宝剑叫惊鲵，用它来搅动海水，长鲸巨鲵都恐惧得钻入海底。
English: The fifth sword is called the Dreadnought. It is used to stir up the sea water, and the fin whales are so scared that they dive into the ocean floor.

古文：六名灭魂，挟之夜行，不逢魑魅。
现代文：第六只宝剑叫灭魂，持着它夜间行路，鬼魅躲得你远远的。
English: The sixth sword is called the Soul Eater. If you travel at night with it, the ghosts will stay away from you.

古文：七名却邪，有妖魅者，见之则止。
现代文：第七只宝剑叫却邪，哪地方出了妖魅鬼怪，将它放在那儿，立刻妖魅就不来了。
English: The seventh sword is called the evil spirit. Wherever the evil spirit appears, put it there, and the evil spirit will immediately disappear.

古文：八名真刚，以之切玉断金，如刻削土木矣。
现代文：第八只宝剑叫真刚，用它来切玉断金，如同刻木削土一样。
English: The eighth sword is called Zhengang, and it is used to cut the jade and break the gold, just like chopping wood and cutting soil.

古文：以应八方之气铸之者。
现代文：以上八只宝剑，在铸造中，工匠们感应八方的精气炼铸而成。
English: In the casting of the above eight swords, the craftsmen were inspired by the essence of the eight sides.

古文：汉太上皇
现代文：汉太上皇
English: The Emperor of the Han Dynasty

古文：汉太上皇微时，常佩一刀长三尺。
现代文：汉高祖刘邦的父亲，当年未显贵时，身边经常佩带一把刀，长三尺，上面刻有铭文。
English: Henkel's ancestor Liu Bang's father, when he was not prominent, often carried around a knife, three feet long, with an inscription on it.

古文：上有铭，其字虽难识，疑是殷高宗伐鬼方时，作此物也。
现代文：这些铭文虽然很难认识，但是怀疑这把刀很可能是殷商时期高宗征伐鬼方国时铸造的。
English: Although these inscriptions are difficult to recognize, it is suspected that this sword was probably cast during the conquest of the Ghost Country by Gaozong in the Yin Shang period.

古文：太上皇游丰沛山泽中，穷谷里有人欧冶铸。
现代文：一次，刘邦的父亲去丰沛山泽中，看到山谷里有人在冶炼、打造器具。
English: Once, Liu Bang's father went to the Fengpei Mountains and saw people smelting and making utensils in the valley.

古文：上皇息其傍，问曰：此铸何器？
现代文：刘邦的父亲在旁边歇息，问道：你们在铸造什么器具？
English: Liu Bang's father was resting nearby and asked, "What kind of equipment are you casting?"

古文：工人笑而答曰：为天子铸剑，勿泄言。
现代文：工匠们笑着回答道：我们在为天子铸剑。
English: The craftsmen replied with a smile, "We are making a sword for the Son of Heaven."

古文：上皇谓为戏言，了无疑色。
现代文：不要对外面的人说哟！刘父认为这是笑谈，一点也未感到惊异。
English: Don't say yo to people outside! Father Liu thought it was a joke and wasn't surprised at all.

古文：工曰：今所铸铁，钢砺难成。
现代文：工匠们说：我们现在用的铸铁，怎么冶炼打造都很难将它铸成剑。
English: The craftsmen said: The cast iron we use now is difficult to make into a sword no matter how it is smelted.

古文：若得翁腰间佩刀，杂而冶之，即成神器，可以克定天下。
现代文：如果将老汉你身边佩的这把刀投放到炉中一块儿冶炼，铸造出来的肯定是神剑，可以用它来平定天下。
English: If you put this knife worn by the old man next to you into the furnace and smelt it together, the cast will definitely be a divine sword, which can be used to pacify the world.

古文：星精为辅佐，以歼三猾。
现代文：这是用天上的星辰的精气为辅佐，完全可以歼灭三猾。
English: This is assisted by the essence of the stars in the sky, which can completely annihilate the three cunning.

古文：水衰火盛，此为异兆也。
现代文：水衰火盛，这是世兆啊。
English: It's a sign of the times.

古文：上皇曰：余有此物，名为匕首，其利难俦。
现代文：刘父说：我这把刀，叫匕首。它特别锋利，是任何刀剑不能相比的。
English: Father Liu said, "This knife of mine is called a dagger. It is extremely sharp and cannot be compared to any sword.

古文：水断虬龙，陆斩虎兕。
现代文：在水中可以折断虬龙，在陆上可以刺杀猛虎与犀牛。
English: In the water you can break a dragon, on land you can kill a tiger and a rhinoceros.

古文：魑魅魍魉，莫难逢之。
现代文：妖魔鬼怪都敌挡不了它。
English: No demon or monster can stand against it.

古文：削玉镌金，其刃不卷。
现代文：而且刻金削玉，它的利刃一点也不卷。
English: Moreover, its sharp cutting edge does not curl at all.

古文：工人曰：若不得此匕首以和铸，虽欧冶专精，越工砥锷，终为鄙器。
现代文：工匠们说：如果得不到你这把匕首跟现在炉中的这些铁在一块冶炼，尽管冶炼打制得再精致，让最好的越工来磨刃，也终归是件粗鄙的凡品。
English: The craftsmen said, "If you don't get this dagger of yours smelted in one piece with these irons in the furnace, no matter how refined the smelting, if you let the best craftsman grind the blade, it will still be a vulgar and ordinary product."

古文：上皇即解腰间匕首，以投于炉中。
现代文：刘父听到这里立即从腰间解下匕首，投入熊熊燃烧的炉火中。
English: Hearing this, Father Liu immediately unsheathed the dagger from his waist and threw it into the blazing fire.

古文：俄而烟焰冲天，日为之昼暗。
现代文：不一会儿，炉火挟烟冲天而起，天上的太阳也昏暗。
English: In a short time, the fire and smoke rose into the sky, and the sun in the sky also dimmed.

古文：及乎剑成，杀三牲衅祭之。
现代文：待到宝剑冶造成了，工匠们宰杀猪、牛、羊三牲。用三牲的血涂剑祭祀。
English: After the sword was forged, the craftsmen slaughtered three animals, a pig, a cow, and a sheep, and used the blood of the three animals to paint the sword as a sacrifice.

古文：铸工问上皇：何时得此匕首。
现代文：工匠们问刘父：老汉，你什么时候得到这把利刀？
English: The craftsmen asked Father Liu: Old man, when did you get this sharp knife?

古文：曰：秦昭襄王之时，余行，逢一野人于路。
现代文：刘父说：昭襄王时，我有一次出行，途中遇到一个野人，将这把刀送给我。
English: Father Liu said, "When I was in Zhaoxiang, I once went on a trip, and on the way I met a wild man who gave me this knife.

古文：授余云： 殷时灵物，世世相传。
现代文：并说 这是殷商时期的灵物，希望你能将它世代相传。
English: and said, "This is a spiritual object from the Shang Dynasty. I hope you can pass it down from generation to generation."

古文：上有古书，记其年月。
现代文：它上面刻有古铭文，记着这把灵刀铸造的年月。
English: It is engraved with an ancient inscription, which records the year in which the sword was cast.

古文：及剑成，工人规之，其铭面存，叶前疑也。
现代文：说到这里，工匠们将新铸造的宝剑拿在手中仔细察看，原来匕首上的铭文还存在，和先前差不多。
English: At this point, the craftsmen took the newly minted sword in their hands and carefully examined it. The inscription on the original dagger was still there, almost the same as before.

古文：工人即持剑授上皇，上皇以赐高祖。
现代文：于是，工匠们当即将这把宝剑授给刘父。后来，刘父将这把宝剑传授给刘邦。
English: As a result, the craftsmen had to give this sword to Father Liu, who later passed it on to Liu Bang.

古文：高祖长佩于身，以歼三猾。
现代文：刘邦佩用这把宝剑歼灭三猾，平定了天下，建立汉朝。
English: Liu Bangpei used this sword to annihilate the Three Cunning Men, pacify the world, and establish the Han Dynasty.

古文：及天下已定，授吕后，藏于宝库之中。
现代文：后来，刘邦又将这把宝剑传授给吕后。吕后将它藏在宝库中。
English: Later, Liu Bang gave the sword to Queen Lyu, who hid it in her treasure house.

古文：守藏者见白气如云，出于户外，如龙蛇，改其库名曰灵金藏。及诸吕擅权，白气亦灭。
现代文：守护库房的士兵发现一道白气如云。从库房里冲出，直上云天，状如龙蛇。因此改库房的名字为灵金藏到了诸吕独揽大权时，白气也没有了。
English: The soldiers guarding the storehouse found a white gas like a cloud. It rushed out of the storehouse, straight up to the sky, shaped like a dragon snake. Therefore, when the name of the storehouse was changed to Lingjin Hiding to Zhulü to monopolize power, there was no white gas.

古文：及惠帝即位，以此库贮禁兵器，改曰灵金内府。
现代文：到了汉惠帝登极继位后，用这座库房贮放宫中御用武器，改名为灵金内府。
English: After Emperor Han Hui ascended to the throne, he used this warehouse to store the palace's official weapons and renamed it Lingjinnaifu.

古文：又汉帝相传以秦王子婴所奉白玉玺，高祖斩白蛇剑。
现代文：又：相传汉帝将秦王子婴奉献的白玉玺、高祖斩白蛇用的剑这两件宝物，世代相传。
English: Also: According to legend, the two treasures, the white jade scepter that Emperor Han dedicated to Prince Qin and the sword used by Gao Zu to cut the white snake, have been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：剑上皆用七采珠九华玉以为饰，杂厕五色琉璃为剑匣。
现代文：剑上镶嵌的都是七彩珠、九华玉，并用五色琉璃杂陈在一起镶嵌剑匣。
English: The sword is inlaid with seven-coloured beads and nine-coloured beads, and the scabbard is inlaid with five-coloured glazed beads.

古文：剑在室中其光景犹照于外，与挺剑不殊十二年一加磨龙，刃上常若霜雪。
现代文：这把宝剑放在室内自己会发光，一直射到室外，跟刺剑一样。这把宝剑十二年磨一次，剑刃上总象布着一层霜雪似的。
English: This sword shines by itself when placed indoors, and shines outside, just like a thrusting sword. This sword is sharpened once every twelve years, and the blade always seems to be covered with a layer of frost and snow.

古文：开匣板鞘，辄有风气，光彩射人。
现代文：打开剑匣板鞘，就会产生一股冷风寒气，而且光彩射人。
English: Open the scabbard sheath, it will produce a cold wind and cold air, and it will shoot brilliantly.

古文：汉武帝
现代文：汉武帝
English: Emperor Hanwu

古文：孙氏《应瑞图》云：神鼎者文质精也。
现代文：孙氏《应瑞图》上说：神鼎的文理质的制作得非常精致。
English: Mr. Sun said, "The production of the literary and intellectual quality of Shending is very exquisite.

古文：知吉凶，知存亡。能轻能重，能息能行。
现代文：它能够预兆吉凶、存亡，能够变轻也能变重，能停住不动，能自行移走。
English: It can foreshadow good and bad luck, survive and die, can become lighter or heavier, can stop moving, and can move away on its own.

古文：不灼自沸，不汲自满，中生五味。
现代文：它能不烧烤里面的水自己沸起来，不住里放水，里面就有满满一下水。
English: It can boil the water inside the barbecue by itself, and it does not need to be filled with water, so there is plenty of water inside.

古文：王者兴则出，衰则去。
现代文：它还能自行生出酸、甜、苦、辣、咸五种气味。
English: It can also produce five kinds of odors: sour, sweet, bitter, spicy and salty.

古文：《说苑》云：孝武时，汾阴人得宝鼎，献之甘泉宫，群臣毕贺。
现代文：当有道明君产生时，就出现在世上；当这个王国衰败的时候，它又自行离去隐匿起来。《说苑》上说：汉武帝时，汾阴人得到这只宝鼎，进献甘泉宫。文武百官都来祝贺。
English: When a Taoist prince was born, he appeared in the world; when this kingdom was in decline, it went away of its own accord and went into hiding. "Sayuan" said: When Emperor Han Wu, the Jinyin people got this treasure and presented it to Ganquan Palace. All the civil and military officials came to congratulate.

古文：上寿曰：陛下得周鼎。
现代文：上寿说： 皇上得到的是周鼎。
English: Shang Shou said, "What the emperor got was Zhou Ding.

古文：侍中吾丘寿王曰：非周鼎。
现代文：侍中吾丘说： 这不是周鼎。
English: Wook, the chamberlain, said, "This is not Zhou Ding."

古文：上召问之：有说则生，无说则死。
现代文：寿王说： 你能说出为什么不是周鼎的道理就让你活着，否则，说不出道理来，我就处死你。
English: Shouwang said, "If you can tell me why you should be allowed to live if it is not Zhou Ding's reason, otherwise, if you cannot tell me the reason, I will execute you."

古文：寿王对曰：周德者，始于天授，成于文武，显于周公。
现代文：寿王回答说： 周朝的德政由上天授给它开始，由文、武二王将这项伟业干成了，而周公又将它发展了。
English: King Shou replied, "The Zhou Dynasty began with the virtuous governance bestowed upon it by Heaven. King Wen and King Wu II accomplished this great undertaking, and King Zhou developed it further.

古文：德泽上畅于天，下漏三泉。
现代文：周朝的德政，上可以畅达至天，下可通流三泉。
English: The German government of the Zhou Dynasty, the upper can reach the sky, and the lower can flow through the three springs.

古文：上天报应，鼎为周出。
现代文：这是上天的意旨，因此宝鼎在周朝时就自行出现在世间。
English: This is God's will, so Baoding appeared spontaneously in the world during the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：今汉继周，德□显行，六合和同，至陛下之身而逾盛，天瑞并至。
现代文：现在，我汉朝高祖皇帝继周朝之后，德政昭明，天下六合归一。皇上您继位后国运日盛，各种祥瑞一同出现。
English: Now, I, Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, after the Zhou Dynasty, after the German Democratic Republic, the world is six in one. After your accession to the throne, the national movement is flourishing, and all kinds of auspicious signs appear together.

古文：昔秦始皇亲求鼎于彭城而不得，天昭有德，神宝自至。
现代文：从前，秦始皇亲自到彭城去寻找宝鼎而没有得到，现在上天将它昭示给有德的君王，宝鼎自行出现让皇上得到它。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Shihuang personally went to Pengcheng to look for Baoding and did not get it. Now the heavens will show it to the virtuous king. Baoding will appear on its own to let the emperor get it.

古文：此天所以遗汉，乃汉鼎，非周鼎也。
现代文：这是上天馈赠给我汉朝的，因此是汉鼎，而不是周鼎。武帝听了说： 讲的好！ 
English: This was a gift from heaven to me from the Han Dynasty, so it is Han Ding, not Zhou Ding. Emperor Wu listened and said, "That's good to hear!

古文：上曰：善。魏文帝《典论》亦云：墨子曰，昔夏后启使飞廉折金，以精神于昆吾。
现代文：魏文帝《典论》上说：墨子说： 从前，夏后启派大臣飞廉到昆吾山掘采金矿石，这种精神感动了昆吾神，让他采到了矿石。
English: Wei Wendi said in the "Analects": Mozi said: Once upon a time, Xiaoqiao sent the minister Fei Lian to Kunwushan to mine gold ore. This spirit moved Kunwushin and allowed him to mine ore.

古文：使翁乙灼自若之龟，鼎成。
现代文：夏后启又让翁乙用神龟为柴，将这些矿石冶炼铸成宝鼎。
English: Later that summer, he asked Weng Yi to smelt these ores with tortoise wood and cast them into Baoding.

古文：四定而方，不灼自烹，不举自灭，不迁自行。《拾遗录》云：周末大乱，九鼎飞入天池。
现代文：这只宝鼎呈方形，下面有四足站地。不用烧火可以自行烹煮东西；不用将它从火上移开，火自行息灭；不搬挪它可以自行移动 《拾遗录》上说：周朝末年，天下大乱，九只宝鼎自行飞走没入天池。
English: This Baoding is square-shaped, with a four-legged stand underneath. It can cook things on its own without a fire; it does not need to be removed from the fire, the fire will extinguish itself; it can move on its own without being moved. According to "Picking Up the Bodies," at the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the world was in turmoil, and nine Baoding flew away on their own and sank into the Celestial Pool.

古文：《末世书论》云，入泗水，声转谬焉。
现代文：《末世书论》上说：宝鼎落入泗水中，落时宝鼎发出哭泣声。
English: "Book of the Last Days" said: Baoding fell into the turbid water, and Baoding cried when it fell.

古文：轻玉磬
现代文：轻玉磬
English: Light jade bracelet

古文：汉武帝起招仙阁于甘泉宫西，其上悬浮金轻玉之磬。
现代文：汉武帝在甘泉宫西侧建造了一座招仙阁，阁上面悬挂着浮金轻玉磬。
English: Emperor Hanwu built a Zhaoxian Pavilion on the west side of the Ganquan Palace. Above the pavilion hangs a floating gold and light jade cocoon.

古文：浮金者，自浮水上。轻玉者，其质贞明而轻也。
现代文：所谓浮金，是说它能自浮水上；所谓轻玉，是说它的质的透明而又比一般的玉石轻。
English: The so-called floating gold means that it can float on water; the so-called light jade means that its quality is transparent and lighter than ordinary jade.

古文：李夫人
现代文：李夫人
English: Mrs. Lee

古文：汉武帝过李夫人，就取玉簪拴头。
现代文：汉武帝喜欢李夫人，就用玉簪给她簪头发。
English: Emperor Hanwu liked Mrs. Li, so he gave her a gong to trim her hair.

古文：自此宫人搔头皆用玉，为之贵焉。
现代文：从此，后宫中的嫔妃们梳理头发都用玉饰，认为这是高贵身份的一种标志。
English: From then on, the concubines in the harem combed their hair with jade ornaments, believing that this was a sign of noble status.

古文：夫以象牙为篦，赐李夫人。
现代文：汉武帝又拿象牙让工匠制成篦梳，赏赐给李夫人。
English: Emperor Hanwu had the ivory tusk made into a comb by a craftsman and presented it to Lady Li.

古文：吉光裘
现代文：吉光裘
English: Yoshimitsu Kyo

古文：汉武帝时，西成献吉光裘。入水数日不濡，入火不焦。
现代文：汉武帝时，西成国进献一件吉光裘，放在水中处理政事几天不湿，放在火中烧烤不焦。
English: When Emperor Hanwu was in power, Xi Chengguo presented a piece of jiguang qiu, which could be kept in water for a few days to prevent it from getting wet, and could be placed in a fire to prevent it from getting burnt.

古文：元凤不道之时服此裘，以视朝焉。
现代文：汉武帝有时穿着吉光裘上朝。西毒国
English: Emperor Hanwu sometimes wore the Jiguang Ge to the imperial court.

古文：西毒国汉武帝时，西毒国献连环羁。
现代文：汉武帝时，西毒国进献连环马络头。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, the Western Han Dynasty presented a series of horses with heads.

古文：皆以白玉作之，玛瑙石为勒，白光琉璃为鞍。
现代文：整个络头都用白玉石制做的，用玛瑙做的勒嚼，用白光琉璃做的马鞍。
English: The entire head is made of white jade, the bridle is made of agate, and the saddle is made of white glaze.

古文：安在暗室中，尝照十余丈，其光如昼。
现代文：将它放在暗室中，可以照亮十多丈远，它发出的光照得室内如同白日。
English: If it is placed in a dark room, it can illuminate more than ten feet away, and the light it emits illuminates the room like daylight.

古文：桂宫
现代文：桂宫
English: Katsura Palace

古文：汉武帝为七宝床、杂宝案、杂宝屏风、杂宝帐，设于桂宫。
现代文：汉武帝让人给他制做一张七宝床，还有用各种珠宝镶嵌的宝案、宝屏风、宝帐，将它们陈设在桂宫。
English: Emperor Hanwu had a seven-treasure bed made for him, as well as treasure cases, screens and ledgers inlaid with all kinds of jewels, which were displayed in the Guigu Palace.

古文：时人谓之四宝宫。
现代文：当时人称桂宫为四宝宫。
English: At that time, people called Katsura Palace the Four Treasures Palace.

古文：西胡渠王
现代文：西胡渠王
English: The King of West Hukou

古文：汉武帝冢裹，先有玉箱瑶杖各一，是西胡渠王所献。
现代文：后来，有人在扶风郿市上买到这两件宝物。过去曾在武帝身边的大臣、侍从，认出这两件宝物是武帝的随葬品。
English: Later, someone bought these two treasures at the Fu Feng Ye market. In the past, ministers and attendants who had been around Emperor Wu recognized these two treasures as Emperor Wu's funerary goods.

古文：帝平素常玩之。后有人扶风郿市买得二物，帝左右识而认之。说卖者形状，乃帝也。
现代文：根据买主讲述的卖主的形象，这些大臣、侍从异常惊讶，认为卖主就是汉武帝啊！
English: According to the image of the seller told by the buyer, these ministers and attendants were extremely surprised and thought that the seller was Han Wudi!

古文：汉宣帝
现代文：汉宣帝
English: Emperor Han Xuan

古文：汉采女常以七月七日夜，穿七针于开襟楼，俱以习之。
现代文：汉时宫女常常在七月七日这天的夜晚，在开襟楼穿七针，以后就沿习下来成为一种仪式。
English: On the evening of July 7th, Han Dynasty princesses would often wear seven pins on the lapel, which later became a ritual.

古文：宣帝被收，系郡邸狱。
现代文：汉宣帝被捕，关押在郡中王府的私狱里。
English: Emperor Han Xuan was arrested and detained in a private prison in the county's Zhongwangfu.

古文：臂上犹带史良娣合采婉转丝绳，系身毒国宝镜一枚，大如八铢钱。
现代文：这时，他的胳臂上还带着女史良娣和采婉为他缠制的丝绳，绳上系着一面身毒国进献的宝镜，八铢钱那么大。
English: At this time, he was still wearing on his arm a silk cord that was twisted for him by the lady Shi Liangyao and Zheyuan, and on the cord was tied a precious mirror, the size of eight yuan, which was a gift from the poisoned country.

古文：旧传此镜照见妖魅，得佩之者，为天神所福，故宣帝从危获济。
现代文：从前传说这面镜子可以照见妖魅，佩带它的人能得以天神的庇佑。因此，汉宣帝后来终于危难中得救。
English: It was once said that this mirror could ward off evil spirits, and that those who wore it would be protected by the gods. As a result, Emperor Han Xuan was eventually saved from danger.

古文：及即大位，每持此镜，感咽移辰。
现代文：待到汉宣帝登极继承皇位后，每当他手持这面宝镜时，便感触万端，几乎流泪，好长时间不能自持。
English: After Emperor Han Xuan ascended the throne and succeeded to the throne, whenever he held this precious mirror in his hand, he felt overwhelmed, almost in tears, unable to control himself for a long time.

古文：常以琥珀笥盛之，缄以戚里织成。
现代文：汉宣帝经常将这面宝镜装在一个方形的琥珀匣中，用戚里织成的丝绳系好。
English: Emperor Han Xuan often put this precious mirror in a square amber box and tied it with a silk cord woven by a relative.

古文：一曰斜纹织成。
现代文：还有人说是用丝织的斜纹绳系好。
English: Others said it was tied with a silk twill rope.

古文：宣帝崩，不知所在。刘表
现代文：汉宣帝死后，这面宝镜下落不明。刘表
English: After the death of Emperor Han Xuan, the whereabouts of this precious mirror are unknown.

