古文：○杜重威
现代文：杜重威，朔州人。
English: Du Chongwei, a native of Shuozhou.

古文：杜重威，朔州人也。其妻石氏，晋高祖之女弟。高祖即帝位，封石氏为公主，拜重威舒州刺史，以典禁兵。
现代文：他的妻子石氏，是晋高祖的妹妹，晋高祖登上帝位，封石氏为公主，授任杜重威为舒州刺史，让他统管禁军。
English: His wife, Shishi, was the sister of Emperor Gaozu. Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, made Shishi a princess, appointed Du Chongwei as the governor of Shuzhou, and put him in charge of the imperial army.

古文：从侯益攻破张从宾于汜水，以功拜潞州节度使。
现代文：跟随侯益在汜水打败张从宾，因功授任潞州节度使。
English: He followed Hou Yi in Surabaya to defeat Zhang Congbin, and was awarded the post of Surabaya Festival envoy.

古文：范延光反于鄴，重威从高祖攻降延光，徙领忠武，加同平章事。
现代文：范廷光在邺都反叛，杜重威跟随晋高祖收服范延光，调领忠武，加同平章事。
English: Fan Tingguang rebelled in Shendu, Du Chongwei followed the Shingao ancestor to recruit Fan Yanguang, transferred the leadership to Zhongwu, and added the title of Tongping.

古文：又徙领天平，迁侍卫亲军都指挥使。安重荣反，重威逆战于宗城，重荣为偃月阵，重威击之不动。
现代文：又调领天平，升任侍卫亲军都指挥使安重荣反叛，杜重威在宗城迎战，安重荣摆偃月阵，杜重威攻打不动。
English: In addition, An Chong Rong rebelled against Du Chong Wei, who led the balance and was promoted to the commander of the bodyguards of the pro-government forces. Du Chong Wei fought against An Chong Rong in the capital, An Chong Rong waged a month-long battle, and Du Chong Wei did not attack.

古文：重威欲少却以伺之，偏将王重胤曰： 两兵方交，退者先败。 
现代文：杜重威打算稍稍后撤等待时机，偏将王重胤说： 两军刚交战，后退的先败。 
English: Du Chongwei planned to withdraw a little later and wait for the right time, but General Wang Chongyin said: The two armies have just engaged in battle, and those who retreat will be defeated first.

古文：乃分兵为三，重威先以左右队击其两翼，战酣，重胤以精兵击其中军，重荣将赵彦之来奔，重荣遂大败，走还镇州，闭壁不敢出。
现代文：于是分兵三路，杜重威先命左右队攻打对方的两翼，战斗激烈时，王重胤又率精兵攻打对方的中军，安重荣部将趟彦之前来投奔，安重荣于是大败，逃回镇州，关闭营垒不敢出战。
English: As a result, there were three detachments of soldiers. Du Chongwei ordered the left and right teams to attack each other's two wings first. When the battle was fierce, Wang Chongyin also led the elite soldiers to attack the opposing Chinese army. An Chong Rong's division would flee before Watanabe. An Chong Rong was defeated, fled back to Zhenzhou, closed the camp and dared not go to war.

古文：重威攻破之，以功拜重威成德军节度使。
现代文：杜重威攻破镇州，因功授任杜重威为成德军节度使。
English: Du Chongwei broke through Zhenzhou, and was awarded the title of the German army's special envoy for meritorious service.

古文：重威出于武卒，无行而不知将略。
现代文：杜重威是军人出身，没有德行而又不懂为将的谋略。
English: Du Chongwei is from the military, has no virtue and does not understand the strategy of generals.

古文：破镇州，悉取府库之积及重荣之赀，皆没之家，高祖知而不问。
现代文：攻破镇州后，将府库的积蓄和安重荣的资产全部夺取，自家吞没，晋高祖虽然知情却没有追问。
English: After breaking through Zhenzhou, he seized all the savings of the prefectural treasury and the assets of An Chongrong, and swallowed them up. Although Jin Gaozu was aware of this, he did not pursue the matter.

古文：及出帝与契丹绝好，契丹连岁入寇，重威闭城自守，属州城邑多所屠戮。
现代文：到晋出帝和契丹绝交后，契丹连年进犯，杜重威闭城自守，所属州县城邑大多受到屠杀。
English: After the end of diplomatic relations between Emperor Jin and Khitan, Khitan attacked for several years, Du Chongwei closed the city to defend himself, and most of the cities and towns in his prefecture were massacred.

古文：胡骑驱其人民千万过其城下，重威登城望之，未尝出救。
现代文：胡骑驱赶他成千上万的百姓经过城下，杜重威登城瞭望，却没有出城营救。
English: Hu Jia drove his thousands of people through the city, Du Chongwei looked over the city, but did not leave the city to rescue.

古文：开运元年，加重威北面行营招讨使。
现代文：开运元年，加封杜重威为北面行营招讨使。
English: In the first year of the campaign, Du Chongwei of Gafeng was the envoy to the north.

古文：明年，引兵攻泰州，破满城、遂城。
现代文：第二年，率领军队攻打泰州，攻破满城、遂城。
English: In the second year, he led the army to attack Taizhou, defeated Mancheng, and conquered the city.

古文：契丹已去至古北，还兵击之，重威等南走，至阳城，为虏所困，赖符彦卿、张彦泽等因大风奋击，契丹大溃。
现代文：契丹已撤军到达古北，回师攻击，杜重威等南逃，到达阳城，被契丹军围困，幸亏符彦卿、张彦泽等人藉大风之势奋力出击，契丹大败逃走。
English: The Khitan army had withdrawn to the ancient north and returned to attack the division. Du Chongwei and others fled to the south and reached Yangcheng, where they were besieged by the Khitan army. Fortunately, Fu Yanqing, Zhang Yanze and others fought hard with the force of the wind, and the Khitan were defeated and fled.

古文：诸将欲追之，重威为俚语曰： 逢贼得命，更望复子乎？ 
现代文：将领们想要追击，杜重威用俚语说： 碰上盗贼而逃脱性命，还指望再得个儿子吗？ 
English: The generals want to pursue, Du Chongwei said in slang: If you encounter a thief and escape with your life, do you still expect to have another son?

古文：乃收马驰归。
现代文：于是收兵驰马而回。
English: So he gathered his troops and rode back.

古文：重威居镇州，重敛其民，户口凋敝，又惧契丹之至，乃连表乞还京师。未报，亟上道，朝廷莫能止，即拜重威为鄴都留守。
现代文：杜重威在镇州，大肆搜刮百姓，使镇州人凋敝，又怕契丹前来进犯，于是接连上表请求回到京师，还没有等到答复，就急忙上路，朝廷不能制止，就授任杜重威为邺都留守。
English: Du Chongwei was in Zhenzhou, searching the people, making the people of Zhenzhou wither, and afraid of the Khitan coming to attack, so he successively requested to return to Beijing Division, and did not wait for a reply, he hurried on his way. The court could not stop him, and appointed Du Chongwei to stay in the capital.

古文：而镇州所留私粟十馀万斛，殿中监王钦祚和市军储，乃录以闻，给绢数万匹以偿之，重威大怒曰： 吾非反者，安得籍没邪！ 三年秋，契丹高牟翰诈以瀛州降，复以重威为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：而在镇州留下私人的粮十多万斛，殿中监王钦祚向百姓议债购买粮食作为军备，于是登记上报，给他几万匹丝绸作抵偿，杜重威大怒说： 我不是反叛的人，怎能登记没收财产： 三年秋，契丹高牟翰诈称以瀛州投降，又任命杜重威为北面行营招讨使。
English: In Zhenzhou, he left more than one hundred thousand baht of private grain, and the palace overseer Wang Qinqiu went to the people to solicit debts to buy grain as armaments, so he registered a report and gave him tens of thousands of silks as compensation. Du Chongwei said angrily: I am not a rebel, how can I register the confiscation of property: In the autumn of the third year, Qidan Gaomukhan fraudulently claimed to surrender to Zhangzhou, and also appointed Du Chongwei as the envoy to the north.

古文：是秋，天下大水，霖雨六十馀日，饥殍盈路，居民拆木以供爨，剉藁席以秣马牛，重威兵行泥潦中，调发供馈，远近愁苦。
现代文：这年秋天，天下大雨成灾，大雨六十多天不停，饿死的人充斥道路，居民们拆除木器用来烧饭，锉磨蓁席喂养牛马，杜重威的军队在泥水中行进，调发百姓供应军需，远近愁苦不堪。
English: In the autumn of that year, the world was devastated by heavy rain. It rained for more than sixty days non-stop. People starving to death flooded the roads. Residents dismantled wooden utensils to cook rice and sharpened pots and pans to feed cattle and horses. Du Chongwei's army marched through the muddy water, dispatching people to supply military supplies. People far and near were miserable.

古文：重威至瀛州，牟翰已弃城去，重威退屯武强。
现代文：杜重威到达瀛州，高牟翰已弃城逃去，杜重威退兵屯驻武强。
English: Du Chongwei arrived in Zhangzhou, Gao Mouhan had abandoned the city and fled, and Du Chongwei retired to Wuqiang.

古文：契丹寇镇、定，重威西趋中渡桥，与虏夹滹沱河而军。
现代文：契丹侵犯镇、定二州，杜重威向西急行军至中渡桥，和契丹隔着滹沱河布阵。
English: The Khitan invaded the town, Ding Erzhou, Du Chongwei marched to the West Express to Zhongdu Bridge, and set up a position across the Wei River from the Khitan.

古文：偏将宋彦筠、王清渡水力战，而重威按军不动，彦筠遂败，清战死。
现代文：偏将宋彦筠、王清渡河奋为作战，而杜重威按兵不动，宋彦筠因此被打败，王清阵亡。
English: Song Yanyuan and Wang Qing waded into the river to fight, but Du Chongwei did not move. As a result, Song Yanyuan was defeated and Wang Qing was killed.

古文：转运使李穀教重威以三脚木为桥，募敢死士过河击贼，诸将皆以为然，独重威不许。
现代文：转运使李谷教杜重威用三脚木建桥，招募不怕死的士兵过河攻打贼军，将领们都认为对，惟独杜重威不同意。
English: The transfer caused Li Gu to teach Du Chongwei to build a bridge with a tripod and recruit soldiers who were not afraid of death to cross the river and attack the thief army. The generals all thought it was right, but Du Chongwei did not agree.

古文：契丹遣骑兵夜并西山击栾城，断重威军后。
现代文：契丹派骑兵连夜沿着西山攻打乐城，截断杜重威军队的后路。
English: Khitan sent cavalry to attack Lecheng along the West Mountain overnight, cutting off the rear path of Du Chongwei's army.

古文：是时，重威已有异志，而粮道隔绝，乃阴遣人诣契丹请降。
现代文：这时，杜重威已有二心，而运粮通道被隔鲍，于是暗中派人去向契丹请求投降。
English: At this time, Du Chongwei had second thoughts, and the grain transportation channel was cut off, so he secretly sent someone to ask the Khitan to surrender.

古文：契丹大悦，许以中国与重威为帝，重威信以为然，乃伏甲士，召诸将告以降虏。
现代文：契丹人十分高兴，许诺拿中原让垄重邀称帝，杜重威信以为真，于是埋伏甲兵，召集将领们宣布向虏军投降。
English: The Khitans were very happy. They promised to take the Central Plains and invite Zhu Rong to be emperor, and Du Chong believed it to be true. So he ambushed the armored soldiers and summoned the generals to announce their surrender to the Krup army.

古文：诸将愕然，以上将先降，乃皆听命。
现代文：将领们惊愕不已，因上将先投降，于是都从命了。
English: The generals were stunned, since the general had surrendered first, and they all gave their lives.

古文：重威出降表使诸将书名，乃令军士阵于栅外，军士犹喜跃以为决战，重威告以粮尽出降，军士解甲大哭，声震原野。
现代文：杜重威拿出降表让将领们签名，于是命令士兵在栅寨外摆开阵势，士兵们还欢喜跳跃以为是要与敌决战，杜重威告诉他们粮食吃完出去投降，士兵们都脱下镗甲大哭起来，声震原野。
English: Du Chongwei took out the surrender form for the generals to sign, and then ordered the soldiers to take up positions outside the stockade. The soldiers also jumped for joy, thinking that they were going to fight the enemy. Du Chongwei told them to go out and surrender after eating the grain. The soldiers all took off their armor and burst into tears. The sound shook the field.

古文：契丹赐重威赭袍，使衣以示诸军，拜重威太傅。
现代文：契丹赐给杜重威红袍，让他穿上巡视军队，授任杜重威为太傅。
English: Khitan gave Du Chongwei a red robe, let him wear a patrol army, and appointed Du Chongwei as taifu.

古文：契丹犯京师，重威以晋兵屯陈桥，士卒饥冻，不胜其苦。
现代文：契丹侵犯京师，杜重威率晋兵屯驻陈桥，士兵饥寒交迫，不龙忍受痛苦。
English: Khitan invaded Beijing Division, Du Chongwei led the Jin soldiers stationed in Chenqiao, the soldiers were hungry and cold, and they had to endure the pain.

古文：重威出入道中，市人随而诟之，重威俯首不敢仰顾。
现代文：杜重威在路上出入，街上的人跟着骂他，杜重威低头不敢仰视。
English: Du Shouwei went in and out on the road, people on the street followed him and cursed him. Du Shouwei bowed his head and dared not look up.

古文：契丹据京师，率城中钱帛以赏军，将相皆不免，重威当率万缗，乃诉于契丹曰： 臣以晋军十万先降，乃独不免率乎？ 
现代文：契丹占据京师，搜刮城中钱财赏赐军队，将相都不能幸免，杜重威应当交钱一万缙，于是向契丹诉苦说： 我率晋军十万人先投降，还不能免交吗？ 
English: When the Khitan occupied the Beijing Division and plundered the city of money and wealth to reward the troops, the generals could not be spared. Du Chongwei should pay ten thousand baht, so he complained to the Khitan: I led the Jin army of one hundred thousand people to surrender first, can I still be exempted?

古文：契丹笑而免之，遣还鄴都。
现代文：契丹人一笑答应了，派他回邺都。
English: With a smile, the Khitan agreed and sent him back to the capital.

古文：明年，契丹北归，重威与其妻石氏诣虏帐中为别。
现代文：第二年，契丹返回北方，杜重威和他的妻子石氏到契丹帐中告别。
English: The following year, Khitan returned to the north, and Du Chongwei and his wife, Shi Shi, went to the Khitan camp to say goodbye.

古文：汉高祖定京师，拜重威太尉、归德军节度使，重威惧，不受命。
现代文：漠高祖平定了京师，授任杜重威为太尉、归德军节度使，杜重威害怕，不接受任命。
English: Mogao Zu defeated the Beijing Division and appointed Du Chongwei as the Second Lieutenant and Returning Officer of the German Army. Du Chongwei was afraid and did not accept the appointment.

古文：遣高行周攻之，不克，高祖乃自将攻之。
现代文：漠高祖派高行周进攻他，没能攻克，漠高祖于是亲自率兵攻打他。
English: Mogao Zu sent Gao Xing Zhou to attack him, but failed to defeat him. Mogao Zu then personally led his troops to attack him.

古文：遣给事中陈同以诏书召之，重威不听命，而汉兵数败，围之百馀日。
现代文：又派给事中陈同以诏书召见他，杜重威不从命，而汉兵多次战败，包围他一百多天。
English: He also sent Chen Tong to summon him with an imperial edict, but Du Chongwei did not obey, and the Han soldiers were defeated many times and surrounded him for more than a hundred days.

古文：初，契丹留燕兵千五百人在京师，高祖自太原入，告者言其将反，高祖悉诛于繁台，其亡者奔于鄴。
现代文：当初，契丹把一千五百名燕兵留在京师，汉高祖从太原进入京师，有人举报说燕兵将要反叛，汉高祖把他们全部杀死在繁台，逃亡的燕兵投奔到邺都。
English: At first, Khitan left fifteen hundred Yan soldiers in the Beijing Division, and Han Gaozhu entered the Beijing Division from Taiyuan. Someone reported that the Yan soldiers were going to rebel, and Han Gaozhu killed them all in Fengtai, and the fleeing Yan soldiers rushed to Shendu.

古文：燕将张琏先以兵二千在鄴，闻燕兵见杀，乃劝重威固守。
现代文：燕将张跶先率兵两千在邺都，听说燕兵被杀，就劝杜重威坚守。
English: Yan placed Zhang Xuanxian and two thousand soldiers in Xindu. Hearing that Yan's soldiers had been killed, he advised Du Chongwei to hold fast.

古文：高祖已杀燕兵，悔之，数遣人招琏等，琏登城呼曰： 繁台之诛，燕兵何罪？
现代文：汉高祖杀掉燕兵后，为此后悔，多次派人招降张珑等人，张跶登城呼叫说： 繁台的诛杀，燕兵有什么罪？
English: After Henkel's ancestor killed the Yan soldiers, he regretted it and repeatedly sent people to recruit Zhang Ye and others. Zhang Ye went to the city and called out, "What is the crime of killing the Yan soldiers?

古文：既无生理，请以死守！ 
现代文：既然不能活，请以死守城！ 
English: Since you can't live, please defend the city with your life!

古文：重威食尽，屑麹而食，民多逾城出降，皆无人色。
现代文：杜重威粮食吃尽，磨曲来吃，不少老百姓越过城墙出来投降，都面无人色。
English: Du Chongwei ran out of food and had to grind grain to eat. Many people crossed the city wall to surrender. The city was deserted.

古文：重威乃遣判官王敏及其妻相次请降，高祖许之。
现代文：杜重威于是派判官王敏和他的妻子相继请求投降，汉高祖准许。
English: Du Chongwei then sent the judge Wang Min and his wife one after another to request the surrender, which was granted by Han Gaozu.

古文：重威素服出见高祖，高祖赦重威，拜检校太师、守太傅、兼中书令。
现代文：杜重威穿着白衣服出来见汉高祖，汉高祖赦免杜重威，授任检校太师、守太傅、兼中书今。
English: Du Chongwei came out in white clothes to see Han Gao Zu. Han Gao Zu pardoned Du Chongwei and appointed him as the school inspector, the governor, and the teacher of the middle school.

古文：悉诛琏及重威将吏，而录其私帑，以重威归京师。
现代文：将张躔和杜重威的将吏全部杀掉，而收录他们的私财，带着杜重威回京师。
English: He killed all of Zhang Xuan and Du Chongwei's generals, confiscated their private wealth, and returned to Beijing with Du Chongwei.

古文：高祖病甚，顾大臣曰： 善防重威！ 
现代文：汉高祖病重，环视大臣说： 好好提防杜重威！ 
English: Henkel's great-grandfather was seriously ill, and the Minister of Environmental Protection said: Beware of Du Chongwei!

古文：高祖崩，秘不发丧，大臣乃共诛之，及其子弘璋、弘璨、弘璲尸于市，市人蹴而诟之，吏不能禁，支裂蹈践，斯须而尽。
现代文：汉高祖去世，封锁消息汝有发丧，大臣们共同杀掉杜重威和他的儿子杜弘璋、杜弘璨、杜弘隧，将尸体抛到街市，街上的人踢尸大骂，官吏不能禁止，肢裂尸体，任意践踏，一会儿就不见尸体了。
English: Han Gaozu passed away, and the news of the blockade was devastating. The ministers jointly killed Du Chongwei and his sons Du Hongtao, Du Hongtao, and Du Hongtun, and threw the bodies into the streets. The people in the streets kicked and cursed the bodies. The officials could not forbid it. They dismembered the bodies, trampled on them at will, and the bodies disappeared in an instant.

古文：○李守贞
现代文：李守贞，河阳人。
English: Li Shouzhen, a native of Kawayang.

古文：李守贞，河阳人也。晋高祖镇河阳，以为客将，其后尝从高祖，高祖即位，拜客省使。
现代文：晋高祖镇守河阳，让他担任客将，后来曾追随晋高祖，晋高祖登上帝位，任他为客省使。
English: Jin Gaozu, the ruler of Heyang, had him serve as a guest general. Later, he followed Jin Gaozu, ascended to the throne, and appointed him as a guest provincial envoy.

古文：监马全节军破李金全于安州，以功拜宣徽使。
现代文：在安州监督马全节的军队打败李金全，因功授任宣徽使。
English: In Anzhou, the army that supervised the Maquan section defeated Li Jinquan and was awarded the title of Xuanhuisi.

古文：出帝即位，杨光远反，召契丹入寇。
现代文：晋出帝登位，杨光速反叛，招引契丹进犯。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, Yang Guangxuo quickly rebelled and invited Khitan to attack.

古文：守贞领义成军节度使，为侍卫亲军都虞候，从出帝幸澶州。
现代文：李守贞任义成军节度使，任侍卫亲军都虞候，随同晋出帝抵达澶州。
English: Li Shouzhen was appointed as the envoy of the Yicheng Army, and served as the bodyguard of the pro-army, and arrived in Zhangzhou with the emperor.

古文：麻荅以奇兵入郓州，渡马家口，栅于河东。
现代文：麻苔率奇兵进入郸州，渡过马家口，在黄河东面修筑栅寨驻军。
English: Mete led the soldiers into Luzhou, crossed the Majiakou, and built a garrison on the east side of the Yellow River.

古文：守贞驰往破之，契丹兵多溺死，获马数百匹，裨将七十馀人。
现代文：李守贞率军前去打败他们，契丹兵大多被淹死，缴获战马几百匹，俘虏副将七十多人。
English: Li Shouzhen led the army to defeat them, most of the Khitan soldiers were drowned, several hundred horses were captured, and more than seventy vice generals were captured.

古文：徙领泰宁军节度使，以兵二万讨之。
现代文：转领泰宁军节度使，率兵二万人讨伐杨光速。
English: He was transferred to be the commander of the Taining Army and led 20,000 soldiers to fight against Yang Guanghui.

古文：光远降，其故吏宋颜悉取光远宝货、名姬、善马献之守贞，守贞德之，阴置颜麾下。
现代文：杨光速投降，他原来的部下宋颜将杨光速的全部财宝、美女、好马献给李守贞，李守贞感激他，暗中把宋颜安置在属下。
English: Yang Guanghui surrendered, and his former subordinate Song Yan gave all of Yang Guanghui's treasure, beautiful women, and fine horses to Li Shouzhen. Li Shouzhen was grateful to him and secretly placed Song Yan under him.

古文：是时，凡出师破贼，必有德音赦其馀类。
现代文：当时，凡是出兵攻破贼军，必定有恩诏赦免贼军余党。
English: At that time, anyone who sent troops to defeat the Kleptocracy was bound to receive an edict of pardon from the Kleptocracy.

古文：而光远党与十馀人皆亡命，捕之甚急，枢密使桑维翰缓其制书，久而不下。
现代文：而杨光速的余党十多人都在逃命，正紧急追捕他们。枢密使桑维翰延缓恩诏，很久不下达。
English: However, more than ten members of Yang Guangxuo's remaining party were fleeing for their lives, and they were being urgently hunted down. The privy council asked San Weihan to delay the edict for a long time before issuing it.

古文：言事者告颜匿守贞所，诏取颜杀之，守贞大怒，乃与维翰有隙。
现代文：议事的人举报宋颜藏在李守贞那里，下诏书捉拿宋颜杀掉，李守贞大怒，于是和桑维翰产生矛盾。
English: The person in charge of the meeting reported that Song Yan was hiding at Li Shouzhen's place, and issued an edict to capture and kill Song Yan. Li Shouzhen was furious, and a conflict arose with San Weihan.

古文：贼平行赏，守贞悉以黦茶染木给之，军中大怒，以帛裹之为人首，枭于木间，曰： 守贞首也。 
现代文：平定贼军后施行奖赏，李守贞全部用黄黑色的茶叶染木赏给他们，军中士兵大怒，用丝绸裹上它们做成人头，挂在树上示众，说： 这是李守贞的头。 
English: When rewards were given after the defeat of the invaders, Li Shouzhen gave them all yellow-and-black tea trees. The soldiers in the army were so angry that they wrapped them in silk to make adult heads and hung them on trees for the public to see, saying, "This is the head of Li Shouzhen."

古文：守贞以功拜同平章事，赐以光远旧第，守贞取旁官民舍大治之，为京师之甲。
现代文：李守贞因功授任同平章事，把杨光速的旧宅赐给他，李守贞夺取旁边的官舍民宅大加整治，成为京师最好的窑第。
English: Li Shouzhen was awarded the title of Tongping Zheng for his merits, and Yang Guanghe's old house was given to him. Li Shouzhen seized the adjacent government house and renovated it, becoming the best kiln in Beijing.

古文：出帝临幸，燕锡恩礼，出于诸将。
现代文：晋出帝亲临他家，宴饮赏赐的恩礼，超过了其它将领。
English: Emperor Jinzei visited his home in person, feasted, and bestowed more gifts than any other general.

古文：契丹入寇，出帝再幸澶州，杜重威为北面招讨使，守贞为都监。
现代文：契丹进犯，晋出帝再度亲往澶州，杜重威任北面招讨使，李守贞任都监。
English: When Khitan invaded, Emperor Jin personally went to Bozhou again. Du Chongwei served as the envoy to the north, and Li Shouzhen served as the inspector of the capital.

古文：晋兵素骄，而守贞、重威为将皆无节制，行营所至，居民豢圉一空，至于草木皆尽。
现代文：晋兵一向骄横，而李守贞、杜重威为将都没有节制，军队行营所到之地，当地居民喂养的马匹被一抢而空，甚至连草木都糟踏光了。
English: Jin soldiers have always been arrogant, while Li Shouzhen and Du Chongwei have no restraint as generals. In the place where the army camped, the horses fed by local residents were snatched away, and even the grass and trees were trampled.

古文：其始发军也，有赐赉，曰 挂甲钱 ，及班师，又加赏劳，曰 卸甲钱 ，出入之费，常不下三十万，由此晋之公私重困。
现代文：他们刚出兵时，有赏赐，叫 挂甲钱 ，到班师回朝时，又加以慰劳赏赐，叫 卸甲钱 ，军队出入的花费，常常不下三十万，因此晋军公私都很窘困。
English: When they first sent out troops, they were given a reward, called "hanging armor money," and when they returned to the North, they were given a consolation reward, called "unloading armor money," the cost of entering and leaving the army was often no less than 300,000 yuan, so the Jin army was in great distress both in public and private.

古文：守贞与重威等攻下泰州，破满城，杀二千馀人。
现代文：李守贞和杜重威等人攻下泰州，攻破满城，杀死二千多人。
English: Li Shouzhen and Du Chongwei and others captured Taizhou, broke through the city, and killed more than two thousand people.

古文：还，为侍卫亲军都指挥使，领天平军节度使，又领归德。
现代文：返回后，李守贞任侍卫亲军都指挥使，领天平军节度使，又领归德。
English: After returning, Li Shouzhen was appointed as the commanding envoy of the bodyguards of the pro-Qing troops, the commander of the Tianping troops, and the leader of the return to Germany.

古文：是时，出帝遣人以书招赵延寿使归国，延寿诈言思归，愿得晋兵为应，而契丹高牟翰亦诈以瀛州降，出帝以为然，命杜重威等将兵应之。
现代文：这时，晋出帝派人带信招赵延寿让他回国，趟延寿诈称想回来，希望得到晋兵的接应，而契丹高牟翰也诈称以瀛州投降，置些帝信以为真，命令杜重威等人率兵接应他们。
English: At this time, Emperor Jin sent a man with a letter to Zhao Yanshou to let him return to China, but Yanshou fraudulently claimed that he wanted to return and hoped to be received by the Jin soldiers, and Qidan Gaomukhan also fraudulently claimed to surrender to Zhangzhou, believed some imperial letters to be true, and ordered Du Chongwei and others to lead the troops to meet them.

古文：初，晋大臣皆言重威不忠，有怨望之心，不可用，乃用守贞。
现代文：当初，晋大臣都说杜重威不忠诚，心有怨恨，不能任用，于是用李守贞。
English: At first, the Jin ministers all said that Du Chongwei was not loyal, had a grudge and could not be appointed, so they used Li Shouzhen.

古文：是时，重威镇魏州，守贞尝将兵往来过魏，重威待之甚厚，多以戈甲金帛奉之。
现代文：这时，杜重威镇守魏州，李守贞曾率兵往来经过魏州，杜重威待他很优厚，常用戈戟镗甲、金银丝绸赠送他。
English: At this time, Du Chongwei was in charge of the defense of Weizhou, and Li Shouzhen had led troops to and from Weizhou. Du Chongwei treated him very generously, often giving him gold and silver armor and silk.

古文：出帝尝谓守贞曰： 卿常以家财散士卒，可谓忠于国者乎！ 
现代文：晋出帝曾对李守贞说： 你常常拿家财散发给士兵，可以说是忠于国家的人了！ 
English: Emperor Jinzhi once said to Li Shouzhen: You often take your family wealth and distribute it to soldiers. You can be said to be a person loyal to the country!

古文：守贞谢曰： 皆重威与臣者。 
现代文：李守贞回答说： 都是杜重威送给我的。 
English: Li Shouzhen replied: Du Chongwei gave them to me.

古文：因请与重威俱北。
现代文：因而请求和杜重威一同北去。
English: So he asked to go north with Du Chongwei.

古文：于是卒以重威为招讨使，守贞为都监，屯于武强。
现代文：于是最终仍以杜重威为招讨使，李守贞为都监，屯驻在武强。
English: As a result, Du Chongwei was eventually appointed as the summoning envoy, and Li Shouzhen as the city supervisor, stationed in Wuqiang.

古文：契丹寇镇、定，守贞等军于中渡，遂与重威降于契丹。
现代文：契丹侵犯镇、定二州，李守贞等驻扎在中渡，于是李守贞和杜重威一道向契丹投降。
English: The Khitan invaded the town, Ding Erzhou, and Li Shouzhen was stationed in Zhongdu, so Li Shouzhen and Du Chongwei surrendered to the Khitan.

古文：契丹以守贞为司徒。
现代文：契丹任李守贞为司徒。
English: Khitan appointed Li Shouzhen as a disciple.

古文：契丹犯京师，拜守贞天平军节度使。
现代文：契丹侵犯京师，拜李守贞为天平军节度使。
English: Khitan invaded Beijing, and Li Shuzhen was appointed as the envoy of the Tianping Army.

古文：汉高祖入京师，守贞来朝，拜太保、河中节度使。
现代文：汉高祖进入京师，李守贞前来朝拜，高祖任他为太保、河中节度使。
English: Han Gao Zu entered Beijing, Li Shouzhen came to pay homage, Gao Zu appointed him as Taibo, and Kechu as Setsudo.

古文：高祖崩，杜重威死，守贞惧，不自安，以谓汉室新造，隐帝初立，天下易以图，而门下僧总伦以方术阴干守贞，为言有非常之相，守贞乃决计反。
现代文：汉高祖去世，杜重威死，李守贞害怕，不能安心，认为漠室新建，漠隐帝刚登位，天下容易谋取，而他门下的僧人总伦用方术暗中迷惑李守贞，说他有不同寻常的相貌，李守贞于是决意反叛。
English: Han Gaozhu passed away, Du Chongwei died, Li Shouzhen was afraid and could not be reassured. He thought that the Imperial Palace was newly built, the Emperor had just ascended to the throne, and the world was easy to obtain, and the monks under his disciple Shulun secretly used the method to confuse Li Shouzhen, saying that he had an unusual appearance. Li Shouzhen then decided to rebel.

古文：而赵思绾先以京兆反，遣人以赭黄衣遗守贞，守贞大喜，以为天人皆应，乃发兵西据潼关，招诱草寇，所在窃发。
现代文：而赵思绾先以京兆反叛，派人拿红黄色的衣服送给李守贞，李守贞非常高兴，认为天人都应验了，于是出兵西去占据潼关，招诱草莽寇盗，到处都发生叛乱。
English: But Zhao Sijian first rebelled with the Beijing Zodiac, sending someone to take red and yellow clothes to Li Shouzhen. Li Shouzhen was very happy, thinking that the gods had fulfilled their promise, so he sent troops to the west to occupy Shaoguan, lure the grasses and robbers, and rebellion occurred everywhere.

古文：汉遣白文珂、常思等出军击之。
现代文：汉派白文珂、常思等人出兵攻打他。
English: The Han dispatched soldiers such as Bai Wenke and Chang Si to attack him.

古文：已而王景崇又以凤翔反，景崇与思绾遣人推守贞为秦王，守贞拜景崇等官爵。
现代文：不久王景崇又议凤翔反叛，王景崇和趟思绾派人推举李立贞做秦王，李守贞以官爵委任王景崇等人。
English: Soon after, Wang Jingsong also proposed a rebellion against Fengxiang, and Wang Jingsong and Wanzhixuan sent people to nominate Li Lizhen as the Qin king, and Li Shouzhen appointed Wang Jingsong as a peer.

古文：又遣人间以蜡丸书遗吴、蜀、契丹，使出兵以牵汉。
现代文：又派人暗中送蜡丸书给昊、蜀、契丹，要他们出兵牵制汉。
English: He also sent people to secretly send wax pills to Hao, Shu and Qidan, asking them to send troops to contain Han.

古文：文珂等攻景崇、思绾等久无功，隐帝乃遣枢密使郭威率禁兵将文珂等督攻之。
现代文：白文珂等人进攻王景崇、赵思绾等人久无战功，汉隐帝于是派枢密使郭威率领禁兵统领白文珂等人，监督他们攻打。
English: Bai Wenke and others attacked Wang Jingsong, Zhao Sijun and others for a long time without success, so Emperor Han Yin sent a confidential envoy to Guo Wei to lead the forbidden soldiers to lead Bai Wenke and others to supervise their attack.

古文：诸将皆请先击思绾、景崇，威计未知所向。
现代文：将领们都请求先攻打赵思绾、王景祟，郭威还未拿定主意。
English: The generals all requested that Zhao Siyu and Wang Jingcai be attacked first, but Guo Wei had not yet made up his mind.

古文：行至华州，节度使扈彦珂谓威曰： 三叛连衡，以守贞为主，守贞先败，则思绾、景崇可传声而破矣。
现代文：到达华州时，节度使扈彦珂对郭威说： 三个叛将联合，以李守贞为主，李守贞先被打败，那么赵思绾、王景崇就会应声而破。
English: When he arrived in Huazhou, he said to Guo Wei, "Three traitors are united, with Li Shuzhen as the main one. If Li Shuzhen is defeated first, then Zhao Siyu and Wang Jingsong will follow suit."

古文：若舍近图远，使守贞出兵于后，思绾、景崇拒战于前，则汉兵屈矣。 
现代文：如果拾近求速，让李守贞在后面攻击，趟思绾、王景崇在前面抵抗，那汉兵就必败了。 
English: If they picked up speed and let Li Shuzhen attack in the rear, and Wanzhong and Wang Jingsong resist in the front, then the Han soldiers would be defeated.

古文：威以为然，遂先击守贞。
现代文：郭威认为对，于是先攻打李守贞。
English: Guo Wei thought it was right, so he attacked Li Shouzhen first.

古文：是时，冯道罢相居河阳，威初出兵，过道家问策，道曰： 君知博乎？ 
现代文：这时，冯道罢相住在河阳，郭威刚出兵时，到冯道家拜访询问计策，冯道说： 你懂得博戏吗？ 
English: At this time, Feng Dao was living in Heyang. When Guo Weigang sent troops, he visited Feng Dao's home to inquire about the strategy. Feng Dao said: Do you know the play?

古文：威少无赖，好蒲博，以为道讥之，艴然而怒。
现代文：郭威年轻时无赖，喜好蒲博，认为冯道讥讽他，羞恼发怒。
English: Guo Wei was a ruffian when he was young. He liked Pubo. He thought that Feng Dao was mocking him. He was embarrassed and angry.

古文：道曰： 凡博者钱多则多胜，钱少则多败，非其不善博，所以败者，势也。
现代文：冯道说： 凡是博戏，钱多就嬴，钱少就输，不是输家不善于博戏，之所以输，是由于财势不足的缘故。
English: Feng Dao said: In all gambling games, the one with more money is the winner, and the one with less money is the loser. It is not that the loser is not good at gambling, but the reason for losing is due to the lack of financial resources.

古文：今合诸将之兵以攻一城，较其多少，胜败可知。 
现代文：如今联合各将的军队攻打一座城，比较力量大小，胜败可以料定。 
English: Today, the combined armies of the generals attack a city, compare the size of the forces, and victory or defeat can be predicted.

古文：威大悟，谋以迟久困之，乃与诸将分为三栅，栅其城三面，而阙其南，发五县丁夫筑长城以连三栅。
现代文：郭威豁然顿悟，计议以持久战围困李守贞，于是和将领们分成三个栅寨，在李守贞城外三面筑栅，而在城南留下缺口，调动五个县的丁夫修筑长城连接三个栅寨。
English: Guo Wei suddenly had an epiphany. He planned to besiege Li Shouzhen with a protracted war, so he and the generals divided into three stockades. They built a fence on three sides outside the city of Li Shouzhen, but left a gap in the south of the city. They mobilized Dingfu from five counties to build the Great Wall and connect the three stockades.

古文：守贞出其兵坏长城，威辄补其所坏，守贞辄出争之，守贞兵常失十三四，如此逾年，守贞城中兵无几，而食又尽，杀人而食。
现代文：李守贞出兵破坏长城，郭威就命人把壤的地方修补好，李守贞随即出城争夺，李守贞的士兵常常损失十分之三四，如此一年多，李守贞城中士兵所剩无几，而粮食又吃尽，杀人来吃。
English: Li Shouzhen sent soldiers to destroy the Great Wall, Guo Wei ordered people to repair the soil. Li Shouzhen then went out of the city to fight. Li Shouzhen's soldiers often lost three or four tenths. After more than a year, there were only a few soldiers left in Li Shouzhen's city, and they had eaten all the food, killing to eat.

古文：威曰： 可矣。 
现代文：郭威说： 行了。 
English: Guo Wei said, "That's enough.

古文：乃为期日，督兵四面攻而破之。
现代文：于是定下日期，督促兵士四面出擎，攻破了城池。
English: So he set a date, urged the soldiers to come out in all directions, and broke through the city.

古文：初，守贞召总伦问以济否，总伦曰： 王当自有天下，然分野方灾，俟杀人垂尽，则王事济矣。 
现代文：当初，李守贞召见总伦问他能否成事，总伦说： 大王自当据有天下，但天象和你对应的地区正有灾难，等人快要杀光时，大王的事业就成功了。 
English: At the beginning, Li Shouzhen summoned General Lun to ask him whether he could accomplish the task. General Lun said, "The Great King has all the power in the world, but the Celestial Elephant and the region corresponding to you are experiencing a disaster. When people are about to be wiped out, the Great King's undertaking will be successful."

古文：守贞以为然。
现代文：李守贞信以为真。
English: Li Shouzhenxin believed it to be true.

古文：尝会将吏大饮，守贞指画虎图曰： 吾有天命者中其掌。 
现代文：曾和将吏们畅饮，李守贞指着画虎图说： 我有天命就能射中它的脚掌。 
English: After having a drink with the generals, Li Shouzhen pointed to a picture of a tiger and said: I have the power to shoot it in the foot.

古文：引弓一发中之，将吏皆拜贺，守贞益以自负。
现代文：拉弓一箭射中，将吏们都下拜祝贺。李守贞更加自负。
English: Li Shouzhen was even more proud when she shot an arrow with her bow, and the officials all bowed down and congratulated her.

古文：城破，守贞与妻子自焚，汉军入城，于烟烬中斩其首，传送京师，枭于南市，其馀党皆磔之。○张彦泽张彦泽，其先突厥部人也。
现代文：城被攻破后，李守贞和妻子儿女自焚而死，汉军进城，在熘灰中斩下他的头，传送到京师，在南市上示众，他的余党都被分尸张彦泽，他的祖先是突厥人。
English: After the city was breached, Li Shouzhen and his wife and children died of self-immolation. The Chinese army entered the city, cut off his head in the ashes, transported it to Beijing and displayed it in Nanshi. The rest of his party were dismembered. Zhang Yanzhe, his ancestor was a Turk.

古文：后徙居阴山，又徙太原。
现代文：后来移居阴山，又移居太原。
English: Later he moved to Yinshan and then to Taiyuan.

古文：彦泽为人骁悍残忍，目睛黄而夜有光，顾视如猛兽。
现代文：张彦泽为人骁悍残忍，眼珠黄而晓上有光，看人就像猛兽一般。
English: Zhang Yanzhe is a fierce and cruel person. His eyes are yellow and have light in them. He looks at people like a beast of prey.

古文：以善射为骑将，数从庄宗、明宗战伐。
现代文：因善于射箭任骑将，多次跟随唐庄宗、唐明宗攻战征伐。
English: Because he was good at archery, he was appointed as a cavalry commander, and he followed Tang Zhuangzong and Tang Mingzong to attack and conquer many times.

古文：与晋高祖连姻，高祖时，已为护圣右厢都指挥使、曹州刺史。
现代文：和晋高祖结为姻亲，晋高祖时，已任护圣右厢都指挥使、曹州刺史。
English: He was a relative by marriage of the founder of Jin Gao. At the time of the founding of Jin Gao, he had already been appointed as the guardian of the Holy Right Wing and the commander of the capital, Caozhou.

古文：与讨范延光，拜镇国军节度使，岁中，徙镇彰义。为政暴虐，常怒其子，数笞辱之。
现代文：参与讨伐范延光，拜为镇国军节度使，年内，调任镇守彰义，张彦泽为政残暴，常对他的儿子发怒，多次鞭打羞辱他。
English: He took part in the campaign against Fan Yanguang, and served as the commander of the town's national army. During the year, he was transferred to the post of the town guard of Changyi. Zhang Yanzhe was cruel in politics, often angry with his son, and repeatedly whipped and humiliated him.

古文：子逃至齐州，州捕送京师，高祖以归彦泽。
现代文：儿子逃到齐州，州中捉到他送至京师，晋高祖把他交还张彦泽。
English: His son fled to Qizhou. When he was caught in Qizhou, he was sent to the Beijing division. His father handed him back to Zhang Yanzhe.

古文：彦泽上章请杀之，其掌书记张式不肯为作章，屡谏止之。
现代文：张彦泽上奏请求杀掉他，他的掌书记张式不愿焉他起草奏章，多次劝谏阻止他。
English: Zhang Yanze requested to kill him, his secretary Zhang Shih was reluctant to let him draft the report, and repeatedly urged him to stop him.

古文：彦泽怒，引弓射式，式走而免。
现代文：张彦泽发怒，拉弓射张式，张式快步躲开纔幸免于难。
English: Zhang Yanze flew into a rage, drew his bow and shot Zhang style, Zhang style quickly dodged the crossbow and survived.

古文：式素为彦泽所厚，多任以事，左右小人皆素嫉之，因共谗式，且迫之曰： 不速去，当及祸。 
现代文：张式素来受到张彦泽厚待，常常把事情交托给他，因此张彦泽手下的小人一直都嫉恨他，乘机共同诋毁张式，而且威胁他说： 不赶快离去，必定遇害。 
English: Zhang Shih-tze had always been treated well by Zhang Yan-tao, who often entrusted things to him. Therefore, the villains under Zhang Yan-tao always hated him, took the opportunity to jointly discredit Zhang Shih-tze, and threatened him: "If you don't leave soon, you will surely be killed."

古文：式乃出奔。
现代文：张式于是出逃。
English: Zhang then fled the country.

古文：彦泽遣指挥使李兴以二十骑追之，戒曰： 式不肯来，当取其头以来！ 
现代文：张彦泽派指挥使李兴率领二十名骑兵追赶他，告诫他们说： 张式如果不愿回来，就必须取他的头来！ 
English: Zhang Yanze ordered Li Xing to lead twenty cavalrymen to chase after him, warning them: "If Zhang Shi doesn't want to come back, you must take his head!"

古文：式至衍州，刺史以兵援之门邠州，节度使李周留式，驰骑以闻，诏流式商州。
现代文：张式到达衍州，刺史用兵护送他到合州，节度使李周留下张式，驰马上报，下诏流放张式到商州。
English: Zhang Shih arrived in Yanzhou, the soldiers escorted him to Heshou. Li Zhou left Zhang Shih behind and immediately reported to the emperor, who then exiled Zhang Shih to Shangzhou.

古文：彦泽遣司马郑元昭诣阙论请，期必得式，且曰： 彦泽若不得张式，患在不测。 
现代文：张彦泽派司马郑元昭到朝廷论辩请求，希望一定得到张式，而且说： 张彦泽如得不到张式，祸患难以预测。 
English: Zhang Yanze sent Sima Zheng Yuan Zhao to the imperial court to argue the request, hoping to get Zhang style, and said: If Zhang Yanze does not get Zhang style, the disaster is difficult to predict.

古文：高祖不得已，与之。
现代文：晋高祖迫不得已，把张式交给他。
English: As a last resort, Jin Gaozu handed over the Zhang style to him.

古文：彦泽得式，剖心、决口、断手足而斩之。
现代文：张彦泽得到张式，将张式剖心、裂嘴、断手脚，然后把他杀掉。
English: Zhang Yanze got hold of Zhang Xie, cut his heart, slit his mouth, and cut off his hands and feet, and then killed him.

古文：高祖遣王周代彦泽，以为右武卫大将军。
现代文：晋高祖派王周接替张彦泽，任彦泽为右武卫大将军。
English: Wang Zhou, the founder of Jin Gao, was appointed to succeed Zhang Yanze, and Yanze was appointed to the post of General of the Right Division of Middle Palace Guards.

古文：周奏彦泽所为不法者二十六条，并述泾人残敝之状，式父鐸诣阙诉冤，谏议大夫郑受益、曹国珍，尚书刑部郎中李涛、张麟，员外郎麻麟、王禧伏阁上疏，论彦泽杀式之冤，皆不省。
现代文：王周奏报张彦泽所犯二十六条罪行，并述说泾州人残破的状况，张式的父亲张铎到朝廷申诉冤情，谏议大夫郑受益、曹国珍，尚书刑部郎中李涛、张麟，员外郎麻涛、王禧都上殿上疏，论说张彦泽杀死张式的冤案，都没有理睬。
English: Wang Zhou reported the twenty-six crimes committed by Zhang Yanze, and described the broken condition of the people of Zhangzhou. Zhang Xi, Zhang's father, went to the imperial court to appeal for grievances. He did not pay attention to the arguments of doctors Zheng Guobang and Cao Guozhen, Shang Shuxu's vice-ministers Li Tao and Zhang Lin, and vice-ministers Ma Tao and Wang Xi, who all went to the imperial court to argue that Zhang Yanze had killed Zhang Xi.

古文：涛见高祖切谏，高祖曰： 彦泽功臣，吾尝许其不死。 
现代文：李涛进见晋高祖恳切规劝，晋高祖说： 张彦泽是功臣，我曾许诺不杀他。 
English: Li Tao went to see Jinguo Zu and earnestly advised him. Jinguo Zu said: Zhang Yanzhe is a meritorious subject, I had promised not to kill him.

古文：涛厉声曰： 彦泽罪若可容，延光铁券何在！ 
现代文：李涛高声说： 张彦泽的罪行如果可以容忍，那么范延光的铁券又在哪里！ 
English: Li Tao said in a loud voice: If Zhang Yanze's crime can be tolerated, then where is Fan Yanguang's ticket!

古文：高祖怒，起去，涛随之谏不已，高祖不得已，召式父鐸、弟守贞、子希范等，皆拜以官，为蠲泾州民税，免其杂役一年，下诏罪己，然彦泽止削阶、降爵而已。于是国珍等复与御史中丞王易简率三院御史诣阁门连疏论之，不报。
现代文：晋高祖发怒，起身离去，李涛跟在后面不停地规劝，晋高祖迫不得已，召见张式的父亲张铎、弟弟张守贞、儿子张希范等人，都授官职，为此免除泾州百姓的赋税，免除杂役一年，下诏书归罪自己，而张彦泽只是削碱官阶、降低爵位而已于是曹国珍等人又和御史中丞王易简率领三院御史到朝廷接连上疏论理，没有答复。
English: Zhang Gaozhu got angry and got up to leave, Li Tao followed behind and kept exhorting him. As a last resort, Zhang Gaozhu summoned Zhang Shih's father Zhang Qian, his brother Zhang Shuzhen, his son Zhang Xifan, and others, all of whom were appointed to official positions. For this reason, he exempted the people of Zhangzhou from paying taxes, exempted them from miscellaneous services for one year, and issued an edict to incriminate himself, while Zhang Yanzhe only reduced his official rank and lowered his title. Therefore, Cao Guozhen and others, together with Wang Yijian, the middle-ranking official, led the

古文：出帝时，彦泽为左龙武军大将军，迁右武卫上将军，又迁右神武统军。
现代文：晋出帝时，张彦泽任左龙武军大将军，升任右武卫上将军，又升任右神武统军。
English: When he was promoted to emperor, Zhang Yanzhe served as the general of the Left Dragon Army, the general of the Right Wuwei Army, and the general of the Right Shenwu United Army.

古文：自契丹与晋战河北，彦泽在兵间，数立战功，拜彰国军节度使。
现代文：自从契丹和晋在河北交战，张彦泽在军中，多次立下战功，拜为彰德军节度使。
English: Ever since Khitan and Jin clashed in Hebei, Zhang Yanzhe was in the army, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and was worshipped as the messenger of the German army.

古文：与契丹战阳城，为契丹所围，而军中无水，凿井辄坏，又天大风，契丹顺风扬尘奋击甚锐，军中大惧。
现代文：和契丹在阳城作战，被契丹包围，而车中无水，挖井就坏，加上天刮大风，契丹顺风飞马扬尘，攻势十分凶猛，张彦泽军中非常恐惧。
English: He fought against the Khitans in Yangcheng. He was surrounded by the Khitans, and there was no water in the wagon, and the well was not well dug. In addition, the sky was blowing a gale, and the Khitans were kicking up dust with the wind. The offensive was very fierce, and Zhang Yanze's army was very afraid.

古文：彦泽以问诸将，诸将皆曰： 今虏乘上风，而吾居其下，宜待风回乃可战。 
现代文：张彦泽询问将领们，将领们都说： 现在敌军凭借顺风的优势，而我们处在下风，应等风向回转后纔能作战。 
English: Zhang Yanze asked the generals, and the generals all said: Now the enemy forces have the advantage of the tail wind, while we are in the downwind, we should wait for the wind direction to turn around before we can fight.

古文：彦泽以为然。诸将皆去，偏将药元福独留，谓彦泽曰： 今军中饥渴已甚，若待风回，吾属为虏矣！
现代文：张彦泽赞同这种意见，将领们都已离去，偏将药元福独自留下，对张彦泽说： 现在车队十分饥渴，假如等到风向回转，我们就成俘虏了！
English: Zhang Yanze agreed with this opinion. The generals had all departed, leaving Yue Yuanfu alone. He said to Zhang Yanze, "The convoy is very hungry and thirsty now. If we wait until the wind changes, we will become prisoners!"

古文：且逆风而战，敌人谓我必不能，所谓出其不意。 
现代文：而且逆风作战，敌人必定认为我们不会这样做，造就叫出其不意。 
English: Moreover, fighting against the wind, the enemy must think that we will not do so, creating a surprise.

古文：彦泽即拔拒马力战，契丹奔北二十馀里，追至卫村，又大败之，契丹遁去。
现代文：张彦泽就拔掉障碍物，奋力作战，契丹逃跑奔走二十多里，追到卫村，又大败契丹，契丹逃去。
English: Zhang Yanze pulled out the obstacles and fought hard. Khitan ran away and ran more than twenty miles, chased to Wei village, and defeated Khitan, and Khitan fled.

古文：开运三年秋，杜重威为都招讨使，李守贞兵马都监，彦泽马军都排阵使。
现代文：开运三年秋，杜重威任都招讨使，李守贞任兵马都监，张彦泽任马军都排阵使。
English: In the autumn of the third year after the start of the campaign, Du Chongwei was appointed as the envoy to summon the troops, Li Shouzhen was appointed as the inspector of the army and horses, and Zhang Yanze was appointed as the envoy to the horse army.

古文：彦泽往来镇、定之间，败契丹于泰州，斩首二千级。
现代文：张彦泽在镇、定二州问往来，在泰州打败契丹，杀敌二干人。
English: Zhang Yanze asked for exchanges in Zhen and Ding two states, defeated Khitan in Taizhou, and killed two enemy cadres.

古文：重威、守贞攻瀛州不克，退及武强，闻契丹空国入寇，惶惑不知所之，而彦泽适至，言虏可破之状，乃与重威等西趋镇州。
现代文：杜重威、李守贞进攻瀛州没有攻克，退到武强，听说契丹举国进犯，惊惶疑惑不知所措，而张彦泽恰好赶到，论说可以破虏军的情况，于是和杜重威等人往西奔赴镇州。
English: Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen did not conquer the attack on Zhangzhou, but retreated to Wuqiang. Hearing that the Khitan had attacked the whole country, they were overwhelmed with panic and doubt. Zhang Yanze just happened to arrive and discussed the situation of defeating the Khitan army, so he and Du Chongwei and others went west to Zhenzhou.

古文：彦泽为先锋，至中渡桥，已为虏所据，彦泽犹力战争桥，烧其半，虏小败却，乃夹河而寨。
现代文：张彦泽做先锋，到达中渡桥，已被敌军占据，张彦泽又奋战夺桥，敌军稍稍败退，于是夹河筑寨。
English: Zhang Yanze, as a pioneer, arrived at Zhongdu Bridge, which was already occupied by the enemy army. Zhang Yanze fought hard to capture the bridge, and the enemy army was slightly defeated and retreated, so he built a castle across the river.

古文：十二月丙寅，重威、守贞叛降契丹，彦泽亦降。
现代文：十二月丙寅，杜重威、李守贞反叛投降契丹，张彦泽也投降了。
English: In December, Hsin-Yin, Du Chung-Wei, and Li Shou-Zhen rebelled and surrendered to the Khitan, and Zhang Yanzhe also surrendered.

古文：耶律德光犯阙，遣彦泽与傅住兒以二千骑先入京师，彦泽倍道疾驱，至河，衔枚夜渡。
现代文：耶律德光侵犯京师，派张彦泽和傅住儿率领两千骑兵先进京师，张彦泽兼程飞驰，到达黄河，摘下马铃连夜渡河。
English: Yerutdeguang invaded the Beijing Division and sent Zhang Yanzhe and Fu Zhubei to lead two thousand cavalrymen to the front of the Beijing Division. Zhang Yanzhe also flew to the Yellow River, took down the horse bell and crossed the river at night.

古文：壬申夜五鼓，自封丘门斩关而入。
现代文：壬申晚上五更时，从封丘门破关而入。
English: At 5:00 p.m. on the evening of Jinshin, a crow broke through the gate of Fengqiu.

古文：有顷，宫中火发，出帝以剑拥后宫十馀人将赴火，为小吏薛超所持。
现代文：一会儿，宫中起火，晋出帝持剑簇拥后宫十多人将赴火自尽，被小吏薛超抱住。
English: A moment later, a fire broke out in the palace, and more than ten people gathered around the harem, holding swords, ready to set themselves on fire. They were embraced by minor official Xue Chao.

古文：彦泽自宽仁门传德光与皇太后书入，乃灭火。
现代文：张彦浬从童￡门传进耶律德光和皇太后的信，于是灭火。
English: Zhang Yanyan put out the fire after receiving a letter from Yelu Deguang and the empress dowager.

古文：大内都点检康福全宿卫宽仁门，登楼觇贼，彦泽呼而下之，诸门皆启。
现代文：大内都点检康福全守卫宽仁门，登楼看见贼军，张彦泽呼叫他下来，打开所有城门。
English: Daini all checked Kangfu, all guarded the Kuanren Gate, saw the thief army, Zhang Yanze called him down and opened all the gates.

古文：彦泽顿兵明德楼前，遣傅住兒入传戎王宣语，帝脱黄袍，素服再拜受命。
现代文：张彦泽在明德楼前屯驻军队，派傅住儿进去传达契丹君主的命今，出帝脱下黄袍，穿着白衣服下拜两次接受命令。
English: Zhang Yanze stationed troops in front of the Mingde Building, sent Fu Zhi Er to go in and convey the order of the Khitan monarch, took off his yellow robe and wore a white robe to bow twice to receive the order.

古文：使人召彦泽，彦泽谢曰： 臣无面目见陛下。 
现代文：出帝派人召见张彦泽，张彦泽推辞说： 我无脸见陛下。 
English: The emperor sent someone to summon Zhang Yanze, but Zhang Yanze declined, saying, "I have no face to meet your majesty."

古文：复使召之，彦泽笑而不答。
现代文：又派人召见他，张彦泽笑而不答。
English: They also sent someone to summon him, but Zhang Hikozawa laughed and did not answer.

古文：明日，迁帝于开封府，帝与太后、皇后肩舆，宫嫔、宦者十馀人皆步从。
现代文：第二天，将皇帝迁到开封府，皇帝和太后、皇后坐着轿，宫妃、宦官十多人都步行跟随。
English: The next day, the emperor was moved to Kaifeng. The emperor, the empress dowager, and the empress were seated in a sedan, while the empress and more than ten eunuchs followed on foot.

古文：彦泽遣控鹤指挥使李筠以兵监守，内外不通。
现代文：张彦泽派控鹤指挥使李筠率兵监守，内外不能通消息。
English: Zhang Yanze sent the commanding officer of the controlling cranes to make Li Jun lead the soldiers to keep watch, and it was impossible to communicate information inside and outside.

古文：帝与太后所上德光表章，皆先示彦泽乃敢遣。
现代文：皇帝和太后上给耶律德光的表章，都事先拿给张彦泽看后纔敢派人送去。
English: The emperor and the empress dowager both showed Zhang Yanze the badge of Yelu Deguang in advance, and he dared to send someone to see it.

古文：帝取内库帛数段，主者曰： 此非帝有也。 
现代文：皇帝想拿几段内库的丝绸，主管的人说： 这不是皇帝的东西。 
English: The emperor wanted to take a few pieces of silk from the treasury, and the person in charge said: This is not the emperor's stuff.

古文：不与。
现代文：不给。
English: In fact, they didn't.

古文：又使求酒于李崧，崧曰： 臣家有酒非敢惜，虑陛下忧躁，饮之有不测之虞，所以不敢进。 
现代文：又派人向李崧要酒，李崧说： 我家有酒不敢吝惜，只是担心陛下忧愁急躁，喝了有难以预测的灾祸，所以不敢进献。 
English: He also sent someone to ask Li Qiye for wine. Li Qiye said, "I dare not begrudge my family for having wine, but I am worried that His Majesty is sad and impatient, and has drunk from an unpredictable disaster, so I dare not offer it."

古文：帝姑乌氏公主私赂守门者，得入与帝诀，归第自经死。
现代文：皇帝的姑姑乌氏公主私下贿赂守门人，得以进去和皇帝诀别，回家后上吊而死。
English: The emperor's aunt, Princess Wu, privately bribed the gatekeeper to let her in to say goodbye to the emperor, and then went home and hanged herself.

古文：德光渡河，帝欲郊迎，彦泽不听，遣白德光，德光报曰： 天无二日，岂有两天子相见于道路邪！ 
现代文：耶律德光渡过黄河，出帝想去郊外迎接，张彦泽不同意，派人告诉耶律德光，耶律德光回答说； 天上没有两个太阳，难道有两个天子在路上相见的事吗！ 于是作罢。
English: Yeludeko crossed the Yellow River and wanted to go out of the imperial palace to meet him in the suburbs. Zhang Yanze disagreed and sent someone to tell Yeludeko. Yeludeko replied, "There are not two suns in the sky. Is it possible for two heavenly sons to meet on the road?" So let it be.

古文：乃止。初，彦泽至京师，李涛谓人曰： 吾祸至矣！
现代文：当初，张彦泽到京师，李涛对人说： 我的灾祸到了！
English: At first, Zhang Yanze went to Beijing to study, Li Tao told people: My disaster has arrived!

古文：与其逃于沟窦而不免，不若往见之。 
现代文：与其逃到沟洞中而不免一死，不如去见他。 
English: Rather than running into a ditch and dying, go see him.

古文：涛见彦泽，为俚语以自投死，彦泽笑而厚待之。
现代文：李涛见到张彦泽，说着粗话自寻死路，张彦泽却笑着对他很优厚。
English: When Li Tao saw Zhang Yanzhe, he said some rude words and tried to kill himself, but Zhang Yanzhe smiled and was very kind to him.

古文：彦泽自以有功于契丹，昼夜酣饮自娱，出入骑从常数百人，犹题其旗帜曰 赤心为主 。
现代文：张彦泽自认为对契丹有功劳，昼夜畅饮娱乐，出入随从的骑兵常常几百人，还在他的旗帜上题写 赤心为主 。
English: Zhang Yanze considered himself to be a credit to the Khitan. He enjoyed drinking and entertainment day and night. The cavalry accompanying him often numbered several hundred. He also inscribed the word "Red Heart" on his banner.

古文：迫迁出帝，遂辇内库，输之私第，因纵军士大掠京师。
现代文：逼迫晋出帝迁走后，就用车载上内库的财物，送到自己家中，并且放纵士兵在京师大肆掠夺。
English: After forcing Emperor Jinzei to move away, he used a vehicle to transport the treasury's belongings to his own home, and allowed soldiers to plunder the imperial palace.

古文：军士逻获罪人，彦泽醉不能问，真目视之，出三手指，军士即驱出断其腰领。
现代文：士兵巡逻抓获罪人，张彦泽酒醉不能审问，瞪着眼睛看他们，伸出三个手指，士兵就把他们推出去砍头斩腰。
English: The soldiers patrolled and captured the criminals. Zhang Yanze was too drunk to interrogate them. He stared at them, held out three fingers, and the soldiers pushed them out to be beheaded.

古文：皇子延煦母楚国夫人丁氏有色，彦泽使人求于皇太后，太后迟疑未与，即劫取之。
现代文：皇子石延煦的母亲楚国夫人丁氏有美色，张彦泽派人向皇太后索求，皇太后迟疑着没有给他，张彦泽就把她抢走。
English: Prince Shi Yanqi's mother, Lady Chu Guo Ding, was beautiful. Zhang Yanze sent someone to ask the empress dowager. The empress dowager hesitated and did not give it to him, so Zhang Yanze snatched her away.

古文：彦泽与阁门使高勋有隙，乘醉入其家，杀数人而去。
现代文：张彦泽和合门使高勋有矛盾，就藉醉闯进他家，杀死几个人离去。
English: Zhang Yanzawa and the conciliator made Gao Xun conflicted, so they broke into his house by drunkenness, killed several people and left.

古文：耶律德光至京师，闻彦泽劫掠，怒，锁之。
现代文：耶律德光到达京师，听说张彦泽四处劫掠，非常生气，把他关起来。
English: When Yerutde Guang arrived in Beijing Division, he heard that Zhang Yanze was robbing everywhere. He was very angry and locked him up.

古文：高勋亦自诉于德光，德光以其状示百官及都人，问： 彦泽当诛否？ 
现代文：高勋也向耶律德光告状，耶律德光把他的状子拿给百官和都人看，问： 张彦泽该不该杀？ 
English: Gao Xun also complained to Yelu Deguang. Yelu Deguang showed his complaint to hundreds of officials and citizens and asked: Should Zhang Yanze be killed?

古文：百官皆请不赦，而都人争投状疏其恶，乃命高勋监杀之。
现代文：百官都请求不要赦免，而国都的人争相投递状子告发他的罪恶，于是命令高勋监督杀掉他。
English: All the officials begged him not to pardon him, and the people of the capital rushed to deliver letters denouncing his crimes, so they ordered Gao Xun to kill him.

古文：彦泽前所杀士大夫子孙，皆缞绖杖哭，随而诟詈，以杖朴之，彦泽俯首无一言。
现代文：以前被张彦泽杀死的士大夫的子孙，都穿上丧服拄着丧杖哭泣，跟在棱面大骂张彦泽，用杖打他，张彦泽低头说不出一句话。
English: The sons and grandsons of the shidafu who had been killed by Zhang Yanze before, all put on mourning clothes and carried mourning canes and wept. They shouted at Zhang Yanze and beat him with canes. Zhang Yanze could not say a word.

古文：行至北市，断腕出锁，然后用刑，勋剖其心祭死者，市人争破其脑，取其髓，脔其肉而食之。
现代文：走到北市，砍断手腕取下枷锁，然后行刑，高勋剖出他的心祭奠死者，街上的人争相砸破他的脑袋，取出脑髓，把他割成碎肉吃掉了。
English: He went to Beicheng, cut off his wrists, took off the shackles, and then executed him. Gao Xun cut out his heart to pay tribute to the deceased. People on the street rushed to smash his head, take out his brain, cut him into pieces and eat him.

古文：呜呼，晋之事丑矣，而恶亦极也！
现代文：唉，后晋的事很丑恶，而罪恶也达到了极点！
English: Alas, the situation in Hojin is very ugly, and the evil has reached an extreme!

古文：其祸乱覆亡之不暇，盖必然之理尔。
现代文：它的祸乱灭亡接踵而来，是必然的道理。
English: It is inevitable that its disastrous demise will come one after another.

古文：使重威等虽不叛以降虏，亦未必不亡；然开虏之隙，自一景延广，而卒成晋祸者，此三人也。
现代文：假使杜重威等人不反叛向敌人投降，它也未必就不灭亡；然而给敌人以可乘之机，是从景延广一人开始的，而最终导致晋的祸患，是杜重威、李守贞、张彦泽三人。
English: If Du Chongwei and others had not rebelled and surrendered to the enemy, the Jin dynasty would not necessarily have survived. However, it was the three men Du Chongwei, Li Shouzhen and Zhang Yanzhe who gave the enemy an opportunity to take advantage of, starting with Jing Yanguang alone, and eventually leading to the calamity of the Jin dynasty.

古文：视重威、彦泽之死，而晋人所以甘心者，可以知其愤疾怨怒于斯人者，非一日也。
现代文：看到杜重威、张彦泽的死，而晋人之所以那样称心快意，就可以知道他们对这些人的痛恨怨怒，不止一天了。
English: Seeing the death of Du Chongwei and Zhang Yanze, and the reason why the Jin people were so happy, we can know that they have been hating and resenting these people for more than a day.

古文：至于争已戮之尸，脔其肉，剔其髓而食之，撦裂蹈践，斯须而尽，何其甚哉！
现代文：至于争夺已经杀戮的尸体，割成碎肉，剔出脑髓来吃，裂尸践踏，瞬间化为乌有，是多么过分呵！
English: As for fighting over corpses that have already been killed, chopped up into minced meat, their brains removed and eaten, their bodies torn apart and trampled on, annihilated in an instant, how outrageous!

古文：此自古未有也。
现代文：这是自古以来没有过的。
English: This has not happened since ancient times.

古文：然当是时，举晋之兵皆在北面，国之存亡，系此三人之胜败，则其任可谓重矣。
现代文：然而在当时，晋的所有军队都在北方，国家的存亡，决定于这三个人的胜败，那么他们的责任可说够重大了。
English: However, at that time, Jin's entire army was in the north, and the country's survival depended on the success or failure of these three men, so their responsibility was quite significant.

古文：盖天下恶之如彼，晋方任之如此，而终以不悟，岂非所谓 临乱之君，各贤其臣 者欤？
现代文：大概天下人那样憎恶他们，晋又这样信任他们，而且始终不能醒悟，遭难道不是人们所说的 面临乱亡的君主，各有自认为贤良的臣子 吗？
English: Perhaps the world hates them as much as they do, and Jin trusts them as much as they do, and still can't wake up. Isn't it true that the monarchs who are said to be facing chaos and death all have courtiers who think they are virtuous?

