古文：王播，字明扬。
现代文：王播字明易攵。
English: Wang Huan's words are clear and easy to understand.

古文：曾祖璡，嘉州司马。
现代文：曾祖王，嘉州司马。
English: Zengzu Wang, Jiashu Sima.

古文：祖升，咸阳令。
现代文：祖父王升，咸阳令。
English: Grandfather Wang Sheng, Xianyang.

古文：父恕，扬府参军。
现代文：父王恕，扬府参军。
English: Father Wang Zhen, Yangfu joined the army.

古文：播擢进士第，登贤良方正制科，授集贤校理，再迁监察御史，转殿中，历侍御史。
现代文：王播进士及第，登贤良方正制科，授集贤校理，升监察御史，转殿中省任职，又做过侍御史。
English: Wang Huan was promoted to the rank of junior and senior, and was awarded the title of "Distinguished Scholar," "Distinguished Scholar," "Distinguished Historian," "Distinguished Historian" and "Distinguished Historian."

古文：贞元末，幸臣李实为京兆尹，恃恩颇横，尝遇播于途，不避。
现代文：贞元末，宠臣李实为京兆尹，仗恃恩宠颇为强横，曾遇王播于途，竟不回避。
English: At the end of the Zhengyuan era, Li Si's favorite vassal was Jing Zhaoyun. He was quite domineering, and when he met Wang Bo on his way, he did not shy away.

古文：故事，尹避台官。
现代文：旧例，府尹回避台官。
English: Under the old system, Fu Yin avoided becoming a Taiwanese official.

古文：播移文诋之；实怒，后奏播为三原令，欲挫之。
现代文：王播向各署发送公文谴责他，李实大怒，后来启奏将王播贬为三原令，企图挫伤王播的锐气。
English: Wang Huan sent official documents to the various departments to condemn him, Li Si was furious, and later the opening ceremony reduced Wang Huan to the three original orders, in an attempt to frustrate Wang Huan's spirit.

古文：播受命，趋府谒谢，尽府县之仪。
现代文：王播受命，赴府衙谒见拜谢，严守府县上下级之礼仪。
English: Wang Huan was ordered to go to the prefecture to see the thanksgiving and strictly abide by the etiquette of the prefectures and counties.

古文：及临所部，政理修明，恃势豪门，未尝贷法。
现代文：及至赴辖县上任，政事办理得妥善明白，那些倚仗权势的豪门贵族，犯法亦不能宽免。
English: When he took office in the county under his jurisdiction, he handled political affairs properly and clearly, and those aristocrats who relied on their power could not be forgiven for breaking the law.

古文：岁终考课，为畿邑之最。
现代文：年终考核，为京畿各县之最优。
English: The year-end assessment is the best among all counties in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：实以其人有政术，甚礼重之，频荐之于上。
现代文：李实因王播治政有方，对他甚为敬重，频频向皇上推荐。
English: Li Si held Wang Bo Zhi in high esteem because of his skillful governance, and frequently recommended him to the emperor.

古文：德宗奇之，将不次拔用，会母丧。
现代文：德宗认为他才能出众，打算破格擢用，可王播恰值母丧。
English: Dezong thought that his talent was outstanding, and he planned to use it to break the mold, but Wang Biao happened to be a mother's death.

古文：顺宗即位，除驾部郎中，改长安令。
现代文：顺宗即位，授王播驾部郎中，改任长安令。
English: Shunsong ascended to the throne, and he was appointed to the post of Janganling.

古文：岁中，迁工部郎中，知台杂，刺举纲宪，为人所称。
现代文：这一年中，调任工部郎中，知台府杂务，他敢于调查举报上司，受到人们的称赞。
English: During this year, he was transferred to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and he dared to investigate and report his boss, which was praised by people.

古文：转考功郎中，出为虢州刺史。
现代文：调任考功郎中，出任虢州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the meritorious examination, and served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：李巽领盐铁，奏为副使、兵部郎中。
现代文：李巽代理盐铁使，奏请王播为盐铁副使、兵部郎中。
English: Li Jun, acting as envoy of the Salt and Iron Ministry, asked Wang Bo to be the deputy envoy of the Salt and Iron Ministry and a junior member of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：元和五年，代李夷简为御史中丞。
现代文：元和五年，替代李夷简为御史中丞。
English: In the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he replaced Li Yijian as Goshi Chujo.

古文：振举朝章，百职修举。
现代文：他努力振兴朝纲，使各项政务得以施行。
English: He worked hard to revitalize the imperial system, so that various government affairs could be carried out smoothly.

古文：十月，代许孟容为京兆尹。
现代文：十月，替代许孟容为京兆尹。
English: In October, the replacement of Xu Meng Rong was Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：时禁军诸镇布列畿内，军人出入，属鞬佩剑，往往盗发，难以擒奸。
现代文：此时禁军诸镇遍布京畿地区，军人出入，皆携弓佩剑，往往生发盗案，难以擒捉奸人。
English: At this time, the banned troops were all over the towns in the Gyeonggi region. Soldiers went in and out, all carrying bows and swords. Theft cases often occurred, and it was difficult to catch the traitors.

古文：布播奏请畿内军镇将卒，出入不得持戎具，诸王驸马权豪之家，不得于畿内按试鹰犬畋猎之具。
现代文：因而王播奏请京畿内军镇将卒，出入不得携带武器，诸王、驸马及权豪之家，不得在京畿内验试鹰犬及狩猎器械。
English: Therefore, Wang Bansong asked the military commanders in Gyeonggi Province not to carry weapons in and out of the province, and the kings, emperors and powerful families were not allowed to test eagle dogs and hunting equipment in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：诏从之，自是奸盗弭息。
现代文：诏命允从，从此奸盗止息。
English: The imperial edict was obeyed, and thievery ceased.

古文：六年三月，转刑部侍郎，充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：元和六年三月，调任刑部侍郎，充当诸道盐铁转运使。
English: In March of the 6th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department, and served as the envoy for the transfer of salt and iron from various provinces.

古文：播长于吏术，虽案牍鞅掌，剖析如流，黠吏诋欺，无不彰败。
现代文：王播长于属吏事务，即使案牍烦杂难阅，亦能剖析如流。黠吏妄图诋毁欺瞒，无不被他揭穿而败露。
English: Wang Huan is good at bureaucratic affairs. Even if the case is tedious and difficult to read, he can analyze it smoothly. Bureaucrats try to discredit and deceive, and nothing can be exposed without being exposed by him.

古文：时天下多故，法寺议谳，科条繁杂。
现代文：当时天下多事，大理寺议罪，条目繁杂。
English: At that time, there were a lot of things going on in the world, and the Dalian Temple was involved in a lot of controversies.

古文：播备举前后格条，置之座右。凡有详决，疾速如神。
现代文：王播将前后格条全部集中，置于座右备查，凡详审裁决，疾速如神。
English: Wang Huan concentrated all the lattices before and after, placed them on the right of the seat for inspection, and the detailed review of the ruling was as fast as a god.

古文：当时属僚，叹服不暇。
现代文：当时一班属吏幕僚，无不叹服至极。
English: At that time, there was a group of staff officers, all of whom were extremely impressed.

古文：十年四月，改礼部尚书，领使如故。
现代文：元和十年四月，改任礼部尚书，代理使务如前。
English: In April of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was reassigned to the ceremonial department of Shangshu, acting as before.

古文：先是，李巽以程异为江淮院官，异又通泉货，及播领使，奏之为副。
现代文：这之先，李巽让程异做江淮院官，程异又通晓钱财货币之事，及至王播代理使务，奏请程异为副使。
English: Prior to this, Li Gan made Cheng Yi an official of the Jianghuai Academy, and Cheng Yi was also familiar with money and currency, and Wang Bo acted as the deputy envoy, and asked Cheng Yi to be the deputy envoy.

古文：当王师讨吴元济，令异乘传往江淮，赋舆大集，以至贼平，深有力焉。
现代文：当王师讨伐吴元济时，令程异乘驿车往江淮，征集了大批军用物资，为平定叛乱出了大力。
English: When Wang Shi was fighting against Wu Yuanji, Ling Cheng took a stagecoach to Jianghuai and collected a large number of military supplies, exerting great efforts to quell the rebellion.

古文：及皇甫镈用事，恐播大用，乃请以使务命程异领之，播守本官而已。
现代文：及至皇甫钅甫寸执政，惟恐王播被重用，于是奏请命程异代理使务，王播只担任本官便可。
English: When Emperor Fuxiong Fuxun came to power, Wang Bo was afraid that he would be reused, so he asked for a different assignment. Wang Bo could only serve as his own official.

古文：十三年，检校户部尚书、成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
现代文：元和十三年，检校户部尚书、成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and Heian dynasties, Shang Shu, Chengdu Yin, and Jian Nan Nishikawa were sent to inspect the school.

古文：穆宗即位，皇甫镈贬，播累表求还京师。
现代文：穆宗即位，皇甫钅甫寸被贬斥，王播屡次上表请求调回京师。
English: Emperor Mu Zong ascended the throne, Emperor Fu Xi Fuxin was reviled, and Wang Han repeatedly petitioned to be transferred back to the capital.

古文：长庆元年七月，征还，拜刑部尚书，复领盐铁转运等使。
现代文：长庆元年七月，召还，拜刑部尚书，再度兼任盐铁转运使等职。
English: In July of the first year of the Changqing era, he was recalled to the Penal Correction Department, and once again concurrently served as the Salt and Iron Transportation Officer.

古文：十月，兼中书侍郎、平章事，领使如故。
现代文：十月，兼中书侍郎、平章事，代理使务如故。
English: In October, he also served as the chancellor's secretary and secretary to Taira no Shoji, and continued to serve as acting envoy.

古文：长庆中，内外权臣，率多假借。
现代文：长庆年间，内外权臣大都彼此借助。
English: During the period of Changqing, most of the powerful ministers at home and abroad took advantage of each other.

古文：播因铜盐擢居辅弼，专以承迎为事，而安危启沃，不措一言。
现代文：王播因主管铜盐之事擢居宰辅之位，专侍奉承迎合，而对国家安危大计，不出一言。
English: Wang Bi, who was promoted to the position of vice-minister because he was in charge of copper and salt, was devoted to flattery and pandering, and did not say a word about the national security plan.

古文：时河北复叛，朝廷用兵。
现代文：此时河北又叛乱，朝廷用兵讨伐。
English: At this time, Hebei rebelled again, and the imperial court sent troops to put down the rebellion.

古文：会裴度自太原入觐，朝野物论，言度不宜居外。
现代文：恰好裴度自太原入朝晋见，朝野上下一片议论，说裴度不宜身居朝外。
English: It just so happened that Pei Du came from Taiyuan to see Emperor Jin, and there was a lot of discussion in the morning and evening, saying that Pei Du was not suitable to live outside the imperial court.

古文：明年三月，留度复知政事，以播代度为淮南节度使、检校右仆射，领使如故。
现代文：次年三月，诏令裴度留朝重掌政事，命王播替代裴度为淮南节度使、检校右仆射，代理使务如故。
English: In March of the following year, Baidu was ordered by the emperor to stay in China and resume political affairs, and Wang Bo ordered Baidu to be replaced by Huainan Jiedu Envoy, Inspection of Schools Right Handed Envoy, and Acting Envoy as before.

古文：仍请携盐铁印赴镇，上都院印，请别给赐，从之。
现代文：王播便奏请携盐铁使印赴镇，并奏请另赐上都院印，诏命允从。
English: Wang Bo then requested the envoy to bring the salt and iron seal to the town, and also requested that the Shangduin seal be given, which was complied with.

古文：播至淮南，属岁旱俭，人相啖食，课最不充，设法掊敛，比屋嗟怨。
现代文：王播到了淮南，碰上天旱歉收，人相啖食，根本无力缴纳赋税。官府设法征收，百姓户户嗟怨。
English: Wang Xuan came to Huainan, encountered drought and poor harvest, and was unable to pay taxes. The government tried to collect the taxes, but the people resented it.

古文：敬宗即位，就加银青光禄大夫、检校司空，罢盐铁转运使。
现代文：敬宗即位，便加授王播为银青光禄大夫、检校司空，免去盐铁转运使职务。
English: When Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, Wang Bo was additionally awarded the titles of Silver Qingguanglu Doctor and School Inspection Officer, and was exempted from the post of Salt and Iron Transport Envoy.

古文：时中尉王守澄用事，播自落利权，广求珍异，令腹心吏内结守澄，以为之助。
现代文：当时护军中尉王守澄当权，王播权力旁落，于是广求珍异之物，命属吏中心腹秘密结交王守澄，以图他的帮助。
English: At that time, the guard lieutenant Wang Shoucheng was in power, and Wang Bo's power was falling by the wayside, so he sought out rare things, and ordered the subordinate officials to secretly make friends with Wang Shoucheng to seek his help.

古文：守澄乘闲启奏，言播有才，上于延英言之。
现代文：王守澄伺机启奏，说王播有才，皇上在延英殿将这话对群臣说了。
English: Wang Shoucheng waited for the opening and said that Wang Bo had talent, and the emperor said this to the courtiers at Yan Ying Palace.

古文：谏议大夫独孤朗、张仲方，起居郎孔敏行、柳公权、宋申锡，补阙韦仁实、刘敦儒，拾遗李景让、薛廷老等，请开延英面奏播之奸邪，交结宠幸，复求大用。
现代文：谏议大夫独孤朗、张仲方，起居郎孔敏行、柳公权、宋申锡，补阙韦仁实、刘敦儒，拾遗李景让、薛廷老等，请皇上开延英殿以便面奏王播为人奸邪，交结宠贵，企图重新受重用。
English: Dr. Dukuyulang, Zhang Zhongfang, Dr. Kong Minxing, Liu Gongquan, Song Shensi, Dr. Wei Renshi, Liu Dunru, Dr. Li Jingzhang, Xue Ting, etc. asked the emperor to open the Yan Ying palace so that Wang Xuan would be exposed as a traitor and a favorite, in an attempt to be re-used.

古文：天子冲幼，不能用其言。
现代文：天子年幼，未能采纳他们的意见。
English: He was too young to take their advice.

古文：自是，物议纷然不息。
现代文：从此，舆论纷然不息。
English: Since then, public opinion has been in an uproar.

古文：明年正月，播复领盐铁转运使。
现代文：次年正月，王播重任盐铁转运使。
English: In the first month of the following year, Wang Biao was reappointed as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：播既得旧职，乃于铜盐之内，巧为赋敛，以事月进。名为羡余，其实正额，务希奖擢，不恤人言。
现代文：他既得旧职，便在铜盐税收之内，巧设名目敛取，借故按月进奉，名为羡余钱，实际是正式税额，一心指望奖赏擢升，不顾人们议论。
English: Once he got the old post, he took advantage of the copper and salt tax, cleverly set up the name of the collection, borrowed the excuse of the monthly payment, called the surplus money, but it was actually the official tax amount, and hoped for the reward and promotion, regardless of people's discussion.

古文：时扬州城内官河水浅，遇旱即滞漕船。乃奏自城南阊门西七里港开河向东，屈曲取禅智寺桥通旧官河，开凿稍深，舟航易济；所开长一十九里，其工役料度，不破省钱，当使方圆自备，而漕运不阻。
现代文：当时扬州城内官河水浅，遇旱则漕运之船滞阻难行，王播便奏请自城南阊门西边七里港开河向东，弯曲取道禅智寺桥通向旧官河，开凿稍深，航路易于畅通，所开河道长一十九里，其工役用料开支，不破费朝廷省署之钱，当由各地自筹，这样漕运便不再滞阻。
English: At that time, the water of the Guanhe River in Yangzhou was shallow, and in the event of drought, it was difficult for the rowing boat to travel. Wang Bansong asked the seven-mile port west of the South Gate of the city to open the river to the east, take the curved road of the Zenji Temple Bridge to the old Guanhe River, dig a little deeper, and the navigation was smooth. The river was nineteen miles long. The cost of labor and materials was not less than the money spent by the imperial court and the provincial department. It should be self-financed by all regions, so that the rowing would no longer be blocked.

古文：后政赖之。
现代文：后任官员亦仰赖王播此举之利。
English: Subsequent officials also relied on Wang Bo's move.

古文：文宗即位，就加检校司徒。
现代文：文宗即位，加授检校司徒。
English: Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, and the title of imperial inspector was added.

古文：太和元年五月，自淮南入觐，进大小银碗三千四百枚、绫绢二十万匹。
现代文：大和元年五月，王播自淮南入朝晋见，进奉大小银碗三千四百枚、绫绢二十万匹。
English: In May of the first year of the Yamato era, Wang Bo entered the Jin Dynasty from Huainan, bringing with him 3,400 silver bowls and 200,000 horses.

古文：六月，拜尚书左仆射、同平章事，领使如故。
现代文：六月，拜尚书左仆射、同平章事，代理使务如故。
English: In June, Bai Shangshu left his post to join Tongping Zhang, and his duties as deputy envoy remained unchanged.

古文：二年，进封太原公、太清宫使。
现代文：二年，进封太原公、太清宫使。
English: Two years later, he became an envoy of the Taiyuan Emperor and the Taiqing Emperor.

古文：四年正月，患喉肿暴卒，时年七十二。废朝三日，赠太尉。
现代文：四年正月，患喉肿暴病身亡，时年七十二，停朝三日，追赠太尉。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, he died of laryngitis, at the age of seventy-two, and was posthumously awarded the rank of captain.

古文：播出自单门，以文辞自立；践升华显，郁有能名。
现代文：王播出身寒门，以文辞入仕，荣登华贵之位，颇富才名。
English: Wang Huan was born in a poor family, entered the service with a literary degree, and rose to a position of high rank. He was quite rich and famous.

古文：而随势沉浮，不存士行；奸邪进取，君子耻之。
现代文：但随势沉浮，不保持士人节操，依靠奸邪手段获取进升，君子以为羞耻。
English: However, with the ups and downs of the times, he did not maintain the discipline of a scholar, and relied on treachery and evil means to obtain promotion. The gentleman thought it was shameful.

古文：曾祖贞简。
现代文：曾祖李贞简。
English: Zengzu Li Zhenjian.

古文：祖刚，官终宰邑。
现代文：祖父李刚，官至县令。
English: His grandfather, Li Gang, was a high-ranking official and county magistrate.

古文：父元善，襄州录事参军。
现代文：父李元善，任襄州录事参军。
English: His father, Li Yuanzen, joined the army as a conscript in Xiangzhou.

古文：绛举进士，登宏辞科，授秘书省校书郎。
现代文：李绛应举进士，登博学宏辞科，授秘书省校书郎。
English: Li Yan should be promoted to a scholar, and he should be awarded the title of provincial school scribe.

古文：秩满，补渭南尉。
现代文：任满，补渭南县尉。
English: Upon completion of his term of office, he was promoted to the rank of Suifenan County Lieutenant.

古文：贞元末，拜监察御史。
现代文：贞元末，拜监察御史。
English: At the end of the reign of Sadamoto, he became the inspector general.

古文：元和二年，以本官充翰林学士。
现代文：元和二年，以本官充任翰林学士。
English: In the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：未几，改尚书主客员外郎。
现代文：不久，改授尚书主客员外郎。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Shangshu host and guest member.

古文：逾年，转司勋员外郎。
现代文：一年后，调任司勋员外郎。
English: A year later, he was transferred to the post of Grand Officer of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：五年，迁本司郎中、知制诰。
现代文：五年，升本司郎中、知制诰。
English: In the fifth year, he was promoted to the position of junior secretary, and became chisel master.

古文：皆不离内职，孜孜以匡谏为己任。
现代文：均未离朝任职，勤勉不息以匡救劝谏为己任。
English: All of them have not left the government, and they have been diligently doing their best to help and advise.

古文：宪宗即位，叛臣李锜阻兵于浙右。
现代文：宪宗即位时，叛臣李钅奇聚兵于浙右。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, the renegade minister Li Hongqi gathered soldiers in Zhe Zu.

古文：锜既诛，朝廷将辇其所没家财。绛上言曰： 李锜凶狡叛戾，僭侈诛求，刻剥六州之人，积成一道之苦。
现代文：李钅奇被诛后，朝廷将发车运取其被没收的家财，李绛上言道： 李钅奇凶顽狡诈背叛朝廷，僭越放纵勒索百姓，剥夺六州之人，积成一道之苦。
English: After Li Rongqi was arrested, the imperial court would send a car to take away his confiscated family wealth. Li Rong said: Li Rongqi betrayed the imperial court, extorted the people, deprived the people of six states, and accumulated a lot of suffering.

古文：圣恩本以叛乱致讨，苏息一方。
现代文：圣恩本因其叛乱而进讨，使一方得以安宁复苏。
English: Sainte-Geneviève intervened because of his rebellion, allowing one side to recover peacefully.

古文：今辇运钱帛，播闻四海，非所谓式遏乱略，惠绥困穷。
现代文：现在辇运钱帛，传闻四海，就不是什么遏制叛乱、安抚困穷了。
English: Now, transporting money and rumours are everywhere, it is no longer a matter of curbing rebellion and appeasing the poor.

古文：伏望天慈，并赐本道，代贫下户今年租税，则万姓欣戴，四海歌咏矣。 
现代文：伏望圣慈，将没收之钱帛一并赐予本道，顶替贫苦民户今年租税，则万姓欢呼、四海歌咏啊。 
English: Fubang Shengci gave all the confiscated money to the church, replacing the poor people's tax this year, and everyone cheered and sang songs.

古文：宪宗嘉之。
现代文：宪宗嘉许他。
English: Kenzong praised him.

古文：时中官吐突承璀自籓邸承恩宠，为神策护军中尉，乃于安国佛寺建立《圣政碑》，大兴功作，仍请翰林为其文。
现代文：此时中官吐突承璀得恩宠。自藩王府擢升神策护军中尉，即于安国佛寺建立《圣政碑》，大兴歌功颂德之事，并请翰林撰写碑文。
English: At this time, Lieutenant Colonel Tu Tu Cheng was favored. He was promoted from the king's palace of the clan to the lieutenant of the Divine Protection Force, that is, he established the "Sacred Government Monument" in the Anguo Buddhist Temple, and invited Hanlin to write the inscription.

古文：绛上言曰：
现代文：李绛上言道：
English: Li Qiye said:

古文：陛下布惟新之政，刬积习之弊，四海延颈，日望德音。
现代文： 陛下推行新政，铲除旧法之弊，四海引颈，日日翘望德音。
English: His Majesty is promoting the New Deal, eradicating the evils of the old law, leading the four seas, and looking forward to the sound of virtue day by day.

古文：今忽立《圣政碑》，示天下以不广。
现代文：今忽立《圣政碑》，是示意天下人不能安心。
English: The sudden erection of the "Sacred Government Monument" is a sign that people around the world cannot rest easy.

古文：《易》称：大人者与天地合德，与日月合明。
现代文：《易》称：品行高尚之人与天地合德，与日月齐明。
English: "Yi" said: A person of high moral character is in harmony with heaven and earth, and is aligned with the sun and the moon.

古文：执契垂拱，励精求理，岂可以文字而尽圣德，碑表而赞皇猷？
现代文：受命理政，当励精图治，岂能以一篇文字终止圣上之恩德，以一方碑表替代君王之谋略？
English: If you are ordered to administer the government, and you work hard to govern, can you end the divine grace with a single letter, and replace the king's strategy with a single tablet?

古文：若可叙述，是有分限，亏损盛德，岂谓敷扬至道哉？
现代文：若可叙述，则需恰当，如果损害陛下盛德，还谈得上弘扬济世之大道吗？
English: If it can be described, it needs to be done properly. If it harms His Majesty's virtue, can we still talk about promoting the road of benevolence?

古文：故自尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，并无建碑之事。
现代文：故自尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，并无建碑之事。
English: Therefore, there is no need to build a monument for Zi, Zi, Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu.

古文：至秦始皇荒逸之君，烦酷之政，然后有罘、峄之碑，扬诛伐之功，纪巡幸之迹，适足为百王所笑，万代所讥。至今称为失道亡国之主，岂可拟议于此！
现代文：到了秦始皇这个荒暴放纵之君，施行混乱酷虐之政，然后有芝罘、峄山之碑，颂扬诛伐之功，记载巡幸之迹，恰好足为百王所笑、万代所讥，至今被称为失道亡国之君，岂可仿效此人？
English: When it came to Qin Shihuang, the prince of violence and indulgence, who implemented a chaotic and cruel government, and then had the Zhisheng and Lushan Monuments, which celebrated the achievements of the eunuchs, and recorded the traces of the pilgrimage, he was just enough to be laughed at by hundreds of kings and ridiculed by all generations, and has been called the prince of the lost country. Can we follow this person?

古文：陛下嗣高祖、太宗之业，举贞观、开元之政，思理不遑食，从谏如顺流；固可与尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武方驾而行，又安得追秦皇暴虐不经之事，而自损圣政？
现代文：陛下承继高祖、太宗之事业，开拓贞观、开元之政局，思治而忘食，从谏如顺流，本可与尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武并驾齐驱，又怎能追效秦皇暴虐无道之事而自损圣政？
English: His majesty succeeded the undertakings of Gao Zu and Taizong, opened up the political situation of Zhenguan and Kaigen, thought about and forgot to eat, and followed the flow of the river. He could have been on a par with Yao, Yao, Yu, Tang, Wen and Wu, but how could he follow the Qin Emperor's tyrannical and senseless things and self-damage the sacred government?

古文：近者，阎巨源请立纪圣功碑，陛下详尽事宜，皆不允许。
现代文：前些时，阎巨源奏请立纪圣功碑，陛下详察此事，概不允许。
English: Some time ago, Yan Jiuyuan made a request to erect a monument to commemorate his heroic deeds. His Majesty inspected the matter in detail and did not allow it.

古文：今忽令立此，与前事颇乖。
现代文：今忽令立此碑，与先前之举措截然相违。
English: The sudden decision to erect the monument is in stark contrast to previous moves.

古文：况此碑既在安国寺，不得不叙载游观宗饰之事。述游观且乖理要，叙崇饰又匪政经，固非哲王所宜行也。
现代文：再说此碑既在安国寺，不得不叙述记载游观崇饰之事，述游观不合立碑旨意，叙崇饰又非关治政常则，原本不是圣哲君王所应做的。
English: Moreover, since this monument is in Anguo Temple, it is necessary to describe the details of the description of the tour of worship, and the description of the tour is not in accordance with the intention of erecting the monument, and the description of the worship is not related to the rules of government, and it is not what the king of saints should have done.

古文：其碑，伏乞圣恩特令寝罢。
现代文：此碑，伏乞圣恩特别下令罢止。 
English: This monument, Fuxi Sheng'en specifically ordered to stop.

古文：宪宗深然之，其碑遂止。
现代文：宪宗认为所言极是，立碑之事便作罢。
English: Kenzong believes that what he said is true, and the monument will not be erected.

古文：绛后因浴堂北廊奏对，极论中官纵恣、方镇进献之事。宪宗怒，厉声曰： 卿所论奏，何太过耶？ 
现代文：后来李绛因在浴堂北廊奏对，极力抨击中官放纵恣肆、方镇奉迎进献之事，宪宗恼怒，厉声说道： 卿所论奏，何以太过分？ 
English: Later, because Li Qiye played the piano in the north corridor of the bathhouse, he strongly criticized the indulgence and arbitrariness of the middle-ranking officials and the dedication of the town. Kenzong was angry and said in a loud voice: What is too much for you to play?

古文：绛前论不已，曰： 臣所谏论，于臣无利，是国家之利。
现代文：李绛上前辩说不已，道： 臣所谏论，于臣无利，是国家之利。
English: Li Yao argued until he was exhausted. He said, "It is not in the interest of the minister to argue with the minister, but in the interest of the country.

古文：陛下不以臣愚，使处腹心之地，岂可见事亏圣德，致损清时，而惜身不言？仰屋窃叹，是臣负陛下也。
现代文：陛下不嫌臣愚，使臣处于腹心之地，岂可见事有亏圣德，有损清世，却顾惜自身而不出一言，仰视屋梁暗地叹息，这样便是为臣辜负陛下呀。
English: Your Majesty does not dislike foolishness in a vassal, and when a vassal is in the position of a confidant, can you not see that there is a loss of sanctity, a loss of purity, but you take care of yourself without uttering a word, looking up at the rafters and secretly sighing. In this way, you are failing your Majesty as a vassal.

古文：若不顾患祸，尽诚奏论，旁忤幸臣，上犯圣旨，以此获罪，是陛下负臣也。
现代文：若臣不避祸患，竭诚奏论，旁忤宠臣，上犯圣旨，因此获罪，那就是陛下辜负臣了。
English: If a minister does not avoid a calamity, devotes himself wholeheartedly to the cause, sides with a favorite minister, and transgresses the sacred will, and is therefore found guilty, then His Majesty has failed his minister.

古文：且臣与中官，素不相识，又无嫌隙，只是威福太盛，上损圣朝，臣所以不敢不论耳。
现代文：再说臣与中官素不相识，又无仇怨，只因他们作威作福太甚，上损盛朝，所以臣不敢不论奏。
English: Furthermore, the vassal and the lieutenant-general had never known each other, and had no grudge against each other. It was only because they had been too arrogant and spoiled the prosperity of the dynasty, that the vassal did not dare to play independently.

古文：使臣缄默，非社稷之福也。 
现代文：假若臣缄默不语，并非社稷之福呀。 
English: If ministers remain silent, it is not a blessing for society.

古文：宪宗见其诚切，改容慰喻之曰： 卿尽节于朕，人所难言者，卿悉言之，使朕闻所不闻，真忠正诚节之臣也。
现代文：宪宗见他十分诚挚，缓和了脸色抚慰他道： 卿对朕竭尽臣节，人所难言之事，卿尽皆言说，使朕能听到平素听不到的话，真正是忠诚守节之臣哪。
English: Seeing that he was very sincere, Gensong softened his face and comforted him, saying, "Your Excellency has done his best for me as a vassal. You have said all the things that are difficult for people to say, so that I can hear what I cannot normally hear. You are truly a loyal and loyal vassal."

古文：他日南面，亦须如此。 
现代文：他日为众官之长，亦须如此。 
English: He is the chief of all officers, and must act as such.

古文：绛拜恩而退。
现代文：李绛拜恩而退。
English: Li Shibai bowed and retreated.

古文：遽宣宰臣，令与改官，乃授中书舍人，依前翰林学士。
现代文：皇上立即宣旨宰臣，令与李绛调职。于是授以中书舍人，充任翰林学士如前。
English: The emperor immediately issued an edict appointing him as a vice-minister and transferring him to the same position as Li Qian. He was then awarded the title of Senior Scholar of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and continued to serve as Hanlin Scholar as before.

古文：翌日，面赐金紫，帝亲为绛择良笏赐之。
现代文：次日，面赐紫服金鱼袋，皇上亲自为李绛择一良笏赐给他。
English: The next day, he was presented with a purple goldfish bag, and the emperor personally selected a good luck charm for him.

古文：前后朝臣裴武、柳公绰、白居易等，或为奸人所排陷，特加贬黜；绛每以密疏申论，皆获宽宥。
现代文：前后朝臣裴武、柳公绰、白居易等，往往被奸人排斥陷害，朝廷特意加以贬黜。李绛每每以秘密奏疏为之辩诉，皆获宽赦。
English: The courtiers Pei Wu, Liu Gongqiao, Bai Juyi and others were often ostracized and framed by the traitors, and the imperial court deliberately disparaged them. Li Qiye always filed a secret appeal, and all were pardoned.

古文：及镇州节度使王士真死，朝廷将用兵讨除，绛深陈以为未可。
现代文：及至镇州节度使王士真死，朝廷将发兵扫除余党，李绛竭力陈说认为不可。
English: As far as the Zhenzhou Festival, Wang Shizhen was killed, and the imperial court would send troops to sweep away the remaining party. Li Yan tried his best to say that it was impossible.

古文：绛既尽心匡益，帝每有询访，多协事机。
现代文：李绛既然尽心辅佐，皇上每有询问，他多能抓住事情的关键。
English: Since Li Qian was a dedicated aide, whenever the emperor asked questions, he was able to grasp the key to the matter.

古文：六年，犹以中人之故，罢学士，守户产侍郎，判本司事。
现代文：元和六年，仍因谏奏中官之故，罢免翰林学士，代理户部侍郎，判本司事。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan and Yuan Dynasty, Hanlin Biao, acting as the head of the household, and Hanbon Siji were removed from their posts due to the fact that they played the role of middle-ranking officials.

古文：尝因次对，宪宗曰： 户部比有进献，至卿独无，何也？ 
现代文：曾因事应对，宪宗道： 户部每年有进献，到了你便没了，是何原故？ 
English: In response to a question, Gensong said, "The head of the household makes a donation every year, but when it comes to you, it's gone. Why is that?

古文：绛曰： 将户部钱献入内藏，是用物以结私恩。 
现代文：李绛说： 将户部钱献入内库，这是用钱财来结私恩。 
English: Li Wei said: Donating household money to the internal treasury is using money and wealth to gain personal favor.

古文：上耸然，益嘉其直。
现代文：皇上听罢肃然起敬，越发赞许他的鲠直。
English: Hearing this, the Emperor was awestruck and praised him all the more for his straightforwardness.

古文：吐突承璀恩宠莫二，是岁，将用绛为宰相；前一日，出承璀为淮南监军。
现代文：吐突承璀最受恩宠，这年，准备起用李绛为宰相。前一日，令吐突承璀出任淮南监军。
English: The most favored was Tu Tu Cheng Ho, this year, Li Kui was prepared to be appointed as prime minister. The day before, Tu Tu Cheng Ho was appointed as the supervisor of Huainan troops.

古文：翌日，降制，以绛为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：次日，降下制书，授李绛为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The next day, he was demoted to the position of book maker, and Li Xi was awarded the title of the attendant of the Chinese book and the title of the lower level of the Chinese book.

古文：同列李吉甫便僻，善逢迎上意；绛梗直，多所规谏，故与吉甫不协。
现代文：同列相位的李吉甫乖巧谄媚，善逢迎皇上之意，而李绛鲠直，对皇上多所规谏，因此同李吉甫不和。
English: Li Jifu, who was in the same line, was good-natured and charming, and was good at meeting the emperor's wishes, but Li Yanzhi, who had many rules and regulations for the emperor, was at odds with Li Jifu.

古文：时议者以吉甫通于承璀，故绛尤恶之。
现代文：当时舆论认为李吉甫同吐突承璀相勾结，所以李绛特别厌恶他。
English: At that time, the public opinion believed that Li Jifu was in collusion with Tucu Chengyu, so Li Xuan particularly detested him.

古文：绛性刚讦，每与吉甫争论，人多直绛。
现代文：李绛性情刚直，每与李吉甫争论，人们多以李绛为是。
English: Li Gan was a man of upright character. Whenever he argued with Li Jifu, people mostly took Li Gan to be right.

古文：宪宗察绛忠正自立，故绛论奏，多所允从。
现代文：宪宗明察李绛忠正守节，故李绛论奏，多所允从。
English: The Kenzong clearly observed that Li Shizhong was observing the festival, so Li Shizhong played the recital, and many agreed to follow.

古文：上尝谓绛曰： 卜筮之事，习者罕精，或中或否。
现代文：皇上曾对李绛说： 卜筮之事，研习者极少能精通，有时应验，有时不中。
English: The emperor once said to Li Qiye: In matters of divination, students are rarely proficient, sometimes they pass, sometimes they fail.

古文：近日风俗，尤更崇尚，何也？ 
现代文：近来风气，更加崇尚，是何原故？ 
English: Recently, the culture is more reverent, why is that?

古文：对曰： 臣闻古先哲王畏天命，示不敢专，邦有大事可疑者，故先谋于卿士庶人，次决于卜筮，俱协则行之。
现代文：李绛答道： 臣闻古代圣王畏惧天命，理事不敢专断，因此国家有大事难以决断者，先同卿士庶人商议，其次依靠卜筮判断，两者一致便施行。
English: Li Lan replied: According to the ancient sages, the holy king feared the fate of heaven, and the director did not dare to arbitrate. Therefore, if the country had important matters that were difficult to decide, it should first consult with the nobles and commoners, and then rely on the judgment of the magistrate, and the two would be implemented in unison.

古文：末俗浮伪，幸以徼福。
现代文：陋俗虚浮，侥幸求福。
English: Vulgarity and vanity, seeking fortune by chance.

古文：正行虑危，邪谋觊安，迟疑昏惑，谓小数能决之。
现代文：正直之行为无人赞同，邪恶之计谋畅通无阻，人们迟疑昏惑，以为小小伎俩便能决事。
English: No one approves of honest behavior, evil schemes go unimpeded, and people are hesitant and confused, thinking that small tricks can solve things.

古文：而愚夫愚妇，假时日鬼神者，欲利欺诈，参之见闻，用以刺射小近之事，神而异之。
现代文：而愚夫愚妇借口选吉日敬鬼神，一味贪利欲行欺诈，参杂市井见闻，用以预测眼下之事，自诩神异。
English: But the foolish man and the foolish woman worship ghosts and gods under the pretext of choosing a lucky day, are greedy for profit, want to commit fraud, and use hearsay to predict the current situation, pretending to be supernatural.

古文：近者，风俗近巫，此诚弊俗。
现代文：近来，风气近于巫术，这确是陋俗。
English: Lately, the culture is closer to witchcraft, which is really vulgar.

古文：圣旨所及，实辨邪源。
现代文：圣旨所及，实能辨清邪恶之源。
English: Within the reach of the Holy Will, the source of evil can indeed be discerned.

古文：但存而不论，弊斯息矣。 
现代文：但其理既存勿加议论，弊陋习俗自会消除。 
English: However, there is no need to discuss the existing reasons, and the bad customs will be eliminated.

古文：他日延英，上曰： 朕读《玄宗实录》，见开元致理，天宝兆乱。
现代文：一日在延英殿，皇上道： 朕读《玄宗实录》，见开元大治，天宝始乱。
English: On the first day at Yan Ying Dian, the emperor said, "I read "The True Record of the Xuanzong," see the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, the beginning of the Tianbao Rebellion.

古文：事出一朝，治乱相反，何也？ 
现代文：事出一朝，治乱相反，何故？ 
English: Why is it that as soon as something happens, it's chaos instead of order?

古文：绛对曰：
现代文：李绛应答道：
English: Li Lan replied:

古文：臣闻理生于危心，乱生于肆志。
现代文： 臣闻治生于思危之心，乱生于恣肆之志。
English: Subordinate discipline is born out of a sense of crisis, and chaos is born out of a desire to be reckless.

古文：玄宗自天后朝出居籓邸，尝莅官守，接时贤于外，知人事之艰难。
现代文：玄宗自天后朝出居藩王府第，曾居官守职，在朝外接触当世贤才，了解人事之艰难。
English: Xuanzong lived in the palace of the king of the domain from the time of the Queen of Heaven and Earth. He had served as an official and was in charge of duties. He came into contact with contemporary talents outside the court and learned about the difficulties of personnel.

古文：临御之初，任姚崇、宋璟，二人皆忠鲠上才，动以致主为心。
现代文：即位之初，任用姚崇、宋王景，二人皆忠诚鲠直绝异人才，行事均怀报主之心。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement, Yao Chong and Song Wangjing were appointed. Both of them are loyal, upright and extraordinary talents, and they all act with the heart of reporting to the Lord.

古文：明皇乘思理之初，亦励精听纳，故当时名贤在位，左右前后，皆尚忠正。
现代文：明皇登位之初，亦能励精图治听纳忠言，故当时名贤在位，左右前后之臣，皆崇尚忠恳正直。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Emperor's ascension to the throne, he was also able to make efforts to listen to and accept loyal advice. Therefore, at that time, eminent sages were on the throne, and the vassals around and behind were all loyal and honest.

古文：是以君臣交泰，内外宁谧。
现代文：因此君臣融洽，内外安宁。
English: Therefore, monarchs and subjects are in harmony, and there is peace inside and outside the country.

古文：开元二十年以后，李林甫、杨国忠相继用事，专引柔佞之人，分居要剧，苟媚于上，不闻直言。
现代文：开元二十年以后，李林甫、杨国忠相继执政，专门引荐巧言谗佞之人，让他们各居要职，一味献媚上司，不听纳正直之言。
English: After the 20th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong came to power one after another. They specially recommended smooth-talking people, let them occupy important positions, and blindly flattered their superiors, not listening to honest words.

古文：嗜欲转炽，国用不足，奸臣说以兴利，武夫说以开边。
现代文：他们的贪欲日趋炽烈，国库的财用便日益减少，奸臣说用钱是为兴利，武夫说用钱是为开边。
English: Their greed is becoming more and more fierce, the treasury's financial use is decreasing day by day, the treacherous minister says that the use of money is for prosperity, and the warrior says that the use of money is for opening the border.

古文：天下骚动，奸盗乘隙，遂至两都覆败，四海沸腾，乘舆播迁，几至难复。
现代文：天下骚动，奸盗乘隙，以至于两都沦陷，四海沸腾，圣驾出行，险于蒙难。
English: The whole world is in turmoil, and thieves and robbers are taking advantage of the gap, so that both cities have fallen, the four seas are boiling, and the saint is traveling, risking disaster.

古文：盖小人启导，纵逸生骄之致也。
现代文：皆因小人诱导，纵情享乐横生骄矜所造成。
English: All of them were induced by villains, indulgence and enjoyment, and caused by arrogance.

古文：至今兵宿两河，西疆削尽，甿户凋耗，府藏空虚，皆因天宝丧乱，以至于此。
现代文：至今两河屯兵，西疆削尽，农户凋敝，府藏空虚，皆因天宝丧乱，以至于此。
English: So far, the two rivers have been garrisoned, the western region has been exhausted, the farmers have withered, and the prefectures have been empty, all due to the destruction of the heavenly treasure, so much so.

古文：安危理乱，实系时主所行。
现代文：国家安危治乱，确实系于当世君主奉行的大政方针。
English: The safety of the country and the prevention of chaos are indeed linked to the major policy pursued by the current monarch.

古文：陛下思广天聪，亲览国史，垂意精赜，鉴于化源，实天下幸甚。
现代文：陛下欲广开视听，亲览国史，思虑精深，能探寻安危治乱变化之本源，实为天下之大幸。 
English: His Majesty's desire to widely open the audio-visual, familiar with the history of the country, thoughtful, and able to explore the source of changes in security and chaos, is indeed a great blessing for the world.

古文：上又曰： 凡人行事，常患不通于理，已然之失，追悔诚难。
现代文：皇上又说： 人们行事，常担忧不通事理，已然失误，追悔莫及。
English: The emperor also said: People act, often worried and unreasonable, have already made mistakes, and there is no time to repent.

古文：古人处此，复有道否？ 
现代文：古人遇到这种情况，还有什么办法吗？ 
English: The ancients encountered this situation, is there any other way?

古文：绛对曰： 行事过差，圣哲皆所不免，故天子致诤臣以匡其失。
现代文：李绛答道： 行事出现差错，圣哲在所难免，故天子诏纳诤臣以匡救己之失误。
English: Li Qiye replied: When there is a mistake in one's actions, it is inevitable that a saint will step in. Therefore, it is the mistake of the heavenly son to save himself by punishing the vassal.

古文：故主心理于中，臣论正于外，制理于未乱，销患于未萌。
现代文：因此圣心决策于内，臣论扶正于外，创建治世于未乱之际，消除祸患于未萌之时。
English: Therefore, the decision-making of the Sacred Heart is inside, the support of the subject is outside, the creation of the reign is in the absence of chaos, and the elimination of the evil is in the absence of budding.

古文：主或过举，则谏以正之，故上下同体，犹手足之于心膂，交相为用，以致康宁。
现代文：圣主偶有失误，则劝谏以扶正，故君臣上下协同，犹如手足之于心膂，交互作用，而导致康宁。
English: If the patron saint makes a mistake, he will advise him to straighten up. Therefore, the cooperation between the monarch and the minister is like the interaction between the hand and the foot in the heart, which leads to Kangning.

古文：此亦常理，非难遵之事。
现代文：这也是常理，并非难为之事。
English: This is also common sense and is not difficult to do.

古文：但矜得护失，常情所蔽。
现代文：但夸耀功劳遮掩过失，则与常情不相容。
English: But boasting of one's merits to cover up one's faults is incompatible with common sense.

古文：古人贵改过不吝，从善如流，良为此也。
现代文：古人推崇努力改过、从善如流，确实为此呀。
English: The ancients praised the efforts to reform and follow the virtuous path, and this is indeed the reason.

古文：臣等备位，无所发明，但陛下不废刍言，则端士贤臣，必当自效。 
现代文：臣等处于重任，未能开启圣主耳目之明，但陛下不废弃刍言野说，则端直之士贤良之臣，必当主动报效。 
English: The ministers are in an important position, and they have not been able to open the eyes and ears of the Lord, but His Majesty does not abandon the field of slander, saying that the upright men and good ministers must take the initiative to repay the favor.

古文：帝曰： 朕擢用卿等，所冀直言。
现代文：皇上说： 朕任用卿等，正希望卿等直言。
English: The emperor said, "I have appointed my ministers, and I hope that they will speak frankly."

古文：各宜尽心无隐，以匡不逮。
现代文：当各自尽心竭力无所保留，以弥补朝政之不足。
English: They should spare no effort to make up for the shortcomings of the imperial government.

古文：无以护失为虑也！ 
现代文：切勿担心朕庇护过失！ 
English: Don't worry, I'll get the blame!

古文：其秋，魏博节度使田季安死，其子怀谏幼弱，军中立其大将田兴，使主军事，兴卒以六州之地归命。
现代文：那年秋天，魏博节度使田季安死，其子田怀谏年幼力弱，军中立其大将田兴，让他主持军事，田兴最终以六州之地归顺朝廷。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wei Bo Jiedu caused Tian Ji'an to die. His son, Tian Huai'en, was young and weak, and the army neutralized his general, Tian Xing, and let him preside over the military. Tian Xing eventually surrendered to the imperial court with six states.

古文：其经始营创，皆绛之谋也。
现代文：此事经营策划，皆出于李绛之计谋。
English: The management and planning of this matter are all due to the scheming of Li Yan.

古文：时教坊忽称密旨，取良家士女及衣冠别第妓人，京师嚣然。
现代文：当时教坊忽然宣称朝廷有密旨，征选良家子女及贵族官吏家中的艺妓充当乐妓，京师舆论哗然。
English: At that time, Kyobo suddenly announced that the imperial court had a secret plan to recruit geishas from the families of the children of noble families and aristocratic officials to act as geishas, and public opinion in Kyoto was outraged.

古文：绛谓同列曰： 此事大亏损圣德，须有论谏。 
现代文：李绛对同僚说： 此事大损圣德，必须上奏谏阻。 
English: Li Yao said to his colleagues: This is a great damage to the sanctity of life, and must be resisted.

古文：或曰： 此嗜欲间事，自有谏官论列。 
现代文：同僚中有人说： 这是嗜欲之类闲事，自有谏官论说。 
English: One of my colleagues said: "It's a trivial matter like lust, a private eunuch's argument."

古文：绛曰： 相公居常病谏官论事，此难事即推与谏官，可乎？ 
现代文：李绛道： 相公平日厌恶谏官论事，这件棘手的事便推诿给谏官，妥当吗？ 
English: Li Hongdao: Is it reasonable to push this thorny issue to the eunuchs when it is a matter of fairness and aversion to eunuchs?

古文：乃极言论奏。
现代文：于是竭力论奏。
English: So I tried my best to play.

古文：翌日延英，宪宗举手谓绛曰： 昨见卿状所论采择事，非卿尽忠于朕，何以及此？
现代文：次日在延英殿，宪宗举手对李绛说： 昨日见卿奏状所论征选乐妓一事，若非卿尽忠于朕，何以有此举动？
English: The next day at the Yan Ying Palace, Gensong raised his hand to Li Xi and said: "Yesterday, I saw your report on the recruitment of prostitutes. If you are not loyal to me, why did you do this?

古文：朕都不知向外事，此是教坊罪过，不谕朕意，以至于此。
现代文：朕全然不知外间事，这是教坊罪过，不明朕之意图，以致做出这等事。
English: I didn't know what was going on. It was the school's fault. They didn't know my intentions, so they did these things.

古文：朕缘丹王已下四人，院中都无侍者，朕令于乐工中及闾里有情愿者，厚其钱帛，只取四人，四王各与一人。
现代文：朕本因丹王以下四人，院中均无侍奉者。朕令于乐工之中及民间有情愿者，付给丰厚钱帛，只征选四人，四位侯王各予一人。
English: Originally, there were only four people in the court, including King Dan, and there were no attendants in the court. I ordered the musicians and the people who were willing to pay a lot of money to select only four people, and each of the four princes was given one.

古文：伊不会朕意，便如此生事。
现代文：他们不领会朕意，便如此生事。
English: They didn't get my meaning, and that's how things got started.

古文：朕已令科罚，其所取人，并已放归。
现代文：朕已下令处罚，所征选的那些人，都已放遣归家。
English: I have ordered the punishment, and those who were selected have been sent home.

古文：若非卿言，朕宁知此过？ 
现代文：若非卿言，朕怎知有此失误？ 
English: If I didn't say it, how would I know it was a mistake?

古文：八年，封高邑县男。
现代文：元和八年，封高邑县男。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of Gaoyu County man.

古文：绛以足疾，拜章求免。
现代文：李绛因足疾上章请求免职。
English: Due to a foot ailment, Li Wei requested to be relieved of his duties.

古文：九年，罢知政事，授礼部尚书。
现代文：九年，免除知政事，授礼部尚书。
English: In the ninth year, he was exempted from the post of governor, and the awarding department was abolished.

古文：十年，检校户部尚书，出为华州刺史。未几，入为兵部尚书。
现代文：十年，检校户部尚书，出任华州刺史，不久，入朝为兵部尚书。
English: Ten years later, he became the inspector of the Household Division of the Imperial Academy of Sciences and served as the historian of the State of Washington. Soon after, he became the inspector of the Military Division of the Imperial Academy.

古文：丁母忧。
现代文：逢母丧。
English: Every mother's death is sad.

古文：十四年，检校吏部尚书，出为河中观察使。
现代文：元和十四年，检校吏部尚书，出任河中观察使。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shang Shu, a school inspector, was appointed as an observer in the middle of the river.

古文：河中旧为节制，皇甫镈恶绛，只以观察命之。
现代文：旧制，河中设节度使，皇甫钅甫寸厌恶李绛，只任命他为观察使。
English: Under the old system, the emperor set up a festival envoy in the middle of the river, but the emperor detested Li Xi and only appointed him as an observation envoy.

古文：十五年，镈得罪，绛复为兵部尚书。
现代文：十五年，皇甫钅甫寸获罪，李绛重任兵部尚书。
English: In the fifteenth year, Emperor Fuxun was found guilty, and Li Qiye was appointed to the military department.

古文：穆宗即位，改御史大夫。
现代文：穆宗即位，李绛改任御史大夫。
English: Mu Zong ascended to the throne, and Li Xi was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：穆宗亟于畋游行幸，绛于延英切谏，帝不能用。
现代文：穆宗沉湎于游猎巡幸，李绛在延英殿极力劝谏，皇上不能听纳。
English: Mu Zong indulged in a hunting trip, Li Yao tried his best to persuade him at the Yan Ying Palace, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：绛以疾辞，复为兵部尚书。
现代文：李绛借病辞职，重任兵部尚书。
English: Li Hongzhi resigned due to illness and returned to his post at the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：长庆元年，转吏部尚书。
现代文：长庆元年，转任吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Changqing era, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu.

古文：是岁，加检校尚书右仆射，判东都尚书省事，充东都留守。
现代文：当年，加授检校尚书右仆射，判东都尚书省事，充任东都留守。
English: In that year, the school inspector Shang Shuxu and his right-hand man were given additional awards, and Dong Du was awarded the prize for his diligent work. Dong Du stayed at home.

古文：二年正月，检校本官、兗州刺史、兗海节度观察待使。
现代文：二年正月，检校本官、兖州刺史、兖海节度观察等使。
English: In the first month of the second year, the inspector of the school, the governor of Bozhou, and the observer of the festival in Bohai were sent.

古文：三年，复为东都留守。
现代文：三年，重任东都留守。
English: For three years, Shigenobu Higashi stayed away.

古文：四年，就加检校司空。
现代文：四年，加授检校司空。
English: Four years later, he was awarded the additional post of superintendent.

古文：宝历初，入为尚书左仆射。
现代文：宝历初，入朝任尚书右仆射。
English: At the beginning of the Horei era, he entered the imperial court as the right-hand man of Sho Sho Sho.

古文：二年九月，昭议节度使刘悟卒，遗表请以子从谏嗣袭，将吏诣阙论请。
现代文：二年九月，昭义节度使刘悟去世，临终留表请求让其子刘从谏承袭官职，将吏们抵宫门奏请。
English: In September of the second year, the Shouyi Festival caused Liu Wugu to pass away. On his deathbed, he left a request for his son Liu Conglu to succeed to the official post, and invited the officials to come to the palace gate.

古文：绛密奏请速除近泽潞四面将帅一人，以充节度；令倍程赴镇，使从谏未及拒命，新使已到，所谓 疾雷不及掩耳 。
现代文：李绛秘密奏请立即任命靠近泽潞四方的将帅一人，充任节度使，令其兼程赴镇，使刘从谏来不及抵拒诏命，新使已到，所谓 迅雷不及掩耳 。
English: Li Qiye secretly requested that a military commander be immediately appointed near the four sides of Zeyu to act as the envoy of the festival, so that he would go to the town on the way, so that Liu Conglu could not resist the imperial order. The new envoy has arrived, and the so-called thunderbolt could not be concealed.

古文：潞州军心，自有所系。
现代文：这样潞州军心，自有所归。
English: In this way, the military spirit of Zhangzhou has its own return.

古文：从谏无位，何名主张。
现代文：刘从谏无职任，凭什么主宰军队。
English: Liu Conglu has no official position, so how can he lead the army?

古文：时宰相李逢吉、王守澄已受从谏赂，俱请以从谏留后，不能用绛言。
现代文：但此时宰相李逢吉、王守澄已受刘从谏贿赂，皆奏请让刘从谏为节度使留后，故皇上不能采纳李绛之主张。
English: However, at this time, the Prime Minister Li Fengji and Wang Shoucheng had already been bribed by Liu Conglu, and they all requested that Liu Conglu remain as the festival envoy, so the emperor could not accept Li Conglu's proposal.

古文：绛以直道进退，闻望倾于一时。
现代文：李绛进退仕途均奉行正道，一时名望颇大。
English: Li Xi followed the right path in his career, and at one time he was quite famous.

古文：然刚肠嫉恶，贤不肖太分，以此为非正之徒所忌。
现代文：然而心肠刚直嫉恶如仇，对待贤者与不肖之人态度判然有别，因此被邪恶之辈所忌恨。
English: However, his heart is filled with jealousy and hatred, and he treats the wise differently from the wicked, so he is hated by the wicked.

古文：又尝与御史中丞王播相遇于道，播不为之避；绛奏论事体，敕命两省详议，咸以绛论奏是。
现代文：有次曾与御史中丞王播相遇道中，王播未避让他。李绛上奏论说事理，诏命门下中书两省详议，均认为李绛论奏正确。
English: On one occasion, he met with Wang Fan, the Grand Historian of the Middle Ages, in the middle of the road, and Wang Fan did not avoid him. Li Xi was the first to discuss the matter, and the two provinces under the command of the Emperor discussed the matter in detail, and both believed that Li Xi's discussion was correct.

古文：李逢吉佑播恶绛，乃罢绛仆射，改授太子少师，分司东都。
现代文：李逢吉庇护王播而厌恶李绛，便罢免李绛仆射之职，改授太子少师，分司东都。
English: Li Fengji sheltered Wang Bo and detested Li Jie, so he dismissed Li Jie from the post of deputy, and gave him the post of prince's apprentice instead, and made him the deputy governor of Dongdu.

古文：文宗即位，征为太常卿。
现代文：文宗即位，诏李绛为太常卿。
English: Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, and Emperor Li Xi became the Grand Duke.

古文：二年，检校司空，出为兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：大和二年，检校司空，出任兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yamato era, he was appointed as the inspector of schools, and served as the delegate of Xingyuanyin and Shannan West Road Festival.

古文：三年冬，南蛮寇西蜀，诏征赴援。
现代文：三年冬，南蛮进犯西蜀，李绛奉诏赴西蜀救援。
English: In the winter of the third year, the Southern Barbarians invaded West Shu, and Li Xi went to West Shu for rescue.

古文：绛于本道募兵千人赴蜀；及中路，蛮军已退，所募皆还。
现代文：李绛在本道招募兵卒千人赴蜀，行至中途，蛮军已退，所募兵卒皆返回。
English: Li Hong recruited a thousand soldiers in this province and sent them to Shu. Halfway through the journey, the barbarian army had retreated, and all the recruited soldiers had returned.

古文：兴元兵额素定，募卒悉令罢归。
现代文：兴元兵额素来有规定，招募之兵卒得全部退伍回家。
English: There has always been a provision for the number of Xingyuan soldiers, and all recruited soldiers must be discharged and return home.

古文：四年二月十日，绛晨兴视事，召募卒，以诏旨喻而遣之，仍给以廪麦，皆怏怏而退。
现代文：那是大和四年二月十日，李绛晨起理事，召集募卒，说根据诏令遣返他们，依例发给粮饷，募卒一个个怏怏而退。
English: It was on February 10th of the year of the Yamato, when Li Yucheng, the director, summoned the enlisted soldiers and said that they would be repatriated according to the imperial edict, and that they would be given food rations as usual. The enlisted soldiers left one by one.

古文：监军使杨叔元贪财怙宠，怨绛不奉己，乃因募卒赏薄，众辞之际，以言激之，欲其为乱，以逞私憾。
现代文：监军使杨叔元贪财恃宠，怨恨李绛不奉敬自己，于是趁募卒嫌赏赐微薄，众口喧嚷之际，用言辞刺激他们，企图挑动他们作乱，以泄私愤。
English: The overseer of the army made Yang Shuyuan greedy for money and favored, and resented Li Xuan for not honoring himself, so he took advantage of the fact that the recruitment fee was meager and the reward was meager, and when the crowd was noisy, he used words to stimulate them, trying to provoke them to make a disturbance to vent their private anger.

古文：募卒因监军之言，怒气益甚，乃噪聚趋府，劫库兵以入使衙。
现代文：募卒被监军的话煽动，怒火更盛，便喧噪聚集涌向府署，劫夺库中兵器冲入使衙。
English: The enlisted soldiers were incited by the words of the supervisors, and their anger was more intense, so they gathered noisily to rush to the prefectural office, robbed the weapons in the warehouse and rushed into the enlisted soldiers.

古文：绛方与宾僚会宴，不及设备。
现代文：李绛正与幕僚会宴，来不及防备。
English: Li Qiye is having a banquet with his staff, and it's too late to prepare.

古文：闻乱北走登陴，衙将王景延力战以御之。
现代文：听说叛乱立即朝北奔逃登上女墙，衙将王景延力战以抵御乱兵。
English: Hearing of the rebellion, Wang Jing immediately fled northward and climbed the Female Wall to fight against the rebels.

古文：兵折矢穷，景延死。绛乃为乱兵所害，时年六十七。
现代文：兵刃折断箭支用尽，王景延战死，李绛亦遭乱兵杀害，时年六十七。
English: Wang Jingyan was killed in the battle, and Li Yao was also killed by the soldiers. He was 67 years old at the time.

古文：绛初登陴，左右请绛缒城，可以避免，绛不从。乃并从事赵存约、薛齐俱死焉。
现代文：李绛刚登上女墙时，左右将校请他缒城出走，可以避免凶祸，李绛不从，终于同从事赵存约、薛齐一起殉职。
English: When Li Qian had just ascended the women's wall, the left and right officers asked him to leave Shicheng to avoid the evil. Li Qian did not comply, and finally died together with Zhao Cunyu and Xue Qi.

古文：文宗闻奏震悼，下制曰： 朝有正人，时称令德，入参庙算，出总师干。
现代文：文宗闻奏震惊悲痛，降下制书道： 朝中有此正人，人们赞其美德，入能制定谋略，出则统领将士。
English: Wenzong Wenzao was shocked and saddened, and lowered the system of calligraphy: There is such a righteous person in the morning, people praise his virtues, he is able to formulate strategies, and he is a leader.

古文：方当宠任之臣，横罹不幸之酷。
现代文：正当重任之臣，横遭不测之祸。
English: A high-ranking vassal has suffered an unexpected misfortune.

古文：殄瘁兴叹，搢绅所同。
现代文：以身殉职令人叹惋，朝廷上下此心皆同。
English: To die in the line of duty is deplorable, and everyone in the Imperial Court shares this sentiment.

古文：故山南西道节度、管内观察处置等使、银青光禄大夫、检校司空，兼兴元尹、御史大夫、上柱国、赵郡开国公、食邑二千户李绛，神授聪明，天赋清直。抱仁义以希前哲，立标准以程后来。
现代文：故山南西道节度使、管内观察使处置等使、银青光禄大夫、检校司空，兼兴元尹、御史大夫、上柱国、赵郡开国公、食邑二千户李绛，神赋聪慧明智，天授清正刚直，胸怀仁义追随前代圣哲，身立标准以为后人楷模。
English: The late Dr. Shannan Xi Dao, who was in charge of festivals, internal observation, and disposition, Dr. Yin Qing Guanglu, the school inspector, Dr. Jian Xing Yuan Yin, the chief historian, Shangzhu Guo, the founding father of Zhao County, and the ruler of two thousand households in Shiyou, were endowed with wisdom and wisdom, gifted with uprightness and uprightness, and followed the previous sages with benevolence and righteousness. They were regarded as a model for future generations.

古文：抑扬时情，坐致台辅。
现代文：抑浊扬清顺应世情，因此官至台辅。
English: Yan Xuan Yang Qing conformed to the world situation, so he was promoted to the position of Tai Fu.

古文：佐我烈祖，格于皇天。
现代文：佐我功业卓著之先祖，忠诚感通皇天。
English: Soga's distinguished ancestors, loyalty to the emperor.

古文：仗钺宣风，联居乐土。
现代文：仗斧钺布风纪，庇护百姓安居乐土。
English: We will uphold discipline and discipline, and protect the people to live a happy life.

古文：乘轩鸣玉，尝极清班。
现代文：乘轩轾鸣玉，曾位至清贵官班之极。
English: He rose to the highest ranks of Qing officials by virtue of his prowess as a general.

古文：先声而物议皆归，不约而群情自许。
现代文：先声夺人舆论齐赞，不约而同群情共许。
English: The pre-announcement has been widely praised by the public, and it has been unanimously approved by the public.

古文：汉中名部，俾遂便安。
现代文：本为汉中名臣，善于治政安邦。
English: He was a famous minister in the Han Dynasty and was good at governing the country.

古文：而变起不图，祸生无兆。
现代文：而未料及变乱突起，无先兆灾祸横生。
English: But unexpected and chaotic protrusion, no signs of disaster.

古文：歼良之恸，闻讣增伤。
现代文：忠良罹难人皆悲痛，闻听讣告倍增哀伤。
English: All of the victims of the death of Mr. Tadayoshi are grieving, and hearing the obituary has multiplied their sorrow.

古文：是极哀荣，用优典礼。
现代文：当隆重追悼，用上等礼仪。
English: When solemnly mourning, use the highest etiquette.

古文：三公正秩，品数甚崇，式表异恩，以摅沉痛。
现代文：三公正秩，品位甚高，特示殊恩，以抒沉痛。
English: Three just ranks, very high grade, special thanks, with deep sorrow.

古文：可赠司徒。
现代文：可赠司徒。
English: You can get a free sitori.

古文：仍令所司择日备礼册命。 
现代文：即令主管署衙，择日备礼册命。 
English: The competent authority is hereby ordered to set a date for the preparation of the protocol.

古文：赙布帛三千段、米粟二百硕。
现代文：赐其家属布帛三千段，米粟二百石。
English: He gave his family 3,000 pieces of cloth and 200 koku of rice.

古文：子璋、顼。
现代文：李绛子名璋、顼。
English: Li Yanzi is a famous singer and actor.

古文：璋，登进士第。
现代文：李璋，登进士第。
English: Li Wei, promoted to the first rank of scholar.

古文：卢钧镇太原，辟为从事。
现代文：卢钧镇守太原，召他为从事。
English: Lu Yao, the town guard of Taiyuan, called him to work.

古文：大中末，入朝为监察，转侍御史。
现代文：大中末，入朝为监察，转侍御史。
English: At the end of junior high school, he entered the imperial court as an inspector, and later became imperial historian.

古文：出刺两郡，终宣歙观察使。
现代文：出任两郡刺史，最终任宣歙观察使。
English: He served as the chief historian of the two counties, and was eventually appointed as the Xuancheng observation envoy.

古文：子德林。
现代文：其子名德林。
English: His son's name is Derin.

