古文：九年春，王二月，葬杞僖公。
现代文：九年春季，周历二月，安葬杞僖公。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, in February according to the lunar calendar, the funeral of Shingong took place.

古文：宋皇瑗帅师取郑师于雍丘。
现代文：宋国的皇瑗率领军队在雍丘采用奇袭轻松打败了郑国军队。
English: The imperial eunuch of the Song Dynasty led the army in Yongqiu and easily defeated the Zheng army with a surprise attack.

古文：夏，楚人伐陈。
现代文：夏季，楚国人攻打陈国。
English: In the summer, the people of Chu attacked Chen.

古文：秋，宋公伐郑。
现代文：秋季，郑公出兵攻打郑国。
English: In autumn, Zheng Gong sent troops to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：冬，十月。
现代文：冬季十月。
English: Winter in October.

古文：九年春，齐侯使公孟绰辞师于吴。
现代文：九年春季，齐悼公派公孟绰到吴国辞谢出兵。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Meng Zhuo, a member of the mourning public, went to Wu to resign from the army.

古文：吴子曰： 昔岁寡人闻命，今又革之，不知所从，将进受命于君。 
现代文：吴王说： 去年我听到君王的命令，现在又改变了，不知道该听从什么，我准备到贵国去接受君王的命令。 
English: King Wu said, "Last year I heard the king's order, and now it has changed again. I don't know what to follow. I am preparing to go to your country to receive the king's order."

古文：郑武子賸之嬖许瑕求邑，无以与之。
现代文：郑国武子賸的宠臣许瑕求取封邑，没有地方可以封给他了。
English: Zheng Guo's favorite vassal, Xu Ke, asked for a fiefdom, but there was no place to give him.

古文：请外取，许之。故围宋雍丘。
现代文：许瑕请求取之于外国，武子賸答应，所以包围了宋国的雍丘。
English: Xu Ke requested to take it from a foreign country, and Wu Zixuan agreed, so they surrounded Yongqiu in Song.

古文：宋皇瑗围郑师，每日迁舍，垒合，郑师哭。
现代文：宋国的皇瑗又包围郑军，每天挖沟修筑堡垒，连成一线。
English: The Song emperors encircled the Zheng army, dug trenches every day to build a fortress, and formed a line.

古文：子姚救之，大败。
现代文：郑国军士都号啕大哭，武子賸前去救援，大败。
English: Zheng Guo's sergeants were all crying loudly, and the samurai went to the rescue, and was defeated.

古文：二月甲戌，宋取郑师于雍丘，使有能者无死，以郏张与郑罗归。
现代文：二月十四日，宋军在雍丘全歼郑军，让有才能的人留下性命，带了郏张和郑罗回去。
English: On February 14, the Song army completely wiped out the Zheng army in Yongqiu, let the talented people stay alive, and took Yu Zhang and Zheng Luo back.

古文：夏，楚人伐陈，陈即吴故也。
现代文：夏季，楚国人进攻陈国，这是因为陈国投向吴国的缘故。
English: In the summer, the people of Chu attacked Chen, because Chen had defected to Wu.

古文：宋公伐郑。
现代文：宋景公发兵攻打郑国。
English: Song Jing Gong sent troops to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：秋，吴城邗沟，通江、淮。
现代文：秋季，吴国在邗地筑城，穿沟贯通长江、淮水。
English: In the autumn, the State of Wu built a city at Fengti, with a ditch running through the Yangtze River and Huai Shui.

古文：晋赵鞅卜救郑，遇水適火，占诸史赵、史墨、史龟。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅为救援郑国而占卜，得到水流向火的卦象，向史赵、史墨、史龟询问卦象的吉凶。
English: Zhao Yao of Jin did divination for the rescue of Zheng Guo. He obtained a Gua Elephant with water flowing towards fire, and asked Shi Zhao, Shi Mo and Shi Que about the fortunes of the Gua Elephant.

古文：史龟曰： 是谓沈阳，可以兴兵。利以伐姜，不利子商。
现代文：史龟说： 这叫做阳气下沉，可以发兵，利于攻打姜氏，不利于攻打子商。
English: Shi Turtle said: This is called yang qi sinking, you can send troops, it is beneficial to attack Jiang, but it is not beneficial to attack merchants.

古文：伐齐则可，敌宋不吉。 
现代文：攻打齐国就可以，攻打宋国就不吉利。 
English: It is all right to attack Qi, but it is not auspicious to attack Song.

古文：史墨曰： 盈，水名也。
现代文：史墨说： 盈，是水泊名称。
English: Shi Mo said, "Ying" is the name of Suipo.

古文：子，水位也。
现代文：子，是水的方位。
English: The child is the direction of the water.

古文：名位敌，不可干也。炎帝为火师，姜姓其后也。
现代文：名称方位相当，不能触犯，炎帝是火师，姜姓是他的后代。
English: The names are in the same direction and cannot be infringed. Yan Di is a fireman, and Jiang is his descendant.

古文：水胜火，伐姜则可。 
现代文：水胜火，攻打姜姓就可以。 
English: Water is better than fire, so it's okay to attack Jiang.

古文：史赵曰： 是谓如川之满，不可游也。郑方有罪，不可救也。救郑则不吉，不知其他。 
现代文：史赵说： 这卦叫做像河水涨满，不能游泳；郑国正有罪，不能救，救援郑国就不吉利，其他的不知道。 
English: Shi Zhao said: This situation is called like the river is full, can not swim; Zheng Guozheng is guilty, can not save, rescue Zheng Guozheng is unlucky, others do not know.

古文：阳虎以《周易》筮之，遇《泰》之《需》，曰： 宋方吉，不可与也。
现代文：阳虎用《周易》占筮，得到《泰》卦变成《需》卦，说： 宋国正在吉利的时候，不能以他为敌。
English: Yang Hu used "Zhou Yi" to predict the future, and obtained "Tai" Gua to become "Need" Gua. He said: "When Song is in good luck, you can't use him as an enemy.

古文：微子启，帝乙之元子也。
现代文：微子启，是帝乙的大儿子。
English: Micro Zi Kai is the eldest son of Emperor Wu.

古文：宋、郑，甥舅也。
现代文：宋国和郑国，是舅舅和外甥。
English: Song and Zheng dynasties are uncle and nephew.

古文：祉，禄也。
现代文：福祉，是爵禄。
English: Welfare, it's called.

古文：若帝乙之元子归妹，而有吉禄，我安得吉焉？ 
现代文：如果帝乙的大儿子嫁女儿而又有吉利的爵禄，我们哪里能够吉利？ 
English: If the eldest son of the emperor marries a daughter and has a lucky peerage, where can we be lucky?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是晋国就不去救援郑国。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：冬，吴子使来儆师伐齐。
现代文：冬季，吴王派人来鲁国通知出兵攻打齐国。
English: In the winter, King Wu sent someone to Lu to inform him to send troops to attack Qi.

