古文：子墨子言见染丝者而叹，曰：染于苍则苍，染于黄则黄，所入者变，其色亦变。
现代文：墨子说，他曾见人染丝而感叹说： 染了青颜料就变成青色，染了黄颜料就变成黄色。染料不同，丝的颜色也跟着变化。
English: Mozi said that he had seen people dyeing silk and lamented: "If you dye the blue pigment, it turns blue, and if you dye the yellow pigment, it turns yellow. Different dyes, the color of silk also changes.

古文：五入必而已则为五色矣。
现代文：经过五次之后，就变为五种颜色了。
English: After five times, it turns into five colors.

古文：故染不可不慎也！
现代文：所以染这件事是不可不谨慎的。 
English: So it's only prudent to get ahead of it.

古文：非独染丝然也，国亦有染。
现代文：不仅染丝如此，国家也有 染 。
English: Not only silk dyeing, the country also has a situation similar to silk dyeing.

古文：舜染于许由、伯阳，禹染于皋陶、伯益，汤染于伊尹、仲虺，武王染于太公、周公。
现代文：舜被许由、伯阳所染，禹被皋陶、伯益所染，汤被伊尹、仲虺所染，武王被太公、周公所染。
English: Yu was dyed by Xu Yu and Boyang, Yu by Yu Tao and Bo Yi, Tang by Yi Yin and Zhong Yao, and King Wu by Taigong and Zhou Gong.

古文：此四王者，所染当，故王天下，立为天子，功名蔽天地。举天下之仁义显人，必称此四王者。
现代文：这四位君王因为所染得当，所以能称王于天下，立为天子，功盖四方，名扬天下，凡是提起天下著名的仁义之人，必定要称这四王。
English: These four emperors, because of their proper dyeing, can be called kings in the world, established as the sons of heaven, made great achievements in all directions, and are famous all over the world. Anyone who mentions the world's famous benevolence and righteousness must call these four kings.

古文：夏桀染于干辛、推哆，殷纣染于崇侯、恶来，厉王染于厉公长父、荣夷终，幽王染于傅公夷、蔡公谷。
现代文：夏桀被干辛、推哆所染，殷纣被崇侯、恶来所染，周厉王被厉公长父、荣夷终所染，周幽王被傅公夷、蔡公穀所染。
English: Xia Yao was dyed by Han Xin and Du Dui, Yin Yao was dyed by Chong Hou and Xilai, Zhou Li Wang was dyed by Li Gong's eldest father, Rong Yi, and Zhou Yu Wang was dyed by Fu Gong Yi and Cai Gong Gu.

古文：此四王者，所染不当，故国残身死，为天下僇，举天下不义辱人，必称此四王者。
现代文：这四位君王因为所染不当，结果身死国亡，遗羞于天下。凡是提起天下不义可耻之人，必定要称这四王。
English: These four emperors died for their misdeeds and brought shame to the world. Anyone who mentions the world's shameful injustices must name these four emperors.

古文：齐桓染于管仲、鲍叔，晋文染于舅犯、高偃，楚庄染于孙叔、沈尹，吴阖闾染于伍员、文义，越勾践染于范蠡、大夫种。
现代文：齐桓公被管仲、鲍叔牙所染，晋文公被舅犯、高偃所染，楚庄王被孙叔敖、沈尹茎所染，吴王阖闾被伍员、文义所染，越王勾践被范蠡、文种所染。
English: Qi Kuan Gong was dyed by Guanzhong and Bao Shuji, Jin Wen Gong was dyed by Wu Guanzhong and Gao Yao, Chu Zhuang Wang was dyed by Sun Shuxuan and Shen Yanzhi, Wu Wang Yao was dyed by Wu Jian and Wenyi, and Yue Wang Guozhan was dyed by Fan Yao and Wenyi.

古文：此五君者，所染当，故霸诸侯，功名传于后世。
现代文：这五位君主因为所染得当，所以能称霸诸侯，功名传于后世。
English: These five monarchs, because they were properly dyed, were able to dominate the princes, and their exploits were passed down to future generations.

古文：范吉射染于长柳朔、王胜，中行寅染于藉秦、高强，吴夫差染于王孙雒、太宰嚭，知伯摇染于智国、张武，中山尚染于魏义、偃长，宋康染于唐鞅、佃不礼。
现代文：范吉射被长柳朔、王胜所染，中行寅被籍秦、高强所染，吴王夫差被王孙雒、太宰嚭所染，知伯摇被知国、张武所染，中山尚被魏义、偃长所染，宋康王被唐鞅、佃不礼所染。
English: Fan Jisha was dyed by Chang Liu Shuo and Wang Sheng, Zhong Rong Yin was dyed by Qi Qin and Gao Qiang, Wu Wang Fuzha was dyed by Wang Sun Rong and Dazai Rong, Zhibo Shao was dyed by Zhi Guo and Zhang Wu, Zhongshan Shang was dyed by Wei Yi and Zou Chang, and Song Kang Wang was dyed by Tang Zi and Zou Buren.

古文：此六君者，所染不当，故国家残亡，身为刑戮，宗庙破灭，绝无后类，君臣离散，民人流亡。
现代文：这六位君主因为所染不当，所以国破家亡，身受刑戮，宗庙毁灭，子孙灭绝，君臣离散，百姓逃亡。
English: These six monarchs, because they were improperly tainted, led to the ruin of their country, the death of their families, the torture of their bodies, the destruction of their ancestral temples, the extermination of their children and grandchildren, the dispersion of their princes and ministers, and the flight of their people.

古文：举天下之贪暴苛扰者，必称此六君也。
现代文：凡是提起天下贪暴苛刻的人，必定称这六君。
English: Anyone who mentions the world's greedy and harsh people must call these six princes.

古文：凡君之所以安者何也？
现代文：大凡人君之所以能够安定，是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason why mortal man is able to be stable?

古文：以其行理也。
现代文：是因为他们行事合理。
English: Because they acted reasonably.

古文：行理性于染当。
现代文：而行事合理源于所染得当。
English: But acting reasonably comes from doing the right thing.

古文：故善为君者，劳于论人而佚于治官。
现代文：所以善于做国君的，用心致力于选拔人才。
English: Therefore, those who are good at being the ruler of the country should devote themselves to the selection of talents.

古文：不能为君者，伤形费神，愁心劳意；然国逾危，身逾辱。
现代文：不善于做国君的，劳神伤身，用尽心思，然而国家更危险，自己更受屈辱。
English: Those who are not good at being a sovereign, work hard and exhaust themselves, but the country is more dangerous and they are more humiliated.

古文：此六君者，非不重其国、爱其身也，以不知要故也。
现代文：上述这六位国君，并非不重视他们的国家、爱惜他们的身体，而是因为他们不知道治国要领的缘故。
English: The above-mentioned six emperors did not neglect their country and their bodies, but because they did not know the essentials of governing the country.

古文：不知要者，所染不当也。
现代文：所谓不知道治国要领，即是所染不得当。
English: Those who do not know the essentials of statecraft cannot be trusted.

古文：非独国有染也，士亦有染。
现代文：不仅国家有染，士也有 染 。
English: Not only the country is tainted, but also the judges.

古文：其友皆好仁义，淳谨畏令，则家日益，身日安，名日荣，处官得其理矣，则段干木、禽子、傅说之徒是也。
现代文：一个人所交的朋友都爱好仁义，都淳朴谨慎，慑于法纪，那么他的家道就日益兴盛，身体日益平安，名声日益光耀，居官治政也合于正道了，如段干木、禽子、傅说等人即属此类。
English: If a person has friends who all love benevolence and righteousness, are simple and prudent, and respect the law and discipline, then his family way will become increasingly prosperous, his body will become increasingly safe, his reputation will become increasingly brilliant, and the governance of officials will also be in line with the right path. Such people as Duan dry wood, poultry, Fu said, and others belong to this category.

古文：其友皆好矜奋，创作比周，则家日损，身日危，名日辱，处官失其理矣，则子西、易牙、竖刀之徒是也。
现代文：一个人所交的朋友若都不安分守己，结党营私，那么他的家道就日益衰落，身体日益危险，名声日益降低，居官治政也不得其道，如子西、易牙、竖刀等人即属此类。《诗》上说： 选好染料。 
English: If the friends a person makes are all insecure, self-serving, party-oriented, and selfish, then his family way will increasingly decline, his body will become increasingly dangerous, his reputation will increasingly decline, and he will not be able to govern, such as Zixi, Yi Ya, and Hanzhao. "Poem" says: Choose a good dye.

古文：诗曰 必择所堪，必谨所堪 者，此之谓也。
现代文：所谓选好染料，正是这个意思。
English: This is what is meant by choosing the right dye.

