古文：田莘之为陈轸说秦惠王曰： 臣恐王之如郭君。
现代文：田莘替陈轸游说秦惠王说： 我担心大王会像郭君那样。
English: Tian Rong lobbied Qin Hui Wang on behalf of Chen Rong and said: I am worried that the great king will be like Guo Jun.

古文：夫晋献公欲伐郭，而惮舟之侨存，荀息曰： 周书有言，美女破舌。 
现代文：晋献公想要攻打郭地，然而畏难舟之侨的存在。苟息说： 《周书》上有话，美女可以破败谏臣。 
English: Jin Xian Gong wanted to attack Guo Di, but he was afraid of the presence of foreigners. Guo Xiu said: "There is a saying in the Zhou Shu that a beautiful woman can defeat a vassal.

古文：乃遗之女乐，以乱其政。
现代文：于是送出漂亮的女歌伎，用她去干扰敌方的政治。
English: So he sent out a beautiful female kabuki actor and used her to interfere with the enemy's politics.

古文：舟之侨谏而不听，遂去。
现代文：舟之侨因进谏而郭君不听，便离郭而去。
English: Since Guo Jun did not listen to Bo Zhou's request to enter the castle, Guo Jun left the castle.

古文：因而伐郭，遂破之。
现代文：于是晋献公讨伐郭君，终于攻破了郭地。
English: As a result, Jin Xian fought against Guo Jun and finally broke through Guo Di.

古文：又欲伐虞，而惮宫之奇存。
现代文：后来，晋献公又想要攻打虞国，然而又畏难宫之奇的存在。
English: Later, Emperor Jinxian wanted to attack the State of Yu, but he was afraid of the strange existence of the Forbidden City.

古文：荀息曰： 周书有言，美男破老。 
现代文：苟息说： 《周书》上有话，外宠之臣可以破败国老。 
English: Gou Xiu said: "There is a saying in the "Weekly Book" that a foreign favorite can defeat a veteran.

古文：乃遗之美男，教之恶宫之奇。
现代文：于是送出外宠之臣，让他去中伤宫之奇。
English: So he sent his favorite vassal to defame the palace.

古文：宫之奇以谏而不听，遂亡。
现代文：宫之奇因进谏而虞君不听，便离开了虞国。
English: As a result of the palace's strange entrance into the palace, Yu Jun did not listen and left Yu Province.

古文：因而伐虞，遂取之。
现代文：于是晋献公讨伐虞国，终于夺取了虞国。
English: As a result, Jin Xianguo fought against Yu Guo and finally captured Yu Guo.

古文：今秦自以为王，能害王者之国者，楚也。
现代文：现在秦国自封为王，能祸害大王您的是楚国。
English: Now that Qin has made itself king, it is Chu that can do the greatest harm to you.

古文：楚智横君之善用兵，用兵与陈轸之智，故骄张仪以五国。
现代文：楚国知道横门君善于用兵，同时知道陈轸足智多谋，所以重用张仪出使韩、魏、赵、燕、齐五国。
English: Chu knew that Hengmenjun was good at using soldiers, and at the same time knew that Chen Xi was resourceful, so he used Zhang Yi to send envoys to Han, Wei, Zhao, Yan and Qi.

古文：来，必恶是二人。
现代文：张仪来秦国，必定要中伤横门君和陈轸。
English: When Zhang Yi came to Qin, he definitely wanted to slander Hengmen and Chen Yao.

古文：愿王勿听也。 
现代文：希望大王您不要听信他。 
English: I hope you don't believe him.

古文：张仪果来辞，因言轸也，王怒而不听。
现代文：不久，张仪果真前往秦国向秦惠王呈辞，说了陈轸的坏话，秦惠王大怒没有听信他。
English: Soon after, Zhang Yizhen went to Qin to tender his resignation to Qin Hui Wang. He spoke ill of Chen Qi, but Qin Hui Wang was furious and did not listen to him.

