古文：秦、韩战于浊泽，韩氏急。
现代文：秦韩两国在浊泽交战，韩国告急。
English: The two countries of Qin and Han fought in Heze, and South Korea was in a hurry.

古文：公仲明谓韩王曰： 与国不可恃。
现代文：公仲明对韩王说： 盟国不能依靠。
English: Publicly, Zhongming said to Han Wang: Allies cannot be relied on.

古文：今秦之心欲伐楚，王不如因张仪为和于秦，赂之以一名都，与之伐楚。
现代文：现在秦国的意图是想要攻打楚国，大王不如通过张仪来和秦国讲和，送给它一座大城市，同秦国一起攻打楚国。
English: Now Qin's intention is to attack Chu. It would be better for the king to make peace with Qin through Zhang Yi, give it a big city, and attack Chu together with Qin.

古文：此以一易二之计也。 
现代文：这是以一换二的计策。 
English: This is a two-for-one strategy.

古文：韩王曰： 善。 
现代文：韩王说： 好。 
English: Han Wang said: Good.

古文：乃儆公仲之行，将西讲于秦。
现代文：于是就为公仲明出使秦国，打算到西方同秦国讲和。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy to Qin for Gongzhongming, intending to go to the West to make peace with Qin.

古文：楚王闻之大怒，召陈轸而告之。
现代文：楚王听到这个消息，大为恐慌，马上召见陈轸。
English: When King Chu heard the news, he panicked and immediately summoned Chen Xi.

古文：陈轸曰： 秦之欲伐我久矣，今又得韩之名都一而具甲，秦、韩并兵南乡，此秦所以庙祠而求也。今已得之矣，楚国必伐矣。
现代文：陈轸说： 秦国想攻打我国已经很久了，如今又得到韩国一座大城市，它的军费又可以增加了，秦韩两国合兵向南，这是秦国很多年以前就梦想要实现的，如今它的目的已经达到，楚国必然要遭受进攻。
English: Chen Yao said: Qin has wanted to attack our country for a long time, and now it has gained a large city in South Korea. Its military expenditure can be increased again. Qin and South Korea are heading south together. This is what Qin dreamed of many years ago. Now its goal has been achieved, and Chu is bound to be attacked.

古文：王听臣，为之儆四境之内，选师，言救韩，令战车满道路；发信臣，多其车，重其币，使信王之救己也。
现代文：大王要听从我的意见：在全国实行戒严，挑选军队声言援救韩国，让战车布满道路，派遣使者，增加使者的车辆，加重使者的聘礼，使韩国相信大王是在救它。
English: The great king should listen to my advice: impose martial law across the country, select the army to speak out to save South Korea, let the chariots cover the roads, send messengers, increase the vehicles of the messengers, increase the bride price of the messengers, and make South Korea believe that the great king is saving it.

古文：纵韩为不能听我，韩必德王也，必不为雁行以来。
现代文：韩国如果不能听从我们，一定会感激大王，绝不会联兵而来。
English: If South Korea cannot listen to us, it will certainly be grateful to the emperor and will never join forces with us.

古文：是秦、韩不和，兵虽至，楚国不大病矣。
现代文：这样秦韩两国不和，秦兵虽然来到，楚国不会遭受大的损失。
English: In this way, the two countries of Qin and Han were at odds, and although the Qin soldiers came, the state of Chu would not suffer great losses.

古文：为能听我绝和于秦，秦必大怒，以厚怨于韩。
现代文：韩国如果能够听从我们，同秦国决裂，秦国必然大怒，因而痛恨韩国。
English: If South Korea were to listen to us and break away from Qin, Qin would be furious and hate South Korea.

古文：韩得楚救，必轻秦。轻秦，其应秦必不敬。
现代文：韩国得到楚国的援救，一定会轻视秦国；轻视秦国，它应付秦国一定不恭敬。
English: If Korea is rescued by Chu, it will despise Qin; if it despises Qin, it will not respect Qin.

古文：是我困秦、韩之兵，而免楚国之患也。 
现代文：这样我们便可以使秦韩两国的军队疲惫不堪，从而解除楚国的忧患。 
English: In this way, we can make the armies of Qin and Han exhausted, thus relieving the worries of Chu.

古文：楚王大说，乃儆四境之内选师，言救韩，发信臣，多其车，重其币。
现代文：楚王非常高兴，便在全国范围内实行戒严，挑选军队声言援救韩国，派遣使者，增加使者的车辆，加重使者的聘礼。
English: King Chu was very pleased, so he imposed martial law nationwide, selected troops to speak out to save South Korea, dispatched envoys, increased the envoy's vehicles, and increased the envoy's bride price.

古文：谓韩王曰： 敝邑虽小，已悉起之矣。愿大国遂肆意于秦，敝邑将以楚殉韩。 
现代文：让使者对韩王说： 敝国虽小，已经全部动员起来了，希望贵国从容对付秦国，敝国为将愿意为韩国付出一切地进行帮助。 
English: Let the envoy say to the King of Korea: Although your country is small, it has already been fully mobilized. I hope that your country will calmly deal with Qin. Your country will be willing to do everything to help Korea.

古文：韩王大说，乃止公仲。
现代文：韩王十分高兴，便停止公仲明使秦。
English: Han Wang was so pleased that he stopped playing the role of a loyal servant to Qin.

古文：公仲曰： 不可，夫以实告我者，秦也；以虚名救我者，楚也。
现代文：公仲朋说： 不行。用实际行动使我国陷入困境的是秦国，用虚假的名义来援救我们的是楚国。
English: Guozhong said, "No. It was Qin that plunged our country into difficulties with its practical actions, and it was Chu that came to our rescue under a false name.

古文：恃楚之虚名，轻绝强秦之敌，必为天下笑矣。
现代文：倚仗楚国的虚名，轻易停止同强秦这样的敌人讲和，一定会被天下人所耻笑。
English: Relying on the false reputation of Chu, and easily stopping from making peace with such an enemy as the strong Qin, will surely be laughed at by the world.

古文：且楚、韩非兄弟之国也，又非素约而谋伐秦矣。秦欲伐楚，楚因以起师言救韩，此必陈轸之谋也。
现代文：何况楚韩两国不是兄弟国家，又不是预先约定共谋攻打秦国的，情况是秦国要攻打楚国，楚国这才发兵声言援救韩国的，这一定是陈轸的阴谋。
English: What's more, the two countries of Chu and Han were not brotherly countries, nor was it a pre-arranged conspiracy to attack Qin. The situation was that Qin wanted to attack Chu, and it was only then that Chu sent troops to help South Korea. This must have been Chen Qi's plot.

古文：且王以使人报于秦矣，今弗行，是欺秦也。
现代文：再说大王已经派人通知秦国了，如今使者不去，是欺骗秦国。
English: Besides, the great king had already sent someone to inform Qin. If the envoy does not go now, he is deceiving Qin.

古文：夫轻强秦之祸，而信楚之谋臣，王必悔之矣。 
现代文：忽视强秦的灾祸，却听信楚国的谋臣，大王一定要后悔的了。 
English: Ignoring the calamity of Qiang and Qin, but listening to the advisors of Chu, the great king must have regretted it.

古文：韩王弗听，遂绝和于秦。
现代文：韩王不听从，就同秦国停止讲和。
English: Han Wang disobeyed and stopped making peace with Qin.

古文：秦果大怒，兴师与韩氏战于岸门⑧，楚救不至，韩氏大败。
现代文：秦国果然大怒，发兵与韩国交战于岸门。楚国的救兵不到，韩国大败。
English: Qin was furious and sent troops to fight against Korea at the quay gate. Chu's soldiers were unable to come to the rescue and Korea suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：韩氏之兵非削弱也，民非蒙愚也，兵为秦禽，智为楚笑，过听于陈侦，失计于韩明也。
现代文：韩国的军队并不弱小，人民并不愚昧，可是军队被秦国俘获，谋略被楚国耻笑，是因为错误地听信了陈轸，没有采纳公仲朋的计策啊。
English: The Korean army is not weak and small, and the people are not ignorant, but the army was captured by Qin and the strategy was ridiculed by Chu, because they mistakenly listened to Chen Xi and did not adopt the strategy of Gongzhong and his friends.

