古文：儒者传书言： 尧之时，十日并出，万物焦枯。
现代文：儒者的传书上说： 尧的时候，十个太阳同时升起，万物焦烂枯死。
English: A Confucian textbook says: "At the time of the dragonfly, ten suns rise at the same time, and all things are scorched and withered.

古文：尧上射十日，九日去，一日常出 。
现代文：尧就举箭射十个太阳，九个太阳被除掉，一个太阳永久升起。 
English: The dragonfly then shot ten suns with an arrow, nine suns were eliminated, and one sun rose forever.

古文：此言虚也。
现代文：这话是假的。
English: This allegation is false.

古文：夫人之射也，不过百步，矢力尽矣。
现代文：人射箭，不超过一百步箭的力量就完了。
English: When someone shoots an arrow, if it does not exceed a hundred steps, the strength of the arrow is over.

古文：日之行也，行天星度。
现代文：太阳运行，是按天上星宿一定的度数转动的。
English: The sun rotates according to a certain number of degrees of the stars in the sky.

古文：天之去人，以万里数，尧上射之，安能得日？
现代文：天离人，要用万里来计算，尧举箭向上射，怎么能够射着太阳呢？
English: Heaven is far away from man, and it is necessary to use ten thousand miles to calculate. If you shoot an arrow upward, how can you shoot the sun?

古文：使尧之时，天地相近，不过百步，则尧射日，矢能及之；过百步，不能得也。
现代文：假使尧的时候，天地相隔很近，不超过一百步，那尧射太阳，箭就能射到太阳；超过一百步，就不能射到。
English: If, at the time of the thunderbolt, heaven and earth are very close together, no more than a hundred paces apart, then if the thunderbolt hits the sun, the arrow can hit the sun; if it goes beyond a hundred paces, it cannot hit the sun.

古文：假使尧时天地相近，尧射得之，犹不能伤日。伤日何肯去？
现代文：假使尧的时候天地相隔很近，尧射着太阳，尚且不能伤害太阳，太阳怎么肯离开呢？
English: If heaven and earth are very close to each other at the time of a thunderstorm, and the thunderstorm shines on the sun, but cannot harm the sun, how can the sun be willing to leave?

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：日，火也。
现代文：因为太阳是火。
English: Because the sun is fire.

古文：使在地之火附一把矩，人从旁射之，虽中，安能灭之？
现代文：假使在地上的火点着一个火把，人从一旁用箭射它，虽然射中，怎么能使它熄灭呢？
English: If fire kindled a lamp on the earth, and someone shot an arrow at it from the side, how could it be put out?

古文：地火不为见射而灭，天火何为见射而去？
现代文：地上的火不是被射中而熄灭，天上火怎么是被射中而去掉呢？
English: The fire on the earth is not extinguished by being shot, but how can the fire in the sky be removed by being shot?

古文：此欲言尧以精诚射之，精诚所加，金石为亏，盖诚无坚则亦无远矣。
现代文：这是想说尧是用真心诚意去射太阳，凡是真心诚意达到的地方，金属和石头都会被毁坏，似乎在 精诚 面前没有坚硬的东西，那么也就没有远得达不到的地方了。
English: This is to say that the dragonfly shoots the sun with sincerity. Wherever sincerity reaches, metal and stone will be destroyed. It seems that there is no hard thing in front of Jingcheng, so there is no place that is too far to reach.

古文：夫水与火，各一性也。能射火而灭之，则当射水而除之。
现代文：水与火，分别具有同是物质实体的特性，能射中火而使它熄灭，那就应该能射中水而使它消除。
English: Water and fire, respectively, have the characteristics of the same material entity. If you can hit fire and extinguish it, then you should be able to hit water and eliminate it.

古文：洪水之时，流滥中国，为民大害。尧何不推精诚射而除之？
现代文：洪水成灾的时候，泛滥中原各国，成为老百姓的大祸害，尧为什么不拿出真心诚意来射洪水而使它消除呢？
English: When the flood became a disaster, it flooded all the countries of the Central Plains and became a great disaster for the people. Why not come up with a sincere intention to shoot the flood and eliminate it?

古文：尧能射日，使火不为害，不能射河，使水不为害。
现代文：尧能够射太阳，使火不成为灾害，却不能射河，使水不成为灾害。
English: The dragonfly can shoot the sun, so that fire does not become a disaster, but it cannot shoot the river, so that water does not become a disaster.

古文：夫射水不能却水，则知射日之语，虚非实也。
现代文：射水不能使水退却，那就知道尧能射太阳的话，是虚假不真实的。
English: If shooting water can't make it recede, then it's false and untrue to say that the dragonfly can shoot the sun.

古文：或曰： 日，气也。射虽不及，精诚灭之 。
现代文：有人说： 太阳是气，用箭射虽然达不到，但真心诚意能去掉它。 
English: Some people say: The sun is qi, and although it cannot be reached with arrows, it can be removed with sincerity.

古文：夫天亦远，使其为气，则与日月同；使其为体，则与金石等。
现代文：天特别远，如果它是气，那跟日月相同；如果它是物体，那跟金属、石头一样。
English: The sky is very far away, if it is gas, it is the same as the sun and moon; if it is an object, it is the same as metal and stone.

古文：以尧之精诚，灭日亏金石，上射日则能穿天乎？
现代文：用尧的真心诚意能去掉太阳毁坏金属、石头，那他举箭向上射天就能射穿天吗？
English: With the sincerity of a dragonfly, can the sun destroy metal and stone, and can he shoot an arrow up to the sky and shoot it through the sky?

古文：世称桀、纣之恶，射天而殴地；誉高宗之德，政消桑谷。
现代文：社会上声称夏桀、商纣的罪恶，射天而打地；称赞殷高宗的德操，能用善政消除桑树穀树生于朝廷的凶象。
English: The society claims that the evils of the Xia and Shang dynasties are rampant; praises the moral conduct of the Yin Gaozong, and can use good governance to eliminate the evil of the mulberry tree and the grain tree born in the imperial court.

古文：今尧不能以德灭十日，而必射之；是德不若高宗，恶与桀、纣同也。安能以精诚获天之应也？
现代文：如今尧不能用良好的德操来除掉十个太阳，而一定要射掉它，这是他的德操不如殷高宗，罪恶则与夏桀、商纣相同，如此，怎么能用精诚的心获得上天去掉九个太阳的报应呢？
English: Now, Yao can't use good moral conduct to get rid of the ten suns, but must shoot it down. This is because his moral conduct is not as good as that of Yin Gaozong, and his evil is the same as that of Xia Yao and Shang Yao. So, how can he use his sincere heart to obtain the retribution of Heaven to remove the nine suns?

古文：传书言：武王伐纣，渡孟津，阳侯之波逆流而击，疾风晦冥，人马不见。
现代文：传书上说： 周武王讨伐商纣，过孟津，碰到惊涛骇浪，逆流而上，大风刮得天昏地暗，人马都看不清楚。
English: According to the biography: Zhou Wu Wang fought against the merchants, crossed Mengjin, encountered rough seas, went upstream against the current, the wind was so strong that it was dark, and people could not see clearly.

古文：於是武王左操黄钺，右执白旄，瞋目而麾之曰： 余在，天下谁敢害吾意者！ 
现代文：于是周武王左手拿着黄钺，右手握着白旄，瞪大眼睛挥动着它们，喊道： 我在这里，天下有谁敢违反我意志的！ 
English: So King Zhou Wu held a yellow scepter in his left hand and a white scepter in his right hand, waved them with wide eyes and shouted: I am here, who in the world would dare to violate my will!

古文：於是风霁波罢。
现代文：于是风停了波浪也平息了。 
English: Then the wind died down and the waves calmed down.

古文：此言虚也。
现代文：这个说法不真实。
English: This allegation is false.

古文：武王渡孟津时，士众喜乐，前歌後舞。
现代文：周武王过孟津的时候，将士们都欢喜快乐，前边的歌唱后边的舞蹈。
English: When Zhou Wu Wang passed through Mengjin, the soldiers were happy and joyful, singing in the front and dancing in the back.

古文：天人同应，人喜天怒，非实宜也。
现代文：照传书的说法，天和人是互相感应的，人欢喜而天发怒，这实在不合情理。
English: According to the legend, heaven and man are mutually responsive, man rejoices and heaven is angry, which is really unreasonable.

古文：前歌後舞，未必其实。麾风而止之，迹近为虚。夫风者，气也；论者以为天地之号令也。
现代文：前边的歌唱后边的舞蹈，未必有其事；手挥动风就停止，事情近乎是虚构，风是气，议论的人认为它是天地发出的号令。
English: Singing in front, dancing behind, there may be nothing; the wind stops with a wave of the hand, the matter is almost imaginary, the wind is air, and the talker thinks it is a call from heaven and earth.

古文：武王诛纣是乎，天当安静以佑之；如诛纣非乎，而天风者，怒也。
现代文：周武王讨伐商纣是对的，天就应当用安静的环境来保祐他；如果讨伐商纣是不对的，那么天刮风就是发怒。
English: If it is right for King Zhou Wu to crack down on gossips, then heaven should protect him with a quiet environment; if it is wrong to crack down on gossips, then heaven's wind is anger.

古文：武王不奉天令，求索己过，瞋目言曰 余在，天下谁敢害吾者 ，重天怒、增己之恶也，风何肯止？
现代文：周武王没有遵奉天的命令，检查自己的罪过，却瞪着眼睛喊道； 我在这里，天下有谁敢违反我意志的！ 这就加重了天的愤怒，增加了自己的罪恶，风怎么肯停止刮呢？
English: King Zhou Wu did not obey Heaven's command to examine his own sins, but stared into his eyes and shouted, "Here I am, who in the world would dare to violate my will!" This increased Heaven's anger and increased his own sins. How could the wind stop blowing?

古文：父母怒，子不改过，瞋目大言，父母肯贳之乎？
现代文：就像父母亲发怒，儿子不肯改正过错，反而瞪着眼睛大喊，父母亲肯饶恕他吗？
English: Just as the parents are angry, the son does not want to correct the mistake, but instead stares into the eyes and shouts, will the parents forgive him?

古文：如风天所为，祸气自然，是亦无知，不为瞋目麾之故止。
现代文：如果风是天自然而然刮的，那么水波逆流，疾风晦冥这些祸气就是自然形成的，可见这些也是无意识的，不会因为周武王瞪眼、挥旄的缘故而停止。
English: If the wind is naturally blown by the sky, then the backwash of the water waves, the gusts of the wind, and these evils are naturally formed. It can be seen that these are also unconscious and will not stop because of Zhou Wu Wang's staring and waving.

古文：夫风犹雨也，使武王瞋目以旄麾雨而止之乎？
现代文：风同雨一样，即使周武王瞪眼用旄挥动雨就会停止下吗？
English: The wind is the same as the rain, even if Zhou Wu Wang waved his eyelashes with a hoe, would the rain stop?

古文：武王不能止雨，则亦不能止风。
现代文：武王不能使雨停下，那么也不能使风停刮。
English: If King Wu can't stop the rain, then he can't stop the wind.

古文：或时武王适麾之，风偶自止，世褒武王之德，则谓武王能止风矣。
现代文：或许是周武王正好挥动白旄，风碰巧自然停止，世人为了赞扬武王的圣德，就说武王能制止刮风。
English: It may be that King Wu of Zhou just happened to wave the egret, and the wind happened to stop naturally. In order to praise the holiness of King Wu, the world said that King Wu could stop the wind from blowing.

古文：传书言：鲁公与韩战，战酣，日暮，公援戈而麾之，日为之反三舍。
现代文：传书上说： 鲁阳公跟韩国打仗，打得正起劲太阳落山了，鲁阳公举戈一挥，太阳因此退了三舍。 
English: According to the biography: Lu Yang Gong was at war with Korea, and was fighting hard. When the sun went down, Lu Yang Gong waved his sword, and the sun retreated.

古文：此言虚也。
现代文：这话是假的。
English: This allegation is false.

古文：凡人能以精诚感动天，专心一意，委务积神，精通於天，天为变动，然尚未可谓然。
现代文：凡是人能够以真心诚意感动上天的，都要专心一意，放弃一切事务，全神贯注，才能感应给天，天才会改变移动，但是还不能说就一定会使它如此。
English: Anyone who can move heaven with sincerity and sincerity must concentrate, give up all affairs, and concentrate. Only then can he respond to heaven. Genius will change the movement, but it cannot be said that it will definitely make it so.

古文：公志在战，为日暮一麾，安能令日反？
现代文：鲁阳公心思在打仗，因为太阳落山而挥了一下戈，怎么能使太阳退回呢？
English: Luyang Gongxin was at war, because the sun had set, he waved his sword. How could he make the sun go back?

古文：使圣人麾日，日终之反。公何人，而使日反乎？
现代文：即使是圣人对着太阳挥戈，太阳也始终不会退回，鲁阳公是什么人，而能使太阳退回呢？
English: Even if a sage waved his wand at the sun, the sun would never return. Who is Lord Luyang that he can make the sun return?

古文：《鸿范》曰： 星有好风，星有好雨。
现代文：《尚书·洪范》上说： 星宿有好刮风的，星宿有好下雨的。
English: "Shangshu Hongfan" said: The stars have good wind, and the stars have good rain.

古文：日月之行，则有冬有夏。
现代文：太阳与月亮运行，才有冬有夏。
English: Only when the sun and the moon move can there be winter and summer.

古文：月之从星，则有风雨。 
现代文：月亮靠近箕宿毕宿，就要刮风下雨。 
English: If the moon is close to Shibuya after Shibuya, it will be windy and rainy.

古文：夫星与日月同精，日月不从星，星辄复变。
现代文：星与太阳月亮同样是精气，太阳月亮不靠近星，星总是在反复变化，同样要刮风下雨。
English: The stars and the sun and the moon are the same essence. The sun and the moon are not close to the stars, the stars are always changing repeatedly, and the wind and rain must also blow.

古文：明日月行有常度，不得从星之好恶也，安得从公之所欲？
现代文：这表明太阳月亮的运行有一定的度数，不会随着星的好恶而靠近或离开星的，怎么会顺从鲁阳公的欲望而退三舍呢？
English: This shows that the movement of the sun and moon has a certain degree. If you do not approach or leave the star according to the star's likes and dislikes, how can you obey Lu Yanggong's desire and retreat?

古文：星之在天也，为日月舍，犹地有邮亭，为长吏廨也。
现代文：星在天上，是太阳月亮休息停留的地方，就像地下有邮亭，作为地方官吏办公的地方。
English: Stars in the sky are places for the sun and moon to rest and stay, just as there are underground post offices that serve as offices for local officials.

古文：二十八舍有分度，一舍十度，或增或减。言日反三舍，乃三十度也。
现代文：二十八舍划分得有度数，每舍大致十度，有的多一些，有的少一些，说太阳退回三舍，就是三十度。
English: The twenty-eight houses were divided into degrees, each house roughly ten degrees, some more, some less, saying that the sun returned to the three houses, that is, thirty degrees.

古文：日，日行一度。
现代文：太阳，每天运行一度。
English: The sun sets once a day.

古文：一麾之间，反三十日时所在度也？
现代文：挥戈一下顷刻间，就退回到三十天前所在的地方。
English: In the blink of an eye, you're back where you were 30 days ago.

古文：如谓舍为度，三度亦三日行也。
现代文：如果说一舍为一度，三度也就是太阳三天的行程。
English: If once is a lifetime, three times is a three-day journey of the sun.

古文：一麾之间，令日却三日也。
现代文：挥戈一下的瞬间，竟使太阳退回了三天的行程。
English: With a single wave of the hand, the sun actually reversed its three-day journey.

古文：宋景公推诚出三善言，荧惑徙三舍。
现代文：宋景公发自诚心说了三句好话，火星就移动了三舍。
English: Song Jing Gong sent three good words from his heart, and Mars moved three houses.

古文：实论者犹谓之虚。
现代文：实事求是的人尚且说这件事是假的。
English: Truth-seekers say the whole thing is fake.

古文：公争斗，恶日之暮，以此一戈麾，无诚心善言，日为之反，殆非其意哉！
现代文：鲁阳公正在打仗，讨厌的太阳要落山，因此挥了一下戈，没有诚心，也没有说好话，太阳就为他退回，这大概不是事实吧！
English: Lu Yang Gong is at war, and the unpleasant sun is about to set, so he waves a sword. If he is not sincere and does not say a kind word, the sun will return for him. This is probably not true!

古文：且日，火也，圣人麾火，终不能却；公麾日，安能使反？
现代文：况且太阳是火。圣人向火挥动一下，始终不能使火退却；鲁阳公对着太阳挥动一下戈，怎么能使太阳返回呢？
English: Moreover, the sun is fire. If a sage waves his wand at the fire, he can never make the fire retreat; if Lu Yang Gong waves his wand at the sun, how can he make the sun return?

古文：或时战时日正卯，战迷，谓日之暮，麾之，转左曲道，日若却。
现代文：或许打仗的时候太阳正在东方，打迷糊了，以为太阳要落山，于是挥戈转向东方，就错误地说太阳好像倒退回去了。
English: Perhaps the sun was in the east at the time of the war, and he got confused and thought the sun was going to set, so he waved his hand to the east and mistakenly said that the sun seemed to have gone backwards.

古文：世好神怪，因谓之反，不道所谓也。
现代文：世人好谈神怪，在此就说太阳退回去了，而不讲这究竟是怎么回事。
English: People like to talk about the supernatural, and here they say that the sun has retreated, but they don't say what it's all about.

古文：传书言：荆轲为燕子谋刺秦王，白虹贯日。
现代文：传书上说： 荆轲为燕太子谋杀秦王时，天空出现白色长虹穿过太阳。
English: According to the biography: "When Emperor Qin was murdered by Emperor Jingwu for Prince Yan, a white rainbow appeared in the sky and crossed the sun.

古文：卫先生为秦画长平之事，太白蚀昴。
现代文：卫先生为秦国谋画长平之事时，天空出现金星侵蚀昴宿。 
English: When Mr. Wei was plotting Changping for Qin, Venus appeared in the sky to encroach on the pagoda.

古文：此言精感天，天为变动也。
现代文：这话是说人用真心诚意感动上天，上天才会变化受打动。
English: This is to say that people are moved to heaven with sincerity and sincerity, and only the Lord can change and be moved.

古文：夫言白虹贯日，太白蚀昴，实也。
现代文：要说白色长虹穿过太阳，金星侵蚀昴宿，是事实。
English: It is true to say that the long white rainbow crosses the sun, and Venus encroaches on the Pleiades.

古文：言荆轲之谋，卫先生之画，感动皇天，故白虹贯日，太白蚀昴者，虚也。
现代文：但说荆轲谋杀秦王，卫先生谋画长平之事，感动了上天，所以才有 白虹贯日，太白蚀昴 的事，这是假的。
English: However, it is false to say that the murder of King Qin by Jing Kun and the plot of Changping by Wei Shizhen moved heaven and earth, which is why there is a white rainbow across the sky and a white eclipse of the sun.

古文：夫以箸撞钟，以算击鼓，不能鸣者，所用撞击之者，小也。
现代文：我们用筷子敲钟，用算筹来打鼓，之所以不能发出声音，是因为用来敲打的东西太小。
English: We use chopsticks to strike a bell, and a compass to beat a drum. The reason why we can't make a sound is because the things we use to strike are too small.

古文：今人之形不过七尺，以七尺形中精神，欲有所为，虽积锐意，犹箸撞钟、算击鼓也，安能动天？
现代文：如今人的形体不过七尺，凭人七尺形体中的精神，想有所作为，即使全神贯注真心诚意，也同用筷子敲钟、用算筹打鼓一样，怎么能感动上天呢？
English: Nowadays, the human body is only seven feet tall. If you want to make a difference by relying on the spirit in the seven-foot human body, even if you pay full attention with sincerity, it is the same as using chopsticks to ring a bell or using a calculator to play a drum. How can you move the heavens?

古文：精非不诚，所用动者小也。
现代文：心不是不诚，而是用来感动上天的东西太小了。
English: The heart is not insincere, but it is too small to be used to move heaven.

古文：且所欲害者人也，人不动，天反动乎！
现代文：况且想杀害的是人，人还没有预感，天反而能预感到吗？
English: Moreover, it is man who wants to kill. Man does not yet have a premonition, but can heaven have a premonition?

古文：问曰： 人之害气，能相动乎？ 曰： 不能！ 
现代文：有人问说： 人想谋害别人的气，能使人预感到吗？ 我以为： 不能 。
English: Someone asked: Can a person's anger at someone else's murder be a premonition? I thought: No.

古文： 豫让欲害赵襄子，襄子心动。贯高欲篡高祖，高祖亦心动。
现代文：人又责难道： 那么豫让想谋害赵襄子，赵襄子却事先心动察觉；贯高想弑杀汉高祖，汉高祖也事先心动有所察觉。
English: People also blame: So Yu Zang wanted to kill Zhao Xiangzi, but Zhao Xiangzi was aware of it beforehand; Guan Gao wanted to kill Han Gao Zu, and Han Gao Zu was also aware of it beforehand.

古文：二子怀精，故两主振感。 
现代文：他二人怀有害人的精气，所以两位君主被震动而有感觉。 
English: The two of them have a malevolent spirit, so the two monarchs are shaken and have feelings.

古文：曰： 祸变且至，身自有怪，非适人所能动也。
现代文：依我说： 祸害将要来，这人本身就会有作为预兆的奇怪现象出现，而并不是敌人害人的精气所能震动的。
English: If I say, "A calamity is coming," there will be a strange phenomenon in the person himself as an omen, and it is not the enemy's harmful spirit that can shake the person.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：时或遭狂人於途，以刃加己，狂人未必念害己身也，然而己身先时已有妖怪矣。
现代文：有时会在路上碰到狂人，用刀砍他自己，狂人未必想伤自己的身体，然而自己身体先的时候却已经有作为预兆的奇怪现象发生。
English: Sometimes he will meet a madman on the road and cut himself with a knife. The madman may not want to hurt his own body, but when his own body is first, a strange phenomenon has occurred as an omen.

古文：由此言之，妖怪之至，祸变自凶之象，非欲害己者之所为也。
现代文：照这样说，奇怪现象的出现，是灾祸要到来的凶兆，而不是想害自己的人造成的。
English: Thus, the appearance of strange phenomena is a sign of impending disaster, and not caused by people who want to harm themselves.

古文：且凶之人卜得恶兆，筮得凶卦，出门见不吉，占危睹祸气，祸气见於面，犹白虹太白见於天也。
现代文：将要遭到灾祸的人，去占卜会得恶兆，去算卦会得凶卦，出门也会见到不吉利的事情，观天象占卜会见到祸气，祸气表现在脸上，就像白虹，金星在天空出现一样。
English: People who are about to suffer calamity will get bad omens from divination, and evil omens from fortune-telling. They will also see unlucky things when they go out. People who watch the sky like divination will see evil spirits, and evil spirits will appear on their faces, just like a white rainbow and Venus appear in the sky.

古文：变见於天，妖出於人，上下适然，自相应也。 
现代文：灾变在天空呈现，奇异的预兆在人身上出现，天上地下的怪现象碰巧同时出现，这是自然的相互应和。
English: Catastrophes appear in the sky, strange omens appear in people, and strange phenomena in the sky and underground happen to appear at the same time. This is a natural mutual response.

古文：传书言： 燕太子丹朝於秦，不得去，从秦王求归。
现代文：传书上说： 燕太子丹在秦国朝见，得不到离开，于是向秦王请求回国。
English: According to the biography: Yan Taizi Dan met with the Qin Dynasty and was unable to leave, so he asked the Qin King to return to China.

古文：秦王执留之，与之誓曰： 使日再中，天雨粟，令乌白头，马生角，厨门木象生肉足，乃得归。 
现代文：秦王坚持要留下他，跟他发誓说 除非偏西的太阳再回到正中来，天上降下谷子，使乌鸦白头，马长出角，厨门上的木象生出肉脚来，才能回去 。
English: King Qin insisted on keeping him, and swore to him that he would not be able to return until the west-facing sun returned to the middle of the day, and the sky rained down grain, causing crows to turn white, horses to grow horns, and the wooden elephant on the kitchen door to sprout legs.

古文：当此之时，天地佑之，日为再中，天雨粟，乌白头，马生角，厨门木象生肉足。
现代文：正当这个时候，天地保祐他，偏西的太阳则又回到正中，天上降下谷子，乌鸦白了头，马长出了角，厨门上的木象长出了肉脚。
English: Just at this time, heaven and earth protected him, the west-facing sun returned to the middle, the sky rained grain, the crow turned white, the horse grew horns, and the wooden elephant on the kitchen door grew legs.

古文：秦王以为圣，乃归之。 
现代文：秦王认为他是圣人，就放他回去了。 
English: King Qin thought he was a saint and let him go.

古文：此言虚也。
现代文：这个说法是假的。
English: This allegation is false.

古文：燕太子丹何人，而能动天？
现代文：燕太子丹是什么人，能感动上天？
English: Who is Prince Yan Zi Dan and can he move the heavens?

古文：圣人之拘，不能动天，太子丹贤者也，何能致此？
现代文：圣人被拘禁，没有能感动上天；太子丹是贤人，怎么能做到这样！
English: The holy man was detained, but he was not able to move heaven; Prince Dan is a wise man, how can he do this!

古文：夫天能佑太子，生诸瑞以免其身，则能和秦王之意以解其难。
现代文：上大能保祐燕太子丹，生出诸多吉祥的东西来以避免他的身体被困，那就应该能缓和秦王意图，以解除他的困境。
English: If Shangtao can protect Yan Taizi Dan and give birth to many auspicious things to avoid his body being trapped, then it should be able to temper Qin Wang's intention to relieve his predicament.

古文：见拘一事而易，生瑞五事而难。
现代文：要解决被拘禁一事很容易，要产生出吉祥的五件事来却是极困难的。
English: It is easy to resolve the issue of being detained, but it is very difficult to produce five auspicious things.

古文：舍一事之易，为五事之难，何天之不惮劳也？
现代文：抛开一件容易做的事，而去干五件困难的事，上天怎么就不怕辛苦呢？
English: If you set aside one easy thing to do and do five difficult things, how can God not be afraid of hard work?

古文：汤困夏台，文王拘羑里，孔子厄陈、蔡。
现代文：成汤被囚禁在夏台，周文王被拘留在羑里，孔子被困在陈国、蔡国。
English: Cheng Tang was imprisoned in Xatai, Zhou Wen Wang was detained in Yili, and Confucius was trapped in Chen Guo and Cai Guo.

古文：三圣之困，天不能佑，使拘之者睹佑知圣，出而尊厚之。
现代文：三个圣人受困，上天不能保祐他们，使拘留者看到上天的保祐而知道他们是圣人，释放并尊重、厚待他们。
English: Three saints are trapped, heaven cannot protect them, so that the detainees see the protection of heaven and know that they are saints, release and respect and treat them well.

古文：或曰： 拘三圣者，不与三誓，三圣心不愿，故佑圣之瑞无因而至。
现代文：有人说： 拘留三圣人的人没有与他们立誓，三个圣人的心里就没有产生求天保祐的愿望，所以保祐三圣的吉祥物就无从出现。
English: Some people said: The person who detained the three saints did not swear an oath with them, and the three saints did not have the desire to ask for heavenly protection in their hearts, so the mascot of the protection of the three saints could not appear.

古文：天之佑人，犹借人以物器矣。人不求索，则弗与也。 
现代文：上天保祐人，就像拿器物借给人一样，别人不来求取，就不给他。 
English: Heaven's protection is like lending someone a vessel. If others do not come to ask for it, they will not give it to them.

古文：曰： 太子愿天下瑞之时，岂有语言乎！ 
现代文：我的回答是：燕太子丹希望上天降吉祥的时候，那里会开口说话呢？
English: My answer is: When Prince Yan wishes for good luck, where will he open his mouth to speak?

古文：心愿而已。
现代文：只是心里希望罢了。
English: It's just my hope.

古文：然汤闭於夏台，文王拘於羑里，时心亦愿出；孔子厄陈、蔡，心愿食。
现代文：然而成汤被关在夏台，周文王被囚在姜里的时候，心里也希望被释放；孔子被困在陈国、蔡国，心里是多么希望有饭吃。
English: However, when Cheng Tang was imprisoned in Xatai and Zhou Wen Wang was imprisoned in Jiangli, they also hoped to be released in their hearts; Confucius was trapped in Chen Guo and Cai Guo, and how much he hoped to have food in his heart.

古文：天何不令夏台、羑里关钥毁败，汤、文涉出；雨粟陈、蔡，孔子食饱乎？
现代文：上天为什么不使夏台、羑里的门闩和锁毁坏，让成汤、文王走出来；降谷子在陈国和蔡国，让孔子吃饱呢？
English: Why didn't Heaven destroy the latches and locks of the summer palace and the cocoon, so that Cheng Tang and King Wen could come out; and let Confucius eat his fill of grain in the states of Chen and Cai?

古文：太史公曰： 世称太子丹之令天雨粟、马生角，大抵皆虚言也。 
现代文：太史公说： 世人称赞燕太子丹能使天降谷，马生角，大都是假话。 
English: Tai Shikong said: The world praises Prince Yan for being able to make the sky fall into the valley and the horse grow horns, but these are mostly lies.

古文：太史公书汉世实事之人，而云 虚言 ，近非实也。
现代文：太史公是记载汉代真实情况的人，却说是 假话 ，可见上面的说法近似不真实了。
English: Tai Shigong was the person who recorded the true situation of the Han Dynasty, but said it was a lie, so the above statement is approximately untrue.

古文：传书言：杞梁氏之妻向城而哭，城为之崩。
现代文：传书上说： 杞梁的妻子对着城痛哭，城为此崩塌。 
English: According to the biography: "Hao Liang's wife wept bitterly against the city, and the city collapsed as a result.

古文：此言杞梁从军不还，其妻痛之，向城而哭，至诚悲痛，精气动城，故城为之崩也。
现代文：这是说杞梁随军打仗没有回来，他的妻子很悲哀，对着城痛哭，至诚的悲痛，精气感动了城，所以城墙为此崩塌。
English: This is to say that Hao Liang did not return from the war with the army. His wife was very sad and wept bitterly against the city. The sincere grief and energy moved the city, so the city wall collapsed because of this.

古文：夫言向城而哭者，实也。城为之崩者，虚也。
现代文：说杞梁妻子对着城痛哭，是事实；但说城为此而崩塌，是假的。
English: It is true that Yan Liang's wife cried bitterly against the city, but it is false to say that the city collapsed because of this.

古文：夫人哭悲莫过雍门子。
现代文：人们哭声的悲哀没有超过雍门子的。
English: People's cries of grief did not exceed Yongmenzi's.

古文：雍门子哭对孟尝君，孟尝君为之於邑。盖哭之精诚，故对向之者凄怆感动也。
现代文：雍门子向孟尝君哭诉，孟尝君也为此抽泣，大概哭得真诚，所以面对他的人也感到凄惨悲痛。
English: Yongmenzi cried to Meng Yuqun, and Meng Yuqun also sobbed for this, probably crying sincerely, so the people who faced him also felt miserable grief.

古文：夫雍门子能动孟尝之心，不能感孟尝衣者，衣不知恻怛，不以人心相关通也。
现代文：雍门子能感动孟尝君的心，但不能感动孟尝君的衣服，因为衣服不知道忧伤，不与人的心相贯通。
English: Yongmenzi can touch Meng Tanjun's heart, but cannot touch Meng Tanjun's clothes, because clothes do not know sadness and do not connect with people's hearts.

古文：今城，土也。
现代文：如今的城是土的。
English: Today, the city is made of earth.

古文：土犹衣也，无心腹之藏，安能为悲哭感动而崩？
现代文：土就同衣服一样，没有五脏，怎么会为悲哀的哭声悲痛而崩塌呢？
English: How can the earth, which is as a garment, and hath no covering, be moved at the cry of the poor, at the cry of the afflicted?

古文：使至诚之声能动城土，则其对林木哭，能折草破木乎？
现代文：假使至诚的哭声能感动城的泥土，那她对着草木哭，就能使草折断使树裂开吗？
English: If a sincere cry can move the earth of the city, can she cry to the grass and trees, can she make the grass break and the trees crack?

古文：向水火而泣，能涌水灭火乎？
现代文：对着水和火哭泣，能使水冒出来灭掉火吗？
English: Can weeping over water and fire make the water rise up and extinguish the fire?

古文：夫草木水火与土无异，然杞梁之妻不能崩城，明矣。或时城适自崩，杞梁妻适哭。
现代文：草木水火与泥土没有两样，那么杞梁妻的哭声，不能使城崩塌，是明明白白的了，或许是城正好要自己崩塌，而杞梁的妻子恰巧这时痛哭。
English: Grass, wood, water, fire and soil are all the same, so it is clear that the cries of Gong Liang's wife cannot make the city collapse. Perhaps the city is just about to collapse on its own, and Gong Liang's wife just happens to be crying.

古文：下世好虚，不原其实，故崩城之名，至今不灭。
现代文：后代喜欢随便说的人，不追究这事的真实情况，所以杞梁妻使城崩塌的名声，到今天也没有消失。
English: Subsequent generations like to casually talk about people who do not pursue the true situation of this matter, so the reputation of Yan Liang's wife for causing the collapse of the city has not disappeared to this day.

古文：传书言：邹衍无罪，见拘於燕，当夏五月，仰天而叹，天为陨霜。
现代文：传书上说： 邹衍没有罪，却被燕王囚禁，正当夏天五月，仰天长叹，天因此降霜。 
English: According to the biography: Zou Yan was not guilty, but he was imprisoned by the King of Swallows. In the summer of May, he sighed for a long time, and the sky turned frosty.

古文：此与杞梁之妻哭而崩城，无以异也。
现代文：这跟杞梁妻痛哭使城崩塌，没有什么不同。
English: It's no different than the wife of a warlord crying so hard that the city collapses.

古文：言其无罪见拘，当夏仰天而叹，实也。言天为之雨霜，虚也。
现代文：说他没有罪被囚禁，正值夏天而仰天长叹，是事实；说上天为此而降霜，不是事实。
English: It is true to say that he was imprisoned without any crime, and that he looked up to the sky and sighed in the summer; it is not true to say that the sky froze because of this.

古文：夫万人举口并解吁嗟，犹未能感天，皱衍一人冤而壹叹，安能下霜？
现代文：万人张口一齐发出叹气声，尚且不能感动上天；邹衍一个人受冤枉叹一口气，怎么就会下霜呢？
English: Ten thousand people open their mouths and sigh together, yet they cannot move heaven; if one person sighs unjustly, how can frost fall?

古文：邹衍之冤不过曾子、伯奇。
现代文：邹衍的冤枉不会超过曾子和伯奇。
English: Huan Yan's wrongdoing will not exceed that of Zengzi and Berch.

古文：曾子见疑而吟，伯奇被逐而歌。
现代文：曾子被疑忌就低声哀吟，伯奇被放逐就高声悲歌。
English: Zeng Zi was suspected to be a low-pitched lament, and Birch was banished to a high-pitched dirge.

古文：疑、与拘同。吟、歌与叹等。
现代文：疑忌、放逐跟囚禁一样，哀吟、悲歌与叹气等同。
English: Suspicion and exile are the same as imprisonment, lamentation, dirge and sighing are the same.

古文：曾子、伯奇不能致寒，邹衍何人，独能雨霜？
现代文：曾子和伯奇不能招致寒冷，邹衍是什么人，唯独他能降霜？
English: Zengzi and Burch can't cause cold, what kind of person is Yan Yan, but he can reduce frost?

古文：被逐之冤，尚未足言。
现代文：被放逐的冤枉，尚且不值得说。
English: It is not worth while to say how unjustly he was exiled.

古文：申生伏剑，子胥刎颈。实孝而赐死，诚忠而被诛。
现代文：申生自杀，伍子胥割颈，一个忠心孝敬被赐死，一个真心效忠被诛杀。
English: Shen Sheng committed suicide, Wu Zi castrated his neck, a loyal filial piety was given death, and a sincere loyalty was killed.

古文：且临死时，皆有声辞，声辞出口，与仰天叹无异。
现代文：临死的时候他们都有话说，话说出口，与仰天长叹没有两样。
English: When they are about to die, they all have something to say. There is no difference between uttering words and sighing.

古文：天不为二子感动，独为邹衍动，岂天痛见拘，不悲流血哉？
现代文：上天不被他二人感动，唯独被邹衍感动，难道是上天痛心被囚禁，而不哀怜流血吗！
English: Heaven is not moved by the two of them, but is only moved by Yu Yan. Is it possible that Heaven is saddened by being imprisoned, but is not saddened by the bloodshed?

古文：伯冤痛相似，而感动不同也？
现代文：为什么那冤屈悲痛相似而上天所感动不一样呢？
English: Why is it that grievances and sorrows are similar, but what moves the heavens is different?

古文：夫然一炬火，爨一镬水，终日不能热也；倚一尺冰，置庖厨中，终夜不能寒也。
现代文：点一个火把烧一大锅水，整天不会热；拿一尺冰放在厨房中，整夜不会冷。为什么呢？
English: Light a torch, boil a big pot of water, and it won't be hot all day; put a foot of ice in the kitchen, and it won't be cold all night. Why?

古文：何则？微小之感不能动大巨也。
现代文：因为微弱的感触不能触动巨大的东西。
English: Because a feeble touch cannot touch what is great.

古文：今邹衍之叹，不过如一炬、尺冰，而皇天巨大，不徒镬水庖厨之丑类也。
现代文：现在邹衍的叹气，不过像一个火把、一尺冰，而上天的巨大，不只像一锅水及厨房一类东西。
English: Now, the sighs of Yan Yan are just like a torch, a foot of ice, and the vastness of heaven is not just like a pot of water and a kitchen.

古文：一仰天叹，天为陨霜。何天之易感，霜之易降也？
现代文：一仰天长叹，天就会降霜，是什么天这样容易感动，是什么霜这样容易降下？
English: As soon as the sky sighs, the sky will frost, what kind of day is so easily moved, what kind of frost is so easy to fall?

古文：夫哀与乐同，喜与怒均。
现代文：悲哀跟快乐相同，欢喜与愤怒一样。
English: Sorrow is the same as joy, gladness is the same as anger.

古文：衍兴怨痛，使天下霜，使衍蒙非望之赏，仰天而笑，能以冬时使天热乎？
现代文：邹衍发出怨痛的声音，能使天降霜，那么假使邹衍受到意外的赏赐，仰天大笑，能在冬天使天变热吗？
English: Yuanyan can make the sky turn frosty by making bitter sounds, so if Yuanyan receives an unexpected reward and laughs up at the sky, can he make the sky turn warm in winter?

古文：变复之家曰： 人君秋赏则温，夏罚则寒。 
现代文：谈变复的人说： 人之君子秋天受赏则天气温暖，夏天被罚则天气寒冷。 
English: People who talk about change say: If a gentleman is rewarded in autumn, the weather will be warm; if he is punished in summer, the weather will be cold.

古文：寒不累时，则霜不降，温不兼日，则冰不释。
现代文：寒气不累积多时则霜不会降，暖气不连续几天则冰不会化。
English: If the cold air does not accumulate for a long time, the frost will not fall, and if the heating is not continuous for several days, the ice will not melt.

古文：一夫冤而一叹，天辄下霜，何气之易变，时之易转也？
现代文：一个人被冤枉而叹一口气，天就下霜，是什么气候这样容易改变，是什么时节这样容易转变？
English: A person is wronged and sighs, the sky freezes, what kind of climate is so easy to change, what season is so easy to change?

古文：寒温自有时，不合变复之家。
现代文：气候的寒冷与温暖自有一定时节，这与谈变复的人的说法是不相合的。
English: Cold and warm weather have their own seasons, contrary to what the doubters say.

古文：且从变复之说，或时燕王好用刑，寒气应至；而衍囚拘而叹，叹时霜适自下。
现代文：姑且听从变复的说法，或许燕惠王好用刑，寒冷的气候应该来了；而邹衍被囚禁长叹，叹气时霜正好自己降下。
English: Let's listen to the theory of change and complication, perhaps Yan Hui Wang is good at using punishment, and the cold weather should come; while Qian Yan was imprisoned for a long time, and when he sighed, the frost just fell down by itself.

古文：世见适叹而霜下，则谓邹衍叹之致也。
现代文：世人看见正好在邹衍叹气的时候霜下起来了，就说是邹衍叹气所导致的。
English: When the world saw that the frost rose just at the time of Yuanyan's sigh, they said it was caused by Yuanyan's sigh.

古文：传书言：师旷奏《白雪》之曲，而神物下降，风雨暴至。平公因之癃病，晋国赤地。
现代文：传书上说： 师旷演奏《白雪》曲，神物从天而降，风雨突然而来，晋平公因此得了手脚麻痹的病，晋国地上则寸草不生。 
English: According to the biography: Shiguang played the "White Snow" melody, the gods fell from the sky, the wind and rain came suddenly, so Jinping got the disease of paralysis of the hands and feet, and the grass did not grow on the land of Jin.

古文：或言师旷《清角》之曲，一奏之，有云从西北起：再奏之，大风至，大雨随之，裂帷幕，破俎豆，堕廊瓦。坐者散走。
现代文：有人说： 师旷的《清角》曲，开始演奏，就有云从西北面升起；再次演奏，大风来，大雨随之而到，吹裂帷幕，砸坏俎、豆，把廊上的瓦刮了下来，坐着的人纷纷逃散。
English: Some people said: When Shi Kuang's "Clear Angle" began to play, a cloud rose from the northwest; when it was played again, a strong wind came, followed by heavy rain, blowing the curtain, breaking the beanbags and beans, scraping the tiles on the porch, and the seated people fled in droves.

古文：平公恐惧，伏乎廊室。晋国大旱，赤地三年；平公癃病。
现代文：晋平公感到恐惧，趴在廊室里，接着晋国大旱，三年地上寸草不生，平公也得了手脚麻痹的病。
English: Jin Ping Gong felt fear and lay down in the hallway, followed by a great drought in Jin. For three years, not a single blade of grass grew on the ground, and Jin Ping Gong also contracted a disease that paralyzed his hands and feet.

古文：夫《白雪》与《清角》，或同曲而异名，其祸败同一实也。
现代文：看来《白雪》和《清角》也许是同曲异名，因为它们灾祸的情况相同。
English: It seems that "White Snow" and "Clear Angle" may be the same song with different names, because they have the same disaster situation.

古文：传书之家，载以为是；世俗观见，信以为然。
现代文：解释儒家经典的人，把它当作对的东西记载下来，社会上一般人看见，相信以为就是如此。
English: Those who interpret the Confucian classics, record it as the right thing, and the general public sees it, believes it and thinks it is so.

古文：原省其实，殆虚言也。
现代文：要是研究考察一下它的实际情况，大概是句假话。
English: If you look at the reality of it, it's probably a lie.

古文：夫《清角》，何音之声而致此？ 《清角》，木音也，故致风雨，如木为风，雨与风俱。 
现代文：那么《清角》是什么声音能导致它这样呢？要说 《清角》是木音，所以能招致风产生。如果木能招风，雨就会跟风一起来。 
English: So what is the sound of "Clear Angle" that can cause it to swell like this? Let's say that "Clear Angle" is a wooden sound, so it can cause wind to occur. If the wood can blow, the rain will come with the wind.

古文：三尺之木，数弦之声，感动天地，何其神也！
现代文：三尺长的一把木琴，几根弦发出的声音，就能感动天地，怎么这样神奇啊！
English: A three-foot-long xylophone, the sound emitted by a few strings, can move heaven and earth. How amazing!

古文：此复一哭崩城、一叹下霜之类也。
现代文：这还是一哭就使城崩塌，一叹气就使天下霜之类。
English: This is still a cry to make the city collapse, a sigh to make the world frost and the like.

古文：师旷能鼓《清角》，必有所受，非能质性生出之也。
现代文：师旷能弹奏《清角》，肯定有传授的人，不可能是本性生就出来的。
English: A person who is able to play "Clear Angle" by his teacher must have been taught, and cannot have been born with this ability.

古文：其初受学之时，宿昔习弄，非直一再奏也。
现代文：他开始接受学习的时候，经常练习，不只一次两次地弹奏过。
English: When he started to study, he practiced a lot and played more than once or twice.

古文：审如传书之言，师旷学《清角》时，风雨当至也。
现代文：考察一下，如果确实像传书所说的，那么师旷学奏《清角》时，风雨就一定会经常到来。
English: Let's take a look. If it's really like the biography says, then when Shiyaku is learning to play "Clear Angle," storms will surely come often.

古文：传书言： 瓠芭鼓瑟，渊鱼出听；师旷鼓琴，六马仰秣 。
现代文：传书上说： 瓠芭弹瑟，深渊里的鱼会冒出水面来听；伯牙奏琴，正在吃料的马也抬起头来听。 
English: According to the biography: "When Baba plays the flute, the fish in the abyss will come up to the surface to listen; when Baba plays the harp, the horse, which is eating, will also look up to listen.

古文：或言： 师旷鼓《清角》，一奏之，有玄鹤二八自南方来，集於廊门之危；再奏之而列；三奏之，延颈而鸣，舒翼而舞，音中宫商之声，声吁於天。
现代文：有人说： 师旷弹奏《清徵》，开始演奏，有十六只黑鹤从南方飞来，在廊门的脊上停留；再演奏黑鹤就排成队；第三次演奏，黑鹤群便伸长脖子鸣叫，舒展翅膀起舞，乐音中符合五音的声音，响彻天空。
English: Some people said: When Shi Guang played "Qing Zheng" and began to play, sixteen black cranes flew from the south and stopped on the ridge of the corridor door; when the black cranes played again, they lined up; the third time they played, the black cranes stretched their necks and chirped, stretched their wings and danced, and the sound of the five tones in the music resounded throughout the sky.

古文：平公大悦，坐者皆喜 。
现代文：晋平公很高兴，在坐的都欢喜。 
English: Emperor Jinpyeong was delighted, and everyone present was overjoyed.

古文：《尚书》曰： 击石拊石，百兽率舞。 
现代文：《尚书·舜典》上说： 敲击着石磬，使各种兽类一齐起舞。 
English: "Shangshu·Yongxuan" said: "Strike the stalagmite to make all kinds of animals dance together."

古文：此虽奇怪，然尚可信。
现代文：这虽然使人奇怪，然则尚且可信。
English: This is strange but plausible.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：鸟兽好悲声，耳与人耳同也。
现代文：因为鸟兽喜好动听的声音，它们的耳朵与人的耳朵一样。
English: Because birds and beasts like to hear pleasant sounds, their ears are the same as human ears.

古文：禽兽见人欲食，亦欲食之；闻人之乐，何为不乐？
现代文：禽兽看见人的食物，也想吃；听到人的乐曲，为什么要不快乐呢？
English: When animals see man's food, they want to eat it; when they hear man's music, why shouldn't they be happy?

古文：然而 鱼听 、 仰秣 、 玄鹤延颈 、 百兽率舞 ，盖且其实；风雨之至、晋国大旱、赤地三年、平公癃病，殆虚言也。
现代文：虽然鱼冒出水面来听，吃料的马抬着头听，黑鹤伸长脖子鸣叫，各种兽类一齐起舞，这些大概接近其真实。但狂风暴雨的到来，晋国大旱，地上三年寸草不长，晋平公得手脚麻痹的病，大概是假话。
English: Although the fish rising out of the water to listen, the horses listening with their heads up, the black cranes craning their necks to sing, and all kinds of animals dancing together are probably close to reality, the arrival of violent storms and rains, the drought in Jin Province, the three-year-old grass on the ground, and the paralysis of Jin Ping Gong's hands and feet are probably lies.

古文：或时奏《清角》时，天偶风雨、风雨之後，晋国适旱；平公好乐，喜笑过度，偶发癃病。
现代文：也许弹奏《清角》的时候，天正好要刮风下雨，风雨过后，晋国碰巧遭上大旱；晋平公喜欢听乐曲，喜笑过度，偶然得了手脚麻痹的病。
English: Perhaps when "Clear Angle" was played, the weather just happened to be windy and rainy. After the wind and rain, Jin Province happened to suffer a drought; Jin Ping Gong liked to listen to music, laughed excessively, and accidentally got the disease of hand and foot paralysis.

古文：传书之家，信以为然，世人观见，遂以为实。
现代文：解释儒家经典的人，相信认为是这样，世人看了，就更认为是事实了。
English: Those who interpret the Confucian classics believe that this is so, and the world sees it, and believes it to be true.

古文：实者乐声不能致此。
现代文：事实上，乐声不可能招致这样。
English: In fact, the music couldn't have been more inviting.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：风雨暴至，是阴阳乱也。
现代文：风雨突然到来，这是阴阳错乱。
English: When the wind and rain come suddenly, it is a disorder of yin and yang.

古文：乐能乱阴阳，则亦能调阴阳也。
现代文：乐声能使阴阳错乱，那么也能使阴阳调和。
English: Music can make yin and yang confused, then it can also reconcile yin and yang.

古文：王者何须修身正行，扩施善政？
现代文：既然如此作君王的又何必要修养身心，端正操行，广泛施行善政呢？
English: Since he is such a king, why is it necessary for him to cultivate his mind and body, conduct himself properly, and widely implement good governance?

古文：使鼓调阴阳之曲，和气自至，太平自立矣。
现代文：只要让人弹奏能调和阴阳的曲子，调和之气自然到来，太平景象自然就会呈现。
English: As long as people play music that can harmonize yin and yang, the harmony will naturally come, and the peaceful scene will naturally appear.

古文：传书言： 汤遭七年旱，以身祷於桑林，自责以六过，天乃雨 。
现代文：传书上说： 汤遇上七年大旱，用自己做牺牲在桑山的树林里祷告，列举六项过失责备自己，天才下雨。 
English: According to the biography: Tang encountered a seven-year drought, used himself as a sacrifice to pray in the forest of Mulberry Mountain, listed six faults to blame himself, and made it rain.

古文：或言： 五年。
现代文：有人说： 大旱是五年。 
English: Some people say: The drought is five years old.

古文：祷辞曰： 余一人有罪，无及万夫。
现代文： 祷告说： 我一个人有罪，不要涉及万民。
English: And said, I have sinned, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

古文：万夫有罪，在余一人。
现代文：万民有罪，罪在我一个人。
English: All men are guilty; I alone am to blame.

古文：天以一人不敏，使上帝鬼神伤民之命 。
现代文：不要因为我一个人的昏庸，就让上天鬼神伤害万民的生命。 
English: Don't let the heavens and the demons harm the lives of all people because of my own stupidity.

古文：於是剪其发，丽其手，自以为牲，用祈福於上帝。
现代文：于是剪自己的头发，捆自己的手，把自己作为牺牲，以此向上天请求降福。
English: So he cut his hair, tied up his hands, and offered himself as a sacrifice to ask for blessings from heaven.

古文：上帝甚说，时雨乃至。
现代文：上天很高兴，当时就下了雨。 
English: The heavens were pleased, and it rained.

古文：言汤以身祷於桑林自责，若言剪发丽手，自以为牲，用祈福於帝者，实也。
现代文：说汤把自己当做牺牲在桑林祷告责备自己，以及说剪头发捆手，把自己当作牺牲，以此向上天请求降福，这是事实。
English: It is true that Tang blamed himself for praying as a sacrifice in the mulberry grove, and that he cut his hair and tied his hands as a sacrifice to ask for blessings from heaven.

古文：言雨至为汤自责以身祷之故，殆虚言也。
现代文：至于说天下雨，是因为汤责备自己，把自己当做牺牲向上天祷告的缘故，大概是不符合事实的说法。
English: As for saying that it's raining, it's because Tang blames himself and regards himself as a sacrifice for the sake of praying to heaven, which is probably not true.

古文：孔子疾病，子路请祷。
现代文：孔子得病，子路请求为他祷告。
English: When Confucius fell ill, Zilu asked to pray for him.

古文：孔子曰： 有诸？ 
现代文：孔子说： 有这样的事吗？ 
English: Confucius said: Is there such a thing?

古文：子路曰： 有之；《诔》曰： 祷尔於上下神祗。  
现代文：子路说： 有的。祷词上有： 为你向天上的神和地下的神祈祷。  
English: Zilu said, "Yes, there is. The prayer says, 'Pray for you to the God of heaven and to the God of the earth.'

古文：孔子曰： 丘之祷，久矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 我祈祷已经很久了。 
English: Confucius said: I have been praying for a long time.

古文：圣人修身正行，素祷之日久，天地鬼神知其无罪，故曰祷久矣。
现代文：圣人修养身心，端正操行，平常祷告的时间已经很久了，天地鬼神都知道他们没有罪过，所以说 祷告很久了 。
English: It has been a long time for the saints to cultivate their mind and body, to conduct themselves properly, and to pray normally. Heaven and earth, spirits and gods all know that they have not sinned, so they say that they have been praying for a long time.

古文：《易》曰： 大人与天地合其德，与日月合其明，与四时合其叙，与鬼神合其吉凶。 
现代文：《周易·乾卦·文言》上说： 圣人与天地同德行，与日月同光明，与春、夏、秋、冬四时变化同顺序，与鬼神同吉凶。 
English: "Zhou Yi, Qian Gua, Wen Yuan" said: The sage and heaven and earth have the same virtue, the sun and the moon have the same light, the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter have the same order, and the ghosts and gods have the same good luck and bad luck.

古文：此言圣人与天地、鬼神同德行也。
现代文：这是说圣人跟天地鬼神同德行。
English: This means that the saints walk in the same virtue as the gods and spirits of heaven and earth.

古文：即须祷以得福，是不同也。
现代文：如果圣人一定要祈祷才能得福，这就是说他跟天地鬼神不同德行了。
English: If a saint must pray in order to be blessed, it means that he is not as virtuous as heaven and earth.

古文：汤与孔子俱圣人也，皆素祷之日久。
现代文：商汤和孔子都是圣人，平素祈祷的时间都很久。
English: Shangtang and Confucius were both saints, and they always prayed for a long time.

古文：孔子不使子路祷以治病，汤何能以祷得雨？
现代文：孔子不让子路祷告为他治病，商汤为什么要用祷告来得到雨水呢？
English: Confucius did not allow Zi Lu to pray for him to cure his illness, why should Shang Tang use prayer to get rainwater?

古文：孔子素祷，身犹疾病。
现代文：孔子一向祈祷，身体尚且还生病。
English: Confucius always prayed, even when he was ill.

古文：汤亦素祷，岁犹大旱。
现代文：商汤也一向祈祷，整年还是大旱。
English: Shangtang has also been praying that the whole year will be a drought.

古文：然则天地之有水旱，犹人之有疾病也。
现代文：既然如此，那么天地有水灾旱灾，就像人会生病一样。
English: That being the case, the world is subject to floods and droughts, just as people are subject to illness.

古文：疾不可以自责除，水旱不可以祷谢去，明矣。
现代文：生病不可能因为责备自己而消除，水灾旱灾同样不可能因为祈祷而自动免除，这是明摆着的。
English: It is clear that illness cannot be eliminated by blaming oneself, and floods and droughts cannot be automatically exempted by prayer.

古文：汤之致旱，以过乎？
现代文：商汤遭到旱灾，是因为犯了过错吗？
English: Was Shangtang hit by drought because it made a mistake?

古文：是不与天地同德也。
现代文：这就是他不与天地同德行了。
English: That's why he doesn't walk with heaven and earth.

古文：今不以过致旱乎？自责祷谢，亦无益也。
现代文：如果不是由于他的过错招致来的大旱，那么，责备自己向上天祷告谢罪，也没有什么用处。
English: If it were not for the drought caused by his fault, then blaming himself and praying to the heavens for forgiveness would be of no use.

古文：人形长七尺，形中有五常，有瘅热之病，深自克责，犹不能愈，况以广大之天，自有水旱之变。汤用七尺之形，形中之诚，自责祷谢，安能得雨邪？
现代文：人的形体长七尺，身体中有五脏，会得疟疾，狠狠地责备自己，尚且不能痊愈。何况广阔的天，本来就有水灾和旱灾，汤用七尺长的身体，心中的诚挚，责备自己祷告谢罪，怎么能得到雨水呢？
English: The human body is seven feet long, has five internal organs, can get malaria, severely blames himself, and still can't recover. Not to mention the vast sky, there are floods and droughts, with a seven-foot-long body, sincere in the heart, blaming himself, praying and thanking, how can we get rain?

古文：人在层台之上，人从层台下叩头，求请台上之物。
现代文：要是人在高台上，有人从高台下叩头，请求得到台上的东西。
English: If a person is on a high platform, someone will bow from under the high platform and ask for something on the platform.

古文：台上之人闻其言，则怜而与之；如不闻其言，虽至诚区区，终无得也。
现代文：台上的人听见他的话，就会怜悯给他；如果听不见他的话，即使他诚恳到极点，最终还是得不到。
English: If the people on the platform hear his words, they will have pity on him; if they do not hear his words, even if he is sincere to the extreme, he will not get it in the end.

古文：夫天去人，非徒层台之高也，汤虽自责，天安能闻知而与之雨乎？
现代文：天离人，不只高台那样高，商汤即使责备自己，天怎么能听见而给他雨水呢？
English: The sky is far away from people, not only as high as the plateau. Even if Shangtang blames himself, how can the sky hear him and give him rain?

古文：夫旱，火变也；湛，水异也。
现代文：那干旱，是火气造成的灾害，久雨，是水造成的灾异。
English: The drought is a disaster caused by fire, and the long rain is a disaster caused by water.

古文：尧遭洪水，可谓湛矣。
现代文：尧遇到的洪水，可以说是大得很。
English: The floods encountered by cormorants can be said to be very large.

古文：尧不自责以身祷祈，必舜、禹治之，知水变必须治也。
现代文：尧并没有责备自己，用自己作牺牲来向上天祈祷，而是一定要舜、禹去治理它，因为他知道水灾必须靠治理才会消除。
English: Yu did not blame himself, but prayed to heaven with his own sacrifice, but he must ask Yu and Yu to control it, because he knew that the flood would be eliminated only by controlling it.

古文：除湛不以祷祈，除旱亦宜如之。
现代文：消除水患不能靠祈祷，消除旱灾也应该像这样。
English: You can't pray away floods, and you shouldn't pray away droughts.

古文：由此言之，汤之祷祈，不能得雨。
现代文：由此说来，商汤的祈祷不可能得到雨水。
English: Therefore, it is impossible for Shangtang's prayer to receive rain.

古文：或时旱久，时当自雨；汤以旱久，亦适自责。世人见雨之下，随汤自责而至，则谓汤以祷祈得雨矣。
现代文：也许是干旱得太久了，该当是下雨的时候，商汤由于久旱，碰巧在责备自己，世人看雨下来，是随着汤责备自己而来的，就说汤是靠祈祷得到雨水的。
English: Perhaps it is because the drought has lasted too long. When it is time for rain, Shang Tang happens to blame himself for the long drought. When the world sees the rain come down, it comes with Tang blaming himself. They say that Tang got rainwater by praying.

古文：传书言： 仓颉作书，天雨粟，鬼夜哭。 
现代文：传书上说： 仓颉创造文字，天上降下谷米，鬼夜晚哭泣。 
English: According to the biography: "Cangluo created characters, the sky rained grain, and ghosts cried at night.

古文：此言文章兴而乱渐见，故其妖变致天雨粟、鬼夜哭也。
现代文：这是说文字产生而祸乱也随着出现，所以他创作文字的奇异现象导致了天降谷，鬼夜哭头。
English: This is to say that the writing is produced and the calamity also appears with it, so the strange phenomenon of his creation of writing has led to the fall of the sky and the crying of the night.

古文：夫言天雨粟、鬼夜哭，实也。言其应仓颉作书，虚也。
现代文：说天降谷，鬼夜哭，是事实，但说那是应验仓颉创造文字，则是假话。
English: It is true to say that the sky falls into the valley and the ghosts cry at night, but it is a lie to say that it is the fulfillment of the creation of words.

古文：夫河出图，洛出《书》，圣帝明王之瑞应也。
现代文：黄河中出现图，洛水中出现书，是圣帝明王吉兆的应验。
English: The appearance of a map in the Yellow River and a book in the Luo River is the fulfillment of the auspicious sign of the Holy Emperor Mingwang.

古文：图书文章，与仓颉所作字画何以异？
现代文：图书文章跟仓颉创造文字有什么区别？
English: What is the difference between a book article and a creative text?

古文：天地为图书，仓颉作文字，业与天地同，指与鬼神合，何非何恶而致雨粟鬼哭之怪？
现代文：天地作图书，仓颉创造文字，所从事的跟天地相同，意图与鬼神相合，有什么错，有什么罪，却招来天降谷、鬼夜哭的怪现象呢？
English: Heaven and earth make books, the barn owl creates words, and what they do is the same as heaven and earth, and their intentions coincide with ghosts and gods. What is wrong, what is the sin, but it has brought about the strange phenomenon of the sky falling into the valley and the ghosts crying at night?

古文：使天地鬼神恶人有书，则其出图书，非也；天不恶人有书，作书何非而致此怪？
现代文：如果天地、鬼神憎恨人有文字，那么黄河中出现图，洛水中出现书，就不对了；要是天不憎恨人有文字，创造文字又有什么错而会导致这样的怪现象呢？
English: If heaven and earth, ghosts and gods hate people with letters, then it is not right for a map to appear in the Yellow River and a book to appear in the Luo River; if heaven does not hate people with letters, what is wrong with creating letters that would lead to such a strange phenomenon?

古文：或时仓颉适作书，天适雨粟，鬼偶夜哭，而雨粟、鬼神哭自有所为。世见应书而至，则谓作书生乱败之象，应事而动也。 天雨谷 ，论者谓之从天而下，变而生。
现代文：也许仓颉正好创造文字，天碰巧降谷，鬼偶尔夜哭。而天降谷，鬼夜哭，自有它的原因，世人看到它们是随着文字的出现而到来的，就说创造文字产生祸乱的现象，是跟随着仓颉的事业而发生的。天降谷，议论的人说它从天而降，是随着灾变而发生。
English: Perhaps Canglu just happened to create the characters, the sky happened to fall into the valley, and the ghosts occasionally cried at night. And the sky falling into the valley, and the ghosts crying at night, have their own reasons. The world saw that they came with the emergence of the characters, and said that the phenomenon of creating characters to produce disasters occurred with the cause of Canglu. The sky falling into the valley, and the people who talked about it said that it fell from the sky, occurred with the disaster.

古文：如以云雨论之，雨谷之变，不足怪也。
现代文：如果用云雨来解说，降谷的怪现象，不足奇。
English: If clouds and rain are used to explain it, the strange phenomenon of the falling valley is not surprising.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：夫云出於丘山，降散则为雨矣。
现代文：因为云是从山丘中产生，分散落下来就成为雨。
English: Because the cloud originates in the hills, it falls as rain when it is dispersed.

古文：人见其从上而坠，则谓之天雨水也。
现代文：人看见它从天上落下来，就说天下雨了。
English: When people see it falling from the sky, they say it's raining.

古文：夏日则雨水，冬日天寒则雨凝而为雪，皆由云气发於丘山，不从天上降集於地，明矣。
现代文：夏天则是雨水，冬天天冷，那雨就凝结成雪花，这都是由于云气在山丘中产生，而不是从天上产生降落在地上，道理是明明白白的。
English: In summer it is rainwater, in winter it is cold, and that rain condenses into snowflakes. This is all due to the fact that clouds are produced in the hills, rather than being produced from the sky and landing on the ground. The reason is clear.

古文：夫谷之雨，犹复云之亦从地起，因与疾风俱飘，参於天，集於地。
现代文：那谷雨，好比重复云雨一样，也是从地上产生，随着跟大风一起飘扬，高入云霄，然后再降集在地上。
English: The valley rain, like the repetitive cloud rain, is also generated from the ground, flying with the wind, rising into the sky, and then falling to the ground.

古文：人见其从天落也，则谓之天雨谷。
现代文：人们看见它从天上落下来，就说 天降谷米 。
English: When people saw it falling from the sky, they called it "heavenly rice."

古文：建武三十一年中，陈留雨谷，谷下蔽地。
现代文：建武三十一年，陈留地方降谷米，谷米下来把地都遮盖了。
English: In the 31st year of the Jianwu era, grain rained down in the Chenlu area, and the grain rained down and covered the land.

古文：案视谷形，若茨而黑，有似於稗实也。
现代文：察看谷米的形态，像蒺藜子但要黑些，有点类似于稗子。
English: Look at the shape of the grain, like hazelnuts but darker, somewhat similar to hazelnuts.

古文：此或时夷狄之地，生出此谷。夷狄不粒食，此谷生於草野之中，成熟垂委於地，遭疾风暴起，吹扬与之俱飞，风衰谷集，坠於中国。
现代文：这或许是边远的夷狄地方，出产这种谷米，夷狄不用谷米作粮食，这谷子生于荒野中，成熟后散落在地上，碰到大风突然来，吹起飘扬跟着一起飞驰，等风势减弱谷子聚集在中原地区落下。
English: This may be a remote Yidi place, producing this kind of grain rice. Yidi do not use grain rice for food. This grain was born in the wilderness, matured and scattered on the ground. When a strong wind suddenly came, it blew and flew together, and when the wind weakened, the grain gathered and fell in the Central Plains.

古文：中国见之，谓之雨谷。
现代文：中原地区的人看见，就说天降谷米。
English: When people in the Central Plains region see it, they say it's fallen from the sky.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：以什么来验证呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：野火燔山泽，山泽之中，草木皆烧，其叶为灰，疾风暴起，吹扬之，参天而飞，风衰叶下，集於道路。
现代文：野火烧山泽，山泽中草木都被烧光，树叶成了灰，大风突然来，吹起飘扬，高高在天上纷飞，风势减弱叶灰下落，堆集在路上。
English: Wildfires burn mountains and forests. The grasses and trees in the mountains and forests are all burned out. The leaves have turned to ash. A strong wind comes suddenly, blows and flutters, flying high in the sky. As the wind weakens, the leaf ash falls and accumulates on the road.

古文：夫 天雨谷 者，草木叶烧飞而集之类也。
现代文：天降谷米，就像草木的叶子被烧成灰飞上天，然后降集在地上一样。
English: Like the leaves of plants that are burnt to ashes and fly up to the sky, and then fall to the ground.

古文：而世以为雨谷，作传书者以变怪。
现代文：而一般人便以为天降谷米，作传书的人就认为是灾变的怪现象。
English: But the average person thinks it's just rice falling from the sky, while the person who wrote the letter thinks it's a strange phenomenon of cataclysm.

古文：天主施气，地主产物。
现代文：天主管散布气，地主管生产物。
English: Heaven is in charge of dispersing the gas, and earth is in charge of producing it.

古文：有叶、实可啄食者，皆地所生，非天所为也。
现代文：有叶子、有果实可以啄吃的东西，都是地上长出来的，不是上天所造的。
English: Everything that has leaves and fruit that can be eaten by cormorants grows on the ground and was not created by the heavens.

古文：今谷非气所生，须土以成。虽云怪变，怪变因类。
现代文：这谷米不是气生成的。而必须有土才能长成，虽说天降谷是怪现象，但怪现象都源于同类事物。
English: This grain of rice is not gaseous. It must have soil to grow. Although the falling of the sky into the valley is a strange phenomenon, strange phenomena all originate from the same kind of things.

古文：生地之物，更从天集，生天之物，可从地出乎？
现代文：长在地上的东西，变成从天上降下来；那么产生在天上的东西，可以从地上长出来吗？
English: That which is born of the earth is earthly; and that which is born of heaven is heavenly. Can that which is born of heaven be earthly?

古文：地之有万物，犹天之有列星也。
现代文：地上有万物，就像天上有群星一样。
English: There are things on the earth, just as there are stars in the sky.

古文：星不更生於地，谷何独生於天乎？
现代文：群星不会改变从地上长出来，谷米为什么就能单独从天上产生呢？
English: Stars do not change and grow from the earth, so how can rice be produced from the sky alone?

古文：传书又言：伯益作井，龙登玄云，神栖昆仑。
现代文：传书上又说： 因为伯益凿井，龙飞升到高高厚厚的云端，神隐居于昆仑山中。 
English: The letter also said: Because of Bo Yi's well-digging, the dragon soared to the top of the high and thick clouds, and the god lived in seclusion in the Kunlun Mountains.

古文：言龙井有害，故龙神为变也。
现代文：这是说凿井有害，所以龙和神在作怪。
English: This is to say that digging wells is harmful, so the dragon and the god are playing tricks.

古文：夫言龙登玄云，实也。
现代文：要说龙飞升到高高的厚厚的云端，是事实。
English: It is true to say that Longfei has risen to the top of a high, thick cloud.

古文：言神栖昆仑，又言为作井之故，龙登神去，虚也。
现代文：但要说神隐居昆仑山中，又说因为凿井的缘故，龙飞升神离开，那是假的。
English: However, it is false to say that the god lives in seclusion in the Kunlun Mountains, or that the dragon flies up and leaves the god because of the well.

古文：夫作井而饮，耕田而食，同一实也。
现代文：凿井有水喝，种田有饭吃，同是一种情况。
English: There is water to drink in the well and food to eat in the field. It is the same situation.

古文：伯益作井，致有变动。
现代文：伯益凿井，导致变化，开始有种田的人，怎么能说没有改变呢？
English: How can the people who dug wells in Bo Yi, brought about changes and started farming, be said to have not changed?

古文：始为耕耘者，何故无变？神农之桡木为耒，教民耕耨，民始食谷，谷始播种。
现代文：神农把木头弄弯做成耒，教百姓种田锄草，百姓才开始以五谷为粮食，五谷才开始播种。
English: Shennong bent wood into ploughshares and taught the people to grow crops and weeds. Only then did the people begin to use grain as food, and only then did they begin to sow grain.

古文：耕土以为田，凿地以为井。
现代文：改耕土成为田，凿地成为井。
English: The ploughed ground becomes a field, the hewn ground becomes a well.

古文：井出水以救渴，田出谷以拯饥，天地鬼神所欲为也，龙何故登玄云？
现代文：井出水能解渴，田产谷能救饥，这是天地鬼神想做的事，龙为什么要躲入高高的厚厚的云端去呢？
English: Well water can quench thirst, field crops can save hunger, this is what heaven and earth want to do, why should the dragon hide in the high thick clouds?

古文：神何故栖昆仑？
现代文：神又为什么蔽居昆仑山呢？
English: Why does God live in Mount Kunlun?

古文：夫龙之登玄云，古今有之，非始益作井而乃登也。
现代文：其实，龙升入高高的厚厚的云端，古今都有，并非始于伯益凿井才升入云端。
English: In fact, dragons have been ascending into the high, thick clouds from ancient times to the present. They did not start ascending into the clouds from the Hefei Well.

古文：方今盛夏，雷雨时至，龙多登云。
现代文：如今盛夏，雷雨的季节到了，龙多数要飞升云里。
English: Now it is midsummer, the season of thunderstorms has arrived, and most of the dragons want to fly up into the clouds.

古文：云龙相应，龙乘云雨而行，物类相致，非有为也。
现代文：云雨与龙相互应和，龙驾云雨而行，同类之物互相招致，这并非是有意的行为。
English: The clouds and rain and the dragon correspond to each other, the dragon drives the clouds and rain, and the same kind of things attract each other. This is not a deliberate act.

古文：尧时，五十之民，击壤於涂。
现代文：尧的时候，天下很和睦，老百姓无事，有个五十岁的老人在路上玩击壤的游戏。
English: When I was a child, the world was very harmonious, the common people had nothing to worry about, and there was a fifty-year-old man playing a game of hitting the ground on the road.

古文：观者曰： 大哉，尧之德也！ 
现代文：围观的人说： 伟大啊，尧的德政！ 
English: Onlookers said: "Great, great German politics!"

古文：击壤者曰： 吾日出而作，日入而息，凿井而饮，耕田而食。尧何等力？ 
现代文：玩击壤的人则说 我太阳升起就劳动，太阳下山才休息，凿井来喝水，种田来吃饭，这里边尧出了什么力呢？ 
English: Those who play at striking the soil say, "I work when the sun rises and rest when the sun sets. I dig wells to drink water and grow crops to eat. What power has been unleashed here?"

古文：尧时已有井矣。
现代文：可见，尧的时候已经有井了。
English: As you can see, there was already a well at the time of the flood.

古文：唐、虞之时，豢龙、御龙，龙常在朝。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜的时候，养龙驾龙，龙常在朝廷。
English: During the Tang Dynasty and the Yu Dynasty, dragons were kept in the imperial court.

古文：夏末政衰，龙乃隐伏。
现代文：夏朝末年政治衰败，龙才隐藏起来。
English: It was only after the political decline at the end of the Summer Dynasty that the dragon was hidden.

古文：非益凿井，龙登云也。
现代文：并非伯益凿井，龙才飞入高高的厚厚的云端隐藏。
English: It wasn't Bo Yi who dug the well, it was the dragon who flew into the high and thick clouds to hide.

古文：所谓神者，何神也？
现代文：所说的神，是什么神呢？
English: What is this God of whom you speak?

古文：百神皆是。
现代文：各种各样的神都是。
English: All kinds of gods are.

古文：百神何故恶人为井？
现代文：各种各样的神为什么要憎恨人凿井呢？
English: Why do all kinds of gods hate people digging wells?

古文：使神与人同，则亦宜有饮之欲。
现代文：假使神跟人一样，那也应该有喝水的欲望，有喝水的欲望。
English: If God were like man, He would have a desire to drink water.

古文：有饮之欲，憎井而去，非其实也。
现代文：却要憎恨井而离开，这就不真实。
English: But to hate the well and leave, that's not true.

古文：夫益殆之凿井，龙不为凿井登云，神不栖於昆仑，传书意妄，造生之也。
现代文：要是伯益不凿井，龙就不会因为憎恨凿井而蔽入云端，神也不会因此而隐居昆仑，这是作传书的人胡乱揣测，编造出来的。
English: If Bo Yi hadn't dug the well, the dragon wouldn't have been sucked into the clouds because he hated digging wells, and the god wouldn't have been able to live in seclusion in Kunlun because of it. This is a wild guess and fabrication by the writer of the letter.

古文：传书言：梁山崩，壅河三日不流，晋君忧之。
现代文：传书上说： 吕梁山崩塌，堵塞了黄河三天没有流水，晋景公非常发愁。
English: The letter said: "The collapse of Mount Luliang blocked the Yellow River and there was no running water for three days. Jinjinggong was very worried.

古文：晋伯宗以辇者之言，令景公素缟而哭之，河水为之流通。
现代文：晋伯宗听从拉车人的话，叫晋景公穿着丧服哭泣，河水就会因此流通。 
English: Jin Bo Zong obeyed the driver's words and told Jin Jing Gong to wear mourning clothes and cry, and the river would circulate.

古文：此虚言也。
现代文：这是假话。
English: That's a lie.

古文：夫山崩壅河，犹人之有痈肿，血脉不通也。
现代文：山崩塌堵塞黄河，就像人生疮长脓，血脉不通。
English: The landslide blocked the Yellow River, just like a life-long wound, the blood does not flow.

古文：治痈肿者，可复以素服哭泣之声治乎？
现代文：治毒疮的人，难道可以又重复用穿丧服，通过哭泣的声音来治病吗？
English: Can he who heals the leper, put on sackcloth again and again, and heal by the sound of weeping?

古文：尧之时，洪水滔天，怀山襄陵。
现代文：尧的时候，洪水滔天，包围了高山，漫上了丘陵。
English: At the time of the flood, the flood surged skyward, encircling the high mountains and engulfing the hills.

古文：帝尧吁嗟，博求贤者。
现代文：帝尧叹息，广求贤能的人。
English: The emperor sighed, and called for a man of virtue.

古文：水变甚於河壅，尧忧深於景公，不闻以素缟哭泣之声能厌胜之。
现代文：洪水成灾比黄河堵塞更凶，尧为此发愁比晋景公厉害，但没有听见用穿丧服，通过哭泣声的手段能制服洪水的。
English: The flood disaster is more severe than the blockage of the Yellow River, and the baboons are more worried about this than Jin Jing Gong, but they have not heard that the flood can be subdued by wearing mourning clothes and crying.

古文：尧无贤人若辇者之术乎？
现代文：这是因为尧的时候没有贤能的人像拉车人那样具有法术呢？
English: Is it because there is no one as skillful as a charioteer to perform magic in a thunderstorm?

古文：将洪水变大，不可以声服除也？
现代文：还是洪水灾害太大，不能用哭泣声和穿丧服的办法来消除它呢？
English: Or is the flood disaster too great to be eliminated by crying and wearing mourning clothes?

古文：如素缟而哭，悔过自责也，尧、禹之治水以力役，不自责。
现代文：如果穿着丧服哭泣是在悔过和责备自己，那么尧和禹治水是用人力，而不靠责备自己。
English: If weeping in mourning clothes is repenting and blaming oneself, then Yu and Yu control the water with manpower, not by blaming themselves.

古文：梁山，尧时山也；所壅之河，尧时河也。
现代文：吕梁山，是尧时的山；堵塞的黄河，是尧时的黄河。
English: Luliangshan is a mountain at the right time; the blocked Yellow River is the Yellow River at the wrong time.

古文：山崩河壅，天雨水踊，二者之变无以殊也。
现代文：山崩塌黄河堵塞，天下雨洪水猛涨，二者灾害没有区别。
English: There is no difference between the two disasters of landslide and blockage of the Yellow River, and torrential rains and floods.

古文：尧、禹治洪水以力役，辇者治壅河用自责。变同而治异，人钧而应殊，殆非贤圣变复之实也。
现代文：尧和禹治理洪水用人力，拉车人治理黄河堵塞靠责备自己，灾害一样而治理办法不同，同样是人而对付水灾的办法却不同，这大概不是圣贤消除灾祸恢复正常状态的实际情况。
English: Yu He and Yu used manpower to control floods, and the truck driver controlled the blockage of the Yellow River by blaming himself. The disasters are the same, but the control methods are different. The same is the man, but the methods to deal with floods are different. This is probably not the actual situation of the sages eliminating the disaster and returning to normal.

古文：凡变复之道，所以能相感动者，以物类也。
现代文：但凡能消除灾祸恢复正常状态的道理，是因为能互相感动，是同类事物的缘故。
English: But the reason why we can eliminate the disaster and return to normal is because we can move each other, because of the same kind of things.

古文：有寒则复之以温，温复解之以寒。
现代文：寒冷就用温暖去消除它，温暖就用寒冷去解除它。
English: Cold uses warmth to eliminate it, and warmth uses cold to release it.

古文：故以龙致雨，以刑逐，皆缘五行之气用相感胜之。
现代文：所以用龙招致下雨，用酷刑会带来严寒赶走暑气，这都是因为五行之气需要相互感应，相互克制的缘故。
English: Therefore, dragons are used to bring rain, and torture is used to bring cold to drive away heat. This is because the five elements need to interact with each other and restrain each other.

古文：山崩壅河，素缟哭之，於道何意乎？
现代文：山崩塌堵塞黄河，就穿着丧服哭泣，在道理上是什么意思呢？
English: What does it logically mean when a landslide blocks the Yellow River and people wear mourning clothes and weep?

古文：此或时何壅之时，山初崩，土积聚，水未盛。
现代文：这事或许是黄河被堵塞的时候，山刚崩塌，泥土聚积，河水没有兴起。
English: This may be due to the fact that when the Yellow River was blocked, the mountain just collapsed, the soil accumulated, and the river did not rise.

古文：三日之後，水盛土散，稍坏沮矣。
现代文：三天以后，河水兴起泥土失散，逐渐毁坏。
English: Three days later, the river rose up, the soil was scattered, and it was gradually destroyed.

古文：坏沮水流，竟注东去。
现代文：积土毁坏了河水开始流动，终于向东流去。
English: The sediment destroyed the river and it began to flow, eventually heading east.

古文：遭伯宗得辇者之言，因素缟而哭，哭之因流，流时谓之河变，起此而复，其实非也。
现代文：碰巧伯宗听到拉车人的话，于是晋景公穿着丧服哭泣，一哭河水就流了。河水流了，人们就说黄河的灾害是由于哭泣才被消除并恢复正常状态的。事实并不是这样。
English: It happened that Bozong heard the words of the driver, so Jin Jinggong wore mourning clothes and cried, and the river flowed as soon as he cried. When the river flowed, people said that the disaster of the Yellow River was eliminated and restored to normal due to crying. This is not the case.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：使山恆自崩乎，素缟哭无益也。
现代文：假使山经常自然崩塌，穿着丧服哭泣也没有用。
English: If the mountain often collapses naturally, it is useless to wear mourning clothes and cry.

古文：使其天变应之，宜改政治。
现代文：如果山崩是天应和人事的一种灾变，那就应该改变政治才能消除。
English: If the landslide is a natural and man-made disaster, then politics should be changed to eliminate it.

古文：素缟而哭，何政所改而天变复乎？
现代文：穿着丧服哭泣，是什么改革了政治而使天灾消除并恢复正常的呢？
English: Wearing mourning clothes and weeping, what reformed politics to eliminate natural disasters and restore normalcy?

古文：传书言：曾子之孝，与母同气。
现代文：传书上说： 由于曾子很孝顺，所以能跟母亲的气相同。
English: The letter said: "Since Zengzi is very filial, he can have the same temperament as his mother.

古文：曾子出薪於野，有客至而欲去，曾母曰： 愿留，参方到。 
现代文：曾子在野外去砍柴，有客人来找，见不在想走，曾母说： 请留步，曾子马上就到。 
English: Zeng Zi went to chop wood in the field. A guest came to look for him, but he didn't want to go. Zeng Zi's mother said, "Please wait, Zeng Zi will be here soon."

古文：即以右手扼其左臂。
现代文：立即用右手掐她自己的左臂。
English: Immediately use your right hand to pinch her own left arm.

古文：曾子左臂立痛，即驰至问母： 臂何故痛？ 
现代文：曾子的左臂立刻感到疼痛，就飞跑到家问母亲： 我的左臂为什么会疼痛？ 
English: Zeng Zi's left arm immediately felt pain, so he ran home and asked his mother: Why does my left arm hurt?

古文：母曰： 今者客来欲去，吾扼臂以呼汝耳。 
现代文：母亲说： 现在有客人来访想要回去，我掐臂叫你回来。 
English: My mother said, "There are guests visiting right now who want to go home, so I'm going to ask you to come back."

古文：盖以至孝，与父母同气，体有疾病，精神辄感。
现代文：就因为曾子非常孝顺，所以跟他父母的气相同，身体有疾病，精神上总是有感应。 
English: Just because Zeng Zi is very filial, he has the same temperament as his parents. His body has diseases, but his spirit is always responsive.

古文：曰：此虚也。
现代文：我认为这话是假的。
English: I don't think that's true.

古文：夫孝悌之至，通於神明，乃谓德化至天地。
现代文：所谓 孝顺父母，尊重兄长到极点，能与天神地神相通。 
English: The so-called filial piety, respect the elder brother to the extreme, can communicate with the gods.

古文：俗人缘此而说，言孝悌之至，精气相动。
现代文：是说德行可以感化天地。一般人由此解释说，孝顺父母，尊重兄长到极点，人与人之间精气就可以互相感动。
English: It is said that virtue can influence heaven and earth. The average person explains from this that filial piety, respect for brothers and sisters to the extreme, and the spirit between people can move each other.

古文：如曾母臂痛，曾子臂亦辄痛，曾母病，曾子亦病？
现代文：像曾母左臂痛，曾子的左臂也就跟着痛。那曾母生病，曾子也跟着生病吗？
English: Like the pain in the left arm of the great-grandmother, the pain in the left arm of the great-grandson also follows. Is the great-grandmother sick and the great-grandson also sick?

古文：曾母死，曾子辄死乎？
现代文：曾母死，曾子也跟着死吗？
English: If the great-grandmother dies, will the great-grandson also die?

古文：考事，曾母先死，曾子不死矣。此精气能小相动，不能大相感也。
现代文：考察事实，曾母先死，曾子没有死，这样说来，精气只能在小事上互相感动，而不能在大事上互相感应了。
English: Looking at the facts, the great-grandmother died first, but the great-grandson did not die. In this way, the spirits can only touch each other in small things, but cannot touch each other in big things.

古文：世称申喜夜闻其母歌，心动，开关问歌者为谁，果其母。
现代文：世人声称申喜晚上能听见他母亲唱歌，心有所感动，开门问唱歌的人是谁，果真会是他的母亲。
English: The world claimed that Shen Xi could hear his mother singing in the evening, his heart was moved, he opened the door to ask who the singer was, and it really would be his mother.

古文：盖闻母声，声音相感，心悲意动，开关而问，盖其实也。
现代文：这大概是听见他母亲的声音，声音相互感应，心里悲哀神情感动，开门而问，大约是事实。
English: It was probably the fact that he heard his mother's voice, that the voices resonated with each other, that his heart was moved by sadness and emotion, that he opened the door and asked.

古文：今曾母在家，曾子在野，不闻号呼之声，母小扼臂，安能动子？
现代文：如今曾母在家，曾子在野外，听不见叫喊的声音，母亲稍微掐一下左臂，怎么就能感动曾子呢？
English: Now Zeng mother is at home, Zeng son is out in the field, can't hear the sound of shouting, how can the mother touch Zeng son with her left arm?

古文：疑世人颂成，闻曾子之孝天下少双，则为空生母扼臂之说也。
现代文：我怀疑是一般人为宣扬诚心，又听说曾子孝顺父母天下难找第二个，就为此凭空捏造了曾母掐臂的说法。
English: I suspect that it is an ordinary person who is propagating sincerity. I also heard that it is difficult to find a second great-grandson who is filial to his parents, so I fabricated the story of his great-grandmother's arm twisting out of thin air.

古文：世称：南阳卓公为缑氏令，蝗不入界。
现代文：社会上称道南阳卓公做密县县令时，蝗虫不飞入他的县界。
English: Locusts do not fly into the borders of his county when he was the county magistrate.

古文：盖以贤明至诚，灾虫不入其县也。
现代文：这大概是因为他贤明得极诚心，害虫不会进入他县境的缘故。
English: This is probably because he is wise enough to be very sincere, and pests will not enter his county.

古文：此又虚也。
现代文：这又不真实了。
English: That's not true anymore.

古文：夫贤明至诚之化，通於同类，能相知心，然後慕服。
现代文：贤明极诚心使卓公德化，与同类相通，能互相知心，然后对他仰慕，信服。
English: Wisdom and sincerity make a virtuous person virtuous, communicate with the same kind, can know each other, and then admire and convince him.

古文：蝗虫，闽虻之类也，何知何见而能知卓公之化？
现代文：蝗虫是蚊虻之类，它们何时知道何时看见而能够晓得卓公德化？
English: Locusts are like mosquitoes, when will they know when to see and be able to recognize altruism?

古文：使贤者处深野之中，闽虻能不入其舍乎？
现代文：如果贤者住在茫茫荒野之中，蚊虻能不飞入他的房子里吗？
English: If a sage lives in the middle of a vast wilderness, can a gnat not fly into his house?

古文：闽虻不能避贤者之舍，蝗虫何能不入卓公之县？
现代文：蚊虻尚且不能避免飞进贤者的房舍，蝗虫怎么又能不飞入卓公的县境呢？
English: Mosquitoes can't avoid flying into the sage's house, so how can locusts avoid flying into the county of Zhuogong?

古文：如谓蝗虫变与闽虻异，夫寒温亦灾变也，使一郡皆寒，贤者长一县，一县之界能独温乎？
现代文：发果说蝗虫是一种灾变，跟蚊虻不同，那寒冷与温暖也是一种灾变，假使一郡都寒冷，贤者做一县之长，一县之内能单独温暖吗？
English: It is said that locusts are a kind of disaster. Unlike mosquitoes, cold and warmth are also a kind of disaster. If a county is cold, and a wise man is the head of a county, can a county be warm alone?

古文：夫寒温不能避贤者之县，蝗虫何能不入卓公之界？
现代文：寒冷与温暖不能避开贤者的县，蝗虫又怎么能不飞入卓公的县界呢？
English: Cold and warmth cannot avoid the wise man's county, and how can locusts not fly into the county border of Zhuogong?

古文：夫如是，蝗虫适不入界，卓公贤名称於世，世则谓之能却蝗虫矣。
现代文：要么是这样，蝗虫碰巧没有飞入县境，而卓公的贤名恰好在社会上被称颂，于是世人就说他能使蝗虫不入境。
English: Either this is the case, the locusts happened not to fly into the county border, and the virtuous name of Zhuo Gong happened to be praised in the society, so the world said that he could prevent the locusts from entering.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：拿什么证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：夫蝗之集於野，非能普博尽蔽地也，往往积聚多少有处。
现代文：蝗虫在野外降落，不可能完全都把地遮盖住，往往有的地方聚积得多些，有的少些。
English: When locusts land in the wild, it is impossible for them to completely cover the ground. They tend to accumulate more in some places and less in others.

古文：非所积之地，则盗跖所居；所少之野，则伯夷所处也。
现代文：它们没有聚积的地方，只有盗跖住的地方；聚积少的野外，只有伯夷隐居的地方。
English: There is no place for them to gather, only a place for robbers to live; in the field, where there are few gatherings, there is only a place for Bo Yi to live in seclusion.

古文：集过有多少，不能尽蔽覆也。
现代文：降落和飞过的蝗虫有多有少，不可能把一个地方完全都遮盖住。
English: No matter how many locusts land and fly over, it is impossible to completely cover a place.

古文：夫集地有多少，则其过县有留去矣。
现代文：蝗虫聚集的地方有多有少，它们飞过的县，有的停留，有的飞走。
English: Locusts gather in more or less places. Some stay in the counties they fly through, while others fly away.

古文：多少不可以验善恶；有无安可以明贤不肖也？
现代文：其降落的多少不可能证明谁善谁恶，那么有没有降落怎么能够用来说明谁贤谁不贤呢？
English: Its landing is more or less impossible to prove who is good and who is evil, so how can it be used to show who is virtuous and who is not?

古文：盖时蝗自过，不谓贤人界不入明矣。
现代文：大概当时蝗虫自己飞过，并不认为是贤人管理的县界就不飞进去，这是很清楚的。
English: Probably at that time, the locusts flew by themselves and did not think that they would not fly into the county border managed by sages, which is very clear.

