古文：陆俟，代人也。曾祖干，祖引，世领部落。
现代文：陆俟，是代郡人。他的曾祖父陆干，祖父陆引，是世袭的部落首领。
English: His great-grandfather, Lu Gan, and grandfather, Lu Hui, were hereditary tribal leaders.

古文：父突，道武初帅部人从征伐，数有战功，位离石镇将、上党太守、关内侯。
现代文：他的父亲陆突，道武初年率领部落跟随大军征战，立了很多战功，官至离石镇将、上党太守、关内侯。
English: His father, Lu Tu, led the tribe to follow the great army in the first year of the war, and made a lot of achievements in the war. He served as the general of Lishizhen, the grand marshal of Shang Party, and the governor of Guanai.

古文：俟少聪慧。
现代文：陆俟少年就很聪慧。
English: Lu Yao is a very clever boy.

古文：明元践祚，袭爵关内侯，位给事中，典选部、兰台事，当官无所挠。
现代文：明元帝即位后，他承袭了关内侯之爵，官拜给事中，负责选部、兰台的事务，从不干扰别人。
English: After Emperor Mingyuan ascended the throne, he inherited the title of Marquis of Guanzhong. During official visits, he was responsible for the affairs of the Selection Department and the Orchid Garden, and never interfered with others.

古文：太武征赫连昌，诏俟督诸军镇以备蠕蠕。与西平公安颉攻克武牢，赐爵建鄴公，拜冀州刺史。
现代文：太武帝征讨赫连昌时，下诏令陆俟统领各个军镇防备蠕蠕，他和西平公安颉一起并给他攻克武牢关，赐爵为建邺公，官拜冀州刺史。
English: When Emperor Taowu conquered and besieged Helianchang, he issued an imperial edict ordering Lu Xun to lead all the military towns in the defense of Helianchang. Together with Xiping Public Security Bureau, Lu Xun conquered and besieged Wudangguan. He was awarded a knighthood for his service to Jianxiang, and was given the title of the official of Jizhou Historian.

古文：时考州郡，唯俟与河内太守丘陈为天下第一。
现代文：当时对州郡长官进行了考核，陆俟和河内太守丘陈为天下第一。
English: At that time, the assessment of prefectural and county governors was carried out, and Lu Ye and Hanoi Governor Chen were the first in the world.

古文：转武牢镇大将。
现代文：后来他又转任武牢镇大将。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Wuye Town General.

古文：平凉休屠金崖、羌狄子玉等叛，复转为安定镇大将，追讨崖等，皆获之。
现代文：平凉的休屠金崖、羌的狄子玉等反叛，陆俟又转任为安定镇大将军，追击征讨金崖军队，将他们全部擒获。
English: The peaceful Xiu Tu Jinya and the arrogant Di Ziyu rebelled, and Lu Yao was appointed as the general of Anding Town. He pursued the army of the Jinya and captured all of them.

古文：迁怀荒镇大将。
现代文：陆俟又被升迁为怀荒镇大将。
English: Lu Yao was also promoted to General of Huaiya Town.

古文：未期，诸高车莫弗惧俟严急，请前镇将郎孤。
现代文：到任未满朝，高车的众莫弗指控陆俟为政严厉，性情暴躁，恳请前任镇将郎孤回来接任。
English: Before the end of his term of office, Mofo, a member of the Taka clan, accused Lu Yao of being a harsh politician with a hot temper, and implored his predecessor, Zhengyang Langluo, to come back and take over.

古文：太武许之。
现代文：太武帝批准了他们的要求，陆俟被召回。
English: Emperor Taibu approved their request, and Lu Yao was recalled.

古文：征俟，至京朝见，言不过周年，孤身必败，高车必叛。
现代文：到京师朝见太武帝时，他说不超过一年，郎孤一定会丧命，而高车一定要反叛。
English: When he arrived in Beijing to see Emperor Taibu, he said that within a year, his brother-in-law would surely die, and Takache would definitely rebel.

古文：帝疑不实，切责之，以公归第。
现代文：太武帝怀疑他在胡说，狠狠将他责备了一番。
English: Emperor Taowu suspected that he was talking nonsense and severely rebuked him.

古文：明年，诸莫弗果杀孤以叛。
现代文：只保留他的爵位而让他回家。
English: Let him come home with his knighthood intact.

古文：帝闻之大惊，召俟问其故。
现代文：第二年，众莫弗果然杀了郎孤而起兵反叛，太武帝听到消息后大惊，召来陆俟问是什么原因。
English: In the second year, Zhuang Mofu killed Lang Guo and rebelled. Emperor Taibu was shocked when he heard the news, and summoned Lu Yao to ask what the reason was.

古文：俟曰： 夫高车之俗，上下无礼，无礼之人，难为其上。
现代文：陆俟道 ：高车那里的风俗是上上下下都不知礼数，对不知礼数的人，很难做他们的上司。
English: Lu'an Road: The custom in Gaochao is that everyone knows the number of etiquette, and it is difficult to be the boss of someone who does not know the number of etiquette.

古文：臣莅以威严，节之宪网，欲渐加训导，使知分限。而恶直丑正，实繁有徒，故讼臣无恩，称孤之美。
现代文：臣到高车后，对他们施加威严，用法纪纲常约束他们，想慢慢引导他们，使他们知道自己的本分和行事的限度，然而的确颇有些奸恶之人，厌恶正义道德，因而指控臣没有恩德，却称赞郎孤的好处。
English: After the courtiers arrived at the chariot, they imposed their majesty on them, used the law and regulations to restrict them, and wanted to slowly guide them so that they knew their duties and the limits of their actions. However, there were indeed quite a few evil people who detested justice and morality, so they accused the courtiers of having no kindness, but praised the benefits of the orphans.

古文：孤获还镇，欣其名誉，必加恩于百姓，讥臣为失，专欲以宽惠临之，仁恕待之。
现代文：郎孤得以回镇为官，对自己的好名誉很得意，一定会更多施恩给百姓，而贬低臣的行为，对下级只想以宽厚、仁慈、恩惠、放任对待他们。
English: Lang Guo was able to return to the town as an official, he was very proud of his good reputation, he would certainly be more generous to the people, but he belittled the behavior of his subordinates, and only wanted to treat them with leniency, benevolence, grace, and permissiveness.

古文：无礼之人，易生陵傲，不过期年，无复上下。既无上下，然后收之以威，则人怀怨憝。
现代文：不知礼数的人，容易滋生霸气和傲气，于是不再有上下级之分，不再有上下之礼后，郎孤再用威势想使下面人收敛，就招来那些人的怨恨情绪。
English: Those who do not know the number of courtesies are likely to breed domineering and arrogance. As a result, there is no longer a distinction between superiors and subordinates. After there is no longer a courtesy between superiors and subordinates, the lackeys will use their might to make the people below converge, which will attract the resentment of those people.

古文：怨憝既多，败乱彰矣。 
现代文：怨恨情绪高涨，叛乱之事就发生了。 
English: Resentment boiled over and the mutiny took place.

古文：帝叹曰： 卿身乃短，虑何长也！ 
现代文：太武帝叹道： 卿身材短小，顾虑却那么长远！ 
English: Emperor Taibu sighed, "Sir, your stature is short, but your concerns are so far-reaching!

古文：即日复除散骑常侍。
现代文：当天就重新起用他为散骑常侍。
English: On the same day, he was reinstated as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：帝征蠕蠕，破凉州，常随驾别督辎重。又与高凉王那复渡河南略地。仍迁长安镇大将。
现代文：太武帝征讨蠕蠕，攻破凉州，陆俟经常随驾督管辎重的运输，他又和高凉王那渡过黄河去攻城夺地，被升任为长安镇大将。
English: Emperor Taowu conquered Cun Cun and broke through Liangzhou. Lu Yao often accompanied the commander in charge of heavy transportation. He and King Gao Liang crossed the Yellow River to attack the city and seize the land. He was promoted to the general of Chang'an Town.

古文：与高凉王那击盖吴于杏城，获吴二叔。诸将欲送京师，俟独不许，曰： 若不斩吴，恐长安之变未已。一身藏窜，非其亲信，谁能获之？
现代文：又和高凉王那在杏城击败盖吴，擒获盖吴的两个叔叔，众将想将二人解送到京城，只有陆俟不同意，他说： 如果不杀了盖吴，只怕长安之变还不会结束，盖吴一个人藏匿潜逃，如果不是他的亲信，谁能抓得到他。
English: In addition, King Gao Liang defeated and captured two uncles of Gui Wu in Apricot City. The generals wanted to send the two men to Beijing. Only Lu Yao disagreed. He said, "If we don't kill Gui Wu, I'm afraid the Chang'an Revolution won't be over. Gui Wu is a fugitive in hiding. If it wasn't for his cronies, who would be able to catch him?"

古文：若停十万众追一人，非上策也。
现代文：假若十万大兵停驻而追他一个人，不是上策。
English: If a hundred thousand soldiers were to stop and chase him alone, it would not be the best strategy.

古文：不如私许吴叔，免其妻子，使自追吴。 
现代文：不如暗地答应盖吴的两个叔叔，不为难他们的妻子儿女，让他们去追杀盖吴。 
English: It would be better to secretly promise Gai Wu's two uncles that their wives and children would not be troubled, and let them go after and kill Gai Wu.

古文：诸将咸曰： 今获其二叔，唯吴一人，何所复至？ 
现代文：诸将都说 ：如今已捉住了他们两个叔叔，就剩盖吴一个人，怎么还会卷土重来呢？ 
English: The generals all said, "Now that their two uncles have been captured, only Gai Wu is left. How can he make a comeback?"

古文：俟曰： 诸君不见毒蛇乎？
现代文：陆俟道 ：诸位难道没见过毒蛇吗？
English: Lu Xuan Dao: Haven't you all seen poisonous snakes?

古文：不断其头，犹能为害。
现代文：不把它的头斩下，它仍能为害。
English: If you don't cut off its head, it can still do harm.

古文：况除腹心之疾，而曰必遗其类，可乎？ 
现代文：况且在治疗心腹的疾患时，却说一定要留下类似的毛病，这样怎么能行？ 
English: Moreover, when treating diseases of the heart and abdomen, it is said that similar problems must be left behind. How can this be done?

古文：遂舍吴二叔，与之期。
现代文：于是放了盖吴的两个叔叔，并给他们规定了期限。
English: Therefore, the two uncles of Gai Wu were released, and a time limit was set for them.

古文：及期，吴叔不至，诸将皆咎俟。俟曰： 此未得其便耳，必不背也。 
现代文：期限到时，盖吴的叔叔还没回来，诸将都埋怨陆俟，陆俟道： 这是因为他们还不方便下手，他们一定不会背信的。 
English: When the deadline arrived, Gui Wu's uncle had not yet returned, and the generals all complained to Lu Wei. Lu Wei said: This is because it is not convenient for them to start, they will not betray their trust.

古文：后数日，果斩吴以至，皆如其言。
现代文：过了几天，二人果然杀了盖吴回来，正如陆俟说的情形一样。
English: A few days later, the two did indeed kill Ge Wu and return, just as Lu Yao said.

古文：俟之明略独决，皆此类也。
现代文：陆俟料事如神，精明决断，由此可见一斑。
English: It can be seen from this that Lu Wei is a master of materials and a shrewd decision-maker.

古文：迁内都大官。
现代文：他后来被升任为内都大官。
English: He was later promoted to the post of Inner Capital Official.

古文：安定卢水刘超等叛，太武以俟威恩被关中，诏以本官加都督秦、雍诸军，镇长安。
现代文：安定卢水的刘超等反叛，太武帝因为陆俟的威名和恩德遍及关中，下诏任命他在原来的官职外加都督秦、雍各路军马，镇守长安。
English: Liu Chao and others in Lu Shui, Anding rebelled, and Emperor Taibu, because of Lu Yao's prestige and benevolence, spread throughout Guanzhong, and issued an edict appointing him to his original official position, in addition to the governor of Qin, the military horses of various roads in Yong, and the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：帝曰： 超等恃险，不顺王命，朕若以重兵与卿，则超等必合为一；若以轻兵与卿，则不制矣。
现代文：太武帝道： 刘超等人仗着地势险要，不再听从王命，朕如果让您统率重兵，刘超等各路叛党将合而为一与我们相抗衡；如果给您的兵力太弱，又不能制服叛贼。
English: Emperor Taibu said, "Liu Chao and the others are taking advantage of the precarious situation and are no longer obeying the king's order. If I let you lead the heavy troops, Liu Chao and the other rebels will unite as one to compete with us. If the troops given to you are too weak, you will not be able to subdue the rebels.

古文：今使卿以方略定之。 
现代文：现在只有您自己拿主意了。 
English: You're on your own now.

古文：于是俟单马之镇。
现代文：于是陆俟单人匹马到了军镇。
English: So Lu Wei rode alone to the military town.

古文：既至，申扬威信，示以成败，超犹无降意。
现代文：到了之后，他宣扬己方的威信，暗示刘超成败得失的利害关系，刘超仍然没有降意。
English: After arriving, he promoted the prestige of his own side, suggesting that Liu Chao's success or failure was at stake. Liu Chao still did not give up.

古文：俟乃率其帐下见超。超使人逆曰： 三百人以外，当以弓马相待；三百人以内，当以酒食相供。 
现代文：陆俟就率领帐下人马去找刘超，刘超派人迎接，并说道： 来人若超过三百，就用弓箭刀马迎接；来人若在三百以内，就用酒肉饮食招待。 
English: Lu Yao led his staff to look for Liu Chao. Liu Chao sent someone to greet them, and said: If more than three hundred people come, they will be greeted with bows and arrows; if less than three hundred people come, they will be invited with wine and meat.

古文：乃将二百骑诣超。
现代文：陆俟于是领着三百名骑兵与刘超见面。
English: Lu Wei then led three hundred horsemen to meet Liu Chao.

古文：超备甚严，遂纵酒，尽醉而还。
现代文：刘超防备十分严密，陆俟于是纵情饮酒，大醉而回。
English: Liu Chao was very well prepared, so Lu Yao drank a lot and came back very drunk.

古文：后伪猎，诣超。
现代文：后来陆俟假装出猎，又去找刘超。
English: Later, Lu Yao pretended to go hunting and went to look for Liu Chao.

古文：与士卒约曰： 今会发机，当以醉为限。 
现代文：他和手下士兵约定 ：今天一定要找机会下手，你们不能喝醉。 
English: He and his soldiers agreed: today we must find an opportunity to start, you can't get drunk.

古文：俟乃诈醉，上马大呼，斩超首。
现代文：陆俟于是装醉，上马大叫，斩下刘超首级。
English: Lu Wei then pretended to be drunk, got on a horse and shouted, beheading Liu Chao.

古文：士卒应声纵击，遂平之。
现代文：士卒们应声出击，这样就平定了这次叛乱。
English: The mutiny was quelled by the soldiers responding to the call.

古文：帝大悦，征拜外都大官。
现代文：太武帝十分高兴，召回陆俟拜他为外都大官。
English: Emperor Taowu was very pleased and recalled Lu Yibai to be the foreign capital official.

古文：文成践祚，以子丽有定策勋，进爵东平王。
现代文：文成帝即位后，因为陆俟之子陆丽有立君定国的功勋，陆俟晋爵为东平王。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Wencheng, because the son of Lu Xun, Lu Li, had the merit of establishing a kingdom, Lu Xun Jinjie became the king of Dongping.

古文：薨，年六十七，谥成王。
现代文：去世时，享年六十七，谥号成王。
English: At the time of his death, at the age of sixty-seven, his posthumous name was Shinno.

古文：有子十二人。长子珝，多智，有父风。
现代文：陆俟的长子名瞨，很有智谋，有父亲的风范。
English: Lu Yao's eldest son, Mei Yao, is very resourceful and has his father's demeanor.

古文：文成见而悦之，谓朝臣曰： 吾常叹其父智过其躯，是复逾于父矣！ 
现代文：文成帝见后非常喜爱，便对朝臣们说 ：我过去经常感叹他的父亲智谋长而身躯短，这位看来更超过他父亲了。 
English: After meeting him, Emperor Wencheng was very fond of him and said to his courtiers: "I used to often lament that his father was clever and short, but this one seems to be even taller than his father."

古文：少为内都下大夫。
现代文：从年轻时起，陆瞨就担任内都下大夫。
English: From a young age, Lu Wei served as a doctor in the Inner Capital.

古文：奉上接下，行止取与，每能逆晓人意。与其从事者无不爱之。
现代文：他侍奉上司，接待下级，该行该止，取得和给予，往往都办得正合人们的心愿，和他共事的人都从内心十分喜爱他。
English: He serves his superiors, receives subordinates, this line should stop, get and give, often do exactly what people want, and those who work with him are very fond of him from the bottom of their hearts.

古文：兴安初，赐爵聊城侯。出为相州刺史，假长广公。
现代文：兴安初年，被封为聊城侯，又出任相州刺史，升长广公。
English: In the first year of Xing'an, he was given the title of Liaocheng Mayor, and he also served as the governor of Xiangzhou and was promoted to the rank of Guanggong.

古文：为政清平，抑强扶弱。
现代文：他治理政务清廉公正，抑制强暴，救助贫弱。
English: He governs the government with integrity and justice, suppresses violence, and helps the poor and weak.

古文：州中有德宿老名望素重者，以友礼待之。询之政事，责以方略，如此者十人，号曰十善。
现代文：州中凡是德高望重的老人，他都把他们当成朋友以礼相待，向他们咨询政务，请他们提出治理的意见，这样人的有十个，州人称他们为 十善 。
English: He treated all the respected elders of the state as his friends and treated them with courtesy. He consulted them on government affairs and asked them to put forward their opinions on governance. There are ten such people, and the people of the state call them the ten good men.

古文：又简取诸县强门百余人以为假子。诱接殷勤，赐以衣服，令各归家为耳目。于是发奸擿伏，事无不验。
现代文：他又从各县的豪强族中挑选了一百多人作为自己的干儿子，热情地接待他们，送给衣服，让他们回家以后充当官府的耳目，于是，揭露坏事，捕捉逃犯等，样样有根有据。
English: He also selected more than a hundred people from the powerful clans in each county to be his sons. He warmly received them, gave them clothes, and asked them to serve as the eyes and ears of the government when they returned home. As a result, he was able to expose bad things, catch fugitives, and so on. Everything was well-founded.

古文：百姓以为神明，无敢劫盗者。
现代文：百姓们都认为陆瞨就像神人一样，再没有人敢于抢劫偷盗了。
English: The people all think that Lu Yao is like a godman, and no one dares to rob and steal anymore.

古文：在州七年，家至贫约。
现代文：他在州中任职七年，家中清贫俭朴。
English: He served in the state for seven years, and his family was poor and frugal.

古文：征为散骑常侍，百姓乞留珝者千余人。
现代文：朝廷召他任散骑常侍，百姓一千多人向朝廷请求让他留任。
English: The imperial court called him to serve as a knight errant, and more than a thousand people petitioned the imperial court to keep him in office.

古文：献文不许，谓群臣曰： 珝之善政，虽古人何以加之。 
现代文：献文帝不答应，他对群臣们说： 像陆瞨这样善于治政的人，就是古代人又能怎样呢？ 
English: Emperor Xianwen did not agree, and he said to his courtiers, "What can an ancient man, who is as good at governing as Lu Yao, do?

古文：赐绢五百匹，奴婢十口。
现代文：便赐给陆瞨绢五百匹，奴婢十人。
English: and he gave him five hundred yoke of oxen and ten men-servants.

古文：珝之代还也，吏人大敛布帛以遗之。珝皆不受，人亦不取，于是以此物起佛寺焉，因名长广公寺。
现代文：陆瞨从相州回朝廷以后，官吏们纷纷募集布帛来赠给他，陆瞨一律不接受，可是那些人也不肯收回，于是就把这些财物用于建造佛教寺院，名为长广公寺。
English: After Lu Xun returned to the imperial court from Xiangzhou, the officials solicited cloth bags one after another to give to him. Lu Xun did not accept any of them, but those people did not want to take them back, so they used these belongings to build a Buddhist temple, called Changguang Temple.

古文：后袭父爵，改封建安王。
现代文：后来他承袭父亲的爵位，改封为建安王。
English: Later, he inherited his father's title and changed his title to King Jianan.

古文：时宋司州刺史常珍奇以悬瓠内附，新人犹怀去就。
现代文：这时，宋朝司州刺史常珍奇把悬瓠归降北魏，新归顺的人内心还没有决定何去何从。
English: At this time, the Song Dynasty, the Sizhou Dynasty, and the Chang Zhenqi Dynasty all returned to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the newly converted people had not yet decided where to go.

古文：珝衔旨抚慰，诸有陷军为奴婢者，珝皆免之。百姓欣悦，人情乃定。
现代文：陆瞨奉旨前去安抚慰问，凡是有被抓到军中充当奴婢的，陆瞨都把他们释放回家，百姓们都欢欣鼓舞，人心由此而安定下来。
English: Lu Xun was ordered to go to appease and console. All those who had been captured to serve as slaves in the army were released by Lu Xun to go home. The people were happy and encouraged, and their hearts settled down.

古文：车驾讨蠕蠕，诏珝为选部尚书，录留台事。
现代文：皇帝征讨蠕蠕时，传旨让陆瞨为选部尚书、录留台事。
English: When the emperor was enlisting soldiers to fight against the Kuomintang, he sent an order to Lu Wei to write and record Taiwan affairs as a member of the selection committee.

古文：及献文将禅位于京兆王子推，任城王云、陇西王源贺并固谏。
现代文：当献文帝准备把皇帝的位子禅让给京兆王子推时，任城王云、陇西王源贺都坚决反对。
English: When Emperor Xianwen prepared to cede the imperial throne to Prince Jingzhao, both King Ren of Chengdu and King Yuan of Shaanxi were firmly opposed.

古文：珝抗言曰： 皇太子圣德承基，四海瞻望，不可横议，干国之纪。
现代文：陆瞨也严词进谏说 ：皇太子有圣明之德，承继帝业，正是天下人的共同心愿，千万不可以横生枝节，自乱国家的纲纪。
English: Lu Wei also said sternly, "The crown prince has the virtue of holiness, and inheriting the imperial inheritance is the common wish of the people of the world. It is absolutely forbidden to create problems and disrupt the discipline of the country."

古文：臣请刎颈殿庭，有死无贰。 
现代文：请让我在殿堂自刎，我只有一死，没有第二条路。 
English: Please let me hang myself in the hall of fame, I only have one death, there is no other way.

古文：久之，帝乃解。
现代文：过了许久，皇帝才改变了自己的想法。
English: It took a long time for the emperor to change his mind.

古文：太和中，征拜中书博士，稍迁散骑常侍。
现代文：他说 ：陆瞨真是刚直的忠臣啊！他能保护我的儿子吗？ 
English: He said, "Lu Yao is really an upright and loyal subject! Can he protect my son?

古文：知天下将乱，遂隐于太行山，屡征不起。卒后，赠并、汾、恆、肆四州刺史。
现代文：于是封陆瞨为太保，和太尉源贺一起拿着皇帝的符节将皇帝的玉玺传给孝文帝。延兴四年，陆瞨死，仍赠本官衔，谥号 贞王 。
English: As a result, Lu Xun was appointed as the imperial bodyguard, and together with the captain Yuan He, he took the emperor's symbols and passed the emperor's jade scepter to Emperor Xiaowen. Four years after Yanxing, when Lu Xun died, he was still given his official title, the nickname Zhenwang.

古文：子腾。腾字显圣，少慷慨有大节。
现代文：陆瞨有六个儿子，陆、陆凯知名于世。陆腾，字显圣，年轻时胸怀大志且有高尚的气节。
English: Lu Xun had six sons, Lu and Lu Kai, who are famous in the world. Lu Teng, known as Xian Sheng, was ambitious and noble when he was young.

古文：从尔硃荣平葛荣，以功赐爵清河县伯。
现代文：他跟随尔朱荣平定葛荣，因为战功赐爵为清河县伯。
English: He followed Er Zhu Rong to subdue Ge Rong, and was awarded the title of Count of Qinghe County for his war service.

古文：稍迁通直散骑常侍。
现代文：稍后，升迁为通直散骑常侍。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Tsuchidana Sanshiro no Tsuneishi.

古文：及孝武西迁，时使青州，遂留鄴，为阳城郡守。
现代文：孝武帝西迁时，他正出使青州，于是就留在邺，出任为阳城郡守。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, he was on a mission to Qingzhou, so he stayed in Handan and served as Yangcheng County Governor.

古文：大统九年，大军东讨阳城，被执。周文帝释而与语，腾盛论东州人物，又叙述时事，辞理抑扬。
现代文：大统九年，周大军攻打阳城，陆腾被捕，周文帝给他松了绑并且和他交谈，陆腾对东部各州的风土人物给予很高的评价，又对时事进行叙述评论，条理清晰，言语动听。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Reunification, Zhou's army attacked Yangcheng, and Lu Teng was arrested. Emperor Zhou loosened his bonds and talked with him. Lu Teng gave a high evaluation to the folk characters of the eastern states, and also made a description and comment on current affairs, which was well organized and eloquent.

古文：周文叹曰： 卿真不背本也！ 
现代文：周文帝叹道： 卿真是个不忘本的人！ 
English: Zhou Wendi sighed: Sir, you really are a person who never forgets his books!

古文：即拜帐内大都督。
现代文：立即拜为帐内大都督。
English: He was immediately appointed as the grand governor of the account.

古文：未几，除太子庶子，迁武卫将军。
现代文：不久，任命为太子庶子，升迁为武卫将军。
English: Soon after, he was appointed the Prince's illegitimate son and promoted to General Wuwei.

古文：腾既为周文所知，国欲立功，不愿内职。
现代文：陆腾因为自己被周文帝所知遇，想要立些军功，所以不愿在皇帝身边当官。
English: Lu Teng did not want to be an official at the emperor's side because he was well-known to Emperor Zhou and wanted to make some military achievements.

古文：及安康贼黄众宝等作乱，攻围东梁州。城中粮尽，诏腾率军大破之。
现代文：后来安康贼寇黄众宝等作乱，攻打围困东梁州，城中粮食已经吃完，皇帝下诏令陆腾率军队大破贼众。
English: Later, the Ankang bandits invaded Huangzangbao and other towns and wreaked havoc, attacked and besieged Dongliangzhou, the grain in the city had already been eaten, and the emperor ordered Lu Teng to lead the army to smash the bandits.

古文：军还，拜龙州刺史。
现代文：大军回师，官拜龙州刺史。
English: The great army returned to the division, and the official paid homage to Longzhou stabbing history.

古文：使通江油路，直出南秦。
现代文：周文帝派他带兵开通经过江油之路，一直到南秦。
English: Emperor Zhou Wen sent him to lead the troops to open the road through the Yangtze River, all the way to South Qin.

古文：周文谓曰： 此是卿取柱国之日。 
现代文：周文帝对他说 ：这是你能得到柱国的时候了！ 
English: Zhou Wendi said to him: This is the time for you to get the pillar country!

古文：即解所服金带赐之。
现代文：当场解下身上的金腰带给他。
English: He took off his gold belt and gave it to him on the spot.

古文：州人李广嗣、李武等凭据岩险，历政不能制。
现代文：当地人李广嗣、李武等占据着险要之地。历届州官都拿他们没办法。
English: Local people such as Li Guangzhi and Li Wu occupy important positions. Successive state officials have been unable to do anything about them.

古文：腾密令多造飞梯，夜袭破之，执广嗣等于鼓下。
现代文：陆腾暗地命令打造了许多云梯，夜里突袭，攻破了他们的防守，天不亮时就将李广嗣等拿获。
English: Lu Teng secretly ordered the construction of many ladders, raided at night, broke through their defenses, and captured Li Guangzhi and others before dawn.

古文：其党有任公忻，围逼州城，请免广嗣及武，即散兵请罪。
现代文：他们的同党任公忻，将州城围困，请求放了李广嗣和李武，就立刻解散围城之兵向陆腾请罪。
English: Their co-partisans, who held the position of public officials, besieged the prefectural capital and asked for the release of Li Guangzhi and Li Wu. They immediately disbanded the besieging soldiers and pleaded guilty to Lu Teng.

古文：腾谓将士曰： 吾不杀广嗣等，可谓堕军实而长寇仇。 
现代文：陆腾对手下将士说 ：我不杀李广嗣等人的话，真是扫了我军的威风，长了贼寇的志气。 
English: Lu Teng said to his subordinate officers: If I don't kill Li Guangzhi and others, it will really sweep away the prestige of our army and grow the ambition of thieves and robbers.

古文：即斩广嗣及武，以首示之。
现代文：立刻将李广嗣和李武斩杀，拿首级给贼寇看。
English: He immediately beheaded Li Guangzhi and Li Wu and showed their heads to the bandits.

古文：于是出兵奋击，尽获之。
现代文：于是出兵奋战，将贼兵全部拿获。
English: So the soldiers went out to fight and captured all the bandits.

古文：进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，转江州刺史，进爵上庸县公。
现代文：皇上给他进官为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，转任江州刺史，晋爵位上庸县公。
English: The emperor promoted him to the post of General of Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and he was transferred to the post of the Governor of Jiangsu Province and promoted to the peerage of Shangyong County.

古文：陵州木笼獠恃险，每行抄劫，诏腾讨之。
现代文：陵州的木笼獠凭借占据着险要地势，经常干些打家劫舍的勾当，皇帝下诏令陆腾去征讨他。
English: By virtue of occupying a precarious and important position, the Emperor of Lingshou ordered Lu Teng to collect him.

古文：獠因山为城，攻之未可拔。
现代文：木笼獠依着山势构筑城防，攻不破他的防守。
English: The wooden cage towered against the mountain to build a city defense, and his defense was impregnable.

古文：腾遂于城下多设声乐及诸杂伎，示无战心。诸贼果弃其兵仗，或携妻子临城观乐。腾知其无备，遂纵兵讨击，尽杀破之。
现代文：陆腾于是在他们城下安排了许多歌舞和杂技，显示出无交战之心，众贼寇果然放下了武器，有些还带着妻子儿女站在城边观赏，陆腾料知敌人没有防备，于是发兵进攻，将贼寇全部歼灭。
English: Lu Teng then arranged many songs, dances and acrobatics under their city, showing no belligerence. The thieves and robbers indeed laid down their weapons, and some even brought their wives and children to stand on the edge of the city to watch. Lu Teng knew that the enemy was unprepared, so he sent troops to attack and annihilate all the thieves and robbers.

古文：周明帝初，陵、眉等八州夷夏并反，攻破郡县，腾率兵讨平之。及齐公宪作镇于蜀，以腾为隆州刺史，令宪入蜀兵马镇防，皆委腾统摄。
现代文：周明帝初期，陵、眉等八个州的夷族和汉人一起反叛，攻破占领了许多郡县，陆腾率兵征讨并平定了这次叛乱，等到齐公宪到蜀镇守，朝廷任命陆腾为隆州刺史，让宪带进蜀的兵马布防，都由陆腾统管。
English: In the early days of the Zhou Ming Dynasty, the Yi people and the Han people in eight states such as Ling and Mei rebelled together, defeated and occupied many counties and counties. Lu Teng led the army to fight and quell this rebellion. When Qi Gong Xian came to Shu to guard the town, the imperial court appointed Lu Teng as the historian of Longzhou, and let him bring troops and horses into Shu to defend it. All of this was managed by Lu Teng.

古文：赴公招代宪，复请留之。
现代文：赵公招代替宪的职务后，又请求让陆腾留下。
English: After Zhao Gongzhao replaced the duties of the Constitution, he also asked Lu Teng to stay.

古文：迁隆州总管，领刺史。
现代文：陆腾升迁为隆州总管，兼任刺史。
English: Lu Teng was promoted to the post of Longzhou chief administrator and concurrently held the post of chief historian.

古文：保定二年，资州石槃人反，杀郡守，据险自守，州军不能制。
现代文：保定二年，资州石人造反，杀了郡守，占据险要死守，州军对他们也无能为力。
English: In the second year of Baoding, Zizhou Shi staged a rebellion, killed the county governor, occupied the precarious defense, and the state army was powerless against them.

古文：腾率军讨击，尽破斩之。
现代文：陆腾率领大军进攻，将他们全部歼灭斩杀。
English: Lu Teng led a large army to attack and annihilate them all.

古文：而蛮子反，所在蜂起，山路险阻，难得掩袭。遂量山川形势，随便开道。
现代文：而后蛮人造反，成群结队，无处不在。由于山路崎岖艰险，难以出兵偷袭，于是陆腾测量山川地势，在方便处开路。
English: Since the mountain roads were rugged and dangerous, it was difficult to launch a surprise attack, so Lu Teng measured the topography of the mountains and rivers and opened roads at convenient locations.

古文：蛮獠畏威，承风请服。
现代文：蛮獠之人害怕他的威势，闻风而降。
English: Fierce men fear his power and yield to him.

古文：所开之路，多得古铭，并是诸葛亮、桓温旧道。
现代文：在开路时，发掘出许多古时的铭刻碑石，这本来是诸葛亮、桓温开过的旧道。
English: When the road was opened, many ancient inscribed stones were unearthed. This was originally the old road traveled by Zhuge Liang and Huan Wen.

古文：是年，铁山獠抄断内江路，使驿不通。
现代文：这一年，铁山獠截断了内江的道路，使驿路不通。
English: In that year, the Iron Mountain Dam cut off the road of the Neijiang River, making it impassable.

古文：腾乃进军讨之，一日下其三城，招纳降附者三万户。
现代文：陆腾进兵征讨，一日之内攻陷贼寇的三座城池，招纳归降者三万户。
English: Lu Teng entered the army to recruit soldiers, captured three castles of bandits within one day, and recruited 30,000 returnees.

古文：帝以腾母在齐，未令东讨。
现代文：皇帝因为陆腾的母亲还在齐，所以不让他出兵东征。
English: Because Lu Teng's mother was still alive, the emperor did not allow him to go to the East.

古文：适有其亲属自齐还朝者，晋公护奏令告腾云： 齐已诛公母兄。 
现代文：正好陆腾的一个亲戚从齐回朝，晋公护上奏皇帝让他告诉陆腾道 ：齐已经诛杀了您的母亲和兄长。 
English: Just as one of Lu Teng's relatives was returning to the imperial court from Qi, the emperor sent him to tell Lu Teng: Qi has killed your mother and brother.

古文：盖欲发其怒也。腾乃发哀泣血，志在复仇。
现代文：是为了激怒陆腾，陆腾听后哀痛不已，立志要复仇。
English: It was to anger Lu Teng. Lu Teng was heartbroken and determined to take revenge.

古文：四年，齐公宪与晋公护东征，请腾为副。
现代文：保定四年，齐公宪和晋公护出兵东征，申请让陆腾为副手。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, Qi Gongxin and Jin Gongyou sent troops to the east, and applied for Lu Teng to be his deputy.

古文：赵公招时在蜀，复欲留之。
现代文：当时赵公招在蜀中镇守，还想挽留他。
English: At that time, Zhao Gongzhu was a town guard in Shuzhong, and they still wanted to retain him.

古文：晋公护与招书，于是令腾驰传还朝，副宪东伐。
现代文：晋公护给招写了一封书信，于是令陆腾飞马赶回京师，担任宪的副手参加东征。
English: Jin Gongyou wrote a letter to Zhao, so he ordered Lu Tengfei to rush back to Beijing and serve as the deputy of Xian Rong to participate in the Eastern Expedition.

古文：天和初，信州蛮、蜑据江硖反叛，连结二千余里，又诏腾讨之。
现代文：天和初年，信州蛮人和譙人凭据江硖反叛，前后连结二千余里。又下诏命陆腾征讨。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the barbarians from Shinshu and the people from Hanzhong rebelled on the basis of the Yangtze River, linking more than two thousand miles back and forth.

古文：腾沿江南而下，军至汤口，分道奋击，所向摧破。
现代文：陆腾沿江南下，军队到汤口后，分兵奋力进攻，所向披靡。
English: Lu Teng went south along the river, and after the army arrived at Tangkou, the detachment of soldiers fought hard to attack, and they were invincible.

古文：乃筑京观，以旌武功。
现代文：于是筑京观，用以旌表武功。
English: As a result, the view of Chikukyo was used to display military prowess.

古文：涪陵郡守兰休祖又阻兵为乱，方二千余里。
现代文：涪陵郡守兰休祖又倚仗军队反叛，占地二千余里。
English: Lan Xiuzu, the governor of Fuling County, once again relied on the army to rebel, covering an area of more than two thousand li.

古文：复诏腾讨之，巴蜀悉定，诏令树碑纪功绩焉。
现代文：再次下诏命令陆腾征讨，巴蜀这才安定下来。皇帝下诏令树碑纪念功绩。
English: Once again, the emperor issued an edict ordering Lu Teng to collect taxes, and only then did Bashu settle down. The emperor issued an edict ordering a monument to commemorate the feat.

古文：腾自在龙州至是，前后破平诸贼，凡赏得奴婢八百口，马牛称是。
现代文：陆腾从来龙州到这次涪陵之乱，先后平定了各路贼寇，共赏得奴婢八百口，牛、马不计其数。
English: Lu Teng traveled all the way from Longzhou to this time of the Fuling Rebellion, and successively quelled the various bandits. He was awarded a total of 800 slaves and maidservants, as well as countless cattle and horses.

古文：四年，迁江陵总管。
现代文：天和四年，陆腾升迁为江陵总管。
English: In the fourth year of Tianhe, Lu Teng was promoted to be the general manager of Gangneung.

古文：陈遣其将章昭达围江陵，卫王直闻有陈寇，遣大将军赵訚、李迁哲等率步骑赴之，并受腾节度。
现代文：陈派大将章昭达围困江陵，卫王直听说有陈兵来犯，派大将军赵躢、李迁哲等率步兵、骑兵赶赴江陵，一起受陆腾节制调度。
English: Chen sent General Zhang Zhaoda to besiege Gangneung. Hearing that Chen's soldiers had come to commit crimes, Wei Wang Zuo Zhi sent General Zhao Jun, Li Qian Zhe and other infantry and cavalry to rush to Gangneung, and together they were subject to Lu Teng Jie's schedule.

古文：时迁哲等守外城，陈将程文季、雷道勤夜来掩袭，迁哲等惊乱，不能抗御。
现代文：当时李迁哲等守外城，陈将程文季、雷道勤夜间来偷袭，李迁哲等惊慌失措，抵挡不住。
English: At that time, Li Qizhe and others were guarding the outer city. Chen sent Cheng Wenzhi and Lei Daoqin to attack secretly at night. Li Qizhe and others panicked and could not resist.

古文：腾夜遣开门奋击，大破之。
现代文：陆腾派人打开城门迎头痛击，大败陈军。
English: Lu Teng sent someone to open the city gate and hit it head-on, defeating Chen's army.

古文：陈人奔溃，道勤中流矢而毙。
现代文：陈兵四散奔逃，雷道勤被流矢乱箭射中而毙命。
English: Chen Bing scattered and ran away. Lei Daoqin was hit by a stray arrow and died.

古文：陈人决龙川宁朔堤，引水灌江陵城。
现代文：陈兵决开龙川的宁朔堤，引水倒灌江陵城。
English: Chen Bing broke through the Ningshuo dike of the Longchuan River and diverted water to flood Jiangling City.

古文：腾亲率将士，战于西堤，破之，陈人乃遁。
现代文：陆腾亲自率领将士，与陈兵在西堤交战，大败陈兵，陈兵逃走。
English: Lu Teng personally led the generals and fought with Chen Bing in the West Bank, defeated Chen Bing, and Chen Bing fled.

古文：加位柱国，进爵上庸郡公。
现代文：陆腾加官为柱国，晋爵为上庸郡公。
English: Lu Tengga Guan is the pillar state, and Jinjie is the Shangyong County.

古文：建德二年，征拜大司空，寻出为泾州总管。
现代文：建德二年，拜为大司空，不久出任为泾州总管。
English: In the second year of Jiande, he was appointed as the chief secretary of the Air Force, and soon he was appointed as the chief administrator of Zhangzhou.

古文：玄弟融，字士倾，最知名，少历显职。
现代文：宣政元年冬天，在京师去世，追赠为太尉公，谥号 定 。
English: In the winter of the first year of Xuan Zheng's reign, he died in Beijing and was posthumously awarded the title of Taifeng, and his posthumous name was Ding.

古文：大象末，位至大将军、定陵县公。弟丽，少以忠谨，入侍左右，太武特亲昵之。举动审慎，初无愆失。赐爵章安子，稍迁南部尚书。
现代文：儿子陆玄承嗣爵位。陆丽年轻时因为忠诚谨慎，入宫为皇帝侍从，太武帝对他格外亲昵，陆丽的举止行动十分谨慎，从不犯一点过错，被赐爵为章安子，升任南部尚书。
English: Lu Xuan's son inherited the title of nobility. When Lu Li was young, because of his loyalty and prudence, he entered the palace as an attendant of the emperor. Emperor Taibu was extraordinarily intimate with him. Lu Li's behavior was very cautious and never made a mistake. He was given the title of Zhang Anzi and promoted to Nanbu Shangshu.

古文：太武崩，南安王余立。
现代文：太武帝驾崩后，南安王余即位。
English: After the death of Emperor Taivu, King Yu of Nan'an ascended the throne.

古文：既而为中常侍宗爱等所杀。百寮忧惶，莫知所立。
现代文：不久就被中常侍宗爱等所杀，百官都惊慌失措，不知该拥立何人为君。
English: Soon after, he was killed by Naka no Tsunenori Soai and others, and all the officials panicked, not knowing who to support.

古文：丽首建大议，与殿中尚书长孙渴侯、尚书源贺、羽林中郎刘尼奉迎文成于苑中而立之。
现代文：陆丽首先提出建议，并和殿中尚书长孙渴侯、尚书源贺、羽林中郎刘尼在皇苑中恭迎文成帝登基。
English: Lu Li first made a suggestion, and together with Shangshu's eldest grandson, Qiu Hou, Shangshu Yuan He, and Ulin's middle son, Liu Ni, welcomed Emperor Wencheng to the throne in the imperial garden.

古文：社稷获安，丽之谋也。
现代文：国家社稷又得以安定，都是陆丽谋划之功。
English: The fact that the country's society and economy have been stabilized is the result of Lu Li's planning.

古文：由是受心膂之任，在朝者无出其右。
现代文：由于这次事件他成为皇帝心腹股肱的重臣，在朝的官员没有人能超过他的地位。
English: As a result of this incident, he became the chief minister of the emperor's confidant, and no official in the government could surpass his status.

古文：兴安初，封平原王。丽频让，不听，乃启以让父。
现代文：兴安初年，封陆丽为平原王，他推让了多次，皇帝不准，陆丽就上表请求将王爵之号让给父亲。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Lu Li was given the title of the King of the Plain. He made several concessions, but the emperor did not allow it. Lu Li requested that the title of the Prince be given to her father.

古文：文成曰： 朕为天下主，岂不能得二王封卿父子也？ 
现代文：文成帝道 ：朕为天下之主，难道不能用两个王号封爱卿父子吗？ 
English: Emperor Wencheng said, "I am the lord of the world. Can't I use two royal titles to honor my father and son?"

古文：以其父俟为东平王。
现代文：于是拜陆丽的父亲俟为东平王。
English: As a result, Bai Lu Li's father became the King of Dongping.

古文：丽寻迁侍中、抚军大将军、司徒公，复其子孙，赐妻妃号。
现代文：陆丽不久升任侍中、抚军大将军、司徒公，免除他子孙的赋税，赐予他妻室以妃的称号。
English: Lu Li was soon promoted to the ranks of Chamberlain, General of the Armies, and Grand Steward. He exempted his children and grandchildren from paying taxes, and gave his wife the title of Empress.

古文：丽以优宠既频，固辞不受，帝益重之。
现代文：陆丽因为自己所受的优待宠遇已经很多，不肯接受，皇帝就愈加看重他。
English: Because Lu Li had already received a lot of preferential treatment and favors, he refused to accept it, and the emperor valued him more and more.

古文：领太子太傅。
现代文：拜为太子太傅。
English: Pray for the crown prince.

古文：丽好学爱士，常以讲习为业。
现代文：陆丽喜欢读书爱护学者，经常进行讲习。
English: Lu Li likes to read, loves scholars, and often conducts seminars.

古文：甚孝，遭父忧，毁瘠过礼。
现代文：他十分孝顺，父亲丧礼时，因过于哀痛而形神憔悴。
English: He was very filial, and at his father's funeral, he was overcome with grief.

古文：和平六年，文成崩。
现代文：和平六年，文成帝驾崩。
English: After six years of peace, Emperor Wencheng passed away.

古文：先是，丽疗疾于代郡温泉，闻凶欲赴。
现代文：刚听到噩耗时，陆丽在代都温泉疗养治病，他立刻就要起身奔丧。
English: When he first heard the bad news, Lu Li was recuperating and treating his illness at the Daidu Hot Spring. He immediately got up and rushed to his death.

古文：左右止之曰： 宫车晏驾，王德望素重，奸臣若疾人誉，虑有不测之祸。 
现代文：左右心腹劝止他道 ：皇上不幸晏驾了，您向来德高望重，如果有奸臣对您心怀不满，您去了恐怕有难以预料的祸事。 
English: His right and left confidants tried to dissuade him, saying, "Unfortunately, the Emperor has passed away. You have always been held in high esteem. If a treacherous vassal is dissatisfied with you, I'm afraid you will meet with an unforeseeable disaster."

古文：丽曰： 安有闻君父之丧，方虑祸难！ 
现代文：陆丽道 ：哪有听到君王的噩耗，却因害怕祸事而不奔丧的道理？ 
English: Lu Lidao: Is there any reason to hear the bad news of the king, but not to mourn for fear of disaster?

古文：公主有三女，无男，以昕之从兄希道第四子子彰为后。
现代文：于是飞驰赴京。以前，乙弗浑狂傲放肆，经常干不法之事，陆丽多次直言批评他，于是他怀恨在心，杀害了陆丽。谥号 简王 ，在金陵陪葬。
English: So he flew to Beijing. Previously, Yifu was arrogant and impudent, and often did illegal things. Lu Li criticized him many times, so he held a grudge and killed Lu Li. His posthumous name was Jian Wang, and he was buried in Jinling.

古文：子彰字明远，本名士沈。
现代文：孝文帝追录前朝功臣时，将陆丽配祭在宗庙。陆子彰，字明远，本名士沈。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen was recording the exploits of the previous emperor, Lu Li was enshrined in the ancestral temple. Lu Zi Zhang, the character Mingyuan, is actually the famous Shen.

古文：年十六出后，事公主尽礼。
现代文：十六岁时出了本房，过继到常山公主膝下，尽人子之礼，十分孝顺。
English: When he was sixteen years old, he left home and was adopted by Princess Tsuneyama. He was a very dutiful son.

古文：丞相、高阳王雍常言曰： 常山妹虽无男，以子彰为兒，乃过自生矣。 
现代文：丞相、高阳王雍常说道 ：常山妹虽然无子，但有子彰当儿子，比亲生的还要好。 
English: The prime minister, Goyang Wang Yong Chang, said: Although Chang Shan Mei does not have a son, it is better to have a son than a son.

古文：正光中，袭爵东郡公，累迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：正光年间，承袭爵位为东郡公。后来任给事黄门侍郎。
English: During the reign of Masamitsu, he succeeded to the title of Higashi-gun no kimi. Later, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：子彰妻即咸阳王禧女。
现代文：陆子彰之妻为咸阳王禧之女。
English: Lu Zi Akira's wife was the daughter of Xianyang Wang Xizang.

古文：禧诛，养于彭城王第，庄帝亲之，略同诸姊。
现代文：禧被诛，她被收养在彭城王府里，庄帝对她很亲善，同对别的妹妹一样。
English: She was adopted at the royal palace in Pengcheng. Emperor Zhuang was very kind to her, just as he was to her other younger sisters.

古文：建义初，尔硃荣欲循旧事，庶姓封王，由是封子彰濮阳郡王。
现代文：建义初年，尔朱荣想沿袭过去的制度，皇室以外的旁姓也能封王，于是封陆子彰为濮阳郡王。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, Lzhu Rong wanted to follow the previous system, in which non-royal surnames could also be crowned king, so he crowned Lu Zi Zhang as the king of Poyang County.

古文：寻而诏罢，仍复先爵。
现代文：不久这个诏书被取消，仍恢复原来的爵位。
English: The edict was soon rescinded, but the peerage was restored.

古文：天平中，拜卫将军、颍州刺史，以母忧去职。
现代文：天平年间，陆子彰拜为卫将军、颍州刺史，后来因为母亲的丧事而辞官奔丧。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Lu Zi served as Wei general and Zhangzhou governor. Later, he resigned from his post because of his mother's death.

古文：元象中，以本将军除齐州刺史，又加骠骑将军，行怀州事，转北豫州刺史，仍除徐州刺史，将军并如故。
现代文：元象年间，以本来的将军称号出任齐州刺史，又加封骠骑将军，总管怀州的政事，转任为北豫州刺史，仍保留将军的称号。
English: During the Yuanxiang era, he was appointed as the governor of Qi Province with the original title of general, and was also appointed as the general of the cavalry, the chief administrator of the political affairs of Huai Province, and was transferred to the governor of North Henan Province, still retaining the title of general.

古文：一年历三州，当世荣之。
现代文：他一年之内当了三个州的长官，当世人都以此为荣。
English: He became the governor of three states within a year, and the whole world is proud of this.

古文：还朝，除卫大将军、右光禄大夫，行瀛州事。
现代文：回到朝中，陆子彰又被任命为卫大将军、右光禄大夫，总管瀛州的政务。
English: Back in the Imperial Court, Lu Zi Akira was also appointed as the General of the Guard, the Doctor of the Right Hand, and the Chief Manager of the Government Affairs of Bozhou.

古文：寻拜侍中，复行沧州事。
现代文：不久又官拜侍中，又掌管沧州的政务。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to vice-premier and took charge of Cangzhou's government affairs.

古文：进号骠骑大将军。行冀州事。
现代文：他被封为骠骑大将军，总管冀州政务。
English: He was given the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and was put in charge of the administration of Jizhou Province.

古文：除侍读，兼七兵尚书，行青州事。
现代文：又被任命为侍读，兼任七兵尚书，总管青州政务。
English: He was also appointed as an attendant, concurrently serving as the chief of the seven soldiers, and in charge of Qingzhou government affairs.

古文：子彰初为州，以聚敛为事，晚节修改，自行青、冀、沧、瀛，甚有时誉。加以虚己纳物，人士敬爱之。
现代文：陆子彰刚开始任州官时，搜刮了很多财物，晚年时改正了行为。一个人总管青、冀、沧、瀛四州，很得当时人们的称誉，加上他为人谦虚，对别人宽厚，人们都尊敬爱戴他。
English: When Lu Zi Zhang first became a prefectural official, he looted a lot of property, and in his later years he corrected his behavior. As a person in charge of the four prefectures of Qing, Hebei, Cang and Handan, he was highly praised by the people at that time. In addition, he was humble and kind to others, and people respected and loved him.

古文：除中书监。
现代文：他又被任命为中书监。
English: He was also appointed as the Central Library Supervisor.

古文：卒，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰文宣。
现代文：去世后，追赠开府仪同三司，谥号 文宣 。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, posthumously known as Wen Xuan.

古文：子彰崇好道术，曾婴重病药中须桑螵蛸。子彰不忍害物，遂不服焉，其仁如此。
现代文：陆子彰喜爱道术，他的曾孙得了重病，药方中需要加桑螵蛸，陆子彰不忍心杀生，就不让孩子吃下，他就是仁爱到这个地步。
English: Lu Zi Akira is fond of Taoism. His great-grandson was seriously ill, and needed to add samphire to the prescription. Lu Zi Akira couldn't bear to kill, so he wouldn't let the child eat it. He is benevolent to this point.

古文：教训六子，雅有法度。
现代文：他教育训导六个儿子，很有方法。
English: He educated and disciplined his six sons in a very methodical way.

古文：子仰。仰字云驹，少机悟，美风神。
现代文：陆瞫，字云驹，年轻时机智而且悟性好，风度翩翩，神采奕奕。
English: Lu Yao, Ziyun Yao, young, intelligent and good understanding, graceful, energetic.

古文：好学不倦，博览群书，《五经》多通大义。
现代文：他学习刻苦，不知疲倦，博览群书，掌握了《五经》的精髓。
English: He studied hard, tirelessly, read widely, and mastered the essence of the "Five Classics."

古文：善属文，甚为河间邢邵所赏。
现代文：他擅长写文章，深为河间邢邵所赏识。
English: He is good at writing articles and is deeply appreciated by Kawama Shiro.

古文：劭又与子彰交游，尝谓子彰曰： 吾以卿老蜯遂出明珠，意欲为群拜纪可乎？ 由是名誉日高，雅为搢绅所推许。
现代文：邢邵又常和陆瞫的父亲陆子彰交往，曾经对陆子彰道： 我认为您是只老蚌，所以才会产生明珠。 于是陆瞫的名声越来越响，深为缙绅们推崇赞许。
English: Zou Shao also often interacted with Lu Zi Chang, the father of Lu Zi, and once said to Lu Zi Chang: I think you are only an old man, so you will produce a pearl. As a result, Lu Zi's reputation is getting louder and louder, and he is deeply respected and praised by the gentry.

古文：起家员外散骑侍郎，历文襄大将军主簿、中书舍人、兼中书侍郎，以本职兼太子洗马。
现代文：开始任员外散骑常侍，后历任文襄大将军主簿、中书舍人、兼中书侍郎，又兼任太子洗马。
English: He began his career as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and later served as the general secretary of the Wenxiang Grand Army, the secretary of the Central Military Commission, the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and the prince's horse washer.

古文：自梁、魏通和，岁有交聘，仰每兼官宴接。
现代文：自从梁、魏互相交好后，每年都要派使节互致问候，陆瞫每次都要负责在宫宴上招待来使。
English: Since Liang and Wei made friends with each other, they sent envoys to exchange greetings every year, and Lu Wei was responsible for inviting the envoys to the palace banquet every time.

古文：在席赋诗，仰必先成，虽未能尽工，以敏速见美。
现代文：在宴席上赋诗，陆瞫每次都先完成，虽然不是很完美，但也因为文思敏捷而被称道。
English: When composing a poem at a banquet, Lu Yao always finished it first. Although it was not perfect, he was praised for his quick wit.

古文：除中书侍郎，修国史。
现代文：他被任命为中书侍郎，负责编修国史。
English: He was appointed to the position of Chusho-sajiro, responsible for compiling the history of the country.

古文：以父忧去职。
现代文：后来因为父亲的丧事辞职去守丧。
English: He left the post due to the death of his father.

古文：居丧尽礼，哀毁骨立，诏以本官起。
现代文：服丧时他尽了孝子之礼，由于哀痛过度而形销骨立，皇帝下诏让他恢复原官。
English: At the time of the funeral, he did his best to be a filial son. Due to excessive grief, his bones were broken, and the emperor issued an edict to restore him to his original post.

古文：文襄时镇鄴，嘉其至行，亲诣门以慰勉之。
现代文：文襄帝这时镇守邺，为了表彰他至孝的品行，皇帝亲自到他家中劝慰勉励他。
English: At this time, Emperor Wenxiang was in a state of vigilance. In order to commend his filial piety, the emperor personally went to his home to comfort and encourage him.

古文：仰母，魏上庸公主。初封蓝田，高明妇人也。甚有志操。
现代文：陆瞫的母亲，是魏的上庸公主，开始封地在蓝田，是个高明的妇人，很有志气和操守。
English: Lu Yao's mother, the Shangyong Princess of the Wei Dynasty, began her fiefdom in Lantian. She was a clever woman with great ambition and integrity.

古文：仰昆季六人，并主所出，故邢邵常谓人云： 蓝田生玉，固不虚矣。 
现代文：陆瞫兄弟六人，都是公主所生，所以邢邵常对人说： 蓝田生玉，真是一点不假。 
English: Lu Yao's six brothers were all born to princesses, so Zou Shao often said to people: "Lantian's raw jade is really authentic.

古文：主教训诸子，皆以义方。虽创巨痛深，出于天性；然动依礼度，亦母氏之训焉。
现代文：公主教育训导诸子，都是用道理礼法，虽然父亲去世的悲哀伤痛是出于天性，但他们举哀的方式都按照礼法，也是母亲教导的结果。
English: The princess's education and training of her sons were all based on reason and etiquette. Although the sadness and pain of their father's death was due to nature, the way they mourned was in accordance with etiquette and was also the result of their mother's teaching.

古文：仰兄弟相率庐于墓侧，负土成坟。
现代文：陆瞫兄弟都在父亲的墓旁搭草棚住下，背土堆成坟茔。
English: The Lu Yao brothers all lived in grass huts next to their father's grave, piling up the back soil into graves.

古文：朝廷所嗟尚，发诏褒扬，改其所居里为孝终里。
现代文：朝廷对此大为叹赏，下诏表扬他们的行为，将他们所居住的乡里改称为孝终里。
English: The Imperial Court greatly appreciated this and issued a decree praising their actions, changing the name of the village where they lived to "Takasetsu Village."

古文：服竟，当袭，不忍嗣侯。使迄未应受。
现代文：丧期服满后，陆瞫本应当承袭父亲的爵位，但他不忍心自己接受侯爵之号，上表请求让给最小的弟弟彦师。
English: After the period of mourning was over, Lu Xun was supposed to inherit his father's title, but he could not bear to accept the title of marquis himself, and asked to give it to his youngest brother, Hikonshi.

古文：齐天保初，常山王荐仰器干，文宣面授给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：齐天保初年，常山王举荐陆瞫有才干，文宣帝当面授他给事黄门侍郎之职。
English: In the first year of Qi Tianbo, the King of Changshan recommended the talented Lu Yao, and Emperor Wenzhong personally awarded him the position of Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：迁吏部郎中。
现代文：后来升为吏部郎中。
English: Later he was promoted to junior secretary.

古文：上洛王思宗为清都尹，辟为邑中正，食贝丘县干。
现代文：上洛王思宗做清都尹时，又征召他为邑中正，食邑在贝丘县里。
English: When Shangluo Wang Shizong made Yin the capital of Qing Dynasty, he also recruited him to be the mayor of the town, and the food town was in Beqiu County.

古文：遭母丧，哀慕毁悴，殆不胜丧，遂至沈笃，顿伏床枕，又成风疾。
现代文：后来母亲去世，他因悲痛而身心憔悴，可能是因为他承受不了举丧的哀痛，所以萎靡不振，一下子卧床不起，得了风病。
English: Later, his mother died, and he was physically and mentally exhausted from grief, probably because he could not bear the grief of mourning, so he was depressed, suddenly bedridden, and got wind disease.

古文：第五弟抟遇疾，临终，谓其兄弟曰： 大兄尪病如此，性至慈爱，抟之死日，必不得使大兄知之，哭泣声必不可闻彻，致有感动。 
现代文：他的五弟陆抟也得了重病，临终前，对另外几个兄弟道： 大哥身体虚弱多病，生性又最为慈爱，我死的时候，千万不要让大哥知道，哭泣的声音千万不要传出去，恐怕大哥听见了会有所惊动。 
English: His fifth brother, Lu Yao, also fell seriously ill. Before his death, he said to several other brothers: Big brother is frail and sickly, and his nature is the most loving. When I die, don't let big brother know, and don't let the sound of crying go out. I'm afraid big brother will be alarmed when he hears it.

古文：家人至于祖载，方始告之。
现代文：家里人直到出殡时，才告诉陆瞫。
English: The family did not tell Lu Yao until the funeral.

古文：仰闻而悲痛，一恸便绝。
现代文：陆瞫听说后十分悲痛，大哭一场而亡。
English: After hearing this, Lu Yao was very sad and burst into tears and died.

古文：年四十八。
现代文：去世时年仅四十八岁。
English: He was only forty-eight when he died.

古文：仰自在朝行，笃慎周密。不说人短，不伐己长，言论清远，有人伦鉴裁，朝野甚悲惜之。
现代文：陆瞫在朝为官，诚笃谨慎，办事周密，不议论别人的缺点，也不炫耀自己的长处，言谈清晰，见解深刻，而且在人伦大事上堪为榜样，去世后朝野上下都为他悲痛惋惜。
English: Lu Wei was an official in the imperial court. He was sincere, prudent, and meticulous in his work. He did not discuss the shortcomings of others, nor did he show off his own strengths. His speech was clear, his opinions were profound, and he was a role model in matters of human relations. After his death, the imperial court and the whole country mourned for him.

古文：赠卫将军、青州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠为卫将军、青州刺史，谥号文。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Wei general and Qingzhou sashimi.

古文：所著文章十四卷，行于世。
现代文：他所撰写的文章十四卷，流传在民间。
English: Fourteen volumes of articles written by him have been circulated among the people.

古文：睿字思弼，年十余，袭爵抚军大将军、平原王。
现代文：齐郊庙里奏的祭歌，大都是陆瞫做的。陆睿，字思弼，十几岁时，袭爵为抚军大将军、平原王。
English: Most of the sacrificial songs played in the temples in the suburbs of Qi were composed by Lu Rui. Lu Rui, also known as Siyi, became the general of the army and the king of the plain when he was a teenager.

古文：沈雅好学，折节下士。
现代文：他生性沉静高雅好学，对地位低的文士很有礼。
English: By nature, he was quiet, elegant and eager to learn, and he was very courteous to low-ranking scribes.

古文：年未二十，时人便以宰辅许之。
现代文：年龄未到二十，当时的人们就说他能当辅国重臣。
English: Before the age of twenty, people at that time said that he could be an assistant chief minister.

古文：娶东徐州刺史博陵崔鉴女。时孝文尚未改北人姓，鉴谓所亲云： 平原王才度不恶，但恨其姓名殊为重复。 
现代文：他娶了东徐州刺史博陵崔鉴的女儿为妻，当时孝文帝还没有改去北人的姓氏，崔鉴对亲熟的人道 ：平原王才干和气度都不错，就是姓名太复杂很讨厌。 
English: He married the daughter of the East Xuzhou Jishi Boling Cui Jian as his wife. At that time, Emperor Xiaowen had not yet changed his surname to a northerner. Cui Jian told the familiar humanities: The Plains King's talent and temperament are good, but the name is too complicated and unpleasant.

古文：睿婚，自东徐还经鄴，见李彪，甚敬悦之。仍与趣京，以为馆客。
现代文：陆睿成婚后，从东徐州返回时经过邺，拜访了李彪，很欣赏他，和他一起赴京，留他为馆客。
English: After Lu Rui got married, he visited Li Biao on his way back from East Xuzhou, passing through Handan. He admired Li Biao very much, and went to Beijing with him, keeping him as a guest.

古文：后为北征都督，击蠕蠕，大破之。
现代文：后来陆睿被任命为北征都督，征讨蠕蠕，大败敌军。
English: Later, Lu Rui was appointed as the governor of the Northern Expedition, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：迁侍中、都曹尚书。
现代文：升任为侍中、都曹尚书。
English: He was promoted to the position of chamberlain, and became Du Cao Shangshu.

古文：时蠕蠕又犯塞，诏睿讨之，追至石碛，禽其帅赤阿突等数百人。还，加散骑常侍，迁尚书左仆射，领北部尚书。
现代文：不久蠕蠕又来侵犯边塞，下诏令陆睿出兵征讨，他把敌兵追杀到石碛，擒获了敌兵元帅赤阿突等数百人，回兵后加封散骑常侍，升任尚书左仆射，兼任北部尚书。
English: Not long after, Cun Cun invaded the border fortress again, and issued the edict ordering Lu Rui to send out troops for conscription. He chased the enemy soldiers to Shijiazhuang, captured hundreds of enemy soldiers, including Marshal Red Attu. After the return of the soldiers, he was promoted to the position of Shangshu's left-hand man, and also served as the Northern Shangshu.

古文：十六年，降五等之爵，以丽勋著前朝，封睿钜鹿郡公。
现代文：大和十六年，降五种爵位的等级，因为陆丽曾为前朝建立过奇勋，所以封陆睿为巨鹿郡公。
English: In the 16th year of the Yamato era, the ranks of five kinds of peerages were reduced, because Lu Li had established a special decoration for the previous government, so Lu Rui was awarded the title of Koga County.

古文：寻为使持节、镇北大将军、尚书令、卫将军，讨蠕蠕，大破之而还。
现代文：不久被任命为使持节、镇北大将军、尚书令、卫将军，率兵征讨蠕蠕，大败敌军而回。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the general of Zhenbei, the general of Shang Shuling, and the general of Wei. He led the army to fight against Crum Crum, defeated the enemy army, and returned.

古文：以母忧解。
现代文：后来因为母亲去世而辞职奔丧。
English: He later resigned due to the death of his mother.

古文：孝文将有南伐之事，以本官起授征南将军。
现代文：孝文帝想要出兵南伐，任命他官复原职，授为征南将军。
English: Emperor Xiaowen wanted to send troops to invade the south, so he appointed him to restore the position of an official and appointed him as a general to invade the south.

古文：睿固辞，请终情礼，敕有司敦喻不许。
现代文：陆睿坚持推辞，请求尽完孝礼，皇上敕令有关部门劝谕，不准他推辞。
English: Lu Rui insisted on withdrawing his resignation and requested to complete the filial piety. The emperor ordered the relevant departments to advise him not to withdraw his resignation.

古文：复除使持节、都督恆州刺史，行尚书令。
现代文：再次被任命为使持节、都督恒州刺史、行尚书令。
English: He was again appointed as the envoy of the festival, the governor of Hengzhou, and the executioner of the imperial edict.

古文：时车驾南征，上表谏，帝不从。
现代文：当时皇帝想御驾亲自南征，陆睿上表劝谏，皇上不听。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to personally lead the Southern Expedition. Lu Rui went to the front to persuade him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：睿又表请车驾还代，亲临太师冯熙葬，坐削夺都督三州诸军事。
现代文：陆睿又上表奏请御驾回代都，亲临太师冯熙的葬礼，坐罪被免除都督三州诸军事。
English: Lu Rui also asked him to come back to the capital to attend the funeral of Grandmaster Feng Xi. He was absolved of the crime of being the military governor of the three states.

古文：寻进号征北大将军。
现代文：不久，又晋封他为征北大将军。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to General of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：以有顺迁之表，加邑四百户。
现代文：由于他曾上表赞同迁都，加封食邑四百户。
English: Since he had previously endorsed the relocation of the capital, four hundred households in food villages were added.

古文：时穆泰为定州刺史，以疾病，请恆州自效，乃以睿为定州刺史。
现代文：当时穆泰被任命为定州刺史，因为身患疾病，请求改到恒州效力，于是任命陆睿为定州刺史。
English: At that time, Mutai was appointed as the chief historian of Dingzhou, but because he was ill, he requested to be transferred to Hengzhou, so Lu Rui was appointed as the chief historian of Dingzhou.

古文：其身虽故，子孙并宜屏黜，终身不齿。 
现代文：尚未到任，就和穆泰密谋反叛，被赐死在狱中。
English: Before taking office, he plotted a rebellion with Mutai and was sentenced to death in prison.

古文：法言竟坐除名。
现代文：赦免了全家的死罪，将他妻子儿女发配辽西。
English: He pardoned the entire family of the capital crime and sent his wife and children to Liaoning Province.

古文：源贺，西平乐都人，私署河西王秃发傉檀之子也。
现代文：源贺，是西平乐都人，是自封河西王秃发亻辱擅之子。
English: Genga, a native of Xiping Ledu, was the illegitimate son of the self-styled King of Hexi.

古文：傉檀为乞伏炽盘所灭，贺自乐都奔魏。
现代文：秃发亻辱擅被乞伏炽盘所灭，源贺从乐都投奔魏。
English: Bald-faced insults were arbitrarily extinguished by the begging bowl, and Genga fled from the capital to Wei.

古文：贺伟容貌，善风仪。
现代文：源贺相貌伟岸，风度翩翩。
English: Genga is a great-looking man with a dashing personality.

古文：太武素闻其名。及见，器其机辩，赐爵西平侯。
现代文：太武帝一直听说他的大名，等召见后，很赏识他的机智才干，赐他西平侯之爵。
English: Emperor Taivu had always heard of his great name, and when he was summoned to see him, he was very appreciative of his wit and talent, and gave him the title of Marquis of Xiping.

古文：谓曰： 卿与朕同源，因事分姓，今可为源氏。 
现代文：太武帝对他说道 ：卿和朕为同一祖先所出，后来因为所在国家不同而姓氏不一样，现在卿可改为姓源。 
English: Taiwu Emperor said to him: Sir and I are from the same ancestor. Later, because of the different countries, the surnames were different. Now, Sir can be changed to Yuan.

古文：从击叛胡白龙，又讨吐京胡，皆先登陷阵。以功进号平西将军。
现代文：源贺随驾征讨胡人叛贼白龙，又征讨吐京胡，他都冲锋陷阵，因为战功晋封为平西将军。
English: Geng He went along to enlist Hu's traitor Bai Long, and also enlisted Tu Jing Hu. He was forced to charge into battle, because he was promoted to Pingxi General for his military exploits.

古文：太武征凉州，以为乡导，问攻战之计。
现代文：太武帝出征凉州时，让他做向导，问他如何攻战之计。
English: When Emperor Taowu went to fight in Liangzhou, he asked him to be his guide and asked him how he planned to fight.

古文：贺曰： 姑臧外有四部鲜卑，各为之援，然皆臣祖父旧人。臣愿军前宣国威信，必相率请降。外援既服，然后攻其孤城，拔之如反掌耳。 帝曰： 善。 
现代文：源贺道 ：姑臧之外有四个鲜卑部族，都做为凉州外援，但他们都是我祖父的老部下，臣愿意在交战前宣扬我朝的威信，他们定会相继投降，外援被降服后，再攻一座孤城，取胜还不是易如反掌。 太武帝道 ：好。 
English: Minamoto no Hedao: In addition to the Gutai, there are four new inferior tribes, all of which are foreign aid to Liangzhou, but they are all my grandfather's old subordinates. The minister is willing to promote the prestige of my dynasty before the war. They will surely surrender one after another. After the foreign aid is surrendered, they will attack another isolated city. Winning is not as easy as it looks. Emperor Taibu: Good.

古文：乃遣贺招慰，下三万余落。及围姑臧，由是无外虑，故得专力攻之。
现代文：于是派他去招降，争取了三万多人，等围困了姑臧城，由于没有外援的顾虑，所以能集中力量攻城。
English: So he sent him to recruit and win over more than thirty thousand people, and besieged the city of Gudang. Because there was no concern about foreign aid, he was able to concentrate his forces to attack the city.

古文：凉州平，以功进爵西平公。
现代文：凉州平定后源贺因为战功晋爵位西平公。
English: After the subjugation of Liangzhou, Geng He was promoted to the title of Xiping Gong because of his war service.

古文：又从征蠕蠕，击五城吐京胡，讨盖吴诸贼，皆有功，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：他又随驾征讨蠕蠕，打五城吐京胡，讨伐盖吴等贼寇，都立了大功，官拜为散骑常侍。
English: He also went with the cavalry to fight against the Qin Qin, the Five Cities, the Capital of the Five Dynasties, and the Thieves and Robbers of the Five Dynasties, all of which were great feats. He was honored by the officials as a knight errant.

古文：从驾临江，为前锋大将，善抚士卒，加有料敌制胜之谋。
现代文：他跟随御驾至长江，作为前锋大将，他善于抚慰士卒，而且有料敌制胜的谋略。
English: He followed the emperor to the Yangtze River. As a vanguard general, he was good at soothing his soldiers and devising strategies to defeat the enemy.

古文：贺为人雄果，每遇强寇，輙自奋击，帝深诫之。
现代文：源贺为人勇敢果断，每次遇到强敌都亲自与敌奋力搏斗，皇帝常常劝诫他。
English: Minamoto no He was a brave and decisive man. Every time he encountered a strong enemy, he personally fought with the enemy. The emperor often admonished him.

古文：贺本名破羌，是役也，帝谓曰： 人之立名，宜保其实，何可滥也？ 
现代文：源贺原名破羌，在那场战役中，皇帝对他说道： 人起名字应该保有其实，怎么能乱起呢？ 
English: During that battle, the emperor said to him, "People should keep their original names, but how can there be chaos?

古文：赐名贺焉。拜殿中尚书。
现代文：赐给他名贺，官拜殿中尚书。
English: He was given the title of nakahe (famous person) and was given the title of shosho (honorable person) in the official worship hall.

古文：南安王余为宗爱所杀，贺部勒禁兵，静遏外内，与南部尚书陆丽决议定策，翼戴文成。令丽与刘尼驰诣苑中奉迎，贺营中为内应。
现代文：南安王余即位后被宗爱所杀，源贺统率禁兵，控制宫内外局势，并和南部尚书陆丽商议决定国策，拥戴文成帝，令陆丽和刘尼骑马至皇苑中恭迎，源贺在禁军营中为内应。
English: After the enthronement of King Yu of Nan'an, who was killed by Zong Ai, Geng He led the ban on soldiers, controlled the situation inside and outside the palace, and discussed and decided the national policy with Southern Shang Shul and Lu Li, supported Emperor Wencheng, made Lu Li and Liu Ni ride to the imperial garden to welcome, and Geng He was the inner supporter in the ban military camp.

古文：俄而丽抱文成，单骑而至。
现代文：不一会儿陆丽抱着文成帝，同骑一匹马而来。
English: Soon after, Lu Li hugged Emperor Wencheng and rode a horse with him.

古文：及即位，贺有力焉。
现代文：直到即位，源贺都起了很大作用。
English: Up until his accession to the throne, Genga played a major role.

古文：以定策勋，进爵西平王。
现代文：因为他有参与决定国策的大功，晋爵为西平王。
English: Because he played a major role in determining national policy, he was given the title of Xiping Wang.

古文：及班赐百寮，敕贺任意取之，辞以江南未宾，汉北不款，府库不宜致匮。
现代文：在赏赐百官的时候，敕令源贺可任意选取物品，源贺推辞说因为长江以南尚未宾服，大漠之北没有称臣进贡，国家府库不应该因赏赐而致匮乏。
English: When awarding hundreds of officials, the imperial commanding officer, Genge, could select items at will. Genge reasoned that since there were no guests south of the Yangtze River and no tributes north of the Great Desert, the national treasury should not be depleted as a result of the award.

古文：固使取之，唯取戎马一疋。
现代文：文成帝坚持让他取一件赏物，他只取了一匹战马。
English: Emperor Wencheng insisted that he take a reward, but he only took a horse.

古文：时断狱多滥。贺上书曰： 案律，谋反之家，其子孙虽养他族，追还就戮所以绝罪人之类，彰大逆之辜。
现代文：当时断狱判刑都过于严酷，源贺上书奏道 ：按照法律，谋反的，他的子孙就算是被其他家族收养，也要追查出来诛杀，这是为了断绝罪人的同类，宣扬大逆之臣的死有余辜。
English: At that time, prison sentences were too harsh, and Geng He wrote: According to the law, if a person plots a rebellion, his descendants, even if they are adopted by other families, must be tracked down and killed. This is in order to cut off the same kind of criminals and promote the death of a traitor.

古文：其为劫贼应诛者，兄弟子侄在远道隔关津皆不坐。
现代文：那些做强盗而应被杀的人，他们的兄弟子侄若远隔千山万水都不用被株连。
English: Those who are robbers and deserve to be killed, their brothers and cousins do not need to be taken away if they are far away from each other.

古文：窃惟先朝制律之意，以不同谋，非绝类之罪，故特垂不死之诏。
现代文：臣窃以为先朝制定此项法律的意义，在于防止同谋，若犯的不是灭族大罪，就要专门下不连坐的诏书。
English: It was thought by courtiers that the significance of enacting this law in the previous dynasty was to prevent complicity, and if the crime was not genocide, it was necessary to issue a special edict not to sit together.

古文：若年十三已下，家人首恶，计所不及。
现代文：若家长犯了十恶不敕的罪，而孩子在十三岁以下，不可能参与同谋。
English: If a parent has committed a heinous crime, and the child is under the age of thirteen, it is impossible to participate in the conspiracy.

古文：臣愚以为可原其命，没入官。 
现代文：依臣愚见应该饶了他们性命，罚没入官。 
English: In the foolish opinion of Yoritomo, their lives should have been spared and they should have been punished and imprisoned.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝接受了他的建议。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：出为冀州刺史，改封陇西王。
现代文：源贺又出任冀州刺史，改封陇西王。
English: In addition, Genga was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province and changed his title to the King of Shaanxi Province.

古文：既受除，上书曰： 臣闻人之所宝，莫宝于生命；德之厚者，莫厚于宥死。
现代文：受任命后，他上书道： 臣听人说最珍贵的莫过于生命；恩德最深厚的莫过于饶恕人的死罪。
English: After his appointment, he wrote in his diary: "I have heard it said that there is nothing more precious than life; there is no greater kindness than to forgive a mortal sin.

古文：然犯死之罪，难以尽恕。
现代文：然而犯死罪的，也不能都宽恕。
English: However, not all those who commit capital crimes can be pardoned.

古文：权其轻重，有可矜恤。
现代文：应该衡量罪行轻重，还是有些值得怜悯体恤的。
English: We should weigh the severity of the crime, and there are still some deserving of pity and compassion.

古文：今勍寇游魂于北，狡贼负险于南，其在疆场，犹须戍防。
现代文：如今北方有强悍的夷寇在游弋骚扰，南面有狡猾的蛮贼据险作乱，在田中耕作的农民，还要服役去戍守边防。
English: Nowadays, there are strong invaders in the north harassing the peregrine falcons, there are cunning thieves in the south causing chaos, and farmers working in the fields have to serve to defend the border.

古文：臣愚以为自非大逆、赤手杀人之罪，其坐赃及盗与过误之愆应入死者，皆可原命，谪守边境。是则已断之体，更受生成之恩；徭役之家，渐蒙休息之惠。
现代文：依臣愚见除了犯下大逆不道，空手杀人的大罪，那些贪污、盗窃及过失犯罪的罪人按照法律应该处死的，都可以放他们一条生路，让他们戍守边境，这样就使那些本已丢了性命的人，又受了再生的恩德；而必须服役的农家，享受了得以休养生息的恩惠。
English: In his foolish opinion, in addition to the great crime of high treason and killing people with bare hands, those guilty of embezzlement, theft and negligent crimes, who should be put to death according to the law, could be given a way out and let them guard the border. In this way, those who had lost their lives received the grace of regeneration; and farmers who had to serve enjoyed the grace of being able to recuperate and live.

古文：刑措之化，庶几在兹。 
现代文：刑罚措施的改良，希望能由此开始。 
English: It is hoped that this will be the start of an improvement in penal measures.

古文：帝喜纳之，已后入死者，皆恕死徙边。
现代文：皇帝对这个建议十分赞赏，并批准执行，从此犯了死罪的人，都被饶了性命而去戍边。
English: The emperor was very appreciative of this suggestion and approved the execution. From then on, those who had committed capital crimes were spared their lives.

古文：久之，帝谓群臣曰： 昔源贺劝朕，宥诸死刑，徙充北籓诸戍。
现代文：过了好些年后，皇帝对群臣道： 当年源贺劝谏朕，宽宥所有的死刑犯人，让他们充军到北部边境戍守。
English: Many years later, the emperor said to his courtiers, "Back then, Geng He advised me to pardon all death-row prisoners and let them join the army to guard the northern border.

古文：自尔至今，一岁所活，殊为不少。
现代文：从那时起，一年所存活下来的就很不少。
English: Since then, only a handful of yearlings have survived.

古文：济命之理既多，边戍之兵有益。
现代文：这样不但保存下了许多人的生命，而且满足了戍守的兵源。
English: This not only saved the lives of many people, but also satisfied the military resources of the garrison.

古文：苟人人如贺，朕临天下，复何忧哉！ 
现代文：假若人人都像源贺一样，朕统治天下，还有什么可担忧的！ 
English: If everyone were like Genga, ruling the world, there would be nothing to worry about!

古文：群臣咸曰： 非忠臣不能进此计，非圣明不能纳此言。 
现代文：群臣都说道 ：不是忠臣不会提出这样的建议，不是圣明之君也不会接受这样的建议。 
English: The ministers all said, "No loyal minister would make such a suggestion, and no sage prince would accept such a suggestion."

古文：贺之临州，鞫狱以情，徭役简省，清约宽裕，甚得人心。
现代文：源贺在冀州执政期间，裁断官司通情达理，从不大兴劳役、兵役之事，清廉节约，宽宏大度，深得人心。
English: During his time in power in Jizhou, Geng He was a judicious and reasonable judge. He was never enthusiastic about labor service and military service. He was honest and thrifty, and his magnanimity won the hearts of the people.

古文：时武邑郡奸人石华告沙门道可与贺谋反，有司以闻。
现代文：当时武邑郡的奸险小人石华诬告僧人道可和源贺密谋造反，有关部门将此消息上奏。
English: At that time, the villain Shi Hua of Wuyi County falsely accused the monk Du Duan Ke and Gen He of plotting to rebel, and the relevant departments reported this news.

古文：文成曰： 贺保无此。 
现代文：文成帝道 ：源贺绝对不会做这样的事情。 
English: Emperor Wencheng: Genga would never do such a thing.

古文：乃精加讯检，华果引诬。
现代文：于是命人仔细审讯，石华果然招供是诬告。
English: As a result, the court ordered a careful interrogation, and Shihua admitted that it was a false accusation.

古文：乃遣使慰勉之。
现代文：于是又派使臣向源贺加勉。
English: As a result, envoys were sent to MINAMOTO no Hagatomi.

古文：帝顾左右曰： 贺忠诚，尚致诬谤，其不若是者，可无慎乎！ 
现代文：皇帝对左右亲信大臣道： 源贺忠心耿耿，尚且招致诬告毁谤，那些不如他的大臣，更得小心警惕！ 
English: The emperor said to the ministers of close confidants on the right and the left, "Geng He is loyal to the core, yet he has attracted false accusations and slander. Those ministers who are not as good as him should be even more careful and vigilant!

古文：时考殿最，贺政为上第，赐衣马器物，班宣天下。
现代文：当时考核功绩，源贺政绩为最上等，皇上赐予衣服马匹器物，颁诏告知天下。
English: At that time, the Emperor gave clothes, horses and utensils to Genga, and issued an edict to inform the world.

古文：后征拜太尉。蠕蠕寇边，贺从驾讨破之。
现代文：后来源贺又被封为太尉，蠕蠕侵犯边境，源贺随驾征讨，大败贼寇。
English: After that, Yuan He was made a captain again. He violated the border, and Yuan He went with him to fight against the invaders. He defeated the invaders.

古文：及献文将传位于京兆王子推，时贺都督诸军事屯漠南，乃驰传征贺。
现代文：献文帝想要将帝位传给京兆王子推，当时源贺统率大军屯兵大漠以南，皇上让人飞骑召源贺回京。
English: Emperor Xianwen wanted to pass the imperial throne to Prince Jingzhao. At that time, when Geng He was leading a large army south of the Great Desert, the emperor had Geng He called back to Beijing on horseback.

古文：贺至，正色固执不可。
现代文：源贺回京后，坚持说不可。
English: After returning to Kyoto, Genga insisted that it was impossible.

古文：即诏持节奉皇帝玺绶以授孝文。
现代文：于是皇上立刻下诏让他持节捧着皇帝的玉玺印绶传给孝文帝。
English: As a result, the emperor immediately issued an edict to let him hold the emperor's jade seal and pass it on to Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：是岁，河西叛，敕遣贺讨之，多所降破。
现代文：同一年，黄河西面的敕勒叛乱，派源贺出兵征讨，大破贼兵。
English: In the same year, the Xule Rebellion on the west side of the Yellow River, sent Yuan He to send troops to recruit and destroy the bandits.

古文：贺依古今兵法及先儒耆旧说，略采至要，为十二陈图，上之，献文览而嘉焉。
现代文：源贺参考古代和当世的兵法以及前辈名家的描述，取其精髓，做成十二阵图，献给朝廷，献文帝阅览后颇为赞赏。
English: Referring to the ancient and contemporary methods of warfare as well as the descriptions of famous predecessors, Genga took their essence and made twelve pictures, dedicated to the imperial court. The emperor was quite appreciative after reading the dedication.

古文：又都督三道诸军屯漠南。
现代文：源贺后来又统率三道的大军屯住在漠南。
English: Later, Genga led a large army from three provinces and settled in the south of the country.

古文：时每岁秋冬，遣军三道并出，以备北寇，至春中乃班师。
现代文：当时每年秋冬季，都要将三道大军一起派出，用来防备北面的敌寇，到第二年春天才班师。
English: At that time, every autumn and winter, the three armies were sent out together to guard against enemy raiders in the north, and the division was formed in the spring of the following year.

古文：贺以劳役京都，又非御边长计，乃上言，请募诸州镇有武勇者三万人，复其徭赋，厚加振恤，分为三部。
现代文：源贺认为这样给京城增加了许多劳役的任务，又不是防御边患的长久之计，于是向朝廷上奏，请求招募各个州城、军镇中有武艺和胆量者三万人，免除他们的劳役和赋税，多给他家救济补助。
English: Genge thought that this added a lot of labor service tasks to the capital, but it was not a long-term defense of the border, so he appealed to the imperial court and requested the recruitment of 30,000 people with martial arts and courage in various prefectures and military towns, exempting them from labor service and taxes, and giving more relief subsidies to his family.

古文：二镇之间筑城，城置万人，给强弩十二床，武卫三百乘。弩一床给牛六头，武卫一乘给牛二头。
现代文：将这三万人分成三个部分，在每两个军镇之间建筑一座城防，每座城里驻扎一万人，发给十二只带架子的巨弓，三百辆武士乘的战车，每只巨弓配给六头牛，每辆战车配给两斗牛。
English: He divided the thirty thousand men into three parts, built a city wall between each two military towns, stationed ten thousand men in each city, issued twelve huge bows with racks, three hundred chariots with warriors, six cows for each giant bow, and two bulls for each chariot.

古文：多造马枪及诸器械，使武略大将二人以镇抚之。
现代文：大量制造马具和兵器以及其他器械，每城派二名武艺谋略高强的大将镇守。
English: Harnesses, weapons and other equipment were mass-produced, and each city was guarded by two generals skilled in martial arts.

古文：冬则讲武，春则种植，并戍并耕，则兵未劳而有盈蓄矣。
现代文：冬天时操练武艺，春天时从事农业，一边戍边一边耕作。这样士兵不会疲惫而且有粮草的积蓄。
English: In the winter, they practiced martial arts, and in the spring, they engaged in agriculture, working side by side, so that the soldiers would not get tired and they would have grain and grass reserves.

古文：又于白道南三处立仓，运近州镇租粟以充之。
现代文：还可以在白道南面设立三处粮仓，将附近州镇收的租粮运来储备。
English: In addition, three grain silos can be set up in the south of Baidoa to store grain collected from nearby counties.

古文：足食足兵，以备不虞，于事为便。
现代文：这样兵源粮草都充足，用来防备难以预料的敌情，十分便利。
English: In this way, there are enough food and grass for soldiers, which is very convenient to prevent unpredictable hostile situations.

古文：不可岁常举众。
现代文：用不着每年都兴师动众。
English: There is no need to motivate the teachers every year.

古文：事寝不报。
现代文：这项奏议被搁下没有回报。
English: The motion was put on hold with no response.

古文：上书称病乞骸骨，至于再三，乃许之。
现代文：源贺上书称自己有病请求告老还乡，他申请了多次，皇上才批准。
English: Geng He wrote a letter saying that he was ill and requested to return to his hometown. He applied several times before the emperor approved it.

古文：朝有大议，皆就询访，又给衣药珍羞。
现代文：每逢朝中有重大决策，皇上都要派人征询他的意见，还赏给他衣服药品和美味佳肴。
English: Whenever there was a major decision to be made in the court, the emperor would send someone to consult him, and he would also give him clothes, medicine, and delicious food.

古文：太和元年二月，疗疾于温汤。
现代文：太和元年二月，源贺到温泉去疗养治病。
English: In February of the first year of the Taiwa era, Genga went to a hot spring to recuperate and treat his illness.

古文：孝文、文明太后遣使屡问消息，太医视疾。
现代文：孝文帝、文明太后多次派使臣询问病情，并派太医给他治疗。
English: Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Fuxing repeatedly sent envoys to inquire about his condition, and sent the Imperial Physician to treat him.

古文：患笃，还于京师。乃遗令诸子曰： 吾顷以老患辞事，不悟天慈降恩，爵逮于汝。汝其毋傲吝，毋荒怠，毋奢越，毋嫉妒。
现代文：病情越来越重后，他回到京师，临死前对众儿子道： 我不久前因年老患病而辞官离职，没想到圣上恩典，让你们继承了我的官爵，你们不要骄傲吝啬，不要玩乐放纵，不要奢侈炫耀，不要嫉妒猜疑。
English: After his illness became more and more serious, he returned to Beijing and said to his sons before his death: I recently resigned from my post due to old age and illness. I didn't expect the divine grace to let you inherit my title. Don't be proud and stingy, don't play and indulge, don't flaunt luxury, don't be jealous and suspicious.

古文：疑思问，言思审，行思恭，服思度。
现代文：如果有疑就要多问，言谈要审慎，举止行为要谦逊，服饰要有限度。
English: If in doubt, ask more questions, speak cautiously, behave modestly, and dress modestly.

古文：遏恶扬善，亲贤远佞，目观必真，耳属必正，忠勤以事君，清约以临己。
现代文：要去恶扬善，亲近贤良疏远奸佞。眼要看到事物的真实面，耳听进有道理的话，对皇上要忠诚勤恳，对自己要清廉节约。
English: It is necessary to do evil and promote good, to be close to the virtuous and alienate the treacherous. The eyes should see the true side of things, the ears should listen to reasonable words, the emperor should be loyal and diligent, and he should be honest and frugal.

古文：吾终之后，所葬，时服单椟，足申孝心，皞灵明器，一无用也。 
现代文：我死后下葬时，只要穿着随身的衣服，你们准备一口棺材，就足以表示孝心了，刍灵之类明器，一点用都没有。 
English: When I die and am buried, as long as I am wearing the clothes I brought with me and you prepare a coffin, it will be enough to show your filial piety. Apparatus such as eulogies are useless.

古文：子子邕，字灵和。少好文雅，笃志于学，推诚待士，士多归之。
现代文：太和三年去世，追赠侍中、太尉、陇西王印绶，谥号 宣王 ，赐给丧车和命服，温明生产的棺木，陪葬于金陵。源子邕，字灵和。年轻时爱好文学，专心于学业，对士人坦诚相见，文士们都来归附他。
English: His mother died three years later, and he was posthumously given the titles of chamberlain, captain, and prince of the Western Han Dynasty, as well as the posthumous name of King Xuan. He was given a funeral carriage and a life jacket, and a coffin made by Wenming. He was buried in the Jinling Mausoleum with his mother, his father, and his father-in-law. When he was young, he loved literature, devoted himself to his studies, and was honest with scholars. Scribes all came to admire him.

古文：累迁夏州刺史。
现代文：后来被任命为夏州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief historian of Xiazhou.

古文：时沃野镇人破六韩拔陵首为反乱，统万逆徒，寇害应接。
现代文：当时沃野镇人破六韩拔陵首先起来造反。统万的叛逆之徒，纷纷起来为寇，与之相呼应。
English: At that time, the people of Wano Town broke through the six Korean tombs and rebelled first. All the traitors in the world rose up as invaders, echoing this.

古文：子邕婴城自守，城中粮尽，煮马皮而食之。
现代文：源子邕的州城被包围，他率军民死守，城中粮食吃光了，他们就吃煮过的马皮。
English: The prefectural capital of Minamoto no Tsukuda was besieged, and he led his soldiers and people in a desperate defense. When they ran out of food in the city, they ate boiled horse hide.

古文：子邕善绥抚，无有离贰。
现代文：源子邕善于安抚人心，所以手下没有离叛之心。
English: Minamoto no Tsukuda is good at placating people's hearts, so his subordinates do not have a rebellious heart.

古文：以饥馑转切，欲自出求粮，留子延伯据守。
现代文：后来因为缺粮的问题更加严重，他要亲自出城去借粮，留儿子源延伯据守城池。
English: Later, as the problem of grain shortage became more serious, he himself had to go out of the city to borrow grain, leaving his son, Yuan Yanbo, to guard the city.

古文：僚属佥云，未若弃城俱去，更展规略。
现代文：手下的官吏都说，不如一起弃城而逃，再想别的办法。
English: The officials under his command all said that it would be better to abandon the city and flee together, and then think of another way.

古文：子邕泣请于众曰： 吾世荷国恩，此是吾死地，更欲何求！ 
现代文：源子邕哭着对众人道： 我家世代蒙受国家恩典，这里是我的死地，我还贪求什么！ 
English: Genji cried to the crowd: My family has been blessed by the state for generations, this is my place of death, what more could I ask for!

古文：遂自率羸弱向东夏运粮。
现代文：于是亲自率领疲弱的兵士去东夏运粮。
English: So he personally led the weak soldiers to Dongxia to transport grain.

古文：延伯与将士送出城，哭而拜辞，三军莫不呜咽。
现代文：源延伯与众将士送他们出城，哭着向他拜辞，三军将士无不呜咽哭泣。
English: Yuan Yanbo and his generals sent them out of the city, crying and bowing to him. The three soldiers were all sobbing and crying.

古文：子邕为朔方胡帅曹阿各拔所邀，力屈被执。
现代文：源子邕被朔方的胡帅曹阿各拔所拦击，力气不济而被捕。
English: Yuan Ziqi was stopped by the Shuo side's Hu Shuai Cao Aqobat, and was arrested due to lack of strength.

古文：乃密遣人赍书间行与城中云： 大军在近，汝其奉忠，勿移其操。 
现代文：他还偷偷派人送一封密信给城中的源延伯，信上说： 大军就在附近，你要坚持尽忠，不要动摇。 
English: He also secretly sent someone to deliver a secret letter to Yuan Yanbo in the city, saying in the letter: A large army is nearby, you must remain loyal and not waver.

古文：子邕虽被囚束，雅为胡人所敬，常以百姓礼事之。
现代文：源子邕虽然被囚禁，还深为胡人所敬重，常用对待官吏之礼接待他。
English: Although he was imprisoned, Yuan Zixuan was still deeply respected by the Hu people, who often received him with the courtesy of officials.

古文：子邕为陈安危祸福之端，劝阿各拔令降。将从之，未果而死。
现代文：源子邕对他们陈述安危祸福的利害关系，劝阿各拔命令胡人归降，阿各拔刚接受了他的劝降，还没有成行就死了。
English: Minamoto no Tsukuda told them that their safety was at stake, and advised Agobard to order the Huns to surrender. Agobard had just accepted his advice, but died before he could carry it out.

古文：拔弟桑生代总部众，竟随子邕降。
现代文：阿各拔的弟弟桑生代为统率部下，最终还是跟随源子邕归降。
English: Alqobar's younger brother, Sang Sang, was the second in command, but he eventually followed Yuan Zixu in abdicating.

古文：时北海王颢为大行台，子邕具陈诸贼可灭状。颢给子邕兵，令其先出。时东夏合境反叛，所在屯结。子邕转战而前，九旬之中，凡数十战，乃平东夏。
现代文：当时北海王颢为大行台，源子邕具体陈述了该如何剿灭诸贼寇，颢给源子邕人马，让他作为先锋，那时东夏境内到处都有叛乱，到处集结驻屯，源子邕边打边前进，几十天之内，大小数十战，终于平定了东夏。
English: At that time, the king of the North Sea was a great leader, and Yuan Ziqi specifically stated how to annihilate the thieves and robbers, and gave Yuan Zi a man and a horse, and let him be the vanguard. At that time, there were rebellions everywhere in Dongxia, and garrisons were assembled everywhere. Yuan Ziqi fought and advanced side by side. Within a few dozen days, dozens of battles were fought, and Dongxia was finally pacified.

古文：徵税租粟，运粮统万，于是二夏渐宁。
现代文：他又将征收的税粮运到统万，于是东夏、夏州渐趋平静。
English: He also transported the collected tax grain to Tongwan, so Dongxia and Xiazhou gradually calmed down.

古文：及萧宝夤等为贼所败，关右骚扰，时子邕新平黑城，遂率士马并夏州募义人，鼓行南出。
现代文：后来萧宝夤被贼寇所败，关右动荡不安，当时子邕刚刚平定黑城，立刻率兵马以及在夏州招募的义军，一路击鼓向南进军。
English: Later, Xiao Baojun was defeated by thieves and robbers, and Guanzhong was in turmoil. At that time, Zi Yao had just conquered the Black City, and immediately led the soldiers and horses, as well as the rebels recruited in Xiazhou, marching all the way to the south with drums.

古文：贼帅康维摩守锯谷，断绝棠桥。子邕与战，大破之，禽维摩。
现代文：贼帅康维摩据守锯谷，拆断了婴瓦棠桥，源子邕率兵和贼军交战，大败敌兵，擒获了康维摩。
English: The bandit commander, Konwima, defended Saw Valley and tore down the infant tile-and-tangent bridge. Yuan Ziqi and his soldiers fought against the bandits, defeated the enemy soldiers, and captured Konwima.

古文：又攻破贼帅契官斤于杨氏堡。出自西夏，至于东夏，转战千里。
现代文：后来他又在杨氏堡打败了贼帅契官斤。源子邕从西夏出发，直到东夏，转战千里。
English: Later, he defeated the thief-soldier Qigang Jin in Yang's Fort. Yuan Ziqi traveled thousands of miles from Western Xia to Eastern Xia.

古文：至是，朝廷始得委问。
现代文：到这时，朝廷才关心这件事。
English: It was only then that the court became interested.

古文：除兼行台尚书。
现代文：任命源子邕兼任行台尚书。
English: Appointed Minamoto no Tsukuda to the post of chief priest.

古文：复破贼帅纥单步胡提于曲沃，明帝玺书劳勉之。
现代文：他又在曲沃打败了贼帅纥单步胡提，明帝御笔亲写出一封勉励慰劳的信给他。
English: He also defeated Thief Handsome One-Step Hootie in Quwo, and Emperor Ming personally wrote a letter of encouragement and consolation to him.

古文：子邕在白水郡破贼率宿勤明达子阿非军，多所斩获。
现代文：源子邕在白水郡又攻破了贼帅宿勤明达之子阿非的军队，歼敌无数。
English: In Baishui County, Minamoto no Tsukuda defeated the army of Afi, the son of Thief-in-Chief Sukin Minda, and wiped out countless enemies.

古文：除给事黄门侍郎，封乐平县公。
现代文：被任命为给事黄门侍郎，封为乐平县公。
English: He was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and was appointed as the governor of Leping County.

古文：以葛荣久逼信都，诏子邕为北讨都督。时相州刺史、安乐王鉴据鄴反，敕子邕与都督李神轨先讨平之。
现代文：由于葛荣围困了信都很久，皇上诏令源子邕为北讨都督，当时相州刺史、安乐王鉴占据了邺反叛，皇上敕令源子邕与都督李神轨先将他讨平。
English: As Ge Rong had besieged Shinui for a long time, the emperor issued an imperial edict to make Minamoto no Tsukuda the northern governor. At that time, Soshu no Shishi and Anle no Wankan occupied Shinui, and the emperor ordered Minamoto no Tsukuda and the governor Li Shenlu to fight him first.

古文：三年，拜魏尹，又为齐神武王军司。
现代文：改封他为阳平县公。于是和裴衍从邺发兵，征讨葛荣，信都城被攻陷。
English: He was made the governor of Yangping County. Therefore, he and Peiyan sent troops from the capital to fight Ge Rong, and Xindu City was captured.

古文：卒，赠司空公，谥曰文献。
现代文：源子邕被任命为冀州刺史，与裴衍合力进攻，源子邕战败而亡，追赠司空，谥号 庄穆 。
English: Yuan Ziqi was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province, and he and Pei Yan jointly attacked. Yuan Ziqi was defeated and died, and was posthumously given the title of Sikuo and the nickname Zhuangmu.

古文：子彪。彪字文宗，学涉机警，少有名誉。
现代文：源彪，字文宗，学识渊博，机智敏捷，年轻时就很有名气。
English: Yuan Biao, a literati, learned and quick-witted, became famous at a young age.

古文：魏永安中，以父功赐爵临颍县伯。
现代文：魏永安年间，因为父亲的功劳被赐爵为临颍县伯。
English: During the Wei and Yong'an dynasties, he was given the title of Linyi County Count because of his father's merits.

古文：天平四年，为凉州大中正。
现代文：天平四年，任凉州大中正。
English: He was a senior middle school teacher at Liangzhou University for four years.

古文：及齐文襄摄选，沙汰台郎，以文宗为尚书祠部郎中。
现代文：等到齐文襄掌权，淘汰台、郎的官员，任命文宗为尚书祠部郎中。
English: When Qi Wenzhong took power, he eliminated the officials of the table and the ro, and appointed Wenzong as the ro of the Ministry of Books and Antiquities.

古文：皇建二年，累迁泾州刺史。
现代文：皇建二年，升迁为泾州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, it was promoted to the status of Zhangzhou Jishi.

古文：文宗以恩信待物，甚得边境之和，为邻人所钦服，前政被抄掠者，多被放遣。
现代文：文宗待人接物有恩德讲信义，使得边境和平，为邻近地方上下所钦佩敬服，前任刺史在任期间被邻境劫掠去的人，大多被他们放还。
English: Wen Zong treated everyone with benevolence and loyalty, made the border peaceful, and was admired and respected by the neighboring places. Most of the people who were plundered by the neighboring countries during the tenure of his predecessor, were released by them.

古文：累迁秦州刺史，乘传之府，特给后部鼓吹。
现代文：后来又迁任秦州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to Qinzhou.

古文：时李贞聘陈，陈主云： 齐朝还遣源泾州来在瓜步，真可谓通和矣。 
现代文：他的车马起程赴任时，皇帝特地赏赐他车后鼓吹的仪仗，当时李孝贞为使节访问陈，陈帝道： 齐朝廷还派源泾州到瓜步来当政，真可称为 通和 呀！ 
English: When his chariot and horse set off to take office, the emperor specially rewarded him with the ceremonial battle trumpeted after the chariot. At that time, Li Xiaozhen visited Chen as an envoy. Chen Di said: The Qi court also sent Yuan Bozhou to Guabou to take office. It can really be called Tonghe!

古文：武平三年，授秘书监。
现代文：武平三年，源彪被授予秘书监之职。
English: In the third year of Wu Ping, Geng Biao was awarded the post of secretary-supervisor.

古文：陈将吴明彻寇淮南，历阳、瓜步相寻失守。
现代文：陈将吴明彻进攻淮南，历阳、瓜步等相继失守。
English: Chen sent Wu Mingche to attack Huainan, and Liyang and Guapu were lost one after another.

古文：赵彦深于起居省密访文宗讨捍之计。
现代文：赵彦深在起居省与源彪密商退敌之计。
English: Zhao Yanshen's strategy of retreating from the enemy with Yuan Biao's secret merchants in Qijiu Province.

古文：文宗曰： 国家待遇淮南，失之同于蒿箭。
现代文：源彪道 ：朝廷看待淮南之地的失陷，像丢了些草箭一样不在意。
English: Yuan Biao said: The imperial court regarded the loss of Huainan Province as if they had lost some grass arrows.

古文：以为宜以淮南委之王琳。琳于昙顼，不肯北面事之明矣。 
现代文：我认为应该将淮南委托给王琳，但昙顼显然不甘心做他部下。 
English: I think Huainan should be entrusted to Wang Lin, but Zou is obviously not willing to be his subordinate.

古文：彦深曰： 弟此良图。但以口舌争来十日，已是不见从。时事如此，安可尽言！ 
现代文：彦深道 ：贤弟说的是条良策，但费尽口舌争了十天，朝廷已经不会再答应了，现在事情已到了这个地步，还有什么可说的！ 
English: Hikobuka said, "Kenji said it was a good plan, but after ten days of arguing, the Imperial Court would no longer agree to it. Now that things have reached this point, what else is there to say!"

古文：因相顾流涕。
现代文：于是两人面面相视，黯然泪下。
English: As a result, the two looked at each other and burst into tears.

古文：及齐平，与阳休之等十八人入京，授仪同大将军、司成下大夫。
现代文：等到齐被灭国，源彪和阳休之等十八人进京，被授为仪同大将军、司成下大夫。
English: By the time Qi had been wiped out, eighteen people, including Yuan Biao and Yang Xiu, had entered Beijing and were awarded the titles of General of the People's Liberation Army and Senior Doctor of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：隋开皇中，拜莒州刺史。遇病去官，卒。
现代文：隋开皇年间，官拜莒州刺史，因患病离职，后来去世。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, the official paid homage to the history of Zhangzhou, left his post due to illness, and later died.

古文：文宗以贵族子弟升朝列，才识敏赡，以干局见知。
现代文：源彪以贵族子弟的身份入朝为官，有善于应变的才干和渊博的学识，以办事干练而知名。
English: MINAMOTO no Biao entered the imperial court as the son of an aristocrat. He was known for his ability to adapt to changing circumstances and his profound knowledge. He was also known for his efficiency.

古文：然好游贵要之门，时论以为善附会。
现代文：但他好出入权贵显要之门，当时都评论他善巴结攀附。
English: But he liked to go in and out of the doors of high-ranking dignitaries. At the time, they all commented on his good-natured attachment.

古文：子师，字践言。
现代文：源师，源彪之子，字践言。
English: Genji, the son of Genpyo, is a wordsmith.

古文：少知名，明辩有识悟，尤以吏事自许。
现代文：年轻时就很知名，聪明善辩，有学识、悟性强，尤其得意于自己处理政事的能力。
English: He was well-known at a young age, clever and eloquent, learned and intelligent, and especially good at his ability to deal with politics.

古文：仕齐为尚书左外兵郎中，又摄祠部。
现代文：齐时，被任命为尚书左外兵郎中，还负责祠部。
English: At the same time, he was appointed as a member of the Shoshu Zuogeiro, and was also responsible for the ancestral hall.

古文：后属孟夏，以龙见请雩。
现代文：有一年初夏，他因为龙星初现请求举办一次雩祭。
English: In the early summer of one year, he requested that a dragon festival be held to celebrate the first appearance of the dragon.

古文：时高阿那肱为录尚书事，谓为真龙出见，大惊喜。问龙所在，云： 作何颜色？ 
现代文：当时高阿那肱为录尚书事，还以为是真龙出现，十分惊喜，问龙在哪里，并问道 ：龙出现时是什么情形？ 
English: At that time, Gao Ananzhang was engaged in record-keeping and thought that a real dragon had appeared. He was very surprised and asked where the dragon was. He also asked: What was the situation when the dragon appeared?

古文：师整容云： 此是龙星初见，依礼当雩祭郊坛，非谓真龙别有所降。 
现代文：源师满脸严肃地说道 ：那只是星的初次出现，依照礼法应该在郊庙的神坛上举行雩祭，而不是所谓另有条真龙下降人间。 
English: Genji said with a serious expression on his face, "That was only the first appearance of the star. According to the etiquette, a burnt offering should be held on the altar of the suburban temple, not the so-called other true dragon descending to the human world."

古文：阿那肱忿然作色曰： 汉兒多事，强知星宿！ 
现代文：高阿那肱忿然翻脸道 ：汉儿多事，牵强去解释星辰。 
English: Gao Anaxuan turned his face angrily and said, "Han Er has many things to do, it's far-fetched to explain the stars.

古文：祭事不行。师出，窃叹曰： 国家大事，在祀与戎，礼既废也，其能久乎？
现代文：这次祭事就没有举行，源师出了官署，私下里叹息道 ：国家大事，主要就是祭祀和军事，礼法既然已经废了，国运还能长久吗？
English: This time the festival did not take place, and Genji left the government office, privately sighing: national events, mainly sacrifice and military, since the etiquette has been abolished, can the National Games last long?

古文：齐亡无日矣！ 
现代文：齐亡国之日不远了。 
English: The day of Qi's downfall is not far off.

古文：寻周武帝平齐，授司赋上士。
现代文：不久周武帝灭齐，他被授为司赋上士。
English: Shortly after Emperor Zhou Wu was killed, he was awarded the title of Shifu Staff Sergeant.

古文：隋文帝受禅，累迁尚书左丞，以明干著称。
现代文：隋文帝接受禅让后，他升任为尚书右丞，以精明干练著称。
English: After Emperor Sui Wen accepted Zen's resignation, he was promoted to Shang Shujing, known for his shrewdness and ability.

古文：时蜀王秀颇违法度，乃以师为益州总管司马。俄而秀被征，秀恐京师有变，将谢病。
现代文：当时蜀王杨秀经常违反国法约束，于是让源师出任为益州总管司马，不久秀被征召回京，秀怕回京后有变故，想推病不去。
English: At that time, Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, often violated the constraints of national law, so he appointed Yuan Shi as the chief administrator of Yizhou. Soon, Xiu was called back to Beijing. Xiu was afraid that there would be a change after returning to Beijing, and he wanted to avoid illness.

古文：师数劝之，不可违命。
现代文：源师多次劝说他，不可违逆圣命。
English: Genji repeatedly persuaded him not to violate his sacred life.

古文：秀乃作色曰： 此我家事，何预卿也？ 
现代文：杨秀动怒道： 这是我的家事，和卿有什么相关？ 
English: Yang Xiu angrily said, "This is my family business, what does it have to do with you?"

古文：师垂涕苦谏，秀乃从征。
现代文：源师流着泪苦谏，杨秀才应召回京。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Yang Xiucai was called back to Beijing.

古文：秀发后，州官属多相连坐，师以此获免。
现代文：秀出事后，州中官员大多被牵连，只有源师因为这件事被敕免。
English: After the show, most of the officials in the state were implicated, and only Genji was exonerated because of this incident.

古文：后加仪同三司。
现代文：后来又加官为仪同三司。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Third Division.

古文：炀帝即位，拜大理少卿。
现代文：隋炀帝即位后，源师官拜大理少卿。
English: After the enthronement of the Sui and Qian Dynasties, Yuan Shiguan paid homage to Dali Shaoqing.

古文：帝在显仁宫，敕宫外卫士，不得辄离所守。
现代文：皇帝住在显仁宫，命令宫外的卫士，不准擅离职守。
English: The emperor lived in the Xianren Palace and ordered the guards outside the palace not to leave their posts without permission.

古文：有一主帅，私令卫士出外，帝付大理。
现代文：有一名主帅，私自命卫士外出，炀帝命交付大理寺审问定罪。
English: There was a coach who went out as a self-appointed guardian and was sentenced to be interrogated and convicted by the Emperor.

古文：师据法奏徒。
现代文：源师按照法典奏称应将他发配。
English: According to the Code of Criminal Procedure, he should be extradited.

古文：帝令斩之。
现代文：炀帝要将他问斩。
English: Emperor Gong wants to behead him.

古文：师奏曰： 若陛下初便杀之，自可不关文墨。既付有司，义归恆典。脱宿卫近侍者更有此犯，将何以加之？ 
现代文：源师奏道： 如果陛下当初就杀他，自然用不着浪费文墨，既然交给有关部门处理，就应当遵照法典行事，何况卫兵和近侍再有犯这种罪的，又将如何处置呢？ 
English: "If His Majesty had killed him in the first place, there would have been no need to waste time and ink. Since it was handed over to the relevant departments for handling, they should have acted according to the code of law. What's more, if the guards and aides-de-camp commit such a crime again, what will they do?

古文：遇害河阴，赠定州刺史。子雄。
现代文：炀帝便不再坚持。源师任职虽然精明能干，有口才，却没有清廉公平的称誉，死时官至刑部侍郎。
English: Emperor Xuan no longer insisted. Although Genji was shrewd, capable and eloquent, he did not have the reputation of being honest and fair. When he died, he was promoted from an official to an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：雄字世略，少宽厚，美姿容。
现代文：源雄，字世略，年轻时为人宽厚，容貌俊美。
English: Minamoto no Takeshi, a man of few words, was generous and handsome when he was young.

古文：初仕魏，历位秘书郎。
现代文：开始时在魏为官，历任秘书郎。
English: At the beginning, he was a government official in Wei, and successively served as a secretary.

古文：在周以伐齐功，封朔方公，历冀、平二州刺史，检校徐州总管。
现代文：后来在周因为征讨齐有战功，被封为朔方公，历任冀、平二州刺史，检校徐州总管。
English: Later, Zhou was awarded the title of "Shuo Fang Gong" for his military exploits in the War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, and successively served as the chief historian of Hebei Province, the chief historian of Binzhou Province, and the chief inspector of Xuzhou Province.

古文：及尉迟迥作乱，时雄家累在相州，迥潜以书诱之。
现代文：后来尉迟迥叛乱，当时源雄一家老小都在相州。尉迟迥暗地写信劝降他，他始终没有答应。
English: Later, Fuchizaki rebelled. At that time, Geno and his family were all in Sangju. Fuchizaki secretly wrote a letter to persuade him to surrender, but he never agreed.

古文：雄卒不顾。
现代文：隋文帝写信对他抚慰勉励。
English: Emperor Sui wrote a letter to comfort and encourage him.

古文：隋文帝遗书慰勉之。迥遣其将毕义绪据兰陵，席毗陷昌虑下邑，雄遣众悉平之。
现代文：尉迟迥手下将领毕义绪攻占了兰陵，席毗攻陷了昌虑的下城，源雄派兵将他们全部消灭。
English: Bi Yixu, a general under the command of Yi Xuan, captured Lanling, and Shibi captured the lower city of Changxian. Geng Xiong sent soldiers to wipe them all out.

古文：陈人见中原多故，遣其将陈纪、萧摩诃、任蛮奴、周罗、樊毅等侵江北。自江陵，东距寿阳，人多应之，攻陷城镇。
现代文：陈国皇帝见中原变故频繁，派手下大将陈纪、萧摩诃、任蛮奴、周罗目侯、樊毅等侵犯长江北岸一带，从江陵，东到寿阳，百姓都纷纷响应，攻陷了许多城镇。
English: Emperor Chen Guo saw frequent changes in the Central Plains, and sent his generals Chen Ji, Xiao Maqi, Ren Wanzhong, Zhou Lome Hou, and Zou Yi to encroach on the northern bank of the Yangtze River, from Jiangling and Dong to Shouyang. The people responded in succession and conquered many towns.

古文：雄与吴州总管于顗等击走之。
现代文：源雄与吴州总管于瞭等将敌兵击退，将失地全部收复。
English: Geng Xiong and Wuzhou Governor Yu Qiao repelled the enemy soldiers and recovered all the lost territory.

古文：悉复故地。进位上大将军，拜徐州总管，迁朔州总管。
现代文：晋位为上大将军，拜为徐州总管，又改任为朔州总管。
English: He was promoted to the rank of senior general, was appointed as the general manager of Xuzhou, and was reappointed as the general manager of Shuozhou.

古文：平陈之役，从秦王俊出信州道。
现代文：在平定陈国之战中，他随秦王俊出兵信州道。
English: In the war to pacify Chen Guo, he followed Qin Wangjun to send troops to Shinshu.

古文：子嵩嗣，大业中，为尚书虞部郎，讨北海贼。
现代文：陈国被平定后，他因为战功晋位为上柱国，其子源崇被赐爵为端氏县伯，源褒为安化县伯，让他再次去镇守朔方。
English: After Chen Province was subdued, he was promoted to Shangzhu Province for his war exploits, and his son, Yuan Chong, was awarded the title of Hanzhi County Commissar, and Yuan Bao was awarded the title of Anhua County Commissar, so that he could once again go to guard the Shuo side.

古文：力战死之，赠正议大夫。刘尼，代人也。
现代文：后来上了年纪，他上表请求辞官还乡，皇帝将他召回京师，在家中去世。刘尼，是代人。
English: Later, when he was old, he went to the table to ask the official to return to his hometown, the emperor called him back to Beijing, and he died at home. Liu Ni was the representative.

古文：曾祖敦，有功于道武，为方面大人。
现代文：曾祖父刘敦，在道武帝时有战功，被任命为一个方面的大人。
English: Liu Dun's great-grandfather, who had distinguished himself in battle during the reign of Emperor Daowu, was appointed as a grandmaster.

古文：父娄，为冠军将军。
现代文：父亲刘娄，为冠军将军。
English: His father, Liu Wei, was a champion general.

古文：尼勇果善射，太武见而善之，拜羽林中郎，赐爵昌国子。
现代文：刘尼英勇果敢，擅长骑射。太武帝见到他后很赏识，拜为羽林中郎，赐爵为昌国子。
English: Liu Ni was brave and courageous, and good at riding and shooting. Emperor Taibu was very appreciative after seeing him, and worshiped him as the middle brother of Uebayashi, and gave him a peerage as the son of Masakuni.

古文：宗爱既杀南安王余于东庙，秘之，唯尼知状。
现代文：宗爱在东庙杀了南安王余，秘而不宣。只有刘尼知道情况。
English: Zong Ai secretly killed Wang Yu of Nan'an in the East Temple. Only Liu Ni knew the circumstances.

古文：尼劝爱立文成。
现代文：刘尼劝宗爱立文成为帝。
English: Liu Ni persuaded Zong Ai Liwen to become emperor.

古文：爱自以负罪于景穆，闻而惊曰： 君大痴人！
现代文：宗爱因为自己有罪于景穆，闻言后惊道： 您真是糊涂人！
English: After hearing this, Zong Ai, who felt guilty for being involved with Jing Mu, was shocked and said, "You really are a stupid person!"

古文：皇孙若立，岂忘正平时事乎？ 
现代文：皇孙若即位，怎么会忘了正平年间的事情呢？ 
English: If the emperor's grandson ascends the throne, how can he forget the events of the Zhengping years?

古文：尼曰： 若尔，立谁？ 
现代文：刘尼道 ：按你的意思，该立谁为帝呢？ 
English: Liu Ni said: According to your meaning, who should be the emperor?

古文：爱曰： 待还宫，擢诸王子贤者而立之。 
现代文：宗爱道： 等回宫后，从各个王子中挑选个贤明的迎立为君。 
English: Zong Ai said, "When you return to the palace, choose a wise prince from among all the princes to be your regent."

古文：尼惧其有变，密以状告殿中尚书源贺。时与尼俱典兵宿卫，仍共南部尚书陆丽谋，密奉皇孙。
现代文：刘尼怕他反悔，将情况偷偷告诉了殿中尚书源贺，当时源贺和刘尼一起掌管禁兵在宫中值宿警卫，并和南部尚书陆丽一起商议，要秘密迎立皇孙。
English: Liu Ni was afraid that he would recant, so he secretly told the situation to Shangshu Yuan He in the palace. At that time, Yuan He and Liu Ni were in charge of the guards on duty in the palace, and discussed with Nanfang Shangshululi to secretly welcome the emperor's grandson.

古文：于是，贺与尚书长孙渴侯严兵守卫，尼与丽迎文成于苑中。
现代文：于是，源贺与尚书长孙渴侯派重兵守卫，刘尼和陆丽在皇苑中迎立文成。
English: As a result, Yuan He and Shang Shu's eldest son Thirsty Hou sent a heavy guard, and Liu Ni and Lu Li welcomed Wencheng in the imperial garden.

古文：丽抱文成于马上，入于京城。
现代文：陆丽抱着文成骑上马，驰入京城。
English: Lu Li rode a horse with Wencheng in her arms and rode into the capital.

古文：尼驰还东庙，大呼曰： 宗爱杀南安王，大逆不道。
现代文：刘尼骑马返回东庙，大叫道： 宗爱杀了南安公，大逆不道。
English: Liu Ni rode back to the East Temple, shouting: "Zong Ai killed Nan'an Gong, it's a great treason.

古文：皇孙已登大位。有诏，宿卫之士，皆可还宫。 
现代文：现在皇孙已登上皇位，皇帝有诏，值宿的卫士，都可以回宫。 
English: Now that the emperor's grandson has ascended the throne, the emperor has issued an edict, and the guards on duty can all return to the palace.

古文：众咸唱万岁。
现代文：众人齐呼万岁。
English: Everyone shouted "Long live!"

古文：贺及渴侯登执宗爱、贾周等，勒兵而入，奉文成于宫门外，入登永安殿。
现代文：源贺及长孙渴侯立刻拿下宗爱、贾周等人，率兵进入宫中，在宫门外恭迎文成，请文成入宫登上永安殿。
English: MINAMOTO no He and his eldest grandson, Thirsty Hou, immediately captured Soai, Jia Zhou and others, and led the soldiers into the palace. They greeted Muncheng outside the palace gate, and invited Muncheng to enter the palace and ascend to Yongan Hall.

古文：以尼为内行长，封东安公。
现代文：刘尼被任命为内行长，封为东安公。
English: Liu Ni was appointed head of the Ministry of the Interior and given the title of Dongan Gong.

古文：寻迁尚书右仆射，为定州刺史。
现代文：不久他改任尚书右仆射，为定州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu, and wrote the history of Dingzhou.

古文：在州清慎，然率多酒醉。
现代文：他在定州为政清廉审慎，但经常喝醉酒。
English: He was a clean and prudent politician in Dingzhou, but he was often drunk.

古文：文成末，为司徒。
现代文：文成末，刘尼被任命为司徒。
English: At the end of Wencheng, Liu Ni was appointed as a scholar.

古文：献文即位，以尼有大功于先朝，特加尊重，赐别户四十。
现代文：献文帝即位后，刘尼对先朝有大功，对他格外尊重，另外赐给他四十户属户。
English: After Emperor Xianwen ascended the throne, Liu Ni, who had made great contributions to the previous dynasty, showed him special respect and gave him another forty households.

古文：皇兴四年，车驾北征，帝亲誓众，而尼昏醉，兵陈不整。
现代文：皇兴四年，皇帝御驾北征，要亲自率众宣誓，而刘尼因为喝醉了酒，军容不整。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xing, the emperor was on his way to the Northern Expedition, and he had to personally lead the people to swear an oath, but Liu Ni was drunk, and the army was not complete.

古文：帝以其功重，特恕之，免官而已。
现代文：皇帝因为他功勋卓著，特地宽恕了他，仅仅将他免官。
English: The emperor specifically pardoned him because of his outstanding merits, and only removed him from his post.

古文：延兴四年薨，子社生袭。
现代文：延兴四年去世，其子刘杜生承袭了爵位。
English: Yanxing died four years later, and his son Liu Dusheng inherited the title.

