古文：庄暴见孟子，曰： 暴见于王，王语暴以好乐，暴未有以对也。 
现代文：庄暴进见孟子，说： 我朝见宣王的时候，宣王给我说他喜爱音乐，我不知道应该用什么应答。 
English: Zhuang riotously went to see Mencius and said, "When I saw King Xuan in the morning, King Xuan told me that he loved music. I don't know how to respond.

古文：曰： 好乐何如？ 
现代文：接着问孟子道： 国君喜好音乐怎么样啊？ 
English: Then he asked Mencius: How about the Emperor's taste in music?

古文：孟子曰： 王之好乐甚，则齐国其庶几乎！ 
现代文：孟子说， 宣王如果非常喜好音乐，那齐国恐怕就治理得很不错了！ 
English: Mencius said, "If King Xuanwu is very fond of music, then I'm afraid Qi will be well governed!"

古文：他日见于王曰： 王尝语庄子以好乐，有诸？ 
现代文：后来有一天，孟子拜见宣王时问道： 大王曾经告诉庄暴您喜爱音乐，有这回事吗？ 
English: One day, when Mencius met with King Xuan, he asked: The great king once told Zhuang Bo that you loved music. Is this true?

古文：王变乎色，曰： 寡人非能好先王之乐也，直好世俗之乐耳。 
现代文：宣王听后脸色一变，惭愧地说： 我喜欢的不是先代帝王留下来的清静典雅的音乐，只不过是喜好当下世俗流行的音乐罢了。
English: After listening to it, Xuan Wang's face changed, and he said with shame: I don't like the quiet and elegant music left behind by the previous emperor, I just like the current popular music.

古文：曰： 王之好乐甚，则齐其庶几乎！
现代文：孟子说， 大王如果非常喜爱音乐，那齐国恐怕就会治理得很好了！
English: Mencius said, "If the great king loved music very much, I am afraid that Qi would be well governed!"

古文：今之乐犹古之乐也。 
现代文：在这件事上，现在流行的音乐与古代的雅乐差不多。 
English: In this matter, the current popular music is similar to the ancient classical music.

古文：曰： 可得闻与？ 
现代文：宜王说： 可以把这些道理说给我听吗？ 
English: Yi Wang said, "Could you please tell me these truths?"

古文：曰： 独乐乐，与人乐乐，孰乐？ 
现代文：孟子说： 独自一个人听音乐的乐趣，和与别人一起听音乐的乐趣，哪一种更快乐些？ 
English: Mencius said: Which is happier, the pleasure of listening to music alone, or the pleasure of listening to music with others?

古文：曰： 不若与人。 
现代文：宣王说： 不如与他人一起听音乐更快乐。 
English: Xuan Wang said: It is better to be happy by listening to music with others.

古文：曰： 与少乐乐，与众乐乐，孰乐？ 
现代文：孟子说： 和少数人一起听音乐的乐趣，与和多数人一起听音乐的乐趣，哪个更快乐？ 
English: Mencius said: Which is happier, the pleasure of listening to music with a few people or the pleasure of listening to music with many people?

古文：曰： 不若与众。 
现代文：宣王说： 不如与多数人一起听音乐更快乐。 
English: Xuan Wang said: It's better to be happy by listening to music with many people.

古文： 臣请为王言乐：今王鼓乐于此，百姓闻王钟鼓之声，管籥之音，举疾首蹙頞而相告曰： 吾王之好鼓乐，夫何使我至于此极也？
现代文：孟子说， 那就让我来为大王讲讲娱乐吧！假如大王在演奏音乐，百姓们听到大王鸣钟击鼓、吹萧奏笛的音声，都愁眉苦脸地相互诉苦说： 我们大王喜爱音乐，为什么还让我们这么贫穷困苦呢？
English: Mencius said, "Then let me tell you about entertainment for the great king! If the great king is playing music, and the people hear the sound of the great king ringing the bells, beating the drums, and playing the flute, they will all complain to each other with sad faces, saying, "Our great king loves music, why does he still make us so poor and miserable?"

古文：父子不相见，兄弟妻子离散。 
现代文：父亲和儿子不能相见，兄弟和妻儿分离流散。 
English: Fathers and sons cannot see each other, brothers are separated from their wives and children.

古文：今王田猎于此，百姓闻王车马之音，见羽旄之美，举疾首蹙頞而相告曰： 吾王之好田猎，夫何使我至于此极也？
现代文：假如大王在围猎，百姓们听到大王车马的喧嚣，见到旗帜的华丽，都愁眉苦脸地相互诉苦说： 我们大王喜爱围猎，为什么还让我们这般贫穷困苦呢？
English: If the great king was out hunting, and the people heard the noise of the great king's chariots and horses, and saw the magnificence of the banners, they would complain to each other with sad faces, saying: Our great king loves hunting, why does he make us so poor and miserable?

古文：父子不相见，兄弟妻子离散。 
现代文：父亲和儿子不能相见，兄弟和妻儿分离流散。 
English: Fathers and sons cannot see each other, brothers are separated from their wives and children.

古文：此无他，不与民同乐也。
现代文：这没有别的原因，只是由于不与百姓一同娱乐的缘故。
English: This is for no other reason than the fact that they do not play with the people.

古文：今王鼓乐于此，百姓闻王钟鼓之声，管籥之音，举欣欣然有喜色而相告曰： 吾王庶几无疾病与？何以能鼓乐也？ 
现代文：假如大王在演奏音乐，百姓们听到大王鸣钟击鼓、吹萧奏笛的音声，都眉开眼笑地相互告诉说： 我们大王大概没有疾病吧，要不怎么能奏乐呢？ 
English: If the great king was playing music, and the people heard the sound of the great king ringing the bells, beating the drums, and playing the flute, they would open their eyes and smile and tell each other: Our great king probably does not have a disease, otherwise how could he play music?

古文：今王田猎于此，百姓闻王车马之音，见羽旄之美，举欣欣然有喜色而相告曰 吾王庶几无疾病与？何以能田猎也？ 
现代文：假如大王在围猎，百姓们听到大王车马的喧嚣，见到旗帜的华丽，都眉开眼笑地相互告诉说： 我们大王大概没有疾病吧，要不怎么能打猎呢？ 
English: If the great king was out hunting, and the people heard the noise of the great king's chariots and horses, and saw the magnificence of the banners, they would open their eyes and smile and say to each other: Our great king probably does not have a disease, otherwise how could he hunt?

古文：此无他，与民同乐也。
现代文：这没有别的原因，是由于和民众一起娱乐的缘故。
English: It's for no other reason than to have fun with the crowd.

古文：今王与百姓同乐，则王矣。 
现代文：如果大王能和百姓同乐，就能受到民众的拥戴，称王天下了。 
English: If the great king can have fun with the people, he can be supported by the people and called the king of the world.

