古文：蚁子蛙蛤金龟子海山蜈蚣蚊翼壁虱白虫
现代文：蚁子蛙蛤金龟子海山蜈蚣蚊翼壁虱白虫
English: Ants, frogs, toads, beetles, seagulls, gnats, mosquitoes, whiteflies

古文：蚕女砂俘效舍毒老蛛李禅蝗化水蛙蚓疮
现代文：蚕女砂俘效舍毒老蛛李禅蝗化水蛙蚓疮
English: Silkworm female sand captive effect poison old spider Li Zen locust water frog scabies

古文：蜂余熊乃螽斯蝻化
现代文：蜂余熊乃螽斯蝻化
English: Hummingbirds undergo aphrodisiac transformation

古文：蚁子
现代文：蚁子
English: Ants

古文：南方尤多蚁子，凡柱楣户牖悉游蚁。
现代文：南方白蚁特别多，凡是柱子门楣门窗等木制的东西上都有白蚁在爬来爬去。
English: Nanfang has a particularly large number of termites. There are termites crawling around on everything made of wood, such as pillars, doors, lintels and windows.

古文：循途奔走，居有所营，里栋相接，莫穷其往来。
现代文：它们沿着一定的路线爬行。为了防备白蚁，人们都筑墙把房子围起来。但乡里的房栋互相连接，因此不能隔断它们的往来。
English: They crawl along a certain route. In order to prevent termites, people build walls to enclose houses. But the houses in the countryside are connected to each other, so they cannot be cut off.

古文：蛙蛤
现代文：蛙蛤
English: Frogs and toads

古文：南方又有水族，状如蛙，其形尤恶。土人呼为蛤。
现代文：南方又有一种水中动物，形状像青蛙，它的外形尤其难看，当地人把它称为 蛤 。
English: In the south, there is another kind of aquatic animal, shaped like a frog, its appearance is particularly ugly, the locals call it a toad.

古文：为臞食之，味美如鹧鸪。
现代文：做成羹吃，味道鲜美，像鹧鸪汤。
English: Made into a soup, it tastes delicious, like bean soup.

古文：及治男子劳虚。
现代文：还能治男子的痨虚。
English: It can also cure men's inferiority complex.

古文：金龟子
现代文：金龟子
English: The golden cockchafer

古文：金龟子，甲虫也，春夏间生于草木上，大如小指甲，飞时即不类。
现代文：金龟子是一种甲虫，春夏间从草或树上产生出来，有小指甲那样大，飞的时候就不像小指甲了。
English: The golden beetle is a beetle that emerges from grass or trees in spring and summer. It is as big as a little fingernail, but it does not look like a little fingernail when it flies.

古文：泊草蔓上，细视之，真金色龟儿也。
现代文：停在草蔓上时，去仔细观察它，真像金色的小龟。
English: When you stop on a blade of grass, take a closer look at it. It really does look like a little golden turtle.

古文：行必成双。
现代文：它爬行时一定成双成对。
English: It always crawls in pairs.

古文：南人采之阴干，装以金翠，为首饰之物。
现代文：南方人把它采集回来阴干后，用金翠装饰起来，当作首饰。
English: After the Nanfang people collected it and dried it, they decorated it with gold and jade and used it as jewelry.

古文：亦类黔中所产青虫子也。海山
现代文：它也很像贵州省所出产的青虫子。海山
English: It is also very similar to the caterpillar produced in Guizhou Province.

古文：又珠崖人，每晴明，见海中远山罗列，皆如翠屏，而东西不定，悉蜈蚣也。
现代文：听说海南岛人，每当天气晴朗明净时，就看见海里的远处有山一座挨着一座，都像绿色的屏风，而忽东忽西飘忽不定，这都是蜈蚣。
English: It is said that the people of Hainan Island, whenever the weather is fine and clear, can see the mountains in the far distance of the sea, one next to the other, all like a green screen, but they are erratic.

古文：虾须长四五十尺，此物不足怪也。蜈蚣
现代文：像虾的触须有四五十尺长，这种东西也不值得奇怪。蜈蚣
English: The shrimp-like tentacles are forty or fifty feet long, and it's no wonder.

古文：蜈蚣，《南越志》云，大者其皮可以鞔鼓。取其肉，曝为脯，美于牛肉。
现代文：《南越志》上说，大的蜈蚣，它的皮可以用来蒙鼓，把它的肉晒成肉干，比牛肉味道还好。
English: "Nan Yue Zhi" said that the skin of the big toad can be used to cover the drum, and its meat can be dried into jerky, which tastes better than beef.

古文：又云，大者能噉牛。里人或遇之，则鸣鼓然火炬，以驱逐之。
现代文：又说，大的蜈蚣能吃牛，村里人有时遇到这种情况就敲鼓点起火炬，来赶走它。
English: He also said that the large toad can eat cattle, and when villagers sometimes encounter this situation, they beat drums and light torches to drive it away.

古文：蚊翼
现代文：蚊翼
English: Mosquito wings

古文：南方蚊翼下有小蜚虫焉，目明者见之。
现代文：南方的蚊子翅下有一种小飞虫，眼力好的人能看见。
English: There is a small flying insect under the wings of mosquitoes in the south. People with good eyesight can see it.

古文：每生九卵，复未尝曾有，复成九子，蜚而俱去，蚊遂不知。
现代文：这种虫每次产九个卵，又不曾有孵不出幼虫的，因此就变成了九只幼虫，一起飞走了，蚊子却始终不知道。
English: This insect lays nine eggs each time, and there has never been one that cannot hatch larvae, so it becomes nine larvae and flies away together, but the mosquito still does not know.

古文：亦食人及百兽，食者知。
现代文：这种小飞虫也咬人和各种野兽，被咬的人是有感觉的。
English: This small flying insect also bites people and all kinds of beasts. The person who is bitten is sentient.

古文：言虫小食人不去也。此虫既细且小，因曰细蠛，陈章对齐桓公小虫是也。
现代文：这种虫虽小但叮上人就不走，又细又小，因此叫细蠛，陈章回答齐桓公说的那种小虫就是这种。
English: Although this kind of insect is small, it does not leave the person who bites it. It is thin and small, so it is called a fine beetle. Chen Zhang answered that the kind of small insect that Qi Huan Gong said was this kind.

古文：此虫常春生，而以季夏冬藏于鹿耳中，名孆婗。
现代文：此虫常在春季出生，从夏末到冬末，它藏在鹿的耳朵中，这时名叫孆婗。
English: The worm is often born in the spring, and hides in the ears of deer from late summer to late winter, when it is called a tadpole.

古文：孆婗亦细小也。
现代文：孆婗也是非常细小的。
English: The beak is also very small.

古文：壁虱
现代文：壁虱
English: Wall sconces

古文：壁虱者，土虫之类，化生壁间。
现代文：壁虱属于土虫一类动物，是在墙壁上变化生长出来的。
English: Wall lice belong to the earthworm class of animals and are grown on walls.

古文：暑月啮人，其疮虽愈，每年及期必发。
现代文：在夏天时常咬人，咬出的伤口即便暂时好了，但每年到了曾被咬的那个时候一定会复发。
English: They often bite people in the summer, and even if the bite wound is temporarily healed, it will certainly recur every year at the time when it was bitten.

古文：数年之后，其毒方尽。
现代文：几年以后，那余毒才会完全消失。
English: After a few years, the residual poison will completely disappear.

古文：其状与牛虱无异。
现代文：它的形状跟牛虱没有什么两样。
English: Its shape is similar to that of a beef brisket.

古文：北都厩中之马，忽相次瘦劣致毙，所损日甚。
现代文：北方的京城中马圈里的马，忽然陆续瘦弱无力最后死去，马一天比一天减少，情况严重。
English: The horses in the stables in the northern capital suddenly became emaciated and weak, and eventually died. The number of horses was decreasing day by day, and the situation was serious.

古文：主将虽督审刍药勤至，终莫能究。
现代文：主将虽然每天不断地来检查询问吃草和吃药的情况，但始终没找到原因。
English: Although the captain kept coming every day to check and inquire about the situation of eating grass and taking medicine, he never found the reason.

古文：而毙者状类相似，亦莫知其疾之由。
现代文：而马死的状况都很相似，也没有人知道它们的病怎么得的。
English: The horses all died in similar circumstances and it is not known how they contracted the disease.

古文：掌厩获罪者，已数人矣，皆倾家破产，市马以陪纳，然后伏刑。
现代文：管马厩的因为马死而获罪的已有好几个人了，都倾家破产来买马交上赔偿，然后还要承受刑罚。
English: There have been several cases of stable owners being found guilty of causing the death of a horse. They have had to go bankrupt to buy the horse, pay compensation and then face criminal charges.

古文：有一裨将干敏多识，凡所主掌，皆能立功。
现代文：有一位副将办事聪敏，见识很广，凡是他负责的事情，都能办出成效。
English: There is a deputy general who is very intelligent and knowledgeable, and everything he is responsible for can be done effectively.

古文：众所推举，俾其掌厩马。
现代文：于是大家推荐他，让他管理马圈中的马。
English: So everyone recommended him to manage the horses in the stable.

古文：此人勤心养膳，旦夕躬亲。
现代文：这个人用心喂养，早晨晚上亲自照看，经过一个月，马的死亡情况还是照旧。
English: The man diligently fed the horse and personally looked after it in the morning and evening. After a month, the horse's condition remained the same.

古文：旬月之后，马之殒毙如旧，疑其有他，乃明烛以守之。二鼓之后，马皆立不食，黑者变白，白者变黑。
现代文：副将疑心有别的原因，就点亮蜡烛守护着马。二更天后，马都站在那儿不吃草了，只见黑马变成了白马，白马变成了黑马。
English: The adjutant suspected something else, so he lit a candle and guarded the horse. Two days later, the horse stopped eating grass, and the black horse turned into a white horse, and the white horse turned into a black horse.

古文：秉炬以视，诸马之上，有物附之，不可胜数，乃壁虱所噆也。
现代文：拿着蜡烛去仔细一看，那些马的身上都有什么东西附着，数都数不过来，原来是壁虱叮在上面。
English: Take a candle and take a closer look. There are countless horses with something attached to their bodies. Turns out it's a hook stuck on them.

古文：五鼓之后，壁虱皆去，一道如绳，连亘不绝。
现代文：五更天后，壁虱都走了，走在路上就像一条绳子，连续不断。
English: Five days later, the alcoves are gone, walking on the road like a rope, continuously.

古文：翌日，而以其事白于帅臣，寻其去踪。
现代文：第二天，把此事报告了做主帅的大臣。
English: The next day, the minister, who was the coach, reported the matter.

古文：于楼中得巨穴焉，以汤灌之。
现代文：于是顺着它们回归的踪迹，在楼里面找到了一个巨大的洞穴，把热水灌了进去。
English: So, following the trail of their return, they found a huge cave inside the building and poured hot water into it.

古文：坏楼门穴，得壁虱死者数十斛。
现代文：挖开了楼门附近的洞穴，看到烫死的壁虱有数十斛。
English: He dug out a cave near the door of the building and saw dozens of skeletons in the burnt-out alcoves.

古文：穴中大者一枚，长数尺，形如琵琶，金色，焚而杀之。
现代文：洞中有一只大壁虱，长有数尺，形状像琵琶，金黄色，于是烧死了它。
English: In the cave there was a large python, several feet long, shaped like a lute, golden yellow, so he burned it.

古文：筑塞其处，其害乃绝。
现代文：又用土填塞了那个洞穴，并捣实了，从此那种灾害就再也没有出现。
English: They filled the hole with earth and tamped it down, and the disaster never happened again.

古文：白虫
现代文：白虫
English: White Worm

古文：有人忽面上生疮，暑月即甚，略无完皮，异常楚痛。涂尝饵药，不能致效。
现代文：有人忽然脸上长疮，夏天就更厉害，脸上几乎没有完整的皮肤，非常疼痛，抹药吃药都不见效。
English: Some people suddenly develop sores on their face, and it's even worse in the summer. There is almost no intact skin on the face, and it's very painful. Applying medicine and taking medicine are not effective.

古文：忽一日，既卧，余烛未灭，同寝者见有物如弦如线，以著其面，因执烛视之，白虫如虱，自瓷枕穴中出，以噆其面。
现代文：忽然有一天，他躺上床以后，残烛尚未灭，同床睡觉的人见有个东西像琴弦又像线落在了已躺下的人的脸上。于是此人拿着蜡烛去仔细看，只见有些白虫像虱子，从瓷枕孔内爬出，来咬那人的脸。
English: Suddenly, one day, after he had gone to bed and the candle was still burning, the person sleeping in the same bed saw something like a string or a thread fall on the face of the person who had been lying down. So the person took the candle to take a closer look and saw some white worms like lice crawling out of the porcelain pillow hole to bite the person's face.

古文：既明，遂道其事，剖枕以视之，白虫无数，因尽杀之，面疮乃愈。
现代文：天亮以后，便告诉了这个情况，剖开瓷枕一看，里面有无数白虫。于是把它们全杀了，脸上的疮也就好了。
English: After dawn, he told them about the situation, opened the porcelain pillow and saw that there were countless white worms inside. So he killed them all, and the sores on his face were healed.

古文：蚕女
现代文：蚕女
English: Female silkworm

古文：蚕女者，当高辛帝时，蜀地未立君长，无所统摄。
现代文：还在上古高辛帝时代，四川那个地方还没设立官长，没有统一的领导。
English: During the time of Emperor Gao Xin in ancient times, there were no government officials or unified leadership in that part of Sichuan.

古文：其人聚族而居，递相侵噬。
现代文：那里的人每个家族居住在一起，家族间交替地互相侵吞。
English: People there live together in families, and families take turns devouring each other.

古文：蚕女旧迹，今在广汉，不知其姓氏。其父为邻邦掠去，已逾年，唯所乘之马犹在。
现代文：蚕女的遗迹在现在的四川广汉。蚕女，不知道她姓什么，她的父亲被邻国抢走，已经一年了，只有她父亲常骑的马还在家中。
English: The remains of a female silkworm in what is now Guanghan, Sichuan. The female silkworm, who does not know her surname, lost her father to a neighboring country a year ago, and only the horse her father used to ride is still at home.

古文：女念父隔绝，或废饮食，其母慰抚之。
现代文：蚕女想到父亲远在异乡，常常饭也吃不下。
English: Thinking that her father was far away in a foreign land, the female silkworm often couldn't even eat.

古文：因告誓于众曰，有得父还者，以此女嫁之。
现代文：她的母亲为了安慰她，就向众人立誓说： 有能把她的父亲找回来的，就把这个女儿嫁给他。 
English: To console her, her mother made a vow to the people: "Whoever finds her father, let him marry her to him."

古文：部下之人，唯闻其誓，无能致父归者。
现代文：部下的人，只能听听那个誓言，没有能把她父亲找回来的。
English: Her subordinates could only listen to the oath and failed to find her father.

古文：马闻其言，惊跃振迅，绝其拘绊而去。
现代文：那匹马听到蚕女母亲的话，却惊喜跳跃躁动不停，挣断缰绳跑了。
English: When the horse heard the mother's words, it was so surprised that it kept jumping up and down, broke the bridle and ran away.

古文：数日，父乃乘马归。
现代文：过了几天，蚕女的父亲骑着马回来了。
English: A few days later, the silkworm's father returned on horseback.

古文：自此马嘶鸣，不肯饮龁。
现代文：从这一天开始这匹马就不断地嘶叫，不肯吃草喝水。
English: Since that day, the horse has been whining incessantly, refusing to eat grass or drink water.

古文：父问其故，母以誓众之言白之。
现代文：蚕女的父亲问这事的原因，蚕女的母亲就把向众人立誓的话告诉了他。
English: When the girl's father asked why, the girl's mother told him that she had sworn an oath to the people.

古文：父曰： 誓于人，不誓于马。安有配人而偶非类乎？
现代文：蚕女的父亲说： 是向人立誓，不是向马立誓，哪有把人嫁给马的呢？
English: And the damsel's father said, I sware by man, and not by horse: for who hath made a man to marry a horse?

古文：能脱我于难，功亦大矣。所誓之言，不可行也。 
现代文：这匹马能使我脱离灾难，功劳也算是很大的事，不过你立的誓言是不能实行的。 
English: This horse can save me from disaster, and it's a great achievement, but you can't keep your promise.

古文：马愈跑，父怒，射杀之，曝其皮于庭。
现代文：马听后用蹄刨地刨得更厉害了，蚕女的父亲很生气，用箭射死了马，并把马皮放在院子里晒着。
English: When the horse heard this, it hoofed even harder. The silkworm's father was so angry that he shot the horse with an arrow and left the horse's hide in the yard to dry.

古文：女行过其侧，马皮蹶然而起，卷女飞去。
现代文：蚕女经过马皮旁边时，马皮骤然立起来，卷起蚕女飞走了。
English: When the female silkworm passed by the horse hide, the horse hide suddenly stood up, rolled up the female silkworm and flew away.

古文：旬日，皮复栖于桑树之上。女化为蚕，食桑叶，吐丝成茧，以衣被于人间。
现代文：过了十天，马皮又停在桑树上面了，但蚕女已变成了蚕；吃桑叶，吐丝做茧，让人们用来作衣被。
English: Ten days later, the horse's hide was back on top of the mulberry tree, but the female silkworm had already turned into a silkworm; eating mulberry leaves, spinning silk to make cocoons, and letting people use it to make quilts.

古文：父母悔恨，念之不已。
现代文：蚕女的父母非常悔恨，苦苦思念女儿。
English: The parents of the female silkworm were very remorseful and pined for their daughter.

古文：忽见蚕女，乘流云，驾此马，侍卫数十人，自天而下。谓父母曰： 太上以我孝能致身，心不忘义，授以九宫仙殡之任，长生于天矣，无复忆念也。 
现代文：有一天，忽然看见蚕女驾着飘浮的云彩，乘着那匹马，带着几十名侍从从天而下，蚕女对父母说： 玉皇大帝因为我孝顺能达到献身的地步，并且心中念念不忘大义，所以把九宫仙嫔的职位授给了我。从此将永远在天上生活，请不要再想念我了。 
English: One day, she suddenly saw a female silkworm descend from the sky on a floating cloud, riding a horse and accompanied by dozens of attendants. The female silkworm said to her parents, "The Jade Emperor gave me the position of the Nine Palace Fairy Godmother because I am so filial that I can reach the point of dedication, and because I never forget the Great Righteousness in my heart. From now on, I will live forever in the sky. Please don't miss me anymore."

古文：乃冲虚而去。
现代文：说完升空而去。
English: After saying that, he took off.

古文：今家在什邡绵竹德阳三县界。
现代文：蚕女的家在今什邡、绵竹、德阳三县交界处。
English: The home of the female silkworm is located at the junction of three counties: Imashizhu, Mianzhu and Deyang.

古文：每岁祈蚕者，四方云集，皆获灵应。
现代文：每年祈祷蚕茧丰收的人，从四面八方像云彩般聚集到这里来，都获得灵验的效果。
English: Every year, people who pray for a bumper silkworm cocoon harvest gather here like clouds from all directions, and all of them get the desired effect.

古文：宫观诸化，塑女子之像，披马皮，谓之马头娘，以祈蚕桑焉。
现代文：道观佛寺中都塑了一个女子的神像，身披马皮，称她为马头娘，向她祈祷蚕桑的事。
English: In all the Taoist Buddhist temples, there is a statue of a female deity, dressed in a horse's skin, who is called the Horse Head Maiden, and to whom prayers are said for silkworms.

古文：稽圣赋曰： 安有女，感彼死马，化为蚕虫，衣被天下是也。 
现代文：稽圣赋说： 有个女子，被那死马感应，化为蚕虫，而为天下人带来衣裳，这就是蚕女。 
English: Qisheng Fu said: There was a woman who was turned into a silkworm by the dead horse, and brought clothes to the world. This was the silkworm woman.

古文：砂俘效
现代文：砂俘效
English: Sand trapping effect

古文：陈藏器《本草》云，砂俘，又云倒行拘子，蜀人号曰俘郁。
现代文：陈藏器的《本草》上说，砂俘，又叫倒行拘子，四川人把它称为俘郁。
English: Chen Zhanju's "The Primordial Herb" said that the sand trap, also known as the retrograde pincer, was called the trap trap by the Sichuanese.

古文：旋干土为孔，常睡不动，取致枕中，令夫妻相悦。
现代文：这种虫在于土上旋转钻出眼来，常睡在里面不活动。把它弄来放到枕头中，可以使夫妻互相爱悦。
English: This kind of worm rotates on the ground and drills out an eye, often sleeping in it without moving. Getting it and putting it in a pillow can make couples love each other.

古文：愚有亲表，曾得此物，未尝试验。
现代文：我有一位表亲，曾弄到这种东西，但未试验过。
English: I've got a cousin who's got some of this stuff but hasn't tried it.

古文：愚始游成都，止于逆旅，与卖草药李山人相熟。见蜀城少年，往往欣然而访李生，仍以善价酬。
现代文：我首次游览成都，住在旅馆，跟卖草药的李山人相识，看到蜀城中的少年，常常很高兴地去拜访这个姓李的年轻人，花高价买他的药。
English: It was my first time to visit Chengdu. I stayed in a hotel and got to know a man from Lishan who sold herbal medicine. When I saw a boy from Shucheng, I was often happy to visit this young man surnamed Li and buy his medicine at a high price.

古文：因诘之，曰： 媚药。 征其所用，乃砂俘，与陈氏所说，信不虚语。
现代文：我因此问他，他回答说是 媚药 ，再问他所用的材料，原来就是砂俘，跟陈藏器所说的相同，陈确没说假话。
English: So I asked him about it, and he replied that it was an aphrodisiac, and then I asked him about the material he used, which turned out to be sand trap, which is the same as what the collector said, and Chen really didn't lie.

古文：李生亦秘其所传之法，人不可得也。
现代文：姓李的年轻人对他制药的方法保密，别人是得不到的。
English: The young man, surnamed Li, keeps his pharmaceutical methods a closely guarded secret.

古文：武陵山川媚草，无赖者以银换之，有因其术而男女发狂，罹祸非细也。
现代文：武陵山川出产的媚草，无赖们都抢着买，有些男女由于服用了媚药而发了疯，遭到的祸害可是不小啊！
English: Rogues are rushing to buy the aphrodisiacs produced in the mountains and rivers of Wuling. Some men and women have gone mad after taking the aphrodisiacs. The harm they have suffered is no small matter!

古文：舍毒
现代文：舍毒
English: Poisonous plants

古文：舍毒者，蚊蚋之属，江岭间有之，郴连界尤甚。
现代文：舍毒是蚊蚋之类的昆虫，长江与五岭之间就有，郴连界那里更多些。
English: The insecticides are insects such as mosquitoes. There are insecticides between the Yangtze River and the Wuling Mountains. There are more insecticides between the Yangtze River and the Wuling Mountains.

古文：为客中者，慎勿以手搔之，但布盐于上，以物封裹，半日间，毒则解矣。
现代文：在外作客的人，被虫咬后，千万不要用手去挠，只在咬处撒上盐，用东西包扎好，半天时间毒就化解了。
English: If you are a guest, after being bitten by an insect, do not scratch it with your hands, only sprinkle salt on the bite, bandage it with something, and the poison will dissolve in half a day.

古文：若以手搔，痒不可止，皮穿肉穴，其毒弥甚。
现代文：如果用手挠了，就瘙痒不止。皮肉上出现伤口，中毒就更厉害。
English: If you scratch it with your hands, it will continue to itch. If there is a wound on the skin, the poisoning will be more severe.

古文：湘衡北间有之，其毒稍可。
现代文：湖南衡山北边一带也有这种虫，它的毒性还差些。
English: This insect is also found in the northern area of Hengshan, Hunan Province, and its toxicity is not as high.

古文：峡江至蜀，有蟆子，色黑，亦能咬人，毒亦不甚。
现代文：从瞿塘峡到蜀地，有一种叫蟆子的虫，黑色，也能咬人，毒却不太厉害。
English: From the Qutang Gorge to Shu Di, there is an insect called the lice, black, can also bite people, but the poison is not very strong.

古文：视其生处，即麸盐树叶背上，春间生之，叶成窠，大如桃李，名为五倍子，治一切疮毒。
现代文：看它生存的地方，原来就附在盐麸子树叶的背面。这种虫春天出生，把叶成窝，窝大如桃李。名为五倍子。五倍子可以治一切疮毒。
English: Looking at where it lives, it was originally attached to the back of the leaves of the saltmarsh tree. This insect is born in the spring and makes a nest of leaves, the nest is as big as a peach or plum. It is called the fivefold son. The fivefold son can cure all sores.

古文：收者晒而杀之，即不化去，不然者，必窍穴而出，飞为蟆子矣。
现代文：采收五倍子的人要把它晒干杀死，这样里面的虫子才不会孵化飞走。不这样处理，这种虫子一定会破孔飞出，变成了蟆子。
English: The person who harvests the quintuplets has to kill it by drying it in the sun, so that the worms inside do not hatch and fly away. If not treated in this way, the worms will certainly fly out of the hole and become lice.

古文：黔南界有微尘，色白甚小，视之不见。
现代文：贵州南部边境有一种叫微尘的小虫，白色，身体很小，一般看不清它，这种虫能白天晚上都害人。
English: In the southern border of Guizhou, there is a kind of small insect called micro-dust. It is white, its body is small, and it is generally not clearly visible. This insect can harm people both day and night.

古文：能昼夜害人，虽帐深密，亦不可断。以粗茶烧之，烟如焚香状，即可断之。
现代文：即使蚊帐严密无缝，也挡不住它。把粗茶叶烧起来像烧香时冒出的烟，就可以赶走它。
English: Even if the mosquito net is tight and seamless, it will not stop it. If you burn the coarse tea leaves like the smoke emitted when burning incense, you can drive it away.

古文：又如席铺油帔隔之，稍可灭。
现代文：还有一种办法，如果席上铺上油布，也可以稍微地使白尘危害减轻。
English: There is another way, if the seat is covered with an oil cloth, it can also slightly reduce the harm of white dust.

古文：老蛛
现代文：老蛛
English: The Old Spider

古文：泰岳之麓有岱岳观，楼殿咸古制，年代寝远。
现代文：泰山脚下有座岱岳观，楼房殿堂都是古代建造的，年代已很久远了。
English: At the foot of Mount Tai, there is a beautiful view of the mountains. The buildings of the palace were all built in ancient times, and have been around for a long time.

古文：一夕大风，有声轰然，响震山谷。
现代文：有一天晚上刮大风，听到 轰 的一声，响声震动了山谷。
English: One windy night, there was a loud boom that shook the valley.

古文：及旦视，即经楼之陊也。
现代文：等到早晨去看时，原来是经楼倒塌了。
English: When I looked in the morning, it turned out to be a collapsed warren.

古文：楼屋徘徊之中，杂骨盈车。有老蛛在焉，形如矮腹五升之茶鼎，展手足则周数尺之地矣。
现代文：人们在楼的废址上来回查看时，找到的各种枯骨能装满一车，还发现了一个老蜘蛛，形体像腹部能装五升的煎茶的鼎那么大，伸开前后爪子就能覆盖方圆几尺的地面。
English: When people looked back and forth at the waste site of the building, they found all kinds of dead bones that could fill a car, and they also found an old spider, the shape of which was as big as the belly of a five-liter sencha, and its claws could cover several feet of the ground.

古文：先是侧近寺观，或民家，亡失幼儿，不计其数，盖悉罹其啖食也。
现代文：以前靠近寺观住的老百姓家，常常丢失孩子，数量不少，原来全都是被老蜘蛛吃了。
English: People who used to live near the temple often lost a large number of children, all of whom were eaten by the old spider.

古文：多有网于其上，或遭其黏然縻绊，而不能自解而脱走，则必遭其害矣。
现代文：楼屋上有很多蛛网，有的孩子就被那粘糊糊的蛛丝束缚住，不能自己解脱逃走，就被蜘蛛吃了。
English: There are many cobwebs on the building, and some children are bound by the sticky spider silk, unable to free themselves and escape, and are eaten by the spiders.

古文：于是观主命薪以焚之，臭闻十余里。
现代文：于是观主命令用木柴烧死那老蜘蛛，烧时放出的臭气十多里外都能闻到。
English: So the onlooker ordered that the old spider be burned with firewood, and the stench emitted during the burning could be smelled from more than ten miles away.

古文：李禅
现代文：李禅
English: Li Zhen

古文：李禅，楚州刺史承嗣少子也，居广陵宣平里大第。
现代文：李禅是楚州刺史承嗣的小儿子，住在广陵宣平里的大宅子里。
English: Li Zen, the youngest son of Chuzhou's Shishi Heir, lives in a large mansion in Guangling Xuanping Village.

古文：昼日寝庭前，忽有白蝙蝠，绕庭而飞。
现代文：有一天白天，他在院子前面的床上睡觉，忽然有只白色的蝙蝠，围着院子飞。
English: One day during the day, he was sleeping on the bed in front of the yard, when suddenly a white bat flew around the yard.

古文：家僮辈竟以帚扑，皆不能中，久之，飞去院门，扑之亦不中。
现代文：家僮们争先恐后地用扫帚扑打它。
English: The house baboons scrambled to beat it with brooms.

古文：又飞出门，至外门之外，遂不见。
现代文：但都没打着。过了好半天，白蝙蝠飞出了院门，还是没打着它，又飞出大门的外面，便看不见了。
English: But it didn't. Half a day later, the white bat flew out of the courtyard door, still without striking it, and flew out of the gate, and then it was out of sight.

古文：其年，禅妻卒，輀车出入之路，即白蝙蝠飞翔之所也。
现代文：那一年，李禅的妻子死了，丧车出入的路，正是白蝙蝠飞行经过的地方。
English: That year, Li Zhen's wife died, and the road where the funeral car drove in and out was exactly where the white bat flew.

古文：蝗化
现代文：蝗化
English: Locust infestation

古文：唐天祐末岁，蝗虫生地穴中，生讫。
现代文：唐代天祐末年，蝗虫出生在地洞中。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, locusts were born in caves.

古文：即众蝗衔其足翅而拽出。
现代文：蝗虫们长成以后，就立即咬住它们的爪子和翅膀从洞里扯出来。
English: As soon as the locusts are fully grown, they bite their claws and wings to pull them out of the hole.

古文：帝谓蝗曰： 予何罪，食予苗。 
现代文：皇帝对蝗虫说： 我犯了什么罪，你们要吃我的庄稼苗？ 
English: The emperor said to the locusts, "What crime have I committed that you should eat my crops?"

古文：遂化为蜻蜓，洛中皆验之。
现代文：蝗虫于是都变成了蜻蜓。洛阳一带的蝗虫也都变成了蜻蜓。
English: As a result, all the locusts turned into maggots. Locusts around Luoyang also turned into maggots.

古文：是岁，群雀化燕。
现代文：那一年，各种雀都变成了燕子。
English: That year, all kinds of sparrows turned into swallows.

古文：水蛙
现代文：水蛙
English: Water frog

古文：徐之东界，接沂川，有沟名盘车，相传是奚仲试车之所。
现代文：徐州的东部边界跟沂川相接，有条沟名叫盘车，相传是夏代第一个造车的奚仲试车的地方。
English: The eastern border of Xuzhou is adjacent to the Fenchuan River. There is a ditch called Panche, which is said to be the place where the first car in the Xia Dynasty was built and tested in Fenzhong.

古文：沟有水，水有蛙，可大如五石瓮，目如碗。
现代文：沟里有水，水里有青蛙，可长到像装五石粮的瓮那么大，眼睛像碗那样大。
English: There is water in the ditch, and there are frogs in the water. They can grow to be as big as a five-koku grain basket, and their eyes are as big as bowls.

古文：昔尝有人，于其项上得药，服之度世。
现代文：从前曾有人在它的脖子上得到一种药，吃了药就离开世俗出家了。
English: Once upon a time, a man received a medicine around his neck. After taking the medicine, he left the world and became a monk.

古文：蚓疮
现代文：蚓疮
English: Acne

古文：天祐中，浙西重造慈和寺，治地既毕，每为蚯蚓穿穴，执事者患之。
现代文：唐代天祐年间，浙江西部重修慈和寺。地面整治完毕后，常被蚯蚓打上些洞，承担此项任务的人很头疼。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tianyu in the Tang Dynasty, the western part of Zhejiang was rebuilt as Cihe Temple. After the ground was repaired, it was often pounded with holes, which was a headache for those who undertook this task.

古文：有一僧教以石灰覆之，由是得定，而杀蚯蚓无数。
现代文：有一位和尚教给一法，用石灰把地面盖上，由此地面固定不受破坏了，但却杀死了不少的蚯蚓。
English: A monk taught a method to cover the ground with lime, which fixed the ground and did not damage it, but killed a lot of earthworms.

古文：顷之，其僧病苦，举身皆痒，恒须得长指爪者搔之，以至成疮。
现代文：不久，那个和尚就被病痛所苦，全身发痒，总得让指甲长的人给搔痒，时间一长，就形成了疮。
English: Before long, the monk was plagued by pain and itching all over his body. He had to ask someone with long fingernails to scratch it. Over time, sores formed.

古文：疮中辄得死蚯蚓一条，殆数百千条。肉尽至骨而卒。
现代文：每个疮里都有一条死蚯蚓，总共差不多有成百上千条，最后和尚的肉被蚯蚓吃尽，露出了骨头，死去了。
English: In each wound there was a dead maggot, altogether there were almost hundreds and thousands of maggots, and finally the monk's flesh was eaten away by the maggots, his bones were exposed, and he died.

古文：蜂馀
现代文：蜂馀
English: Bee residue

古文：庐陵有人应举，行遇夜，诣一村舍求宿。
现代文：庐陵有个书生进京赶考，夜晚到一个村庄里的人家借宿。
English: A student from Fuling went to Beijing to take an exam. At night, he stayed at a villager's house.

古文：有老翁出见客曰： 吾舍窄人多，容一榻可矣。 
现代文：有位老翁出来会见客人，说： 我家房子狭小而人口挺多，容纳一张床还可以。 
English: An old man came out to meet the guests and said, "My house is small and crowded, but it can accommodate one bed.

古文：因止其家。
现代文：于是就住在了这家。
English: So I ended up living in this house.

古文：屋室百余间，但窄小甚。
现代文：屋里的房间有一百多个，只是窄小得很。
English: There are more than a hundred rooms in the house, but they are very small.

古文：久之告饥，翁曰： 居家贫，所食唯野菜耳。 
现代文：过了好久，书生说饿了，老翁说： 家里穷，吃的东西只有野菜。 
English: After a long time, the scholar said that he was hungry, and the old man said: My family is poor, and we only eat vegetables.

古文：即以设，客食之，甚甘美，与常菜殊。
现代文：就把野菜摆了出来。书生吃了，觉得味道甜美，与一般的菜不一样。
English: Shousei ate it and thought that the taste was sweet and different from ordinary dishes.

古文：及就寝，唯闻讧讧之声。
现代文：等到上床睡觉时，只听到哄哄的声音。
English: By the time I went to bed, all I could hear was the whooshing sound.

古文：既曙而寤，身卧田中，旁有大蜂窠。
现代文：天亮后客人醒了，却看见自己睡在田地里，旁边有一个大蜂窝。
English: After dawn, the guest woke up to find himself sleeping in a field with a large beehive next to him.

古文：客尝患风，因尔遂愈，盖食蜂之余尔。
现代文：这位客人曾患有风湿病，因为这次经历便全好了。
English: The guest, who had suffered from rheumatism, was completely cured by the experience.

古文：熊乃
现代文：熊乃
English: Kumano grows up

古文：信州有版山，川谷深远，采版之所，因以名之。
现代文：信州有座版山，溪流山谷幽深遥远，是采木制版的地方，于是以此给它命名。
English: There is a plate mountain in Shinshu. The valley of the stream is deep and far away. It is a place where wood is harvested to make plates, so it was named after this.

古文：州人熊乃，尝与其徒入山伐木。其弟从而追之，日暮，不及其兄。
现代文：州里人有个熊乃，曾和他的徒弟们进山伐木，他的弟弟在后面跟着追赶，到黄昏时候，还没追上。
English: There was a kumano in Shoushu, who went into the mountains with his apprentices to cut wood. His younger brother followed behind, and by dusk, they still hadn't caught up.

古文：忽见甲士清道，自东来，传呼甚厉。
现代文：忽然看见有穿铠甲的人清道，从东而来，高声传唤。
English: Suddenly they saw a man in armor coming from the east, shouting loudly.

古文：乃弟惧恐，伏于草间。俄而旗帜戈甲，络绎而至。
现代文：熊乃的弟弟很害怕，就趴在草中，不一会儿就看见许多打着旗、扛着戈、穿着铠甲的人连续不断地来了。
English: Kumano's younger brother was so scared that he lay down in the grass, and soon he saw many people with flags, carrying weapons, and wearing armor coming continuously.

古文：道旁亦有行人，其犯清道者，辄为所戮。
现代文：道路旁边也有走路的人，有人触犯了清道的，就被杀死。
English: There are also people walking next to the road, and if someone violates the clear road, they will be killed.

古文：至军中，拥一人若大将者，西驰而去。
现代文：说话间，只见一大队士兵簇拥着一位像大将的人，骑着马向西急驰而去。
English: While we were talking, we saw a large group of soldiers surrounding a man resembling a general, who was galloping westward on a horse.

古文：度其远，乃敢起行。
现代文：熊乃的弟弟估计那些人走远了，才敢起来继续赶路。
English: Kumano's younger brother estimated that those people had gone too far before he dared to get up and continue on his way.

古文：迨晓，方见其兄，具道所见。
现代文：走到天亮，才追上他的哥哥，就把自己看到的全都告诉了哥哥。
English: When he caught up with his brother at dawn, he told him everything he had seen.

古文：众皆曰： 非巡逻之所，而西去溪滩险绝，往无所诣，安得有此人？ 
现代文：大家都说： 这儿不是巡逻的地方，向西去有溪流险滩，非常危险，而且没有可投奔的去处，怎么会有这样的一些人？ 
English: Everyone said: This is not a place for patrols, it is very dangerous to go west where there are rapids and dangerous beaches, and there is nowhere to run to, how can there be such people?

古文：即共寻之，可十余里，隔溪滩，犹见旌旗纷若，布围畋猎之状。
现代文：就立即一同去寻找那帮人。大约走了十多里，隔着溪流险滩，就看见许多旗帜乱纷纷的，围成一圈好像打猎的样子。
English: They immediately went to look for the group of people. After walking for more than ten miles, across a dangerous stream, they saw a lot of flags scattered around in a circle, as if they were hunting.

古文：其徒有勇者，遥呼叱之，忽无所见。
现代文：熊乃的徒弟中有个勇敢的人，就远远地呼喊喝叱那些人。忽然便什么都看不见了。
English: A brave one of Kumano's apprentices shouted and scolded the men from a distance, and suddenly nothing could be seen.

古文：就视之，人皆树叶，马皆大蚁。取而碎之，皆有血云。螽斯
现代文：熊乃等人走近细看，人都是树叶，马都是大蚂蚁，把它们拿过来弄碎，却都有血。螽斯
English: Xiong Nai and the others came closer to take a closer look. The people were all leaves, and the horses were all large ants. They took them and broke them, but they all had blood.

古文：蝗之为孽也，盖沴气所生，斯臭腥，或曰，鱼卵所化。
现代文：蝗虫作为一种妖孽，本是灾害不祥之气产生出来的。因为它的气味很腥，便有人说是鱼子变成的。
English: Locusts, as a kind of witchcraft, were originally produced by disasters and ominous spirits. Because its smell is very bad, some people say that it has turned into fish roe.

古文：每岁生育，或三或四。
现代文：蝗虫每年产卵三次或四次，每一次能产卵一百多粒。
English: Locusts lay eggs three or four times a year, and each time they can lay more than a hundred eggs.

古文：每一生，其卵盈百，自卵及翼，凡一月而飞。故《诗》称螽斯子孙众多。
现代文：从卵到长出翅膀，总共一个月就能飞了，所以《诗经》里说螽斯的子孙众多。
English: From the egg to the growth of wings, a total of one month can fly, so the "Song of Songs" says that there are many descendants of lice.

古文：螽斯即蝗属也。
现代文：螽斯就属蝗虫一类。
English: Lice are a type of locust.

古文：羽翼未成，跳跃而行，其名蝻。
现代文：蝗虫翅膀没长成时，跳跃着行动，这时它的名字叫蝻。
English: When the locust's wings are not fully grown, it hops about and its name is grasshopper.

古文：晋天福之末，天下大蝗，连岁不解。
现代文：后晋天福末年，天下发生大蝗灾，连续几年也没有灭除。
English: In the last year of Emperor Jintian's reign, a great locust plague swept across the country, and it was not eradicated for several years.

古文：行则蔽地，起则蔽天。
现代文：那些蝗虫在地面走时就遮蔽了地面，飞起来时就遮蔽了天空。
English: Those locusts cover the ground when they walk on the ground, and cover the sky when they fly.

古文：禾稼草木，赤地无遗。
现代文：庄稼草木全被吃光。大地光秃秃的什么也没剩。
English: Crops, plants and trees have all been eaten away. There is nothing left of the bare earth.

古文：其蝻之盛也，流引无数，甚至浮河越岭，逾池渡堑，如履平地。
现代文：在蝻灾最严重的时候， 蝗流 不断延伸、扩展，数量数不胜数，甚至能浮水过河、越过山岭、水池和壕沟，就像走平地一样。
English: At the time of the most serious flood disaster, the locusts continued to extend and expand, the number was countless, and they could even float across the river, over the mountains, ponds and ditches, just like walking on flat ground.

古文：入人家舍，莫能制御，穿户入牖，井溷填咽，腥秽床帐，损啮书衣，积日连宵，不胜其苦。
现代文：蝗虫进入人家，谁也阻挡不了。
English: Locusts enter people's homes, and no one can stop them.

古文：郓城县有一农家，豢豕十余头，时于陂泽间，值蝻大至，群豢豕跃而啖食之，斯须复饫，不能运动。
现代文：山东郓城县有一户农民，家中养了十多头猪，当时正在山坡、沼泽一带。正赶上蝻虫大批涌来，这十多头猪于是跳跃着吃起蝻虫来，不一会就吃饱了，不能走动了。
English: A farmer in Lucheng County, Shandong Province, had more than ten pigs at home. At that time, they were on a hillside and in a swamp. They were just catching up with a large influx of aphids. The more than ten pigs jumped to eat the aphids, and soon they were full and could not move.

古文：其蝻又饥，唼啮群豕，有若堆积，豕竟困顿，不能御之，皆为蝻所杀。
现代文：哪些蝻又饥又饿，开始咬吃那些猪。蝻虫成堆地聚在猪身上，猪竟然无力对付，结果十几头猪都被蝻虫吃光了。
English: Hungry and hungry maggots began to bite the pigs. Maggots gathered in piles on the pigs, and the pigs were powerless to deal with them. As a result, more than a dozen pigs were eaten up by maggots.

古文：癸卯年，其蝗皆抱草木而枯死，所为天生杀也。
现代文：到了癸卯年，那些蝗虫却都抱着草木干死了。这就是通常所说的上天掌握着生杀之权啊！
English: In the year of the rooster, however, those locusts clung to the plants and withered to death. This is what is commonly referred to as the heavens holding the power of life and death!

古文：蝻化
现代文：蝻化
English: Purification

古文：己酉年，将军许敬迁奉命于东洲按夏苗。
现代文：己酉那年，将军许敬迁奉命到东洲视察夏天捕捉野兽保护庄稼的情况。
English: In the same year, General Xu Jianqian was ordered to visit Dongzhou to inspect the situation of catching wild animals to protect crops in the summer.

古文：上言，称于陂野间，见有蝻生十数里，才欲打捕，其虫化为白蛱蝶，飞去。
现代文：不久呈上报告说，在野外山坡上，看到有十几里的地方都有蝻生活着，刚想去扑打，那些蝻虫就都化为白蛱蝶飞走了。
English: Soon, a report was submitted, saying that on the hillside in the field, there were maggots living in more than a dozen places. As soon as I wanted to swat them, those maggots turned into butterflies and flew away.

