古文：草人掌土化之法以物地，相其宜而为之种。
现代文：草人掌管改良土壤、审视土地，观察某地适宜种什么就决定种什么。
English: Grass people are in charge of improving the soil, inspecting the land, observing what is suitable for planting in a certain place, and deciding what to plant.

古文：凡粪种，骍刚用牛，赤缇用羊，坟壤用麋，渴泽用鹿，咸澙用貆，勃壤用狐，埴垆用豕，彊用蕡。轻用犬。
现代文：凡浸种，赤色而坚硬的土地用牛骨汁，赤黄色的土地用羊骨汁，润泽而苏松的土地用麇骨汁，干涸的泽地用鹿骨汁，盐碱地用獾骨汁，沙土地用狐骨汁，有黏性的黑色而坚硬的土地用猪骨汁，坚硬成块的土地用麻子汁，轻脆而缺乏韧性的土地用狗骨汁。
English: For soaking, use ox bone juice for red and hard soil, sheep bone juice for reddish-yellow soil, shin bone juice for moist and loose soil, deer bone juice for dry soil, shin bone juice for saline soil, fox bone juice for sandy soil, pig bone juice for sticky black and hard soil, poppy seed juice for hard, lumpy soil, and dog bone juice for light and brittle soil that lacks toughness.

古文：稻人掌稼下地。以猪畜水，以防止水，以沟荡水，以遂均水，以列舍水，以浍写水，以涉扬其芟。
现代文：稻人掌管在泽地种稻，用陂塘蓄水，用堤防阻止水，用沟排放水，用遂均分水，用畦埂留止水，用浍泻水。涉水入田扬弃去年割除的草而治理田。
English: The rice growers are in charge of growing rice in the rice paddies, storing water in paddies, blocking water with dikes, draining water with ditches, distributing water evenly, stopping water with hoes, and draining water with hoes. They wade into the fields to remove the grass that was cut last year and manage the fields.

古文：作田，凡稼泽，夏以水殄草而芟荑之，泽草所生，种之芒种。
现代文：凡在泽地种稻，夏季用水淹的方法灭绝草而割除。泽地草所生长的地方，就可以在那里种稻麦。
English: If rice is grown in marshland and the grass is eradicated in the summer by flooding with water, rice can be grown where the marshland grass grows.

古文：旱叹，共其雩敛。
现代文：举行雩祭就供给为雩祭所征收的财物。
English: If a wreath-laying ceremony is held, the property collected for the wreath-laying ceremony will be provided.

古文：丧纪，共其苇事。
现代文：有丧事就供给填塞墓坑底部所用的芦苇。
English: For funerals, reeds are used to fill the bottom of the grave.

古文：土训掌道地图。
现代文：土训掌管解说地图，以告诉王不同的地区所适宜施行的事。
English: The tutelary deity presided over an explanatory map to tell the king what was appropriate to do in different regions.

古文：以诏地事，道地慝，以辨地物而原其生，以诏地求。
现代文：解说各地的害人之物，辨别各地的有益于人之物而了解它们的生产时间，以便告诉王某地的物产何时可以求取。
English: To explain the harmful things of various places, to distinguish the beneficial things of various places and to understand their production time, so as to tell the king when the property of a certain place can be obtained.

古文：王巡守，则夹王车。
现代文：王外出巡守，就在王车左右随行。
English: When the king is out, the guards follow him around in the royal carriage.

古文：诵训掌道方志以诏观事。
现代文：诵训负责解说四方的历史典故，以告诉王了解古代的事。
English: The recitation is responsible for explaining the historical allusions of the four sides to tell the king to understand the ancient things.

古文：掌道方慝以诏辟忌，以知地俗。
现代文：负责解说四方言语的忌讳，以告诉王避免触犯忌讳，而了解各地的风俗。
English: Responsible for explaining the taboos of the four dialects to tell the king to avoid breaking taboos and understand the customs of various regions.

古文：王巡守，则夹王车。
现代文：王外出巡守，就在王车左右随行。
English: When the king is out, the guards follow him around in the royal carriage.

古文：山虞掌山林之政令。物为之厉而为之守禁。
现代文：山虞掌管有关山林的政令，为山中的各种物产设置藩界，并为守护山林的民众设立禁令。
English: The Sangu presided over the decrees related to the mountains and forests, set the boundaries of the domain for various products in the mountains, and set up a ban for the people who guarded the mountains and forests.

古文：仲冬，斩阳木；仲夏，斩阴木。
现代文：仲冬时节砍伐山南边的树木，仲夏时节砍伐山北边的树木。
English: The trees on the south side of the mountain are cut down in mid-winter, and the trees on the north side of the mountain are cut down in mid-summer.

古文：凡服耜；斩季材，以时入之，令万民时斩材，有期日。
现代文：凡制造车较和耒，砍伐较幼小的木材，按时送交负责制造的官。
English: Those who make cars should be more gentle, cut smaller wood, and send it to the official in charge of manufacturing on time.

古文：凡邦工入山林而抡材，不禁，春秋之斩木不入禁。
现代文：命令民众按规定的时间砍伐木材，并规定了砍伐的刑罚加以惩处。如果祭祀山林，就负责办理和监视，并负责修整扫除，且禁止行人通行。
English: The people were ordered to cut wood according to the prescribed time, and the penalty for cutting was stipulated. If the mountain forest was sacrificed, it was responsible for handling and monitoring, and was responsible for repairing and cleaning, and pedestrians were prohibited from passing.

古文：凡窃木者有刑罚。
现代文：如果王亲自田猎，就芟除山中田猎场周围的草。
English: If the king himself hunts in the field, he will remove the grass around the hunting field in the middle of the mountain.

古文：若祭山林，则为主而修除，且跸。
现代文：到停止田猎时，就在猎场中央树起虞旗，在旗下集中所猎获的禽兽而割取兽的左耳。
English: When the field hunt is over, a cedar flag is hoisted in the center of the hunting ground, and the left ear of the animal is cut off when the animals are gathered under the flag.

古文：若大田猎，则莱山田之野。及弊田，植虞旗于中，致禽而珥焉。林衡掌巡林麓之禁令而平其守，以时计林麓而赏罚之。
现代文：林衡掌管巡视平地和山脚的林木而执行有关的禁令，合理安排守林的民众，按时核计他们守护平地和山脚林木的成绩而对他们进行赏罚。
English: Lin Heng is in charge of patrolling the flatlands and foothills of the forest to enforce the relevant prohibitions, reasonably arrange the people guarding the forest, and reward and punish them for their achievements in protecting the flatlands and foothills of the forest.

古文：若斩木材，则受法于山虞，而掌其政令。
现代文：若要砍伐木材，就要到山虞那里接受所安排的时间，而掌管有关的政令。
English: If you want to cut wood, you must go to the mountains to receive the arranged time and take charge of the relevant decree.

古文：川衡掌巡川泽之禁令而平其守。以时舍其守，犯禁者，执而诛罚之。
现代文：川衡掌管巡视川泽，执行有关的禁令，而合理安排守护川泽的民众，按时安置守护人，有违犯禁令的就抓捕而加以惩罚。
English: Kawahira is in charge of patrolling Kawazawa, enforcing the relevant ban, and reasonably arranging the people who guard Kawazawa, placing guardians on time, and arresting and punishing violators of the ban.

古文：祭祀、宾客，共川奠。
现代文：举行祭祀，或招待宾客，供给河中所产的鱼、蛤等物。
English: They hold religious services, or invite guests, and supply fish, bream and other products from the river.

古文：泽虞掌国泽之政令，为之厉禁。使其地之人守其财物，以时入之于玉府，颁其余于万民。
现代文：泽虞掌管王国湖泽的有关政令，为之设置藩界和禁令，使当地的民众守护湖泽的财物，按时缴纳皮角珠贝等给玉府，其余的财物分归民众所有。
English: Zego issued a decree to administer the lakes in the kingdom, establishing the boundaries of the domain and prohibitions, so that the local people would protect the lake's property, pay the horns and pearls to the government on time, and the rest of the property would be owned by the people.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客，共泽物之奠。
现代文：凡祭祀或接待宾客，供给湖泽所产芹菜、莼菜、菱角、鸡头等物。
English: Whenever there is a religious service or guests are received, celery, amaranth, lingonberries, chicken heads and other items produced in the lake are served.

古文：丧纪，共其苇蒲之事。
现代文：丧事，供给所需的芦苇和蒲草。
English: funeral, supplying the reeds and rushes needed.

古文：若大田猎，则莱泽野。
现代文：如果王亲自田猎，就芟除湖泽猎场周围原野的草。
English: If the king himself hunts in the field, he will remove the grass from the fields around the lake hunting ground.

古文：及弊田，植虞旌以属禽。
现代文：到停止田猎时，就在猎场中树起虞旌而聚集所猎获的禽兽。
English: When the field hunt was over, the animals that had been hunted gathered around the yakitori tree in the hunting ground.

古文：迹人掌邦田之地政，为之厉禁而守之。
现代文：迹人掌管王国田猎场的政令，为之设置藩界和禁令而加以守护，凡田猎的人都要接受迹人的安排。
English: The trappers controlled the hunting grounds of the kingdom by decree, and protected them by setting up boundaries and prohibitions. Anyone who hunted in the fields had to accept the trappers' arrangements.

古文：凡田猎者受令焉，禁麛卵者，与其毒矢射者。
现代文：禁止猎杀幼兽和获取鸟卵的人以及用毒箭射猎的人。
English: It is prohibited to hunt young animals and to obtain bird eggs, as well as to shoot with poisoned arrows.

古文：丱人掌金玉锡石之地，而为之厉禁以守之。
现代文：矿人掌管出产金玉锡石等的地方，为之设置藩界和禁令而加以守护。
English: Miners controlled the places where gold, jade, cassiterite, etc. were produced, and protected them by establishing boundaries and prohibitions.

古文：若以时取之，则物其地图而授之，巡其禁令。
现代文：如果按时采取，就选择开采地，绘成地图交给开采者。巡视是否有人违犯禁令。
English: If it is taken on time, the mining site will be selected, a map will be drawn and handed over to the miner, and an inspection will be made to see if anyone is violating the ban.

古文：角人掌以时征齿角凡骨物於山泽之农，以当邦赋之政令。以度量受之，以共财用。
现代文：角人掌管按时向山泽地区的农民征收兽齿、兽角、兽骨之物而用以算作上缴国家赋税的政令，用度量器具加以度量而接受征收物，以供财用。
English: The person in charge of the horns issued a decree to collect animal teeth, horns, and bones from farmers in the Yamazawa region on time to be counted as a national tax, and measured them with a measuring instrument to accept the collected goods for financial use.

古文：羽人掌以时征羽翮之政于山泽之农，以当邦赋之政令。
现代文：羽人掌管按时向山泽地区的农民征收羽毛而用以算作上缴国家赋税的政令。
English: The feather people are in charge of collecting feathers from farmers in the Yamazawa region on time and using it as a decree to submit national taxes.

古文：凡受羽，十羽为审，百羽为抟，十抟为缚。
现代文：凡接受所征收的羽毛，十根羽毛为一审，百根羽毛为一抟，十抟为一缚。
English: Anyone who accepts the collected feathers, ten feathers will be the first trial, one hundred feathers will be one cuff, and ten cuffs will be one bondage.

