古文：凡决物，必托于疑者。
现代文：凡为他人决断事情，都是受托于心中有疑难的人。
English: Anyone who decides things for others is entrusted with people who have doubts in their hearts.

古文：善其用福，恶其用患；善至于诱也，终无惑偏。
现代文：一般说来，人们都希望遇到有利的事，不希望碰上祸患和被骗诱，希望最终能排除疑惑。
English: Generally speaking, people hope to encounter favorable things, do not want to encounter disasters and be deceived, and hope to finally eliminate doubts.

古文：有利焉，去其利，则不受也；奇之所托。
现代文：在为人作决断时，如果只对一方有利，那么没有利的一方就不会接受，就是因为依托的基础不平衡。
English: In human decision-making, if only one side benefits, then the side that does not benefit will not accept it, because the foundation on which it rests is unbalanced.

古文：若有利于善者，隐托于恶，则不受矣，致疏远。
现代文：任何决断本来都应有利于决断者的，但是如果在其中隐含着不利的因素，那么决断者也就不会接受，双方的关系也就会疏远。
English: Any decision should be in favor of the decision-maker, but if there is an unfavorable factor in it, then the decision-maker will not accept it, and the relationship between the two sides will be alienated.

古文：故其有使失利者，有使离害者，此事之失。
现代文：这样对为人决断的人就不利了，甚至还会遭到灾难，这样决断是失误的。
English: It is a mistake to make such a decision, as it will be to the detriment of the person making the decision, and may even lead to disaster.

古文：圣人所以能成其事者有五：有以阳德之者，有以阴贼之者，有以信诚之者，有以蔽匿之者，有以平素之者。
现代文：圣人所以能完成大业，作出正确的判断，主要有五个途径：有用阳道来感人的；有用阴道来惩治的；有用信义来教化的；有用爱心来庇护的；有用廉洁来净化的。
English: There are five main ways for a saint to accomplish his great work and make a correct judgment: to use the yang way to impress people; to use the vagina to punish; to use faith and righteousness to educate; to use love to protect; and to use integrity to purify.

古文：阳励于一言，阴励于二言，平素、枢机以用；四者微而施之。
现代文：行阳道则努力守常如一，行阴道则努力掌握事物对立的两面。要在平时和关键时刻巧妙的运用这四方面，小心谨慎行事。
English: The yang line tries to be consistent, and the vagina line tries to grasp the two opposing sides of things. It is necessary to skillfully use these four aspects in peacetime and at critical moments, and proceed with caution.

古文：于事度之往事，验之来事，参之平素，可则决之。
现代文：推测以往的事，验证未来的事，再参考日常的事，如果可以，就作出决断。
English: Speculate about the past, test the future, refer to everyday things, and make a decision if you can.

古文：王公大人之事也，危而美名者，可则决之；不用费力而易成者，可则决之；用力犯勤苦，然不得已而为之者，可贵则决之；去患者，可贵则决之；从福者，可则决之。
现代文：王公大臣的事，崇高而享有美名的，如果可以就作出决断；不用费力轻易可获成功的事，如果可以就作出决断，费力气又辛苦，但不得不做的，如果可以就作出决断；能消除忧患的，如果可以就作出决断；能实现幸福的，如果可以就作出决断。
English: If you can make a decision about something noble and well-known, you can make a decision; if you can make a decision about something easy to succeed without effort, you can make a decision; if you have to do something hard and laborious, you can make a decision; if you can eliminate sorrow, you can make a decision; if you can achieve happiness, you can make a decision.

古文：故夫决情定疑，万事之基，以正治乱，决成败，难为者。
现代文：所以，为事情做决断以解决疑难，是做事情的关键。制止动乱决定成败，是很难做到的事。
English: Therefore, making decisions for things to solve problems is the key to doing things. Stopping turmoil determines success or failure, which is difficult to do.

古文：故先王乃用蓍龟者，以自决也。
现代文：所以，古代先王自己用筮草和龟甲，决定一些难断之事。
English: Therefore, the ancient kings decided some difficult things by themselves with reeds and tortoise shells.

