古文：一曰：仲秋之月，日在角，昏牵牛中，旦觜嶲中。
现代文：仲秋仲秋八月，太阳的位置在角宿，初昏时刘，牵牛星宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，觜巂星宿出现在南方中天。
English: Mid-autumn Mid-autumn In August, the sun's position is in the cusp, at dusk Liu, the Cowherd star appears in the southern sky, at dawn, the Ploughshare star appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日庚辛，其帝少皞，其神蓐收，其虫毛，其音商，律中南吕。
现代文：仲秋于夭千属庚辛，它的主宰之帝是少皞，佐帝之神是蓐收。应时的动物是老虎一类前毛族，相配的声音是商音，音律与南吕相应。
English: The Mid-Autumn Festival falls in the year of the rooster, and belongs to the Genghis Khan. Its ruling emperor is Shao Zang, and the god of the Southern Dynasty is Jiu Jie. The animal of the time is a tiger of the former Mao tribe, the matching sound is the commercial sound, and the melody corresponds to the Southern Lu.

古文：其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其祀门，祭先肝。
现代文：这个月的数字是九，味道是辣味，气味是腥气，要举行的祭祀是门祭，祭祀时祭品以肝脏为尊。
English: The number of this month is nine, the taste is spicy, the smell is pungent, the sacrifice to be held is the door sacrifice, and the sacrificial offering is the liver.

古文：凉风生，候雁来，玄鸟归，群鸟养羞。
现代文：这个月凉风发生，候雁从北来，燕子向南归，各类鸟儿都养护增生它们的羽毛来御寒。
English: This month, cool winds occur, geese come from the north, swallows return to the south, and all kinds of birds conserve and increase their feathers to keep out the cold.

古文：天子居总章太庙，乘戎路，驾白骆，载白旂，衣白衣，服白玉，食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：天子住在西向明堂的中央正室，乘坐白色的兵车，车前驾着白色的马，车上插着白色的绘有龙纹的旗帜，天子穿着白色的衣服，佩戴着白色的饰玉，吃的食物是麻耔和狗肉，甩的器物锐利而深邃。
English: Tianzi lived in the central main room of Xixiangming Hall. He rode in a white chariot with a white horse in front of it. A white dragon-patterned flag was attached to the chariot. Tianzi wore white clothes and white ornaments. He ate mochi and dog meat. The objects he threw were sharp and deep.

古文：是月也，养衰老，授几杖，行麋粥饮食。
现代文：这个月，要赡养衰老的人，授予他们几案和手杖，施与他们稀粥饮食。
English: This month, the elderly should be supported, they should be given a few cases and canes, and they should be given a gruel diet.

古文：乃命司服具饬衣裳，文绣有常，制有小大，度有短长，衣服有量，必循其故，冠带有常。
现代文：命令主管服制的官吏，准备并整饬衣裳，祭服的文饰有固定的规格，大小长短有一定的制度，祭服之外的服装也有一定的尺寸，必须依照旧有的规定。
English: The officials in charge of the dress code were ordered to prepare and tidy up the clothes. The decoration of the sacrificial clothing has fixed specifications, the size and length have a certain system, and the clothing other than the sacrificial clothing also has a certain size and must be in accordance with the old regulations.

古文：命有司申严百刑，斩杀必当，无或枉桡，枉桡不当，反受其殃。
现代文：随着服制的不同，冠带也有相应的固定规格。命令司法官重申严明各种刑罚斩杀罪犯一定要恰当，不要曲法冤枉人。如果有曲挂冤枉人的事，执法者会遭受灾祸。
English: The judicial officers were ordered to reiterate that all kinds of punishments for criminals must be appropriate, and that there should be no wrongdoing. If there is wrongdoing, the law enforcers will suffer disaster.

古文：是月也，乃命宰祝巡行牺牲，视全具，案刍豢，瞻肥瘠，察物色，必比类，量小大，视长短，皆中度。
现代文：这个月，命令主管牺牲和祭祀的官吏巡视将用来祭祀的牺牲，看看形体是否完整，喂养的情况如何，是肥是瘦，毛色是否纯一，这些一定要符合旧例；再量量它们的大小，看看长短，送些也都要符合要求。
English: This month the officials in charge of the sacrifices and the rites were ordered to inspect the sacrifices that were to be offered, to see whether they were whole, well fed, lean or fat, and of the same colour as before, and to measure their size, to see if they were long or short, and to give them to those who asked for them.

古文：五者备当，上帝其享。
现代文：形体、肥瘦、毛色、大小、长短都完全适当，上天就享用这些祭品。
English: The shape, fatness, hair color, size, and length are all completely appropriate, and the heavens enjoy these offerings.

古文：以犬尝麻，先祭寝庙。
现代文：天子于是举行傩祭，御止遂除疫疠，以通达金秋之气。
English: As a result, the heavenly son held a hail sacrifice, which was successful in eliminating the plague and bringing the atmosphere of the golden autumn.

古文：是月也，可以筑城郭，建都邑，穿窦窌，修囷仓。
现代文：这个月，可以修筑城鄣，建置都邑挖掘地窖，修葺仓虞。
English: This month, you can build castles, excavate cellars, and repair warehouses.

古文：乃命有司趣民收敛，务蓄菜，多积聚。
现代文：命令主管官吏督促百姓收敛谷物，努力储藏过冬的干菜，多多积聚柴草。
English: The officials in charge were ordered to urge the people to collect grain, store dried vegetables for the winter, and accumulate firewood.

古文：乃劝种麦，无或失时，行罪无疑。
现代文：要鼓励百姓及时种麦，不要错过农时，如果错过农时，一定要给以处罚。
English: It is necessary to encourage the people to plant wheat in time, not to miss the farming time, and if they miss the farming time, they must be punished.

古文：是月也，日夜分，雷乃始收声，蛰虫俯户。
现代文：这个月，日夜的时刻相等，雷声渐渐消逝。
English: This month, the time of day and night are equal, and the thunder gradually fades away.

古文：杀气浸盛，阳气日衰，水始涸。
现代文：蛰伏的动物都藏在洞穴口。冬阴之气渐渐旺盛，阳气日新衰触，水开始干涸了。
English: The animals were hiding at the mouth of the cave. The winter gloom was getting stronger, the yang was fading, and the water was beginning to dry up.

古文：日夜分，则一度量，平权衡，正钧石，齐斗甬。
现代文：日夜时刻相等，要在此时统一和校正各度量衡器具。
English: The time of day and night are equal, and it is necessary to unify and calibrate all measuring instruments at this time.

古文：是月也，易关市，来商旅，入货贿，以便民事。
现代文：这个月，要减轻关市的税收，招徕各地的商旅，收纳财物，以利于百姓的生产和生话。
English: This month, it is necessary to reduce the taxes of Guan, attract business travel from all over the country, and collect property to benefit the production and livelihood of the people.

古文：四方来杂，远乡皆至，则财物不匮，上无乏用，百事乃遂。
现代文：四方之人前来聚集，连偏远乡邑也全都到来。这样，财物就不缺乏，国家用费就充足，各种事情就都能成功。
English: People from all over the country have come to gather, and even the remote villages have all come. In this way, there is no lack of property, the state expenditure is sufficient, and all kinds of things can be successful.

古文：凡举事无逆天数，必顺其时，乃因其类。
现代文：作各种事精不要违背自然规律，一定要顺应天时，按照事情的类别，什么时侯该作什么就作什么。
English: In doing all kinds of things, we should not go against the laws of nature. We must conform to the time of day, according to the category of things, and do what we should do at any time.

古文：行之是令，白露降三旬。
现代文：实行这个月的政令，白露降落，每旬一次。
English: In implementation of this month's decree, the white dew will descend once every ten days.

古文：仲秋行春令，则秋雨不降，草木生荣，国有大恐；行夏令，则其国乃旱，蛰虫不藏，五谷复生；行冬令，则风灾数起，收雷先行，草木早死。
现代文：仲秋实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，秋雨就会停而不降，草木就会重新开花，国家就会有大的恐慌。如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，国家就会出现干旱，蛰伏的动物就不再藏伏，五谷就重新萌发生长。如果实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，风灾就会屡屡发生，雷声就会提前收敛，草木就会过早死亡。
English: If the government order that should be implemented in spring is implemented in mid-autumn, then the autumn rain will stop and not fall, the plants will bloom again, and the country will have a big panic. If the government order that should be implemented in summer is implemented, then the country will have a drought, the animals will no longer hide, and the crops will grow again. If the government order that should be implemented in winter is implemented, then the wind disaster will occur repeatedly, the thunder will converge ahead of time, and the plants will die prematurely.

古文：二曰：义也者，万事之纪也，君臣、上下、亲疏之所由起也，治乱、安危、过胜之所在也。
现代文：论威义，是万事的法则，是君臣、长幼、亲疏产生的根基，是国家治乱，安危、胜败的关键。
English: On majesty and righteousness, it is the law of all things, the foundation for the generation of monarchs and ministers, elders and children, and kinship and estrangement, and the key to the country's governance, security, victory and defeat.

古文：过胜之，勿求于他，必反于己。
现代文：胜败的关键，不要向其它方面寻求，一定要在自己身上寻找。
English: Don't look for the key to victory and defeat in other aspects, but look for it in yourself.

古文：人情欲生而恶死，欲荣而恶辱。
现代文：人的本性都是想要生存而厌恶死亡，想耍荣耀而厌恶耻辱。
English: It is the nature of man to desire life and to hate death, to desire glory and to hate dishonor.

古文：死生荣辱之道一，则三军之士可使一心矣。
现代文：死生、荣辱的道理统一于义，就可以使三军将士思想一致了。
English: If the principles of life and death, honor and dishonor are unified with righteousness, it will be possible to unify the thoughts of the three armies.

古文：凡军，欲其众也；心，欲其一也。
现代文：凡军队，人数应该众多，军心应该一致。
English: In any army, the number of people should be large, and the military spirit should be consistent.

古文：三军一心，则令可使无敌矣。
现代文：三军思想一致，就可以使号令畅行无阻了。
English: If the three armies are of the same mind, the order can be carried out smoothly.

古文：令能无敌者，其兵之于天下也，亦无敌矣。
现代文：号令能够畅行无阻的君主，他的军队也就无敌于天下了。
English: A monarch who is able to march unimpeded, his army is invincible in the world.

古文：古之至兵，民之重令也，重乎天下，贵乎天子。
现代文：古代的正义之师，人民尊重号令，看得比天下还重大，比天子还尊贵。
English: The ancient teacher of justice, the people respect the edict, and regard him as more important than the world, and more honorable than the Son of Heaven.

古文：其藏于民心，捷于肌肤也，深痛执固，不可摇荡，物莫之能动。
现代文：号令藏于民心，感干肌肤，深切牢固，不可动摇，没有任何东西能够使它改变。
English: The slogan is deeply rooted in the hearts of the people, it is deeply rooted, it is unshakable, and nothing can change it.

古文：若此则敌胡足胜矣？
现代文：像这样，敌人自然不战而溃，哪儿还值得一击呢？
English: In this way, the enemy is naturally defeated without a fight, where else is it worth a shot?

古文：故曰：其令强者其敌弱，其令信者其敌诎。
现代文：所以说：号令不可冲犯的军队，它的敌手必然软弱，号令畅行无阻的军队，它的敌手必然屈服。
English: Therefore, it is said that if an army is ordered not to offend, its opponent is bound to be weak; if an army is ordered to march unimpeded, its opponent is bound to yield.

古文：先胜之于此，则必胜之于彼矣。
现代文：在朝廷中发布命夸时就已经胜过了敌手，因此，在原野上战胜敌手就是必然的了。
English: He had already defeated his opponent when he issued his proclamation of destiny in the imperial court, so it was inevitable that he would defeat his opponent on the field.

古文：凡兵，天下之凶器也；勇，天下之凶德也。
现代文：凡兵器都是天下的凶器，勇武是天下的凶稽。
English: All weapons are the world's deadly weapons, and bravery is the world's ferocity.

古文：举凶器，行凶德，犹不得已也。
现代文：举凶器，行凶话，是由于不得已。
English: The raising of the murder weapon and the murderous words were the result of necessity.

古文：举凶器必杀，杀，所以生之也；行凶德必威，威，所以慑之也。
现代文：举凶器必定耍杀人，杀恶人是使人民得以生存的手段，行凶德必定要显示武力使人畏惧，使人畏惧是叫敌手屈服的手段。
English: To raise the murder weapon is to play at killing, to kill evil-doers is a means to enable the people to survive, to commit murder is to show that force makes people afraid, and to make people afraid is a means to make the enemy surrender.

古文：敌慑民生，此义兵之所以隆也。
现代文：敌手最惧屈服，人民获得生存，这是正义之师兴盛的原因。
English: The reason for the prosperity of the Teacher of Righteousness is that the enemy is most afraid of succumbing and the people are able to survive.

古文：故古之至兵，士民未合，而威已谕矣，敌已服矣，岂必用枹鼓干戈哉？
现代文：所以，古代的正义之师出征，士兵尚未交锋，而威力就已经显示出来发挥作用了，敌手就已经降服了，难道还一定用得着冲锋厮杀吗？
English: Therefore, the ancient justice division went to war, the soldiers have not yet clashed, but the power has already been shown to play a role, the enemy has already surrendered, is it still necessary to charge and kill?

古文：故善谕威者，于其未发也，于其未通也，窅窅乎冥冥，莫知其情，此之谓至威之诚。
现代文：所以，善于显示威力的，他的威力在他尚未发挥、尚未显示之前就已经产生作用。他的威力深远难见，没有谁知道它的真实情况，这就是威力达到顶点的情形。
English: Therefore, he is good at displaying power, and his power is already effective before he has not yet exerted and displayed it. His power is far-reaching and difficult to see, and no one knows its true situation. This is the situation where power reaches its peak.

古文：凡兵，欲急疾捷先。
现代文：凡用兵打杖，应该行动迅速，先发制人。
English: Anyone who fights with a stick should act quickly and pre-emptively.

古文：欲急疾捷先之道，在于知缓徐迟后而急疾捷先之分也。
现代文：要想行动迅速，先发制人，方法在于明辨迟缓、落后与迅速、抢先的区别。
English: In order to act quickly and preemptively, the method lies in distinguishing the difference between being slow and lagging behind and being quick and ahead of the game.

古文：急疾捷先，此所以决义兵之胜也。
现代文：行动迅速，先发制人，这是决定正义之师胜利的因素。
English: Act quickly and pre-emptively, this is the factor that determines the victory of the righteous.

古文：而不可久处，知其不可久处，则知所兔起凫举死㱪之地矣。
现代文：因而布可滞留一处，懂得军队不可滞留的道理，那就知道哪些地方是该迅逸避开的死绝之地了。
English: Therefore, Bu can stay in one place, understand the principle that the army cannot stay, then know which places are places of death that should be quickly avoided.

古文：虽有江河之险则凌之，虽有大山之塞则陷之。
现代文：这样，纵有江河之险也可以凌越它，纵有大山险塞也能够攻陷它。
English: In this way, even if there is the danger of rivers, it can be overcome, and even if there is the danger of mountains, it can be conquered.

古文：并气专精，心无有虑，目无有视，耳无有闻，一诸武而已矣。
现代文：要克敢制胜，只要精神专一，心中没有疑虑，目不旁视，耳布旁听，把心力，眼力、耳力都集中在军事上就行了。
English: To dare to win, as long as the spirit is single-minded, there is no doubt in the heart, the eyes are not watching, the ears are listening, and the heart, eyes and ears are concentrated on the military.

古文：冉叔誓必死于田侯，而齐国皆惧；豫让必死于襄子，而赵氏皆恐；成荆致死于韩主，而周人皆畏；又况乎万乘之国而有所诚必乎？
现代文：冉叔发誓一定要杀死齐侯，齐国君臣都十分恐惧，豫让决心要刺杀赵襄子，赵氏上下都裉惊恐。成荆跟韩主拼命，周人都十分敬畏。一个人决心拼命尚且如此，又何况拥有兵车万辆的大国决心要达到目的呢？
English: Uncle Ran swore that he would definitely kill Qihou. The princes and ministers of Qihou were very afraid. Yu Let was determined to assassinate Zhao Xiangzi. The entire Zhao clan was terrified. Cheng Jing and Han Zheng were desperate, and Zhou people were very awe-struck. How could a person be so determined, and how could a big country with ten thousand chariots be determined to achieve its goal?

古文：则何敌之有矣？
现代文：那还有什么人能够跟他抗衡昵？
English: So who else can compete with him?

古文：刃未接而欲已得矣。
现代文：士兵尚未交锋而欲望就已经满足了。
English: The soldiers have not yet clashed and the desire has already been satisfied.

古文：敌人之悼惧惮恐、单荡精神，尽矣，咸若狂魄，形性相离，行不知所之，走不知所往，虽有险阻要塞、銛兵利械，心无敢据，意无敢处，此夏桀之所以死于南巢也。
现代文：敌人恐惧害怕，精神衰竭、动摇，已经达到极点了。他们吓得都像是精神错乱一样，魂不守舍，行走不知目标，奔跑不知去处，纵有险阻要塞、坚甲利兵，心里也不敢依托，精神也无法安宁，这就是夏奘之所以死在南巢的缘故啊。
English: The enemy's fear, fear, mental exhaustion, and wavering have reached an extreme. They are all terrified as if they were mentally deranged, their souls are restless, they don't know where to go, they don't know where to go, even if there are dangerous obstacles, strongholds, and strong soldiers, they don't dare to rely on their hearts, and their spirits can't be calm. That's why Xia Yao died in the South Nest.

古文：今以木击木则拌，以水投水则散，以冰投冰则沈，以涂投涂则陷，此疾徐先后之势也。
现代文：假如用木头击打术头，后者就会裂开。把水注人水中，后者就会散开，把冰投向冰面，后者就会沉没，把泥抛向泥中，后者就会下陷，达就是快慢先后的必然态势。
English: If you hit the skull with a piece of wood, the skull will crack; if you pour water on the water, the skull will break; if you throw ice on the ice, the ice will sink; if you throw mud on the mud, the mud will sink.

古文：夫兵有大要，知谋物之不谋之不禁也，则得之矣。
现代文：用兵有它的关键，如果懂得攻其无备，出其不意，那就掌握了用兵的关键了。
English: The use of troops has its key. If you know how to attack the unprepared and surprise the unprepared, then you have mastered the key to the use of troops.

古文：专诸是也，独手举剑至而已矣，吴王壹成。
现代文：专诸就是这样。他不过是独自一人手举剑落罢了。专诸仅一举就成全了阖闾，使他当上吴王。
English: That's how it was with Zhuozhu. He was just one person who raised his sword and fell. Zhuozhu accomplished the feat in just one stroke, making him the king of Wu.

古文：又况乎义兵，多者数万，少者数千，密其躅路，开敌之涂，则士岂特与专诸议哉！
现代文：又何况正义之师呢？正义之师人数多的几万，少的也有几千，所到之处，足迹布满道路，在敌国畅行无阻，像这样的武士，专诸怎么就跟他们相提并论呢？
English: And what about the Masters of Justice? There are tens of thousands of Masters of Justice, and thousands of lesser ones. Wherever they go, their footprints cover the roads, and they travel unhindered through enemy countries. How can such warriors be compared to them?

古文：三曰：世有言曰： 驱市人而战之，可以胜人之厚禄教卒；老弱罢民，可以胜人之精士练材；离散係絫，可以胜人之行陈整齐；锄耰白梃，可以胜人之长铫利兵。 
现代文：简选世人有一种言论说； 驱使市人作战，靠他们可以战胜敌手禄秩丰厚的武士和受过训练的士兵；靠老弱疲惫的百姓可以战胜敌手精壮、熟练的武士，靠散乱无纪的囚徒可以战胜敌手行列整齐的军队；靠锄櫌木棒可以战胜敌手的长矛利刃。 
English: There is a saying among the people of the world: If you drive the citizens to fight, they can defeat the enemy's highly-ranked warriors and trained soldiers; the old and tired people can defeat the enemy's strong and skilled warriors; the disorderly and undisciplined prisoners can defeat the enemy's well-ordered army; and the eucalyptus sticks can defeat the enemy's spears and blades.

古文：此不通乎兵者之论。
现代文：说这种言论的根本不通晓用兵之道。
English: Those who make such remarks do not understand the way of using force at all.

古文：今有利剑于此，以刺则不中，以击则不及，与恶剑无择，为是斗因用恶剑则不可。
现代文：假如有一把锋利的宝剑，由于技艺不精，拿它来刺却刺不中敌手，拿它去击却击不着目标，这同手持劣剑没有什么分别，但为此在搏斗时就使用劣剑却不可。
English: If there is a sharp sword, due to poor technique, take it to stab but can not stab the opponent, take it to hit but can not hit the target, this is no different from holding a bad sword, but for this reason, it is impossible to use a bad sword when fighting.

古文：简选精良，兵械銛利，发之则不时，纵之则不当，与恶卒无择，为是战因用恶卒则不可。
现代文：经过选拔的装备精良的军队，发动它们总不合时机，使用它们总不得适宜，这同统率劣等军队没有什么分别，但为此在战争中就使用劣等军队却不可。
English: After the selection of well-equipped troops, it is always inappropriate to launch them, and it is always inappropriate to use them. There is no difference between this and inferior troops, but for this reason it is impossible to use inferior troops in war.

古文：王子庆忌、陈年犹欲剑之利也。
现代文：像王子庆忌、陈年那样的勇士，尚且还希望宝剑锋利，更何况一般人呢？
English: How can a warrior, like a prince celebrating his birthday or an old man, still want his sword to be sharp, let alone an ordinary person?

古文：简选精良，兵械銛利，令能将将之，古者有以王者、有以霸者矣，汤、武、齐桓、晋文、吴阖庐是矣。
现代文：经过选拔的、装备精良的军队，让有才干的将领统率它，古代有借此成就王业的，有惜此成就霸业的，商汤、周武王，齐桓公、晋文公、吴阖庐就是这样。
English: A well-trained and well-equipped army should be led by a talented general. In ancient times, this was used to achieve royal power, but it was not enough to achieve hegemony. This was the case with Shang Tang, King Zhou Wu, King Qi Huan, King Jinwen, and King Wu Xi.

古文：殷汤良车七十乘，必死六千人，以戊子战于郕，遂禽推移、大牺，登自鸣条，乃入巢门，遂有夏。
现代文：商汤率领精良的战车七十辆，不怕死的勇士六千人，在戊子那天与夏桀在郕地交战，抓住了桀臣推移、大牺。商汤进军鸣条，接着进入巢门，于是占有了夏的天下。
English: On the day of Bo Zi, Shang Tang led 70 excellent chariots and 6,000 brave men who were not afraid of death, and fought against Xia Yao in Shunde, and captured his vassal and great vassal. Shang Tang marched into Mingtang, then entered the nest gate, and thus occupied the summer world.

古文：桀既奔走，于是行大仁慈，以恤黔首，反桀之事，遂其贤良，顺民所喜，远近归之，故王天下。
现代文：夏桀已经逃跑了，在这时商汤发扬仁慈的美德，以抚恤百姓，一反桀的所作所为，拔举夏的贤人，顺应人民的意愿，远近的人都归附了他，所以扬称王天下。
English: Xia Yao had already run away. At this time, Shang Tang promoted the virtue of benevolence, and in order to appease the people, he did the opposite of what he had done. He promoted Xia's sages and complied with the wishes of the people. People from far and near joined him, so Yang was hailed as king.

古文：武王虎贲三千人，简车三百乘，以要甲子之事于牧野，而纣为禽。
现代文：周武王率勇士三千人，精选的战车三百辆，甲子那天，在牧野打败了商封的军队，纣被擒获。
English: Zhou Wu Wang led three thousand warriors and three hundred selected chariots. On the day of Kozi, he defeated the merchant army in Makino and was captured.

古文：显贤者之位，进殷之遗老，而问民之所欲，行赏及禽兽，行罚不辟天子，亲殷如周，视人如己，天下美其德，万民说其意，故立为天子。
现代文：武王把贤人提拔到显贵的位置，举荐殷朝的遗老，询问人民的愿望，行赏及于禽兽，惩罚不避天子，亲近殷的士民百姓就像亲近周的士民百姓一样，看待另别人就像看待自己一样，天下赞美他的德行，万民喜欢他的仁义，所以武王立为天子
English: King Wu promoted the sages to prominent positions, recommended the elders of the Yin Dynasty, inquired about the wishes of the people, rewarded the animals, and punished the sons of heaven. The people who were close to the Yin Dynasty were like the people who were close to the Zhou Dynasty, and treated others like themselves. The world praised his virtue, and the people liked his benevolence and righteousness. Therefore, King Wu was established as the son of heaven

古文：齐桓公良车三百乘，教卒万人，以为兵首，横行海内，天下莫之能禁，南至石梁，西至鄗，北至令支。中山亡邢，狄人灭卫，桓公更立邢于夷仪，更立卫于楚丘。
现代文：齐桓公率领精良的兵车三百辆，训练有素的士兵一万人，作为大军的前锋，纵横驰骋于四海之内，天下没有谁能够阻挡。他率领军队向南到达石粱，向西到达酆，鄗，向北到达令支、中山攻陷了邢国，狄人灭亡了卫国，桓公在夷仪重建起邢国，在楚丘重建起卫国。
English: As the vanguard of the great army, Qi Kuan Gong led three hundred well-made chariots and ten thousand well-trained soldiers, galloping across the four seas, and no one in the world could stop him. He led the army to the south to Shijiazhuang, to the west to Shijiazhuang, Shijiazhuang, and to the north to Lingshi and Zhongshan, and conquered Shijiazhuang. Di people perished in the defense of the country, and Kuan Gong rebuilt Shijiazhuang in Yiyi, and rebuilt the defense of the country in Chuqiu.

古文：晋文公造五两之士五乘，锐卒千人，先以接敌，诸侯莫之能难。
现代文：晋文公训练出具有五种技能的甲士十五人，让他们率领精锐的步卒一千人作为前锋，先同敌人交锋，没有任何诸侯能够抵挡。
English: Jinwen Gong trained fifteen knights with five kinds of skills, and let them lead a thousand elite foot soldiers as forwards to fight the enemy first, and no princes could resist.

古文：反郑之埤，东卫之亩，尊天子于衡雍。
现代文：晋文公命令毁掉郑国城上的女墙，以便随时攻取，命令卫国的田垄一律东西向，以便自己的兵车通行无阻，并率领诸侯在衡雍尊奉周天子。
English: Jinwen ordered the destruction of the female wall on the city of Zheng, so that it could be captured at any time, ordered the fields and ridges of the defense of the country to be uniformly east-west, so that his chariots could pass unimpeded, and led the princes in Hengyong to worship Zhou Tianzi.

古文：吴阖庐选多力者五百人，利趾者三千人，以为前陈，与荆战，五战五胜，遂有郢。
现代文：吴壬阖庐选拔力士五百人，善跑的士兵三千人作为军队的前锋，跟楚国交战，五战五胜，接着占领了楚国的国都郢。
English: Wu Rinchen selected five hundred wrestlers and three thousand soldiers who were good runners to be the vanguard of the army. They fought with the State of Chu, won five victories in five battles, and then occupied the State Capital of Chu.

古文：东征至于庳庐，西伐至于巴、蜀，北迫齐、晋，令行中国。
现代文：吴王阖庐率军向东征伐一直打到庳庐，向西征伐一直打封巴，蜀，向北逼近齐国、晋国，号令在中原华夏各诸侯国榜行无阻。
English: Wu Wangtao led the army to the east to fight until the end of the war, to the west to fight until the end of the war, to the north to approach Qi and Jin, and to march unimpeded in the Central Plains of China.

古文：故凡兵势险阻，欲其便也；兵甲器械，欲其利也；选练角材，欲其精也；统率士民，欲其教也。
现代文：所以，凡战争形势，山川险阻，用兵的人都希望它对自己有利，兵甲器械，都希望它锋刺坚固；选拔、训练武士，都希望他们精锐强壮，统率士卒，都希望他们训练有素。
English: Therefore, regardless of the war situation, mountains and rivers, dangers and obstacles, people who use soldiers hope that it will be beneficial to themselves. Armor equipment hopes that it is sharp and strong. Selection and training of warriors hope that they are elite and strong, and leading soldiers hope that they are well trained.

古文：此四者，义兵之助也，时变之应也，不可不为而不足专恃。此胜之一策也。
现代文：这四个方面是正义之师的辅助，是适应时势变化的凭借，不能没有，也不能一味依赖它，这是取胜的一种策略。
English: These four aspects are the auxiliary of the teacher of justice, and the reliance of adapting to the changes of the times. We cannot do without it, nor can we rely on it blindly. This is a strategy to win.

古文：四曰：夫兵有本干：必义，必智，必勇。
现代文：决胜用兵之遭有它的根本；一定要符合正义，一定要善用智谋，一定要勇猛果敢。
English: The decisive use of force has its foundation; it must be in accordance with justice, it must make good use of wisdom and strategy, and it must be brave and bold.

古文：义则敌孤独，敌孤独则上下虚，民解落；孤独则父兄怨，贤者诽，乱内作。
现代文：符台正义，敌人就孤独无援，敌人孤独无援，上上下下就缺乏斗志，人民就会瓦解离散，孤独无援，父兄就怨恨，贤人就非议，叛乱就会从内部发生。
English: If there is no justice, the enemy will be alone and helpless, the enemy will be alone and helpless, the top and bottom will lack fighting spirit, the people will be disintegrated and scattered, alone and helpless, the father and brother will be resentful, the wise man will criticize, and the rebellion will occur from within.

古文：智则知时化，知时化则知虚实盛衰之变，知先后远近纵舍之数。
现代文：善用智谋就能知道时势的发展趋势，知道时势的发展趋势，就会知道虚实盛衰的变化，就会知道关于先后、远近、行止的策略。
English: By making good use of wisdom and strategy, we can know the development trend of the current situation, know the development trend of the current situation, know the changes of the rise and fall of the truth and falsehood, and know the strategies of succession, proximity and action.

古文：勇则能决断，能决断则能若雷电飘风暴雨，能若崩山破溃、别辨坠；若鸷鸟之击也，搏攫则殪，中木则碎。
现代文：勇猛果敢就能临事果断，能临事果断，行动起来就能像雷电、旋风、暴雨，就能像山崩，溃决、异变、星坠，势不可当，就像猛禽奋击，搏击禽兽，禽兽就会毙命，击中树木，树木就会碎裂。
English: If you are brave and courageous, you can act decisively. If you can act decisively, you can act like thunder and lightning, whirlwinds, and rainstorms. You can act like landslides, crashes, mutations, and falling stars. You can be very powerful. You can be like a bird of prey. If you fight an animal, the animal will die. If you hit a tree, the tree will break.

古文：此以勇得也。
现代文：这是靠勇猛果敢达到的。
English: It was achieved through sheer guts and determination.

古文：夫民无常勇，亦无常怯。
现代文：人民的勇放不是永恒不变的，人民的怯弱也不是永恒不变的。
English: The people's courage is not eternal and unchanging, and the people's cowardice is not eternal and unchanging.

古文：有气则实，实则勇；无气则虚，虚则怯。
现代文：士气饱满就充实，充实就会勇敢，士气丧失就空虚，空虚就会怯弱。
English: When morale is full, it is rich, and when it is rich, it is brave; when morale is low, it is empty, and when it is empty, it is timid.

古文：怯勇虚实，其由甚微，不可不知。
现代文：怯弱与勇敢、空虚与充实，它们产生的缘由十分微妙，不可不知晓。
English: Cowardice and courage, emptiness and fullness, their causes are very subtle and must be known.

古文：勇则战，怯则北。
现代文：勇敢就能奋力作战，怯弱就会临阵逃跑。
English: The brave fight hard, the cowardly run away.

古文：战而胜者，战其勇者也；战而北者，战其怯者也。
现代文：打仗获胜的，是凭恃自已的勇气而战，打仗败逃的，是心怀胆怯而战。
English: He who wins a war does so by his own courage; he who loses a war does so by cowardice.

古文：怯勇无常，倏忽往来，而莫知其方，惟圣人独见其所由然。
现代文：怯弱与勇政变化不定，变动疾速，没有谁知道其中的道理，惟有圣人知道它之所以这样的缘由。
English: Cowardice and valor are fickle and change quickly. No one knows the reason for this, but only a sage knows why.

古文：故商、周以兴，桀、纣以亡。
现代文：所以，商、周由此而兴盛，桀、纣由此而灭亡。
English: Therefore, Shang and Zhou prospered from this, and Zhou and Zhou died from this.

古文：巧拙之所以相过，以益民气与夺民气，以能斗众与不能斗众。
现代文：用兵巧妙与笨拙的结局之所以彼此绝然不同，是因为有的提高人民的士气，有的削弱人民的士气，有的善于使用民众作战，有的不会使用民众作战的缘故。
English: The reason why clever and clumsy use of troops end up completely different from each other is that some raise the morale of the people, some weaken the morale of the people, some are good at using the people to fight, and some will not use the people to fight.

古文：军虽大，卒虽多，无益于胜。
现代文：后者军队虽然庞大，士兵虽然众多，但对于取胜没有什么益处。
English: The latter's army, though large and its soldiers numerous, is of little use in winning.

古文：军大卒多而不能斗，众不若其寡也。
现代文：军队庞大，士兵众多，如果不能战斗，人多还不如人少。
English: The army is huge, the soldiers are numerous, and if they can't fight, more people are not as good as fewer people.

古文：夫众之为福也大，其为祸也亦大。譬之若渔深渊，其得鱼也大，其为害也亦大。
现代文：人数众多造福大，但如果带来灾祸，为害也大，这就好像在深捕中捕鱼一样，虽然可能捕到大鱼，但如果遇难，灾害也大。
English: A large number of people brings great benefits, but if it brings disaster, it will also cause great harm. This is like fishing in deep fishing. Although you may catch big fish, if you die, the disaster will be great.

古文：善用兵者，诸边之内莫不与斗，虽厮舆白徒，方数百里皆来会战，势使之然也。
现代文：善于用兵的人，四境之内无不参战，即使是方圆几百里之内的奴仆以及没有受过训练的百姓都来参战，这是态势使他们这样的。
English: Those who are skilled in the use of arms will not fail to take part in a war in any of the four realms, even if the slaves and untrained people within a radius of several hundred miles all come to fight. It is the situation that has made them this way.

古文：势也者，审于战期而有以羁诱之也。
现代文：态势的取得在于审慎地选择战争时机，并且有办法辖制引导他们。
English: The acquisition of the situation lies in the prudent choice of the time of war, and there is a way to control and guide them.

古文：凡兵，贵其因也。
现代文：凡用兵，贵在善于凭借。
English: Whoever uses soldiers should be able to rely on them.

古文：因也者，因敌之险以为己固，因敌之谋以为己事。
现代文：所谓凭借是指利用敌人的险阻作为自己坚固的要塞，利用敌人的谋划达到自己的目的。
English: The so-called reliance means using the enemy's obstacles as one's own strong fortress, using the enemy's plans to achieve one's own goals.

古文：能审因而加，胜则不可穷矣。
现代文：能够明察所凭借条件再采取行动，那胜利就不可穷尽了。
English: The victory is inexhaustible when one can see the conditions and act on them.

古文：胜不可穷之谓神，神则能不可胜也。
现代文：胜利不可穷尽叫作 神 ，达到 神 的境界就能不可战胜了。
English: God is called an inexhaustible victory, and when you reach God's realm, you will be invincible.

古文：夫兵，贵不可胜。
现代文：用兵贵在不可被敌战胜。
English: You can't be defeated by the enemy if you're a good soldier.

古文：不可胜在己，可胜在彼。
现代文：不可被敌战胜的主动权掌在自己手中，能不能战胜敌人在于敌人是否虚怯谋失。
English: The initiative, which cannot be defeated by the enemy, is in one's own hands. Whether or not one can defeat the enemy depends on whether or not the enemy is trying to lose face.

古文：圣人必在己者，不必在彼者，故执不可胜之术以遇不胜之敌，若此，则兵无失矣。
现代文：圣人一定把握自己的主动权，一定不依赖敌人的过失，所以，掌握着不可被战胜的策略，以此同可以战胜的敌人交锋，像这样，用兵就万无一失了。
English: The sage must grasp his own initiative, must not rely on the mistakes of the enemy, so he has an invincible strategy to confront the enemy that can be defeated. In this way, the use of troops is foolproof.

古文：凡兵之胜，敌之失也。
现代文：凡用兵获胜都是敌人犯有过失的缘故。
English: All military victories are the result of mistakes made by the enemy.

古文：胜失之兵，必隐必微，必积必摶。
现代文：战胜犯有过失的军队，一定要隐蔽，一定要潜藏赢，一定要蓄积力量，一定要集中兵力。
English: To defeat an army guilty of negligence, we must hide, we must win by stealth, we must accumulate strength, we must concentrate forces.

古文：隐则胜阐矣，微则胜显矣，积则胜散矣，摶则胜离矣。
现代文：做到隐蔽就能战胜公开的敌人了，做到潜藏就能战胜暴露的敌人了，做到蓄积就能战胜力量零散的敌人了，做到集中就能战胜兵力分散的敌人了。
English: Concealment will enable us to defeat the open enemy, concealment will enable us to defeat the exposed enemy, accumulation will enable us to defeat the enemy with scattered forces, and concentration will enable us to defeat the enemy with scattered forces.

古文：诸搏攫抵噬之兽，其用齿角爪牙也，必托于卑微隐蔽，此所以成胜。
现代文：各种依靠齿角爪牙抓取、顶撞、撕咬猎物的野兽，在它们使用齿角爪牙的时候，一定先要隐身缩形，这是它们成功取胜的原因。
English: All kinds of beasts that rely on their horned claws to grab, push, and bite prey, must first hide and shrink when they use their horned claws, which is the reason for their success.

古文：五曰：衣人以其寒也，食人以其饥也。
现代文：爱士给人衣穿是因为人们在受冻，绐人饭吃是因为人们在挨饿。
English: Love is dressing people because they are cold, and feeding them because they are hungry.

古文：饥寒，人之大害也；救之，义也。
现代文：挨饿受冻是人的大灾，拯救挨饿受冻的人是正义的行为。
English: Starving and freezing is a human catastrophe, and saving starving and freezing people is a righteous act.

古文：人之困穷，甚如饥寒，故贤主必怜人之困也，必哀人之穷也。如此则名号显矣，国士得矣。
现代文：人的艰难窘迫比起挨饿受冻来灾难更为深重，所以贤明的君主对人陷入困境必定怜悯，对人遭受困厄必表痛惜。做到这一步，君主的名声就显赫了，国士就会归附了。
English: Man's hardships and distresses are more serious than the calamity of starving and freezing, so a wise monarch must have pity on people in trouble, and must express regret for people suffering hardships. If this step is taken, the reputation of the monarch will be prominent, and the nationalists will be attached.

古文：昔者，秦缪公乘马而车为败，右服失而野人取之。
现代文：从前，有一次秦穆公乘马车出行车坏了，右侧驾辕的马跑了，一群农夫抓住了它。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Mu's horse-drawn carriage broke down. The horse on the right ran away, and a group of farmers caught it.

古文：缪公自往求之，见野人方将食之于岐山之阳。缪公叹曰： 食骏马之肉而不还饮酒，余恐其伤女也！ 
现代文：穆公亲自去寻找那匹马，在岐山的南面看到农夫正在分食马肉，穆公叹息说： 吃了骏马的肉而不马上喝酒，恐怕马肉会伤了你们的身体。 
English: Mu Gong himself went to look for the horse. On the south side of Qishan Mountain, he saw a farmer eating horse meat. Mu Gong sighed and said, "If you eat horse meat and don't drink immediately, I'm afraid the horse meat will hurt your body."

古文：于是遍饮而去。处一年，为韩原之战。
现代文：于是穆公给他们一一喝了酒，才离开。过了一年，秦、晋在韩原展开激战。
English: So Mu Gong gave them each a drink before he left. A year later, Qin and Jin fought a fierce battle in Hanwon.

古文：晋人已环缪公之车矣，晋梁由靡已扣缪公之左骖矣，晋惠公之右路石奋杸而击缪公之甲，中之者已六札矣。野人之尝食马肉于岐山之阳者三百有余人，毕力为缪公疾斗于车下，遂大克晋，反获惠公以归。
现代文：晋国士兵已经包围了秦穆公的兵车，晋国大夫粱由靡已经抓住穆公车上左边的马，晋惠公的车右路石举起长殳击中了穆公的皑甲，穆公的七层铠甲已被击穿了六层，在这危急时刻，曾在岐山之南分食马肉的农夫三百多人，赶来在车下竭尽全力为穆公拼死搏斗。于是秦军大胜晋军，反而俘获了晋惠公带回秦国。
English: The Jin soldiers had already surrounded Qin Mu Gong's chariot, the Jin doctor Zang Yimai had already grabbed the horse on the left side of the Mu chariot, the right-hand road stone of the Jin Hui's chariot had lifted up and hit the armor of the Mu Gong. The seven-layer armor of the Mu Gong had been broken through six layers. At this critical moment, more than three hundred farmers who had eaten horse meat in the south of Qishan came to fight for the Mu Gong under the chariot. So the Qin army defeated the Jin army, but captured the Jin Hui and brought him back to Qin.

古文：此《诗》之所谓 君君子则正，以行其德；君贱人则宽，以尽其力 者也。
现代文：这就是《诗》中所说的 给君子作国君就要平正无私，借以让他们施行仁德，给卑贱的人作国君就要宽容厚道，借以让他们竭尽全力 啊！
English: This is what is said in the "Poem": To be the sovereign of a gentleman, one must be fair and selfless, so that they can practice benevolence; to be the sovereign of a lowly person, one must be tolerant and kind, so that they can do their best!

古文：人主其胡可以无务行德爱人乎？
现代文：君主怎么能不务求施行仁德、爱抚人民呢？
English: How can a monarch not strive to exercise benevolence and caress the people?

古文：行德爱人，则民亲其上；民亲其上，则皆乐为其君死矣。
现代文：君主施行仁德，爱抚人民，人民就爱戴他们，人民如果爱戴他们的君主，那就都乐意为他们去死了。
English: If a ruler is benevolent and caresses the people, the people will love him. If the people love their ruler, they will be willing to die for him.

古文：赵简子有两白骡而甚爱之。
现代文：赵简子有两匹白骡，简子特别喜爱它们。
English: Zhao Jianzi has two egrets, and he is particularly fond of them.

古文：阳城胥渠处广门之官，夜款门而谒曰: 主君之臣胥渠有疾，医教之曰： 得白骡之肝，病则止；不得则死。 
现代文：一天夜里，任广门邑小吏的阳城胥渠来到简子的门前，叩门申述说： 主君的家臣胥纂病了，医生告诉他说： 如果弄到白骡的肝吃了，病就能好，如果弄不到，就必死。  
English: One night, Yangcheng Xuanqiu, a minor official of Guangmen, came to Jianzi's door, knocked on the door and said: The master's vassal Xuanqiao was ill. The doctor told him: If you can get the liver of the egret and eat it, your illness will be cured. If you can't get it, you will die.

古文：谒者入通。
现代文：负责通报的人进去禀告赵简子。
English: The person in charge of the notification went in to denounce Zhao Jianzi.

古文：董安于御于侧，愠曰： 嘻！胥渠也。
现代文：董安于正在一旁侍奉，恼怒地说； 嘿，胥渠这个家伙！
English: Dong Anyu, who was waiting on the sidelines, said angrily; Hey, this guy!

古文：期吾君骡，请即刑焉。 
现代文：竟算计起玻们主君的白骡来了。请允许我去把他杀掉！ 
English: It turns out that our master's egret has arrived. Please allow me to kill him!

古文：简子曰： 夫杀人以活畜，不亦不仁乎？
现代文：简子说； 杀人为的是使牲畜活命，不也太不仁义了吗？
English: "Killing people to keep livestock alive, isn't that too cruel and unjust?" said Kenshi.

古文：杀畜以活人，不亦仁乎？ 
现代文：杀掉牲畜为的是救活人命，不正是仁爱的体现吗？ 
English: Isn't it an expression of benevolence to kill livestock in order to save human lives?

古文：于是召庖人杀白骡，取肝以与阳城胥渠。
现代文：于是呼唤厨师杀掉白骡，取出肝，送给阳城胥渠。
English: So he called the chef to kill the egret, take out its liver and give it to Yangcheng Canal.

古文：处无几何，赵兴兵而攻翟。广门之官，左七百人，右七百人，皆先登而获甲首。
现代文：过了设多久，赵简子举兵攻狄，广门邑的小吏，左队七百人，右队七百人都争先登上城头，并斩获敌方披甲武士的首级。
English: After a long time, Zhao Jianzi raised an army to attack Di, and the minor officials of Guangmen, seven hundred people from the left team and seven hundred people from the right team, all rushed to the top of the city and won the heads of the enemy armored warriors.

古文：人主其胡可以不好士？
现代文：由此看来，君主怎么可以不爱士呢？
English: From this point of view, how could the monarch not love him?

古文：凡敌人之来也，以求利也。今来而得死，且以走为利。
现代文：凡敌人来犯，都是为了追求利益，假如来犯而遭到覆灭，那将把退却看作是有利了。
English: All invasions by the enemy are in pursuit of gain, and if the invaders are annihilated, then retreat will be seen as advantageous.

古文：敌皆以走为利，则刃无与接。
现代文：如果敌人都把退却看作是有利，那就用不着交锋了。
English: If the enemy sees retreat as an advantage, there is no need to fight.

古文：故敌得生于我，则我得死于敌；敌得死于我，则我得生于敌。
现代文：所以，如果敌人从我们这里获得生存，那我们就要死在敌手；如果敌人死在我们手下，那我们就从敌人那里获得了生存。
English: So if the enemy lives by us, we die by the enemy; if the enemy dies by us, we live by the enemy.

古文：夫得生于敌，与敌得生于我，岂可不察哉？
现代文：或是我们从敌人那里获得生存，或是敌人从我们逸里获得生存，这其中的道理难道不该仔细研究吗？
English: Shouldn't the reason why we survive from the enemy, or the enemy survives from us, be carefully studied?

古文：此兵之精者也。存亡死生决于知此而已矣。
现代文：这是用兵的精妙所在，生死存亡就取决于是否懂得这个道理了。
English: This is the subtlety of the use of soldiers, survival depends on whether you understand this truth.

