古文：陆逊字伯言，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆逊，字伯言，吴郡吴县人。
English: Lu Xun, surnamed Boyan, from Wu County, Wuxi County.

古文：本名议，世江东大族。
现代文：他原名陆议，世代是江东的大族。
English: His original name was Lu Zhe, and he was a member of a large family from the eastern Jiangsu Province.

古文：逊少孤，随从祖庐江太守康在官。
现代文：陆逊年少时父亲就去世了，跟随堂祖父庐江太守陆康到他的任所居住。
English: Lu Xun's father died when he was young, and he followed his great-grandfather Lu Kang, the governor of Minjiang, to live at his post.

古文：袁术与康有隙，将攻康，康遣逊及亲戚还吴。
现代文：袁术和陆康有嫌隙，将要攻打陆康，陆康就让陆逊和亲眷们返回吴县。
English: Yuan Shu and Lu Kang had a grudge and were going to attack Lu Kang, so Lu Kang let Lu Xun and his relatives return to Wuxian.

古文：逊年长於康子绩数岁，为之纲纪门户。
现代文：陆逊比陆康的儿子陆绩年长几岁，就替陆康管理家族事务。
English: Lu Xun, who was a few years older than Lu Kang's son Lu Ji, managed the family affairs for Lu Kang.

古文：孙权为将军，逊年二十一，始仕幕府，历东西曹令史，出为海昌屯田都尉，并领县事。
现代文：孙权做将军时，陆逊二十一岁，起初在孙权幕府任职，历任东曹令史、西曹令史，出任海昌县屯田都尉，并管理县中事务。
English: When Sun Quan was a general, Lu Xun was twenty-one years old. At first, he served in the Sun Quan Shogunate, successively serving as East Cao Ling Shi and West Cao Ling Shi, as the captain of Tonden in Haichang County, and managing the affairs of the county.

古文：县连年亢旱，逊开仓谷以振贫民，劝督农桑，百姓蒙赖。
现代文：该县连年大旱，陆逊打开官仓放粮赈济贫民，鼓励督促种田养蚕，百姓蒙受很多益处。
English: The county has been in drought for several years. Lu Xun opened the official storehouse to give grain to the poor, encouraged the supervision of farming and raising silkworms, and the people have benefited a lot.

古文：时吴、会稽、丹杨多有伏匿，逊陈便宜，乞与募焉。
现代文：当时吴县、会稽、丹杨都有很多在山林中隐藏躲乱的人，陆逊向朝廷陈述当前急迫解决的事宜，请求招募这些人。
English: At that time, there were a lot of people hiding in the mountains and forests in Wuxian, Hefei and Danyang. Lu Xun presented the urgent matters to the imperial court and requested to recruit these people.

古文：会稽山贼大帅潘临，旧为所在毒害，历年不禽。
现代文：会稽山越贼人大首领潘临，向来是该地区的祸害，数年来官府不能抓获他。
English: Pan Lin, the leader of the Shan Yue Thieves' Association, has always been a scourge in the region, and the government has been unable to catch him for several years.

古文：逊以手下召兵，讨治深险，所向皆服，部曲已有二千馀人。
现代文：陆逊让部下召集士兵，征讨藏身险地的贼寇，所到之处全都降服，他的部队已增加到二千多人。
English: Lu Xun ordered his subordinates to gather soldiers and fight the bandits in their hiding places. Everywhere they went, they all surrendered, and his troops had increased to more than two thousand.

古文：鄱阳贼帅尤突作乱，复往讨之，拜定威校尉，军屯利浦。
现代文：鄱阳郡贼寇首领尤突作乱，陆逊又前往讨伐，被授予定威校尉，军队驻扎在利浦。
English: The leader of the bandits in Poyang County made a sudden disturbance, and Lu Xun went to the crusade, was awarded the rank of lieutenant, and the army was stationed in Lippu.

古文：权以兄策女配逊，数访世务，逊建议曰： 方今英雄棋跱，财狼闚望，克敌宁乱，非众不济。而山寇旧恶，依阻深地。
现代文：孙权将哥哥的女儿嫁给陆逊，多次询问他对时局的看法，陆逊建议说: 如今英雄各据一方对峙争霸，豺狼般的敌人窥探时机，要打败敌人平定战乱，没有大量的人马不能成功，而山越贼寇和我们素有恩怨，凭借山势占据险要。
English: Sun Quan married his brother's daughter to Lu Xun, and repeatedly asked him about his views on the current situation. Lu Xun suggested, "Nowadays, heroes fight for supremacy on one side, and the wolf-like enemy spies the opportunity. To defeat the enemy and settle the war, you can't succeed without a large number of people and horses. And the mountain bandits and us have a grudge, and they use the mountain situation to occupy the crucial point."

古文：夫腹心未平，难以图远，可大部伍，取其精锐。 
现代文：我们的内乱尚未平定，难以图谋远方敌人，应当壮大部队，挑选精锐士兵。 
English: Our civil strife has not yet been quelled, and it is difficult to plot against distant enemies. We should strengthen our troops and select elite soldiers.

古文：权纳其策，以为帐下右部督。
现代文：孙权采纳了他的计策，任命他为帐下右部督。
English: Sun Quan adopted his strategy and appointed him as his right-hand governor.

古文：会丹杨贼帅费栈受曹公印绶，扇动山越，为作内应，权遣逊讨栈。
现代文：正值丹杨贼寇首领费栈接受曹操的任命，煽动山越部族作乱，作为曹操内应，孙权派遣陆逊前往征讨费栈。
English: It was the time when Fei Xuan, the leader of the Danyang Thieves and Robbers, accepted Cao Cao's appointment and instigated the Shan Yue tribe to make a disturbance. As Cao Cao's subordinate, Sun Quan sent Lu Xun to collect Fei Xuan.

古文：栈支党多而往兵少，逊乃益施牙幢，分布鼓角，夜潜山谷间，鼓噪而前，应时破散。
现代文：费栈的党羽很多而陆逊带领的士卒少，陆逊便增设不少旗旌，另外安排战鼓、号角，深夜潜行山谷之间，擂鼓前进，费栈人马一下子被攻破逃散。
English: There were many party members of Feistang and few soldiers led by Lu Xun, so Lu Xun added a lot of banners, arranged war drums and horns, sneaked between the valleys in the middle of the night, marched with drums, and Feistang's soldiers were defeated and dispersed at once.

古文：遂部伍东三郡，强者为兵，羸者补户，得精卒数万人，宿恶荡除，所过肃清，还屯芜湖。
现代文：于是陆逊整编东三郡的部队，强者继续留在军营，老弱回到地方安户，这样有了精锐部队几万人，将过去的贼患全部清楚，军队所过之地社会肃清安定，随后回师驻扎芜湖。
English: As a result, Lu Xun reorganized the troops of the eastern three counties, the strong continued to stay in the military camp, and the old and weak returned to the local Ando. In this way, there were tens of thousands of elite troops, the past thieves were all clear, the society where the army passed was clean and stable, and then the division was stationed in Wuhu.

古文：会稽太守淳于式表逊枉取民人，愁扰所在。
现代文：会稽太守淳于式上表奏劾陆逊违法征用民众，所辖区域的民众深受困扰而愁苦不堪。
English: Jun Jun, the auditor-general of the CPC Central Committee, formally filed an impeachment against Lu Xun for illegally expropriating the people, and the people in the area under his jurisdiction were deeply troubled and distressed.

古文：逊后诣都，言次，称式佳吏，权曰： 式白君而君荐之，何也？ 
现代文：陆逊后来进京，言语之中，称赞淳于式是个好官，孙权问他: 淳于式控告你而你却举荐他，为什么呢? 
English: Later, when Lu Xun entered Beijing, he praised Jun Yushi as a good official in his speech. Sun Quan asked him: Jun Yushi sued you, but you recommended him. Why?

古文：逊对曰： 式意欲养民，是以白逊。
现代文：陆逊回答说: 淳于式的想法是希望安养百姓，所以控告我。
English: Lu Xun replied, "The idea of Jun Yu style is to hope to keep the people safe, so sue me.

古文：若逊复毁式以乱圣听，不可长也。 
现代文：如果我再诋毁他以扰乱陛下视听，这种风气不可滋长! 
English: If I slander him again by disturbing His Majesty's audio-visual performance, this culture must not be allowed to grow!

古文：权曰： 此诚长者之事，顾人不能为耳。 
现代文：孙权说: 这确实是忠厚诚实者所为，一般人是做不到的。 
English: Sun Quan said, "This is really the work of a loyal and honest person. An ordinary person can't do it.

古文：吕蒙称疾诣建业，逊往见之，谓曰： 关羽接境，如何远下，后不当可忧也？ 
现代文：吕蒙假称有病前往建业，陆逊前去拜见他，问吕蒙说: 关羽驻守在我国边境，您为何远离防区而东，后来不会有后顾之忧吗? 
English: Lv Meng pretended to be ill and went to Jianye. Lu Xun went to see him and asked Lv Meng: Guan Yu is stationed at our border. Why did you leave the defense zone and go east? Won't you be worried about him later?

古文：蒙曰： 诚如来言，然我病笃。 
现代文：吕蒙说: 确实如你所说，但我的病很重。 
English: Lu Meng said, "It's true what you said, but I'm very ill."

古文：逊曰： 羽矜其骁气，陵轹於人。
现代文：陆逊说: 关羽自恃他的骁勇胆气，欺负别人。
English: Lu Xun said: Guan Yu boasted of his bravery and bullied others.

古文：始有大功，意骄志逸，但务北进，未嫌於我，有相闻病，必益无备。
现代文：刚刚建立大功，意气骄横志向狂妄，只努力往北攻打魏国，对我国没有防备，他若得知您病重，必然更加不做防备。
English: He has just made a great achievement, his spirit is arrogant, his ambition is arrogant, he only strives to attack Wei in the north, and he has no defense against our country. If he learns that you are seriously ill, he will certainly be even more unprepared.

古文：今出其不意，自可禽制。
现代文：现在出其不意地攻打他，一定能够将他擒获。
English: If we attack him unexpectedly now, we will definitely be able to capture him.

古文：下见至尊，宜好为计。 
现代文：您见到主上，应好好谋划。 
English: When you meet the Lord, you should plan well.

古文：蒙曰： 羽素勇猛，既难为敌，且已据荆州，恩信大行，兼始有功，胆势益盛，未易图也。 
现代文：吕蒙说: 关羽素来勇猛，本就难以与他匹敌，而且他又占据荆州，对当地广施恩信，再加上他刚立下大功，胆量和威势愈加盛壮，不容易图取他。 
English: Lv Meng said: Guan Yu had always been brave, and it was difficult to match him. Moreover, he had occupied Jingzhou and had been generous to the local people. In addition, he had just made a great achievement, and his courage and might had become more powerful. It was not easy to capture him.

古文：蒙至都，权问： 谁可代卿者？ 
现代文：吕蒙到京后，孙权问他: 谁可以接替您? 
English: After Lv Meng arrived in Beijing, Sun Quan asked him: Who can succeed you?

古文：蒙对曰： 陆逊意思深长，才堪负重，观其规虑，终可大任。
现代文：吕蒙回答说: 陆逊思虑事情深远，才能可担当重任，看他的规划思虑，最终可以承担大任。
English: Lv Meng replied, "Lu Xun thinks about far-reaching matters before he can take on heavy responsibilities. Judging from his planning and thinking, he can eventually take on heavy responsibilities.

古文：而未有远名，非羽所忌，无复是过。
现代文：而且他还没有远大的名声，不是关羽忌惮的，没有人比他更合适。
English: And he doesn't have a big name yet, he's not someone to be scared of, there's no one better.

古文：若用之，当令外自韬隐，内察形便，然后可克。 
现代文：如果用他，应让他表面上隐藏起真实的意图，暗中察看有利形势，然后可以攻克关羽。 
English: If you use him, you should let him hide his true intentions on the surface, secretly observe the favorable situation, and then you can overcome the difficulties.

古文：权乃召逊，拜偏将车右部督代蒙。
现代文：孙权就召见陆逊，任命他为偏将军右部督，代替吕蒙。
English: Sun Quan summoned Lu Xun and appointed him as the commander of the Right Division of the General Staff, replacing Lv Meng.

古文：逊至陆口，书与羽曰： 前承观衅而动，以律行师，小举大克，一何巍巍！
现代文：陆逊到陆口后，写信给关羽说: 过去承您观察对方形势而行动，依据法则指挥部队，细微的举动即大获全胜，何等崇高的威风!
English: After Lu Xun arrived in Lukou, he wrote a letter to Guan Yu saying: In the past, you observed the situation of the other side and took action, commanded the troops according to the law, and won a great victory with a small move. What a lofty prestige!

古文：敌国败绩，利在同盟，闻庆拊节，想遂席卷，共奖王纲。
现代文：敌国打了败仗，我们的同盟有利，得知您胜利的喜讯而击节叫好，想您得以因此完成席卷天下的功业，共同辅佐朝廷纲纪。
English: The enemy country lost the war, our alliance was advantageous. When we learned the good news of your victory, the festival cheered, thinking that you would be able to complete the work of sweeping the world and jointly assist the imperial court discipline.

古文：近以不敏，受任来西，延慕光尘，思禀良规。 
现代文：最近我这不聪敏之人，奉命西来此地，非常仰慕您的风采，颇想受到您的良好劝导。 
English: Recently, I, an unintelligent person, was ordered to come here from the west. I admire your style very much and would like to be well advised by you.

古文：又曰： 于禁等见获，遐迩欣叹，以为将军之勋足以长世，虽昔晋文城濮之师，淮阴拔赵之略，蔑以尚兹。
现代文：又说: 于禁等人为您俘获，远近都对您钦佩赞叹，认为将军您的功勋足以流传后世，即使是当年晋文公出师城濮，淮阴侯攻下赵国的谋略，也未能超过将军的功绩。
English: He also said: Yu Han and others were captured for you, and people from near and far admired and admired you. They thought that your merits as a general were enough to be passed down to future generations. Even the strategy of Jin Wenkong and Huai Yin Hou to capture Zhao Province failed to surpass the general's achievements.

古文：闻徐晃等少骑驻旌，闚望麾葆。
现代文：听说徐晃等带领少数骑兵驻扎，探测您的情况。
English: I heard that Xu Ak, etc. led a few cavalry stationed to detect your situation.

古文：操猾虏也，忿不思难，恐潜增众，以逞其心。
现代文：曹操这个狡猾的敌人，因失败而忿恨不会想到危难，恐怕会暗中增添人马，以完成他的野心。
English: Cao Cao, the cunning enemy, will not think of danger because he is angry at his failure. I am afraid that he will secretly increase the number of people to fulfill his ambition.

古文：虽云师老，犹有骁悍。
现代文：虽说他的军队出战时久，但还有一些骁勇善战的将士。
English: Although his army has been at war for a long time, there are still some brave and good soldiers.

古文：且战捷之后，常苦轻敌，古人杖术，军胜弥警，愿将军广为方计，以全独克。
现代文：况且人们在打了胜仗之后，常常会产生轻敌想法，古人根据兵法，军队获胜后更加警惕，希望将军广泛采取措施，以保住自己的全胜。
English: Moreover, after winning a battle, people often have the idea of despising the enemy. According to the ancient military method, the army is more vigilant after winning, and hopes that the general will take extensive measures to maintain his complete victory.

古文：仆书生疏迟，忝所不堪，喜邻威德，乐自倾尽，虽未合策，犹可怀也。
现代文：我书生意气粗浅迟钝，颇为惭愧自己不足胜任这个职位，十分高兴与将军为邻，钦佩您的威望德行，乐意向您倾诉心中所想，所说的虽不能合乎您的策略，但仍然可以表达我的想法。
English: My book is businesslike, coarse, shallow and obtuse, I am rather ashamed that I am not qualified for this position, I am very happy to be a neighbor of the general, I admire your prestige and virtue, I am happy to tell you what I think in my heart, although what I said can not match your strategy, but I can still express my thoughts.

古文：傥明注仰，有以察之。 
现代文：如若承蒙您的关注，您会明察情况的。 
English: If your attention is appreciated, you will see the situation clearly.

古文：羽览逊书，有谦下自讬之意，意大安，无复所嫌。
现代文：关羽看过陆逊的信，内容含有谦虚依附的意思，心中很是高兴安定，再没有防备想法。
English: Guan Yu read Lu Xun's letter, the content of which contained the meaning of modesty and attachment. In his heart, he was very happy and stable, and he had no idea of being prepared.

古文：逊具启形状，陈其可禽之要。
现代文：陆逊将关羽的态度上报孙权，指出可以擒获关羽的关键。
English: Lu Xun reported Guan Yu's attitude to Sun Quan and pointed out the key to capturing Guan Yu.

古文：权乃潜军而上，使逊与吕蒙为前部，至即克公安、南郡。
现代文：孙权就暗中领兵西上，任命陆逊与吕蒙为先锋，东吴大军一到就攻下了公安、南郡。
English: Sun Quan secretly led the troops to the west and appointed Lu Xun and Lv Meng as the vanguard. As soon as the Dongwu army arrived, they captured the Public Security Bureau and Nan County.

古文：逊径进，领宜都太守，拜抚边将军，封华亭侯。
现代文：陆逊率军长驱直入，兼任宜都太守，被授为抚边将军，封华亭侯。
English: Lu Xun led the army commander to drive straight in, and concurrently served as the governor of Yidu, was awarded as the Fubian general, and was given the title of Huatingo.

古文：备宜都太守樊友委郡走，诸城长吏及蛮夷君长皆降。
现代文：刘备的宜都太守樊友弃城逃跑，各城邑长官和各少数民族头领都投降了。
English: Liu Bei's Yidu Taishou and his friends abandoned the city and fled, and the governors of all cities and towns and the leaders of all ethnic minorities surrendered.

古文：逊请金银铜印，以假授初附。
现代文：陆逊请发给金银铜印，以便授任那些刚投降归附的人物。
English: Lu Xun, please issue gold, silver and bronze seals to those who have just surrendered and been annexed, so that they can be appointed.

古文：是岁建安二十四年十一月也。
现代文：这年是建安二十四年十一月。
English: This year is November of the 24th year of Jian'an.

古文：逊遣将军李异、谢旌等将三千人，攻蜀将詹晏、陈凤。
现代文：陆逊派遣将军李异、谢旌等率军三千，攻打蜀将詹晏、陈凤。
English: Lu Xun dispatched three thousand troops led by generals Li Yi and Xie Jun to attack Shu generals Zhan Jun and Chen Feng.

古文：异将水军，旌将步兵，断绝险要，即破晏等，生降得凤。
现代文：李异率领水军，谢旌率领步兵，截断险要地势，很快攻破詹晏等，陈凤被擒投降。
English: Li Yi led the navy, Xie Jun led the infantry, cut off the dangerous situation, quickly defeated Zhan Jun and others, Chen Feng was captured and surrendered.

古文：又攻房陵太守邓辅、南乡太守郭睦，大破之。
现代文：进而又攻打蜀国房陵太守邓辅、南乡太守郭睦，大获全胜。
English: He then attacked Deng Fu, the governor of Fangling in Shu Province, and Guo Mutu, the governor of Nansha Township, and won a complete victory.

古文：秭归大姓文布、邓凯等合夷兵数千人，首尾西方。
现代文：秭归的豪族文布、邓凯等纠集少数民族兵士几千人，连结蜀国。
English: The returnees, including the local warlords Wenbu and Dengkai, gathered several thousand soldiers from ethnic minorities and linked up with Shu.

古文：逊复部旌讨破布、凯。
现代文：陆逊又部署谢旌攻破文布、邓凯。
English: Lu Xun also deployed Xie Jun to attack Wenbu and Deng Kai.

古文：布、凯脱走，蜀以为将。
现代文：文布、邓凯逃走，蜀国任命他们为将军。
English: Wenbu and Deng Kai fled, and Shu appointed them as generals.

古文：逊令人诱之，布帅众还降。
现代文：陆逊派人引诱他们，文布率军又转来投降。
English: Lu Xun sent people to lure them, and Wenbu led the army to surrender.

古文：前后斩获招纳，凡数万计。
现代文：陆逊前后斩杀、俘获、招降之人共有数万。
English: A total of tens of thousands of people were killed, captured or surrendered by Lu Xun.

古文：权以逊为右护军、镇西将军，进封娄侯。
现代文：孙权任命他为右护军、镇西将军，进封娄侯。
English: Sun Quan appointed him as the right guard, the general of Zhenxi, and the crown prince.

古文：时荆州士人新还，仕进或未得所，逊上疏曰： 昔汉高受命，招延英异，光武中兴，群俊毕至，苟可以熙隆道教者，未必远近。
现代文：当时荆州士人刚归附东吴，仕进之人有的还未得到妥善的安置，陆逊上疏说: 昔日汉高祖承受天命，招揽优异才杰，光武帝中兴，广大的俊杰都去归附，只需他们可以兴盛道德教化，不必区分远近亲疏。
English: At that time, the Jingzhou scholars had just been annexed to Dongwu, and some of those who had been sent in had not yet been properly resettled. Lu Xun said: In the past, the Han Gao Zu was destined by heaven to recruit outstanding talents, and Emperor Guangwu Zhongxing and the vast number of young masters all went to be annexed. As long as they could flourish in moral education, there was no need to distinguish between distant and close relatives.

古文：今荆州始定，人物未达，臣愚慺慺，乞普加覆载抽拔之恩，令并获自进，然后四海延颈，思归大化。 
现代文：现在荆州刚刚平定，有声望之人没有得到显达，为臣恭敬恳切地请求您普遍给予他们供职提拔的恩德，使他们都得到晋升的机会，然后天下人就会引颈期望，希望能接受您的深广的教化。 
English: Now that Jingzhou has just been pacified, and the prestigious people have not been promoted, the vassals respectfully and earnestly request that you generally give them the benefits of service and promotion, so that they all have the opportunity to be promoted, and then the people of the world will expect and hope to accept your profound enlightenment.

古文：权敬纳其言。
现代文：孙权敬佩并采纳了他的建议。
English: Sun Quan admired and adopted his suggestion.

古文：黄武元年，刘备率大众来向西界，权命逊为大都督、假节，督朱然、潘璋、宋谦、韩当、徐盛、鲜于丹、孙桓等五万人拒之。
现代文：黄武元年，刘备亲自率领大军来到吴国西部边界，孙权任命陆逊为大都督，假节，督率朱然、潘璋、宋谦、韩当、徐盛、鲜于丹、孙桓等所部五万人马抗击刘备。
English: In the first year of Huangwu, Liu Bei personally led a large army to the western border of Wu, and Sun Quan appointed Lu Xun as the grand governor. On the day of the false festival, the governor led Zhu Ran, Pan Ye, Song Qian, Handang, Xu Sheng, Shen Yu Dan, Sun Huan and other 50,000 soldiers to fight against Liu Bei.

古文：备从巫峡、建平连围至夷陵界，立数十屯，以金锦爵赏诱动诸夷，使将军冯习为大督，张南为前部，辅匡、赵融、廖淳、傅肜等各为别督，先遣吴班将数千人於平地立营，欲以挑战。
现代文：刘备从巫峡、建平至夷陵边界，连接扎营几十座，以金银财帛和爵位的赏赐招诱各少数民族部落，以冯习为大都督，张南为前锋，辅匡、赵融、廖淳、傅肜为各分部都督，先派吴班带领数千人在平地安营，想以此向吴军挑战。
English: Liu Bei connected dozens of camps from Wuxia, Jianping to the Yiling border, lured various ethnic minority tribes with the reward of gold, silver, wealth and peerage, with Feng Xi as the grand governor, Zhang Nan as the vanguard, and Fu Kuang, Zhao Rong, Liao Chun and Fu Xi as the governors of each branch, and first sent Wu Ban to lead thousands of people to camp on the plain in order to challenge the Wu army.

古文：诸将皆欲击之，逊曰： 此必有谲，且观之。 
现代文：东吴各将都想攻打吴班，陆逊说: 蜀军此举必定有诈，暂且观察一下。 
English: All the generals in Eastern Wu wanted to attack Wu Ban, and Lu Xun said: "This move by the Shu army must be fraudulent. Let's wait and see."

古文：备知其计不可，乃引伏兵八千，从谷中出。
现代文：刘备知道自己的计谋不成功，于是带领八千名伏兵，从山谷中撤出。
English: Liu Bei knew that his stratagem was not successful, so he led eight thousand ambush soldiers and withdrew from the valley.

古文：逊曰： 所以不听诸君击班者，揣之必有巧故也。 逊上疏曰： 夷陵要害，国之关限，虽为易得，亦复易失。
现代文：陆逊说: 我之所以不听从各位攻打吴班的原因，是估计到蜀军必有巧诈的缘故。 陆逊上奏疏说: 夷陵是军事要害之地，国家重要的关口，虽说容易夺取，但也容易丢失。
English: Lu Xun said, "The reason why I did not listen to you when you attacked Wuban is that I thought that the Shu army must have cheated." Lu Xun said, "Yiling is a military key place, an important national pass, although it is easy to capture, it is also easy to lose.

古文：失之非徒损一郡之地，荆州可忧。
现代文：失去夷陵并非只是失去一郡的土地，而是荆州就有忧虑了。
English: The loss of Yiling is not just the loss of a county's land, but Jingzhou is worried.

古文：今日争之，当令必谐。
现代文：现在争夺此地，一定要取得成功。
English: To compete here now, we must succeed.

古文：备干天常，不守窟穴，而敢自送。
现代文：刘备违背常理，不守着自己的地盘，而竟敢自来送死。
English: Liu Bei violated common sense, did not guard his own territory, and dared to send people to their deaths.

古文：臣虽不材，凭奉威灵，以顺讨逆，破坏在近。
现代文：臣下虽然不才，但凭借陛下的声威，以有道讨伐无道，击破歼灭蜀军近在眼前。
English: Although his vassals were incompetent, by virtue of his majesty's authority, they were able to defeat and annihilate the Shu army in front of his eyes.

古文：寻备前后行军，多败少成，推此论之，不足为戚。
现代文：考虑刘备前后带兵作战，总是胜少败多，推而论之，此人不足为忧!
English: Considering that Liu Bei has led troops in battle before and after, always winning less and losing more, it follows that this person is not enough to worry about!

古文：臣初嫌之，水陆俱进，今反舍船就步，处处结营，察其布置，必无他变。
现代文：为臣起初担心他水陆并进，现在他反而舍弃舟船而以步兵作战，到处安营相连，探察他的军事安排，必定没有什么大的变化。
English: At first, his vassals feared that he would advance by land and sea. Now, on the contrary, he has abandoned boats and ships to fight with infantry, setting up camps everywhere, and inspecting his military arrangements. There must be no major changes.

古文：伏愿至尊高枕，不以为念也。 
现代文：希望陛下高枕无忧，不必挂念。 
English: I hope His Majesty will have a good night's sleep and will not have to worry.

古文：诸将并曰： 攻备当在初，今乃令入五六百里，相衔持经七八月，其诸要害皆以固守，击之必无利矣。 
现代文：众将领都说: 攻打刘备应当在他刚出兵的时候，如今让他深入境内五、六百里，相互对峙七、八个月，很多要害关隘都被他们据守控制，现在攻打必然对我们不利。 
English: All the generals said: Liu Bei should have been attacked when he first sent out troops, but now he has been allowed to penetrate five or six hundred miles into the country, and they have been confronting each other for seven or eight months. They have been able to maintain control over many important areas. Attacking now would certainly be to our disadvantage.

古文：逊曰： 备是猾虏，更尝事多，其军始集，思虑精专，未可干也。
现代文：陆逊说: 刘备是个狡猾的敌人，经历了很多事，他的军队刚刚集结时，考虑精密用心专一，不可轻易进犯他。
English: Lu Xun said: Liu Bei is a cunning enemy and has experienced a lot of things. When his army was just assembled, it should not easily attack him, considering precision and single-mindedness.

古文：今住已久，不得我便，兵疲意沮，计不复生，犄角此寇，正在今日。 
现代文：现在他驻扎时间很长了，没有占到我们的便宜，军队疲乏情绪低落，再也想不出新的计策，抵触这种敌人，现在正是时候。 
English: Now that he has been stationed for a long time and has not taken advantage of us, and the army is tired and depressed and can no longer come up with new strategies, it is time to resist this kind of enemy.

古文：乃先攻一营，不利。
现代文：于是陆逊先出兵攻打蜀军一处营寨，未得胜利。
English: As a result, Lu Xun first sent troops to attack a camp of the Shu army, but did not achieve victory.

古文：诸将皆曰： 空杀兵耳。 
现代文：将领们都说: 这是白白让兵卒去送死。 
English: The generals all said: It is in vain to send soldiers to their deaths.

古文：逊曰： 吾已晓破之之术。 
现代文：陆逊说: 我已知晓打败敌人的办法了。 
English: Lu Xun said: I know how to defeat the enemy.

古文：乃敕各持一把茅，以火攻拔之。
现代文：就命令全军将士每人拿着一把茅柴，用火攻的办法攻克蜀军的营寨。
English: He ordered the soldiers of the whole army to take a handful of firewood each and use fire to attack the Shu army's camp.

古文：一尔势成，通率诸军同时俱攻，斩张南、冯习及胡王沙摩柯等首，破其四十馀营。
现代文：顷刻间形成熊熊大火，陆逊便率领各军同时进攻，斩杀蜀将张南、冯习及胡王沙摩柯等人，攻下蜀军四十多处营寨。
English: A raging fire was formed in an instant, and Lu Xun led all the armies to attack at the same time, killing Shu generals Zhang Nan, Feng Xi and Hu Wang Shamoke, and capturing more than forty camps of the Shu army.

古文：备将杜路、刘宁等穷逼请降。
现代文：刘备的将领杜路、刘宁等走投无路而请求投降。
English: Liu Bei's generals, Du Lu and Liu Ning, had no choice but to surrender.

古文：备升马鞍山，陈兵自绕。
现代文：刘备登上马鞍山，布军防守围绕。
English: Liu Bei ascended Ma'anshan, and the Bo army surrounded him defensively.

古文：逊督促诸军四面蹙之，土崩瓦解，死者万数。
现代文：陆逊督促各军四面收围紧逼，蜀军土崩瓦解，死者数以万计。
English: Lu Xun urged the armies to close in on all sides, the Shu army collapsed, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：备因夜遁，驿人自担烧铙铠断后，仅得入白帝城。
现代文：刘备乘夜逃走，只有驿站里的人自动挑担兵卒扔下的铠甲、铙钹，在隘口烧化以阻断追兵的道路，刘备才得以逃入白帝城。
English: Liu Bei fled by night, and only when the people in the post station voluntarily picked up the armor and shields thrown by the soldiers and burned them at the pass to block the path of the pursuing soldiers, was Liu Bei able to escape into Baidicheng.

古文：其舟船器械，水步军资，一时略尽，尸骸漂流，塞江而下。
现代文：蜀军船只军器、水军步兵的物资，一下子全都丢尽，士兵尸体随水漂流，拥塞江面流下。
English: The Shu army's ships, military equipment, and naval infantrymen's supplies were all lost at once, and the soldiers' bodies drifted with the water and flowed down the Yangtze River.

古文：备大惭恚，曰： 吾乃为逊所折辱，岂非天邪！ 
现代文：刘备非常羞愧愤恨，说: 我竟受到陆逊的挫折侮辱，难道不是天意吗! 
English: Liu Bei was very ashamed and indignant, saying, "I have actually been humiliated by Lu Xun's setback. Isn't it God's will?

古文：初，孙桓别讨备前锋於夷道，为备所围，求救於逊。
现代文：起初，孙桓另率部队在夷道攻打刘备的前锋部队，被刘备军队围困，于是向陆逊求援。陆逊说: 不行。 
English: At first, Sun Kuan Yi led his troops to attack Liu Bei's forward troops in Yiduo and was besieged by Liu Bei's troops, so he asked Lu Xun for help. Lu Xun said, "No."

古文：逊曰： 未可。 诸将曰： 孙安东公族，见围已困，奈何不救？ 
现代文：众将领说: 安东将军是主上的同族，他受到围困，怎能不去救援? 
English: The generals said: General Anton is a compatriot of the Lord, he is under siege, how can he not go to the rescue?

古文：逊曰： 安东得士众心，城牢粮足，无可忧也。
现代文：陆逊说: 安东将军得到将士拥戴，城池坚固粮草充足，没有什么可担忧的。
English: Lu Xun said: General Anton is supported by his generals, the city is strong and has plenty of grain and grass, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：待吾计展，欲不救安东，安东自解。 
现代文：待我的计谋展开行动，即使不去救他，他的困境自然解除。 
English: Wait for my plan to unfold, and even if I don't save him, his predicament will naturally be resolved.

古文：及方略大施，备果奔溃。
现代文：及至陆逊的计谋全面施行实现后，刘备军队果然奔逃溃散。
English: After Lu Xun's plan was fully implemented, Liu Bei's army ran away and dispersed.

古文：桓后见逊曰： 前实怨不见救，定至今日，乃知调度自有方耳。 
现代文：孙桓后来见到陆逊说: 开始我确实怨您不来相救，如今胜局已定，才知道您的调度自有良策。 
English: Afterward, Sun Huan saw Lu Xun and said, "At first, I really resented you for not coming to my rescue, but now that the victory has been decided, I know that your scheduling has its own good strategy.

古文：当御备时，诸将军或是孙策时旧将，或公室贵戚，各自矜恃，不相听从。
现代文：正是抗击刘备之时，将领们有的孙策时期的老将，有的皇亲国戚，各有倚仗，不从命令。
English: It was precisely when Liu Bei was being resisted that the generals, some of them veterans of the Sun Tse period and some of them relatives of the emperor, each had their own reasons for not obeying orders.

古文：逊案剑曰： 刘备天下知名，曹操所惮，今在境界，此强对也。
现代文：陆逊手握剑柄说: 刘备天下闻名，连曹操都忌惮他，现在他出兵我国境界，这是一个强劲的敌人。
English: Gripping the hilt of his sword, Lu Xun said: Liu Bei is famous all over the world. Even Cao Cao is afraid of him. Now he has sent troops to our borders. This is a powerful enemy.

古文：诸君并荷国恩，当相辑睦，共翦此虏，上报所受，而不相顺，非所谓也。
现代文：各位都深受国家恩泽，应当相互和睦，共同铲除这个强敌，上报所受的国恩，但现在互不和顺，这并非我们应做的事。
English: All of you have been deeply blessed by the state. You should be in harmony with each other and jointly eradicate this powerful enemy. You should report the national blessing you have received. But now you are not in harmony with each other. This is not what we should do.

古文：仆虽书生，受命主上。
现代文：我虽是一介书生，但接受主上的任命。
English: Although I am a scholar, I accept the Lord's appointment.

古文：国家所以屈诸君使相承望者，以仆有尺寸可称，能忍辱负重故也。
现代文：国家之所以委屈各位来听从我的指挥，是认为我还有一些长处可用，能忍辱负重的缘故。
English: The reason why the state has wronged you to obey my command is that it believes that I still have some strengths available and can bear the burden of humiliation.

古文：各任其事，岂复得辞！军令有常，不可犯矣。 
现代文：各自担负自己的责任，怎能再互相推诿?军令有常，不可违犯! 
English: Everyone should shoulder their own responsibilities, how can we push each other around? Military orders are regular and must not be violated!

古文：及至破备，计多出逊，诸将乃服。
现代文：及至攻破刘备，谋划大多出自陆逊本人，众将这才敬服。
English: As far as defeating Liu Bei, most of the planning came from Lu Xun himself, and the general public admired this.

古文：权闻之，曰： 君何以初不启诸将违节度者邪？ 
现代文：孙权得知后，说: 你当时怎么不上告诸将不服从指挥约束呢? 
English: After learning of this, Sun Quan said, "Why didn't you sue Zhu Zhu for insubordination at the time?

古文：逊对曰： 受恩深重，任过其才。
现代文：陆逊回答说: 我深受国恩，所担重任超越自己的实际能力。
English: Lu Xun replied: I am deeply indebted to the nation, and the heavy responsibilities I have taken on are beyond my actual capabilities.

古文：又此诸将或任腹心，或堪爪牙，或是功臣，皆国家所当与共克定大事者。
现代文：况且这些将领有的陛下亲信，有的是我军勇将，有的是国家功臣，都是国家理当依靠来共同建立大业的人。
English: Moreover, these generals who are His Majesty's close confidants, some of whom are our military heroes, some of whom are national heroes, are the people the country should rely on to jointly build a great cause.

古文：臣虽驽懦，窃慕相如、寇恂相下之义，以济国事。 
现代文：为臣虽说愚钝懦弱，心中仰慕蔺相如、寇恂谦虚居下的道义，以成就国家大事。 
English: Although he was a stupid and cowardly vassal, his heart admired the morality of being modest and humble in order to achieve national events.

古文：权大笑称善，加拜逊辅国将军，领荆州牧，即改封江陵侯。
现代文：孙权大笑称好，加授陆逊辅国将军，兼任荆州牧，随后又改封为江陵侯。
English: Sun Quan laughed loudly and said that he was pleased. He was awarded the title of Lu Xun Fu Guo Gen. and concurrently served as the governor of Jingzhou Province. Later, he was renamed as the governor of Jiangling Province.

古文：又备既住白帝，徐盛、潘璋、宋谦等各竞表言备必可禽，乞复攻之。
现代文：又因刘备住在白帝城，徐盛、潘璋、宋谦等争相上奏说刘备必能被擒获，请求再出兵攻打。
English: Also, because Liu Bei lived in Baidicheng, Xu Sheng, Pan Yao, Song Qian and other contenders said that Liu Bei would certainly be captured and asked for another attack.

古文：权以问逊，逊与朱然、骆统以为曹丕大合士众，外讬助国讨备，内实有奸心，谨决计辄还。
现代文：孙权以此事询问陆逊，陆逊和朱然、骆统认为曹丕正大规模聚集军队，表面上假言助吴国共讨刘备，实际上内藏奸计，因此应郑重决断率兵撤还。
English: Sun Quan asked Lu Xun about this. Lu Xun and Zhu Ran and Luo Tong believed that Cao Pi was amassing troops on a large scale, ostensibly under the pretense of helping the State of Wu to fight Liu Bei, but in reality it was a treacherous plan of the Inner Tibetans. Therefore, it should be solemnly decided to withdraw the troops.

古文：无几，魏军果出，三方受敌也。
现代文：不久，魏军果然出李，吴国三面受到进攻。
English: Soon, the Wei army did indeed leave Li, and Wu was attacked on three sides.

古文：备寻病亡，子禅袭位，诸葛亮秉政，与权连和。
现代文：不久刘备病死，其子刘禅继位，诸葛亮主理国事，与孙权通好连和。
English: Soon after, Liu Bei died of illness and was succeeded by his son Liu Zhen. Zhuge Liang took charge of state affairs and made peace with Sun Quan.

古文：时事所宜，权辄令逊语亮，并刻权印，以置逊所。
现代文：根据时势的要求，孙权即命令陆逊告知诸葛亮，并刻孙权的印玺放在陆逊的官署。
English: According to the requirements of the current situation, Sun Quan ordered Lu Xun to inform Zhuge Liang, and engraved Sun Quan's seal on Lu Xun's government office.

古文：权每与禅、亮书，常过示逊，轻重可否，有所不安，便令改定，以印封行之。
现代文：孙权每次给刘禅、诸葛亮的书信，都让陆逊看过，措辞语气轻重，有所不妥之处，便叫陆逊修改定稿，然后用孙权印玺封好送走。
English: Every time Sun Quan sent a letter to Liu Zhen and Zhuge Liang, he had Lu Xun read it. The wording and tone were weighty, and there was something wrong, so he asked Lu Xun to revise the final draft, and then seal it with Sun Quan's seal and send it away.

古文：七年，权使鄱阳太守周鲂谲魏大司马曹休，休果举众入皖，乃召逊假黄钺，为大都督，逆休。
现代文：黄武七年，孙权让鄱阳太守周鲂诈骗魏国大司马曹休，曹休果然中计率军进入皖县，孙权就征召陆逊赐以黄钺，任命为大都督，抵御曹休。
English: In the seventh year of Huangwu, Sun Quan allowed Zhou Ye, the governor of Shenyang, to defraud the general secretary of Wei, Ma Cao Xiu. Cao Xiu eventually led the army into Shixian, and Sun Quan called up Lu Xun to give him Huang Ye and appoint him as the grand governor to resist Cao Xiu.

古文：休既觉知，耻见欺诱，自恃兵马精多，遂交战。
现代文：曹休发觉上当，耻于欺诈，自恃兵马众多精良，就和陆逊交战。
English: Cao Xiu found out that he had been deceived and was ashamed of the deception. Since there were many excellent soldiers and horses, he fought with Lu Xun.

古文：逊自为中部，令朱桓、全琮为左右翼，三道俱进，果冲休伏兵，因驱走之，追亡逐北，径至夹石，斩获万馀，牛马骡驴车乘万两，军资器械略尽。
现代文：陆逊自领中路军，命朱然、全琮率领左右两翼军队，三路并进，果然冲散曹休的伏兵，趁机将他们尽力驱赶流散，往北追击败逃之敌人，径直赶到夹石，斩杀俘获一万多人，缴获牛、马、骡、驴等车一万辆，将魏军军用物资、兵器收掠殆尽。
English: Lu Xun himself led the middle army, ordered Zhu Ran and Quanzhang to lead the left and right wings of the army, and marched in three directions. They successfully dispersed Cao Xiu's ambush, took advantage of the opportunity to drive them away as much as possible, chased and defeated the fleeing enemy to the north, and drove straight to Jiaosi, killed and captured more than 10,000 people, captured 10,000 cattle, horses, mules, donkeys and other vehicles, and plundered the Wei army's military supplies and weapons.

古文：休还，疽发背死。
现代文：曹休回去后，发背疽而死。
English: After Cao Xiu returned, he developed gangrene and died.

古文：诸军振旅过武昌，权令左右以御盖覆逊，入出殿门，凡所赐逊，皆御物上珍，於时莫与为比。
现代文：吴军各军整顿过武昌，孙权命令左右侍从用御伞遮护陆逊出入宫殿大门，凡是赐予陆逊的东西，都是御用的上等珍品，当时没有人能和他相比。
English: After Wuchang, the armies of the Wu army were reorganized. Sun Quan ordered his attendants to use umbrellas to shield Lu Xun from entering and leaving the palace gate. Everything that was given to Lu Xun was a high-class treasure for royal use. At that time, no one could compare to him.

古文：遣还西陵。
现代文：随后陆逊被派回西陵。
English: Subsequently, Lu Xun was sent back to Xiling.

古文：黄龙元年，拜上大将军、右都护。
现代文：黄龙元年，陆逊被任命为上大将军、右都护。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, Lu Xun was appointed as the supreme commander and the protector of the right capital.

古文：是岁，权东巡建业，留太子、皇子及尚书九官，徵逊辅太子，并掌荆州及豫章三郡事，董督军国。
现代文：当年，孙权东巡建业，留太子、皇子及尚书等九卿在武昌，征召陆逊辅佐太子，并主管荆州及豫章三郡事务，处理和监管军国大事。
English: In that year, Sun Quan went to the East to inspect the construction industry, and the nine nobles including the Crown Prince, the Crown Prince and Shang Shu stayed in Wuchang. They conscripted Lu Xun to assist the Crown Prince, and were in charge of the affairs of Jingzhou and Yuzhang three counties, handling and supervising military affairs.

古文：时建昌侯虑於堂前作斗鸭栏，颇施小巧，逊正色曰： 君侯宜勤览经典以自新益，用此何为？ 
现代文：当时建昌侯孙虑在堂前修建一座斗鸭栏，建造十分精巧，陆逊严肃地说: 您应当勤读经典，增加自己的知识，修建这些东西有什么用? 
English: At that time, Jianchang Hou Sun Qian was building a duck pen in front of the hall. The construction was very elaborate. Lu Xun said seriously: You should diligently read the classics and increase your knowledge. What is the use of building these things?

古文：虑即时毁彻之。
现代文：孙虑立即就拆毁了斗鸭栏。
English: Sun Qian immediately demolished the duck ring.

古文：射声校尉松於公子中最亲，戏兵不整，逊对之髡其职吏。
现代文：射声校尉孙松在公子中最亲近孙权，他不整顿军纪，放纵士兵，陆逊当着他的面将他的手下处以剃光头发的刑罚。
English: Captain Sun Song was the closest to Sun Quan among the princes. He did not rectify military discipline and indulged soldiers. In front of him, Lu Xun punished his men by shaving their hair.

古文：南阳谢景善刘廙先刑后礼之论，逊呵景曰： 礼之长於刑久矣，廙以细辩而诡先圣之教，皆非也。
现代文：南阳人谢景称赞刘讷先刑后礼的做法，陆逊斥责谢景说: 长久以来，证明礼治先于刑治，刘讷以琐屑的狡辩来歪曲先圣的教诲，全都是错误的。
English: Nanyang citizen Xie Jing praised Liu Ne's practice of first punishment and then ritual, while Lu Xun rebuked Xie Jing, saying, "For a long time, it has been proved that ritual comes before punishment, and Liu Ne distorted the teachings of the Ancestor with trivial arguments. All of these are wrong.

古文：君今侍东宫，宜遵仁义以彰德音，若彼之谈，不须讲也。 
现代文：您现在在东宫侍奉，应当遵循仁义以彰显善言，像刘讷的话，不必讲了。 
English: Now that you are serving in the East Palace, you should follow the principles of benevolence and righteousness to highlight the good words. Like Liu Ne's words, there is no need to speak.

古文：逊虽身在外，乃心於国，上疏陈时事曰： 臣以为科法严峻，下犯者多。
现代文：陆逊虽在外任职，但心中却牵挂着国事，他上疏陈述时事说: 为臣认为律例条文过于严苛，底层触犯的人太多。
English: Although Lu Xun was in an outside position, he was concerned about national affairs in his heart. He made a brief statement on current affairs, saying: The minister believes that the provisions of the law are too strict, and there are too many people at the bottom who have committed offenses.

古文：顷年以来，将吏罹罪，虽不慎可责，然天下未一，当图进取，小宜恩贷，以安下情。
现代文：近几年来，将领官吏犯罪，虽然由于自身不谨慎应受到责罚，但天下尚未统一，应当谋求进取，小错应受到宽宥，以安定下面的心情。
English: In recent years, generals and officials have committed crimes. Although they should be punished for their own imprudence, the world is not yet unified. They should strive for advancement, and minor mistakes should be forgiven in order to stabilize the mood.

古文：且世务日兴，良能为先，自非奸秽入身，难忍之过，乞复显用，展其力效。
现代文：而且当前要办的事日益增多，应首先考虑人的优良才干，只要不是奸邪之人，没有犯过难以容忍的罪过，请求还是提拔重用他们，施展他们为国效力的才能。
English: Moreover, as there are more and more things to be done at present, we should first consider the fine talents of people. As long as they are not traitors and have not committed intolerable sins, we should ask for their promotion and re-use, and exert their talents to serve the country.

古文：此乃圣王忘过记功，以成王业。
现代文：这是圣明君主忘人之过记人之功，成就帝王大业的原因。
English: This is the reason why the Sage Monarch forgets the faults of others and achieves the great cause of the emperor.

古文：昔汉高舍陈平之愆，用其奇略，终建勋祚，功垂千载。
现代文：昔日汉高祖舍弃陈平的过失，采用他的奇谋妙计，最终建成大汉，功业流传千载。
English: Once upon a time, the founder of the Han Dynasty renounced the mistakes of Chen Ping and adopted his ingenious plan to finally become a great man. His achievements have been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：夫峻法严刑，非帝王之隆业；有罚无恕，非怀远之弘规也。 
现代文：严刑峻法，不是帝王建立大业的做法，只有惩罚而无宽恕，不是招揽远方人才归附的大计。 
English: Severe punishment and stern law are not the emperor's practice of establishing a great cause, only punishment without forgiveness, not a plan to recruit talent from far away.

古文：权欲遣偏师取夷州及朱崖，皆以谘逊，逊上疏曰： 臣愚以为四海未定，当须民力，以济时务。
现代文：孙权想要派遣一支部队前去攻取夷州及珠崖，都要征询陆逊意见，陆逊上书说: 为臣认为天下尚未平定，正需要集中民力，成就当下大事。
English: If Sun Quan wanted to send an army to attack Yizhou and Zhuliang, he had to consult Lu Xun. Lu Xun wrote to Sun Quan saying, "As a minister, I believe that the world has not yet been pacified, and it is necessary to concentrate the people's power to achieve the current major events."

古文：今兵兴历年，见众损减，陛下忧劳圣虑，忘寝与食，将远规夷州，以定大事，臣反覆思惟，未见其利，万里袭取，风波难测，民易水土，必致疾疫，今驱见众，经涉不毛，欲益更损，欲利反害。
现代文：如今连年用兵，人口损失减少，陛下忧虑，废寝忘食，又要远道谋取夷州，成就大业。我反复思量，看不出其中的益处。万里远程去攻取疆土，风险难测，百姓改换熟悉的水土，必定导致疾病流行，现在派出大军，跋涉荒芜之地，想要得益反而损失更大，幻想获利反而遭受祸患。
English: Now, he has been using soldiers for years, the population loss has decreased, his majesty is worried, he has lost sleep and forgotten to eat, and he has to go far away to win the state of Yizhou and achieve a great cause. I have repeatedly thought about it, but I can't see the benefit. To conquer the territory from a distance of thousands of miles, the risk is unpredictable, and the people change the familiar water and soil, which will surely lead to an epidemic of diseases. Now he has sent a large army to trek through a barren land. If he wants to gain, he will lose more, and if he wants to gain, he will suffer misfortune.

古文：又珠崖绝险，民犹禽兽，得其民不足济事，无其兵不足亏众。
现代文：再加上珠崖是隔绝险要之地，那里未被开化的人犹如野兽，得到那些百姓也不能帮助我们成就大事，没有那里的兵也不使我的军力减弱。
English: In addition, the Pearl Cliff is an isolated and dangerous place, where uncivilized people are like beasts. Getting those people will not help us achieve great things, and not having soldiers there will not weaken my military strength.

古文：今江东见众，自足图事，但当畜力而后动耳。
现代文：如今江东的人多，已足够用来图谋大事，只是应先积蓄力量然后再行动而已。
English: Nowadays, there are more people in the east of the Yangtze River, which is enough to plot big things, but we should first accumulate strength and then act.

古文：昔桓王创基，兵不一旅，而开大业。
现代文：昔日桓王创立基业，兵员不足五百，就开创了伟大功业。
English: Long ago, King Kan founded the foundation, with less than five hundred soldiers, he created a great achievement.

古文：陛下承运，拓定江表。
现代文：陛下承受天命，开拓平定江南大地。
English: His Majesty has received the mandate from Heaven to explore the land south of the Yangtze River.

古文：臣闻治乱讨逆，须兵为威，农桑衣食，民之本业，而干戈未戢，民有饥寒。
现代文：为臣听说治理乱世征讨叛贼，必须凭借兵力之威，而农桑衣食，是百姓的本业，只因战事不停，百姓有饥寒之苦。
English: For the vassals, it is said that to control the chaotic world and fight against the traitors, it is necessary to rely on the might of the army. However, farming, weaving, clothing, and eating are the people's own business. It is only because of the incessant war that the people suffer from cold and hunger.

古文：臣愚以为宜育养士民，宽其租赋，众克在和，义以劝勇，则河渭可平，九有一统矣。 
现代文：为臣认为应该育养将士百姓，放宽对征赋的征收，依靠百姓和睦取胜，用道义鼓舞他们勇敢献身，那黄河、渭水流域可得平定，天下可以统一。 
English: The vassal believed that it was necessary to nurture the soldiers and the people, relax the levying of taxes, rely on the people to win in harmony, and encourage their brave dedication with morality, so that the Yellow River and Surabaya watershed could be pacified and the world could be unified.

古文：权遂征夷州，得不补失。
现代文：孙权依然去征讨夷州，结果得不偿失。
English: Sun Quan still went to conquer Yizhou, but the result was a loss.

古文：及公孙渊背盟，权欲往征，逊上疏曰： 渊凭险恃固，拘留大使，名马不献，实可雠忿。
现代文：等到公孙渊背叛盟约，孙权打算前往征讨，陆逊上疏说: 公孙渊凭借险固之地，扣押我国派往的使节，不肯进献名马，实在可恨可怒。
English: When Gongsun Yuan betrayed the covenant and Sun Quan planned to go to the battlefield, Lu Xun said: Gongsun Yuan, by virtue of the precarious land, detained the envoys sent by our country and refused to present the famous horse, which was really hateful and angry.

古文：蛮夷猾夏，未染王化，鸟窜荒裔，拒逆王师，至令陛下爰赫斯怒，欲劳万乘汎轻越海，不虑其危而涉不测。
现代文：这种蛮夷侵扰中原，没有接受王道的教化，飞鸟般地远窜蛮荒地区，抵御我王朝大军，导致陛下如此震怒，竟想劳动万乘之尊亲乘小舟泛越大海，不考虑其中危艰而涉足无法预料的险恶之地。
English: This kind of barbarian invasion of the Central Plains, not accepting the enlightenment of the king's way, flying like a bird to the distant wild areas, resisting the army of my dynasty, led to His Majesty being so furious that he wanted to cross the sea in a small boat, not considering the dangers and wading into an unpredictable and dangerous place.

古文：方今天下云扰，群雄虎争，英豪踊跃，张声大视。
现代文：如今天下纷纷扰扰，群雄争斗，英豪涌现，狂呼争斗，虎视眈眈。
English: Such as today, there are many disturbances, heroes fight, heroes emerge, fierce fighting, and the tiger is watching the dragonfly.

古文：陛下以神武之姿，诞膺期运，破操乌林，败备西陵，禽羽荆州，斯三虏者当世雄杰，皆摧其锋。
现代文：陛下以神圣威武的英姿，承受天命，在乌林攻破曹操，在西陵大胜刘备，在荆州擒获关羽，这三个敌人都是当时的英雄豪杰，都挫败其锋芒。
English: His majesty, with the holy and mighty heroic posture, withstood the fate of heaven, defeated Cao Cao in Wulin, defeated Liu Bei in Xiling, and captured Guan Yu in Jingzhou. These three enemies were the heroes of the time, and all defeated their sharpness.

古文：圣化所绥，万里草偃，方荡平华夏，总一大猷。
现代文：圣明教化安抚之地，万里依附如小草随风，这正是平定华夏，统一天下的大好时机。
English: This is a great opportunity to pacify China and unify the country.

古文：今不忍小忿，而发雷霆之怒，违垂堂之戒，轻万乘之重，此臣之所惑也。
现代文：如今陛下不忍耐住小小的愤怒，而勃发雷霆盛怒，违背古人不坐屋檐下以防瓦落损伤的训诫，看低自己万乘之尊的身份，这是我感到迷惑的。
English: I am puzzled by the fact that His Majesty does not have the patience to put up with a little anger, but lashes out violently and violently, disobeys the ancient admonition not to sit under a roof to avoid damage from falling rubble, and belittles his status as the Buddha of Ten Thousand Buddhas.

古文：臣闻志行万里者，不中道而辍足；图四海者，匪怀细以害大。
现代文：为臣听说志行万里者，不到半路而停步;图取天下者，不因小事妨害大业。
English: As a vassal, I heard that those who have traveled thousands of miles will not stop halfway; those who have charted the world will not interfere with the great cause due to minor matters.

古文：强寇在境，荒服未庭，陛下乘桴远征，必致闚，慼至而忧，悔之无及。
现代文：强大敌人正在边境，荒远地区尚未归服，陛下乘船远征，必然留下缺口，灾祸临头再去忧虑已经追悔莫及。
English: A powerful enemy is at the border, the desolate areas have not yet been subdued, His Majesty's expedition by ship will inevitably leave a gap, and the disaster is imminent.

古文：若使大事时捷，则渊不讨自服；今乃远惜辽东众之与马，奈何独欲捐江东万安之本业而不惜乎？
现代文：如果使统一天下的大业能早日成功，则公孙渊不用讨伐也自动归降，现在却舍不得远东的百姓与名马，难道仅仅就抛弃江东长安的基业而不觉得可惜吗?
English: If the great cause of unifying the country can be successful at an early date, then Gongsun Yuan will automatically surrender without having to fight, but now he is reluctant to the people and famous horses in the Far East. Isn't it a pity to just abandon the foundation of Chang'an in the East River?

古文：乞息六师，以威大虏，早定中夏，垂耀将来。 
现代文：请停止所有军事行动，以威势对付主要敌人，早日平定中原，垂耀功名万代。 
English: Please stop all military operations, deal with the main enemy with vigor, pacify the Central Plains at an early date, and glorify your name for generations to come.

古文：权用纳焉。
现代文：孙权采纳了他的意见。
English: Sun Quan accepted his opinion.

古文：嘉禾五年，权北征，使逊与诸葛瑾攻襄阳。
现代文：嘉禾五年，孙权北征魏国，派陆逊与诸葛瑾进攻襄阳。
English: In the fifth year of Jiahe, Sun Quan led the Northern Expedition of Wei, and sent Lu Xun and Zhuge Liang to attack Yangyang.

古文：逊遣亲人韩扁赍表奉报，还，遇敌於沔中，钞逻得扁。
现代文：陆逊派亲信韩扁带着奏章上报孙权，回程时在沔中遇上敌军，敌人搜索抓到韩扁。
English: Han Bian, a close confidant of the Lu Xun faction, reported to Sun Quan with a report. On the way back, he met the enemy army in the middle of the Yunnan River, and the enemy search caught Han Bian.

古文：瑾闻之甚惧，书与逊云： 大驾已旋，贼得韩扁，具知吾阔狭。
现代文：诸葛瑾得知后非常惊恐，写信给陆逊说: 主上大驾已返回，敌人抓到韩扁，完全掌握到我们的情况。
English: After learning this, Zhuge Liang was very alarmed and wrote to Lu Xun, saying: The Lord has returned, the enemy has captured Han Bian, and has completely grasped our situation.

古文：且水乾，宜当急去。 
现代文：况且如今江水干涸，应当立即撤军。 
English: Moreover, now that the rivers have dried up, the troops should be withdrawn immediately.

古文：逊未答，方催人种葑豆，与诸将弈棋射戏如常。瑾曰： 伯言多智略，其当有以。 
现代文：陆逊没有回信，正在督促人们种芜菁、豆子，自己与将领们像往常一样下棋、射戏。诸葛瑾说: 伯言足智多谋，他必定有良计。 
English: Lu Xun did not reply to the letter, he was urging people to grow turnips and beans, and he and the generals were playing chess and shooting as usual. Zhuge Li said: He is resourceful, he must have a good plan.

古文：自来见逊，逊曰： 贼知大驾以旋，无所复慼，得专力於吾。
现代文：于是亲自前来会见陆逊，陆逊说: 敌人知道主上大驾返回，没有什么可担忧的，可以专门对付我们。
English: So he came to meet Lu Xun in person. Lu Xun said, "The enemy knows that the Lord has returned, there is nothing to worry about, and they can deal with us specifically.

古文：又已守要害之处，兵将意动，且当自定以安之，施设变术，然后出耳。
现代文：再者他们已把扼守要害之处，我军将士军心动摇，这就需要我们稳定自己以稳定军心，施展灵变的谋略，然后退兵。
English: Moreover, they have already taken the key points, and our soldiers' morale has been shaken. This requires us to stabilize ourselves in order to stabilize the morale of the military, and then retreat.

古文：今便示退，贼当谓吾怖，仍来相蹙，必败之势也。 
现代文：现在就表示出要退兵，敌人一定认为我们恐惧，就会前来进逼，这是必败的形势。 
English: If we announce that we are withdrawing now, the enemy will think that we are afraid and will come to attack us. This is a lose-lose situation.

古文：乃密与瑾立计，令瑾督舟船，逊悉上兵马，以向襄阳城。
现代文：于是与诸葛瑾暗中设计，让诸葛瑾统领船队，陆逊带领全部兵马，向襄阳进发。
English: So he and Zhuge Yao made a secret plan to have Zhuge Yao lead the fleet, and Lu Xun lead all the soldiers and horses, and set off for Xiangyang.

古文：敌素惮逊，遽还赴城。
现代文：敌人一向畏惧陆逊，于是立即退回城内。
English: The enemy had always been afraid of Lu Xun, so they immediately retreated to the city.

古文：瑾便引船出，逊徐整部伍，张拓声势，步趋船，敌不敢干。
现代文：诸葛瑾便带领船队出现在江边，陆逊徐缓地整顿队伍，虚张声势，缓步上船，敌军不敢进犯。
English: Zhuge Liang then led the fleet to appear on the river, and Lu Xun slowly reorganized the team, bluffed, and slowly boarded the ship. The enemy army did not dare to attack.

古文：军到白围，讬言住猎，潜遣将军周峻、张梁等击江夏新市、安陆、石阳，石阳市盛，峻等奄至，人皆捐物入城。
现代文：军队行进到白围，陆逊假说要住下打猎，却暗中派将军周峻、张梁等攻打江夏郡新市、安陆、石阳。石阳此时正是市集热闹之时，周峻等率军突然杀到，人们都丢下货物纷纷逃进城去。
English: The army marched to Baiei. Lu Xun said that he wanted to stay and hunt, but secretly sent generals Zhou Jun and Zhang Liang to attack Xincheng, Anlu and Shiyang in Jiangxia County. At this time, Shiyang was a bustling market. Zhou Jun and his army suddenly arrived, and people left their goods and fled into the city.

古文：城门噎不得关，敌乃自斫杀己民，然后得阖。
现代文：城门被堵塞无法关闭，敌兵便砍杀自己的百姓，然后城门才得以关上。
English: The gates were blocked and could not be closed, so the enemy soldiers hacked their own people to death before the gates could be closed.

古文：斩首获生，凡千馀人。
现代文：吴军斩杀俘虏了一千多人。
English: The Wu army killed and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：其所生得，皆加营护，不令兵士干扰侵侮。
现代文：那些被擒获的人，都得到保护，不准士兵干扰欺侮。
English: Those who are caught are protected and soldiers are not allowed to interfere with the hazing.

古文：将家属来者，使就料视。
现代文：带着家眷前来的，派人前往照看。
English: Those who come with their families should send someone to look after them.

古文：若亡其妻子者，即给衣粮，厚加慰劳，发遣令还，或有感慕相携而归者。
现代文：如果失去妻子儿女的，就供给他们衣服、粮食，勤加慰问，让他们回家，有的人因此感动仰慕而相携前来归附。
English: If they lost their wives and children, they provided them with clothes and food, and worked hard to comfort them and let them go home. Some people were moved by this admiration and came to join them.

古文：邻境怀之，江夏功曹赵濯、弋阳备将裴生及夷王梅颐等，并帅支党来附逊。
现代文：相邻地区的百姓也感念陆逊，魏国江夏功曹赵濯、弋阳备将裴生及少数民族首领梅颐等人，都率领党羽部下前来依附陆逊。
English: The people in the neighboring regions also felt sorry for Lu Xun. Cao Zhao Maidong of the Wei State Jiangxia Gong, Pei Sheng, the commander of Shenyang, and Mei Xuan, the leader of ethnic minorities, all led their subordinates to follow Lu Xun.

古文：逊倾财帛，周赡经恤。
现代文：陆逊拿出所有财物，周到地赡养体恤他们。
English: Lu Xun took out all of his belongings and thoughtfully supported them.

古文：又魏江夏太守逯式兼领兵马，颇作边害，而与北旧将文聘子休宿不协。
现代文：又有魏国江夏太守逯式，兼管当地兵马，是吴国边境一大患，但与魏国老将文聘的儿子文休素来不和。
English: There was also the Empress Dowager Cixi of Wei, who was also in charge of the local soldiers and horses, which was a big problem on the border of Wu, but she had always been at odds with the son of the Wei veteran Wenbei, Wen Xiu.

古文：逊闻其然，即假作答式书云： 得报恳恻，知与休久结嫌隙，势不两存，欲来归附，辄以密呈来书表闻，撰众相迎。
现代文：陆逊得知这一情况，就假装给逯式回信说: 得到您言辞恳切的来信，知道您与文休结怨已久，势不两立，想要前来归附我国，我立即暗中将您的来信上报给朝廷，并召集人马前来迎接您。
English: When Lu Xun learned of this situation, he pretended to reply to Zou's letter, saying, "Having received your earnest letter, knowing that you and Wenyu have been feuding for a long time and cannot be reconciled, and wanting to come and join our country, I immediately and secretly reported your letter to the imperial court and gathered people to come and welcome you.

古文：宜潜速严，更示定期。 
现代文：您应当秘密并迅速整顿行李，再告知归附的明确时间。 
English: You should secretly and promptly tidy up your luggage, and then tell the exact time of return.

古文：以书置界上，式兵得书以见式，式惶惧，遂自送妻子还洛。
现代文：吴军将信放在两国的境界上，逯式的士兵看到书信拿回给他，逯式心中惊恐，于是亲自送妻子儿女返回洛阳。
English: The Wu army placed the letter on the border between the two countries. When the soldiers of the Zou Dynasty saw the letter and took it back to him, the Zou Dynasty was terrified, so he personally sent his wife and children back to Luoyang.

古文：由是吏士不复亲附，遂以免罢。
现代文：从此后逯式的部下再也不亲近依附他，因此被罢官免职。
English: From then on, Yu's subordinates were no longer close to him, so he was dismissed from his post.

古文：六年，中郎将周祗乞於鄱阳召募，事下问逊。
现代文：嘉禾六年，中郎将周祗请求在鄱阳招募士兵，孙权将此事询问陆逊。
English: In the sixth year of Jiahe, Zhong Lang asked Zhou Qi to recruit soldiers in Shenyang, and Sun Quan asked Lu Xun about this.

古文：逊以为此郡民易动难安，不可与召，恐致贼寇。
现代文：陆逊认为该郡百姓容易煽动扰乱难于安定，不可前往招募，担心由此导致他们成为贼寇。
English: Lu Xun believes that the county's people are easy to incite disturbance and difficult to stabilize, and cannot go to recruit, fearing that this will lead them to become thieves.

古文：而祗固陈取之，郡民吴遽等果作贼杀祗，攻没诸县。
现代文：而周祗坚决要求招募，郡民吴遽等人果然作乱杀了周祗，攻占了几个县城。
English: However, Zhou Qi resolutely demanded to be recruited, and county residents Wu Huan and others killed Zhou Qi and captured several county seats.

古文：豫章、庐陵宿恶民，并应遽为寇。
现代文：豫章、庐陵的长久恶霸，一起响应吴遽称为匪宼。
English: The long-standing bullies of Yuzhang and Fuling responded to Wu Hanzhong by calling him a gangster.

古文：逊自闻，辄讨即破，遽等相率降，逊料得精兵八千馀人，三郡平。
现代文：陆逊听说，当即前往征讨并攻破他们，吴遽等相继投降，陆逊从中挑选精兵八千余人，三郡由此平定。
English: When Lu Xun heard of this, he immediately went to conquer and defeat them. Wu Huan and others surrendered one after another. Lu Xun selected more than eight thousand elite soldiers from among them, and the three counties were thus pacified.

古文：时中书典校吕壹，窃弄权柄，擅作威福，逊与太常潘濬同心忧之，言至流涕。
现代文：当时中书典校吕壹，倚仗职位把持权柄，擅自作威作福，陆逊与太常潘濬对此都很忧虑，谈到此事甚至于流泪。
English: At that time, Lu Yi of the Chinese Classics School, relying on his position to hold power, arbitrarily used his power to do good. Lu Xun and Taichang Pan Ye were very worried about this, and even shed tears when they talked about it.

古文：后权诛壹，深以自责，语在权传。
现代文：后来孙权诛杀吕壹，并深深责备自己，自责言论记载在《孙权传》中。
English: Later, Sun Quan killed Lu Yi, and deeply reproached himself, and his self-reproach was recorded in "The Biography of Sun Quan."

古文：时谢渊、谢厷等各陈便宜，欲兴利改作，以事下逊。
现代文：当时谢渊、谢瞇等各自陈述当前应处理事宜，想要改变一些政治措施，为国家兴办一些有益的事情，孙权将此事下交陆逊裁决。
English: At that time, Xie Yuan, Xie Yao and others made their own statements on the matters that should be dealt with at present, and wanted to change some political measures and do some useful things for the country. Sun Quan submitted the matter to Lu Xun for adjudication.

古文：逊议曰： 国以民为本，强由民力，财由民出。
现代文：陆逊建议: 国家以百姓为本，强盛取决于民力，财货也出自民众。
English: Lu Xun suggested: The country is people-oriented, prosperity depends on people's power, and wealth and goods also come from the people.

古文：夫民殷国弱，民瘠国强者，未之有也。
现代文：民富而国弱，民贫而国强，这种事从来没有。
English: The people are rich, but the country is weak; the people are poor, but the country is strong. This has never happened before.

古文：故为国者，得民则治，失之则乱，若不受利，而令尽用立效，亦为难也。
现代文：因而治理国家者，得到民心则国家安定，失去民心则国家动乱。倘若不使百姓受益，而想让他们竭力效劳，实在难以做到。
English: Therefore, those who govern the country, if they win the people's hearts, the country will be stable, and if they lose the people's hearts, the country will be in turmoil. If they do not benefit the people, but want them to work hard, it is really difficult to achieve.

古文：是以诗叹 宜民宜人，受禄于天 。
现代文：因此《诗经》有言慨叹 便益人民，上天赐福 。
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" has a lamentation: "Benefit the people, bless the heavens."

古文：乞垂圣恩，宁济百姓，数年之间，国用少丰，然后更图。 
现代文：请求陛下广施圣恩，安抚赈济百姓，几年之间，国家财力稍稍丰裕，然后再考虑其他事情。 
English: May it please Your Majesty to bestow Your grace and comfort on the people of Shanxi, so that in a few years, the country's financial resources will be a little more abundant, and then other things will be considered.

古文：赤乌七年，代顾雍为丞相，诏曰： 朕以不德，应期践运，王涂未一，奸宄充路，夙夜战惧，不惶鉴寐。
现代文：赤乌七年，陆逊接替顾雍担任丞相，孙权下诏说: 我以无德之人，承受天命，登上帝位，天下尚未统一，奸邪之人充塞道路，我日夜忧虑，无暇休息。
English: In the seventh year of the Red Emperor's reign, Lu Xun succeeded Gu Yong as the prime minister. Sun Quan issued an edict saying, "I, as a man without virtue, bear the fate of heaven and ascend to the throne of God. The world has not yet been unified. People with evil intentions are blocking the road. I am worried day and night and have no time to rest.

古文：惟君天资聪叡，明德显融，统任上将，匡国弭难。
现代文：惟您天资聪颖，美德传扬，担任上将重职，匡扶朝廷消除动乱。
English: However, you are gifted with intelligence, propagate virtue, hold the important post of admiral, and support the imperial court to eliminate turmoil.

古文：夫有超世之功者，必应光大之宠；怀文武之才者，必荷社稷之重。
现代文：有盖世之功者，就应受到广大的荣耀，兼具文武才干的人，定要担当社稷重任。
English: Those who have made great contributions to the world should be widely honored, and those who have both literary and military talents must be responsible for social responsibility.

古文：昔伊尹隆汤，吕尚翼周，内外之任，君实兼之。
现代文：昔日伊尹使商汤兴隆，吕尚辅佐西周，现在朝内外事务，实由您一人承担。
English: In the past, Yi Yin made commerce flourish, and Lü Shang assisted Su Xi Zhou. Now, the affairs of the North and the outside world are actually undertaken by you alone.

古文：今以君为丞相，使使持节守太常傅常授印绶。
现代文：今以您为丞相，遣使持节太常傅常授予您印章绶带。
English: Now, with you as chancellor, I am sending you the imperial seal and sash.

古文：君其茂昭明德，脩乃懿绩，敬服王命，绥靖四方。
现代文：您自当发扬光大美好的德行，建立美好的功业，恭服遵从王命，安抚平定四方。呜呼!
English: You should take it upon yourself to carry forward the glorious and wonderful virtue, establish a wonderful cause, obey the king's command, pacify and pacify the four quarters. Alas!

古文：於乎！总司三事，以训群寮，可不敬与，君其勖之！
现代文：总管三公事宜，训导群臣百官，能不严谨恭敬吗?
English: As the head of the three public affairs and the instructor of hundreds of officials, can he not be strict and respectful?

古文：其州牧都护领武昌事如故。 
现代文：您自勉努力吧!您依旧担任的荆州牧、右都护兼武昌留守等职。 
English: Do your best! You still hold the posts of Jingzhou Maki, Right Capital Protector and Wuchang Resident.

古文：先是，二宫并阙，中外职司，多遣子弟给侍。
现代文：在此之前，太子与鲁王两宫并立，朝廷内外的官员任职，大多派遣子弟担任侍臣。
English: Prior to this, the prince and the two palaces of King Lu stood side by side, officials inside and outside the court served, and most of them sent their sons to serve as courtiers.

古文：全琮报逊，逊以为子弟苟有才，不忧不用，不宜私出以要荣利；若其不佳，终为取祸。
现代文：全琮将这种情况上报陆逊，陆逊认为这些子弟如果有才干，不需担忧不得不到任用，但不应私自托请为官邀取荣名利禄;如果把握不好，给他们功名职位最终只会导致灾祸。
English: Quanzhang reported the situation to Lu Xun. Lu Xun believed that if these sons were talented, they did not have to worry about being appointed, but they should not ask for the honor and glory of being invited to the official; if they were not good at grasping, giving them meritorious positions would only lead to disaster in the end.

古文：且闻二宫势敌，必有彼此，此古人之厚忌也。
现代文：况且听说两宫势均力敌，这些子弟必会各为彼此结成帮派。这是古人非常忌讳之事。
English: Moreover, it is said that the two houses are evenly matched, and these children will inevitably form a gang for each other. This is a very taboo thing for the ancients.

古文：琮子寄，果阿附鲁王，轻为交构。
现代文：全琮的儿子全寄，果然奉承依附鲁王，轻率地与鲁王结下紧密的交情。
English: Quanzhang's son, Quanzhang, flattered and attached himself to King Lu, and rashly formed a close friendship with him.

古文：逊书与琮曰： 卿不师日磾，而宿留阿寄，终为足下门户致祸矣。 
现代文：陆逊给全琮写信说: 您不效法金石单，而庇护您的儿子阿寄，最终会给您的家族招致祸患。 
English: Lu Xun wrote to Quanzhang: "You will eventually bring disaster to your family if you do not follow the example of Jinshi Shan and shelter your son Ah Ying.

古文：琮既不纳，更以致隙。
现代文：全琮不仅不接受陆逊规劝，反而与陆逊产生矛盾。
English: Quanzhang not only did not accept Lu Xun's exhortation, but also had conflicts with Lu Xun.

古文：及太子有不安之议，逊上疏陈： 太子正统，宜有盘石之固，鲁王藩臣，当使宠秩有差，彼此得所，上下获安。
现代文：等到太子孙和有在位不稳的议论后，陆逊上疏陈述说: 太子是皇位正统继承人，应有稳如磐石的地位，鲁王是藩臣，应当在恩宠赏赐和地位上与太子有所差别，这样他们各得其所，上下才能得到安宁。
English: After waiting for the discussion of the prince's descendants and the instability of the throne, Lu Xun Shangsu stated: The prince is the legitimate heir to the throne and should have a rock-solid position. Lu Wang is a vassal of the domain and should be different from the prince in terms of grace and reward and status. In this way, they can get their own place, and the upper and lower levels can get peace.

古文：谨叩头流血以闻。 
现代文：为臣谨向陛下叩首流血，请陛下了解。 
English: I humbly bow my head and shed blood for Your Majesty, please understand.

古文：书三四上，及求诣都，欲口论適庶之分，以匡得失。
现代文：他上书三四次，并请求赶赴京城，想亲口与孙权阐明嫡庶区别，以纠正得失。
English: He wrote three or four times, and requested to rush to Beijing to personally clarify the difference between the heir and the heir with Sun Quan in order to correct the gains and losses.

古文：既不听许，而逊外生顾谭、顾承、姚信，并以亲附太子，枉见流徙。
现代文：孙权并不听从他的意见，而且陆逊的外甥顾谭、顾承、姚信，都因为亲附太子，无辜地被流放。
English: Sun Quan did not listen to his advice, and Lu Xun's nephews, Gu Tan, Gu Cheng and Yao Xin, were all exiled innocently because they were close to the prince.

古文：太子太傅吾粲坐数与逊交书，下狱死。
现代文：太子太傅吾粲因多次与陆逊有书往来而获罪，被下狱处死。
English: Prince Taifu Wuxuan was convicted of having written to Lu Xun on several occasions and was sentenced to death.

古文：权累遣中使责让逊，逊愤恚致卒，时年六十三，家无馀财。
现代文：孙权多次派遣宫中使者前往责备陆逊，陆逊悲愤痛恨而死，时年六十三岁，死时家中没有什么财物。
English: Sun Quan repeatedly sent emissaries from the palace to rebuke Lu Xun. Lu Xun died of grief and indignation at the age of sixty-three, with no possessions in his home at the time of his death.

古文：初，暨艳造营府之论，逊谏戒之，以为必祸。
现代文：当初，暨艳宣扬修建府第的舆论，陆逊规劝告诫他，认为这样必定招来灾祸。
English: At first, when Cui Yan publicized the construction of the prefecture, Lu Xunjie advised and warned him, saying that it would surely bring disaster.

古文：又谓诸葛恪曰： 在我前者，吾必奉之同升；在我下者，则扶持之。
现代文：陆逊又对诸葛恪说: 在我之前的人，我一定事奉他与我一道升迁;在我之后的人，我就会帮助扶持他。
English: Lu Xun also said to Zhuge Ke: "I will certainly serve those who were promoted before me; I will help and support those who are promoted after me."

古文：今观君气陵其上，意蔑乎下，非安德之基也。 
现代文：现在看您气势侵凌上级，心中轻视下属，这并非能巩固自己德行的基础。 
English: Looking at you now, you are aggressively encroaching on your superiors and despising your subordinates in your heart. This is not the basis for consolidating your virtue.

古文：又广陵杨竺少获声名，而逊谓之终败，劝竺兄穆令与别族。
现代文：又有广陵人杨竺，年轻时就获得显达的名声，而陆逊认为他最终会惹祸败亡，便劝杨竺的哥哥杨穆与杨竺分开生活另立门户。
English: There was also Yang Mu, a Guangling man, who gained a prominent reputation when he was young, and Lu Xun thought that he would eventually cause trouble and defeat, so he advised Yang Mu's brother Yang Mu to separate from Yang Mu and live separately.

古文：其先睹如此。
现代文：他的先见之明到如此程度。
English: That's how prescient he was.

古文：长子延早夭，次子抗袭爵。
现代文：陆逊的长子陆延年少夭折，次子陆抗承袭了他的爵位。
English: Lu Xun's eldest son, Lu Yan, died young, and his second son, Lu Kang, inherited his title.

古文：孙休时，追谥逊曰昭侯。
现代文：孙休在位，追赠陆逊的谥号为 昭侯 。
English: While Sun Xiu was on the throne, he posthumously gave Lu Xun the posthumous title of Shao Hou.

古文：抗字幼节，孙策外孙也。
现代文：陆抗，字幼节，是孙策的外孙。
English: Lu Gan, the younger son, is the grandson of Sun Ce.

古文：逊卒时，年二十，拜建武校尉，领逊众五千人，送葬东还，诣都谢恩。
现代文：陆逊去世时，陆抗二十岁，担任建武校尉，接管陆逊五千亲兵，送父灵柩东归，到京城向孙权谢恩。
English: At the time of Lu Xun's death, Lu Anti was 20 years old. He served as Jianwu's lieutenant, took over the command of Lu Xun's 5,000 soldiers, sent his father's coffin back to the East, and went to Beijing to thank Sun Quan.

古文：孙权以杨竺所白逊二十事问抗，禁绝宾客，中使临诘，抗无所顾问，事事条答，权意渐解。
现代文：孙权以杨竺控告陆逊的二十件事来责问陆抗，禁绝他来往宾客，派宫中使者上门诘问，陆抗不假思索，事事都依据条理回答，孙权心中不满渐渐消退。
English: Sun Quan accused Yang Quan of twenty things against Lu Xun and interrogated Lu Cang, forbade him from visiting guests, and sent an emissary to the palace to interrogate him. Lu Cang did not think twice, and answered everything in an orderly manner. Sun Quan's dissatisfaction gradually subsided.

古文：赤乌九年，迁立节中郎将，与诸葛恪换屯柴桑。
现代文：赤乌九年，陆抗升任立节中郎将，与诸葛恪换防驻守柴桑。
English: In the ninth year of the Red Emperor Wu, Lu Qi was promoted to the position of commander of the middle section of the festival, and he and Zhuge were transferred to the garrison of Chaisang.

古文：抗临去，皆更缮完城围，葺其墙屋，居庐桑果，不得妄败。
现代文：陆抗临走时，将城墙全部修整好，房屋也作了修缮，周围的桑树果树，不允许妄自损坏。
English: When the troops left, the city walls were all repaired, the houses were also repaired, and the surrounding mulberry trees and fruit trees were not allowed to be damaged.

古文：恪入屯，俨然若新。
现代文：诸葛恪到达军营，一切仿佛新造。
English: Zhuge Ke arrived at the military camp, everything seemed to be brand new.

古文：而恪柴桑故屯，颇有毁坏，深以为惭。
现代文：而诸葛恪柴桑的旧营，缺遭到一定程度的毁坏，诸葛恪因此十分惭愧。
English: However, the old camp of Zhuge Ke Chaisang was destroyed to a certain extent, and Zhuge Ke was very ashamed.

古文：太元元年，就都治病。
现代文：太元元年，陆抗到京城治病。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, Lu Qi went to Beijing to treat his illness.

古文：病差当还，权涕泣与别，谓曰： 吾前听用谗言，与汝父大义不笃，以此负汝。
现代文：病好正该回去时，孙权流泪同他告别，对他说: 我之前听信谗言，认为你父亲在君臣大义上不笃定，因此亏待了你。
English: When he was well enough to return home, Sun Quan bade him farewell with tears and said to him, "I listened to your father's advice before, and I thought that your father was not sure about the great justice of kings and ministers, so I mistreated you.

古文：前后所问，一焚灭之，莫令人见也。 
现代文：我前后责问的材料，全都付之一炬，不要让人再见到。 
English: The materials of my questioning, all of them, should be burned and never be seen again.

古文：建兴元年，拜奋威将军。
现代文：建兴元年，陆抗被任命为奋威将军。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, Lu Gan was appointed as General Fenwei.

古文：太平二年，魏将诸葛诞举寿春降，拜抗为柴桑督，赴寿春，破魏牙门将偏将军，迁征北将军。
现代文：太平二年，魏国将领诸葛诞献寿春城归降东吴，任命陆抗为柴桑督，赶赴寿春，攻破魏国牙门将偏将军，被提升为征北将军。
English: In the second year of the Taiping era, the Wei general Zhuge Xizhong dedicated Shuchun City and returned to East Wu, appointed Lu An as Chai Sangduo, rushed to Shuchun, defeated the Wei general Fang Men and was promoted to the general of the Northern Expedition.

古文：永安二年，拜镇军将军，都督西陵，自关羽至白帝。
现代文：永安二年，陆抗又被任命为镇军将军，都督西陵，主管自关羽濑至白帝城的军事事务。
English: In the second year of Yongan, Lu Gan was also appointed as the general of the town army, the governor of Xiling, in charge of military affairs from Guan Yu to Baidicheng.

古文：三年，假节。
现代文：永安三年，被授假节职权。
English: Yongan three years, was awarded the authority of the holiday.

古文：孙皓即位，加镇军大将军，领益州牧。
现代文：孙皓登基，加授陆抗镇军大将军，兼任益州牧。
English: Sun Yat-sen ascended to the throne, and was awarded the title of General of the Anti-Japanese People's Army. He also served as the Governor of Yizhou.

古文：建衡二年，大司马施绩卒，拜抗都督信陵、西陵、夷道、乐乡，公安诸军事，治乐乡。
现代文：建衡二年，大司马施绩去世，陆抗被任命为信陵、西陵、夷道、乐乡、公安各地军事的都督，治所设在乐乡。
English: In the second year of Jianheng, the grand secretary Ma Shiji passed away, and Lu An was appointed as the military governor of Xinling, Xiling, Yiduo, Lexiang and public security in various regions, and the government office was set up in Lexiang.

古文：抗闻都下政令多阙，忧深虑远，乃上疏曰： 臣闻德均则众者胜寡，力侔则安者制危，盖六国所以兼并於强秦，西楚所以北面於汉高也。
现代文：陆抗得知朝廷政令多有错漏之处，很是忧虑，于是上疏说: 为臣听说君主德行等同，而百姓多者胜过百姓少者，国力相平，则安定之国制服混乱之国，这大概是六国所以被强秦兼并，西楚所以败北于汉高祖的原因吧。
English: When Lu Huan learned that there were many errors and omissions in the imperial decrees, he was very worried, so Shang Shu said: As a vassal, I heard that the virtue of the monarch is equal, and the people are more than the people are few, and the national strength is equal, the stable country is the same as the chaotic country. This is probably the reason why the six countries were annexed by the strong Qin, and the west Chu was defeated by the Han Gaozu.

古文：今敌跨制九服，非徒关右之地；割据九州，岂但鸿沟以西而已。
现代文：现在敌国势力横跨四方，并非只有关右之地;割据九州，哪只鸿沟以西的土地而已。
English: Now the enemy's forces span the four directions, not just the right; divided by Kyushu, which is just the land west of the chasm.

古文：国家外无连国之援，内非西楚之强，庶政陵迟，黎民未乂，而议者所恃，徒以长川峻山，限带封域，此乃守国之末事，非智者之所先也。
现代文：我国外无盟国的支援，内无西楚那样强大，朝政凌乱迟缓，百姓不得安定，而议论国事者所依恃的条件，只不过大江高山，围隔着我国的国土，这不过是守卫国家最末等的条件，不是明智之人考虑的先决条件。
English: We do not have the support of allies abroad, we are not as strong as the West, the government is chaotic and sluggish, the people are not stable, and the conditions that those who discuss state affairs rely on are nothing more than the great rivers and mountains that surround our country's territory. This is only the lowest-level condition for guarding the country, not a prerequisite for wise people to consider.

古文：臣每远惟战国存亡之符，近览刘氏倾覆之衅，考之典籍，验之行事，中夜抚枕，临餐忘食。
现代文：臣下时常回想战国各国存亡的迹象，近看刘汉王朝覆灭的征兆，考校典籍，以实事验证，深夜抚枕无法入睡，面对饭菜忘记进餐。
English: The vassals often recalled the signs of the existence and demise of the warring states, looked closely at the signs of the downfall of the Liu Han Dynasty, examined the school classics, verified by facts, couldn't fall asleep when stroking the pillow late at night, and forgot to eat in the face of meals.

古文：昔匈奴未灭，去病辞馆；汉道未纯，贾生哀泣。
现代文：昔日匈奴未被消灭，霍去病推辞皇上为他所造府第;汉朝治国之道未得至纯，贾谊为之悲哀哭泣。
English: In the past, the Xiongnu were not exterminated, and Huo became ill and refused the emperor's offer to build a palace for him; the Han Dynasty's way of governing the country was not pure enough, and Jia Yi wept with sorrow.

古文：况臣王室之出，世荷光宠，身名否泰，与国同慼，死生契阔，义无苟且，夙夜忧怛，念至情惨。
现代文：况且我是王室血缘所出，世代蒙受光荣的恩宠，个人名声安危，与国家休戚相关，生死离合，绝无苟且一说，日夜忧心，想到这些就深感悲痛。
English: Moreover, I am born of royal blood, have been favored with glory for generations, my personal reputation is in danger, I am closely related to the country, I am inseparable from life and death, I must be very careful, I am worried day and night, I am deeply saddened by the thought of these things.

古文：夫事君之义犯而勿欺，人臣之节匪躬是殉，谨陈时宜十七条如左。 
现代文：奉事君上的道义在于犯颜直谏而不欺瞒，身为臣下的节操不在屈膝卑躬而殉节，谨陈当今急务十七条如左。 
English: The moral of serving the sovereign is to be honest and not deceitful, and the discipline of being a vassal is not to bend the knee and grovel, but to be a martyr.

古文：十七条失本，故不载。
现代文：十七条失去原本，因此不作记载。
English: The original of Article 17 was lost, so it was not recorded.

古文：时何定弄权，阉官预政；抗上疏曰： 臣闻开国承家，小人勿用，靖谮庸回，唐书攸戒，是以雅人所以怨刺，仲尼所以叹息也。
现代文：当时何定把持权柄，宦官干预国事，陆抗上疏说: 为臣听说开创国家、继承家业，不用小人，听信小人谗言毁谤，任用奸邪之才，是《尧典》所告诫的，因此诗人为此写诗怨刺，仲尼因此叹息。
English: At that time, the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs, and the eunuchs interfered in state affairs.

古文：春秋已来，爰及秦、汉，倾覆之衅，未有不由斯者也。
现代文：春秋以来，直至秦汉，朝代覆灭之征兆，没有一个不是因为这个缘由。
English: Since the Spring and Autumn Period, until the Qin and Han Dynasties, there was not a single sign of the dynasty's downfall that was not due to this reason.

古文：小人不明理道，所见既浅，虽使竭情尽节，犹不足任，况其奸心素笃，而憎爱移易哉？
现代文：小人不明治国之道，见识浅陋，纵使他们竭心尽力保全名节，也不能胜任，更何况这类人向来存有奸邪之心，爱憎情感时常变化呢!
English: The villains do not know the way of governing the country, their knowledge is shallow, and even if they try their best to preserve the festival, they are not competent, not to mention that such people have always had a heart of treachery, and love and hate emotions often change!

古文：苟患失之，无所不至。
现代文：如果害怕失去他们，则此类无所不至。
English: If you're afraid of losing them, they'll do anything.

古文：今委以聪明之任，假以专制之威，而冀雍熙之声作，肃清之化立，不可得也。
现代文：现在将朝廷重任委托他们，让他们得以有专制权威，还希望出现和乐的盛世之音，清明纯正的社会风气，这是绝不可能之事。
English: It is absolutely impossible to entrust the heavy responsibilities of the imperial court to them now, so that they can have autocratic authority, and also hope for the emergence of a harmonious sound of prosperity, a clear and pure social ethos.

古文：方今见吏，殊才虽少，然或冠冕之胄，少渐道教，或清苦自立，资能足用，自可随才授职，抑黜群小，然后俗化可清，庶政无秽也。 
现代文：现在任职官吏，特殊才能者虽少，但他们有的是王室贵族的后代，自小受到道德教化的影响，有的是清苦自立之人，其资质才能值得任用，自然可以根据他们的才干授官任职，以此抑制、黜退小人，然后社会风气才可纯净，国家大事才没有污秽。 
English: Although there are few officials with special talents, some of them are descendants of royal aristocrats who have been influenced by moral education since childhood, and some are hard-working and self-reliant people. Their qualifications and talents are worthy of appointment. Naturally, they can be appointed according to their talents. In this way, villains can be restrained and repelled. Then the social ethos can be pure, and national events will not be dirty.

古文：凤皇元年，西陵督步阐据城以叛，遣使降晋。
现代文：凤凰元年，西陵督步阐占据城池发动叛乱，派人前往晋国投降。
English: In the first year of the Phoenix Dynasty, the governor of Xiling occupied the city and launched a rebellion, sending people to Jin Province to surrender.

古文：抗闻之，日部分诸军，令将军左奕、吾彦、蔡贡等径赴西陵，敕军营更筑严围，自赤谿至故市，内以围阐，外以御寇，昼夜催切，如敌以至，众甚苦之。
现代文：陆抗得知这一消息，当日部署各军，命令将军左奕、吾彦、蔡贡等直接赶赴西陵，下令各军军营再修筑坚固的围墙，从赤溪到故市，对内则围困步阐，对外则抵御敌军，陆抗日夜催促监管，如同敌军已经来到，全军将士十分困苦。
English: Upon learning of this news, the land resistance deployed all the troops on the same day, ordered generals Zuo Yi, Azhi, Cai Gong and others to rush directly to Xiling, and ordered the military camps of each army to build a solid fence again. From Chixi to the ancient city, the internal situation was a siege, and the external situation was to resist the enemy army. The land resistance urged supervision day and night, as if the enemy army had already arrived, and the soldiers of the whole army were very distressed.

古文：诸将咸谏曰： 今及三军之锐，亟以攻阐，比晋救至，阐必可拔。
现代文：诸将都劝谏陆抗说: 如今以三军精锐，急速攻打步阐，等到晋军救援到来，步阐一定已被攻下。
English: The generals all advised Yan Lu to fight back, saying, "Nowadays, with the elite of the three armies, we will quickly attack and defeat Shucheng. By the time the Jin army comes to the rescue, Shucheng will definitely have been conquered."

古文：何事於围，而以弊士民之力乎？ 
现代文：何必修筑围墙，让士兵和百姓困苦疲惫呢? 
English: Why is it necessary to build a wall, leaving soldiers and civilians exhausted and exhausted?

古文：抗曰： 此城处势既固，粮谷又足，且所缮修备御之具，皆抗所宿规。
现代文：陆抗说: 这座城池城墙坚固地势险要，城内粮草充足，而且所修缮的防御工事和配置的防御器械，都是我过去详细规划安排的。
English: Lu said, "This city wall is solid and impregnable, and there is plenty of grain and grass in the city. Moreover, the repaired fortifications and deployed defensive equipment were all planned and arranged by me in detail in the past.

古文：今反身攻之，既非可卒克，且北救必至，至而无备，表里受难，何以御之？ 
现代文：现在我们反过来出兵攻打，既不能很快攻克，且北方援军一定要赶来，敌人来后我们没有防备，则腹背受敌，屏什么抵御他们呢? 
English: Now, on the other hand, we have sent troops to attack, which cannot be quickly defeated, and the northern reinforcements must come. If we are not prepared after the enemy comes, we will suffer from the enemy. What should we do to resist them?

古文：诸将咸欲攻阐，抗每不许。
现代文：将领们都急于攻打步阐，陆抗总是不同意。
English: The generals are all eager to attack, and Lu always disagrees.

古文：宜都太守雷谭言至恳切，抗欲服众，听令一攻。
现代文：宜都太守雷谭要求十分恳切，陆抗为了使众将信服，便听任他们去攻打一次。
English: Li Tan, the governor of Yidu, was very earnest in his demands. In order to convince the generals, Lu Gan allowed them to attack once.

古文：攻果无利，围备始合。
现代文：进攻果然不利，防御围墙由是得以完工。
English: The attack turned out to be unfavourable, and the defensive wall was therefore completed.

古文：晋车骑将军羊祜率师向江陵，诸将咸以抗不宜上，抗曰： 江陵城固兵足，无所忧患。
现代文：晋车骑将军羊祜率军挺进江陵，诸将都认为陆抗不宜率军西上，陆抗说: 江陵城池坚固兵力充足，没有什么担忧的。
English: Jin chariot-riding general Yang Hui led the army into Gangneung, and all generals believed that Lu Qi should not lead the army westward. Lu Qi said: Gangneung Castle is solid and has sufficient troops, so there is nothing to worry about.

古文：假令敌没江陵，必不能守，所损者小。
现代文：倘若敌人攻下江陵，也一定防守不住，我们所受损失很小。
English: If the enemy attacks Gangneung, we will not be able to defend it, and our losses will be small.

古文：如使西陵槃结，则南山群夷皆当扰动，则所忧虑，难可竟言也。
现代文：但如果让西陵与敌人联结起来，则南山诸族夷人都将骚动扰乱，那我忧虑的事情，就不是能说得清楚的。
English: But if Xiling is allowed to be linked to the enemy, then all the ethnic groups in Nanshan will be disturbed, and then I can't say clearly what I am worried about.

古文：吾宁弃江陵而赴西陵，况江陵牢固乎？ 
现代文：我宁愿放弃江陵而奔赴西陵，何况江陵十分牢固! 
English: I would rather give up Jiangling and go to Xiling, not to mention that Jiangling is very solid!

古文：初，江陵平衍，道路通利，抗敕江陵督张咸作大堰遏水，渐渍平中，以绝寇叛。
现代文：当初，江陵地势平旷，交通便利，陆抗下令江陵督张咸修造一道大堰拦水，浸没平原中心，借以阻碍敌人进攻和内部叛乱。
English: At the beginning, Gangneung was flat and had convenient transportation. The governor of Gangneung, Zhang Xian, was ordered to build a large weir to block the water and submerge the center of the plain, in order to hinder the enemy's attack and internal rebellion.

古文：祜欲因所遏水，浮船运粮，扬声将破堰以通步车。
现代文：羊祜想利用大堰蓄的水域，浮船运粮，宣称要毁掉大堰以通行步兵。
English: Sheep herders wanted to use the waters stored by the weir to transport grain by floating boats, and declared that they wanted to destroy the weir to allow infantry passage.

古文：抗闻，使咸亟破之。诸将皆惑，屡谏不听。
现代文：陆抗听说，让张咸立即毁掉大堰，众将领都感到困惑，多次劝谏，陆抗不听。
English: Lu Anti heard that Zhang Xian should immediately destroy the weir. The generals were puzzled and tried to persuade him many times, but Lu Anti would not listen.

古文：祜至当阳，闻堰败，乃改船以车运，大费损功力。
现代文：羊祜到了当阳，得知大堰已毁，就改船运为车运，耗费了大量的时间和精力。
English: When the yakitori arrived in Dangyang and learned that the weir had been destroyed, they changed the transportation from ship to car, which consumed a lot of time and energy.

古文：晋巴东监军徐胤率水军诣建平，荆州刺史杨肇至西陵。
现代文：晋国巴东监军徐胤率水军赶到建平，荆州刺史杨肇前至西陵。
English: The naval force led by Xu Yan, the inspector of the East Jin Province, arrived at Jianping, and the Jingzhou expeditionary force went to Xiling.

古文：抗令张咸固守其城；公安督孙遵巡南岸御祜；水军督留虑、镇西将军朱琬拒胤；身率三军，凭围对肇。
现代文：陆抗命令张咸固守江陵，公安督孙遵巡视长江南岸抗击羊祜，水军督留虑、镇西将军朱琬抗击徐胤，陆抗亲自统率三军，凭借军营围墙抵御杨肇。
English: Lu Anti ordered Zhang Xian to firmly defend Jiangling, the public security director Sun Zun to patrol the south bank of the Yangtze River to resist Yang Zhao, the navy inspector to be cautious, the Zhenxi general Zhu Xi to resist Xu Yin, Lu Anti personally led the three armies, and relied on the military camp fence to resist Yang Zhao.

古文：将军朱乔、营都督俞赞亡诣肇。
现代文：吴国将军朱齐、营都督俞赞逃跑到杨肇处投降。
English: Zhu Qi, the general of the State of Wu, and Yuzan, the governor of the battalion, fled to Yang Zhao and surrendered.

古文：抗曰： 赞军中旧吏，知吾虚实者，吾常虑夷兵素不简练，若敌攻围，必先此处。 
现代文：陆抗说: 俞赞是我军中的老办事人员，知道我方虚实底细的人，我常担心夷兵素不精练，如果敌人围攻，必定先从夷兵防守处下手。 
English: Lu Antai said: Yu Zan is an old clerk in our army, a person who knows the ins and outs of our side. I often worry that the barbarians are not refined. If the enemy besieges, he must first attack from the barbarian defense.

古文：即夜易夷民，皆以旧将充之。
现代文：当夜就撤换夷兵，全用吴军老将替代防守。
English: On the same night, the Yi soldiers were withdrawn and replaced, and the veterans of the Wu Army were used to defend the city.

古文：明日，肇果攻故夷兵处，抗命旋军击之，矢石雨下，肇众伤死者相属。
现代文：第二天，杨肇果然攻打原先夷兵的防守处，陆抗下令守军反击，箭石如雨下，杨肇部队接连有死伤士兵。
English: The next day, Yang Zhao attacked the defensive position of the former Yihai soldiers, and the land resistance ordered the defenders to counterattack. It rained arrows and stones, and Yang Zhao's troops had soldiers killed and wounded one after another.

古文：肇至经月，计屈夜遁。
现代文：杨肇到达西陵后一个多月，无计可施之下趁夜逃走。
English: More than a month after Yang Zhao arrived in Xiling, he had no choice but to flee in the night.

古文：抗欲追之，而虑阐畜力项领，伺视间隙，兵不足分，於是但鸣鼓戒众，若将追者。
现代文：陆抗打算追击他，又担心步阐积蓄力量趁机攻打吴军要害之处，部队不够分配，就告诫将士，只击鼓作出要追击的样子。
English: Lu Huan planned to pursue him, but he was worried that he would not have enough troops to attack the key points of the Wu army, so he warned his soldiers to only play the drums to make it look like they were chasing him.

古文：肇众凶惧，悉解甲挺走，抗使轻兵蹑之，肇大破败，祜等皆引军还。
现代文：杨肇的军队都很惊恐，全都抛盔弃甲四散奔走，陆抗派轻兵在后追击，杨肇被打得大败，羊祜等都率军返回。
English: Yang Zhao's army was very frightened. They all abandoned their armor and ran away. The light soldiers of the land resistance group chased after them. Yang Zhao was defeated, and the sheep and donkeys led the army back.

古文：抗遂陷西陵城，诛夷阐族及其大将吏，自此以下，所请赦者数万口。
现代文：陆抗就攻下了西陵城，诛杀步阐全家及其部下首要的将吏，自将军以下，请求赦免的人有几万。
English: Lu Huan then captured Xiling City, and the whole family and their subordinates, including the principal officers, from the general down, were killed in battle. There were tens of thousands of people who asked for pardon.

古文：脩治城围，东还乐乡，貌无矜色，谦冲如常，故得将士欢心。
现代文：陆抗修整西陵城墙和防御工事，回师东归乐乡，脸上没有骄横的神色，谦逊如常，因此深得将士衷心拥戴。
English: Lu resisted the renovation of the Xiling city wall and fortifications, and returned to his hometown after returning to the east. He did not have a haughty look on his face, and was humble as usual. Therefore, he was deeply loved by the soldiers.

古文：加拜都护。
现代文：陆抗被加官都护。
English: Lu Kang was given the additional post of tutelary of the capital.

古文：闻武昌左部督薛莹徵下狱，抗上疏曰： 夫俊乂者，国家之良宝，社稷之贵资，庶政所以伦叙，四门所以穆清也。
现代文：得知武昌左部督薛莹因罪被征召下狱，陆抗上疏说: 俊杰之人，是国家之瑰宝，社稷的财富，国家政务才得以清晰有条理，四方才得以太平祥和。
English: Upon learning that Wuchang's left-wing governor, Xue Ying, had been conscripted and sent to prison for his crime, Lu Dajian said: "A brilliant person is the treasure of the country, the wealth of the society, the state affairs can be clear and orderly, and the four directions can be peaceful and tranquil.

古文：故大司农楼玄、散骑中常侍王蕃、少府李勖，皆当世秀颖，一时显器，既蒙初宠，从容列位，而并旋受诛殛，或圮族替祀，或投弃荒裔。
现代文：已故大司农楼玄、散骑中常侍王蕃、少府李勖，都是当世俊杰人才，一时显名之士，他们起初蒙受君主恩宠，在官职上从容行事，而不久后就被诛杀，有的被灭族断绝祭祀，有的被弃荒远之地。
English: The late Daisho Nonglou Xuan, Sanzhong Zhongzheng Wang Quan, and Shofu Li Quan were all outstanding talents of the day, and were famous for a while. At first, they were favored by the monarch and acted calmly in their official duties, but soon after they were killed, some were cut off from the sacrificial rites by the exterminated people, and some were abandoned to a desolate place.

古文：盖周礼有赦贤之辟，春秋有宥善之义，书曰： 与其杀不辜，宁失不经。
现代文：《周礼》上有赦免贤人的律法，《春秋》里有宽恕善人的词义。《尚书》中说: 与其杀害无辜，宁可违背成法 。
English: In the "Weekly Ritual," there is a law to pardon the wise, and in the "Spring and Autumn," there is a word meaning to forgive the good. In the "Book of Proverbs," it says: "Rather than killing the innocent, it is better to violate the law."

古文：而蕃等罪名未定，大辟以加，心经忠义，身被极刑，岂不痛哉！
现代文：王蕃等罪名尚未被确定，就被死刑加身，他们心怀忠义，却身遭极刑，怎么能不哀痛呢!
English: Wang Yao and others, whose crimes had not yet been determined, were sentenced to death. Their hearts were loyal, but they were subjected to capital punishment. How could they not mourn?

古文：且已死之刑，固无所识，至乃焚烁流漂，弃之水滨，惧非先王之正典，或甫侯之所戒也。
现代文：且受刑死去，本来没有意识了，竟然还要将其挫骨扬灰，丢入水中，弃尸水边，恐怕这不是先王之严正法典，或许应该是甫侯立法时所要戒免。
English: And he was tortured and died, he was not conscious, and he was still going to be cremated, thrown into the water, and his body was abandoned by the water's edge. I'm afraid this is not the strict legal code of the former king, perhaps it should be the prince's legislation.

古文：是以百姓哀耸，士民同慼。
现代文：所以百姓哀伤恐惧，士民同悲。
English: So the people mourn and fear, and the scholars mourn with them.

古文：蕃、勖永已，悔亦靡及，诚望陛下赦召玄出，而顷闻薛莹卒见逮录。
现代文：王蕃、李勖已死，后悔已来不及，我诚恳地希望陛下赦免楼玄出狱。而近来又得知薛莹突然被逮捕入狱。
English: Wang Wei and Li Wei are dead, and it is too late to regret. I sincerely hope that His Majesty will pardon Lou Xuan and release him from prison. Recently, I learned that Xue Ying was suddenly arrested and imprisoned.

古文：莹父综纳言先帝，傅弼文皇，及莹承基，内厉名行，今之所坐，罪在可宥。
现代文：薛莹的父亲薛综曾为先帝建言献策，辅佐过文皇帝，到薛莹继承父业，修养自身，注意品行，现在被连坐判罪，实属可以宽恕。
English: Xue Ying's father, Xue Siming, once gave advice to the former emperor and assisted Emperor Guofan. To Xue Ying, he inherited his father's business, cultivated himself, and paid attention to moral conduct. Now he has been sentenced to consecutive imprisonment. In fact, he can be forgiven.

古文：臣惧有司未详其事，如复诛戮，益失民望，乞垂天恩，原赦莹罪，哀矜庶狱，清澄刑网，则天下幸甚！ 
现代文：为臣担心有关主管官员不详细了解情况，如再将他杀害，更加使百姓失望，乞求主上施恩，原谅宽赦薛莹的罪过，怜悯罪人，清澄法理，则是天下的大幸事。 
English: The vassal worried that the relevant competent officials did not understand the situation in detail, and if they killed him again, the people would be even more disappointed, and it would be a great blessing for the world to beg the Lord for mercy, forgive the sins of Xue Ying, pity the sinners, and clarify the legal principles.

古文：时师旅仍动，百姓疲弊，抗上疏曰： 臣闻易贵随时，传美观衅，故有夏多罪而殷汤用师，纣作淫虐而周武授钺。
现代文：当时军队频繁战争，百姓困苦凋敝，陆抗上疏说: 为臣听说《周易》看重随时而行，《左传》称美趁机攻打，所以夏桀罪孽深重商汤王才动用大军征讨，商纣多行荒淫暴虐之事，周武王才授钺讨伐。
English: At that time, the army had frequent wars, the people were poor and withered, and the land resistance was sparse, saying: For the vassal, I heard that "Zhou Yi" valued and went at any time, and "Zo Zhuan" said that the United States took advantage of the opportunity to attack, so King Tang, a sinister merchant in Xiaqi, mobilized a large army to fight, and the merchants often engaged in brutal and violent things, and King Zhou Wu was awarded the crusade.

古文：苟无其时，玉台有忧伤之虑，孟津有反旆之军。
现代文：如果时机不到，则商汤王宁肯被囚禁于玉台有着忧伤的思虑，周武王宁愿在孟津撤军而不轻举妄动。
English: If the time is not right, then the merchant Tang Wang would rather be imprisoned in Yutai and has sad thoughts. Zhou Wu Wang would rather withdraw troops in Mengjin than act rashly.

古文：今不务富国强兵，力农畜谷，使文武之才效展其用，百揆之署无旷厥职，明黜陟以厉庶尹，审刑罚以示劝沮，训诸司以德，而抚百姓以仁，然后顺天乘运，席卷宇内，而听诸将徇名，穷兵黩武，动费万计，士卒彫瘁，寇不为衰，而我已大病矣！
现代文：现在我们不努力实现富国强兵，致力于农耕储备粮食，让文武人才得以施展运用，上下官员府衙没有玩忽职守，明确官职升降制度以激励各级官吏，刑罚得当以彰显劝勉阻滞，以道德教育上下官员，用仁义安抚全国百姓，然后顺承天命，看准时机，收揽天下。若是放任将领们舍身求名，穷兵黩武，功辄耗费数以万计的军资费用，使士卒疲惫不堪，敌人并没有因此衰弱，而我方却已疲乏衰弱!
English: Now we do not strive to achieve a rich country and strong soldiers, we are committed to farming and grain reserves, so that military and civilian talents can be exercised and applied, officials at and above the government have not neglected their duties, clear promotion and demotion system to encourage officials at all levels, appropriate punishment to highlight and dissuade, moral education of officials at and above the government, to appease the people of the whole country with benevolence and righteousness, and then to obey the destiny of heaven, to see the opportunity, and to gather the world. If the generals are allowed to devote themselves to seeking fame, poor soldiers and martial arts, and consume tens of thousands of military and financial expenses, the soldiers are

古文：今争帝王之资，而昧十百之利，此人臣之奸便，非国家之良策也。
现代文：现在争夺帝王的资格，却被小小利益遮住双眼，这是臣子的奸恶，不是国家的上策。
English: Now they are vying for the title of emperor, but their eyes are blinded by petty interests. This is the treachery of courtiers, not the best policy for the country.

古文：昔齐鲁三战，鲁人再克而亡不旋踵。
现代文：昔日齐、鲁两国交战三次，鲁国胜了两次而很快就灭亡了，为什么呢?
English: Once upon a time, the two countries of Qi and Lu fought three times, Lu won twice and soon perished, why?

古文：何则？大小之势异也。
现代文：因为两国大小实力的情况不同。
English: Because the size and strength of the two countries are different.

古文：况今师所克获，不补所丧哉？
现代文：何况现在出兵征讨所获得的战果，还不能弥补所损失的呢？
English: What's more, the gains made by sending soldiers to fight cannot make up for the losses?

古文：且阻兵无众，古之明鉴，诚宜蹔息进取小规，以畜士民之力，观衅伺隙，庶无悔吝。 
现代文：况且依仗兵力没有人民的支持，这是古代明确的警戒，实在应暂停出兵征战的计划，来储备军民的力量，等候时机，就不会有什么悔恨的事发生。 
English: Moreover, relying on military strength without the support of the people, this is a clear warning from ancient times. It is really necessary to suspend the plan of sending troops to war, to reserve the strength of the military and the people, and wait for the opportunity. There will be no regrets.

古文：二年春，就拜大司马、荆州牧。
现代文：凤凰二年春，陆抗在驻地被授予大司马、荆州牧。
English: In the spring of the second year of the phoenix, Lu Huan was awarded the grand steed and Jingzhou herd in the resident.

古文：三年夏，疾病，上疏曰： 西陵、建平，国之蕃表，既处下流，受敌二境。
现代文：三年夏，陆抗生病，上疏说: 西陵、建平，是我国边防屏障，地处长江下流，受到魏、蜀两方威胁。
English: In the summer of the third year, when Lu Qi fell ill, Shang Su said: Xiling and Jianping are China's border defense barrier, located in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River, threatened by Wei and Shu.

古文：若敌汎舟顺流，舳舻千里，星奔电迈，俄然行至，非可恃援他部以救倒县也。
现代文：如果敌人船只顺江而下，战船千里，急速奔赴，顷刻就到，无法倚仗别处援军来解救危急。
English: If enemy ships sail down the river, warships thousands of miles away, rushing rapidly, they will arrive in an instant, unable to rely on reinforcements from elsewhere to relieve the crisis.

古文：此乃社稷安危之机，非徒封疆侵陵小害也。
现代文：这是国家安危的关键之处，并非只是边境被侵扰的小祸患。
English: This is a key point of national security, not just a minor scourge of border intrusion.

古文：臣父逊昔在西垂陈言，以为西陵国之西门，虽云易守，亦复易失。
现代文：为臣的父亲陆逊过去在西部边境上书陈述个人意见，认为西陵是我国的西大门，虽说容易防守，也容易失守。
English: In the past, Lu Xun, the father of the minister, wrote a letter to the western border to state his personal opinion that Xiling is the western gate of our country. Although it is easy to defend, it is also easy to lose.

古文：若有不守，非但失一郡，则荆州非吴有也。
现代文：一旦西陵失守，不只丢失一郡之地，则整个荆州也不属吴国所有了。
English: Once Xiling was lost, not only was one county lost, but the whole of Jingzhou did not belong to the State of Wu.

古文：如其有虞，当倾国争之。
现代文：如若西陵有意外变故，应当倾尽全国兵力前往争夺。
English: If there is an accident at the Western Mausoleum, the whole country should be mobilized to fight for it.

古文：臣往在西陵，得涉逊迹，前乞精兵三万，而主者循常，未肯差赴。
现代文：为臣过去守卫西陵，得以依照父亲陆逊的做法。之前请求派三万精兵驻守，而主管军务官员遵循常规，不肯派遣那么多兵力前往。
English: As a vassal used to guard the West Mausoleum, he was able to follow the practice of his father, Lu Xun. Previously, he requested to send thirty thousand elite soldiers to guard, but the responsible military officials followed the usual practice and refused to send so many troops.

古文：自步阐以后，益更损耗。
现代文：自步阐事件以后，兵力损耗更加严重。
English: After the Spontaneous Interpretation Incident, the loss of troops was even more serious.

古文：今臣所统千里，受敌四处，外御强对，内怀百蛮，而上下见兵财有数万，羸弊日久，难以待变。
现代文：现在为臣管辖的千里之地，四处受敌，对外要抵御强敌，对内要安抚各蛮夷部族，而部下现有的军资装备只够数万之众，羸弱积弊的情况已经很久，很难应付事变。
English: The land of a thousand miles, which is now under the jurisdiction of the vassal, has been subjected to enemies everywhere. It is necessary to resist strong enemies externally, and to appease barbarian tribes internally. However, the existing military equipment of subordinates is only enough for tens of thousands of people. The situation of weakness and accumulation of defects has been for a long time, and it is difficult to cope with events.

古文：臣愚以为诸王幼冲，未统国事，可且立傅相，辅导贤姿，无用兵马，以妨要务。
现代文：臣愚以为众王子年纪尚幼，尚未掌管国事，应当设置傅相，辅佐教导他们形成贤能的姿态，不应动用兵马，以此妨碍国家当前的紧急事务。
English: Vassal Gou thought that the princes were too young and had not yet taken charge of state affairs, so he should set up a tutor minister and an assistant to teach them to form a virtuous posture, and should not use soldiers and horses to hinder the current urgent affairs of the country.

古文：又黄门竖宦，开立占募，兵民怨役，逋逃入占。
现代文：又有黄门内宦官，开创私自确定招募的制度，士民怨恨服役，纷纷逃到宦官门下。
English: There were also eunuchs within the Yellow Gate, creating a system of self-determined recruitment. The people resented military service and fled to the eunuchs.

古文：乞特诏简阅，一切料出，以补疆埸受敌常处，使臣所部足满八万，省息众务，信其赏罚，虽韩、白复生，无所展巧。
现代文：请求特诏精简选用，一切重新根据需要来安排，将其中多余兵力补充前方常常受敌侵扰之处的军队，使我所辖地域的部队能补足八万，俭省事务，赏罚有根据，即便韩信、白起复生，也无法施展他们的巧计。
English: I request you to streamline the selection and use of special orders, rearrange everything according to the needs, supplement the surplus troops with the troops that are often disturbed by the enemy in the front, so that the troops in the area under my jurisdiction can make up the 80,000, economize on affairs, reward and punish well-founded, even if Han Xin and Bai Qi revive, they will not be able to exert their cunning plan.

古文：若兵不增，此制不改，而欲克谐大事，此臣之所深慼也。
现代文：如果军队不增添，这一制度不改变，而想成就大事，这是为臣十分忧虑的事情。
English: If the army is not increased and this system is not changed, it is a matter of great concern for the minister if he wants to achieve great things.

古文：若臣死之后，乞以西方为属。
现代文：如果我死之后，请求陛下以西部边境为重。
English: If I die, I ask your majesty to focus on the western border.

古文：愿陛下思览臣言，则臣死且不朽。 
现代文：希望陛下考虑我的意见，那我就死而不朽了。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will consider my opinion, and then I will die and become immortal.

古文：秋遂卒，子晏嗣。
现代文：当年秋天，陆抗去世，其子陆晏继承爵位。
English: In the autumn of that year, Lu Huan died, and his son Lu Xun succeeded to the peerage.

古文：晏及弟景、玄、机、云、分领抗兵。
现代文：陆晏及其弟弟陆景、陆玄、陆机、陆云，分别率领陆抗的部队。
English: Lu Yao and his younger brothers Lu Jing, Lu Xuan, Lu Ji, and Lu Yun led the anti-Japanese forces respectively.

古文：晏为裨将军、夷道监。
现代文：陆晏做裨将军、夷道监。
English: Lu Yao became the general and the superintendent of roads.

古文：天纪四年，晋军伐吴，龙骧将军王濬顺流东下，所至辄克，终如抗虑。
现代文：天纪四年，晋军攻打吴国，龙骧将军王濬顺江东下，所到之处全都攻下，都像陆抗生前预料的。
English: In the fourth year of Tianji, the Jin army attacked the State of Wu, and the Long March general Wang Shun went to the east of the Yangtze River, and conquered everywhere he went, which was expected before the land resistance.

古文：景字士仁，以尚公主拜骑都尉，封毗陵侯，既领抗兵，拜偏将军、中夏督，澡身好学，著书数十篇也。
现代文：陆景，字士仁，因为娶了公主而被任命为骑都尉，封为毗陵侯，统管陆抗的部队后，被任为偏将军、中夏督，他勤于修身笃好学习，著写文章几十篇。
English: Lu Jian, also known as Zhiren, married a princess and was appointed as a cavalry captain, and was given the title of Viling Hou. After he took control of the troops of Lu Anti, he was appointed as a partial general and the governor of the Central Xia. He was diligent in self-cultivation and good at studying, and wrote dozens of articles.

古文：二月壬戌，晏为王濬别军所杀。
现代文：二月五日，陆晏被王濬的分支部队所杀。
English: On February 5, Lu Yao was killed by Wang Yao's branch troops.

古文：癸亥，景亦遇害，时年三十一。
现代文：二月六日，陆景也被杀害，时年三十一岁。
English: On February 6, Lu Jing was also killed, at the age of 31.

古文：景妻，孙皓適妹，与景俱张承外孙也。
现代文：陆景的妻子是孙皓的亲妹，和陆景都是张承的外孙。
English: Lu Jie's wife is Sun Yat-sen's sister, and both Lu Jie and Sun Yat-sen are Zhang Cheng's grandchildren.

古文：评曰：刘备天下称雄，一世所惮，陆逊春秋方壮，威名未著，摧而克之，罔不如志。
现代文：评曰：刘备是称雄天下的人，为当时人忌惮，陆逊春秋鼎盛，正值盛年，威势名声尚未建立，刘备想要挫败摧毁他，但最后未能成功。
English: The commentary said: Liu Bei was a man who dominated the world, and was feared by the people at that time. Lu Xun was in his prime, and his reputation for power had not yet been established. Liu Bei wanted to defeat and destroy him, but was ultimately unsuccessful.

古文：予既奇逊之谋略，又叹权之识才，所以济大事也。
现代文：我既感叹于陆逊的谋略才干，又赞叹孙权的识人之才，所以才能成就大业。
English: I not only admire Lu Xun's ability to strategize, but also admire Sun Quan's ability to know people, so I can achieve great things.

古文：及逊忠诚恳至，忧国亡身，庶几社稷之臣矣。
现代文：等到陆逊忠诚殷勤，忧虑国家以至身死，可以称得上是社稷重臣了。
English: By the time Lu Xun was loyal and diligent, worried about the country to the point of death, he could be called a social and political leader.

古文：抗贞亮筹幹，咸有父风，奕世载美，具体而微，可谓克构者哉！
现代文：陆抗忠贞正直很有才干，很有父亲风范，受到世代赞美，拥有品德却并未传扬，可说是能完成先辈事业的啊！
English: Lu Quanzhang is very talented, has a very fatherly demeanor, has been praised by generations, has character but has not been propagated, and can be said to be able to complete the cause of the forefathers!

