古文：黄帝曰：余闻先师，有所心藏，弗著于方，余愿闻而藏之，则而行之，上以治民，下以治身，使百姓无病，上下和亲，德泽下流，子孙无优，传于后世，无有终时。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说前辈老师有很多心得秘密，没有记载在书籍里，我想了解它们而将它们保存下来，作为准则加以推广实行，上可以统治百姓，下可以修养自身，使百姓没有疾病，统治者和百姓相互和睦友爱，美德流传后代，使得子孙继承优良传统而无忧，这样的状态流传百世，没有终止之时。
English: Huang Di said: I have heard that the predecessors of teachers have a lot of secrets, which are not recorded in books. I want to understand them and preserve them, and promote and implement them as guidelines. The top can rule the people, the bottom can cultivate themselves, so that the people do not have diseases, the rulers and the people have mutual harmony and friendship, and the virtues are passed on to future generations, so that the descendants inherit the fine traditions without worry. Such a state has been passed down for centuries, and there is no time to end.

古文：可得闻乎？
现代文：所有这些我可以了解吗？
English: Can I understand all of this?

古文：岐伯曰：远乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你问的是很深远的问题啊！
English: Qibo said: You are asking a very profound question!

古文：夫治民与自治，治彼与治此，治小与治大，治国与治家，未有逆而能治之也，夫惟顺而已矣。
现代文：统治百姓和修养自身，统治那里和统治这里，处理小事和处理大事，治理国家和治理家庭，从来没有逆其情而能治理好的，只有顺其情才能治理得好。
English: Ruling the people and cultivating oneself, ruling there and ruling here, dealing with minor matters and dealing with major matters, governing the country and governing the family, have never been able to govern well against their will, and can only govern well if they go with their will.

古文：顺者，非独阴阳脉论气之逆顺也，百姓人民皆欲顺其志也。
现代文：顺其情，不只是阴阳、经脉、营卫之气的顺逆，人民百姓也都希望能顺从他们的意愿。
English: It is not just the yin and yang, the meridians, and the ying and yang of the atmosphere that go with the flow, but the people also hope to obey their wishes.

古文：黄帝曰：顺之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：怎样才能做到顺其情呢？
English: Huangdi asked: How can we make things go smoothly?

古文：岐伯曰：入国问俗，入家问讳，上堂问礼，临病人问所便。
现代文：岐伯说：到一国应先问清人家的礼俗，到别人家去应先问清人家的忌讳，登庙堂应先问清见君主的礼节，给人看病应先问清病人的适与不适。
English: Qibo said: when going to a country, you should first ask about people's etiquette and customs; when going to other people's homes, you should first ask about people's taboos; when going to a temple, you should first ask about the etiquette of seeing the monarch; when seeing a doctor, you should first ask about the patient's fit and unfit.

古文：黄帝曰：便病人奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样通过了解病人的适与不适来诊察疾病呢？
English: Huang Di said: How to diagnose the disease by understanding the patient's fit and unfit?

古文：岐伯曰：夫中热消瘅，则便寒。寒中之属，则便热。
现代文：岐伯说：因内热而致多食易饥的消渴病，病人喜欢寒，得寒就会感到舒适。
English: Qi Bo said: the thirst-quenching disease of overeating and easy hunger caused by internal heat, the patient likes the cold, and feels comfortable when it gets cold.

古文：胃中热，则消谷，令人悬心善饥，脐以上皮热。
现代文：属于寒邪内侵一类的病，病人喜欢热，得到热就会感到舒适。
English: It is a cold-induced invasive disease. Patients like heat and feel comfortable when they get it.

古文：肠中热，则出黄如糜，脐以下皮寒。
现代文：胃中有热邪积滞，则饮食物容易消化，使病人常有饥饿和胃中空虚难忍的感觉，同时感到脐以上腹部的皮肤发热。
English: If there is a buildup of fever in the stomach, it is easy to digest food, so that the patient often has hunger and an unbearable feeling of emptiness in the stomach, and at the same time feels that the skin above the navel and abdomen is hot.

古文：胃中寒，则腹胀。肠中寒，则肠鸣飧泄。
现代文：肠中有热邪积滞，则排泄黄色如稀粥样的粪便，脐以下小腹部有发热的感觉。胃中有寒邪积滞，则出现腹胀。
English: If there is a fever in the intestine, the stool will be yellow and porridge-like, and there will be a feeling of fever in the abdomen below the navel. If there is a cold in the stomach, there will be bloating.

古文：胃中寒，肠中热，则胀而且泄。
现代文：肠中有寒邪积滞，则出现肠鸣腹泻及粪便中有不消化的食物。
English: If there is a build-up of cold sores in the intestines, there will be diarrhea and indigestible food in the feces.

古文：胃中热，肠中寒，则疾饥，小腹痛胀。
现代文：胃中有寒邪而肠中有热邪的寒热错杂证，则表现为腹胀而兼见泄泻。
English: The mixed symptom of fever and chills in which the stomach is cold and the intestines are hot is manifested as bloating and diarrhea.

古文：黄帝曰：胃欲寒饮，肠欲热饮，两者相逆，便之奈何？
现代文：胃中有热邪而肠中有寒邪的寒热错杂证，则表现为容易饥饿，兼见小腹胀痛。黄帝说：胃中有热而欲得寒饮，肠中有寒而欲得热饮，二者相互矛盾，遇到这种情况怎样做才能顺应病情调节饮食呢？
English: The mixed symptom of having fever in the stomach and cold in the intestine is manifested as easy hunger and abdominal pain. Huangdi said: If you have fever in the stomach and want to drink cold drinks, and if you have cold in the intestine and want to drink hot drinks, the two are contradictory. In this situation, what can you do to adjust your diet according to your condition?

古文：且夫王公大人血食之君，骄恣从欲，轻人而无能禁之，禁之则逆其志，顺之则加其病，便之奈何？
现代文：特别是王公大人和一向肉食的君主，骄恣纵欲，看不起任何人，就无法使他们禁忌一些食物，让他们禁忌不利食物就会拂逆其意愿，顺从他们的欲望则加重其病情，在这种情况下应当如何处置呢？
English: In particular, princes and monarchs who have always been carnivorous, arrogant and indulgent, and despise anyone, cannot make them forbid some foods. If they forbid unfavorable foods, they will go against their wishes, and obeying their desires will aggravate their condition. In this case, what should be done?

古文：治之何先？
现代文：治疗应该先治哪一方面呢？
English: Which aspect should be treated first?

古文：岐伯曰：人之情，莫不恶死而乐生，告之以其败，语之以其善，导之以其所便，开之以其所苦，虽有无道之人，恶有不听者乎？
现代文：岐伯说：愿意生存而害怕死亡，是人之常情，如果把这样做的危害告诉他们，把改变这种做法的好处告诉他们，用适合的方法引导他们，把引起他们痛苦的原因开解掉，如此这般即使有不懂道理的人，又怎么会不听从劝告呢？
English: Zibo said: "It is human nature to want to live and fear death. If you tell them the harm of doing so, tell them the benefits of changing this practice, guide them with appropriate methods, and solve the causes of their suffering, then even if there are unreasonable people, how can they not listen to advice?

古文：黄帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：那怎样进行治疗呢？
English: Huang Di said: How should the human body's clear gas and argon gas abnormalities be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：春夏先治其标，后治其本；秋冬先治其本，后治其标。
现代文：岐伯说：春夏之际，阳气充沛体表，应先治其在外的标病，后治其在内的本病；秋冬之际，精气敛藏于内，应先治其在内的本病，而后治其在外的标病。
English: Qi Bo said: in the spring and summer, when the yang qi is abundant on the body surface, it is necessary to treat the external sign disease first, and then treat the internal disease including it; in the autumn and winter, when the essence is hidden inside, it is necessary to treat the internal disease including it first, and then treat the external sign disease.

古文：黄帝曰：便其相逆者奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：对于那种生活习性与病情相矛盾的情况，应当如何处置才合适呢？
English: Huang Di said: For that kind of situation in which the living habits and the disease are contradictory, what should be the appropriate treatment?

古文：岐伯曰：便此者，食饮衣服，亦欲适寒温，寒无凄怆，暑无出汗。
现代文：岐伯说：在这种情况下，要让病人调整饮食起居，顺应天气变化。天冷时，应当加厚衣服而不要着凉；天热时，当减少衣服而不要热得出汗。
English: Qi Bo said: In this case, it is necessary to let the patients adjust their diet and living to conform to the weather changes. When it is cold, they should wear thicker clothes and not get cold; when it is hot, they should wear less clothes and not sweat.

古文：食饮者，热无灼灼，寒无沧沧。
现代文：在饮食方面，热天不吃滚烫的食物，冷天不吃寒凉的食物。
English: In terms of diet, hot foods should not be eaten on hot days, and cold foods should not be eaten on cold days.

古文：寒温中适，故气将持，乃不致邪僻也。
现代文：饮食衣服要寒温适中，这样正气才能内守，才能不使邪气侵入体内。
English: Food and clothing should be kept at a moderate temperature, so that the righteous energy can be kept inside and the evil energy cannot invade the body.

古文：黄帝曰：《本藏》以身形肢节䐃肉，候五脏六腑之大小焉。
现代文：黄帝说：在《本脏》篇中讲到，根据人的形体、四肢、关节及隆起的肌肉，可以测知五脏六腑的大小。
English: Huang Di said: In the article "The Internal Organs," it was said that the size of the internal organs can be measured according to the human body, limbs, joints and bulging muscles.

古文：今夫王公大人、临朝即位之君而问焉，谁可扪循之而后答乎？
现代文：但是如果显贵的王公大人、在位的统治者想知道自己的身体情况，谁又敢扣摸他们的身体进行检查，然后再答复他们呢？
English: But if high-ranking princes and reigning rulers want to know about their physical condition, who would dare to touch their bodies to examine them and then answer them?

古文：岐伯曰：身形肢节者，脏腑之盖也，非面部之阅也。
现代文：岐伯说：形体、四肢、关节是覆盖在五脏六腑的外围组织，和内脏有一定的关系，不能仅通过观察面部的方法来进行推断。
English: Qi Bo said: The body, limbs, and joints are peripheral tissues that cover the internal organs, and have a certain relationship with the internal organs. It cannot be inferred by observing the face alone.

古文：黄帝曰：五脏之气，阅于面者，余已知之矣，以肢节知而阅之，奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：通过诊察面部色泽来推测五脏精气的方法，我已经知道了，那怎样根据形体肢节的情况推测内脏的情况呢？
English: Huang Di said: I already know the method of estimating the visceral essence by examining the color and luster of the face, so how can I estimate the condition of the internal organs according to the condition of the limbs?

古文：岐伯曰：五脏六腑者，肺为之盖，巨肩陷咽，候见其外。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说：在五脏六腑中，以肺的位置最高，而为五脏六腑的华盖，则可通过肩部的宽厚、咽部的凹陷情况，来测知肺的虚实。黄帝说：对。
English: Qi Bo said, "Among the five viscera and six alveoli, the lung is the highest, while the alveoli, which are the five viscera and six alveoli, can be detected by the thickness of the shoulder and the depression of the pharynx. Huang Di said, "That's right."

古文：岐伯曰：五脏六腑，心为之主，缺盆为之道，䯏骨有余，以候𩩲骬。岐伯曰：肝者主为将，使之候外，欲知坚固，视目小大。
现代文：岐伯说：心为五脏六腑的主宰，缺盆为血脉运行的主要通路，观察缺盆两旁肩端锁骨的距离远近，再配合观察胸部剑突骨端的高低，就可以测知胸腔的大小情况。岐伯说：肝为将军之官，开窍于目，欲知肝脏的坚固情况，则可以通过观察眼睛的大小明亮来进行判断。
English: Qi Bo said: The heart is the master of the five viscera and six glands, and the isthmus is the main passageway for blood circulation. By observing the distance between the clavicles at the shoulder ends on both sides of the isthmus, and then observing the height of the tip of the sternum in the chest, it is possible to measure the size of the chest cavity. Qi Bo said: The liver is the general's officer, it opens to the eyes, and if you want to know the strength of the liver, you can judge by observing the size and brightness of the eyes.

古文：岐伯曰：脾者主为卫，使之迎粮，视唇舌好恶，以知吉凶。
现代文：岐伯说：脾主捍卫身体健康，用它接受饮食，运送食物精华到身体各部分，观察嘴唇和舌头的色泽的正常与否，来了解脾的健康与否。
English: Qi Bo said: The spleen is the guardian of physical health. It is used to receive meals, transport food essence to all parts of the body, and observe the normal or abnormal color of the lips and tongue to understand the health of the spleen.

古文：岐伯曰：肾者主为外，使之远听，视耳好恶，以知其性。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说：肾主形体骨骼，肾气通耳而影响听力，因此根据耳朵听力的强弱，就可以判断肾脏的虚实。黄帝说：对。
English: Qi Bo said: The kidney is the main body of the skeleton, and the kidney gas passes through the ear and affects the hearing. Therefore, according to the strength of the ear's hearing, it is possible to judge whether the kidney is real or fake. Huang Di said: Yes.

古文：愿闻六腑之候。
现代文：我还想听你再讲一下测候六腑的方法。
English: I'd also like you to tell me again about the method of measuring sextuplets.

古文：岐伯曰：六腑者，胃为之海，广骸、大颈、张胸，五谷乃容。
现代文：岐伯说：六腑中，胃为水谷之海，是容纳水饮食物的器官，如果脸颊肌肉丰满、颈部粗壮、胸部宽阔，胃容纳水谷的量就多。
English: Qi Bo said, "In six-year-olds, the stomach is a sea of troughs. It is the organ that holds water and food. If the cheeks are full of muscles, the neck is thick, and the chest is broad, the stomach will hold more troughs.

古文：鼻隧以长，以候大肠。
现代文：鼻道深长，可以推测大肠的功能正常。
English: The nasal passage is deep and long, so it can be assumed that the function of the large intestine is normal.

古文：唇厚、人中长，以候小肠。
现代文：口唇厚，人中沟长，可推测小肠的功能正常。
English: The lips are thick and the cleft in the middle is long. It can be assumed that the function of the small intestine is normal.

古文：目下果大，其胆乃横。
现代文：眼睛下方的眼袋大，则胆气不下降。
English: If the bags under the eyes are large, the courage does not decrease.

古文：鼻孔在外，膀胱漏泄。
现代文：鼻孔向上显露，则膀胱不能够正常的存储尿液而致小便漏泄。
English: If the nostrils are turned upwards, the bladder is not able to store urine properly, leading to leakage of urine.

古文：鼻柱中央起，三焦乃约，此所以候六腑者也。
现代文：鼻梁中央高起的，则三焦固密功能正常。这些就是用来测候六腑情况的方法。
English: If the middle of the bridge of the nose is raised, the three-focal-density function is normal. These are the methods used to measure the condition of the sextant.

古文：上下三等，脏安且良矣。
现代文：总之，面部的上、中、下三部相等和谐，则内脏功能正常安定而且健康。
English: In short, if the upper, middle and lower three parts of the face are equally harmonious, then the internal organ function is normal, stable and healthy.

