古文：诏尚书省集百官详议，亦以为可，语在《乐志》。
现代文：显德六年正月六日，高丽国国王王昭派使者进贡地方特产。十五日，女真国派使者进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 6th year of Hende, the king of Goryeo, Wang Zhao, sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products. On the 15th day, the envoy of Yeongjin sent tribute.

古文：二月庚辰，发徐、宿、宋、单等州丁夫数万浚汴河。
现代文：十六日，青州上奏，节度使、陈王安审琦被部下杀害。二月五日，征发徐、宿、宋、单等州丁壮民夫数万人疏浚汴河。
English: On the 16th, the Qingzhou Shangso, the festival envoy, Chen Wang Anjun, was killed by his subordinates. On February 5, tens of thousands of Ding Zhuang people from Xu, Shukou, Song and Shan states were recruited and sent to dredge the Fenhe River.

古文：甲申，发滑、亳二州丁夫浚五丈河，东流于定陶，入于济，以通青、郓水运之路。
现代文：九日，征发滑、亳二州丁壮民夫疏浚五丈河，向东流往定陶，流入济水，以打通青州、郓州的航道。
English: On the 9th, Ding Zhuangmin of Erzhou and Ding Zhuangmin of Guizhou were recruited to dredge the Wuzhang River, which flowed eastward to Dingtao and flowed into Jishui to open the waterway of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：又疏导蔡河，以通陈、颍水运之路。
现代文：又疏导蔡河，以打通陈州、颍州的航道。
English: He also diverted the Caihe River to open up the shipping routes of Chenzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：乙酉，诏诸道应差摄官各支半俸。
现代文：三月十九日，诏令因为北方尚未收复，定于本月内前往沧州。
English: On March 19th, because the north had not yet been recovered, the imperial command was scheduled to travel to Cangzhou within the month.

古文：甲戌，车驾发京师。
现代文：命诸位将领各领马军步军以及战船奔赴沧州。
English: I order you generals to lead the cavalry, infantry and warships to Cangzhou.

古文：夏四月辛卯，车驾次沧州，以前左谏议大夫薛居正为刑部侍郎。
现代文：二十四日，濠州上奏，钟离县饥民饿死五百九十四人。二十九日，御驾离开京城。
English: On the 24th, Bozhou went into mourning, and 594 people starved to death in Zhongli County. On the 29th, he left Beijing.

古文：是日，帝率诸军北征。
现代文：夏四月十六日，世宗到达沧州。这天，世宗率领各军北征。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, Shizong arrived in Cangzhou. On this day, Shizong led the army in the Northern Expedition.

古文：壬辰，至乾宁军，伪宁州刺史王洪以城降。丁酉，驾御龙舟，率舟师顺流而北，首尾数十里。
现代文：十七日，到乾宁军驻地，伪宁州刺史王洪献城投降，二十二日，世宗乘坐龙舟，率领水军顺流向北，前后数十里长。
English: On the 17th, he went to the garrison of the Qianning Army and surrendered to Wang Hong, the governor of Fuxing Province. On the 22nd, Shizong took a dragon boat and led the navy along the river to the north, dozens of miles long.

古文：《隆平集》：姚内斌，平州人也。
现代文：二十六日，到达益津关。从这里再往西，水面逐渐狭窄，水军难以前进，便弃船上岸。二十七日，住宿在野外。
English: On the 26th, they arrived at Izu Pass. From here, they sailed westward, and the water gradually narrowed, making it difficult for the sailors to advance, so they abandoned ship and went ashore. On the 27th, they stayed in the open.

古文：世宗北征，将兵至瓦桥关，内斌为关使，开门请降，世宗以为汝州刺史。甲辰，鄚州刺史刘楚信以州来降。
现代文：当时世宗是在预定日期之前就来到了这里，大军尚未汇合，在身边的士兵，还不到一旅人，全靠今上赵匡胤率领勇武的官员和骑士以保卫世宗。二十八日，赵匡胤先到瓦桥关，伪守将姚内斌献城投降。二十九日，莫州刺史刘楚信献州城投降。
English: At that time, Shizong arrived here before the scheduled date, the great army had not yet converged, and the soldiers around him were less than one traveler, all relying on the brave officials and knights led by Zhao Kuangyin to defend Shizong. On the 28th, Zhao Kuangyin first went to Wabiao Pass, and the false guard surrendered Yao Neibin to the city. On the 29th, Liu Chuxin, the governor of Mozhou, surrendered to the city.

古文：五月乙巳朔，帝驻跸于瓦桥关。侍卫亲军都指挥使李重进及诸将相继至行在，瀛州刺史高彦晖以本城归顺。
现代文：五月一日，世宗驻扎在瓦桥关，侍卫亲军都指挥使李重进以及各位将领都相继来到这里，瀛州刺史高彦晖献本城投降。
English: On May 1st, Shizong was stationed in Waha Qiaoguan. Li Shoujin, who commanded the bodyguards and the troops, and all the generals came here one after another. Gaozhou's governor Gao Yanqian presented the city to surrender.

古文：关南平，凡得州三、县十七、户一万八千三百六十。
现代文：瓦桥关以南得以平定，共得到三州，十七县，一万八千三百六十户。
English: The area south of Waha Qiaoguan was pacified, with a total of 18,360 households in the three prefectures and 17 counties.

古文：是役也，王师数万，不亡一矢，边界城邑皆望风而下。
现代文：这一战，朝廷数万军队，不发一箭，边境城邑都望风而降。
English: In this battle, the tens of thousands of troops of the imperial court did not fire a single arrow, and the border towns all surrendered to the wind.

古文：己酉，以瓦桥关为雄州，《宋史·陈思让传》：得瓦桥关为雄州，命思让为都部署，率兵戍守。
现代文：二日，世宗与众将商议进攻幽州，众将都认为不可，世宗不听。这夜，世宗生病，进攻幽州之事才作罢。
English: On the second day, Sejong and the generals discussed attacking Yuzhou. The generals all thought it was impossible, but Sejong did not listen. That night, Sejong fell ill and the attack on Yuzhou was called off.

古文：以益津关为霸州。《宋史·韩令坤传》：为霸州都部署，率所部兵戍之。是日，先锋都指挥使张藏英破契丹数百骑于瓦桥关北，攻下固安县。
现代文：四日，定州节度使孙行友上奏，攻下易州，俘获伪刺史李在钦献上，斩杀在军营中的街上。五日，以瓦桥关为雄州，以益津关为霸州。这天，先锋都指挥使张藏英在瓦桥关以北打败契丹数百骑兵，攻下固安县。
English: On the 4th, the Dingzhou Festival made Sun Xingyou play the leading role, captured Yizhou, captured the fake assassin Shi Li in Qinxian, and killed him in the street in the military camp. On the 5th, with Wahaqiao Pass as the male state and Yizhong Pass as the dominant state. On this day, Zhang Zangying commanded the vanguard to defeat hundreds of Khitan cavalry north of Wahaqiao Pass and capture Guan County.

古文：诏发滨、棣二州丁夫城霸州。
现代文：诏令征发滨、棣二州丁壮民夫修筑霸州州城。
English: The imperial edict ordered the enlistment of the people of Daban and Dingshuang in Zhouzhou to build the city of Zhouzhou.

古文：庚戌，遣侍卫都指挥使李重进率兵出土门，入河东界。
现代文：六日，派侍卫都指挥使李重进领兵经过土门，进入河东地界。
English: On the sixth day, the guards were sent to command Li Chongjin to lead the soldiers through the earthen gate and enter the land boundary of Hedong.

古文：晋州节度使杨廷璋奏，率兵入河东界，招降堡寨一十三所。
现代文：八日，世宗从雄州出发，回京。泉州节度使留从效派别驾从事使王禹锡到世宗所在地奉上贡物，世宗认为泉州不久前还臣服于南唐，南唐李景才归顺周朝，所以不想夺南唐所属，仅赐诏褒扬泉州而已。
English: On the eighth day, Shizong set out from Xiongzhou and returned to Beijing. On the Quanzhou Festival, the remaining followers of the Quanzhou faction were engaged in sending Wang Yuxi to the location of Shizong to pay tribute. Shizong believed that Quanzhou had not long ago submitted to South Tang, and South Tang Li Jing had only surrendered to the Zhou Dynasty. Therefore, he did not want to take over South Tang, but only gave praise to Quanzhou.

古文：癸未，立魏王符彦卿女为皇后，仍令所司择日备礼册命。
现代文：二十五日，侍卫都指挥使李重进上奏，在百井打败河东贼军，斩首二千级。三十日，世宗从雄州回到京城。
English: On the 25th, the commander of the Imperial Guards ordered Li Chongjin to march up and defeat the East Hedonist bandits at Momii, beheading 2,000 of them. On the 30th, King Sejong returned to the capital from Xiongzhou.

古文：以皇长子宗训为特进左卫上将军，封梁王；以第二子宗让为左骁卫上将军，封燕国公。
现代文：六月一日，潞州李筠上奏，攻下辽州，俘获伪辽州刺史张丕旦。四日，郑州上奏，黄河冲决原武县堤防，诏令宣徽南院使吴延祚征发附近县邑的丁壮民夫二万人堵塞决口。六月，晋州节度使杨廷璋上奏，领兵进入河东地界，招降城堡营寨十三座。九日，以皇长子郭宗训为特进、左卫上将军，封为燕国公。
English: On the first day of June, Bozhou's Li Qiye ascended the throne, conquered Liaozhou, and captured the pseudo-Liaozhou assassin Zhang Xidan. On the fourth day, Zhengzhou ascended the throne, the Yellow River broke through the original Wuxian dike, and the Southern Yuan Emperor ordered Wu Yanxuan to conscript 20,000 Ding Zhuang people from the nearby counties to block the breach. In June, the Jinzhou Festival made Yang Tingyu ascend the throne, led the troops into the eastern part of the river, and invited the 13 castle camps to surrender. On the ninth day, the eldest son of the emperor, Guo Zongxun

古文：赐江南进奉使李从善钱二万贯、绢二万匹、银一万两，赐两浙进奉使吴延福钱三千贯、绢五千匹、银器三十两。
现代文：赐给江南进奉使李从善钱二万贯，绢二万匹，银子一万两；赐给两浙进奉使吴延福钱三千贯，绢五千匹，银器三千两。
English: Li Congzheng, the envoy to the south of the Yangtze River, was given 20,000 cords of money, 20,000 horses and 10,000 taels of silver; Wu Yanfu, the envoy to Zhejiang, was given 3,000 cords of money, 5,000 horses and 3,000 taels of silver.

古文：然每思澶州所为，终不以公忠待之。
现代文：十四日，潞州押送俘获的辽州刺史张丕旦等二百四十五人献上，诏令释放他们。
English: On the 14th, Zhangzhou escorted the captured Liaozhou assassin Zhang Xidan and other two hundred and forty-five people to present, and issued a decree to release them.

古文：癸巳，帝崩于万岁殿，圣寿三十九。
现代文：十五日，以今上赵匡胤为殿前都点检，加封检校太傅，依旧任忠武军节度使。十九日，世宗在万岁殿驾崩，圣寿三十九岁。
English: On the 15th, the present Zhao Kuangyin was appointed as the inspector of the front of the hall, and he was also appointed as the inspector of the school, and still served as the festival envoy of the loyal troops. On the 19th, Sejong passed away in the Hall of Long Life, at the age of 39.

古文：甲午，宣遗制，梁王于柩前即皇帝位，服纪月日一依旧制。
现代文：二十日，宣读遗诏，梁王郭宗训在灵柩前即皇帝位，服饰纪元，全依旧时制度。
English: On the 20th, the last will and testament of Liang Wang Guo Zongxun was read out, and Liang Wang Guo Zongxun was enthroned as emperor in front of the coffin. The era of clothing began, and the time system remained unchanged.

古文：是日，群臣奉梁王即位于殿东楹，中外发哀。
现代文：这天，群臣在万岁殿东边奉梁王即位，朝廷内外举哀。
English: On this day, the courtiers in the east side of the Hall of Long Life honored the enthronement of King Liang, and mourned both inside and outside the court.

古文：其年八月，翰林学士、判太常寺事窦俨上谥曰睿武孝文皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：同年八月，翰林学士、判太常寺事窦亻严进谥号叫睿武孝文皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: In August of the same year, Hanlin Baccalaureate, the judge of the Taizhong Temple, Ji Dou Yanjin, was named Emperor Rui Wu Xiaowen, and the temple name was Shizong.

古文：十一月壬寅朔，葬于庆陵。
现代文：十一月一日，葬在庆陵。
English: He was buried in Qingling on November 1.

