古文：○氏叔琮氏叔琮，开封尉氏人也。
现代文：氏叔琮是开封尉氏人。
English: Ujihime was a member of the Kaifeng clan.

古文：为梁骑兵伍长，梁兵击黄巢陈、许间，叔琮战数有功，太祖壮之，使将后院马军，从攻徐、兗，表宿州刺史。
现代文：担任梁骑兵伍长，梁兵在陈、许二州间攻打黄巢，氏叔琮作战多次立功，梁太祖认为他威武雄壮，让他统率后院马军，随梁太祖打徐、充二州，上表奏为宿州刺史。
English: He served as the commander of the Liang cavalry. Liang soldiers attacked Huang Chao between the two states of Chen and Xu, and made meritorious contributions to the war many times. Liang Taizu thought that he was powerful and strong, and let him lead the horse army in the backyard. He followed Liang Taizu to fight Xu and Chong in the two states, and the above table played as the history of Shuzhou.

古文：使攻襄阳，战数败，降为阳翟镇遏使。
现代文：让化攻襄阳，多次被打败，降为阳翟镇遏使。
English: Let the chemical attack Xiangyang, was defeated many times, reduced to impotence town.

古文：久之，迁曹州刺史。
现代文：遇了很久，迁任曹州刺史。
English: It's been a long time coming, but the move to Caozhou is historic.

古文：太祖下河中，取晋、绛，晋王遣使致书太祖求成，太祖以晋书词嫚，乃遣叔琮与贺德伦等攻之。
现代文：梁太祖攻克河中，攻取晋、绛二州，晋王派使臣致信梁太祖求和，梁太祖认为晋的书信语言轻慢，于是派氏叔琮和贺德伦等人攻晋。
English: Liang Taizu conquered Hezhong, captured Jin and Shandong two states, and the King of Jin sent an envoy to Liang Taizu to sue for peace. Liang Taizu thought that Jin's writing language was insolent, so he sent Shuxuan and He Delun to attack Jin.

古文：叔琮自太行入，取泽、潞，出石会，营于洞涡，久之粮尽，乃旋。
现代文：氏叔琮从太行山进兵，攻取泽、潞二州，出石会，在洞涡驻营，时间长了粮食吃完，纔回师。
English: Uji no Tsukuda marched from Mt. Taihang, captured Ze and Ye two prefectures, the Izushi Association, and camped in Dongwoo. After a long time of eating grain, he returned to his division.

古文：表晋州刺史。
现代文：表奏为晋州刺史。
English: The tableau is the history of Jinzhou.

古文：晋人复取绛州，攻临汾，叔琮选壮士二人深目而胡须者，牧马襄陵道旁，晋人以为晋兵，杂行道中，伺其怠，擒晋二人而归。
现代文：晋人又攻取绛州，进攻临汾，氏叔琮挑选两个眼窝深、有胡须的强壮士兵，在襄陵路旁牧马，晋人以为他们是晋兵，在路上混杂行进，等到晋人懈怠时，擒获两个晋人回来。
English: The Jin people also captured Bozhou and attacked Linyi. Mr. Zhu Rong selected two strong soldiers with deep eye sockets and beards to herd horses next to Yangling Road. The Jin people thought they were Jin soldiers and mixed on the road. When the Jin people slacked off, they captured two Jin people to come back.

古文：晋人大惊，以为有伏兵，乃退屯于蒲县。
现代文：晋军十分惊慌，以为有伏兵，于是退兵屯驻在蒲县。
English: The Jin army was very panicked, thinking that there was an ambush, so they withdrew and stationed in Pu County.

古文：太祖遣友宁兵万人会叔琮御晋，友宁欲休兵以待，叔琮曰： 敌闻救至必走，走则何功邪？ 
现代文：梁太祖派朱友宁军队一万人会合氏叔琮抵御晋，朱友宁想休整士兵等待，氏叔琮说： 敌人听说救兵到了必定会逃跑，跑了哪还有什么战功呢？ 
English: Liang Taizu sent Zhu Youning's army of ten thousand people to join Utsunomiya to resist Jin. Zhu Youning wanted to rest and wait for the soldiers. Utsunomiya said: The enemy heard that the rescuers would definitely escape, where did they go and what was their war achievement?

古文：乃夜击之，晋人大败，逐之至于太原。
现代文：于是趁晚上出击晋人，晋人大败，追赶到太原。
English: So they took advantage of the evening to attack the Jin people. The Jin people were defeated and chased to Taiyuan.

古文：太祖大喜曰： 破太原非氏老不可。 
现代文：梁太祖十分高兴地说： 攻破太原没有氏老不行。 
English: Liang Taizu was very pleased and said, "It is impossible to conquer Taiyuan without Ujiro."

古文：已而兵大疫，叔琮班师，令曰： 病不能行者焚之。 
现代文：不久军队中发生大瘟疫，氏叔琮班师，下命令说： 患病不能走的就烧死他。 
English: Soon after, a great plague broke out in the army, and the commander of the division, Ujitsuna, gave the order: "If a sick man cannot march, burn him to death."

古文：病者惧，皆言无恙，乃以精卒为殿而还至石会，留数骑，以大将旗帜立于高冈，晋兵疑其有伏，乃不敢追。
现代文：患病的人害怕，都说没有病，于是率精兵殿后而返回石会，留下几个骑兵，把大将的旗帜树在高高的山冈上，晋兵疑心他们有埋伏，就不敢追击。
English: The sick people were afraid and said that they were not ill, so they led the elite soldiers and returned to the Stone Association, leaving behind a few cavalrymen, and planted the general's banner on a high hill. The Jin soldiers suspected that they were ambushed and did not dare to pursue.

古文：久之，徙保大军节度使。
现代文：过了很久，移任保大军节度使。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to the post of the chief of staff of the Korean People's Army.

古文：昭宗迁洛，拜右龙武统军。
现代文：唐昭宗迁到洛阳，拜为右龙武统军。
English: Tang Zhaozong went to Luoyang and worshiped the right dragon Wu Rongjun.

古文：太祖遣叔琮与李彦威等弑昭宗，已而杀之。
现代文：梁太祖派氏叔琮和李彦威等人杀唐昭宗，不久又杀了氏叔琮。
English: Liang Taizu sent Ujitong and Li Yanwei and others to kill Tang Zhaozong, and they soon killed Ujitong.

古文：○李彦威
现代文：李彦威是寿州人。
English: Li Yanwei is from Shoushou.

古文：李彦威，寿州人也。
现代文：年轻时跟随梁太祖，为人聪颖有悟性，善于揣摩人意。
English: When he was young, he followed Liang Taizu. He was intelligent and insightful, and was good at guessing people's intentions.

古文：少事梁太祖，为人颖悟，善揣人意，太祖怜之，养以为子，冒姓硃氏，名友恭。
现代文：梁太祖疼爱他，收养作儿子，冒姓朱，名叫友恭。
English: Liang's great-grandfather loved him dearly and adopted him as his son. He assumed the surname Zhu and was called Yu Qiong.

古文：历汝、颍二州刺史。
现代文：历任汝、颖二州刺史。
English: Successive heads of state have made history in the two states.

古文：昭宗迁洛，拜右龙武统军。
现代文：唐昭宗到洛阳，拜为右龙武统军。
English: Tang Zhaozong went to Luoyang and worshiped the right dragon Wu Rongjun.

古文：初，刘季述废昭宗，立皇太子裕为天子。
现代文：当初，刘季述废黜唐昭宗，立皇太子李裕为天子。
English: At first, Liu Jizhong dethroned Tang Zhaozong and established Crown Prince Li Yu as the Son of Heaven.

古文：昭宗反正，以为太子幼，为贼所立，赦之，复其始封为德王。
现代文：唐昭宗恢复帝位，认为皇太子年幼无知，被贼人拥立，宽恕了他，恢复他过去的德王封爵。
English: Tang Zhaozong restored the imperial throne, thought that the crown prince was young and ignorant, and was supported by thieves, forgave him, and restored his former German king's knighthood.

古文：昭宗自岐还，太祖见裕眉目疏秀，恶之，谓宰相崔胤曰： 德王尝为季述所立，安得犹在乎？
现代文：唐昭宗从岐返回，梁太祖见李裕眉清目秀，讨厌他，对宰相崔胤说： 德王曾被刘季述立为天子，怎么能还活着呢？
English: When Emperor Zhaozong of Tang returned from Qi, Liang Taizu saw Li Yu Mei's handsome face and hated him. He said to Prime Minister Cui Yin: King De was once proclaimed the Son of Heaven by Liu Qishu. How can he still be alive?

古文：公白天子杀之。 
现代文：你告诉天子杀掉他。 
English: You tell God to kill him.

古文：胤奏之，昭宗不许，佗日以问太祖，太祖曰： 臣安敢及之，胤欲卖臣尔。 昭宗迁洛，谓蒋玄晖曰： 德王，朕爱子也，全忠何为欲杀之？ 
现代文：崔胤上奏，唐昭宗不同意，有一天拿这事询问梁太祖，梁太祖说： 我怎敢说这事，崔胤想出卖我罢了 唐昭宗遭到洛阳，对蒋玄晖说： 德王是我的爱子，朱全忠为什么想杀掉他？ 
English: One day, Liang Taizu was asked about the matter. Liang Taizu said, "How dare I say this, it's just that Cui Yin wants to betray me." When Tang Zhaozong was attacked by Luoyang, he said to Jiang Xuanqi, "De Wang is my beloved son, why does Zhu Quanzhong want to kill him?

古文：因泣下，啮指流血。
现代文：于是哭起来，把指头咬出了血。
English: Then she began to cry and bit her finger until it bled.

古文：玄晖具以白太祖，太祖益恶之。
现代文：蒋玄晖全部告诉了梁太祖，梁太祖更加讨厌李裕。
English: Jiang Xuanqi told Liang Taizu everything, and Liang Taizu hated Li Yu even more.

古文：是时，昭宗改元天祐，迁于东都，为梁所迫，而晋人、蜀人以为天祐之号非唐所建，不复称之，但称天复。王建亦传檄天下，举兵诛梁。
现代文：这时，唐昭宗改年号为天佑，迁到柬都，这是受梁逼迫，而晋人、蜀人认为天佑这个年号不是唐建立的，不再称用它，只称天复王建也传布檄文于天下，出兵讨伐梁。
English: At this time, Tang Zhaozong changed the name of the year to Tianyou and moved to the capital of Cambodia, which was forced by Liang. Jin and Shu people believed that Tianyou was not established by Tang and no longer used it. They only said that Tianfu Wang Jian also spread the message to the world and sent troops to fight against Liang.

古文：太祖大惧，恐昭宗奔佗镇，以兵七万如河中，阴遣敬翔至洛，告彦威与氏叔琮等，使行弑逆。
现代文：梁太祖十分害怕，怕唐昭宗出奔到别的镇，率兵七万人到河中，暗中派敬翔到洛阳，告诉李彦威和氏叔琮等人，让他们杀掉唐昭宗。
English: Liang Taizu was very scared. He was afraid that Tang Zhaozong would flee to another town. He led 70,000 soldiers to the middle of the river and secretly sent Qixiang to Luoyang to tell Li Yanwei, Uji Shuxuan and others to kill Tang Zhaozong.

古文：八月壬辰，彦威、叔琮以龙武兵宿禁中，夜二鼓，以兵百人叩宫门奏事，夫人裴正一开门问曰： 奏事安得以兵入？ 
现代文：八月壬辰，李彦威、氏叔琮率龙武兵守卫宫禁中，晚上二鼓时，率兵一百人叩官门上奏事情，夫人裴正一开门问道： 奏报事情怎能率兵进来？ 
English: In August of the same year, Li Yanwei and his uncle Li Shuxuan led the Longwu soldiers to guard the palace. At two o'clock in the evening, they led a hundred soldiers to knock on the official's door to report the matter. Mrs. Pei Zheng asked as soon as she opened the door: How can you lead soldiers to report the matter?

古文：龙武牙官史太杀之，趋椒兰殿，问昭宗所在，昭宗方醉，起走，太持剑逐之，昭宗单衣旋柱而走，太剑及之，昭宗崩。讣至河中，太祖阳为惊骇，投地号哭，骂曰： 奴辈负我，俾我被恶名于后世邪！ 
现代文：龙武牙官史太杀掉裴正一，奔赴椒兰殿，问唐昭宗在哪里，唐昭宗正喝醉酒，起身逃跑，史太持剑追他，唐昭宗穿着单衣绕柱而逃，史太的剑刺中了他，唐昭宗死讣告送到河中，梁太祖假装惊骇，倒在地上哭号，骂道： 你们这些奴才辜负了我，让我在后世背上恶名吗！ 
English: Longwuji official Shih Tai killed Pei Zhengyi and rushed to the Jiaolan Hall to ask where Tang Zhaozong was. Tang Zhaozong was drunk and got up to run away. Shih Tai chased him with a sword. Tang Zhaozong ran around the pillar in a singlet. Shih Tai's sword stabbed him. The obituary of Tang Zhaozong was sent to the river. Liang Taizu pretended to be shocked and fell to the ground crying and cursing: "You slaves have failed me and let me have a bad name in the future!"

古文：太祖至洛，流彦威、叔琮岭南，使张廷范杀之。
现代文：梁太祖到洛阳，把李彦威、氏叔琮流放到岭南，派张廷范杀了他们。
English: Liang Taizu went to Luoyang, exiled Li Yanwei and his uncle to Lingnan, and sent Zhang Tingfan to kill them.

古文：彦威临刑大呼曰： 卖我以灭口，其如神理何？ 
现代文：李彦威临刑时大呼道： 出卖我而杀人灭口，这合天理吗？ 
English: When Li Yanwei was about to be sentenced, he cried out loudly: "Betraying me and killing me, is this in accordance with the laws of heaven?

古文：顾廷范曰： 勉之，公行自及。 
现代文：回头望着张廷范说： 尽力做吧，你也快赶上了。 
English: Looking back at Zhang Tingfan, he said, "Do your best, you'll catch up soon."

古文：遂见杀。
现代文：于是被杀。
English: He was killed.

古文：已而还其姓名。
现代文：不久恢复他原来的姓名。
English: He soon reverted to his original name.

古文：庄宗时，得故唐内人景姹，言当彦威等弑昭宗时，诸王宗属数百人皆遇害，而同为一坑，瘗于龙兴寺北，请合为一冢而改葬之。
现代文：唐庄宗时，得到唐原来的宫人景姹，述说当李彦威等人杀唐昭宗时，各王宗属几百人都遇害，而挖了一个坑，一同埋在龙兴圭北，请求合为一个坟而改葬他们。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong was assassinated, the Tang's former palace attendant, Jing Qi, obtained the following account: When Li Yanwei and others killed Tang Zhaozong, several hundred members of each royal family were killed, and they dug a pit and buried them together in Longxinggu North, requesting that they be buried together in a single grave.

古文：诏以故濮王为首，葬以一品礼云。
现代文：诏令以已故的濮王为首，按一品官礼节安葬。
English: According to the imperial edict, the late Shao Wang was the first to be buried according to the official etiquette.

古文：○李振李振，字兴绪，其祖抱真，唐潞州节度使。
现代文：李振字兴绪，他的祖父李抱真，任唐潞州节度使。
English: Li Zhenzhi Xingxu, his grandfather Li Baozhen, was the Tang Bozhou Festival Commissioner.

古文：振为唐金吾卫将军，拜台州刺史。
现代文：李振任唐金吾卫将军，拜台州刺史。
English: Li Zhen served as the general of Tang Jinguwei, and wrote the history of Baitai Prefecture.

古文：盗起浙东，不果行，乃西归。
现代文：盗贼兴起于浙束，未能成行，于是西归。
English: The thieves arose in Zhezhuang, failed to travel, and then returned to the West.

古文：过梁，以策干太祖，太祖留之。
现代文：经过梁，献计策干谒梁太祖，梁太祖留下他。
English: After Liang, Liang Taizu was able to devise a plan, and Liang Taizu left him.

古文：太祖兼领郓州，表振节度副使。
现代文：梁太祖兼领郓州，上表奏李振为节度副使。
English: Liang Taizu is also the leader of Bozhou, and Li Zhen is the vice-envoy of the festival.

古文：振奏事长安，舍梁邸。
现代文：李振到长安奏事，住在梁王在京城的官邸。
English: Li Zhen went to Chang'an to make a report and stayed at the official residence of Liang Wang in Beijing.

古文：宦官刘季述谋废昭宗，遣其侄希正因梁邸吏程岩见振曰： 今主上严急，诛杀不辜，中尉惧及祸，将行废立，请与诸邸吏协力以定中外，如何？ 
现代文：宦官刘季述策谋废黜唐昭宗，派他的侄子刘希正通过梁王府邸官吏程岩见李振说： 如今主上严酷急躁，诛杀无辜的人，中尉怕遭受灾祸，将要行废立大事，请求你和各位王府官吏同心协力安定中外，怎么样？ 
English: Eunuch Liu Ji recounted the plot to dethrone Tang Zhaozong, and sent his nephew Liu Xizheng through Liang Wangfu's residence official Cheng Yanwen Li Zhen, saying: "Nowadays, the Lord is severe and hasty, killing innocent people. The lieutenant is afraid of suffering a disaster, and will carry out the great event of abolishing the monarchy. I ask you and all the officials of the palace to work together to stabilize China and the world. How about it?

古文：振骇然曰： 百岁奴事三岁主，而敢尔邪！
现代文：李振惊骇地说： 百岁奴仆也要事奉三岁的主人，你们敢这样做吗！
English: Li Zhen was shocked and said, "A hundred-year-old servant should also serve a three-year-old master. Do you dare to do this?"

古文：今梁王百万之师，方仗大义尊天子，君等无为此不祥也！ 
现代文：如今梁王拥有百万军队，正依仗大义尊奉天子，你们不要做这种不吉利的事！ 
English: Now that King Liang has a million-man army, he is relying on great righteousness and honoring the Son of Heaven. Don't do such an unlucky thing!

古文：振还，季述卒与岩等废昭宗，幽之东宫，号太上皇，立皇太子裕为天子。
现代文：李振返回，刘季逑最终和程岩等人废黜唐昭宗，把他囚禁在东官，称为太上皇，立皇太子李裕为天子。
English: When Li Zhen returned, Liu Jizhe and Cheng Yan and others finally deposed Tang Zhaozong, imprisoned him in Dongguan, called him the last emperor, and established the crown prince Li Yu as the son of heaven.

古文：是时，太祖用兵在邢、洺间，季述诈为太上皇诰告太祖，太祖犹豫，未知所为，振曰： 夫竖刁、伊戾之乱，所以为霸者资也。今阉宦作乱，天子危辱，此正仗义立功之时。 
现代文：这时，梁太祖用兵于邢、沼二州问，刘季述伪造太上皇的制诰告知梁太祖，梁太祖犹豫不决，不知怎么做，李振说： 竖刁、伊戾作乱，成为想称霸的人的依托如今宦官作乱，天子危急受屈辱，这是你仗义立功的时机。 
English: At this time, Liang Taizu sent soldiers to Yunnan and Shandong to ask Liu Jizhong to tell Liang Taizu about the forgery of the emperor's imperial edict. Liang Taizu hesitated and did not know how to do it. Li Zhen said: "Hengzhu and Yili made turmoil and became the support of those who wanted to dominate. Now the eunuchs are making turmoil and the emperor is in danger of being humiliated. This is the time for you to do your duty."

古文：太祖大悟，乃囚季述使者，遣振诣京师见崔胤，谋出昭宗。
现代文：梁太祖恍然大悟，于是拘囚刘季述的使臣，派李振到京师见崔胤，商量救出唐昭宗。
English: Liang Taizu suddenly realized, so he sent Li Zhen, the envoy described by the prisoner Liu Ji, to meet with Cui Yin, the Beijing scholar, to discuss the rescue of Tang Zhaozong.

古文：昭宗返正，太祖大喜，执振手曰： 卿谋得之矣！ 
现代文：唐昭宗复位，梁太祖十分高兴，握着李振的手说： 你的计谋成功了！ 
English: When Tang Zhaozong was reinstated, Liang Taizu was very happy. He shook Li Zhen's hand and said, "Your stratagem has succeeded!

古文：王师范以青州降梁，遣振往代师范，师范疑惧，不知所为，振曰： 独不闻汉张绣乎？
现代文：王师范在青州向梁投降，派李振去替代王师范，王师范怀疑畏惧，不知所措，李振说： 难道不知道汉代的张绣吗？
English: Wang Shifan surrendered to Liang in Qingzhou and sent Li Zhen to replace Wang Shifan. Wang Shifan was doubtful, afraid, and at a loss. Li Zhen said, "Don't you know about Zhang Xiu in the Han Dynasty?"

古文：绣与曹公为敌，然不归袁绍而归曹公者，知其志大，不以私雠杀人也。
现代文：张绣和曹公为敌，但却不归附袁绍而归附曹公，是因为他知道曹公的志向远大，不因私仇杀人。
English: Zhang Xiu was an enemy of Cao Gong, but he did not join Yuan Shao but joined Cao Gong, because he knew that Cao Gong's ambition was lofty and that he would not kill for personal enmity.

古文：今梁王方欲成大事，岂以故怨害忠臣乎？ 
现代文：现在梁王正想成就大事业，难道会因过去的恩怨残害忠臣吗？ 
English: Now that Liang Wang is trying to achieve a great career, will he harm his loyal vassals because of past grudges?

古文：师范洗然自释，乃西归梁。
现代文：王师范的疑虑了然自解，于是西归梁。
English: Wang Shifan's doubts were clearly resolved, and Xi Guiliang was released.

古文：昭宗迁洛，振往来京师，朝臣皆侧目，振视之若无人。
现代文：唐昭宗迁到洛阳，李振往来于京师，朝臣们都对他侧目而视，李振见了他们就像无人一样。
English: Tang Zhaozong moved to Luoyang, Li Zhen went back and forth to Beijing. The courtiers all looked sideways at him, and Li Zhen saw them as if they were nobody.

古文：有所小怒，必加谴谪。
现代文：稍有所怒，必定加以谴责贬斥。
English: If there is a hint of anger, it is bound to be denounced and belittled.

古文：故振一至京师，朝廷必有贬降。
现代文：因此李振一到京师，朝廷就必定有贬降官吏的事。
English: Therefore, as soon as Li Zhen arrived in Beijing, the imperial court was bound to demean officials.

古文：时人目振为鸱枭。
现代文：当时人把李振看作是鸥枭。
English: At that time, people regarded Li Zhen as a baboon.

古文：太祖之弑昭宗也，遣振至京师与硃友恭、氏叔琮谋之。
现代文：梁太祖杀唐昭宗，派李振到京师和朱友恭、氏叔琮商量。
English: Liang Taizu killed Tang Zhaozong and sent Li Zhen to Beijing to consult with Zhu Yuqong and Uji Shuxuan.

古文：昭宗崩，太祖问振所以待友恭等宜如何？振曰： 昔晋司马氏杀魏君而诛成济，不然，何以塞天下口？ 
现代文：唐昭宗死，梁太祖间李振应当怎样对待朱友恭等人，李振说： 过去晋朝司马氏杀魏的君主，同时杀掉成济，不这样，拿什么堵住天下人的嘴？ 
English: After the death of Tang Zhaozong, Li Zhen asked Liang Taizu how he should treat Zhu Youqiong and others. Li Zhen said: In the past, the Jin Dynasty and the Sima Dynasty killed the monarchs of Wei, and at the same time killed Cheng Zhi. Otherwise, what should be used to gag the people of the world?

古文：太祖乃归罪友恭等而杀之。
现代文：梁太祖于是归罪朱友恭等人而把他们杀了。
English: Liang Taizu then incriminated Zhu Youqiong and others and killed them.

古文：振尝举进士咸通、乾符中，连不中，尤愤唐公卿，及裴枢等七人赐死白马驿，振谓太祖曰： 此辈尝自言清流，可投之河，使为浊流也。 
现代文：李振曾在咸通、干符年间举进士，连续考试不中，尤其愤恨唐的公卿，到裴枢等人被赐死于白马驿时，李振对梁太祖说： 这些人曾自称清流，可以把他们扔到黄河中，让他们变成浊流。 
English: During the years of Hamdong and Ganfu, Li Zhen had promoted young scholars, but they failed in successive examinations, especially the nobility who resented Tang. When Pei Zu and others were given white horses to die, Li Zhen said to Liang Taizu: These people once claimed to be a clear stream, you can throw them into the Yellow River and let them become a turbulent stream.

古文：太祖笑而从之。
现代文：梁太祖笑着照办了。
English: Liang Taizu smiled and did as he was told.

古文：太祖即位，累迁户部尚书。
现代文：梁太祖登位，累官迁户部尚书。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and the reshuffle of officials was completed.

古文：友珪时，以振代敬翔为崇政院使。
现代文：朱友珪时，以李振代敬翔任崇政院使。
English: At the time of Zhu Youxuan, Li Zhende was appointed as the envoy of the Supreme People's Procuratorate of Chongzheng.

古文：庄宗灭梁入汴，振谒见郭崇韬，崇韬曰： 人言李振一代奇才，吾今见之，乃常人尔！ 
现代文：唐庄宗灭梁入汴梁，李振拜见郭崇韬，郭崇韬说： 人称李振是一代奇才，我今天见了，不过是普通人罢了！ 
English: When Li Zhen met Guo Chongya, Guo Chongya said: Li Zhen is known as a generation of wizards, but what I saw today was just an ordinary person!

古文：已而伏诛。
现代文：不久伏法被诛。
English: He was soon arrested.

古文：○裴迪裴迪，字升之，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴迪字升之，河东闻喜人。
English: Paddy is a rising star, and Hedong is a pleasant person.

古文：为人明敏，善治财赋，精于簿书。
现代文：为人聪明机敏，善于治理财赋，精通簿书。
English: He is clever and astute, good at managing wealth, and proficient in bookkeeping.

古文：唐司空裴璩判度支，辟为出使巡官。
现代文：唐司空裴璩判度支，征召他为出使巡官。
English: Tang Dynasty Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：都统王鐸镇滑州，奏迪汴、宋、郓等州供军院使。
现代文：都统王铎镇守滑州，奏请裴迪任汴、宋、郓等州供军院使。
English: The Emperor of China, Wang Qizhen, was in charge of the defense of Luzhou, and requested that Pei Di be appointed as the envoy to the Imperial Academy of Military Science for Luzhou, Song Dynasty, and Qing Dynasty.

古文：鐸为租庸使，辟租庸招纳使。
现代文：王铎任祖庸使，辟为租庸招纳使。
English: Wang Qian was appointed as an ancestor-yong envoy, and he was appointed as a tenant-yong recruitment envoy.

古文：梁太祖镇宣武，辟节度判官。
现代文：梁太祖镇守宣武，征召为节度判官。
English: Liang Taizu, the town warden of Xuanwu, was conscripted as a judge of the festival.

古文：太祖用兵四方，常留迪以调兵赋。
现代文：梁太祖在各地用兵，常常留下裴迪调拨军需钱赋。
English: Liang Taizu used soldiers in various regions, often leaving Pei Di to allocate money to the army.

古文：太祖乃榜门，以兵事自处，而以货财狱讼一切任迪。
现代文：梁太祖于是在官府门前张榜，把军中事务留给自己处理，而把财货狱讼等一切事务交给裴迪。
English: Liang Taizu then put up a board in front of the gate of the government office, leaving the military affairs to himself to deal with, and handed over all the affairs such as the property and prison litigation to Pei Di.

古文：太祖西攻岐，王师范谋袭汴，遣健卒苗公立持书至汴，阴伺虚实。
现代文：梁太祖西攻岐州，王师范策谋袭击汴，派壮士苗公立送信到汴，暗中窥探虚实。
English: Liang Taizuxi attacked Qizhou, Wang Shifan plotted to attack Handan, and sent the strongman Miao Guozhong to Handan to secretly spy on the truth.

古文：迪召公立问东事，公立色动，乃屏人密诘之，具得其事。
现代文：裴迪召苗公立询问束面的情况，苗公立变脸色，于是屏退旁人秘密追问他，完全了解了情况。
English: Pei Di summoned Miao Zongguo to inquire about the situation of the bundled face, Miao Zongguo turned pale, so the bystanders secretly questioned him, and fully understood the situation.

古文：迪不暇启，遣硃友宁以兵巡兗、郓，以故师范虽窃发而事卒不成。
现代文：裴迪来不及上报，派朱友宁率兵巡视兖、郫二州，因此王师范虽然暗中作乱，但事情最终未能成功。
English: Pedi did not have time to report, and sent Zhu Youning and his soldiers to inspect the two states of Handan and Handan. Therefore, although Wang Shifan secretly made trouble, the matter was ultimately unsuccessful.

古文：太祖自岐还，将吏皆赐 迎銮叶赞功臣 ，将吏入见，太祖目迪曰： 叶赞之功，惟裴公有之，佗人不足当也。 
现代文：梁太祖从岐返回，将吏们都赐以 迎銮时赞功臣 ，将吏们进见，梁太祖看着裴迪说：  时赞，的功劳，只有裴公具有，别的人不配承受。 
English: When Liang Taizu returned from Qi, he gave all the officials a "welcome gift" of "praise for meritorious service," and led the officials into the hall. Liang Taizu looked at Pei Di and said, "Praise for meritorious service, only Pei Gong has it, others are not worthy to bear it."

古文：迪入唐，累迁太常卿。
现代文：裴迪入唐，累官迁太常卿。
English: Pedi entered Tang and was transferred to the position of Taizhongqing.

古文：太祖即位，召拜右仆射，居一岁告老，以司空致仕，卒于家。
现代文：梁太祖登位，召拜为右仆射，一年后请老归家，以司空退休，死在家中。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, was called to be the right-hand man of Jia, and one year later he invited the old man to return home, retired with Siku, and died at home.

古文：○韦震韦震，字东卿，雍州万年人也。
现代文：韦震字束卿，雍州万年人。原名韦肇。
English: Wei Zhenzhezhu Sokqing, originally named Wei Zhao, is a native of Yongzhou.

古文：初名肇。
现代文：为人强悍机敏，能言善辩。
English: He is strong, quick-witted, and a good debater.

古文：为人强敏，有口辩。事梁太祖为都统判官。
现代文：事奉梁太祖任都统判官。
English: Liang Taizu was appointed as the judge of the Supreme People's Court.

古文：申丛执秦宗权，欲送于太祖，又欲自献于京师，又欲挟宗权夺其兵。
现代文：申丛捉住秦宗权，想送到梁太祖那里，又想亲自献于京师，又想挟持秦宗权夺取他的军队。
English: Shen Cong wanted to capture Qin Zongquan and send him to Liang Taizu, he also wanted to personally dedicate himself to the Beijing division, and he also wanted to seize Qin Zongquan and capture his army.

古文：太祖遣震入蔡州视之，丛遣骑兵三百迎震，欲杀之，震以计得免。
现代文：梁太祖派韦震到蔡州察看，申丛派骑兵三百人迎接韦震，想杀掉他，韦震施计得以幸免。
English: Liang Taizu sent Wei Zhen to Caizhou to inspect, and Shen Cong sent three hundred cavalry to meet Wei Zhen and wanted to kill him. Wei Zhen's plan was spared.

古文：还白太祖曰： 丛不足虑，为其谋者牙将裴涉，妄庸人也。 
现代文：回来报告梁太祖说： 申丛不值得担心，为他出谋划策的牙将裴涉，是个虚妄庸碌的人。 
English: When he returned, Liang Taizu said: "Shen Cong is not worth worrying about. His strategist, Fang Zhao, is a vain and mediocre person.

古文：丛后果为郭璠所杀。
现代文：申丛后来果然被郭墦杀掉。
English: Shen Cong was later killed by Guo Gan.

古文：璠以宗权归于太祖，太祖欲大其事，请献俘于唐，唐以时溥破黄巢，献馘而已，宗权不足俘，左拾遗徐彦枢亦疏请所在斩决。
现代文：郭墦把秦宗权送到梁太祖那里，梁太祖想要张扬逭件事，请求向唐进献俘虏，唐朝廷因时溥攻破黄巢，只进献死者的左耳罢了，秦宗权不值得献俘，左拾遗徐彦枢也上疏请求就地斩决。
English: Guo Gan sent Qin Zongquan to Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu wanted to publicize the incident and asked the Tang Dynasty to sacrifice prisoners. The Tang Dynasty broke through the Yellow Nest due to time constraints, and only the left ear of the deceased was sacrificed. Qin Zongquan was not worth sacrificing prisoners, and Xu Yanzhu, who was left behind, also asked the Tang Dynasty to execute him on the spot.

古文：太祖遣震奏事京师，往复论列，卒俘宗权。太祖德之，表为节度副使。
现代文：梁太祖派韦震到京师奏报事情，反复论争，最终把秦宗权作为俘虏献给京师，梁太祖感激他，上表举任他为节度副使。
English: Liang Taizu sent Wei Zhen to the Beijing division to report the matter, and repeatedly argued, and finally dedicated Qin Zongquan as a prisoner to the Beijing division. Liang Taizu was grateful to him, and appointed him as the deputy envoy of the festival.

古文：昭宗幸石门，太祖遣震由虢略间道奉表行在，昭宗赐其名震。
现代文：唐昭宗到石门，梁太祖派韦震从虢州、略州由小路送表章到行宫，唐昭宗赐给他名字震。
English: Tang Zhaozong went to Shimen. Liang Taizu sent Wei Zhen from Bozhou and Liaozhou by the back roads to deliver the seal to the imperial palace. Tang Zhaozong gave him the name Zhen.

古文：太祖已破兗、郓，遂攻吴，大败于清口。
现代文：粱太祖攻破充、郫二州后，就攻打昊，住清口大败。
English: After conquering Chengdu and Shandong and two provinces, Emperor Taizu attacked Hao and suffered a crushing defeat in Qingkou.

古文：太祖惧诸镇乘间图己，乃讽杜洪、钟传、王师范、钱镠等荐己为元帅，且求兼领郓州。
现代文：梁太祖害怕各镇乘机算计自己，于是暗示杜洪、锺传、王师范、钱铿等人举荐自己任元帅，而且请求兼领郫州。
English: Liang Taizu was afraid that the towns would take advantage of the opportunity to count on him, so he hinted that Du Hong, Zou Chuan, Wang Shifan, Qian Ye and others would recommend him to be appointed marshal, and also requested to take Zhangzhou.

古文：昭宗初不许，震强辩，敢大言，语数不逊，昭宗卒许梁以郓州，太祖遂兼四镇，表震郓州留后。
现代文：唐昭宗起初不答应，韦震极力辩白，敢于夸大言辞，语言多不恭敬，唐昭宗最终允许把郭州给梁，梁太祖于是兼领四镇，表奏韦震为郫州留后。
English: At first, Tang Zhaozong did not agree, Wei Zhen tried his best to argue, dared to exaggerate the words, and the language was mostly disrespectful. Tang Zhaozong finally allowed Guozhou to be given to Liang, and Liang Taizu then took over the four towns, leaving Wei Zhen for Zhangzhou.

古文：昭宗迁洛，震入为河南尹、六军诸卫副使，以病喑，守太子太保致仕。
现代文：唐昭宗迁都洛阳，韦震入朝为河南尹、六军诸卫副使，因病成了哑巴，以太子太保辞官退休。
English: Tang Zhaozong moved the capital to Luoyang, Wei Zhen entered the court as Henan Yin, the vice-envoy of the six armies of Wei, became mute due to illness, and retired as Tai Bao Dictator.

古文：太祖受禅，改太子太傅。末帝即位，加太师，卒。
现代文：梁太祖接受禅让，改为太子太傅梁末帝登位，加太师，死。
English: Liang Taizu accepted Zen's resignation and was replaced by the crown prince Taifu Liang Mudi, who ascended to the throne, became the next emperor, and died.

古文：○孔循孔循，不知其家世何人也。
现代文：孔循，不知道他家世代是什么人。
English: Kong Cui didn't know who his family's generation was.

古文：少孤，流落于汴州，富人李让阑得之，养以为子。
现代文：从小孤苦，流落到汴州，富人李让得到他，收养作儿子。
English: From a young age, he suffered alone and was exiled to Zhangzhou. The rich man Li Zhan obtained him and adopted him as his son.

古文：梁太祖镇宣武，以李让为养子，循乃冒姓硃氏。
现代文：梁太祖镇宣武，把李让作为养子，孔循于是冒姓朱。
English: Liang Taizu's town of Xuanwu adopted Li Zhan as his son, so Kongxu changed his surname to Zhu.

古文：稍长，给事太祖帐下，太祖诸兒乳母有爱之者，养循为子，乳母之夫姓赵，循又冒姓为赵氏，名殷衡。
现代文：稍稍长大后，在梁太祖营帐中供事，梁太祖儿子的乳母有喜爱他的，收养孔循作儿子，乳母的丈夫姓趟，孔循又冒姓为赵，名叫殷衡。
English: After growing up a little, he worked in the camp of Liang Taizu. The nanny of Liang Taizu's son loved him and adopted Kong Xuan as her son. The nanny's husband's surname was Wai. Kong Xuan also pretended to be Zhao and was named Yin Heng.

古文：昭宗东迁洛阳，太祖尽去天子左右，悉以梁人代之，以王殷为宣徽使，循为副使。
现代文：唐昭宗束迁到洛阳，梁太祖全部去掉天子手下的人，完全用梁王手下的人代替他们，任命王殷为宣徽使，孔循为副使。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty moved to Luoyang. Liang Taizu removed all of Tianzi's subordinates and completely replaced them with Liang Wang's subordinates. He appointed Wang Yin as the envoy and Kong Xuan as the deputy envoy.

古文：循与蒋玄晖、张廷范等共与弑昭宗之谋，其后循与玄晖有隙，哀帝即位，将有事于南郊，循因与王殷谗于太祖曰： 玄晖私侍何太后，与廷范等奉天子郊天，冀延唐祚。 
现代文：孔循和蒋玄晖、张廷范等人共同参与杀死唐昭宗的阴谋，后来孔循和蒋玄晖有矛盾，唐哀帝登位，将要在南郊祭祀，孔循于是和王殷向梁太祖进谗言说： 蒋玄晖私下侍奉何太后，和张廷范等人事奉天子在郊外祭天，希望延长唐的国统。 
English: Kong Cui and Jiang Xuanqian, Zhang Tingfan and others jointly participated in the conspiracy to kill Tang Zhaozong. Later, Kong Cui and Jiang Xuanqian had a conflict. When Emperor Tang Yei ascended to the throne, he was going to offer sacrifices in the southern suburbs. Kong Cui and Wang Yin then said to Liang Taizu: Jiang Xuanqian secretly served the Empress Dowager He, and Zhang Tingfan and other officials worshipped the Son of Heaven in the suburbs, hoping to extend the national line of Tang.

古文：太祖大怒。
现代文：梁太祖大怒。
English: Liang Taizu was furious.

古文：是时，梁兵攻寿春，大败而归，哀帝遣裴迪劳军，太祖见迪，怒甚，迪还，哀帝不敢郊。
现代文：这时，梁兵攻打寿春，大败而回，唐哀帝派裴迪犒劳军队，梁太祖见到裴迪，很愤怒，裴迪返回，唐哀帝不敢去郊外祭天。
English: At this time, Liang's soldiers attacked Shuchun, were heavily defeated and returned. Emperor Tang sent Pei Di to help the army. Liang Taizu was very angry when he saw Pei Di. Pei Di returned. Emperor Tang did not dare to go to the suburbs to offer sacrifices to Heaven.

古文：封太祖魏王，备九锡，太祖拒而不受。
现代文：封梁太祖焉魏王，备办九锡法物，梁太祖拒不接受。
English: When Liang Taizu was crowned the King of Wei, he prepared the Jiuxi Law, but Liang Taizu refused to accept it.

古文：玄晖与宰相柳璨相次驰至梁自解，璨曰： 自古王者之兴，必有封国，而唐所以不即逊位者，当先建国备九锡，然后禅也。 
现代文：蒋玄晖和宰相柳璨相继急驰到梁为自己开脱，柳璨说： 自古以来帝王的兴起，必定有封国，而唐之所以没有立即让位，是因为应当先建国，设九锡，然后纔禅让帝位。 
English: Jiang Xuanqian and the Prime Minister Liu Qian hurried to Liang successively to exonerate themselves. Liu Qian said: Since ancient times, the rise of emperors must have fiefdoms, and the reason why Tang did not immediately abdicate was because it was necessary to first build a country, establish Jiuxi, and then abdicate the throne.

古文：太祖曰： 我不由九锡作天子可乎？ 
现代文：梁太祖说： 我不由九锡而做天子，行吗？ 
English: Liang Taizu said, "I don't want to be a son of heaven just because I'm from Juxi, okay?

古文：璨惧，驰去。
现代文：柳壕害怕，飞驰离去。
English: The wren is frightened and flies away.

古文：太祖遣循与王殷弑何皇后，因杀璨及玄晖、廷范等，以循为枢密副使。
现代文：梁太祖派孔循和王殷杀何皇后，又杀掉柳璨和蒋玄晖、张廷范等人，任命孔循为枢密副使。
English: Liang Taizu sent Kong Xuan and Wang Yin to kill Queen He, and also killed Liu Xuan, Jiang Xuanqin, Zhang Tingfan and others, and appointed Kong Xuan as a vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：唐亡，事梁为汝州防御使、左卫大将军、租庸使，始改姓孔，名循。
现代文：唐灭亡，在梁任职，为汝州防御使、左卫大将军、租庸使，方纔改姓孔，名叫循。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, he served in Liang, and was the Ruzhou Defense Envoy, the Left Guard General, and the Ten Yong Envoy. He changed his surname to Kong and was named Xun.

古文：庄宗时，权知汴州。
现代文：唐庄宗时，权知汴州。
English: When Tangzhuang Zong, the right to know Bozhou.

古文：明宗自魏兵反而南，庄宗东出汜水，循持两端，遣迎明宗于北门，迎庄宗于西门，供帐牲饩，其礼如一，而戒其人曰： 先至者入之。 
现代文：唐明宗自从魏兵反叛后南逃，唐庄宗往东出汜水，孔循两面观望，派人在北门迎接唐明宗，在西门迎接唐庄宗，供给营帐牲口粮草，对两方礼节相同，而告诫他的人说： 先到的人让他进城。 
English: Tang Mingzong fled south after the Wei soldiers rebelled. Tang Zhuangzong went to the east out of Surabaya. Kong followed the two sides to watch. He sent people to meet Tang Mingzong at the north gate and Tang Zhuangzong at the west gate. He provided the camp animals with rations of grain and grass, and the etiquette was the same for both sides. He warned his people: Let the first person to arrive let him enter the city.

古文：明宗先至，遂纳之。
现代文：唐明宗先到，于是接纳他进城。
English: Tang Mingzong arrived first and welcomed him into the city.

古文：明宗即位，以为枢密使。
现代文：唐明宗登位，任命为枢密使。
English: Emperor Mingzong of Tang ascended to the throne and was appointed as a privy councilor.

古文：明宗幸汴州，循留守东都，民有犯曲者，循族杀其家，明宗知其冤，因诏天下除曲禁，许民得造曲。
现代文：唐明宗到汴州，孔循留守东都，百姓有触犯酒曲法的，孔循杀了他的全家，唐明宗知道他们冤枉，于是诏令天下废除酒曲禁令，准许老百姓可以制造酒曲。
English: Tang Mingzong went to Zhangzhou, Kong Cun stayed in Dongdu, the people had violated the liquor law, Kong Cun killed his whole family, Tang Mingzong knew they were wrong, so he issued a decree to abolish the liquor ban and allow the people to make liquor.

古文：循为人柔佞而险猾，安重诲尤亲信之，凡循所言，无不听用。
现代文：孔循为人表面温和谄媚而实际阴险狡猾，安重诲尤其亲近信用他，大凡孔循说的话，没有不采用的。
English: Confucius was a gentle and charming person on the surface, but he was actually insidious and cunning. I felt especially close to him and trusted him. Whenever Confucius said something, I did not hesitate to use it.

古文：明宗尝欲以皇子娶重诲女，重诲以问循，循曰： 公为机密之臣，不宜与皇子婚。 
现代文：唐明宗曾打算让皇子娶安重诲的女儿，安重诲拿这事问孔循，孔循说： 你是掌管国家机密的臣子，不宜和皇子联姻。 
English: Tang Mingzong had planned to let the prince marry the daughter of An Chongzhu. An Chongzhu asked Kongxun about this, and Kongxun said: You are a courtier in charge of state secrets, and it is not appropriate to marry the prince.

古文：重诲信之，乃止。
现代文：安重诲相信他，于是作罢。
English: But I trusted him, so I gave up.

古文：而循阴使人白明宗，求以女妻皇子，明宗即以宋王从厚娶循女。
现代文：而孔循暗中派人禀告唐明宗，请求把女儿嫁给皇子，唐明宗就让宋王李从厚娶孔循的女儿。
English: However, Confucius secretly sent someone to denounce Tang Mingzong and ask him to marry his daughter to the prince. Tang Mingzong let Song Wang Li Conghou marry Confucius' daughter.

古文：重诲始恶其为人，出循为忠武军节度使，徙镇横海，卒于镇，年四十八，赠太尉。
现代文：安重诲从此开始憎恶他的为人，以孔循出任忠武军节度使，改任横海节度使，死于任上，年龄四十八岁，赠太尉。
English: From then on, An Chongyun began to detest him as a person. To Kongxu, he was appointed as the loyal military festival envoy, changed to the cross-sea festival envoy, and died in office, at the age of forty-eight, with the rank of captain.

古文：○孙德昭孙德昭，盐州五原人也。
现代文：孙德昭是盐州五原人。
English: Sun Dezhao is a native of Wuhuan, Yanzhou.

古文：其父惟最，有材略。
现代文：父亲孙惟最，具有雄才大略。
English: His father, Sun Wei, was the most talented.

古文：黄巢陷长安，惟最率其乡里子弟，得义兵千人，南攻巢于咸阳，兴平州将壮其所为，益以州兵二千。
现代文：黄巢攻陷长安，孙惟最率领乡里的子弟，得到义兵一千人，向南攻黄巢于咸阳，兴平州将认为他的行为很雄壮，把州兵两千人增派给他。
English: Huang Chao captured Chang'an, Sun Wei led the children in the village, got a thousand volunteers, and attacked Huang Chao in Xianyang to the south. Xingping Prefecture thought his actions were very heroic and sent him two thousand additional National Guard soldiers.

古文：与破贼功，拜右金吾卫大将军。
现代文：因为他参与破贼有功劳，拜为右金吾卫大将军。
English: Because he participated in the cracking of the thieves, he was worshiped as the great general of the right Kim Woo Woo.

古文：硃玫乱京师，僖宗幸兴元，惟最率兵击贼。
现代文：朱玫在京师作乱，唐僖宗到兴元，孙惟最率兵攻击贼军。
English: Zhu Mei made a disturbance in Beijing, Tang Xizong went to Xingyuan, and Sun Wei led the most soldiers to attack the thief army.

古文：累迁鄜州节度使，留京师宿卫。
现代文：累官升任墉州节度使，留在京师护卫。
English: He was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou Festival Commissioner and stayed in Beijing to escort the parade.

古文：鄜州将吏诣阙请惟最之镇，京师民数万与神策军复遮留不得行，改荆南节度使，在京制置，分判神策军，号 扈驾都 。
现代文：墉州将吏到京城请求孙惟最到镇赴任，京师百姓几万人和神策军又拦路挽留他，不能出行，改为荆南节度使，在京师处理事务，分管神策军，号称 扈驾都 。
English: The Zhangzhou magistrate went to Beijing to request Sun Wei to come to the town to take office. Tens of thousands of Beijing people and the Shengzhao Army blocked the road to detain him, and he could not travel. He was replaced by the Jingnan Festival envoy, who handled affairs in Beijing and was in charge of the Shengzhao Army. It was known as the "driving capital."

古文：是时，京师数乱，民皆赖以为保。
现代文：这时，京师动乱，百姓都靠他作为保障。
English: At this time, the capital was in turmoil, and the people relied on him as a guarantee.

古文：德昭以父任为神策军指挥使。
现代文：孙德昭因父亲恩荫被任为神策军指挥使。
English: Because of his father's favor, Sun De Zhao was appointed as the commander of the Shen Zhao Army.

古文：光化三年，刘季述废昭宗，幽之东宫，宰相崔胤谋反正，阴使人求义士可共成事者，德昭乃与孙承诲、董从实应胤，胤裂衣襟为书以盟。
现代文：光化三年，刘季述废唐昭宗，把他幽禁在束宫，宰相崔胤策谋恢复昭宗帝位，暗中派人寻求可以共同成就事业的义士，孙德昭于是和孙承诲、董从实响应崔胤，崔胤撕下衣襟书写结盟。
English: In the third year of the Guanghua era, Liu Ji abolished Tang Zhaozong and imprisoned him in the Sokong Palace. Prime Minister Cui Yan plotted to restore Zhaozong's imperial throne and secretly sent people to seek righteous men who could jointly accomplish the cause. Sun Dezhao then responded to Cui Yan with Sun Chengyu and Dong Congshi, and Cui Yan tore off his shirt collar to write an alliance.

古文：天复元年正月朔，未旦，季述将朝，德昭伏甲士道旁，邀其舆斩之，承诲等分索馀党皆尽。
现代文：天复元年正月初一，还没有天亮，刘季述将要上朝，孙德昭茌路旁埋伏甲兵，拦击他的车马把他杀掉，孙承诲等人分别搜索他的全部余党。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first year of the year, before dawn, Liu Jizhong was about to go to the morning, Sun De Zhaohui roadside ambushed armored soldiers, stopped his car and killed him, Sun Chengyi and others separately searched all his remaining party.

古文：昭宗闻外喧哗，大恐。
现代文：唐昭宗听见外面喧哗，非常恐惧。
English: When Tang Zhaozong heard the commotion outside, he was terrified.

古文：德昭驰至，扣门曰： 季述诛矣，皇帝当反正！ 
现代文：孙德昭驰马赶到，敲门说： 刘季述被杀了，皇帝应当复位！ 
English: Sun Dezhao arrived on horseback, knocked on the door and said: Liu Jishu was killed, the emperor should be reinstated!

古文：何皇后呼曰： 汝可进逆首！ 
现代文：何皇后呼唤道： 你可进献逆贼的头来！ 
English: The queen called out, "You may come and offer the head of the traitor!"

古文：德昭掷其首入。
现代文：孙德昭把刘季述的头扔进去。
English: Sun Dezhao threw Liu Ji's head into it.

古文：已而承诲等悉取馀党首以献，昭宗信之。
现代文：不久孙承诲等人都取来刘季述余党的人头进献，唐昭宗相信了他们。
English: Soon after, Sun Chengyun and others took Liu Ji's report and the rest of the party's heads for donation, and Tang Zhaozong believed them.

古文：德昭破锁出昭宗，御丹凤楼反正，以功拜静海军节度使，赐姓李，号 扶倾济难忠烈功臣 ，与承诲等皆拜节度使、同中书门下平章事，图形凌烟阁，俱留京师，号 三使相 ，恩宠无比。
现代文：孙德昭打破门锁救出唐昭宗，登上丹凤楼复位，因功拜为静海军节度使，赐姓李，号称 扶倾济难忠烈功臣 ，和孙承诲等人都拜为节度使、同中书门下平章事，在凌烟合悬挂画像，都留在京师，号称 三使相 ，恩宠无比。
English: Sun Dezhao broke the lock of the door to rescue Tang Zhaozong, ascended the Danfeng Building to restore the throne, and was awarded the surname Li for his service as the naval festival envoy, known as the "supporting and supporting the hard-working and loyal heroes," and Sun Chengyu and others were worshiped as the festival envoy, and the door of the same book was closed, and the pictures were hung in the Lingyagou, and they all remained in the Beijing division, known as the three envoys, with incomparable grace.

古文：是时，崔胤方欲诛唐宦官，外交梁以为恃，而宦官亦倚李茂贞为捍蔽，梁、岐交争。
现代文：这时，崔胤正打算诛杀唐的宦官，在外和梁交结作为依靠，而宦官也倚仗李茂贞作保护，梁、岐两方交相争斗。
English: At this time, Cui Yan was planning to kill the eunuchs of Tang, and he relied on Liang Jie as a support, while the eunuchs also relied on Li Maozhen for protection. Liang and Qi fought against each other.

古文：冬十月，宦者韩全诲劫昭宗幸凤翔，承诲、从实皆从，而德昭独与梁，乃率兵卫胤及百官保东街，趣梁兵以西，梁太祖颇德其附己，以龙凤剑、斗鸡纱遗之。
现代文：冬十月，宦官韩全诲劫持唐昭宗到凤翔，孙承诲、董从实都随行，而孙德昭独亲附梁，于是率兵护卫崔胤以及百官保卫束街，催促梁兵西进，梁太祖颇为感激他亲附自己，拿龙凤剑、斗鸡纱送给他。
English: In the winter of October, eunuch Han Quanzhi kidnapped Tang Zhaozong to Fengxiang, accompanied by Sun Chengyi and Dong Congsheng, but Sun Dezhao was the only one to accompany Liang, so he led soldiers to escort Cui Yin and hundreds of officials to guard Sok Jie, urging Liang's soldiers to go west. Liang Taizu was quite grateful that he personally accompanied him, and gave him a dragon and phoenix sword and cockfighting yarn.

古文：太祖至华州，德昭以军礼迎谒道旁。
现代文：梁太祖到华州，孙德昭以军礼在路旁谒见。
English: When Liang Taizu went to Huazhou, Sun Dezhao greeted him with a military salute on the roadside.

古文：太祖至京师，表同州留后，将行，京师民复请留，遂为两街制置使。
现代文：梁太祖到京师，表奏孙德昭为同州留后，将要出行，京师百姓又请求把他留下，于是任为两街制置使。
English: When Liang Taizu went to Beijing to present Sun Dezhao as staying in the same province, he was going to travel. The people of Beijing also asked him to stay, so he was appointed as an envoy of the two-street system.

古文：梁兵围凤翔，德昭以其兵八千属太祖，太祖益德之，使先之洛阳，赐甲第一区。
现代文：梁兵包围凤翔，孙德昭把他的士兵八干人归属梁太祖，梁太祖更加感激他，让他先到洛阳，赐给处上等住宅。
English: Liang's soldiers encircled Fengxiang. Sun Dezhao assigned his eight soldiers to Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu was even more grateful to him, letting him go to Luoyang first and giving him a first-class residence.

古文：昭宗东迁，拜左威卫上将军，以疾免。
现代文：唐昭宗束迁，拜为左威卫上将军，因病免职。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty was exiled and worshiped as the Supreme Commander of the Western Wei Dynasty. He was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：太祖即位，以乌银带、袍、笏、名马赐之。
现代文：梁太祖登位，用乌银带、官袍、笏板、名马赏赐他。
English: Liang Taizu ascended the throne, and rewarded him with a black and silver belt, official robes, a scepter, and a famous horse.

古文：疾少间，以为左卫大将军。
现代文：病稍痊愈，任命为左卫大将军。
English: He recovered slightly from his illness and was appointed General of the Left Division.

古文：末帝立，拜左金吾大将军以卒。
现代文：梁末帝登位，拜为左金吾大将军而死。
English: Emperor Liang Matsu ascended to the throne and died for General Zuo Jingu.

古文：承诲、从实至凤翔，与宦者俱见杀。
现代文：孙承诲、董从实到凤翔，和宦官们一起都被杀死。
English: Sun Chengyun, Dong Congsheng and Fengxiang were all killed along with the eunuchs.

古文：○王敬荛王敬荛，颍州汝阴人也。事州为牙将。
现代文：王敬莞是颖州汝阴人。在州中做事，任牙将。
English: Wang Jingguan is a native of Yingzhou Ruyin. Working in Yingzhou, he is always on the go.

古文：唐末，王仙芝等攻劫汝、颍间，刺史不能拒，敬荛遂代之，即拜刺史。
现代文：唐代末期，王仙芝等人在汝、颖二州间攻战劫掠，刺史不能抵御，王敬莞就替代他，拜为刺史。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Xianzhi and others attacked and plundered between the two states of Ru and Ying. Zishi could not resist, so Wang Jingguan replaced him and became Zishi.

古文：敬荛为人状貌魁杰，而沈勇有力，善用铁枪，重三十斤。
现代文：王敬莞的状貌魁伟雄杰，而又沉勇有力，善于使用铁，重三十斤。
English: Wang Jingguan's appearance is majestic, and he is strong and brave. He is good at using iron and weighs 30 pounds.

古文：颍州与淮西为邻境，数为秦宗权所攻，力战拒之，宗权悉陷河南诸州，独敬荛不可下，由是颍旁诸州民，皆依敬荛避贼。
现代文：颖州与淮西是邻境，多次受到秦宗权进攻，奋力作战抵御秦宗权，秦宗权把河南各州全部攻陷，惟独壬敬萎不能攻克，因此颖州附近各州的百姓，都依仗王敬莞躲避贼人。
English: Yingzhou is adjacent to Huaxi. It was attacked many times by the Qin Dynasty, and fought hard to resist the Qin Dynasty. The Qin Dynasty conquered all the states in Henan, but could not conquer Mengjing. Therefore, the people in the states near Yingzhou all rely on Wang Jingguan to avoid thieves.

古文：是时，所在残破，独颍州户二万。
现代文：这时，各地残破，惟独颖州有二万户人口。
English: At this time, all regions were devastated, but Yingzhou alone had a population of 20,000 households.

古文：梁太祖攻淮南，道过颍州，敬荛供馈梁兵甚厚，太祖大喜，表敬荛沿淮指挥使。
现代文：梁太祖进攻淮南，路经颖州，王敬莞供应梁兵十分丰厚，梁太祖非常高兴，表奏王敬莞为沿淮指挥使。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Huainan, passing through Yingzhou, and Wang Jingguan supplied Liang soldiers very richly. Liang Taizu was very happy, and presented Wang Jingguan as the commander along Huai.

古文：其后梁兵攻吴，庞师古死清口，败兵亡归，过颍，大雪，士卒饥冻，敬荛乃沿淮积薪为作糜粥餔之，亡卒多赖以全活，太祖表敬荛武宁军留后，遂拜节度使。
现代文：后来梁兵进攻昊，庞师古战死于清口，败兵逃回，经过颖州，大雪，士兵饥寒交迫，王敬莞于是沿淮河堆积柴草为其做粥供应他们，逃亡的士兵大多靠此活命，梁太祖表奏王敬莞为武宁军留后，又拜为节度使。
English: Later, Liang soldiers attacked Hao, the Pang division of the ancient war died in Qingkou, the defeated soldiers fled back, passing through Yingzhou, heavy snow, the soldiers were hungry and cold, Wang Jingguan then piled up firewood along the Huai River to make porridge for them and supply them. Most of the fleeing soldiers lived on this. Liang Taizu played Wang Jingguan for the Wu Ning army, and also served as a festival envoy.

古文：天祐三年，为左卫上将军。
现代文：天佑三年，任左卫上将军。
English: By the grace of God, he served as General of the Left Division for three years.

古文：太祖即位，敬荛以疾致仕，后卒于家。
现代文：梁太祖登位，王敬莞因病退休，后来死在家中。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, Wang Jingguan retired due to illness, and later died at home.

古文：○蒋殷蒋殷，幼为王重盈养子，冒姓王氏。
现代文：蒋殷，小时候为王重盈的养子，冒姓王。
English: Jiang Yin, when he was a child, was the adopted son of Wang Shouyuan, pretending to be Wang.

古文：梁太祖取河中，以王氏旧恩录其子孙，表殷牙将，太祖尤爱之。
现代文：梁太祖攻取河中，因王氏的旧恩录用他的子孙，表奏蒋殷为牙将，梁太祖特别喜欢他。
English: Liang Taizu conquered the middle of the river, and because of the old favor of the Wang clan, he used his sons and grandsons to play Jiang Yin as a general. Liang Taizu was particularly fond of him.

古文：唐迁洛阳，殷为宣徽北院使。
现代文：唐迁都到洛阳，蒋殷任宣徽北院使。
English: The Tang Dynasty moved the capital to Luoyang, and Jiang Yin became the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：太祖已下襄阳，转攻淮南，还屯正阳，哀帝遣殷劳军。
现代文：梁太祖已经攻克襄阳，转而进攻淮南，还军时屯驻在正阳，唐哀帝派蒋殷犒劳军队。
English: Liang Taizu had already conquered Xiangyang and turned to attack Huainan. When he returned to the army, he was stationed in Zhengyang. Emperor Tang sent Jiang Yin to work on the army.

古文：是时，哀帝方卜郊，殷与枢密使蒋玄晖等有隙，因谮之太祖，言玄晖等教天子卜郊祈天，且待诸侯助祭者以谋兴复，太祖大怒，哀帝为改卜郊。
现代文：这时，唐哀帝正要筹划在郊外祭天，蒋殷和枢密使蒋玄晖等人有矛盾，于是向梁太祖进谗言，说蒋玄晖等人教天子在郊外祭天，并等待助祭的诸侯以谋求复兴，梁太祖大怒，唐裒帝为此取消了郊外祭天。
English: At this time, Emperor Tangye was planning to hold a festival in the suburbs. Chiang Yin and his privy council caused a conflict with Chiang Xuan Pi and others, so they made a complaint to Emperor Liang, saying that Chiang Xuan Pi and others were teaching the Son of Heaven to hold a festival in the suburbs, and were waiting for the princes to assist the festival in order to seek revival. Emperor Liang was furious, and Emperor Tangye cancelled the festival in the suburbs for this reason.

古文：是时，太祖将有篡弑之谋，何太后尝泣涕叩头为玄晖等言： 梁王禅位后，愿全唐家子母。 
现代文：这时，梁太祖将有杀君篡国的阴谋，何太后曾哭泣着叩头对蒋玄晖等人说： 梁王继位后，希望保全唐家母子。 
English: At this time, Liang Taizu will have a plot to kill the prince and usurp the country. The Empress Dowager He once wept and kowtowed to Jiang Xuanqi and others, saying: After Liang Wang's succession, I hope to preserve the Tang mother and son.

古文：殷乃诬玄晖尝私侍太后，太祖斩玄晖及张廷范、柳璨等，遣殷弑太后于积善宫。
现代文：蒋殷于是诬陷蒋玄晖等人曾私下侍候太后，梁太祖斩蒋玄晖和张廷范、柳璨等人，派蒋殷在积善宫杀掉太后。
English: Jiang Yin then falsely accused Jiang Xuanzhang and others of having served the empress dowager in private. Liang Taizu then beheaded Jiang Xuanzhang, Zhang Tingfan, Liu Xuan and others, and sent Jiang Yin to kill the empress dowager in the Jishan Palace.

古文：哀帝下诏惭愧，自言以母后故无以奉天，乃卒不郊。
现代文：唐哀帝下诏表示羞愧，自称因母后的缘故无法祭祀上天，于是最终没有郊祀。
English: Emperor Tang expressed his shame by issuing an edict, saying that he could not offer a sacrifice to heaven for the sake of his mother, so there was ultimately no suburban worship.

古文：庶人友珪与殷善，友珪弑太祖自立，拜殷武宁军节度使。
现代文：平民朱友珪和蒋殷友善，朱友珪杀梁太祖自立，拜蒋殷为武宁军节度使。
English: Civilians Zhu Youyao and Jiang Yin are friendly, Zhu Youyao killed Liang Taizu and became independent, and Jiang Yin became the festival envoy of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：末帝即位，以福王友璋代殷，殷不受代。
现代文：梁末帝登位，以福王朱友璋代替蒋殷，蒋殷不受替代。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai ascended to the throne, replacing Jiang Yin with Fu Wang Zhu Youyao, but Jiang Yin was not replaced.

古文：王瓚亦王氏子，惧为殷所累，乃言殷非王氏子，本姓蒋。
现代文：王瓒也是王氏的儿子，怕受蒋殷的连累，于是说蒋殷不是王氏的儿子，原本姓蒋。
English: Wang Qian was also a son of the Wang clan, and he was afraid of being entangled with Jiang Yin, so he said that Jiang Yin was not a son of the Wang clan, and his original surname was Jiang Wu.

古文：末帝诏削官爵，还其姓，遣牛存节讨之，殷举族自燔死。
现代文：梁末帝下诏削除他的官爵，恢复他的原姓，派牛存节讨伐他，蒋殷全族人自焚而死。
English: Emperor Liangmu issued an edict to remove his official title, restore his original surname, and sent the Cattle Preservation Day to fight him, and Jiang Yin's entire clan died by self-immolation.

