古文：武王问太公曰： 律章之声，可以知三军之消息、胜负之决乎？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 从律管发出的声乐中，可以判断军队力量的消长，预知战争的胜负吗？ 
English: King Wu asked the grand duke, "Can you judge the strength of an army and predict the outcome of a war from the music played by the compass?"

古文：太公曰： 深哉！王之问也。
现代文：太公回答道： 君王您问的这个问题很深奥啊！
English: The father-in-law replied, "Your Majesty, the question you have asked is very profound!

古文：夫律管十二，共要有五音一一宫、商、角、徵、羽、此其正声也。
现代文：律管共有十二个音阶，其中主要的有五个，即宫、商、角、徵、羽。这是最基本的乐音，千秋万代都不会改变。
English: There are a total of twelve scales in the ritsukan, of which there are five major scales, namely, palace, merchant, horn, chime, and feather. This is the most basic musical tone, which will not change for thousands of years.

古文：万代不易，五行之神，道之常也，可以之敌金、木、水、火、土，各以其胜攻之。
现代文：五行相生相克，神妙无比，这是天地变化的自然规律、藉此可以预测敌情的变化。金、木、水、火、土五行，各以其相互生克取胜。
English: This is the natural law of the changes in the heavens and the earth, and it can be used to predict the changes in the enemy situation. The five elements of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth, each with their mutual growth, win.

古文：古者三皇之世，虚无之情以制刚强。
现代文：用兵之道也是以其胜攻不胜啊！ 古代帝王统治的时候，崇尚虚无无为，以克制刚强暴虐。
English: The way of using soldiers is also invincible by virtue of its victory! When ancient emperors ruled, they advocated doing nothing, and used restraint to suppress violence.

古文：无有文字，皆由五行。
现代文：当时没有文字，一切都按照五行生克行事。
English: At that time, there was no written language, and everything was done according to the Five Elements.

古文：五行之道，天地自然。
现代文：五行相互生克的原理，就是天地演变的自然规律。
English: The principle of the mutual growth of the five elements is the natural law of the evolution of heaven and earth.

古文：六甲之分，微妙之神。
现代文：六甲懒分合是十分微妙的。
English: Rokko laziness differentiation is very subtle.

古文： 其法：以天清净，无阴云风雨，夜半，遣轻骑往至敌人之垒，去九百步外，遍持律管。
现代文：根据五音和五行相配来判断敌情、指挥作战的具体方法是：当天气清明晴朗，没有阴云风雨时，在夜半时分派遣轻骑前往敌人营垒，在距离敌营九百步以外的地方，都手拿律管对着耳朵，向敌方大声疾呼以惊动他们。
English: The specific method of judging the enemy situation and directing the battle according to the five tones and five elements is as follows: when the weather is clear and sunny and there are no clouds, wind or rain, dispatch light cavalry to the enemy camp at midnight. At a distance of more than nine hundred paces from the enemy camp, they all hold the compass in their hands to their ears and shout loudly to the enemy to alert them.

古文：有应志管，其来甚微。
现代文：这时，就会有来自敌方的回声反应于律管中，这回声非常微弱。
English: At this time, there will be an echo from the enemy, which is very weak.

古文：角声应管，当以白虎；徵声应管，当以玄武；商声应管，当以朱雀；羽声应管，当以勾陈；五管声尽，不应者，宫也，当以青龙以五行之符，佐胜之征，成败之机。 武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：如果是角声反应于律管中，就应当根据白虎所代表的方位从西方攻打敌人；如果律管中反应出来的是徵声，就应当根据玄武所代表的方位从北边攻打敌人；如果律管中反应出来的是商声，就应当根据朱雀所代表的方位从南边攻打敌人；如果律管中反应出来的是羽声，就应当根据勾陈所代表的方位从中央攻打敌人；如果律管中没有回声反映的那是宫声，应当根据青龙所代表的方位从东边攻打敌人。所有这些就是五行生克的应验，辅佐制胜的征兆，胜败的关键。 武王说： 说的太好了！ 
English: If the sound of the horn is reflected in the compass, the enemy should be attacked from the west according to the position represented by the white tiger; if the sound of the call is reflected in the compass, the enemy should be attacked from the north according to the position represented by the hawk; if the sound of the call of the merchant is reflected in the compass, the enemy should be attacked from the south according to the position represented by the sparrow; if the sound of the feather is reflected in the compass, the enemy should be attacked from the center according to the position represented by the crane; if there is no echo reflected in the compass, it is the sound of the palace, the

古文：太公曰： 微妙之音，皆有外候。 
现代文：太公说： 微妙的音律，都有外在的征候。 
English: Taigong said: Subtle melodies have external signs.

古文：武王曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文： 武王问： 怎样才能知道呢？ 
English: King Wu asked: How can we truly understand them?

古文：太公曰： 敌人惊动则听之，闻鼓之音者，角也；见火光者，徵也；闻金铁矛戟之音者，商也；闻人啸呼之音者，羽也；寂寞无闻者，宫也。
现代文：太公说： 当敌人被惊动时就仔细倾听，听到击鼓的声音，那代表着角声；看见火光，那代表着徵声，听见各种兵器碰撞的声音，那代表着商声；听到敌人大声呼叫的声音，那代表着羽声；安安静静，什么声音也听不到，那代表着宫声。
English: The father-in-law said, "When the enemy is alarmed, listen carefully. If you hear the sound of drums beating, that represents the sound of a horn. If you see the light of a fire, that represents a signal. If you hear the sound of various weapons colliding, that represents the sound of commerce. If you hear the sound of the enemy shouting, that represents the sound of feathers. If you are calm and quiet, and hear no sound, that represents the sound of the palace."

古文：此五者，声色之符也。 
现代文：这五种音律与外界的动静是各有对称，互相符合的。 
English: These five kinds of musical rhythms are all symmetrical and consistent with each other.

