古文：咸丘蒙问曰： 语云： 盛德之士，君不得而臣，父不得而子。 
现代文：咸丘蒙问： 古语说： 道德高尚的人，君主不能把他看作臣子，父亲不能把他看作儿子。 
English: Hamgyu Meng asked: An ancient saying says: A person with high moral standards cannot be regarded as a vassal by the sovereign, nor can he be regarded as a son by his father.

古文：舜南面而立，尧帅诸侯北面而朝之，瞽瞍亦北面而朝之。
现代文：舜南面而立当了天子，尧带领诸侯向北面朝见他，瞽瞍也向北面朝见他。
English: He ascended to heaven from the south. He led the princes to the north to see him, and they also went to the north to see him.

古文：舜见瞽瞍，其容有蹙。
现代文：舜见到瞽瞍，神情局促不安。
English: When I saw him, the Shin Bet was alarmed.

古文：孔子曰： 于斯时也，天下殆哉，岌岌乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 那个时候，天下真是岌岌可危啊！ 
English: Confucius said: At that time, the world was really in a precarious situation!

古文：不识此语诚然乎哉？ 
现代文：不知道这话确实如此吗？ 
English: I don't know, is that really true?

古文：孟子曰： 否。此非君子之言，齐东野人之语也。
现代文：孟子说： 不，这不是君子所说的，是齐国东郊老百姓的野话。
English: Mencius said, "No, this is not what a gentleman said, it is the wild talk of the common people in the eastern suburbs of Qi."

古文：尧老而舜摄也。
现代文：是尧上了岁数而叫舜代理天子的。
English: It is  who is getting old and is called  acting as the son of heaven.

古文：尧典曰： 二十有八载，放勋乃徂落，百姓如丧考妣，三年，四海遏密八音。 
现代文：《尧典》上说： 舜代理了二十八年，尧才去世，人们像死了父母一样服丧三年，民间停止了一切音乐。 
English: "The Song of Song" said: "Song has been acting for twenty-eight years, Song only died, people mourned for three years like their dead parents, and the folk stopped all music.

古文：孔子曰： 天无二日，民无二王。 
现代文：孔子说： 天上没有两个太阳，百姓没有两个天子。 
English: Confucius said: There are not two suns in the sky, and the people do not have two heavenly sons.

古文：舜既为天子矣，又帅天下诸侯以为尧三年丧，是二天子矣。 
现代文：要是舜已做了天子，又率领天下诸侯为尧服丧三年，那就是有两个天子了。 
English: If you have become a heavenly son and led the world's lords in mourning for three years, then you have two heavenly sons.

古文：咸丘蒙曰： 舜之不臣尧，则吾既得闻命矣。
现代文：咸丘蒙说： 舜不以尧为臣，我已聆听了您的教诲。
English: Hamchumon said, "I am not your vassal, I have listened to your teachings.

古文：诗云： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 走遍天下，没有一处不是天子的土地；围绕四周，没有一个不是天子的臣民。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Throughout the world, there is no land that is not the son of heaven; around, there is no subject who is not the son of heaven.

古文：而舜既为天子矣，敢问瞽瞍之非臣，如何？ 
现代文：舜既然做了天子，请问瞽瞍却不是臣民，这该作何解释呢？ 
English: Since you have become a son of heaven, how can you explain that you are not a subject?

古文：曰： 是诗也，非是之谓也；劳于王事，而不得养父母也。
现代文：孟子说： 这首诗，不是你所理解的那样；而是说为王事勤劳不能奉养父母。
English: Mencius said, "This poem is not as you understand it, but it says that if you work hard for the king, you will not be able to support your parents.

古文：曰： 此莫非王事，我独贤劳也。 
现代文：诗中的意思是说： 这些都是大王的事务，只有我才更辛劳。 
English: The meaning of the poem is to say: These are the affairs of a great king, only I am more laborious.

古文：故说诗者，不以文害辞，不以辞害志。
现代文：所以解说《诗经》的人，不能因为文字损害语句，不能以语句损害原作主旨。
English: Therefore, the person who interprets the "Song of Songs" must not damage the words because of the words, and must not damage the original theme with the words.

古文：以意逆志，是为得之。
现代文：要用自己的思考去领会诗意，才能得到诗的真谛。
English: It is necessary to use one's own thinking to understand the poetry in order to get the true meaning of the poem.

古文：如以辞而已矣，云汉之诗曰： 周余黎民，靡有孑遗。 
现代文：如果只看辞句，《云汉》诗篇说： 周朝剩余的平民，没有一个生存。 
English: If you only look at the words, the "Yunhan" psalm says: None of the remaining civilians of the Zhou Dynasty survived.

古文：信斯言也，是周无遗民也。
现代文：相信这个话，就等于说周朝没有后代了。
English: If you believe this, it is tantamount to saying that the Zhou Dynasty has no descendants.

古文：孝子之至，莫大乎尊亲；尊亲之至，莫大乎以天下养。
现代文：孝子的思想，最大的就是尊敬父母；尊敬父母的最高程度，最大的莫过于以天下来奉养父母。
English: In the thought of filial piety, the greatest is to respect one's parents; the highest degree of respect for one's parents, the greatest is to take care of one's parents.

古文：为天子父，尊之至也；以天下养，养之至也。
现代文：作为天子的父亲，尊贵到了极至；以天下来奉养他，奉养达到了极至。
English: As the father of God's son, he was honored to the utmost; he was supported by God to the utmost.

古文：诗曰： 永言孝思，孝思维则。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 长久言说孝的思想，孝的思想是准则。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Long speak the thought of filial piety, the thought of filial piety is the standard.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：书曰： 只载见瞽瞍，夔夔齐栗，瞽瞍亦允若。 是为父不得而子也。 
现代文：《书》说： 舜恭敬地来见瞽瞍，以至谨慎战栗，瞽瞍也就相信舜的诚心而顺着儿子了。 
English: "The Book" says: "He came respectfully to see him, so that he trembled with caution, and he believed in his sincerity and followed his son.

