古文：起上章执徐，尽著雍困敦，凡九年。
现代文：起，止，一共九年。汉元帝永光三年
English: It lasted for nine years. Emperor Yongguang of the Han Dynasty ruled for three years.

古文：孝元皇帝下永光三年春，二月，冯奉世还京师，更为左将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：春季，二月，冯奉世回长安，调任左将军，封关内侯。
English: In the spring, in February, Feng Bongshi returned to Chang'an, was transferred to the left general, and became the lord of the fief.

古文：三月，立皇子康为济阳王。
现代文：三月，元帝赐封皇子刘康当济阳王。
English: In March, Prince Kang was appointed King of Jiyang.

古文：夏，四月，癸未，平昌考侯王按薨。
现代文：夏季，四月，平昌侯王接去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Pyeongchang Hou Wangjie passed away.

古文：秋，七月，壬戌，以平恩侯许嘉为大司马、车骑将军。
现代文：秋季，七月壬戌，任命平恩侯许嘉当大司马、车骑将军。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ping'en marquess Xu Jia was appointed to be the grand steward of horses and chariot general.

古文：冬，十一月，己丑，地震，雨水。
现代文：冬季，十一月己丑，地震，降雨。
English: Winter, November is ugly, earthquakes, rain.

古文：复盐铁官；置博士弟子员千人。
现代文：恢复盐铁专卖制度。规定博士弟子的定员为一千人。
English: The salt and iron monopoly system was restored, and the number of doctoral students was set at 1,000.

古文：以用度不足，民多复除，无以给中外繇役故也。
现代文：是因为朝廷经费不够开支，而民间又有许多人免除赋税徭役，使朝廷无法供应内外徭役的缘故。四年春季，二月，大赦天下。
English: This was due to the fact that the Imperial Court did not have enough funds to pay for expenses, while many people in the private sector were exempt from paying taxes, which made it impossible for the Imperial Court to supply internal and external servants. In the spring of the fourth year, in February, there was a general amnesty.

古文：孝元皇帝下永光四年
现代文：三月，元帝前往雍城，祭祀五帝。
English: In March, Emperor Yuan traveled to Yongcheng to worship the Five Emperors.

古文：春，二月，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，六月甲戌，孝宣皇帝陵园东门失火。
English: Spring, February, general amnesty.

古文：三月，上行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：戊寅晦，出现日食。
English: In March, Emperor Cheng Rong went to Yongcheng to attend the Five Sacred Rites.

古文：夏，六月，甲戌，孝宣园东阙灾。
现代文：元帝召集那些先前说天变灾难都是为周堪、张猛而发的官员进行责问，他们都跪拜于地谢罪。
English: Emperor Yuan summoned those officials who had previously said that the natural disaster was caused by Zhou Kan and Zhang Meng to question them, and they all bowed to the ground and confessed their sins.

古文：戊寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：于是，元帝下诏褒扬周堪、张猛，调回京师长安。
English: As a result, Emperor Yuan issued an edict praising Zhou Kan and Zhang Meng and transferred them back to the capital Chang'an.

古文：上于是召诸前言日变在周堪、张猛者责问，皆稽首谢；因下诏称堪之美，征诣行在所，拜为光禄大夫，秩中二千石，领尚书事；猛复为太中大夫、给事中。
现代文：任命周堪担任光禄大夫，支中二千石俸禄，主管尚书事务；任命张猛当太中大夫、给事中。而这时候，中书令石显兼管尚书，尚书五人都是石显的党羽。
English: Zhou Kan was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the leader of Shizhong with a salary of two thousand koku, and was in charge of Shangshu affairs; Zhang Meng was appointed as the grand doctor of Shizhong, and was in charge of Shizhong. At this time, Shi Xian, the leader of Shizhong, was also in charge of Shangshu, and the five Shangshu were the party members of Shi Xian.

古文：中书令石显管尚书，尚书五人皆其党也；堪希见得，常因显白事，事决显口。会堪疾喑，不能言而卒。
现代文：周堪很难见到元帝，虽有建议，往往不得不拜托石显代为转达，大政方针的决定权被石显控制。正巧周堪得了失音病，不能说话而去世。
English: It was difficult for Zhou Kan to meet the Yuan Emperor. Although he had some suggestions, he often had to ask Shi Xian to relay them to him. Shi Xian controlled the decision-making power of major policies. It just so happened that Zhou Kan suffered from a deafness disease and died without being able to speak.

古文：显诬谮猛，令自杀于公车。
现代文：石显又诬陷张猛，让他自杀于公车官署。
English: The false accusation was so severe that he committed suicide in the bus.

古文：初，贡禹奏言： 孝惠、孝景庙皆亲尽宜毁，及郡国庙不应古礼，宜正定。 
现代文：当初，贡禹上奏章说： 孝惠帝、孝景帝的祭庙，因为亲情己尽，应该撤除。各郡、各封国设置皇帝祭庙，不合古代礼制规定，应该改正。 
English: At the beginning, Gong Yu wrote: The temples of Emperor Xiao Hui and Emperor Xiao Jing should be removed because they are too close to the emperor. The establishment of imperial temples in counties and fiefdoms is not in accordance with the ancient ritual system and should be corrected.

古文：天子是其议。
现代文：元帝认为有理。
English: The Yuan Emperor thought it was justified.

古文：秋，七月，戊子，罢昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后、戾太子、戾后园，皆不奉祠，裁置吏卒守焉。
现代文：秋季，七月戊子，撤除昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后、戾太子、戾后的祭庙，都不再祭祀，只设置官吏兵卒守护。
English: In the autumn, in July, after the removal of Zhaoling, Wu'ei Wang, Zhaoling, Wei Si, Xuan Taizi, and Xuan You, the temples no longer offered sacrifices, and only officials and soldiers were set up to guard them.

古文：冬，十月，乙丑，罢祖宗庙在郡国者。
现代文：冬季，十月乙丑，撤除设置在各郡、各封国的祖宗祭庙。
English: In winter, in October, the removal of ancestor temples set up in counties and fiefdoms.

古文：以渭城寿陵亭部原上为初陵。
现代文：元帝下诏，各位皇帝的陵园，以其所在地区，分属三辅管理。
English: The original mausoleum of the Yuan Emperor is located on the grounds of the Pavilion of the Shouling Mausoleum.

古文：诏勿置县邑及徙郡国民。孝元皇帝下永光五年春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：在渭城寿陵亭部原上预设坟墓，下诏不要把它发展成为一个县，也不要强迫各郡、各崐封国移民到那里。五年春季，正月，元帝前往甘泉，在泰祭祀天神。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, in the first month, Emperor Yuan went to Ganquan to worship the Tenjin in Thailand.

古文：三月，幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，再往河东，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, they will travel to the eastern part of the river to offer sacrifices to the god of soil.

古文：秋，颍川水流杀人民。
现代文：秋季，颍川郡水灾，淹死百姓。
English: In autumn, floods in Luochuan County killed and drowned many people.

古文：冬，上幸长杨射熊馆，大猎。
现代文：冬季，元帝前往长杨宫射熊馆，大肆游猎。
English: In winter, Emperor Yuan went to the Changyang Palace Shooting Bear Museum to go hunting.

古文：十二月，乙酉，毁太上皇、孝惠皇帝寝庙园，用韦玄成等之议也。
现代文：十二月乙酉，元帝采用丞相韦玄成等的建议，下诏拆毁太上皇、孝惠皇帝的祭庙。元帝喜好儒家的学说，又喜爱文章辞语。
English: At the end of December, Emperor Yuan issued an edict to demolish the ceremonial temples of Emperor Taejong and Emperor Xiao Hui, following the advice of Wei Xuancheng and others. Emperor Yuan was fond of Confucianism and liked the language of literature.

古文：上好儒术、文辞，颇改宣帝之政。言事者多进见，人人自以为得上意。
现代文：对宣帝的法令制度多有改变。谈论政事，提出建议的人，多数都被召见，每人都认为受到皇帝的注意。
English: There were many changes in the legal system of Emperor Xuan, and most of the people who talked about politics and made suggestions were summoned, and everyone thought that they had the attention of the emperor.

古文：又傅昭仪及子济阳王康爱幸，逾于皇后、太子。
现代文：这时候，傅昭仪和她的儿子济阳王刘康，正受到元帝特别的宠爱，超过皇后和皇太子刘骜。
English: At this time, Fu Zhaoyi and her son Liu Kang, King of Jiyang, were receiving special favors from the Yuan Emperor, surpassing the empress and crown prince Liu Ye.

古文：太子少傅匡衡上疏曰： 臣闻治乱安危之机，在乎审所用心。
现代文：太子少傅匡衡上书说： 我曾经听说，治乱安危的关键，在于人主是不是慎重用心。
English: The young prince Fu Kuangheng wrote: I once heard that the key to managing chaos and safety lies in whether the person in charge is prudent and diligent.

古文：盖受命之王，务在创业垂统，传之无穷；继体之君，心存于承宣先王之德而褒大其功。
现代文：接受天的旨意的君王，任务在于开创大业，使它世代相承，无穷无尽地传下去。而继任的君王，心思要放到继承和发扬祖先的恩德功勋上。
English: The task of a king who accepts the will of heaven is to create a great cause, pass it down from generation to generation, and pass it on endlessly. And the succeeding king should put his mind on inheriting and developing the grace and merits of his ancestors.

古文：昔者成王之嗣位，思述文、武之道以养其心，休烈盛美皆归之二后，而不敢专其名，是以上天歆享，鬼神祐焉。
现代文：从前，周成王继承王位之后，追思祖父周文王、父亲周武王成功的道理，用以培养自己的心性，把美好的声誉和荣耀，都归功于祖父和父亲两位先王，而不敢自己居功。因此，上天享受他的供品，连鬼神也都保佑他。
English: Once upon a time, after inheriting the throne, King Zhou Cheng recalled the success of his grandfather King Zhou Wen and his father King Zhou Wu to cultivate his character. He attributed the good reputation and glory to his grandfather and his father, the first two kings, and did not dare to take credit for it. Therefore, heaven enjoyed his offerings, and even the ghosts and gods blessed him.

古文：陛下圣德天覆，子爱海内，然阴阳未和，奸邪未禁者，殆论议者未丕扬先帝之盛功，争言制度不可用也，务变更之，所更或不可行而复复之，是以群下更相是非，吏民无所信。
现代文：陛下圣明的恩德，象天一样覆盖大地，象爱护儿女一样爱护四海之内的百姓。可是阴阳没有调和，奸诈邪恶也没有禁止。这大概是因为臣子未能发扬光大先帝的盛大功业，反而争先恐后地抨击过去的法令规章不可用，一定要加以改变。然而，很多制度改变了之后，无法执行，只好再恢复原状。结果是，在下位的人发生纠纷，官吏和平民无所遵信。
English: His Majesty's holy benevolence covers the earth like the sky, and protects the people in the four seas like loving children. However, the yin and yang are not reconciled, and treachery and evil are not prohibited. This is probably because the courtiers failed to carry forward the great work of the great emperor, but instead rushed to criticize the laws and regulations of the past as useless and must be changed. However, after many systems were changed, they could not be implemented, and had to be restored to their original state. As a result, disputes occurred among the lower ranks, and officials and civilians did not obey.

古文：臣窃恨国家释乐成之业，而虚为此纷纷也！
现代文：我常在内心痛恨，国家放弃了人心所乐的已成的功业，而白白去做那些纷乱的事情。
English: I often inwardly hate it when a country abandons a cherished and accomplished cause in order to do something chaotic for nothing.

古文：愿陛下详览统业之事，留神于遵制扬功，以定群下之心。
现代文：但愿陛下仔细回顾汉室世代相继的事业，留意遵守先帝的法制，弘扬先帝的功业，用以安定臣僚的心。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will pay close attention to the foundation of the country, pay attention to following the system of the former emperor, and carry forward the work of the former king, so as to stabilize the minds of hundreds of officials and ministers.

古文：《大雅》曰： 无念尔祖，聿脩厥德。 
现代文：《诗经·大雅》说： 不要忘记祖先的教诲，努力修养自己的德行。 
English: "Shijing · Daya" said: Don't forget the teachings of your ancestors, and strive to cultivate your own virtues.

古文：盖至德之本也。
现代文：这是达到 德 的根本方法。
English: This is the fundamental way to attain virtue.

古文：《传》曰： 审好恶，理情性，而王道毕矣。 
现代文：《诗传》说 知道应喜爱什么，应厌恶什么，使性情变好，圣王的道路就是如此。 
English: The "Book of Songs" says, "To know what one should love and what one should loathe is to improve one's disposition. This is the path of the sage-king."

古文：治性之道，必审己之所有馀而强其所不足，盖聪明疏通者戒于太察，寡闻少见者戒于壅蔽，勇猛刚强者戒于太暴，仁爱温良者戒于无断，湛静安舒者戒于后时，广心浩大者戒于遗忘。
现代文：修养性情的方法，必定要知道自己的长处，而弥补自己的缺欠。聪明通达的人，警惕苛察；见识不广的人，警惕被蒙蔽；勇猛刚强的人，警惕过于暴烈；仁爱温良的人，警惕没有决断；恬淡安静的人，警惕贻误时机；胸襟广阔的人，警惕疏忽大意。
English: The way to cultivate one's disposition is to know one's own strengths and make up for one's own shortcomings. Those who are intelligent and well-informed should be wary of being harsh; those who are not well-informed should be wary of being deceived; those who are brave and strong should be wary of being too violent; those who are benevolent and gentle should be wary of being indecisive; those who are dull and quiet should be wary of wasting time; and those who are broad-minded should be wary of being careless.

古文：必审己之所当戒而齐之以义，然后中和之化应，而巧伪之徒不敢比周而望进。
现代文：必须了解自己所应当注意纠正的缺失，以大义来弥补它，然后才能达到万事和谐的美好境界。那些伪善的乖巧之徒，才无法结党搭帮，企望挤进朝廷。
English: It is necessary to understand the shortcomings that you should pay attention to correct, and make up for it with great righteousness, and then you can achieve a beautiful state of harmony in all things. Those hypocritical well-behaved people can't form a party and try to squeeze into the imperial court.

古文：唯陛下戒之，所以崇圣德也！
现代文：务请陛下警惕自己，使陛下的圣德更为崇高。
English: I beseech Your Majesty to be on your guard, so that Your Majesty's sanctity may be exalted.

古文： 臣又闻室家之道修，则天下之理得，故《诗》始《国风》，《礼》本冠、婚。
现代文： 我又曾经听说，家庭如果安详和睦，天下自然治理得好。所以《诗经》开头就是《国风》。《礼记》开头就讲冠礼、婚礼。
English: I also once heard that if the family is peaceful and harmonious, the world will naturally be well governed. Therefore, the beginning of the "Song of Songs" is "National Style." The beginning of the "Book of Rites" is about the coronation ceremony and wedding.

古文：始乎《国风》，原情性以明人伦也；本乎冠、婚，正基兆以防未然也。
现代文：用《国风》开头，追溯性情的根本，表明人伦之间的关系。用冠礼、婚礼开头，为安详的家庭奠定基础，以防患于乱起之前。
English: Use the beginning of "National Style" to trace the root of temperament and show the relationship between people. Use the beginning of the coronation and wedding to lay the foundation for a peaceful family to prevent problems before the outbreak of chaos.

古文：故圣王必慎妃后之际，别適长之位，礼之于内也。
现代文：所以圣明的君王，必须慎重处理妃嫔与皇后之间的关系，注意区分 嫡子 与 庶子 的地位，把礼仪纳入自己家内。
English: Therefore, the wise king must carefully handle the relationship between the concubine and the empress, pay attention to the distinction between the status of the legitimate son and the illegitimate son, and incorporate the etiquette into his own family.

古文：卑不逾尊，新不先故，所以统人情而理阴气也；其尊適而卑庶也，適子冠乎阼，礼之用醴，众子不得与列，所以贵正体而明嫌疑也。
现代文：其他的儿子，不能用这种仪式，其目的就在于显示嫡子的尊贵，使立于无可怀疑的地位，不仅仅是表面的礼节仪式而已，而是内心对待嫡子与其他儿子截然不同，所以用礼仪。把真情显露于外。
English: Other sons cannot use this ceremony. Its purpose is to show the dignity of the legitimate son and to establish him in an unquestionable position. It is not just a superficial ritual of etiquette, but the heart treats the legitimate son very differently from other sons, so it uses etiquette. to reveal the true feelings.

古文：非虚加其礼文而已，乃中心与之殊异，故礼探其情而见之外也。
现代文：圣人的一举一动，和谁欢宴娱乐，和谁亲近，都要使尊贵卑贱都有一定次序。
English: It is not a gratuitous addition to the forms of etiquette, but an inner recognition that there is a great difference between the two, so that etiquette is used to express inner feelings and make them manifest in action.

古文：圣人动静游燕所亲，物得其序，则海内自修，百姓从化。如当亲者疏，当尊者卑，则佞巧之奸因时而动，以乱国家。
现代文：如此的话，全国百姓都会自我修养，顺从归化。如果应当亲近的反而疏远，应当尊重的反而放到卑贱的地位，那么乖巧的邪恶之徒就会乘机而动，使国家混乱。
English: In this way, the people of the whole country will cultivate themselves and obey naturalization. If they should be close to each other, but alienated, and if they should be respected, but put in a lowly position, then the well-behaved evil people will take the opportunity to move and make the country chaotic.

古文：故圣人慎防其端，禁于未然，不以私恩害公义。《传》曰： 正家而天下定矣！  
现代文：所以圣人谨慎小心，不愿有一个坏的开头。用心防范于乱起之前，决不因私人的恩情，伤害正大的原则。正如《易传》所说： 家庭端正，则天下就安定了。  
English: Therefore, the sage was cautious and did not want to have a bad beginning. He tried to prevent chaos before it started, and never harmed the principle of uprightness because of personal kindness. As "Easy Transmission" said: If the family is correct, then the world will be stable.

古文：初，武帝既塞宣房，后河复北决于馆陶，分为屯氏河，东北入海，广深与大河等，故因其自然，不堤塞也。
现代文：当初，武帝曾经堵塞黄河决口，筑宣房宫。后来，黄河又在北面的馆陶决口，形成屯氏河，沿东北方向入海，因为河床广度深度跟黄河相同，所以听其自由发展，不再堵塞决口。
English: At first, Emperor Wu blocked the mouth of the Yellow River and built the Xuanfang Palace. Later, the Yellow River was blocked again at the northern mouth of the Pavilion Tao, forming the Tunxi River, which entered the sea along the northeast direction. Because the width and depth of the riverbed were the same as the Yellow River, it was allowed to develop freely and the mouth was no longer blocked.

古文：是岁，河决于清河灵鸣犊口，而屯氏河绝。
现代文：本年，黄河在清河郡所属灵县鸣犊堤再度决口，屯氏河于是无水干涸。
English: This year, the Yellow River broke through the Mingyu dike again in Ling County, which belongs to Qinghe County, and the Tunxi River dried up without water.

古文：孝元皇帝下建昭元年
现代文：建昭元年
English: Built in the first year of Jian Zhao

古文：春，正月，戊辰，陨石于梁。
现代文：春季，正月戊辰，陨石坠在梁国。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, the meteorite fell in Liang Province.

古文：冬，河间王元坐贼杀不辜废，迁房陵。
现代文：冬季，河间王刘元，被控残杀无罪之人，撤销爵位，贬逐房陵。
English: In winter, Liu Yuan, the king of Kawama, was accused of killing innocent people, his title was revoked, and his mausoleum was condemned.

古文：罢孝文太后寝祠园。
现代文：元帝下令撤除文帝母亲薄太后的陵园。
English: Emperor Yuan ordered the demolition of the mausoleum of Emperor Wen's mother, Empress Dowager Bo.

古文：上幸虎圈斗兽，后宫皆坐。
现代文：元帝前往虎圈，观赏野兽搏斗，妃嫔们都在座奉陪。
English: Emperor Yuan went to the tiger enclosure to watch the beasts fight, and the concubines were there to accompany him.

古文：熊逸出圈，攀槛欲上殿，左右、贵人、傅婕妤等皆惊走。
现代文：一只熊突然跳出圈外，攀着阑杆想上殿堂。元帝左右的侍从、贵族，包括傅婕妤在内的妃嫔们，都惊慌逃命。
English: A bear suddenly jumped out of the circle and tried to climb the pole to get into the hall of fame. The attendants, aristocrats, and concubines around the former emperor, including Fu Xi, all panicked and ran for their lives.

古文：冯婕妤直前，当熊而立。
现代文：只有冯婕妤，一直向前站着挡住熊。
English: Only Feng Yao kept moving forward to block the bear.

古文：左右格杀熊。
现代文：武士把熊杀死。
English: The samurai killed the bear.

古文：上问： 人情惊惧，何故前当熊？ 
现代文：元帝惊魂初定后，问她： 人人恐惧，你为什么上前阻挡熊？ 
English: Yuan Di asked, "People are shocked and afraid. Why did you go forward to block the bear?"

古文：傅婕妤惭，由是与冯婕妤有隙。
现代文：冯婕妤说： 猛兽凶性发作，只要抓着一个人，就会停止攻击，我恐怕它直扑陛下的座位，所以以身阻挡它。 
English: Feng Yao said: "The ferocious beast attacks, and as long as it grabs a person, it will stop attacking. I'm afraid it will attack your majesty's seat, so I'll block it with my body."

古文：冯婕妤，左将军奉世之女也。
现代文：元帝感激嗟叹，对冯婕妤倍加敬重。而傅婕妤大为惭愧，从此与冯婕妤产生隔阂。
English: Emperor Yuan was very grateful and respected Feng Yu even more. However, Fu Yu was very ashamed, and from then on, there was a rift with Feng Yu.

古文：孝元皇帝下建昭二年
现代文：冯婕妤是左将军冯奉世的女儿。二年
English: Feng Rong is the daughter of the left-wing general Feng Fengshi.

古文：春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：春季，正月，元帝前往甘泉，在泰祭祀天神。
English: Liu Xing, the king of Zhongshan, and Liu Xin, the king of Dingtao, both went to Chang'an to meet the emperor.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，前往河东，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：夏，四月，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu declared a general amnesty.

古文：六月，立皇子兴为信都王。
现代文：六月，元帝赐封皇子刘兴为信都王。
English: In June, Emperor Yuan gave the crown prince Liu Xing the title of Prince of Xindu.

古文：东郡京房学《易》于梁人焦延寿。
现代文：东郡人京房跟从梁人焦延寿学习《易经》。
English: East County resident Kyofusa learns the I Ching from Liang resident Jiao Yanshou.

古文：延寿常曰： 得我道以亡身者，京生也。 
现代文：焦延寿常说： 得到我的学问而丧失生命的，就是京房。 
English: Jiao Yan Shou often said: "The one who gains my knowledge but loses his life is Kyobo."

古文：其说长于灾变，分六十卦，更直日用事，以风雨寒温为候，各有占验。
现代文：他的学说长于占卜天灾人祸，共分六十卦，轮流交替地指定日期，用风雨冷热作为验证，都很准确。
English: His theory is better than divination of natural disasters and man-made disasters. It is divided into sixty parts, and the dates are specified alternately, and the wind, rain, cold and heat are used as verification. They are all accurate.

古文：房用之尤精，以孝廉为郎，上疏屡言灾异，有验。
现代文：京房运用这种学说，尤其功力深厚，被地方官府推荐为 孝廉 之后，他到朝廷充当郎，屡次上书元帝，议论天象变异，十分灵验。
English: Kyofusa's application of this doctrine was particularly profound. After he was recommended by the local government as a filial son, he went to the imperial court to act as a steward, repeatedly writing to Emperor Yuan, discussing celestial phenomena, and was very effective.

古文：天子说之，数召见问。
现代文：元帝喜欢他，数次召见，向他询问。
English: Emperor Yuan liked him and summoned him several times to ask him questions.

古文：房对曰： 古帝王以功举贤，则万化成，瑞应著；末世以毁誉取人，故功业废而致灾异。
现代文：京房回答说： 古代帝王按功劳选拔贤能，万事都有成就，祥瑞显现。衰亡之世，任用官员则以遭诋毁还是受称赞为依据，所以政治腐败，因而招致天灾变异。
English: Kyofusa replied, "Ancient emperors selected people according to their merits and abilities, and everything was successful and auspicious. In the era of decline and fall, officials were appointed based on whether they had been slandered or praised. As a result, politics became corrupt, which led to natural disasters.

古文：宜令百官各试其功，灾异可息。 
现代文：应当考察文武百官的行政效率及其政绩，天灾变异才可停止。 
English: At this time, it is best to let the officials examine their own performance, so that the disaster will subside.

古文：诏使房作其事，房奏考功课吏法。
现代文：元帝命京房主持这件事，京房于是拟定了考功课吏法，上奏元帝。
English: As a result, Emperor Yuan sent Emperor Jingfang to do the dispatching, and Emperor Jingfang came up with a specific method of inspecting the performance of officials.

古文：上令公卿朝臣与房会议温室，皆以房言烦碎，令上下相司，不可许；上意乡之。
现代文：元帝下令，公卿朝臣与京房在温室殿举行讨论会。大家都认为京房的办法过于琐碎，使上级和下级互相监督侦察，不可施行。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed that all court nobles and courtiers should hold a discussion with Emperor Jingfang in the greenhouse. Everyone agreed that Emperor Jingfang's method was too petty, making superiors and subordinates supervise and spy on each other, and should not be implemented.

古文：时部刺史奏事京师，上召见诸刺史，令房晓以课事；剌史复以为不可行。
现代文：但元帝却倾向京房。当时，正好各州刺史向朝廷奏报事宜，集中在京师长安。元帝召见他们，命京房向他们宣布考核之事，刺史们也认为不可施行。
English: However, Emperor Yuan preferred Kyofusa. At that time, it was a time when the states were busy sending reports to the imperial court, concentrating on the capital city of Chang'an. Emperor Yuan summoned them and ordered Kyofusa to announce to them the assessment, which the historians also considered impossible to implement.

古文：唯御史大夫郑弘、光禄大夫周堪初言不可。后善之。
现代文：只有御史大夫郑弘、光禄大夫周堪，开始时反对，后来转为支持。
English: Only Imperial Historian Zheng Hong and Guanglu Doctor Zhou Kan initially opposed it, but later came to support it.

古文：是时，中书令石显颛权，显友人五鹿充宗为尚书令，二人用事。
现代文：这时，中书令石显正独揽大权。石显的好友五鹿充宗任尚书令，二人联合执政。
English: At this time, Shih-hsien, the middle-ranking Shoryo, was in sole possession of power. Shih-hsien's close friend, Gokucho-mune, was appointed Shih-hsien, and the two ruled jointly.

古文：房尝宴见，问上曰： 幽、厉之君何以危？
现代文：有一次，元帝在闲暇时召见京房，京房问元帝： 周幽王、周厉王为什么导致国家出现危机？
English: Once, Emperor Yuan summoned Kyofang in his spare time. Kyofang asked Emperor Yuan: Why did Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang cause a crisis in the country?

古文：所任者何人也？ 
现代文：他们任用的是些什么人？ 
English: Who did they appoint?

古文：上曰： 君不明而所任者巧佞。 
现代文：元帝说： 君王昏庸，任用的都是善于伪装的奸佞。 
English: Emperor Yuan said: Emperor Duyong, the appointees are all traitors who are good at camouflage.

古文：房曰： 知其巧佞而用之邪，将以为贤也？ 
现代文：京房进一步问： 君王是明知奸佞而仍用他们？还是认为贤能才用他们？ 
English: Kyofusa said, "Did Yu Wang Liguo appoint these people after he knew they were clever, or did he appoint them because he thought they were capable people?"

古文：上曰： 贤之。 
现代文：元帝回答说： 是认为他们贤能。 
English: Emperor Yuan replied, "I thought they were appointed for their ability."

古文：房曰： 然则今何以知其不贤也？ 
现代文：京房说： 可是，今天为什么我们却知道他们不是贤能呢？ 
English: Kyofusa said: So how do we know today that they are not sages?

古文：上曰： 以其时乱而君危知之。 
现代文：元帝说： 根据当时局势混乱，君王身处险境便可以知道。 
English: Yuan Di said: Because the society at that time was very chaotic and the monarch failed, so it can be known.

古文：房曰： 若是，任贤必治，任不肖必乱，必然之道也。
现代文：京房说： 如果是这样的话，任用贤能时国家必然治理得好，任用奸邪时国家必定混乱，这是事物发展的必然轨迹。
English: Kyofusa said, "In this way, it is a certain truth that if a country appoints a capable person, the country will be well governed, but if it appoints an unscrupulous person, the country will be chaotic."

古文：幽、厉何不觉寤而更求贤，曷为卒任不肖以至于是？ 
现代文：为什么幽王、厉王不觉悟而另外任用贤能，为什么终究要任用奸佞以致后来陷入困境？ 
English: Why did Yu Wang Li Wang not wake up to the fact that he was using capable people, but ended up appointing those unsavory people, so that he ended up in that situation?

古文：上曰： 临乱之君，各贤其臣；令皆觉寤，天下安得危亡之君！ 
现代文：元帝说： 乱世君王，各自认为他所任用的官员全是贤能。假如都能觉悟到自己的错误，天下怎么还会有危亡的君王？ 
English: Yuan Di said: The ruler of the chaotic world, everyone thinks that the officials appointed by him are all virtuous. If everyone can realize their mistakes, how can there still be a dying king in the world?

古文：房曰： 齐桓公、秦二世亦尝闻此君而非笑之；然则任竖刁、赵高，政治日乱，盗贼满山，何不以幽、厉卜之而觉寤乎？ 
现代文：京房说： 齐桓公、秦二世也曾经知道周幽王、周厉王的故事，并讥笑过他们。可是，齐桓公任用竖刁，秦二世任用赵高，以致政治日益混乱，盗贼满山遍野。为什么不能用周幽王、周厉王的例子测验自己的行为，而觉悟到用人的不当？ 
English: Jing Fang said, "Qi Kuan Gong and Qin II also once knew the stories of Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang, and ridiculed them. However, Qi Kuan Gong appointed Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang, and Qin II appointed Zhao Gao. As a result, politics has become increasingly chaotic, and thieves are everywhere. Why can't we use the examples of Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang to test our own behavior, and realize that it is inappropriate to employ people?

古文：上曰： 唯有道者能以往知来耳。 
现代文：元帝说： 只有治国有法的君王，才能依据往事而预测将来。 
English: Emperor Yuan said: "Only those who have virtue can punish the former and the latter."

古文：房因免冠顿首曰： 《春秋》纪二百四十二年灾异，以示万世之君。
现代文：京房于是脱下官帽，叩头说： 《春秋崐》一书，记载二百四十二年间的天变灾难，用来给后世君王看。
English: Kyofusa then took off his official hat and bowed his head, saying: "The Spring and Autumn Annals" is a book that records the natural disasters that have occurred over the past 242 years, and is used to show future monarchs.

古文：今陛下即位已来，日月失明，星辰逆行，山崩，泉涌，地震，石陨，夏霜，冬雷，春凋，秋荣，陨霜不杀，水，旱，螟虫，民人饥、疫，盗贼不禁，刑人满市，《春秋》所记灾异尽备。
现代文：而今陛下登极以来，出现日食月食，星辰逆行；山崩泉涌，大地震动，天落陨石；夏季降霜，冬季响雷，春季百花凋谢，秋季树叶茂盛，降霜后草木并不凋谢。水灾、旱灾、虫灾，百姓饥馑，瘟疫流行。盗贼制伏不住，受过刑罚的人充满街市。《春秋》所记载的灾异，已经俱备。
English: However, since His Majesty ascended to the throne, there have been solar eclipses, lunar eclipses, retrograde movement of stars, mountain landslides, earthquakes, meteorites falling from the sky, summer frosts, winter thunderstorms, spring flowers withering, autumn leaves blooming, and grasses not withering after frosts. Floods, droughts, insect plagues, people starving, plague epidemics. Thieves cannot be controlled, and people who have been punished fill the streets. The disasters recorded in "Spring and Autumn" are ready.

古文：陛下视今为治邪，乱邪？ 
现代文：陛下看现在是治世，还是乱世？ 
English: Your Majesty, in your opinion, is the current situation one of governance or chaos?

古文：上曰： 亦极乱耳，尚何道！ 
现代文：元帝说： 已经乱到极点了，这还用问？ 
English: Yuan Di said, "The chaos has reached its peak. Is there any need to ask?

古文：房曰： 今所任用者谁与？ 
现代文：京房说： 陛下现在任用的是些什么人？ 
English: Kyofusa said: Who are you going to appoint now?

古文：上曰： 然，幸其愈于彼，又以为不在此人也。 
现代文：元帝说： 今天的灾难变异和为政之道，幸而胜过前代。而且认为责任不在这些人身上。 
English: Yuan Di said: Today's disaster mutation and the way of doing politics are fortunately better than the previous generation, and that the responsibility does not lie with these people.

古文：房曰： 夫前世之君，亦皆然矣。
现代文：京房说： 前世的那些君王，也是陛下这种想法。
English: Kyofusa said, "Those kings in past lives also had the same thoughts as your majesty.

古文：臣恐后之视今，犹今之视前也！ 
现代文：我恐怕后代看今天，犹如今天看古代。 
English: I'm afraid that future generations will look at today as we look at antiquity today.

古文：上良久，乃曰： 今为乱者谁哉？ 
现代文：元帝过了很久才说： 现在扰乱国家的是谁？ 
English: It took a long time for Emperor Yuan to say: Who is disturbing the country now?

古文：房曰： 明主宜自知之。 
现代文：京房回答说： 陛下自己应该知道。 
English: Kyofusa said: The sovereign of the sacred should know this for himself.

古文：上曰： 不知也。如知，何故用之！ 
现代文：元帝说： 我不知道；如果知道，哪里还会用他？ 
English: Yuan Di said, "I don't know; if I knew, where else would I use him?"

古文：房曰： 上最所信任，与图事帷幄之中，进退天下之士者是矣。 
现代文：京房说： 陛下最信任，跟他在宫廷之中共商国家大事，掌握用人权柄的人，就是他。 
English: Kyofusa said, "He is the one whom His Majesty trusts the most, with whom he discusses national affairs in the court, and who has the authority to use people.

古文：房指谓石显，上亦知之，谓房曰： 已谕。 
现代文：京房所指的是石显。元帝也知道，他对京房说： 我晓得你的意思。 
English: What Kyofusa was referring to was Shihsien. Yuan Di also knew, so he said to Kyofusa, "I understand."

古文：房罢出，后上亦不能退显也。
现代文：京房告退。后来，汉元帝还是不能让石显退位。
English: Later, Emperor Han Yuan could not let Shi Xian abdicate.

古文：臣光曰：人君之德不明，则臣下虽欲竭忠，何自而入乎！
现代文：臣司马光曰：君王的德行不昌明，则臣属虽然想竭尽忠心，又从何着手呢？
English: Sima Guang, a vassal, said: "The virtue of the monarch is not very clear, so although the vassals want to be loyal, where do they start?

古文：观京房之所以晓孝元，可谓明白切至矣，而终不能寤，悲夫！
现代文：观察京房对元帝的诱导，可以说是把道理说得十分清楚透彻了，而最终仍不能使元帝觉悟，可悲啊！
English: Observing Kyofusa's inducement of Emperor Yuan, it can be said that he spoke the truth very clearly and thoroughly, but in the end he still could not make Emperor Yuan realize, how sad!

古文：《诗》曰： 匪面命之，言提其耳。
现代文：《诗经》说： 我不但当面把你教训过，而且提起过你的耳朵。
English: The Book of Psalms says, "I have not only taught you face to face, but I have also whispered in your ear.

古文：匪手携之，言示之事。 
现代文：不但是用手携带着你，而且指示了你许多事。 
English: He not only carried you by the hand, but also showed you many things.

古文：又曰： 诲尔谆谆，听我藐藐。 
现代文：又说： 我教导你是那么的恳切细致，而你却漫不经心、听不进去。 
English: And he said, I have taught thee well, and thou hast not hearkened.

古文：孝元之谓矣！
现代文：这说的就是汉元帝啊！
English: That's what Emperor Han Yuan said!

古文：上令房上弟子晓知考功、课吏事者，欲试用之。
现代文：元帝命京房推荐他的学生中通晓检验政绩和有能力考察官吏的人，准备试用。
English: Yuan Teimei recommended that his students, who are familiar with the examination of political performance and have the ability to inspect officials, prepare to try.

古文：房上 中郎任良、姚平，愿以为刺史，试考功法；臣得通籍殿中，为奏事，以防壅塞。 
现代文：京房上奏： 中郎任良、姚平，希望能用为刺史，在各州试行考绩制度。请准许我留在朝廷，转报他们的奏章，免得下情不能上达。 
English: From the Imperial Household Agency: Zhong Lang, Ren Liang, and Yao Ping, I hope to be used as an example to test the performance appraisal system in various states. Please allow me to stay at the imperial court and report their performance record, so that I will not be unable to present it.

古文：石显、五鹿充宗皆疾房，欲远之，建言，宜试以房为郡守。
现代文：然而石显、五鹿充宗都痛恨京房，想使京房远离元帝，于是向元帝建议，应该试任京房为郡守。
English: However, both Ishi Hsien and Goka Mitsumune hated Kyofusa and wanted to keep Kyofusa away from Emperor Yuan, so they suggested to Emperor Yuan that Kyofusa should be appointed as the county governor on a trial basis.

古文：帝于是以房为魏郡太守，得以考功法治郡。
现代文：元帝遂任命京房当魏郡太守，允许他以考功法去治理本郡。
English: Emperor Yuan then appointed Jingfang as the governor of Wei County, and allowed him to govern the county by taking the gong test.

古文：房自请： 岁竟，乘传奏事。 
现代文：京房请求： 年终时候，请准许我乘坐驿车前来，向陛下当面报告。 
English: Request from the Imperial Household Agency: At the end of the year, please allow me to come in a carriage and report to His Majesty in person.

古文：天子许焉。
现代文：元帝许可。
English: Emperor Yuan agreed.

古文：房自知数以论议为大臣所非，与石显等有隙，不欲远离左右，乃上封事曰： 臣出之后，恐为用事所蔽，身死而功不成，故愿岁尽乘传奏事，蒙哀见许。
现代文：京房自知数次因为议论受到大臣的非议，跟石显之间怨恨已成，不想远离元帝身边。于是上密封的奏章： 我一出京师，恐怕被当权大臣所害，身死而事败，所以盼望在年终之时，得以乘驿车到京师向陛下奏事，幸而蒙陛下哀怜而允许。
English: Kyofusa knew that he had been reprimanded several times by the minister because of his comments, and there was already a grudge between him and Ishihito, and he did not want to be away from the side of the former emperor. Therefore, he sealed the record: As soon as I left Kyoto, I was afraid that I would be victimized by the minister in power, and I would lose my life. Therefore, I hoped that at the end of the year, I would be able to take a stagecoach to Kyoto to report to His Majesty. Fortunately, His Majesty was compassionate and allowed it.

古文：乃辛已，蒙气复乘卦，太阳侵色，此上大夫覆阳而上意疑也。
现代文：然而，六月辛巳，阴云乱风四起，太阳光芒暗淡，显示高级官员蒙蔽天子，而天子心里怀疑。
English: However, in the middle of June, with storm clouds gathering and the sun's rays fading, it became clear that high-ranking officials had blinded the emperor, and the emperor was suspicious.

古文：己卯、庚辰之间，必有欲隔绝臣，令不得乘传奏事者。 
现代文：六月己卯、庚辰之间，定有要隔绝陛下与我的关系，使我不得乘坐驿车奏事的事情发生。 
English: Between Jun Jiwu and Geng Chen, there must have been something that happened to sever the relationship between His Majesty and me, so that I would not be allowed to ride in the carriage.

古文：房未发，上令阳平侯王凤承制诏房止无乘传奏事。
现代文：京房还没有出发，元帝命阳平侯王凤奉诏通知京房，不要乘驿车回京师奏事。
English: The imperial household had not yet set off, and the former emperor, Yang Ping Hou Wang Feng, issued an edict to inform the imperial household not to take the carriage back to Beijing to attend the ceremony.

古文：房意愈恐。
现代文：京房心中更加惊恐。
English: Kyofusa was even more terrified.

古文：秋，房去至新丰，因邮上封事曰： 臣前以六月中言《遁卦》不效，法曰： 道人始去，寒涌水为灾。 
现代文：秋季，京房出发，走到新丰，托朝廷传送文书的差人再上密封的奏章： 我先前于六月间曾上书陛下，所说《遁卦》虽未应验，但占候之法说： 有道术的人刚刚离去，天气寒冷，大水涌出成灾。 
English: In autumn, I set out from Beijing and walked to Xinfeng. I asked the courier to deliver the document to the imperial court and then sealed the record: I had previously sent a letter to His Majesty in June. Although the "Dao Gua" had not been fulfilled, the method of divination said: A person with Taoism had just left, the weather was cold, and large water gushed out into a disaster.

古文：至其七月，涌水出。
现代文：到了七月，果然大水涌出。
English: By July, the water was gushing out.

古文：臣弟子姚平谓臣曰： 房可谓知道，未可谓信道也。
现代文：我的学生姚平告诉我： 你可以说通晓道术，却不能说笃信崐道术。
English: My disciple Yao Gan said to me: Jingfang can be said to know the Tao, but cannot be said to believe in the Tao.

古文：房言灾异，未尝不中。
现代文：你所预测的天灾变异，没有一件事不应验。
English: None of the cataclysmic changes you have predicted have failed to occur.

古文：涌水已出，道人当逐死，尚复何言！ 
现代文：现在，大水已经涌出，有道术的人就要被放逐而死在外边，还有什么话可说！ 
English: Now that the floodwaters have come, and those with Taoism are about to be banished and die outside, what is there left to say!

古文：臣曰： 陛下至仁，于臣尤厚，虽言而死，臣犹言也。 
现代文：我说： 陛下最仁爱，对我尤其宽厚，即令因进言而死，我还是要进言。 
English: I said: Your Majesty is most benevolent, especially generous to me, even if I die because of the speech, I still want to speak.

古文：平又曰： 房可谓小忠，未可谓大忠也。
现代文：姚平又说： 你只能说是小忠，不算大忠。
English: Yao Ping also said: You can only say that you are a minor loyalist, not a major loyalist.

古文：昔秦时赵高用事，有正先者，非刺高而死，高威自此成，故秦之乱，正先趣之。 
现代文：从前，秦朝赵高执政，有一位叫正先的人，因讥讽赵高而被处死，赵高的淫威从此形成。所以秦朝的衰乱，是正先推动的。 
English: Once upon a time, when Zhao Gao of the Qin Dynasty was in power, a man named Zhengxian was executed for mocking Zhao Gao. Zhao Gao's arrogance was formed from this. Therefore, the decline of the Qin Dynasty was promoted by Zhengxian.

古文：今臣得出守郡，自诡效功，恐未效而死，惟陛下毋使臣塞涌水之异，当正先之死，为姚平所笑。 
现代文：而今我出任郡守，把考核功效引为自己的责任，只恐怕还没有着手便被诛杀。求陛下不要使我应验大水上涌的预言，像正先那样死去，让姚平嘲笑。 
English: Now that I am the county magistrate, I have made it my duty to examine the efficacy of the crane, but I am afraid that I will be killed before I have begun. I beg Your Majesty not to make me fulfill the prophecy of the great water surge and die as I did before, and let Yao Ping laugh at me.

古文：房至陕，复上封事曰： 臣前白愿出任良试考功，臣得居内。
现代文：京房到陕县，再上密封奏章： 我先前建议由任良负责官员考绩，让我留在朝廷。
English: Jingfang went to Shaanxi, and then sealed the record: I had previously suggested that Renliang, the official in charge of performance evaluation, let me stay at the imperial court.

古文：议者知如此于身不利，臣不可蔽，故云 使弟子不若试师。 
现代文：议论此事的人知道这样对于他们自身不利，而且不可能把我和陛下隔绝开来，所以说： 与其学生出面，不如试用老师。 
English: Knowing that it would be to their own detriment, and that it would be impossible to isolate me from His Majesty, those who were discussing the matter said, "It is better to test the teacher than the pupil."

古文：臣为刺史，又当奏事，故复云 为刺史，恐太守不与同心，不若以为太守。 
现代文：可是，如果派我当刺史，又怕我面见陛下奏报，于是又说： 当刺史，可能与太守不同心，不如当太守。 
English: However, if I were to be sent as a member of the Privy Council, they would be afraid that I would appear in front of His Majesty to deliver the report, so they would say, "As a member of the Privy Council, you may not have the same heart as the Emperor, so it is better to be the Emperor."

古文：此其所以隔绝臣也。
现代文：目的在于隔绝我们君臣。
English: The aim is to isolate us.

古文：陛下不违其言而遂听之，此乃蒙气所以不解、太阳无色者也。
现代文：陛下没有反对他们的主张，听从了他们的建议。这正是阴云乱风所以不散，太阳失去光辉的原因。
English: His Majesty did not oppose their proposal, but he followed their advice, which is why the clouds and wind did not disperse and the sun lost its brilliance.

古文：臣去稍远，太阳侵色益甚，唯陛下毋难还臣而易逆天意。
现代文：我离京师长安渐远，太阳的昏暗越来越重。盼望陛下不要难于征我回京师而轻易地违背天意！
English: I am getting farther and farther away from Beijing Division Chang'an, and the sun is getting darker and darker. I hope that His Majesty will not find it difficult to conscript me back to Beijing Division and easily violate the will of heaven!

古文：邪说虽安于人，天气必变，故人可欺，天不可欺也，愿陛下察焉。 
现代文：邪恶阴谋，人虽不觉，上天却必有变化，所以人可以欺，天不可以欺，请陛下详察！ 
English: In the human world, although evil theories can be stable, the weather will certainly change, so people can be deceived, but the heavens cannot be deceived. I hope Your Majesty will see this.

古文：房去月馀，竟征下狱。
现代文：京房离开一月余，竟被征回京师，逮捕入狱。
English: After leaving the capital for more than a month, he was conscripted back to the capital, arrested and imprisoned.

古文：初，淮阳宪王舅张博，倾巧无行，多从王求金钱，欲为王求入朝。
现代文：当初，淮阳宪王刘钦的舅父张博是一个看风行事，无善行的人物，向刘钦要了许多金钱，到京师长安活动征召刘钦入朝。
English: At first, Zhang Bo, the uncle of Liu Qin, the constitutional king of Huaiyang, was a person who watched the wind and did not do good deeds. He asked Liu Qin for a lot of money and went to Beijing to organize the Chang'an activities to recruit Liu Qin to the dynasty.

古文：博从京房学，以女妻房。
现代文：张博曾跟随京房学习《易经》，而且把女儿嫁给京房。
English: Zhang Bo once studied "I Ching" with Kyofusa, and married his daughter to Kyofusa.

古文：房每朝见，退辄为博道其语。
现代文：京房每次朝见，回家之后，都把跟元帝之间问答的话告诉张博。
English: Every morning in the imperial palace, and after returning home, he told Zhang Bo the words of the Q&A between him and the Yuan Emperor.

古文：博因记房所说密语，令房为王作求朝奏草，皆持柬与王，以为信验。
现代文：张博于是暗中记下京房所说的机密言语，让京房代刘钦草拟请求入朝的奏章。他把这些密语记录和奏章草稿，都送给刘钦过目，作为他工作的证明。
English: Zhang Bo then secretly recorded the confidential words spoken by Jingfang Zhou, and asked Liu Qin to draft a request for entry into the North on behalf of Jingfang. He sent these secret language records and drafts of the play to Liu Qin for review, as proof of his work.

古文：石显知之，告房与张博通谋，非谤政治，归恶天子，诖误诸侯王。
现代文：石显知道此事后，指控： 京房跟张博通谋，诽谤治国措施，把罪恶推到皇帝身上，贻误连累诸侯王。 
English: After Shi Xian knew about this, he accused: Jingfang conspired with Zhang Bo, slandered the measures for governing the country, pushed the evil onto the emperor, and entangled the princes.

古文：皆下狱，弃市，妻子徙边。
现代文：于是京房跟张博都被捕入狱，在街市上斩首，妻子儿女被放逐到边塞。
English: As a result, Jingfang and Zhang Bo were both arrested and imprisoned, beheaded in the street market, and their wives and children were banished to the frontier town of Tsuru.

古文：郑弘坐与房善，免为庶人。
现代文：御史大夫郑弘，被控跟京房是朋友，遭免职，贬作平民。
English: Chief historian Zheng Hong, accused of being a friend of Kyofang, was dismissed from his post and reduced to the status of a commoner.

古文：御史中丞陈咸数毁石显，久之，坐与槐里令硃云善，漏泄省中语，石显微伺知之，与云皆下狱，髡为城旦。
现代文：御史中丞陈咸不断抨击石显。过了一段时间，石显指控他跟槐里令朱云是好友，泄露宫禁之中的机密，这是石显暗暗侦察得知的。于是陈咸、朱云都被捕下狱，判处髡刑，罚做苦工。
English: After a while, Shi Xian accused him of being a close friend of Zhu Yun and of divulging secrets from the palace, which Shi Xian had learned through surreptitious reconnaissance. As a result, Chen Xian and Zhu Yun were both arrested, sentenced to flogging, and forced to do hard labor.

古文：石显威权日盛，公卿以下畏显，重足一迹。
现代文：石显的淫威和权势日益增长，公卿及以下的官员都害怕他，人人自危，不敢稍有宽纵。
English: Shi Xian's arrogance and power are growing day by day. Officials from the nobility on down are afraid of him. Everyone is afraid to be too lenient.

古文：显与中书仆射牢梁、少府五鹿充宗结为党友，诸附倚者皆得宠位，民歌之曰： 牢邪！
现代文：石显与中书仆射牢梁、少府五鹿充宗结为死党密友，凡依附他们的人，都得到了高官厚禄。
English: Shi Xian was a close friend of the dead party with Shailiang, a middle-ranking clerk, and Woluqomzong, a lower-ranking official, and all those who adhered to them received high-ranking officials and rich rewards.

古文：石邪！五鹿客邪！印何累累，绶若若邪！ 
现代文：民间有歌谣说： 你是姓牢的人，还是姓石的人，是五鹿家的门客吗？官印何其多，绶带何其长！ 
English: There is a folk song that says: Are you a person with the surname Zhuang, or a person with the surname Shi, or a guest of the Wula family? How many official seals, how long is the umbilical cord!

古文：显内自知擅权专柄在掌握，恐天子一旦纳用左右耳目以间己，乃时归诚，取一信以为验。
现代文：石显心知自己专权，把持朝政，怕元帝一旦听取亲信的抨击而疏远自己，便时常向元帝表示忠诚，取得信任，验证元帝对自己的态度。
English: Shi Xian knew in his heart that he had absolute power and controlled the government, and he was afraid that if the Yuan Emperor listened to the criticism of his close friends and distanced himself, he would often express his loyalty to the Yuan Emperor, gain his trust, and verify the attitude of the Yuan Emperor towards himself.

古文：显尝使至诸官，有所征发，显先自白： 恐后漏尽宫门闭，请使诏吏开门。 
现代文：石显曾经奉命到诸官府征集人力和物资，他先向元帝请求： 恐怕有时回宫太晚，漏壶滴尽，宫门关闭，我可不可以说奉陛下之命，教他们开门！ 
English: Shi Xian was once ordered to go to various government offices to collect manpower and materials. He first asked Emperor Yuan: I am afraid that sometimes it is too late to return to the palace, the leaking pot is dripping, the palace gate is closed, I can't say that I am ordered by His Majesty to teach them to open the door!

古文：上许之。
现代文：元帝允许。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：显故投夜还，称诏开门入。
现代文：一天石显故意到夜里才回来，宣称元帝命令，唤开宫门入内。
English: Shi Xian deliberately did not return until late at night, claiming that the emperor had ordered someone to open the door.

古文：后果有上书告 显颛命，矫诏开宫门 ，天子闻之，笑以其书示显。
现代文：后来，果然有人上书控告： 石显专擅皇命，假传圣旨，私开宫门。 元帝听说了这件事，笑着把奏章拿给石显看。
English: Later, someone did indeed submit a complaint in writing: Shi Xianxuan was not good at the imperial command, falsely transmitted the imperial edict, and secretly opened the palace gate. When Emperor Yuan heard about this, he smiled and showed the record to Shi Xianxuan.

古文：显因泣曰： 陛下过私小臣，属任以事，群下无不嫉妒，欲陷害臣者，事类如此非一，唯独明主知之。
现代文：石显抓住时机，流泪说： 陛下过于宠爱我，委任我办事，下面无人不妒火中烧，想陷害我，类似这种情形已不止一次，只有圣明的主上才知道我的忠心。
English: Seizing the opportunity, Shi Xian shed tears and said, "Your Majesty is too fond of me and has appointed me to do things. No one below is not jealous and wants to frame me. This kind of situation has happened more than once. Only the Lord of the Sacred Light knows my loyalty."

古文：愚臣微贱，诚不能以一躯称快万众，任天下之怨。
现代文：我出身微贱，实在不能以我一个人去使万人称心快意，担负起全国所有的怨恨。
English: I come from a humble background, and I really can't be the only one to make everyone happy and bear all the resentment in the country.

古文：臣愿归枢机职，受后宫扫除之役，死无所恨。
现代文：请允许我辞去中枢机要职务，只负责后宫的清洁洒扫，死而无恨。
English: Please allow me to resign from the important position of the central cardinal, and only be responsible for the clean sweep of the harem, without hatred.

古文：唯陛下哀怜财幸，以此全活小臣。 
现代文：唯求陛下哀怜裁择，再给我一次宠幸，以此保全我的性命。 
English: I beg Your Majesty to have mercy on me and give me one more chance to save my life.

古文：天子以为然而怜之，数劳勉显，加厚赏赐，赏赐及赂遗訾一万万。
现代文：元帝认为石显说得对而怜悯他，不断慰问勉励，又重重赏赐。这样的赏赐及百官赠送的资金达一亿。
English: The emperor thought that what he said was all true, and felt very sorry for him. He consoled and encouraged Shi Xian many times, and even increased the reward. Thus, the reward that Shi Xian received, as well as the gifts sent by courtiers to flatter him, amounted to ten million yuan.

古文：初，显闻众人匈匈，言己杀前将军萧望之，恐天下学士讪己，以谏大夫贡禹明经箸节，乃使人致意，深自结纳，因荐禹天子，历位九卿，礼事之甚备。
现代文：当初，石显听说人们议论愤激，都说是他逼死前将军萧望之，怕招来全国儒生的抨击。由于谏大夫贡禹深明儒家经典，节操高尚而有名望，石显便托人向贡禹表示问候之意，用心结交，并向元帝推荐，使贡禹擢升九卿，并对他以礼相待，很是周详。
English: At first, Shi Xian heard that people were talking about indignation, saying that he forced the death of the former general Xiao Wangzhi, fearing to attract the criticism of Confucians across the country. Since Dr. Gong Yu was well-versed in Confucian classics, noble and renowned, Shi Xian asked people to express their greetings to Gong Yu, make friends with all their hearts, and recommend to the Yuan Emperor that Gong Yu be promoted to nine Lords, and treat him with courtesy, very detailed.

古文：议者于是或称显，以为不妒谮望之矣。
现代文：于是舆论也有赞扬石显的，认为他不曾妒恨陷害萧望之。
English: As a result, public opinion also praised Shi Xian, believing that he did not envy, frame, or despise her.

古文：显之设变诈以自解免，取信人主者，皆此类也。
现代文：石显谋略变诈，善于为自己解围，以取得皇帝的信任，用的都是此类手法。
English: Shi Xian was a cunning schemer, adept at breaking out of his shell to gain the emperor's trust.

古文：荀悦曰：夫佞臣之惑君主也甚矣，故孔子曰： 远佞人。 
现代文：荀悦曰：奸佞迷惑君主的方法太多了。所以孔子说： 要远离奸佞！ 
English: Mu Yue said: There are too many ways for traitors to deceive the sovereign. Therefore, Confucius said: Stay away from traitors!

古文：非但不用而已，乃远而绝之，隔塞其源，戒之极也。
现代文：对于罪恶，必须核实是真实的，才加以惩罚。对于行为，必须核实是真实的，才可以尊重。
English: For crimes, it is necessary to verify that they are true in order to punish them; for actions, it is necessary to verify that they are true in order to respect them.

古文：孔子曰： 政者，正也。 
现代文：对于言谈，必须核实是真实的，才能够相信。
English: For a statement to be believed, it must be verified as true.

古文：夫要道之本，正己而已矣。
现代文：对于物器，必须核实是真实的，才可以使用。
English: For objects, it must be verified that they are real before they can be used.

古文：平直真实者，正之主也。
现代文：对于事情，必须核实是真实的，才能够去做。
English: For things, you have to verify that it's real before you can do it.

古文：故德必核其真，然后授其位；能必核其真，然后授其事；功必核其真，然后授其赏；罪必核其真，然后授其刑；行必核其真，然后贵之；言必核其真，然后信之；物必核其真，然后用之；事必核其真，然后修之。故众正积于上，万事实于下，先王之道，如斯而已矣！
现代文：所以各种端正风气都汇集到朝廷，则下面万事没有虚伪。古代圣王的道理，不过如此而已。
English: Therefore, all kinds of proper customs are gathered to the imperial court, then there is no hypocrisy in the following things. The principle of the ancient holy kings, but that's all.

古文：八月，癸亥，以光禄勋匡衡为御史大夫。
现代文：八月癸亥，元帝擢升光禄勋匡衡任御史大夫。
English: In August of the Year of the Rooster, the Yuan Emperor promoted the honorable Kuang Heng to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：闰月，丁酉，太皇太后上官氏崩。
现代文：闰八月丁酉，上官太皇太后驾崩。
English: In late August, Ding Xi, the superior officer of the Empress Dowager, passed away.

古文：冬，十一月，齐、楚地震，大雨雪，树折，屋坏。
现代文：冬季，十一月，齐、楚地区地震，下大雪，树木折断，民房倒塌。
English: In winter, in November, there was an earthquake in Qi and Chu regions, heavy snowfall, trees snapped, and houses collapsed.

古文：孝元皇帝下建昭三年
现代文：建昭三年
English: Jian Zhao three years

古文：夏，六月，甲辰，扶阳共侯韦玄成薨。
现代文：夏季，六月甲辰丞相扶阳侯韦玄成去世。
English: In the summer, in June, Fuyang Hou Wei Xuancheng, Minister of Jia Chenzheng, passed away.

古文：秋，七月，匡衡为丞相。
现代文：秋季，七月，元帝擢升匡衡作丞相。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Yuan promoted Kuangheng to the post of chancellor.

古文：戊辰，卫尉李延寿为御史大夫。
现代文：戊辰，擢升卫尉李延寿当御史大夫。
English: Boshen, Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards Li Yanju was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：冬，使西域都护、骑都尉北地甘延寿、副校尉山阳陈汤共诛斩匈奴郅支单于于康居。
现代文：冬季，命西域都护、骑都尉、北地郡人甘延寿，和副校尉、山阳郡人陈汤一同出兵，在康居王国斩杀郅支单于。
English: In the winter, Gan Yanshou, the Western Capital Protector, Cavalry Captain, and Hokkien County resident, and Chen Tang, the Vice-Colonel and Sanyang County resident, dispatched troops together to kill Zou Zhidan in the Kangju Kingdom.

古文：始，郅支单于自以大国，威名尊重，又乘胜骄，不为康居王礼，怒杀康居王女及贵人、人民数百，或支解投都赖水中。
现代文：最初，郅支单于自以为匈奴汗国是一个大国，威名远扬，颇受别国尊重，又乘军事胜利而十分骄傲。因为不得康居王礼敬，一怒之下杀了康居王的女儿及康居贵族、平民数百人，有的还截其四肢，扔到都赖水里。
English: At first, he thought that the Hunnic Khanate was a great power with a high reputation and respect from other countries, and he was very proud of his military victory. Because he could not pay respect to the Kangju King, he killed the daughter of the Kangju King and hundreds of Kangju nobles and commoners in a fit of rage. Some of them had their limbs amputated and were thrown into the Dora water.

古文：发民作城，日作五百人，二岁乃已。
现代文：他强迫康居人为他建筑城垣，每日有五百名工匠施工，历时二年才完成。
English: He conscripted and sent out people to build the city, using five hundred people every day, and only stopped after two years.

古文：又遣使责阖苏、大宛诸国岁遗，不敢不予。汉遣使三辈至康居，求谷吉等死，郅支困辱使者，不肯奉诏；而因都护上书，言 居困厄，愿归计强汉，遣子入侍。 
现代文：郅支对于汉朝使节窘困侮辱，不肯接受汉朝皇帝的诏书，只是通过西域都护上书，说： 居住的地方环境困苦，愿意归顺强大的汉朝，还打算派儿子去当人质。 
English: To the embarrassment and humiliation of the envoys of the Han Dynasty, Luo Zhi refused to accept the edict of the emperor of the Han Dynasty, but sent a letter through the Western Capital, saying: The local environment is difficult, I am willing to submit to the powerful Han Dynasty, and I also plan to send my son to be a hostage.

古文：其骄嫚如此。
现代文：其态度傲慢如此。
English: It is a matter of pride that they have neglected it to this extent.

古文：汤为人沉勇，有大虑，多策略，喜奇功，与延寿谋曰： 夷狄畏服大种，其天性也。
现代文：陈汤为人沉着勇敢，能深思熟虑，富有计策谋略，渴望建立奇特的功勋，他向甘延寿建议说： 边境各族畏惧匈奴，这是天性。
English: Chen Tang was a calm and brave man, capable of deep thinking, rich in strategy, eager to establish a strange merit, he suggested to Gan Yanshou: It is natural for all ethnic groups on the border to fear the Xiongnu.

古文：西域本属匈奴，今郅支单于威名远闻，侵陵乌孙、大宛，常为康居画计，欲降服之。
现代文：西域各国，本来都属匈奴管辖，而今郅支单于的威名传播很远，不断侵略乌孙王国和大宛王国，经常给康居王国出谋划策，企图使乌孙、大宛投降归顺。
English: The western region originally belonged to the Xiongnu, but now the Xiongzhi single-handedly spread the reputation far and wide, invaded and bullied the Usun, Dawan and other countries, and often made plans for Kangju to subjugate them.

古文：如得此二国，数年之间，城郭诸国危矣。
现代文：如果把这两国征服，只要几年时间，西域城邦国家都会陷于危险的境地。
English: If these two countries were conquered, it would only take a few years for the countries of the Western Regions to fall into a dangerous situation.

古文：且其人剽悍，好战伐，数取胜，久畜之，必为西域患。
现代文：郅支单于性情剽悍，喜好战争，不断取得胜利。日子一久，必将成为西域的灾难。
English: Moreover, their people are tough, like to fight, and often win. If they are indulged for a long time, they will surely become a hidden danger in the western region.

古文：虽所在绝远，蛮夷无金城、强弩之守。
现代文：虽然他现在地处遥远，幸而他们没有坚固的城堡和强劲的弓弩，无法固守。
English: Although he is now far away, fortunately they do not have a strong castle and strong bows and arrows to hold on to.

古文：如发屯田吏士，驱从乌孙众兵，直指其城下，彼亡则无所之，守则不足自保，千载之功可一朝而成也！ 
现代文：我们如果征发屯田的军队，并率领乌孙王国的军队，一直挺进到他的城堡之下，他要逃没有地方可逃，要守则兵力不足以自保，千载难逢的功业可以在一天早上完成。 
English: If we conscript the army of Tun Tian, and lead the army of the Wusun Kingdom, and advance all the way to his castle, he will have no place to escape, and the troops are not enough to protect themselves, and the once-in-a-lifetime work can be completed in one morning.

古文：延寿亦以为然，欲奏请之。
现代文：甘延寿认为有理，准备先奏请朝廷批准。
English: Gan Yanshou thought it was reasonable and prepared to ask the Imperial Court for approval first.

古文：汤曰： 国家与公卿议，大策非凡所见，事必不从。 
现代文：陈汤说： 圣上一定会召集公卿商议，远大的策略，不是平庸的官僚所能了解，肯定不同意。 
English: Chen Tang said: The Holy Father will certainly convene the nobles to discuss, and the grand strategy is not something that the mediocre bureaucrats can understand, and they will certainly disagree.

古文：延寿犹与不听。
现代文：甘延寿迟疑，不肯听他的话。
English: Gan Yanshou hesitantly did not obey.

古文：会其久病，汤独矫制发城郭诸国兵、车师戊已校尉屯田吏士。
现代文：正好甘延寿久病卧床，陈汤单独行动，假传圣旨，征发各城邦国家的军队、车师戊己校尉的屯田部队。
English: Just as Gan Yan Shou was bedridden with a long-term illness, Chen Tang acted alone, falsely preached the holy will, and conscripted the armies of various city-states and the Tonden troops of the coachman Captain Wu Ji.

古文：延寿闻之，惊起，欲止焉。汤怒，按剑叱延寿曰： 大众已集会，竖子欲沮众邪！ 延寿遂从之。
现代文：发出奏章的当天，大军出发，分成六路纵队，其中三路纵队沿南道越过葱岭，穿过大宛王国。
English: On the day of issuing the music chapter, the great army set out and was divided into six columns, of which the three-way column crossed the Qiu Ling along the South Road and passed through the Dayuan Kingdom.

古文：部勒行陈，汉兵、胡兵合四万馀人。延寿、汤上疏自劾奏矫制，陈言兵状，即日引军分行，别为六校：其三校从南道逾葱领，径大宛；其三校都护自将，发温宿国，从北道入赤谷，过乌孙，涉康居界，至阗池西。而康居副王抱阗将数千骑寇赤谷城东，杀略大昆弥千馀人，驱畜产甚多，从后与汉军相及，颇寇盗后重。
现代文：另三路纵队，由都护甘延寿亲自率领，从温宿国出发，由北道经乌孙王国首府赤谷城，穿过乌孙王国，进入康居王国边界，挺进到阗池西岸。而这时康居王国的副王抱阗，率领数千骑兵，在赤谷城东方攻击乌孙王国大昆弥地区，屠杀及俘虏千余人，抢走牛、羊、马等大批牲畜，然后从后面追上汉军，夺取汉军后部的大批辎重。
English: Another three-pronged column, led by the capital protector Gan Yan Shou himself, set out from Onjuku Province, passed through the capital of the Wusun Kingdom, Akaya City, through the Wusun Kingdom, entered the border of the Kangju Kingdom, and advanced to the west coast of Dianchi. At this time, the vice-king of the Kangju Kingdom, Bao Bao, led thousands of cavalry to attack the Da Kunmi area of the Wusun Kingdom in the east of Akaya City, killed and captured more than a thousand people, and robbed a large number of livestock such as cattle, sheep, and horses, and then caught up with the Chinese army from

古文：汤纵胡兵击之，杀四百六十人，得其所略民四百七十人，还付大昆弥，其马、牛、羊以给军食。
现代文：陈汤命西域兵迎战，杀四百六十人，夺回抱阗所掳掠的乌孙百姓四百七十人，交给大昆弥。而夺回的马匹、牛、羊，则留下来作为军队食物。
English: Chen Tang unleashed the Hu army to attack them, killed four hundred and sixty people, got the four hundred and seventy people they had robbed, and handed them back to King Amada Wusong. The horses, cattle and sheep they got were used to supply the military.

古文：又捕得抱阗贵人伊奴毒。
现代文：又逮捕到抱阗手下的贵族伊奴毒。
English: They also captured the prominent Inugami, who was holding a scepter.

古文：入康居东界，令军不得为寇。
现代文：进入康居王国东部国界后，陈崐汤严明军纪，不准烧杀抢掠。
English: When they reached the Sokube border of Kangju, Chen Tang ordered the army not to loot.

古文：间呼其贵人屠墨见之，谕以威信，与饮、盟，遣去。
现代文：秘密召康居王国的贵族屠墨来会晤，向他展示汉朝的威力与决心，摆下酒筵席，共同盟誓，然后送他回去。
English: He secretly summoned Tu Mo, an aristocrat from the Kangju Kingdom, to meet him, showed him the power and determination of the Han Dynasty, set up a banquet, swore together, and then sent him back.

古文：径引行，未至单于城可六十里，止营。
现代文：大军继续挺进，在距新筑的单于城约六十里处，安营扎寨。
English: From the trail, he led the army forward, and when he reached a place about sixty miles from the city, he stopped advancing and set up camp.

古文：复捕得康居贵人贝色子男开牟以为导。
现代文：这时，又俘虏康居王国另一贵族具色子男开牟，让他作向导。
English: He also captured Kangju's son Kaimu, the son of the eminent Baise, and made him his guide.

古文：贝色子，即屠墨母之弟，皆怨单于，由是具知郅支情。
现代文：具色子男开牟是屠墨的舅父，也痛恨郅支单于的凶暴。汉朝军队于是对郅支单于内部的情况，了如指掌。
English: The Han Dynasty's army was well aware of the internal situation of Yan Zhizan, as Guo Shi Zi Niang Kai Mou was the uncle of Tu Mo, and he also hated the ferocity of Yan Zhizan.

古文：明日，引行，未至城三十里，止营。
现代文：第二天，大军继续挺进，距单于城三十里，扎营。
English: The next day, the large army continued to advance and camped 30 miles from the city of Shan.

古文：单于遣使曰： 汉兵何以来？ 
现代文：郅支单于派使节前来询问： 汉朝军队到这里来的目的何在？ 
English: He sent envoys to inquire: What is the purpose of the Han Dynasty troops coming here?

古文：应曰： 单于上书言： 居困厄，愿归计强汉，身入朝见， 天子哀闵单于弃大国，屈意康居，故使都护将军来迎单于妻子。
现代文：汉军的官员回答说： 你们单于曾经上书汉朝皇帝，说： 居住环境困苦，愿意归降强大的汉朝，亲身到长安朝见。 皇帝怜悯单于放弃幅员广大的国土，委屈地住在康居，所以派遣都护将军，率军前来迎接单于及妻子儿女。
English: The officials of the Han army replied: You alone once wrote to the emperor of the Han Dynasty, saying: The living environment is difficult, willing to surrender to the powerful Han Dynasty, to see the Chang'an Dynasty in person. The emperor's mercy is only to give up the vast territory and live in Kangju with grievances, so he sent Duyou General and led the army to come to meet you and your wife and children.

古文：恐左右惊动，故未敢至城下。 
现代文：恐怕单于的左右惊动，所以没有敢于直接到达城下。 
English: I'm afraid that I was just startled from left to right, so I didn't dare to go directly under the castle.

古文：使数往来相答报，延寿、汤因让之： 我为单于远来，而至今无名王、大人见将军受事者，何单于忽大计，失客主之礼也！
现代文：双方使节来往了几次之后，甘延寿、陈汤出面，责备郅支单于的使节说： 我们为了单于，不远万里来到此地，然而，一直到今天，他还没有派出一位名王、显贵，前来晋见都护将军，接受命令而供事，为什么单于对大事这么疏忽，不讲主人待客人的礼节？
English: After the envoys of the two sides had been in and out several times, Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang came forward to reproach the envoys of Yan Zhizhi and Shanyu, saying: We have come here for Shanyu, not far away. However, until today, he has not sent a famous king and dignitary to come to see General Jin Du and accept orders to serve. Why is Shanyu so negligent about major events and does not speak of the host's etiquette for treating guests?

古文：兵来道远，人畜罢极，食度且尽，恐无以自还，愿单于与大臣审计策。 
现代文：我们从遥远的地方到此，人马困乏已极，而粮草又快用完，恐怕连回程都不够用，请单于跟大臣们慎重考虑。 
English: We have come here from a faraway place, we are extremely short-staffed, and we are running out of grain and grass. I'm afraid we don't even have enough for the return journey. Please consider this carefully with the ministers.

古文：明日，前至郅支城都赖水上，离城三里，止营傅陈。
现代文：次日，大军挺进到都赖水畔，在距单于城三里外扎营，构筑阵地，遥望单于城上，五色旗帜迎风飘扬，数百匈奴人披甲戴胄，登上城楼守备。
English: The next day, the army advanced to the upper reaches of the Dulai River, three miles from the city, and stopped to set up camp.

古文：望见单于城上立五采幡帜，数百人被甲乘城；又出百馀骑往来驰城下，步兵百馀人夹门鱼鳞陈，讲习用兵。城上人更招汉军曰： 斗来！ 
现代文：又从城中冲出一百余名骑兵，往来奔驰城下。一百余名匈奴步兵，在城门两侧，结成 鱼鳞阵 ，正作战斗演习。城上守军还向汉朝军队挑战： 来打吧！ 
English: More than a hundred horsemen also rushed out of the city and galloped back and forth. More than a hundred Hun infantrymen, on both sides of the city gate, formed a fish scale formation and were doing battle drills. The defenders on the city also challenged the Han Dynasty army: Let's fight!

古文：百馀骑驰赴营，营皆张弩持满指之，骑引却。
现代文：一百余名匈奴骑兵直冲汉营，汉营的强弩全部拉满，箭矢外指。匈奴骑兵不敢攻击，撤退。
English: More than a hundred Hun cavalry charged straight at the Han camp, and the strong towers of the Han camp were all filled with arrows. The Hun cavalry did not dare to attack and retreated.

古文：颇遣吏士射城门骑、步兵，骑、步兵皆入。
现代文：强弩部队射击城门外操练的匈奴骑兵、步兵，匈奴兵全部退入城内。
English: The Xiangfan troops fired at the Hun cavalry and infantry practicing outside the city gate, and the Hun soldiers all retreated into the city.

古文：延寿、汤令军： 闻鼓音，皆薄城下，四面围城，各有所守，穿堑，塞门户，卤楯为前，戟弩为后，仰射城楼上人。 
现代文：甘延寿、陈汤下令总攻： 听到鼓声，都直扑城下，四面包围，各军记住所分配的位置，开凿洞穴，堵塞射击孔。盾牌在前，戟弩在后，仰射城楼上的守军。 
English: Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang ordered a general attack: when they heard the drums, they all rushed straight to the bottom of the city, surrounded on all sides, each army remembered the assigned position, dug caves, blocked shooting holes, shields in front, shackles behind, and shot the defenders on the towers.

古文：楼上人下走。
现代文：攻击开始，城楼上的匈奴守军退下逃走。
English: The attack began, and the Hun defenders on the castle tower retreated and fled.

古文：土城外有重木城，从木城中射，颇杀伤外人。
现代文：土城之外，还有由两层木樯构成的重木城。匈奴人由木城射击，使汉朝远征军多有伤亡。
English: In addition to the earthen fort, there was also a heavy wooden fort consisting of two-storey wooden rafts. The Huns fired from the wooden fort, causing many casualties to the Han Dynasty expeditionary force.

古文：外人发薪烧木城，夜，数百骑欲出，外迎射，杀之。
现代文：于是远征军以薪纵火，焚烧木城。入夜，匈奴守军骑兵数百名突围，汉军予以迎头痛击，箭如雨下，全部歼灭。
English: As a result, the expeditionary force started a fire with firewood and burned the wooden city. At nightfall, hundreds of cavalrymen of the Hunnic defenders broke through the encirclement, and the Chinese army struck them head-on, with arrows raining down, annihilating them all.

古文：初，单于闻汉兵至，欲去，疑康居怨己，为汉内应，又闻乌孙诸国兵皆发，自以无所之。
现代文：当初，郅支单于听说汉朝军队到达，打算离开此城。可是，怀疑康居王对他怨恨，与汉朝勾结，里应外合，又听说乌孙王国等西域各国，都派出军队，自以为无处可以投奔。
English: At the beginning, just because he heard that the Han Dynasty army had arrived and wanted to escape, but suspected that Kangju resented himself and would act as a mute army, and also heard that the U.S.S.R. countries had sent troops, he thought there was no place to go.

古文：郅支已出，复还，曰： 不如坚守。
现代文：所以，他已逃出单于城，却又返回，说： 不如坚守。
English: After the letter came out, he went back again and said, "We might as well hold on to the castle."

古文：汉兵远来，不能久攻。 
现代文：汉朝军队远征万里，不可能持久进攻。 
English: The Chinese army came from far away and could not attack for a long time.

古文：单于乃被甲在楼上，诸阏氏、夫人数十皆以弓射外人。
现代文：郅支单于全身披甲，在城楼上指挥作崐战。他的阏氏、夫人共数十名，也都用弓箭射城外的汉军。
English: He wore armor all over his body and commanded battles on the castle tower. Dozens of members of his clan and his wife also used bows and arrows to shoot at the Han troops outside the city.

古文：外人射中单于鼻，诸夫人颇死；单于乃下。
现代文：汉朝的弩兵射中郅支单于的鼻子，而他的夫人也多有死亡。郅支单于于是从城楼下来。
English: Han soldiers shot him in the nose, and his wife also died. So he came down from the castle tower.

古文：夜过半，木城穿，中人却入土城，乘城呼。
现代文：午夜之后，木城被攻破，木城中的匈奴军退入土城，登上城头，呼号呐喊。
English: Halfway through the night, the wooden city was penetrated, and the masked man retreated into the earthen city, climbed the tower and shouted.

古文：时康居兵万馀骑，分为十馀处，四面环城，亦与相应和。
现代文：这时，康居王国一万余人的骑兵援军来到郅支城附近，分散在十余处，环绕城的东西南北四面部署，跟城上的匈奴守军互相呼应。
English: At this time, more than ten thousand cavalry reinforcements from the Kangju Kingdom came to the vicinity of Jiuzhi City, dispersed in more than ten places, and deployed on all four sides of the east-west and north-south directions around the city, echoing the Hun defenders on the city.

古文：夜，数奔营，不利，辄却。
现代文：乘着夜色，多次向汉朝军队的营地冲击，然而不能得手，每次都退下来。
English: In the evening, they made several raids on the Chinese camp, but without success, they retreated.

古文：平明，四面火起，吏士喜，大呼乘之，钲鼓声动地。
现代文：天将亮时，四面火起，官兵振奋，乘火势大喊，钲鼓之声动地。
English: At dawn, the city was set on fire on all sides. The officers and soldiers cheered, shouted loudly, chased the enemy, and shook the earth with the sound of gongs and drums.

古文：康居兵引却；汉兵四面推卤楯，并入土城中。
现代文：康居军队再向后撤。汉朝军队推举盾牌，从四面同时冲入土城中。
English: Kangju's army then retreated backwards. The Han Dynasty army raised their shields and stormed into the mud castle from all sides at the same time.

古文：单于男女百馀人走入大内。汉兵纵火，吏士争入，单于被创死。
现代文：郅支单于率匈奴男女一百余人逃入王宫，汉朝军队纵火焚烧王宫，官兵争先冲入，郅支单于身受重伤而死。
English: More than a hundred Hun men and women fled into the royal palace led by Gong Zhidan, the Han Dynasty army set fire to the royal palace, officers and soldiers rushed in, and Gong Zhidan was seriously injured and died.

古文：军候假丞杜勋斩单于首。
现代文：军候假丞杜勋，砍下郅支单于人头。
English: Guxun Duxun, a military cadet, chopped off the braid on the man's head.

古文：得汉使节二及谷吉等所赍帛书。
现代文：在王宫中搜出汉朝使臣的节两只以及谷吉等携带的写在帛上的书信。
English: In the royal palace, there were found two letters from Han Dynasty envoys, as well as letters carried by Gu Ji and others, which were written on an urn.

古文：诸卤获以畀得者。
现代文：凡是抢掠的财物，都归抢掠者所有。
English: All the loot goes to me.

古文：凡斩阏氏、太子、名王以下千五百一十八级；生虏百四十五人，降虏千馀人，赋予城郭诸国所发十五王。
现代文：斩阏氏、太子、名王及以下共一千五百一十八人，生擒一百四十五人，投降的一千余人，分配给领兵共围单于的西域十五个国王。
English: There were a total of 1,518 people from the Choson clan, the prince, the great king and below, 145 who were alive, and more than 1,000 who surrendered. They were distributed to the 15 kings of the western region who led the troops to encircle Shan.

古文：孝元皇帝下建昭四年
现代文：建昭四年
English: Jian Zhao four years

古文：春，正月，郅支首至京师。
现代文：春季，正月，郅支单于的人头被送到长安。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, the heads of those who supported the single were sent to Chang'an.

古文：延寿、汤上疏曰： 臣闻天下之大义当混为一，昔有唐、虞，今有强汉。
现代文：甘延寿、陈汤上书说： 我们曾经听说，天下的大道理莫过于统一。从前有唐尧、虞舜，今有强大的汉朝。
English: Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang wrote: We once heard that the great principle of the world is unity. In the past, there were Tang and Yu Dynasties, and now there is a powerful Han Dynasty.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于已称北籓，唯郅支单于叛逆，未伏其辜，大夏之西，以为强汉不能臣也。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于已成为我们北方的藩属，只有郅支单于背叛汉朝，没有伏罪。他逃亡到大夏王国以西，认为强大的汉朝不能使他称臣归顺。
English: The Xiongnu called Han Yidan to become a vassal of our northern domain, but only Zou Zhidan betrayed the Han Dynasty and did not commit treason. He fled to the west of the Daxia Kingdom, believing that the powerful Han Dynasty could not make him submit.

古文：郅支单于惨毒行于民，大恶通于天。
现代文：郅支单于对百姓残忍狠毒，巨大的罪恶上通于天。
English: He single-handedly and cruelly poisoned the people, and his crimes reached as high as heaven.

古文：臣延寿，臣汤，将义兵，行天诛，赖陛下神灵，阴阳并应，天气精明，陷陈克敌，斩郅支首及名王以下，宜县头槀街蛮夷邸间，以示万里，明犯强汉者，虽远必诛！ 
现代文：臣甘延寿、陈汤，率领仁义的军队，替天讨伐，幸赖陛下神异威灵，阴阳配合，天气晴明，攻破敌阵，打败敌人，斩杀郅支单于及名王以下。应该把郅支单于的头悬挂在长安槁街蛮夷馆舍之间，以昭示万里，胆敢冒犯强大汉朝的，距离虽远也必诛杀！ 
English: The vassals Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang, leading the benevolent and righteous army, fought on behalf of the heavens, thanking His Majesty for the divine power, the cooperation of the yin and yang, and the fine weather, broke through the enemy lines, defeated the enemy, and killed Xing Zhi Shan Yu and the following emperors. The head of Xing Zhi Shan Yu should be hung between the barbarian buildings on Chang'an Road to show the thousands of miles. If you dare to offend the powerful Han Dynasty, you will be killed even if the distance is far away!

古文：丞相匡衡等以为： 方春，掩骼、埋胔之时，宜勿县。 
现代文：丞相匡衡等认为： 现在春季，正是掩埋尸骨之时，不应悬挂人头。 
English: The prime minister, Kuang Heng, and others believe: Now that it is spring, the time to bury the bones, it is not right to hang people's heads.

古文：诏县十日，乃埋之。
现代文：元帝下令悬挂郅支单于的头示众十日，然后掩埋。
English: Emperor Yuan ordered to hang the skull and crossbones in front of the public for ten days, and then buried.

古文：仍告祠郊庙，赦天下。
现代文：并祭告位于郊外的祖先祭庙，大赦天下。
English: He also announced that the ancestor temple, which is located in the suburbs, would be amnestied.

古文：群臣上寿，置酒。
现代文：满朝文武向元帝祝贺，举行酒宴。
English: The Manchurian Emperor Wenwu congratulated the Yuan Emperor and held a wine banquet.

古文：六月，甲申，中山哀王竟薨。
现代文：六月甲申，中山王刘竟去世。
English: In June, King Liu of Zhongshan passed away.

古文：哀王者，帝之少弟，与太子游学相长大。
现代文：刘竟是元帝的幼弟，跟皇太子刘骜年龄相仿，在一起游玩、读书，一起长大。
English: King Aye was the emperor's younger brother, and he and the prince grew up together.

古文：及薨，太子前吊。
现代文：刘竟去世后，刘骜前往吊丧。
English: After the death of Liu Ge, Liu Ye went to the funeral.

古文：上望见太子，感念哀王，悲不能自止。
现代文：元帝看到太子，怀念幼弟，悲哀不能自制。
English: The emperor saw the prince from a distance and thought of the mourning king with emotion. He was so sad that he could not control himself.

古文：太子既至前，不哀，上大恨曰： 安有人不慈仁，而可以奉宗庙，为民父母者乎！ 
现代文：可是已经走到面前的太子，却并不悲哀，元帝对此非常怨恨，说： 天下哪有一点慈爱心肠都没有的人，可以继承祖宗祭庙香火，做人民父母的？ 
English: However, the crown prince, who had already come to the front, was not sad. The Yuan Emperor was very resentful of this, saying, "Who in the world is there who does not have a bit of a loving heart, can inherit the incense of the ancestral temple and be the people's parents?

古文：是时驸马都尉、侍中史丹护太子家，上以责谓丹，丹免冠谢曰： 臣诚见陛下哀痛中山王，至以感损。
现代文：这时，驸马都尉、侍中史丹，正充当太子刘骜的监护人。元帝责备史丹，史丹脱下官帽，请罪说： 我确实看见陛下哀痛中山王，以致身体瘦损。
English: At this time, Captain of the Horse Guards, Stan, an aide-de-camp, was acting as the guardian of Prince Liu Xuan. The Yuan Emperor reproached Stan. Stan took off his officer's cap and pleaded guilty, saying, "I did indeed see His Majesty grieve for King Zhongshan, to the extent that his body was emaciated.

古文：向者太子当进见，臣窃戒属，毋涕泣，感伤陛下；罪乃在臣，当死！ 
现代文：前些时，太子应当进见，我暗中嘱咐他，不要流泪哭泣，免得引起陛下伤感。罪过在我，我应该被处死。 
English: Some time ago, when the crown prince was to be crowned, I secretly ordered him not to shed tears and weep, so as not to cause His Majesty sadness. The sin is mine, I should be put to death.

古文：上以为然，意乃解。
现代文：元帝认为史丹说的是事实，才息怒。
English: The emperor thought his words were right, and his anger was resolved.

古文：蓝田地震，山崩，壅霸水；安陵岸崩，壅泾水，泾水逆流。
现代文：蓝田发生地震，山崩，霸水壅塞。安陵堤岸崩塌，泾水壅塞，向西逆流。
English: An earthquake, a landslide, and flooding occurred in Lantian. The Anling embankment collapsed, flooding occurred, and there was a westward backflow.

古文：孝元皇帝下建昭五年
现代文：建昭五年
English: Jian Zhaofeng

古文：春，三月，赦天下。
现代文：春季，三月，大赦天下。
English: In spring, in March, there is a general amnesty.

古文：夏，六月，庚申，复戾园。
现代文：夏，六月，庚申，复戾园。
English: Summer, June, Koshin, Fushien.

古文：壬申晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，六月庚申恢复刘据的陵园戾园。壬申晦，出现日食。
English: In summer, in June, Goshun restored Liu Bei's mausoleum and garden. In Jinshin, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，复太上皇寝庙园、原庙、昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后园。
现代文：秋季，七月庚子，恢复太上皇祭庙、陵园及原庙，恢复昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后的陵园。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Emperor Gaozhi restored the Emperor's mausoleum, cemetery and the original temple, and the cemeteries of Emperor Zhaoling, King Wu'ai, Emperor Zhao'ai and Emperor Wei were restored.

古文：时上寝疾，久不平。以为祖宗谴怒，故尽复之；唯郡国庙遂废云。
现代文：当时元帝卧病，长时间不能痊愈，认为是祖宗发怒谴责，所以将以上祭庙、陵园全部恢复。但各郡、各封国的祭庙却废除了。
English: At that time, Emperor Yuan was bedridden and could not recover for a long time. He thought it was the angry condemnation of the ancestors, so he restored all the above temples and cemeteries. However, the temples in counties and fiefdoms were abolished.

古文：是岁，徙济阳王康为山阳王。
现代文：本年，元帝改封济阳王刘康为山阳王。
English: This year, Emperor Yuan changed the title of Jiyang King Liu Kang to Shanyang King.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于闻郅支既诛，且喜且惧；上书，愿入朝见。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于得到郅支单于已被诛杀的消息，既高兴，又恐惧。于是，向汉朝皇帝上书，请求入朝觐见。
English: The Xiongnu, who called Han Yidan, was both happy and afraid when he received the news that Han Yidan had been killed. Therefore, he wrote to the emperor of the Han Dynasty, requesting to see him in the imperial court.

古文：孝元皇帝下竟宁元年
现代文：竟宁元年
English: In the first year of Jingting

古文：春，正月，匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝，自言愿婿汉氏以自亲。
现代文：春季，正月，匈奴呼韩邪单于前来朝见，请求准许他当汉家女婿，使他有缘亲近汉朝。
English: In the spring, in the first month, the Xiongnu called Han Yidan to come to the court and asked for permission to be the son-in-law of the Han family, so that he would be close to the Han Dynasty.

古文：帝以后宫良家子王嫱字昭君赐单于。
现代文：元帝把后宫良家女子王嫱，别名王昭君，赏赐给呼韩邪单于。
English: Emperor Yuan gave the harem's best girl, Wang Zhaojun, also known as Wang Zhaojun, to Huan Yanshan.

古文：单于欢喜，上书 愿保塞上谷以西至敦煌，传之无穷。
现代文：呼韩邪单于非常欢喜，上书汉元帝： 愿保护东起上谷，西至敦煌的汉朝边塞，永远相传。
English: Calling Han Han, Yidan was very happy and wrote to Han Emperor Yuan: I wish to protect the Han Dynasty border fortress from Shangguan in the east to Dunhuang in the west, which will be passed down forever.

古文：请罢边备塞吏卒，以休天子人民。 
现代文：请撤销边境防务和守塞的官吏士卒，使天子的小民获得休息。 
English: Please revoke the border defense and defense officials and officers, so that God's little people can have a rest.

古文：天子下有司议，议者皆以为便。
现代文：元帝把呼韩邪单于的建议交给有关官员讨论，参与讨论的官员都认为可以接受。
English: Emperor Yuan submitted the proposal to the relevant officials for discussion, and the officials who participated in the discussion thought it was acceptable.

古文：郎中侯应习边事，以为不可许。
现代文：郎中侯应了解边塞事务，认为不可以允许。
English: His brother-in-law, the marquis, should be familiar with the matter of border fortifications, and he thought that he could not promise the Xiongnu in this way.

古文：上问状，应曰： 周、秦以来，匈奴暴桀，寇侵边境；汉兴，尤被其害。
现代文：元帝问他原因，侯应说： 周朝和秦朝以来，匈奴暴戾强悍，不断侵略边境。汉王朝建立之初，尤其受到它的伤害。
English: When Emperor Yuan asked him why, Hou Ying said: Since the Zhou and Qin Dynasties, the Xiongnu have been violent and strong, constantly invading the border. At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, they were particularly harmed by it.

古文：臣闻北边塞至辽东，外有阴山，东西千馀里，草木茂盛，多禽兽，本冒顿单于依阻其中，治作弓矢，来出为寇，是其苑囿也。
现代文：据我了解，北方边塞，东到辽东，外有阴山，东西长达一千余里，草崐木茂盛，禽兽众多，本来冒顿单于依赖这里地势险要，制造弓箭，出来抢劫，正是匈奴畜养禽兽的圈地。
English: As far as I know, the northern border fortress, east to east of Liaodong, there are gloomy mountains outside, the east and west are more than a thousand miles long, the grass and shrubs are lush, and there are many animals. Originally, it was risky to rely on the terrain here, make bows and arrows, and go out to rob. It is the enclosure for the Huns to raise animals.

古文：至孝武世，出师征伐，斥夺此地，攘之于幕北，建塞徼，起亭隧，筑外城，设屯戍以守之，然后边境得用少安。
现代文：直到孝武皇帝出军北征，把这一地区夺到手，而将匈奴赶到大漠以北。在这一地区，建立城堡，修筑道路，兴建外城，派遣军队前往屯戍守卫。然后，边境才比从前稍稍安宁。
English: It was not until Emperor Xiaowu went on the Northern Expedition, captured this region, and drove the Huns north of the desert. In this area, built castles, built roads, built outer cities, and sent troops to guard the settlements. Then, the border was a little calmer than before.

古文：幕北地平，少草木，多大沙，匈奴来寇，少所蔽隐；从塞以南，径深山谷，往来差难。
现代文：漠北土地平坦，草木稀少，沙漠相连。
English: The land in the north of the desert is flat, plants and trees are scarce, and the deserts are connected.

古文：边长老言： 匈奴失阴山之后，过之未尝不哭也。 
现代文：匈奴前来侵扰，缺少隐蔽之地。边塞之南，道路深远，山谷起伏，往来十分困难。边塞老一辈的人说： 匈奴丧失阴山之后，每次经过那里都伤心痛哭。 
English: The Xiongnu came to invade, and there was a lack of hiding places. South of the border fortress, the road is far away, the valley is undulating, and it is very difficult to travel. The older generation of the border fortress said: After the Xiongnu lost the gloomy mountain, every time they passed there, they cried with sorrow.

古文：如罢备塞戍卒，示夷狄之大利，不可一也。
现代文：如果撤销边防军队，对夷狄大为有利，这是不能答应的理由之一。
English: Now, if we withdraw the soldiers guarding the frontier fortress and present them with such favourable conditions, this is the first thing that cannot be done.

古文：今圣德广被，天覆匈奴，匈奴得蒙全活之恩，稽首来臣。
现代文：现在，圣上的恩德宽阔广大，如天一样覆盖着匈奴。匈奴人得到拯救，才能活下去。感激救命之恩，叩头称臣。
English: Today, Your Imperial Majesty, You have bestowed Your grace upon us. Your benevolence has enveloped the Xiongnu people like the heavens. The Xiongnu people were saved by the Han Dynasty, and only then did they come to bow their heads and praise You.

古文：夫夷狄之情，困则卑顺，强则骄逆，天性然也。
现代文：不过，夷狄的性情，穷困时谦卑顺从，强大时骄傲横逆，天性如此。
English: It is the nature of those Huns to be humble and submissive in times of danger, and to be arrogant and rebellious in times of strength.

古文：前已罢外城，省亭隧令，裁足以候望，通烽火而已。
现代文：前些时，己撤除了外城，减少了亭、燧等军事建筑，现在的边防军队，仅够担任望，互通烽火而已。
English: Some time ago, the outer city was removed, and military buildings such as pavilions and towers were reduced. The current border guard troops are only enough to serve as lookouts and exchange bonfires.

古文：古者安不忘危，不可复罢，二也。
现代文：古人居安思危，边防不可再撤除，这是理由之二。
English: The ancients said that we should live in peace and mind the danger, and the Chinese army can no longer withdraw. This is the second article.

古文：中国有礼义之教，刑罚之诛，愚民犹尚犯禁；又况单于，能必其众不犯约哉！
现代文：中国有礼义的教育，有刑罚的惩处，愚昧的小民还要犯禁。何况匈奴单于，他能绝对保证他的部众不违犯规定吗？
English: China has the education of etiquette and justice, the punishment of criminal punishment, and the ignorant people still have to violate the ban. Moreover, can the Hun alone absolutely guarantee that his subordinates will not violate the regulations?

古文：三也。
现代文：这是理由之三。
English: That's three.

古文：自中国尚建关梁以制诸侯，所以绝臣下之觊欲也。
现代文：即令在中国境内，还在水陆要道设立关卡，用以控制封国王侯，使做臣属的断绝非分之想。
English: Even within China, checkpoints were set up on important water and land routes to control the sealing of kings and princes, so that it was not desirable to be a subject.

古文：设塞徼，置屯戍，非独为匈奴而已，亦为诸属国降民本故匈奴之人，恐其思旧逃亡，四也。
现代文：在边塞设置亭障，屯田戍守，不仅仅是为了防备匈奴，也是因为各属国的降民，他们本是匈奴的人，恐怕他们念旧而逃亡。
English: The erection of pavilions at the border fortresses and the maintenance of garrisons were not only for the purpose of guarding against the Huns, but also because the subject peoples of the various vassal states, who were originally Huns, were afraid that they would forget the past and flee.

古文：近西羌保塞，与汉人交通，吏民贪利，侵盗其畜产、妻子，以此怨恨，起而背畔。今罢乘塞，则生嫚易分争之渐，五也。
现代文：近年来，接近边塞的西羌部落，与汉人来往。汉朝的官吏小民贪图财利，掠夺盗取他们的牲畜，甚至强占他们的妻子，因为这些怨恨，激起他们叛变。现在如果撤除边防军队，可能发生这种因欺侮而起的纷争。
English: In recent years, the Xidi tribe, which is close to the border fortress, has been in contact with the Han people. The Han officials and common people are greedy for money, plunder and steal their livestock, and even force their wives, because these resentments incite them to mutiny. Now, if the border troops are removed, such disputes arising from bullying may occur.

古文：往者从军多没不还者，子孙贫困，一旦亡出，从其亲戚，六也。
现代文：这是理由之五。过去，从军的战士，很多人没有回来，留在匈奴，他们的子孙生活贫困，有可能大批前往匈奴投靠亲友。
English: This is the fifth reason. In the past, many soldiers from the army did not return and stayed in the Huns. Their children and grandchildren live in poverty, and it is possible that a large number of them will go to the Huns to help their relatives and friends.

古文：又边人奴婢愁苦，欲亡者多，曰： 闻匈奴中乐，无奈候望急何！ 
现代文：这是理由之六。沿边一带，奴仆婢子忧愁悲苦，想逃亡的人多，都说： 听说匈奴那里快乐，无可奈何的是边塞的监视太紧！ 
English: This is the sixth reason. All along the border, slaves and servants are sad and miserable, and there are many people who want to escape, saying: I heard that the Xiongnu are happy there, it can't be helped, the surveillance of the border fort is too tight!

古文：然时有亡出塞者，七也。
现代文：然而时常仍有逃出边塞的人。
English: However, from time to time there are also people who escape from the border fortress. This is the seventh article.

古文：盗贼桀黠，群辈犯法，如其窘急，亡走北出，则不可制，八也。
现代文：这是理由之七。窃贼强盗凶暴狡诈，结成团伙触犯法令，如被追捕得急了，就会北逃匈奴，则不可以制裁。
English: Robbers and thieves are very cunning. They often break the law and steal in groups. If they are in a hurry and escape from the northern checkpoint, there is no way to restrain and punish them. This is Article 8.

古文：起塞以来百有馀年，非皆以土垣也，或因山岩、石、木、溪谷、水门，稍稍平之，卒徒筑治，功费久远，不可胜计。
现代文：这是理由之八。自从沿边设立要塞，已有一百余年，并不完全用土筑墙，有的利用山岩，有的利用石木，有的利用山谷，有的利用水峡，稍加连接增补，征发士兵、刑徒修建，长年累月，用去的劳力经费，无法计算。
English: This is the eighth reason. Since the establishment of the fortress along the edge, it has been more than a hundred years, and the wall is not entirely built with soil. Some use mountain rock, some use stone, some use valleys, some use canyons, add a little connection and supplement, conscript soldiers and convicts to build, and it takes many years and months. The labor cost cannot be calculated.

古文：臣恐议者不深虑其终始，欲以壹切省繇戍，十年之外，百岁之内，卒有它变，障塞破坏，亭隧灭绝，当更发屯缮治，累世之功不可卒复，九也。
现代文：我恐怕主张撤除边塞的官员，没有深刻考虑到事情的来龙去脉，只想暂时减少戍边的负担。十年之后，百年之内，如果突然发生变化，而边塞已经破坏，烽火亭已经湮没，还要再征发戍卒修建。可是，百余年累积下来的工程，不可能马上恢复。
English: I am afraid that the officials who advocate the removal of border fortifications have not deeply considered the ins and outs of the matter, and only want to temporarily reduce the burden on the border. Ten years later, within a hundred years, if there is a sudden change, and the border fortifications have been destroyed, and the campfire pavilion has disappeared, it will be necessary to solicit the construction of the construction. However, the projects accumulated for more than a hundred years cannot be restored immediately.

古文：如罢戍卒，省候望，单于自以保塞守御，必深德汉，请求无已；小失其意，则不可测。
现代文：这是理由之九。如果撤销边防军队，废除边境上用于伺望侦察的土堡，匈奴单于必定自认为保塞守边，对汉朝有大恩德，将不断请求赏赐，如果稍有失望，那么后果就难以推测。
English: This is the ninth reason. If the frontier troops were to be abolished, and the earthen fortresses on the border used for reconnaissance were to be abolished, the Huns would certainly think that they were protecting the border and had a great favor to the Han Dynasty, and would constantly ask for rewards. If they were a little disappointed, then the consequences would be difficult to predict.

古文：开夷狄之隙，亏中国之固，十也。
现代文：引起夷狄与汉族感情上的裂痕，毁坏中国的防卫。这是理由之十。
English: This would open a convenient door for Hungary and weaken the stability of our country's defense force, which is prohibited by Article 10.

古文：非所以永持至安，威制百蛮之长策也！ 
现代文：由于以上十项理由，我认为：撤除边防军队，不是保持永久和平安定，控制百蛮的好策略！ 
English: Due to the above ten reasons, I believe that: the removal of border troops is not a good strategy to maintain permanent peace and stability, but to control everything!

古文：对奏，天子有诏： 勿议罢边塞事。 
现代文：奏书上去后，元帝下诏： 停止讨论撤除边塞这件事。 
English: After Hou Ying's reply was reported to the emperor, the emperor issued an edict saying: Don't discuss the matter of revoking the border defense.

古文：使车骑将军嘉口谕单于曰： 单于上书愿罢北塞吏士屯戍，子孙世世保塞。
现代文：派车骑将军许嘉向单于传达口谕说： 单于上书，请求汉朝撤走北方边塞屯田戍守的军队，愿意子孙世代永远保卫边陲。
English: He sent the cavalry general Xu Jia to deliver a message to Shan, saying: "In the letter alone, I request the Han Dynasty to withdraw the troops stationed in the northern border fortress, and I am willing to protect the border fortress for generations to come.

古文：单于乡慕礼义，所以为民计者甚厚。此长久之策也，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：单于向往仰慕礼义，为人民想得很周到，这的确是一个有久远意义的计划，朕非常赞美。
English: Apart from the longing to admire the propriety, it is very thoughtful for the people. This is indeed a plan with a long-term significance, which I highly praise.

古文：中国四方皆有关梁障塞，非独以备塞外也，亦以防中国奸邪放纵，出为寇害，故明法度以专众心也。
现代文：中国四方都有关卡、要塞，不是专门为防备来自长城以北的侵扰，也是为了防备中国的奸邪之徒到外面肆无忌惮地胡作非为，造成祸害，所以设边塞表明法规，消灭人们的邪念。
English: There are bridges on all four sides of the border of our country. It is not just to guard against intruders, but also to guard against the rampant bandits in our country, who run out of the border to harm the Xiongnu. Therefore, it is necessary to affirm the law to discipline the hearts of the people.

古文：敬谕单于之意，朕无疑焉。
现代文：幸亏天子派大臣告诉我，待我这么优厚！ 
English: I know what it's like to be single, there's no doubt about that.

古文：为单于怪其不罢，故使嘉晓单于。 
现代文：当初，左伊秩訾建议呼韩邪单于归附汉朝，匈奴竟然因此安定。
English: At first, Zuo Yi Chichibu suggested calling Han Zidan to join the Han Dynasty, and the Xiongnu actually became stable as a result.

古文：单于谢曰： 愚不知大计，天子幸使大臣告语，甚厚！ 初，左伊秩訾为呼韩邪画计归汉，竟以安定。
现代文：后来，有人进谗言，说左伊秩訾自以为他有安定匈奴的功劳，却没有得到什么封赏，心里常常不满。
English: Later, someone said that Zuo Yicheng thought he had the merit of stabilizing the Xiongnu, but he did not receive any reward, and he was often dissatisfied.

古文：其后或谗伊秩訾自伐其功，常鞅鞅，呼韩邪疑之；伊秩訾惧诛，将其众千馀人降汉，汉以为关内侯，食邑三百户，令佩其王印绶。
现代文：呼韩邪对他产生怀疑。左伊秩訾担心被杀，于是率领他的部下一千余人投降汉朝。朝廷封他关内侯，拥有三百户人家的封地。佩戴王爵的官印和绶带。
English: Zuo Yi Chizhong was worried about being killed, so he led more than a thousand of his subordinates to surrender to the Han Dynasty. The court named him Guan Nei Hou, owning the fiefs of three hundred families. He wore the official seal and sash of the prince.

古文：及呼韩邪来朝，与伊秩訾相见，谢曰： 王为我计甚厚，令匈奴至今安宁，王之力也，德岂可忘！
现代文：等到呼韩邪单于到汉朝朝见，与左伊秩訾会面，呼韩邪单于向他道歉崐说： 大王为我谋划策略，待我非常厚道。匈奴能有今天太平安宁的局面，都是大王的力量，恩德岂能忘记？
English: When he went to the Han Dynasty and met with Zuo Yicheng, he apologized to him and said, "The Great King planned a strategy for me and treated me very kindly. If the Xiongnu can have today's situation of peace and tranquility, it is the power of the Great King. Can the Great King forget?

古文：我失王意，使王去，不复顾留，皆我过也。
现代文：我却使大王失望，离我而去，不再顾念而留住匈奴，都是我的过失。
English: But it was my fault that I let the great king down, that he left me, and that I no longer kept the Hun in mind.

古文：今欲白天子，请王归庭。 
现代文：如今我想向圣上报告，请大王重回王庭。 
English: Now I would like to say to the Son of Heaven, please return to the court of the Hun king.

古文：伊秩訾曰： 单于赖天命，自归于汉，得以安宁，单于神灵，天子之祐也，我安得力！
现代文：左伊秩訾说： 单于承受上天的旨意，自从归附汉朝，使匈奴得到安定太平。这是单于神异威灵，汉朝天子的保，我怎么会有这种力量？
English: Zuo Yicheng said, "It is only by bearing the will of Heaven that the Huns have been stable and peaceful since they joined the Han Dynasty. It is only by the power of God, the guardian of the heavenly son of the Han Dynasty, how can I have such power?"

古文：既已降汉，又复归匈奴，是两心也。
现代文：既然已经归降汉朝，而又再回匈奴，是有二心。
English: Now that I have already surrendered to the Han Dynasty, if I return to the Xiongnu, it will be half-hearted.

古文：愿为单于侍使于汉，不敢听命！ 
现代文：愿留在汉朝作为单于的一个使臣，不敢听从您的命令。 
English: I would like to stay in the Han Dynasty as a single envoy, I dare not obey your orders.

古文：单于固请，不能得而归。
现代文：呼韩邪单于坚决请求，不能得到左伊秩訾的允许，于是回国。
English: At the firm request of Han Xizan, he could not get permission from Zuo Yicheng, so he returned to China.

古文：单于号王昭君为宁胡阏氏；生一男伊屠智牙师，为右日逐王。
现代文：呼韩邪单于称王昭君为宁胡阏氏；生下一个男孩，名叫栾提伊屠智牙师，被封为右日逐王。
English: Calling Han Yidan, Wang Zhaojun was called the Ninghuyu clan; she gave birth to a boy, named Xingtai Tu Zhi Dentist, who was crowned the rightful king.

古文：皇太子冠。
现代文：皇太子刘骜行加冠礼。
English: After the imperial edict and the court edict, the crown prince performed the coronation.

古文：二月，御史大夫李延寿卒。
现代文：二月，御史大夫李延寿去世。
English: In February, Dr. Li Yanshou passed away.

古文：初，石显见冯奉世父子为公卿著名，女又为昭仪在内，显心欲附之，荐言： 昭仪兄谒者逡修敕，宜侍幄帷。 
现代文：当初，中书令石显，看到冯奉世父子都当公卿，名声显著，女儿又是元帝后宫的昭仪，存心要亲近这家权贵。于是向元帝推荐： 冯昭仪的哥哥谒者冯逡，品格美好，行为端正，应该侍奉左右。 
English: At first, Shi Xian, the scribe of the Central Committee, saw that Feng Fengshi and his father and son were both court nobles with outstanding reputations, and that his daughter was Zhao Yi of the Yuan Emperor's harem, and he was determined to get close to this powerful family. So he recommended to the Yuan Emperor: Feng Zhao Yi's brother, Zhao Feng, has a good character and proper behavior, and should serve around.

古文：天子召见，欲以为侍中。
现代文：于是，元帝召见冯逡，打算任命他当侍中。
English: As a result, Emperor Yuan summoned Feng Xuan, intending to appoint him as a chamberlain.

古文：逡请间言事。
现代文：冯逡请求单独接见谈事情。
English: Feng Jun requested a separate interview to discuss the matter.

古文：上闻逡言显颛权，大怒，罢逡归郎官。
现代文：元帝听他抨击石显专擅权力，大怒，让他仍然回到原来郎官的位置。
English: Emperor Yuan listened to his criticism of Shi Xian's exclusive power and was furious, so he still returned to his original position as steward.

古文：及御史大夫缺，在位多举逡兄大鸿胪野王；上使尚书选第中二千石，而野王行能第一。
现代文：等到御史大夫出缺，很多官员推荐冯逡的哥哥大鸿胪冯野王继任。元帝命尚书在二千石官员中遴选，而冯野王以品行好，能力强被评为第一。
English: When the post of Imperial Historian became vacant, many officials recommended Feng Yu's elder brother, the great nobleman Feng Ye Wang, as his successor. Emperor Yuan ordered Shang Shu to select him from the 2,000-koku officials, and Feng Ye Wang was rated first for his good character and strong ability.

古文：上以问显，显曰： 九卿无出野王者。
现代文：元帝询问石显的意见，石显说； 九卿中，没有比冯野王更恰当的人选。
English: The Yuan Emperor asked Shi Xian's opinion, and Shi Xian said, "Among the nine nobles, there is no one more appropriate than Feng Ye Wang.

古文：然野王，亲昭仪兄，臣恐后世必以陛下度越众贤，私后宫亲以为三公。 
现代文：然而冯野王是冯昭仪的亲哥，我恐怕后世评论起来，必然认为陛下越过许多贤能，对后宫亲属徇私而任命为三公。 
English: However, Feng Ye Wang is Feng Zhaoyi's own brother. I am afraid that future generations will comment on this and inevitably think that His Majesty overstepped many virtues by appointing him as the Third Prince in favor of his relatives in the imperial court.

古文：上曰： 善，吾不见是！ 
现代文：元帝说： 好，我没有看到这一点！ 
English: Yuan Di said, "Well, I didn't see that!"

古文：因谓群臣曰： 吾用野王为三公，后世必谓我私后宫亲属，以野王为比。 
现代文：于是，告诉众位大臣说： 我如果用冯野王当三公，后世一定抨击我对后宫亲属徇私，会把冯野王拿出来作为例证。 
English: Therefore, he told the ministers: "If I use Feng Ye Wang as the Three Princes, posterity will surely criticize me for favoring my harem relatives, and will take Feng Ye Wang as an example.

古文：三月，丙寅，诏曰： 刚强坚固，确然亡欲，大鸿胪野王是也。
现代文：三月丙寅，元帝下诏说： 刚强正直，宁静淡泊，大鸿胪冯野王就是这种人。
English: In March, Emperor Yuan issued the following edict: "Strong and upright, tranquil and unassuming, this is the type of person that King Fengye is.

古文：心辨善辞，可使四方，少府五鹿充宗是也。
现代文：心辨是非，善于辞令，可以代表皇帝出使四方，少府五鹿充宗就是这种人。
English: If you can speak well and argue well, you can be sent to the four directions, and you should count the number of Shofu, Goka, and Mitsumune.

古文：廉洁节俭，太子少傅张谭是也。
现代文：廉洁而又节俭，太子少傅张谭就是这种人。
English: To be honest and frugal, Zhang Tan, the youngest prince, should be counted among the best.

古文：其以少傅为御史大夫。 
现代文：现在，提拔少傅张谭当御史大夫。 
English: He has now appointed Junior Master Zhang Tan as the chief historian.

古文：河南太守九江召信臣为少府。
现代文：河南郡太守九江人召信臣，被任命当少府。
English: The governor of Henan County, Jiujiang, summoned trusted vassals and was appointed to be a minor prefect.

古文：信臣先为南阳太守，后迁河南，治行常第一。
现代文：召信臣原先是南阳郡太守，后来才调到河南郡，考绩在全国常常列于第一。
English: Zhao Xincheng was originally the governor of Nanyang County, but was later transferred to Henan County. His performance evaluation is often ranked first in the country.

古文：视民如子，好为民兴利，躬劝耕稼，开通沟渎，户口增倍。
现代文：他看待黎民跟看待儿女一样，热心为百姓谋求福利，亲自劝导人们务农，开凿疏通灌溉用的沟渠，使户口成倍增加。
English: He regarded the people of Lebanon as his sons and daughters, zealously seeking welfare for the people, personally persuading people to work in agriculture, digging ditches for irrigation, and doubling the number of households.

古文：吏民亲爱，号曰 召父 。
现代文：官员和平民都敬爱他，称他 召父 。
English: Officials and ordinary citizens alike adored him, calling him "my father."

古文：癸未，复孝惠皇帝寝庙园、孝文太后、孝昭太后寝园。
现代文：三月癸卯，恢复孝惠皇帝祭庙陵园、孝文太后陵园、孝昭太后陵园。
English: In March, the Emperor Xiaohui's mausoleum, the Empress Xiaowen's mausoleum, and the Empress Xiaozhao's mausoleum were restored.

古文：初，中书令石显尝欲以姊妻甘延寿，延寿不取。
现代文：当初，中书令石显，曾经打算把姐姐嫁给甘延寿，甘延寿拒绝。
English: At first, Shixian, the middle-ranking official, had planned to marry his sister to Gan Yanshou, but Gan Yanshou refused.

古文：及破郅支还，丞相、御史亦恶其矫制，皆不与延寿等。
现代文：等到崐甘延寿打败郅支单于，返回长安，丞相、御史也对假传圣旨这件事深恶痛绝，对甘延寿的功勋并不赞许。
English: When Gan Yan Shou defeated Zou Zhishan and returned to Chang'an, the prime minister and the minister of history also abhorred the false transmission of the sacred edict, and did not approve of Gan Yan Shou's merits.

古文：陈汤素贪，所卤获财物入塞，多不法。
现代文：而陈汤又一向贪财，把在外国掳掠的金银财宝带入塞内，违反了多项法令。
English: But Chen Tang has always been greedy for money, bringing gold and silver treasures looted in foreign countries into Senai, violating a number of laws and regulations.

古文：司隶校尉移书道上，系吏士，按验之。
现代文：司隶校尉用公文通知沿途郡县，逮捕陈汤的部下，加以审问。
English: Lieutenant Sili used official documents to notify the counties along the route, arrest Chen Tang's subordinates, and interrogate them.

古文：汤上疏言： 臣与吏士共诛郅支单于，幸得禽灭，万里振旅，宜有使者迎劳道路。
现代文：陈汤上书元帝说： 我和我的部下共同诛讨郅支单于，幸而将他擒获歼灭，从万里之外，凯旋班师，应有朝廷派出的使者在道上迎接慰劳。
English: Chen Tang said in his report: "Our vassals and officers and soldiers fought together to kill the instigators and instigators. Fortunately, we were able to eliminate them. The army thousands of miles away returned victorious. There should be an envoy on the road to meet the reward.

古文：今司隶反逆收系按验，是为郅支报雠也！ 
现代文：然而今天司隶校尉反而逮捕审问，这是替郅支单于报仇啊！ 
English: However, today, Captain Sili arrested and interrogated him instead. This is revenge for the support letter!

古文：上立出吏士，令县、道具酒食以过军。
现代文：元帝下令，立即释放所有被捕官兵，命沿途地方官府用酒和食品慰劳通过的军队。
English: Emperor Yuan ordered the immediate release of all arrested officers and soldiers, and ordered the local government to use wine and food to comfort the troops.

古文：既至，论功，石显、匡衡以为： 延寿、汤擅兴师矫制，幸得不诛，如复加爵土，则后奉使者争欲乘危徼幸，生事于蛮夷，为国招难。 
现代文：甘延寿、陈汤返回长安后，评论功劳，石显、匡衡认为： 甘延寿、陈汤假传圣旨，擅自调动军队，不诛杀他们，已是宽大，如果再赐他们爵号，封他们土地，那么以后派出的使节，就会争先恐后地采取冒险行动，以图侥幸成功，在蛮夷中间生事，给国家招来灾难。 
English: Commenting on the merits of Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang after their return to Chang'an, Shi Xian and Kuangheng held that: Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang falsely preached the holy will, mobilized the army without authorization, and did not kill them, which was already generous. If they were given a title and land, then the envoys sent later would scramble to take risky actions in order to get lucky, cause trouble among the barbarians, and bring disaster to the country.

古文：帝内嘉延寿、汤功而重违衡、显之议，久之不决。
现代文：元帝内心嘉许甘延寿、陈汤的功劳，而又难于违反匡衡、石显的意见。过了很久，事情仍不能定下来。
English: In his heart, Emperor Yuan praised the merits of Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang, and it was difficult to go against the opinions of Kuang Heng and Shi Xian. After a long time, things still could not be settled.

古文：故宗正刘向上疏曰： 郅支单于囚杀使者、吏士以百数，事暴扬外国，伤威毁重，群臣皆闵焉。
现代文：前任宗正刘向上书说： 郅支单于囚禁和杀害的中国使节以及随从官员，数以百计。这种事在外国广为传播，严重地伤害中国的威望，朝廷群臣都为此而痛苦难过。
English: His predecessor, Zong Zheng Liu, said in a letter to the emperor: "Hundreds of Chinese envoys and officials accompanying them have been imprisoned and killed, and this has been widely spread abroad, seriously harming China's prestige, and the courtiers of the imperial court are pained and saddened by this.

古文：陛下赫然欲诛之，意未尝有忘。
现代文：陛下大怒，要诛杀郅支单于，这一欲念从未忘怀。
English: His Majesty was so angry that he wanted to kill him, and he never forgot that.

古文：西域都护延寿，副校尉汤，承圣指，倚神灵，总百蛮之君，揽城郭之兵，出百死，入绝域，遂蹈康居，屠三重城，搴歙侯之旗，斩郅支之首，县旌万里之外，扬威昆山之西，扫谷吉之耻，立昭明之功，万夷慑伏，莫不惧震。
现代文：西域都护甘延寿，副校尉陈汤，秉承圣上旨意，倚仗神灵，统率百蛮的君主，集结各城邦的军队，百死一生，深入极远的地域，于是击破康居，攻杀郅支单于的三层城防。拔掉歙侯大旗，砍下郅支单于人头，悬挂战旗于万里之外，为国家扬威到昆仑山之西。洗刷掉谷吉被杀的耻辱，建立了光辉的功勋，所有的夷民全都慑服，无不震恐。
English: The Western Capital Protector Gan Yan Shou, Vice-Lieutenant Chen Tang, adhering to the sacred will, relying on the gods, leading hundreds of barbaric monarchs, assembled the armies of the city-states, died a hundred times, and penetrated into the most distant regions, so he broke through the Kangju, attacked and killed the three-layered city defense. Pull out the banner of the Xiong Hou, cut off the banner of the Xiong Hou in the head, and hang the battle flag thousands of miles away, for the country to the west of Kunlun Mountain. Wash away the shame of Guji's killing, and establish a brilliant merit, all the barbarians

古文：呼韩邪单于见郅支已诛，且喜且惧，乡风驰义，稽首来宾，愿守北籓，累世称臣。
现代文：呼韩邪单于看到郅支单于已经伏诛，既高兴又害怕，归化慕义，驱驰而来，叩首朝觐，愿为中国守卫北方边疆，世代做中国的臣属。
English: Calling out to Han Xidan, he was both happy and afraid to see that Xizhi Xidan had already fled. He became a naturalized Muyi, drove to the capital, bowed to the emperor, and was willing to guard the northern frontier for China and be a Chinese vassal for generations.

古文：立千载之功，建万世之安，群臣之勋莫大焉。
现代文：建立千年永垂的功劳，为国家奠定万世和平，所有官员都没有这么大的贡献。
English: All officials have not made such a great contribution to the establishment of a millennium-long achievement and the establishment of everlasting peace for the country.

古文：昔周大夫方叔、吉甫为宣王诛猃狁而百蛮从，其诗曰： 啴々焞々，如霆如雷。
现代文：从前，周王朝大夫方叔、吉甫，为周宣王诛杀猃狁部落酋长，而后四方的蛮民全都归附。
English: Once upon a time, the Zhou Dynasty doctors Fang Xiu and Ji Fu were killed by Zhou Xuan Wang for the tribal chiefs, and then the barbarians in the four directions were all annexed.

古文：显允方叔，征伐猃狁，蛮荆来威。 
现代文：所以《诗经》赞扬说： 战车是那么众多威武，犹如雷霆轰鸣一般。
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" praised: The chariots are so numerous and powerful, just like the thunder and roar.

古文：《易》曰： 有嘉折首，获匪其丑。 
现代文：如此光明诚实的方叔，率师征伐猃狁，荆地的蛮人畏威都来归附。 《易经》说： 应该嘉奖的是：斩敌首、获敌虏。 
English: Yi said: "The person who eliminates the enemy leader is praiseworthy, because he can get more people of different races.

古文：言美诛首恶之人，而诸不顺者皆来从也。
现代文：说的是赞美诛杀首恶，则所有不愿顺从的人都会来归顺的。
English: This is praising those who killed the culprit and can make others who do not want to obey come to submit.

古文：今延寿、汤所诛震，虽《易》之折首，《诗》之雷霆，不能及也。
现代文：而今，甘延寿、陈汤，他们的诛杀所引起的震动，即令《易经》的 斩敌首 ，《诗经》的 雷霆 ，都无法相比。
English: But now, Gan Yan Shou, Chen Tang, the shock caused by their battle, even the decapitation of the "I Ching" and the thunder of the "Song of Songs," cannot be compared.

古文：论大功者不录小过，举大美者不疵细瑕。
现代文：评价一项重大的功勋，崐不能计较小的过失错误，推举重大的善行，不能抓着一点瑕疵不放。
English: Great achievements should be praised regardless of minor mistakes, and the most beautiful things should be praised regardless of minor flaws.

古文：《司马法》曰： 军赏不逾月， 欲民速得为善之利也。
现代文：《司马法》说： 对于军事上的赏赐，不要超过一个月。 目的在于使人迅速得到为善的利益。
English: "The Sima Law" says: "For military awards, do not exceed one month, the purpose is to make people quickly get the benefit of doing good.

古文：盖急武功，重用人也。
现代文：这是为了以武功为先，以用人为重。
English: This is due to the emphasis on war service and the re-use of talent.

古文：吉甫之归，周厚赐之，其诗曰： 吉甫宴喜，既多受祉。
现代文：尹吉甫班师，周王朝对他重赏，《诗经》上形容说： 尹吉甫既得宴乐的喜庆，又多受赏赐。
English: Yin Jifu's class teacher, the Zhou Dynasty rewarded him highly. The "Song of Songs" described: Yin Jifu not only received the joy of feasting, but also received many rewards.

古文：来归自镐，我行永久。 
现代文：只因从镐归来，路遥日久。 
English: It's just that it's been a long journey back from Handan.

古文：千里之镐犹以为远，况万里之外，其勤至矣。
现代文：千里之外的镐城尚且认为路远，何况万里之外，辛苦已极。
English: A thousand miles away, Lucheng still thinks that the road is far away, let alone thousands of miles away, and it is extremely hard to get there.

古文：延寿、汤既未获受祉之报，反屈捐命之功，久挫于刀笔之前，非所以劝有功，厉戎士也。
现代文：可是，甘延寿、陈汤不但没有受到祝福，得到报赏，反而抹杀他们浴血奋战的功劳，在舞文弄墨的刀笔吏前被挑剔，这不是奖励有功，劝勉战士的方法。
English: However, Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang were not only not blessed and rewarded, but their blood-soaked war efforts were obliterated, and they were criticized in front of sword and ink-wielding scribes. This is not the way to reward meritorious soldiers and exhort them.

古文：昔齐桓前有尊周之功，后有灭项之罪，君子以功覆过而为之讳。
现代文：从前齐桓公，前有尊崇周王室的功劳，后有消灭项国的罪过，儒家学派的君子，认为他功大于过，为他掩饰。
English: In the past, Prince Qi Huan, in the past, there was the merit of honoring the Zhou royal family, and later, there was the sin of eliminating Xiangguo. Confucian scholars believed that he did more good than harm, and covered up for him.

古文：贰师将军李广利，捐五万之师，靡亿万之费，经四年之劳，而仅获骏马三十匹，虽斩宛王母寡之首，犹不足以复费，其私罪恶甚多；孝武以为万里征伐，不录其过，遂封拜两侯、三卿、二千石百有馀人。
现代文：贰师将军李广利，丧失五万军队的性命，耗费了亿万钱的费用，经过四年之久的辛劳，而仅仅获得三十匹好马而已，虽然砍下大宛王国国王母寡的人头，还不足以抵消耗费，他自身的罪恶很多。但武帝认为，这是万里之外的征讨，不追究过失，于是赐封两位侯爵，擢升三位卿，提拔二千石一百余人。
English: Li Guangli, the general of the imperial army, lost the lives of fifty thousand soldiers and spent hundreds of millions of money. After four years of hard work, he only obtained thirty good horses. Although he cut off the head of the widow of the king of the kingdom of Dawan, it was not enough to cover the cost. His own sins were many. However, Emperor Wu believed that this was a thousand miles away and did not investigate the fault. Therefore, he awarded two marquesses, promoted three lords, and promoted more than two thousand and one hundred people.

古文：今康居之国，强于大宛，郅支之号，重于宛王，杀使者罪，甚于留马，而延寿、汤不烦汉士，不费斗粮，比于贰师，功德百之。
现代文：而今，康居王国，比大宛强大，郅支单于的地位，比大宛国王尊贵，诛杀中国使节的罪行，超过不向汉朝献出汗血马。而甘延寿、陈汤，并没有调用汉朝内地的部队，也没有由中国供应一斗粮食。比起李广利来，他们的功德要超过百倍。
English: Today, the Kangju Kingdom is more powerful than Dawan, more respected than the King of Dawan, and the crime of killing the Chinese envoy exceeds the crime of not giving blood and sweat to the Han Dynasty. But Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang did not call up the troops of the Han Dynasty inland, nor did they supply a bucket of grain from China. Compared to Li Guangli, their merits are more than a hundred times.

古文：且常惠随欲击之乌孙，郑吉迎自来之日逐，犹皆裂土受爵。
现代文：而且常惠凭他个人的意见，从乌孙王国进攻龟兹；郑吉没有得到命令，擅自接受匈奴日逐王的投降；他们都享受采邑，晋封侯爵。
English: Moreover, Chang Hui listened to the grandson of Utsong who wanted to attack the Xiongnu, Zheng Ji greeted the king who came to surrender, and they were both knighted.

古文：故言威武勤劳，则大于方叔、吉甫；列功覆过，则优于齐桓、贰师；近事之功，则高于安远、长罗。
现代文：所以说，甘延寿、陈汤的威武功劳，大于方叔、尹吉甫；功大过小，优于刘桓公、李广利；近世功劳，更高过郑吉、常惠。
English: Therefore, Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang's military exploits are greater than those of Fang Xiu and Yin Jifu; their great exploits are smaller than those of Liu Huan Gong and Li Guangli; and their modern-day exploits are higher than those of Zheng Ji and Chang Hui.

古文：而大功未著，小恶数布，臣窃痛之！
现代文：然而震动天下的功勋还没有受到褒扬，而微小的过失却不断传播，我深感痛惜。
English: However, I deeply deplore the fact that the exploits that shook the world have not yet been praised, while minor faults continue to spread.

古文：宜以时解县，通籍，除过勿治，尊宠爵位，以劝有功。 
现代文：建议陛下，应立即解除对甘延寿、陈汤的惩处，恢复他们的自由之身。不再搜寻他们的过失，赐给他们爵位，用以奖励功业。 
English: I suggest that His Majesty should immediately lift the punishment on Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang, restore their freedom, stop searching for their faults, and give them a knighthood to reward their service.

古文：于是天子下诏赦延寿、汤罪勿治，令公卿议封焉。
现代文：于是元帝下诏赦免甘延寿、陈汤，不准指控，命公卿讨论如何赐封他们爵位。
English: Therefore, Emperor Yuan issued an edict to pardon Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang, forbade them from making accusations, and ordered the nobles to discuss how to bestow peerages on them.

古文：议者以为宜如军法捕斩单于令。匡衡、石显以为 郅支本亡逃失国，窃号绝域，非真单于。 
现代文：大家认为应该按照军法 捕斩单于令 ，可是匡衡、石显认为 郅支本已逃亡，失去国土，在极远的地域盗用单于名号，而不是真单于 。
English: Everyone thought that it was necessary to capture and behead Shan Yu in accordance with the Military Law, but Kuangheng and Shi Xian thought that Shan Yu had already fled, lost his land, and stolen Shan Yu's name in a very remote area, instead of truly being Shan Yu.

古文：帝取安远侯郑吉故事，封千户；衡、显复争。
现代文：元帝援用安远侯郑吉的前例，要封给甘延寿、陈汤各一千户的采邑。匡衡、石显再次争执。
English: The Yuan Emperor cited the precedent of Zheng Ji, the lord of Anyuan, and wanted to grant 1,000 households each to Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang. Kuang Heng and Shi Xian once again quarreled.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，封延寿为义成侯，赐汤爵关内侯，食邑各三百户，加赐黄金百斤。
现代文：夏季，四月戊辰，元帝赐封甘延寿 义成侯 ，赐封陈汤 关内侯 ，采邑各三百户人家，加赐黄金各一百斤。
English: In the summer, in April, the Yuan Emperor bestowed the titles of Gan Yan Shou (甘延寿) and Yi Cheng Hou (義成侯), Chen Tang (陈汤) and Guan Nei Hou (关内侯), and each of the three hundred households in the county received an additional one hundred jin of gold.

古文：拜延寿为长水校尉，汤为射声校尉。
现代文：任命甘延寿当长水校尉，陈汤当射声校尉。
English: Gan Yanshou was appointed as the school captain of Changshui, and Chen Tang as the school captain of Yixing.

古文：于是杜钦上疏追讼冯奉世前破莎车功。
现代文：当时，杜钦上书追述冯奉世从前击破莎车王国，击斩莎车王的功勋。
English: At that time, Du Qin wrote a letter recounting Feng Bongshi's exploits in defeating the Shache Kingdom and defeating the Shache King.

古文：上以先帝时事，不复录。
现代文：元帝认为那是他父亲汉宣帝在位时的往事，不再受理。
English: The emperor thought that this was a matter of the previous emperor, so he no longer accepted his opinion.

古文：钦，故御史大夫延年子也。
现代文：杜钦是原御史大夫杜延年的儿子。
English: Du Qin is the son of the former imperial historian Du Yanzhong.

古文：荀悦论曰：成其功义足封，追录前事可也。
现代文：荀悦论曰：如果冯奉世的功勋大义应该封爵，纵是过去的事，照样应该受理。
English: "If Feng Fengxian's meritorious service is worthy of a knighthood, even if it is in the past, it should still be accepted.

古文：《春秋》之义，毁泉台则恶之，舍中军则善之，各由其宜也。
现代文：《春秋》大义，鲁文公拆毁泉台则受谴责，撤销中军则受到赞许，各有各的原因。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is a great justice, Lu Wenjun's demolition of the spring is condemned, and the withdrawal of the Chinese army is praised, each with its own reasons.

古文：夫矫制之事，先王之所慎也，不得已而行之。
现代文：假传圣旨这件事，先王看得很严重，但那是在不得已的情况下才这样作。
English: The former king was very serious about the matter of falsifying the imperial edict, but he only did so under extreme circumstances.

古文：若矫大而功小者，罪之可也；矫小而功大者，赏之可也；功过相敌，如斯而已可也。
现代文：如果功勋小，处罚他是可以的。
English: If the merit is small, he can be punished.

古文：权其轻重而为之制宜焉。
现代文：如果功勋大，就应该赏赐。
English: If the merit is great, it should be rewarded.

古文：初，太子少好经书，宽博谨慎；其后幸酒，乐燕乐，上不以为能。
现代文：功过相等，如此也就算了。应该权衡功过大小而作出适当的决定。当初，太子刘骜从小就喜爱儒家经典，宽厚、博学、谨慎。可是后来却爱饮酒，喜欢安乐，元帝认为他没有能力。
English: In the beginning, Prince Liu Bei loved the Confucian classics from a young age, and was generous, erudite, and prudent. However, he later loved to drink and enjoy life, and the Yuan Emperor thought that he was not capable.

古文：而山阳王康有材艺，母傅昭仪又爱幸，上以故常有意欲以山阳王为嗣。
现代文：而另一位皇子山阳王刘康有才干，他的母亲傅昭仪又受到宠爱，元帝因此常有意改封刘康为太子。
English: However, another prince, Liu Kang, the King of Shanyang, was talented, and his mother, Fu Zhaoyi, was also loved. Therefore, Emperor Yuan often intended to change Liu Kang's title to prince.

古文：上晚年多疾，不亲政事，留好音乐；或置鼙鼓殿下，天子自临轩槛上，贵铜丸以擿鼓，声中严鼓之节。
现代文：元帝晚年多病，不过问国家大事，喜爱音乐。有时候把军中所用的骑鼓放在殿下，元帝亲自走到廊上，凭倚栏杆，用铜丸从远处投击鼓面，发出紧密的节奏。
English: In his later years, Emperor Yuan was often ill, but he was always up to date on national events and loved music. Sometimes, he would place the riding drum used in the army in front of His Imperial Highness. Emperor Yuan himself would walk to the veranda, lean on the railing, and use a bronze ball to strike the drum from a distance, emitting a tight rhythm.

古文：后宫及左右习知音者莫能为，而山阳王亦能之，上数称其材。
现代文：侍妾们与左右对音乐有素养的人，都办不到，可是刘康却能够，元帝多次夸奖他的才干。
English: His attendants and concubines, as well as those around him who were well-versed in music, couldn't do it, but Liu Kang was able to, and Emperor Yuan praised his talent many times.

古文：史丹进曰： 凡所谓材者，敏而好学，温故知新，皇太子是也。
现代文：史丹进言说： 才干的意义是，聪明而喜好学问，温习旧的知识，能够得到崐新的理解和体会，皇太子就是这样的人。
English: "The meaning of talent is to be intelligent and fond of learning, to review old knowledge, to be able to gain new understanding and experience, and the crown prince is such a person," said Stan.

古文：若乃器人于丝竹鼓鼙之间，则是陈惠、李微高于匡衡，可相国也！ 
现代文：如果是用演奏乐器的能力衡量人，那么陈惠、李微比匡衡高明，可以辅助国政了。 
English: If people are measured by their ability to play musical instruments, then Chen Hui and Li Wei are more intelligent than Kuang Heng, and can assist in national politics.

古文：于是上嘿然而笑。
现代文：元帝沉默不语，一笑了之。
English: So the Emperor chuckled.

古文：及上寝疾，傅昭仪、山阳王康常在左右，而皇后、太子希得进见。
现代文：及至元帝卧病，长久不能起床。傅昭仪和她的儿子山阳王刘康，经常在病床前侍奉。而皇后王政君和太子刘骜，却很少能够进见。
English: Fu Zhaoyi and her son, Sanyang Wang Liu Kang, often served at the bedside, while Empress Wang Zhengjun and Prince Liu Ye were rarely able to see.

古文：上疾稍侵，意忽忽不平，数问尚书以景帝时立胶东王故事。
现代文：元帝的病势渐渐沉重，心绪不宁，几次向尚书查问汉景帝废掉皇太子刘荣，改立胶东王刘彻当皇太子的旧事。
English: The emperor's illness gradually worsened, his mood was uneasy, and he repeatedly asked Shangshu about the example of Emperor Jing's enthronement of Jiuquan Wang as crown prince.

古文：是时太子长舅阳平侯王凤为卫尉、侍中，与皇后、太子皆忧，不知所出。
现代文：这时，太子的大舅父阳平侯王凤当卫尉、侍中，和皇后、太子忧心忡忡，不知道用什么方法才能挽救危局。
English: At this time, the prince's great-uncle Yang Ping, Prince Wang Feng, who was a guard lieutenant and chamberlain, and the queen and the prince were worried and did not know how to save the situation.

古文：史丹以亲密臣得侍视疾，候上间独寝时，丹直入卧内，顿首伏青蒲上，涕泣而言曰： 皇太子以適长立，积十馀年，名号系于百姓，天下莫不归心臣子。
现代文：史丹是元帝最亲密的大臣之一，因此能够直接进入寝殿探病，等到元帝单独躺着的时候，他径直进入寝殿，在地面的青蒲上叩头，流泪说： 刘骜以嫡长子的身份，被封作太子，已十多年了，他的尊号家喻户晓，天下无不归心，愿做他的臣子。
English: Stan was one of Emperor Yuan's closest ministers, so he was able to go directly into the bed chamber to investigate the illness. When Emperor Yuan was lying alone, he went straight into the bed chamber, prostrated himself on the ground, and said with tears: Liu Bei, as the eldest son, has been crowned as the crown prince for more than ten years. His honorific title is well known to everyone. The whole world has his heart, and is willing to be his vassal.

古文：见山阳王雅素爱幸，今者道路流言，为国生意，以为太子有动摇之议。
现代文：我见山阳王刘康一向得到陛下的宠爱，如今道路上纷纷传言，既为国家也有个人考虑，认为太子的地位不稳。
English: I see that Liu Kang, the king of Shanyang, has always been favored by His Majesty, and now there are rumors on the road, both for the country and for personal considerations, that the position of the prince is not stable.

古文：审若此，公卿以下必以死争，不奉诏。
现代文：如果是这样，三公、九卿及其以下高级官员，必然必死相争，拒绝接受这样的诏令。
English: If this is indeed the case, nobles, ministers and others will certainly fight to the death and not accept the edict.

古文：臣愿先赐死以示群臣！ 
现代文：我请求陛下先赐我死，作为群臣的表率。 
English: I am willing to be given up and die first to show the ministers!

古文：天子素仁，不忍见丹涕泣，言又切至，意大感寤，喟然太息曰： 吾日困劣，而太子、两王幼少，意中恋恋，亦何不念乎！
现代文：元帝素来仁慈，不忍看到史丹伤心流泪，而史丹的话又恳切中肯，甚为感动，有所觉悟，喟然叹息说： 我的病日益沉重，太子刘骜、山阳王刘康、信都王刘兴、年纪都小，心中思恋，对他们的未来怎不悬念！
English: Emperor Yuan was always kind, and could not bear to see Stan's sad tears, while Stan's words were earnestly pertinent, very moved, somewhat aware, and said with a sigh: My illness is becoming more and more serious. Prince Liu Bei, the Sun King Liu Kang, and the Shandong King Liu Xing are all young, and their hearts are yearning. How can I not be suspenseful about their future!

古文：然无有此议。
现代文：可是，并没有改立太子的念头。
English: But there is no such proposal.

古文：且皇后谨慎，先帝又爱太子，吾岂可违指！
现代文：而皇后王政君一向谨慎小心，先帝又喜爱太子，我怎么能违背他的意旨？
English: Besides, the Empress is careful and prudent, and her late father loved the Crown Prince. How could I go against his wishes!

古文：驸马都尉安所受此语？ 丹即却，顿首曰： 愚臣妄闻，罪当死！ 
现代文：你从什么地方听到这些话？ 史丹立即向后退，叩头说： 我愚昧妄信传言，罪当处死。 
English: Where did you hear that?Stan immediately stepped back, bowed his head and said, "I was stupid enough to believe the rumors, and I deserve to die for it."

古文：上因纳，谓丹曰： 吾病浸加，恐不能自还，善辅道太子，毋违我意。 
现代文：汉元帝于是接受劝谏，对史丹说： 我的病势越来越沉重，恐不能痊愈，你要好好辅导刘骜，不要辜负了我的重托。 
English: Emperor Han Yuan then accepted the advice and said to Stan: My illness is getting more and more serious, and I'm afraid I won't be able to recover. You should give good advice to Liu Bei, and don't fail to live up to my important trust.

古文：丹嘘唏而起，太子由是遂定为嗣。
现代文：史丹唏嘘起身告退。太子的地位，从此才告巩固。
English: Stan Xuan stood up and resigned. The position of the crown prince was only consolidated from then on.

古文：而右将军、光禄大夫王商，中书令石显亦拥佑太子，颇有力焉。
现代文：而右将军、光禄大夫王商，中书令石显，也都站在刘骜一边，用力拥戴保助。
English: But the Right General, the Guanglu doctor Wang Shang, and the Chinese scholar Shi Xian, also stood on the side of Liu Bei and strongly supported Bao Zuo.

古文：夏，五月，壬辰，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：夏季，五月壬辰，汉元帝在未央宫驾崩。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Hanyuan passed away in Weiyang Palace.

古文：班彪赞曰：臣外祖兄弟为元帝侍中，语臣曰： 元帝多材艺，善史书，鼓琴瑟，吹洞箫，自度曲，被歌声，分刌节度，穷极幼眇。
现代文：班彪赞曰：我外祖父的兄弟曾当过元帝的侍中，告诉我说： 元帝多才多艺，能写一笔好篆书，会弹琴鼓瑟，吹奏洞箫。自己谱出曲调，填词歌唱，厘定音节，极其精妙。
English: Ban Biao Zhan said: My grandfather's brother was once a waiter of the Yuan Emperor, and he told me: The Yuan Emperor was versatile, he could write a good poem, play the piano, the drums, and the gong. He composed his own tunes, wrote lyrics, sang, and determined syllables, which was extremely exquisite.

古文：少而好儒，及即位，征用儒生，委之以政，贡、薛、韦、匡迭为宰相。
现代文：从小就喜欢儒学，即位后征召任用儒生，把国家的大政交给他们。贡禹、薛广德、韦玄成、匡衡，相继担任丞相。
English: The boy revered Confucianism, and succeeded to the throne, requisitioned Confucian students, and appointed them to political affairs. Confucian students such as Gong Yu, Xue Guangde, Wei Xian, and Kuang Heng successively served as prime ministers.

古文：而上牵制文义，优游不断，孝宣之业衰焉。
现代文：但是，他为儒家经书的文义所牵制，优柔寡断，汉宣帝的大业因此衰退。
English: However, Emperor Yuan was held back by Emperor Wenyi, who was indecisive, and Emperor Xuan's efforts to revive the economy failed.

古文：然宽弘尽下，出于恭俭，号令温雅，有古之风烈。 
现代文：然而，他宽厚而能容人，谦恭节俭，态度温雅，有古代君王的风范。
English: However, out of respect and frugality, Hirohiro tried his best to be gentle, which is a legacy of the ancient wise kings.

古文：匡衡奏言： 前以上体不平，故复诸所罢祠，卒不蒙福。
现代文：丞相匡衡奏称： 前些时，因为先帝身体不适，所以把废除的祭庙和陵园予以恢复，结果仍不能蒙受祖先的赐福。
English: The prime minister, Kuang Hengsoo, said: Some time ago, because the former emperor was unwell, the abolished temples and cemeteries were restored. As a result, he was still unable to receive the blessings of his ancestors.

古文：案卫思后、戾太子、戾后园，亲未尽。
现代文：据查，卫思后陵园、戾太子陵园、戾后陵园，亲情未尽，不当撤除。
English: According to the investigation, the Mausoleum of Emperor Weizhi, the Mausoleum of the Crown Prince and the Mausoleum of Empress Dowager Cixi were removed inappropriately.

古文：孝惠、孝景庙，亲尽，宜毁。
现代文：孝惠皇帝、孝景皇帝的祭庙，亲情已尽，应该撤除。
English: The temples dedicated to Emperor Xiaohui and Emperor Xiaojing are no longer family-friendly and should be removed.

古文：及太上皇、孝文、孝昭太后、昭灵后、昭哀后、武哀王祠，请悉罢勿奉。 
现代文：至于太上皇、孝文帝、孝昭太后、昭灵后、昭哀王、武哀王的庙堂，也请一并撤除，不再奉祭。 
English: As for the temples of the Retired Emperor, Emperor Xiaowen, Empress Dowager Xiaozhao, Empress Dowager Zhaoling, King Zhao and King Wu, please also remove them together and no longer offer sacrifices.

古文：奏可。
现代文：刘骜批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：六月，己未，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙。
现代文：六月，己未，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙。
English: In June, Zi Wei, the crown prince, ascended to the imperial throne and founded Gao Miao.

古文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
English: The respected empress dowager is the great empress dowager, and the empress is the empress dowager.

古文：以元舅侍中、卫尉、阳平侯王凤为大司马、大将军、领尚书事。
现代文：以元舅侍中、卫尉、阳平侯王凤为大司马、大将军、领尚书事。
English: With the former uncle-in-waiting, guard lieutenant, and Yangping marquis Wang Feng as the chief steward, general, and secretary.

古文：秋，七月，丙戌，葬孝元皇帝于渭陵。
现代文：秋季，七月丙戌，将元帝安葬于渭陵。
English: In the autumn, in July, the emperor was buried in Fuling.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：丞相衡上疏曰： 陛下秉至孝，哀伤思慕，不绝于心，未有游虞弋射之宴，诚隆于慎终追远，无穷已也。
现代文：丞相匡衡上书说： 陛下天性非常孝顺，对先帝的哀伤思念，永存内心，没有游乐射猎的欢娱，确实是重视孝道的始终，不忘祖先，永无穷尽。
English: The prime minister, Kuangheng, wrote: "His Majesty is very filial by nature, and the sorrowful memories of the former emperor live forever in his heart. There is no pleasure in shooting game. He always attaches importance to filial piety, never forgets his ancestors, and never runs out of things to do."

古文：窃愿陛下虽圣性得之，犹复加圣心焉！
现代文：陛下虽然得到了上天赐予的圣人之性，但仍望陛下不断以圣人之心去加强它。
English: Although His Majesty has received the nature of a saint given by God, we still hope that His Majesty will continue to strengthen it with the heart of a saint.

古文：《诗》云： 茕茕在疚， 言成王丧毕思慕，意气未能平也。
现代文：《诗经》说： 悲伤忧郁犹如大病在身 ，这是形容周成王服丧后思念祖先，内心的忧郁难解。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Sadness and melancholy are like a serious illness in the body," which is a description of Zhou Chengwang thinking about his ancestors after the funeral, and his inner melancholy is difficult to solve.

古文：盖所以就文、武之业，崇大化之本也。
现代文：这正是他之所以能够继承周文王、周武王的勋业，并加以发扬光大的根本原因。
English: This is the fundamental reason why he was able to inherit the distinguished career of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu and carry it forward.

古文：臣又闻之师曰： 妃匹之际，生民之始，万福之原。
现代文：我听我的老师告诉我： 夫妻婚配的时候，是人生的开始，千万幸福的源头。
English: The minister also heard the teacher say: The choice of a spouse is the beginning of life and the foundation of all happiness.

古文：婚姻之礼正，然后品物遂而天命全。 
现代文：婚姻的礼仪端正，然后事物成就，而天命全备。 
English: Only after the great gift of marriage has been established can all things be accomplished and God's will be preserved.

古文：孔子论《诗》，以《关雎》为始，此纲纪之首，王教之端也。
现代文：孔子论《诗经》，从《关睢》入手，因为这婚姻是纲纪的起首，是礼教的开端。
English: For Confucius's discussion of the Book of Songs, let's start with the Book of Decrees, because this marriage is the beginning of the syllabus and the beginning of the teaching of etiquette.

古文：自上世已来，三代兴废，未有不由此者也。
现代文：自从上古以来，夏商周三代的兴起和衰落，没有不以此为缘由的。
English: Since the previous generation, the rise and fall of the three generations did not start from this point.

古文：愿陛下详览得失盛衰之效，以定大基，采有德，戒声色，近严敬，远技能。
现代文：希望陛下考查过去的得失兴衰，用以巩固根本。物色有品德的人，排除靡靡之音和女色，接近严肃自尊的人，远离花言巧语、诡计多端的人。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will examine the ups and downs of the past and use them to consolidate the fundamentals. Find people with moral character, eliminate the whispers and women, people who are close to serious self-esteem, and stay away from gossips and schemers.

古文：臣闻《六经》者，圣人所以统天地之心，著善恶之归，明吉凶之分，通人道之正，使不悖于其本性者也。
现代文：我听说，儒家的《六经》是圣人用来统御天下人心，把善恶分别归类，显明吉凶祸福，指示做人的正道，使人不违背本性的著作。
English: I heard that the "Six Classics" is a work used by sages to control the heart of heaven and earth, to distinguish between good and evil, to know the difference between good and evil, to lead to the right path of humanity, and to make people not violate their own nature.

古文：及《论语》、《孝经》，圣人言行之要，宜究其意。
现代文：还有《论语》，《孝经》，也都是圣人们重要言行的记录，应该探求其中的深意。
English: As for the two books of "Analects" and "The Book of Filial Piety," they are compendiums of the saint's speech and behavior, and their significance should be deeply understood.

古文：臣又闻圣王之自为，动静周旋，奉天承亲，临朝享臣，物有节文，以章人伦。
现代文：我还听说：圣明君王的作为，无论动静周旋，奉天之命，承亲之意，当朝处理国事，面对群臣，事事都有节制法度，以发扬人伦的美德。
English: I have also heard that the actions of King Shengming, no matter what happens, obeying the order of heaven, inheriting the will of relatives, dealing with state affairs when in power, and facing the courtiers, all have restraint and legality, in order to promote the virtue of human relations.

古文：盖钦翼祗栗，事天之容也；温恭敬逊，承亲之礼也；正躬严恪，临众之仪也；嘉惠和说，飨下之颜也。举错动作，物遵其仪，故形为仁义，动为法则。
现代文：严以律己，正直谨慎，是统御文武百官的原则。给予恩惠，和颜悦色，是待下的态度。举止行为，凡事都遵循一定的礼仪，因而在形貌上就是一派仁义气象，一举一动都可以成为效法的榜样。
English: Strict self-discipline, honesty and prudence are the principles that govern all civil and military officials. Granting favors, being pleasant, is the attitude to be expected. Manners and behavior, everything follows a certain etiquette, so in appearance it is a benevolent weather, every move can become a model to follow.

古文：今正月初，幸路寝，临朝贺，置酒以飨万方。
现代文：今正月初一，陛下驾临正殿，接受百官朝贺，设置筵席，慰劳四方。
English: On the first day of the first month of this year, His Majesty arrived at the main hall, received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials, set up a banquet, and comforted all sides.

古文：《传》曰： 君子慎始。 
现代文：经传书上说： 君子开始时就要谨慎。 
English: Tradition says: A gentleman should be cautious at the beginning.

古文：愿陛下留神动静之节，使群下得望盛德休光，以立基桢，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：建议陛下留意动静时的仪节，使臣子们得以仰望高贵品德的光彩，为国家奠立坚固的基础，则天下万福。 
English: To advise His Majesty to pay attention to the rituals of the times, so that the courtiers can look up to the splendor of noble character and lay a solid foundation for the country, then the world will be blessed.

古文：上敬纳其言。
现代文：成帝谦敬地采纳了他的规劝。
English: The Emperor graciously accepted his suggestion.

