古文：苏秦者，东周雒阳人也。东事师於齐，而习之於鬼谷先生。
现代文：苏秦是东周雒阳人，他曾向东到齐国拜师求学，在鬼谷子先生门下学习。
English: Su Qin is a native of Shiyang in eastern Zhou. He went east to Qi Province to study under the tutelage of Mr. Kigalitso.

古文：出游数岁，大困而归。
现代文：外出游历多年，弄得穷困潦倒，狼狈地回到家里。
English: After travelling abroad for many years, he became destitute and returned home in dismay.

古文：兄弟嫂妹妻妾窃皆笑之，曰： 周人之俗，治产业，力工商，逐什二以为务。
现代文：兄嫂、弟妹、妻妾都私下讥笑他，说： 周国人的习俗，人们都治理产业，努力从事工商，追求那十分之二的盈利为事业。
English: His brothers and sisters, brothers and sisters-in-law, wives and concubines all sneered at him in private, saying, "It is the custom of the Zhou people to manage industries, strive to engage in commerce and industry, and pursue the two-tenths profit as a cause.

古文：今子释本而事口舌，困，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：如今您丢掉本行而去干搬弄口舌的事，穷困潦倒，不也应该嘛！ 
English: Now you've thrown away your profession to do what you've been talking about, and you're destitute, as well you should be!

古文：苏秦闻之而惭，自伤，乃闭室不出，出其书遍观之。
现代文：苏秦听了这些话，暗自惭愧、伤感，就闭门不出，把自己的藏书全部阅读了一遍。
English: Su Qin listened to these words, secretly feeling ashamed and sad, he closed the door and read all of his books.

古文：曰： 夫士业已屈首受书，而不能以取尊荣，虽多亦奚以为！ 
现代文：说： 一个读书人既然已经从师受教，埋头读书，可又不能凭借它获得地位和荣耀，即使读书再多，又有什么用呢？ 
English: He said: Since a reader has been taught by a teacher and has immersed himself in reading, but cannot gain status and glory by virtue of it, even if he reads more, what is the use?

古文：於是得周书阴符，伏而读之。
现代文：于是找到一本周书《阴符》，伏案而钻研它。
English: So I found a weekly book "Yinpu" and studied it in secret.

古文：期年，以出揣摩，曰： 此可以说当世之君矣。 
现代文：下了一整年的功夫，悉求真缔，找到与国君相合的门道，激动地说： 就凭这些足可以游说当代的国君了。 
English: After a whole year of hard work, seeking truth and finding a doorway that is compatible with the sovereign, he said excitedly: With these feet, you can lobby the contemporary sovereign.

古文：求说周显王。
现代文：他求见并游说周显王。
English: He met and lobbied Zhou Xianwang.

古文：显王左右素习知苏秦，皆少之。弗信。
现代文：可是显王周围的臣子一向了解苏秦的为人，都瞧不起他，因而周显王也不信任他。
English: However, the courtiers around Hsien Wang had always known Su Qin as a person and despised him, so King Hsien Wang did not trust him.

古文：乃西至秦。
现代文：于是，他向西到了秦国。
English: So he went west to Qin.

古文：秦孝公卒。
现代文：秦孝公已经死了。
English: Qin Xiaogong is dead.

古文：说惠王曰： 秦四塞之国，被山带渭，东有关河，西有汉中，南有巴蜀，北有代马，此天府也。
现代文：就游说惠王说： 秦国是个四面山关险固的国家，为群山所环抱，渭水如带横流，东面有函谷关和黄河，西面有汉中，南有巴蜀，北有代马和马邑，这真是个险要、肥沃、丰饶的天然府库啊。
English: Hui Wang, a lobbyist, said: "Qin is a country with mountains on all sides, surrounded by mountains. Surabaya is like a cross-flowing river. To the east is Hangu Pass and the Yellow River, to the west is Hanzhong, to the south is Bashu, and to the north is Daima and Mayi. This is truly an important, fertile, and rich natural resource.

古文：以秦士民之众，兵法之教，可以吞天下，称帝而治。 
现代文：秦国凭借着众多的百姓，训练有素的士兵，足以吞并天下，建立帝业，统治四方。 
English: With a large number of people and well-trained soldiers, Qin was able to absorb the world, establish an empire, and rule the four directions.

古文：秦王曰： 毛羽未成，不可以高蜚；文理未明，不可以并兼。 
现代文：秦惠王说： 鸟儿在羽毛还没长丰满的时候，不可能凌空飞翔；国家的政教还没有正轨，不可能兼并天下。 
English: Qin Hui Wang said: Birds cannot fly in the sky when their feathers are not yet plump; the country's politics and religion are not on the right track, and it is impossible to annex the world.

古文：方诛商鞅，疾辩士，弗用。
现代文：这时秦国刚刚处死商鞅，非常讳恨游说的人，因而不任用苏秦。
English: At this time, the State of Qin had just executed a merchant and hated lobbyists very much, and therefore did not appoint Su Qin.

古文：乃东之赵。
现代文：于是，他向东到了赵国。
English: So he went east to Zhao.

古文：赵肃侯令其弟成为相，号奉阳君。
现代文：赵肃侯让自己的弟弟赵成出任国相，封号叫奉阳君。
English: Zhao Su Hou appointed his brother Zhao Cheng as Minister of State, with the title of Bongyangjun.

古文：奉阳君弗说之。
现代文：奉阳君不喜欢苏秦。
English: Bongyang doesn't like Su Qin.

古文：去游燕，岁馀而後得见。
现代文：苏秦又离开了赵国，游历到燕国，经过了一年多才有机会见到了燕文侯。
English: Su Qin also left Zhao Province and traveled to Yan Province. It took more than a year before he had the opportunity to meet Yan Wenhou.

古文：说燕文侯曰： 燕东有朝鲜、辽东，北有林胡、楼烦，西有云中、九原，南有嘑沱、易水，地方二千馀里，带甲数十万，车六百乘，骑六千匹，粟支数年。
现代文：他向燕文侯进言道： 燕国的东边是朝鲜、辽东，北边是林胡、楼烦，西边是云中、九原，南边是嘑沱河、易水，国土纵横两千多里，士兵好几十万，战车六百辆，战马六千匹，储存的粮食足够好几年之用。
English: He said to Yan Wenhou: The east side of Yan's country is Korea and Liaodong, the north side is Linhu and Loudui, the west side is Yunzhong and Jiuyuan, and the south side is Luohe and Yishui. The length and width of the country is more than two thousand miles, there are hundreds of thousands of soldiers, six hundred chariots, and six thousand horses. The stored grain is enough for several years.

古文：南有碣石、雁门之饶，北有枣栗之利，民虽不佃作而足於枣栗矣。
现代文：在南面，碣石山、雁门山一带的土地肥沃，物产丰富；在北面，可以种植红枣和板栗获得收益，百姓即使不耕作，单是红枣、板栗的收入就能够保证他们生活富裕了。
English: In the south, the land around Zhishi Mountain and Yanmen Mountain is fertile and rich in products; in the north, people can earn income by planting red dates and chestnuts. Even if people do not farm, the income from red dates and chestnuts alone can ensure their well-being.

古文：此所谓天府者也。
现代文：这就是所谓的天然府库。
English: This is the so-called natural reservoir.

古文： 夫安乐无事，不见覆军杀将，无过燕者。
现代文：百姓能够安居乐业，没有战事，不会面临军队覆灭、将领士兵被杀的危险，在这一点上没有谁比得上燕国。
English: The people can live and work in peace, there is no war, and they will not face the danger of the army being destroyed and the generals and soldiers being killed. In this respect, there is no one comparable to Yan Guo.

古文：大王知其所以然乎？
现代文：大王知道这其中的原因吗？
English: Does the king know the reason for this?

古文：夫燕之所以不犯寇被甲兵者，以赵之为蔽其南也。
现代文：燕国之所以不遭受敌人的侵犯，是因为赵国是燕国在南方的屏障。
English: The reason why Yan's country is not invaded by the enemy is because Zhao's country is the southern barrier of Yan's country.

古文：秦赵五战，秦再胜而赵三胜。
现代文：秦国和赵国发动五次战争，秦国战胜两次而赵国战胜三次。
English: Qin and Zhao launched five wars, with Qin winning twice and Zhao winning three times.

古文：秦赵相毙，而王以全燕制其後，此燕之所以不犯寇也。
现代文：两国相互残杀，彼此消亡，而大王可以凭借完好的燕国势力，在后边控制它们，这就是燕国之所以不受敌国侵犯的原因。
English: The two countries killed each other and died out, and the great king could control them from behind with the help of the intact forces of Yan, which is why Yan was not invaded by the enemy.

古文：且夫秦之攻燕也，逾云中、九原，过代、上谷，弥地数千里，虽得燕城，秦计固不能守也。
现代文：况且秦国如果想要攻打燕国，就必须穿越云中和九原，经过代郡和上谷，穿行几千里，即使能攻克燕国的城池，秦国也会考虑到自己没有办法守住它。
English: Moreover, if Qin wanted to attack Yan, it would have to cross Yunzhong and Jiuyuan, pass through Daigun and Shanggu, and travel thousands of miles. Even if it could conquer the city of Yan, Qin would consider that it had no way to defend it.

古文：秦之不能害燕亦明矣。
现代文：秦国不能侵犯燕国的道理已经非常明显了。
English: The reason why Qin could not invade Yan was very obvious.

古文：今赵之攻燕也，发号出令，不至十日而数十万之军军於东垣矣。渡呼沱，涉易水，不至四五日而距国都矣。
现代文：如今赵国想要进攻燕国，只要发布号令，不需要十天，就能使几十万大军进驻到边境的东桓一带了，赵军接着再渡过嘑沱河，涉过易水，所花费的时间不会超过四五天，就能到达燕国的都城了。
English: Now Zhao wanted to attack Yan. As long as he issued an order, it would not take more than ten days to have hundreds of thousands of troops stationed in the Donghuan area along the border. Zhao's army would then cross the Wei River and wade through the Yishui River. It would not take more than four or five days to reach the capital of Yan.

古文：故曰秦之攻燕也，战於千里之外；赵之攻燕也，战於百里之内。
现代文：所以说，秦国攻打燕国，要到千里之外作战；赵国攻打燕国，只是在百里之内作战。
English: Therefore, when Qin attacked Yan, they had to fight thousands of miles away; when Zhao attacked Yan, they only had to fight within a hundred miles.

古文：夫不忧百里之患而重千里之外，计无过於此者。
现代文：不担心百里之内的祸患，却看重千里之外的敌人，没有比这更错误的策略了。
English: There is no more erroneous strategy than not to worry about the disaster within a hundred miles, but to attach importance to the enemy thousands of miles away.

古文：是故原大王与赵从亲，天下为一，则燕国必无患矣。 
现代文：因此我希望大王能与赵国联合，把各国联成一体，那么燕国一定没有祸患了。 
English: Therefore, I hope that the great king can unite with the state of Zhao and unite all countries into one, then there will be no disaster in the state of Yan.

古文：文侯曰： 子言则可，然吾国小，西迫强赵，南近齐，齐、赵强国也。
现代文：燕文侯说： 您说的当然不错，可是我的国家弱小，西边又紧靠着强大的赵国，南边接近齐周，齐、赵都是强大的国家。
English: Yan Wenhou said: Of course, what you said is right, but my country is small and weak. To the west, it is close to the powerful country of Zhao. To the south, it is close to Qi Zhou. Both Qi and Zhao are powerful countries.

古文：子必欲合从以安燕，寡人请以国从。 
现代文：您一定要用合纵相亲的办法使燕国安全无事，我愿倾国相从。 
English: You must use the method of long-term and long-term affinity to make Yan Guo safe and sound. I am willing to follow you.

古文：於是资苏秦车马金帛以至赵。
现代文：于是就资助苏秦车马钱财到赵国。
English: So he financed Su Qin's car, horse and money to go to Zhao.

古文：而奉阳君已死，即因说赵肃侯曰： 天下卿相人臣及布衣之士，皆高贤君之行义，皆原奉教陈忠於前之日久矣。
现代文：奉阳君已经死了，就趁机游说赵肃侯说： 天下的卿相臣子一直到穿粗衣的读书人，都仰慕您这贤明的国君施行仁义，都希望能在您面前听从教诲，陈述忠言，为时很久了。
English: Feng Yangjun was already dead, so he took advantage of the opportunity to lobby Zhao Su Hou, saying: "The world's nobles, ministers and courtiers, all the way to the readers in coarse clothing, all admire you, this wise sovereign, for your practice of benevolence and righteousness, and all hope to be able to listen to your teachings and state your loyal advice in front of you. It's been a long time.

古文：虽然，奉阳君妒而君不任事，是以宾客游士莫敢自尽於前者。
现代文：虽然如此，然而奉阳君妒嫉人才而您又不理政事，因此宾客和游说之士没有谁敢在您面前畅所欲言。
English: Despite this, however, Bong Yangjun is jealous of talent and you do not care about politics, so guests and lobbyists do not dare to speak freely in front of you.

古文：今奉阳君捐馆舍，君乃今复与士民相亲也，臣故敢进其愚虑。
现代文：如今奉阳君已经撒手人寰，您又可以和士民百姓亲近了，所以我才敢于向您陈述愚见。
English: Now that Bongyang has passed away, you can be close to the people, so I dare to tell you my foolish opinion.

古文： 窃为君计者，莫若安民无事，且无庸有事於民也。
现代文： 我私下为您考虑，没有比百姓生活的安宁，国家太平，并且无须让人民卷入战争中去更重要的了。
English: In my private thoughts for you, there is nothing more important than the tranquility of the people's lives, the peace of the country, and the need not to involve the people in the war.

古文：安民之本，在於择交，择交而得则民安，择交而不得则民终身不安。
现代文：使人民安定的根本，在于选择邦交，邦交选择得当，人民就安定；邦交选择不得当，人民就终身不安定。
English: The essence of stabilizing the people lies in the choice of diplomatic relations. If the choice of diplomatic relations is proper, the people will be stable; if the choice of diplomatic relations is improper, the people will be unstable for life.

古文：请言外患：齐秦为两敌而民不得安，倚秦攻齐而民不得安，倚齐攻秦而民不得安。
现代文：请允许我分析赵国的外患：假如赵国与齐、秦两国为敌，那么人民就得不到安宁，如果依靠秦国攻打齐国，人民也不会得到安宁，假如依靠齐国攻打秦国，人民还是得不到安宁。
English: Please allow me to analyze the external troubles of Zhao: If Zhao is an enemy of Qi and Qin, then the people will not have peace. If they rely on Qin to attack Qi, the people will not have peace. If they rely on Qi to attack Qin, the people will still not have peace.

古文：故夫谋人之主，伐人之国，常苦出辞断绝人之交也。原君慎勿出於口。
现代文：所以想要计算别国的国君，攻打别人的国家，常常苦于公开声明断绝跟别国的外交关系，希望您小心谨慎，不要轻易把这话说出来。
English: Therefore, if you want to count the sovereigns of other countries, attack other countries, and often struggle to publicly declare the severance of diplomatic relations with other countries, I hope you will be careful not to say this easily.

古文：请别白黑所以异，阴阳而已矣。
现代文：请让我为您分析这种黑白、阴阳极其分明的利害得失吧。
English: Please let me analyze for you the advantages and disadvantages of this black-and-white, yin-yang extremely clear.

古文：君诚能听臣，燕必致旃裘狗马之地，齐必致鱼盐之海，楚必致橘柚之园，韩、魏、中山皆可使致汤沐之奉，而贵戚父兄皆可以受封侯。
现代文：您果真能听我的忠告，燕国一定会献出盛产毡裘狗马的土地，齐国一定会献出盛产鱼盐的海湾，楚国一定会献出盛产桔柚的园林，韩、卫、中山都可以相应地献出供您汤沐的费用，而您的亲戚和父兄都可以裂士封侯了。
English: If you can really listen to my advice, Yan's country will surely offer a land rich in horse mackerel, Qi's country will surely offer a bay rich in fish and salt, Chu's country will surely offer a garden rich in orange peel, Han, Wei, and Zhongshan can all offer correspondingly for your soup and shower expenses, and your relatives and father and brother can all be crowned princes.

古文：夫割地包利，五伯之所以覆军禽将而求也；封侯贵戚，汤武之所以放弑而争也。
现代文：获得割地、享受权利，正是春秋五霸不惜全军覆没、将领被俘的代价去追求的；使贵戚封侯，正是商汤、武王所以要起兵并采用流放甚至冒着弑君的罪名去争取的原因。
English: To obtain land and enjoy rights is exactly what the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties pursued at the cost of the entire army being wiped out and the generals being captured; to have their noble relatives enthroned as lords is exactly why Shang Tang and King Wu had to raise an army and fight for it by means of exile and even by risking the accusation of usurping the throne.

古文：今君高拱而两有之，此臣之所以为君原也。
现代文：如今我让您安然就座，就可以轻易地获得这两种好处，这就是我希望于您的。
English: Now that I've got you safely seated, it's easy to get both of those benefits, and that's what I want for you.

古文： 今大王与秦，则秦必弱韩、魏；与齐，则齐必弱楚、魏。
现代文： 现在如果大王和秦国友好，那么秦国一定要利用这种优势去削弱韩国、魏国；如果和齐国友好，那么齐国一定会利用这种优势去削弱楚国、魏国。
English: Now if the Great King is friendly with Qin, then Qin must use this advantage to weaken Korea and Wei; if he is friendly with Qi, then Qi must use this advantage to weaken Chu and Wei.

古文：魏弱则割河外，韩弱则效宜阳，宜阳效则上郡绝，河外割则道不通，楚弱则无援。
现代文：魏国衰弱了就要割地河外，韩国衰弱了就要献出宜阳。宜阳一旦献纳秦国，上郡就要陷入绝境，割让了河外就会切断上郡的交通。楚国要衰弱了，您就孤立无援。
English: If Wei weakens, it will have to cede territory outside the river; if Korea weakens, it will have to surrender Yiyang; if Yiyang surrenders to Qin, Shangxian will be in a desperate situation; if it surrenders outside the river, it will cut off Shangxian's transportation; if Chu weakens, you will be left alone.

古文：此三策者，不可不孰计也。
现代文：这三个方面您不能不仔细地考虑啊。
English: You must carefully consider these three aspects.

古文： 夫秦下轵道，则南阳危；劫韩包周，则赵氏自操兵；据卫取卷，则齐必入朝秦。
现代文： 秦国攻下轵道，韩国的南阳就危在旦夕，秦国要强夺南阳，包围周都，那么赵国就要拿起武器自卫；假如秦国占据了卫地，攻取了卷城，那么齐国一定会向秦国俯首称臣。
English: If Qin conquered Shandong, South Korea's Nanyang would be in danger. If Qin conquered Nanyang and encircled Zhou, Zhao would have to take up arms to defend itself. If Qin conquered Meidi and captured Wuling, Qi would have to bow to Qin.

古文：秦欲已得乎山东，则壁举兵而乡赵矣。
现代文：秦国的欲望既然已经在山东得逞，就一定会发兵向赵国进犯。
English: Since Qin's desire has already succeeded in Shandong, it will certainly send troops to invade Zhao.

古文：秦甲渡河逾漳，据番吾，则兵必战於邯郸之下矣。
现代文：假如秦军渡过黄河，越过漳水，占据番吾，那么，秦、赵两国的军队一定要在邯郸城下作战了。
English: If the Qin army crossed the Yellow River and Surabaya and occupied Fangu, then the armies of Qin and Zhao would have to fight under the city of Surabaya.

古文：此臣之所为君患也。
现代文：这就是我替你忧虑的原因啊。
English: That's why I'm worried about you.

古文： 当今之时，山东之建国莫彊於赵。
现代文： 正当这时，山东境内所建立的国家没有比赵国强大的。
English: At that time, there was no country in Shandong that was more powerful than Zhao.

古文：赵地方二千馀里，带甲数十万，车千乘，骑万匹，粟支数年。
现代文：赵国区域纵横两千多里，武装部队几十万人，战车千辆，战马万匹，粮食可支用好几年。
English: The area of Zhao Province has a length and width of more than two thousand miles, hundreds of thousands of armed forces, thousands of chariots, thousands of war horses, and grain can be used for several years.

古文：西有常山，南有河漳，东有清河，北有燕国。
现代文：西有常山，南有漳水，东有清河，北有燕国。
English: There is Changshan in the west, Surabaya in the south, Qinghe in the east, and Yan Province in the north.

古文：燕固弱国，不足畏也。
现代文：燕，本来就是个弱小的国家，不值得害怕。
English: Yan, by nature, is a small and weak country. It is not worth being afraid of.

古文：秦之所害於天下者莫如赵，然而秦不敢举兵伐赵者，何也？
现代文：天下间，秦国最忌恨的莫过于赵国。然而秦国为什么不敢发兵攻打赵国呢？
English: There is nothing in the world that Qin hates more than Zhao. However, why did Qin not dare to attack Zhao?

古文：畏韩、魏之议其後也。
现代文：是害怕韩国和魏国在后边暗算它。
English: It was afraid that South Korea and China were plotting behind its back.

古文：然则韩、魏，赵之南蔽也。
现代文：既然如此，那么韩、魏可算是赵国南边的屏障了。
English: Since this is the case, Han and Wei can be considered a barrier on the southern side of Zhao.

古文：秦之攻韩、魏也，无有名山大川之限，稍蚕食之，傅国都而止。
现代文：秦国要是攻打韩、魏，就没有什么名山大川的阻挡，象蚕吃桑叶似的逐渐地侵占，直到逼近两国的国都为止。
English: If Qin attacked Han and Wei, there would be no famous mountains or rivers to block it. It would gradually encroach on them like a silkworm eating a mulberry leaf, until it approached the capitals of both countries.

古文：韩、魏不能支秦，必入臣於秦。
现代文：韩、魏不能抵挡秦国，必然会向秦国臣服。
English: Han and Wei could not resist Qin and would inevitably submit to Qin.

古文：秦无韩、魏之规，则祸必中於赵矣。
现代文：秦国解除了韩、魏暗算的顾虑，那么战祸必然会临到赵国了。
English: Qin relieved Han and Wei's misgivings, so the war would inevitably come to Zhao.

古文：此臣之所为君患也。
现代文：这也是我替你忧虑的原因啊。
English: That's why I'm worried about you.

古文： 臣闻尧无三夫之分，舜无咫尺之地，以有天下；禹无百人之聚，以王诸侯；汤武之士不过三千，车不过三百乘，卒不过三万，立为天子：诚得其道也。
现代文： 我听说当初唐尧没有分到过三百亩的赏赐，虞舜也没有得到过一尺的封地，却能拥有整个天下；禹夏聚集的民众不够百人，却能在诸侯中称王；商汤、周武的卿士不足三千，战车不足三百辆，士兵不足三万，却能成为天子：他们确实掌握了夺取天下的策略。
English: I heard that at that time, Tang Xuan did not receive the reward of three hundred mu, Yue Xuan did not get a foot of fief, but he could own the whole world; Yu Xia gathered less than a hundred people, but he could become king among the princes; Shang Tang and Zhou Wu had less than three thousand noblemen, less than three hundred chariots, and less than thirty thousand soldiers, but they could become the son of heaven: they really mastered the strategy of seizing the world.

古文：是故明主外料其敌之彊弱，内度其士卒贤不肖，不待两军相当而胜败存亡之机固已形於胸中矣，岂揜於众人之言而以冥冥决事哉！
现代文：所以，一个贤明的君主，对外要能预料敌国的强弱，对内要能估计士兵们素质的优劣，这样用不着等到双方军队接触，胜败存亡的关键所在早就了然于胸了。怎么会被众人的议论所蒙蔽，而昏昧不清地决断国家大事呢？
English: Therefore, a wise monarch must be able to predict the strength and weakness of the enemy country to the outside world, and must be able to estimate the quality of the soldiers to the inside. In this way, it is not necessary to wait until the two armies come into contact. The key to victory, defeat, and survival has long been clear to the heart. How can he be blinded by the discussions of many people and decide national affairs in a vague and unclear manner?

古文： 臣窃以天下之地图案之，诸侯之地五倍於秦，料度诸侯之卒十倍於秦，六国为一，并力西乡而攻秦，秦必破矣。
现代文： 我私下考察过天下的地图，各诸侯国的土地五倍于秦国，估计各诸侯国的士兵十倍于秦国，假如六国结成一个整体，同心协力，向西攻打秦国，秦国一定会被打败。
English: I have privately examined the map of the world. The land of each vassal state is five times larger than that of Qin. It is estimated that the soldiers of each vassal state are ten times larger than that of Qin. If the six countries unite as a whole and work together to attack Qin in the west, Qin will definitely be defeated.

古文：今西面而事之，见臣於秦。
现代文：如今反而向西侍奉秦国，向秦国称臣。
English: Now, on the contrary, he serves Qin to the west and claims to be Qin's vassal.

古文：夫破人之与破於人也，臣人之与臣於人也，岂可同日而论哉！
现代文：打败别人和被别人打败，让别人向自己称臣和自己向别人称臣，难道是可以同日而语的么！
English: Is it possible to defeat others and be defeated by others, to make others submit to oneself and oneself submit to others?

古文： 夫衡人者，皆欲割诸侯之地以予秦。
现代文： 凡主张连衡政策的人，都想把各诸侯国的土地割让给秦国。
English: All those who advocated the policy of linkage and balance wanted to cede the land of each vassal state to Qin.

古文：秦成，则高台榭，美宫室，听竽瑟之音，前有楼阙轩辕，後有长姣美人，国被秦患而不与其忧。
现代文：秦国的霸业成功，他们就可把楼台亭榭建得高大，把宫室建得华美，欣赏着竽瑟演奏的音乐，前有楼台、宫阙，高敞华美的车子；后有窈窕艳丽的美女，至于各国遭受秦国的祸害，他们就不去分担忧愁了。
English: If Qin's hegemony succeeds, they will be able to build their pavilions and pavilions taller, and their palaces more beautiful. They will enjoy the music played by musicians. In front of them, there will be pavilions and pavilions, tall and beautiful cars; behind them, there will be beautiful women. As for the countries suffering from the scourge of Qin, they will not worry about it.

古文：是故夫衡人日夜务以秦权恐愒诸侯以求割地，故原大王孰计之也。
现代文：所以那些主张连衡的人凭借秦国的权势日夜不停地威胁诸侯各国，谋求割让土地，因此，希望大王能仔细地考虑啊。
English: Therefore, those who advocate lianheng, by virtue of the power of Qin, are constantly threatening the princes and countries, seeking to cede land. Therefore, I hope the great king can carefully consider it.

古文： 臣闻明主绝疑去谗，屏流言之迹，塞朋党之门，故尊主广地彊兵之计臣得陈忠於前矣。
现代文： 我听说贤明的君主决断疑虑，排斥谗言，摒弃流言蜚语的途径，堵塞结党营私的门路，所以我才有机会在您面前陈述使国君尊崇，使土地扩展，使军队强大的计策。
English: I have heard that the wise monarch resolves doubts, rejects gossip, abandons the way of gossip, and blocks the way of party and private, so I have the opportunity to present to you the strategy of making the king respected, expanding the land, and making the army strong.

古文：故窃为大王计，莫如一韩、魏、齐、楚、燕、赵以从亲，以畔秦。
现代文：我私下为大王考虑，不如使韩、魏、齐、楚、燕、赵结成一个相亲的整体，对抗秦国。
English: I privately considered for the Great King, it would be better to make Han, Wei, Qi, Chu, Yan, and Zhao form a matchless whole to fight against Qin.

古文：令天下之将相会於洹水之上，通质，刳白马而盟。要约曰： 秦攻楚，齐、魏各出锐师以佐之，韩绝其粮道，赵涉河漳，燕守常山之北。
现代文：让天下的将相在洹水之上聚会，相互沟通故有的嫌隙，杀白马歃血盟誓，彼此约定说： 假如秦国攻打楚国，那么齐、魏就分别派出精锐部队帮助楚国，韩国就切断秦国的运粮要道，赵军就南渡河漳支援，燕军就固守常山以北。
English: Let the world's generals meet on the Surabaya, communicate with each other the old grudges, kill the white horse, swear blood oaths, and mutually agree to say: If Qin attacks Chu, then Qi and Wei will separately send elite troops to help Chu, South Korea will cut off Qin's grain transportation routes, Zhao's army will support Nanduhe, and Yan's army will stick to the north of Changshan.

古文：秦攻韩魏，则楚绝其後，齐出锐师而佐之，赵涉河漳，燕守云中。
现代文：假如秦国攻打韩国、魏国，那么楚军就切断秦国的后援，齐国就派出精锐部队去帮助韩、魏。赵军就渡过河漳支援，燕国就固守云中地带。
English: If Qin attacked Korea and Wei, Chu would cut off Qin's support, Qi would send elite troops to help Han and Wei, Zhao's army would cross the Yangtze River to support them, and Yan would hold the Yunnan region.

古文：秦攻齐，则楚绝其後，韩守城皋，魏塞其道，赵涉河漳、博关，燕出锐师以佐之。
现代文：假如秦国攻打齐国，那么楚国就切断秦国的后援，韩国固守城皋，魏国堵塞秦国的要道，赵国的军队就渡河漳挺进博关支援，燕国派出精锐部队去协同作战。
English: If Qin attacked Qi, then Chu would cut off Qin's support, Korea would hold the city, Wei would block Qin's way, Zhao's army would cross the river to support Bo Guan, and Yan would send elite troops to fight together.

古文：秦攻燕，则赵守常山，楚军武关，齐涉勃海，韩、魏皆出锐师以佐之。
现代文：假如秦国攻打燕国，那么，赵国固守常山，楚国的部队驻扎武关，齐军渡过渤海，韩、魏同时派出精锐部队协同作战。
English: If Qin attacked Yan, Zhao would hold Changshan, Chu would garrison Wuguan, Qi would cross the Bohai Sea, and Han and Wei would send their elite troops to fight together.

古文：秦攻赵，则韩军宜阳，楚军武关，魏军河外，齐涉清河，燕出锐师以佐之。
现代文：假如秦国攻打赵国，那么韩国的部队驻扎宜阳，楚国的部队驻扎武关，魏国的部队驻扎河外，齐国的部队渡过清河，燕国派出精锐部队协同作战。
English: If Qin attacked Zhao, then the troops of South Korea would be stationed in Yiyang, the troops of Chu would be stationed in Wuguan, the troops of Wei would be stationed outside the river, the troops of Qi would cross the Qing River, and the elite troops of Yan would be sent to fight together.

古文：诸侯有不如约者，以五国之兵共伐之。 
现代文：假如有的诸侯不照盟约办事，便用其他五国的军队共同讨伐他。 
English: If any of the lords did not act in accordance with the covenant, they would use the armies of the other five countries to jointly fight him.

古文：六国从亲以宾秦，则秦甲必不敢出於函谷以害山东矣。
现代文：假如六国相亲结成一体共同抵抗秦国，那么秦国一定不敢从函谷关出兵侵犯山东六国了。
English: If the relatives of the six countries unite as one to jointly resist Qin, then Qin will not dare to invade the six countries of Shandong from Hanyu Pass.

古文：如此，则霸王之业成矣。 
现代文：这样，您霸主的事业就成功了。 
English: In this way, the cause of your overlord has been successful.

古文：赵王曰： 寡人年少，立国日浅，未尝得闻社稷之长计也。
现代文：赵王说： 我还年轻，治理国家的时间又短，不曾听到过使国家长治久安的策略。
English: Zhao Wang said: I am still young, the time to govern the country is short, and I have never heard of a strategy to keep the country stable for a long time.

古文：今上客有意存天下，安诸侯寡人敬以国从。 
现代文：如今您有意使天下得以生存，使各诸侯国得以安定，我愿诚恳地倾国相从。 
English: Now that you have the intention to ensure the survival of the world and the stability of all principalities, I would like to sincerely follow you.

古文：乃饰车百乘，黄金千溢，白璧百双，锦绣千纯，以约诸侯。
现代文：于是装饰车子一百辆，载上黄金一千镒，白璧一百双，绸缎一千匹，用来游说各诸侯国加盟。
English: As a result, a hundred decorated cars, loaded with a thousand ingots of gold, a hundred pairs of white brocade, and a thousand silk brocades, were used to lobby the accession of various states.

古文：是时周天子致文武之胙於秦惠王。
现代文：这时，周天子把祭祀文王、武王用过的肉赐给秦惠王。
English: At this time, Zhou Tianzi gave Qin Hui Wang the meat used in the sacrifices of King Wen and King Wu.

古文：惠王使犀首攻魏，禽将龙贾，取魏之雕阴，且欲东兵。
现代文：惠王派犀首攻打魏国，生擒了魏将龙贾，攻克了魏国的雕阴，并打算挥师向东挺进。
English: Hui Wang sent the rhinoceros to attack Wei first, captured the Wei general Long Jia, conquered Wei's Chongyin, and planned to advance eastward.

古文：苏秦恐秦兵之至赵也，乃激怒张仪，入之于秦。
现代文：苏秦恐怕秦国的部队打到赵国来，就用计激怒了张仪，迫使他投奔秦国。
English: Su Qin was afraid that the Qin troops would come to Zhao, so he used a trick to infuriate Zhang Yi and force him to go to Qin.

古文：於是说韩宣王曰： 韩北有巩、成皋之固，西有宜阳、商阪之塞，东有宛、穰、洧水，南有陉山，地方九百馀里，带甲数十万，天下之彊弓劲弩皆从韩出。
现代文：于是苏秦去游说韩宣王说： 韩国北部有坚固的巩邑、城皋，西部有宜阳、商阪的要塞，东有宛、穰、洧水，南有陉山，区域纵横九百多里，武装部队有几十万，天下的强弓硬弩都是从韩国制造出来的。
English: So Su Qin went to lobby Han Xuan Wang and said: In the north of South Korea, there are strong Gongyup and Chengyu; in the west, there are Yiyang and Shanghan fortresses; in the east, there are Wuan, Handan and Surabaya; in the south, there are Lushan; the area is more than nine hundred miles long and wide; there are hundreds of thousands of armed forces; and all the world's strong bows and hardened crossbors are made in South Korea.

古文：谿子、少府时力、距来者，皆射六百步之外。
现代文：像谿子弩，以及少府制造的时力、距来，射程都在六百步以外。
English: Like the dice roller, and the time and distance roller made by Shaofu, the shooting range is beyond six hundred paces.

古文：韩卒超足而射，百发不暇止，远者括蔽洞胸，近者镝弇心。
现代文：韩国士兵脚踏连弩而射，能连续发射一百箭，中间不停止。远处的敌人，可以射穿他们胸前的铠甲，穿透胸膛，近处的敌人，可以射透他们的心脏。
English: South Korean soldiers can fire a hundred arrows in succession without stopping. A distant enemy can pierce the armor on their chests and penetrate their chests, and a nearby enemy can pierce their hearts.

古文：韩卒之剑戟皆出於冥山、棠谿、墨阳、合赙、邓师、宛冯、龙渊、太阿，皆陆断牛马，水截鹄雁，当敌则斩坚甲铁幕，革抉簠芮，无不毕具。
现代文：韩国士兵使用的剑、都是从冥山、棠谿、墨阳、合赙、邓师、宛冯、龙渊、太阿锻冶的，这些锋利的武器都能在陆上截断牛马，水上能劈天鹅、大雁，临阵对敌能斩断坚固的铠甲、铁衣，从臂套、盾牌到系在盾牌上的丝带，没有不具备的。
English: The swords and halberds used by South Korean soldiers are all forged from Hushan, Tonglu, Moyang, Haenglu, Dengshi, Wanfeng, Longyuan, and Taia. These sharp weapons can cut off cattle and horses on land, swans and geese on the water, and strong armor and iron clothing on the enemy, from arm covers and shields to ribbons attached to shields. There is nothing they do not have.

古文：以韩卒之勇，被坚甲，蹠劲弩，带利剑，一人当百，不足言也。
现代文：凭着韩国士兵的勇敢，披着坚固的铠甲，拉着强劲的硬弩，佩戴着锋利的宝剑，即使以一当百，也不在话下。
English: With the bravery of Korean soldiers, wearing sturdy armor, pulling a strong hard shovel, wearing a sharp sword, even if it is a hundred, it is not out of the question.

古文：夫以韩之劲与大王之贤，乃西面事秦，交臂而服，羞社稷而为天下笑，无大於此者矣。
现代文：凭着韩国兵力的强劲和大王的贤明，却向西侍奉秦国，拱手而臣服，使国家蒙受耻辱而被天下人耻笑，没有比这更严重的了。
English: With the strength of the Korean army and the wisdom of the great king, it served Qin to the west, surrendered and submitted, humiliated the country and was laughed at by the world. There is nothing more serious than this.

古文：是故原大王孰计之。
现代文：因此希望大王仔细地考虑啊。
English: So I hope the king will think about it carefully.

古文： 大王事秦，秦必求宜阳、成皋。
现代文： 如果大王去侍奉秦国，秦国必定会向您索取宜阳、成皋。
English: If the great king goes to serve the Qin State, the Qin State will certainly ask you for Yiyang and Chengdu.

古文：今兹效之，明年又复求割地。
现代文：今年把土地献给他，明年又要索取割地。
English: This year the land was given to him, and next year he will ask for more land.

古文：与则无地以给之，不与则弃前功而受後祸。
现代文：给他吧，却没有土地可给，不给吧，那么就会丢掉以前割地求好的功效而遭受后患。
English: Give it to him, but there is no land to give. If you don't give it to him, then you will lose the effect of cutting land to seek better land and suffer the consequences.

古文：且大王之地有尽而秦之求无已，以有尽之地而逆无已之求，此所谓市怨结祸者也，不战而地已削矣。
现代文：况且大王的土地是有限的，而秦国贪婪的索取是没有止境的，拿有限的土地，去换取无止境的索取，这就叫做拿钱购买怨恨，纠结灾祸。不用打仗，而土地就被割去了。
English: Moreover, the land of the great king is limited, but the greedy demands of the Qin state are endless. Taking limited land in exchange for endless demands is called taking money to buy resentment and entangle disaster. There is no need to fight, and the land is cut off.

古文：臣闻鄙谚曰： 宁为鸡口，无为牛後。 
现代文：我听说过一句俗话： 宁ò鸡的嘴，不做牛的肛门。 
English: I heard a saying: "It's better to be a chicken's mouth than a cow's anus."

古文：今西面交臂而臣事秦，何异於牛後乎？
现代文：现在，如果向西拱手臣服，和做牛的肛门有什么不同呢？
English: Now, if you surrender to the West, what is the difference from being a cow's anus?

古文：夫以大王之贤，挟彊韩之兵，而有牛後之名，臣窃为大王羞之。 
现代文：凭着大王的贤明，又拥有韩国强大的军队，却蒙受做牛后的丑名，我私下为大王感到羞耻啊。 
English: With the wisdom of the great king, and with South Korea's powerful army, but suffering the stigma of being a cow queen, I am privately ashamed of the great king.

古文：於是韩王勃然作色，攘臂瞋目，按剑仰天太息曰； 寡人虽不肖，必不能事秦。
现代文：这时韩王突然变了脸色，捋起袖子，愤怒地瞪大眼睛，手按宝剑，仰望天空长长地叹息说： 我虽然没有出息，也决不能去侍奉秦国。
English: At this time, Han Wang suddenly changed his face, rolled up his sleeves, stared wide-eyed in anger, pressed his sword in his hand, looked up at the sky and sighed for a long time, saying: Although I have no future, I can never serve Qin.

古文：今主君诏以赵王之教，敬奉社稷以从。 
现代文：现在您既然转告了赵王的指教，我愿意把整个国家托付给您，听从您的安排。 
English: Now that you have conveyed Zhao Wang's instructions, I am willing to entrust the entire country to you and follow your arrangements.

古文：又说魏襄王曰： 大王之地，南有鸿沟、陈、汝南、许、郾、昆阳、召陵、舞阳、新都、新郪，东有淮、颍、枣、无胥，西有长城之界，北有河外、卷、衍、酸枣，地方千里。
现代文：苏秦又游说魏襄王说： 大王的国土，南边有鸿沟、陈地、汝南、许地、郾地、昆阳、召陵、舞阳、新都、新郪，东边有淮河、颍河、煮枣、无胥，西边有长城为界，北边有河外、卷地、衍地、酸枣，国土纵横千里。
English: Su Qin also lobbied Wei Xiang Wang to say: the great king's land, the south has a chasm, Chen, Yunan, Xu, Kunyang, Zhaoling, Maiyang, Xindu, Xinlu, the east has the Huai River, Minhe River, boiled date, no date, the west has the Great Wall as the boundary, the north has the outside of the river, the winding land, the derivative land, the sour date, the land is thousands of miles long.

古文：地名虽小，然而田舍庐庑之数，曾无所刍牧。
现代文：地方名义上虽然狭小，但是田间到处盖满房屋，连放牧牲畜的地方都没有了。
English: Although the place is nominally small, the fields are full of houses, and there is no place to graze livestock.

古文：人民之众，车马之多，日夜行不绝，輷輷殷殷，若有三军之众。
现代文：人口稠密，车马众多，日夜行驰，络绎不绝，轰轰隆隆，好象有三军人马的声势。
English: The city is densely populated, there are many cars and horses, and they drive around day and night, in an endless stream, rumbling and rumbling, as if there were three soldiers.

古文：臣窃量大王之国不下楚，然衡人怵王交彊虎狼之秦以侵天下，卒有秦患，不顾其祸。
现代文：我私下估量大王的国势和楚国不相上下。可是那些主张连衡的人诱惑您侍奉秦国，伙同像虎狼一样凶恶的秦国侵扰整个天下，一旦魏国遭受秦国的危害，谁都不会顾及您的灾祸。
English: Privately, I estimate the power of the Great King to be on a par with that of the State of Chu. However, those who advocate a balance of power tempt you to serve the State of Qin. Together with the State of Qin, which is as ferocious as a tiger and a wolf, they invade the whole world. If the State of Wei is harmed by the State of Qin, no one will care about your disaster.

古文：夫挟彊秦之势以内劫其主，罪无过此者。
现代文：依仗着秦国强大的势力，在内部劫持别国的君主，一切罪恶没有比这更严重的了。
English: Relying on the powerful forces of the Qin State to internally abduct the monarchs of other countries, there is nothing more serious than this.

古文：魏，天下之彊国也；王，天下之贤王也。
现代文：魏，是天下强大的国家；王，是天下贤明的国君。
English: Wei is a powerful country in the world; Wang is a wise ruler in the world.

古文：今乃有意西面而事秦，称东籓，筑帝宫，受冠带，祠春秋，臣窃为大王耻之。
现代文：现在您竟然有意向西面奉事秦国，自称是秦国东方的属国，为秦国建筑离宫，接受秦国的分封，采用秦国的冠服式样，春秋季节给秦国纳贡助祭，我私下为大王感到羞耻。
English: Now you have the audacity to serve Qin to the west, to claim to be a vassal state of Qin to the east, to build a palace for Qin, to accept the crown of Qin, to adopt the crown dress of Qin, and to pay tribute to Qin in the spring and autumn seasons. I am privately ashamed of the great king.

古文： 臣闻越王勾践战敝卒三千人，禽夫差於干遂；武王卒三千人，革车三百乘，制纣於牧野：岂其士卒众哉，诚能奋其威也。
现代文： 我听说越王勾践仅用三千疲惫的士兵作战，就在干遂活捉了吴王夫差；周武王只用了三千士兵，三百辆蒙着皮革的战车，在牧野制服了商纣：难道他们是靠着兵多将广吗？
English: I heard that King Gou of Yue used only three thousand tired soldiers to fight, and then captured Wu Wangfuchai; King Zhou Wu used only three thousand soldiers and three hundred leather-covered chariots to subdue the merchants in Makino: do they rely on more soldiers to expand?

古文：今窃闻大王之卒，武士二十万，苍头二十万，奋击二十万，厮徒十万，车六百乘，骑五千匹。
现代文：实在是因为充分发挥出他们的威力。现在，我私下听说大王的军事力量，精锐部队二十万，裹着青色头巾的部队二十万，能冲锋陷阵的部队二十万，勤杂兵十万，战车六百辆，战马五千匹。
English: Now I have heard in private of the military strength of the great king: two hundred thousand elite troops, two hundred thousand troops wrapped in blue turbans, two hundred thousand troops able to charge, one hundred thousand foot soldiers, six hundred chariots, and five thousand horses.

古文：此其过越王勾践、武王远矣，今乃听於群臣之说而欲臣事秦。
现代文：这些实力超过越王勾践和周武王很远了，可是，如今您却听信群臣的建议，想以臣子的身份服事秦国。
English: These strengths far exceed those of Yue Wang Gochun and Zhou Wu Wang, but now you have listened to the advice of your ministers and want to serve Qin as a minister.

古文：夫事秦必割地以效实，故兵未用而国已亏矣。
现代文：如果奉事秦国，必然要割让土地来表示自己的忠诚，因此，还没动用军队，国家却已亏损了。
English: If you serve the Qin state, you must cede land to show your loyalty. Therefore, before using the army, the country has already lost money.

古文：凡群臣之言事秦者，皆奸人，非忠臣也。
现代文：凡是群臣中妄言服事秦国的，都是奸妄之人，而不是忠臣。
English: Any of the vassals who spoke out of turn to serve the Qin State was a traitor, not a loyal subject.

古文：夫为人臣，割其主之地以求外交，偷取一时之功而不顾其後，破公家而成私门，外挟彊秦之势以内劫其主，以求割地，原大王孰察之。
现代文：他们作为君主的臣子，却想割让自己国君的土地，以求得与秦国的友谊，偷取一时的功效而不顾后果，破坏国家的利益而成就私人的好处，对外凭借着强秦的势力，从内部劫持自己的国君，以达到割让土地的目的，希望大王仔细地审察这种情况。
English: As the vassals of the monarch, they wanted to cut off the land of their sovereign in order to win the friendship of the Qin state, steal the momentary effect without regard to the consequences, destroy the interests of the state to achieve private benefits, and rely on the power of the strong Qin to hijack their sovereign from within to achieve the purpose of ceding land. I hope the great king will carefully examine this situation.

古文： 周书曰： 釂釂不绝，蔓蔓柰何？
现代文： 《周书》上说： 草木滋长出微弱的嫩枝时，要不及时去掉它，到处滋长延伸了怎么办呢？
English: "Zhou Shu" said: When the grass and trees sprout weak shoots, should we remove it in time, and what should we do if it grows and extends everywhere?

古文：豪氂不伐，将用斧柯。 
现代文：细微嫩枝不及时砍掉它，等到长的粗壮了，就得用斧头了。 
English: If you do not cut off the tender twig in time, you will have to use an axe when it becomes long and thick.

古文：前虑不定，後有大患，将柰之何？
现代文：事前不考虑成熟，事后将有灾祸临头，那时对它将怎么办呢？
English: Without considering maturity in advance, there will be a disaster after the fact, and then what will happen to it?

古文：大王诚能听臣，六国从亲，专心并力壹意，则必无彊秦之患。
现代文：大王果真能听从我的建议，六国联合相亲，专心合力，一个意志，就一定没有强秦侵害的祸患了。
English: If the great king can really listen to my suggestion, and the six countries can jointly meet each other, concentrate on joint efforts, and have one will, then there will definitely be no evil of strong Qin infringement.

古文：故敝邑赵王使臣效愚计，奉明约，在大王之诏诏之。 
现代文：所以敝国的赵王派我来献上不成熟的策略，奉上详明的公约，全赖大王的指示号召大家了。 
English: Therefore, King Zhao of Shandong sent me to present an immature strategy, to present a detailed convention, and to call on everyone to fully rely on the instructions of the great king.

古文：魏王曰： 寡人不肖，未尝得闻明教。今主君以赵王之诏诏之，敬以国从。 
现代文：魏王说： 我没有出息，从没听说过如此贤明的指教，如今您奉赵王的使命来指教我，我将严肃地率领全国民众听从您的安排。 
English: Wei Wang said: I have no ambition, I have never heard of such wise advice. Now you are on a mission from Zhao Wang to advise me. I will seriously lead the people of the whole country to follow your arrangements.

古文：因东说齐宣王曰： 齐南有泰山，东有琅邪，西有清河，北有勃海，此所谓四塞之国也。
现代文：接着，苏秦又向东方游说齐宣王，说： 齐国南面有泰山，东面有瑯邪山，西面有清河，北面有渤海，这可说是四面都有天险的国家了。
English: Next, Su Qin lobbied Qixuan Wang to the east, saying: "Qi has Mount Tai in the south, Mount Qi in the east, the Qinghe River in the west, and the Bohai Sea in the north. This can be said to be a country with natural hazards on all sides.

古文：齐地方二千馀里，带甲数十万，粟如丘山。
现代文：齐国的土地纵横两千余里，武装部队几十万人，粮食堆积得象山丘一样高大。
English: The land of Qi is more than two thousand miles long and wide, the armed forces are hundreds of thousands of people, and the grain is piled up as high as the hills.

古文：三军之良，五家之兵，进如锋矢，战如雷霆，解如风雨。
现代文：三军精良，联合起五家的兵卒，进攻如同锋芒之刀刃、良弓之矢那样勇猛捷速，打起仗来好象雷霆震怒一样猛烈，撤退好象风雨一样快地消散。
English: Three excellent armies, the soldiers of five families united, the attack was as brave and swift as the blade of a sharp sword and the arrow of a good bow, the battle was as fierce as the thunder and fury, and the retreat dissipated as quickly as the wind and rain.

古文：即有军役，未尝倍泰山，绝清河，涉勃海也。
现代文：自有战役以来，从未征调过泰山以南的军队，也不曾渡过清河，涉过渤海去征调这二部的士兵。
English: Since the beginning of the campaign, the army south of Mount Taishan has never been conscripted, nor has it crossed the Qinghe River and waded through the Bohai Sea to recruit soldiers from these two parts.

古文：临菑之中七万户，臣窃度之，不下户三男子，三七二十一万，不待发於远县，而临菑之卒固已二十一万矣。
现代文：光是临淄就有居民七万户，我私下估计，每户不少于三个男子，三七二十一万，用不着征集远处县邑的兵源，光是临淄的士兵本来就够二十一万了。
English: Linyi alone has 70,000 households. I privately estimate that each household has no less than three men, 37.21 million. There is no need to recruit soldiers from distant counties and towns. Linyi alone has 210,000 soldiers.

古文：临菑甚富而实，其民无不吹竽鼓瑟，弹琴击筑，斗鸡走狗，六博蹋鞠者。
现代文：临淄富有而殷实，这里的居民没有不吹竽鼓瑟、弹琴击筑、斗鸡走狗、下棋踢球的。
English: Linyi is rich and affluent, and there is no resident here who does not play the drums, play the piano, walk the dog, play chess and kick the ball.

古文：临菑之涂，车毂击，人肩摩，连衽成帷，举袂成幕，挥汗成雨，家殷人足，志高气扬。
现代文：临淄的街道上车子拥挤得车轴互相撞击，人多得肩膀相互磨擦，把衣襟连接起来，可以形成围幔，举起衣袖，可以成为遮幕，大家挥洒的汗水，就象下雨一样，家家殷实，人人富足，志向高远，意志飞扬。
English: On the streets of Linyi, the cars are so crowded that the axles collide with each other, there are so many people that the shoulders rub against each other, the collars can be connected to form an enclosure, the sleeves can be raised to become a screen, and the sweat of everyone is like rain, the family is rich, everyone is rich, the ambition is high, and the will is flying.

古文：夫以大王之贤与齐之彊，天下莫能当。
现代文：凭借着大王的贤明和齐国的强盛，天下没有那个国家能够比得上。
English: With the wisdom of the great king and the prosperity of Qi, there is no country in the world that can match it.

古文：今乃西面而事秦，臣窃为大王羞之。
现代文：如今您却要向西去奉事秦国，我私下替大王感到羞耻。
English: Now you want to go west to serve Qin. I'm secretly ashamed for the great king.

古文： 且夫韩、魏之所以重畏秦者，为与秦接境壤界也。兵出而相当，不出十日而战胜存亡之机决矣。
现代文： 况且韩、魏之所以非常畏惧秦国，是因为他们和秦国的边界相接壤，假如双方派出军队交战，不出十天，胜败存亡的局势就决定了。
English: Moreover, the reason why Han and Wei were very afraid of Qin was because they shared a border with Qin. If the two sides sent troops to fight, the situation of victory or defeat would be decided within ten days.

古文：韩、魏战而胜秦，则兵半折，四境不守；战而不胜，则国已危亡随其後。
现代文：如果韩、魏战胜了秦国，那么自己的兵力要损失一半，四面的国境无法保卫；如果作战不能取胜，那么国家接着就陷入危亡的境地。
English: If Han and Wei defeated Qin, then they would lose half of their troops and the four-sided border could not be defended; if they could not win the battle, then the country would fall into a perilous situation.

古文：是故韩、魏之所以重与秦战，而轻为之臣也。
现代文：这就是韩、魏把和秦国作战看得那么重要，而很轻易地想要向秦国臣服的原因。
English: This is the reason why Han and Wei regarded the war with Qin as so important, and easily wanted to submit to Qin.

古文：今秦之攻齐则不然。倍韩、魏之地，过卫阳晋之道，径乎亢父之险，车不得方轨，骑不得比行，百人守险，千人不敢过也。秦虽欲深入，则狼顾，恐韩、魏之议其後也。
现代文：现在，秦国攻打齐国的情况就不同了，秦国背靠着韩、魏的土地，要经过卫国阳晋的要道，穿过齐国亢父的险塞，战车不能并驶，战马不能并行，只要有一百人守在险要之处，就是有一千人也不敢通过，即使秦国军队想要深入，就像狼一样疑虑重重，时常回顾，生怕韩、魏在后面暗算它。
English: Now, the situation of Qin's attack on Qi is different. Qin's back is against the land of Han and Wei, and it is necessary to pass through the important road of Yangjin, the defender of the country, and pass through the dangerous traffic jam of Qi's father. The chariots cannot drive side by side, and the horses cannot go side by side. As long as there are a hundred people guarding the critical places, even a thousand people will not dare to pass. Even if the Qin army wants to go deeper, it is full of doubts like a wolf. It often looks back, for fear that Han and Wei are plotting behind it.

古文：是故恫疑虚猲，骄矜而不敢进，则秦之不能害齐亦明矣。
现代文：所以它虚张声势，恐吓威胁。它虽然骄横矜夸却不敢冒险进攻，那么秦国不能危害齐国的形势也就相当明了啦。
English: Therefore, it is bluffing and threatening. Although it is arrogant and boastful, it does not dare to risk an attack. Then it is quite clear that Qin cannot harm Qi.

古文： 夫不深料秦之无柰齐何，而欲西面而事之，是群臣之计过也。
现代文： 不能深刻地估计到秦国根本对齐国无可奈何的实情，却想要向西而奉事秦国，这是群臣们策略上的错误。
English: It is a mistake in strategy for the ministers to want to serve Qin to the west, when they cannot deeply estimate the unavoidable reality that Qin is fundamentally aligned with the country.

古文：今无臣事秦之名而有彊国之实，臣是故原大王少留意计之。 
现代文：现在，齐国还没有向秦国臣服的丑名却有强大的国家实力，所以我希望大王稍微留心考虑一下，以便决定对策。 
English: At present, Qi has not yet been subjected to the bad name of Qin, but it has a strong national strength, so I hope the king will think about it a little in order to decide on a countermeasure.

古文：齐王曰： 寡人不敏，僻远守海，穷道东境之国也，未尝得闻馀教。
现代文：齐王说： 我不是一个聪明的人，居住在偏僻遥远、紧靠大海、道路绝尽、地处东境的国家，从未听到过您高明的教诲。
English: King Qi said, "I am not a wise man. I live in a remote country, close to the sea, with no roads, on the eastern border. I have never heard of your wise teachings.

古文：今足下以赵王诏诏之，敬以国从。 
现代文：如今您奉赵王的使命来指教我，我将严肃地率领全国民众听从您的安排。 
English: Now you are instructing me according to the mission of King Zhao, and I will earnestly lead the people of the whole country to follow your arrangements.

古文：乃西南说楚威王曰： 楚，天下之彊国也；王，天下之贤王也。
现代文：于是，苏秦又向西南去游说楚威王，说： 楚国，是天下强大的国家；大王，是天下贤明的国王。
English: As a result, Su Qin went to the southwest to lobby King Chu Wei, saying: Chu is a powerful country in the world; the great king is a wise king in the world.

古文：西有黔中、巫郡，东有夏州、海阳，南有洞庭、苍梧，北有陉塞、郇阳，地方五千馀里，带甲百万，车千乘，骑万匹，粟支十年。
现代文：楚国西边有黔中、巫郡，东边有夏州、海阳，南边有洞庭、苍梧，北边有径塞、郇阳，土地纵横五千多里，武装部队一百万，战车千辆，战马万匹，存粮足够支用十年。
English: On the west side of Chu, there are Fuzhong and Wushun; on the east side, there are Xiazhou and Haiyang; on the south side, there are Dongting and Cangwu; on the north side, there are Jiancang and Fuxiang; the land is more than 5,000 miles in length and width, the armed forces are one million, the chariots are one thousand, the horses are ten thousand, and the grain reserves are enough for ten years.

古文：此霸王之资也。
现代文：这是建立霸业的资本啊。
English: This is the capital to establish hegemony.

古文：夫以楚之彊与王之贤，天下莫能当也。
现代文：凭借着楚国的强大和大王的贤明，天下没有哪个国家能比得上。
English: With the power of Chu and the wisdom of the great king, no other country in the world can match it.

古文：今乃欲西面而事秦，则诸侯莫不西面而朝於章台之下矣。
现代文：如今您却想向西侍奉秦国，那么，天下就再没有哪个诸侯不向西面拜服在秦国的章台宫下了。
English: Now you want to go west to serve Qin, then there will be no other lords in the world who will not bow to the west under the Zhangdai Palace of Qin.

古文： 秦之所害莫如楚，楚彊则秦弱，秦彊则楚弱，其势不两立。
现代文： 秦国最大的忧患没有比得上楚国的，楚国强大，那么秦国就会弱小；秦国强大，那么楚国就会弱小。从这种情势判断，两国不能同时并存。
English: The biggest worry of Qin is not comparable to that of Chu. If Chu is strong, then Qin will be weak; if Qin is strong, then Chu will be weak. Judging from this situation, the two countries cannot coexist.

古文：故为大王计，莫如从亲以孤秦。
现代文：所以，我劝大王策划，不如合纵相亲，来孤立秦国。
English: Therefore, I advise the great king to plan, it is better to make a long-term relationship, to isolate Qin.

古文：大王不从，秦必起两军，一军出武关，一军下黔中，则鄢郢动矣。
现代文：如果大王不采纳合纵政策，秦国一定会出动两支军队，一支从武关出击，一支直下黔中，那么鄢郢的局势就动摇了。
English: If the great king did not adopt the policy of consolidation, Qin would certainly dispatch two armies, one from Wuguan and one directly from Yunnan, and the situation in Yunnan would be shaken.

古文： 臣闻治之其未乱也，为之其未有也。患至而后忧之，则无及已。
现代文： 我听说在未发生动乱之前，就应该治理它，在祸患没有降临之前，就要采取行动。要等到祸患临头，再去忧虑它，那就来不及了。
English: I have heard it said that it is necessary to govern before there is a disturbance, to act before the calamity comes, and to wait until the calamity comes before worrying about it.

古文：故原大王蚤孰计之。
现代文：所以希望大王能早作仔细的打算。
English: Therefore, I hope that the king can make careful plans early.

古文： 大王诚能听臣，臣请令山东之国奉四时之献，以承大王之明诏，委社稷，奉宗庙，练士厉兵，在大王之所用之。
现代文：大王果真能听从我的建议，我能山东使各国向您奉献四时的礼物，接受你英明的指教，把国家委托给您，奉献宗庙请您保护，训练士兵，磨砺兵器，听任大王的指挥。
English: If the great king can really listen to my advice, I can make Shandong make all countries offer you the gift of four hours, accept your wise advice, entrust the country to you, dedicate the ancestral temple to ask you for protection, train soldiers, sharpen weapons, and obey the command of the great king.

古文：大王诚能用臣之愚计，则韩、魏、齐、燕、赵、卫之妙音美人必充後宫，燕、代橐驼良马必实外厩。
现代文：大王果真能采纳我这不成熟的计策，那么，韩、魏、齐、燕、赵、卫等国动听的音乐和美丽的女子，一定会充满您的后宫。燕国、代地所产的骆驼、良马一定会充满您的畜圈。
English: If the great king can really adopt this immature strategy of mine, then the beautiful music and beautiful women of Han, Wei, Qi, Yan, Zhao, Wei and other countries will surely fill your harem. The camels and good horses produced by Yan and other countries will surely fill your stables.

古文：故从合则楚王，衡成则秦帝。
现代文：所以，合纵成功了，楚国就能称王。连衡成功了，秦国就能称帝。
English: Therefore, if the merger is successful, the state of Chu will be able to claim the throne. If the merger is successful, the state of Qin will be able to claim the throne.

古文：今释霸王之业，而有事人之名，臣窃为大王不取也。
现代文：如今您要放弃称王称霸的功业，蒙受侍奉别人的丑名，我私下认为大王这种做法不可取。
English: Now you want to give up the work of being king and hegemon, and get the bad name of serving others. I privately think that this approach is not advisable for a great king.

古文： 夫秦，虎狼之国也，有吞天下之心。
现代文： 秦，是虎狼一样凶恶的国家，还有吞并天下的野心。
English: Qin is a country as ferocious as tigers and wolves, with ambitions to annex the world.

古文：秦，天下之仇雠也。
现代文：秦国也是天下各诸侯的共同仇敌。
English: Qin was also the common enemy of all the princes in the world.

古文：衡人皆欲割诸侯之地以事秦，此所谓养仇而奉雠者也。
现代文：凡主张连衡的人都想分割各诸侯的土地奉献给秦国，这就叫做供养仇人和敬奉仇敌啊。
English: All those who advocate lianheng want to divide the lands of various provinces and dedicate them to Qin. This is called feeding the enemy and honoring the enemy.

古文：夫为人臣，割其主之地以外交彊虎狼之秦，以侵天下，卒有秦患，不顾其祸。
现代文：做为人家的臣子，却要分割自己国君的土地，用来和如狼似虎的强秦相交往，侵扰天下，而自己的国家突然遭受秦国的侵害，他们却不顾及这些灾祸。
English: As the vassals of a human family, they want to divide the land of their sovereign, to use it to interact with the strong Qin, which is like a wolf and tiger, to invade the world, and their own country is suddenly invaded by the Qin, but they do not care about these disasters.

古文：夫外挟彊秦之威以内劫其主，以求割地，大逆不忠，无过此者。
现代文：对外依仗着强秦的威势，用来在内部劫持自己的君主，索取割地，是最大的叛逆，最大的不忠，没有比这更严重的罪过了。
English: Relying on the might of the strong Qin Dynasty to the outside world, and using it to hijack one's own monarch internally, and to demand land to be divided, is the greatest rebellion, the greatest disloyalty. There is no more serious sin than this.

古文：故从亲则诸侯割地以事楚，衡合则楚割地以事秦，此两策者相去远矣，二者大王何居焉？
现代文：所以，合纵相亲，各诸侯就会割让土地奉事楚国，连衡成功，楚国就要割让土地奉事秦国，这两种策略相差太远了，这二者，大王要处于哪一方的立场呢？
English: Therefore, the two strategies are too far apart. If the two strategies are mutually beneficial, each vassal will cede land to serve the state of Chu. If the two strategies are mutually beneficial, the state of Chu will cede land to serve the state of Qin. Which side should the great king be on?

古文：故敝邑赵王使臣效愚计，奉明约，在大王诏之。 
现代文：所以敝国赵王派我来奉献这不成熟的策略，奉上详明的公约，全靠大王晓喻众人了。 
English: Therefore, King Zhao of the State of Shandong sent me to dedicate this immature strategy and to present a detailed convention. It is entirely up to the great king to make everyone aware of it.

古文：楚王曰： 寡人之国西与秦接境，秦有举巴蜀并汉中之心。
现代文：楚王说： 我国西边和秦国接壤，秦国有夺取巴、蜀并吞汉中的野心。
English: King Chu said: China's western border is with Qin, and Qin's ambition is to conquer Ba and Shu and annex Han.

古文：秦，虎狼之国，不可亲也。
现代文：秦，是虎狼一样凶恶的国家，是不可以亲近的。
English: Qin, a country as vicious as tigers and wolves, is not to be approached.

古文：而韩、魏迫於秦患，不可与深谋，与深谋恐反人以入於秦，故谋未发而国已危矣。
现代文：韩、魏经常遭受秦国侵害的威胁，不可以和他们作深入地策划。假如和他们深入地策划，恐怕有叛逆的人泄露给秦国，以致计划还没施行，而国家就面临危险了。
English: Han and Wei often suffered from the threat of invasion by Qin, and it was not possible to carry out in-depth planning with them. If they were to carry out in-depth planning with them, it was feared that some traitor would leak it to Qin, so that the plan would not be implemented, and the country would face danger.

古文：寡人自料以楚当秦，不见胜也；内与群臣谋，不足恃也。
现代文：我自己估计，拿楚国对抗秦国，不一定取得胜利；在朝廷内和群臣谋划，他们又不可信赖。
English: In my own estimation, taking the state of Chu against the state of Qin would not necessarily lead to victory; they could not be trusted to plot with the courtiers in the imperial court.

古文：寡人卧不安席，食不甘味，心摇摇然如县旌而无所终薄。
现代文：我躺在床上睡不安稳，吃东西也感觉不到香甜，心神恍恍惚惚，好像挂在空中的旗子，始终没有个着落。
English: I lay in bed and slept fitfully, I couldn't taste anything sweet when I ate, my mind was in a trance, like a flag hanging in the air, and I never settled down.

古文：今主君欲一天下，收诸侯，存危国，寡人谨奉社稷以从。 
现代文：现在您打算使天下统一，团结诸侯，使处于危境的国家保存下来，我愿意恭恭敬敬地把整个国家托付给您，听从您的安排。 
English: Now that you are planning to unify the world, unite the princes, and preserve the country in danger, I am willing to respectfully entrust the entire country to you and obey your arrangements.

古文：於是六国从合而并力焉。
现代文：于是，六国合纵成功，同心协力了。
English: As a result, the six countries succeeded in merging and made concerted efforts.

古文：苏秦为从约长，并相六国。
现代文：苏秦做了合纵联盟的盟长，同时兼任六国国相。
English: Su Qin became the leader of the United Front Alliance and concurrently served as the Minister of State of the six countries.

古文：北报赵王，乃行过雒阳，车骑辎重，诸侯各发使送之甚众，疑於王者。
现代文：苏秦北上向赵王复命，途中经过洛阳，随行的车辆马匹满载着行装，各诸侯派来送行的使者很多，气派比得上帝王。
English: Su Qin went to the north to restore Zhao Wang's life, passing Luoyang on the way. The accompanying vehicles and horses were fully loaded with baggage, and there were many messengers sent by various princes to see him off. The style was comparable to that of God's king.

古文：周显王闻之恐惧，除道，使人郊劳。
现代文：周显王听到这个消息感到害怕，赶快找人为他清除道路，并派使臣到郊外迎接慰劳。
English: Upon hearing this news, King Zhou Xian was terrified. He quickly found someone to clear the road for him, and sent an envoy to the suburbs to offer consolation.

古文：苏秦之昆弟妻嫂侧目不敢仰视，俯伏侍取食。
现代文：苏秦的兄弟、妻子、嫂子斜着眼不敢抬头看他，都俯伏在地上，非常恭敬地服侍他用饭。
English: Su Qin's brother, wife, and sister-in-law did not dare to look up at him with their eyes averted. They all prostrated themselves on the ground and very respectfully served him dinner.

古文：苏秦笑谓其嫂曰： 何前倨而後恭也？ 
现代文：苏秦笑着对嫂子说： 你以前为什么对我那么傲慢，现在却对我这么恭顺呢？ 
English: Su Qin smiled and said to her sister-in-law: Why were you so arrogant to me before, but now you are so obedient to me?

古文：嫂委石蒲蒲服，以面掩地而谢曰： 见季子位高金多也。 
现代文：他的嫂子赶紧伏俯在地上，弯曲着身子，匍匐到他面前，脸贴着地面请罪说： 因为我看到小叔您地位显贵，钱财多啊。 
English: His sister-in-law quickly prostrated herself on the ground, bent over, prostrated herself in front of him, and pleaded with her face to the ground, saying, "Because I saw that your uncle has a high position and a lot of money."

古文：苏秦喟然叹曰： 此一人之身，富贵则亲戚畏惧之，贫贱则轻易之，况众人乎！
现代文：苏秦感慨地叹息说： 同样是我这个人，富贵了，亲戚就敬畏我，贫贱时，就轻视我。何况一般人呢！
English: Su Qin sighed with emotion and said, "I am the same person. When I am rich, my relatives fear me. When I am poor, they despise me. How much more ordinary people!

古文：且使我有雒阳负郭田二顷，吾岂能佩六国相印乎！ 
现代文：假使我当初在洛阳近郊有二顷良田，如今，我难道还佩带得上六个国家的相印吗？ 
English: If I had two hectares of good farmland on the outskirts of Luoyang at the beginning, would I still be able to wear the stamps of six countries today?

古文：於是散千金以赐宗族朋友。
现代文：当时他就散发了千金，赏赐给亲戚朋友。
English: At that time, he distributed thousands of dollars to reward relatives and friends.

古文：初，苏秦之燕，贷人百钱为资，乃得富贵，以百金偿之。
现代文：当初，苏秦到燕国去，向人家借过一百钱做路费，现在富贵了，就拿出一百金偿还那个人。
English: At first, Su Qin went to Yan's country and borrowed one hundred yuan from someone to pay for the travel expenses. Now that he is rich, he took out one hundred yuan to repay that person.

古文：遍报诸所尝见德者。
现代文：并且报答了以前所有对他有恩德的人。
English: And he repaid everyone who had been kind to him in the past.

古文：其从者有一人独未得报，乃前自言。
现代文：他的随从人员中，唯独有一个人没得到报偿，就上前去自己申说。
English: But one of his attendants, who had not been paid, came forward to explain himself.

古文：苏秦曰： 我非忘子。子之与我至燕，再三欲去我易水之上，方是时，我困，故望子深，是以苏秦既约六国从亲，归赵，赵肃侯封为武安君，乃投从约书於秦。
现代文：苏秦说： 我不是忘了您，当初您跟我到燕国去，在易水边上，您再三要离开我，那时正当我困窘不堪，所以我深深地责怪您，所以把您放在最后，您现在也可以得到赏赐了。 苏秦约定六国联盟之后，回到赵国，赵肃侯封他为武安君，于是，苏秦把合纵盟约送交秦国。
English: Su Qin said: I didn't forget you, at the beginning you went with me to Yan Guo, on the edge of Yishui, you repeatedly wanted to leave me, at that time I was embarrassed, so I deeply blamed you, so I put you last, now you can also be rewarded. After Su Qin agreed on the six-nation alliance, he returned to Zhao Guo, Zhao Su Hou signed him as Wu An Jun, so Su Qin sent the alliance agreement to Qin Guo.

古文：秦兵不敢闚函谷关十五年。
现代文：从此秦国不敢窥伺函谷关以外的国家，长达十五年之久。
English: Since then, Qin State has not dared to spy on countries other than Hangu, for as long as fifteen years.

古文：其後秦使犀首欺齐、魏，与共伐赵，欲败从约。
现代文：后来秦国派使臣犀首欺骗齐国和魏国，和它们联合起来攻打赵国，打算破坏合纵联盟。
English: Later, Qin sent envoys to deceive Qi and Wei, and united with them to attack Zhao, intending to destroy the alliance.

古文：齐、魏伐赵，赵王让苏秦。
现代文：齐、魏攻打赵国，赵王就责备苏秦。
English: When Qi and Wei attacked Zhao, King Zhao rebuked Su Qin.

古文：苏秦恐，请使燕，必报齐。
现代文：苏秦害怕，请求出使燕国，一定要向齐国报复。
English: Su Qin was afraid and requested to send an envoy to Yan, so that he could take revenge on Qi.

古文：苏秦去赵而从约皆解。
现代文：苏秦离开赵国以后，合纵盟约便瓦解了。
English: After Su Qin left Zhao, the alliance disintegrated.

古文：秦惠王以其女为燕太子妇。
现代文：秦惠王把他的女儿嫁给燕国太子做妻子。
English: Qin Hui Wang married his daughter to Prince Yan as his wife.

古文：是岁，文侯卒，太子立，是为燕易王。
现代文：这一年，燕文侯去世，太子即位，这就是燕易王。
English: In the same year, Prince Yanwen passed away, and the crown prince ascended to the throne. This is King Yan Yi.

古文：易王初立，齐宣王因燕丧伐燕，取十城。
现代文：易王刚刚登位，齐宣王趁着燕国发丧之机，攻打燕国，一连攻克了十座城池。
English: Yi Wang had just ascended to the throne, Qi Xuan Wang took advantage of the opportunity of the death of Yan Guo to attack Yan Guo and conquered ten cities in a row.

古文：易王谓苏秦曰： 往日先生至燕，而先王资先生见赵，遂约六国从。
现代文：易王对苏秦说： 从前先生到燕国来，先王资助您去见赵王，于是才约定六国合纵。
English: Yi Wang said to Su Qin: Once upon a time, when you came to Yan Province, the previous king helped you to meet King Zhao, and that's how the Six Kingdoms Alliance was agreed upon.

古文：今齐先伐赵，次至燕，以先生之故为天下笑，先生能为燕得侵地乎？ 
现代文：如今齐国首先进攻赵国，接着又打到燕国，因为先生的缘故被天下人耻笑，先生能替燕国收复侵占的国土吗？ 
English: Now, Qi attacked Zhao first, and then went on to attack Yan. Because of him, the world laughed at him. Can he recover the occupied land for Yan?

古文：苏秦大惭，曰： 请为王取之。 
现代文：苏秦感到非常惭愧，说： 请让我替大王把失地收回来。 
English: Su Qin felt very ashamed and said, "Please let me recover the lost land for the great king."

古文：苏秦见齐王，再拜，俯而庆，仰而吊。
现代文：苏秦见到齐王，拜了两拜，弯下腰去，向齐王表示庆贺；仰起头来，又向齐王表示哀悼。
English: When Su Qin saw King Qi, he bowed twice, bent down and congratulated King Qi; when he looked up, he also expressed his condolences to King Qi.

古文：齐王曰： 是何庆吊相随之速也？ 
现代文：齐王说： 为什么庆贺和哀悼相继这么快呢？ 
English: Qi Wang said, "Why are celebration and mourning so soon after each other?"

古文：苏秦曰： 臣闻饥人所以饥而不食乌喙者，为其愈充腹而与饿死同患也。
现代文：苏秦说： 我听说饥饿的人，宁愿饥饿而不吃乌头这种有毒植物的原因，是因为它越是能填满肚子就和饿死的灾祸越是没有区别啊。
English: Su Qin said: I heard that the reason why hungry people would rather starve than eat aconite, a poisonous plant, is because the more it can fill the stomach, the more there is no difference between it and the scourge of starving to death.

古文：今燕虽弱小，即秦王之少婿也。
现代文：现在，燕国虽然弱小，但燕王却是秦王的小女婿。
English: Now, although Yan Guo is weak and small, Yan Wang is the youngest son-in-law of Qin Wang.

古文：大王利其十城而长与彊秦为仇。
现代文：大王占了他十座城池的便宜却长久地和强秦结成仇怨。
English: The great king took advantage of his ten castles, but for a long time he had a grudge against the strong Qin.

古文：今使弱燕为雁行而彊秦敝其後，以招天下之精兵，是食乌喙之类也。 
现代文：如今，使弱小的燕国像大雁一样相继飞行，强大的秦国跟在它的后面做掩护，从而招致天下的精锐部队攻击你，这和吃乌头是相类似的啊。 
English: Now, making the weak Yan country fly like geese one after another, and the powerful Qin country follow behind it to cover, thus inviting the world's elite troops to attack you, is similar to eating aconite.

古文：齐王愀然变色曰： 然则柰何？ 
现代文：齐王的脸色一下子变得凄怆而严肃，说： 既然如此，那怎么办呢？ 
English: King Qi's face suddenly became gloomy and serious. He said, "Since this is the case, what should we do?

古文：苏秦曰： 臣闻古之善制事者，转祸为福，因败为功。
现代文：苏秦说： 我听说古代善于处理事情的人，能够把灾祸转化为吉祥，通过失败变为成功。
English: Su Qin said: I heard that people who were good at handling things in ancient times could turn disaster into good luck, and turn failure into success.

古文：大王诚能听臣计，即归燕之十城。
现代文：大王果真能听从我的计策，立即归还燕国的十座城池。
English: The great king can really listen to my strategy and immediately return the ten castles of Yan country.

古文：燕无故而得十城，必喜；秦王知以己之故而归燕之十城，亦必喜。
现代文：燕国白白地收回十城，一定很高兴。秦王知道因为他的关系而归还燕国的十城，也一定很高兴。
English: Yan Guo recovered the ten cities in vain, he must be very happy. Qin Wang knew that because of his relationship, he returned the ten cities of Yan Guo, he must also be very happy.

古文：此所谓弃仇雠而得石交者也。
现代文：这就叫做放弃仇恨而得到牢不可破的友谊。
English: This is called giving up hatred and gaining unbreakable friendship.

古文：夫燕、秦俱事齐，则大王号令天下，莫敢不听。
现代文：燕国、秦国都来奉事齐国，那么大王对天下发出的号令，没有敢不听的。
English: Yan and Qin both came to serve Qi, so the great king did not dare to disobey the order he issued to the world.

古文：是王以虚辞附秦，以十城取天下。此霸王之业也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：这就等于用虚夸不实地依附秦国，实际上却以十城的代价取得天下，这是称霸天下的功业啊。 齐王说： 好 。
English: This is tantamount to falsely and boastfully adhering to Qin, but actually gaining the whole country at the cost of ten cities. This is the achievement of dominating the world. King Qi said: Good.

古文：於是乃归燕之十城。
现代文：于是就归还了燕国的十座城池。
English: As a result, the ten castles and ponds in Yan's country were returned.

古文：人有毁苏秦者曰： 左右卖国反覆之臣也，将作乱。 
现代文：有毁谤苏秦的人说： 苏秦是个左右摇摆、出卖国家、反复无常的臣子，将要引起乱子。 
English: Some people who slandered Su Qin said: Su Qin is a capricious courtier who swings from side to side, betrays the country, and will cause chaos.

古文：苏秦恐得罪归，而燕王不复官也。
现代文：苏秦生怕获罪，回到燕国，而燕王却不给他官职。
English: Su Qinsheng was afraid of being found guilty and returned to Yan's country, but Yan Wang did not give him an official post.

古文：苏秦见燕王曰： 臣，东周之鄙人也，无有分寸之功，而王亲拜之於庙而礼之於廷。
现代文：苏秦求见燕王说： 我是东周一个鄙陋的人，没有一点功劳，而大王却在宗庙里授与我官职，在朝廷上以礼相待。
English: Su Qin asked to see Yan Wang and said: I am a despicable person in Eastern Zhou, without any merit, but the great king awarded me an official post in the ancestral temple and treated me with courtesy at the court.

古文：今臣为王卻齐之兵而得十城，宜以益亲。
现代文：如今，我为大王说退了齐国的军队，又收回了十座城池，应该对我越发地亲近。
English: Now that I have withdrawn the troops of Qi and recovered ten cities for the Great King, you should get closer and closer to me.

古文：今来而王不官臣者，人必有以不信伤臣於王者。臣之不信，王之福也。
现代文：如今我回到燕国而大王不授与我官职，一定有人以不忠实的罪名在您面前中伤我。其实我的 不忠实 ，正是大王的福气啊。
English: Now that I have returned to the Kingdom of the Swallows and the Great King has not given me an official position, someone must have slandered me in front of you with the accusation of being unfaithful. In fact, my unfaithfulness is the blessing of the Great King.

古文：臣闻忠信者，所以自为也；进取者，所以为人也。
现代文：我听说忠诚信实的人，一切都为着自己的目的；奋发进取的人，一切都为着别人去努力。
English: I have heard it said that those who are loyal and faithful do everything for their own ends, and those who are enterprising do everything for the sake of others.

古文：且臣之说齐王，曾非欺之也。
现代文：况且我游说齐王，也没有欺骗他啊。
English: Moreover, I lobbied King Qi and did not deceive him.

古文：臣弃老母於东周，固去自为而行进取也。
现代文：我把老母抛在东周，本来就不打算为自己树立忠信的名声，而决心帮助别人求得进取。
English: I left my mother in the East Zhou, and originally did not intend to establish a reputation for loyalty, but was determined to help others get ahead.

古文：今有孝如曾参，廉如伯夷，信如尾生。得此三人者以事大王，何若？ 
现代文：现在，假如有像曾参一样孝顺，像伯夷一样廉洁，像尾生一样信实的人，让这样三种人去奉事大王，您认为怎样？ 
English: Now, if there are people who are as filial as Zeng Zhan, as incorruptible as Bo Yi, and as faithful as Ou Sheng, let these three kinds of people serve the great king, what do you think?

古文：王曰： 足矣。 
现代文：燕王回答说： 足够了。 
English: The swallow king replied, "That's enough.

古文：苏秦曰： 孝如曾参，义不离其亲一宿於外，王又安能使之步行千里而事弱燕之危王哉？
现代文：苏秦说： 像曾参一样孝顺，为尽孝道，决不离开父母在外面过上一夜。像这样您又怎么能让他步行千里，来到弱小的燕国，侍奉处在危困中的国君呢？
English: Su Qin said, "He is as filial as Zeng Zhan. In order to fulfill his filial duty, he would never leave his parents to spend the night outside. How can you let him walk thousands of miles to the weak country of Yan to serve the king who is in danger?

古文：廉如伯夷，义不为孤竹君之嗣，不肯为武王臣，不受封侯而饿死首阳山下。
现代文：像伯夷一样的廉洁，坚守正义，不愿作孤竹君的继承人，不肯作周武王的臣子，不接受赐爵封侯而最终饿死在首阳山下。
English: He was as incorruptible as Bo Yi, adhered to justice, did not want to be the heir of Lone Bamboo Prince, refused to be the vassal of King Zhou Wu, did not accept to be given the title of prince, and eventually starved to death at the foot of Shouyang Mountain.

古文：有廉如此，王又安能使之步行千里而行进取於齐哉？
现代文：像他这样廉洁，大王又怎么能让他步行千里到齐国干一番事业取回十座城池呢？
English: As he is so incorruptible, how could the great king let him walk thousands of miles to Qi to do one thing and take back ten cities?

古文：信如尾生，与女子期於梁下，女子不来，水至不去，抱柱而死。
现代文：像尾生那样城信，和女子相约在桥下幽会，女子如期没来，洪水来了也不离去，紧抱桥柱被水淹死。
English: Like Omiya, Shigenobu made an appointment with a woman to meet under the bridge, but the woman did not come as planned. When the flood came, she did not leave, and she was drowned while clinging to the bridge pillar.

古文：有信如此，王又安能使之步行千里卻齐之彊兵哉？
现代文：像这样的诚信，大王又怎么能让他步行千里退去齐国强大的军队呢？
English: With such integrity, how could the great king let him walk thousands of miles away from the powerful army of Qi?

古文：臣所谓以忠信得罪於上者也。 
现代文：我正是以所谓的忠诚信实在国君面前获罪的呀。 
English: It was precisely my so-called loyalty and faithfulness that I was found guilty of in front of the sovereign.

古文：燕王曰： 若不忠信耳，岂有以忠信而得罪者乎？ 
现代文：燕王说： 你自己不忠诚信实罢了，难道还有因为忠诚信实而获罪的吗？ 
English: Yan Wang said, "You yourself are not loyal and trustworthy. Do you still feel guilty for being loyal and trustworthy?"

古文：苏秦曰： 不然。
现代文：苏秦说： 不是这样的。
English: Su Qin said: This is not the case.

古文：臣闻客有远为吏而其妻私於人者，其夫将来，其私者忧之，妻曰 勿忧，吾已作药酒待之矣 。
现代文：我听说有一个人在很远的地方作官，他的妻子和别人私通，她的丈夫快要回来时，和她私通的人就忧虑，妻子说： 你不要担心，我已经作好了毒酒等着他呢。 
English: I heard about a man who was an official in a faraway place. His wife was having an affair. When her husband was about to return, the man she was having an affair with was worried. The wife said, "Don't worry, I've made poisoned wine and I'm waiting for him."

古文：居三日，其夫果至，妻使妾举药酒进之。妾欲言酒之有药，则恐其逐主母也，欲勿言乎，则恐其杀主父也。於是乎详僵而弃酒。
现代文：过了三天，她丈夫果然到了，妻子让侍妾端着有毒的酒给他喝，侍妾想告诉他酒中有毒，又恐怕他把主母赶走；可是不告诉他吧，又恐怕她的毒酒害死了主父，于是她假装跌倒，把酒泼在地上。
English: Three days later, her husband did indeed arrive, and his wife had a concubine bring him poisoned wine to drink. The concubine wanted to tell him that the wine was poisoned, and she was afraid that he would drive his mistress away; but she didn't want to tell him, and she was afraid that her poisoned wine would kill her master, so she pretended to fall down and threw the wine on the ground.

古文：主父大怒，笞之五十。
现代文：主父大发雷霆之怒，将她打了五十竹板。
English: Her father flew into a rage and beat her with 50 bamboo planks.

古文：故妾一僵而覆酒，上存主父，下存主母，然而不免於笞，恶在乎忠信之无罪也？
现代文：所以侍妾一跌倒而泼掉了那杯毒酒，在上保存了主父，在下保存了主母，可是自己却免不掉挨竹板子，怎么能说忠诚信实就不能获罪呢？
English: So the concubine fell down and spilled the poisoned wine, saved the master at the top and the mistress at the bottom, but she couldn't save herself. How can you say that being loyal and faithful can't be a crime?

古文：夫臣之过，不幸而类是乎！ 
现代文：不幸的是我的罪过跟侍妾的遭遇相类似啊！ 
English: Unfortunately, my sin is similar to what happened to the concubine!

古文：燕王曰： 先生复就故官。 
现代文：燕王说： 先生恢复原来的官职吧。 
English: Yan Wang said: Let the teacher resume his former official position.

古文：益厚遇之。
现代文：从此燕王愈发优厚地对待他。
English: From then on, Yan Wang treated him more and more generously.

古文：易王母，文侯夫人也，与苏秦私通。
现代文：燕易王的母亲，是燕文侯的夫人。与苏秦私通。
English: Yan Yi Wang's mother was the wife of Yan Wen Hou. She had an affair with Su Qin.

古文：燕王知之，而事之加厚。
现代文：燕易王知道这件事，却对苏秦的待遇更加优厚。
English: Yan Yi Wang knew about this, but treated Su Qin more generously.

古文：苏秦恐诛，乃说燕王曰： 臣居燕不能使燕重，而在齐则燕必重。 
现代文：苏秦恐怕被杀，就劝说燕王： 我留在燕国，不能使燕国的地位提高，假如我在齐国，就一定能提高燕国的地位。 
English: Su Qin feared that he would be killed, so he persuaded Yan Wang: If I stay in Yan, I cannot improve the status of Yan. If I stay in Qi, I can definitely improve the status of Yan.

古文：燕王曰： 唯先生之所为。 
现代文：燕王说： 一切听任先生去做吧。 
English: Yan Wang said, "Leave everything to your master.

古文：於是苏秦详为得罪於燕而亡走齐，齐宣王以为客卿。
现代文：于是，苏秦假装得罪了燕王而逃跑到齐国。齐宣王便任用他为客卿。
English: As a result, Su Qin pretended to have offended Yan Wang and fled to Qi. Qi Xuan Wang then appointed him as a guest.

古文：齐宣王卒，湣王即位，说湣王厚葬以明孝，高宫室大苑囿以明得意，欲破敝齐而为燕。
现代文：齐宣王去世，湣王继位，苏秦就劝说湣王把葬礼办得铺张隆重，用来表明自己的孝道，高高地建筑宫室，大规模地开辟园林，以表明自己得志，其实苏秦打算使齐国破败，从而有利于燕国。
English: After the death of King Qi Xuan and the succession of King Yao, Su Qin persuaded King Yao to hold a grand funeral to show his filial piety, build a palace at a high altitude, and open a large-scale garden to show his ambition. In fact, Su Qin intended to ruin Qi and benefit Yan.

古文：燕易王卒，燕哙立为王。
现代文：燕易王去世，燕哙登基做了国君。
English: King Yan Yi died, and Yan Xun ascended to the throne and became the sovereign.

古文：其後齐大夫多与苏秦争宠者，而使人刺苏秦，不死，殊而走。
现代文：此后，齐国大夫中有许多人和苏秦争夺国君的宠信，因而派人刺杀苏秦，苏秦当时没死，带着致命的伤逃跑了。
English: After that, many of the doctors of the State of Qi competed with Su Qin for the favor of the sovereign, so they sent someone to assassinate Su Qin. Su Qin did not die at that time, but fled with a fatal wound.

古文：齐王使人求贼，不得。
现代文：齐王派人捉拿凶手，然而没有抓到。
English: King Qi sent someone to catch the murderer, but he was not caught.

古文：苏秦且死，乃谓齐王曰： 臣即死，车裂臣以徇於市，曰 苏秦为燕作乱於齐 ，如此则臣之贼必得矣。 
现代文：苏秦将要死去，便对齐王说： 我马上就要死了，请您在人口集中的街市上把我五马分尸示众，就说： 苏秦为了燕国在齐国谋乱 ，这样做，刺杀我的凶手一定可以抓到。 
English: Su Qin was about to die, so he said to the king of Qi: I am about to die, please display my five-horse corpse on the crowded street market, and said: Su Qin is plotting chaos in Qi for the sake of Yan, and by doing so, my murderer can definitely be caught.

古文：於是如其言，而杀苏秦者果自出，齐王因而诛之。
现代文：当时，齐王就按照他的话做了，那个刺杀苏秦的凶手果然自动出来了，齐王因而就把他杀了。
English: At that time, King Qi did as he was told, and the murderer of Su Qin did indeed come out of nowhere, so King Qi killed him.

古文：燕闻之曰： 甚矣，齐之为苏生报仇也！ 
现代文：燕王听到这个消息说： 齐国为苏先生报仇，作法也太过份啦。 
English: Upon hearing this news, Yan Wang said: Qi Guo's revenge for Mr. Su is too excessive.

古文：苏秦既死，其事大泄。
现代文：苏秦死后不久，他为燕国破坏齐国的大量事实泄露出来。
English: Shortly after Su Qin's death, a large number of facts about his sabotage of Qi for Yan Guo leaked out.

古文：齐後闻之，乃恨怒燕。
现代文：后来，齐国听到这些秘密，就把恼恨迁怒燕国。
English: Later, when Qi heard about these secrets, he took his anger out on Yan.

古文：燕甚恐。
现代文：燕王很害怕。
English: Yan Wang was very scared.

古文：苏秦之弟曰代，代弟苏厉，见兄遂，亦皆学。
现代文：苏秦的弟弟叫苏代，代的弟弟叫苏厉，他们看到哥哥功成名就，遂顺心愿，也都发奋学习纵横之术。
English: Su Qin's younger brother was named Su Dai, and his younger brother was named Su Li. Seeing their brother's success, they followed their heart's desire and also worked hard to learn the horizontal and vertical techniques.

古文：及苏秦死，代乃求见燕王，欲袭故事。
现代文：等到苏秦死了，苏代就去求见燕王，打算承袭苏秦的旧业。
English: When Su Qin died, Su Dai went to see Yan Wang, intending to inherit Su Qin's old business.

古文：曰： 臣，东周之鄙人也。
现代文：他对燕王说： 臣，是东周鄙陋的人。
English: He said to Yan Wang, "Minister, you are a despicable person.

古文：窃闻大王义甚高，鄙人不敏，释鉏耨而干大王。
现代文：私下听说大王德行很高，鄙人很愚笨，放弃农具来求见大王。
English: Privately, I heard that the great king was very virtuous and the humble man was very stupid, giving up farm tools to seek the great king.

古文：至於邯郸，所见者绌於所闻於东周，臣窃负其志。
现代文：到了赵国邯郸，所看到的情况远不如我在东周听到的，我私下决定担负起为您做一番事业的志向。
English: When I arrived in Zhao Guozhen, the situation I saw was far worse than what I heard in Eastern Zhou. I privately decided to take on the ambition of doing a good job for you.

古文：及至燕廷，观王之群臣下吏，王，天下之明王也。 
现代文：等到了燕国朝廷，遍观大王的臣子、下吏，才知道大王是天下最贤明的国君啊。 
English: It wasn't until Yan's imperial court was visited by the emperor's vassals and subordinate officials that they learned that the emperor was the wisest sovereign in the world.

古文：燕王曰： 子所谓明王者何如也？ 
现代文：燕王说： 您所说的贤明的国君是什么样的呢？ 
English: Yan Wang said: What kind of wise sovereign are you talking about?

古文：对曰： 臣闻明王务闻其过，不欲闻其善，臣请谒王之过。
现代文：苏代回答说： 我听说贤明的国君一定愿听到别人指出他的过失，而不希望只听到别人称赞他的优点，请允许让我说明大王的过失。
English: Sudai replied, "I have heard that a wise ruler must be willing to hear others point out his faults, rather than only hear others praise his merits. Please allow me to explain the faults of the great king."

古文：夫齐、赵者，燕之仇雠也；楚、魏者，燕之援国也。
现代文：齐国和赵国，是燕国的仇敌，楚国和魏国，是燕国的后援国家。
English: Qi and Zhao were the enemies of Yan, while Chu and Wei were the backers of Yan.

古文：今王奉仇雠以伐援国，非所以利燕也。
现代文：如今，大王却去奉承仇敌而攻打能援救自己的国家，这对燕国是没有好处的。
English: Now, the great king is flattering the enemy and attacking the country that can save himself, which is not good for Yan.

古文：王自虑之，此则计过，无以闻者，非忠臣也。 
现代文：请大王自己想一想，这是策略上的失误，不把这种失误讲给您听的人，就不是忠臣。 
English: Think for yourself, Your Majesty. This is a strategic blunder, and anyone who does not tell you about it is not a loyal subject.

古文：王曰： 夫齐者固寡人之雠，所欲伐也，直患国敝力不足也。
现代文：燕王说： 齐国本来就是我的仇敌，是要讨伐的国家，只是担心国家衰弱，没有足够的力量。
English: Yan Wang said: Qi was originally my enemy, a country that I wanted to fight, but I was worried that the country was weak and did not have enough strength.

古文：子能以燕伐齐，则寡人举国委子。 
现代文：假如您能以燕国现有的力量讨伐齐国，那么，我愿把整个国家托付给您。 
English: If you can fight against Qi with the existing strength of Yan, then I would like to entrust the entire country to you.

古文：对曰： 凡天下战国七，燕处弱焉。
现代文：苏代回答说： 天下能够互相征战的国家共有七个，而燕国处于弱小的地位。
English: Su Dai replied: There are seven countries in the world that can fight each other, and Yan Guo is in a weak position.

古文：独战则不能，有所附则无不重。
现代文：单独作战不能取得胜利，然而只要有所依附，那么就没有不提高声威的。
English: No victory can be achieved by fighting alone, but as long as there is attachment, then there is no one who does not raise his voice.

古文：南附楚，楚重；西附秦，秦重；中附韩、魏，韩、魏重。
现代文：向南依附楚国，楚国的声威提高；向西依附秦国，秦国的声威提高。中部依附韩国、魏国，韩国、魏国的声威提高。
English: To the south, it adhered to the State of Chu, and the prestige of the State of Chu increased; to the west, it adhered to the State of Qin, and the prestige of the State of Qin increased; to the center, it adhered to the State of Korea and the State of Wei, and the prestige of the State of Korea and the State of Wei increased.

古文：且苟所附之国重，此必使王重矣。
现代文：假如所依附的国家声威提高了，这样也就一定能使您的声威提高啊。
English: If the national prestige of the country you are attached to is raised, this will certainly make your prestige rise.

古文：今夫齐，长主而自用也。
现代文：如今齐国的国君，年纪大而固执自信，听不进别人的意见。
English: Now the sovereign of Qi is old, stubborn and self-confident, and does not listen to the opinions of others.

古文：南攻楚五年，畜聚竭；西困秦三年，士卒罢敝；北与燕人战，覆三军，得二将。
现代文：他向南攻打楚国长达五年之久，积聚的财富也消耗尽了；西边被秦国困扰了多年，士兵们已疲惫衰败；向北和燕国人作战，以三军覆没的代价，仅仅俘虏了两名将领。
English: He attacked Chu to the south for five long years, and the accumulated wealth was exhausted; the west was plagued by Qin for many years, and the soldiers were exhausted and decayed; he fought the Yan people to the north, and only captured two generals at the cost of the destruction of the three armies.

古文：然而以其馀兵南面举五千乘之大宋，而包十二诸侯。
现代文：然而，还要发动剩余的兵力向南攻打拥有五千辆战车的宋国，吞并十二个小诸侯国。
English: However, he still had to send his remaining forces south to attack Song, which had five thousand chariots, and annex twelve small states.

古文：此其君欲得，其民力竭，恶足取乎！
现代文：这是他们国君的欲望，可是他们的民力已经枯竭了，怎么能够办得到呢？
English: This is the desire of their sovereigns, but their people's strength has been exhausted, how can they do it?

古文：且臣闻之，数战则民劳，久师则兵敝矣。 
现代文：况且我听说过，连续打仗，百姓就疲困劳乏，战争持续太久，士兵就疲惫不堪。 
English: Moreover, I have heard that if the war continues, the people will be exhausted, and if the war continues for a long time, the soldiers will be exhausted.

古文：燕王曰： 吾闻齐有清济、浊河可以为固，长城、钜防足以为塞，诚有之乎？ 
现代文：燕王说： 我听说齐国据有清济、浊河可以用来固守，长城、钜防足以作为要塞，果真是这样吗？ 
English: Yan Wang said, "I heard that Qingzhi and the Li River in Qi Province can be used to defend the country, and that the Great Wall and fortifications are enough to serve as a fortress. Is this really true?"

古文：对曰： 天时不与，虽有清济、浊河，恶足以为固！
现代文：苏代回答说： 天时不给他有利的机会，即使有清济、浊河怎么能够固守呢？
English: Sudai replied, "If the weather does not give him a favorable opportunity, even if there is Qingzhi and Luohe, how can he stick to it?

古文：民力罢敝，虽有长城、钜防，恶足以为塞！
现代文：百姓已经疲困劳乏，即使有长城、钜防，怎么能够成为要塞呢？
English: The people are already tired and exhausted. Even if there is a Great Wall and fortifications, how can it become a fortress?

古文：且异日济西不师，所以备赵也；河北不师，所以备燕也。
现代文：况且，以前不征发济州以西的兵力，目的是为了防备赵国的入侵，不征发漯河以北的兵力，目的是为了防备燕国的入侵。
English: Moreover, in the past, troops west of Jeju were not conscripted for the purpose of preventing the invasion of Zhao, and troops north of the Min River were not conscripted for the purpose of preventing the invasion of Yan.

古文：今济西河北尽已役矣，封内敝矣。
现代文：如今，济西、河北的兵力都被征发参战了，境内的防卫力量已很薄弱了。
English: Today, the military forces of Jixi and Hebei have all been conscripted into the war, and the defense forces in the territory have become very weak.

古文：夫骄君必好利，而亡国之臣必贪於财。
现代文：骄横的国君一定好利，亡国的臣子一定贪财。
English: Arrogant sovereigns must be greedy for profit, and exiled courtiers must be greedy for money.

古文：王诚能无羞从子母弟以为质，宝珠玉帛以事左右，彼将有德燕而轻亡宋，则齐可亡已。 
现代文：大王如果能够不因为以侄儿弟弟做为人质而感到羞耻，用宝珠、美玉、布帛去贿赂齐王的亲信，那么齐王就会友好地对待燕国，而轻率地出兵去消灭宋国，那么，这样一来，齐国就可以灭掉了。 
English: If the great king could not be ashamed of taking his nephew and younger brother as hostages, and bribe the close friends of King Qi with precious beads, precious stones, and cloth, then King Qi would treat Yan's country in a friendly manner, and rashly send troops to destroy Song's country, then, in this way, Qi could be eliminated.

古文：燕王曰： 吾终以子受命於天矣。 
现代文：燕王说： 我终于凭借着您而承受灭亡齐国的天命了。 
English: Yan Wang said, "I have finally, thanks to you, received the divine destiny of the destruction of Qi."

古文：燕乃使一子质於齐。
现代文：燕国就派了一位公子到齐国充当人质。
English: Yan Province sent a nobleman to Qi Province to act as a hostage.

古文：而苏厉因燕质子而求见齐王。
现代文：苏厉也借着燕国派人质的机会求见齐王。
English: Su Li also took advantage of the opportunity that Yan Guo sent a hostage to ask for a meeting with King Qi.

古文：齐王怨苏秦，欲囚苏厉。
现代文：齐王怨恨苏秦，打算把苏厉囚禁起来。
English: King Qi resented Su Qin and planned to imprison Su Li.

古文：燕质子为谢，已遂委质为齐臣。
现代文：燕国质子替他在齐王面前请罪，随后苏厉就委身做了齐国的臣子。
English: Yan Guo's proton pleaded guilty for him in front of the king of Qi, and then Su Li committed himself to be a courtier of Qi.

古文：燕相子之与苏代婚，而欲得燕权，乃使苏代侍质子於齐。
现代文：燕国的宰相子之与苏代结为姻亲，子之想夺取燕国的政权，就派苏代到齐国去侍奉做人质的那位公子。
English: Zi Zi, the prime minister of Yan, was related by marriage to Su Dai. Zi Zi wanted to seize power in Yan, so he sent Su Dai to Qi to serve the prince who was a hostage.

古文：齐使代报燕，燕王哙问曰： 齐王其霸乎？ 
现代文：齐王派遣苏代回燕国复命，燕王哙问道： 齐王可能要称霸了吧？ 
English: King Qi sent the Su Dynasty back to the Yan Kingdom to answer the call, and King Yan asked: King Qi may want to dominate, right?

古文：曰： 不能。 
现代文：苏代回答说： 不可能。 
English: Sudet answered: "Impossible.

古文：曰： 何也？ 
现代文：燕王说： 为什么呢？ 
English: Yan Wang said: Why?

古文：曰： 不信其臣。 
现代文：苏代回答说： 齐王不信任他的臣子。 
English: Sudai replied, "King Qi does not trust his vassals."

古文：於是燕王专任子之，已而让位，燕大乱。
现代文：于是，燕王专一重用子之，不久又把王位禅让给子之，燕国因此大乱。
English: As a result, the King of the Swans used his son very heavily, and soon gave the throne to his son Zen. As a result, the Kingdom of the Swans was in turmoil.

古文：齐伐燕，杀王哙、子之。
现代文：齐国趁机攻打燕国，杀了燕王哙和子之。
English: Qi took advantage of the opportunity to attack Yan and killed Yan's king, Yu Kazuchika.

古文：燕立昭王，而苏代、苏厉遂不敢入燕，皆终归齐，齐善待之。
现代文：燕国拥立昭王即位，而苏代、苏厉就再不敢回到燕国来，最后都归附了齐国，齐王友好地对待他们。
English: The Yan Kingdom supported the enthronement of King Zhao, while the Su Dynasty and the Su Li Dynasty did not dare to return to the Yan Kingdom. In the end, they all joined the Qi Kingdom, and the Qi King treated them in a friendly manner.

古文：苏代过魏，魏为燕执代。
现代文：苏代经过魏国，魏国替燕国拘捕了苏代。
English: The Su Dynasty passed through Wei, and Wei arrested the Su Dynasty on behalf of Yan.

古文：齐使人谓魏王曰： 齐请以宋地封泾阳君，秦必不受。
现代文：齐王派人去对魏王说： 齐国想要把宋地分封给秦王的弟弟泾阳君，秦王一定不肯接受。
English: The king of Qi sent a man to the king of Wei and said, "If the state of Qi wants to assign Song to the brother of the king of Qin, Shenyang, the king of Qin will not accept it."

古文：秦非不利有齐而得宋地也，不信齐王与苏子也。
现代文：秦王并不是不愿齐国的协助而夺取宋国的土地，而是他不相信齐王和苏先生。
English: It was not that King Qin did not want the assistance of King Qi to seize the land of Song, but that he did not trust King Qi and Mr. Su.

古文：今齐魏不和如此其甚，则齐不欺秦。
现代文：如今齐国和魏国矛盾已经达到如此严重的地步，那么齐国就不会去欺骗秦国。
English: Now that the contradiction between Qi and Wei has reached such a serious level, then Qi will not deceive Qin.

古文：秦信齐，齐秦合，泾阳君有宋地，非魏之利也。
现代文：秦国也会相信齐国，齐、秦联合起来，泾阳君就会得到宋国的土地，这就不是一件有利于魏国的事了。
English: Qin would also believe in Qi, and if Qi and Qin united, Poyang would get the land of Song, which would not be a good thing for Wei.

古文：故王不如东苏子，秦必疑齐而不信苏子矣。
现代文：所以大王不如让苏先生东归齐国，秦王一定会怀疑齐王，而又不相信苏先生了。
English: Therefore, it is better for the great king to let Mr. Su return to Qi. The Qin king will certainly doubt the Qi king, but will not believe Mr. Su.

古文：齐秦不合，天下无变，伐齐之形成矣。 
现代文：齐、秦不能联合，天下的局势就不会有什么大的变动，攻打齐国的形势就形成了。 
English: If Qi and Qin could not unite, the situation in the world would not have any major changes, and the situation of attacking Qi was formed.

古文：於是出苏代。代之宋，宋善待之。
现代文：于是魏国释放了苏代，苏代到了宋国，宋王友好地对待他。
English: So Wei released Sudai, Sudai came to Song, and Song treated him kindly.

古文：齐伐宋，宋急，苏代乃遗燕昭王书曰：
现代文：齐国攻打宋国，宋国危急，苏代就写了一封信致送燕昭王，说：
English: When Qi attacked Song and Song was in a critical situation, the Su Dynasty wrote a letter to Yan Zhao Wang, saying:

古文：夫列在万乘而寄质於齐，名卑而权轻；奉万乘助齐伐宋，民劳而实费；夫破宋，残楚淮北，肥大齐，雠彊而国害：此三者皆国之大败也。
现代文：燕国是列入万乘的大国，却向齐国派遣了人质，名声卑下而权力低微；奉献出众多军队帮助齐国攻打宋国，使得百姓劳困而财力消费；即便打败宋国，残害楚国的淮北，只能壮大齐国，帮助仇敌日益强大而残害了自己的国家；这三方面都是对燕国很不利的事。
English: Yan's country is a great country listed in Wanxiang, but it has sent hostages to Qi, with a low reputation and low power; it has dedicated many troops to help Qi attack Song, making the people work hard and consume financial resources; even if it defeats Song and destroys Huaibei in Ch'u, it can only strengthen Qi, and help the enemy become increasingly powerful and destroy its own country; these three aspects are very unfavorable to Yan.

古文：然且王行之者，将以取信於齐也。
现代文：虽然如此，可是大王还在继续这样干下去，是为了取得齐国的信任。
English: In spite of this, however, the great king continued to do so in order to gain the trust of the Qi.

古文：齐加不信於王，而忌燕愈甚，是王之计过矣。
现代文：齐国对大王更加不信任，而且对燕国的忌恨越来越深，这就说明大王的策略是错误的。
English: Qi's distrust of the great king deepened, and his hatred of Yan deepened. This showed that the great king's strategy was wrong.

古文：夫以宋加之淮北，强万乘之国也，而齐并之，是益一齐也。
现代文：把宋国和楚国淮北加在一起，抵得上一个强大的万乘国家，而齐国吞并了它，就等于使齐国得益于一倍的国力。
English: If Song and Chu and Huaibei were added together, they would be equal to the last powerful Wanxiang country, and if Qi annexed it, it would be equal to doubling the national strength of Qi.

古文：北夷方七百里，加之以鲁、卫，彊万乘之国也，而齐并之，是益二齐也。
现代文：北夷纵横七百里，再把鲁国和卫国加上，又抵得上一个强大的万乘国家。
English: Beiyi has a length and breadth of seven hundred miles, and if we add Lu and Wei, it is equal to a powerful country of Wanxiang.

古文：夫一齐之彊，燕犹狼顾而不能支，今以三齐临燕，其祸必大矣。
现代文：齐国吞并了它们，这就等于使齐国得益于二倍的国力。一个强大的齐国，燕国就忧虑重重而不能支持，如今把三个齐国那么强大的力量压到燕国头上，那个灾祸必然很严重了。
English: Qi absorbed them, which is equivalent to making Qi benefit from twice the national strength. A strong Qi country, Yan country is worried and can not support, and now the three Qi countries are so powerful that they are pressing on the head of Yan country, that disaster is bound to be very serious.

古文：虽然，智者举事，因祸为福，转败为功。
现代文：虽然如此，但是一个明智的人做事，能够利用灾祸变为吉祥，把失败转化为成功。
English: Nevertheless, a wise man can turn disaster into good fortune and failure into success.

古文：齐紫，败素也，而贾十倍；越王勾践栖於会稽，复残彊吴而霸天下：此皆因祸为福，转败为功者也。
现代文：齐国的紫布，本来是破旧的白缯染成的，却能够提高十倍的价钱；越王勾践被困栖身在会稽山上，却又击败了强大的吴国而称霸天下；这都是利用灾祸变为吉祥，把失败转化为成功的事例啊。
English: The purple cloth of Qi, originally dyed from worn-out egrets, could raise the price tenfold; Yue Wang Ke Jian was trapped and perched on the Huiqi Mountain, but defeated the powerful Wu Kingdom to dominate the world; these are all examples of using disaster to become auspicious and turning failure into success.

古文：今王若欲因祸为福，转败为功，则莫若挑霸齐而尊之，使使盟於周室，焚秦符，曰 其大上计，破秦；其次，必长宾之 。
现代文：如今，假若大王想把灾祸变为吉祥，把失败转化为成功，莫如怂恿各国尊奉齐国为霸主，派遣使臣到周王室去公然结盟，烧毁秦国的信符，宣告说： 最高明的策略就是攻破秦国；其次是一定要永远排斥它。 
English: Today, if the great king wanted to turn the disaster into a blessing and the failure into a success, it would be better for all countries to honor Qi as the overlord, send envoys to the Zhou royal family to openly ally, burn the letter of Qin, and declare: The most brilliant strategy is to break Qin; secondly, it must be excluded forever.

古文：秦挟宾以待破，秦王必患之。
现代文：秦国遭到各国共同的排斥面临被攻破的威胁，秦王必定为此而忧虑。
English: Qin was ostracized by all countries and faced the threat of being invaded. The Qin king must have been worried about this.

古文：秦五世伐诸侯，今为齐下，秦王之志苟得穷齐，不惮以国为功。
现代文：秦国连续五代都主动攻打各诸侯国，如今却屈居齐国之下，按照秦王的意志，如果能迫使齐国走投无路，就不怕拿整个国家作赌注以求得成功。
English: For five consecutive generations, the Qin state has actively attacked all the vassal states, but now it has succumbed to the Qi state. According to the will of the Qin king, if he can force the Qi state into a corner, he is not afraid to gamble with the entire country in order to succeed.

古文：然则王何不使辩士以此言说秦王曰： 燕、赵破宋肥齐，尊之为之下者，燕、赵非利之也。
现代文：既然如此，那么大王何不派遣说客用这些话去劝说秦王：燕、赵攻破宋国，都壮大了齐国，大家尊崇他，作他的下属。燕、赵并没有得到好处。
English: Since this is the case, why doesn't the great king send a lobbyist to persuade the Qin king with these words: Yan and Zhao defeated the Song Kingdom, both of them made Qi Kingdom strong, everyone respected him and became his subordinates. Yan and Zhao did not benefit.

古文：燕、赵不利而势为之者，以不信秦王也。
现代文：燕、赵得不到好处而又一定这么干的原因，那就在于不相信秦王。
English: The reason why Yan and Zhao did not receive any benefits and still did this was that they did not trust Qin Wang.

古文：然则王何不使可信者接收燕、赵，令泾阳君、高陵君先於燕、赵？
现代文：既然如此，那么大王何不派可信赖的人勾通燕国和赵国，让泾阳君、高陵君先到燕国，赵国去呢？
English: Since this is the case, why doesn't the great king send a trustworthy person to mediate between Yan and Zhao, and let Shenyang and Gaoling go to Yan and Zhao first?

古文：秦有变，因以为质，则燕、赵信秦。
现代文：如果秦国背信弃义，就用他们做人质，这样燕国和赵国就相信秦国了。
English: If Qin reneges, they will be used as hostages, so that Yan and Zhao will believe in Qin.

古文：秦为西帝，燕为北帝，赵为中帝，立三帝以令於天下。
现代文：这样一来，秦国在西方称帝，燕国在北方称帝，赵国在中部称帝，树立起三个帝王在天下发号施令。
English: As a result, the state of Qin claimed the throne in the west, the state of Yan claimed the throne in the north, and the state of Zhao claimed the throne in the center, establishing three emperors to issue orders in the world.

古文：韩、魏不听则秦伐之，齐不听则燕、赵伐之，天下孰敢不听？
现代文：假如韩国、魏国不服从，那么，秦国就出兵攻打它，齐国不服从，那么，燕国、赵国出兵攻打它，这样一来，天下还有谁敢不服从呢？
English: If Korea and Wei did not obey, then Qin would attack them; if Qi did not obey, then Yan and Zhao would attack them. In this way, who in the world would dare to disobey?

古文：天下服听，因驱韩、魏以伐齐，曰 必反宋地，归楚淮北 。
现代文：天下都服从了，就趁势驱使韩、魏攻打齐国，说： 必须交出宋国的失地，归还楚国的淮北 。
English: The whole world obeyed, and he took advantage of the situation to drive Han and Wei to attack Qi, saying, "We must hand over the lost territories of Song and return Huaibei to Chu."

古文：反宋地，归楚淮北，燕、赵之所利也；并立三帝，燕、赵之所原也。
现代文：交出宋国的失地，归还楚国的淮北，对燕国和赵国都是有利的事；并立三帝，也是燕、赵甘之如饴的事。
English: Surrendering the lost territories of Song and returning Huaibei to Chu were beneficial to Yan and Zhao; the establishment of the Three Emperors was also beneficial to Yan and Zhao.

古文：夫实得所利，尊得所原，燕、赵弃齐如脱鵕矣。
现代文：他们实际上得到了好处，名分上如愿以偿，那么让燕国和赵国抛弃齐国，就好像甩掉拖鞋一样的容易。
English: In fact, they got the benefit, and they got what they wanted in the name, so it was as easy for Yan Guo and Zhao Guo to abandon Qi Guo as it was to throw away a slipper.

古文：今不收燕、赵，齐霸必成。
现代文：现在如果您不去勾通燕、赵，那么齐国称霸的局势一定会形成。
English: Now, if you don't get along with Yan and Zhao, then the situation of Qi's hegemony will definitely take shape.

古文：诸侯赞齐而王不从，是国伐也；诸侯赞齐而王从之，是名卑也。
现代文：诸侯们都拥护齐国而唯独您不服从，这就会遭到各国诸侯的讨伐；诸侯们都拥护齐国而您也服从它，这就会使你的声望降低了。
English: If the princes all support Qi and you disobey them, you will be attacked by the princes of all countries; if the princes all support Qi and you obey them, your reputation will be lowered.

古文：今收燕、赵，国安而名尊；不收燕、赵，国危而名卑。
现代文：如今，您勾通燕、赵，可使国家安定而声望尊崇；不勾通燕、赵，国家就会危险而声望就会降低。
English: Today, if you entice Yan and Zhao, you can make the country stable and respected; if you do not entice Yan and Zhao, the country will be in danger and its reputation will be reduced.

古文：夫去尊安而取危卑，智者不为也。 
现代文：抛弃名尊国安而选择国危名卑，明智的人是不会这样干的。 
English: A wise person would not abandon the honor of national security and choose the danger of national inferiority.

古文：秦王闻若说，必若刺心然。
现代文：秦王听完这些话，一定像匕首刺进他的心房一样。
English: After listening to these words, King Qin must have felt as if a dagger had pierced his heart.

古文：则王何不使辩士以此若言说秦？
现代文：那么大王为什么不派遣说客用这些话去游说秦王呢？
English: So why didn't the great king send a lobbyist to use these words to lobby King Qin?

古文：秦必取，齐必伐矣。
现代文：秦王听到了一定会采纳，齐国一定会遭到讨伐。
English: When the Qin King heard about it, he would definitely adopt it, and Qi would definitely be attacked.

古文：夫取秦，厚交也；伐齐，正利也。
现代文：结交秦国，是有利的外交；讨伐齐国，是正当的利益。
English: To make friends with Qin is advantageous diplomacy; to fight against Qi is a legitimate interest.

古文：尊厚交，务正利，圣王之事也。
现代文：奉行有利的外交政策，追求正当的利益，是圣王所做的事业啊。
English: Pursuing a favorable foreign policy and pursuing legitimate interests are the undertakings made by the holy king.

古文：燕昭王善其书，曰： 先人尝有德苏氏，子之之乱而苏氏去燕。燕欲报仇於齐，非苏氏莫可。 
现代文：燕昭王认为他写的这封信太好了，就说： 先王曾对苏家有恩德，后来因为子之的乱子，苏氏才离开了燕国，燕国要向齐国报仇，非得苏氏不可。 
English: King Yan Zhao thought that the letter he had written was too good, and said: The previous king had been kind to the Su family, and later, because of his son's disorder, the Su family left Yan Province. Yan Province wanted to take revenge on Qi Province, and the Su family had to do it.

古文：乃召苏代，复善待之，与谋伐齐。
现代文：于是就召回苏代，又很好地对待他，和他一块儿策划攻打齐国的事情。
English: So he recalled Su Dai, treated him well, and plotted with him to attack Qi.

古文：竟破齐，湣王出走。
现代文：终于打败了齐国，迫使齐湣王逃离齐国。
English: They finally defeated Qi and forced the King of Qi to flee the country.

古文：久之，秦召燕王，燕王欲往，苏代约燕王曰： 楚得枳而国亡，齐得宋而国亡，齐、楚不得以有枳、宋而事秦者，何也？
现代文：过了很久，秦国邀请燕王，燕王就想前往，苏代阻止燕王说： 楚国贪得了枳地而导致国家危亡，齐国夺取了宋地而导致国家破败。齐、楚不能因为拥有了枳、宋反而还要奉事秦国，这是为什么呢？
English: After a long time, the State of Qin invited the King of Yan, and the King of Yan wanted to go, but the State of Su prevented the King of Yan, saying: the State of Chu got greedy for the land of Yunnan, which led to the death of the country, and the State of Qi seized the land of Song, which led to the ruin of the country. Qi and Chu could not serve the State of Qin because they owned Yunnan and Song. Why is that?

古文：则有功者，秦之深雠也。
现代文：那是因为凡是成功的国家，都是秦国最忌恨的大敌。
English: That's because all successful countries are the most hated enemies of Qin.

古文：秦取天下，非行义也，暴也。
现代文：秦国夺取天下，不是凭借着推行正义，而是施以暴力。
English: Qin conquered the world, not by virtue of promoting justice, but by violence.

古文：秦之行暴，正告天下。
现代文：秦国施以暴力，是公开宣告于天下的。
English: The violence of Qin was openly declared to the world.

古文： 告楚曰： 蜀地之甲，乘船浮於汶，乘夏水而下江，五日而至郢。
现代文：他曾警告楚国说： 蜀地的军队，坐着船漂浮在汶水之上，趁着夏季盛大的水势而直下长江，五天就能抵达郢都。
English: He once warned the state of Chu: "The army of Shu, floating on a boat on the water of the Wen, taking advantage of the summer's great water potential and going straight down the Yangtze River, can reach Shidu in five days.

古文：汉中之甲，乘船出於巴，乘夏水而下汉，四日而至五渚。
现代文：汉中的军队，坐着船从巴江出发，趁着夏季盛涨的水势而直下汉江，四天就能抵达五渚。
English: Hanzhong's army set out on a boat from the Ba River and took advantage of the summer's rising water to go straight down the Han River. They could reach Wuzhong in four days.

古文：寡人积甲宛东下随，智者不及谋，勇土不及怒，寡人如射隼矣。
现代文：我亲自在宛东集结军队，直下随邑，聪明才智的人来不及出谋献策，勇武的人来不及发怒，我攻击你们的行动就象射杀鹰隼一样神速。
English: I myself am assembling an army to the east and west, and I am marching to and fro through the towns. The wise and the intelligent have no time to make plans, and the brave have no time to be angry. I am attacking you with the same speed as if I were shooting an eagle.

古文：王乃欲待天下之攻函谷，不亦远乎！ 
现代文：而楚王你还想等待天下各国一起来攻打函谷关，岂不是太遥远了吗？ 
English: And King Chu, you still want to wait for all the countries of the world to attack Hakodate, isn't that too far away?

古文：楚王为是故，十七年事秦。
现代文：楚王就是因为这个缘故，十七年事奉秦国。
English: It was for this reason that King Chu served Qin for seventeen years.

古文： 秦正告韩曰： 我起乎少曲，一日而断大行。
现代文： 秦国又严正地警告韩国说： 我的军队从少曲出发，一天之内就能切断太行山的通道。
English: Qin also sternly warned South Korea, saying, "If my army sets out from Shaoqu, it will be able to cut off the passage of Mount Taihang in one day."

古文：我起乎宜阳而触平阳，二日而莫不尽繇。
现代文：我的军队从宜阳出发，直接攻击平阳，两天之内韩国各地的局势就没有不动摇的了。
English: My troops set out from Yiyang and directly attacked Pyonyang. Within two days, the situation in all parts of South Korea was no longer stable.

古文：我离两周而触郑，五日而国举。 
现代文：我的军队穿过东西两周攻击新郑，五天之内，我将攻克整个韩国。 
English: My army will cross the east and west to attack Xinzheng in two weeks, and in five days I will conquer the whole of South Korea.

古文：韩氏以为然，故事秦。
现代文：韩国认为他说的有道理，所以奉事秦国。
English: South Korea thought he had a point, so he served Qin.

古文： 秦正告魏曰： 我举安邑，塞女戟，韩氏太原卷。
现代文： 秦国还严正地警告魏国说： 我的军队攻克安邑，围困女戟，韩国的太原就被切断。
English: Qin also sternly warned Wei, saying, "My army will conquer An'yip, besiege Niang, and Korea's Taiyuan will be cut off.

古文：我下轵，道南阳，封冀，包两周。乘夏水，浮轻舟，彊弩在前，錟戈在後，决荥口，魏无大梁；决白马之口，魏无外黄、济阳；决宿胥之口，魏无虚、顿丘。
现代文：我的军队直下轵道，通过南阳，封锁冀邑，包抄东西两周，趁着夏季旺盛的水势，驾着轻便的战船，强劲的弓弩在前，锋利的戈矛在后，掘开荥泽水口，魏国的大梁就会被洪水吞没不复存在了；掘开白马河的水口，魏国的外黄、济阳也会被洪水吞没不复存在了；掘开宿胥河的水口，魏国的虚地、顿丘也会被洪水淹没不复存在了。
English: My army went straight down the Yangtze River, passed through Nanyang, sealed off Ji'e, and encircled everything for two weeks. Taking advantage of the summer's strong water potential, driving a light warship, with a strong bow and arrow in front and a sharp spear behind, they dug out the mouth of the Yangtze River, and the girders of Wei would be swallowed up by the flood and cease to exist; dug out the mouth of the Baima River, and Wei's Waigao and Jiyang would also be swallowed up by the flood and cease to exist; dug out the mouth of the Suiyang River, and Wei's empty land and hills would

古文：陆攻则击河内，水攻则灭大梁。 
现代文：在陆地上作战，就攻击河内，利用水攻就可毁灭大梁。 
English: If we fight on land, we can attack Hanoi, and if we attack by water, we can destroy the girders.

古文：魏氏以为然，故事秦。
现代文：魏国认为他说的有道理，所以奉事秦国。
English: The State of Wei thought he was right, so he served the State of Qin.

古文： 秦欲攻安邑，恐齐救之，则以宋委於齐。
现代文： 秦国打算攻打安邑，担心齐国救援它，就把宋地许给齐国。
English: Qin intended to attack An'yur, and fearing that Qi would come to its rescue, promised Song territory to Qi.

古文：曰： 宋王无道，为木人以寡人，射其面。寡人地绝兵远，不能攻也。
现代文：说： 宋王无道，做了个木头人很象我，用箭射它的脸，我的国家和宋国路途隔绝，军队距宋太远，不能直接攻打它。
English: He said, "King Song has no way out. He has become a wooden man much like me. I shot him in the face with an arrow. My country and Song are cut off from each other. The army is too far away from Song to attack it directly.

古文：王苟能破宋有之，寡人如自得之。 
现代文：齐王您如果能打败宋国据为己有，那就象我自己占有它一样高兴。 
English: King Qi, if you can defeat the Song Dynasty and take it as your own, then I will be as happy as if I owned it myself.

古文：已得安邑，塞女戟，因以破宋为齐罪。
现代文：后来，秦国攻下了魏国的安邑，围困了女戟，反而把攻破宋国作为齐国的罪过。
English: Later, Qin conquered Wei's An'yun and besieged Onna, but regarded defeating Song as Qi's sin.

古文： 秦欲攻韩，恐天下救之，则以齐委於天下。曰： 齐王四与寡人约，四欺寡人，必率天下以攻寡人者三。
现代文： 秦国打算进攻韩国，担心天下诸侯救援它，就把齐国许给天下诸侯去讨伐，说： 齐王四次和我订立盟约，四次欺骗我，坚决地率领天下的军队进攻我国，就有多次。
English: Qin intended to attack Korea, and, fearing that the princes of the world would come to its rescue, promised Qi to the princes of the world to fight against it, saying: "King Qi has made a covenant with me four times, deceived me four times, and resolutely led the armies of the world to attack our country.

古文：有齐无秦，有秦无齐，必伐之，必亡之。 
现代文：只要齐国存在，就没有秦国，只要有秦国的存在，就没有齐国，一定要讨伐它，一定要毁灭它 。
English: As long as Qi exists, there will be no Qin. As long as Qin exists, there will be no Qi. We must fight it and destroy it.

古文：已得宜阳、少曲，致蔺、石，因以破齐为天下罪。 秦欲攻魏重楚，则以南阳委於楚。
现代文：等到秦国夺取了韩国的宜阳、少曲，攻克了蔺邑、离石，却又把打败齐国作为天下诸侯国的罪过。 秦国打算进攻魏国，就先尊崇楚国，便把南阳许给楚国。
English: When Qin conquered the Korean provinces of Yiyang and Shaoqu, and conquered Ganymede and Zhishan, it regarded the defeat of Qi as a sin of the world's principalities. When Qin planned to attack Wei, it first honored Chu, and then promised Nanyang to Chu.

古文：曰： 寡人固与韩且绝矣。
现代文：说： 我本来就和韩国断绝了关系。
English: "I had already severed ties with South Korea," he said.

古文：残均陵，塞鄳戹，苟利於楚，寡人如自有之。 
现代文：摧毁均陵，围困，假如对楚国有利，那就像我占有它一样高兴 。
English: If it's good for Chu, I'll be as happy as if I owned it.

古文：魏弃与国而合於秦，因以塞鄳戹为楚罪。
现代文：等到魏国抛弃了盟约的国家而与秦国联合，秦国却以围困作为楚国的罪名。
English: Wait until Wei abandoned the countries of the covenant and united with Qin, but Qin used the siege of Yunnan as an accusation against Chu.

古文： 兵困於林中，重燕、赵，以胶东委於燕，以济西委於赵。
现代文： 秦国的军队被困在林中，就尊崇燕国和赵国，把胶东许给燕国，把济西许给赵国。
English: When the army of Qin was trapped in the forest, they honored Yan and Zhao, and promised Jiaodong to Yan and Jishi to Zhao.

古文：已得讲於魏，至公子延，因犀首属行而攻赵。
现代文：等到秦国和魏国和解了，就把公子延作为人质，利用犀首连兵相续地攻打赵国。
English: When Qin and Wei reconciled, they took Yan as a hostage and used him to attack Zhao one after another.

古文： 兵伤於谯石，而遇败於阳马，而重魏，则以叶、蔡委於魏。
现代文： 秦国的军队在谯石遭到重创，在阳马又被打败，就尊崇魏国，便把叶地和蔡地许给魏国。
English: The army of Qin suffered heavy losses in Shaoshi and was defeated again in Yangma, so they respected Wei and promised Ye Di and Cai Di to Wei.

古文：已得讲於赵，则劫魏，不为割。
现代文：等到他和赵国和解后，就威胁魏国而不肯依照约定分割土地。
English: After he and Zhao reconciled, he threatened Wei and refused to divide the land according to the agreement.

古文：困则使太后弟穰侯为和，嬴则兼欺舅与母。
现代文：秦军陷入困境，就派太后的弟弟穰侯去讲和，等他取得了胜利，连自己的舅舅和母亲也都受到欺骗。
English: When the Qin army was in trouble, they sent the Empress Dowager's brother, Yan Hou, to make peace. By the time he achieved victory, even his uncle and mother had been deceived.

古文： 適燕者曰 以胶东 ，適赵者曰 以济西 ，適魏者曰 以叶、蔡 ，適楚者曰 以塞鄳戹 ，適齐者曰 以宋 ，此必令言如循环，用兵如刺蜚，母不能制，舅不能约。 龙贾之战，岸门之战，封陵之战，高商之战，赵庄之战，秦之所杀三晋之民数百万，今其生者皆死秦之孤也。西河之外，上雒之地，三川晋国之祸，三晋之半，秦祸如此其大也。
现代文：西河以外，上洛地区，三川一带经常遭受秦国的攻打，这是晋国的灾难！
English: In addition to the West River, Shangluo area and the area around the Three Rivers were often attacked by Qin. This was a disaster for Jin!

古文：而燕、赵之秦者，皆以争事秦说其主，此臣之所大患也。 
现代文：秦国侵扰了韩、赵、魏的一半土地，秦国制造的灾难是如此地严重啊！而燕、赵等国到秦国去游说的人，却争相以奉事秦国来劝说自己的国君，这是我非常忧虑的事啊。 
English: Qin invaded half of the lands of Han, Zhao, and Wei, and the disaster caused by Qin is so serious! Meanwhile, people from Yan, Zhao, and other countries who went to Qin to lobby were competing to persuade their sovereigns by serving Qin. This is a matter of great concern to me.

古文：燕昭王不行。苏代复重於燕。
现代文：燕昭王没有去秦国，苏代又被燕王所重用。
English: Yan Zhao Wang did not go to Qin, and was reused by Yan Wang in the Su Dynasty.

古文：燕使约诸侯从亲如苏秦时，或从或不，而天下由此宗苏氏之从约。
现代文：燕王派苏代联络各国合纵相亲，就如同苏秦在世时一样，诸侯们有的加入了联盟，有的没加入联盟，而各国人士从此都尊崇苏秦所倡导的合纵联盟。
English: Yan Wang sent the Soviet to liaise with all countries to form a long-term alliance, just as when Su Qin was alive. Some princes joined the alliance, some did not join the alliance, and people from all countries have since respected the long-term alliance advocated by Su Qin.

古文：代、厉皆以寿死，名显诸侯。
现代文：苏代、苏厉都寿终天年，他们的名声在各诸侯国显扬。
English: Both the Su Dynasty and the Su Li Dynasty lived to a ripe old age, and their fame spread throughout the various states.

古文：太史公曰：苏秦兄弟三人，皆游说诸侯以显名，其术长於权变。
现代文：太史公说： 苏秦兄弟三人，都是因为游说诸侯而名扬天下，他们的学说擅长于权谋机变。
English: Taishikong said: The three Su Qin brothers are famous for lobbying the princes, and their doctrine is good at manipulating power.

古文：而苏秦被反间以死，天下共笑之，讳学其术。
现代文：而苏秦承担着反间计的罪名被杀死，天下人都嘲笑他，讳忌研习他的学说。
English: But Su Qin was killed on the charge of plotting against the emperor, and the whole world laughed at him and avoided studying his teachings.

古文：然世言苏秦多异，异时事有类之者皆附之苏秦。
现代文：然而社会上流传的苏秦事迹有许多差异，凡是不同时期和苏秦相类的事迹，都附会到苏秦身上。
English: However, there are many differences between Su Qin's deeds that have been passed down in society, and all the deeds similar to those of Su Qin in different periods are attached to Su Qin.

古文：夫苏秦起闾阎，连六国从亲，此其智有过人者。吾故列其行事，次其时序，毋令独蒙恶声焉。
现代文：苏秦出身于民间，却能联合六国合纵相亲，这正说明他的才智有超过一般人的地方，所以，我列出他的经历，按着正确的时间顺序加以陈述，不要让他只蒙受不好的名声。
English: Su Qin was born in the folk, but he was able to unite six countries to form a long-term relationship. This just shows that his intelligence is beyond the ordinary. Therefore, I will list his experiences and present them in the correct chronological order, so as not to let him suffer only a bad reputation.

