古文：程普羊聃刘毅张和思梁元帝窦轨武攸宁崔进思祁万寿郭霸曹惟思邢璹万国俊王瑶陈岘萧怀武李龟祯陈洁
现代文：程普羊聃刘毅张和思梁元帝窦轨武攸宁崔进思祁万寿郭霸曹惟思邢璹万国俊王瑶陈岘萧怀武李龟祯陈洁
English: Cheng Puyang, Liu Yi, Zhang He, Liang Yuandi, Douluo, Wuzhong, Youning, Cui Jin, Wan Shou, Guo Bao, Cao Wei, Wan Guo, Jun Wang, Chen Qi, Xiao Huaiwu, Li Gui, Chen Jie

古文：程普
现代文：程普
English: Cheng Pu

古文：程普，字嘉谋，吴孙权将也，领江夏太守荡寇将军。
现代文：程普，字嘉谋，是吴国孙权的大将。封为江夏太守，荡寇将军。
English: Cheng Pu, also known as Jiamou, was the general of Sun Quan of the State of Wu. He was appointed as the governor of Jiangxia and the general of the wandering bandits.

古文：尝杀叛者数百人，皆使投火。
现代文：曾经杀死了叛军几百人，都把他们投入火里烧了。
English: He once killed hundreds of rebels, throwing them into a fire and burning them.

古文：即日普病热，百余日便死。
现代文：当天程普浑身病热，一百多天就死了。
English: On the same day, Cheng Pu fell ill with fever and died after more than a hundred days.

古文：羊聃
现代文：羊聃
English: Sheep stew

古文：羊聃，字彭祖，晋庐江太守，为人刚克粗暴。
现代文：羊聃，字彭，是晋朝庐江的太守。为人性情刚硬粗暴。
English: Yang Hui, also known as Peng, was the governor of the Li River during the Jin Dynasty. He was a tough and rough character.

古文：恃国姻亲，纵恣尤甚，睚眦之嫌，辄加刑戮。
现代文：依仗和朝廷有姻亲的关系，非常放纵。只要因极小的怨恨，就立即将他加刑杀死。
English: Ryohei, who was related to the imperial court by marriage, was very indulgent. As long as there was a very small grudge, he would immediately be sentenced to death.

古文：征西大将军庾亮槛送，具以状闻。
现代文：征西大将军庚亮，用囚车押送羊聃把全部的罪状禀报了朝廷。
English: Geng Liang, the general of the Western Conquest, reported all the crimes to the imperial court by escorting the sheep with a cart.

古文：右司马奏聃杀郡将吏及民简良等二百九十人，徒谪一百余人，应弃市，依八议请宥。
现代文：右司马上书羊聃杀了郡里的大将官吏以及老百姓简良等二百九十多人，降职流放了一百多人，应当受到 死刑 的刑罚。但依照 八议 请示赦罪。
English: The Right Division immediately killed more than two hundred and ninety people, including generals, officials, and ordinary people in the county, demoted and exiled more than one hundred people, and should be punished by the death penalty. However, according to the Eight Opinions, please pardon the crime.

古文：显宗诏曰： 此事古今所未有。此而可忍，孰不可忍！
现代文：显宗下诏说： 此事是从古到今所没有的，这个可以忍受，那么，什么不可以忍受？
English: Emperor Han Zong said, "This is something that has not happened since ancient times. This is bearable, so what is not bearable?"

古文：何八议之有？下狱所赐命。 
现代文：有什么 八议 ，应下狱叫他自尽。 
English: What's the big deal, let him go to jail and let him kill himself.

古文：聃兄子贲，先尚南郡公主，自表解婚，诏不许。
现代文：羊聃的哥哥子贲先是娶了南郡公主，因为羊聃的事自己上表请求解除婚姻，皇帝没有允许。
English: Sheep's elder brother, Zi Yao, first married the princess of Nanshun, but because of Sheep's own request to dissolve the marriage, the emperor did not allow it.

古文：瑯琊孝王妃山氏，聃之甥也，苦以为请。
现代文：瑯琊孝王的妃子山氏，是羊聃的外甥女，苦苦替聃求情。
English: King Gong Xiao's concubine, Ms. Shan, is the niece of Yang Yao, and is struggling to intercede for him.

古文：于是司徒王导启聃罪不容恕，宜极重法。
现代文：于是司徒王导上奏说： 羊聃罪过不容宽恕，应当处以重法。
English: As a result, King Stutts issued an edict saying: "The crime of mutton-chopping is unforgivable and should be punished severely."

古文：山太妃忧感动疾，陛下罔极之恩，宜蒙生全之宥。
现代文：但是山太妃担忧伤感得了重病。陛下蒙受太妃的恩情，应当饶恕羊聃一命 。
English: However, Mountain Toffee became seriously ill with worry and sadness. His Majesty, having received the grace of Toffee, should spare Sheep's life.

古文：于是诏下曰： 山太妃唯此一舅，发言摧鲠，乃至吐血，情虑深重。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏书说： 太妃只有这一个舅舅，这样直言相求到了口吐鲜血的地步，忧虑的心情十分深重，我自幼受苦。
English: Then the emperor issued an edict saying, "Tao Fei has only this one uncle, and such a straightforward request has reached the point of spitting blood. My anxiety is very deep, and I have suffered since I was a child.

古文：朕丁荼毒，受太妃抚育之恩，同于慈亲。
现代文：受太妃抚育之恩，就象亲生的母亲。
English: Thanks to the nurturing of Princess Toa, she is just like her own mother.

古文：若不堪难忍之痛，以致顿毙，朕亦何颜自处。今便原聃生命，以慰太妃渭阳之恩。 
现代文：假如太妃不能忍受难忍的痛苦，以致出了什么意外，我也没有脸面活着，现在就赦羊聃死罪，来安慰太妃渭阳的大恩。 
English: If Tofu couldn't bear the unbearable pain, and something unexpected happened, I wouldn't have the face to live, so now I'll forgive the crime of killing the sheep to comfort Tofu's great kindness.

古文：于是除名为民。
现代文：于是将羊聃废去爵位做了老百姓。
English: So he abolished his title and became a commoner.

古文：少时，聃病疾，恒见简良等曰： 枉岂可受，今来相取，自由黄泉。 
现代文：过不久，羊聃病的厉害，眼前常看见简良等说： 冤枉难道可以忍受吗？现在来取你到黄泉来。 
English: After a short while, the sheep became very ill with scurvy, and they often saw Jian Liang in front of them, and they said, "Is it possible to bear injustice? Now let's take you to the underworld."

古文：经宿死。
现代文：经过一宿羊聃就死了。
English: After an overnight stay, the goat died.

古文：刘毅
现代文：刘毅
English: Liu Yi

古文：宋高祖平桓玄后，以刘毅为抚军荆州刺史。
现代文：南朝宋高祖平定了桓玄后，用刘毅做抚军荆州刺史。
English: After Song Gaozu of the Southern Dynasty had subdued Huan Xuan, he used Liu Yi to lead the army to Jingzhou to make history.

古文：到州，便收牧牛寺主，云藏桓家儿庆为沙弥，并杀四道人。
现代文：刘毅到荆州，就杀了牧牛寺的寺主。说藏匿桓家的儿子庆做和尚。并杀死四个僧人。
English: When Liu Yi arrived in Jingzhou, he killed the head priest of the Cattle-herding Temple, saying that he was hiding the son of the Huan family, Qing, to become a monk. He also killed four monks.

古文：后梦见此僧来云： 君何以枉杀贫道？
现代文：后来梦见这里的和尚来说： 你为什么屈枉地杀死我们！
English: Later, the monk who dreamed of this place said, "Why did you kill us without reason?"

古文：贫道已白于天帝，恐君亦不得久。 
现代文：我们已经禀告了天帝，恐怕你也活不多久了。 
English: We have already reported to the Heavenly Emperor. I'm afraid you don't have long to live.

古文：因遂得疾不食，日弥羸瘦。
现代文：刘毅因此就得了重病不能吃东西。一天天瘦弱。
English: As a result, Liu Yi became seriously ill and was unable to eat. He became thinner and thinner day by day.

古文：当毅发扬都时，多有争竞，侵凌宰辅，宋高祖因遣人征之。
现代文：当刘毅发兵扬都时，有许多争论，刘毅侵犯凌辱宰辅，宋高祖因此派人讨伐他。
English: When Liu Yi sent troops to conquer the capital, there were many disputes. Liu Yi violated and insulted Zhai Yu, so Song Gaozu sent people to fight him.

古文：毅败后，夜单骑突投牧牛寺僧，僧曰： 抚军昔枉杀我师，我道人，自无报仇之理，然何宜来此！
现代文：刘毅被打败后，夜里独自骑马突围投奔牧牛寺。和尚说： 抚军从前屈枉地杀死了我们的师傅，我们修道人从无报仇的道理，可是你来这里干什么？
English: After Liu Yi was defeated, he rode alone at night to break through the encirclement and rush to the Cowherd Temple. The monk said, "Fu Jun killed our master unjustly in the past, and we monks never have the principle of revenge, but what are you doing here?"

古文：主师屡有灵验，云天帝当收抚军于寺杀之。 
现代文：我们主师多次显灵，说天帝要处死抚军，在寺院杀掉。 
English: Our master manifested his spirit many times, saying that the Heavenly Emperor wanted to execute Fuzhuang and kill him in the temple.

古文：毅便叹吒出寺，因上大树，自缢而死。
现代文：刘毅便慨叹地走出寺院，在大树上，上吊死了。
English: Liu Yi then walked out of the temple with a sigh and hanged himself from a tree.

古文：张和思
现代文：张和思
English: Zhang He Si

古文：北齐张和思，断狱囚，无问善恶贵贱，必被枷锁杻械，困苦备极。
现代文：北齐张和思，审狱中的囚犯，不问善恶贵贱，一定要使囚犯遭受枷锁刑具的惩罚。
English: Beiqi Zhanghe thought that when judging prisoners in prison, regardless of whether they were good or evil, they must make prisoners suffer the punishment of shackles and instruments of torture.

古文：囚徒见者，破胆丧魂，号生罗刹。
现代文：囚犯痛苦到了极点。每当看到他，就吓得胆破魂飞。给他起外号叫活着的魔鬼。
English: The prisoner was in extreme pain. Whenever he was seen, he was scared out of his wits. He was nicknamed the living devil.

古文：其妻前后孕男女四人，临产即闷绝求死。所生男女，皆著肉锁，手脚并有肉杻束缚，连绊堕地。
现代文：张和思的妻子前后生了男女四人，临产前就闷绝的只想去死，所生下的男女，都用肉包裹着，手脚都有肉链子束缚着，连着肉拘系着一起落地。
English: Zhang He Si's wife gave birth to four boys and four girls. Before giving birth, she was so exhausted that she just wanted to die. The boys and girls she gave birth to were all wrapped in meat, their hands and feet were bound with meat chains, and they fell to the ground bound together with meat.

古文：后和思为县令，坐法杖死。
现代文：后来张和思做县令，因为犯法用杖刑被打死。
English: Later, Zhang Hesi was made a county magistrate and was beaten to death with a cane for breaking the law.

古文：梁元帝
现代文：梁元帝
English: Emperor Liang Yuan

古文：后周文帝宇文泰，初为魏丞相。
现代文：北周文帝宇文泰，当初担任魏丞相，正赶上梁国丧乱，梁孝元帝做了湘东王，当时在荆州。
English: Northern Zhou Emperor Wu Wentei, who was the prime minister of the Wei Dynasty, was in Jingzhou at the time of the Liang Rebellion, when Emperor Liang Xiaoyuan became the king of eastern Hunan.

古文：又求索无厌，乃不惬意，遂遣兵袭江汉，虏系朝士，至于民庶，百四十万口，而害孝元。
现代文：元帝派使者与魏讲和，双方表示友好以礼相待，并和文泰断金立盟，结成了兄弟。后来平定了侯景，孝元帝即位，文泰处在臣子的地位，而欺凌侮辱，而且索取没有止境，但他仍不满意。于是派兵袭击江汉，俘获了朝官和老百姓一百四十万口，并且杀害了孝元帝。
English: Emperor Yuan sent an envoy to make peace with Wei, the two sides expressed their friendship and courtesy to each other, and made an alliance with Wen Tai to form a brotherhood. Later, Hou Jing was pacified, Emperor Xiaoyuan ascended to the throne, and Wen Tai was in the position of a vassal, but he was still not satisfied with the bullying and insults, and there was no end to the demands. So he sent troops to attack Jianghan, captured 1.4 million imperial officials and ordinary people, and killed Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：又魏文帝先纳茹茹主郁久闾阿那坏女为后，亲爱殊笃。
现代文：另一件事是魏文帝先娶了茹茹王郁久闾阿那坏的女儿做妻子，他们十分亲爱。
English: On the other hand, Emperor Weiwen first married the wicked daughter of King Yujujuan of Zhuge, who was very dear to him.

古文：害梁主之明年，坏为齐国所败，因率余众数千奔魏。而突厥旧与茹茹怨仇，即遣饷泰马三千匹，求诛坏等。
现代文：文泰杀害梁孝元帝的第二年，阿那坏被齐国打败。于是率领剩下的数千人逃奔魏，而突厥过去和茹茹有仇怨，就派人给文泰三千匹马，求请文泰杀了坏等人，文泰答应了。
English: In the second year after Wen Tai killed Emperor Liang Xiaoyuan, Anak was defeated by Qi. He then led the remaining thousands of people to flee to Wei. The Turks had a grudge against Zhu Ru in the past, so they sent three thousand horses to Wen Tai and asked him to kill the bad people. Wen Tai agreed.

古文：泰许诺，伏突厥兵马，与坏宴会，醉便缚之，即日灭郁久闾姓五百余人。
现代文：他埋伏下突厥兵马，与坏宴会，等坏酒醉后就将他捆绑了。第二天杀了郁久闾百姓五百多人。
English: He ambushed Turkish soldiers and horses, had a bad banquet, got drunk with bad wine, and then tied him up. The next day, he killed more than five hundred people from Ikuhida.

古文：茹茹临死，仰天而诉。
现代文：茹茹临死时仰天控诉。
English: When Zhu Ru was on the verge of death, he appealed to heaven.

古文：明年冬，泰猎于陇右，得病，见孝元及坏为祟。泰发怒肆骂，命索酒食与之，两月泰卒。
现代文：第二年冬天，文泰在陇右打猎，得了重病，看见了孝元帝和坏向他索命，文泰发怒肆意漫骂，命人拿酒食给他，两个月文泰就死了。
English: In the winter of the following year, Ventai was hunting in Shizhuang and fell seriously ill. Seeing Emperor Xiaoyuan and Habao pleading for his life, Ventai flew into a rage and cursed, ordering someone to bring him food and drink. Two months later, Ventai died.

古文：窦轨
现代文：窦轨
English: Sinus tracts

古文：唐洛州都督酂国公窦轨，太穆皇后三从兄，性刚严好杀。
现代文：唐洛州都督酂国公窦轨，是太穆皇后的叔伯哥哥。他性情刚烈十分厉害，并且喜欢杀人。
English: Dongluo's governor, Gongguo Douluo, was an uncle of the Empress Dowager Mu. He was very tough and liked to kill people.

古文：为益州行台仆射，多杀将士，又害行台尚书韦云起，贞观二年，在洛病甚，忽言有人饷我瓜来。
现代文：做益州行台仆射，杀死了许多将士，并且杀害了行台尚书韦云起。贞观二年，他在洛阳病得厉害，忽然说： 有人给我送瓜来。 
English: As a foot soldier of Yizhou Xingtai, he killed many soldiers, and also killed Xingtai Shangshuwei Yunqi. In the second year of Zhenguan, he was seriously ill in Luoyang, and suddenly said: Someone sent me a melon.

古文：左右报之：冬月无瓜，轨曰： 一盘好瓜，何谓无耶？ 
现代文：左右的人告诉他说： 冬月没有瓜。 窦轨说： 确实是一盘好瓜，为什么说没有呢？ 
English: People around him told him, "There are no melons in the winter moon." Douluo said, "It is indeed a plate of good melons, why do you say there are none?"

古文：即而惊视曰： 非瓜，并是人头。 
现代文：不一会又惊恐地看着说： 不是瓜，都是人头。 
English: After a while, he looked at me in horror and said, "It's not a melon, it's a human head."

古文：轨曰： 从我偿命。 
现代文：窦轨说： 是跟我要命来了。 
English: Dou Liao said, "I'm the one who's going to die."

古文：又曰： 扶我起见韦尚书。 
现代文：又说： 快扶我起来见韦尚书。 
English: He also said, "Quickly help me get up and see Wei Shangshu."

古文：言毕而薨。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：武攸宁
现代文：武攸宁
English: Wu Yoning

古文：唐建昌王武攸宁，任置勾任，法外枉征财物，百姓破家者十而九。
现代文：唐建昌王武攸宁，另外设置了 勾任 ，法外胡乱征收财物，百姓被逼的倾家荡产的十家就有九家。
English: Tang Jianchang Wang Wu Youning, in addition, set up a "curfew," extrajudicial indiscriminate collection of property, and there were nine out of ten families whose people were forced to sell their homes and properties.

古文：告冤于天，吁嗟满路。
现代文：老百姓向苍天诉苦，满路上的人都长吁短叹。
English: Ordinary people complain to the heavens about their hardships, and people all over the road sigh and groan.

古文：为大库，长百步，二百余间。
现代文：武攸宁建筑了一百多步长的大库二百多间，将所征收来的东西都贮存在那里面。
English: Wu Youning built more than 200 large warehouses, each more than a hundred paces long, and stored everything he collected there.

古文：所征获者，贮在其中，天火烧之，一时荡尽，众口所咒。
现代文：后来天火烧了大库，东西被烧得一干二净，百姓无不痛恨咒骂。
English: Later, the great storehouse was burned by the fire of heaven, everything was burned to the ground, and the people all hated cursing.

古文：攸宁寻患足肿，粗于瓮，其酸楚不可忍，数月而终。
现代文：武攸宁不久得了脚肿病，脚肿得像瓮粗。他酸楚疼痛的不能忍受，几个月后就死了。
English: Wu Youning soon developed a swollen foot, which swelled to the size of a coccyx. He could not bear the pain and died a few months later.

古文：崔进思
现代文：崔进思
English: Choi Jin Si

古文：唐虔州参军崔进思，恃郎中孙尚容之力，充纲入都，送五千贯，每贯取三百文裹头，百姓怨叹，号天哭地。
现代文：唐虔州参军崔进思，依仗郎中孙尚容的力量，押送进贡的金钱去京都。送去五千贯，每贯里另收三百文作路费。百姓怨恨叹息，哭天号地。
English: Cui Jinshi, who joined the army in Tangyan Prefecture, relied on the strength of his son and grandson, Cui Shangrong, to escort the tribute money to Kyoto. He sent five thousand yuan, and received another three hundred yuan for travel expenses for each yuan. The people resented, sighed, and cried loudly.

古文：至瓜步江，遭风船没，无有孑遗。
现代文：到了瓜步江，遇到大风，沉了船，一点东西都没有留下。
English: When we arrived at the Guabu River, we encountered a strong wind, the boat sank, and there was nothing left.

古文：家资田园，货卖并尽，解官落职，求活无处。
现代文：为了赔偿，家里的财产田园全部卖光，被解除了官职，落到无处求生的下场。
English: In order to compensate, all of the family's property and farmland were sold out, he was dismissed from his post, and ended up with nowhere to live.

古文：此所谓聚敛之怨。
现代文：这就是所说的横征暴敛的报应。
English: This is the so-called retribution of extortion.

古文：祁万寿
现代文：祁万寿
English: 万寿from

古文：唐乾封县录事祁万寿，性好杀人。
现代文：唐乾封县录事祁万寿，天生喜欢杀人。
English: Tang Qianfeng County Records, he was born with a penchant for killing.

古文：县官每决罚人，皆从索钱，时未得与间，即取粗杖打之。
现代文：每当县官判决处罚人的时候，他都跟着要钱，还没有送到以前，就拿粗木仗打犯人，象这样死的人，数也数不清。
English: Whenever a prefectural official decided to punish someone, he would ask for money, and before it was delivered, he would beat the prisoner with a rough wooden stick. There are countless people who have died like this.

古文：如此死者，不可胜数，囚徒见之，皆失魂魄。有少不称心，即就狱打之，困苦至垂死。
现代文：囚徒们看见他，都丧魂落魄。对哪个犯人稍微不称心的，就立刻到狱中打他，让他痛苦到就要死的程度。
English: When the prisoners saw him, they were heartbroken. If they were not satisfied with a prisoner, they would immediately go to the prison and beat him, making him suffer to the point of death.

古文：其妻生子，或著肉枷，或有肉杻，或无口鼻，或无手足，生而皆死。
现代文：祁万寿的妻子生孩子，有的脖子上缠绕着肉链；有的手脚带着肉的镣铐；有的没有口鼻；有的没有手脚。孩子生下来就死了。
English: Some of the wives had chains around their necks; some had their hands and feet bound with meat; some had no nose or mouth; some had no hands or feet. The children died at birth.

古文：郭霸
现代文：郭霸
English: Guo Ba

古文：唐侍御史郭霸，奏杀宋州三百人，暴得五品。
现代文：唐侍御史郭霸，上奏杀死了宋州三百多人，因此突然得五品官。
English: The Tang retainer, Shi Guoba, killed more than 300 people in Songzhou at the beginning of the war, so he was suddenly promoted to the Fifth Rank.

古文：经月患重，台官问疾，见老巫曰： 郭公不可救也，有数百鬼，遍体流血，攘袂龆齿，皆云不相放。
现代文：正月患重病，台官去探视病情，看见一个老巫婆说： 郭公的病不能救了。有几百个鬼，遍体流血，扬起袖子，呲牙咧嘴都说不能放他。
English: Guo Gong fell seriously ill in the first month of the year. A Taiwanese official went to visit him and saw an old witch saying, "Guo Gong's illness cannot be cured. There are hundreds of ghosts, bleeding all over, with their sleeves rolled up and their teeth grinning, all saying that he cannot be released."

古文：有一碧衫人喝绯衣人曰： 早合去，何因许时？ 
现代文：有个穿青绿色衣服的人吆喝穿红色衣服的人说： 早应当抓他去，为什么要这么久？ 
English: A man in teal shouted at a man in red, "He should have been arrested a long time ago, why did it take so long?"

古文：答曰： 比缘未得五品，未合放。  
现代文：回答说： 他遭的罪还不够他得到五品官时所作的恶，不应让他马上死。 
English: He replied, "His crime is not bad enough. He should not be allowed to die right away for the evil he did when he was awarded the five-star rank."

古文：俄而霸以刀子自刺乳下，搅之，曰： 大快 。
现代文：不一会郭霸用刀子刺自己乳下，在里边乱搅，说： 非常痛快。 
English: After a while, Guo Ba stabbed himself under the breast with a knife, stirred it around inside, and said, "It was very enjoyable."

古文：家人走问之，曰： 御史孙容师刺我。 
现代文：家里人跑去问他，他说： 御史孙容师刺我。 
English: His family members ran to ask him, and he said, "Master Sun Rong Shi stabbed me."

古文：其子经御史顾琮讼容师，琮以荒乱言不理。其夜而卒，容师以明年六月霸死日而终，皆不知其所以。
现代文：元一说： 外面有三庆。天旱降雨，是一庆；中桥建成为子孙万代造福，是二庆；郭霸死了百姓都高兴，是三庆。 
English: Yuan I said: There are three festivals outside. The drought and rainfall is the first festival; the middle bridge is built to benefit the descendants for generations, is the second festival; the people are happy when Guo Bao died, is the third festival.

古文：司勋郎中张元一云： 自春大旱，至霸死雨足，天后问在外有何事，元一曰： 外有三庆，旱降雨，一庆；中桥新成，万代之利，二庆；郭霸身死，百姓皆欢，三庆也。 天后笑曰： 霸见憎如此耶！ 
现代文：天后笑着说： 郭霸被憎恨到这种地步了吗？ 
English: Tianhou smiled and said, "Is Guo Ba hated to such an extent?

古文：曹惟思
现代文：曹惟思
English: Cao Weisi

古文：唐蜀郡法曹参军曹惟思，当章仇兼琼之时，为西山运粮使，甚见委任。
现代文：唐蜀郡法曹参军曹惟思，在章仇兼琼当郡守时，做西山运粮使。兼琼对他很信任。
English: Tangshu County Legal Clerk and Sergeant Cao Weisi, when Zhangqiu and Qian Qiong were county governors, was the West Mountain Grain Transport Envoy. Qian Qiong had great trust in him.

古文：惟思白事于兼琼，琼与语毕，令还运。
现代文：惟思向兼琼禀告事情，兼琼和他说完，命令立刻运输。
English: However, he wanted to report the matter to Can Qiong. When Can Qiong had finished speaking with him, he ordered that they be transported immediately.

古文：惟思妻生男有疾，因以情告兼琼，请留数日。
现代文：惟思妻子生孩子有病，于是把情况告诉兼琼，请求留几天。
English: However, thinking that his wife was sick after giving birth, he told Can Qiong about the situation and asked her to stay for a few days.

古文：兼琼大怒，叱之令出，集众斩之。
现代文：兼琼大怒呵叱他，让他出去，集合众人宣布杀他。
English: Can Qiong scolded him angrily, told him to go out, and gathered everyone to announce that they would kill him.

古文：其妻闻之，乘车携两子与之诀，惟思已辫发束缚，兼琼出监斩之。
现代文：惟思的妻子听说了这件事，坐车带着两个孩子和他诀别。惟思已披头散发被捆绑着。兼琼出来监斩。
English: When his wife heard about this, she took their two children in her car to say goodbye to him. But his head was already shaved and he was tied up. And Qian Qiong came out to supervise the beheading.

古文：惟思二男叩头乞命，来抱马足，马为不行，兼琼为之下泣云： 业已斩矣。 犹未释。
现代文：惟思两个儿子跪地磕头乞求饶命，上前抱住马脚，马不能走。兼琼为此也哭了说： 就要杀了 ，只是不想释放。
English: But she thought of her two sons on their knees, bowing their heads and begging for their lives. She went forward and hugged the horse's feet. The horse couldn't walk. For this reason, Kanechon also cried and said, "I'm going to kill it, but I don't want to release it."

古文：郡有禅僧，道行至高，兼琼母师之。禅僧乃见兼琼曰： 曹法曹命且尽，请不须杀，免之。 
现代文：郡里有个和尚，道行非常高，是兼琼母亲的师傅，和尚于是去见兼琼说： 曹惟思没有几天活了，不必你来杀他，不如让他自己死。 
English: There was a monk in the county, a very high-ranking Taoist, who was the teacher of Cang Qiong's mother. The monk then went to see Cang Qiong and said, "Cao Weisi has only a few days to live. You don't have to kill him, it's better to let him die on his own."

古文：兼琼乃赦惟思。
现代文：兼琼于是放了惟思。
English: Kanechon thought for a moment.

古文：明日，使惟思行卢府长史事，赐绯鱼袋，专知西山转运使，仍许与其妻行。
现代文：第二天，派惟思去卢府做长史的差事。赐给他绯红色的鱼袋，专任西山转运使。并且允许与他妻子同去。
English: The next day, he sent Wei Si to Lufu to do a long-term errand. He gave him a crimson fish bag, full-time West Mountain transfer envoy. And allowed him to go with his wife.

古文：惟思至泸州，因疾，梦僧告之曰： 曹惟思一生中，负心杀人甚多，无分毫善事，今冤家债主将至，为之奈何。 
现代文：惟思到了卢州就得了病。梦见一个和尚告诉他说： 曹惟思一生当中违背良心，杀人很多，没有做一点好事。今天冤家债主将到了。怎么办呢？ 
English: However, when he thought of Luzhou, he fell ill. He dreamed of a monk telling him: Cao Weisi has violated his conscience throughout his life, killed many people, and has not done a single good deed. Today, his creditor will arrive. What should he do?

古文：惟思哀祈甚至，僧曰： 汝能度两子为僧，家中钱物衣服，尽用施寺，仍合家素餐，堂前设道场，请名僧，昼夜诵经礼忏，可延百日之命。
现代文：百般哀求祈祷，和尚说： 你能让两个儿子做和尚，将家中所有的钱财衣物都施舍在寺院里，全家还要吃素，在堂前设置道场，昼夜不停地念经，恭敬地忏悔，可以延长一百天的寿命。
English: After much pleading and prayer, the monk said, "If you can have two sons become monks, donate all the money, wealth and clothing in the family to the temple, have the whole family become vegetarians, set up a dojo in front of the temple, chant the sutras day and night, and respectfully repent, you can extend your life by one hundred days."

古文：如不能，即当死矣。 
现代文：如做不到，立刻就要死了。 
English: If you don't, you'll die instantly.

古文：惟思曰： 诸事易耳。然苦不食，若之何！ 
现代文：惟思说： 这些事情都很容易，只是苦于不能吃素怎么办？ 
English: Wei Si said, "These things are all very easy, but what if you suffer from not being able to go vegetarian?

古文：僧曰： 取羊肝水浸，加以椒酱食之，即能餐矣。 
现代文：和尚说： 拿羊肝水浸泡，加上椒酱吃它，就能吃了。 
English: The monk said, "You can eat it by soaking it in sheep's liver water and eating it with pepper sauce.

古文：既觉，具言其妻，妻赞之。
现代文：醒了以后，把梦中的事情都告诉了妻子。妻子很同意。
English: After he woke up, he told his wife everything that happened in the dream. His wife agreed.

古文：即僧二子，又如言置道场转经，且食羊肝，即饭矣，如是月余。
现代文：立即让两个儿子做了和尚，又象说的那样设置了道场不停地念经，并且吃羊肝当饭。
English: He immediately had his two sons become monks and, as he said, set up a dojo where they constantly chanted sutras and ate lamb liver for dinner.

古文：晨坐，其亡母亡姊皆来视之，惟思大惊，趋走迎候。有一鬼子，手执绛幡前引，升自西阶，植绛幡焉。
现代文：象这样一个多月，一天早晨，他的死去的母亲和姐姐都来看他，惟思非常惊讶，走上前去迎候，有一小鬼，手里拿着红色的旗子在前面，从西面台阶升起，树起了红色的旗子。
English: For more than a month, one morning, his dead mother and sister came to see him, but they were very surprised and went forward to meet him. A small ghost, holding a red flag in front of him, rose from the west steps and raised a red flag.

古文：其亡姊不言，但于幡前下僛，儛儛不辍。
现代文：他死去的姐姐不说话，只在旗帜下面跳舞，象喝醉酒那样跳个不停。
English: His dead sister did not speak, but danced under the flag, and danced on and on like a drunk.

古文：其母泣曰： 惟思在生不知罪，杀人无数，今冤家欲来，吾不忍见汝受苦辛，故来视汝。 
现代文：他的亡母哭着说： 惟思活着不知罪，杀人无数，现在冤家都要来，我不忍心看见你受苦，所以来看你。
English: His dead mother cried and said, "I just want to live without guilt, I have killed countless people, and now the wrongdoers are coming. I can't bear to see you suffer, so I came to see you."

古文：惟思命设祭母，母食之。
现代文：惟思让人摆设上祭祀母亲的东西，母亲吃了。
English: However, the mother ate the food that had been set up as a sacrifice for her.

古文：其姊舞更不已，不交一言。
现代文：他姐姐跳舞一刻不停，不说一句话。
English: His sister danced on and on, not saying a word.

古文：母食毕，与姊皆去。
现代文：母亲吃完了就和姐姐都离开了。
English: After my mother finished eating, she and my sister left.

古文：惟思疾转甚，于是羊肝亦不食，常卧道场中，昼日眠觉。
现代文：惟思病得更严重了，于是羊肝也不吃了，经常趴在道场中，整天睡觉。
English: However, his illness became more serious, so he didn't eat the lamb's liver and often lay down in the dojo and slept all day.

古文：有二青衣童子，其长等僬侥也，一坐其头，一坐其足。
现代文：有两个穿青色衣服的童子长的非常矮小，一个坐在他头上，一个坐在他脚上。
English: There were two very short boys in blue, one sitting on his head and one on his feet.

古文：惟思问之，童子不与语。
现代文：惟思问他们，童子不和他说话。
English: But when he questioned them further, the boy would not speak to him.

古文：而童子貌甚闲暇，口有四牙，出于唇外。
现代文：童子的表情很悠闲，口里有四棵牙，都露在嘴唇的外面。
English: The boy's expression is laid-back. He has four teeth in his mouth, all on the outside of his lips.

古文：明日食时，惟思见所杀人，或披头溃肠，断截手足，或斩首流血，盛怒来诟惟思曰： 逆贼与我同事，急反杀我灭口，我今诉于帝，故来取汝。 
现代文：第二天吃饭时，惟思看见了他所杀的人，有的披散着头发烂了肠子截断了手脚，有的被砍去了头流着血，都充满愤怒来见惟思，说： 逆贼与我们一起做事，情况危急反到杀我们灭口，我们现在已对上天控告了，所以来拿你。 
English: The next day at dinner, Woese saw the people he had killed, some with their hair disheveled, their intestines rotten, their hands and feet amputated, some with their heads cut off and bleeding. They were all filled with anger and came to see Woese, saying, "The traitors are working with us, the situation is so critical that they are killing us. We have already made an accusation against heaven, so we are coming to get you."

古文：言毕升阶，而二童子推之，不得进，但谩骂曰： 终须去。 惟思知不免，具言其事。
现代文：说完就升上台阶，两童子推他们，不让进去。但谩骂说： 你是死定了 惟思知道不能免，把作的恶事全承认了。
English: When he had said this, he went up the steps, and the two boys pushed them and would not let them in, but he swore at them and said: "You are doomed.

古文：如此每日常来，皆为童子所推，不得至惟思所。
现代文：象这样被惟思杀的人每天都来，都被童子所推，不能到惟思跟前。
English: People like this, who have been taken away by Wuxi, come every day. They are pushed by the boy, and cannot get to Wuxi.

古文：月余，忽失二童子，惟思大惧，与妻子别。
现代文：一个多月，忽然两个童子失踪了，惟思非常恐惧，和妻子儿子告别，于是死的人都来了。
English: More than a month later, the two boys suddenly disappeared, but he was very afraid and said goodbye to his wife and son, so the dead came.

古文：于是死者大至，众见惟思如被曳状。
现代文：大家看见惟思象被拽着的样子坠落到堂下就死了。
English: Everyone saw Wei Si falling to the floor as if he was being dragged, and he died.

古文：坠于堂下，遂卒。惟思不臧人也，自千牛备升为泽州相州判司，常养贼徒数十人，令其所在为盗而馆之。
现代文：惟思不是好人，从千牛备升做泽州相州判司以来，常养几十个贼徒，让他们到处偷窃而给他们住处。
English: However, he is not a good person. Ever since he was promoted to judge of Jeju and Sangju, he has often raised dozens of thieves, letting them steal everywhere and giving them a place to live.

古文：及事发，则杀之以灭口，前后杀百余人，故祸及也。
现代文：等事情要暴露了，就杀了他们灭口。前后共杀了一百多人。因此报应就来了。
English: When things were about to be exposed, they killed them to silence them. More than a hundred people were killed before and after. So retribution came.

古文：邢璹
现代文：邢璹
English: 

古文：唐邢璹之使新罗也，还归，泊于炭山。
现代文：唐邢璹出使新罗回来时，船停在炭山，遇到了一百多个商人。
English: When Tang Xuan's envoy Silla came back, the ship stopped at the Coal Mountain and met more than a hundred merchants.

古文：遇贾客百余人，载数船物，皆珍翠沈香象犀之属，直数千万。
现代文：他们装载几船货物，都是珍珠翡翠沉香象牙犀牛角之类的东西，价值几千万。
English: They loaded several ships with goods, all of which were pearls, emeralds, incense, ivory, rhinoceros horn, and the like, worth tens of millions.

古文：璹因其无备，尽杀之，投于海中而取其物。
现代文：邢璹趁他们没有防备，把他们全杀了，尸体投到了海里，把这些货物全都据这己有。
English: He took advantage of their unpreparedness, killed them all, threw their bodies into the sea, and took all the goods as his own.

古文：至京，惧人知也，则表进之，敕还赐璹，璹恣用之。
现代文：回到京城，怕人知道，就表示要送给皇帝。皇帝下诏赐给邢璹。邢璹任意地使用它。
English: When he returned to the capital, afraid that people would find out, he said that he wanted to give it to the emperor. The emperor issued an edict giving it to Yao. Yao used it at will.

古文：后子縡与王鉷谋反，邢氏遂亡，亦其报也。
现代文：后来他儿子邢璹和王鉷共同谋反，邢璹全家都被朝廷诛杀，这也是他的报应啊。
English: Later, his son Zou and Wang Zou jointly plotted a rebellion, and Zou's entire family was killed by the imperial court, which was also his retribution.

古文：万国俊
现代文：万国俊
English: WANG Guojun

古文：唐侍御史万国俊，令史出身，残忍为怀，楚毒是务。
现代文：唐朝侍御史万国俊，令史家庭出身，为人残忍，处事阴险狠毒。
English: Wang Guojun, a retainer of the Tang Dynasty, was born into the Lingshi family. He was a cruel person and dealt with things in a sinister and vicious manner.

古文：奏六道使，诛斩流人，杀害无数。
现代文：曾上奏告六道使，诬陷被流放的人，杀人无数。
English: He once reported to six emissaries, framed the exiled people, and killed countless people.

古文：后从台出，至天津桥南，有鬼满路，遮截马足，不得前进。
现代文：有一次从衙门外出，到天津桥以南时，发现满道都是鬼，拦挡马腿不能前进。
English: Once, when I went out from Shimen to the south of Tianjin Bridge, I found that there were ghosts all over the road, blocking the horse's legs from moving forward.

古文：口云： 叩头缓我。 连声忍痛，俄而据鞍，舌长数尺，遍身青肿。
现代文：他口中还说： 给你磕头，饶了我 喊声悲惨痛苦，不一会又按着马鞍，把舌头伸出几寸长，全身都青肿了。
English: He also said in his mouth: "I'll give you a steamed bun, spare me!" He cried out in abject pain, and a moment later he sat down in the saddle, stuck out his tongue a few inches long, and his whole body was bruised and swollen.

古文：舆至宅，夜半而卒。
现代文：把他用车运回住所，半夜就死了。
English: He was driven back to his home and died in the middle of the night.

古文：王瑶
现代文：王瑶
English: Wang Yao

古文：会昌中。
现代文：唐武宗会昌年间，有个名叫王瑶的人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Huichang of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Yao.

古文：瑶祖请以牲币祷于岱宗，遂感现形，留连顾问，瑶祖因叩头泣血，愿垂矜悯。
现代文：自己说：祖上本是青州人，曾在平卢节度使麾下作事，当时他的主公姓李，记不得姓名了，背上经常长疮，很多医生都不能治好。王瑶的祖辈请求用供品到岱岳庙去祈祷。
English: He said, "My ancestor was originally from Qingzhou, and he once worked under the patronage of the Pinglu Festival. At that time, his master's surname was Li, but I can't remember his name. He often had sores on his back, and many doctors couldn't heal them. Wang Yao's ancestors asked to use the offerings to go to the Shanyue Temple to pray.

古文：岳神言曰： 尔之主师，位居方伯，职在养民，而虐害生灵，广为不道，淫刑滥罚，致冤魂上诉。
现代文：于是感动了泰山神。现出原身来查问，王瑶的祖辈就叩头并哭出了血，请求泰山神能发发善心。泰山神说： 你的祖师位居高官，本应使百姓安居乐业，然而他残害生灵，做了很多坏事，乱施刑罚，致使冤魂告状。
English: Thus, the god of Mount Tai was moved. When the original body appeared for investigation, Wang Yao's ancestors bowed their heads and wept blood, begging the god of Mount Tai to send forth a good heart. The god of Mount Tai said: Your forefather was a high-ranking official who should have enabled the people to live and work in peace. However, he harmed living beings, did many bad things, arbitrarily imposed punishments, and caused the souls of wrongdoers to sue.

古文：所患背疮，葢鞭笞之验，必不可愈也。天法所被，无能宥之。 
现代文：所患的背疮病就是在阴曹地府被鞭打的结果，一定不会好，上天的责罚，没有办法宽恕他。 
English: The back sores he suffers from are the result of being whipped in the underworld, he will definitely not get better, God's punishment, there is no way to forgive him.

古文：瑶祖因拜乞一见主公，洎归青丘，主公已殂殁矣。
现代文：王瑶的祖辈要求拜见一下主公。等他回到了青丘，主公已经死了。
English: Wang Yao's ancestors asked to see the lord. By the time he returned to Qingqiu, the lord was dead.

古文：瑶祖具以泰山所睹之事，白于主公夫人，云： 何以为验？ 
现代文：王瑶的祖辈就把在泰山所看见的事，都告诉了主公夫人，夫人说： 凭什么来证明你说的是真事呢？ 
English: Wang Yao's ancestors told his wife what they had seen on Mount Taishan, and she said, "How can I prove that what you say is true?

古文：瑶祖曰： 某当在冥府之中，亦虑归之不信，请谒主公，备窥缧絏，主公遂裂近身衣袂，方圆寸余，以授某曰： 尔归，将此示吾家。 
现代文：王瑶的祖辈说： 我在冥府里，也怕回来你们不信，就请求拜见了主公，看见他全身绑着绳索。主公就撕下一块贴身的衣袖，大约有一寸见方，交给我说： 你回去，把这块衣袖给家人看。 
English: Wang Yao's ancestors said, "I am in the Netherworld, and I am afraid to come back here because you don't believe me. So I asked to see the Lord, and I saw that his whole body was tied with ropes. The Lord tore off a piece of his close-fitting sleeve, about an inch square, and gave it to me, saying, "Go back and show this sleeve to your family."

古文：具衣袂见在。 
现代文：现在衣服袖子还在。 
English: Now the sleeves are still there.

古文：夫人得之，遂验临终服之衣，果有裁裂之处，疮血犹在，知其言不谬矣。
现代文：夫人得到衣袖后，就检验主公临终所穿的衣服，果然有撕裂的地方，背疮流的血还在。知道他说的不是假话啊。
English: After receiving the sleeve, the lady checked the clothes worn by the lord on his deathbed. Sure enough, there was a tear, and the blood from the back wound was still flowing. She knew that what he said was not a lie.

古文：陈岘
现代文：陈岘
English: Chen Yao

古文：闽王审知初入晋安，开府多事，经费不给。孔目吏陈岘献计，请以富人补和市官，恣所征取，薄酬其直。
现代文：闽王审知刚刚占领晋安，开府以来，要办的事很多，经费不足，孔目吏陈岘献计，请求让有钱的富人充当 和市官 。于是就任意向他们征收索取，却给他们很少酬金。
English: Shao Wang Xian knew that Jin'an had just been occupied, and since the capital was founded, there were many things to be done, funds were insufficient, and the officials of Confucius had made a plan, requesting that rich and wealthy people act as officials. Therefore, he arbitrarily levied and collected from them, but gave them little remuneration.

古文：人问其故，对曰： 渠献计置和市官，坐此破家者众，凡破家者祖考，皆诉于水西大王，王使来追尔。 
现代文：有钱的富人都怨恨他。陈岘由于这样很受宠爱，被提升为支计官。过了几年，有两个官吏，拿着文书到陈岘住的乡里，问陈岘家住在哪里，人们问是要干什么，回答说： 他献计设立和市官，由于这个原因倾家荡产的很多。凡倾家荡产的人的祖先，都向水西大王告状，大王派我们来追究的。 
English: Rich and wealthy people all resented him. Because of this, Chen Xuan was very popular and was promoted to the position of treasurer. A few years later, two officials came to the village where Chen Xuan lived with a document and asked where Chen Xuan's family lived. People asked what he wanted to do, and he replied, "He devoted himself to building up the city and becoming a city official. For this reason, there are many people who have lost their families. The ancestors of all those who have lost their families have complained to the king of the west, and the king has sent us to investigate.

古文：岘方有势，人惧不敢言。
现代文：陈岘正有势力，人们都害怕他不敢说。
English: Chen Bingzheng is powerful, and people are afraid of him and dare not speak out.

古文：翌日，岘自府驰归，急召家人，设斋置祭，意色慞惶。
现代文：第二天陈岘从府里骑着马回来，急忙召集家里人，准备斋饭摆上祭典，神色彷徨疑惧。
English: The next day, Chen Yao rode back from the mansion on a horse, hastily gathered his family members, prepared a meal and put on a festival, his face was confused and suspicious.

古文：是日，里中复见二吏入岘家，遂暴卒。
现代文：这天，乡里又看见二个官吏去陈岘家，于是陈岘突然死了。
English: On the same day, two officials were seen in the village going to Chen Yao's home, and Chen Yao suddenly died.

古文：初审知之起事，其兄潮首倡，及审知据闽中，为潮立庙于水西，故俗谓之水西大王云。
现代文：当初审知起事，是他的哥哥潮首倡的。等到审知占据闽中，就给潮立了个庙在水西。因此世人叫他水西大王。
English: At first, it was his brother Shuchi who instigated the uprising. When Shuchi took control of Shuzhong, he built a temple for Shuchi in the west of Shuixi. For this reason, the world called him the Great King of Shuixi.

古文：萧怀武
现代文：萧怀武
English: by Xiao Huaiwu

古文：伪蜀有寻事团，亦曰中团，小院使萧怀武主之，盖军巡之职也。
现代文：伪蜀有个寻事团，也叫中团。由小院使萧怀武主持，相当于军巡的职务。
English: Pseudo-Shu has a fact-finding group, also called the middle group. It is presided over by Xiao Huaiwu, a small courtier, and is equivalent to the duties of a military patrol.

古文：怀武自所团捕捉贼盗多年，官位甚隆，积金巨万，第宅亚于王侯，声色妓乐，为一时之冠。
现代文：怀武指挥这个团捕捉贼盗，年头多了，因此官位很高，搜刮了巨万的钱财。住宅宏伟仅次于王侯，歌妓美女是当时第一流的。
English: Huaiwu commanded this regiment to catch thieves and thieves. He was much older, so his official rank was high, and he scrounged up a huge amount of money. The magnificent house was second only to the prince, and the beautiful geisha was the first class at that time.

古文：所管中团百余人，每人各养私名十余辈，或聚或散，人莫能别，呼之曰狗。
现代文：所管辖的中团有一百多人，每人又都豢养了十多个属于自己的部下，时而聚时而分，人们不能辨别，就管他们叫 狗 。
English: There are more than a hundred people in the central group under its jurisdiction, and each of them has raised more than ten subordinates who belong to them. They come together from time to time, and people can't tell them apart, so they call them dogs.

古文：至于深坊僻巷，马医酒保，乞丐佣作，及贩卖童儿辈，并是其狗。
现代文：至于深坊僻巷，马医酒保，乞丐佣人，以及作小生意的小孩这些人，都是中团的 狗 。
English: As for the back streets of Shenfang, the horse doctor, the bartender, the beggar servant, and the children who do small business, these people are the dogs of the middle group.

古文：民间有偶语者，官中罔不知。
现代文：百姓互相间偶尔有说牢骚话的人，官中没有不知道的。
English: There is no official who does not know that there are occasional grumblers among the common people.

古文：又有散在州郡及勋贵家，当庖看厩，御车执乐者，皆是其狗。
现代文：还有的分散在州郡以及达官贵人家当厨师、当马夫、驾马车、拉乐器的，都是中团的 狗 。
English: Others are scattered in prefectures and counties, and work as cooks, grooms, drivers of carriages, and pullers of musical instruments for high-ranking dignitaries. They are the dogs of the middle group.

古文：公私动静，无不立达于怀武，是以人怀恐惧，常疑其肘臂腹心，皆是其狗也。
现代文：无论是公家的还是个人的事情，没有不立刻传达到怀武那里的，因此人们都心里怀有恐惧，常常怀疑自己的身边知近的人都是 狗 。
English: Whether it is a public or personal matter, there is nothing that does not immediately reach Huaiwu's place, so people have fear in their hearts and often suspect that the people they know and are close to are dogs.

古文：怀武杀人不知其数，蜀破之初，有与己不相协，及积金藏镪之夫，日夜捕逐入院，尽杀之。
现代文：怀武杀人不知道有多少，刚刚灭蜀，有与自己不协调的，以及积金藏钱多的那些人，日夜不停地加以逮捕，并全把他们杀掉。
English: There are an unknown number of armed murderers, those who have just destroyed Shu, those who are not in harmony with themselves, and those who have a lot of hidden money, and they are constantly arresting them day and night and killing them all.

古文：冤枉之声，闻于街巷。
现代文：喊冤叫屈的声音在大街小巷都能听到。
English: Voices shouting grievances can be heard in the streets and alleys.

古文：后郭崇韬入蜀，人有告怀武欲谋变者，一家百余口，无少长戮于市。
现代文：后郭崇韬进入四川，有人告发怀武想要谋反叛变，怀武一家一百多口，不分老少全部被杀。
English: After Guo Chongzhen entered Sichuan, someone accused Huaiwu of plotting a rebellion. More than a hundred members of Huaiwu's family, young and old, were all killed.

古文：李龟祯
现代文：李龟祯
English: Lee Kuk-yuen

古文：乾德中，伪蜀御史李龟祯久居宪职。
现代文：乾德年间，伪蜀御史李龟祯，长久地担任司法官员。
English: During the Qiande era, the pseudo-Shushu imperial historian Li Guijuan served as a judicial official for a long time.

古文：尝一日出至三井桥，忽睹十余人，摧头及被发者，叫屈称冤，渐来相逼。
现代文：有一天，他出去，走到三井桥，忽然看见十多人。他们破了头的，披着发的，喊冤叫屈，渐渐向他逼来，龟祯十分震惊害怕。
English: One day, he went out, walked to Mitsui Bridge, and suddenly saw more than ten people. They had broken their heads, wore their hair, shouted grievances, and gradually forced themselves on him. The turtle dove was very shocked and afraid.

古文：龟祯慑惧，回马径归，说与妻子。
现代文：调回马头直奔家中向妻子孩子讲了这件事。
English: After being transferred back to Ma Tau, he went straight home and told his wife and children about it.

古文：仍诫其子曰： 尔等成长筮仕，慎勿为刑狱官，以吾清慎畏惧，犹有冤枉，今欲悔之何及。 
现代文：于是告诫自己的孩子说： 你们长大出外做官，千万不要做刑狱官。凭着我清白谨慎胆小怕事，还有被冤枉的，现在后悔怎么能来得及呢？ 
English: So he admonished his children, saying, "When you grow up and go out to work as a magistrate, don't become a prison warden. With my innocence, caution, fearlessness, and having been wronged, how can I regret it now?

古文：自此得疾而亡。
现代文：从这以后，得病而死。
English: After that, he fell ill and died.

古文：陈洁
现代文：陈洁
English: Chen Jie

古文：伪蜀御史陈洁，性惨毒，谳刑定狱，尝以深刻为务。
现代文：伪蜀御史陈洁，天生凶恶狠毒。审判处理案件，曾经把严酷做为规范。
English: Chen Jie, the pseudo-emperor of Shu, was born vicious and cruel. The trial of cases used to be very harsh.

古文：十年内，断死千人。
现代文：十年里，经他手判处死刑的有上千人。
English: In ten years, he has sentenced more than a thousand people to death.

古文：因避暑行亭，见蟢子悬丝面前，公引手接之，成大蜘蛛，衔中指，拂落阶下，化为厉鬼，云来索命。
现代文：因避暑，到亭子里，看见一个长腿的小蜘蛛挂着丝在面前，他伸手去接，突然变成了大蜘蛛咬住他的中指，甩落到台阶下面，就变成一个厉鬼，说： 来要你的命。 
English: Because of the summer vacation, he went to the pavilion and saw a long-legged little spider with silk hanging in front of him. When he reached out to pick it up, it suddenly turned into a big spider, bit his middle finger, flung it down to the bottom of the steps, and turned into a fierce ghost, saying, "I'm coming to take your life."

古文：惊讶不已，指渐成疮，痛苦十日而死。
现代文：陈洁惊讶害怕的不得了。手指渐渐变成了疮，痛苦极了。十天就死了。
English: Chen Jie was so surprised and scared. His fingers gradually turned into sores, and he was in extreme pain. He died ten days later.

