古文：张武，浏阳人。
现代文：张武，浏阳人。
English: Zhang Wu, Liu Yang people.

古文：豁达有勇力，稍涉书史。
现代文：勇猛而豁达，曾读过一点文史书籍。
English: Brave and open-minded, he had read a little bit of literature and history.

古文：为燕山右护卫百户。
现代文：为燕山右护卫百户。
English: It is Yanshan right guard hundred households.

古文：从成祖起兵，克蓟州，取雄县，战月漾桥，乘胜抵鄚州。
现代文：跟随成祖起兵，克蓟州，取雄县，战于月漾桥，乘胜直抵莫阝州。
English: He followed Cheng Zu to raise an army, and went to Keqin County, Torao County, fought in Yueyuan Bridge, and took the victory to arrive in Mogao County.

古文：与诸将败耿炳文于真定。
现代文：与诸将一起在真定击败耿炳文。
English: Together with the generals, he defeated Geng Bingwen in Zhending.

古文：夹河之战，帅壮士为前锋，突阵，佯败走。
现代文：夹河之战，张武率壮士为前锋，冲向敌阵，又佯装败逃。
English: In the Battle of Jiahe, Zhang Wu led a strong man as a forward, rushed to the enemy line, and pretended to be defeated and fled.

古文：南军追之，武还击，南军遂溃。
现代文：南军追赶，张武调头回击，南军溃败。
English: The Southern Army chased them, Zhang Wu turned around to fight back, and the Southern Army was routed.

古文：攻西水寨，前军夜失道，南军来追。
现代文：进攻西水寨时，前军夜里迷失道路，南军前来追击。
English: When attacking Xishuizhai, the former army lost the road at night, and the Southern Army came to pursue.

古文：武引兵伏要路，击却之。
现代文：张武率兵埋伏于要道，将追兵击退。
English: Zhang Wu and his soldiers lay in ambush on the main road and repelled the pursuing soldiers.

古文：战小河，陈文殁于阵。武帅敢死士自林间突出，与骑兵合，大破南军，斩首二万级，溺死无算。
现代文：小河之战，陈文死于阵中，张武率敢死队自林间冲出，与骑兵会合，大破南军，斩敌二万人，淹死无数。
English: In the Battle of Xiaohe, Chen Wen died in the battle, Zhang Wu led the death squad to rush out of the forest, meet with the cavalry, and defeated the Southern Army, killing 20,000 enemies and drowning countless people.

古文：累授都督同知。
现代文：张武被累授为都督同知。
English: Zhang Wu was repeatedly awarded the title of "Totoku Tongzhi."

古文：成祖即位，论功封成阳侯，禄千五百石，位次朱能下。
现代文：成祖即位后，论功行赏，张武被封为成阳侯，食禄一千五百石，位居朱能之下。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, on the basis of merit and reward, Zhang Wu was named Chengyang marquis, with a stipend of fifteen hundred koku, ranking below Zhu Neng.

古文：是时侯者，陈珪、郑亨、孟善、火真、顾成、王忠、王聪、徐忠、张信、李远、郭亮、房宽十三人，武为第一。
现代文：这时被封为侯者，有陈皀、郑亨、孟善、火真、顾成、王忠、王聪、徐忠、张信、李远、郭亮、房宽等十三人，张武位居第一。
English: At this time, there were 13 people who were given the title of Hou, including Chen Yu, Zheng Heng, Meng Shan, Hu Zhen, Gu Cheng, Wang Zhong, Wang Cong, Xu Zhong, Zhang Xin, Li Yuan, Guo Liang, and Fang Kuan. Zhang Wu ranked first.

古文：父用，洪武时，积功为大兴左卫副千户。请老，亨嗣职。
现代文：不久，回守北平。永乐元年，张武去世。成祖拿出宫中马匹为他操办丧事，赠他为潞国公，谥号忠毅。郑亨，合肥人。父亲郑用，洪武时，积功升为大兴左卫副千户。郑用请求退休养老，郑亨承袭其职。
English: Soon, he returned to defend Peking. In the first year of Yongle, Zhang Wu passed away. Cheng Zu took out the horses in the palace to carry out the funeral for him and presented him as the Duke of Shandong, surnamed Zhong Yi. Zheng Heng, from Hefei. His father Zheng Yi, at the time of Hong Wu, was promoted to the deputy of Daxing Zuwei. Zheng Yi requested retirement pension, and Zheng Heng inherited his post.

古文：洪武二十五年，应募持檄谕鞑靼，至斡难河。
现代文：洪武二十五年，郑亨应募携带檄文去谕示鞑靼，到达斡难河。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, Zheng Heng was recruited to carry the imperial edict to Tatarstan, and arrived at the Mudanhua River.

古文：还，迁密云卫指挥佥事。
现代文：回来后，升为密云卫指挥佥事。
English: After his return, he was promoted to the rank of commander of the Miyun Guards.

古文：燕师起，以所部降。
现代文：燕王起兵后，郑亨率所部投降。
English: After Yan Wang raised an army, Zheng Heng and his troops surrendered.

古文：战真定，先登，进指挥使。
现代文：真定之战，郑亨率先登城，进升为指挥使。
English: In the decisive battle, Zheng Heng took the lead in entering the city and was promoted to commander.

古文：袭大宁，至刘家口，诸将将攻关，成祖虑守关卒走报大宁得为备，乃令亨将劲骑数百卷旆登山，潜出关后，断其归路。急攻之，悉缚守关者，遂奄至大宁。进北平都指挥佥事。
现代文：袭击大宁时，至刘家口，诸将准备攻关。成祖担心守关官兵逃往大宁报告，增加防备，于是命郑亨率劲骑数百，卷旗登山，暗至关后，断其归路，然后强打猛攻，将守关者全部捆绑起来，然后突至大宁，郑亨进升为北平都指挥佥事。
English: When the attack on Danying reached Liujiakou, the generals prepared to tackle the key. Cheng Zu was worried that the guard officers and soldiers fled to Danying to report and increase their preparedness, so he ordered Zheng Heng to lead hundreds of people to ride hard, climb the mountain with a banner, secretly break their way back, then attack hard, tie up all the guards, and then rush to Danying. Zheng Heng was promoted to the command of Beiping.

古文：夜帅众破郑村坝兵，西破紫荆关，掠广昌，取蔚州，直抵大同。
现代文：他趁夜率军击败郑村坝守军，西破紫荆关，攻取广昌、蔚州，直抵大同。
English: He took advantage of the night to lead the army to defeat the Zhengcunba defenders, break through the west of the Bauhinia Pass, capture Guangchang and Ulshu, and go straight to Datong.

古文：还战白沟河，逐北至济南，进都指挥同知。
现代文：又回战白沟河，追击至济南，进升为都指挥同知。
English: He returned to the battle of Baigouhe, pursued to Jinan, and advanced to be the commander of Tongzhi.

古文：攻沧州，军北门，扼饷道东昌。
现代文：郑亨进攻沧州，驻军北门，在东昌扼住陆运道路。
English: Zheng Heng attacked Cangzhou, garrisoned the North Gate, and choked the land transport road in Dongchang.

古文：战败，收散卒，还军深州。
现代文：战败，收集散兵，回军深州。
English: Defeated, he gathered his scattered soldiers and returned to Shinshu.

古文：明年战夹河、藁城，略地至彰德，耀兵河上。
现代文：第二年，郑亨战于夹河、藁城，略地至彰德，耀兵河上。
English: In the second year, Zheng Heng fought in Jiahe, Shicheng, and briefly in Changde, and he was victorious.

古文：还屯完县。
现代文：然后回军驻扎完县。
English: Then the returning troops were stationed in the county.

古文：明年从破东平、汶上，军小河。
现代文：第二年，他随军攻破东立、汶上，驻扎小河。
English: In the second year, he accompanied the army to break through Dongli and Wenshang, and stationed in Xiaohe.

古文：战败，王真死。诸将皆欲北还，惟亨与朱能不可。
现代文：战败，王真战死，诸将都想北还，唯独郑亨与朱能不能同意。
English: Defeated, Wang Zhen died in battle, all generals wanted to return to the north, but Zheng Heng and Zhu Neng could not agree.

古文：入京师，历迁中府左都督，封武安侯，禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：入京城后，郑亨历升为中府左都督，被封为武安侯，食禄一千五百石，并给予世袭凭证。
English: After entering the capital, Zheng Hengli was promoted to the left governor of Zhongfu, was named Wu'an Hou, with a stipend of 1,500 koku, and was given a hereditary certificate.

古文：留守北京。
现代文：他留守北京。
English: He stayed in Beijing.

古文：时父用犹在，受封爵视亨。
现代文：当时其父郑用还在，与郑亨一样封爵。
English: At that time, his father Zheng Yi was still alive, and he was knighted like Zheng Heng.

古文：永乐元年，充总兵官，帅武成侯王聪、安平侯李远备宣府。
现代文：永乐元年，郑亨充任总兵官，率武成侯王聪、安平侯李远防守宣府。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Zheng Heng was appointed as the chief military officer, and led Wu Cheng Hou Wang Cong and Anping Hou Li Yuan to defend Xuanfu.

古文：亨至边，度宣府、万全、怀来形便，每数堡相距，中择一堡可容数堡士马者，为高城深池，浚井蓄水，谨瞭望。
现代文：郑亨到达边境后，估计宣府、万全、怀来有利的地形后，每隔数堡，选择一座可以容纳数堡兵马的堡垒，修筑高城深沟，挖井蓄水，小心望。
English: After Zheng Heng arrived at the border, after estimating the favorable terrain of Xuanfu, Wanquan and Huailai, he chose a fortress that could accommodate several soldiers and horses every few forts, built a deep ditch in Gaocheng, dug wells to store water, and carefully watched.

古文：寇至，夜举火，昼鸣炮，并力坚守。规画周详，后莫能易。
现代文：一旦寇贼来到，便夜举火，昼鸣炮，合力坚守，规划周详，后莫能改。
English: Once the bandits come, they will light fires at night and fire cannons in the daytime, stick together, plan thoroughly, and never change.

古文：三年二月召还，旋遣之镇。
现代文：三年二月，郑亨应诏回京，随即又奉命前往镇守。
English: In February of the third year, Zheng Heng returned to Beijing in response to the edict, and was immediately ordered to go to the town.

古文：七年秋，备边开平。
现代文：七年秋，郑亨防守开平边境。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year, Zheng Heng defended the border.

古文：明年，帝北征，命亨督运。
现代文：第二年，皇上北征，命郑亨监督运输。
English: In the second year, the emperor went on the Northern Expedition, and ordered Zheng Heng to supervise the transportation.

古文：出塞，将右哨，追败本雅失里。
现代文：出塞后，郑亨率领右哨，追击并打败本雅失里。
English: After getting out of the jam, Zheng Heng led the right post, chased and defeated Ben Ya.

古文：大军与阿鲁台遇。亨帅众先，大破之。
现代文：大军与阿鲁台相遇，郑亨率众先冲，大破敌军。
English: The large army met with Arutai, and Zheng Heng led the crowd to rush ahead and smash the enemy army.

古文：论功为诸将冠。
现代文：论功时，郑亨为诸将之首。
English: When it comes to merit, Zheng Heng is at the top of all generals.

古文：其冬仍出镇宣府。
现代文：这年冬天，他仍出外镇守宣府。
English: This winter, he still went out to guard Xuanfu.

古文：十二年复从北征，领中军。
现代文：十二年，郑亨又随军北征，率领中军。
English: In the twelfth year, Zheng Heng followed the army to the north and led the Chinese army.

古文：战忽失温，追敌中流矢却，复与大军合破之。
现代文：忽失温之战，郑亨追击敌军时中飞箭而退，又与大军破敌军。
English: In the battle of sudden loss of temperature, Zheng Heng chased the enemy army and retreated with arrows, and broke the enemy army with a large army.

古文：二十年复从出塞，将左哨，帅卒万人，治龙门道过军，破兀良哈于屈裂河。
现代文：二十年，郑亨又随军出塞，统领左哨，他率领一万士兵，修筑龙门之路，让大军能过，在屈裂击败兀良哈。
English: Twenty years later, Zheng Heng followed the army out of the fortress and led the left post. He led ten thousand soldiers to build the Longmen Road, so that the large army could pass through, and defeated Gongliangha in the crack.

古文：将辎重还，击破寇之追蹑者，仍守开平。
现代文：郑亨率军运送辎重返回，再败追踪的敌寇，仍驻守开平。
English: Zheng Heng led the army to transport the heavy loads back, defeated the pursuing enemy, and still stationed in Kaiping.

古文：成祖凡五出塞，亨皆在行。
现代文：成祖共五次出塞，郑亨都在军中随行。
English: Cheng Zu made five trips to Tibet, and Zheng Heng accompanied him in the army.

古文：仁宗即位，镇大同。
现代文：仁宗即位后，郑亨镇守大同。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, Zheng Heng became the governor of Datong.

古文：洪熙元年二月，颁制谕及将军印于各边总兵官。亨佩征西前将军印。
现代文：洪熙元年二月，仁宗向各边地总兵官发制谕及将军印。郑亨佩征西前将军印。
English: In February of the first year of Hongxi, Rinzong issued an edict and the seal of the general to the general officers on all sides. Zheng Heng received the seal of the former general.

古文：在镇垦田积谷，边备完固，自是大同希寇患。
现代文：他镇守边地时，垦田积谷，使边备完固，从此大同很少有寇贼之患。
English: When he was in charge of guarding the borderlands, he made the borderlands complete, and from then on, Datong was rarely plagued by bandits.

古文：宣德元年召掌行后府事。
现代文：宣德元年，郑亨应诏掌管后府事务。
English: In the first year of Xuande, Zheng Heng took charge of the affairs of the Hougu in accordance with the edict.

古文：已，仍镇大同，转饷宣府。
现代文：不久，仍镇守大同，运饷给宣府。
English: Soon, he was still the town guard of Datong and was sent to Xuanfu.

古文：招降迤北部长四十九人，请于朝，厚抚之，归附者相属。
现代文：他招降了迤北部长四十九人，并向朝廷请求厚抚，因而归附者接踵而至。
English: He recruited forty-nine ministers from northern Jiangxi Province and asked the imperial court for a generous allowance. As a result, adherents came one after another.

古文：九年二月卒于镇。
现代文：九年，郑亨死于大同。
English: In nine years, Zheng Heng died in Datong.

古文：亨严肃重厚，善抚士卒，耻掊克。
现代文：郑亨严肃厚道，善抚士卒，耻于用苛捐重税盘剥百姓。
English: Zheng Heng is serious and kind, he is kind to his subordinates, and he is ashamed of ripping off the people with heavy taxes.

古文：在大同时，镇守中官挠军政，亨裁之以理，其人不悦，然其卒也，深悼惜之。
现代文：在大同时，镇守中官扰乱军纪，郑亨便以理裁处，这些人很不高兴，但他死后，他们都深深悲悼痛惜。
English: At the same time, Zheng Heng was taken to court by the town marshal for disturbing military discipline. These people were very unhappy, but after his death, they were deeply saddened and regretted.

古文：赠漳国公，谥忠毅。
现代文：郑亨被赠为漳国公，谥号忠毅。
English: Zheng Heng was given the title of Duke of Shandong Province and the posthumous name of Zhongyi.

古文：妾张氏，自经以殉，赠淑人。
现代文：其妾张氏，自尽殉夫，被赠为淑人。
English: His concubine Zhang, who committed suicide, was given the title of Lady.

古文：子能嗣，传爵至明亡。徐忠，合肥人，袭父爵为河南卫副千户。
现代文：徐忠，合肥人。承袭父爵为河南卫副千户。
English: Xu Zhong, from Hefei, inherits his father's title as Henan Deputy Governor.

古文：累从大军北征，多所俘获，进济阳卫指挥佥事。
现代文：屡次随大军北征，俘获颇多，进升为济阳卫指挥佥事。
English: He repeatedly accompanied the army on the Northern Expedition, captured quite a lot, and was promoted to the commander of Jiyangwei.

古文：洪武末，镇开平。
现代文：洪武末年，徐忠镇守开平。
English: At the end of Hongwu's life, Xu Zhongzheng was in charge of Kaiping.

古文：燕兵破居庸、怀来，忠以开平降。
现代文：燕兵攻破居庸、怀来，徐忠以开平投降。
English: Yan soldiers defeated Ju Yong and Huai Lai, and Xu Zhong surrendered to Kaiping.

古文：从徇滦河，与陈旭拔其城。
现代文：随军攻战于滦河，与陈旭一起攻取其城。
English: He followed the army to fight in Luohe and captured its city together with Chen Xu.

古文：李景隆攻北平，燕师自大宁还救。
现代文：李景隆进攻北平，燕兵自大宁回救。
English: Li Jinglong attacked Beiping, and Yan soldiers came back from Danying.

古文：至会州，置五军：张玉将中军，朱能将左军，李彬将右军，房宽将后军，忠号骁勇，使将前军。
现代文：至会州，设五军，张玉统率中军，朱能统率左军，李彬统率右军，房宽统率后军，徐忠号称骁勇之将，因而奉命统领前军。
English: At Huizhou, five armies were set up. Zhang Yutong led the central army, Zhu Neng led the left army, Li Bin led the right army, Fang Kuan led the rear army. Xu Zhong was known as a brave general, so he was ordered to lead the front army.

古文：遂败陈晖于白河，破景隆于郑村坝。
现代文：于是在白河击败陈晖，在郑村坝击败李景隆。
English: So he defeated Chen Xi in Baihe and Li Jinglong in Zhengcunba.

古文：白沟河之战，忠单骑突阵。一指中流矢，未暇去镞，急抽刀断之。控满疾驱，殊死战。
现代文：白沟河之战，徐忠单骑冲向敌阵，一指被飞箭射中，无暇拔箭头，便急忙抽刀砍断，勒马疾驱，殊死奋战。
English: In the Battle of Baigou River, Xu Zhong single-handedly rushed to the enemy's camp. One of his fingers was hit by a flying arrow, and he had no time to pull out the arrow, so he hurriedly drew a knife to cut it off, slowed down, and fought to the death.

古文：燕王乘高见之，谓左右曰： 真壮士也！ 
现代文：燕王在高处望见，对左右说道： 真是一名壮士啊！ 
English: Yan Wang looked down from a high place and said to both sides: What a strong man!

古文：进攻济南，克沧州，大战东昌、夹河。
现代文：燕兵进攻济南，攻克沧州，大战东昌、夹河。
English: Yan soldiers attacked Jinan, conquered Cangzhou, fought in Dongchang and Jiehe.

古文：攻彰德，破西水寨，克东阿、东平、汶上，大战灵璧。
现代文：攻彰德，破西水寨，克东阿、东平、汶上，大战灵璧。
English: Challenging De, breaking the West Water Village, Kdonga, Dongping, and Wenshang, the great battle spirit.

古文：遂从渡江入京师。
现代文：徐忠遂随燕王渡江进入京城。
English: Xu Zhong finally followed Yan Wang across the river and entered the capital.

古文：自指挥同知累迁都督佥事。封永康侯，禄一千一百石，予世券。
现代文：他从指挥同知累迁至都督佥事，被封为永康侯，食禄一千一百石，并给予世袭凭证。
English: He was promoted from commander to viceroy, was named Yongkang marquis, received a stipend of 1,100 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：忠每战，摧锋跳荡，为诸将先。
现代文：徐忠每次参战，冲锋突阵，都为诸将之先。
English: Every time Xu Zhong went to war, he was ahead of the generals.

古文：而驭军甚严，所过无扰。
现代文：他治军甚严，其军所过之地，毫无侵扰。
English: He led his army with great severity, and did not trouble the land through which his army passed.

古文：善抚降附，得其死力。
现代文：又善于安抚降附者，因而他们能为他出力死战。
English: He is also good at placating his followers so that they will fight to the death for him.

古文：事继母以孝闻。夜归，必揖家庙而后入。
现代文：徐忠对继母十分孝顺，晚上回家一定要在家庙行礼之后才进门。
English: Xu Zhong is very filial to his stepmother. When he comes home in the evening, he must enter the door after performing a ritual at the family temple.

古文：崇祯末，协守南京，大清兵下江南，之龙迎降。
现代文：他生活节俭，为人恭敬谨慎，少有如此者。成祖北巡时，因徐忠老成持重，而将他留下辅佐太子监国。永乐十一年，徐忠去世。
English: He lived a frugal life and was a respectful and prudent person, which is rare. When Cheng Zu was on a northern tour, he was left as an assistant to the crown prince and overseer of the country because Xu Zhong was too old. In the eleventh year of Yongle, Xu Zhong died.

古文：张信，临淮人。
现代文：被赠为蔡国公，谥号忠烈。张信，临淮人。
English: He was given the title of Cai Guogong (蔡国公) and the posthumous name of Zhong Rong (忠烈).

古文：父兴，永宁卫指挥佥事。
现代文：父亲张兴，为永宁卫指挥佥事。
English: His father, Zhang Xing, was a conductor for Yongning Wei.

古文：信嗣官，移守普定、平越，积功进都指挥佥事。
现代文：张信承袭官职，移守普定、平越，积功升至都指挥佥事。
English: Zhang Xin inherits the official post, moves to Puding and Pingyue, and is promoted to the capital command.

古文：惠帝初即位，大臣荐信谋勇，调北平都司。
现代文：惠帝刚刚即位，大臣推荐张信，说他有勇有谋，因而调为北平都司。
English: Emperor Hui had just ascended to the throne, and the minister recommended Zhang Xin, saying that he was courageous and resourceful, and thus he was transferred to the Beiping Capital.

古文：受密诏，令与张昺、谢贵谋燕王。
现代文：张信接受密诏，奉命与张籨、谢贵一起去谋取燕王。
English: Zhang Xin accepted the secret edict, and was ordered to go with Zhang Xuan and Xie Gui to obtain Yan Wang.

古文：信忧惧不知所为。
现代文：张信内心恐惧不安，不知如何是好。
English: Zhang Xin is afraid and uneasy inside, and doesn't know what to do.

古文：母怪问之，信以告。
现代文：其母觉得他反常，便询问他，张信以实相告。
English: His mother thought he was abnormal and asked him about it. Zhang Xin told her the truth.

古文：母大惊曰： 不可。
现代文：其母大惊道 ：不能这么做。
English: His mother was shocked and said, "You can't do that."

古文：汝父每言王气在燕。
现代文：你父亲总说王气在燕。
English: Your father always said that the king's spirit is in the swallows.

古文：汝无妄举，灭家族。 
现代文：你的无妄之举，会招来灭族之灾的。 
English: Your reckless act will bring about the destruction of the nation.

古文：成祖称病，信三造燕邸，辞不见。
现代文：成祖自称有病，张信三次造访燕邸，燕王都推辞不见。
English: Chengzu claimed to be ill, Zhang Xin visited Yan's residence three times, and Yan Wang did not refuse.

古文：信固请，入拜床下。
现代文：张信固执请求，终于进入燕邸，在床下拜见，将此情密告成祖。
English: Zhang Xin persisted in his request, and finally entered Yan's residence, met him under the bed, and told this secret to Cheng Zu.

古文：密以情输成祖，成祖戄然起立，召诸将定计，起兵，夺九门。
现代文：成祖惧然起立，召集诸将定计起兵，攻夺九门。
English: Cheng Zu stood up fearfully and gathered all the generals to raise an army and conquer the Nine Gates.

古文：成祖入京师，论功比诸战将，进都督佥事。封隆平侯，禄千石，与世伯券。
现代文：成祖进入京城后，论功行赏，张信晋升为都督佥事，被封为隆平侯，食禄千石。
English: After Cheng Zu entered the capital, he was awarded for his meritorious deeds. Zhang Xin was promoted to the post of the capital's governor, was given the title of Longping, and received a stipend of one thousand koku.

古文：成祖德信甚，呼为 恩张 。
现代文：成祖十分感激张信，称他为 恩张 。
English: Chengzu was very grateful to Zhang Xin and called him Enzhang.

古文：欲纳信女为妃，信固辞，以此益见重。
现代文：成祖想纳张信之女为妃，张信坚决推辞。由此而更受成祖敬重。
English: Cheng Zu wanted to take Zhang Xin's daughter as his wife, but Zhang Xin resolutely refused. As a result, Cheng Zu was respected even more.

古文：凡察藩王动静诸密事，皆命信。
现代文：凡是观察藩王动静等密事，都命张信去办。
English: Zhang Xin was ordered to handle all secret matters, such as observing the movements of the king of the domain.

古文：信怙宠颇骄。
现代文：张信恃宠颇骄。
English: Zhang Xinyan is quite proud of his favor.

古文：永乐八年冬，都御史陈瑛言信 无汗马劳，忝冒侯爵，恣肆贪墨，强占丹阳练湖八十余里、江阴官田七十余顷，请下有司验治。 
现代文：永乐八年冬，都御史陈瑛说张信无汗马功劳，却忝冒侯爵，恣意贪污，强占丹阳练湖八十余里、江阴官田七十余顷，请求下到官府验证治罪。
English: In the winter of the eighth year of Yongle, the Metropolitan Historian Chen Ying said that Zhang Xin had no hard work, but he pretended to be a marquis, arbitrarily embezzled, occupied more than eighty miles of Danyang Lianhu and more than seventy hectares of Jiangyin government land, and requested to go to the government office to verify and punish the crime.

古文：帝曰： 瑛言是也。
现代文：皇上说道 ：陈瑛说得对。
English: The Emperor said, "Chen Ying is right.

古文：昔中山王有沙洲一区，耕农水道所经，家僮阻之以擅利。
现代文：昔日中山王拥有一区沙洲，农民的水道经过其地，家僮借此以谋取私利。
English: In the past, the Sun Yat-sen King owned a sandbank in the first district. Farmers' waterways passed through the area, and the family took advantage of this to seek personal gain.

古文：王闻，即归其地于官。
现代文：中山王获悉后，马上将其地归还了官府。
English: After learning of this, Zhongshan Wang immediately returned his land to the government.

古文：今信何敢尔！ 
现代文：如今张信怎么敢做这种事呢？ 
English: How dare Zhang Xin do such a thing now?

古文：命法司杂治之。寻以旧勋不问。
现代文：仍命法司处理此事，随后因张信是功勋旧臣而不予追究。
English: He still ordered the legal department to deal with the matter, and then did not pursue it because Zhang Xin was a meritorious former minister.

古文：二十年从北征，督运饷。
现代文：二十年，张信跟随北征，监督运饷。
English: For twenty years, Zhang Xin followed the Northern Expedition, supervising the transportation of goods.

古文：大阅于隰宁，信辞疾不至，谪充办事官。
现代文：成祖在隰宁进行大检阅，张信称病不至，被贬为办事官。
English: Cheng Zu carried out a major inspection in Suining, Zhang Xin said that he was not ill, and was demoted to clerk.

古文：已而复职。
现代文：不久复职。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：仁宗即位，加少师，并支二俸，与世侯券。
现代文：仁宗即位后，张信被加封为少师，同时支取二份俸禄，并给予世袭凭证。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Zhang Xin was given the additional title of Junior Teacher, and at the same time received two salaries and was given a hereditary certificate.

古文：宣德元年，从征乐安。
现代文：宣德元年，随军征讨乐安。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, he went with the army to solicit Le An.

古文：三年，帝巡边，征兀良哈，命居守。
现代文：三年，皇上巡边，征讨兀良哈，张信受命居守。
English: Three years later, the emperor went on a tour of the provinces to solicit contributions from the peasants, and Zhang Xin was ordered to stay at home.

古文：明年督军万五千人浚河西务河道。
现代文：第二年，张信督军一万五千人前去疏通河西务河道。
English: In the second year, 15,000 soldiers of Zhang Xindu's army went to dredge the West Hebei River.

古文：又五传而明亡。
现代文：正统七年五月，他死于南京。
English: He died in Nanjing in May of the same year.

古文：王友，荆州人。
现代文：被赠为郧国公，谥号恭僖。王友，荆州人。
English: He was given the title of Prince of the State of Shandong and the posthumous name of Gongjun. Wang You, a native of Jingzhou.

古文：袭父职为燕山护卫百户。
现代文：承袭父职为燕山护卫百户。
English: He inherited his father's position as the guardian of Yanshan Mountain.

古文：从起兵，定京师。
现代文：跟随燕王起兵，平定京城。
English: Follow Yan Wang to raise an army and subdue the capital city.

古文：论功当侯，以骄纵，授都指挥佥事。
现代文：论功应当封侯，可他因行为骄纵，只被授为都指挥佥事。
English: On the merits, he should be given a knighthood, but because of his arrogant behavior, he was only awarded the title of grand marshal.

古文：及邱福等议上，乃封清远伯。
现代文：直到丘福等奏达朝廷，才封为清远伯。
English: It was not until Chufu and others petitioned the imperial court that he was given the title of Qingyuan Bo.

古文：明年充总兵官，帅舟师沿海捕倭。
现代文：第二年，王友充任总兵官，率水师沿海追捕倭寇。
English: In the second year, Wang You was appointed as the chief military officer and led the sailors to chase the wako along the coast.

古文：倭数掠海上，友无功，帝切责之。
现代文：倭寇屡次骚扰海上，王友无功，皇上严厉指责。
English: Wako repeatedly harassed Wang You at sea, to no avail, and the emperor severely reprimanded him.

古文：已，大破倭。
现代文：不久，王友大破倭寇。
English: Soon, Wang You defeated the wokou.

古文：帝喜，降敕褒劳，寻召还。
现代文：皇上大喜，降旨褒奖慰劳，王友随即应诏回京。
English: The emperor was overjoyed, reduced the order of commendation and consolation, and Wang You immediately returned to Beijing.

古文：四年从征交阯，与指挥柳琮合兵破筹江栅，困枚、普赖诸山，斩首三万七千余级。
现代文：永乐四年，他随军征讨交趾，与指挥柳琮合兵攻破筹江栅栏，困枚、普赖诸山，斩首三万七千余人。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, he went along with the army to solicit and negotiate with the enemy, and together with the commander Liu Xuan, broke through the fence of the Chejiang River, trapped and fled to the mountains, and beheaded more than 37,000 people.

古文：六年七月进侯，加禄五百石，与世券。
现代文：六年七月，王友进封为侯，加禄五百石，并被授予世袭凭证。
English: In July of the sixth year, Wang You entered the territory as a marquess with a stipend of 500 koku and was awarded a hereditary certificate.

古文：明年，再征交阯，为副总兵。
现代文：第二年再征交趾，王友任副总兵。
English: The next year, he was conscripted again, and Wang You was appointed deputy general.

古文：八年还，从北征，督中军。
现代文：八年，王友回京，又随军北征，督率中军。
English: In the eighth year, Wang You returned to Beijing and accompanied the army to the north, supervising and leading the army.

古文：别与刘才筑城饮马河上。
现代文：王友另与刘才在饮马河岸筑城。
English: Wang You and Liu Cai also built a city on the bank of the Puma River.

古文：会知院失乃干欲降，帝令友将士卒先行，谕以遇敌相机剿灭。
现代文：恰逢知院失乃干打算投降，皇上命王友率士卒先行，并谕示他遇到敌人要伺机剿灭。
English: Just as Shiiin Shonagon was about to surrender, the emperor ordered Wang You to lead the soldiers in advance and ordered him to wait for an opportunity to annihilate the enemy.

古文：友等至，与敌相距一程，迂道避之应昌。
现代文：王友等到后，与敌军相距还有一段路程，便绕道避往应昌。
English: After Wang You waited, there was still some distance between him and the enemy, so he took a detour to avoid Yingchang.

古文：军中乏食，多死者。
现代文：军中缺乏粮食，许多士兵饿死了。
English: There was a shortage of food in the army and many soldiers starved to death.

古文：帝震怒，屡旨切责，夺其军属张辅。
现代文：皇上为此震怒，屡次降旨切责，夺去其属下军官张辅。
English: The emperor was furious about this and repeatedly abdicated his command, taking away his subordinate officer Zhang Fu.

古文：还令群臣议罪。已而赦之。
现代文：还命群臣议王友之罪，不久赦免了他。
English: He also ordered his ministers to discuss Wang You's crime, and soon pardoned him.

古文：十二年，坐妾告友夫妇诽谤。
现代文：十二年，因其妾告发王友夫妇诽谤而获罪。
English: In 2012, he was found guilty of defamation after his mistress accused Wang Youxuan and his wife.

古文：有验，夺爵。
现代文：查有证据，王友被剥夺爵位，不久便去世了。
English: Wang You was stripped of his title after evidence was found, and he died soon after.

古文：仁宗即位，官其子顺为指挥佥事。
现代文：仁宗即位后，任命其子王顺为指挥佥事。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he appointed his son Wang Shun as the orchestra's conductor.

