古文：熙宁中，新法方行，州县骚然，邵康节闲居林下，门生故旧仕宦者皆欲投劾而归，以书问康节。答曰： 正贤者所当尽力之时。
现代文：原文
English: Original text from

古文：新法固严，能宽一分，则民受一分之赐矣。
现代文：宋神宗熙宁年间，王安石的新法正大力推行，地方州县纷纷骚动。
English: During the reign of Emperor Song Shenzong, Wang Anshi's new law was being vigorously implemented, and local states and counties were in turmoil.

古文：投劾而去何益？ 李燔常言： 人不必待仕宦有职事才为功业，但随力到处，有以及物，即功业也。 
现代文：邵雍正隐居山林，一些做官的门生旧友，都想自举罪状辞官回乡，写信问邵雍的看法。邵雍回答他们说： 现在正是你们应当尽力的时候。新法固然严苛，但能宽松一分，百姓就能得一分好处，辞职不干于国于民又有什么好处呢？ 冯述评李燔常常说： 不必非得等到做官了才能建功立业，只要处处尽力，于人有益，就是功业。 
English: Shao Yong was living in seclusion in the mountains, and some of his old friends, who were disciples of officials, wanted to self-incriminate and resign from the officials to return to their hometowns, and wrote to ask Shao Yong's opinion. Shao Yong replied to them: Now is the time for you to do your best. Although the new law is strict, if you can relax one point, the people can get one point of benefit. What is the benefit of resigning from the country and the people? Feng Shuxuan Li Yao often said: You don't have to wait until you become an official to build a career, as long as you do your best everywhere, it

古文：莲池大师劝人作善事，或辞以无力，大师指凳曰： 假如此凳，欹斜碍路，吾为整之，亦一善也。 
现代文：莲池大师劝人做善事，有人以自己能力不足为借口，大师指着面前的一个凳子说： 假如这张凳子倾斜在地阻碍通路，我把它摆正放好，这也是一件善事啊! 
English: Master Lianchi exhorts people to do good deeds. Some people use their lack of ability as an excuse. The master pointed to a stool in front of him and said: "If this stool is tilted on the ground, blocking the passage, and I put it upright, this is also a good deed!"

古文：如此存心，便觉临难投劾者是宝山空回。
现代文：如果心中有这样的境界，便会明白遇到困难辞官不做就犹如进入宝山却空手而回一样。
English: If you have such a realm in your heart, you will understand that if you encounter difficulties and do not make a decision, it will be like entering a treasure mountain but returning empty-handed.

古文：鲜于侁为利州路转运副使，部民不请青苗钱，王安石遣吏诘之，曰： 青苗之法，愿取则与，民自不愿，岂能强之？ 
现代文：鲜于侁担任利州路转运副使时，他所管辖的农民不申请青苗钱，王安石派官吏前往质问责难，鲜于侁回答说： 青苗法规定：愿意申请的百姓就贷给他，百姓自己都不愿意，又怎么能勉强他们呢？ 
English: When he served as deputy envoy of Lizhou Road Transportation, the farmers under his jurisdiction did not apply for seedling money, and Wang Anshi sent officials to the quality accountability. He replied: The seedling law stipulates that the people who are willing to apply will lend to him, but the people themselves are not willing, so how can they be forced?

古文：东坡称侁 上不害法，中不废亲，下不伤民 ，以为 三难 ，仕途当以为法。
现代文：苏轼称赞鲜于侁 对上不妨害法令施行，居中可以照顾到亲人，对下又不伤害百姓 ，三方面都能够兼顾到，实在不容易。
English: It is not easy to take into account all three aspects, that is to say, it is not easy to implement laws and regulations without harming those on the top, take care of relatives in the middle, and do not harm the people on the bottom.

