古文：张邦昌，字子能，永静军东光人也。
现代文：张邦昌字子能，永静军东光人。
English: Zhang Bangchang's character Zi Neng, Yongjing's Dongguang people.

古文：举进士，累官大司成，以训导失职，贬提举崇福宫，知光、汝二州。
现代文：举进士，连续升任为大司成，因训导失职，贬为崇福宫提举，知光、汝二州。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Shinshi, successively promoted to the rank of Daisicheng, demoted to the rank of Chongfu Palace, and promoted to Zhiguang and Ruizhou.

古文：政和末，由知洪州改礼部侍郎。
现代文：政和末，由知洪州改为礼部侍郎。
English: At the end of the Meiji era, he was transferred from Chihonshu to become a chamberlain of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：首请取崇宁、大观以来瑞应尤殊者增制旗物，从之。
现代文：第一个请求把崇宁、大观以来出现的特殊的祥瑞感应制成旗帜、器物，被采纳。
English: The first request was to make flags and utensils of the special auspiciousness that has appeared since Chongning and Daegu, and it was accepted.

古文：宣和元年，除尚书右丞，转左丞，迁中书侍郎。
现代文：宣和元年，任尚书右丞，转为左丞，升为中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Xuanwu era, he was appointed as the junior secretary of the right, changed to the junior secretary of the left, and was promoted to the junior secretary of the middle.

古文：钦宗即位，拜少宰。
现代文：钦宗即位后，升为少宰。
English: After Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the rank of Shoshu.

古文：金人犯京师，朝廷议割三镇，俾康王及邦昌为质于金以求成。
现代文：金人进犯京师，宋廷议割三镇，派康王及张邦昌去金营为人质以求议和。
English: The Jin people attacked the Beijing division, Song Ting negotiated to cut three towns, and sent King Kang and Zhang Bangchang to the Jin camp as hostages to negotiate peace.

古文：会姚平仲夜斫金人营，斡离不怒责邦昌，邦昌对以非出朝廷意。
现代文：恰好姚平仲夜袭金营，斡离不怒责张邦昌，张邦昌以袭金营不是朝廷的意思做答。
English: It just so happened that Yao Ping attacked the gold camp in the middle of the night, but Zhang Bangchang was not angry. Zhang Bangchang replied that the attack on the gold camp was not the intention of the imperial court.

古文：俄进太宰兼门下侍郎。
现代文：不久张邦昌升为太宰兼门下侍郎。
English: Soon after, Zhang Bangchang was promoted to Dazai and his subordinate's chamberlain.

古文：既而康王还，金人复质肃王以行，仍命邦昌为河北路割地使。
现代文：不久，康王回来，金人又以肃王为人质，仍命张邦昌为河北路割地使。
English: Soon after, King Kang returned, and the goldsmiths again took King Su as a hostage, but still ordered Zhang Bangchang to be the Hebei Road cutter.

古文：初，邦昌力主和议，不意身自为质，及行，乃要钦宗署御批无变割地议，不许；又请以玺书付河北，亦不许。
现代文：先前，张邦昌力主和议，不料自己成为人质，等动身时，就请求钦宗亲署御批不改变割地和议的决定，没答应他；又请求给河北发诏书，也没答应。
English: Previously, Zhang Bangchang tried to lead the peace talks, but he became a hostage, and when he set out, he asked the Qinzong family to approve the decision not to change the land-sharing and peace talks, but they did not agree; he also asked for an imperial decree to be issued to Hebei, but they did not agree.

古文：时粘罕兵又来侵，上书者攻邦昌私敌，社稷之贼也。
现代文：此时粘罕的兵马又来侵略，上书者攻击张邦昌私通金人，是社稷之贼。
English: At this time, the sticky soldiers and horses came to invade again. The sender of the letter attacked Zhang Bangchang, a money launderer, and a thief of society.

古文：遂黜邦昌为观文殿大学士、中太一宫使，罢割地议。
现代文：于是，贬张邦昌为观文殿大学士、中太一宫使，罢去割地求和之议。
English: As a result, Zhang Bangchang was denounced as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and an envoy of the Chinese Emperor, and the discussion of dividing the land and seeking peace was abandoned.

古文：其冬，金人陷京师，帝再出郊，留青城。
现代文：当年冬，金人攻陷京师，皇上又出城与金议和，留在青城。
English: In the winter of that year, the Jin people attacked and occupied Beijing, and the emperor went out of the city to discuss peace with the Jin people and stayed in Qingcheng.

古文：明年春，吴幵、莫俦自金营持文书来，令推异姓堪为人主者从军前备礼册命。
现代文：第二年春，吴千干、莫俦从金营带着文书回来，让推举异姓堪当皇帝的人到金营接受册封。
English: In the spring of the following year, Wu Chigang and Mogao came back from Jinying with a document, asking the person who was chosen to be emperor to come to Jinying to accept the title.

古文：留守孙傅等不奉命，表请立赵氏。
现代文：留守孙傅等不听从命令，上表请求立赵氏。
English: Left-behind Sun Fu and others disobeyed the order and petitioned for the establishment of the Zhao clan.

古文：金人怒，复遣幵、俦促之，劫傅等召百官杂议。
现代文：金人怒，又派吴千干、莫俦来督促，胁迫孙傅等召集百官商议。
English: The goldsmith was angry, and sent Wu Qiangan and Mo Yan to urge and coerce Sun Fu and others to convene hundreds of officials for discussion.

古文：众莫敢出声，相视久之，计无所出，乃曰： 今日当勉强应命，举在军前者一人。 适尚书员外郎宋齐愈至自外，众问金人意所主，齐愈书 张邦昌 三字示之，遂定议，以邦昌治国事。
现代文：众人不敢说什么，相视很久，无计可施，就说 ：今日应勉强听命，应付过去，推举在金营中的一人。 正好尚书员外郎宋齐愈从金营回来，众人问金人的意向，宋齐愈写 张邦昌 三字给大家看，于是就决定推举张邦昌。
English: The people did not dare to say anything, they looked at each other for a long time, there was nothing they could do, so they said, "Today, we should reluctantly obey orders, deal with the past, and nominate one of the people in the gold camp." Just as Song Qiyu, the son of a scholar, came back from the gold camp, the people asked the intention of the gold person. Song Qiyu wrote the three characters of Zhang Bangchang for everyone to see, so he decided to nominate Zhang Bangchang.

古文：孙傅、张叔夜不署状，金人执之置军中。
现代文：孙傅、张叔夜不在推举书上签名，被金人抓到营中。
English: Sun Fu and Zhang Shuzhu did not sign the election petition at night, and were caught by the Jin people in the camp.

古文：王时雍时为留守，再集百官诣秘书省，至即闭省门，以兵环之，俾范琼谕众以立邦昌，众意唯唯。
现代文：王时雍当时任留守，又把百官召集到秘书省，百官到后就关上省门，用兵把守，让范琼告诉大家立张邦昌为帝，众人只唯唯称是。
English: At that time, Wang Shiyong stayed behind and summoned hundreds of officials to the Ministry of Secretaries. After the arrival of the hundreds of officials, they closed the provincial gate and guarded it with soldiers, and let Fan Qiong tell everyone to establish Zhang Bangchang as the emperor.

古文：有太学生难之，琼恐沮众，厉声折之，遣归学舍。
现代文：有太学生提出异议，范琼恐他惑众，就厉声训斥他，让他回学舍。
English: When another student raised objections, Fan Qiong, fearing that he was misleading the public, harshly reprimanded him and sent him back to his dormitory.

古文：时雍先署状，以率百官。
现代文：王时雍先在推举书上签名，给百官做榜样。
English: Wang Shiyong first signed his name on the nomination form, setting an example for hundreds of officials.

古文：御史中丞秦桧不书，抗言请立赵氏宗室，且言邦昌当上皇时，专事宴游，党附权奸，蠹国乱政，社稷倾危实由邦昌。
现代文：御史中丞秦桧不签名，力争立赵氏宗室，并说张邦昌在徽宗时，专事安逸游乐，党附权奸，蠹国乱政，社稷倾危实是张邦昌所致。
English: Grand Historian Chujo Qin Yu did not sign his name, and strove to establish the Zhao family as the family of the Zhao clan, and said that when Zhang Bangchang was in Huizong, he was devoted to leisure and pleasure, the party was attached to power, the country was in chaos, and the society was in danger, which was actually caused by Zhang Bangchang.

古文：金人怒，执桧。
现代文：金人怒，抓秦桧。
English: The rich man got angry and grabbed Qin Yu.

古文：幵、俦持状赴军前。
现代文：吴千干、莫俦拿着推举状到金营。
English: Wu Chigang and Mo Yan went to Jinying with the nomination letter.

古文：邦昌入居尚书省，金人趣劝进，邦昌始欲引决，或曰： 相公不前死城外，今欲涂炭一城耶？ 适金人奉册宝至，邦昌北向拜舞受册，即伪位，僣号大楚，拟都金陵。
现代文：张邦昌回来主持尚书省，金人劝他称帝，张邦昌开始想推辞，有人说 ：相公不先死在城外，现在想使全城受涂炭吗？ 正赶上金人带着册宝来，张邦昌向北拜舞后接受了册命，即伪皇帝位，僭号大楚，准备定都金陵。
English: Zhang Bangchang returned to preside over Shangshu Province. The Jin people advised him to proclaim himself emperor. Zhang Bangchang began to want to refuse. Some people said, "If your father-in-law does not die outside the city first, do you now want the whole city to be charred?" Just as the Jin people arrived with the treasures, Zhang Bangchang bowed to the north and accepted the mandate, that is, the pseudo-emperor's throne, the title of grand chu, and prepared to set the capital at Jinling.

古文：遂升文德殿，设位御床西受贺，遣閤门传令勿拜，时雍率百官遽拜，邦昌但东面拱立。
现代文：于是登上文德殿，在西面设御位接受朝贺，让门官传令不要跪拜，王时雍率百官竟跪拜，张邦昌只是面朝东恭敬地站着。
English: So he went up to the Emperor's throne room, set up a throne on the west side to receive morning greetings, and asked the gatekeeper to order him not to kneel. Wang Shiyong led all the officials to kneel, while Zhang Bangchang just stood respectfully facing east.

古文：外统制官、宣赞舍人吴革耻屈节异姓，首率内亲事官数百人，皆先杀其妻孥，焚所居，谋举义金水门外。
现代文：外统制官、宣赞舍人吴革以屈节异姓为耻，首先率内亲事官数百人，都先杀了自己的妻子儿女，烧毁宅第，计划在金水门外举事。
English: Wu Ge, the foreign-controlled official and propagandist, was ashamed of having a different surname from Qu Jie. First of all, he led hundreds of relatives and officials to kill their wives and children, burn their homes, and plan to hold an event outside the Jinshui Gate.

古文：范琼诈与合谋，令悉弃兵仗，乃从后袭杀百余人，捕革并其子皆杀之，又擒斩十余人。
现代文：范琼假装与他合谋，让大家丢弃武器，竟从背后袭杀了百余人，捕获了吴革和他的儿子，并杀了他们，又杀了十余人。
English: Fan Qiong pretended to conspire with him and made everyone discard their weapons, but actually attacked and killed more than a hundred people from behind, captured Wu Ge and his son, and killed them, and killed more than ten people.

古文：是日，风霾，日晕无光。
现代文：当天，狂风大作，遮天蔽日，太阳昏暗无光。
English: On the same day, the wind blew wildly, obscuring the sky, and the sun was dim and without light.

古文：百官惨沮，邦昌亦变色。
现代文：百官凄惨颓丧，张邦昌也惊恐失色。
English: All the officials were miserable and dejected, and Zhang Bangchang was also scared and discolored.

古文：唯时雍、幵、俦、琼等欣然鼓舞，若以为有佐命功云。
现代文：只有王时雍、吴千干、莫俦、范琼等欢欣鼓舞，他们认为有佐命之功。
English: Only Wang Shiyong, Wu Chigang, Mo Yan, Fan Qiong and others were jubilant, believing that they had contributed to saving lives.

古文：即以时雍权知枢密院事领尚书省，幵权同知枢密院事，俦权签书枢密院事，吕好问权领门下省，徐秉哲权领中书省。
现代文：张邦昌当即命王时雍权知枢密院事领尚书省，吴千干同知枢密院事，莫俦权签书枢密院事，吕好问权领门下省，徐哲权领中书省。
English: At the time of Zhang Bangchang's immediate appointment as king, Yong Quanzhi was in charge of the Privy Council and the Ministry of Education, Wu Qiangan was in charge of the Privy Council and the Ministry of Education, Mo Yan Quanzhi was in charge of the Privy Council and the Ministry of Education, Lu Hao Quanzhi was in charge of the Ministry of Education and Xu Zhe was in charge of the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Education.

古文：下令曰： 比缘朝廷多故，百官有司皆失其职。
现代文：下令说： 近来因朝廷多变故，百官和各部门都失去其职能，从今起要各自恢复职能，依法度办事。
English: The order said: "Recently, due to the frequent changes in the imperial court, all officials and departments have lost their functions. From now on, they should resume their respective functions and act in accordance with the law."

古文：自今各遵法度，御史台觉察以闻。 见百官称 予 ，手诏曰 手书 。
现代文：御史台监察上报。 张邦昌见百官时自称 予 ，手诏称 手书 。
English: When Zhang Bangchang saw hundreds of officials, he called himself "you," and the handwritten note was called "handwriting."

古文：独时雍每言事邦昌前，辄称 臣启陛下 ，邦昌斥之；劝邦昌坐紫宸、垂拱殿，吕好问争之，乃止。
现代文：只有王时雍每次在张邦昌面前说事时，往往称 臣启陛下 ，张邦昌斥责他；又劝张邦昌坐紫宸、垂拱殿，吕好问争辩后，才停止。
English: Only every time Wang Shiyong said something in front of Zhang Bangchang, he often called him "His Majesty," and Zhang Bangchang rebuked him; he also advised Zhang Bangchang to sit in the Courtyard and Hanging Arch, and only stopped after he had a good argument.

古文：邦昌以嗣位之初，宜推恩四方，以道阻先赦京城，选郎官为四方密谕使。
现代文：张邦昌刚即位，应推恩四方，因道路阻隔，先在京城大赦，选郎官为四方密谕使。
English: As soon as Zhang Bangchang ascended the throne, the four parties should be grateful. Due to the road blockage, the amnesty was first carried out in Beijing. The elector was the envoy of the four parties.

古文：金人将退师，邦昌诣金营祖别，服柘袍，张红盖，所过设香案，起居悉如常仪，时雍、秉哲、幵、俦皆从行，士庶观者无不感怆。
现代文：金人将退兵，张邦昌到金营去送别，他身穿皇袍，张红色伞盖，在金人所过之地设香案，言行举止都和平常一样，王时雍、徐秉哲、吴千干、莫俦都跟着他，观看的人无不感伤。
English: Jinren will retire, Zhang Bangchang went to Jinying to see him off, he was wearing a royal robe, a red umbrella cover, and set incense in the place where Jinren passed. His words and deeds were the same as usual. Wang Shiyong, Xu Bingzhe, Wu Chigang, and Mogao all followed him. The people watching were all sentimental.

古文：二帝北迁，邦昌率百官遥辞于南薰门，众恸哭，有仆绝者。
现代文：二帝被金掠走北去，张邦昌率百官在南薰门遥辞二帝，众人痛哭，有倒地而死的人。
English: The two emperors were robbed of their gold and fled north. Zhang Bangchang led hundreds of officials to leave the two emperors at the South Gate. People cried bitterly, and some fell to the ground and died.

古文：金师既还，邦昌降手书赦天下。
现代文：金军已退，张邦昌降手书大赦天下。
English: The Golden Army had retreated, and Zhang Bangchang was pardoned for his surrender.

古文：吕好问谓邦昌曰： 人情归公者、劫于金人之威耳，金人既去，能复有今日乎？
现代文：吕好问对张邦昌说： 人情归你，那是迫于金人的威势，金人已离去，能再有今日的光景吗？
English: Lv Hao asked Zhang Bangchang and said: "Human dignity belongs to you. That is forced by the authority of the Jin people. The Jin people have left. Can there be today's situation again?

古文：康王居外久，众所归心，曷不推戴之？ 又谓曰： 为今计者，当迎元祐皇后，请康王早正大位，庶获保全。 监察御史马伸亦请奉迎康王。邦昌从之。
现代文：康王久居在外，是众心所归，何不推戴他呢？ 又说： 为今之计，应当迎回元佑皇后，请康王早登帝位，大概还可保全官位性命。 监察御史马伸也请求迎康王即位，张邦昌同意。
English: King Kang has been away for a long time, he is loved by everyone, so why not promote him? He also said: For now, it is necessary to welcome back the Empress Yuan You, and ask King Kang to ascend the throne as soon as possible, and he can probably save his official position and life. The inspector Ma Shin also requested to welcome King Kang to the throne, and Zhang Bangchang agreed.

古文：王时雍曰： 夫骑虎者势不得下，所宜熟虑，他日噬脐，悔无及已。 徐秉哲从旁赞之，邦昌弗听，乃册元祐皇后曰宋太后，入御延福宫。
现代文：王时雍说： 骑虎难下，应深思熟虑，否则，他日遭吞噬，悔之晚矣。 徐秉哲也在旁边表示赞同，张邦昌不听，于是，册封元佑皇后为太后，迎入延福宫。
English: Wang Shiyong said, "If riding a tiger is difficult, you should think about it deeply, otherwise, he will be swallowed up by the day and it will be too late to repent." Xu Bingzhe also expressed his approval next to him, but Zhang Bangchang did not listen, so he made Yuanyou the empress dowager and welcomed her into Yanfu Palace.

古文：遣蒋师愈赍书于康王自陈： 所以勉循金人推戴者，欲权宜一时以纾国难也，敢有他乎？ 王询师愈等，具知所由，乃报书邦昌。
现代文：派蒋师愈带书信到康王那自述说： 我所以同意金人的推戴，是出于权宜之计，以纾国难，怎敢怀有他图？ 康王询问蒋师愈等，就知道了一切，于是给张邦昌写了回书。
English: He sent Jiang Shiyue with a letter to King Kang, in which he said, "I agreed to the promotion of Jin Ren because it was expedient and because the country was in trouble. How dare he have other plans?" King Kang asked Jiang Shiyue and learned everything, so he wrote a reply to Zhang Bangchang.

古文：邦昌寻遣谢克家献大宋受命宝，复降手书请元祐皇后垂帘听政，以俟复辟。
现代文：张邦昌随即派谢克家献上大宋受命宝，又降手书请元佑皇后垂帘听政，等康王即位。
English: Zhang Bangchang immediately sent the Shiek family to present the Great Song Dynasty Ordered Treasure, and also asked the Empress Yuan You to listen to the government and wait for King Kang to ascend the throne.

古文：书既下，中外大说。
现代文：手书下后，朝廷内外的人十分高兴。
English: After the handwriting, people inside and outside the court were very happy.

古文：太后始御内东门小殿，垂帘听政。
现代文：宋太后开始在内东门小殿垂帘听政。
English: Empress Dowager Song began to listen to the government at the Inner East Gate.

古文：邦昌以太宰退处内东门资善堂。
现代文：张邦昌以太宰的身份居于内东门资善堂。
English: Zhang Bangchang lived in Neidongmen Shizen-do Hall as the ethereal ruler.

古文：寻遣使奉乘舆服御物至南京，既而邦昌亦至，伏地恸哭请死，王抚慰之。
现代文：不久，又派使者带着乘舆服御去南京，很快张邦昌也到，他跪地痛哭请死，康王慰抚他。
English: Not long after, he sent an envoy to Nanjing with a coat of arms, and soon Zhang Bangchang also arrived. He knelt down and wept and begged for death, and King Kang consoled him.

古文：王即皇帝位，相李纲，徙邦昌太保、奉国军节度使，封同安郡王。
现代文：康王即位，以李纲为宰相，张邦昌转为太保、奉国军节度使，被封为同安郡王。
English: Kang Wang ascended to the throne, with Li Gang as prime minister, Zhang Bangchang was transferred to the Taiho, the festival envoy of the national army, and was named the king of Tongan County.

古文：纲上书极论： 邦昌久典机政，擢冠宰司。国破而资之以为利，君辱而攘之以为荣。
现代文：李纲上书论奏： 张邦昌久任机务，位高权重，却趁国家破亡之机为己谋利，君主受辱之时窃位求荣。
English: Li Gang's essay on the book: Zhang Bangchang has been in office for a long time, with a high position and weight, but he took advantage of the opportunity of the country's ruin for his own benefit, and stole the position to seek glory when the monarch was insulted.

古文：异姓建邦四十余日，逮金人之既退，方降赦以收恩。
现代文：以异姓建国四十多天，等金人退去，才降赦来笼络人心。
English: It took more than forty days to establish the country under a different name, and it was not until the gold people retreated that they were pardoned and won the hearts of the people.

古文：是宜肆诸市朝，以为乱臣贼子之戒。 时黄潜善犹左右之。
现代文：这种人应枭首示众，作为对乱臣贼子的惩戒。 当时黄潜善也帮助李纲。
English: Such a person should show his dagger to the public as a punishment for the ruffian thief. At that time, Huang Kuanzhen also helped Li Gang.

古文：纲又力言： 邦昌已僣逆，岂可留之朝廷，使道路目为故天子哉？ 高宗乃降御批曰： 邦昌僣逆，理合诛夷，原其初心，出于迫胁，可特与免贷，责授昭化军节度副使、潭州安置。 
现代文：李纲又说 ：张邦昌已是僭逆，怎能留在朝廷，使人们把他看成是先前的天子呢？ 高宗就降御批说： 张邦昌僭逆，理应诛杀，但考察他的本意，是出于威胁，可特别给予宽恕，贬为昭化军节度副使，安置于潭州。 
English: Li Gang also said: Zhang Bangchang is already rebellious, how can he stay in the imperial court, so that people regard him as the former son of heaven? Gao Zong submitted to the imperial sanction and said: Zhang Bangchang is rebellious and should be killed, but if his intention is to threaten, he can be specially pardoned, demoted to the vice-envoy of the Shaohua Army, and placed in Tanzhou.

古文：初，邦昌僣居内庭，华国靖恭夫人李氏数以果实奉邦昌，邦昌亦厚答之。
现代文：起初，张邦昌入主皇宫，华国靖恭夫人李氏多次给张邦昌送果品，张邦昌也对她特别厚待。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Bangchang entered the main imperial palace. Mrs. Li, the wife of Jing Gong of China, repeatedly sent fruit to Zhang Bangchang, and Zhang Bangchang also treated her particularly well.

古文：一夕，邦昌被酒，李氏拥之曰： 大家，事已至此，尚何言？ 因以赭色半臂加邦昌身，掖入福宁殿，夜饰养女陈氏以进。
现代文：一天晚上，张邦昌醉酒，李氏扶着他说 ：陛下，事已至此，还说什么？ 于是把胳膊搭在张邦昌身上，扶他进了福宁殿，晚上，把自己的养女陈氏打扮好送给张邦昌。
English: One night, when Zhang Bangchang was drunk, Mr. Li held him up and said, "Your Majesty, things have come to this, what else can I say?" So he put his arm around Zhang Bangchang and helped him into the Fu Ning Palace. In the evening, he dressed up his adopted daughter, Ms. Chen, and gave her to Zhang Bangchang.

古文：及邦昌还东府，李氏私送之，语斥乘舆。
现代文：等张邦昌退位回东府，李氏偷偷送他，并责备皇上。
English: When Zhang Bangchang abdicated and returned to Dongfu, the Li clan secretly sent him there and reproached the emperor.

古文：帝闻，下李氏狱，词服。
现代文：皇上听说后，把李氏投入狱中，她服罪。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he threw Li into prison, and she pleaded guilty.

古文：诏数邦昌罪，赐死潭州，李氏杖脊配车营务。
现代文：下诏列举张邦昌的罪状，赐死于潭州。李氏处以杖脊后发配到车务营。
English: The following edict listed the charges against Zhang Bangchang, who was sentenced to death in Tanzhou. Li was given a cane and sent to a labor camp.

古文：时雍、秉哲、幵、俦等先已远窜，至是，并诛时雍。
现代文：王时雍、徐秉哲、吴千干、莫俦等早已流放到远方，这时，又杀了王时雍。
English: Wang Shiyong, Xu Bingzhe, Wu Chigang, Mo Yan and others had already been exiled to a faraway place, when Wang Shiyong was killed.

古文：刘豫，字彦游，景州阜城人也。
现代文：刘豫字彦游，景州阜城人。
English: Liu Yu, a native of Fucheng, Gyeongju.

古文：世业农，至豫始举进士，元符中登第。
现代文：世代务农，到刘豫时才考进士，元符中考中进士。
English: He worked in agriculture for generations, and was promoted to the rank of juniors only when he reached Liu Yu. He was promoted to the rank of juniors in the Yuanfu Middle School Examination.

古文：豫少时无行，尝盗同舍生白盂、纱衣。
现代文：刘豫小时候缺乏教养和德行，曾偷同学的白金盂、纱衣。
English: As a child, Liu Yu lacked upbringing and virtue, and once stole a classmate's platinum bracelet and gauze.

古文：政和二年，召拜殿中侍御史，为言者所击，帝不欲发其宿丑，诏勿问。
现代文：政和二年，被任命为殿中侍御史，被言者攻击，皇上不想揭发他过去的丑行，下诏不要追究。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was appointed to serve as the court historian. The subject of the speech attacked him. The emperor did not want to expose his past misdeeds, so he issued an edict not to investigate.

古文：未几，豫累章言礼制局事，帝曰： 刘豫河北种田叟，安识礼制？ 黜豫两浙察访。
现代文：不久，刘豫多次上书讲礼制局的事，皇上说： 刘豫是河北的种田人，怎懂礼制？ 贬刘豫为两浙察访。
English: Soon, Liu Yu repeatedly wrote to the emperor about the Bureau of Etiquette, and the emperor said, "Liu Yu is a farmer from Hebei Province, how does he know about etiquette?

古文：宣和六年，判国子监，除河北提刑。
现代文：宣和六年，判国子监，拜官为河北提刑。
English: Six years after the proclamation of peace, he was sentenced to the custody of the son of the state, and he was sentenced to Hebei Province.

古文：金人南侵，豫弃官避乱仪真。
现代文：金人南侵，刘豫弃官到仪真避乱。
English: The Jin invaded the south, and Liu Yu abandoned his post to escape the turmoil.

古文：豫善中书侍郎张悫，建炎二年正月，用悫荐除知济南府。
现代文：刘豫与中书侍郎张悫交好，建炎二年正月，因张悫的推荐刘豫被任为济南知府。
English: Liu Yu was on good terms with Zhang Ye, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and in the first month of the second year of Jianyan, Liu Yu was appointed to Jinan Prefecture due to Zhang Ye's recommendation.

古文：时盗起山东，豫不愿行，请易东南一郡，执政恶之，不许，豫忿而去。
现代文：当时山东盗贼蜂起，刘豫不愿去，请求改任东南部某郡，执政讨厌他，不许，刘豫气愤地上任去了。
English: At that time, the bandits in Shandong revolted. Liu Yu did not want to go. He asked to be reassigned to a county in the southeast. The government hated him and did not allow it. Liu Yu angrily resigned.

古文：是冬，金人攻济南，豫遣子麟出战，敌纵兵围之数重，郡倅张柬益兵来援，金人乃解去。
现代文：当年冬，金人攻济南，刘豫派儿子刘麟出战，敌人重重包围了济南，副长官张柬增兵来援，敌兵才撤。
English: In the winter of that year, the Jin people attacked Jinan, and Liu Yu sent his son Liu Lin to fight. The enemy surrounded Jinan, and the vice-commander Zhang Kham brought more soldiers to help, but the enemy soldiers only withdrew.

古文：因遣人啖豫以利，豫惩前忿，遂畜反谋，杀其将关胜，率百姓降金，百姓不从，豫缒城纳款。
现代文：金趁机派人以利劝诱刘豫，刘豫想起先前的忿恨，于是蓄谋反叛，杀他的部将关胜，率百姓降金，百姓不从，刘豫献城投降。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity, Jin sent people to persuade Liu Yu. Liu Yu remembered the previous resentment, so he plotted a rebellion, killed his subordinate Guan Sheng, led the people to reduce the gold, the people did not comply, and Liu Yu surrendered the city.

古文：三年三月，兀术闻高宗渡江，乃徙豫知东平府，充京东西、淮南等路安抚使，节制大名开德府、濮滨博棣德沧等州，以麟知济南府，界旧河以南，俾豫统之。
现代文：建炎三年三月，兀术听说高宗已渡过长江，就派刘豫知东平府，任京东西、淮南等路安抚使，节制大名、开德府、濮、滨、博、棣、德、沧等州，刘麟为济南知府，黄河以南，由刘豫统领。
English: In March of the third year of Jianyuan, when Jiu Jiu heard that Gaozong had crossed the Yangtze River, he sent Liu Yu Zhi to Dongping Prefecture, and appointed him as the pacifying envoy of Beijing East-West, Huainan and other roads, and the temperate daimyo, Kade Prefecture, Zhai, Bin, Bo, Zhai, De, Cang and other states, and Liu Lin to Jinan Prefecture, south of the Yellow River, led by Liu Yu.

古文：四年七月丁卯，金人遣大同尹高庆裔、知制诰韩昉册豫为皇帝，国号大齐，都大名府。
现代文：建炎四年七月二十七日，金派大同尹高庆裔、知制诰韩窻册封刘豫为皇帝，国号大齐，建都大名府。
English: On July 27th, the fourth year of Jianyan, Liu Yu, a descendant of Yin Gaoqing, a member of the Jin faction, was crowned emperor. The country was unified, and the capital was built in Damingfu.

古文：先是，北京顺豫门生瑞禾，济南渔者得鳣，豫以为己受命之符，遣麟持重宝赂金左监军挞辣求僣号。
现代文：先前，北京顺豫门长出瑞禾，济南渔民捕到鳝鱼，刘豫认为这是自己登帝位的符瑞，就派刘麟带重礼贿赂金左监军挞懒，请求封他为帝。
English: Previously, Beijing's Shunyumen had grown rice, and fishermen in Jinan had caught catfish. Liu Yu believed that this was proof of his accession to the throne, so he sent Liu Lin with a heavy gift to bribe the laziness of Jin Zuo's army to request that he be made emperor.

古文：挞辣许之，遣使即豫所部咨军民所宜立，众未及对，豫乡人张浃越次请立豫，议遂决，乃命庆裔、昉备玺绶宝册以立之。
现代文：挞懒应允，派使到刘豫所部询问军民应立谁为帝，众人未来得及回答，刘豫的同乡张浃超越次序答话，请求立刘豫，于是就决定立他，命高庆裔、韩日方备好玺绶宝册来册封他。
English: Zou was too lazy to agree, so he sent an envoy to Liu Yu's headquarters to ask the military and the people who should be the emperor, and everyone had time to answer in the future. Liu Yu's countryman Zhang Zou went beyond the order of the answer and asked to appoint Liu Yu, so he decided to appoint him, and ordered Gao Qing's descendants, South Korea and Japan to prepare a precious book to register him.

古文：九月戊申，豫即伪位，赦境内，奉金正朔，称天会八年。
现代文：九月初九，刘豫即位为伪皇帝，大赦境内，遵用金的年号，称天会八年。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the 9th month, Liu Yu ascended the throne as a pseudo-emperor, amnestied the territory, followed the golden year, and said that it would be eight years.

古文：以张孝纯为丞相，李孝扬为左丞，张柬为右丞，李俦为监察御史，郑亿年为工部侍郎，王琼为汴京留守，子麟为太中大夫、提领诸路兵马兼知济南府。
现代文：以张孝纯为丞相，李孝扬为左丞，张柬为右丞，李俦为监察御史，郑亿年为工部侍郎，王琼为汴京留守，他的儿子刘麟为太中大夫、提领诸路兵马兼知济南府。
English: With Zhang Xiaochun as the chancellor, Li Xiaoyang as the left chancellor, Zhang Kam as the right chancellor, Li Jiao as the inspector of the history, Zheng Er as the attendant of the Ministry of Industry, Wang Qiong as the stay-at-home in Beijing, and his son Liu Lin as the doctor of the Taizhong and the leader of all the soldiers and horses in Jinan.

古文：孝纯始坚守太原，颇怀忠义，高宗以王衣雅厚孝纯，俾衣招之，会粘罕遣人自云中送归豫，遂失节于贼。
现代文：张孝纯开始时坚守太原，十分忠义，高宗因王衣与张孝纯是至交，就让他去招抚张孝纯，正巧粘罕派人从云中送他归属刘豫，于是失节于叛贼。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Xiaochun stuck to Taiyuan and was very loyal. Since Wang Yi and Zhang Xiaochun were close friends, Gao Zong let him go to woo Zhang Xiaochun. It was just a coincidence that he sent someone from the clouds to send him to Liu Yu, so he lost the line to the traitor.

古文：豫还东平，升为东京。改东京为汴京，降南京为归德府。
现代文：刘豫回东平，升东平为东京，改东京为汴京，降南京为归德府。
English: Liu Yu returned to Dongping, promoted Dongping to Tokyo, changed Tokyo to Shijing, and demoted Nanjing to Guidefu.

古文：以弟益为北京留守，寻改汴京留守。
现代文：以弟刘益为北京留守，不久又改为汴京留守。
English: With his brother Liu Yi staying in Beijing, it was soon changed to staying in Beijing.

古文：复降淮宁、颍昌、顺昌、兴仁府悉为州。
现代文：又降淮宁、颍昌、兴仁府皆为州。
English: Huaining, Binchang and Xingren were also downgraded to prefectures.

古文：自以生景州，守济南，节制东平，僣位大名，乃起四郡丁壮数千人，号 云从子弟 。
现代文：因他生于景州，任过济南知府，节制东平，僭位于大名，就招募以上四郡的丁壮数千人，号称 云从子弟 。
English: Because he was born in Jingzhou, served as governor of Jinan, controlled Dongping, and resided in Daimyo, he recruited thousands of Ding Zhuang from the above four counties, and was known as the son of Yun Cong.

古文：下伪诏求直言。
现代文：下伪诏求直言。
English: Let's call a spade a spade.

古文：十月，册其母翟氏为皇太后，妾钱氏为皇后。
现代文：十月，封他的母亲翟氏为皇太后，妾钱氏为皇后。
English: In October, he made his mother, Lady Zou, the empress dowager, and his concubine, Lady Qian, the empress.

古文：钱氏，宣和内人也，习宫掖事，豫欲有所取则，故立之。
现代文：钱氏，是宣和时的宫人，熟悉宫中之事，刘豫想仿照宫中各种规制，故立她为后。
English: Qian, who was a member of the imperial court at the time of the declaration of peace, was familiar with the affairs of the imperial court. Liu Yu wanted to follow the various regulations of the imperial court, so he appointed her as empress.

古文：十一月，改明年元阜昌。
现代文：十一月，改明年年号为阜昌。
English: In November, the name of the next year was changed to Fuchang.

古文：方豫未僣号时，数遣人说东京副留守上官悟，及赂悟左右乔思恭与共说悟令降金，悟并斩之。
现代文：在刘豫未僭号时，多次派人劝说东京副留守上官悟，并贿赂上官悟的亲信乔思恭一起劝上官悟降金，上官悟把他们都杀了。
English: When Liu Yuwei died, he repeatedly sent people to persuade Shangguo, the vice-governor of Tokyo, to stay, and bribed Qiao Sikyong, a close confidant of Shangguo, to persuade Shangguo to lower the price. Shangguo killed them all.

古文：又招知楚州赵立，立不发书，斩其使。
现代文：又招降楚州知州赵立，赵立不看他的书信就斩了他的使者。
English: He also invited Zhao Li of Chizhou to surrender Chuzhou. Zhao Li did not read his letter and beheaded his messenger.

古文：复遣立友人刘偲以榜旗诱之，且曰： 吾君之故人也。 立曰： 我知有君父，不知有故人。 烧杀偲。
现代文：又派赵立的朋友刘用写着大字的旗来诱降，并说 ：我是你的老朋友啊。 赵立说 ：我知有君父，不知有老朋友。 把刘烧死。
English: He also sent Liu, a friend of Zhao Li, to entice him to surrender with a banner with large characters, saying, "I am your old friend." Zhao Li said, "I know you have a father, but I don't know if you have an old friend. Burn Liu to death."

古文：博州判官刘长孺以书劝豫反正，豫囚之十旬，不屈；欲官之，不受。
现代文：博州判官刘长孺写信劝刘豫反正，刘豫囚他一百天，他都不屈服；又给他官做，他也不接受。
English: Boshou magistrate Liu Changyao wrote a letter to persuade Liu Yu to do the right thing. Liu Yu imprisoned him for a hundred days, but he did not give in. He also did not accept being made an official.

古文：豫大索宋宗室，承务郎阎琦匿之，豫杖死琦。
现代文：刘豫大肆搜索宋宗室，承务郎阎琦把宋宗室藏起来，被刘豫杖死。
English: Liu Yu searched extensively for Song's family, and the steward, Yan Qi, hid Song's family and was killed by Liu Yu Jie.

古文：召迪功郎王宠，不至。
现代文：征召迪功郎王宠，王宠不到。
English: Conscript Di Gonglang, the king's favorite, but not the king's favorite.

古文：文林郎李喆、尉氏令姚邦基皆弃官去。
现代文：文林郎李吉吉、尉氏令姚邦基都弃官而去。
English: Wenlin's son, Li Jijie, and his subordinate, Yao Bangji, both resigned.

古文：朝奉郎赵俊书甲子不书僣年，豫亦无如之何。
现代文：朝奉郎赵俊以甲子纪年而不写刘豫年号，刘豫也拿他没办法。
English: Zhao Jun, the chief vassal of the Qing Dynasty, used the year of the rooster instead of writing the year of Liu Yu, and Liu Yu couldn't do anything about it.

古文：洪皓久陷于金，粘罕劝皓仕豫，不从，窜皓冷山。
现代文：洪皓身陷金朝已很久，粘罕劝他去为刘豫做官，他不答应，被流放到皓冷山。
English: Hong Hao had been trapped in the Kim dynasty for a long time. Mui Han advised him to work as an official for Liu Yu. He did not agree and was exiled to Luoleng Mountain.

古文：处士尹惇闻豫召，逃山谷间，走蜀中。
现代文：隐士尹听说刘豫召他，逃到山谷间，远走蜀中。
English: When the hermit Yin heard that Liu Yu had summoned him, he fled to the valley and went as far as Shulong.

古文：国信副使宋汝为以吕颐浩书勉豫忠义，豫曰： 独不见张邦昌乎？
现代文：国信副使宋汝为用吕颐浩的书信劝勉刘豫要以忠义为本，刘豫说： 没见张邦昌吗？
English: The vice-envoy of Guoxin, Song Ru, used the letter of Lü Binghao to urge Liu Yu to be loyal. Liu Yu said: Have you seen Zhang Bangchang?

古文：业已然，尚何言哉！ 沧州进士邢希载上豫书乞通宋朝，豫杀希载。
现代文：已经如此，还说什么！ 沧州进士邢希载上书刘豫请求与宋通好，被杀。
English: It's already like this, what else can I say! Cangzhou Jin Shi Yan Xi wrote a letter to Liu Yu, asking for a good relationship with Song Tong, and was killed.

古文：是月，豫立陈东、欧阳澈庙于归德，如唐张巡、许远双庙制。
现代文：当月，刘豫在归德为陈东、欧阳澈立庙，是唐代张巡、许远那样的双庙制。
English: In the same month, Liu Yu founded a temple for Chen Dong and Ouyang Ke after returning to Germany. It was a double temple system similar to that of Zhang Jun and Xu Yuan in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：绍兴元年五月，张俊讨李成败之，成逃归豫。
现代文：绍兴元年五月，张俊讨伐并打败李成，李成逃归刘豫。
English: In May of the first year of Shaoxing, Zhang Jun fought and defeated Li Cheng, and Li Cheng fled to Liu Yu.

古文：雄州大侩王友直尝抵豫书招李成，谓刘光世、吕颐浩非中兴将相才，后为人所诉，诏鞫而刑之。
现代文：雄州的大侩王友直曾致书刘豫让他招抚李成，说刘光世、吕颐浩不是国家中兴的将相之才，后被人告发，下诏审问他并用刑法惩处他。
English: Wang Youzhi, the grand vizier of Xiongzhou, once wrote to Liu Yu to let him woo Li Cheng, saying that Liu Guangshi and Lv Yinghao were not the best generals of the national ZTE. Later, he was denounced, interrogated and punished with criminal law.

古文：六月，豫以麟为兵马大总管、尚书左丞相。
现代文：六月，刘豫以刘麟为兵马大总管、尚书左丞相。
English: In June, Liu Yu appointed Liu Lin as the commander-in-chief of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses and Shang Shuxu as the minister of the left.

古文：置招受司于宿州，诱宋逋逃。
现代文：在宿州设招受司，诱惑宋逃亡者。
English: Set up a recruiting office in Suzhou to lure Song fugitives.

古文：金人既立豫，以旧河为界，恐两河民之陷没者逃归，下令大索，或转鬻诸国，或系送云中，实防豫也。
现代文：金人册立刘豫，以黄河为界，恐怕两河地区陷没敌伪境的人民逃归，下令大搜捕，有的被卖到别国，有的押送到云中，实际是防刘豫。
English: The Golden Book of Man set up Liu Yu, with the Yellow River as the boundary, I am afraid that the people in the two rivers area who had fallen into the enemy's false territory fled back, ordered a large-scale search and arrest, some were sold to other countries, some were escorted to the clouds, in fact, it was to prevent Liu Yu.

古文：十月，豫入寇，遣其将王世冲以蕃、汉兵攻庐州，守臣王亨诱斩世冲，大败其众。
现代文：十月，刘豫侵宋，派部将王世冲率蕃、汉兵攻庐州，庐州守臣王亨诱斩王世冲，大败他的军队。
English: In October, Liu Yu invaded Song, dispatched Wang Shichong to lead the Han soldiers to attack Bozhou, and Wang Heng, the governor of Bozhou, induced Wang Shichong to be beheaded, and defeated his army.

古文：十一月，帅臣叶梦得招降豫将王才。
现代文：十一月，帅臣叶梦得招降刘豫部将王才。
English: In November, the handsome minister Ye Meng was able to recruit and demote Liu Yu Department General Wang Cai.

古文：伪秦凤帅郭振入寇，王彦、关师古败之。
现代文：伪秦凤帅郭振入寇，王彦、关师古把他打败。
English: The pseudo Qin Feng general Guo Zhengyi, Wang Yan and Guan Shigu defeated him.

古文：伪知海州薛安靖及通判李汇以州来归。
现代文：伪知海州薛安靖及通判李汇献州降宋。
English: Pseudo-knowledge Haizhou Xue Anjing and pass sentence to Li Hui to offer the state to Song.

古文：二年二月，知商州董先以商、虢二州叛附于豫。
现代文：绍兴二年二月，知商州董先献商、虢二州叛附刘豫。
English: In February of the second year of Shaoxing, Zhishang Zhou Dong first donated merchants, and Zang Er Zhou rebelled against Liu Yu.

古文：襄阳镇抚使桑仲上疏请正豫罪。
现代文：襄阳镇抚使桑仲上疏治刘豫罪。
English: Xiangyang Zhenfu ordered Sangzhong Shangsozhi to punish Liu Yuxin.

古文：朝廷寻命仲兼节制应援京城军马，量度事势，复豫所陷郡。
现代文：朝廷即命桑仲兼任节制应援京城军马，审时度势，收复被刘豫攻占的州郡。
English: The imperial court immediately ordered Kuanzhong to also serve as a restraint to assist the Beijing army and horses, review the situation at the time, and recover the states and counties occupied by Liu Yu.

古文：仍命河南翟兴、荆南解潜、金房王彦、德安陈规、蕲黄孔彦舟、庐寿王亨相为应援，毋失事机。
现代文：仍命河南翟兴，荆南解潜，金、房二州的王彦，德安陈规，蕲、黄二州的孔彦舟，庐、寿二州的王亨互为应援，毋失事机。
English: Still alive, Henan Lixing, Jingnan Qianling, Jin and Fang two states' Wang Yan, De'an Chen Gui, Zhai and Huang two states' Kong Yan Zhou, Zhai and Shou two states' Wang Heng supported each other.

古文：三月，仲为其将霍明所杀，高宗闻之，授仲二子将仕郎。
现代文：三月，桑仲被他的部将霍明杀死，高宗听后，授官给桑仲的两个儿子为将仕郎。
English: In March, Kuanzhong was killed by his subordinate commander Homing. After hearing this, Gaozong appointed Kuanzhong's two sons as generals.

古文：河南镇抚使翟兴屯伊阳山，豫患之，使人招兴，许以王爵。
现代文：河南镇抚使翟兴屯驻在伊阳山，刘豫认为是祸患，派人招降他，并答应封他王爵。
English: The Henan Town Fuhrer, Zou Xing, was stationed in Yiyang Mountain. Liu Yu considered him to be a scourge and sent someone to recruit him, promising to make him a peer.

古文：兴焚伪诏并戮其使。
现代文：翟兴烧了伪诏并杀了伪使。
English: Gong Xing burned the forged edict and killed the forger.

古文：豫乃阴结兴麾下杨伟图之。
现代文：刘豫就暗中勾结翟兴的部下杨伟谋取翟兴。
English: Liu Yu secretly colluded with Yan Xing's subordinate Yang Wei to obtain Yan Xing.

古文：伟杀兴，持兴首降豫。
现代文：杨伟杀翟兴，拿着翟兴的头投降刘豫。
English: Yang Wei killed Xing Xing and took his head to surrender to Liu Yu.

古文：四月丙寅，豫迁都汴。
现代文：四月初五，刘豫迁都汴京。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth lunar month, Liu Yu moved the capital to Beijing.

古文：因奉祖考于宋太庙，尊其祖曰徽祖毅文皇帝，父为衍祖睿仁皇帝。
现代文：于是就把祖先的灵位奉于宋太庙，尊他的祖父为徽祖毅文皇帝，父为衍祖睿仁皇帝。
English: As a result, he dedicated the ancestor's spiritual position to the Song Dynasty Temple, honoring his grandfather as Emperor Huizhou Yiwen and his father as Emperor Yunzu Ruiren.

古文：亲巡郊社。
现代文：亲自祭祀天地。
English: He personally sacrificed heaven and earth.

古文：是日，暴风卷旗，屋瓦皆震，士民大恐。
现代文：当天，暴风卷旗，屋瓦震动，士民恐惧。
English: On the same day, the storm rolled in, the roof tiles shook, and the scholars and citizens were afraid.

古文：豫曲赦汴人，与民约曰： 自今不肆赦，不用宦官，不度僧道。
现代文：刘豫在汴京大赦，与百姓相约说 ：自今起不滥赦，不用宦官，不度僧道。
English: Liu Yu granted amnesty in Beijing and made an agreement with the people, saying, "From now on, we will not abuse amnesty, we will not use eunuchs, and we will not practice monasticism."

古文：文武杂用，不限资格。 时河、淮、陕西、山东皆驻北军，麟籍乡兵十余万为皇子府十三军。
现代文：文武杂用，不限资格。 当时河、淮、陕西、山东都驻扎着金兵，刘麟招乡兵十余万为皇子府十三军。
English: At that time, gold soldiers were stationed in He, Huai, Shaanxi, and Shandong, and Liu Lin recruited more than one hundred thousand villagers as the 13th army of the prince's government.

古文：分置河南、汴京淘沙官，两京冢墓发掘殆尽。
现代文：在河南、汴京分别设淘沙官，使这两京的冢墓被发掘殆尽。
English: Taosha officials were set up in Henan and Beijing, respectively, so that the tombs of the two capitals were completely excavated.

古文：赋敛烦苛，民不聊生。
现代文：赋敛烦苛，民不聊生。
English: Enrichment is tedious, and the people are not bored.

古文：五月，豫闻桑仲死，遣人招随州李道、邓州李横，皆不受，执其使以闻。
现代文：五月，刘豫听说桑仲死，派人招降随州李道、邓州李横，都不受降，抓刘豫的使臣报告朝廷。
English: In May, when Liu Yu heard that Sang Zhong had died, he sent envoys to demand the surrender of Suizhou Li Dao and Dengzhou Li Yang, but neither would accept the surrender. Liu Yu's envoys reported to the imperial court.

古文：六月，蕲、黄镇抚使孔彦舟叛降豫，其将陈彦明率众千余来归。
现代文：六月，蕲、黄镇抚使孔彦舟叛附刘豫，他的部将陈颜明率千余人归宋。
English: In June, Zhai and Huang Zhenfu ordered Kong Yanzhou to defect to Liu Yu, and his general Chen Yanming led more than a thousand people to return to Song.

古文：直徽猷阁凌唐佐、尚书郎李亘、国信副使宋汝为留伪庭，久谋疏豫虚实蜡书以闻，事泄，豫杀唐佐，亘亦遇害。
现代文：直徽猷阁凌唐佐、尚书郎李亘、国信副使宋汝为留在伪朝廷，早就谋划把刘豫的虚实写成蜡书报告给朝廷，事泄露，刘豫杀了凌唐佐，李亘也遇害。
English: In order to remain in the pseudo-Imperial Court, Ling Tang Zuo, Shang Shulang Li Wang, and Guoxin's deputy envoy Song Ru, all of Zhihui, had long planned to write Liu Yu's falsehood into a wax book report to the Imperial Court. The matter was leaked, Liu Yu killed Ling Tang Zuo, and Li Wang was also killed.

古文：豫以知东平府李邺为尚书右丞，河南镇抚司都统制董先为大总管府先锋将。
现代文：刘豫以知东平府李邺为尚书右丞、河南镇抚司都统制董先为大总管府先锋将。
English: Liu Yu took Li Qian of Chidongping as his right-hand man, and Dong Xian of Henan as his vanguard.

古文：十二月，襄阳镇抚使李横败豫兵于扬石，乘胜趣汝州，伪守彭玘以城降。
现代文：十二月，襄阳镇抚使李横在扬石打败刘豫兵马，乘胜奔汝州，伪守彭王己献城投降。
English: In December, Li Yang defeated Liu Yu's soldiers and horses in Yangshi, and took advantage of the victory to rush to Ruzhou. The false guard, Peng Wang, surrendered the city.

古文：豫遣刘夔与金帅撒离曷侵蜀。
现代文：刘豫派刘夔与金帅撒离曷侵蜀。
English: Liu Yu sent Liu Ye and Jin Shuai to invade Shu.

古文：执进士薛筇送豫，筇勉豫： 早图反正，庶或全宗，孰与他日并妻子磔东市？ 豫怒，欲兵之，赖张孝纯获免。
现代文：抓住进士薛筇送给刘豫，劝他： 应早图反正，或可保全宗族，何必日后作为乱臣贼子与妻子儿女枭首示众呢？ 刘豫怒，想用兵器杀伤他，全赖张孝纯说情，方才获免。
English: He caught the young soldier Xue Yao and gave him to Liu Yu, advising him: "You should have made plans earlier anyway, or you could have preserved your family line. Why do you have to show yourself to the public in the future as the son of a ruffian thief with your wife and children? Liu Yu was angry and wanted to kill him with a weapon. It was all thanks to Zhang Xiaochun's intercession that he was spared.

古文：三年正月庚申，李横破颍顺军，伪守兰和降。
现代文：绍兴三年正月初四，李横攻破颍顺军，伪守将兰和投降。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Shaoxing, Li Yang attacked and defeated the Shun army, and the false guard surrendered.

古文：壬戌，败豫兵于长葛。
现代文：初六，在长葛打败刘豫兵马。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, he defeated Liu Yu's horse in Changge.

古文：甲子，横引兵至颍昌府，伪安抚赵弼固守，急攻下之，弼遁，复颍昌。
现代文：初八，李横率兵到颍昌府，伪安抚赵弼固守城池，李横猛攻，赵弼逃走，收复了颍昌。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Li Yang led his troops to Fuchang Prefecture. The pseudo-pacifier Zhao Yao firmly defended the city. Li Yang stormed, Zhao Yao fled, and recaptured Fuchang.

古文：二月，河南镇抚司统制官李吉败豫将梁进于伊阳台，殪之。
现代文：三月，河南镇抚司统制官李吉在伊阳台打败刘豫部将梁进，梁进被杀。
English: In March, Li Ji, an official of the Henan town of Fuxi, defeated Liu Yubei's general Liang Jin on the balcony of Yi, and Liang Jin was killed.

古文：三月，豫闻横入颍昌，求援于金人。
现代文：三月，刘豫听说李横攻占颍昌，向金求援。
English: In March, Liu Yu heard that Li Yang attacked and occupied Fuchang, and appealed to Jin for help.

古文：粘罕遣兀术赴之，豫亦遣将李成率师二万逆战于京城西北之牟驼冈。
现代文：粘罕派兀术来援，刘豫也派李成率二万人在京城西北的牟驼冈截击宋军。
English: Mui Han dispatched Xun Shu to come to their aid, and Liu Yu also sent Li Cheng, with a force of 20,000 men, to intercept the Song army at Mucao Hill in the northwest of Beijing.

古文：横败绩，复陷颍昌。
现代文：李横战败，颍昌又失陷。
English: Li Heng was defeated, and Fuchang fell again.

古文：横军本群盗，恃勇无律，胜则争取子女金帛，故及于败。
现代文：李横的军队本是一群盗贼，勇敢但无军纪，战胜时就争抢子女金帛，因此失败。
English: Li Yang's army was originally a group of thieves, brave but undisciplined, and when they won, they scrambled for the children's gold ingots, and thus failed.

古文：四月，陷虢州。
现代文：四月，虢州失陷。
English: In April, Zhangzhou fell.

古文：镇抚司统制官谢皋指腹示贼曰： 此吾赤心也！ 自剖心以死。
现代文：镇抚司统制官谢皋指着自己的腹部对敌人说： 这就是我的赤心！ 自己剖腹而死。
English: Xie Zhen pointed to his abdomen and said to the enemy, "This is my naked heart! I will die by disembowelment."

古文：皋，开封人。
现代文：谢皋，开封人。
English: Xie Qi, the person who opened the envelope.

古文：是月，明州守将徐文以所部海舟六十艘、官军四千余人浮海抵盐城，输款于豫。
现代文：当月，明州守将徐文率领所部海船六十艘、官军四千多人从海上到达盐城，投降了刘豫。
English: That month, the governor of Mingzhou, Xu Wen, led 60 naval vessels and more than 4,000 government troops from the sea to Yancheng, and surrendered to Liu Yu.

古文：文言沿海无备，二浙可袭取。
现代文：徐文说宋沿海没防备，可袭取二浙。
English: Xu Wen said that the Song coast was unprepared and could attack the Second Zhejiang.

古文：豫大喜，以文知莱州，益海舰二十，俾寇通、泰间。
现代文：刘豫大喜，以徐文知莱州，增加二十艘海舰，让他在通、泰间袭扰宋军。
English: Liu Yu was overjoyed, and with the help of Xu Wen, he increased the number of ships in Lai Zhou by twenty, allowing him to harass the Song army between Tong and Tai.

古文：五月，朝廷遣韩肖胄、胡松年使伪齐。
现代文：五月，朝廷派韩肖胄、胡松年出使伪齐。
English: In May, the imperial court sent Han Xiaoqi and Hu Songnian as emissaries.

古文：豫欲以臣礼见，肖胄无以应，松年曰： 均为宋臣。 遂长揖不拜，豫不能屈。
现代文：刘豫想以召见臣下的礼节见他们，韩肖胄没说什么，胡松年说： 我们都是宋臣。 就拱手作揖而不跪拜，刘豫不能使他们屈服。
English: Liu Yu wanted to see them with the etiquette of summoning his vassals, but Han Xiaoqi did not say anything, and Hu Songnian said: We are all Song Dynasty vassals.

古文：因问主上如何，松年曰： 圣主万寿。 复问帝意所向，松年曰： 必欲复故疆耳。 豫有惭色。
现代文：于是问皇上怎么样，胡松年说： 圣主万寿。 又问皇上的意向，胡松年说： 一定要收复故疆。 刘豫有愧色。
English: So when he asked the emperor what he should do, Hu Songnian said, "Long live the Lord." When he asked the emperor what he should do, Hu Songnian said, "We must recover the motherland." Liu Yu felt ashamed.

古文：时豫悉有梁、卫之地，翟琮屯伊阳之凤牛山，不能孤立，突围奔襄阳。
现代文：此时刘豫完全占有梁、卫之地，翟琮驻屯在伊阳的凤牛山，孤军无援，就突围到襄阳。
English: At this time, Liu Yu completely occupied the territory of Liang and Wei, and Shun was stationed in Feng Niu Shan in Yiyang. With no support from a lone army, he broke through to Xiangyang.

古文：九月，杨政遣川陕将官吴胜破豫兵于莲花城。
现代文：九月，杨政派川陕将官吴胜在莲花城打败刘豫军队。
English: In September, Yang Zheng sent Wu Sheng, the general of Sichuan and Shaanxi, to defeat Liu Yu's army in Lotus City.

古文：十月己亥，贼将李成陷邓州，以齐安守之；癸卯，陷襄阳，李横奔荆南，知随州李道弃城走。
现代文：十月十八日，贼将李成攻陷邓州，由齐安守卫；二十二日，攻陷襄阳，李横逃奔荆南，知随州李道弃城逃走。
English: On October 18th, Li Cheng was captured by thieves in Dangzhou and was guarded by Qi'an; on the 22nd, when Xiangyang was captured, Li Heng fled to Jingnan, and Zhizhu Li Dao abandoned the city and fled.

古文：成据襄阳，以王嵩知随州。
现代文：李成占据襄阳，以王嵩知随州。
English: Li Cheng occupies Yangyang, with Wang Songchi leading Suizhou.

古文：甲辰，陷郢州，守臣李简遁，豫以荆超知州事。
现代文：二十三日，攻陷郢州，守臣李简逃跑，刘豫命荆超知郢州。
English: On the twenty-third day, the capture of Luzhou, the guardian Li Jian fled, Liu Yu ordered Jing Chao to know Luzhou.

古文：贼将王彦先自亳引兵至寿春，将窥江南。
现代文：贼将王彦先从亳州率兵到寿春，将进兵江南。
English: The thief and general Wang Yan first led troops from Zhangzhou to Shouchun, and then marched into the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：刘光世驻军建康，扼马家渡，遣郦琼领所部驻无为军，为濠、寿声援，贼乃还。
现代文：刘光世驻军建康，扼守马家渡，派郦琼率所部驻在无为军，为濠、寿声援，敌兵才退。
English: Liu Guangxing stationed troops in Jiankang, closely guarded Majiadu, and sent Zou Qiong to lead the headquarters to stay in the helpless army, to support Zou and Shou, and the enemy soldiers retreated.

古文：十二月，金人遣李永寿、王翊来报聘。
现代文：十二月，金派李永寿、王翊来报聘。
English: In December, Jin sent Li Yongshou and Wang Qi to apply for the job.

古文：永寿等骄倨，请还豫俘及西北士民之流寓者，复要画江以益豫。
现代文：李永寿等放纵傲慢，请求放回刘豫的俘虏和西北人民流寓在江南的，又要割江北的土地给刘豫。
English: Li Yongshou and others indulged in arrogance and requested the return of Liu Yu's captives and the northwest people living in the south of the Yangtze River, and they also wanted to cut off the land in the north of the Yangtze River for Liu Yu.

古文：监广州盐税吴伸上书请讨豫，谓 金人虽强，实不足虑，贼豫虽微，实为可忧。
现代文：监广州盐税吴伸上书请求讨伐刘豫，说： 金人虽强大，实际不值得忧虑，叛贼刘豫虽弱小，实在可忧。
English: Wu Shin, the supervisor of the salt tax in Guangzhou, wrote a letter requesting a crackdown on Liu Yu, saying: Although the Jin people are powerful, they are not really worth worrying about. Although the traitor Liu Yu is weak, it is really worrying.

古文：今敌使在廷，宜阳许而阴图之，乘其不疑，可一战擒也。 
现代文：现在敌人使臣在朝廷，应明里答应他们的条件而暗中谋取他们，趁他们不怀疑，可一战而擒获刘豫。 
English: Now that the enemy's envoys are in the imperial court, they should openly agree to their conditions and secretly seek to obtain them. If they do not doubt, they can capture Liu Yu in one battle.

古文：四年正月，翰林学士綦崇礼言： 豫父子倚重金人，且永寿等从豫所来，画江之请必出于豫。
现代文：绍兴四年正月，翰林学士綦崇礼说 ：刘豫父子倚重金人，且李永寿等是从刘豫那来，画江为界一定是刘豫的主意。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Shaoxing, Hanlin scholar Zou Chongli said: Liu Yu father and son rely heavily on gold, and Li Yongshu and others came from Liu Yu, painting the river as the world must be Liu Yu's idea.

古文：观其奸谋，在窥吾境土。
现代文：看他的奸谋，是在窥伺我国疆土。
English: Look at his treacherous plot, he is spying on our territory.

古文：恐既通使，人情必解弛，宜戒将帅愈益置守。
现代文：恐怕已通使，人情定会懈怠，应告诫将帅更要严守边防。
English: I'm afraid that having been sent, the human condition is bound to slacken, and the generals should be admonished to strictly observe the border defense.

古文：纵和议成，亦未可驰备。 既而朝廷遣章谊使金，至云中。
现代文：即使和议成，亦不可放松防御。 不久，朝廷派章谊使金。
English: Even if a compromise is reached, the defense must not be relaxed. Soon, the imperial court sent Zhang Ye to extort money.

古文：粘罕答书约毋驻军淮南，谊不屈，还过汴，豫欲留之，以计获免。
现代文：到云中，粘罕答书中不让宋驻军淮南，章谊没屈从，回来时路过汴京，刘豫想留他，他用计谋才脱身。
English: To Yunzhong, Muxian replied that he would not allow Song to garrison Huainan, Zhang Yi did not succumb, and passed by Beijing when he returned. Liu Yu wanted to keep him, and he used tricks to escape.

古文：熙河路马步军总管关师古与豫兵战于左要岭，败绩，遂降贼。
现代文：熙河路马步军总管关师古在左要岭与刘豫军交战失败，于是投降刘豫。
English: Guan Shigu, the general in charge of Ma Bu's army on the Heihe Road, failed to engage Liu Yu's army in Zuoyoling, so he surrendered to Liu Yu.

古文：洮、岷之地尽归豫矣。
现代文：洮、岷地区全被刘豫占领。
English: The whole of Handan and Handan was occupied by Liu Yu.

古文：二月，豫策进士。
现代文：二月，刘豫策进士。
English: In February, Liu Yuze was promoted.

古文：五月，知寿春府罗兴叛降豫。
现代文：五月，知寿春府罗兴叛降刘豫。
English: In May, Luo Xing of Zhishunfu rebelled against Liu Yu.

古文：舒、蕲等州制置使岳飞复襄阳，李成遁，寻复唐州。
现代文：舒、蕲等州制置使岳飞收复襄阳，李成逃走，很快又收复唐州。
English: Shu, Handan and other states were set up to enable Yuefei to recover Xiangyang, Li Cheng fled, and soon recovered Tangzhou.

古文：六月，复随州，磔伪守王嵩于襄阳市。
现代文：六月，收复随州，在襄阳把随州伪守王嵩斩首。
English: In June, he recovered Suizhou and beheaded Wang Song, the pseudo-guard of Suizhou, in Xiangyang.

古文：七月，复邓州，语在《飞传》。
现代文：七月，收复邓州。《岳飞传》中有记载。
English: In July, Dengzhou was recaptured, as recorded in "Yuefei Zhuan."

古文：豫闻岳飞取襄、邓，遂乞师于金人。
现代文：刘豫听说岳飞攻取了襄、邓，就向金求援。
English: When Liu Yu heard that Yue Fei had captured Xiang and Deng, he asked Jin for help.

古文：伪奉议郎罗诱上南征策，豫大喜。
现代文：伪奉议郎罗诱上奏南征策，刘豫大喜。
English: Liu Yu was overjoyed when the fake minister, Lang Luo, lured him to the Southern Song Dynasty to solicit suggestions.

古文：夺民舟五百载战具，以徐文为前军，声言攻定海。
现代文：刘豫抢民船五百条装战具，以徐文为先锋，声称攻定海。
English: Liu Yu robbed the civilian ship of five hundred pieces of war equipment, with Xu Wen as the vanguard, claiming to attack the sea.

古文：九月，豫下伪诏，有 混一六合 之言，遣子麟入寇，及诱金人宗辅、挞辣、兀术分道南侵，步兵自楚、承进，骑兵由泗趋滁。
现代文：九月，刘豫下伪诏，有 混一六合 的话，派他的儿子刘麟侵宋，并诱金人宗辅、挞辣、兀术分道南侵，步兵由楚、承进兵，骑兵由泗州奔滁州。
English: In September, Liu Yu issued a false edict and sent his son Liu Lin to invade Song, and enticed Jinren Zongfu, Zourai, and Zouxu to invade the south, with infantrymen from Chu and Chengjin soldiers, and cavalrymen from Ganzhou to Ganzhou.

古文：复遣伪知枢密院卢纬请师于金主，金主集诸将议，粘罕、希尹难之，独宗辅以为可。
现代文：又派伪知枢密院卢纬向金主请兵，金主召诸将商议，粘罕、希尹反对，只宗辅认为可以。
English: He also sent Lu Wei, a pseudo-intellectual privy councillor, to invite soldiers to the gold lord. The gold lord called the generals to discuss, and Mu Han and Xi Yin objected. Only Zong Fu thought it was okay.

古文：乃以宗辅权左副元帅，挞辣权右副元帅，调渤海汉军五万应豫。
现代文：于是以宗辅权左副元帅，挞懒权右副元帅，调渤海、汉军五万支援刘豫。
English: As a result, the left deputy marshal Zong Fu Quan and the right deputy marshal Zou Lai Quan transferred 50,000 troops from the Bohai and Han armies to support Liu Yu.

古文：以兀术尝渡江，习知险易，俾将前军。
现代文：因兀术曾渡过长江，熟悉地形，让他为前锋。
English: He was a striker because he had crossed the Yangtze River and was familiar with the terrain.

古文：豫以麟领东南道行台尚书令。
现代文：刘豫以刘麟领东南道行台尚书令。
English: Liu Yu ordered Liu Lin to lead the southeast road march.

古文：朝廷震恐。
现代文：朝廷震恐。
English: The court was horrified.

古文：或劝帝他幸，赵鼎曰： 战而不捷，去未晚也。 张俊曰： 避将安之？ 遂决意亲征。
现代文：有的劝皇上到别处，赵鼎说： 与敌交战不胜，再走也不晚。 张俊说 ：到哪儿去避敌？ 就决定亲征。
English: Some urged the emperor to go elsewhere, but Zhao Ding said, "It's not too late to leave after fighting with the enemy."Zhang Jun said, "Where should we go to avoid the enemy?" and decided to go himself.

古文：壬申，豫兵与金人分道渡淮，楚州守臣樊序弃城走，淮东宣抚使韩世忠自承州退保镇江。
现代文：二十六日，刘豫军和金军分道渡淮，楚州守臣樊序弃城逃走，淮东宣抚使韩世忠自承州退保镇江。
English: On the 26th, Liu Yu's army and Jin's army went their separate ways to Huaihai, Chuzhou's defenders and vassals abandoned the city and fled in order, and Huaidong's proclamation made Han Shizhong retreat from the state to Zhenjiang.

古文：十月丙子朔，诏张俊援世忠，刘光世移军建康。
现代文：十月初一，诏命张浚增援韩世忠，刘光世移军建康。
English: On the first day of October, the emperor ordered Zhang Jun to reinforce Han Shizhong, and Liu Guangxi to move his army to Jiankang.

古文：世忠复还扬州。
现代文：韩世忠又回扬州。
English: Han Shizhong returned to Yangzhou.

古文：起张浚为侍读。戊子，韩世忠战于大仪，己丑，解元战于承州，皆捷。
现代文：起用张浚为侍读，十三日，韩世忠战于大仪，十四日，解元战于承州，都取胜。
English: Zhang Jun was appointed as an attendant, and on the 13th, Han Shizhong fought in the Great Ceremony, and on the 14th, the Yuan Dynasty was defeated in Chengzhou.

古文：丙申，豫露榜有窥江之言。
现代文：二十一日，刘豫的告示中有窥伺江南的话。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Yu's announcement included the words "peeking into the south of the Yangtze River."

古文：戊戌，帝发临安。
现代文：二十三日，皇上从临安出发。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor set out from Lin'an.

古文：十一月壬子，下诏讨豫，始暴豫罪恶，士气大振，欲济江决战。
现代文：十一月初七，下诏讨刘豫，才列举刘豫的罪恶，宋士气大振，想渡江与敌决战。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the first month, the imperial edict to punish Liu Yu was issued, and only then were Liu Yu's crimes enumerated. Song's morale was greatly boosted, and he wanted to cross the river to fight the enemy.

古文：赵鼎曰： 退固不可，渡江亦非策。
现代文：赵鼎说： 退却本不可以，渡江也非良策。
English: Zhao Ding said: Retreating is not allowed, and crossing the river is not a good strategy.

古文：豫犹不亲来，至尊岂可与逆雏决胜负哉？ 淮西将王师晟、张琦合兵复南寿春府，执伪知州王靖。
现代文：刘豫尚且不亲来，陛下怎能同逆雏决胜负呢？ 淮西将领王师晟、张琦合兵收复南寿春府，捉住伪知州王靖。
English: Even though Liu Yu was not a close relative, how could his majesty decide the outcome with the rebel cubs? The Huaixi generals Wang Shijun and Zhang Hui combined forces to recapture Nan Shuchunfu and capture the pseudo-Chizhou Wang Jing.

古文：十二月壬辰，岳飞遣将牛皋、徐庆败金人于庐州。
现代文：十二月十八日，岳飞派部将牛皋、徐庆在庐州打败金兵。
English: On December 18th, Yuefei dispatched Niu Gan and Xu Qing to defeat Jin Bing in Ganzhou.

古文：庚子，金人退师，遣使告麟，麟弃辎重宵遁，语在《世忠传》。
现代文：二十六日，金退兵，派使告知刘麟，刘麟丢掉辎重晚上逃走。《韩世忠传》中有记载。
English: On the 26th, when Kim retired from the army, he sent an envoy to inform Liu Lin that Liu Lin had lost his heavy baggage and fled in the evening. This is recorded in the "Han Shizhong Biography."

古文：五年正月，淮西将郦琼复光州，伪守许约降。
现代文：绍兴五年正月，淮西将郦琼收复光州，伪守许约投降。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Shaoxing, Huaxi recovered Gwangju from Gongqiong, and surrendered after a false promise.

古文：闰二月，豫将商元攻信阳军，知军事舒继明死之。
现代文：闰二月，刘豫派商元攻信阳军，知军事舒继明杀死商元。
English: In leap February, Liu Yu sent merchants to attack the Xinyang army, and the intellectual soldier Shu Jiming killed the merchants.

古文：七月，豫废明堂为讲武殿，暴风连日。
现代文：七月，刘豫废明堂为讲武殿，暴风连日不停。
English: In July, the Liu Yu Hui Ming Hall became a lecture hall, and the storm continued day after day.

古文：八月，陷光州。
现代文：八月，攻陷光州。
English: In August, he invaded Gwangju.

古文：十月，豫令民鬻子依商税法许贯陌而收其算。
现代文：十月，刘豫下令百姓卖子依商税法纳税，即按卖多少钱而收税。
English: In October, Liu Yu ordered the sellers of ordinary people to pay taxes in accordance with the Commercial Tax Law, that is, to collect taxes according to the amount of money sold.

古文：豫献《海道图》及战船木样于金主亶。
现代文：刘豫献《海道图》及战船模型给金主完颜。
English: Liu Yu presented the "Road Map" and the warship model to the donor.

古文：六年正月，豫聚兵淮阳，韩世忠引兵急围之。
现代文：绍兴六年正月，刘豫在淮阳聚兵，韩世忠率军赶快围攻。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Shaoxing, Liu Yu gathered soldiers in Huaiyang, and Han Shizhong led the army to quickly besiege.

古文：贼守将连举六烽，兀术与刘猊合兵来援，皆为世忠所败。
现代文：敌守将连续六次举烽火报警，兀术和刘猊合兵来援，都被韩世忠打败。
English: Six times in a row, the enemy defenders would raise the bonfire alarm, and the combined forces of Yan Xiu and Liu Ying would come to their aid, but they were all defeated by Han Shizhong.

古文：六月，筑刘龙城以窥淮西，王师晟破之，执华知刚，俘其众而还。
现代文：六月，刘豫筑刘龙城观察淮西动静，被王师晟攻破，捉华知刚，俘获他的部众而回。
English: In June, Liu Yu built Liu Longcheng to observe the movement of Huaixi, was defeated by Wang Shijun, captured Hua Zhigang, captured his subordinates and returned.

古文：九月，豫罢沿海互市。
现代文：九月，刘豫罢沿海互市。
English: In September, Liu Yu went to the coastal markets.

古文：张孝纯谓豫曰： 闻南人久治舟，一旦乘风北济，将不利于我。 豫惧，故罢之。
现代文：张孝纯对刘豫说 ：听说南人久在造船，一旦乘风北来，将于我不利。 刘豫恐惧，因此罢互市。
English: Zhang Xiaochun said to Liu Yu, "I have heard that the people in the south have been building ships for a long time, and if they take the wind and come to the north, it will be to my disadvantage.

古文：豫闻帝亲征，告急于金主亶，领三省事宗磐曰： 先帝立豫者，欲豫辟疆保境，我得按兵息民也。
现代文：刘豫听说皇上亲征，向金主完颜告急，领三省事宗磐说： 先帝立刘豫，是希望刘豫辟疆保境，我能按兵息民。
English: Liu Yu heard that the emperor himself was conscripting soldiers, so he made an urgent appeal to the emperor and received three provinces from Zong Pan. Zong Pan said, "The previous emperor established Liu Yu, hoping that Liu Yu would secure the frontier and that I would be able to control the soldiers and save the people.

古文：今豫进不能取，退不能守，兵连祸结，休息无期。
现代文：现在刘豫进不能取，退不能守，兵连祸结，休息无期。
English: Now Liu Yujin can't take, can't retreat, can't defend, soldiers are linked by misfortune, and have no time to rest.

古文：从之则豫收其利，而我实受弊，奈何许之！ 金主报豫自行，姑遣兀术提兵黎阳以观衅。
现代文：发援兵是刘豫得利，而实际是我受弊，怎能答应他？ 金主答复刘豫让他自行其事，暂派兀术率兵在黎阳见机行事。
English: The donor replied that Liu Yu let him do his own thing, and temporarily dispatched the soldiers led by Zou Jing to Liyang to take advantage of the situation.

古文：豫于是以麟领东南道行台尚书令，李邺行台右丞，冯长宁行台户部，许清臣兵马大总管，李成、孔彦舟、关师古为将，籍民兵三十万，分三道入寇。麟总中路兵，由寿春犯庐州；猊率东路兵，取紫荆山出涡口以犯定远；西兵趋光州寇六安，彦舟统之。
现代文：于是刘豫以刘麟领东南道行台尚书令，李邺为行台右丞，冯长宁为行台户部，许清臣为兵马大总管，李成、孔彦舟、关师古为将，组织三十万民兵，分三路侵宋，刘麟总领中路兵，由寿春进犯庐州，刘猊率东路兵，取道紫荆山出涡口进犯定远；西路兵奔光州进犯六安，由孔彦舟统领。
English: As a result, Liu Yu, with Liu Lin as the leader of the south-eastern road, Shang Shuling, Li Hao as the leader of the south-eastern road, Feng Changning as the leader of the south-eastern road, Xu Qingcheng as the commander-in-chief of the army and cavalry, Li Cheng, Kong Yan Zhou and Guan Shigu as the generals, organized 300,000 militiamen, divided into three routes to invade Song, Liu Lin as the leader of the middle route soldiers, invaded Zhangzhou by Shuchun, Liu Wei led the east route soldiers, and invaded Dingyuan via the outlet of the Bauhinia Mountain; the west

古文：十月，猊兵阻韩世忠不得前，还顺昌。
现代文：十月，刘猊军被韩世忠阻止不能前进，回到顺昌。
English: In October, Liu Bei's army was prevented from advancing by Han Shizhong and returned to Shunchang.

古文：麟兵从淮西系三浮桥以济，贼众十万次濠、寿间。
现代文：刘麟军从淮西架三座浮桥过淮，贼众十万驻扎在濠、寿之间。
English: Liu Lin's army built three floating bridges to cross the Huai River from the west to the west, and hundreds of thousands of soldiers were stationed between the Jiu and Shou Rivers.

古文：江东安抚使张俊拒战，诏并以淮西属俊，命殿帅杨沂中至泗州与俊合，比至濠而刘光世已弃合肥矣。
现代文：江东安抚使张俊拒敌，诏命淮西宋军皆听张俊调遣，命殿帅杨沂中去泗州与张俊会合，等杨沂中到濠州时，刘光世已放弃合肥。
English: The pacification of the East River made Zhang Jun refuse the enemy, and he ordered the Huai and West Song armies to listen to Zhang Jun's dispatch. He also ordered the commander Yang Bingzhong to go to Zhangzhou to meet Zhang Jun. By the time Yang Bingzhong arrived in Zhangzhou, Liu Guangxing had already abandoned Hefei.

古文：张浚遣人星驰采石谕光世曰： 敢济者斩。 光世不得已还庐州，与沂中相应。
现代文：张俊派人星夜赶往采石对刘光世说 ：有敢渡过江南者斩。 刘光世不得已回到庐州，与杨沂中相呼应。
English: Zhang Jun sent people to rush to the quarry on a starry night and said to Liu Guangshi: "Whoever dares to cross the south of the Yangtze River will be beheaded." Liu Guangshi had no choice but to return to Zhangzhou, echoing Yang Yuzhong.

古文：统制王德、郦琼出安丰，遇贼三将军皆败之。
现代文：统制王德、郦琼从安丰出兵，遇敌人三将军并打败他们。
English: Commanding Wang De and Yao Qiong sent troops from Anfeng, encountered three enemy generals and defeated them.

古文：猊众数万过定远，欲趋宣化犯建康。
现代文：刘猊军数万人过定远，想奔宣化进犯建康。
English: Tens of thousands of Liu Bei's troops were too far away from Dingyuan and wanted to go to Xuanhua to attack Jiankang.

古文：沂中遇猊兵于越家坊，破之；又遇于藕塘，大破之。
现代文：杨沂中在越家坊与刘猊军相遇，打败敌军；又在藕塘相遇，大败敌军。
English: Yang Xizhong met Liu Ye's army in Yuejiafang and defeated the enemy army; they also met in Shantang and defeated the enemy army.

古文：猊遁，麟闻亦拔砦走，麟兵有自书乡贯姓名而缢者，豫由此失人心。
现代文：刘猊逃，刘麟听说后亦拔砦逃走，刘麟军中有自己写好乡贯姓名而自缢的士卒，刘豫因此而失掉人心。
English: Liu Yu fled, Liu Lin also fled after hearing about it. There were soldiers in Liu Lin's army who wrote their hometown names and killed themselves. Liu Yu lost his heart because of this.

古文：金人闻麟等败，诘豫罪状，始有废豫意矣。
现代文：金人听说刘麟等失败，责问刘豫的罪状，开始有废刘豫之意。
English: When the goldsmith heard that Liu Lin and others had failed, he questioned Liu Yu's guilt and began to have the intention of getting rid of Liu Yu.

古文：豫觉，请立麟为太子，以觇其意。
现代文：刘豫觉察到此事，就请立刘麟为太子，来窥测金人的意图。
English: Liu Yu became aware of this and asked Liu Lin to be made the crown prince, in order to spy on Jinren's intentions.

古文：金人乃答豫曰： 徐当遣人咨访河南百姓。 
现代文：金人答刘豫说 ：慢慢来，应派人去询问，征求河南百姓的意见。 
English: The goldsmith replied to Liu Yu, saying: Take your time, you should send someone to inquire and solicit the opinions of the people of Henan.

古文：七年春，豫策进士。遣谍纵火淮甸，燔刘光世帑藏。
现代文：绍兴七年春，刘豫策进士，派间谍在淮甸放火，烧了刘光世的仓库。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Shaoxing, Liu Yuzhe sent spies to set fire to Liu Guangshi's warehouse in Huadian.

古文：二月，又焚镇江。
现代文：二月，又烧镇江。
English: In February, Zhenjiang was burned again.

古文：豫自麟败，意沮气夺。
现代文：刘豫自刘麟败后，意沮气丧。
English: Liu Yu has been depressed since Liu Lin's defeat.

古文：中原遗民，日望王师。
现代文：中原地区刘豫统治下的百姓，天天盼宋军。
English: The people under the rule of Liu Yu in the Central Plains look forward to the Song Army every day.

古文：三月，帝进驻建康。
现代文：三月，皇上进驻建康。
English: In March, the emperor entered Jiankang.

古文：八月，统制郦琼执吕祉，以兵三万叛降豫，寻杀祉。
现代文：八月，统制郦琼抓住吕祉，率三万兵叛降刘豫，不久杀了吕祉。
English: In August, the governor Gong Qiong seized Lv Zhi, led 30,000 soldiers to rebel against Liu Yu, and soon killed Lv Zhi.

古文：豫闻琼降大喜，御文德殿见之，授琼静难军节度使、知拱州。
现代文：刘豫听说郦琼投降十分高兴，在文德殿接见他，授给他静难军节度使的官衔，知洪州。
English: Liu Yu was very happy to hear that Gong Qiong had surrendered. He received him at the Winter Palace and gave him the official title of the commander of the Jingnan Army, Zhihong Prefecture.

古文：琼劝豫入寇，豫复乞师金人，且言琼欲自效。
现代文：郦琼劝刘豫侵宋，刘豫再次向金请求援兵，并说郦琼想亲自效力。
English: Yao Qiong advised Liu Yu to invade Song. Liu Yu once again asked Jin for reinforcements, and said that Yao Qiong wanted to serve personally.

古文：金人恐豫兵众难制，欲以计除之，乃佯言琼降恐诈，命散其兵。
现代文：金人怕刘豫兵多难以控制，想用计除掉他，于是谎称郦琼投降恐怕有诈，命刘豫解散郦琼的军队。
English: The goldsmith was afraid that Liu Yu's soldiers would be difficult to control and wanted to get rid of him by trickery, so he falsely claimed that it would be deceitful for Yao Qiong to surrender, and ordered Liu Yu to disband Yao Qiong's army.

古文：金人业已废豫，而豫日益请兵，遂以女真万户束拔为元帅府左都监屯太原，渤海万户大挞不也为右都监屯河间。
现代文：金人已经废刘豫，而刘豫还向金人日益请兵，金就以女真万户束拔为元帅府左都监屯兵太原，以渤海万户大挞不也为右都监屯河间。
English: The Jin people had already overthrown Liu Yu, but Liu Yu continued to invite more and more soldiers from the Jin people. The Jin people selected the woman Zhen Wanzhongzhu as the left-wing military governor of Taiyuan, and the right-wing military governor of Hebei Wanzhongzhu as the right-wing military governor of Heze.

古文：于是尚书省奏豫治国无状，当废。
现代文：于是尚书省弹奏刘豫治国没有成绩，应当废掉。
English: As a result, Shang Shushu's attempt to play the role of Liu Yu in governing the country was unsuccessful and should be scrapped.

古文：十一月丙午，废豫为蜀王。
现代文：十一月十八日，金废刘豫为蜀王。
English: On November 18th, Jinwu Liu Yu became the King of Shu.

古文：初，金主先令挞辣、兀术伪称南侵至汴，绐麟出至武城，麾骑翼而擒之，因驰至城中。
现代文：先前，金主先令挞懒、兀术伪称南侵到汴，骗出刘麟到武城，指挥骑兵从两侧包围并擒获刘麟，于是又奔入城中。
English: In the past, Shilling, a lazy and lazy man, falsely claimed that the south invaded Wu, tricked Liu Lin into Wucheng, commanded the cavalry to surround and capture Liu Lin from both sides, and then rushed into the city.

古文：豫方射讲武殿，兀术从三骑突入东华门，下马执其手，偕至宣德门，强乘以羸马，露刃夹之，囚于金明池。
现代文：刘豫正在讲武殿射箭，兀术率三名骑兵突入东华门，下马抓住他的手，一起到宣德门，强迫他骑上羸马，两边人露出利刃挟持他，被囚于金明池。
English: Liu Yu was teaching archery at the Palace of Martial Arts. Three cavalrymen charged into the East China Gate, dismounted and grabbed his hand. Together they went to the Xuande Gate and forced him to ride a donkey. People on both sides showed their sharp blades to hold him, and he was imprisoned in the Jinming Pool.

古文：翼日，集百官宣诏责豫，以铁骑数千围宫门，遣小校巡闾巷间，扬言曰： 自今不佥汝为军，不取汝免行钱，为汝敲杀貌事人，请汝旧主少帝来此。 由是人心稍安。
现代文：第二天，召集百官宣诏责备刘豫，用数千铁骑兵围宫门，派小校在大街小巷巡逻，扬言说： 从今起不签发你们当兵，不收取你们的免行钱，替你们击杀貌似猛兽的人，请你们的旧主少帝来此。 于是人心才稍微安定。
English: The next day, they summoned hundreds of officials to issue an edict to reprimand Liu Yu, surrounded the palace gate with thousands of iron cavalry, sent junior officers to patrol the streets and alleys, and threatened: "From now on, we will not issue you as soldiers, we will not collect your free travel money, we will kill people who look like wild beasts for you, and we will ask your former master, the young emperor, to come here."

古文：置行台尚书省于汴，以张孝纯权行台左丞相。
现代文：在汴设行台尚书省，以张孝纯权行台左丞相。
English: Xingtai Shangshu Province was set up in Handan, with Zhang Xiaozunquan as Minister of the Left of Handan.

古文：伪丞相张昂知孟州，李邺知代州，李成、孔彦舟、郦琼、关师古各予一郡。
现代文：伪丞相张昂为孟州知州，李邺知代州，李成、孔彦舟、郦琼、关师古也各为一郡长官。
English: The pseudo-chancellor Zhang Ang is Mengzhou Chizhou, Li Shizhidaizhou, Li Cheng, Kong Yanzhou, Zou Qiong and Guan Shigu are also county magistrates.

古文：以女真胡沙虎为汴京留守，李俦副之。
现代文：以女真人胡沙虎为汴京留守，李俦为副留守。
English: With the female real person Hu Shahu as the leading role, Li Yao as the second leading role.

古文：诸军悉令归农，听宫人出嫁。
现代文：各军都令兵士归农，宫人可以出嫁。
English: All armies ordered their soldiers to return to farming, and the imperial family was allowed to marry.

古文：得金一百二十余万两、银一千六百余万两、米九十余万斛、绢二百七十万匹、钱九千八百七十余万缗。
现代文：得到金一百二十余万两、银一千六百余万两、米九十余万斛、绢二百七十万匹，钱九千八百七十余万缗。
English: They obtained more than 1.2 million taels of gold, more than 1.6 million taels of silver, more than 900,000 taels of rice, 2.7 million taels of barley, and more than 98.7 million taels of money.

古文：豫求哀，挞辣曰： 昔赵氏少帝出京，百姓然顶炼臂，号泣之声闻于远迩。
现代文：刘豫求哀，挞懒说： 从前赵氏少帝离开京城，百姓有自焚赴死的，号泣之声远近都能听到。
English: Liu Yu begged for mercy and said lazily, "Once upon a time, the young emperor of the Zhao clan left the capital, and people set themselves on fire to die. The sound of their wailing could be heard far and wide.

古文：今汝废，无一人怜汝者，何不自责也。 豫语塞，迫之行，愿居相州韩琦宅，许之。
现代文：现今你被废，没有一人可怜你，你怎不自责呢？ 刘豫无以回答，强迫他走，他表示愿住在相州韩琦宅第，允许。
English: Now that you have been dethroned and no one feels sorry for you, why don't you blame yourself? Liu Yu couldn't answer and forced him to leave. He said that he would like to live in the area of Han Yu's house in Xiangzhou and allowed him to do so.

古文：后并其子麟徙于临潢，封豫为曹王，赐田以居之。
现代文：后来，他和他的儿子刘麟一起被迁到临潢，金封刘豫为曹王，赐田使他居住。
English: Later, he and his son Liu Lin were moved to Linyi together. Jin Feng made Liu Yu the king of Cao and gave him a field to live in.

古文：绍兴十三年六月卒，是年金皇统三年也。
现代文：绍兴十三年六月去世，这年是金皇统三年。
English: Shaoxing passed away in June of the thirteenth year, which was the third year of the reign of the Golden Emperor.

古文：豫僣号凡八年，废时年六十五。
现代文：刘豫僭号共八年，被废时六十五岁。
English: Liu Yuqi was in service for a total of eight years, and was 65 years old when it was scrapped.

古文：先是，齐地数见怪异，有枭鸣于后苑，龙撼宣德门灭 宣德 二字，有星陨于平原镇。
现代文：先前，齐地多次出现怪事，有枭在后苑鸣叫，有龙摇撼宣德门毁了 宣德 二字，有星在平原镇陨落。
English: In the past, strange things have occurred many times in Qi, such as crickets chirping in the backyard, a dragon shaking the Xuande Gate and ruining the word "Xuande," and a star falling in Pingyuan Town.

古文：识者谓祸不出百日，豫怒杀之。
现代文：有见识的人认为不出百日定有灾祸，刘豫怒杀了他。
English: People with insight believed that there would be a disaster within 100 days, and Liu Yu killed him in anger.

古文：未几果废。
现代文：不久，刘豫果真被废。
English: Soon, Liu Yu Guozhen was really eliminated.

古文：初，伪麟府路经略使折可求以事抵云中，左监军撒离曷密谕可求代豫。
现代文：当初，伪麟府路经略使折可求因事到云中，左监军撒离曷密告以折可求代刘豫。
English: At first, the pseudo-Linfu government made a slight concession in exchange for Liu Yu's resignation, and the Left Supervision Army secretly announced that Liu Yu could be replaced by Liu Yu.

古文：九年，迁行台右丞相。
现代文：后来，挞懒有归疆之议，怕折可求失望，就鸩杀了他。
English: Later, Zou Lazy had the idea of returning to the motherland, but he was afraid of being disappointed, so he killed him.

古文：十一年，和议成而充死矣。吴曦，信王璘之孙，节度挺之中子。
现代文：刘豫僭逆，马定国进《君臣名分论》，祝简献《迁都》、《国马赋》，言语中对朝廷都多有指斥；又如许清臣毁坏景灵宫，孟邦雄掘永安陵，这是跖狗吠尧，各为其主，就不责罚了。
English: Liu Yuqin, Ma Ding Guojin's "Theory of the Separation of Rulers and Subjects," Zhu Jianken's "The Relocation of the Capital" and "Country Horse Feeding" all contain many references to the imperial court; and Xu Qingcheng's destruction of the Jingling Palace and Meng Bangxiong's excavation of the Yong'an Mausoleum are examples of hyenas barking, each to his own master, and will not be punished.

古文：以祖任补右承奉郎。
现代文：吴曦，是信王吴瞞的孙子，节度使吴挺的次子。
English: Wu Xi is the grandson of the religious king Wu Xie, and the second son of the ruler Wu Ting.

古文：淳熙五年，换武德郎，除中郎将，后省言其太骤，改武翼郎。
现代文：因祖辈的功劳吴曦被补官为右承奉郎。淳熙五年，改换为武德郎，任命为中郎将，后因台谏官说他升迁得太快，改为武翼郎。
English: Due to the merits of his ancestors, Wu Xi was promoted to the position of Ushouhongro. In the fifth year of Junxi, he was changed to Wudelang and appointed to the position of Chulangzhe. Later, because the Taiwanese eunuch said that his promotion was too fast, he was changed to Wu Yulang.

古文：累迁高州刺史。
现代文：吴曦历迁高州刺史。
English: Wu Xi's history of moving to Gaozhou.

古文：绍熙四年，挺卒，起复濠州团练使。
现代文：绍熙四年，吴挺去世，吴曦守丧未满三年，朝廷重新起用他为濠州团练使。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoxi, Wu Ting died, and Wu Xi mourned for less than three years. The imperial court re-appointed him as the training envoy of the Zhangzhou Regiment.

古文：庆元元年冬，由建康军马都统制除知兴州兼利西路安抚使。
现代文：庆元元年冬，他由建康军马都统制被任命为兴州知州兼利西路安抚使。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he was appointed by the Jiankang Army to be the pacifying envoy of Xingzhou, Chizhou and West Lixi Road.

古文：四年，宪圣园陵成，以劳迁武宁军承宣使。
现代文：庆元四年，光宗园陵修成，吴曦因功升为武宁军承宣使。
English: In the fourth year of the Qing Dynasty, Guangzong's garden mausoleum was completed, and Wu Xi was promoted to Wu Ning's military envoy.

古文：六年，光宗攒陵成，迁太尉。
现代文：庆元六年，光宗的陵寝修好，吴曦被升为太尉。
English: In the sixth year of the Qing Dynasty, Guangzong's tomb was repaired, and Wu Xi was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：会韩侂胄谋开边，曦潜畜异志，因附侂胄求还蜀。
现代文：正巧韩胄谋求北伐，吴曦暗怀异志，趁机依附韩胄请求返还蜀地。
English: It just so happened that Han Xuan was pursuing the Northern Expedition, while Wu Xi harbored a different ambition and took advantage of the opportunity to adhere to Han Xuan's request to return to Shu.

古文：枢密何澹觉其意，力沮之。
现代文：枢密何澹觉察到他的意图，极力加以阻挠。
English: Privy Councillor Ho Yeon sensed his intention and tried his best to thwart it.

古文：陈自强纳曦厚赂，阴赞侂胄，遂命曦兴州驻紥御前诸军都统制，兼知兴州、利州西路安抚使。
现代文：陈自强接受吴曦的厚赂，暗中支持韩胄，于是吴曦被任命为兴州驻答刂御前诸军都统制，兼任兴州知州、利州西路安抚使。
English: Chen Ziqiang accepted a hefty bribe from Wu Xi and secretly supported Han Yu, so Wu Xi was appointed as the military governor of Xingzhou stationed in Dadu, and concurrently served as the pacification envoy of Xingzhou Zhizhou and Lizhou West Road.

古文：从政郎朱不弃上侂胄书，谓曦不可主西师，侂胄不报。
现代文：从政郎朱不弃上书韩胄说吴曦不应统帅西北军队，韩胄没做答复。
English: Han Zheng did not reply to the letter from politician Zhu Niu to Han Zheng saying that Wu Xi should not command the Northwest Army.

古文：曦至镇，谮副都统制王大节，罢之，更不除副帅，而兵权悉归于曦。
现代文：吴曦到兴州，诬陷副都统制王大节，王大节被罢职，宋廷没再任命副帅，使兵权都由吴曦掌握。
English: Wu Xi went to Xingzhou and framed Wang Datong, the vice-governor of the capital, Wang Datong was dismissed, Song Ting did not appoint another vice-governor, and the power of dispatching troops was controlled by Wu Xi.

古文：开禧二年，朝廷议出师，诏曦为四川宣抚副使，仍知兴州，听便宜行事。
现代文：开禧二年，朝廷议论出师北伐，诏命吴曦为四川宣抚副使，仍为兴州知州，允许他见机行事。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the imperial court discussed the Northern Expedition, and the imperial edict ordered Wu Xi to be the vice-envoy of the Sichuan Proclamation, and he was still a chizhou of Xingzhou, allowing him to act as he saw fit.

古文：自绍兴末，王人出总蜀赋，移牒宣司，势均礼敌。
现代文：从绍兴末年开始，由宗室亲王总领蜀地财赋，有关文书交到宣抚司，使总领财赋者与宣抚司势均力敌，互相牵制。
English: Since the end of the year in Shaoxing, the prince's family has been in charge of the general leader of the financial endowment of Shu, and the relevant documents have been submitted to the Fostering Division, so that the general leader of the financial endowment and the Fostering Division are equal in strength and control each other.

古文：而侂胄以总计隶宣司，副使得节制按劾，而财赋之权又归于曦。
现代文：而韩胄使财赋隶属宣抚司，宣抚副使可以节制核查，又使吴曦握有财权。
English: However, Han Xun subordinated the financial endowment to the Department of Propaganda and Fostering, the Vice Minister of Propaganda and Fostering could control the verification, and Wu Xi held the financial power.

古文：未几，兼陕西、河东招抚使。
现代文：不久，吴曦又兼任陕西、河东招抚使。
English: Soon, Wu Xi also served as the Shaanxi and Hedong Recruitment Envoy.

古文：曦与从弟晛及徐景望、赵富、米修之、董镇共为反谋，阴遣客姚淮源献关外阶、成、和、凤四州于金，求封为蜀王。
现代文：吴曦与他堂弟吴日见及徐景望、赵富、米修之、董镇共同谋反，暗中派门客姚淮源把关外阶、成、和、凤四州献给金国，请求金国封吴曦为蜀王。
English: Wu Xi and his cousins Wu Rimin, Xu Jingwang, Zhao Fu, Mi Xiu Zhi, and Dong Zhen plotted together to rebel. They secretly sent their concubine, Yao Huaiyuan, to offer the four states of Guanzhou, Cheng, He, and Feng to the State of Jin, and to request that the State of Jin crown Wu Xi as the King of Shu.

古文：侂胄日夜望曦进兵，曦阳为持重，按兵河池不进，潜为金人地以困王师，侂胄不之觉。
现代文：韩胄日夜盼望吴曦进兵，吴曦表面上持重，在河池按兵不动，暗中帮金兵围困宋军，韩胄没察觉。
English: Han Zheng day and night hoped for Wu Xi to enter the army. On the surface, Wu Xi held a heavy weight, kept the soldiers in the river, and secretly helped the Jin soldiers to besiege the Song army. Han Zheng did not notice.

古文：会正使程松至，曦不庭参，松不敢诘；曦复多摘取松卫兵，松亦不悟。
现代文：正巧四川宣抚使程松到河池，吴曦不到官府以礼相迎，程松不敢责问；吴曦又撤掉程松的许多卫兵，程松也没醒悟。
English: It just so happened that the Sichuan Procuratorate sent Cheng Song to Hechi. Wu Xi did not come to the government office to greet him, and Cheng Song did not dare to question him. Wu Xi also removed many of Cheng Song's guards, and Cheng Song did not wake up.

古文：金人犯西和，王喜、鲁翼拒之。
现代文：金兵进犯西和，王喜、鲁翼拒敌。
English: The gold soldiers invaded West He, and Wang Xi and Lu Qiang rebuffed the enemy.

古文：战方急，曦传令退保黑谷，军遂溃。
现代文：战事正紧，吴曦命他们退保黑谷，宋军因而溃败。
English: The war was in full swing, and Wu Xi ordered them to retreat to Heigu. As a result, the Song army was defeated.

古文：乃焚河池，退壁青野原。
现代文：吴曦焚毁城池，退到青野原。
English: Wu Xi burned the city and retreated to Qingyuan.

古文：曦时已布腹心于金，将士未之知，犹力战，敌人窃笑之。
现代文：此时吴曦安排心腹之人与金人联系，将士们还不知道，仍然同金兵力战，敌人暗自发笑。
English: At this time, Wu Xi arranged for his confidant to contact the Jin people. The soldiers did not know that they were still fighting with the Jin army. The enemy secretly laughed.

古文：曦退壁鱼关，招集忠义，厚赐以收众心。
现代文：吴曦退到鱼关，招集忠义之人，给他们厚赏以收买人心。
English: Wu Xi retreated to Yuguan, summoned loyal people, and gave them a large reward to win their hearts.

古文：兴元都统制毋思以重兵守大散关，曦因撤蓦关之戍，敌由版闸谷绕出思后，思遁。
现代文：兴元都统制毋思用重兵把守大散关，吴曦就撤去蓦关的守军，金人从版闸谷绕到毋思的后方，毋思逃走。
English: The Xingyuan capital was controlled by the thoughtless use of heavy troops to guard the Great Sankuan Pass, and Wu Xi removed the defenders of the pass. The Jin people went around from the Gate Valley to the thoughtless rear, and thoughtlessly fled.

古文：金遂陷大散关，曦退屯罝口。
现代文：于是金兵攻陷大散关，吴曦退到口。
English: As a result, the Golden Army captured the Great Sankan Pass, and Wu Xi retreated to the mouth.

古文：举人陈国饰投匦上书，言曦必叛，侂胄不省。
现代文：举人陈国饰上书，说吴曦必会反叛，韩胄不觉察。
English: Chen Guojie wrote a letter saying that Wu Xi would certainly rebel, but Han Yu did not notice.

古文：十二月，兴州见两日相摩。
现代文：十二月，兴州出现两个太阳。
English: In December, two suns appeared in Xingzhou.

古文：金遣吴端持诏书、金印至罝口，封曦蜀王，曦密受之。
现代文：金国派吴端带着诏书、金印到口，封吴曦为蜀王，吴曦秘密接受。
English: The state of Jin sent Wu Duan with an imperial edict and a gold seal to his mouth, sealing Wu Xi as the King of Shu, which Wu Xi secretly accepted.

古文：李好义败金人于七方关，曦不上其捷，还兴州。
现代文：李好义在七方关打败金军，吴曦不向朝廷奏捷，回到兴州。
English: Li Haoyi defeated the Chinese army at the seven-sided pass, Wu Xi did not play well to the court and returned to Xingzhou.

古文：是夜，天赤如血，光烛地如昼。
现代文：当晚，天色血红，光线和白天一样。
English: That night, the sky was blood red and the light was the same as during the day.

古文：翌日，曦召幕属谕意，谓东南失守，车驾幸四明，今宜从权济事，众失色。
现代文：第二天，吴曦召幕僚表明心意，说东南方已失守，皇上到了四明，现在应见机行事，众人大惊失色。
English: The next day, Wu Xi summoned his staff to express his thoughts, saying that the southeast had been lost, that the emperor had arrived in Shimei, and that he should now act as he saw fit. Everyone was shocked.

古文：王翼、杨骙之抗言曰： 如此，则相公八十年忠孝门户，一朝扫地矣！ 曦曰： 吾意已决。 即诣甲仗库，集兵将官语故，禄禧、褚青、王喜、王大中等皆称贺听命。
现代文：王翼、杨马癸之反驳说 ：如果你称蜀王，那么你家八十年的忠孝名节，一下都扫地殆尽啦！ 吴曦说： 我已决意称王。 立即到武器库，召集兵将说明缘故，禄禧、褚青、王喜、王大中等都向他祝贺，表示听命。
English: Wang Ying and Yang Ma Xizhi retorted, "If you call Shu Wang, then your family's eighty-year-long festival of loyalty and filial piety will be wiped out at a stroke!" Wu Xi said, "I have decided to declare myself king. Immediately go to the armory and call up soldiers to explain the reason. Lu Xiyi, Gong Qing, Wang Xi, Wang Da and others all congratulate him and obey his orders.

古文：曦北向受印。
现代文：吴曦面向北方接受王印。
English: Wu Xi faces north to receive the royal seal.

古文：遣徐景望为四川都转运使、褚青为左右军统制，趋益昌，夺总领所仓库。
现代文：他派徐景望为四川都转运使、褚青为左右军统制，赶奔益昌，夺取总领所的仓库。
English: He sent Xu Jingwang as the Sichuan capital transfer envoy and Gongqing as the commander of the left and right armies to rush to Yichang and seize the warehouse of the General Consulate.

古文：程松闻变，弃兴元去。
现代文：程松听说吴曦叛宋，丢弃兴元逃走。
English: Cheng Song heard that Wu Xi had betrayed Song and abandoned Xing Yuan to escape.

古文：三年正月，曦遣将利吉引金兵入凤州，以四郡付之，表铁山为界。
现代文：开禧三年正月，吴曦派将官利吉接金兵进凤州，把阶、成、和、凤四州割给金国，以铁山为国界。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Heian period, Wu Xi sent the general Liji to receive the gold soldiers into Fengzhou, and assigned the four states of Ta, Cheng, He and Feng to Jin, with the Iron Mountain as the national border.

古文：曦乘黄屋左纛，僣王位于兴州，即治所为行宫，称是月为元年。
现代文：吴曦乘坐天子车，在兴州称蜀王，以治所为行宫，称该年为元年。
English: Wu Xi rode in the celestial chariot, and in Xingzhou he was known as King Shu. He called the year the first year of the year.

古文：使人告其伯母赵氏，赵怒绝之。
现代文：派人告诉他的伯母赵氏，赵氏愤怒地和他绝亲。
English: He sent someone to tell his aunt Zhao, who angrily disowned him.

古文：叔母刘昼夜号泣，骂不绝口，曦扶出之。
现代文：他的婶母刘氏日夜号泣，骂不绝口，吴曦把她扶出去了。
English: His aunt, Ms. Liu, cried day and night and cursed incessantly. Wu Xi helped her out.

古文：族子僎为兴元统制，见伪檄，色甚不平。
现代文：同族人吴亻巽为兴元统制，看见吴曦的檄文，神色很不平静，十分愤怒。
English: When Wu Xi's compatriot Wu Yao, who was in charge of the Xingyuan Dictatorship, saw Wu Xi's letter, he looked very angry and uneasy.

古文：曦既僣位，议行削发左衽之令。
现代文：吴曦僭位后，讨论实行削发左衽的命令。
English: After Wu Xi was enthroned, the order to cut the hair on the left side of the head was discussed.

古文：遣董镇至成都治宫殿，将徙居之。
现代文：他派董镇到成都修宫殿，准备迁居到成都。
English: He sent Dong Zhen to Chengdu to build a palace and prepare to move to Chengdu.

古文：曦所统军七万并程松军三万，分隶十统帅。
现代文：吴曦所率的七万兵和程松的三万兵，分别隶属于十个统帅。
English: The seventy thousand soldiers led by Wu Xi and the thirty thousand soldiers led by Cheng Song were subordinated to ten commanders.

古文：遣禄祁、房大勋戍万州，泛舟下嘉陵江，声言约金人夹攻襄阳。
现代文：他派禄祁、房大勋戍守万州，泛舟沿嘉陵江而下，声称与金人相约夹攻襄阳。
English: He sent Lu Kui and Fang Da Xun to defend Wanzhou, and sailed down the Jialing River in a raft, claiming that he had made an agreement with the Jin people to attack Xiangyang.

古文：祁寻至夔，遣兵扼巫山得胜、罗护等砦，以遏王师。
现代文：禄祁很快到达夔州，派兵扼守巫山的得胜、罗护等寨，以阻挡宋军。
English: Luk Ying soon arrived in Ganzhou and sent troops to defend the victory of Wushan, Luo and other villages to block the Song Army.

古文：侂胄闻曦反，不知所为，或劝不如因而封之，侂胄纳其说。
现代文：韩胄听说吴曦反叛后，不知所措，有人劝韩胄不如趁势就封吴曦为王，韩胄采纳了这种说法。
English: After hearing of Wu Xi's rebellion, Han Kuo was at a loss for words. Someone advised Han Kuo that it would be better to take advantage of the situation and make Wu Xi king. Han Kuo adopted this argument.

古文：吴晛为曦谋，宜收用蜀名士以系民心。
现代文：吴日见替吴曦谋划，让吴曦召用蜀中名人以收买民心。
English: Wu Rimin planned for Wu Xi, and let Wu Xi call on famous people in Shu to buy the hearts of the people.

古文：于是陈咸自髡其发，史次秦涂其目，杨震仲饮药卒，王翊、家拱辰皆不受伪命，杨修年、詹久中、家大酉、李道传、邓性善、杨泰之悉弃官去。
现代文：于是陈咸自己剃发，史次秦涂抹自己的眼睛，杨震仲服毒自尽，王翊、家拱辰都不接受吴曦的任命，杨修年、詹久中、家大酉、李道传、邓性善、杨泰之都弃官离去。
English: As a result, Chen Xian shaved his hair, Shi Ziqin smeared his eyes, Yang Zhenzhong poisoned himself, Wang Xi and Jia Gongchen did not accept Wu Xi's appointment, Yang Shunian, Zhan Jiuzhong, Jia Dazhong, Li Daochuan, Deng Shongshen and Yang Taizhong all resigned and left.

古文：薛九龄谋举义兵。
现代文：薛九龄谋划起兵讨伐吴曦。
English: Xue Jiu Ling planned to raise an army to fight Wu Xi.

古文：兴州合江仓官杨巨源倡义讨逆，未有以发，遂与随军转运安丙共谋诛曦。
现代文：兴州合江仓官杨巨源倡议讨伐吴曦，还没起兵，就与随军转运官安丙共同谋划诛杀吴曦。
English: Yang Jiuyuan, a warehouse official of Xingzhou Hejiang, proposed to fight against Wu Xi. Before he raised an army, he and An He, a transfer officer with the army, jointly plotted to kill Wu Xi.

古文：会李好义与兄好古、李贵等皆有谋，交相结纳。
现代文：恰好李好义与他哥哥李好古、李贵等都有讨伐吴曦的计划，他们互相支持。
English: It just so happened that Li Haoyi and his brother Li Haogu and Li Gui all had plans to fight Wu Xi, and they supported each other.

古文：二月甲戌夜，漏尽，巨源、好义首率勇敢七十人斧门以入。
现代文：二月廿八日晚，杨巨源、李好义首先率七十名勇士用斧头劈门冲入伪宫。
English: On the evening of February 28th, Yang Jiuyuan and Li Haoyi first led 70 warriors to break the door with an axe and rushed into the pseudo-palace.

古文：李贵即曦室斩其首，裂其尸。
现代文：李贵到吴曦居室中砍掉他的头，肢解他的尸体。
English: Li Gui went to Wu Xi's room, cut off his head and dismembered his body.

古文：丙分遣将士收其二子及叔父柄、弟晫、从弟晛、贼党姚淮源、李珪、郭仲、米修之、郭澄等皆诛之。
现代文：安丙分别派遣将士抓获吴曦的两个儿子和他的叔父吴柄、弟弟吴日卓、堂弟吴日见、死党姚淮源、李王圭、郭仲、米修之、郭澄等，并杀掉他们。
English: An Hien separately dispatched soldiers to capture Wu Xi's two sons and his uncle Wu Gang, brother Wu Rizhuo, cousin Wu Rimin, close friend Yao Huaiyuan, Li Wanggui, Guo Zhong, Mi Xiu Zhi, Guo Cheng, etc., and killed them.

古文：时吴端犹卧后阁，亦伏诛。
现代文：此时吴端还在后殿睡觉，也被杀。
English: At this time, Wu Duan was still sleeping in the vestibule and was also killed.

古文：徐景望、赵富、吴晓、董镇、郭荣、禄禧等皆在外，遣人就诛之。
现代文：徐景望、赵富、吴晓、董镇、郭荣、禄禧等都在城外，也派人去诛杀他们。
English: Xu Jingwang, Zhao Fu, Wu Xiao, Dong Zhen, Guo Rong, Luk Xi, etc. were all outside the city, and they also sent people to fight and kill them.

古文：函曦首献于朝。
现代文：吴曦的人头被放入匣中献给朝廷。
English: Wu Xi's head was placed in a box and presented to the imperial court.

古文：诏曦妻子处死，亲昆弟除名勒停，吴璘子孙并徙出蜀，吴玠子孙免连坐，通主璘祀。
现代文：皇上诏命处死吴曦妻子，他的亲兄弟都除去名籍，取消原有的资格和官职，吴王的子孙都被迁出蜀地，吴王介的子孙免于连坐，不受处罚，负责祭祀吴王。
English: The emperor's edict ordered the death of Wu Xi's wife, his brothers were all stripped of their family names and cancelled their original qualifications and official positions, Wu Wang's children and grandchildren were all moved out of Shu, and Wu Wang Jie's children and grandchildren were exempted from joint sitting and were not punished, and were responsible for sacrificing to Wu Wang.

古文：曦败时年四十六。
现代文：吴曦败亡时四十六岁。
English: Wu Xi was 46 years old at the time of his defeat.

