古文：孔子曰： 性相近也，习相远也。 
现代文：党锢列传，序，孔子曰： 性相近也，习相远也。 
English: In the preface to the Analects of Confucius, he said, "Sex is similar, but learning is different."

古文：言嗜恶之本同，而迁染之涂异也。
现代文：这是说人的好恶本性是相同的，而所受的教育与环境使人的性情与操守相差很大。
English: This is to say that people's likes and dislikes are the same in nature, but the education and environment make people's temperament and conduct vary greatly.

古文：夫刻意则行不肆，牵物则其志流。
现代文：所以有德行的人，教人修养品性，克服放荡行为，交朋友谨慎，控制偏颇，遇事平正。
English: Therefore, a virtuous person teaches people to cultivate character, overcome dissolute behavior, make friends carefully, control biased, and be fair in the face of things.

古文：是以圣人导人理性，裁抑宕佚，慎其所与，节其所偏，虽情品万区，质文异数，至于陶物振俗，其道一也。叔末浇讹，王道陵缺，而犹假仁以效己，凭义以济功。
现代文：虽然人的情志千差万别，文与质也不相同，至于培养成材，振兴风俗，道理是相同的。周末乱世风俗浮薄诈伪，国家上下失序，纲纪废弛，还有人假借行仁的名义以达到自己的目的，靠义气来使事业成功。
English: Although people's sentiments are very different, and their culture and quality are also different, as far as cultivating talent and revitalizing customs are concerned, the reason is the same. The weekend is chaotic, the customs are flimsy and fraudulent, the country is out of order, the discipline is slack, and there are also people who use the name of charity to achieve their goals, and rely on loyalty to make their career successful.

古文：举中于理，则强梁褫气；片言违正，则厮台解情。
现代文：行为举动合于法度，凶狠粗暴的人，也不得不屈服；一句话说得不在理，下贱无知的人，也能体察得到。
English: Behaviour and action conform to the law, and the violent and rough people have to give in; a word is unreasonable, and the lowly and ignorant people can also experience it.

古文：盖前哲之遗尘，有足求者。
现代文：从前明达的人遗留下来的东西，是值得学习的。
English: What has been left behind by those who once knew is worth learning.

古文：霸德既衰，狙诈萌起。
现代文：霸德衰坏，欺诈发生。
English: Hubris decays, fraud occurs.

古文：强者以决胜为雄，弱者以诈劣受屈。
现代文：强的凭决胜称雄，弱的因诈劣受屈。
English: The strong win by virtue of a decisive victory, and the weak suffer because of fraud.

古文：至有画半策而绾万金，开一说而锡琛瑞。
现代文：以至有的因出了半个主意得了万金，有的因进一言受赐珍宝。
English: So much so that some people have won thousands of dollars because of a half-baked idea, and others have been given precious treasures because of a single word.

古文：或起徒步而仕执珪，解草衣以升卿相。
现代文：有的出身平民做到大官，升为卿相。能说会道，有智谋的人，卖弄才华图取功名富贵的，不约而至。
English: Some people from the common people have become high-ranking officials and have been promoted to the noble minister. People who can speak well, have wit, show off their talents to gain fame and wealth, come by chance.

古文：士之饰巧驰辩，以要能钓利者，不期而景从矣。
现代文：从此爱尚相争，与时推移，这种风气不可挽回，流弊不能反正。
English: Since then, love has been in conflict, and with the passage of time, this culture is irrevocable, and the flow can not be corrected anyway.

古文：自是爱尚相夺，与时回变，其风不可留，其敝不能反。及汉祖仗剑，武夫兴，宪令宽赊，文礼简阔，绪余四豪之烈，人怀陵上之心，轻死重气，怨惠必仇，令行私庭，权移匹庶，任侠之方，成其俗矣。
现代文：到汉高祖仗剑而起，崇尚武力的人勃然兴起，法令宽松，礼仪也简阔不密，继承信陵、平原、春申、孟尝四君的流风，人人怀抱侵慢在上之心，轻死生，重义气，有怨有德，必相报答；命令行于私家，大权掌握在匹夫的手中，任侠一流，成了社会风俗。
English: When the ancestors of the Han Dynasty fought with swords, people who advocated the use of force rose up. Laws and regulations were relaxed, and etiquette was simple and informal. Inheriting the customs of the four princes of Xinying, Pingyuan, Chunshen, and Mengqi, everyone embraced the spirit of arrogance, valued life and death, cherished the spirit of righteousness, had grievances and virtues, and had to repay each other. It became a social custom for orders to be issued in private homes, for power to be held in the hands of peers, and for knights to be first-class.

古文：自武帝以后，崇尚儒学，怀经协术，所在雾会，至有石渠分争之论，党同伐异之说，守文之徒，盛于时矣。
现代文：自从汉武帝以后，推崇儒学，经术之士比比皆是。以至有石渠阁议论六艺的争辩，与我的意见相合的结为朋党；不合的攻击之。讲求文学的人，这时最盛。
English: Since Emperor Hanwu, Confucianism has been revered, and scholars of Confucianism are everywhere. So much so that there is a debate on the six arts in Shiquijiao, and those who agree with my opinion are my friends; those who disagree are attacked. People who are interested in literature are at their best at this time.

古文：至王莽专伪，终于篡国，忠义之流，耻见缨绋，遂乃荣华丘壑，甘足枯槁。
现代文：到了王莽专权诈伪，终于篡夺了汉朝的皇位。忠于汉朝胸怀正义的，以替王莽做官为耻的，以隐居为光荣，甘心贫困。
English: Wang Mang eventually usurped the imperial throne of the Han Dynasty. Those who were loyal to the Han Dynasty and had justice in their hearts, were ashamed to be Wang Mang's officials, were proud to live in seclusion, and were willing to be poor.

古文：虽中兴在运，汉德重开，而保身怀方，弥相慕袭，去就之节，重于时矣。
现代文：虽光武中兴，汉德重新建立起来，而明哲保身，方正自持，仍使众人羡慕袭蹈。仕与不仕的大节，为时论所重！
English: Although Guangwu Zhongxing and Hande have been re-established, Mingzhe's self-preservation and Founder's self-reliance still make everyone envy him. The big issue of serving and not serving is the focus of current affairs!

古文：逮桓、灵之间，主荒政缪，国命委于阉寺，士子羞与为伍，故匹夫抗愤，处士横议，遂乃激扬名声，互相题拂，品核公卿，裁量执政，婞直之风，于斯行矣。
现代文：到了桓帝灵帝的时代，君主荒乱，政治腐败，国家的命脉掌握在宦官手里，读书人认为同他们在一起可耻。所以平民百姓，愤愤不平，处士们放肆议论，标榜名节，彼此褒扬，评比公卿，议论执政的得失，刚正不阿的风气于是大行。
English: In the era of Emperor Hun, the monarchy was in disarray, politics was corrupt, and the lifeblood of the country was in the hands of eunuchs. Readers thought it was shameful to be with them. Therefore, the common people were angry and disgruntled, and the officials talked freely, advertised famous festivals, praised each other, compared court nobles, and discussed the gains and losses of governing. The culture of being upright and upright then flourished.

古文：夫上好则下必甚，矫枉故直必过，其理然矣。
现代文：上面喜好的，下面更喜好。要矫正枉曲，一定要过直。道理就是这样的啊！
English: If you like the top, you'll like the bottom even more. If you want to straighten things out, you have to straighten them out. That's just how it is!

古文：若范滂、张俭之徒，清心忌恶，终陷党议，不其然乎？
现代文：如范滂、张俭等，清政疾恶，终于陷入党锢之祸，难道不是这样吗？
English: Isn't it the case that Fan Yu, Zhang Jian and others, who suffered from the evil of the Qing government, eventually fell into the evil of the Party?

古文：初，桓帝为蠡吾侯，受学于甘陵周福，及即帝位，擢福为尚书。
现代文：从前，桓帝为蠡吾侯，从甘陵周福学习，做了皇帝，提拔周福为尚书。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Huan was the prince of Xingwu, learned from Zhou Fu of Ganling, became the emperor, and promoted Zhou Fu to Shangshu.

古文：时同郡河南尹房植有名当朝，乡人为之谣曰： 天下规矩房伯武，因师获印周仲进。 
现代文：当时与周福同郡的河南尹房植在朝廷里很有名，乡里人做了两句歌谣： 天下规矩房伯武，因师获印周仲进。 
English: At that time, Yin Fangzhi of Henan Province, who was in the same county as Zhou Fu, was very famous in the imperial court. The villagers made two ballads: "The world is ruled by Fang Bokwu, and Zhou Zhongjin won the prize because of his teacher."

古文：二家宾客，互相讥揣，遂各树朋徒，渐成尤隙，由是甘陵有南北部，党人之议，自此始矣。
现代文：二家的宾客，互相讥刺，于是各结朋徒，慢慢地成了怨尤。由是甘陵分为南北部，党人的名，就从此开始有了。
English: The guests of the two families started to make fun of each other, so they each formed a group of friends, which slowly became a grudge. Therefore, Kanling was divided into the north and the south, and the name of the party member came into being from then on.

古文：后汝南太守宗资任功曹范滂，南阳太守成瑨亦委功曹岑，二郡又为谣曰： 汝南太守范孟博，南阳宗资主画诺。
现代文：后来，汝南太守宗资举用功曹范滂，南阳太守成缙也委任功曹岑日至，二郡又作歌谣说： 汝南太守范孟博，南阳宗资主画诺。
English: Later, the Southern Yunnan Imperial Governor Zongzhi appointed Gong Cao Fan to be the chief painter, and the Southern Yang Imperial Governor Chengyu also appointed Gong Cao to be the chief painter. The two counties also made a song saying: Southern Yunnan Imperial Governor Fan Mengbo, the Southern Yunnan Imperial Governor Zongzhi is the chief painter.

古文：南阳太守岑公孝，弘农成瑨但坐啸。 
现代文：南阳太守岑公孝，弘农成缙但坐啸。 
English: Nanyang Daju was a dutiful son, while Hongnong was a rebellious son.

古文：因此流言转入太学，诸生三万余人，郭林宗、贾伟节为其冠，并与李膺、陈蕃、王暢更相褒重。
现代文：因此流言转入太学，诸生三万余人，郭林宗、贾伟节是首领，都与李膺、陈蕃、王畅彼此推重。
English: As a result, the rumor spread to Taixue, and more than 30,000 people from all walks of life, with Guo Linzong and Jia Wei Jie as the leaders, all supported each other with Li Jun, Chen Jun and Wang Chang.

古文：学中语曰： 天下模楷李元礼，不畏强御陈仲举，天下俊秀王叔茂。 
现代文：学中流言说 ：天下模楷李元礼，不畏强御陈仲举，天下俊秀王叔茂。 
English: A school rumor says: Li Yuanli is the model of the world, Chen Zhongji is fearless and strong, and Wang Shumo is the most handsome man in the world.

古文：又渤海公族进阶、扶风魏齐卿，并危言深论，不隐豪强。
现代文：又渤海公族进阶，扶风魏齐卿，都敢说敢讲，不怕豪强。
English: In addition, the public figures of the Bohai Sea and Fu Feng Wei Qiqing dare to speak and speak, and are not afraid to be brave.

古文：自公卿以下，莫不畏其贬议，屣履到门。
现代文：从公卿以下，没有不怕他们指责的，纷纷到门结纳。
English: From the nobility on down, no one who did not fear their reproach came to the door to pay.

古文：时，河内张成善说风角，推占当赦，遂教子杀人。
现代文：当时河内张成擅长占候术，根据四方四隅的风，以占吉凶。他推算朝廷将有大赦，于是教儿子杀人。
English: At that time, Hanoi Zhang Cheng was good at fortune-telling, according to the four directions and four corners of the wind. He calculated that the court would have an amnesty, so he taught his son to kill.

古文：李膺为河南尹，督促收捕，既而逢宥获免，膺愈怀愤疾，竟案杀之。
现代文：李膺为河南尹，督促收捕张成。不久，遇上朝廷赦罪免予收捕，李膺更加气愤，逮捕处死。
English: Li Yu was Yin of Henan Province and urged the arrest of Zhang Cheng. Soon, when the court pardoned him and exempted him from arrest, Li Yu became even more angry and was arrested and executed.

古文：初，成以方伎交通宦官，帝亦颇谇其占。
现代文：起先，张成用星相之术交结宦官，皇帝也曾经问讯过张成的占卜情况。
English: At first, Zhang Cheng used astrology to meet eunuchs, and the emperor once inquired about Zhang Cheng's divination.

古文：成弟子牢修因上书诬告膺等养太学游士，交结诸郡生徒，更相驱驰，共为部党，诽讪朝廷，疑乱风俗。
现代文：张成的弟子牢因此上书诬陷李膺等人收养太学游士，交结各郡的诸生，兴风作浪，结为朋党，诽谤朝廷，搞乱风俗。
English: As a result, Zhangcheng's disciples falsely accused Li Xuan and others in a letter of adopting too-academic wanderers, intermarrying the lives of all counties, stirring up trouble, forming a crony party, slandering the imperial court, and disrupting customs.

古文：于是天子震怒，班下郡国，逮捕党人，布告天下，使同忿疾，遂收执膺等。
现代文：于是天子发怒，颁布郡国，逮捕党人，布告天下，同仇敌忾。于是逮捕了李膺等人。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven became angry, promulgated the county and state, arrested the party members, and announced to the world that they would fight together with the enemy. Therefore, Li Yao and others were arrested.

古文：其辞所连及陈寔之徒二百余人，或有逃遁不获，皆悬金购募。
现代文：供辞所连及的陈萛之徒共二百余人，有的逃跑没有捉到的，都悬赏捕捉。
English: A total of more than two hundred of Chen Xi's followers were linked to the confession, and a reward was offered for the capture of those who did not escape.

古文：使者四出，相望于道。
现代文：派人四出搜捕，道路络绎不绝。
English: People were sent out to search and arrest, and the roads were incessantly congested.

古文：明年，尚书霍谞、城门校尉窦武并表为请，帝意稍解，乃皆赦归田里，禁锢终身。
现代文：第二年，尚书霍、城门校尉窦武等人都上表请求皇上重新考虑，皇上的怒意稍为缓解了。
English: The following year, Shang Shuho, Shing Mun's Captain Dou Wu and others petitioned the emperor to reconsider, and the emperor's anger eased slightly.

古文：而党人之名，犹书王府。
现代文：于是被捕的人都免罪送回农村，终身不得录用。党人的名字写在王府。
English: As a result, all those arrested were exonerated and sent back to the countryside. They were not allowed to be employed for life. The names of the party members were written down in the royal palace.

古文：自是正直废放。
现代文：自此以后，正直的人被废弃不用，坏人臭味相投，勾结一起。
English: Since then, honest people have been discarded, and bad people have been mingling and colluding with each other.

古文：邪枉炽结，海内希风之流，遂共相标榜，指天下名士，为之称号。上曰 三君 ，次曰 八俊 ，次曰 八顾 ，次曰 八及 ，次曰 八厨 ，犹古之 八元 、 八凯 也。
现代文：海内追求高风亮节的人互相标榜，指天下的名士，定出标号。上叫 三君 ，次叫 八俊 ，三叫 八顾 ，四叫 八及 ，五叫 八厨 ，与古时候的 八元 、 八凯 相似。
English: People at home and abroad who pursue high winds and bright festivals advertise each other, refer to celebrities around the world, and set up labels. The first is called Sanjun, the second is called Hachijun, the third is called Hachigu, the fourth is called Hachiji, and the fifth is called Hachiku, which is similar to the eight yuan and Hachikai in ancient times.

古文：窦武、刘淑、陈蕃为 三君 。
现代文：窦武、刘淑、陈蕃称 三君 。
English: Dou Wu, Liu Shu and Chen Qi are called the Three Kings.

古文：君者，言一世之所宗也。
现代文：君，是说为一世所宗。
English: You, I mean, for life.

古文：李膺、荀翌、杜密、王暢、刘祐、魏朗、赵典、朱为 八俊 。
现代文：李膺、荀翌、杜密、王畅、刘祐、魏朗、赵典、朱称 八俊 。
English: Li Qian, Xingnong, Du Mi, Wang Chang, Liu Yu, Wei Lang, Zhao Dian, and Zhu Wei are the eight juniors.

古文：俊者，言人之英也。
现代文：俊，是说人中的英杰。
English: Jun, means a hero among men.

古文：郭林宗、宗慈、巴肃、夏馥、范滂、尹勋、蔡衍、羊陟为 八顾 。
现代文：郭林宗、宗慈、巴肃、夏馥、范滂、尹勋、蔡衍、羊陟称 八顾 。
English: Guo Linzong, Zong Ci, Baxu, Xia Qian, Fan Qian, Yin Xun, Cai Yan and Yang Qian are called Ba Gu.

古文：顾者，言能以德行引人者也。张俭、岑晊、刘表、陈翔、孔昱、苑康、檀敷、翟超为 八及 。
现代文：顾，是说能够用自己的道德品行为人拥护，张俭、岑日至、刘表、陈翔、孔昱、苑康、檀敷、翟超称八及 。
English: Gu means being able to use one's own moral qualities to act as a person's best supporter, and Zhang Jian, Xing Zi, Liu Biao, Chen Xiang, Kong Wei, Yuan Kang, Dan Shiki, and Zou Chao are eight.

古文：及者，言其能导人追宗者也。
现代文：及，是说能够引导别人宗仰。
English: And, that is, to be able to lead others to admiration.

古文：度尚、张邈、王考、刘儒、胡母班、秦周、蕃向、王章为 八厨 。厨者，言能以财救人者也。
现代文：度尚、张邈、王考、刘儒、胡母班、秦周、蕃向、王章称 八厨 ，是说能够用钱财救人。
English: Du Shang, Zhang Ye, Wang Kao, Liu Ru, Hu Muban, Qin Zhou, Hao Xiang, and Wang Zhang are called Eight Cuisines, which means that they can save people with money.

古文：又张俭乡人朱，承望中常侍侯览意旨，上书告俭与同乡二十四人别相署号，共为部党，图危社稷。
现代文：又张俭乡人朱并，按照中常侍侯览的意旨，上书告张俭与同乡二十四人别立名号，共为朋党，企图危害国家。
English: In addition, Zhang Jian's fellow villager Zhu Jian, in accordance with the intention of Zhong Changzhi Houzhan, submitted a letter to inform Zhang Jian and twenty-four of his fellow villagers that they should not set up a name, that they were friends of the party, and that they were attempting to endanger the country.

古文：以俭及檀彬、褚凤、张肃、薛兰、冯禧、魏玄、徐乾为 八俊 田林、张隐、刘表、薛郁、王访、刘祗、宣靖、公绪恭为 八顾 ，朱楷、田槃、耽、薛敦、宋布、唐龙、嬴咨、宣褒为 八及 ，刻石立墠，共为部党，而俭为之魁。
现代文：以张俭及檀彬、褚凤、张肃、薛兰、冯禧、魏玄、徐乾为 八俊 ，田林、张隐、刘表、薛郁、王访、刘祗、宣靖、公绪恭为 八顾 ，朱楷、田、疏耽、薛敦、宋布、唐龙、嬴咨、宣褒为 八及 ，刻石立于郊外。共为朋党，张俭是太帅。
English: Zhang Jian and Dang Bin, Yu Feng, Zhang Su, Xue Lan, Feng Xiyi, Wei Xuan, and Xu Qian are the eight princes, Tian Lin, Zhang Yin, Liu Bo, Xue Yu, Wang Qi, Xuan Jing, and Gong Xujong are the eight princes, Zhu Kai, Tian, Zhotan, Xue Dun, Song Bu, Tang Long, Zou Zi, and Xuan Bo are the eight princes, and the carved stone stands in the suburbs. They are all friends of the party, and Zhang Jian is too handsome.

古文：灵帝诏刊章捕俭等。
现代文：灵帝下诏逮捕张俭等人，但诏书上不写朱并的名字。
English: Emperor Lingdi issued an edict to arrest Zhang Jian and others, but Zhu Rong's name was not written on the edict.

古文：大长秋曹节因此讽有司奏捕前党故司空虞放、太仆杜密、长乐少府李膺、司隶校尉朱、颍川太守巴肃、沛相荀翌、河内太守魏朗、山阳太守翟超、任城相刘儒、太尉掾范滂等百余人，皆死狱中。
现代文：以示保密。大长秋曹节因此示意有关官员上奏逮捕前党人先司空虞放、太仆杜密、长乐少府李膺、司隶校尉朱额、颍川太守巴肃、沛相荀翌、河内太守魏朗、山阴太守翟超、任城相刘儒、太尉掾范滂等一百多人，都死在狱中。
English: As a result, the grand marshal, Qiu Cao, instructed the relevant officials to report the arrest of more than a hundred former party members, including the first secretary, Ku Yu Fang; the eunuch, Du Mi; the vice-governor of Changle, Li Yu; the lieutenant, Zhu Ge; the governor of Lu River, Ba Su; the vice-governor, Pei Xiang; the governor of Hanoi, Wei Lang; the governor of Shan Yin, Zou Chao; the governor of Rencheng, Liu Ru; the vice-governor, Zou Fan; and others, all of whom died in prison.

古文：余或先殁不及，或亡命获免。
现代文：其余的有的在被捕之前就死了，有的逃跑了没被捉捕。
English: The rest either died before they could be arrested, or fled without being caught.

古文：自此诸为怨隙者，因相陷害，睚眦之忿，滥入党中。
现代文：自此以后凡是有怨恨的，彼此陷害，稍微有点私怨的，都被划入朋党。
English: From then on, anyone with a grudge, who had set each other up, or who had a slight personal grudge, was classified as a friend.

古文：又州郡承旨，或有未尝交关，亦离祸毒。
现代文：又州郡跟着上面的意旨，有的根本没有与他们有来往，也遭到株连。
English: Yanzhou County followed the above intention, some did not have any dealings with them at all, and they were also expelled.

古文：其死徙废禁者，六七百人。
现代文：被杀、谪徙、废禁的有六七百人。
English: Six to seven hundred people were killed, displaced, and the ban was lifted.

古文：熹平五年，永昌太守曹鸾上书大讼党人，言甚方切。
现代文：熹平五年，永昌太守曹鸾上书大声疾呼为党人伸冤，说得正当切合事实。
English: In the 5th year of Heping, Cao Jun, the Yongchang Grand Empress Dowager, wrote a letter calling for the party members to be vindicated, which was justified and true.

古文：帝省奏大怒，即诏司隶、益州槛车收鸾，送槐里狱掠杀之。
现代文：帝看了奏书大怒，马上下诏司隶，益州以槛车逮捕曹鸾，送槐里狱打死。
English: When the emperor saw the report, he was furious. He immediately issued an imperial edict, and Yizhou arrested Cao Qi with a carriage, and sent him to the Yili Prison, where he was beaten to death.

古文：于是又诏州郡更考党人门生故吏父子兄弟，其在位者，免官禁锢，爰及五属。
现代文：于是再下诏州郡更考查党人门生、旧部下、父子兄弟，在位的，撤职，禁止做官，牵涉五代。
English: As a result, Zhaozhou County further investigated the party members' protégés, former subordinates, and father-son brothers, who were in power, removed from office, prohibited from serving as officials, and involved five generations.

古文：光和二年，上禄长和海上言： 礼，从祖兄弟别居异财，恩义已轻，服属疏末。而今党人锢及五族，既乖典训之文，有谬经常之法。 
现代文：光和二年，上禄长和海上书说 ：礼，从祖兄弟分居，财产也分了。恩义已轻，居丧也属于疏远之末，现在党人禁锢到五族，已不合典训之文，父子兄弟，罪不牵连；又违反了经常的法令。 
English: In the 2nd year of the Guangwa era, the head of the upper Luk and the maritime book said, "Congratulations, you have been separated from your grandparents, and your property has also been divided. Your gratitude has been light, and your death is also a result of estrangement. Now the party members have been imprisoned to five families, which is not in accordance with the text of the ceremony training, and the father and son brothers are not implicated in the crime; it also violates the regular laws and regulations.

古文：帝览而悟之，党锢自从祖以下，皆得解释。
现代文：帝看了后醒悟过来了，党锢自从祖以下，都得到解除。
English: After seeing this, the emperor came to his senses. Party discipline from the patriarch on down was lifted.

古文：中平元年，黄巾贼起，中常侍吕强言于帝曰： 党锢久积，人情多怨。
现代文：中平元年，黄巾贼起，中常侍吕强对帝说： 党锢这长时间，人情多不服。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, when the Yellow Turban Thieves were on the rise, Lyu Qiang, a member of the Central Standing Committee, said to the emperor: "People are not satisfied with this long period of party discipline.

古文：王考字文祖，东平寿张人，冀州刺史；秦周字平王，陈留平丘人，北海相；蕃向字嘉景，鲁国人，郎中；王璋字伯仪，东莱曲城人，少府卿：位行并不显。翟超，山阳太守，事在《陈蕃传》，字及郡县未详。
现代文：如果长此不赦罪，容易与张角合谋，变乱一大，后悔无救了。 帝被他说得害怕了，于是大赦党人，被处死迁徙的家属，都回到原来的郡里。后来黄巾大乱，政府分崩离析，国家的纲纪文章荡然无存了。
English: If you do not forgive the crime for a long time, it is easy to conspire with Zhang Jiao, make a big mess, and regret is hopeless. The emperor was scared by him, so the amnesty party members, and the family members who were executed and migrated, all returned to the original county. Later, the yellow scarf riot, the government fell apart, and the national discipline articles were all gone.

古文：朱，沛人，与杜密等俱死狱中。唯赵典名见而已。
现代文：总计朋党事件，开始于甘陵、汝南，成于李膺、张俭，四海之内，人民水深火热，流离失所，二十多年，所有受连累的都是天下的好人。
English: All in all, the fratricide incident began in Ganling and Runan, and developed into Li Qian and Zhang Jian. In the four seas, the people were in deep water, and they were displaced for more than 20 years. All the people who were involved were good people.

古文：刘淑字仲承，河间乐成人也。
现代文：◆刘淑传，刘淑字仲承，河间郡乐成县人。
English: ◆Liu Shucuan, Liu Shucai Zhongcheng, a native of Lecheng County, Haima County.

古文：祖父称，司隶校尉。
现代文：祖父刘称，司隶校尉。
English: Liu's grandfather said that Sisli is a lieutenant.

古文：淑少学明《五经》，遂隐居，立精舍讲授，诸生常数百人。
现代文：刘淑年轻时学明《五经》之后，就隐居不仕，立精舍讲授，学生常达几百人。
English: After learning the "Five Classics" when she was young, Liu Shu lived in seclusion and devoted herself to teaching. She often had hundreds of students.

古文：州郡礼请，五府连辟，并不就。
现代文：州郡以礼相请，五府连辟，都不去。
English: The state and county invite each other with courtesy, but the five prefectures do not go.

古文：永兴二年，司徒种暠举淑贤良方正，辞以疾。
现代文：永兴二年，司徒种詗推举刘淑贤良方正，他托病辞谢。
English: In the second year of Yongxing, Liu Shuxianliang Fangzheng was elected by Szeto Zongyi. He resigned due to illness.

古文：恒帝闻淑高名，切责州郡，使舆病诣京师。
现代文：桓帝听见刘淑高名，责斥州郡，用轿子把卧病的刘淑抬到京师。
English: When Emperor Kuan heard of Liu Shu's high reputation, he reprimanded the prefectural government and used a palanquin to carry Liu Shu, who was ill, to the capital.

古文：淑不得已而赴洛阳，对策为天下第一，拜议郎。
现代文：刘淑不得已去了洛阳，对天子所问，对答为天下第一，授以议郎。
English: Liu Shu had no choice but to go to Luoyang. He was the first in the world to answer the questions asked by the heavenly son, and was awarded the title of Hezro.

古文：又陈时政得失，灾异之占，事皆效验。
现代文：刘淑又陈述时政的得失和灾异之所以发生，都有效验。
English: Liu Shu also stated that the gains and losses of current politics and the reasons for the occurrence of disasters are all valid.

古文：再迁尚书，纳忠建议，多所补益。
现代文：再升尚书，采纳忠言，向天子建议，多有补益。
English: Re-promoting the noble book, adopting the loyal counsel, and suggesting to the heavenly son, there are many complementary benefits.

古文：又再迁侍中、虎贲中郎将。
现代文：又升侍中、虎贲中郎将。
English: In addition, he was promoted to Samurai Junior High School and then to Togakushi Junior High School Captain.

古文：上疏以为宜罢宦官，辞甚切直，帝虽不能用，亦不罪焉。
现代文：向皇上上疏认为应当罢斥宦官，言词急切，天子虽然没有采用，也没有加罪他。
English: Xiang Shang Shang Shou thought that the eunuch should be dismissed, and his words were eager. Although Tianzi did not adopt, he did not add to his guilt.

古文：以淑宗室之贤，特加敬异，每有疑事，常密谘问之。
现代文：因刘淑是宗室的贤者，特别对他敬重，遇到有疑惑不易决断的事，经常秘密地问他。
English: As Liu Shu was the wise man of the family, she held him in high esteem and often asked him questions in secret when she had doubts about something that was not easy to decide.

古文：灵帝即位，宦官谮淑与窦武等通谋，下狱自杀。
现代文：灵帝即位，宦官诬陷刘淑与窦武等通谋，把他投入监狱，刘淑自杀而死。
English: When Emperor Lingdi ascended the throne, the eunuchs framed Liu Shu for conspiring with Dou Wu and put him in prison. Liu Shu committed suicide and died.

古文：李膺字元礼，颍川襄城人也。
现代文：◆李膺传，李膺字元礼，颍川郡襄城县人。
English: ◆Li Yuxuan, Li Yuxi, a native of Xiangcheng County, Beichuan County.

古文：祖父脩，安帝时为太尉。
现代文：祖父名，安帝时任太尉。
English: His grandfather's name, An Di, was a captain at the time.

古文：父益，赵国相。
现代文：父亲名益，任赵国相。
English: His father, Menyi, served as Zhao Guozhong.

古文：膺性简亢，无所交接，唯以同郡荀淑、陈■为师友。
现代文：李膺性格孤高，不善交际，只把同郡的荀淑、陈萛当作师友。
English: Li Yao was a loner and not good at socializing. He only considered his classmates from the same county, Gong Shu and Chen Yao, as his mentors.

古文：初举孝廉，为司徒胡广所辟，举高第，再迁青州刺史。
现代文：当初李膺被举荐为孝廉，被司徒胡广征召，举为高第。再升为青州刺史。
English: At the beginning, Li Yao was recommended as a filial son, was recruited by Sito Hu Guang, and was promoted as a high-ranking official. He was then promoted to the top of Qingzhou's history.

古文：守令畏威明，多望风弃官。
现代文：郡守县令害怕李膺的威严与明察，大多听到李膺来青州的消息就弃官走了。
English: The county governors and county magistrates were afraid of Li Qiye's majesty and shrewdness, and most of them resigned when they heard the news of Li Qiye's visit to Qingzhou.

古文：复征，再迁渔阳太守。
现代文：李膺又被征召，再调任渔阳太守。
English: Li Qian was once again conscripted and reassigned to the post of Yuyang governor.

古文：寻转蜀郡太守，以母老乞不之官。
现代文：不久又转任蜀郡太守，因母亲年老请求不就职。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Shuxi County Governor, but his elderly mother asked him not to take up the post.

古文：转护乌桓校尉。
现代文：调任护乌桓校尉。
English: Transferred to the post of Captain Wu Huan.

古文：鲜卑数犯塞，膺常蒙矢石，每破走之，虏甚惮慑。
现代文：鲜卑多次侵犯边境，李膺常冒矢石，每次打败他们，赶走他们。
English: Xianbei repeatedly violated the border, and Li Lan often took the initiative to defeat them and drive them away.

古文：以公事免官，还居纶氏，教授常千人。
现代文：敌人非常畏惧。因公事免官，回家乡纶氏县居住，教授学生常达千人。
English: He was dismissed from his post due to his official duties and returned to his hometown, Shinshi County, where he lived and taught thousands of students.

古文：南阳樊陵求为门徒，膺谢不受。
现代文：南阳人樊陵请求做他的门徒，李膺谢绝了他，不接受。
English: The man from Nanyang, Fuling, asked to be his disciple, but Li Xie declined and did not accept.

古文：陵后以阿附宦官，致位太尉，为节志者所羞。
现代文：樊陵后来依靠阿谀攀附宦官，得到了太尉的高位，被有节操的人所羞耻。
English: Huling later relied on his aunt to climb the eunuchs and got the high rank of captain. He was shamed by those with discipline.

古文：荀爽尝就谒膺，因为其御，既还，喜曰： 今日乃得御李君矣。 
现代文：荀爽曾经去拜访李膺，就便为李膺赶车，回来高兴地说： 今天居然为李君赶车了。 
English: Hao Shuang once went to visit Li Yao, so he caught the bus for Li Yao. When he came back, he said happily, "I actually caught the bus for Li Jun today."

古文：其见慕如此。
现代文：李膺被人敬慕到了这种地步。
English: Li Yao has been admired to such an extent.

古文：永寿二年，鲜卑寇云中，桓帝闻膺能，乃复征为度辽将军。
现代文：桓帝永寿二年，鲜卑侵犯云中，桓帝听说李膺有才能，于是又征召他作度辽将军。
English: In the second year of Emperor Kuan's eternal life, when he was still young, Emperor Kuan heard that Li Yao had talent, so he conscripted him to be General Du Liao.

古文：先是，羌虏及疏勒、龟兹数出攻抄张掖、酒泉、云中诸郡，百姓屡被其害。
现代文：先时，羌人掳掠到疏勒、龟兹，多次侵扰抢掠张掖、酒泉、云中各郡，百姓多次遭受他们的祸害。
English: In the past, the Jurchens invaded and plundered Zhangye, Jiuquan and Yunzhong counties several times, and the people suffered from their scourge many times.

古文：自膺到边，皆望风惧服，先所掠男女，悉送还塞下。
现代文：自从李膺到达边境，听到消息就都畏惧屈服了。以前掳掠的男女，统统送还到边境。
English: Since Li Yao arrived at the border, when he heard the news, he was afraid and caved in. All the men and women who had been abducted before were sent back to the border.

古文：自是之后，声振远域。
现代文：从此以后，李膺的声威传播到很远的地方。
English: Since then, Li Yao's fame has spread far and wide.

古文：延熹二年征，再迁河南尹。
现代文：桓帝延熹二年，受征召，又升作河南尹。
English: In the second year of Emperor Kan's reign, he was conscripted and promoted to Henan Yin.

古文：时宛陵大姓羊元群罢北海郡，臧罪狼籍，郡舍轩有奇巧，乃载之以归。
现代文：这时宛陵的大姓羊元群从北海郡罢官，贪污之罪行极多，无奇不有，郡舍厕所中奇巧之物，也用车子拉了回家。
English: At this time, Wanling's eldest son, Yang Yuanqun, was dismissed from Beihai County. There were many corruption crimes, which was no surprise. He also used his car to take home the strange things in the toilet of the county seat.

古文：膺表欲按其罪，元群行赂宦竖，膺反坐输作左校。
现代文：李膺上表要审查他的罪行，羊元群贿赂宦官，李膺被判为诬告，反坐发配到左校劳。
English: Li Yan was on the watch list to review his crimes, Yang Yuanqun bribed eunuchs, Li Yan was convicted of false accusation, and was sent to Zuo School for forced labor.

古文：初，膺与廷尉冯绲、大司农刘祐等共同心志，纠罚奸幸，绲、祐时亦得罪输作。
现代文：起先，李膺与廷尉冯绲、大司农刘祐等同心同德，检举惩处那些奸邪得宠的人，冯绲、刘祐这时也犯罪被发配到左校劳作。
English: At first, Li Yu, together with the imperial lieutenant Feng Yu and the chief agronomist Liu Yu, acted in the same spirit and with the same morality to prosecute and punish those who were favored by evil. At this time, Feng Yu and Liu Yu also committed crimes and were sent to the Zuo School to work.

古文：司隶校尉应奉上疏理膺等曰：
现代文：司隶校尉应奉向皇帝上书替李膺等人申诉。
English: Lieutenant Sili should write to the emperor to appeal on behalf of Li Yao and others.

古文：昔秦人观宝于楚，昭奚恤莅以群贤；梁惠王玮其照乘之珠，齐威王答以四臣。
现代文：说： 从前秦观宝于楚，昭奚恤使各位贤臣居坛请秦国的使人观看，秦国的使者看了，回到秦国说： 楚国多贤臣，不可侵犯。 梁惠王以照车辆之珠为宝，齐威王回答他四个贤臣是他的宝。
English: He said, "Once upon a time, when the Qin Dynasty was looking at the treasures in Chu, Zhaojun made all the wise ministers stay at the altar and invited the people of Qin to look at them. When the Qin emissaries saw them, they returned to Qin and said, "There are many wise ministers in Chu, they are inviolable." King Liang Hui took the pearl of the shining chariot as his treasure, and King Qi Wei replied that his four wise ministers were his treasure.

古文：夫忠贤武将，国之心膂。
现代文：惭愧不乐而去。那些忠贤的武将，才是国家的心腹。
English: Ashamed and unhappy, they left. Those loyal and wise generals are the country's confidants.

古文：窃见左校弛刑徒前廷尉冯绲、大司农刘祐、河南尹李膺等，执法不挠，诛举邪臣，肆之以法，众庶称宜。昔季孙行父亲逆君命，逐出莒仆，于舜之功二十之一。
现代文：私心认为左校刑徒前廷尉冯绲、大司农刘祐、河南尹李膺，执法严正，揭举坏人，按法处理，老百姓都认为不错，从前季孙行父亲自违犯君命赶走莒仆，不过大舜功二十分之一而已。
English: Privately, they believe that the former imperial lieutenant Feng Yu, the head of the peasant Liu Yu, and the Henan Yin Lijun, all of whom are left-wing school convicts, enforce the law strictly, expose the bad guys, and deal with them according to the law. The common people all think it is good. Former Ji Sun Xing's father drove away his servants for violating the king's order, but it was only one-twentieth of the great achievement.

古文：今膺等投身强御，毕力致罪，陛下既不听察，而猥受谮诉，遂令忠臣同愆元恶。
现代文：现在李膺等人守御边境，奋不顾身，尽力而获罪，皇上全不听察，使他们为坏人诬谄，使忠臣与大恶同罪。
English: Now Li Yu and the others are guarding the border, and they have been punished for their selfless efforts. The emperor has not listened to them at all, and has falsely accused them of being bad people, making loyal subjects guilty of the same crime as the great evil.

古文：自春迄冬，不蒙降恕，遐迩观听，为之叹息。
现代文：自春到冬，不见原恕，远近的人，为之叹息。
English: From spring to winter, there is no reason to forgive, and people far and near sigh for it.

古文：夫立政之要，记功忘失，是以武帝舍安国于徒中，宣帝征张敞于亡命。
现代文：立政的首要，记功劳，忘过失，所以汉景帝不以安国为徒犯，任命他为二千石。宣帝征召逃亡犯张敞为冀州刺史。
English: The first priority in establishing a government is to remember the merits and forget the mistakes. Therefore, Emperor Han Jing did not regard An Guo as a criminal, but appointed him as a 2,000-koku official. Emperor Xuan summoned the fugitive criminal Zhang Zhang to write the history of Jizhou.

古文：绲前讨蛮荆，均吉甫之功。
现代文：冯绲从前讨伐蛮荆，与吉甫等功。
English: In the past, Feng Li fought against the barbarians and made great achievements with Ji Fu.

古文：祐数临督司，有不吐菇之节。
现代文：刘祐多次临督司，奏劾梁冀的弟弟梁，有刚亦不吐，柔亦不茹的大节。
English: Liu Yu served as vice-governor several times and impeached Liang Ji's younger brother, Liang.

古文：膺著威幽、并，遗爱度辽。
现代文：李膺威著幽、并，遗爱远渡辽海以外。
English: Li Xuanwei has traveled far and wide beyond the Liaohai Sea.

古文：今三垂蠢动，王旅未振。
现代文：现在三边不安宁，王师未动。
English: Now the three sides are uneasy, and Wang Shirao has not moved.

古文：《易》称 雷雨作解，君子以赦过宥罪 。
现代文：《易》称 雷雨作解，君子以赦过宥罪。 
English: "Yi" said that the thunderstorm was the solution, and the gentleman forgave and pardoned.

古文：乞原膺等，以备不虞。
现代文：乞原宥李膺等人的罪，防备没有想到的祸患。 
English: Pray for the forgiveness of the sins of Li Yan and others, and be prepared for unexpected disasters.

古文：书奏，乃悉免其刑。
现代文：奏上，全部免了对他们的处罚。
English: According to the report, all of them were exempted from punishment.

古文：再迁，复拜司隶校尉。
现代文：李膺再次升官，又被任命作司隶校尉。
English: Li Jun was promoted again and was appointed to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：时，张让弟朔为野王令，贫残无道，至乃杀孕妇，闻膺厉威严，惧罪逃还京师，因匿兄让弟舍，藏于合柱中。
现代文：这时张让的弟弟张朔当野王县县长，贪婪残暴，无法无天，竟至杀害孕妇，他听说李膺十分威严，畏罪逃回京师。就躲在他哥哥张让家中，藏在夹柱中。
English: At this time, Zhang Zhan's younger brother, Zhang Shuo, was the head of Yanwang County. He was greedy, cruel and lawless, even killing a pregnant woman. He heard that Li Xi was very dignified and fled back to Beijing for fear of crime. He hid in his brother Zhang Zhan's home, hiding in a pillar.

古文：膺知其状，率将吏卒破柱取朔，付洛阳狱。
现代文：李膺知道了这个情况，率领吏卒拆破夹柱捉拿了张朔，交付洛阳监狱。
English: Li Qian knew this situation, and led the officers to break the pillar to capture Zhang Shuo and deliver him to Luoyang Prison.

古文：受辞毕，即杀之。
现代文：录供完了，就杀了他。
English: When the confession is finished, kill him.

古文：让诉冤于帝，诏膺八殿，御亲临轩，诘以不先请便加诛辟之意。
现代文：张让向皇帝诉冤，诏召李膺入殿，皇上亲到廊上，责问李膺为什么不先请示就施行死刑。
English: Zhang Zhan appealed to the emperor for redress of grievances, and the emperor summoned Li Xi into the hall. The emperor's relatives came to the hallway and asked Li Xi why he did not ask for permission before carrying out the death penalty.

古文：膺对曰： 昔晋文公执卫成公归于京师，《春秋》是焉。
现代文：李膺答说 ：从前晋文公捉拿卫成公回到京城，《春秋》肯定他是对的。
English: Li Wei replied, "Once upon a time, Jin Wengong captured and took Wei Chenggong back to Beijing. "Spring and Autumn" is sure that he is right."

古文：《礼》云公族有罪，虽曰宥之，有司执宪不从。
现代文：《礼记》上说 ：官宦子弟犯了罪，国君即使说宽赦他，官吏也严守法律不听从。 
English: "Riki" says: The son of a government official commits a crime, and even if the sovereign says he will pardon him, the government official strictly observes the law and does not obey.

古文：昔仲尼为鲁司寇，七日而诛少正卯。
现代文：从前孔子做鲁国的司寇七天就杀掉了少正卯。
English: Once upon a time, Confucius, when he was the governor of Lu, killed Shoshou in seven days.

古文：今臣到官已积一旬，私惧以稽留为愆，不意获速疾之罪。
现代文：如今我到职已满十天，私心害怕因办事迟滞造成过失，没有想到却获了办案过速的罪。
English: Now that I've been on the job for ten days, I'm selfishly afraid that I'll make a mistake by being late, and I didn't expect to get the crime of speeding up the case.

古文：诚自知衅责，死不旋踵，特乞留五日，克殄元恶，退就鼎镬，始生之意也。 
现代文：我的确知道自己的罪责，死期就要到了。特请求宽留我五天，限期灭尽大恶，回来受烹煮之刑，这是我生的本愿啊！ 
English: I do know my guilt, and the time of my death is approaching. I beg you to grant me five days to destroy all evil and come back to face my punishment. This is my birthright!

古文：帝无复言，顾谓让曰： 此汝弟之罪，司隶何愆？ 
现代文：皇帝没有再说什么，回过头来对张让说： 这是你弟弟的罪过，司隶有什么过失？ 
English: The emperor did not say anything else, but turned back to Zhang Zhan and said, "This is your brother's fault. What is the fault of your subordinate?"

古文：乃遣出之。
现代文：便打发李膺出去。
English: and sent Li Zhen out.

古文：自此诸黄门常侍皆鞠躬屏气，休沐不敢复出宫省。
现代文：从此各个黄门、常侍都屈身敛迹不敢出声气，休假也不敢再出宫廷。
English: From then on, all Yellow Doors and regular attendants have bent over backwards not to speak out, and dare not leave the palace during their vacations.

古文：帝怪问其故，并叩头泣曰： 畏李校尉。 
现代文：皇帝诧异地问是什么原因，都叩头流泪说： 怕李校尉。 
English: Surprised, the emperor asked what the reason was, and they all bowed their heads and shed tears, saying, "I'm afraid of Captain Li."

古文：是时，朝廷日乱，纲纪穨阤，膺独持风裁，以声名自高。
现代文：这时，朝廷一天比一天紊乱，纲纪败坏，李膺独自保持风采，凭借声名自我清高。
English: At this time, the imperial court was becoming more and more chaotic day by day, and discipline was deteriorating. Li Gan alone maintained his style, and by virtue of his reputation, he became self-sufficient.

古文：士有被其容接者，名为登龙门。
现代文：读书人有被他接待的，叫做登龙门。
English: Readers have a place to be received by him, called the Dragon Gate.

古文：及遭党事，当考实膺等。案经三府，太尉陈蕃却之。
现代文：到遭受党祸时，该当察究核实李膺等的罪状，经太尉、司徒、司空三府案验，太尉陈蕃拒绝受理。
English: When the party suffered a disaster, it was necessary to investigate and verify the guilt of Li Xuan and others. After the examination of the three prefectures of the captain, the officer, and the officer, the captain Chen Xuan refused to accept it.

古文：曰： 今所考案，皆海内人誉，忧国忠公之臣。
现代文：说： 现在考纠案验的，都是海内人们赞誉的忧心国事忠诚无私的大臣。
English: He said: All the ministers who are now being investigated and punished are those who are concerned about national affairs, loyal and selfless, and have been praised by the people at home.

古文：此等犹将十世宥也，岂有罪名不章而致收掠者乎？ 
现代文：这样的人即使下传十世还是应该宽恕他们，难道有罪名不明就逮捕拷打吗？ 
English: Should such people be pardoned even if they are passed down to the tenth generation, or should they be arrested and tortured if their names are not known?

古文：不肯平署。
现代文：不肯在案卷上签名。
English: He refused to sign his name on the file.

古文：帝愈怒，遂下膺等于黄门北寺狱。
现代文：皇帝更加发怒，就把李膺等下到黄门北寺狱。
English: The emperor was even more angry, so he sent Li Qiye to Huangmen North Temple Prison.

古文：膺等颇引宦官子弟，宦官多惧，请帝以天时宜赦，于是大赦天下。
现代文：李膺等人案件牵涉到一些宦官子弟，宦官大多畏惧，请求皇帝按照天时赦免。于是大赦天下，李膺免官回故乡，住在阳城山中。
English: The case of Li Yu and others involved some eunuchs' sons and brothers. Most of the eunuchs were afraid and asked the emperor to pardon them according to the time of the day. As a result, Li Yu was pardoned and returned to his hometown, living in the mountains of Yangcheng.

古文：膺免归乡里，居阳城山中，天下士大夫皆高尚其道，而污秽朝廷。
现代文：天下的士大夫都认为李膺的道德高尚，朝廷污秽肮脏。到陈蕃免去太尉，朝廷和一般士大夫有意要李膺任太尉之职。
English: The world's judges and magistrates all thought that Li Lan's morals were noble and that the imperial court was dirty and filthy. When Chen Lan was relieved of the rank of captain, the imperial court and the general judges and magistrates wanted Li Lan to hold the rank of captain.

古文：及陈蕃免太尉，朝野属意于膺，荀爽恐其名高致祸，欲令屈节以全乱世，为书贻曰： 久废过庭，不闻善诱，陟岵瞻望，惟日为岁。知以直道不容于时，悦山乐水，家于阳城。
现代文：荀爽担心李膺名气太高而惹祸，想让他容忍保全性命于乱世，写信给他说： 很久没有听到您循循善诱的教训，陟岵瞻望，一日如一年，知道您因直道不容于当世，以山水为乐，家于阳城。
English: Hao Shuang was worried that Li Xuan's fame was too high and would cause trouble, and wanted him to tolerate the preservation of life in a chaotic world, and wrote to him: "I haven't heard you follow the lessons of good and evil for a long time, I look around, day after day, year after year, and know that you are intolerant of the present world because of your straight path, you enjoy the landscape, and your home is in Yangcheng.

古文：道近路夷，当即聘问，天状婴疾，阙于所仰。
现代文：相距不远，道路也平垣，本当马上去拜访的，因为身体有病，未能成行。
English: The distance is not far, the road is also flat, I really went to visit right away, but I couldn't go because I was ill.

古文：顷闻上帝震怒，贬黜鼎臣，人鬼同谋，以为天子当贞观二五，利见大人，不谓夷之初旦，明而未融，虹蜺扬辉，弃和取同。
现代文：近来听说皇上发怒，贬谪罢免大臣陈蕃，人鬼同谋，认为天子当贞观二五，利见大人，不想夷卦日之初出，其明未朗，虹霓扬辉，弃君子，同小人。
English: Recently, I heard that the emperor was angry, demeaned and dismissed the minister Chen Qi, and conspired with the ghosts. He thought that the heavenly son should be chaste and considerate, and he did not want to destroy the first appearance of the day, which was unclear, the rainbow was bright, the gentleman was abandoned, and the villain was the same.

古文：方今天地气闭，大人休否，智者见险，投以远害。
现代文：当今天地气闭，贤人隐，休废而否塞，聪明之士，看见险难，投身远害。
English: Today, the air is closed, the wise man is hidden, the idle man denies the danger, the clever man sees the danger, and devotes himself to the distant harm.

古文：虽匮人望，内合私愿。想甚欣然，不为恨也。
现代文：虽然少点名望，却符合自己的私愿，想您很欢欣，不以为恨的。
English: Although a little fame, but in line with their own wishes, I think you are very happy, do not think hate.

古文：愿怡神无事，偃息衡门，任其飞沈，与时抑扬。 
现代文：希望您无事养神，隐居衡门，任其浮沉，与时俯仰。 
English: I hope you will keep your spirits up, live in seclusion, let it ebb and flow, and look up to the times.

古文：顷之，帝崩。陈蕃为太傅，与大将军窦武共秉朝政，连谋诛诸宦官，故引用天下名士，乃以膺为长乐少府。
现代文：不久，桓帝逝世，陈蕃担任太傅，与大将军窦武共同主持朝政，合谋诛杀各个宦官，引荐任用天下名士，便以李膺任长乐少府。
English: Soon after, Emperor Huan died, Chen Xi served as Taifu, presided over the imperial government together with General Dou Wu, conspired to kill various eunuchs, and recommended the appointment of world celebrities, and then appointed Li Xi as Changle Shaofu.

古文：及陈、窦之败，膺等复废。
现代文：到陈蕃、窦武失败，李膺等人又被免官。
English: After Chen Qi and Dou Wu failed, Li Wei and others were removed from their posts.

古文：后张俭事起，收捕钩党，乡人谓膺曰： 可去矣 。
现代文：后来张俭事件发生了，逮捕有牵连的党人。同乡的人对李膺说： 可以走了。 
English: Later, the Zhang Jian incident happened, and the party members who were implicated were arrested. The fellow villagers said to Li Yu: You can go.

古文：对曰： 事不辞难，罪不逃刑，臣之节也。
现代文：李膺回答说： 事君不躲避灾难，有罪不逃脱刑罚。这是我的节操。
English: Li Yan replied: "A good man does not avoid disaster, and a guilty man does not escape punishment. This is my discipline."

古文：吾年已六十，死生有命，去将安之？ 
现代文：我已经六十岁了，死和生都由命中注定，跑到什么地方去呢？ 
English: I'm sixty years old, my life and death are predetermined by fate. Where am I going?

古文：乃诣诏狱。考死，妻子徙边，门生、故吏及其父兄，并被禁锢。
现代文：便主动到皇帝诏令指定的监狱中去，被拷打死，妻子儿女被流放边境，学生、旧时属下的官吏和他们的父兄，都被禁锢不准做官。
English: He voluntarily went to the prison designated by the emperor's edict and was tortured to death, his wife and children were exiled to the border, students, former subordinate officials and their fathers and brothers were all imprisoned and not allowed to work as officials.

古文：时，侍御史蜀郡景毅子顾为膺门徒，而未有录牒，故不及于谴。
现代文：这时担任侍御史的蜀郡人景毅的儿子景顾是李膺的门徒，但没有记入党人的名册，所以没有遭到责罚。
English: At this time, Jing Gu, the son of Jing Yi from Shu County, who served as the attendant of the historian, was a disciple of Li Xi, but he was not recorded in the roster of party members, so he was not punished.

古文：张孟卓与吾善，袁本初汝外亲，虽尔勿依，必归曹氏。 
现代文：景毅感慨自豪地说： 本来认为李膺有贤德，派儿子拜他为师，怎么可以因为漏掉名簿，便苟且偷安算了呢？ 
English: Jing Yi said with emotion and pride: Originally, I thought that Li Qiye was virtuous and sent his son to worship him as a teacher. How could I have omitted his name from the roster and just quietly made the calculation?

古文：诸子从之，并免于乱世。
现代文：于是就自己上表请求免官回家。
English: So he went home with a written request to be relieved of his duties.

古文：杜密字周甫，颍川阳城人也。
现代文：当时人们认为他有正义的情操。◆杜密传，杜密字周甫，颍川郡阳城县人。
English: At that time, it was believed that he had a righteous spirit. ◆Dumichuan, Dumichuan character Zhou Fu, from Yangcheng County, Beichuan County.

古文：为人沈质，少有厉俗志。
现代文：为人深沉朴质，年轻时有志整齐风俗。
English: He is a man of profound simplicity, and when he was young, he had the ambition to tidy up customs.

古文：为司徒胡广所辟，稍迁代郡太守。征，三迁太山太守、北海相。
现代文：被司徒胡广举用，稍升为代郡太守，朝廷征召，三升太山太守、北海相。
English: He was promoted to deputy county magistrate, was called up by the imperial court, and was promoted to governor of Taishan and minister of the North Sea.

古文：其宦官子弟为令长有奸恶者，辄捕案之。
现代文：宦官子弟中为令长有奸恶行为的，就收捕审讯。
English: If any of the eunuchs' sons commit treason, they will be arrested and interrogated.

古文：行春到高密县，见郑玄为乡佐，知其异器，即召署郡职，遂遣就学。
现代文：一次，杜密到高密检查春耕生产，赈济贫困，发现郑玄任乡佐是一个人才，就召他代理郡职，派他去学习。
English: Once, Du Mi went to Gaomi to inspect the spring ploughing production and alleviate poverty, and found that Zheng Xuan Renxiang was a talented person. He called him to act as a county official and sent him to study.

古文：后密去官还家，每谒守令，多所陈托。同郡刘胜，亦自蜀郡告归乡里，闭门埽轨，无所干及。
现代文：后来杜密去官还家，每次谒见守令，陈述意见，请托的事情多，同郡刘胜，也是自蜀郡告归乡里的，却是闭门不与人事，没有什么要求。
English: Later, Du Mi went to the official and returned home. Every time he saw him, he kept his orders, stated his opinions, and asked for more things. Liu Sheng from the same county, who also returned to his hometown from Shu County, did not talk to the officials behind closed doors, and had no demands.

古文：太守王昱谓密曰： 刘季陵清高士，公卿多举之者。 
现代文：太守王昱对杜密说： 刘季陵真是清高的人，公卿中不少人都推举他。 
English: Wang Xi, the governor-general, said to Du Mi, "Liu Jiling is really a high-ranking person. Many of the nobles have nominated him.

古文：密知昱激己，对曰： 刘胜位为大夫，见礼上宾，而知善不荐，闻恶无言，隐情惜己，自同寒蝉，此罪人也。
现代文：杜密晓得王昱是刺激自己，答曰 ：刘胜位为大夫，太守以上宾的礼对他，但他知善不推荐，听了坏消息也不吭声，为了自己把真情隐藏起来，如同寒蝉，这是有罪的人啊。
English: Du Mi knew that Wang Yao was stimulating himself, and replied, "Liu Shengdi is a doctor, and the eunuch bowed to him as a guest, but he does not recommend kindness, nor does he keep silent when he hears bad news, and he hides his true feelings for his own sake, like a cicada. This is a guilty person.

古文：今志义力行之贤而密达之，违道失节之士而密纠之，使明府赏刑得中，令问休扬，不亦万分之一乎？ 
现代文：现在志义力行的贤人我上达之，违道失节的坏人我纠劾之，使太守赏罚得中，好的名声得到宣扬，这难道不是对您的万分之一的帮助吗？ 
English: Now, the wise people who are selfless and virtuous have been promoted by me, and the bad people who are immoral and unprincipled have been punished by me, so that the emperor has been rewarded and punished, and the good reputation has been promoted. Isn't this a one-ten-thousandth help to you?

古文：昱惭服，待之弥厚。
现代文：王昱又惭愧，又佩服他，对他更加敬重。
English: Wang Yao felt ashamed, but also admired him and respected him even more.

古文：后桓帝征拜尚书令，迁河南尹，转太仆。
现代文：后来桓帝征拜他为尚书令，升河南尹，调太仆。
English: Later, Emperor Kuan recruited him as Shang Shuling, promoted him to Henan Yin, and transferred him to Taibu.

古文：党事既起，免归本郡，与李膺俱坐，而名行相次，故时人亦称 李杜 焉。
现代文：党事起来以后，免官回原籍，与李膺俱获罪，名声行事相上下，所以当时人也称他们为李杜。
English: After the rise of the party, they were dismissed from their posts and returned to their hometowns. They were convicted together with Li Yan and their reputations were on a par with each other. Therefore, they were also called Li Du at that time.

古文：后太傅陈蕃辅政，复为太仆。
现代文：后来太傅陈蕃辅政，再为太仆。
English: Later, he served as the Grand Master of the Chen Clan, and then as the Grand Servant.

古文：明年，会党事被征，自杀。
现代文：第二年，因党事被召，自杀。
English: The following year, he was recalled for party affairs and committed suicide.

古文：刘祐字伯祖，中山安国人也。
现代文：◆刘祐传，刘祐字伯祖，中山郡安国县人。
English: ◆ Liu Yuchuan, Liu Yuzi's great-grandfather, was from Anguo County, Zhongshan County.

古文：安国后别属博陵。
现代文：安国县后来别属博陵。
English: Anguo County later became part of Boling.

古文：祐初察孝廉，补尚书侍郎，闲练故事，文札强辨，每有奏议，应对无滞，为僚类所归。
现代文：刘祐开始举孝廉，补尚书侍郎。熟悉史事，文书尤为所长，平常对天子奏议，应对敏捷，为同事们所赞赏。
English: Liu Yu began to promote filial piety, supplementing Shang Shushan. Familiar with history, especially the director of the clerical staff, he usually appealed to the emperor and responded quickly, which was appreciated by his colleagues.

古文：除任城令，兗州举为尤异，迁扬州刺史。
现代文：出作任城令，兖州举他为尤异的人才。升扬州刺史。
English: As the appointed city commander, Zhangzhou praised him as a special talent. He was promoted to the highest rank in the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：是时会稽太守梁旻，大将军冀之从弟也。
现代文：这时会稽太守梁是大将军梁冀的从弟。
English: At this time, Grand Inquisitor Liang Shouliang was the younger brother of General Liang Jie.

古文：祐举奏其罪，旻坐征。
现代文：刘祐揭发他的罪行，旻因此梁旻被斥问。
English: Liu Yu exposed his crime, and because of this, Liang Jun was interrogated.

古文：复迁祐河东太守。
现代文：又升刘祐为河东太守。
English: Liu Yu was also promoted to the position of the governor of Hedong.

古文：时属县令长率多中官子弟，百姓患之。
现代文：当时所属县令长大多是宦官子弟，危害百姓。
English: At that time, most of the county magistrates were the sons of eunuchs, endangering the people.

古文：祐到，黜其权强，平理冤结，政为三河表。
现代文：刘祐到任，把那些权势强暴之徒，该撤职的撤职，该判刑的判刑，平反冤假错案，政治为河东、河内、河南 三河 的模范。
English: When Liu Yu took office, he made those powerful and violent thugs, the dismissal of the dismissal, the sentencing of the sentencing, the redress of wrongs and wrongful cases, and politics a model for the three rivers of Hedong, Hanoi, and Henan.

古文：再迁，延熹四年，拜尚书令，又出为河南尹，转司隶校尉。
现代文：再升，延熹四年，任尚书令，又出为河南尹，调司隶校尉。
English: He was promoted again, for another four years, to the post of Shang Shuling, and then to the post of Henan Yin, and finally to the post of chief inspector and sub-lieutenant.

古文：时权贵子弟罢州郡还入京师者，每至界首，辄改易舆服，隐匿财宝。
现代文：当时权势富贵子弟自州郡罢退回京师的，一到边境，就改换服装，把财宝隐藏起来。
English: At that time, if a powerful rich person's son was sent back to Beijing from Zhoushou County, he would change his clothes and hide his treasure as soon as he arrived at the border.

古文：威行朝廷。
现代文：刘祐威行朝廷。
English: Liu Yuwei went to the imperial court.

古文：拜宗正，三转大司农。
现代文：任宗正，三调大司农。
English: Ren Zongzheng, the third-ranking farmer.

古文：时中常侍苏康、管霸用事于内，遂固天下良田美业，山林湖泽，民庶穷困，州郡累气。
现代文：当时中常侍苏康、管霸在朝廷内掌权，占天下良田美业，山林湖泽，百姓穷困，州郡不敢吭声。
English: At that time, Su Kang and Guan He, the second-in-command, were in power in the imperial court. They were responsible for the beauty of the fields, mountains, forests and lakes, the poverty of the people, and the states and counties did not dare to speak out.

古文：祐移书所在，依科品没入之。
现代文：刘祐移文到他们所占的地区，依法按类没收。
English: Liu Yu transferred the documents to the area they occupied, and confiscated them according to categories according to the law.

古文：桓帝大怒，论祐输左校。
现代文：桓帝大怒，判刘祐送左校劳改。
English: Emperor Kantei was furious and sentenced Liu Yu to be sent to a reform school.

古文：后得赦出，复历三卿，辄以疾辞，乞骸骨归田里。
现代文：后来赦罪出来，再历三卿，往往托病辞却，请求归田里。
English: Later, when he was pardoned, he often took sick leave and asked to return to the fields.

古文：诏拜中散大夫，遂杜门绝迹。
现代文：诏授中散大夫，于是杜门绝迹人事。
English: Zhaozhu Zhongshan doctor, so Dumen disappeared.

古文：每三公缺，朝廷皆属意于祐，以谮毁不用。
现代文：三公出缺，天子都属意刘祐，因被人诽谤不用。
English: The three princes are vacant, and the heavenly sons all belong to Liu Yu, who is not needed because he has been slandered.

古文：延笃贻之书曰： 昔太伯三让，人无德而称焉。延陵高揖，华夏仰风。
现代文：延笃写信给刘祐说 ：从前太伯三让，百姓怀念他，延陵季子揖让，华夏称述他的高尚的风格。
English: Yan Du wrote a letter to Liu Yu, saying: Once upon a time, Tai Bo Sanjun, the people miss him, Yan Ling Ji Zi Xuanjun, Huaxia praised his noble style.

古文：吾子怀蘧氏之可卷，休甯子之如愚，微妙玄通，冲而不盈，蔑三光之明，未暇以天下为事，何其劭与！ 
现代文：您有蘧伯玉 邦无道则可卷而怀之 的德行，体认宁武子 邦无道则愚 的精神，微妙玄通，深不可识，道冲而用之或不盈，三光不足为明，哪有闲暇把天下看作一回事呢。
English: You have the virtue of knowing that a noble and virtuous state has no road but can be rolled up and cherished. You have the spirit of knowing that a warrior state has no road but is foolish. You are subtle and inscrutable. You are not able to know the depth. You are not able to use the road but are not full. You are not able to see the three lights clearly. You have no leisure to regard the whole world as one thing.

古文：灵帝初，陈蕃辅政，以祐为河南尹。
现代文：纯笃自强，难能可贵啊。 灵帝初，陈蕃辅政，任命刘祐为河南尹。
English: At the beginning of the Ling Dynasty, Chen Bingyu appointed Liu Yu as Yin of Henan Province.

古文：及蕃败，祐黜归，卒于家。
现代文：陈蕃失败之后，刘祐被罢黜回乡，死在家里。
English: After Chen Yu's defeat, Liu Yu was sent back to his hometown and died at home.

古文：明年，大诛党人，幸不及祸。
现代文：第二年，大肆杀害党人，刘祐幸而没有遭到祸害。
English: The following year, he killed a large number of party members, but Liu Youxing was not harmed.

古文：魏朗字少英，会稽上虞人也。
现代文：◆魏朗传，魏朗字少英，会稽郡上虞县人。
English: ◆ Wei Lang Chuan, Wei Lang Zi Shao Ying, was from Shangyu County, Hefei County.

古文：少为县吏。
现代文：年轻为县吏。
English: Young is a county official.

古文：兄为乡人所杀，朗白日操刃报仇于县中，遂亡命到陈国。
现代文：哥哥被乡人杀害，魏朗白天持刀报仇于县里。因此逃跑到了陈国。
English: His brother was killed by a villager, and Wei Lang took revenge on the county with a knife during the day. Therefore, he fled to Chen Province.

古文：从博士仲信学《春秋图纬》，又诣太学受《五经》，京师长者李膺之徒争从之。
现代文：跟博士谷阝仲信学《春秋图纬》，又去太学学《五经》，京师长者李膺等都争着跟他来往。
English: He studied the "Spring and Autumn Classic" with Dr. Gu Yizhongxin and the "Five Classics" with Dr. Tai Xue, and the elder of the Beijing division, Li Xuan, and others all competed with him.

古文：初辟司徒府，再迁彭城令。
现代文：开始被举入司徒府，升彭城令。
English: At the beginning, it was elevated to Shuto-fu, and then to Pengcheng.

古文：时，中官子弟为国相，多行非法，朗与更相章奏，幸臣忿疾，欲中之。
现代文：当时宦官子弟任国相，所作所为多非法，魏朗多次上奏朝廷，天子左右宠幸的臣子十分恼火，想中伤他。
English: At that time, the eunuch's son was minister of state, and his actions were mostly illegal. Wei Lang appealed to the imperial court many times. The courtier, who was favored by the emperor, was very angry and wanted to slander him.

古文：会九真贼起，乃共荐郎为九真都尉。
现代文：遇九真贼起来，于是共同推荐魏朗任九真都尉。
English: When Jiuzhen thieves arose, they jointly recommended Wei Lang as Jiuzhen captain.

古文：到官，奖厉吏兵，讨破群贼，斩首二千级。
现代文：到任后，魏朗奖励吏兵，讨破郡贼，斩首二千级。
English: After taking office, Wei Lang rewarded officers and soldiers, cracked down on county thieves, and beheaded two thousand.

古文：桓帝美其功，征拜议郎。
现代文：桓帝嘉奖他的功劳，任为议郎。
English: Emperor Kanto commended him for his service and appointed him as a hirō.

古文：顷之，迁尚书。
现代文：不久，升任司马。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Sima.

古文：屡陈便宜。
现代文：多次陈述为政的意见，对朝廷有贡献。
English: He repeatedly stated his political opinions, which contributed to the Imperial Court.

古文：有所补益。出为河内太守，政称三河表。
现代文：出为河内太守，政治为河东、河内、河南 三河 的模范。
English: He emerged as the supreme governor of Hanoi, and his politics served as a model for the three rivers of Henan, Hanoi, and the eastern part of the province.

古文：尚书令陈蕃荐朗公忠亮直，宜在机密，复征为尚书。
现代文：尚书令陈蕃推荐魏朗公忠直亮，可任机密职务，再征为尚书。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Chen Xi to recommend Wei Lang Gongzhong Zhi Liang, who could be appointed to confidential positions and then re-recruited as Shang Shuling.

古文：会被党议，免归家。
现代文：遇党祸，免官回家。
English: In the event of a party disaster, he was dismissed and returned home.

古文：朗性矜严，闭门整法度，家人不见墯容。
现代文：魏朗本性矜持严肃，闭门整法度。家里人没有看见他有怠惰之容。
English: Wei Lang's nature is reserved and serious, and he is a law-abiding person behind closed doors. His family members did not see him as lazy.

古文：后窦武等诛，朗以党被急征，行至牛渚，自杀。
现代文：后来窦武等人被杀，魏朗因党祸被急召，走到牛渚，自杀。
English: Later, Dou Wu and others were killed, Wei Lang was urgently summoned due to a party accident, went to Niu Nagisa, and committed suicide.

古文：著书数篇，号《魏子》云。
现代文：著书数篇，叫做《魏子》。
English: He is the author of several books, including "Weizi Rong."

古文：夏馥字子治，陈留圉人也。
现代文：◆夏馥传，夏馥字子治，陈留郡圉县人。
English: ◆ Xia Yu Chuan, Xia Yu Zi Zi, Chen Liu County, Lu County.

古文：少为书生，言行质直。
现代文：年轻时是个书生，言行质直。
English: When he was young, he was a bookworm, and his words and actions were straightforward.

古文：同县高氏、蔡氏并皆富殖，郡人畏而事之，唯馥比门不与交通，由是为豪姓所仇。
现代文：同县高氏、蔡氏都是富豪，郡人怕他，小心地奉事他，只有夏馥虽然与高、蔡并门而居，却不与他们来往，因此被豪姓仇视。
English: The Gao and Cai clans in the same county are both rich. The people of the county are afraid of him and serve him carefully. Only Xia Yao, although he lives with Gao and Cai, does not socialize with them, so he is hated by the Gao family.

古文：桓帝初，举直言，不就。
现代文：桓帝初，举直言，不应。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Kan's reign, it was not appropriate to speak out.

古文：馥虽不交时宦，然以声名为中官所惮，遂与范滂、张俭等俱被诬陷，诏下州郡，捕为党魁。
现代文：夏馥虽然不与宦官交结，但因声名大为宦官所畏惧，与范滂、张俭等人都被宦官诬谄，朝廷下诏到州郡，作为党魁收捕。
English: Although Xia Qian did not associate with eunuchs, he was feared by eunuchs because of his great reputation. He, Fan Qian, Zhang Jian and others were all falsely accused by eunuchs, and the imperial court sent an order to Zhoushu County to arrest them as party leaders.

古文：及俭等亡命，经历之处，皆被收考，辞所连引，布遍天下。
现代文：张俭等人逃命，所经历的地方，凡与他们接触过的人，都被收捕考讯，审讯牵连的人，遍布天下。
English: Zhang Jian and others fled for their lives. The places they went through, and everyone who came into contact with them, were all arrested for interrogation, and the people involved were interrogated all over the world.

古文：馥乃顿足而叹曰： 孽自己作，空污良善，一人逃死，祸及万家，何以生为！ 
现代文：夏馥顿足叹息说： 罪孽是自己作的，白白地连累好人，一人逃死，祸及万家，活着干什么啊！ 
English: Xia Xuan suddenly sighed and said, "Sins are self-inflicted, good people are entangled in vain, one person escapes death, woe to all families, what are you doing alive!

古文：乃自剪须变形，入林虑山中，隐匿姓名，为治家佣。
现代文：于是把胡须剪掉，改变自己的容貌，跑到林虑山中，隐瞒了自己的姓名，为冶炼家的佣人。
English: So he cut off his beard, changed his appearance, ran into the forest and mountains, concealed his name, and became the smelter's servant.

古文：亲突烟炭，形貌毁瘁，积二三年，人无知者。
现代文：与烟囱烟炭打交道，形貌毁瘁，经过二三年，没有人知道是他。
English: After two or three years of dealing with chimney soot, his appearance ruined, no one knew it was him.

古文：后馥弟静，乘车马，载缣帛，追之于涅阳市中。
现代文：后来夏馥的弟弟夏静，乘着车子，载着缣帛，追寻到涅阳市中。
English: Later, Xia Jing, Xia Yao's younger brother, took a car, carrying a shovel, and pursued them to the middle of Neyang City.

古文：遇馥不识，闻其言声，乃觉而拜之。
现代文：碰了夏馥认不得了，听见夏馥说话的声音，才发现了夏馥，向夏馥跪拜。
English: When he touched Xia Yao, he couldn't recognize him. When he heard Xia Yao's voice, he found Xia Yao and bowed down to him.

古文：馥避不与语，静追随至客舍，共宿。
现代文：夏馥逃避不同他说话，夏静追到旅舍里，同夏馥共睡。
English: Xia Jie chased him to the hostel and slept with him.

古文：夜中密呼静曰： 吾以守道疾恶，故为权宦所陷。
现代文：晚上夏馥悄悄地叫夏静 ：我因守正道，恨邪恶，被掌权的宦官诬陷。
English: In the evening, Xia Yao quietly called Xia Jing: I was framed by the eunuchs in power because I followed the right path and hated evil.

古文：且念营苟全，以庇性命，弟奈何载物相求，是以祸见追也。 
现代文：想图苟全，以保性命，老弟为什么载着东西来找我呢！你这是用祸来找我啊！ 
English: If you want to complete the picture and save your life, why is my brother carrying something to find me? You are using misfortune to find me!

古文：明旦，别去。
现代文：天亮即离别而去。
English: They parted at dawn.

古文：党禁未解而卒。
现代文：党禁没有解除就死了。
English: He died before the party ban was lifted.

古文：宗慈字孝初，南阳安众人也。
现代文：◆宗慈传，宗慈字孝初，南阳郡安众县人。
English: ◆Zong Ci Chuan, Zong Ci Zi Xiaochu, from Anzhu County, Nanyang County.

古文：举孝廉，九辟公府，有道征，不就。
现代文：举孝廉，九次公府辟召，以有道征，不就。
English: It is not enough to be a filial son or daughter, to be called to the public office nine times, and to have a road sign.

古文：后为脩武令。
现代文：后来任修武令。
English: He was later assigned to the Military Training Command.

古文：时，太守出自权豪，多取货赂，慈遂弃官去。
现代文：这时太守出自权势豪富之家，贪污受贿很严重，宗慈因此丢掉县令走了。
English: At this time, the governor came from a powerful and wealthy family, and the corruption and bribery were very serious. Therefore, Zong Ci lost the county magistrate and left.

古文：征拜议郎，未到，道疾卒。
现代文：朝廷征授议郎，没有到，死于路上。
English: The imperial court solicited the conferment of the peerage, but he did not arrive, and died on the way.

古文：南阳群士皆重其义行。
现代文：南阳的士大夫都敬重他的义行。
English: The magistrates in Nanyang all respect his righteous deeds.

古文：巴肃字恭祖，勃海高城人也。
现代文：◆巴肃传，巴肃字恭祖，勃海郡高城县人。
English: ◆Basu Chuan, Basu Zhi Gong Zu, from Gaocheng County, Bohai County.

古文：初察孝廉，历慎令、贝丘长，皆以郡守非其人，辞病去。
现代文：最先被举孝廉，历任慎县令，贝丘县长，都因郡守不得人，托病离职。
English: The first to be promoted was Xiaolian, and the successive county magistrate of Shen County and the county governor of Beqiu all resigned due to illness.

古文：辟公府。稍迁拜议郎。
现代文：辟公府，稍升迁授议郎。
English: He was dismissed from the public office, and was later promoted to the position of councilor.

古文：与窦武、陈蕃等谋诛阉官，武等遇害，肃亦坐党禁锢。
现代文：与窦武、陈蕃等谋诛杀宦官，窦武等人遇害，巴肃也以党祸被禁锢不得为官。
English: He plotted with Dou Wu, Chen Yao and others to kill eunuchs, Dou Wu and others were killed, and Ba Su was also banned from being an official due to a party accident.

古文：中常侍曹节后闻其谋，收之。
现代文：中常侍曹节后来听说巴肃曾经参预谋害宦官，收捕他。
English: Later, it was learned that Baxu had participated in the plot to kill the eunuch, and he was arrested.

古文：肃自载诣县。
现代文：巴肃自己乘车到县。
English: Basu drove to the county on his own.

古文：县令见肃，入阁解印绶与俱去。
现代文：县令见巴肃，入阁内解印绶要与他同去。
English: The county magistrate is going to see Baxu, and the cabinet secretary is going with him to unseal the seal.

古文：肃曰： 为人臣者，有谋不敢隐，有罪不逃刑。
现代文：巴肃说： 为人臣，有谋不敢隐瞒，有罪不逃刑。
English: Basu said, "As a courtier, he dares not conceal his plot, and does not evade punishment when he is guilty.

古文：既不隐其谋矣，又敢逃其刑乎？ 
现代文：我既不隐瞒参与谋杀宦官的事，岂敢逃避刑罚吗？ 
English: If I do not conceal my participation in the murder of the eunuch, may I not escape punishment?

古文：遂被害。刺史贾琮刊石立铭以记之。
现代文：因被杀，刺史贾琮刻石立铭记述他的事迹。
English: Because he was killed, he engraved a stone to remember his deeds.

古文：范滂字孟博，汝南征羌人也。
现代文：◆范滂传，范滂字孟博，汝南征羌人。
English: ◆Fan Bingzhuan, Fan Bingzhi Mengbo, Runan Zengyuan.

古文：少厉清节，为州里所服，举孝廉，光禄四行。
现代文：年轻时磨练清高气节，为州里推崇，举孝廉、光禄四行：敦厚、质朴、逊让、节俭。
English: When he was young, he honed a clear and lofty spirit, and was highly respected by the state. He promoted four virtues of filial piety, modesty, simplicity, compromise, and thrift.

古文：时冀州饥荒，盗贼群起，乃以滂为清诏使，案察之。
现代文：这时冀州饥荒，盗贼蜂起，于是任用范滂为清诏使，考查盗贼情况。
English: At this time, there was a famine in Jizhou, and thieves rose up. Therefore, Fan Qi was appointed as an envoy of the Qing Dynasty to investigate the situation of thieves.

古文：滂登车揽辔，慨然有澄清天下之志。
现代文：范滂登车揽辔，意气豪迈，有澄清天下的志概。
English: Fan Ye boarded the train and rode to the platform. He was full of spirit and had the will to clarify the world.

古文：乃至州境，守令自知臧污，望风解印绶去。
现代文：到州郡，守令自己知道贪污枉法，听到消息就弃官走了。
English: In Zhouzhou County, the sheriff knew about the corruption and abandoned his post when he heard the news.

古文：其所举奏，莫不厌塞众议。迁光禄勋主事。
现代文：范滂揭发的，都是舆论要求处理的，升光禄勋主事。
English: All the cases exposed by Fan Yu were dealt with according to the demands of public opinion, and Shiguanglu was the main one.

古文：时，陈蕃为光禄勋，滂执公仪诣蕃，蕃不止之，滂怀恨，投版弃官而去。
现代文：这时陈蕃任光禄勋，范滂执公仪见陈蕃，陈蕃不留止他，范滂怀恨，投笏弃官而去。
English: At this time, Chen Rong was awarded the Medal of Honor, Fan Rong saw Chen Rong performing a public ceremony, Chen Rong did not stop him, Fan Rong harbored a grudge, resigned and left.

古文：郭林宗闻而让蕃曰： 若范孟博者，岂宜以公礼格之？
现代文：郭林宗听说责让陈蕃说 ：像范孟博这样的人，难道可以按公礼要求他吗？
English: Guo Linzong heard that he had ordered Chen Qi to say: Can a person like Fan Mengbo be asked to leave according to the rules of etiquette?

古文：今成其去就之名，得无自取不优之议也？ 
现代文：现在一去，反而使他成名，可不是自取不好吗？ 
English: Now that he is gone, isn't it wrong to take credit for making him famous?

古文：蕃乃谢焉。
现代文：陈蕃于是向范滂表示歉意。
English: Chen Yu then expressed his apologies to Fan Yu.

古文：复为太尉黄琼所辟。
现代文：又被太尉黄琼征举。
English: He was enlisted again by First Lieutenant Huang Qiong.

古文：后诏三府掾属举谣言，滂奏刺史、二千石权豪之党二十余人。
现代文：后来皇上诏令三府掾属听采长史好坏，人民疾苦，条奏朝廷。范滂奏刺史、二千石权势之党二十几个人。
English: Later, the emperor issued a decree that the three prefectures and their subordinates should listen to the good and bad of the long history, the people's sufferings, and report to the imperial court.

古文：尚书责滂所劾猥多，疑有私故。
现代文：尚书责备范滂劾举太多，怀疑他有挟私报复。
English: Shang Shu reproached Fan Qi for making too many impeachments and suspected him of taking revenge.

古文：滂对曰： 臣之所举，自非叨秽奸暴，深为民害，岂以污简札哉！
现代文：范滂回答说 ：我劾举的如果不是贪污奸暴，深为民害，难道是为了脏污简札吗？
English: Fan Zhe replied: If my impeachment is not for corruption, rape and violence, and is deeply harmful to the people, is it for the sake of dirty stamps?

古文：间以会日迫促，故先举所急，其未审者，方更参实。
现代文：因为时间来不及，所以先劾举那些急宜劾举的，没有审查清楚的当再落实。
English: Because the time is too short, those urgent impeachments are carried out first, and there is no clear review of when to implement them.

古文：臣闻农夫去草，嘉谷必茂；忠臣除奸，王道以清。
现代文：我听说农夫除草，好的谷子一定茂盛；忠臣除奸，国家政治就清明。
English: I have heard that when a farmer weeds, the good grain will surely flourish; when a loyal subject removes a traitor, the national politics will be clear.

古文：若臣言有贰，甘受显戮。 
现代文：如果我说的不实，愿受重罚。 
English: If I'm not telling the truth, I'll be severely punished.

古文：吏不能洁。
现代文：吏不能诘责他。
English: Officials can't reprimand him.

古文：滂睹时方艰，知意不行，因投劾去。
现代文：范滂看到国家正是艰难之时，晓得自己的理想不能实行，于是自己引罪上书走了。
English: Seeing that the country was going through a difficult time, Fan Yu knew that his ideals could not be put into practice, so he took the blame and resigned.

古文：太守宗资先闻其名，请署功曹，委任政事。
现代文：太守宗资先前听说范滂这个人，请代理功曹，委任政事。
English: The Tai Shou Dousuke, who had heard of Fan Ye before, asked Gong Cao to act on his behalf and appoint him to government affairs.

古文：滂在职，严整疾恶。
现代文：范滂在职，严厉整肃，对坏人坏事，深恶痛绝。
English: Fan Wei is on duty, strictly rectifying, and abhors bad people and bad things.

古文：其有行违孝悌，不轨仁义者，皆埽迹斥逐，不与共朝。
现代文：有人不孝不悌，或有不合仁义的行为，都驱逐，不与共事，连他们的足迹也要扫除干净。
English: Anyone who is not filial or obedient, or who acts in a way that is not in accordance with benevolence and righteousness, will be expelled, will not work with others, and even their footprints will be wiped clean.

古文：显荐异节，抽拔幽陋。
现代文：着意推举那些高风亮节的人，提拔那些被埋没的人。
English: Deliberately promote those who shine brightly, and promote those who are buried.

古文：滂外甥西平李颂，公族子孙，而为乡曲所弃，中常侍唐衡以颂请资，资用为吏。
现代文：范滂的外甥西平李颂，公族子孙，被乡里遗弃，中常侍唐衡把李颂介绍给宗资，宗资用李颂为吏。
English: Fan Yu's nephew Xiping Lisong, a descendant of the nobility, was abandoned by the village. The middle attendant, Tang Heng, introduced Lisong to Douzhi, and Douzhi used Lisong as an official.

古文：滂以非其人，寝而不召。
现代文：范滂认为李颂不合适，压下来不用。
English: Fan Yu thought that Li Song was not suitable, and there was no need to force him down.

古文：资迁怒，捶书佐朱零。
现代文：宗资迁怒，找了书佐朱零出气，鞭打他。
English: In a fit of anger, Dousuke sought out Shuza Zhu and whipped him.

古文：零仰曰： 范滂清裁，犹以利刃齿腐朽。今日宁受笞死，而滂不可违。 
现代文：朱零抬头说： 范滂的裁决，如用快刀斩腐朽，今天我宁愿打死，范滂是不可违抗的。 
English: Zhu Zi raised his head and said, "If I had to use a sword to cut off the rottenness of Fan Yu's ruling, I would rather fight to the death today. Fan Yu is irresistible."

古文：资乃止。
现代文：宗资才没有打朱零了。
English: It is only now that the dowry has not been reduced to zero.

古文：郡中中人以下，莫不归怨，乃指滂之所用以为 范党 。
现代文：郡中中人以下，没有不怨恨范滂的。于是指范滂用的人为 范党 。
English: There is no one in the county middle-aged or younger who does not hate Fan Yu. Therefore, the people used by Fan Yu are the best of the Fan Party.

古文：后牢脩诬言钩党，滂坐系黄门北寺狱。
现代文：后来牢诬陷党人，范滂因罪系黄门寺狱。
English: Later, the party members were framed, and Fan Qi was sent to Huangmen Prison for his crime.

古文：狱吏谓曰： 凡坐系皆祭皋陶。 
现代文：狱吏对范滂说 ：凡属系狱的人都祭祀皋陶。 
English: The prison officer said to Fan Qi: "Everyone who belongs to the prison system worships Zang Tao.

古文：滂曰： 皋陶贤者，古之直臣。
现代文：范滂说： 皋陶是贤者，古时候的忠直之臣，知道范滂无罪，会为我向老天爷申诉。
English: Fan Qi said: Juntao is a wise man, a loyal and upright vassal in ancient times. He knows that Fan Qi is not guilty and will appeal to God for me.

古文：知滂无罪，将理之于帝；如其有罪，祭之何益！ 众人由此亦止。
现代文：如果我真的有罪，祭祀他有什么好处呢？ 那些同被关押的人，也从此不祭皋陶了。
English: If I am really guilty, what good is it to offer sacrifices to him? Those who were imprisoned with him have also stopped offering sacrifices to him.

古文：狱吏将加掠考，滂以同囚多婴病，乃请先就格，遂与同郡袁忠争受楚毒。
现代文：狱吏准备拷打犯人，范滂因同囚的人多有病，于是请求先打他，与同郡袁忠争受毒打。
English: The prison officers were preparing to torture the prisoner. As many of his fellow prisoners were ill, Fan Qi asked to be beaten first, and he and his fellow prisoner, Yuan Zhong, fought to be beaten severely.

古文：桓帝使中常侍王甫以次辨诘，滂等皆三木囊头，暴于阶下，余人在前，或对或否，滂、忠于后越次而进。
现代文：桓帝派中常侍王甫按次审问，范滂等手、足、颈项都用木架了，更用布蒙头，暴露在阶下。其余的人在前，有的回答，有的没有回答，范滂、袁忠从后面越次走到前面。
English: Wang Fu, a member of Emperor Huan's faction, was interrogated one by one. Fan Qi and the others had their hands, feet, and necks put on a wooden frame, and even their heads were covered with cloth and exposed under the steps. The rest of the people were in front, some answered, some didn't answer, and Fan Qi and Yuan Zhong came to the front more and more from behind.

古文：王甫诘曰： 君为人臣，不惟忠国，而共造部党，自相褒举，评论朝廷，虚构无端，诸所谋结，并欲何为？皆以情对，不得隐饰。 
现代文：王甫责问说 ：你为人臣，不思忠于国家，居然共同结党，自己标榜，评论朝廷，捏造事实，各种谋划交结，都是想干什么，老实招来，不得隐瞒假托。 
English: Wang Fu scolded: "You are a vassal, you are not loyal to the country, you have actually formed a party together, you have advertised yourself, you have commented on the imperial court, you have fabricated facts, and you have made all kinds of plans. What are you trying to do? You honestly invited me, and you must not hide the pretext.

古文：滂对曰： 臣闻仲尼之言， 见善如不及，见恶如探汤 。
现代文：范滂回答说： 我听说仲尼有言： 看见善事，要像惟恐赶不上似的赶快去做，看见恶事，要像手探沸水那样赶快躲开。 
English: Fan Ye replied, "I heard Zhong Ni say, 'When you see a good deed, do it quickly as if you were afraid you would not be able to catch up, and when you see an evil deed, avoid it as if you were trying to find boiling water.'

古文：欲使善善同其清，恶恶同其污，谓王政之所愿闻，不悟更以为党。 
现代文：想使善善同清，恶恶同污，以为这是王政所愿意听的，不意反而以为这是结党。 
English: They wanted to make good and good alike pure, and evil and evil alike impure. They thought that this was what the royal government wanted to hear, but they inadvertently thought that this was the formation of a party.

古文：甫曰： 卿更相拔举，迭为脣齿，有不合者，见则排斥，其意如何？ 
现代文：王甫说 ：你们互相提拔推举，唇齿相依，不合你们意的就排斥，这是什么意思？ 
English: Wang Fu said, "You promote and promote each other, your lips and teeth stick together, and if it doesn't suit you, you reject it. What does this mean?"

古文：滂乃慷慨仰天曰： 古之循善，自求多福；今之循善，身陷大戮。
现代文：范滂于是激昂慷慨仰天说 ：古时候做好事，是自求多福；现在做好事，犯了死罪。
English: Fan Ye was so excited that he looked up to the heavens and said, "In ancient times, to do good deeds was to seek good fortune; now, to do good deeds is to commit a capital crime."

古文：身死之日，愿埋滂于首阳山侧，上不负皇天，下不愧夷、齐。 
现代文：处死的那天，请埋范滂于首阳山侧，上不辜负皇天，下不愧于伯夷叔齐。 
English: On the day of his execution, please bury Fan Qi on the side of Shouyang Mountain. Above all, he will live up to the Emperor, and below, he will live up to Uncle Bo Yi.

古文：甫愍然为之改容。
现代文：王甫怜悯他，颜色都变了。
English: Wang Fu took pity on him, and his color changed.

古文：乃得并解桎梏。
现代文：于是都解除了桎梏。
English: So the shackles were removed.

古文：滂后事释，南归。
现代文：范滂后来释放出来，南归。
English: Fan Qi was later released and returned to the south.

古文：始发京师，汝南、南阳士大夫迎之者数千两。
现代文：自京师启行，汝南、南阳士大夫欢迎他的有几千辆车子。
English: Starting from Beijing Division, Dr. Runan and Dr. Nanyang welcomed him with thousands of cars.

古文：同囚乡人殷陶、黄穆，亦免俱归，并卫侍于滂，应对宾客。
现代文：同囚乡人殷陶、黄穆，也免罪同归，都招扶保卫范滂，接待宾客。
English: Fellow prisoners Yin Tao and Huang Mu were also pardoned and allowed to return home. They were all summoned to help defend Fan Ye and receive guests.

古文：滂顾谓陶等曰： 今子相随，是重吾祸也。 
现代文：范滂对殷陶等说： 现在您跟着我，是加重我的罪祸啊！ 
English: Fan Qi said to Yin Tao and others: Now you are following me, you are aggravating my crime!

古文：遂遁还乡里。
现代文：他们就逃回乡里。
English: They fled back to the countryside.

古文：初，滂等系狱，尚书霍谞理之。
现代文：起先，范滂等入狱，尚书霍审讯他。
English: At first, Fan Qi waited in prison while Shang Shuhou interrogated him.

古文：及得免，到京师，往候谞而不为谢。
现代文：及范滂免罪，到京师，去拜访霍却不感谢他。
English: And Fan Xuan was exonerated, went to Beijing to visit Ho, but did not thank him.

古文：或有让滂者。对曰： 昔叔向婴罪，祁奚救之，未闻羊舌有谢恩之辞，祁老有自伐之色。 
现代文：有人责让范滂，他回答说： 从前叔向犯了罪，祁奚营救了他，没有听说羊舌有谢恩的话，祁老有居功之色。 
English: When someone reproached Fan Zheng, he replied: "Once upon a time, my uncle committed a crime, and I rescued him. I have never heard of a word of thanks from the sheep's tongue, and I always take the credit.

古文：竟无所言。
现代文：终没有说感谢的话。
English: In the end, there was no word of thanks.

古文：建宁二年，遂大诛党人，诏下急捕滂等。
现代文：建宁二年，大批诛杀党人，诏令紧急逮捕范滂等人。
English: In the second year of Jianning, a large number of party members were killed, and an emergency arrest order was issued for Fan Yu and others.

古文：督邮吴导至县，抱诏书，闭传舍，伏床而泣。滂闻之，曰： 必为我也。 
现代文：督邮吴导到县，抱诏书，闭驿舍，伏床哭泣，范滂听了说： 一定是为了我啊！ 
English: The postmaster Wu led to the county, held the imperial edict, closed the house, wept in bed, and Fan Ye said: It must be because of me!

古文：即自诣狱。
现代文：马上自己去监狱。
English: You're going to jail right now.

古文：县令郭揖大惊，出解印绶，引与俱亡。
现代文：县令郭揖大惊，出来解除印绶，要与范滂一同逃跑。
English: Guo Gan, the county magistrate, was shocked, came out to cancel the seal, and wanted to run away with Fan Gan.

古文：曰： 天下大矣，子何为在此？ 
现代文：说 ：天下大得很啊！您为什么要在这里？ 
English: He said: The world is so big! Why are you here?

古文：滂曰： 滂死则祸塞，何敢以罪累君，又令老母流离乎！ 
现代文：范滂说： 滂死，祸就了结了，哪敢因罪连累您，还要使老母流离失所呢。 
English: Fan Ye said: "If you die, the calamity will be over. How dare you be implicated in a crime and cause your mother to be displaced?"

古文：其母就与之诀。
现代文：范滂的母亲马上与范滂诀别。
English: Fan Yao's mother immediately said goodbye to Fan Yao.

古文：滂白母曰： 仲博孝敬，足以供养，滂从龙舒君归黄泉，存亡各得其所。惟大人割不忍之恩，勿增感戚。 
现代文：范滂对母亲说： 仲博孝敬，足以供养您老人家，滂从龙舒君归黄泉，存者亡者，各得其所，望大人割断不可忍的恩情，不要悲痛。 
English: Fan Yu said to his mother: "Zhongbo, your filial piety is enough to support your elderly family. You will go to hell from Longshu, and the living and the dead will each have their own place. I hope you can cut off the unbearable kindness, and do not grieve."

古文：母曰： 汝今得与李、杜齐名，死亦何恨！
现代文：母亲说： 你现在能够与李膺、杜密齐名，死也无遗恨了！
English: My mother said, "Now you can be as famous as Li Yan and Du Mei, and you won't have any regrets when you die!"

古文：既有令名，复求寿考，可兼得乎？ 
现代文：已有好名声，再求寿考，可兼得吗？ 
English: Already have a good reputation, and then apply for the exam, can you do both?

古文：滂跪受教，再拜而辞。
现代文：滂下跪受教，再拜辞去。
English: Get down on your knees, submit to discipline, and then resign.

古文：顾谓其子曰： 吾欲使汝为恶，则恶不可为；使汝为善，则我不为恶。 
现代文：回头对他儿子说： 我想要你为恶吧，则恶不可为；要你为善吧，我不为恶，而结果如此！ 
English: He turned to his son and said, "If I want you to do evil, you must not do evil; if I want you to do good, I must not do evil, and that is the end of the matter."

古文：行路闻之，莫不流涕。时年三十三。
现代文：路上行人听了，没有不流泪的，时年三十三岁。
English: There was not a pedestrian on the road who did not shed a tear when he heard it. He was then thirty-three years old.

古文：论曰：李膺振拔污险之中，蕴义生风，以鼓动流俗，激素行以耻威权，立廉尚以振贵势，使天下之士奋迅感概，波荡而从之，幽深牢破室族而不顾，至于子伏其死而母欢其义。壮矣哉！
现代文：吏官评论说：李膺卓然自立于污秽险恶之际，胸怀义烈，用以鼓动流俗，激励洁身自好的高行以羞辱权威，树立廉洁的风气以摧贵势，使天下之士奋起感慨，如水之趋下，波荡相从。虽坐穿牢底，破灭家族，也义无返顾。至于儿子伏死，母亲为儿子的就义而高兴，何等壮烈呀！
English: The magistrate commented, "Li Yingzhuo stood up for himself at a time of filth and danger, with a strong sense of righteousness, and used it to encourage vulgarity, to encourage clean and self-righteous behavior to humiliate authority, to establish a clean culture to destroy the nobility, and to make the people of the world rise up with emotion, like water flowing downhill. Although he sat through the bottom of the prison and destroyed his family, there was no turning back. As for his son's death, his mother was happy for his son's righteousness, how magnificent!

古文：子曰： 道之将废也与？
现代文：孔子说 ：道将废弃了吗？
English: Confucius said: Will the Tao be abandoned?

古文：命也！ 
现代文：还是天命如此呢？ 
English: Or is it fate?

古文：尹勋字伯元，河南巩人也。
现代文：◆尹勋传，尹勋字伯元，河南巩县人。
English: ◆Yin Xun Chuan, Yin Xun Zi Bo Yuan, from Gongxian County, Henan Province.

古文：家世衣冠。
现代文：世世代代为官宦之家。
English: It has been the home of government officials for generations.

古文：伯父睦为司徒，兄颂为太尉，宗族多居贵位者，而勋独持清操，不以地势尚人。
现代文：伯父尹睦为司徒，哥哥尹颂为太尉，尹家族也多居要位，尹勋独持清廉的操守，不以地位势力压人。
English: His uncle, Yin Mu, was a scholar, his brother, Yin Song, was a captain, and the Yin family also held many important positions. Yin Xun was the only one to maintain a clean ethics and did not use his position to oppress others.

古文：州郡连辟，察孝廉，三迁邯郸令，政有异迹。
现代文：州郡多次征辟，举孝廉，三迁邯郸令，政绩不凡。
English: The state and county have been requisitioned many times, the filial piety has been raised, the three relocation orders have been issued, and the political achievements have been extraordinary.

古文：后举高第，五迁尚书令。
现代文：后来举高第，五迁尚书令。
English: Later, it was raised to a higher level, and the five-move Shang Shuling was issued.

古文：及桓帝诛大将军梁冀，勋参建大谋，封都乡侯。
现代文：桓帝诛杀大将军梁冀，尹勋参加谋划，封都乡侯。
English: Emperor Kuan killed the general Liang Ji, and Yin Xun participated in the planning, and the capital was assigned to the township.

古文：迁汝南太守。
现代文：迁汝南太守。
English: He was transferred to the position of Southern Imperial Governor.

古文：上书解释范滂、袁忠等党议禁锢。
现代文：上书为范滂解释，袁忠等人以党祸建议禁锢，不许做官。
English: The petition was written by Fan Qi to explain that Yuan Zhong and others had suggested that Fan should be imprisoned for causing harm to the Party, and that he should not be allowed to become an official.

古文：寻征拜将作大匠，转大司农。
现代文：不久，征召任将作大匠，调大司农。
English: Soon, he will be conscripted to become a master craftsman and transferred to the position of chief farmer.

古文：坐窦武等事，下狱自杀。
现代文：因窦武等事，被投入监狱，自杀。
English: Because of Douwu and other things, he was thrown into prison and committed suicide.

古文：蔡衍字孟喜，汝南项人也。
现代文：◆蔡衍传，蔡衍字孟喜，汝南郡项县人。
English: ◆Cai Yan Chuan, Cai Yan Zi Meng Xi, a native of Xiang County, Runan County.

古文：少明经讲授，以礼让化乡里。
现代文：年轻时通晓经术，教授生徒，用礼让教化乡里。
English: When he was young, he was well versed in the scriptures, taught his students, and educated the villagers with courtesy.

古文：乡里有争讼者，辄诣衍决之，其所平处，皆曰无怨。
现代文：乡里有争讼的，常到蔡衍家请求解决，经蔡衍调解，都说无意见。
English: If there is a dispute in the village, they often go to Cai Yan's house to request a solution. After Cai Yan's mediation, they all say that they have no objection.

古文：举孝廉，稍迁冀州刺史。
现代文：被举为孝廉，升冀州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Xiaolian and became a historical figure in the State of Zhejiang.

古文：中堂侍具瑗托其弟恭举茂才，衍不受，乃收赍书者案之。
现代文：中常侍具瑗托蔡衍推举他弟弟为茂才，蔡衍不接受，并且收捕送信的考问。
English: Cai Yan, the Vice-Minister of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, recommended his younger brother as Maozai, but Cai Yan did not accept the recommendation and intercepted the inquiry.

古文：又劾奏河间相曹鼎臧罪千万。
现代文：又劾奏河间相曹鼎贪赃千万。
English: He also accused Cao Ding of embezzling tens of millions of yuan.

古文：鼎者，中堂侍腾之弟也。
现代文：曹鼎是中常侍曹腾的弟弟。
English: Cao Ding is the younger brother of Cao Teng.

古文：腾使大将军梁冀为书请之，衍不答，鼎竟坐输作左校。
现代文：曹腾使大将军梁冀写信给蔡衍请他说情，蔡衍也不理，曹鼎于是因此获罪送左校劳改。
English: Cao Teng asked General Liang Jie to write to Cai Yan and ask him to intercede, but Cai Yan ignored him. As a result, Cao Ding was convicted and sent to the Zuo School for reform through labor.

古文：乃征衍拜议郎、符节令。
现代文：朝廷征蔡衍为议郎、符节令。
English: The imperial court appointed Cai Yan as a pleader, and the order of symbols was issued.

古文：梁冀闻衍贤，请欲相见，衍辞疾不往，冀恨之。
现代文：梁冀听说蔡衍贤能，请他会晤，蔡衍托病不去，梁冀于是恨了他。
English: Liang Jie heard that Cai Yan was capable, asked him to meet, Cai Yan did not go because of illness, so Liang Jie hated him.

古文：时南阳太守成瑨等以收纠宦官考廷尉，衍与议郎刘瑜表救之，言甚切厉，坐免官还家，杜门不出。
现代文：这时，南阳太守成王晋等因收纠宦官被廷尉审讯，蔡衍与议郎刘瑜上表营救，话说得严厉切激，因免官回家，关门不出户。
English: At this time, Nanyang Daju Cheng Wang Jin and others were interrogated by a courtier for receiving corrections from eunuchs. Cai Yan and Liu Yu, the negotiator, came to the rescue. They spoke harshly and passionately. Because they were dismissed, they went home and closed the door and did not go out.

古文：灵帝即位，复拜议郎，会病卒。
现代文：灵帝即位，再任议郎，因病死。
English: Emperor Lingdi ascended to the throne, was reappointed as Heiro, and died of illness.

古文：羊陟字嗣祖，太山梁父人也。
现代文：◆羊陟传，羊陟字嗣祖，太山梁父县人。
English: ◆He was born in Liangzhu County, Taishan Province.

古文：家世冠族。
现代文：世代是官宦之家。
English: Generations have been the home of government officials.

古文：陟少清直有学行，举孝廉，辟太尉李固府，举高第，拜侍御史。
现代文：羊陟年轻时清廉正直，有学问，被举为孝廉，征召入太尉李固府，因成绩优异，举高第，任为侍御史。
English: When he was young, he was clean, honest, and learned. He was promoted to filial piety and enlisted as a lieutenant in the Li Gufu. Due to his excellent performance, he was promoted to the highest rank and appointed as a courtier to the emperor.

古文：会固被诛，陟以故吏禁锢历年。
现代文：遇李固被诛，羊陟因为是李固的旧吏，被禁止做官多年。
English: When Li Gu was arrested, Yang Xuan was banned from working as an official for many years because he was an old official of Li Gu.

古文：复举高第，再迁冀州刺史。
现代文：再因优异举高第，再升冀州刺史。
English: He was then promoted to the highest rank for excellence, and then promoted to the highest rank in the history of Jizhou.

古文：奏案贪浊，所在肃然。
现代文：奏请案办贪污腐化，所到的地方，贪赃枉法的事绝迹。
English: In the places where the corruption cases were reported and investigated, the cases of corruption and bribery had disappeared.

古文：又再迁虎贲中郎将、城门校尉，三迁尚书令。
现代文：又再升虎贲中郎将、城门校尉，三升尚书令。
English: He was also promoted to vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment, captain of the castle gate, and third-ranked courtier.

古文：时，太尉张颢、司徒樊陵、大鸿胪郭防、太仆曹陵、大司农冯方并与宦竖相姻私，公行货赂，并奏罢黜之，不纳。
现代文：这时太尉张颢、司徒樊陵、大鸿胪郭防、太仆曹陵、大司农冯方都与宦官通婚姻，搞在一起，公开贿赂，羊陟一一奏请罢免逐退他们，皇上没有采纳。
English: At this time, First Lieutenants Zhang Qian, Szeto Qianling, Dahong Qian Guo Guo, Second Servant Cao Qian, and Grand Secretary Nong Feng all married eunuchs, conspired together, openly bribed, and one by one begged the emperor to dismiss and expel them. The emperor did not accept.

古文：以前太尉刘宠、司隶校尉许冰、幽州刺史杨熙、凉州刺史刘恭、益州刺史庞艾清亮在公，荐举升进。帝嘉之。拜陟河南尹。
现代文：前太尉刘宠、司隶校尉许冰、幽州刺史杨熙、凉州刺史刘恭、益州刺史庞艾在公清廉亮节，羊陟荐举提拔他们，皇帝嘉奖他，任为河南尹。
English: Former captain Liu Cun, captain Xu Bing of Sili, Yang Xi of Yuzhou, Liu Qiong of Liangzhou, and Pang Ai of Yizhou were recommended and promoted by Yang Jie during the Qing Dynasty. The emperor commended him and appointed him as Henan Yin.

古文：计日受奉，常食干饭茹菜，禁制豪右，京师惮之。会党事起，免官禁锢。卒于家。
现代文：按日收受俸金，经常吃干饭，吃蔬菜，压制豪强，京师居官的都怕了他，遇党祸起，免官，禁锢他做官，死在家里。
English: He received his salary on a daily basis, often ate dry rice and vegetables, suppressed the powerful, and was feared by all officials in Beijing. In the event of a party disaster, he was removed from office, banned from being an official, and died at home.

古文：张俭字元节，山阳高平人，赵王张耳之后也。
现代文：◆张俭传，张俭字元节，山阳高平人，赵王张耳的后代。
English: ◆ Zhang Jian Chuan, Zhang Jian Byte Festival, Shanyang Gaoping people, descendants of Zhao Wang Zhang Er.

古文：父成，江夏太守，俭初举茂才，以刺史非其人，谢病不起。
现代文：父亲张成，江夏太守。张俭最初被乡里推举为茂才，认为刺史不得其人，托病不去。
English: His father, Zhang Cheng, was the governor-general of Jiangxia. Zhang Jianlu was initially promoted by the township as a Maozai, believing that he was not worthy of the title, so he did not go because he was ill.

古文：延熹八年，太守翟超请为东部督邮。
现代文：延熹八年，大守翟超请他做东部督邮。
English: Eight years later, the grand marshal Gong Chao asked him to be the eastern postal inspector.

古文：时中常侍侯览家在防东，残暴百姓，所为不轨。
现代文：这时，中常侍侯览家在防东，残暴百姓，无法无天。
English: At this time, the middle-ranking attendant Houxian family was in the East, brutal people, lawless.

古文：俭举劾览及其母罪恶，请诛之。
现代文：张俭揭露侯览和他的母亲的罪恶，请朝廷处死他们。
English: Zhang Jian exposed the crimes of Houzhan and his mother, and asked the court to execute them.

古文：览遏绝章表，并不得通，由是结仇。
现代文：侯览把张俭上的章表扣压起来，皇上没有看到，于是与侯览结了仇怨。
English: The emperor did not see Hou Xiang press the seal on Zhang Jian's scroll, so he and Hou Xiang had a grudge.

古文：乡人朱并，素性佞邪，为俭所弃，并怀怨恚，遂上书告俭与同郡二十四人为党，于是刊章讨捕。
现代文：乡人朱并本性谄媚，卑鄙龌龊，为张俭所瞧不起，恨了他。就上书告张俭与同郡二十四人为朋党，朝廷于是下令捉拿张俭，并把朱并的名字削掉，以示为他保密。
English: Zhu Nian, a villager with a charming and despicable nature, despised Zhang Jian and hated him. He wrote a letter accusing Zhang Jian and his twenty-four compatriots of being cronies. The court then ordered the arrest of Zhang Jian and the removal of Zhu Nian's name to show that it was confidential.

古文：俭得亡命，困迫遁走，望门投止，莫不重其名行，破家相容。
现代文：张俭逃命，狼狈出走。跑到哪里，天黑了，就到哪家住宿，没有不敬重他的名气和品行的，虽家破人亡，还愿收容他。
English: Zhang Jian fled for his life and was chased away. Wherever he ran, when it got dark, he would find a place to stay. He did not disrespect his reputation and character. Even though his family was destroyed, they were willing to take him in.

古文：后流转东莱，止李笃家。
现代文：后来流亡到东莱，宿李笃家里。
English: Later, he went into exile in Donglai and stayed at the home of Li Duc.

古文：外黄令毛钦操兵到门，笃引钦谓曰： 张俭知名天下，而亡非其罪。
现代文：外黄令毛钦带兵到他家，李笃叫了毛钦说： 张俭知名天下，逃跑不是他有罪。
English: On the other hand, Huang ordered Mao Qin to lead soldiers to his house. Li Du called Mao Qin and said, "Zhang Jian is famous all over the world. He is not guilty of escaping.

古文：纵俭可得，宁忍执之乎？ 
现代文：即使见到张俭，您难道能忍心把他捉了吗？ 
English: Even if you see Zhang Jian, can you bear to catch him?

古文：钦因起抚笃曰： 蘧伯玉耻独为君子，足下如何自专仁义？ 
现代文：毛钦站起来抚着李笃说 ：蘧伯玉以独为君子可耻，你为什么一个人独专仁义呢？ 
English: Mao Qin stood up and stroked Li Du and said: "It is shameful for Zibo Yu to be a gentleman alone. Why do you single out benevolence and righteousness?

古文：笃曰： 笃虽好义，明廷今日载其半矣。 
现代文：李笃说 ：我李笃虽说好义，您今日已得义一半啊！ 
English: Li Duc said: Although I, Li Duc, say that I am righteous, you are already half righteous today!

古文：钦叹息而去。
现代文：毛钦叹息地走了。
English: Mao went away with a sigh.

古文：笃因缘送俭出塞，以故得免。
现代文：李笃因此得以送张俭出塞，张俭终于免于遇难。
English: As a result, Li Duc was able to send Zhang Jian out of the country, and Zhang Jian was finally saved from death.

古文：其所经历，伏重诛者以十数，宗亲并皆殄灭，郡县为之残破。
现代文：凡是张俭所经过住宿的人家，被处死的数以十计，宗族亲戚都被杀灭，郡县因此残破不堪。
English: All the families that Zhang Jian stayed with were killed by the dozens, and their relatives were all killed, leaving the county in ruins.

古文：中平元年，党事解，乃还乡里。
现代文：中平元年，党锢的事解除了，张俭回到了自己的家乡。
English: In the first year of the Zhongping era, the matter of the Party Committee was resolved, and Zhang Jian returned to his hometown.

古文：大将军、三公并辟，又举敦朴，公车特征，起家拜少府，皆不就。
现代文：大将军、三公都征召他，又以敦朴推举，朝廷公车特征，起用拜少府，都不就。
English: He was called up by the great generals and the three princes, and was elected by Dunpuk, the official car of the imperial court. It was not enough for him to be appointed by Baishofu.

古文：献帝初，百姓饥荒，而俭资计差温，乃倾竭财产，与邑里共之，赖其存者以百数。
现代文：献帝初年，百姓饥荒，张俭家里的财产还比较富裕一些，于是他拿出财产和同乡人共同享用。靠这些财产得以生存的以百数。
English: In the first year of the emperor's enthronement, the people were starving, and Zhang Jianlu's family was still relatively wealthy, so he took out his property and shared it with his fellow villagers. Hundreds of people were able to survive on this property.

古文：建安初，征为卫尉，不得已而起。
现代文：建安初年，朝廷征召他作卫尉，不得已才去接受。
English: In the first year of Jianan, the imperial court called him to serve as a guard lieutenant, and he had no choice but to accept.

古文：俭见曹氏世德已萌，乃阖门县车，不豫政事。
现代文：张俭看到曹操有篡夺野心，于是闭门不问世事，把车子也悬挂起来。
English: Zhang Jian saw that Cao Cao had ambitions to usurp the throne, so he closed the door and left the car hanging.

古文：岁余卒于许下。年八十四。
现代文：一年多以后，在许州去世，终年八十四岁。
English: More than a year later, he died in Xuzhou, at the age of 84.

古文：论曰：昔魏齐违死，虞卿解印；季布逃亡，朱家甘罪。
现代文：史官评论说：从前魏齐避死，虞卿离职同他一起逃亡，季布逃命，朱家甘心隐蔽他，救他。
English: The historian commented: In the past, Wei Qi avoided death, Yu Jing left his post and fled with him, Qibu fled for his life, Zhu Jia was willing to hide him and save him.

古文：而张俭见怒时王，颠沛假命，天下闻其风者，莫不怜其壮志，而争为之主。
现代文：张俭触怒了天子，颠沛流离，到处逃命，天下的人听到他的风节的，没有不喜爱他的壮志，争着做收留他的东道主。
English: Zhang Jian angered the Son of Heaven, wandered wildly, and fled for his life everywhere. People all over the world who heard of his exploits did not dislike his ambition and competed to be his host.

古文：至乃捐城委爵、破族屠身，盖数十百所，岂不贤哉！
现代文：乃至弃城丢官，灭身破族的，大约有数十百起，难道张俭还不贤良吗？
English: Even abandoned the city, lost his position, died and broke the tribe, there are about tens of hundreds of cases, is Zhang Jian still not virtuous?

古文：然俭以区区一掌，而欲独堙江河，终婴疾甚之乱。多见其不知量也。
现代文：然而张俭单凭自己的一只手掌，想堵塞江河，终于因痛恨不仁之人而引起祸乱，可见他是多么的不自量力啊！
English: However, Zhang Jian wanted to block the river with the palm of his hand, and finally caused a disaster by hating the cruel people. You can see how much he did not measure up!

古文：岑晊字公孝，南阳棘阳人也。
现代文：◆岑晊传，岑晊字公孝，南阳郡棘阳县人。
English: ◆传,字公孝, Nanyang County, Spineyang County.

古文：父豫，为南郡太守，以贪叨诛死。
现代文：父亲岑豫，任南郡太守，因贪残被杀。
English: His father, Zou Yu, the governor of Nan County, was killed for his greed.

古文：晊年少未知名，往侯同郡宗慈，慈方以有道见征，宾客满门，以晊非良家子，不肯见。
现代文：岑晊年轻时未成名，去见同郡宗慈，宗慈正以有道被征，宾客满门，认为岑晊不是良家子，不愿接见。
English: When he was young and had not yet become famous, he went to see his fellow county official Zong Ci. Zong Ci was being conscripted as a virtuous person, and the house was full of guests who thought he was not a good son and did not want to meet him.

古文：晊留门下数日，晚乃引入。
现代文：岑晊留在门外好多天，才被带进去。
English: The baboons were left outside the gate for days before being brought inside.

古文：慈与语，大奇之，遂将俱至洛阳，因诣太学受业。
现代文：宗慈与他说话，大加赞赏，于是带了他同到洛阳，去太学学习。
English: Zong Ci spoke with him and greatly appreciated him, so he took him to Luoyang to study at Taixu.

古文：晊有高才，郭林宗、朱公叔等皆为友，李膺、王暢称其有干国器，虽在闾里，慨然有董正天下之志。
现代文：岑晊有高超的才能，郭林宗、李公叔等都与他结为朋友，李膺、王畅说他有治国的才略，虽然在乡下，意气风发，有督正天下的志气。
English: He had great talent. Guo Linzong, Li Gongzhu and others were friends with him. Li Qian and Wang Chang said that he had the ability to govern the country. Although he was in the countryside, he was spirited and had the ambition to govern the world.

古文：太守弘农成瑨下车，欲振威严，闻晊高名，请为功曹，又以张牧为中贼曹吏。
现代文：太守弘农成王晋到任，想树立自己的威严，听了岑晊的大名，请他任功曹，又任命张牧为中贼曹吏。
English: When the daimyō Hongnongcheng Wang Jin came to office, he wanted to establish his own majesty. After hearing the daimyō's name, he asked him to be a meritorious officer, and also appointed Zhang Mu as a middle-ranking officer.

古文：瑨委心晊、牧，褒善纠违，肃清朝府。
现代文：成王晋信任岑晊、张牧，奖善纠错，肃清府内。
English: Cheng Wangjin trusted Zhai and Zhang Mu, rewarded good deeds and corrected mistakes, and cleaned up the government.

古文：宛有富贾张汎者，桓帝美人之外亲，善巧雕镂玩好之物，颇以赂遗中官，以此并得显位，恃其伎巧，用势纵横。
现代文：宛县有个富商名叫张汛的，是桓帝美人的亲戚，会雕刻一些奇巧好玩的东西，多用贿赂送给宦官，因此也得了显要的官位，靠了他的这门技巧，为所欲为。
English: In Wan County, there was a wealthy merchant named Zhang Xuan, who was a relative of Emperor Huan's wife. He could carve some wonderful and fun things, and often bribed eunuchs to give them to him. As a result, he also got a prominent official position. He could do whatever he wanted with this skill.

古文：晊与牧劝收捕汎等，既而同赦，晊竟诛之，并收其宗族宾客，杀二百余人，后乃奏闻。
现代文：岑晊与张牧劝成王晋收捕张汛等人，后来碰上赦免，岑晊仍然把他们杀了，并且收捕他们的宗族宾客，杀二百多人以后，才报告朝廷。
English: Yao and Zhang Mu advised Cheng Wang Jin to arrest Zhang Yao and others. Later, when they were pardoned, Yao still killed them, and arrested their family guests. After killing more than 200 people, he reported to the court.

古文：于是中常侍侯览使汎妻上书讼其兔。
现代文：于是中常侍侯览使张汛的妻子上书诉冤。
English: As a result, the middle-ranking attendant, Hou Xian, made Zhang Ye's wife write a letter to complain about the injustice.

古文：帝大震怒，征，下狱死。
现代文：桓帝大为震怒，征召成王晋监死于狱中。
English: Emperor Kuan was so furious that he conscripted Chengwang Jinjun, who died in prison.

古文：晊与牧亡匿齐鲁之间。
现代文：岑晊与张牧躲藏于齐鲁之间。
English: Zhai and Zhang Mu hid between the Qilu.

古文：会赦出。
现代文：遇上赦免出来。
English: If he is pardoned, he will be released.

古文：后州郡察举，三府交辟，并不就。
现代文：后来州郡推举，三府征辟，他都不应。
English: Later, the state and county elected him, but he was not allowed to enter the three prefectures.

古文：及李、杜之诛，因复逃窜，终于江夏山中云。
现代文：李固、杜密被杀以后，他再次逃窜，听说死在江夏山中。
English: After Li Gu and Du Mi were killed, he fled again and was said to have died in the mountains of Jiangxia.

古文：陈翔字子麟，汝南邵陵人也。
现代文：◆陈翔传，陈翔字子麟，汝南郡邵陵县人。
English: ◆Chen Xiang Chuan, Chen Xiang Zi Lin, from Sholing County, Runan County.

古文：祖父珍，司隶校尉。
现代文：祖父陈珍，司隶校尉。
English: Grandfather Chen Zhen, Lieutenant Sili.

古文：翔少知名，善交结。
现代文：陈翔年轻时就有名于时，会交际。
English: At a young age, Chen Xiang was already famous and sociable.

古文：察孝廉，太尉周景辟举高第，拜侍御史。
现代文：举为孝廉，太尉周景以高第举他，任为侍御史。
English: He was raised to the rank of filial piety, and the first lieutenant, Zhou Jing, raised him to the rank of high rank and appointed him as the attendant of the Emperor.

古文：时正旦朝贺，大将军梁冀威仪不整。翔奏冀恃贵不敬，请收案罪，时人奇之。
现代文：这时，农历正月初一朝贺，大将军梁冀不修边幅，威仪不整，陈翔上奏皇帝，说梁冀恃贵幸，对皇上不敬，请收捕治罪，当时人认为他是个奇人。
English: At this time, on the morning of the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, the general Liang Jie did not trim his hair, his dignity was not in order, Chen Xiang played the emperor, saying that Liang Jie was a valuable person, disrespectful to the emperor, please arrest and punish. At that time, people thought he was a strange person.

古文：迁定襄太守，征拜议郎，迁扬州刺史。
现代文：升定襄太守，征授议郎，升扬州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the position of Xiang Dai Shou, solicited the conferment of the title of Heiro, and promoted to the position of Zhou Zhishi.

古文：举奏豫章太守王永奏事中官，吴郡太守徐参在职贪秽，并征诣廷尉。
现代文：上奏皇帝说豫章太守王永奏事中官，吴郡太守徐参在职贪污，都被征去廷尉。
English: The emperor said that Yu Zhang, the eunuch Wang Yong, the eunuch vice-governor, and Wu County's eunuch Xu San, who were corrupt on the job, were all conscripted as court lieutenants.

古文：参，中常侍璜之弟也。
现代文：徐参是中常侍徐璜的弟弟。
English: Xu San is the younger brother of the middle attendant Xu Yao.

古文：由此威名大振。
现代文：因此威名大振。
English: As a result, its prestige has been greatly enhanced.

古文：又征拜议郎，补御史中丞。
现代文：又征任为议郎，补御史中丞。
English: He was also appointed to the post of hirō (counselor) and shuigoshi chujo (junior secretary).

古文：坐党事考黄门北寺狱，以无验见原，卒于家。
现代文：因党祸被黄门北寺狱考讯，以无证据受到原宥，死在家里。
English: Because of the party's misfortune, he was interrogated by the Yellow Gate North Temple Prison, and was pardoned without evidence. He died at home.

古文：孔昱字元世，鲁国鲁人也。
现代文：◆孔昱传，孔昱字元世，鲁国鲁县人。
English: ◆Confucius was born in Lu County, Lu Province in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：七世祖霸，成亲时历九卿，封褒成侯。
现代文：七世祖孔霸，成帝时历任九卿，封褒成侯。
English: Kongba, the seventh generation ancestor, became the emperor when the successive nine nobles, and was awarded the title of prince.

古文：自霸至昱，爵位相系，其卿相牧守五十三人，列侯七人。
现代文：自孔霸至孔昱，爵位不断，计卿相牧守五十三人，列侯七人。
English: From Confucius to Confucius, the titles of nobility continued, and there were fifty-three Keikyo, Somoku, and seven vassals.

古文：昱少习家学，大将军梁冀辟，不应。
现代文：孔昱小时候学习《尚书》，大将军梁冀征召，不应。
English: When Confucius was a child, he studied "Shang Shu" and was conscripted by General Liang Jie.

古文：太尉举方正，对策不合，乃辞病去。
现代文：太尉举方正，对答天子的问题，不合，于是以病辞去。
English: The captain raised his hand, but was unable to answer Tianzi's question, so he resigned due to illness.

古文：后遭党事禁锢。
现代文：后遭党祸禁止做官。
English: He was later banned from holding public office by the party.

古文：灵帝即位，公车征拜议郎，补洛阳令，以师丧弃官，卒于家。
现代文：灵帝即位，公车征授议郎，补洛阳令，因老师死，弃官，死在家里。
English: Emperor Ling ascended to the throne, the bus solicited the conferment of the magistrate, supplemented the Luoyang Order, because of the teacher's death, resigned, and died at home.

古文：苑康字仲真，勃海重合人也。
现代文：◆苑康传，苑康字仲真，勃海郡重合县人。
English: ◆Yuan Kang Chuan, Yuan Kang Zi Zhong Zhen, born in Chonghe County, Bohai County.

古文：少受业太学，与郭林宗亲善。
现代文：年轻时在太学受业，与郭林宗很相好。
English: When he was young, he studied in Taishu and was very friendly with Guo Linzong.

古文：举孝廉，再迁颍阴令，有能迹。
现代文：举孝廉，再迁颍阴令。以能干著称。
English: He was raised as a filial son, and later moved to Jinying. He was known for his ability.

古文：迁太山太守。
现代文：升太山太守。
English: He rose to the position of Taiyama Taishu.

古文：郡内豪姓多不法，康至，奋威怒，施严令，莫有干犯者。
现代文：郡内大姓多行不法，苑康到任，奋然作威，勃然发怒，颁布严格的法令，没有敢于犯法的。
English: Many of the county's leading family names were involved in illegal activities. When Yuan Kang took office, he was full of bravado, flew into a rage, issued strict decrees, and did not dare to break the law.

古文：先所请夺人田宅，皆遽还之。
现代文：从前侵夺他人田地住宅的，都很快归还了原主。
English: In the past, those who usurped other people's fields and houses were quickly returned to their original owners.

古文：是时，山阳张俭杀常侍侯览母，案其宗党宾客，或有迸匿太山界者，康既常疾阉官，因此皆穷相收掩，无得遗脱。
现代文：这时山阳张俭杀常侍侯览的母亲，苑康就调查她的宗党宾客，有的隐藏在太山境内，他素恨宦官，因此都全部收捕，没有遗漏或跑掉一个。
English: At this time, Sanyang Zhang Jian killed the mother of the regular attendant Hou Xiang, and Yuan Kang investigated her father's party guests, some hidden in the territory of Taishan. He hated eunuchs, so he arrested all of them, without missing or running away one.

古文：览大怨之，诬康与兗州刺史第五种及都尉壶嘉诈上贼降，征康诣廷尉狱，减死罪一等，徙日南。
现代文：侯览恨苑康到了极点，诬谄苑康与兖州刺史第五种及都尉壶嘉假上贼降表，征召苑康到廷尉监狱，减死罪一等，贬徙日南。
English: Houyan hated Yuan Kang to the extreme, falsely accused Yuan Kang of the fifth type of Zhangzhou stabbing history and captain Jujia falsely accused of theft, summoned Yuan Kang to the lieutenant prison, reduced the death penalty to the first class, and deported to Nichinan.

古文：颍阴人及太山羊陟等诣阙为讼，乃原还本郡，卒于家。
现代文：颍阴人和太山羊陟等到朝廷为苑康申诉，得到宽宥，送回本郡，死在家里。
English: Shenyin and Taizang waited for the court to appeal for Yuan Kang, were pardoned, sent back to the county, and died at home.

古文：檀敷字文有，山阳瑕丘人也。
现代文：◆檀敷传、檀敷字文有，山阴郡瑕丘人。
English: ◆Danshiki legend, written in Danshiki characters, from Kegooka, Sangin-gun.

古文：少为诸生，家贫而志清，不受乡里施惠。
现代文：年轻时为诸生，家里虽然穷困，但志气清高，不接受乡里富有者的施惠。
English: When he was young, he was a layman. Although his family was poor, they had high aspirations and did not accept favors from the rich people in the village.

古文：举孝廉，连辟公府，皆不就。
现代文：举孝廉，公府多次征召，都不就。
English: Raising filial piety and repeatedly being called up by the government are not enough.

古文：立精舍教授，远方至者常数百人。
现代文：建精舍教授学生，远地来学的经常有几百人。
English: Jian Jingshe teaches students, and there are often hundreds of people who come from far away to study.

古文：桓帝时，博士征，不就。
现代文：桓帝时，以博士征召他，也不就。
English: When Emperor Kan summoned him as a doctor, it was not enough.

古文：灵帝即位，太尉黄琼举方正，对策合时宜，再迁议郎，补蒙令。
现代文：灵帝即位，太尉黄琼举他为方正，对答皇上的所问，合当时施政的要求，升议郎，补蒙县令。
English: When Emperor Lingdi ascended to the throne, Lieutenant Huang Qiong promoted him to the position of Founder, and he answered the emperor's questions in accordance with the requirements of the government at that time.

古文：以郡守非其人，弃官去。
现代文：因郡守不得人，弃官回家。
English: Due to the lack of candidates for county governor, he resigned and went home.

古文：家无产业，子孙同衣而出。
现代文：家里无产业，与子孙同衣而出，并日而食。
English: The family has no property, they go out with their children and grandchildren in the same clothes, and live from hand to mouth.

古文：年八十，卒于家。
现代文：年八十，死在家里。
English: He died at home in his eighties.

古文：刘儒字叔林，东郡阳平人也。
现代文：◆刘儒传，刘儒字叔林，东郡阳平县人。
English: ◆ Liu Ju Chuan, Liu Ju Zi Shulin, from Yangping County, Dong County.

古文：郭林宗常谓儒口讷心辩，有珪璋之质。
现代文：郭林宗曾经说刘儒虽然说话结结巴巴，但人是顶聪明的，有玉一般洁白的本质。
English: Guo Linzong once said that although Liu Ru stammered when he spoke, he was an extremely intelligent person with a pure and white essence.

古文：察孝廉，举高第，三迁侍中。
现代文：举孝廉，又以成绩优秀举高第，升侍中。
English: He was raised as a filial son, and was promoted to middle-ranking samurai with excellent grades.

古文：桓帝时，数有灾异，下策博求直言，儒上封事十条，极言得失，辞甚忠切。
现代文：桓帝时，常常发生灾异，下诏广泛地征求直言，刘儒密上十条，极言朝廷的得失，忠心耿耿，说得十分恳切。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kuan, disasters and calamities often occurred. The following edict widely solicited forthright speech. Liu Rongmi wrote ten articles, spoke highly of the gains and losses of the imperial court, and was very loyal. He spoke very earnestly.

古文：帝不能纳，出为任城相。
现代文：桓帝不能采纳，出为任城相。
English: Emperor Kantei could not accept it, and he was appointed as the city minister.

古文：顷之，征拜议郎。
现代文：不久，征任议郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a member of the Diet.

古文：会窦武事，下狱自杀。
现代文：遇上窦武事，下狱，自杀。
English: Encountered Douwujie, went to prison, committed suicide.

古文：贾彪字伟节，颍川定陵人也。
现代文：贾彪传，贾彪字伟节，颍川郡定陵县人。
English: Jia Biao Chuan, Jia Biao Zi Wei Jie, a native of Dingling County, Beichuan County.

古文：少游京师，志节慷慨，与同郡荀爽齐名。
现代文：年轻时游京师，志节不凡，激昂慷慨，与同郡人荀爽齐名。
English: When he was young, he traveled to Beijing and became famous for his extraordinary dedication, enthusiasm, and generosity.

古文：初仕州郡，举孝廉，补新息长。
现代文：开始在州郡做官，举孝廉，补新息县长。
English: He began to work as an official in Zhoushu County, promoted Xiaolian, and became the county governor.

古文：小民困贫，多不养子，彪严为其制，与杀人同罪。
现代文：百姓贫困，多不养儿育女，贾彪作出严格的法制，不养子女的，与杀人一样犯罪。
English: The people are poor, many do not raise children, Jia Biao made a strict legal system, and those who do not raise children are as criminal as homicide.

古文：城南有盗劫害人者，北有妇人杀子者，彪出案发，而掾吏欲引南。
现代文：城南有盗劫害人的，城北有妇人杀子的，贾彪去案发地处理，掾史想把贾彪带到城南去。
English: In the south of the city, there were robbers and robbers, and in the north of the city, there was a woman who killed her son. Jia Biao went to the place where the crime was committed to deal with it. Zou Shi wanted to take Jia Biao to the south of the city.

古文：彪怒曰： 贼冠害人，此则常理，母子相残，逆天违道。 
现代文：贾彪发怒说； 贼寇害人，这是常理；母子相残，这是逆天理，违反人道。 
English: Jia Biao said angrily; it is common sense for thieves and bandits to harm people; it is against nature and against humanity for a mother and child to be cruel to each other.

古文：遂驱车北行，案验其罪。
现代文：于是驱车到城北，办了那妇人的罪。
English: So they drove to the north of the city and arrested the woman.

古文：城南贼闻之，亦面缚自首。
现代文：城南贼听说了，也捆绑自己到县里自首。
English: When the thieves in the south of the city heard about this, they also tied themselves up and went to the county to turn themselves in.

古文：数年间，人养子者千数，佥曰： 贾父所长 ，生男名为 贾子 ，生女名为 贾女 。
现代文：几年之内，百姓养子女的以千计，都说 贾公所长 ，生男的取名为 贾子 ，生女的取名为 贾女 。
English: Within a few years, there were thousands of people who had children, and they all said that the director of Jia Gong was the originator. The newborn boy was named Jia Zi, and the newborn girl was named Jia Nian.

古文：延熹九年，党事起，太尉陈蕃争之不能得，朝廷寒心，莫敢复言。
现代文：延熹九年，党祸起，太尉陈蕃反对，没有成功，朝廷百官为之寒心，不敢再说。
English: In the ninth year of Yancheng's reign, when the Party's calamity began, Tai Li Chen Qi opposed it, but without success. The hundreds of officials in the imperial court were so cold-hearted that they dared not say a word.

古文：彪谓同志曰： 吾不西行，大祸不解。 
现代文：贾彪对同僚说： 我不西行，大祸不能解除。 
English: Jia Biao said to his colleagues: "If I don't go west, the great calamity can't be relieved."

古文：乃入洛阳，说城门校尉窦武、尚书霍谞，武等讼之，桓帝以此大赦党人。
现代文：于是入洛阳，说城门校尉窦武、尚书霍，窦武等向皇帝申诉，桓帝因此大赦党人。
English: As a result, he entered Luoyang and said that the castle gate lieutenants Dou Wu, Shang Shuhou, Dou Wu, etc. appealed to the emperor, and Emperor Huan therefore amnestied the party members.

古文：李膺出，曰： 吾得免此，贾生之谋也。 
现代文：李膺出来说 ：我得以免遭党祸，贾生的力啊！ 
English: Li Wei came out and said: I was able to avoid the party disaster, Jia Sheng's strength!

古文：先是，岑晊以党事逃亡，亲友多匿焉，彪独闭门不纳，时人望之。
现代文：先时，岑晊因党祸逃亡，亲戚朋友都隐藏他，贾彪独闭门不接纳，当时的人都恨了他。
English: In the past, Zhai fled because of the party's misfortune, relatives and friends all hid him, Jia Biao alone closed the door and did not accept him, and people at that time hated him.

古文：彪曰： 《传》言 相时而动，无累后人 。
现代文：贾彪说 ：《传》说 ：要看时间行动，不要连累后人。 
English: Jia Biao said: "Legend" said: "Depend on the time of action, do not involve future generations."

古文：公孝以要君致衅，自遗其咎，吾以不能奋戈相待，反可容隐之乎？ 
现代文：公孝因要挟皇上招罪，自取其咎，我正因不能持戈相待为恨，难道反而可以收留隐藏他吗？ 
English: I hate him because I can't stand him, but can I keep him and hide him?

古文：于是咸服其裁正。
现代文：因党祸禁止不得做官，死在家里。
English: Banned from holding public office due to his party affiliation, he died at home.

古文：以党禁锢，卒于家。初，彪兄弟三人，并有高名，而彪最优，故天下称曰 贾氏三虎，伟节最怒 。何颙字伯求，南阳襄乡人也。
现代文：起先，贾彪兄弟三人，都很有名气，贾彪最好，故天下传说： 贾氏三虎，伟节最怒。 ◆何颙传，何颙字伯求，南阳郡襄乡县人。
English: At first, Jia Biao's three brothers were all famous, and Jia Biao was the best, so the world legend: Jia's three tigers, Wei Jie was the angriest. ◆何传, 何字伯求, Nanyang County, Xiangxiang County.

古文：少游学洛阳。
现代文：年轻时游学京师。
English: When he was young, he studied in Kyoto.

古文：颙虽后进，而郭林宗、贾伟节等与之相好，显名太学。
现代文：何颙虽然是晚辈，但郭林宗、贾伟节等与他很要好。著名太学。
English: Although He Yao was a younger generation, Guo Linzong, Jia Wei Jie and others were very close to him. He was a famous scholar.

古文：友人虞伟高有父仇未报，而笃病将终，颙往候之，伟高泣而诉。颙感其义，为复仇，以头其墓。
现代文：友人虞伟高有父亲的仇没有报，重病将死，何颙去看他，虞伟高向他哭诉，何颙被他的大义感动了，为他报了仇，用仇人的脑袋祭了虞伟高父亲的坟墓。
English: His friend, Yu Weigao, did not avenge his father's death. He was seriously ill and about to die. He went to see him. Yu Weigao cried to him. He was moved by his great righteousness. He took revenge for him and used the enemy's head to sacrifice the grave of Yu Weigao's father.

古文：及陈蕃、李膺之败，颙以与蕃、膺善，遂为宦官所陷，乃变姓名，亡匿汝南间。
现代文：陈蕃、李膺失败以后，何颙因与陈蕃、李膺相好，被宦官诬陷，他于是改变自己的姓名，逃亡汝南郡境内。
English: After the defeat of Chen Zhen and Li Zhen, He Zhen was framed by eunuchs because of his friendship with Chen Zhen and Li Zhen. He then changed his name and fled to the territory of Runan County.

古文：所至皆亲其豪桀，有声荆豫之域。
现代文：他所到的地方，结纳豪杰，有名于荆州、豫州一带。
English: The places he visited, known as "Kunna Gaojie," are famous in the Jingzhou and Yuzhou regions.

古文：袁绍慕之，私与往来，结为奔走之友。
现代文：袁绍仰慕他的为人，悄悄地与他往来，结为谕德宣誓的朋友。
English: Yuan Shao admired him as a person, quietly communicated with him, and became his sworn friend.

古文：是时，党事起，天下多离其难，颙常私入洛阳，从绍计议。
现代文：这时党祸起，天下不少人遭了难，何颙经常私自跑到洛阳，与袁绍计议。
English: At this time, the party's misfortune arose, and many people in the world suffered hardship. He Zheng often went to Luoyang to discuss with Yuan Shao.

古文：其穷困闭厄者，为求援救，以济其患。
现代文：对一些穷困无助的人，帮助他们渡过祸患。
English: For some destitute and helpless people, to help them get through the disaster.

古文：有被掩捕者，则广设权计，使得逃隐，全免者甚众。
现代文：对一些被追捕的人，就大为出谋献计，使他们得以逃跑或隐藏起来，使不少人免于党祸。
English: For some of those who were pursued, they made great efforts to escape or hide, so that many people were spared from the party's scourge.

古文：及党锢解，颙辟司空府。
现代文：党祸解除了以后，何颙被司空府征召。
English: After the party's calamity was resolved, He Ying was called up by the Air Force.

古文：每三府会议，莫不推颙之长。
现代文：每次三府会议，没有不推何颙为长的。
English: At each meeting of the three prefectures, there is no such thing as a long-term solution.

古文：累迁。
现代文：累次升迁。
English: Repeatedly promoted.

古文：及董卓秉政，逼颙以为长史，托疾不就，乃与司空荀爽、司徒王允等共谋卓。
现代文：董卓秉政，逼迫何颙为长史，他托疾不接受，与司空荀爽、司徒王允等共同谋划诛杀董卓。
English: Dong Zhuo adhered to the rule of law. He had a long history of persecuting He Xuan. He did not accept any excuses. He plotted to kill Dong Zhuo together with Siku Shao Shuang, Sitou Wang Yun and others.

古文：会爽薨，颙以他事为卓所系，忧愤而卒。
现代文：荀爽逝世，何颙因别的事被董卓收捕，忧愤死去。
English: Hao Shuang passed away, and He Yao was arrested by Dong Zhuo for other reasons, and died in sorrow and anger.

古文：初，颙见曹操，叹曰： 汉家将亡，安天下者必此人也。 
现代文：起先，何颙见曹操，叹息说： 汉家将亡，安天下的必定是这个人啊。 
English: At first, when he saw Cao Cao, he sighed and said, "The Han family will die, and it must be this man who will bring peace to the world."

古文：操以是嘉之。
现代文：曹操因此非高常兴。
English: Cao Cao was therefore not happy.

古文：尝称 颍川荀彧，王佐之器 。
现代文：曾经称赞 颍川荀，王佐之器。 
English: He once praised Shukawa Shoko, the instrument of Wang Sa.

古文：及彧为尚书令，遣人西迎叔父爽，并致颙尸，而葬之爽之冢傍。
现代文：荀任尚书令，派人西迎叔父荀爽，并收何颙尸体，葬在荀爽的墓旁。
English: He sent someone to Xiying to collect the body of Uncle Gao Shuang and buried it next to Gao Shuang's grave.

