古文：木怪张叔高陆敬叔聂友董奇赵翼魏佛陀临淮将崔导贾秘薛弘机
现代文：木怪张叔高陆敬叔聂友董奇赵翼魏佛陀临淮将崔导贾秘薛弘机
English: Uncle Zhang, Uncle Gao, Uncle Jing, Uncle Yao, Friend Dong, Qi, Zhao, Wing, Wei, Buddha, Lin, Huai, General Cui, Guide Jia, Secret Xue, Hongji

古文：卢虔僧智通江夏从事
现代文：卢虔僧智通江夏从事
English: Lu Qian, a monk of Zhitong, Jiangxia, engaged in

古文：张叔高
现代文：张叔高
English: Zhang Shugao

古文：桂阳太守江夏张辽字叔高，留其使家居买田。
现代文：桂阳太守江夏的张辽张叔高，派人留在家里买田地。
English: Zhang Liao Zhang Shugao, the Guiyang governor of Jiangxia, sent people to stay at home to buy fields.

古文：田中有大树十余围，扶疏盖数亩，地不生谷。
现代文：买到的一块田中，有一棵十余围的大树，枝叶茂密的树冠荫地好几亩，不能长庄稼。
English: In the middle of a purchased field, there is a large tree with a circumference of more than ten meters. The tree canopy, with its dense branches and leaves, covers several mu of shady land, making it impossible to grow crops.

古文：遣客伐之，有赤汁六七斗出。
现代文：张叔高就派食客们去把大树砍掉。
English: Zhang Shugao sent the diners to cut down the tree.

古文：客惊怖归，具白叔高。高怒曰： 树老赤汁，有何等血！ 
现代文：砍树的时候，大树出了六七斗红色的汁水，食客又惊又怕地回到桂阳来，向张叔高作了详细报告。张叔高生气地说： 树老了就有红色的汁水，有什么根据能说那是血呢？ 
English: When the tree was cut down, the tree produced six or seven buckets of red sap. The diners, shocked and afraid, returned to Guiyang and made a detailed report to Zhang Shugao. Zhang Shugao said angrily: When a tree is old, it has red sap. What basis is there to say that it is blood?

古文：因自行，复斫之。
现代文：于是他亲自赶回家来，又砍那棵大树。
English: So he hurried home and cut down the tree himself.

古文：血大流洒。
现代文：大树流血不止。
English: The tree bled profusely.

古文：叔高使先斫其枝。
现代文：张叔高让人先砍树枝。
English: Zhang Shugao asked someone to cut the branches first.

古文：有一空处，见白头公可长四五尺，忽出往叔高。
现代文：有一个空处，出现一个白头老汉，这老汉高四五尺，忽然出来走向张叔高。
English: There was an empty space, and an old man with a white head appeared. This old man was four or five feet tall, and he suddenly came out and walked towards Zhang Shugao.

古文：叔高乃逆格之。
现代文：张叔高迎上去把他击倒在地。
English: Zhang Shugao tackled him and knocked him to the ground.

古文：遂伐其木。是岁，司空辟高为侍御史兖州刺史，以居二千石之尊，过乡里，荐祝祖孝，竟无他怪。
现代文：如此一共出现四次，左右的人都吓得趴在地上，但是张叔高恬静自如。仔细看那些被击杀的东西，不是人也不是兽。后来终于把树伐倒了。这一年，司空征召张叔高做侍御史兖州刺史，从而他处于两千石的尊位上。路过乡里的时候，他照样去祭拜祖先，到底也没发生别的怪事。
English: This happened a total of four times, and people on both sides were so scared that they fell to the ground, but Zhang Shuguang remained calm. He carefully looked at the things that were killed, neither man nor beast. Later, he finally cut down the tree. This year, Zhang Shuguang was recruited by the civil aviation authority to be the attendant of Shuzhou's history, so he was in the position of two thousand stones. When passing through the countryside, he still went to worship the ancestors, and nothing else strange happened.

古文：陆敬叔
现代文：陆敬叔
English: Uncle Lu Jing

古文：吴先主时，陆敬叔为建安郡太守。
现代文：吴先主那时候，陆敬叔是建安郡太守。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, Uncle Lu Jing was the governor of Jian'an County.

古文：使人伐大樟树，不数斧，有血出，树断，有物人面狗身，从树中出。
现代文：他派人砍伐一棵大樟树，砍了不几斧，就有血流出来。树被砍断以后，有一个人面狗身的东西从树中钻出来。
English: He sent someone to cut down a large eucalyptus tree. After cutting a few axes, blood flowed out. After the tree was cut, a human-faced dog-shaped thing emerged from the tree.

古文：敬叔曰，此名 彭侯 。
现代文：陆敬叔说，这东西名叫彭侯。
English: Uncle Lu Jing said, this thing is called Peng Hou.

古文：乃烹食之。
现代文：于是就把它煮着吃了。
English: So he boiled it and ate it.

古文：白泽图曰： 木之精名彭侯，状如黑狗，无尾。可烹食之。 
现代文：白泽图说： 树精的名叫彭侯，样子像黑狗，没有尾巴，可以煮了吃肉。 
English: Bai Zetu said: The name of the tree spirit is Peng Hou. He looks like a black dog, has no tail, and can be boiled to eat meat.

古文：聂友
现代文：聂友
English: 友

古文：吴聂友字文悌，豫章新涂人。
现代文：吴时，有一个人姓聂名友字文悌，是豫章新涂人。
English: At the time of Wu, there was a person with the surname of 名友字文, who was a Yuanzhang new coated person.

古文：少时贫贱，常好射猎。
现代文：此人年轻的时候比较贫贱，常常喜欢上山打猎。
English: When he was young, his family was poor and his status was low. He often liked to hunt with a bow and arrow.

古文：见一白鹿，射之中，寻踪血尽，不知所在。
现代文：有一天，他发现一只白色的鹿，就射箭射中了它。他寻着血踪追赶，追到不见血迹。也不知白鹿在哪。
English: One day, he found a white deer and shot it with an arrow. He chased after it, looking for blood, until there was no trace of blood. He didn't know where the white deer was.

古文：饥困，卧梓树下。
现代文：他又饥又困，倒在一棵梓树下休息。
English: Hungry and sleepy, he collapsed under an azusa tree to rest.

古文：仰见所射鹿箭，著树枝，怪之。于是还家赍粮，命子弟持斧伐之。
现代文：一仰脸看到他射鹿的那支箭扎在树枝上，他很奇怪，就回到家里，准备了干粮，率领着子弟们带着斧子来砍伐那棵树。
English: When he looked up, he saw that the arrow with which he had shot the deer was stuck in a branch. He was surprised. He went home, prepared dry food, and led his children with axes to cut down the tree.

古文：树有血，遂截为二板。
现代文：树有血。他就把它破成两块板子，扔在河边上。
English: The tree had blood on it, so he cut it into two pieces and threw them into the river.

古文：牵置陂中，常沉，时复浮出。
现代文：这两块板子常常沉下去，也常常浮上来。
English: These two boards often sink and often rise.

古文：出家必有吉。
现代文：凡是浮出来的时候，聂友家中必然有吉事。
English: Whenever it comes up, there is bound to be a happy event in the family of a friend.

古文：友欲迎宾客，常乘此板。
现代文：他到外地迎送宾客，常乘坐这两块板。
English: He often takes these two boards to welcome guests from out of town.

古文：或于中流欲没，客大惧，友呵之，复浮。
现代文：有时候正处一中流的时候，板子要沉没，客人十分惊惧，聂友就呵斥那木板一番，它就再浮上来。
English: Sometimes in the middle of the stream, when the board is about to sink and the guests are very frightened, the friends shout at the board and it rises again.

古文：仕官如愿，位至丹阳太守。
现代文：聂友的仕途是如愿的，官位一直到了丹阳太守。
English: Shen You's career was as he had hoped, and his official position went all the way to Danyang Daju.

古文：其板忽随至石头，友惊曰： 此陂中板来，必有意。 
现代文：那两块板子忽然间随他来到石头城，他大吃一惊，心想，这河边的两块板子来，一定是有意的。
English: The two boards suddenly followed him to Stone Town. He was taken aback and thought that the two boards by the river must have come intentionally.

古文：因解职还家。
现代文：于是他就解职回家。
English: So he was dismissed and went home.

古文：二板挟两边，一日即至。
现代文：两块板子挟在两边，一天就到。
English: Two boards sandwiched on both sides, arrived in one day.

古文：自尔后，板出或为凶祸。
现代文：从此后，板子的出现就可能是凶祸。
English: From then on, the appearance of the board may be a disaster.

古文：今新涂北二十里余，曰封溪，有聂友截梓树板涛牂柯处。
现代文：现在新涂北边二十多里的地方，叫做封溪。封溪有当年聂友截梓树板泛游牂柯的地方。
English: The area more than 20 miles to the north of the present-day Xintuo is called Fengxi. Fengxi was once a place where Xingyou cut down trees to let the cormorants roam.

古文：牂柯有樟树，今犹存，乃聂友回日所栽，枝叶皆向下生。
现代文：牂柯那里有一棵樟树，现在还活着，那是聂友当年要回来时栽的。这棵树的枝叶全向下长。
English: There is an eucalyptus tree at Shinko's place, which is still alive. It was planted by Shinko's friend when he wanted to return that year. The branches and leaves of this tree all grow downwards.

古文：董奇
现代文：董奇
English: Dongqi

古文：京兆董奇庭前有大树，阴映甚佳。
现代文：京兆的董奇，庭院前有一棵大树，茂盛遮荫，挺不错的。
English: There is a big tree in front of Dongqi's courtyard in Jingzhao. It provides a lush shade, which is quite nice.

古文：后霖雨，奇独在家乡，有小吏言，太承云府君来。
现代文：后来连续几天下雨，董奇独自在家，有一个小官对他说，太承云府的一位先生来见。
English: Later, when it rained for several days in a row and Dong Qi was home alone, a minor official told him that a gentleman from Taizhengyunfu had come to see him.

古文：乃见承云著通天冠，长八尺，自言。
现代文：于是他看到那位承云先生头戴通天冠，身高八尺。
English: Then he saw that Mr. Chengyun was wearing a crown on his head and was eight feet tall.

古文：为方伯，某第三子有隽才，方当与君周旋。
现代文：那人自称是方伯，说： 我的三儿子人才出众，他将与您周旋。 
English: The man, who claimed to be the abbot, said, "My third son is very talented, he will negotiate with you."

古文：明日，觉树下有异。
现代文：第二天，董奇觉得树下有了变化。
English: The next day, Dong Qi felt a change under the tree.

古文：每晡后无人，辄有一少年就奇语戏，或命取饮食。
现代文：每当午后没人的时候，总有一个青年人来到董奇面前说话嬉戏，有时候还让董奇拿吃喝的东西。
English: Whenever there is no one in the afternoon, there is always a young man who comes to talk and play in front of Dong Qi, and sometimes let Dong Qi take food and drink.

古文：如是半年。
现代文：如此半年之久。
English: This went on for half a year.

古文：奇气强壮，一门无疾。
现代文：董奇的气色强壮，全家都没病。
English: Dong Qi's appearance is strong, and the whole family is healthy.

古文：奇后适下墅，其仆客三人送护。
现代文：董奇后来到下墅去，他的三个仆人送他。
English: Dong Qi then went to the lower villa, and his three servants accompanied him.

古文：言树材可用，欲贷之，郎常不听，今试共斩斫之。
现代文：三人对董奇说，这棵大树的材料有大用，想要卖它，您一直不同意，现在是否可以把它一块砍了呢？
English: The three of them said to Dong Qi, "The material of this big tree is very useful. If you want to sell it, you have always disagreed. Now, can you cut it down in one piece?"

古文：奇遂许之。
现代文：董奇于是就允许了。
English: Dong Qi then allowed it.

古文：神亦自尔绝矣。
现代文：神灵也就从此消失了。
English: The deities have since disappeared.

古文：赵翼
现代文：赵翼
English: Zhao Ying

古文：永嘉松阳赵翼以义熙中与大儿鲜共伐山桃树，有血流，惊而止。
现代文：永嘉郡松阳县的赵翼，于义熙年中与大儿子赵鲜一起砍伐一棵山桃树。刚砍儿斧，见树流血，大吃一惊，急忙停止。
English: Zhao Ying, from Songyang County, Yongjia County, was chopping down a peach tree with his eldest son Zhao Xian in the middle of the year. As soon as he cut the axe, he was surprised to see the tree bleeding and quickly stopped.

古文：后忽失第三息所在，经十日自归。
现代文：后来忽然丢失了第三个孩子。十天以后，这孩子又自己回来了。
English: Then she suddenly lost her third child. Ten days later, the child came back on his own.

古文：闻空中有语声，或歌哭。
现代文：赵翼听到空中有说话的声音，有时候唱歌，有时候哭泣。
English: Zhao Ying heard voices talking in the air, sometimes singing, sometimes crying.

古文：翼语之曰： 汝既是神，何不与我相见？ 
现代文：赵翼就对着空中说： 你既然是神仙，为什么不和我见面呢？ 
English: Zhao Ying said to the air: Since you are a fairy godmother, why don't you meet me?

古文：答曰： 我正气耳。
现代文：空中回答说： 我是一股正气罢了。
English: The air replied: I'm just a breath of sanity.

古文：舍北有大枫树，南有孤峰，名曰石楼。
现代文：屋舍之北有一棵大枫树，南面有一座孤立的山峰。
English: There is a large maple tree to the north of the house and an isolated mountain to the south.

古文：四壁绝立，人兽莫履。
现代文：孤峰名叫 石楼 ，四面全是悬崖绝壁，不管是人是兽，没有能上去的。
English: The lonely peak is called Shilou, and there are cliffs on all four sides. No one can climb it, no matter if they are human or animal.

古文：小有失意，便取此儿著树杪及石楼上。
现代文：大枫树有点不高兴，就把这孩子弄到那树梢和石楼上了。
English: The big maple tree was not happy, so it dragged the child to the top of the tree and up to the stone tower.

古文：举家叩头请之，然后得下。 
现代文：全家磕头请求，然后才能下来。 
English: The whole family begged for bread before they could come down.

古文：魏佛陀
现代文：魏佛陀
English: Wei Buddha Ensemble

古文：梁末，蔡州布席家空宅，相承云，凶不可居。
现代文：梁代末年，蔡州布席家的空宅院，相传说是座凶宅不能居住。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, the empty mansion of the Buxi family in Caizhou was rumored to be an uninhabitable house.

古文：有回防都督军人魏佛陀将火入宅，前堂止息。
现代文：有一个回防都督手下的军人，名叫魏佛陀，他率领着十名兵士进入宅中，在前堂住下。
English: There was a soldier under the command of the defense governor, named Wei Buddha, who led ten soldiers into the house and lived in the front hall.

古文：曛黄之际，堂舍有一物，人面狗身，无尾，在舍跳踯。
现代文：日落的时候，堂屋里出现一个东西，人面狗身，没有尾巴。那东西在堂屋里乱跳。
English: At sunset, a thing appeared in the hall, with a human face and a dog's body, but no tail. The thing danced around the hall.

古文：佛陀挽弓射之，一发即不复见。
现代文：魏佛陀挽弓搭箭射那东西。一射便看不见了。
English: Wei Buddha took a bow and arrows and shot the thing. It was out of sight in one shot.

古文：明日发屋，看箭饮羽，得一朽木，可长尺许，下有凝血。
现代文：第二天在堂屋里挖掘，挖到一块被箭射中的朽烂木头。木头有一尺来长，下端有凝结的血迹。
English: The next day, digging in the hall, they found a piece of rotten wood that had been hit by an arrow. The piece of wood was a foot long, with congealed blood at the bottom.

古文：自后遂绝。
现代文：从此以后就根绝了闹鬼神的现象。
English: Since then, the haunting phenomenon has been eradicated.

古文：临淮将
现代文：临淮将
English: Lin Huai Zheng

古文：上元中，临淮诸将等乘夜宴集，燔炙猪羊，芬馥备至。
现代文：上元年间，临淮的将领们连夜举行宴会。炙烤猪羊，美味备至。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, the generals of Linhuai held a banquet overnight. Roasted pork and lamb, deliciously prepared.

古文：有一巨手从窗中入，言乞一脔，众皆不与。
现代文：有一只大手从窗口伸了进来，说要块肉吃。
English: A large hand reached through the window and asked for a piece of meat.

古文：频乞数四，终亦不与。
现代文：众人都没给。频频要了四次，始终也没给。
English: Many people didn't give it to me. I asked for it four times, but they never gave it to me.

古文：乃潜结绳作彄，施于孔所。绐云： 与肉。 
现代文：于是人们暗中找绳子系了一个彄，放在窗户那个有孔的地方，欺骗说： 给你肉！ 
English: So they secretly found a rope, tied a noose to it, and put it in the hole in the window, saying, "Here's some meat for you!"

古文：手复入，因而系其臂。
现代文：手就又伸了进来。于是一紧绳彄就系住了那人的胳膊。
English: The hand reached in again, and a tight cord was tied around the man's arm.

古文：牵挽甚至，而不能脱。
现代文：绳子拉得很紧，他无法逃脱。
English: The rope was so tight he couldn't escape.

古文：欲明，乃朴然而断。
现代文：天将亮的时候，那手臂木头似地折断了。
English: Just before dawn, the arm snapped like a piece of wood.

古文：视之，是一杨枝。
现代文：一看，不是手臂，而是一个杨树枝。
English: At first glance, it's not an arm, but a poplar branch.

古文：持以求树，近至河上，以碎断，往往有血。
现代文：拿着这个树枝去找那棵树，在不远的河边找到了，因为碎断，到处都有血迹。
English: I took this branch to look for the tree and found it not far from the river, because it was broken and there was blood everywhere.

古文：崔导
现代文：崔导
English: Cui Du

古文：唐荆南有富人崔导者，家贫乏。
现代文：唐朝时，荆南有一个叫崔导的富人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a rich man named Cui Duan in Jingnan.

古文：偶种桔约千余株，每岁大获其利。
现代文：他家里本来很穷，偶然种了大约一千株桔树，每年都能大获其利。
English: His family was originally very poor, but by chance they planted about a thousand orange trees, and every year they made a great profit.

古文：忽一日，有一株化为一丈夫，长丈余，求见崔导。
现代文：忽然有一天，有一棵桔树变成一个一丈多高的成年男子，来求见崔导。
English: Suddenly, one day, an orange tree turned into a very tall adult man, who came to see Cui Du.

古文：导初怪之，不敢出。
现代文：崔导感到奇怪，不敢出去。
English: Cui Du felt strange and did not dare to go out.

古文：丈夫苦求之，导遂出见之。
现代文：那男子苦苦地求他，他就出来见那男子。
English: The man pleaded with him, and he came out to the man.

古文：丈夫曰： 我前生欠君钱百万，未偿而死。
现代文：男子说： 我前生欠你一百万钱，没还就死了。
English: The man said, "In my previous life, I owed you a million dollars, but I died before I could pay it back.

古文：我家人复自欺，君乃上诉于天。
现代文：我的家人又自己欺骗自己，你就上诉到天庭。
English: My family lied to themselves, and you appealed to heaven.

古文：是以令我合门为桔，计佣于君，仅能满耳。
现代文：所以上天让我们全家变成桔树，计酬雇用给你。才能还满一百万。
English: That's why, God willing, we'll turn our entire family into orange trees and hire you for a fee. Only then will we be able to pay back the full million.

古文：今上帝有命，哀我族属，复我本形。
现代文：现在上天有命令。可怜我的家族亲属，复还我的本形。
English: Now there is an order from heaven. Have mercy on my family and relatives, and return me to my original form.

古文：兼我自省前事，止如再宿耳。
现代文：加上我自己反省以前的事，只再过一夜便回复人形了。
English: With my own reflection on what happened before, it only took one more night for me to return to the doll.

古文：君幸为我置一敝庐，我自耕凿，以卒此生。
现代文：希望你为我盖一所小草房，我亲自耕种，以了结此生。
English: I hope you will build me a small grass hut, and I will cultivate it myself to end my life.

古文：君仍尽剪去桔树，端居守常，则能自保。
现代文：你还是把所有的桔树都砍去，老老实实地过日子，就能够保住自己。
English: If you still cut down all the orange trees and live honestly, you will be able to save yourself.

古文：不能者，天降祸矣。
现代文：不然的话，天就降祸于你了。
English: If you don't, you'll be damned.

古文：何者，昔百万之资，今已足矣。 
现代文：为什么呢？过去我欠的那百万之资，如今已经还够了。 
English: Why? The million dollars I owed in the past is already enough.

古文：导大惊，乃皆如其言，即为葺庐，且尽伐去桔树。
现代文：崔导非常吃惊，就完全按照那人说的去做，立即着手为那人盖房子，而且砍伐了所有的桔树。
English: Cui Du was very surprised and did exactly what the man said. He immediately started to build a house for the man and cut down all the orange trees.

古文：后五年而导卒，家复贫。
现代文：五年后崔导便死去，家又开始变穷。
English: Five years later, Cui Duan died, and the family began to become poor again.

古文：其人亦不知所在。
现代文：那个人也不知在哪。
English: I don't know where that man is.

古文：贾秘
现代文：贾秘
English: Jia Jiam

古文：顺宗时，书生贾秘自睢阳之长安。行至古洛城边，见绿野中有数人环饮，自歌自舞。
现代文：顺宗的时候，书生贾秘从睢阳到长安去，走到古洛城边，见绿野之中有几个人环坐在一起饮酒，自己唱歌，自己跳舞。
English: When Shunzong, the scholar Jia Hui went from Shenyang to Chang'an, walked to the edge of the ancient city of Luo, and saw several people sitting in a circle drinking together in the green, singing and dancing by themselves.

古文：秘因诣之。
现代文：于是贾秘就到那边去了。
English: So Jia Si went there.

古文：数人忻然齐起，揖秘同席。
现代文：那几个人一齐欣然而起，揖让贾秘和他们一起坐。
English: Those few people got up happily, and asked Jia Si to sit with them.

古文：秘既见七人皆儒服，俱有礼，乃问之曰： 观数君子，士流也。乃敢聚饮于野，四望无人？ 
现代文：贾秘见七个人都是书生打扮，都彬彬有礼，就问道： 看各位君子，属于士人阶层，怎敢在这四望无人的野外聚饮？ 
English: Seeing that the seven people were all well-dressed and courteous, Jia Hui asked: "Look, gentlemen, you belong to the scholar class, how dare you gather and drink in the open air with no one around?

古文：有一人言曰： 我辈七人，皆负济世之才，而未用于时者，亦犹君之韬蕴，而方谋仕进也。
现代文：有人回答说： 我们七个人，都负有济世之才，之所以没有被重用于当世，这也和你颖处囊中一样，正在谋划仕进的办法呢。
English: Someone answered: "We seven people all have the ability to benefit the world. The reason why we have not been reused in the present world is the same as what you have in your pocket. We are planning a way to advance.

古文：我辈适偶会论之间，君忽辱临。幸且共芳樽，惜美景，以古之兴亡为警觉，以人间用舍为拟议，又何必涉绮阁，入龙舟，而方尽一醉也？ 
现代文：我们碰巧偶然相会谈论之间，您忽然光临，我们有幸与您一起饮酒，共赏美景，以古代的兴亡为警觉，以人间的取舍为话题，又何必居住绮阁，乘坐龙舟才能喝一顿酒呢？ 
English: We happen to meet by chance to talk about, you suddenly come, we are fortunate to drink with you, enjoy the scenery, with the ancient rise and fall as a vigilance, with human choice as a topic, and why do you have to live in a pavilion, take a dragon boat to drink a meal of wine?

古文：秘甚怪之，不觉肃然致敬。
现代文：贾秘特别奇怪，不知不觉就肃然起敬。
English: Jia Hii is particularly strange, and I was awestruck without realizing it.

古文：及欢笑久，而七人皆递相目，若有所疑。
现代文：等谈笑欢乐的时间长了，那七个人都在互相使眼色，好像有什么怀疑。
English: After a long time of laughter and joy, the seven people looked at each other suspiciously.

古文：乃问秘曰： 今既接高论，奚不一示君之芳猷，使我辈服君而不疑也？ 
现代文：于是就问贾秘道： 现在既然在一起交谈，何不展示一下您的智谋和观点，使我们佩服而不生疑呢？ 
English: So he asked Jia Hailu: Now that we are talking together, why don't you show us your wit and point of view so that we can admire you without being suspicious?

古文：秘乃起而言曰： 余睢阳人也。少好读书，颇识古者王霸之道。
现代文：贾秘就站起来说： 我是睢阳人，从小喜欢读书，多少知道一些古代的王霸之道。
English: Jia Hii stood up and said: I am a native of Fenyang. I have loved reading since I was a child, and I know some of the ancient ways of the king.

古文：今闻皇上纂嗣大宝，开直言之路，欲一叩象阙，少伸愚诚。
现代文：如今听说皇上继承了皇位，广开言路，我便想叩一下皇宫的门阙，略尽我的愚忠。
English: Now that I have heard that the Emperor has succeeded to the Imperial Throne and has opened up a wide avenue of communication, I would like to knock on the door of the Imperial Palace and show my foolish loyalty.

古文：亦不敢取富贵，但一豁鄙怀耳。
现代文：也不敢谋取富贵，只不过施展一下抱负而已。
English: They do not dare to seek wealth, but only to pursue their ambitions.

古文：适见七君子高会，故来诣之。
现代文：恰巧遇见七位君子雅会，所以便来到这里。
English: I came here because I happened to meet seven gentlemen.

古文：幸无遐弃可也。 
现代文：多谢各位没有嫌弃我。 
English: Thank you for not abandoning me.

古文：其一人顾诸辈笑曰： 他人自道，必可无伤。吾属断之，行当败缺。 
现代文：其中一人看着几位笑道： 他人自如此说，一定必是无什么大害处；我们推断，行将败缺。 
English: One of them looked at the others and said with a smile, "Since the others say so, there must be no great harm; we deduce that the line is about to fail."

古文：其一人曰： 己虽勿言。
现代文：其中一人说： 自己虽然不说，人家还是不用我。 
English: One of them said: "Even though I don't say it myself, people still don't use me.

古文：人其舍我： 一人曰： 此君名秘，固当为我匿瑕矣。 
现代文：一人说： 此人名字叫 秘 ，一定能替我隐瞒缺点了。 
English: One person said, "This person's name is Hime, he will definitely be able to hide my shortcomings for me."

古文：乃笑谓秘曰： 吾辈是七树精也：其一曰松，二曰柳，三曰槐，四曰桑，五曰枣，六曰栗，七曰樗。
现代文：于是就笑着对贾秘说： 我们是七个树精。头一个是松树精；二一个是柳树精；三一个是槐树精；四一个是桑树精；五一个是枣树精；六一个是栗树精；七一个是樗树精。
English: So he smiled and said to Jachi, "We are seven tree spirits. The first is the pine spirit; the second is the willow spirit; the third is the eucalyptus spirit; the fourth is the mulberry spirit; the fifth is the jujube spirit; the sixth is the chestnut spirit; and the seventh is the eucalyptus spirit.

古文：今各言其志，君幸听而秘之。 
现代文：现在咱们各言其志，您听了不要讲出去。 
English: Now, let's each of us say what we want to say. If you listen, don't speak out.

古文：其松精乃起而言曰： 我本处空山，非常材也。负坚贞之节，虽霜凌雪犯，不能易其操。
现代文：那松精就起来说道： 我本来处在空山之中，是非常之材，身负坚贞的气节，虽然霜也欺凌雪也来犯，但是不能动摇我的高尚情操。
English: The pine spirit stood up and said: I was originally in the middle of an empty mountain, I am a very good person, with a firm temperament, although frost and bullying snow also come, but I can not shake my noble sentiments.

古文：设若哲匠构大厦，挥斤斧，长短之木，各得其用。
现代文：如果高明的工匠建筑大厦，挥起斧头，木头不论长短，各有用场。
English: When a skilled craftsman builds a house, he wields an axe, and the pieces of wood, no matter how long or short, all have their place.

古文：榱桷虽众，而欠梁栋，我即必备栋梁之用也。
现代文：椽子檩子尽管很多，但是缺少栋梁。我就一定具备栋梁的大用。
English: Although there are a lot of rafters, there is a lack of beams. I must have a great use for beams.

古文：我得其用，则永无倾危之患矣。 
现代文：我得到重用，那就永远没有倾斜倒塌的忧患了。 
English: If I get reused, I'll never have to worry about tipping over.

古文：其次一人起言曰： 我之风流之名，闻于古今。
现代文：其次一个人站起来说： 我的这个风流的名字，闻于古今。
English: Next, a man stood up and said: "My name, as a womanizer, has been known from ancient times to the present.

古文：但恨炀帝不回，无人见知。
现代文：我只恨隋炀帝不回来，没人知道我。
English: I just hate that Sui and Qin didn't come back. No one knows me.

古文：张绪效我，空耀载籍。
现代文：张绪效仿我，空留名字于书籍之中。
English: Zhang Xu followed my example and left his name blank in the book.

古文：所喜者，絮飞则才子咏诗，叶嫩则佳人学画，柔胜刚强，且自保其性也。 
现代文：令人高兴的是，我的花絮飞扬就有才子咏诗；我的叶子还嫩，就有佳人学画。我的柔弱胜过刚强。我将保持自己的性情。 
English: Happily, when my flowers are in full bloom, I am a poet; when my leaves are young, I am a painter; when I am weak, I am strong; I will keep my temper.

古文：其次者曰： 我受阳和之恩，为不材之木。
现代文：又一个人说： 我受阳和的恩泽，却是不成材的树木。
English: Another said: "I'm blessed by the sun and by nature, but I'm not a tree.

古文：大川无梁，人不我取；大厦无栋，人不我用。
现代文：大河里没桥，人家不取我；大厦里没栋，人家不用我。
English: There is no bridge in the river, so people do not take me; there is no building in the building, so people do not use me.

古文：若非遭郢匠之垩，则必不合于长短大小也。噫！
现代文：如果没有好木匠加工，那就肯定不合乎长短大小的要求。噫！
English: If there is no good carpenter processing, then it certainly does not meet the requirements of the length and short size.

古文：倚我者有三公之名矣。 
现代文：依靠我的有三公之名呢！ 
English: There are three princes who rely on me!

古文：其次者言曰： 我平生好蚕。无辞吐饲，不异推食。
现代文：另一个说道： 我平生喜欢蚕，供蚕食用，从不推辞。
English: Another said: I've always liked silkworms, I've fed them and I've never turned them down.

古文：蚕即茧，茧而丝，丝为绔绮。绔绮入贵族之用。
现代文：蚕就是茧，茧就是丝，丝织出绔绮，绔绮成为贵族的用品。
English: Silkworms are cocoons, cocoons are silk, silk weaves cocoons, and cocoons become the goods of the aristocracy.

古文：设或贵族之流，见绔绮之美丽以念我，我又岂须大为梁栋，小为榱桷者也？ 
现代文：如果那些贵族阶层的人，看到绔绮的美丽能够想到我，我又何必做什么栋梁和檩子椽子什么的。 
English: If those aristocrats, seeing the beauty of the cocoon, can think of me, why do I have to do anything with beams and rafters?

古文：其次者曰： 我自辩士苏秦入燕之日，已推我有兼济之名也。
现代文：下一个说： 我自从辩士苏秦进入燕国那天起，就已经有了兼济的名声。
English: The next one said, "Ever since the debater Su Qin entered Yan's country, I have had a reputation as a moneylender.

古文：不唯汉武帝号为束束，投我者足表赤心。
现代文：不光汉武帝给了我封号，以我为礼物送人，足以表达赤诚之心。
English: Not only Emperor Hanwu gave me a seal number, but also gave me as a gift, which is enough to express the sincerity of the heart.

古文：我又奚虑不为人所知也？ 
现代文：我又何必忧虑不为人所知呢？ 
English: And why should I be anxious about not being known?

古文：其次曰： 我虽处蓬荜，性实恬然，亦可以济大国之用也。
现代文：再一个说： 我虽然处在蓬荜之间，性情朴实而恬静，但是也可以对大国有所帮助。
English: Another said: Although I am in the middle of the mountains, my temperament is simple and quiet, but I can also be helpful to big countries.

古文：倘人主立宗庙，虔祀飨，而法古以用我，我实可以使民之战栗也。 
现代文：倘若皇家立宗庙，虔诚地祭祀鬼神，就会效法古人而用我。我实在可以让百姓战栗。 
English: If the royal family were to establish a temple and piously worship ghosts and gods, they would follow the example of the ancients and use me. I can really make the people shudder.

古文：其次曰： 我与众何殊也？
现代文：最后一个说： 我与大伙有什么不同？
English: The last one said, "What's the difference between me and everyone else?"

古文：天亦覆我，地亦载我。春即荣，秋即落。
现代文：天也盖我，地也载我，春天我就繁茂，秋天我就凋落。
English: The sky also covers me, the earth also carries me, in spring I flourish, in autumn I fall.

古文：近世人以我为不材，我实常怀愤惋。
现代文：近代人认为我不成材，我确实经常感到愤慨不平。
English: I do often feel resentful that modern people think I'm not up to the job.

古文：我不处涧底，怎见我有凌云之势；我不在宇下，焉知我是构厦之材。
现代文：我不处在山涧底下，怎能看到我有凌云之势；我不处在屋宇之下，哪能知道我是构厦之材。
English: If I am not at the foot of the mountain, how can I see that I have the potential to climb the clouds; if I am not under the building, how can I know that I am the material of the building.

古文：骥不骋即驽马也，玉不剖即顽石也。
现代文：千里马不驰骋就是跑不快的劣马，美玉不从璞中剖出来就是顽石。
English: If a good horse does not gallop, it is a poor horse that does not run fast. If a beautiful jewel is not cut out of the cocoon, it is a stubborn stone.

古文：固不必松即可构厦凌云，我即不可构厦凌云。
现代文：所以，不一定松树就可以建大厦凌云霄，不一定我就不能建大厦凌云霄。
English: Therefore, it is not necessarily that a pine tree can build a skyscraper, and it is not necessarily that I can build a skyscraper.

古文：此所谓信一人之言，大丧其真矣。
现代文：这叫做听信一个人的话就大丧其真了。
English: It's called taking one person at their word.

古文：我所以慕隐沦之辈，且韬藏其迹。
现代文：我因此才敬慕隐逸沦落的人们，并且韬藏自己的行迹。
English: That's why I admire people who are reclusive and hide their whereabouts.

古文：我若逢陶侃之一见，即又用之有余也。 
现代文：我若能遇上陶侃那样的长官，就又有用了。 
English: If I could meet a superior officer like Tao Kan, it would be useful.

古文：言讫，复自歌自舞。
现代文：说完了，树精们又是自歌自舞起来。
English: Having said that, the tree spirits began to sing and dance again.

古文：秘闻其言，大怖，坐不安席，遽起辞之。
现代文：贾秘听了他们的话，很是恐怖，坐立不安，急忙起身告辞。
English: Jia Hai listened to their words, was very scared, restless, and hurriedly got up to say goodbye.

古文：七人乃共劝酒一杯，谓秘曰： 天地间人与万物，皆不可测，慎勿轻之。 
现代文：那七人就一起劝他一杯酒，对他说： 天地间人和万物都不可预测，希望您谨慎行事，不要轻心。 
English: The seven of them together persuaded him to take a glass of wine and said to him, "People and things in heaven and on earth are unpredictable. I hope you will be careful and not be careless."

古文：秘饮讫，谢之而去。
现代文：贾秘喝完，告辞而去。
English: After drinking, Jia Hii said goodbye and left.

古文：薛弘机
现代文：薛弘机
English: Xue Hongji

古文：东都渭桥铜驼坊，有隐士薛弘机。
现代文：东都渭桥铜驼坊，有一个隐士叫薛弘机。
English: There is a hermit named Xue Hongji in Tongdu Qiao Tonglu Fang.

古文：营蜗舍渭河之隈，闭户自处，又无妻仆。
现代文：薛弘机在渭河边上盖了一所小草房，闭户自处，又没有妻室奴仆。
English: Xue Hongji built a small grass hut on the edge of the Wei River, closed the house to himself, and did not have a wife and slave.

古文：每秋时，邻树飞叶入庭，亦扫而聚焉，盛以纸囊，逐其强而归之。
现代文：每到秋天，邻近的树叶飞落到院子里来，他就把它们扫到一块，装进纸口袋，找到那树的地方而归还。
English: Every autumn, when leaves from nearby trees fall into the yard, he sweeps them up, puts them in a paper bag, finds the tree's location and returns them.

古文：常于座隅题其词曰： 夫人之计，将徇前非且不可，执我见不从于众亦不可。
现代文：他曾经在座席角落题词说： 为人之计，顺从以前的过错是不行的，固执己见不为群众所理解也是不行的。
English: He once wrote an inscription in the corner of the seat, saying: "To be human, it is not possible to obey previous mistakes, and it is not possible to be stubborn and not be understood by the masses."

古文：人生实难，唯在处中行道耳。 
现代文：人生之难，只在人的思想行为罢了。 
English: The difficulties of life arise only from man's thoughts and actions.

古文：居一日，残阳西颓，霜风入户，披褐独坐，仰张邴之余芳。忽有一客造门。
现代文：过了一天，残阳西斜，秋风入户，他正披着衣衫独坐，仰慕张邴的美名，忽然有一客人来到门前。
English: A day later, with the sun setting and the autumn wind blowing into the house, he was sitting alone with his shirt on, admiring Zhang Ye's reputation, when a guest suddenly came to the door.

古文：仪状瑰古，隆隼庞眉，方口广颡，嶷然四皓之比。
现代文：客人的样子挺古怪，眍睫眼，花白眉，口方额大超绝的样子完全可以与四皓相比。
English: The appearance of the guests is quite strange. They have thin eyelashes, white eyebrows, and a large square mouth, which is completely comparable to the four-eyed crows.

古文：衣早霞裘，长揖薛弘机曰： 足下性尚幽道，道著嘉肥。
现代文：他身穿早霞裘，长揖薛弘机说： 先生您的性情喜尚幽静之道，颇有修养，造诣很深。
English: He was dressed in a morning gown, and his father-in-law, Xue Hongji, said, "Teacher, your disposition likes a quiet life, you are quite cultivated, and you are very accomplished.

古文：仆所居不遥，向慕足下操履，特相诣。 
现代文：我住的地方离这不远，一向仰慕您的德才，特意来拜见。 
English: I live not far from here, and I have always admired your talent, so I came specially to see you.

古文：弘机一见相得，切磋今古，遂问姓氏。
现代文：薛弘机一见就喜欢他，正好可以和他切磋一些今古学问。于是就问他的姓名。
English: Xue Hongji liked him at first sight, and just happened to be able to exchange some ancient knowledge with him. So he asked his name.

古文：其人曰： 藏经姓柳。 即便歌吟，清夜将艾。
现代文：他说他姓柳，名藏经。于是就一起唱歌吟诗，直到夜深。
English: He said his surname was Liu and his name was Zangjing, so they sang and chanted together until late at night.

古文：云： 汉兴，叔孙为礼，何得以死丧婚姻而行二载制度？
现代文：他说： 汉朝兴，叔孙氏制定礼法，怎么能以死丧和婚姻而行二载制度？
English: He said: When the Han Dynasty was flourishing and the Sun Yat-sen family established the etiquette, how could the two-year system be implemented with death, mourning and marriage?

古文：吾所感焉。 
现代文：这是我有所感的。 
English: That's what I feel.

古文：歌曰： 寒水停圆沼，秋池满败荷。
现代文：接着唱道：  寒水停圆沼，秋池满败荷。
English: Then he sang: "The cold water has stopped in the pond, and the autumn pond is full."

古文：杜门穷典籍，所得事今多。 
现代文：杜门穷典籍，所得事今多。 
English: Dumont is a poor classicist, but he has achieved a lot.

古文：弘机好《易》，因问。
现代文：薛弘机喜好《周易》，就向他问起《周易》的事。
English: Xue Hongji likes "Zhou Yi" and asked him about "Zhou Yi."

古文：藏经则曰： 易道深微，未敢学也。
现代文：他刚说： 《周易》的道理深奥精微，我没敢学。
English: He just said: The principles of "Zhou Yi" are so profound and subtle, I dare not learn them.

古文：且刘氏六说，只明《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》及《春秋》，而亡于《易》。
现代文：况且刘氏的六说，只说明了《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》和《春秋》，而把《易》丢了。
English: Moreover, Liu's six sayings only explained "Poetry," "Book," "Rite," "Music" and "Spring and Autumn," and lost "Ease."

古文：其实五说。
现代文：其实是五说。
English: Actually, it's five.

古文：是道之难。 
现代文：这是因为道理太难。 
English: This is because the truth is too difficult.

古文：弘机甚喜此论。
现代文：薛弘机特别赞同此论。
English: Xue Hongji particularly agrees with this theory.

古文：言讫辞去，窣飒有声，弘机望之，隐隐然丈余而没。
现代文：柳藏经说完就告辞了，走的时候窣窣窸窸地有声音。薛弘机望着他，见他走出一丈多远就影影绰绰地隐没了。
English: After Liu Zangjing finished his speech, he said goodbye. As he left, there was a thudding sound. Xue Hongqi looked at him, and saw how far he had walked, and then he faded away.

古文：后问诸邻，悉无此色。
现代文：后来向邻居打听，都说没有这样一个人。
English: Later, when I asked my neighbors, they all said that there was no such person.

古文：弘机苦思藏经，又不知所。
现代文：薛弘机苦苦地思念柳藏经，却又不知他在什么地方。
English: Xue Hongji thought hard about Liu Zangjing, but he did not know where he was.

古文：寻月余，又诣弘机。
现代文：一个多月以后，柳藏经又来见薛弘机。
English: More than a month later, Liu Zangjing came to see Xue Hongji again.

古文：弘机每欲相近，藏经辄退。
现代文：薛弘机每次想要接近他，他总是往后退。
English: Every time Xue Hongji tried to get close to him, he always backed away.

古文：弘机逼之，微闻朽薪之气，藏经隐。
现代文：薛弘机逼近他，就能闻到略微有一点朽烂木材的气味。柳藏经便隐去了。
English: As Xue Hongji approached him, he could smell the faint scent of rotting wood. Liu Zangjing disappeared.

古文：至明年五月又来，乃谓弘机曰： 知音难逢，日月易失，心亲道旷，室迩人遐。
现代文：到第二年五月他又来了，竟然对薛弘机说： 知音难觅，日月易失。心相亲，道理明，室很近，人却远。
English: In May of the following year, he came again and said to Xue Hongji: "It's hard to find a good friend, and it's easy to lose one. It's obvious that we're soul mates. Our rooms are very close, but people are far away."

古文：吾有一绝相赠，请君记焉。 
现代文：我有一首《绝句》赠你，请记住它。 
English: I have a "final sentence" poem for you, please remember it.

古文：诗曰： 谁谓三才贵，余观万化同。
现代文：诗说： 谁谓三才贵，余观万化同。
English: The poem says: Who is the most valuable of the three?

古文：心虚嫌蠹食，年老怯狂风。 
现代文：心虚嫌蠹食，年老怯狂风。 
English: An empty heart hates to eat, and old age is a fearful thing.

古文：吟讫，情意搔然，不复从容，出门而西，遂失其踪。
现代文：吟罢，他就有些不安的样子，不再那么从容，出门向西走去。
English: After singing, he looked a little uneasy, no longer so calm, and went out to the west.

古文：是夜恶风，发屋拔树。
现代文：这天夜里刮大风，毁屋拔树。
English: On this night, a strong wind blew, destroying houses and uprooting trees.

古文：明日，魏王池畔有大枯柳，为烈风所拉折。
现代文：第二天，魏王池畔的一棵大枯柳，被大风刮断。
English: The next day, a large withered willow tree on the bank of Wei Wang Pond was blown down by the strong wind.

古文：其内不知谁人藏经百余卷，尽烂坏。
现代文：树洞里不知什么人藏经书一百多卷，全都朽烂腐坏。
English: I don't know who hid more than a hundred volumes of scriptures in a tree cave, but they are all rotten.

古文：弘机往收之，多为雨渍断，皆失次第，内唯无《周易》。
现代文：薛弘机去把这些经书收回来，大多被雨水浸泡了，完全没了次序。其中唯独没有《周易》。
English: When Xue Hongji went to collect these scriptures, most of them were soaked in rainwater and completely out of order. Among them, only "Zhou Yi" was missing.

古文：弘机叹曰： 藏经之谓乎？ 
现代文：薛弘机叹道： 这就叫做 柳藏经 啊！ 
English: Xue Hongji sighed, "This is called the Willow Sutra!

古文：建中年事。
现代文：这是建中年的事。
English: It's a middle-aged thing.

古文：卢虔
现代文：卢虔
English: Lu Qian

古文：东洛有故宅，其堂奥轩级甚宏特，然居者多暴死，是以空而键之且久。
现代文：东洛有一所旧宅院，它的堂、奥、轩、级非常宏伟奇特，但是在此居住的人多半都暴死。所以已经空锁着放了很久。
English: There is an old mansion in East L.A. Its hall, backyard, courtyard, and staircase are very grand and peculiar, but most of the people who lived here died violently. Therefore, it has been empty, locked and left for a long time.

古文：故右散骑常侍万阳卢虔，贞元中为御史，分察东台，常欲贸其宅而止焉。
现代文：贞元年中，右散骑常侍万阳的卢虔，当时是御史，分察东台，曾经想要买这所宅院而住在里边。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Zhen, Lu Qian, a right rider and a regular attendant of Wanyang, who was an imperial historian at that time and inspected Dongtai, once wanted to buy this house and lived in it.

古文：或曰： 此宅有怪，不可居。 
现代文：有的人告诉他说： 这个宅子里有鬼怪，不能住人。 
English: Some people told him: "This house is haunted, it's not fit for human habitation."

古文：虔曰： 吾自能弭之。 
现代文：卢虔说： 我自有办法除掉它。 
English: Lu Qian said: I have my own way to get rid of it.

古文：后一夕，虔与从吏同寝其堂，命仆使尽止于门外。
现代文：后一天夜里，卢虔和他的一个从吏一起睡在堂屋里，让其他手下人全都住到门外。
English: On the night of the second day, Lu Qian slept in the hall with one of his subordinates, leaving the rest of his men to live outside the gate.

古文：从吏勇悍善射，于是执弓矢，坐前轩下。
现代文：这个从吏勇猛善射，于是他就拿着弓和箭，坐在窗下。
English: This one shot bravely and well from the officials, so he took his bow and arrows and sat down under the window.

古文：夜将深，闻有叩门者，从吏即问之。
现代文：夜将深的时候，听到有人敲门。从吏就问是谁。
English: Late at night, he heard someone knocking on his door. He asked the clerk who it was.

古文：应声曰： 柳将军遣奉书于卢侍御。 
现代文：外边答应说： 柳将军给卢御史送来一封信。 
English: The outside world promised to say: General Liu sent a letter to Lu Yishi.

古文：虔不应。
现代文：卢虔不应声。
English: Lu Qian did not respond.

古文：已而投一幅书轩下，字似濡笔而书者，点画纤然。
现代文：过一会扔一幅书在窗下，字迹好像是用柔软的毛笔写的，点画挺细的。
English: After a while he threw a book under the window, the handwriting seemed to be written with a soft brush, the dots were very fine.

古文：虔命从吏视其字云： 吾家于此有年矣。
现代文：卢虔让从吏看看那上面写的是什么。上面写道： 我家住在这里有年头了。
English: Lu Qian let the official see what was written on it. It said: My family has lived here for years.

古文：堂奥轩级，皆吾之居也。
现代文：堂、奥、轩、级，都是我的住处。
English: The hall, the back room, the hall, and the class are all my residences.

古文：门神户灵，皆吾之隶也。
现代文：门神户灵，都是我的属下。
English: The gate, Kobe, and the spirit are all my subordinates.

古文：而君突入吾舍，岂其理耶？
现代文：而你突然来到我屋里来，哪有这样的道理呢？
English: And why did you suddenly come to my house?

古文：假令君有余，吾入之，可乎？
现代文：假如你有房舍，我去住了，可以吗？
English: If you have a house, can I live there?

古文：既不惧吾，宁不愧于心耶？
现代文：你既然不怕我，难道你心中无愧吗？
English: Since you're not afraid of me, don't you feel ashamed?

古文：君速去，勿招败亡之辱。 
现代文：你赶快离开，不要招致败亡的耻辱！ 
English: Leave at once, and do not incur the disgrace of defeat!

古文：读既毕，其书飘然四散，若飞烬之状。
现代文：读完，那书就飘然四散，像飞去的灰烬那样。
English: After reading it, the book flew away, like flying ashes.

古文：俄又闻有言者， 柳将军愿见卢御史 。
现代文：不久又听到有人说话： 柳将军愿意见一见卢御史。 
English: Not long after, someone else was heard to say: General Liu would like to have a look at Lu's history.

古文：已而有大厉至，身长数十寻，立庭，手执一瓢。
现代文：过一会儿便有一个大恶鬼来到院子里，身长好几十寻，手里头握着一个大瓢。
English: After a while, a big evil spirit came to the yard, he was several tens of meters tall, and he was holding a big hammer in his hand.

古文：其从吏即引满而发，中所执，其厉遂退，委其瓢。
现代文：那个从吏立刻拉满弓射出一箭，射到了那瓢上。
English: The bailiff immediately drew his bow and shot an arrow, which hit the anchor.

古文：久之又来，俯轩而立，俯其首且窥焉，貌甚异。
现代文：那鬼于是就退回去，找地方把瓢放下，过一会儿又来。那鬼立在窗外，俯身低头往屋里看，面貌极怪。
English: The ghost then retreated, looking for a place to put down his shovel, and came back a moment later. The ghost stood outside the window, bent down and looked into the house, looking very strange.

古文：从吏又射之，中其胸。
现代文：那从吏又射一箭，射中鬼的胸部。
English: The bailiff shoots another arrow, hitting the ghost in the chest.

古文：厉惊，若有惧，遂东向而去。
现代文：鬼惊慌，好像害怕了，就向东而去。
English: The ghost panicked, as if frightened, and headed east.

古文：至明，虔命穷其迹。至宅东隙地，见柳高百余尺，有一矢贯其上，所谓柳将军也。
现代文：到了天亮，卢虔让人查寻鬼的踪迹，来到宅子东面的一块空地上，见一棵一百多尺高的柳树上，扎着一支箭。这就是所谓的柳将军。
English: At dawn, Lu Qian sent someone to look for the ghost's tracks. They came to an open space on the east side of the house and saw an arrow stuck in a willow tree more than a hundred feet tall. This is the so-called willow general.

古文：虔伐其薪。自此其宅居者无恙。
现代文：卢虔把柳树砍了，从此这宅院里的任何居者都安全无恙。
English: Lu Qian cut down the willow tree, and from then on, anyone living in the courtyard was safe and sound.

古文：后岁余，因重构堂室，于屋瓦下得一瓢。
现代文：后来一年多，因为重建堂室，在屋瓦的下面弄出一个大瓢，长一丈多，有支箭扎在把上。
English: Later, more than a year later, because of the reconstruction of the hall, a large cocoon was made under the roof tiles. It was more than a meter long, and there was an arrow stuck in the handle.

古文：长约丈余，有矢贯其柄，即将军所执之瓢也。僧智通临湍寺僧智通常持《法华经》。
现代文：这就是柳将军拿着的那个大瓢。僧智通临湍寺有一个叫智通的和尚，经常念《法华经》。
English: This is the large scepter held by General Liu. There is a monk named Zhitong in Linyi Temple, who often recites the Lotus Sutra.

古文：入禅宴坐，必求寒林净境，殆非人迹所至处，经年，忽夜有人环其院呼智通。
现代文：他入禅宴坐，一定找寒林静境，几乎是没有人迹到过的地方。一年之后，忽然有人绕着院子喊智通。
English: When he sat down to meditate at a banquet, he was sure to find a quiet place in the cold forest, a place where almost no one had been before. A year later, someone suddenly called out to Zhitong around the courtyard.

古文：至晓，声方息。
现代文：直到天亮喊声才止。
English: The shouting didn't stop until dawn.

古文：历三夜。
现代文：三个夜晚都这样。
English: It's been like this for three nights.

古文：声侵户，智通不耐，因应曰： 呼我何事？
现代文：第三夜，喊声从窗口传进来，智通忍耐不下去了，就答应说： 喊我有什么事？
English: On the third night, shouts came through the window, and Zhitong's patience was exhausted, so he promised: "What's the point of calling me?

古文：可入来言也。 
现代文：可以进来讲。 
English: You can come in and speak.

古文：有物长六尺余，皂衣青面，张目巨吻。
现代文：有一个怪物走来。怪物长六尺多，黑衣黑脸，大睁着眼，嘴挺大。
English: There was a monster coming. The monster was more than six feet long, black-clad, black-faced, with wide-open eyes and a big mouth.

古文：见僧，初亦合手。
现代文：怪物见了智通，一开始也合一下手。
English: When the monster saw Zhitong, he also clasped his hands at first.

古文：智通熟视良久，谓曰： 尔寒乎？
现代文：智通仔细地端详他许久，说道： 你冷吗？
English: Zhitong looked at him carefully for a long time and said, "Are you cold?"

古文：就此向火。 
现代文：坐近来烤烤火。 
English: Come and sit by the fire.

古文：物乃就坐。
现代文：那怪物就坐下了。
English: The creature sat down.

古文：智通但念经。
现代文：智通只是念经。
English: Wisdom is nothing more than chanting sutras.

古文：至五更，物为火所醉，因闭目开口，据炉而鼾。
现代文：到了五更天，怪物被火陶醉了，就闭着眼张着口，拥着火炉发出鼾声。
English: On the fifth day, the monster, intoxicated by the fire, closed his eyes, opened his mouth, hugged the stove and chirped.

古文：智通观之，乃以香匙举灰火，置其口中。
现代文：智通见状，就用香匙取炭火，放到怪物口中。
English: Wisely, he used a spoon to scoop out the charcoal and put it in the monster's mouth.

古文：物大呼起，至门若蹶声。
现代文：怪物怪叫而起，跑到门外好像有摔倒的声音。
English: The monster screamed and ran out of the door as if it had fallen.

古文：其寺背山。
现代文：这座寺庙背靠着山。
English: The temple backs onto a mountain.

古文：智通及明，视蹶处，得木皮一片。
现代文：智通等到天明，看那怪物摔倒的地方，拾到一块树皮。
English: Zhitong waited until dawn to see where the monster had fallen and found a piece of bark.

古文：登山寻之数里，见大青桐树梢已老矣。
现代文：登山寻找了几里，看到一棵大青桐树，树梢已经老了，它的根部有一块凹陷的地方好像是新近弄掉的。
English: After hiking for several miles, I saw a large Cypress tree. The treetops were already old, and there was a depression at its base that seemed to have been recently removed.

古文：其下凹根若新缺，僧以木皮附之，合无綖隙。其半，有薪者创成一蹬，深六七寸余，盖魅之口。
现代文：智通把手中的树皮往上一安，正好合上。树干一半处，有砍柴人砍成的一个陷窝儿，深六七寸还多，大概这就是怪物的嘴。
English: Zhitong lifted the bark in his hand to the top and closed it just right. Halfway down the trunk, there was a trap made by the woodcutter. It was more than six or seven inches deep. This was probably the monster's mouth.

古文：灰火满其中，久犹荧荧。
现代文：这里边还装着炭火，时间这么长还荧荧有光。
English: There is also a charcoal fire here, which has been glowing for such a long time.

古文：智通焚之，其怪遂绝。
现代文：智通把这棵树烧了，那鬼怪也就从此绝迹了。
English: Zhitong burned the tree, and the ghost disappeared.

古文：江夏从事
现代文：江夏从事
English: Jiangxia is engaged in

古文：太和中，有从事江夏者，其官舍尝有怪异。
现代文：太和年中，有一个叫江夏的从事，它的官舍里有怪物。
English: In the middle of the 19th century, there was a man named Jiang Xia who had a monster in his official residence.

古文：每夕，见一巨人身尽黑，甚光。见之即悸而病死。
现代文：每到夜晚，就有一个浑身发黑而且有光的巨人出现，看见的人就会惊悸而病死。
English: Every night, a black-clad, luminous giant appears, and those who see it are terrified and fall ill.

古文：后有许元长者，善视鬼。从事命元长以符术考召。
现代文：后来有个叫许元长的人，善于捉鬼，江从事就让他用符术制服它。
English: Later, there was a man named Xu Yuanchang, who was good at catching ghosts. When Jiang was engaged, he asked him to subdue it with magic.

古文：后一夕，元长坐于堂西轩下，巨人忽至，元长出一符飞之，中其臂。
现代文：后一个夜晚，巨人忽然而至，许元长坐在堂屋的西窗下，许元长投出一符直飞过去，击中了巨人的手臂。
English: On the last night, the giant suddenly appeared. Xu Yuanlang was sitting under the west window of the hall. Xu Yuanlang threw a ball straight and hit the giant's arm.

古文：剨然有声，遂堕于地。巨人即去。
现代文：随着一声响，那只手臂掉到地上，巨人立即离去。
English: With a sound, the arm fell to the ground and the giant immediately left.

古文：元长视其堕臂，乃一枯木枝。
现代文：许元长看那断臂，原来是一个枯树枝。
English: Xu Yuanlong looked at the broken arm, which turned out to be a dead tree branch.

古文：至明日，有家僮谓元长曰： 堂之东北隅，有枯树焉，先生符今在其上。 
现代文：到了第二天，有个家僮对许元长说： 堂屋的东北边，有一棵枯树，先生的那张符现在那棵树上呢。 
English: On the second day, a family member said to Xu Yuanlong: On the northeast side of the hall, there is a dead tree. My teacher's certificate is now on that tree.

古文：即往视之，其树有枝梢折者，果巨人所断臂也。
现代文：于是就去查看。这棵树上有一个断了的树枝，果然是那巨人的断臂。
English: So he went to investigate. There was a broken branch on the tree, and sure enough, it was the giant's severed arm.

古文：即伐而焚之，宅遂无怪。
现代文：于是就把这棵树砍了，烧了，这宅子也就无怪了。
English: So they cut down the tree and burned it, and the house was no longer strange.

