古文：贞观初，太宗谓侍臣曰： 隋炀帝广造宫室，以肆行幸。自西京至东都，离宫别馆，相望道次，乃至并州、涿郡，无不悉然。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 隋炀帝大肆营建宫室，以便纵情游乐，从西京到东都，沿途离宫别馆随处可见，并州、涿郡，也无不如此。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: The Sui and Qian emperors built palace rooms on a large scale in order to indulge in pleasure. From Xijing to Dongdu, the palace annexes can be seen everywhere along the way, and the same is true for prefectures and counties.

古文：驰道皆广数百步，种树以饰其傍。
现代文：驰道有几百步宽，两边还种上树作为装饰。
English: The track is several hundred paces wide, and trees have been planted on both sides as decoration.

古文：人力不堪，相聚为贼。
现代文：百姓无力承担徭役和劳役的重负，相继起来反抗。
English: The people were unable to bear the heavy burden of forced labor and forced labor, and they revolted one after another.

古文：逮至末年，尺土一人，非复己有。
现代文：到了隋朝末年，隋炀帝已经众叛亲离，连一尺土地、一个百姓，都不再属于他了。
English: By the end of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Sui Xuan had been ousted by his relatives, and not even a foot of land or a single person belonged to him anymore.

古文：以此观之，广宫室，好行幸，竟有何益？
现代文：这样看来，多营宫室，喜爱游乐，有什么好处呢？
English: From this perspective, what are the benefits of having multiple households and being fond of amusement?

古文：此皆朕耳所闻，目所见，深以自诫。
现代文：隋朝从兴到亡我都经历过，这些都是我耳闻目睹的事，这样的教训，应该深以为诫啊！
English: I have experienced the Sui Dynasty from its rise to its demise. These are all things I have heard and witnessed. Such a lesson should be taken to heart.

古文：故不敢轻用人力，惟令百姓安静，不有怨叛而已。 
现代文：因此，我不敢随便动用人力，只想让百姓安居乐业，不要发生叛乱才好。 
English: Therefore, I do not dare to use manpower arbitrarily. I only want the people to live and work in peace and not to rebel.

古文：贞观十一年，太宗幸洛阳宫，泛舟于积翠池，顾谓侍臣曰： 此宫观台沼并炀帝所为，所谓驱役生民，穷此雕丽，复不能守此一都，以万民为虑。
现代文：贞观十一年，唐太宗到洛阳宫，在积翠池上泛舟，环顾身边的侍臣说： 这里的宫苑、台榭都曾是隋炀帝建造的，他生前驱使万民，为他修筑精雕细刻的宫室，丝毫不关心老百姓的疾苦，并且他还喜好到各地巡游玩乐。
English: In the 11th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong went to Luoyang Palace and went boating on the Jicui Pond. He looked around at the attendants around him and said, "The palace gardens and pavilions here were all built by the Sui and Qian Emperors. During his lifetime, he drove all the people to build finely carved palace chambers for him. He did not care at all about the suffering of the common people, and he also liked to cruise around the country to have fun.

古文：好行幸不息，民所不堪。昔诗人云： 何草不黄？何日不行？ 
现代文：耗资巨大，老百姓怎么能够忍受呢？《诗经》云： 哪里的草不枯黄，哪一天不赶路啊？ 
English: The cost is huge, how can the common people bear it? "Song of Songs" clouds: Where the grass is not withered, what day is not on the way?

古文： 小东大东，杼轴其空。 
现代文： 远远近近东方国，织布机上都空空。 
English: Far away, close to the Orient, the looms are empty.

古文：正谓此也。
现代文：说的正是这种情形啊。
English: That's exactly what I'm talking about.

古文：遂使天下怨叛，身死国灭，今其宫苑尽为我有。
现代文：隋炀帝的荒淫导致天下人的怨恨和叛乱，最后落得国破家亡，现在，他的宫殿完全归我所有了。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan's debauchery led to the resentment and rebellion of the people of the world, and finally led to the destruction of the country and the death of his family. Now, his palace is completely owned by me.

古文：隋氏倾覆者，岂惟其君无道，亦由股肱无良。
现代文：隋代灭亡的原因，难道只是因为君王无道吗？其实他的臣子们也不忠良。
English: Was the reason for the demise of the Sui Dynasty just because the king was a scoundrel? In fact, his courtiers were also disloyal.

古文：如宇文述、虞世基、裴蕴之徒，居高官，食厚禄，受人委任，惟行谄佞，蔽塞聪明，欲令其国无危，不可得也。 
现代文：像宇文述、虞世基、裴蕴这些人，他们身居高位，享受着丰厚的俸禄，被皇帝委以重任，但他们只知道行小人谄媚之事，扰乱视听。这样要使朝廷不危亡，怎么可能呢？ 
English: Such people as Yu Wenshu, Yu Shiji, and Pei Yun, they hold high positions, enjoy rich salaries, and are entrusted with important duties by the emperor, but they only know how to do things that are flattering to the villain and disturb the audio-visual. How is it possible to keep the imperial court from perishing?

古文：司空长孙无忌奏言： 隋氏之亡，其君则杜塞忠谠之言，臣则苟欲自全，左右有过，初不纠举，寇盗滋蔓，亦不实陈。
现代文：司空长孙无忌上书说： 隋代灭亡的原因在于君王杜绝忠言，臣子苟且偷生，上下都有过失。开始不纠偏改过，后来反叛势力日渐猖獗，也没人敢把实情说出来。
English: "The reason for the Sui Dynasty's downfall is that the king abrogated his oath of loyalty, his vassals stole lives, and there were faults at all levels. At first, there was no correction, and later, the rebel forces became increasingly rampant, and no one dared to tell the truth.

古文：据此，即不惟天道，实由君臣不相匡弼。 
现代文：因此，隋朝灭亡不在天意，而是君臣之间不相互扶持所致啊。 
English: Therefore, the demise of the Sui Dynasty was not the will of heaven, but the result of the lack of mutual support between monarchs and ministers.

古文：太宗曰： 朕与卿等承其余弊，惟须弘道移风，使万世永赖矣。 
现代文：唐太宗说： 我和各位大臣是在隋末天下大乱之后得到江山的，因此我们应该弘扬大道、移风易俗，才能使国家长治久安。 
English: Tang Taizong said: I and the ministers were given the country after the great turmoil at the end of the Sui Dynasty. Therefore, we should promote the road and change the customs in order to make the country enjoy long-term stability.

古文：贞观十三年，太宗谓魏征等曰： 隋炀帝承文帝余业，海内殷阜，若能常处关中，岂有倾败？
现代文：贞观十三年，唐太宗对魏徵等大臣说： 隋炀帝在继承隋文帝基业的时候，海内升平，如果他能长期住在关中，怎么可能遭致灭亡呢？
English: In the 13th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Wei Zheng and other ministers: When the Sui and Qian Dynasties succeeded the Sui and Wen Dynasties, the sea level rose. If he could live in Guanzhong for a long time, how could he be destroyed?

古文：遂不顾百姓，行幸无期，径往江都，不纳董纯、崔象等谏诤，身戮国灭，为天下笑。
现代文：可是后来他不顾百姓的疾苦，到各地去行幸巡游，没有归期。最后索性住在江都，不听从董纯、崔象等大臣的忠言，最终不仅自己死于叛臣之手，也断送了江山社稷，还留下笑柄让世人感叹评说。
English: However, he later disregarded the sufferings of the people and went on a happiness tour to various places, without a return date. In the end, he simply lived in Jiangdu and did not listen to the loyal advice of ministers such as Dong Chun and Cui Xiang. In the end, he not only died at the hands of a traitor, but also severed the social credit of Jiangshan and left a laughing stock for the world to comment on.

古文：虽复帝祚长短，委以玄天，而福善祸淫，亦由人事。
现代文：虽然帝运的长短，是天意决定的，但是祸福善恶，也在于人事。
English: Although the length of the imperial era is determined by the will of heaven, the good, the evil, and the calamity also depend on people.

古文：朕每思之，若欲君臣长久，国无危败，君有违失，臣须极言。
现代文：我每每想到这些，都认为若要国家太平，君臣相安无事，君主一旦有了过失，臣子就一定要直言不讳地指出来。
English: Every time I think about these things, I think that if the country is to be at peace, and if there is to be no trouble between the sovereign and the vassal, if there is any fault on the part of the sovereign, the vassal must point it out bluntly.

古文：朕闻卿等规谏，纵不能当时即从，再三思审，必择善而用之。 
现代文：我对你们提出的意见，虽然不能当时就采纳，但在我反复思考之后，必定会选择好的意见加以采纳。 
English: The suggestions I made to you, although I could not accept them at the time, but after repeated reflection, I will certainly choose good suggestions to adopt.

古文：贞观十二年，太宗东巡狩，将入洛，次于显仁宫，宫苑官司多被责罚。
现代文：贞观十二年，唐太宗东巡，即将进入洛阳，下榻在显仁宫，宫里的侍从因为侍候不周，受到很多责罚。
English: In the 12th year of Zhenguan, when Emperor Taizong of Tang was on his eastern tour and about to enter Luoyang, he stayed at the Xianren Palace. The attendants in the palace received a lot of punishment because they did not serve well.

古文：侍中魏征进言曰： 陛下今幸洛州，为是旧征行处，庶其安定，故欲加恩故老。
现代文：对此，侍中魏徵向唐太宗进谏，说： 陛下如今到洛阳，是因为以前在战争期间这里遭到了祸殃，陛下希望这里获得安宁，所以对洛阳的百姓施以特别的恩惠。
English: In response, Wei Zheng, the chamberlain, approached Tang Taizong and said: Your Majesty has come to Luoyang today because you suffered a disaster here during the war. Your Majesty hopes that you will find peace here, so you have granted a special favor to the people of Luoyang.

古文：城郭之民未蒙德惠，官司苑监多及罪辜，或以供奉之物不精，又以不为献食。
现代文：但事到如今，这里的百姓非但没得到眷顾，相反，显仁宫的侍从还受到了很多无辜的责罚。他们有的是因为进献的物品不精致，或者因为食物不甘美而受罚。
English: However, to date, the people here have not received any favors, but on the contrary, the attendants of the Henin Palace have also received a lot of innocent punishments. Some of them were punished because the donated items were not delicate, or because the food was not sweet.

古文：此则不思止足，志在奢靡，既乖行幸本心，何以副百姓所望？
现代文：这可能是因为陛下不知足，太奢侈造成的。这样做不仅违背了巡游的初衷，也辜负了老百姓的期望。
English: This may be caused by His Majesty not being satisfied and being too extravagant, which not only violates the original intention of the parade, but also fails to live up to the expectations of the people.

古文：隋主先命在下多作献食，献食不多，则有威罚。
现代文：过去，隋炀帝命令下人多多进献食物，只要食物不丰美，就要受到责罚。
English: In the past, Emperor Sui Xuan ordered people to donate more and more food. As long as the food was not plentiful, they would be punished.

古文：上之所好，下必有甚，竞为无限，遂至灭亡。
现代文：上面有什么样的喜好，下面必定会加倍效仿，这样下去，人就会变得贪得无厌，最后走向灭亡。
English: Whatever inclinations there are above must be doubly imitated below, and in this way, people will become insatiably greedy and finally go to ruin.

古文：此非载籍所闻，陛下目所亲见。
现代文：这不只是史书所载，也是陛下亲眼所见，亲耳所闻的。
English: This is not only recorded in history books, but also seen and heard by His Majesty with his own eyes.

古文：为其无道，故天命陛下代之。
现代文：正因为隋炀帝昏庸无道，所以上天才委派你来代替他。
English: Because he was a tyrant, it was his destiny to be replaced by His Majesty.

古文：当战战栗栗，每事省约，参踪前列，昭训子孙，奈何今日欲在人之下？
现代文：陛下应当战战兢兢，凡事从俭，以前人的风范为楷模，来告诫子孙后代。
English: His Majesty should be wary and frugal in all things, and take the manners of the ancients as a model to admonish future generations.

古文：陛下若以为足，今日不啻足矣；若以为不足，万倍于此，亦不足也。 
现代文：如果陛下意足了，那么现在就能感到满意，反之，即使比现在好过千倍万倍，也不会感到满足的。 
English: If His Majesty is satisfied, he will be satisfied now, but if he is a thousand times better, he will not be satisfied.

古文：太宗大惊曰： 非公，朕不闻此言。
现代文：唐太宗听后大惊失色，说： 没有你，我绝不会听到这样的诤言。
English: Tang Taizong was stunned and said, "Without you, I would never have heard such insults."

古文：自今已后，庶几无如此事。 
现代文：从今以后，再也不会有此类事情发生了。 
English: From now on, nothing like this will ever happen again.

