古文：啮缺问于王倪，四问而四不知。
现代文：齧缺向王倪请教，问了四次，王倪都回答说不知道。
English: He asked Wang Ni for advice four times, and Wang Ni replied that he did not know.

古文：啮缺因跃而大喜，行以告蒲衣子。
现代文：齧缺因此高兴得跳了起来，把这事告诉蒲衣子。
English: As a result, Zou Que jumped for joy and told this to Pu Rongzi.

古文：蒲衣子曰： 而乃今知之乎？有虞氏不及泰氏。
现代文：蒲衣子说： 现在你才知道了吧，有虞氏不如泰氏。
English: Puizi said, "Now you know, it's not as good to have a Yu clan as a Tai clan."

古文：有虞氏其犹藏仁以要人，亦得人矣，而未始出于非人。泰氏其卧徐徐，其觉于于。一以己为马，一以己为牛。其知情信，其德甚真，而未始入于非人。 
现代文：有虞氏还心怀仁义，以此要结人心，虽然也获得了人心，却未能超然物外，而泰氏睡眠时呼吸舒缓，醒来时悠闲自在，任人把自己称为马，或是牛，他的心智真实不虚，他的品德纯真高尚，丝毫没有受到外物的牵累。 
English: Yu Yu's heart was still full of benevolence and righteousness, in order to win people's hearts. Although he also won people's hearts, he was unable to transcend the external world, while Tai's breathing was soothing when he slept, and he was leisurely and comfortable when he woke up. He allowed people to call him a horse or a cow. His mind was real, his moral was pure and noble, and he was not affected by external things at all.

古文：肩吾见狂接舆。
现代文：肩吾拜会隐士接舆。
English: I'll call the hermit next to me.

古文：狂接舆曰： 日中始何以语女？ 
现代文：接舆说： 往日你的老师日中始用什么来教导你？ 
English: Interviewer: In the past, what did your teachers use to teach you at the beginning of the day?

古文：肩吾曰： 告我：君人者以己出经式义度，人孰敢不听而化诸！ 
现代文：肩吾说： 他告诉我，做国君的一定要凭借自己的意志来推行法度，人们谁敢不听从而随之变化呢？ 
English: My shoulder said: He told me that to be a sovereign, you must use your own will to enforce the law. Who would dare not to listen to the people and change accordingly?

古文：狂接舆曰： 是欺德也。其于治天下也，犹涉海凿河而使蚊负山也。
现代文：接舆说： 这是欺诳的做法，那样治理天下，就好像徒步下海开凿河道，让蚊虫背负大山一样。
English: "This is a bullying practice, and governing the world in such a way is like going to the sea on foot to dig a river channel and letting mosquitoes carry the mountain on their backs," said Zhi Ying.

古文：夫圣人之治也，治外夫？
现代文：圣人治理天下，难道去治理社会外在的表象吗？
English: Saints govern the world, but do they govern the outward appearance of society?

古文：正而后行，确乎能其事者而已矣。
现代文：他们顺应本性而后感化他人，听任人们之所能罢了。
English: They follow their nature and then influence others, just let people do what they can.

古文：且鸟高飞以避矰弋之害，鼷鼠深穴乎神丘之下以避熏凿之患，而曾二虫之无知？ 
现代文：鸟儿尚且懂得高飞躲避弓箭的伤害，老鼠尚且知道深藏于神坛之下的洞穴逃避熏烟凿地的祸患，而你竟然连这两种小动物本能地顺应环境也不了解！ 
English: Birds still know how to fly high to avoid the harm of bows and arrows, mice still know the caves hidden deep under the altar to escape the scourge of smoke, and you don't even know how these two small animals instinctively adapt to the environment!

古文：天根游于殷阳，至蓼水之上，适遭无名人而问焉，曰： 请问为天下。 
现代文：天根在殷阳游览，走到蓼水岸边，恰巧碰见无名人，便问道： 请问治理天下的办法。 
English: Tiangen toured in Yinyang, walked to the shore of Surabaya, happened to meet an unknown person, and then asked: Please tell me how to govern the world.

古文：无名人曰： 去！
现代文：无名人说： 走开！
English: Nobody said: Go away!

古文：汝鄙人也，何问之不豫也！
现代文：你这鄙陋的人，为何要问这些令人不快的问题！
English: You despicable man, why do you ask these unpleasant questions!

古文：予方将与造物者为人，厌则又乘夫莽眇之鸟，以出六极之外，而游无何有之乡，以处圹埌之野。汝又何帛以治天下感予之心为？ 
现代文：我正要和造物者结伴遨游，一旦厌烦就乘着像鸟一样轻盈清虚的气流，飞出天地四方之外，畅游于无何有之乡，歇息在广阔无边的旷野，你又为何要用治理天下的梦话来触动我的心呢？ 
English: I am about to travel with the Creator, and when I get bored, I will fly out of the four quarters of the world on a stream of air as light and clear as a bird, swim in the land of nothingness, and rest in the vast and boundless wilderness. Why do you want to touch my heart with the dream of governing the world?

古文：又复问，无名人曰： 汝游心于淡，合气于漠，顺物自然而无容私焉，而天下治矣。 
现代文：天根再次询问，无名人说： 你的心神要安于淡漠，你的形气要合于虚寂，顺着万物的自然本性而不掺杂私意，天下就可以大治了。 
English: Tian Ge inquired again, and the unknown person said: "Your mind and spirit should be calm and indifferent, your form should be in line with emptiness, and you should follow the natural nature of all things without mixing personal desires. Then the world can be governed well."

古文：阳子居见老聃，曰： 有人于此，向疾强梁，物彻疏明，学道不倦，如是者，可比明王乎？ 
现代文：阳子居拜见老聃，说： 倘若现在有这样一个人，他办事迅疾敏捷、强干果决，对待事物洞察准确、了解透彻，学 道 专心勤奋从不厌怠。象这样的人，可以跟圣哲之王相比而并列吗？ 
English: Yang Zi Ju paid a visit to Laozi and said, "If there is such a person now, who acts quickly and swiftly, is strong and decisive, treats things with accurate insight and thorough understanding, and never tires of learning and concentrating. Can such a person be compared to the king of sages?

古文：老聃曰： 是於圣人也，胥易技系，劳形怵心者也。
现代文：老聃说： 这样的人在圣人看来，只不过就像聪明的小吏供职办事时为技能所拘系、劳苦身躯担惊受怕的情况。
English: Lao Zi said, "In the eyes of the sages, such a person is just like a clever petty official who is constrained by his skills when he performs his duties, and who is terrified by his hard work.

古文：且也虎豹之文来田，猨狙之便执嫠之狗来藉。如是者，可比明王乎？ 
现代文：况且虎豹因为毛色美丽而招来众多猎人的围捕，猕猴因为跳跃敏捷、狗因为捕物迅猛而招致绳索的拘缚。象这样的动物，也可以拿来跟圣哲之王相比而并列吗？ 
English: Moreover, tigers and leopards are rounded up by many hunters because of their beautiful fur color, macaques are bound by ropes because of their quick jumps, and dogs are bound by ropes because of their rapid prey. Can such animals also be compared to the king of saints?

古文：阳子居蹴然曰： 敢问明王之治。 
现代文：阳子居听了这番话脸色顿改，不安地说： 冒昧地请教圣哲之王怎么治理天下。 
English: Upon hearing this, Yang Zi Ju's face suddenly changed, and he said uneasily, "I have the temerity to ask the king of sages how to rule the world."

古文：老聃曰： 明王之治：功盖天下而似不自己，化贷万物而民弗恃。有莫举名，使物自喜。立乎不测，而游于无有者也。 
现代文：老聃说： 圣哲之王治理天下，功绩普盖天下却又像什么也不曾出自自己的努力，教化施及万物而百姓却不觉得有所依赖；功德无量没有什么办法称述赞美，使万事万物各居其所而欣然自得；立足于高深莫测的神妙之境，而生活在什么也不存在的世界里。 
English: Lao Zi said: The king of sages governs the world, his achievements are all over the world, but it is as if nothing came from his own efforts; he teaches and enlightens all things, but the people do not feel dependent; his merits are immeasurable, there is no way to praise, so that all things and all things have their own place and are pleased with themselves; based on the unfathomable and wonderful situation, but living in a world where nothing exists.

古文：郑有神巫曰季咸，知人之死生、存亡、祸福、寿夭，期以岁月旬日若神。
现代文：郑国有一个名叫季咸的神巫，能够占卜人的生死存亡和祸福寿命，所预言的时间，哪年哪月哪日，都能如期发生，料事如神。
English: In Zheng Guo, there is a god-witch named Ji Xian, who is able to predict a person's life and death, as well as the duration of good and bad fortune. The predicted time, year, month, and day can all occur on schedule, and everything is perfect.

古文：郑人见之，皆弃而走。
现代文：郑国人见了他，因为害怕知道自己的凶日而都远远逃走。
English: When the people of Zheng saw him, they all fled far away for fear of knowing their fate.

古文：列子见之而心醉，归，以告壶子，曰： 始吾以夫子之道为至矣，则又有至焉者矣。 
现代文：列子，却被他的神算所折服，回来后，便把此事告诉了壶子，说道： 当初我还以为先生的道术最高明了，没想到还有更加高深的。 
English: Upon his return, he told the pot about this and said, "At first, I thought my master's Taoism was the most clear, but I didn't expect it to be more profound.

古文：壶子曰： 吾与汝既其文，未既其实。而固得道与？
现代文：壶子说： 我教给你的都是外在的东西，还没有展现道的本质，难道你就认为自己得道了吗？
English: The pot said, "All I have taught you are external things, and have not yet revealed the essence of the Tao. Do you think you have attained the Tao?"

古文：众雌而无雄，而又奚卵焉！
现代文：就像有许多雌性的鸟而缺少雄性的鸟，又怎能生出卵来呢？
English: Just as there are many female birds and not enough male birds, how can eggs be produced?

古文：而以道与世亢，必信，夫故使人得而相汝。
现代文：你用表面的道与世人较量，希望得到肯定，所以才让神巫窥测到你的心迹，从而要给你相面。
English: You use the surface way to compete with the world, hoping to be affirmed, so you let the gods and witches spy on your heart, so as to give you a face.

古文：尝试与来，以予示之。 
现代文：试着把他带来，让他给我看看相。 
English: Why don't you invite him over and show him what I look like.

古文：明日，列子与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，列子与季咸一起来见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought Ji Xian to see the pot.

古文：出而谓列子曰： 嘻！
现代文：季咸出来后，对列子说： 唉！
English: After Ji Xian went out, he said to Lei Zi: Alas!

古文：子之先生死矣！
现代文：你的先生快要死了！
English: Your husband is going to die!

古文：弗活矣！
现代文：活不成了！
English: I can't live!

古文：不以旬数矣！
现代文：不超过十来天了！
English: It's been no more than ten days!

古文：吾见怪焉，见湿灰焉。 
现代文：我见他形色怪异。犹如湿灰一样毫无生机。 
English: I thought he was odd-looking, with a lifeless, wet-looking face.

古文：列子入，泣涕沾襟以告壶子。
现代文：列子进去，泪水汪汪沾湿了衣裳，把季咸的话告诉了壶子。
English: The procession enters, tears wet their clothes, and they tell Ji Xian's words to the pot.

古文：壶子曰： 乡吾示之以地文，萌乎不震不正，是殆见吾杜德机也。尝又与来。 
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我显给他看的是大地般的寂静，茫然一片，不动不止，他大概是看到我闭塞生机的景象，试着再让他进来看看。 
English: The pot said: What I showed him just now was the silence of the earth, a daze, and incessant movement. He probably saw the scene of me blocking my life, and tried to let him come in again.

古文：明日，又与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，列子又跟神巫季咸一道拜见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought seasoned salt to see the pot.

古文：出而谓列子曰： 幸矣！子之先生遇我也，有瘳矣！
现代文：季咸走出门来就对列子说： 幸运啊，你的先生遇上了我!
English: Ji Xian walked out of the door and said to Lei Zi: Lucky, your husband met me!

古文：全然有生矣！吾见其杜权矣！ 
现代文：症兆减轻了，完全有救了，我已经观察到闭塞的生机中神气微动的情况。 
English: The symptoms have lessened, there is complete relief, and I have observed a slight change in the vitality of the obstruction.

古文：列子入，以告壶子。
现代文：列子进到屋里，把季咸的话告诉给壶子。
English: Noriko went into the house and told Kichisan's words to the kettle.

古文：壶子曰： 乡吾示之以天壤，名实不入，而机发于踵。
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我将天与地那样相对而又相应的心态显露给他看，名声和实利等一切杂念都排除在外，而生机从脚跟发至全身。
English: The pot said: Just now, I revealed to him the opposite and corresponding state of mind of heaven and earth, excluding all distracting thoughts such as fame and material gain, and sending vitality from the heel to the whole body.

古文：是殆见吾善者机也。尝又与来。 
现代文：这样恐怕已看到了我的一线生机。试着再跟他一块儿来看看。 
English: So I'm afraid I've seen the first ray of hope. Let's try it again with him.

古文：明日，又与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，列子又跟神巫季咸一道拜见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought seasoned salt to see the pot.

古文：出而谓列子曰： 子之先生不齐，吾无得而相焉。
现代文：季咸走出门来就对列子说： 你的先生心迹不定，神情恍惚，我不可能给他看相。
English: Ji Xian walked out of the door and said to Reiko, "Your teacher's state of mind is unstable and he looks dazed. I can't possibly show him his face.

古文：试齐，且复相之。 
现代文：等到心迹稳定，再来给他看相。 
English: Wait until the heart is stable, and then show him your face.

古文：列子入，以告壶子。
现代文：列子进到屋里，把季咸的话告诉给壶子。
English: Noriko went into the house and told Kichisan's words to the kettle.

古文：壶子曰： 吾乡示之以以太冲莫胜，是殆见吾衡气机也。
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我把阴阳二气均衡而又和谐的心态显露给他看。
English: The pot said: Just now, I showed him the balanced and harmonious state of mind of yin and yang.

古文：鲵桓之审为渊，止水之审为渊，流水之审为渊。
现代文：这样恐怕看到了我内气持平、相应相称的生机。大鱼盘桓逗留的地方叫做深渊，静止的河水聚积的地方叫做深渊，流动的河水滞留的地方叫做深渊。
English: In this way, I'm afraid I've seen the vitality within me that is balanced and proportionate.The place where the big fish stay is called the abyss, the place where the still river water accumulates is called the abyss, and the place where the flowing river water stays is called the abyss.

古文：渊有九名，此处三焉。
现代文：渊有九种称呼，这里只提到了上面三种。
English: There are nine names for the abyss, but only the above three are mentioned here.

古文：尝又与来。 
现代文：试着再跟他一块儿来看看。 
English: Try it again with him and see.

古文：明日，又与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，列子又跟神巫咸季一道拜见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought seasoned salt to see the pot.

古文：立未定，自失而走。壶子曰： 追之！ 
现代文：季咸还未站定，就不能自持地跑了。壶子说： 追上他！ 
English: Not yet standing firm, Ji Xian panicked and fled. The pot said: Catch up with him!

古文：列子追之不及。反，以报壶子曰： 已灭矣，已失矣，吾弗及已。 
现代文：列子没能追上，回来告诉壶子，说： 已经没有踪影了，让他跑掉了，我没能赶上他。 
English: Letson could not catch up, came back to tell the kettle, saying: There is no trace, let him run away, I could not catch up with him.

古文：壶子曰： 乡吾示之以未始出吾宗。
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我把我未曾显露出来的大道给他看。
English: The pot said: Just now I showed him the avenue I had not revealed.

古文：吾与之虚而委蛇，不知其谁何，因以为弟靡，因以为波流，故逃也。 
现代文：我给他看玄虚之象，且与他随和应付，他分不清彼我万物，因而感觉自己变得颓靡低顺，好像水滴随波逐流一样，所以他逃跑了。 
English: I showed him the shadowy figure and went along with him, and he could not tell the difference between me and him, so he felt like he was drifting, like a drop of water going with the tide, so he ran away.

古文：然后列子自以为未始学而归。
现代文：这之后，列子深深感到像从不曾拜师学道似的回到了自己的家里，三年不出门。
English: After that, Reiko felt deeply as if she had never studied under a teacher. She returned to her home and did not go out for three years.

古文：三年不出，为其妻爨，食豕如食人，于事无与亲。雕琢复朴，块然独以其形立。
现代文：他帮助妻子烧火做饭，喂猪就像侍侯人一样。对于各种世事不分亲疏没有偏私，过去的雕琢和华饰已恢复到原本的质朴和纯真，像大地一样木然忘情地将形骸留在世上。
English: He helps his wife to light the fire for cooking, and feeds the pigs like an attendant. For all kinds of worldly affairs, regardless of kinship or estrangement, there is no favoritism. The carvings and ornaments of the past have been restored to their original simplicity and innocence, and like the earth, they have left their remains in the world.

古文：纷而封哉，一以是终。
现代文：虽然涉入世间的纷扰却能固守本真，并像这样终生不渝。
English: Although involved in the turmoil of the world, they can stick to the truth and remain like this for life.

古文：无为名尸，无为谋府，无为事任，无为知主。
现代文：不要承担的附加名誉，不要作为智慧的府库，不要担当事物的责任，不要成为智慧的主宰。
English: Don't take on the additional honor, don't be the repository of wisdom, don't take on the responsibility of things, don't become the master of wisdom.

古文：体尽无穷，而游无朕。
现代文：体悟大道，应化没有穷尽；逍遥自在，游于无物之初。
English: The road of realization, adaptation is inexhaustible; leisurely, swimming in the beginning of nothingness.

古文：尽其所受乎天而无见得，亦虚而已！
现代文：尽享自然所赋予的本性而不自现人为的所得，这正是虚寂无为的心境！
English: Enjoying the nature given by nature without showing artificial income, this is the state of mind of doing nothing!

古文：至人之用心若镜，不将不逆，应而不藏，故能胜物而不伤。
现代文：至人用心犹如明镜，物来不迎，物去不送，物来应照。物去不留，顺应自然，不存私心，所以能够超脱物外而不为外物所害。
English: A person's mind is like a mirror. Things come and go, things go and go, things come and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go, things go and go and go, things go and go and go, things go and go and go, things go and go and go and go.

古文：南海之帝为儵北海之帝为忽，中央之帝为浑沌。儵与忽时相与遇于浑沌之地，浑沌待之甚善。
现代文：南海的帝王叫儵，北海的帝王叫忽，中央的帝王叫浑沌，儵和忽时常在浑沌的境内相遇，浑沌对他们很好。
English: The emperor of the South Sea is called Ying, the emperor of the North Sea is called Hu, and the emperor of the center is called Chaos. Ying and Hu often meet in the territory of Chaos, and Chaos is very good to them.

古文：儵与忽谋报浑沌之德，曰： 人皆有七窍以视听食息此独无有，尝试凿之。 
现代文：儵和忽商量报答浑沌的深厚情谊，说： 人们都有七窍，用来看、听、饮食、呼吸，唯独他没有，我们试着给他凿出来。 
English: Discussing the profound friendship that rewards chaos, Zou and Huo said: People all have seven knuckles for seeing, hearing, eating, and breathing, but he doesn't have one, so we tried to carve one out for him.

古文：日凿一窍，七日而浑沌死。
现代文：于是每天凿出一窍，到了第七天浑沌就死了。
English: So they dug a hole every day, and on the seventh day Chaos died.

