古文：起上章困敦，尽著雍涒滩，凡九年。
现代文：起，止，一共九年。晋纪三晋武帝太庚元年
English: A total of nine years have passed since then. In the first year of the Third Jin Dynasty, Emperor Wu of Jinji

古文：世祖武皇帝中太康元年
现代文：春季，正月，吴国实行大赦。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the State of Wu implemented an amnesty.

古文：春，正月，吴大赦。杜预向江陵，王浑出横江，攻吴镇、戍，所向皆克。
现代文：杜预向江陵进发，王浑从横江出兵，攻打吴的兵镇及边防营垒，攻无不克。
English: Du advanced to Jiangling, Wang Hun sent troops from the Yangtze River to attack Wu's military towns and border fortifications.

古文：二月，戊午，王濬、唐彬击破丹杨监盛纪。
现代文：二月，戊午，王濬、唐彬打败了丹阳监盛纪。
English: In February, at noon, Wang Hui and Tang Bin defeated Danyang Inspector Sheng Ji.

古文：吴人于江碛要害之处，并以铁锁横截之；又作铁锥，长丈馀，暗置江中，以逆拒舟舰。
现代文：吴人把江边浅滩上的要害区域，用铁锁拦住，还打造了一丈多长的大铁锥，暗中放进江里，用以阻挡战船。
English: The Wu people blocked the critical area on the shoal by the river with an iron lock, and also built a large iron cone, which was more than a meter long, and secretly put it into the river to block the warship.

古文：濬作大筏数十，方百馀步，缚草为人，被甲持仗，令善水者以筏先行，遇铁锥，锥辄著筏而去。
现代文：王濬造了几十个大木筏，每一个木筏，长、宽都有一百余步。王濬让人扎了许多草人，草人披铠甲，拿兵器，放在大木筏上，让水性好的人与木筏走在前面，遇到铁锥，铁锥就扎到木筏上，被木筏带走了。
English: Wang Yao made dozens of large rafts, each raft with a length and width of more than one hundred paces. Wang Yao had people tie up many straw men. The straw men put on armor, took weapons and placed them on the rafts, and let the people with good water skills walk in front of the rafts. When they encountered iron cones, the iron cones were tied to the rafts and taken away by the rafts.

古文：又作大炬，长十馀丈，大数十围，灌以麻油，在船前，遇锁，然炬烧之，须臾，融液断绝，于是船无所碍。
现代文：王濬又造了许多大火把，火把长十几丈，有几十围粗，用麻油浇在火把上，把火把放在船的前面，遇到铁锁就点燃火把，一会儿功夫，铁锁就被火把烧得融化而断开，于是战船就无所阻挡。
English: Wang Yao also made many torches. The torches were more than a dozen feet long and dozens of meters thick. He poured hemp oil on the torches, placed the torches in front of the ship, and lit the torches when they met the iron lock. After a while, the iron lock was burned by the torches to melt and break, so the warship was unstoppable.

古文：庚申，濬克西陵，杀吴都督留宪等。
现代文：庚申，王濬攻克了西陵，杀了吴都督留宪等人。
English: Goshun and Wang Xi conquered Xiling and killed the Wu governor Ruixian and others.

古文：壬戌，克荆门、夷道二城，杀夷道监陆晏。
现代文：壬戌，又攻下了荆门、夷道两座城，杀了夷道监陆晏。
English: He also captured Jingmen and the two cities of Yidu, and killed the Yidu overseer, Lu Yao.

古文：杜预遣牙门周旨等帅奇兵八百泛舟夜渡江，袭乐乡，多张旗帜，起火巴山。
现代文：杜预派遣牙门周旨等人率领八百名奇兵，在夜里泛舟渡过长江，袭击乐乡。周旨树起许多旗帜，又在巴山点起火。
English: Du Yu sent 800 soldiers led by Zhou Zhi of Yamen and others to cross the Yangtze River in a raft at night and attack Le Township. Zhou Zhi set up many flags and started a fire at Bashan Point.

古文：吴都督孙歆惧，与江陵督伍延书曰： 北来诸军，乃飞渡江也。 
现代文：吴都督孙歆非常恐惧，写信给江陵督伍延说： 从北边过来的军队，是飞渡过江的。 
English: Sun Yat-sen, the governor of Wu, was so frightened that he wrote to Wu Yan, the governor of Gangneung, saying, "The army that came from the north flew across the river.

古文：旨等伏兵乐乡城外，歆遣军出拒王濬，大败而还。
现代文：周旨等人把军队埋伏在乐乡城外。孙歆派兵出城去打王濬，结果大败而回。
English: Zhou Zhi and others ambushed the army outside the city of Lexiang. Sun Yat-sen sent soldiers out of the city to fight Wang Hui, but they were soundly defeated and returned.

古文：旨等发伏兵随歆军而入，歆不觉，直至帐下，虏歆而还。
现代文：周旨等人让伏兵尾随孙歆的军队进了城，孙歆没有觉察，周旨的兵一直到了孙歆的帐幕之下，活捉孙歆而回。
English: Zhou Zi and others let the ambush soldiers follow Sun Yat-sen's army into the city. Sun Yat-sen did not notice that Zhou Zi's soldiers went all the way under Sun Yat-sen's tent and captured Sun Yat-sen alive.

古文：乙丑，王濬击杀吴水军都督陆景。
现代文：乙丑，王濬打败了吴水军都督陆景，把他杀了。
English: In the second ugliness, Wang Yao defeated Lu Jing, the governor of the Wushu Army, and killed him.

古文：杜预进攻江陵，甲戌，克之，斩伍延。
现代文：杜预进攻江陵，甲戌，攻克了江陵，杀了伍延。
English: Du Yueh attacked Gangneung, Jiaotong, conquered Gangneung, killed Wu Yan.

古文：于是沅、湘以南，接于交、广，州郡皆望风送印绶。
现代文：这时候，沅、湘以南地区以及地界相接的交、广等州郡，都闻声把印绶送来。
English: At this time, the areas south of Handan and Hunan, as well as Jiaotong, Guangzhou and other counties along the border, were all rumored to have sent banknotes.

古文：预杖节称诏而缓抚之。
现代文：杜预手持符节按照皇帝的诏命安抚了这些州郡。
English: Du Huan, holding a banner, pacified these prefectures and counties in accordance with the emperor's edict.

古文：凡所斩获吴都督、监军十四，牙门、郡守百二十馀人。
现代文：到此时为止，总共俘获、斩杀吴都督、监军十四人，牙门、郡守一百二十多人。
English: Up to this time, a total of fourteen people, including the governor of Wu and supervisors, and more than one hundred and twenty people, including governors and county governors, have been captured and killed.

古文：胡奋克江安。
现代文：胡奋又攻克了江安。
English: Hu Fen also conquered Jiang'an.

古文：乙亥，诏： 王濬、唐彬既定巴丘，与胡奋、王戎共平夏口、武昌，顺流长骛，直造秣陵。
现代文：乙亥，晋武帝下诏书说： 王濬、唐彬已经平定了巴丘，再与胡奋、王戎一同平定夏口、武昌，顺长江长驱直入，直到秣陵。
English: According to the imperial edict issued by Emperor Jinwu at the Battle of Yihai, Wang Qian and Tang Bin had already subdued Bachu, and then together with Hu Fen and Wang Rong, they subdued Xia Kou and Wuchang, and drove straight along the Yangtze River until they reached Fuling.

古文：杜预当镇静零、桂，怀辑衡阳。
现代文：杜预则应当安定零陵、桂阳，安抚衡阳。
English: Du Yuantang stabilized the area around Jingluling and Guilin, and encouraged the military and civilians of Hengyang.

古文：大兵既过，荆州南境固当传檄而定。
现代文：大军过后，荆州以南的区域，传布檄文自然会平定。
English: After the great army, the area south of Jingzhou will naturally be pacified.

古文：预等各分兵以益濬、彬，太尉充移屯项。 
现代文：杜预等人各自分兵以增援王濬、唐彬，太尉贾充转移到项驻扎。 
English: Du Yuanyuan and others transferred their soldiers to reinforce Wang Qi, Tang Bin, and Taiyi Jia Chong.

古文：王戎遣参军襄阳罗尚、南阳刘乔将兵与王濬合攻武昌，吴江夏太守刘朗、督武昌诸军虞昺皆降。
现代文：王戎派遣参军、襄阳人罗尚，南阳人刘乔领兵与王濬一起攻打武昌。吴江夏太守刘朗、督武昌诸军虞投降了。
English: Wang Rong sent troops to join the army, and Luo Shang from Yangyang and Liu Qiao from Nanyang led the troops to attack Wuchang together with Wang Hui. Liu Lang, the Empress Dowager of Wujiang Xia and the governor of Wuchang surrendered.

古文：昺，翻之子也。
现代文：虞是虞翻的儿子。
English: Yu is the son of Yu Tong.

古文：杜预与众军会议，或曰： 百年之寇，未可尽克，方春水生，难于久驻，宜俟来冬，更为大举。 
现代文：杜预与众将领议事，有人说： 百年的寇贼，不可能一下子彻底消灭，现在正是春季，有雨水，军队难以长时间驻扎，最好等到冬季来临，再大举发兵。 
English: Du Yueh and the generals were having a discussion. Someone said, "It is impossible to completely wipe out the century-old bandits all at once. It is spring now, there is rain, and it is difficult for the army to stay for a long time. It is best to wait until winter comes and then send troops in large numbers."

古文：预曰： 昔乐毅藉济西一战以并强齐，今兵威已振，譬如破竹，数节之后，皆迎刃而解，无复著手处也。 
现代文：杜预说： 从前，乐毅凭藉济西一伏而一举吞并了强大的齐国。目前，我军兵威已振，这就好比破竹，破开数节之后，就都迎刃而解了，不会再有吃力的地方了。 
English: Du Yu said, "In the past, Zhishu won a war with the help of Jiaxi and annexed the powerful state of Qi. Now, the military power has been invigorated and the momentum is unstoppable. After a few days, everything will be solved, and there will be no place for effort.

古文：遂指授群帅方略，径造建业。
现代文：于是，指点传授众将领计策谋略，部队一直到了建业。
English: As a result, the generals were instructed on strategies, and the troops went all the way to Jianye.

古文：吴主闻王浑南下，使丞相张悌督丹杨太守沈莹、护军孙震、副军师诸葛靓帅众三万渡江逆战。
现代文：吴主听说王浑领兵南下，就派丞相张悌，督率丹阳太守沈莹、护军孙震、副军师诸葛靓率领部众三万人渡过长江迎战。
English: When the Lord of Wu heard that Wang Hun was leading his army south, he sent the prime minister Zhang Ye, the governor of Danyang, Shen Ying, the military escort Sun Zhen, and the deputy military instructor Zhu Gejun to lead 30,000 people across the Yangtze River to meet the war.

古文：至牛渚，沈莹曰： 晋治水军于蜀久矣，上流诸军，素无戒备，名将皆死，幼少当任，恐不能御也。
现代文：走时牛渚时，沈莹说： 晋在蜀地整治水军已经有很长时间了。我上流各部队，素来没有戎备，名将又都死了，只是些年少之人担当重任，恐怕抵挡不住。
English: While walking along Ushi Nagisa, Shen Ying said, "It's been a long time since Jin Ru took charge of the navy in Shu. All of my upper-level troops have never been armed, and the famous generals have all died, but some younger people are in charge of important tasks, I'm afraid I can't resist.

古文：晋之水军必至于此，宜畜众力以待其来，与之一战，若幸而胜之，江西自清。
现代文：晋的水军必然要到这些地方，我们应当集中大家的力量等他们到来，与晋打一仗，假如有幸能够取胜，那么长江以北的地区自然就太平了。
English: Jin's navy is bound to come to these places. We should gather everyone's strength and wait for them to arrive and fight a battle with Jin. If we are fortunate enough to win, then the area north of the Yangtze River will naturally be peaceful.

古文：今渡江与晋大军战，不幸而败，则大事去矣！ 
现代文：如果现在渡江与晋大军交战，不幸而打败了，那么大事就完了。 
English: If, now, Watarie engages in a battle with the large Jin army and is unfortunately defeated, then the big event will be over.

古文：悌曰： 吴之将亡，贤愚所知，非今日也。
现代文：张悌说： 吴将要亡国，这是无论聪明还是愚笨的人都知道的事实，不是今日才有的事。
English: Zhang Ye said, "Wu is about to lose the country. This is a fact that everyone knows, whether they are smart or stupid. This is not something that just happened today.

古文：吾恐蜀兵至此，众心骇惧，不可复整。
现代文：我担心蜀地之兵到了这里，我军恐惧惊慌，就不可能再整肃起来了。
English: I'm worried that when the Shu soldiers get here, our army will be scared and panicked, and it will be impossible to clean up.

古文：及今渡江，犹可决战。
现代文：趁着现在渡江，尚且还能与晋决一死战。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity to cross the river now, he can still fight a battle to the death with Jin.

古文：若其败丧，同死社稷，无所复恨。若其克捷，北敌奔走，兵势万倍，便当乘胜南上，逆之中道，不忧不破也。
现代文：如果败亡，就一同为国而死，再没有什么可遗憾的了；假如能够取胜，那么敌军奔逃，我军声势就将倍增，然后就乘胜向南进军，在半路上迎击敌人，那就不愁不能破敌。
English: If we are defeated, we will die together for the country, and there will be nothing to regret; if we can win, then the enemy troops will flee, and our army's momentum will be doubled, and then we will take advantage of the victory to march south and meet the enemy halfway, then we can not help but break the enemy.

古文：若如子计，恐士众散尽，坐待敌到，君臣俱降，无复一人死难者，不亦辱乎！ 
现代文：要是依了你的计谋，恐怕兵士都四散奔逃；坐等到敌军到来，君臣就一起投降，没有一个人死于国难，这难道不是耻辱吗？ 
English: If you had followed your plan, I'm afraid the soldiers would have fled in all directions; wait until the enemy army arrives, the monarchs and ministers would have surrendered together, and no one would have died in the national tragedy. Isn't this a disgrace?

古文：三月，悌等济江，围浑部将城阳都尉张乔于杨荷。
现代文：三月，张悌等人渡过长江，在杨荷包围了王浑的部将、城阳都尉张乔。
English: In March, Zhang Xuan and others crossed the Yangtze River and surrounded Wang Hun's commander, Chengyang Lieutenant Zhang Qiao, in Yanghe.

古文：乔众才七千，闭栅请降。
现代文：张乔手下只有七千人，他关闭了栅栏请求投降。
English: Zhang Qiao had only seven thousand men, he closed the fence and asked for surrender.

古文：诸葛靓欲屠之，悌曰： 强敌在前，不宜先事其小，且杀降不祥。 
现代文：诸葛靓想把他们都杀了，张悌说： 强敌还在前面，不宜先去做无关紧要的事情，况且杀了投降的人不吉利。 
English: Zhuge Liang wanted to kill them all, Zhang Ye said: The strong enemy is still ahead, it is not appropriate to do unimportant things first, and it is unlucky to kill those who surrender.

古文：悌与扬州刺史汝南周浚，结陈相对，沈莹帅丹杨锐卒、刀楯五千，三冲晋兵，不动。
现代文：诸葛靓说： 这些人是因为救兵还没有到、力量弱小抵挡不住，所以才暂且假装投降以拖延时间，并不是真正的屈服了。
English: Zhuge Liang said: These people pretended to surrender to delay the time because the rescuers had not yet arrived and their strength was too weak to resist, so they did not really surrender.

古文：莹引退，其众乱；将军薛胜、蒋班因其乱而乘之，吴兵以次奔溃，将帅不能止，张乔自后击之，大败吴兵于版桥。诸葛靓帅数百人遁去，使过迎张悌，悌不肯去，靓自往牵之曰： 存亡自有大数，非卿一人所支，奈何故自取死！ 
现代文：如果放了他们，和我们一起往前走。张悌与扬州刺史、汝南人周浚，组成陈列相对。沈莹领兵退却，部众开始乱起来，这时，晋将军薛胜、蒋班乘吴兵混乱之机打过来，吴兵接二连三地奔逃溃散，将帅们也制止不住，张乔又从背后杀过来，结果在版桥，晋大破吴兵。诸葛靓带着几百人逃走，他派人去接张悌，张悌不肯离开，诸葛靓又亲自拉他走，说：存亡自有气数，并不是你一个人所能支撑的，为什么一定要自己求死呢？ 
English: If we let them go, they will go forward with us. Zhang Qian and Yangzhou Zhanshi and Yunnan people Zhou Jun formed a display opposite. Shen Ying led the troops to retreat, and the troops began to be disorderly. At this time, Jin generals Xue Sheng and Jiang Ban took advantage of the chaos of the Wu soldiers to attack. The Wu soldiers ran away and scattered one after another, and the generals could not stop them. Zhang Qiao also killed them from behind. As a result, in the bridge, Jin defeated the Wu soldiers. Zhu Gejun fled with hundreds of people. He sent someone to pick up Zhang Qian, Zhang Qian refused to leave,

古文：悌垂涕曰： 仲思，今日是我死日也！
现代文：张悌流泪说： 诸葛靓，今天是我死的日子。
English: Zhang Ye shed tears and said: Zhuge Ye, today is the day I die.

古文：且我为儿童时，便为卿家丞相所识拔，常恐不得其死，负名贤知顾。
现代文：况且我还是幼儿的时候，就被你家丞相诸葛亮所赏识提拔。我常常怕我死得没有意义，辜负了名贤对我的了解与照顾。
English: Moreover, when I was a toddler, I was appreciated and promoted by your family chancellor Zhuge Liang. I was often afraid that my death would be meaningless and that I would fail the sages' understanding and care for me.

古文：今以身徇社稷，复何道邪！ 
现代文：我今天以身殉国，还有什么可说的呢！ 
English: I am a martyr today, what more can I say!

古文：靓再三牵之，不动，乃流泪放去，行百馀步，顾之，已为晋兵所杀，并斩孙震、沈莹等七千八百级，吴人大震。
现代文：诸葛靓再三拉他走，还是拉不动他，于是就流着眼泪放开手，走了。走了一百多步远，回过头去看张悌，他已经被晋兵杀了。同时被斩首的，还有孙震、沈莹等七千八百人。吴人受到了极大的震动。
English: Zhuge Liang repeatedly pulled him away, but could not move him, so he let go of his hand with tears and walked away. He walked more than a hundred steps away and turned back to see Zhang Liang, who had been killed by Jin soldiers. At the same time, Sun Zhen, Shen Ying and other seven thousand eight hundred people were beheaded. The people of Wu were greatly shaken.

古文：初，诏书使王濬下建平，受杜预节度，至建业，受王浑节度。
现代文：当初，晋武帝下诏书，命令王濬攻下建平，接受杜预的节制调度，到了建业，接受王浑的部署、调度。
English: At first, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict, ordering Wang Qian to conquer Jianping and accept Du Yu's restraint and dispatch, and to accept Wang Hun's deployment and dispatch in Jianye.

古文：预至江陵，谓诸将曰： 若濬得建平，则顺流长驱，威名已著，不宜令受制于我；若不能克，则无缘得施节度。 
现代文：杜预到江陵，对各位将领说： 如果王濬攻克了建平，就会顺长江长驱直进，他的威名已经显著，就不适合再让他受我的节制。如果他不能取胜，那么我就没有缘份对他施行节制调度了。 
English: Du arrived in Gangneung in advance and said to the generals: "If Wang Xuan conquers Jianping, he will drive straight ahead along the Yangtze River. His prestige is already significant, and it is not suitable for him to be restrained by me. If he cannot win, then I have no chance to restrain him.

古文：濬至西陵，预与之书曰： 足下既摧其西籓，便当径取建业，讨累世之逋寇，释吴人于涂炭，振旅还都，亦旷世一事也！ 
现代文：王濬到了西陵，杜预写信对他说： 您已经摧毁了敌人的西部屏障，应立即直取建业，讨伐历代的逃寇，从水深火热之中解救吴人，整顿部队，返回都城，这也是前所未有的一件事。 
English: When Wang Hui arrived at Xiling, Du Yuan wrote to him: You have already destroyed the enemy's western barrier, you should immediately go straight to Jianye, fight the fugitive bandits of all ages, rescue the Wu people from the heat of the moment, rectify the troops, and return to the capital, which is also an unprecedented thing.

古文：濬大悦，表呈预书。
现代文：王濬非常高兴，上表陈述杜预的信。
English: Wang Jun was very pleased and presented the letter to Du Yuan on the table.

古文：及张悌败死，扬州别驾何恽谓周浚曰： 张悌举全吴精兵殄灭于此，吴之朝野莫不震慑。
现代文：张悌战败身死时，扬州别驾何恽对周浚说： 张悌发动的全吴的精兵就在这里灭亡了，这使吴朝野上下没有人不震动恐惧。
English: When Zhang Ye was defeated and died, Yangzhou Beidou He Jun said to Zhou Jun: All the elite soldiers of Wu launched by Zhang Ye died here, which made no one in and around the Wu Dynasty shake with fear.

古文：今王龙骧既破武昌，乘胜东下，所向辄克，土崩之势见矣。
现代文：现在，王濬已经攻下了武昌，正乘胜东下，所向无敌，敌人土崩瓦解之势已经显露出来了。
English: Now that Wang Hui has captured Wuchang, he is taking advantage of the victory to go eastward, he is invincible, and the enemy's potential for collapse has been revealed.

古文：谓宜速引兵渡江，直指建业，大军猝至，夺其胆气，可不战禽也！ 
现代文：我认为，应当立即领兵渡江，直指建业。大军突然到来，必然使敌人胆战心惊，失去勇气，我们就能不战而擒敌了。 
English: In my opinion, we should immediately lead the troops across the river and head straight for Jianye. The sudden arrival of a large army will inevitably make the enemy lose heart and lose courage, and we will be able to defeat the enemy without a fight.

古文：浚善其谋，使白王浑。
现代文：周浚赞赏何恽的计谋，让他去报告王浑。
English: Zhou Jun appreciated He Yao's stratagem and asked him to report to Wang Hun.

古文：恽曰： 浑暗于事机，而欲慎己免咎，必不我从。 
现代文：何恽说： 王浑不懂得把握事情的时机，但他想行事谨慎，不使自己有过失，所以他肯定不会听从我的意见。 
English: He Wei said: Wang Hun does not know how to grasp the timing of things, but he wants to be cautious and not make himself at fault, so he will definitely not listen to my opinion.

古文：浚固使白之，浑果曰： 受诏但令屯江北以抗吴军，不使轻进。
现代文：周浚坚持让他去向王浑禀告，王浑果然说： 我接受皇帝的命令，只让我驻扎在长江以北，以便抗击吴军，并没有让我轻易进兵。
English: Zhou Jun insisted that he go and report to Wang Hun, and Wang Hun finally said: I accept the emperor's order, only let me be stationed north of the Yangtze River in order to resist the Wu army, but did not let me enter the army easily.

古文：贵州虽武，岂能独平江东乎！
现代文：你们州的军队虽然勇武，又岂能独立地平定江东之地呢！
English: Although the troops of your states are brave, can they independently settle the land east of the Yangtze River?

古文：今者违命，胜不足多，若其不胜，为罪已重。
现代文：现在如果违反诏命而出兵，打了胜仗固然值得称赞，如果没有取胜，那么犯下的罪过就已经很严重了。
English: Now, if a soldier is sent out in violation of the imperial edict, it is certainly commendable if he wins the battle, but if he does not win, then the crime committed is already very serious.

古文：且诏令龙骧受我节度，但当具君舟楫，一时俱济耳。 
现代文：而且皇帝命令王濬接受我的部署调度，你们所应该作的，只是准备好船和桨，一齐渡江。 
English: Moreover, the emperor ordered Wang Yao to accept my deployment schedule. All you have to do is prepare a boat and oars and cross the river together.

古文：恽曰： 龙骧克万里之寇，以既成之功来受节度，未之闻也。
现代文：何恽说： 王濬攻克了万里之敌，他会以成就功勋的身份来接受您的部署调度，这样的事情我可没有听说过。
English: He Yao said, "Wang Yao has conquered the enemy thousands of miles away. He will accept your deployment scheduling as a meritorious achievement. I have never heard of such a thing.

古文：且明公为上将，见可而进，岂得一一须诏令乎！
现代文：况且明公您为上将，抓住适当的机会就可以行动，怎么可以事事都等待命令呢？
English: Moreover, it is clear that you are an admiral, you can seize the right opportunity to act, how can you wait for orders in everything?

古文：今乘此渡江，十全必克，何疑何虑而淹留不进！此鄙州上下所以恨恨也。 
现代文：现在如果乘机渡江，完全有把握取胜，您还犹豫、顾虑什么而停留不进，这正是使鄙州上上下下的人士抱恨不已的原因。 
English: Now, if you take the opportunity to cross the river, you are completely sure to win, but you still hesitate, worry about something and do not move forward, which is exactly the reason why people up and down the state hold a grudge.

古文：浑不听。
现代文：王恽不听。
English: Wang Yao didn't listen.

古文：王濬自武昌顺流径趣建业，吴主遣游击将军张象帅舟师万人御之，象众望旗而降。
现代文：王濬从武昌顺着长江直接向建业进逼。吴主派遣游击将军张象率领舟师一万人抵抗。张象的部下望见王濬的旌旗就投降了。
English: Wang Hui marched directly from Wuchang along the Yangtze River to Jianye. The Lord of Wu dispatched the guerrilla general Zhang Xiang to lead 10,000 boatmen to resist. Zhang Xiang's men saw Wang Hui's banner and surrendered.

古文：濬兵甲满江，旌旗烛天，威势甚盛，吴人大惧。
现代文：这时候，江中满满的全都是身披铠甲的王濬的士兵，旌旗映照着天空，威猛的气势极其盛大，吴人异常恐惧。
English: At this time, the river was full of Wang Yao's soldiers clad in armor, their banners reflected the sky, their power was extremely great, and the Wu people were extremely afraid.

古文：吴主之嬖臣岑昏，以倾险谀佞，致位九列，好兴功役，为众患苦。
现代文：吴主的宠臣岑昏，由于阴险狡诈、谄媚逢迎而爬上了九卿的地位。他喜好大兴工程劳役，使众人深受困苦与祸患。
English: Lord Wu's favorite vassal, Zhaodong, rose to the status of the Nine Lords due to his insidious cunning and flattery. He was fond of encouraging laborers to work on construction projects, causing great hardship and misfortune to the people.

古文：及晋兵将至，殿中亲近数百人叩头请于吴主曰： 北军日近而兵不举刃，陛下将如之何？ 吴主曰： 何故？ 
现代文：等晋兵就要到达的时候，宫中亲近的几百名随从官吏向吴主叩头请求说： 北方的敌军一天一天地逼近了，而我们的士兵却不拿起武器抵抗，陛下您打算怎么办呢？ 吴主问： 是什么原因？ 
English: When the Jin soldiers were about to arrive, several hundred officials close to the palace bowed down to Lord Wu and asked: "Your Majesty, what are you going to do when the enemy army in the north is approaching day by day, but our soldiers do not take up arms to resist? Lord Wu asked: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 正坐岑昏耳。 
现代文：众人回答说： 正是由于岑昏的缘故。 
English: They answered, "It is because of the darkness."

古文：吴主独言： 若尔，当以奴谢百姓！ 众因曰： 唯！ 
现代文：吴主只说了一句： 要是这样，就拿这个奴才去向老百姓谢罪吧！ 众人答应 是！ 
English: Lord Wu only said one sentence: If this is the case, then take this slave to thank the people for their sins! The people agreed.

古文：遂并起收昏。吴主骆驿追止，已屠之矣。
现代文：从地上爬起来就去抓岑昏，等到吴主后悔，不断地派人去追赶制止，岑昏已经被杀了。
English: When he got up from the ground, he went to catch Zhaodou. When the Lord of Wu regretted, he kept sending people to chase and stop him. Zhaodou had already been killed.

古文：陶浚将讨郭马，至武昌，闻晋兵大入，引兵东还。
现代文：陶浚要去征讨郭马，到了武昌，听说晋兵已大举进逼，就领兵返回东边。
English: Tao Jun went to recruit Guo Ma. When he arrived in Wuchang, he heard that the Jin soldiers had made a large-scale advance, so he led the soldiers back to the east.

古文：至建业，吴主引见，问水军消息，对曰： 蜀船皆小，今得二万兵，乘大船以战，自足破之。 
现代文：到了建业，吴主派人领他来见面，向他询问水军的情况。陶浚回答说： 蜀地的船都很小，现在给二万名士兵，乘大船作战，我有把握打败敌人。 
English: When he arrived at Jianye, Master Wu sent someone to bring him to meet him and ask him about the situation of the navy. Tao Jun replied: The ships of Shu are all small. Now, with twenty thousand soldiers fighting on large ships, I am sure to defeat the enemy.

古文：于是合众，授浚节钺。
现代文：于是吴召集兵员，授予陶浚符节斧钺。
English: So Wu gathered the soldiers and awarded Tao Jun with the Axe.

古文：明日当发，其夜，众悉逃溃。
现代文：原定第二天了发，但当天夜里，陶浚召集的士兵全都跑光了。
English: It was scheduled to take place the next day, but that night, all the soldiers summoned by Tao Jun ran away.

古文：时王浑、王濬及琅邪王亻由皆临近境，吴司徒何植、建威将军孙晏悉送印节诣浑降。
现代文：这时，王浑、王濬以及琅邪王司马都已逼近建业附近。吴司徒何植、建威将军孙晏都把印玺、符节送到王浑那里投降了。
English: At this time, Wang Hun, Wang Yao and the evil king Sima were already approaching the vicinity of Jianye. Wu Sidu He Zhi and Jianwei's general Sun Yao both sent the seal and rune to Wang Hun and surrendered.

古文：吴主用光禄勋薛莹、中书令胡冲等计，分遣使者奉书于浑、滩、亻由以请降。
现代文：吴主采用光禄勋薛莹、中书令胡冲等人的计谋，分别派遣使者向王浑、王濬、司马奉上书信请求投降。
English: The Lord of Wu used the stratagem of Guanglu Xue Ying and the Chinese envoy Hu Chong respectively to send envoys to Wang Hun, Wang Yao and Sima to request their surrender.

古文：又遗其群臣书，深自咎责，且曰： 今大晋平治四海，是英俊展节之秋，勿以移朝改朔，用损厥志。 
现代文：吴主又给大臣们一封信，在信中深深地谴责了自己的罪过，还说： 当前，大晋平治四海，这正是杰出优秀的人材发挥、施展其气节操守的时期，不要因为改朝换代就因此丧失了志向。 
English: The Lord Wu also wrote a letter to the ministers, in which he deeply condemned his own sins, and said: At present, the Great Jin is pacifying the four seas, this is precisely the period for outstanding and outstanding talents to exert themselves and display their moral integrity. Don't lose your ambition because of the change of dynasty.

古文：使者先送玺绶于琅邪王亻由。
现代文：吴主的使者先把印玺送到琅邪王司马那里。
English: The emissary of the Lord of Wu first sent the seal to the evil king Sima.

古文：壬寅，王濬舟师过三山，王浑遣信要濬暂过论事；濬举帆直指建业，报曰： 风利，不得泊也。 
现代文：壬寅，王濬的舟师经过三山，王浑派信使邀请王濬暂时过来商议事情，王濬正扬帆直逼建业，回复王浑说： 船行正顺风，不便停下来。 
English: Jinyin, Wang Hui's boatman, passed through the Three Mountains. Wang Hun sent a messenger to invite Wang Hui to come over temporarily to discuss the matter. Wang Hui was setting sail to force the construction, and Wang Hun replied: The ship is sailing with a fair wind, it is inconvenient to stop.

古文：是日，濬戎卒八万，方舟百里，鼓噪入于石头，吴主皓面缚舆榇，诣军门降。
现代文：这一天，王濬的八万士兵，乘着相连百里的战船，擂鼓呐喊进入石头城。吴主孙松了绑，焚烧了棺材，请他相见。
English: On this day, the eighty thousand soldiers of Wang Qian, riding a hundred-mile-long warship, entered the stone city with drums and shouts. Wu Shusun loosened his bonds, burned the coffin, and invited him to meet.

古文：濬解缚焚榇，延请相见。收其图籍，克州四，郡四十三，户五十二万三千，兵二十三万。
现代文：晋接收了吴的地图、户籍，攻克了吴的四个州，四十三个郡，五十二万三千户，二十三万名士兵。
English: Jin received Wu's maps and household registration, and conquered Wu's four prefectures, forty-three counties, 523,000 households, and 230,000 soldiers.

古文：朝廷闻吴已平，群臣皆贺上寿。
现代文：朝廷听到吴已平定的消息，大臣们都去庆贺，为晋武帝祝寿。
English: When the imperial court heard the news that Wu had been pacified, the ministers all went to celebrate and wish Emperor Jinwu a happy birthday.

古文：帝执爵流涕曰： 此羊太傅之功也。 
现代文：晋武帝手持酒杯流泪说： 这是太傅羊祜的功劳。 
English: Holding a wine glass in his hand, Emperor Jinwu said through tears: This is the merit of Taifu Yangjun.

古文：骠骑将军孙秀不贺，南向流涕曰： 昔讨逆弱冠以一校尉创业，今后主举江南而弃之，宗庙山陵，于此为墟。悠悠苍天，此何人哉！ 
现代文：票骑将军孙秀没有和大家一起庆贺，他面朝南方流泪说： 从前，先主孙策刚满二十岁，以一个校尉的身份创下了基业，如今后主把整个江南之地都抛弃了，宗庙陵墓从此将成为废墟，悠悠青天啊，这究竟是谁造成的啊！ 
English: General Sun Xiu, the ticket rider, did not celebrate with everyone. He turned his face to the south and shed tears, saying: Once upon a time, the forefather Sun Ce had just turned twenty years old and created a foundation as a captain. Now the forefather has abandoned the entire south of the Yangtze River. The ancestral temple mausoleum will become ruins from now on.

古文：吴之未下也，大臣皆以为未可轻进，独张华坚执以为必克。
现代文：当初，还没有攻陷吴国的时候，大臣们都认为不可以轻易进军，只有张华非常坚定地坚持进军，认为一定能成功。
English: At first, when Wu had not yet been conquered, the ministers all believed that it was not easy to march into the country. Only Zhang Hua very firmly insisted on marching into the country, believing that it would be successful.

古文：贾充上表称： 吴地未可悉定，方夏，江、淮下湿，疾疫必起，宜召诸军还，以为后图。
现代文：贾充当时上表说： 吴地不能全都平定，现在正是夏季，长江、淮水下游地区潮湿，必然会发生疾病瘟疫，应当把各部队都召回来，以后再作打算。
English: Jia Chong said at the time: Wu cannot be completely pacified, it is summer now, the lower reaches of the Yangtze River and Huai Shui River are humid, diseases and plagues will inevitably occur, all troops should be recalled, and plans should be made later.

古文：虽腰斩张华不足以谢天下。 
现代文：即使腰斩张华，也不足以向天下人谢罪。 
English: Even if Zhang Hua was beheaded, it would not be enough to apologize to the world.

古文：帝曰： 此是吾意，华但与吾同耳。 
现代文：晋武帝说： 这正是我的意思，张华只不过是与我意见相同而已。 
English: The emperor said: This is my opinion, Zhang Hua is just like me.

古文：荀勖复奏，宜如充表，帝不从。
现代文：荀勖又上奏，大致上与贾充的看法相同。
English: The gong is played again, which is roughly the same as Jia Chong's opinion.

古文：杜预闻充奏乞罢兵，驰表固争，使至轘辕而吴已降。
现代文：晋武帝没有听他们的话。杜预听说贾充上奏请求停止进兵，急忙上表晋武帝，坚决地争论，派使者拿了给晋武帝的表文，飞驰而去。使者走到辕时吴已经投降了。
English: Emperor Jinwu did not listen to them. Du Yuan heard Jia Chongwu's request to stop the advance, hurried to Emperor Jinwu's table, argued resolutely, sent an envoy to take the letter to Emperor Jinwu, and sped away. By the time the envoy got to the table, Wu had surrendered.

古文：充惭惧，诣阙请罪，帝抚而不问。
现代文：贾充又惭愧又害怕，到宫里去请罪，晋武帝抚慰了他而没有追究。
English: Jia Chong was ashamed and afraid, and went to the palace to plead guilty. Emperor Jinwu consoled him and did not pursue the case.

古文：夏，四月，甲申，诏赐孙皓爵归命侯。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲申，晋武帝下诏，赐予孙爵位归命侯。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Jianwu of Jiaxing issued an edict, bestowing the title of Sun Jiao on him.

古文：乙酉，大赦，改元。
现代文：乙酉，大赦天下，改年号为太康。
English: Acetylene, amnesty to the world, change the year name to Taikang.

古文：大酺五日。
现代文：晋朝聚餐饮酒五天。
English: The Jin dynasty had a banquet and drank alcohol for five days.

古文：遣使者分诣荆、扬抚慰，吴牧、守已下皆不更易，除其苛政，悉从简易，吴人大悦。
现代文：派遣使者分别到荆州、扬州去抚慰，吴原来的牧、守以下的官吏全都不更换；废除了吴的繁琐的规章制度，一切都遵循简便易行的原则，吴人非常高兴。
English: Envoys were sent to Jingzhou and Yangzhou to comfort them, and none of the officials below Wu's original herdsmen and guards were replaced. Wu's cumbersome rules and regulations were abolished, and everything followed the principle of being simple and easy to do. The people of Wu were very happy.

古文：滕修讨郭马未克，闻晋伐吴，帅众赴难，至巴丘，闻吴亡，缟素流涕，还，与广州刺史闾丰、苍梧太守王毅各送印绶请降。
现代文：滕修讨伐郭马没有成功，听说晋征讨吴，就率领部下奔来救难。到巴丘，听到吴已亡国的消息，于是身穿白色的丧服流泪，然后就返回了。他与广州刺史闾丰、苍梧太守王毅各自向晋送去印玺绶带请求投降。
English: Tengxiu's campaign against Guoma was not successful. When he heard that Jin's campaign against Wu was unsuccessful, he led his subordinates to rush to the rescue. When he heard the news that Wu had lost his country, he went to Bachu, where he shed tears in his white mourning clothes, and then returned. He, along with Guangzhou's Grand Vizier Shifeng and the Cangwu Grand Vizier Wang Yi, each sent a printed ribbon to Jin to request surrender.

古文：孙皓遣陶璜之子融持手书谕璜，璜流涕数日，亦送印绶降；帝皆复其本职。
现代文：孙派陶璜的儿子陶融，拿着他亲笔写的信指示陶璜降晋，陶璜哭了好几天，最后也送去了印玺绶带投降了。晋武帝全都恢复了他们原来的官职。
English: Sun Pai's son Tao Rong, holding a letter written in his own hand, instructed Tao Ying to surrender to the Jin. Tao Ying cried for several days, and finally also sent a seal ribbon and surrendered. The Jin Emperors all resumed their original official positions.

古文：王濬之东下也，吴城戍皆望风款附，独建平太守吾彦婴城不下，闻吴亡，乃降。
现代文：王濬向东挺进时，吴各城的守备都望风而降，只有建平太守吾彦环绕着城固守，没有攻下来。
English: When Wang Hui advanced eastward, the defenses of all the cities in Wu fell to the wind. Only Emperor Jianping's father, Emperor Wu, surrounded the city and did not attack it.

古文：帝以彦为金城太守。
现代文：后来他听到吴亡国的消息就投降了。晋武帝任命吾彦为金城太守。
English: Later, when he heard the news of Wu's death, he surrendered. Emperor Jinmu appointed Azhiko as the governor of Jincheng.

古文：初，朝廷尊宠孙秀、孙楷，欲以招来吴人。
现代文：当初，朝廷对孙秀、孙楷尊重恩宠，是想利用他们招来吴人。
English: At first, the imperial court respected and favored Sun Xiu and Sun Kai, and wanted to use them to recruit Wu people.

古文：及吴亡，降秀为伏波将军，楷为渡辽将军。
现代文：等到吴灭亡了，孙秀就被降职为伏波将军，孙楷降为度辽将军。
English: After Wu's death, Sun Xiu was demoted to General Fubo, and Sun Kai was demoted to General Du Liao.

古文：琅邪王亻由遣使送孙皓及其宗族诣洛阳。
现代文：琅邪王司马派使者送孙及他的宗族去洛阳。
English: The evil king Sima sent an envoy to take Sun and his clan to Luoyang.

古文：五月，丁亥朔，皓至，与其太子瑾等泥头面缚，诣东阳门。
现代文：五月，丁亥朔，孙到了洛阳。他和太子孙瑾等人用泥涂在头上，反绑了双手，来到洛阳的东阳门。
English: In May, Ding Hai Shuo and Sun arrived in Luoyang. He, together with the prince's son Zou and others, smeared mud on their heads, tied their hands behind their backs, and arrived at Luoyang's Dongyang Gate.

古文：诏遣谒者解其缚，赐衣服、车乘、田三十顷，岁给钱谷、绵绢甚厚。
现代文：晋武帝下诏，派谒者解开他们的绳索，赐以衣服、车子、三十顷田地，每年都供应他们非常充足的钱币、粮食和布匹。
English: Emperor Jinwu decreed that the envoys should untie their ropes, give them clothes, cars, thirty hectares of fields, and supply them with a very ample supply of money, grain and cloth every year.

古文：拜瑾为中郎，诸子为王者皆为郎中，吴之旧望，随才擢叙。
现代文：晋授予孙瑾中郎的官职，孙皓其他的儿子，凡是原先为王的，都被任命为郎中。吴从前的有名望的人士，都根据他们的才能提拔进用。
English: Jin appointed Sun Yat-sen's other sons, all of whom had previously been kings, as vice-regents, and Wu's former notables were promoted according to their abilities.

古文：孙氏将吏渡江者复十年，百姓复二十年。
现代文：孙皓的将领、官吏渡过长江的，免除十年的赋税、劳役；老百姓免除二十年的赋税、劳役。
English: Sun Yat-sen's generals and officials who crossed the Yangtze River were exempted from ten years of tax and labor service; ordinary people were exempted from twenty years of tax and labor service.

古文：庚寅，帝临轩，大会文武有位及四方使者，国子学生皆预焉。
现代文：庚寅，晋武帝来到堂前的长廊，会见文武官员中有爵位的以及四方来晋的使者，国子学生也都参加会见。
English: Emperor Go-In and Emperor Jinmu came to the promenade in front of the hall to meet with officials from the civil and military ranks, as well as envoys from all over the country, and Kuniko students also attended the meeting.

古文：引见归命侯皓及吴降人，皓登殿稽颡。
现代文：晋武帝派人把归命侯孙以及投降的吴人带来相见。孙登上大殿向晋武帝叩头。
English: Emperor Jinwu sent someone to bring the returnee Hou Sun and the surrendered Wu people to see each other. Sun climbed onto the main hall to kowtow to Emperor Jinwu.

古文：帝谓皓曰： 朕设此座以待卿久矣。 
现代文：晋武帝对孙说： 联设了这个座位以等待你已经有很久了。 
English: Emperor Jinwu said to Sun, "This seat has been waiting for you for a long time.

古文：皓曰： 臣于南方，亦设此座以待陛下。 
现代文：孙说： 我在南方，也设了这个座位以等待陛下。 
English: Sun said: I am in the south, and I also set up this seat to wait for Your Majesty.

古文：贾充谓皓曰： 闻君在南方凿人目，剥人面皮，此何等刑也？ 
现代文：贾充对孙说： 听说你在南方，凿人的眼睛，剥人的脸皮，这是哪一等级的刑法？ 
English: Jia Chong said to Sun: I heard that you were in the south, gouging people's eyes, skinning people's faces, what level of criminal law is this?

古文：皓曰： 人臣有弑其君及奸回不忠者，则加此刑耳。 
现代文：孙说： 为人臣子的，杀了他的君王以及邪恶不忠的就处以这种刑法。 
English: Sun said, "This is the punishment for a vassal who kills his lord and for the wicked and disloyal.

古文：充默然甚愧，而皓颜色无怍。
现代文：贾充沉默无语，非常羞愧，而孙却面无愧色。
English: Jia Chong was silent and speechless, very ashamed, while Sun was full of shame.

古文：帝从容问散骑常侍薛莹孙皓所以亡，对曰： 皓昵近小人，刑罚放滥，大臣诸将，人不自保，此其所以亡也。 
现代文：晋武帝从容地询问散骑常侍薛莹，孙为什么会亡国。薛莹回答说： 孙亲近小人，任意地施行刑罚，大臣和各位将领，人人都不能自保，这就是孙灭亡的原因。 
English: Emperor Jinwu calmly asked his equestrian attendant, Xue Ying, why Sun was killed. Xue Ying replied: Sun was close to villains and arbitrarily imposed punishments. Ministers and generals cannot protect themselves. This is the reason for Sun's death.

古文：它日，又问吾彦，对曰： 吴主英俊，宰辅贤明。 
现代文：又一天，晋武帝用同样的问题问吾彦，吾彦回答说： 吴君王才智出众，辅佐的大臣贤能聪明。 
English: The next day, Emperor Jinwu asked Azhiko the same question. Azhiko replied, "Emperor Wu is very intelligent, and his assistant ministers are very wise.

古文：帝笑曰： 若是，何故亡？ 
现代文：晋武帝笑着说： 要是这样，为什么会亡国？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu smiled and said, "If that's the case, why was the country destroyed?"

古文：彦曰： 天禄永终，历数有属，故为陛下禽耳。 
现代文：吾彦说： 天赐的福禄永久断绝，天道却有归属，所以才被陛下所擒。 
English: Azhiko said, "The blessings given by Heaven have been cut off forever, but the heavenly way has a place of belonging. That is why I was chosen by Your Majesty.

古文：帝善之。
现代文：晋武帝赞赏他的话。
English: Emperor Wu agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：王濬之入建业也，其明日，王浑乃济江，以濬不待己至，先受孙皓降，意甚愧忿，将攻濬。
现代文：王濬进入建业的第二天，王浑就渡过长江。王浑因为王濬不等他到，就先接受孙投降，心中又羞愧又怨恨，就想攻打王濬。
English: On the second day after Wang Xi entered Jianye, Wang Hun crossed the Yangtze River. Because Wang Xi did not wait for him to arrive, Wang Hun accepted Sun's surrender first. He was ashamed and resentful, and wanted to attack Wang Xi.

古文：何攀劝濬送皓与浑，由是事得解。
现代文：何攀劝王濬把孙送给王浑，事情才得到缓解。
English: It took a lot of persuading for Wang Qian to give his grandson to Wang Hun for the situation to be eased.

古文：何恽以浑与濬争功，与周浚笺曰： 《书》贵克让，《易》大谦光。
现代文：何恽因为王浑与王濬争功，就写信给周浚说： 《尚书》重视能退让，《易经》赞赏谦逊的光荣。
English: Because Wang Hun and Wang Yao were competing for merit, he wrote to Zhou Jun and said: "The Shang Shu" attaches great importance to the ability to concede, and "The Yi Jing" appreciates the glory of modesty.

古文：前破张悌，吴人失气，龙骧因之，陷其区宇。
现代文：前些时候打败了张悌，使吴人丧失了胆量勇气，王濬乘这个机会，攻下了吴的疆土。
English: After defeating Zhang Ye some time ago, the Wu people lost their courage. Wang Ye seized this opportunity to conquer the territory of Wu.

古文：论其前后，我实缓师，既失机会，不及于事，而今方竞其功；彼既不吞声，将亏雍穆之弘，兴矜争之鄙，斯愚情之所不取也。 
现代文：如果要论谁先谁后，我们确实是慢了，已经失去了机会，没有及时赶上，而目前又在争功，他既然咽不下这口怨气，就会使谐和的风气受到损坏，而使自矜争功的鄙陋之习兴起，这实在是我从心里所不敢同意的。 
English: If it is a question of who will be first and who will be last, we are indeed slow, have lost the opportunity, have not caught up in time, and are currently competing for merits. Since he cannot swallow this grudge, the harmonious culture will be damaged, and the despicable habit of claiming to compete for merits will arise. This is something I really do not dare to agree with.

古文：浚得笺，即谏止浑。浑不纳，表濬违诏不受节度，诬以罪状。
现代文：周浚收到信，立即进谏劝止王浑，王浑不听，上表说王濬违反诏命，不服从调度，还捏造事实诬告王濬有罪。
English: Zhou Jun received the letter and immediately went to Wang Hun to persuade him to stop. Wang Hun did not listen. The above table said that Wang Hun violated the imperial edict, disobeyed the dispatch, and fabricated facts to falsely accuse Wang Hun of guilt.

古文：浑子济，尚常山公主，宗党强盛。
现代文：王浑的儿子王济和晋武帝的女儿常山公主结了亲，在朝廷宗族帮派中很有势力。
English: Wang Hun's son, Wang Jie, married Emperor Jinmu's daughter, Princess Changshan, and became very powerful in the imperial clan gang.

古文：有司奏请槛车征濬，帝弗许，但以诏书责让濬以不从浑命，违制昧利。
现代文：于是，有关部门就上奏晋武帝，请求用囚车把王濬召回来，但是晋武帝没有同意，只是下诏书责备王濬不服从王浑的命令，违抗诏命，去求功利。
English: As a result, the relevant departments appealed to Emperor Jinwu and asked him to use the prison wagon to call Wang Qian back, but Emperor Jinwu did not agree, but issued an edict accusing Wang Qian of disobeying Wang Hun's order, defying the edict, and seeking material gain.

古文：濬上书自理曰： 前被诏书，令臣直造秣陵，又令受太尉充节度。
现代文：王濬上书为自己申辩说： 我先接到诏命，让我直接到秣陵，又命令我接受太尉贾充调度。
English: In a letter to the emperor, Wang Qi defended himself, saying: I first received the imperial command to go directly to Fuling, and I was also ordered to accept the dispatch of Lieutenant Jia Chong.

古文：臣以十五日至三山，见浑军在北岸，遣书邀臣；臣水军风发乘势，径造贼城，无缘回船过浑。
现代文：我于十五日到三山，看见王浑的军队在北岸，王浑写信邀请我去他那里，当时我的水军正顺风乘势直到贼城，没有理由再调转船头返回去见王浑。
English: I arrived at Sanshan on the 15th and saw Wang Hun's army on the north shore. Wang Hun wrote a letter inviting me to go to him. At that time, my navy was riding the wind to Kekeng. There was no reason to turn the bow of the ship and return to see Wang Hun.

古文：臣以日中至秣陵，暮乃被浑所下当受节度之符，欲令臣明十六日悉将所领还围石头，又索蜀兵及镇南诸军人名定见。
现代文：我在中午时到秣陵，黄昏时分才接到受王浑调度的命令，命令我于第二天十六日，率领全部属下，回过头去包围石头城。还索取我率领的蜀地兵士以及随我东下的镇南各军的确切人数。
English: I arrived in Fuling at noon, and only at dusk did I receive an order from Wang Hun's dispatch, ordering me to return on the 16th day of the next day, leading all my subordinates, to surround Stone Town. I was also asked for the exact number of Shu soldiers I was leading, as well as the troops from the south of the town following me to the east.

古文：臣以为皓已来降，无缘空围石头；又，兵人定见，不可仓猝得就，皆非当今之急，不可承用，非敢忽弃明制也。
现代文：我认为孙已经来投降，没有理由徒劳地包围石头城。另外，士兵的确切人数，不可能在匆促之间就能很快得知，而且都不是眼前急迫的事情，不能顺从施行，并不是我胆敢忽略、弃置圣明的诏令。
English: I think that Sun has already surrendered, and there is no reason to encircle Stone Town in vain. In addition, the exact number of soldiers cannot be known quickly in a hurry, and it is not an urgent matter, it cannot be obeyed, and it is not a decree that I dare to ignore and abandon the Holy Light.

古文：皓众叛亲离，匹夫独坐，雀鼠贪生，苟乞一活耳，而江北诸军不知虚实，不早缚取，自为小误。
现代文：孙众叛亲离，匹夫独坐，像麻雀、老鼠那样贪生，苟且乞求一条活命而已。但是江北的各部队不了解虚实，不早些来捉拿孙皓，自己造成了失误。
English: Sun defected from his relatives and sat alone, greedy for life like a sparrow and a mouse, begging for a living. However, the troops in the northern part of the river did not understand the truth and did not come to catch Sun Yao earlier, causing their own mistakes.

古文：臣至便得，更见怨恚，并云： 守贼百日，而令他人得之。 
现代文：我一到便得手，就更遭到怨恨与不满，还说什么守贼守了一百天，却让别人得到了。
English: As soon as I arrived, I got my hands on it, and I was met with even more resentment and dissatisfaction. They also said that the thief kept it for a hundred days, but let someone else get it.

古文：臣愚以为事君之道，苟利社稷，死生以之。
现代文：我认为，侍奉君王的原则是：假如有利于国家，无论生与死都要追求。
English: I believe that the principle of serving the king is: if it is good for the country, it should be pursued regardless of life and death.

古文：若其顾嫌疑以避咎责，此是人臣不忠之利，实非明主社稷之福也。 
现代文：如果顾虑别人猜忌怀疑因而逃避过错责任，这是作臣子的以不忠诚得到的私利，实在不是圣明的君主与国家的福气。 
English: If one avoids culpable responsibility out of concern for others, suspicion, and doubt, this is the selfish gain of a courtier through disloyalty, and is not the blessing of a saintly monarch and country.

古文：浑又腾周浚书云： 濬军得吴宝物。 
现代文：王浑又递上周浚的书信，信上说： 王濬军队得到了吴的珍贵物品。 
English: Wang Hun also submitted a letter from last week, saying in the letter: Wang Qian's army has obtained Wu's precious items.

古文：又云 濬牙门将李高放火烧皓伪宫。 
现代文：还说： 王濬的牙门将李高，放火烧了孙的宫殿。 
English: He also said: Wang Yao's gatekeeper, Li Gao, set fire to Sun's palace.

古文：濬复表曰： 臣孤根独立，结恨强宗。
现代文：王濬又上表说： 我孤根独立，与强大的宗派结下了仇怨。
English: Wang Yao also said on the table: I am a lone independent, and I have a grudge with a powerful sect.

古文：夫犯上干主，其罪可救；乖忤贵臣，祸在不测。
现代文：如果是冒犯了君王的罪过还可能得救，但要是得罪了权贵之臣，灾祸就难以预料了。
English: If you have offended the king, you may still be saved, but if you have offended a powerful vassal, disaster is difficult to predict.

古文：伪郎将孔摅说：去二月武昌失守，水军行至，皓案行石头还，左右人皆跳刀大呼云： 要当为陛下一死战决之。 皓意大喜，意必能然，便尽出金宝以赐与之。
现代文：吴中郎将孔摅说：二月武昌失守，晋水军马上就要到了。孙巡行石头城回来，他手下的人都挥舞着刀大呼，说： 正要为了陛下去决一死战， 孙非常高兴，觉得必然能如此，就把他的金器宝物全都拿出来赐给这些人。
English: Wu Zhonglang said to Confucius, "In February, Wuchang was lost, and the Jin navy was about to arrive. When Sun returned from the inspection of Stone Town, his men were waving their swords and shouting, saying, 'We are about to go into a battle to the death for the sake of Your Majesty.' Sun was very happy and felt that this was inevitable, so he took out all of his gold and treasures and gave them to these people.

古文：小人无状，得便持走。
现代文：然而小人无礼，这些人得了值钱的东西就飞快地逃走了。
English: However, the villain was insolent and the men quickly fled with the valuables.

古文：皓惧，乃图降首。
现代文：孙非常恐惧，于是打算投降伏罪。
English: Sun was very afraid, so he planned to surrender and commit a crime.

古文：降使适去，左右劫夺财物，略取妻妾，放火烧宫。
现代文：孙派出的使者刚离开，他手下的人就开始抢夺财物，掠夺孙的妻妾，放火烧了宫殿。
English: The surrendering envoys had just left, looting property left and right, plundering wives and concubines, and setting fire to the palace.

古文：皓逃身窜首，恐不脱死。
现代文：孙抱头鼠窜，唯恐不能活命。
English: Sun cradled his head in his hands, fearing he would not survive.

古文：臣至，遣参军主者救断其火耳。
现代文：我到那里时，派参军主者才把火扑灭。
English: By the time I got there, the fire had been put out by the soldiers.

古文：周浚先入皓宫，浑又先登皓舟，臣之入观，皆在其后。
现代文：周浚先进入孙的宫殿，王浑又先登上孙的船，我进去和我所见到的，全都在他们之后。
English: Zhou Jun first entered Sun's palace, Wang Hun first boarded Sun's ship, I went in and what I saw was all after them.

古文：皓宫之中，乃无席可坐，若有遗宝，则浚与浑先得之矣。
现代文：孙的宫里，连可以坐的席子都没有，假如有遗留下来的珍贵之物，也是周浚与王浑先得到了。
English: In Sun's palace, there was not even a seat to sit on. If there were any precious things left behind, Zhou Jun and Wang Hunxian got them first.

古文：等云臣屯聚蜀人，不时送皓，欲有反状。
现代文：周浚等人说我聚集蜀人，不准时把孙送去，是想谋反。
English: Zhou Jun and others said that I gathered Shu people and did not send Sun on time, in order to plot a rebellion.

古文：又恐动吴人，言臣皆当诛杀，取其妻子，冀其作乱，得骋私忿。
现代文：他们还吓唬吴人，说我要把他们都杀了，把他们的妻子儿女都抓走，希望吴人作乱，以发泄他们的私恨。
English: I also threatened the Wu people, saying that I would kill them all and take their wives and children, hoping that they would revolt and vent their private anger.

古文：谋反大逆，尚以见加，其馀谤沓，故其宜耳。
现代文：像谋反这种大逆不道的罪名，他们尚且用来加到我的头上，其他的诽谤与诬陷也就是必然的了。
English: They even used the charge of high treason, such as conspiracy to commit treason, to pin on me, and other slander and frame-ups were inevitable.

古文：今年平吴，诚为大庆；于臣之身，更受咎累。 
现代文：今年平定了吴，的确是大庆，但是对于我个人来说，却遭到了灾祸与忧患。 
English: This year, Wu has been pacified, it is indeed Daqing, but for me personally, it has been a disaster and sorrow.

古文：濬至京师，有司奏濬违诏，大不敬，请付廷尉科罪；诏不许。
现代文：王濬到了京都，有关部门上奏皇帝，说王濬违抗诏命，极不恭敬，请求把他交付廷尉依法判罪。晋武帝下诏书不同意。
English: When Wang Hui arrived in Kyoto, the relevant departments appealed to the emperor, saying that Wang Hui had disobeyed the imperial edict and was extremely disrespectful, and requested that he be handed over to a courtier to be sentenced according to the law. Emperor Jinmu did not agree with the imperial edict.

古文：又奏濬赦后烧贼船百三十五艘，辄敕付廷尉禁推；诏勿推。
现代文：于是他们又上奏，说王濬在赦免了吴人之后还放火烧了吴人的一百三十五艘船，应立即下令把他交付延尉，关进监狱里追究审问。
English: So they played up again, saying that Wang Hui, after pardoning the Wu people, also set fire to one hundred and thirty-five ships of the Wu people, and should immediately order him to be handed over to Yanfei, put in prison and investigated and interrogated.

古文：浑、濬争功不已，帝命守廷尉广陵刘颂校其事，以浑为上功，濬为中功。
现代文：晋武帝下诏书，不同意追究他。王浑与王濬，为了功劳而争执不休，晋武帝命令守廷尉、广陵人刘颂来审定、处理这件事。刘颂认为王浑立了上功，王濬是中功。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict that he did not agree to prosecute him. Wang Hun and Wang Qian argued incessantly about the merits, and Emperor Jinwu ordered Liu Song, a courtier and Guangling man, to investigate and deal with the matter. Liu Song believed that Wang Hun had made a great contribution, and Wang Qian was a medium contribution.

古文：帝以颂折法失理，左迁京兆太守。
现代文：晋武帝认为刘颂断法不合理，就把他降职为京兆太守。
English: Emperor Jinwu thought it was unreasonable for Liu Song to break the law, so he demoted him to the position of the governor of Beijing.

古文：庚辰，增贾充邑八千户，以王濬为辅国大将军，封襄阳县侯；杜预为当阳县侯；王戎为安丰县侯；封琅邪王亻由二子为亭侯；增京陵侯王浑邑八千户，进爵为公；尚书关内侯张华进封广武县侯，增邑万户；荀勖以专典诏命功，封一子为亭侯；其馀诸将及公卿以下，赏赐各有差。
现代文：庚辰，增加贾充封邑八千户。任命王濬为辅国大将军，封为襄阳县侯。杜预被封为当阳县侯。王戎被封为安丰县侯。琅邪王司马的两个儿子被封为亭侯。增加京陵侯王浑食邑八千户，提升爵位为公。尚书关内侯张华，被进爵封为广武县侯，增加食邑至万户。荀勖因为专门掌管诏命的功劳，一个儿子被封为亭侯。其余各位将领以及公卿大臣以下的官吏。
English: Geng Chen increased the fiefs of eight thousand households in Jia Chong. Appointed Wang Xuan as the Assistant General of the State and appointed as the Marquis of Xiangyang County. Du Yu was appointed as the Marquis of Dangyang County. Wang Rong was appointed as the Marquis of Anfeng County. The two sons of the evil King Sima were appointed as the Marquis of Ting. Increased the fiefs of eight thousand households in the Marquis of Jingling, Wang Hun Cuisine, and promoted the peerage to the Prince. Shang Shu Guan, the Marquis of Zhang Hua, was knighted as the Marquis of Guangwu County, and increased the

古文：帝以平吴，策告羊祜庙，乃封其夫人夏侯氏为万岁乡君，食邑五千户。
现代文：受到的赏赐各不相同。晋武帝以平吴的功绩，到羊祜庙里用简书靠慰他，封羊祜的夫人夏侯氏为万岁乡君，食邑五千户。
English: The rewards received varied. Emperor Jinwu took advantage of Pingwu's achievements and consoled him with a simple letter in the Yangshuo Temple. The wife of Yangshuo, Xia Hou, was awarded the title of "Long Live the Countryman" and fed five thousand households.

古文：王濬自以功大，而为浑父子及党与所挫抑，每进见，陈其攻伐之劳及见枉之状，或不胜忿愤，径出不辞；帝每容恕之。
现代文：王濬自以为功劳大，却遭到了王浑父子及其党羽的打击和冤枉，所以每次进见晋武帝，总要陈述他讨伐攻战的辛劳以及被冤屈的情况，有时候忍不住愤恨与不满，竟不辞而别，晋武帝总是宽容、原谅他。
English: Wang Xuan considered himself to have done a great deal of merit, but he was beaten and wronged by Wang Hun and his followers. Therefore, every time he visited Emperor Jinwu, he always had to explain the hardships of his crusade and the situation of being wronged. Sometimes, he could not help but be angry and dissatisfied, but he did not say goodbye. Emperor Jinwu was always tolerant and forgave him.

古文：益州护军范通谓濬曰： 卿功则美矣，然恨所以居美者未尽善也。
现代文：益州护军通对王濬说： 你的功劳确实值得赞美，但遗憾的是，你以别人的赞美自居，这就不完全值得赞赏了。
English: The Yizhou tutor said to Wang Qianlong: Your merits are indeed worthy of praise, but unfortunately, you take others' praise as your own, which is not entirely worthy of appreciation.

古文：卿旋旃之日，角巾私第，口不言平吴之事，若有问者，辄曰： 圣人之德，群帅之力，老夫何力之有！ 
现代文：你应当凯旋之后就隐居在自己家里，嘴里不谈平吴的事情，如果有人问到平吴之事，你就说： 这是圣明的君主的德行，是各位将帅的力量，我这个老头子又有什么功劳！ 
English: After your triumphant return, you should live in seclusion in your own home and not talk about the Pingwu Incident. If anyone asks you about the Pingwu Incident, you should say: This is the virtue of the enlightened monarch, the strength of the generals, and what merit do I, an old man, have!

古文：此蔺生所以屈廉颇也，王浑能无愧乎！ 
现代文：蔺相如就是用这个办法把廉颇降住了，王浑他能不惭愧吗？ 
English: Wang Xiangru is using this method to reduce the corruption, Wang Hun, can he not be ashamed?

古文：濬曰： 吾始惩邓艾之事，惧祸及身，不得无言；其终不能遣诸胸中，是吾褊也。 
现代文：王濬说： 我开始那样作是吸取了邓艾的教训，害怕把灾祸惹上身，我不能不说，但是我最终也不能放开这件事，还是因为我心地狭窄。 
English: Wang Yao said: I can't help but say that I learned a lesson from Deng Ai when I started to behave like that. I was afraid of bringing disaster upon myself, but in the end I couldn't let go of the matter, because I was narrow-minded.

古文：时人咸以濬功重报轻，为之愤邑。
现代文：当时，人们都觉得王濬的功劳大，但是对他的报偿轻了，都对此愤恨不平。
English: At that time, people all felt that Wang Xuan's merit was great, but his reward was light, and they all resented this.

古文：博士秦秀等并上表讼濬之屈，帝乃迁濬镇军大将军。
现代文：博士秦秀等人一起上表，替王濬叫屈，晋武帝于是授予王濬镇军大将军官职。
English: Dr. Qin Xiu and others came to the table to plead on behalf of Wang Xizhen, and the Jin Emperor then granted Wang Xizhen the post of general.

古文：王浑尝诣濬，濬严设备卫，然后见之。
现代文：王浑曾经到王濬那里去，王濬设置了森严的戒备、护卫，然后会见王浑。
English: Wang Hun once went to Wang Yao. Wang Yao set up a strict alert and escort, and then met with Wang Hun.

古文：杜预还襄阳，以为天下虽安，忘战必危，乃勤于讲武，申严戍守。
现代文：杜预回到襄阳以后，觉得天下虽然安定了，但是如果忘记了战事就必然会导致危难，于是他勤于讲习武事，命令部下要严于防守。
English: After Du Yu returned to Xiangyang, he felt that although the world was stable, if he forgot about the war, it would inevitably lead to danger, so he diligently studied martial arts and ordered his subordinates to be strict in defense.

古文：又引滍、淯水以浸田万馀顷，开扬口通零、桂之漕，公私赖之。
现代文：他还引来水和水浇灌田地一万多顷，开凿扬口，与零、桂之水相通，以利水上运输，公与私都赖此而得到方便。
English: He also brought in water and irrigated more than 10,000 hectares of fields, and opened a sluice gate to communicate with the waters of the Zero and Katsura Rivers to facilitate water transportation, which made it convenient for both the public and private sectors.

古文：预身不跨马，射不穿札，而用兵制胜，诸将莫及。
现代文：杜预身不跨战马，射箭不能透甲，但是他以善于用兵战胜对方，各位将领都比不上他。
English: Du pre-body does not straddle the warhorse, archery can not penetrate armor, but he is good at using soldiers to defeat the other side, the generals are not comparable to him.

古文：预在镇，数饷遗洛中贵要；或问其故，预曰： 吾但恐为害，不求益也。 
现代文：杜预人在镇守，却多次向京都的权贵要人馈赠，有人问他为什么要这样作，杜预回答说： 我只怕他们会加害于我，并不指望他们能给我什么好处。 
English: Du Yueh, who was in charge of the town, repeatedly gave gifts to powerful and important people in Kyoto. When someone asked him why he did this, Du Yueh replied, "I'm only afraid that they will harm me, and I don't expect them to do me any good."

古文：王浑迁征东大将军，复镇寿阳。
现代文：王浑升迁为征东大将军，又去镇守寿阳。
English: Wang Hun was promoted to General of the Expedition to the East, and went to guard Shouyang.

古文：诸葛靓逃窜不出。
现代文：诸葛靓逃走以后，就隐藏起来不露面。
English: After Zhuge Liang fled, he hid and did not show his face.

古文：帝与靓有旧，靓姊为琅邪王妃，帝知靓在姊间，因就见焉。
现代文：晋武帝与诸葛靓有旧交，诸葛靓的姐姐是琅邪王司马的妻子。晋武帝知道诸葛靓躲在他姐姐那里，因此就去那里见他。
English: Emperor Jinmu had an old friendship with Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Liang's sister was the wife of the evil king Sima. Emperor Jinmu knew that Zhuge Liang was hiding with his sister, so he went there to see him.

古文：靓逃于厕，帝又逼见之，谓曰： 不谓今日复得相见！ 
现代文：诸葛靓逃进厕所躲着不见，晋武帝又强行见他，对他说： 没想到今天又见面了！ 
English: Zhuge Liang fled into the toilet to avoid being seen, but Emperor Jinwu forced him to see him again and said to him: I didn't expect to see you again today!

古文：靓流涕曰： 臣不能漆身皮面，复睹圣颜，诚为惭恨！ 
现代文：诸葛靓流泪说： 我没能作到往身上涂漆，把脸上的皮刮下来，又见到了圣上您的面容，我实在是又愧又恨。 
English: With tears streaming down her face, Zhuge Liang said, "I am truly ashamed and disgusted that I was not able to paint my body, scrape the skin off my face, and see Your Holiness' face again.

古文：诏以为侍中；固辞不拜，归于乡里，终身不向朝廷而坐。
现代文：晋武帝下诏书任命诸葛靓为侍中，诸葛靓坚决推辞不接受。后来诸葛靓回到了家乡，一生也没有面朝着晋朝廷的方向就座。
English: Zhuge Liang was appointed as an attendant in the imperial edict issued by Emperor Jinwu, but Zhuge Liang firmly refused to accept the appointment. Later, Zhuge Liang returned to his hometown and never sat in the direction of the Jin court.

古文：六月，复封丹水侯睦为高阳王。
现代文：六月，重新封丹水侯司马睦为交阳王。
English: In June, Dan Shui Hou Sima Mutsu was re-appointed as the King of Jiaoyang.

古文：秋，八月，己未，封皇弟延祚为乐平王，寻薨。
现代文：秋季，八月，己未，封武帝弟司马延祚为乐平王，不久他就去世了。
English: In the autumn, in August, the Emperor's younger brother, Sima Yanjun, was crowned King of Leping, but he died soon after.

古文：九月，庚寅，贾充等以天下一统，屡请封禅；帝不许。
现代文：九月，庚寅，贾充等人认为天下已经统一了，多次请到泰山上举行祭天地的典礼，晋武帝不同意。
English: In September, Geng Yin, Jia Chong and others believed that the world had been unified, and repeatedly invited to Mount Tai to hold a ceremony to celebrate heaven and earth. Emperor Jinwu did not agree.

古文：冬，十月，前将军青州刺史淮南胡威卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，前将军、青州刺史、淮南人胡威去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Hu Wei, the former general, Qingzhou Shishi, and Huainan native, passed away.

古文：威为尚书，尝谏时政之宽。
现代文：胡威任尚书，曾经进谏，认为当时的政治措施宽松。
English: Hu Wei Ren Shangshu, once promoted to the imperial court, believed that the political measures at that time were loose.

古文：帝曰： 尚书郎以下，吾无所假借。 
现代文：晋武帝说： 尚书郎以下的官吏，我没有对他们宽容。 
English: Emperor Jinmu said: I have no tolerance for officials below Shoshuro.

古文：威曰： 臣之所陈，岂在丞、郎、令史，正谓如臣等辈，始可以肃化明法耳！ 
现代文：胡威说： 我所陈述的，难道是丞、郎、令史这一类官吏吗？我正是说像我同辈的官员，才可以严肃教化，彰明法度。 
English: Hu Wei said: What I have stated, is it the officials such as Jo, Rong and Ling Shi? I just said that officials of my generation can seriously educate and clarify the law.

古文：是岁，以司隶所统郡置司州，凡州十九，郡国一百七十三，户二百四十五万九千八百四十。
现代文：这一年，以司隶所统领的郡设置司州。一共有十九个州，一百七十三个郡国，二百四十五万九千八百四十户。
English: In the same year, counties under the leadership of counties were set up as counties. In total, there were 19 counties, 173 counties, and 2,459,840 households.

古文：诏曰： 昔自汉末，四海分崩，刺史内亲民事，外领兵马。
现代文：晋武帝下诏书说： 从前自汉末开始，四海之内分崩离析，刺史对内亲自处理民事，对外统领兵马。
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Jinwu said: "Since the end of the Han Dynasty, the four seas have been falling apart. Emperor Jinshi personally handled civil affairs at home and led the troops abroad.

古文：今天下为一，当韬戢干戈，刺史分职，皆如汉氏故事；悉去州郡兵，大郡置武吏百人，小郡五十人。 
现代文：如今天下一统，应当收藏起兵器，把刺史的职权区分开，全都依照汉时的制度行事。把州郡的兵都去掉，大郡设置武官一百人，小郡设置五十人。 
English: If there is a unification today, it is necessary to collect weapons, separate the powers of the imperial court, and all act in accordance with the Han system. Remove the soldiers from the state and county, and set up 100 military attachés in the large county and 50 in the small county.

古文：交州牧陶璜上言： 交、广州西数千里，不宾属者六万馀户，至于服从官役，才五千馀家。
现代文：交州牧陶璜上书说： 交州、广州，从东到西有几千里，不归顺的有六万多户，至于服从官府劳役的，只有五千多家。
English: Jiaozhou and Guangzhou are separated by thousands of miles from east to west, and there are more than 60,000 households that have not surrendered. As for those who are subject to government labor, there are only more than 5,000.

古文：二州脣齿，唯兵是镇。
现代文：两个州唇齿相依，只有靠军队才能镇守住。
English: The two states are so close to each other that only the army can hold the town.

古文：又，宁州诸夷，接据上流，水陆并通，州兵未宜约损，以示单虚。 
现代文：另外，宁州各蛮夷，与上流地区接壤，他们据守在那里，水路陆路都通。所以，不应该减损州兵，以显出官府的力量单薄虚弱。 
English: In addition, each barbarian village in Ningzhou shares a border with the upstream areas, and they are protected there. Waterways and land routes are all accessible. Therefore, the National Guard should not be reduced in order to show the weakness of the power of the government.

古文：仆射山涛亦言 不宜去州郡武备 。
现代文：仆射山涛也说： 不应当去掉州郡的军事守备。 
English: He also said, "The military garrison of the prefecture should not be removed.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：晋武帝却不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：及永宁以后，盗贼群起，州郡无备，不能禽制，天下遂大乱，如涛所言。
现代文：到了永宁以后，盗贼群起，州郡由于没有军队和武器，没有办法捉拿制止，于是天下大乱，正像山涛所说的那样。
English: After arriving in Yongning, the thieves swarmed, and the prefectures and counties had no army and weapons, so there was no way to catch and stop them. As a result, the whole world was in chaos, just as Shantao had said.

古文：然其后刺史复兼兵民之政，州镇愈重矣。
现代文：然而从这以后，刺史又兼管兵民的政务，地方的军事力量更加强大了。
English: Since then, however, local military forces have become even more powerful, as the shogunate has also been in charge of military and civilian affairs.

古文：汉、魏以来，羌、胡、鲜卑降者，多处之塞内诸郡。
现代文：汉、魏以来，羌、胡、鲜卑等投降的部落，大乡居住在关塞之内的各个郡里。
English: Since the Han and Wei dynasties, the tribes that surrendered, such as the Min, Hu, and Xianbei, have lived in various counties within Guanxi.

古文：其后数因忿恨，杀害长吏，渐为民患。
现代文：以后多次因为不满和怨恨，杀害了郡县的长官，逐渐成为百姓的祸患。
English: Later, because of dissatisfaction and resentment, he killed the county magistrate several times, gradually becoming a scourge of the people.

古文：侍御史西河郭钦上疏曰： 戎狄强犷，历古为患。
现代文：侍御史、西河人郭钦上疏说： 戎狄强暴蛮横，自古以来就是祸患。
English: Guo Qin Shangsuo, a courtier and historian from the West River, said: "Eun Di Qiang is violent and domineering, and has been a scourge since ancient times.

古文：魏初民少，西北诸郡，皆为戎居，内及京兆、魏郡、弘农，往往有之。
现代文：魏初期，百姓人数少，西北各郡，都被戎人居住，内地一直到京兆、魏郡、弘农，也往往有戎人居住。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, the number of people was small, and all counties in the northwest were inhabited by Eunuchs. In the inland, as far as Jingzhao, Wei County, and Hongnong, Eunuchs often lived there.

古文：今虽服从，若百年之后有风尘之警，胡骑自平阳、上党不三日而至孟津，北地、西河、太原、冯翊、安定、上郡尽为狄庭矣。
现代文：现在虽然服从我们，但如果百后之后，发生了战乱的危机，胡人的骑兵从平阳、上党地区，用不了三天就能到孟津，那么北地、西河、太原、冯翊、安定、上郡这些地区，就都成为狄人的占地了。
English: Although they obey us now, if, a hundred years later, there is a crisis of war, and Hu's cavalry from Pingyang and Shangdang areas can reach Mengjin in less than three days, then the areas of Beidi, Saihe, Taiyuan, Fengye, Ding'an and Shangguan will all become occupied by Di people.

古文：宜及平吴之威，谋臣猛将之略，渐徙内郡杂胡于边地，峻四夷出入之防，明先王荒服之制，此万世之长策也。 
现代文：应当趁平吴的威势，谋臣猛将的谋略，逐渐迁徒内地各郡居住的胡人到边境地区去，加强夷狄经常出入地区的防卫，以彰明先王所制定的使戎狄远离都城的制度，这是千年万代的长远的策略。 
English: It is necessary to take advantage of the power of Pingwu and the strategy of the fierce general to gradually relocate the Hu people living in the counties of the inland to the border areas, strengthen the defense of the areas where the Yidi often enter and leave, in order to highlight the system of keeping the Yidi away from the capital city established by the Ming Dynasty, which is a long-term strategy for thousands of years.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：晋武帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：世祖武皇帝中太康二年
现代文：太康二年
English: Taikang two years old

古文：春，三月，诏选孙皓宫人五千人入宫。
现代文：春季，三月，晋武帝下诏书，挑选孙的宫女五千人进宫。
English: In the spring, in March, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to select five thousand of his grandson's concubines to enter the palace.

古文：帝既平吴，颇事游宴，怠于政事，掖庭殆将万人。
现代文：晋武帝已经平定了吴，他开始把很多时间花费在游乐、宴饮上，对政事的处理懈怠了，宫中妃嫔的人数几乎接近一万人。
English: Emperor Jinwu had already pacified Wu. He began to spend a lot of time on entertainment and banquets, and slacked off in dealing with political affairs. The number of concubines in the palace was almost 10,000.

古文：常乘羊车，恣其所之，至便宴寝；宫人竞以竹叶插户，盐汁洒地，以引帝车。
现代文：晋武帝经常乘坐着羊拉的车子，听凭羊走到哪里，就在哪里宴饮、入寝，宫女们都争先恐后地用竹叶插在门上，用盐水洒地，诱使羊把车子拉到自己门前。
English: Emperor Jinwu often rode in a carriage pulled by sheep. Wherever the sheep went, he would have a banquet and go to sleep. The palace maids scrambled to put bamboo leaves on the door and sprinkle the floor with salt water to entice the sheep to pull the carriage in front of their door.

古文：而后父杨骏及弟珧、济始用事，交通请谒，势倾内外，时人谓之三杨，旧臣多被疏退。
现代文：皇后的父亲杨骏及杨骏的弟弟杨珧、杨济开始当权，他们互相勾结，互相利用，权势倾动朝廷内外，当时的人称他们为三杨，朝廷里的旧臣，许多都被疏远、贬退了。
English: The queen's father, Yang Hui, and Yang Hui's brothers, Yang Hui and Yang Jiu, came to power. They colluded with each other, used each other, and wielded power both inside and outside the imperial court. People at the time called them the three yangs. Many of the old courtiers in the imperial court were alienated and degraded.

古文：山涛数有规讽，帝虽知而不能改。
现代文：山涛多次对晋武帝规劝、谏阻，晋武帝心里也明白，但就是改不了。
English: Shantao repeatedly advised and discouraged Emperor Jinwu, and Emperor Jinwu knew it in his heart, but he just couldn't change.

古文：初，鲜卑莫护跋始自塞外入居辽西棘城之北，号曰慕容部。
现代文：当初，鲜卑人莫护跋开始从塞外入关，居住在辽西的棘城的北边，其称号是慕容部。
English: At the beginning, the Xianbei people, the Mo Guobas, began to enter the customs from outside the country and lived in the north of the Thorn City in the west of Liaoning Province. Their title was the Murong Department.

古文：莫护跋生木延，木延生涉归，迁于辽东之北。世附中国，数从征讨有功，拜大单于。
现代文：莫护跋生下了木延，木延生下涉归，迁移到辽东以北地区，世代归附中国，曾经多次随从官府的军队去征讨，立了功，被封为大单于。
English: Mo Juba gave birth to Mu Yan, Mu Yan gave birth to Zanggui, migrated to the north of Liaodong, generationally attached to China, once followed the government's army to conquer many times, made great contributions, and was awarded the title of Da Shan Yu.

古文：冬，十月，涉归始寇昌黎。
现代文：冬季十月，涉归开始入侵昌黎。
English: In the winter of October, the invaders began to invade Changli.

古文：十一月，壬寅，高平武公陈骞薨。
现代文：十一月，壬寅，高平武公陈骞去世。
English: In November, Ren Yin, Gaoping Wu Gong Chen Yao passed away.

古文：是岁，扬州刺史周浚移镇秣陵。
现代文：这一年，扬州刺史周浚把治所迁移到秣陵。
English: In the same year, Zhou Jun, the governor of Yangzhou, moved the government office to Fuling.

古文：吴民之未服者，屡为寇乱，浚皆讨平之。
现代文：吴百姓中还没有归顺的，经常搔扰抢掠，都被周浚讨伐平定了。
English: Those among the people of Wu who had not yet surrendered were often harassed and plundered, and they were all leveled by Zhou Jun's crusade.

古文：宾礼故老，搜求俊乂，威惠并行，吴人悦服。
现代文：周浚以宾客之礼对待元老旧臣，访求有才德的人，威势与恩惠并用，吴人心悦诚服。
English: Zhou Jun treated the elders and old ministers with the courtesy of guests, and visited the talented people. He used both power and grace, which pleased the hearts of the Wu people.

古文：世祖武皇帝中太康三年春，正月，丁丑朔，帝亲祀南郊。
现代文：太康三年春季，正月，丁丑朔，晋武帝亲自到南郊祭祀。
English: In the spring of the third year of Taikang, in the first month of the year, Ding Xi Shuo, Emperor Jinwu personally went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：礼毕，喟然问司隶校尉刘毅曰： 朕可方汉之何帝？ 
现代文：典礼结束后，晋武帝感叹地询问司隶校尉刘毅说： 我可以和汉代的哪一个帝王相比？ 
English: After the ceremony, Emperor Jinwu asked Lieutenant Liu Yi, "Can I be compared to any emperor of the Han Dynasty?"

古文：对曰： 桓、灵。 
现代文：刘毅回答说： 可与桓帝、灵帝相比。 
English: Liu Yi replied: It can be compared to Emperor Kan and Emperor Ling.

古文：帝曰： 何至于此？ 
现代文：晋武帝说： 何至于到这个地步？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu said: How did things get to this point?

古文：对曰： 桓、灵卖官钱入官库，陛下卖官钱入私门。以此言之，殆不如也！ 
现代文：刘毅说： 桓帝、灵帝出卖官职的钱都进了官府的仓库，陛下出卖官职的钱都进了个人的家门，凭这一点来说，大概还不如桓帝、灵帝了。 
English: Liu Yi said, "The money that Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling sold their official positions went into the warehouse of the government, and the money that His Majesty sold his official positions went into the homes of individuals. In this respect, it is probably not as good as Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling.

古文：帝大笑曰： 桓、灵之世，不闻此言，今朕有直臣，固为胜之。 
现代文：晋武帝大笑道： 桓帝、灵帝的时代，听不到这样的话，现在朕有正直的臣下，已经胜过桓帝、灵帝了。 
English: Emperor Jinwu laughed loudly, "In the era of Emperor Kantei and Emperor Lingdi, I never heard such words. Now I have honest subjects who have already surpassed Emperor Kantei and Emperor Lingdi.

古文：毅为司隶，纠绳豪贵，无所顾忌。
现代文：刘毅任司隶，举发惩处豪门权贵，无所顾忌。
English: Liu Yi served as a subordinate, and punished the rich and powerful without any scruples.

古文：皇太子鼓吹入东掖门，毅劾奏之。
现代文：皇太子吹打着乐器进入宫中的东掖门，违反了宫中的规定，刘毅就上奏皇帝检举他。
English: The crown prince played a musical instrument to enter the East Gate of the palace, violating the palace's regulations. Liu Yi reported him to the emperor.

古文：中护军、散骑常侍羊琇，与帝有旧恩，典禁兵，豫机密十馀年，恃宠骄侈，数犯法。
现代文：中护军、散骑常侍羊，过去曾有恩于晋武帝。他掌管皇帝的亲兵，十几年来一直参与朝廷机密要事，倚仗着皇帝的恩宠，骄横奢侈，多次犯法。
English: In the past, he was grateful to Emperor Jinwu. He was in charge of the emperor's personal soldiers. For more than ten years, he had been involved in confidential and important matters of the imperial court. He relied on the emperor's favor, was arrogant and extravagant, and repeatedly broke the law.

古文：毅劾奏琇罪当死；帝遣齐王攸私请琇于毅，毅许之。
现代文：刘毅上奏皇帝，检举羊的罪行，认为他所犯下的罪应当处以死刑，晋武帝派齐王司马攸私下去找刘毅，为羊求情，刘毅同意了。
English: Liu Yi appealed to the emperor, denounced the crime of the sheep, and believed that the crime he committed should be punished by death. Emperor Jinwu sent Qi Wang Sima You to go to Liu Yi in private to plead for the sheep. Liu Yi agreed.

古文：都官从事广平程卫径驰入护军营，收琇属吏，考问阴私，先奏琇所犯狼籍，然后言于毅。
现代文：这时，都官从事、广平人程卫，直接进入护军营，拘捕了羊的手下官吏，拷打审问他暗中所作的隐秘之事。他先把羊所犯下的不检点的事上奏皇帝，然后告诉了刘毅。
English: At this time, the government official Cheng Wei, who was engaged in Guangping, directly entered the military camp, arrested the sheep's subordinate officials, tortured and interrogated him about the secret things he had done in secret. He first reported the sheep's misconduct to the emperor, and then told Liu Yi.

古文：帝不得已，免琇官。未几，复使以白衣领职。
现代文：晋武帝不得已，免了羊的官，但是没过多久，又让他以平民的身份兼任职务。
English: As a last resort, Emperor Jinwu pardoned the sheep official, but it didn't take long before he allowed him to serve as a commoner.

古文：琇。景献皇后之从父弟也；后将军王恺，文明皇后之弟也；散骑常侍、侍中石崇，苞之子也。
现代文：羊是景献皇后的叔伯堂弟；后将军王恺，是文明皇后的弟弟；散骑常侍、侍中石崇，是石苞的儿子。
English: Yang is the uncle and cousin of Queen Jingxian; Queen General Wang Yao, is the younger brother of the Queen of Civilization; and the knight-errant and chamberlain Shi Chong, is the son of Shi Yao.

古文：三人皆富于财，竞以奢侈相高。
现代文：这三个人都有丰富的财物，他们互相攀比，谁最奢侈谁就最受尊重。
English: All three of them have a lot of wealth. They compare themselves with each other, and whoever has the most luxury is the most respected.

古文：恺以台澳釜，崇以蜡代薪；恺作紫丝步障四十里，崇作锦步障五十里；崇涂屋以椒，恺用赤石脂。
现代文：王恺用糖膏刷锅，石崇就用密蜡当柴烧。王恺用紫色的蚕丝作路两旁的屏幕，长达四十里，石崇就用锦作屏幕，长五十里。石崇用花椒粉和泥涂房屋，王恺就用赤石腊涂墙。
English: Wang Yao used sugar paste to brush the pot, and Shizong used dense wax as firewood. Wang Yao used purple silk to make screens on both sides of the road, up to forty miles long, and Shizong used brocade to make screens, up to fifty miles long. Shizong used pepper powder and mud to paint houses, and Wang Yao used red stone wax to paint walls.

古文：帝每助恺，尝以珊瑚树赐之，高二尺许，恺以示崇，崇便以铁如意碎之；恺怒，以为疾己之宝。
现代文：晋武帝时常帮助王恺，曾经赐给珊瑚树，有二尺多高。王恺把珊瑚树拿给石崇看，石崇就用铁如意把王恺的珊瑚树击碎了。
English: Emperor Jinwu often helped Wang Yao. He once gave him a coral tree that was more than two feet tall. Wang Yao showed the coral tree to Shi Chong. Shi Chong then crushed Wang Yao's coral tree with an iron rod.

古文：崇曰： 不足多恨，今还卿！ 
现代文：王恺动了怒，认为石崇是嫉妒他的珍贵之物。石崇说： 你不值得生那么大的气；我现在就还给你。 
English: Wang Yao was angry and thought that Shizong was jealous of his precious things. Shizong said: You don't deserve to be so angry; I'll give it back to you now.

古文：乃命左右悉取其家珊瑚树，高三、四尺者六、七株，如恺比者甚众；恺恍然自失。
现代文：于是命令手下人把家中的珊瑚树全都拿了出来，其中高三、四尺的有六、七棵，和王恺的珊瑚树相同的有很多，王恺惘然失意，不知所措。
English: So he ordered his subordinates to take out all the coral trees in the house, of which six or seven were three or four feet high, and many were the same as Wang Yao's coral trees. Wang Yao was heartbroken and at a loss.

古文：车骑司马傅咸上书曰： 先王之治天下，食肉衣帛，皆有其制。
现代文：车骑司马傅咸上书说： 先王治理天下，对吃肉、穿丝织的衣服，都有规定。
English: Fu Xian, a chariot driver and horse rider, wrote: The previous king ruled the world, and there were rules about eating meat and wearing silk clothing.

古文：窃谓奢侈之费，甚于天灾。
现代文：我私下认为，由于奢侈而造的浪费，比天灾还要严重。
English: Privately, I believe that extravagant waste is worse than natural disasters.

古文：古者人稠地狭，而有储蓄，由于节也。
现代文：古时候人多地少，然而有积蓄，这就是因为节俭的缘故。
English: In ancient times, people were few and far between, but they had savings, and this was due to thrift.

古文：今者土旷人稀，而患不足，由于奢也。
现代文：现在土地辽阔，人丁稀少，但是却为物品不充足而忧虑，这是由于奢侈的缘故。
English: Now the land is vast and the people are few, but they are worried about the lack of goods, which is due to luxury.

古文：欲时人崇俭，当诘其奢。奢不见诘，转相高尚，无有穷极矣！ 
现代文：要想让人们都崇尚节俭，那就应当整治奢侈的习气，奢侈而不被整治，反而互相攀比，那就没有止境了！ 
English: If we want people to advocate frugality, then the habit of extravagance should be rectified. If extravagance is not rectified, but is compared with each other, then there is no end!

古文：尚书张华，以文学才识名重一时，论者皆谓华宜为三公。
现代文：尚书张华由于他的文章、博学，才能与见识，在当时有名气，被人尊重。人们议论说，张华应当作三公。
English: Shangshu Zhanghua was famous and respected at that time for his articles, erudition, talent and insight, and people argued that Zhanghua should be the three princes.

古文：中书监荀勖、侍中冯紞以伐吴之谋深疾之。
现代文：中书监荀勖、侍中冯，由于伐吴的谋略，深深地嫉恨张华。
English: Feng, the inspector of books and the chamberlain, deeply envied Zhang Hua because of Wu's stratagem.

古文：会帝问华： 谁可托后事者？ 
现代文：这时晋武帝问张华： 谁是我可以向他托付后事的人呢？ 
English: At this time, Emperor Jinwu asked Zhang Hua: Who is the person I can entrust with the succession?

古文：华对以 明德至亲，莫如齐王。 
现代文：张华回答说： 聪明有德行，又是您的至亲之人，没有人比齐王更合适了。 
English: Zhang Hua replied, "There is no one more suitable than King Qi, who is intelligent, virtuous, and your closest relative.

古文：由是忤旨，勖因而谮之。
现代文：这一句话就触犯晋武帝的心思，荀勖就乘机诽谤张华。
English: This sentence offended the mind of Emperor Jinwu, and Zou took the opportunity to slander Zhang Hua.

古文：甲午，以华都督幽州诸军事。
现代文：甲午，任命张华统领幽州诸军事。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Zhang Hua was appointed to lead the military in Yuzhou.

古文：华至镇，抚循夷夏，誉望益振，帝复欲征之。
现代文：张华到了镇守，安抚汉族及夷的平民百姓，声望更高了。
English: Zhang Hua became the town guard, appeasing the Han and Yi civilians, and his reputation became even higher.

古文：冯紞侍帝，从容语及钟会，紞曰： 会之反，颇由太祖。 
现代文：这时，晋武帝又想把他召回来。冯正在晋武帝身旁侍候，他不慌不忙地和晋武帝谈到了钟会。冯说： 钟会之所以谋反，很大部分原因在于太祖。 
English: At this time, Emperor Jinwu wanted to call him back again. Feng was waiting next to Emperor Jinwu, and he talked to Emperor Jinwu about the bell association. Feng said: The reason why the bell association is rebelling is largely due to the great-grandfather.

古文：帝变色曰： 卿是何言邪！ 
现代文：晋武帝变了脸色，说： 你这是什么话！ 
English: Emperor Jinwu turned pale and said, "What are you talking about!

古文：紞免冠谢曰： 臣闻善御者必知六辔缓急之宜，故孔子以仲由兼人而退之，冉求退弱而进之。
现代文：冯脱帽谢罪说： 我听说善于驾奴车马的人必然懂得六根缰绳的掌握要缓急适度，所以孔子因为仲由胜过别人而贬退他，因为冉求退缩、软弱而推举他。
English: Feng took off his hat and said, "I have heard that a person who is good at driving a slave carriage and horse must understand that the mastery of the six reins should be moderately prioritized. Therefore, Confucius demoted him because Zhongyu was better than others, and promoted him because Ran sought retreat and weakness.

古文：汉高祖尊宠五王而夷灭，光武抑损诸将而克终。
现代文：汉高祖尊重、宠爱的五位王最终都被除掉；光武帝抑制、贬损各位将领，他们因而能善终。
English: The five kings who were respected and favored by Emperor Gaozhu were eventually eliminated; Emperor Guangwu restrained and belittled the generals, so they could die well.

古文：非上有仁暴之殊，下有愚智之异也，盖抑扬与夺使之然耳。
现代文：这并不是因为圣贤、帝王有仁爱、残暴的区别，臣下有愚昧、聪明的不同，这是由于褒贬和与夺才使得他们这样。
English: This is not because the sages and emperors are different from each other in benevolence and cruelty, and their subjects are different from each other in stupidity and cleverness, but because they are made so by praise and criticism, and by taking advantage of their talents.

古文：钟会才智有限，而太祖夸奖无极，居以重势，委以大兵，使会自谓算无遗策，功在不赏，遂构凶逆耳。
现代文：钟会的才能、谋略有限，但是太祖对他的赞赏没有止境，让他担任重要的职权，把大军托付给他，使钟会自认为谋划周密，没有遗漏，有功劳却得不到赏赐，于是就构成了谋反。
English: The talents and strategies of the Bell Association are limited, but the great-grandfather's appreciation of him is boundless, letting him assume important powers and entrusting him with a large army, making the Bell Association think that the plan is well-planned, without omissions, and that there is merit but no reward, thus constituting a rebellion.

古文：向令太祖录其小能，节以大礼，抑之以威权，纳之以轨则，则乱心无由生矣。 帝曰： 然。 
现代文：假使太祖任用他的小才能，用大的礼法主谥狡他，用威势和权力抑制他，使他纳入法则制度，那么他作乱之心就没有产生的机会了。 晋武帝说： 是这样。 
English: If the great-grandfather had used his small talent, and the great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-

古文：紞稽首曰： 陛下既然臣之言，宜思坚冰之渐，勿使如会之徒复致倾覆。 
现代文：冯跪拜，说： 陛下既然同意了我的话，就应当想一想坚冰之所以形成，非一日之寒，不要让像钟会那样的人再导致颠覆。 
English: Feng knelt down and said, "Since Your Majesty has agreed to my words, you should think about the fact that the formation of ice is not the result of one day's cold, and don't let people like the Bell Association lead to subversion."

古文：帝曰： 当今岂复有如会者邪？ 
现代文：晋武帝说： 当今难道还有像钟会那样的人吗？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu said: Are there still people like the Bell Association today?

古文：紞因屏左右而言曰： 陛下谋画之臣，著大功于天下，据方镇、总戎马者，皆在陛下圣虑矣。 
现代文：冯于是屏退身边的人，然后说： 为陛下谋划的大臣，在天下有显著的大功，据守一方，统领兵马的人，都在陛下您圣明的思虑之中了。 
English: Feng then screened off the people around him, and then said: "The minister who planned for His Majesty has made remarkable achievements in the world. On the other hand, those who led the soldiers and horses are all in Your Majesty's sacred thoughts.

古文：帝默然，由是止，不征华。
现代文：晋武帝沉默不语，从此就不征召张华了。
English: Emperor Jinwu was silent, and never called up Zhang Hua again.

古文：三月，安北将军严询败慕容涉归于昌黎，斩获万计。
现代文：三月，安北将军严询在昌黎打败了慕容涉归，斩首、俘获敌人以万计。
English: In March, General Anbei Yanchuan defeated Murong Wagui in Changli, decapitating and capturing the enemy with ten thousand methods.

古文：鲁公贾充老病，上遣皇太子省视起居。
现代文：鲁公贾充上了年纪又有病，晋武帝派皇太子去问候探望他的日常生活。
English: When Lu Gongjia became old and ill, Emperor Jinwu sent the crown prince to pay him a visit.

古文：充自忧谥传，从子模曰： 是非久自见，不可掩也！ 
现代文：贾充很忧虑他死后的谥号以及修史者对他的记载。他的侄子贾模说： 是与非天长日久自然就显现出来，不是能掩盖得住的。 
English: Jia Chong is very worried about his posthumous nickname and what historians will write about him. His nephew Jia Miao said: "Whether or not it will appear naturally over time, it can't be covered up."

古文：夏，四月，庚午，充薨。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚午，贾充去世，他的长子贾黎民死得早，没有后嗣，贾充的妻子郭槐，想以贾充的外孙韩谧作嫡长孙。
English: In the summer, in April, at noon, Jia Chong died. His eldest son, Jia Limin, died early and had no heir. Jia Chong's wife, Guo Wei, wanted to make Jia Chong's grandson, Han Wei, the eldest grandson.

古文：世子黎民早卒，无嗣，妻郭槐欲以充外孙韩谧为世孙，郎中令韩咸、中尉曹轸谏曰： 礼无异姓为后之文，今而行之，是使先公受讥于后世而怀愧于地下也。 槐不听。咸等上书，救改立嗣，事寝不报。
现代文：郎中令韩咸、中尉曹轸谏阻说： 礼法中没有让异姓作后代的条文，现在如果这样做了，这是让先公在后世受到讥笑而在地下心怀羞愧。 
English: His lieutenant Han Xian and lieutenant Cao Yanzhong said, "There is no provision in the code of etiquette for descendants with different surnames. If this is done now, it will make the late grandfather be ridiculed in the future and feel ashamed in the underground.

古文：槐遂表陈之，云充遗意。
现代文：郭槐不听。韩咸等人又上书，请求更改立嗣，但是事情就搁置下来，没有答复。
English: Guo Wei did not listen. Han Xian and others also submitted a letter, requesting a change in the heir, but the matter was shelved and there was no response.

古文：帝许之，仍诏 自非功如太宰，始封、无后者，皆不得以为比。 
现代文：郭槐又上表陈述，说这是贾充的遗愿，晋武帝同意了，还下诏说： 如果功劳不如太宰的，初次封号、没有后代的，都不可以和贾充相比。 
English: Guo Wei also made a statement on the table, saying that this was Jia Chong's last wish. Emperor Jin agreed, and also issued an edict saying: If the merit is not as good as that of Dazai, the first seal number, and no descendants, can not be compared with Jia Chong.

古文：及太常议谥，博士秦秀曰： 充悖礼溺情，以乱大伦。
现代文：等到太常开始议论给贾充定谥号的事，博士秦秀说： 贾充违反礼法，沉迷于私情，因而败坏了伦常大道。
English: When Taizang began to discuss the matter of giving Jia Chong a surname, Dr. Qin Xiu said: Jia Chong violated etiquette and indulged in personal affairs, thus corrupting Lunzang Avenue.

古文：昔鄫养外孙莒公子为后，《春秋》书 莒人灭鄫 。
现代文：从前，国养育外孙、莒公的儿子为后代，《春秋》中写道 莒人灭 。
English: Once upon a time, the country raised the grandson, the son of Ying Gong, as a descendant. "Spring and Autumn" wrote, "Ying people are exterminated."

古文：绝父祖之血食，开朝廷之乱原。
现代文：断绝了父系祖先的祭祀，开了朝廷败坏变乱的根源。
English: It cut off the sacrificial rites of the paternal ancestors and opened up the root cause of corruption and turmoil in the imperial court.

古文：按《谥法》： 昏乱纪度曰荒 ，请谥 荒公 。 
现代文：按照《谥法》的规定： 混淆毁坏纲纪法度叫作荒 ，请求给贾充封谥为荒公。 
English: According to the provisions of the "Jia Law": Confusion and destruction of discipline are called "chaos," and it is requested to give Jia Chong the title of "chaos."

古文：帝不从，更谥曰武。
现代文：晋武帝没有听从秦秀的话，更改贾充谥号为武。
English: Emperor Jinwu did not listen to Qin Xiu's words and changed Jia Chongyi's name to Wu.

古文：闰月，丙子，广陆成侯李胤薨。
现代文：闰月，丙子，广陆成侯李胤去世。
English: Leap month, Bizi, Guanglu Chenghou Li Yin passed away.

古文：齐王攸德望日隆，荀勖、冯紞、杨珧皆恶之。
现代文：齐王司马攸的德行与名望一天比一天受人尊崇，荀勖、冯、杨珧都憎恨他。
English: The virtue and fame of King Sima You of Qi became more and more respected day by day, and Yu, Feng, and Yang Xuan all hated him.

古文：紞言于帝曰： 陛下诏诸侯之国，宜从亲者始。
现代文：冯对晋武帝说： 陛下命令诸侯回到自己的封国去，应当从亲属开始执行。
English: Feng said to Emperor Jinwu, "Your Majesty ordered the lords to return to their fiefdoms, and they should start with their relatives.

古文：亲者莫如齐王，今独留京师，可乎？ 
现代文：与您最亲的没有人能比得上齐王了，如今却只有他还留在京城，这可以吗？ 
English: Your nearest and dearest can't be compared to King Qi, but now he's the only one left in Beijing. Is that okay?

古文：勖曰： 百僚内外皆归心齐王，陛下万岁后，太子不得立矣。
现代文：荀勖说： 朝廷内外的百官，都从心里归附齐王，陛下万年之后，太子就不可能即天子之位了。
English: Zou said: Hundreds of officials both inside and outside the court have wholeheartedly adhered to King Qi. After ten thousand years of your majesty, it is impossible for the prince to be the son of heaven.

古文：陛下试诏齐王之国，必举朝以为不可，则臣言验矣。 
现代文：陛下可以试着命令齐王回封国，必定是朝廷上下都认为不可以，那么我说的话就应验了。 
English: Your Majesty can try to order King Qi to return the country to the emperor, but it is certain that everyone in the imperial court will think it is not possible. Then my words will come true.

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：晋武帝同意了。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：冬，十二月，甲申，诏曰： 古者九命作伯，或入毘朝政，或出御方岳，其揆一也。
现代文：冬季，十二月，甲申，晋武帝下诏书说： 古时候九级官爵可以作方伯，或者是在朝廷里辅佐帝王处理朝政，或者外出统治一方，无论在内在外，都遵循着一个准则。
English: In winter, in December, in Jiaxing, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying: In ancient times, nine-ranked officials could serve as provincial governors, or assist the emperor in the court to deal with court politics, or rule outside the court. Both inside and outside, they all followed one principle.

古文：侍中、司空齐王攸，佐命立勋，劬劳王室，其以为大司马、都督青州诸军事，侍中如故，仍加崇典礼，主者详案旧制施行。
现代文：侍中、司空、齐王司马攸，辅佐天子，建立了功勋，为了国家而辛勤劳苦，任命他为大司马、统领青州诸军事，侍中之职依旧，仍然增加、提高典制礼仪，令主管人详细地按照旧制施行。 
English: The chamberlain, Siku, Qi Wang Sima You, assisted the heavenly son, established merits, worked hard for the country, appointed him as the chief steward, and commanded the military in Qingzhou. The position of the chamberlain is still the same, and the ceremonial etiquette is still increased and improved, so that the person in charge implements it in detail according to the old system.

古文：以汝南王亮为太尉、录尚书事、领太子太傅，光禄大夫山涛为司徒，尚书令卫瓘为司空。
现代文：任命汝南王司马亮为太尉、录尚书事、兼领太子太傅，光禄大夫山涛任司徒，尚书令卫任司空。
English: He appointed Runan King Sima Liang as Tai Liang (太尉) and Shao Shuling (录尚書事) and concurrently the Prince's Daifu (兼領太子太傅), Guanglu Daifu (光禄大夫山涛) as Sito (司徒) and Shao Shuling Wei (尚書令衛) as Siku (司空).

古文：征东大将军王浑上书，以为： 攸至亲盛德，侔于周公，宜赞皇朝，与闻政事。
现代文：征东大将军王浑上书，他说： 司马攸是皇帝至亲又很有德行，可以与周公相比，应当让他辅佐皇朝，参与、过问政事。
English: Wang Hun, the Grand General of the Expedition to the East, wrote: Sima You is the emperor's closest relative and very virtuous, and can be compared to Zhou Gong. He should be allowed to assist the imperial court, participate in and handle political affairs.

古文：今出攸之国，假以都督虚号，而无典戎干方之实，亏友于款笃之义，惧非陛下追述先帝、文明太后待攸之宿意也。
现代文：如今派遣司马攸离开朝廷去封国，给他一个都督的虚号，却没有领兵治理一方的实权，毁坏忠诚恳挚的兄弟友爱之情。我感到恐惧的是，这并不是陛下追随、遵循先帝与文明太后，以对待司马攸的平素心意。
English: Now, sending Sima You away from the Imperial Court to fiefdoms, giving him a false title of governor, but without the real power to lead troops to govern one side, destroying the loyal and sincere brotherly love. I am afraid that this is not His Majesty's intention to follow and follow the former emperor and the civilized empress dowager in his treatment of Sima You.

古文：若以同姓宠之太厚，则有吴、楚逆乱之谋，汉之吕、霍、王氏，皆何人也！
现代文：如果是害怕对同姓王的恩宠太深重，会发生吴、楚叛变作乱的阴谋，那么就不看一看汉代的吕后、霍光、王莽都是什么人吗？
English: If you are afraid that the grace of the king with the same surname is too profound, and there will be a conspiracy of Wu and Chu rebels to cause chaos, then why not take a look at the Han Dynasty's Lü Guo, Huo Guang, and Wang Mang?

古文：历观古今，苟事之轻重所在，不无为害，唯当任正道而求忠良耳。
现代文：历观古今，假如事情的轻重所在没有不为害的，那么就只有任用正直而求忠诚善良的人。
English: From ancient times to the present, if there is nothing harmless in the importance of things, then only honest people who seek loyalty and kindness can be appointed.

古文：若以智计猜物，虽亲见疑，至于疏者，庸可保乎！
现代文：如果凭着智巧计谋猜疑事物，即使是亲属也被怀疑，那么对于关系疏远的人，难道就能保证吗？
English: If, through cunning, one suspects things, and even relatives are suspected, is it possible to guarantee the safety of someone who is not a relative?

古文：愚以为太子太保缺，宜留攸居之，与汝南王亮、杨珧共干朝事。
现代文：我认为太子太保是个空缺，应当留下司马攸来担任，与汝南王司马亮、杨珧一起办理朝廷的事务。
English: I think Prince Taibo is a vacancy, and Sima You should be left in charge to handle the affairs of the imperial court together with King Sima Liang and Yang Hui.

古文：三人齐位，足相持正，既无偏重相倾之势，又不失亲亲仁覆之恩，计之尽善者也。 
现代文：三个人地位相等，足可以互相保持中正，既没有偏倚、互相排挤的形势，又不失去与亲近者相亲、以仁受庇荫的恩德，这是尽善尽美的计谋。 
English: Three people are equal in status, and they can keep each other in the middle, and there is no bias, no situation of mutual exclusion, and they do not lose the kindness of being close to those who are close to them, and being protected by benevolence. This is the perfect strategy.

古文：于是扶风王骏、光禄大夫李憙、中护军羊琇、侍中王济、甄德皆切谏。帝并不从。
现代文：这时，扶风王司马骏，光禄大夫李，中护军羊，侍中王济、甄德都直言极谏，晋武帝一概不听。
English: At this time, Fufeng Wang Sima Qian, Guanglu Doctor Li, Middle Guard Sheep, Attendant Wang Ji, Zhen De were all extremely outspoken, and Emperor Jinwu did not listen at all.

古文：济使其妻常山公主及德妻长广公主俱入，稽颡涕泣，请帝留攸。
现代文：王济让他的妻子常山公主以及甄德的妻子长广公主一起去见晋武帝，她们跪下磕头，哭着请求晋武帝留下司马攸。
English: Wang Jie asked his wife, Princess Changshan, and Zende's wife, Princess Changguang, to go to see Emperor Jinwu. They knelt down and begged Emperor Jinwu to let Sima You stay.

古文：帝怒，谓侍中王戎曰： 兄弟至亲，今出齐王，自是朕家事，而甄德、王济连遣妇来生哭人邪！ 
现代文：晋武帝动了怒，对侍中王戎说： 兄弟是至亲，如今派齐王离开京城，自然是朕的家事，但是甄德、王济却接连打发妇人到这里来哭死哭活的！ 
English: Emperor Jinwu became angry and said to the attendant Wang Rong: My brother is my closest relative. Now I have sent King Qi to leave the capital. Naturally, it is my family's business, but Zhende and Wang Ji have sent their wives here one after another, crying their eyes out!

古文：乃出济为国子祭酒，德为大鸿胪。
现代文：于是派王济出去担任国子祭酒，甄德任大鸿胪。
English: Therefore, Wang Ji was sent out to serve as the son of the country, and Zhen De served as the great leader.

古文：羊琇与北军中候成粲谋见杨珧，手刃杀之；珧知之，辞疾不出，讽有司奏琇，左迁太仆。
现代文：羊和北军中候成粲密谋，去见杨珧，然后持刀杀了他。杨珧知道他们的意图，推辞有病不出来相见。杨珧让有关部门上奏羊，把他降职为太仆。
English: Sheep and North Korean soldiers plotted to meet Yang Mi, and then killed him with a sword. Yang Mi knew their intentions, but refused to meet because he was ill. Yang Mi ordered the relevant departments to arrest Sheep, and demoted him to the position of eunuch.

古文：琇愤怨，发病卒。
现代文：羊又怒又恨，结果生病死了。
English: The sheep was angry and hateful, and as a result, it got sick and died.

古文：李憙亦以年老逊位，卒于家。
现代文：李也因上了年纪而退了职，后来死在家里。
English: Li also retired due to old age and later died at home.

古文：憙在朝，姻亲故人，与之分衣共食，而未尝私以王官，人以此称之。
现代文：李在朝廷任职时，他的亲戚、旧友分穿他的衣服，和他一起吃饭，但是他却不曾以私人关系为他们谋个官作，人们因此而赞赏他。
English: When Li served in the imperial court, his relatives and old friends wore his clothes and dined with him, but he did not use personal relationships to get them an official post, and people appreciated him for that.

古文：是岁，散骑常侍薛莹卒。
现代文：这一年，散骑常侍薛莹去世。
English: This year, the equestrian attendant Xue Ying passed away.

古文：或谓吴郡陆喜曰： 莹于吴士当为第一乎？ 
现代文：斟酌时势所宜，时常作一些微小的补益工作，这是第四等。
English: This is the fourth grade, which is to do some minor supplementary work from time to time according to the situation.

古文：喜曰： 莹在四五之间，安得为第一！
现代文：温和谦恭，遵循谨慎的原则，不带头奉承献媚，这是第五等。
English: To be gentle and courteous, to follow the principle of prudence, not to take the lead in flattery and flattery, this is the fifth grade.

古文：夫以孙皓无道，吴国之士，沈默其体，潜而勿用者，第一也；避尊居卑，禄以代耕者，第二也；侃然体国，执正不惧者，第三也；斟酌时宜，时献微益者，第四也；温恭修慎，不为诌首者 第五也；过此以往，不足复数。
现代文：过了这五等再往下，就不值得数了。
English: After these five grades and below, it is not worth counting.

古文：故彼上士多沦没而远悔吝，中士有声位而近祸殃。
现代文：所以那些属于上等的士人大多都湮没无闻而远离悔恨，中等士人有名声地位却靠近灾祸。
English: Therefore, those who belong to the upper class of scholars are mostly unknown and far from remorse, while the middle-class scholars have a reputation but are close to disaster.

古文：观莹之处身本末，又安得为第一乎！ 
现代文：观察薛莹的处世为人的原委，他又怎能算是第一呢？ 
English: Observing Xue Ying's life as a human being, how can he be considered the first?

古文：世祖武皇帝中太康四年
现代文：太康四年
English: Taikang four years old

古文：春，正月，甲申，以尚书右仆射魏舒为左仆射，下邳王晃为右仆射。
现代文：春季，正月甲申，任命尚书右仆射魏舒为左仆射，下邳王司马晃为右仆射。
English: In spring, in the first month of Jiaxin, he appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Wei Shu as his left-hand man, and Wang Simakang as his right-hand man.

古文：晃，孚之子也。
现代文：司马晃是司马孚的儿子。
English: Sima Ao is the son of Sima Fu.

古文：戊午，新沓康伯山涛薨。
现代文：戊午，新沓康伯山涛去世。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Xinjian Kangbo Shantao passed away.

古文：帝命太常议崇锡齐王之物。
现代文：晋武帝命令太常商议敬赐齐王之物。
English: Emperor Jinwu ordered that the matter of the tribute to King Qi be discussed frequently.

古文：博士庾旉、太叔广、刘暾、缪蔚、郭颐、秦秀、傅珍上表曰： 昔周选建德以左右王室，周公、康叔、聃季，皆入为三公，明股肱之任重，守地之位轻也。
现代文：博士庾、太叔广、刘暾、缪蔚、郭颐、秦秀、傅珍上表说： 从前，周选择树立有完美德行的人辅佐协助朝廷，周公、康叔、聃秀都被选入朝廷任三公之职，这就显示出辅佐君王的责任重大，掌管地方的地位轻一些。
English: Doctor Zhou, Great Uncle Guang, Liu Zhou, Miao Wei, Guo Zhou, Qin Xiu, Fu Zhen said at the table: Once upon a time, Zhou chose to establish a person with perfect virtue to assist the imperial court. Zhou Gong, Kang Xiu, and Zhou Xiu were all elected to the imperial court to serve as the three princes. This shows that the responsibility of the king's assistant is heavy, and the position of the local government is lighter.

古文：汉诸王侯，位在丞相、三公上，其入赞朝政者，乃有兼宫，其出之国，亦不复假台司虚名为隆宠也。
现代文：汉代的诸侯王，地位在丞相、三公之上，但如果进入朝廷佐助朝政，就要有兼职，如果离开朝廷去封国，也不再给予高级职务的虚名作为尊贵的恩宠。
English: Princes and princes in the Han Dynasty had a higher status than the prime minister and the three princes, but if they entered the imperial court to assist the imperial government, they had to have a part-time job, and if they left the imperial court to serve the country, they would no longer be given the false name of a high-ranking position as an honorable favor.

古文：今使齐王贤邪，则不宜以母弟之亲尊居鲁、卫之常职；不贤邪，不宜大启土宇，表建东海也。
现代文：现在假如齐王贤德的话，那么就不应当以同母之弟的尊贵与亲近去担任鲁、卫之地的寻常职务；如果他不贤德，就不应当开拓疆域，在东海边建国。
English: Now, if King Qi is virtuous, then he should not use the dignity and closeness of his younger brother by the same mother to take on the ordinary duties of the land of Lu and Wei; if he is not virtuous, he should not explore the territory and build a country on the East Sea.

古文：古礼，三公无职，坐而论道，不闻以方任婴之。
现代文：古时候的礼法是，三公没有职守，陪侍帝王议论政事，没听说过以一方的重任去烦扰他。
English: In ancient times, the etiquette was that the three princes did not have duties, they accompanied the emperor to discuss political affairs, and it was unheard of to bother him with the heavy responsibility of one side.

古文：惟宣王救急朝夕，然后命召穆公征淮夷，故其诗曰： 徐方不回，王曰旋归。 
现代文：只有周宣王为了解救危急于一时，命令召穆公征讨淮夷，所以那《诗经》说： 徐地不违逆，宣王令班师。 
English: Only Zhou Xuan Wang, in order to understand the urgency of the crisis, ordered the summoning of Mu Gongzheng to fight Huaiyi, so the "Song of Songs" said: Do not disobey, Xuan Wang ordered the teacher.

古文：宰相不得久在外也。
现代文：宰相不应当长久在外。
English: The prime minister should not be away for long.

古文：今天下已定，六合为家，将数延三事，与论太平之基，而更出之，去王城二千里，违旧章矣。 
现代文：现在天下已经平定，天地四方都成了自己的家，应马上遵循古时候的作法，让齐王参与议论太平的基业。现在反而派他出去，离开都城二千里，这样作就违反了过去的规章了。 
English: Now that the country has been pacified, and all four directions of the world have become his home, he should immediately follow the practice of ancient times and let King Qi participate in the discussion of the foundation of peace. Now, however, he is sent out 2,000 miles away from the capital, which violates the rules of the past.

古文：旉，纯之子；暾，毅之子也。
现代文：庾是庾纯的儿子。刘暾是刘毅的儿子。
English: Yao is the son of Yaochun, and Liu Yao is the son of Liu Yi.

古文：旉既具草，先以呈纯，纯不禁。
现代文：庾已经拟好了草稿，他先呈送给庾纯过目，庾纯没有禁止他。
English: Zou had already prepared a draft, he first presented it to Zou Chun for review, Zou Chun did not forbid him.

古文：事过太常郑默、博士祭酒曹志，志怆然叹曰： 安有如此之才，如此之亲，不得树本助化，而远出海隅！晋室之隆，其殆矣乎！ 
现代文：这件事经过太常郑默、博士祭酒曹志时，曹志悲伤地叹道： 哪里有如此才能，如此亲近的关系，不但不用他建立基业、辅佐教化，反而打发他去天涯海角，晋朝宗室的兴旺，大概危险了吧？ 
English: When this happened to Zheng Miao and Cao Zhi at the doctoral ceremony, Cao Zhi sadly sighed: Where is such a talent, such a close relationship, not only does he not need to establish a foundation and assist in education, but instead sends him to the ends of the earth, the prosperity of the Jin dynasty family, probably dangerous?

古文：乃奏议曰： 古之夹辅王室，同姓则周公、异姓则太公，皆身居朝廷，五世反葬。
现代文：于是他上奏晋武帝说： 古时候在左右辅佐王室的人，同姓的是周公，异姓的是太公，他们都身居朝廷，到了第五代，都归葬于周地。
English: So he appealed to Emperor Jinwu and said: In ancient times, the people who assisted the royal family on the right and left were Zhou Gong and Tai Gong. They all lived in the imperial court, and by the fifth generation, they were all buried in Zhou.

古文：及其衰也，虽有五霸代兴，岂与周、召之治同日而论哉！
现代文：后来世道衰微，即使有五霸代之而兴起，又怎能与周公、召公辅佐王室的政治清明同日而语呢？
English: Later, with the decline of the world order, even if there were five tyrants to rise in its place, how could it be the same as the political clarity of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong Fu of the royal family?

古文：自羲皇以来，岂一姓所能独有！
现代文：自从伏羲以来，天下岂是一姓所能独自占有的？
English: Since Fuxi, is it possible for one family to own the whole country?

古文：当推至公之心，与天下共其利害，乃能享国久长。
现代文：应当以至公之心待人，与天下共有利与害，这样才能长久地拥有天下。
English: You should treat others with a heart of justice, and share the benefits and harms with the world, so that you can own the world for a long time.

古文：是以秦、魏欲独擅其权而才得没身，周、汉能分其利而亲疏为用，此前事之明验也。
现代文：因此秦、魏想独揽国政所以才灭亡，周、汉能够把利益分能别人所以无论关系是亲是疏都被其所用，这是前代所发生的明显的证明。
English: Therefore, the Qin and Wei dynasties wanted to monopolize national politics, which is why they died out, and the Zhou and Han dynasties were able to share their interests with others, so they were used by them regardless of whether they were close or distant, which is a clear proof of what happened in the previous generation.

古文：志以为当如博士等议。 
现代文：我认为应当按照博士们的意见去作。 
English: I think it should be done in accordance with the opinions of doctors.

古文：帝览之，大怒曰： 曹志尚不明吾心，况四海乎！ 
现代文：晋武帝看了曹志的上奏，非常生气，说： 曹志尚且不明白我的心，更何况四海之内的人！ 
English: When Emperor Jinwu saw Cao Zhi's opening, he was very angry and said, "Cao Zhi still doesn't understand my heart, let alone the people within the four seas!"

古文：且谓： 博士不答所问而答所不问，横造异论。 
现代文：于是就说： 博士们不回答我所问的，却回答我所不问的，肆意制造不同的议论。 
English: Then he said: "The doctors do not answer what I ask, but they answer what I do not ask, and they wantonly make different arguments.

古文：下有司策免郑默。
现代文：晋武帝命令有关部门免去郑默的职务。
English: Emperor Jinwu ordered the relevant departments to remove Zheng Miao from his post.

古文：于是尚书硃整、褚等奏： 志等侵官离局，迷罔朝廷，崇饰晋言，假托无讳，请收志等付廷尉科罪。 
现代文：这时尚书朱整、褚上奏说： 曹志等人越犯职权，脱离职责，蒙蔽朝廷，尊崇、粉饰邪恶的言论，却假托直言无忌，请拘捕曹志等人，把他们交付廷尉、依法判罪。 
English: This fashion book Zhu Zhengyi and Zou Shangso said: Cao Zhi and others have exceeded their authority, abandoned their duties, blinded the imperial court, honored and whitewashed evil speech, but pretended to be outspoken. Please arrest Cao Zhi and others, hand them over to the court officers, and convict them according to law.

古文：诏免志官，以公还第；其馀皆付廷尉科罪。
现代文：晋武帝就下诏书免除了曹志的官职，让他以鄄城县公的身份回到家里。其他的人都被交付廷尉依法判罪。
English: Emperor Jinmu excused Cao Zhi from his official position in the next imperial edict, and let him return home as a public official of Lucheng County. Other people were sentenced to court officers according to law.

古文：庾纯诣廷尉自首： 旉以议草见示，愚浅听之。 
现代文：庾纯到廷尉去自首，说： 庾上表的草稿我看到了，但是我却肤浅无知没有阻止他。 
English: Hao Chun went to the imperial lieutenant to turn himself in, saying: I saw the draft of the watch on the table, but my superficial ignorance did not stop him.

古文：诏免纯罪。
现代文：晋武帝下诏免庾纯的罪。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to absolve him of his sins.

古文：廷尉刘颂奏旉等大不敬，当弃市。
现代文：廷尉刘颂上奏，认为庾等人极其不恭敬，应当处以死刑，陈尸街头示众。
English: Liu Song, a courtier, was the first to play, and he thought that Zou and others were extremely disrespectful and should be sentenced to death, and their corpses were paraded in the streets.

古文：尚书奏请报听廷尉行刑。
现代文：尚书上奏，请求报与廷尉，让廷尉决定执行刑罚。
English: Shang wrote a report and requested to report to the imperial lieutenant, so that the imperial lieutenant could decide to carry out the punishment.

古文：尚书夏侯骏曰： 官立八座，正为此时。 
现代文：尚书夏侯骏说： 朝廷设立了八座官员，正是为了在这种时候能派上用场。 
English: Shang Shuxia Houyi said: The imperial court set up eight officials, precisely in order to be useful at this time.

古文：乃独为驳议。
现代文：于是他独自上书，提出了不同的意见。
English: So he wrote a letter on his own, putting forward a different opinion.

古文：左仆射下邳王晃亦从骏议。
现代文：左仆射、下邳王司马晃也同意夏侯骏的意见。
English: Zuo Fuxia and Xiamen Wang Simakang also agreed with Xia Houyao's opinion.

古文：奏留中七日，乃诏曰： 旉是议主，应为戮首；但旉家人自首，宜并广等七人皆丐其死命，并除名。 
现代文：大臣们的表奏在皇帝那里搁置了七天，晋武帝才下诏说： 庾是提出议论的主要人物，按理应杀头，但是他的家人已经自首了，所以庾应当与太叔广等共七人一起都免去他们的死罪，但要把他们都除去名位。 
English: The ministers' report was withheld from the emperor for seven days, and it was only then that Emperor Jinwu issued an edict: Xing was the main figure in the debate and deserved to be beheaded, but his family members had already turned themselves in, so Xing should be exonerated from the death penalty along with seven others, including Great Uncle Guang, but they should all be removed from their positions.

古文：二月，诏以济南郡益齐国。
现代文：二月，晋武帝下诏书，把济南郡归并到齐国。
English: In February, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to annex Jinan County to Qi.

古文：己丑，立齐王攸子长乐亭侯寔为北海王，命攸备物典策，设轩辕之乐，六佾之舞，黄钺朝车，乘舆之副从焉。
现代文：己丑，立齐王司马攸的儿子长乐亭侯司马为北海王。
English: In spite of his ugliness, the son of King Sima Yu of Qi, Chao Le Ting Hossima, became the king of the North Sea.

古文：三月，辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：下命令规定了司马攸所用物品及行使权力的规格。
English: The next order specified the items used by Sima You and the specifications for the exercise of power.

古文：齐献王攸愤怨发病，乞守先后陵。
现代文：他陈列乐器，应三面悬挂；所用乐舞，舞者分成六列。
English: He exhibits musical instruments, hanging on three sides; for the music and dance, the dancers are divided into six rows.

古文：帝不许，遣御医诊视。
现代文：其他如黄钺朝车、车马的标准等都遵从以上的水准。三月，辛丑朔，出现日食。
English: Others, such as the Huangpi morning carriage and the standards for chariots and horses, all comply with the above standards. In March, Xin uglishuo, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：诸医希旨，皆言无疾。河南尹向雄谏曰： 陛下子弟虽多，然有德望者少；齐王臣居京邑，所益实深，不可不思也。 
现代文：齐献王司马攸由于愤怒、怨恨而生了病，他请求去守文明皇后的陵暮，晋武帝不答应，派了御医给他看病。各位御医为了迎合晋武帝，都说司马攸没有病。河南尹向雄进谏说： 陛下子侄弟兄虽然多，但是有德行名望的却很少。让齐王卧病居住在京都，所带来的好处实际上是很深远的，不可以不考虑。 
English: Qiqian Wang Sima You fell ill due to anger and resentment. He asked to guard the tomb of the Empress of Civilization. Emperor Jinwu did not agree and sent a doctor to see him. In order to please Emperor Jinwu, all the doctors said that Sima You was not ill. Henan Yin Xiangyong Jinjun said: Although there are many brothers and nephews of His Majesty, there are few who have the reputation of virtue. The benefits of letting King Qi live in Kyoto while he is ill are actually very far-reaching and cannot be ignored.

古文：帝不纳，雄愤恚而卒。
现代文：晋武帝不采纳他的意见，向雄由于愤怒怨恨而死去了。
English: Emperor Jinwu did not accept his opinion, and Xiangxiong died out of anger and resentment.

古文：攸疾转笃，帝犹催上道。
现代文：这时，司马攸的病开始加重，晋武帝仍然催促他上路。
English: At this time, Sima You's illness began to worsen, and Emperor Jinwu still urged him to go.

古文：攸自强入辞，素持容仪，疾虽困，尚自整厉，举止如常，帝益疑其无疾；辞出数日，呕血而薨。
现代文：司马攸勉力撑持着去向晋武帝辞行，他平日里一贯保持容貌与仪表，虽然病得很厉害，他还是整齐振作，举止和往常一样，晋武帝越发怀疑他没有病。司马攸辞别上路，没有几天，他就吐血而死。
English: Sima You diligently supported his resignation to Emperor Jinwu. He always maintained his appearance and appearance on weekdays. Although he was very ill, he was neat and cheerful, and his behavior was the same as usual. Emperor Jinwu increasingly suspected that he was not ill. Sima You said goodbye to the road, and within a few days he vomited blood and died.

古文：帝往临丧，攸子冏号踊，诉父病为医所诬。诏即诛医，以冏为嗣。
现代文：晋武帝去司马攸那里亲临丧事，司马攸的儿子司马顿足号哭，诉说他父亲的病是被医生给耽误了，受了医生的欺骗。
English: Emperor Jinwu went to Sima You's place to attend the funeral in person. Sima You's son, Sima Tong, cried profusely, saying that his father's illness was delayed by the doctor and he was deceived by the doctor.

古文：初，帝爱攸甚笃，为荀勖、冯紞等所构，欲为身后之虑，故出之。
现代文：晋武帝立即下令杀了医生，司马接替了司马攸的地位。当初，晋武帝对司马攸的疼爱之情是很深厚的。但是，由于苟勖、冯等人的挑拨，晋武帝要为自己死后的事作打算，所以就让司马攸离开京都。
English: Emperor Jinwu immediately gave the order to kill the doctor, and Sima succeeded Sima You. At first, Emperor Jinwu was very fond of Sima You. However, because of the provocation of Goguryeo, Feng and others, Emperor Jinwu wanted to plan for his own death, so he let Sima You leave Kyoto.

古文：及薨，帝哀恸不已。
现代文：等司马攸死了，晋武帝悲哀伤痛不止。
English: When Sima You died, Emperor Jinmu was saddened and pained.

古文：冯紞侍侧，曰： 齐王名过其实，天下归之，今自薨殒，社稷之福也，陛下何哀之过！ 
现代文：这时，冯正在身旁侍候，就说： 齐王的名声超过了他的实际，天下的人都归附他。现在他自己死了，这是国家的福气，陛下为什么要过份悲哀呢！ 
English: At this time, Feng, who was waiting nearby, said, "King Qi's reputation exceeded his reality, and people all over the world were drawn to him. Now that he himself has died, this is a blessing for the country. Why should His Majesty be overly sad?

古文：帝收泪而止。诏攸丧礼依安平献王故事。
现代文：晋武帝于是止住了眼泪，命令司马攸的丧礼要仪照安平献王司马孚的规格去办。
English: Emperor Jinwu then stopped his tears and ordered Sima You's funeral ceremony to be carried out according to the specifications of Anping's offering to King Sima Fu.

古文：攸举动以礼，鲜有过事，虽帝亦敬惮之。每引之同处，必择言而后发。
现代文：司马攸的行为举止都合于礼法，很少有过错，即使是晋武帝也对他又敬又畏，每次拉着他在一起相处时，总是斟酌词语然后才说话。
English: Sima You's behavior is in line with etiquette, and he rarely makes mistakes. Even Emperor Jinwu respected and feared him. Every time he brought him along, he always weighed his words before speaking.

古文：夏，五月，己亥，琅邪武王亻由薨。
现代文：夏季，五月，己亥，琅邪武王司马去世。
English: In the summer, in May, Ji Hai, Zhai Yanwu Wang Sima passed away.

古文：冬，十一月，以尚书左仆射魏舒为司徒。
现代文：冬季，十一月，任命尚书左仆射魏舒为司徒。
English: In winter, in November, he appointed Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Wei Shu, as his disciple.

古文：河南及荆、扬等六州大水。
现代文：河南以及荆、扬等六州洪水泛滥。
English: Floods in six prefectures including Henan, Jing and Yang.

古文：归命侯孙皓卒。
现代文：归命侯孙去世。
English: Hosun passed away after being ordered to return home.

古文：是岁，鲜卑慕容涉归卒。
现代文：这一年，鲜卑慕容涉归去世。
English: In the same year, Xianbei Murong passed away.

古文：弟删篡立，将杀涉归子廆，廆亡匿于辽东徐郁家。
现代文：他的弟弟慕容删篡位代立，想杀掉慕容涉归的儿子慕容，慕容逃跑了，隐藏在辽东人的徐郁的家里。
English: His younger brother, Murong, wanted to kill Murong Wagui's son, Murong. Murong ran away and hid in Xu Yu's home in eastern Liaodong.

古文：春，正月，己亥，有青龙二，见武库井中。
现代文：太康五年春季，正月，己亥，武器库的井里出现了两条青龙。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Taikang, the first month, Ji Hai, two blue dragons appeared in the well of the arsenal.

古文：帝观之，有喜色。
现代文：晋武帝去观看，脸上现出欢喜的神色来。
English: When the emperor saw it, he was overjoyed.

古文：百官将贺，尚书左仆射刘毅表曰： 昔龙降夏庭，卒为周祸。
现代文：百官们要去道贺，尚书左仆射刘毅上表说： 从前，龙降临在夏代的厅堂里，最后酿成了周代的祸殃。
English: Hundreds of officials went to congratulate, and Liu Yi, the left-hand man of Shang Shuxu, said on the table: Once upon a time, a dragon descended on the hall of the Xia Dynasty, and finally brought about the calamity of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：《易》称 潜龙勿用，阳在下也。 
现代文：《易经》里说， 龙潜代不作施展，是因为阳气低沉。 
English: "I Ching" says that the reason why the dragon lurks and does not perform is because the yang qi is low.

古文：寻案旧典，无贺龙之礼。 
现代文：我寻查了旧典籍，前人没有恭贺龙的礼节。 
English: I searched the old classics, and the ancients did not have the etiquette to congratulate the dragon.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：晋武帝听从了刘毅的话。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：初，陈群以吏部不能审核天下之士，故令郡国各置中正，州置大中正，皆取本士之人任朝廷官，德充才盛者为之，使铨次等级以为九品，有言行修著则升之，道义亏缺则降之，吏部凭之以补授百官。
现代文：当初，陈群由于吏部不能够审查核实天下的士人，所以就命令郡国各自设置中正，州设置大中正，都选取本地区的人担任朝廷的官职，只有富于德才的人才能够当选。按照士人的才能、政绩、资历分为不同的九品等级。如果言行卓越显著就可以被提升，道义缺损的就被降级，吏部就凭借这个来补充朝廷的百官。
English: At first, Chen Qun, because the Ministry of Civil Service was unable to examine and verify the world's scholars, ordered the county and state governments to set up middle ranks respectively, and the state governments to set up large and medium ranks, and all selected people from this region to serve as officials of the imperial court. Only those who are rich in virtue can be elected. According to the talents, political achievements and qualifications of the scholars, they are divided into nine grades. If the words and deeds are outstanding, they can be promoted, and those with moral defects will be downgraded. The Ministry of Civil Service will use this to supplement the hundred officials of the imperial court.

古文：行之浸久，中正或非其人，奸敝日滋。
现代文：这个制度实行的日子越来越长久，有的中正并不是合格的人选，于是邪恶敝败的风气一天一天地滋长。
English: The days of this system are getting longer and longer, and some of the candidates are not qualified, so the culture of evil and defeat is growing day by day.

古文：刘毅上疏曰： 今立中正，定九品，高下任意，荣辱在手，操人主之威福，夺天朝之权威，公无考校之负，私无告讦之忌，用心百态，营求万端，廉让之风灭，争讼之俗成，臣窃为圣朝耻之！
现代文：刘毅针对这种状况上书说： 如今设立了中正来决定官职的九品等级，品级的高与低，中正可以随自己的心愿来决定，别人的荣与辱都攥在他们的手里。他们掌握着人君才能有的威与福，夺取了朝廷的权势。他们对公，不因为自己的考查失实而觉得有所亏负；对私，也不为揭人隐私而有所避忌。这种制度使人们以各种各样的用心从各个方面去钻营，廉洁谦让的风气消失了，争斗的习俗形成了，我私下为圣朝感到羞耻。
English: In response to this situation, Liu Yi wrote: "Nowadays, the nine grades have been established by the CCP to determine official positions, the high and low grades. The CCP can decide according to their own wishes, and the honor and disgrace of others are in their hands. They hold the dignity and blessing of human talent and have seized the power of the imperial court. They do not feel a disadvantage to the public because of their examination of untruths; they do not avoid revealing people's privacy to me. This system has made people go to the camp from various aspects with all kinds of intentions. The culture of honesty and modesty has disappeared, and the custom of fighting has formed. I am privately ashamed of the Holy

古文：盖中正之设，于损政之道有八；高下逐强弱，是非随兴衰，一人之身，旬日异状，上品无寒门，下品无势族，一也。
现代文：中正制度的设立，对于政治的损害有八点：品级的高下，随着势力的强弱为转移，是与非的标准，以人的兴盛衰败来决定，同一个人，十天之内，处境就发生了变化。上品的官员没有出身于贫贱之家的，下品的官员，没有出身于有权势的大族的，这是第一。
English: The establishment of the Zhongzheng system has eight points of damage to politics: from the higher to the lower class, with the strength of the power shifting, the standard of right and wrong, determined by the prosperity and decline of the people, the same person, within ten days, the situation has changed. The upper-class officials did not come from a poor family, the lower-class officials did not come from a powerful clan, this is the first.

古文：置州都者，本取州里清议咸所归服，将以镇异同，一言议也。
现代文：设置中正的目的，是要使州里公正的评论都能够归服顺从，将要以此来安定异同，使言论归于统一。
English: The main purpose of the establishment is to make the just comments in the state able to submit to obedience, which will be used to stabilize the differences and make the speech unified.

古文：今重其任而轻其人，使驳违之论横于州里，嫌仇之隙结于大臣，二也。
现代文：现在却重视中正的职权而轻视担任中正的人选，使得违悖的言论在州中放任，在大臣之间结下了憎恶的仇怨，这是第二。
English: The second reason is that they now attach importance to the powers of the CPC Central Committee and despise the candidates for the post of the CPC Central Committee, which has led to the unethical remarks being allowed in the state and the hateful grudge between the ministers.

古文：本立格之体，为九品者，谓才德有优劣，伦辈有首尾也。
现代文：本着设置这项制度的规则，之所以要把士人分为九个等级，就是因为人的才与德有优劣的不同，资历、辈份也有前有后。
English: According to the rules of this system, the reason why scholars should be divided into nine grades is because people's talents and virtues are different, and seniority and generation are also different.

古文：今乃使优劣易地，首尾倒错，三也。
现代文：现在的作法却使得优与劣掉换了位置，前与后颠倒，这是第三。
English: The current practice, on the other hand, has caused the superior and inferior to switch places, and the front and back to be reversed. This is the third.

古文：陛下赏善罚恶，无不裁之以法，独置中正，委以一国之重，曾无赏罚之防，又禁人不得诉讼，使之纵横任意，无所顾惮，诸受枉者，抱怨积直，不获上闻，四也。
现代文：陛下奖赏善良，惩罚邪恶，从来都是依法来裁决，唯独设置中正，把一国的重任托付给他，却没有能控制他的奖赏与惩罚的办法。还禁止人们控告中正，这就使中正为所欲为，肆无忌惮，各位受了冤枉的人，有一肚子的怨言和真心话，却不能使陛下听到，这是第四。
English: His Majesty rewards the good and punishes the evil, and has always made rulings in accordance with the law. However, he set up Zhongzheng and entrusted him with the important task of a country, but there was no way to control his rewards and punishments. He also prohibited people from suing Zhongzheng, which made Zhongzheng do whatever he wanted and act recklessly. All of you who have been wronged have a bellyful of complaints and sincere words, but you can't make His Majesty hear them. This is the fourth.

古文：一国之士，多者千数，或流徙异邦，或取给殊方，面犹不识，况尽其才！
现代文：一个国家里的士人，多得可以以千计数，他们或者流徙于异邦，或者是到别的地方谋求衣食。
English: A country's literati can number in the thousands, and they either migrate to foreign countries or seek food and clothing elsewhere.

古文：而中正知与不知，皆当品状，采誉于台府，纳毁于流言，任己则有不识之蔽，听受则有彼此之偏，五也。
现代文：对这些人的相貌都不曾见过，更何况要发挥他们的才能！作为中正，对这些人无论是了解还是不了解，都应当评论、衡量他们的表现，不管是官府对他们赞誉之词，还是败坏他们名声的流言蜚语，都应当全面地听取。但对这些意见如果只相信自己的判断，就会被不了解所蒙蔽，只听别人告诉你的话，就会因为彼此的局限而陷于片面与狭隘，这是第五。
English: As a Zhongzheng, whether you understand these people or not, you should comment on and measure their performance. Whether it is the words of praise from the government or the gossip that corrupts their reputation, you should listen to them comprehensively. But if you only trust your own judgment, you will be blinded by lack of understanding. If you only listen to what others tell you, you will be trapped in one-sidedness and narrowness because of each other's limitations. This is the fifth.

古文：凡求人才者，欲以治民也，今当官著效者或附卑品，在官无绩者更获高叙，是为抑功实而隆空名，长浮华而废考绩，六也。
现代文：凡是寻求人材的目的，就是为了用他们的来治理民众。现在担任官职有显著的成绩的人，有的却处于很低的等级，担任官职没有政绩的人，反而获得很高的级别，这就是压抑了确实有功劳的人而崇尚空虚的名声，助长了浮华的风气，使得对官员政绩的考核被废除。
English: The purpose of seeking talents is to use them to govern the people. Some of those who currently hold official positions have remarkable achievements, but some are at a very low level. Those who hold official positions without political achievements, on the other hand, have obtained a high level. This is suppressing people with real merits and advocating empty fame, promoting a flashy style, and abolishing the assessment of officials' political achievements.

古文：凡官不同人，事不同能。
现代文：这是第六。所有的官职都是由不同的人担任的，各种各样的事情也需要不同才能的人来处理。
English: This is the sixth. All offices are held by different people, and all sorts of things need people with different talents to handle.

古文：今不状其才之所宜而但第为九品，以品取人，或非才能之所长，以状取人，则为本品之所限，徒结白论而品状相妨，七也。
现代文：现在是不问其才能是否合适，只管让他登上九品。以品级来选取人，有的人的才能与品级并不相符；若要根据具体人的情况来选取人，又被品级所局限，不过是空话，官职的品级与人的才德不相吻合，这是第七。
English: Now it is not a question of whether his talent is suitable, just let him ascend to the ninth grade. Selecting people by grade, some people's talent does not match the grade; if you want to select people according to their specific circumstances, and are limited by the grade, it is just empty talk. The grade of the official position does not match the talent of the person. This is the seventh.

古文：九品所下不彰其罪，所上不列其善，各任爱憎，以植其私，天下之人焉得不懈德行而锐人事，八也。
现代文：九品中恶劣的人，也不彰明他的罪过，对所推举的人也不陈述他们的好处，各自放任自己的爱憎，培植自己的亲信，那么天下的人又如何不懈怠于德行而却专心于人情世故呢？
English: The bad people in the nine grades do not reveal their sins, nor do they state their benefits to those who are promoted, each of them indulges in their own love and hate, cultivating their own relatives, so how can the people of the world not slack off in virtue but concentrate on humanities and worldliness?

古文：由此论之，职名中正，实为奸府；事名九品，而有八损。古今之失，莫大于此！
现代文：这是第八。由此看来，职务名为中正，实际上是邪恶的处所；事务名称为九品，却有八点损害，古今的过失，没有比这更大的了。
English: This is the eighth. From this perspective, the name of the office is Zhongzheng, which is actually an evil place; the name of the business is Jiuping, but there are eight points of damage. There is no greater fault than this.

古文：愚臣以为宜罢中正，除九品，弃魏氏之敝法，更立一代之美制。 
现代文：我愚昧地认为，应当罢免中正，废除九品，抛弃魏氏的这一敝陋之法，再重新建立一代美好的制度。 
English: I foolishly believed that Zhongzheng should be removed from office, Jiupon should be abolished, Wei's barbaric law should be abandoned, and a better system should be established for the next generation.

古文：太尉汝南王亮、司空卫瓘亦上疏曰： 魏氏承丧乱之后，人士流移，考详无地，故立九品之制，粗且为一时选用之本耳。
现代文：太尉、汝南王司马亮、司空卫也上疏说： 魏氏在丧乱之后当权，人士四处流徙迁移，要想详细地加以考察是办不到的，所以建立了九品官职的制度，以作为一时选拔人才的大致上的标准和依据。
English: Captain, Ru Nan Wang Sima Liang, Siku Wei also said: The Wei clan came to power after the turmoil, and people migrated everywhere. It is impossible to investigate in detail. Therefore, a system of nine grades of official posts was established to serve as a general standard and basis for selecting talents.

古文：今九域同规，大化方始，臣等以为宜皆荡除末法，咸用土断，自公卿以下，以所居为正，无复县客，远属异土，尽除中正九品之制，使举善进才，各由乡论，则华竞自息，各求于己矣。 
现代文：如今九州有了统一的制度，伟大的教化正要开始推行，我们认为，应当扫除浅陋的措施，改用以所在地区为主的土断之法，从公卿以下，以自己的居住地为准，不要再像客居当地似的，隶属于远处的其他地区。全部废除九品中正制度，使得荐举选拔优秀的人材，各自由乡里讨论决定，那么争相追求浮华的习气自然就会止息，人们也就会尽心于自己的努力了。 
English: Now that Kyushu has a unified system, and the great enlightenment is about to begin, we believe that it is necessary to sweep away the shallow measures and replace them with the law of the land, which is based on the region, from the nobles down, according to their place of residence, and no longer subordinate to other distant regions like a guest living in the local area. Abolish the nine grades of the middle school system altogether, so that outstanding talents can be selected by recommendation and discussed and decided in each free township, then the habit of competing to pursue flashy will naturally cease, and people will devote themselves to their own efforts.

古文：始平王文学江夏李重上疏，以为： 九品既除，宜先开移徙，听相并就，则土断之实行矣。 
现代文：在始平王那里任文学之职的江夏人李重上疏，他认为： 九品制度废除后，应当先开始流动迁徙，听任人们相互合并附就，那么真正的土断之法就开始实行了。 
English: Li Chung Shang Zuo, a native of Jiangxia, who held the post of literature with King Shi Ping, believed that: After the abolition of the nine product system, the flow and migration should begin first, and people should be allowed to merge with each other, and then the true law of the land will begin to be implemented.

古文：帝虽善其言而终不能改也。
现代文：晋武帝虽然对这些建议很赞赏，但是最终也没能实行改革。
English: Although Emperor Jinwu appreciated these suggestions, he was ultimately unable to implement the reforms.

古文：冬，十二月，庚午，大赦。
现代文：冬季，十二月，庚午，实行大赦。
English: In winter, in December, in the late afternoon, there is a general amnesty.

古文：闰月，当阳成侯杜预卒。
现代文：闰月，当阳成侯杜预去世。
English: In the intercalary month, Yang Cheng Hou Du Wu passed away.

古文：是岁，塞外匈奴胡太阿厚帅部落二万九千三百人来降，帝处之塞内西河。
现代文：这一年，塞外的匈奴人太阿厚，率领他的部落二万九千三百人归降晋，晋武帝让他们在塞内西河居住。
English: In the same year, the Huns from outside of Serbia, the Taaho, led 29,300 members of his tribe to surrender to Jin, and Emperor Jinwu allowed them to live in the Senesi River.

古文：罢宁州入益州，置南夷校尉以护之。
现代文：废除了宁州，归并入益州，设置南夷校尉监理益州。
English: Ningzhou was abolished, merged into Yizhou, and Nanyi Lieutenant was set up to supervise Yizhou.

古文：世祖武皇帝中太康六年
现代文：太康六年
English: Six years of Taikang

古文：春，正月，尚书左仆射刘毅致仕，寻卒。
现代文：春季，正月，尚书左仆射刘毅辞官回家，不久就去世了。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Liu Yi, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, returned home after resigning from his post, and died soon after.

古文：戊辰，以王浑为尚书左仆射，浑子济为侍中。
现代文：戊辰，任命王浑为尚书左仆射，任命王浑的儿子王济为侍中。
English: Boshen, appointed Wang Hun as Shang Shushi's left-hand man, and appointed Wang Hun's son, Wang Jie, as an attendant.

古文：浑主者处事不当，济明法绳之。
现代文：王浑手下的主管人处理事务不当，王济严明法纪处置了他。
English: The supervisor under Wang Hun handled affairs improperly, and Wang Jie dealt with him with strict legal discipline.

古文：济从兄佑，素与济不协，因毁济不能容其父，帝由是疏济，后坐事免官。
现代文：王济的堂兄王佑平素就与王济不和，这时就抓住这件事情诽谤王济，说他容不下他的父亲，晋武帝从此就疏远了王济。后来王济由于获罪被免去了官职。
English: Wang Ji's cousin, Wang Youping, who had always been at odds with Wang Ji, seized on the incident to slander Wang Ji, saying that he could not tolerate his father. Emperor Jinmu alienated Wang Ji from then on. Later, Wang Ji was removed from his official post due to the crime.

古文：济性豪侈，帝谓侍中和峤曰： 我将骂济而后官之，如何？ 
现代文：王济性情豪放豁达，晋武帝对侍中和峤说： 我要骂王济，然后给他封官，他会怎么样呢？ 
English: Wang Ji had a generous and open-minded nature. Emperor Jinwu said to the chamberlains and eunuchs, "If I were to curse Wang Ji and then place him under house arrest, what would happen to him?"

古文：峤曰： 济俊爽，恐不可屈。 
现代文：和峤说： 王济性格豪爽，怕是不能屈服。 
English: He said: Wang Jigao is cool, I'm afraid I can't offend him.

古文：帝乃召济，切让之，既而曰： 颇知愧不？ 
现代文：晋武帝召来王济，严厉地责备他，然后问他： 你是不是心里有点儿知道惭愧了？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu summoned Wang Jie, severely reprimanded him, and then asked him: Are you a little ashamed in your heart?

古文：济曰：  尺布 、 斗粟 之谣，常为陛下愧之。
现代文：王济回答说： 像《尺布》、《斗粟》这些歌谣所说的，我常常因此而为陛下感到羞愧。
English: Wang Zi replied, "I often feel ashamed of Your Majesty because of this, as the ballads such as "Shakubo" and "Dou Mao" say.

古文：他人能令亲者疏，臣不能令亲者亲，以此愧陛下耳。 
现代文：别人能够使亲近的人疏远，我却不能让亲近的人更亲，因为这一点，我有愧于陛下。 
English: Others can alienate those who are close to them, but I cannot make those who are close to me closer, because of this, I am ashamed of Your Majesty.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：晋武帝听了他的话沉默不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：峤，治之孙也。
现代文：和峤是和洽的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of He Chong.

古文：青、梁、幽、冀州旱。
现代文：青、梁、幽、冀州闹旱灾。
English: The provinces of Qingdao, Liang, Yu and Jizhou are suffering from drought.

古文：秋，八月，丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，八月，丙戌朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in August, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：冬，十二月，庚子，襄阳武侯王濬卒。
现代文：冬季，十二月，庚子，襄阳武侯王濬去世。
English: In winter, December, Geng Zi, Yangyang Wuhou Wang Xi passed away.

古文：是岁，慕容删为其下所杀，部众复迎涉归子廆而立之。
现代文：这一年，慕容删被他的手下人杀了，他的部众又去迎接慕容涉归的儿子慕容继了位。
English: That year, Murong Qian was killed by his subordinates, and his subordinates went to welcome Murong's son, Murong Wu, who succeeded to the throne.

古文：涉归与宇文部素有隙，廆请讨之，朝廷弗许。
现代文：慕容涉归和鲜卑的宇文部素来有仇怨，慕容请求去讨伐宇文部，而朝廷不允许。
English: Murong had a long-standing grudge against Umenbu, who was inferior to Murong. Murong asked to attack Umenbu, but the imperial court would not allow it.

古文：廆怒，入寇辽西，杀略甚众。
现代文：慕容于是发怒，入侵辽西，杀人抢掠，造成了很大的损害。
English: Murong then flew into a rage, invaded western Liao, killed and robbed, and caused a great deal of damage.

古文：帝遣幽州军讨廆，战于肥如，廆众大败。
现代文：晋武帝就派遣幽州的军队讨伐慕容，双方在肥如打了起来，慕容的部众被打得大败。
English: Emperor Jinwu sent Yuzhou's army to fight Murong, and the two sides fought in Huiru. Murong's followers were soundly defeated.

古文：自是每岁犯边，又东击扶馀，扶馀王依虑自杀；子弟走保沃沮。
现代文：从这时开始，慕容每年都要侵犯边境地区。他还向东去打扶余，扶余王依虑自杀了，依虑的儿子弟兄们都逃到沃沮防守。
English: From then on, Murong invaded the border area every year. He also went east to fight Fuyu. Fuyu's king, Yixian, committed suicide, and Yixian's sons and brothers all fled to Wuxia to defend themselves.

古文：廆夷其国城，驱万馀人而归。
现代文：慕容就把扶余国的城削平，驱赶着一万多人返回部落。
English: Murong leveled the city of Buyeo and drove more than ten thousand people back to the tribe.

古文：世祖武皇帝中太康七年春，正月，甲寅朔，日有食之。魏舒称疾，固请逊位，以剧阳子罢。
现代文：太康七年春季，正月，甲寅朔，出现日食。魏舒声称有病，坚决请求退位，他以剧阳子的身份免职。
English: In the spring of Taikang's seventh year, in the first month of the year, there was a solar eclipse. Wei Shu claimed to be ill and firmly requested to abdicate. He was dismissed as a playboy.

古文：舒所为，必先行而后言，逊位之际，莫有知者。
现代文：魏舒作事，总是先有了行动然后才说出来，所以他退位的时候没有人知道。
English: Wei Shu always acted before he spoke, so no one knew when he abdicated.

古文：卫瓘与舒书曰： 每与足下共论此事，日日未果，可谓 瞻之在前，忽焉在后 矣。 
现代文：卫写信给魏舒说： 常常和您在一起议论退位的事情，可是一天一天过去了，却没有能够实现，真可说是 瞻望于前，忽然就落在后头 了。 
English: Wei wrote to Wei Shu, saying: I often discussed the abdication with you, but day after day passed, but it could not be realized. It can truly be said that I was looking ahead, but suddenly fell behind.

古文：夏，慕容廆寇辽东，故扶馀王依虑子依罗求帅见人还复旧国，请援于东夷校尉何龛，龛遣督护贾沈将兵送之。
现代文：夏季，慕容侵犯辽东。从前的扶馀王依虑的儿子依罗，请求率领他还留存的部下，返回他的国家去恢复它，他向东夷校尉何龛请求援助。何龛派遣督护贾沈带领兵士送依罗去扶馀国。
English: In the summer, Murong invaded Liaodong. Yiro, the son of the former Fuyu king Yixian, requested to lead his remaining subordinates back to his country to restore it. He requested assistance from Dongyi captain He Ying. He Ying sent the overseer Jia Shen to lead the soldiers to send Yiro to Fuyu.

古文：廆遣其将孙丁帅骑邀之于路，沈力战，斩丁，遂复扶馀。
现代文：慕容派遣他的部将孙丁，率领骑兵在半路上拦截依罗。贾沈奋力作战，杀了孙丁，于是恢复了扶馀国。
English: Murong dispatched his subordinate Sun Ding and led his cavalry to intercept Iro in the middle of the road. Jia Shen fought hard, killed Sun Ding, and then restored Fuyu.

古文：秋，匈奴胡都大博及萎莎胡各帅种落十万馀口诣雍州降。
现代文：秋季，匈奴人都大博以及萎莎人，各自率领种族部落十万多人到雍州投降。
English: In autumn, the Xiongnu people, including the Dabo people and the Wuxia people, each led more than 100,000 ethnic tribes to surrender to Yongzhou.

古文：九月，戊寅，扶风武王骏薨。
现代文：九月，戊寅，扶风武王司马骏去世。
English: In September, Wu Yin, Fu Feng Wu Wang Sima Yi passed away.

古文：冬，十一月，壬子，以陇西王泰都督关中诸军事。
现代文：冬季，十一月壬子，任命陇西王司马泰统领关中诸军事。
English: In winter, in November, Renzi appointed the Shaanxi king Sima Tai to be the commander of the military.

古文：泰，宣帝弟馗之子也。
现代文：司马泰是晋宣帝的弟弟司马馗的儿子。
English: Simatai was the son of Emperor Jinxuan's younger brother Simatai.

古文：是岁，鲜卑拓跋悉鹿卒，弟绰立。
现代文：这一年，鲜卑人拓跋悉鹿去世，他的弟弟拓跋绰继位。
English: In this year, the Xianbei person Tuoba Shishi died, and his younger brother Tuoba Jiao succeeded to the throne.

古文：世祖武皇帝中太康八年春，正月，戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：太康八年春季，正月，戊申朔，出现日食。太庙的殿堂陷落了。
English: In the spring of the 8th year of Taikang, in the first month of the year, the solar eclipse occurred. The hall of the Great Temple fell.

古文：太庙殿陷，秋，九月，改营太庙，作者六万人。
现代文：秋季，九月，改建太庙，有六万人参加营建。
English: In the autumn, in September, the Great Temple was rebuilt, with sixty thousand people participating in the construction.

古文：是岁，匈奴都督大豆得一育鞠等复帅种落万一千五百口来降。
现代文：这一年，匈奴都督大豆得一育鞠等人又率领其种族部落一万一千五百人投降了晋。
English: In the same year, the Xiongnu governor, Soybean, led 11,500 members of his ethnic tribe to surrender to Jin.

古文：春，正月，壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：太康九年春季，正月，壬申朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Taikang, the first month of the year, Jinshen New Year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：夏，六月，庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，六月，庚子朔，出现日食。
English: Summer, June, Geng Zi Shuo, solar eclipse.

古文：郡国三十三大旱。
现代文：有三十三个郡国大旱。
English: Thirty-three counties are experiencing drought conditions.

古文：秋，八月，壬子；星陨如雨。
现代文：秋季，八月，壬子，星星像下雨似的坠落下来。
English: In autumn, in August, in Renzi, the stars fall like rain.

古文：地震。
现代文：发生了地震。
English: An earthquake.

