古文：○徽宗二四年春正月庚午朔，改熙河兰会路为熙河兰湟路。丙戌，筑溪哥城。
现代文：崇宁四年春正月初一，改熙河兰会路为熙河兰惶路。十七日，修筑溪哥城。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the spring of Chongning, the Hehe Lanhui Road was changed to the Hehe Lanfen Road. On the 17th, the construction of the Hehe Lanfen City began.

古文：壬辰，诏察诸路监司贪虐者论其罪。
现代文：二十三日，下诏察举各路监司贪赃暴虐的人，按规定予以处罚。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued to the supervisors of all roads to punish those who were corrupt and violent in accordance with the regulations.

古文：丙申，诏京畿路改置转运使、提点刑狱官。
现代文：二十七日，下诏京瓷路改置转运使、提点刑狱官。
English: On the 27th, it was announced that Kyocera Road would be converted into a transfer station and a detention center.

古文：蔡卞罢。
现代文：蔡卞被罢免。
English: Tsai Ing-wen was removed from office.

古文：立武学法。
现代文：确立武学法。
English: Martial law was established.

古文：丁酉，秦凤蕃落献邦、潘、叠三州。
现代文：二十八日，秦凤蕃族部落献出邦、潘、叠三州。
English: On the 28th, the Qin, Feng and Qiang tribes presented the three states of Bang, Pan and Yaxu.

古文：以内侍童贯为熙河兰湟、秦凤路经略安抚制置使。
现代文：任命童贯为熙河兰惶、秦凤路经略安抚制置使。
English: Tong Run was appointed as the special envoy of He He Lanpan and Qin Feng Lu Jing as the special envoy of appeasement.

古文：二月乙巳，筑御谋城。
现代文：二月初六，修筑御谋城。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, the construction of Omashiro began.

古文：己酉，置亲卫、勋卫、翊卫郎、中郎等官，以勋戚近臣之兄弟子孙有官者试充。
现代文：初十，设置亲卫勋卫诩卫郎官、中郎官等，委任勋戚近臣的兄弟子孙有官衔的人充任。
English: In the 10th year of the Heian period, the Imperial Guards, the Guards of the Imperial Family, the Guardians of the Imperial Family, the Middle Guardians, etc. were established, and the brothers and descendants of the close relatives of the Imperial Family and the courtiers with official ranks were appointed to fill the posts.

古文：甲寅，以张康国知枢密院事，兵部尚书刘逵同知枢密院事，吏部尚书何执中为尚书左丞。
现代文：十五日，任命张康国为知枢密院事，兵部尚书刘连为同知枢密院事，吏部尚书何执中为尚书左承。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Kangguo was appointed as the first secretary of the Privy Council, Liu Lian of the Ministry of Military Affairs was appointed as the second secretary of the Privy Council, and He Xingzhong of the Ministry of Civil Affairs was appointed as the second secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：乙卯，班方田法。
现代文：十六日，颁布方田法。
English: On the 16th, the Fangda Law was promulgated.

古文：庚申，诏西边用兵能招纳羌人者，与斩级同赏。
现代文：二十一日，下诏西部边境用兵能够招纳羌人的人与斩杀敌人首级一样奖赏。
English: On the 21st, it was announced that soldiers on the western border who were able to recruit soldiers would receive the same reward as those who decapitated the enemy.

古文：壬戌，升赵州为庆源军。
现代文：二十三日，升赵州为庆源军。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Zhou was promoted to the Qingyuan Army.

古文：甲子，雨雹。
现代文：二十五日，降冰雹。
English: On the 29th, hail fell.

古文：乙丑，改三卫郎为侍郎。
现代文：二十六日，改三卫郎为侍郎。
English: On the 26th, he was changed to a waiter.

古文：闰月壬申，复元丰铨试断按法。
现代文：闰二月初四，恢复实行元丰锉试断按法。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the leap year, the implementation of the Yuanfeng trial was resumed according to the law.

古文：令州县仿尚书六曹分六案。
现代文：命令州县政府仿照尚书六曹分置六案。
English: Ordered the state and county governments to follow the example of Shangshu's six points and six cases.

古文：甲申，置陕西、河东、河北、京西监，铸当二夹锡铁钱。
现代文：十六日，设置陕西、河东、河北、京西钱监，铸造当二夹锡铁钱。
English: On the 16th, the money supervisors of Shaanxi, Hedong, Hebei and West Beijing were set up, and the two-clamp tin iron money was minted.

古文：己丑，御端门，受赵怀德降，授感德军节度使，封安化郡王。
现代文：二十一日，到端门接受赵怀德投降，授给他为成德军节度使，封为安化郡王。
English: On the twenty-first day, he went to the front gate to accept Zhao Huide's surrender and awarded him the title of King of Anhua County as the German army's envoy.

古文：壬辰，曲赦熙河兰湟路。
现代文：二十四日，因特殊情况赦免熙河兰惶路。
English: On the 24th, due to special circumstances, He He Lan Gan Road was pardoned.

古文：三月壬寅，置青海马监。
现代文：三月初五，设置青海马监。
English: On March 5th, the Qinghai Equestrian Supervision Bureau was set up.

古文：甲辰，以赵挺之为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：初七，任命赵挺之为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Zhao Tingling was appointed as the junior high school secretary and the junior high school secretary.

古文：丙午，诏建王口砦为怀远军。
现代文：初九，下诏修筑王口寨为怀远军。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the emperor issued an edict to build Wangkou Village for the Huaiyuan Army.

古文：庚戌，令吕惠卿致仕。
现代文：十三日，命令吕惠卿退休。
English: On the 13th, he ordered Lü Huiqing to retire.

古文：戊午，复银州。
现代文：二十一日，收复银州。
English: On the 21st, Yinzhou was recaptured.

古文：乙丑，诏州县属乡聚徒教授者，非经书、子、史毋习。
现代文：二十八日，下诏州县所属乡，聚集士子教授学业的，不是经书、子、史范围内的书籍学问不许教学。
English: On the 28th, in the township belonging to Zhaozhou County, the scholars gathered to teach their studies, but they were not allowed to teach books within the scope of scriptures, children, and history.

古文：丁卯，牂牁、夜郎首领以地降。
现代文：三十日，粳、夜郎首领据地降宋。
English: On the 30th, the strongholds of the leaders of the Xing and the Yelang fell to the Song Dynasty.

古文：是月，夏人攻塞门砦。
现代文：这个月，夏军攻打塞门寨。
English: This month, Xia's army attacked Saimen Village.

古文：夏四月辛未，辽遣萧良来，为夏人求还侵地及退兵。
现代文：夏四月初四，辽朝派遣萧良来，为夏国请求归还侵占的土地以及退兵事宜。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：戊寅，夏人攻临宗砦。
现代文：十一日，夏军攻打临宗寨。
English: On the 11th day, Xia's army attacked Linzongzhai.

古文：辛巳，诏诸路走马承受毋得预军政及边事。
现代文：十四日，下诏各路走马承受官不得参与决定军政要事及边防大事。
English: On the 14th, it was decreed that subordinate officers should not participate in the decision of military and political affairs and border defense affairs.

古文：己丑，夏人寇顺宁砦，鄜延第二副将刘延庆击破之；复攻湟州北蕃市城，知州辛叔献等击却之。
现代文：二十二日，夏军攻打顺宁寨。延第二副将刘延庆打败夏军；夏军又攻打惶州北面的蕃市城，知州辛叔献等率军打退夏军。
English: On the 22nd, Xia's army attacked Shuningzhai. Liu Yanqing, the second vice-general of Yan, defeated Xia's army; Xia's army also attacked the city of Handan in the north of Panzhou, and the army led by Chizhou Xinxiu Xian and others drove back Xia's army.

古文：五月戊申，除党人父兄子弟之禁。
现代文：五月十二日，废除对元党人父兄子弟限制的命令。
English: On May 12th, the order to restrict former Party members and their children was abolished.

古文：壬子，遣林摅报聘于辽。
现代文：十六日，派遣林滤回访辽朝。
English: On the 16th, Lin Yiling was sent back to visit the Liao Dynasty.

古文：赐张继先号虚静先生。
现代文：赐给张继先虚靖先生的称号。
English: Zhang Jixian was given the title of Mr. Deception.

古文：癸丑，罢转运司检察钩考法。
现代文：十七日，罢除转运司检察钩考法。
English: On the 17th, the inspection hook test method of the Forwarding Division was abolished.

古文：辛酉，命官分部决狱。
现代文：二十五日，命令官员到各地处理狱讼案件。
English: On the 25th, officials were ordered to go to various regions to deal with prison cases.

古文：六月丙子，复解池盐。
现代文：六月十一日，占城来进贡。
English: On June 11, Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：占城入贡。
现代文：十二日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，虑囚。辛巳，罢陕西、河东力役。
现代文：十六日，废罢陕西、河东力役。
English: On the 16th, Shaanxi and Hedong Liyuan were abolished.

古文：甲申，曲赦熙河、陕西、河东、京西路。
现代文：十九日，因特殊情况赦免熙河、陕西、河东、京西路。
English: On the 19th, Heihe, Shaanxi, Hedong and West Beijing Roads were pardoned due to special circumstances.

古文：戊子，赵挺之罢。
现代文：二十三日，赵挺之被罢免。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Tingzhi was dismissed.

古文：秋七月丙申朔，罢三京国子监官，各置司业一员。
现代文：秋七月初一，罢除三京国子监官，分别设置司业一名。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the supervisors of the three provinces in Beijing were removed, and a department was set up separately.

古文：辛丑，置荧惑坛。
现代文：初六，设置荧惑坛。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, an amusement park is set up.

古文：置四辅郡，以颍昌府为南辅，襄邑县为东辅，郑州为西辅，澶州为北辅。
现代文：设置四辅郡，以颖昌府为南辅，襄邑县为东辅，郑州为西辅，擅州为北辅。
English: Set up four auxiliary counties, with Yingchang Prefecture as the south auxiliary, Xiangyi County as the east auxiliary, Zhengzhou as the west auxiliary, and Zhoushou as the north auxiliary.

古文：甲寅，诏夺元祐辅臣坟寺。
现代文：十九日，下诏削夺元辅臣的坟寺。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict was issued to seize the former aide-de-camp's cemetery.

古文：丁巳，还上书流人。
现代文：二十二日，放回因上书被流放的人。
English: On the 22nd, those who had been exiled because of the letter were allowed to return.

古文：户部尚书曾孝广坐钱帛皆阙，出知杭州。
现代文：户部尚书曾孝宽因钱帛都出现短缺，被调出朝廷，担任杭州知州。
English: The head of the household, Zeng Xiaoguang, was transferred out of the imperial court due to a shortage of money, and served as the leader of Hangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：八月戊辰，以德妃王氏为淑妃。
现代文：八月初四，封德妃王氏为淑妃。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the title of Princess Tak was changed to Princess Suk.

古文：庚午，以王、江、古州归顺，置提举溪洞官二员，改怀远军为平州。
现代文：初六，因王、江、古州归顺朝廷，设置提举溪洞官二名，改怀远军为平州。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because Wang, Jiang and Guzhou surrendered to the imperial court, two officials of Xidong were promoted and the Huaiyuan Army was changed to Pingzhou.

古文：丙子，以东辅为拱州。
现代文：十二日，以东辅为拱州。
English: On the 12th, Dongfu was designated as the capital of Gongzhou.

古文：甲申，奠九鼎于九成宫。
现代文：二十日，把九鼎安放在九成宫。
English: On the 20th, Jiuding was placed in Jiucheng Palace.

古文：乙酉，诣宫酌献。
现代文：二十一日，到宫中设酒食祭祀。
English: On the twenty-first day, they went to the palace to hold a wine and food sacrifice.

古文：辛卯，赐新乐名《大晟》，置府建官。
现代文：二十七日，赐新乐名称为伏昆，置府建官。
English: On the 27th, the name of the new music was given as "Fukun" and the government was established.

古文：壬辰，遣刘正夫使辽。
现代文：二十八日，派遣刘正夫出使辽国。
English: On the 28th, Liu Zhengfu was dispatched to Liaoning Province.

古文：九月己亥，赦天下。
现代文：九月初五，赦免全国。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the amnesty was extended to the whole country.

古文：乙巳，诏元祐人贬谪者以次徙近地，惟不得至畿辅。
现代文：十一日，下诏元党人被贬滴者按照次序迁移到靠近内地的地区，但不得到京城附近地区。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the former party members who were demoted according to the order were relocated to areas close to the mainland, but they did not get the areas near the capital.

古文：诏京畿、三路保甲并于农隙时教阅。
现代文：下诏京瓷、三路保甲都要在农闲时节进行教阅。
English: The following edicts of the Kyocera and the Three-Way Guarantee are to be read during the off-peak season.

古文：乙卯，赐上舍生三十五人及第。
现代文：二十一日，赐上舍生三十五人进士及第。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, thirty-five people were conferred the title of Shosho and promoted to Shinshi and Dai.

古文：丙辰，诏自今非宰臣毋得除特进。
现代文：二十二日，下诏从今以后不是宰臣不得授给特进一职。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: From now on, if you are not a vice-minister, you cannot be given a special promotion.

古文：冬十月，自七月雨，至是月不止。
现代文：冬十月，从七月开始下雨，到这个月仍不停止。
English: Winter in October, it started raining in July and hasn't stopped this month.

古文：甲申，以左、右司所编绍圣、元符以来申明断例班天下，刑名例班刑部、大理司。
现代文：二十日，把左右司所编辑的绍圣、元符以来的申明断例向全国颁布，刑名例向刑部、大理司颁布。
English: On the 20th, it promulgated to the whole country the cases of affirmation and sentence since Shosheng and Yuanfu edited by the Left and Right Departments, and promulgated the cases of punishment to the Criminal Law Department and the Justice Department.

古文：丁亥，升武冈县为军。
现代文：二十三日，升武冈县为军。
English: On the 23rd, he was promoted to the army in Wookang County.

古文：戊子，诏上书进士未获者，限百日自陈免罪。
现代文：二十四日，下诏上书进士没有治罪的限定在一百天之内自己陈述，予以免罪。
English: On the 24th, the magistrate issued the following edict, stating that there was no limit to the punishment of the criminal, and that he had to make a statement within 100 days to be exonerated.

古文：壬辰，日中有黑子。
现代文：二十八日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the 28th, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：十一月戊戌，安定郡王世雍薨。
现代文：十一月初四，安定郡王赵世雄逝世。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of November, Zhao Shixiong, the king of Anning County, passed away.

古文：丙辰，置诸路提举学事官。
现代文：二十二日，设置各路提举学事官。
English: On the 22nd, the system of nominating academic officials was set up.

古文：己未，章惇卒。
现代文：二十五日，章去世。
English: On the 25th, Zhang passed away.

古文：十二月癸酉，升拱州为保庆军。
现代文：十二月初十，升拱州为保庆军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of December, Shengggzhou was taken by the Baoqing Army.

古文：甲申，分平州置允州、格州。
现代文：二十一日，把平州划分为允州、格州。
English: On the 21st, Pingzhou was divided into Yongzhou and Gezhou.

古文：是岁，苏、湖、秀三州水，赐乏食者粟。
现代文：这一年，苏、湖、秀三州发生水灾，赐给缺乏粮食吃的人粟。
English: In the same year, floods occurred in the three prefectures of Suzhou, Hubei and Xiuzhou, and millet was given to people who lacked food.

古文：泰州禾生鲁。
现代文：泰州稻自生。
English: Taizhou rice is self-grown.

古文：五年春正月戊戌，彗出西方，其长竟天。
现代文：崇宁五年春正月初五，彗星出现在西方，历时一整天。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the fifth year of the spring of Chongning, the comet appeared in the west and lasted for a whole day.

古文：庚子，复置江、湖、淮、浙常平都仓。
现代文：初七，重新设置江、湖、淮、浙常平都仓。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Jiang, Hu, Huai, and Zhejiang Changping were re-established.

古文：甲辰，以吴居厚为门下侍郎，刘逵为中书侍郎。
现代文：十一日，任命吴居厚为门下侍郎，刘连为中书侍郎。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wu Ju Hou was appointed as a junior attendant, and Liu Lian was appointed as a junior attendant.

古文：乙巳，以星变，避殿损膳，诏求直言阙失。
现代文：十二日，因为星变不上殿，减少饮食，下诏访求直言缺政。
English: On the 12th, because Xingwen did not go to the palace and reduced his diet, he made a visit to Zhao Zhao to ask for a lack of politics.

古文：毁《元祐党人碑》。
现代文：毁掉元党人石豁。
English: Destroy the former party member Shi Hao.

古文：复谪者仕籍，自今言者勿复弹纠。
现代文：恢复被贬滴者的仕籍，从今以后言者不要再弹勃了。
English: Restore the demeaned person's style, and from now on, the speaker should not play again.

古文：丁未，太白昼见，赦天下，除党人一切之禁。
现代文：十四日，太白星白天出现，赦免天下，废除元党人的禁令。
English: On the 14th, Taibai Xing appeared in the daytime, pardoned the world, and abolished the ban on former party members.

古文：权罢方田。
现代文：暂且罢除方田法。
English: For the time being, the "Honda Law" has been abolished.

古文：戊申，诏侍从官奏封事。
现代文：十五日，下诏侍从官奏上密封的章奏。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the sealed chapter was played.

古文：己酉，罢诸州岁贡供奉物。
现代文：十六日，罢除各州岁贡供奉物。
English: On the 16th, the New Year's tribute offerings from each state were cancelled.

古文：庚戌，诏崇宁以来左降者，各以存殁稍复其官，尽还诸徙者。
现代文：十七日，下诏：崇宁以来贬滴降官者，分别视其存活或去世的情况，恢复他们的官职，所有流徙者全部归还。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Those who had been demoted since Chongning, depending on whether they were alive or dead, would resume their official positions, and all those who had been exiled would be returned.

古文：辛亥，御殿复膳。
现代文：十八日，开始上殿听政，恢复饮食。
English: On the 18th, he began to go to the palace to listen to the government and resume his diet.

古文：壬子，罢圜土法。
现代文：十九日，罢除监狱法。
English: On the 19th, the prison law was repealed.

古文：丁巳，罢书、画、算、医四学。
现代文：二十四日，罢除书、画、算、医四学。
English: On the 24th, the four disciplines of calligraphy, painting, arithmetic and medicine were abolished.

古文：壬戌，复书、画、算学。
现代文：二十九日，恢复书、画、算学。
English: On the 29th, they resumed reading, painting, and arithmetic.

古文：二月甲子朔，诏监司条奏民间疾苦。
现代文：二月初一，下诏监司陈述上奏民间疾苦。
English: On the first day of February, the following statement by the overseer of the imperial edict mentioned the hardships of the people.

古文：丙寅，蔡京罢为开府仪同三司、中太一宫使。
现代文：初三，蔡京罢为开府仪同三司、中太一宫使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Cai Jing became an envoy of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi and Zhongtai Yijing.

古文：以观文殿大学士赵挺之为特进、尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：任命观文殿大学士赵挺之为特进、尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: He appointed Zhao Tingxing, a scholar of the University of the Confucian Academy of Literature, as a special envoy, and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man as well as the junior secretary.

古文：庚午，诏翰林学士、两省官及馆阁自今并除进士出身人。
现代文：初七，下诏翰林学士、两省官、馆阁从今以后都授给进士出身。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, the title of Hanlin Scholar, the title of two provincial officials, and the title of pavilion will be awarded to students from now on.

古文：壬申，省内外冗官，罢医官兼宫观者。
现代文：初九，裁减朝廷内外冗官，罢除医官兼任宫观使的人。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, redundant officials both inside and outside the imperial court were reduced, and those who were medical officers and court observers were dismissed.

古文：蒲甘国入贡。
现代文：蒲甘国来进贡。
English: Bagan comes to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，以前后所降御笔手诏模印成册，班之中外。
现代文：十四日，把前后所降御笔手诏模印成册，向朝廷内外颁布。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict was printed in a book and promulgated both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：州县不遵奉者，监司按劾，监司推行不尽者，诸司互察之。
现代文：州县不遵从照办者监司负责按察弹勃，监司察访不到的地方，各部门相互检察举报。
English: If the state or county fails to comply with the operator, the supervision department is responsible for inspecting the explosion. If the supervision department cannot inspect the place, the departments shall inspect and report to each other.

古文：三月丙申，诏星变已消，罢求直言。
现代文：三月初四，下诏星变已经消失，罢求直言。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, the star change has disappeared, so please speak frankly.

古文：辛丑，改威德军为石堡砦。
现代文：初九，改威德军为石堡寨。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the German army was transformed into a stone fortress.

古文：封眉州防御使世福为安定郡王。
现代文：封眉州防御史赵世福为安定郡王。
English: Zhao Shifu, the defense historian of Fenmei County, is the king of Ding'an County.

古文：癸卯，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：十一日，到集英殿策试进士。
English: On the 11th day, he went to Shueiden to make a plan to enter the priesthood.

古文：丁未，罢诸州武学。
现代文：十五日，罢除各州武学。
English: On the 15th, martial arts schools in all prefectures were abolished.

古文：乙卯，废银州为银川城。
现代文：二十三日，废银州为银川城。
English: On the 23rd, the abandoned Yinzhou became Yinchuan City.

古文：丙辰，蔡王似薨。
现代文：二十四日，蔡王赵似逝世。
English: On the 24th, Cai Wang Zhao Xi passed away.

古文：己未，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身六百七十一人。
现代文：二十七日，赐礼部奏名进士及第出身六百七十一人。
English: On the 27th, he bestowed the title of "Honorary Conductor" and the rank of "671st-Born" to the members of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：夏四月丁丑，停免两浙水灾州郡夏税。
现代文：夏四月十六日，停止免除两浙水灾州郡夏税。
English: On April 16, the summer tax exemption for the two flood-stricken counties in Zhejiang Province was suspended.

古文：五月丁未，班《纪元历》。
现代文：五月十六日，颁布馆己元历。
English: On May 16th, the promulgation hall of the original calendar was built.

古文：辛亥，封子栩为鲁国公。
现代文：二十日，封儿子赵栩为鲁国公。
English: On the 20th, Fong's son, Zhao Tuo, became the Prince of Lu.

古文：乙卯，罢辟举，尽复元丰选法。
现代文：二十四日，罢除辟举，完全恢复元丰选举法。
English: On the 24th, the Yuanfeng Election Law was revoked and completely restored.

古文：六月癸亥，立诸路监司互察法，庇匿不举者罪之，仍令御史台纠劾。
现代文：六月初三，确立各路监司互相察访办法，庇护隐匿不举报者治罪，仍命令御史台纠察弹勃。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, a mutual inspection method was established for the supervisors of various roads, and the protection and concealment of whistleblowers were not criminalized, but the historical station was still ordered to picket and fire.

古文：改格州为从州。
现代文：改格州为从州。
English: Reclassify the state as a dependent state.

古文：甲子，诏求隐逸之士，令监司审核保奏，其缘私者，御史察之。
现代文：初四，下诏访求隐逸之士，命令监司审查考核保奏，其中有询私舞弊者御史台察访。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, he issued an edict to pay a visit to those who had absconded, and ordered the Supervision Department to review the assessment and guarantee of performance, including a visit to the History Channel to investigate those who had committed fraud.

古文：丁卯，诏辅臣条具东南守备策。
现代文：初七，下诏辅臣陈述东南守备策略。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Vice-Minister Zhao made a report on the southeast defense strategy.

古文：壬申，虑囚。
现代文：十二日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 12th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：秋七月庚寅朔，日当食不亏。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食没有出现。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, there was no solar eclipse.

古文：壬寅，诏改明年元。
现代文：十三日，下诏明年改元。
English: On the 13th, it was announced that the yuan would be changed next year.

古文：九月辛丑，河南府嘉禾与芝草同本生。
现代文：九月十三日，河南府嘉禾与芝草同根而生。
English: On September 13th, Jiahua in Henan Province was born from the same root as the turfgrass.

古文：冬十月己卯，升澶州为开德府。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，升擅州为开德府。
English: In winter, on October 21, Shoshu was upgraded to Kide Prefecture.

古文：庚辰，降德音于开德府：减囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十二日，向开德府颁布德音文告，囚犯减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 22nd, a German-language announcement was issued to Kade Prefecture, and the prisoner was given a first-class reduction of his sentence and released from prison.

古文：十一月辛卯，陈王佖薨。
现代文：十一月初四，陈王赵泌逝世。
English: On early November 4th, Chen Wang Zhaoxu passed away.

古文：乙巳，诏立武士贡法。
现代文：十八日，下诏立武士贡法。
English: On the 18th, the Samurai Tribute Law was promulgated.

古文：辛亥，并京畿提刑入转运司。
现代文：二十四日，京瓷提刑并人转运司。
English: On the 24th, Kyocera was fined and transferred to the Transportation Division.

古文：十二月戊午朔，日当食不亏，群臣称贺。
现代文：十二月初一，日食没有出现，大臣们称赞庆贺。
English: On the first day of December, the solar eclipse did not appear, and the ministers praised the celebration.

古文：己未，刘逵罢。
现代文：初二，刘连被罢免。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Liu Lian was dismissed.

古文：壬戌，诏臣僚休日请对，特御便殿。
现代文：初五，下诏臣僚休息时间请对，特到便殿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, please make sure that the rest time of the ministers is correct, and go to the toilet hall.

古文：己巳，诏监司按事，有怀奸挟情不尽实者，流窜不叙。
现代文：十二日，下诏：监司按察事情，有怀奸挟情不尊重事实的，流放不再录用。
English: On the twelfth day, the following edict was issued: the supervising director shall investigate the matter, and if there is treachery and blackmail and does not respect the facts, the banishment will no longer be hired.

古文：是岁，广西黎洞韦晏闹等内附。
现代文：这一年，广西黎洞韦晏闹等内附朝廷。
English: In that year, Lidong, Guangxi and other provinces were annexed by the imperial court.

古文：大观元年春正月戊子朔，赦天下。
现代文：大观元年春正月初一，赦免全国。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year, the whole country was pardoned.

古文：甲午，以蔡京为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：初七，任命蔡京为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he appointed Cai Jing as Shangshu's left-hand servant and subordinate attendant.

古文：戊戌，幸兴德禅院。
现代文：十一日，到兴德禅院。
English: On the 11th day, I arrived at Xingde Zen Temple.

古文：复废官。
现代文：恢复废官。
English: The reinstatement of dismissed officials.

古文：庚子，复置议礼局于尚书省。甘露降于帝鼎内，群臣称贺。
现代文：十三日，重新在尚书省设置议礼局。甘露降到皇帝大鼎内，大臣们称赞庆贺。
English: On the 13th, the Bureau of Protocol was re-established in Shangshu Province. When the nectar was lowered to the Emperor's Great Throne, the ministers praised the celebration.

古文：壬寅，吴居厚罢。
现代文：十五日，吴居厚被罢免。
English: On the 15th, Wu Ju Hou was removed from office.

古文：戊申，进封卫王俣为魏王，定王偲为邓王。
现代文：二十一日，进封卫王赵误为魏王、定王赵为邓王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhao, the Wei king of Jinfu, was mistaken for the Wei king, and Zhao, the Ding king, was mistaken for the Deng king.

古文：壬子，以何执中为中书侍郎，邓洵武为尚书左丞，户部尚书梁子美为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十五日，任命何执中为中书侍郎，邓询武为尚书左承，户部尚书梁子美为尚书右承。
English: On the 25th, He Xingzhong was appointed as the middle secretary, Deng Xuanwu as the left successor of Shangshu, and the head of the household, Shangshu Liang Zi Mei, as the right successor of Shangshu.

古文：乙卯，封仲损为南康郡王，仲御为汝南郡王。
现代文：二十八日，封赵仲损为南康郡王，赵仲御为汝南郡王。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Zhongzai was named the king of Nankang County, and Zhao Zhongyou was named the king of Runan County.

古文：二月壬戌，以向宗回为开府仪同三司，徙封安康郡王。
现代文：二月初五，任命向宗回为开府仪同三司，迁封为安康郡王。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, he was appointed to the 3rd Division of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and moved to Ankang County.

古文：甲子，以黎洞纳土，曲赦广西。
现代文：初七，因黎洞纳土依附，特赦免广西。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Guangxi was specially pardoned for its dependence on Lidong.

古文：乙亥，复医学。
现代文：十八日，恢复医学。
English: On the 18th, he resumed medicine.

古文：己卯，复行方田。
现代文：二十二日，重新实行方田法。
English: On the 22nd, the Fangda Law was reintroduced.

古文：丙戌，以平昌郡君韦氏为才人。
现代文：二十九日，封平昌郡君韦氏为才人。
English: On the 29th, Mr. Junwei of Pyeongchang County was honored as a talented person.

古文：三月丁酉，赵挺之罢。
现代文：三月十一日，赵挺之被罢免。
English: On March 11, Zhao Tingzhi was dismissed.

古文：以何执中为门下侍郎，邓洵武为中书侍郎，梁子美为尚书左丞，吏部尚书朱谔为右丞。
现代文：任命何执中为门下侍郎，邓询武为中书侍郎，梁子美为尚书左承，吏部尚书朱愕为尚书右承。
English: He appointed He Jianzhong as his junior attendant, Deng Xuanwu as the junior attendant, Liang Zibi as the left successor of Shangshu, and Li Zubei as the right successor of Shangshu.

古文：甲辰，立八行取士科。
现代文：十八日，确立八行取士科。
English: On the 18th, he established the eight-line swordsmanship course.

古文：癸丑，赵挺之卒。
现代文：二十七日，赵挺之去世。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Tingzhi passed away.

古文：夏四月乙丑，以淑妃王氏为贵妃。
现代文：夏四月初九，命淑妃王氏为贵妃。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, the life of Queen Su was crowned.

古文：五月己丑，封子棫为杨国公。
现代文：五月初四，封儿子赵域为扬国公。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, Zhao Wei, the son of Feng, became Yang Guoguo.

古文：朝散郎吴储、承议郎吴侔坐与妖人张怀素谋反，伏诛。
现代文：朝散郎吴储、承议郎吴体因与妖人张怀素谋反获罪，被处以死刑。
English: Asosan's son, Wu Chu, and Choeji's son, Wu Tie, were found guilty of conspiring with the sorcerer, Zhang Huai, and sentenced to death.

古文：贬吕惠卿为祁州团练副使。
现代文：贬吕惠卿为祁州团练副使。
English: He demoted Lü Huiqing to the vice-envoy of the Bozhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：庚寅，邓洵武罢。
现代文：初五，邓询武被罢免。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Deng Xuanwu was dismissed.

古文：甲午，诏班新乐于天下。
现代文：初九，下诏向全国颁布新乐。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the emperor issued an edict to promulgate the new music to the whole country.

古文：癸卯，诏自今凡总一路及监司之任，勿以元祐学术及异意人充选。
现代文：十八日，下诏：自今以后凡是总管一路事务及监司的职任，不要选择元学术及不同意元学术的人担任。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: From now on, do not choose former scholars and those who do not agree with former scholars to hold the position of the general manager of the first road affairs and the supervisor.

古文：以安化蛮犯边，益兵赴广西讨之。
现代文：因安化蛮犯攻边境，增兵赴广西征讨。
English: Due to the barbarians of Anhua attacking the border, more soldiers went to Guangxi to fight.

古文：乙巳，子构生。
现代文：二十日，儿子赵构出生。
English: On the 20th, her son Zhao Jie was born.

古文：六月己未，以梁子美为中书侍郎。
现代文：六月初四，任命梁子美为中书侍郎。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, Yang Zimi was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：壬戌，诏景灵宫建僖祖殿室。
现代文：初七，下诏景灵宫建造嘻祖殿室。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, He Zuo's palace was built in Jingling Palace.

古文：甲子，以黎人地为庭、孚二州。
现代文：初九，以黎人地设为庭州、孚州。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, the Li people's land was set up as the Garden State and Fuzhou.

古文：癸酉，赐上舍生二十九人及第。
现代文：十八日，赐上舍生二十九人及第。
English: On the eighteenth day, the twenty-nine disciples were ordained.

古文：乙亥，朱谔卒。
现代文：二十日，朱愕去世。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Sheng passed away.

古文：丁丑，虑囚。
现代文：二十二日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 22nd, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：甲申，以才人韦氏为婕妤。
现代文：二十九日，以才人韦氏为婕好。
English: On the 29th, Mr. Wei, a talented person, was selected as the winner.

古文：秋七月乙酉朔，伊、洛溢。
现代文：秋七月初一，伊、洛水溢出河道。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the rivers I and Luo overflowed.

古文：戊子，诏括天下漏丁。
现代文：初四，下诏搜刮全国漏丁。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the nationwide search for missing children will begin.

古文：壬寅，班祭服于州郡。
现代文：十八日，向州郡颁布祭服等级。
English: On the 18th, the level of sacrificial clothing was promulgated to the prefectures.

古文：乙巳，贤妃武氏薨。
现代文：二十一日，贤妃武氏逝世。
English: On the 21st, Princess Takeshi passed away.

古文：八月乙卯，曾布卒。
现代文：八月初二，曾布去世。
English: On August 2nd, Zeng Bu passed away.

古文：丁巳，封子构为蜀国公。
现代文：初四，封儿子赵构为蜀国公。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Jie, the son of Fu, became the prince of Shu.

古文：庚申，以户部尚书徐处仁为尚书右丞，吏部尚书林摅同知枢密院事。
现代文：初七，任命户部尚书徐处仁为尚书右承，吏部尚书林滤为同知枢密院事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he appointed the head of the household, Shangshu Xu Zhandren, to be the right successor of Shangshu, and the head of the personnel department, Shangshulin Filter, to be the head of the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：己巳，降德音于淮、海、吴、楚二十六州：减囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：十六日，向淮、海、吴、楚等二十六州颁降德音文告，减囚犯罪刑一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 16th, the 26 states, including Huai, Hai, Wu and Chu, were issued with the announcement of the abatement of capital punishment, the first-class reduction of criminal punishment, and the release of those sentenced to exile or less.

古文：九月庚寅，建显烈观于陈桥。
现代文：九月初七，在陈桥建置显烈观。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the lunar month, a monument was built in Chenqiao.

古文：己酉，加上僖祖谥曰立道肇基积德起功懿文宪武睿和至孝皇帝，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：二十六日，加上嘻祖溢号为立道肇基积德起功爵文宪武睿和至孝皇帝，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, with the addition of the He Zu Yue for the establishment of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation of the foundation

古文：庚戌，飨太庙。
现代文：二十七日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, a ritual is held at Taimyo.

古文：辛亥，大飨明堂，赦天下。
现代文：二十八日，在明堂举行大规模祭祀赦免全国。
English: On the 19th, the Great Memorial Hall was built, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：升永兴军为大都督府。
现代文：升永兴军为大都督府。
English: Sheng Yongxing's army became the largest governor's office.

古文：章綖坐冒法，窜海岛。
现代文：章缝因冒犯法令获罪，贬滴海岛。
English: Zhang Jie was found guilty of violating the law, disparaging the island.

古文：李景直等四人以上书观望罪，并编管岭南。
现代文：李景直等四人因上书观望罪，都被编管岭南。
English: Li Jingzhi and four other people were all sent to Lingnan for the crime of watching the letter.

古文：冬十月己未，诏士有才武绝伦者，岁贡准文士上舍上等法。
现代文：冬十月初七，下诏：士有才武双全，无与伦比的，按照文士上舍上等法每年进行选送。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, the following edict was issued: "The scholars are talented and well-equipped, and they are incomparable. They are selected and sent every year according to the method of selecting and sending the best scholars."

古文：辛酉，苏州地震。
现代文：初九，苏州发生地震。
English: In early September, an earthquake occurred in Suzhou.

古文：乙丑，贬张商英为安化军节度副使。
现代文：十三日，贬张商英为安化军节度副使。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Shangying was demoted to deputy envoy of the Anhua Army.

古文：己巳，大雨雹。
现代文：十七日，大规模降冰雹。
English: Come on, let's have a big hailstorm.

古文：闰月丙戌，以林摅为尚书左丞，资政殿学士郑居中同知枢密院事。
现代文：闰十月初四，任命林滤为尚书左承，资政殿学士郑居中为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th lunar month, Lin Yil was appointed as the heir of Shang Shulzu, and Zheng Juzhong, the scholar of the Palace of the Grand Vizier, was appointed as the Privy Councilor of Tongzhi.

古文：乙未，诏守令以户口为殿最。
现代文：十三日，下诏守令的考核以户口增长减少为好坏标准。
English: On the 13th, the assessment of the following edict was based on the decrease in household growth as a good or bad standard.

古文：升桂州为大都督府，镇州为靖海军节度。
现代文：升桂州为大都督府，镇州为靖海军节度。
English: Guizhou was elevated to the status of a major prefectural capital, and Zhenzhou was elevated to the status of a naval base.

古文：壬寅，禁用翡翠。
现代文：二十日，禁止使用翡翠。
English: On the 20th, the use of jade was banned.

古文：乙巳，升太原府、郓州并为大都督府。
现代文：二十三日，升太原府、军仔州并为大都督府。
English: On the 23rd, it was promoted to Taiyuan Prefecture, Wanzi Prefecture, and became the grand governor's office.

古文：十一月壬子朔，日有食之，蔡京等以不及所当食分，率群臣称贺。
现代文：十一月初一，日食，蔡京等因日食亏损不及应当到的程度，率大臣们称赞庆贺。
English: On the first day of November, the solar eclipse, Cai Jing and other eclipse losses were not as high as they should be, and the ministers praised the celebration.

古文：乙丑，置符宝郎。
现代文：十四日，设置符宝郎。
English: On the 14th, the treasure chests were set up.

古文：己巳，升瀛州为河间府、瀛海军节度。
现代文：十八日，升赢州为河间府、赢海军节度。
English: On the 18th, Sheng Yingzhou won the title of Hema Prefecture and won the Navy Festival.

古文：戊寅，南丹州刺史莫公佞降。
现代文：二十七日，南丹州刺史莫公债降宋。
English: On the 27th, the public debt of Nantan County was reduced to Song Dynasty.

古文：徐处仁以母忧去位。
现代文：徐处仁因母亲去世离职。
English: Xu Duanren resigned from his post due to his mother's death.

古文：十二月庚寅，以蔡京为太尉，进何执中以下官二等。
现代文：十二月初九，任命蔡京为太尉，何执中等官员进官二等。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, Cai Jing was appointed as a second lieutenant, and He Jie as a middle-ranking official was promoted to the second grade.

古文：癸巳，以江宁、荆南、扬、杭、越、洪、福、潭、广、桂并为帅府。
现代文：十二日，把江宁、荆南、扬、杭、越、洪、福、潭、广、桂都确定为帅府。
English: On the 12th, Jiangning, Jingnan, Yang, Hang, Yue, Hong, Fu, Tan, Guang, and Gui were all determined to be Shuaifu.

古文：置黔南路。
现代文：设置铃南路。
English: Set up the South Ring Road.

古文：丁酉，置开封府府学。
现代文：十六日，设置开封府府学。
English: On the 16th, Kaifeng Prefecture School was established.

古文：己亥，以婉容乔氏为贤妃。
现代文：十八日，以婉容乔氏为贤妃。
English: On the 18th, with Wan Rong Qiao as the wise wife.

古文：开潩河。
现代文：开凿报河。
English: Digging ditches for the river.

古文：是岁，秦凤旱。
现代文：这一年，秦凤发生早灾。
English: In the same year, an early disaster struck Qin and Feng.

古文：京东水，河溢，遣官振济，贷被水户租。
现代文：京东发生水灾，黄河水溢出河道，派官贩济灾民，免遭水灾民户田租。
English: Floods occurred in Jingdong, the Yellow River water overflowed the river, officials were sent to help the victims, and the flood victims were able to rent their homes.

古文：庐州雨豆。
现代文：庐州降豆。
English: Luzhou bean curd.

古文：汀、怀二州庆云见。
现代文：汀、怀二州出现象征吉样的五色云。
English: Five-colored clouds, symbolizing auspiciousness, appear in Ting and Huai states.

古文：乾宁军、同州黄河清。
现代文：乾宁军、同州段黄河清澈见底。
English: The Qianling Army reached the bottom of the Yellow River in the same prefecture.

古文：于阗、夏国入贡。
现代文：于闻、夏国来进贡。
English: Yu Wen and Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：涪州夷骆世叶、骆文贵内附。
现代文：涪州夷骆世华、骆文贵内附朝廷。
English: Luo Shihua and Luo Wengui, both from Zhangzhou, were attached to the imperial court.

古文：二年春正月壬子朔，受八宝于大庆殿，赦天下，文武进位一等。
现代文：大观二年春正月初一，在大庆殿接受八宝，赦免全国，文武官员进升一级。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Da Guan accepted the Eight Treasures in Daqing Hall, pardoned the whole country, and promoted the civil and military officials to the first level.

古文：蔡京表贺符瑞。
现代文：蔡京上表祝贺符瑞降临。
English: Cai Jing congratulated Fu Rui on his arrival.

古文：乙卯，以婉仪刘氏为德妃。
现代文：初四，以婉仪刘氏为德妃。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Wan Yi Liu will be the crown princess.

古文：己未，蔡京进太师；加童贯节度使，仍宣抚。
现代文：初八，蔡京进为太师；加童贯为节度使，仍担任宣抚使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Cai Jingjin became the Grand Master; Ga Tongran became the Secretary of the State Council, and still served as the Special Envoy of the State Council.

古文：庚申，进封魏王俣为燕王，邓王偲为越王，并为太尉；京兆郡王桓为定王，高密郡王楷为嘉王，并为司空；吴国公枢为建安郡王，冀国公杞为文安郡王，楚国公栩为安康郡王，杨国公棫为济阳郡王，蜀国公构为广平郡王，并为开府仪同三司。
现代文：初九，进封魏王赵误为燕王，邓王赵为越王，并为太尉；京兆郡王赵桓为定王，高密郡王赵楷为嘉王，并为司空；吴国公赵枢为建安郡王，冀国公赵祀为文安郡王，楚国公赵栩为安康郡王，扬国公赵域为济阳郡王，蜀国公赵构为广平郡王，并为开府仪同三司。
English: In the early 9th century, the Wei King Zhao mistakenly became the Yan King, the Deng King Zhao became the Yue King, and became the Taiyi; the King of Jingzhao County Zhao Huan became the Ding King, the King of Gaomi County Zhao Kai became the Jia King, and became the Siku; the King of Wu Province Zhao Zu became the King of Jian'an County, the King of JI Province Zhao Shi became the King of Wen'an County, the King of Chu Province Zhao Tu became the King of Ankang County, the King of Yang Province Zhao Gui became the King of Jiyang County, the King of Shu Province

古文：甲子，以神宗德妃宋氏、刘氏为淑妃，贤妃乔氏为德妃。
现代文：十三日，以神宗德妃宋氏、刘氏为淑妃，贤妃乔氏为德妃。
English: On the 13th, Shenzong Tefei Song and Liu were named Shufei, and Xianfei Qiao was named Tefei.

古文：庚午，徙封仲损为齐安郡王，仲御为华阳郡王，孝骞为晋康郡王，孝参为豫章郡王，并开府仪同三司；封仲增为信安郡王，仲忽为普安郡王，仲癸为咸安郡王，仲仆为同安郡王，仲糜为淮安郡王。
现代文：十九日，迁封赵仲损为齐安郡王，赵仲御为华阳郡王，赵孝赛为晋康郡王，赵孝参为豫章郡王，并为开府仪同三司。封赵仲增为信安郡王，赵仲忽为普安郡王，赵仲癸为咸安郡王，赵仲仆为同安郡王，赵仲糜为淮安郡王。
English: On the 19th, the fiefs of Zhao Zhongzai as the king of Qian County, Zhao Zhonggu as the king of Huayang County, Zhao Xiaosai as the king of Jinkang County, Zhao Xiaoshan as the king of Yuzhang County, and as the third secretary of Kaifu County, Zhao Zhongzang as the king of Xin'an County, Zhao Zhongwu as the king of Pu'an County, Zhao Zhongxun as the king of Xian'an County, Zhao Zhongbai as the king of Tong'an County, and Zhao Zhongyun as the king of Huai'an County were

古文：戊寅，徙封向宗回为汉东郡王，向宗良为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十七日，迁封向宗回为汉东郡王，向宗良为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 27th, the fiefs of Xiang Zonghui as the King of Hantong County and Xiang Zongliang as the Keifu Yi and Sanji were transferred.

古文：仲损薨。
现代文：赵仲损逝世。
English: Zhao Zhongzai passed away.

古文：河东、北盗起。
现代文：河东、北盗贼兴起。
English: The thieves from the east of the river and the north rise up.

古文：二月甲申，置诸州曹掾官。
现代文：二月初三，设置各州曹椽官。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Cao Yu'an was set up in each state.

古文：甲午，诏建徽猷阁，藏《哲宗御集》，置学士、直学士、待制官。
现代文：十三日，下诏修建徽酞阁，藏哲宗御集，设置学士、直学士、待制官。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued for the construction of Huiyuan Pavilion, the collection of Tibetan philosophers, and the establishment of baccalaureate, direct baccalaureate, and waiting officer.

古文：己亥，以安德军节度使钱景臻为开府仪同三司。
现代文：十八日，任命安德军节度使钱景臻为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the Andean Military Festival was appointed, and Qian Jing was appointed as the Kefu Yi and the three departments.

古文：庚戌，以婕妤韦氏为修容。
现代文：二十九日，以婕好韦氏为修容。
English: On the 29th, he underwent a face-lift to look more like Wei Zhou.

古文：三月庚申，班《金箓灵宝道场仪范》于天下。甲子，封子材为魏国公。
现代文：三月初十，向全国颁布金灵宝道场仪范。十四日，封儿子赵材为魏国公。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the ritual of the Jinling treasure dojo was promulgated to the whole country. On the 14th day, the son of Zhao Zai was appointed as Wei Guogong.

古文：乙亥，封子模为镇国公。
现代文：二十六日，封儿子赵模为镇国公。
English: On the 26th, Zhao Miao, the son of Feng, became the governor of the town.

古文：戊寅，赐上舍生十三人及第。
现代文：二十九日，赐上舍生十三人及第。
English: On the 29th, the 13th and last place was awarded.

古文：升乾宁军为清州。
现代文：升乾宁军为清州。
English: The Qianling army advanced to Qingzhou.

古文：诏监司岁举所部郡守二人、县令四人赴三省审察。
现代文：下诏监司每年推荐所管辖郡守二人，县令四人，前往三省审察。
English: Under the supervision of the overseer, two county governors and four county magistrates are recommended to go to the three provinces for inspection every year.

古文：夏四月甲辰，复洮州。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，恢复姚州。
English: On the 24th day of April, Yaozhou was restored.

古文：五月庚戌朔，日有食之。辛亥，虑囚。
现代文：五月初一，日食。初二，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the first day of May, the solar eclipse. On the second day of the month, the criminal status of prisoners is reported.

古文：以复洮州功，赐蔡京玉带，加童贯检校司空，仍宣抚。
现代文：因收复姚州功，赐给蔡京玉带，加童贯为检校司空，仍担任宣抚使。
English: Cai Jing was given a jade belt for his contribution to the recovery of Yaozhou, and Ga Tongran was appointed as the inspector of the school and still served as the envoy.

古文：甲寅，复诸路岁贡供奉物。
现代文：初五，恢复各路岁贡供奉物。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the offering of the New Year's tribute was resumed.

古文：壬戌，溪哥王子臧征扑哥降，复积石军。
现代文：十三日，溪哥王子减征扑哥投降，收复积石军。
English: On the 13th, Prince Kieko reduced the conscription, Pogo surrendered, and the Seki army was recovered.

古文：戊辰，诏官蔡京子孙一人，进执政官一等。
现代文：十九日，下诏授给蔡京子孙一人官职，执政官升官一级。
English: On the 19th, the next imperial edict awarded an official post to one of Cai Jing's descendants, and the consul was promoted to the first level.

古文：六月乙酉，以涪夷地为珍州。
现代文：六月初六，以涪夷地建为珍州。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month.

古文：甲午，以平夏城为怀德军。
现代文：十五日，以平夏城为怀德军。
English: On the 15th, the German army marched to Pingxia Town.

古文：乙未，以殿中六尚、算学、太官局、翰林仪鸾司皆隶六察。
现代文：十六日，把殿中六尚、算学、太官局、翰林仪莺司都划归六察。
English: On the 16th, the palace's six ministries, mathematics, the Office of the Grand Magistrate, and the Office of Hanlin, were all assigned to the Sixth Inspection.

古文：秋七月庚戌，罢建僖祖殿室。
现代文：秋七月初二，废罢建造嘻祖殿室。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the construction of the He Zu Hall was abandoned.

古文：乙卯，以婉容王氏为贤妃。
现代文：初七，以婉容王氏为贤妃。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Wanrong Wang will appear as the virtuous empress.

古文：八月辛巳，邢州河水溢，坏民庐舍，复被水者家。
现代文：八月初四，邢州河水溢出河道，毁坏百姓庐舍，免除遭水灾民户赋役。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth lunar month, the water of the Luzhou River overflowed the river channel, destroying people's houses, and exempting the flood-affected households from forced labor.

古文：丙申，中书侍郎梁子美罢知郓州。
现代文：十九日，中书侍郎梁子美罢为邪州知州。
English: On the 19th, Liang Zi Mei, a Chinese calligrapher, left for Yanzhou Chizhou.

古文：己亥，置保州敦宗院。
现代文：二十日，设置保州敦宗院。
English: On the 20th, Bozhou Dunsoin was established.

古文：九月辛亥，以林摅为中书侍郎，吏部尚书余深为尚书左丞。
现代文：九月初四，任命林滤为中书侍郎，吏部尚书余深为尚书左承。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Lin Yil was appointed as the attendant of Zhongshu, and Shangshu Yu Sheng as the successor of Shangshu Zuo.

古文：壬戌，贬向宗回为太子少保致仕。
现代文：十五日，贬向宗回为太子少保退休。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he was demoted to the position of prince junior protector and retired.

古文：壬申，封子植为吴国公。
现代文：二十五日，封儿子赵植为吴国公。
English: On the 25th, Fong's son Zhao Zhi became the Prince of Wu.

古文：癸酉，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：二十六日，皇后王氏逝世。
English: On the 26th, Empress Wang died.

古文：削向宗回官爵。
现代文：削夺向宗回官爵。
English: Take away the peerage of Emperor Zonghu.

古文：丙子，曲赦熙河兰湟、秦凤、永兴军路。
现代文：二十九日，因特殊情况赦免熙河兰惶、秦凤、永兴军路。
English: On the 29th, due to special circumstances, He He Lanchen, Qin Feng and Yongxing Junlu were pardoned.

古文：冬十一月丁未朔，太白昼见。
现代文：冬十一月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of November in winter, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：乙丑，上大行皇后谥曰靖和。
现代文：十九日，敬上大行皇后溢号为靖和。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Empress Dowager Jing Dajang ascended to the throne, and her posthumous name was Yasuko.

古文：十二月壬寅，陪葬靖和皇后于永裕陵。
现代文：十二月二十七日，把靖和皇后葬在永裕陵。
English: On December 27th, Jing and the empress were buried in Yongyu Mausoleum.

古文：是岁，同州黄河清。
现代文：这年，同州黄河段清澈见底。
English: This year, the Yellow River in the same state was crystal clear to the bottom.

古文：出宫女七十有七人。
现代文：放出宫女七十七人。
English: Seventy-seven maids of honour were released.

古文：于阗、夏国入贡。
现代文：于闻、夏国来进贡。
English: Yu Wen and Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：涪夷任应举、杨文贵，湖南徭杨再光内附。
现代文：涪陵任应举、杨文贵，湖南瑶杨再光内附朝廷。
English: Gong Ling Ren Yingzhuo, Yang Wengui, and Hunan Gong Yang Zeguang were all attached to the imperial court.

古文：三年春正月乙卯，祔靖和皇后神主于别庙。
现代文：大观三年正月初十，在别庙附祭靖和皇后神主。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Taikan era, the temple held a ceremony to enshrine Yasuko, the Empress deity.

古文：己未，减两京、河阳、郑州囚罪一等，民缘园陵役者蠲其赋。
现代文：十四日，两京、河阳、郑州囚犯减罪一等，民户为园陵服役者免除其赋。
English: On the 14th, prisoners in Beijing, Heyang and Zhengzhou received first-class reductions in their sentences, and private households were exempted from paying for those who served as gardeners.

古文：丁卯，以涪夷地为承州。
现代文：二十二日，以涪夷地建为承州。
English: On the 22nd, it was renamed as Chengzhou.

古文：甲戌，升湟州为向德军节度。
现代文：二十九日，升惶州为向德军节度。
English: On the 29th, Shengan Prefecture made a solemn offering to the German army.

古文：二月丙子朔，播州杨文贵纳土，以其地置遵义军。
现代文：二月初一，播州杨文贵纳土归顺，以其地设置遵义军。
English: On the first day of February, Banzhou Yang Wen Gui Na surrendered and set up the Zunyi Army in his place.

古文：丁丑，韩忠彦致仕。
现代文：初二，韩忠彦退休。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Han Tadahiko retired.

古文：三月丙午，立海商越界法。
现代文：三月初二，确立海商越界法。
English: On the second day of March, the Maritime Commerce Law was established.

古文：庚戌，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：初六，到集英殿策试进士。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, he went to Shueiden to prepare for his entrance exam.

古文：辛酉，诏四川郡守并选内地人任之。
现代文：十七日，下诏：四川郡守一律挑选内地人担任。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: All Sichuan county governors were to select mainlanders to serve.

古文：壬戌，并黔南入广西路。
现代文：十八日，黔南并人广西路。
English: On the 18th, the southern part of Hunan and Guangxi Road were merged.

古文：乙丑，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身六百八十五人。
现代文：二十一日，赐礼部奏名进士及第出身六百八十五人。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Ministry of Ceremonies gave awards to six hundred and eighty-five musicians.

古文：壬申，张康国卒。
现代文：二十八日，张康国去世。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Kanguo passed away.

古文：夏四月戊寅，林摅罢。
现代文：夏四月初四，林滤被罢免。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the fourth month of the summer, Lin Filter was dismissed.

古文：戊子，以淑妃刘氏为贵妃。
现代文：十四日，以淑妃刘氏为贵妃。
English: On the 14th, Liu Shu Fei was named the honorary consort.

古文：癸巳，以郑居中知枢密院事，吏部尚书管师仁同知枢密院事。
现代文：十九日，任命郑居中为知枢密院事，吏部尚书管师仁为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 19th, Zheng Juzhong was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and Shang Shujuan Shi Ren of the Personnel Department was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：癸卯，以余深为中书侍郎，兵部尚书薛昂为尚书左丞，工部尚书刘正夫为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十九日，任命余深为中书侍郎，兵部尚书薛昂为尚书左承，工部尚书刘正夫为尚书右承。
English: On the 29th, Yu Shen was appointed as the attendant of the middle secretary, the military secretary Xue Ang was appointed as the left successor of the secretary, and the industrial secretary Liu Zhengfu was appointed as the right successor of the secretary.

古文：五月乙巳朔，孟翊献所画卦象，谓宋将中微，宜更年号、改官名、变庶事以厌之。帝不乐，诏窜远方。
现代文：五月初一，孟诩献上所画卦象，说宋朝将中衰，应该更改年号，改官名，变更庶事来压住兆头，徽宗不高兴，下诏流放边远地区。
English: On the first day of May, Meng Jun presented the painted Gua Zong, saying that the Song Dynasty would be in decline, it should change the year, change the official name, and change the general affairs to suppress the signs, Huizong was not happy, and the lower edict was exiled to remote areas.

古文：丙辰，令辟雍宴用雅乐。
现代文：十二日，命令辟雍宴使用雅乐。
English: On the twelfth day, he ordered the use of classical music at the banquet.

古文：丁巳，虑囚。
现代文：十三日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 17th, Gaozhu sent a record of the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：戊辰，大雨雹。
现代文：二十四日，大规模降冰雹。
English: On the 24th, a large-scale hailstorm occurred.

古文：辛未，以德妃乔氏为贵妃。
现代文：二十七日，以德妃乔氏为贵妃。
English: On the 27th, Tefui Qiao was crowned empress.

古文：六月甲戌朔，诏修《乐书》。管师仁罢。
现代文：六月初一，下诏修撰冻扣。管师仁罢职。
English: On the first day of June, the following edict was revised and frozen. The superintendent resigned.

古文：丁丑，蔡京罢。
现代文：初四，蔡京被罢免。
English: On the fourth day of the new school year, Cai Jing was dismissed.

古文：辛巳，以何执中为特进、尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：初八，任命何执中为特进、尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: At the eighth year of junior high school, He Xingzhong was appointed as a special trainee, Shangshu's left-hand servant and a servant.

古文：以泸夷地为纯、滋二州。
现代文：以沪夷地建为纯州、滋州。
English: Huji was built as Chuzhou and Shizhou.

古文：庚寅，冀州河水溢。
现代文：十七日，冀州段黄河水溢出河道。
English: On the 17th, the Jizhou section of the Yellow River overflowed.

古文：秋七月丁未，诏谪籍人除元祐奸党及得罪宗庙外，余并录用。
现代文：秋七月初四，下诏：贬滴人中除元奸党及得罪朝廷者外，其余一律加以录用。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: Except for the former traitors and those who had offended the imperial court, all the others would be hired.

古文：丙辰，诏罢都提举茶事司，在京令户部、在外令转运司主之。
现代文：十三日，下诏废罢都提举茶事司，在京城里命令户部、在外的命令转运司主管。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the tea affairs department was raised in the capital, and the household department was ordered in the capital, and the director of the transportation department was ordered outside.

古文：八月乙酉，封子朴为雍国公。
现代文：八月十三日，封儿子赵朴为雍国公。
English: On August 13th, Zhao's son Zhao Pu became the Yong Guogong.

古文：己丑，嗣濮王宗汉薨。
现代文：十七日，嗣攫王赵宗汉逝世。
English: On the 17th, King Zhao Zonghan passed away.

古文：甲午，以仲增为开府仪同三司，封嗣濮王。
现代文：二十二日，任赵仲增为开府仪同三司，封为嗣攫王。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Zhongzheng was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, and was given the title of crown prince.

古文：丙申，升融州为清远军节度。
现代文：二十四日，升融州为清远军节度。
English: On the 24th, Sheng Rong Zhou became the Qingyuan Army Festival.

古文：己亥，韩忠彦薨。
现代文：二十七日，韩忠彦逝世。
English: On the 27th, Han Tadahiko passed away.

古文：九月癸丑，封子棣为徐国公。
现代文：九月十二日，封儿子赵棣为徐国公。
English: On September 12th, Zhao Yu, the son of Feng, became Xu Guogong.

古文：己未，赐天下州学藏书阁名 稽古 。
现代文：十八日，赐天下州学藏书阁名为 稽古 。
English: On the 18th, the State Library of the People's Republic of China was given the name "Rehearsal."

古文：冬十月癸巳，减六尚局供奉物。
现代文：冬十月二十二日，减免六尚局供奉物。
English: On the 22nd day of winter in October, the reduction and exemption of the offerings of the Six Dynasties Bureau came into effect.

古文：十一月丁未，诏算学以黄帝为先师，风后等八人配飨，巫咸等七十人从祀。
现代文：十一月初七，下诏算学以黄帝为先师，风后等八人配享，巫咸等七十人随从祭祀。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the following eight people, including Emperor Huangdi, attended the ceremony, and seventy people, including Emperor Wuxian, followed the ceremony.

古文：己巳，蔡京进封楚国公致仕，仍提举《哲宗实录》，朝朔望。
现代文：二十九日，蔡京进封楚国公退休，仍提举修撰哲宗实录，逢一日、十五日朝见皇上。
English: On the 29th, Cai Jingjin retired from the post of the Duke of Chu, but still proposed to compile a true record of Zhezong, and met with the emperor every morning on the 15th.

古文：十二月己亥，罢东南铸夹锡钱。
现代文：十二月二十九日，废罢东南铸造夹锡钱。
English: On December 29th, the Southeast Casting of Clamped Tin Coins was abolished.

古文：是岁，江、淮、荆、浙、福建旱，秦、凤、阶、成饥，发粟振之，蠲其赋。
现代文：这一年，江、淮、荆、浙、福建发生早灾。秦、凤、阶、成发生饥荒，调发粮食贩济灾民，免除其赋。
English: In this year, the early disasters occurred in Jiang, Huai, Jing, Zhejiang and Fujian, and the famine occurred in Qin, Feng, Jia and Cheng. Grain traders were dispatched to help the victims and were exempted from the tax.

古文：陕州、同州黄河清。
现代文：陕州、同州段黄河清澈见底。
English: In Shaanxi Province, the Yellow River in the same province is crystal clear.

古文：阇婆、占城、夏国入贡。
现代文：婆、占城、夏国来进贡。
English: Grandma, Zhancheng and Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：泸州夷王募弱内附。
现代文：沪州夷王募弱内附朝廷。
English: Huzhou Yi Wang Wei weakly annexed the imperial court.

古文：四年春正月癸卯，罢改铸当十钱。
现代文：大观四年春正月初四，废罢改铸当十钱。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the fourth year of the Great View, the abolition of the strike was changed to the casting of ten coins.

古文：辛酉，诏士庶拜僧者，论以大不恭。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：士庶有为僧者，以大不恭论处。
English: On the twenty-second day, the following edict was issued: If any of the off-duty soldiers were monks, they were to be treated with the greatest disdain.

古文：丁卯，夏国入贡。
现代文：二十八日，夏国来进贡。
English: On the 28th, Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：二月庚午朔，禁然顶、炼臂、刺血、断指。
现代文：二月初一，严禁燃顶、炼臂、刺血、断指。
English: On the first day of February, it is strictly forbidden to burn the top, clean the arm, prick the blood, and cut the finger.

古文：庚辰，罢京西钱监。
现代文：十一日，罢除京西钱监。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the West Beijing Money Supervisor was dismissed.

古文：甲申，诏自今以赏进秩者毋过中奉大夫。
现代文：十五日，下诏从今以后赏赐升官者不超过奉大夫。
English: On the fifteenth day, it was decreed that from now on, no one would be promoted beyond the rank of doctor.

古文：己丑，以余深为门下侍郎。资政殿学士张商英为中书侍郎，户部尚书侯蒙同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十一日，任命余深为门下侍郎，资政殿学士张商英为中书侍郎，户部尚书侯蒙为同知枢密院事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yu Sheng was appointed as a subordinate attendant, Zhang Shangying, a scholar of the House of Councillors, as a junior secretary, and Hube Shang Shuhong as a Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：壬辰，罢河东、河北、京东铸夹锡铁钱。
现代文：二十四日，罢除河东、河北、京东铸造夹锡铁钱。
English: On the 24th, the casting of pewter-clad iron coins in Hedong, Hebei and Jingdong was suspended.

古文：三月庚子，募饥民补禁卒。
现代文：三月初二，招募饥民补充禁军。
English: On the second day of March, the recruitment of starving people to supplement the forbidden army began.

古文：诏医学生并入太医局，算入太史局，书入翰林书艺局，画入翰林画图局，学官等并罢。
现代文：下诏：医学生员并人太医局，算学生员并人太史局，书学生员并人翰林书艺局，画学生并人翰林图画局，学官一律废罢。
English: The following edict: Medical students should join the Medical Bureau, Math students should join the History Bureau, Literature students should join the Literature and Art Bureau, Painting students should join the Painting and Art Bureau, and all academic officials should be abolished.

古文：甲寅，敕所在振恤流民。
现代文：十六日，命令各地负责贩济抚恤当地流民。
English: On the 16th, it ordered all regions to be responsible for providing subsidies to local displaced people.

古文：癸亥，诏：罪废人稍加甄叙，能安分守者，不俟满岁，各与叙进，以责来效。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：因罪废罢者稍加审别任用，能安分守纪者，不等期满分别予以任用升官，以观后效。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: Those who have been dismissed due to crime will be given a little extra examination and will not be appointed, and those who can be safe and keep discipline will be appointed and promoted separately at the end of the unequal period, with the effect of observation.

古文：丙寅，赐上舍生十五人及第。
现代文：二十八日，赐上舍生十五人及第。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, fifteen and a half sons were given to the emperor.

古文：戊辰，诏上书邪下等人可依无过人例，今后改官升任并免检举。
现代文：三十日，下诏：上书邪等人中的下等人可以按照没有过错官员的规定，今后改官升官一律免除检查推举。
English: On the 30th, the following edict was issued: In accordance with the regulations for officials who have not committed any wrongdoing, the lower-ranking officials among those who submitted the letter may be exempted from inspection and promotion in the future.

古文：夏四月己卯，班乐尺于天下。
现代文：夏四月十一日，向全国颁布乐尺。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, the musical ruler was promulgated to the whole country.

古文：癸未，蔡京上《哲宗实录》。
现代文：十五日，蔡京呈上哲宗实录。
English: On the 15th, Cai Jing presented a live recording of Shangzhezong.

古文：丙申，立感生帝坛。
现代文：二十八日，设立感生帝坛。
English: On the 28th, the Kansei Emperor's Altar was established.

古文：丁酉，诏修《哲宗史》。
现代文：二十九日，下诏修撰哲宗史。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Xiu compiled the history of the Zhe Sect.

古文：五月壬寅，停僧牒三年。
现代文：五月初四，停止度僧碟三年。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, he was suspended for three years.

古文：丁未，彗出奎、娄。
现代文：初九，彗星出现在奎宿、娄宿。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the comet appeared in Kuishuku and Shishuku.

古文：甲寅，立词学兼茂科。
现代文：十六日，设立词学兼茂科。
English: On the 16th, the Department of Ciology and the Department of Shigeru were established.

古文：丙辰，诏以彗见，避殿减膳，令侍从官直言指陈阙失。
现代文：十八日，下诏因彗星出现不上殿，减少饮食，命令侍从官直言朝政缺失。
English: On the 18th, due to the appearance of the comet, the emperor did not go to the palace, reduced the diet, and ordered the attendants to speak frankly about the lack of government.

古文：戊午，赦天下。
现代文：二十日，赦免全国。
English: At noon, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：壬戌，改广西黔南路为广南西路。
现代文：二十四日，改广西黔南路为广南西路。
English: On the 24th, Guangxi Minan Road was changed to Guangnan West Road.

古文：癸亥，治广西妄言拓地罪，追贬帅臣王祖道为昭信军节度副使。
现代文：二十五日，究治广西妄言拓地罪，追贬帅臣王祖道为昭信军节度副使。
English: On the 25th, he investigated the crime of making ground-breaking remarks in Guangxi and reprimanded the courtier Wang Zu Dao for being the deputy envoy of the Shao Xin Army.

古文：甲子，贬蔡京为太子少保。
现代文：二十六日，贬蔡京为太子少保。
English: On the 26th, Cai Jing was demoted to the position of Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：丙寅，余深罢。
现代文：二十八日，余深被罢免。
English: On the 28th, Yu Sheng was dismissed.

古文：六月庚午，御殿复膳。
现代文：六月初三，上殿听政，恢复饮食。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the upper court listened to the government and resumed eating and drinking.

古文：乙亥，以张商英为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：初八，任命张商英为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: In the eighth year of his junior high school, Zhang Shangying was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and the junior high school secretary.

古文：壬辰，复向宗回为开府仪同三司、汉东郡王。
现代文：二十五日，向宗回恢复为开府仪同三司、汉东郡王。
English: On the 25th, Xiang Zonghui was reinstated as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong and the king of Hantong County.

古文：乙未，虑囚。
现代文：二十八日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 28th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：丙申，薛昂罢。
现代文：二十九日，薛昂被罢免。
English: On the 29th, Xue Ang was removed from office.

古文：秋七月辛丑，复罢方田。
现代文：秋七月初四，又罢方田法。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, there will be another round of rice planting.

古文：戊申，封子咢为冀国公。
现代文：十一日，封儿子赵妖为冀国公。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhao You, the son of Fu, became the ruler of Ji Province.

古文：八月乙亥，以刘正夫为中书侍郎，侯蒙为尚书左丞，翰林学士承旨邓洵仁为尚书右丞。
现代文：八月初九，任命刘正夫为中书侍郎，侯蒙为尚书左承，翰林学士承旨邓询仁为尚书右承。
English: On the 9th day of August, Liu Zhengfu was appointed as the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, Hou Meng as the left successor of Chinese calligraphy, and Hanlin Baccalaureate Deng Yingren as the right successor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：戊寅，省内外冗官。
现代文：十二日，精减朝廷内外冗官。
English: On the 12th, redundant officials inside and outside the imperial court were purged.

古文：庚辰，以资政殿学士吴居厚为门下侍郎。
现代文：十四日，任命资政殿学士吴居厚为门下侍郎。
English: On the 14th, he appointed Wu Ju Hou, a scholar of the House of Councillors, as his chamberlain.

古文：丁亥，行内外学官选试法。
现代文：二十一日，颁行内外学官选试法。
English: On the twenty-first day, the method for selecting internal and external academic officials was promulgated.

古文：闰月辛丑，诏诸路事有不便于民者，监司条奏之。
现代文：闰八月初五，下诏：各路有不便于民的事情，监司陈述奏上。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, the following edict was issued: There are inconvenient things for the people on all roads, and the supervisor's statement was issued.

古文：癸卯，改陵井监为仙井监。
现代文：初七，改陵井监为仙井监。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, the position of the lingjing supervisor was changed to senjing supervisor.

古文：辛酉，诏戒朋党。
现代文：二十五日，下诏严禁朋党。
English: On the 25th, the edict was issued to strictly ban the crony party.

古文：以张阁知杭州，兼领花石纲。
现代文：任命张阁为知杭州，兼领花石纲。
English: Zhang Ge was appointed as the leader of Hangzhou, and also the leader of Huashi Gang.

古文：九月丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十月丁酉，立贵妃郑氏为皇后。
现代文：冬十月初二，立贵妃邓氏为皇后。
English: On the second day of the second month of October in winter, Guifei Deng was crowned empress.

古文：郑居中罢。
现代文：郑居中被罢免。
English: He was dismissed from Zhengju.

古文：戊戌，太白昼见。
现代文：初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Taibai Xing appeared during the day.

古文：以吴居厚知枢密院事。
现代文：任命吴居厚为知枢密院事。
English: Appointed Wu Ju Hou as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：十一月乙丑朔，朝景灵宫。
现代文：十一月初一，朝拜景灵宫。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, visit the Jingling Palace.

古文：丙寅，飨太庙。
现代文：初二，祭祀太庙。
English: On the second day of the school year, a ritual is held at Taimyo.

古文：丁卯，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，赦天下，改明年元。
现代文：初三，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国，明年改元。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the god Haotian will be sacrificed at the round mound, the whole country will be pardoned, and the era will be changed next year.

古文：丙戌，罢拱州为襄邑县。
现代文：二十二日，罢拱州为襄邑县。
English: On the 22nd, the strike-hit county was changed to Xiangyi County.

古文：十二月庚戌，改谥靖和皇后为惠恭。
现代文：十二月十六日，靖和皇后溢号改为惠恭。
English: On December 16, Empress Jinghe's posthumous name was changed to Huigong.

古文：是岁，夔州江水溢。
现代文：这一年，夔州段长江水溢出河道。
English: In that year, water overflowed from the Yangtze River in Zhangzhou.

古文：海水清。
现代文：海水清澈见底。
English: The water is crystal clear to the bottom.

古文：出宫女四百八十六人。
现代文：放出宫女四百八十六人。
English: Four hundred and eighty-six maids of honour were released.

古文：南丹州首领莫公晟内附。
现代文：南丹州首领莫公晨内附朝廷。
English: The leader of Nantan Province, Mokongchen, became a vassal of the imperial court.

古文：政和元年春正月己巳，以贤妃王氏为德妃。
现代文：政和元年春正月初六，以贤妃王氏为德妃。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of

古文：壬申，毁京师淫祠一千三十八区。
现代文：初九，毁掉京师淫祠一千零三十八区。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the 1,038th district of the Beijing Martyrs' Shrine was destroyed.

古文：戊寅，封子共为定国公。
现代文：十五日，封儿子越供为定国公。
English: On the fifteenth day, Fong's son, Yue Yue, ascended to the throne.

古文：丙戌，废白、龚二州。
现代文：二十三日，废罢白、龚二州。
English: On the 23rd, it was abolished and the two prefectures merged.

古文：壬辰，诏百官厉名节。
现代文：二十九日，下诏百官磨砺名节。
English: On the 29th, the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：二月壬寅，册皇后。
现代文：二月初九，册立皇后。
English: On the ninth day of the second month, she was proclaimed empress.

古文：乙巳，诏陕西、河东复铸夹锡钱。
现代文：十二日，下诏陕西、河东重新铸造夹锡钱。
English: On the 12th, Shaanxi and Hedong re-minted the pewter money.

古文：丙午，以太子少师郑绅为开府仪同三司。
现代文：十三日，任命太子少师郑绅为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 13th, Zheng Sheng, the prince's young teacher, was appointed as the head of the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：三月己巳，诏监司督州县长吏劝民增植桑柘，课其多寡为赏罚。
现代文：三月初七，下诏监司督州县长吏劝民增植桑拓，按照数量多少作为赏罚的依据。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, the inspector, the governor, and the county officials issued an edict to persuade the people to increase the planting of mulberry trees, according to the quantity as the basis for reward and punishment.

古文：癸酉，以吏部尚书王襄同知枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命吏部尚书王襄为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shangshu Wangxiang, an official of the Ministry of Personnel, was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：夏四月乙卯，罢陕西、河东铸夹锡钱。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，罢除陕西、河东铸造夹锡钱。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of summer, the minting of clamped tin money in Shaanxi and Hedong was abolished.

古文：丙辰，虑囚。
现代文：二十三日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 23rd, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：立守令劝农黜陟法。
现代文：立守令劝农默陆法。
English: An order was issued to persuade farmers to obey the law of the land.

古文：丁巳，以淮南旱，降囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十四日，因淮南早灾，减轻囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 24th, due to the early disaster in Huainan, prisoners' criminal punishment was reduced to the first class, and they were released from prison.

古文：五月癸亥，诏四川羡余钱物归左藏库。
现代文：五月初二，下诏四川羡余钱物上交左藏库。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, the remaining money in Sichuan Province was finally handed over to the left bank.

古文：戊辰，改当十钱为当三。
现代文：初七，改当十钱为当三钱。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the ten-yen bet was changed to a three-yen bet.

古文：己卯，东南有星昼陨。
现代文：十八日，东南方向有星白天陨落。
English: On the 18th, a star fell in the southeast direction during the day.

古文：丁亥，解池生红盐。
现代文：二十六日，解池出现红盐。
English: On the 26th, red salt appeared in the digester.

古文：六月甲寅，复蔡京为太子少师。
现代文：六月二十三日，蔡京恢复为太子少师。
English: On June 23, Cai Jing was reinstated as the prince's apprentice.

古文：秋七月壬申，以疾愈，赦天下。
现代文：秋七月十一日，因病情痊愈赦免全国。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, he was pardoned nationwide after he recovered from his illness.

古文：癸未，废平、从二州为砦。
现代文：二十二日，废平州、从州为寨。
English: On the 22nd, Pingzhou and Congzhou were abolished.

古文：八月乙未，复蔡京为太子太师。
现代文：八月初五，蔡京恢复太子太师职衔。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth month, Cai Jing restored the title of crown prince.

古文：丁巳，张商英罢。
现代文：二十七日，张商英被罢免。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Shangying was dismissed.

古文：戊午，诏： 监司部内官吏，一岁中有犯罪至三人以上，虽不及三人而或有曾荐举者，罪及监司。 
现代文：二十八日，下诏： 监司辖区内官吏，一年中有三人以上犯罪，或者不到三人但曾推荐犯罪者，要治监司的罪。 
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: Officials in the area under the jurisdiction of the Supervision Division who have committed more than three crimes in one year, or less than three but have recommended a crime, must be punished for the crime of the Supervision Division.

古文：九月戊寅，王襄罢。
现代文：九月十八日，王襄被罢免。
English: On September 18, Wang Xiang was dismissed.

古文：丁亥，封子栻为黄国公。
现代文：二十七日，封儿子赵试为广国公。
English: On the 27th, Fong's son Zhao Jian became the governor of Guanggu.

古文：是月，郑允中、童贯使辽，以李良嗣来，良嗣献取燕之策，诏赐姓赵。
现代文：这个月，郑允中、童贯出使辽朝，带回来李良嗣，李良嗣献上攻取燕京策略，下诏赐给他赵姓。
English: This month, Zheng Yunzhong and Tong Rong sent envoys to the Liao Dynasty and brought back Li Liangzhi. Li Liangzhi presented a strategy to capture Yanjing and gave him the surname Zhao.

古文：冬十月辛卯，以用事之臣多险躁朋比，下诏申儆。
现代文：冬十月初二，因管事大臣多邪恶争权、结党营私，下诏警告。
English: On the second day of October in winter, due to the evil of the minister in charge competing for power and forming a party, a warning was issued.

古文：庚戌，封昭化军节度使宗粹为信安郡王。
现代文：二十一日，封昭化军节度使赵宗粹为信安郡王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Zhao Zongzhi was crowned the king of Xin'an County.

古文：辛亥，贬张商英为崇信军节度副使。
现代文：二十二日，贬张商英为崇信军节度副使。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Shangying was demoted to vice-envoy of the Chongxin Army.

古文：十一月任戌，以上书邪等及曾经入籍人并不许试学官。
现代文：十一月初三，规定上书邪等人及曾经人籍者一律不许试学官。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, it was stipulated that all examiners would not be allowed to be people who had been enrolled in the school and those who had been enrolled in the school.

古文：丙子，封子榛为福国公。
现代文：十七日，封儿子赵棒为福国公。
English: On the 17th, Fong's son, Zhao Bang, was named the Prince of Good Fortune.

古文：十二月己酉，诏台谏以直道核是非，毋惮大吏，毋比近习。
现代文：十二月二十一日，下诏台谏官用正直公道辨别是非，不要畏惮大吏，不要结党亲近小人。
English: On December 21, the following edict was issued to the eunuchs to distinguish right from wrong with honesty and fairness, not to be afraid of the big officials, and not to form a party to get close to the villains.

古文：辛亥，废镇州，升琼州为靖海军。
现代文：二十三日，废镇州，升琼州为靖海军。
English: On the 23rd, the abandoned Zhenzhou and ascended Qiongzhou became the Jing navy.

古文：是岁，虔州芝草生。
现代文：这一年，虔州出现芒草。
English: In this year, mung grass appeared in Kenzhou.

古文：蔡州瑞麦连野。
现代文：蔡瑞州麦遍野。
English: The wheat fields of Cai Ruizhou.

古文：河南府嘉禾生，野蚕成茧。
现代文：河南府出现嘉禾，野蚕成茧。
English: Jiahe appeared in Henan Province, and wild silkworms became cocoons.

古文：出宫女八十人。
现代文：放出宫女八十人。
English: Eighty maids of honour were released.

古文：交趾、夏国入贡。
现代文：交趾、夏国来进贡。
English: As a result, Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

