古文：刘颂，字子雅，广陵人，汉广陵厉王胥之后也。
现代文：刘颂，字子雅，广陵人，汉广陵厉王刘胥的后代。
English: Liu Song, Zizi Ya, Guangling people, descendants of Han Guangling King Liu Xi.

古文：世为名族。
现代文：世代为名门望族。
English: They have been a prestigious family for generations.

古文：同郡有雷、蒋、谷、鲁四姓，皆出其下，时人为之语曰 雷、蒋、谷、鲁，刘最为祖。 
现代文：同郡有雷、蒋、谷、鲁四姓，都出于刘姓，当时的人为他们编谚语说： 雷、蒋、谷、鲁，刘为最祖。 
English: There are four surnames of Lei, Jiang, Gu and Lu in the same county, all of which are derived from the surname Liu. People at that time made up a proverb for them, saying: Lei, Jiang, Gu, Lu, Liu is the most ancestral.

古文：父观，平阳太守。
现代文：父名刘观，做过平阳太守。
English: His father's name was Liu Guan, and he served as the governor of Pingyang Province.

古文：颂少能辨物理，为时人所称。
现代文：刘颂从小就能辨析物理，被当时人所称颂。
English: Liu Song was able to distinguish physics from an early age, and was praised by people at the time.

古文：察孝廉，举秀才，皆不就。
现代文：推举为孝廉、秀才，都不就。
English: It is not enough to be elected for filial piety and talent.

古文：文帝辟为相府掾，奉使于蜀。
现代文：文帝召用为相府属官，奉命出使蜀。
English: Emperor Wen called him to be a subordinate official of the imperial court, and he was ordered to dispatch Shu.

古文：时蜀新平，人饥土荒，颂表求振贷，不待报而行，由是除名。
现代文：当时蜀地刚刚平定，百姓饥饿，土地荒芜，刘颂上表请求救济，不等答覆就实行救济，因此被除去官职。
English: At that time, Shu had just been pacified, the people were starving, the land was desolate, and Liu Song requested relief from the table, and relief was implemented without waiting for a reply, so he was removed from office.

古文：武帝践阼，拜尚书三公郎，典科律，申冤讼。
现代文：晋武帝即位，授刘颂为尚书三公郎，主持法律法令，申昭冤案。
English: Emperor Jinwu ascended the throne, conferred Liu Song as the third prince of Shangshu, presided over laws and decrees, and handled grievances.

古文：累迁中书侍郎。
现代文：逐渐升任为中书侍郎。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of chushojiro.

古文：咸宁中，诏颂与散骑郎白褒巡抚荆、扬，以奉使称旨，转黄门郎。
现代文：咸宁时，诏刘颂与散骑郎白褒巡视荆扬地区，因为奉使合乎旨意，转任黄门郎。
English: When he was in Xianning, Liu Song and the horseman Bai Bo made a tour of the Jingyang area. Because the envoy was in accordance with his wishes, he was transferred to Huangmen Lang.

古文：迁议郎，守廷尉。
现代文：再迁为议郎，代理廷尉。
English: He was then transferred to the position of courtier, acting as a court lieutenant.

古文：时尚书令史扈寅非罪下狱，诏使考竟，颂执据无罪，寅遂得免，时人以颂比张释之。
现代文：当时尚书令史扈寅无罪入狱，韶派刘颂复查，他主持证明无罪，扈寅得以免罪，当时人把刘颂比之为张释之。
English: At that time, Shang wrote a letter ordering Shi Yingying to be imprisoned without charge, and sent Liu Song to review the case. He presided over the proof of innocence, and Yingying was exonerated. At that time, people compared Liu Song to Zhang.

古文：在职六年，号为详平。
现代文：在职六年，号称详密公平。
English: He has been in the post for six years and is known for his thoroughness and fairness.

古文：会灭吴，诸将争功，遣颂校其事，以王浑为上功，王浚为中功。
现代文：恰会灭了吴国，诸将争功，派遣刘颂校理此事，刘颂认为王浑应为上功，王浚应为中功。
English: He just happened to destroy the State of Wu, and all the generals competed for the credit, sending Liu Song to be the judge of the matter. Liu Song believed that Wang Hun should be the top credit, and Wang Jun should be the middle credit.

古文：帝以颂持法失理，左迁京兆太守，不行，转任河内。
现代文：皇帝以为刘颂执法失理，降为京兆太守，未上任，转任河内。
English: The emperor thought that Liu Song's enforcement of the law was unreasonable and demoted him to the governor of Beijing and Shandong, but he did not take office and was transferred to Hanoi.

古文：临发，上便宜，多所纳用。
现代文：临出发前，上奏利国之事，多被采用。
English: Before the departure, the matter of going to Korea was mostly used.

古文：郡界多公主水碓，遏塞流水，转为浸害，颂表罢之，百姓获其便利。
现代文：各郡界内多由公家设置水碓，堵塞水流，反而成为灾害，刘颂上表请求罢除拆毁了这些水碓，使百姓得到了便利。
English: Within the boundaries of each county, dams were mostly set up by public officials to block the flow of water, but they became disasters. Liu Song requested the removal and demolition of these dams, which made it convenient for the people.

古文：寻以母忧去职。
现代文：不久因母丧离职。
English: He left the post shortly afterwards due to the death of his mother.

古文：服阕，除淮南相。
现代文：丧服期满后，任淮南相。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was appointed Huainan Minister.

古文：在官严整，甚有政绩。
现代文：在任严肃整饬，很有政绩。
English: During his tenure, he seriously rectified the situation and achieved great political achievements.

古文：旧修芍陂，年用数万人，豪强兼并，孤贫失业，颂使大小戮力，计功受分，百姓歌其平惠。
现代文：过去修筑芍陂，一年动用数万人的劳力，豪强乘机兼并，孤弱贫困的人失去了田地，刘颂叫老幼一齐努力，按所修多少计值，百姓都歌颂他为政公平施惠人民。
English: In the past, tens of thousands of people's labor was used to build fences, the strong and the brave took advantage of mergers, the weak and the poor lost their fields, Liu Song called on the old and the young to work together, according to the value of the repairs, and the people all praised him for being fair and benefiting the people.

古文：颂在郡，上疏曰：
现代文：刘颂在郡上疏说：
English: Liu Song said in the county:

古文：臣昔忝河内，临辞受诏： 卿所言悉要事，宜大小数以闻。
现代文：我过去任职河内，临别时接受诏令说： 你所讲的都是很重要的事情，到任后也应该把大小事情都上奏。
English: I used to work in Hanoi, and at the time of parting, I received a decree saying: What you have said are all very important things, and after taking office, you should play up all the big and small things.

古文：恆苦多事，或不能悉有报，勿以为疑。 
现代文：朕平常苦于事多，或许不能给你一一答覆，你也不要因此而有所怀疑。 
English: I usually struggle with a lot of things, and may not be able to give you a one-to-one answer, so don't be suspicious.

古文：臣受诏之日，喜惧交集，益思自竭，用忘其鄙，愿以萤烛，增晖重光。
现代文：臣下接受诏令那天，欢喜和恐惧交集，更加思虑竭力尽忠，因此忘记了自己的鄙浅，愿用小小的一点烛光，增加皇上的光辉。
English: On the day when the Emperor's edict was received by his subjects, joy and fear mingled, and they were all the more anxious to be loyal, so they forgot their own meanness and were willing to use a tiny bit of candlelight to increase the glory of the Emperor.

古文：到郡草具所陈如左，未及书上，会臣婴丁天罚，寝顿累年，今谨封上前事。
现代文：到郡任后草草写成下面所说的话，没等到奏上，恰好我遭母丧，停职多年，现在谨慎地奏上以前想上奏的事。
English: After I was appointed to the county post, I scribbled down the following words and did not wait for it to be played. It just so happened that I lost my mother and was suspended for many years. Now, I carefully play what I wanted to play before.

古文：臣虽才不经国，言浅多违，犹愿陛下垂省，使臣微诚得经圣鉴，不总弃于常案。
现代文：我虽然才能不足以治理好，言语浅陋违错，但希望陛下能够审阅，使我的忠诚能让圣上知道，不至于被丢弃到文书堆裹。
English: Although my talent is not enough to govern well, and my words are shallow and erroneous, I hope that His Majesty will be able to review them so that my loyalty can be made known to His Holiness and not be discarded into a pile of paperwork.

古文：如有足采，冀补万一。
现代文：如果有可以采用的意见，还希望对治理国家能起到一点补助作用。
English: If there are opinions that can be adopted, it is also hoped that they can play a supplementary role in governing the country.

古文：伏见诏书，开启土宇，以支百世，封建戚属，咸出之籓，夫岂不怀，公理然也。
现代文：我见到诏书中说，开辟国土，建立百世的基业，分封亲族，让他们出守藩国，难道就不思念他们，但公理就是如此。
English: I saw it said in the imperial edict that opening up the country, establishing a hundred-year-old heritage, dividing relatives, and letting them go to defend the domain, would not they miss them, but this is the truth.

古文：树国全制，始成于今，超秦、汉、魏氏之局节，绍五帝三代之绝迹。
现代文：建设国家健全制度，到今天取得成功，超过了秦、坠、秀继的狭隘的礼法制度，发扬了五帝三伐的绝迹。
English: The construction of a national sound system has been successful to this day, surpassing the narrow etiquette system of Qin, Qinling and Xiu Zhi, and carrying forward the extinction of the Five Emperors and Three Dynasties.

古文：功被无外，光流后裔，巍巍盛美，三五之君殆有惭德。
现代文：功绩流被天下，光辉照耀后代，巍巍盛美，前代的一些帝王大概会惭愧自己仁德不厚。
English: Some emperors of the previous generation would probably be ashamed of their lack of benevolence.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：彼因自然而就之，异乎绝迹之后更创之。
现代文：因为他们因循自然而成就功业，和今天在绝迹以后另创大业根本不同。
English: Because they followed the course of nature and accomplished great things, which is fundamentally different from today's creation of great things after extinction.

古文：虽然，封幼稚皇子于吴、蜀，臣之愚虑，谓未尽善。
现代文：即使这样，把年纪幼小的皇子分封到星蜀，以我之见，认为不是最好。
English: Even so, I don't think it's the best thing to send a young prince to Xingshu.

古文：夫吴、越剽轻，庸、蜀险绝，此故变衅之所出，易生风尘之地。
现代文：吴、越一带的人轻浮，庐、蜀一带地方险峻绝远，因此常出变故叛乱，是容易发生事情的地方。
English: People in the regions of Wu and Yue are frivolous, while the regions of Min and Shu are remote and dangerous. As a result, there are frequent changes and rebellions, and it is a place where things can easily happen.

古文：且自吴平以来，东南六州将士更守江表，此时之至患也。
现代文：况且自从平定吴以来，让东南六州的将士守卫垦辽下游，这是目前最大的隐患。
English: Moreover, since the pacification of Wu, the soldiers of the six southeastern states have been guarding the lower reaches of Liaoning Province, which is currently the biggest hidden danger.

古文：又内兵外守，吴人有不自信之心，宜得壮主以镇抚之，使内外各安其旧。
现代文：加上内地军队出守外地，吴人自己有不信任朝廷的心理，应该有强壮的主将镇守安抚他们，使他们内外都安于现状。
English: Coupled with the fact that the mainland troops were sent to defend foreign countries, the Wu people themselves had the mentality of distrusting the imperial court. They should have a strong commander-in-chief to pacify them and make them both at home and abroad comfortable with the status quo.

古文：又孙氏为国，文武众职，数拟天朝，一旦堙替，同于编户。
现代文：又孙氏建国后，文武众多官员，人数和我们天朝差不多，一旦灭国，使他们和百姓一样。
English: Moreover, after the founding of the country by the Sun Dynasty, the number of civil and military officials was almost the same as that of our Heavenly Dynasty. Once the country was destroyed, they became the same as the common people.

古文：不识所蒙更生之恩，而灾困逼身，自谓失地，用怀不靖。
现代文：他们看不到蒙受再生之恩德，而自认为灾祸困苦逼着他们，使他们失去了原有的土地，因此心中怀著作乱的意图。
English: They do not see the benefit of regeneration, but think that the calamity and hardship have forced them to lose their original land, so they have the intention of chaos in their hearts.

古文：今得长王以临其国，随才授任，文武并叙，士卒百役不出其乡，求富贵者取之于国内。
现代文：现在应有一位年长德高的封王统治吴地，量才任职，文武并用，使军队和各种劳役不出于这些地方，想求得富贵的人向封国之内求取。
English: Now, there should be an elderly and virtuous vassal king to rule the Wu region. He should be qualified to hold office, and use both literature and military power to keep the army and all kinds of laborers away from these places. People who want to get rich should look for it within the vassal state.

古文：内兵得散，新邦乂安，两获其所，于事为宜。
现代文：内兵就可以解散，新得的封国可以平安，两全其美，遣样处理也非常合宜。
English: The internal troops can be disbanded, the newly acquired fief can be safe, the best of both worlds, and the handling of samples is also very appropriate.

古文：宜取同姓诸王年二十以上人才高者，分王吴、蜀。
现代文：所以应该选择同姓的诸王中年龄在二十岁以上有高才的人，分封吴、蜀。
English: Therefore, you should choose a highly talented person over the age of twenty from the kings with the same surname, and assign him to Wu or Shu.

古文：以其去近就远，割裂土宇，令倍于旧。
现代文：以他们去地远近，给他们分封的土地，加倍于过去的封国。
English: With them going to places far and near, giving them fiefs of land, doubling the number of past fiefs.

古文：以徙封故地，用王幼稚，须皇子长乃遣君之，于是无晚也。
现代文：如迁徙所封故地，皇子年纪幼小，等到皇子长大便派他去统治那些地区，那时也不算晚。
English: If the emigration is to a fiefdom where the prince is young, it is not too late to send the prince to rule those areas when he grows up.

古文：急所须地，交得长主，此事宜也。
现代文：解决了那些地区的急务，又得到年纪大的藩主，这样处理比较合宜。
English: Solved the urgent tasks of those areas, and got the elderly lord of the domain, so it is more appropriate to deal with.

古文：臣所陈封建，今大义已举，然余众事，傥有足采，以参成制，故皆并列本事。
现代文：我所陈奏有关分封的事，现已列举了大概，但还有其他一些事务，如果有足以采用的，可用来参考以前各项制度，因此都一起列举在下面。
English: What I have set forth concerning the repartition of the fiefs has been outlined, but there are other matters which, if sufficiently employed, may be used as a reference to the previous systems, and are therefore enumerated together below.

古文：臣闻：不惮危悔之患，而愿献所见者，尽忠之臣也；垂听逆耳，甘纳苦言者，济世之君也。
现代文：我知道：不害怕危险灾难，而愿意进献所闻所见的人，是尽忠心的大臣；听取逆耳的言语，甘愿采纳苦言的，是能治世的国君。
English: I know that a person who is not afraid of danger and disaster, but is willing to offer what he has heard and seen, is a loyal minister; a person who listens to harsh words and is willing to accept harsh words is a sovereign who can rule the world.

古文：臣以期运，幸遇无讳之朝。
现代文：臣运气好，荣幸地遇上了无所讳忌的朝廷。
English: The vassal had good luck and was honored to meet the unscrupulous imperial court.

古文：虽尝抗疏陈辞，泛论政体，犹未悉所见，指言得失，徒荷恩宠，不异凡流。
现代文：虽然曾经直言上书陈辞，广泛议论国政，但仍没有把所见所闻全部陈奏，指出其中的利弊得失，白白地承蒙恩宠，和凡俗的人没两样。
English: Although he has been outspoken, written speeches, and extensively discussed national politics, he still has not recounted everything he has seen and heard, pointed out the advantages and disadvantages, and received grace in vain. He is no different from ordinary people.

古文：臣窃自愧，不尽忠规，无以上报，谨列所见如左。
现代文：我心裹非常惭愧，不能尽忠力谏，难以报效，仅列举我的见闻如下。
English: My heart is very ashamed, I can't be loyal, it's hard to serve, just list my experiences as follows.

古文：臣诚未自许所言必当，然要以不隐所怀为上报之节。
现代文：我的确不敢自称所说的一定妥当，但大要是以不隐讳自己的所思所想。
English: Indeed, I dare not claim that what I have said must be correct, but rather that I am not concealing what I think.

古文：若万一足采，则微臣更生之年；如皆瞽妄，则国之福也。
现代文：如万一有可采纳的，那将是我的再生之年；如都是妄说，也是国家的好事。
English: If by any chance there is something to adopt, it will be the year of my rebirth; if it is all nonsense, it is also a good thing for the country.

古文：愿陛下缺半日之间，垂省臣言。
现代文：请皇上花一点时间，看我的奏言。
English: I would like to ask the Emperor to take a moment to read my speech.

古文：伏惟陛下虽应天顺人，龙飞践阼，为创基之主，然所遇之时，实是叔世。
现代文：我想陛下虽应天顺人，登上皇位，成为开创基业的国主，但所遇的时机，却是末世。
English: I think that although His Majesty ascended to the throne in accordance with the will of heaven and became the sovereign who started the foundation, the opportunity he encountered was in the last days.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样说呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：汉末陵迟，阉竖用事，小人专朝，君子在野，政荒众散，遂以乱亡。
现代文：汉末衰败，宦官专权，小人把持朝政，君子在野，国政荒废人民离散，终于衰乱灭亡。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty was in decline, the eunuchs had absolute power, the villains controlled the government, the nobles were in the field, the people were scattered, and the country was in ruins. Finally, the Han Dynasty collapsed and perished.

古文：魏武帝以经略之才，拨烦理乱，兼肃文教，积数十年，至于延康之初，然后吏清下顺，法始大行。
现代文：魏武帝以其雄才大略，拨乱反正，整顿文教，积数十年，到了延康之初，官吏清廉百姓顺服，法令制度大行于天下。
English: Emperor Weiwu, with his great talent, made a general plan to rectify the chaos and rectify the culture and education. After decades of accumulation, at the beginning of Yan Kang, the officials were clean and the people were obedient, and the legal system was popular all over the world.

古文：逮至文、明二帝，奢淫骄纵，倾殆之主也。
现代文：到了文帝和明帝，骄奢淫逸。成为使国家覆亡的国主。
English: To Emperor Wen and Emperor Ming, he was arrogant and debauched. He became the sovereign who brought about the downfall of the country.

古文：然内盛台榭声色之娱，外当三方英豪严敌，事成克举，少有愆违，其故何也？
现代文：但仍然在内盛行游山玩水和喜好音乐美色，在外有三方英雄豪杰的威胁，国家大事都能成功，很少有失误，这又是什么缘故呢?
English: However, it is still popular to go hiking in the mountains, play in the water, and enjoy music. Outside, there is the threat of the heroic heroes of the three parties. National events can be successful and there are few mistakes. What is the reason for this?

古文：实赖前绪，以济勋业。
现代文：实际上全凭以前的兴旺，用来接济当时的业绩。
English: In fact, it was all based on the previous prosperity, which was used to bolster the performance at that time.

古文：然法物政刑，固已渐穨矣。
现代文：但立法刑政等制度，已经逐渐衰败了。
English: However, the legislative, penal, political and other systems have gradually deteriorated.

古文：自嘉平之初，晋祚始基，逮于咸熙之末，其间累年。
现代文：从嘉平初年，晋朝开始建立，到咸熙末年，这期间好多年。
English: From the first year of Jiaping, the Jin Dynasty began to be established, to the last year of the Han Dynasty, this period lasted for many years.

古文：虽鈇钺屡断，翦除凶丑，然其存者咸蒙遭时之恩，不轨于法。
现代文：虽然常常动用鈇铁刑具，剪除一些凶残之人，但遣留下来的好人却都蒙受一时的恩赐，受不到法律的制裁。
English: Although they often used the hammer and sickle to cut off the heads of some murderous people, the good people who were sent back received a temporary blessing and were not punished by the law.

古文：泰始之初，陛下践阼，其所服乘皆先代功臣之胤，非其子孙，则其曾玄。
现代文：泰始初年，陛下登基后，所任用的人都是前代功臣的后代，不是他们的子孙，就是他们的曾孙玄孙。
English: In the first year of the Taizhi era, after His Majesty ascended to the throne, the people appointed were all descendants of the previous generation of heroes, either their children or grandchildren, or their great-grandchildren.

古文：古人有言，膏粱之性难正，故曰时遇叔世。
现代文：古人说，贪图美食佳肴的本性难以改正，因此我说遇上了末世。
English: The ancients said that the nature of craving for food and delicacies is difficult to correct, so I said that I had encountered the end of the world.

古文：当此之秋，天地之位始定，四海洗心整纲之会也。
现代文：在逭多事之秋，天下刚刚安定，正是洗心革面整顿纲纪的机会。
English: In this eventful autumn, the world has just stabilized, which is an opportunity to purify the heart and rectify the discipline.

古文：然陛下犹以用才因宜，法宽有由，积之在素，异于汉、魏之先。三祖崛起，易朝之为，未可一旦直绳御下，诚时宜也。
现代文：但陛下仍以用人适宜，法律宽松，假以时日，逭和汉魏的创业者不一样；经历三位祖先才兴起的我朝，改朝换代初期的作为，不能一朝一夕就使用严法统治，这也的确是应当如此。
English: However, His Majesty still believes that it is appropriate to employ people, the law is loose, and it takes time, which is different from the founders of the Han and Wei Dynasties. Our dynasty, which experienced the rise of three ancestors, and the actions of the early days of the change of dynasty, cannot use the strict rule of law overnight, which is indeed how it should be.

古文：然至所以为政，矫世众务，自宜渐出公涂，法正威断，日迁就肃。譬由行舟，虽不横截迅流，然俄向所趣，渐靡而往，终得其济。
现代文：但在为政方面，矫正各种事情，自然应当逐渐出于公正之途，法律公正威严，一天天地走向整肃，就像水上行舟，虽然不能横截急流，但侧着船身，渐渐地向前，终能渡过江河。
English: However, in terms of politics, to rectify all kinds of things, it is natural that we should gradually take the path of justice, the law is just and dignified, and move towards rectification day by day. It is like a boat on the water, although it cannot cross the rapids, but it can move sideways, gradually forward, and eventually cross the rivers.

古文：积微稍著，以至于今，可以言政。
现代文：从少积多，到了今天，就可以好好地治理国家。
English: From less accumulation to more, to today, it is possible to govern the country well.

古文：而自泰始以来，将三十年，政功美绩，未称圣旨，凡诸事业，不茂既往。
现代文：但从泰始年间以来，近三十年，国政功绩，不能符合圣上的旨意，各项事业，比不上过去。
English: However, in the nearly 30 years since the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the national political achievements have not been able to meet the sacred will, and the various undertakings have not been comparable to the past.

古文：以陛下明圣，犹未及叔世之弊，以成始初之隆，传之后世，不无虑乎！
现代文：以陛下的英明，仍未改变末世的弊病，成就伟业，传给后世，没有忧虑吗!
English: With Your Majesty's wisdom, you have not yet changed the ills of the last days, achieved great things, and passed them on to future generations. Do you have no worries?

古文：意者，臣言岂不少概圣心夫！
现代文：或者说，我的话难道就不能放在圣上的心上!
English: Or should not my words be in the sanctuary of the heart?

古文：顾惟万载之事，理在二端。
现代文：回想千万年以来的大事，有两条道理。
English: Looking back on the great events of the past ten thousand years, there are two reasons.

古文：天下大器，一安难倾，一倾难正。
现代文：天下国家，一旦安定就很难倾覆，一旦倾覆就很难反正。
English: Once a country is stable, it is difficult to overthrow it, and once it is overthrown, it is difficult to restore it.

古文：故虑经后世者，必精目下之政，政安遗业，使数世赖之。
现代文：因此思虑能使后世长久的君主，必然精心治理当前的政事，政权稳固遗留大业，才能使后世有所依靠。
English: Therefore, a monarch who can make future generations long-lasting must carefully manage the current political affairs, and the regime must be stable and leave a great legacy in order to make future generations have something to rely on.

古文：若乃兼建诸侯而树籓屏，深根固蒂，则祚延无穷，可以比迹三代。
现代文：如果同时建立诸侯王而立藩国，使根深蒂固，就会国运延续没有穷尽，可以和三代相比。
English: If, at the same time, a vassal state of princes and kings is established, so that the roots are deep-rooted, the national movement will continue without exhaustion, which can be compared to three generations.

古文：如或当身之政，遗风余烈不及后嗣，虽树亲戚，而成国之制不建，使夫后世独任智力以安大业。
现代文：如果自身在位时的国政，遗风遣业传不到后代，即使立藩国，但成就大国基业的制度不建立，后继者衹能凭自己的才智来建国家大业。
English: If the legacy of the national politics during one's own reign is not passed on to future generations, even if a feudal state is established, but the system of achieving a great national heritage is not established, the successor will not be able to build a great national cause with their own talents.

古文：若未尽其理，虽经异时，忧责犹追在陛下，将如之何！
现代文：如果不能依理而行，虽然到了以后的时代，忧患的责任仍然会追究到陛下头上，那时将怎么办!
English: If it is not possible to act according to reason, although in the future, the responsibility for the sorrow will still be held accountable to His Majesty, what will happen then!

古文：愿陛下善当今之政，树不拔之势，则天下无遗忧矣。
现代文：我希望陛下能很好地治理今天的国家，建立坚不可摧之势，那样天下就没有遣患。
English: I hope that His Majesty can well govern today's country and establish an indestructible momentum, so that there will be no disaster in the world.

古文：夫圣明不世及，后嗣不必贤，此天理之常也。
现代文：圣明不能传到后世，后继的人不是必然贤明，这是常理。
English: It is common sense that sacred knowledge cannot be passed on to future generations, and that those who follow are not necessarily wise.

古文：故善为天下者，任势而不任人。
现代文：因此善于治理天下的人，会顺应形势而不是依靠人。
English: Therefore, those who are good at governing the world will adapt to the situation rather than rely on others.

古文：任势者，诸侯是也；任人者，郡县是也。
现代文：顺应形势，指的是分封诸侯；依靠人，指的是郡县。
English: Complying with the situation refers to the subdivision of provinces; relying on people refers to counties.

古文：郡县之察，小政理而大势危；诸侯为邦，近多违而远虑固。
现代文：考察郡县，就使小的政务得到治理但大的局势却很危急；诸侯作为藩邦，则会日前虽多失误但从长远考虑却很稳固。
English: Looking at counties and counties, small government affairs have been managed, but the big situation is very critical; as a feudal state, the princes have made many mistakes before the meeting, but they are very stable in the long run.

古文：圣王推终始之弊，权轻重之理，包彼小违以据大安，然后足以籓固内外，维镇九服。
现代文：圣明的帝王推测前后弊端，权衡轻重之理，包容诸侯的小错误以稳固大的安定，然后足以使国内外藩屏巩固，维持统治天下。
English: The emperor of the sacred and wise guesses the drawbacks before and after, weighs the reasons, tolerates the small mistakes of the princes with a solid and stable stability, and then it is enough to consolidate the domestic and foreign Han screens and maintain the rule of the world.

古文：夫武王圣主也，成王贤嗣也，然武王不恃成王之贤而广封建者，虑经无穷也。
现代文：武王是圣主，成王是贤能的继君，但武王不依靠成王的贤能而建立封国的原因，就是考虑到国家大业的长久流传。
English: King Wu was a saint, and King Cheng was a virtuous successor, but the reason why King Wu did not rely on King Cheng's virtue to establish a vassal state was to take into account the long-term propagation of the great cause of the country.

古文：且善言今者，必有验之于古。
现代文：况且善于谈论今日国政的人，他必然是拿古代发生的事作为验证。
English: Moreover, anyone who is good at talking about today's national politics is bound to take what happened in ancient times as verification.

古文：唐、虞以前，书文残缺，其事难详。
现代文：唐虞以前的事，史书记载残缺，难以知道那时的详情。
English: Before the Tang and Yu Dynasties, historical records were incomplete, and it was difficult to know the details of that time.

古文：至于三代，则并建明德，及兴王之显亲，列爵五等，开国承家，以籓屏帝室，延祚久长，近者五六百岁，远者仅将千载。
现代文：到了三代，就立圣明的仁德，以及把那些兴立帝王的亲族，都按五等爵位分封他们，使他们开国承家，用来保障皇室，使国运久长，其中时间短的五六百年，时间长的将近千年。
English: When it came to the third generation, they established the benevolence of Shengming, and divided the relatives of those who established emperors according to the fifth rank of nobility, so that they founded the country, inherited the family, used to protect the royal family, and made the national fortune long, of which the short time was five or six hundred years, and the long time was nearly a thousand years.

古文：逮至秦氏，罢侯置守，子弟不分尺土，孤立无辅，二世而亡。
现代文：到了秦朝，罢除诸侯设立郡县，帝王子弟不分给尺寸土地，孤立而无人辅助，两代就灭亡。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, the princes were abolished and counties were established, and the emperor's younger brother was given land without size, isolated and unassisted, and the two generations perished.

古文：汉承周、秦之后，杂而用之，前后二代各二百馀年。
现代文：汉承周、秦之后，诸侯郡县混杂设置，前后两朝各传了二百多年。
English: After the Han, Zhou and Qin dynasties, the provinces, counties and counties were mixed, and each of the two dynasties was passed down for more than 200 years.

古文：揆其封建不用，虽强弱不适，制度舛错，不尽事中，然迹其衰亡，恆在同姓失职，诸侯微时，不在强盛。
现代文：考察当时是不用分封，虽然诸侯国强弱不同，制度错误百出，很不完备，但从其衰亡的迹象看，常在于同姓王失去职权，诸侯王势力微弱，并不在于强盛。
English: At that time, it was not necessary to divide the territory. Although the strength of the vassal states was different, the system was full of errors and very incomplete. However, from the signs of their decline, it was often due to the loss of authority of the king with the same surname. The power of the vassal kings was weak, not strong.

古文：昔吕氏作乱，幸赖齐、代之援，以宁社稷。
现代文：当年吕氏作乱，依靠齐、代二王的援助，安定了国家。
English: At that time, the Lv clan caused a disturbance, and relied on the assistance of Qi and the second generation of kings to stabilize the country.

古文：七国叛逆，梁王捍之，卒弭其难。
现代文：七国叛乱时，梁王捍卫国家，终于平定了叛乱。
English: When the Seven Kingdoms rebelled, King Liang defended the country and finally quelled the rebellion.

古文：自是之后，威权削夺，诸侯止食租奉，甚者至乘牛车。
现代文：从此以后，诸侯王的势力被削夺，仅仅有享受封国租赋的权力，更严重的甚至于坐着牛拉的车子。
English: From then on, the power of the princes was taken away from them, and they only had the right to enjoy feudal rent, and even worse, to ride in a cart pulled by oxen.

古文：是以王莽得擅本朝，遂其奸谋，倾荡天下，毒流生灵。
现代文：因此使王莽能够篡夺汉朝，实现了他的奸计，使天下倾覆动荡，祸害百姓。
English: As a result, Wang Mang was able to usurp the Han Dynasty, realize his treachery, cause the world to be overturned and destabilized, and harm the people.

古文：光武绍起，虽封树子弟，而不建成国之制，祚亦不延。
现代文：光武帝继起后，虽然封立子弟为王，但不设立成国的制度，国运未能长久。
English: After the succession of Emperor Guangwu, although he made his son the king, he did not establish the system of becoming a country, and the national movement did not last long.

古文：魏氏承之，圈闭亲戚，幽囚子弟，是以神器速倾，天命移在陛下。
现代文：魏氏继承汉朝，禁闭亲戚，关押子弟，因此国运很快倾亡，天命转移到了陛下身上。
English: The Wei dynasty succeeded the Han dynasty, imprisoned their relatives and imprisoned their children. As a result, the national fortune soon collapsed, and the fate of heaven was transferred to His Majesty.

古文：长短之应，祸福之徵，可见于此。
现代文：长处短处的应验，灾祸福分的征兆，由此可见。
English: The fulfillment of strengths and weaknesses, the signs of disaster and blessing, can be seen from this.

古文：又魏氏虽正位居体，南面称帝，然三方未宾，正朔有所不加，实有战国相持之势。
现代文：又魏氏虽然身居正位，面朝南而称帝，但三方尚未服顺，皇权不能凌驾于那些地区，实际上形成战国时各国对峙的局面。
English: In addition, although the Wei clan was in a positive position, facing south and claiming to be the emperor, the three parties had not yet obeyed, and the imperial power could not prevail over those regions, in fact forming a situation of confrontation between countries during the Warring States period.

古文：大晋之兴，宣帝定燕，太祖平蜀，陛下灭吴，可谓功格天地，土广三王，舟车所至，人迹所及，皆为臣妾，四海大同，始于今日。
现代文：大晋兴起，宣帝平定了燕，太祖平定了蜀，陛下灭了吴，可以说是功盖天下，国土比三王时还要广，车船能通的地方，人迹能到的地方，都成了陛下的奴仆，四海统一，开始于今天。
English: With the rise of the Great Jin Dynasty, Emperor Xuan conquered Yan, the Great Ancestor conquered Shu, and His Majesty annihilated Wu, which can be said to be the achievement of the whole world. The country is even wider than when the three kings ruled. The places where cars and ships can pass, and the places where human footprints can reach, have all become His Majesty's slaves. The unification of the four seas begins today.

古文：宜承大勋之籍，及陛下圣明之时，开启土宇，使同姓必王，建久安于万载，垂长世于无穷。
现代文：应该乘逭盛大功勋的机会，以及陛下圣明之时，分封国土，使同姓子弟为诸侯王，建立千秋万代的长治久安，直至世代相传。
English: It is necessary to take advantage of the opportunity of his grand exploits, as well as the time of his majesty's death, to divide the land, to make his son the prince of princes, and to establish long-term peace and stability for thousands of generations, until it is passed down from generation to generation.

古文：臣又闻国有任臣则安，有重臣则乱。
现代文：我又听说国家有能臣就安宁，有权臣就混乱。
English: I also heard that when a country has capable ministers, there is peace, but when there are powerful ministers, there is chaos.

古文：而王制，人君立子以嫡不以长，立嫡以长不以贤，此事情之不可易者也。
现代文：而帝王的制度，国君设立太子用嫡子而不是按年龄大小，设立嫡子用年长的而不是按他们贤能的程度，造是不能改变的。
English: On the other hand, the imperial system, in which the sovereign uses the eldest son as heir to the throne rather than the eldest son according to age, and the eldest son as heir to the throne according to seniority rather than ability, cannot be changed.

古文：而贤明至少，不肖至众，此固天理之常也。
现代文：但贤明的极少，没有才能的极多，这原是一般的情况。
English: But wise men are few, and fools are many: and these things are common.

古文：物类相求，感应而至，又自然也。
现代文：物类相求，相互感应而聚到一起，这是很自然的。
English: It is quite natural for things to seek each other out and to come together by mutual attraction.

古文：是以暗君在位，则重臣盈朝；明后临政，则任臣列职。
现代文：因此愚昧的国君在位，就会权臣满朝；贤明的帝皇临朝，就会能臣占据职位。
English: Therefore, when a foolish sovereign is on the throne, the court will be full of powerful vassals; when a wise emperor comes to the throne, powerful vassals will occupy positions.

古文：夫任臣之与重臣，俱执国统而立断者也。然成败相反，邪正相背，其故何也？
现代文：能臣和权臣，都是执掌国事而决断朝政的，但成败相反，邪正相背，这是何故呢?
English: Both able ministers and powerful ministers are in charge of state affairs and decide on the government of the dynasty, but success and failure are the opposite, evil and righteousness are opposite. Why is this?

古文：重臣假所资以树私，任臣因所籍以尽公。
现代文：权臣凭藉权力树立私党，能臣通过权力尽力为公。
English: A powerful vassal uses his power to establish a private party, while a capable vassal uses his power to do his best for the public.

古文：尽公者，政之本也；树私者，乱之源也。
现代文：尽力为公，是政治的根本；树立私党，是祸乱的根源。
English: To do one's best for the public is the fundamental of politics; to establish a private party is the root of disaster.

古文：推斯言之，则泰日少，乱日多，政教渐穨，欲国之无危，不可得也。
现代文：比较而言，安定的时日少，而混乱的时日多，政教逐渐颓废，想让国家没有危险，是不可能的。
English: Comparatively speaking, there are fewer days of stability and more days of chaos. Politics and religion are gradually decaying. It is impossible to keep the country out of danger.

古文：又非徒唯然而已。
现代文：不仅仅是这样。
English: It's not just that.

古文：借令愚劣之嗣，蒙先哲之遗绪，得中贤之佐，而树国本根不深，无干辅之固，则所谓任臣者化而为重臣矣。
现代文：假如愚昧劣弱的后继者，承蒙前代哲王的遣业，得到中等贤能之才的辅佐，但建立国家的根基不深，没有枝干相辅的局势，那样的话所谓能臣的人也就变成了权臣。为什么呢?
English: If a stupid and weak successor inherits the legacy of the previous Zhe Wang and receives the assistance of a medium-level sage, but the foundation of the country is not deep and there is no situation where the branches complement each other, then the so-called able minister will also become a powerful minister. Why?

古文：何则？国有可倾之势，则执权者见疑，众疑难以自信，而甘受死亡者非人情故也。
现代文：国家出现倾覆的势态，当权的人就受到怀疑，被众人猜疑就难以自信，而甘愿接受死亡，逭不是入之常情，因此为保护自己的缘故就成了权臣。
English: When a country is in a state of collapse, the people in power are suspected, and when they are suspected by everyone, it is difficult to be confident, and being willing to accept death is not a normal situation. Therefore, in order to protect himself, he became a powerful minister.

古文：若乃建基既厚，籓屏强御，虽置幼君赤子而天下不惧，曩之所谓重臣者，今悉反忠而为任臣矣。
现代文：如果国基深厚，作为屏障的藩国强大，那即使立幼小的君主天下人也不会忧惧，过去所说的权臣，现在反而忠诚而成为能臣。为什么呢?
English: If the foundation of the country is deep, and the domain is strong as a barrier, then even if a young monarch is established, the people of the world will not be worried. The powerful vassals mentioned in the past are now loyal and become powerful vassals. Why?

古文：何则？理无危势，怀不自猜，忠诚得著，不惕于邪故也。
现代文：从道理上讲国家没有危亡的情势，大臣不受猜疑，忠诚的人得到表彰，正是由于不害怕奸邪的缘故。
English: Logically speaking, the country is not in a critical situation, ministers are not suspected, and loyal people are commended precisely because they are not afraid of treachery.

古文：圣王知贤哲之不世及，故立相持之势以御其臣。
现代文：圣明的帝王知道贤能的哲王不会代代出现，因此设立藩国相持的局势来统治大臣。
English: Emperor Shenming knew that a virtuous philosopher king would not appear from generation to generation, so he set up a feudal situation to rule the minister.

古文：是以五等既列，臣无忠慢，同于竭节，以徇其上。
现代文：因此一经设立五等爵位，大臣无论忠奸，都会一同尽力守忠，来顺从他们的主上。
English: Therefore, as soon as the fifth-class peerage was established, ministers, whether loyal or traitorous, would all try their best to be loyal and obey their master.

古文：群后既建，继体贤鄙，亦均一契，等于无虑。
现代文：诸侯一确定，继承的人不论贤能还是鄙陋，也都一样对待，等于没有忧虑。
English: Once the lords were certain, they treated the inheritors in the same way, regardless of whether they were virtuous or vile, and there was no cause for concern.

古文：且树国苟固，则所任之臣，得贤益理，次委中智，亦足以安。
现代文：况且封国如果稳固，那么所任用的大臣，贤能的人将会使国家治理得更好；委任中等智力的大臣，也足以长治久安。
English: Moreover, if the state is stable, then the minister appointed by the emperor, a capable person, will make the country better governed; the appointment of a minister of moderate intelligence is also sufficient for long-term peace and stability.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：势固易持故也。
现代文：是由于国势本来就容易维持的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that the national situation is inherently easy to maintain.

古文：然则建邦苟尽其理，则无向不可。
现代文：这样说来设立邦国如果能事事合理，就会无所不成。
English: In this way, if the establishment of a state can be reasonable in all respects, it will achieve everything.

古文：是以周室自成、康以下，逮至宣王，宣王之后，到于赧王，其间历载，朝无名臣，而宗庙不陨者，诸侯维持之也。
现代文：所以周室自成康以来，到宣王以后，一直到赧王，逭中间有好些代，朝廷没有名臣，但国家没有坠毁的原因，正是由于诸侯的帮助。
English: Therefore, the Zhou dynasty since Chengkang, to Xuan Wang, and all the way to Zhao Wang, there are several generations in the middle, the imperial court has no famous ministers, but the reason why the country has not crashed is precisely because of the help of the princes.

古文：故曰，为社稷计，莫若建国。
现代文：所以说，为社稷考虑，没有比立封国更重要的。
English: Therefore, for the sake of society, there is nothing more important than establishing a feudal state.

古文：夫邪正逆顺者，人心之所系服也。今之建置，宜审量事势，使诸侯率义而动，同忿俱奋，令其力足以维带京邑。
现代文：邪正逆顺，是维系人心的关键。现在建置藩国，应该审时度势，让诸侯王率义而行，同仇敌忾，使他们的力量足以维护京城。
English: It is the key to maintain the people's heart. Now that the feudal state has been established, it is necessary to assess the situation and let the princes and kings lead the way, fight with the enemy, and make their strength sufficient to maintain the capital.

古文：若包藏祸心，惕于邪而起，孤立无党，所蒙之籍不足独以有为。
现代文：如果诸侯包藏祸心，因奸邪而起事，就会孤立无援，他所凭藉的力量也不足以有所作为。
English: If a vassal harbors a malevolent spirit and rises up due to treachery, he will be alone and helpless, and the power he relies on will not be enough to make a difference.

古文：然齐此甚难，陛下宜与达古今善识事势之士深共筹之。
现代文：但要做到如此是很难的，陛下应该与通达古今懂得事势的人共同谋划。
English: But it is difficult to do so, and His Majesty should plan with people who understand the situation from ancient times to the present.

古文：建侯之理，使君乐其国，臣荣其朝，各流福祚，传之无穷。上下一心，爱国如家，视百姓如子，然后能保荷天禄，兼翼王室。
现代文：建立诸侯国，在于使诸侯以藩国为乐，大臣以能在封国的朝廷为光荣，各自福运传承，传到万代；上下同心，爱国如家，视百姓如子女，然后才能保持享受福禄，同时保卫王室。
English: The establishment of a vassal state is to make the vassals enjoy the feudal state, and the ministers take the glory of being able to be in the imperial court of the vassal state. Each of them will inherit the good fortune and pass it on to all generations; the upper and lower levels are of the same mind, the patriotism is like a family, and the people are like children. Only then can they continue to enjoy the benefits and at the same time protect the royal family.

古文：今诸王裂土，皆兼于古之诸侯，而君贱其爵，臣耻其位，莫有安志，其故何也？
现代文：现在诸侯王的封土，都超过了古时的诸侯，但诸侯轻视的爵位，大臣以所处的职位为耻辱，没有安定的心志，这是什么原因呢?
English: Nowadays, the fiefs of the princes exceed those of the princes in ancient times, but what is the reason for the nobility despised by the princes, the position of the minister is a disgrace, and there is no stable mind?

古文：法同郡县，无成国之制故也。
现代文：是由于他们地位和郡县相同，没有封国的制度的缘故。
English: This is because their status is the same as that of counties, and there is no system of fiefdoms.

古文：今之建置，宜使率由旧章，一如古典。
现代文：现在的建置，应该按照旧有的章程，一如古代的典制。
English: The current construction should be carried out in accordance with the old regulations, just like the ancient legal system.

古文：然人心系常，不累十年，好恶未改，情愿未移。
现代文：但人心都是守常，不到十年，好恶不会改变，心愿不会变化。
English: However, people's hearts are conservative. In less than ten years, their likes and dislikes will not change, and their wishes will not change.

古文：臣之愚虑，以为宜早创大制，迟回众望，犹在十年之外，然后能令君臣各安其位，荣其所蒙，上下相持，用成籓辅。
现代文：我的愚笨想法，觉得应该早建制度，迟缓就会失去众望，要改变人心将更在十年以后，如早立制度然后就能使君臣各安其位，以所受的职位为荣，上下互相支持，形成藩屏辅助的事态。
English: My stupid idea was that a system should be established early, and if it was delayed, people's hopes would be lost, and it would take more than ten years to change people's hearts. If the system was established early, then it would be possible to keep the monarchs and ministers in their respective positions, take pride in the positions they received, support each other up and down, and form a state of affairs that was supported by the clan.

古文：如今之为，适足以亏天府之藏，徒弃谷帛之资，无补镇国卫上之势也。
现代文：如果仍像现在一样，那就祇能是亏损国家的储存物资，白白地浪费粮食布帛，无补于镇守国土保卫皇上的大局。
English: If it remains as it is now, it can only be the stockpile of a loss-making country, wasting grain and cloth in vain, and not contributing to the overall situation of defending the country and defending the emperor.

古文：古者封建既定，各有其国，后虽王之子孙，无复尺土，此今事之必不行者也。
现代文：古时分封诸侯既定，各自有了封国，后来即便是诸侯王的子孙，再不分封尺寸的土地，遣在今天是必然行不通的。
English: In ancient times, feudal lordships were established, and each had a feudal state. Later, even the descendants of feudal lords, regardless of the size of the land, it is inevitable that it is not feasible today.

古文：若推亲疏，转有所废，以有所树，则是郡县之职，非建国之制。
现代文：如果推论亲疏，转而废黜疏远的人，来立亲近的人，那就像是郡县的官制，不是建立封国的制度。
English: If it is inferred that those who are distantly related should be deposed and those who are distantly related should be appointed, it would be like the official system of counties, not the system of establishing a feudal state.

古文：今宜豫开此地，令十世之内，使亲者得转处近。
现代文：现在应该预先实施分封，使十世以内，血缘关系亲近的人分封在近郊地区。
English: Now it is necessary to implement the partitioning in advance, so that within the tenth generation, people who are closely related by blood can be partitioned in the suburban areas.

古文：十世之远，近郊地尽，然后亲疏相维，不得复如十世之内。
现代文：十世以后，近郊地分封完了，然后亲疏相互支持，不能再如十世以内一样。
English: After the tenth generation, the subdivision of the suburbs is complete, and then they support each other closely. It can no longer be the same as within the tenth generation.

古文：然犹树亲有所，迟天下都满，已弥数百千年矣。
现代文：但建立亲属封国仍有地方，等到天下都分封满了，就已经过了好几百年上千年了。
English: However, there is still a place for establishing relatives to seal the country. By the time the world is completely sealed, it will have been hundreds of thousands of years.

古文：今方始封而亲疏倒施，甚非所宜。
现代文：现在刚刚开始分封就使亲疏关系倒置，很不合宜。
English: It is very inappropriate to reverse the relationship of kinship and estrangement at the very beginning of the division.

古文：宜更大量天下土田方里之数，都更裂土分人，以王同姓，使亲疏远近不错其宜，然后可以永安。
现代文：应再次大规模地丈量天下土地的数量，都分封给人，用来使同姓的亲族为王，让亲疏远近不至于错置而各得其所，这样就可以永久安宁。
English: The amount of land in the world should be measured again on a large scale, and all of it should be given to people, so that relatives with the same surname would be kings, and distant relatives would not be misplaced, but would each have their own place, so that there would be permanent peace.

古文：古者封国，大者不过土方百里，然后人数殷众，境内必盈其力，足以备充制度。
现代文：古时的封国，大的不过方圆百里，然后人民很多，境内必然人力充盈，足以完备各项制度。
English: In ancient times, a fiefdom was no larger than a hundred miles in circumference, and since there were many people, the territory was inevitably full of manpower, which was sufficient to complete various systems.

古文：今虽一国周环近将千里，然力实寡，不足以奉国典。
现代文：现在虽然一封国将近千里，但国力实际上寡弱，不足以尊奉国家典制。
English: Now, although a country is nearly a thousand miles away, the national strength is actually weak and is not enough to honor the national system.

古文：所遇不同，故当因时制宜，以尽事适今。
现代文：所遇到的情形不同，就应当因时制宜，用来适应今天的局势。
English: The different situations encountered should be adapted to the times and adapted to the current situation.

古文：宜令诸王国容少而军容多，然于古典所应有者悉立其制，然非急所须，渐而备之，不得顿设也。
现代文：所以应该使诸侯王国的礼仪制度少但军队纪律多，但对于古代典制中诸侯国应有的制度都给他们设立健全，对一些不是急需的制度，可以逐渐趋于完备，不能立即全部设立起来。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to make the vassal kingdoms have fewer etiquette systems but more military discipline. However, the systems that vassal states should have in the ancient ceremony system should be set up for them. For some systems that are not urgently needed, they can be gradually perfected, but they cannot be set up all at once.

古文：须车甲器械既具，群臣乃服彩章；仓廪已实，乃营宫室；百姓已足，乃备官司；境内充实，乃作礼乐。
现代文：要等到车甲器械都齐备了，群臣才佩带彩色服饰；仓库已经充实了，才营建宫室；百姓已经富足了，才完善官司衙门；国内充实了，才设置礼乐制度。
English: It is necessary to wait until the car armor equipment is ready, and the ministers wear colorful clothes; the warehouse has been enriched, and the palace room is built; the people have been rich, and the judge's gate has been improved; the country has been enriched, and the music system has been set up.

古文：唯宗庙社稷，则先建之。
现代文：但宗庙社稷，应先建造起来。
English: However, the family temple and shrine should be built first.

古文：至于境内之政，官人用才，自非内史、国相命于天子，其余众职及死生之断、谷帛资实、庆赏刑威、非封爵者，悉得专之。
现代文：至于境内的政务，任用官员，如果是内史、国相的话由天子任命，其余各级职务以及决断死生、粮食物资、刑罚赏赐、不是封爵位的事，都由诸侯王专权处理。
English: As for government affairs within the territory, the appointment of officials, if it is the head of internal history or the minister of state, is appointed by the Son of Heaven, and the remaining positions at all levels, as well as the decision of life and death, food and food supplies, punishment and reward, and not the knighthood, are handled by the exclusive power of the princes.

古文：今臣所举二端，盖事之大较，其所不载，应在二端之属者，以此为率。
现代文：我所列举的两点，是这事的大概；其中没有写的，应在这两点范围内的，应以此为准。
English: The two points I have listed are the general outline of the matter; what is not written in them should be within the scope of these two points and should be based on this.

古文：今诸国本一郡之政耳，若备旧典，则官司以数，事所不须，而以虚制损实力。
现代文：现在的诸侯国原是一个郡的政事而已，如果设立古时的典章制度，就会官衙太多，不需要那些机构，虚设的官制损耗实力。
English: Today's vassal states used to be nothing more than a county's political affairs. If the ancient ceremonial system had been established, there would have been too many bureaucrats, and there would have been no need for those institutions. The artificial bureaucratic system would have drained power.

古文：至于庆赏刑断，所以卫下之权，不重则无以威众人而卫上。
现代文：至于刑罚赏赐，是统治下级的大权，权力不重就不能统治众人保卫皇上。
English: As for the punishment and reward, it is the power to rule the subordinates, and it is not possible to rule the people and protect the emperor without great power.

古文：故臣之愚虑，欲令诸侯权具，国容少而军容多，然亦终于必备今事为宜。
现代文：因此我的意见认为，想使诸侯有权，就应使他们礼仪少而军队法纪多，但最终仍以能处理今天的事为宜。
English: Therefore, in my opinion, if you want to make the lords more powerful, you should make them have less etiquette and more military discipline, but in the end it is still appropriate to be able to deal with today's affairs.

古文：周之建侯，长享其国，与王者并，远者仅将千载，近者犹数百年；汉之诸王，传祚暨至曾玄。
现代文：周建立诸侯，长久享有封国，和称王的人并存，长久的近千年之久，时间短的也好几百年；汉朝的诸侯王，传位才到曾孙或玄孙辈。
English: Zhou established princes, enjoyed the fiefdom for a long time, and coexisted with those who praised the king. The long-term was nearly a thousand years, and the short-term was several hundred years. The princes of the Han Dynasty were only passed down to their great-grandchildren or great-great-grandchildren.

古文：人性不甚相远，古今一揆，而短长甚违，其故何邪？
现代文：人性相差不远，古今一样，而这两代诸侯王享国的年代长短相差太悬殊，这是什么原因呢?
English: Human nature is not far apart, the same from ancient times to the present, but the age difference between these two generations of princes and kings is too great. What is the reason for this?

古文：立意本殊而制不同故也。
现代文：是立意原本就不同而制度又不一样的缘故。
English: This is because the original intention was different and the system is different.

古文：周之封建，使国重于君，公侯之身轻于社稷，故无道之君不免诛放。
现代文：周朝设立诸侯，使封国重于君主，公侯之身轻于国家，因此无道的君主免不了被诛杀流放。
English: Zhou Dynasty set up princes, so that the feudal state was more important than the monarch, and the body of the prince was lighter than the country. Therefore, the monarch with no way out was inevitably killed and exiled.

古文：敦兴灭继绝之义，故国祚不泯。
现代文：切实振兴继承将要灭绝了的诸侯的封国，因此国家不至于泯减。
English: to effectively revitalize the feudal states that succeeded the extinct lords, so that the state would not be diminished.

古文：不免诛放，则群后思惧；胤嗣必继，是无亡国也。
现代文：免不了被诛杀流放，各诸侯王就会害怕；后代必然继承国位，所以没有亡国。
English: It is inevitable that they will be killed and exiled, and the princes will be afraid; descendants will inevitably inherit the throne, so there is no lost country.

古文：诸侯思惧，然后轨道，下无亡国，天子乘之，理势自安，此周室所以长在也。
现代文：诸侯王害怕，然后就遵守法度，也就使在下没有灭亡的诸侯国，天子统治依靠他们，国势自然安定，造就是周室之所以长期存在的缘故。
English: Princes are afraid, and then they obey the law. This is the reason why the Zhou dynasty has existed for a long time.

古文：汉之树置君国，轻重不殊，故诸王失度，陷于罪戮，国随以亡。
现代文：汉朝设置封国，轻重相同，因此诸侯王失去法度，身陷罪遇被杀，封国随着灭亡。
English: The Han Dynasty set up the fiefdoms, which were of equal importance, so the princes lost their legitimacy, were imprisoned and killed, and the fiefdoms died with them.

古文：不崇兴灭继绝之序，故下无固国。
现代文：不崇尚兴继灭绝的道理，因此在下没有稳固的封国。
English: They do not believe in the principle of succession and extinction, so there is no stable nationalization.

古文：下无固国，天子居上，势孤无辅，故奸臣擅朝，易倾大业。
现代文：下面没有稳固的封国，天子居处在上，势力孤单无人救助，所以奸臣把持朝政，容易使国家灭亡。
English: There is no stable fief below, the Son of Heaven resides above, and the forces are alone without help. Therefore, treacherous vassals control the government, and it is easy for the country to perish.

古文：今宜反汉之弊，修周旧迹。
现代文：现在应该改革汉朝的弊端，修复周朝的旧制。
English: It is time to reform the drawbacks of the Han Dynasty and restore the old system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：国君虽或失道，陷于诛绝，又无子应除，苟有始封支胤，不问远近，必绍其祚。
现代文：即使有失道的国君，被诛杀灭绝，又没有子嗣继承君位，但如果有当初受封的封国的后代，不论亲疏远近，也必然能继承君位。
English: Even if there is a misguided sovereign, who was killed and exterminated, and there are no heirs to inherit the throne, if there are descendants of the original vassal, regardless of whether they are close or distant, they will inevitably inherit the throne.

古文：若无遗类，则虚建之，须皇子生，以继其统，然后建国无灭。
现代文：如果没有遗留下来的后代，就设立虚位，等皇子出生，来继承国统，然后使国家继兴而不至灭绝。
English: If there are no surviving descendants, a vacant throne will be created, and a prince will be born to inherit the national line, and then the country will continue to prosper and not become extinct.

古文：又班固称 诸侯失国亦犹网密 ，今又宜都宽其检。
现代文：班固说 诸侯失去封国也是由于法网严密 ，所以现在又应放宽对他们的检查。
English: Ban Gu said that it was also due to the tight legal net that the lords lost their fiefdoms, so now they should relax their inspections.

古文：且建侯之理，本经盛衰，大制都定，班之群后，著誓丹青，书之玉版，藏之金匮，置诸宗庙，副在有司。
现代文：况且建立封国的道理，关系盛衰，大制都确定下来，颁告各封王，昭显盟誓，写在玉板上，藏进金柜中，安放在宗庙裹，副本藏在有关部门。
English: Moreover, the principle of establishing a vassal state, the relationship between the rise and fall, and the great system were all determined, each vassal king was announced, and the oath was revealed, written on a jade board, hidden in a gold cabinet, placed in the ancestral temple, and the copy was hidden in the relevant department.

古文：寡弱小国犹不可危，岂况万乘之主！
现代文：这样的话势寡力弱的小封国也不会有危险，何况万乘之国的主上呢!
English: In such a case, there would be no danger for the weak and feeble small fiefdoms, let alone for the Lord of the Kingdom of Ten Thousand Buddhas and Bodies!

古文：承难倾之邦而加其上，则自然永久居重固之安，可谓根深华岳而四维之也。
现代文：国君凌驾于难以倾覆的封国之上，就会稳固安全，如华岳般根深蒂固而天下太平。
English: When the ruler of the country is above the hard-to-overthrow feudal country, the country will be stable and safe. It will be as deep-rooted as Mount Hua and the world will be peaceful.

古文：臣之愚，愿陛下置天下于自安之地，寄大业于固成之势，则可以无遗忧矣。
现代文：我的意见，是希望陛下能处于安全的地位，寄托大业于已成之势，就可以没有后患了。
English: My opinion is that I hope that His Majesty will be in a safe position and will be able to rely on the momentum that has been achieved, and there will be no after-effects.

古文：今阎闾少名士，官司无高能，其故何也？
现代文：现在乡村没有名士，官衙没有贤才，这是什么缘故呢?
English: At present, there are no famous scholars in the countryside, and there are no wise men in the government. What is the reason for this?

古文：清议不肃，人不立德，行在取容，故无名士。
现代文：对时政的议论不整肃，人们不树立德行，一举一动都是为了取悦他人，所以没有名士。
English: There is no such thing as a celebrity because people are not serious about discussing current affairs, people do not cultivate virtue, and every move is made to please others.

古文：下不专局，又无考课，吏不竭节，故无高能。
现代文：下面的人不专管一职，又不进行考核，官吏不尽力，所以没有很高才能的人。
English: The people below do not specialize in one position, and do not conduct assessment, officials do not try their best, so there are no highly talented people.

古文：无高能，则有疾世事；少名士，则后进无准，故臣思立吏课而肃清议。
现代文：没有很高才能的人，就会使国家大事遭受危害；名士太少，就使后进的人没有来源，因此我觉得应该对官吏进行考核并整肃对时政的议论。
English: Without highly talented people, national affairs will be jeopardized; too few celebrities will make backward people have no source, so I think it is necessary to assess officials and clean up discussions on current affairs.

古文：夫欲富贵而恶贫贱，人理然也。
现代文：想富贵而讨厌贫贱，遣是人之常情。
English: It is human nature to want to be rich and hate to be poor.

古文：圣王大谙物情，知不可去，故直同公私之利，而诡其求道，使夫欲富者必先由贫，欲贵者必先安贱。
现代文：圣王非常懂得事物的情理，知道这种常情不能除去，所以将公私利益等同起来，而责成人们按道义来求取财富，使想富裕的人必先经过贫苦，想显贵的人必先安于卑贱。
English: The sage-king understood the reason of things very well, and knew that this kind of habit cannot be eliminated, so he equated public and private interests, and ordered people to seek wealth in accordance with morality, so that those who want to be rich must first go through poverty, and those who want to be noble must first settle for lowliness.

古文：安贱则不矜，不矜然后廉耻厉；守贫者必节欲，节欲然后操全。
现代文：安于卑贱就不骄傲，不骄傲就有了廉耻；坚守贫苦的人必然会节制欲望，节制欲望然后就能保全节操。
English: To be humble is not to be proud, and not to be proud is to be shameless; those who persevere in poverty will inevitably restrain their desires, and by restraining their desires, they will be able to maintain self-discipline.

古文：以此处务，乃得尽公。
现代文：这样处理事务，便能尽力为公。
English: Doing business this way, you can do your best for the public.

古文：尽公者，富贵之徒也。为无私者终得其私，故公私之利同也。
现代文：尽力为公，是走向富贵的路途；不谋私利的人最终得到私利，所以说公私的利益是相同的。
English: To do one's best for the public is the road to riches; those who do not seek private interests will eventually get private interests, so the interests of the public and the private are the same.

古文：今欲富者不由贫自得富，欲贵者不安贱自得贵，公私之涂既乖，而人情不能无私，私利不可以公得，则恆背公而横务。
现代文：现在想谋求富的人不经过贫苦就得到富，想显贵的人不安于卑贱就得到显贵，公私利益相反，就导致了人情不能没有私心，满足私利不是通过为公的途径，就会常常背弃公而取私利。
English: Nowadays, people who want to seek wealth get rich without going through poverty, and people who want to be distinguished get distinguished without worrying about being lowly. The opposite of public and private interests has led to the fact that human feelings cannot be without selfishness. If private interests are not satisfied through public means, they will often turn their backs on the public and seek private interests.

古文：是以风节日穨，公理渐替，人士富贵，非轨道之所得。
现代文：所以风俗节操一天比一天颓废，公理渐丧，人们谋取富贵，不是通过合法的渠道获得。
English: Therefore, the custom of being austere is becoming more and more decadent day by day, justice is gradually lost, and people seek wealth, not through legal channels.

古文：以此为政，小大难期。
现代文：这样处理政务，大小事情都难以实现。
English: It is difficult to achieve both large and small things when dealing with government affairs in this way.

古文：然教穨来既久，难反一朝。
现代文：但政教颓废由来已久，难以一朝反正。
English: However, the decadence of politics and religion has been around for a long time, and it is difficult to rectify it once and for all.

古文：又世放都靡，营欲比肩，群士浑然，庸行相似，不可顿肃，甚殊黜陟也。
现代文：又社会风气奢侈萎靡，竞相营私，众人浑然，庸俗的行为一样，不能一下就整顿肃清，升降悬殊。
English: In addition, the social ethos of extravagance is languishing, competing for private interests, everyone is hazy, and vulgar behavior is the same. It cannot be rectified and eliminated at once, and there is a great disparity in promotion and demotion.

古文：且教不求尽善，善在抑尤，同侈之中，犹有甚泰。
现代文：况且政教不求尽善尽美，在于抑制大者，一样奢侈的人中，还有更过分的。
English: Moreover, politics and religion do not seek to be perfect, but to restrain the great, and among those who are as extravagant, there are still more excessive.

古文：使夫昧适情之乐者，捐其显荣之贵，俄在不鲜之地；约己洁素者，蒙俭德之报，列于清官之上。
现代文：应让那些不懂得适合情理而纵情的人，放弃他们显赫荣耀的富贵，一下处在不毛之地；约束自己廉洁朴素的人，受到有俭约德行的报答，排列在清官的位置上。
English: Let those who do not know how to be reasonable and indulgent, give up their conspicuous glory and wealth, and suddenly find themselves in a barren land; those who discipline themselves to be clean and simple, are rewarded with thrifty and virtuous behavior, and are arranged in the position of clean officials.

古文：二业分流，令各有蒙。
现代文：两种情况分开来，使各得其所。
English: Separate the two situations and let each take its proper place.

古文：然俗放都奢，不可顿肃，故臣私虑，愿先从事于渐也。
现代文：但社会风气奢侈，不能短期内整顿肃清，因此我私下考虑，希望渐渐地来改变。
English: But the social atmosphere is extravagant and cannot be rectified in a short time, so I think about it in private and hope to change it gradually.

古文：天下至大，万事至众，人君至少，同于天日，故非垂听所得周览。
现代文：天下极大，万事极多，帝皇仅一位，如同天日仅有一个，因此不能事事都听取遍览。
English: The world is vast and there are so many things to do. There is only one emperor, just as there is only one sun, so we cannot listen to everything.

古文：是以圣王之化，执要而已，委务于下而不以事自婴也。
现代文：所以圣王的教化，抓住大要而已，委任政务于下面的官吏而不是事事由自己来处理。
English: Therefore, the edification of the holy king only grasped the essentials, and appointed government affairs to the officials below, rather than handling things by himself.

古文：分职既定，无所与焉，非惮日昃之勤，而牵于逸豫之虞，诚以政体宜然，事势致之也。
现代文：分职已定，就不再参与，不要日夜操劳，不要怕人说不管事，而是政体应该如此，事势导致这样。
English: Once the division of duties has been decided, do not participate, do not work day and night, do not be afraid to say that you do not care about things, but the political system should be like this, the situation leads to this.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：夫造创谋始，逆暗是非，以别能否，甚难察也。
现代文：刚开始创业策谋，不懂是非，难区别能与不能，很难对官员考察。
English: It is difficult to distinguish between can and can't, and it is difficult to inspect officials.

古文：既以施行，因其成败，以分功罪，甚易识也。
现代文：已经实行以后，按照做事的成败，来区分功罪，非常容易。
English: After it has been implemented, it is very easy to distinguish between merits and demerits according to the success or failure of doing things.

古文：易识在考终，难察在造始，故人君恆居其易则安，人臣不处其难则乱。
现代文：容易识别在于考察以后，难以观察在于创造以前，所以帝王常处在容易考察的情况下就很安然，大臣不处在危难之中就会罱。
English: What is easy to recognize is after inspection, but what is difficult to observe is before creation. Therefore, the emperor is always at ease in a situation that is easy to inspect, and the minister will be paralyzed if he is not in danger.

古文：今陛下每精事始而略于考终，故群吏虑事怀成败之惧轻，饰文采以避目下之谴重，此政功所以未善也。
现代文：现在陛下常常精于注意事情的起始而忽略了考察其结果，因此各级官吏处理事务时很少有做得成功与否的忧惧，矫饰文词来躲避眼前将要受到的谴责，所以政事没有处理好。
English: Nowadays, His Majesty often pays attention to the beginning of things and neglects to examine their results. Therefore, officials at all levels rarely worry about whether they are successful or not when handling affairs, and they embellish words to avoid the condemnation they are about to receive. Therefore, political affairs have not been handled well.

古文：今人主能恆居易执要以御其下，然后人臣功罪形于成败之征，无逃其诛赏。
现代文：陛下如能抓住要领以统治臣下，然后大臣的功罪就能通过政事成败表现出来，难以逃脱对他的赏罚。
English: If His Majesty can grasp the essentials to rule his subjects, then the merits and demerits of the minister can be shown through the success or failure of government affairs, and it is difficult to escape his reward and punishment.

古文：故罪不可蔽，功不可诬。
现代文：这样就会罪不能隐，功不能没。
English: In this way, sin cannot be hidden, and merit cannot be lost.

古文：功不可诬，则能者劝；罪不可蔽，则违慢日肃，此为国之大略也。
现代文：功不能没，就使贤能的人得到勉励；罪不能隐，就会错误减少日趋整肃，这是治理国家的大计。
English: If merit cannot be eliminated, then the virtuous will be encouraged; if sin cannot be concealed, then mistakes will be reduced and rectified day by day. This is the overall plan for governing the country.

古文：臣窃惟陛下圣心，意在尽善，惧政有违，故精事始，以求无失。
现代文：我推测陛下的心意，在于尽善尽美，又害怕政事有失误，所以精心于事情的起始，以求得到没有失误。
English: I surmise that His Majesty's intention is to do everything perfectly, and he is afraid of making mistakes in politics, so he is careful at the beginning of things to ensure that there are no mistakes.

古文：又以众官胜任者少，故不委务，宁居日昃也。
现代文：又因为众多的官员中能胜任的很少，因此不委托政务给他们，宁肯自己终日忙碌。
English: Also, because there are few competent officials among the numerous officials, they do not entrust government affairs to them, preferring to be busy all day.

古文：臣之愚虑，窃以为今欲尽善，故宜考终。
现代文：我认为现在想尽善尽美，就应当考察结果。
English: I think now, if we want to be perfect, we should look at the results.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：精始难校故也。
现代文：因为精于起始则难以考察结果。
English: It's hard to look at the results because you're so good at starting.

古文：又群官多不胜任，亦宜委务，使能者得以成功，不能者得以著败。
现代文：官员大多不能胜任，也应委任政务给他们，使有才能的人能够取得成功，无能的人能够显现错误。
English: Officials, most of whom are incompetent, should also be entrusted with government affairs, so that talented people can succeed and incompetent people can make mistakes.

古文：败著可得而废，功成可得遂任，然后贤能常居位以善事，暗劣不得以尸禄害政。
现代文：错误表现出来就能废除他的职务，取得成功的人可以得到进一步的任用，然后贤能的人就可以常居官位来很好地工作，愚劣的人就不能占据官位浪费俸禄来祸害政事。
English: If a man is found to be in the wrong, he can be removed from office; if he succeeds, he can be reappointed; if he is a good man, he can stay in office and do a good job; if he is a bad man, he can stay in office and waste his salary and do harm to the government.

古文：如此不已，则胜任者渐多，经年少久，即群司遍得其人矣。
现代文：如此不断地实行下去，就会使胜任职位的人慢慢增多起来，年代稍为久远，各部门就都能得到胜任的人才。
English: If we continue to do this, we will gradually increase the number of people who are qualified for positions. In a few years' time, all departments will be able to obtain qualified personnel.

古文：此校才考实，政之至务也。
现代文：这样考核，是为政的要务。
English: Such an assessment is an important task for the government.

古文：今人主不委事仰成，而与诸下共造事始，则功罪难分。
现代文：现在陛下不依靠官员取得成功，而和众位官吏共同谋划事务的起始，就使功罪难以区分。
English: Now that His Majesty does not depend on officials to succeed, the beginning of planning affairs together with officials makes it difficult to distinguish between merits and demerits.

古文：下不专事，居官不久，故能否不别。何以验之？
现代文：下面的人不能专任事务，身居官位时间不长，因此能与不能难以区分。
English: The people below cannot work full-time, and they have not been in office for a long time, so it is difficult to distinguish between them.

古文：今世士人决不悉良能也，又决不悉疲软也。
现代文：如何考察他们呢?现在的官员决不会都是贤良的人才，又决不会都是软弱无能的人。
English: How can they be examined? Today's officials are by no means all good people, and by no means are they all weak and incompetent.

古文：然今欲举一忠贤，不知所赏；求一负败，不知所罚。
现代文：但现在想举荐一位忠诚贤良的人，却得不到奖赏；查出一位无能犯法的官吏。也得不到惩罚。
English: But now I want to recommend a loyal and virtuous person, but I can't get a reward; I can't find an official who can't break the law, and I can't get punished.

古文：及其免退，自以犯法耳，非不能也。
现代文：等到被免官退职，还自认为不应该，并不是没有才能。
English: It's not a lack of talent to wait until you've been removed from office and think you shouldn't have done it.

古文：登进者自以累资及人间之誉耳，非功实也。
现代文：升进的人自己觉得不过是资历久和人们的奖誉而已，并不是有功绩。
English: Those who have been promoted feel that it is only because of their seniority and people's praise, not because of their merits.

古文：若谓不然，则当今之政未称圣旨，此其征也。
现代文：如果说不是这样，那么当今的政务不能使圣上称心，造就是验证。
English: If this is not the case, then today's government affairs cannot satisfy the sacred, and creation is verification.

古文：陛下御今法为政将三十年，而功未日新，其咎安在？
现代文：陛下利用现在的法度为政将近三十年，而功业不能日新一日，这原因又在哪裹呢?
English: What is the reason why His Majesty has been governing for nearly thirty years using the current laws, but his work cannot be renewed day by day?

古文：古人有言： 琴瑟不调，甚者必改而更张。 
现代文：古人说： 琴瑟不调，必须改弦更张。 
English: The ancients said, "If the lyre is out of tune, the strings must be changed."

古文：凡臣所言，诚政体之常，然古今异宜，所遇不同。
现代文：大凡我所说的，是政体的常规，但古今情况不同，遇到的事不同。
English: What I have said is the norm of the political system, but the situation is different from the past to the present, and the things encountered are different.

古文：陛下纵未得尽仰成之理，都委务于下，至如今事应奏御者，蠲除不急，使要事得精可三分之二。
现代文：陛下纵然不能尽得成功的途径，将事务都委任臣下，但把如今应上奏的事务，去掉不是急务的，使重大的事情精减大约三分之一。
English: Although His Majesty cannot succeed in delegating everything to his vassals, he has eliminated the non-urgent matters and reduced the important matters by about one-third.

古文：古者六卿分职，冢宰为师。
现代文：古时六卿分职，冢宰为首。
English: In ancient times, there were six divisions of responsibilities for the court nobles, headed by the chief steward.

古文：秦、汉已来，九列执事，丞相都总。
现代文：秦漠以来，九卿执掌国事，丞相为总管。
English: Since the reign of Qin, nine princes have been in charge of state affairs, with the prime minister as the chief administrator.

古文：今尚书制断，诸卿奉成，于古制为重，事所不须，然今未能省并。
现代文：现在由尚书决断，各部门遵照执行，比古代的制度要繁重，有些部门本不需要，但今天未能减省归并。
English: Now, the decision is made by Shangshu, and all departments follow the implementation, which is more onerous than the ancient system. Some departments do not need it, but today they cannot reduce and merge provinces.

古文：可出众事付外寺，使得专之，尚书为其都统，若丞相之为。
现代文：可以分出众多事务交付外寺，使他们有专管的权力，由尚书总管，像古时的丞相。
English: It is possible to allocate many affairs to be handed over to outside temples, so that they have the power of exclusive management, by the general manager of Shangshu, like the prime minister in ancient times.

古文：惟立法创制，死生之断，除名流徙，退免大事，及连度支之事，台乃奏处。
现代文：衹有创立法制，决断死生，罢除流放官吏，斥退黜免的大事，以及收入支出等事，由台合上奏处理。
English: Important matters such as the creation of a legal system, the determination of life and death, the dismissal and banishment of officials, the rejection and removal of officials, and the expenditure of income and other matters shall be dealt with by the Taiwan Association.

古文：其余外官皆专断之，岁终台閤课功校簿而已。
现代文：其余事务由外官专掌决断，年底由台合考察计算功绩就可以了。
English: The rest of the affairs will be decided by the foreign affairs expert, and at the end of the year, it will be up to the Taiwan-US joint inspection to calculate the merits.

古文：此为九卿造创事始，断而行之，尚书书主，赏罚绳之，其势必愈考成司非而已。
现代文：这样由九卿起始创造，决断实行，尚书记载主持，依法赏罚，其结果必然会更好地考察成绩追究错误。
English: In this way, the nine emperors will create from the beginning, implement decisively, preside over the record, and reward and punish according to law. The result will inevitably be better examination of achievements and investigation of errors.

古文：于今亲掌者动受成于上，上之所失，不得复以罪下，岁终事功不建，不知所责也。
现代文：当今执行的人一举一动都受上面指挥，上面有了失误，不能再归罪于下，年底也不考核功绩，不加责罚。
English: The people who are in charge today are under the command of the superiors in every move. If there is a mistake made by the superiors, it can no longer be blamed on the subordinates. At the end of the year, their performance is not evaluated and they are not punished.

古文：夫监司以法举罪，狱官案劾尽实，法吏据辞守文，大较虽同，然至于施用，监司与夫法狱体宜小异。
现代文：监察部门依法纠举罪责，狱官按罪查清事实，执法的官吏根据讼辞谨守律文，大法虽然相同，但在实施的过程中，监察部门和法狱官吏又有些小的差异。
English: The supervision department will investigate the criminal responsibility according to the law, the prison officers will investigate the facts according to the crime, and the law enforcement officials will strictly abide by the law according to the lawsuit. Although the great law is the same, there are some small differences between the supervision department and the legal prison officials in the process of implementation.

古文：狱官唯实，法吏唯文，监司则欲举大而略小。
现代文：狱官注重事实，法吏重文辞，监察部门则想列举大过而略去小误。
English: Prison officers focus on facts, law enforcement officials emphasize words, and monitoring departments want to enumerate major and omit minor errors.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：夫细过微阙，谬妄之失，此人情之所必有，而悉纠以法，则朝野无全人，此所谓欲理而反乱者也。
现代文：捆微的过失，谬妄的缺点，这入之常情是每个人都必然会有的，而都依法追究，就会使朝野没有不犯错误的人，这就造成所谓本想治理却反而使局面更为混乱的原因。
English: Small mistakes and absurd shortcomings, which are unavoidable for everyone, and are all investigated according to the law, will make the government and the country have no one who does not make mistakes. This is the reason why the so-called intended governance has made the situation more chaotic.

古文：故善为政者纲举而网疏，纲举则所罗者广，网疏则小必漏，所罗者广则为政不苛，此为政之要也。
现代文：所以善于为政的人抓住纲要而放宽小罪，抓住纲要就会包罗面广，法纪宽疏就会使小的过失被遣漏，包罗面广就会为政不严苛，这是为政的关键。
English: Therefore, a person who is good at politics will grasp the outline and relax minor crimes. If he grasps the outline, he will cover a wide range. If the legal discipline is loose, small faults will be omitted. If it covers a wide range, it will be lax. This is the key to politics.

古文：而自近世以来，为监司者，类大纲不振而微过必举。
现代文：但从近世以来，监司官员，常常不抓住大纲但对细微过错必加追究。
English: However, since modern times, supervising officials often do not grasp the outline, but must be investigated for minor mistakes.

古文：微过不足以害政，举之则微而益乱；大纲不振，则豪强横肆，豪强横肆，则百姓失职矣，此错所急而倒所务之由也。
现代文：细微的遇错不足以祸害政务，追究的话就会苛捆而更乱；大纲不振，就会豪强横行肆虐，豪强横行肆虐，就会使百姓失业，造就是造成缓急失措轻重颠倒的原因。
English: Minor mistakes are not enough to harm government affairs, if they are investigated, they will be harsh and more chaotic; if the outline is not strong, it will be rampant and rampant, and if it is rampant and rampant, it will cause people to lose their jobs, which is the reason for the reversal of priorities.

古文：今宜令有司反所常之政，使天下可善化。
现代文：现在应命令有关部门改正平常的为政方式，使天下可以推行好的教化。
English: The relevant departments should now be ordered to correct the usual way of doing politics, so that the world can carry out good education.

古文：及此非难也，人主不善碎密之案，必责犯强举尤之奏，当以尽公，则害政之奸自然禽矣。
现代文：要达到这种程度并不难，陛下如不喜好支离苛密的案件，必然会责成上奏重大案件，使官吏尽力为公，则祸害国政的奸臣自然会束手就擒。
English: It is not difficult to reach such a level. If His Majesty does not like cases that are too complicated, he will certainly order important cases to be reported, so that officials will do their best to serve the public, and treacherous ministers who harm national politics will naturally lay down their arms.

古文：夫大奸犯政而乱兆庶之罪者，类出富强，而豪富者其力足惮，其货足欲，是以官长顾势而顿笔。
现代文：那些大奸犯法而扰乱百姓的人，大多出自豪强，而豪强势力足以吓人，财货足以为所欲为，因此官员怯于他的势力而不敢上奏。
English: Those traitors who violate the law and disturb the people, most of them are proud and strong, and the strong and powerful forces are enough to scare people, and the goods are enough to do whatever they want, so officials are afraid of his power and dare not play.

古文：下吏纵奸，惧所司之不举，则谨密网以罗微罪。
现代文：下吏放纵奸邪，但怕说他任职而不负责，就罗织一些小的过错。
English: A subordinate official indulges in evil, but for fear of saying that he is in charge and not responsible, he makes some small mistakes.

古文：使奏劾相接，状似尽公，而挠法不亮固已在其中矣。
现代文：使上奏弹劾不断，看起来尽力为公，而扰乱法律不公平却被掩盖。
English: The constant impeachment drama makes it look like they are doing their best to serve the public, while the injustice of disrupting the law is being covered up.

古文：非徒无益于政体，清议乃由此而益伤。
现代文：不仅无益于政体，对时政的议论也更多。
English: Not only is it not beneficial to the political system, but there is also more discussion about current politics.

古文：古人有言曰： 君子之过，如日之蚀焉。 
现代文：古人说： 君子的过失，像太阳发生日食一样。 
English: The ancients said: The fault of a gentleman is like the eclipse of the sun.

古文：又曰： 过而能改 又曰 不贰过 。
现代文：又说： 有了过失但能改正。 又说： 不犯第二次错误。 
English: He also said, "If you make a mistake, you can correct it," and "Don't make the same mistake twice."

古文：凡此数者，皆是贤人君子不能无过之言也。
现代文：这几条，都是讲贤人君子也不能没有过错的言论。
English: These are all statements that a wise man and a gentleman cannot make without fault.

古文：苟不至于害政，则皆天网之所漏；所犯在甚泰，然后王诛所必加，此举罪浅深之大例者也。
现代文：如果不至于祸害国政，就都应为法网所遗漏；所犯错误太大，然后加以王法，这是我所说的罪过深浅如何处理的大概。
English: If it does not harm national politics, it should be omitted by the legal network; if the mistake is too big, then it should be dealt with by the royal law. This is what I mean by the depth of the crime and how to deal with it.

古文：故君子得全美以善事，不善者必夷戮以警众，此为政诛赦之准式也。
现代文：君子应保全美誉来从事善政，不好的人必被诛杀来警戒众人，这是为政或杀或赦的准则。为什么呢?
English: A gentleman should preserve his reputation to engage in good government, and a bad man must be killed to warn everyone. This is the principle of killing or forgiving for politics. Why?

古文：何则？所谓贤人君子，苟不能无过，小疵不可以废其身，而辄绳以法，则愧于明时。
现代文：所谓贤人君子，也不能没有过失，不因小的过失就废免其人，动不动就绳之以法，就会愧对圣明。
English: The so-called wise men and gentlemen can't be without fault, can't be dismissed for minor faults, can't be brought to justice at every turn, and will be ashamed of the sacred.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：虽有所犯，轻重甚殊，于士君子之心受责不同而名不异者，故不轨之徒得引名自方，以惑众听，因名可乱，假力取直，故清议益伤也。
现代文：虽然犯有错误，但轻重悬殊，对于士君子心中所受的责罚不同但名誉上没有什么不同，所以不法之徒得以引用他们的声名来自比，惑乱视听，趁著名声可以扰乱，藉力取直。所以对时政议论更不利。
English: Although mistakes have been made, there is a disparity in severity, and there is a difference in the punishment received in the hearts of scholars and gentlemen, but there is no difference in reputation, so the wrongdoers can use their reputation to compare themselves, confuse audio-visual, take advantage of the reputation to disturb, and straighten out by force. Therefore, it is more unfavorable to the current political debate.

古文：凡举过弹违，将以肃风论而整世教，今举小过，清议益穨。
现代文：大凡纠举过错弹劾失误，是要用来肃清诬陷整顿教化，现在纠举小过，使清议更为颓废。
English: The great rectification of faults and mistakes of impeachment is to be used to clear up the frame-up, rectify and enlighten. Now the rectification is too small, making the discussion more decadent.

古文：是以圣人深识人情而达政体，故其称曰： 不以一眚掩大德。 
现代文：所以圣人深知人情而通达政体，所以说： 不因一点小错误而掩盖了大德行。 
English: That is why the sage, who was well aware of the human condition, was able to achieve a political system. Therefore, he said: Do not cover up great virtue with a small mistake.

古文：又曰： 赦小过，举贤才。 
现代文：又说： 赦免小过，推举贤才。 
English: He also said, "It is better to pardon a minor and promote a wise person."

古文：又曰： 无求备于一人。 
现代文：又说： 不要对人求全责备。 
English: And he said, Let no man despise thy youth.

古文：故冕而前旒，充纩塞耳，意在善恶之报必取其尤，然后简而不漏，大罪必诛，法禁易全也。
现代文：因此戴着冕冠前有玉旒，用丝絮塞住耳朵表示不听信谗言，用意在于对恶人的惩罚必须取其中大的，然后简约但不疏漏，犯大罪的人必然受到诛杀，这样法禁就容易全备。
English: Therefore, wearing a crown, wearing a jade bracelet, and plugging one's ears with silk to indicate that one does not listen to advice, the intention is that the punishment for the wicked must be the greatest, and then it is simple but not omitted, and those who commit major crimes must be killed, so that the prohibition is easy to complete.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：害法在犯尤，而谨搜微过，何异放兕豹于公路，而禁鼠盗于隅隙。
现代文：危害法律在于犯大罪行，却去严谨地搜寻小的过失，造和把豺狼虎豹放在大路上不管，而去严禁在墙角缝中偷盗物品的老鼠，又有什么区别。
English: What is the difference between endangering the law by committing a major crime and searching rigorously for minor faults, and creating a mouse that does not care about the wolf, tiger and leopard on the road, but is strictly forbidden to steal things in the corner?

古文：古人有言， 鈇钺不用而刀锯日弊，不可以为政 ，此言大事缓而小事急也。
现代文：古人说， 鈇铁放弃不用而常使用刀锯，不能为政 ，这是说放弃大事而处理小事。
English: The ancients said, "If you give up using a hammer and an iron and use a knife and a saw instead, you cannot be a statesman." This means giving up big things and dealing with small things.

古文：时政所失，少有此类，陛下宜反而求之，乃得所务也。
现代文：当今政务的过失，有点相类似，陛下应当反过来去做，就能做应做的事。
English: The faults of present-day government are somewhat similar, and His Majesty should do the opposite, so that he can do what he should do.

古文：夫权制不可以经常，政乖不可以守安，此言攻守之术异也。
现代文：权宜之制不能长期使用，政务乖谬不能保安，这是说攻与守的方法不同。
English: The expedient system cannot be used for a long time, and government affairs cannot be secured. This means that the methods of attack and defense are different.

古文：百姓虽愚，望不虚生，必因时而发。
现代文：百姓虽然愚昧无知，但他们的愿望不会凭空产生，必定是随时宜而产生。
English: Although the people are stupid and ignorant, their desire will not arise out of thin air, but must arise at any time.

古文：有因而发，则望不可夺；事变异前，则时不可违。
现代文：有原因而产生，那这一愿望就不可剥夺；事情没发生变化以前，那时机也不可违抗。
English: If there is a reason, then this desire is inalienable; if things have not changed, then the opportunity cannot be defied.

古文：明圣达政，应赴之速，不及下车，故能动合事机，大得人情。
现代文：圣明的为政之道，会迅速去处理，等不到下车，因此能一举一动合乎时机，做到大得人心。
English: Shengming's way of doing politics is to deal with things quickly, and can't wait to get off the bus, so he can make every move at the right time and win people's hearts.

古文：昔魏武帝分离天下，使人役居户，各在一方；既事势所须，且意有曲为，权假一时，以赴所务，非正典也。
现代文：昔年魏武帝分离天下，使人们服役住家，各在一方；这既是形势所需要，又不得意，权且用于一时，以应付急务，并不是常典。
English: In the past, Emperor Wu of Wei separated the world and made people serve and live at home, on the one hand; this is both necessary and inconvenient, and the power is used temporarily to deal with urgent matters, and is not a constant.

古文：然逡巡至今，积年未改，百姓虽身丁其困，而私怨不生，诚以三方未悉荡并，知时未可以求安息故也。
现代文：但沿用至今，积年不改，百姓虽然身受困苦，但不生私怨，实在是因为他们懂得三方尚未平定统一，知道暂时不能求得安宁的缘故。
English: However, it has been used to this day, unchanged over the years. Although the people are suffering hardships, they do not bear personal grudges. This is because they understand that the three parties have not yet been pacified and unified, and know that they cannot obtain peace for the time being.

古文：是以甘役如归，视险若夷。
现代文：所以心甘情愿服役就像在家裹一样，视危险如同平安。
English: Therefore, they are willing to serve as if they were at home, and see danger as peace.

古文：至于平吴之日，天下怀静，而东南二方，六州郡兵，将士武吏，戍守江表，或给京城运漕，父南子北，室家分离，咸更不宁。
现代文：到了平定吴的时候，天下想望平静，但东南二方，六州的郡兵，将士武吏，戍守长江沿岸，或者给京城在水上运输物资，父亲在南，儿子在北，家人分离，都不安宁。
English: When the time came to pacify Wu, the world hoped for calm, but the two sides in the southeast, the county soldiers of the six states, the soldiers and officers, guarded the coast of the Yangtze River, or transported materials to the capital on the water, the father in the south, the son in the north, the separation of families, were all restless.

古文：又不习水土，运役勤瘁，并有死亡之患，势不可久。
现代文：又不习水土，运输劳作频繁生病，甚至有死亡的灾患，这种情势不可长久。
English: They are not accustomed to water and soil, and frequent illnesses and even deaths occur in transportation work. This situation cannot last long.

古文：此宜大见处分，以副人望。
现代文：这些事应当很好地加以解决，以满足人们的愿望。
English: These matters should be well addressed to meet the aspirations of the people.

古文：魏氏错役，亦应改旧。
现代文：魏氏人役交错，也应改革旧法。
English: The old law should also be reformed.

古文：此二者各尽其理，然黔首感恩怀德，讴吟乐生必十倍于今也。自董卓作乱以至今，近出百年，四海勤瘁，丁难极矣。
现代文：这雨点做得合理，百姓就会十倍于今天地感恩戴德，妪歌欢乐的生活。自董卓作乱到今天，将近百年，天下苦于劳役，人丁艰难到了极点。
English: If this rain point is done reasonably, the people will be ten times more grateful than today, and live a happy life. From the time of Dong Zhuo's chaos to today, nearly a hundred years, the world has been suffering from labor service, and people have been extremely difficult.

古文：六合浑并，始于今日，兆庶思宁，非虚望也。
现代文：天下统一，开始在今天，百姓想念安宁，不是凭空虚望。
English: The unification of the world begins today. The people yearn for peace, and it is not an empty hope.

古文：然古今异宜，所遇不同，诚亦未可以希遵在昔，放息马牛。然使受百役者不出其国，兵备待事其乡，实在可为。
现代文：但古今不同，遭遇不同，确实也不能全照古人的方法，全部免役，但让受各种劳役的人不出各自的地区，兵卒守备在各自的家乡，的确可以做到。
English: However, the situation is different from the past to the present, and it is true that we cannot follow the methods of the ancients and exempt them all from military service. However, it is true that we can let the people who are subjected to various kinds of labor service not go out of their respective regions, and the soldiers stay in their respective hometowns.

古文：纵复不得悉然为之，苟尽其理，可静三分之二，吏役可不出千里之内。
现代文：即使不能全部这样做，但如果做到合理，就可以平静三分之二的人，服役就可以不出千里。
English: Even if you can't do it all, if you do it reasonably, you can calm down two-thirds of people, and you won't have to go thousands of miles to serve.

古文：但如斯而已，天下所蒙已不訾矣。
现代文：做到这些，天下人蒙受的好处就难以计算了。
English: If this is achieved, the benefits to the world will be incalculable.

古文：政务多端，世事之未尽理者，难遍以疏举，振领总纲，要在三条。
现代文：政务千头万绪，世事尚未治理好的，难以全部在奏疏中列举，提纲挈领，关键在于三条。
English: Government affairs are in flux, the world is not yet well governed, it is difficult to enumerate everything in a treatise, the outline is incomplete, the key lies in three articles.

古文：凡政欲静，静在息役，息役在无为。
现代文：想要政治清静，清静在于减少劳役，减少劳役在于无马而治。
English: If you want political tranquillity, tranquillity lies in the reduction of labour service, and the reduction of labour service lies in the elimination of horse-trading.

古文：仓廪欲实，实在利农，利农在平籴。
现代文：想使仓库充实，则在于发展农业，而利农在于平耀粮价。
English: If you want to replenish the storehouse, it lies in the development of agriculture, while the benefit of farmers lies in the leveling of grain prices.

古文：为政欲著信，著信在简贤，简贤在官久。
现代文：为政在于申明信义，申明信义在于简选贤能，简选贤能在于任官时间长。
English: To be a politician is to affirm one's faith, to affirm one's faith is to be elected, and to be elected is to be in office for a long time.

古文：官久非难也，连其班级，自非才宜，不得傍转以终其课，则事善矣。
现代文：使官员任职长并不是困难的事，让他们在位连任，如果才能不合适，就不要让他转任他官，这样事情就能办好。
English: It is not difficult to make an official the chief of the post, let them be re-elected, and if the talent is not suitable, do not let him transfer to another official, so that things can be done well.

古文：平籴已有成制，其未备者可就周足，则谷积矣。
现代文：平耀粮价现在已经有了成法，其中尚未完备的可以补充完善，就能储蓄谷物。
English: The leveling of grain prices has now become a law, and those that are not yet complete can be supplemented and improved, and grain can be saved.

古文：无为匪他，却功作之勤，抑似益而损之利。如斯而已，则天下静矣。
现代文：要无为而治没有别的方法，减轻烦重的劳役，抑制像是有益实则有害的事。如此而已，天下就清静了。
English: There is no other way but to do nothing, to lighten the heavy labor, to suppress what seems to be beneficial but is actually harmful, and then the world will be at peace.

古文：此三者既举，虽未足以厚化，然可以为安有余矣。
现代文：这三条一旦实施，虽然还不足以纯厚教化，但可以做到安宁是绰绰有余的。
English: Once these three articles are implemented, although it is not enough for pure and profound enlightenment, it is more than enough to achieve tranquility.

古文：夫王者之利，在生天地自然之财，农是也。
现代文：国家的利益，在于天地自然之财富，也就是农业。
English: The country's interests lie in the natural wealth of heaven and earth, that is, agriculture.

古文：所立为指于此，事诚有功益。
现代文：所建立的制度为农，就会有功益。
English: If the system established is agricultural, it will be beneficial.

古文：苟或妨农，皆务所息，此悉似益而损之谓也。
现代文：如果妨碍农业，都专务于搜刮，遣都是好像有利实则有害的做法。
English: If it interferes with agriculture, they are all dedicated to scraping, and it is a practice that seems to be beneficial but actually harmful.

古文：然今天下自有事所必须，不得止已，或用功甚少而所济至重。
现代文：但现在天下有必须要做的事，不能停下来，有的花费功夫很少但所起作用很大。
English: But now there are things in the world that must be done and cannot be stopped, some of which cost little effort but have a great effect.

古文：目下为之，虽少有废，而计终已大益。
现代文：目前做的事，稍微有些废弛，但到了最后会大有好处。
English: What you're doing now is a little bit of a waste, but it's going to pay off in the end.

古文：农官有十百之利，及有妨害，在始似如未急，终作大患，宜逆加功，以塞其渐。
现代文：农官有十倍百倍的好处，到后来有了妨害，在于有些事开始时看来似乎不要紧，但最终成了大患，应该反过来做工作，用来堵塞住这种祸患的发展。
English: An agrarian official has ten times a hundred times the benefit, and then there is a hindrance, in that some things seem to be unimportant at the beginning, but eventually become a big problem, and work should be done in turn to block the development of this scourge.

古文：如河、汴将合，沈莱苟善，则役不可息。
现代文：又如黄河、汴水合堤，沈莱治理，这些劳役不能停下来。
English: Another example is the Yellow River, the Bohai Reservoir, and the Shenlai Reclamation. These laborers cannot stop.

古文：诸如此类，亦不得已已。
现代文：诸如此类，也是不得已的。
English: Things like this are also a last resort.

古文：然事患缓急，权计轻重，自非近如此类，准以为率，乃可兴为，其余皆务在静息。
现代文：但事情要考虑缓急，权衡轻重，如果不是此类，就以此为准则，才可以用劳役，其余都专务于清静而与民休息。
English: However, things should be prioritized and weighted, and if they are not, they should be used as a guideline. Only then can they be used for labor service, and the rest should be dedicated to tranquility and rest with the people.

古文：然能善算轻重，权审其宜，知可兴可废，甚难了也，自非上智远才，不干此任。
现代文：但要能精于计算轻重，权衡利弊，知道该兴什么废什么，这很难做到，如果不是上等的智能高超的才干，不能胜任。
English: However, it is difficult to be good at calculating the weight, weighing the pros and cons, and knowing what should be promoted and what should be scrapped. If it is not a superior intelligence and superb talent, it is not competent.

古文：夫创业之美，勋在垂统，使夫后世蒙赖以安。
现代文：创业的伟大，功勋在于垂范，使后世的人有所依赖得到安宁。
English: The greatness of entrepreneurship lies in following the example, so that future generations can rely on it for peace of mind.

古文：其为安也，虽昏犹明，虽愚若智。
现代文：安宁的局面，虽然看似昏暗实则光明，大智若愚。
English: The situation of peace, although seemingly dim, is actually bright, and wisdom is foolish.

古文：济世功者，实在善化之为，要在静国。
现代文：成就济世功业的人，实际在于做好教化工作，其根本在于使国家清静。
English: Those who have accomplished the work of benefiting the world are actually doing a good job of enlightenment, which is fundamentally to make the country calm.

古文：至夫修饰宫署，凡诸作役务为恆伤过泰，不患不举，此将来所不须于陛下而自能者也。
现代文：至于修建官署，诸如此类的役作往往伤于过于奢侈，这些用不着担心不做，将来会不等陛下下令就会做。
English: As for the construction of government offices, such projects are often marred by excessive extravagance, and there is no need to worry about not doing them, they will be done in the future without waiting for His Majesty's order.

古文：至于仰蒙前绪，所凭日月者，实在遗风系人心，余烈匡幼弱，而今勤所不须，以伤所凭。
现代文：至于承受前代的遣业，依靠时日，实际在于前代的遣风能得人心，他们的余业可以匡救幼弱，但现在勤于所不需要的事，却损伤了所依靠的事。
English: As for inheriting the work of the previous generation, depending on the time, the reality is that the wind-sending work of the previous generation can win people's hearts, and their extra work can save the young and weak, but now they are busy with unnecessary things, but they have damaged the things they rely on.

古文：钧此二者，何务孰急，陛下少垂恩回虑，详择所安，则大理尽矣。
现代文：造两点，哪些事急需解决，陛下如稍微加以考虑，详细选择合适的事，就会天下大治了。
English: There are two things that urgently need to be resolved. If Your Majesty gives them a little consideration and chooses the right thing in detail, the world will be a better place.

古文：世之私议，窃比陛下于孝文。
现代文：社会上的议论，私下将陛下比作孝文帝。
English: In society, people privately compare His Majesty to Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：臣以为圣德隆杀，将在乎后，不在当今。
现代文：我认为圣德的兴隆还是衰败，在于后世，不在当今。
English: I think that the rise and fall of holiness is in the future, not in the present.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么?
English: Why is that?

古文：陛下龙飞凤翔，应期践阼，有创业之勋矣。
现代文：陛下就像龙凤飞翔，应时登上帝位，有创业的大功。
English: His Majesty is like a dragon and phoenix flying, ascended to the throne at the right time, and has made great achievements in entrepreneurship.

古文：扫灭强吴，奄征南海，又有之矣。
现代文：扫荡消灭了强大的吴国，很快又征服了南海而有之。
English: The sweep wiped out the powerful state of Wu, and soon conquered the South China Sea.

古文：以天子之贵，而躬行布衣之所难，孝俭之德，冠于百王，又有之矣。
现代文：以天子之尊，仍为百姓着想，有孝顺节俭的仁德，超过了百王，又有这一功德。
English: To hold the Son of Heaven in high esteem, to still think of the people, to have filial piety and frugality, to surpass a hundred kings, and to have this merit.

古文：履宜无细，动成轨度，又有之矣。
现代文：做事无论巨捆，一举一动都成法度，又有这种品德。
English: Regardless of the huge amount of work, every move is legal, and there is this kind of character.

古文：若善当身之政，建籓屏之固，使晋代久长，后世仰瞻遗迹，校功考事，实与汤、武比隆，何孝文足云！
现代文：如果处理好在位时的国政，建立巩固的封国，使晋代天长地久，后世瞻仰遣迹，考察功绩，那实在能和汤武相比，孝文帝怎能同陛下相比呢!
English: If the state affairs during the reign are well handled, and a consolidated vassal state is established, so that the Jin Dynasty lasts forever, and future generations look back on the history and examine the merits, then it can really be compared with Tangwu, and how can Emperor Xiaowen compare with His Majesty!

古文：臣之此言，非臣下褒上虚美常辞，其事实然。
现代文：我遣番话，并不是褒扬虚美陛下的说法，事实就是如此。
English: I do not say this to praise Her Majesty, but it is the truth.

古文：若所以资为安之理，或未尽善，则恐良史书勋，不得远尽弘美，甚可惜也。
现代文：如果要问为何如此，或有未能做好，那恐怕优秀的史官在记载功勋的时候，没有写好，非常可惜。
English: If you want to ask why this is so, or if it was not done well, then I am afraid that the excellent historian did not write well when recording the merits, which is a great pity.

古文：然不可使夫知政之士得参圣虑，经年少久，终必有成。
现代文：造就不能不使那些懂得政务的人士参与陛下的谋虑，等实行的年代稍长久，最终必然会取得成就。
English: It is impossible to build without involving those who understand government affairs in His Majesty's deliberation, and if it is implemented for a long time, it will eventually achieve success.

古文：愿陛下少察臣言。
现代文：希望陛下能稍加注意我的言论。
English: I hope Your Majesty will pay some attention to what I am saying.

古文：又论肉刑，见《刑法志》。
现代文：又议论对肉刑的看法，见于《刑法志》中。
English: He also discussed his views on corporal punishment, which can be found in the Criminal Law.

古文：诏答曰： 得表陈封国之制，宜如古典，任刑齐法，宜复肉刑，及六州将士之役，居职之宜，诸所陈闻，具知卿之乃心为国也。
现代文：下诏回答说： 得到陈奏建立封国制度，应遵照古代典制，用刑齐法，应该恢复肉刑，以及谈到六州将士之役，居官任职的方法等，所陈奏的各条，我知道了你在忠心为国。
English: Xiao Zhao replied, "I know that you are loyal to the country, because you have learned the rules for establishing a national system, you should follow the ancient formal system, use punishment equally, and should restore corporal punishment, as well as the rules for the six-state soldiers' service, the method of holding office, and so on.

古文：动静数以闻。 
现代文：以后有事仍请全部奏报。 
English: In the future, please report all incidents.

古文：元康初，从准南王允入朝。
现代文：元康初年，刘垣跟随淮南王司马允入朝。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Kang, Liu Qi followed Huainan King Sima Yun into the imperial court.

古文：会诛杨骏，颂屯卫殿中，其夜，诏以颂为三公尚书。
现代文：正遇上诛杀杨骏，刘颂驻扎守卫殿中，当天夜裹，下诏任命刘颂为三公尚书。
English: On the day of the assassination of Yang Hui, Liu Song was stationed to guard the palace. Later that night, Liu Song was appointed as the Third Prince of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：又上疏论律令事，为时论所美。
现代文：又上书议论律令方面的事，受到时论的称赞。
English: He also wrote a book to discuss matters related to the ritsuryo code, which was praised by contemporary scholars.

古文：久之，转吏部尚书，建九班之制，欲令百官居职希迁，考课能否，明其赏罚。
现代文：很久以后，转任吏部尚书，设立九班制度，想使百官任职很少改任，以便考察其是否有才能，赏罚分明。
English: After a long time, Shang Shu, who was transferred to the cadre department, set up a nine-class system in order to make the hundred officials rarely change their posts, so as to examine whether they have talent and reward and punish clearly.

古文：贾郭专朝，仕者欲速，竟不施行。
现代文：当时贾郭专擅朝政，做官的人想迅速得到升迁，这一制度最后不能施行。
English: At that time, Jia Guo was exclusively in charge of the government, and officials wanted to be promoted quickly. This system could not be implemented in the end.

古文：及赵王伦之害张华也，颂哭之甚恸。
现代文：赵王司马伦杀害了张华，哭得很悲痛。
English: Zhao Wang Simarun killed Zhang Hua and wept bitterly.

古文：闻华子得逃，喜曰： 茂先，卿尚有种也！ 
现代文：他听说张华的儿子逃脱，又高兴地说： 茂先，您还有后代啊! 
English: When he heard that Zhang Hua's son had escaped, he said happily, "Mao Xian, you still have descendants!

古文：伦党张林闻之，大怒，惮颂持正而不能害也。
现代文：司马伦的党羽张林听到此事，大怒，但惧于圣堕为人持正而不能暗害他。
English: Zhang Lin, a member of Sima Lun's party, was furious when he heard about this, but he could not assassinate him because he was afraid of being slandered.

古文：孙秀等推崇伦功，宜加九锡，百僚莫敢异议。
现代文：孙秀等人推崇司马伦的功绩，认为应加九锡，百官不敢提出异议。
English: Sun Xiu and others praised Smalen's achievements, believing that they should be added to the list, and that the officials would not dare to raise objections.

古文：颂独曰： 昔汉之锡魏，魏之锡晋，皆一时之用，非可通行。
现代文：惟有型堕说： 昔年出给堕加九锡，垫给置加九锡，都是一时使用，不能当常礼推行。
English: There is only one type of falling: In the past, nine tin was given to the falling and nine tin was given to the cushion, both of which were used temporarily and could not be carried out as a regular ritual.

古文：今宗庙乂安，虽嬖后被退，势臣受诛，周勃诛诸吕而尊孝文，霍光废昌邑而奉孝宣，并无九锡之命。
现代文：现在宗庙平安，即使皇后被废黜，专权的奸臣受到诛杀，但过去周勃杀诸吕而推尊孝文，霍光废掉昌邑而奉孝宣，都没有给予九锡的成命。
English: Now the ancestral temple is safe. Even if the empress was deposed and the treacherous vassals of the dictatorship were killed, but in the past, Zhou Bo killed Zhu Lv and promoted the honor of filial piety, and Huo Guang abolished Changyi and promoted filial piety, they did not give Jiuxi a successful life.

古文：违旧典而习权变，非先王之制。
现代文：现在违背旧有的典制而效法一时之制，不是前代帝王的制度。
English: It is not the system of the previous emperors, but a temporary system that is now being followed in violation of the old system.

古文：九锡之议，请无所施。 
现代文：九锡的建议，请不要施行。 
English: Please do not implement Jiuxi's suggestion.

古文：张林积忿不已，以颂为张华之党，将害之。
现代文：张并对此愤怒不已，认为刘颂是张华的党羽，将要杀他。
English: Zhang Nian was furious about this and thought that Liu Song was Zhang Hua's henchman and was going to kill him.

古文：孙秀曰： 诛张、裴已伤时望，不可复诛颂。 
现代文：孙秀说： 杀了张华、裴颁已经伤了人望，不能再杀了刘颂。 
English: Sun Xiu said, "Killing Zhang Hua and Pei Zi has already hurt people's reputation. I can't kill Liu Song again."

古文：林乃止。
现代文：张林才罢手。
English: Only then did Zhang Lin stop.

古文：于是以颂为光禄大夫，门施行马。
现代文：便任命塑堕为光禄大夫，在他官署前设有行马。
English: He then appointed Shupo to the post of Guanglu Doctor and set up a horse parade in front of his office.

古文：寻病卒，使使者吊祭，赐钱二十万、朝服一具，谥曰贞。
现代文：不久病逝，皇帝派人去吊唁祭祀，赐给二十万钱、朝服一具，谧为贞。
English: Soon after, she died of illness, and the emperor sent someone to offer a condolence sacrifice, giving her 200,000 coins, a court dress, and a necklace for her.

古文：中书侍郎刘沈议，颂当时少辈，应赠开府。
现代文：中书侍郎刘沈奏议，称刘坛为当时小辈，应赠开府。
English: Liu Shen, the steward of the Chinese Academy of Letters, proposed that Liu Dan, who was a junior at the time, should be presented with the palace.

古文：孙秀素恨之，不听。
现代文：孙秀平素忌恨他，没有允许。
English: Sun Xiuping hated him and did not allow him to do so.

古文：颂无子，养弟和子雍早卒，更以雍弟诩子焉为嫡孙，袭封。
现代文：颂无子，抚养弟弟刘和的儿子刘雍早死，又以刘雍弟弟型翅的儿子型历为嫡孙，继承封爵。
English: As he had no son, Liu Yong, the son who raised his younger brother Liu He, died early, and Liu Yong's younger brother Liu Ling, the son of Liu Ling, became the legitimate grandson, inheriting the title of peer.

古文：永康元年，诏以颂诛贾谧督摄众事有功，追封梁邹县侯，食邑千五百户。颂弟彪字仲雅，参安东军事。
现代文：永康元年，下诏因刘颂杀贾谧时统摄百事有功，追封为梁邹县侯，赐给食邑一千五百户刘颂的弟弟刘彪字仲雅，参与安东军事。
English: In the first year of the Yongkang era, Liu Biao's younger brother Liu Biao Zhi Zhongya, who was posthumously awarded the title of Count of Liangye County, was given the title of Count of Liangye County, and was awarded the title of Count of Liangye County. He was awarded the title of Count of Liangye County, and was given the title of Count of Liangye County, and was awarded the title of Count of Liangye County.

古文：伐吴，获张悌，累官积弩将军。
现代文：伐县时，抓获了张悌，多次升官至积弩将军。
English: When he was felling the county, he captured Zhang Xuan, and was promoted to the rank of general several times.

古文：及武库火，彪建计断屋，得出诸宝器。
现代文：到武库发生火灾，刘彪出主意拆断了与着火地方相接的房屋，抢救出来很多珠宝器物。
English: When a fire broke out in the arsenal, Liu Biao came up with the idea of tearing down the houses adjacent to the place where the fire broke out, and many jewelry items were rescued.

古文：历荆州刺史。
现代文：历任荆州刺史。
English: Successive presidents of Jingzhou have left their mark on history.

古文：次弟仲字世混，历黄门郎、荥阳太守，未之官，卒。
现代文：刘颂的二弟刘仲字世混，历任黄门郎、荣阳太守，还未上任，逝世。
English: Liu Song's second brother, Liu Zhong, also known as Shigong, successively Huangmen Lang and Rongyang Dazhu, died before taking office.

古文：初，颂嫁女临淮陈矫，矫本刘氏子，与颂近亲，出养于姑，改姓陈氏。
现代文：当初，刘颂把女儿嫁给临淮人陈矫陈矫本是刘氏人家的后代，和刘颂是近亲，由他姑姑家收养，改姓陈。
English: At first, Liu Song married his daughter to Chen Jiao, a resident of Linhuai. Chen Jiao was originally a descendant of the Liu family, and was a close relative of Liu Song. He was adopted by his aunt's family and changed his surname to Chen.

古文：中正刘友讥之，颂曰： 舜后姚虞、陈田本同根系，而世皆为婚，礼律不禁。
现代文：中正刘友以此事规劝他，刘颂说： 舜以后姚虞、陈田等姓本是同根一系，而世世通婚，礼律不禁。
English: Vice-president Liu You advised him on this matter, and Liu Song said, "After Mao Zedong, surnames such as Yao Yu and Chen Tian are originally from the same root, and intermarriage is inevitable.

古文：今与此同义，为婚可也。 
现代文：现在我家这件事也是一样的道理，通婚是可以的。 
English: It's the same in my family now, it's okay to intermarry.

古文：友方欲列上，为陈骞所止，故得不劾。
现代文：刘友正想条列奏上。被速画所阻止，因此未被弹劾。
English: Liu You was trying to play the melody. He was stopped by the speed painting, so he was not impeached.

古文：颂问明法掾陈默、蔡畿曰： 乡里谁最屈？ 
现代文：刘颂问明法掾陈麸、基毯说： 乡人中谁最委屈? 
English: Liu Song asked Ming Fa Qian Chen Qian, and Ji Bao said: Who is the most aggrieved among the villagers?

古文：二人俱云： 刘友屈。 
现代文：二人都说： 刘友委屈。 
English: Both of them said: Liu You is wronged.

古文：颂作色呵之，畿曰： 友以私议冒犯明府为非，然乡里公论称屈。 
现代文：型堕变色呵斥他们，鉴堂辩解说： 刘友因私自议论冒犯明府是错了，但乡人公论说他委屈。 
English: The court rebuked them, saying: Liu You was wrong to offend Mingfu because of his private discussion, but the villagers said publicly that he was wronged.

古文：友辟公府掾、尚书郎、黄沙御史。
现代文：刘友前后被征召为公府掾、尚书郎、黄沙御史等职。
English: Around this time, Liu You was conscripted to serve as a government official, Shang Shuro, Huang Sha Mi Shi and other positions.

古文：李重字茂曾，江夏钟武人也。
现代文：李重，字茂曾，江夏钟武人。
English: Starring Li Chong, Zi Maozeng, and Jiangxia Zhongwu Ren.

古文：父景，秦州刺史、都亭定侯。
现代文：父李景，为秦州刺史、都亭定侯。
English: His father, Li Jing, was a Qin State magistrate.

古文：重少好学，有文辞；早孤，与群弟居，以友爱著称。
现代文：奎重从小好学，有文采；早年成为孤儿，和众位弟弟住在一起，以友爱着称。
English: As a child, Kuijong was eager to learn and had a flair for literature. He was orphaned at an early age and lived with his younger brothers. He was known for his friendliness.

古文：弱冠为本国中正，逊让不行。
现代文：二十岁时任本国中正，谦逊退让不上任。
English: At the age of twenty, he became the country's vice-premier. He humbly refused to step down.

古文：后为始平王文学，上疏陈九品曰： 先王议制，以时因革，因革之理，唯变所适。
现代文：后任丝垩王文学，上疏陈述九品说： 前代帝王设立制度，随时变革，变革的道理，在于变得适合国情。
English: Later, King Sejong's literature, the Shang Zuo statement Jiuping, said: The previous emperor set up a system and changed it at any time. The reason for the change is to become suitable for the national conditions.

古文：九品始于丧乱，军中之政，诚非经国不刊之法也。
现代文：九品制开始实行于丧乱时期，是军队中的制度，不是长久实行的治国方法。
English: The nine-grade system began to be implemented in the period of turmoil. It is a system in the army, not a long-term method of governing the country.

古文：且其检防转碎，征刑失实，故朝野之论，佥谓驱动风俗，为弊已甚。
现代文：况且检查防备也变得烦琐，刑罚失实，因此朝野的议论，都认为九品制乱风俗，已经有很大弊端。
English: Moreover, inspection and prevention have also become cumbersome, and punishments have become unrealistic. As a result, both the government and the opposition have argued that the nine-grade system is a disorderly custom, and that it already has serious drawbacks.

古文：而至于议改，又以为疑。
现代文：但到了有人提议更改，就又迟疑不决。
English: But when changes were proposed, they balked.

古文：臣以革法创制，当先尽开塞利害之理，举而错之，使体例大通而无否滞亦未易故也。
现代文：我认为改革法令创立制度，应当首先考虑利害得失，然后实施，使大的体例通达而没有阻碍并不轻易变动。
English: I think that the reform of laws and regulations and the creation of a system should first consider the gains and losses, and then implement, so that the great style can be achieved without obstacles and is not easy to change.

古文：古者诸侯之治，分土有常，国有定主，人无异望，卿大夫世禄，仕无出位之思，臣无越境之交，上下体固，人德归厚。
现代文：古时候诸侯治国，分封土地有一定的制度，封国有固定的王侯，人没有非分的欲望，卿大夫世世代代享受福禄，做官的人没有超出自己本职的想法，大臣没有超越国境的交往，上下秩位固定，人们的道德归于仁厚。
English: In ancient times, lords ruled the country, there was a certain system for apportioning fief lands, the feudal state had a fixed number of princes, people had no desire to be apportioned, nobles and doctors enjoyed prosperity for generations, officials did not think beyond their duties, ministers did not cross national borders, and ranks were fixed, and people's morals were attributed to benevolence.

古文：秦反斯道，罢侯置守，风俗浅薄，自此来矣。
现代文：窒反其道而行之，废除诸侯设立郡守，风俗变得浅薄，就是由此。
English: It was because of this that they did the opposite, abolished the establishment of county governors by the lords, and the customs became shallow.

古文：汉革其弊，斟酌周、秦，并建侯守，亦使分土有定，而牧司必各举贤，贡士任之乡议，事合圣典，比踪三代。
现代文：汉改革秦的弊病，参考题、台制度，设立了封国与郡县，使分封土地有了一定的制度，而郡县官吏必须各自推举贤才，贡举士人要依据家乡对他的评议，事情做得合乎圣王典制，可以和三代相比迹。
English: The Han Dynasty reformed the Qin Dynasty's ills, the reference point, the Taiwan system, and established the fief state and counties, so that the fief land had a certain system, and the county officials had to nominate their own talents, and the tributes had to be based on the hometown's evaluation of him. Things were done in accordance with the holy king system, and could be compared with the three generations.

古文：方今圣德之隆，光被四表，兆庶颙颙，欣睹太平。
现代文：当今圣德隆厚，光芒照耀四方，亿万百姓仰望不已，看到了太平盛世。
English: Today, the glory of Saint Teresa shines in all directions, and hundreds of millions of people look up to her and see a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：然承魏氏凋弊之迹，人物播越，仕无常朝，人无定处，郎吏蓄于军府，豪右聚于都邑，事体驳错，与古不同。
现代文：但承接魏氏的凋敝，人离物散，做官的人不常在朝廷，人们没有固定的居处，郎吏聚集在军府，豪强集中在都城，事体驳杂乖错，和古代不同。
English: However, after the Wei Dynasty's decline, people were scattered, officials were not often in the imperial court, people did not have a fixed place of residence, officials gathered in the military headquarters, and the brave and strong were concentrated in the capital, and things were mixed and disorderly, which was different from the ancient times.

古文：谓九品既除，宜先开移徙，听相并就。
现代文：我认为九品制已经授舆，就应首先使各级迁移，听任相互合并。
English: I think that since the nine-commodity system has been established, we should first relocate all levels and allow them to merge with each other.

古文：且明贡举之法，不滥于境外，则冠带之伦将不分而自均，即土断之实行矣。
现代文：而且申明荐举的方法，不能滥收境外之人，这样做官的人士不用分别就可以达到均衡，就地解决实施。
English: Moreover, it is affirmed that the method of recommendation cannot be abused by people outside the country, and such officials do not need to be separated to achieve a balance and solve the implementation on the spot.

古文：又建树官司，功在简久。
现代文：又建立官级制度，成功在于简便而能长久推行。
English: It also established an official-level system. Its success lies in the fact that it is simple and can be implemented for a long time.

古文：阶级少，则人心定；久其事，则政化成而能否著，此三代所以直道而行也。
现代文：品级少，人心就安定；长期从事某职，就会取得成就显出好坏，所以三代能够直道而行。
English: If there are few grades, people's hearts will be stable; if they are engaged in a certain position for a long time, they will achieve success and show good or bad, so the three generations can walk straight ahead.

古文：以为选例九等，当今之要，所宜施用也。
现代文：我认为选官按例分为九等，是当今的要务，现在应当加以实施。
English: I think that the election of officials is divided into nine grades according to the example, which is the most important task today and should be implemented now.

古文：圣王知天下之难，常从事于其易，故寄隐括于闾伍，则邑屋皆为有司。
现代文：圣王知道天下不好治理，常常用简易的方法来治理，所以在乡里寄托那些隐逸的人，这样家家户户都像是官署。
English: The holy king knew that it was not easy to govern the world, and he often used simple methods to do so. Therefore, he sent those who were hidden away to the countryside, so that every house looked like a government office.

古文：若任非所由，事非所核，则虽竭圣智，犹不足以赡其事。
现代文：如果任用不当，事务不合，那即使竭尽圣明之智，也不能办好事情。
English: If the appointment is improper and the affairs do not fit, then even if you exhaust the wisdom of the sage, you will not be able to do things well.

古文：由此而观，诚令二者既行，即人思反本，修之于乡，华竞自息，而礼让日隆矣。 
现代文：由此看来，如果能使这两点都实行的话，就会都想回归本业，在乡里的人也进德修业，奢华竞争的风气就会自然止息，而礼貌谦让的风气将一天比一天隆盛。 
English: From this point of view, if these two points can be implemented, everyone will want to return to their own business, people in the countryside will also improve their moral character, the culture of luxury competition will naturally cease, and the culture of courtesy and modesty will flourish day by day.

古文：迁太子舍人，转尚书郎。
现代文：升任太子舍人，转为尚书郎。
English: He was promoted to Crown Prince, and changed his name to Sho Shuro.

古文：时太中大夫恬和表陈便宜，称汉孔光、魏徐干等议，使王公已下制奴婢限数，及禁百姓卖田宅。
现代文：当时太中大夫恬和陈上表，讲到汉孔光、魏徐登等人曾有过议论，使王公以下限制占有奴婢的数量，以及禁止百姓卖掉田地院宅。
English: At that time, the Tai Zhong Daifu and Chen Shangbai mentioned that Han Kongguang, Wei Xuden and others had discussed restricting the number of slaves and maids owned by princes and forbidding the people to sell their homesteads.

古文：中书启可，属主者为条制。
现代文：中书认为可以实行，下令主持的人制定条例。
English: In the opinion of the document, it can be implemented, and the person presiding over the meeting is ordered to formulate regulations.

古文：重奏曰： 先王之制，士农工商有分，不迁其业，所以利用厚生，各肆其力也。
现代文：李重上奏说道： 先王的制度。士农工商各有分别，不变更他们的职业，所以物尽其用生活充裕，各尽其力。
English: Li Chongwu said: The system of the late king. The farmers, craftsmen and merchants are all different, and they do not change their occupations, so they do their best to live well and do their best.

古文：《周官》以土均之法，经其土地井田之制，而辨其五物九等贡赋之序，然后公私制定，率土均齐。
现代文：《周官》平均土地的方法，用井田制经营土地，分别五物九等赋税的次序，然后公私的制度确定，天下的土地都平均。
English: Zhou Guan's method of averaging land, using the well-field system to manage land, the order of taxation of five things and nine items respectively, and then the public and private systems are determined, and the land under the world is averaged.

古文：自秦立阡陌，建郡县，而斯制已没。
现代文：自从秦打破井田的疆界，建立了郡县制度，这种制度受到瓦解。
English: Since the Qin Dynasty broke the boundaries of the Yitian and established the county system, this system has been disintegrated.

古文：降及汉、魏，因循旧迹，王法所峻者，唯服物车器有贵贱之差，令不僭拟以乱尊卑耳。
现代文：到了漠、魏，因袭旧制，国法所严格限制的，衹是在衣服器物车辆等方面有高贵舆卑贱的差别，使人们不至于僭越仿效而扰乱了尊卑制度。
English: In the Ming and Wei Dynasties, because of the imitation of the old system and the strict restriction of the national law, there was a difference between the noble and the lowly in clothing, utensils, vehicles, etc., so that people would not be tempted to imitate and disrupt the system of superiority and inferiority.

古文：至于奴婢私产，则实皆未尝曲为之立限也。
现代文：至于奴婢作为私产，却实际上没有做遇限制。
English: As for slaves and maidservants as private property, there are actually no restrictions on their use.

古文：八年《己巳诏书》申明律令，诸士卒百工以上，所服乘皆不得违制。
现代文：八年《己巳诏书》中已申明律令，士卒百工以上，所穿的衣服和使用的车马都不能违犯制度。
English: In the "Imperial Rescript" of eight years ago, it was stated in the ritsuryo that the clothes worn and the chariots and horses used could not violate the system if they were more than a hundred workers.

古文：若一县一岁之中，有违犯者三家，洛阳县十家已上，官长免。
现代文：如果一县在一年之中，有三家人违犯这一法令，洛阳县一年之中有十家以上犯法的。
English: If three families in one county violate this law in one year, more than ten families in Luoyang County will violate the law in one year.

古文：如诏书之旨，法制已严。
现代文：就免地方官之职。照诏书的方法，法制已经很严格。
English: According to the method of the imperial edict, the legal system has become very strict.

古文：今如和所陈而称光、干之议，此皆衰世逾侈，当时之患。
现代文：现在如恬和所陈奏中讲的了光、徐干的建议，都是衰败时代过于奢侈，成了当时的祸患。
English: Now, the light and slow-moving suggestions mentioned in the recital by Yu He are all too extravagant in the era of decline and have become the scourge of that time.

古文：然盛汉之初不议其制，光等作而不行，非漏而不及，能而不用也。
现代文：但盛汉在其初期并没有这种制度，孔光等人提议了却未实行，这不是遣漏掉而没有实行，而是能推行但并未采用。
English: However, Sheng Han did not have such a system in its early days. Kong Guang and others proposed it but did not implement it. This is not a case of omitting it and not implementing it, but it can be implemented but not adopted.

古文：盖以诸侯之轨既灭，而井田之制未复，则王者之法不得制人之私也。
现代文：是因为诸侯分封已灭，而井田制并没有恢复，这样国家的法律不能限制人们的私产。
English: It is because the vassalage system of feudal lords has disappeared, and the rice field system has not been restored, so the national law cannot restrict people's private property.

古文：人之田宅既无定限，则奴婢不宜偏制其数，惧徒为之法，实碎而难检。
现代文：人们的田地宅院既然没有一定的限度，那么奴婢也就不应该限制占有的数量，我害怕这是一种徒劳的法令，实际琐碎而难以检查。
English: As there is no definite limit to the number of fields and houses people can own, so there should be no limit to the number of slaves they can own. I am afraid this is a futile decree, trivial in practice and difficult to check.

古文：方今圣明垂制，每尚简易，法禁已具，和表无施。 
现代文：当今圣明天子统治天下，事事都崇尚简单易行，各项法令禁律都已完备，恬和的上表请不要施行。 
English: Today, when the Son of Heaven rules the world, everything is simple and easy to do. All laws and prohibitions have been completed. Please do not implement the above-mentioned peace plan.

古文：又司隶校尉石鉴奏，郁林太守介登役使所监，求召还；尚书荀恺以为远郡非人情所乐，奏登贬秩居官。
现代文：司隶校尉石鉴上奏说，郁林太守介登被诸侯王役使，请求召还他；尚书荀恺认为边远郡地不是人们所乐意去的地方，奏请降低介登的官级让他在原郡做官。
English: Shi Jian, a sub-lieutenant, reported that Yu Lin Taishu Kaiden had been sent by the princes to request that he be recalled; Shang Shuxuan believed that remote counties were not a place where people would like to go, and requested that Kaiden's official rank be lowered so that he could work as an official in the original county.

古文：重驳曰： 臣闻立法无制，所以齐众检邪，非必曲寻事情，而理无所遗也。
现代文：李重驳议说： 我听说立法没有定制，用以整饬众人纠察奸邪，不必琐碎追究，无所遗漏。
English: Li Chong refuted and said: I heard that the legislation is not customized, it is used to rectify people's picketing and evil deeds, there is no need for trivial investigation, and nothing is left out.

古文：故所滞者寡，而所济者众。
现代文：所以受阻滞的人少，而受帮助的人多。
English: As a result, fewer people are held back and more people are helped.

古文：今如登郡比者多，若听其贬秩居官，动为准例，惧庸才负远，必有黩货之累，非所以肃清王化，辑宁殊域也。
现代文：现在像介登一样做郡守的人很多，如果听任让他降级任职，并成为准则的话，我担忧才能平庸的人到边远郡地任职，会有贪污受贿的弊病，造不是整肃清明教化，使边远地区和辑安宁的办法。
English: Now, there are many people who are county magistrates like Jia Deng. If he is allowed to be demoted and become the standard, I am worried that mediocre people can serve in remote counties, and there will be the ills of corruption and bribery. This is not the way to clean up, clarify and educate, and make the remote areas peaceful.

古文：臣愚以为宜听鉴所上，先召登还，且使体例有常，不为远近异制。 
现代文：我认为应该听从石鉴所上的奏议，先召回介登，使国法有常例可遵守，不因为地方的远近而实行不同的制度。 
English: I think we should listen to the proposal made by Shijian, and recall Kaiden first, so that the national law can be observed, and different systems will not be implemented because of the distance between places.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏听从了他的建议。
English: He complied.

古文：太熙初，迁廷尉平。
现代文：太熙初年，升廷尉平。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tahei, he was promoted to the rank of courtier.

古文：驳廷尉奏邯郸醉等，文多不载。
现代文：驳议廷尉邯郸醉等人，文词繁多逭裹不记载。
English: There is no record of the many words and phrases used in the rebuttal by the courtier and the drunkard.

古文：再迁中书郎，每大事及疑议，辄参以经典处决，多皆施行。
现代文：再升为中书郎，朝廷每有大事以及有疑问的问题，他都参考经典进行处理，大多都被施行。
English: He was promoted to the position of chushiro, and whenever there was a major event or doubtful issue in the imperial court, he would refer to the classics to deal with it, and most of them were implemented.

古文：迁尚书吏部郎，务抑华竞，不通私谒，特留心隐逸，由是群才毕举。拔用北海西郭汤、琅邪刘珩、燕国霍原、冯翊吉谋等为秘书郎及诸王文学，故海内莫不归心。
现代文：升为尚书吏部郎，坚决抑制奢华争竞，不接待私下拜谒的人，尤其留心任用隐逸的人才，于是众多的贤才都被举用，提拔任用习匕海西郭汤、琅邪刘珩、燕国霍原、冯翊室谌等人作秘书郎以及诸侯王文学，因此天下莫不归心。
English: He was promoted to the post of secretary, resolutely restrained the luxury competition, did not receive people who worshiped privately, and paid special attention to the appointment of hidden talents. As a result, many talents were promoted and appointed Xi Bihai, Xiguotang, Zhaoyuan, Yan Guohuan, Feng Yishuang and others as secretaries and princes and kings of literature, so the world could not return to the heart.

古文：时燕国中正刘沈举霍原为寒素，司徒府不从，沈又抗诣中书奏原，而中书复下司徒参论。
现代文：当时燕国中正刘沈荐举霍原为寒素，司徒府不同意，刘沈又坚持向中书奏举霍原，而中书又把这件事下达给司徒府讨论。
English: At that time, Liu Shen, the vice-governor of Yan Province, recommended that hawthorn be listed as a cold vegetable, but Szeto Prefecture did not agree. Liu Shen insisted on listing hawthorn to the Chinese government, and the Chinese government sent the matter to Szeto Prefecture for discussion.

古文：司徒左长史荀组以为： 寒素者，当谓门寒身素，无世祚之资。
现代文：司徒左长史荀叁眬为： 所谓寒，应当指出身卑微贫穷的人，没有世族渊源的资格。
English: The so-called cold, it should be pointed out that people who are lowly and poor do not have the qualifications of the source of the world.

古文：原为列侯，显佩金紫，先为人间流通之事，晚乃务学，少长异业，年逾始立，草野之誉未洽，德礼无闻，不应寒素之目。 
现代文：霍原是列侯，拥有金紫，当初在社会上做一些流通往来的事务，后来才致力于学习，小时候和长大成人后不一样，年纪大了才树立声名，但乡野间对他的称誉还不大，听不到他好的德行礼法，不应当把他看成是寒门出身。 
English: Huo Yuan was a vassal lord with gold and purple. At the beginning, he did some circulation business in the society. Later, he devoted himself to study. When he was a child, he was not the same as when he grew up and became an adult. It was not until he was older that he established a reputation. However, his reputation in the countryside was not great. His good moral conduct and etiquette could not be heard, and he should not be regarded as being from a poor family.

古文：重奏曰： 案如《癸酉诏书》，廉让宜崇，浮竞宜黜。
现代文：李重上奏说： 按照《癸酉诏书》，应该推崇廉洁谦让，废黜浮华争竞。
English: Li Chongzheng said, "According to the "Decree of the Grand Duke," we should promote honesty, modesty and forbearance, and discard pompous competition.

古文：其有履谦寒素靖恭求己者，应有以先之。
现代文：其中有自谦称为寒门而端正谦恭要求自己的人，应先任用他。
English: Among them, there is a person who humbly calls himself a cold-hearted person and demands himself to be upright and courteous. He should be appointed first.

古文：如诏书之旨，以二品系资，或失廉退之士，故开寒素以明尚德之举。
现代文：按诏书的意旨，如以二品作为资格，可能会失去廉洁退让的人士，因此起用寒门出身的人用来表明崇尚美德。
English: According to the intention of the edict, if the second grade is used as a qualification, it may lose the integrity of those who concede, so the use of people from the cold gate is used to show that they advocate virtue.

古文：司徒总御人伦，实掌邦教，当务峻准评，以一风流。
现代文：司徒总管选拔人才，实际上是掌管国家教化，应当有严格的评定标准，来统一风气。
English: The chief administrator of Szeto selects talents, in fact, he is in charge of the country's indoctrination. There should be strict evaluation standards to unify the culture.

古文：然古之厉行高尚之士，或栖身岩穴，或隐迹丘园，或克己复礼，或耄期称道，出处默语，唯义所在。
现代文：但古代德行高尚的人士，有的栖身岩穴之中，有的隐迹在山丘园林，有的要求自己遵从礼制，有的到老以仁道见称，出处行动沉默寡言，惟义是从。
English: However, some of the ancient virtuous and noble people lived in rock caves, some hid in the hills and gardens, some demanded that they follow the etiquette, and some were known for their benevolence. They were taciturn in their actions, but followed the truth.

古文：未可以少长异操，疑其所守之美，而远同终始之责，非所谓拟人必于其伦之义也。
现代文：不能因为年轻时和成人后操守不同，就怀疑他现有的美德，而责成他始终如一，这不是所说的选人必选其德之理。
English: One should not suspect a man's existing virtue and require him to be consistent just because his behavior is different when he is young than when he is an adult. This is not the so-called principle of selecting people by virtue.

古文：诚当考之于邦党之伦，审之于任举之主。
现代文：而确实应当以当地的情况来考察他，从任用荐举的人那裹调查他。
English: Rather, it should be examined in the light of the local situation, and should be investigated from the perspective of the person who appointed and recommended him.

古文：沈为中正，亲执铨衡。
现代文：刘沈是中正，亲自执掌选举权。
English: Liu Shen is a member of the CPC Central Committee and holds the right to vote in person.

古文：陈原隐居求志，笃古好学，学不为利，行不要名，绝迹穷山，韫韣道艺，外无希世之容，内全遁逸之节，行成名立，搢绅慕之，委质受业者千里而应，有孙、孟之风，严、郑之操。
现代文：他陈奏霍原隐居求志，热爱古制喜好学习，学习不图谋利，行为不邀取功名，躲藏在深山，身藏道艺，对外没有希图取悦于世的谀容，在内保全隐逸的气节，成就了德行树立了声名，缙绅之士都钦慕他，委身向他求教的学生来自千里之外，有着孙子孟子的遣风，严光郑玄的节操。
English: He played the role of a hermit seeking aspiration, loved the ancient system, liked to study, studied without seeking profit, did not ask for fame, hid in the mountains, hid in Taoism, did not seek to please the outside world, preserved a secluded temperament, achieved virtue and established a reputation. All the gentlemen admired him, and the students who committed themselves to learning from him came from thousands of miles away. He had the style of his grandson Meng Zi and the discipline of Yan Guang Zheng Xuan.

古文：始举原，先谘侍中、领中书监华，前州大中正、后将军婴，河南尹轶。
现代文：刘沈一开始举荐霍原，先咨询了侍中、领中书监张华，前州大中正、后将军婴，河南尹轶等。
English: At the beginning, Liu Shen recommended Huo Yuan. First, he consulted Zhang Hua, the chancellor and librarian, the former vice-chancellor of the University of Zhuhai, the future general's child, and Yin Qi from Henan Province.

古文：去三年，诸州还朝，幽州刺史许猛特以原名闻，拟之西河，求加征聘。
现代文：过了三年，各州官员还朝，幽州刺史许猛特意把霍原的名字向上荐举，把他拟任西河，请求加以征聘任用。
English: Three years later, officials from various prefectures made a special effort to recommend Ho Yuan's name to the Emperor, nominating him for appointment to Saikawa and requesting that he be recruited and appointed.

古文：如沈所列，州党之议既举，又刺史班诏表荐，如此而犹谓草野之誉未洽，德礼无闻，舍所征检之实，而无明理正辞，以夺沈所执。
现代文：如刘沈所列举的那样，州裹已举荐丁他，而且刺史也上表举荐，这样还说他在乡野的声誉不好，没有好的德行，舍弃了已征验考察遇的结果，而又没有明确的道理和义正的言辞，使刘沈改变看法。
English: As listed by Liu Shen, he was recommended by the prefectural government, and was also recommended by the history, which said that he had a bad reputation in the countryside, had no good moral character, abandoned the results of the inspection and investigation, and had no clear reason and righteous words to make Liu Shen change his opinion.

古文：且应二品，非所求备。
现代文：况且荐应二品，不是他所要求的。
English: Moreover, two dishes should be recommended, not what he asked for.

古文：但原定志穷山，修述儒道，义在可嘉。
现代文：但是霍原意志坚定隐居深山，修述儒道，德义可嘉。
English: However, Huo Yuan resolutely secluded himself deep in the mountains, studying Confucianism, and was very virtuous.

古文：若遂抑替，将负幽邦之望，伤敦德之教。
现代文：如果抑制不用，将会辜负幽州人的愿望，伤害敦厚仁德的教化。
English: If restraint is not used, it will fail to live up to the aspirations of Yuzhou people and harm the enlightenment of Dunhuang Rende.

古文：如诏书所求之旨，应为二品。 
现代文：按照诏书所要求的旨意，应举霍原为二品。 
English: According to the will required by the imperial edict, the hawthorn should be raised to the second grade.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏听从了刘沈的奏议。
English: He complied.

古文：重与李毅同为吏部郎，时王戎为尚书，重以清尚见称，毅淹通有智识，虽二人操异，然俱处要职，戎以识会待之，各得其所。
现代文：李重和李毅同为吏部郎，当时王戎任尚书，李重以清正尚直受到称赞，李毅博通有智慧才识，虽然二人节操不同，但都身处要职，王戎以知音对待他们，各得其长。
English: Li Chong and Li Yi were both cadres. At that time, Wang Rong was a scholar, Li Chong was praised for his purity and uprightness, and Li Yi had a wealth of wisdom and talent. Although the two were different in terms of discipline, they were both in important positions. Wang Rong treated them with friendliness, each with their own strengths.

古文：毅字茂彦，旧史阙其行事。
现代文：李毅字茂彦，史书没有记载他的事迹。
English: Li Yi is called Shigehiko, but history books do not record his deeds.

古文：于时内官重，外官轻，兼阶级繁多，重议之，见《百官志》。
现代文：当时内官权重，外官权轻，加上官级繁多，李重奏议过这一弊端，见于《百官志》中。
English: At that time, the weight of the inner official was heavy, the weight of the outer official was light, and there were many levels of officials. Li Shuxiao discussed this drawback, which can be found in the "Hundred Official Records."

古文：又上疏曰： 凡山林避宠之士，虽违世背时，出处殊轨，而先王许之者，嘉其服膺高义也。
现代文：又上疏说： 大凡在山林之中逃避宠幸的人士，虽然违背当世，出处不同，但先王赞许他们的原因，是嘉许他们高尚的情操。
English: Shang Zuo also said: Although the great ones who escaped their favors in the mountains and forests are contrary to the current world and have different origins, the reason why the former king praised them was to praise their noble sentiments.

古文：昔先帝患风流之弊，而思反纯朴，乃谘询朝众，搜求隐逸。
现代文：过去先帝忧虑风俗奢华的弊端，想反归纯朴，就向在朝的官员咨询，搜访隐逸之士。
English: In the past, the former emperor was worried about the drawbacks of luxury customs, and if he wanted to return to simplicity, he would consult with officials in the DPRK and search for secluded people.

古文：咸宁二年，始以太子中庶子征安定皇甫谧，四年又以博士征南安硃冲，太康元年，复以太子庶子征冲，虽皆以病疾不至，而朝野悦服。
现代文：咸宁二年，征用安定皇甫谧为太子中庶子，四年又召南安朱冲为博士，太康元年，又征用朱冲为太子庶子，虽然他们都称病没有到任，但朝野都表示高兴诚服。
English: In the second year of the Xianning era, Emperor Anning requisitioned Empress Dowager Fuxi as the prince's illegitimate son, and in the fourth year he summoned Nan'an Zhu Chong as a doctor, and in the first year of the Taikang era, he also requisitioned Zhu Chong as the prince's illegitimate son. Although they both claimed that they were ill and did not arrive at the post, the court was pleased and satisfied.

古文：陛下远迈先帝礼贤之旨，臣访冲州邑，言其虽年近耋耋，而志气克壮，耽道穷薮，老而弥新，操尚贞纯，所居成化，诚山栖耆德，足以表世笃俗者也。
现代文：现在陛下发扬光大先帝礼敬贤才的宗旨，我寻访朱冲的家乡，说是他虽然年纪很老，但志气仍很大，精心研究儒道，到老而更新，德操纯贞，所在地都受他的教化，的确是隐居山野的高德之人，足以作为表率而使风俗敦厚。
English: Now that His Majesty is carrying forward the purpose of honoring the great predecessors, I have visited Zhu Chong's hometown and found that although he is very old, he still has great ambition. He has carefully studied Confucianism, and when he is old, he renews it. He is virtuous and pure, and all the localities have been educated by him. He is indeed a virtuous person who lives in seclusion in the mountains and fields, and is enough to set an example and make customs strong.

古文：臣以为宜垂圣恩，及其未没，显加优命。 
现代文：我认为应该宣示圣恩，趁他还没有去世，给予表彰优礼。 
English: I think he should be canonised and honoured before he dies.

古文：时朝廷政乱，竟不能从。
现代文：当时朝政混乱，最终没能听从。
English: At that time, the imperial court was in political turmoil, and in the end failed to obey.

古文：出为行讨虏护军、平阳太守，崇德化，修学校，表笃行，拔贤能，清简无欲，正身率下，在职三年，弹黜四县。
现代文：李重出任行讨虏护军、平阳太守，尊崇道德教化，修建学校，表彰忠诚笃行之人，提拔贤能，清廉俭约而无欲，端正自己给下属作表率，在职三年期间，弹劾罢免了四个县的官员。
English: Li Chong served as the commander of the garrison, the governor of Pingyang, revered moral enlightenment, built schools, commended those who were loyal and diligent, promoted the virtuous, clean and frugal without desire, and set an example for his subordinates. During his three years in office, he impeached and dismissed four county officials.

古文：弟嶷亡，表去官。
现代文：他的弟弟李嶷死后，他上表辞去了官职。
English: After the death of his brother, Li Xuan, he formally resigned from his post.

古文：永康初，赵王伦用为相国左司马，以忧逼成疾而卒，时年四十八。
现代文：永康初年，赵王司马伦用李重为相国左司马，因忧迫成疾而死，终年四十八岁。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, Zhao Wang Sima Lun used Li Chong as the left Sima of the same country. He died of anxiety-induced illness at the age of 48.

古文：家贫，宅宇狭小，无殡敛之地，诏于典客署营丧。
现代文：家贫，住宅狭小，没有收殓停柩之地，下韶在典客署办丧事。
English: The family is poor, the house is small, there is no place to stay, and the funeral will be held at the guest house.

古文：追赠散骑常侍，谥曰成。
现代文：追赠为散骑常侍，谧号成。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of samurai for horseback riding, 号成.

古文：子式，有美名，官至侍中，咸和初卒。
现代文：子名李式，有好的名声，官至侍中，咸和初年逝世。
English: His son's name was Li Shih, he had a good reputation, he rose to the rank of chamberlain, and died in the first year of the Han dynasty.

古文：史臣曰：子雅束发登朝，竭诚奉国，广陈封建，深中机宜，详辨刑名，该核政体。
现代文：史臣曰：子雅年轻时就在朝做官，竭尽忠诚努力为国，广泛论述建立封国，深合时宜，详细论述刑名，所论都适合政体。
English: Shichen said: Ziya became an official in the DPRK when he was young, made every effort to be loyal to the country, extensively discussed the establishment of a vassal state, which was timely, and discussed the name of the punishment in detail, all of which were suitable for the political system.

古文：虽文惭华婉，而理归切要。
现代文：虽然文辞不够华美婉丽，但切要有理。
English: Although the wording is not beautiful and elegant enough, it must be reasonable.

古文：游目西京，望贾谊而非远；眷言东国，顾郎顗而有余。
现代文：和西京时代的人相比，离买谊不远；和束国的人相比，超过了郎颤。
English: Compared with the people in the Western Capital era, it is not far from buying friendship; compared with the people in the Eastern Capital era, it is more than a flutter.

古文：逮元康之间，贼臣专命，举朝战栗，苟避菹醢；颂以此时，忠鲠不挠，哭张公之非罪，拒赵王之妄锡，虽古遗直，何以尚兹。
现代文：到元康之间，乱臣贼子专擅朝命，朝廷上下震惊，都苟且偷安；刘颂在这时，仍忠直不屈，痛哭张公的无罪，拒绝给赵王妄加九锡，即使古代的耿直名臣，谁能如此。
English: During the reign of Yuan Kangs, the ruffian and thief was always disobeying the orders of the imperial court, shocking the imperial court from top to bottom. Liu Song was still loyal and unyielding at this time, weeping bitterly for Zhang Gong's innocence and refusing to give Zhao Wang any extra money, even if he was an ancient and famous courtier, who could do such a thing.

古文：至于缘其私议，不平刘友，异夫憎而知善，举不避仇者欤！
现代文：至于私议，对刘友有不公平的看法。是憎恶某人但又能表彰他的优点，推举人才能不避仇敌一样!
English: As for private discussion, it is unfair to have an opinion about Liu You. It is like hating someone but being able to commend his merits. It is like praising someone without avoiding the enemy!

古文：李重言因革之理，驳田产之制，词惬事当，盖亹癖可观。
现代文：李重讲因循舆改革的道理，驳斥田产之制，词合事当，都有可取之处。
English: Li Chong spoke of the principle of reforming according to public opinion, refuted the rural production system, and the words were appropriate, all of which had merits.

古文：及锐志铨衡，留心隐逸，浚冲期之识会，岂虚也哉！
现代文：到他锐意主持选拔官吏，留意举荐隐逸的贤人，浚冲当成知己，岂是虚假的!
English: His eagerness to preside over the selection of officials, pay attention to the recommendation of secluded sages, and dredge as a confidant, is false!

古文：赞曰：刘颂刚直，义形于词。
现代文：赞曰：刘颂刚烈正直，德义形于言表。
English: Praise says: Liu Song is courageous and honest, and his virtue is reflected in his words.

古文：自下摩上，彼实有之。
现代文：上下磨砺，他的确有这种德义。
English: He's really got that grit about him.

古文：李重清雅，志乃无私。
现代文：李重清廉雅正，心志无私。
English: Li Chung Ching is honest, decent and selfless.

古文：推贤拔滞，嘉言在兹。
现代文：推举贤良提拔隐逸，好的言行在他那裹体现。
English: The promotion of the virtuous is elusive, and good words and deeds are embodied in him.

古文：懋哉两哲，邦家之基。
现代文：两位贤哲，是国家的基石。
English: The two sages are the cornerstones of the country.

