古文：孔休源江革孔休源，字庆绪，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：孔休源字庆绪，是会稽山阴人。
English: Kong Xiuyuan (孔休源), also known as Qingxu, is a member of the Shanyin people.

古文：晋丹阳太守冲之八世孙。
现代文：晋丹阳太守孔冲的八世孙。
English: He is the eighth-generation grandson of the Jin Danyang Grand Prince Kong Chong.

古文：曾祖遥之，宋尚书水部郎。
现代文：曾祖孔遥之，任宋尚书水部郎。
English: Zengzu Kongyao was appointed as Song Shangshu's water minister.

古文：父珮，齐庐陵王记室参军，早卒。
现代文：其父亲王迩，任查庐堕王记室参军，去世早。
English: His father, Wang Yao, was appointed to join the army by the fallen king's secretary, and died early.

古文：休源年十一而孤，居丧尽礼，每见父手所写书，必哀恸流涕，不能自胜，见者莫不为之垂泣。
现代文：休源年十一岁丧父，服丧期间完全符合礼仪，每见父亲手迹，必然痛哭流涕，不能自己，看见的人没有不为他落泪的。
English: He lost his father at the age of eleven in the year of Huyuan. During the mourning period, he fully complied with the etiquette. Whenever he saw his father's handwriting, he would inevitably shed tears. He couldn't help himself, and there was no one who saw him without shedding tears for him.

古文：后就吴兴沈驎士受经，略通大义。
现代文：后来前往吴兴师从选叠灶，通晓经学大义。
English: Later, he went to Wu Xing to learn the meaning of the sutra from the syllabus.

古文：建武四年，州举秀才，太尉徐孝嗣省其策，深善之，谓同坐曰： 董仲舒、华令思何以尚此，可谓后生之准也。
现代文：建武四年，州裹举秀才，太尉途耋翅看了他的策文，极为赞赏，对同座的人说： 董仲舒、华令思何以比他高明，可以称为后生的楷模。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianwu era, the state sponsored a talented person, and the captain, Tu Yingying, read his essay and highly appreciated it. He said to the audience, "How is it that Dong Zhongshu and Hua Ling Si are more brilliant than him? They can be called a model for future generations."

古文：观其此对，足称王佐之才。 
现代文：看他这篇策文，足可称他有王佐之才。 
English: Looking at this essay of his, it is enough to say that he has the talent of a king.

古文：琅邪王融雅相友善，乃荐之于司徒竟陵王，为西邸学士。
现代文：垄邪人王融与他极相友善，便将孔述妪推荐给司徒竟陵王，为玺历学士。
English: The evil person Wang Rong was very friendly with him, and he recommended Kong Shujuan to the King of Sifu, who was a scholar of Confucianism.

古文：梁台建，与南阳刘之遴同为太学博士，当时以为美选。
现代文：凿塑建立，舆卢厘人型主茎同任太学博士，当时人认为这是美选。
English: At the time, it was thought to be a U.S. election.

古文：休源初到京，寓于宗人少府卿孔登宅，曾以祠事入庙，侍中范云一与相遇，深加褒赏，曰： 不期忽觏清颜，顿袪鄙吝，观天披雾，验之今日。 
现代文：休源初次到京，寄居在宗人少府卿孔登宅中，曾因祭祀去庙堂，侍中范云初次与他相遇，对他极为称赞赏识，说： 不期而得见先生，鄙吝之心顿消，谁料拨云雾而见青天竟在今日。 
English: For the first time, Huiyuan came to Beijing. He stayed at the residence of his ancestor, Shofu-kyo Kondo, and went to a temple for a religious service. His chamberlain, Fan Yun, met him for the first time and was extremely appreciative of him, saying, "I got to meet you unexpectedly, sir. My miserliness disappeared immediately. Who would have expected to see the blue sky through the clouds today."

古文：后云命驾到少府门，登便拂筵整带，谓当诣己，既而独造休源，高谈尽日，同载还家，登深以为愧。
现代文：后茎昼乘车到少府门，壬逞便拂筵整带，认为一定是拜访自己，然而独访休源，高谈尽日，一同乘车回去，孔登深感惭愧。
English: After taking the car to Shofu Gate in the afternoon, he thought that it must be a visit to himself, but he only visited the source of rest, talked for a long time, and went back together by car. Kong Deng felt deeply ashamed.

古文：尚书令沈约当朝贵显，轩盖盈门，休源或时后来，必虚襟引接，处之坐右，商略文义。
现代文：尚书令沈约是朝中的贵颢，车马盈门，休源有时后到，必虚心接待他，让他坐在右边，商讨文义。
English: Shang Shuling and Shen Rongyao were high-ranking courtiers in the imperial court, and their chariots and horses filled the gate. When Huiyuan came, they would humbly receive him and let him sit on their right side to discuss the meaning of the text.

古文：其为通人所推如此。
现代文：他被学识渊博的人推重就像这样。
English: He's being pushed by learned people just like this.

古文：俄除临川王府行参军。
现代文：不久授临川王府行参军。
English: He was soon sent to join the army in Linchuan.

古文：高祖尝问吏部尚书徐勉曰： 今帝业初基，须一人有学艺解朝仪者，为尚书仪曹郎。
现代文：高祖曾间吏部尚书徐勉： 今帝业初定，需要一个有学艺懂得朝廷礼仪的人任尚书仪曹郎。
English: Gao Zu's great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great

古文：为朕思之，谁堪其选？ 
现代文：为朕想想，谁能胜任。 
English: Think for me, who is competent.

古文：勉对曰： 孔休源识具清通，谙练故实，自晋、宋《起居注》诵略上口。 
现代文：徐勉回答说： 孔休源的见识清通，熟悉往事，晋朝、宋朝两朝的《起居注》烂熟于心。 
English: Xu replied, "Kong Xiuyuan's insight is clear and lucid, he is familiar with the past, and he is familiar with the "Living Notes" of the Jin Dynasty and the Song Dynasty.

古文：高祖亦素闻之，即日除兼尚书仪曹郎中。
现代文：高祖平素也有所闻，即日授他兼尚书仪曹郎中。
English: Gao Zu has also heard that he will also be conferred the title of Shang Shuxi Saurong Junior High School.

古文：是时多所改作，每逮访前事，休源即以所诵记随机断决，曾无疑滞。
现代文：当时对朝仪多有改变，每当询问他前事，休源立即根据记忆随机断决，竟没有迟疑。
English: At that time, there were many changes to the imperial regalia. Whenever he was asked about his past, he immediately made a random decision based on memory, without hesitation.

古文：吏部郎任昉常谓之为 孔独诵 。
现代文：吏部郎任防常称他为 孔独诵 。
English: He was called "Kong Duxiao" by the head of the Ministry of Public Security.

古文：迁建康狱正，及辨讼折狱，时罕冤人。
现代文：迁建康狱正，他审理案件，很少冤屈人。
English: He is in charge of the relocation of Kang Prison. He hears cases, and rarely has any grievances.

古文：后有选人为狱司者，高祖尚引休源以励之。
现代文：后有选拔人担任狱司，高祖还举休源的事迹勉励他们。
English: Later, there was a selection of people to serve as prison wardens, and Gao Zu also encouraged them with the deeds of the source of rest.

古文：除中书舍人，司徒临川王府记室参军，迁尚书左丞，弹肃礼闱，雅允朝望。
现代文：授中书舍人，司徒临王府记室参军，迁尚书左丞，整肃尚书省，不负朝廷之所望。
English: He was awarded the title of "Junior High School Scholar" and joined the army after passing through the Records Office of the Imperial Palace. He was also promoted to "Senior Third Rank" and "Senior Third Rank" and was responsible for the rectification of the "Senior Third Rank" and "Senior Third Rank" of the Ministry of Education.

古文：时太子詹事周舍撰《礼疑义》，自汉魏至于齐梁，并皆搜采，休源所有奏议，咸预编录。
现代文：当时太子詹事周舍编撰《礼疑义》，从汉、魏以至齐、梁的有关史料一并收录，休源所有奏议，都被选入录。
English: At that time, Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou She compiled "Rites and Doubts," and the relevant historical materials from Han, Wei to Qi and Liang were included together, and all of Huiyuan's suggestions were selected for recording.

古文：除给事黄门侍郎，迁长兼御史中丞，正色直绳，无所回避，百僚莫不惮之。
现代文：授给事黄门侍郎，迁长兼御史中丞，严正执法，无所回避，百官没有不惧怕的。
English: He was awarded the title of Huangmen Zhi Rong, Chief of Relocation and Chief Historian, and strictly enforced the law. He did not shy away from anything, and was feared by hundreds of officials.

古文：除少府卿，又兼行丹阳尹事。
现代文：授少府卿，又兼行丹阳尹事。
English: He was awarded the title of Junior Prefect and concurrently held the post of Danyang Yin.

古文：出为宣惠晋安王府长史、南郡太守、行荆州府州事。
现代文：出任宣惠晋安王府长史、南郡太守、行荆州府州事。
English: He served as the prefect of King An of the Xuan Hui Jin Dynasty, the governor of Nan County, and the governor of Jing Prefecture.

古文：高祖谓之曰： 荆州总上流冲要，义高分陕，今以十岁儿委卿，善匡翼之，勿惮周昌之举也。 
现代文：高祖对他说： 荆州地处长江上游要地，比周之周公、召公之治陕还要重要，今将十岁儿委托给卿，望能尽心辅佐，不要怕作西汉的周昌。 
English: Gao Zu said to him: Jingzhou is located in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River and is more important than Zhou's Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong's governance of Shaanxi. Now entrust the ten-year-old son to the lord, hoping that he can do his best to assist, and do not be afraid to be the Zhou Chang of the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：对曰： 臣以庸鄙，曲荷恩遇，方揣丹诚，效其一割。 
现代文：休源回答说： 臣如此平庸，却受到如此恩遇，正想尽力效劳。 
English: Huiyuan replied: "The minister is so mediocre, but he has been so favored, and he is trying his best to serve.

古文：上善其对，乃敕晋安王曰： 孔休源人伦仪表，汝年尚幼，当每事师之。 
现代文：高祖称赞他的对答，便指令晋安王： 孔休源是人们的榜样，你年尚幼，应当事事请教他。 
English: Gaozhu praised his answer, and then instructed King Jinan: Kong Xiuyuan is a role model for people. You are still young, you should ask him for advice on everything.

古文：寻而始兴王嶦代镇荆州，复为憺府长史，南郡太守、行府州事如故。
现代文：不久始兴王萧儋代镇荆州，孔休源又任萧怆府长史，南郡太守、行府州事照旧。
English: Not long after, Wang Xiaohui's town of Jingzhou began to prosper, and Kong Xiuyuan was appointed the prefect of Xiaohui, the governor of Nan County, and the administration of the prefecture continued as before.

古文：在州累政，甚有治绩，平心决断，请托不行。
现代文：在州任职多年，很有政绩，处事公平，人情请托之风不行。
English: Having served in the state for many years, I have a lot of political achievements, I am fair in my dealings, and I don't take any favors from people.

古文：高祖深嘉之。
现代文：高祖极称赞他。
English: Gao Zu highly praised him.

古文：除通直散骑常侍，领羽林监，转秘书监，迁明威将军，复为晋安王府长史、南兰陵太守，别敕专行南徐州事。
现代文：授通直散骑常侍，领羽林监，转秘书监，迁任明威将军，又任晋安王府长史、南兰陵太守，另敕专行南徐州事。
English: He was awarded the title of Zhi Xuan Ji Changzhi, led the Feather Forest Supervisor, transferred to the Secretary Supervisor, transferred to the Ming Wei General, and was also appointed as the Governor of Jinan Wangfu, the Governor of South Lanling, and the other was dedicated to South Xuzhou affairs.

古文：休源累佐名籓，甚得民誉，王深相倚仗，军民机务，动止询谋。
现代文：休源多次辅佐有名望的藩王，甚得人民的称赞，晋安王极倚仗他，有关军民之事，均向他询谋。
English: Huiyuan repeatedly assisted the famous king of the domain, and was highly praised by the people. The king of Jin'an relied on him greatly, and consulted him on military and civilian matters.

古文：常于中斋别施一榻，云 此是孔长史坐 ，人莫得预焉。
现代文：常在中斋另置一榻，说 此即孔长史专座 ，别人不得去坐。
English: They often set up a special seat in the lunch room, saying that this is the special seat for Kong Changshi, and no one else is allowed to sit there.

古文：其见敬如此。
现代文：他被敬重就像这样。
English: He's revered like this.

古文：征为太府卿，俄授都官尚书，顷之，领太子中庶子。
现代文：入朝任太府卿，不久授都官尚书，旋即领太子中庶子。
English: Entered the imperial court as daifu-kyo, was soon given the title of todokan (governor of the capital), and immediately became the second son of the crown prince.

古文：普通七年，扬州刺史临川王宏薨，高祖与群臣议代王居州任者久之，于时贵戚王公，咸望迁授，高祖曰： 朕已得人。
现代文：普通七年，扬州刺史临川王宏薨去世，高祖与群臣商议以代王久任州刺史者继任，当时贵戚王公都想迁授此职，高祖说： 朕已得人。
English: In the seventh year, the Yangzhou prefect, Linchuan Wang Hongyi, died. Gaozu and his courtiers discussed who should succeed Wang Jiu as prefect. At that time, Wang Gong, a noble relative, wanted to transfer the post. Gaozu said, "I have found the right person."

古文：孔休源才识通敏，实应此选。 
现代文：孔体源才识通敏，应任此职。 
English: He should be appointed to this position because he is very knowledgeable and sensitive.

古文：乃授宣惠将军、监扬州。
现代文：便授他宣惠将军、监扬州。
English: He was awarded the title of General Xuan Hui and Supervisor of Yangzhou.

古文：休源初为临川王行佐，及王薨而管州任，时论荣之。
现代文：休源初任临川王行佐，王去世而他任此职，时论认为很光荣。
English: Huiyuan was initially appointed as the assistant of Linchuan Wang Xing, but when the king died and he assumed this post, he was considered very honorable.

古文：而神州都会，簿领殷繁，休源割断如流，傍无私谒。
现代文：扬州为中原的大城市，事务繁杂，休源办事果断，请托之风骤息。
English: Yangzhou is a large city in the Central Plains. Its affairs are complicated, but it resolutely deals with rest sources, and asks for a sudden respite.

古文：中大通二年，加授金紫光禄大夫，监扬州如故。
现代文：中大通二年，加授金紫光禄大夫，监扬州照旧。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was additionally awarded the Gold Ziguanglu Doctor, supervised by Yangzhou as before.

古文：累表陈让，优诏不许。
现代文：多次上表辞职，优诏不许。
English: He has repeatedly resigned from the cabinet, but he is not allowed to do so.

古文：在州昼决辞讼，夜览坟籍。
现代文：在州裹白天断案，夜读古籍。
English: In Zhubei, cases are dismissed during the day, and ancient books are read at night.

古文：每车驾巡幸，常以军国事委之。
现代文：每当皇帝出外巡视，常将军国大事相托。
English: Whenever the emperor went abroad on inspection, he often entrusted the military with the country's major events.

古文：昭明太子薨，有敕夜召休源入宴居殿，与群公参定谋议，立晋安王纲为皇太子。
现代文：昭明太子去世，有敕当夜召休源入宴居殿，舆群公商议，立晋安王萧纲为皇太子。
English: Prince Shomei died, and on the night of his death, the emperor summoned Shugen to a banquet at the Imperial Palace. After public deliberation, Emperor Jinan appointed King Xiao Gang as the crown prince.

古文：四年，遘疾，高祖遣中使候问，并给医药，日有十数。
现代文：四年，得病，高祖派中使问候，并派医生送去药物，一日多达十多次。
English: In four years, when he fell ill, Gao Zu sent greetings and sent a doctor to deliver medicine more than a dozen times a day.

古文：其年五月，卒，时年六十四。
现代文：逭年五月去世，时年六十四岁。
English: He died in May of the same year, at the age of 64.

古文：遗令薄葬，节朔荐蔬菲而已。
现代文：述逊遣言薄葬，逢年过节扫墓就进献蔬菜罢了。
English: It is said that the emperor's last words were buried in a shallow grave, and when the tomb was swept every year after the festival, only vegetables were offered.

古文：高祖为之流涕，顾谓谢举曰： 孔休源奉职清忠，当官正直，方欲共康治道，以隆王化。
现代文：产担为之流涕，回视邀垦说： 孔并逊奉职清忠，当官正直，正想与他同治太平，以昌王化。
English: The production supervisor was outraged, and he said: Kong Nixiong is a loyal and honest official, and I really want to rule the country peacefully with him and make Chang a king.

古文：奄至殒殁，朕甚痛之。 
现代文：不料突然去世，朕极痛惜。 
English: I am very sorry for his sudden and unexpected death.

古文：举曰： 此人清介强直，当今罕有，微臣窃为陛下惜之。 
现代文：谢举说： 此人清介刚直，当今罕有，微臣为陛下惋惜。 
English: Xie Jiu said: This person, Qing Jie, is straightforward, which is rare nowadays. We, the ministers, feel sorry for His Majesty.

古文：诏曰： 慎终追远，历代通规；褒德畴庸，先王令典。
现代文：韶令说： 居丧尽礼，追念前贤，这是历代常规；表扬酬报有功劳的人，这是先王的令典。
English: The imperial edict said: It is the custom of all ages to pay the utmost respect at funerals and to remember the dead, and it is the edict of the late king to commend and reward those who have rendered meritorious services.

古文：宣惠将军、金紫光禄大夫、监扬州孔休源，风业贞正，雅量冲邈，升荣建礼，誉重搢绅。
现代文：宣惠将军、金紫光禄大夫、监荡赵孔休源，风操贞正，气量宽宏，荣任尚书之职，誉满缙绅之间。
English: Xuan Hui general, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, supervising Zhao Kong Xuyuan, the style is chaste and upright, the temperament is magnanimous, he was appointed to the post of Shangshu, and he is well-known among the gentry.

古文：理务神州，化覃歌咏，方兴仁寿，穆是伦。
现代文：治理神州，被人歌颂，仁者长寿，本属常理。
English: It is common sense that the governance of the divine state is praised by people, and the benevolent people have a long life.

古文：奄然永逝，倍用悲恻。可赠散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，赙第一材一具，布五十匹，钱五万，蜡二百斤。
现代文：忽然辞世，倍感悲伤，可追赠他散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，赏赐宅第一所，棺材一具，布五十匹，钱五万，蜡二百斤。
English: Suddenly passed away, feeling very sad, he can be posthumously presented with a horseback riding attendant, a gold and purple doctor, the first house, a coffin, fifty pieces of cloth, fifty thousand money, and two hundred pounds of wax.

古文：克日举哀。
现代文：约定日期举办丧事。
English: The funeral will be held on the agreed date.

古文：丧事所须，随由资给。
现代文：丧事所需，按需供给。
English: Funeral needs, supply on demand.

古文：谥曰贞子。 
现代文：谧为贞王。 
English: Her nickname is Sadako.

古文：皇太子手令曰： 金紫光禄大夫孔休源，立身中正，行己清恪。
现代文：皇太子手令说： 金紫光禄大夫孔休逊立身中正，清廉谨慎。
English: The crown prince's handwritten order said: "Golden Purple Guanglu Doctor Kong Huisong is upright, honest and prudent.

古文：昔岁西浮渚宫，东泊枌壤，毘佐蕃政，实尽厥诚。
现代文：曾西至渚宫，东去扮地，辅佐藩王，恪尽忠诚。
English: He went as far west as Nagisa Palace and as far east as Kyakuden, assisting the lord of the domain, and was loyal to the end.

古文：安国之详审，公仪之廉白，无以过之。
现代文：李固的详审，张范的廉白都不能舆之相比。
English: Li Gu's detailed examination, Zhang Fan's integrity can not be compared with the top.

古文：奄至殒丧，情用恻怛。
现代文：忽然硕丧，倍感忧伤。
English: He suddenly felt very sad and sorrowful.

古文：今须举哀，外可备礼。 
现代文：今日之丧，务求尽礼。 
English: We would like to express our deepest condolences for today's loss.

古文：休源少孤，立志操，风范强正，明练治体。持身俭约，学穷文艺，当官理务，不惮强御，常以天下为己任。
现代文：休源年幼丧父，自立志向，立身刚正，熟悉政治，持身俭约，学问深厚，当官理事，不怕强权，常以天下为己任，产担极为信任他。
English: Huiyuan lost his father at a young age. He was self-reliant, upright, familiar with politics, thrifty, and learned a lot. He was an official director, was not afraid of power, and often took the world as his own responsibility. Producers trusted him very much.

古文：高祖深委仗之。累居显职，纤毫无犯。
现代文：累任显职，纤毫无犯。
English: A long-serving public servant, he has committed no crime.

古文：性慎密，寡嗜好。
现代文：性情谨慎，极少嗜好。
English: Discreet temperament, very few hobbies.

古文：出入帷幄，未尝言禁中事，世以此重之。
现代文：出入宫廷，不言宫中之事，世人以此更加敬重他。
English: When he entered the court, he did not say a word about what was going on in the palace, which made the world respect him even more.

古文：聚书盈七千卷，手自校治，凡奏议弹文，勒成十五卷。
现代文：藏书超过七千卷，亲自校勘整理，其奏议弹劾章疏编为十五卷。
English: He has a collection of more than seven thousand volumes, which he has personally proofread and edited. His impeachment report has been edited into fifteen volumes.

古文：长子云童，颇有父风，而笃信佛理，遍持经戒。
现代文：长子名云童，颇有父风，笃信佛理，遍持经戒。
English: The eldest son, named Yundong, is very much like his father. He is a firm believer in Buddhism and follows all the precepts.

古文：官至岳阳王府谘议、东扬州别驾。
现代文：官到岳阳王府谘议、东扬州别驾。
English: Officials went to King Yueyang's palace for consultation, but did not go to East Yangzhou.

古文：少子宗轨，聪敏有识度，历尚书都官郎，司徒左西掾，中书郎。
现代文：小儿子名宗轨，聪敏有识度，历任尚书都官郎，司徒左西掾，中书郎。
English: The youngest son, Mei Zonglu, was intelligent and perceptive, and successively held the posts of Shang Shudu Kanro, Szeto Zu Xi, and Zhong Shuro.

古文：江革，字休映，济阳考城人也。
现代文：江革字休映，是济阳考城人。
English: Jiangge Zi Juying, is a Jiyang Kaocheng star.

古文：祖齐之，宋尚书金部郎。
现代文：祖父名查之，在宋朝任尚书金部郎。
English: His grandfather, named Cha Zhi, served as Shang Shuxin Minister in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父柔之，齐尚书仓部郎，有孝行，以母忧毁卒。
现代文：父亲名柔之，在齐朝任尚书仓部郎，事奉父母至孝，因母丧迥哀而卒。
English: His father, Mei Rongzhi, served as Shang Shukang's subordinate in the Qi Dynasty, and served his parents with filial piety. He passed away after the death of his mother.

古文：革幼而聪敏，早有才思，六岁便解属文。柔之深加赏器，曰： 此儿必兴吾门。 
现代文：江革年幼而聪敏，早有才思，六岁便能写文章，其父极为赏识他，曾说： 此儿必兴吾门。 
English: Jiang Ge was young and intelligent. He had an early talent. He was able to write articles at the age of six. His father appreciated him very much. He once said, "This is where I will succeed."

古文：九岁丁父艰，与弟观同生孤贫，傍无师友，兄弟自相训勖，读书精力不倦。
现代文：九岁时父亲去世，舆弟弟江观是双胞胎，因少年孤贫，没有师友，兄弟互相勉励，读书精力不倦。
English: When he was nine years old, his father passed away. My younger brother, Jiang Guan, was a twin. As he was a poor boy, he had no teacher or friend. The brothers encouraged each other and never tired of studying.

古文：十六丧母，以孝闻。
现代文：十六岁丧母，以孝闻名。
English: He lost his mother at the age of sixteen and was known for his filial piety.

古文：服阕，与观俱诣太学，补国子生，举高第。
现代文：服丧期满后，舆江塑一起前往太学，补为国子生，成绩最优秀。
English: After the period of mourning was over, Mujiang Plastic went to Taiyue together to supplement the national students, with the best results.

古文：齐中书郎王融、吏部谢朓雅相钦重。
现代文：齐曲中书郎王融、吏部谢锤极为敬重他们。
English: Wang Rong, the scribe, and Xie Hammer, the official, highly respected them.

古文：朓尝宿卫，还过候革，时大雪，见革弊絮单席，而耽学不倦，嗟叹久之，乃脱所著襦，并手割半氈与革充卧具而去。
现代文：趱腿曾在宫中值宿警卫，回来路过去看望江革，时下大雪，见江革破衣单席，而专心学习不知疲倦，感叹很久，便脱下衣服，并亲手把毡割下一半舆江堇充做卧具而去。
English: The lame man had been on guard duty at the palace. On his way back, he went to visit Jiang Ge. It was snowing heavily, and he saw Jiang Ge's torn clothes sitting alone. But he concentrated on studying tirelessly. He sighed for a long time, then took off his clothes, and with his own hands he castrated the lower half of Mujiang's yakitori and made it into bedding.

古文：司徒竟陵王闻其名，引为西邸学士。
现代文：司徒竟陵王闻其名，引他为垩迎学士。
English: His name was even known to the king of the tombs, and he was referred to as 迎学士.

古文：弱冠举南徐州秀才。
现代文：二十岁被举为宜徐州秀才。
English: At the age of 20, he was named as the outstanding talent of Yizhou Xuzhou.

古文：时豫章胡谐之行州事，王融与谐之书，令荐革。
现代文：当时豫章人胡谐之办理州事，王融写信给谴之，让他推荐江革。
English: At that time, Yu Zhangren was in charge of state affairs, and Wang Rong wrote to him, asking him to recommend Jiang Ge.

古文：谐之方贡琅邪王泛，便以革代之。
现代文：谐之正要推荐琅邪王泛，便以江革代替他。
English: When 谐之 was about to recommend 邪王泛, he replaced him with江革.

古文：解褐奉朝请。
现代文：始仕为奉朝请。
English: First come, first served.

古文：仆射江祏深相引接，祏为太子詹事，启革为府丞。
现代文：仆射江柘极力引进他，江柘任太子詹事，启奏红堇任府丞。
English: His servant Jiang Chen tried his best to bring him in. Jiang Chen was appointed as the prince of Zhanji, and Qisheng Hongxuan was appointed as the prefect of the prefecture.

古文：祏时权倾朝右，以革才堪经国，令参掌机务，诏诰文檄，皆委以具。
现代文：在当时权势极大，认为吴兴有经国之才，便让他参掌机要，韶诰檄文，皆相委托。
English: At that time, he was extremely powerful, and he thought that Wu Xing had the ability to manage the country, so he asked him to be in charge of the machine, the script, and everything else.

古文：革防杜形迹，外人不知。
现代文：江革不露形迹，此事亦不为外人所知。
English: There is no trace of the Jangge Rebellion, nor is it known to outsiders.

古文：祏诛，宾客皆罹其罪，革独以智免。
现代文：辽拓被杀，门下宾客都受牵连，江堇独以智谋得免。
English: Liao Tuo was killed, his guests were implicated, and Jiang Xuan was able to get away with his wiles.

古文：除尚书驾部郎。
现代文：授尚书驾部郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Shuki-buro.

古文：中兴元年，高祖入石头，时吴兴太守袁昂据郡距义师，乃使革制书与昂，于坐立成，辞义典雅，高祖深赏叹之，因令与徐勉同掌书记。
现代文：中兴元年，高祖进军石头，当时吴兴太守袁昂占据郡地抗拒，高祖便让江革写信与昂，于即席写就，辞义典雅，高祖极为赞赏，因此令他与徐勉共掌书记。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, Gao Zu marched into the Stone. At that time, Wu Xing's eunuch Yuan Ang occupied the county and resisted. Gao Zu then asked Jiang Ge to write a letter to Ang, which was written at the spur of the moment. Gao Zu greatly appreciated Gao Zu's elegant words, so he made him and Xu Mian jointly hold the secretarial position.

古文：建安王为雍州刺史，表求管记，以革为征北记室参军，带中庐令。
现代文：建安王任雍州刺史，上表求管记，以江革为征北记室参军，带中庐令。
English: Jian'an Wang was appointed as a historian of Yongzhou, the above table asked for records, and he joined the army with Jiang Ge as the Northern Recorder's Office, and he was awarded the Order of the Star.

古文：与弟观少长共居，不忍离别，苦求同行，乃以观为征北行参军，兼记室。
现代文：与弟弟江观从未分别，不忍离别，苦求同行，于是任江观为征北行参军，兼记室。
English: He had never been separated from his younger brother Jiang Guan, and he could not bear to part from him. He longed to accompany him. Therefore, Jiang Guan joined the army for the Northern Expedition, and also worked as a clerk.

古文：时吴兴沈约、乐安任昉，并相赏重，昉与革书云： 此段雍府妙选英才，文房之职，总卿昆季，可谓驭二龙于长途，骋骐骥于千里。 
现代文：时吴兴人沈约、乐安人任叻都敬重他，任防给江革的信说： 这次雍府妙选英才，文房的职务，都由卿兄弟担任，可称是驭二龙于长途，骋骐骥于千里。 
English: At that time, Wu Xing's Shen Yu and Le An's Ren Xi both respected him, and Ren Fang's letter to Jiang Ge said: This time, Yongfu made a brilliant choice of talents, and the duties of the publishing house were all held by brothers. It can be said that it is a long way to ride two dragons and a thousand miles to travel.

古文：途次江夏，观遇疾卒。
现代文：至江夏，江观得病去世。
English: By the time of Jiang Xia, Jiang Guan had fallen ill and passed away.

古文：革时在雍，为府王所礼，款若布衣。
现代文：江革当时在雍州，受到府王的礼遇，其诚如平民之交。
English: At that time, Jiang Ge was in Yongzhou. He was treated with courtesy by the governor, and his sincerity was like that of a commoner's friend.

古文：王被征为丹阳尹，以革为记室，领五官掾，除通直散骑常侍，建康正。
现代文：王被征为丹阳尹，任江革为记室，领五官掾，授通直散骑常侍，建康正。
English: Wang was conscripted as Danyang Yin, appointed as a recorder of the Jiang Ge, led the five officials, and was awarded as a regular attendant, Jian Kang Zheng.

古文：频迁秣陵、建康令。为治明肃，豪强惮之。
现代文：频迁秣陵、建康令，为政清明严正，豪强都惧怕他。
English: Frequent relocation of the tomb, Jiankang order, clear and strict for politics, strong and powerful are afraid of him.

古文：入为中书舍人，尚书左丞，司农卿，复出为云麾晋安王长史、寻阳太守、行江州府事。
现代文：入任中书舍人，尚书左丞，司农卿，再出任云麾晋安王长史、寻阳太守、行江州府事。
English: He was appointed as the middle school teacher, Shang Shuzhong, the secretary of agriculture, and then served as the king of Yunnan Jinan Changshi, the governor of Huanyang, and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：徙仁威庐陵王长史，太守、行事如故，以清严为百城所惮。
现代文：徙任仁威庐陵王长史。太守、行事照旧，他的清明严正使百城官吏惧怕。
English: He was appointed as the benevolent ruler of the Long History Mausoleum. As the governor, he acted as usual, and his clearness and strictness made the officials of the hundred cities fear him.

古文：时少王行事多倾意于签帅，革以正直自居，不与签帅等同坐。
现代文：当时少王办事多听从签帅的意见，江革以正直自居，不与签帅等人同坐。
English: At that time, Shaowang was more inclined to listen to the opinions of the commander-in-chief, Jiang Ge was honest and did not sit with the commander-in-chief and others.

古文：俄迁左光禄大夫、南平王长史、御史中丞，弹奏豪权，一无所避。
现代文：不久迁任左光禄大夫、南平王长史、御史中丞，他弹劾豪强，无所畏惧。
English: He was soon transferred to the positions of Sakoroku no daibu, Nanpyo Wangchoshi, and Goshi chujo. He was courageous and fearless.

古文：除少府卿，出为贞威将军、北中郎南康王长史、广陵太守，改授镇北豫章王长史，将军、太守如故。
现代文：授少府卿，出任贞威将军、北中郎南康王长史、广陵太守，改授镇北豫章王长史，将军、太守照旧。
English: He was awarded the title of Shoshofu-kyo (Minor Prefectural Lord) and appointed as General Zhenwei, Northern Middle-ranking Official Nankang Wangchongshi, and Guangling Dazhong (governor-general); he was instead awarded the title of Northern Middle-ranking Official Zhenbei Yuzhang Wangchongshi, and remained a general and governor-general.

古文：时魏徐州刺史元法僧降附，革被敕随府王镇彭城。
现代文：当时魏朝徐州刺史元法僧降附，江革受命随府王镇守彭城。
English: At that time, the Wei Dynasty of Xuzhou subdued and annexed the monk Zhi Yuan, and Jiang Ge was ordered to guard Pengcheng with the prefectural governor.

古文：城既失守，革素不便马，乃泛舟而还，途经下邳，遂为魏人所执。
现代文：城失守，江革素不骑马，于是泛舟而还，途经下邳，被魏人捉去。
English: The city was lost, Jiang Ge Su did not ride a horse, so he returned by boat, passing through the Lower Yangtze River, and was caught by the Wei people.

古文：魏徐州刺史元延明闻革才名，厚加接待。革称患脚不拜，延明将加害焉，见革辞色严正，更相敬重。
现代文：魏朝徐州刺史元延明早知江革的才名，隆重接待江革，江革以患脚病为由不拜，延明将要加害他，见江堇辞色严正，就更敬重他。
English: The Wei dynasty Xuzhou assassin Yuan Yanming knew Jiang Ge's talent early, and received him grandly. Jiang Ge refused to bow to Yan Ming on the grounds that he had a foot disease, and Yan Ming was going to harm him. Seeing Jiang Ge's stern demeanor, he respected him even more.

古文：时祖芃同被拘执，延明使芃作《欹器》、《漏刻铭》，革骂芃曰： 卿荷国厚恩，已无报答，今乃为虏立铭，孤负朝廷。 
现代文：当时祖佢同被拘执，型旦让!吵写《欹器》、《漏刻铭》，辽茎骂祖佢说： 你受国家厚恩，还没有报答，而今为敌人写铭，有负朝廷。 
English: At that time, Zhu Xi and others were detained, and they quarreled over the writing of "The Vase" and "The Missing Inscription." Liao Zi scolded Zhu Xi and said, "You have been favored by the state and have not repaid it, but now you are writing an inscription for the enemy, and you have failed the imperial court."

古文：延明闻之，乃令革作丈八寺碑并祭彭祖文，革辞以囚执既久，无复心思。
现代文：延明听到了，便让江革写丈丛寺碑及祭彭祖文，江革以囚执已久，不会再有心思为理由推辞。
English: When Yanming heard this, he asked Jiang Ge to write about the temple monument and the Peng Zu memorial. Jiang Ge refused on the grounds that he had been imprisoned for a long time and would no longer have the heart to do so.

古文：延明逼之逾苦，将加箠扑。
现代文：延明逼他很厉害，将要对他施棰扑之刑。
English: Yanming has been pushing him very hard, and is going to give him a beating.

古文：革厉色而言曰： 江革行年六十，不能杀身报主，今日得死为幸，誓不为人执笔。 
现代文：江革厉色而言说： 江革年已六十，不能报效君主，今日能死是幸运的，誓不为人执笔。 
English: As far as the revolutionary year is concerned, he said: The revolutionary year is sixty years old, I can't serve the monarch, I'm lucky to be able to die today, I swear I won't write.

古文：延明知不可屈，乃止。
现代文：延明知道不能使他屈服，便不再逼他。
English: Yan Ming knew that he couldn't make him give in, so he didn't force him anymore.

古文：日给脱粟三升，仅余性命。
现代文：每天给他三升小米，仅能维持生命。
English: He was given three litres of millet a day, just enough to keep him alive.

古文：值魏主讨中山王元略反北，乃放革及祖芃还朝。
现代文：正值魏主请中山王五监回北方，于是放丝堇及圭困回朝。
English: It was time for the Wei lord to invite the five supervisors of Zhongshan Wang to return to the north, so they released the silk cocoon and Gui trapped to return to the North.

古文：诏曰： 前贞威将军、镇北长史、广陵太守江革，才思通赡，出内有闻，在朝正色，临危不挠，首佐台铉，实允佥谐。
现代文：诏令说： 前任贞威将军、镇北长史、卢堕太守红堇，才思通达，远近闻名，在朝廷端庄严肃，临危不屈，辅佐宰相，确能胜任。
English: The imperial edict said: "The former General Zhenwei, Zhenbei Changshi and Lu Kui Taishu Hongyi were all brilliant, well-known far and wide, dignified and serious in the imperial court, unyielding in the face of danger, assistant to the prime minister, and truly competent.

古文：可太尉临川王长史。 
现代文：可为太尉堕贝王长史。 
English: It could be the long history of Bei Wang, who was demoted to the rank of captain.

古文：时高祖盛于佛教，朝贤多启求受戒，革精信因果，而高祖未知，谓革不奉佛教，乃赐革《觉意诗》五百字，云 惟当勤精进，自强行胜修；岂可作底突，如彼必死囚。
现代文：当时高祖推崇佛教，朝廷贤人多请求受戒，辽堇相信因果报应，而直担却不知道，认为辽革不信奉佛教，便赐江革《觉意诗》五百字，其中说： 当勤勉精进，自强多修行；岂可唐突行事，像那样必成死囚。
English: At that time, Gao Zu revered Buddhism, and many wise men in the imperial court asked to be ordained. Liao Gan believed in karmic retribution, but Zhitan did not know. He thought that Liao Ge did not believe in Buddhism, so he gave Jiang Ge the 500-character "Consciousness Poem," which said: "Be diligent and hard-working, and practice self-improvement; if you act abruptly, you will be sentenced to death."

古文：以此告江革，并及诸贵游。 
现代文：以此告知江革，并及诸显贵。 
English: He used this to inform Jiang Ge, as well as other dignitaries.

古文：又手敕云： 世间果报，不可不信，岂得底突如对元延明邪？ 
现代文：又亲笔写敕书说： 因果报应，不可不信，怎能像元延明那样唐突? 
English: He also wrote in his own handwriting: Do not believe in cause and effect, how can it be as sudden as Yuan Yanming?

古文：革因启乞受菩萨戒。
现代文：红堇因此请求受菩萨戒。
English: Therefore, Hongyu requested to be ordained as a bodhisattva.

古文：重除少府卿、长史、校尉。
现代文：重授少府卿、长史、校尉。
English: He was re-awarded the titles of Shofu-kyo, Choshi, and school lieutenant.

古文：时武陵王在东州，颇自骄纵，上召革面敕曰： 武陵王年少，臧盾性弱，不能匡正，欲以卿代为行事。
现代文：逭时武陵王在东州，极为骄纵，产担召见丝茎面敕说： 茎厘王年少骄纵，越屋软弱，不能尽其匡正之责，想让你去替代。
English: At that time, King Wuling was in Dongzhou, and he was very arrogant. The overseer called him and said, "King Wuling is young and arrogant, and King Yueya is weak. He cannot perform his duty of rectification, and he wants you to take his place."

古文：非卿不可，不得有辞。 
现代文：非卿不可，不可推辞。 
English: If you're not noble, you can't be dismissed.

古文：乃除折冲将军、东中郎武陵王长史、会稽郡丞、行府州事。
现代文：于是授折冲将军、东中郎迭陆王长史、盒曼逦丞、行府州事。
English: As a result, the generals Zhaorochong, Dongzhongro, Lu Wangchongshi, and Huanman Juncheng were appointed to govern the prefecture.

古文：革门生故吏，家多在东州，闻革应至，并赍持缘道迎候。
现代文：辽堇的门生故吏，家多在东州，闻江革将至，都带着礼物沿途迎候。
English: The disciples and dignitaries of Liao Zhen, most of whom are from Dongzhou, smell the impending revolution, and welcome it with gifts along the way.

古文：革曰： 我通不受饷，不容独当故人筐篚。 
现代文：江革说： 我概不接受馈赠，我不能变成故人的礼品筐。 
English: Jiang Ge said, "I don't accept gifts at all. I can't become the deceased's gift basket."

古文：至镇，惟资公俸，食不兼味。
现代文：至镇，衹取俸禄，食不兼味。
English: To the town, take the salary, and enjoy the food.

古文：郡境殷广，辞讼日数百，革分判辨析，曾无疑滞。
现代文：此郡地广人众，每天几百起案件，分别处理，竟没有积案。
English: This county has a large population, hundreds of cases every day, handled separately, and there is no backlog.

古文：功必赏，过必罚，民安吏畏，百城震恐。
现代文：有功必赏，有过必罚，民安吏畏，百城畏服。
English: If there is merit, there must be reward; if there is not merit, there must be punishment; if there is not merit, there must be punishment; if there is not merit, there must be reward; if there is not merit, there must be punishment; if there is merit, there must be reward; if there is merit, there must be punishment; if there is merit, there must be reward; if there is merit, there must be punishment; if there is merit, there must be reward.

古文：琅邪王骞为山阴令，赃货狼藉，望风自解。
现代文：琅邪人王骞任山鉴令，贪污受贿声名狼藉，因之自求解职。
English: Wang Xuan, a villain, was appointed as a mountain inspector. He had a bad reputation for corruption and bribery, so he asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：府王惮之，遂雅相钦重。
现代文：武尘王也怕他，对他极为敬重。
English: King Wu Chen was also afraid of him and held him in high esteem.

古文：每至侍宴，言论必以《诗》《书》，王因此耽学好文。
现代文：每当侍宴时，江革言必引据《诗》、《书》，逮堕王因此也好学爱文。
English: Whenever there is a banquet, Jiang Kegui always quotes from "Poetry" and "Books" to catch the fallen king. Therefore, it is also good to learn to love literature.

古文：典签沈炽文以王所制诗呈高祖，高祖谓仆射徐勉曰： 江革果能称职。 
现代文：典签沈炽文将王写的诗呈送高祖，高祖对仆射徐纤：果然称职。 于是授都官尚书。
English: Annotation Shen Blazin sent the poem written by Wang to Gao Zu. Gao Zu said to his servant Xu Fei: "You are indeed qualified." So he gave Shang Shu to the governor of the capital.

古文：乃除都官尚书。将还，民皆恋惜之，赠遗无所受。
现代文：将还，百姓恋恋不舍，馈赠很多，但概不接受。
English: In addition, the people are not willing to give up, there are many gifts, but they do not accept them.

古文：送故依旧订舫，革并不纳，惟乘台所给一舸。
现代文：按旧例送故吏要订做新船，江革一并不收，祇乘坐官府给的一小舟。
English: According to the old practice, it is necessary to order a new boat to send the deceased officials, and the river is not collected, only a small boat given by the government is taken.

古文：舸艚偏欹，不得安卧。
现代文：船舱已经偏斜，不能安卧。
English: The cabin is tilted, and we can't sleep.

古文：或谓革曰： 船既不平，济江甚险，当移徙重物，以迮轻艚。 
现代文：有人对红堇说： 船不平稳，过江极险，应当搬来重物，压住小船。 
English: Someone said to the kestrel: The boat is not stable, it is extremely dangerous to cross the river, we should bring in heavy objects to hold down the boat.

古文：革既无物，乃于西陵岸取石十余片以实之。
现代文：红革没有重物，便从西陵岸取石十余片压在船上。
English: Red Leather did not have any heavy objects, so he took more than ten pieces of stone from Xiling Bank and pressed them on the boat.

古文：其清贫如此。
现代文：他就是如此清贫。
English: That's how poor he is.

古文：寻监吴郡。
现代文：不久监吴郡。
English: He was soon put in charge of Wuxi County.

古文：于时境内荒俭，劫盗公行。革至郡，惟有公给仗身二十人，百姓皆惧不能静寇；反省游军尉，民下逾恐。
现代文：遣时境内受灾歉收，盗贼公行，江革至郡，衹带有官署派的仗身二十人，百姓皆担心他不能平定盗贼；江革反而又撤去游军尉，百姓更加恐慌。
English: At the time of the transfer, there was a bad harvest in the territory, the thieves were on a public trip, and Jiang Ge went to the county and brought 20 soldiers from the government office. The people were worried that he would not be able to quell the thieves; Jiang Ge, on the other hand, removed Lieutenant You, and the people were even more panicked.

古文：革乃广施恩抚，明行制令，盗贼静息，民吏安之。
现代文：江革广施恩德，公开政令，结果盗贼平息，民吏安定。
English: Jiang Geguang showed benevolence and made the government decree public. As a result, the thieves were subdued and the civil servants were stable.

古文：武陵王出镇江州，乃曰： 我得江革，文华清丽，岂能一日忘之，当与其同饱。 
现代文：武陵王即将出镇江州之时。曾经说过： 我有江革，则文章清丽，怎能一日相忘，当与他同桌而食。 
English: When Wuling Wang was about to leave the town of Jiangzhou, he once said: "If I have Jiangge, then the article is beautiful, how can I forget one day, I should eat at the same table with him."

古文：乃表革同行。
现代文：于是上表请求让江革同行。
English: As a result, the above table requested that Jiang Ge accompany them.

古文：又除明威将军、南中郎长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：又授江革为明威将军、南中郎长史、寻阳太守。
English: Jiang Ge was also awarded the titles of Ming Wei General, Nan Zhong Lang Chang Shi, and Huan Yang Dazhong.

古文：征入为度支尚书。
现代文：入朝任度支尚书。
English: His appointment to the imperial court was supported by letters of recommendation.

古文：好奖进闾阎，为后生延誉，由是衣冠士子，翕然归之。
现代文：他喜欢提携平民夸奖晚辈，士大夫亦因此而欣然相从。
English: He likes to associate with the common people and praise the younger generation, and the scholar-officials also gladly follow him.

古文：时尚书令何敬容掌选，序用多非其人。
现代文：当时尚书令何敬容掌管选拔人才，其所选用的人多不称职。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling He Jingrong was in charge of selecting talents, and most of the people he selected were incompetent.

古文：革性强直，每至朝宴，恒有褒贬，以此为权势所疾，乃谢病还家。
现代文：江革的性情强直，每至朝宴，常对此褒贬，因为这样被有权势的人憎恨，于是称有病还家。
English: Jiang Ge's temperament was strong and forthright. Every time he went to the morning banquet, he often praised and criticized it, because he was hated by powerful people, so he said he was sick and returned home.

古文：除光禄大夫、领步兵校尉、南、北兗二州大中正，优游闲放，以文酒自娱。
现代文：授光禄大夫、领步兵校尉、南兖、北兖二州大中正，清静安逸，以赋文饮酒自娱。
English: Dr. Zhuguanglu, the captain leading the infantry, and the junior high school principals of the two state universities of Nanshan and Beilun, are quiet and comfortable, and enjoy themselves by drinking Fuwen.

古文：大同元年二月，卒，谥曰强子。
现代文：大同元年二月，去世，谧号为强子。
English: He died in February of the first year of Datong, and his nickname was Qiangzi.

古文：有集二十卷，行于世。
现代文：有集二十卷，流传于世。
English: There are twenty volumes in the collection, which have been handed down to the world.

古文：革历官八府长史，四王行事，三为二千石，傍无姬侍，家徒壁立，世以此高之。
现代文：江革历任八府长史，四王行事，三次俸禄为二千石，身旁没有侍妾，家徒四壁，世人以此敬重他。
English: Jiang Ge successively held eight prefectural governorships, acted as four kings, three times received a stipend of two thousand koku, had no attendants or concubines, and was surrounded by four walls of family and servants. The world respected him for this.

古文：长子行敏，好学有才俊，官至通直郎，早卒，有集五卷。
现代文：长子名行敏，好学有才，官至通直郎，去世早，有集五卷。
English: The eldest son, named Yukitoshi, was studious and talented, and rose to the rank of Tsuchinairo. He died early, and had a collection of five volumes.

古文：次子从简，少有文情，年十七，作《采荷词》以刺敬容，为当时所赏。
现代文：次子名从简，年轻时有文才，十七岁时，作《采荷词》以讽刺敬容，被时人所欣赏。
English: His second son, named Cong Jian, was a talented writer when he was young. At the age of seventeen, he wrote "Catchphrase" with a sarcastic attitude, which was appreciated by people at the time.

古文：历官司徒从事中郎。
现代文：历官司徒从事中郎。
English: Historically, officials and magistrates were engaged as middlemen.

古文：侯景乱，为任约所害。子兼叩头流血，乞代父命，以身蔽刃，遂俱见杀。天下莫不痛之。
现代文：侯景叛乱，被任约所害，儿子江兼叩头流出血，请求以己命代父命，以身挡刃，结果两人都被杀死，天下人无不哀痛。
English: Houjing rebelled and was killed by Ren Ying, his son Jiang Keng kowtowed and bled profusely, begged for his life in place of his father's life, and used his body to block the blade. As a result, both of them were killed, and the whole world was saddened.

古文：史臣曰：高祖留心政道，孔休源以识治见知，既遇其时，斯为幸矣。
现代文：史臣曰：高祖留心政事，孔健游以其见识受到赏识，生逢其时，可谓幸运。
English: Shichen said: Gao Zu paid attention to politics, Kong Jianyu was appreciated for his insight, and he was lucky to be born at the right time.

古文：江革聪敏亮直，亦一代之盛名欤。
现代文：江革聪敏亮直，也有一代的盛名呀。
English: Jiang Ge is bright and upright, and he is also famous for a generation.

