古文：傅介子，北地人也，以从军为官。
现代文：傅介子是北地人，因为参军而被提升为官。
English: Fu Kaizi is from the North, and because he joined the army, he was promoted to officer.

古文：先是，龟兹、楼兰皆尝杀汉使者，语在《西域传》。
现代文：原先龟兹、楼兰都曾杀过汉朝的使者，《西域传》中曾有记载。
English: Originally, both Kamezi and Loulan had killed emissaries of the Han Dynasty, which was recorded in "The Legend of the Western Regions."

古文：至元凤中，介子以骏马监求使大宛，因诏令青楼兰、龟兹国。
现代文：到元凤年间，傅介子以骏马监的身份请求出使大宛，拿着皇帝的韶书去谴责楼兰、龟兹国。
English: During the Yuan and Feng dynasties, Fu Kaizi, in his capacity as the inspector of horses, requested the dispatch of an envoy to Dawan, taking the emperor's imperial edict to condemn Loulan and Kuez.

古文：介子至楼兰，责其王教匈奴遮杀汉使： 大兵方至，王苟不教匈奴，匈奴使过至诸国，何为不言？ 
现代文：傅介子到了楼兰，责备楼兰王怂恿匈奴截杀汉朝使者时说： 大部队就要到了，您如果不怂恿匈奴，匈奴使者经过这裹到各国，为什么不报告？ 
English: When Fu Kaizi arrived in Loulan and reproached the King of Loulan for inciting the Huns to intercept the Han Dynasty's envoy, he said, "A large force is about to arrive. If you do not incite the Huns, and if the Huns' envoys pass through here to various countries, why not report it?

古文：王谢服，言： 匈奴使属过，当至乌孙，道过龟兹。 
现代文：楼兰王表示服罪，说： 匈奴使者刚刚过去，应当是到乌孙，中途经过龟兹。 
English: King Loulan confessed his guilt, saying: The Hun messenger has just passed, it should be to Usun, halfway through Kuez.

古文：介子至龟兹，复责其王，王亦服罪。
现代文：傅介子到了龟兹，又责备龟兹王，龟兹王也表示服罪。
English: When Fu Kaizi arrived at Kuez, he also rebuked the king of Kuez, and the king of Kuez also confessed his guilt.

古文：介子从大宛还到龟兹，龟兹言： 匈奴使从乌孙还，在此。 
现代文：傅介子从大宛回到龟兹，龟兹人说 匈奴使者从乌孙回来，正在这裹。 
English: Fu Kaizi returned to Kuez from Dayuan, and the Kuez people said that the Hun envoy was returning from Usun and was here.

古文：介子因率其吏士共诛斩匈奴使者。
现代文：傅介子乘机率领所带的官兵一起斩杀了匈奴使者。
English: Fu Kaizi took the opportunity to lead the officers and soldiers he brought with him to kill the Hun envoy.

古文：还奏事，诏拜介子为中郎，迁平乐监。
现代文：傅介子回到京城把情况上奏，皇上下诏任命他为中郎，升为平乐监。
English: Fu Kaizi returned to the capital to report on the situation, and the emperor appointed him as a middle-ranking official and promoted him to the position of chief music supervisor.

古文：介子谓大将军霍光曰： 楼兰、龟兹数反复而不诛，无所惩艾。
现代文：傅介子对大将军霍光说： 楼兰、龟兹国多次反覆无常却没有受到谴责，不能用来惩戒他国。
English: Fu Kaizi said to the general Huo Guang: Loulan and Kuez countries have repeatedly been capricious but have not been condemned, and cannot be used to punish other countries.

古文：介子过龟兹时，其王近就人，易得也，愿往刺之，以威示诸国。 
现代文：我经过龟兹时，他们的王离人很近，容易得手，我愿前去刺杀他，以此树立威信告示各国。 
English: When I pass through Kuz, their king is near at hand, and easy of capture; I will go and smite him, that he may be feared among the nations.

古文：大将军曰： 龟兹道远，且验之于楼兰。 
现代文：大将军说道： 龟兹国路远，暂且去楼兰试验此法。 
English: The general said, "The turtle is a long way from home, let's go to Loulan to test this method."

古文：于是白遣之。
现代文：于是就告诉皇上派遣他前去。
English: So he told the emperor to send him on his way.

古文：介子与士卒俱赍金币，扬言以赐外国为名。
现代文：傅介子和士兵一同带着金银钱币，声称把这些东西赏赐给外国。
English: Fu Kaizi, together with the soldiers, carried gold and silver coins, claiming that these things would be given to foreign countries.

古文：至楼兰，楼兰王意不亲介子，介子阳引去，至其西界，使译谓曰： 汉使者持黄金、锦绣行赐诸国，王不来受，我去之西国矣。 
现代文：他们到了楼兰，楼兰王看起来不愿亲近傅介子，傅介子假装离开，到达楼兰的西部边界后，傅介子指使翻译对楼兰王说： 汉朝使者带有黄金锦绣巡回赐给各国，大王如果不来受赐，我就要离开到西面的国家去了。 
English: When they arrived in Loulan, King Loulan did not seem to want to be close to Fu Kaizi. Fu Kaizi pretended to leave. After arriving at the western border of Loulan, Fu Kaizi ordered an interpreter to say to King Loulan: Han Dynasty emissaries with gold brocade travel around and give it to various countries. If the great king does not come to receive it, I will leave for a country in the west.

古文：即出金币以示译。
现代文：当即拿出金币给翻译看。
English: He immediately took out a gold coin and showed it to the translator.

古文：译还报王，王贪汉物，来见使者。
现代文：翻译回来把情况报告给楼兰王，楼兰王贪图汉朝财物，就来会见使者。
English: When the translator returned, he reported the situation to King Loulan. King Loulan, who was greedy for Han Dynasty wealth, came to meet the envoy.

古文：介子与坐饮，陈物示之。
现代文：傅介子和他坐在一起饮酒，并拿出财物给他看。
English: Fu Kaizi sat with him and drank alcohol, and took out his belongings to show him.

古文：饮酒皆醉，介子谓王曰： 天子使我私报王。 
现代文：饮酒后都醉了，傅介子就对楼兰王说： 天子派我来私下报告大王一些事情。 
English: After drinking and getting drunk, Fu Kaizi said to King Loulan, "God has sent me to privately report some things to the great king.

古文：王起随介子入帐中，屏语，壮士二人从后刺之，刃交胸，立死。
现代文：楼兰王起身随同傅介子进入帐幕中，两人单独谈话，两个壮士从后面刺杀楼兰王，刀刃在胸前相交，楼兰王立即死掉了。
English: Loulan Wang got up and followed Fu Kaizi into the tent. The two talked alone. Two strong men stabbed Loulan Wang from behind. The blades intersected in front of his chest. Loulan Wang died immediately.

古文：其贵人左右皆散走。
现代文：他的贵族及左右官员都各自逃走。
English: His nobles and right and left officials all fled separately.

古文：介子告谕以： 王负汉罪，天子遣我业诛王，当更立前太子质在汉者。
现代文：傅介子告谕他们说 楼兰王有罪于汉朝，天子派我来诛杀他，应改立以前留在汉朝为人质的太子为王。
English: Fu Kaizi told them that King Loulan was guilty of the Han Dynasty, and that the Son of Heaven had sent me to fight and kill him, and that the crown prince, who had previously remained in the Han Dynasty as a hostage, should be reinstated as king.

古文：汉兵方至，毋敢动，动，灭国矣！ 
现代文：汉军刚到，你们不要轻举妄动，一有所动，就把你们的国家消灭了！ 
English: As soon as the Chinese army arrives, you should not make any rash moves. If you do, your country will be destroyed!

古文：遂持王首还诣阙，公卿将军议者咸嘉其功。
现代文：尔后就带着楼兰王的首级回京交旨，公卿、将军等议论都称赞他的功劳。
English: After that, he returned to Beijing with the message of the head of King Loulan, and courtiers, generals and others praised his work.

古文：上乃下诏曰： 楼兰王安归尝为匈奴间，候遮汉使者，发兵杀略卫司马安乐、光禄大夫忠、期门郎遂成等三辈，及安息、大宛使，盗取节印、献物，甚逆天理。
现代文：皇上于是下诏令说： 楼兰王安归曾充当匈奴的间谍，暗中侦探汉朝使者，派兵杀戮抢掠卫司马安乐、光禄大夫忠、期门郎遂成等三人，以及安息、大宛的使者，偷走漠使节印以及安息、大宛的贡品，极端违背天理。
English: The emperor then issued a decree saying: Loulan Wang Angui had served as a spy for the Xiongnu, secretly a detective of the Han Dynasty emissaries, sent soldiers to kill and rob three people, including Wei Sima Anle, Guanglu Dafu Zhong, and Qimen Lang Suicheng, as well as the emissaries of Saban and Dayuan, and stole the seal of the desert envoys as well as the tributes of Saban and Dayuan, which was extremely against the laws of heaven.

古文：平乐监傅介子持节使诛斩楼兰王安归首，县之北阙，以直报怨，不烦师从。
现代文：平乐监傅介子拿着符节出使，诛杀了楼兰王安归，把他的头悬挂在北面的城楼上，以正直之道回报有怨恨的人，没有烦师动众。
English: The overseer of Pingle, Fu Kaizi, dispatched an envoy with a rune, killed Loulan Wang Anqi, and hung his head on the north tower of the city, repaying those who had resentment with honesty, and did not bother the teacher to move the crowd.

古文：其封介子为义阳侯，食邑七百户。
现代文：封傅介子为义阳侯，赐给食邑七百户。
English: Fong Fuxie Zi was given the title of Yiyang marquis, and was given 700 households in Shuxi village.

古文：士刺王者皆补侍郎。 
现代文：士兵中刺杀楼兰王的都补官为侍郎。 
English: Among the soldiers, the officer who assassinated King Loulan was a waiter.

古文：介子薨，子敞有罪不得嗣，国除。
现代文：傅介子薨后，他的儿子傅敞有罪不能继承爵位，封国被废除。
English: After Fu Kaishi's death, his son Fu Zhan was found guilty of not being able to inherit the title of nobility, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：元始中，继功臣世，复封介子曾孙长为义阳侯，王莽败，乃绝。
现代文：元始年中，重续功臣的后代，又封傅介子的曾孙傅长为义阳侯，王莽失败后，才断绝。
English: In the first half of the year, the descendants of the meritorious returnees were renewed, and Fu Chang, the great-grandson of Fu Jiezi, was appointed as the Prince of Yiyang. It was only after Wang Mang's failure that it was discontinued.

古文：常惠，太原人也。
现代文：常惠是太原人。
English: Chang Hui is from Taiyuan.

古文：少时家贫，自奋应募，随移中监苏武使匈奴，并见拘留十余年，昭帝时乃还。
现代文：年轻时家中贫穷，自告奋勇报名参军，跟从栘中监苏武出使匈奴，一同被匈奴扣押了十多年，到昭帝时才得以返回。
English: When he was young, his family was poor. He volunteered to enlist in the army, and he was sent as an emissary to the Xiongnu by Su Wu, a high-ranking middle school inspector. Together, they were detained by the Xiongnu for more than ten years, and were only able to return when Emperor Zhao came to power.

古文：汉嘉其勤劳，拜为光禄大夫。
现代文：汉朝为嘉奖他的辛勤劳苦，就任他为光禄大夫。
English: The Han Dynasty rewarded him for his hard work by appointing him as a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：是时，乌孙公主上书言： 匈奴发骑田车师，车师与匈奴为一，共侵乌孙，唯天子救之！ 汉养士马，议欲击匈奴。
现代文：这个时候，乌孙公主上书说： 匈奴发动骑兵在车师屯垦，车师与匈奴军合二为一，共同侵犯乌孙，希望天子来救我们厂汉朝征兵养马，商议准备攻打匈奴。
English: At this time, Princess Wusun wrote: "The Huns have launched cavalry to encamp at the chariot division. The chariot division and the Hun army have merged into one to jointly invade Wusun. I hope that the Son of Heaven will come to save our factory from the Han Dynasty to recruit soldiers and raise horses, and discuss preparations for attacking the Huns."

古文：会昭帝崩，宣帝初即位，本始二年，遣惠使乌孙。
现代文：赶上昭帝崩，宣帝刚登基，本始二年，派常惠出使乌孙。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhao, Emperor Xuan had just ascended to the throne. In the first two years of this era, Emperor Zhao sent his emissary, Emperor Wusun.

古文：公主及昆弥皆遣使，因惠言： 匈奴连发大兵击乌孙，取车延、恶师地，收其人民去，使使胁求公主，欲隔绝汉。
现代文：乌孙公主和乌孙王都派使者来朝，通过常惠上书说 匈奴接连派大部队攻打乌孙，夺取了车延、恶师等地，把当地的百姓都抢走了，还派使者来威胁要求娶乌孙公圭，想使畠茎同选塑隔绝。
English: Both Princess U Sun and King U Sun sent envoys to the imperial court. Through Chang Hui, they sent a letter saying that the Huns had successively sent large forces to attack U Sun, seized Cheyang, Qushi and other places, and robbed the local people. They also sent envoys to threaten and demand the marriage of U Sun Gonggui, and wanted to isolate the stem of the ginger from the selected plastic.

古文：昆弥愿发国半精兵，自给人马五万骑，尽力击匈奴。
现代文：乌逐王愿意征发国内一半的精锐部队，自行配备好五万士兵和马匹，竭尽全力攻打匈奴。
English: Wu Chuan Wang is willing to conscript half of the elite troops in the country, equip himself with fifty thousand soldiers and horses, and make every effort to attack the Huns.

古文：唯天子出兵以救公主、昆弥！ 
现代文：希望天子派兵来拯救公主和乌孙王！ 
English: I hope that God will send soldiers to save the princess and King Uson!

古文：于是汉大发十五万骑，五将军分道出，语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：于是汉朝大规模调发十五万骑兵，五位将军分路出发，这件事记在《匈奴传》。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty dispatched 150,000 cavalry on a large scale, and five generals set off on separate routes. This event is recorded in the "History of the Xiongnu."

古文：以惠为校尉，持节护乌孙兵。
现代文：任常惠为校尉，让他带着符节统辖乌孙军队。
English: Ren Changhui was made a captain, and he was given the task of leading the Wusun army.

古文：昆弥自将翕侯以下五万余骑，从西方入至右谷蠡庭，获单于父行及嫂居次，名王骑将以下三万九千人，得马、牛、驴、骡、橐佗五万余匹，羊六十余万头，乌孙皆自取卤获。
现代文：乌孙王自己率领翎侯以下的五万多骑兵从西面进兵到右谷蠡庭，俘获了单于的父亲一行人马以及嫂嫂公主，有名的王爷以及骑兵将领和部下三万九千人，夺得马、牛、驴、骡、骆驼五万多匹，羊六十多万头，乌孙都自行取走所俘获的东西。
English: King Wusun himself led more than fifty thousand cavalry soldiers from the west to the right valley, captured the father and his entourage, as well as the princess, the famous prince, the cavalry generals and thirty-nine thousand of his subordinates, and captured more than fifty thousand horses, cattle, donkeys, mules and camels, and more than six hundred thousand sheep. Wusun himself took what he had captured.

古文：惠从吏卒十余人随昆弥还，未至乌孙，乌孙人盗惠印绶节。
现代文：鲎塞带着十多个官兵同乌瑟王还军，还没有到乌孙，乌孙人就偷走了常惠的官印和符节。
English: Yu Xie took more than ten officers and soldiers with King Uther to return to the army. Before they arrived at Wusun, the Wusun people stole Changhui's official seal and symbols.

古文：惠还，自以当诛。
现代文：常惠回到京城，自以为一定会被杀头。
English: Changhui returned to Beijing, thinking that he would certainly be killed.

古文：时，汉五将皆无功，天子以惠奉使克获，遂封惠为长罗侯。
现代文：当时汉的五位将军都没有功绩，天子觉得常惠奉命出使取得成功，就封他为长罗侯。
English: At that time, the five generals of the Han Dynasty did not have any achievements. Tianzi felt that Chang Hui was successful in his mission, so he made him the governor of Luo.

古文：复遣惠持金币还赐乌孙贵人有功者，惠因奏请龟兹国尝杀校尉赖丹，未伏诛，请便道击之，宣帝不许。
现代文：又派遣常惠带着黄金缯帛回去赏赐给乌孙的显贵以及有功的人，常惠乘机上奏说龟兹国曾杀校尉赖丹，没有治他们的罪，请顺便去攻打龟兹，宣帝没有同意。
English: He also sent Chang Hui back with a golden scepter to reward the dignitaries and meritorious people of Wusun. Chang Hui took the plane to report that the turtle country had killed Lieutenant Laidan and did not punish them. Please go by the way to attack turtles. Emperor Xuan did not agree.

古文：大将军霍光风惠以便宜从事。
现代文：大将军霍光暗示常惠根据情况自行决断行事。
English: General Huo Guang hinted that Changhui would make its own decision according to the situation.

古文：惠与吏士五百人俱至乌孙，还过，发西国兵二万人，令副使发龟兹东国二万人，乌孙兵七千人，从三面攻龟兹，兵未合，先遣人责其王以前杀汉使状。
现代文：常惠和官兵五百人一同到了乌孙国，回来路过龟兹，就征发西面国家的军队二万人，命令副使征发龟兹以束国家两万人，乌孙兵七千人，从三面攻打龟鏊。军队还没有会合前，就先派人指责龟兹王以前杀汉朝使者的罪状。
English: Chang Hui went to Wusun with five hundred officers and soldiers, and when he came back, he passed through Kuez, and then he conscripted and dispatched twenty thousand troops from the western countries. He ordered the deputy envoy to conscript and dispatch Kuez with twenty thousand soldiers from the country and seven thousand soldiers from Wusun to attack Kuez from three sides. Before the army had even assembled, he first sent someone to accuse King Kuez of the crime of killing the envoys of the Han Dynasty.

古文：王谢曰： 乃我先王时为贵人姑翼所误耳，我无罪。 
现代文：龟兹王道歉道： 这是我先王的时候被贵人姑翼所害而成，我没有罪。 
English: The tortoise king apologized, "It was when I was king that I was victimized by a noble aunt. I am not guilty.

古文：惠曰： 即如此，缚姑翼来，吾置王。 
现代文：常惠说： 即使是这样，也要把姑翼捆来，我可以放了大王。 
English: Chang Hui said, "Even if it's like this, we still have to tie up Aunt Ying. I can let go of the king."

古文：王执姑翼诣惠，惠斩之而还。
现代文：龟兹王就捆缚姑翼带到常惠处，常惠杀了姑翼后就回去了。
English: Turtle King then tied up Aunt Wing and took her to Chang Hui's place. After Chang Hui killed Aunt Wing, he went back.

古文：后代苏武为典属国，明习外国事，勤劳数有功。
现代文：后来常惠替代苏武为典属国，他熟悉外国的情况，辛勤劳苦数次有功绩。
English: Later, Chang Hui replaced Suwu as Duan's vassal state. He was familiar with the situation in foreign countries and worked hard several times.

古文：甘露中，后将军赵充国薨，天子遂以惠为右将军，典属国如故。
现代文：甘露年中，后将军赵充国薨，天子就任鲎墓为右将军，典属国的官职照旧。
English: In the middle of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：宣帝崩，惠事元帝，三岁薨，谥曰壮武侯。
现代文：宣帝崩，常惠事奉元帝，三年后薨，谧号为壮亘邀。
English: When Emperor Xuan died, Chang Hui served Emperor Yuan. Three years later, he died. His posthumous name was Zhuang Wanyin.

古文：传国至曾孙，建武中乃绝。
现代文：封国传到曾孙，建武年中才断绝。
English: The fief passed down to his great-grandson, and was only broken off in the middle of the Jianwu era.

古文：郑吉，会稽人也，以卒伍从军，数出西域，由是为郎。
现代文：郑吉，是会稽人。因为参军服役，几次出使酉塑，因此被封为郎。
English: Zheng Ji, is the auditor of the association. Because he joined the army and served, he was sent out several times to cast and mold, so he was given the title of rooster.

古文：吉为人强执，习外国事。
现代文：奠睦为人坚强执着，熟悉外国事情。
English: Dianmu is a strong and persistent person, familiar with foreign affairs.

古文：自张骞通西域，李广利征伐之后，初置校尉，屯田渠黎。
现代文：自从堡塞通酉球，奎庐型征讨后，开始设立校尉，在渠黎屯田。
English: Since the Fort Saitong, after the Kuijun-type expropriation, the establishment of school lieutenants has begun, in the channel of Lintian.

古文：至宣帝时，吉以侍郎田渠黎，积谷，因发诸国兵攻破车师，迁卫司马，使护鄯善以西南道。
现代文：到宣帝时，郑吉以侍郎身份在渠黎屯田，积累了谷物，就征发各国军队攻破车师，升他为卫司马，派他领护鄯善以西的南道。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuanxuan, Zheng Jie, as a waiter, was in the canal Li Tuntian, accumulated grain, and conscripted the armies of various countries to defeat the chariot division, promoted him to the position of Wei Sima, and sent him to lead the protection of the south road west of Juxian.

古文：神爵中，匈奴乖乱，日逐王先贤掸欲降汉，使人与吉相闻。
现代文：神爵年中，匈奴内部发生动乱，曰逐王先贤掸打算投降汉朝，派人同郑吉联系。
English: In the middle of the year of Jinzhe, there was turmoil within the Xiongnu, saying that the king-chasing sages planned to surrender to the Han Dynasty and sent someone to contact Zheng Ji.

古文：吉发渠黎、龟兹诸国五万人迎日逐王，口万二千人、小王将十二人随吉至河曲，颇有亡者，吉追斩之，遂将诣京师。
现代文：郑吉征调渠黎、龟兹等国的五万人迎接曰逐王，有一万两千人、小王将十二人跟着郑吉到达河曲，有许多人逃走，郑吉追赶这些人并把他们杀了，于是将剩下的人带到京城。
English: Zheng Ji called for 50,000 people from the countries of Lijiang, Guizhou and other countries to meet the "chasing king," 12,000 people, and Xiao Wang led 12 people to follow Zheng Ji to arrive in Hequ. Many people fled. Zheng Ji chased these people and killed them, so he brought the rest of the people to Beijing.

古文：汉封日逐王为归德侯。
现代文：漠帝封日逐王为归德侯。
English: Lian Shuping said that the king is a fortified castle.

古文：吉既破车师，降日逐，威震西域，遂并护车师以西北道，故号都护。
现代文：郑吉攻破车师后，又收降曰逐王，威名震动西域，于是一并领护车师以西的北道，因此号称都护。
English: After Zhengji defeated the Chariot Division, he retreated again, saying that he was chasing the king. His prestige shook the western region, so he also led the Chariot Division to the west of the North Road, so he was known as the protector of the capital.

古文：都护之置自吉始焉。
现代文：都护的设置是从郑吉开始的。
English: The setting up of the capital guard began in Zhengji.

古文：上嘉其功效，乃下诏曰： 都护西域骑都尉郑吉，拊循外蛮，宣明威信，迎匈奴单于从兄日逐王众，击破车师兜訾城，功效茂著。
现代文：皇上为嘉奖他的功绩，就下诏说： 都护西域骑都尉郑吉，安抚外国蛮夷，宣示威望和信用，迎来匈奴单于的堂兄日逐王和他的部下，攻破车师兜訾城，功绩显著。
English: In order to commend his achievements, the emperor issued the following edict: protect the capital of the western region, pacify the foreign barbarians, proclaim the demonstration of hope and trust, welcome the cousin of the Xiongnu, the Sun King and his subordinates, and defeat the chariot driver, the city of Dadu, remarkable achievements.

古文：其封吉为安远侯，食邑千户。 
现代文：封郑吉为安远侯，赐食邑一千户。 
English: Zhengji was given the title of Anyuan Hou, and a thousand households in the county were given food.

古文：吉于是中西或则立莫府，治乌垒城，镇抚诸国，诛伐怀集之。
现代文：郑吉于是在西域各国中心地带设立幕府，官署在乌垒城，镇抚各国，诛杀讨伐安抚招集他们。
English: Zhengji then set up a shogunate in the heartland of the western countries, and the government office in Wujiang, to pacify the countries and fight and pacify them.

古文：汉之号令班西域矣，始自张骞而成于郑吉。语在《西域传》。
现代文：汉朝的号令颁布到西域，造开始于张骞而完成于郑吉，这些《西域传》中有载。
English: The edicts of the Han Dynasty were promulgated in the western region, and construction began in Zhangye and was completed in Zhengji. These events are recorded in the "History of the Western Region."

古文：吉薨，谥曰缪侯。
现代文：郑吉薨后，谧号为缪侯。
English: After Zheng Ji's death, his posthumous name was Miao Hou.

古文：子光嗣，薨，无子，国除。
现代文：儿子郑光继承爵位，薨后没有儿子，封国被废除。
English: Zheng Guang, his son, inherited the title of nobility, but there was no son after his death, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：元始中，录功臣不以罪绝者，封吉曾孙永为安远侯。
现代文：元始年中，录用功臣中不是因犯罪而绝后的，封郑吉曾孙郑永为安远侯。
English: In the first half of the year, among the meritorious scholars who were not terminated due to crime, Zheng Yong, the great-grandson of Zheng Ji, was awarded the title of Anyuan Hou.

古文：甘延寿字君况，北地郁郅人也。
现代文：甘延寿字君况，是北地郁郅人。
English: Gan Yan Shou (甘延寿) is a native of Ikuhata in the north of Japan.

古文：少以良家子善骑射为羽林，投石拔距绝于等伦，尝超逾羽林亭楼，由是迁为郎。
现代文：年轻时因是良家子弟善于骑马射箭被选为羽林，用手投石和跳跃的功夫同辈中没有人可比，曾跳遇羽林的亭楼，因此升为郎。
English: When he was young, he was chosen to be a member of the Uirin family because he was a member of a good family and was good at horseback riding and archery. There was no one comparable among his kung fu peers who threw stones by hand and jumped. He had jumped into the pavilion of the Uirin family, so he was promoted to the rank of rook.

古文：试弁，为朝门，以材力爱幸。
现代文：考试手搏的功夫后，又任他为期门，他依靠勇力受到了宠幸。
English: After the hard work of hand-to-hand combat in the examination, he was allowed to pass the exam, and he was favored to rely on his courage.

古文：稍迁至辽东太守，免官。
现代文：不久调任为辽东太守，被免官。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Liaodong governor and dismissed.

古文：车骑将军许嘉荐延寿为郎中，谏大夫，使西域都护、骑都尉，与副校尉陈汤共诛斩郅支单于，封义成侯。
现代文：车骑将军许嘉推荐甘延寿为郎中谏大夫，出使西域为都护骑都尉，同副校尉陈汤一起诛杀了郅支单于，被封为义成侯。
English: The cavalry general Xu Jia recommended Gan Yan Shou as the doctor of Yicheng, and sent him to the western region as the cavalry captain of the capital. Together with the vice-captain Chen Tang, he killed Zou Zhishan Yu and was awarded the title of Yicheng.

古文：薨，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：甘延寿薨后，谧号为壮侯。
English: After Gan Yan Shou's death, his posthumous name was Zhuang Hou.

古文：传国至曾孙，王莽败，乃绝。
现代文：封国传到曾孙，王莽失败后，封国才断绝。
English: The fiefdom was passed down to his great-grandson, and only ended after Wang Mang's defeat.

古文：陈汤字子公，山阳瑕兵人也。
现代文：陈汤字子公，是山阳瑕丘人。
English: Chen Tang Zi Gong is a native of Shanyang Keqiu.

古文：少好书，博达善属文。
现代文：年轻时喜欢读书，学识渊博通达事理，写得一手好文章。
English: When he was young, he liked to read. He was well-read and well-versed in science, and he was a good writer.

古文：家贫丐贷无节，不为州里所称。
现代文：家中贫穷靠乞讨借贷为生，没有节操，不被州里人所称道。
English: At home, the poor live by begging and borrowing, have no discipline, and are not praised by the people of the state.

古文：西至长安求官，得太官献食丞。
现代文：陈汤就西到长安去求取官职，谋得太官献食丞一官。
English: Chen Tang went west to Chang'an to seek a government post, and became a high-ranking official.

古文：数岁，富平侯张勃与汤交，高其能。
现代文：几年后，富平侯张勃同陈汤交往，佩服他的才能。
English: A few years later, Fuping marquis Zhang Bo met Chen Tang and admired his talent.

古文：初元二年，元帝诏列侯举茂材，勃举汤。
现代文：初元二年时，元帝韶令列侯举荐秀才，张勃就举荐了陈汤。
English: In the second year of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan Emperor ordered the Marquis to recommend talents, and Zhang Bo recommended Chen Tang.

古文：汤待迁，父死不奔丧，司隶奏汤无循行，勃选举故不以实，坐削户二百，会薨，因赐谥曰缪侯。
现代文：陈汤为等待升官，父亲死后也不去奔丧，司隶就弹劾陈汤不守孝道，张勃选任举荐欺诈不依实际情况，被削减食邑二百户，赶上他去世，因此就赐给他谧号为缪侯。
English: Chen Tang was waiting for a promotion and did not go to the funeral after his father's death. The subordinates impeached Chen Tang for not keeping the filial piety. Zhang Bo's election recommendation fraud was not in accordance with the actual situation. He was reduced to two hundred households. When he died, he was given the nickname Mu Hou.

古文：汤下狱论。
现代文：陈汤被下狱治罪。
English: Chen Tang was sent to prison.

古文：后复以荐为郎，数求使外国。
现代文：后来他重新被举荐为郎，几次请求出使外国。
English: Later, he was again recommended as a successor, and he requested to be sent abroad several times.

古文：久之，迁西域副校尉，与甘延寿俱出。
现代文：过了很久，调任他为西域副校尉，同甘延寿一同出使西域。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to the Western Region as a vice-captain and sent to the Western Region together with Kanenju.

古文：先是，宣帝时匈奴乖乱，五单于争立，呼韩邪单于与郅支单于俱遣子入侍，汉两受之。
现代文：原先宣帝的时候，匈奴内部矛盾激化，五个单于争夺王位，呼韩邪单于和郅支单于都送儿子为人质，汉朝都接受了。
English: Originally, when Emperor Xuan was proclaimed, the internal contradictions within the Huns intensified. The five dynasties competed for the throne, and both the Han dynasty and the Han dynasty sent their sons as hostages, and the Han dynasty accepted them.

古文：后呼韩邪单于身入称臣朝见，郅支以为呼韩邪破弱降汉，不能自还，即西收右地。
现代文：后来呼韩邪单于亲自到汉朝称臣朝见宣帝，郅支单于以为呼韩邪衰败虚弱投降了汉朝，不能再回去了，就向西收取匈奴右边的地方。
English: Later, Huan Yanshan went to the Han Dynasty in person to claim that he was a vassal of the Han Dynasty to see Emperor Xuan, and Zou Zhichan thought that Huan Yanshan was weak and had surrendered to the Han Dynasty and could not go back, so he charged the place on the right side of the Xiongnu to the west.

古文：会汉发兵送呼韩邪单于，郅于由是遂西破呼偈、坚昆、丁令，兼三国而都之。
现代文：正好赶上汉朝派兵护送呼韩邪单于回去，郅支因此而向西攻破了呼偈、坚昆、丁令，兼并了三国并把他们统一起来。
English: Just in time for the Han Dynasty to send troops to escort Han Yat-Sen back to China, the Han Dynasty broke through Huge, Jiankun and Dingling to the west, annexed the three countries and unified them.

古文：怨汉拥护呼韩邪而不助己，困辱汉使者汉乃始等。
现代文：郅支单于怨恨汉朝拥护呼韩邪单于而不帮助自己，就困住汉朝使者江乃始等人并羞辱他们。
English: Without helping himself, he trapped and humiliated the emissaries of the Han Dynasty, Jiang Naishi and others.

古文：初元四年，遣使奉献，因求侍子，愿为内附。
现代文：初元四年，郅支单于派使者进贡，顺便要求带走入侍的儿子，愿意归附朝廷。
English: In the first year of the 4th year of the 1st century, Gong Zhichan sent an envoy to pay tribute, and asked for the son of a samurai to be taken away. He was willing to join the imperial court.

古文：汉议遣卫司马谷吉送之。
现代文：汉朝商议派遣卫司马谷吉去护送侍子。
English: The Han Dynasty discussed sending the Weishi Magokichi to escort the samurai.

古文：御史大夫贡禹、博士匡衡以为《春秋》之义 许夷狄者不一而足 ，今郅支单于乡化未醇，所在绝远，宜令使者送其子至塞而还。
现代文：御史大夫贡禹、博士匡衡认为《春秋》上说 对夷狄的要求不能一一都满足 。现在郅支单于趋向教化之心尚未纯厚，所在的地方又相当遥远，最好是派使者把他的儿子送到边境地区后就返回。
English: Dr. Gong Yu and Dr. Kuang Heng, the chief historian, said in "Spring and Autumn" that they could not meet all the demands of the Yidi. At present, the Yidi's heart is not yet pure enough to tend to enlightenment, and the place is quite far away. It is best to send an envoy to send his son to the border area and then return.

古文：吉上书言： 中国与夷狄有羁縻不绝之义，今既养全其子十年，德泽甚厚，空绝而不送，近从塞还，示弃捐不畜，使无乡从之心，弃前恩，立后怨，不便。
现代文：谷吉上书说道： 中国和夷狄有笼络而不断绝之义，现在既然已抚养成全他的孩子十年，恩泽已很厚了，如今他到空旷绝远之地而不去护送，到了边塞就返回，这是表示抛弃他不再爱护，使他们失去归附的心意。抛弃以前的恩泽，产生后来的怨恨，不妥。
English: Guji said in his letter: China and Yidi have a close and constant relationship. Now that he has raised and perfected his children for ten years, the favor is already very thick. Now he goes to an empty and remote place without escorting, and returns to the border fortress. This is to abandon him and no longer love him, so that they lose their attachment. It is not right to abandon the previous favor and cause later resentment.

古文：议者见前江乃始无应敌之数，知勇俱困，以致耻辱，即豫为臣忧。
现代文：讨论的人看见以前江乃始没有对付敌人的办法，智慧和胆量都缺乏，以致遭受耻辱，就事先替臣担忧。
English: The discussant saw that in the past, Jiang Nao had no way to deal with the enemy, and lacked wisdom and courage, so that he suffered humiliation, and worried about the minister in advance.

古文：臣幸得建强汉之节，承明圣之诏，宣谕厚恩，不宜敢桀。
现代文：臣下有幸得以执持强汉的符节，秉承圣明的韶令，宣明晓告以深厚的恩义，他就不应当敢于凶暴狡诈。
English: If a vassal is fortunate enough to be able to uphold the code of a strong man, adhere to the edicts of the sacred, and proclaim with deep gratitude, he should not dare to be fierce and cunning.

古文：若怀禽兽，加无道于臣，则单于长婴大罪，必遁逃远舍，不敢近边。
现代文：如果他怀有禽兽之心，对臣施行无道，那么单于就长期背负深罪，一定逃得远远的，不敢靠近边境。
English: If he harbors the heart of a beast and treats his vassals badly, then he will have to bear the deep sin for a long time. He must flee far away and dare not approach the border.

古文：没一使以安百姓，国之计，臣之愿也。
现代文：失去一个人而使百姓安定，是国家的利益，臣下的愿望。
English: It is in the interest of the country and the desire of the vassals to lose a person and make the people stable.

古文：愿送至庭。 
现代文：我希望把他送到郅支朝廷。 
English: I'd like to send him to the court of the Xizhi Dynasty.

古文：上以示朝者，禹复争，以为吉往必为国取悔生事，不可许。
现代文：皇上就把谷吉的奏书呈给上朝的人，贡禹重又争论，认为谷吉前去一定会给国家带来灾祸和事端，不能答应他的奏请。
English: The emperor presented Guji's report to the people of the previous dynasty, and Gong Yu-chong argued that Guji's going would certainly bring disaster and trouble to the country, and could not agree to his report.

古文：右将军冯奉世以为可遣，上许焉。
现代文：右将军冯奉世认为可以派遣，皇上就答应了。
English: The right general, Feng Fengshi, thought it could be dispatched, and the emperor agreed.

古文：既至，郅支单于怒，竟杀吉等。
现代文：到郅支王庭后，郅支单于发怒了，竟然杀了谷吉等人。
English: After arriving at the court of Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu became enraged and killed Guji and the others.

古文：自知负汉，又闻呼韩邪益强，遂西奔康居。
现代文：郅支单于自己知道有负汉朝，又听说呼韩邪更加强盛，于是向西逃到康居。
English: Because he knew that there was a negative Han Dynasty, and heard that the evil of the Han Dynasty was more powerful, he fled westward to Kangju.

古文：康居王以女妻郅支，郅支亦以女予康居王。
现代文：康居王把女儿嫁给郅支单于做妻子，郅支也把女儿嫁给了康居王。
English: King Kangju married his daughter to Gong Zhishan to be his wife, and Gong Zhishan also married his daughter to King Kangju.

古文：康居甚尊敬郅支，欲倚其威以胁诸国。郅支数借兵击乌孙，深入至赤谷城，杀略民人，驱畜产，乌孙不敢追，西边空虚，不居者且千里。
现代文：康居王很尊敬郅支单于，打算依靠他的威力来胁迫各国，郅支几次借兵攻打乌孙，深入到了赤谷城，残杀掠夺人民，抢夺牲畜财产，乌孙国不敢追讨，西部空虚，有千里方圆的地区没有人住。
English: King Kangju had great respect for Utsunomiya, and planned to rely on his power to coerce other countries. Utsunomiya borrowed soldiers several times to attack Utsunomiya, and penetrated deep into Akaya City, killing and plundering people, and robbing livestock property. Utsunomiya did not dare to pursue, and the west was empty, and there were no people living in areas thousands of miles around.

古文：郅支单于自以大国，威名尊重，又乘胜骄，不为康居王礼，怒杀康居王女及贵人、人民数百，或支解投都赖水中。
现代文：郅支单于自以为是大国，名望盛大受人尊重，又乘胜骄傲，不被康居王所礼遇，愤怒中杀了康居王的女儿和他的显贵、人民数百人，有的人还被支解后投到都赖水中。
English: In his anger at not being treated courteously by King Kangju, he killed King Kangju's daughter and several hundred of his nobles and people, some of whom were thrown into the water of Turai after being freed.

古文：发民作城，日作五百人，二岁乃已。
现代文：征发百姓筑城，每天用五百人，两年才停止。
English: He conscripted and sent out people to build the city, using five hundred people every day, and only stopped after two years.

古文：又遣使责阖苏、大宛诸国岁遗，不敢不予。
现代文：又派遣使者责求阖苏、大宛诸国每年进贡，他们不敢不给。
English: They also sent envoys to ask the countries of Bansu and Dawan to pay tribute every year, and they dared not refuse.

古文：汉遣使三辈至康居求谷吉等死，郅支困辱使者，不肯奉诏，而因都护上书言： 居困厄，愿归计强汉，遣子入侍。 
现代文：汉朝派遣三批使者到康居要谷吉等人的尸体，郅支单于困住使者并羞辱他们，不肯听从韶令，却通过都护上书说： 我处于困苦危难之中，愿归附强大的汉朝，送儿子来作为人质。 
English: The Han Dynasty sent three groups of emissaries to Kangju to retrieve the corpses of Guji and others. Zou Zhichan trapped the emissaries and humiliated them. Unwilling to obey the imperial order, he wrote a letter through the tutelary, saying, "I am in the midst of hardships and dangers. I am willing to join the powerful Han Dynasty and send my son as a hostage."

古文：其骄嫚如此。
现代文：郅支单于骄傲怠慢到如此地步。
English: It is a matter of pride that they have neglected it to this extent.

古文：建昭三年，汤与延寿出西域。
现代文：建昭三年，陈汤和甘延寿出使西域。
English: In the third year of Jian Zhao, Chen Tang and Gan Yan Shou were sent to the western region.

古文：汤为人沉勇有大虑，多策谋，喜奇功，每过城邑山川，常登望。
现代文：陈汤为人沉着勇敢有大谋，有很多策略，喜好建立卓越的功勋，每次经过都城小镇，高山大河，常常要爬到高处去看一看。
English: Chen Tang is a calm, brave and resourceful person. He has many strategies and likes to build outstanding achievements. Every time he passes the capital town, Gaoshan River, he often has to climb to a higher place to have a look.

古文：既领外国，与延寿谋曰： 夷狄畏服大种，其天性也。
现代文：接到出使外国的差事后，就同甘延寿谋划说道： 夷狄畏惧服从大部落，这是他们的天性。
English: After receiving an assignment from a foreign country, he planned with Gan Yanshou and said: It is their nature to be afraid of obeying the big tribe.

古文：西域本属匈奴，今郅支单于威名远闻，侵陵乌孙、大宛，常为康居画计，欲降服之。
现代文：西域本来属于匈奴，现在郅支单于威名远播，侵犯欺凌乌孙、大宛等国，常替康居出谋划策，想降服它们。
English: The western region originally belonged to the Xiongnu, but now the Xiongzhi single-handedly spread the reputation far and wide, invaded and bullied the Usun, Dawan and other countries, and often made plans for Kangju to subjugate them.

古文：如得此二国，北击伊列，西取安息，南排月氏、山离乌弋，数年之间，城郭诸国危矣。
现代文：如果能得到这两个国家，北部攻打伊列，西面攻取安息，南面排济月氏、山离乌弋，几年之内，有都城的几个国家就会形势危急。
English: If we can get these two countries, attack Ille in the north, conquer Tranquility in the west, and drive out the Jiyue clan and the mountains from Wuyi in the south, within a few years, several countries with capital cities will be in a critical situation.

古文：且其人剽悍，好战伐，数取胜，久畜之，必为西域患。
现代文：而且他们的人都剽悍，喜欢打仗，经常取得胜利，如果长期放纵他们，一定会成为西域的隐患。
English: Moreover, their people are tough, like to fight, and often win. If they are indulged for a long time, they will surely become a hidden danger in the western region.

古文：郅支单于虽所在绝远，蛮夷无金城强弩之守，如发屯田吏士，驱从乌孙众兵，直指其城下，彼亡则无所之，守则不足自保，千载之功可一朝而成也。 
现代文：郅支单于虽然所在的地方相当遥远，蛮夷没有坚固的城墙和强劲的剑弩用来自守，如果发动屯田的官兵，率领乌孙的部队，一直打到他们城下，他们逃亡又没有可去的地方，坚守又不能白保，千载功业可以一朝而成。 
English: Although the place where they are located is quite far away, the barbarians do not have solid city walls and strong swords and ploughshares to defend themselves. If they launch the officers and soldiers of Tunden and lead the troops of Wusun, they will fight all the way to the bottom of their city. They have nowhere to flee, and they cannot defend themselves for nothing. A thousand years of work can be accomplished in one day.

古文：延寿亦以为然，欲奏请之，汤曰： 国家与公卿议，大策非凡所见，事必不从。 
现代文：甘延寿也认为是这样，就准备上奏请示这件事，陈汤又说： 国家大事都要让公卿讨论，非凡的策略是凡人所想像不到的，事情一定不能得到准许。 
English: Gan Yanshou also thought so, so he prepared to report the matter. Chen Tang also said: National affairs should be discussed by nobles, extraordinary strategies are unimaginable to ordinary people, and things must not be permitted.

古文：延寿犹与不听。
现代文：甘延寿犹豫着没有听从。
English: Gan Yanshou hesitantly did not obey.

古文：会其久病，汤独矫制发城郭诸国兵、车师戊己校尉屯田使士。
现代文：正好他长时间有病，陈汤独自假托朝廷命令调发有城镇的各国军队以及车师国戊己校尉屯田的官兵。
English: Just as he had been ill for a long time, Chen Tang alone, on the pretext of an order from the imperial court, dispatched the armies of various countries with towns and the officers and soldiers of the coachman Guo Wuji, captain Tun Tian.

古文：延寿闻之，惊起，欲止焉。
现代文：甘延寿知道后，惊慌地爬起床，打算阻止他。
English: When Gan Yanshou found out, he got up in a panic, intending to stop him.

古文：汤怒，按剑叱延寿曰： 大众已集会，竖子欲沮众邪？
现代文：陈汤发怒了，按住剑叱责甘延寿说： 部队已经集合了，你想坏大家的事么？ 
English: Chen Tang became angry, held down his sword and scolded Gan Yanshou, saying, "The troops have assembled, do you want to ruin things for everyone?

古文：延寿遂从之，部勒行陈，益置扬威、白虎、合骑之校，汉兵，胡兵合四万余人，延寿、汤上疏自劾奏矫制，陈言兵状。
现代文：甘延寿于是只好听从他。部署行军的阵式，增设扬威、白虎、合骑三校，汉兵、胡兵合起来共四万多人，甘延寿、陈汤上奏自我弹劾假托皇帝命令，陈述用兵情况。
English: Therefore, Gan Yanshou had no choice but to listen to him. He deployed the marching formation, added three schools of Yangwei, White Tiger, and Combined Cavalry, and the total number of Han soldiers and Hu soldiers was more than 40,000. Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang played self-impeachment on the pretext of the emperor's order and stated the situation of the use of soldiers.

古文：即日引军分行，别为六校，其三校从南道逾葱岭径大宛，其三校都护自将，发温宿国，从北道入赤谷，过乌孙，涉康居界，至阗池西。
现代文：当天他们就带领军队分道前进，分为六校，其中三校从南道越过葱领从小道到大宛，另外三校由都护自己率领，从温宿国出发，经北道进入赤谷，过了乌孙，到达康居边界，一直到了阗池的西面。
English: On the same day, they led the army to advance in separate ways, divided into six schools, of which three schools went from the South Road across the green onion collar from the trail to the cormorant, and the other three schools were led by the tutelary himself, starting from the host country, passing through the North Road into Akaya, passing through Usun, reaching the Kangju border, and all the way to the west of Dianchi Lake.

古文：而康居副王抱阗将数千骑，寇赤谷城东，杀略大昆弥千余人，驱畜产甚多，从后与汉军相及，颇寇盗后重。
现代文：而康居的副王抱阗率领几千骑兵，进犯赤谷城东，杀害抢夺了大乌孙王的一千多人，抢走很多牲畜和财产。又在后面同汉朝军队遭遇，抢夺走了后面部队相当多的辎重。
English: On the other hand, Kangju's vice-king Baojun led several thousand cavalrymen to attack the eastern part of Akaya Castle, killed and robbed more than a thousand people of the Great Uson King, and robbed a lot of livestock and property. He also encountered the Han Dynasty army in the rear, and robbed the rear troops of a considerable amount of baggage.

古文：汤纵胡兵击之，杀四百六十人，得其所略民四百七十人，还付大昆弥，其马、牛、羊以给军食。
现代文：陈汤放出胡人军队攻打他们，杀了四百六十人，得到了他们所抢走的四百七十名百姓，交还给丫大乌孙王，所得到的马、牛、羊就用来供给军用。
English: Chen Tang unleashed the Hu army to attack them, killed four hundred and sixty people, got the four hundred and seventy people they had robbed, and handed them back to King Amada Wusong. The horses, cattle and sheep they got were used to supply the military.

古文：又捕得抱阗贵人伊奴毒。
现代文：还俘虏了抱阗的显贵伊奴毒。
English: They also captured the prominent Inugami, who was holding a scepter.

古文：入康居东界，令军不得为寇。
现代文：到了康居的束部边界，陈汤命令军队不得进行抢掠。
English: When they reached the Sokube border of Kangju, Chen Tang ordered the army not to loot.

古文：间呼其贵人屠墨见之，谕以威信，与饮盟遣去。
现代文：暗中把康居的显贵屠墨叫来相见，向他说明汉朝的威势和信誉，并同他饮酒结盟后就放他回去了。
English: He secretly summoned Tu Mo, a dignitary of Kangju, to meet him, explained to him the prestige and credibility of the Han Dynasty, and after drinking and making an alliance with him, he let him go.

古文：径引行，未至单于城可六十里，止营。
现代文：从小道带领军队前进，到了离单于城大约六十里的地方就停止前进并扎下营寨。
English: From the trail, he led the army forward, and when he reached a place about sixty miles from the city, he stopped advancing and set up camp.

古文：复捕得康居贵人贝色子男开牟以为导。
现代文：又捕捉到了康居的显贵贝色的儿子开牟，让他作为向导。
English: He also captured Kangju's son Kaimu, the son of the eminent Baise, and made him his guide.

古文：贝色子即屠墨母之弟，皆怨单于，由是具知郅支情。
现代文：贝色的儿子也就是屠墨母亲的弟弟，他们都怨恨单于，因此很详细地知道了郅支的情况。
English: Baise's son, who is also the younger brother of Tu Mo's mother, both resented Zeng Yu, so they knew the situation of Zeng Zhi in great detail.

古文：明日引行，未至城三十里，止营。
现代文：第二天又带领军队前进，离城还有三十里，就停下扎营。
English: The next day he led his army forward again, and when they were still thirty miles from the city, they stopped and set up camp.

古文：单于遣使问： 汉兵何以来？ 应曰： 单于上书言居困厄，愿归计强汉，身入朝见。
现代文：单于派使者来问汉朝军队为何而来，答道： 单于上书说现在处境困难，愿意归附汉朝，亲自入汉朝朝见。
English: Duan Yu sent an envoy to ask the Han Dynasty troops why they had come, to which they replied: Duan Yu sent a letter saying that he was in a difficult situation and that he was willing to join the Han Dynasty and go to see the Han Dynasty in person.

古文：天子哀闵单于弃大国，屈意康居，故使都护将军来迎单于妻子，恐左右惊动，故未敢至城下。 
现代文：天子哀怜单于离开匈奴的广阔国土，在康居受到委屈，所以派都护将军来迎接单于的妻子和儿女，恐怕惊动了您的左右，因此军队不敢到城下。 
English: The Son of Heaven was saddened to leave the vast land of the Xiongnu and was wronged in Kangju. Therefore, he sent General Du Fu to meet the wife and children of Du Yu. I am afraid that you were alarmed, so the army did not dare to go under the city.

古文：使数往来相答报。
现代文：使者几次往来互相通报情况。
English: The envoys have met several times to brief each other on the situation.

古文：延寿、汤因让之： 我为单于远来，而至今无名王大人见将军受事者，何单于忽大计，失客主之礼也！
现代文：甘延寿、陈汤于是责备单于道： 我们为了单于远道而来，而到现在还没有有名的王侯大臣来见将军接受命令，单于怎么能这样忽略大计，失去主人对待客人的礼仪呢！
English: Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang then reproached Shan Yu: We have come a long way for the sake of Shan Yu, and so far no famous prince or minister has come to see the general to receive orders. How can Shan Yu ignore the grand plan and lose the master's etiquette for treating guests?

古文：兵来道远，人畜罢极，食度日尽，恐无以自还，愿单于与大臣审计策。 
现代文：军队远道而来，人马都相当疲劳，粮草估计也将完了，恐怕不能自行还军了，希望单于同大臣审慎考虑计划安排。 
English: The army has come a long way, the men and horses are quite tired, the grain and grass estimate will also be completed, I am afraid I can not return to the army on my own, I hope that the minister will carefully consider the plan and arrangement.

古文：明日，前至郅支城都赖水上，离城三里，止营傅陈。
现代文：第二天，军队向前到达郅支城的都赖水上游，离城有三里，停下安营布阵。
English: The next day, the army advanced to the upper reaches of the Dulai River, three miles from the city, and stopped to set up camp.

古文：望见单于城上立五采幡帜，数百人披甲乘城，又出百余骑往来驰城下，步兵百余人夹门鱼鳞陈，讲习用兵。
现代文：望见单于城上立有五彩旗帜，几百人披着锁甲登城守备，又派出百余名骑兵往来奔驰于城下，步兵百余人在城门两边像鱼鳞一样布下阵式，讲授操演用兵的方法。
English: One can see multicolored flags on the city, several hundred people wearing armor to defend the city, and more than a hundred cavalrymen are sent to and fro under the city. More than a hundred infantrymen are deployed on both sides of the city gate like fish scales, teaching the method of exercising soldiers.

古文：城上人更招汉军曰 斗来！ 
现代文：城上的人还招呼汉军说： 来跟我斗！ 
English: The people in the city also called out to the Chinese troops, saying: Come and fight with me!

古文：百余骑驰赴营，营皆张弩持满指之，骑引却。
现代文：一百多名骑兵奔驰着冲向营地，营地的士兵都拉满弓指向骑兵，骑兵就引退了。
English: More than a hundred horsemen galloped towards the camp. The soldiers in the camp all drew their bows to point at the horsemen, and the horsemen retired.

古文：颇遣吏士射城门骑步兵，骑步兵皆入。
现代文：漠军几次派官兵射击城门的骑兵和步兵，骑兵和步兵都进去了。
English: Several times, the desert army sent officers and soldiers to shoot the cavalry and infantry at the city gate, and the cavalry and infantry all entered.

古文：延寿、汤令军闻鼓音皆薄城下，四周围城，各有所守，穿堑，塞门户，卤楯为前，戟弩为后，卬射城中楼上人，楼上人下走。
现代文：甘延寿和陈汤命令军队听到鼓声后都逼近城下，从四面围住城，各有自己的任务，有的挖濠沟，有的堵塞城门，拿盾牌的人在前面，拿刀戟弓剑的在后面，向上射击城楼上的人，楼上的人就跑到了楼下。
English: Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang ordered the troops to approach the city after hearing the drums. They surrounded the city from all sides, each with their own tasks. Some dug trenches, others blocked the city gates. Those with shields were in front, and those with knives and swords were behind. They shot the people on the upper floors of the city, and the people on the upper floors ran downstairs.

古文：土城外有重木城，从木城中射，颇杀伤外人。外人发薪烧木城。
现代文：在土城外面还有一座木城，敌人从木城中射击，很杀伤了一些外面的人，外面的人就用柴草烧了木城。
English: Outside Tucheng, there was also a wooden city. The enemy fired from the wooden city, severely injuring some people outside. The people outside burned the wooden city with firewood.

古文：夜，数百骑欲出外，迎射杀之。
现代文：夜裹，几百名骑兵打算突围，被迎头射死。
English: At nightfall, several hundred cavalrymen tried to break through the encirclement and were shot in the head.

古文：初，单于闻汉兵至，欲去，疑康居怨己，为汉内应，又闻乌孙诸国兵皆发，自以无所之。
现代文：刚开始，单于听说汉朝军队到了，想逃走，但怀疑康居怨恨自己，会作为漠军的内应，又听说乌孙各国都派了军队，自以为没有地方可去了。
English: At the beginning, just because he heard that the Han Dynasty army had arrived and wanted to escape, but suspected that Kangju resented himself and would act as a mute army, and also heard that the U.S.S.R. countries had sent troops, he thought there was no place to go.

古文：郅支已出，复还，曰： 不如坚守。
现代文：郅支单于出来后又重新回去，说： 还不如坚守城池。
English: After the letter came out, he went back again and said, "We might as well hold on to the castle."

古文：汉兵远来，不能久攻。 
现代文：汉军远道而来，不能进攻得很久。 
English: The Chinese army came from far away and could not attack for a long time.

古文：单于乃被甲在楼上，诸阏氏夫人数十皆以弓射外人。
现代文：单于就披上镗甲站在楼上，各位辟氏夫人有几十人都用弓箭射杀城外的人。
English: He just put on armor and stood on the upper floor, and dozens of his wives used bows and arrows to shoot people outside the city.

古文：外人射中单于鼻，诸夫人颇死。
现代文：城外的人射中了单于的鼻子，几十个夫人也多被射死。
English: Someone from outside the city shot Chanyu in the nose, and dozens more of his wives were also shot dead.

古文：单于下骑，传战大内。
现代文：单于下楼骑上马，转战到单于的内室。
English: She went downstairs, mounted her horse, and went to her inner room.

古文：夜过半，木城穿，中人却入土城，乘城呼。
现代文：夜晚过了一半，木城被穿透了，裹面的人退入土城，登上城楼呼喊。
English: Halfway through the night, the wooden city was penetrated, and the masked man retreated into the earthen city, climbed the tower and shouted.

古文：时，康居兵万余骑分为十余处，四面环城，亦与相应和。
现代文：当时康居的军队有一万多骑兵分为十多处，四面围绕着城墙，也互相应声相和。
English: At that time, Kangju's army of more than ten thousand cavalrymen was divided into more than ten places, surrounded by city walls on all sides, and also responded to each other.

古文：夜，数奔营，不利，辄却。
现代文：夜晚，几次奔袭汉军营地，没有成功，就退回去了。
English: In the evening, they made several raids on the Chinese camp, but without success, they retreated.

古文：平明，四面火起，吏士喜，大呼乘之，钲鼓声动地。
现代文：等到天亮，城四面放起了火，官兵高兴起来，大声呼喊追逐敌人，鸣釭敲鼓震动大地。
English: At dawn, the city was set on fire on all sides. The officers and soldiers cheered, shouted loudly, chased the enemy, and shook the earth with the sound of gongs and drums.

古文：康居兵引却。
现代文：康居兵退走了。
English: Kangju soldiers retreated.

古文：汉兵四面推卤楯，并入土城中。
现代文：汉军就从四面推着大的盾牌，一同进入土城中。
English: The Chinese army pushed the large shields from all sides and entered the earthen city together.

古文：单于男女百余人走入大内。
现代文：单于男女一百多人跑进他的内室。
English: More than a hundred men and women alone ran into his inner chamber.

古文：汉兵纵火，吏士争入，单于被创死。
现代文：汉兵就放火，官兵争着进入内室，单于受伤而死。
English: The Chinese soldiers then set fire to it, and the officers and soldiers fought to enter the inner room, only to be injured and die.

古文：军候假丞杜勋斩单于首，得汉使节二及谷吉等所赍帛书。
现代文：军候假丞杜勋砍下了单于的头，得到了汉朝使者的两个符节以及谷吉等所带的帛书。
English: Guxun Du Xun, a military cadet, chopped off the head of Shan Yu, and obtained the two symbols of the Han Dynasty emissary, as well as the imperial edict carried by Gu Ji and others.

古文：诸卤获以畀得者。
现代文：所有抢得的东西都给予本人。
English: All the loot goes to me.

古文：凡斩阏氏、太子、名王以下千五百一十八级，生虏百四十五人，降虏千余人，赋予城郭诸国所发十五王。
现代文：一共斩杀丁关氏、太子、名王以下一千五百一十八人，俘虏了一百四十五人，收降了一千多人，把他们都分给了有城市的各国所派出的十五个王。
English: They killed a total of 1,518 people, including the Dingguan clan, the prince, and the famous king, captured 145 people, captured more than 1,000 people, and distributed them to 15 kings sent by countries with cities.

古文：于是延寿、汤上疏曰： 臣闻天下之大义，当混为一，昔有康、虞，今有强汉。
现代文：于是甘延寿、陈汤上奏书说： 臣等听说天下的大道理，应当是天下一统，以前有唐和虞，现在有强大的汉朝。
English: Therefore, Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang recited the following sutra: "Ministers and others have heard the great principle of the world, which is that there should be unity under heaven. In the past, there was Tang and Yu, and now there is the powerful Han Dynasty.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于已称北藩，唯郅支单于叛逆，未伏其辜，大夏之西，以为强汉不能臣也。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于已自称是北藩，衹有郅支单于反叛对抗，没有受到惩罚，大夏以西的地方，都以为强大的汉朝不能使郅支单于臣服。
English: The Xiongnu had already claimed to be the Northern Han Dynasty, and had not been punished for rebelling against the Han Dynasty. In the west of Daxia, it was believed that the powerful Han Dynasty could not subjugate the Han Dynasty.

古文：郅支单于惨毒行于民，大恶通于天。
现代文：郅支单于残酷毒害百姓，罪大恶极通达到上天。
English: He single-handedly and cruelly poisoned the people, and his crimes reached as high as heaven.

古文：臣延寿、臣汤将义兵，行天诛，赖陛下神灵，阴阳并应，天气精明，陷陈克敌，斩郅支首及名王以下。
现代文：臣甘延寿、陈汤率领仁义的军队，替天诛伐，依赖陛下的神灵，阴阳调和，天气晴朗明丽，冲锋陷阵打败敌人，砍了郅支单于的头以及杀死了名王以下的人。
English: The vassals Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang led the army of benevolence and righteousness, fought on behalf of heaven, relied on the gods of his majesty, reconciled yin and yang, the weather was clear and bright, stormed and defeated the enemy, cut off the head of the king and killed the people below the king.

古文：宜县头槁街蛮夷邸间，以示万里，明犯强汉者，虽远必诛。 
现代文：应把所砍的头悬挂在稿街蛮夷的官邸间，用以昭示万里之外的人，让他们明白违犯强大的汉朝的，即使再远也一定要诛杀。 
English: The severed head should be hung in the barbaric official residence on Jiuzhaigou Street to show people thousands of miles away that those who violate the powerful Han Dynasty, even if they are far away, must be killed.

古文：事下有司。
现代文：事情被下到司法部门处理。
English: The matter was referred to the judiciary.

古文：丞相匡衡、御史大夫繁延寿以为： 郅支及名王首更历诸国，蛮夷莫不闻知。
现代文：丞相匡衡、御史大夫繁延寿认为 郅支单于以及名王的头周游各国，蛮夷没有不知道的。
English: Consul-General Kuang Heng and Imperial Historian Shen Yan Shou believed that there was nothing the barbarians did not know about the king's travels around the world.

古文：《月令》春： 掩骼埋胔 之时，宜勿县。 
现代文：《月令》上说春天是 掩埋尸骨 的时候，还是不要悬头为好。 
English: "Lunar Calendar" says that spring is the time to bury the dead, so it's better not to hang your head.

古文：车骑将军许嘉、右将军王商以为： 春秋夹谷之会，优施笑君，孔子诛之，方盛夏，首足异门而出。
现代文：车骑将军许嘉、右将军王商认为 春秋时夹谷会盟，优施讥笑君主，孔子杀了他，当时正是盛夏，被斩的手和足分不同的门运出。
English: The cavalry general Xu Jia and the right-hand general Wang Shang believed that in spring and autumn, the valley would be divided, and the emperor would be ridiculed, and Confucius would kill him. At that time, it was midsummer, and the hands and feet that were cut off were transported out of different doors.

古文：宜县十日乃埋之。 
现代文：应悬挂十天后再掩埋。 
English: It should be hung for ten days and then buried.

古文：有诏将军议是。
现代文：皇上下诏令说将军的意见正确。
English: The imperial edict stated that the general's opinion was correct.

古文：初，中书令石显尝欲以姊妻延寿，延寿不取。
现代文：起初，中书令石题曾经想把姐姐嫁给苴丝寿，甘延寿没有同意。
English: At first, Shi Zhi had wanted to marry his sister to Yan Si Shou, but Gan Yan Shou did not agree.

古文：及丞相、御史亦恶其矫制，皆不与汤。
现代文：等到丞相、御史也憎恨他们假托皇帝命令行事，都不赞许陈汤。
English: When the prime minister and the minister of history also hated them for acting under the pretext of the emperor's order, they did not approve of Chen Tang.

古文：汤素贪，所卤获财物入塞多不法。
现代文：陈汤平时比较贪婪，所缴获的财物进入汉界后多不依法上交。
English: Chen Tong is usually greedy, and most of the seized property is not handed over in accordance with the law after entering China.

古文：司隶校尉移书道上，系吏士按验之。
现代文：司隶校尉寄信给道上的官员，逮捕官兵来审查这件事。
English: The sub-lieutenant sent a letter to officials in the province to arrest officers and soldiers to look into the matter.

古文：汤上疏言： 臣与吏士共诛郅支单于，幸得禽灭，万里振旅，宜有使者迎劳道路。
现代文：陈汤就上奏书说道： 臣下同官兵一同诛杀郅支单于，幸亏能把他们消灭，军队万里之外得胜归来，应有使者在路上迎接犒劳。
English: Chen Tang said in his report: "Our vassals and officers and soldiers fought together to kill the instigators and instigators. Fortunately, we were able to eliminate them. The army thousands of miles away returned victorious. There should be an envoy on the road to meet the reward.

古文：今司隶反逆收系按验，是为郅支报仇也！ 
现代文：现司隶逆其道而行，逮捕官兵审查，这是为郅支单于报仇啊！ 
English: The current magistrates and subordinates are going against their own way, arresting officers and soldiers for review, this is revenge for their support!

古文：上立出吏士，令县道具酒食以过军。
现代文：皇上立即派出官兵，命令各县在路上备好酒食犒劳路过的军队。
English: The emperor immediately dispatched officers and soldiers and ordered all counties to prepare food and drink for the troops passing by on the road.

古文：既至，论功，石显、匡衡以为： 延寿、汤擅兴师矫制，幸得不诛，如复加爵土，则后奉使者争欲乘危徼幸，生事于蛮夷，为国招难，渐不可开。 
现代文：回到京城后，评论功劳，石显、匡衡认为 甘延寿、陈汤擅自假托皇帝命令兴师动众，有幸没有被诛杀，如果再封爵位赐食邑，那么以后奉命的使者就会都争相想冒着危险以取得侥幸，在蛮夷中惹起事端，给国家带来灾难，这个头不能开。 
English: After returning to Beijing, commenting on the merits, Shi Xian and Kuangheng believed that Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang had ordered the mobilization of teachers without authorization and on behalf of the emperor, and were fortunate not to be killed. If they were to be awarded a knighthood, then the emissaries who were ordered would all compete to take risks to get lucky, stir up trouble in the wilderness, and bring disaster to the country. This head cannot be opened.

古文：元帝内嘉延寿、汤功，而重违衡、显之议，议久不决。
现代文：元帝内心嘉许甘延寿、陈汤的功劳，但难以违背匡衡、石显的意见，此事很长一段时间没有决定。
English: Emperor Yuan praised the merits of Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang in his heart, but it was difficult to go against the opinions of Kuang Heng and Shi Xian, and the matter was not decided for a long time.

古文：故宗正刘向上疏曰： 郅支单于囚杀使者吏士以百数，事暴扬外国，伤威毁重，群臣皆闵焉。
现代文：原宗正刘向上奏书说： 郅支单于监禁杀害使者和官兵数以百计，事情沸沸扬扬于外国，损失威望，失去了别人的敬重，各位大臣都为此忧愁。
English: The original Zongzheng Liu said in his report to the emperor, "All the ministers are saddened by the fact that Zongzheng's sole motive was to imprison and kill hundreds of envoys and officers and soldiers, and the incident was widely reported in foreign countries, resulting in a loss of prestige and respect from others.

古文：陛下赫然欲诛之，意未尝有忘。
现代文：陛下发怒想诛杀他，一直没有忘怀。
English: His Majesty was so angry that he wanted to kill him, and he never forgot that.

古文：西域都护延寿、副校尉汤承圣指，倚神灵，总百蛮之君，揽城郭之兵，出百死，入绝域，遂蹈康居，屠五重城，搴歙侯之旗，斩郅支之首，县旌万里之外，扬威昆山之西，扫谷吉之耻，立昭明之功，万夷慑伏，莫不惧震。
现代文：西域都护甘延寿、副校尉陈汤秉承圣明的旨意，倚靠神灵的保佑，统率百蛮的君主，带领有城镇之国的军队，出生入死，进入无人能到的地方，才踏平康居，攻破五道城墙，拔下歙侯的旗帜，斩下郅支单于的脑袋，悬扬旌旗于万里之外的地方，远播威名于昆山之西，洗刷了谷吉的耻辱，建立了卓越的功勋，万夷畏惧屈服，没有不震动的。
English: Western Capital Protector Gan Yan Shou and Vice-Colonel Chen Tang, adhering to the will of the Holy Spirit, relying on the blessing of the gods, led hundreds of monarchs, led the army of the country with towns, from birth to death, entered the place where no one can reach, only to live a peaceful life, break through five city walls, pull down the banner of the warlord, cut off the head of the warlord who supported the warlord, fly the warlord's flag in a place thousands of miles away, broadcast the prestige in the west of Kunshan, washed away the shame of Guji, and established outstanding merits. The world is afraid to give in, and there is

古文：呼韩邪单于见郅支已诛，且喜且惧，乡风驰义，稽首来宾，愿守北藩，累世称臣。
现代文：呼韩邪单于看到郅支单于已被杀，又喜又怕，向风慕义驱驰前来，稽拜表示归附，愿意守护北藩，历代称臣。
English: Calling out to Han Xidan when he saw that Gong Shizan had been killed, he was both pleased and afraid, and drove to the wind to seek righteousness. He bowed down to show his allegiance, and was willing to guard the Northern Domain. He was praised as a minister throughout the ages.

古文：立千载之功，建万世之安，群臣大勋莫大焉。
现代文：他们建立了千年的功业，保证了万代的平安，群臣中功勋没有比他们再大的了。
English: They have established a thousand-year career and ensured the peace of all generations. There is no greater meritorious service among the courtiers.

古文：昔周大夫方叔、吉甫为宣王诛猃狁而百蛮从，其《诗》曰： 啴々焞々，如霆如雷，显允方叔，征伐猃狁，蛮荆来威。 
现代文：往昔周朝大夫方叔、吉甫为周宣王诛杀了殓狁而使百蛮都来归顺。《诗》上说： 车马喧喧，有如雷霆，既显贵又诚信的方叔，征讨殓狁，蛮荆也因畏惧威力而来臣服。 
English: In the past, the Zhou Dynasty's doctors, Fangzhu and Ji Fu, killed hundreds of barbarians for Zhou Xuan Wang. "The Poem" said: "The chariot and horse are like thunder. Fangzhu, who is both noble and honest, solicits barbarians. The barbarians are also afraid of power and come to submit."

古文：《易》曰： 有嘉折首，获匪其丑。 
现代文：《易》上说： 消灭敌人首领的人值得表扬，因为他可以获得更多不同族类的人。 
English: Yi said: "The person who eliminates the enemy leader is praiseworthy, because he can get more people of different races.

古文：言美诛首恶之人，而诸不顺者皆来从也。
现代文：这是赞美那些诛杀了罪魁祸首可以使其它不愿顺服的人前来归顺的人。
English: This is praising those who killed the culprit and can make others who do not want to obey come to submit.

古文：今延寿、汤所诛震，虽《易》之折首、《诗》之雷霆不能及也。
现代文：现在甘延寿、陈汤诛杀所带来的震动，即使是《易》上所说的消灭首领，《诗》上所说的有如雷霆也比不上。
English: Now, the shock brought about by the killing of Gan Yanshou and Chen Tangxuan, even if it is the leader of the extermination mentioned in "Yi," it is not comparable to what is said in "Poem."

古文：论大功者不录小过，举大美者不疵细瑕。
现代文：评论大的功绩应不计较小的遇错，推举绝美的东西应不顾捆小的瑕疵。
English: Great achievements should be praised regardless of minor mistakes, and the most beautiful things should be praised regardless of minor flaws.

古文：《司马法》曰 军赏不逾月 ，欲民速得为善之利也。
现代文：《司马法》上说 赏赐军队不超过一个月，希望立功的人快速得到他们行善事的报酬。
English: "The Sima Fa" says that the army will be rewarded for no more than one month, and it is hoped that those who have performed meritorious deeds will be quickly rewarded for their good deeds.

古文：盖急武功，重用人也。
现代文：这是由于重视战功，重用人才的缘故。
English: This is due to the emphasis on war service and the re-use of talent.

古文：吉甫之归，周厚赐之，其《诗》曰： 吉甫燕喜，既多受祉，来归自镐，我行永久。 
现代文：吉甫回去后，周王赐给他丰盛的东西，《诗》上说： 吉甫因为被宴请，所以很高兴，他受到了那么多祝福，是因为他从镐地回来，功劳同曰月一样长久。 
English: After Ji Fu returned, King Zhou gave him rich gifts. The poem said: Ji Fu was so happy because he was invited to the banquet. He received so many blessings because he came back from Shunde. His merits are as long as the moon.

古文：千里之镐犹以为远，况万里之外，其勤至矣！
现代文：千里之外的镐地还认为遥远，更何况万里之外，他们的辛勤已是到了极点！
English: Thousands of miles away, Shantou is still considered far away, let alone thousands of miles away, their hard work has reached the extreme!

古文：延寿、汤既未获受祉之报，反屈捐命之功，久挫于刀笔之前，非所以劝有功厉戎士也。
现代文：甘延寿、陈汤不仅没有受到赏赐的回报，反而因义无反顾而取得的功劳受到委屈，长期受挫于刀笔小吏，这不是奖励有功之人、鞭策士兵的方法。
English: Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang not only did not receive rewards, but on the contrary, they were aggrieved because of the merits they gained without hesitation, and they were frustrated by petty officials for a long time. This is not a way to reward meritorious people and whip soldiers.

古文：昔齐桓公前有尊周之功，后有灭项之罪；君子以功覆过而为之讳行事。
现代文：以前齐桓公先有尊周的功劳，后来又有灭项国的罪责，君子就以功劳来掩盖过错而隐讳了他所行的错事。
English: In the past, Prince Qi Kuan first had the merit of respecting Zhou, and later the guilt of exterminating the state. The gentleman used the merit to cover up the fault and concealed the wrongdoing he had done.

古文：贰师将军李广利捐五万之师，靡亿万之费，经四年这劳，而廑获骏马三十匹，虽斩宛王毋鼓之首，犹不足以复费，其私罪恶甚多。
现代文：贰师将军李广利损失了五万人的部队，花去了亿万的费用，经历了四年的劳苦，却衹获得三十匹骏马，虽然斩下了宛王母鼓的脑袋，也不足以补偿耗费，而且他自己的罪恶也很多。
English: The general Li Guangli lost fifty thousand troops, spent hundreds of millions of money, experienced four years of hard work, but only gained thirty horses. Although he cut off the head of Wan Wangmu, it was not enough to compensate for the cost, and his own sins were many.

古文：孝武以为万里征伐，不录其过，遂封拜两侯、三卿、二千石百有余人。
现代文：孝武帝认为到万里之远的地方去征讨敌人，不应计较他的过失，就封拜两侯、三卿、二千石的官职爵位给了一百多人。
English: Emperor Xiaowu thought that he should not be held accountable for his mistake of going thousands of miles away to fight the enemy, so he gave more than a hundred people the titles of two princes, three nobles, and 2,000 koku.

古文：今康居国强于大宛，郅支之号重于宛王，杀使者罪甚于留马，而延寿、汤不烦汉士，不费斗粮，比于贰师，功德百之。
现代文：现今康居国力强于大宛，郅支单于的号令重于宛王，他们杀害使者之罪大于大宛留住马匹的罪，而且甘延寿、陈汤没有烦劳汉朝的士兵，不用耗费一斗粮食，和贰师将军相比，功德胜于他百倍。
English: Nowadays, the national strength of Kangju is stronger than that of Dawang, and the call of supporting and singling out Dawang is more important than that of the king of Dawang. Their crime of killing the messenger is greater than the crime of Dawang retaining horses. Moreover, Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang did not bother the soldiers of the Han Dynasty, they did not need to spend a bucket of grain, and compared with General Gong Shi, their merits are a hundred times better than him.

古文：且常惠随欲击之乌孙，郑吉迎自来之日逐，犹皆裂土受爵。
现代文：而且常惠听从想要攻击匈奴的乌孙，郑吉迎接自己来归顺的曰逐王，还都裂土封爵。
English: Moreover, Chang Hui listened to the grandson of Utsong who wanted to attack the Xiongnu, Zheng Ji greeted the king who came to surrender, and they were both knighted.

古文：故言威武勤劳则大于方叔、吉甫，列功覆过则优于齐桓、贰师，近事之功则高于安远、长罗，而大功未著，小恶数布，臣窃痛之！
现代文：所以说武功和辛勤劳苦大于方叔、吉甫，将功补遇又优于齐桓公、贰师将军，他们所做事情的功劳又高于安远侯、长罗侯，但大的功劳没有得到表彰，小的过失却到处传布，臣下深为痛惜！
English: Therefore, it is said that their military exploits and hard work are greater than those of Fang Xiu and Ji Fu, and their rewards are also superior to those of Qi Huan Gong and General Zou Shi. Their achievements are also higher than those of An Yuan Hou and Chang Luo Hou, but their great achievements have not been commended, while their small mistakes have been spread everywhere, which is deeply regretted by their subjects!

古文：宜以时解县通籍，除过勿治，尊宠爵位，以劝有功。 
现代文：应及时解除悬案让他们自由出入，免罪不究，给予尊宠封授爵位，用以奖励有功之人。 
English: The unsolved cases should be resolved in a timely manner, so that they can come and go freely, be exonerated, and be given honorary titles and knighthoods to reward meritorious people.

古文：于是天子下诏曰： 匈奴郅支单于背畔礼义，留杀汉使者、吏士，甚逆道理，朕岂忘之哉！
现代文：于是天子下诏令说： 匈奴郅支单于背叛礼义，扣留并杀害了汉朝使者、官兵，深违事理，朕岂能忘记！
English: Therefore, the emperor issued a decree saying, "The Huns and their vassals betrayed propriety, detained and killed the Han Dynasty's envoys and officers and soldiers, which was a serious violation of justice. How can I forget this!"

古文：所以优游而不征者，重协师众，劳将帅，故隐忍而未有云也。
现代文：之所以犹豫不决不去征讨，是因为难以兴师动众，劳苦将帅，因此一直克制忍着没有提这件事。
English: The reason why he hesitates not to go after them is because it's hard to motivate the masses, and hard work is the key to success, so he's been refraining from mentioning this.

古文：今延寿、汤睹便宜，乘时利，结城郭诸国，擅兴师矫制而征之。赖天地宗庙之灵，诛讨郅支单于，斩获其首，及阏氏、贵人、名王以下千数。
现代文：如今甘延寿、陈汤看到可以乘机行事，就乘着时间的便利，集结有城镇的各国，擅自假托皇帝命令用兵去征讨敌人，依靠天地和宗庙的神灵保佑，征讨郅支单于，斩得他的脑袋，以及板氏夫人、显贵、名王和其他一千多人。
English: Now that Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang saw that they could take advantage of the opportunity to act, they took advantage of the convenience of time to gather all the countries with towns, without authorization and on the pretext of the emperor's order to use soldiers to collect the enemy, relying on the blessings of heaven and earth and the gods of the ancestral temple, to collect the support of Yan Shan Yu and cut off his head, as well as the Pan's wife, dignitaries, famous kings and more than a thousand others.

古文：虽逾义干法，内不烦一夫之役，不开府库之臧，因敌之粮以赡军用，立功万里之外，威震百蛮，名显四海。
现代文：虽然他们背离了道义违反了国法，但国内没有烦劳一人服兵役，没有动用国库的贮藏，借敌人的粮食用来供给部队的所用，建立功勋于万里之外，威力震动百蛮，名声速扬四海。
English: Although they have deviated from morality and violated the national law, they have not bothered one person to serve in the military, have not used the reserves of the national treasury, have used the enemy's grain to supply the troops, have built merits thousands of miles away, have shaken hundreds of power, and their reputation has spread rapidly around the world.

古文：为国除残，兵革之原息，边竟得以安。
现代文：为国家除去残暴，断绝兵事的根源，边境得以安定。
English: For the country to eliminate brutality, cut off the root causes of military affairs, and stabilize the border.

古文：然犹不免死亡之患，罪当在于奉宪，朕甚闵之！
现代文：然而仍避免不了死伤的忧患，罪责应当在于遵守法令，朕深为哀怜这件事！
English: However, the sorrow of death and injury can still not be avoided. The blame should lie in compliance with the law. I am deeply sorry about this!

古文：其赦延寿、汤罪，勿治。
现代文：特赦免甘延寿、陈汤的罪过，不要追究了。 
English: The sins of Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang are specially pardoned, and they will not be investigated.

古文：诏公卿议封焉。
现代文：韶令公卿讨论封赏的事。
English: The Emperor ordered the court nobles to discuss the award.

古文：议者皆以为宜如军法捕斩单于令。
现代文：讨论的人都认为宜按军法捕杀单于令。
English: The people who discussed it all thought that it would be appropriate to carry out the order to capture and kill according to military law.

古文：匡衡、石显以为 郅支本亡逃失国，窃号绝域，非真单于 。
现代文：匡衡、石显认为 郅支本来是丧失国家逃亡在外，衹在无人的地方盗用名号，并非是真的单于。 
English: Kuang Heng and Shi Xian believed that Zou Zhi had originally fled abroad after losing the country, and that Zou had stolen the name in an uninhabited place, and was not really alone.

古文：元帝取安远侯郑吉故事，封千户，衡、显复争。
现代文：元帝就按照安远侯郑吉的旧例，封他们千户食邑，匡衡、石显又抗议。
English: According to the old example of Anyuan lord Zhengji, Emperor Yuan gave them the title of thousand households food village, but Kuangheng and Shi Xian protested again.

古文：乃封延寿为义成侯。赐汤爵关内侯，食邑各三百户，加赐黄金百斤。
现代文：于是就封甘延寿为义成侯，赐给陈汤关内侯的爵位，每人赐给食邑三百户，再赐给黄金一百斤。
English: Therefore, he made Gan Yanju the lord of Yicheng and gave Chen Tangguanzhong the title of lord of Guanzhong, and each of them was given 300 households of food villages and 100 jin of gold.

古文：告上帝、宗庙，大赦天下。
现代文：祭告上天、宗庙，大赦天下。
English: Tell it to the heavens, to the ancestral temple, and it will be forgiven.

古文：拜延寿为长水校尉，汤为射声校尉。
现代文：授任甘延寿为长水校尉，陈汤为射声校尉。
English: Gan Yanshou was appointed as the school captain of Changshui, and Chen Tang as the school captain of Yixing.

古文：延寿迁城门校尉、护军都尉，薨于官。
现代文：甘延寿升任为城门校尉，护军都尉，薨于官位上。
English: Gan Yanshou was promoted to the position of castle gate captain, guard captain, and was promoted to the highest official rank.

古文：成帝初即位，丞相衡复奏： 汤以吏二千石奉使，颛命蛮夷中，不正身以先下，而盗所收康居财物，戒官属曰绝域事不复校。
现代文：成帝刚登帝位，丞相匡衡又上奏道： 陈汤以二千石官员的身份奉命出使，不待请命就行事于蛮夷中，不严格要求自己以为部下的榜样，反而自取从康居夺得的财物，警告官员们不要再重新验证边远地区的事。
English: Emperor Cheng had just ascended the throne, and the prime minister, Kuangheng, made another report: Chen Tang was dispatched as an official of 2,000 koku, acting in the middle of the barbarians without waiting for orders. He did not strictly require himself to be a role model for his subordinates, but instead took the property seized from Kangju and warned officials not to re-verify things in remote areas.

古文：虽在赦前，不宜处位。 
现代文：即使事在赦免以前，还是不适合当官。 
English: Even before the pardon, he was unfit for office.

古文：汤坐免。
现代文：陈汤因此被免官。
English: As a result, Chen Tang was removed from his post.

古文：后汤上书言康居王侍子非王子也。
现代文：后来陈汤上书说康居王送来侍奉皇帝的儿子并不是王子。
English: Later, Chen Tang wrote that the son sent by King Kangju to serve the emperor was not a prince.

古文：按验，实王子也。
现代文：经过审查核实，确实是王子。
English: After review and verification, it is indeed a prince.

古文：汤下狱当死。
现代文：陈汤被关进监狱应当处死。
English: Chen Tang should be put to death.

古文：太中大夫谷永上疏讼汤曰： 臣闻楚有子玉得臣，文公为之仄席而坐；赵有廉颇、马服，强秦不敢窥兵井陉；近汉有郅都、魏尚，匈奴不敢南乡沙幕。
现代文：太中大夫谷永上奏书为陈汤辩冤说道： 臣下听说楚国有子玉得臣，晋文公因为他而坐不安稳；趟国有廉颇、马服，强大的秦国不敢图谋井陉；近代汉朝有郅都、魏尚，匈奴就不敢越过沙漠南下。
English: The Tai Zhong Daifu, Gu Yong Shang, wrote a report to defend Chen Tang's grievances, saying: "The vassals heard that the son of the state of Chu won the throne, and because of him, the prince of Jinwen did not feel secure; the state of Chu was not rich, and the state of Qin was not rich, and the powerful Qin did not dare to plot a coup; the modern Han Dynasty had the capital of Wei and Shang, and the Xiongnu did not dare to cross the desert to the south.

古文：由是言之，战克之将，国之爪牙，不可不重也。
现代文：从这些情况来看，胜敌的将领是国家得力的武臣，不能不重视。
English: Judging from these circumstances, the victorious generals are the country's most powerful warriors, and must be valued.

古文：盖 君子闻鼓鼙之声，则思将率之臣 。窃见关内侯陈汤，前使副西域都护，忿郅支之无道，闵王诛之不加，策虑愊亿，义勇奋发，卒兴师奔逝，横厉乌孙，逾集都赖，屠三重城，斩郅支首，报十年之逋诛，雪边吏之宿耻，威震百蛮，武畅西海，汉元以来，征伐方外之将，未尝有也。
现代文：所以 君子听到军鼓声，就想到能够率兵作战的大臣，臣私下认为关内侯陈汤，以前以副都护身份出使西域，愤恨郅支单于没有人道，忧虑君王不能给他以惩处，越想越愤怒，见义勇为的精神一下爆发，突然间率领军队急驰而行，横穿乌孙，集合于都赖水上，攻破了三层城墙，斩下了郅支单于的脑袋，报复了十年没有能诛杀他的怨仇，洗雪了边境官兵往日的耻辱，威风震动了百蛮，武功远扬四海，汉朝建立以来，征讨外国的将领，还未曾有过这样的情景。
English: Therefore, when the gentleman heard the sound of the military drum, he thought of the minister who could lead the soldiers in battle. The minister privately thought that the Guanai marquis Chen Tang, who had previously been sent to the western region as the deputy capital protector, was angry that there was no humanity, and worried that the king could not punish him. The more he thought about it, the angrier he became. The spirit of bravery suddenly broke out. Suddenly, he led the army to speed away, crossed the Wusun River, gathered on the Dulai River, broke through the three-layered city wall, cut off the head of Zou Zhixin, avenged the grudge that

古文：今汤坐言事非是，幽囚久系，历时不决，执宪之吏欲致之大辟。
现代文：现在陈汤因为所说的事情有误而犯法，被关在牢裹很久了，很长时间还不能判决，执法的官员想对他使用大辟的刑法。
English: Now Chen Tang has been in prison for a long time because he broke the law by making a mistake in what he said. He has not been able to be sentenced for a long time, and the law enforcement officials want to use the harsh criminal law against him.

古文：昔白起为秦将，南拔郢都，北坑赵括，以纤介之过，赐死杜邮，秦民怜之，莫不陨涕。
现代文：往日白起任秦国将领，南面攻下郢都，北面坑杀趟括，因为一点小小的过错，就被赐死于杜邮，秦国百姓为他哀痛，没有不流泪的。
English: In the past, he was appointed as the general of Qin in vain. In the south, he captured the capital of Shandong, and in the north, he was killed by the pit. Because of a small mistake, he was given the death of Du Ying. The people of Qin mourned for him, and there was no one who did not shed tears.

古文：今汤亲秉钺，席卷喋血万里之外，荐功祖庙，告类上帝，介胄之士靡不慕义。
现代文：现在陈汤亲自带着武器，流血转战于万里之外的地方，以战功献祭给祖庙，呈告给上天，武士没有不仰慕他的节义的。
English: Now, Chen Tang himself is carrying weapons, bleeding blood and going to war in a place thousands of miles away, sacrificing to the ancestral temple with his war exploits, and reporting to the heavens. There is no samurai who does not admire his righteousness.

古文：以言事为罪，无赫赫之恶。
现代文：因为陈说事情而犯罪，并没有很大的罪恶。
English: There is no great evil in committing a crime because of a rumor.

古文：《周书》曰： 记人之功，忘人之过，宜为君者也。 
现代文：《周书》上说： 牢记别人的功劳，忘记他人的过错，就适合做君主了。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: "To remember the merits of others and forget the faults of others is suitable for being a monarch.

古文：夫犬马有劳于人，尚加帷盖之报，况国之功臣者哉！
现代文：况且犬马为人劳苦了，还可以得到给它们盖窝棚的报答，更何况国家的有功之臣呢！
English: Moreover, dogs and horses have worked hard for people, and they can also get the reward of building shelters for them, not to mention the meritorious ministers of the country!

古文：窃恐陛下忽于鼙鼓之声，不察《周书》之意，而忘帷盖之施，庸臣遇汤，卒从吏议，使百姓介然有秦民之恨，非所以厉死难之臣也。 
现代文：私下担心陛下忽略了军鼓的声音，不能体察《周书》的含义，而忘了盖窝棚的恩施，以庸臣来对待陈汤，最后听从了官吏的决议，让百姓也有秦国百姓耿耿于怀的怨恨，并不是鞭策以身赴难的臣子的方法。 
English: Privately, he worried that his majesty had ignored the sound of the military drums, could not appreciate the meaning of the "Weekly Book," and had forgotten the kindness of covering the shelter, treated Chen Tang with a mediocre minister, and finally obeyed the decision of the officials, so that the people also had the resentment of the people of Qin. It was not a way to whip the minister who was in trouble.

古文：书奏，天子出汤，夺爵为士伍。
现代文：奏书呈上去后，天子就放出了陈汤，取消他的爵位而成为普通士兵。
English: After the report was submitted, Tianzi released Chen Tang, revoked his title and became an ordinary soldier.

古文：后数岁，西域都护段会宗为乌孙兵所围，驿骑上书，愿发城郭敦煌兵以自救。
现代文：后来过了几年，西域都护段会宗被乌孙国的军队所包围，驿站的人骑着马赶来报告，希望派遣西域有城镇的国家以及敦煌的军队来救自己。
English: A few years later, when the western region was surrounded by the armies of the Wusun Kingdom, people from the post came on horseback to report that they hoped to send troops from countries with towns in the western region as well as Dunhuang to save themselves.

古文：丞相王商、大将军王凤及百僚议数日不决。
现代文：丞相王商、大将军王凤以及百官商议了几天还没有结果。
English: The chancellor Wang Shang, the general Wang Feng and hundreds of officials have been discussing for a few days, but there is still no result.

古文：凤言： 汤多筹策，习外国事，可问。 
现代文：王凤就说： 陈汤很能谋划，熟悉外国情况，可以把他叫来问问。 
English: Wang Feng said: Chen Tang is very good at planning and is familiar with foreign situations. You can call him in for questioning.

古文：上召汤见宣室。
现代文：皇上就在宣室召见了陈汤。
English: The emperor summoned Chen Tang to the throne room.

古文：汤击郅支时中塞病，两臂不诎申。
现代文：陈汤攻打郅支单于时得了伤寒病，两只手臂不能弯曲。
English: Chen Tang got typhoid fever when he was playing the flute, and his two arms could not bend.

古文：汤入见，有诏毋拜，示以会宗奏。
现代文：陈汤进去参见，有诏令叫他不用跪拜，把段会宗的奏书给他看。
English: Chen Tang went in and saw that there was an edict telling him not to kneel, and to show him the playbook of the Duan Hui sect.

古文：汤辞谢，曰： 将相九卿皆贤材通明，小臣罢癃，不足以策大事。 
现代文：陈汤辞让说： 将相九卿都是贤才，通晓事理，小臣衰弱多病，不足以来策谋大事。 
English: Chen Tangjie said: The nine generals are all sages, knowledgeable about things, the ministers are weak and sickly, and they have been plotting big things since they were young.

古文：上曰： 国家有急，君其毋让。 
现代文：皇上说： 国家有急事，您就不要推让了。 
English: The emperor said, "The country is in a hurry, so don't give in."

古文：对曰： 臣以为此必无可忧也。 
现代文：陈汤答道： 臣下认为这件事一定没有值得忧虑的地方。 
English: Chen Tang replied, "My subordinates believe that there is nothing to worry about.

古文：上曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：皇上问： 凭什么这样说呢？ 
English: The emperor asked: Why do you say that?

古文：汤曰： 夫胡兵五而当汉兵一，何者？
现代文：陈汤就说： 胡人士兵五人才能抵上一个汉朝士兵，为什么呢？
English: Chen Tang said: Only five Hu soldiers can match the strength of one Han soldier. Why?

古文：兵刃朴钝，弓弩不利。
现代文：因为胡人兵器原始不锐利，弓箭不锋利。
English: Because the primitive weapons of the Hu people are not sharp, and the bows and arrows are not sharp.

古文：今闻颇得汉巧，然犹三而当一。
现代文：现听说他们学得了很多汉人的技巧，但仍要三个人才能敌挡一个汉兵。
English: Now I hear that they have learned a lot of Chinese skills, but it still takes three people to fend off a Chinese soldier.

古文：又兵法曰 客倍而主人半然后敌 ，今围会宗者人众不足以胜会宗，唯陛下勿忧！
现代文：还有兵法上说： 敌人比主方多一半的兵力然后才可以相敌 ，现在围住段会宗的人数不足以战胜他，请陛下不用担忧！
English: It is also said in the art of war: The enemy must have half the number of troops than the host before he can be defeated. The number of people now surrounding Duan Congregation is not enough to defeat him. Please, Your Majesty, do not worry!

古文：且兵轻行五十里，重行三十里，今会宗欲发城郭敦煌，历时乃至，所谓报仇之兵，非救急之用也！ 
现代文：况且军队轻装前进一天走五十里，负重前进祇能走三十里，现在段会宗想调动西域有城镇的国家以及敦煌的军队，经过很长一段时间才能到达，这是所谓报仇的军队，并不是救急可以用得上的。 
English: Moreover, the army marches fifty miles a day with a light load, and can only march thirty miles with a heavy load. Now, the section will want to mobilize the countries with towns in the western region and the army of Dunhuang, and it will take a long time to arrive. This is the so-called revenge army, and it is not an emergency.

古文：上曰： 奈何？
现代文：皇上说： 那怎么办？
English: The emperor said: What about that?

古文：其解可必乎？度何时解？ 
现代文：解围是一定的吗？那大概几时可以解围？ 
English: Is the lifting of the siege certain? Approximately when can the siege be lifted?

古文：汤知乌孙瓦合，不能久攻，故事不过数日。因对曰： 已解矣！ 
现代文：陈汤知道乌孙军队是乌合之众，不能持久进攻，以前的这种事情都过不了几天，就答道： 已经解围了！ 
English: Chen Tang knew that the Wusun army was a rabble and could not attack for a long time. In the past, this kind of thing did not take more than a few days. He replied: The siege has been lifted!

古文：诎指计其日，曰： 不出五日，当有吉语闻。 
现代文：屈指计算了一下日子，说： 不超过五天，就可听到好消息。 
English: Counting the days with his little finger, he said, "In no more than five days, we can hear the good news."

古文：居四日，军书到，言已解。
现代文：过了四天，军书送到，上面说包围已解。
English: Four days later, a military letter arrived saying that the siege had been lifted.

古文：大将军凤奏以为从事中郎，莫府事一决于汤。
现代文：大将军王凤上奏任命他为从事中郎，幕府中的事全由陈汤来处理。
English: The great general Wang Feng Shangso appointed him to be the middle man, and Chen Tang handled everything in the shogunate.

古文：汤明法令，善因事为势，纳说多从。
现代文：陈汤明晓法令，善于根据情况分析形势，他所提的建议多数被采纳。
English: Chen Tangmingxiao is good at analyzing the situation according to the situation, and most of his suggestions have been adopted.

古文：常受人金钱作章奏，卒以此败。
现代文：陈汤经常接受别人的金钱来为别人起草奏章，终于因为此事而被罢黜。
English: Chen Tang often accepted other people's money to write music for others, and was eventually ousted for this.

古文：初，汤与将作大匠解万年相善。
现代文：当初，陈汤和将作大臣解万年友好。
English: At the beginning, Chen Tanghe will serve as a minister to solve the eternal friendship.

古文：自元帝时，渭陵不复徙民起邑。
现代文：从元帝时候起，渭陵地区没有再迁徙人营造居民点。
English: Since the time of Emperor Yuan, there have been no new settlements built by migrants in the Fuling area.

古文：成帝起初陵，数年后，乐霸陵曲亭南，更营之。
现代文：成帝就在这裹初步建造陵墓，几年后，又喜欢上霸陵曲亭南面的地方，就重新再建。
English: Emperor Chengdu initially built a mausoleum here, and a few years later, he liked the place on the south side of the tyrant's mausoleum and rebuilt it.

古文：万年与汤议，以为： 武帝时工杨光以所作数可意，自致将作大匠，及大司农、中丞耿寿昌造杜陵赐爵关内侯，将作大匠乘马延年以劳苦秩中二千石；今作初陵而营起邑居，成大功，万年亦当蒙重赏。
现代文：解万年和陈汤计议，认为 武帝时候，工匠杨光以他的建造几次都让皇上感到满意，自己谋得将作大匠一职，还有大司农中丞耿寿昌因建造了杜陵被赐给关内侯爵位，将作大匠乘马延年因为劳苦被赐给中二千石的职位；现在初步建造陵墓并营建居民点，成就大功，我也应当受到重赏。
English: Xie Wanlin and Chen Tang thought that when Emperor Wu was in power, the craftsman Yang Guang made the emperor feel satisfied with his construction several times, and he himself won the position of master craftsman. Also, the Grand Secretary of Farmers, Geng Shuchang, was given the marquisate of Guanai for building the tomb, and the master craftsman, Ma Yanren, was given the position of middle two thousand stone because of his hard work. Now, the preliminary construction of the tomb and the construction of settlements have achieved great success, and I should also be rewarded.

古文：子公妻家在长安，儿子生长长安，不乐东方，宜求徙，可得赐田宅，俱善。 
现代文：子公的妻子家在长安，儿子也生长在长安，不喜欢东方，应当请求迁居，可以得到赏赐的田宅，这样都有好处。 
English: His son-in-law's wife's family is in Chang'an, his son also grew up in Chang'an, he doesn't like the East, he should ask to move, he can get a farmhouse, this is all good.

古文：汤心利之，即上封事言： 初陵，京师之地，最为肥美，可立一县。
现代文：陈汤心中认为这有利可图，就密封奏章呈给皇上说： 初步建造的陵墓在京城地区，是最肥沃美丽的地方，可以建立一个县。
English: Chen Tang thought in his heart that this would be profitable, so he sealed the record and presented it to the emperor, saying: The mausoleum that was initially built is in the capital area, which is the most fertile and beautiful place, and it is possible to establish a county.

古文：天下民不徙诸陵三十余岁矣，关东富人益众，多规良田，役使贫民，可徙初陵，以强京师，衰弱诸侯，又使中家以下得均贫富，汤愿与妻子家属徙初陵，为天下先。 
现代文：天下百姓没有迁徙到各陵已三十多年了，关东的富人越来越多，占领了很多好田，驱使贫困的百姓，可以把他们迁到初步建造陵墓的地方，用来增强京城，削弱诸侯，又使中等人家以下的都能平均贫富。陈汤愿意和妻子儿女以及家属迁徙到初陵地区，为天下人带个头。 
English: It has been more than 30 years since the people around the world have not migrated to the mausoleums. The number of rich people in Guandong is increasing, occupying a lot of good fields and driving the poor people. They can be moved to the place where the mausoleums are initially built, which will be used to strengthen the capital, weaken the princes, and make the middle-class people below the average rich and poor. Chen Tang is willing to migrate to the Chouling area with his wife, children and family members to take the lead for the people around the world.

古文：于是天子从其计，果起昌陵邑，后徙内郡国民。
现代文：于是天子就听从了他的计策，果然先营建昌陵地区居民点，然后迁徙内地郡县的国民。
English: As a result, Tianzi listened to his strategy, and successfully built settlements in the Changling area first, and then migrated the citizens of the inland counties.

古文：万年自诡三年可成，后卒不就，群臣多言其不便者。
现代文：解万年自己提出三年可以完工，后来终于没有完成，群臣大多说在造裹建邑不妥当。
English: Xie Manian himself proposed that it could be completed in three years, but it was not completed in the end, and most of the ministers said that it was not appropriate to build the town while it was under construction.

古文：下有司议，皆曰： 昌陵因卑为高，积土为山，度便房犹在平地上，客土之中不保幽冥之灵，浅外不固，卒徒工庸以巨万数，至然脂火夜作，取土东山，且与谷同贾。
现代文：皇上就把此事交给有关官员讨论，都说： 昌陵的工程是把低地填高，积土成山，估计便房仍在平地上。运来的土中不能保护幽冥中的灵魂，土浅了外面就不牢固，白白地浪费数以万计的劳动力，甚至点着脂火在夜间工作，到东山去运土，将要同谷价一样贵了。
English: The emperor brought the matter to the relevant officials for discussion, and they all said: The Changling project is to fill the lowlands with mountains of accumulated soil, and it is estimated that the latrines are still on the flatlands. The soil brought in cannot protect the souls in the dark, and if the soil is shallow, it will not be strong outside, wasting tens of thousands of labor in vain, and even working at night with a grease fire. To transport the soil to Dongshan will be as expensive as the price of grain.

古文：作治数年，天下遍被其劳，国家罢敝，府臧空虚，下至众庶，熬熬苦之。
现代文：工程进行了几年，天下人都受到了劳累，国家疲敝，国家库藏空虚，一直到老百姓，都愁苦不堪。
English: The project has been carried out for several years, the people of the world have been exhausted, the country is exhausted, the national treasury is empty, and all the way to the common people, they are miserable.

古文：故陵因天性，据真土，处势高敞，旁近祖考，前又已有十年功绪，宜还复故陵，勿徙民。 
现代文：旧陵是根据自然地形，依就本来的土地，所处地势高大宽敞，旁边又靠近祖先，以前又已经有了十年的营建，应该重新建造旧陵，不要迁徙百姓。 
English: According to the natural topography, according to the original land, the old mausoleum is located on a high and spacious ground, next to it is close to the ancestors, and it has been built for ten years before. The old mausoleum should be rebuilt, and the people should not move.

古文：上乃下诏罢昌陵，语在《成纪》。
现代文：皇上就下诏令停止昌陵的工程，这件事记在《成帝纪》。
English: The emperor issued a decree to stop the construction of the Changling Mausoleum, which is recorded in the "Chronicle of Chengdu Emperor."

古文：丞相、御史请废昌陵邑中室，奏未下，人以问汤： 第宅不彻，得毋复发徙？ 
现代文：丞相、御史请求废除昌陵地区新建的住宅，奏议没有批下，有人就问陈汤： 住宅不拆，难道还要再进行迁徙吗？ 
English: The prime minister and the minister of history requested the abolition of the newly built houses in the Changling area. The motion was not approved, and someone asked Chen Tang: If the houses are not demolished, do they still have to migrate?

古文：汤曰： 县官且顺听群臣言，犹且复发徙之也。 
现代文：陈汤说： 天子暂且听听群臣们所说的，到时还是要再迁徙的。 
English: Chen Tang said, "Son of Heaven, let's listen to what the ministers have said for the time being. At that time, we will have to migrate again.

古文：时，成都侯商新为大司马卫将军辅政，素不善汤。
现代文：当时成都侯王商新被任命为大司马卫将军辅助政事，平常就不喜欢陈汤。
English: At that time, the lord of Chengdu, Wang Shangxin, was appointed as the general secretary of Ma Wei to assist in government affairs. He usually did not like Chen Tang.

古文：商闻此语，白汤惑众，下狱治，按验诸所犯。
现代文：王商听到陈汤说的话后，就报告皇帝说陈汤惑乱群众，被抓进牢房治罪，审查他所犯的各种罪行。
English: After Wang Shang heard Chen Tang's words, he reported to the emperor that Chen Tang had misled the masses, and was taken to a cell to be punished and examined for various crimes he had committed.

古文：汤前为骑都尉王莽上书言： 父早死，独不封，母明君共养皇太后，尤劳苦，宜封。 
现代文：陈汤以前替骑都尉王莽上书说道： 父亲过早地去世，惟独没有得到封地，母亲明君供养皇太后，尤其劳累辛苦，应当封爵。 
English: Chen Tang once wrote a letter on behalf of the cavalry captain Wang Mang, saying: My father died prematurely, but he didn't get the fief. My mother, Ming Jun, provided for the empress dowager, and was especially hardworking, and should be knighted.

古文：竟为新都侯。
现代文：竟被封为新都侯。
English: He was even made the new lord of the capital.

古文：后皇太后同母弟苟参为水衡都尉，死，子伋为侍中，参妻欲为伋求封，汤受其金五十斤，许为求比上奏。
现代文：后来皇太后同母弟弟苟参任水衡都尉，死后，儿子苟伋为侍中，苟参的妻子打算为苟伋求取封地，陈汤接受了她给的五十斤金子，答应按照旧例替他上奏。
English: Later, the Empress Dowager's younger half-brother, Goh Sang, was appointed Captain of the Surveying Office. After his death, his son, Goh Chun, became an attendant. Goh Sang's wife planned to seek a fief for Goh Chun. Chen Tang accepted the fifty kilos of gold she gave him and agreed to play for him according to the old custom.

古文：弘农太守张匡坐臧百万以上，狡猾不道，有诏即讯，恐下狱，使人报汤。
现代文：弘农太守张匡因贪污百万以上，狡猾无道，下诏立即审问，他害怕进监狱，就派人告诉陈汤。
English: Zhang Kuangru, the deputy governor of Hongnong, was immediately interrogated for embezzlement of more than one million yuan and cunning. He was afraid of going to prison, so he sent someone to tell Chen Tang.

古文：汤为讼罪，得逾冬月，许射钱二百万，皆此类也。
现代文：陈荡就为他辩冤，准许过了冬天再说，他就被许给答谢的钱两百万，都是这样一类的事情。
English: Chen Xiang pleaded his case, and after the winter, he was allowed to speak, and he was allowed to give two million yuan as a thank-you, all of which were of this kind.

古文：事在赦前。
现代文：这些事都在大赦以前。
English: All this happened before the amnesty.

古文：后东莱郡黑龙冬出，人以问汤，汤曰： 是所谓玄门开。
现代文：后来束莱郡有黑龙在冬天裹出现，有人就问陈汤，陈汤说： 这是所谓的玄门开启。
English: Later, a black dragon appeared in winter in Shuklai County. Someone asked Chen Tang, and Chen Tang said: This is the so-called opening of the front door.

古文：微行数出，出入不时，故龙以非时出也。 
现代文：皇帝几次便装出行，出入的都不是时候，所以龙也就出现的不是时候。 
English: The emperor made several trips in civilian clothes, and it was not the right time to go in and out, so it was not the right time for the dragon to appear.

古文：又言当复发徙，传相语者十余人。
现代文：又说就要重新进行迁徙了，互相传说的有十多人。
English: It is also said that the migration will be renewed, and there are more than ten people who have mutual legends.

古文：丞相御史奏： 汤惑众不道，妄称诈归异于上，非所宜言，大不敬。 
现代文：丞相、御史弹劾道 陈汤惑众无道，妄自诈称，把异象归给皇上，这不是他所应当说的，犯了大不敬的罪。 
English: Chen Tang led the way to the impeachment of the prime minister and the minister of history. He misled the public, made false claims, and attributed the vision to the emperor. This was not what he should have said, and he committed the crime of great disrespect.

古文：廷尉增寿议，以为： 不道无正法，以所犯剧易为罪，臣下承用失其中，故移狱廷尉，无比者先以闻，所以正刑罚，重人命也。
现代文：廷尉趟增寿评议，认为 惩治无道没有正当的法则，根据所犯的罪行轻重来治罪，臣下沿用此法却往往判罪失当，所以把案子拿到廷尉来审理，没有先例可参照就把事情首先报告给皇上，这是为了端正刑罚，使人命得到重视。
English: The courtier went to increase his life expectancy, and thought that there was no legitimate law to punish the wicked, and that the crime should be punished according to the severity of the crime committed. However, the subjects followed this law but often judged the crime improperly, so they brought the case to the courtier for trial. If there was no precedent to refer to, they would first report the matter to the emperor. This was in order to correct the punishment and give importance to people's lives.

古文：明主哀悯百姓，下制书罢昌陵勿徙吏民，已申布。
现代文：圣明君主哀怜百姓，颁布韶令叫停止建造昌陵，不要迁徙官员和百姓，诏令早已发布。
English: The Sage Monarch took pity on the people and issued a royal decree to stop the construction of Changling and not to relocate officials and people. The royal decree had already been issued.

古文：汤妄以意相谓且复发徙，虽颇惊动，所流行者少，百姓不为变，不可谓惑众。
现代文：陈汤妄自把自己的揣度告诉其他人说将要重新迁徙，虽然受到惊动不小，但话流传得不是很广，百姓没有发生变乱，造就不可以说是惑乱众人。
English: Chen Tangli told others of his speculation that he would relocate again. Although he was shocked, the story did not spread widely. If there was no disturbance among the people, it could not be said that he had confused everyone.

古文：汤称诈，虚设不然之事，非所宜言，大不敬也。 
现代文：陈汤散布谣言，假设并不真实的事情，不是他应该说的，犯了大不敬的罪。 
English: Chen Tang spread rumors, assumed things that were not true, not what he should have said, and committed the crime of great disrespect.

古文：制曰： 廷尉增寿当是。
现代文：皇上颁布命令说： 廷尉赵增寿所评议的很正确。
English: The emperor issued an order saying: What the courtier Zhao Zengshou commented on is very correct.

古文：汤前有讨郅支单于功，其免汤为庶人，徙边。 
现代文：陈汤从前有讨伐郅支单于的功劳，特贬陈汤为百姓，发配到边疆去。 
English: Chen Tang once had the merit of fighting against the Kuomintang and supporting the Kuomintang. Chen Tang was specially demoted to a commoner and sent to the frontier.

古文：又曰： 故将作大匠万年佞邪不忠，妄为巧诈，多赋敛，烦繇役，兴卒暴之作，卒徒蒙辜，死者连属，毒流众庶，海内怨望。虽蒙赦令，不宜居京师。 
现代文：又命令说： 以前的将作大匠解万年奸巧邪恶没有忠心，胡乱制造谎言，增加赋税，征发徭役，仓猝兴起工程，使人民白白遭受罪苦，死的人接连不断，流毒遍及百姓，国内的人都心怀不满，他虽然遇上赦令，但也不适合住在京城。 
English: The order also said: "The former general was a master of deceit, cunning and evil, he was not loyal, he made up lies at random, increased taxes, levied and distributed forced labor, and hastily launched projects, causing the people to suffer in vain, people died one after another, poison spread throughout the people, and people in the country were dissatisfied. Although he was pardoned, he was not suitable to live in Beijing.

古文：于是汤与万年俱徙敦煌。
现代文：于是陈汤与解万年一同被发配到敦煌。
English: As a result, Chen Tang was sent to Dunhuang together with Xie Wanlin.

古文：久之，敦煌太守奏： 汤前亲诛郅支单于，威行外国，不宜近边塞。 
现代文：过了很久，敦煌太守上奏书说： 陈汤以前亲自诛杀了郢支单于，在外国威望很大，不适宜接近边塞。 
English: After a long time, the Dunhuang governor said in his report: Chen Tang had personally killed Zou Shizan in the past. He had great prestige in foreign countries, and it was not appropriate for him to approach the border fortress.

古文：诏徙安定。
现代文：皇帝下令把他迁徙到安定。
English: The emperor ordered him to be moved to a stable.

古文：议郎耿育上书言便宜，因冤讼汤曰； 延寿、汤为圣汉扬钩深致远之威，雪国家累年之耻，讨绝域不羁之君，系万里难制之虏，岂有比哉！
现代文：议郎耿直上奏书陈述对国家有利的事，顺便为陈汤呜冤道： 甘延寿、陈汤替伟大的汉朝显示了钩取深处之敌和招致远方之国的威力，为国家洗刷了多年的耻辱，征讨极远地区桀傲不羁的君主，俘获了万里之外难以制服的敌人，难道还有比这更大的功劳吗？
English: Counselor Geng Zhiang submitted a report stating the things that are beneficial to the country, and by the way, he was unfair to Chen Tang: Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang showed the power of hooking deep enemies and attracting distant countries for the great Han Dynasty, washed away years of shame for the country, fought against arrogant and unruly monarchs in remote areas, and captured enemies that are difficult to subdue thousands of miles away. Is there a greater merit than this?

古文：先帝嘉之，仍下明诏，宣著其功，改年垂历，传之无穷。
现代文：先帝嘉奖他们，几次颁布英明的诏令，宣传彰明他们的功劳，更改年号，记其功勋，传之无穷。
English: The previous emperor commended them, issued several wise decrees, publicized their merits, changed the year, and recorded their merits.

古文：应是，南郡献白虎，边陲无警备。
现代文：与此相应，南郡贡献白虎，边塞平安无事。
English: Correspondingly, Nan County contributed white tigers, and the border fortress was safe.

古文：会先帝寝疾，然犹垂意不忘，数使尚书责问丞相，趣立其功。
现代文：当先帝卧病在床时，还留意于他们，没有忘记，几次派尚书质问丞相，立即为他们论功行赏。
English: When the former emperor was ill in bed, he also paid attention to them, and did not forget to send Shang Shu to question the prime minister several times, and immediately rewarded them for their merits.

古文：独丞相匡衡排而不予，封延寿、汤数百户，此功臣战士所以失望也。
现代文：惟独丞相匡衡进行排斥不给记功，衹封了甘延寿、陈汤几百户，造就是有功的大臣和战士所以失望的原因。
English: However, it was only the Minister of War, Kuang Heng, who did not give credit for the exclusion, and sealed off several hundred households of Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang. This was the reason for the disappointment of meritorious ministers and soldiers.

古文：孝成皇帝承建业之基，乘征伐之威，兵革不动，国家无事，而大臣倾邪，谗佞在朝，曾不深惟本末之难，以防未然之戒，欲专主威，排妒有功，使汤块然被冤拘囚，不能自明，卒以无罪，老弃敦煌，正当西域通道，令威名折冲之臣旅踵及身，复为郅支遗虏所笑，诚可悲也！
现代文：孝成皇帝继承了已建立起来的事业基础，趁着征战讨伐的威力，没有进行战争，国家平安无事，但大臣邪恶不正，又有谄媚奸巧的人在朝廷，毫不深思本末的患难，用来防止还没有形成的事情，他们想独占君主的威严，排挤妒嫉有功的人，使陈汤孤独地蒙冤被押，不能自己辩明，最后终于以无罪之身而在年老时被抛弃在敦煌，正好处在往来西域的通道之上，让威名令敌人闻风而逃的大臣转足之间就自己遭受灾祸，被郅支剩下的敌虏所耻笑，实在可悲！
English: Emperor Xiaocheng inherited the foundation of the cause that had already been established. He took advantage of the strength of the campaign and crusade. There was no war, the country was safe and sound, but the ministers were evil and dishonest, and there were charming and cunning people in the court. They did not think deeply about the last tribulation and used it to prevent things that had not yet been formed. They wanted to monopolize the majesty of the monarch, crowd out the envious and meritorious people, so that Chen Tang was wronged and detained alone, unable to defend himself. Finally, he was abandoned in Dunhuang in his old age with no guilt. It was good to be on the

古文：至今奉使外蛮者，未尝不陈郅支之诛以扬汉国之盛。
现代文：到现在奉命出使到外蛮的人，没有不讲述郅支的被诛杀用来宣扬汉朝的强盛的。
English: To this day, there is no one who has been sent to the barbarians without telling the story of the Xizhi people who were killed to promote the prosperity of the Han Dynasty.

古文：夫援人之功以惧敌，弃人之身以快谗，岂不痛哉！
现代文：藉助别人的功绩来威胁敌人，抛弃他人来使说他坏话的人感到高兴，这怎么不叫人悲痛呢？
English: How can it not be sad to threaten one's enemies with one's own merits, and to make one's detractors happy by discarding others?

古文：且安不忘危，盛必虑衰，今国家素无文帝累年节俭富饶之畜，又无武帝荐延枭俊禽敌之臣，独有一陈汤耳！
现代文：况且身处安定不要忘了危险，强盛的时候要想到衰败，现在国家平常没有文帝成年累月进行节俭而使国家富饶起来的积蓄，又没有武帝时被推荐而任用的勇猛机智、擒获敌人的大臣，衹有一个陈汤罢了！
English: Moreover, when you are in a stable situation, do not forget the danger. When you are strong, you should think about decay. Nowadays, the country usually does not have the savings that Emperor Wen spent years and years to make the country rich, and does not have the courageous wit and the minister who captured the enemy, who was recommended and appointed by Emperor Wu. There is only a stale soup!

古文：假使异世不及陛下，尚望国家追录其功，封表其墓，以劝后进也。
现代文：假使陈汤去世没能及上陛下的时代，还希望国家追加他的功劳，为他的墓树碑，用以勉励后来的人们。
English: If Chen Tang died before the time of His Majesty, we hope that the state will add his merit and erect a tombstone for his grave to encourage people in the future.

古文：汤幸得身当圣世，功曾未久，反听邪臣鞭逐斥远，使亡逃分窜，死无处所。
现代文：陈汤有幸得以生活在现在圣明的时代，建立功劳没有过去多久，反而听任奸邪的大臣把他排斥得远远的，使他流亡逃匿，死无葬身之地。
English: Chen Tang was fortunate to be able to live in the present era of enlightenment. It did not take long for his achievements to be established. Instead, he allowed the treacherous minister to expel him far away, causing him to flee into exile and die without a place to bury him.

古文：远览之士，莫不计度，以为汤功累世不可及，而汤过人情所有，汤尚如此，虽复破绝筋骨，暴露形骸，犹复制于唇舌，为嫉妒之臣所系虏耳。
现代文：眼光远大的人士，无不考虑，认为陈汤的功劳几个时代都没有人比得上，而陈汤所犯的罪过是人情所都有的，陈汤尚且这样，即使再有人为国流血牺牲，抛尸沙场，还是要受制于舌，被嫉妒他的大臣所俘虏。
English: People with far-sightedness all consider that Chen Tang's merits are unmatched in several eras, and the sins committed by Chen Tang are common to all human beings. Even if someone else sacrifices blood for the country and throws corpses on the battlefield, Chen Tang still has to be restrained by the tongue and be captured by his jealous minister.

古文：此臣所以为国家尤戚戚也。 
现代文：这是臣下为国家深感忧戚的原因。 
English: This is the reason why the vassals are deeply concerned about the country.

古文：书奏，天子还汤，卒于长安。
现代文：奏书递上去后，天子就让陈汤回来了，最后死在长安。
English: After the report was submitted, Tianzi let Chen Tang return, and he eventually died in Chang'an.

古文：死后数年，王莽为安汉公秉政，既内德汤旧恩，又欲谄皇太后，以讨郅支功尊元帝庙称高宗。
现代文：陈汤死后几年，王莽为安汉公，执掌朝政。内心既感激陈汤的旧恩，又想讨好皇太后，就以讨伐郅支的功劳来尊称元帝庙号为高宗。
English: A few years after the death of Chen Tang, Wang Mang became the Prince of Anhan and took charge of the imperial government. In his heart, he was both grateful for Chen Tang's old favor and wanted to please the empress dowager, so he honored the name of the Yuan Emperor's temple as Gao Zong with the merit of fighting the Wei branch.

古文：以汤、延寿前功大赏薄，及候丞杜勋不赏，乃益封延寿孙迁千六百户，追谥汤曰破胡壮侯，封汤子冯为破胡侯，勋为讨狄侯。
现代文：又因为以前陈汤、甘延寿的功劳大封赏薄，还有候丞杜勋根本就没有封赏，就加封甘延寿的孙子甘迁一千六百户，为陈汤追加谧号为破胡壮侯，封陈汤的儿子陈冯为破胡侯，杜勋为讨狄侯。
English: In addition, because Chen Tang and Gan Yanshou's achievements in the past were not rewarded, and there was no award at all for Ho Jiao Du Xun, the grandson of Gan Yanshou, Gan Qian, was additionally awarded 1600 households, Chen Tang was awarded the additional title of Hu Zhuang, Chen Tang's son Chen Feng was awarded the title of Hu, and Du Xun was awarded the title of Tendi.

古文：段会宗字子孙，天水上邽人也。
现代文：段会宗字子松，是天水上圭人。
English: Duan Huizong's character, Zi Song, is from Tianshui Shanggui.

古文：竟宁中，以杜陵令五府举为西域都护、骑都尉、光禄大夫。西域敬其威信。
现代文：竟宁年中，以杜陵令被五府举荐为西域都护、骑都尉光禄大夫，西域人敬重他的威望和信用。
English: In the middle of the year of King Ning, he was recommended by the five prefectures as the Western Capital Protector and Cavalry Captain Guanglu, and the people of the Western Regions respected his prestige and trust.

古文：三岁，更尽还，拜为沛郡太守。
现代文：三年后，任期满返回京城，授官为沛郡太守。
English: Three years later, he returned to Beijing at the end of his term and was appointed the governor of Pei County.

古文：以单于当朝，徙为雁门太守。
现代文：因为单于应当来朝见，就调任他为雁门太守。
English: Because he was supposed to come to the Imperial Court, he was transferred to be the governor of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：数年，坐法免。
现代文：过了几年，段会宗因犯法被免官。
English: A few years later, Duan Huizong was removed from office for violating the law.

古文：西域诸国上书愿得会宗，阳朔中复为都护。
现代文：西域各国上书表示希望派任段会宗，阳朔年中又任命为都护。
English: Countries in the western region submitted a letter expressing their wish to appoint a section of the congregation, and Yangshuo was appointed as the guardian of the capital in the middle of the year.

古文：会宗为人好大节，矜功名，与谷永相友善。
现代文：段会宗为人喜好大节，注重功名，同谷永交情不错。
English: Duan Huizong likes big festivals, pays attention to achievements, and has a good relationship with the valley.

古文：谷永闵其老复远出，予书戒曰： 足下以柔远之令德，复典都护之重职，甚休甚休！
现代文：谷永怜惜段会宗年老又到远方去任官，就去信劝诫他说道： 足下以能安抚远方的美德，重又担负都护的重要职位，甚好甚好！
English: Gu Yong, who was an old man and went to a faraway place to be an official, wrote to him and admonished him, saying, "It is very good to have the virtue of being able to pacify a faraway place, and to be responsible for the important position of protecting the capital.

古文：若子之材，可优游都城而取卿相，何必勒功昆山之仄，总领百蛮，怀柔殊俗？
现代文：以您的才能，可以轻而易举地在都城取得卿相的职位，何必要去昆山之侧创建功业，统率百蛮，安抚异域的人们呢？
English: With your talent, you can easily obtain the position of minister-general in the capital city. Why do you need to go to Kunshan to create a career, lead a hundred barbarians, and pacify people in a foreign land?

古文：子之所长，愚无以喻。
现代文：您的思虑深长，本来我是没有什么可以告诉您的。
English: You are thoughtful, and I have nothing to say to you.

古文：虽然，朋友以言赠行，敢不略意。
现代文：即使这样，朋友间临别赠言，怎敢不略略说说自己的意思呢。
English: Even so, in parting words between friends, how dare you not say a little bit about what you mean?

古文：方今汉德隆盛，远人宾服，傅、郑、甘、陈之功没齿不可复见，愿吾子因循旧贯，毋求奇功，终更亟还，亦足以复雁门之踦，万里之外以身为本。
现代文：现在汉朝恩德正盛大，边远地区的人们都来臣服，傅、郑、甘、陈的功绩终身不可能再次出现，希望我的朋友您要按照旧有的惯例，不要追求奇特的功绩，任职期满就回来，也足以抵销雁门的不幸。万里之外应以身体为本，希望您仔细考虑我的话。 
English: Now that the Han Dynasty is flourishing, people in remote areas are coming to submit, and the feats of Fu, Zheng, Gan and Chen are unlikely to reappear for a lifetime. I hope, my friend, that you will follow the old practice, do not pursue strange feats, and return at the end of your term of office, which is also enough to offset the misfortune of the Wild Goose Gate. You should be body-oriented when you are thousands of miles away. I hope you will carefully consider my words.

古文：愿详思愚言。 
现代文：段会宗已经出了边境。
English: Duan Huizong has already left the border.

古文：会宗既出，诸国遣子弟郊迎。
现代文：各国派子弟到城郊去迎接他。
English: Countries sent their sons and daughters to the outskirts of the city to meet him.

古文：小昆弥安日前为会宗所立，德之，欲往谒，诸翕侯止不听，遂至龟兹谒。
现代文：小乌孙王安曰以前是段会宗立他为王的。心中感激他的恩德，打算去拜访，各位翎侯阻止他前去，他不听，于是到了龟兹去拜会。
English: Little Wusun Wang'an said that he used to be a member of the Council of Elders, who made him king. He was grateful for his kindness, and he planned to visit. However, the members of the Council of Elders prevented him from going. He didn't listen, so he went to Kuez to visit the Council.

古文：城郭甚亲附。
现代文：有城郭的各国都对他很亲近顺从。
English: All the countries that have castles are very close to him and obey him.

古文：康居太子保苏匿率众万余人欲降，会宗奏状，汉遣卫司马逢迎。
现代文：康居太子保苏匿率领一万多人想投降，段会宗就把情况上奏，汉朝派遣卫司马去迎接。
English: Prince Kangju Bao Sunan led more than ten thousand people who wanted to surrender, and the Han Dynasty sent Wei Sima to meet them.

古文：会宗发戊己校尉兵随司马受降。
现代文：段会宗调派戊己校尉的军队随同司马接受投降的人。
English: Duan Huizong dispatched Captain Wu Ji's army to accompany Sima to accept the surrender.

古文：司马畏其众，欲令降者皆自缚，保苏匿怨望，举众亡去。
现代文：司马畏惧投降的人多，打算叫投降的人都自己捆绑上，保苏匿于是产生了怨恨心理，就率领众人逃走。
English: There were many people who were afraid to surrender, and those who wanted to surrender were tied up themselves. Baosun then developed a grudge and led the people to escape.

古文：会宗更尽还，以擅发戊己校尉之兵乏兴，有诏赎论。
现代文：会宗任期满后回来，因为擅自派遣戊己校尉的军队，耽误了军事行动，皇上下韶将功抵罪。
English: He returned after his term of office was over, because he had delayed military operations by dispatching the army of Captain Wu Zi without authorization, and the Emperor and the Emperor's son-in-law took the blame for the delay.

古文：拜为金城太守，以病免。
现代文：授官为金城太守，因为生病被免官。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Jincheng, but was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：岁余，小昆弥为国民所杀，诸翕侯大乱。
现代文：一年多后，小乌孙王被他国内的人所杀害，各位翎侯就大乱起来。
English: A little more than a year later, King Wusun was killed by someone from his own country, and all the princes and queens were in an uproar.

古文：征会宗为左曹中郎将、光禄大夫，使安辑乌孙，立小昆弥兄末振将，定其国而还。
现代文：皇上就征召段会宗为左曹中郎将光禄大夫，让他去安抚乌孙国，他立小乌孙王的哥哥末振将为王，安定了他的国家后就回来了。
English: The emperor then conscripted Duan Huizong as the left-hand middle-ranking official, General Guanglu Daifu, and asked him to pacify the Wusun Kingdom. He appointed the younger Wusun King's brother, Sui Zhen, as king, and returned after his country was stabilized.

古文：明年，末振将杀大昆弥，会病死，汉恨诛不加。
现代文：第二年，末振将杀害了大乌孙王，赶上他又病死了，汉朝遗憾不能亲自杀了他。
English: In the second year, Late Zhen Zong killed the Great Wusun King. When he caught up with him, he fell ill and died. The Han Dynasty regretted not being able to kill him personally.

古文：元延中，复遣会宗发戊己校尉诸国兵，即诛末振将太子番丘。
现代文：元延年中，又派遣段会宗发动戊己校尉和各国的军队，去诛杀末振将的太子番丘。
English: In the middle of the first year of the extension of the Yuan Dynasty, Duan Huizong also dispatched Colonel Wu Ji and the armies of various countries to fight and kill Prince Fanqiu of the late General Zhen.

古文：会宗恐大兵入乌孙，惊番丘，亡逃不可得，即留所发兵垫娄地，选精兵三十弩，径至昆弥所在，召番丘，责以： 末振将骨肉相杀，杀汉公主子孙，未伏诛而死，使者受诏诛番丘。 
现代文：段会宗恐怕大部队进入乌孙国后，惊动了番丘，让他逃走后不能再捉到，就把他所派遣的军队留在垫娄，挑选精干的持弩士兵三十人，从小道到达了乌孙王所在的地方，把番丘召来，责备他 末振将杀害骨肉至亲，杀了汉朝公主的子孙，没有来得及诛杀他就死了，使者奉皇帝命令来诛杀番丘。 
English: Duan Huizong was afraid that after the large army entered the Wusun Kingdom, he would alarm Fangqiu and let him escape and not be able to catch him again. He left the army he sent on the mat, selected thirty capable soldiers with shovels, reached the place where King Wusun was from the trail, called Fangqiu, and scolded him: "The late Zhen will kill his own relatives, kill the descendants of the Han Dynasty princess, and die before he can kill him. The messenger was ordered by the emperor to kill Fangqiu."

古文：即手剑击杀番丘。
现代文：就用手拿着剑杀死了番丘。
English: He killed the chief priest with a sword in his hand.

古文：官属以下惊恐，驰归。
现代文：番丘的官员和部下惊慌害怕，骑着马逃跑回去。
English: Pancho's officers and men panicked and fled back on horseback.

古文：小昆弥乌犁靡者，末振将兄子也，勒兵数千骑围会宗，会宗为言来诛之意： 今围守杀我，如取汉牛一毛耳。
现代文：小乌孙王鸟犁靡是末振将哥哥的儿子，带领几千名骑兵包围了段会宗，段会宗就对他们说了来杀番丘的意思： 现在你们包围并杀我，如同取汉牛之一毛。
English: Xiao Wusun Wangcangmai was the son of Sui Zhen's elder brother, and led several thousand cavalry to surround Duan Huizong. Duan Huizong told them the meaning of killing Fanqiu: Now you surround and kill me, just like taking a hair from a Han ox.

古文：宛王郅支头县槁街，乌孙所知也。 
现代文：宛王、郅支的头悬挂在稿街，你们乌孙是知道的。 
English: An Wang, the head of the Xizhi family hangs from the street in Jiuzhaigou, as you Wusun know.

古文：昆弥以下服，曰： 末振将负汉，诛其子可也，独不可告我，令饮食之邪？ 
现代文：乌孙王以下的人都畏服了，说： 末振将背弃汉朝，杀了他的儿子是可以的。难道就不能先告诉我们，让我们供给他最后一顿饮食吗？ 
English: Everyone from King Wusun on down was awestruck and said, "Mutian will abandon the Han Dynasty, and it's okay to kill his son. Can't you tell us first, and let us provide him with his last meal?"

古文：会宗曰： 豫告昆弥，逃匿之，为大罪。
现代文：段会宗说道： 事先告诉了乌孙王，让番丘逃走躲藏起来，就要犯下大罪。
English: Duan Huizong said, "If I told King Wusun in advance to let Fanqiu run away and hide, I would be committing a serious crime."

古文：即饮食以付我，伤骨肉恩，故不先告。 
现代文：如果供给他饮食后再交给我，那就伤害了骨肉的恩情，所以没有事先告知。 
English: If you give it to me after feeding it, it will hurt the flesh and blood, so I didn't tell you in advance.

古文：昆弥以下号泣罢去。
现代文：乌孙王和部下哭泣着撤兵而去。
English: King Uson and his men retreated weeping.

古文：会宗还奏事，公卿议会宗权得便宜，以轻兵深入乌孙，即诛番丘。宣明国威，宜加重赏。
现代文：段会宗回去把情况上奏，公卿议论认为段会宗权衡时宜得以见机行事，用小部队深入到乌孙国，诛杀番丘，宣扬彰明了国威，应加以重赏。
English: Duan Huizong went back to report on the situation, and the court nobles discussed that Duan Huizong weighed the time to act opportunistically, used small troops to go deep into the Wusun country, killed Fanqiu, and promoted the national prestige, and should be rewarded.

古文：天子赐会宗爵关内侯，黄金百斤。
现代文：天子就赐段会宗的爵位为关内侯，黄金一百斤。
English: The Son of Heaven bestowed upon Duan Huizong the title of Guan Nei Hou, with one hundred jin of gold.

古文：是时，小昆弥季父卑爰疐拥众欲害昆弥，汉复遣会宗使安辑，与都护孙建并力。
现代文：这个时候，小乌孙王父亲的小弟弟卑爰窒率领众人想加害乌孙王，汉朝又派遣段会宗前去，和都护孙建合力安抚。
English: At this time, the younger brother of the father of the young Wusun Wang, Bei Xun Tong, led the crowd to want to harm Wusun Wang, and the Han Dynasty sent a delegation to Zong to work with the capital's guardian, Sun Jian, to pacify him.

古文：明年，会宗病死乌孙中，年七十五矣，城郭诸国为发丧立祠焉。
现代文：第二年，段会宗病死在乌孙国中，享年七十五岁，城郭各国为他发丧，建立祠堂。
English: The following year, Duan Huizong died of illness in the Wusun Kingdom at the age of seventy-five. Castles and countries mourned for him and established ancestral halls.

古文：赞曰：自元狩之际，张骞始通西域，至于地节，郑吉建都护之号，讫王莽世，凡十八人，皆以勇略选，然其有功迹者具此。
现代文：赞曰：从元狩年间，张骞开始沟通西域，到了地节年间，郑吉建立了都护的称号，一直到王莽的时代为止，共有十八人，都是凭勇猛有谋略而当选，然而其中有功迹的人都记载在这裹了。
English: Zang Zai said: From the years of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Xuan began to communicate with the Western Regions. By the time of the Spring Festival, Zheng Ji established the title of the Capital Protector. Up until the era of Wang Mang, there were a total of eighteen people, all of whom were elected on the basis of bravery and strategy. However, some of the people who performed feats are recorded here.

古文：廉褒以恩信称，郭舜以廉平著，孙建用威重显，其余无称焉。
现代文：廉裹凭藉恩德信用而为人称道，郭舜因为廉洁公平而著名，孙建因为办事威严而突出，其余的人都没什么可称道的。
English: Lianwu was praised for his benevolence and trustworthiness, Guo Gan was famous for his honesty and fairness, Sun Jian was outstanding for his authority, and the rest of the people had nothing to commend.

古文：陈汤傥，不自收敛，卒用困穷，议者闵之，故备列云。
现代文：陈汤行为不检点，不自己加以收敛，终于因此而艰难窘迫，议论的人哀怜他，所以把他也列记于此。
English: Chen Tang did not behave properly, did not restrain himself, and finally suffered hardships as a result. The commentators felt sorry for him, so he is also listed here.

