古文：刘斐刘文静字肇仁，自言系出彭城，世居京兆武功。
现代文：刘文静字肇仁，他自称远祖是彭城人，而世代居住于京兆府武功县。
English: Liu Wenjing, alias Zhao Ren, claimed that his distant ancestor was from Pengcheng and that he had lived in Wugong County, Beijing Zhao Prefecture for generations.

古文：父韶，仕隋战死，赠上仪同三司。
现代文：其父刘韶，任隋官时战死，赠予仪同三司之爵。
English: His father, Liu Ye, who died in battle while serving as a Sui official, was given the title of "Duke of the Three Departments."

古文：文静以死难子，袭仪同。
现代文：刘文静因是死难官员之子，承袭其父仪同三司之爵。
English: Because Liu Wenjing is the son of a deceased official, he inherits his father's title and the title of the three departments.

古文：侗傥有器略。
现代文：他为人倜傥而有权谋。
English: He's a public figure and has the right to do what he wants.

古文：大业末，为晋阳令，与晋阳宫监裴寂善。
现代文：大业末年，担任晋阳县令，和晋阳宫监裴寂相友善。
English: In the last years of his life, he served as the governor of Jinyang County, and was friendly with Jinyang Palace Inspector Peizhang.

古文：寂夜见逻堞传烽，吒曰： 天下方乱，吾将安舍？ 
现代文：裴寂夜见城上巡逻的士卒燃举烽火，感叹说： 天下将乱，我们将去何处安身啊？ 
English: On the night of Pei's death, he saw the soldiers patrolling the city lighting bonfires and sighed, "The world will be in turmoil. Where will we go to live?

古文：文静笑曰： 如君言，豪英所资也。吾二人者可终■贱乎？ 
现代文：刘文静笑着回答说 ：您所说的话，有英雄豪杰气概，我们俩难道会贫贱终身吗？ 
English: Liu Wenjing replied with a smile, "What you said is heroic. Will we both be poor forever?"

古文：高祖为唐公，镇太原，文静察有大志，深自结。
现代文：高祖皇帝封为唐公，镇守太原，刘文静察其胸有大志，于是深相结纳。
English: Emperor Gaozu was named Tang Gong, and the town guard was Taiyuan. Liu Wenzhing saw that he had a great ambition, so he was deeply impressed.

古文：既又见秦王，谓寂曰： 唐公子，非常人也，豁达神武，汉高祖、魏太祖之徒欤！殆天启之也。 
现代文：不久又见到秦王李世民，对裴寂说： 唐公之子不是平庸之辈，豁达大度，神武雄豪，是汉高帝、魏太祖之类的人物，实为天纵之圣啊！ 
English: Soon after, he met Qin King Li Shimin, who said to Pei Zhiru: "The son of Tang Gong is not a mediocre generation, he is open-minded and generous, he is a great warrior, he is a character like Emperor Han Gao and Emperor Wei, he is truly a saint!

古文：寂未谓然。
现代文：裴寂不以为然。
English: Pei Shou was not impressed.

古文：文静俄坐李密姻属系狱，秦王顾它无可与计者，私入视之。
现代文：不久刘文静坐与李密联姻之罪逮入牢狱，秦王认为别的人不足以商议大计，便私自入狱探视。
English: Soon after, Liu Wenjing was arrested and imprisoned for the crime of marrying Li Mi. Qin Wang thought that other people were not good enough to discuss the grand plan, so he went to the prison to visit.

古文：文静喜，挑言曰： 丧乱方剡，非汤、武、高、光不能定。 
现代文：刘文静很高兴，用话打动他说： 方今天下丧亡离乱，非得出现商汤、周武王、汉高祖、光武帝一类的人物才能平定。 
English: Liu Wenjing was very happy and impressed him with his words: "Fang has been devastated and disorganized today. It is necessary to have figures such as Shang Tang, King Zhou Wu, Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, and Emperor Guangwu to pacify it.

古文：王曰： 安知无其人哉？
现代文：秦王说 ：怎能说没有呢？
English: Qin Wang said, "How can you say there is no Qin?"

古文：今过此，非儿女子姁姁相忧者。世道将革，直欲共大计，试为我言之。 
现代文：今天来此看望，并非因儿女情长，故而宽解排忧，实因世道将变，打算与您共议大计，请您为我筹划此事。 
English: I have come to visit you today not because I have a long-term relationship with my children, so I would like to relieve their worries, but because the world is about to change, and I intend to discuss the overall plan with you. I would like you to plan this for me.

古文：文静曰： 上南幸，兵填河、洛，盗贼蜉结，大连州县，小阻山泽，以万数，须真主取而用之。
现代文：刘文静说： 皇上南下江都，兵马充斥河洛地区，盗贼盘结，大者连接州县，小者保阻山泽，人数之多以万计，只须真命天子驾取而用之。
English: Liu Wenjing said: The emperor went south to the capital of the Yangtze River, the soldiers and horses flooded the Helo region, the thieves were entangled, the big ones connected the prefectures, the small ones protected the mountains and the lakes, the number of people was in the tens of thousands, and only the true God could use them.

古文：诚能投天会机，奋礻艺大呼，则四海不足定也。
现代文：如能顺应天命，抓住时机，奋臂大呼，那么天下就可平定。
English: If we can comply with the destiny, seize the opportunity, and shout loudly, then the world can be pacified.

古文：今汾、晋避盗者皆在，文静素知其豪杰，一朝号召，十万众可得也。
现代文：现在汾州、晋州一带百姓避乱者皆在城内，文静平时就知其豪杰，一旦号召起义，十万之众可得。
English: At present, all the people in and around Zhangzhou and Jinzhou are in the city, and Wenjing is known as a hero in peacetime. If he calls for an uprising, a hundred thousand people can be won.

古文：加公府兵数万，一下令，谁不愿从？
现代文：加上唐公府兵数万，一声令下，谁敢不从！
English: Add tens of thousands of soldiers from Tang Gongfu, and who would not obey an order?

古文：鼓而入关，以震天下，王业成矣。 
现代文：然后鼓行入关，威震天下，帝业即可成就。 
English: Then the drum line enters the pass, dominates the world, and the empire can be achieved.

古文：王笑曰： 君言正与我意合。 
现代文：秦王笑着说 ：您的话正与我意相合。 
English: Qin Wang smiled and said, "Your words resonate with me."

古文：乃阴部署宾客。
现代文：于是暗自分派宾客，准备起兵。
English: So he secretly sent his guests to prepare to raise an army.

古文：将发，恐唐公不从，文静谋因裴寂开说，于是介寂以交王，遂得进议。
现代文：又怕唐公不同意，刘文静打算利用裴寂加以开解，便介绍裴寂与秦王交结，也参与谋议之事。
English: In addition, fearing that Tang Gong would not agree, Liu Wenzhing planned to use Pei Jia to solve the problem, so he introduced Pei Jia to Qin Wang, and also participated in the deliberation.

古文：及突厥败高君雅兵，唐公被劾，王遣文静、寂共说曰： 公据嫌疑之地，势不图全。
现代文：不久突厥打败高君雅的兵马，唐公也遭弹劾，秦王派遣刘文静与裴寂一道开说 ：您处于嫌疑之地，其势不能图全。
English: Soon after, the Turks defeated Gao Junya's soldiers and horses, Tang Gong was also impeached, and the Qin King sent Liu Wenzhing and Pei Zh to say: You are in a suspicious place, and you cannot make full use of your potential.

古文：今部将败，方以罪见收，事急矣，尚不为计乎？
现代文：现在部将战败，将因坐罪被逮，事已迫急，还不举大计吗？
English: Now that the general has been defeated and is about to be arrested for sedition, the matter is urgent. Shouldn't you make a big plan?

古文：晋阳兵精马强，宫库饶丰，大事可举也。
现代文：晋阳士马精强，宫库财物盈满，据此举大事可成。
English: Jinyang's army is strong, and the palace treasury is full of wealth. According to this move, great things can be accomplished.

古文：今关中空虚，代王弱，贤豪并兴，未有适归，愿公引兵西，诛暴除乱。
现代文：现在关中空虚，代王幼弱，豪杰并起，无所适从，希望您率兵西进，平息暴乱。
English: Now Guanzhong is empty, the king is young and weak, and heroes and heroines are rising at the same time. I hope you will lead your soldiers westward to quell the riots.

古文：乃受单使囚乎？ 
现代文：怎能接受单使之令而就囚呢？ 
English: How can you be imprisoned for accepting a single order?

古文：唐公私可，会得释而止。
现代文：唐公同意起事，但不久因得到宽释而止。
English: Tang Gong agreed to revolt, but soon stopped because he was pardoned.

古文：王教文静伪为诏 发太原、西河、雁门、马邑男子年二十至五十悉为兵，期岁尽集涿郡以伐辽。 
现代文：秦王指派刘文静假造隋炀帝诏令，调发太原、西河、雁门、马邑等郡男子年二十至五十者悉数为兵，定以年底会集涿郡，征讨辽东。
English: The King of Qin assigned Liu Wenzhing to forge the imperial edict of the Sui and Qian Dynasties, and dispatched all the men between the ages of 20 and 50 from Taiyuan, Xihe, Ganmen, and Mayi counties as soldiers. It was decided that by the end of the year, they would gather in Min County to conquer Liaodong.

古文：繇是人心愁扰，益思乱。
现代文：由于这个缘故，人心愁忧，愈益思乱。
English: Because of this, people are worried and increasingly confused.

古文：文静谓寂曰： 公闻先发制人，后发制于人乎？
现代文：刘文静对裴寂说： 您没听说先动手可制服人，后动手就为人所制的话吗？
English: Liu Wenzhing said to Pei Shao: "Haven't you heard that you can subdue a person if you start first, but if you start later, it's man-made?

古文：唐公名载图谶，闻天下，尚可怗怗以待祸哉？ 
现代文：唐公名字合应图谶，闻于天下，怎能坐失良机以待大祸降临呢？ 
English: Tang Gong's name fits the picture and is known all over the world. How can we miss the opportunity to wait for the disaster to come?

古文：又胁寂曰： 公为监，以宫人侍客，公死何憾，奈何累唐公？ 
现代文：又恐吓裴寂说： 您为宫监官，而让宫人侍候宾客，您犯死罪便行了，为何连累唐公呢？ 
English: He also threatened Peizhang, saying, "You are the palace supervisor, but you let the palace attendants wait for the guests. If you commit a capital crime, you will go free. Why do you involve Tang Gong?

古文：寂惧，乃劝起兵。
现代文：裴寂感到害怕，便规劝唐公起兵。
English: Peizhang was afraid, so he advised Tang Gong to raise an army.

古文：秦王即委文静、长孙顺德等募士，声讨刘武周。
现代文：秦王随即委派刘文静、长孙顺德等人招募士卒，声讨刘武周。
English: King Qin then appointed Liu Wenzhing, his eldest grandson Shunde and others to recruit soldiers to denounce Liu Wuzhou.

古文：文静与寂作符敕，发宫监库物佐军兴。
现代文：刘文静还与裴寂假造符敕，调拨宫监仓库物资以助起兵。
English: Liu Wenzhing also forged a certificate with Pei Jia and allocated materials from the palace warden's warehouse to help raise an army.

古文：会王威、高君雅猜贰，文静与刘政会为急变书，诣留守告二人反，候唐公与威、君雅视事，文静进曰： 有密牒言反者。 
现代文：时逢王威、高郡雅怀猜贰之意，刘文静便与刘政会做急变之书，前往留守处告二人谋反。等唐公与王威、高君雅共同视事时，刘文静上前说： 有密信上告谋反者。 
English: At the time of Wang Wei and Gao Gu Ya's conjecture, Liu Wenzhing and Liu Zhengkai made a sudden change and went to the residence to report the two to conspire. When Tang Gong and Wang Wei and Gao Junya jointly observed the matter, Liu Wenzhing came forward and said: There is a secret letter to report the rebel.

古文：公目威等省牒，政会不肯，曰： 所告乃副留守，唯唐公得观。 
现代文：唐公示意让王威等人看信，刘政会不肯给，并说： 所告正是副留守，只有唐公才能看信。 
English: Tang Gong indicated to let Wang Wei and others read the letter, but Liu Zhenghui refused to give it, and said: The accused is the deputy left behind, only Tang Gong can read the letter.

古文：公惊曰： 讵有是乎？ 
现代文：唐公惊奇地说 ：难道有这种事吗？ 
English: Tang Gong said in surprise: Is there really such a thing?

古文：读已，语威曰： 人告公等，信乎？ 
现代文：读完信，对王威说： 有人告你等谋反，有这事吗？ 
English: After reading the letter, he said to Wang Wei, "Someone accused you of plotting a rebellion. Is this true?

古文：君雅诟曰： 反人欲杀我耳。
现代文：高君雅骂道： 这是谋反的人想杀我等啊！ 
English: Gao Junya scolded: This is a rebel who wants to kill me, wait!

古文：文静叱左右执之，由是举兵。
现代文：刘文静喝令左右逮住他们，于是起兵。
English: Liu Wenzhing shouted orders to arrest them left and right, and the troops were called out.

古文：唐公乃开大将军府，以文静为司马。
现代文：唐公随即置大将军府，任命刘文静为司马。
English: Tang Gong immediately set up a general's office and appointed Liu Wenzhing as Sima.

古文：文静劝改旗帜，彰特兴，又请与突厥连和，唐公从之。
现代文：刘文静劝唐公更改旗帜，彰明特地兴兵之举，还建议与突厥连兵，唐公接受这个意见，并派刘文静出使始毕可汗。
English: Liu Wenzing advised the Tang emperor to change the flag to highlight the special move of raising an army, and also suggested that the Tang emperor accept the idea of joining forces with the Turks, and sent Liu Wenzing as an envoy to the Khan.

古文：遣文静使始毕可汗，始毕曰： 唐公兵何事而起？ 文静曰： 先帝废冢嗣以授后主，故大乱。
现代文：始毕可汗说 ：唐公兵马为何缘故而起？ 刘文静说： 先帝废弃嫡子，传位于后主，导致天下大乱。
English: Liu Wenzhing said: The previous emperor abandoned his legitimate son and passed it on to his successor, which led to great turmoil in the world.

古文：唐公，国近戚，惧毁王室，起兵黜不当立者。
现代文：唐公是国之近戚，担心王室之业毁坏，起兵废黜不应即位者。
English: Tang Gong is a relative of the country, who is worried about the destruction of the royal family, and who should not be dethroned by the military.

古文：愿与突厥共定京师，金币、子女尽以归可汗。 
现代文：故愿与突厥共同平定京师，金银财宝及子女全都归可汗所有。 
English: He wished to jointly subdue the capital with the Turks, and all the gold, silver, treasure, and children would belong to the khan.

古文：始毕大喜，即遣二千骑随文静至，又献马千匹。
现代文：始毕可汗闻言大喜，随即派遣二千精骑随文静抵达，还献马一千匹。
English: At first, Bi Khan was overjoyed to hear this, and immediately dispatched two thousand elite riders to accompany Wen Jing, and also offered a thousand horses.

古文：公喜曰： 非君何以致之？ 
现代文：唐公高兴地说： 不是你，谁能办成此事？ 
English: Tang Gong said happily: If not you, who can accomplish this?

古文：寻拒屈突通于潼关，与其将桑显和苦斗，死者数千。
现代文：不久，率兵抵御隋将屈突通于潼关，与其部将桑显和苦战，死者数千人。
English: Soon, he led the troops to resist the Sui generals and suddenly arrived at Shaoguan. He and his subordinate commander, Sang Xianhe, fought hard, and thousands of people died.

古文：文静度显和军怠，以奇兵从后掩之，显和败绩。
现代文：刘文静趁桑显和军懈怠之机，暗派奇兵从后掩袭，大败其众。
English: Liu Wenjing took advantage of the slackness of Sangxian and the army, secretly sent a strange soldier to attack from behind, and defeated the crowd.

古文：通兵尚数万，欲引而东，文静命将追执之，徇新安以西，皆下。
现代文：屈突通兵士还有数万，想退归东都，刘文静派遣诸将将其擒获，并略定新安以西地区。
English: There are still tens of thousands of soldiers who want to retreat to Dongdu, and Liu Wenzhing dispatched generals to capture them and roughly determine the area west of Xin'an.

古文：转大丞相府司马，进光禄大夫、鲁国公。
现代文：转任大丞相府司马，进授光禄大夫、鲁国公。
English: He was transferred to the post of Dajo Minister, Fusima, and promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor, and the post of Prince of the State of Lu.

古文：唐公践天子位，擢纳言。
现代文：唐公登天子之位，升任纳言。
English: Tang Gong ascended to the position of the Son of Heaven and was promoted to the post of Counselor.

古文：时多引贵臣共榻，文静谏曰： 今率土莫不臣，而延见群下，言尚称名。
现代文：当时高祖常引贵臣共席而食，刘文静进谏说： 现在天下莫不臣服，而陛下接见群臣，尚且自称其名。
English: At that time, Gao Zu often invited dignitaries to dine with him, and Liu Wenzhing said, "Nowadays, there is no room for insubordination in the world, and His Majesty received a group of ministers and still called himself by their names.

古文：帝坐严尊，屈与臣子均席，此王导所谓太阳俯同万物者也。 
现代文：帝座尊严，而屈己与臣子同席，这就如同王导所说的太阳俯同万物了。 
English: The dignity of the imperial throne, but bowing down to sit at the same table with the courtiers, is like the sun bowing down to all things, as Wang Du said.

古文：帝曰： 我虽应天受命，宿昔之好何可忘？
现代文：高祖说： 我虽说应天受命，昔日好友怎能忘怀？
English: Gaozu said, "Even though I say that I have been commanded by Heaven, how can I forget my old friends?

古文：公其无嫌。 
现代文：你就不要说了。 
English: Just don't say it.

古文：薛举寇泾州，以元帅府长史与司马殷开山出战，大败，奔还京师，坐除名。
现代文：薛举进犯泾州，以元帅府长史之职与司马殷开山出军交战，大败亏输，奔还京师，坐罪除名。
English: Xue He took the initiative to invade Zhangzhou, and with the position of marshal and prefectural governor, he went out to fight against Sima Yin Kaishan. He was defeated and defeated, and returned to the Beijing division. He was removed from the list.

古文：与讨仁杲，平之，复爵邑，授民部尚书、陕东道行台左仆射。
现代文：不久参与讨伐薛仁杲，将其平定，因功恢复爵邑，就任民部尚书、陕东道行台左仆射。
English: He soon took part in the campaign against Xue Renzhen, pacified him, and was rewarded with the restoration of his peerage. He was appointed as the People's Secretary of Shangshu and as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：从秦王镇长春宫。
现代文：随从秦王镇守长春宫。
English: He followed Qin Wang Zhen to guard Changchun Palace.

古文：文静自以材能过裴寂远甚，又屡有军功，而寂独用故旧恩居其上，意不平。
现代文：刘文静自以为才能超过裴寂很多，又多次立下军功，而裴寂偏偏因故旧之恩位居其上，意颇不平。
English: Liu Wenzhing thought that she was much more talented than Pei Jia, and had made military exploits many times. However, Pei Jia ranked higher than her because of the grace of the past, and she was quite dissatisfied.

古文：每论政多戾驳，遂有隙。
现代文：每逢议论多所违驳，遂生嫌隙。
English: Whenever there are many contradictions in the discussion, a rift is created.

古文：尝与弟散骑常侍文起饮酣，有怨言，拔刀击柱曰： 当斩寂！ 
现代文：文静曾与其弟散骑常侍文起酣饮，口出怨言，拔刀击柱说 ：非斩裴寂不可！ 
English: Once upon a time, Wenzhing and his brother, Wenzhing's horseback-riding attendant, Wenzhing, went out for a drink, complained, drew their swords and hit the pillar, saying: "We must not be lonely!"

古文：会家数有怪，文起忧，召巫夜被发衔刀为禳厌。
现代文：时逢家中怪异数见，文起担忧，便招巫觋星夜披发衔刀做禳厌之法。
English: Whenever he saw a strange number at home, he was worried, so he invited Wuxi Starry Night to wear a sword as a way to get rid of it.

古文：文静妾失爱，告其兄上变，遂下吏。
现代文：而文静之妾因失宠，将其事告兄以上告朝廷，于是被逮入狱。
English: However, because of her fall from grace, Wenjing's concubine sued her brother and the imperial court, and was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：帝遣裴寂、萧瑀讯状，对曰： 昔在大将军府，司马与长史略等。
现代文：高祖派遣裴寂、萧蠫讯问，回答说 ：从前在大将军府时，司马与长史位望略同。
English: Gaozu dispatched Pei Zh and Xiao Jie to interrogate him, and he replied: In the past, when he was in the general's palace, Sima and Chang Shi were somewhat on the same level.

古文：今寂已仆射，居甲第，宠赉不赀。
现代文：现在裴寂官侍仆射，身居甲第，受宠赏赐无数。
English: Now Pei Jakuan's attendant shoots, is in the first place, and is favored with countless rewards.

古文：臣官赏等众人，家无赢，诚不能无少望。 
现代文：而臣官爵赏赐不异众人，家无赢余，确实不能不生怨望之心。 
English: However, the vassals and dignitaries awarded the same to everyone, the family has nothing to gain, and it is indeed impossible not to feel resentment.

古文：帝曰： 文静此言，反明甚。 
现代文：高祖说： 刘文静说此话，反状非常明白。 
English: Gao Zu said: When Liu Wenzhing said this, the opposite was very clear.

古文：李纲、萧瑀明其不反；秦王亦以文静首决非常计，事成乃告寂，今任遇弗等，故怨望，非敢反，宜赐全宥。
现代文：李纲、萧蠫都认为文静不反；秦王也认为文静首定非常之计，事成才告裴寂，现在待遇不等，因生怨望之心，不是谋反之人，应当格外宽宥。
English: Both Li Gang and Xiao Yao believed that Wenjing would not rebel; the Qin King also believed that Wenjing was the first to take drastic measures, and that things would only be successful when Wenjing was dead. Now, the treatment is unequal, and because of the heart of resentment, it is not a rebel who should be particularly pardoned.

古文：帝素疏忌之，寂又言： 文静多权诡，而性猜险，忿不顾难，丑言怪节已暴验，今天下未靖，恐为后忧。 
现代文：而高祖平素就疏忌他，裴寂还有话说： 文静擅长权谋，而性情猜忌粗陋，忿而思难，其恶言怪节已经暴露无遗，方今天下未定，恐会成为后日之忧。 
English: However, Gao Zu had always been wary of him, and Pei Jia also said: "Wen Jing is good at scheming for power, but his temperament is suspicious, rude, angry, and difficult. His evil words and eccentricities have been fully exposed. The party is undecided today, and it may become a worry in the future."

古文：帝遂杀之，年五十二。
现代文：高祖于是下令杀他，时年五十二岁。
English: Gaozu then gave the order to kill him, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：文起亦死，籍其家。
现代文：文起也被杀，其家遭籍没。
English: Wenqi was also killed, and his family was stripped of their citizenship.

古文：文静临刑，抚膺曰： 高鸟尽，良弓藏，果不妄。 
现代文：文静临刑时，抚胸感叹说： 高鸟一飞尽，良弓就收藏起来，这话果真不假。 
English: When Wen Jing was on the verge of execution, he stroked his chest and lamented: "As soon as the high bird flies out, the good bow will be collected. This is really true.

古文：贞观三年，追复官爵，以子树义袭鲁国公，诏尚主。
现代文：贞观三年，追复刘文静官爵，以其子刘树义袭封鲁国公，下诏娶公主为妻。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, he restored Liu Wenzhing to the title of nobility, and with his son Liu Shu Yi, he attacked the Duke of Lu, and issued an edict to marry the princess.

古文：然怨父不得死，谋反，诛。
现代文：但怨恨父亲不得其死，又因谋反之罪被杀。
English: But he could not bear to see his father die, and he was killed for the crime of plotting rebellion.

古文：裴寂，字玄真，蒲州桑泉人。
现代文：裴寂字玄真，蒲州桑泉县人。
English: Pei Jia Zi Xuan Zhen, from Sangquan County, Puzhou.

古文：幼孤，兄鞠之。
现代文：小时成为孤儿，由诸兄抚养。
English: He became an orphan and was raised by his brothers.

古文：年十四，补郡主簿。
现代文：十四岁时，补任郡主簿。
English: At the age of fourteen, he was appointed as the county registrar.

古文：及长，伟容貌，涉知书传。
现代文：长大成人后，容貌魁伟，粗知书传。
English: When he grew up, he had a magnificent appearance, and he was known for being a bookworm.

古文：隋开皇中，调左亲卫。
现代文：隋开皇年间，调赴左亲卫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he was transferred to Zuo Sheng.

古文：家贫，徙步走京师，过华山祠，祈神自卜，夜梦老人谓曰： 君年逾四十当贵。 
现代文：因家贫，徒步前往京师，经过华岳祠庙，祈祷神灵，自卜其命。夜里梦见白发老人对他说 ：你年过四十才能大富大贵。 
English: Due to his family's poverty, he walked to Beijing on foot, passed Huayue Ancestral Temple, prayed to the gods, and prayed for his life. At night, he dreamed of a white-haired old man who said to him: "You can only be rich and noble when you are over forty years old."

古文：大业中，为齐州司户参军，历侍御史，晋阳宫副监。
现代文：大业年间，担任齐州司户参军，历任侍御史、晋阳宫副监。
English: During the reign of King Taejo, he served as the Secretary of State of the State of Chizhou, a member of the Imperial Army, and the Vice-Inspector of Jinyang Palace.

古文：唐公雅与厚，及留守太原，契分愈密，至蒲酒通昼夜。
现代文：唐公素与交好，到留守太原时，交情愈密，以至博戏饮酒通宵达旦。
English: Tang Gongsu and friends, when he stayed in Taiyuan, the friendship became closer, and the gambling and drinking lasted all night.

古文：秦王与刘文静方建大计，未敢白公，以寂最厚善，乃同私钱数百万饷龙山令高斌廉，俾与寂博，阳不胜，寂得进多，大喜，日滋昵。
现代文：秦王与刘文静商讨起兵大计，而不敢告知唐公，因裴寂与唐公最为厚善，于是拿出私房钱数百万给予龙山县令高斌廉，让他与裴寂赌博，假装不胜，裴寂得钱既多，大喜过望，日渐亲昵。
English: Qin Wang and Liu Wenzhing discussed the grand plan of starting an army, but did not dare to tell Tang Gong, because Pei Xiang and Tang Gong were the most generous, so they took out millions of private money and gave it to Longshan County Deputy Gao Binlian, and let him gamble with Pei Xiang, pretending to be invincible. Since Pei Xiang had a lot of money, he was overjoyed and became more and more intimate.

古文：太宗以情告之，许诺。
现代文：秦王告以真情，裴寂答应照办。
English: Qin Wang told the truth, and Peizhang agreed to do the same.

古文：寂尝以宫人侍唐公，恐事发诛，闲饮酣，乃白秦王将举兵状，因言： 今盗遍天下，城阖外即战场，虽徇小节，犹不脱死。
现代文：裴寂曾用宫人服侍唐公，恐事觉被诛，待饮酒酣畅时，才告知秦王即将起兵的情况，并且说 ：当今盗寇遍天下，城门之外就是战场，虽守小节，仍不免一死。
English: Peizhang once used palace servants to serve the Tang Emperor, fearing that he would be captured, and only informed the Qin King of the impending military situation when he was well drunk, and said: Today, robbers are all over the world, and outside the city gate is the battlefield. Although they keep a low profile, they still cannot avoid death.

古文：若举义师，不特免祸，且就大功。 
现代文：如举义兵，不仅能免祸患，而且能立大功，得天位。 
English: If you raise a volunteer army, you will not only be able to avoid disaster, but also be able to make great contributions and obtain the heavenly throne.

古文：唐公然所计。
现代文：唐公赞同其计。
English: Tang Gong agreed to his plan.

古文：兵起，寂进宫女五百，米九百万斛，杂彩五万段，铠四十万首。
现代文：兵起时，裴寂进献宫女五百人、粮食九百万斛、杂彩五万段、铠甲四十万副。
English: At the time of the military uprising, Pei Jakin offered 500 palace maids, 9 million baht of grain, 50,000 pieces of miscellaneous flowers, and 400,000 pairs of armor.

古文：大将军府建，为长史。
现代文：大将军府建置后任职长史。
English: This is the long history of the post after the establishment of the General Headquarters.

古文：下临汾，封闻喜县公。
现代文：攻下临汾后，被封为闻喜县公。
English: After the capture of Linyi, he was named the governor of Wensi County.

古文：至河东，屈突通未下，而三辅豪杰多归者。
现代文：从至河东时，屈突通拒守未下，而三辅豪杰归义者多。
English: From there to the east of the river, Qu Xutong refused to go down, while the three auxiliary heroes were mostly pardoned.

古文：唐公欲先取京师，恐通掎其后，犹豫未决，寂说曰： 今通据蒲关，未下而西，我腹背支敌，败之符也。
现代文：唐公打算先取京师，又怕屈突通在后为患，因而犹豫不决。裴寂建议说： 如今屈突通占据蒲关，未攻下而西进，我军就会腹背受敌，这是失败的征兆。
English: Tang Gong planned to capture the capital first, but hesitated, fearing that Qu Jutong might attack later. Peizhang suggested, "Now that Qu Jutong occupies Baguan, if we advance westward without capturing it, our army will be defeated, which is a sign of defeat."

古文：不若破通而后趋京师。 
现代文：不如击破屈突通后再赴京师。 
English: It would be better to go to Beijing after defeating Qu Xu Tong.

古文：秦王曰： 不然。
现代文：秦王说 ：不是这样。
English: Qin Wang said, "That's not true."

古文：兵尚权，权利于速。
现代文：用兵崇尚权变，权变在于神速。
English: The use of soldiers advocates the power of change, and the power of change lies in speed.

古文：今乘机度河以夺其心。
现代文：如今趁机渡河可以惊骇其心。
English: Now, taking the opportunity to cross the river can be terrifying.

古文：且关中群盗处处屯结，疑力相杖，易以招怀，抚而有之，众附兵强，何向不克。
现代文：况且关中群盗处处屯集，未有定主，容易招抚，统而有之，众附兵强，何向而不胜。
English: Moreover, the gangs of robbers in Guanzhong are concentrated everywhere. They do not have a fixed master, so they are easy to be pandered to. They are unified, and they have a large number of soldiers, so they cannot win in any direction.

古文：通自守贼耳，庸能患我？
现代文：屈突通不过自守之贼，怎能成为我军后患？
English: How can a self-protecting thief, who is quick to retaliate, become the scourge of our army?

古文：一失其机，胜负未可计也。 
现代文：万一坐失良机，胜败不可知啊！ 
English: In the unlikely event that you miss a good opportunity, victory or defeat is uncertain!

古文：唐公两从之，留兵围蒲，而遣秦王入关。
现代文：唐公认为双方都有道理，于是留兵围攻蒲城，而派秦王率军入关。
English: Tang Gong thought that both sides had a point, so he left his troops to besiege Puteng, and sent Qin Wang to lead the army into the pass.

古文：长安平，赐寂田千顷、甲第一区，物四万段，迁大丞相府长史，进魏国公，邑三百户。
现代文：平定长安之后，赐予裴寂田地千顷、甲第一所、织品四万段，升任大丞相府长史，进封魏国公，食邑三百户。
English: After Chang'an was pacified, Pei Jak was given 1,000 hectares of farmland, the first Class A factory, and 40,000 pieces of textiles. He was promoted to the position of grand secretary, minister, prefect, and governor of Wei, and had 300 households.

古文：隋帝禅位，公固让，寂开陈符命以劝，又督太常具仪、撰日。
现代文：隋恭帝禅位，唐公一再推让，裴寂开说符命以劝进，还督促太常具办仪物，挑选吉日。
English: Sui and Qing emperors practiced Zen, Tang emperors repeatedly made concessions, Pei Zhaokai said that it was his duty to persuade them to advance, and he also urged the emperor to always carry out rituals and select auspicious days.

古文：唐公即位，曰： 使我至此者，公也。 
现代文：唐公即帝位后说： 使我至此，靠的是你啊！ 
English: After his accession to the throne, Emperor Tang said, "You are the one who made me this far!

古文：拜尚书右仆射，赐服玩不赀，诏尚食日给御膳，视朝必引与同坐，入閤则延卧内，言无不从，呼为裴监，不名也，贵震当世。
现代文：命为尚书右仆射，赏赐服玩无数，下诏尚食官每天赐与御膳，视朝时必定引裴寂同坐，入阁则延至卧内，言无不从，呼为裴监而不称名，贵盛震动一时。
English: His orders were to write to his right-hand servant, to reward him with innumerable articles of clothing, to give his meal every day to his dining officer, to always sit with him when he was in the morning, to go to his bed when he was in bed, to listen to his every word, to call him Baizhang without giving him a name, and to make him tremble for a moment.

古文：武德二年，刘武周寇太原，守将数困，寂请行，授晋州道行军总管讨贼，以便宜决事。
现代文：武德二年，刘武周进犯太原，守将与战不利，裴寂自请前往解围，授职晋州道行军总管以讨伐贼寇，得以权益行事。
English: In the second year of Wu De, Liu Wuzhou marched into Taiyuan, and the defenders were at a disadvantage in the battle. Peizhang invited himself to go to relieve the siege, and was appointed as the head of the Jinzhou Road march to fight the bandits, so that he could act in his own interest.

古文：贼将宋金刚据介州，寂屯度索原，贼埭水上流，寂徙屯，为贼所搏，兵大溃，死亡略尽。
现代文：贼将宋金刚占据介州城，裴寂屯驻于度索原，贼军堵塞上游涧水，裴寂移营就水，为贼众所攻，全军大败，死亡殆尽。
English: Song King Gang was occupied by the bandits in Jiezhou City, Pei Shatun was stationed in Duxuoyuan, the bandits blocked the upstream water, Pei Shatun moved his camp to the water, and was attacked by the bandits. The whole army was defeated and died out.

古文：寂昼夜驰抵平阳，镇戍皆没。
现代文：裴寂一日一夜驰至平阳，晋州以东城堡皆陷。
English: Peizhang raced all day and night to Pingyang, and all the castles east of Jinzhou fell.

古文：上书谢罪，高祖薄其过，下诏慰谕，俾留抚河东。
现代文：裴寂上书自责，高祖不计其过，下诏慰谕，让他留镇河东。
English: Peizhang wrote a letter of self-condemnation, Gao Zu did not think twice, and issued an imperial edict of consolation, allowing him to stay in Hedong Town.

古文：寂无它才，惟飞檄郡县，促入屯垒相保赘，焚积聚，人益惴骇思乱。
现代文：裴寂别无他才，仅只发使传书郡县，督促居民进入城堡防守，焚其积聚之物，人心愈益惶恐思乱。
English: Pei Shizhen had no other talent. He only sent messengers to counties and counties to urge residents to enter the castle to defend it and burn the things they had accumulated. People's hearts became more and more fearful and confused.

古文：夏人吕崇茂杀其令，反，为贼守，寂攻之，复为所败。
现代文：夏县人吕崇茂杀其县令反叛，为贼防守，裴寂攻城，又被击败。
English: Lv Chongmao, a man from Xia County, killed the rebel of his county magistrate, defended the thieves, and Pei Jia attacked the city, and was defeated again.

古文：召还，帝责让良久，以属吏，俄释之，遇待如初。
现代文：被招还朝，高祖斥责了好久，将他交吏下狱，不久就放出，待遇照旧。
English: Recruited back to the imperial court, Gao Zu was reprimanded for a long time, he was sent to prison, and soon released, with the same treatment as before.

古文：帝每巡幸，必委以居守。
现代文：高祖每逢巡幸，必委任裴寂任居守之职。
English: Whenever Gaozhu went on a pilgrimage, he would appoint Pei Jia as his caretaker.

古文：麟州刺史韦云起告寂反，按讯无状，帝谓曰： 朕有天下，公推毂成之也，容有贰哉？
现代文：麟州刺史韦云起告发裴寂谋反，按讯无证，高祖对他说： 我取得天下，本是你促成的，岂有二心？
English: Linshou assassin Shi Wei Yunqi denounced Pei Zhizhang for plotting a rebellion. According to the report, there was no evidence. Gao Zu said to him: I won the world, it was you who made it happen, do you have two hearts?

古文：所以讯吏，欲天下人信公不反耳。 
现代文：所以交付吏议，是想让天下之人相信你不会谋反。 
English: So to hand it over to the officials is to make everyone in the world believe that you will not rebel.

古文：诏三贵妃赍玉食宝器宴其家，经宿去。
现代文：下诏三位贵妃携带美食宝器宴乐其家，达旦方休。
English: The following three empresses brought their gourmet treasures to entertain their families, and then departed.

古文：帝尝从容夸语曰： 前王多兴细微，间关行阵而后成功。
现代文：高祖曾从容夸耀说 ：前代帝王多起于寒微，苦斗于战阵而后取得成功。
English: Gaozu once calmly boasted, "The previous generation of emperors were mostly born in poverty, struggled in the battlefield, and then achieved success.

古文：我家陇西旧族，世姻娅帝室，一呼倡义，不三月有天下，公复华胄，职宦光显，非刘季亭长、萧曹刀笔吏比也。
现代文：我家本是陇西旧族，世与帝室结姻，一呼举义，不满三月取得天下。你也是世族名家，历任光显之职，刘季亭长、萧何曹参刀笔之吏不能和我们相比。
English: My family is originally from the old Shaanxi ethnic group, the world and the imperial family were married, and the world was called for justice, and the world was not satisfied in March. You are also a famous family of the world, and the successive posts of Guangxian, Liu Jiting, Xiao He Cao, and the officials of the sword cannot be compared with us.

古文：我与公无愧焉。 
现代文：我与你，无愧前人了。 
English: I am with you, a worthy predecessor.

古文：四年，改铸钱，赐一炉得自铸。
现代文：武德四年，改铸钱币，特赐一炉令自铸钱。
English: In the fourth year of Wude, the minting of coins was changed, and a special order to mint coins was issued.

古文：又聘其女为赵王元景妃。
现代文：特聘娶其女儿为赵王李元景之妃。
English: He was specially invited to marry his daughter to Zhao Wang Li Yuanjing's wife.

古文：迁左仆射。
现代文：升任左仆射。
English: Promoted to the position of left-handed shooter.

古文：帝置酒含章殿，欢甚，寂顿首曰： 始陛下发太原，约天下已定，许上印绶。今四海妥安，愿赐骸骨归田里。 
现代文：高祖置酒赐宴于含章殿，高祖极欢，裴寂叩头说 ：当初陛下起兵太原，约好天下平定之后，允许辞职归田，现今四海太平，望赐骸骨回乡。 
English: Gao Zu set out the wine and gave a banquet at the Hall of Han Zhang. Gao Zu was overjoyed. Pei Jing bowed his head and said: At the beginning, His Majesty raised an army in Taiyuan, and after the world was pacified, he was allowed to resign and return to the fields. Now the four seas are peaceful, and he hopes to give the skeleton back to his hometown.

古文：帝泣下曰： 未也，要当相与老尔。
现代文：高祖为之下泪说 ：不能这样，应当相与偕老才好。
English: Gaozu said with tears streaming down his face, "This can't be, it's better to be like your father."

古文：公为宗臣，我为太上皇，逍遥晚岁，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：你为宗臣，我为太上皇，逍遥快活于晚年，不是很好吗？ 
English: You are the vassal, I am the emperor. Isn't it great to live happily ever after?

古文：九年，册拜司空，遣尚书员外郎日一人直第。
现代文：武德九年，册封司空，派遣尚书员外郎每天一人于其居第轮值。
English: In the ninth year of Wu De, the official seal of the Secretary of the Air Force, dispatched Shang Shucan Wai Lang every day one person to his place of rotation.

古文：贞观初，太宗亲郊，命寂与长孙无忌升金辂，寂辞，帝曰： 公有佐命勋，无忌宣力王室，非二人谁可参乘者？ 
现代文：贞观初年，太宗亲临郊祠，命裴寂与长孙无忌同乘金辂之车，裴寂辞让，太宗说 ：你有佐命之功，无忌尽力于王室，除了你们俩谁能参乘呢？ 
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Taizong personally visited the suburban shrine, and his eldest grandson and Peizhang took the golden carriage together. Peizhang gave in, and Taizong said, "You have the merit of supporting the mission, and you must do your best for the royal family. Who can participate except the two of you?"

古文：遂同载归。
现代文：于是同载而归。
English: So they returned with it.

古文：浮屠法雅坐妖言，辞连寂，坐免官，削封邑半，归故郡。
现代文：僧人法雅坐妖言获罪，辞连裴寂，坐此免官，削夺一半封邑，令返本乡。
English: The monk Faya was found guilty of sitting on evil words, and was dismissed from his post, stripped of half of his fief, and ordered to return to his hometown.

古文：寂请留京师，帝让曰： 公勋不称位，徙以恩泽居第一。
现代文：裴寂奏请留居京师，太宗斥责说： 你的功劳不称其位，仅以私恩位居第一。
English: Pei Zhaxiao asked him to stay in Beijing as a teacher, and Taizong reprimanded him, saying, "Your achievements are not worthy of your position. You are only in the first place because of my favor.

古文：武德之政，间或弛紊，职公为之。今归扫坟墓，尚何辞？ 
现代文：武德年间，政令松弛紊乱，是你的责任，如今回乡扫墓，还有什么话说？ 
English: During the Wude era, the government decreed slackness and disorder, which is your responsibility. Now that you have returned to your hometown to sweep the graves, what else is there to say?

古文：寂遂归。
现代文：裴寂于是返归乡里。
English: Pei Jia then returned to his hometown.

古文：未几，汾阴狂男子谓寂奴曰： 公有天分。 
现代文：不久，汾阴狂男子对裴寂奴仆说： 裴公有天份。 
English: Before long, the gloom-mad man said to Pei Shao's slave: "Pei Gong has talent.

古文：监奴白寂，寂惶惧不敢闻，遣监奴杀所言者。
现代文：监奴告知裴寂，裴寂惊恐不敢奏闻，暗派监奴杀其知情者。
English: The inmate told Pei Zh, but Pei Zh was too scared to report it, and secretly sent the inmate to kill the informant.

古文：奴盗寂封邑钱百万，寂捕急，遂上变。
现代文：监奴盗用裴寂封邑之钱百余万，因捕急而上告。
English: The convict embezzled more than one million yuan of money from Peizhafu, and appealed because he was caught in a hurry.

古文：帝怒曰： 寂有死罪四：为三公，与妖人游，一也；既免官，乃恚称国家之兴皆其所谋，二也；匿妖人言不奏，三也；专杀以灭口，四也。
现代文：太宗发怒说： 裴寂有死罪四条：身为三公，而与妖人交游，是其一；既已罢官，竟愤称国家之兴是其所谋，是其二；隐匿妖人之言不奏，是其三；专行杀戮以灭口，是其四。
English: Taizong said angrily, "Pei Jia has committed four capital offenses: as one of the three princes, consorting with a demon is one; having been dismissed from office, claiming to have plotted the rise of the country is another; concealing a demon is a third; and killing a demon is a fourth.

古文：我戮之非无辞。 
现代文：我杀他不是没有理由。 
English: I didn't kill him for no reason.

古文：议者多请贷，乃放静州。
现代文：议者多请宽大处理，于是流放于静州。
English: Most of the deputies pleaded for leniency and were exiled to Jingzhou.

古文：会山羌反，或言劫寂为主。
现代文：不久山羌造反，有人说他们劫持裴寂为主。
English: Soon after, the mountain baboons rebelled, and some people said that they mainly kidnapped Pei Zhong.

古文：帝曰： 国家于寂有恩，必不尔。 
现代文：太宗说： 国家对裴寂有恩德，肯定不会这样。 
English: Taizong said, "The state has been kind to Pei Shanzhong, and this will definitely not happen.

古文：既而寂率家僮破贼。
现代文：果然，不久就有奏报说裴寂率领家僮破贼。
English: Sure enough, soon there was a report that Pei Jia led the family to break the thieves.

古文：帝念寂功，诏入朝，会卒，年六十。
现代文：太宗思念裴寂有佐命之功，下诏征召入朝，而裴寂已经去世，时年六十。
English: Taizong thought highly of Peizhang's role in saving lives, and issued an edict summoning him to join the imperial court. However, Peizhang had already passed away at the age of 60.

古文：赠相州刺史、工部尚书、河东郡公。
现代文：封赠相州刺史、工部尚书、河东郡公。
English: He was bestowed with the titles of "Sangju Sashishi," "Minister of Industry and Commerce Shangshu" and "Governor of Hedong County."

古文：子律师嗣，尚临海长公主，终汴州刺史。
现代文：其子裴律师嗣爵，娶临海长公主为妻，官至汴州刺史。
English: His son, Bae, a lawyer and heir to the throne, married Princess Linhai Chang for his wife, and rose through the ranks to become the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：律师子承先，武后时为殿中监，酷吏杀之。
现代文：律师之子裴承先，武后时任职殿中监，被酷吏杀害。
English: The son of a lawyer, Pei Chengxian, who served as the palace middle warden during the reign of Empress Wu, was killed by a cruel official.

