古文：凡人操行，有贤有愚，及遭祸福，有幸有不幸；举事有是有非，及触赏罚，有偶有不偶。
现代文：人的操行有的贤良有的愚昧，至于碰上灾祸福禄的时候，有的幸运，有的倒霉；做事行动有的对，有的错，至于遇到奖赏惩罚，有的受到赏识重用，有的则被斥责贬黜。
English: Some people's conduct is virtuous and some is foolish. As for the time when they encounter misfortune and fortune, some are lucky and some are unlucky. Some actions are right and some are wrong. As for the reward and punishment, some are appreciated and reused, and some are rebuked and belittled.

古文：并时遭兵，隐者不中。同日被霜，蔽者不伤。
现代文：同时碰上打仗，隐蔽的人不被击中；就像植物同一天被霜冻，有遮盖的不会受伤害。
English: When there is a battle, those who hide will not be hurt; when there is frost, the plants will not be harmed.

古文：中伤未必恶，隐蔽未必善。
现代文：被中伤的未必是坏人，隐蔽的未必是好人。
English: Those who are slandered are not necessarily bad people, and those who are hidden are not necessarily good people.

古文：隐蔽幸，中伤不幸。
现代文：隐蔽的是幸运，中伤的算倒霉。
English: What is hidden is lucky, what is slandered is unlucky.

古文：俱欲纳忠，或赏或罚；并欲有益，或信或疑。
现代文：大家都想向君主表示效忠，可是有的受赏，有的被罚；都想对君主作贡献，可是有的受到信任，有的却遭到怀疑。
English: Everyone wants to show loyalty to the monarch, but some are rewarded and some are punished; everyone wants to contribute to the monarch, but some are trusted and some are doubted.

古文：赏而信者未必真，罚而疑者未必伪。
现代文：受到奖赏并被信任的，未必真心；遭到惩罚并被怀疑的，未必伪装。
English: Those who are rewarded and trusted are not necessarily sincere; those who are punished and doubted are not necessarily disguised.

古文：赏信者偶，罚疑不偶也。孔子门徒七十有余，颜回蚤夭。
现代文：受奖赏信任的，只不过是受到君主的赏识重用；遭惩罚怀疑的，也只不过是被君主斥责贬黜而已。孔子有学生七十多人，颜回早死。
English: Those who are rewarded and trusted are only appreciated and reused by the monarch; those who are punished and doubted are only rebuked and belittled by the monarch. Confucius had more than seventy students and died young.

古文：孔子曰： 不幸短命死矣！ 
现代文：孔子说： 不幸他短命死了！ 
English: Confucius said, "Unfortunately, his life was cut short.

古文：短命称不幸，则知长命者幸也，短命者不幸也。
现代文：短命称不幸，就知道长命的是幸，短命的是不幸了。
English: To call a short life a misfortune is to know that a long life is a blessing and a short life is a misfortune.

古文：服圣贤之道，讲仁义之业，宜蒙福佑。
现代文：奉行圣贤的学说，讲习仁义的学业，应该得到福佑。
English: Those who follow the teachings of sages and sages and study righteousness should be blessed.

古文：伯牛有疾，亦复颜回之类，俱不幸也。
现代文：伯牛得了疾病，又与颜回类似，都遭到不幸。
English: Uncle Niu got sick, and similar to Yan Hui, both suffered misfortune.

古文：蝼蚁行於地，人举足而涉之。足所履，蝼蚁荏笮死；足所不蹈，全活不伤。
现代文：蝼蛄和蚂蚁在地上爬行，人抬脚走过，脚踩过的地方，蝼蛄和蚂蚁都被踩死；脚没有踩到的地方，它们都完全活着没有受到伤害。
English: Earthworms and ants crawl on the ground, and people walk over them with their feet. Where the feet have stepped on, earthworms and ants are trampled to death; where the feet have not stepped on, they are completely alive and unharmed.

古文：火燔野草，车轹所致，火所不燔，俗或喜之，名曰幸草。
现代文：火烧野草，车轮碾过的地方，火烧不着，一般人喜欢它，起名叫幸草。
English: Fire burns weeds. Where the wheel has passed, the fire cannot burn. Ordinary people like it and call it "luck grass."

古文：夫足所不蹈，火所不及，未必善也，举火行有适然也。
现代文：脚没有踩到的地方，火烧不到的地方，未必就好，因为火烧起来，大家要夺路走，是当然的。
English: It is not necessarily a good idea to go where your feet have not stepped on, where the fire cannot burn, because if the fire burns, everyone will have to take the road, of course.

古文：由是以论，痈疽之发，亦一实也。
现代文：因此来说：毒疮的发作，也是同一种情况。
English: Therefore, the onset of canker sores is also the same situation.

古文：气结阏积，聚为痈；溃为疽创，流血出脓，岂痈疽所发，身之善穴哉？
现代文：血气郁结堵塞不通，聚积在一块的是痈，溃烂的是疽疮，流血出脓。难道痈疽发作的地方，不是身上原来良好的部位吗？
English: Bloody knots can't be plugged, it's pus that accumulates in one place, it's gangrene that festers, it bleeds out pus. Isn't the place where gangrene occurs the original good part of the body?

古文：营卫之行，遇不通也。
现代文：营卫的运行，也会碰巧不通。
English: The operation of the camp guard will also happen to be impassable.

古文：蜘蛛结网，蜚虫过之，或脱或获；猎者张罗，百兽群扰，或得或失。渔者罾江河之鱼，或存或亡。或奸盗大辟而不知，或罚赎小罪而发觉：灾气加人，亦此类也。不幸遭触而死，幸者免脱而生，不幸者，不侥幸也。
现代文：蜘蛛结网，飞虫飞过，有的逃脱有的被捕捉；猎人张开罗网，各种野兽乱奔乱跑，有的被捕获，有的跑掉了；渔人用罾在江湖里捕鱼，鱼有活的有死的；有的奸盗犯了死罪而不知道，可是有的犯了用钱可赎的小罪却被发觉；灾害之气施加给人，也就是这类情况，不幸者遇到碰上就死，幸者避免逃脱就得活。所谓不幸，就是不能侥幸。
English: Spiders spin webs, flying insects fly over, some escape, some are caught; hunters spread nets, all kinds of beasts run wildly, some are caught, some run away; fishermen use baits to catch fish in rivers and lakes, fish are alive or dead; some thieves commit capital crimes without knowing, but some commit petty crimes that can be redeemed with money but are discovered; disasters are imposed on people, that is, such situations, the unlucky ones die when they encounter them, and the lucky ones live when they avoid escape. The so-called misfortune is not a fluke.

古文：孔子曰： 人之生也直，罔之生也幸。 
现代文：孔子说： 一个人能够活着是由于正直，不正直的人虽然也活着，那只是侥幸免于灾祸。 
English: Confucius said: A person can live because he is honest. Even if a dishonest person lives, it is only by chance that he is spared from disaster.

古文：则夫顺道而触者，为不幸矣。
现代文：那么遵循道义而遭到灾祸的就是不幸了。
English: Then it is unfortunate to follow morality and be plagued by disaster.

古文：立岩墙之下，为坏所压；蹈圻岸之上，为崩所坠，轻遇无端，故为不幸。
现代文：站在高墙之下，被毁坏的墙压倒；立在裂开的堤岸之上，因崩塌而落河。无缘无故随便遇上灾祸，所以叫做不幸。
English: To stand under a high wall and be crushed by the broken wall; to stand on a cracked embankment and fall into the river because of the collapse; to encounter disaster for no reason at all is called misfortune.

古文：鲁城门久朽欲顿，孔子过之，趋而疾行。
现代文：鲁城城门长期腐朽将要倒塌，孔子经过，就快步迅速地走过。
English: The long-term decay of the city gate of Lucheng is about to collapse. Confucius passed by and walked quickly.

古文：左右曰： 久矣。 
现代文：他周围的学生说： 已经朽坏很久了。 
English: The students around him said: "It's been rotten for a long time."

古文：孔子曰： 恶其久也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我就害怕它朽坏的时间太长。 
English: Confucius said, "I am afraid that it will take too long to decay."

古文：孔子戒慎已甚，如过遭坏，可谓不幸也。
现代文：孔子防备谨慎已算到极点，如果经过恰巧碰到倒塌，真可以说是不幸了。
English: Confucius said, "Prevention and caution have been taken to the extreme. If you happen to encounter a collapse, it is truly unfortunate."

古文：故孔子曰： 君子有不幸而无有幸，小人有幸而无不幸。 
现代文：因此孔子说： 君子只有不幸，却没有幸的问题，小人只有幸，却没有不幸的问题。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: A gentleman has only misfortune, but no problem of misfortune; a villain has only good fortune, but no problem of misfortune.

古文：又曰： 君子处易以俟命，小人行险以徼幸。 
现代文：又说： 君子处于平安地位而听天由命，小人做险恶的事却想侥幸免灾得福。 
English: He also said: A gentleman is in a safe position and is resigned to his fate, a villain does dangerous things but wants to get away with it and avoid disaster.

古文：佞幸之徒，闳孺、籍孺之辈，无德薄才，以色称媚，不宜爱而受宠，不当亲而得附，非道理之宜。
现代文：靠花言巧语长得漂亮得宠的人，象闳孺、籍孺之类，无德少才，专靠容貌美丽取悦君主，看来不该受庞的却被宠，不当亲近的却受到亲信，这是不合道理的，所以太史公为他们作传记。
English: It is unreasonable that people who are favored because they are good-looking and beautiful by means of rhetoric and clever words, such as Zhuang Zi and Zi Zi, have no virtue or talent, and only rely on their beautiful appearance to please the monarch. It seems that those who should not be admired are favored, and those who are improperly close are trusted. Therefore, Taishigong wrote biographies for them.

古文：故太史公为之作传，邪人反道而受恩宠，与此同科，故合其名谓之《佞幸》。
现代文：邪恶的人违反道义而受到恩宠，与此同类，因此把他们合起来称之为佞幸。
English: The wicked, who have been favored against their better judgment, are of the same kind, and therefore they are called "wicked" together.

古文：无德受恩，无过遇祸，同一实也。
现代文：无品德而受到恩宠，无过错却遭受灾祸，也是同一种情况。
English: It is one and the same thing to be favored without virtue and afflicted without fault.

古文：俱禀元气，或独为人，或为禽兽。
现代文：一起承受元气，有的唯独给人，有的给禽兽。
English: Together they sustain vitality, some only for humans, some for animals.

古文：并为人，或贵或贱，或贫或富。
现代文：一齐给人的，有人尊贵有人卑贱，有人贫穷有人富裕。
English: All things come to those who wait; some to the noble, some to the base, some to the poor, some to the rich.

古文：富或累金，贫或乞食；贵至封侯，贱至奴仆。
现代文：富裕的有人积累了大量金银，贫穷的有人乞讨为食；尊贵的直到被封王侯，卑贱的则沦为奴仆。
English: Some of the rich amassed large amounts of gold and silver, some of the poor begged for food; the noble were crowned princes, while the lowly were reduced to servitude.

古文：非天禀施有左右也，人物受性有厚薄也。
现代文：这并不是天施气时有偏袒，而是人和万物承受形成自己生命的气有厚有薄。
English: This does not mean that there is favoritism when heaven gives the breath, but that people and all things bear the breath that forms their lives thick and thin.

古文：俱行道德，祸福不钧；并为仁义，利害不同。
现代文：同样施行道德，祸福却不一样；同样实行仁义，利害却不相同。
English: The same morality is practiced, but the misfortunes and blessings are different; the same benevolence and righteousness are practiced, but the interests are different.

古文：晋文修文德，徐偃行仁义，文公以赏赐，偃王以破灭。
现代文：晋文公修行文德，徐偃王施行仁义，文公因此受赏赐，偃王由此遭破灭。
English: Jin Wengong practised morality, while King Xu Shun practised benevolence and righteousness. As a result, Wengong was rewarded, and King Shun was destroyed.

古文：鲁人为父报仇，安行不走，追者舍之；牛缺为盗所夺，和意不恐，盗还杀之。
现代文：鲁人为父报仇，从容地离开而没有逃跑，追赶的人就不再追杀他了；牛缺被盗贼抢去财物，态度和顺没有任何惧怕，盗贼仍然杀了他。
English: Lu took revenge for his father. He calmly left without running away, and his pursuers no longer chased him. Cows were robbed by thieves, and the thieves still killed him.

古文：文德与仁义同，不走与不恐等，然文公、鲁人得福，偃王、牛缺得祸者，文公、鲁人幸，而偃王、牛缺不幸也。
现代文：文德与仁义相同，没有逃跑与不惧怕一样，然而文公、鲁人得福，偃王、牛缺遭祸，这就是文公、鲁人有幸，而偃王、牛缺不幸。
English: Culture and virtue are the same as benevolence and righteousness, and not running away is the same as not being afraid. However, Wengong and Lu people are blessed, and the king and cow are in trouble. This means that Wengong and Lu people are lucky, and the king and cow are unlucky.

古文：韩昭侯醉卧而寒，典冠加之以衣，觉而问之，知典冠爱己也，以越职之故，加之以罪。
现代文：韩昭侯酒醉卧床身打寒噤，典冠拿衣服给他盖上，韩昭侯酒醒问起这件事，知道是典冠爱惜自己，却因为超越职责的缘故，把罪过加给他。
English: Han Zhaohou was drunk in bed and shivering. The crown prince took his clothes and covered him. Han Zhaohou woke up and asked about the matter. He knew that the crown prince cared about himself, but because he exceeded his duties, he added the crime to him.

古文：卫之骖乘者，见御者之过，从後呼车，有救危之义，不被其罪。
现代文：卫国的骖乘者见赶车的有过错，在后边呼喊着赶车，有拯救危险的意愿，没有被惩罚。
English: The passengers of the imperial guard saw the mistake of rushing the car, shouted in the back to rush the car, had the will to save the danger, and were not punished.

古文：夫骖乘之呼车，典冠之加衣，同一意也。
现代文：骖乘者呼喊着赶车，跟典冠给韩昭侯盖上衣服，同是一个意思。
English: The passengers of the train shouted to catch the train, and covered Han Zhaohou's clothes with the ceremonial crown, with the same meaning.

古文：加衣恐主之寒，呼车恐君之危，仁惠之情，俱发於心。
现代文：盖上衣服是怕君主寒冷，呼喊着赶车是怕君主危险，仁爱的感情，都发自内心。
English: Covering up with clothes is to fear the cold of the monarch, shouting to catch a car is to fear the danger of the monarch, and the feelings of benevolence are all from the heart.

古文：然而於韩有罪，於卫为忠，骖乘偶，典冠不偶也。
现代文：然而在韩昭侯却认为有罪，在卫将军则认为是忠心，是因为骖乘者受赏识，典冠不被赏识的缘故。
English: However, in Han Zhaohou, it was considered guilty, while in Wei, it was considered to be loyal, because the attendants were appreciated, but the crown was not appreciated.

古文：非唯人行，物亦有之。
现代文：幸偶不仅适用于人的所作所为，万物也都有这种情况。
English: Fortune dolls are not only applicable to the actions of people, but also to all things.

古文：长数仞之竹，大连抱之木，工技之人，裁而用之，或成器而见举持，或遗材而遭废弃。
现代文：高数仞的竹子，两人合抱的大树，工人把它锯开来派用，有的做成器具被使用，有的当作剩下材料遭到废弃。
English: The tall bamboo, the two-person hugging tree, the workers sawed it to use it, some were used to make utensils, and some were discarded as leftover materials.

古文：非工技之人有爱憎也，刀斧如有偶然也。
现代文：这不是工人对它们有偏爱与憎恨，而是刀斧的使用有偶然性。
English: It's not that workers have a love-hate relationship with them, but that the use of knives and axes is accidental.

古文：蒸谷为饭，酿饭为酒。
现代文：蒸谷米成饭，酿造米饭成酒。
English: Steamed rice into rice, brewed rice into wine.

古文：酒之成也，甘苦异味；饭之熟也，刚柔殊和。
现代文：酒酿成了，味道有好有坏；饭煮熟了，有硬有软。
English: The wine is made, the taste is good or bad; the rice is cooked, it is hard or soft.

古文：非庖厨酒人有意异也，手指之调有偶适也。
现代文：这不是厨师和酿酒的人有意使它们存在差异，而是手指之间的协调有偶然性。
English: It's not that the chef and the winemaker are deliberately different, but that the coordination between their fingers is accidental.

古文：调饭也殊筐而居，甘酒也异器而处，虫堕一器，酒弃不饮；鼠涉一筐，饭捐不食。
现代文：就是软硬适合的饭，也要用不同的竹筐来装，好酒也要用不同的器皿来存放。虫子掉进酒坛里，酒就被抛弃不饮；老鼠爬进饭筐里，饭就被扔掉不吃。
English: Different bamboo baskets are used to hold soft and hard rice, and different utensils are used to store good wine. If a worm falls into the wine vat, the wine is thrown away and not drunk; if a mouse climbs into the rice basket, the rice is thrown away and not eaten.

古文：夫百草之类，皆有补益，遭医人采掇，成为良药；或遗枯泽，为火所烁。
现代文：各种各样的草类，对人都是有帮助有好处的。有的遇到医生就采集起来，成为良药；有的则遗留在干涸了的沼泽里，被火烧掉。
English: All kinds of herbs are helpful and good for people. Some are collected by doctors and become good medicine; others are left in the dried-up swamp and burned by fire.

古文：等之金也，或为剑戟，或为锋钴。
现代文：同样的金属，有的铸成剑戟，有的则做成锋铦。
English: Some of the same metal is cast into the hilt of a sword, while others are made into daggers.

古文：同之木也，或梁於宫，或柱於桥。
现代文：同样的树木，有的在宫殿成了大梁，有的则在桥下成了支柱。
English: Some of the same trees have become girders in palaces, others pillars under bridges.

古文：俱之火也，或烁脂烛，或燔枯草。
现代文：同样是火，有的烧蜡烛，有的则烧枯草。
English: The same is true of fire. Some burn candles, while others burn dead grass.

古文：均之土也，或基殿堂，或涂轩户。
现代文：同样是土，有的成了殿堂的地基，有的则用去涂抹轩户。
English: It is also soil, some of which became the foundation of the hall of fame, while others were used to paint Xuanwu.

古文：皆之水也，或溉鼎釜，或澡腐臭。
现代文：同样是水，有的用去洗鼎釜，有的则用去洗腐臭的东西。
English: It's the same with water. Some people use it to wash the kettle, while others use it to wash things that smell rancid.

古文：物善恶同，遭为人用，其不幸偶，犹可伤痛，况含精气之徒乎！
现代文：万物的好坏是相同的，碰上被人使用，其偶然性使它们遭受不幸，尚且应该悲伤痛心，何况是有精神的人呢！
English: All things, whether good or bad, are the same. If they are used by someone, and the accident of their use causes them to suffer misfortune, they should be saddened and grieved, especially if they are spiritual beings!

古文：虞舜圣人也，在世宜蒙全安之福。
现代文：虞舜都是圣人，在世的时候完全应当蒙受安适生活的福份。
English: The gourds are all saints, and when they are alive, they should fully receive the blessings of a comfortable life.

古文：父顽母，弟象敖狂，无过见憎，不恶而嚚得罪，不幸甚矣！
现代文：但是，他父亲质劣，母亲愚蠢，弟弟象又傲慢任性，没有过失也要被别人憎恨，没有做坏事也要受惩罚，真是不幸得很。
English: However, his father is of inferior quality, his mother is stupid, his younger brother is arrogant and willful, and he is hated by others without any fault, and he is punished without doing anything bad. It is really unfortunate.

古文：孔子，舜之次也。生无尺土，周流应聘，削迹绝粮。
现代文：孔子，比舜差一点，一生没有得到一尺土地的封赐，到处奔走想接受人家聘请做官，结果遭到削迹绝粮。
English: Confucius, who was a little less fortunate than Xing, was never given a foot of land in his lifetime. He ran around everywhere trying to be hired as an official. As a result, he was deprived of food.

古文：俱以圣才，并不幸偶。
现代文：他们同是具有圣人的品德才能，都碰上偶然的不幸。
English: They both have the virtues and talents of a saint, and both have met with accidental misfortune.

古文：舜尚遭尧受禅，孔子已死於阙里。
现代文：但舜还能碰到尧让位给他，而孔子却死在阙里。
English: But the dragonfly could still touch the earthworm to give him space, but Confucius died in the cocoon.

古文：以圣人之才，犹不幸偶，庸人之中，被不幸偶，祸必众多矣！
现代文：凭圣人的品德才能，尚且会有偶然不幸，平庸的人中，遭受偶然不幸的，肯定多得很！
English: With the virtue and talent of a saint, there will still be accidental misfortune. Among the mediocre people, those who suffer from accidental misfortune are certainly very many!

