古文：十八日天色明丽，待夫，上午始行。
现代文：十八日天色明朗艳丽，等待派夫，上午才上路。
English: On the 18th, the sky was bright and dazzling. We waited for the pavement, and didn't get on the road until the morning.

古文：周文韬、粱心谷与茂林师远送，订后期而别。
现代文：周文韬、梁心谷与茂林禅师远道相送，约定日后相见便告别了。
English: Zhou Wenzhong, Liang Xingu and Maolin Zenji went on a long journey to see each other off. They agreed to meet again at a later date and then said their goodbyes.

古文：东过红石崖下。
现代文：向东经过红石崖下。
English: Head east past the red rock cliffs to Mt.

古文：其北石山有洞南向，甚崆峒，惜不及登，从此南入山，土石相间而出。
现代文：它北面的石山上有洞向南，十分空阔，可惜来不及登。正东马上走出东隘，大约五十里到旧州，再三十里是刁村，再三十里是土官所辖的上林县。我从去镇远州的路走，于是从此处向南入山，土山石山相间而出。
English: There is a cave to the south on the stone mountain to the north of it. It is very open, but unfortunately it is too late to climb. Zhengdong immediately went out of the East Pass, about fifty miles to the old prefecture, another thirty miles to the village of Yao, and another thirty miles to Shanglin County, which is under the jurisdiction of the local government. I walked from the road to Zhenyuanzhou, so from here I went south into the mountain, and came out between the soil mountain and the stone mountain.

古文：五里，南逾一石山脊，亦置隘门，是名峺腋。
现代文：五里，往南越过一条石山山脊，也设了隘门，这里名叫硬腋。
English: Five miles to the south, over a rocky ridge, there is also a narrow gate, here called the Hard Rock.

古文：下岭东南行，山夹间始有田畴。
现代文：下岭后往东南行，山峡间开始有田地。
English: After descending the ridge, we headed southeast, and fields began to appear between the mountain gorges.

古文：村人以虫为 咹 ，形如长身蟋蟀，而首有二眼，光如蜻蜓，亦一异也。
现代文：又走五里，走到一个村落叫邓村，换夫。又向东走入山峡，过了一条山脊，在路上换了夫。
English: She walked another five miles to a village called Dengcun and changed her husband. She then walked east into a mountain gorge, crossed a ridge, and changed her husband on the way.

古文：又东南行山峡间，三里，换夫于北麓。
现代文：此处村子在山北面，把脚夫呼唤出来。又是二里，在嗦村吃饭。又向东南走在山峡间，三里，在北麓换夫。
English: Here, the village is on the north side of the mountain, calling out the porters. It's another two miles to eat in the village of Zou. It's another three miles to walk between the mountain gorges to the southeast, changing husbands at the northern foot.

古文：又东南半里，渡小溪。
现代文：又向东南行半里，渡过小溪。
English: Another half-mile to the southeast, across the creek.

古文：半里，复上土山，其岭甚峻。
现代文：半里，再上登土山，此岭十分陡峻。
English: After half a mile, the ridge climbs up the hill, which is very steep.

古文：半里登其巅，日已暮矣。
现代文：半里登上岭头，天已黑了。
English: Halfway up the ridge, it was already dark.

古文：东南下山一里，抵其坞。
现代文：向东南下山一里，抵达山坞。
English: Go one mile southeast down the mountain and arrive at the dock.

古文：又暗行半里，抵一村。
现代文：又在黑暗中前行半里，走到一个村庄。
English: They walked another half-mile in the dark to a village.

古文：时顾奴候夫，后久而始至。
现代文：此时顾奴等候脚夫，在后面很久才来到。
English: At this time, Gu Nong was waiting for the porter, who came a long time later.

古文：得夫，又秉炬行。
现代文：得到脚夫后，又举着火把前行。
English: After getting the porter, they marched forward again, holding torches.

古文：又东南下，渡一小溪，复南循水上山峡间，时闻水声潺潺，不可睹也。
现代文：又向东南下走，渡过一条小溪，再向南沿溪水上行到山峡间，时时听见水声潺潺，但看不见。
English: I walked down to the southeast, crossed a creek, and then walked south along the creek to the canyon. I could hear the sound of rushing water, but I couldn't see it.

古文：自十一月初三至向武，十八日起行，共十六日。
现代文：共走五里便住宿在下宁炯的炯槽村。从十一月初三到向武，十八日起程，共十六天。
English: After walking a total of five miles, they stayed in the village of Hanzo in Shimo-Ningbo. From the beginning of November 3rd to Xiangwu, they left on the 18th, a total of 16 days.

古文：向武石峰，其洞甚多，余所游者七：为百感洞，又东洞，又下洞，又后岩水洞；为琅山洞，又下洞；为龙巷东北江流所入之上洞。
现代文：向武的石峰上岩洞很多，我所游的洞有七个：是百感洞，又有东洞，又有下洞，又有后洞的水洞；是琅山洞，又有下洞；是龙巷村东北江流流入之处的上洞。
English: There are many caves on the stone peak of Xiangwu, and there are seven caves I swam through: the Hundred Sense Cave, the East Cave, the Lower Cave, and the Back Cave; the Lushan Cave, and the Lower Cave; and the Upper Cave where the Northeast River flows into Longxiang Village.

古文：其过而未登者三：为中江坠穴之上，高岸南向洞；又为南江所绕独峰之上西南向洞；又为州东北巨峰南向洞，其闻而未至者二：为吉样，在西南四十里，韦守老所居。
现代文：经过但未上登的洞有三个：一是琅山东北二里，中江坠入的洞穴的上面，在高岸上向南的洞；又一个是琅山东南二里，南江绕过的独立山峰之上面向西南方的洞；又一个是州城东北巨大山峰上向南的洞，洞在红崖峰北面。听说却未到的洞有两个：一是吉祥洞，一是定稳洞，这两个洞又最是以奇丽著称的洞。
English: There are three caves that have been passed through but not ascended: one is two miles northeast of Lushan Mountain, above the cave into which the Middle River falls, and southward on the high bank; another is two miles southeast of Lushan Mountain, southwestward above the independent peak bypassed by the South River; another is a southward cave on the huge peak northeast of Zhucheng, and the cave is north of the Red Cliff Peak. There are two caves that have not been reached: one is the auspicious cave and the other is the stable cave, and these two holes are most famous for their beauty.

古文：为定稔，土音丰辇，在东南三十里。二洞又最以奇著者也。所游之最奇者，百感雄邃宏丽，琅山层叠透漏，百感东洞曲折窈窕，百感水洞杳渺幽閟，各擅其胜，而百感为巨擘矣。
现代文：共有十二个洞。游过的洞最奇丽的，百感岩雄伟深邃，宏大壮丽，琅山岩层层叠叠透亮漏风，百感岩东洞曲曲折折窈窕幽深，百感岩水洞杳渺幽深，各自显出优美之处，而百感岩居于首位。
English: There are a total of twelve caves. The most beautiful caves that I have swum through are: Baigan Rock, majestic and deep, grand and magnificent, Lushan Rock, layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers of layers

古文：枯榕江自向武西南境东流，自北岸寨抵向武北龙巷村之前。
现代文：枯榕江就是州城北面的大溪，自向武州的西南境向东流，从北岸寨流到向武州北面龙巷村的前方。
English: The Qianlong River is a large stream to the north of the city of Wuzhou, flowing from the southwest border of Wuzhou to the east, from Beigangzhai to the front of Longxiang Village to the north of Wuzhou.

古文：其东有石峰一枝，东西如屏横列。
现代文：村东有一支石峰，由东到西如屏风样横列着。
English: In the east of the village there is a stone peak, which is lined up from east to west like a screen.

古文：江当其西垂，分而为三：北枝东循峰北入峡，为正派；中枝东循峰南，停而大，为中江；南枝东南流田塍间，小而急，为南江。
现代文：江流正当石峰的西垂，分为三条水流：北面的支流向东沿石峰北麓流入山峡，是主流；中间的支流向东沿石峰南麓流，江水滞缓而水势大，是中江；南面的支流向东南流入田野间，水势小而急，是南江。
English: Due to the westward slope of Shifeng, the river is divided into three streams: the northern tributary flows eastward along the northern foot of Shifeng and flows into the gorge, which is the mainstream; the middle tributary flows eastward along the southern foot of Shifeng, and the river water is slow and the water potential is large, which is the Middle River; the southern tributary flows southeastward into the fields, and the water potential is small and rapid, which is the South River.

古文：入峡者东北转五里，山势四逼，遂东捣石崖穴中，势若奔马齐驱。
现代文：流入峡中的向东北流转五里，山势四面紧逼，于是向东冲捣进石崖下的洞穴中，气势如奔马并驾齐驱。
English: The stream flows into the gorge and flows five miles to the northeast, with the mountains closing in on all sides, so it rushes east into the cave under the cliff, with the momentum of a galloping horse.

古文：下坂，入山而东，经百感岩，北透其下，为水洞者也。
现代文：下了山坡，流入山中往东去，流经百感岩，向北穿流过山下，就是水洞了。
English: Down the mountain slope, flowing into the mountain to the east, flowing through the rock, flowing north through the mountain, it is a water cave.

古文：循山南者，东行二里，忽下坠土穴，此派经流独短。亦北注石山而一，想亦潜通百感者也。
现代文：沿山南面流去的，向东流二里，忽然下坠到土穴中，也是向北流注到同一座石山下，推想也是潜通百感岩的水流。
English: Flowing along the southern face of the mountain, it flows eastward for two miles, suddenly falling down into a hole in the ground. It is also a northward flow that pours into the same stone mountain, and it is speculated that it is also a stream of water that flows through hematite.

古文：南行塍间者，东绕平畴中两独峰之南，又东抵隘门岭西麓，折而北，直趋百感东洞之下，稍东入峡，亦下坠土穴，而北入百感。
现代文：向南流经田野间的，往东绕过平旷原野中两座独立山峰的南边，又向东流到隘门岭的西麓，折向北，直奔百感岩东洞之下，稍往东流入山峡，也是下泻到土穴中，而后向北流入百感岩。
English: It flows southward through the fields, eastward around the south side of the two independent peaks in the flat wilderness, eastward to the west foot of the Gaimen Ridge, turns northward, runs straight under the east cave of the Hundred Senses Rock, flows eastward into the mountain gorge, also sinks into the pit, and then flows northward into the Hundred Senses Rock.

古文：三流分于横列石峰之西，隔山岐壑，而均倾地穴，又均复合于百感一岩之中，而北出为大溪，始东北流峡去，经土上林之刁村而入右江。
现代文：三条支流在横列石峰的西面分流，隔着山，被壑谷岔开，但都倾注入地下的洞穴中，又都再次在一百感岩一个岩洞之中合流，而后向北流出去形成大溪，这才向东北流经峡中而去，经过上林土县的刁村而流入右江。
English: Three tributaries branch off on the west side of the cross-row of stone peaks. They are separated by the mountain and separated by the Shugu Valley, but they all pour into underground caves. They all merge again in a hundred rock caves, and then flow north to form a large stream. This then flows northeast through the gorge, passing through the village of Shugu in Shanglin County and flowing into the Right River.

古文：百感岩北，有村曰百感村。
现代文：百感岩在向武州城东北七里处。
English: Baikangyan is located seven miles northeast of Wuzhou City.

古文：村东南向，庐舍之下有小流三派，从石穴溢而成渠，大溪自百感岩出，即与之合流。始知此山其中皆空，水无不出入旁通也。百感岩在向武州东北七里。其西南即分水横列之山，中江之水所由入者，其东南即隘门岭之山，北逦而屏于东，南江之水所由折而北入者，其西北即此山之背，环为龙巷东入之内坞，北江之水所由捣而下者；其东北即此山后门，绕而为百感村，众江既潜合于中，所由北出者。
现代文：它西南就是横向排列江水分流的山，是中江的江水由此处流进去的地方；它东南就是隘门岭所在之山，向北透巡而去如像屏风样排列在东方，是南江的水经过折向北流入的地方；它西北就是此山的背后，环绕成龙巷村向东深入到里面的山坞，是北江的江水由此冲捣而下的地方；它的东北就是此山后面的山口，绕过去便是百感村，是众江在岩洞中潜流会合后，经由北面流出去的地方。
English: Its southwest is the mountains that horizontally arrange the river's water flow, and it is the place where the water of the Middle River flows into it from here; its southeast is the mountain where the Narrow Gate Ridge is located, and it is arranged in the east like a screen as it sweeps northward, and it is the place where the water of the South River flows into the north through the bend; its northwest is the back of this mountain, the dock that surrounds the village of Chenglongxiang and penetrates into it to the east, and it is the place where the water of the North River rushes down from here; its northeast is the mountain pass behind this mountain, and it is the village

古文：此山外之四面也。
现代文：这是山外四面的情况。
English: This is the situation on all four sides of the mountain.

古文：而其岩则中辟于山之半，南通二门皆隘：一为前门，一为偏穴。
现代文：而这个岩洞则是裂开在半山腰中，南边通着的两个洞口都很窄：一个是前洞口，一个是偏洞。
English: But this cave is split in the middle of the mountainside, and the two openings on the south side are very narrow: one is the front opening, and the other is the side opening.

古文：北通一门甚拓，而北面层峦阻閟，不通人间。
现代文：北边通着的一个洞口十分宽阔，但北面层层山峦阻塞，没有人烟。
English: The entrance to a cave on the north side is very wide, but the north side is blocked by layers of mountains, and there is no smoke.

古文：自州来，必从南门入，故巨者反居后，而隘者为前。
现代文：自州城来，必得从南面的侗口进去，所以大的洞口反而在后面，而窄的是前洞口。
English: If you come from the city of Suzhou, you have to enter from the southern mouth of the gorge, so the large mouth of the cave is at the back, while the narrow one is at the front.

古文：前门在重崖之上，其门南向。
现代文：前洞口在重重山崖之上，洞口向南。
English: The front entrance of the cave is on top of a mountain cliff, and the entrance faces south.

古文：初抵山下，东北攀级以上，仰见削崖，高数百仞，其上杙木横栈，缘崖架空，如带围腰，东与云气同其蜿蜒。
现代文：刚到山下时，向东北攀石阶上登，仰面见笔直的山崖，高有数百初，悬崖上横插木桩修为栈道，沿着山崖架空，如腰带围在山腰上，向东与云气一同蜿蜒而去。
English: When I first arrived at the foot of the mountain, I climbed up the stone steps to the northeast. On my back, I saw a straight cliff, hundreds of meters high. On the cliff, cross-cut wooden piles were built as a footpath. Along the cliff overhead, like a belt around the mountainside, I meandered eastward with the clouds.

古文：既而西上危梯三十级，达崖之半，有坪一掌，石窍氤氲，然裂而深。
现代文：随即向西上登高梯三十级，到达悬崖的半中腰，有手掌大的一块平地，石窍烟云弥漫，然而裂得很深。
English: Then I climbed thirty steps to the west, and reached the midpoint of the cliff. There was a flat area about the size of a hand. The rock was covered with clouds of smoke, but it was deeply cracked.

古文：由其东缘崖端石级而左，为东洞；由其西践栈而右，为正洞之前门。
现代文：由这里的东面沿悬崖外侧的石阶往左走，是东洞；由这里的西边踩着栈道向右走，是正洞的前洞口。
English: From the east side of here, walk along the stone steps on the outer side of the cliff to the left, which is the east cave; from the west side of here, walk along the boardwalk to the right, which is the front cave entrance of the main cave.

古文：栈阔二尺，长六七丈，石崖上下削立，外无纤窦片痕，而虬枝古干，间有斜骞于外，倒悬于上者，辄就之横木为杙外者藉树杪，内者凿石壁，复以长木架其上为梁，而削短枝横铺之，又就垂藤以络于外。
现代文：栈道宽二尺，长有六七丈，石崖上下陡削壁立，表面没有丝毫孔洞和一片石痕，可盘曲的树枝古树的树干，间或有斜举在外的，倒悬在上方的，便就势把它作为横架木头的木桩。外侧借助于树梢，内侧凿穿石壁，再用长木头架在壁上作为横梁，而后削短树枝横铺在架子上，又就着下垂的藤条用来编织在外。
English: The boardwalk is two feet wide and sixty-seven feet long. The stone cliff is built up and down with steeply hewn walls. There is not the slightest hole or stone mark on the surface. The branches of the ancient trees, which can be bent, are sometimes held out at an angle or upside down, and then they are used as wooden stakes for the crossbeam. The outside is supported by the treetops, the inside is cut through the stone wall, and then the long wooden frame is used as a crossbeam on the wall, and then the branches are cut short and laid on the shelf, and the sagging rattan is used for weaving.

古文：人践其上，内削壁而外悬枝，上倒崖而下绝壑，飞百尺之浮桴，俯千仞而无底，亦极奇极险矣。
现代文：人踩在栈道上，里面是陡削的石壁而外边是悬垂的枝条，上方倒卧着悬崖而下临绝谷，似飞空百尺飘浮着的木筏，俯身千切而无底，也是极奇异极险要的了。
English: People step on the boardwalk, the inside is a steeply cut stone wall and the outside is overhanging branches, upside down above the cliff and down to the valley, like a floating raft flying a hundred feet in the air, leaning down and bottomless, it is also very strange and dangerous.

古文：栈西尽，又北上悬梯十余级，入洞前门。
现代文：栈道在西边到了尽头，又向北上了十多级高悬的梯子，走入前洞口。
English: After reaching the end of the boardwalk on the west side, I climbed more than ten high-hanging ladders to the north and walked into the front of the cave.

古文：门南向，其穴高三尺五寸，阔二尺，仅容伛偻入。
现代文：洞口向南，洞穴高三尺五寸，宽二尺，仅容得下弯腰进去。
English: The mouth of the cave faces south. The cave is three feet five inches high and two feet wide, and can only be entered by bending down.

古文：下丈许，中平，而石柱四环如一室，旁多纤穴，容光外烁，宿火种于中。
现代文：下去一丈左右，中间平坦，而石柱四周环绕如像一个石室，四旁有很多细小的孔洞，光芒在外面闪烁，在里面原来留有火种。
English: The column is flat in the middle, but it is surrounded by a stone chamber, with many small holes on all sides. The light shines on the outside, but there is fire inside.

古文：爇炬由西北隙下，则窅然深陷。
现代文：点燃火把由西北的缝隙中下走，感到杳渺深陷。
English: I lit a torch and walked down from the northwest crevice, feeling deeply immersed.

古文：此乃洞之由明而暗处也。
现代文：这里是洞中由亮处通到暗处的地方。
English: This is where the light enters the dark in the cave.

古文：下处悬梯三十级，其底开夹而北，仰眺高峻。
现代文：下走之处悬有梯子三十级，洞底分开一条峡谷向北去，仰眺过去又高又陡峻。
English: On the way down, there is a ladder with thirty steps. The bottom of the cave is separated by a canyon to the north. Looking up, it is high and steep.

古文：梯之下，有小穴伏壁根。
现代文：梯子的下边，有个小穴伏在石壁根部。
English: At the bottom of the ladder, there is a small hole at the base of the stone wall.

古文：土人云： 透而南出，亦有明室一围，南向。 
现代文：本地人说： 向南钻出去，也有一个明亮的圆形石室，面向南。 
English: Locals say: Drilling out to the south, there is also a bright circular stone chamber, facing south.

古文：则前门之下层，当悬栈之下者也。
现代文：就是前洞口的下层，应当就是高悬的栈道之下的洞穴了。
English: It is the lower level of the former cave entrance, which should be the cave under the high-hanging boardwalk.

古文：由夹北入，路西有穴平坠如井，其深不测。
现代文：由峡谷向北进去，路西有个石穴在平地上像井一样陷下去，洞深不可测。
English: Entering from the canyon to the north, there is a stone pit on the west side of the road that sinks like a well on the plain. The depth of the hole is unfathomable.

古文：又入其西壁下，有洼穴斜倾西坠。
现代文：又进到它西面的石壁下，有个洼穴向西倾斜下陷。
English: Under the stone wall to the west of it, there is a depression sloping down to the west.

古文：土人云： 深入下通水穴，可以取水。 
现代文：本地人说： 深入进去下面通到水洞，可以取水。 
English: The local people said, "Go deep inside, there is a water hole underneath, you can get water."

古文：然流沙圮泻，不能着足也。
现代文：但是流动的沙土倒塌下泻，不能落脚。
English: But the shifting sands are collapsing and sinking, unable to settle.

古文：西壁上有奥室围环中拓，若悬琉璃灯一盏，乃禅室之最閟者。
现代文：西面石壁上有一个深室，围成环状，洞中扩开，好像一盏琉璃灯，是禅室中最隐密的地方。
English: On the western stone wall there is a deep room, enclosed in a ring, the hole expanding, like a lattice lamp, is the most secret place in the Zen room.

古文：出由其东，又北过一隘，下悬梯三十级，其底甚平旷，石纹粼粼，俱作荔枝盆。
现代文：由它东边出去，又向北过了一处隘口，下了三十级高悬的梯子，那底下十分平坦空旷，石纹如粼粼的水波，全是荔枝盆。
English: Leaving it to the east, and passing through a pass to the north, one descends a thirty-step ladder, beneath which there is a very flat and empty space, with ripples of water like ripples of stone, all of which are litchi pots.

古文：其西悬萎蕤，攀隙而入，如穿云叶。
现代文：它西面悬垂的石钟乳纷纭众多，攀着缝隙进去，如穿越在云层叶片之间。
English: On its western side, there are many hanging stone bells, climbing into the crevices, as if passing through the clouds between the blades.

古文：稍北转而西上，望见微光前透甚遥，蹑沙坂从之，透隘门西出，则赫然大观，如龙宫峨阙，又南北高穹，光景陆离，耳目闪烁矣。
现代文：稍向北转往西上走，望见前方有微弱的亮光从十分遥远的地方透进来，踏着沙坡赶到那里去，穿过隘口向西出去，便突然呈现出壮丽的景观，如龙宫和巍峨的宫网，又呈南北向高大弯隆，光怪陆离，耳目闪烁。
English: Turning slightly to the north and walking westward, I saw a faint light ahead of me coming in from a very distant place. I walked along the sandy slope to get there and went west through the pass. Suddenly, a magnificent landscape appeared, such as the Dragon Palace and the towering palace network, and it was tall and curved in a north-south direction. The light was strange and the land was far away, and my eyes were flashing.

古文：此乃洞之由暗而明处也。
现代文：这是洞中由暗转明之处。
English: This is where the darkness in the cave turns to light.

古文：其洞内抵西南通偏门，外抵东北通后门，长四十丈，阔十余丈，高二十余丈。
现代文：此洞里面抵达西南通到偏洞口，外边抵达东北通到后洞口，长四十丈，宽十多丈，高二十多丈。
English: The inside of this cave is reached by the south-west passage to the upper cave mouth, and the outside is reached by the north-east passage to the back cave mouth. It is forty meters long, more than ten meters wide, and more than twenty meters high.

古文：其上倒垂之柱，千条万缕，纷纭莫有纪极；其两旁飞驾之悬台，剜空之卷室，列柱穿崖之榭，排云透夹之门，上下层叠，割其一脔，即可当他山之全鼎。
现代文：顶上倒垂的石柱，千条万缕，纷纭繁多没有办法计出它的极限；洞两旁飞架高悬的平台，刻空卷曲的石室，石柱排列穿透崖壁的台榭，推开云层穿透峡谷的门洞，上上下下，层层叠叠，随便取下一点，都是其他山上的美景。
English: There are thousands of stone pillars hanging upside down at the top, and there is no way to calculate its limit; the flying platforms on both sides of the cave, the high-hanging platforms, the carved and curled stone chambers, the stone pillars lined up to pierce the cliff wall, the doorways that push the clouds through the canyon, up and down, layer upon layer, just take a bit off, are all beautiful scenery on other mountains.

古文：其内多因其高下架竹为栏，大者十余丈，小者二、三丈，俱可憩可眺。
现代文：洞内大多凭借高低的地势用竹子架为围栏，大的有十多丈，小的二三丈，全都可以歇息可以凭眺。
English: Most of the caves are fenced with bamboo racks, depending on the height of the terrain. The large ones are more than 10 meters high, and the small ones are two or three meters high. All of them can be rested and can be seen.

古文：由东崖跻隘入西南洞底之上层，其内有编竹架菌而为廪者，可置谷千钟十釜为一钟，合六斛四斗焉。
现代文：由东面的石崖登隘口走入西南洞底的上层，那里面有用竹子编架为谷仓的，可以放置千钟稻谷。
English: From the stone cliff-climbing pass in the east, walk into the upper level at the bottom of the southwest cave. There, if you use bamboo to make a barn, you can place a thousand bells of rice.

古文：其上又有龛一围，置金仙于中，而旁小龛曰慈云莲座，乃黄君之母夫人像也。
现代文：那上边又有一个圆形石完，在正中放了佛像，而旁边的小石完叫做慈云莲座，是黄君母亲的塑像。
English: There is also a round stone on the upper side, with a Buddha statue in the middle, and the small stone next to it is called Ciyun Lotus, which is the statue of Huang Jun's mother.

古文：黄母数年前修西方之业拜佛于此，此其退藏之所；而外所编竹栏，则选佛之场；而廪则黄君储以备不虞者。
现代文：黄君的母亲几年前在此修道拜佛，这里是她退身隐藏的场所；而外边竹子编成的围栏，便是开堂设戒诵佛的场所；而谷仓则是黄君储粮以备不测用的。
English: Huang Jun's mother practiced Buddhism here a few years ago, and this is the place where she retreated and hid; while the fence made of bamboo on the outside is the place to open the hall and chant Buddha's precepts; and the barn is where Huang Jun stores grain in case of emergency.

古文：龛西则偏门之光，自顶射下。
现代文：石兔西边就见偏洞口的光芒，从洞顶射下来。
English: On the west side of the stone rabbit, you can see the light of the partial hole, which shoots down from the top of the hole.

古文：此处去后门已遥，而又得斯光相续，遂为不夜之城。
现代文：此处距后洞口已很远，并又得到这里的亮光相续，终于成为不夜之城。
English: This place is far away from the back of the cave, and the light here is continuous, finally becoming a city that never sleeps.

古文：攀峻峡西上，透其门颇隘，即偏门也。
现代文：攀着陡峻的峡谷向西上登，穿过的洞口非常狭窄，就是偏洞口了。
English: Climbing up the steep canyon to the west, the cave entrance is very narrow, it is a partial cave entrance.

古文：其门西南向，下临不测，惟见树杪丛丛出叠石间，岨悬嶂绝，不辨其处为前山、后山也。
现代文：洞口朝向西南，下测不测之渊，唯见一丛丛树梢重叠出现在石壁间，石崖高悬山峰断绝，辨不出此处是前山还是后山。
English: The mouth of the cave faces south-west, the abyss of the unmeasurable, only to see a clump of overlapping treetops appear between the stone walls, the stone cliff is cut off by high-hanging peaks, and it is not possible to distinguish whether this is the front mountain or the back mountain.

古文：龛既穷，仍由故道下，东北趋后门。
现代文：石完完后，仍由原路下走，向东北赶到后洞口。
English: After finishing the stone, I still walked down the original road and drove to the northeast to the back of the cave.

古文：其门东北向，高二十丈，门以外则两旁石崖直坠山麓，而为水洞之门；门以内，则洞底中陷，亦直坠山底而通水洞之内。
现代文：洞口朝向东北，高二十丈，洞口以外就见两旁石崖笔直下坠到山麓，便成为水洞的洞口；洞口以内，洞底就向中央下陷，也是一直下坠到山的底部而通向水洞之内。
English: The mouth of the cave faces northeast and is 20 meters high. Beyond the mouth of the cave, you can see the two sides of the stone cliff falling straight down to the foot of the mountain, which becomes the mouth of the water cave. Within the mouth of the cave, the bottom of the cave sinks to the center, and also falls all the way down to the bottom of the mountain and leads to the inside of the water cave.

古文：陷处径尺五，周围如井。
现代文：下陷处直径一尺五，周围如水井。
English: The sinkhole is a foot and a half in diameter, and the area around it looks like a well.

古文：昔人置辘轳于上，引百丈绠下汲，深不啻十倍虎阜。
现代文：从前有人在上面安设了辘护，引百丈长的井绳下去汲水，深处不止虎阜的十倍。
English: Once upon a time, someone set up a guard on top of it, pulling a hundred-meter-long well rope down to draw water, more than ten times deeper than the tiger's den.

古文：恐人失足，亦编竹护其上，止留二孔以引轴轳，人不敢涉而窥也。
现代文：担心有人失足，也编有竹栏护在上面，只留下两个孔引轴护，人不敢走过去窥视。
English: Fearing that someone might slip, they also wove a bamboo rail to protect the shaft above, leaving only two holes to protect the shaft. No one dared to go over and peek.

古文：井外即门，巨石东西横峙，高于洞内者五尺，若门之阈。
现代文：井外就是洞口，巨石在东西横峙，高过洞内之处有五尺，好似门槛。
English: The outside of the well is the mouth of the cave. The huge rock faces east and west, and is five feet higher than the inside of the cave, like a threshold.

古文：由井东践阈，踞门之中，内观洞顶，垂龙舞蛟，神物出没，目眩精摇；外俯洞前，绝壁抟云，重渊破壑，骨仙神耸。
现代文：由井东侧踏上门槛，坐在门洞之中，向内观看洞顶，垂龙舞蛟，神龙出没，目眩神动；向外俯瞰洞前，绝壁上云雾盘旋，重重深渊裂成壑谷，身入仙景神魄惊然。
English: From the east side of the well, step onto the threshold, sit in the doorway, look inward at the top of the cave, dragon dance, dragon haunt, dizzying movement; look out over the front of the cave, clouds hover on the cliff, the abysses crack into the valley, and you will be stunned by the fairy scenery.

古文：此阈内井外峡，下透水门，亦架空之梁，第势极崇峻，无从对瞩耳。
现代文：这是门槛内井外的峡谷，下通到水洞洞口，也有架空的桥梁，只是地势极其高峻，无法正面注视而已。
English: This is the canyon outside the threshold inner well, leading down to the mouth of the water cave. There are also overhead bridges, but the terrain is extremely steep and it is impossible to look straight ahead.

古文：阈东透石隘东北下，磴倚绝壁，壁石皆崆峒，木根穿隙缘窍，蹬断处，亦横木飞渡。
现代文：从门槛东侧穿过石隘向东北下去，石瞪紧靠绝壁，石壁上都是空洞，树根沿着石窍穿过缝隙，石瞪断绝之处，也是横架木头飞渡过去。
English: From the east side of the threshold through the stone path to the northeast, the stone gate is close to the cliff, the stone wall is hollow, the roots of the tree along the stone hole through the gap, where the stone gate is broken, the cross-beam wood flies over.

古文：下里半而为百感村。
现代文：下走一里半便是百感村。
English: A mile and a half down the road is the village of Hundred Senses.

古文：徐子曰：此洞外险中閟，既穿历窅渺，忽仰透崇宏，兼一山之前后以通奇，汇众流于壑底而不觉，幽明两涵，水陆济美，通之则翻出烟云，塞之则别成天地。
现代文：徐子说：此洞外边险要洞中幽深，穿过杳渺之境后，忽然仰面透进高大宏伟的景观，兼有一山前后的全部奇景，在壑谷底汇合众流却不能察觉，包容了幽深与明亮两种景致，水陆之美兼收，打通它便翻身出到烟云之上，把它堵塞起来就另成一番天地。
English: Xu Zi said: The outer edge of this cave is almost as deep as the middle of the cave. After passing through the vastness of the world, suddenly the back of the face penetrates into the tall and magnificent landscape. It has all the wonders of the mountains before and after, but it cannot be detected at the bottom of the valley. It contains both deep and bright landscapes. The beauty of water and land are both collected. When it is opened, it will turn over to the top of the smoke cloud. When it is blocked, it will become another world.

古文：西来第一，无以易此。
现代文：是我西游以来的第一优美之处，没有地方能取代此处。
English: It is the first place of beauty I have seen since my trip to the West, and there is no place that can replace it.

古文：百感东岩在百感前门之东。
现代文：百感岩东洞在百感岩前洞口的东面。
English: The east cave of Baekan Rock is east of the mouth of Baekan Rock Front Cave.

古文：由栈东危崖之端，东缘石痕一缕，数十步而得洞。
现代文：由栈道东面危崖的外侧，向东沿一缕石痕，走数十步便找到洞。
English: From the outside of the cliff on the east side of the boardwalk, walk east along a stone ridge, walk a few dozen steps, and you will find the cave.

古文：其门亦南向，门以内不甚深，而高爽窈窕，石有五色氤氲之状，由峡中东入三、四丈，转而北，有石中峙。
现代文：洞口也是向南，洞口以内不怎么深，可高大清朗幽深，岩石有五色氰氯之状，裂成奇异的形状。由峡中向东走进去三四丈，转向北，有岩石屹立在中央。
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the south. It is not very deep within the mouth of the cave, but it is tall, clear and deep. The rock has the shape of five-colored cyanogen chloride, cracked into a strange shape. From the middle of the gorge, walk east into the three or four heights, turn north, and there is a rock standing in the center.

古文：逾隘以进，遂昏黑。
现代文：穿过窄处进去，便昏黑下来。
English: Entering through the narrow passage, it got dark.

古文：其中又南北成峡，深十余丈，底平而上峻；北尽处有巨柱回环，其外遂通明。
现代文：其中又有成南北向的峡谷，深十多丈，底下平坦而上面陡峻；北边的尽头处有巨大的石柱环绕，石柱外便通到明亮之处。
English: Among them, there is also a north-south canyon, more than ten meters deep, flat at the bottom and steep at the top; at the northern end, there are huge stone pillars around, and outside the stone pillars, there is a bright place.

古文：跻级北上，有窍东透而欹侧，只纳天光，不堪出入也。
现代文：登石阶向北上走，有石窍在东面倾斜地穿通出去，只纳入天光，不能出入。
English: Climbing the stone steps to the north, there is a stone nook on the east sloping to penetrate out, only included in the skylight, can not enter and exit.

古文：由窍内转而北，又连辟为二室：一室中通而外障，乃由内北达者；一室北尽而东向，乃临深而揽胜者。
现代文：由石窍内转向北，又接连开启为两个石室：一个石室中间相通外边阻断，是由洞内通向北边的地方；一个石室北面的尽头处面向东方，是下临深渊揽胜之处。
English: Turning from the inside of the cave to the north, it opens successively into two stone chambers: a stone chamber in the middle is connected to the outside, blocking the passage from the cave to the north; the end of the north side of a stone chamber faces east, and is the place where the abyss lies.

古文：先由中通之室入，其西隙旁环，俱可为房为榻。
现代文：先由中间相通的石室进去，它西边的缝隙从旁侧环绕，都可作为房间作为卧床。
English: First, enter through the stone room connected in the middle. The gap on the west side of it is surrounded from the side, and can be used as a room or a bed.

古文：其东之外障，亦多零星之穴，悬光引照焉。
现代文：它东面与外边阻隔之处，也有许多零星的洞穴，高悬着，引进光照来。
English: On its eastern side, where it is separated from the outside, there are also many scattered caves, hanging high, bringing in light.

古文：北透一峡，达于北室，其前遂虚敞高门。
现代文：向北穿过一峡，到达北室，它前方便虚敞为高大的洞口。
English: Heading north through a canyon, you reach the North Chamber, which is conveniently preceded by a tall, empty cave entrance.

古文：门乃东临绝壁，中有纤笋尖峙于前，北有悬崖倒垂于外，极氤氲之致，其下闻水声潺潺，则南江之水，北转而低其下入穴者也，然止闻声而不见形焉。
现代文：洞口东临绝壁，洞中有纤细的石笋尖尖耸立在前边，北面有悬崖倒垂在外，极尽云烟氰氯的景致。它下边可听见水声潺潺，是南江的江水，转向北后流抵山下进入洞穴之处，但只听见水声却不见形迹。
English: The mouth of the cave faces the cliff to the east, and there is a slender stalagmite standing in the front of the cave. To the north, there is a cliff hanging upside down, with a view of cyanogen chloride clouds. The sound of water can be heard below it. It is the water of the Nanjiang River, turning to the north downstream to the place where it enters the cave under the mountain, but only the sound of water can be heard, but there is no sign.

古文：其内西壁，亦有群乳环为小龛，下皆编竹架栏，亦昔人栖隐者。
现代文：洞内西侧石壁上，也有成群的石钟乳环结成小完，下边用竹子编架为围栏，也是前人隐居之处。
English: On the stone wall on the west side of the cave, there are also groups of stone bells tied into small rings. The lower side is made of bamboo and is used as a fence. It is also a place where the ancestors lived in seclusion.

古文：此洞小而巧，幽爽兼备，为隐真妙境。
现代文：此洞小而巧，幽明兼备，是隐居修真的妙境。
English: This cave is small and ingenious, both dark and bright, and is a wonderful place for seclusion and meditation.

古文：第中无滴沥，非由前栈入百感后轴轳取之，则由前梯转觅涧山前，取道其遥也。
现代文：只是洞中无水，非得由前边的栈道进入百感岩后面的辘护去取水，或者由前面的梯子转到山前去找山涧，取水的路极其遥远。
English: However, there is no water in the cave, so they have to take water from the boardwalk in front to the moat behind the Hundred Senses Rock, or from the ladder in front to the mountain to find the hawthorn. The way to get water is extremely far away.

古文：百感下水岩，在百感后门之下，百感村之南。
现代文：百感岩下的水洞，在百感岩后洞口之下，百感村之南。
English: The water cave under Baekan Rock, south of Baekan Village, under the back entrance of Baekan Rock.

古文：百感有内、外两村。
现代文：百感村有内、外两村。
English: There are two villages in Baikan Village, the inner and the outer.

古文：山从百感洞分两界，北向回环，下成深坞，而岩下水透山成江，奔腾曲折而北去。
现代文：山从百感岩分为两列，向北回绕，下面形成深坞，而岩洞下的水穿过山汇成大江，向北奔腾曲折流去。
English: The mountain is divided into two rows from the hundred-feeling rock, winding northward, forming a deep dock below, while the water under the cave passes through the mountain to form a large river and flows northward.

古文：从上林刁村下右江。界于其中，源长而土沃，中皆腴产。
现代文：村子隔在坞中，源远流长而土地肥沃，盛产谷物瓜果。
English: The village is isolated in a dock, has a long history and fertile land, and is rich in cereals and fruits.

古文：洞在内村之南二百步，其门东北向，高耸而上，即后门也。
现代文：洞在内村之南二百步处，洞口向东北，高耸在上的，就是后洞口了。
English: The cave is two hundred paces south of the inner village. The entrance faces northeast and is high up. This is the back entrance.

古文：水自洞出，前汇为广潭，中溢两崖，石壁倒插水底。
现代文：水自洞中流出，在洞前汇成宽广的深潭，在中间溢到两侧的山崖下，石壁倒插进水底。
English: Water flows out of the cave, merging into a wide deep pool in front of the cave, overflowing in the middle to the cliffs on both sides, and the stone wall plunges into the bottom of the water.

古文：从潭中浮筏以入，仰洞顶飘渺若云，孰意乃向之凌跨而下者耶！
现代文：坐上木筏从潭中进去，仰望洞顶好像云雾一样飘缈，谁想得到就是先前凌空横跨而下的地方呢！
English: Sitting on a raft to get into the pool, looking up at the top of the cave, drifting like a cloud, who would have thought it was the place where he had previously flown across and down!

古文：洞内两壁排空，商向而入，潴水甚深。
现代文：洞内两侧石壁凌空而起，向南进去，积水非常深。
English: The stone walls on both sides of the cave soar into the air, heading south. The water is very deep.

古文：西壁有木梯悬嵌石间，土人指曰： 此即上层轴轳之处。
现代文：西面石壁有木梯悬嵌在石上，本地人指着说： 这就是上层安有辘护之处。
English: On the western side of the stone wall there is a wooden ladder suspended on the stone. Locals point to it and say: This is where the upper level is secured.

古文：昔侬智高宋代初年壮族首领时，有据洞保聚者，兹从下汲。
现代文：从前侬智高时，有人占据洞中聚众自保的，从这里往下汲水。
English: From the time of the former Nongzhi High School, someone occupied the cave and gathered a crowd of self-protection, and drew water down from here.

古文：此其遗构也。 东壁石隙中拓，有架庐绝顶，飞缀凭空，而石墅危削虚悬二十丈，无可攀跻。
现代文：这就是他们遗下的建造物了。 东面石壁上的石缝从中扩开，有人在绝顶架起了房屋，飞缀凭临在高空，但石壁险峻陡削悬在虚空二十丈，不能攀登。
English: This is what they have left behind: the gap in the eastern stone wall has widened, and houses have been erected on the very top, soaring high into the sky, but the steeply hewn stone wall hangs 20 metres into the void and cannot be climbed.

古文：土人曰： 此戊午公无年荒歉，土人藏粟储粮以避寇者。
现代文：本地人说： 这是戊午年饥荒时，当地人用来储藏粮食躲避盗贼的地方。
English: Local people said: This is the place where local people used to store grain to avoid thieves during the famine in the year of Wu.

古文：须缚梯缀壁以上，兹时平，久不为也。 入十余丈，下壑即穷，上峡悬透，遥眺西南峡窦深入处，高景下射，光采烨烨，而石峻无级可跻，不知所通为山之前、山之右也。
现代文：必须绑梯子悬挂在石壁上才能上去，此时太平，很久不用了。 进去十多丈，壑谷就走完了，只见悬崖高耸，远眺西南方峡洞深入之处，高处的光影下射，光彩闪烁灿烂，可石崖陡峻无石阶可登，不知所通之处是山前还是山右了。
English: It is necessary to tie a ladder and hang it on the stone wall in order to go up. At this time, it is peaceful and there is no need to go for a long time. Once you enter the valley, you have finished walking. You can only see the towering cliff, look into the depths of the southwest canyon, see the light and shadow of the high places, and see the glittering brilliance. However, the stone cliff is steep and there are no stone steps to climb. I don't know whether the pass is in front of the mountain or to the right of the mountain.

古文：下壑石根插入水间，水面无内入之隙，水之所从，向下泛滥而出，则其中众水交合处，犹崆峒内扃，无从问津焉。
现代文：下边鸯谷中石根插入水中，表面上没有进入里面的缝隙，水流经的地方，是由水面下泛滥而出，其中众水交汇之处，可能就锁在空洞里面，无法问津了。
English: In the middle of the valley below, the stone roots are inserted into the water, and there is no gap on the surface to enter the inside. Where the water flows through, it comes from the flooding under the water surface. Where the waters meet, it may be locked inside the cavity and cannot be used.

古文：乃返筏出洞，从门外潭西蹑崖登门左之壁。
现代文：于是木筏返回出洞，从洞口外水潭西边踏着石崖上登洞口左边的石壁。
English: Therefore, the raft returned out of the cave and climbed the stone wall on the left side of the cave entrance from the west side of the pond outside the cave entrance.

古文：透峡窍而上，辟岩一围，其门东向，下临前潭，右瞰洞水，前眺对岸之上，旁窦氤氲，可横木跨洞门而渡也。
现代文：穿过峡洞上去，辟开一个圆形岩洞，洞口向东，下临前边的深潭，右边俯瞰洞中之水，向前眺望对面山崖之上，旁洞云气氮氢，可用木头横跨洞口飞渡过去。
English: Go up through the canyon and open up a round rock cave. The cave opens to the east, down to the deep pool in front, overlooking the water in the cave on the right, looking forward over the cliff on the opposite side, nitrogen and hydrogen clouds next to the cave, you can use wood to fly across the cave.

古文：辟岩中广下平，可栖可憩，第门虽展拓，而对岸高屏，曾无日光之及，不免阴森。
现代文：辟开的岩洞中间宽底下平，可以栖身可以停息，但是洞口虽宽阔，却被对面的山崖高高遮挡住，阳光不能射到，不免阴森森的。
English: The middle of the opened rock cave is wide and flat at the bottom, you can shelter and rest, but although the mouth of the cave is wide, it is blocked by the opposite cliff, the sun cannot reach it, and it is gloomy.

古文：若跨木以通对崖，则灏灵爽气无不收之矣。
现代文：如果跨木桥通到对面的山崖去，那么水势浩渺的灵妙之境与明朗开阔的景色就无不兼收了。
English: If you cross the wooden bridge to the opposite cliff, then the vastness of the water and the bright and open scenery will be combined.

古文：此洞阻水通源，缥缈掩映，为神仙奥宫。
现代文：此洞被水所阻，水源相通，水势缥缈，互相掩映，是神仙的深宫。
English: This cave is blocked by water, the water sources are connected, the water is turbulent, and they cover each other. It is the deep palace of the gods.

古文：若夫重峦外阻，日月中扃，即内村已轶ｙì超越桃源，而况窈窕幽閟，若斯之擅极者乎！
现代文：至于说到外边阻隔着重重山峦，日月中锁，即使是内村也已超过世外桃源，何况是窈窕幽深，像这里那样独擅其极的地方呢！
English: As far as the outer barrier is concerned, it is mainly mountains and mountains, and the sun is locked in the middle of the month. Even the inner village has surpassed the world's peach source. What's more, it is very deep, and it is a place that excels in its own right like here!

古文：百感前下岩，在百感洞前门之下，路西坑腋间。
现代文：百感岩前的下洞，在百感岩前洞口之下，路西深坑的肘腋之间。
English: The lower hole in front of Hyakken Rock, below the mouth of the hole in front of Hyakken Rock, between the elbows of the deep pit on the west side.

古文：其门亦南向，高拓如堂皇，中多巨石磊落，其后渐下。
现代文：洞口也是向南，高高拓开如同大厅，洞中有很多杂乱堆积的巨石，洞后部渐渐下洼。
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the south, high and open like a hall, there are a lot of jumbled boulders in the cave, and the back of the cave is gradually sinking.

古文：盖水涨时，山前之水亦自洞外捣入者，而今无滴沥也。
现代文：大概是水涨时，山前的水也是从洞外冲人洞中，但今天没有滴水了。
English: Presumably, when the water rises, the water in front of the mountain rushes into the cave from outside the cave, but today there is no dripping.

古文：洞东北隅有峡北入，其上透容光，其下嵌重石。
现代文：洞东北角有峡向北进去，峡上透进明亮的光辉，下面嵌着重叠岩石。
English: In the northeast corner of the cave, there is a canyon to the north. A bright light shines through the canyon, and the overlying rocks are embedded below.

古文：累数石而下窥，其底渊然，水涵深窦，而石皆浮缀两崖间，既不能破隙而下，亦不能架空而入，惟倚石内望。
现代文：垒起几块岩石往下窥视，洞底非常深，水涵在深洞中，而岩石都浮出水面悬缀在两侧崖壁间，既不能穿过裂缝下去，也不能凌空而入，只能靠着岩石向内远望。
English: The bottom of the cave is very deep, the water is contained in the deep cave, and the rocks are surfaced and suspended between the cliff walls on both sides. You can neither go down through the cracks, nor can you fly in, you can only look into the distance by leaning on the rock.

古文：西北峡穷处，亦有光内射，其隙长而狭，反照倒影，烨烨浮动，亦不如所通为山之后、山之右也。
现代文：西北方峡谷到头之处，也有亮光内射，那裂缝又长又窄，倒影反照，闪烁浮动，也不知所通之处是山后还是山右了。
English: At the end of the northwest canyon, there is also a bright light, the crack is long and narrow, the reflection is reflected, flashing and floating, and it is not known whether the passage is behind the mountain or to the right of the mountain.

古文：龙巷东北坞上洞，在向武州东北七里，即百感之西崖，第路由龙巷村东入，北转盘旋成坞，枯榕北枝大江分捣其中，崖回坞绝。坠穴东入，而洞临其上，其门西向，左右皆危崖，而下临激湍。
现代文：龙巷村东北山坞中的上洞，在向武州城东北七里，就是百感岩西面的山崖，但是道路由龙巷村往东进去，山向北转盘绕成山坞，枯榕江在北面分流，大江分流捣入坞中，山崖回绕山坞断绝，向东坠入洞穴中，而岩洞高临在它上方，洞口向西，左右都是危崖，而下临湍急的水流。
English: The upper cave in the northeastern dockyard of Longxiang Village, seven miles northeast of Wuzhou City, is the cliff on the west side of Baixuan Rock. However, the road enters from Longxiang Village to the east, the mountain turns to the north to form a dock, the Wuyi River branches off to the north, the Dajiang River branches off into the dock, the cliff turns around the dock, breaks off, and falls into the cave to the east, while the cave is high above it, the cave mouth is to the west, and there are dangerous cliffs on both sides, and the water flow is rapid.

古文：原无入路，由其北攀线纹践悬壁以入，上幕云卷，下披芝叠。
现代文：原来没有入洞的路，从洞北面攀着线一样的石纹踏着悬空的石壁进去。上边岩石如筛幕云朵样飞卷，下边分开如重叠的灵芝。
English: Originally, there was no way to enter the cave. From the north side of the cave, you had to climb the hanging stone wall, stepping on the line-like stone stripes. The upper rocks were like flying clouds, and the lower ones were separated like overlapping reishi mushrooms.

古文：东进六丈后，忽烘然内暖，若有界其中者。
现代文：向东前进六丈后，忽然洞内一下暖和起来，好像有东西隔在洞中的样子。
English: After advancing six meters to the east, the cave suddenly warmed up, as if something separated it.

古文：盖其后无旁窦，而气盎不泄也。
现代文：原来是洞后部无旁洞，而空气充盈洞中不外泄形成的。
English: Originally, there was a hole in the back of the hole, but the air filled the hole and did not leak out.

古文：又三丈，转而北，渐上而隘，又三丈而止。
现代文：又走三丈，转向北，渐渐上去便窄起来，又走三丈就断了。
English: I walked another three meters, turned to the north, gradually went up and got narrower, then walked another three meters and broke.

古文：其中悬柱亦多，不及百感之林林总总。
现代文：洞中悬垂的石柱也很多，但不及百感岩纷纭众多。
English: There are also a lot of overhanging stone pillars in the cave, but they are not as numerous and varied as the hypsotite.

古文：而下有九石如珠，洁白圆整，散布满坡坂间。
现代文：而地下有如珠子一样的石丸，洁白圆整，散布在满洞坡之间。
English: But underground there are bead-like stone balls, clean, white and round, scattered between the cavernous slopes.

古文：坡坂之上，其纹皆粼粼如绉簇，如鳞次，纤细匀密，边绕中洼，圆珠多堆嵌纹中，不可计量。
现代文：斜坡表面上，粼粼的石纹都好像簇聚在一起的给纹，如鱼鳞一样依次排列，纤细均匀密布，边沿围绕中间下洼，圆珠大多堆嵌在石纹中，不可计数。
English: On the surface of the slope, the jagged stone patterns all seem to be clustered together. They are arranged in sequence like fish scales, thin and uniformly dense, with the edges surrounding the middle depression. Most of the round beads are embedded in the stone patterns and cannot be counted.

古文：余选其晶圆者得数握，为董苡，为明珠，不能顾人疑也。
现代文：我挑选其中晶莹圆滑的得到几把，如慧仁米，似明珠，不管别人怀疑不怀疑了。
English: I picked a few of them that were crystal clear and round, such as huiren rice, like pearls, regardless of whether others doubted or not.

古文：玉砂洞中甚难得，亦无此洁白。琅山岩在州北半里，其形正如独秀。
现代文：琅山岩在州城北半里，山形正如独秀峰。
English: Lushan Rock is half a mile north of the city of Suzhou, and the shape of the mountain is just like the Duxiu Peak.

古文：始见西向有门三叠，而不知登处反在东峰之半也。
现代文：开始时见向西处有三层洞口，却不知上登之处反而在山峰东面的半腰上。
English: At the beginning, I saw a three-story cave opening to the west, but I didn't know where to climb, but on the east side of the mountain, halfway up.

古文：余至后，黄君始命缚梯通栈，盖亦欲择其尤者为静修之地耳。
现代文：我到州城后，黄君才命令绑梯子修通栈道，大概也是想选择其中特异之处作为他静修之地罢了。
English: It was only after I arrived in the state capital that Huang Jun ordered the ladders to be tied up to repair the causeway, presumably to choose one of the special places as his place of meditation.

古文：由东麓攀危梯数百级，入其东门，其门豁然高敞。
现代文：由东麓攀危梯数百级，进入它的东洞口，洞口豁然高敞。
English: After climbing hundreds of steps from the eastern foot to the eastern cave entrance, the cave entrance is suddenly very spacious.

古文：门以内遂分三径。
现代文：洞口以内就分为三条路。
English: Within the mouth of the cave, it is divided into three paths.

古文：由北窍者，平开一曲，即透北门，直瞰龙巷后北山，大溪西来界其中，抵横裂峰西而三分之，北面峦岚溪翠，远近悉揽。
现代文：由北洞进去的，开有一处平坦的弯道，马上通到北洞口，直接俯瞰龙巷村后的北山，大溪自西面流来隔在其中，抵达横向裂开的山峰西头便一分为三，北面山峦雾气缭绕溪水翠绿，远近尽揽。
English: Entering from the North Cave, there is a flat curve that immediately leads to the mouth of the North Cave, directly overlooking the North Mountain behind Longxiang Village. The large stream flows from the west and is separated from it. When you reach the west side of the horizontally cracked mountain, it is divided into three, and the north side of the mountain is misty and the stream is green.

古文：由南窍者，反从洞内折而东山，外复豁然，即东门之侧窍也。
现代文：由南洞进去的，反而从洞内折向东出来，外边重又豁然开阔，就是东洞口的侧洞了。
English: Those who entered from the south cave, on the other hand, turned from the inside of the cave to the east, and the outside was heavy and suddenly wide open, that is, the side hole of the east cave mouth.

古文：第一石屏横断其径，故假内峡中曲出，其内下有深洼，渊坠而底平。
现代文：第一道石屏风横断了这条路，所以借路从里面的峡中曲折而出，洞内下边有深洼，深坠下去但底下平坦。
English: The first stone screen crossed this road, so I took the road from the inside of the canyon and zigzagged out. There are deep depressions at the bottom of the cave, deep down but flat at the bottom.

古文：由其上循崖又南入峡中，渐上渐隘，有石横跨其上，若飞梁焉。
现代文：由它上面沿石崖又向南走入峡中，渐渐上走渐渐窄起来，有岩石横跨在峡上，像飞桥一样。
English: From there, you walk along the cliff to the south into the gorge, gradually going up and narrowing. There are rocks across the gorge, like a flying bridge.

古文：透梁下再上，峡始南尽，东壁旋穴庋空，透窗倒影，西窍高穹曲嵌，复透而南，是为南门。
现代文：钻过桥下再上走，峡谷这才在南边到了尽头，东面壁上旋绕的石穴架在高空，透过石窗光影倒射，西面的石窍高大弯隆，曲折深嵌，再钻向南，这是南洞口。
English: Drilling under the bridge and then going up, the canyon only came to an end on the south side. The stone cave winding around the east wall is high in the sky, reflected through the stone window. The western stone hole is high and curved, with deep twists and turns. Drilling southward, this is the south cave entrance.

古文：其前正与州东北巨峰为对，若屏之当前，西南不能眺一州烟火，东南不能挹三曲塍流，而不知其下乃通行之峡也。
现代文：它前方正与州城东北的巨大山峰相对，像屏风一样挡在前方，向西南不能眺望一州的烟火，往东南不见三江弯曲处和田野，不知山下就是可通行的峡谷了。
English: In front of it, it is opposite to the huge mountain peak in the northeast of the state capital. It blocks the front like a screen. To the southwest, you can't see the fireworks of Isshu. To the southeast, you can't see the bend of the Sanjiang River and the fields. I don't know if the mountain is a passable canyon.

古文：由西直入者，高穹旁拓，十丈以内，侧堰曲房，中辟明扉，若隘门之中堑者。
现代文：由西面一直进去的，高大弯隆四旁开阔，十丈以内，侧卧着深隐的石室，中间辟有明亮的门扉，好像隘门深陷在中央的样子。
English: Entering all the way from the west, the tall curved ridge is wide open on all sides, less than ten meters high, with a deep stone chamber lying on the side, with a bright door in the middle, as if the narrow door was deep in the center.

古文：然其上穹盘如庐，当隘处亦上裂成峡，高剧弥甚。
现代文：然而它上方弯隆盘结如像房屋，正当隘口之处也向上裂成峡谷，更加高峻。
English: However, it is curved and twisted above like a house, and where there is a legitimate pass, it also splits up into a canyon, which is even steeper.

古文：透隘门而西，则西辟为堂，光明四溢，以西门最高而敞也。
现代文：穿过隘门往西走，就见西面辟为大堂，光明四溢，以西洞口最高最宽敞了。
English: Passing through the narrow gate to the west, you can see that the west side is a lobby, bright and overflowing, with the west cave entrance being the highest and most spacious.

古文：堂左南旋成龛，有片石平庋为榻，有悬石下卷为拓托，皆天成器具也。
现代文：大堂左侧向南旋绕成石完，有石片平架为卧床，有悬垂的岩石向下卷起成为拓碑用的托子，都是天然形成的器具。
English: On the left side of the lobby, the stone is twisted to the south, and there is a stone plate for the bed, and there is an overhanging rock that is rolled down to become a support for the monument. All of these are naturally formed tools.

古文：堂左右分嵌楼龛，圆转无隙，比及前门，则石阈高栏。
现代文：大堂左右分别嵌有楼阁石完，圆圆环绕没有缝隙，等到走到前面洞口时，就见石门槛高高栏住。
English: On the left and right sides of the lobby, there are built-in pavilion stones, and there is no gap around the circle. When you walk to the front of the cave, you will see the high stone threshold.

古文：透窍以出，始俯门下层崖叠穴，危若累棋，浮如飞鹢，状似鹭鹚。
现代文：钻过石窍出去，这才俯身看到洞口下方山崖洞穴层层叠叠，危险之势如同累起来的棋子，浮在高空如像飞空的鹊鸟。
English: Drilling through a stone hole to get out, I leaned over to see the caves of the mountain cliff below the cave mouth. The danger was like a stacked chess piece, floating in the sky like a flying ostrich.

古文：盖已出西望第三门之上，而中门在其下矣。
现代文：原来是出到望着西方的第三层洞口之上，而中层的洞口在它下边了。
English: Originally, it was on top of the third-storey entrance looking west, while the middle-storey entrance was below it.

古文：坐其上，倒树外垂，环流下涌，平畴乱岫，延纳重重，断壑斜晖，凭临无限，三门中较为最畅矣。
现代文：坐在洞上，外面树枝倒垂，环绕的江流在山下腾涌，平旷的田野中山峰零乱，重重叠叠，壑谷断绝，斜阳余晖，凭临无限空间，三个洞口中比起来这个最畅通了。
English: Sitting on the cave, the branches outside are hanging upside down, the surrounding rivers are surging under the mountain, the peaks in the flat fields are scattered, overlapping, the valleys are cut off, the sun is setting, and there is infinite space. Compared to the three caves, this one is the smoothest.

古文：夫此一山，圆如卓锥，而且上则中空外透，四面成门，堂皇曲室，夹榭飞甍，靡所不备。
现代文：这一座山，圆如卓立的锥子，可山上却中间空空外边相通，四面成为洞口，宽敞的殿堂，幽深的内室，夹层的台榭，飞卷的屋脊，无所不备。
English: This mountain is round like a prominent cone, but on the mountain, the middle is empty and the outer edges are connected. The four sides become openings, spacious halls, deep inner chambers, mezzanine platforms, flying roof ridges, all-encompassing.

古文：徙倚即殊方，宛转频易向，和风四交，蒸郁不到，洵中使负戴耳。下洞即在琅山西麓，其门西向，东入三丈余而止。
现代文：往返徘徊马上方位不同，弯弯曲曲频繁变换方向，和风四面交聚，不感到蒸热郁闷，确实是顶天的一根柱子，兼有凌空的八面天窗，是隐居修真最为缥缈而又最接近人间的地方了。
English: Wandering back and forth from different directions, bending and twisting, frequently changing directions, meeting the wind on all sides, not feeling hot and humid, it is indeed a pillar at the top of the sky, with a soaring eight-sided skylight, it is the most secluded and closest place to the human world.

古文：仰其上。则悬岩层穴，又连叠门两重。
现代文：仰望顶上，就见层层洞穴高悬，又一连重叠着两层洞口。
English: Looking up at the top, you can see layers of caves hanging high, and a series of overlapping two-storey openings.

古文：余初至此，望之不能上达。
现代文：我初到此处时，望见洞口不能上达。
English: When I first got here, I couldn't see the entrance to the cave.

古文：明日又至，亦不知其上层之中通于东，并不知东之可登也。
现代文：第二天又来到，也不知它上层的洞中通到东面，且不知东面可以上登。
English: The next day he came again, not knowing that the hole in its upper layer led to the east side, and not knowing that the east side could be climbed.

古文：既而闻黄君命缚梯，既而由其南峡，同韦守老往百感出山之东，回望见梯已婉蜒垂空，始知上洞须东上，下洞独西入，而中洞则无由陟焉。
现代文：随后听说黄君命令绑梯子，不久由山南的峡谷，同韦守老前往百感岩出到山的东面，回头望见梯子已蜿蜿蜒蜒垂在高空，这才知道上洞必须由东面上去，下洞唯独由西面进去，但中洞却无法上登了。
English: Then I heard that Huang Jun ordered the ladders to be tied. Soon, he and Wei Shoulao went from the canyon in the south of the mountain to the east of the mountain. Looking back, I saw that the ladders had been winding and hanging high in the sky. It was only then that I knew that the upper cave had to be climbed from the east, and the lower cave could only be entered from the west, but the middle cave could not be climbed.

古文：十九日晓起，有云。
现代文：十九日拂晓起床，有云。
English: I got up at dawn on the 19th, and it was cloudy.

古文：晨餐后，半里过宁墟。
现代文：早餐后，半里走过宁墟。
English: After breakfast, I walked half a mile past Ningxu.

古文：东折入山坞一里，北入峡一里，逾小脊北下。
现代文：从南面山峡去，到达天灯墟，听说有个营怀洞，是龙英州的分界，为左、右二江分流的山脊。向东折入山坞走一里，向北走入山峡一里，越过小山脊向北下去。
English: I heard that there is a cave called Yinghuai Cave, which is the boundary of Longyingzhou, and is the ridge that divides the left and right two rivers. Turn east into the dock and walk one mile, north into the canyon for one mile, and cross the ridge to the north.

古文：随山东转，又二里，南那村换夫。
现代文：顺着山往东转，又走二里，在南那村换夫。
English: Turn east along the mountain, walk another two miles, and change husbands in Nanna Village.

古文：东北行二里，东逾一岭，曰石房岭。
现代文：往东北行二里，向东越过一座岭，叫做石房岭。
English: Go two miles to the northeast and cross a ridge to the east, called Shifang Ridge.

古文：下岭而东，又二里，至石房村换夫。
现代文：下岭往东行，又二里，到石房村换夫。
English: Shimo-ling went east, another two miles, to Shifang village to change husbands.

古文：又东二里，复上山半里，过一岭脊。
现代文：又向东二里，再上山走半里，越过一道岭脊。
English: Another two miles to the east, then half a mile up the mountain, over a ridge.

古文：脊不高，其北水从东北坠，其南水从南流，是为向武、镇远分界，而左、右江亦以此分焉。
现代文：岭脊不高，脊北有水流从东北方下坠，脊南有水流往南流，这是向武州、镇远州的分界处，而且左江、右江也从此脊分流。
English: The ridge is not high. To the north of the ridge, water flows down from the northeast, and to the south of the ridge, water flows to the south. This is the dividing point to Wuzhou and Zhenyuanzhou. Moreover, the Left and Right Rivers also branch off from this ridge.

古文：随流南下一里，大路自西来合，遂东转循老山之南，东逾平陕一里，大道直东去，又从岐随水东南下一里半，四山环坞一围，曰龙那村，已镇远属矣。饭而行，北逾岭而下，共一里，又行峡中半里，与西来大道合。
现代文：刚到村里时，远远望见屋角有灿烂的黄花，以为是菊花，怀疑没有此等盛景，走近细看，是一丛丛的小花，不知它的名字。又见有一树白梅，折下来看，原来是李子花。黄花白李，错落在红霜叶中，也是仲冬季节的一个奇景。吃过饭上路，向北越岭下走，共一里，又行走在峡中半里，与西来的大道相遇。
English: When I first arrived in the village, I saw a brilliant yellow flower in the corner of the house from far away. I thought it was a chrysanthemum, and suspected that there was no such grand scene. When I looked closer, it was a bunch of small flowers, and I didn't know its name. I also saw a white plum tree, and when I folded it down, it turned out to be a plum blossom. The yellow flower, white plum, accidentally falling among the red frost leaves, is also a miracle of the midwinter season. After eating, I went on the road and walked down the North Yue Mountains for a total of one mile, and then walked half a mile

古文：于是随水形东行山峡间，五里，水形东北去，路东南上山。
现代文：于是顺水势向东行走在山峡间，五里，水势向东北流去，路向东南上山。
English: As a result, I walked east along the water potential between the mountain gorges, five miles, the water potential flowed to the northeast, and the road went up the mountain to the southeast.

古文：半里，又从岐南逾一岭，共一里而下，得南峒村。
现代文：半里，又从岔路向南越过一岭，共一里后下走，到南桐村。
English: Half a mile, and from Kushiro to the south over a ridge, a total of one mile downhill, to Nantong Village.

古文：村人顽甚，候夫不即至，薄暮始发。
现代文：村里人十分刁顽，等待派夫不马上来，傍晚才出发。
English: The villagers are very tenacious, waiting for Paifu to come immediately, and only setting out in the evening.

古文：其峒四山连脊，中洼为地，池上有穴，东面溢水穿山腹东出，池西乃居人聚庐所托也。
现代文：此响四面山脊相连，中央下洼为水池，水池上有洞穴，东面溢出的池水穿过山腹向东流出去，水池西面是居民房屋聚居依托之处。
English: The four sides of the mountain ridge are connected, and the central depression is a pool. There are caves in the pool, and the overflowing pool water in the east flows eastward through the mountainside. The west side of the pool is a place where residential houses are clustered and supported.

古文：东逾岭而下，共一里，东向行山坞间。
现代文：往东越过岭下行，共一里，向东行走在山坞间。
English: Go east over the ridge and go down, a total of one mile, walk east between the docks.

古文：八里，过一村，又东与石山遇。
现代文：八里，路过一个村庄，又向东走与石山相遇。
English: Eight miles, passing through a village, and then going east to meet Ishiyama.

古文：循其南崖，崖上石窦历乱，俱可入，崖下累石属南山，傍崖设隘门以入，于是南北两石山复峥峥屏立矣。
现代文：沿石山南面的山崖走，山崖上石洞杂乱众多，都可以走进去，山崖下垒砌石块连接到南山，靠近山崖设了隘门以便出入，到这里南北两面的石山又山势峥嵘似屏风样矗立了。
English: Walking along the cliff on the south side of Shishan, there are many stone caves on the cliff, which can be entered. The stone blocks below the cliff are connected to Nanshan. A narrow gate has been set up near the cliff for access. At this point, the stone mountains on the north and south sides stand like a screen.

古文：又东一里为镇远州，宿于州市之铺舍。
现代文：又向东走一里是镇远州，住宿在州城东边的骤站客馆中。
English: Another mile to the east is the town of Yuzhou, where you can stay in a railway station guesthouse on the east side of the city.

古文：州官名赵人伟。
现代文：州衙宅第朝向西南。
English: In the morning, it was moving southwest.

古文：州宅西南向。其地在太平府东北二百里。
现代文：此地属太平府，在太平府城东北二百里。
English: This place belongs to Taiping Prefecture, two hundred miles northeast of Taiping City.

古文：西南一日至全茗，又经养利而达俯。西北为向武界，十八里。
现代文：西北是向武州的地界，东北是结伦州的边界，东面是结安州的分界，西南是全茗州的边界。
English: To the northwest is the border with Wuzhou, to the northeast is the border with Jielun, to the east is the border with Jianan, and to the southwest is the border with Quanzhou.

古文：州前流甚细，南入山峡，据土人言，乃东北至佶伦，北入右江者。
现代文：州城前的水流十分细小，往南流入山峡中，据本地人说，是向东北流到结伦州，往北流入右江的水流。
English: The water flow in front of the provincial capital is very small, flowing south into the mountain gorge. According to local people, it is the water flow that flows to the northeast to the state of Kailuan and flows north into the Yu River.

古文：由此言之，则两江界脊西自镇安、都康，经天灯墟，龙英之北，向武之南，二州分界。
现代文：由此说来，那么两江分界的山脊从西面的镇安府、都康州，延经天灯墟，往东经过全茗州、永康县、罗阳县诸地后抵达合江镇。
English: Therefore, the ridge of the boundary between the two rivers stretches from the western towns of Anfu and Dukangzhou, through the Sky Lantern Market, eastward through the provinces of Quanzhou, Yongkang County and Luoyang County, and finally reaches Hejiang Town.

古文：昨所过石房村东南之脊，乃北走分支，其南下之水，尚非入左江者也。
现代文：昨天走过的石房村东南的山脊，是向北分出延伸的支脉，山脊南面下流的水流，还不是流入左江的水流。
English: The ridge to the southeast of Shifang Village, which I walked along yesterday, is a branch extending northward. The water flowing down the south side of the ridge is not the water flowing into the Zuo River.

