古文：天祚皇帝二五年春正月，下诏亲征，遣僧家奴持书约和，斥阿骨打名。
现代文：天庆五年春正月，下诏亲征，派遣僧家奴带着书信要求订立和约，信中直呼阿骨打之名姓。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Tianqing, the emperor personally enlisted and dispatched monks and servants with a letter requesting the conclusion of a peace treaty. In the letter, he directly called Akotai's name.

古文：阿骨打遣赛剌复书：若归叛人阿疏，迁黄龙府于别地，然后议之。
现代文：阿骨打派遣赛剌回信，如果归还叛人阿疏，将黄龙府迁到外地，然后才可商谈和议。
English: If the traitor Ah So was returned, Huanglong Prefecture would be moved to another place, and only then could peace be negotiated.

古文：都统耶律斡里朵等与女直兵战于达鲁古城，败绩。
现代文：都统耶律斡里朵等人与女真军交战于达鲁古城，失败。
English: Dutoit, Yerushalmi, Ridot and others fought the Jurchen army in the ancient city of Dalu and lost.

古文：二月，饶州渤海古欲等反，自称大王。
现代文：二月，饶州渤海古欲等人反叛，自称大王。
English: In February, people such as Raozhou's Bohai Guzhu rebelled, claiming to be the great king.

古文：三月，以萧谢佛留等讨之。
现代文：三月，派萧谢佛留等攻讨古欲。
English: In March, he sent Xiao Xiefolu and others to attack the old desire.

古文：遣耶律张家奴等六人赍书使女直，斥其主名，冀以速降。
现代文：派遣耶律张家奴等六人挟带书信出使女真，直呼其主姓名，希望他们赶紧投降。
English: Yerut dispatched Zhang Jiannu and six others to smuggle a letter out of the envoy Jianzhen, calling his master's name directly, hoping that they would quickly surrender.

古文：夏四月癸丑，以萧谢佛留等为渤海古欲所败，以南面副部署萧陶苏斡为都统，赴之。
现代文：夏四月十四日，萧谢佛留等为渤海古欲击败，以南面副部署萧陶苏斡为都统，前往再战。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of summer, Xiao Xiefolu and others marched for the defeat of Bohai Guyi, and Xiao Tao Su, who was seconded to the south, went to the rematch.

古文：五月，陶苏斡及古欲战，败绩。
现代文：五月，萧陶苏斡与古欲交战，失败。
English: In May, Xiao Tao Su Ying fought with Gu Xiu Long and lost.

古文：张家奴等以阿骨打书来，复遣之往。
现代文：张家奴等人带着阿骨打书信前来，再派张家奴前往女真。
English: Zhang Jiannu and the others came with a letter from the emperor, and then sent Zhang Jiannu to Meizhen.

古文：六月己亥朔，清暑特礼岭。
现代文：六月初一，消夏于特礼岭。
English: On the first day of June, the summer is over in Trellis Ridge.

古文：壬子，张家奴等还，阿骨打复书，亦斥名谕之使降。
现代文：十四日，张家奴等人回京，阿骨打回了信，又直呼其名晓谕于他让他投降。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Jianu and others returned to Beijing, and Akone typed back a letter, calling him by name and telling him to surrender.

古文：癸丑，以亲征谕诸道。
现代文：十五日，以亲征晓谕诸道。
English: On the fifteenth day, he personally went out to teach the disciples.

古文：丙辰，陶苏斡招获古欲等。
现代文：十八日，萧陶苏斡招抚擒获古欲等人。
English: On the 18th, Xiao Tao and Su Zhaozhong and others received the ancient desire.

古文：癸亥，以惕隐耶律末里为北院大王。
现代文：二十五日，以惕隐耶律末里为北院大王。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the month, Ittihiyin Yerutsu became the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：是月，遣萧辞剌使女直，以书辞不屈见留。
现代文：同月，派遣萧辞剌出使女真，因书信用词不卑不亢而被扣留。
English: In the same month, Xiao Jie dispatched a messenger girl, Zhen, who was detained for writing a letter of credit.

古文：秋七月辛未，宋遣使致助军银绢。
现代文：秋七月初四，宋国派使者送来助战的银两和绢帛。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to bring the silver two-and-a-half-crowned pheasant to help in the war.

古文：丙子，猎于岭东。
现代文：初九，出猎于岭东。
English: At the age of nine, he went hunting in the eastern part of Lingdong.

古文：是月，都统斡里朵等与女直战于白马泺，败绩。
现代文：同月，都统斡里朵等人与女真交战于白马泊，失败。
English: In the same month, Du Tong Yu Li Duo and others fought against Niang Zhen in Baima Po and failed.

古文：八月甲子，罢猎，趋军中。以斡里朵等军败，免官。
现代文：八月二十七日，中止狩猎，赶赴军中，因斡里朵等人兵败，免去其官职。
English: On August 27th, he stopped hunting, rushed to the army, and was relieved of his official position due to the defeat of Yulido and others.

古文：丙寅，以围场使阿不为中军都统，耶律张家奴为都监，率番、汉兵十万，萧奉先充御营都统，诸行营都部署耶律章奴为副，以精兵二万为先锋。
现代文：二十九日，以围场使阿不为中军都统，耶律张家奴为都监，率番、汉兵十万；以萧奉先充任御营都统，诸行营都部署耶律章奴为副统，率精兵两万担任先锋。
English: On the 29th, the Chinese army was placed under the command of General A Bu in the paddock, and Ye Lu Zhang Jia Nong was appointed as the governor of the capital, leading 100,000 soldiers; Xiao Bongxian was appointed as the commander of the imperial camp, and Ye Lu Zhang Nong was appointed as the deputy commander of all the camps, leading 20,000 soldiers as the vanguard.

古文：余分五部为正军，贵族子弟千人为硬军，扈从百司为护卫军，北出骆驼口；以都点检萧胡睹姑为都统，枢密直学士柴谊为副，将汉步骑三万南出宁江州。
现代文：其余分五部作为正军，贵族子弟一千人作为硬军，扈从百司作为护卫军，从北出骆驼口；以都点检萧胡睹姑为都统，枢密直学士柴谊为副统，率领汉军马步军三万从南出宁江州。
English: The remaining five divisions served as the main army, and the nobles' sons led a thousand men as the hard army, and the eunuchs from the Hundred Division as the escort army, and from the north out of the camel's mouth; with Du Danggu Xiao Hujian Gu as the general, and the privy direct bachelor Chai Yi as the vice-general, and led the Chinese army of 30,000 horseback from the south out of Ningjiang Province.

古文：自长春州分道而进，发数月粮，期必灭女直。
现代文：从长春州分路进发，发给几个月的军粮，相期一定要剿灭女真。
English: From the Changchun Prefecture branch line, to send a few months of rations, the phase must be to annihilate the Jurchen.

古文：九月丁卯朔，女直军陷黄龙府。
现代文：九月初一，女真军攻陷黄龙府。
English: On the first day of September, the Jurchen Army captured Huanglong Prefecture.

古文：己巳，知北院枢密使萧得里底出为西南面招讨使。
现代文：初三，出贬知北院枢密使萧得里底为西南面招讨使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Xiao Delidi, the privy councillor of Zhibei North Academy, was sent to the southwestern side to recruit envoys.

古文：辞剌还，女直复遣赛剌以书来报：若归我叛人阿疏等，即当班师。
现代文：辞剌回来，女真又派赛剌带着书信前来知会：如果归还我国叛人阿疏等人，便当班师。
English: After the resignation letter came back, Jurchen sent Sai Kung with a letter to let him know that if the traitor Aso and others were returned to China, he would be the team leader.

古文：上亲征。
现代文：皇上亲征。
English: The Emperor personally led the expedition.

古文：粘罕、兀术等以书来上，阳为卑哀之辞，实欲求战。
现代文：粘罕、兀术等带着书信奉上，表面做出卑下哀恳之辞，实际上却想求战。
English: Klichan, Xingjie and others came with letters, and on the surface made humble and mournful words, but in fact they wanted to go to war.

古文：书上，上怒，下诏有 女直作过，大军翦除 之语。
现代文：书信上达，皇上震怒，下诏有 女真作过，大军翦除 之语。
English: When the letter arrived, the emperor was furious, and issued the following edict: "Neshin did it, and the army will exterminate him."

古文：女直主聚众，剺面仰天恸哭曰： 始与汝等起兵，盖苦契丹残忍，欲自立国。
现代文：女真主聚众，以刀割面，显出悲愁之状，仰天痛哭说： 当初我与你等起兵，是因为苦于契丹残忍，想自己立国。
English: The goddess gathered the crowd, cut the face with a knife, appeared sad, and wept bitterly, saying: At first, I waited for you to raise an army, because I suffered from the cruelty of the Khitan and wanted to establish my own country.

古文：今主上亲征，奈何？
现代文：现在主上亲征，该怎么办呢？
English: Now it's up to you to enlist, so what should you do?

古文：非人死战，莫能当也。
现代文：除非人人拼死作战，否则无法阻挡。
English: Unless everyone fights to the death, it cannot be stopped.

古文：不若杀我一族，汝等迎降，转祸为福。 
现代文：不如杀死我一族，你等去投降，转祸为福。 
English: It would be better to kill my family, wait for you to surrender, and turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：诸军皆曰： 事已至此，惟命是从。 
现代文：诸军都说： 事已至此，惟命是从。 
English: And all the people said, So be it; so be it.

古文：乙巳，耶律章奴反，奔上京，谋迎立魏国王淳。
现代文：十月初九，耶律章奴反叛，奔上京，图谋迎立魏国王耶律淳。
English: At the beginning of October 9th, Yeluchangnu rebelled and rushed to Beijing, attempting to usher in the Wei King Yeluchun.

古文：上遣驸马萧昱领兵诣广平淀护后妃，行宫小底乙信持书驰报魏国王。
现代文：皇上派驸马萧昱领兵前往广平淀保护后妃，派行宫小底乙信带着书信飞驰告知魏国王。
English: The emperor sent his horse Xiaoqi to lead the troops to Guangpingdian to protect the empress, and sent the palace Xiaodi Yi letter with the letter to inform the king of Wei.

古文：时章奴先遣王妃亲弟萧谛里以所谋说魏国王。
现代文：当时章奴先派王妃亲弟萧谛里用其谋划劝说魏国王。
English: At that time, Zhang Nong first sent the princess's own brother, Xiao Dili, to use his plan to persuade the Wei king.

古文：王曰： 此非细事，主上自有诸王当立，北、南面大臣不来，而汝言及此，何也？ 
现代文：魏国王说 ：这又不是小事，皇上自有诸王可以立为后继，北、南面大臣不来，而你言及此事，这是为何？ 
English: The Wei king said, "This is no small matter. The emperor can appoint his own kings as successors. The ministers from the north and the south will not come. Why did you mention this matter?"

古文：密令左右拘之。
现代文：暗中命令左右拘执之。
English: Secretly ordered the right and left detentions.

古文：有顷，乙信等赍御札至，备言章奴等欲废立事。
现代文：不久，乙信等人带着皇上亲笔信前来，详细说明章奴等人想要废父立子之事。
English: Soon after, Eixin and others came with a personal letter from the emperor, explaining in detail that Zhang Niu and others wanted to abolish the father-son relationship.

古文：魏国王立斩萧谛里等首以献，单骑间道诣广平淀待罪。
现代文：魏国王当即将萧谛里等人斩下首级进献，单骑抄小路前往广平淀待罪。
English: The king of Wei was about to cut off the heads of Xiao Dili and others, and he rode alone to Guangpingdian to await his punishment.

古文：上遇之如初。
现代文：皇上待他像先前一样信任。
English: The Emperor trusted him as never before.

古文：章奴知魏国王不听，率麾下掠庆、饶、怀、祖等州，结渤海群盗，众至数万，趋广平淀犯行宫。顺国女直阿鹘产以三百骑一战而胜，擒其贵族二百余人，并斩首以徇。
现代文：章奴得知魏国王不听，率领部下攻掠庆、饶、怀、祖等州，结连渤海群盗，人马发展到数万人，进军至广平淀想要加害皇上，顺国女真阿鹘产率三百骑一次交战就取得了胜利，擒获其贵族两百余人，一概斩首示众。
English: Zhang Nong learned that the king of Wei did not listen to him, and led his subordinates to attack and plunder Qing, Rao, Huai, Zu and other states, linked together the Bohai Sea group of thieves, and the number of men and horses grew to tens of thousands. He marched to Guangpingdian to harm the emperor. Shun Guo's daughter, Zhen'a, had a birth rate of three hundred and rode to victory in a single battle, captured more than two hundred of his nobles, and beheaded them all.

古文：其妻子配役绣院，或散诸近侍为婢，余得脱者皆奔女直。
现代文：将章奴之妻子儿女配到绣院服苦役，或者散发给近侍做婢女，其余得以逃脱者都投奔了女真。
English: The wives and children of the slaves were assigned to the brothel for hard labor, or distributed to the servants as maids, and the rest who were able to escape went to join the Jurchens.

古文：章奴诈为使者，欲奔女直，为逻者所获，缚送行在，腰斩于市，剖其心以献祖庙，支解以徇五路。
现代文：章奴伪装是使者，想投奔女真，为巡逻人员逮获，捆缚送至行宫所在，将他腰斩于市，剖出其心以祭献祖庙，又将他肢解后拿到五路示众。
English: Zhang Nong disguised himself as an emissary and wanted to go to Jianzhen. He was arrested for the patrol officers, tied up and sent to the location of the palace, he was beheaded in the city, his heart was cut out to sacrifice to the ancestral temple, and he was dismembered and taken to the five-way demonstration.

古文：冬十一月，遣驸马萧特末、林牙萧察剌等将骑兵五万、步卒四十万、亲军七十万至驼门。
现代文：冬十一月，派遣驸马萧特末、林牙萧察剌等率领骑兵五万、步兵四十万、亲军七十万到驼门。
English: In the winter of November, Xiaotemai and Lin Yao sent 50,000 cavalry, 400,000 infantry and 700,000 pro-government troops to Cammen.

古文：十二月乙巳，耶律张家奴叛。
现代文：十二月初十，耶律张家奴反叛。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, Ye Lu Zhang Jia Nong rebelled.

古文：戊申，亲战于护步答冈，败绩，尽亡其辎重。
现代文：十三日，皇上亲自率兵与之交战于护步答冈，失败，辎重全部丧失。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor personally led the soldiers to fight against it in the guarding of the foot of the hill, failed, and all the weight was lost.

古文：己未，锦州刺史耶律术者叛应张家奴。
现代文：二十四日，锦州刺史耶律术者叛乱以响应张家奴。
English: On the 24th, the Jinzhou Zhishie Legalists rebelled in response to Zhang Jia Nu.

古文：庚申，北面林牙耶律马哥讨张家奴。
现代文：二十五日，北面林牙耶律马哥攻讨张家奴。
English: On the 25th, Lin Ya Yerumago from the north attacked Zhang Jia Nu.

古文：癸亥，以北院宣徽使萧韩家奴知北院枢密使事，南院宣徽使萧特末为汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：二十八日，以北院宣徽使萧韩家奴为知北院枢密使事，以南院宣徽使萧特末为汉人行宫都部署。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Hanjia, with the proclamation of the Northern Court, was appointed as the confidential envoy of the Northern Court, and Xiao Te, with the proclamation of the Southern Court, was appointed as the Han people's marching palace.

古文：六年春正月丙寅朔，东京夜有恶少年十余人，乘酒执刃，逾垣入留守府，问留守萧保先所在： 今军变，请为备。 
现代文：六年春正月初一，东京城夜里有恶少年十余人，乘着酒兴手执利刃，翻越围墙进入留守府，问明留守萧保先住处后说： 现在发生了兵变，请赶紧做好防备。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, there were more than ten evil boys in the night of Tokyo Castle. They took advantage of the wine to hold a sharp blade, climbed over the fence into the left-behind house, asked the left-behind Xiao Bao where he lived first, and said: Now there has been a mutiny, please quickly prepare for it.

古文：萧保先出，刺杀之。
现代文：萧保先出门，恶少年刺杀了他。
English: Xiao Bao went out first, and the evil boy stabbed him to death.

古文：户部使大公鼎闻乱，即摄留守事，与副留守高清明集奚、汉兵千人，尽捕其众，斩之，抚定其民。
现代文：户部使大公鼎得知发生了乱子，当即摄理留守事务，与副留守高清明集中奚、汉兵一千人，尽数捕获乱人，并将他们斩首，安抚稳定当地百姓。
English: The household department informed the grand duke that there had been a disturbance, and immediately the procurator of the left-behind affairs, together with the deputy left-behind Gao Qingming, concentrated 1,000 Han soldiers to capture as many ruffians as possible, and beheaded them to pacify and stabilize the local people.

古文：东京故渤海地，太祖力战二十余年乃得之。
现代文：东京为渤海故地，太祖力战二十余年才得到其地。
English: Tokyo is the birthplace of the Bohai Sea, and it took Taizu more than 20 years of hard work to get there.

古文：而萧保先严酷，渤海苦之，故有是变。
现代文：而萧保先严苛酷虐，渤海苦不堪言，所以发生了这次事变。
English: But Xiao Baoxian was harsh and cruel, and Bohai was miserable, so this incident happened.

古文：其裨将渤海高永昌僣号，称隆基元年。遣萧乙薛、高兴顺招之，不从。
现代文：其裨将渤海高永昌僭号称帝，称隆基元年，派遣萧乙薛、高兴顺招抚之，高永昌不从。
English: It will benefit the Bohai Gao Yongchang to proclaim himself emperor, to proclaim the first year of Longji, to send Xiao Yixue, glad Shun to invite him, Gao Yongchang will not follow.

古文：闰月乙亥，遣萧韩家奴、张琳讨之。
现代文：闰正月初四，派萧韩家奴、张琳讨伐高氏。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the leap year, he sent Xiao Han Jia Rong and Zhang Lin to fight Gao.

古文：戊午，贵德州守将耶律余睹以广州渤海叛附永昌，我师击败之。
现代文：二十三日，贵德州守将耶律余睹据广州渤海反叛，依附高永昌，我军击败之。
English: On the 23rd, the governor of Guizhou, Ye Lu, witnessed the rebellion in the Bohai Sea off Guangzhou and sided with Gao Yongchang. Our army defeated him.

古文：二月戊辰，侍御司徒挞不也等讨张家奴，战于祖州，败绩。
现代文：二月初四，侍御司徒挞不也等讨伐张家奴，接战于祖州，我军败绩。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, Zhang Jia Nong's attendant, Sittu Niu, joined the crusade against Zhang Jia Nong and fought in Zhou. Our army was defeated.

古文：乙酉，遣汉人行宫都部署萧特末率诸将讨张家奴。
现代文：二十一日，派遣汉人行宫都部署萧特末率领诸将攻讨张家奴。
English: On the twenty-first day, dispatching Han people to the palace, they deployed Xiao Temei to lead the generals to attack Zhang Jianlu.

古文：戊子，张家奴诱饶州渤海及中京贼侯既等万余人，攻陷高州。
现代文：二十四日，张家奴招诱饶州渤海及中京贼人侯概等万余人，攻陷高州。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Jianu recruited more than ten thousand people, including Baohai from Raozhou and Hou Zhou from Zhongjing, to invade Gaozhou.

古文：三月，东面行军副统酬斡等擒侯概于川州。
现代文：三月，东面行军副统萧酬斡等人在川州擒获侯概。
English: In March, the deputy general Xiao Rongyu and others who marched to the east won the election in Sichuan.

古文：夏四月戊辰，亲征张家奴。
现代文：夏四月初五，亲征张家奴。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of summer, Zhang Jiannu was personally recruited.

古文：癸酉，败之。
现代文：初十，击败之。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it was defeated.

古文：甲戌，诛叛党，饶州渤海平。
现代文：初八，诛杀叛党，饶州渤海之乱平定。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the rebels were killed and the Raozhou-Bohai Rebellion was put down.

古文：丙子，赏平贼将士有差；而萧韩家奴、张琳等复为贼所败。
现代文：十三日，赏赐平定叛贼的将士各有等差；而同时，萧韩家奴、张琳等人再度为贼军所败。
English: On the 13th, the rewards for the soldiers who subdued the traitors were unequal; meanwhile, Xiao Han, Zhang Lin and others were once again defeated by the rebel army.

古文：五月，清暑散水原。
现代文：五月，消夏于散水原。
English: In May, they spend the summer at the watering place.

古文：女直军攻下沈州，复陷东京，擒高永昌。
现代文：女真军攻下沈州，又攻陷东京，活捉了高永昌。
English: The Jurchen Army captured Shenzhou and Tokyo, and captured Gao Yongchang alive.

古文：东京州县族人痕孛、铎剌、吴十、挞不也、道剌、酬斡等十三人皆降女直。
现代文：东京州县之族人痕孛、铎剌、吴十、挞不也、道剌、酬斡等十三人均投降于女真。
English: Thirteen people from the Tokyo Prefecture, including Yuen Mi, Mi, Wu Ju, Hao Buya, Dao Mi, and Fuyuo, all surrendered to Nyoshin.

古文：六月乙丑，籍诸路兵，有杂畜十头以上者皆从军。
现代文：六月初三，登记诸路兵马，有杂畜十头以上者均令充为军用。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, soldiers and horses of all ranks were registered, and anyone with more than ten head of livestock was ordered to serve in the military.

古文：庚辰，魏国王淳进封秦晋国王，为都元帅，上京留守萧挞不也为契丹行宫都部署兼副元帅。
现代文：十八日，魏国王耶律淳晋封为秦晋国王，任都元帅；以上京留守萧挞不也为契丹行宫都部署兼副元帅。
English: On the 18th, the king of Wei, Ye Lu Jun Jin, was appointed as the king of Qin Jin and was appointed as the marshal of the capital; Xiao Bingfu, who stayed in Beijing, was also deployed as the deputy marshal of the palace of Khitan.

古文：丁亥，知北院枢密使事萧韩家奴为上京留守。
现代文：二十五日，知北院枢密使事萧韩家奴任上京留守。
English: On the 25th, the envoy of the Privy Council of Chihoku-in, Xiao Hanjia, left for Beijing.

古文：秋七月，猎秋山。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于秋山。
English: In autumn and July, they go hunting in Akiyama.

古文：春州渤海二千余户叛，东北路统军使勒兵追及，尽俘以还。
现代文：春州渤海二千余户反叛，东北路统军使整顿兵力追及，尽数俘获而回。
English: More than two thousand households in Chunzhou and Bohai rebelled, and the Northeast Road Union Army made the rectification force catch up, and captured as many as possible and returned.

古文：八月，乌古部叛，遣中丞耶律挞不也等招之。
现代文：八月，乌古部反叛，派中丞耶律挞不也等人招降之。
English: In August, Ugube rebelled and sent Chujo Yerutsuko and others to invite him to surrender.

古文：九月丙午，谒怀陵。
现代文：九月十六日，拜谒怀陵。
English: On September 16th, he paid his respects at the imperial mausoleum.

古文：冬十月丁卯，以张琳军败，夺官。
现代文：冬十月初七，因张琳兵败，削夺其官职。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, because of Zhang Lin's military defeat, he was deprived of his official position.

古文：庚辰，乌古部来降。
现代文：二十日，乌古部前来降附。
English: On the 20th, the Ugube came to annex it.

古文：十一月，东面行军副统马哥等攻曷苏馆，败绩。
现代文：十一月，东面行军副统马哥等进攻曷苏馆，失败。
English: In November, Margo, the deputy commander of the eastern march, and others attacked the Su Pavilion, but failed.

古文：十二月乙亥，封庶人萧氏为太皇太妃。
现代文：十二月十六日，追封庶人萧氏为太皇太妃。
English: On December 16th, Xiao Shi, a commoner, was enthroned as the Great Empress Dowager.

古文：辛巳，削副统耶律马哥官。
现代文：二十二日，削夺副统耶律马哥之官职。
English: On the 22nd, the vice-commander, Yerumago, was stripped of his post.

古文：七年春正月甲寅，减厩马粟，分给诸局。
现代文：七年春正月二十五日，削减供给厩马之粟米，挪出分给诸局。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the supply of maize to stables was reduced and allocated to various bureaus.

古文：是月，女直军攻春州，东北面诸军不战自溃，女古、皮室四部及渤海人皆降，复下泰州。
现代文：同月，女真军进攻春州，东北面诸军不战自溃，女古、皮室四部及渤海人均投降，女真又攻下泰州。
English: In the same month, the Jurchen army attacked Chunzhou, and the armies in the northeast were routed without a fight. Jurchen, Four Divisions of Leather and Bohai surrendered, and Jurchen conquered Taizhou.

古文：二月，涞水县贼董庞儿聚众万余，西京留守萧乙薛、南京统军都监查剌与战于易水，破之。
现代文：二月，涞水县贼人董庞儿聚众一万余人，西京留守萧乙薛、南京统军都监查剌与之交战于易水，击败之。
English: In February, Dong Pang'er, a thief from Surabaya County, gathered more than ten thousand people. Xiao Yixue, who stayed in West Beijing, and Zhaohui, the inspector of the united forces of Nanjing, fought with him in Yishui and defeated him.

古文：三月，庞儿党复聚，乙薛复击破之于奉圣州。
现代文：三月，庞儿党徒再度聚合，乙薛又在奉圣州击破之。
English: In March, the Pang'er Party members gathered again, and Yixue defeated them again in Feng Shengzhou.

古文：夏五月庚寅，东北面行军诸将涅里、合鲁、涅哥、虚古等弃之。
现代文：夏五月初三，东北面行军诸将涅里、合鲁、涅哥、虚古等被处以弃市。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the summer, the generals Nieri, Helu, Nego, and Keku, who were marching in the northeast, were punished by abandoning the city.

古文：乙巳，诸围场隙地，纵百姓樵采。
现代文：十八日，对于诸围场之空地，任从百姓樵柴采集。
English: On the 18th, for the open spaces of various paddocks, it was allowed to collect firewood from the people.

古文：六月辛巳，以同知枢密院事余里也为北院大王。
现代文：六月二十四日，以同知枢密院事余里也为北院大王。
English: On the 24th of June, Tongzhi, the Privy Councillor, also became the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：秋七月癸卯，猎秋山。
现代文：秋七月十七日，出猎于秋山。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in Akiyama.

古文：八月丙寅，猎狘斯那里山，命都元帅秦晋王赴沿边，会四路兵马防秋。
现代文：八月十一日，出猎于笰斯那里山，命都元帅秦晋王前往边境沿线，会集四路兵马防备夷人趁秋高马肥时入侵。
English: On August 11th, on a hunting trip in the mountains near Gansu, the commander-in-chief, Marshal Qin Jinwang, went to the border to gather four armies and horses to prevent the barbarians from invading during the autumn harvest.

古文：九月，上自燕至阴凉河，置怨军八营：募自宜州者曰前宜、后宜，自锦州者曰前锦、后锦，自乾自显者曰乾曰显，又有乾显大营、岩州营，凡二万八千余人，屯卫州蒺藜山。
现代文：九月，皇上自燕地到达阴凉河，设置怨军八营：自宜州募得者称前宜、后宜，自锦州募得者称前锦、后锦，自乾州和显州募得者称为乾，称为显，又有乾显大营、岩州营，总计二万八千余人，屯驻于卫州蒺藜山。
English: In September, the emperor arrived at Yinlianghe from Yan Di and set up eight detachment battalions: those recruited from Yizhou were called Zengyi and Houyi, those recruited from Jinzhou were called Zengyi and Houyin, those recruited from Qianzhou and Xianzhou were called Qian and Xian, and there were also Qianxian battalions and Iwazhou battalions. A total of more than 28,000 people were stationed in Lushan, Weizhou.

古文：丁酉，猎辋子山。
现代文：十二日，出猎于辋子山。
English: On the 12th, they went hunting in Lazy Mountain.

古文：冬十月乙卯朔，至中京。
现代文：冬十月初一，到中京。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, I went to Chukyo.

古文：十二月丙寅，都元帅秦晋国王淳遇女直军，战于蒺藜山，败绩。
现代文：十二月十三日，都元帅秦晋国王耶律淳遭遇女真军，接战于蒺藜山，我军败。
English: On December 13th, the Grand Marshal of the Qin Dynasty, King Ye Lu Chun, encountered the Jurchen Army and engaged it in Lushan. Our army was defeated.

古文：女直复拔显州旁近州郡。
现代文：女真又攻取显州附近州郡。
English: Nyoman also captured the nearby county of Xianzhou.

古文：庚午，下诏自责。
现代文：十七日，下诏自责。
English: On the 17th, he issued a statement of self-reproach.

古文：癸酉，遣夷离毕查剌与大公鼎诸路募兵。
现代文：二十日，派遣夷离毕查剌与大公鼎到诸路募兵。
English: On the 20th, Bi Zhaojun and the Grand Duke Ding were sent to the provinces to recruit soldiers.

古文：丁丑，以西京留守萧乙薛为北府宰相，东北路行军都统奚霞末知奚六部大王事。
现代文：二十四日，以西京留守萧乙薛为北府宰相，以东北路行军都统奚霞末为知奚六部大王事。
English: On the 24th, Xiao Yixue, who stayed in Xijing, became the prime minister of Beifu, and the troops marching along the Northeast Road marched to the end of the year as the king of the Six Provinces.

古文：是岁，女直阿骨打用铁州杨朴策，即皇帝位，建元天辅，国号金。
现代文：这一年，女真阿骨打采用铁州杨朴之谋略，即皇帝位，建元天辅，国号金。
English: In this year, Jianzhen Achebe adopted the strategy of Tiezhou Yangpu, that is, the emperor, Jianyuan Tianyu, and the country's gold.

古文：杨朴又言，自古英雄开国或受禅，必先求大国封册，遂遣使议和，以求封册。
现代文：杨朴又说，自古以来英雄开国或者受禅即位，必定先求得大国封册，于是派遣使者议和，以求封册。
English: Yang Pu also said that since ancient times, when a hero founded a country or ascended to the throne, he must first obtain the seal of a great power, and then send an envoy to negotiate peace in order to obtain the seal.

古文：八年春正月，幸鸳鸯泺。
现代文：八年春正月，临幸鸳鸯泊。
English: In the first month of spring in the eighth year, Lin Xing stayed overnight.

古文：丁亥，遣耶律奴哥等使金议和。
现代文：初四，派遣耶律奴哥等人出使金国议和。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he sent Jericho and others to negotiate peace with Kim.

古文：庚寅，保安军节度使张崇以双州二百户降金。
现代文：初七，保安军节度使张崇以双州二百户降于金。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the festival of the security forces made Zhang Chong reduce the sum of 200 households in Shuangzhou to gold.

古文：东路诸州盗贼蜂起，掠民自随以充食。
现代文：东路诸州盗贼蜂起，掳掠百姓随身携带，饿即杀之以充食。
English: Thieves in eastern Zhuzhou revolted, abducting and robbing people to take with them, killing them when they were hungry and stuffing them with food.

古文：二月，耶律奴哥还自金，金主复书曰： 能以兄事朕，岁贡方物，归我上、中京、兴中府三路州县；以亲王、公主、驸马、大臣子孙为质；还我行人及元给信符，并宋、夏、高丽往复书诏、表牒，则可以如约。 
现代文：二月，耶律奴哥自金回国，金主回信说 ：如能以兄长之礼事奉朕，每年贡献土产，退还我国的上京、中京、兴中府三路之州县；以亲王、公主、驸马、大臣子孙为人质；归还我国使者及信符原件，以及宋、夏、高丽与我国往来之书信诏书、表牒，则可以按约行事。 
English: In February, Brother Yelu returned to China from Jin. The ruler of Jin replied in a letter: "If you can serve me with the courtesy of an elder brother, contribute to the local production every year, return the three counties of Shangjing, Zhongjing and Xingzhongfu to our country, take princes, princesses, horses and the descendants of ministers as hostages, and return the original documents of our emissaries and letters, as well as the letters, imperial decrees and ultimatums sent by Song, Xia and Goryeo to and from our country, then you can act according to the agreement.

古文：三月甲午，复遣奴哥使金。
现代文：三月十二日，再次派奴哥出使金国。
English: On the 12th of March, he sent Nooke again to send an envoy to China.

古文：夏四月辛酉，以西南面招讨使萧得里底为北院枢密使。
现代文：夏四月初九，以西南面招讨使萧得里底为北院枢密使。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, Shoudlidi was invited to the south-west to become a privy councilor of the Northern Court.

古文：五月壬午朔，奴哥以书来，约不逾此月见报。
现代文：五月初一，奴哥带着金主书信前来，约定不超过本月就可做出答复。
English: On the first day of May, the servant came with a letter from his master, promising to reply no later than this month.

古文：戊戌，复遣奴哥使金，要以酌中之议。
现代文：十七日，再度派奴哥出使金国，希望能订立折中之议案。
English: On the seventeenth day, he again sent Nuo Gao to dispatch Jin Guo, hoping to conclude a compromise proposal.

古文：是月，至纳葛泺。
现代文：同月，到纳葛泊。
English: In the same month, to Nagpur.

古文：贼安生儿、张高儿聚众二十万，耶律马哥等斩生儿于龙化州，高儿亡入懿州，与霍六哥相合。
现代文：贼人安生儿、张高儿聚众二十万，耶律马哥等人在龙化州杀死安生儿，张高儿逃入懿州，与霍六哥合并。
English: The thieves An Sheng'er and Zhang Gao'er gathered a crowd of two hundred thousand, Yerumago and others killed An Sheng'er in Longhua Prefecture, Zhang Gao'er fled to Zhangzhou and merged with Huo Liugang.

古文：金主遣胡突衮与奴哥持书，报如前约。
现代文：金主派胡突衮与奴哥一同带着书信前来，回复说按照先前所订和约不变。
English: The financier sent Hu Tujuan and his brother to come with a letter, and they replied that they would not change according to the previously concluded peace treaty.

古文：六月丁卯，遣奴哥等赍宋、夏、高丽书诏、表牒至金。
现代文：六月十六日，派奴哥等人携带宋、夏、高丽给金国的书信、诏令、表牒到金国。
English: On June 16th, Phanook and others carried the letter, edict, and ultimatum from Song, Hsia, and Goryeo to Kim.

古文：霍六哥陷海北州，趣义州，军帅回离保等击败之。
现代文：霍六哥攻陷海北州，进军义州，军帅回离保等人击败之。
English: Huo Liuko invaded Hebei Province, marched into Yizhou Province, and was defeated by the military commander who returned from Bao Zhuang.

古文：通、祺、双、辽四州之民八百余户降于金。
现代文：通、祺、双、辽四州百姓八百余户投降金国。
English: More than 800 households in Tong, Handan, Shuangliu and Liaoning Provinces surrendered to Jin.

古文：秋七月，猎秋山。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于秋山。
English: In autumn and July, they go hunting in Akiyama.

古文：金复遣胡突衮来，免取质子及上京、兴中府所属州郡，裁减岁币之数， 如能以兄事朕，册用汉仪，可以如约。 
现代文：金国再度派胡突衮前来，免取人质及上京、兴中府所属州郡，裁减岁币的数量，并声言 ，如果能够以兄长之礼事奉于朕，封册采用汉人礼仪，可以按约行事。 
English: Jin Guo once again sent Hu Tujuan to come, free the hostages and Shangjing and Xingzhong Prefecture, reduce the number of year-old coins, and claimed that if he could serve me with the courtesy of an elder brother, and use Chinese etiquette to seal the book, he could act according to the agreement.

古文：八月庚午，遣奴哥、突迭使金，议册礼。
现代文：八月二十日，派遣奴哥、突迭出使金国，商议封册之礼仪。
English: On August 20th, he dispatched his brother, Nuko, as an emissary to discuss the etiquette of sealing books.

古文：九月，突迭见留，遣奴哥还，谓之曰： 言如不从，勿复遣使。 
现代文：九月，突迭被扣留，打发奴哥回来，转达金主的话说 ：所要求的如果不能听从，不要再派使者来了。 
English: In September, when he was detained, he sent his slave-brother back to convey the words of his master: "If you can't do what I ask, don't send any more envoys."

古文：闰月丙寅，遣奴哥复使金，而萧宝、讹里等十五人各率户降于金。
现代文：闰九月十七日，派奴哥再度出使金国，而同时萧宝、讹里等十五人分别率所辖民户投降于金。
English: On the 17th day of the 9th month of the leap year, Phanook again sent an envoy to Kim, and at the same time, Xiao Bao, Bao Li and other fifteen people led the people under their jurisdiction to surrender to Kim.

古文：冬十月，奴哥、突迭持金书来。
现代文：冬十月，奴哥、突迭带着金人书信回来。
English: In the winter of October, he suddenly came back with a letter from Jinren.

古文：龙化州张应古等四人率众降金。
现代文：龙化州张应古等四人率众降金。
English: Longhua County Zhang Yinggu and other four people led the crowd to reduce the price.

古文：十一月，副元帅萧挞不也薨。
现代文：十一月，副元帅萧挞不也逝世。
English: In November, Vice-Marshal Xiao Junfu also passed away.

古文：十二月甲申，议定册礼，遣奴哥使金。
现代文：十二月初七，议定封册之礼仪，派遣奴哥出使金国。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, they agreed on the protocol of sealing the book, and sent Nooke to dispatch it to Jin.

古文：宁昌军节度使刘宏以懿州户三千降金。
现代文：宁昌军节度使刘宏率懿州民户三千投降于金。
English: At the Ningchang Army Festival, Liu Hong led three thousand households in Zhangzhou to surrender to Kim.

古文：时山前诸路大饥，乾、显、宜、锦、兴中等路，斗粟直数缣，民削榆皮食之，既而人相食。
现代文：这时山前诸路发生大饥荒，乾、显、宜、锦、兴中等路，一斗粟价值数匹细绢，百姓削榆树皮为食，接着又出现了人吃人现象。
English: At this time, a great famine occurred in the roads in front of the mountain. In the middle of the roads such as Jian, Xian, Yi, Jin and Xing, a bucket of millet was worth several fine strawberries. People cut the bark of eucalyptus trees for food, and then there was a phenomenon of people eating people.

古文：是年，放进士王翚等三百人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士王踂等一百零三人。
English: In this year, there were one hundred and three people, including Wang Qi, who were admitted to the list.

古文：九年春正月，金遣乌林答赞谟持书来迎册。
现代文：九年春正月，金国派遣乌林答赞谟带着书信前来迎接封册。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, the State of Kim dispatched Ulin Dazhan Moo with a letter to come and receive the sealed book.

古文：二月，至鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二月，皇上到鸳鸯泊。
English: In February, the Emperor came to Oshidomari.

古文：贼张撒八诱中京射粮军，僣号，南面军帅余睹擒撒八。
现代文：贼人张撒八引诱中京射粮军反，僭号称帝，南面军帅余睹擒获撒八。
English: The thief Zhang Saba lured the Central Capital's grain-shooting army to rebel, proclaimed himself emperor, and was captured by the Southern Field Marshal Yu Jiubai.

古文：三月丁卯朔，遣知右夷离毕事萧习泥烈等册金主为东怀国皇帝。
现代文：三月初一，派遣知右夷离毕事萧习泥烈等人册立金主为东怀国皇帝。
English: On the first day of March, he dispatched Zhiyi Zhizhi, Xiao Xi, and others to record and establish Jin as the emperor of Donghuai.

古文：己酉，乌林答赞谟奴哥等先以书报。
现代文：初三，乌林答赞谟、奴哥等先行带着书信告知。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Ulin Tazanmu, Nugo and others went ahead with a letter to inform.

古文：夏五月，阻卜补疏只等叛，执招讨使耶律斡里朵，都监萧斜里得死之。
现代文：夏五月，阻卜补疏只等人反叛，拘执招讨使耶律斡里朵，都监萧斜里得战死。
English: In the summer of May, only those who obstructed and sidetracked others rebelled, and those who persisted in soliciting and persuading caused Yelu to be defeated, and the provincial governor Xiao Xili was killed in the battle.

古文：秋七月，猎南山。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于南山。
English: Autumn and July, hunting in Nanshan.

古文：金复遣乌林答赞谟来，责册文无 兄事 之语，不言 大金 而云 东怀 ，乃小邦怀其德之义；及册文有 渠材 二字，语涉轻侮；若 遥芬多戩 等语，皆非善意，殊乖体式。
现代文：金国再次派遣乌林答赞谟前来，指责册文中没有 兄事 之语，不称 大金 而称 东怀 ，乃是小邦可以德怀柔之义；又册文中有 渠材 二字，用语显得轻慢；至于 遥芬多戬 等语，都不怀好意，也与封册之正仪体式相差太远。
English: The Golden State once again sent Ulin Ta-zammo to criticize the fact that there was no word for "brotherhood" in the booklet. Instead of calling it big money, it called it "Eastern warmth," which is the meaning of a small state that can be gentle; the booklet also contains the word "drainage material," and the use of language appears to be frivolous; as for words such as "Yao Fen Duo," they are not well-intentioned, and they are also too far from the correct ceremonial style of the booklet.

古文：如依前书所定，然后可从。
现代文：如果能依前次书信所定，然后才可以听从。
English: If it is possible to do so in accordance with the previous letter, then it can be done.

古文：杨询卿、罗子韦率众降金。
现代文：杨询卿、罗子韦率众降金。
English: Yang Zhengying and Luo Ziwei led the crowd in lowering the price.

古文：八月，以赵王习泥烈为西京留守。
现代文：八月，以赵王习泥烈为西京留守。
English: In August, Zhao Wang Xi Murei left for West Beijing.

古文：九月，至西京。
现代文：九月，到西京。
English: In September, I went to Saikyo.

古文：复遣习泥烈、杨立忠先持册稿使金。
现代文：再次派遣习泥烈、杨立忠先行带着册文的草稿出使金国。
English: Xi Delirious was sent again, and Yang Lizhong was sent ahead with a draft of the book.

古文：冬十月甲戌朔，耶律陈图奴等二十余人谋反，伏诛。
现代文：冬十月初一，耶律陈图奴等二十余人谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the first day of October in winter, more than 20 people, including Yerut Chen Tunu, plotted a rebellion and were killed.

古文：是月，遣使送乌林答赞谟持书以还。
现代文：同月，派遣使者送乌林答赞谟带着书信回国。
English: In the same month, an envoy was sent to Ulin Tazanmu to bring a letter back to the country.

古文：十年春二月，幸鸳鸯泺。
现代文：十年春二月，临幸鸳鸯泊。
English: In the spring and February of the tenth year, Lin Xing stayed there.

古文：金复遣乌林答赞谟持书及册文副本以求，仍责乞兵于高丽。
现代文：金国再次派遣乌林答赞谟带着书信及册文副本前来，又指责我国向高丽请求援兵。
English: Once again, Kim sent Ulin Tha Zanmoo with a letter and a copy of the document, and also accused our country of requesting reinforcements from Korea.

古文：三月己酉，民有群马者，十取其一，给东路军。
现代文：三月初九，百姓拥有马群者，十匹中抽取一匹，供给东路军。
English: On the ninth day of the third month, the people who owned a herd of horses were allowed to take one horse out of ten to supply the Eastern Route Army.

古文：庚申，以金人所定 大圣 二字，与先世称号同，复遣习泥烈往议。
现代文：二十日，因金人所定文本中 大圣 二字，与先世帝王称号相同，再派习泥烈前往商议。
English: On the 20th, due to the fact that the word "Great Saint" is the same as the title of the previous emperor in the text determined by the goldsmiths, Xi Murei was sent to negotiate.

古文：金主怒，遂绝之。
现代文：金主发怒，于是断绝了议和。
English: The financier was furious and broke off the negotiations.

古文：夏四月，猎胡土白山，闻金师再举，耶律白斯不等选精兵三千以济辽师。
现代文：夏四月，出猎于胡土白山，得知金国再度发兵，耶律白斯不等挑选精兵三千人以济助辽军。
English: In the summer of April, on a hunting trip in the Hutu Baishan, he learned that China had once again sent troops, and Yerubets was waiting to select three thousand elite soldiers to help the Liao army.

古文：五月，金主亲攻上京，克外郛，留守挞不也率众出降。
现代文：五月，金主亲自进攻上京，攻克外城，留守挞不也率众出降。
English: In May, the gold owner personally attacked Beijing and conquered the outer city, and the left-behind Shifu also led the crowd to surrender.

古文：六月乙酉，以北府宰相萧乙薛为上京留守、知盐铁内省两司、东北统军司事。
现代文：六月十六日，以北府宰相萧乙薛为上京留守，知盐铁内省两司、东北统军司事。
English: On June 16th, Xiao Yixue, the prime minister of Beifu, left for Beijing, leaving two departments of Zhishan Railway and two departments of Northeastern United Front.

古文：秋，猎沙岭。
现代文：秋，出猎于沙岭。
English: Autumn, hunting in the sands.

古文：冬，复至西京。
现代文：冬，再次到西京。
English: In winter, I went to Saikyo again.

