古文：夫以为疾病至急，仓卒寻按，要者难得，故重集诸可与不可方治，比之三阴三阳篇中，此易见也。
现代文：我考虑到疾病发展迅速，病情十分危急，要想在仓卒时间内寻求到辨证治疗的要领，是很难做到的，所以重新收集各种可与不可的诊治原则和方法，整理成可与不可诸篇。这与三阴三阳篇中相比，更容易查找。
English: Considering that the disease develops rapidly and the condition is very critical, it is difficult to find the essentials of differential treatment in a hurry, so I re-collected various possible and impossible diagnosis and treatment principles and methods, and organized them into possible and impossible articles. This is easier to find than in the three yin and three yang articles.

古文：又时有不止是三阴三阳，出在诸可与不可中也。
现代文：同时，还时有三阴三阳篇中没有的内容，也补充在可与不可各篇中。
English: At the same time, the content not found in the "Three Yin and Three Yang" chapter is also added to the "Possible and Impossible" chapters.

古文：脉濡而弱，弱反在关，濡反在巅，微反在上，涩反在下。
现代文：关脉濡而弱，寸脉反见微，尺脉反见涩。微主阳气不足，涩主阴血亏虚。
English: The junction vein is wet and weak, the inch vein is weak, and the yard vein is astringent. The micro main yang is insufficient, and the astringent main yin blood is deficient.

古文：微则阳气不足，涩则无血。阳气反微，中风汗出而反躁烦。
现代文：阳气虚弱而又阴亏，就容易出现中风多汗、烦躁不安、形寒怕冷、四肢厥冷。阳虚发汗，就会引起亡阳，出现烦躁、不得安眠的变证。
English: If yang qi is weak and yin deficiency, it is easy to have stroke, sweating, irritability, fear of cold, and cold limbs. Yang deficiency sweating will cause the death of the sun, and there will be irritability and insomnia.

古文：涩则无血，厥而且寒。阳微发汗，躁不得眠。
现代文：脐右有气筑筑然跳动，是肺气虚，不能发汗。
English: The right lung is short of qi and cannot sweat.

古文：动气在右，不可发汗，发汗则衄而渴，心苦烦，饮即吐水。
现代文：误发其汗，就会导致鼻衄、口渴、心中烦闷、喝水后立即吐出的变证。
English: If you accidentally sweat, it will lead to nasal congestion, thirst, boredom, and vomiting immediately after drinking water.

古文：动气在左，不可发汗，发汗则头眩，汗不止，筋惕肉目闰。
现代文：脐左有气筑筑然跳动，是肝气虚，不能发汗。误发其汗，就会引起头昏目眩、汗出不止、筋肉跳动的变证。
English: The left eyelid has gas and beats vigorously, but the liver is weak and cannot sweat. If it sweats by mistake, it will cause dizziness, excessive sweating, and abnormal muscle beats.

古文：动气在上，不可发汗，发汗则气上冲，正在心端。
现代文：脐上有气筑筑然跳动，是心气虚，不能发汗。误发其汗，就会引起气向上冲撞、直至心下的变证。
English: When the qi builds up and beats on the palate, the heart is deficient in qi and cannot sweat. If it sweats by mistake, it will cause the qi to rush upward, until the heart changes.

古文：动气在下，不可发汗，发汗则无汗，心中大烦，骨节苦疼，目运，恶寒，食则反吐。谷不得前。
现代文：脐下有气筑筑然跳动，是肾气虚，不能发汗。误发其汗，就会导致汗闭不出、心中烦躁厉害、骨节疼痛、头目眩晕、怕冷、进食即吐、食物不能进的变证。
English: Under the armpit, there is a strong pulsation, the kidneys are weak and can't sweat. If you sweat by mistake, it will lead to sweat not closing, severe irritability, pain in the joints, dizziness, fear of cold, vomiting when eating, and food can't get in.

古文：咽中闭塞，不可发汗，发汗则吐血，气欲绝，手足厥冷，欲得蜷卧，不能自温。
现代文：咽喉闭塞的病症，不能发汗。误发其汗，就会引起吐血、呼吸微弱、手足厥冷、想蜷曲而睡、不能自行温暖的变证。
English: The disease of throat obstruction, can't sweat. If you accidentally sweat, it will cause vomiting blood, weak breathing, cold hands and feet, want to curl up and sleep, and can't warm yourself.

古文：诸脉得数动微弱者，不可发汗，发汗则大便难，腹中干，胃燥而烦，其形相象，根本异源。
现代文：凡是见到动数微弱脉象的，不能发汗。误发其汗，就会导致肠胃干燥，出现大便难以解出、心烦不安等变证。其表现虽然很象阳明府实证，但病源却根本不同。
English: Anyone who sees a pulse with a weak pulse cannot sweat. If you sweat by mistake, it will lead to dry intestines and stomach, difficulty in excreting stool, anxiety and other abnormalities. Although its performance is very similar to the Yangmingfu demonstration, the source of the disease is fundamentally different.

古文：脉微而弱，弱反在关，濡反在巅，弦反在上，微反在下。
现代文：关部脉濡弱，寸部脉弦，尺部脉微。弦是阳气扰动于上，微是阴寒盛于下，这是上实而下虚，所以病人喜欢温暖。
English: The junction pulse is weak, the inch pulse is string, and the ruler pulse is faint. The string is yang disturbed on the top, and the faint pulse is cold on the bottom. This is true on the top and false on the bottom, so the patient likes to be warm.

古文：咳者则剧，数吐涎沫，咽中必干，小便不利，心中饥烦，日卒时而发，其形似疟，有寒无热，虚而寒栗，咳而发汗，蜷而苦满，腹中复坚。
现代文：由于下焦阳气本虚，所以不能发汗。误发其汗，则更伤阳气，引起畏寒战栗、不能自行恢复的变证。咳嗽剧烈，频频吐出涎沫，咽喉干燥，小便不通畅，腹中感觉饥饿，心中烦躁不安，一昼夜一发，好象疟疾，但只有畏寒甚至寒战而没有发热，这是肺虚寒饮内停所致。如果把咳嗽当作表寒而发汗，就会引起身体蜷曲而卧、胸中满闷、腹中坚硬的变证。
English: Due to the fact that the lower scorched yang qi is inherently deficient, it cannot sweat. If it sweats by mistake, it will hurt the yang qi even more, causing shivering and trembling, and cannot recover on its own. The cough is severe, frequently spitting out foam, the throat is dry, the urination is not smooth, the abdomen feels hungry, the heart is restless and uneasy, and it occurs once a day and night, like malaria, but only chills or even chills without fever, which is caused by the cold in the lungs. If the cough is taken as a cold and sweats, it will cause the body to curl

古文：厥，脉紧，不可发汗，发汗则声乱、咽嘶、舌萎、声不得前。
现代文：四肢厥冷、脉象紧的，是阳虚阴寒内盛，不能发汗。误发其汗，就会导致语声散乱、咽喉嘶哑、舌萎不用、发不出声音的变证。
English: The extremities are very cold, the pulse is tight, the yang is weak and the yin is cold and can not sweat. If you sweat by mistake, it will lead to voice disorder, hoarse throat, tongue atrophy, and no sound.

古文：诸逆发汗，病微者难差；剧者言乱、目眩者死，命将难全。
现代文：各种四肢厥冷证，不能发汗。误发其汗，病变轻的，难以治愈；病变重的，就会导致神昏语言错乱、目眩等变证，其生命难以保全。
English: All kinds of limbs are cold and cannot sweat. If they sweat by mistake, the disease is mild and difficult to cure; if the disease is severe, it will lead to abnormalities such as delirium, language disorder, and dizziness, and it is difficult to preserve their lives.

古文：咳而小便利，若失小便者，不可发汗，汗出则四肢厥逆冷。
现代文：咳嗽而小便通利，或小便自遗的，不能发汗。误发其汗，就会引起四肢厥冷的变证。
English: If you cough and urinate profusely, or if you urinate on your own, you cannot sweat. If you sweat by mistake, it will cause coldness in the extremities.

古文：伤寒头痛，翕翕发热，形象中风，常微汗出自呕者，下之益烦，心中懊憹如饥；发汗则致痉，身强，难以屈伸；熏之则发黄，不得小便；灸则发咳唾。
现代文：外感病，头痛，象皮毛复盖身上一样发热，表现象太阳中风证，经常微微出汗，呕吐。如果误用泻下法治疗，则发热更甚，心中烦闷异常，嘈杂似饥；如果用发汗法治疗，就会引起痉证，出现身体强直、难以屈伸的症状；如果误用火熏法，就会引起身体发黄、小便不通，病久就会出现咳嗽唾脓血。
English: Exogenous disease, headache, fever like fur covering the body, symptoms like sun stroke, frequent slight sweating, vomiting. If the laxative method is misused, the fever is worse, the mind is unusually dull, and the noise is like hunger; if the sweating method is used, it will cause bruising, and the body will be stiff and difficult to flex; if the fire smoking method is misused, it will cause the body to be yellow, the urine will not pass, and the cough, spit, and blood will appear for a long time.

