古文：岳飞岳飞，字鹏举，相州汤阴人。
现代文：岳飞，字鹏举，相州汤阴人。
English: Yuefei, also known as Pengju, was from Tangyin, Xiangzhou.

古文：世力农。
现代文：祖上世代务农。
English: Our ancestors have been farming for generations.

古文：父和，能节食以济饥者。
现代文：父亲岳和，常能节衣缩食，接济困危。
English: His father, Yue He, was often able to cut back on food and clothing and help others in need.

古文：有耕侵其地，割而与之；贳其财者不责偿。
现代文：有人的庄稼侵入他的田地，收割之后归还别人；借贷其钱财者不要求别人偿还。
English: A man's crops invade his fields, and after they are harvested he returns them to others; he who lends his money and goods does not require repayment from others.

古文：飞生时，有大禽若鹄，飞鸣室上，因以为名。
现代文：岳飞出生时，有一大鸟如鲲鹏，从屋顶飞鸣而过，因此取名为岳飞。
English: When Yuefei was born, there was a big bird like a cormorant flying over the roof, so he was named Yuefei.

古文：未弥月，河决内黄，水暴至，母姚抱飞坐瓮中，冲涛及岸得免，人异之。
现代文：尚未满月，黄河在内黄一带决堤，大水突然冲来，母亲姚氏抱着岳飞坐在瓮中，被波涛冲到岸上才幸免于难，人们对此感到十分惊异。
English: Before the full moon, the Yellow River broke the dike in the Inner Yellow area, and the water suddenly rushed in. Mother Yao held Yuefei and sat in the raft. She was washed ashore by the waves and survived. People were very surprised.

古文：少负气节，沈厚寡言，家贫力学，尤好《左氏春秋》、孙吴兵法。
现代文：岳飞少年时便很有气节抱负，性情深沉淳厚，寡言少语，家庭贫寒而用心读书，尤其喜好《左氏春秋》、《孙吴兵法》等书。
English: When Yue Fei was a young boy, he was very ambitious, his temperament was deep and honest, he was taciturn, his family was poor, and he studied hard. He especially liked books such as "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" and "The Art of War of Sun Wu."

古文：生有神力，未冠，挽弓三百斤，弩八石，学射于周同，尽其术，能左右射。
现代文：生下来时就有很大力气，不到二十岁时，就能拉动三百斤的强弓，八石的劲弩。曾向周侗学习射箭，尽得周侗射箭技术，能够左右开弓。
English: When he was born, he had a lot of strength. When he was less than twenty years old, he was able to pull a three-hundred-pound strong bow, with a strength of eight stone. He had learned archery from Zhou Qi, and had mastered Zhou Qi's archery techniques, and was able to open the bow left and right.

古文：同死，朔望设祭于其冢。
现代文：周侗死后，每逢初一、十五日，都要设法买些祭品到周侗的坟上祭奠一番。
English: After Zhou Ye's death, on the first and fifteenth day of every lunar month, people should try to buy some offerings to pay tribute to Zhou Ye's grave.

古文：父义之，曰： 汝为时用，其徇国死义乎！ 
现代文：父亲对此十分赞许，说： 如果将来有一天报效国家，你能够成为为国捐躯的忠义之人吗？ 
English: My father was full of praise for this, saying: If one day in the future you serve your country, will you be able to become a loyal person who dies for the country?

古文：宣和四年，真定宣抚刘韐募敢战士，飞应募。
现代文：宣和四年，真定宣抚使刘韦合招募勇敢战士，岳飞前往应征入伍。
English: Four years after the proclamation of peace, Liu Weihe and Yuefei went to enlist in the army.

古文：相有剧贼陶俊、贾进和，飞请百骑灭之。
现代文：当时相州有一股以陶俊、贾进和为首的盗贼为祸甚烈，岳飞请求率领二百名士兵前去将其消灭。
English: At that time, there was a band of thieves headed by Tao Jun and Jia Jinhe in Sanzhou, which was a great calamity. Yue Fei asked him to lead 200 soldiers to eliminate them.

古文：遣卒伪为商入贼境，贼掠以充部伍。
现代文：先派部分士兵扮作商人进入盗贼活动区，被陶俊等俘去编入部伍。
English: First, some soldiers were sent to enter the thieves' activity area disguised as merchants, and were captured by Tao Jun and others to be incorporated into the club.

古文：飞遣百人伏山下，自领数十骑逼贼垒。
现代文：岳飞派遣其余的士兵埋伏在山下，自己亲自率领数十骑逼近敌人营垒挑战。
English: Yuefei sent the rest of the soldiers to lie in ambush at the foot of the mountain, and personally led dozens of horsemen to challenge the enemy camp.

古文：贼出战，飞阳北，贼来追之，伏兵起，先所遣卒擒俊及进和以归。
现代文：陶俊出兵应战，岳飞假装不敌引诱敌人，陶俊等果然随后紧追，山下伏兵突然杀出，先前被陶俊掳去的士兵也起而内应，遂将陶俊和贾进和活捉，凯旋而归。
English: Tao Jun sent troops to fight, Yue Fei pretended to be defeated and lured the enemy, Tao Jun and others followed closely afterwards, the mountain ambush suddenly came out, and the soldiers who had previously been captured by Tao Jun also responded, and then captured Tao Jun and Jia Jin He alive and returned triumphantly.

古文：康王至相，飞因刘浩见，命招贼吉倩，倩以众三百八十人降。补承信郎。
现代文：康王赵构至相州，岳飞通过刘浩进见，受命招讨游寇吉倩，吉倩率众三百八十人投降，因功被封为承信郎。
English: Kang Wang Zhaozhe went to Xiangzhou, and Yue Fei went through Liu Hao Jinjin, and was ordered to recruit the wandering bandit Jixuan. Jixuan led a total of 380 people to surrender, and was awarded the title of Chengxin Lang for his service.

古文：以铁骑三百往李固渡尝敌，败之。
现代文：率铁骑三百人前往李固渡诱敌，将金兵击败。
English: He led 300 cavalrymen to Li Guodu to lure the enemy and defeat the gold soldiers.

古文：从浩解东京围，与敌相持于滑南，领百骑习兵河上。
现代文：随从刘浩解东京开封之围，与金军相持于滑州南，率领一百名骑兵在结冰的河上演习。
English: Accompanied by Liu Hao, he solved the siege of Tokyo and Kaifeng, confronted the gold army in the south of Slanting, and led a hundred cavalry in exercises on the frozen river.

古文：敌猝至，飞麾其徒曰： 敌虽众，未知吾虚实，当及其未定击之。 乃独驰迎敌。
现代文：敌军突然而至，岳飞对部属说： 敌军虽然人数众多，但不知我军虚实，应当趁其立足未稳迅速出击。 于是独自策马向前迎敌。
English: The enemy suddenly arrived, and Yue Fei said to his subordinates: Although the enemy is numerous, they do not know the truth about our army, and they should take advantage of their unstable footing to quickly attack.

古文：有枭将舞刀而前，飞斩之，敌大败。
现代文：金有一猛将手舞大刀扑面而来，岳飞将其斩于马下，敌人大败而逃。
English: JinYu slammed his sword into YueFei's face. YueFei chopped him under the horse, and the enemy fled in defeat.

古文：迁秉义郎，隶留守宗泽。
现代文：岳飞因此迁为秉义郎，隶属于东京留守宗泽。
English: As a result, Yuefei was moved to the position of Bingyiro, and was subordinated to the Tokyo-based Sozawa.

古文：战开德、曹州皆有功，泽大奇之，曰： 尔勇智才艺，古良将不能过，然好野战，非万全计。 因授以阵图。
现代文：转战于开德、曹州，都立有战功，宗泽十分惊奇，说 ：你的勇敢机智和才能武艺，即使是古代的良将也不能超过，但你喜好野战，却不是万全之计。 因此将作战阵图传授给岳飞。
English: Having fought in Kade and Caozhou, both of which were distinguished war feats, Soze was very surprised and said, "Your brave wit and talent in martial arts cannot be surpassed even by the great generals of ancient times, but your fondness for field battles is not a panacea. Therefore, I will pass on the battle plan to Yuefei."

古文：飞曰： 阵而后战，兵法之常，运用之妙，存乎一心。 泽是其言。
现代文：岳飞说 ：摆好阵势再开战，这是用兵的一般法则；要把它运用得巧妙得当，全在于潜心思考，灵活多变。 
English: Yuefei said, "It is the general rule of using soldiers to set up a good position and then go to war. To use it skillfully and properly, it is all about thinking deeply and being flexible.

古文：康王即位，飞上书数千言，大略谓： 陛下已登大宝，社稷有主，已足伐敌之谋，而勤王之师日集，彼方谓吾素弱，宜乘其怠击之。
现代文：宗泽听后深感此话有理。康王赵构即位以后，岳飞上书数千言，大概意思是说： 陛下已登皇位，社稷有主，已经足以打破敌人奸谋，加上勤王的军队日益集中，而敌人以为我方素来软弱，应该乘金轻敌懈怠之时出兵击之。
English: After the enthronement of Kang Wang Zhaozhe, Yue Fei wrote thousands of words, probably meaning: His Majesty has ascended the throne, the society has a master, it is enough to break the enemy's treachery, coupled with the increasing concentration of the king's army, and the enemy thinks that we have always been weak and should take advantage of the enemy's slackness.

古文：黄潜善、汪伯彦辈不能承圣意恢复，奉车驾日益南，恐不足系中原之望。
现代文：黄潜善、汪伯彦之辈不能秉承陛下旨意，图谋恢复故土，而是劝陛下不断南逃，恐不能维系中原父老厚望。
English: Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Bohian could not uphold His Majesty's will and try to restore the motherland, but advised His Majesty to keep fleeing south, fearing that they would not be able to maintain the high hopes of the Central Plains fathers.

古文：臣愿陛下乘敌穴未固，亲率六军北渡，则将士作气，中原可复。 书闻，以越职夺官归。
现代文：臣希望陛下乘敌巢穴未固之机，率大军北渡，这样将士振奋，士气激昂，中原失地可一举恢复。 书上之后，以小臣越职言事，被剥夺官位，赶出军队。
English: The vassal hoped that his majesty would take the opportunity of the enemy's lair not being solidified and lead a large army to the north, so that the soldiers would be excited and morale would be high, and the Central Plains lost land could be restored at one stroke.

古文：诣河北招讨使张所，所待以国士，借补修武郎，充中军统领。
现代文：岳飞投奔河北招讨使张所，张所以国士之礼接待了他，补为修武郎，充任中军统领。
English: Yue Fei rushed to Zhang's office in Hebei Province to solicit recruits, and Zhang received him with the courtesy of a statesman, made him a tutor, and appointed him as the commander of the Chinese army.

古文：所问曰： 汝能敌几何？ 飞曰： 勇不足恃，用兵在先定谋，栾枝曳柴以败荆，莫敖采樵以致绞，皆谋定也。 所矍然曰： 君殆非行伍中人。 飞因说之曰： 国家都汴，恃河北以为固。
现代文：张所问道： 你能战过多少敌人？ 岳飞回答说： 勇敢并不能够依恃，用兵作战贵在先定好谋略，古代晋国栾枝用曳柴扬尘的方法战胜楚国，楚国莫敖用采樵之计打败绞国，都是先定谋略取胜的例子。 张所惊而叹道 ：君决非一般行伍中人可比。 岳飞于是劝说张所道 ：国家定都开封，凭恃河北才能稳固。
English: Zhang Zuo asked: How many enemies can you fight? Yue Fei replied: You can't rely on bravery, and it's important to have a good strategy before you fight with soldiers. In ancient times, the Jin Dynasty used the method of dragging firewood and dust to defeat the Chu Kingdom, and the Chu Kingdom used the method of picking straw to defeat the Ruan Kingdom, all of which are examples of a good strategy to win. Zhang Zuo was surprised and sighed: You are by no means comparable to ordinary people in the military. Yue Fei then persuaded Zhang Zuo: The country's fixed capital is Kaifeng, and it can only be stable if it is north

古文：苟冯据要冲，峙列重镇，一城受围，则诸城或挠或救，金人不能窥河南，而京师根本之地固矣。
现代文：如果占据要冲之地，重兵布列各军事重镇，一城受到敌人包围，则其他城池出兵或扰敌或救援，那么金军就不能窥视河南，而开封这一根本之地便能稳固了。
English: If they occupy the key areas, and concentrate their troops in the key military towns, and if one city is encircled by the enemy, while other cities send troops to disturb or rescue the enemy, then the Golden Army will not be able to peep into Henan, and Kaifeng, the fundamental place, will be stable.

古文：招抚诚能提兵压境，飞唯命是从。 所大喜，借补武经郎。
现代文：招抚使果能提兵压境，岳飞当唯命是从。 张所听罢大喜，即将岳飞补为武经郎。
English: Zhang was overjoyed to hear that Yuefei was to become a military strategist.

古文：命从王彦渡河，至新乡，金兵盛，彦不敢进。
现代文：张所命令岳飞随从王彦渡河，进至新乡时，金兵人多势众，王彦不敢前进。
English: Zhang ordered Yuefei to cross the river with Wang Yan, and when they entered Xinxiang, the gold soldiers were so numerous that Wang Yan did not dare to advance.

古文：飞独引所部鏖战，夺其纛而舞，诸军争奋，遂拔新乡。
现代文：岳飞独自率领所部与敌鏖战，夺过敌人大旗挥舞鼓励士气，属下将士人人奋勇争先，遂攻拔新乡。
English: Yuefei single-handedly led the headquarters to battle with the enemy, captured the enemy's banner and waved it to encourage morale. His subordinates all fought bravely for the lead, and then attacked Xinxiang.

古文：翌日，战侯兆川，身被十余创，士皆死战，又败之。
现代文：次日，岳飞又与金军战于侯兆川，身受创伤十多处，士卒也都拼力死战，又将金兵击败。
English: The next day, Yuefei fought again with the Golden Army in Hou Zhaochuan, suffering more than ten wounds. The soldiers also fought to the death, and defeated the Golden Army.

古文：夜屯石门山下，或传金兵复至，一军皆惊，飞坚卧不动，金兵卒不来。
现代文：夜晚驻扎在石门山下，有人传言金兵卷土重来，全军都惊恐不安，岳飞镇定自若，坚卧不动，金兵最终并没前来。
English: At night, he was stationed at the foot of Shimen Mountain. There were rumors that the Golden Soldier had made a comeback. The entire army was alarmed and uneasy. Yue Fei remained calm and motionless. The Golden Soldier did not come after all.

古文：食尽，走彦壁乞粮，彦不许。
现代文：粮饷用尽后，岳飞到王彦处乞求拨给粮饷，王彦没有答允。
English: After the grain basket was exhausted, Yuefei went to Wang Yan to beg for the allocation of grain baskets, but Wang Yan did not agree.

古文：飞引兵益北，战于太行山，擒金将拓跋耶乌。
现代文：岳飞率兵北进，同金军战于太行山，俘虏金将拓跋耶乌。
English: Yuefei led his soldiers northward, fought with the Jin army in Taihang Mountain, and captured the Jin general Tuoba Yewu.

古文：居数日，复遇敌，飞单骑持丈八铁枪，刺杀黑风大王，敌众败走。
现代文：驻扎数日后，又同敌人遭遇，岳飞单人独骑手持丈八铁枪，刺死金将黑风大王，敌众大败而逃。
English: After being stationed for a few days, he encountered the enemy again. Yue Fei, a single rider holding a long eight-iron gun, stabbed the King of the Black Wind to death, and the enemy fled in defeat.

古文：飞自知与彦有隙，复归宗泽，为留守司统制。
现代文：岳飞自知与王彦不和，转而投归宗泽，任留守司统制。
English: Yuefei knew from his own knowledge that he could not get along with Wang Yan, so he turned to Munezawa and stayed on as the head of the imperial court.

古文：泽卒，杜充代之，飞居故职。
现代文：宗泽去世后，杜充接任东京留守，岳飞仍任旧职。
English: After Sozawa's death, Dudong took over his position in Tokyo, while Yuefei remained in his old position.

古文：二年，战胙城，又战黑龙潭，皆大捷。
现代文：建炎二年，岳飞先与金军战于胙城，又战于黑龙潭，都获得大胜。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, Yue Feixian fought against the Chinese army in Lucheng, and also fought in Heilongtan, and won a great victory.

古文：从闾勍保护陵寝，大战汜水关，射殪金将，大破其众。
现代文：随从闾京力保护宋皇陵，与金大战汜水关，射杀金将，大败其众。
English: He followed the Qing forces to protect the Song Emperor's mausoleum, and fought against the Jin forces in the Battle of Zhishuiguan, shooting the Jin general and defeating all of them.

古文：驻军竹芦渡，与敌相持，选精锐三百伏前山下，令各以薪刍交缚两束，夜半，爇四端而举之。
现代文：率部驻扎竹芦渡时，与金军相持下不，岳飞选择精锐三百人埋伏在前面山下，命令每人将两束薪草交叉绑缚起来，等到夜半时分，点燃四端将其举起。
English: When Yuefei's headquarters was stationed in Zhu Ludu, Yuefei chose three hundred elite men to lie in ambush at the foot of the mountain in front of him. He ordered each man to cross-tie two bundles of firewood and grass, wait until midnight, and light the four ends to lift them up.

古文：金人疑援兵至，惊溃。
现代文：金军怀疑宋援兵赶到，大惊而溃散。
English: Suspecting that Song's reinforcements had arrived, the Chinese army panicked and scattered.

古文：三年，贼王善、曹成、孔彦舟等合众五十万，薄南薰门。
现代文：建炎三年，寇贼王善、曹成、孔彦舟等人集众五十万人，进攻南薰门。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, the bandits Wang Zhen, Cao Cheng, Kong Yanzhou and others gathered a total of half a million people to attack Nanhuangmen.

古文：飞所部仅八百，众惧不敌，飞曰： 吾为诸君破之。 左挟弓，右运矛，横冲其阵，贼乱，大败之。
现代文：岳飞所部人马仅有八百，众人都恐惧难以抵挡，岳飞说： 我可以为诸位击败敌人。 于是左手挟弓，右手运矛，横冲敌阵，敌人大乱，大败而散。
English: Yuefei said, "I can defeat the enemy for all of you," because there were only 800 people in the Yuefei Research Institute, and everyone was too afraid to resist, so he carried a bow in his left hand and a spear in his right hand, and stormed the enemy's lines.

古文：又擒贼杜叔五、孙海于东明。借补英州刺史。
现代文：又在东明活捉贼首杜叔五、孙海。借补为英州刺史。
English: In addition, the thief leaders Du Shugu and Sun Hai were captured alive in Dongming. The loan supplement is the history of Yingzhou.

古文：王善围陈州，飞战于清河，擒其将孙胜、孙清，授真刺史。
现代文：王善围攻陈州，岳飞与其战于清河，擒获其将领孙胜、孙清，被授予真州刺史。
English: Wang Zhen besieged Chenzhou, Yuefei fought with him in Qinghe, captured his generals Sun Sheng and Sun Qing, and was awarded the Zhenzhou Medal of Honor.

古文：杜充将还建康，飞曰： 中原地尺寸不可弃，今一举足，此地非我有，他日欲复取之，非数十万众不可。 充不听，遂与俱归。
现代文：杜充准备率军南撤建康，岳飞说： 中原之地尺寸不能遗弃，今天部队一移动，这些地方就会被金军占领，将来要想收复，没有数十万军队难以办到。 杜充不听，岳飞无奈只好随军南归。
English: Du Chong prepared to lead the army south to withdraw Jiankang, Yue Fei said: the size of the Central Plains cannot be abandoned. Today, as soon as the troops move, these places will be occupied by the gold army. In the future, if you want to recover, it is difficult to do without hundreds of thousands of troops. Du Chong did not listen, Yue Fei had no choice but to return south with the army.

古文：师次铁路步，遇贼张用，至六合遇李成，与战，皆败之。
现代文：军队行至铁路步时，遇到贼张用部，至六合又遇李成，岳飞与之交战，都取得了胜利。
English: When the army marched to the railway, they encountered the thief Zhang Yibe, and when they reached Lihe, they encountered Li Cheng, and Yuefei fought with him, and both won victory.

古文：成遣轻骑劫宪臣犒军银帛，飞进兵掩击之，成奔江西。
现代文：李成遣精兵轻骑劫夺朝廷犒军财物，岳飞进兵掩击，李成逃往江西。
English: Li Cheng sent his elite soldiers on horseback to rob the property of the imperial court troops, Yue Fei entered the army to cover the attack, and Li Cheng fled to Jiangxi.

古文：时命充守建康，金人与成合寇乌江，充闭门不出。飞泣谏请视师，充竟不出。
现代文：这时朝廷命令杜充守卫建康，金军与李成合军进攻乌江，杜充闭门不出，岳飞哭谏着请求他视察军队，杜充依然不出。
English: At this time, the imperial court ordered Du Cheng to guard Jiankang, the Jin army and the Li Chenghe army attacked Wujiang, Du Cheng closed the door and did not leave, Yue Fei cried and begged him to inspect the army, Du Cheng still did not leave.

古文：金人遂由马家渡渡江，充遣飞等迎战，王〈王燮〉先遁，诸将皆溃，独飞力战。
现代文：金军于是由马家渡渡江，杜充派岳飞等迎战，王王燮未战先逃，其他将领也都随之溃散，只有岳飞一人独自苦战。
English: The gold army was then led by Ma Jia to cross the river, Du Chong sent Yue Fei to meet the battle, Wang Wang Yao fled before the battle, other generals also broke up, and only Yue Fei fought alone.

古文：会充已降金，诸将多行剽掠，惟飞军秋毫无所犯。
现代文：适逢杜充叛变降金之后，诸位将领多怂恿部下剽窃掠夺，只有岳飞所部秋毫无犯。
English: After the fall of the Duchong Rebellion, many generals' subordinates plundered and pillaged, but only Yuefei's subordinates committed no crimes.

古文：兀术趋杭州，飞要击至广德境中，六战皆捷，擒其将王权，俘签军首领四十余。
现代文：兀向杭州进军，岳飞率部在广德境内截击，六战皆胜，擒获金将王权，俘虏金军首领四十多人。
English: He marched to Hangzhou, and Yuefei led his troops to intercept the attack in the territory of Guangde. They won all six battles, captured the kingship of the Jin generals, and captured more than forty leaders of the Jin army.

古文：察其可用者，结以恩遣还，令夜斫营纵火，飞乘乱纵击，大败之。
现代文：岳飞考察其中可以利用的人，用恩惠结交然后将他们遣回金军，让他们在夜间攻打敌营纵火焚烧，岳飞乘乱直击，大败金军。
English: Yuefei examined those who could be used, made friends with favor and then sent them back to the Chinese army, let them attack the enemy camp at night and set it on fire, Yuefei took advantage of the random direct hit and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：驻军钟村，军无见粮，将士忍饥，不敢扰民。
现代文：驻军钟村时，军中没有粮饷，将士忍饥挨饿，但不敢骚扰百姓。
English: When the army was stationed in Zhongcun, there was no food in the army, and the soldiers were starving, but they did not dare to harass the people.

古文：金所籍兵相谓曰： 此岳爷爷军。 争来降附。
现代文：金朝所征集的汉族士兵互相传告 ：这是岳爷爷的军队。 因此争相前来投降归附。
English: The Han soldiers recruited by the Kim dynasty told each other: This is Grandpa Yue's army, so they rushed to surrender.

古文：四年，兀术攻常州，宜兴令迎飞移屯焉。
现代文：建炎四年，金兀进攻常州，宜兴县令迎接岳飞部移屯境内。
English: In the fourth year of Jianyan, Jinyu attacked Changzhou, and Yixing County issued an order to welcome Yuefeib to the territory.

古文：盗郭吉闻飞来，遁入湖，飞遣王贵、傅庆追破之，又遣辩士马皋、林聚尽降其众。
现代文：盗贼郭吉听说岳飞前来，逃入太湖之中，岳飞派遣王贵、傅庆追击打败他们，又派能言善辩的马皋、林聚前去劝说他们全部投降。
English: The thief Guo Ji heard that Yue Fei was coming and fled into the Taihu Lake. Yue Fei sent Wang Gui and Fu Qing to chase and defeat them, and sent Ma Jun and Lin Ju, who could speak well, to persuade them all to surrender.

古文：有张威武者不从，飞单骑入其营，斩之。
现代文：有一位名叫张威武的不肯降附，岳飞单人独骑冲入他的营寨，将他斩首。
English: There was a man named Zhang Weiwu who refused to surrender. Yuefei single-handedly rode into his camp and beheaded him.

古文：避地者赖以免，图飞像祠之。
现代文：避乱到此地的百姓得以幸免盗贼祸患，因此画出岳飞像而供奉起来。
English: The people who evacuated to this place were able to avoid the scourge of thieves, so they painted a Yuefei statue and offered it up.

古文：金人再攻常州，飞四战皆捷；尾袭于镇江东，又捷；战于清水亭，又大捷，横尸十五里。
现代文：金军再次进攻常州，岳飞四战皆胜；尾随追击金军到镇江东，又获得胜利；战于清水亭，又获得大胜，金军横尸遍布十五里。
English: The gold army attacked Changzhou again, and Yuefei won all four battles; followed and chased the gold army to the east of Zhenjiang River, and won again; fought in Qingshui Pavilion, and won again, and the gold army's corpses were all over fifteen miles.

古文：兀术趋建康，飞设伏牛头山待之。
现代文：兀军趋向建康，岳飞在牛头山下预设埋伏等待敌人。
English: The Han army was moving towards Jiankang, and Yuefei was waiting for the enemy in a pre-arranged ambush at the foot of Niu Tou Mountain.

古文：夜，令百人黑衣混金营中扰之，金兵惊，自相攻击。
现代文：夜里，命令一百名士兵穿着黑色衣服混入金营袭扰，金兵惊慌失措，自相攻击残杀。
English: In the night, he ordered a hundred soldiers dressed in black to attack the gold camp. The gold soldiers panicked and attacked and killed each other.

古文：兀术次龙湾，飞以骑三百、步兵二千驰至新城，大破之。
现代文：兀军驻扎在龙湾，岳飞率骑兵三百、步兵二千赶至新城，大破金军。
English: The Shan army was stationed in Longwan, and Yuefei, with three hundred cavalry and two thousand infantry, rushed to Xincheng and defeated the Jin army.

古文：兀术奔淮西，遂复建康。
现代文：兀逃奔到淮西，岳飞于是收复建康。
English: Zou fled to Huaxi, and Yuefei was restored to health.

古文：飞奏： 建康为要害之地，宜选兵固守，仍益兵守淮，拱护腹心。 帝嘉纳。
现代文：岳飞上奏说 ：建康是要害之地，应选派军队固守，还必须增兵守卫淮河，以保护心腹地区。 被皇帝嘉许采纳。
English: Yuefei Shangsoo said: Jiankang is a critical place, it is necessary to send troops to defend it, and it is also necessary to increase the number of troops to guard the Huaihe River to protect the heartland.

古文：兀术归，飞邀击于静安，败之。
现代文：兀率军北撤，岳飞邀击于静安，将金兵打败。
English: Xing led his army northward, and Yuefei invited him to attack Jing'an, and defeated the Jin soldiers.

古文：诏讨戚方，飞以三千人营于苦岭。
现代文：朝廷诏令讨伐戚方，岳飞率三千人在苦岭安营扎寨。
English: The imperial court issued a decree to crack down on the relatives, and Yuefei's three thousand people set up camp in Quling.

古文：方遁，俄益兵来，飞自领兵千人，战数十合，皆捷。
现代文：戚方逃遁，不久又增加兵力卷土重来，岳飞亲自率兵一千人，与戚方激战数十次，都获得了胜利。
English: His relatives fled, but soon they came back with more troops. Yue Fei personally led a thousand soldiers and fought with his relatives dozens of times, all of which were victorious.

古文：会张俊兵至，方遂降。
现代文：适逢张俊军队来到，戚方于是投降。
English: When Zhang Jun's army arrived, the relatives surrendered.

古文：范宗尹言张俊自浙西来，盛称飞可用，迁通、泰镇抚使兼知泰州。
现代文：范宗尹说张俊从浙西来，盛赞岳飞可用，朝廷因此将岳飞擢升为通、泰镇抚使兼知泰州。
English: Fan Zongyin said that Zhang Jun came from the west of Zhejiang and praised Yuefei. Therefore, the imperial court promoted Yuefei to Tong, Taizhen Fuzhi and Taizhou.

古文：飞辞，乞淮南东路一重难任使，收复本路州郡，乘机渐进，使山东、河北、河东、京畿等路次第而复。
现代文：岳飞辞谢，请求担承淮南东路一重要而艰难的职务，收复本路所辖州郡，然后伺机北进，渐次收复山东、河北、河东、京畿等路沦陷地区。
English: Yue Fei thanked him and asked him to assume an important and difficult position of Huainan East Road, recover the counties and prefectures under the jurisdiction of this road, and then wait for the opportunity to go north and gradually recover the areas in Shandong, Hebei, Hedong, and Gyeonggi.

古文：会金攻楚急，诏张俊援之。
现代文：恰逢金军加紧进攻楚州，形势十分危急，朝廷令张俊率部增援。
English: At the same time, the Chinese army stepped up its attack on Chuzhou, the situation was very critical, and the imperial court ordered Zhang Jun to lead reinforcements.

古文：俊辞，乃遣飞行，而命刘光世出兵援飞。
现代文：张俊推辞不去，朝廷于是派遣岳飞前去，同时命令刘光世出兵随后支援岳飞。
English: Zhang Jun refused to go, so the imperial court sent Yuefei ahead, and ordered Liu Guangxi to send troops to support Yuefei.

古文：飞屯三墩为楚援，寻抵承州，三战三捷，杀高太保，俘酋长七十余人。
现代文：岳飞部驻扎在三敦土作为楚州援兵，不久进抵承州，三战三胜，杀死敌将高太保，俘虏敌军首领七十多人。
English: Yuefei's unit was stationed in Sanduntu as reinforcements for Chuzhou, and soon advanced against Chengzhou, winning three battles and three victories, killing the enemy general Gao Taibo, and capturing more than seventy enemy leaders.

古文：光世等皆不敢前，飞师孤力寡，楚遂陷。
现代文：刘光世等都惧敌不敢前进，岳飞势单力小，楚州终于被金军攻陷。
English: Liu Guangshi and others were afraid of the enemy and did not dare to advance, Yuefei's single force was small, and Chuzhou was finally conquered by the Golden Army.

古文：诏飞还守通、泰，有旨可守即守，如不可，但以沙洲保护百姓，伺便掩击。
现代文：诏令岳飞回军守卫通、泰，并言明能守就守，如守不住，便在沙州保护百姓撤退，伺机掩击敌人。
English: Zhao ordered Yue to fly back to the army to guard Tongtong and Tai, and said that if he could keep it, he would keep it. If he could not keep it, he would protect the people in Shazhou and retreat, waiting for an opportunity to cover the enemy.

古文：飞以泰无险可恃，退保柴墟，战于南霸桥，金大败。
现代文：岳飞认为泰州一带无险阻可以依恃，遂退保柴墟，同金军在南霸桥展开激战，大败金军。
English: Yuefei thought that there was no danger in the Taizhou area, so he withdrew to the Chai Market and fought a fierce battle with the Jin Army at Nanba Bridge, defeating the Jin Army.

古文：渡百姓于沙上，飞以精骑二百殿，金兵不敢近。
现代文：在沙州护卫百姓渡江，岳飞率领二百名精锐骑兵殿后，金军不敢逼近。
English: After escorting the people to cross the river in Shazhou, Yuefei led 200 elite cavalrymen to the palace, and the Golden Army did not dare to approach.

古文：飞以泰州失守待罪。
现代文：岳飞因泰州失守请求朝廷处分。
English: Yuefei lost control of Taizhou and petitioned the imperial court for punishment.

古文：绍兴元年，张俊请飞同讨李成。
现代文：绍兴元年，张俊请让岳飞一同前去讨伐李成。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, Zhang Jun asked Yuefei to go with him to fight Li Cheng.

古文：时成将马进犯洪州，连营西山。
现代文：当时李成部将马进侵犯洪州，在西山一带连营结寨。
English: At that time, Li Chengbu invaded Hongzhou with Majin and built a camp in the Xishan area.

古文：飞曰： 贼贪而不虑后，若以骑兵自上流绝生米渡，出其不意，破之必矣。 飞请自为先锋，俊大喜。
现代文：岳飞说： 敌人贪图立功而不顾后路，如果用骑兵从上流生米渡处过江，出其不意从后面发起攻击，必然能够击败敌人。 岳飞请求由自己亲自担任先锋，张俊大喜。
English: Yuefei said: "The enemy is greedy for exploits and does not care about the way back. If cavalry is used to cross the river from the upper stream, and unexpectedly attack from behind, it will inevitably defeat the enemy. Yuefei asked himself to be the vanguard, Zhang Jun was very happy.

古文：飞重铠跃马，潜出贼右，突其阵，所部从之。
现代文：岳飞身披重甲骑着战马，悄然出现在敌军右翼，突入敌阵之中，所部随之跟进攻击。
English: Yue Fei, wearing heavy armor and riding a warhorse, quietly appeared on the enemy's right flank, burst into the enemy's line, and the headquarters followed up the attack.

古文：进大败，走筠州。
现代文：马进大败，逃往筠州。
English: Ma Jin suffered a crushing defeat and fled to Ganzhou.

古文：飞抵城东，贼出城，布阵十五里，飞设伏，以红罗为帜，上刺 岳 字，选骑二百随帜而前。
现代文：岳飞追击抵达城东，贼众出城，布阵连绵长达十五里，岳飞设置伏兵，以红色绸缎做旗帜，上绣 岳 字，挑选二百名骑兵跟随旗帜前进。
English: Yuefei's pursuit reached the east of the city, the thieves left the city, and the battle line stretched for fifteen miles. Yuefei set up an ambush, made a flag with red satin, embroidered the word "Yue" on it, and selected two hundred cavalry to follow the flag.

古文：贼易其少，薄之，伏发，贼败走。
现代文：敌人认为岳飞兵少可欺，向其发动进攻，预先埋伏的军队突然杀出，敌人大败而逃。
English: The enemy thought that the Yuefei soldiers were too few to be deceived, and launched an attack on them. The ambushed troops suddenly came out, and the enemy was defeated and fled.

古文：飞使人呼曰： 不从贼者坐，吾不汝杀。 坐而降者八万余人。
现代文：岳飞令人大声呼喊 ：不愿追随贼寇者坐下，我们不杀害你们。 于是坐下投降的贼众达到八万多人。
English: Yuefei made people shout loudly: "If you don't want to sit down with the bandits, we won't kill you," and the bandits who sat down and surrendered reached more than 80,000 people.

古文：进以余卒奔成于南康。
现代文：马进率领残兵到南康投奔李成。
English: Ma Jin led the remnants to Nankang to join Li Cheng.

古文：飞夜引兵至朱家山，又斩其将赵万。
现代文：岳飞于夜里领军至朱家山，又斩杀其将领赵万。
English: Yuefei led the army to Zhujiashan in the night, and killed his general Zhao Wan.

古文：成闻进败，自引兵十余万来。
现代文：李成听到马进失败的消息，亲自率领十多万的人马赶来。
English: When Li Cheng heard the news of the failure of Majin, he personally led more than one hundred thousand people to come.

古文：飞与遇于楼子庄，大破成军，追斩进。
现代文：岳飞与李成在楼子庄遭遇，大破李成军队，追击斩杀马进。
English: Yue Fei encountered Li Cheng in Louzizhuang, defeated Li Cheng's army, and chased and killed Ma Jin.

古文：成走蕲州，降伪齐。
现代文：李成败走到蕲州，投降了伪齐政权。
English: Li Chengfei went to Zhangzhou and surrendered to the pseudo-Qi regime.

古文：张用寇江西，用亦相人，飞以书谕之曰： 吾与汝同里，南薰门、铁路步之战，皆汝所悉。
现代文：张用侵犯江西，张用也是相州人，与岳飞是同乡，岳飞写信劝告他说： 我和你是同乡，以前的南薰门、铁路步之战，都是你所了解的。
English: Zhang Ying invaded Jiangxi, Zhang Ying is also a resident of Xiangzhou, and is a fellow villager of Yue Fei. Yue Fei wrote to him to advise him: I am a fellow villager with you. You know about the previous Nanhuangmen and the battle of the railway.

古文：今吾在此，欲战则出，不战则降。 用得书曰： 果吾父也。 遂降。
现代文：今天我在这里，你如果准备决一死战就请出来，不战就请投降。 张用接到岳飞的信后说 ：果真是我的再生父母。 于是率众投降。
English: Today I am here, if you are ready to fight to the death, please come out, if you are not ready to fight, please surrender. After receiving Yuefei's letter, Zhang Ye said, "You are indeed my reincarnated parents," and led the crowd to surrender.

古文：江、淮平，俊奏飞功第一，加神武右军副统制，留洪州，弹压盗贼，授亲卫大夫、建州观察使。
现代文：江、淮平定之后，张俊奏报岳飞战功第一，朝廷封岳飞为神武右军副统制，留守洪州，镇压境内盗贼，授予他亲卫大夫、建州观察使官衔。
English: After Jiang and Huai were subdued, Zhang Junsong reported that Yuefei's war exploits were the best. The imperial court designated Yuefei as the deputy commander of the Shenwu Right Army. He stayed in Hongzhou to suppress domestic thieves and was awarded the official title of personal bodyguard and Jianzhou observation envoy.

古文：建寇范汝为陷邵武，江西安抚李回檄飞分兵保建昌军及抚州，飞遣人以 岳 字帜植城门，贼望见，相戒勿犯。
现代文：建州贼寇范汝为攻陷邵武，江西安抚使李回急告岳飞分兵保卫建昌军及抚州，岳飞派人将 岳 字旗插在城门上，贼众望见，互相告诫不要侵犯。
English: In order to invade Shaowu, Fan Ru, the robber of Jianzhou, and Li Hui, the pacifier of Jiangxi, sent an urgent message to Yuefei's detachment to defend Jianchang's army and Fuzhou. Yuefei sent a person to put the "Yue" flag on the city gate. The robbers looked at each other and warned each other not to encroach.

古文：贼党姚达、饶青逼建昌，飞遣王万、徐庆讨擒之。
现代文：贼寇同党姚达、饶青逼近建昌，岳飞派遣王万、徐庆率兵讨伐并将他们擒获。
English: Yao Da and Rao Qing, thieves and bandits with the Party, approached Jianchang. Yuefei sent Wang Wan and Xu Qing to fight them and captured them.

古文：升神武副军都统制。
现代文：因功升为神武副军都统制。
English: He was promoted to vice-commander of the Jinwu army for his merits.

古文：二年，贼曹成拥众十余万，由江西历湖湘，据道、贺二州。
现代文：绍兴二年，贼寇曹成率领部众十余万人，从江西经湖湘，占据道、贺两州。
English: In the second year of Shaoxing, the thief Cao Cheng led more than 100,000 people from Jiangxi to Hunan, occupying the two states of Dao and He.

古文：命飞权知潭州，兼权荆湖东路安抚都总管，付金字牌、黄旗招成。
现代文：朝廷命岳飞权知潭州，兼权荆湖东路安抚都总管，付给他金字牌、黄旗招安曹成。
English: The imperial court gave Yuefei the right to govern Zhitanzhou and the concurrent right to be the head of the East Jinghu Road Pacifying Capital, and gave him a gold nameplate and a yellow flag to recruit An Cao Cheng.

古文：成闻飞将至，惊曰： 岳家军来矣。 即分道而遁。
现代文：曹成听说岳飞将到，惊呼： 岳家军到了。 即刻分路逃跑。
English: Cao Cheng heard that Yuefei was about to arrive and exclaimed, "Yuefei's army has arrived.

古文：飞至茶陵，奉诏招之，成不从。
现代文：岳飞至茶陵，奉诏招安曹成，曹成拒不归降。
English: Yuefei flew to the tea mausoleum and summoned Cao Cheng. Cao Cheng refused to surrender.

古文：飞奏： 比年多命招安，故盗力强则肆暴，力屈则就招，苟不略加剿除，蜂起之众未可遽殄。 许之。
现代文：岳飞上奏 ：近年来多次下命招安，因此盗贼力量强大时便恣行暴虐，力量弱小时就接受招安，如果不加以剿灭铲除，蜂拥而起的盗贼就不可能迅速消灭。 
English: Yuefei: In recent years, there have been many orders to recruit security guards. As a result, when the thieves are strong, they will arbitrarily commit violence. When they are weak, they will accept the recruitment of security guards. If they are not eliminated, the swarming thieves cannot be quickly eliminated.

古文：飞入贺州境，得成谍者，缚之帐下。
现代文：岳飞走出营帐分配粮草，有关官员报告说： 粮食已用尽，怎么办？ 岳飞假装说 ：暂返军茶陵。 
English: Yuefei went out of the camp to distribute grain and grass, and the relevant officials reported: The grain has been exhausted, what should we do? Yuefei pretended to say: temporarily return to the military tea house.

古文：飞出帐调兵食，吏曰： 粮尽矣，奈何？ 飞阳曰： 姑反茶陵。 已而顾谍若失意状，顿足而入，阴令逸之。谍归告成，成大喜，期翌日来追。
现代文：随即回头看到间谍，又装出因泄露机密而懊丧的神态，跺脚进入营帐，暗地里下令让间谍逃走。间谍回去告诉曹成，曹成闻讯大喜，约定第二天追击岳飞。
English: Then he looked back to see the spy, and pretended to be upset because of the leaking of secrets, stomped into the camp, and secretly ordered the spy to escape. The spy went back to tell Cao Cheng, Cao Cheng was very happy to hear the news, and agreed to chase Yue Fei the next day.

古文：飞命士蓐食，潜趋绕岭，未明，已至太平场，破其砦。
现代文：岳飞下令士兵早起吃饭，然后悄悄绕岭急行，天色未明，已到太平场，攻破曹成营寨。
English: Yuefei ordered the soldiers to get up early to eat, and then quietly rushed around the ridge. Before dawn, they arrived at the morgue and broke through Cao Cheng's camp.

古文：成据险拒飞，飞麾兵掩击，贼大溃。
现代文：曹成依托险阻抵御岳飞军进攻，岳飞指挥军队掩击，敌人大败溃逃。
English: Cao Cheng relied on dangerous obstacles to resist the attack of Yue Fei's army, Yue Fei commanded the army to cover the attack, and the enemy was defeated and fled.

古文：成走据北藏岭、上梧关，遣将迎战，飞不阵而鼓，士争奋，夺二隘据之。
现代文：曹成逃到北藏岭、上梧关一带盘踞，派将迎战岳飞，岳飞不待他摆好阵势就击鼓出击，士兵人人奋勇争先，夺占两个关隘。
English: Cao Cheng fled to North Tibet Ridge, Shangwuguan and the surrounding areas were entrenched. The faction would fight against Yuefei. Yuefei did not wait for him to set up a good position and beat the drums to attack. The soldiers all fought bravely to seize the two passes.

古文：成又自桂岭置砦至北藏岭，连控隘道，亲以众十余万守蓬头岭。
现代文：曹成又从桂岭设寨一直到北藏岭，接连控制隘要通道，亲自率领十多万人守卫蓬头岭。
English: Cao Cheng also set up villages from Guiling to Beizangling, successively controlled the narrow passage, and personally led more than one hundred thousand people to guard Pontoon Ridge.

古文：飞部才八千，一鼓登岭，破其众，成奔连州。
现代文：岳飞部仅有八千人，一鼓作气登上山岭，大破曹成大军。曹成逃到连州。
English: There were only eight thousand people in the Yuefei Division, and they went up the mountain with great energy to defeat Cao Cheng's large army. Cao Cheng fled to Lianzhou.

古文：飞谓张宪等曰： 成党散去，追而杀之，则胁从者可悯，纵之则复聚为盗。
现代文：岳飞对张宪等人说： 曹成同伙已经溃散，追上去杀死他们，那么许多胁从者又让人怜悯，放走他们，又会重新聚集起来成为盗贼。
English: Yuefei said to Zhang Xian and others: Cao Chengdu's comrades have already broken up, chase them and kill them, so many followers are pitiful, let them go, and they will re-gather to become thieves.

古文：今遣若等诛其酋而抚其众，慎勿妄杀，累主上保民之仁。 于是宪自贺、连，徐庆自邵、道，王贵自郴、桂，招降者二万，与飞会连州。
现代文：现在派遣你们去诛杀他们的首领而招抚他们的部众，小心不要妄加杀戮，使皇上爱护百姓的仁德受到损害。 于是张宪自贺州、连州，徐庆自邵州、道州，王贵自郴州、桂州，招降曹成部下二万人，与岳飞在连州会合。
English: Now send you to fight and kill their chiefs and win over their subordinates, but be careful not to kill indiscriminately, so that the emperor's benevolence to protect the people is damaged. So Zhang Xian from Hezhou and Lianzhou, Xu Qing from Shaozhou and Daozhou, Wang Gui from Zhangzhou and Guizhou, recruited 20,000 of Cao Cheng's subordinates and met with Yue Fei in Lianzhou.

古文：进兵追成，成走宣抚司降。
现代文：进军追击曹成，曹成逃到宣抚司投降。
English: The army pursued Cao Cheng, and Cao Cheng fled to the Propaganda Department to surrender.

古文：时以盛夏行师瘴地，抚循有方，士无一人死疠者，岭表平。授武安军承宣使，屯江州。
现代文：当时于盛夏季节在有瘴气的地区行师用兵，由于岳飞管理有方，士卒没有一人死于瘟疫。岭表平定，被授予武安军承宣使，屯驻江州。
English: At that time, in the midsummer season, Yue Fei sent soldiers to fight in areas where there was radon gas. Due to Yue Fei's good management, none of the soldiers died of the plague. Ling tabo was pacified, and he was awarded the title of Wu'an Army's successor envoy and stationed in Jiangzhou.

古文：甫入境，安抚李回檄飞捕剧贼马友、郝通、刘忠、李通、李宗亮、张式，皆平之。
现代文：刚刚入境，安抚使李回命令岳飞捕拿大贼马友、郝通、刘忠、李通、李宗亮、张式，岳飞都一一平定。
English: Having just entered the country, Li Hui, the pacifying envoy, ordered Yue Fei to capture the great thieves Ma You, Yan Tong, Liu Zhong, Li Tong, Li Zongliang, and Zhang Shih, and Yue Fei had them all subdued.

古文：三年春，召赴行在。
现代文：绍兴三年春天，朝廷召岳飞前往行在杭州。
English: In the spring of the third year of Shaoxing, the imperial court summoned Yuefei to travel to Hangzhou.

古文：江西宣谕刘大中奏： 飞兵有纪律，人恃以安，今赴行在，恐盗复起。 不果行。
现代文：江西宣谕刘大中上奏说 ：岳飞的部队军纪严明，当地百姓依赖他们得到安宁，现在赶往行在，恐怕盗贼会死灰复燃。 
English: Jiangxi Xuan Zhu Liu, a junior high school student, said: Yuefei's troops have strict military discipline, the local people rely on them to get peace, and now they are rushing to travel, I am afraid that the thieves will revive.

古文：时虔、吉盗连兵寇掠循、梅、广、惠、英、韶、南雄、南安、建昌、汀、邵武诸郡，帝乃专命飞平之。
现代文：因此岳飞没有成行。当时虔、吉州盗贼联兵寇掠循、梅、广、惠、英、韶、南雄、南安、建昌、汀、邵武等州郡，皇帝专门下令让岳飞前去平定。
English: Therefore, Yuefei did not march. At that time, Qian and Jizhou thieves jointly raided and plundered counties such as Mei, Guang, Hui, Ying, Handan, Nanxiong, Nan'an, Jianchang, Ting, and Shaowu. The emperor specifically ordered Yuefei to go ahead and subdue them.

古文：飞至虔州，固石洞贼彭友悉众至雩都迎战，跃马驰突，飞麾兵即马上擒之，余酋退保固石洞。
现代文：岳飞到虔州，固石洞贼寇彭友率领全部人马至雩都迎战，他本人跃马直冲宋军，岳飞指挥士兵在马上把他擒获，其余的贼寇首领退保固石洞。
English: Yuefei flew to Qianzhou, Guishidong bandit Pengyou led all the men and horses to fight, he himself jumped straight into the Song Army, Yuefei commanded the soldiers to capture him immediately, and the rest of the bandit leaders retreated to Guishidong.

古文：洞高峻环水，止一径可入。
现代文：固石洞地势险峻四周有水环绕，只有一条小路可供往来出入。
English: The steep terrain of Gushi Cave is surrounded by water on all sides, and there is only one small road for travel to and from the cave.

古文：飞列骑山下，令皆持满，黎明，遣死士疾驰登山，贼众乱，弃山而下，骑兵围之。
现代文：岳飞将骑兵在山下列阵，命令他们都拉满弓弦，待到黎明时分，派出敢死队迅速出击登上山顶，敌众大乱，放弃山头四下逃散，被岳飞的骑兵紧紧包围。
English: Yuefei lined up the cavalry under the mountain, ordered them all to pull the bowstring, stay until dawn, sent a death squad to quickly attack the top of the mountain, the enemy was in chaos, abandoned the top of the mountain and fled in all directions, tightly surrounded by Yuefei's cavalry.

古文：贼呼丐命，飞令勿杀，受其降。
现代文：贼众呼喊乞求饶命，岳飞下令不要屠杀，接受他们投降。
English: The thieves shouted and begged for their lives. Yuefei ordered not to kill them and accepted their surrender.

古文：授徐庆等方略，捕诸郡余贼，皆破降之。
现代文：岳飞传授徐庆等人计谋方略，让他们搜捕各地残余的贼寇，都一一攻破并迫使他们投降。
English: Yuefei taught Xu Qing and others the tactics and strategies, let them hunt down the remaining thieves and robbers around the country, break them one by one and force them to surrender.

古文：初，以隆祐震惊之故，密旨令飞屠虔城。
现代文：当初，因为隆佑太后曾在此受到惊吓的缘故，皇帝密令岳飞占领虔州城后屠尽城中民众。
English: At first, because Empress Dowager Longyou had been frightened here, the emperor secretly ordered Yuefei to occupy Gyeongju and slaughter the people in the city.

古文：飞请诛首恶而赦胁从，不许；请至三四，帝乃曲赦。
现代文：岳飞请求诛杀首恶而赦免胁从，高宗不许；岳飞再三恳求，高宗才下令赦免。
English: Yuefei asked Gao Zong to pardon him for killing the evil leader, but Gao Zong refused; Yuefei pleaded repeatedly, but Gao Zong finally ordered a pardon.

古文：人感其德，绘像祠之。余寇高聚、张成犯袁州，飞遣王贵平之。
现代文：城中百姓感激岳飞恩德，绘岳飞像供奉起来，余寇高聚、张成侵犯袁州，岳飞派王贵率军前去将其平定。
English: The people in the city were grateful for Yuefei's kindness, painted Yuefei's portrait and offered it up. The remaining raiders gathered, Zhang Cheng invaded Yuanzhou, and Yuefei sent Wang Gui to lead the army to subdue it.

古文：秋，入见，帝手书 精忠岳飞 字，制旗以赐之。
现代文：这年秋天，岳飞入朝觐见高宗，高宗亲自书写 ：精忠岳飞 四字，制成旗帜赐给岳飞。
English: In the autumn of that year, Yuefei went to the imperial court to see Gao Zong. Gao Zong personally wrote the words "Be loyal to Yuefei" and made a flag and gave it to Yuefei.

古文：授镇南军承宣使、江南西路沿江制置使，又改神武后军都统制，仍制置使，李山、吴全、吴锡、李横、牛皋皆隶焉。
现代文：朝廷任命他为镇南军承宣使、江南西路沿江制置使，不久又改任神武后军都统制，仍保留制置使职务，李山、吴全、吴锡、李横、牛皋等部都隶属他统辖。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the ambassador of the Zhennan Army and the envoy of the Jiangnan West Road along the river, and soon he was appointed as the envoy of the Jinwu Rear Army. He still retained the position of the envoy, and Li Shan, Wu Quan, Wu Xi, Li Yang, Niu Ye and other departments were under his jurisdiction.

古文：伪齐遣李成挟金人入侵，破襄阳、唐、邓、随、郢诸州及信阳军，湖寇杨么亦与伪齐通，欲顺流而下，李成又欲自江西陆行，趋两浙与么会。
现代文：伪齐派遣李成依仗金兵入侵，攻破襄阳、唐、邓、随、郢等州及信阳军，洞庭湖寇贼杨么也和伪齐勾结，企图顺流而下，李成又打算从江西陆路进攻，直趋两浙和杨么会合。
English: The pseudo Qi dispatched Li Cheng to invade with the help of the Jin soldiers and break through the Xiangyang, Tang, Deng, Sui, Shun and other states and the Xinyang army. The Dongting Lake bandit Yang Miao also colluded with the pseudo Qi and attempted to go down the river. Li Cheng also planned to attack from Jiangxi by land and directly meet the two Zhe and Yang Miao.

古文：帝命飞为之备。
现代文：高宗命令岳飞做好迎击准备。
English: Gaozong ordered Yuefei to prepare for the attack.

古文：四年，除兼荆南、鄂岳州制置使。
现代文：绍兴四年，朝廷任命岳飞兼任荆南、鄂、岳州制置使。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoxing, the imperial court appointed Yuefei to also serve as the Jingnan, Hubei and Yuezhou Commissioner.

古文：飞奏： 襄阳等六郡为恢复中原基本，今当先取六郡，以除心膂之病。
现代文：岳飞上奏说： 襄阳等六郡是恢复中原故地的根本所在，今天应该首先攻取这六郡，以解除心腹之患。
English: Yuefei Shangsoo said: Six counties such as Xiangyang are the foundation of restoring the Central Plains. Today, we should first capture these six counties to solve the problems of the henchmen.

古文：李成远遁，然后加兵湖湘，以殄群盗。 帝以谕赵鼎，鼎曰： 知上流利害，无如飞者。 遂授黄复州、汉阳军、德安府制置使。
现代文：李成远逃之后，再增兵湖湘地区，以歼灭所有的盗寇。 高宗将岳飞的建议告诉赵鼎，赵鼎说： 了解长江上流利害得失，没有人超过岳飞。 于是授予岳飞为黄州、复州、汉阳军、德安府制置使。
English: After Li Chengyuan fled, he increased the number of soldiers in the Hunan region to annihilate all the robbers. Gaozong told Zhao Ding about Yuefei's suggestion. Zhao Ding said, "Understanding the advantages and disadvantages of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, no one is better than Yuefei. Therefore, Yuefei was awarded the post of Huangzhou, Fuzhou, Hanyang Army, and De'an Prefecture.

古文：飞趣襄阳，李成迎战，左临襄江，飞笑曰： 步兵利险阻，骑兵利平旷。
现代文：岳飞乘船渡江至江中时，回头对幕僚部属说： 岳飞如不擒获贼寇，再不渡江。 进抵郢州城下，伪将京超号称 万人敌 ，凭借坚城抗拒岳飞。
English: When Yuefei took a boat across the river to the middle of the river, he turned back to his staff and said: Yuefei will not cross the river again if he does not capture the thief and robber. Entering the city of Zhangzhou, the pseudo-commander of Beijing Super, known as the enemy of all mankind, resisted Yuefei with the help of a strong city.

古文：成左列骑江岸，右列步平地，虽众十万何能为。 举鞭指王贵曰： 尔以长枪步卒击其骑兵。 指牛皋曰： 尔以骑兵击其步卒。 合战，马应枪而毙，后骑皆拥入江，步卒死者无数，成夜遁，复襄阳。
现代文：岳飞擂鼓激励士众登城，京超投崖自杀，收复郢州，派张宪、徐庆前去收复随州。岳飞率部趋襄阳，李成挥众迎战，左翼靠近襄江，岳飞笑道： 步兵适宜于在险阻地形上作战，骑兵则适宜于在平原旷野的地形上作战。李成左翼骑兵排列在江岸，右翼步兵排列于平地，虽然拥有十万之众又能有什么作为？ 他举起马鞭对王贵说： 你率长枪步兵进攻李成的骑兵。 又指着牛皋说 ：你率骑兵攻击李成的步兵。 两军交战之后，李成军的战马应枪倒毙，后面的骑兵被挤掉入江中，步兵死亡的人不计其数，李成连夜逃走，岳飞于是收复襄阳。
English: Yue Fei encouraged the soldiers to go to the city, Jing Chao committed suicide by throwing himself over a cliff and recovered Luzhou, and sent Zhang Xian and Xu Qing to recover Suzhou. Yue Fei led the troops to Xiangyang, Li Cheng led the troops to fight, and the left wing was close to the Yangjiang River. Yue Fei laughed and said, "Infantrymen are suitable for fighting on the dangerous terrain, and cavalrymen are suitable for fighting on the terrain of the plain wilderness. Li Cheng's left wing cavalrymen are lined up on the riverbank, and the right wing infantrymen are lined up on the plain. Even though he has 100,000

古文：刘豫益成兵屯新野，飞与王万夹击之，连破其众。
现代文：伪齐刘豫增加李成兵力让他驻守新野，岳飞和王万两面夹击，接连打败李成的军队。
English: Pseudo-Qi Liu Yu increased Li Cheng's troop strength and stationed him in Shinno. Yue Fei and Wang Wan clashed with each other and successively defeated Li Cheng's army.

古文：飞奏： 金贼所爱惟子女金帛，志已骄惰；刘豫僣伪，人心终不忘宋。
现代文：岳飞上奏说 ：金人所喜爱的只是子女金帛，他们的意志已经骄逸懈怠；刘豫虽然超越臣子本分建立起伪齐政权，但民心始终没有忘记宋朝。
English: Yuefei Shangsoo said: The people of Jin loved only their children, the Jin brothers. Their wills had become arrogant and slack. Although Liu Yu exceeded his duties as a vassal and established a pseudo-Qi regime, the people's hearts never forgot the Song Dynasty.

古文：如以精兵二十万，直捣中原，恢复故疆，诚易为力。
现代文：如派出精兵二十万，长驱直捣中原，恢复故疆旧土，实在容易办到。
English: If 200,000 elite soldiers were sent to the Central Plains to restore the old territory, it would be very easy to do.

古文：襄阳、随、郢地皆膏腴，苟行营田，其利为厚。
现代文：襄阳、随州、郢州土地都十分肥沃，如果实行营田，好处很多。
English: The land in Xiangyang, Suizhou and Zhangzhou is very fertile, and there are many benefits to be gained from the implementation of yingtao.

古文：臣候粮足，即过江北剿戮敌兵。 时方重深入之举，而营田之议自是兴矣。
现代文：臣等到粮饷充足之时，即率部过江剿灭敌军。 当时朝廷正重视深入北方的举动，因此营田的议论从此兴盛起来。
English: When the vassal waited until the grain supply was sufficient, he led his troops across the river to destroy the enemy army. At that time, the imperial court was paying attention to the action of going deep into the north, so the discussion of Yingtian flourished from then on.

古文：进兵邓州，成与金将刘合孛堇列砦拒飞。
现代文：岳飞进军邓州，李成和金将刘合孛堇排列营寨抵御岳飞。
English: Yuefei marched into Dengzhou, and Li Cheng and Jin arrayed Liu Hejun in a camp to resist Yuefei.

古文：飞遣王贵、张宪掩击，贼众大溃，刘合孛堇仅以身免。
现代文：岳飞派遣王贵、张宪率兵掩击，敌军大败而溃，仅有刘合孛堇一人只身逃脱。
English: Yuefei dispatched Wang Gui and Zhang Jian to lead troops to cover the attack. The enemy army was defeated and routed, and only Liu Hejun escaped.

古文：贼党高仲退保邓城，飞引兵一鼓拔之，擒高仲，复邓州。
现代文：李成的党羽高仲退保邓州城，岳飞率军一鼓作气攻拔邓州城，活捉高仲，收复邓州。
English: Gao Zhong, a member of Li Cheng's faction, retreated to defend Denzhou City, and Yue Fei led the army to attack Denzhou City, capture Gao Zhong alive, and recover Denzhou.

古文：帝闻之，喜曰： 朕素闻岳飞行军有纪律，未知能破敌如此。 又复唐州、信阳军。
现代文：高宗得知这一消息，高兴地说： 我早就听说岳飞行军纪律严明，没想到他也像这样善于攻战破敌。 岳飞又收复唐州、信阳军。
English: When Gao Zong learned this news, he said happily, "I have long heard that Yue Fei's flying army is well-disciplined. I didn't expect him to be so good at attacking and defeating the enemy. Yue Fei has also recovered Tangzhou and Xinyang Army.

古文：襄汉平，飞辞制置使，乞委重臣经画荆襄，不许。
现代文：襄汉地区平定之后，岳飞辞去制置使，请求朝廷另外派重臣经营治理荆襄地区，朝廷没有同意。
English: After the subjugation of the Xianghan region, Yuefei resigned from his post and requested the imperial court to send another senior minister to manage and govern the Jingxiang region. The imperial court did not agree.

古文：赵鼎奏： 湖北鄂、岳最为上流要害，乞令飞屯鄂、岳，不惟江西藉其声势，湖、广、江、浙亦获安妥。 乃以随、郢、唐、邓、信阳并为襄阳府路隶飞，飞移屯鄂，授清远军节度使、湖北路、荆、襄、潭州制置使，封武昌县开国子。
现代文：赵鼎上奏说： 湖北鄂州、岳州是上流最要害的地区，请求命令岳飞屯驻鄂州、岳州，这样不仅江西可以借助他的声势，湖、广、江、浙也可以获得安定。 于是朝廷将随州、郢州、唐州、邓州、信阳军并合为襄阳府路隶属于岳飞，岳飞移驻鄂州，被授予为清远军节度使，湖北路、荆、襄、潭州制置使，封爵为武昌县开国子。
English: Zhao Ding Shangsuo said: Hubei Ezhou and Yuezhou are the most critical areas in the upper reaches of Hubei, and requested that Yuefei be ordered to be stationed in Ezhou and Yuezhou, so that not only Jiangxi can use his influence, but also Hubei, Guangxi, Jiangxi and Zhejiang can be stabilized. Therefore, the imperial court merged the Suizhou, Zhangzhou, Tangzhou, Dengzhou and Xinyang armies into the Xiangyang Prefecture Road, which is subordinate to Yuefei, and Yuefei moved to Ezhou, was awarded the Qingyuan Army Commander, Hubei Road, Jing,

古文：兀术、刘豫合兵围庐州，帝手札命飞解围，提兵趋庐，伪齐已驱甲骑五千逼城。
现代文：兀、刘豫合兵包围庐州，高宗亲自写信命令岳飞率部前往解围，岳飞率军赶往庐州，伪齐已驱使五千名铁甲骑兵进逼城下。
English: Liu Yuhe's soldiers encircled Zhangzhou, Gaozong personally wrote a letter ordering Yuefei to go to relieve the siege, Yuefei led the army to Zhangzhou, and the pseudo-Qi had driven five thousand iron-clad cavalry into the city.

古文：飞张 岳 字旗与 精忠 旗，金兵一战而溃，庐州平。
现代文：岳飞打出 岳 字旗和 精忠 旗，金兵一战即溃，庐州平定。
English: Yuefei played Yue Ziqi and Jingzhongqi, the gold soldiers were defeated in one battle, and Zhangzhou was pacified.

古文：飞奏： 襄阳等六郡人户阙牛、粮，乞量给官钱，免官私逋负，州县官以招集流亡为殿最。 
现代文：岳飞上奏说 ：襄阳等六郡的民户缺乏耕牛和粮食，请求朝廷酌量贷给官钱，免除他们以前拖欠的公私债务，以招集流亡百姓归业的多少作为考核州县官员政绩优劣的标准。 
English: Yuefei Shangsoo said: The households in six counties including Xiangyang were short of cattle and grain, and requested the imperial court to lend the government money at its discretion, exempt them from the public and private debts that they had previously defaulted on, and use the number of exiled people recruited to return to work as the standard for assessing the political performance of state and county officials.

古文：五年，入觐，封母国夫人；授飞镇宁、崇信军节度使，湖北路、荆襄潭州制置使，进封武昌郡开国侯；又除荆湖南北、襄阳路制置使，神武后军都统制，命招捕杨么。
现代文：绍兴五年，岳飞到朝廷觐见高宗，高宗封岳飞母亲为国夫人；授予岳飞镇宁、崇信军节度使，湖北路、荆襄潭州制置使，进封爵位为武昌郡开国侯；又任命他为荆湖南北、襄阳路制置使，神武后军都统制，命令他招捕杨么。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Yuefei went to the imperial court to see Gao Zong. Gao Zong appointed Yuefei's mother as the wife of the country; awarded Yuefei Zhenning, Chongxin Army Festival Envoy, Hubei Road, Jingxiangtan State Establishment Envoy, and granted a knighthood to Wuchang County; and appointed him as Jinghu North-South, Xiangyang Road Establishment Envoy, and ordered him to recruit Yang.

古文：飞所部皆西北人，不习水战，飞曰： 兵何常，顾用之何如耳。 先遣使招谕之。
现代文：岳飞所部都是西北人，不习惯水上作战，岳飞说 ：战斗哪有常规，看你如何运用罢了。 他先派遣使者前去招谕杨么。
English: The members of Yuefei's club were all from the northwest and were not used to fighting on the water. Yuefei said, "There are no rules for fighting, it's up to you how to use them." He first sent an envoy to invite Yang.

古文：贼党黄佐曰： 岳节使号令如山，若与之敌，万无生理，不如往降。
现代文：贼寇党羽黄佐说： 岳节度使号令如山，如果同他作对，万万没有活命之理，不如前去投降。
English: The Kleptocrat Party member, Fei Huang Zuo, said: "Yue Jiedu has issued a mountain of orders. If you oppose him, you have no reason to live. It is better to surrender."

古文：节使诚信，必善遇我。 遂降。
现代文：节度使诚实而讲信义，必然会好好对待我们。 于是投降。
English: Discretion begets honesty, which begets trustworthiness, which begets good treatment, which begets surrender.

古文：飞表授佐武义大夫，单骑按其部，拊佐背曰： 子知逆顺者。
现代文：岳飞上表朝廷授予黄佐为武义大夫，自己单人独骑巡视黄佐的部队，抚着黄佐的背说： 你是知道逆顺的人。
English: Yuefei went to the imperial court to award Huang Zuo as the Wuyi doctor. He rode alone to inspect Huang Zuo's troops, stroked Huang Zuo's back and said: You are a person who knows the ups and downs.

古文：果能立功，封侯岂足道？
现代文：果真能立功，封侯又何在话下？
English: If he really can do meritorious deeds, what is the reason for the fiefdom?

古文：欲复遣子至湖中，视其可乘者擒之，可劝者招之，如何？ 佐感泣，誓以死报。
现代文：我打算派你返回洞庭湖中，看到杨么军中可以制服的就擒获他，能够劝降的就招降他，你看怎么样？ 黄佐感激涕零，誓死报效。
English: I'm going to send you back to Dongting Lake, and when you see a leader in Yang's army, if you can subdue him, you can capture him, and if you can persuade him to surrender, you can recruit him. What do you think? Huang Zuo is grateful and swears to do his best.

古文：时张浚以都督军事至潭，参政席益与浚语，疑飞玩寇，欲以闻。
现代文：当时张浚以都督军事的身份到潭州，参政席益对张浚说，怀疑岳飞玩忽职守放纵贼寇，要把这些情况上报朝廷。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun went to Tanzhou as the military governor of the capital. The political councilor said to Zhang Jun that he suspected Yue Fei of neglecting his duties and indulging in banditry, and that he would report the situation to the imperial court.

古文：浚曰： 岳侯，忠孝人也，兵有深机，胡可易言？ 益惭而止。
现代文：张浚说 ：岳飞是忠孝之人，用兵有深机，怎么能随便议论呢？ 席益惭愧而止。
English: Zhang Jun said: Yuefei is a person of loyalty and filial piety, and has a profound ability to use soldiers, so how can he talk about it casually? Shiyi was ashamed.

古文：黄佐袭周伦砦，杀伦，擒其统制陈贵等。
现代文：黄佐袭击周伦营寨，杀死周伦，活捉其统制陈贵等人。
English: On the other hand, Huang Zuo attacked the encampment of the bandit Zhou Lun, killed Zhou Lun, and captured the leader Chen Gui and others.

古文：飞上其功，迁武经大夫。
现代文：岳飞上报黄佐的功绩，升黄佐为武功大夫。
English: Yue Fei reported Huang Zu's exploits, and Huang Zu was promoted to military doctor.

古文：统制任士安不禀王〈王燮〉令，军以此无功。
现代文：统制官任士安不服从王王燮的命令，军队因此而没能战胜杨么。
English: The commanding officer, Ren Shi'an, disobeyed Wang Wangyao's orders, and the army was unable to defeat Yang Shuo as a result.

古文：飞鞭士安使饵贼，曰： 三日贼不平，斩汝。 士安宣言： 岳太尉兵二十万至矣。 贼见止士安军，并力攻之。
现代文：岳飞鞭打任士安，并命令他引诱贼寇，说 ：如果三日内不能平定贼寇，我将斩你示众。 士安到处扬言 ：岳太尉二十万大军来到了。 贼众见到只有任士安一支军队，集中兵力向他进攻。
English: Yue Fei whipped Ren Shian and ordered him to lure the bandits, saying, "If you can't subdue the bandits within three days, I will behead you in front of the public." Shian threatened everywhere, "Lieutenant Yue's 200,000-strong army has arrived." When the bandits saw that only Ren Shian had an army, they concentrated their forces to attack him.

古文：飞设伏，士安战急，伏四起击贼，贼走。
现代文：岳飞设置伏兵，等到任士安战斗危急之时，伏兵四起突击贼寇，贼众败逃。
English: Yuefei set up an ambush, and when Ren Shian's battle was critical, four ambushes attacked the bandits, and the bandits fled in defeat.

古文：会召浚还防秋，飞袖小图示浚，浚欲俟来年议之。
现代文：恰好这时朝廷召张浚还朝部署防备金兵秋季入侵，岳飞从袖中拿出一幅小图给张浚看，张浚准备等到来年再商议破灭杨么事宜。
English: Just at this time, the imperial court summoned Zhang Jun to return to the north to deploy the gold soldiers to guard against the autumn invasion. Yue Fei took out a small map from his sleeve to show Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun was prepared to wait until the next year to discuss the matter of defeating Yang.

古文：飞曰： 已有定画，都督能少留，不八日可破贼。 浚曰： 何言之易？ 飞曰： 王四厢以王师攻水寇则难，飞以水寇攻水寇则易。
现代文：岳飞说 ：已经有了确定的计划，都督能稍作停留，不出八天就可以攻破贼寇。 
English: Yuefei said, "We already have a definite plan. The governor can stay for a while, and we can defeat the bandits in eight days."

古文：水战我短彼长，以所短攻所长，所以难。
现代文：张浚问道 ：怎么说得如此容易？ 岳飞答道 ：王四厢用官军攻打水寇当然很困难，而我用水寇攻打水寇自然就很容易。
English: Zhang Jun asked, "How can you say it's so easy?" Yue Fei replied, "Of course, it's very difficult for Wang Xifeng to use the government army to attack the water moth, but it's naturally easy for me to attack the water moth with water moth."

古文：若因敌将用敌兵，夺其手足之助，离其腹心之托，使孤立，而后以王师乘之，八日之内，当俘诸酋。 浚许之。
现代文：水上作战是敌人长处我们的短处，用我们的短处攻击敌人的长处，因此很困难。如果延用敌将使用敌兵，剥夺敌人手足的辅助，离间敌人心腹的依托，使敌人陷于孤立，然后用官军乘机进攻，八天之内，必然能俘虏敌人各位首领。 
English: Water combat is the enemy's strength and our weakness, and it is very difficult to use our weakness to attack the enemy's strength. If we continue to use the enemy's strength, deprive the enemy of the support of arms and legs, alienate the support of the enemy's confidants, make the enemy fall into isolation, and then use the official army to take advantage of the opportunity to attack, within eight days, we will certainly be able to capture the enemy leaders.

古文：飞遂如鼎州。
现代文：张浚答应停留几天。岳飞于是前往鼎州。
English: After Yuefei flew to Dingzhou, Huang Zuo had already persuaded Yang Qin to surrender.

古文：黄佐招杨钦来降，飞喜曰： 杨钦骁悍，既降，贼腹心溃矣。 表授钦武义大夫，礼遇甚厚，乃复遣归湖中。
现代文：黄佐招杨钦前来投降，岳飞高兴地说： 杨钦骁勇强悍，他既然投降，贼寇内部心腹已崩溃了。 上表朝廷授予杨钦武义大夫，对他给予隆重的礼遇，仍旧派遣他回到湖中。
English: Huang Zuo invited Yang Qin to come and surrender, and Yue Fei said happily, "Yang Qin is so brave and strong. Since he surrendered, the inner circle of the bandits has collapsed. Above, the court awarded Yang Qin to Dr. Wuyi, gave him a grand courtesy, and still sent him back to the lake.

古文：两日，钦说余端、刘诜等降，飞诡骂钦曰： 贼不尽降，何来也？ 杖之，复令入湖。
现代文：两天后，杨钦说服余端、刘诜等前来投降，岳飞佯怒骂杨钦说 ：贼寇还没有全部投降，你为什么又回来了？ 于是杖打杨钦，命令他再次进入湖中。
English: Two days later, Yang Chin persuaded Yu Duan, Liu Ye and others to come and surrender. Yue Fei Yao scolded Yang Chin and said, "The thieves and robbers have not all surrendered yet. Why did you come back again?" So he beat Yang Chin with a cane and ordered him to enter the lake again.

古文：是夜，掩贼营，降其众数万。
现代文：这天夜里，岳飞指挥军队突袭敌营，逼降杨么部众数万人。
English: On this night, Yuefei commanded the army to raid the enemy camp, forcing tens of thousands of people to surrender.

古文：么负固不服，方浮舟湖中，以轮激水，其行如飞，旁置撞竿，官舟迎之辄碎。
现代文：杨么依恃险固的地势不肯降服，正驾着车船行驶湖中，用车轮击水，航速快捷如飞，船旁装置撞竿，官船迎上去便被撞得粉碎。
English: Yang Rong refused to yield to the precarious terrain, and was driving a car-boat in the lake. He hit the water with the wheel, the speed was fast as flying, the ship's side device hit the pole, and the official ship was hit and crushed.

古文：飞伐君山木为巨筏，塞诸港〈氵義〉，又以腐木乱草浮上流而下，择水浅处，遣善骂者挑之，且行且骂。
现代文：岳飞命令砍伐君山上的树木制成巨大的木筏，堵塞各湖汊港湾，又用腐木乱草投放上流使其顺流而下，选择水浅的地方，派遣善于叫骂的士兵挑逗贼寇，边走边骂。
English: Yuefei ordered to cut down the trees on Junshan to make huge wooden rafts, block the lakes and harbors, and use rotten wood and weeds to make it flow upstream, choose shallow places, and send soldiers who are good at shouting to tease the thieves and curse while walking.

古文：贼怒来追，则草木壅积，舟轮碍不行。
现代文：贼寇激怒来追，因腐木乱草堆积堵塞水道，车船的水轮受阻不能前行。
English: Thieves and bandits chased them in anger. Due to the accumulation of rotten wood and weeds, the waterway was blocked, and the water wheels of the car and boat could not move forward.

古文：飞亟遣兵击之，贼奔港中，为筏所拒。
现代文：岳飞迅速派兵出击，贼寇奔逃到港湾中，又被木筏阻拦。
English: Yuefei quickly dispatched soldiers to attack, and the bandits fled to the harbor and were stopped by the raft.

古文：官军乘筏，张牛革以蔽矢石，举巨木撞其舟，尽坏。
现代文：官军乘着木筏，张开牛皮革以遮挡弓矢石块，举起巨大的木头撞击敌船，敌船被全部撞坏。
English: The government troops rode on rafts, spread cowhide to shield the bows and arrows from the rocks, and lifted huge logs to ram the enemy ships. The enemy ships were all destroyed.

古文：么投水，牛皋擒斩之。
现代文：杨么跳入湖水中，被牛皋捉住斩首。
English: Yang Luo jumped into the lake, was caught by a bull and beheaded.

古文：飞入贼垒，余酋惊曰： 何神也！ 俱降。
现代文：岳飞进入敌军营垒，其余的贼寇首领惊奇地说： 怎么如此神妙啊！ 于是全部投降。
English: Yue Fei entered the enemy camp, and the rest of the bandit leaders said in surprise, "How is this so amazing!" So they all surrendered.

古文：飞亲行诸砦慰抚之，纵老弱归田，籍少壮为军，果八日而贼平。
现代文：岳飞亲自巡视各个营寨安抚慰问投降的贼寇，把其中的老弱病残放归田里，年轻力壮的登记编入官军，果然在八天之内平定贼寇。
English: Yuefei personally inspected the various camps to appease and console the surrendering bandits, released the old and sick among them to return to the fields, and registered the young and strong into the official army, and successfully quelled the bandits within eight days.

古文：浚叹曰： 岳侯神算也。 初，贼恃其险曰： 欲犯我者，除是飞来。 至是，人以其言为谶。
现代文：张浚叹服说 ：岳飞真是神机妙算啊！ 当初，贼众凭借天险扬言说 ：要想攻打我们，除非是从天而降。 到这时，人们才相信了岳飞的预言。
English: Zhang Jun sighed and said, "Yuefei is really a great tactician! At first, the thieves threatened to attack us unless we came down from the sky, and only then did people believe in Yuefei's prophecy.

古文：获贼舟千余，鄂渚水军为沿江之冠。
现代文：此战缴获敌船千余艘，鄂州水军遂成为沿江水军中最大的一支。
English: More than a thousand enemy ships were captured in this battle, and the Ezhou Naval Force became the largest naval force along the river.

古文：诏兼蕲、黄制置使，飞以目疾乞辞军事，不许，加检校少保，进封公。
现代文：朝廷诏令岳飞兼任蕲、黄制置使，岳飞以眼睛有疾病请求辞去所任职务，朝廷没有批准，加升他为检校少保，进封爵位为公。
English: The imperial court ordered Yue Fei to concurrently hold the posts of vice-premier and minister of the Yellow Horde. Yue Fei requested to resign from his post due to an eye disease, but the court did not approve. He was promoted to school inspector, and received a knighthood.

古文：还军鄂州，除荆湖南北、襄阳路招讨使。
现代文：岳飞率军返回鄂州，被任命为荆湖南北、襄阳路招讨使。
English: Yuefei led the army back to Ezhou and was appointed as the recruiting envoy for Jinghu North-South and Xiangyang Road.

古文：六年，太行山忠义社梁兴等百余人，慕飞义率众来归。
现代文：绍兴六年，太行山忠义社梁兴等一百多人，仰慕岳飞忠义可信，率领部众前来归附。
English: Six years ago in Shaoxing, more than a hundred people, including Liang Xing from the Taihang Mountain Loyalist Society, admired Yue Fei's loyalty and trustworthiness, and led the members to join him.

古文：飞入觐，面陈： 襄阳自收复后，未置监司，州县无以按察。 帝从之，以李若虚为京西南路提举兼转运、提刑，又令湖北、襄阳府路自知州、通判以下贤否，许飞得自黜陟。
现代文：岳飞入朝觐见高宗，当面陈述说： 襄阳自从收复以来，没有设置监司机构，因此无法按察管理所属州县。 高宗接受了他的意见，任命李若虚为京西南路提举兼任转运使、提点刑狱，又下令湖北、襄阳府路自知州、通判以下官员，视其贤能与否，允许岳飞罢免或提升。
English: Yuefei went to see Gao Zong at the court and made a statement in person, saying: Since the recovery of Xiangyang, there has been no supervisory agency set up, so it is impossible to supervise the management of the state and county. Gao Zong accepted his opinion and appointed Li Ruoqiu as the transfer envoy for the southwest of Beijing and the transfer prison, and ordered the officials from Zhizhou and Tongzhan in Hubei and Xiangyang prefectural road to allow Yuefei to be dismissed or promoted according to his ability.

古文：张浚至江上会诸大帅，独称飞与韩世忠可倚大事，命飞屯襄阳，以窥中原，曰： 此君素志也。 飞移军京西，改武胜、定国军节度使，除宣抚副使，置司襄阳。
现代文：张浚到长江会见各位大帅，唯独称赞岳飞和韩世忠两人可以托付大事，命令岳飞屯驻襄阳，以便伺机收复中原，说 ：这是你一贯的志向夙愿。 岳飞率军移居京西，改任武胜、定国军节度使，并任宣抚副使，设置宣抚司于襄阳。
English: Zhang Jun went to the Yangtze River to meet with the generals, but he only praised Yue Fei and Han Shizhong as two people who could be entrusted with important matters, and ordered Yue Fei to stay in Xiangyang in order to wait for the opportunity to recover the Central Plains, saying: This is your consistent aspiration. Yue Fei led the army to move to the west of Beijing, and was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wu Sheng and Dingguo armies, and was appointed as the deputy envoy of the proclamation, and set up the proclamation department in Xiangyang.

古文：命往武昌调军。
现代文：朝廷命令岳飞前往武昌调动军队。
English: The imperial court ordered Yuefei to go to Wuchang to mobilize the army.

古文：居母忧，降制起复，飞扶榇还庐山，连表乞终丧，不许，累诏趣起，乃就军。
现代文：因母亲去世在家守丧，高宗降诏岳飞在守丧未满期时应召复职，岳飞护送母亲灵柩回庐山，接连上表请求守满丧期，高宗不同意，多次下诏催促岳飞复职，岳飞于是回到军中。
English: Due to his mother's death, Gao Zong issued a demarcation order for Yue Fei to resume his duties before the period of mourning was over. Yue Fei escorted his mother's coffin back to Shaoshan. He repeatedly requested to complete the period of mourning. Gao Zong disagreed and repeatedly issued an order to urge Yue Fei to resume his duties. Yue Fei then returned to the army.

古文：又命宣抚河东，节制河北路。
现代文：朝廷又命令岳飞负责河东路事务，管辖河北路。
English: The imperial court also ordered Yuefei to be responsible for the affairs of Hedong Road and to have jurisdiction over Hebei Road.

古文：首遣王贵等攻虢州，下之，获粮十五万石，降其众数万。
现代文：岳飞先派遣王贵等人进攻虢州，将其攻克，缴获粮食十五万石，收降敌众数万人。
English: Yuefei first sent Wang Gui and others to attack Zhangzhou, conquered it, seized 150,000 kilos of grain, and defeated tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：张浚曰： 飞措画甚大，令已至伊、洛，则太行一带山砦，必有应者。 飞遣杨再兴进兵至长水县，再战皆捷，中原响应。
现代文：张浚说： 岳飞筹措计划宏大，命令已行达伊水、洛水之间，那么太行山一带的山寨，必然会有人响应。 岳飞派遣杨再兴进兵至长水县，几战几胜，中原响应。
English: Zhang Jun said: Yuefei's mobilization plan is grand, and the order has been carried out between Dayi Water and Luoshui, so the cottage around Taihang Mountain will inevitably be responded to. Yuefei dispatched Yang Zaoxing to march into Changshui County, several battles and several victories, and the Central Plains responded.

古文：又遣人焚蔡州粮。
现代文：又派人焚烧敌蔡州粮草。
English: They also sent people to burn the enemy Caizhou grain and grass.

古文：九月，刘豫遣子麟、侄猊分道寇淮西，刘光世欲舍庐州，张俊欲弃盱眙，同奏召飞以兵东下，欲使飞当其锋，而己得退保。
现代文：九月，刘豫派遣儿子刘麟、侄子刘猊分路侵犯淮西地区，宋刘光世准备放弃庐州，张俊打算放弃盱眙，同时上奏要求朝廷召岳飞率军东下，想让岳飞部队抵挡刘豫军锋芒，而使自己得以退守自保。
English: In September, Liu Yu sent his son, Liu Lin, and his nephew, Liu Kun, to invade Huaixi region. Song Liu Guangshi was ready to give up Zhangzhou, and Zhang Jun was going to give up Handan. At the same time, he requested the court to summon Yuefei to lead the army to the east. He wanted Yuefei's troops to resist Liu Yu's army, so that he could retreat and protect himself.

古文：张浚谓： 岳飞一动，则襄汉何所制？ 力沮其议。
现代文：张浚说 ：岳飞军队一动，那么襄汉地区又靠什么控制？ 
English: Zhang Jun said: If Yuefei's army moves, then what control will the Xianghan region rely on?

古文：帝虑俊、光世不足任，命飞东下。
现代文：极力反对刘光世等人的这一建议。高宗担心张俊、刘光世难以担当重任，命令岳飞东下。
English: Gao Zong was worried that it would be difficult for Zhang Jun and Liu Guangxi to take on heavy responsibilities, and ordered Yuefei to go to the east.

古文：飞自破曹成、平杨么，凡六年，皆盛夏行师，致目疾，至是，甚；闻诏即日启行，未至，麟败。
现代文：岳飞自破曹成，平定杨么，前后共六年，都是盛夏酷暑季节行师用兵，导致眼睛生病，到这时病情愈加严重，但岳飞接到诏令的当天便率军启程出发，还没有赶到淮西，刘麟军便被击败。
English: It took Yuefei a total of six years to defeat Cao Cheng and pacify Yang Rong, all of which were in the midsummer heat of the summer season, leading to eye illness. At this time, the condition became more serious. However, on the day Yuefei received the edict, he led the army to set off. Before reaching Huaxi, Liu Lin's army was defeated.

古文：飞奏至，帝语赵鼎曰： 刘麟败北不足喜，诸将知尊朝廷为可喜。 遂赐札，言： 敌兵已去淮，卿不须进发，其或襄、邓、陈、蔡有机可乘，从长措置。 飞乃还军。
现代文：岳飞奏章到朝廷，高宗对赵鼎说 ：刘麟兵败不足以让人高兴，各位将领尊崇朝廷却是值得庆贺的。 于是赐给岳飞书信，说： 敌军已离开淮河地区，你不必继续前进，敌人或许乘机进犯襄、邓、陈、蔡，应从长计议处置。 岳飞于是撤军返回。
English: After Yuefei's report to the imperial court, Gao Zong said to Zhao Ding, "Liu Lin's defeat is not enough to make people happy, but the generals' reverence for the imperial court is worth celebrating." He then gave Yuefei a letter, saying, "The enemy army has left the Huaihe area, you don't need to continue to advance, the enemy may take the opportunity to invade Xiang, Deng, Chen, and Cai, and should be dealt with from a long-term perspective." Yuefei then withdrew and returned.

古文：时伪齐屯兵窥唐州，飞遣王贵、董先等攻破之，焚其营。
现代文：当时伪齐集结军队窥视唐州，岳飞派遣王贵、董先等人率军攻破敌军，焚毁敌军营寨。
English: At that time, the pseudo Qi gathered an army to spy on Tangzhou, and Yuefei sent Wang Gui, Dong Xian and others to lead the army to break through the enemy army and burn down the enemy camp.

古文：奏图蔡以取中原，不许。
现代文：上奏图谋夺取蔡州以进军收复中原，高宗没有批准。
English: Gaozong did not approve of the attempt to capture Caizhou by marching to recover the Central Plains.

古文：飞召贵等还。
现代文：岳飞命令王贵等人回师。
English: Yuefei ordered Wang Gui and the others to return to the division.

古文：七年，入见，帝从容问曰： 卿得良马否？ 飞曰： 臣有二马，日啖刍豆数斗，饮泉一斛，然非精洁则不受。
现代文：绍兴七年，岳飞入朝见高宗，高宗从容问道 ：你得到良马没有？ 岳飞回答说 ：我有两匹马，每日吃掉几斗草料豆子，饮掉一斛泉水，但如果不是精料洁水便不吃不饮。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, Yue Fei came to see Gao Zong in the morning. Gao Zong calmly asked, "Have you got any good horses?" Yue Fei replied, "I have two horses. Every day, I eat several buckets of herbs and beans and drink a bucket of spring water, but if it's not pure water, I don't eat or drink."

古文：介而驰，初不甚疾，比行百里始奋迅，自午至酉，犹可二百里。
现代文：披挂上鞍甲奔驰，开始时跑得并不快，等到百里之后才开始奋起加速，自午时到酉时，还可以再跑二百里。
English: Wearing a saddlecloth Mercedes, at the beginning he did not run fast, but after a hundred miles he began to accelerate. From noon to dusk, he could still run another two hundred miles.

古文：褫鞍甲而不息不汗，若无事然。
现代文：卸下鞍甲依然气不喘汗不流，好像没事一样。
English: When I took off my saddlebags, I was still out of breath and sweating, as if nothing had happened.

古文：此其受大而不苟取，力裕而不求逞，致远之材也。
现代文：这是它能吃能喝但又不乱吃滥饮，力量充足而不求逞一时之速，是能够逾越遥远的良才。
English: This is that it can eat and drink but does not eat and drink indiscriminately, has sufficient strength and does not seek the speed of the moment, and is a talent that can overcome the distance.

古文：不幸相继以死。
现代文：不幸相继死亡。
English: Unfortunately, they died one after another.

古文：今所乘者，日不过数升，而秣不择粟，饮不择泉，揽辔未安，踊踊疾驱，甫百里，力竭汗喘，殆欲毙然。
现代文：现在所乘坐的马匹，每天吃的草料不过几升，而吃不择食，饮不挑水，缰绳还没有拿好，便踊跃急奔，才跑了一百里，便力量用尽而喘汗交加，好像要倒毙的样子。
English: The horses I ride now eat only a few liters of grass every day, but they don't choose what to eat, they don't drink water, and they don't have the reins yet, so they gallop and gallop until they've run a hundred miles, and then they're exhausted and sweating, as if they're going to die.

古文：此其寡取易盈，好逞易穷，驽钝之材也。 帝称善，曰： 卿今议论极进。 拜太尉，继除宣抚使兼营田大使。
现代文：这是它吃喝不多容易得到满足，喜好逞能卖弄而力量容易枯竭，是平庸低下之才。 高宗称赞岳飞回答得好，说： 你今天的议论比以往大有进步。 任命岳飞为太尉，接着任命他为宣抚使兼营田大使。
English: This is because it does not eat and drink much and is easily satisfied, likes to be able to show off and is easily exhausted, and is a mediocre and inferior talent. Gaozong praised Yuefei and answered well, saying: Your discussion today is much more advanced than before. Appointed Yuefei as a captain, and then appointed him as a messenger and ambassador of Yingtian.

古文：从幸建康，以王德、郦琼兵隶飞，诏谕德等曰： 听飞号令，如朕亲行。 
现代文：跟随高宗来到建康，高宗把王德、郦琼的部队隶属岳飞指挥，诏令晓谕王德等人说： 服从岳飞的命令，如同我亲自下令一样。 
English: Gaozong followed Gaozong to Jiankang. Gaozong commanded the troops of Wang De and Zi Qiong subordinate to Yuefei, and issued an edict to Wang De and others saying: Obey Yuefei's orders, just as I personally ordered.

古文：飞数见帝，论恢复之略。
现代文：岳飞数次见到高宗，谈论恢复中原的方略。
English: Yuefei met with Gao Zong several times to discuss strategies for restoring the Central Plains.

古文：又手疏言： 金人所以立刘豫于河南，盖欲荼毒中原，以中国攻中国，粘罕因得休兵观衅。
现代文：又手写奏章说 ：金人所以在河南扶植刘豫，大概是企图残害中原，用中国人攻打中国人，粘罕因此可以休整兵马，寻机进攻。
English: The handwritten record also said: "That is why the Jin supported Liu Yu in Henan. It was probably an attempt to destroy the Central Plains and use the Chinese to attack the Chinese. Therefore, Mu Han could rest and recuperate, and look for an opportunity to attack.

古文：臣欲陛下假臣月日，便则提兵趋京、洛，据河阳、陕府、潼关，以号召五路叛将。
现代文：希望陛下给予我一些时日，有机会就率领军队直趋汴京、洛阳，占据河阳、陕府、潼关，以此号召五路叛将来归。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will give me some time and opportunity to lead the army straight to Beijing and Luoyang, occupy Hebei, Shaanxi and Shaoguan, and call on the five traitors to return to the future.

古文：叛将既还，遣王师前进，彼必弃汴而走河北，京畿、陕右可以尽复。
现代文：叛将既来归顺，派遣官军前进，敌人必然放弃汴京而逃往河北，京畿、陕右地区可以全部收复。
English: Since the traitors have already surrendered and the government troops have been sent forward, the enemy will inevitably abandon Beijing and flee to Hebei. The Gyeonggi and Shaanxi regions can all be recovered.

古文：然后分兵浚、滑，经略两河，如此则刘豫成擒，金人可灭，社稷长久之计，实在此举。 帝答曰： 有臣如此，顾复何忧，进止之机，朕不中制。 又召至寝阁命之曰： 中兴之事，一以委卿。 命节制光州。
现代文：然后分兵进攻浚州、滑州，经营两河地区，这样刘豫就可以擒获，金人可以消灭，国家长久之计，在于这一举动。 高宗回答说 ：有你这样的大臣，我还有什么可忧虑的，进退的时机，由你把握，我不从中干预。 又把岳飞召到寝宫对他说： 中兴宋朝的大事，全部委托给你了。 命令管辖光州。
English: Then the detachment attacked Danzhou and Leshou, and managed the Shuanghe region, so that Liu Yu could be captured and Jin could be eliminated, and the country's long-term strategy lay in this move.Gao Zong replied: With a minister like you, I have nothing to worry about, the time of advance and retreat is up to you, I will not interfere.He also summoned Yue Fei to his bedchamber and said to him: All the important matters of the Song Dynasty have been entrusted to you.Order to govern Gwangju.

古文：飞方图大举，会秦桧主和，遂不以德、琼兵隶飞。
现代文：岳飞正在计划大举北伐之时，恰逢秦桧主持和议，于是不把王德、郦琼的军队隶属岳飞统辖。
English: When Yuefei was planning a large-scale northern expedition, it coincided with Qin Hui presiding over the peace talks, so he did not subordinate the armies of Wang De and Yao Qiong to Yuefei.

古文：诏诣都督府与张浚议事，浚谓飞曰： 王德淮西军所服，浚欲以为都统，而命吕祉以督府参谋领之，如何？ 飞曰： 德与琼素不相下，一旦揠之在上，则必争。
现代文：朝廷诏令岳飞到都督府同张浚商议军事，张浚对岳飞说： 王德为淮西军士众所敬服，我想任用他为都统，而让吕祉以都督府参谋的身份率领这支部队，你以为如何？ 岳飞回答说： 王德同郦琼向来不相上下，一旦提拔王德位于郦琼之上，那么必然发生争执。
English: The imperial court ordered Yuefei to go to the governor's office to discuss military affairs with Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun said to Yuefei, "Wang De is respected by all the soldiers of Huaixi. I want to appoint him as the governor of the capital, and let Lushi lead this army as the staff officer of the governor's office. What do you think?" Yuefei replied, "Wang De and Gong Qiong have always been on a par. Once Wang De is promoted above Gong Qiong, there will inevitably be a dispute."

古文：吕尚书不习军旅，恐不足服众。 浚曰： 张宣抚如何？ 飞曰： 暴而寡谋，尤琼所不服。 浚曰： 然则杨沂中尔？ 飞曰： 沂中视德等尔，岂能驭此军？ 浚艴然曰： 浚固知非太尉不可。 飞曰： 都督以正问飞，不敢不尽其愚，岂以得兵为念耶？ 即日上章乞解兵柄，终丧服，以张宪摄军事，步归，庐母墓侧。浚怒，奏以张宗元为宣抚判官，监其军。
现代文：吕祉不熟悉军队事务，恐怕不能让士众信服。 张浚说 ：张宣抚这人怎么样？ 
English: Lv Zhi is not familiar with military affairs, I'm afraid I can't convince the soldiers.Zhang Jun said: Zhang Xuanfu, what about this person?

古文：帝累诏趣飞还职，飞力辞，诏幕属造庐以死请，凡六日，飞趋朝待罪，帝尉遣之。
现代文：高宗多次下诏催促岳飞回军复职，岳飞极力推辞，高宗下令岳飞的幕僚前往岳飞守丧的居处，以死恳求他回来，用了六天时间，岳飞才赶往朝廷等待处罚，高宗安慰他后派他回部队。
English: Gaozong repeatedly issued edicts to urge Yuefei to return to the army and resume his duties, but Yuefei strongly refused. Gaozong ordered Yuefei's staff to go to Yuefei's place of residence to hold a funeral and plead with him to return. It took six days for Yuefei to rush to the court to await punishment. Gaozong consoled him and then sent him back to the army.

古文：宗元还言： 将和士锐，人怀忠孝，皆飞训养所致。 帝大悦。
现代文：张宗元回来后报告说： 将领团结和睦，士兵骁勇精锐，人人心怀忠孝，都是岳飞培养教育的结果。 
English: After Zhang Zongyuan returned, he reported: Generals are united and harmonious, soldiers are brave and elite, and everyone is loyal and filial, all of which are the results of Yuefei's training and education.

古文：飞奏： 比者寝阁之命，咸谓圣断已坚，何至今尚未决？
现代文：高宗十分高兴。岳飞上奏说 ：以前在寝宫聆听圣命，都以为陛下决心已经坚定，为什么至今还没有做出出师北伐的决定？
English: Gao Zong was very happy. Yue Fei said, "Previously, when we listened to the sacred life in the sleeping palace, we all thought that His Majesty's determination had been firm. Why has he not yet made the decision to go to the North?"

古文：臣愿提兵进讨，顺天道，固人心，以曲直为老壮，以逆顺为强弱，万全之效可必。 又奏： 钱塘僻在海隅，非用武地。愿陛下建都上游，用汉光武故事，亲率六军，往来督战。
现代文：我愿意率兵进讨，顺应天道，符合民心，我军师出有名则士气高涨，敌人师出无名则士气低落，我军顺应天道民意必然强大，敌人违背天道民意必然虚弱，如此必可收到万全的效果。 又上奏 ：钱塘地处偏僻的海边，不是使用武力的地方，希望陛下能把都城建在上游，仿效汉光武帝当年的做法，亲自率领六军，往来督战。
English: I am willing to lead the army to advance, conform to the heavenly way, conform to the people's heart, our army's famous teachers will have high morale, the enemy's nameless teachers will have low morale, our army's compliance with the heavenly way will inevitably be strong, and the enemy's violation of the heavenly way will inevitably be weak, so it will surely receive a perfect result. Also played: Qiantang is located on the remote coast, not a place to use force, I hope that His Majesty can build the capital upstream, follow the practice of the Han Guangwu Emperor, personally lead the six armies, and supervise the war.

古文：庶将士知圣意所向，人人用命。 未报而郦琼叛，浚始悔。
现代文：使全军将士知道陛下的意图志向，必然会人人拼死效命。 没有得到回答。郦琼已经叛变，张浚后悔未听岳飞之言。
English: To let the soldiers of the whole army know His Majesty's intentions and aspirations, everyone will inevitably fight to the death. There was no answer. Zou Qiong had already mutinied, and Zhang Jun regretted not listening to Yue Fei's words.

古文：飞复奏： 愿进屯淮甸，伺便击琼，期于破灭。 不许，诏驻师江州为淮、浙援。
现代文：岳飞又上奏 ：愿意北进屯驻淮甸，等到便利时进击郦琼，必定能消灭他。 高宗没有答应，诏令他驻军江州作为淮浙地区的后援。
English: Yuefei also made a request: he was willing to enter the north and station troops in Huai-Dian, and when it was convenient, he would enter Qiaojiong, which would certainly be able to eliminate him. Gao Zong did not agree, and ordered his troops to be stationed in Jiangzhou as backup in the Huai-Zhe region.

古文：飞知刘豫结粘罕，而兀术恶刘豫，可以间而动。
现代文：岳飞侦知刘豫结好粘罕，而兀却厌恶刘豫，可以离间他们而后采取行动。
English: Yuefei detects that Liu Yu is good at sticking together, while Zou detests Liu Yu, and can separate them and then take action.

古文：会军中得兀术谍者，飞阳责之曰： 汝非吾军中人张斌耶？
现代文：恰好这时士兵捕到了兀的一位侦探，岳飞假装责备他说 ：你不是我军中的张斌吗？
English: Just then, the soldiers caught a detective from Handan. Yue Fei pretended to scold him and said, "Aren't you the Zhang Bin in our army?"

古文：吾向遣汝至齐，约诱至四太子，汝往不复来。
现代文：我以前派遣你到齐国去，约定引诱四太子兀来，但你去后不再回来。
English: I sent you to Qi to lure the four princes, but you never came back.

古文：吾继遣人问，齐已许我，今冬以会合寇江为名，致四太子于清河。
现代文：我再派人前去询问，齐国已答允我，今年冬天以联合进犯长江为借口，把四太子诱到清河。
English: I sent another person to inquire. The State of Qi has promised me to lure the four princes to Qinghe under the pretext of a joint attack on the Yangtze River this winter.

古文：汝所持书竟不至，何背我耶？ 谍冀缓死，即诡服。
现代文：你所拿的书信竟没有送到，为什么要背叛我？ 敌间谍企图不被立即处死，便假装服罪。
English: Why did you betray me when the letter you took did not arrive? The enemy spy pretended to confess in order not to be immediately executed.

古文：乃作蜡书，言与刘豫同谋诛兀术事，因谓谍曰： 吾今贷汝。 复遣至齐，问举兵期，刲股纳书，戒勿泄。
现代文：岳飞于是写了一封书信藏于蜡丸中，上面说明同刘豫合谋诛杀兀的事情，并对敌探说： 我今天饶你不死。 又派他到齐国去，询问用兵的日期，割开敌探的大腿把蜡丸藏进去，告诫他不得泄露。
English: Yuefei then wrote a letter and hid it in a ball of wax, explaining that he had conspired with Liu Yu to kill the dragonfly, and said to the enemy scout: I will not let you die today. He also sent him to Qi Province to inquire about the date of enlistment, cut open the thigh of the enemy scout to hide the ball of wax, and warned him not to leak it.

古文：谍归，以书示兀术，兀术大惊，驰白其主，遂废豫。
现代文：敌探归去后，把蜡书交给兀，兀大吃一惊，迅速报告给金朝皇帝，金朝于是废掉刘豫。
English: After the enemy explorer returned, he handed the wax book to Zou. Zou was taken aback and quickly reported it to the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty. The Jin Dynasty then abolished Liu Yu.

古文：飞奏： 宜乘废豫之际，捣其不备，长驱以取中原。 不报。
现代文：岳飞上奏： 应该乘金废掉刘豫的大好机会，攻其不备，长驱直入收复中原。 
English: Yuefei played up: We should take advantage of the golden opportunity to abolish Liu Yu, attack him unprepared, and drive straight into the recovery of Central Plains.

古文：八年，还军鄂州。
现代文：没有得到朝廷的答复。绍兴八年，岳飞回军鄂州。
English: There was no reply from the imperial court. In the eighth year of Shaoxing, Yuefei returned to Ezhou.

古文：王庶视师江、淮，飞与庶书： 今岁若不举兵，当纳节请闲。 庶甚壮之。
现代文：王庶到江淮地区视察军队，岳飞给王庶写信说 ：今年如果不举兵北进，我就交还符节请求辞职赋闲。 
English: Wang Shizhu went to the Jianghuai region to inspect the army. Yue Fei wrote to Wang Shizhu, saying, "If you do not raise an army to march north this year, I will hand back my insignia, ask you to resign, and lay you off."

古文：秋，召赴行在，命诣资善堂见皇太子。
现代文：王庶给予了热情鼓励。这年秋天，岳飞奉召前往行在杭州，高宗命令他到资善堂会见皇太子。
English: In the autumn of that year, Yue Fei was summoned to Hangzhou, and Gaozong ordered him to meet the crown prince at Shishan Hall.

古文：飞退而喜曰： 社稷得人矣，中兴基业，其在是乎？ 会金遣使将归河南地，飞言： 金人不可信，和好不可恃，相臣谋国不臧，恐贻后世讥 桧衔之。
现代文：岳飞退下后高兴地说： 国家得到主人了，中兴的基业，可能就在他身上吧？ 适逢金朝遣使前来准备归还河南失地，岳飞上奏说： 金人不可信赖，和好不能依恃，宰相谋划国家大事不当，恐怕会让后世讥笑。 
English: After Yuefei retreated, he said happily: The country has got its master, ZTE's inheritance, may be on him? When the Kim dynasty sent an envoy to prepare for the return of Henan's lost land, Yuefei made a report saying: Kim people cannot be trusted, reconciliation cannot be embraced, the prime minister is not planning national events properly, I am afraid it will make future generations laugh.

古文：九年，以复河南，大赦。
现代文：秦桧因此怀恨岳飞。绍兴九年，由于收复了河南失地，朝廷下令大赦。
English: In Shaoxing nine years later, as a result of regaining the lost territory in Henan, the imperial court ordered an amnesty.

古文：飞表谢，寓和议不便之意，有 唾手燕云，复仇报国 之语。
现代文：岳飞上表感谢，表中包含着不应与金议和的意思，其中有 燕云之地唾手可复，雪耻复仇报效国家 等语。
English: Yuefei thanked the table, which contained the meaning that he should not discuss peace with Kim. Among them were "Yan Yun's land is at your fingertips" and "Snow shame revenge retaliation country."

古文：授开府仪同三司，飞力辞，谓： 今日之事，可危而不可安；可忧而不可贺；可训兵饬士，谨备不虞，而不可论功行赏，取笑敌人。 三诏不受，帝温言奖谕，乃受。
现代文：朝廷授予他开府仪同三司，岳飞极力辞谢，说： 今天的形势，应该感到危急而不应感到安枕无忧，应该感到忧虑而不能进行庆贺，应该训练军队，谨慎戒备以应付突然事变，而不能论功行赏，让敌人取笑。 高宗三次诏命他都不接受，高宗温和地奖励劝慰，他才接受。
English: The imperial court awarded him the ceremony of opening the government together with the three departments, and Yue Fei tried his best to decline, saying: Today's situation should be felt as a crisis, but not as a peace of mind; it should be felt as a worry, but not as a celebration; it should be trained as an army, cautiously prepared to deal with sudden events, but not as a reward for merit, and made fun of by the enemy.

古文：会遣士〈亻褭〉谒诸陵，飞请以轻骑从洒埽，实欲观衅以伐谋。
现代文：正逢朝廷派遣赵士朝谒先帝陵墓，岳飞请求率领轻骑兵随从使者前去祭扫先帝陵墓，实际上是想借此机会侦察金朝虚实以谋划北伐的方略。
English: Just when the imperial court sent Zhao Shizhao to visit the former emperor's mausoleum, Yue Fei requested to lead the light cavalry to follow the envoy and sweep the former emperor's mausoleum. In fact, he wanted to take this opportunity to investigate the truth and falsity of the Kim dynasty to plan the strategy of the Northern Expedition.

古文：又奏： 金人无事请和，此必有肘腋之虞，名以地归我，实寄之也。 桧白帝止其行。
现代文：又上奏 ：金人无故请求和解，其中必然包含心腹之患，名义上把土地归还我们，实际上不过是暂时寄放在我们这里罢了。 
English: And again: The Kims are asking for reconciliation for no reason, which must include the suffering of their confidants. The land is nominally returned to us, but in fact it is only temporarily deposited with us.

古文：十年，金人攻拱、亳，刘锜告急，命飞驰援，飞遣张宪、姚政赴之。
现代文：秦桧报告高宗阻止岳飞前往。绍兴十年，金军进攻拱州、亳州，刘钅奇向朝廷告急，朝廷命令迅速出兵援助，岳飞派遣张宪、姚政率军前往增援。
English: Qin Yu reported to Gao Zong to prevent Yue Fei from going to Shaoxing. In the tenth year of Shaoxing, when the Chinese army attacked Gongzhou and Zhangzhou, Liu Rongqi sent an urgent appeal to the imperial court. The imperial court ordered the rapid dispatch of troops to provide assistance. Yue Fei dispatched Zhang Xian and Yao Zheng to lead the army to provide reinforcements.

古文：帝赐札曰： 设施之方，一以委卿，朕不遥度。 飞乃遣王贵、牛皋、董先、杨再兴、孟邦杰、李宝等，分布经略西京、汝、郑、颍昌、陈、曹、光、蔡诸郡；又命梁兴渡河，纠合忠义社，取河东、北州县。
现代文：高宗赐给岳飞亲笔信说 ：同金军作战的计划安排，全部委托给你处置，我不从朝廷进行遥控。 岳飞于是派遣王贵、牛皋、董先、杨再兴、孟邦杰、李宝等人，分道经营略取西京、汝州、郑州、颍昌、陈州、曹州、光州、蔡州等地；又命令梁兴渡过黄河，联络召集忠义社抗金义军，攻取河东、河北各州县。
English: Gao Zong gave a personal letter to Yue Fei, saying, "All the plans and arrangements for the war with the Golden Army are entrusted to you, and I will not carry out remote control from the imperial court." Yue Fei then dispatched Wang Gui, Niu Yao, Dong Xian, Yang Zai Xing, Meng Bangjie, Li Bao and others to carry out separate operations in Xijing, Ruzhou, Zhengzhou, Binchang, Chenzhou, Caozhou, Gwangju, Caizhou and other places; he also ordered Liang Xing to cross the Yellow River, contact and convene the loyalist anti-gold army, and

古文：又遣兵东援刘锜，西援郭浩，自以其军长驱以阚中原。
现代文：又派兵去东面援助刘钅奇，往西面援助郭浩，自己率领主力长驱北进以虎视中原。
English: He also sent troops to the east to aid Liu Bingqi, to the west to aid Guo Hao, and led the main force northward to the Central Plains.

古文：将发，密奏言： 先正国本以安人心，然后不常厥居，以示无忘复仇之意。 帝得奏，大褒其忠，授少保，河南府路、陕西、河东北路招讨使，寻改河南、北诸路招讨使。
现代文：大军即将出发时，岳飞秘密上奏说 ：首先确立国家的根本以安定人心，使这个位子不致长期空缺，以表示没有忘记复仇雪耻的决心。 高宗得到奏章，对他的忠心大大褒奖了一番，授予他为少保，河南府路、陕西、河东北路招讨使，不久改任河南、北诸路招讨使。
English: When the great army was about to set out, Yue Fei secretly made a report saying: First, establish the foundation of the country to stabilize the people's hearts, so that this position would not be vacant for a long time, to show that he had not forgotten the determination to avenge the shame. Gao Zong received a report, and his loyalty was greatly commended, and he was awarded the title of Shao Bao, Henan Provincial Road, Shaanxi, and Northeast Henan Province Recruitment Envoy, and soon he was reappointed as Henan and North Henan Province Recruitment Envoy.

古文：未几，所遣诸将相继奏捷。
现代文：没过多久，岳飞派遣的各位将领先后传来捷报。
English: Before long, everyone dispatched by Yuefei will be in the lead, and then the good news will come.

古文：大军在颍昌，诸将分道出战，飞自以轻骑驻郾城，兵势甚锐。
现代文：大军进至颍昌，各位将领分路出兵作战，岳飞亲自率领轻骑兵驻扎在郾城，军队气势十分锐利。
English: The large army advanced to Fuchang. The generals led the detachment of troops to fight. Yue Fei personally led the light cavalry stationed in Fucheng. The army's momentum was very sharp.

古文：兀术大惧，会龙虎大王议，以为诸帅易与，独飞不可当，欲诱致其师，并力一战。
现代文：兀极为害怕，与龙虎大王商议对策，认为其他宋军将领都容易对付，唯独岳飞难以抵挡，打算引诱岳飞军前来，集中兵力进行决战。
English: He was extremely afraid, and discussed countermeasures with the Dragon and Tiger King. He thought that the other Song generals were easy to deal with, but Yuefei was difficult to resist. He intended to lure Yuefei's army to come and concentrate forces for a decisive battle.

古文：中外闻之，大惧，诏飞审处自固。
现代文：朝廷内外听说这一消息，十分恐惧，诏令岳飞谨慎处置保全军队。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court heard this news and were very afraid, so they ordered Yuefei to carefully dispose of and preserve the army.

古文：飞曰： 金人伎穷矣。 乃日出挑战，且骂之。
现代文：岳飞说 ：金人的伎俩已经用尽了。 于是天天出兵挑战，不断辱骂金军。
English: Yuefei said, "The tactics of the Jin people have been exhausted," so he sent out troops every day to challenge and constantly insult the Jin army.

古文：兀术怒，合龙虎大王、盖天大王与韩常之兵逼郾城。
现代文：兀怒不可遏，会合龙虎大王、盖天大王和韩常的兵力进逼郾城。
English: Unable to contain his anger, the forces of the Dragon and Tiger Kings, the Great King of Heaven and Earth, and Han Zang entered and forced the city to surrender.

古文：飞遣子云领骑兵直贯其阵，戒之曰： 不胜，先斩汝！ 鏖战数十合，贼尸布野。
现代文：岳飞派遣儿子岳云率领骑兵直穿金军阵中，告诫他说： 不能取胜，我先杀你！ 双方激战数十个回合，金军遗尸遍野。
English: Yuefei sent his son, Yueyun, to lead the cavalry straight through the golden army, and warned him: If you can't win, I'll kill you first! The two sides fought dozens of rounds, and the remains of the golden army were everywhere.

古文：初，兀术有劲军，皆重铠，贯以韦索，三人为联，号 拐子马 ，官军不能当。
现代文：当初，兀有一支精锐部队，都身穿重甲，以皮绳连贯在一起，三人一组，号称 拐子马 ，宋军不能抵挡。
English: At the beginning, there was only one elite unit, all wearing heavy armor, connected by leather ropes, a group of three, known as "Kou Zi Ma," the Song Army could not resist.

古文：是役也，以万五千骑来，飞戒步卒以麻札刀入阵，勿仰视，第斫马足。
现代文：这次战役，兀出动一万五千名骑兵前来，岳飞命令步兵用麻扎刀冲入敌骑兵阵中，不要抬头仰视，只砍敌马足。
English: In this battle, Yue Fei sent out fifteen thousand cavalry and ordered the infantry to rush into the enemy cavalry with a matzah knife. Don't look up, just cut the enemy horse's foot.

古文：拐子马相连，一马仆，二马不能行，官军奋击，遂大败之。
现代文：拐子马因用皮绳互相连结，一马倒下，其他两马便不能行动，宋军奋力攻击，于是大败金军。
English: Because the two horses were tied together with a leather rope, one horse fell down, and the other two horses could not move. The Song army fought hard to attack, and then defeated the Jin army.

古文：兀术大恸曰： 自海上起兵，皆以此胜，今已矣！ 兀术益兵来，部将王刚以五十骑觇敌，遇之，奋斩其将。
现代文：兀大哭道： 我自海上起兵以来，都是用拐子马取胜，今天完了！ 兀增兵前来，岳飞部将王刚率领五十名骑兵侦察敌情，突然与金军遭遇，王刚奋力斩杀敌军将领。
English: Hao Da wept loudly, "Since I took up arms at sea, I have always used a horse-drawn carriage to win. Today is over!" When the reinforcements arrived, the commander of the Yuefei Division, Wang Gang, led fifty cavalrymen to reconnoiter the enemy situation. Suddenly, they encountered the Golden Army, and Wang Gang fought hard to kill the enemy general.

古文：飞时出视战地，望见黄尘蔽天，自以四十骑突战，败之。
现代文：当时岳飞出来观察战场情况，望见黄色烟尘遮蔽天空，亲自率领四十名骑兵突入敌阵冲杀，将金军打败。
English: At that time, Yue flew out to observe the battlefield situation, saw the yellow smoke and dust covering the sky, and personally led forty cavalrymen to rush into the enemy line and defeat the Chinese army.

古文：方郾城再捷，飞谓云曰： 贼屡败，必还攻颍昌，汝宜速援王贵。 既而兀术果至，贵将游奕、云将背嵬战于城西。
现代文：当郾城之战再次获胜时，岳飞对岳云说 ：金军屡次失败，必然回军进攻颍昌，你应迅速率兵增援王贵。 不久兀果然率军进逼颍昌，王贵率领游奕军、岳飞率领背嵬军同金军在城西大战。
English: When the Battle of Lucheng was won again, Yuefei said to Yueyun, "The Golden Army has failed many times, so it is inevitable to return to attack Lucheng, you should quickly lead troops to reinforce Wang Gui." Shortly after, Yuefei led the army into Lucheng, and Wang Gui led the Yuyi Army, and Yuefei led the back Lucheng Army to fight with the Golden Army in the west of the city.

古文：云以骑兵八百挺前决战，步军张左右翼继之，杀兀术婿夏金吾、副统军粘罕索孛堇，兀术遁去。
现代文：岳云率八百名骑兵冲至阵前同敌决战，步兵在左右翼展开继进，杀死兀女婿夏金吾、副统军粘罕索孛堇，兀逃走。
English: Yueyun led eight hundred cavalrymen to rush to the front of the battle to fight with the enemy, and the infantry advanced on the left and right wings, killing Xie's son-in-law Xia Jingu and the deputy commander of the unified army, and fled.

古文：梁兴会太行忠义及两河豪杰等，累战皆捷，中原大震。
现代文：梁兴会合太行山忠义民兵和两河地区的英雄豪杰等，同金军屡战屡胜，极大地震动了中原地区。
English: Liang Xing's association of the Taihang Mountain Loyalist Militia and the heroes of the Two Rivers region fought and won many battles with the Chinese army, greatly shaking the Central Plains region.

古文：飞奏： 兴等过河，人心愿归朝廷。
现代文：岳飞上奏 ：梁兴等渡过黄河，那里的民众都愿意归附朝廷。
English: Yuefei inserts: Liang Xing and others have crossed the Yellow River, where the people are willing to join the imperial court.

古文：金兵累败，兀术等皆令老少北去，正中兴之机。 飞进军朱仙镇，距汴京四十五里，与兀术对垒而阵，遣骁将以背嵬骑五百奋击，大破之，兀术遁还汴京。
现代文：金军接连战败，兀等人都命令当地老少百姓向北迁移，这正是中兴宋朝大业的好机会。 岳飞进军朱仙镇，距离汴京只有四十五里，与兀对峙布阵，派遣勇将率领背嵬军五百名骑兵奋勇冲击，大破金军，兀逃回汴京。
English: The Jin army was defeated one after another, and Yao and others ordered the local people to migrate to the north, which was a good opportunity to promote the Song Dynasty. Yue Fei marched into Zhu Xian Town, only forty-five miles from Beijing, and confronted Yao, sending a brave general to lead the 500 cavalrymen of the back of the Jin army to make a bold impact, smash the Jin army, and escape back to Beijing.

古文：飞檄陵台令行视诸陵，葺治之。
现代文：岳飞命令陵台令巡视察看皇室陵墓，加以修葺整治。
English: Yuefei ordered the mausoleum commander to inspect the imperial mausoleum and repair it.

古文：先是，绍兴五年，飞遣梁兴等布德意，招结两河豪杰，山砦韦铨、孙谋等敛兵固堡，以待王师，李通、胡清、李宝、李兴、张恩、孙琪等举众来归。
现代文：早先，绍兴五年，岳飞派遣梁兴等人传布朝廷的恩德，招纳结交两河地区的英雄豪杰，山寨中的韦铨、孙谋等人收缩兵力固守堡寨，以等待宋军到来，李通、胡清、李宝、李兴、张恩、琪等人率领部众前来归附。
English: Earlier, in the fifth year of Shaoxing, Yuefei sent Liang Xing and others to spread the benevolence of the imperial court and recruit heroes and heroines in the two rivers region. Wei Wei and Sun Mu, who were in the cottage, held the fortification with a shrinking force to wait for the arrival of the Song Army. Li Tong, Hu Qing, Li Bao, Li Xing, Zhang En, Qi and others led the troops to come and annex it.

古文：金人动息，山川险要，一时皆得其实。
现代文：金军的动静，山川的险要，一时都能了如指掌。
English: The movements of the gold army, the perils of the mountains and rivers, can all be known at a glance.

古文：尽磁、相、开德、泽、潞、晋、绛、汾、隰之境，皆期日兴兵，与官军会。
现代文：磁、相、开德、泽、潞、晋、绛、汾、隰等州府的所有地区，都约定日期同时起兵，与宋军互相呼应。
English: All regions of the prefectures of Gyeonggi, Sang, Kaede, Ze, Gyeonggi, Jin, Gyeonggi, Yeonggi, and Yeonggi agreed on the date for the simultaneous start of the army, echoing each other with the Song Army.

古文：其所揭旗以 岳 为号，父老百姓争挽车牵牛，载糗粮以馈义军，顶盆焚香迎候者，充满道路。
现代文：他们所打出的旗帜以 岳 字为号，父老百姓争相拉车牵牛，装载着粮草赠给义军，顶盆烧香迎候宋军的人群，充满了道路。
English: The flag they flew was called "Yue Zi," and the roads were full of people competing to pull carts and lead oxen, loaded with grain and grass to give to the rebels, and burning incense to welcome the Song Army.

古文：自燕以南，金号令不行，兀术欲签军以抗飞，河北无一人从者。
现代文：自燕京以南，金朝的号令得不到贯彻执行，兀打算强迫壮男充军以抗拒岳飞，整个河北地区没有一人服从。
English: From the south of Yanjing, the orders of the Kim dynasty could not be carried out, and Zhai planned to force the strong men to join the army to resist Yuefei, and no one in the entire Hebei region obeyed.

古文：乃叹曰： 自我起北方以来，未有如今日之挫衄。 金帅乌陵思谋素号桀黠，亦不能制其下，但谕之曰： 毋轻动，俟岳家军来即降。 金统制王镇、统领崔庆、将官李觊崔虎华旺等皆率所部降，以至禁卫龙虎大王下忔查千户高勇之属，皆密受飞旗榜，自北方来降。
现代文：兀于是哀叹说 ：自从我朝兴起于北方以来，从没有遭到过像今天这样的挫败。 金朝将领乌陵思谋一向号称凶悍多谋，也不能治服他的部下，只能劝谕他的部下说： 不要轻举妄动，等到岳家军到来时便投降。 金军统制王镇、统领崔庆、将官李觊、崔虎、华旺等人都率部投降，以至于金禁卫龙虎大王的下属忄乞查千户高勇等人，都秘密接受了岳飞的旗号，从北方前来归降。
English: Rui then lamented, "Since the rise of my dynasty in the north, there has never been a defeat like today's. The general of the Kim dynasty, Wuling Simo, has always been known as fierce and resourceful, but he could not subdue his subordinates. He could only advise his subordinates to say, "Don't act rashly, wait until the Yue family's army arrives, and then surrender." Wang Zhen, commander of the Kim army, Cui Qing, generals Li Xi, Cui Hu, and Hua Wang all surrendered at the head of their units, so much so that the subordinates of the King of the Golden Guard, Longhu, such

古文：金将军韩常欲以五万众内附。
现代文：金军将领韩常打算率部五万人归附。
English: Han Chang, the general of the Chinese army, planned to take 50,000 men and annex them.

古文：飞大喜，语其下曰： 直抵黄龙府，与诸君痛饮尔！ 
现代文：岳飞十分高兴，对部下说： 长驱直入金老巢黄龙府，我同诸位将领一起开怀痛饮！ 
English: Yue Fei was very happy and said to his subordinates: "Let's drive straight into the golden nest of Huanglong Palace. I'll have a drink with you generals!"

古文：方指日渡河，而桧欲画淮以北弃之，风台臣请班师。
现代文：正当岳飞指日之内就要渡过黄河北进时，秦桧却企图放弃淮河以北地区，暗示台谏官奏请高宗命令岳飞班师回朝。
English: When Yuefei was about to cross the Yellow River to the north within a few days, Qin Hui tried to give up the area north of the Huai River, suggesting that the Taiwanese officials should ask Gao Zong to order Yuefei's division to return to the North.

古文：飞奏： 金人锐气沮丧，尽弃辎重，疾走渡河，豪杰向风，士卒用命，时不再来，机难轻失。 桧知飞志锐不可回，乃先请张俊、杨沂中等归，而后言飞孤军不可久留，乞令班师。
现代文：岳飞上奏： 金兵士气沮丧，抛弃全部辎重，急忙渡河北逃，两河地区豪杰闻风响应，我军士兵拼死效命，这样的时机不会再来，难得的机会不应轻易放弃。 秦桧知道岳飞北伐意志坚决不可改变，于是先请求高宗让张俊、杨沂中等人率军回师，然后说岳飞孤军深入不能久留，请求下令班师。
English: Yuefei played up: the gold soldiers were depressed, abandoned all their burdens, hurriedly crossed to Hebei to escape, the heroes in the two rivers region responded to the wind, and our soldiers worked hard to save their lives. Such an opportunity will not come again, and the rare opportunity should not be easily given up. Qin Yu knew that Yuefei's will to go to the north was resolute and could not be changed, so he first asked Gao Zong to let Zhang Jun and Yang Hui's medium-sized army return to the division, and then said that Yuefei's lone army could not stay for a long time, and asked to order

古文：一日奉十二金字牌，飞愤惋泣下，东向再拜曰： 十年之力，废于一旦。 飞班师，民遮马恸哭，诉曰： 我等戴香盆、运粮草以迎官军，金人悉知之。
现代文：一天之内连下十二道金字牌，岳飞愤慨泪下，面朝东方再拜说 ：十年的努力，毁弃于一旦。 岳飞率军南撤，民众拦住他的坐骑痛哭失声，诉说道： 我们头顶香盆、运送粮草以迎接官军，金人全都知道。
English: Within one day, twelve gold plaques were laid down. Yue Fei, indignant and in tears, turned his face to the east and said: "Ten years of hard work, destroyed in a moment." Yue Fei led the army to retreat south, and the people stopped his mount, crying and crying, and said: We are carrying incense, transporting grain and grass to meet the government army, and the gold people all know.

古文：相公去，我辈无噍类矣。 飞亦悲泣，取诏示之曰： 吾不得擅留。 哭声震野，飞留五日以待其徙，从而南者如市，亟奏以汉上六郡闲田处之。方兀术弃汴去，有书生叩马曰： 太子毋走，岳少保且退矣。 兀术曰： 岳少保以五百骑破吾十万，京城日夜望其来，何谓可守？ 生曰： 自古未有权臣在内，而大将能立功于外者，岳少保且不免，况欲成功乎？ 兀术悟，遂留。飞既归，所得州县，旋复失之。
现代文：岳少保祸害尚且不能免，更何况还想成就功业呢？ 兀恍然大悟，于是留居汴京。
English: The scourge of Yue Shao Bao is still unavoidable, what's more, do you still want to accomplish your career? Zou suddenly realized, so he stayed in Beijing.

古文：飞力请解兵柄，不许，自庐入觐，帝问之，飞拜谢而已。
现代文：岳飞大军既已撤归，原来所收复的州县，立即又全部丧失。岳飞极力请求解除自己的兵权，高宗没有批准，自庐山入朝觐见高宗，高宗问他，除了拜谢之外别无他言。
English: Yuefei's large army had already retreated, and all the prefectures and counties that had been recovered were immediately lost. Yuefei strongly requested to be relieved of his military power, but Gao Zong did not approve. He went to the imperial court to see Gao Zong from Lushan Mountain. Gao Zong asked him if he had anything to say other than to thank him.

古文：十一年，谍报金分道渡淮，飞请合诸帅之兵破敌。
现代文：绍兴十一年，间谍报告金军分路渡过淮河南侵，岳飞请求会合各位将帅的部队打破敌人的进攻。
English: In the eleventh year of Shaoxing, a spy reported that a detachment of the Chinese army had crossed the southward invasion of the Huai River. Yuefei requested the meeting of the generals to break the enemy's attack.

古文：兀术、韩常与龙虎大王疾驱至庐，帝趣飞应援，凡十七札。
现代文：兀、韩常和龙虎大王率军迅速来到庐州，高宗催促岳飞率部应援，前后写了十七封信。
English: Yao, Han Zang and Longhu Daowang led the army quickly to Ganzhou, Gao Zong urged Yuefei to support, and wrote seventeen letters back and forth.

古文：飞策金人举国南来，巢穴必虚，若长驱京、洛以捣之，彼必奔命，可坐而敝。
现代文：岳飞估计金人集中全国兵力南犯，巢穴必然空虚，如果长驱直入汴京、洛阳，金军必然疲于奔命，可以坐待敌人困毙。
English: Yuefei estimated that if the Kim people concentrated the national troop strength to the south, the lair would inevitably be empty. If they drove straight into Beijing and Luoyang, the Kim army would inevitably be exhausted from running for their lives, and they could wait for the enemy to die.

古文：时飞方苦寒嗽，力疾而行。
现代文：当时岳飞正患风寒咳嗽，竭力支撑病体行动。
English: At that time, Yuefei was suffering from cold and cough, and he tried his best to support the sick body.

古文：又恐帝急于退敌，乃奏： 臣如捣虚，势必得利，若以为敌方在近，未暇远图，欲乞亲至蕲、黄，以议攻却。 帝得奏大喜，赐札曰： 卿苦寒疾，乃为朕行，国尔忘身，谁如卿者？ 师至庐州，金兵望风而遁。
现代文：又担心高宗急于打退敌人进攻，于是上奏： 我军如果直捣敌人空虚地区，势必能获得胜利，如果由于敌人正在附近，没有空闲图谋远方，我准备请求亲自到蕲州、黄州，以商议进攻退敌事宜。 高宗得到岳飞奏章十分高兴，赐给岳飞书信说 ：你正患风寒，仍然为我领军行动，为国家而忘记自己，谁能像你这样？ 岳飞大军进至庐州，金军闻风而逃。
English: He was also worried that Gao Zong was anxious to repel the enemy's attack, so he sent a letter to Yue Fei: "If our army directly attacks the enemy's empty areas, it is bound to win. If, because the enemy is nearby, there is no time to plot far away, I am ready to request to personally go to Ganzhou and Huangzhou to discuss the attack and retreat of the enemy. Gao Zong was very happy to get Yue Fei's letter, and gave Yue Fei a letter saying: "You are suffering from cold, still leading the army for me, forgetting yourself for the country, who can be like you? Yue Fei

古文：飞还兵于舒以俟命，帝又赐札，以飞小心恭谨、不专进退为得体。
现代文：岳飞回军舒州等待命令，高宗又赐给岳飞书信，认为岳飞小心恭谨、不擅自进退是十分得体的。
English: Yuefei returned to the Shuzhou army to wait for orders, and Gaozong also gave Yuefei a letter, believing that it was very proper for Yuefei to be careful and respectful and not to advance and retreat without authorization.

古文：兀术破濠州，张俊驻军黄连镇，不敢进；杨沂中遇伏而败，帝命飞救之。
现代文：兀攻破濠州，张俊将军队驻扎在黄连镇，不敢前进；杨沂中中了金军埋伏而失败，高宗命令岳飞率部救援。
English: Zhang Jun stationed his army in Huanglian Town, and did not dare to advance. Yang Xizhong was ambushed by the Chinese army and failed. Gaozong ordered Yuefei to lead the rescue.

古文：金人闻飞至，又遁。
现代文：金军听说岳飞来到，又逃走了。
English: When the Chinese army heard that Yuefei had arrived, they fled.

古文：时和议既决，桧患飞异己，乃密奏召三大将论功行赏。
现代文：这时宋金和议已经签订，秦桧害怕岳飞反对自己，于是秘密奏请高宗召还三位大将论功行赏。
English: At this time, Song and Jin had already signed a peace treaty. Qin Yu was afraid that Yue Fei would oppose him, so he secretly asked Gao Zong to recall the three generals and reward them for their service.

古文：韩世忠、张俊已至，飞独后，桧又用参政王次翁计，俟之六七日。
现代文：韩世忠、张俊已回到朝廷，唯独岳飞后到，秦桧又使用参政王次翁的计谋，等待岳飞六七天时间。
English: Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun have returned to the imperial court, but only Yuefei has arrived, and Qin Hui has used the strategy of Wang Jiong to wait for Yuefei for six or seven days.

古文：既至，授枢密副使，位参知政事上，飞固请还兵柄。
现代文：岳飞到后，任命他为枢密副使，位在参知政事之上，岳飞坚决请求交还兵权。
English: After Yuefei arrived, he was appointed as a vice-envoy of the Privy Council, and was in charge of political affairs. Yuefei firmly requested the return of military power.

古文：五月，诏同俊往楚州措置边防，总韩世忠军还驻镇江。
现代文：五月，诏令他同张俊一起到楚州部署边防，率领韩世忠的部队还驻镇江。
English: In May, the emperor ordered him and Zhang Jun to deploy to Chuzhou to guard the border. The troops led by Han Shizhong were still stationed in Zhenjiang.

古文：初，飞在诸将中年最少，以列校拔起，累立显功，世忠、俊不能平，飞屈己下之，幕中轻锐教飞勿苦降意。
现代文：当初，岳飞在各位大将中年龄最小，从一个小校层层提拔起来，多次建立显赫战功，韩世忠、张俊心中不服，岳飞委曲求全甘居他们之下，幕僚中年轻气盛的官员劝说岳飞不要过于谦恭退让。
English: At the beginning, Yuefei was the youngest among the generals. He was promoted from a small school layer by layer and repeatedly established outstanding war exploits. Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun were not convinced. Yuefei's committee asked Qu Qu Quan to stay under them. The young and energetic officials in the staff persuaded Yuefei not to be too humble and yield.

古文：金人攻淮西，俊分地也，俊始不敢行，师卒无功。
现代文：金军进攻淮西，这里本是张俊负责的防区，张俊开始时不敢迎战，所以没能立功。
English: The Chinese army attacked Huaixi, which was Zhang Jun's defense zone. Zhang Jun did not dare to fight at the beginning, so he could not make a contribution.

古文：飞闻命即行，遂解庐州围，帝授飞两镇节，俊益耻。
现代文：岳飞听到命令立即行动，于是解了庐州之围，高宗授予岳飞两镇节度使，张俊更加感到这是一种耻辱。
English: Yuefei heard the order to act immediately, so he lifted the siege of Zhangzhou, and Gaozong awarded Yuefei the two towns. Zhang Jun felt that this was a disgrace.

古文：杨么平，飞献俊、世忠楼船各一，兵械毕备，世忠大悦，俊反忌之。
现代文：杨么平定之后，岳飞赠送张俊、韩世忠每人一艘楼船，武器装备齐全，韩世忠十分高兴，张俊反而认为这是岳飞故意羞辱他而怀恨在心。
English: After Yang Rong was pacified, Yue Fei presented Zhang Jun and Han Shizhong with a houseboat each, complete with weapons and equipment. Han Shizhong was very happy, but Zhang Jun thought that this was Yue Fei deliberately humiliating him and harboring a grudge.

古文：淮西之役，俊以前途粮乏訹飞，飞不为止，帝赐札褒谕，有曰： 转饷艰阻，卿不复顾。 俊疑飞漏言，还朝，反倡言飞逗遛不进，以乏饷为辞。至视世忠军，俊知世忠忤桧，欲与飞分其背嵬军，飞议不肯，俊大不悦。及同行楚州城，俊欲修城为备，飞曰： 当戮力以图恢复，岂可为退保计？ 俊变色。
现代文：张俊怀疑岳飞泄露了自己的话，回到朝廷后，反而散布谣言说岳飞逗留不进，以缺乏粮草为借口。到这时视察韩世忠军时，张俊知道韩世忠忤逆秦桧，打算同岳飞一起瓜分韩世忠的背嵬军，岳飞顾全大义不肯这样做，张俊极为不高兴，等到和岳飞一起去楚州城，张俊打算修缮城池作为防备，岳飞说： 应当尽力谋取收复失地，怎么能做退守自保的打算？ 张俊悖然变色。
English: Zhang Jun suspected that Yue Fei had leaked his own words. After returning to the imperial court, he instead spread the rumor that Yue Fei would not enter, using the lack of grain and grass as an excuse. At this time, when inspecting Han Shizhong's army, Zhang Jun knew that Han Shizhong had rebelled against the Qin Dynasty and planned to divide Han Shizhong's army with Yue Fei. Yue Fei refused to do so out of consideration for the greater good. Zhang Jun was extremely unhappy. When he and Yue Fei went to Chuzhou City, Zhang Jun planned to repair the city pool as a precaution. Yue

古文：会世忠军吏景著与总领胡纺言： 二枢密若分世忠军，恐至生事。 纺上之朝，桧捕著下大理寺，将以扇摇诬世忠。
现代文：恰逢韩世忠的军吏景著对总领胡纺说 ：两位枢密使如果瓜分韩世忠的军队，恐怕会引起事变。 胡纺将此上报朝廷，秦桧把景著逮捕关进大理寺，准备以此煽动谣言诬陷韩世忠。
English: At the same time, Han Shizhong's military official, Jingsong, said to the commander-in-chief, Hu Fong, "If the two confidential envoys divide Han Shizhong's army, I am afraid it will cause an incident." Hu Fong reported this to the imperial court, Qin Yu arrested Jingsong and locked him up in Dali Temple, preparing to use this to incite rumors to frame Han Shizhong.

古文：飞驰书告以桧意，世忠见帝自明。
现代文：岳飞迅速写信给韩世忠，把秦桧的用意告诉他，韩世忠面见高宗辩明自己。
English: Yue Fei quickly wrote to Han Shizhong, telling him of Qin Hui's intention. Han Shizhong saw Gao Zong's face and defended himself.

古文：俊于是大憾飞，遂倡言飞议弃山阳，且密以飞报世忠事告桧，桧大怒。
现代文：张俊因此极其憎恨岳飞，于是散布谣言说岳飞倡议放弃山阳，并且秘密地把岳飞给韩世忠写信这件事告诉秦桧，秦桧极为恼怒。
English: As a result, Zhang Jun hated Yuefei intensely, so he spread the rumor that Yuefei proposed to give up Sanyang, and secretly told Qin Yu that Yuefei had written to Han Shizhong. Qin Yu was extremely angry.

古文：初，桧逐赵鼎，飞每对客叹息，又以恢复为己任，不肯附和议。
现代文：当初，秦桧将赵鼎逐出朝廷，岳飞常常对幕僚感叹惋惜，又把恢复中原作为自己的责任，不肯附和同金议和。
English: At first, Qin Hui expelled Zhao Ding from the imperial court, and Yue Fei often lamented to his staff, and took it as his responsibility to restore the Central Plains, and refused to go along with Jin's peace talks.

古文：读桧奏，至 德无常师，主善为师 之语，恶其欺罔，恚曰： 君臣大伦，根于天性，大臣而忍面谩其主耶！ 兀术遗桧书曰： 汝朝夕以和请，而岳飞方为河北图，必杀飞，始可和。 桧亦以飞不死，终梗和议，己必及祸，故力谋杀之。
现代文：阅读秦桧奏章，到 德行没有一定的师法标准，只要主张为善就可以师法 这句话时，厌恶他对皇帝的欺骗蒙蔽，愤怒地说 ：君臣之间的伦常，根源于天性，臣下怎么能忍心当面欺骗他的主子呢！ 兀送给秦桧的信中说 ：你每天都在请求和议，但岳飞却正在谋取进攻河北，必须杀掉岳飞，然后才能够议和。 秦桧也认为岳飞不死，终究要阻碍和议，自己也必然会遭到祸害，因此极力图谋杀死岳飞。
English: Reading the Qin Yu Song chapter, there is no certain teaching standard for virtue, as long as it is good, it can be taught. When he heard this sentence, he was disgusted with his deception of the emperor and said angrily: The morality between princes and ministers is rooted in nature, how can a subject have the heart to deceive his master in person! The letter sent by Yu to Qin Yu said: You are asking for peace every day, but Yue Fei is seeking to attack Hebei, and you must kill Yue Fei before you can negotiate peace. Qin Yu also believed that Yue Fei would not die, and that he would eventually prevent peace, and that he

古文：以谏议大夫万俟禼与飞有怨，风禼劾飞，又风中丞何铸、侍御史罗汝楫交章弹论，大率谓： 今春金人攻淮西，飞略至舒、蕲而不进，比与俊按兵淮上，又欲弃山阳而不守。 飞累章请罢枢柄，寻还两镇节，充万寿观使、奉朝请。
现代文：由于谏议大夫万俟与岳飞早有怨仇，就暗示万俟弹劾岳飞，又指示御史何铸、侍御史罗汝楫接连上章弹劾论说，大概意思是说： 今年春天金军进攻淮西，岳飞进军至舒州、蕲州而不再前进，近来他和张俊在淮河一带视察军队，又打算放弃山阳而不加防守。 岳飞多次上章请求罢免自己的枢密副使职务，不久又交还两镇节度使的官位，充任万寿观使、奉朝请。
English: Because of the long-standing enmity between Wan Xuan and Yue Fei, he hinted that Wan Xuan would impeach Yue Fei, and also instructed the imperial historian He Ji and the attendant historian Luo Rui to successively discuss the impeachment of the last chapter, which probably meant: This spring, the Golden Army attacked Huaixi, Yue Fei marched to Shuzhou and Zhangzhou and no longer advanced, recently he and Zhang Jun inspected the army around the Huai River, and also planned to give up Sanyang without defense. Yue Fei repeatedly petitioned the last chapter to dismiss his vice-minister of the privy council, and soon returned the

古文：桧志未伸也，又谕张俊令劫王贵、诱王俊诬告张宪谋还飞兵。
现代文：秦桧的意图还没有得到满足，又指示张俊下令逼迫王贵，引诱王俊诬告张宪策划迫使朝廷把兵权交还岳飞。
English: Qin Yu's intention had not yet been satisfied, and he also instructed Zhang Jun to order the persecution of Wang Gui, luring Wang Jun to falsely accuse Zhang Xian of plotting to force the imperial court to return military power to Yue Fei.

古文：桧遣使捕飞父子证张宪事，使者至，飞笑曰： 皇天后土，可表此心。 初命何铸鞠之，飞裂裳以背示铸，有 尽忠报国 四大字，深入肤理。
现代文：秦桧派遣使者逮捕岳飞父子证实张宪的事情，使者来到时，岳飞大笑说 ：皇天后土，可以表明我的心迹。 秦桧开始命令何铸审讯岳飞，岳飞撕开衣服把脊背给何铸看，上面有 尽忠报国 四个大字，字迹深入皮肤之中。
English: Qin Yu sent an emissary to arrest Yue Fei and his son to confirm Zhang Xian's affair. When the emissary arrived, Yue Fei laughed loudly and said, "Empress Dowager Earth, you can show me my footprints." Qin Yu began to order He Casting to interrogate Yue Fei. Yue Fei tore open his clothes to show He Casting the back of his neck. On it were four large characters, "Be loyal and serve the country," the handwriting deep in the skin.

古文：既而阅实无左验，铸明其无辜。
现代文：不久查实缺乏证据，何铸说明岳飞无辜。
English: Soon, the lack of evidence was verified, which indicated that Yuefei was innocent.

古文：改命万俟禼。
现代文：秦桧又改命万俟审理。
English: Qin Hui also changed his name and was put on trial.

古文：禼诬：飞与宪书，令虚申探报以动朝廷，云与宪书，令措置使飞还军；且言其书已焚。
现代文：万俟诬蔑岳飞曾写信给张宪，让张宪谎报敌情以耸动朝廷，岳云也写信给张宪，让张宪采取措施让岳飞回到军中；并且说这些书信已经烧毁。
English: Wan Xun slandered Yuefei and wrote to Zhang Xian, asking Zhang Xian to lie about the hostile situation to stir up the imperial court. Yueyun also wrote to Zhang Xian, asking Zhang Xian to take measures to let Yuefei return to the army; and said that these letters had been burned.

古文：飞坐系两月，无可证者。
现代文：岳飞被关押两个月，没有找到可以证明他有罪的证据。
English: Yuefei was detained for two months, and no evidence was found to prove his guilt.

古文：或教禼以台章所指淮西事为言，禼喜白桧，簿录飞家，取当时御札藏之以灭迹。
现代文：有人教万俟以御史台奏章所指责的淮西一事为借口陷害岳飞，万俟高兴地报告秦桧，查抄登记岳飞的家产，取走当时高宗写给岳飞的书信收藏起来以灭迹。
English: Some people told Wanjun to frame Yuefei on the pretext of the Huaixi incident, which was blamed by the Imperial Historian Songzhang. Wanjun happily reported to Qin Rong, inspected and registered Yuefei's family property, and took away Gaozong's letter to Yuefei at that time to collect and destroy the trace.

古文：又逼孙革等证飞受诏逗遛，命评事元龟年取行军时日杂定之，傅会其狱。
现代文：又逼迫孙革等人证明岳飞接到高宗诏令后仍逗留不进，命令大理寺评事元龟年把岳飞行军日程颠倒排定，用来附会岳飞冤案。
English: He also forced Sun Ge and others to prove that Yue Fei did not stay after receiving the Emperor Gao's edict, and ordered the assessor of Dali Temple to reverse the schedule of Yue Fei's flight army in the year of the tortoise, and use it to attach Yue Fei's injustice case.

古文：岁暮，狱不成，桧手书小纸付狱，即报飞死，时年三十九。
现代文：这年岁末，这件案子还是没有成立，秦桧亲自写了一张纸条交给监狱，监狱当即报告岳飞死亡，当时年仅三十九岁。
English: At the end of the year, the case was still not established. Qin Yu personally wrote a note and handed it to the prison. The prison immediately reported the death of Yue Fei, who was only 39 years old at the time.

古文：云弃市。籍家赀，徙家岭南。
现代文：岳云被斩首弃于闹市，登记并没收岳飞的全部家产，全家被迁徙到岭南。
English: Yueyun was beheaded and dumped in the downtown area, Yuefei's entire family property was registered and confiscated, and the whole family was relocated to Lingnan.

古文：幕属于鹏等从坐者六人。
现代文：岳飞的幕僚于鹏等六人也被牵连定罪。
English: Six of Yuefei's aides, including Yu Peng, were also implicated and convicted.

古文：初，飞在狱，大理寺丞李若朴何彦猷、大理卿薛仁辅并言飞无罪，禼俱劾去。
现代文：当初，岳飞被关在狱中时，大理寺丞李若朴、何彦猷，大理卿薛仁辅等都说岳飞无罪，万俟都把他们弹劾赶走。
English: At first, when Yuefei was locked up in prison, Li Ruopu, He Yanqian, the chancellor of Dali Temple, and Xue Renshuo, the chancellor of Dali, all said that Yuefei was not guilty, and they were all impeached and driven away.

古文：宗正卿士〈亻褭〉请以百口保飞，禼亦劾之，窜死建州。
现代文：宗正卿赵士请求以全家老少百口人的性命担保岳飞，万俟也弹劾他，赵士被贬逐建州而死。
English: Zong Zhengqing Zhao Shih requested to guarantee Yue Fei with the lives of his entire family of 100 people, old and young. Wan Xuan also impeached him. Zhao Shih was expelled from Jianzhou and died.

古文：布衣刘允升上书讼飞冤，下棘寺以死。
现代文：平民刘允升上书朝廷为岳飞鸣冤，被关到大理寺处死。
English: Liu Yunsheng, a commoner, wrote to the imperial court to express his grievances against Yue Fei, and was imprisoned in Dali Temple and executed.

古文：狱之将上也，韩世忠不平，诣桧诘其实，桧曰： 飞子云与张宪书虽不明，其事体莫须有。 世忠曰：  莫须有 三字，何以服天下？ 时洪皓在金国中，蜡书驰奏，以为金人所畏服者惟飞，至以父呼之，诸酋闻其死，酌酒相贺。飞至孝，母留河北，遣人求访，迎归。
现代文：凡是附会凑成岳飞冤狱的人，都不同等级地升了官。岳飞一案准备上报时，韩世忠愤愤不平，到秦桧那里质问真凭实据，秦桧说 ：岳飞儿子岳云写信给张宪这件事虽不明确，但这件事情或许有的。 韩世忠说 ： 或许有 三个字，怎么能够使天下人信服？ 当时洪皓正出使金国，派人迅速送回一封蜡书上奏高宗，说金国所畏服的只有岳飞一人，甚至称呼他为岳爷爷，金国将领听说他已被处死，举杯互相庆贺。岳飞十分孝顺，母亲留在河北老家时，岳飞派人寻访，迎接母亲南归。
English: When the Yuefei case was about to be reported, Han Shizhong was indignant and went to Qin Zang to question him about the true facts. Qin Zang said: Although it is not clear whether Yuefei's son, Yueyun, wrote to Zhang Xian, the matter may exist. Han Shizhong said: Perhaps there are three words, how can they convince the world? At that time, Hong Zang was sending an envoy to Jin Guo, and he sent someone to quickly return a wax book, inscribing Gaozong, saying that only Yuefei was feared by Jin Guo, and even calling him Grandpa Y

古文：母有痼疾，药饵必亲。
现代文：母亲长期生病，岳飞必定亲自调理药物。
English: As his mother had been ill for a long time, Yue Fei must have personally adjusted the medicine.

古文：母卒，水浆不入口者三日。
现代文：母亲去世后，岳飞连续三天滴水不沾。
English: After his mother's death, Yuefei did not touch water for three days in a row.

古文：家无姬侍。
现代文：家中没有姬妾侍奉。
English: There are no concubines in the family.

古文：吴玠素服飞，愿与交欢，饰名姝遗之。
现代文：吴一向佩服岳飞，愿意同他结交，打扮一位姿色出众的美女送给岳飞。
English: Wu has always admired Yuefei, and is willing to make friends with him and dress up a beautiful woman with an outstanding appearance to give to Yuefei.

古文：飞曰： 主上宵旰，岂大将安乐时？ 却不受，玠益敬服。
现代文：岳飞说： 皇上早起晚睡，日夜忧虑，现在哪是大将享受安乐的时候？ 推辞不受，吴更加敬服。
English: Yue Fei said, "The emperor gets up early and goes to bed late, and worries day and night. When is it time for the general to enjoy peace and quiet?

古文：少豪饮，帝戒之曰： 卿异时到河朔，乃可饮。 遂绝不饮。
现代文：年轻时能喝酒，高宗告诫他说： 你将来军至河朔地区，才可以畅饮。 岳飞从此戒酒不喝。
English: When he was young, he could drink alcohol, but Gaozong warned him, "You can only drink alcohol freely when you join the army and go to the Hexuo region." Yuefei never drank alcohol again.

古文：帝初为飞营第，飞辞曰： 敌未灭，何以家为？ 或问天下何时太平，飞曰： 文臣不爱钱，武臣不惜死，天下太平矣。 
现代文：高宗当初下令为岳飞营造府第，岳飞辞谢说： 敌人没有消灭，怎么能够为家庭筹划呢？ 有人问天下什么时候太平，岳飞说： 文官不爱钱财，武官不惜生命，天下就可以太平了。 
English: At first, Gao Zong ordered to build a palace for Yue Fei, but Yue Fei declined, saying, "The enemy has not been eliminated, so how can I plan for my family?" When someone asked, "When will the world be at peace?," Yue Fei said, "Civil servants don't care about money, military officers don't care about their lives, so the world can be at peace."

古文：师每休舍，课将士注坡跳壕，皆重铠习之。
现代文：军队每次驻扎休整，便训练将士从斜坡上骑马直下跳跃壕沟，都身穿重甲练习这些项目。
English: Every time the army stops for a rest, they train their soldiers to jump from the slope on horseback straight down the trench, all wearing heavy armor to practice these items.

古文：子云尝习注坡，马踬，怒而鞭之。
现代文：儿子岳云曾练习从斜坡上骑马急驰而下，马被绊倒，岳飞愤怒而鞭打岳云。
English: Yueyun's son had practiced riding a horse down a steep slope. When the horse tripped, Yuefei got angry and whipped Yueyun.

古文：卒有取民麻一缕以束刍者，立斩以徇。
现代文：有一名士卒拿了百姓的一缕丝麻捆扎刍草，立即斩首示众。
English: One of the soldiers took a strand of flax from the people, tied it with rushes, and immediately beheaded the people.

古文：卒夜宿，民开门愿纳，无敢入者。
现代文：士兵夜间宿营，百姓打开屋门愿意让他们进屋休息，没有一个敢擅自进入。
English: After that, they marched at night, and although private homes opened their doors to invite the sergeants to stay in their houses, no soldier dared to accept the invitation from a private home.

古文：军号 冻死不拆屋，饿死不卤掠。 卒有疾，躬为调药；诸将远戍，遣妻问劳其家；死事者哭之而育其孤，或以子婚其女。
现代文：军队的口号是 冻死不拆屋，饿死不掳掠。 士卒有病，岳飞亲自调药；将领们远征，派妻子到他们家中慰问；将士战死岳飞悲痛流泪抚育他们的遗孤，或让儿子娶阵亡将士的女儿为妻。
English: The army's slogan is "Freeze to death without demolishing houses, starve to death without being captured and plundered." If a soldier is ill, Yuefei will personally adjust the medicine; generals will go on expeditions and send their wives to their homes to offer condolences; if a soldier dies in battle, Yuefei will grieve and shed tears to nurture their orphans, or let his son marry the daughter of the dead soldier.

古文：凡有颁犒，均给军吏，秋毫不私。
现代文：凡是朝廷的封赏犒劳，都分给部下军吏，不私拿一丝一毫。
English: All the rewards and rewards of the imperial court were distributed to the subordinate military officials, and they did not take any of them for themselves.

古文：善以少击众。
现代文：善于以少击众。
English: Good at hitting the crowd with less.

古文：欲有所举，尽召诸统制与谋，谋定而后战，故有胜无败。
现代文：张俊曾经询问岳飞用兵的方法，岳飞回答说： 仁义、智谋、诚信、勇敢、严格，缺一不可。 每当征集军粮时，岳飞必定皱眉说： 东南地区百姓的财力，消耗困敝到极点了。 
English: Zhang Jun once asked Yue Fei how to use soldiers, and Yue Fei replied, "Righteousness, wisdom, honesty, bravery, and strictness are indispensable." Whenever collecting military rations, Yue Fei must have frowned and said, "The financial resources of the people in the southeastern region have been exhausted to the extreme.

古文：猝遇敌不动，故敌为之语曰： 撼山易，撼岳家军难。 张俊尝问用兵之术，曰： 仁、智、信、勇、严，阙一不可。 调军食，必蹙额曰： 东南民力，耗敝极矣。 荆湖平，募民营田，又为屯田，岁省漕运之半。
现代文：荆湖地区平定之后，招募百姓营田，又实行军队屯田，每年节省一半漕粮。
English: After the Jinghu area was pacified, the people were recruited to farm the fields, and the army was also sent to farm the fields, saving half of the grain every year.

古文：帝手书曹操、诸葛亮、羊祜三事赐之。
现代文：高宗亲笔书写曹操、诸葛亮、羊祜三人的事迹赐给他。
English: Gaozong personally wrote down the deeds of Cao Cao, Zhuge Liang, and Yang Xuan and gave them to him.

古文：飞跋其后，独指操为奸贼而鄙之，尤桧所恶也。
现代文：岳飞在高宗手书之后写了跋语，特地指出曹操是奸贼而鄙视他，这一点尤其为秦桧所憎恶。
English: Yuefei wrote a eulogy after Gao Zong's handwriting, specifically pointing out that Cao Cao was a traitor and despised him, which was especially detested by Qin Yu.

古文：张所死，飞感旧恩，鞠其子宗本，奏以官。
现代文：张所死后，岳飞感戴他以前的恩德，抚育他的儿子张宗本，奏请朝廷给了他一个官职。
English: After Zhang So's death, Yue Fei felt that he should return to his former benevolence, raised his son Zhang Zongben, and asked the court to give him an official post.

古文：李宝自楚来归，韩世忠留之，宝痛哭愿归飞，世忠以书来谂，飞复曰： 均为国家，何分彼此？ 世忠叹服。
现代文：李宝自楚州前来归附，韩世忠把他留下，李宝痛哭流涕愿意隶属岳飞名下，韩世忠写信告诉这件事，岳飞复信说： 都是为了国家，何必要分彼此？ 韩世忠感叹佩服。
English: Li Bao came from Chuzhou to attach, Han Shizhong left him behind, Li Bao cried bitterly and was willing to be under the name of Yuefei, Han Shizhong wrote to tell the matter, Yuefei replied to the letter saying: It is all for the sake of the country, why do we need to divide each other? Han Shizhong sighed with admiration.

古文：襄阳之役，诏光世为援，六郡既复，光世始至，飞奏先赏光世军。
现代文：襄阳之战，高宗诏令刘光世为后援，六郡已经收复，刘光世才率军赶到，岳飞上奏先犒赏刘光世的部队。
English: In the Battle of Yangyang, Gao Zongzhao ordered Liu Guangshi to be his backup. Six counties had already been recovered. Liu Guangshi led the army to arrive, and Yuefei flew up to be the first to reward Liu Guangshi's troops.

古文：好贤礼士，览经史，雅歌投壶，恂恂如书生。
现代文：岳飞喜爱贤能，礼遇士人，阅览经书史籍，歌唱雅词，投壶为乐，谨恭风雅像个读书的人。
English: Yuefei likes virtue, treats scholars with courtesy, reads scriptures and historical books, sings elegant words, throws pots for fun, and respects elegance like a reader.

古文：每辞官，必曰： 将士效力，飞何功之有？ 然忠愤激烈，议论持正，不挫于人，卒以此得祸。
现代文：每次辞谢朝廷加官进爵，必然说： 全军将士出力，我有什么功劳？ 但是性格忠诚慷慨激烈，议论公正持平，不屈服于人，最终因此而被害。
English: Every time he thanked the imperial court and was promoted to the peerage, he would inevitably say, "The whole army contributed soldiers, what merit do I have?" However, his character was loyal, generous and fierce, his speech was fair and even-handed, he did not give in to others, and he eventually suffered as a result.

古文：桧死，议复飞官。
现代文：秦桧死后，朝廷讨论恢复岳飞官职。
English: After Qin Hui's death, the imperial court discussed reinstating Yuefei as an official.

古文：万俟禼谓金方愿和，一旦录故将，疑天下心，不可。
现代文：万俟说金正愿意讲和，一旦录用以前的将领，会使金人怀疑朝廷讲和的诚意，不能这样做。
English: If Kim Jong-un says he is willing to make peace, once he hires former generals, it will make the Kim people doubt the sincerity of the court to make peace, and they cannot do so.

古文：及绍兴末，金益猖獗，太学生程宏图上书讼飞冤，诏飞家自便。
现代文：到绍兴末年，金国更加猖獗，太学生程宏图上书为岳飞申冤，皇帝下诏允许岳飞家属自行选择居处。
English: By the end of Shaoxing, Jin Guo was even more rampant. The great scholar Cheng Hongtu petitioned for Yuefei's redress, and the emperor issued an edict allowing Yuefei's family members to choose their own place of residence.

古文：初，桧恶岳州同飞姓，改为纯州，至是仍旧。
现代文：当初，秦桧厌恶岳州和岳飞姓氏相同，将岳州改为纯州，至此才恢复原来岳州的旧称。
English: At first, Qin Hui disliked the fact that the surnames of Yuezhou and Yuefei were the same, and changed Yuezhou to Chuzhou. It was only then that the former name of Yuezhou was restored.

古文：中丞汪澈宣抚荆、襄，故部曲合辞讼之，哭声雷震。
现代文：御史中丞汪澈巡视荆襄地区，岳飞过去的一些部下联合写信申诉岳飞的冤屈，哭声如同雷震。
English: Wang Chieh, the Vice-Minister of History, toured the Jingxiang area. Some of Yuefei's former subordinates jointly wrote a letter to complain about Yuefei's grievances. Their cries were like thunder.

古文：孝宗诏复飞官，以礼改葬，赐钱百万，求其后悉官之。
现代文：孝宗诏令恢复岳飞的官职，以相应的礼仪改葬，赐给岳飞家属钱一百万贯，寻找岳飞的后代，全部授予官职。
English: Emperor Xiaozong issued an edict to restore Yuefei's official position, re-bury him with the appropriate etiquette, give Yuefei's family members one million yuan, search for Yuefei's descendants, and grant them all official positions.

古文：建庙于鄂，号忠烈。
现代文：在鄂州建立祠庙，称为忠烈庙。
English: An ancestral temple was established in Ezhou, known as the Loyal Martyrs' Temple.

古文：淳熙六年，谥武穆。
现代文：淳熙六年，封岳飞谥号为武穆。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, Wu Mu was given the title Yuefei.

古文：嘉定四年，追封鄂王。
现代文：嘉定四年，追封岳飞为鄂王。
English: In the fourth year of Jiading, Yuefei was crowned King of Hubei.

古文：五子：云、雷、霖、震、霆。
现代文：岳飞有五个儿子：岳云、岳雷、岳霖、岳震、岳霆。
English: Yue Fei has five sons: Yue Yun, Yue Lei, Yue Lin, Yue Zhen and Yue Ting.

