古文：赵汝愚赵汝愚，字子直，汉恭宪王元佐七世孙，居饶之余干县。
现代文：赵汝愚字子直，汉恭宪王赵元佐的七世孙，居住在饶州余干县。
English: Zhao Rugu Zizi Zhi, the seventh-generation grandson of the Han Emperor Zhao Yuanzu, lives in Yugang County, Raozhou.

古文：父善应，字彦远，官终修武郎、江西兵马都监。
现代文：赵汝愚的父亲赵善应，字彦远，官职至修武郎、江西兵马都监。
English: Zhao Zhugu's father, Zhao Zanying, a.k.a.

古文：性纯孝，亲病，尝刺血和药以进。
现代文：他性格纯朴孝顺，父亲生病时，曾刺出自己的血和药给父亲吃。
English: His character is simple and filial. When his father was ill, he once pricked out his own blood and medicine to give to his father.

古文：母畏雷，每闻雷则披衣走其所。
现代文：母亲害怕雷鸣，他每次听到雷声就披衣到母亲房间陪母亲。
English: His mother is afraid of thunder, and every time he hears thunder, he goes to his mother's room to accompany her.

古文：尝寒夜远归，从者将扣门，遽止之曰： 无恐吾母。 露坐达明，门启而后入。
现代文：曾经在一个寒冷的夜晚他从远处回家，随从们将要扣门，赵善应于是阻止说： 不要吓着我母亲。 他露天坐在门外到天亮，门开后才进家。
English: Once, on a cold night, when he was returning home from a distance and his followers were about to lock the door, Zhao Shan stopped them and said, "Don't scare my mother." He sat outside the door until dawn, and only entered the house after the door was opened.

古文：家贫，诸弟未制衣不敢制，已制未服不敢服，一瓜果之微必相待共尝之。
现代文：家里贫穷，几个弟弟没做新衣服他就不敢制新衣，弟弟们有新衣但未穿他也不敢穿，一个瓜果这样的小东西必定大家共同品尝。
English: His family was poor, and he didn't dare to make new clothes without his younger brothers making new clothes for him. His brothers had new clothes but he didn't dare to wear them without wearing them. A small thing like a melon must be tasted by everyone.

古文：母丧，哭泣呕血，毁瘠骨立，终日俯首柩傍，闻雷犹起，侧立垂涕。
现代文：母亲死后，赵善应哭得吐血，身体瘦骨伶仃，终日伏在灵柩旁，一听到雷声就起来，侧立在灵柩旁流泪。
English: After her mother's death, Zhao Shan Ying cried until she vomited blood, her body was emaciated, and she lay next to the coffin all day. As soon as she heard thunder, she got up and stood next to the coffin, shedding tears.

古文：既终丧，言及其亲，未尝不挥涕，生朝必哭于庙。
现代文：丧事已经结束了，一讲到他的母亲，未曾不流泪的，母亲生日那天，他必定在庙中大哭一场。
English: The funeral is over, and when he talks about his mother, who has never been without tears, he is sure to burst into tears in the temple on her birthday.

古文：父终肺疾，每膳不忍以诸肺为羞。
现代文：赵善应的父亲死于肺病，他每次吃饭不忍心以各种肺为食物。
English: Zhao Shanying's father died of lung disease. He could not bear to eat all kinds of lungs every time he had a meal.

古文：母生岁值卯，谓卯兔神也，终其身不食兔。
现代文：母亲的生辰正值卯时，视卯兔为神，赵善应终生不吃兔子。
English: When his mother was born, he regarded the rabbit as a god. Zhao Shan should not eat rabbit for the rest of his life.

古文：闻四方水旱，辄忧形于色。
现代文：他听说四方水旱灾害，就会忧形于色。
English: When he hears about the floods and droughts in the four directions, he is overwhelmed with sorrow.

古文：江、淮警报至，为之流涕，不食累日；同僚会宴，善应怅然曰： 此宁诸君乐饮时耶！ 众为失色而罢。
现代文：江淮地区传来敌人入侵的警报，他就为这流泪，数日不吃东西；同僚宴会，赵善应不悦地说： 这难道是各位娱乐、饮酒之时！ 大家深感不妥而罢除了酒宴。
English: When the alarm of enemy invasion came from the Jianghuai region, he shed tears for this and did not eat for several days; at a colleague's banquet, Zhao Shan Ying said with displeasure: Is this the time for entertainment and drinking! Everyone felt deeply uncomfortable and canceled the wine banquet.

古文：故人之孤女，贫无所归，善应聘以为己子妇。
现代文：故人的孤女，贫困无家可归，赵善应把她聘为自己的儿媳妇。
English: The orphaned daughter of the deceased, poor and homeless, Zhao Shan should employ her as his daughter-in-law.

古文：有尝同僚者死不克葬，子佣食他所，善应驰往哭之，归其子而予之赀，使葬焉。
现代文：有个曾与他是同僚的人死了家人无力埋葬，其子到另处受雇求食，赵善应跑去哭奠，并把他的儿子带回家又给他钱，让他葬父。
English: When one of his former colleagues died and his family couldn't afford to bury him, and his son had to seek employment elsewhere, Zhao Shan Ying ran to pay his respects, took his son home and gave him money to bury his father.

古文：道见病者必收恤之，躬为煮药。
现代文：赵善应在路上看见生病的人必定带回家救济，亲自为他煮药。
English: When Zhao Shan saw a sick person on the road, he would definitely bring home relief and personally cook medicine for him.

古文：岁饥，旦夕率其家人辍食之半，以饲饥者。
现代文：遇到饥年，每天早晚带领全家人省下食物的一半，给饥饿的人吃。
English: When faced with a famine, every morning and evening he would lead his whole family to save half of the food and give it to the hungry.

古文：夏不去草，冬不破坏，惧百虫之游且蛰者失其所也。
现代文：赵善应夏天不除去庭院的草，冬天不挖土，怕百虫游荡及蛰身者失去其所。
English: Zhao Shan Ying does not remove the grass of the courtyard in summer, and does not dig the soil in winter, fearing that the insects will wander and the insects will lose their place.

古文：晋陵尤袤称之曰： 古君子也。 既卒，丞相陈俊卿题其墓碣曰： 宋笃行赵公彦远之墓。 
现代文：晋陵尤袤称赞他 ：是古代的君子。 赵善应死后，丞相陈俊卿在其墓碑上题字为 宋笃行赵公彦远之墓 。
English: Jinling Yuxuan praised him as "an ancient gentleman," and after Zhao Zanying's death, the prime minister Chen Junqing inscribed on his tombstone, "The tomb of Song Duxing Zhao Gongyan Yuan."

古文：汝愚早有大志，每曰： 丈夫得汗青一幅纸，始不负此生。 擢进士第一，签书宁国军节度判官，召试馆职，除秘书省正字。
现代文：赵汝愚早年就胸怀大志，他常说： 大丈夫被载入史册，才不辜负此生。 赵汝愚考中进士第一名，任签书宁国军节度判官，朝廷召他参加馆职考试，拜为秘书省正字。
English: In his early years, Zhao Rugu had a great ambition in his heart. He often said: "It is only when my husband is recorded in the history books that I can live up to this life." Zhao Rugu was the first to be promoted in the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as the judge of the Ningguo Military Festival. The court called him to participate in the librarian's examination, and he was given the title of secretary.

古文：孝宗方锐意恢复，始见，即陈自治之策，孝宗称善，迁校书郎。
现代文：孝宗正锐意恢复疆土，赵汝愚首次拜见孝宗，就陈述自治之策，孝宗称好，升他为校书郎。
English: Xiaozong was determined to recover his territory. When Zhao Rugu met with Xiaozong for the first time, he told him about the policy of autonomy. Xiaozong was pleased and promoted him to school scribe.

古文：知阁门张说擢签书枢密院事，汝愚不往见，率同列请祠，未报。
现代文：知门张说被升为签书枢密院事，赵汝愚不去拜见，率同僚一起请求管理一祠观，未得到批准。
English: Zhang Zhimen said that he was promoted to sign the letter of the Privy Council, Zhao Rugu did not go to visit, and led his colleagues to request the management of an ancestral hall, which was not approved.

古文：会祖母讣至，即日归，因自劾，上不加罪。
现代文：正好他祖母的讣闻到，赵汝愚当天回去，又自我弹劾，皇上不加他的罪。
English: Just as his grandmother's slander was heard, Zhao Rugu went back the same day and self-impeached. The emperor did not add to his guilt.

古文：迁著作郎、知信州，易台州，除江西转运判官，入为吏部郎兼太子侍讲。
现代文：赵汝愚升为著作郎、信州知州，改为台州知州，拜官江西转运判官，进宫任吏部郎兼太子侍讲。
English: Zhao Rugu Sheng was a scholar, Shinshu Chizhou, changed to Taizhou Chizhou, appointed to the post of Jiangxi Transportation Judge, and entered the palace as a clerk and assistant to the prince.

古文：迁秘书少监兼权给事中。
现代文：又升为秘书少监兼代给事中。
English: He was also promoted to the position of secretary and acting junior inspector.

古文：内侍陈源有宠于德寿宫，添差浙西副总管。
现代文：内侍陈源受宠于高宗，补差为浙西副总管。
English: Chen Yuan, the chambermaid, was favored by Gao Zong, and his place was filled by the deputy head of West Zhejiang.

古文：汝愚言： 祖宗以童贯典兵，卒开边衅，源不宜使居总戎之任。 孝宗喜，诏自今内侍不得兼兵职。
现代文：赵汝愚说 ：祖宗派童贯主管军队，最终引起边境的战争，陈源不宜担任统兵之职。 孝宗很高兴，从今后内侍不能兼军职。
English: Zhao Ruwu said, "Chen Yuan was not suitable to serve as the commander-in-chief of the army because his ancestral sect put Tong Rong in charge of the army, which eventually led to the war on the border.

古文：旧制，密院文书皆经门下省，张说在西府，托言边机不宜泄。
现代文：过去的制度规定，枢密院文书都要经过门下审查，张说在枢密院，托言边防机密不可泄露，拒交文书予门下省审查。
English: According to the previous system, the documents of the Privy Council had to go through a door-to-door examination. Zhang said that in the Privy Council, the secret of border defense could not be disclosed, and the refusal to submit the documents was subject to the door-to-door examination.

古文：汝愚谓： 东西二府朝廷治乱所关，中书庶政无一不由东省，何密院不然？ 孝宗命如旧制。
现代文：赵汝愚说： 中书门下、枢密院二府关系到朝廷政治的好坏，中书门下的大小政事无一不经枢密院审查，为何枢密院不这样做？ 孝宗令一切照旧。
English: Zhao Ruwu said: The two offices of the Privy Council under the auspices of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference are related to the quality of imperial politics. Under the auspices of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, no matter how big or small the political affairs are, they will not be examined by the Privy Council. Why doesn't the Privy Council do this? Xiaozong ordered everything as usual.

古文：权吏部侍郎兼太子右庶子，论知阁王抃招权预政，出抃外祠。
现代文：赵汝愚暂代吏部侍郎兼太子右庶子，他论及知门王扌卞揽权预政，皇上派王扌卞离朝到外地的祠观任职。
English: Zhao Rugu, the attendant of the provisional cadre and the prince's right son-in-law, talked about Zhimen Wang Yao's pre-political power grab, and the emperor sent Wang Yao away from the imperial court to serve in the outside world.

古文：以集英殿修撰帅福建，陛辞，言国事之大者四，其一谓： 吴氏四世专蜀兵，非国家之利，请及今以渐抑之。 进直学士、制置四川兼知成都府。
现代文：赵汝愚以集英殿撰修身份统帅福建，他到宫中辞行时，对皇上指出国家大事有四方面，其一是： 吴氏四世掌管蜀军，对国家不利，请从今慢慢限制他的权力。 赵汝愚被提为直学士、制置四川使兼成都府知府。
English: Zhao Ruwu was the commander-in-chief of Fujian in his capacity as a scholar of the Shuying dynasty. When he went to the palace to resign, he pointed out to the emperor that there were four aspects of national events. The first was: The fourth generation of the Wu clan is in charge of the Shu army, which is not good for the country, please slowly limit his power from now on. Zhao Ruwu was promoted to the rank of direct bachelor, and the Sichuan envoy and Chengdu prefectural governor were established.

古文：诸羌蛮相挻为边患，汝愚至，悉以计分其势。
现代文：诸羌族相继挑起边患，赵汝愚到四川后，全部施计瓦解了他们的势力。
English: The Yi people successively provoked border troubles. After Zhao Rugu arrived in Sichuan, he made every effort to destroy their power.

古文：孝宗谓其有文武威风，召还。
现代文：孝宗说他文武双全，召他回朝。
English: Takamune called him back to the imperial court, saying that he was both a scholar and a warrior.

古文：光宗受禅，趣召未至，殿中侍御史范处义论其稽命，除知潭州，辞，改太平州。
现代文：光宗受禅即位，派人去四川召赵汝愚回朝，赵汝愚没回，殿中侍御史范处义说赵汝愚拖延命令，朝廷让赵汝愚任潭州知州，赵汝愚不接受，朝廷又任他为太平州知州。
English: Guangzong was enthroned by Zen, sent someone to Sichuan to summon Zhao Rugu to return to the imperial court, Zhao Rugu did not return, the attendant of the palace said Zhao Rugu delayed the order, the court appointed Zhao Rugu as Tanzhou Chizhou, Zhao Rugu did not accept, and the court appointed him as Taiping Chizhou Chizhou.

古文：进敷文阁学士，知福州。
现代文：赵汝愚进升为敷文阁学士，福州知州。
English: Zhao Rugu Jin was promoted to Shibunkaku Bachelor, Fuzhou Chizhou.

古文：绍熙二年，召为吏部尚书。
现代文：绍熙二年，赵汝愚被召为吏部尚书。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Zhao Ruyou was called to be the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：先是，高宗以宫人黄氏侍光宗于东宫，及即位为贵妃，后李氏意不能平。
现代文：当初，高宗让宫女黄氏侍奉光宗于东宫，等到光宗即位黄氏为贵妃时，皇后李氏内心愤愤不平。
English: At first, Emperor Gao Zong had the Huang clan's concubine serve Emperor Guangzong in the East Palace, but when Emperor Guangzong enthroned the Huang clan as empresses, Empress Li was furious.

古文：是年冬十一月郊，有司已戒而风雨暴至，光宗震惧，及斋宿青城，贵妃暴薨，驾还，闻之恚，是夕疾作。
现代文：这年冬十一月郊祀，有关部门已经警告将有暴风雨来临，光宗很震惧，等到在青城斋宿时，贵妃突然去世，光宗回宫后，听说此事十分生气，当天晚上疾病发作。
English: In the winter of November of that year, the relevant departments had already warned that there would be a storm coming, and Guangzong was very frightened. When he was in the Qingcheng Inn, Guifei suddenly died. After Guangzong returned to the palace, he was very angry when he heard about this, and the disease broke out that evening.

古文：内侍驰白孝宗，孝宗仓卒至南内，问所以致疾之由，不免有所戒责。
现代文：内侍跑去报告孝宗，孝宗慌忙赶到南内，询问光宗致病的原因，不免对光宗有所警告、责怪。
English: The chambermaid ran to report to Takamune, and Takamune hurried to Nannai to inquire about the cause of Mitsumune's illness, inevitably warning and blaming Mitsumune.

古文：及光宗疾稍平，汝愚入对。
现代文：等光宗病稍稍好些时，赵汝愚进宫回答皇上提问。
English: When Zhao Guangzong's illness was slightly better, Zhao Rugu entered the palace to answer the emperor's question.

古文：上常以五日一朝孝宗于重华宫，至是往往以传旨免，至会庆节上寿，驾不出，冬至朝贺又不出，都人以为忧。
现代文：光宗常常五天一次到重华宫拜见孝宗，到这时孝宗往往传旨让光宗免去，到会庆节光宗生日时，光宗不上朝，冬至大臣们进宫朝贺他也不出来，国都的人都很担心。
English: Guangzong often visited Chonghua Palace once every five days to meet with Xiaozong. At this time, Xiaozong often sent a message to let Guangzong be excused. At the celebration of Guangzong's birthday, Guangzong did not go to the morning, and the winter solstice ministers did not come to the palace to congratulate him. People in the capital were very worried.

古文：汝愚往复规谏，上意乃悟。
现代文：赵汝愚前去反复规劝，光宗于是醒悟。
English: Zhao Rugu went to persuade him repeatedly, and then Guangzong woke up.

古文：汝愚又属嗣秀王伯圭调护，于是两宫之情通。
现代文：赵汝愚又叮嘱嗣秀王伯圭护理、调和，于是孝宗与光宗的感情得以沟通。
English: Zhao Rugu also told the heir, Shu Wang Bokei, to care for and reconcile, so the feelings of Xiaozong and Guangzong were able to communicate.

古文：光宗及后俱诣北内，从容竟日。
现代文：光宗及李后都到孝宗住所北内去，与孝宗一起愉快地度过了一天。
English: Both Guangzong and Li Hou went to Xiaozong's residence, Kitanai, and spent a happy day with him.

古文：四年，汝愚知贡举，与监察御史汪义端有违言。
现代文：绍熙四年，赵汝愚主持贡举，与监察御史汪义端有违忤之言。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Zhao Rugu presided over the tribute, and had a quarrel with the inspector Wang Yiduan.

古文：汝愚除同知枢密院事，义端言祖宗之法，宗室不为执政，诋汝愚植党沽名，疏上，不纳。
现代文：赵汝愚拜为同知枢密院事，汪义端说祖宗时法律规定，宗室不能为执政，他还诋毁赵汝愚植党营私沽名钓誉，汪义端呈上奏书，皇上不接受。
English: Zhao Ruyubai was a confidant of the Privy Council, Wang Yidang said that the law stipulated that the ancestor's family could not govern, and he also slandered Zhao Ruyubai's reputation as a party member. Wang Yidang submitted a report, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：又论台谏、给舍阴附汝愚，一切缄默，不报。
现代文：汪义端又指责台谏、给舍暗中附和赵汝愚，对赵汝愚的一切言行缄默不语，皇上对此不予答复。
English: Wang Yidang also accused the Empress Dowager of secretly siding with Zhao Rugu and being silent on all of Zhao Rugu's words and deeds. The Emperor did not reply to this.

古文：论汝愚发策讥讪祖宗，又不报。
现代文：汪义端又说赵汝愚发的策问讥讽祖宗，皇上还是不予回复。
English: Wang Yidang also said that Zhao Rongfu's questioning was mocking the ancestors, and the emperor still did not reply.

古文：汝愚力辞，上为徙义端军器监。
现代文：赵汝愚竭力辞职，皇上于是把汪义端调任军器监。
English: Zhao Rugu tried his best to resign, and the emperor then transferred Wang Yidang to the post of inspector of military equipment.

古文：给事中黄裳言： 汝愚事亲孝，事君忠，居官廉，忧国爱民，出于天性。
现代文：给事中黄裳说 ：赵汝愚事奉双亲孝顺，事奉君主忠心，居官廉洁，忧国爱民，出于天性。
English: In the letter, Huang Xiang said, "Zhao Rugu is by nature dutiful to his parents, loyal to the monarch, incorruptible, cares about the country and loves the people.

古文：义端实忌贤，不可以不黜。 上乃黜义端补郡，汝愚不获已拜命。
现代文：汪义端真正是忌贤，不可以不罢黜。 皇上于是罢黜汪义端，让他到地方任职，赵汝愚不得已只好接受任命。
English: The emperor then dismissed Wang Yidang and sent him to a local post, and Zhao Rugu had no choice but to accept the appointment.

古文：未几，迁知枢密院事，辞不拜，有旨趣受告。
现代文：不久，赵汝愚被升为知枢密院事，他辞去不受，皇上下旨要他去接受诰命。
English: Soon after, Zhao Ruwu was promoted to the position of Secretary of the Privy Council. He was not allowed to resign, and the emperor ordered him to accept his death.

古文：汝愚对曰： 臣非敢久辞。
现代文：赵汝愚回答说 ：我不敢久久地推辞。
English: Zhao Rugu replied, "I dare not refuse for a long time."

古文：臣尝论朝廷数事，其言未见用，今陛下过重华，留正复相，天下幸甚。
现代文：我曾论述朝廷的几件事，所提的意见未见采纳，今天陛下探访孝宗，留正恢复相职。这是天下的大幸。
English: I have discussed several matters concerning the Imperial Court, but the opinions I have proposed have not been adopted. Today, His Majesty visited Takamune and resumed his duties. This is a great blessing for the world.

古文：惟武兴未除帅，臣心不敢安。 上遂以张诏代领武兴军，汝愚乃受命。
现代文：只是武兴军未确定统帅，我心中不安。 皇上于是派张诏代任武兴军统帅，赵汝愚于是接受任命。
English: However, I was uneasy because the commander of the Wuxing Army had not yet been determined. The emperor then sent Zhang Zhao to take the place of the commander of the Wuxing Army, and Zhao Rugu accepted the appointment.

古文：光宗之疾生于疑畏，其未过宫也，汝愚数从容进谏，光宗出闻其语辄悟，入辄复疑。
现代文：光宗的病源于对孝宗心存疑惧，他不肯去拜见孝宗，赵汝愚多次从容劝谏，光宗出寝宫听到赵汝愚的劝说就醒悟，一入寝宫又疑心了。
English: Guangzong's illness stemmed from his suspicion of Xiaozong's heart. He refused to go to see Xiaozong. Zhao Rugu repeatedly persuaded him calmly. When Guangzong went out of the sleeping palace and heard Zhao Rugu's persuasion, he woke up. Once he entered the sleeping palace, he became suspicious again.

古文：五年春，孝宗不豫，夏五月，疾日臻。
现代文：绍熙五年春，孝宗生病，夏五月，孝宗的病一天天加重。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Emperor Xiaozong fell ill. In the summer of May, Emperor Xiaozong's illness worsened day by day.

古文：光宗御后殿，丞相率同列入，请上诣重华宫侍疾，从臣、台谏继入，阁门吏以故事止之，不退。
现代文：光宗到后殿去，丞相率同僚进来，请求光宗到重华宫侍奉孝宗，侍从、台谏相继进入后殿，门吏根据过去的惯例加以阻止，他们都不肯退出。
English: Guangzong went to the antechamber, the prime minister and his colleagues came in and asked Guangzong to go to Chonghua Palace to serve Xiaozong. The attendants and the eunuchs entered the antechamber one after another. The gatekeepers stopped them according to the past practice, and they refused to withdraw.

古文：光宗益疑，起入内。
现代文：光宗更加疑心，起身入寝宫。
English: Ever more suspicious, Mitsumune got up and went to bed.

古文：越二日，宰相又请对，光宗令知阁门事韩侂胄传旨云： 宰执并出。 于是俱至浙江亭俟命。
现代文：过了二天，宰相又请求面奏，光宗令知门事韩胄传旨说： 宰相执政一起出去。 于是赵汝愚、留正二人一起到浙江亭待罪。
English: Two days later, the prime minister again requested a meeting, and Guangzong ordered the gatekeeper, Han Zheng, to convey the message: "The prime minister should go out to govern together." Therefore, Zhao Ruwu and Ruizheng both went to Zhejiang Pavilion to await the crime.

古文：孝宗闻之忧甚，嗣秀王简丞相传孝宗意，令宰执复入。
现代文：孝宗听说后很担心，嗣秀王派丞相传达孝宗的旨意，令宰执又进宫。
English: After hearing about this, Takamune was very worried. Tsuguhide sent the prime minister to convey Takamune's will, and ordered Zaisei to return to the palace.

古文：侂胄奏曰： 昨传旨令宰执出殿门，今乃出都门。 请自往宣押，汝愚等乃还第。
现代文：韩胄奏言说 ：昨天陛下传旨让宰执出宫门，今天应下令把他们赶出国都。 并请求自己前去押送他们，赵汝愚等人于是回到家中。
English: Han Yu said in his speech, "Yesterday, His Majesty sent an order to let the emperors leave the palace gate, and today he should order them to be driven out of the capital, and asked himself to escort them, and Zhao Rugu and others then returned home.

古文：六月丁酉，夜五鼓，重华大阉扣宰执私第，报孝宗崩，中书以闻，汝愚恐上疑，或不出视朝，持其札不上。
现代文：六月初八，晚上五更，重华宫的大宦官叩响宰执赵汝愚的家门，报告孝宗驾崩的消息，中书报告皇上，赵汝愚担心皇上疑心病发作，又不肯出来视朝，就扣住奏札不呈上。
English: On the evening of the fifth day of the eighth month of June, the grand eunuch of the Chonghua Palace knocked on the door of the family of Zhao Rugu, the chief, to report the news of the death of Xiaozong. Zhao Rugu was worried that the emperor had a suspected heart attack and did not want to come out to see the DPRK, so he held back the report card and did not submit it.

古文：次日，上视朝，汝愚以提举重华宫关礼状进，上乃许过北内，至日昃不出，宰相率百官诣重华宫发丧。
现代文：第二天，皇上视朝，赵汝愚把提举重华宫关礼状进献上，皇上于是答应到北内探望孝宗，但一直到太阳下山光宗仍不出宫，宰相率领百官到重华宫发丧。
English: The next day, the emperor visited the court, and Zhao Ruwu presented a letter of commendation for the promotion of Chonghua Palace to the emperor. The emperor then agreed to visit Xiaozong in the north, but Guangzong still did not leave the palace until the sun went down. The prime minister led hundreds of officials to Chonghua Palace to mourn.

古文：壬寅，将成服，留正与汝愚议，介少傅吴琚请宪圣太后垂帘暂主丧事，宪圣不许。
现代文：十三日，将制成服，留正与赵汝愚商议，通过少傅吴琚请宪圣太后垂帘暂且主丧事，宪圣太后不答应。
English: On the thirteenth day, the clothes will be made, and Ruizheng will discuss with Zhao Rugu, and through the young master Wu Xi, he will ask the Empress Dowager to hang the curtain temporarily for the main funeral, but the Empress Dowager will not agree.

古文：正等附奏曰： 臣等连日造南内请对，不获。
现代文：留正等人一起奏道： 我们连日到南内请求面奏，未得到皇上批准。
English: Ruizheng and others played together and said, "We went to Nan'ei for days to request a face-to-face performance, but did not receive the Emperor's approval.

古文：累上疏，不得报。
现代文：屡次上疏，也得不到回音。
English: Repeatedly upsetting, also do not get a response.

古文：今当率百恭官请，若皇帝不出，百官相与恸哭于宫门，恐人情骚动，为社稷忧。
现代文：今天当率领百官恭请皇上，如果皇上不出宫，百官一起在宫门大哭，恐怕会引起人心骚动，有害于国家。
English: If the Emperor does not come out of the palace, and the officials cry loudly together at the palace gate, I am afraid it will cause turmoil in the hearts of the people and be harmful to the country.

古文：乞太皇太后降旨，以皇帝有疾，蹔就宫中成服。
现代文：恳求太皇太后降旨，说明由于皇上有病，暂且让他就在宫中服丧。
English: He implored the empress dowager to issue a decree stating that, due to the emperor's illness, he would temporarily be allowed to mourn in the palace.

古文：然丧不可无主，祝文称 孝子嗣皇帝 ，宰臣不敢代行。
现代文：然而丧事不可以无人主持，祝文称 孝子嗣皇帝 ，宰臣不敢代行。
English: However, no one should preside over the funeral, and the congratulatory letter said that the emperor was a filial son, and the vice-minister did not dare to act on his behalf.

古文：太皇太后，寿皇之母也，请摄行祭礼。 盖是时正、汝愚之请垂帘也，以国本系乎嘉王，欲因帘前奏陈宗社之计，使命出帘帏之间，事行庙堂之上，则体正言顺，可无后艰。
现代文：太皇太后，是寿皇孝宗的母亲，请主持行祭礼。 在这时留正、赵汝愚请求太后垂帘主丧，是想把国家大权交给嘉王，想在帘前奏陈国家大策，使命令出自帘帏之间，所行之事居于庙堂之上，那么一切名正言顺，可以没有后顾之忧。
English: The Grand Empress Dowager, the mother of Emperor Shou and Emperor Xiaozong, please preside over the ceremony. At this time, Ruizheng and Zhao Rugu asked the Empress Dowager to hang the curtain for the funeral. They wanted to hand over the power of the state to King Jia, and wanted to play Chen's national strategy in front of the curtain, so that the order would come from between the curtains, and the things done would be above the temple. Then everything would be in accordance with the truth, and there would be no worries.

古文：而吴琚素畏慎，且以后戚不欲与闻大计，此议竟格。
现代文：而吴琚一向胆小、谨慎，并以自己是后戚不想参与国家大计，这个计划最终中止。
English: But Wu Gan had always been timid and cautious, and he did not want to participate in the national plan as a descendant. This plan was eventually suspended.

古文：丁未，宰臣已下，待对和宁门，不报，乃入奏云： 皇子嘉王仁孝夙成，宜早正储位以安人心。 又不报。
现代文：十八日，宰臣已到宫门前，在和宁门外等待与皇上对话，未得到回复，于是上奏书说： 皇子嘉王仁孝早就显现出来，应早日确定王储之位以安人心。 仍未得到回复。
English: On the 18th, the Vice-Minister had arrived in front of the palace gate and was waiting outside the Ho Ning Gate for a dialogue with the Emperor, but received no reply, so the report said: Prince Jia Wang Ren Xiao has already appeared, and the position of crown prince should be determined as soon as possible to reassure the people.

古文：越六日再请，御批云： 甚好。 明日，同拟旨以进，乞上亲批付学士院降诏。
现代文：过了六天宰相又来请求，皇上批示说： 很好。 第二天，大家一同拟旨呈上，请皇上亲自批示交给学士院降诏。
English: Six days later, the prime minister came again to make a request, and the emperor issued an order saying, "Very good." The next day, everyone submitted a draft order together, and asked the emperor to personally give the order to the Academy to issue the order.

古文：是夕，御批付丞相云： 历事岁久，念欲退闲。 留正见之惧，因朝临佯仆于庭，密为去计。
现代文：这天晚上，皇上批示给丞相说： 我执政年月久了，想退下来清闲一下。 留正看到后很害怕，就趁上朝时假装倒在朝廷上，私下考虑离去的计谋。
English: On this evening, the emperor gave instructions to the prime minister, saying, "I have been in power for a long time, and I would like to step down and relax for a while." Seeing this, Ruzheng was very afraid, so he pretended to be in the imperial court when he became emperor, and privately considered the strategy of leaving.

古文：汝愚自度不得辞其责，念故事须坐甲以戒不虞，而殿帅郭杲莫有以腹心语者。
现代文：赵汝愚估计自己不得推脱干系，想起过去的事例须让士兵披甲不卧，坐以待敌，以备不测，而殿帅郭杲没有说出自己的心里话，赵汝愚不敢轻举妄动。
English: Zhao Rugu estimated that he could not get out of the situation. Recalling the past cases, he had to let the soldiers wear armor and not lie down, sit and wait for the enemy to prepare for any eventuality. However, Admiral Guo Jun did not say his heartfelt words, and Zhao Rugu dared not make any rash moves.

古文：会工部尚书赵彦逾至私第，语及国事，汝愚泣，彦逾亦泣，汝愚因微及与子意，彦逾喜。
现代文：正遇工部尚书赵彦逾到赵汝愚的私宅来，谈到国家大事，赵汝愚哭泣起来，赵彦逾也哭起来，赵汝愚于是透露出想让光宗传位给嘉王的意思，赵彦逾很高兴。
English: When Zhao Yanqiao, a senior official of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, came to Zhao Ruigu's private home and talked about national events, Zhao Ruigu cried, Zhao Yanqiao also cried. Zhao Ruigu then revealed his intention to have Guangzong pass the throne to Jiahuang. Zhao Yanqiao was very happy.

古文：汝愚知彦逾善杲，因缪曰： 郭杲傥不同，奈何？ 彦逾曰： 某当任之。 约明乃复命。
现代文：赵汝愚知道赵彦逾与郭杲关系好，就假装说： 郭杲如果不同意，怎么办？ 赵彦逾说 ：我会让他听从的。 二人约定明天就回话。
English: Zhao Rugu knew that Zhao Yanyu had a good relationship with Guo Yao, so he pretended to say: If Guo Yao disagrees, what should he do? Zhao Yanyu said: I will make him obey. The two agreed to talk tomorrow.

古文：汝愚曰： 此大事已出诸口，岂容有所俟乎？ 汝愚不敢入私室，退坐屏后，以待彦逾之至。
现代文：赵汝愚说 ：这件事已经从大家口中传出，岂能有时间等待？ 赵汝愚不敢入寝室睡觉，退坐到屏风后面，以等待赵彦逾的到来。
English: Zhao Ruyou said, "This matter has already spread from everyone's mouth, can there be time to wait? Zhao Ruyou did not dare to go to his bedroom to sleep, and retreated behind the screen to wait for Zhao Yanqiao's arrival.

古文：有顷，彦逾至，议遂定。
现代文：一会儿，赵彦逾到了，决定于是定下。
English: After a while, Zhao Yan passed the time and decided to go ahead.

古文：明日，正以五更肩舆出城去，人心益摇，汝愚处之恬然。
现代文：第二天，留正五更乘轿子出城去，人心更加动摇，赵汝愚显得很坦然。
English: The next day, when Zhao Zhengwujian left the city in a palanquin, people were even more shaken. Zhao Ruwu appeared very calm.

古文：自吴琚之议不谐，汝愚与徐谊、叶适谋可以白意于慈福宫者，乃遣韩侂胄以内禅之意请于宪圣。
现代文：自从与吴琚的意见不一致后，赵汝愚与徐谊、叶适商量可以把意见报告慈福宫，于是派韩胄把内禅的意见请示于宪圣太后。
English: Since he did not agree with Wu Xi's opinion, Zhao Rugu consulted with Xu Yi and Ye Shi to report his opinion to the Cifu Palace, so he sent Han Xi to ask the Empress Dowager Xian Sheng for advice on inner meditation.

古文：侂胄因所善内侍张宗尹以奏，不获命，明日往，又不获命。
现代文：韩胄通过所相好的内侍张宗尹去禀奏，没有得到回音。第二天又去，仍没获得旨意。
English: Han Zheng went to play the harp through his close friend Zhang Zongyin, but received no response. He went again the next day, but still did not receive the will.

古文：侂胄逡巡将退，重华宫提举关礼见而问之，侂胄具述汝愚意。
现代文：韩胄迟疑不决准备退出时，重华宫提举关礼看见他就问何事，韩胄具体叙述了赵汝愚的意见。
English: When Han Wei hesitantly prepared to withdraw, the Chonghua Palace raised the guard of honor and asked him what he saw. Han Wei specifically described Zhao Rugu's opinion.

古文：礼令少俟，入见宪圣而泣。
现代文：关礼令他少候，进宫见宪圣太后就哭。
English: Guan Li made him wait a short time, and when he entered the palace and saw Empress Dowager Xian Sheng, he cried.

古文：宪圣问故，礼曰： 圣人读书万卷，亦尝见有如此时而保无乱者乎？ 宪圣曰： 此非汝所知。 礼曰： 此事人人知之，今丞相已去，所赖者赵知院，旦夕亦去矣。 言与泪俱。
现代文：宪圣太后问什么原因，关礼说： 圣人读书达万卷，敢曾看见过有这样的时节而能保证没有出乱子的吗？ 宪圣太后说： 这不是你所想知道的。 关礼说： 这件事人人知道，今天丞相已经走了，朝廷所依靠的赵知院，早晚也要走的。 说完眼泪流下来了。
English: Empress Dowager Gensheng asked what the reason was, and Guan Li said: "Sages have read tens of thousands of books. Have you ever seen a time like this and been able to ensure that there was no disturbance?" Empress Dowager Gensheng said: "This is not what you want to know." Guan Li said: "Everyone knows about this. Today, the prime minister has left, and Zhao Zhi Yuan, which the imperial court relies on, will also leave sooner or later." After saying this, tears flowed down.

古文：宪圣惊曰： 知院同姓，事体与他人异，乃亦去乎？ 礼曰： 知院未去，非但以同姓故，以太皇太后为可恃耳。
现代文：宪圣太后吃惊地说 ：赵知院与皇家同姓，处理事情应与别人不同，他也要走吗？ 关礼说： 赵知院没走，并不只是因为与皇家同姓的缘故，是因为太皇太后可以依靠呀。
English: The Empress Dowager Gensheng was surprised and said: Zhao Zhi Yuan has the same surname as the royal family, so he should handle things differently from others. Should he also leave? Guan Li said: Zhao Zhi Yuan did not leave, not only because of the same surname as the royal family, but because the Empress Dowager can rely on him.

古文：今定大计而不获命，势不得不去。去，将如天下何？愿圣人三思。 宪圣问侂胄安在，礼曰： 臣已留其俟命。 宪圣曰： 事顺则可，令谕好为之。 礼报侂胄，且云： 来早太皇太后于寿皇梓宫前垂帘引执政。 侂胄复命，汝愚始以其事语陈骙、余端礼，使郭杲及步帅阎仲夜以兵卫南北内，礼使其姻党宣赞舍人傅昌朝密制黄袍。
现代文：韩胄向赵汝愚转达了太后的命令，赵汝愚才把此事告诉陈马癸、余端礼，派郭杲以及步帅阎仲晚上率兵守卫南北内，关礼派他的姻亲宣赞舍人傅昌朝秘密制作黄袍。
English: Han Xuan conveyed the empress dowager's order to Zhao Rugu. Zhao Rugu then told Chen Ma Jun and Yu Dangli about the matter. He sent Guo Jun and the foot-soldier Yan Zhong to guard the north and south at night, and Guan Li sent his in-laws to proclaim the secret production of yellow robes by Fu Chang.

古文：是日，嘉王谒告不入临，汝愚曰： 禫祭重事，王不可不出。 翌日，礻覃祭，群臣入，王亦入。
现代文：当日，嘉王告诉赵汝愚他不想去哭吊孝宗，赵汝愚说： 礻覃祭这么重要的事，王子不可以不去。 第二天礻覃祭，群臣都去了，嘉王也去了。
English: On the same day, King Jia told King Jia that he did not want to go and weep for the death of Prince Xiaozong. King Jia said, "For such an important matter as the burnt offering, the prince must not miss it." The next day, the ministers all went to the burnt offering, and King Jia also went.

古文：汝愚率百官诣大行前，宪圣垂帘，汝愚率同列再拜，奏： 皇帝疾，未能执丧，臣等乞立皇子嘉王为太子，以系人心。
现代文：赵汝愚带领百官到孝宗前面去，宪圣太后垂帘，赵汝愚率同僚拜见了宪圣太后，然后奏道： 皇上生病，不能执丧事，我们请求立皇子嘉王为太子，以稳定人心。
English: Zhao Ruwu led hundreds of officials to go in front of Xiaozong, and the curtain of the Empress Dowager Xian Sheng hung down. Zhao Ruwu and his colleagues paid a visit to the Empress Dowager Xian Sheng, and then made a speech: The emperor is ill and cannot perform the funeral, we request that the prince Jia Wang be appointed as the prince to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：皇帝批出有 甚好 二字，继有 念欲退闲 之语，取太皇太后处分。 宪圣曰： 既有御笔，相公当奉行。 汝愚曰： 兹事重大，播之天下，书之史册，须议一指挥。 宪圣允诺。
现代文：皇上批示 很好 二字，又有 想退下来休息 的话，听由太皇太后处分。 宪圣太后说 ：既然有御笔批示，你们应当奉行。 赵汝愚说： 这件事事关重大，要传谕天下，载入史册，必须议定一个指挥。 宪圣太后答应了。
English: The Emperor's instructions were very good, and if they wanted to retire and rest, they should be punished by the Grand Empress Dowager.The Grand Empress Dowager Gensho said, "Since there is a written instruction, you should follow it."Zhao Rugu said, "This matter is very important, to be announced to the world and recorded in history, we must agree on a command."The Grand Empress Dowager Gensho agreed.

古文：汝愚袖出所拟太皇太后指挥以进，云： 皇帝以疾至今未能执丧，曾有御笔，欲自退闲。
现代文：赵汝愚从袖中拿出所拟定的太皇太后指挥呈上，指挥说： 皇上因为生病至今未能执丧，曾有御笔批示，想退下休息。
English: Zhao Ruwu took out from his sleeve the draft of the grand empress dowager's funeral march and presented it to the conductor. The conductor said: The emperor has not been able to hold a funeral so far because of his illness. There was a written order that he wanted to retire and rest.

古文：皇子嘉王扩可即皇帝位，尊皇帝为太上皇帝，皇后为太上皇后。 宪圣览毕曰： 甚善。 汝愚奏： 自今臣等有合奏事，当取嗣君处分。
现代文：皇子嘉王赵扩可以继承皇位，尊光宗为太上皇帝，皇后为太上皇后。 宪圣太后看完后说 ：很好。 赵汝愚奏道 ：从今我们有需上奏的事，应该听从嗣皇帝处理。
English: Prince Jia Wang Zhao Zhan could succeed to the throne, with Sun Guangzong as the Grand Empress Dowager and the Empress as the Grand Empress Dowager. After reading it, Empress Dowager Xian Sheng said, "Very good." Zhao Ruwu said, "From now on, we have things that need to be played, and we should listen to the Heir Emperor."

古文：然恐两宫父子间有难处者，须烦太皇太后主张。 又奏： 上皇疾未平，骤闻此事，不无惊疑，乞令都知杨舜卿提举本宫，任其责。 遂召舜卿至帘前，面喻之。
现代文：然而担心两宫父子间有难以处理的地方，须烦请太皇太后论处。 赵汝愚又奏道 ：太上皇病未好，突然听到此事，不无惊讶，请求令都令杨舜卿提举泰安宫，担负侍奉太上皇的职责。 于是宪圣太后召杨舜卿到帘前，当面告诉他。
English: However, he was worried that there was something difficult to deal with between the two emperors and their children, so he had to go to the trouble of asking the Grand Empress Dowager to discuss the matter. Zhao Rugu also said, "The Grand Empress Dowager is not well. When I suddenly heard about this, I was surprised. The request order made Yang Jieqing to raise the Tai'an Palace and assume the duties of serving the Grand Empress Dowager. Therefore, the Grand Empress Dowager summoned Yang Jiejing to the curtain and told him in person.

古文：宪圣乃命皇子即位，皇子固辞曰： 恐负不孝名。 汝愚奏： 天子当以安社稷、定国家为孝。
现代文：宪圣太后于是命令皇子即位，皇子坚决推辞说： 恐怕背上不孝之名。 赵汝愚奏道 ：天子应以安社稷、定国家为孝。
English: Empress Dowager Gensho then ordered the prince to ascend the throne, but the prince firmly refused, saying, "I'm afraid I'll have the name of being unfilial on my back." Zhao Ruyou said, "The Son of Heaven should be filial to Anshu and the country."

古文：今中外人人忧乱，万一变生，置太上皇何地？ 众扶入素幄，披黄袍，方却立未坐，汝愚率同列再拜。
现代文：今天内外人人忧心忡忡，一片混乱，万一发生事变，把太上皇置于何地？ 大家扶着皇子入素幄，披上黄袍，正站立未坐下，赵汝愚率同僚又拜。
English: Today, everyone at home and abroad is worried and confused. In the event of an incident, where will the emperor be placed? Everyone supports the prince into the coffin, puts on the yellow robe, stands up without sitting down, and Zhao Ruwu and his colleagues bow again.

古文：宁宗诣几筵殿，哭尽哀。
现代文：宁宗前往几个筵殿，悲哀地大哭。
English: Ning Zong went to several imperial residences and wept bitterly.

古文：须臾，立仗讫，催百官班。
现代文：过了一会儿，陈设仪仗结束，催促百官回去。
English: After a while, the display ceremony ended, urging the officials to go back.

古文：帝衰服出就重华殿东庑素幄立，内侍扶掖乃坐。
现代文：皇上穿着丧服就在重华殿东厢房的素幄旁站着，内侍扶着他的胳膊才坐下。
English: The Emperor, dressed in his mourning clothes, stood next to the wooden cross in the East Wing of the Chunghwa Palace. An attendant supported his arm before he sat down.

古文：百官起居讫，行禫祭礼。
现代文：百官请安完毕，行礻覃祭礼。
English: After all the officials have left, let's have a dragonfly festival.

古文：汝愚即丧次，召还留正长百僚，命朱熹待制经筵，悉收召士君子之在外者。
现代文：赵汝愚就在主持丧事的地方，派人召回留正为宰相，令朱熹待制经筵，把在朝外的士人君子全部召来。
English: Zhao Rugu was in the place where he presided over the funeral. He sent someone to recall Ruzheng as prime minister, ordered Zhu Xi to wait for the establishment of the government, and called all the scholars and gentlemen outside the court.

古文：侍御史张叔椿请议正弃国之罚，汝愚为迁叔椿官。
现代文：侍御史张叔椿请求治留正弃国之罪，赵汝愚于是改换了张叔椿的官职。
English: Zhao Rugu changed Zhang Shuzhu's official position after Zhang Shuzhu, the attendant of the historian, requested that he be punished for the crime of abandoning the country.

古文：是月，上命汝愚兼权参知政事。
现代文：在这个月，皇上令赵汝愚兼任暂代参知政事。
English: In this month, the emperor ordered Zhao Rugu to concurrently serve as a provisional co-premier.

古文：留正至，汝愚乞免兼职，乃除特进、右丞相。
现代文：留正回朝后，赵汝愚乞求免去兼职，于是赵汝愚拜为特进、右丞相。
English: After Ruzheng returned to the imperial court, Zhao Ruyou begged to be exempted from the part-time job, so Zhao Ruyou was promoted to the post of special envoy and minister of the right.

古文：汝愚辞不拜，曰： 同姓之卿，不幸处君臣之变，敢言功乎？ 乃命以特进为枢密使，汝愚又辞特进。
现代文：赵汝愚推辞不接受任命，说： 我是与皇家同姓的官卿，不幸处理君臣之变，怎敢讲有功劳？ 于是皇上令他以特进身份任枢密使，赵汝愚又辞去特进身份。
English: Zhao Rugu refused to accept the appointment, saying: I am a government official with the same surname as the royal family, unfortunately dealing with the change of monarchs and ministers, how dare I say there is merit? Therefore, the emperor ordered him to serve as a special envoy, and Zhao Rugu resigned as a special envoy.

古文：孝宗将欑，汝愚议欑宫非永制，欲改卜山陵，与留正议不合。
现代文：孝宗被埋入临时葬地木赞宫，赵汝愚认为木赞宫不是永久的制度，想改卜山陵，他与留正商量，二人意见不合。
English: Xiaozong was buried in the temporary burial ground of Muzan Palace. Zhao Ruyou thought that Muzan Palace was not a permanent system and wanted to reform the mausoleum. He discussed with Ruizheng, but the two disagreed.

古文：侂胄因而间之，出正判建康，命汝愚为光禄大夫、右丞相。
现代文：韩胄于是从中离间他们，皇上让留正离朝任建康判官，命令赵汝愚为光禄大夫、右丞相。
English: Han Zheng then separated them from the middle, and the emperor appointed Ru Ru Ru to be the judge of Jiankang, and ordered Zhao Ru to be the doctor of Guanglu and the minister of the right.

古文：汝愚力辞至再三，不许。
现代文：赵汝愚极力再三推辞，皇上不答应。
English: Zhao Rugu tried his best to repeatedly refuse, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：汝愚本倚正共事，怒侂胄不以告，及来谒，故不见，侂胄惭忿。
现代文：赵汝愚原本依靠留正共事，他恨韩胄不把留正被罢的消息告诉他，等到韩胄来拜访他时，就故意不见，韩胄又羞又气。
English: Zhao Rugu had originally relied on Ruizheng to work with him. He hated Han Zheng for not telling him the news of Ruizheng's dismissal. When Han Zheng came to visit him, he deliberately did not see him. Han Zheng was ashamed and angry.

古文：签书枢密罗点曰： 公误矣。 汝愚亦悟，复见之。
现代文：签书枢密罗点说 ：你做得不对了。 赵汝愚也醒悟过来，又接见韩胄。
English: Zhao Ruwu also came to his senses and met with Han Xuan again.

古文：侂胄终不怿，自以有定策功，且依托肺腑，出入宫掖，居中用事。
现代文：韩胄始终不高兴，自以为有制定策略的功劳，并依靠心腹，出入宫廷，在宫中理事。
English: Han Zheng was always unhappy, he thought he had the merit of formulating a strategy, and he relied on his confidant to enter and leave the court and be a director in the palace.

古文：朱熹进对，以为言，又约吏部侍郎彭龟年同劾之，未果。
现代文：朱熹进宫对话，把此事报告皇上，又约吏部侍郎彭龟年一同弹劾他，没有结果。
English: Zhu Xi went to the palace for a dialogue, reported the matter to the emperor, and also made an appointment with the secretary of the cadre department, Peng Gui Nian, to impeach him. There was no result.

古文：熹白汝愚，当以厚赏酬劳，勿使预政，而汝愚谓其易制不为虑。
现代文：朱熹报告赵汝愚，要他多付酬劳重奖韩胄，不要让韩胄参政，而赵汝愚认为韩胄容易制服，不必担心。
English: Zhu Rong reported to Zhao Rugu that he should pay more remuneration and reward Han Rong more, and not let Han Rong participate in politics. Zhao Rugu thought that Han Rong was easy to subdue, and there was no need to worry.

古文：右正言黄度欲论侂胄，谋泄，以内批斥去。
现代文：右正言黄度想论韩胄的罪，其计划暴露，皇上手诏将他罢黜。
English: Right righteous Huang Du wanted to discuss Han Xuan's crime, his plan was exposed, and the emperor issued an edict to depose him.

古文：熹因讲毕，奏疏极言： 陛下即位未能旬月，而进退宰执，移易台谏，皆出陛下之独断，大臣不与谋，给舍不及议。
现代文：朱熹讲经结束，奏书时极力说： 陛下即位未到十个月，而进退宰相、执政，变换台谏，都出自陛下个人独自的决定，大臣没参与商量，给舍官来不及讨论。
English: At the end of Zhu Xi's sermon, he said emphatically as he read from his book: His Majesty ascended the throne less than ten months ago, and the promotion and relegation of the prime minister, his administration, and the change of the throne, all came from His Majesty's personal and independent decision. The minister did not participate in the discussion, and it was too late for the officials to discuss.

古文：此弊不革，臣恐名为独断，而主威不免于下移。 疏入，遽出内批，除熹宫观。
现代文：这个弊端不革除，我担心皇上名义上是独断专行，而实际上皇上的威权不免下移。 朱熹呈上奏书后，皇上就颁布批示，任朱熹为宫观官。
English: If this defect is not eliminated, I am worried that the emperor is nominally acting arbitrarily, but in fact the authority of the emperor will inevitably shift downward.After Zhu Xi submitted the report, the emperor issued instructions and appointed Zhu Xi as the palace observer.

古文：汝愚袖批还上，且谏且拜，侂胄必欲出之，汝愚退求去，不许。
现代文：赵汝愚把藏在衣袖里的批示还给皇上，又劝又拜，韩胄一定要赶出朱熹，赵汝愚退下请求离职。皇上不答应。
English: Zhao Rugu returned the instruction hidden in his sleeve to the emperor, and persuaded and worshiped him. Han Zheng must expel Zhu Xi, and Zhao Rugu withdrew and requested to leave the post. The emperor did not agree.

古文：吏部侍郎彭龟年力陈侂胄窃弄威福，为中外所附，不去必贻患。
现代文：吏部侍郎彭龟年极力陈述韩胄窃弄威福，内外大臣都依附他，不去除他必定后患无穷。
English: Peng Jiannian, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, tried his best to explain that Han Zheng had been stealing from Weifu, and that the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior were all dependent on him. If he was not removed, there would be endless suffering.

古文：又奏： 近日逐朱熹太暴，故欲陛下亦亟去此小人。 既而内批龟年与郡，侂胄势益张。
现代文：又奏道： 近日驱逐朱熹太突然，所以希望陛下也立即去除韩胄这一小人。 不久皇上批示令彭龟年任一地方官，韩胄的势力更加膨胀。
English: He also said, "Recently, the expulsion of Zhu Xi was too sudden, so I hope that His Majesty will also immediately remove Han Xuan, a villain. Soon, the emperor ordered Peng Jian to appoint a local official, and Han Xuan's power expanded even more.

古文：侂胄恃功，为汝愚所抑，日夜谋引其党为台谏，以摈汝愚。
现代文：韩胄自恃有功，被赵汝愚所抑制，韩胄日夜想提拔他的私党为台谏，以排斥赵汝愚。
English: Han Yu, who prided himself on his achievements, was suppressed by Zhao Rugu. Han Yu day and night wanted to promote his own party as Taiwan's ruling party in order to exclude Zhao Rugu.

古文：汝愚为人疏，不虞其奸。
现代文：赵汝愚为人粗心，没有预料到他的奸邪。
English: Zhao Ruwu was careless and did not anticipate his treachery.

古文：赵彦逾以尝达意于郭杲，事定，冀汝愚引与同列，至是除四川制置，意不惬，与侂胄合谋。
现代文：赵彦逾因为曾传话给郭杲，事情结束后，他希望赵汝愚引荐自己为同僚，到这时他被任命为四川制置，心中不满，就与韩胄合谋排挤赵汝愚。
English: Because Zhao Yan had sent a message to Guo Yu, after the matter was over, he hoped that Zhao Rugu would recommend him as a colleague. At this time, he was appointed as the Sichuan governor. He was dissatisfied and conspired with Han Yu to oust Zhao Rugu.

古文：陛辞日，尽疏当时贤者姓名，指为汝愚之党，上意不能无疑。
现代文：赵彦逾到宫中辞行的那天，尽奏当时贤者的姓名，指出他们是赵汝愚的私党，皇上心中不能不有所怀疑。
English: On the day of Zhao Yan's resignation from the palace, he played the names of the sages of the time, pointing out that they were Zhao Ruwu's private party, and the emperor could not help but have doubts in his heart.

古文：汝愚请令近臣举御史，侂胄密谕中司，令荐所厚大理寺簿刘德秀，内批擢德秀为察官，其党牵联以进，言路遂皆侂胄之人。
现代文：赵汝愚请求令亲近大臣推荐御史，韩胄秘密告诉中司，要他们推荐与他交情深厚的大理寺簿刘德秀，皇上批示升刘德秀为御史，他的党徒也跟随得以升职，言官于是都是韩胄的人。
English: Zhao Rugu asked his close ministers to recommend him, and Han Zheng secretly told the middle-ranking officials that they should recommend Liu Dexiu of Dali Temple, who had a deep friendship with him. The emperor ordered Liu Dexiu to be promoted to the position of imperial historian, and his party members were also promoted. The officials were all Han Zheng's people.

古文：会黄裳、罗点卒，侂胄又擢其党京镗代点，汝愚始孤，天子益无所倚信。
现代文：遇到黄裳、罗点死去，韩胄又提拔他的党徒京镗取代罗点的职位，赵汝愚开始被孤立，皇上更加无所倚仗和信任的人了。
English: When Huang Xiang and Luo Dian died, and Han Xuan promoted his party member Jing Jun to replace Luo Dian, Zhao Rugu began to be isolated, and the emperor had no one to rely on or trust.

古文：于是中书舍人陈傅良、监察御史吴猎、起居郎刘光祖各先后斥去，群憸和附，疾正士如仇雠，而衣冠之祸始矣。
现代文：于是中书舍人陈傅良、监察御史吴猎、起居郎刘光祖先后被排斥，群臣邪佞附和韩胄，视正直之士如仇敌，而士大夫之祸开始。
English: As a result, Chen Fu Liang, the scribe, Wu Han, the overseer, and Liu Guang, the steward, were ostracized after the ancestors, and the courtiers were attached to Han Xuan, treating honest people as enemies, and the calamity of the scholar-officials began.

古文：侂胄欲逐汝愚而难其名，或教之曰： 彼宗姓，诬以谋危社稷，则一纲无遗。 侂胄然之，擢其党将作监李沐为正言。
现代文：韩胄想驱逐赵汝愚而难以找到名目，有人教他说： 他与宗室同姓，诬陷他阴谋危害国家，那么就把他及私党一网打尽了。 韩胄认为这个方法很好，于是提拔他的私党将作监李沐为正言。
English: Han Yu wanted to expel Zhao Rugu, but it was difficult to find a name. Someone told him, "He has the same surname as his father's family, and if he is framed for plotting to harm the country, then he and his faction will be wiped out." Han Yu thought this was a good method, so he promoted his faction to be a prisoner, Li Mu.

古文：沐，彦颖之子也，尝求节度使于汝愚不得，奏： 汝愚以同姓居相位，将不利于社稷，乞罢其政。 汝愚出浙江亭待罪，遂罢右相，除观文殿学士、知福州。
现代文：李沐，是李彦颖的儿子，曾向赵汝愚求节度使一职未得到，他奏道： 赵汝愚因为与宗室同姓而居相位，这将不利于国家，请求皇上罢去其权。 赵汝愚被赶到浙江亭待罪，于是被罢除右相之职，任观文殿学士、福州知州。
English: Li Mu, the son of Li Yan Ying, once petitioned Zhao Ruwu for a position, but he did not get it, he said: Zhao Ruwu, because he shares the same surname as his ancestral family, is in the same position, which will be detrimental to the country, and asked the emperor to remove his power. Zhao Ruwu was driven to Zhejiang Pavilion to wait for the crime, so he was removed from the position of the right phase, and was appointed as a bachelor of the Guanwen Hall and Fuzhou Zhizhou.

古文：台臣合词乞寝出守之命，遂以大学士提举洞霄宫。
现代文：台谏大臣一起奏请去掉他的郡守的职务，于是赵汝愚以大学士身份提举洞霄宫。
English: The minister of the Taiwan Straits Administration called for the removal of his position as county governor, so Zhao Ruwu promoted Dongxiao Palace as a university professor.

古文：国子祭酒李祥言： 去岁国遭大戚，中外汹汹，留正弃相位而去，官僚几欲解散，军民皆将为乱，两宫隔绝，国丧无主。
现代文：国子祭酒李祥说 ：去年国家遭遇大的变故，内外议论纷纷，留正弃相位而走，官僚们几度要解散，军民都将会作乱，两宫消息隔绝，孝宗死了，国丧无人主持。
English: Li Xiang said, "Last year, the country suffered great changes. There were many discussions both at home and abroad. Some people wanted to abandon the status quo and move on. The bureaucrats had to be disbanded several times. The military and the people were going to riot. The two palaces were cut off from news. Xiaozong died, and there was no one to preside over the national mourning.

古文：汝愚以枢臣独不避殒身灭族之祸，奉太皇太后命，翊陛下以登九五，勋劳著于社稷，精忠贯于天地，乃卒受黯黮而去，天下后世其谓何？ 博士杨简亦以为言。
现代文：赵汝愚以枢臣身份独独不避开身死灭族之祸，奉太皇太后的命令，帮助陛下登上帝位，对国家有显著功勋，对君主的精忠贯穿于天地，而突然受人暗算离朝，天下后世人会怎么看呢？ 博士杨简也如此说。
English: Zhao Ruwu, as a pivotal minister, was the only one who did not avoid the calamity of killing and exterminating the nation. He was ordered by the great empress dowager to help His Majesty ascend to the throne. He has made significant contributions to the country. His loyalty to the monarch runs through heaven and earth. But suddenly he was plotted to leave the dynasty. What will the world think? Dr. Yang Jian also said so.

古文：李沐劾祥、简，罢之。
现代文：李沐弹劾李祥、杨简，罢黜了他们。
English: Li Mu impeached Li Xiang and Yang Jian and ousted them.

古文：太府丞吕祖俭亦上书诉汝愚之忠，诏祖俭朋比罔上，送韶州安置。
现代文：太府丞吕祖俭也上书诉说赵汝愚的忠心，皇上下诏说吕祖俭与同党相互勾结欺骗皇上，把他安置到韶州。
English: Lv Zu Jian, the grand prefect of the imperial court, also wrote a letter telling of Zhao Rugu's loyalty, and the emperor issued an imperial edict saying that Lv Zu Jian had colluded with the same party to deceive the emperor and place him in Zhangzhou.

古文：太学生杨宏中、周端朝、张、林仲麟、蒋傅、徐范等伏阙言： 去岁人情惊疑，变在朝夕。
现代文：太学生杨宏中、周端朝、张、林仲麟、蒋传、徐范等人伏在宫殿前说： 去年人心慌恐，变故在朝夕之间。
English: Students Yang Hongzhong, Zhou Duanchao, Zhang, Lin Zhonglin, Jiang Chuan, Xu Fan and others prostrated in front of the palace and said: Last year, people were panicked, and the change happened between morning and evening.

古文：当时假非汝愚出死力，定大议，虽百李沐，罔知攸济。
现代文：当时如果不是赵汝愚出死力，定大策，即使一百个李沐，也不知道如何渡过难关。
English: At that time, if it wasn't for Zhao Ruwu's determination and determination, even a hundred Li Mu wouldn't know how to get through the difficulties.

古文：当国家多难，汝愚位枢府，本兵柄，指挥操纵，何向不可，不以此时为利，今上下安恬，乃独有异志乎？ 书上，悉送五百里外羁管。
现代文：当国家多难时，赵汝愚位居枢府，掌握兵权，指挥操纵一切，要国家朝哪个方向都行，但他不因此乘机谋划，今天上下安宁，他又怎么会有异心呢？ 奏书呈上后，太学生们全被送到五百里外管制。
English: When the country was facing many difficulties, Zhao Ruwu was in the central government, in control of military power, commanding and manipulating everything, and he could steer the country in any direction, but he did not take the opportunity to plan. Today, there is peace up and down the country. How could he have a different intention? After the report was submitted, all the students were sent to a control five hundred miles away.

古文：侂胄忌汝愚益深，谓不重贬，人言不已。
现代文：韩胄对赵汝愚的怨恨更深了，认为不大大贬斥他，人们的议论不会终止。
English: Han Wei's resentment of Zhao Rugu deepened, and he thought that people's discussion would not end without greatly disparaging him.

古文：以中丞何澹疏，落大观文。
现代文：由于中丞何澹的上疏，赵汝愚被落职为大观文。
English: Zhao Ruwu was demoted to the rank of Daikanmon due to the desertion of the middle-ranked general He Xuan.

古文：监察御史胡纮疏汝愚唱引伪徒，谋为不轨，乘龙授鼎，假梦为符。
现代文：监察御史胡上书说赵汝愚诱引大臣为自己的党徒，图谋不轨，乘龙授鼎，假梦为符。
English: The inspector of imperial history Hu wrote that Zhao Rugu lured the minister to be his own party member, schemed, used the dragon to ascend to the throne, and had a false dream.

古文：责宁远军节度副使，永州安置。
现代文：朝廷贬赵汝愚为宁远军节度副使，把赵汝愚安置在永州。
English: The imperial court demoted Zhao Ruwu to vice-envoy of the Ningyuan Army, and placed Zhao Ruwu in Yongzhou.

古文：初，汝愚尝梦孝宗授以汤鼎，背负白龙升天，后翼宁宗以素服登大宝，盖其验也，而谗者以为言。
现代文：当初，赵汝愚曾梦见孝宗授给他汤鼎，背着白龙升天，后保护宁宗素服登上皇位，是为验证，而谗言者以此指控赵汝愚。
English: At first, Zhao Ruwu had a dream that Xiaozong gave him Tang Ding, ascended to heaven with a white dragon on his back, and later ascended to the throne under the protection of Ning Zong, which was a verification, and the detractors accused Zhao Ruwu of this.

古文：时汪义端行词，用汉诛刘屈氂、唐戮李林甫事，示欲杀之意。
现代文：当时汪义端提出，引用汉代杀刘屈、唐朝杀李林甫的事例，暗示宁宗杀掉赵汝愚。
English: At that time, Wang Yidang proposed, citing the Han Dynasty's killing of Liu Qu and the Tang Dynasty's killing of Li Linfu, suggesting that Ning Zong killed Zhao Rugu.

古文：迪功郎赵师召亦上书乞斩汝愚。
现代文：迪功郎赵师召也上书乞求杀赵汝愚。
English: Di Gonglang Zhao Shizhao also wrote a letter begging to kill Zhao Rugu.

古文：汝愚怡然就道，谓诸子曰： 观侂胄之意，必欲杀我，我死，汝曹尚可免也。 至衡州病作，为守臣钱鍪所窘，暴薨，天下闻而冤之，时庆元二年正月壬午也。
现代文：赵汝愚怡然启程，他对诸子说： 看韩胄的意思，一定想杀死我，我死了，你们才可能幸免。 赵汝愚到衡州时疾病发作，被守臣钱鍪所困迫，突然死去，天下人听说后为他感到冤屈，当时是庆元二年，正月壬午日。
English: When Zhao Ruyi set off on his journey, he said to his sons: "Look at Han Xuan's meaning, he must want to kill me. Only when I die can you be spared." When Zhao Ruyi arrived in Hengzhou, he fell ill, was trapped by his loyal subject Qian Ye, and died suddenly. After hearing about this, the whole world felt a sense of grievance for him. It was the second year of Qingyuan, the first day of the third lunar month.

古文：汝愚学务有用，常以司马光、富弼、韩琦、范仲淹自期。
现代文：赵汝愚做学问务求学以致用，常常把司马光、富弼、韩琦、范仲淹作为自己学习的榜样。
English: Zhao Rugu was always eager to learn and put it to good use. He often used Sima Guang, Fuxi, Han Wei and Fan Zhongyun as his role models.

古文：凡平昔所闻于师友，如张栻、朱熹、吕祖谦、汪应辰、王十朋、胡铨、李焘、林光朝之言，欲次第行之，未果。
现代文：凡是平时从师友处听到的，如张木式、朱熹、吕祖谦、汪应辰、王十朋、胡铨、李焘、林光朝所说的话，他都想依次做到，但没有来得及施行而身死。
English: He wanted to do everything he had heard from his teachers and friends, such as Zhang Mu Rongshih, Zhu Xi, Lu Zuqian, Wang Yingchen, Wang Shibo, Hu Yao, Li Yao, and Lin Guangchao, but he did not have time to do it and died.

古文：所著诗文十五卷、《太祖实录举要》若干卷、《类宋朝诸臣奏议》三百卷。
现代文：赵汝愚所著的诗文有十五卷、《太祖实录举要》若干卷、《类宋朝诸臣奏议》三百卷。
English: There are fifteen volumes of poetry and prose written by Zhao Rugu, several volumes of "Introduction to the True Records of the Great Ancestors," and three hundred volumes of "Records of the Song Dynasty and Its Subjects."

古文：汝愚聚族而居，门内三千指，所得廪给悉分与之，菜羹疏食，恩意均洽，人无间言。
现代文：赵汝愚聚族人而居，家里有三百人，他所得的粮物全部分给他们，菜汤蔬菜食物，按所得多少平均分配，人们没有不满之言。
English: Zhao Ruwu lives in a family of 300 people. The grain and vegetables he earns are all given to them, and the vegetable soup and vegetable food are equally distributed according to the amount of income. People are not dissatisfied.

古文：自奉养甚薄，为夕郎时，大冬衣布裘，至为相亦然。
现代文：赵汝愚自己生活很清苦，为夕郎时，冬天穿布衣，为相时也是如此。
English: Zhao Ruwu himself lives a very clean and hard life. When he is a young man, he wears cloth clothes in winter, and the same is true when he is a young man.

古文：汝愚既殁，党禁浸解，旋复资政殿学士、太中大夫，已而赠少保。
现代文：赵汝愚已经死去，党禁渐渐解除，不久朝廷恢复他资政殿大学士、太中大夫之官职，不久又赠他为少保。
English: Zhao Ruwu had already died, the party ban was gradually lifted, and soon the imperial court restored him to the official positions of Senior Councilor of State, Grand Vice-Minister of Education, and Grand Vice-Minister of Education, and soon gave him the title of Junior Guard.

古文：侂胄诛，尽复元官，赐谥忠定，赠太师，追封沂国公。
现代文：韩胄被杀后，赵汝愚全部恢复了原来的官职，朝廷赐他谥号 忠定 ，赠他为太师，追封他为沂国公。
English: After Han Xuan was killed, Zhao Rugu restored all of his former official positions. The imperial court gave him the nickname "Zhongding" (忠定), made him Grand Master, and posthumously made him the Prince of Xiang.

古文：理宗诏配享宁宗庙庭，追封福王，其后进封周王。
现代文：理宗时下令把赵汝愚衤付祭在宁宗庙里，追封为福王，其后又封为周王。
English: At that time, Emperor Rizong ordered that Zhao Ruyun be enshrined in the Ningzong Temple, posthumously crowned as the King of Good Fortune, and then crowned as the King of Zhou.

古文：子九人，崇宪其长子也。
现代文：赵汝愚有九个儿子，赵崇宪是他的长子。
English: Zhao Rugu had nine sons, of whom Zhao Chongxian was the eldest.

