古文：主之所用也七术，所察也六微。
现代文：君主用来控制臣子的方法有七种，称为七术，君王需要明察的隐秘情况有六种，称为六微。
English: There are seven methods used by the monarch to control his vassals, known as the seven arts, and six secret situations that the monarch needs to observe, known as the six subtleties.

古文：七术：一曰众端参观，二曰必罚明威，三曰信赏尽能，四曰一听责下，五曰疑诏诡使，六曰挟知而问，七曰倒言反事。
现代文：七术：一是从各个方面参验、观察臣子的言行；二是必须惩罚以显示君王的威严；三是对尽力效忠的一定兑现奖赏；四是逐一听取意见，督促他们行动；五是传出可疑的诏令，诡诈地驱使臣子来考察他们的忠诚度；六是掌握了事实反而询问臣子；七是故意说反话，做逆理的事来刺探臣子。
English: The seven tricks: one is to examine and observe the words and deeds of the vassals from all aspects; the second is to punish them to show the majesty of the monarch; the third is to reward them for their loyalty; the fourth is to listen to their opinions one by one and urge them to act; the fifth is to issue a suspicious edict and cunningly drive the vassals to examine their loyalty; the sixth is to ask the vassals instead of grasping the facts; the seventh is to deliberately say the opposite and do the opposite to probe the vassals.

古文：此七者，主之所用也。
现代文：这七种方法是君王所使用的。
English: These seven methods are used by kings.

古文：△经一参观
现代文：参观一
English: Tour 1

古文：观听不参则诚不闻，听有门户则臣壅塞。
现代文：君主观察和听取臣下的言行，如果不加验证，就不会知道实情；如果偏听偏信，就会受到臣下的蒙蔽。
English: Monarchs observe and listen to the words and deeds of their subjects. If they do not verify, they will not know the truth; if they are partial to listening, they will be deceived by their subjects.

古文：其说在侏儒之梦见灶，哀公之称 莫众而迷 。
现代文：有关的解说在 说一 中侏儒梦见灶，鲁哀公称引 莫众而迷 部分。
English: The relevant commentary is in Part One: A Midget Dreams of a Stove, and Lu Aye is said to be bewitched by it.

古文：故齐人见河伯，与惠子之言 亡其半 也。
现代文：所以有齐人看见黄河神的事，而惠施说君主会失去半数人的意见。
English: Therefore, Qi people saw the matter of the Yellow River God, and Hui Shi said that the monarch would lose half of the people's opinions.

古文：其患在竖牛之饿叔孙，而江乙之说荆俗也。
现代文：有关的祸患表现在竖牛饿死叔孙，江乙评论楚国风俗部分。
English: The relevant scourge is manifested in the cattle starving uncle and grandson, Jiang Yi commented on the customs of Chu.

古文：嗣公欲治不知，故使有敌。
现代文：卫嗣公想治国却不懂方法，结果臣妄相抗衡，自己更闭塞。
English: Weizhikong wanted to rule the country but did not know how. As a result, his ministers were competing with each other, and he became even more closed off.

古文：是以明主推积铁之类而察一市之患。
现代文：因此明君类推积铁防箭的道理，明察三人成虎的祸患。
English: Therefore, according to the principle of accumulating iron and preventing arrows, the three of them become a tiger.

古文：△经二必罚
现代文：必罚二
English: Penalty two

古文：爱多者则法不立，威寡者则下侵上。
现代文：君主过分仁慈的话，法制就建立不起来；威严不足的话，就要受到臣下的侵害。
English: If a monarch is too benevolent, the rule of law cannot be established; if he is not dignified enough, he will be violated by his subjects.

古文：是以刑罚不必则禁令不行。
现代文：因此刑罚执行得不坚决，禁令就无法推行。
English: Therefore, the penalty is not firmly enforced, and the ban cannot be enforced.

古文：其说在董子之行石邑，与子产之教游吉也。
现代文：有关的解说在 说二 中董阀于巡视石邑和子产教导游吉。
English: The relevant explanation is in the second story, in which Dong Hu is said to have toured Shiyu and Zi Zang to teach Yu Ji.

古文：故仲尼说陨霜，而殷法刑弃灰；将行去乐池，而公孙鞅重轻罪。
现代文：所以孔子要谈论降霜，殷法要重刑把灰烬倒到街上，领队要辞别乐池，而商鞅要重罚轻罪。
English: Therefore, Confucius should talk about reducing frost, Yin Fa should be severely punished for pouring ashes into the street, the leader should leave the orchestra pit, and the merchants should be severely punished for minor crimes.

古文：是以丽水之金不守，而积泽之火不救。
现代文：因此丽水的金子会守不住，而积泽的火会没人救。
English: Therefore, the gold of Lishui cannot be protected, and the fire of Jizawa cannot be saved.

古文：成欢以太仁弱齐国，卜皮以慈惠亡魏王。
现代文：成欢认为齐王太仁会削弱齐国，卜皮认为魏王慈惠会走向灭亡。
English: Cheng Huan thought that Qi King Tai Ren would weaken Qi, and Bu Pi thought that Wei King Ci Hui would go to ruin.

古文：管仲知之，故断死人；嗣公知之，故买胥靡。
现代文：管仲懂得必罚，所以要分斩尸体来禁止厚葬；卫嗣君懂得必罚，所以要买回逃犯。
English: Guanzhong knows that punishment must be meted out, so he wants to dismember the bodies to prohibit the mass burial; Weizhong knows that punishment must be meted out, so he wants to buy back the fugitives.

古文：△经三赏誉
现代文：赏誉三
English: Honorable Mention 3

古文：赏誉薄而谩者下不用也，赏誉厚而信者下轻死。
现代文：赏誉轻而不兑现，臣下就不为君用；赏誉厚而守信用，臣下就争着为君献身。
English: If the praise is light and not honored, the vassals will not be of use to you; if the praise is rich and the trust is kept, the vassals will fight to devote themselves to you.

古文：其说在文子称 若兽鹿 。
现代文：有关的解说在 说三 中文子称说臣下 若兽鹿 。
English: The related commentary is in Saying Three, the Chinese sub-title is Saying Vassal, Young Animal Deer.

古文：故越王焚宫室，而吴起倚车辕，李悝断讼以射，宋崇门以毁死。
现代文：所以越王要焚烧宫室，吴起要奖励搬车辕的人，李悝断案要依据射箭，会有宋都东门有人因服丧悲伤过度引出死亡的故事。
English: Therefore, Yue Wang wanted to burn the palace, Wu Qi wanted to reward the person who moved the cart, Li Qian decided the case on the basis of archery, and there would be a story that someone died at the East Gate of the Song Dynasty due to excessive mourning.

古文：勾践知之，故式怒蛙；昭侯知之，故藏弊裤。
现代文：勾践懂得赏誉的作用，所以会向怒蛙凭轼致敬；昭侯懂得赏誉的作用，所以会收藏旧裤子。
English: Gou Jian understands the role of praise, so he will pay tribute to the angry frog; Zhao Hou understands the role of praise, so he will collect old pants.

古文：厚赏之使人为贲、诸也，妇人之拾蚕，渔者之握鳣，是以效之。
现代文：厚赏能使人成为孟贲、专诸那样的勇士，妇人拾蚕，渔夫捉鳝，就是证明。
English: It is a proof that a rich reward can make a person become a great warrior, such as a woman picking up silkworms and a fisherman catching eels.

古文：△经四一听
现代文：一听四
English: One to four

古文：一听则愚智不纷，责下则人臣不参。
现代文：全面听取意见，愚和智就不会混乱；督责臣下行动，庸和能就不会混杂。
English: Comprehensively listen to opinions, stupidity and wisdom will not be confused; supervise subordinates' actions, mediocrity and ability will not be mixed.

古文：其说在 索郑 与 吹竽 。
现代文：有关的解说在 说四 中魏王想要吞并韩国和南郭处士吹竿。
English: The relevant commentary is in "Saying 4," in which the Wei King wants to annex South Korea and the Southern Guo.

古文：其患在申子之以赵绍、韩沓为尝试。
现代文：祸患表现在申不害通过赵绍、韩沓去刺探韩昭侯。
English: The calamity manifested itself in Shen Fuxi going to spy on Han Zhaohou through Zhao Shao and Han Qi.

古文：故公子汜议割河东，而应侯谋弛上党。
现代文：所以会有公子汜议论割让河东的故事，会有应侯谋划放弃上党的故事。
English: Therefore, there will be stories of princes discussing the cession of Hedong, and there will be stories of princes planning to give up the party.

古文：△经五诡使
现代文：诡使五
English: Trickster Five

古文：数见久待而不任，奸则鹿散。
现代文：君主通过频频接见某人、长期留住某人而不予任用的方法，奸臣就会疑惧起来，就会像惊鹿一样四下逃散。
English: If the monarch meets someone frequently and keeps someone for a long time without appointing him, the traitor will become suspicious and run away like a startled deer.

古文：使人问他则并鬻私。
现代文：君主派遣使者询问其他事情，臣下就不敢隐私不报。
English: Monarchs send envoys to inquire about other matters, and their subjects dare not fail to inform them in private.

古文：是以庞敬还公大夫，而戴让诏视辒车；周主亡玉簪，商太宰论牛矢。
现代文：因此，庞敬要召回公大夫，戴欢要下令侦察卧车，周君要假装丢失玉簪，宋太宰要责问牛屎。
English: Therefore, Pang Jing wanted to call back the court doctor, Dai Huan wanted to order the reconnaissance of the sleeping car, Zhou Jun wanted to pretend to have lost the jade bowl, and Song Taizai wanted to question the cow dung.

古文：△经六挟智
现代文：挟智六
English: 挟智六

古文：挟智而问，则不智者至；深智一物，众隐皆变。
现代文：拿已知的事去问别人，那么不知道的事也会知道的；深入了解一件事，许多隐情都能辨明了。
English: Ask what you know, and you will know what you don't know; know one thing well, and you will know many things obscurely.

古文：其说在昭侯之握一爪也。
现代文：有关的解说在 说六 中韩昭侯把一个指甲藏在手里。
English: The related explanation is in Chapter Six: Han Zhaohang hides a fingernail in his hand.

古文：故必审南门而三乡得。周主索曲杖而群臣惧，卜皮使庶子，西门豹详遗辖。
现代文：所以韩昭侯肯定知道南门外情况，然后其他三个门外面的情况也能搞清；周君要下令搜寻弯曲的手杖，引起群臣恐惧；卜皮要指派侍仆刺探御史，西门豹要假装丢失车辖。
English: Therefore, Han Zhaohou must know the situation outside the south gate, and then the situation outside the other three gates can also be clarified; Zhou Jun should order the search for a bent cane, causing the fear of the courtiers; Bupi should assign a servant to spy on the history, and the west gate leopard should pretend to lose the car cover.

古文：△经七
现代文：言七
English: Speech seven

古文：倒言反事以尝所疑，则奸情得。
现代文：用反话反事来测试自己怀疑的事，就会了解到奸情。
English: If you test your suspicions with counter-arguments, you will learn about treachery.

古文：故阳山谩樛竖，淖齿为秦使，齐人欲为乱，子之以白马，子产离讼者，嗣公过关市。
现代文：所以阳山要假装诽谤樛竖，淖齿要派人冒充秦使，齐人作乱前要派人刺探君主，子之要用白马测试左右，子产要隔离诉讼双方，卫嗣公要派人过关市。
English: Therefore, Yangshan should pretend to slander Zhuge, Zhaozhen should send someone to impersonate a Qin envoy, Qi should send someone to spy on the monarch before making a disturbance, Zizhi should use a white horse to test the left and right, Zifu should isolate the two sides of the lawsuit, and Weizhong should send someone to pass the customs city.

古文：△说一
现代文：以上是经文部分。说一
English: Say one thing.

古文：卫灵公之时，弥子瑕有宠，专于卫国。
现代文：卫灵公时，弥子瑕受到宠信，在卫国独揽大权。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ling, Yizikore was favored by the emperor and gained great power in the defense of the country.

古文：侏儒有见公者曰： 臣之梦践矣。 
现代文：有个谒见灵公的侏儒说： 我的梦应验了。 灵公问： 什么梦？ 
English: A dwarf who had seen the genie said, "My dream has come true," and the genie asked, "What dream?"

古文：公曰： 何梦？ 对曰： 梦见灶，为见公也。 
现代文：保儒回答说： 我梦见灶，结果见到了您。 灵公发怒说： 我听说将见君主的人会梦见太阳，为什么你要见我，会梦见灶呢？ 
English: Pao Ru replied, "I dreamt of a stove, and as a result, I saw you." Ling Gong became angry and said, "I heard that people who are going to see the emperor dream of the sun. Why do you want to see me and dream of a stove?"

古文：公怒曰： 吾闻见人主者梦见日，奚为见寡人而梦见灶？ 对曰： 夫日兼烛天下，一物不能当也；人君兼烛一国，一人不能拥也。故将见人主者梦见日。
现代文：侏儒回答说： 太阳普照天下，任何东西都不能遮蔽它；君主普照国家的每一个人，任何一个人也不能遮挡他的光辉。所以将见君主的人会梦见太阳。
English: The dwarf answered: "The sun shines over the whole world, and nothing can hide it; the monarch shines over everyone in the country, and no one can hide his glory. Therefore, those who see the monarch dream about the sun.

古文：夫灶，一人炀焉，则后人无从见矣。
现代文：要是灶的话，一人对着灶门烤火，后面的人就看不见火光了。
English: In the case of a stove, if one person bakes against the stove door, the person behind cannot see the light of the fire.

古文：今或者一人有炀君者乎？
现代文：现在或许就有一个人挡住了您的光辉了吧？
English: Now, perhaps, there is one person who is blocking your glory, right?

古文：则臣虽梦见灶，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：那么我即使梦见灶，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: So even if I dream of a stove, isn't that okay?

古文：鲁哀公问于孔子曰： 鄙谚曰： 莫众而迷。
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子说： 民间谚语说： 做事不与人商议，一定会迷乱。 
English: Lu Aikong asked Confucius: A folk proverb says: If you do things without consulting others, you will surely be confused.

古文：今寡人举事与群臣虑之，而国愈乱，其故何也？ 孔子对曰： 明主之问臣，一人知之，一人不知也。如是者，明主在上，群臣直议于下。
现代文：现在我办事和群臣一起谋划，但国家却越来越乱了，这是为什么呢？ 孔子回答说： 明君有事问臣下，有人知道，有人不知道；像这样的话，明君在上，群臣就可以在下面直率地议论。
English: Now I am working and planning together with my ministers, but the country is getting more and more chaotic. Why is this? Confucius replied, "Mingjun has something to ask his ministers, some know, some don't know; in this way, Mingjun is on top, and the ministers can discuss it frankly below.

古文：今群臣无不一辞同轨乎季孙者，举鲁国尽化为一，君虽问境内之人，犹不免于乱也。 
现代文：现在群臣没有不和季孙统一口径的，全鲁国都变成了一个人，您即使问遍境内百姓，仍然不免于乱。 
English: Now there is no minister who is not of the same caliber as Ji Sun, and the whole country of Lu has become one person. Even if you ask the people throughout the country, you are still not immune to chaos.

古文：一曰：晏婴子聘鲁，哀公问曰： 语曰： 莫三人而迷。
现代文：又一种说法：晏子访问鲁国，鲁哀公问道： 俗话说； 没有三个人合计就会迷惑。 
English: Another way of saying it is: Zizi visits Lu, and Lu Aigong asks: As the saying goes, if there are not three people in total, it will be confusing.

古文：今寡人与一国虑之，鲁不免于乱，何也？ 晏子曰： 古之所谓 莫三人而迷 者，一人失之，二人得之，三人足以为众矣，故曰 莫三人而迷。
现代文：现在我和全国民众一起考虑事情，鲁国不免于乱，为什么呢？ 曼子说： 古代所谓 没有三个人合计就会迷惑 ，是说一个人意见错误，两个人意见正确，三个人足以形成正确的多数了，所以说 没有三个人合计就会迷惑 。
English: Now I am considering things together with the people of the whole country. Lu is not immune to chaos. Why? Manzi said: In ancient times, the so-called "no three people in total will confuse" meant that one person's opinion is wrong, two people's opinion is correct, and three people are enough to form a correct majority. Therefore, no three people in total will confuse.

古文：今鲁国之群臣以千百数，一言于季氏之私，人数非不众，所言者一人也，安得三哉？ 
现代文：现在鲁国的群臣以干、百来计算，言辞统一于季氏的私利，人数不是不多，但说的话就像出自一人之口，哪有三个人呢？ 
English: Now Lu's vassals are counted in hundreds and hundreds, and their words are unified with the selfish interests of the Ji clan. The number is not small, but the words seem to come from the mouth of one person. What are three people?

古文：齐人有谓齐王曰： 河伯，大神也。王何不试与之遇乎？
现代文：有个齐国人对齐王说： 黄河神是伟大的神，大王为什么不尝试和它会会呢？
English: A man from Qi said to the king of Qi: The Yellow River God is a great god, why doesn't the great king try to communicate with it?

古文：臣请使王遇之。 
现代文：请允许我让您会会它。 
English: Allow me to make you aware of it.

古文：乃为坛场大水之上，而与王立之焉。有间，大鱼动，因曰： 此河伯。 
现代文：于是他就在黄河边上筑起了祭神的坛场，和齐王站在坛场上。过了一会儿，有大鱼游动，齐人就说： 这就是黄河神。 
English: So he built an altar to the god on the edge of the Yellow River, and stood with King Qi on the altar. After a while, a big fish swam by, and the Qi people said, "This is the god of the Yellow River."

古文：张仪欲以秦、韩与魏之势伐齐、荆，而惠施欲以齐、荆偃兵。
现代文：张仪想凭秦、韩和魏交好的势力去征伐齐、楚，惠施想与齐、楚罢兵言和。
English: Zhang Yi wanted to rely on the forces of Qin, Han, and Wei to conquer Qi and Chu. Huishi wanted to make peace with Qi and Chu.

古文：二人争之。
现代文：两人争执不下。
English: The two are at loggerheads.

古文：群臣左右皆为张子言，而以攻齐、荆为利，而莫为惠子言。
现代文：群臣近侍都帮张仪说话，认为攻打齐、楚有利，而没有人帮惠施讲话。
English: The close attendants of the courtiers all helped Zhang Yi to speak, believing that it was advantageous to attack Qi and Chu, but no one helped Huishi to speak.

古文：王果听张子，而以惠子言为不可。
现代文：魏王结果听从了张仪的主张，而认为惠施的主张不行。
English: As a result, the Wei king listened to Zhang Yi's proposal, but believed that Huishi's proposal was unacceptable.

古文：攻齐、荆事已定，惠子入见。
现代文：攻打齐、楚的事已经确定之后，惠子进见魏王。
English: After the attack on Qi and Chu had been determined, Huizi went to see the Wei king.

古文：王言曰： 先生毋言矣。
现代文：魏王说： 您不要说了。
English: Wei Wang said: You don't have to say anything.

古文：攻齐、荆之事果利矣，一国尽以为然。 
现代文：攻打齐、楚的事情确实有利，全国都这样认为。 
English: It is indeed advantageous to attack the whole country at the same time, and the whole country thinks so.

古文：惠子因说： 不可不察也。
现代文：惠施趁机进言： 这种情况不能不明察。
English: Huishi took the opportunity to say: This situation cannot go unnoticed.

古文：夫齐、荆之事也诚利，一国尽以为利，是何智者之众也？
现代文：如果攻打齐、楚这件事确实有利，全国都认为有利，聪明的人怎么会这么多啊！
English: If the attack on Qi and Chu is indeed advantageous, and the whole country thinks it is advantageous, how can there be so many smart people?

古文：攻齐、荆之事诚不可利，一国尽以为利，何愚者之众也？
现代文：如果攻打齐、楚这件事确实不利，全国都认为有利，愚蠢的人又该多么多啊！
English: If the attack on Qi and Chu is really unfavorable, the whole country will think it is advantageous, and how many stupid people there will be!

古文：凡谋者，疑也。疑也者，诚疑以为可者半，以为不可者半。
现代文：凡要谋划，是因为有疑；有疑的事，如果确实是疑惑不定的，那么就会有一半人认为可行，一半人认为不可行。
English: If there is a plan, it is because there is doubt; if there is doubt, if it is really doubt and uncertainty, then half of the people will think it is feasible, and half of the people will think it is not feasible.

古文：今一国尽以为可，是王亡半也。
现代文：现在全国都认为可行，这是大王失去了一半人的意见。
English: Now the whole country thinks it is feasible, which is the opinion of the great king who has lost half of his people.

古文：劫主者，固亡其半者一也。 
现代文：被挟持的君主也正是失去了半数意见的君主啊！ 
English: The monarch who is held hostage is also the monarch who has lost half of his opinion!

古文：叔孙相鲁，贵而主断。
现代文：叔孙豹做鲁相，地位尊贵而专权独断。
English: Uncles and grandsons of leopards act as Lu Xiang, their status is noble, but their power is arbitrary.

古文：其所爱者曰竖牛，亦擅用叔孙之令。
现代文：他所宠爱的是竖牛，也独揽了叔孙豹的号令。
English: His favourite animal is the yakitori, and he also has sole command of the uncle and grandson leopards.

古文：叔孙有子曰壬，竖牛妒而欲杀之，因与壬游于鲁君所。
现代文：叔孙豹有个儿子叫仲壬，竖牛嫉妒他，并想杀了他，因而和仲壬一起到鲁君住处去游玩。
English: Uncle Sun Leopard had a son named Zhong Ren. The cattle were jealous of him and wanted to kill him, so they went with Zhong Ren to visit Lu Jun's residence.

古文：鲁君赐之玉环，壬拜受之而不敢佩，使竖牛请之叔孙。
现代文：鲁君赐给仲壬玉环，仲壬接受了，但不敢佩带，就让竖牛向叔孙豹请示。
English: Lu Jun gave Zhong Ren a jade ring, Zhong Ren accepted it, but did not dare to wear it, so he asked Zhang Niu to ask his great-uncle and great-grandson.

古文：竖牛欺之曰： 吾已为尔请之矣，使尔佩之。 
现代文：竖牛骗他说： 我已替你请示过叔孙了。他叫你佩带玉环。 
English: "I have already asked my uncle and grandson for you. He told you to wear a jade ring.

古文：壬因佩之。
现代文：仲壬就佩带了。
English: So I put on my chukarins.

古文：竖牛因谓叔孙： 何不见壬于君乎？ 叔孙曰： 孺子何足见也。 
现代文：竖牛趁机对叔孙豹说 为什么不带仲壬去见见君主呢？ 叔孙豹说： 小孩子哪能见君主。 
English: "Why don't you take Zhongren with you to meet the monarch?" the uncles and grandsons of the leopard said, "How can a child meet the monarch?"

古文：竖牛曰： 壬固已数见于君矣。
现代文：竖牛说： 仲壬本来就多次见过君主了。
English: Zhi Niu said: Zhong Ren had already met the monarch many times.

古文：君赐之玉环，壬已佩之矣。 
现代文：君主赐给他玉环，他已佩带上了。 
English: The sovereign has given him a golden ring, and he has put it on.

古文：叔孙召壬见之，而果佩之，叔孙怒而杀壬。
现代文：叔孙豹就召见仲壬，仲壬果然佩带着玉环，叔孙豹忿怒地杀了他。
English: Uncle Sun Leopard summoned Zhong Ren, and sure enough, Zhong Ren was wearing a jade ring, and Uncle Sun Leopard killed him in anger.

古文：壬兄曰丙，竖牛又妒而欲杀之。
现代文：仲壬的哥哥叫孟丙，竖牛又嫉妒他而想杀死他。
English: Zhongren's brother is called Meng Ping, and the yakitori is jealous of him and wants to kill him.

古文：叔孙为丙铸钟，钟成，丙不敢击，使竖牛请之叔孙。
现代文：叔孙给孟丙铸了口钟，钟铸成后，孟丙不敢擅自敲钟，让竖牛向叔孙请示。
English: The uncle and grandson cast a bell for Meng Biao. After the bell was cast, Meng Biao did not dare to ring the bell without permission, and asked the cow to ask his uncle and grandson.

古文：竖牛不为请，又欺之曰： 吾已为尔请之矣，使尔击之。 
现代文：竖牛不帮他请示，又骗他说； 我已帮你请示过了，他让你敲钟。 
English: The reindeer did not help him to ask for directions, and lied to him, saying, I have already asked you for directions, and he told you to ring the bell.

古文：丙因击之。
现代文：孟丙就敲了钟。
English: Meng Hei rang the bell.

古文：叔孙闻之曰： 丙不请而擅击钟。 
现代文：叔孙豹听见钟声后说； 孟丙不请示就擅自敲钟。 
English: After hearing the bell, Uncle Sun Bao said, "Meng Huan rang the bell without asking permission."

古文：怒而逐之。
现代文：就忿怒地把他赶走了。
English: and she drove him away in a rage.

古文：丙出走齐，居一年，竖牛为谢叔孙，叔孙使竖牛召之，又不召而报之曰： 吾已召之矣，丙怒甚，不肯来。 
现代文：孟丙出逃到了齐国。一年后，竖牛假装替孟丙向叔孙豹谢罪，叔孙豹就让竖牛召回孟丙，竖牛再次没去召人，却报告叔孙豹说： 我已召过他了，孟丙很恼怒，不肯来。 
English: Meng Huan fled to the State of Qi. A year later, Zhi Niu pretended to be Meng Huan's way of thanking Uncle Sun Bao for his sins. Uncle Sun Bao asked Zhi Niu to recall Meng Huan. Again, Zhi Niu did not go to summon anyone, but reported to Uncle Sun Bao: "I have already summoned him. Meng Huan was very angry and refused to come."

古文：叔孙大怒，使人杀之。
现代文：叔孙十分愤怒，派人杀了孟丙。
English: The uncle and grandson were very angry and sent someone to kill Meng Huan.

古文：二子已死，叔孙有病，竖牛因独养之而去左右，不内人，曰： 叔孙不欲闻人声。 
现代文：两个儿子已死，叔孙豹患病，竖牛就独自侍养他，把近侍们支开，不让人进入，说： 叔孙不想听见人声。 
English: His two sons had died, his uncle and grandson were ill, and the cowherd was left to look after him alone. He turned his closest attendants away and would not allow anyone to enter, saying, "My uncle and grandson don't want to hear human voices."

古文：因不食而饿杀。
现代文：竖牛不给叔孙豹东西吃，活活把他饿死了。
English: The cow refused to give the leopard anything to eat and starved him to death.

古文：叔孙已死，竖牛因不发丧也，徙其府库重宝空之而奔齐。
现代文：叔孙豹已死，而竖牛并不发讣告，把叔孙豹财库里的贵重珍宝搬迁一空，然后逃往齐国。
English: Uncle Sun Leopard is dead, but the vultures do not issue an obituary. They move all the valuable treasures in Uncle Sun Leopard's treasury, and then flee to Qi.

古文：夫听所信之言而子父为人僇，此不参之患也。
现代文：听了自己所偏信的人的话，结果父子都被人杀了，这就是不加验证的祸患。
English: He listened to the words of someone he was inclined to believe, and as a result, both father and son were killed. This is the scourge of not verifying.

古文：江乙为魏王使荆，谓荆王曰： 臣入王之境内，闻王之国俗曰： 君子不蔽人之美，不言人之恶。
现代文：江乙为魏王出使楚国，对楚王说： 我进入大王的境内，听说大王国家的风气是： 君子不隐人之美，不言人之恶。 
English: Jiang Yi sent an envoy to the State of Chu on behalf of the King of Wei, and said to the King of Chu: I have entered the territory of the Great King, and I have heard that the ethos of the Great King's country is: A gentleman does not hide the beauty of a person, nor does he speak ill of a person.

古文：诚有之乎？ 王曰： 有之。  然则若白公之乱，得庶无危乎？
现代文：确实有这样的风气吗？ 楚王说： 有 。 既然这样，那么像白公政变之类的事发生，国家能不危险吗？
English: Is there really such a culture? King Chu said: Yes. Since this is the case, if something like Baikong's coup happens, won't the country be in danger?

古文：诚得如此，臣免死罪矣。 
现代文：确实如此，群臣都能幸免于死罪了。 
English: Indeed, all the ministers were spared the death penalty.

古文：卫嗣君重如耳，爱世姬，而恐其皆因其爱重以壅己也，乃贵薄疑以敌如耳，尊魏姬以耦世姬，曰： 以是相参也。 
现代文：卫嗣君看重如耳，喜爱世姬，又怕他们自侍受宠来蒙蔽自己，就抬高薄疑来和如耳匹敌，推重魏姬来和世姬并列，说： 用这种方法使他们互相抗衡。 
English: Wei Shi Jun valued Ru Ru Ru and loved Shiji, but he was afraid that they would blind themselves by being favored, so he elevated Shiji to match Ru Ru Ru, and promoted Wei Ji to be on a par with Shiji, saying, "Use this method to make them compete with each other."

古文：嗣君知欲无壅，而未得其术也。
现代文：卫嗣君懂得需要不受蒙蔽，然而没有掌握相应的方法。
English: Weizhikun understands the need not to be hoodwinked, but does not know how to do it.

古文：夫不使贱议贵，下必坐上，而必待势重之均也，而后敢相议，则是益树壅塞之臣也。
现代文：假如不使贱者议论贵者，不使下级敢于揭发上级，却一定要等双方权势相等，然后才敢互相议论，那就更多地培植起蒙蔽自己的臣子了。
English: If you don't let the inferior discuss the superior, and don't let the inferior dare to expose the superior, but you must wait until both sides are equal in power before you dare to discuss each other, then you will cultivate more courtiers who deceive themselves.

古文：嗣君之壅乃始。
现代文：卫嗣君受蒙蔽便由此开始。
English: This was the start of the deception of the heir to the throne.

古文：夫矢来有乡，则积铁以备一乡；矢来无乡，则为铁室以尽备之。备之则体不伤。
现代文：箭射来有一定方向，就堆集铁器来防备这个方向；箭射来没有一定方向，就建造铁屋来全面地防备着；防备了，身体就不会受伤。
English: If the arrow comes from a certain direction, heap up iron tools to guard against this direction; if the arrow does not come from a certain direction, build an iron house to fully guard against it; if you guard against it, your body will not be injured.

古文：故彼以尽备之不伤，此以尽敌之无奸也。
现代文：所人们凭着全面防备而不致受伤，君主依靠完全警惕而不致生奸。
English: Therefore, people rely on comprehensive prevention to avoid injury, and the monarch relies on complete vigilance to avoid adultery.

古文：庞恭与太子质于邯郸，谓魏王曰： 今一人言市有虎，王信之乎？ 曰： 不信。 
现代文：庞恭和太子到赵都邯郸做人质。庞恭对魏王说： 如今有一个人说集市上有老虎，大王相信吗？ 魏王说： 不相信。 
English: Pangong and the prince went to Zhaoduo as hostages. Pangong said to Wei Wang, "Nowadays, there is a man who says that there is a tiger in the market. Does the king believe him?" Wei Wang said, "I don't believe him."

古文： 二人言市有虎，王信之乎？ 曰： 不信。 
现代文： 两个人说集市上有老虎，大王相信吗？ 魏王说： 不相信。 
English: Two people said that there was a tiger in the market. Did the great king believe them? The Wei king said: I don't believe it.

古文： 三人言市有虎，王信之乎？ 王曰： 寡人信之。 
现代文： 三个人说集市上有老虎，大王相信吗？ 魏王说： 我相信了。 
English: Three people said that there was a tiger in the market. Did the great king believe them? The Wei king said: I believe it.

古文：庞恭曰： 夫市之无虎也明矣，然而三人言而成虎。
现代文：庞恭说： 集市上没有老虎是很清楚的，但是三个人的言论就造出了一只老虎。
English: Pangong said: It is clear that there is no tiger in the market, but the words of three people have created a tiger.

古文：今邯郸之去魏也远于市，议臣者过于三人，愿王察之。 
现代文：现在邯郸离魏国比这儿离集市远得多，妄议我的人也比三个人多，希望大王明察真情。 
English: Now I am much farther away from Wei than I am from the bazaar here, and there are more than three people who talk nonsense about me. I hope the king will see the truth.

古文：庞恭从邯郸反，竟不得见。
现代文：庞恭从邯郸回来时，最终还是不能再见到魏王了。
English: When Pangong returned from Zhai, he was finally unable to see Wei Wang again.

古文：△说二
现代文：说二
English: Say two.

古文：董阏于为赵上地守，行石邑山中，见深涧，峭如墙，深百仞，因问其旁乡左右曰： 人尝有入此者乎？ 对曰： 无有。 
现代文：董阏于做赵国上党地区的郡守。他巡视石邑山中，看见山涧深邃，像墙一样陡峭，深达干丈，就问居住深涧附近村舍的人说： 曾有人下去过吗？ 回答说： 没有。 
English: Dong Xuan Yu was the county governor of the upper party area of Zhao Province. He inspected the mountains of Shiyou, and saw that the mountains were deep, steep as a wall, and deep and dry. He asked the villagers who lived near Shiyou, "Has anyone ever gone down there?" They answered, "No."

古文：曰： 婴兒、盲聋、狂悖之人尝有入此者乎？ 对曰： 无有。 
现代文：又问： 小孩、痴聋、疯颠的人曾有下去过的吗？ 回答说： 没有。 
English: And he asked whether any child, or blind, or deaf, or lame, or blind, had ever gone down into the pit.

古文： 牛马犬彘尝有入此者乎？ 对曰： 无有。 
现代文： 牛马狗猪曾有下去过的吗？ 回答说： 没有。 
English: Have any of the cows, horses, dogs, or pigs ever been down there?

古文：董阏于喟然太息曰： 吾能治矣。
现代文：董阏于感叹地说： 我能治理好上党了。
English: Dong Xuan Yu said with a sigh: I can govern the party well.

古文：使吾治之无赦，犹入涧之必死也，则人莫之敢犯也，何为不治？ 
现代文：假如我治理时对罪犯严惩不贷，使他们好像掉下深涧必死一样，就没有人敢触犯法令了，还怎么会治理不好呢？ 
English: If, when I govern, I severely punish criminals and make them feel as if they have fallen into a deep pit and are doomed to die, then no one will dare to violate the law. How can there still be bad governance?

古文：子产相郑，病将死，谓游吉曰： 我死后，子必用郑，必以严莅人。
现代文：子产做郑相，重病将死，对游吉说： 我死后，您一定会在郑国执政，一定要用威严治理民众。
English: Zheng Xiang, who was seriously ill and about to die, said to Youji: After my death, you will certainly rule Zheng, and you must rule the people with majesty.

古文：夫火形严，故人鲜灼；水形懦，人多溺。
现代文：火的样子是严酷的，所以人们很少被烧伤；水的样子是柔和的，所以很多人被淹死。
English: The appearance of fire is harsh, so people are rarely burned; the appearance of water is soft, so many people are drowned.

古文：子必严子之形，无令溺子之懦。 
现代文：您必须严厉地执行刑罚，不要让人们因您的柔弱而触犯法令。 
English: You must strictly enforce the punishment and not let people violate the law because of your weakness.

古文：子产死。游吉不肯严形，郑少年相率为盗，处于萑泽，将遂以为郑祸。
现代文：子产死后，游吉不肯严厉执行刑罚，郑国青年拉帮结伙成为强盗。盘据在萑苻之泽中，即将给郑国造成祸害。
English: After the birth of his son, Youji refused to strictly enforce the punishment, and the young people of Zheng became bandits. They were plotting to cause disaster to Zheng.

古文：游吉率车骑与战，一日一夜仅能克之。
现代文：游吉率车骑和他们开战，打了一天一夜，才算打败了他们。
English: You Ji led the chariot and rode into battle with them, fought for a day and a night, and finally defeated them.

古文：游吉喟然叹曰： 吾蚤行夫子之教，必不悔至于此矣。 
现代文：游吉感叹地说； 我早按子产的教导去做的话，一定不会懊悔到这般地步了。 
English: Youji sighed and said, "If I had followed my father-in-law's teachings, I wouldn't have regretted it to this extent."

古文：鲁哀公问于仲尼曰： 《春秋》之记曰： 冬十二月陨霜不杀菽。
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子说： 《春秋》里记载说： 冬季十二月份降霜，没有把豆类作物冻死。 
English: Lu Aikong asked Confucius: "In Spring and Autumn, it is recorded that: In winter, the frost in December did not freeze the bean crops to death.

古文：何为记此？ 仲尼对曰： 此言可以杀而不杀也。
现代文：为什么记下这条？ 孔子回答说： 这是说本来可以造成伤害的，但结果没有造成伤害。
English: Why write this down? Confucius replied, "It means that it could have caused harm, but it didn't.

古文：夫宜杀而不杀，桃李冬实。
现代文：应予伤害却不加伤害，桃李就会冬天结果。
English: Should be harmed but not harmed, peach and plum will be the result of winter.

古文：天失道，草木犹犯干之，而况于人君乎？ 
现代文：天道失去常规，草木尚且要违抗它，何况君主呢！ 
English: The way of heaven has lost its regularity, and the plants and trees still want to defy it, not to mention the monarch!

古文：殷之法，刑弃灰于街者。
现代文：商朝的法令规定，对在街上倒灰的人处以刑罚。
English: The laws of the Shang Dynasty stipulated that those who poured ashes on the street would be punished.

古文：子贡以为重，问之仲尼。仲尼曰： 知治之道也。
现代文：子贡认为刑罚过重了，就询问孔子，孔子说： 这是因为他们懂得治理方法。
English: Zigong thought that the punishment was too heavy, so he asked Confucius. Confucius said: This is because they know how to govern.

古文：夫弃灰于街必掩人，掩人，人必怒，怒则斗，斗必三族相残也。
现代文：在街上倒灰一定会迷人眼睛；迷了人家，人家定会发怒；一旦发怒，就会发生争斗；争斗起来，就会引起许多家族相互残杀。
English: Pouring ashes on the street will certainly attract people's eyes; if people are attracted, they will certainly get angry; if they get angry, there will be a fight; if there is a fight, it will cause many families to kill each other.

古文：此残三族之道也，虽刑之可也。
现代文：既然这是会造成许多家相互残杀的情形，那么即使对他们处以刑罚也是可行的。
English: Since this is a situation that will cause many families to kill each other, it is even possible to impose a penalty on them.

古文：且夫重罚者，人之所恶也；而无弃灰，人之所易也。
现代文：再说，刑罚重了是人们所厌恶的；而不去街上倒灰，则是人们容易办到的。
English: Moreover, it is repugnant to people that the punishment should be more severe; but it is easy to do without pouring ashes on the street.

古文：使人行之所易，而无离所恶，此治之道也。 
现代文：让人们做好容易办到的事情，而不去触犯他们所厌恶的刑罚，这合乎治理的原则。 
English: It is a principle of government to let men do what is easy, without inflicting the punishments they abhor.

古文：一曰：殷之法，刑弃灰于公道者断其手。
现代文：另一种说法：商朝的法令规定，在街上倒灰的人，要砍掉他的手。
English: Another way of putting it: a Shang dynasty edict decreed that anyone who poured ashes in the street should have his hands cut off.

古文：子贡曰： 弃灰之罪轻，断手之罚重，古人何太毅也？ 曰： 无弃灰，所易也；断手，所恶也。
现代文：子贡说： 倒灰的罪轻，断手的刑重，古人怎么这般严酷啊： 孔子说： 不在街上倒灰是容易办到的事；断手是人们厌恶的事。
English: Zigong said, "The crime of pouring ashes is light, but the punishment of cutting off hands is heavy. How could the ancients be so severe?" Confucius said, "It is easy not to pour ashes in the street; cutting off hands is something people detest."

古文：行所易，不关所恶，古人以为易，故行之。 
现代文：干容易干的事，不干心里厌恶的事，古人认为容易做到，所以要加以实行。 
English: Do what is easy to do, not what is distasteful. The ancients thought this was easy to do, so it should be done.

古文：中山之相乐池，以车百乘使赵，选其客之有智能者以为将行，中道而乱。
现代文：中山国相乐池率一百乘车马出使赵国，挑选门客中有智慧才能的人作领队，中途车马散乱了。
English: Zhongshan Province's Sanguo Pool led a hundred carriages and horses to dispatch Zhao Province to select a person with wisdom and talent among the guests to lead the team, and the carriages and horses were scattered.

古文：乐池曰： 吾以公为有智，而使公为将行，今中道而乱，何也？ 客因辞而去，曰： 公不知治。
现代文：乐池说： 我认为你聪明，就派你做领队，现在中途队列却散乱了，为什么？ 门客听他这么说话，就要辞别，说： 您不懂得管理原则。
English: Lechi said: I thought you were smart, so I sent you to be the leader, but now the queue is scattered in the middle, why? When the doorman heard him talking like this, he had to say goodbye, saying: You don't understand the principles of management.

古文：有威足以服之人，而利足以劝之，故能治之。
现代文：有威势足以制服人，有利益足以鼓励人，所以能够管理好。
English: There is enough authority to subdue people, and there are enough benefits to encourage people, so it can be managed well.

古文：今臣，君之少客也。
现代文：现在我却是您年少位卑的门客。
English: Now I am your young and humble protégé.

古文：夫从少正长，从贱治贵，而不得操其利害之柄以制之，此所以乱也。
现代文：由年少的管理年长的，由位卑的管理位尊的，又不能掌握赏罚的权柄来制约他们，这才导致了队列散乱。
English: The management of the elderly by the young, the management of the revered by the lowly, and the inability to control them with the power of reward and punishment, which led to the dispersion of the queue.

古文：尝试使臣，彼之善者我能以为卿相，彼不善者我得以斩其首，何故而不治！ 
现代文：假如让我有权，对表现好的我能封为卿相，表现差的我能砍了他们脑袋，哪有管理不好的道理呢？ 
English: If I were given the right to appoint good managers as ministers, and bad ones to be beheaded, what would be the reason for bad management?

古文：公孙鞅之法也重轻罪。
现代文：商鞅的法令是轻罪重罚。
English: The law on hawking is a misdemeanour with a heavy penalty.

古文：重罪者，人之所难犯也；而小过者，人之所易去也。
现代文：重刑之下，人们就不敢触犯了；而小小过失则是容易改掉的。
English: Under heavy punishment, people do not dare to commit crimes; while small mistakes are easy to correct.

古文：使人去其所易，无离其所难，此治之道。夫小过不生，大罪不至，是人无罪而乱不生也。
现代文：另一种说法：公孙鞅说：刑罚，对于较轻的的犯罪，施以重罚，那么轻的犯罪就不回会来，重的犯罪也不会发生。
English: Another way of saying this is that Gongsun Yao said, "The best punishment is to impose a heavy punishment for a minor crime, then the minor crime will not come back, and the serious crime will not happen."

古文：一曰：公孙鞅曰： 行刑重其轻者，轻者不至，重者不来，是谓以刑去刑也。 
现代文：答这就是所谓的用刑罚遏止刑罚，意谓从重量刑，使百姓畏惧而不敢犯法，以收到不用刑的效果。
English: A: This is what is called using punishment to deter punishment, which means using heavy punishment to make the people afraid of breaking the law, so as to obtain the effect of no punishment.

古文：荆南之地，丽水之中生金，人多窃采金。
现代文：楚国南部的地方，丽水里面出产金子，人们大多偷采金子。
English: In the southern part of Chu Province, gold is produced in Lishui, and people mostly steal gold.

古文：采金之禁：得而辄辜磔于市。
现代文：对偷采金在下了禁令：抓住偷采金子的就在闹市上施行车裂之刑并暴尸街头。
English: A ban has been placed on illegal gold mining: anyone caught stealing gold will be sentenced to be run over by a car in the middle of the city and dragged through the streets.

古文：甚众，壅离其水也，而人窃金不止。
现代文：受刑的人很多，尸体堵塞阻断了那道丽水，但是人们偷采金子不停止。
English: There are a lot of people who have been sentenced, and the blockage of corpses has blocked the beautiful waterway, but people do not stop stealing gold.

古文：大罪莫重辜磔于市，犹不止者，不必得也。
现代文：对大罪的惩罚没有比在闹市上分尸示众更重的了，但偷采金子还不停止，是因为不一定被抓到。
English: There is no more severe punishment for a serious crime than cutting up a corpse and displaying it in a busy market, but gold-digging does not stop because it is not always caught.

古文：故今有于此，曰： 予汝天下而杀汝身。 
现代文：所以假如现在有人在这里说： 给你天下而杀掉你。 
English: So if someone were to say here and now: I'll give you the world and kill you.

古文：庸人不为也。
现代文：平庸的人也不干。
English: Mediocre people don't do it either.

古文：夫有天下，大利也，犹不为者，知必死。
现代文：据有天下，是很大的好处，还不干的原因，是知道一定会死。
English: According to the world, it is a great benefit, and the reason for not doing it is that you know you will die.

古文：故不必得也，则虽辜磔，窃金不止；知必死，则有天下不为也。
现代文：所以如果不一定会被抓到，那么即使分尸示众，偷采金子仍不会停止；知道一定会死，那么据有天下也不干。
English: So if you don't necessarily get caught, then even if you show your dead body to the public, you still won't stop stealing gold; if you know you're going to die, you probably won't do it.

古文：鲁人烧积泽。
现代文：鲁人焚烧一处满积柴草的沼泽。
English: Lu people burn a swamp full of firewood and grass.

古文：天北风，火南倚，恐烧国。
现代文：天刮北风，火势向南延伸，恐怕会烧到国都。
English: The wind is blowing from the north, and the fire is spreading south. I'm afraid it will burn all the way to the national capital.

古文：哀公惧，自将众趣救火。左右无人，尽逐兽而火不救，乃召问仲尼。
现代文：鲁哀公害怕了，要亲自率领众人督促救火，到火场后旁边没了人，大家都去追逐野兽了，却没人来救火，于是哀公就把孔子召来询问。
English: Lu Aigong was scared and wanted to personally lead everyone to urge them to fight the fire. When they reached the back of the fire, there was no one around. Everyone went to chase the beast, but no one came to fight the fire. So Aigong called Confucius to inquire.

古文：仲尼曰： 夫逐兽者乐而无罚，救火者苦而无赏，此火之所以无救也。 哀公曰： 善。 
现代文：孔子说： 追逐野兽的人既快乐又不受罚，而救火的人既受苦又不得赏，这便是没人救火的原因。 哀公说： 说得对。 
English: Confucius said, "The reason why there is no one to put out the fire is that the one who chases the wild beast is happy and goes unpunished, while the one who puts out the fire suffers and is not rewarded."

古文：仲尼曰： 事急不及以赏。救火者尽赏之，则国不足以赏于人。
现代文：孔子说： 事情紧急，来不及行赏了；假使救火的人都给予赏赐，那么国库财产也还不够给大家发赏哩。
English: Confucius said, "The matter is urgent, and it is too late to give rewards. If all those who put out the fire were to give rewards, then the treasury's wealth would not be enough to reward everyone.

古文：请徒行罚。 
现代文：请只用刑罚。
English: Penalties only, please.

古文：哀公曰： 善。 
现代文：哀公说： 好吧。 
English: Aiko said, "Okay."

古文：于是仲尼乃下令曰： 不救火者比降北之罪，逐兽者比入禁之罪。 
现代文：于是孔子就下令说； 不救火的，与投降败逃同罪；追野兽的，与擅入禁地同罪。 
English: So Confucius gave the order: "If you do not put out the fire, it is the same as surrendering and fleeing; if you chase wild animals, it is the same as trespassing."

古文：令下未遍而火已救矣。
现代文：命令下达后还未传遍，火已经扑灭了。
English: The fire was extinguished before word of the order spread.

古文：成驩谓齐王曰： 王太仁，太不忍人。 
现代文：成驩对齐王说： 大王您太仁慈，对人大不狠心。 
English: Chengyu Alignment King said: Great King, you are too kind, and you are not cruel to others.

古文：王曰： 太仁，太不忍人，非善名邪？ 对曰： 此人臣之善也，非人主之所行也。
现代文：齐王说： 太仁慈，太不狠心，不是好名声吗？ 成欢回答说： 这是臣子的优点，但不是君主应该实行的。
English: King Qi said, "Isn't it a good reputation to be too kind and not too cruel?" Cheng Huan replied, "This is the virtue of a courtier, but it is not what a monarch should do."

古文：夫人臣必仁而后可与谋，不忍人而后可近也；不仁则不可与谋，忍人则不可近也。 
现代文：臣子一定要仁慈，然后可以和他谋事；对人不狠心，然后才可以和他接近。臣子不仁慈，就不能和他谋事；狠心了，就无法和他接近。 
English: A courtier must be kind, and then he can negotiate with him; he must not be cruel to others, and then he can get close to him. If a courtier is not kind, he cannot negotiate with him; if he is cruel, he cannot get close to him.

古文：王曰： 然则寡人安所太仁，安不忍人？ 对曰： 王太仁于薛公，而太不忍于诸田。
现代文：齐王说： 那么我什么地方太仁慈，什么地方对人不狠心？ 成欢回答说： 大王对薛公太仁慈，对田氏宗族太不狠心。
English: King Qi said, "So where am I too kind, and where am I not cruel to people?" Cheng Huan replied, "The Great King is too kind to Xue Gong, and too not cruel to the Tian clan."

古文：太仁薛公，则大臣无重；太不忍诸田，则父兄犯法。
现代文：对薛公太仁慈，大臣们就没有权势；对田氏宗族太不狠心，大王的叔伯兄弟就会犯法。
English: If you are too kind to Prince Xue, your ministers will have no power; if you are too cruel to the Tian clan, your great-uncle brothers will break the law.

古文：大臣无重，则兵弱于外；父兄犯法，则政乱于内。
现代文：大臣们没有权势，在外军队就会削弱；叔伯兄弟犯法，国内政事就会混乱。
English: If ministers have no power, the foreign army will be weakened; if uncles and brothers break the law, domestic politics will be chaotic.

古文：兵弱于外，政乱于内，此亡国之本也。 
现代文：在外军队削弱，国内政事混乱，这是亡国的根源所在。 
English: Weakened military abroad and political turmoil at home are the root causes of the country's downfall.

古文：魏惠王谓卜皮曰： 子闻寡人之声闻亦何如焉？ 对曰： 臣闻王之慈惠也。 
现代文：魏惠王对卜皮说： 你听到我的声望究竟怎样？ 卜皮回答说： 我听说大王慈惠。 
English: King Wei Hui said to Bo Pei, "How is it that you have heard of my reputation?" Bo Pei replied, "I have heard of the great King Cixi.

古文：王欣然喜曰： 然则功且安至？ 对曰： 王之功至于亡。 
现代文：惠王欣喜地说： 既然这样，功效将怎么样呢？ 卜皮回答说： 大王的功效是走向灭亡。 
English: Hui Wang said joyfully, "In this case, what will the effect be?" Bo Pei replied, "The effect of a great king is to go to ruin."

古文：王曰： 慈惠，行善也。
现代文：惠王说： 慈惠是做好事。
English: Hui Wang said: Charity is to do good deeds.

古文：行之而亡，何也？ 卜皮对曰： 夫慈者不忍，而惠者好与也。
现代文：这样做了却要灭亡，为什么？ 卜皮回答说： 仁慈的人不狠心，行惠的人喜欢施舍。
English: He did so and perished. Why? Bo Pei replied, "A kind person is not cruel, and a charitable person likes to give alms.

古文：不忍则不诛有过，好予则不待有功而赏。
现代文：不狠心就不会惩罚有过错的人，喜欢施舍就会不等臣下立功而加赏。
English: If you are not cruel, you will not punish those who are at fault. If you like to give alms, you will not wait for your vassals to perform meritorious deeds and reward them.

古文：有过不罪，无功受赏，虽亡，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：有过错不惩治，没功劳受赏赐，即使灭亡，不也是应当的吗？ 
English: If there is no punishment for wrongdoing, and no reward for meritorious work, is it not fitting that one should perish?

古文：齐国好厚葬，布帛尽于衣衾，材木尽于棺椁。
现代文：齐国喜欢厚葬，布帛都做了死人衣被，木材都做了棺材。
English: Qiguo liked to have a big funeral. All the cloth shrouds were made into quilts for the dead, and all the wood into coffins.

古文：桓公患之，以告管仲曰： 布帛尽则无以为蔽，材木尽则无以为守备，而人厚葬之不休，禁之奈何？ 管仲对曰： 凡人之有为也，非名之则利之也。 
现代文：桓公很为此担忧，就告诉管仲说： 布帛用完了，就没有东西可做遮体的衣服；木材用完了，就没有东西可筑防御工事。可人们还是不停止厚葬，怎样加以禁止？ 管仲回答说： 大凡人的作为，不是图名，就是图利。 
English: King Huan was very worried about this, so he told Guanzhong: When the cloth is used up, there will be nothing to make clothes to cover the body; when the wood is used up, there will be nothing to build fortifications. However, people still do not stop mass burials, how can they be banned? Guanzhong replied: The actions of ordinary people are either for fame or profit.

古文：于是乃下令曰： 棺椁过度者戮其尸，罪夫当丧者。 
现代文：于是下令说： 棺材超过标准的就刑戮尸体，处罚主丧的人。 
English: So he issued an order: If the coffin exceeds the standard, the body will be killed, and the mourners will be punished.

古文：夫戮死无名，罪当丧者无利，人何故为之也？
现代文：尸体遭到刑戮，无名可言；主丧的人被处罚了，无利可言：人们干吗还要厚葬呢？ 
English: The bodies were tortured and killed, so there is no name to speak of; the mourners were punished, so there is no benefit to speak of: why do people still want to be buried?

古文：卫嗣君之时，有胥靡逃之魏，因为襄王之后治病。
现代文：卫嗣君在位的时候，有个囚犯逃往魏国后，就替魏襄王的王后治病。
English: During the reign of King Weizhi, a prisoner escaped to Wei and treated the queen of King Wuxiang.

古文：卫嗣君闻之，使人请以五十金买之，五反而魏王不予，乃以左氏易之。
现代文：卫嗣君听说了，就派人求襄王允许用五十金赎回囚犯，使者往返五趟，魏王就是不给人，卫君就用左氏城来交换囚犯。
English: Hearing of this, Emperor Wei sent an envoy to ask King Xiang for permission to ransom the prisoners for fifty gold coins. The envoy made five round trips, but King Wei refused to give it to him, and Emperor Wei used Zuo's city to exchange the prisoners.

古文：群臣左右谏曰： 夫以一都买胥靡，可乎？ 王曰： 非子之所知也。
现代文：群臣近侍劝卫君说： 用一个大城邑去买一个囚犯，可行吗？ 卫君说； 不是你们所能理解的。
English: A group of courtiers advised Wei Jun: "Is it possible to use a large city to buy a prisoner?" Wei Jun said, "It's not something you can understand."

古文：夫治无小而乱无大。法不立而诛不必，虽有十左氏无益也；法立而诛必，虽失十左氏无害也。 
现代文：治不在小，乱不在大；如果法令不设立，诛罚不兑现，即使有十个左氏城也没有裨益；如果法令设立，诛罚兑现，即使失去十个左氏城也没有损害。 
English: The ruling is not small, the disorder is not big; if the decree is not established and the punishment is not fulfilled, even if there are ten Zuo cities, there is no benefit; if the decree is established and the punishment is fulfilled, even if ten Zuo cities are lost, there is no harm.

古文：魏王闻之，曰： 主欲治而不听之，不祥。 
现代文：魏王听说后说： 卫君想治理好国家，我却不答应他的要求，不吉利。 
English: After hearing this, Wei Wang said: "Weijun wanted to govern the country well, but I did not agree to his request, which was unlucky.

古文：因载而往，徒献之。
现代文：于是用车子装了囚犯送到卫国，无代价地交付给卫君。
English: As a result, the prisoners were loaded into a car and taken to the capital, where they were handed over to the Emperor at no cost.

古文：△说三
现代文：说三
English: Say three

古文：齐王问于文子曰： 治国何如？ 对曰： 夫赏罚之为道，利器也。君固握之，不可以示人。
现代文：齐王向文子询问道： 怎样治理国家？ 文子回答说： 赏罚作为治国原则，是一种锐利的兵器，君主要牢固地掌握它，不可把它拿给别人看。
English: King Qi asked Fumiko, "How should the country be governed?" Fumiko replied, "Reward and punishment, as the principle of governing the country, is a sharp weapon. The monarch should firmly grasp it and should not show it to others.

古文：若如臣者，犹兽鹿也，唯荐草而就。 
现代文：至于臣子们，也就像兽鹿一样，只要有肥美的草地，就会跑过去的。 
English: As for the courtiers, just like deer, as long as there is fertile grassland, they will run past.

古文：越王问于大夫文种曰： 吾欲伐吴，可乎？ 对曰： 可矣。
现代文：越王向大夫文种询问道： 我想攻打吴国，行吗？ 文种回答说： 行。
English: Yue Wang asked Dr. Wenzong, "I want to attack Wu, is that okay?" Wenzong replied, "It's okay.

古文：吾赏厚而信，罚严而必。
现代文：我们的赏赐优厚而守信，惩罚严厉而坚决。
English: Our rewards are generous and trustworthy, and our punishments are severe and firm.

古文：君欲知之，何不试焚宫室？ 于是遂焚宫室，人莫救之。
现代文：您想了解清楚，为什么不用焚烧宫室来做个试验？ 于是就纵火烧了宫室，没有人去救它。
English: You want to know why they didn't burn the palace to test it, so they set the palace on fire and no one came to save it.

古文：乃下令曰： 人之救火者死，比死敌之赏；救火而不死者，比胜敌之赏；不救火者，比降北之罪。 
现代文：越王就下令说： 为救火而死的，和战场牺牲同赏；救了火而没死的，和战胜敌人同赏；不救火的人，和投降败北同罪。 
English: King Yue then issued an order: Those who died to save the fire would receive the same reward as those who died on the battlefield; those who saved the fire but did not die would receive the same reward as those who defeated the enemy; those who did not save the fire would be guilty of the same crime as those who surrendered and were defeated.

古文：人之涂其体，被濡衣而走火者，左三千人，右三千人。
现代文：人们泥土徐身、蒙上湿衣而奔赴火场的，左面三干人，右面三千人。
English: People covered themselves with mud and wet clothes and rushed to the scene of the fire. On the left were three dry people and on the right were three thousand people.

古文：此知必胜之势也。
现代文：由此知道伐吴已成必胜之势。
English: From this, we know that the battle of Wu has become a must-win situation.

古文：吴起为魏武侯西河之守。
现代文：吴起担任魏武侯时的西河郡守。
English: Wu Qi served as the governor of Xihe County when he was the prince of Weiwu.

古文：秦有小亭临境，吴起欲攻之。
现代文：泰国有个小哨亭靠近魏境，吴起想攻下它。
English: In Thailand, there is a small sentry post near Weijing, and Wu Qim wants to capture it.

古文：不去，则甚害田者；去之，则不足以征甲兵。
现代文：不除掉小哨亭吧，会对魏国的种田人构成很大危害；要除掉小哨亭吧，又不值得为此征集军队。
English: If the small sentry box is not removed, it will cause great harm to Wei farmers; if the small sentry box is removed, it is not worth conscripting troops for this.

古文：于是乃倚一车辕于北门之外而令之曰： 有能徙此南门之外者，赐之上田、上宅。 
现代文：于是吴起就在北门外靠置了一根辕木，然后下令道： 谁能把它搬到南门外，就赏给谁上等田地、上等住宅。 
English: Therefore, Wu Qi placed a camphor tree outside the north gate, and then ordered: Whoever can move it outside the south gate will be rewarded with a first-class field and a first-class house.

古文：人莫之徙也。
现代文：没有人去搬它。
English: There's no one to move it.

古文：及有徙之者，遂赐之如令。
现代文：等到有了搬动它的人，立即按照命令行了赏。
English: As soon as there was someone to carry it, it was immediately rewarded according to the order.

古文：俄又置一石赤菽东门之外而令之曰： 有能徙此于西门之外者，赐之如初。 
现代文：不久吴起又在东门外放了一石赤豆，并下令说： 谁能把它搬到西门，赏赐如前。 人们抢着搬它。
English: Not long after, Wu Qi again placed a stone of red beans outside the east gate, and ordered: "Whoever can move it to the west gate will be rewarded as before.

古文：人争徙之。乃下令曰： 明日且攻亭，有能先登者，仕之国大夫，赐之上田宅。 
现代文：于是吴起下令道： 明天将攻打哨亭，有能先上去的，任命他做国大夫，赏他上等田地住宅。 
English: So Wu Qi ordered, "Tomorrow we will attack the sentry post. If anyone can get there first, appoint him as the state doctor and reward him with a first-class field residence."

古文：人争趋之，于是攻亭一朝而拔之。
现代文：人们争先恐后。于是攻打哨亭，一个早上就拿下了。
English: People were scrambling, so they attacked the sentry post and took it down in one morning.

古文：李悝为魏文侯上地之守，而欲人之善射也，乃下令曰： 人之有狐疑之讼者，令之射的，中之者胜，不中者负。 
现代文：李悝担任魏文侯时的上地郡守，他想要人们都善于射箭，就下令道： 人们遇着难断是非的诉讼时，就让他们用弓箭射靶，射中的胜诉，射不中的败诉。 
English: Li Qian was the Shangdi County Governor when he served as Wei Wenhou. He wanted people to be good at archery, so he ordered: When people encounter difficult lawsuits, let them use bows and arrows to shoot at the target. If they hit the target, they will win the case. If they miss the target, they will lose the case.

古文：令下而人皆疾习射，日夜不休。
现代文：命令下达后，人们都急忙去练习射击，日夜不停。
English: After the order was given, people rushed to practice shooting, day and night.

古文：及与秦人战，大败之，以人之善战射也。
现代文：等到和秦军打起仗来，大胜敌人，这是因为上地人善于打仗射击的缘故。
English: When they fought against the Qin army, they won a great victory over the enemy. This is because Shangdi people are good at fighting and shooting.

古文：宋崇门之巷人，服丧而毁，甚瘠，上以为慈爱于亲，举以为官师。
现代文：宋国都城东门有个平民服丧时，因为过度悲哀，显得非常瘦弱，宋君认为他对父母慈爱，就提升他为官长。
English: When a civilian at the east gate of the Song capital city was in mourning, he appeared very thin due to excessive grief. Song Jun thought that he was kind to his parents, so he promoted him to be an official.

古文：明年，人之所以毁死者岁十余人。
现代文：第二年；人们因服丧时过度悲哀而死的一岁之中就有十几个人。
English: The following year, more than a dozen one-year-olds died as a result of excessive grief at the time of the funeral.

古文：子之服亲丧者，为爱之也，而尚可以赏劝也，况君上之于民乎？
现代文：儿子为父母服丧，是因为爱父母，这种情形尚且可以用奖赏来加以劝勉，何况君主对于民众呢？
English: If a son mourns for his parents because he loves them, this can be encouraged by a reward, and how much more so for the people by the sovereign?

古文：越王虑伐吴，欲人之轻死也，出见怒蛙，乃为之式。
现代文：越王计划着去攻打吴国，想要民众轻视死亡，外出时看见一只发怒的青蛙，就向它凭拭致敬。
English: King Yue planned to attack the State of Wu, and wanted the people to despise death. When he saw an angry frog outside, he saluted it with a mop.

古文：从者曰： 奚敬于此？ 王曰： 为其有气故也。 
现代文：随从说： 干什么对怒蛙致敬？ 越王说； 为的这只青蛙气势汹汹的缘故。 
English: The attendant said, "Why do you salute the angry frog?" The king said, "It is because the frog is so fierce."

古文：明年之请以头献王者岁十余人。
现代文：第二年，请求把头颅献给越王的人，一岁中就有十多位。
English: In the second year, there were more than ten one-year-olds who asked to donate their heads to Yue Wang.

古文：由此观之，誉之足以杀人矣。
现代文：由此看来，赞誉足以鼓动人们舍生忘死啊！
English: From this point of view, praise is enough to encourage people to give up life and forget death!

古文：一曰：越王勾践见怒蛙而式之。
现代文：另一种说法：越王勾践看见一只怒蛙，就向它凭拭致敬。
English: Another way of saying this is that when Yue Wang Gochun saw an angry frog, he saluted it with his mop.

古文：御者曰： 何为式？ 王曰： 蛙有气如此，可无为式乎？ 士人闻之曰： 蛙有气，王犹为式，况士人有勇者乎！ 是岁人有自刭死，以其头献者。
现代文：车夫说： 干吗要凭拭致敬？ 越王说： 青蛙这般气势汹汹，怎么可以不向它凭轼致敬呢？ 武士们听到后说： 青蛙气势汹汹，为王尚且向它致敬，何况勇敢的武士呢！ 这一年，有人自刎后将头献给越王。
English: The coachman said, "Why do you have to salute with a mop?" King Yue said, "The frog is so powerful, how can you not salute it with a scepter?" Upon hearing this, the warriors said, "The frog is so powerful, the king still salutes it, let alone the brave warriors!" This year, someone sacrificed his head to King Yue after committing suicide.

古文：故越王将复吴而试其教，燔台而鼓之，使民赴火者，赏在火者；临江而鼓之，使人赴水者，赏在水也；临战而使人绝头刳腹而无顾心者，赏在兵也。
现代文：所以越王准备向吴国复仇，就试行这样的教育：放火焚烧高台后，击鼓令人前进；使人冲到火里的原因，是进火有赏。靠近江边后，击鼓令人前进；使人冲向水中的原因，是进水有赏。临作战时，使人断头剖腹而义无返顾的原因，是作战有赏。
English: Therefore, King Yue, who was preparing to take revenge on the State of Wu, tried out this kind of education: After setting fire to a high platform, drumming makes people advance; the reason why people rush into the fire is that there is a reward for entering the fire; after getting close to the river, drumming makes people advance; the reason why people rush into the water is that there is a reward for entering the water; when it comes to battle, the reason why people cut off their heads and cut open their stomachs without a second thought is that there is a reward for fighting.

古文：又况据法而进贤，其助甚此矣。
现代文：又何况根据法制进用贤人，它的鼓舞作用就比这些更进一层了。
English: What's more, the use of sages in accordance with the legal system, its inspirational effect is more advanced than these.

古文：韩昭侯使人藏弊裤，侍者曰： 君亦不仁矣，弊裤不以赐左右而藏之。 
现代文：韩昭侯让人把破旧裤子收藏起来，侍从说： 君王太不仁爱了，破旧裤子不赏给近侍们，却要收藏起来。 
English: Han Zhaohou asked the attendant to collect the worn-out trousers. The attendant said, "The king is too unkind. He does not reward the attendants with the worn-out trousers, but he wants to collect them."

古文：昭侯曰： 非子之所知也。
现代文：昭侯说： 这不是你理解得了的。
English: Zhao Hou said: This is not something you can understand.

古文：吾闻明主之爱一嚬一笑，嚬有为嚬，而笑有为笑。
现代文：我听说明君连自己的一颦一笑都要加以珍惜，颦有擎的目的，笑有笑的目的。
English: I have heard that you should cherish even your own smile and laugh, have a goal, and laugh with a purpose.

古文：今夫裤，岂特嚬笑哉！裤之与嚬笑相去远矣。
现代文：现在是裤子了，岂只是一颦一笑啊：裤子和一颦一笑相差太远了。
English: Now it's trousers, is it just a grin: trousers and a grin are too far apart.

古文：吾必待有功者，故收藏之未有予也。 
现代文：我一定要等待有功的人，所以要收藏好，现在还没有给予的对象哩。 
English: I have to wait for a meritorious person, so I have to collect them well. I don't have anyone to give them to yet.

古文：鳣似蛇，蚕似蠋。
现代文：黄鳝像蛇，蚕像毛虫。
English: The stingray is like a snake, the silkworm is like a caterpillar.

古文：人见蛇则惊骇，见蠋则毛起。
现代文：人们看见蛇就惊恐害怕，看见毛虫就汗毛竖起。
English: People get scared when they see a snake, and their hair stands on end when they see a caterpillar.

古文：然而妇人拾蚕，渔者握鳣，利之所在，则忘其所恶，皆为贲诸。
现代文：但是养蚕的妇女拾蚕，捕鱼的人捉黄鳝，因为利益在这上面，也就忘记了害怕，都成了孟贲那样的勇士。
English: But the women who raise silkworms pick up the silkworms, and the fishermen catch the scorpionfish, and because the profit is in this, they forget to be afraid, and they all become warriors like Meng Yao.

古文：△说四
现代文：说四
English: Say four

古文：魏王谓郑王曰： 始郑、梁一国也，已而别，今愿复得郑而合之梁。 
现代文：魏王对韩王说： 当初韩、魏属同一个国家，后来才分开的，现在我希望重新把韩国并入魏国。 
English: The king of Wei said to the king of Han: At first, Han and Wei belonged to the same country, but later they were separated. Now I hope to reincorporate Korea into Wei.

古文：郑君患之，召群臣而与之谋所以对魏。
现代文：韩王很为这件事担忧，召集群臣，和他们商量如何答复魏国。
English: King Han was very worried about this and called together his ministers to discuss with them how to respond to Wei.

古文：公子谓郑君曰： 此甚易应也。
现代文：公子对韩王说： 这很容易回答。
English: The prince said to Han Wang, "That's easy to answer.

古文：君对魏曰： 以郑为故魏而可合也，则弊邑亦愿得梁而合之郑。 
现代文：您对魏王说： 假如认为韩与魏原属一国而可以合并，那么敝国也希望把魏国并入韩国  。
English: You said to the king of Wei: If you think that Korea and Wei originally belong to one country and can be merged, then China also hopes to incorporate Wei into Korea.

古文：魏王乃止。
现代文：魏王因此不再提出合并要求了。
English: It was only the Wei king who did not reward him.

古文：齐宣王使人吹竽，必三百人。
现代文：齐宣王让人吹竿，一定要有三百个人来同时演奏。
English: Qi Xuan Wang let people play the flute, there must be three hundred people to play at the same time.

古文：南国处士请为王吹竽，宣王说之，廪食以数百人。
现代文：南郭处士请求替宣王吹竿，宣王很高兴，伙食待遇和那几百号吃官粮的同等标准。
English: Nanguo clerk asked to blow the whistle for Xuan Wang. Xuan Wang was very happy. The meal treatment was the same standard as that of the hundreds of officials who ate the official food.

古文：宣王死，氵昬王立，好一一听之，处士逃。
现代文：宣王死，湣王立。湣王喜欢一个一个地听他们吹竿，南郭处士便逃跑了。
English: When Xuan Wang died, Xuan Wang rose. Xuan Wang liked to listen to them play one by one, and the Nanguo official ran away.

古文：一曰：韩昭侯曰： 吹竽者众，无以知其善者。 
现代文：另一种说法：韩昭侯说： 吹竿的人多，我无法知道其中吹得好的人。 
English: Another way of putting it: Han Zhaohou said, "There are many people who play the flute, and I have no way of knowing which ones are good at it.

古文：田严对曰： 一一而听之。 
现代文：田严回答说： 不妨逐个地听他们演奏。 
English: Tian Yan replied, "You might as well listen to their performances one by one."

古文：赵令人因申子于韩请兵，将以攻魏。
现代文：赵派人通过申不害向韩借兵，准备用来进攻魏国。
English: Zhao sent men to borrow soldiers from Han through Shen Nihong and prepared to use them to attack Wei.

古文：申子欲言之君，而恐君之疑己外市也，不则恐恶于赵，乃令赵绍、韩沓尝试君之动貌而后言之。
现代文：申不害想对韩国国君说这件事，又怕韩王怀疑自己与外国勾结，不说吧，又怕被赵国厌恶，于是他就让赵绍、韩告试探韩王的态度，然后才去讲了这件事。
English: Shin didn't want to say anything to the Korean sovereign about the matter, and he was afraid that the Korean king would suspect that he was colluding with a foreign country. Needless to say, he was also afraid of being disliked by Zhao Guo. So he asked Zhao Shao and Han Guo to test the attitude of the Korean king, and then he went to talk about the matter.

古文：内则知昭侯之意，外则有得赵之功。
现代文：这样，申不害对内则明白了韩王的意图，对外则有拉拢了赵国的收效。
English: In this way, Shen Fuxi understood Han Wang's intention internally, and had the effect of attracting Zhao Guo to the outside world.

古文：三国兵至，韩王谓楼缓曰： 三国之兵深矣！
现代文：韩、魏、齐三国军队集结到了韩国，秦王对楼缓说： 三国军队就要深入我国了！
English: The armies of Han, Wei, and Qi gathered in South Korea. Qin Wang said to the building: The armies of the three countries are about to enter our country!

古文：寡人欲割河东而讲，何如？ 对曰： 夫割河东，大费也；免国于患，大功也。
现代文：我想割让河东之地和他们讲和，怎么样？ 楼缓回答说： 割让河东，是大代价；免除国家祸患，是大功劳。
English: I want to cede the land to the east of the river and make peace with them, how about that? Lou Ye replied: Ceding the east of the river is a great price; getting rid of the national calamity is a great achievement.

古文：此父兄之任也，王何不召公子汜而问焉？ 王召公子汜而告之，对曰： 讲亦悔，不讲亦悔。
现代文：这是宗族老臣的责任，大王为什么不召见公子汜来征询意见呢？ 秦王召见公子汜并告知了有关情况，公子记对答说： 讲和也会后悔，不讲和也会后悔。
English: This is the responsibility of the elders of the clan. Why didn't the great king call up the nobles to ask for advice? The king of Qin called up the nobles and informed them of the situation. The nobles replied: "If you talk about peace, you will regret it, and if you don't talk about peace, you will regret it."

古文：王今割河东而讲，三国归，王必曰： 三国固且去矣，吾特以三城送之。
现代文：大王眼下如果割让河东而讲 和，三国撤兵，大王一定会说： 三国本来就会回去了，我白白地把三座城送给了他们。 
English: If the great king were to cede the eastern part of the river and talk about peace and the withdrawal of troops from the three countries, the great king would surely say: The three countries would have gone back. I gave them the three cities for nothing.

古文：不讲，三国也入韩，则国必大举矣，王必大悔。
现代文：如果不讲和吧，三国军队进入韩国，那么秦国一定要大动干戈了，大王您一定会非常后悔。
English: If you don't talk about peace, and the troops of the three countries enter South Korea, then Qin will definitely go to war, and you will surely regret it.

古文：王曰： 不献三城也。
现代文：您会说： 这是没有献出三座城的过错。 
English: You will say: This is the fault of not having given up the three cities.

古文：臣故曰：讲亦悔，不讲亦悔。 
现代文：我所以说：大王讲和也会后悔，不讲和也会后悔。 
English: That's why I said: the great king will regret making peace, and he will also regret not making peace.

古文：王曰： 为我悔也，宁亡三城而悔，无危乃悔。寡人断讲矣。 
现代文：秦王说： 既然都会后悔，我宁可丧失三城而后悔，不能等到国家危亡了才去后悔，我决定讲和了。 
English: King Qin said, "Since we will both regret it, I would rather lose the three cities and regret it, rather than wait until the country is in danger before regretting it. I have decided to make peace."

古文：应侯谓秦王曰： 王得宛、叶、兰田、阳夏，断河内，困梁、郑，所以未王者，赵未服也。
现代文：应侯对秦王说： 大王占领了宛、叶、兰田、阳夏几个地方，拦腰切断了河内，围困了魏、韩，之所以到现在还没有称王天下，是因为赵还没有顺服。
English: Ying Hou said to King Qin: The Great King occupied several places in Wan, Ye, Lantian, and Yangxia, cut off Hanoi, and besieged Wei and Han. The reason why he has not been crowned king of the world until now is because Zhao has not obeyed.

古文：弛上党在一而已，以临东阳，则邯郸口中虱也。
现代文：俊使放弃上党，那不过是丢掉一个郡罢了；用兵逼近东阳的话，邯郸就成了口中的虱子。
English: If Shunzhi abandons the party, it is nothing more than losing a county; if the soldiers approach Dongyang, the dragonfly will become a pimple in the mouth.

古文：王拱而朝天下，后者以兵中之。
现代文：大王拱手而使天下来朝，迟到的就用兵拿下它！
English: The great king gave up and let the sky fall down in the morning. If you are late, take it down with soldiers!

古文：然上党之安乐，其处甚剧，臣恐弛之而不听，奈何？ 王曰： 必弛易之矣。 
现代文：但是上党是个安乐之乡，它的地位很要紧，我怕劝您放弃了您不会听从，怎么办呢？ 秦王说： 我一定放弃上党，改变进攻目标了。 
English: However, Shangtang is a land of peace, and its status is very important. I am afraid that if I advise you to give up, you will not listen. What should I do? King Qin said: I will definitely give up Shangtang and change the target of attack.

古文：△说五
现代文：说五
English: Say five.

古文：庞敬，县令也。遣市者行，而召公大夫而还之。
现代文：庞敬是个县令，他派遣一种管理市场的人员一一市者出发，又召回另一位管理市场的官员一一公大夫来见。
English: Pang Jing is a county magistrate. He dispatched one kind of market management personnel - a city official - to set out, and recalled another market management official - a public doctor - to meet him.

古文：立有间，无以诏之，卒遣行。
现代文：公大夫站了一会儿，庞敬并没有什么可告诫的，最后还是让他走了。
English: The public doctor stood for a moment, there was nothing to admonish Pang Jing, and finally he let him go.

古文：市者以为令与公大夫有言，不相信，以至无奸。
现代文：市者以为县令对公大夫有所指示，而对自己不予信任，因此再不敢作奸犯科。
English: The townspeople thought that the county magistrate had given instructions to the public doctor, but they did not trust themselves, so they did not dare to commit crimes.

古文：戴驩，宋太宰，夜使人曰： 吾闻数夜有乘辒车至李史门者，谨为我伺之。 
现代文：戴驩是宋国的太宰，夜晚支使人说： 我听说这几天夜里有人坐着卧车到了李史门口。请你替我监视一下。 
English: Dai Ye is the grand vizier of the Song Dynasty. The night watchman said, "I heard that in the past few nights, someone has arrived at Li Shi's door in a sleeping car. Please keep an eye on him for me."

古文：使人报曰： 不见辒车，见有奉笥而与李史语者，有间，李史受笥。 
现代文：派出去的人回报说： 没有看到卧车，只看到有人捧着竹器和李史说话，过了一会儿，李史收下了竹器。 
English: The person sent out said in return: I didn't see a sleeping car, I only saw someone holding a bamboo utensil and talking to Li Shi. After a while, Li Shi accepted the bamboo utensil.

古文：周主亡玉簪，令吏求之，三日不能得也。
现代文：东周君丢了玉替，让官吏们去找，三天没能找到。
English: When Eastern Zhou lost his jade substitute, he asked officials to look for it, but they couldn't find it for three days.

古文：周主令人求，而得之家人之屋间。
现代文：东周君又派人寻找，结果在居民的房子中间找到了。
English: Dong Zhoujun sent someone to look for it again, and found it in the middle of a resident's house.

古文：周主曰： 吾之吏之不事事也。
现代文：东周君说： 我的官吏都不做事。
English: Dong Zhoujun said: My officials don't do anything.

古文：求簪三日不得之，吾令人求之，不移日而得之。 
现代文：找根玉替，三天没有找到；我派人寻找，不到一天就拿回来了。 
English: I sent someone to look for a replacement, but I didn't find it for three days. I got it back in less than a day.

古文：于是吏皆耸惧，以为君神明也。
现代文：于是官吏都震恐不已，认为君主神明。
English: As a result, the officials were terrified and thought that the monarch was a god.

古文：商太宰使少庶子之市，顾反而问之曰： 何见于市？ 对曰： 无见也。 
现代文：商太宰派遣年轻的侍仆到市场上去，等他回来后问道： 在市场上见到了什么？ 侍仆回答说： 没见到什么 太宰说： 虽说如此，究竟见到了什么呢？ 
English: The merchant's daughter-in-law sent a young servant to the market, and when he came back she asked, "What did you see in the market?" The servant replied, "I didn't see anything." The daughter-in-law said, "Even so, what did you see?"

古文：太宰曰： 虽然，何见也？ 对曰： 市南门之外甚众牛车，仅可以行耳。 太宰因诫使者： 无敢告人吾所问于女。 
现代文：侍仆回答说： 市场南门外牛车很多，仅能勉强地通行。 太宰就告诫他说： 不准告诉别人我问你的话 。于是太宰召来市场官吏并责骂说： 市场门外为什么有那么多的牛屎？ 
English: The attendant replied, "There are a lot of cattle cars outside the south gate of the market, and they can only pass through with difficulty." The Dazai warned him, "Don't tell others what I asked you." So the Dazai summoned the market officials and scolded them, saying, "Why is there so much cow dung outside the market gate?

古文：因召市吏而诮之曰： 市门之外何多牛屎？ 市吏甚怪太宰知之疾也，乃悚惧其所也
现代文：市场官吏很奇怪太宰知道得这么快，于是开始惶恐小心地对待职守了。
English: The market official was surprised that Dazai knew so quickly, so he began to treat his duties with trepidation.

古文：△说六
现代文：说六
English: Say six

古文：韩昭侯握爪，而佯亡一爪，求之甚急。左右因割其爪而效之。
现代文：韩昭侯用手包住指甲，然后假装掉了一个指甲，寻找得非常着急，于是近侍就割掉自己的指甲呈献给他。
English: Han Zhaohou wrapped his hands around his fingernails and then pretended to have lost a fingernail. He was in a hurry to find it, so his aide-de-camp cut off his fingernails and presented them to him.

古文：昭侯以此察左右之诚不。
现代文：昭侯通过此事来考察近侍忠诚与否。
English: Prince Akihito used this incident to examine the loyalty of his close attendants.

古文：韩昭侯使骑于县，使者报，昭侯问曰： 何见也？ 对曰： 无所见也。 
现代文：韩昭侯派人骑马到县里巡视。使者回报，昭侯问道： 见到过什么？ 使者回答说： 没见到什么。 
English: Han Zhaohou sent a man on horseback to inspect the county. The messenger returned, Zhaohou asked: Have you seen anything? The messenger replied: I haven't seen anything.

古文：昭侯曰： 虽然，何见？ 曰： 南门之外，有黄犊食苗道左者。 
现代文：昭侯说： 虽说如此，到底见到什么呢？ 使者说： 南门外有小黄牛在大路左边吃禾苗。 
English: Zhao Hou said, "Even so, what exactly did you see?" The messenger said, "Outside the south gate, there is a small cow eating grain seedlings on the left side of the highway.

古文：昭侯谓使者： 毋敢泄吾所问于女。 
现代文：昭侯对使者说： 不准泄露我问你的话。 
English: Zhao Hou said to the messenger: Do not reveal what I asked you.

古文：乃下令曰： 当苗时，禁牛马入人田中，固有令，而吏不以为事，牛马甚多入人田中。
现代文：就下命令说： 正值禾苗生长时，本来就有命令禁止牛马进入农田里边，但官吏们却不把这当回事，有很多牛马进到农田里边了。
English: He gave the following order: When the seedlings were growing, there was already an order prohibiting cattle and horses from entering the farmland, but the officials did not take this seriously, and many cattle and horses entered the farmland.

古文：亟举其数上之；不得，将重其罪。 
现代文：立即把这个数日报上来；有漏掉的，将加重他的罪过。 
English: Report this immediately; any omission will add to his guilt.

古文：于是三乡举而上之。
现代文：于是东、西、北三面报了上来。
English: As a result, reports came in from the east, west and north.

古文：昭侯曰： 未尽也。 
现代文：昭侯说： 还没有报全。 
English: Akihiro said: It hasn't been reported yet.

古文：复往审之，乃得南门之外黄犊。
现代文：经官吏再去细查，才发现南门外的小黄牛。
English: After the officials went to investigate, they found a small cow outside the south gate.

古文：吏以昭侯为明察，皆悚惧其所而不敢为非。
现代文：官吏认为昭侯明察，都惶恐小心地对待职守，再不敢为非作歹了。
English: The officials believed that Zhaohou had been watching them closely, and they all treated their duties with trepidation and caution, and no longer dared to do anything wrong.

古文：周主下令索曲杖，吏求之数日不能得。
现代文：东周君下令寻找弯曲的手杖，官吏找了几天没能找到。
English: Eastern Zhou ordered a search for the crooked cane, but officials were unable to find it after several days of searching.

古文：周主私使人求之，不移日而得之。
现代文：东周君私下派人再找，不到一天就找到了。
English: Dong Zhou privately sent someone to look for it again, and it was found in less than a day.

古文：乃谓吏曰： 吾知吏不事事也。
现代文：东周君就对官吏说： 我就知道你们不干事情。
English: Eastern Zhou said to the officials, "I knew you wouldn't do anything.

古文：曲杖甚易也，而吏不能得，我令人求之，不移日而得之，岂可谓忠哉！ 吏乃皆悚惧其所，以君为神明。
现代文：弯曲的手杖很容易找，但你们却没能找到；我派人寻找，不到一天就找到了。你们怎么能算忠诚啊！ 官吏们于是都惶恐小心地对待职守，认为东周君神明。
English: It is easy to find a crooked cane, but you have not been able to find it; I sent someone to look for it, and found it in less than a day. How can you be considered loyal! The officials are therefore very cautious about their duties, and think that Dong Zhoujun is a god.

古文：卜皮为县令，其御史污秽而有爱妾，卜皮乃使少庶子佯爱之，以知御史阴情。
现代文：卜皮做县令，他的监察官行为肮脏而有宠妾，卜皮就派遣年轻的侍仆假装喜欢她，靠这种办法来探知监察官的隐情。
English: When Bupi, the county magistrate, finds his inspector behaving badly and having a mistress, Bupi sends a young servant to pretend to like her in order to find out the inspector's secret.

古文：西门豹为鄴令，佯亡其车辖，令吏求之不能得，使人求之而得之家人屋间。
现代文：西门豹做邺县令，假装丢失了车辖，命令官吏寻找，结果没能找到。西门豹再派专人寻找，结果在居民的房子中间找到了。
English: The West Gate Leopard pretended to be the county magistrate, pretending to have lost the vehicle, and ordered officials to look for it, but they couldn't find it. The West Gate Leopard then sent a special person to look for it, but it was found in the middle of a resident's house.

古文：△说七
现代文：说七
English: Say seven

古文：阳山君相谓，闻王之疑己也，乃伪谤勷竖以知之。
现代文：阳山君做卫相，听说卫君怀疑自己，就假装诽谤卫君近侍樛竖来探测端的。
English: Yang Shanjun was the Minister of Public Security, and when he heard that the Minister of Public Security was doubting himself, he pretended to slander the Minister of Public Security's close attendant and went to investigate the matter.

古文：淖齿闻齐王之恶己也，乃矫为秦使以知之。
现代文：淖齿听说齐王厌恶自己，就派人假装秦国使臣来探测真情。
English: Hearing that King Qi detested him, he sent someone pretending to be a Qin envoy to probe his true feelings.

古文：齐人有欲为乱者，恐王知之，因诈逐所爱者，令走王知之。
现代文：有个想作乱的齐人，怕齐王知道，就假装驱逐自己喜爱的人，让他跑到齐王那里，以图探明究竟。
English: There was a troublemaker in Qi who, fearing that the King of Qi would find out, pretended to expel a person he liked and had him run to the King of Qi in an attempt to find out what was going on.

古文：子之相燕，坐而佯言： 走出门者何，白马也？ 左右皆言不见。
现代文：子之做燕相，坐在那里撒谎说： 跑出去的是什么？是白马吗？ 侍从都说没看见。
English: The son, pretending to be a swallow, sat there and lied, saying: What ran out? Was it a white horse? The servants all said they did not see it.

古文：有一人走追之，报曰： 有。 
现代文：有一个人跑出去追赶，回报说： 有白马。 
English: And a man ran out to meet him, and reported back, There is a white horse!

古文：子之以此知左右之不诚信。
现代文：子之通过这种方法了解侍从中那些不诚实的人。
English: He asked his son to look into the matter and see if anyone was loyal to him.

古文：有相与讼者，子产离之，而无使得通辞，倒其言以告而知之。
现代文：有对互相诉讼的人，子产把他们隔离开来，以便使他们无法互相通话，然后将他们的话反过来通知对方，结果了解到了实情。
English: There have been cases where litigants have been separated so that they could not talk to each other, and then their words were reported back to the other side, and the truth came to light.

古文：卫嗣公使人为客过关市，关市苛难之，因事关市以金，关吏乃舍之。
现代文：卫嗣公派人装扮成客商通过关口上的集市。管理关市的官吏刁难他，他就用金贿赂了关吏，这样，关吏才放他过关。
English: Weizhi sent a man dressed as a merchant to pass through the market at the pass. The official in charge of the pass tried to stop him, but he bribed the official with money, so the official let him pass.

古文：嗣公为关吏曰： 某时有客过而所，与汝金，而汝因遣之。 
现代文：嗣公对关吏说： 某时有个客商经过你的地方，给了你金，你才放他走的。 
English: The heir to the throne said to the customs officer: At one time, a merchant passed by your place and gave you money, and you let him go.

古文：关吏乃大恐，而以嗣公为明察。
现代文：关吏因而非常害怕，认为嗣公明察。
English: As a result, the customs officer was very afraid and thought that the heir apparent was not paying attention.

