古文：十四日晨起，阴云四布，即索骑游东岩。
现代文：十四日早晨起床，阴云四布，立即要来马去游东岩。
English: On the morning of the 14th, I got up and it was cloudy. I immediately wanted to go to Dongyan.

古文：岩在东石峰之麓，由独山入隘，度土山一重，共三里抵其下。
现代文：岩洞在东面石峰的山麓，由独山走入山隘，越过一重土山，共三里来到洞下。
English: The cave is at the foot of the stone peak on the east side, from the mountain to the mountain pass, over a heavy earth mountain, a total of three miles to the cave.

古文：有石笋一圆，傍石峰西麓，岩在石笋之上。
现代文：有一根圆石笋，依傍在石峰西麓，岩洞在石笋之上。
English: There is a round stone pillar, leaning against the western foot of the stone peak, with a cave on top of the pillar.

古文：由南麓上跻，有两门并列，暗洞在东，明岩在西，二门俱南向。
现代文：远远望见正当山峰半腰，一个洞口向西高悬着，是西洞穿到后面另外的洞穴。由南麓上登，有两个洞口并列，暗洞在东边，明洞在西边，两个洞口都向南。
English: From a distance, the peak can be seen halfway up the mountain. A cave entrance hangs high to the west, and it is the west cave that penetrates to the other cave behind. Climbing up from the southern foot, there are two cave entrances side by side. The dark cave is on the east side, and the bright cave is on the west side. Both cave entrances face south.

古文：先入明岩，中高敞平豁，后一石蕊中悬。
现代文：先走入明洞，洞中高敞平豁，后面一朵石花悬在中央。
English: First, walk into Myeongdong. The cave is high and spacious, with a stone flower hanging in the middle.

古文：穿蕊而入，转门而西，又开一门，西向，亦明豁高爽，下临绝壁，其内与南门转接处，石柱或耸而为台，或垂而成龛，攒合透映，真神仙窟宅，雕镂所不能就者也。仍出南门，从其东北向，伛偻入暗洞。少下，洞遂穹然，篝火北入数丈，则玉乳倒垂骈耸，夭矫缤纷，由其腋透隙而入，少东转，垂柱益多。
现代文：洞口外边窄中间下洼，稍下走，洞于是育然隆起，点燃火把向北深入数丈，就见白玉状的钟乳石倒垂，成群耸立，屈饶曲折，缤纷争呈，底部很平坦。由钟乳石旁的缝隙钻进去，岔向西边，峡谷东面的缝隙都是不到几丈便到了头，唯有正北方穿过钟乳石间的缝隙进去，里面又宽起来。略微向东转，下垂的石柱更多。
English: The outside of the mouth of the cave is narrow, with a depression in the middle. If you walk down a little, the cave will suddenly rise. Light a torch and go north a few meters. You will see the white jade-like stalactites hanging upside down, standing in groups, twisted and tortuous, colorful, and the bottom is very flat. Drill into the crevice next to the stalactites and crawl to the west. The crevices on the east side of the canyon are all less than a few meters and reach the head. Only the north side goes through the crevice between the stalactites and widens inside. Turn slightly to the east, and there are more

古文：平底中有堆石一方，土人号为 棺材石 ，以形似也。
现代文：平坦的洞底中央有一堆方形岩石，当地人称为 棺材石 ，因为形状相似。
English: In the centre of the flat bottom of the cave is a pile of square rocks, known locally as "coffin stones" because of their similar shape.

古文：更入，从此西北穿隘而下，其入甚遥，闻深处有溪成潭，下跨石为梁，上则空透影。
现代文：再进去，从棺材石向东北转，石坡高低不一，石乳石笋参差而立。穿过石窍往北深入，又辟开一处最大的巨室，钟乳石柱环绕，开合无法探测。从此处向西北穿过隘口下走，进去之处十分遥远，听说深处有溪水流成潭，岩石下跨成为桥梁，顶上是空中透进来的明亮光影。
English: Entering again, turn from the coffin stone to the northeast, the stone slope is uneven in height, and the stalactite ridges are jagged. Go through the crags to the north, and open up the largest chamber, surrounded by stalactite columns, and the opening and closing cannot be detected. From here, go northwest through the pass, the place to enter is very far away, I heard that there are streams flowing into ponds in the depths, bridges under the rocks, and bright light and shadow coming from the sky at the top.

古文：时误从东转，竟从别窦仍下堆石傍。
现代文：此时错从东面转去，竟然从别的洞穴仍下到那堆岩石边。
English: At this time, I mistakenly turned away from the east and went down from another cave to the edge of the pile of rocks.

古文：欲复入觅西北隘，而易炬已多，恐一时不继，乃从故道出。
现代文：想再进去找西北面的隘口，但所换的火把已经很多，担心一时接不上，只得从原路出来。
English: I wanted to go in again to find the northwest pass, but there were already a lot of torches to replace, and I was worried that I wouldn't be able to catch up, so I had to get out of the original path.

古文：闻此洞东通迁江，虽未必然，而透山而东，即为那良贼寨之地，未知果有从出处耳。
现代文：听说此洞往东通到迁江县，虽然未必这样，但通到山的东面，就是那良盗贼山寨所在的地方了，不知果然有从那里出去的地方。
English: I heard that this cave leads eastward to Qianjiang County, although this is not necessarily the case, but it leads to the east side of the mountain, which is where the Thief's Village is located. I don't know if there really is a place to go from there.

古文：余所入止得三四转，度不及其十之一二，然所睹乳柱之瑰丽，无过此者，此洞既以深诡见奇，而西畔明岩复以明透表异，合之真成二美矣。
现代文：我所入之处只得以转过三四处，估计不到它的十分之一二，然而所看到的钟乳石柱的瑰丽，没有超过此处的了。此洞既以幽深诡异见奇，而西侧的明洞又以明亮通透显出异姿，它们合在一起真成了两处美景了。
English: I was only able to visit three or four of the entrances, and I estimate that I saw less than two-tenths of it, but the magnificence of the stalactite columns I saw did not exceed that of this place. This cave is strange in its deepness, and the bright cave on the west side is strange in its bright transparency. Together, they really become two beautiful places.

古文：出洞，仍下山西北行，一里半抵独山。
现代文：出洞来，仍下山往西北行，一里半抵达独山。
English: After coming out of the cave, he still went down the mountain to the northwest, reaching Dokuzan after one and a half miles.

古文：从其北而西，又一里半，饭于后营。
现代文：从山北往西，又走一里半，到后营吃饭。
English: From the north of the mountain to the west, walk another mile and a half to Houying for dinner.

古文：杨君统营兵骑而送余，遂下山北行。
现代文：杨君率领营兵骑马送我，于是下山往北行。
English: Yang Jun led the battalion on horseback to see me off, and then went down the mountain to the north.

古文：东西两山，一石一土，相持南下，有小水南流于其中，经后营而南，金鸡隘之北，乃西南坠壑而去，即琴水桥之上流也。
现代文：东西两面的山，一面是石山一面是土山，相对向南下延，有小溪向南流在其中，经后营往南流，到金鸡隘的北面，于是向西南坠入壑谷中流去，就是琴水桥的上游了。
English: The mountain on both sides of the east and west, one side is a stone mountain and the other side is a dirt mountain, extending relatively southward, with a stream flowing southward in the middle, flowing southward through Houying to the north of Jingu Pass, and then falling to the southwest into the middle of the valley, which is the upstream of Qinshui Bridge.

古文：从此北望，直北甚遥；南望则金鸡石峰若当门之标。
现代文：从此处向北望去，正北延伸很远；向南望去，金鸡峰耸立如立在洞口的标杆。
English: Looking north from here, due north stretches far away; looking south, Jinji peak stands tall as a benchmark at the mouth of the cave.

古文：后营土山头南尾北，中悬两界之中，西南走而尽于三里，遂结为土脉之尽局云。
现代文：后营的土山起于南面，止于北面，中间悬隔在两列山之中，向西南延伸而后在三里城到了尽头，终于盘结为土山，是山脉的尽头处。
English: The mound of soil in the rear camp rises in the south, stops in the north, is suspended in the middle between two rows of mountains, extends to the southwest, and then comes to an end in Sanli City, and finally coils into a mound of soil, which is the end of the mountain range.

古文：北行八里，有土脊自西而东，横属于两界之中，则南北分水之脊也，南入于杨渡，而北遂入罗木渡焉。
现代文：往北行八里，有土山山脊自西延向东，横向连接在两列山的中间，是南北分水的山脊，南面的流入洋渡，而北面的便流入罗木渡。
English: Eight miles to the north, there is a dirt mountain ridge stretching from west to east, horizontally connected in the middle of two rows of mountains. It is the ridge of the north-south watershed. The south side flows into the ocean, and the north side flows into the river.

古文：逾脊北二里，为那力村，又三里为玄岸村。
现代文：越过山脊向北走二里，是那力村，又走三里是玄岸村。
English: Two miles over the ridge to the north is Nali Village, and three miles further is Huanan Village.

古文：二村俱在东石峰之下，昔皆民居，今为八寨贼所踞矣。
现代文：两村都在东面的石峰之下，从前都有百姓居住，如今被八寨的盗贼盘踞着了。
English: Both villages are under the stone peak in the east, and were once inhabited by commoners. Now they are occupied by thieves from the eight villages.

古文：又北三里，水从直北去，路西穿土山之腋。
现代文：又向北三里，水流从正北流去，路向西穿过土山的侧旁。
English: Another three miles to the north, the water flows from due north, and the road goes west through the side of the earthen hill.

古文：一里西下，则土山复东西夹而成坞。
现代文：向西下走一里，就见土山又在东西两面夹成山坞。
English: Walk one mile to the west and you will see that the hill is again sandwiched between the east and west into a dock.

古文：又北十里，是为蓝涧，俱贼村矣。
现代文：又向北十里，这是蓝涧，都是盗贼盘踞的村庄了。
English: Another ten miles to the north, this is the Blue Heron, a village infested with thieves.

古文：贼首蓝海潮者，家西山下。
现代文：盗贼首领蓝海潮，家在西山下。
English: The leader of the thieves, the Blue Tide, lives at the foot of the West Mountain.

古文：有涧从其前北流，溯之行，北一里半，有石山突于坞东，由其西麓逾小坡，即为周安界矣。
现代文：有山涧从村前往北流，溯涧行，向北一里半，有座石山突起在山坞东边，由石山西麓越过小坡，就是周安镇的地界了。
English: There is a mountain ridge from the village to the north stream, tracing the ridge and going north for a mile and a half. There is a stone mountain protruding on the east side of the dock, crossing the slope from the west foot of the stone mountain, which is the boundary of Zhou'an Town.

古文：又二里，一村在东山麓，曰朝蓝。
现代文：又走二里，一个村庄在东山山麓，叫朝蓝。
English: Another two miles away, a village at the foot of Dongshan Mountain, called Chaolan.

古文：前涧中有潭，深汇澄澈，自是而北，遂成拖碧漾翠之流，所云 蓝涧 者，岂以此耶？
现代文：村前山涧中有个水潭，蓄水深碧澄澈，从这里往北，便成了拖碧漾翠的水流，所谓的 蓝涧 ，莫非是因为这个吗？
English: There is a pool in the foothills in front of the village. The water storage is deep and clear. From here to the north, it has become a stream of water, the so-called blue ripple. Is it because of this?

古文：由蓝涧而北抵罗木渡，南抵左营，中开天成直夹，皆土山也。其两石山：西为寨垒、都者、剥丁，东为罗洪、那良。
现代文：蓝涧本来是三里顺业里的属地。如今南边到达那力村山脊延过之地，全被八寨的余党所盘踞，而蓝海潮是他们的首领。
English: The Blue Lagoon was originally the territory of Sanli Shunyeli. Now, the land stretching south to the ridge of Narimura has been occupied by the remaining party of the Eight Villages, and the Blue Tide is their leader.

古文：东西皆贼薮。朝蓝昔本周安属，今北抵周安亦俱为诸蘁ｗù逆贼，造反者所踞，并周安亦岌岌矣。由朝蓝随涧东岸又北五里，转而东逾土山，北下一里，复行坞中。
现代文：朝蓝本来是周安镇的属地，如今往北到达周安也全被众叛贼所盘踞，连周安也岌岌可危了。由朝蓝沿山涧东岸又向北走五里，转向东越过土山，往北下山一里，又行走在坞中。
English: Originally, Chaolan belonged to Zhou'an Town, but now all the cranes heading north to Zhou'an have been occupied by numerous traitors, and even Zhou'an is in danger. From Chaolan, walk five miles north along the east coast of the mountains, turn east over the hills, walk one mile north down the mountain, and walk in the dock.

古文：三里，出坞。
现代文：三里，走出山坞。
English: Three miles, out of the dock.

古文：又西行一里，始见前溪从土山西畔北注，与石山西峡之涧合而东来，遂有汤汤之势。
现代文：又向西行一里，这才见先前的溪水从土山西侧往北流注，与石山西峡的山涧合流后往东流来，竟然有浩浩荡荡的水势。
English: Another mile to the west, we saw the previous stream flowing northward from the west side of Tsuchiyama, merging with the mountains of Ishiyama Nishi-kyo and flowing eastward, with tremendous water potential.

古文：涉溪北上，溪亦折而北，不半里，是为周安镇。
现代文：涉过溪水向北上走，溪流也折向北，不到半里，这就是周安镇。
English: Wading through the stream to go north, the stream also turns north, less than half a mile, this is Zhou'an Town.

古文：数家之聚，颓垣败址，在溪西岸，而溪东膏腴俱为贼踞，不可为镇矣。
现代文：是个几家人的村落，墙垣倒塌房基残破，在溪水西岸，而溪东肥沃之地尽为盗贼占据，不能成为镇了。
English: It is a village of a few families. The walls have collapsed and the foundations of the houses are broken. It is on the west bank of the stream, while the fertile land on the east side of the stream is occupied by thieves. It cannot become a town.

古文：所云镇者，是为周安，其西南为古鹏今作古蓬，其北曰苏吉今作思吉，总名三镇。
现代文：所说的镇的政区，这里是周安镇，它西南的是古鹏镇，它北面的叫苏吉镇，合称三镇。
English: The political district of the town mentioned here is Zhou'an Town, to the southwest of it is Gupeng Town, and to the north of it is Suji Town, collectively known as the Three Towns.

古文：盖界于八寨之中者也。
现代文：原来是隔在八寨之中的政区。
English: Originally, it was a political district in the middle of eight villages.

古文：今周安仅存，古鹏全废，惟苏吉犹故，昔有土镇官吴姓者，以青衫平民所衣服装居宾州，未袭其职。
现代文：今天仅存周安，古鹏全部废除，唯有苏吉仍然如故。从前有个姓吴的土镇官，以卑微的身份居住宾州，未承受官职。
English: Today, only Zhou'an survives, and all of Gupeng has been abolished, with only Suji remaining as it was. Once upon a time, there was a township official surnamed Wu, who lived in Pennsylvania in a lowly position and did not hold an official post.

古文：其子甫袭而死。
现代文：他儿子刚刚接受了官职便死了。
English: His son had just taken office when he died.

古文：后委哨官及古零司九司之一。兼摄之，而古零鞭长不及。
现代文：后来委任哨官及古零司兼任代理州职，可古零司鞭长莫及。
English: Later, he appointed a sentry and an old journeyman postmaster as acting state officials, but the old journeyman postmaster could not keep up.

古文：前年，八寨贼由此劫上林库银，为上林县官所申，当道复觅吴氏之遗孤仍袭。
现代文：前年，八寨盗贼由这里去抢劫了上林县的库银，被上林县县官申告，当局又找来吴家遗下的孤儿仍让他袭职。
English: The previous year, thieves from the Eight Villages went from here to rob the treasury of Shanglin County. They were reported by the county officials of Shanglin County, and the authorities also found the orphan left by the Wu family and still let him attack the post.

古文：其孤名承祚，才十二岁，父即前甫袭而死者。
现代文：那个孤儿名叫承柞，才十二岁，父亲就是从前刚袭职就死掉的人。
English: The orphan's name was Cheng Yao, he was only twelve years old, and his father was a man who had recently died in the line of duty.

古文：其外祖伍姓者号娱心，乃宾州著姓，游大人以成名者。
现代文：他的外祖父是一个姓伍的人，别号叫娱心，是宾州的大姓，是个与大人物交游成名的人。
English: His maternal grandfather was a man surnamed Wu, alias Yuanshin, the first surname of Pennsylvania, a man who became famous by mingling with great people.

古文：甫自宾州同承祚到镇，见周安凋敝，以承祚随师卒业于苏吉。
现代文：刚从宾州同吴承柞到镇上，见周安镇凋敝，让吴承柞在苏吉跟随老师学完学业。
English: He just came to the town from Pennsylvania with Wu Chengyao, saw Zhou'an Town wither away, and let Wu Chengyao finish his studies with his teacher in Suji.

古文：而伍适返周安，见余至，辄割牲以饷。
现代文：而姓伍的恰好返回周安，见我来到，就宰牲口款待。
English: But the surname Wu just happened to return to Zhou'an, and when he saw me coming, he slaughtered livestock to entertain me.

古文：土司以宰猪一味献客为敬。盖杨君昔曾委署此镇，见其送余，非直重新客，犹恋旧主也。
现代文：原来杨君从前曾被委任代理此镇，姓伍的款待我，不仅是敬重新客人，而且还怀恋旧主人。
English: It turned out that Yang Jun had previously been appointed as a representative of this town, and the surname Wu treated me not only with respect for new guests, but also with nostalgia for the old owner.

古文：是晚复同杨、伍二君北二里游罗隐岩。
现代文：这天晚上又同杨、伍二君往北走二里去游罗隐岩。
English: That evening, together with Yang and Wu Erjun, they walked two miles north to visit Luoyin Rock.

古文：岩在镇之西北隅，乃石峰西断处。
现代文：岩洞在镇子的西北偶，是石峰在西边断开之处。
English: The cave is in the northwest part of the town, where the stone peak breaks off in the west.

古文：盖大溪南经周安之前而北至此，有土垣一周，为旧宾州南丹卫遗址，乃万历八年征八寨而镇此者。
现代文：大溪从南面经周安的前边往北流到此地，有土墙一圈，是旧宾州、南丹卫的遗址，是万历八年征八寨时迁来镇守此地的。
English: The Daxi River flows from the south to the north through the front of Zhou'an to this place. There is a circle of earthen walls. It is the site of the former Pennsylvania and South Danwei. It is the town guard who moved to this place during the eight years of the Great Leap Forward.

古文：后卫移三里，州移故处，而此地遂为丘墟，今且为贼薮，可恨也。
现代文：后来南丹卫迁到三里城，宾州迁到原处，而此地便成为废墟，如今快要成为盗贼聚集之地，可恨呀！
English: Later, Nantan Wei moved to Sanli City, Pennsylvania moved to its original location, and this place became a ruin, now it is about to become a place where thieves gather, hateful!

古文：按《一统志》，罗洪洞在上林县东北四十五里，为韦旻，则罗洪昔亦上林属，而后沦于贼者也。
现代文：据《一统志》，罗洪洞在上林县东北四十五里，是韦曼隐居之地，那么罗洪洞从前也是上林县的属地，是以后沦于贼手的。
English: According to the "Historical Record," Luo Hongdong, 45 miles northeast of Shanglin County, is the place where Wei Man lived in seclusion. Luo Hongdong was once a territory of Shanglin County, but later fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：由土垣北直去为苏吉、罗木渡大道，由土垣西向入石峰隘，有数家倚隘侧，为罗寨村。
现代文：由土墙一直向北去是去苏吉、罗木渡的大道，由土墙向西走入石峰隘口，有数家人靠在隘口一侧，是罗寨村。
English: From the earthen wall all the way to the north is the road to Suji and Luo Midu, and from the earthen wall to the west into the Shifeng Pass, there are several families leaning against the side of the pass, which is the village of Luozhai.

古文：村前石峰特起，岩穴颇多，但浅而不深。
现代文：村前石峰独耸，洞穴很多，但浅而不深。
English: The stone peak in front of the village stands out, and there are many caves, but they are shallow and not deep.

古文：其西麓为罗隐岩，岩横裂如榻。
现代文：石峰西麓是罗隐岩，岩石横着裂开如像卧床。
English: The western foot of the stone peak is Luoyin Rock. The rock is cracked like a bed.

古文：昔有儒生过此，无托宿处，寄栖此中，题诗崖上，后人遂指为罗隐。
现代文：从前有个儒生路过此地，无投宿的地方，寄宿在这里边，题诗在石崖上，后人便指认为罗隐岩。
English: Once upon a time, there was a Confucian scholar who passed by this place. He did not have a place to stay, but he boarded here, and his poem was inscribed on the cliff. Later generations referred to it as Luoyin Rock.

古文：其题句鄙俚，而诸绕戎巡逻的军官过之，多有继题其下者，岂以其为崔浩耶？
现代文：他的题句十分粗俗，而出巡的诸将路过这里，有很多在它下面接着题诗的，难道把他当做是崔浩吗？
English: His epigraph is very vulgar. Touring dignitaries will pass by here, and there are many people who follow the epigraph below it. Do you think of him as Cui Hao?

古文：是晚还宿周安，作谢陆君书畀杨。
现代文：这天晚上返回周安镇住宿，写了感谢陆君的信交给杨君。
English: That evening, he returned to Zhou'an Town for accommodation, wrote a letter of thanks to Lu Jun and handed it to Yang Jun.

古文：十五日早雨霏霏，既饭少霁，遂别杨君，伍君骑而送余，俱随大溪西岸北行。于是东西两界俱石峰，无复土山中间矣。北六里，山峡中拓，聚落倚西峰下，是为苏吉镇。
现代文：先向北涉过一条小溪，又向北涉过一涧，水流都是向东流入大溪。共走四里，小峰当坞而立，中间嵌空，洞穴很多，是下游的镇山，也像三里的独山，只是南北方位变换了而已。向北六里，山峡中间拓展开，一个村落靠在西峰下，这是苏吉镇。
English: First, I waded through a small stream to the north, and then waded through a gully to the north, and the water flowed into the big stream to the east. I walked a total of four miles, the small peak was docked, the middle was hollowed out, there were many caves, it was the downstream town mountain, and it was also like a three-mile mountain, but the north-south position had changed. Six miles to the north, the middle of the mountain gorge was expanded, and a village was located under the west peak, which was Suji Town.

古文：伍君留余入头目栏，令承祚及其师出见，欲强饭；余急辞之出，乃以多人送余行。
现代文：伍君留我进入头目的竹楼中，命令吴承作及他的老师出来见我，想强留吃饭；我急忙告辞他们出来，于是派了很多人为我送行。
English: Wu Jun left me to enter the bamboo building of the leader, ordered Wu Cheng Zuo and his teacher to come out to see me and wanted to force me to stay for dinner; I hurriedly said goodbye to them and sent many people to see me off.

古文：又北三里，又有土山突两界石山中，于是升陟高下，俱随两石山之麓，而流溪渐薄迫近东界，相去差远矣。
现代文：又向北三里，又有土山突起在两列石山之中，从这里起上上下下地爬升，都是沿着两面石山的山麓，而溪流渐渐逼近东面一列山，相距较远了。
English: Another three miles to the north, there is also a dirt hill protruding in the middle of the two rows of stone mountains. From here, it climbs up and down, along the foothills of the two stone mountains, while the stream gradually approaches the mountain row in the east, and the distance is farther.

古文：又北十五里，则一江西自万峰石峡中破隘而出，横流东去，复破万峰入峡，则都泥江即红水河也。
现代文：又向北走十五里，就见一条江水从西面的万峰石峡中冲破隘口流出，横向流往东去，再度冲破万峰流入峡中，就是都泥江了。
English: Another fifteen miles to the north, I saw a river of water breaking through the pass in the stone gorge of Wanfeng in the west and flowing out, flowing horizontally to the east, breaking through Wanfeng again and flowing into the gorge. It was a muddy river.

古文：有刳木小舟二以渡人，而马浮江以渡。
现代文：有两条用树挖空的独木小舟渡人，而马浮在江中渡过去。
English: Two canoes hollowed out of trees ferry people across, while a horse floats across the river.

古文：江阔与太平之左江、隆安之右江相似，而两岸甚峻，江嵌深崖间，渊碧深沉，盖当水涸时无复浊流渰漫上色也。
现代文：江面宽处与太平府的左江、隆安县的右江相似，但两岸非常高峻，江流嵌在深深的山崖之间，江水澄碧深沉，大概是正当江水干涸时节不再有浊流漫淹染上颜色了。
English: The width of the river is similar to that of the Zuo River in Taiping Prefecture and the Zuo River in Long'an County, but the banks are very high. The river flows between deep cliffs, and the water is clear and deep. It is probably just when the river dries up that there is no longer a turbulent current to color it.

古文：其江自曲靖东山发源，径沾益而北，普安而南，所谓北盘江是也。
现代文：此江从曲靖东山发源，经沾益州往北流，经普安州往南流，就是所谓的北盘江了。
English: This river originates from the eastern mountains of Qujing and flows northward through Zhanyizhou and southward through Pu'an. It is the so-called Beipan River.

古文：土人云自利州、那地至此，第不知南盘之在阿迷、弥勒者，亦合此否？
现代文：当地人说是从利州、那地州流到此地的，但不知南盘江是从阿迷州、弥勒州发源的水流，也汇合进这条江里没有？
English: Locals say that it flows from Lizhou and Nanji Prefecture to this place, but do they not know that the Nanpan River is a water flow originating from Amizhou and Maile Prefecture, and has it also merged into this river?

古文：渡江而北，饭于罗木堡今作墨，乃万历八年征八寨时所置者。
现代文：渡到江北岸，在罗木堡吃饭，是万历八年征八寨时设置的。
English: Crossing to the north bank of the river and having dinner at Luo Mu Fort was set up during the eight years of the Great Leap Forward.

古文：堡兵五十余家，其头目为王姓，泣而诉予，为土贼黄天台、王平原所侵，近伤其人，掳其赀，求余入府乞示。
现代文：堡内驻军有五十多家，他们的头目姓王，哭着告诉我，被当地盗贼黄天台、王平原侵扰，近来伤了他的人，抢走了他们的资财，求我进府后去请求指示。
English: There were more than fifty soldiers stationed in the fort. Their leader, surnamed Wang Ru, told me in tears that he had been disturbed by the local thieves Huang Tiantai and Wang Pingyuan, who had recently injured his men and robbed them of their wealth. He begged me to go to the palace and ask for instructions.

古文：余以其送人少，不之许。
现代文：我因为他送行的人少，没有答应他。
English: I did not allow him to go because there were not enough people to see him off.

古文：其地已属忻城，而是堡则隶于庆远，以忻城土司也。
现代文：此地已属于忻城县，但此堡却隶属于庆远府，因为忻城县是土司。
English: This place already belongs to Licheng County, but this castle belongs to Qingyuan Prefecture, because Licheng County is the local government.

古文：宾庆之分南北，以江为界。
现代文：宾州县、庆远府分在南北，以都泥江为界。
English: Pengzhou County and Qingyuan Prefecture are divided into north and south, with the Mud River as the boundary.

古文：堡北，东西两界石山复遥列，而土山则盘错于中。
现代文：罗木堡北面，东西两列石山又远远排列，而土山便盘绕错落在其中。
English: On the north side of the castle, the two rows of stone mountains to the east and west are far away, and the earthen mounds are coiled and jumbled in the middle.

古文：北复有小江，北自山寨而来，山寨者，即永定土司也。
现代文：北面又有条小江，从北面的山寨流来，沿着东山往南流入都泥江。
English: There is also a small river to the north, which flows from the cottage to the north and flows south along the Dongshan into the Du Dijiang River.

古文：循东山而南入都泥。路循西畔石山北上二十里，有村倚西山之麓，曰龙头村。村后石山之西，皆瑶人地。
现代文：路沿西侧的石山向北上行二十里，有个村庄靠在西山山麓，叫龙头村。村后石山的西面，都是瑶人的地方。
English: There is a village at the foot of Xishan Mountain, called Longtou Village, about 20 miles north of the road along the west side of Shishan Mountain. Behind the village, on the west side of Shishan Mountain, is a place full of people.

古文：盖自都泥江北，罗木堡西已然矣。
现代文：大体上自都泥江以北，罗木堡以西已是这样了。
English: In general, this has been the case north of the Mud River from the capital and west of Lomiborg.

古文：龙头村之东有水，一自北来者，永定之水也；一自东来者，忻城之水也。
现代文：龙头村的东边有水流，一条自北面流来的，是源自永定司的水流；一条自东面流来的，是源自忻城县的水流。
English: There is a stream on the east side of Longtou village. A stream flowing from the north side is the water flow from Yongdingzi; a stream flowing from the east side is the water flow from Fucheng County.

古文：二水合于村前，即南流而合罗木下流者也。
现代文：两条水流在村前合流，马上往南流而后会合罗木渡下游的水流。
English: The two streams meet in front of the village, immediately flow south and then join the downstream stream of Luo Midu.

古文：又北二里为古勒村，村在平坞中。
现代文：又向北二里是古勒村，村子在平坦的山坞中。
English: Two miles further north is the village of Guler, nestled in a flat hillside.

古文：村北三里，复逼小山西岸行，又五里，有小村倚西峰之麓，又有小水西自石峰下涌穴而出，东流而注于小江。
现代文：从村北走三里，又逼近小山沿小江的西岸走，又是五里，有个小村子背靠西峰的山麓，又有条小溪自西面的石峰下从洞穴中涌出来，向东流注于小江中。
English: From the north of the village, walk three miles, then approach the hill and walk along the west bank of the creek, another five miles, there is a small village at the foot of the west peak, and a stream gushes out of the cave under the western stone peak and flows eastward into the creek.

古文：截流渡小水北，又东上土坡，是为高阳站。
现代文：横渡到小溪北岸，又向东爬上土坡，这是高阳站。
English: Cross to the north bank of the creek and climb up the dirt slope to the east. This is Goyang Station.

古文：自三里马至周安，周安马至高阳高阳换舆直送至府。
现代文：这个骤站在小江的西面，渡过江往东穿越山峰隘口进去，共十五里便到忻城；溯小江往北走五十里到达永定司，再走六十里便到庆远府，也是征八寨时设置的。
English: This sudden stop on the west side of the Xiao Jiang, crossing the river to the east through the mountain pass, a total of fifteen miles to Lucheng; fifty miles north along the Xiao Jiang to Yongding, and another sixty miles to Qingyuan. It was also set up when the eight villages were requisitioned.

古文：此地无虞，可行矣。
现代文：骚站是忻城的头目管理的。
English: Suo Station is managed by the leader of Lucheng.

古文：是日共行五十余里，以渡罗木难也。
现代文：这天共走五十多里，因为渡罗木渡困难。
English: On this day, we walked a total of more than fifty miles, because it was difficult to cross Luo Mu.

古文：十六日晨起，阴如故。
现代文：十六日早晨起床，天照旧阴着。
English: I got up in the morning on the 16th, and it was still cloudy.

古文：夫自龙头村来，始缚竹为舆，既而北行。
现代文：脚夫从龙头村来，开始用竹竿绑成滑竿，不久往北行。
English: The porter came from Longtou village, began to tie a bamboo pole into a pole, and soon headed north.

古文：十里，东西两界石山中土山渐无，有石山突路左，小江由其东，路出其西。
现代文：十里，东西两列石山中土山渐渐消失，有石山突立在路左，小江由山东面流，路经过山的西边。
English: For ten miles, two rows of stone mountains in the east and west gradually disappear. There is a stone mountain protruding on the left side of the road, a small river flows from the east side of the mountain, and the road passes through the west side of the mountain.

古文：又北十里，西界石山突而东出，是为横山，乃忻城、永定分界处也。
现代文：又向北十里，西面一列石山向东突出来，这是横山，是忻城县、永定司的分界处。
English: Another ten miles to the north, a line of stone mountains in the west protrudes to the east. This is Hengshan, the dividing point between Lucheng County and Yongding Division.

古文：缘山嘴盘崖北转，巉石嵚崎，中独淋漓滑淖，间有行潦停隙中，崖路颇高而独若此者，以上有重崖高峙，故水沥其下耳。
现代文：沿山嘴绕着山崖向北转，嵘岩高险，中间唯独有湿淋淋溜滑的泥淖，间或有流水停积在石缝中，山崖上的路相当高，可唯独此处像这样的原因，是由于上面有重重山崖高高矗立着，所以水滴落到这下面罢了。
English: Along the ridge around the cliff to the north, the rock is high and dangerous. In the middle, there is only wet and slippery mud, and occasionally running water is deposited in the stone cracks. The road on the cliff is quite high, but the only reason why it is like this here is because there are many cliffs standing high above, so the water droplets fall to the bottom.

古文：然磊石与密树蒙蔽，上下俱莫可窥眺。
现代文：然而乱石与密树蒙密荫蔽，上下都无法窥视。
English: However, the jumble of rocks and dense trees are shrouded in shadow, making it impossible to see up and down.

古文：间从隙间俯见路石之下，石裂成潭，碧波渊澄，涵影深閟，又或仰见上有削云排空之嶂，透丛而出，或现或隐，倏高倏下，令人恍惚。
现代文：偶然从缝隙间俯身见到路石之下，岩石裂成深潭，碧波渊深澄澈，潜影幽深，又间或抬头见到上面有削云排空的山峰，透过树丛现出来，或隐或现，时高时低，令人神志恍惚。
English: Occasionally, I leaned over from a crevice to see under the paving stones, the rock split into a deep pool, the blue wave abyss was deep and clear, the latent shadow was deep, and occasionally I looked up to see the mountain peak with the cut clouds above, emerging through the trees, either hidden or present, sometimes high and sometimes low, making me dizzy.

古文：既北，两界石山犹拓而北。
现代文：到北面后，两面石山仍然向北拓展。
English: After reaching the north, the two sides of the stone mountain are still expanding to the north.

古文：又八里，有石峰一枝中悬，坞分而为二，其一通西北，其一通东北。
现代文：又走八里，有一支石峰悬在中央，山坞分为两条，其中之一通向西北，另一条通向东北。
English: After another eight miles, there is a stone peak hanging in the middle, and the dock is divided into two, one of which leads to the northwest and the other to the northeast.

古文：余循西北坞溯流入，又五里，复有峰中突，小江缘其东出，路逾其西入。
现代文：我沿着通向西北的山坞溯江流进去，又是五里，又有山峰突立在中央，小江沿山峰东面流出去，路穿过山峰西面进去。
English: I followed the mountain stream leading to the northwest and entered the river. It was five miles long, with a mountain peak protruding in the center. The creek flowed out along the mountain peak to the east, and the road passed through the mountain peak to the west.

古文：其西又有永顺司，土官名邓宗胜。
现代文：又行二里，有数十家人依傍在中立山峰的北麓，这是头奎村，是因为突立在中央的山峰形状有如头盔。
English: After another two miles, there are dozens of families leaning on each other at the northern foot of the neutral peak. This is Toukui village, because the peak protruding in the center is shaped like a helmet.

古文：嘉靖间调二土司兵至吾乡剿倭者，所云狼兵是也。既饭，日色忽霁。
现代文：在姓何的头目家中吃饭。从横山的北面起，都是山寨的辖地。弘治年间调两土司的兵到我家乡清剿楼寇，就是所说的狼兵了。饭后，天色忽然晴开。
English: We had dinner at the headman's house, whose surname was Ho. From the north side of Yokoyama, it was the domain of the cottage. During the reign of Emperor Kōji, two soldiers from Tōji were sent to my hometown to clear out the robbers, the so-called wolf soldiers. After the meal, the sky suddenly cleared.

古文：北向坞中行，始循东界石山矣。
现代文：向北行走在山坞中，开始沿东面一列石山走了。
English: Walking north in the dockyard, I began to walk along a line of stone mountains to the east.

古文：五里，抵永定司，即所谓山寨也。
现代文：五里，抵达永定司，就是所谓的山寨了。
English: Wuli, arriving at Yongding, is the so-called cottage.

古文：土官所居村在西界石山下，欲留余止宿，余以日才过午，不人而行。
现代文：土司所住的村子在西面一列石山之下，想留下我住宿，我因为时间才过中午，不进村便走了。
English: The village where the toastmaster lived was under a line of stone mountains to the west, and they wanted to let me stay there for the night. Since it was just after noon, I didn't go into the village and left.

古文：渐闻雷声隐隐。
现代文：渐渐听到有隐隐约约的雷声。
English: Gradually, a faint rumble of thunder could be heard.

古文：又北二里，西截坞而过。
现代文：又向北二里，往西截过山坞。
English: Another two miles north and west past the dock.

古文：坞中有石潭，或断或续，涵水于中，即小江之脉也，水大时则成溪，而涸则伏流于下耳。
现代文：坞中有石水潭，时断时续，在潭中涵养着水源，就是小江的支流了，水大时就流成溪，干涸时便潜流在地下。
English: There is a stone pool in the dock. From time to time, the water source is maintained in the pool, which is a tributary of the creek. When the water is high, it flows into a stream, and when it dries out, it flows underground.

古文：于是复循西界石山而北，又五里，有峰当坞立，穿其腋而北，坞遂西向而转，于是出又成南北二界矣。
现代文：从这里再沿西面一列石山往北行，又走五里，有山峰正当坞中而立，穿过它的侧边往北走，山坞于是向西转去，到这里山又成南北两列了。
English: From here, I followed a line of stone mountains to the north along the west, and walked another five miles. There was a mountain peak right in the middle of the dock, and I walked through its side to the north. The dock then turned to the west, and here the mountains became two rows of north and south.

古文：其时黑云自西北涌起，势如泼墨，亟西驰七里，雨大至，避之石壁堡今作右别之草蓬下。
现代文：此时黑云从西北方涌起，势如泼墨，急忙向西疾行了七里，大雨暴降，到石壁堡的草棚下躲雨。
English: At this time, a black cloud rose from the northwest, like pouring ink, rushed westward for seven miles, heavy rain fell, and hid under the grass shed of the stone wall fort.

古文：石壁堡在北山之麓，堡适被火，欲止其间，无宿处。
现代文：石壁堡在北山山麓，堡中恰好被火烧过，打算停宿在其中，没有住处。
English: The stone wall castle is at the foot of the North Mountain, the castle has just been burned by fire, it is planned to stay in it, there is no place to live.

古文：半晌雨止，乃西二里，逾岭坳，此乃东西分水之脊也。
现代文：半晌雨停了，于是向西二里，越过岭坳，这是东西两面分水的山脊。
English: The rain had stopped for a while, so I headed two miles west, over the ridge, which is the ridge that divides the water on the east and west sides.

古文：南北俱石山如门，逾门西出，始扩大开，中皆土阜高下。
现代文：南北都有石山如门一样，穿过门向西出来，这才豁然变得十分开阔，其中都是高低不一的土阜，就是与永顺司接界的地区，南面就是成丛攒合的石峰，都是瑶人巢穴。
English: In the north and south, there are stone mountains like a door, through which the crane comes out to the west, which suddenly becomes very open. Among them are earthenware of different heights and depths, which is the area bordering Yongshun. In the south, there are piles of stone peaks, which are the lair of the egrets.

古文：循石峰之西麓，北向升陟土阜，其上多回环中洼，大者如塘，小者如井，而皆无水，俯瞰不见其底。
现代文：沿石峰的西麓，向北升登在土阜间，土阜上有许多四面环绕中央下洼之处，大的如水塘，小的似水井，但都没有水，俯瞰不见它的底。
English: Along the western foot of the stone peak, climb northward between the earthen mounds. There are many depressions around the center of the earthen mounds. The large ones are like ponds, and the small ones are like wells, but there is no water, and you can't see the bottom.

古文：北行五里，始下土山坞中。
现代文：水由地下流，这些都是其中下陷之处，全像在太平府见到的。往北行五里，这才下到土山山坞中。
English: The water flows underground, and these are the places where it sinks, exactly as seen in Taiping. Travel five miles north, and you'll find yourself in the middle of Tsuchiyama dockyard.

古文：其水东北去，路复北透石峰之隘，此处又石峰一支自西而东。
现代文：这里的水向东北流去，路又一次穿过石峰的隘口，此处又有一支石峰自西延向东。
English: The water here flows to the northeast, and the road once again passes through the pass of the stone peak, where another stone peak extends from the west to the east.

古文：故陆君不听余从泗城行，而送余由此，托冯与南丹导余焉。是晚宿东光栏上。
现代文：头目叫东光，说他的主人在青塘，今天暂且去了南乡。我拿出陆君的信命令他从速传递去。这天晚上住宿在东光的饮楼上。
English: The leader was called Dongguang and said that his master was in Qingtang and had temporarily gone to Nanxiang today. I took out Lu Jun's letter and ordered him to pass it on immediately. That night we stayed in Dongguang's drinking hall.

古文：十七日天甚晴霁。
现代文：十七日天十分晴朗。
English: On the 17th, the sky was very clear.

古文：从草塘北行，其地东西两界复土出排闼。
现代文：从草塘往北行，此地东西两列又有土山似门扉样排列。
English: Heading north from Caotang, the east-west two columns are arranged in a door-like pattern.

古文：先从东麓横过西麓，坞中有水成塘，而断续不成溪，亦犹山寨之北也。
现代文：先从东麓横过到西麓，坞中有水积成塘，但断断续续不成溪流，也像山寨的北面一样。
English: First, from the eastern foot across to the western foot, there is water accumulation in the dock into a pond, but intermittently does not become a stream, also like the north side of the cottage.

古文：塘之北始成溪北流，路从其西。
现代文：水塘的北面开始形成溪流往北流去，路从它西边走。
English: A stream begins to form to the north of the pond and flows northwards, with the road running to the west of it.

古文：从西峰北行五里，有山中坞突，水由其东，路由其西。
现代文：从西峰下往北行五里，有座山突立在山坞中央，水由它东面流，路由它西面走。
English: Five miles northward from the west peak, there is a mountain protruding in the center of the dock. Water flows from it to the east and takes a route to the west.

古文：入峡二里，东逾一隘又一里，复北行七里，又一小水横亘两山北口，若门阈然。
现代文：入峡后走二里，向东越过一个隘口又走一里，再往北行七里，又有一条小溪横亘在两座山北面的山口前，好像门槛一样。
English: After entering the gorge, walk two miles, walk one mile to the east across a pass, and then walk seven miles north. There is also a stream that stretches in front of the mountain pass on the north side of the two mountains, like a threshold.

古文：由其西隘出，于是东西两界山俱北尽，其外扩然，又成东西大坞矣。
现代文：由它西边的隘口出去，在这里东西两列山都到了北面的尽头，这以外十分宽广，又成了东西向的大山坞。
English: From the pass on its western side, where the two rows of mountains to the east and west reach the northern end, it is very wide, and it has become a large dock to the east and west.

古文：西界北尽处，有石突起峰头，北龛独有红色一方内嵌，岂所谓 赤心北向 者耶？
现代文：西面一列山在北面的尽头处，有岩石突起在峰头，北面的石完中单独有一块红色嵌入里面，莫非是所谓的 赤心向北 的地方吗？
English: There is a line of mountains in the west at the end of the north face, there are rock protrusions at the peak, and there is a single piece of red embedded in the middle of the stone finish on the north face. Is it the so-called red heart to the north?

古文：又北竟土坂五里，乃下坠土夹中，一里抵夹底。
现代文：又向北五里走完土坡，于是下坠到土山峡谷中，一里到达峡谷底。
English: He walked another five miles north to the end of the dirt slope, whereupon he fell into the dirt mountain canyon, reaching the bottom of the canyon after one mile.

古文：又从夹中行一里，得五蛩桥，有水自西而东出桥下，其势颇大，乃土山中之巨流也。
现代文：又从峡谷中行一里，走到五拱桥，有水流自西往东流出桥下，水势相当大，是土山中的巨流。
English: I also walked one mile from the middle of the canyon to the Wugong Bridge. There was a stream of water flowing from west to east under the bridge. The water potential was quite large, and it was a huge stream in the mountains.

古文：逾桥北又三里，复有石山一支自西而东，穿隘北出，其东即为南山寺，龙隐洞在焉。
现代文：越过桥往北又走三里，又有一支石山自西延向东，穿过隘口向北出来，它东面就是南山寺，龙隐洞在这里。
English: After crossing the bridge and walking north for another three miles, there is another stone mountain stretching from west to east, coming out of the pass to the north. It is Nanshan Temple to the east, and Longyin Cave is here.

古文：有水自其东谷来，即五蛩桥东流之水，至黄冈而分为二流，一东径油罗村入龙江下流，一西北经龙隐之前，而北过庆远东门入龙江。
现代文：有水流从它东边的山谷中流来，就是五拱桥下往东流的水，到黄冈便分为两条支流，一条往东经油罗村流入龙江的下游，一条向西北流经龙隐洞之前，而后向北经过庆远府东门流入龙江。
English: Water flows from the valley to the east of it, that is, the water flowing eastward under the Five-Arch Bridge. When it reaches Huanggang, it is divided into two tributaries. One flows eastward through the village of Yaoluo into the lower reaches of the Longjiang River, and one flows northwestward before the Longjing Cave, and then northward through the East Gate of Qingyuan.

古文：出隘北又皆土山矣。
现代文：出到隘口北边又都是土山了。
English: To the north of the pass, it's all dirt and mountains again.

古文：又五里，抵庆远南门今宜山县。
现代文：又走五里，抵达庆远府的南门。
English: They walked another five miles and arrived at the south gate of Qingyuan.

古文：于是开东西大夹，其南界为龙隐、九龙诸山，北界即龙江北会仙、青鸟诸山，而江流直逼北山下，江南即郡城倚之。
现代文：在这里拓开为东西相夹的大峡谷，它南面一列是龙隐洞、九龙洞诸山，北面一列就是龙江北面的会仙山、青鸟山诸山，而江流直逼到北山下；江南就是府城依傍之处。
English: Here, a grand canyon opens up, sandwiched between east and west. To the south, it is lined with the mountains of Longyin Cave and Jiulong Cave. To the north, it is lined with the mountains of Huixian Mountain and Qingjiao Mountain on the north side of the Longjiang River. The river flows straight to the foot of the north mountain. The south of the river is where the capital city is located.

古文：其城东西长而南北狭。
现代文：庆远府城东西长而南北窄。
English: Qingyuan Fucheng is long from east to west and narrow from north to south.

古文：从城南西抵西城外，税驾于香山寺。
现代文：从城南向西抵达西城外，停宿在香山寺。
English: From the south of the city to the west, arriving outside the west city, stopping at Xiangshan Temple.

古文：日才午，候饭，乃入城，复出南门，抵南山，游龙隐。
现代文：时间才到中午，等候开饭，于是进城。又走出南门，抵达南山，游览龙隐洞。
English: The time was only noon, waiting for dinner to start, so I went into the city. I walked out of the south gate, arrived at Nanshan, and visited Longyin Cave.

古文：先是，余过后营，将抵蓝涧，回顾后有五人者追而至。
现代文：这之前，我过了后营，将到达蓝涧时，回头看见后面有五个人追来。
English: Before that, I had passed through the rear camp, and when I reached the blue raft, I looked back and saw five people chasing behind.

古文：问之，乃欲往庆远而阻于蓝涧不敢入，闻余从此道，故随而往者。
现代文：盘问他们，是想去庆远府却被阻在蓝涧不敢进去的人，听说我从此条路走，所以尾随而来的。
English: Interrogating them, he said that they were people who wanted to go to Qingyuanfu but were blocked at Lanyu and did not dare to go in. They heard that I went this way, so they followed me.

古文：杨君令偕行队伍中。
现代文：杨君命令他们一同跟在队伍中走。
English: Yang Jun ordered them to walk together in a line.

古文：及杨君别去，一路相倚而行，送至香山寺乃谢去。
现代文：及杨君辞别离开后，我们一路上互相依靠，到香山寺他们才告谢走了。
English: And after Yang Jun's departure, we relied on each other all the way. They only thanked us at Xiangshan Temple before they left.

古文：及余独游至此，忽见数人下山迎，即此辈也，亦非庆远人，俱借宿于此。
现代文：到我独自一人游到此地时，忽然见有几个人下山来迎接，就是这些人了，也不是庆远府人，都寄宿在此地。
English: When I swam to this place alone, I suddenly saw several people coming down the mountain to meet me. It was these people, not people from Qingyuan, who were staying here.

古文：余藉之束炬携火，先游龙隐，出，又随游双门洞。
现代文：我借助他们捆了火把带上火种，先游龙隐洞，出来，又跟随游了双门洞。
English: With their help, I bundled torches with kindling, swam to the Dragon Hidden Cave, came out, and then swam to the Shuangmen Cave.

古文：既出，见此洞奥而多不能卒尽，而不忍舍去。
现代文：出洞后，见这里的洞又深又多不能在仓碎间游完，又不忍心放弃离开。
English: After getting out of the cave, seeing how deep and numerous the holes are here, I couldn't finish swimming between the debris, and I couldn't bear to give up and leave.

古文：乃令顾仆留宿香山，令一人同往取卧具，为宿此计。
现代文：于是命令顾仆留宿在香山寺，命令一个人一同去取铺盖，为住宿在此地做准备。
English: Therefore, he ordered the servants to stay at Xiangshan Temple, and ordered one of them to go with him to get a bedspread and prepare for their stay there.

古文：余遂留此，更令两人束炬秉火，尽探双门二洞之奇。
现代文：我就留在此处，另外命令两个人捆好火把举着，探完了双门洞两个洞中的奇境。
English: I stayed here and ordered two other people to tie up their torches and hold them up, and explored the wonderland in the two holes of the Shuangmen Cave.

古文：出已暮，复入龙隐，令两人秉炬引索，悬下洞底深阱。
现代文：出洞已经天黑，再次进入龙隐洞，命令两人举着火把拉住绳子，坠下洞底的深阱。
English: It was already dark when they came out of the cave. They entered the Dragon Hidden Cave again and ordered the two men to hold torches, pull the rope and fall into the deep pit at the bottom of the cave.

古文：是夜宿龙隐。
现代文：这天夜里住在龙隐洞。
English: That night, I stayed in Longyin Cave.

