古文：张臣，榆林卫人。
现代文：张臣，陕西榆林卫人。
English: Zhang Chen, Shaanxi Yulin Guardian.

古文：起行伍，为队长。
现代文：行伍出身，担任队长。
English: He came from the ranks and served as captain.

古文：蹻捷精悍，搏战好陷坚。
现代文：他矫健精悍，喜欢打攻坚战。
English: He is agile and tough, and likes to fight tough battles.

古文：从千总刘朋守黄甫川。
现代文：跟着千总刘朋防守黄甫川。
English: Following the general Liu Peng, defending the Huangfu River.

古文：朋遇寇丧马被围，臣单骑驰救，射中其魁，夺马载朋归，由此知名。
现代文：刘朋遇敌丧失坐骑被敌人包围了，张臣单骑前往救援，射中敌人的头目，抢夺一匹马载着刘朋回到军营，从此声名大震。
English: Liu Peng encountered the enemy, lost his mount and was surrounded by the enemy. Zhang Chen rode to the rescue alone, shot the enemy's leader, and snatched a horse to carry Liu Peng back to the military camp. Since then, he has become famous.

古文：旋代朋职，屡战跨马梁、李家沟、高家堡、田家梁、西红山，并有功，迁宣府膳房堡守备。
现代文：不久代替刘朋的职位，先后攻打跨马梁、李家沟、高家堡、田家梁、西红山，都立下战功，提升为宣府膳房堡守备。
English: He soon took the place of Liu Peng, and successively attacked across Ma Liang, Lijia Gou, Gao Jia Fort, Tian Jia Liang, and Xihongshan. He made great achievements in the war, and was promoted to guard the Xuanfu Canteen Fort.

古文：寇尝大入，环攻堡，欲生得臣。
现代文：敌人曾大举侵犯，围攻膳房堡，想活捉张臣。
English: The enemy had encroached on a large scale, besieged the dining room castle, and wanted to capture Zhang Chen alive.

古文：臣召麾下酌水为酒，欢呼歌饮，寇莫测所为，不敢登。
现代文：张臣召集部下以水代酒，高声欢呼，边喝边唱歌，敌人不知道他们在干什么，不敢登城。
English: Zhang Zhen gathered his subordinates to exchange water for wine, cheered loudly, and sang while drinking. The enemy did not know what they were doing and dared not enter the city.

古文：臣夜决围出，取他道以归。
现代文：张臣夜晚突围出堡，从其他道路返回。
English: Zhang Zhen broke out of the fortress at night and returned from other roads.

古文：上官壮之，擢延绥入卫游击将军。
现代文：上司奖励他，提拔他为延绥入卫游击将军。
English: His superiors rewarded him by promoting him to the rank of general in the guerrilla army.

古文：隆庆元年九月，土蛮大入昌黎、抚宁、乐亭、卢龙，游骑至滦河。
现代文：隆庆元年九月，土蛮大举入侵昌黎、抚亭、乐亭、卢龙，游骑到达滦河。
English: In September of the first year of Longqing, the barbarians invaded Changli, Futing, Leting and Lulong on a large scale, and rode to the Minhe River.

古文：诸将莫敢战，臣独勒兵赴之。
现代文：各将不敢作战，张臣独自一人统率部队前往。
English: The generals did not dare to fight, and Zhang Zhen went alone to lead the troops.

古文：辽帅王治道曰： 敌众我寡，往必无利。 
现代文：辽帅王治道说： 敌众我寡，前去一定不会有好处。 
English: Liao commander Wang Zhi Dao said, "With so few enemies, it will not be beneficial to advance.

古文：臣不顾，率所部千人擐甲直驰，呼声震山谷，寇以数骑尝，奋前斩之。
现代文：张臣不管这些，率领他的部队一千人穿着铠甲径直前往，呼喊声震动山谷，敌人派几个骑兵试探，张臣奋勇向前杀死他们。
English: In spite of all this, Zhang Chen led his army of a thousand men in armor straight to the valley. Shouts shook the valley. The enemy sent a few cavalrymen to probe, and Zhang Chen bravely moved forward to kill them.

古文：追至棒槌崖，斩首百十余级，坠崖死伤者无算。
现代文：把敌人追赶到棒槌崖，斩首一百十余级，掉下悬崖死伤的不计其数。
English: He chased the enemy to the cliff, beheaded more than one hundred and ten people, and fell off the cliff, causing countless deaths and injuries.

古文：事宁，蓟镇诸将悉获罪，臣以功增秩二级。
现代文：事情平定后，蓟镇各将全部被定罪，张臣因军功提升了二级官。
English: After the matter was settled, all the generals of Handan Town were convicted, and Zhang Sen was promoted to the second-grade officer for his military service.

古文：无何，寇潜入场子岭，参将吴昂被杀，命臣代之。
现代文：不久，敌人悄悄进入场子岭，参将吴昂被杀，命令张臣代理他的职位。
English: Soon after, the enemy stealthily entered Zhanziling, killed General Wu Ang, and ordered Zhang Chen to take his place.

古文：寻进副总兵，领总督标下事，改守蓟镇西协。
现代文：不久提升副总兵，管辖总督标下的事情，改派防守蓟镇西协。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of vice-commander-in-chief, and was put in charge of the affairs ordered by the governor-general, and was reassigned to the defense of Shanzhen West Union.

古文：万历初，录秋防功，进署都督佥事。
现代文：万历初年，记录秋季防守的功劳，提升张臣代理都督佥事。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he recorded the merits of the autumn defense and promoted Zhang Chen to the post of acting governor.

古文：炒蛮潜入古北口，参将范宗儒追至十八盘山，战殁，余众被围。
现代文：炒蛮偷偷进入古北口，参将范宗儒把他们追赶到十八盘山，战死了，其余的人被包围。
English: They sneaked into Gubeikou, and General Fan Zongru chased them to Jiaopan Mountain. He was killed in the battle, and the rest of the people were surrounded.

古文：臣急偕游击高廷礼等驰救，寇始去，坐镌一秩。
现代文：张臣急忙随同游击高廷礼等人飞奔前去救援，敌人才离去，由此降了张臣一级官。
English: Zhang Chen hurriedly followed the guerrilla Gao Tingli and others to rush to the rescue before the enemy left, thus reducing Zhang Chen to a first-class officer.

古文：五年春，以总兵官镇守宁夏。
现代文：万历五年春天，张臣以总兵官的身份镇守宁夏。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Wanli, Zhang Sen took up the post of commander-in-chief of Ningxia.

古文：顺义王俺答报怨瓦剌，欲取道贺兰，臣不可，俺答恚，语不逊。
现代文：顺义王俺答向瓦剌报仇，欲取道贺兰，张臣不同意，俺答很愤怒，出言不逊。
English: Shunyi Wang and I agreed to take revenge on Wawu, and wanted to take Dao Helan, but Zhang Chen did not agree. I was very angry and said some harsh words.

古文：臣夜决汉、唐二渠水，道不通，复陈兵赤水口，俺答乃从山后去。
现代文：张臣夜晚挖开汉、唐二个水渠，水淹道路不通，又在赤木口摆上阵势，俺答于是从山后离开了。
English: At night, Zhang Zhen dug two canals in Han and Tang Dynasties. The flooded roads were impassable. He also set up a position at Akagi-guchi. I replied that I would leave from the back of the mountain.

古文：三岁互市，毋敢哗者。
现代文：三年边境互市，没有人敢喧哗闹事。
English: After three years of border exchanges, no one dares to make a fuss.

古文：阅边给事中以苛礼责望，劾罢之。
现代文：阅边给事中用苛刻的礼节来责怪埋怨他，他被弹劾罢免了。
English: He was impeached and removed from office after reading a scathing indictment of him.

古文：十一年，小阿卜户犯黑峪关，守将陈文治以下俱逮系。
现代文：万历十一年，小阿卜户侵犯黑峪关，守将陈文治以下的官员都被逮捕入狱。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, the small Abdu violated Heisheng Pass, and the officials below the commander Chen Wenji were arrested and imprisoned.

古文：诏起臣副总兵，驻守马兰峪。
现代文：下诏起用张臣为副总兵，驻守马兰峪。
English: The following edict appointed Zhang Chen as deputy commander-in-chief and stationed him in Malan County.

古文：会朵颜长昂屡扰边，蓟镇总兵官杨四畏不能御，乃调四畏保定，而徙臣代之。
现代文：正好赶上朵颜长昂多次骚扰边防，蓟镇总兵官杨四畏没有能力防御，于是把杨四畏调往保定，而调张臣来代替他。
English: Just in time for Doyan Chang'an to repeatedly harass the border defense, the general military officer Yang Siwei of Handan Town was unable to defend, so Yang Siwei was transferred to Baoding, and Zhang Chen was transferred to replace him.

古文：长昂雅惮臣，使其从母土阿、妻东桂款关乞降，乃抚赏如初。
现代文：长昂一向害怕张臣，派他的堂母土阿、妻子东桂到关前乞求投降，张臣于是招抚赏赐长昂，双方和好如初。
English: Chang'ang had always been afraid of Zhang Sen. He sent his cousin Toa and his wife Dong Gui to Guan to beg for surrender. Zhang Sen then invited and rewarded Chang'ang, and the two sides were as good as ever.

古文：猛可真者，俺答弟老把都弃妾也，坐与小阿卜户犯黑峪关，罢岁赏。
现代文：猛可真是俺答的弟弟老把都遗弃的小妾，因为跟小阿卜户侵犯黑峪关，停止每年给她的赏赐。
English: It's really tough for my brother, who has abandoned his concubine, to stop giving her a reward every year because he and little Abdo violated Heihe Pass.

古文：既纳款，复猖獗，以谩词报边臣，而令大嬖只代为谢罪。
现代文：既求和，又猖獗起来，用傲慢的语言答复边臣，却派大嬖只代替她前来谢罪。
English: She both sued for peace and became violent. She answered the envoy with arrogant words, but sent Dazhao to apologize on her behalf.

古文：大嬖只者，顺义王乞庆哈弃妾也。
现代文：大嬖只是顺义王乞庆哈遗弃的小妾。
English: Daju was just a concubine abandoned by Shunyi Wang Qieqingha.

古文：臣等测其诈，令将士出塞捕二十三人，系之狱，令还我被掠人。
现代文：张臣等人预料到她的奸诈，命令将士出塞逮捕了二十三人，将他们投入监狱，命令归还被掠夺的我方人员。
English: Zhang Chen and others anticipated her treachery, ordered the soldiers to leave Tibet, arrested twenty-three of them, put them in prison, and ordered the return of our plundered personnel.

古文：猛可真以所爱者五人在俘中，许献还所掠，亲叩关索故赏。
现代文：猛可真因为她所爱的五个人在俘虏里面，答应归还掠夺的人员，亲自在关前索要原来给她的赏赐。
English: Furious because the five people she loved were among the captives, she promised to return the plundered people and personally demanded the reward originally given to her.

古文：臣等并召大嬖只入演武场，谯责甚厉。
现代文：张臣等人一起召见大嬖只进入演武场，严厉地谴责她。
English: Zhang Chen and others summoned Dazhao to enter the martial arts arena and severely condemned her.

古文：两妇叩头请死，乃贷之。
现代文：两个妇女请求自尽，于是宽恕了她。
English: Two women forgave her after she asked them to kill themselves.

古文：先后献还八十余人，中有被拘数十年者。
现代文：大嬖只先后送还八十多人，其中有被拘留达数十年的人员。
English: Of the more than 80 people who have been sent back by Dafu, only a few have been detained for decades.

古文：臣以功纪录优叙。寻进署都督同知，召佥书左府事。
现代文：张臣因功被表彰，不久提升代理都督同知，征召为佥书左府事之职。
English: Zhang Chen was commended for his service, and soon promoted to acting governor of Tongzhi, and was called up for the post of deputy governor.

古文：出为陕西总兵官，镇守固原。
现代文：派出提任陕西总兵官，镇守固原。
English: He was sent to Shaanxi to be appointed commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and became the town guard of Gouyuan.

古文：十八年春，移镇甘肃。
现代文：万历十八年春天，移镇甘肃。
English: In the spring of the 18th year of Wanli, he moved to Gansu.

古文：火落赤犯洮、河，卜失兔将往助之，其母泣沮，不从，遂携妻女行，由永昌宋家庄穴墙入。
现代文：火落赤进犯洮河，卜失兔将要前往帮助他，他的母亲哭着阻止他，卜失兔不听，于是携带妻子女儿出发，由永昌宋家庄挖墙洞进入。
English: Firefall red invaded the Minhe River, the rabbit will go to help him, his mother cried to stop him, the rabbit did not listen, so he set off with his wife and daughter to dig a hole in the wall from Yongchang Songjiazhuang.

古文：臣逆战水泉三道沟，手格杀数人，夺其坐纛。
现代文：张臣在水泉三道沟迎战，亲手搏击杀死数人，夺了他的战旗。
English: Zhang Chen faced the battle in Shiquansandaogou, fought and killed several people with his own hands, and took his battle flag.

古文：卜失兔及其党炒胡儿并中流矢走，臣亦被创。
现代文：卜失兔和他的同伙炒胡儿都中流箭逃跑了，张臣也受了伤。
English: The rabbit and his accomplice, Fried Hul, both ran away in the middle of the stream, and Zhang Chen was also injured.

古文：将士斩级以百数，生获其爱女及牛马羊万八百有奇。
现代文：将士斩首数百级，活捉卜失兔的妻子女儿以及八百多头牛马羊。
English: Hundreds of soldiers were beheaded, and the wife and daughter of the lost rabbit were captured alive, along with more than eight hundred cattle, horses and sheep.

古文：卜失兔仰天大恸曰： 伤哉我女，悔不用母言，以至此也。 
现代文：卜失兔仰天大哭，说： 我的女儿多么悲伤啊，真后悔不听母亲的话，落到今天这种地步。 
English: "How sad my daughter is. I really regret that I didn't listen to my mother and ended up where I am today.

古文：自是不敢归巢，与宰僧匿西海。
现代文：从此之后不敢回老家，跟宰僧一起躲到西海去了。
English: After that, he did not dare to return to his hometown and went to the West Sea to hide with the priest.

古文：已，属宰僧谢罪，其母及顺义王亦代为言，乃还其女，而使归套。
现代文：不久，卜失兔委托宰僧来谢罪，他的母亲和顺义王也为他求情，张臣于是归还了卜失兔的女儿，而让卜失兔回到河套，张臣因功晋级。
English: Soon, Bu Qiu entrusted the priest to apologize, and his mother and Shunyi Wang also interceded for him. Zhang Chen then returned Bu Qiu's daughter, and let Bu Qiu return to Hetao. Zhang Chen was promoted for his service.

古文：臣以功进秩为真。时诸部长桀骜甚，经略郑洛专主款。
现代文：这时各部落首领桀骜不驯，经略郑洛专门主张和议。
English: At this time, the leaders of various tribes were not submissive, and Zheng Luo specifically advocated peace talks.

古文：十四年春，总督杨文岳命从虎大威以五千人援开封，不敢进。其冬，擢保定副总兵，仍从文岳，数有功。
现代文：张臣认为这不是长久之计，上书陈奏八难点、五要点。大意说：边防薄弱，兵力单薄，粮饷匮乏，敌人骄横，各部落是归顺还是叛逆尚不清楚，应该恢复兵员，严格防止士兵脱伍，保证充足的粮饷，分散敌人的势力，严明赏罚。
English: Zhang Chen thought that this was not a long-term strategy, and he wrote a report on the eight difficult points and five important points, to the effect that: the border defense was weak, the military strength was thin, the food supply was scarce, the enemy was arrogant, and it was unclear whether the tribes would surrender or rebel. It was necessary to restore the soldiers, strictly prevent the soldiers from deserting the army, ensure sufficient food supplies, disperse the enemy's forces, and strictly reward and punish them.

古文：十六年卒。赠特进荣禄大夫，左都督。
现代文：并且因为伤势过重请求辞职回家，皇帝不同意。二年之后，称病离职。张臣先后换防四镇，名声传播于边防，是一代良将。
English: And because the injury was too severe, the emperor did not agree to the request to resign and go home. Two years later, he resigned, saying he was ill. Zhang Sen successively changed four towns, and his reputation spread to the border defense. He was a good general.

古文：董一元，宣府前卫人。
现代文：董一元，宣府前卫人。
English: Dong Yiyuan, former guard of Xuanfu.

古文：父旸，嘉靖中为宣府游击将军。
现代文：父亲董，嘉靖年间担任宣府游击将军。
English: His father, Dong, served as a guerrilla general for the Xuanwu government during the Jiajing era.

古文：俺答犯滴水崖，力战死。
现代文：俺答进犯滴水崖，董奋力作战，最后阵亡了。
English: I promised to attack the dripping cliff, and Dong fought hard, and finally died in battle.

古文：赠官锡荫，春秋世祀。
现代文：赠官荫子，每年都纪念他。
English: He was presented with an official gong and is commemorated every year.

古文：兄一奎，都督佥事。
现代文：董一元的哥哥董一奎，是都督佥事。
English: Dong Yiyuan's brother, Dong Yikui, is a duke.

古文：历镇山西、延绥、宁夏三边，以勇敢著。
现代文：先后镇守山西、延绥、宁夏三处边地，以勇敢著称。
English: He successively served as a town guard in Shanxi, Yancheng, and Ningxia, and was known for his bravery.

古文：一元勇如兄，而智略过之。
现代文：董一元像哥哥一样勇敢，而智谋却超过了董一奎。
English: Dong Yiyuan is as brave as his brother, but his wit surpasses Dong Yikui.

古文：嘉靖时，历蓟镇游击将军。
现代文：嘉靖年间，担任蓟镇游击将军。
English: During the Jiajing period, he served as the guerrilla general of Handan.

古文：土蛮、黑石炭等以万余骑犯一片石，总兵官胡镇御之，一元功最，超俸三级，迁石门寨参将。
现代文：土蛮、黑石炭等部以一万多骑兵侵犯一片石，总兵官胡镇率兵抵抗，其中董一元功劳最大，破格领取三级俸禄，提升石门寨参将。
English: More than ten thousand cavalrymen from the Civil War, Black Coal and other departments invaded a piece of stone, and the general officer Hu Zhen led the resistance. Among them, Dong Yifan was the most meritorious, receiving an unprecedented three-level salary and being promoted to the general of Shimenzhai.

古文：隆庆初，破敌棒槌崖，功复最。再进二级，迁副总兵，驻防古北口。移守宣府。
现代文：隆庆初年，在棒槌崖打败敌人，又以董一元功劳最大，再次连升二级，提升副总兵，驻防古北口，移守宣府。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he defeated the enemy at the stick and mallet cliff, and with the greatest merit of Dong 1 yuan, he was once again promoted to the second level, promoted to deputy general, stationed at the ancient North Gate, and moved to Xuanfu.

古文：万历十一年，以都督佥事为昌平总兵官，寻徙宣府。
现代文：万历十一年以都督佥事的身份担任昌平总兵官，不久迁往宣府。
English: In the eleventh year of the eleventh month, he served as the general officer of Changping in the capacity of the governor-general, and soon moved to Xuanfu.

古文：十五年，徙蓟州。
现代文：十五年迁往蓟州。
English: Moved to Ganzhou after 15 years.

古文：久之，劾罢。
现代文：很久之后，又被弹劾罢免了。
English: He was impeached and removed from office a long time later.

古文：郑洛经略洮、河，命一元练兵西宁。
现代文：郑洛为洮河经略，命令董一元在西宁练兵。
English: Zheng Luo was a strategist for Luohe and ordered Dong Yiyuan to train soldiers in Xining.

古文：火落赤入犯，一元击之西川，多所斩获。
现代文：大落赤进犯边疆，董一元在西川迎击，多有斩获。
English: The Great Red Army invaded the frontier, and Dong Yi Yuan met the attack in Xichuan, and made many gains.

古文：寻以副总兵协守宁夏，擢延绥总兵官。
现代文：不久以副总兵的身份协助防守宁夏，提拔为延绥总兵官。
English: Soon he assisted in the defense of Ningxia as a deputy general and was promoted to the post of general in Yancheng.

古文：哱拜之乱，套中诸部长悉助之。
现代文：継拜叛乱，河套一带的各部落首领都帮助他。
English: Tribal chiefs in and around Hetao have rallied to his aid.

古文：一元乘其西掠，轻骑捣土昧巢，获首功百三十，驱其畜产而还，寇内顾引去。
现代文：董一元乘継拜向西方抢劫时，率轻骑直捣土蛮老巢，抓获一百三十人，驱赶牲畜然后回师，敌人为了照顾老家就引兵离去了。
English: When Dong Yiyuan went to the west to rob, he rode a donkey and raided a barbarian's lair, captured a hundred and thirty people, drove away the livestock and then returned to the division. The enemy led the troops away in order to take care of his hometown.

古文：进署都督同知，入为中府佥事。
现代文：提升代理都督同知，进入朝廷担任中府佥事。
English: An acquaintance of the acting governor was promoted and entered the imperial court to serve as the center of government.

古文：辽东自李成梁后，代以杨绍勋，一岁三失事。
现代文：辽东自从李成梁之后，代替李成梁的是杨绍勋，一年三次失守。
English: In Liaodong Province, after Li Chengliang, Yang Shao Xun replaced Li Chengliang. He lost three times a year.

古文：尤继先继之，半岁病去。
现代文：尤继先接替他，半年之后因病离职。
English: He was succeeded by Yoko Ono, who left the post half a year later due to illness.

古文：廷议择帅，乃以命一元。
现代文：廷议选择统帅，于是任命董一元。
English: The court deliberated to choose a commander-in-chief, and then appointed Dong Yiyuan.

古文：泰宁速把亥为官军所杀，其次子把兔儿常欲复仇。
现代文：泰宁速把亥被官军杀死了，他的次子把兔儿老是想报仇。
English: Taining quickly had Hai killed by the government army, and his second son Toutiao always wanted to take revenge.

古文：从父炒花及姑婿花大助之，势益强。
现代文：他的叔叔炒花和女婿花大帮助他，势力日益强大。
English: With the help of his uncle and son-in-law, he became increasingly powerful.

古文：西部卜言台周，故插汉土蛮子也，部众十余万，与把兔儿东西相倚，数侵边。
现代文：西部的卜言台周，是原插汉土蛮的后代，有部众十余万人，跟把兔儿一西一东，遥相呼应，互相依靠，多次侵犯边境。
English: In the western part of the country, there are more than 100,000 descendants of the original Han barbarians. They follow the rabbit to the west and east, echoing each other, relying on each other, and repeatedly violating the border.

古文：至是卜言合一克灰正、脑毛大诸部，声犯广宁。
现代文：到这时卜言联合一克灰正、脑毛大各部，声称要进犯广宁。
English: By this time, Bu Yan had united all the departments with a gram of gray hair and a large head of hair, claiming that he would attack Guangning.

古文：而把兔儿以炒花、花大、暖兔、伯言儿之众营旧辽阳，将入掠镇武、锦、义。
现代文：而把兔儿利用炒花、花大、暖兔、相言儿的力量来营造旧辽阳，将要入侵镇武、锦、义。
English: And the rabbits will use the power of fried flowers, flowers, warm rabbits, and relatives to create the old Liaoyang, and will invade Zhenwu, Jin, and Yi.

古文：一元与巡抚李化龙策曰： 卜言虽众，然去边远，我特患把兔儿及炒花耳。
现代文：董一元跟巡抚李化龙商量说： 卜言人数虽然很多，但离边境较远，我军最担心只不过是把兔儿和炒花罢了。
English: Dong Yiyuan discussed with the inspector Li Hualong and said: Although the number of diviners is large, they are far away from the border. What our army is most worried about is just rabbits and fried flowers.

古文：今其众不过万骑，破之则西部将不战走。 
现代文：现在他们的人数不过万把骑兵，打败了他们，西部的卜言将不战而退。 
English: Now they number no more than ten thousand horsemen. Defeat them, and the Western Oracle will retreat without a fight.

古文：乃遣副将孙守廉驰右屯御西部，而亲将大军匿镇武外，为空营待之。
现代文：于是派遣副将孙守廉驰奔右屯防御西部敌人，董一元亲率大军隐藏到镇武的外边，空出大本营等待敌人。
English: So he sent his vice-commander, Sun Shulianchi, to Bentun to defend against the western enemy, while Dong Yiyuan and his large army hid outside the town and vacated the base camp to await the enemy.

古文：寇骑驰入营，大笑，以为怯，乃深入。
现代文：敌骑兵驰入营房，纵声大笑，以为董一元胆怯，于是深入前进。
English: The enemy cavalrymen galloped into the barracks, laughed loudly, and thought that Dong Yiyuan was timid, so they advanced further.

古文：官军忽从中起，奋呼陷阵，自午至酉。
现代文：官军忽然从阵中出击，高喊着冲锋陷阵，奋勇杀敌，从午时直到酉时。
English: The government army suddenly attacked from the middle of the battle, shouting the charge, and fought bravely to kill the enemy from noon to 3 o'clock.

古文：寇大奔，逐北七十余里，至白沙埚。
现代文：敌人全线溃逃，追击逃敌七十多里，到达白沙埚。
English: The enemy fled across the entire line, pursued the fleeing enemy for more than seventy miles, and reached Baishajing.

古文：俘斩五百四十有奇，获马驼二千计。
现代文：俘虏和斩首共五百四十多人，缴获牛马骆驼二千头。
English: A total of more than 540 people were captured and beheaded, and 2,000 heads of cattle, horses and camels were captured.

古文：伯言儿中矢死，把兔儿亦伤，余众终夜驰，天明驻马环哭。
现代文：伯言儿中箭身亡，把兔儿也受了伤，其余的人跑了一整夜，天亮时停住马围在一起痛哭。
English: The rest of them ran all night, and at dawn they stopped and gathered around the horse, weeping together.

古文：其明日，卜言台周入右屯，攻五日夜。
现代文：第二天，卜言台周进入右屯，攻打了五昼夜。
English: The next day, Buyan Tai Zhou entered Yutong and attacked Wuzhong for five days and nights.

古文：守廉等固守，乃引去。
现代文：孙守廉等人固守，卜言台周于是引兵离去了。
English: Sun Shoulian and others held fast, and Buyan Taizhou then led the troops away.

古文：时二十二年十月也。
现代文：这时是万历二十二年十月。
English: At this time it was October in the 22nd year of Wanli.

古文：捷闻，帝大喜，祭告郊庙，宣捷行赏，进一元左都督，加太子太保，荫本卫世指挥使。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，皇帝非常高兴。在郊庙祭天告祖，宣布捷报论功行赏，提升董一元为左都督，加封太子太保，荫封世代为本卫指挥使。
English: The Emperor was very pleased when the news of the victory reached the Imperial Court. At the Suburban Temple Festival, he announced that the victory had been passed down to the ancestors, and that the victory had been rewarded, and promoted Dong Yi Yuan to the post of Left Governor, Gaofeng to the post of Crown Prince and Taibo to the post of Commander of the Inner Palace Guards.

古文：兵部尚书石星以下亦进秩有差。
现代文：兵部尚书石星以下的官员也各有不同程度的提升。
English: Officials below the rank of Shangshu Shi Xing also have different levels of promotion.

古文：伯言儿最忄票悍，诸部倚以为强。
现代文：伯言儿最悍，各部都依靠他。
English: Bo Yan'er is the most powerful, and all departments rely on him.

古文：尝诱杀庆云守备王凤翔，坐革岁赏。
现代文：曾引诱杀害了庆云守备王凤翔，因此被革除了每年的赏赐。
English: He had seduced and killed Wang Fengxiang, the governor of Qingyun, and was therefore stripped of his annual reward.

古文：至是被歼，诸部为夺气，其部下遂纳款。
现代文：到这时被歼灭，各部都丧失斗志，他的部下于是向朝廷朝贡纳款。
English: By this time, he had been annihilated, all the ministries had lost their fighting spirit, and his subordinates had to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：把兔儿、炒花及卜言台周、瓜兔儿、歹青复临边驻牧，期以明年正月略辽、沈东西。
现代文：把兔儿、炒花和卜言台周、瓜兔儿、歹青又在边境放牧，企图在明年正月侵略辽阳、沈阳东西一带。
English: They also herded rabbits, fried flowers and divination into Taizhou, melon rabbits and gangsters at the border, in an attempt to invade Liaoyang and the eastern and western areas of Shenyang in the first month of next year.

古文：一元虑岁晏不备，为寇所乘，乃先西巡以遏其锋。
现代文：董一元担心时间晚了不加防备，将被敌人乘虚而入，于是先西巡来遏制敌人的锋芒。
English: Dong Yiyuan was worried that the time was late and he was unprepared, and he would be taken advantage of by the enemy, so he made a tour to the west to curb the enemy's edge.

古文：化龙亦留弱卒广宁，数西发以疑寇。
现代文：李化龙也将弱卒留守广宁，多次向西派兵来迷惑敌人。
English: Li Hualong also left the weak pawns in Guangning, and repeatedly sent soldiers to the west to confuse the enemy.

古文：一元提健卒，踏冰渡河，监军杨镐与之俱。
现代文：董一元率领精兵强将，踏冰渡河，监军杨镐跟他同行。
English: Dong Yiyuan led the elite soldiers to cross the river on the ice, and the supervisor Yang Jun accompanied him.

古文：度墨山，天大雪，将士气益奋。
现代文：翻过墨山，天降大雪，将士的斗志更加旺盛。
English: After turning over the mountain of ink, heavy snow fell from the sky, and the fighting spirit of the soldiers became more vigorous.

古文：行四百里，三日夜乃抵其巢。
现代文：行军四百里，三天三夜后才抵达敌人的老巢。
English: They marched for four hundred miles, and it took them three days and three nights to reach the enemy's lair.

古文：斩首百二十级，获牛马甲仗无算，全师而还。
现代文：斩首一百二十级，缴获牛马及兵器不计其数，部队完整地回来了。
English: One hundred and twenty heads were cut off, countless horses, cattle, and weapons were captured, and the troops returned intact.

古文：把兔儿以镇武创重，叹曰： 我竟不获报父仇乎？ 
现代文：把兔儿因在镇武受重伤，感叹道： 我竟然没有机会替父亲报仇么？ 
English: "I didn't have a chance to avenge my father," he said, lamenting that he was seriously injured in Zhenwu.

古文：未几死，其众散乱，诸部悉远遁。
现代文：不久就死了，他的部属全都作鸟兽散，其他各部也都远远地逃走了。
English: He died soon after, and all his subordinates were scattered like birds and animals, and the other departments also fled far away.

古文：一元以功进世荫二秩。
现代文：董一元因军功被增加二级官，世世代代荫袭。
English: Dong Yiyuan was promoted to the second-grade official due to his military service, which has been shadowed for generations.

古文：久之，以病归，命王保代。
现代文：很久之后，因病回家，命令王保代替他。
English: After a long time, he came home sick and ordered Wang Bao to replace him.

古文：朝鲜再用师，诏一元隶总督邢玠麾下，参赞军事。
现代文：朝鲜第二次打仗，下诏董一元隶属为总督邢的部下，担任军事参赞。
English: After Korea's second war, Dong Iyuan was assigned to the subordinates of Governor Chun, serving as a military counselor.

古文：寻代李如梅为御倭总兵官。
现代文：不久代替李如梅担任御倭总兵官。
English: He soon replaced Li Rumei as the commander of the Imperial Japanese Army.

古文：时兵分四路。一元由中路，御石曼子于泗州，先拔晋州，下望晋，乘胜济江，连毁永春、昆阳二寨。
现代文：当时兵分四路，董一元在中路，在泗州防御石曼子，先攻取晋州，占领望晋，乘胜渡江，接连平毁永春、昆阳二座敌寨。
English: At that time, the soldiers were divided into four directions, with Dong Yi Yuan in the middle, defending Shimenzi in Zhangzhou, first conquering Jinzhou, occupying Wangjin, crossing the river in victory, and successively destroying Yongchun and Kunyang.

古文：贼退保泗州老营，攻下之，游击卢得功阵殁。
现代文：敌人退守泗州老营，攻占敌老营，游击卢得功阵亡。
English: The enemy retreated to the old camp of Bozhou, captured the old camp of the enemy, and the guerrilla Lu was killed in action.

古文：前逼新寨。
现代文：前进直逼新寨。
English: Go straight ahead to Xinzhai.

古文：寨三面临江，一面通陆，引海为濠，海艘泊寨下千计，筑金海、固城为左右翼。
现代文：新寨三面临江，一面与陆地相连，引海水做濠沟，停泊在寨下的海船数以千计，修筑金海、固城作为左右的屏障。
English: Xinzhai is surrounded by the Yangtze River on three sides, with one side on the mainland. Seawater is introduced into the river as a protective barrier, and thousands of ships are moored in front of the village. On both sides of Xinzhai, there are two cities, Jinhai and Gucheng, which are its left and right wings.

古文：一元分马步夹攻。
现代文：董一元分派步、骑兵夹击。
English: Dong Yiyuan sent out marching troops and cavalry clamped down.

古文：步兵游击彭信古用大棓击寨，碎其数处。
现代文：步兵游击彭信古用大棒攻击寨，打破了很多地方。
English: The infantry guerrilla Peng Xingu attacked the village with a big stick and broke many places.

古文：众军进逼贼濠，毁其栅。
现代文：大军进逼敌人城壕，烧毁栅栏。
English: The large army pushed into the enemy's trenches and burned the fences.

古文：忽营中炮裂，烟焰涨天。
现代文：忽然军中大炮爆裂，火焰冲天。
English: Suddenly, a cannon in the army exploded, sending flames into the sky.

古文：贼乘势冲击，固城援贼亦至。
现代文：敌人乘机冲击，固城的援敌也到。
English: The enemy took the opportunity to attack, and reinforcements from Gucheng also arrived.

古文：骑兵诸将先奔，一元亦还晋州。
现代文：骑兵各将先逃跑了，董一元也回到晋州。
English: Each of the cavalry commanders fled first, and Dong Yi Yuan also returned to Jinzhou.

古文：事闻，诏斩游击马呈文、郝三聘，落信古等职，充为事官；一元亦夺宫保，贬秩三等。
现代文：消息传来，下诏斩游击马呈文、郝三聘，降彭信古等人的官职，充当事官，董一元也被剥夺了宫保，降了三级官阶。
English: The news came that the next edict was to cut short the guerrilla attack on Ma Xianwen and promote him to the third rank, reduce the official position of Peng Xingu and others, and act as the official concerned. Dong Yiyuan was also deprived of the palace guard and reduced by three levels of official rank.

古文：困变后，文焕父子归原籍昆山，卒。
现代文：很久之后，董一元就死了。董一元长期镇守边境，功绩显著，跟麻贵、张臣、杜桐、达云一样，是很好的边防将领。
English: A long time later, Dong Iyuan died. Dong Iyuan had been guarding the border for a long time, and his achievements were remarkable. Like Maguire, Zhang Chen, Du Tong, and Dayun, he was a good border guard general.

古文：萧如薰，字季馨，延安卫人。
现代文：萧如薰，字季馨，陕西延安卫人。
English: Xiao Ruxuan, also known as Ji Xin, was a guard in Yan'an, Shaanxi.

古文：万历中，由世荫百户历官宁夏参将，守平虏城。
现代文：万历中，由世袭百户任职宁夏参将，守卫平虏城。
English: In the Wanli era, the hereditary hundred households served as the Ningxia Sangzheng, guarding Pingru City.

古文：二十年春，哱拜、刘东旸据宁夏镇城反，谴其党四出略地。
现代文：万历二十年春天，継拜、刘东阳占据宁夏镇城反叛，派遣他们的党徒四出攻城略地。
English: In the spring of the 20th year of Wanli, Liu Dongyang occupied Ningxia Town and rebelled successively, sending their party members to attack the city and other places.

古文：拜子承恩徇玉泉营，游击傅桓拒守，为其下所执。
现代文：継拜的儿子継承恩攻掠玉泉营，游击傅桓拒守，被他的部下逮捕。
English: Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son Succession's son

古文：贼已徇中卫及广武，参将熊国臣等弃城奔，列城皆风靡。
现代文：叛贼已经进攻中卫和广武，参将熊国臣等弃城逃跑，邻近各城皆望风而降。
English: The traitors have already attacked Zhongwei and Guangwu, and the generals, such as Xiong Guotian, have abandoned the city and fled. All the nearby cities have surrendered to the wind.

古文：贼党土文秀徇平虏，独如薰坚守不下。
现代文：叛贼土文秀掠平虏，唯独萧如薰坚守不下。
English: The traitors of the local culture show off, plunder and level the enemy, but Xiao Ruxuan can't keep up.

古文：如薰妻杨氏，故尚书兆女也，贤而有智，赞夫死守，日具牛酒犒士。
现代文：萧如薰的妻子杨氏是前任尚书杨兆的女儿，贤明而足智多谋，支持丈夫死守，每天准备牛肉酒犒劳战士。
English: Xiao Ruxuan's wife, Ms. Yang, is the daughter of his predecessor, Shang Shu Yang Zhao. She is wise and resourceful, supports her husband's dogged defense, and prepares beef wine every day for the overworked soldiers.

古文：拜养子云最骁勇，引河套著力兔急攻。
现代文：継拜的养子継云最为骁勇，引导河套著力兔急攻。
English: Suebai's adopted son, Jiyun, was the most courageous and led Hetao in a surprise attack.

古文：如薰伏兵南关，佯败，诱贼入，射云死，余众败去。又袭著力兔营，获人畜甚多。
现代文：萧如薰在南关设下伏兵，假装战败，引诱叛贼进入伏击圈，射死継云，余下的叛贼逃跑，他又袭击著力兔的军营，夺得大量的人口、牲畜。
English: Xiao Ruxuan set up an ambush under the South Pass, pretended to be defeated, lured the traitors into the ambush circle, shot dead Zhuiyun, and the remaining traitors fled. He also attacked the camp of Liu Lixun and captured a large number of people and livestock.

古文：著力兔愤，复来攻，为麻贵所却，城获全。
现代文：著力兔气愤异常，又来进攻，被麻贵击退，平虏城得以保全。
English: With great effort and anger, the hare attacked again, but was repulsed by Magui, and the city of Pingru was saved.

古文：初，帝闻如薰孤城抗贼，大喜，厚赉银币，擢官副总兵。
现代文：起初，皇上听说萧如薰坚守孤城抗击叛贼，大喜过望，重奖银币，提升他为副总兵。
English: At first, the emperor was overjoyed to hear that Xiao Rucao had defended the lonely city against the traitors, and rewarded him with silver coins and promoted him to deputy general.

古文：六月，遂以都督佥事为宁夏总兵官，尽统延绥、甘肃、固原诸援军。
现代文：六月，萧如薰以都督佥事任宁夏总兵官，统辖延绥、甘肃、固原各路援军。
English: In June, Xiao Ruxuan was appointed as the commander-in-chief of Ningxia with the title of the governor of Ningxia, and he was in charge of the reinforcement of the troops in Yancheng, Gansu, and Guyuan.

古文：其秋，竟与李如松等共平贼，再进署都督同知，荫锦衣世指挥佥事；妻杨氏亦被旌。
现代文：这年秋天与李如松等共同平定叛乱，再次提升官职为都督同知，袭锦衣卫指挥佥事，妻子杨氏也被旌表。
English: In the autumn of that year, he and Li Rusong and others worked together to quell the rebellion, and he was once again promoted to the post of governor. They knew each other well, and they shared the anecdote of the commanding officer of the Imperial Guards. Yang's wife was also executed.

古文：二十二年八月，卜失兔西犯定边，阑入固原塞，副将姜直不能御，遂由沙梁聩墙入，直抵下马关，纵横内地几一月。
现代文：万历二十二年八月，卜失兔西犯定边，闯入固原要塞，副将姜直无法抵御，卜失兔于是由沙梁破墙而入，直抵下马关，纵横内地近一个月。
English: In August of the 22nd year of the Wanli calendar, Bu Guotong made his way to the west side of the fixed edge and broke into the Gouyuan fortress. Vice Admiral Jiang Zhi was unable to resist. Bu Guotong then broke through the wall by the sand beam and reached the lower Maguan, stretching across the inland for nearly a month.

古文：如薰免官，直下吏。
现代文：萧如薰被免官，姜直下吏部受审。
English: Xiao Ruxuan was removed from his post, and Jiang Zhizhong was put on trial.

古文：寻复以总兵官镇守固原。
现代文：不久，萧如薰又以总兵官之职镇守固原。
English: Soon after, Xiao Ruxuan took up the post of commander-in-chief of the garrison of Gouyuan.

古文：套寇入犯，击却之。
现代文：河套边寇进犯，萧如薰击退了他们。
English: When the Hezoutian Cormorants attacked, Xiao Ruxuan repulsed them.

古文：青海寇纠番族犯洮、岷，如薰及临洮总兵孙仁御之，擒斩三百四十有奇，抚叛番五千人，获驼马甲仗无算。
现代文：青海的边寇纠集番族进犯洮、岷，萧如薰和临洮总兵孙仁抵御，抓住、斩首共三百四十多人，招抚叛乱的番族五千人，缴获骆驼、马匹、甲仗无数。
English: The Qinghai border raiders gathered the Qiang people to resist the invasion of Linyi, Xiao Ruxuan and Linyi's general soldier Sun Ren, seized and beheaded a total of more than 340 people, lured 5,000 rebellious Qiang people, and captured countless camels, horses and armored vehicles.

古文：再镇宁夏。
现代文：他又镇守宁夏。
English: He also served as the town guard of Ningxia.

古文：银定、歹成数入犯，辄挫衄去。
现代文：银定、歹成的人数次入犯，都将他们挫败。
English: The number of people who broke into the bank and the number of people who broke into the bank have all defeated them.

古文：徙镇蓟州。
现代文：移镇蓟州。
English: Moved to Bozhou.

古文：久之，罢归。
现代文：过了很久，被罢官回乡。
English: After a long time, he was dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：再起故官，镇延绥。
现代文：后又恢复原官职，镇守延绥。
English: Later, he was reinstated in his former official position as the town guard of Yancheng.

古文：天启初，廷议京军不足用，召边将分营训练。
现代文：天启初年，朝廷议论认为京城的军队不够用，召回边将分营训练。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, the imperial court argued that the troops in the capital were not enough, and recalled the generals for battalion training.

古文：如薰典神机营。
现代文：萧如薰统帅神机营。
English: Xiao Ruxuan is the commander of the magic machine battalion.

古文：陛见，帝赐食加奖劳焉。
现代文：皇上召见他，赐予食物，嘉奖他劳苦功高。
English: The emperor summoned him, gave him food, and commended him for his hard work.

古文：明年，出镇徐州。
现代文：第二年出来镇守徐州。
English: In the second year, he became the town guard of Xuzhou.

古文：俄召还京，复以总兵官镇守保定。
现代文：不久，他又被召回京城，再次以总兵官身份镇守保定。
English: Soon after, he was called back to the capital and once again guarded the city of Baoding as the commander-in-chief.

古文：五年夏，魏忠贤党劾其与李三才联姻，遂夺职。
现代文：天启五年夏天，魏忠贤之流弹劾他与李三才联姻，于是遂被夺职务。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, Wei Zhongxian and others impeached him for marrying Li Sancai, so he was deprived of his post.

古文：祟祯初卒，赐恤如制。
现代文：崇祯初年死去，朝廷按制度予以赏赐、抚恤。
English: In the first year after his death, the imperial court rewarded and gave him a pension according to the system.

古文：如薰为将持重。
现代文：萧如薰作为将领老练持重。
English: Xiao Ruxuan is a veteran general.

古文：更历七镇，所在见称。
现代文：历守七镇，所到之处受到称赞。
English: He has been in charge of seven towns and has been praised everywhere he has gone.

古文：自隆庆后，款市既成，烽燧少警，辇下视镇帅为外府。
现代文：自从隆庆以后，和议互市既成，边境少有警报，朝臣将边镇将领视为外府之官。
English: Since the Longqing, peace talks and exchanges have been established, there are few alarms at the border, and courtiers regard the border town generals as foreign officials.

古文：山人杂流，乞朝士尺牍往者，无不餍所欲。
现代文：山人杂流，乞得朝士书信而来的人，没有不饱其所欲。
English: The miscellaneous stream of mountaineers, begging for letters from Asashi, did not fail to get what they wanted.

古文：蓟镇戚继光有能诗名，尤好延文士，倾赀结纳，取足军府。
现代文：守蓟镇的戚继光以诗闻名，尤其好延请文人学士，倾财结纳，取给于军中府库。
English: Qi Jiguang of Shouyi Town is famous for his poetry. He is especially good at inviting literati bachelors, pouring money into the treasury, and taking it to the military government treasury.

古文：如薰亦能诗，士趋之若鹜，宾座常满。
现代文：萧如薰也能写诗，文人学士趋之若鹜，宾客常常满座。
English: Xiao Ruxuan can also write poetry, literary scholars are in high demand, and the guests are often full.

古文：妻杨氏、继妻南氏皆贵家女，至脱簪珥供客犹不给。
现代文：妻子杨氏、继妻南氏都是贵族家的女儿，到了脱下首饰供给宾客还不能满足的地步。
English: His wife, Ms. Yang, and his step-wife, Ms. Nan, are both daughters of aristocratic families, and they are not yet satisfied with having to take off their jewelry to serve guests.

古文：军中患苦之，如薰莫能却也。
现代文：军中颇以为苦，萧如薰不能推辞。
English: Being in the army is quite a hardship, but Xiao Ruxuan can't refuse.

古文：一时风会所尚，诸边物力为耗，识者叹焉。
现代文：一时成为风气，各边镇的物力为之耗减，有识之士没有不叹息的。
English: It became a trend for a while, the material resources of towns on all sides were depleted, and people with insight did not sigh.

古文：如薰祖汉，凉州副总兵、都督佥事。
现代文：萧如薰的祖父萧汉，是凉州的副总兵、都督佥事。
English: Xiao Ruxuan's grandfather, Xiao Han, was the deputy commander-in-chief and the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：父文奎，京营副将、都督同知。
现代文：父亲萧文奎，京营副将、都督同知。
English: He knew his father, Xiao Wenkui, the vice-commander of the Beijing camp and the governor of the capital.

古文：兄如兰，陕西副总兵、都督佥事，前府佥书；如蕙，宁夏总兵官、都督同知；如芷，提督南京教场、都督佥事。
现代文：哥哥萧如兰，陕西副总兵、都督佥事，前府佥书；萧如蕙，宁夏总兵官、都督同知；萧如芷，提督南京教场、都督佥事。
English: Brother Xiao Rulan, Shaanxi deputy chief soldier, governor of Anji, former governor of Anji; Xiao Rulan, Ningxia chief military officer, governor of Anji; Xiao Rulan, admiral of Nanjing school, governor of Anji.

古文：达云，凉州卫人。
现代文：达云，甘肃凉州卫人。
English: Da Yun, the last guardian of Gansu's Liangzhou.

古文：勇悍饶智略。
现代文：勇敢骠悍有智有谋。
English: Brave and courageous, intelligent and resourceful.

古文：万历中，嗣世职指挥佥事。擢守备，进肃州游击将军。
现代文：万历中，世袭指挥佥事，提升为守备，升任肃州游击将军。
English: In the course of history, the hereditary commanding officer was promoted to guard, and promoted to the position of guerrilla general of Suzhou.

古文：炒胡儿入犯，偕参将杨浚击败之，迁西宁参将。
现代文：炒胡儿入犯，达云带领参将杨浚将他击败，提拔为西宁参将。
English: After stirring up Hu'er to commit a crime, Dayun led the general staff Yang Jun to defeat him and promoted him to the general staff of Xining.

古文：永邵卜者，顺义王俺答从子也，部众强盛。
现代文：永邵卜是顺义王俺答的侄子，部众很强盛。
English: Yong Shaub is the nephew of Shunyi Wang Ertao, and the club is very strong.

古文：先尝授都督同知，再进龙虎将军。
现代文：先前，他曾被授予都督同知，后升为龙虎将军。
English: Previously, he had been awarded the title of "Totoku Tongzhi" and later promoted to "Dragon Tiger General."

古文：自以贡市在宣府，守臣遇己厚，不可逞，乃随俺答西迎活佛，留据青海，与瓦剌他卜囊岁为西宁患。
现代文：自以为贡市在宣府，守臣待他很不错，不可逞强，于是随同俺答西迎活佛，留据青海，与瓦剌他卜囊每年成为西宁的边患。
English: He thought that Gongshi was in Xuanfu, the guards treated him very well, and he could not be stubborn, so he went with me to the west to welcome the living Buddha, stayed in Qinghai, and became a border disease in Xining every year.

古文：尝诱杀副将李魁。
现代文：他们曾经诱杀副将李魁。
English: They once booby-trapped Vice Admiral Li Kui.

古文：边臣不能报，益有轻中国心。
现代文：边疆的大臣不敢复仇，他们愈加有轻视朝廷之心。
English: The ministers of the frontier did not dare to take revenge, and they despised the imperial court more and more.

古文：二十三年九月九日，度将士必燕饮，拥劲骑直入南川。
现代文：万历二十三年九月九日他估计明将士必定宴饮，便拥劲骑直入南川。
English: On September 9th, 23rd year of Wanli, he estimated that the Ming generals would certainly have a banquet, so he rode straight into the South River.

古文：属番侦告，云设兵要害，令番人绕出朵尔硖口外，潜扼其背，而己提精卒二千与战。
现代文：归附的番人告知，达云在要害之地设有兵力，于是他命令番族绕过朵尔硖口外，悄悄地扼住达云部的背部，而自己率精兵二千人与永邵卜部接战。
English: The attached guard informed him that Duyun had troops in the critical area, so he ordered the tribunes to go around the outside of the Dol estuary and quietly strangle the back of Duyun, while he led two thousand elite soldiers to fight with Yongshaub.

古文：方合，伏忽起，寇首尾不相顾，番人夹击，大败之。
现代文：两部刚刚汇合，伏兵四起，边寇首尾不能相互顾及，番人夹击，大败永邵卜部。
English: The two departments have just merged, the ambush has begun, the border robbers cannot take each other into account, the guards have clamped down, and the Yongshao Department has been defeated.

古文：云手馘其帅一人，斩首六百八十余级。
现代文：达云亲手杀死敌帅一人，斩首六百八十余人。
English: Dayun personally killed one enemy commander and beheaded more than 680 people.

古文：其走峡外者，又为番人所歼。获驼马戎器无算。
现代文：永邵卜部退到峡外的人，又被番人歼灭，缴获骆驼、马匹、军器无数。
English: Those who retreated outside the gorge were annihilated by the guards, and countless camels, horses, and military equipment were captured.

古文：为西陲战功第一。
现代文：达云的战功在西部边境为第一。
English: Da Yun's war exploits were the first on the western border.

古文：所馘把都尔哈，即前杀李魁者，其地即魁阵亡处，时又皆九月也。
现代文：他所杀的把都尔哈，就是前面提到杀死李魁的人，那个地方就是李魁阵亡的地方，时间又都是九月。
English: The place where he killed Dulha was the place where Li Kui was killed, and the time was in September.

古文：先是，副将李联芳为寇所杀，总兵尤继先生获其仇。
现代文：先前，副将李联芳被边寇杀死，总兵尤继先将他的仇敌活捉。
English: Previously, Vice Admiral Li Lianfang was killed by a border robber, and the general first captured his enemy alive.

古文：边人以此二事为快。
现代文：边境的人以这二件事为快。
English: People at the border take these two things for granted.

古文：云既胜，度寇必复至，厚集以待。
现代文：达云已经获胜，估计边寇必定再来，于是将兵力集合，严阵以待。
English: Da Yun has already won, and estimates that the border robbers will certainly come again, so he gathers his forces and waits.

古文：逾月，寇果连真相、火落赤诸部，先围番剌卜尔寨以诱官军。
现代文：过了一个月，边寇果然联合真相、火落赤各部，先包围番族剌卜尔寨以引诱官军。
English: After a month, the border raiders successfully united the truth, the fire and the red departments, and first surrounded the tributary Zibo village to lure the government army.

古文：番不能支，合于寇，寇遂逼西川。
现代文：番族抵挡不住，遂与边寇合作，边寇于是进逼西川。
English: Unable to resist, the Banshu finally cooperated with the border robbers, who then forced their way into the West River.

古文：云督诸军营康缠沟，寇悉众围之，矢石如雨。
现代文：达云督帅诸军扎营康缠沟，边寇全部人马将它围住，矢石如雨落下。
English: The troops of the commander-in-chief of the Yangtze River Military Region camped in Kangcheng Ditch. The border troops surrounded it with all their men and horses, and the stones fell like rain.

古文：云左右冲击，自辰至申，战数十合。
现代文：达云左右冲击，从早上到傍晚，交战数十回合。
English: Dajun left and right impact, from morning to evening, the engagement of dozens of rounds.

古文：寇死伤无算，乃以长枪钩杆专犯西宁军。
现代文：边寇死伤无数，于是用长枪钩杆专门进攻西宁军。
English: There were countless deaths and injuries caused by the border raiders, so they specifically attacked the Xining Army with long-barreled guns.

古文：西宁军坚不可破，寇始遁，追奔数十里而还。
现代文：西宁军坚不可破，边寇开始逃跑，西宁军追击了数十里才回去。
English: The Xining Army was impregnable, the border robbers began to flee, and the Xining Army chased them for dozens of miles before returning.

古文：捷闻，帝大喜，遣官告郊庙，宣捷。
现代文：捷报奏上，皇上大喜，遣官祭告郊庙，宣布大捷。
English: When the news of the victory was announced, the emperor was overjoyed and sent an official to the suburb temple to announce the great victory.

古文：大学士赵志皋以下悉进官。
现代文：大学士赵志皋以下全部升官。
English: All university graduates from Zhao Zhixuan onward have been promoted.

古文：云擢都督同知，荫本卫世指挥使。
现代文：达云提拔为都督同知，世袭本卫指挥使。
English: Da Yun was promoted to the same rank as the governor, and became the hereditary commander of the Imperial Guards.

古文：寇岁掠诸番，番不敌则折而入寇。
现代文：边寇每岁掠夺各番族，番族敌不过转而入寇内地。
English: Border raiders plundered each tribe every year, and the enemies of the tribes turned to the interior of the country.

古文：及寇败远徙，云急招番，复业者七千余户。
现代文：等到边寇战败，迁徙远走，达云急忙招抚番族，恢复生产的有七千余户。
English: When the border raiders were defeated and migrated far away, Danyun hurriedly attracted tributaries, and more than seven thousand households resumed production.

古文：永邵卜连犯明沙、上谷，云并击走之。
现代文：永邵卜接连进犯明沙、上谷，达云一并将他击退。
English: Yong Shaub successively attacked Mingsha, Shanggu, and Dayun and repulsed him.

古文：初，南川奏捷，云已进副总兵，至是命以总兵官镇守延绥。
现代文：当初，南川奏捷，达云已升任副总兵，到这时朝廷命令他为总兵官镇守延绥。
English: At first, Nanchuan was successful, and Dayun had been promoted to vice-chief soldier. At this time, the imperial court ordered him to be the chief military officer and the town guard of Yan'an.

古文：未几，镇甘肃。
现代文：没有多久，镇守甘肃。
English: It didn't take long for him to become the town guard of Gansu.

古文：二十六年，永邵卜复犯西宁，参将赵希云等阵殁，云坐停俸。
现代文：万历二十六年，永邵卜再次进犯西宁，参将赵希云等战死，达云坐罪被停发俸禄。
English: In the 26th year of the Manchu era, Yong Shaub attacked Xining again, General Zhao Xiyun and others were killed in the battle, and Dawun was suspended from salary for the crime of sitting.

古文：甘、宁间有松山，宾兔、阿赤兔、宰僧、著力兔等居之，屡为两镇患。
现代文：甘肃、宁夏之间有松山，宾兔、阿赤兔、宰僧、著力兔等部在其间居住，屡屡为两镇的边患。
English: Between Gansu and Ningxia, there is Matsuyama, where the Binzhu, the A-Chakhu, the Zhaizang, the Xiangli and other tribes live, and which is often a borderline between the two towns.

古文：巡抚田乐决策恢复。
现代文：巡抚田乐决定恢复此地。
English: The district superintendent, Deng Le, decided to restore the site.

古文：云偕副将甘州马应龙、凉州姜河、永昌王铁块等分道袭之。
现代文：达云带领副将甘州马应龙、凉州姜河、永昌王铁块等分道袭击。
English: Da Yun led the vice-commanders Ganzhou Ma Yinglong, Liangzhou Jianghe, Yongchang Wang Tieguo and others in a separate attack.

古文：寇远窜，尽拔其巢，攘地五百里。
现代文：边寇远逃，将其巢穴全部拔掉，收复土地五百里。
English: The border robbers fled far away, all their nests were pulled out, and 500 miles of land were recovered.

古文：云以功进右都督，荫世指挥佥事。
现代文：达云因功升右都督，世袭指挥佥事。
English: Da Yun was promoted to the right-hand governor due to his merits, and the hereditary command was anecdotal.

古文：无何，青海寇纠众分犯河西，五道俱有备，献首功百七十有奇。
现代文：没有多久，青海边寇纠集部众分路进犯河西，明军五道都有防备，献首级一百七十多。
English: It didn't take long for the detachment of the Qinghai Border Garrison to advance to the west of the river. The Ming army was prepared in all five provinces, and more than 170 heads were presented.

古文：松山既复，为筑边垣，分屯置戍。
现代文：松山既然收复，达云修筑边墙城垣，分屯设置戍所。
English: Now that Matsuyama has been recaptured, it is time for Danyun to build a border wall and set up a post.

古文：录功进左都督。
现代文：表叙功绩，达云进升左都督。
English: In recognition of his achievements, Dagyun was promoted to left-wing governor.

古文：寇恋其故巢，乘官军撤防时潜兵入犯，云据险邀击之。
现代文：边寇又回到过去的住所，乘官军撤防时潜兵进犯，达云据险还击。
English: The border robbers returned to their former residence, and when the government troops withdrew, the infiltrators attacked, and Dagyun was forced to fight back.

古文：寇大败，斩首百六十。
现代文：边寇大败，被斩首一百六十人。
English: The invaders were soundly defeated, and 160 people were beheaded.

古文：加云太子少保。
现代文：皇上加封达云太子少保。
English: The Emperor confers the title of Junior Protector on Prince Dagun.

古文：寇益纠其党犯镇番，云及诸将葛赖等大破之，斩首三百七十余级。
现代文：边寇变本加厉纠合部众进犯镇番，达云和各将领葛赖等大破之，斩杀三百七十余人。
English: The border raiders intensified their attacks on the town guards, and Danyun and the generals, such as Gu Lai, defeated them, killing more than 370 people.

古文：帝为告庙，行赏，进云世荫二秩。
现代文：皇上为此祭告祖庙，论功行赏，将达云世袭之职提了二级。
English: The emperor told the ancestral temple about this, talked about the merits and rewards, and raised the hereditary position of Dayun to the second level.

古文：寇复入犯，云破走之。
现代文：边寇又进犯，达云击退。
English: The border robbers attacked again, and Dayun repulsed them.

古文：是时，寇失松山，走据贺兰山。
现代文：当时，边寇失掉了松山，占据贺兰山。
English: At that time, the border raiders lost Matsuyama and occupied Mount Horan.

古文：后连青海诸部寇钞不已，银定、歹成尤桀骜。
现代文：以后联络青海各部时时进犯，尤以银定、歹成最为凶狠。
English: After that, they contacted all the departments in Qinghai and attacked them all the time, with the most vicious attacks coming from Yinding and Yucheng.

古文：三十三年，连营犯镇番。
现代文：万历三十三年联合进攻镇番。
English: Thirty-three years later, the joint attack on the town watch continues.

古文：云遣副将柴国柱击之，寇大败去。
现代文：达云派遣副将柴国柱出击，边寇大败而逃。
English: Dayun dispatched Vice Admiral Chai Guozhu to attack, and the border robbers were defeated and fled.

古文：未几，青海寇复大入，将士分道遮击，生擒其长沙赖，余败奔。
现代文：没多久，青海边寇又大举内进，达云部分道拦击，活捉边寇头目沙赖，其余的败逃。
English: Not long after that, the Qinghai Border Cossacks made another large-scale incursion into the interior, and the Da Yun detachment intercepted them, captured the Border Cossack leader, Sharai, alive, and the rest fled in defeat.

古文：三十五年叙功，云增勋荫。
现代文：三十五年按功行赏，达云以功劳增加世袭荫庇的等级。
English: In the 35th year, according to the merit of performance, Danyun increased the level of hereditary shade with merit.

古文：是年，松山、青海二寇复连兵犯凉州，云逆战红崖，大获，斩首百三十有奇。
现代文：这一年，松山、青海二寇又连兵进攻凉州，达云在红崖迎战，大获全胜，斩首一百三十多级。
English: In the same year, the Matsuyama and Qinghai raiders attacked Liangzhou with a company of soldiers. Da Yun fought against them at the Red Cliff and won a complete victory, beheading more than 130 soldiers.

古文：云为将，先登陷阵，所至未尝挫衄，名震西陲，为一时边将之冠。
现代文：达云作为将领，冲锋陷阵，身先士卒，所到之处未尝受到挫折，名震西陲，为当时边将之冠。
English: Da Yun, as a general, charged into battle, leading the troops, and did not experience any setbacks wherever he went. He was famous for being the best general at that time.

古文：以秋防卒于军。赠太子太保。
现代文：秋天防守时他在军中逝世，赠为太子太保。
English: He died in the army during the autumn defense and was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：子奇勋，万历末为昌平总兵官。
现代文：儿子达奇勋，万历末年为昌平总兵官。
English: His son, Daqi Xun, was the general officer of Changping at the end of the Wanli era.

