古文：王融谢朓王融，字元长，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王融字元长，琅邪郡临沂人。
English: Wang Rong Zi Yuan Chang, a native of Linyi, Shiyan County.

古文：祖僧达，中书令，曾高并台辅。
现代文：祖父王僧达是中书令，曾祖高祖都位居台辅高位。
English: His grandfather, Wang Songda, was a Chinese scholar, and his great-great-grandfather, Gao Zu, was a high-ranking Taiwanese official.

古文：僧达答宋孝武云： 亡父亡祖，司徒司空。 
现代文：王僧达回答宋孝武帝时说： 先父先祖，司徒司空。 
English: In reply to Emperor Song Xiaowu, Wang Songda said, "Ancestors, ancestors, Szu Szu.

古文：父道琰，庐陵内史。
现代文：王融的父亲王道琰，任庐陵内史。
English: Wang Rong's father, Wang Daojun, was in charge of the history of the tomb.

古文：母临川太守谢惠宣女，惇敏妇人也。教融书学。
现代文：母亲是临川太守谢惠宣之女，是一位淳厚聪敏的妇女，她教王融写字学习。
English: Wang Rong's mother was the daughter of Linchuan Dazhong Xie Huixuan, an honest and intelligent woman. She taught Wang Rong to learn to write.

古文：融少而神明警惠，博涉有文才。举秀才。
现代文：王融很年轻时就特别机警聪慧，博览群书，有文才，被郡县推举为秀才。
English: When he was very young, Wang Rong was particularly alert, clever, well-read, and literate. He was nominated as an outstanding talent by the county.

古文：晋安王南中郎板行参军，坐公事免。
现代文：任晋安王南中郎板行参军，因某件公事处置不当而坐罪免职。
English: The king of Jinan, Nan Zhong Lang, was appointed to join the army, and was removed from office for misconduct in the handling of a certain official matter.

古文：竟陵王司徒板法曹行参军，迁太子舍人。
现代文：后义任竟陵王司徒板法曹行参军，转迁太子舍人。
English: Later, Emperor Yizong appointed King Jingtong to join the army, and transferred the crown prince to the army.

古文：融以父官不通，弱年便欲绍兴家业，启世祖求自试曰： 臣闻春庚秋蟀，集候相悲，露木风荣，临年共悦。
现代文：王融因为父亲官运不通达，所以从小就想振兴家业，奏报齐世祖要求自试。说： 我听说春天的黄莺秋天的蟋蟀，依照节气的变化而悲喜，遇露降木衰而悲，逢风和草荣而喜。
English: Wang Rong wanted to revitalize the family business since he was a child because his father was not qualified for government service, so he asked his great-grandfather to give it a try. He said: I have heard that the yellow maple in spring and the red maple in autumn are sad and happy according to the changes in the solar terms, when the dew falls and the trees wither, they are sad, and when the wind blows and the grass grows, they are happy.

古文：夫唯动植且或有心，况在生灵而能无感？
现代文：那些动物植物，都有这样的心情，何况是万物之灵的人，怎会没有这种感情?
English: Those animals and plants all have this kind of feeling, and what's more, those who are the spirits of all things, how could they not have this kind of feeling?

古文：臣自奉望宫阙，沐浴恩私，拔迹庸虚，参名盛列，缨剑紫复，趋步丹墀，岁时归来，夸荣邑里。
现代文：我自从沐浴皇恩，被从平庸的人群中提拔出来，加入官宦的行列，侍奉于朝廷宫阙，头戴官帽身穿紫袍佩带宝剑，在殿堂丹墀上急步行走，逢年节归家，夸耀乡里。
English: Since I have been showered with royal grace, I have been promoted from the mediocre crowd, joined the ranks of officials, served in the imperial court, wearing an official hat, wearing a purple robe and carrying a sword, walking briskly on the hall of fame, returning home on the New Year's Eve, and boasting in the countryside.

古文：然无勤而官，昔贤曾议；不任而禄，有识必讥。
现代文：但没有功劳而做官，不承担职责而接受俸禄，这在从前就受到贤人的非议，有识之上对此也必定讥讽。
English: But to hold office without merit, and to accept a salary without fulfilling one's duties, have been criticized by the wise in the past, and must also be ridiculed by the wise.

古文：臣所用慷慨愤懑，不遑自晏。
现代文：我因此而感到慨叹愤懑，遑遑不安。
English: I feel sad, angry and uneasy about this.

古文：诚以深恩鲜报，圣主难逢，蒲柳先秋，光阴不待，贪及明时，展悉愚效，以酬陛下不世之仁。
现代文：我实在是因为圣明的君主干载难遇，深厚的恩德很少报答，蒲柳遇秋而最先零落，光阴迅速时不我待，所以想趁着这清明的时节，竭尽我愚笨的能力，以酬谢陛下对我的特别的仁爱。
English: I really want to take advantage of this bright season, to the best of my stupid ability, to repay His Majesty's special kindness to me, because a saintly monarch is hard to find, a deep kindness is rarely repaid, the bulrushes are the first to fall apart in the autumn, and time passes quickly.

古文：若微诚获信，短才见序，文武吏法，唯所施用。
现代文：如果我造卑微的忠诚能获得陛下的信任，笨拙的才能能够派上用场，那么不论是文臣武职狱吏法官，任凭陛下调遣使用。
English: If I can earn Your Majesty's trust by my humble loyalty, and if my clumsy talents can be put to good use, then whether I am a civil servant, military officer, prison officer or judge, I will use them at Your Majesty's disposal.

古文：夫君道含弘，臣术无隐，翁归乃居中自见，充国曰 莫若老臣 。窃景前修，敢蹈轻节，以冒不媒之鄙，式罄奉公之诚。
现代文：大凡君道宽宏大度，则臣子的本领无须隐瞒，翁归居内廷而能自我表现，连赵充国也暮年请缨说 不若老臣我去最合适，我非常景仰前代贤臣，所以才敢于采取这轻率的举动，甘心忍受他人的鄙视认为我不依赖媒介便自我荐用，为的是竭尽我一心奉公的忠诚。
English: If a great monarch is magnanimous, then the ability of a courtier does not need to be concealed. Weng returned to the inner court and was able to express himself. Even Zhao Chongguo in his twilight years asked him to say that it would be most appropriate for him to go. I have great admiration for the former wise minister, so I dared to take this imprudent action. I am willing to endure the contempt of others and believe that I can recommend myself without relying on the media, in order to exhaust my loyalty to the public.

古文：抑又唐尧在上，不参二八，管夷吾耻之，臣亦耻之。
现代文：君如唐尧高高在上，此时却不能加入到八恺八元的贤才之列，管仲以此为耻辱，我也以此为耻辱。
English: It is a shame for Guanzhong, and a shame for me, that you, as a high-ranking Tang Dynasty official, cannot join the ranks of the eight hundred and eighty-dollar talents at this time.

古文：愿陛下裁览。 
现代文：希望陛下观览裁定。 
English: I hope His Majesty will decide to watch.

古文：迁秘书丞。
现代文：王融被调任秘书丞。
English: Wang Rong was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：从叔俭，初有仪同之授，融赠诗及书，俭甚奇惮之，笑谓人曰： 穰侯印讵便可解？ 
现代文：王融堂叔王俭，初授开府仪同三司时，王融曾经赠给他诗歌和字幅，王俭对此很是惊奇，笑着对别人说： 穣侯的官印岂能是随便就可以解除的? 
English: When Wang Rongtang's uncle, Wang Jian, was first awarded the ceremonial opening of the government and promoted to the Third Division, Wang Rong once presented him with poetry and writing materials. Wang Jian was very surprised by this and said to others with a smile: Can the official seal of a vassal be removed at will?

古文：寻迁丹阳丞，中书郎。
现代文：不久王融便调任丹阳丞，中书郎。
English: Wang Rong was soon transferred to the post of Danyang Cho, Chushuro.

古文：虏使遣求书，朝议欲不与。
现代文：北魏派使臣来求取典籍，朝臣商议想不给他们。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent envoys to ask for the classics, and the courtiers discussed whether or not to give them to them.

古文：融上疏曰：
现代文：王融上书说：
English: Wang Rong said in the letter:

古文：臣侧闻佥议，疑给虏书，如臣愚情，切有未喻。
现代文：我从别处听说，朝廷众议对于给北魏典籍有所疑虑，像我这样笨拙的人，实在不明白这是什么原因。
English: I have heard from elsewhere that the imperial court has doubts about giving the Northern Wei classics, and a clumsy person like me really does not understand what the reason is.

古文：夫虏人面兽心，狼猛蜂毒，暴悖天经，亏违地义，逋窜烛幽，去来豳朔，绵周、汉而不悛，历晋、宋其逾梗。
现代文：魏虏人面默心，像狼一样凶猛蜂一样狠毒，残暴缺德，违背了天经地义，像烛火幽灵一样，在幽、朔之地往来流窜，延绵周、汉而不思悔改，历经晋、宋而越加强硬。
English: Wei Kripu was a man with a contemplative face. He was as vicious as a wolf and as fierce as a bee. He was cruel and devoid of virtue. He violated the precepts of heaven and earth. Like a candle-lit ghost, he wandered in and out of the land of yu and shuo. He extended the Zhou and Han Dynasties without a thought of repentance. He became tougher and tougher through the Jin and Song Dynasties.

古文：岂有爱敬仁智，恭让廉修，惭犬马之驯心，同鹰虎之反目！
现代文：哪裹有一点点爱敬仁智、恭让廉修的道德观念?他们的心像鹰虎一样充满仇恨，而不像犬马那样有一点点的驯服。
English: Where is the moral concept of a little love, respect, wisdom, and tolerance for the corrupt? Their hearts are full of hatred like hawks and tigers, but not a little bit of tameness like dogs and horses.

古文：设稿秣有储，筋竿足用，必以草窃关燧，寇扰边疆；宁容款塞卑辞，承衣请朔。
现代文：假若粮草有积蓄，兵马充足，一定会燃起战火，侵扰边境；怎么会以谦卑的语言来叩阗求通好，贡献礼物请求朝见呢?
English: If there were enough grain and grass and enough soldiers and horses, war would certainly break out and invade the border. How could they humbly ask for favors, contribute gifts, and request a meeting with the emperor?

古文：陛下务存遵养，不时侮亡，许其膜拜之诚，纳裘之赆，况复愿同文轨？
现代文：陛下务必要抱有尊重安抚的态度，不要欺辱他们，答应他们膜拜的诚意，接受他们的礼物。
English: Your Majesty must have an attitude of respect and appeasement, do not bully them, promise them the sincerity of worship, accept their gifts.

古文：傥见款遣，思奉声教；方致猜拒，将使旧邑遗逸，未知所寘，衰胡余噍，或能自推。
现代文：何况他们希望与我们书同文、车同轨，尊奉我们的礼乐教化，如果受到猜疑拒绝，被随便打发走，那么就将使我们原先拥有的那些城镇永远丧失，不知将那些残余的胡人推向何方。
English: What's more, they hope to write the same book as us, ride the same train as us, and worship our rituals and music. If they are suspected and rejected and sent away at will, they will forever lose the towns we originally owned, and I don't know where they will push the remaining Hu people.

古文：一令蔓草难锄，涓流泛酌，岂直疥痒轻痾，容为心腹重患。
现代文：一旦让他们像野草一样地蔓延而难以锄尽，像浮起酒杯的微流流向四方，那就不仅仅是无关痛痒的小毛病，而将成为心腹大患了。
English: Once they are allowed to spread like weeds and are difficult to get rid of, like the micro-stream of a floating wine glass flowing in all directions, it is not just an unimportant little problem, but will become a big problem.

古文：抑孙武之言也，困则数罚，窘则多赏，先暴而后畏其众者，虏之谓乎？
现代文：孙武曾经说过，敌人若一再处罚士卒，说明它已陷入困境；若一再犒赏士卒，说明它已别无办法可想；将帅先是对士卒凶暴而后又惧怕他们，这是太无能的表现。
English: Sun Wu once said that if the enemy repeatedly punishes soldiers, it means that it has fallen into a predicament; if it repeatedly rewards soldiers, it means that it has no other choice; if the commander is first cruel to soldiers and then afraid of them, it is a sign of incompetence.

古文：前中原士庶，虽沦慑殊俗，至于婚葬之晨，犹巾祼为礼。
现代文：孙武所说，大概就指的是北虏吧?前中原的士庶百姓，虽然沦陷于虏手，因害怕而不得不按照其风俗行事，但对于婚丧嫁娶，却仍旧用汉族的礼节仪式。
English: Sun Wu said, probably referring to the Northern Huns, right? The common people of the former Central Plains, although they fell into the hands of the Huns and had to act according to their customs out of fear, still used the etiquette rituals of the Han people when it came to marriage.

古文：而禁令苛刻，动加诛轘。
现代文：而北魏统治者禁令严酷苛刻，动辄诛杀。
English: The Northern Wei rulers, on the other hand, imposed strict prohibitions and killed people at will.

古文：于时獯粥初迁，犬羊尚结，即心徒怨，困惧成逃。
现代文：当时北魏刚刚迁都中原，还能如犬羊一样抱成一团，即便心中有所怨恨，也害怕逃亡以免陷入困境。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Dynasty had just moved its capital to Zhongyuan, and they could still be held together like dogs and sheep. Even if there was resentment in their hearts, they were afraid to flee so as not to get into trouble.

古文：自其将卒奔离，资峙销阙，北畏勍蠕，西逼南胡，民背如崩，势绝防断。
现代文：自从他们人心离散，纷纷逃窜，物资匮乏，储备殆尽，北面畏惧强劲的柔然，西面又为其他南胡所逼迫，百姓背叛有如山崩地裂，形势危急像堤防断塌。
English: Since their hearts and minds have been scattered, they have fled one after another, materials are scarce, reserves are exhausted, the north is afraid of strong gentleness, and the west is persecuted by other southern Hu, the people's betrayal is like a landslide, and the situation is critical like a levee breaking.

古文：于是曲从物情，伪窃章服，历年将绝，隐蔽无闻。
现代文：于是才迫不得已地听从世俗人情，虚伪地采用了汉族的礼仪制度，这些年来隐蔽无闻，毫无动静。
English: As a result, they had no choice but to listen to worldly human feelings and hypocritically adopted the Han ethnic etiquette system, which has been hidden and silent for all these years.

古文：既南向而泣者，日夜以觊；北顾而辞者，江淮相属。
现代文：江淮一带的人民，或想南来，或想北往，都在日夜窥伺，等待着时机。
English: The people along the Yangtze River and Huai River, whether they want to go south or north, are watching day and night, waiting for the right time.

古文：凶谋岁窘，浅虑无方，于是稽颡郊门，问礼求乐。
现代文：北魏统治者日益窘迫，拿不出好的谋略办法来，于是只好来叩关朝拜，要求礼乐教化的典籍。
English: The rulers of the Northern Wei Dynasty were increasingly embarrassed and could not come up with a good strategy, so they had no choice but to knock on the gates of the imperial court and ask for the classics of ritual music education.

古文：若来之以文德，赐之以副书，汉家轨仪，重临畿辅，司隶传节，复入关河，无待八百之师，不期十万之众，固其提浆伫俟，挥戈愿倒，三秦大同，六汉一统。
现代文：如果以礼文仁德招徕他们，赐给他们典籍，那么漠家的礼文仪节、典章制度、政治法规，又会重新进入到函谷关黄河一带，无须八百支军队，十万兵马前去，他们就会提着水浆在那儿伫立迎候，愿意倒戈投降，那样三秦之地便能恢复，天下又重归于统一。
English: If you invite them with propriety, and give them classics, then the propriety, ceremonial festivals, award system, and political laws and regulations of the nomads will re-enter the area around the Yellow River in Hangu, and there will be no need for eight hundred armies and one hundred thousand soldiers and horses to go forward. They will stand there with water in their hands, and are willing to surrender. In this way, the land of Sanqin can be restored, and the world can be reunited.

古文：又虏前后奉使，不专汉人，必介以匈奴，备诸觇获。
现代文：又韭魏前后派来的使者，不专是汉人，其中还有匈奴人，以便偷偷地察看。
English: In addition, the emissaries sent before and after the Wei Dynasty were not exclusively Han people, but also included Huns, in order to secretly observe.

古文：且设官分职，弥见其情，抑退旧苗，扶任种戚。
现代文：而且从他们设置的官职来看，更可见出他们的含意。他们排斥抑制原先的鲜卑各部族，而祇扶持任用自己的种族亲戚。
English: Moreover, from the perspective of the official positions they set up, their meaning can be seen more clearly. They reject and suppress the originally inferior tribes, and only support the appointment of their own ethnic relatives.

古文：师保则后族冯晋国，总录则邽姓直勒渴侯，台鼎则丘颓、苟仁端，执政则目凌、钳耳。
现代文：师保则是太后族的冯晋国，总录则是姓垫的直勤渴侯，台鼎是丘颓、苟仁端，执政是目凌、钳耳。
English: Feng Jinguo of the Empress Dowager's clan is the guarantor, the general record is the direct and diligent thirst of the surname Mat, the Tai Ding is Qiu Yao, Guo Ren Duan, and the ruling is Me Ling, Jian Er.

古文：至于东都羽仪，西京簪带，崔孝伯、程虞虬久在著作，李元和、郭季祐上于中书，李思冲饰虏清官，游明根泛居显职。
现代文：至于东都羽仪一带的文入学士，崔孝伯、程虞虬长期任著作郎，李元和、郭季祐高达中书之位，李思冲、游明根都位居清显之职。
English: As for the literary scholars in the eastern part of Yuyi, Cui Xiao Bo and Cheng Yuxuan were long-term writers, Li Yuanhe and Guo Jiyu were high-ranking Chinese writers, and Li Sichong and You Minggen were high-ranking scholars.

古文：今经典远被，诗史北流，冯、李之徒，必欲遵尚；直勒等类，居致乖阻。
现代文：现在经籍典章、诗乐文史远流入北地，冯、李造些人，都想遵守崇尚；而直勤渴侯等人却百般阻拦。
English: Now, the classics, poems, music and literary history are flowing far into the north, and Feng and Li Zou have created some people who want to abide by and advocate them. However, people such as Zhiqin and Zhidong have obstructed them in various ways.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是什么原因呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：匈奴以毡骑为帷床，驰射为糇粮，冠方帽则犯沙陵雪，服左衽则风骧鸟逝。
现代文：匈坦人以毡包马背当作帷床，以奔驰射猎作为自己的粮食，戴着皮帽穿着皮袍，像风驰鸟飞一样奔驰在沙漠冰雪之中。
English: The Hun-Tang people use the horse's saddle as a bed, the gallop as their food, wear a leather cap and a leather robe, and gallop in the desert ice and snow like a wind-driven bird.

古文：若衣以朱裳，戴之玄頍，节其揖让，教以翔趋，必同艰桎梏，等惧冰渊，婆娑膋幰，困而不能前已。
现代文：如果叫他们穿大红礼服，戴黑色礼帽，用拱手相迎的礼仪限制他们，教他们如何按礼步趋行，必定会使他们像受到桎梏枷锁那样艰难，像害怕冰渊那样畏缩，像舞蹈那样旋转跳跃，陷入困境而不能前进。
English: If they are made to wear scarlet robes and black bonnets, if they are restrained by a handshake, if they are taught how to walk with propriety, they must be made to struggle as if they were in chains, to shrink as if they were afraid of the ice, to spin and jump as if they were dancing, to be pinned down and unable to go forward.

古文：及夫春草水生，阻散马之适，秋风木落，绝驱禽之欢，息沸唇于桑墟，别醍乳于冀俗，听《韶雅》如龙聩，临方丈若爰居，冯、李之徒，固得志矣，虏之凶族，其如病何？
现代文：等到春草萌发，春水流淌，或是秋风频吹木叶飘落，阻绝了马群奔腾驰驱，在桑干、冀州之地，告别了喝酥油茶吃乳酪的生活方式，迁居到安静的房屋之中，听着《雅》、《韶》这样的礼乐，好像振聋发聩，那么冯晋国、李元和等人的志向得到了伸展，而北魏那些凶狠的部落，其痛苦是多么地巨大!
English: By the time the spring grass sprouts and the spring water flows, or the autumn wind frequently blows and the leaves fall, preventing the horses from galloping. In the places of Sangan and Jizhou, they said goodbye to the lifestyle of drinking butter tea and eating cheese, moved to a quiet house, and listened to the liturgical music such as "Ya" and "Dao," as if they were deaf and dumb. Then the aspirations of Feng Jinguo, Li Yuan and others were stretched, and those fierce tribes of the Northern Wei Dynasty, how great their suffering was!

古文：于是风土之思深，愎戾之情动，拂衣者连裾，抽锋者比镞，部落争于下，酋渠危于上，我一举而兼吞，卞庄之势必也。
现代文：于是这些人仍然非常怀恋驰射的生活方式，倔强暴戾的情绪又骚动起来，纷纷甩动着衣袖，拔出刀剑，形成部落间的战争，处在上位的敌酋首领便很危险了。这时我们再发兵，一举而可吞并它，就像卞庄刺虎时的形势一样，必定成功。
English: As a result, these people are still very fond of the galloping way of life, and the violent and violent emotions are stirred up again, and they fling their sleeves, pull out their swords, and form a war between tribes, and the enemy chiefs in the upper ranks are very dangerous. At this time, we will send troops again and can absorb it in one fell swoop, just like the situation when the Zhuangzhuang stabbed the tiger, and will surely succeed.

古文：且棘宝荐虞，晋疆弥盛，大钟出智，宿氏以亡。
现代文：况且棘地的宝物献给虞国，晋国得以灭虞而扩展疆土，大钟出于智地，宿国因此而灭亡。
English: Moreover, the treasure of the thorny place was dedicated to the State of Yu, the State of Jin was able to destroy Yu and expand its territory, the big clock came from the land of wisdom, and the host country died as a result.

古文：帝略远孚，无思不服，銮光幸岱，匪暮斯朝。
现代文：陛下谋略深远，为世人所信服，銮驾巡幸泰山，当不会很晚而是很早的事。
English: It is not too late, but too early, for His Majesty to devise a far-reaching strategy, convince the world, and drive around Mount Tai.

古文：臣请收籍伊瀍，兹书复掌，犹取之内府，藏之外籝，于理有惬，即事何损。
现代文：那时我请求到伊、洛一带去收缴掌管这些典籍，造就好像把书籍从宫内书府中取出来放到外面的书箱中一样，从道理上讲很恰当，从实际情况上看也毫无损害。
English: At that time, I requested to go to the Ilo and Luo areas to confiscate the books in charge of these classics, making it seem as if the books were taken out of the palace library and placed in a bookcase outside, which was very appropriate from a theoretical point of view, and there was no damage from a practical point of view.

古文：若狂言足采，请决敕施行。
现代文：如果我这狂妄的言论足以采用，就请陛下决断，敕命施行吧。
English: If I am bold enough to make such a bold statement, I ask Your Majesty to make a bold decision and carry it out.

古文：世祖答曰： 吾意不异卿。
现代文：齐世祖回答说： 我的意见和你没有什么区别。
English: Qi Shizu replied, "My opinion is no different from yours.

古文：今所启，比相见更委悉。 
现代文：今天的奏报，比相见交谈更实在更详尽。 
English: Today's report is more real and more detailed than the face-to-face conversation.

古文：事竟不行。
现代文：但此事最终未能施行。
English: In the end, this did not happen.

古文：永明末，世祖欲北伐，使毛惠秀画《汉武北伐图》，使融掌其事。
现代文：永明末年，齐世祖想北伐，让毛惠秀画《汉武北伐图》，派王融掌管遣件事。
English: At the end of the Yongming era, Qi Shizu wanted to go to the North, so he asked Mao Hui to draw the "Hanwu Northern Expedition Map" and sent Wang Rong to take charge of the matter.

古文：融好功名，因此上疏曰：
现代文：王融喜好功名，因此上疏说：
English: Wang Rong likes fame, so Shang Zuo said:

古文：臣闻情慉自中，事符则感，象构于始，机动斯彰。
现代文：我听说人的性情蕴积在心中，一旦与外界事物相符合则感发，兆象构建于初始，机运到了才彰显。
English: I have heard that a person's disposition is stored in the heart, and once it is in line with external things, it will be triggered. Signs are built at the beginning, and they will be manifested when the opportunity comes.

古文：庄敬之道可宗，会揖让其弥肃；勇烈之士足贵，应鼙铎以增思。
现代文：端庄敬重的道德值得崇尚，加上揖让的礼式仪节便更显得严肃，英勇刚烈的士人非常珍贵，与鼙鼓金辉相应更激发了雄心壮志。
English: The morality of being dignified and respectful is worthy of admiration, and the etiquette and rituals of eulogy are even more serious. Heroic and courageous scholars are very precious, and they have inspired more ambition in accordance with the gong and drum.

古文：肇植生民，厥详既缅，降及兴运，维道有征，莫不有所因循而升皇业者也。
现代文：自有生民以来直至世运兴盛，那些帝王的事迹都很详细绵迩，没有谁不是顺应着天道的征兆而登上皇帝宝座的。
English: From ancient times until the prosperity of the world movement, the deeds of those emperors were very detailed and continuous. No one ascended the throne of the emperor without following the signs of heaven.

古文：若夫膏腴既称，天乙知五方之富；皮币已列，帝刘测四海之尊。
现代文：如土地肥美，物产丰富，殷帝天乙便知道能取得这五方的财富，毛皮布帛这些古代贵重礼物已经陈列，汉帝刘氏就预测到可以成为四海之尊。
English: If the land is fertile and the products are abundant, the Yin Emperor Tianyi will know that he can obtain the wealth of these five sides. These ancient precious gifts of fur cloth have been displayed, and the Han Emperor Liu predicted that he could become the honor of the four seas.

古文：异封禅之文，则升中之典攸鬯；叹舆地之图，乃席卷之庸是立。
现代文：那封挥的文告，是为登上皇位者的典礼而创立，那舆地图，是为包揽天下、囊括四海之用而设置的。
English: That waving message was created for the ceremony of the ascendant to the throne, and that map was set up for the purpose of covering the whole world, including the four seas.

古文：伏惟陛下穷神尽圣，总极居中，偶化两仪，均明二耀，拯玄纲于颓绝，反至道于浇淳，可谓区宇仪形，齐民先觉者也。
现代文：陛下穷尽了神王圣帝的神威，总位世界的中极，使天地对称，日月并明，在颓败崩绝的时候拯救了纲纪，使浇薄风俗返回到质朴淳厚的正路上来，可谓是将自己的形貌假托在普通人身上的先知先觉者。
English: His Majesty exhausted the divine authority of the God-King, the Holy Emperor, and became the center of the world. He made heaven and earth symmetrical, and the sun and the moon were equal. He saved the discipline at the time of the collapse of the empire, and returned the pagan customs to the simple and honest right path. He can be described as a prescient seer who put his own appearance on ordinary people.

古文：臣亦遭逢，生此嘉运，凿饮耕食，自幸唐年。
现代文：我也遇上好的时运，生在这美好的年代，能够安居乐业，就像身处唐尧时代一样感到幸运。
English: I also met with good fortune, was born in this beautiful era, and was able to live and work in peace. I feel as lucky as I was in the era of Tang Xuan.

古文：而识用昏霾，经术疏浅，将捴且轴，岂蕨与薇。
现代文：但我识见昏乱迷茫，经术空疏浅陋，岂衹像蕨与薇那样的小草，简直就是枯衰的迈草。
English: But what I saw was confused and confused, the technique was empty and shallow, and the small grasses like thistles and weeds were simply withered grass.

古文：皇鉴烛幽，天高听下，赏片言之或善，矜一物之失时，湔拂尘蒙，沾饰光价，拔足草庐，厕身朝序，复得拜贺岁时，瞻望日月，于臣心愿，曾已毕矣。
现代文：陛下伟大的观察力可以洞察极幽微之处，身居高天却倾听下民的呼声，有点滴的善言便给予赏赐，对于丧失时运不能正常发展的事物表示怜悯。陛下洗除了蒙在镜上的灰尘，使它获得了借光照鉴的价值。使我能从草屋中拔起，侧身于朝臣之列，在年节时能朝拜庆贺，瞻望陛下的尊颜，对于我的心愿来说，这已经是很满足了。
English: His Majesty's great powers of observation allow him to see into the most obscure places, to listen to the cries of his subjects even though he is enthroned on high, to reward the merest drop of kind words, and to show compassion for the loss of things that cannot develop normally. His Majesty washed the dust from the mirror and gave it the value of a reference. For me to be able to pull myself out of the grass hut and stand among the courtiers, to be able to worship and celebrate at the time of the New Year, and to gaze upon His Majesty's dignified countenance, this is already very satisfying to my heart's desire.

古文：但千祀一逢，休明难再，思策钅公驽，乐陈涓堨。
现代文：但清明的时世千年衹能遭逢一次而鸡以遇上两回，我想驰骋如铅刀驽马一般卑下的才力，陈述我滴水微尘般浅陋的意见。
English: But in these enlightened times, when the millennium bug can strike once, but the chicken can strike twice, I want to ride my lowly talent like a leaden knife, and present my shallow opinions like water droplets.

古文：窃习战阵攻守之术，农桑牧艺之书，申、商、韩、墨之权，伊、周、孔、孟之道。
现代文：我学习过战阵攻守的方法，博览过农桑牧植的书籍，了解申不害、商鞅、韩非、墨翟之法，懂得伊尹、周公、孔子、孟子之道。
English: I have studied the methods of attacking and defending the battlefield, read books on the cultivation and husbandry of agricultural mulberry trees, understood the methods of Shen Nihong, Shang Qian, Han Fei, and Mo Qian, and understood the ways of Yi Yin, Zhou Gong, Confucius, and Mencius.

古文：常愿待诏朱阙，俯对青蒲，请闲宴之私，谈当世之务。
现代文：常常希望在宫门待韶，面对着学术之士，在私宴清闲时，谈论起当时之急务。
English: He often wanted to wait at the palace gate, face the scholars, and talk about the urgent tasks of the time at private parties.

古文：位贱人微，徒深倾款。
现代文：由于位卑人微，衹是白白地倾注了我一片深深的诚意。
English: Due to his lowly position, he poured out my deep sincerity in vain.

古文：方今九服清怡，三灵和晏，木有附枝，轮无异辙，东鞮献舞，南辫传歌，羌、丱逾山，秦、屠越海，舌象玩委体之勤，輶译厌瞻巡之数，固将开桂林于凤山，创金城于西守。
现代文：当今之世，天下清明和悦，天地人三灵都很平和安乐，树木都有繁茂的枝叶，车道没有不同的轮迹。束狄南蛮，纷纷献舞传歌；羌人焚人，西秦屠各，翻山越海，使节翻译，辛勤地研习语言，互相交往，互相通好，络绎不绝；必将于凤山开通桂林，在西疆创置金城。
English: In today's world, the world is clear and pleasant, the three spirits of heaven and earth are peaceful and happy, the trees have luxuriant branches and leaves, and the lanes do not have different wheel tracks. Bundi Nanban, have offered dances and passed down songs; Xingren Burning Man, West Qin Tu Gu, over the mountains and across the sea, the envoy translation, diligently study the language, interact with each other, communicate with each other, and are endless; will certainly open Guilin in Fengshan and create a golden city in West Xinjiang.

古文：而蠢尔獯狄，敢仇大邦，假息关河，窃命函谷，沦故京之爽垲，变旧邑而荒凉，息反坫之儒衣，久伊川之被发。
现代文：而那愚蠢的獯狄竟敢与大国为敌，暂时窃居函谷、关中、黄河之地，使我们原先的京都旧邑沦落变成荒凉高地，禁止了汉人的礼仪服式，使伊川一带长期地披发胡服。
English: And that stupid Gendai dared to be an enemy of a great power, temporarily stole the land of Hakodate, Guanzhong, and the Yellow River, turned our former Kyoto old town into a desolate highland, banned the Han people's ceremonial dress, and made the Ikawa area wear a long time.

古文：北地残氓，东都遗老，莫不茹泣吞悲，倾耳戴目，翘心仁政，延首王风。
现代文：北地残存的百姓，洛阳的遣老遣少，没有谁不是饮泣吞悲，倾心注目，翘首盼望仁政王风的到来。
English: The remaining people in the north, the old and the young in Luoyang, no one is not crying, devouring grief, devoting attention, and looking forward to the arrival of the benevolent king.

古文：若试驰咫尺之书，具甄戎旅之卒，徇其堕城，纳其降虏，可弗劳弦镞，无待干戈。
现代文：如果尝试着送去一份文告，并选拔军队作为后备，前往那陷落的城镇去当众宣示，接收那些投降的北魏人，就可以不必大动干戈，损耗兵力了。
English: If you try to send a message, and select the army as a reserve, go to the fallen town to make a public announcement, and receive those surrendering Northern Wei people, you don't have to go to war and lose troops.

古文：真皇王之兵，征而不战者也。
现代文：这真是帝王之师，出征却不战而胜。
English: This is truly the emperor's teacher, who goes to war but wins without a fight.

古文：臣乞以执殳先迈，式道中原，澄澣渚之恒流，扫狼山之积雾，系单于之颈，屈左贤之膝，习呼韩之旧仪，拜銮舆之巡幸。
现代文：我请求拿着武器先行，为王前驱，进入中原，澄清沙漠瀚海的横流，扫除积聚在狼山的烽烟，绳系单于的颈项，使左贤王屈膝投降。让他们按照呼韩巫里王的相同礼仪，朝拜迎接皇车的巡察。
English: I request that you take the lead with weapons, drive for the king, enter the Central Plains, clarify the cross-currents of the desert ocean, sweep away the smoke accumulated in the Wolf Mountain, the rope tied to the neck, and make Zuoxian Wang kneel down and surrender. Let them follow the same etiquette as the king of Wuri, and greet the inspection of the royal car.

古文：然后天移云动，勒封岱宗，咸五登三，追踪七十，百神肃警，万国具僚，璯弁星离，玉帛云聚，集三烛于兰席，聆万岁之祯声，岂不盛哉！
现代文：然后天移云动，物换星移，在泰山封惮并刻石铭记，虽不能与五帝三皇相媲美，也能赶得上七十位王那么隆盛，百神都显得庄严警肃，万国都成为臣僚。戴玉饰之冠、穿锦绣之衣的随从官员，像繁星散列，像彩云聚集，在烛光照耀的兰席上，聆听万岁的吉祥之声，这不是很隆盛吗!
English: Then the heavens moved, the stars changed, and they were sealed and engraved on Mount Tai, bearing in mind that although they could not match the five emperors and three kings, they could match the prosperity of seventy kings. Hundreds of gods appeared solemn and solemn, and all nations became their ministers. The attendant officials wearing crowns of jade ornaments and clothes of brocade embroidery, like a starry array, gathered like colorful clouds, and listened to the auspicious voices of longevity on the candlelit Lan Seats. Isn't this very prosperous?

古文：岂不韪哉！
现代文：遣不是很正确吗!
English: Isn't that a very correct way of putting it!

古文：昔恒公志在伐莒，郭牙审其幽趣；魏后心存云汉，德祖究其深言。
现代文：从前齐桓公立志伐莒，郭牙能洞察他内心的志向，魏帝心想去漠而代之，杨德祖探。测到了他深藏的隐秘。
English: In the past, Qi Huan was a public aspirant, Guo Jian was able to discern his inner aspiration, Wei Di's heart wanted to go to the desert instead, and Yang Dezu explored. He measured his deep hidden secrets.

古文：臣愚昧，忖诚不足以知微，然伏揆圣心，规模弘远，既图载其事，必克就其功。
现代文：我很愚昧，虽竭尽思量也难以测知细微隐秘之处，但我揣度陛下的心志，其规制一定宏伟远大，既然用图画来记载莲!生查北伐的事迹，必定是想获得同样的功业。
English: I am very ignorant, and although I have tried my best, it is difficult to detect the subtle and secret places, but I guessed His Majesty's will, and its regulation must be grand and far-reaching. Since I used pictures to record the deeds of the Northern Expedition, I must be trying to achieve the same feat.

古文：臣不胜欢喜。
现代文：我感到非常高兴。
English: I am very happy.

古文：图成，上置琅邪城射堂壁上，游幸辄观视焉。
现代文：图画完成后，齐世祖把它安放在琅邪城射堂的墙壁上，衹要到那儿去游玩，就一定观看逭幅画。
English: After the painting was completed, Qi Shizu placed it on the wall of the shooting hall of Yuyao City. If you want to go there to play, you must watch this painting.

古文：九年，上幸芳林园，禊宴朝臣，使融为《曲水诗序》，文藻富丽，当世称之。
现代文：永明九年，游幸芳林园，楔祭以除不祥，宴请朝臣，让王融作《曲水诗序》，遣篇序文辞华美，富丽堂皇，为当世人所称道。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongming era, he toured the Xingfang Forest Park, held a wedge festival to drive away bad luck, invited courtiers to a banquet, and had Wang Rong compose the "Water Melody Prelude." The preface of the preface is gorgeous and magnificent, and is praised by the world.

古文：上以融才辩，十一年，使兼主客，接虏使房景高、宋弁。
现代文：认为玉融很有论辩的口才，在永明十一年派他兼任主客之职，以接待北魏使臣房景高、宋弁。
English: He thought that Yu Rong was very eloquent in argumentation, and in the eleventh year of the Yongming Dynasty, he sent him to concurrently serve as the host to receive the Northern Wei envoys Fang Jinggao and Song Ben.

古文：弁见融年少，问主客年几？
现代文：宋弁见王融很年轻，便问主客几岁?
English: Song Ben saw that Wang Rong was very young, so he asked the host and guest how old they were.

古文：融曰： 五十之年，久逾其半。 
现代文：王融回答说： 五十岁年纪，我早已超过了一半。 
English: Wang Rong replied, "At the age of fifty, I have already passed the halfway point.

古文：因问： 在朝闻主客作《曲水诗序》。 
现代文：宋弁又接着问： 我在朝时听说主客您作了《曲水诗序》。 
English: Song Ben went on to ask: I heard in the morning that the host and guest you made "Song and Water Poem."

古文：景高又云： 在北闻主客此制，胜于颜延年，实愿一见。 
现代文：房景高又说： 我在北朝听说主客的遣篇大作，超过了颜延年，希望能够观赏观赏。 
English: Fangjing Gao also said: I heard in the Northern Dynasty that the masterpiece of the host and guest exceeded Yan Yan Nian, and I hope to be able to watch and enjoy it.

古文：融乃示之。
现代文：王融于是拿给他看。
English: Wang Rong then showed it to him.

古文：后日，宋弁于瑶池堂谓融曰： 昔观相如《封禅》，以知汉武之德；今览王生《诗序》，用见齐王之盛。 
现代文：他日，宋弁在瑶池堂对王融说： 从前我观看司马相如的《封禅文》，以此知道汉武帝的仁德；今天看了王先生的《曲水诗序》，因此而看出齐王的兴盛。 
English: On the other day, Song Ben said to Wang Rong at Dianchi Hall: Once I watched "Fu Zhenwen" by Sima Xiangru and knew the benevolence of Emperor Hanwu; today I read Mr. Wang's "Canticle of Water" and thus saw the prosperity of King Qi.

古文：融曰： 皇家盛明，岂直比踪汉武！更惭鄙制，无以远匹相如。 
现代文：王融说： 我齐国的隆盛昌明，怎能和漠武帝相比；更惭愧我的拙作，无法和司马相如相匹配。 
English: Wang Rong said: How can I compare the prosperity and prosperity of Qi with that of Emperor Mo; I am even more ashamed of my poor work, which cannot match that of Sima.

古文：上以虏献马不称，使融问曰： 秦西冀北，实多骏骥，而魏主所献良马，乃驽骀之不若。
现代文：齐世祖认为北魏所献的马匹与规定的不相符合，派王融去询问说： 秦地以西冀州之北，确实有很多骏马良骥，而魏主所贡献的良马，大概连驽马也比不上。
English: Qi Shizu believed that the horses donated by the Northern Wei Dynasty did not meet the requirements, and sent Wang Rong to inquire: In the northern part of Hebei Province west of Qin, there are indeed many fine horses, but the fine horses contributed by the Northern Wei Dynasty are probably not even comparable to fine horses.

古文：求名检事，殊为未孚。将旦旦信誓，有时而爽，駉駉之牧，不能复嗣？ 
现代文：查考礼仪规定，实在是名实不副啊。你们信誓旦旦，却不时地违背它。难道那高大雄壮的马，就不能再次接续下去吗? 
English: The examination etiquette stipulation is really a misnomer. You swear by it, but you violate it from time to time. Can't that tall and majestic horse continue again?

古文：宋弁曰： 不容虚伪之名，当是不习土地。 
现代文：宋弁说： 你不必去追求虚伪的良马名称，我们献的马匹大概是不习惯你们的地理环境吧。 
English: Song Ben said, "You don't have to go after the hypocritical name of a good horse. The horses we donated are probably not used to your geographical environment.

古文：融曰： 周穆马迹遍于天下，若骐骥之性，因地而迁，则造父之策，有时而踬。 
现代文：王融说： 周穆王的骏马，足迹踏遍天下，如果骐骥的特性会随着地理环境的不同而改变，那么造父驾马车奔驰，有时也会翻倒吧。 
English: Wang Rong said: Zhou Mu Wang's horse-drawn carriage has traveled all over the world. If the characteristics of a horse-drawn carriage can change according to the geographical environment, then the founding father drove a horse-drawn carriage and sometimes overturned it.

古文：弁曰： 王主客何为勤勤于千里？ 
现代文：宋弁说： 王主客为什么总是殷切地要求千里马呢? 
English: Song Ben said: Why do the king's guests always eagerly ask for a thousand horses?

古文：融曰： 卿国既异其优劣，聊复相访。
现代文：王融说： 贵国既然对马的优劣不分，那么暂且让我再去亲自访求。
English: Wang Rong said, "Since your country is indifferent to the merits and demerits of horses, let me visit you in person for the time being.

古文：若千里日至，圣上当驾鼓车。 
现代文：若千里马到来之时，皇上定会让它去驾驶裁鼓的仪仗车。 
English: When the chirima arrives, the emperor will certainly let it drive the ceremonial car with drums.

古文：弁曰： 向意既须，必不能驾鼓车也。 
现代文：宋弁说： 根据你们从前的需要，一定不是让它去驾鼓车啊。 
English: Song Ben said: Since it has been waiting in the past, it must not be a big deal to let it drive the drum car.

古文：融曰： 买死马之骨，亦以郭隗之故。 
现代文：王融说： 我们之所以这样作，也是出于和郭隗用千金买死马之骨相同的原因啊。 
English: Wang Rong said, "Purchasing the bones of a dead horse is precisely because of Guo Yao's plan.

古文：弁不能答。
现代文：宋弁不能回答。
English: Song Ben could not answer.

古文：融自恃人地，三十内望为公辅。
现代文：王融自恃有才能门第高贵，三十岁内就想成为三公六辅那样的朝廷大臣。
English: Wang Rong considered himself a talented and noble disciple, and he wanted to become a minister of the imperial court like the three princes and six aides within thirty years of age.

古文：直中书省，夜叹曰： 邓禹笑人。 
现代文：在中书省值夜，叹。赋： 邓禹在笑话我。 
English: In the middle of the night, sigh. Fu: Deng Yu is laughing at me.

古文：行逢大行开，喧湫不得进。
现代文：当时正碰上大船开航，声音轰响航道低狭不能前进。
English: At that time, a large ship was encountering and sailing, and the sound was booming. The channel was narrow and narrow, and it was impossible to advance.

古文：又叹曰： 车前无八驺卒，何得称为丈夫！ 
现代文：他又叹息说： 车前若没有八个驾车的士卒，怎能够称为大丈夫! 
English: He also sighed and said: "If there are not eight taxi drivers in front of the car, how can it be called okay!

古文：朝廷讨雍州刺史王奂，融复上疏曰：
现代文：朝廷征讨雍州刺史王奂，王融又上疏说：
English: The imperial court enlisted the help of the Yongzhou prince Wang Zhi, and Wang Rong went on to say:

古文：臣每览史传，见忧国忘家，捐生报德者，未曾不抚卷叹息，以为今古共情也。
现代文：我每次观看史籍传记，一见到忧虑国事而忘自家，捐献生命以报答恩德的人，没有不抚卷叹息的，认为古今主人的情感是相同的。
English: Every time I watch historical biographies, when I see people who are worried about national affairs and forget about their own homes, and give their lives to repay their kindness, I can't help but sigh and think that the feelings of the masters of the past and present are the same.

古文：然或以片言微感，一餐小惠，参国士之眄，同布素之游耳。
现代文：但间或也有被微言所打动、被一冶饭食的小恩小惠所感动，从而舍生忘死的人，他们虽然被视为国士，实际与布衣之交差不多。
English: However, occasionally there are people who are moved by a kind word, by a small favor of a meal, and thus give up life and forget death. Although they are regarded as national heroes, they are actually almost the same as clothed friends.

古文：岂有如臣，独拔无闻之伍，过超非分之位，名器双假，荣禄两升，而宴安昃罢之晨，优游旰食之日。
现代文：哪裹像我，被从默默无闻的人群中提拔出来，地位大大地超过我所应该有的，既有名声又受到器重，荣耀与爵禄都得到了，真是名利双收，而且早晚宴乐，优游自得。
English: Who, like me, has been raised from obscurity to a position far higher than I deserved, to fame and fortune, to fame and glory, to fame and fortune, to banquets, to pleasure.

古文：所以敢布丹愚，仰闻宸听。
现代文：所以我才敢于陈述忠诚的愚见，让陛下圣听能够知道。
English: That is why I have dared to state my honest opinion, so that Your Majesty's ears can hear it.

古文：今议者或以西夏为念，臣窃谓之不尔。
现代文：现在参加朝议的大臣们比较担忧西夏发生事件，我认为不必如此。
English: I don't think it's necessary for the ministers who are currently taking part in the North Korean talks to be so worried about the incident in Western Xia.

古文：其故何哉？
现代文：遣是什么缘故呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：陛下圣明，群臣悉力，顺以制逆，上而御下，指开赏黜之言，微示生死之路，方域之人，皆相为敌。既兵威远临，人不自保，虽穷鸟必啄，固等命于梁鹑；困兽斯惊，终并悬于厨鹿。
现代文：陛下圣明，群臣尽力，以顺制逆，以上制下，衹要公布赏罚的文告，给他们指明生死之路，那么当地之人都愿意与叛逆者为敌等到大军兵威降临到逆贼头上时，即便是穷鸟必啄，困兽犹斗，他们还会垂死挣扎，但其命运最终也不过与悬挂在厨房木梁上的鹑、鹿差不多。
English: Your Majesty, Your Holiness, the courtiers are doing their best to follow the system, but under the above system, you must announce the announcement of rewards and punishments, and show them the path of life and death. Then the local people are willing to fight against the rebels. When the great military power comes down on the head of the traitors, even the poor birds will be killed, the beasts will still fight, and they will still struggle to the death, but their fate will eventually be similar to that of the roe deer hanging on the kitchen beam.

古文：凯师劳饮，固不待晨。
现代文：王师凯旋，慰劳宴饮，自然不必等待朝食之时。
English: Wang Shi's triumphant return, comforting feasting, naturally do not have to wait for breakfast time.

古文：臣之寸心，独有微愿。
现代文：造就是我个人的微小的心愿。
English: To create is my personal tiny aspiration.

古文：自猃狁荐食，荒侮伊瀍，天道祸淫，危亡日至，母后内难，粮力外虚，谣言物情，属当今会。
现代文：自从猃狁吞并国土以来，伊迺一带变得满目荒凉。现在上天越来越多地给他们降下灾祸，国家危亡的时候已日益迫近，其内有母后；蛆的死亡，外则粮食兵力空虚，谣言四起，群情动荡，大概就应验在当今之时。
English: Since the annexation of the country by the Kuomintang, the area around Ili has become completely desolate. Now the heavens are increasingly bringing down disasters on them. The time of the country's peril has become increasingly imminent, including the death of the queen mother; the death of the Kuomintang, and the other is the emptiness of grain and troops, rumors everywhere, and social unrest, which is probably fulfilled at the present time.

古文：若藉巫、汉之归师，骋士卒之余愤，取函谷如反掌，陵关塞若摧枯。
现代文：若依仗巫、连归降的军队，让其士卒发愤驰骋，那么取函谷易如反掌，攻击关塞似摧枯拉朽。
English: If you rely on the army that fought and surrendered, and let its soldiers rage, then it is easy to take Hakodate, and attacking Kansai is like wiping out.

古文：但士非素蓄，无以即用，不教民战，是实弃之。
现代文：但其部士卒，并不是我们原来蓄养的，不能立刻就使用；不教百姓如何打仗，这实在是抛弃他们。
English: But his officers and men are not of our stock and cannot be used at once; not to teach the people how to fight is really to abandon them.

古文：特希私集部曲，豫加习校。
现代文：我特此希望能够私自聚集部下，对他们预先进行训练。
English: I hereby hope to be able to personally gather my subordinates and train them in advance.

古文：若蒙垂许，乞隶监省拘食人身，权备石头防卫之数。
现代文：如果承蒙陛下允许，请求给我配属那些被监狱拘留囚禁的人，暂且充当石头戍的防卫人员。
English: If Your Majesty will permit me, I would like to ask you to assign me to those who are detained in prison, temporarily acting as guards of the stone coffin.

古文：臣少重名节，早习军旅，若试而无绩，伏受面欺之诛；用且有功，仰酬知人之哲。
现代文：我年轻时就看重声名节操，很早就学习遇军旅之事，如果我试验而没有成绩，甘愿受到欺君之罪的处罚；若试用而建立功劳，这也是对陛下知人之明的最好报答。
English: When I was young, I valued reputation and discipline. I learned very early about military service. If I tried and did not succeed, I would be willing to be punished for the crime of defrauding the king; if I tried and built up merit, this is also the best reward for His Majesty's acquaintance.

古文：会虏动，竟陵王子良于东府募人，板融宁朔将军、军主。
现代文：当时正碰上虏兵侵扰，竟陵王子良到东府招募人才，让王融暂时任宁朔将军、军主。
English: At that time, he was facing the intrusion of the invaders, so he went to Dongfu to recruit talent, and let Wang Rong temporarily serve as the general of Ningshuo and the commander.

古文：融文辞辩捷，尤善仓卒属缀，有所造作，援笔可待。
现代文：王融写文章很有条理又很快捷，尤其善于在时间紧迫时写作，每逢有写作任务，拿起笔来一挥而就，立等可待。
English: Wang Rong's articles are well-organized and quick to write. He is especially good at writing when time is short. Whenever he has a writing task, he picks up a pen and swipes it away. He can wait.

古文：子良特相友好，情分殊常。
现代文：萧子良对他特别友好，情分超过常人。
English: Xiao Ziliang is especially friendly to him, and his feelings are beyond ordinary people.

古文：晚节大习骑马。
现代文：他晚年下功夫练习骑马。
English: In his later years, he practiced horseback riding.

古文：才地既华，兼藉子良之势，倾意宾客，劳问周款，文武翕习辐凑之。
现代文：王融才能地位都很显耀，又凭藉着萧子良的权势，竭尽心意对待宾客，关心慰劳，周到诚恳，所以文武官员都乐意聚集在他周围。
English: Wang Rong's talent and status are both very brilliant, and with the power of Xiao Ziliang, he treats guests with all his heart, cares about comfort, and is thoughtful and sincere, so civil and military officials are willing to gather around him.

古文：招集江西伧楚数百人，并有干用。
现代文：他还招集了长江以西的几百个粗疏贫苦的人，这些人都有一些本领才能。
English: He has also recruited hundreds of rough sleepers from west of the Yangtze River, all of whom have some skills.

古文：世祖疾笃暂绝，子良在殿内，太孙未入，融戎服绛衫，于中书省阁口断东宫仗不得进，欲立子良。
现代文：齐世祖病得很重一时气绝，适时萧子良正在殿内，而皇太孙萧昭业还没有进来，王融身穿军服外罩红色衫，在中书省的侧门口阻断东宫的仪仗队不让进去，他想拥立萧子良为帝。
English: Qi Shizhu was gravely ill and temporarily exhausted. At the right time, Xiao Ziliang was in the palace, but the imperial grandson Xiao Zhaoye had not yet come in. Wang Rong, wearing a military uniform and a red shirt, blocked the guard of honor of the East Palace at the side entrance of the Central Library to prevent them from entering. He wanted to make Xiao Ziliang emperor.

古文：上既苏，太孙入殿，朝事委高宗。
现代文：后来齐世祖苏醒过来，皇太孙才进入殿内，朝廷政务都委托给高宗。
English: Later, Qizhezu woke up, the granddaughter of the emperor entered the hall, and the affairs of the imperial court were entrusted to Gaozong.

古文：融知子良不得立，乃释服还省。叹曰： 公误我。 
现代文：王融得知萧子良不能被立为帝，于是脱去戎服回到省台，叹息说： 子良您害了我啊! 
English: When Wang Rong learned that Xiao Ziliang could not be made emperor, he took off his military uniform and returned to the provincial capital, saying with a sigh: "You have hurt me, Xiao Ziliang!

古文：郁林深忿疾融，即位十余日，收下廷尉狱，然后使中丞孔稚珪倚为奏曰： 融姿性刚险，立身浮竞，动迹惊群，抗言异类。
现代文：郁林王萧昭业深深地忿恨憎恶王融，即位才十几天，便将王融收审，拘禁在廷尉狱，然后让中丞孔稚珪依照自己的意思上奏说： 王融性格强悍凶险，立身处世既轻浮又好竞逐，言论行动都不同寻常，使人惊奇。
English: Yu Lin Wang Xiao Zhaoye deeply resented and detested Wang Rong, who had only been on the throne for a dozen days. He had Wang Rong put on trial and detained in the Imperial Guard Prison, and then had Vice Admiral Kong Zhiqi make a report according to his own will: Wang Rong's character is strong and dangerous, his life is both frivolous and competitive, and his speech and actions are unusual and surprising.

古文：近塞外微尘，苦求将领，遂招纳不逞，扇诱荒伧。
现代文：最近塞外一有风吹草动，他就苦苦请求作将领，并招收接纳一些违法作乱之徒，煽动诱惑粗野之辈。
English: Recently, as soon as there was a whiff of grass outside the country, he begged to be a general, and recruited and accepted some illegal troublemakers, inciting and tempting the rough generation.

古文：狡弄声势，专行权利，反覆唇齿之间，倾动颊舌之内。
现代文：他狡猾地谋取声名威势，专权以谋私利，摇唇鼓舌，言论反覆无常。
English: He cunningly seeks fame and prestige, monopolizes power for personal gain, rattles his lips, and his speech is capricious.

古文：威福自己，无所忌惮，诽谤朝政，历毁王公。谓己才流，无所推下。事曝远近，使融依源据答。 
现代文：随心所欲，作威作福，无所忌惮，诽谤朝政，诋毁王公大臣，认为自己是才子名流，对谁也不肯屈尊推崇，这些事情远近都知道，让王融原原本本据实回答。 
English: To do as he pleases, to use his power for his own benefit, to be unscrupulous, to slander the government, to defame princes and ministers, to think of himself as a talented celebrity, and to deign to praise no one - all of these things are known far and wide, so Wang Rongyuan originally answered truthfully.

古文：融辞曰： 囚实顽蔽，触行多愆，但夙忝门素，得奉教君子。
现代文：王融答辞说： 我确实愚笨蒙顽，行为有很多错误，但很早就愧列纯洁的师门，得以侍奉君子并受其教导。
English: Wang Rong replied: I am indeed stupid and obstinate, and there are many mistakes in my behavior, but I have long been a pure teacher, able to serve and be taught by a gentleman.

古文：爰自总发，迄将立年，州闾乡党，见许愚慎，朝廷衣冠，谓无衅咎。
现代文：自从总发的少年开始，迄今将到三十而立之年，州阎的乡亲都赞赏我的敬慎，朝廷的官员也说我没有过失。
English: From the time I was a teenager to now, when I am about to turn thirty, the villagers of Zhujian have all appreciated my prudence, and the officials of the imperial court have also said that I did not make any mistakes.

古文：过蒙大行皇帝奖育之恩，又荷文皇帝识擢之重，司徒公赐预士林，安陆王曲垂眄接。
现代文：我特别受到先帝的奖励教育的厚恩，又受到文皇帝的知人提拔的恩泽，司徒公竞陵王恩赐我加入官宦之林，安陆王对我很是垂爱厚待。
English: I was especially favored by the previous emperor's reward and education, and by the grace of the promotion of the acquaintance of the Emperor Wen. I was given the gift of joining the official forest by the King of Sutugong and Jingling, and the King of Anlu was very affectionate and kind to me.

古文：既身被国慈，必欲以死自效，前后陈伐虏之计，亦仰简先朝。
现代文：我既然身受国家的慈爱，一心想以死报效，曾先后陈述征伐北魏之计，供先帝选择。
English: Since I was loved by the state and wanted to repay it with my death, I had successively presented the plan for the conquest of the Northern Wei Dynasty for the choice of the former emperor.

古文：今段犬羊乍扰，纪僧真奉宣先敕，赐语北边动静，令囚草撰符诏，于时即因启闻，希侍銮舆。
现代文：今年，北魏刚开始侵扰之时，纪僧真奉命去宣示敕命，察看北疆动静，命我草撰符诏，这时我乘机奏闻，希望能亲自侍奉皇驾。
English: This year, when the Northern Wei Dynasty had just begun to invade, Ji Sang Zhen was ordered to proclaim his death, inspect the movement of Northern Xinjiang, and order me to write an edict. At that time, I took the opportunity to report the news, hoping to personally serve the emperor.

古文：及司徒宣敕招募，同例非一，实以戎事不小，不敢承教。
现代文：及至司徒竟陵王宣布敕命招募人才，我才得以担任现职，同时受到任命的不止我一人。实在由于战事不小，我不敢接受大任。
English: Later, the bishop announced the edict to recruit men and horses, and the same situation occurred in more than one place. It was really because the war was not small that he did not dare to accept the edict.

古文：续蒙军号，赐使招集，衔敕而行，非敢虚扇。
现代文：后又获得将军称号，命我招集军马。我是带着敕命去施行的，并不敢用假言去煽动民众，而且我还按标准收录了一些降卒和逃亡的人，并不仅仅限于招收粗卑之人。
English: Later, I was given the title of general, and I was ordered to recruit horses. I did it with a desperate spirit, and I did not dare to incite the people with false words. Moreover, I also included some people who had surrendered and fled according to the standard, and I was not limited to enlisting low-level people.

古文：且格取亡叛，不限伧楚， 狡弄声势 ，应有形迹； 专行权利 ，又无赃贿； 反覆唇齿之间 ，未审悉与谁言？ 倾动颊舌之内 ，不容都无主此。
现代文：所谓 狡猾地谋取声名威势 ，应当有事实为证，所谓 专权以谋私利，又找不到我得的脏物贿赂。所谓 摇唇鼓舌，言论反覆无常，不知道我都与哪些人交谈过。怎会找不出交谈的人来呢?
English: The so-called cunningly seeking fame and prestige should be proved by facts, the so-called autocracy for personal gain, but I can't find the dirty bribe I got. The so-called wagging tongue, the speech is capricious, I don't know which people I have talked to. How can I not find someone to talk to?

古文：但圣主膺教，实所沐浴，自上《甘露颂》及《银瓮启》、《三日诗序》、《接虏使语辞》，竭思称扬，得非 诽谤 ？
现代文：我确实受到圣主的教诲，沐浴了圣泽，所以自愿奏上《甘露颂》及《银瓮启》、《三人哦诗序》、《接虏使语辞》，竭尽思力称赞颂扬，难道这就是 诽谤 ?
English: I have indeed been instructed by the Holy Lord, and have been bathed in the holy ointment, so I voluntarily played "Candlelight" and "Silver Surge," "Three Poets" and "The Speech of the Captured Envoy," and tried my best to praise and glorify them. Is this slander?

古文：且王公百司，唯贤是与，高下之敬，等秩有差，不敢逾滥，岂应 訾毁 ？
现代文：况且我对王公大臣，各级官员，衹要贤能，便与他交往，并依照其官职的高低，区别地待以应有的礼敬，不敢随意地超越或滥用仪式，这怎么是 訾毁，我才能原本就较拙劣，误被任用，恐惧惭愧的情绪，夜都在警戒着我。
English: Moreover, I interacted with the prince minister and officials at all levels, and treated them with due respect according to the level of their official position, and did not dare to exceed or abuse the ceremony at will. How is this "destruction"? My talent was originally more clumsy, I was mistakenly appointed, and the emotions of fear and shame kept me awake at night.

古文：囚才分本劣，谬被策用，悚怍之情，夙宵兢惕，未尝夸示里闾，彰曝远迩，自循自省，并愧流言。良由缘浅寡虞，致贻嚣谤。
现代文：我从来没有在乡里夸耀过，也不敢在远近去显露，而是自我反省，循规蹈矩，以流言为耻。实在由于我人缘浅而又少防备，才招致众人的喧嚣诽谤。
English: I have never boasted in the countryside, nor dared to reveal myself far and wide, but self-reflected, followed the rules, and was ashamed of the rumors. In fact, it was because I was shallow and unprepared that I attracted the loud slander of many people.

古文：伏惟明皇临宇，普天蒙泽，戊寅赦恩，轻重必宥。
现代文：圣明的皇帝君临环宇，普天下的人们都受到恩泽，无论犯有什么罪过，是轻是重，都被恩赦宽宥。
English: The Holy Emperor has come to the world, and people all over the world have received grace. No matter what sins they have committed, whether they are light or heavy, they have been pardoned and forgiven.

古文：百日旷期，始蒙旬日，一介罪身，独婴宪劾。
现代文：衹有我这一介罪人，独自陷入法律的罗网，受到劾问。
English: I am not the only one who has fallen into the net of the law and been questioned.

古文：若事实有征，爰对有在，九死之日，无恨泉壤。 
现代文：从蒙难至今才不过十天，我却像度过了一百天那么遥远的时间。如果我的罪行确实得到验证，证据证人都有，那么即使判我死罪，我也不会在黄泉下怨恨。 
English: It's only been ten days since my ordeal, but it feels like a hundred. If my crime is proven and there are witnesses, even if I'm sentenced to death, I won't hold a grudge.

古文：诏于狱赐死。时年二十七。
现代文：诏命于狱中赐王融自杀，时年二十七岁。
English: Wang Rong was 27 years old when he was ordered to commit suicide in prison.

古文：临死叹曰： 我若不为百岁老母，当吐一言。 
现代文：王融临死前叹息说： 我如果不是为了使百岁老母免遭灾难，一定会吐露出胸中的真言来。 
English: Before his death, Wang Rong sighed and said, "If it weren't for saving my hundred-year-old mother from disaster, I would have revealed the truth in my heart."

古文：融意欲指斥帝在东宫时过失也。
现代文：王融的意思是想指斥郁林王在束宫时的过失。
English: Wang Rong meant to rebuke the emperor's mistakes in the Eastern Palace.

古文：融被收，朋友部曲参问北寺，相继于道。
现代文：王融被收监后，朋友部属到北寺探问的人，前后接续，不绝于路。
English: After Wang Rong was taken into custody, people from the Friends Department went to the North Temple to inquire, one after another, and they were constantly on the road.

古文：融请救于子良，子良忧惧不敢救。
现代文：王融向萧子良求救，萧子皇因担心害怕而不敢救援。
English: Wang Rong asked Xiao Ziliang for help, but Xiao Ziliang did not dare to rescue because he was afraid.

古文：融文集行于世。
现代文：王融有文集在世上流传。
English: Wang Rongyao's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：谢朓，字玄晖，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：谢朓，字玄晖，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Xie Yao, Zha Xuan Yao, Chen County Yang Xia Ren.

古文：祖述，吴兴太守。
现代文：祖父谢述是吴兴太守。
English: Xie Shu's grandfather was Wu Xing Taishu.

古文：父纬，散骑侍郎。
现代文：父亲谢纬任散骑侍郎。
English: His father, Xie Wei, was a horseman.

古文：朓少好学，有美名，文章清丽。
现代文：谢朓从小爱好学习，有美好的名声，文章写得清新华丽。
English: Xie Qi has been fond of studying since childhood, has a good reputation, and his articles are fresh and gorgeous.

古文：解褐豫章王太尉行参军，度随王东中郎府，转王俭卫军东阁祭酒，太子舍人、随王镇西功曹，转文学。
现代文：初任豫章王太尉行参军，又任职随王柬中郎府，调任王俭卫军东合祭酒，太子舍人、随王镇西功曹，转为文学侍从。
English: At the beginning, Yu Zhang Wang Tai Fong joined the army, and also served as the attendant of Wang Kham Chung Langfu, transferred to Wang Jian Wei Army Donghe Festival Wine, the prince's attendant, the attendant of Wang Zhen Xi Gong Cao, and turned into a literary attendant.

古文：子隆在荆州，好辞赋，数集僚友，朓以文才，尤被赏爱，流连晤对，不舍日夕。
现代文：随王萧子隆任荆州刺史时，爱好辞赋，多次招集幕僚朋友相聚会。谢跳由于很有文学才华，特别受到萧子隆的赏识厚爱，夜交谈，不忍分离。
English: When Wang Xiaozilong was in charge of Jingzhou's history, he was fond of making speeches and repeatedly convened staff members and friends to meet. Xie Jian, because of his great literary talent, was especially appreciated and loved by Xiao Zilong. They talked at night and could not bear to be separated.

古文：长史王秀之以朓年少相动，密以启闻。
现代文：长史王秀之认为谢眺年轻，会有什么不良的举动，因此秘密地报告朝廷。
English: Wang Xiuzhi, the chief historian, thought that Xie Qian was young and would have some bad behavior, so he secretly reported to the imperial court.

古文：世祖敕曰： 侍读虞云自宜恒应侍接。朓可还都。 
现代文：齐世祖敕书说： 侍读虞云应当经常地去侍奉随王，谢跳可以回到京都来。 
English: Qi Shizhu said: Attendant Yuyun should regularly attend the king, and Xie Jiao can come back to Kyoto.

古文：朓道中为诗寄西府曰： 常恐鹰隼击，秋菊委严霜。
现代文：谢眺在路途上写了一首诗寄给西府同僚说： 我时常担心受到鹰隼的攻击，将像遭受寒霜的秋菊一样衰败枯萎。
English: On the way, Xie Zhan wrote a poem and sent it to his colleagues in the western province, saying, "I often worry that I will be attacked by hawks and will wither and die like an autumn chrysanthemum that has been hit by frost.

古文：寄言罻罗者，寥廓已高翔。 
现代文：寄上一言给那设置罗网的人们，我已远走高翔飞向辽阔的天际。 
English: Send a word to those who set traps, I have gone far away and flown high into the vast sky.

古文：迁新安王中军记室。
现代文：调任为新安王中军记室。
English: He was transferred to the Military Record Office of Xin'an Wangzhong.

古文：朓笺辞子隆曰： 朓闻潢污之水，思朝宗而每竭；驽蹇之乘，希沃若而中疲。
现代文：谢跳辞别萧子隆的奏笺说： 谢跳我听说停聚不流的积水，想朝宗于海却常常枯竭；驽钝跛足的劣马，希望奔向肥沃的草原却中道疲惫不堪。
English: I heard about stagnant stagnant water. I wanted to live by the sea, but it was often dry. I wanted to go to the fertile grassland, but I was too tired.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：皋壤摇落，对之惆怅；岐路东西，或以呜悒。
现代文：水流已零落成洼地沼泽，对此而使入惆怅无比；道路已分成东西两条，真叫人临歧路而哭泣。
English: Streams of water have been broken up into swamps and marshes, and this has led to a lot of flooding; the road has been divided into east and west, which really makes people cry when they are on the wrong road.

古文：乃服义徒拥，归志莫从，邈若坠雨，飘似秋蒂。
现代文：何况我为国效劳的愿望已成泡影，而归居家园的志向又不能顺遂，邈远如掉落的雨，飘零似秋天的花。
English: What's more, my desire to serve my country has come to naught, and my aspiration to return to my homeland cannot be fulfilled. I am as far away as the falling rain, and drifting like autumn flowers.

古文：朓实庸流，行能无算，属天地休明，山川受纳，褒采一介，搜扬小善，舍耒场圃，奉笔菟园。
现代文：谢跳我实在是平庸之辈，行动办事都不能深算筹划。适逢天地美好清明，山川收受泽露，凡有一技之长点滴善德，都采集褒扬，因此，我馋得以在田野园圃中放下农具，来到菟园作文学侍臣。
English: I am really a mediocre generation, and actions and affairs cannot be well planned. When the heaven and earth are beautiful and clear, the mountains and rivers receive the dew, and every skillful virtue is praised, therefore, I was able to put down the farm tools in the fields and gardens and come to the garden to be a literary attendant.

古文：东泛三江，西浮七泽，契阔戎旃，从容宴语。
现代文：东游三江，西游七泽，告别战旗，从容欢宴笑谈。
English: Travel east to the Sanjiang River, travel west to the Qizhe River, bid farewell to the battle flag, and enjoy a leisurely dinner and conversation.

古文：长裾日曳，后乘载脂，荣立府廷，恩加颜色。
现代文：身穿官服，后车载满粱肉，荣耀地站在府廷之上，受到特别的恩宠。
English: Dressed in official attire, with a wagon full of stewed meat in the back, he stood proudly above the imperial court and received special grace.

古文：沐发晞阳，未测涯涘；抚臆论报，早誓肌骨。
现代文：我受阳光的沐浴，这恩德的光辉无边无际；我早就在心中发誓，一定要全力回报。
English: I am bathed in sunshine, the glory of this grace is boundless; I have long vowed in my heart that I must do my best to repay it.

古文：不悟沧溟未运，波臣自荡；渤澥方春，旅翮先谢。
现代文：不料沧海失去世运，使我受到波澜的摇荡；邀迤刚刚进入春天，我飞翔的翅膀便先行凋落。
English: Unexpectedly, the sea of vicissitudes lost its worldly fortune, causing me to be shaken by the waves; just after spring, my flying wings fell first.

古文：清切蕃房，寂寥旧荜。
现代文：藩府的殿堂门前，一片凄清寂寞。
English: In front of the main hall of the feudal government, there is a bleak loneliness.

古文：轻舟反溯，吊影独留，白云在天，龙门不见。
现代文：我已轻舟回返，衹留下孤独的身影，白云在天，再也望不见龙门。
English: I have returned by light boat, leaving behind a lonely figure, white clouds in the sky, and I can no longer see the Dragon Gate.

古文：去德滋永，思德滋深。
现代文：离开阁下越是长久，思念阁下越是深切。
English: The longer I am away from you, the more I miss you.

古文：唯待青江可望，候归艎于春渚；朱邸方开，效蓬心于秋实。
现代文：惟有等到汀清可望之时，我在春天的小洲上等待您回京的大船；红色官署再开，我在秋天丰收的时节竭尽浅薄的才能报效于您。
English: However, when Tingqing is in sight, I will wait for your big ship to return to Beijing on the spring shoal; the red government office will reopen, and I will do my best to serve you in the autumn harvest season.

古文：如其簪履或存，衽席无改，虽复身填沟壑，犹望妻子知归。
现代文：如果我的职位能够保存而没有改变，即使再次遭逢祸殃，身填沟壑，我仍希望我的妻子儿女能知道我的趋向所在。
English: If my position can be preserved and not changed, even if I meet with misfortune again, I still hope that my wife and children will know where I am heading.

古文：揽涕告辞，悲来横集。 
现代文：含泪告别，不禁悲从中来，横亘于心。 
English: With tearful farewells, I can't help but feel the sadness that comes from this, and it fills my heart.

古文：寻以本官兼尚书殿中郎。
现代文：不久，谢跳以本官兼任尚书殿中郎。
English: Soon after, Xie Jie took on the additional role of acting as Shang Shudong's chief secretary.

古文：隆昌初，敕朓接北使，朓自以口讷，启让不当，见许。
现代文：隆昌初年，敕命谢跳接待北魏使臣，谢脱藉口自己言辞笨拙，上奏推辞，他的请求被批准了。
English: In the first year of Longchang, Xie Danzhang desperately received the Northern Wei envoys. Xie De used the excuse that he was clumsy in his speech and played a disclaimer. His request was approved.

古文：高宗辅政，以朓为骠骑谘议，领记室，掌霸府文笔。
现代文：高宗萧鸾辅佐朝政时，以谢跳为骠骑谘议，领记室，掌管霸府的文书。
English: When Gao Zong Xiao Yan was an assistant to the imperial government, he used Xie Jian as a horse-riding adviser, receiving office, and in charge of the documents of the domineering government.

古文：又掌中书诏诰，除秘书丞，未拜，仍转中书郎。
现代文：又执管中书省草拟韶诰的事务，任秘书丞，但没有正式拜授，便转谰为中书郎。
English: He also oversaw the drafting of the Constitution of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China and served as secretary-general, but he did not officially confer the Constitution, so he became the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China.

古文：出为宣城太守，以选复为中书郎。
现代文：后出任宣城太守，又通过选拔再任中书郎。
English: He later served as the governor of Senshiro, and was reappointed as Chushiro through selection.

古文：建武四年，出为晋安王镇北谘议、南东海太守，行南徐州事。
现代文：齐高宗建武四年，谢眺出任晋安王镇北谘议、南东海太守，代理南徐州事务。
English: In the fourth year of Qi Gaozong Jianwu, Xie Qian served as the Jin'an Wangzhen North Advisory Council, the South East China Sea Governor, and the agent of the South Xuzhou affairs.

古文：启王敬则反谋，上甚嘉赏之。迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：由于奏报王敬则反叛的阴谋，高宗很是嘉奖他，提升他为尚书吏部郎。
English: Because he reported Wang Jing's rebellious plot, Gaozong highly commended him and promoted him to the leading member of the Shoshu Liaison Department.

古文：朓上表三让，中书疑朓官未及让，以问祭酒沈约。
现代文：谢跳上表再三辞让，中书怀疑谢跳的官职还达不到辞让的地位，因此便去问国子祭酒沈约。
English: Xie jumped on the table and repeatedly resigned, the Chinese book suspected that Xie jumped's official position was not up to the status of resignation, so he went to ask Kuniko for a sacrifice of wine.

古文：约曰： 宋元嘉中，范晔让吏部，朱修之让黄门，蔡兴宗让中书，并三表诏答，具事宛然。
现代文：沈约说： 宋朝元嘉年间，范晔辞让吏部郎，朱脩之辞让黄门侍郎，蔡兴宗辞让中书侍郎，都是三表诏答，这些事例已经很明白。
English: Shen Yu said: During the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Fan Xuan's speech was given to the secretary, Zhu Xi's speech was given to the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and Cai Xing's speech was given to the attendant of the Central Library, all of which were three-table edicts. These examples are already very clear.

古文：近世小官不让，遂成恒俗，恐此有乖让意。
现代文：近世以来，小官不能辞让，已经成为常规，恐怕这样做违反了辞让的本意。
English: Since modern times, it has become customary for minor officials not to be able to resign, and I am afraid that doing so violates the original intention of resigning.

古文：王蓝田、刘安西并贵重，初自不让，今岂可慕此不让邪？
现代文：王蓝田、刘安西都位高任重，当初都没有辞让，现在难道能够仿效他们不辞让吗?
English: Wang Lantian and Liu Anxi, both of whom hold high positions, did not resign at the beginning. Is it possible to follow their example of not resigning?

古文：孙兴公、孔觊并让记室，今岂可三署皆让邪？
现代文：孙兴公、孔觊都辞让记室这一小官职，现在难道三署官员都可以辞让吗?
English: Both Sun Xinggong and Kong Lan resigned from the minor official position of the registration office. Can all three officials resign now?

古文：谢吏部今授超阶，让别有意，岂关官之大小？
现代文：谢吏部现在是越级提拔，他的辞让白有别的含意，怎会与官职大小有联系?
English: Xie Lirenbu is now promoted beyond grade, his resignation has other meanings, how can it be related to the size of the post?

古文：捴谦之美，本出人情，若大官必让，便与诣阙章表不异。
现代文：谦让这种美德，本出于人们的情感。如果凡是大官必须辞让，便与到殿阙前上奏章表没有区别。
English: Modesty is a virtue that comes from people's emotions. If a high-ranking official has to make concessions, it is no different from going to the front of the hall to play the hymn sheet.

古文：例既如此，谓都自非疑。 
现代文：按照惯例都是这样去做，自然不必去怀疑是否与之相符。 
English: It is customary to do it this way, and of course there is no need to question whether it is consistent with it.

古文：朓又启让，上优答不许。
现代文：谢跳又一次上奏辞让，齐高宗优诏答覆不准许他的请求。
English: Xie Zhan once again made a concession speech, and Qi Gaozong Youzhao replied that his request was not allowed.

古文：朓善草隶，长五言诗，沈约常云 二百年来无此诗也。 
现代文：谢跳善写草书隶书，特别擅长写五言诗，沈约常常说： 二百年来都没有他这样的好诗。 
English: Xie Jie is good at writing cursive script, especially good at writing five-character poems. Shen Yu often said: There has not been such a good poem in two hundred years.

古文：敬皇后迁祔山陵，朓撰哀策文，齐世莫有及者。
现代文：敬皇后迁到皇陵与帝合葬，谢跳撰写了哀策文。齐朝没有谁能比得上他。
English: Qian Qian moved to the imperial mausoleum to be buried with the emperor, and Xie Jie wrote a lamentation. No one in the Qi Dynasty could match him.

古文：东昏失德，江祏欲立江夏王宝玄，末更回惑，与弟祀密谓朓曰： 江夏年少轻脱，不堪负荷神器，不可复行废立。
现代文：东昏侯丧失了做皇帝应有的德性，于是江柘便想拥立江夏王萧宝玄为帝，后来又反悔，与弟弟江祀一道秘密对谢跳说： 江夏王年轻，性格轻浮，难以担负起继承祖宗帝业的重任，不可拥立他为帝。
English: Dongdimou lost the virtue of being an emperor, so Jiang Chen wanted to make Xiao Baoxuan, the king of Jiangxia, the emperor. Later, he repented and secretly said to Xie Zi together with his brother Jiang Shi: The king of Jiangxia is young, he has a flighty personality, and it is difficult for him to take on the heavy responsibility of inheriting the imperial cause of his ancestors. He should not be made the emperor.

古文：始安年长入纂，不乖物望。
现代文：始安王年纪比较大，如进宫继承皇位，才不会辜负大家的期望。
English: King Shi'an is relatively old, and if he enters the palace to inherit the throne, he will not disappoint everyone's expectations.

古文：非以此要富贵，政是求安国家耳。 
现代文：我们并不想以此求取富贵，祇是为了求得国家安定罢了。 
English: We're not doing this to get rich, we're doing this to stabilize the country.

古文：遥光又遣亲人刘沨密致意于朓，欲以为肺腑。
现代文：始安王萧遥光又派亲信刘飒暗中向谢跳表达心意，想让他做自己的心腹。
English: Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang also sent his close confidant Liu Xuan to secretly express his wishes to Xie Biao, wanting him to be his confidant.

古文：朓自以受恩高宗，非沨所言，不肯答。
现代文：谢跳认为自己受到齐高宗的厚恩，废立大事不是刘飒这种人能谈论的，所以不肯答应。
English: Xie Jie thought that he was favored by Qi Gaozong, and the abolition of the great event was not something that people like Liu Ye could talk about, so he refused to agree.

古文：少日，遥光以朓兼知卫尉事，朓惧见引，即以祏等谋告左兴盛，兴盛不敢发言。
现代文：过了几天，萧遥光又让谢跳兼管卫尉事务，谢跳害怕被他拉下水，便把江柘等人的阴谋报告给左兴盛，左兴盛不敢说什么。
English: A few days later, Xiao Yaoguang also put Xie Jie in charge of the lieutenant's affairs. Xie Jie was afraid of being dragged into the water by him, so he reported the conspiracy of Jiang Wei and others to Zuo Xing Sheng. Zuo Xing Sheng did not dare to say anything.

古文：祏闻，以告遥光，遥光大怒，乃称敕召朓，仍回车付廷尉，与徐孝嗣、祏、暄等连名启诛朓曰： 谢朓资性险薄，大彰远近。
现代文：江柘得知这一消息，便告诉了萧遥光，萧遥光大怒，于是假藉皇帝的名义敕命召回谢跳，等他一到便把他交给廷尉管制。萧遥光与徐孝嗣、江柘、刘喧等人联名上奏，要诛杀谢跳，奏章说： 谢跳品行阴险轻薄，远近都知道。
English: When Jiang Yu learned of this news, he told Xiao Yaoguang. Xiao Yaoguang was furious, so he issued an order in the name of the emperor to recall Xie Biao. As soon as he arrived, he put him under the control of a courtier. Xiao Yaoguang and Xu Xiaozhi, Jiang Yu, Liu Dun and others jointly played a piece to kill Xie Biao. The piece said: Xie Biao's deeds are insidious and frivolous, and are known far and wide.

古文：王敬则往构凶逆，微有诚效，自尔升擢，超越伦伍。
现代文：从前王敬则叛乱时，他立下微小的功劳，自此以后越级提升，超过了同僚。
English: In the past, when Wang Jingzhe rebelled, he made a small contribution. Since then, he has been promoted to a higher rank, surpassing his colleagues.

古文：而溪壑无厌，著于触事。
现代文：但他的欲望像沟壑一样不得满足，逭从他的行事中就看得很明显。
English: But his desires are as insatiable as the ravines, as is clear from his actions.

古文：比遂扇动内外，处处奸说，妄贬乘舆，窃论宫禁，间谤亲贤，轻议朝宰，丑言异计，非可具闻。
现代文：比如他处处用奸邪的言论去煽动朝廷内外的官员，狂妄地贬低皇上，私下议论皇宫中的事情，诽谤皇亲贤王，轻率地议论朝廷宰臣，恶言诡计，不能一一奏闻。
English: For example, he used treacherous remarks everywhere to incite officials inside and outside the imperial court, arrogantly belittled the emperor, privately discussed things in the imperial palace, slandered the imperial princes and kings, rashly discussed the imperial vice-ministers, and spoke evil words and tricks, which cannot be heard one by one.

古文：无君之心既著，共弃之诛宜及。
现代文：非毁君主的用心既然已经很明显，那么应当得到人人共诛的杀身之罪。
English: Now that it has become clear that the intention was not to destroy the monarch, everyone should be held responsible for the crime of murder.

古文：臣等参议，宜下北里，肃正刑书。 
现代文：臣等共同商议，认为应当关进北寺监狱，按刑律受到严厉的惩处。 
English: The ministers and others deliberated together and agreed that he should be put in Hokuji Prison and severely punished according to the criminal law.

古文：诏： 公等启事如此，朓资性轻险，久彰物议。
现代文：诏书说： 各位大臣奏事已是如此，谢跳资性轻浮阴险，早已明显地受到众人议论。
English: The edict said, "This is what the ministers have already reported. The frivolous and insidious nature of capital flight has already been clearly discussed by everyone.

古文：直以彫虫薄伎，见齿衣冠。
现代文：他仅以能诗善书这些雕虫小技，勉强进入官宦之列。
English: He only managed to get into the ranks of government officials by virtue of his ability to write poetry and carve insects.

古文：昔在渚宫，构扇蕃邸，日夜纵谀，仰窥俯画。
现代文：以前在江陵时，便挑拨煽动藩王，日夜奉承谄谀，窥伺朝廷，暗中策划。
English: In the past, when he was in Gangneung, he instigated and incited the king of the domain, flattered him day and night, spied on the imperial court, and plotted in secret.

古文：及还京师，翻自宣露，江、汉无波，以为己功。
现代文：及至回到京师，反而更加自我暴露。江、漠一带没有波澜，他便把这个当成是自己的功劳。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he was even more self-exposed. There were no waves in the rivers and deserts, and he took this as his own achievement.

古文：素论于兹而尽，缙绅所以侧目。
现代文：自此以后他再也没有纯真的言论了，所以官宦们都对他怒目而视。
English: Since then, he hasn't uttered an innocent word, so the officials glare at him.

古文：去夏之事，颇有微诚，赏擢曲加，逾迈伦序，感悦未闻，陵竞弥著。
现代文：去年夏天的事件，他颇有微小的忠诚表现，所以既受赏赐又被提拔。
English: He was both rewarded and promoted for his rather meagre show of loyalty in the aftermath of last summer's events.

古文：遂复矫构风尘，妄惑朱紫，诋贬朝政，疑间亲贤。
现代文：超越了正常升职的次序，但并没有听说他感恩欢悦，反而更明显地盛气凌人，追逐名利。他又掀起了风波，妖言惑众，诋毁贬斥朝政，怀疑离间皇亲贤王。
English: He surpassed the normal order of promotion, but instead of being grateful and happy, he was more obviously arrogant and pursued fame and fortune. He also stirred up a storm, demonized and misled the public, slandered and disparaged the government, and suspected that the emperor and the emperor were separated.

古文：巧言利口，见丑前志。涓流纤孽，作戒远图。
现代文：花言巧语，又现出了从前的丑态；搞小动作，制造祸端，图谋实现其野心。
English: With his rhetoric, he has reverted to his ugly ways of the past; engaging in petty actions, creating disasters, and plotting to realize his ambitions.

古文：宜有少正之刑，以申去害之义。
现代文：所以诛杀少正迎的刑法有必要存在，以便伸张法律除去害人虫的本义。
English: Therefore, it is necessary for the criminal law to exist in order to enforce the law to remove the original meaning of pests.

古文：便可收付廷尉，肃明国典。 
现代文：即可将他收捕，交给廷尉，以严肃国家法纪。 
English: He can then be arrested and handed over to a court official, in accordance with the country's strict laws and regulations.

古文：又使御史中丞范岫奏收朓，下狱死。
现代文：同时，还让御史中丞范岫上奏收捕谢跳。
English: At the same time, he also ordered the Imperial Historian, Chujo Fan, to collect and arrest Xie Zi.

古文：时年三十六。
现代文：谢跳被关进监狱，最后死在狱中，时年三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six years old.

古文：朓初告王敬则，敬则女为朓妻，常怀刀欲报朓，朓不敢相见。
现代文：当初，谢跳告发王敬则，王敬则的女儿是谢跳的妻子，她时常怀藏利刀想杀死谢跳以报父仇，因此谢眺不敢和她见面。
English: At first, Xie Jie reported Wang Jingzhe to Wang Jingzhe. Wang Jingzhe's daughter was Xie Jie's wife. She often hid the knife to kill Xie Jie to avenge her father, so Xie Qian did not dare to meet with her.

古文：及为吏部郎，沈昭略谓朓曰： 卿人地之美，无忝此职。
现代文：及至谢跳任吏部郎，沈昭略对他说： 你人望地位都很好，不愧于担任吏部郎这一职务。
English: When Xie was promoted to the post of secretary, Shen Zhaoyu said to him, "You are both well-regarded and worthy of the post of secretary.

古文：但恨今日刑于寡妻。 
现代文：衹是你对现在将要用刑律来处罚妻子会抱恨终生的。 
English: It is you who will hold a lifelong grudge against your wife who will now be punished by the criminal law.

古文：朓临败叹曰： 我不杀王公，王公由我而死。 
现代文：谢跳临难时叹息说： 我不杀王公，王公由于我的原故而被处死。 
English: When Xie Jian was on the verge of death, he sighed and said, "I won't kill the prince. The prince was executed because of me."

古文：史臣曰：晋世迁宅江表，人无北归之计，英霸作辅，芟定中原，弥见金德之不竞也。元嘉再略河南，师旅倾覆，自此以来，攻伐寝议。
现代文：史臣曰：晋朝迁居江南，众人都没有回归北地的计策，英明的霸主作为朝廷的辅佐，平定中原，更见出晋朝金德的不能再兴宋元嘉年间两次进兵河南，军队覆灭，从此以后，主张北伐攻魏的议论便停止了。
English: Shichen said: the Jin Dynasty moved to the south of the Yangtze River, and people did not have the strategy of returning to the north. The wise overlord, as an assistant to the imperial court, pacified the Central Plains. Moreover, he saw that the children of the Jin Dynasty could no longer rise. During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, they marched into Henan twice, and the army was destroyed. Since then, the discussion of advocating the Northern Expedition to attack Wei has stopped.

古文：虽有战争，事存保境。
现代文：虽然还有南北的战争，对南朝来说衹不过是保境图存而已。
English: Although there was still a war between the north and the south, for the Southern Dynasty, it was nothing more than the preservation of the territory.

古文：王融生遇永明，军国宁息，以文敏才华，不足进取，经略心旨，殷勤表奏。
现代文：王融生当永明之世，国家战事已基本安息。他认为仅凭博学聪敏和文才，不能有大的作为，难以进取卿相高位，所以多次表奏，殷勤献计。
English: Wang Rong was born in the Yongming era, when the country's military affairs were basically at rest. He believed that only by virtue of erudition, acumen and literary talent, he could not make great achievements, and it was difficult to enter the high ranks of the nobles, so he made many appearances and diligently made plans.

古文：若使宫车未晏，有事边关，融之报效，或不易限。
现代文：假使齐武帝未死时，边关发生战事，那么王融报国，所能取得的功绩，大概不是很轻易便能估量得出的。
English: If there had been a war at the border before the death of Emperor Qiwu, then Wang Rong's contribution to the country would probably not have been easy to measure.

古文：夫经国体远，许久为难，而立功立事，信居物右，其贾谊、终军之流亚乎！
现代文：大凡经世济国，要取得成绩是很长远的，所以要获取高位既长久又困难；而在战争中建立功勋，确实很容易位居众人之上。王融大概是贾谊、终军一类的人才吧!
English: If you are a great statesman, it takes a long time to achieve results, so it is both long and difficult to obtain a high position; and in the war, it is indeed easy to rank above everyone else. Wang Rong is probably a talent like Jia Yi, the last soldier!

古文：赞曰：元长颖脱，拊翼将飞。
现代文：赞曰：王元长脱颖而出，将要展翅高飞。
English: Praise said: Wang Yuanchang has stood out and will fly high.

古文：时来运往，身没志违。
现代文：但时运变迁，终于身死而志失。
English: However, with the changes of the times, he finally lost his will.

古文：高宗始业，乃顾玄晖。
现代文：高宗始开帝业，非常看重谢玄晖。
English: Gao Zongshi started the imperial career, and he highly valued Xie Xuanqin.

古文：逢昏属乱，先蹈祸机。
现代文：不料遇上时政昏乱，他却首先遭受到杀身之祸。
English: Unexpectedly, when he encountered the political turmoil, he was the first to be killed.

