古文：宋子曰：人为万物之灵，五官百体，赅而存焉。
现代文：宋先生说：人类是万物之灵长，五官和全身肢体都长得很齐备。
English: Mr. Song said, "Human beings are the elders of all things. All five senses and all body parts are well developed.

古文：贵者垂衣裳，煌煌山龙，以治天下。贱者衤豆褐、裳，冬以御寒，夏以蔽体，以自别于禽兽。
现代文：统治天下的帝王穿着绣有龙凤和山水图案的华服来号令天下，穷苦的百姓则穿着粗制短小的毛布和麻布衣服，冬天用来御寒，夏天借以遮掩身体，只是跟禽兽有所区分罢了。
English: The emperors who ruled the world wore magnificent clothes embroidered with dragons and phoenixes and landscape patterns to command the world, while the poor people wore coarse short blankets and linen clothes, used to keep out the cold in winter and to cover their bodies in summer, just to be distinguished from animals.

古文：是故其质则造物之所具也。
现代文：因此，人们所穿着的衣服的原料是自然界所提供的。
English: Therefore, the raw materials for the clothes people wear are provided by nature.

古文：属草木者为、麻、苘、葛，属禽兽与昆虫者裘褐、丝绵。
现代文：其中属于植物的有棉、麻、葛，属于禽兽昆虫的有裘皮、毛、丝、绵。
English: Among them, cotton, hemp, and kudzu belong to plants, and fur, hair, silk, and lint belong to animals and insects.

古文：各载其半，而裳服充焉矣。
现代文：二者各占一半，加在一起做衣服就足够了。
English: The two make up half each, and together they are enough to make clothes.

古文：天孙机杼，传巧人间。
现代文：巧妙如同天上的织女那样的纺织技术，早就已经传遍人间了。
English: Textile technology, as ingenious as a heavenly weaver, has long been spread throughout the world.

古文：从本质而见花，因绣濯而得锦。
现代文：人们把原料纺出带有花纹的布匹，又经过刺绣、染色而造就华美的锦缎。
English: People spun the raw material into fabric with patterns, and embroidered and dyed it to create gorgeous brocades.

古文：乃杼柚遍天下，而得见花机之巧者，能几人哉？ 治乱 、 经纶 字义，学者童而习之，而终身不见其形象，岂非缺憾也！
现代文：尽管织布机到处都有，但是真正见识过提花机纺织技巧的又有几个人呢？像 治乱 、 经纶 这些词的原意，读书人从小就知道，但他们终其一生都没有见过它的实际形象，对于他们来说这难道不是一件憾事吗？
English: Although looms are everywhere, how many people have actually seen the jacquard loom's weaving techniques? Readers know the original meaning of words like "control chaos" and "govern" from childhood, but they have never seen its actual image throughout their lives. Isn't it a pity for them?

古文：先列饲蚕之法，以知丝源之所自。
现代文：现在我先来讲讲养蚕的方法，让大家明白丝是从哪里来的。
English: Now I will first talk about the method of raising silkworms, so that everyone understands where the silk comes from.

古文：盖人物相丽，贵贱有章，天实为之矣。
现代文：大概是人和衣服相互映衬，其中的贵与贱自然分明，这实在是上天的安排吧！
English: Presumably, people and clothes contrast with each other, and the rich and poor are naturally distinguished, which is really God's arrangement!

古文：○蚕种
现代文：蚕种
English: Silkworm breeding

古文：凡蛹变蚕蛾，旬日破茧而出，雌雄均等。
现代文：蚕由蛹变成蚕蛾，需要经过约十天的时间才能破茧而出，雌蛾和雄蛾数目大致相等。
English: It takes about ten days for a silkworm to change from a cocoon to a silkworm moth and emerge from the cocoon. The number of female and male moths is roughly equal.

古文：雌者伏而不动，雄者两翅飞扑，遇雌即交，交一日、半日方解。
现代文：雌蛾通常伏着不活动，雄蛾则总是在振动两翅飞扑，只要遇到雌蛾就交配，交配半天甚至一天才分开。
English: Female moths usually lie down and are inactive, while male moths are always fluttering their wings. Whenever they encounter a female moth, they mate, and the mating lasts for half a day or even a day before they separate.

古文：解脱之后，雄者中枯而死，雌者即时生卵。
现代文：分开之后，雄蛾因体内精力枯竭而死，雌蛾立刻就开始产卵。
English: After separation, the male moth dies of exhaustion, and the female moth immediately begins to lay eggs.

古文：承藉卵生者，或纸或布，随方所用。
现代文：铺在下面供雌蛾产卵的材料，有用纸也有用布的，各地的习惯有所不同。
English: The material spread below for the female moth to lay her eggs, useful paper or cloth, varies from place to place.

古文：一蛾计生卵二百余粒，自然粘于纸上，粒粒匀铺，天然无一堆积。
现代文：一只雌蛾可产下蚕卵二百多粒，所产下的蚕卵自然地粘在纸上，并且每粒之间均匀排列，不会堆积在一起。
English: A female moth can lay more than two hundred silkworm eggs. The silkworm eggs naturally stick to the paper, and are evenly arranged between each grain, and do not pile up together.

古文：蚕主收贮，以待来年。
现代文：养蚕的人把蚕卵收藏起来，准备第二年用。
English: The silkworm breeders collect the silkworm eggs and prepare them for use the following year.

古文：○蚕浴
现代文：蚕浴
English: Silkworm bath

古文：凡蚕用浴法，唯嘉、湖两郡。
现代文：对蚕种进行浸浴的只有嘉兴、湖州两个地方。
English: Jiaxing and Huzhou are the only two places that bathe silkworm seeds.

古文：湖多用天露、石灰，嘉多用盐卤水。
现代文：湖州多采用天露浴法和石灰浴法，嘉兴则多采用盐水或卤水浴法。
English: Huzhou mostly uses the dew bath method and the lime bath method, while Jiaxing mostly uses the salt water or brine bath method.

古文：每蚕纸一张，用盐仓走出卤水二升，参水浸于盂内，纸浮其面。
现代文：每张蚕纸用从盐仓流出来的卤水约两升掺水倒在一个盆盂内，纸便会浮在水面上。
English: Each sheet of silkworm paper is mixed with about two liters of brine from the salt warehouse and poured into a basin. The paper then floats on the water surface.

古文：逢腊月十二即浸浴，至二十四，计十二日，周即漉起，用微火烘干。
现代文：每逢腊月开始浸种，从腊月十二日到该月二十四日，共浸浴十二天，到时候就把蚕纸捞起，用微火将水分烤干。
English: Every time the waxing gibbous moon begins to soak the seeds, from the twelfth day of the waxing gibbous moon to the twenty-fourth day of the month, a total of twelve days of soaking. At that time, the silk paper is picked up and the water is dried with a small fire.

古文：从此珍重箱匣中，半点风湿不受，直待清明抱产。
现代文：然后小心妥善保管在箱、盒里，不让蚕种受半点儿风寒湿气，一直等到清明节时才取出蚕卵进行孵化。
English: Then carefully and properly stored in boxes and boxes, do not allow the silkworm seeds to be exposed to even a little bit of wind, cold and humidity, and wait until the Tomb-Sweeping Day to take out the silkworm eggs for incubation.

古文：其天露浴者，时日相同。
现代文：天露浴的时间与前述方法相同。
English: The time of the dew bath is the same as the previous method.

古文：以篾盘盛纸，摊开屋上，四隅小石镇压，任从霜雨、风雨、雷电，满十二日方收。
现代文：将蚕纸摊开平放在屋顶的竹篾盘上，将蚕纸的四角用小石块压住，任凭它经受霜雪、风雨、雷电吹打，放够十二天后再收起来。
English: The silk paper is spread out flat on a bamboo chopping board on the roof, the four corners of the silk paper are pressed with small stones, and it is allowed to withstand frost and snow, wind and rain, and lightning. It is put away after twelve days.

古文：珍重待时如前法。
现代文：用前述相同方法珍藏起来等到时候再用。
English: Use the same method as above to store it until it's time to use it again.

古文：盖低种经浴，则自死不出，不费叶故，且得丝亦多也。
现代文：大概是孱弱的蚕种经过浴种就会死掉不出，所以不会浪费桑叶，而且这样处理后蚕吐丝也多。
English: It is probably a weak silkworm seed that will not die after bathing, so it will not waste mulberry leaves, and after this treatment, the silkworm will spit out more silk.

古文：晚种不用浴。○种忌
现代文：而对于一年中孵化、饲养两次的 晚蚕 则不需要浴种。种忌
English: However, for late silkworms, which are hatched and reared twice a year, there is no need for bathing seeds.

古文：凡蚕纸用竹木四条为方架，高悬透风避日梁枋之上，其下忌桐油、烟煤火气。
现代文：装蚕卵的纸，是用四根竹棍或者木棍做成的方架，将方架挂在高高的通风避光的横梁上，进而把蚕纸撑开。方架下面忌讳放桐油和烟熏火燎。
English: The paper used to hold the silkworm eggs is a square frame made of four bamboo sticks or wooden sticks. The square frame is hung on a high, ventilated, light-shielding beam, and the silkworm paper is then propped up. The bottom of the square frame is smeared with tung oil and smoked bonfires.

古文：冬月忌雪映，一映即空。
现代文：冬天要避免雪的反射光映照，蚕卵一经雪光映照就会变成空壳不能孵化。
English: In winter, it is necessary to avoid the reflected light reflection of snow. Once the silkworm eggs are reflected by snow, they will become empty shells and cannot hatch.

古文：遇大雪下时，即忙收贮，明曰雪过，依然悬挂，直待腊月浴藏。
现代文：因此，遇到下雪的时候，要立即将蚕卵收藏起来避光保管好，等到第二天雪停了以后再把它挂起来，一直等到十二月浴种之后再进行收藏。
English: Therefore, when encountering snow, it is necessary to immediately collect the silkworm eggs, store them away from the light, wait until the next day after the snow stops, and then hang it up, and wait until December after the bath.

古文：○种类
现代文：种类
English: Type of cheese

古文：凡蚕有早、晚二种。
现代文：蚕分早蚕和晚蚕两种，晚蚕每年比早蚕先孵化五六天。
English: There are two types of silkworms: early and late. Late silkworms hatch five or six days earlier than early silkworms.

古文：晚种每年先早种五六日出，结茧亦在先，其茧较轻三分之一。若早蚕结茧时，彼已出蛾生卵，以便再养矣。
现代文：结茧也在早蚕之前，但它的茧约比早蚕的茧轻三分之一。当早蚕结茧的时候，晚蚕已经出蛾产卵了，可用来继续喂养。
English: The cocoon also precedes the early silkworm, but its cocoon is about one-third lighter than the early silkworm's cocoon. When the early silkworm cocoons, the late silkworm has already emerged from the moth to lay eggs, which can be used to continue feeding.

古文：凡三种浴种，皆谨视原记。
现代文：三个浴种方法当中，无论采用哪一种，都要特别注意做上记号加以区分。
English: Among the three bathing methods, no matter which one is used, special attention should be paid to making a mark to distinguish them.

古文：如一错误，或将天露者投盐浴，则尽空不出矣。
现代文：如果搞错了，如把已经用天露浴种的卵再放到盐卤水里浴洗，那样卵就会全部变成空壳，不能再孵化。
English: If you make a mistake, such as putting the eggs that have been used in the dew bath and then bathed in brine, then the eggs will all become empty shells and can no longer hatch.

古文：凡茧色唯黄、白二种。
现代文：蚕茧只有黄、白两种颜色。
English: The cocoon is only yellow and white.

古文：川、陕、晋、豫有黄无白，嘉、湖有白无黄。
现代文：四川、陕西、山西和河南只有黄色茧而没有白色茧，嘉兴和湖州两地则只有白色茧没有黄色茧。
English: In Sichuan, Shaanxi, Shanxi and Henan, there are only yellow cocoons and no white cocoons. In Jiaxing and Huzhou, there are only white cocoons and no yellow cocoons.

古文：若将白雄配黄雌，则其嗣变成褐茧。
现代文：如果用白茧的雄蛾跟黄茧的雌蛾进行交配，所产生的后代吐出丝就结成褐色的茧。
English: If a male moth with a white beak mates with a female moth with a yellow beak, the resulting offspring spit out silk and form a brown cocoon.

古文：黄丝以猪胰漂洗，亦成白色，但终不可染漂白、桃红二色。
现代文：黄茧丝经过用猪脂肪提炼的肥皂漂洗，也能变成白色，但是始终无法漂成白丝那样的纯白色，也无法染上桃红的颜色。
English: Jaundice silk can also turn white after being washed with soap extracted from pig fat, but it can never be bleached to pure white like white silk, nor can it be dyed pink.

古文：凡茧形亦有数种。
现代文：茧的形状也分好几种。
English: The shape of the cocoon is also divided into several types.

古文：晚茧结成亚腰葫卢样，天露茧尖长如榧子形，又或圆扁如核桃形。
现代文：晚蚕会把蚕茧结成束腰形，就像葫芦的样子，经过天露水浴洗的蚕结出的茧形状又尖又长，或者是呈扁圆形。
English: The evening silkworms will tie their cocoons into a loin shape, like a gourd. The cocoons of the silkworms that have been bathed in dew are pointed and long, or are flat and round.

古文：又一种不忌泥涂叶者，名为贱蚕，得丝偏多。
现代文：还有一种不怕吃带泥土的桑叶的蚕，名叫 贱蚕 ，吐丝反而会比较多。
English: There is also a kind of silkworm that is not afraid to eat mulberry leaves with soil, called the lowly silkworm, but it will spit out more silk.

古文：凡蚕形亦有纯白、虎斑、纯黑、花纹数种，吐丝则同。
现代文：蚕的体色有纯白、虎斑、纯黑、花纹色几种，吐丝都是一样的。
English: The body color of the silkworm is pure white, tabby, pure black, and several pattern colors, and the spinning is the same.

古文：今寒家有将早雄配晚雌者，幻出嘉种，一异也。
现代文：现在的贫苦人家有用雄性早蚕蛾与雌性晚蚕蛾相交配而培育出良种的，真是很不寻常啊！
English: It is very unusual for poor families to have a male early silkworm moth and a female late silkworm moth to mate and produce a good seed.

古文：野蚕自为茧，出青州、沂水等地，树老即自生。
现代文：有一种野蚕，它不用人工饲养管理而能自己结茧，多产于山东的青州及沂水一带。当树叶枯黄时自然就会有长出的野蚕蛾。
English: There is a kind of wild silkworm, which can grow its own cocoon without artificial feeding management. It is mostly produced in the Qingzhou and Surabaya areas of Shandong. When the leaves turn yellow, there will naturally be a growing wild silkworm moth.

古文：其丝为衣，能御雨及垢污。
现代文：用这种蚕吐的丝织成的衣服，能防雨且耐脏。
English: The clothes woven from this silkworm-spit silk are rainproof and stain-resistant.

古文：其蛾出即能飞，不传种纸上。
现代文：野蚕蛾钻出茧后就能飞走，不在蚕纸上产卵传种。
English: Wild silkworm moths can fly away after burrowing out of the cocoon, and do not lay eggs on the silk paper for propagation.

古文：他处亦有，但稀少耳。
现代文：别的地方也有野蚕，只是不多罢了。
English: Elsewhere there are also wild silkworms, but they are not numerous.

古文：○抱养
现代文：抱养
English: Foster care

古文：凡清明逝三日，蚕妙即不偎衣衾暖气，自然生出。
现代文：清明节过后三天，蚕卵不需要用衣服、被褥等保暖就会自然孵化。
English: Three days after the Tomb-Sweeping Day, the silkworm eggs will hatch naturally without the need to keep warm with clothes, bedding, etc.

古文：蚕室宜向东南，周围用纸糊风隙，上无棚板者宜顶格，值寒冷则用炭火于室内助暖。
现代文：蚕室的位置最好是面向东南方，蚕室周围墙壁上透风的缝隙要用纸糊好，室内房顶上如果没有天花板，就要加上顶棚。遇到天气寒冷温度低的时候，蚕室内还要使用炭火来加温。
English: The location of the silkworm room is best facing southeast, and the air-permeable gaps on the walls around the silkworm room should be papered. If there is no ceiling on the roof of the room, it is necessary to add a roof. When the weather is cold and the temperature is low, the silkworm room should also be heated with charcoal.

古文：凡初乳蚕，将桑叶切为细条。
现代文：喂养初生的蚕宝宝时，要把桑叶切成细条。
English: When feeding newborn baby silkworms, mulberry leaves should be cut into thin strips.

古文：切叶不束稻麦镐为之，则不损刀。
现代文：切桑叶的砧板要用稻麦秆捆扎成，这样就不会损坏刀口了。
English: The cutting board for cutting mulberry leaves should be tied with rice straw, so that the edge of the knife is not damaged.

古文：摘叶用瓮坛盛，不欲风吹枯悴。
现代文：摘回来的桑叶要用陶瓮、陶坛子装好，不要被风吹干了水分。
English: The recovered mulberry leaves should be placed in a ceramic bowl or jar, and should not be wind-dried.

古文：二眠以前，腾筐方法皆用尖圆小竹筷提过。
现代文：蚕在二眠以前，腾筐的方法都是用尖圆的小竹筷子把蚕夹过去。
English: Before the second sleep of the silkworm, the method of lifting the basket is to use small round bamboo chopsticks to clip the silkworm.

古文：二眠以后则不用箸，而手指可拈矣。
现代文：二眠以后就用不着竹筷子，可以直接用手捡了。
English: After two sleeps, you don't need bamboo chopsticks, you can pick them up directly by hand.

古文：凡腾筐勤苦，皆视人工。
现代文：腾筐次数的多少关键在于人是不是真的勤劳。
English: The key to how many times the hoop is raised depends on whether the person is really diligent.

古文：怠于腾者，厚叶与粪湿蒸，多致压死。
现代文：如果人懒得腾筐，堆积的残叶和蚕粪太多了，就会变得湿热，有时往往会把蚕给压死。
English: If people are too lazy to empty the baskets, and there are too many leftover leaves and silkworm droppings, it will become hot and humid, and sometimes the silkworms will be crushed to death.

古文：凡眠齐时，皆吐丝而后眠。
现代文：蚕总是先吐丝而后一齐睡眠。
English: Silkworms always spit out their silk first and then sleep together.

古文：若腾过，须将旧叶些微拣净。若粘带丝缠叶在中，眠起之时，恐其即食一口，则其病为胀死。
现代文：在这个时候腾筐，需要把零碎的残叶都拣干净了，如果还有粘着丝的残叶留下来的话，蚕觉醒之后，哪怕只吃一口残叶也会得病胀死。
English: At this time, the basket is raised, and it is necessary to pick up the scattered remnants of leaves. If there are still remnants of leaves with sticky silk left, after the silkworm wakes up, even if it only eats a mouthful of leaves, it will get sick and die.

古文：三眠已过，若天气炎热，急宜搬出宽凉所，亦忌风吹。
现代文：三眠过后，如果天气十分炎热，就应该赶快搬到宽敞凉爽的房间里，但也忌受风。
English: After three nights of sleep, if the weather is very hot, you should quickly move to a spacious cool room, but also avoid the wind.

古文：凡大眠后，计上叶十二冫食方腾，太勤则丝糙。
现代文：大眠之后，要喂食十二次桑叶以后再腾筐，腾筐次数太多，蚕吐的丝就会变得粗糙。
English: After a good night's sleep, it is necessary to feed the mulberry leaves twelve times before lifting the basket. If the basket is lifted too many times, the silk spit out by the silkworm will become rough.

古文：○养忌
现代文：养忌
English: Food taboos

古文：凡蚕畏香，复畏臭。
现代文：蚕既怕香味也怕臭味。
English: Silkworms are afraid of both fragrance and odour.

古文：若焚骨灰、淘毛圊者，顺风吹来，多致触死。
现代文：如果烧骨头或掏厕所的臭味顺风吹来，接触到蚕，蚕就会死亡。
English: If the smell of burning bones or digging latrines blows downwind and comes into contact with the silkworms, the silkworms will die.

古文：隔壁煎鲍鱼、宿脂，亦或触死。
现代文：隔壁煎咸鱼或不新鲜的肥肉之类的气味如果接触到蚕也会让蚕死亡。
English: The smell of fried salted fish or stale meat next door can also kill silkworms if they come into contact with it.

古文：灶烧煤炭，炉沉、檀，亦触死。
现代文：灶里烧煤炭或香炉里燃沉香、檀香，这些气味接触到蚕时也会把蚕熏死。
English: Coal burning in the stove or burning incense and sandalwood in the incense burner, these odors will also smoke the silkworms to death when they come into contact with them.

古文：懒妇便器摇动气侵，亦有损伤。
现代文：那些懒惰的妇女，家里马桶中积存着大小便，摇动时发出污浊的气味，对蚕也有损害。
English: Those lazy women have feces and urine accumulated in the toilet at home, and when shaken, it emits a foul smell, which is also harmful to silkworms.

古文：若风则偏忌西南，西南风太劲，则有合箔皆僵者。
现代文：此外蚕最怕西南风，如果风势太猛，甚至会让所有的蚕都僵死。
English: In addition, silkworms are most afraid of the southwest wind. If the wind is too strong, it will even cause all the silkworms to freeze to death.

古文：凡臭气触来，急烧残桑叶烟以抵之。
现代文：如果闻到臭气飘散，应该尽快燃烧蚕吃剩的残碎桑叶，用这种烟来抵挡臭气。
English: If you smell the stench wafting away, you should burn the shredded mulberry leaves left over by the silkworms as soon as possible, and use this smoke to ward off the stench.

古文：○叶料
现代文：叶料
English: Foliar feed

古文：凡桑叶无土不生。
现代文：桑树在各个地方都适宜种植。
English: Mulberry trees are suitable for planting everywhere.

古文：嘉、湖用枝条垂压，今年视桑树傍生条，用竹钩挂卧，逐渐近地面，至冬月则抛土压之，来春每节生根，则剪开他栽。
现代文：浙江嘉兴和湖州用压条的方法培植桑树，选当年桑树的侧枝用竹钩坠挂，使它逐渐接近地面，到了冬天就用土压住枝条。第二年春天，每节树枝都能长出根来，这时便可以剪下来，移栽出新的桑树。
English: In Jiaxing and Huzhou of Zhejiang Province, mulberry trees were grown using the method of pressing strips. The side branches of the mulberry tree of that year were selected to be hung with bamboo hooks, so that it gradually approached the ground. In winter, the branches were held down with soil. In the following spring, each branch could grow roots. At this time, it could be cut down and a new mulberry tree could be transplanted.

古文：其树精华皆聚叶上，不复生葚与开花矣。
现代文：用这种方法培植成的桑树，养分都会聚积在叶片上，不会再开花结果。
English: Mulberry trees grown using this method will accumulate nutrients on their leaves and will no longer bear fruit.

古文：欲叶便剪摘，则树至七八尺即斩截当顶，叶则婆娑可扳伐，不必乘梯缘木也。
现代文：为了便于剪摘桑树叶子，可以等到桑树长到七八尺高的时候，就截去树尖，这样树就不会再向上生长，繁茂的枝叶就会批垂下来，不必登梯爬上树去也能随手扳摘、采叶了。
English: In order to facilitate the cutting and picking of mulberry leaves, you can wait until the mulberry tree grows to seven or eight feet high, then cut off the tip of the tree, so that the tree will no longer grow upwards, and the lush branches and leaves will hang down in batches. You don't have to climb up the tree to be able to pick and pick leaves.

古文：其他用子种者，立夏桑葚紫熟时取来，用黄泥水搓洗，并水浇于地面，本秋即长尺余。
现代文：此外，还可以用桑树的种子进行种植，等到立夏时紫红色的桑葚果子成熟的时候，摘下来后用黄泥水搓洗，然后连水一块浇灌在地里，当年秋天就可以长到一尺多高，第二年春天再进行移栽。
English: In addition, mulberry seeds can also be used for planting. When the purple-red mulberry fruit is ripe in early summer, it can be picked and washed with yellow muddy water, and then poured into the ground with water. In the autumn of that year, it can grow to more than a foot high, and then transplanted in the spring of the following year.

古文：来春移栽，倘灌粪勤劳，亦易长茂。
现代文：如果浇水施肥较频繁，枝叶也会很容易长得茂盛。
English: If watering and fertilizing are more frequent, the branches and leaves will easily grow luxuriantly.

古文：但间有生葚与开花者，则叶最薄少耳。
现代文：但其中也有开花结果的，叶子就会薄而又少。
English: But among them, there are also flowering fruits, and the leaves will be thin and few.

古文：又有花桑叶薄不堪用者，其树接过，亦生厚叶也。
现代文：还有一种桑树名叫花桑，叶子太薄不能用，但这种桑树通过嫁接也能长出厚叶。
English: There is also a kind of mulberry tree called mulberry, the leaves are too thin to be used, but this mulberry tree can also grow thick leaves through grafting.

古文：又有柘叶三种以济桑叶之穷。
现代文：另外还有三种柘树的叶子，可以在桑叶缺乏时充当补给。
English: In addition, there are three kinds of eucalyptus leaves, which can be used to replenish the cucumbers when the mulberry leaves are scarce.

古文：柘叶浙中不经见，川中最多。
现代文：这种柘叶在浙江不常见，在四川产量最多。
English: This kind of eucalyptus is not common in Zhejiang, and the largest production is in Sichuan.

古文：寒家用浙种桑叶穷时，仍啖柘叶，则物理一也。
现代文：贫穷人家养蚕，在桑叶不够时就用柘叶补充，同样可以使蚕长大。
English: Poor people raise silkworms, and when the mulberry leaves are not enough, they supplement them with alfalfa leaves, which can also make the silkworms grow.

古文：凡琴弦、弓弦丝，用柘养蚕，名曰棘茧，谓最坚韧。
现代文：制造琴弦和弓弦所用的丝，都来自吃柘叶的蚕，这种蚕结的茧叫做 棘茧 ，据说这种丝最坚韧。
English: The silk used to make strings and bows comes from silkworms that eat the leaves of the cocoon. This type of silk knot is called acanthosis nigricans, and is said to be the toughest type of silk.

古文：凡取叶必用剪，铁剪出嘉郡桐乡者最犀利，他乡未得其利。
现代文：采摘桑叶，必须要用剪刀，以嘉兴桐乡出的铁剪刀最为锋利，其他地方出产的都比不上桐乡的好。
English: To pick mulberry leaves, you must use scissors. The iron scissors from Jiaxing Tongxiang are the sharpest, and those produced elsewhere are not as good as Tongxiang.

古文：剪枝之法，再生条次月叶愈茂，取资既多，人工复便。
现代文：桑树经过剪枝之后，新生枝条一个月后就会长出许多叶子，枝条也就很茂盛了，而且还便于采摘。
English: After the mulberry tree has been pruned, the new branches will grow many leaves after a month, and the branches will be very lush, and they are also easy to pick.

古文：凡再生条叶，仲夏以养晚蚕，则止摘叶而不剪条。
现代文：再生枝条的桑叶，农历五月份便可用来喂养晚蚕，那时就只采摘桑叶而不再进行剪枝了。
English: Recycled mulberry leaves can be used to feed late silkworms in May of the lunar calendar. At that time, only mulberry leaves are picked and no pruning is done.

古文：二叶摘后，秋来三叶复茂，浙人听其经霜自落，片片扫拾以饲绵羊，大获绒毡之利。
现代文：第二茬的桑叶在摘取以后，第三茬叶子到秋天又长得很茂盛了，浙江人让它经霜自落，然后将落叶全都收拾起来，用来饲养绵羊，剪取更多羊毛，从而能取得更加可观的收益。
English: After the second bunch of mulberry leaves was picked, the third bunch of leaves grew very luxuriantly in the autumn. The people of Zhejiang let it frost and fall off, and then collected all the fallen leaves to raise sheep and shear more wool, so that they could make more substantial profits.

古文：○食忌
现代文：食忌
English: Food taboos

古文：凡蚕大眠以后，径食湿叶。
现代文：蚕在大眠之后，就可以直接吃潮湿的桑叶了。
English: After a good night's sleep, the silkworms can directly eat the moist mulberry leaves.

古文：雨天摘来者，任从铺地加冫食；晴日摘来者，以水洒湿而饲之，则丝有光泽。
现代文：下雨天摘来的叶子，也可以随便给蚕吃；天晴时摘来的叶子，还要用水淋湿后再去喂蚕，这样结出的丝才更有光泽。
English: The leaves picked on rainy days can also be eaten by the silkworms; the leaves picked on sunny days should also be drenched with water before feeding the silkworms, so that the silk produced is more shiny.

古文：未大眠时，雨天摘叶用绳悬挂透风檐下，时振其绳，待风吹干。
现代文：但在还没有到大眠的时候，蚕不能吃湿的桑叶，雨天摘来的桑叶要用绳子悬挂在通风的屋檐下，经常抖动绳子，让风吹干。
English: However, before the big sleep, silkworms cannot eat wet mulberry leaves. Mulberry leaves picked on rainy days should be hung with a rope under a ventilated eaves, and the rope should be shaken frequently to let the wind blow them dry.

古文：若用手掌拍干，则叶焦而不滋润，他时丝亦枯色。
现代文：如果是用手掌轻轻拍干的，叶子就不会新鲜滋润了，用来喂蚕，蚕吐出的丝就会黯淡无光泽。
English: If you gently pat it dry with the palm of your hand, the leaves will not be fresh and moist. If you use it to feed silkworms, the silk spit out by the silkworms will be dull and dull.

古文：凡食叶，眠前必令饱足而眠，眠起即迟半日上叶无妨也。
现代文：在蚕进入大眠之前，必须充分喂食桑叶让它吃饱。而眠起之后，即使延迟半天才给蚕喂桑叶，也并无大碍。
English: Before the silkworm goes into a deep sleep, it must be fed enough mulberry leaves to make it full. And after falling asleep, even if you delay feeding mulberry leaves to the silkworm for half a day, it is not a big problem.

古文：雾天湿叶甚坏蚕，其晨有雾，切勿摘叶。
现代文：雾天里潮湿的桑树叶子对蚕的危害很大，因此一旦看见早晨有雾，就一定不要再去采摘桑叶了。
English: Moist mulberry leaves on a foggy day are very harmful to silkworms, so if you see fog in the morning, you must stop picking mulberry leaves.

古文：待雾收时，或晴或雨，方剪伐也。
现代文：等雾散以后，无论晴雨都可以对桑叶进行剪摘了。
English: After the fog dissipates, the mulberry leaves can be cut and picked regardless of the weather.

古文：露珠水亦待于干而后剪摘。
现代文：带露珠的桑叶要等太阳出来把露水晒干后再进行剪摘。
English: Mulberry leaves with dewdrops should wait for the sun to come out and dry the dew before they are cut.

古文：○病症
现代文：病症
English: of the disease

古文：凡蚕卵中受病，已详前款。
现代文：蚕卵在孵化前遇到的病害，前面已经谈过了。
English: The diseases encountered by silkworm eggs before hatching have already been discussed.

古文：出后湿热积压，妨忌在人。
现代文：蚕孵化出来后要防止湿热、堆压，主要依靠人力来防范。
English: After the silkworms are hatched, it is necessary to prevent humidity, heat, and stacking pressure, mainly relying on manpower to prevent it.

古文：初眠腾时，用漆合者不可盖掩逼出气水。
现代文：在蚕初眠腾筐时，用漆盒装的，就不要盖上盖，以便于水分蒸发。
English: In the silkworm dormancy basket, if it is packed in a lacquer box, do not cover it with a lid, so that the water can evaporate.

古文：凡蚕将病，则脑上放光，通身黄色，头渐大而尾渐小；并及眠之时，游走不眠，食叶又不多者，皆病作也。
现代文：当蚕将要发病的时候，脑部透明发亮，全身发黄，头部渐渐变大而尾部慢慢变小。此外，有些蚕在该睡眠的时候仍然游走不眠，吃的桑叶又不多，这都是病态的表现。
English: When the silkworm is about to become ill, the brain is transparent and shiny, the whole body is yellow, the head gradually becomes larger and the tail slowly becomes smaller. In addition, some silkworms still do not sleep when they sleep, and they do not eat many mulberry leaves, which are all manifestations of the disease.

古文：急择而去之，勿使败群。
现代文：应该立即挑拣出去扔掉，以免传染蚕群。
English: They should be picked out immediately and thrown away to avoid infecting the colony.

古文：凡蚕强美者必眠叶面，压在下者或力弱或性懒，作茧亦薄。
现代文：健康而色泽美好的蚕一定会在叶面上睡眠，压在桑叶下面的蚕，不是体弱，就是不健康的，所结的蚕茧也薄。
English: Silkworms that are healthy and have a beautiful color will definitely sleep on the leaf surface. Silkworms that are pressed under the mulberry leaf are either weak or unhealthy, and the cocoons they make are thin.

古文：其作茧不知收法，妄吐丝成阔窝者，乃蠢蚕，非懒蚕也。○老足
现代文：那种结茧、吐丝都不按规则形状排列而是胡乱吐丝结成松散丝窝的，是不正常的蚕而不是懒于活动的蚕。老足
English: The kind of scabs and spun silk are not arranged according to a regular shape, but are randomly spun into loose silk nests, which is an abnormal silkworm and not a lazy one.

古文：凡蚕食叶足候，只争时刻。
现代文：当蚕吃足了桑叶，到了成熟的时刻，必须抓紧时机捉蚕作茧。
English: When the silkworms have eaten enough mulberry leaves and have reached maturity, it is necessary to seize the opportunity to catch the silkworms to make cocoons.

古文：自卵出少多在辰巳二时，故老足结茧亦多辰巳二时。
现代文：蚕卵孵化通常都在上午七时至十一时之间，所以蚕发育成熟结茧，也大多会在这个时间。
English: The eggs of the silkworms usually hatch between seven o'clock and eleven o'clock in the morning, so the silkworms develop mature scabs, and most of them will be at this time.

古文：老足者，喉下两夹通明，捉时嫩一分则丝少。过老一分，又吐去丝，茧壳必薄。
现代文：成熟的蚕胸部变得透明。捉蚕时，如果不小心错捉了还没完全成熟的蚕，吐的丝就会少些；如果捉了过于成熟的，又因为已吐出了一部分丝，蚕茧也会薄一点。
English: Mature silkworm chests become transparent. When catching silkworms, if you accidentally catch a silkworm that is not fully mature, you will spit less silk; if you catch one that is too mature, and because you have spit out a part of the silk, the cocoon will also be thinner.

古文：捉者眼法高，一只不差方妙。
现代文：善于分辨成熟期的养蚕人，每捉一条都会选出成熟程度恰好的蚕，这是最绝妙的地方。
English: Silkworm breeders are good at distinguishing the ripening period, and they will choose the silkworm with the right degree of maturity for each catch. This is the most wonderful place.

古文：黑色蚕不见身中透光，最难捉。
现代文：黑色的蚕成熟时因为看不见身体透明的部分，所以最难分辨。
English: The black silkworms are the most difficult to distinguish because the transparent part of the body is invisible when they mature.

古文：○结茧
现代文：结茧
English: Scab

古文：凡结茧必如嘉、湖，方尽其法。
现代文：处理结茧的蚕要仿照嘉兴、湖州的做法那样才算最好。
English: It is best to follow the practices of Jiaxing and Huzhou to deal with scabbed silkworms.

古文：他国不知用火烘，听蚕结出，甚至丛杆之内，箱匣之中，火不经，风不透。
现代文：其他地方的人都不知道结茧时要加温排湿，而是任蚕到处爬行寻觅吐丝结茧的场所，有的甚至钻到既不通风又不透气的竹竿、箱子里面。
English: People in other places do not know to warm up and dehumidify the cocoon, but let the silkworms crawl around looking for places to spit silk cocoons, and some even drill into bamboo poles and boxes that are neither ventilated nor breathable.

古文：故所为屯、漳等绢，豫、蜀等绸，皆易朽烂。
现代文：因此，用这种茧丝制成的屯溪、彰州的绢，还有河南、四川等地的绸，都很容易腐烂。
English: Therefore, the cocoons made of this cocoon silk in Tunxi and Zhangzhou, as well as the silk in Henan, Sichuan and other places, are easy to rot.

古文：若嘉、湖产丝成衣，即入水浣濯百余度，其质尚存。
现代文：但如果是用嘉兴、湖州丝做出来的衣服，就算在水中洗涤过一百次，质地也依然完好。
English: However, if the clothes are made of Jiaxing and Huzhou silk, even if they are washed in water a hundred times, the texture is still intact.

古文：其法析竹编箔，其下横架料木约六尺高，地下摆列炭火，方圆去四五尺即列火一盆。
现代文：嘉兴、湖州的做法是，先把竹子劈细，用竹条编织成像竹席一样的垫子，放在用木头搭成的高约六尺的支架上。地面摆放炭火。前后左右每隔四五尺就要放一个炭火盆。
English: The practice in Jiaxing and Huzhou is to first split the bamboo into small pieces, weave a cushion with bamboo strips that looks like a bamboo seat, and place it on a stand made of wood about six feet high. Place a charcoal fire on the ground. A charcoal brazier should be placed every four or five feet in front and behind.

古文：初上山时，火分两略轻少，引他成绪，蚕恋火意，即时造茧，不复缘走。
现代文：蚕要开始结茧时，火力要控制得稍微小一点，这可以诱使蚕吐丝。蚕喜欢温暖，会马上安静下来结茧，不再到处爬动。
English: When the silkworm is about to start scabbing, it is necessary to control the fire a little less, which can induce the silkworm to spit. The silkworm likes warmth and will immediately calm down and scab, and will no longer crawl around.

古文：茧绪既成，即每盆加火半斤，吐出丝来随即干燥，所以经久不坏也。
现代文：当茧衣结成之后，每盆炭火再添上半斤炭，使温度升高。蚕吐出的丝随即干燥，所以这种丝能经久不坏。
English: After the cocoons are made, half a catty of charcoal is added to each pot of charcoal to raise the temperature. The silk spit out by the silkworms is then dried, so the silk can last for a long time without deteriorating.

古文：其茧室不宜楼板遮盖，下欲火而上欲风凉也，凡火顶上者不以为种，取种宁用火偏者。
现代文：供蚕结茧的屋子不应当用楼板遮盖，因为结茧时下面要用火烘，而上面需要通风。凡是火盆正顶上的蚕茧不能用做蚕种，取种要用离火盆稍远的。
English: The room for silkworm cocooning should not be covered with a floorboard, because when cocooning, the bottom needs to be baked with fire, while the top needs to be ventilated. The cocoons on the top of the brazier cannot be used for silkworm seeding, and the seeds should be used a little further away from the brazier.

古文：其箔上山用麦稻稿斩齐，随手纠捩成山，顿插箔上。
现代文：蚕箔上的山簇，是用切割整齐的稻秆和麦秸随手扭结而成的，垂直插放在蚕箔上。
English: The mountain cluster on the silkworm foil is made of neatly cut rice stalks and wheat stalks, twisted by hand and placed vertically on the silkworm foil.

古文：做山之人最宜手健。
现代文：做山簇的人最好是手艺纯熟的。
English: People who make mountain clusters should be well-versed in the craft.

古文：箔竹稀疏用短稿略铺洒，妨蚕跌坠地下与火中也。
现代文：蚕箔编得稀疏的，可以在上面略铺一些短稻草秆，以防蚕掉到地下或火盆中。取茧
English: If the silkworm foil is sparsely woven, you can slightly spread some short straw cocoons on top to prevent the silkworms from falling into the ground or into the brazier.

古文：○取茧凡茧造三日，则下箔而取之。
现代文：蚕上山簇上结茧三天之后，就可以拿下蚕箔进行取茧。
English: After three days of cocooning on the mountain cluster, you can take off the silkworm foil to remove the cocoon.

古文：其壳外浮丝一名丝匡者，湖郡老妇贱价买去，用铜钱坠打成线，织成湖绸。
现代文：蚕茧壳外面的浮丝名叫 丝匡 ，湖州的老年妇女用很便宜的价钱买了回去，用铜钱坠子做纺锤，打线，织成湖绸。
English: The floating thread on the outside of the cocoon shell is called silk cormorant. Elderly women in Huzhou bought it back at a very cheap price, used the copper pendant to make a spindle, made thread, and weaved it into lake silk.

古文：去浮之后，其茧必用大盘摊开架上，以听治丝、扩绵。
现代文：剥掉浮丝以后的蚕茧，必须摊在大盘里，放在架子上，准备缫丝或者造丝绵。
English: After stripping the float, the cocoons must be spread out in a large dish and placed on a shelf to prepare the cocoons or to make silk.

古文：若用厨箱掩盖，则郁而丝绪断绝矣。
现代文：如果用橱柜、箱子装盖起来，就会因湿气郁结疏解不良而造成断丝。物害
English: If it is covered with a cabinet or a box, it will cause broken wire due to moisture and poor loosening.

古文：○物害凡害蚕者，有雀、鼠、蚊三种。
现代文：会给蚕带来危害的动物有麻雀、老鼠和蚊子三种。
English: There are three types of animals that can cause harm to silkworms: sparrows, mice and mosquitoes.

古文：雀害不及茧，蚊害不及早蚕丝，鼠害则与之相终始。
现代文：麻雀危害不到茧，蚊子危害不到早蚕，老鼠的危害则始终存在着。
English: Sparrows are not harmful to earthworms, mosquitoes are not harmful to early silkworms, and mice are always harmful.

古文：防驱之智是不一法，唯人所行也。
现代文：防害除害的办法是多种多样的，随人施行。择茧
English: There are many ways to prevent and control hazards, and they can be carried out by anyone.

古文：○择茧凡取丝必用圆正独蚕茧，则绪不乱。
现代文：缫丝要用的茧，必须选择形状端正的单茧，这样缫出的丝就不会乱。
English: For the yarn to be used, it is necessary to choose a single yarn with a neat shape, so that the yarn will not be messy.

古文：若双茧并四五蚕共为茧，择去取绵用。
现代文：如果是两条或由四五条蚕在一起共同结成的茧，应该挑拣出来做丝绵。
English: If it is a cocoon formed by two or four or five silkworms together, it should be picked out and made into silk.

古文：或以为丝则粗甚。○造绵
现代文：不能用这种茧来缫丝，否则缫出的丝就会太粗。造绵
English: You can't use this roller to spin silk, otherwise the spun silk will be too thick.

古文：凡双茧并缫丝锅底零余，并出种茧壳，皆绪断乱不可为丝，用以取绵。
现代文：茧的两头、缫丝时锅底残留的断丝碎茧，以及种茧出蛾后的茧壳，丝绪都已断乱，不能再用来缫丝，只能用来造丝绵。
English: The two ends of the cocoon, the broken silk corms that remain at the bottom of the pot when the silk is spun, and the cocoon shell after the moth emerges from the seed cocoon, the silk threads have been disrupted and can no longer be used to spin silk, but can only be used to make silk.

古文：用稻灰水煮过，倾入清水盆内。
现代文：将这些造丝绵的茧子用稻灰水煮过之后，倒入装有清水的盆子里备用。
English: After boiling these silky-smooth hazelnuts in rice-ash water, they are poured into a basin filled with clean water and set aside.

古文：手大指去甲净尽，指头顶开四个，四四数足，用拳顶开又四四十六拳数，然后上小竹弓。此《庄子》所谓纟光也。
现代文：制造丝绵的工匠要将两个大姆指的指甲剪干净，用指头顶开四个蚕茧，套在左手并拢的四个指头上作为一组，连续套入四个蚕茧后，取下，为一个小抖。做完四组，再用两手拳头把它们一组一组地顶开，拉宽到一定范围，连拉四个小抖共十六个茧，然后套在小竹弓上，这就是庄子所说的 洴澼絖 。
English: Craftsmen who make silk fabric need to cut the nails of the two big fingers cleanly, open the four cocoons with their fingertips, put them on the four fingers of the left hand as a group, continuously insert the four cocoons, remove them, and make a small shaker. After making four groups, use the fists of both hands to open them one by one, widen them to a certain range, and pull the four small shakers together to make a total of sixteen cocoons, and then put them on the small bamboo bow, which is what Zhuangzi called.

古文：湖绵独白净清化者，总缘手法之妙。
现代文：湖州产的丝绵特别干净洁白，这关键在于造绵的人手法的灵巧。
English: The silk produced in Huzhou is particularly clean and white. The key lies in the dexterity of the manual method of making the silk.

古文：上弓之时惟取快捷，带水扩开。
现代文：往竹弓上套时，必须动作敏捷，趁水还没有干的时候将茧拉开。
English: When putting on the bamboo bow, you must act quickly and pull the hook away while the water is still not dry.

古文：若稍缓水流去，则结块不尽解，而色不纯白矣。
现代文：如果动作稍慢一点儿，水已流去，丝绵就会板结，不能完全均匀地拉开，颜色看起来也就不纯白了。
English: If the action is a little slower, the water has flowed away, the silk will be stiff, can not be completely evenly pulled apart, and the color will not look pure white.

古文：其治丝余者名锅底绵，装绵衣衾内以御重寒，谓之挟纩。
现代文：那些缫丝剩下的，叫做 锅底绵 。把这种丝绵装入衣被里用来御寒，叫做丝绵被，即 挟纩 。
English: The remaining silk is called "pot bottom silk," and the silk that is put into a quilt to keep out the cold is called "silk quilt," or "pigtail silk."

古文：凡取绵人工，难于取丝八倍，竟日只得四两余。
现代文：制作丝绵的工夫要比缫丝所花的工夫多八倍，每人劳动一整天也只得四两多丝绵。
English: It takes eight times more time to make silk than it does to weave silk, and each person can only make four or two pieces of silk in a whole day's work.

古文：用此绵坠打线织湖绸者，价颇重。
现代文：用这种绵坠打成线织成湖绸，价值很高。
English: Lake silk, which is woven with this type of continuous warp and weft, is very valuable.

古文：以绵线登花机者名曰花绵，价尤重。
现代文：用这种绵线在花机上织出来的产品叫做 花绵 ，价钱更贵。
English: The product woven with this yarn on a knitting machine is called flower yarn, and the price is more expensive.

古文：○治丝
现代文：治丝
English: Stitching

古文：凡治丝先制丝车，其尺寸器具开载后图。
现代文：在准备缫丝之前，要先制造一台缫车。缫车的尺寸、部件及其组合构造都列在后面的附图上。
English: Before preparing the wire, it is necessary to make a milling machine. The dimensions of the milling machine, its parts and their combined construction are shown in the following diagram.

古文：锅煎极沸汤，丝粗细视投茧多寡，穷日之力一人可取三十两。
现代文：缫丝时首先要将锅内的水烧得滚开，把蚕茧放进锅中，生丝的粗细取决于投入锅中的蚕茧的多少。一个人劳累一整天，只能得到三十两丝。
English: When twisting silk, first of all, the water in the pot should be boiled away, and the cocoon should be put into the pot. The thickness of the raw silk depends on how much cocoon is put into the pot. If a person is tired for a whole day, he can only get thirty-two silk.

古文：若包头丝，则只取二十两，以其苗长也。
现代文：如果是织造头巾等用的包头丝，就只能得到二十两，这是因为那种丝缕比较细。
English: If it is a head-wrapping silk used for weaving headscarves, etc., you can only get twenty-two, because that kind of silk is relatively thin.

古文：凡绫罗丝，一起投茧二十枚，包头丝只投十余枚。
现代文：织绫罗用的丝，一次要投进去二十个蚕茧；织造头巾等用的包头丝，只需投进去十几个蚕茧。
English: The silk used for weaving cocoons requires twenty cocoons to be thrown in at a time; the silk used for weaving headscarves, etc. requires only a dozen cocoons to be thrown in.

古文：凡茧滚沸时，以竹签拨动水面，丝绪自见。
现代文：当煮蚕茧的水滚沸的时候，用竹签拨动水面，丝头自然就会出现。
English: When the water of the boiled cocoon is boiling, use a bamboo stick to move the water surface, and the silk head will naturally appear.

古文：提绪入手，引入竹针眼，先绕星丁头，然后由送丝竿勾挂，以登大关车。
现代文：将丝头提在手中，穿过竹针眼，先绕过星丁头，然后挂在送丝竿上，再连接到大关车上。
English: Hold the silk head in your hands, pass through the eye of the bamboo needle, first go around the star head, then hang it on the delivery pole, and then connect it to the stamping machine.

古文：断绝之时，寻绪丢上，不必绕接。
现代文：遇到断丝的时候，只要找到丝绪头搭上去，不必绕结原来的丝。
English: When encountering a broken thread, just find a thread to attach it to, and there is no need to wind the original thread.

古文：其丝排匀不堆积者，全在送丝竿与磨木之上。
现代文：如果想要丝在大关车上排列均匀而不会堆积在一起，关键要靠送丝竿和脚踏摇柄相互配合好。
English: If you want the yarns to be evenly arranged on the stamping machine without piling up, the key is to match the feeding rod with the foot crank.

古文：川蜀丝车制稍异，其法架横锅上，引四五绪而上，两人对寻锅中绪，然终不若湖制之尽善也。
现代文：四川生产的缫车结构稍有不同，缫丝的方法，是把支架横架在锅上，两人面对面站在锅旁寻找丝绪头，一次牵引上四五缕丝上车，但这种方法终究不如湖州制作的缫车完善。
English: The structure of the forklift truck produced in Sichuan is slightly different. The method of pulling the wire is to place the bracket horizontally on the pan, two people stand face to face next to the pan to find the thread head, and pull four or five strands of wire at a time to get on the truck, but this method is not as perfect as the forklift truck produced in Huzhou.

古文：凡供治丝薪，取极燥无烟湿者，则宝色不损。
现代文：缫丝时要选择干燥不冒烟的柴烧水，这样就会不影响丝的色泽。
English: When twisting silk, you should choose dry, non-smoky wood-fired water. This will not affect the color of the silk.

古文：丝美之法有六字：一曰 出口干 ，即结茧时用炭火烘。一曰 出水干 ，则治丝登车时，用炭火四五两盆盛，去车关五寸许。
现代文：要想让丝品质好，一定要记住两句口诀，第一句叫 出口干 ，就是说蚕在结茧时要用炭火加温烘干，另一句叫 出水干 ，意思就是把丝拉上缫丝车时，要用炭盆装四五两炭生起火来，放在距离大关车约五寸远的地方。
English: If you want the silk to be of good quality, you must remember two sayings. The first one is "exit dry," which means that the silkworms should be heated and dried with charcoal when they are scabbing. The other one is "exit dry," which means that when the silk is pulled onto the spinning wheel, it should be filled with charcoal to start a fire, and placed about five inches away from the turntable.

古文：运转如风转时，转转火意照干，是曰出水干也。
现代文：当大关车飞快转动时，生丝就因火的温度随着转动而逐渐干燥，这就是所谓的 出水干 。
English: When the crane truck rotates rapidly, the raw silk gradually dries due to the temperature of the fire with the rotation, which is the so-called drying cycle.

古文：○调丝凡丝议织时，最先用调。
现代文：如果缫丝时天气晴朗又刚好有风，也可以不用火烘烤。调丝准备织丝的时候，首先要进行调丝。
English: If the weather is fine and windy at the time of spinning, it can also be baked without fire.

古文：透光檐端宇下以木架铺地，植竹四根于上，名曰络笃。
现代文：调丝要在屋檐下光线明亮的室内进行。将木架平放在地上，木架上竖立起四根竹竿，这就叫做 络笃 。
English: The adjustment of the thread should be carried out in a brightly lit room under the eaves. The wooden frame is placed flat on the ground, and four bamboo poles are erected on the wooden frame. This is called rhododendron.

古文：丝匡竹上，其傍倚柱高八尺处，钉具斜安小竹偃月挂钩，悬搭丝于钩内，手中执旋缠，以俟牵经织纬之用。
现代文：丝套在四根竹上，在络笃旁边的靠近立柱上八尺高的地方，用铁钉固定一根斜向的小竹竿，上面装一个半月形的挂钩，将丝悬挂在钩子上，手里拿着大关车旋转绕丝，以备牵经和卷纬时用。
English: The silk was placed on four bamboo poles. Next to the rood screen, at a place eight feet high near the column, a small oblique bamboo pole was fixed with an iron nail. A half-moon-shaped hook was installed on it. The silk was hung on the hook, and a big crane was held in the hand to spin the winding wire. This was used for warping and winding.

古文：小竹坠石为活头，接断之时，扳之即下。
现代文：小竹竿的一头垂下一个小石块为活头。当连接断丝时，一拉小绳，小钩就落下来了。
English: A small stone hangs from the end of a small bamboo pole. When the broken wire is connected, a small rope is pulled and the small hook falls down.

古文：○纬络
现代文：纬络
English: weft weft

古文：凡丝既之后，以就经纬。
现代文：丝在绕丝棒上缠好以后，就可以着手做经纬线了。
English: After the yarn is wound on the winding rod, you can start making the warp and weft.

古文：经质用少而纬质用多，每丝十两，经四纬六，此大略也。
现代文：做时经线用丝少，而纬线用丝较多。大约每十两丝中，四两用做经线，六两用做纬线。
English: When making a warp, less yarn is used, while more yarn is used for the weft. Of approximately every twelve yarns, four yarns are used for the warp and six yarns for the weft.

古文：凡供纬，以水沃湿丝，摇车转铤而纺于竹管之上。
现代文：绕丝棒上缠绕的丝，要先用水淋湿浸透，再摇转纬车带动锭子转动，把丝绕在小箭竹制成的竹管上。
English: To wind the thread around the threaded rod, first wet the thread with water and soak it, then turn the spindle to turn the spindle, and wind the thread around the bamboo tube made of small arrow bamboo.

古文：○经具
现代文：经具
English: Financial instruments

古文：凡丝既之后，牵经就织。
现代文：丝在绕丝棒上绕好之后，下一个步骤就要牵拉经线准备织成丝布。
English: After the silk has been wound on the winding rod, the next step is to pull the warp to prepare it for weaving into a silk cloth.

古文：以直竹竿穿眼三十余，透过篾圈，名曰溜眼。
现代文：在一根直竹竿上钻出三十多个小孔，穿上一个名叫 溜眼 的篾圈。
English: He drilled more than 30 small holes in a straight bamboo pole and put on a hoop called a blind.

古文：竿横架柱上，丝从圈透过掌扇，然后缠绕经耙之上。
现代文：把这条竹竿横架在柱子上，丝通过篾圈再穿过 掌扇 ，然后缠绕在经耙上。
English: Place the bamboo pole horizontally on the post, pass the silk through the hoop and then through the palm fan, and then wrap it around the hoop.

古文：度数既足，将印架捆卷。
现代文：当达到足够的长度时，就用印架卷好、系好。
English: When it reaches a sufficient length, it is rolled and tied with a printing frame.

古文：既捆，中以交竹二度，一上一下间丝，然后扌及于筘内。
现代文：卷好以后，中间用交棒两根把丝分隔成一上一下两层，然后再穿入梳筘里面。
English: After the roll is finished, use the middle of the two rods to separate the silk into two layers, one on top of the other, and then thread it into the comb.

古文：扌及筘之后，然的杠与印架相望，登开五七丈。
现代文：穿过梳筘之后，把经轴与印架相对拉开五丈到七丈远。
English: After passing through the comb, pull the warp shaft five to seven lengths away from the printing frame.

古文：或过糊者，就此过糊。或不过糊，就此卷于的杠，穿综就织。
现代文：如果需要浆丝，就在这个时候进行；如果不需要浆丝，就直接卷在经轴上，这样就可以穿综筘而投梭织造了。
English: If you need a sizing, it is done at this time; if you do not need a sizing, it is rolled directly on the warp, so that it can be woven through the warp and into the weft.

古文：○过糊
现代文：过糊
English: Overwhelming

古文：凡糊用面角力内小粉为质。
现代文：浆丝所用的糊，是用揉面筋沉下的粉作为原料制成的。
English: The paste used for the starch is made from the powder of kneaded gluten as a raw material.

古文：纱罗所必用，绫绸或用或不用。
现代文：织纱、罗的丝必须要浆过，要织成绫或绸的则可浆可不浆。
English: Spun yarn and warp yarn must be starched, and those that are to be woven into satin or silk can be starched or not.

古文：其染纱不存素质者，用牛胶水为之，名曰清胶纱。
现代文：有些丝染过色后失去了原来的特性，就要用牛胶水来浆，这种纱叫 清胶纱 。
English: Some yarns have lost their original characteristics after being dyed, so they must be starched with cow glue. This type of yarn is called clear glue yarn.

古文：糊浆承于筘上，推移染透，推移就干。
现代文：浆丝的糊料要放在梳筘上，用它不停地来回梳理使丝浆透，再晾干。
English: The sizing paste should be placed on the comb, and it should be used to comb back and forth to make the sizing paste transparent, and then dried.

古文：天气晴明，顷刻而燥，阴天必藉风力之吹也。
现代文：如果天气晴朗，丝很快就能干，阴天时就要借助风力把丝吹干。
English: If the weather is fine, the silk can be dried quickly. If the weather is cloudy, it is necessary to use the wind to dry the silk.

古文：○边维
现代文：边维
English: Boundary dimension

古文：凡帛不论绫罗，皆别牵边，两傍各二十余缕。边缕必过糊，用筘推移梳干。
现代文：丝织品不管是厚一些的绫还是比较薄的罗，纺织时都要单独织边。在两边各拉出经丝二十几根，这些织边的经丝必须事先上浆，用浆筘梳理后晾干。
English: Whether the silk fabric is a thicker yarn or a thinner yarn, it is necessary to weave the edge separately when weaving. Twenty or so warp threads are pulled out on both sides. These warp threads must be starched in advance, combed with a starch roller and then dried.

古文：凡绫罗必三十丈、五立十丈一穿，以省穿接繁苦。
现代文：绫罗的经线每次牵出三十丈，或每五六十丈穿一次筘，这样可以减少穿接的重复劳动。
English: The warp of the hoop can be pulled out 30 lengths at a time, or the hoop can be threaded once every 50 or 60 lengths, which can reduce the repetitive labor of threading.

古文：每匹应截画墨于边丝之上，即知其丈尺之足。
现代文：牵出的长度每满一匹应该在边经上用墨笔画个记号标明，这样一看便可掌握长度。
English: The length of the lead-out should be marked with an ink pen on the margin of each full horse, so that the length can be grasped at a glance.

古文：边丝不登的杠，别绕机梁之上。
现代文：要注意的是，织边的经丝不要绕在经轴上，而要另外挂在织机的横梁上。
English: It should be noted that the warp threads of the edge should not be wound around the warp shaft, but should be hung separately on the beam of the loom.

古文：○经数
现代文：经数
English: Longitude

古文：凡织帛，罗纱筘以八百齿为率。绫绢筘以一千二百齿为率。
现代文：织相对薄的纱、罗用的筘以八百个齿为标准，织相对厚的绫、绢用的筘则要以一千二百个齿为标准。
English: For relatively thin yarns and warp yarns, the standard is 800 teeth. For relatively thick yarns and warp yarns, the standard is 1200 teeth.

古文：每筘齿中度经过糊者，四缕合为二缕，罗纱经计三千二百缕，绫绸经计五千六千缕。
现代文：每个筘齿中穿引上过浆的经线，把每四根合成两股，罗、纱的经线总数是三千二百根，绫、绸的经线总计有五六千根。
English: A warp of starched yarn is threaded through each of the tenons, making two strands of yarn for every four strands. The total number of warp and weft yarn is three thousand two hundred, and the total number of warp and weft yarn is five thousand six thousand.

古文：古书八十缕为一升，今绫绢厚者，古所谓六十升布也。
现代文：据古书记载，每八十根为一升，现在较厚的绫、绢也就是古时候说的六十升。
English: According to ancient records, every eighty roots is one liter, and now the thicker stalks and stalks are the sixty liters said in ancient times.

古文：凡织花文必用嘉、湖出口、出水皆干丝为经，则任从提挈，不忧断接。
现代文：织带花纹的丝织品必须用浙江嘉兴和湖州两地在结茧和缫丝时都烘干了的丝作为经线，这种丝可以任意提拉也不必担心会断头。
English: Silk products with ribbon patterns must use silk that has been dried in both Zhejiang Jiaxing and Huzhou as warp threads. This silk can be pulled at will without fear of breaking.

古文：他省者即勉强提花，潦草而已。
现代文：其他地区的丝，即使能勉强当做提花织物，也是相对粗糙而不很精致的。
English: In other regions, silk, even if it can be used as a jacquard fabric, is relatively rough and not very delicate.

古文：○花机式
现代文：花机式
English: Flower machine type

古文：凡花机通身度长一丈六尺，隆起花楼，中托衢盘，下垂衢脚。
现代文：提花机全长约一丈六尺，其中高高耸起的是花楼，中间托着的是衢盘，下面垂着的是衢脚。
English: The total length of the jacquard machine is about six feet, of which the high-rise is the flower tower, the middle is supported by the bowl, and the bottom is hanging down.

古文：对花楼下掘坑二尺许，以藏衢脚。
现代文：在花楼的正下方挖一个约两尺深的坑，用来安放衢脚。
English: Dig a pit about two feet deep directly below the flower bed to place the stamens.

古文：提花小厮坐立花楼架木上。
现代文：提花的小工，坐在花楼的木架子上。
English: A jacquard weaver sits on a wooden shelf in the flower shop.

古文：机末以的杠卷丝，中间叠助木两枝，直穿二木，约四尺长，其尖插于筘两头。
现代文：花机的末端用的是的杠卷丝，中间用叠助木两根，垂直穿接两根约四尺长的木棍，木棍尖端分别插入织筘的两头。
English: The end of the weaving machine is made of coiled wire, the middle is made of two pieces of laminated wood, two sticks of about four feet in length are connected vertically, and the tips of the sticks are separately inserted into the two ends of the loom.

古文：叠助，织纱罗者，视织绫绢者减轻十余斤方妙。
现代文：用来织纱、罗的迭助木，重量应该比织绫、绢用的轻十几斤。
English: The weight of yew wood used for weaving yarn and straw should be more than ten pounds lighter than that used for weaving straw and straw.

古文：其素罗不起花纹，与软纱绫绢踏成浪梅小花者，视素罗只加桄二扇。
现代文：素罗上不需要织花纹，要想在软纱、绫、绢这些织料上织出波浪、梅花等样式的小花纹，机器上只要比织素罗时多加两片综框和踏板，由一个人边踏边织就行了。
English: There is no need to weave patterns on the surro. If you want to weave small patterns such as waves and plum blossoms on soft yarn, satin and satin fabrics, you only need to add two more frames and pedals to the machine than when weaving surro, and it is enough for one person to weave while walking.

古文：一人踏织自成，不用提花之人，闲住花楼，亦不设衢盘与衢脚也。
现代文：不需要另外留一个专门提花的人闲坐在花楼上，中间和下部也不必安装衢盘和衢脚。
English: There is no need to leave a special jacquard person sitting idle on the flower floor, and the middle and lower parts do not have to be fitted with a cutting disc and cutting feet.

古文：其机式两接，前一接平安，自花楼向身一接斜倚低下尺许，则叠助力雄。
现代文：织机的形制可分成两段。前一段是水平放置的，而后一段从花楼朝向织工的方向，要向下倾斜一尺多，这样迭助木的冲力才够强。
English: The loom can be divided into two sections. The first section is placed horizontally, while the second section is tilted more than a foot downwards from the flower bed towards the weaver, so that the impulse of the twine is strong enough.

古文：若织包头细软，则另为均平不斜之机。
现代文：如果织头巾之类细软的丝织品，织机就应放平而不是倾斜，而且，人坐的地方要装上两个脚架。
English: If you are weaving a delicate silk fabric such as a headscarf, the loom should be laid flat rather than tilted, and two footrests should be installed where the person is sitting.

古文：坐处斗二脚，以其丝微细，防遏叠助之力也。
现代文：这是因为织头巾用的丝线非常细，要减弱迭助木的冲力才不会使它断裂。
English: This is because the silk thread used to weave the turban is very thin, and it is necessary to weaken the impulse of the twine so that it does not break.

古文：○腰机式
现代文：腰机式
English: Waist machine type

古文：凡织杭西、罗地等绢，轻素等绸，银条、巾帽等纱，不必用花机，只用小机。
现代文：织 杭西 、 罗地 一类的绢， 轻素 一类的绸，和 银条 和 巾帽 一类的纱，都无须使用提花机，只用一个小型的织机机具就够了。
English: It is not necessary to use a jacquard loom to weave jacquards such as Hangzhou, Luodi, silk such as light cream, and yarn such as silver bars and kerchiefs. Only a small loom tool is enough.

古文：织匠以熟皮一方置坐下，其力全在腰尻之上，故名腰机。
现代文：织匠用一块熟皮当靠背，操作时全靠腰部和臀部用力，所以又叫做腰机。
English: A weaver uses a piece of leather as a backrest, operating with full force on the waist and hips, so it is also called a waist machine.

古文：普天织葛、苎、棉布者，用此机法，布帛更整齐坚泽，惜今传之犹未广也。
现代文：各地织葛、苎麻、棉布的，都用这种织机。织品更加整齐结实而具有光泽，只是可惜这种机器的织法至今还没有普遍传开呢。
English: This type of loom is used all over the world for the weaving of plaid, nettle and cotton. The fabric is neater, stronger and shinier, but it is a pity that the weaving method of this machine has not yet been widely spread.

古文：○结花本
现代文：结花本
English: Flowering book

古文：凡工匠结花本者，心计最精巧。
现代文：能用丝织出花纹的工匠，心思最为细密。
English: Craftsmen who can weave patterns with silk are the most meticulous.

古文：画师先画何等花色于纸上，结本者以丝线随画量度，算计分寸杪忽而结成之。
现代文：无论画师先将什么样的图案在纸上画出，结织花的纹样的工匠都能用丝线按照画样仔细量度，精确细微地算计分寸而编结出织花的纹样来。
English: No matter what kind of pattern the painter first draws on the paper, the craftsmen of the woven flower pattern can use the silk thread to carefully measure according to the pattern, accurately and finely calculate the dimensions and weave the woven flower pattern.

古文：张悬花楼之上，即织者不知成何花色，穿综带经，随甚尺寸度数提起衢脚，梭过之后居然花现。
现代文：织花的纹样张挂在花楼上，即便织工不知道会织出什么花样，只要穿综带经，按照织花的纹样的尺寸、度数，提起纹针，穿梭织造，图案就会呈现出来了。
English: The pattern of the woven flower hangs on the flower bed. Even if the weaver does not know what pattern will be woven, as long as the warp is threaded, the needle is lifted according to the size and degree of the pattern of the woven flower, and the shuttle is woven, the pattern will appear.

古文：盖绫绢以浮轻而见花，纱罗以纠纬而见花。
现代文：绫绢是以突起的经线来形成花样的，纱罗是以绞纠纬线来形成花样的。
English: A lozenge is a raised warp to form a pattern, a sarro is a twisted weft to form a pattern.

古文：绫绢一梭一提，纱罗来梭提，往梭不提。
现代文：因此，织绫绢是投一梭提一次衢脚，织纱罗是来梭时提，去梭时不提。
English: Therefore, the weaving spindle is to put a shuttle to lift a foot, and the weaving spindle is to lift when the shuttle comes, and not to lift when the shuttle goes.

古文：天孙机杼，人巧备矣。
现代文：天上织女的那种纺织技术，现在人间的巧匠也都能较全面地掌握了。
English: The textile technology of the heavenly weavers can now be more comprehensively mastered by human craftsmen.

古文：○穿经
现代文：穿经
English: through the warp

古文：凡丝穿综度经，必用四人列坐。
现代文：将蚕丝穿过综再穿过织筘，需要四个人分坐前后操作。
English: To pass the silk through the warp and then through the weft, it takes four people to sit separately and operate back and forth.

古文：过筘之人，手执筘耙先插以待丝至。
现代文：掌握穿筘的人手握筘钩先穿过筘齿中，等对面的人把丝递过来准备接丝。
English: The person who has mastered putting on the cocoon holds the cocoon hook in his hand and first passes through the cocoon teeth, waiting for the person on the opposite side to hand over the silk and prepare to receive the silk.

古文：丝过筘则两指执定，足五七十筘，则绦结之。
现代文：等丝经过筘后，就用两个手指捏住，每穿好五十到七十个筘齿，就把丝合起来编一个结。
English: After the yarn passes through the cocoon, it is pinched with two fingers. After every fifty to seventy cocoons have been worn, the yarn is tied together to make a knot.

古文：不乱之妙，消息全在交竹。
现代文：丝之所以能够不乱，其中的奥妙全在将丝分开的交竹上。
English: One of the reasons why silk can remain undisturbed is all down to the interlocking bamboo shoots that separate the silk.

古文：即接断，就丝一扯即长数寸。
现代文：如果是接断丝，就把丝一拉就伸长几寸。
English: If it is a broken thread, stretch the thread a few inches by pulling it.

古文：打结之后，依还原度，此丝本质自具之妙也。
现代文：打上结后，仍会回缩到原来的长度，这种良好的弹性是丝本身就具有的。分名
English: After tying a knot, it will still shrink back to its original length, this good elasticity is inherent in the silk itself.

古文：○分名凡罗，中空小路以透风凉，其消息全在软综之中。
现代文： 罗 这种丝织物，中间有一小列纱孔排成横路，用来透风取凉，织造的关键全在于织机上的绞综。
English: Luo This kind of silk fabric has a small row of yarn holes in the middle, which are used for ventilation and cooling. The key to weaving lies in the warp and weft on the loom.

古文：衮头两扇打综，一软一硬。
现代文：绞综的两扇衮头一软一硬，打综既可织成平纹，又可起绞孔。
English: The two hooks of the warp knitting machine are one soft and one hard. The warp knitting machine can be used to weave both plain weave and warp knitting.

古文：凡五梭三梭之后，踏起软综，自然纠转诸经，空路不粘。
现代文：一般织五梭或者三梭之后，提起绞综，自然就会使经丝绞起纱孔，形成清晰的网眼。
English: Generally, after weaving a five-strand or three-strand, if you lift the warp and weft, the warp threads will naturally wind up the yarn holes to form a clear mesh.

古文：若平过不空路而仍稀者曰纱，消息亦在两扇衮头之上。
现代文：如果是全面地起纱孔，不排成横路而显得稀疏的，叫做纱。织造的关键也在于绞综的两扇衮头上。
English: If the holes are made across the board, the ones that do not cross and appear sparse are called yarns. The key to weaving also lies in the two hooks that are twisted together.

古文：直至织花绫绸，则去此两扇，而用桄综八扇。
现代文：至于织造其他的绫绸时，就要去掉绞综的两扇衮头，而改用桄综八扇。
English: As for the weaving of other types of silk, it is necessary to get rid of the two looms and use eight looms instead.

古文：凡左右手各用一梭交互织者，曰绉纱。凡单经曰罗地，双经曰绢地，五经曰绫地。
现代文：用左捻、右捻的丝线，一梭一梭地交互织成的，叫做绉纱；单起单落地织成的叫做罗地；双起双落地织成的叫绢地；五枚同时织成的叫绫地。
English: With left-hand twisted and right-hand twisted silk thread, a shuttle of shuttle is interwoven, called crepe; single-sided single-sided woven is called rhodi; double-sided double-sided woven is called rhodi; five simultaneously woven is called rhodi.

古文：凡花分实地与绫地，绫地者光，实地者暗。
现代文：花织物分平纹地与绫纹地两种结构，绫纹地光亮，而平纹地较暗。
English: Floral fabrics are divided into two structures, plain and crepe, with the crepe being lighter and the plain being darker.

古文：先染丝而后织者曰缎。
现代文：先染丝而后织的，叫做织锦。
English: Silk that is dyed first and then woven is called brocade.

古文：就丝绸机上织时，两梭轻，一梭重，空出稀路者，名曰秋罗，此法亦起近代。
现代文：如果在丝织机上织两梭平纹，一梭起绞综，形成横路的，叫做秋罗。这个织法也是近代才出现的。
English: If you weave two spindles of plain weave on a silk loom, and one spindle is twisted to form a cross path, it is called churo. This weaving method also appeared only in modern times.

古文：凡吴越秋罗，闽广怀素，皆利绅当暑服，屯绢则为外官、卑官逊别锦绣用也。
现代文：江苏省南部和浙江省的秋罗以及福建省、广东省的熟纱，都是大官们用来做夏服的；屯绢则是不够资格穿锦绣的地方官、小官所用的。
English: In southern Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces, and in Fujian and Guangdong provinces, chiffon is used by high-ranking officials to make summer clothes. Tunwu is used by local officials and minor officials who are not qualified to wear brocade.

古文：○熟练
现代文：熟练
English: Skillfully

古文：凡帛织就犹是生丝，煮练方熟。
现代文：丝织品织好后还只是生丝，要经过煮炼之后才会变成熟丝。
English: After weaving, silk products are still only raw silk, and they only become mature silk after being boiled.

古文：练用稻稿灰入水煮。以猪胰脂陈宿一晚，入汤浣之，宝色烨然。
现代文：煮炼时，先把丝织品放入水中加稻草灰一起煮，之后用猪脂肪提炼的肥皂浸泡一晚，再投入热水中洗涤。经稻草灰煮过之后的丝，颜色就会变得鲜艳。
English: When cooking, the silk fabric is first boiled in water with rice straw ash, then soaked with soap extracted from pig fat for one night, and then washed in hot water. After the rice straw ash is boiled, the color of the silk will become bright.

古文：或用乌梅者，宝色略减。
现代文：如果是用乌梅水煮，织物的颜色鲜艳程度会稍差。
English: If it is boiled with ume, the color of the fabric will be slightly less bright.

古文：凡早丝为轻、晚丝为纬者，练熟之时每十两轻去三两。
现代文：用早蚕丝作经线，晚蚕丝作纬线，织出来的成品煮炼以后，重量每十两会减轻三两。
English: Early silk is used for the warp, late silk for the weft, and after the finished product is cooked, the weight will be reduced by three times every ten minutes.

古文：经纬皆美好早丝，轻化只二两。
现代文：如果经、纬线用的都是上等早蚕丝，那么每十两只减轻二两。
English: If the warp and weft yarns are made of high-grade early silk, then every ten or two yarns will be reduced by two.

古文：练后日干张急，以大蚌壳磨使乖钝，通身极力刮过，以成宝色。
现代文：煮练后的织物要用热水洗掉碱性并迅速绷紧晾干，然后用一只磨光的大蚌壳，用力把它从头到尾全部刮过一遍，使它呈现光泽。
English: After cooking, the fabric should be washed with hot water to remove the alkaline wax and quickly tightened to dry, and then with a polished large clamshell, forcefully scrape it all over from the beginning to the end to make it shiny.

古文：○龙袍
现代文：龙袍
English: Dragon robes

古文：凡上供龙袍，我朝局在苏、杭。
现代文：为皇帝供应龙袍的织染局，在明朝时设在苏州和杭州两地。
English: The Weaving and Dyeing Bureau, which supplied the emperor with dragon robes, was located in Suzhou and Hangzhou during the Ming Dynasty.

古文：其花楼高一丈五尺，能手两人扳提花本，织来数寸即换龙形。
现代文：做龙袍的织机花楼高达一丈五尺，要由两个技术熟练的织匠分别拿着花样提花，每织过几寸之后，就要换织龙形图案的另一部分。
English: To make a dragon robe, the loom tower is up to five feet high, and two skilled weavers hold the pattern jacquard separately. After every few inches of weaving, another part of the dragon pattern must be woven.

古文：各房斗合，不出一手。
现代文：这些图案都要经过机房的各部分织工分别织造再拼合，不是一个人可以独自完成的。
English: These patterns have to be woven and pieced together separately by weavers from all parts of the machine room, and cannot be completed by one person alone.

古文：赭黄亦先染丝，工器原无殊异，但人工慎重与资本皆数十倍，以效忠敬之谊。
现代文：织龙袍所用的丝要事先染成红、黄等颜色，所用的工具虽没什么分别，但织造过程所花费的人力和成本都要增加几十倍，以表示对君权的忠诚和敬重。其中细节繁杂，无法详查。
English: The silk used to weave dragon robes had to be dyed red, yellow and other colors in advance. Although the tools used were the same, the manpower and cost spent on the weaving process had to be increased dozens of times in order to show loyalty and respect for the monarchy. The details are complicated and cannot be investigated in detail.

古文：○倭缎
现代文：倭缎
English: 倭

古文：凡倭缎制起东夷，漳、泉海滨效法为之。
现代文：制作倭缎的方法是自日本创始的，福建漳州、泉州等沿海地区随即也加以仿造。
English: The method of making yakitori was pioneered in Japan, and the coastal regions of Fujian, Quanzhou and Quanzhou immediately began to imitate it.

古文：丝质来自川蜀，商人万里贩来，以易胡椒归里。
现代文：织倭缎的丝来自于四川，由商贩从老远的地方运过来卖，同时再买些胡椒回去卖。
English: The silk used to weave the yakitori comes from Sichuan. Merchants bring it from far away to sell, and then buy some peppercorns to sell back home.

古文：其织法亦自夷国传来。
现代文：这种倭缎的织法也是从日本传来的，先将丝进行染色，作为纬线织入经线之中。
English: This method of weaving yakitori was also introduced from Japan. First, the silk is dyed and woven into the warp as a weft.

古文：盖质已先染，而斫绵夹藏经面，织过数寸即刮成黑光。
现代文：织成数寸以后，就用刀削断丝锦即成绒缎，然后刮成墨光。
English: After weaving into a few inches, cut off the brocade with a knife to make a pile, and then scrape it into ink.

古文：北虏互市者见而悦之。
现代文：当时北方的少数民族在互市贸易时一看见就很喜欢。
English: At that time, the ethnic minorities in the north liked it when they saw it when trading with each other.

古文：但其帛最易朽污，冠弁之上顷刻集灰，衣领之间移日损坏。
现代文：但是这种丝织品最容易弄脏，用它做的帽子很快便会集满了灰尘；用它织成的衣服，衣领上的绒毛也很容易破损。
English: But this silk fabric is the most easily soiled, the hats made of it quickly gather dust; the clothes made of it, the fluff on the collar are also easily damaged.

古文：今华夷皆贱之，将来为弃物，织法可不传云。
现代文：因此现在我国各民族都不喜欢它，将来这种倭缎一定会被抛弃，织法也就不再流传了。
English: Therefore, all ethnic groups in our country do not like it now. In the future, this type of yakitori will definitely be abandoned, and the weaving method will no longer be passed down.

古文：○布衣
现代文：布衣
English: Cloth

古文：凡棉布御寒，贵贱同之。棉花古书名麻，种遍天下。
现代文：无论地位高低，人们都会用棉来御寒。在古书中棉花被称为 臬麻 ，全国各地都有种植。
English: Regardless of status, people will use cotton to keep out the cold. In ancient books, cotton is called nettle, and it is grown all over the country.

古文：种有木棉、草棉两者，花有白、紫二色。
现代文：棉花有木棉和草棉两种，花也有白色和紫色两种颜色。
English: There are two kinds of cotton, wood cotton and grass cotton, and the flowers also have two colors, white and purple.

古文：种者白居十九，紫居十一。
现代文：其中种白棉花的占了十分之九，种紫棉花的约占十分之一。
English: Among them, white cotton accounted for nine-tenths of the total, and purple cotton accounted for about one-tenth.

古文：凡棉春种秋花，花先绽者逐日摘取，取不一时。
现代文：棉花都是春天种下，秋天结棉桃，先裂开吐絮的棉桃先摘回，而不是所有的棉桃同时摘取。
English: The cotton is planted in the spring, and the cottonseed is harvested in the fall. The cottonseed that is cracked first is harvested first, but not all the cottonseed is harvested at the same time.

古文：其花粘子于腹，登赶车而分之。
现代文：在棉花里棉籽是同棉絮粘在一起的，要将棉花放在赶车上将棉籽挤出去。
English: In cotton, the cottonseed is stuck together with the lint. The cottonseed should be squeezed out by putting the cotton on a forklift.

古文：去子取花，悬弓弹化。
现代文：棉花去籽以后，再用悬弓来弹松。
English: After the cotton is de-seeded, the cinnamon is sprinkled with a hanging bow.

古文：弹后以木板擦成长条以登纺车，引绪纠成纱缕。然后绕牵经就织。
现代文：棉花弹松后用木板搓成长条，再用纺车纺成棉纱，然后绕在大关车上便可牵经织造了。
English: After the cotton was loosened, a wooden board was used to roll the long strip, and then a spinning wheel was used to spin cotton yarn, which could then be wound around a daiguan cart and woven.

古文：凡纺工能者一手握三管纺于铤上。
现代文：熟练的纺纱工，一只手能同时握住三个纺锤，把三根棉纱纺在锭子上。
English: A skilled spinner, one hand can hold three spindles at the same time and spin three cottons on the spindle.

古文：凡棉布寸土皆有，而织造尚松江，浆染尚芜湖。
现代文：棉布在各地都有出产，但棉布织得最好的是松江，浆染得最好的是芜湖。
English: Cotton cloth is produced everywhere, but the best woven cotton cloth is from Songjiang, and the best dyed cotton cloth is from Wuhu.

古文：凡布缕紧则坚，缓则脆。
现代文：棉布的纱缕纺得紧的，棉布就结实耐用，纺得松的棉布就不结实。
English: If the cotton yarns are tightly spun, the cotton fabric will be strong and durable. If the yarns are loosely spun, the cotton fabric will not be strong.

古文：碾石取江北性冷质腻者，石不发烧，则缕紧不松泛。
现代文：碾石要选用江北那种性冷质滑的。碾布时石头不容易发热，棉布的纱缕就紧，不松懈。
English: When grinding stone, it is necessary to choose the cold and slippery stone from Jiangbei. When grinding cloth, the stone is not easy to heat up, and the cotton yarns are tight and do not loosen.

古文：芜湖巨店首尚佳石。
现代文：芜湖的大布店最注重用这种好碾石。
English: The large cloth stores in Wuhu pay the most attention to the use of this good grinding stone.

古文：广南为布薮而偏取远产，必有所试矣。
现代文：广东是棉布集中的地方，但广东人却偏要用远地出产的碾石，一定是因为试用过后才这样做的。
English: Guangdong is a place with a high concentration of cotton cloth, but the people of Guangdong tend to use milled stone produced in distant places. This must be because they only did so after trial use.

古文：为衣敝浣，犹尚寒砧捣声，其义亦犹是也。
现代文：正如人们浆洗旧衣服时也喜欢放在性冷的石砧上捶打，道理也是如此。
English: Just as people like to beat old clothes on cold stone rollers when washing them, the same is true.

古文：外国朝鲜造法相同，惟西洋则未核其质，并不得其机织之妙。
现代文：朝鲜棉布的织布方法与此相同，只是对西洋的棉布还没有进行研究，也不了解那里机织上的特点。
English: The weaving method of Korean cotton fabric is the same, but Western cotton fabric has not been studied, and the characteristics of its weaving are not known.

古文：凡织布有云花、斜文、象眼等，皆仿花机而生义。
现代文：棉布上可以织出云花、斜纹、象眼等花纹，都是仿照花机的丝织品的花样而织出的。
English: On cotton, patterns such as clouds, diagonals, and eyelets can be woven, all of which are modeled after the patterns of silk fabrics.

古文：然既曰布衣，太素足矣。
现代文：但既然叫做布衣，用最朴实的织法也就行了。
English: But since it is called cloth, it is enough to use the most simple weaving method.

古文：织机十室必有，不必具图。
现代文：每十家之中必有一架织机，可见织机在百姓中用得十分普遍。因此也就不必附图了。
English: There must be one loom in every ten households, which shows that looms are very common among the people. Therefore, there is no need to attach a diagram.

古文：○著
现代文：枲著
English: Written by

古文：凡衣衾挟纩御寒，百有之中止一人用茧绵，余皆著。
现代文：做棉衣和棉被御寒，一百个人之中大概只有一个会用丝绵，大部分都会选用棉絮。
English: When making cotton coats and quilts to keep out the cold, only about one in a hundred people will use silk, and most will use cotton wool.

古文：古袍今俗名胖袄。
现代文：古代的棉袍，大致相当于今天人们通常所说的胖袄。
English: The ancient cotton gown is roughly equivalent to what people commonly call the fat gown today.

古文：棉花既弹化，相衣衾格式而入装之。
现代文：将棉花弹松以后，根据衣被的式样填装进去。
English: After loosening the cotton, fill it in according to the pattern of the quilt.

古文：新装者附体轻暖，经年板紧，暖气渐无，取出弹化而重装之，其暖如故。
现代文：新的穿盖起来既轻柔又暖和，用过几年以后，就会变得沉重结块，逐渐不保暖了。这时再将棉花取出来弹松软，重新装制，又会变得像原来一样暖和了。
English: A new cover will feel soft and warm, but after a few years, it will become heavy and clumpy, and it will not keep you warm. At this time, remove the cotton to make it soft, refit it, and it will become as warm as before.

古文：○夏服
现代文：夏服
English: Summer clothes

古文：凡苎麻无土不生。
现代文：苎麻在什么地方都能种植。
English: Nettle can be grown anywhere.

古文：其种植有撒子、分头两法。色有青、黄两样。
现代文：种植方法有撒种子和分根两种，安徽池州地区每年把肥料堆在麻株根部，它的根会顺着土而逐渐长高。
English: There are two methods of planting: scattering seeds and dividing roots. In Chizhou, Anhui Province, fertilizer is piled at the base of the hemp plant every year, and its roots will gradually grow up along the soil.

古文：每岁有两刈者，有三刈者，绩为当暑衣裳、帷帐。
现代文：广东种青麻则是把直接种子撒播到田里，也能长得非常茂盛。苎麻的颜色有青色和黄色两种，有的一年收割两次，也有的收割三次。苎麻织成的麻布，可以做成夏天的衣服和帷帐。
English: The Guangdong variety of nettle is a direct seed sowing into the field, and can also grow very luxuriantly. The color of nettle is blue and yellow, and some are harvested twice a year, and some are harvested three times. Hemp woven from nettle can be made into summer clothes and curtains.

古文：凡苎皮剥取后，喜日燥干，见水即烂。
现代文：苎麻皮剥下来后，最好在太阳下晒干，浸水后就会腐烂。
English: After the skin of the nettle is peeled off, it is best to dry it in the sun. It will rot after being immersed in water.

古文：破析时则以水浸之，然只耐二十刻，久而不析则亦烂。
现代文：撕破成纤维时要先用水浸泡，但是也只能浸泡四五个小时左右，时间久了不撕破就会烂掉。
English: When it is torn into fibers, it must first be soaked in water, but it can only be soaked for about four or five hours. If it is not torn for a long time, it will rot.

古文：苎质本淡黄，漂工化成至白色。
现代文：苎麻本来是淡黄色的，但经过漂洗后会变成白色。
English: Stinging nettles are naturally pale yellow, but turn white after being rinsed.

古文：纺苎纱能者用脚车，一女工并敌三工，惟破析时穷日之力只担三五铢重。
现代文：一个熟练的纺苎纱能手使用脚踏纺车，能达到三个普通纺工的效率；但是将麻皮撕破成纤维时，一个人干一整天，也只能得麻三五铢重。
English: A skilful spinner, using a pedal-spinning-wheel, can make as many yarns as three ordinary spinners; but when he tears flax into fibres, he can do it for a whole day, and he will only get three or five yarns' worth.

古文：织苎机具与织棉者同。
现代文：织麻布的机具与织棉布的相同。
English: The machinery for weaving linen is the same as that for weaving cotton.

古文：凡布衣缝线，革履串绳，其质必用苎纠合。
现代文：缝布衣的线，绱皮鞋的串绳，都是用苎麻搓成的。
English: The thread of sewing clothes, the string of suede shoes, are all made of nettle.

古文：凡葛蔓生，质长于苎数尺。破析至细者，成布贵重。
现代文：葛则是蔓生的，它的纤维比苎麻的要长几尺，撕破的纤维非常细，织成布就很贵重。
English: Kudzu, on the other hand, is a creeping plant. Its fibers are several feet longer than those of nettle, and the torn fibers are very fine, making it very valuable to weave into cloth.

古文：又有м麻一种，成布甚粗，最粗者以充丧服。
现代文：另外，还有一种苘麻，织成的布很粗，最粗的用来做丧服用。
English: In addition, there is a kind of nettle, woven cloth is very thick, the thickest is used for mourning.

古文：即苎布有极粗者，漆家以盛布灰，大内以充火炬。
现代文：即使是苎麻布也有极粗的，供油漆工包油灰，皇宫里用它来制作火炬。
English: Even the nettle cloth has a very thick, for painters to wrap putty, the palace used it to make a torch.

古文：又有蕉纱，乃闽中取芭蕉皮析缉为之，轻细之甚，值贱而质枵，不可为衣也。
现代文：还有一种蕉纱，是福建地区人用芭蕉皮破析后纺成的，非常轻盈纤弱，价值低微而丝缕质地稀薄，不能用来做衣服。
English: There is also a kind of banana yarn, which is spun by people in Fujian after breaking up the banana peel. It is very light and thin, with low value and thin texture, and cannot be used to make clothes.

古文：○裘
现代文：裘
English: Khoo

古文：凡取兽皮制服统名曰裘。
现代文：凡是用兽皮做的衣服，统称为 裘 。
English: All clothes made from animal skins are collectively known as qiu.

古文：贵至貂、狐，贱至羊、麂，值分百等。
现代文：最贵重的比如貂皮、狐皮，最便宜的比如说羊皮、麂皮，价格的等级约有上百种之多。
English: The most valuable, such as mink and fox fur, and the cheapest, such as sheepskin and mink fur, have more than a hundred price levels.

古文：貂产辽东外徼建州地及朝鲜国。
现代文：貂产在关外辽东、吉林等地区，直到朝鲜国一带。
English: Gourds are produced in regions outside of Guanzhong, such as Liaodong and Jilin, and even as far away as Korea.

古文：其鼠好食松子，夷人夜伺树下，屏息悄声而射取之。
现代文：貂喜欢吃松子，那里的少数民族中捕貂的人，夜里悄悄躲藏在树下守候并伺机射取。
English: Cormorants like to eat pine nuts, and the cormorant fishermen among the ethnic minorities there quietly hide under the trees at night to watch and wait for an opportunity to shoot.

古文：一貂之皮方不盈尺，积六十余貂仅成一裘。
现代文：一张貂皮还不到一尺见方，要用六十多张貂皮连缀起来才能做成一件皮衣。
English: A mink coat is less than a foot square, and it takes more than sixty mink coats to make a single coat.

古文：服貂裘者立风雪中，更暖于宇下。
现代文：穿着这种貂皮衣的人站在风雪中，比待在屋里还觉得暖和。
English: A person wearing such a mink coat feels warmer standing in the wind and snow than indoors.

古文：眯入目中，拭之即出，所以贵也。
现代文：遇到灰沙进入眼睛，用这种貂皮毛一擦就抹出来了，所以十分贵重。
English: When gray sand gets into the eyes, it is wiped out with a wipe of this mink fur, so it is very valuable.

古文：色有三种，一白者曰银貂，一纯黑，一黯黄。
现代文：貂皮的颜色有三种，一种是白色的，叫做 银貂 ，一种是纯黑色的，一种暗黄色的。
English: There are three types of mink, one is white, called silver mink, one is pure black, and one is dark yellow.

古文：凡狐、貂亦产燕、齐、辽、汴诸道。
现代文：狐狸和貉也产在河北、山东、辽宁和河南等地。
English: Foxes and jackals are also bred in Hebei, Shandong, Liaoning and Henan.

古文：纯白狐腋裘价与貂相仿，黄褐狐裘值貂五分之一，御寒温体功用次于貂。
现代文：纯白色的狐腋下的皮衣价钱和貂皮也差不多，黄褐色的狐皮衣价钱是貂皮衣的五分之一，御寒保暖的功效比貂皮要差些。
English: The price of pure white fox fur coats is similar to that of mink coats. The price of yellow-brown fox fur coats is one-fifth of that of mink coats. The effect of keeping warm in cold weather is worse than that of mink coats.

古文：凡关外狐取毛见底青黑，中国者吹开见白色以此分优劣。
现代文：关外出产的狐皮，拨开毛露出的皮板是青黑色的，内地出产的狐皮把毛吹开露出的皮板则是白色的，用这种方法来区分优劣。
English: The skin of the fox pelt produced outside the country is bluish-black, while the skin of the fox pelt produced in the interior of the country is white. This method is used to distinguish the pros and cons.

古文：羊皮裘母贱子贵。
现代文：羊皮衣服，老羊皮价格低贱而羔皮衣价格贵重。
English: For sheepskin clothing, the price of old sheepskin is low, while lambskin clothing is expensive.

古文：在腹者名曰胞羔，初生者名曰乳羔，三月者曰跑羔，七月者曰走羔，胞羔、乳羔为裘不膻。
现代文：孕育在胎中而未生出来的羊羔叫 胞羔 ，刚刚出生的叫做 乳羔 ，三个月大的叫做 跑羔 ，七个月大的叫做 走羔 。用胞羔、乳羔做皮衣没有羊膻气。
English: A lamb that is gestated in the womb and has not yet been born is called a calf, a newborn lamb is called a suckling lamb, a three-month-old lamb is called a running lamb, and a seven-month-old lamb is called a walking lamb.

古文：古者羔裘为大夫之服，今西北绅亦贵重之。
现代文：古时候，羔皮衣只有士大夫们才能穿，而现今西北的地方官吏也能讲究地穿羔皮衣了。
English: In ancient times, the lambskin coat could only be worn by magistrates, but now local officials in the northwest can also wear lambskin coats.

古文：其老大羊皮硝熟为裘，裘质痴重，则贱者之服耳，然此皆绵羊所为。
现代文：老羊皮经过芒硝鞣制之后，做成的皮衣很笨重，是穷人们穿的，然而这些都是绵羊皮做的。
English: After the old sheepskin has been tanned, the leather clothes are very bulky and are worn by poor people, but they are all made of sheepskin.

古文：若南方短毛革，硝其享如纸薄，止供画灯之用而已。
现代文：如果是南方的短毛羊皮，经过芒硝鞣制之后皮板就变得像纸一样薄，只能用来做画灯了。
English: If it is a southern short-haired sheepskin, the leather plate becomes as thin as paper after being salted with amber nitrate, and can only be used as a lantern.

古文：服羊裘者，腥膻之气习久而俱化，南方不习者不堪也。然寒凉渐杀，亦无所用之。
现代文：穿羊皮袄的人，对于羊皮的腥膻气味，穿久了就习惯了，南方不习惯穿的人就受不了；但是，往南天气逐渐变暖，皮衣也没什么用处了。
English: People who wear sheepskin coats get used to the musty smell of sheepskin after wearing it for a long time, and people who are not used to wearing it in the south can't stand it; however, as the weather gradually warms up in the south, fur coats are of little use.

古文：麂皮去毛，硝熟为袄裤御风便体，袜靴更佳。
现代文：麂子皮去了毛，经过芒硝鞣制之后做成袄裤，穿起来又轻便又暖和，做鞋子、袜子就更好些。
English: The hazelnut skin is de-haired, and after the cinnamon salting process, it is made into hazelnut trousers. They are light and warm to wear, and it is better to make shoes and socks.

古文：此物广南繁生外，中土则积集聚楚中，望华山为市皮之所。
现代文：这种动物广东很多，此外，在中原地区则集中于湖南、湖北一带，望华山是买卖麂皮的地方。
English: There are many of these animals in Guangdong. In addition, in the Central Plains, they are concentrated in Hunan and Hubei. Mount Wanghua is the place where mink skins are bought and sold.

古文：麂皮且御蝎患，北人制衣而外，割条以缘衾边，则蝎自远去。
现代文：麂皮还有防御蝎子蜇人的功用，北方人除了用麂皮做衣服之外，还用麂皮做被子边，这样蝎子就会避得远远的。
English: Bran also has the function of defending against scorpion stings. In addition to using bran for clothing, northerners also use bran for the edges of quilts, so that scorpions can avoid them at a distance.

古文：虎豹至文，将军用以彰身；犬豕至贱，役夫用以适足。
现代文：虎豹皮的花纹最美丽，将军们用它来装饰自己，显示威武。猪皮和狗皮最不值钱，脚夫苦力用它来做靴子、鞋子穿。
English: The patterns of tiger and leopard skins are the most beautiful. Generals used it to decorate themselves and show their might. Pig and dog skins are the least valuable. Footmen used it to make boots and shoes.

古文：西戎尚獭皮，以为毳衣领饰。
现代文：西部各少数民族最注重用水獭皮做成细毛皮衣的领子。
English: Ethnic minorities in the west pay the most attention to the collar of a fine fur coat made with mink.

古文：襄黄之人穷山越国射取而远货，得重价焉。
现代文：湖北襄黄人翻山越岭去猎取它，运到很远的地方去，可以赚很多钱。
English: Hubei Xianghuang people can make a lot of money by climbing mountains and crossing ridges to hunt it and transport it to far away places.

古文：殊方异物如金丝猿，上用为帽套；扯里狲御服以为袍，皆非中华物也。
现代文：异域他乡的珍奇物产，如金丝猴的皮，皇帝用来做帽套；猞猁狲皮，皇帝用来做皮袍，这些都不是内地的出产。
English: The exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic exotic

古文：兽皮衣人此其大略，方物则不可殚述。
现代文：以上是人类用兽皮做衣服的大致情形，各地的特产在这里就不能详细叙述了。
English: The above is the general situation of humans using animal skins to make clothes. The special products of various regions cannot be described in detail here.

古文：飞禽之中有取鹰腹、雁胁毳毛，杀生盈万乃得一裘，名天鹅绒者，将焉用之？
现代文：在飞禽之中，有用鹰的腹部和大雁腋部的细毛做衣服的，杀上万只才能做一件所谓 天鹅绒 的衣服；可是，耗费这么大，用这个又有什么意思呢？
English: Of all the birds, those that can be used for clothing are the eagle's abdomen and the fine hairs of the goose's beak. Tens of thousands of them have to be killed to make a so-called velvet garment; but what is the point of using this when it costs so much?

古文：○褐毡
现代文：褐毡
English: Brown trout

古文：凡绵羊有二种，一曰蓑衣羊，剪其毳为毡、为绒片，帽袜遍天下，胥此出焉。
现代文：绵羊可分为两种，一种是蓑衣羊，剪下它的细毛可以做成毛毯或绒片，各地毛线帽和毛袜的原料都是这样得来的。
English: Sheep can be divided into two types, one is the wool sheep, and its fine wool can be cut to make blankets or fleeces. This is how the raw materials for wool hats and wool socks are obtained.

古文：古者西域羊未入中国，作褐为贱者服，亦以其毛为之。
现代文：古时候西域的羊还没有传入中原，穷人穿的毛布衣料，也是用这种毛制成。
English: In ancient times, sheep from the West had not yet been introduced to the Central Plains, and the blankets and clothing worn by the poor were also made from this wool.

古文：褐有粗而无精，今日粗褐亦间出此羊之身。
现代文：毛布料的质地只有粗糙的，而没有细致的。现在的粗毛布，有些也用这种羊毛制成。
English: The texture of the blanket material was coarse rather than fine, and some of today's coarse blankets are also made from this wool.

古文：此种自徐、淮以北州郡无不繁生。
现代文：蓑衣羊在徐州、淮河以北各地都大量饲养。
English: Longyi sheep are bred in large numbers in Xuzhou and everywhere north of the Huaihe River.

古文：南方唯湖郡饲畜绵羊，一岁三剪毛。
现代文：在南方则只有湖州饲养绵羊，这种羊一年可剪毛三次，夏季不长新毛。
English: In the south, only Huzhou raises sheep, which can be sheared three times a year and do not grow new hair in the summer.

古文：每羊一只，岁得绒袜料三双。
现代文：一只羊每年所剪下的毛可以做成三双毛袜。
English: The wool sheared from one sheep each year can make three pairs of wool socks.

古文：生羔牝牡合数得二羔，故北方家畜绵羊百只，则岁入计百金云。
现代文：一只公羊和一只母羊配种一次可产下两只小羊，所以北方的农家畜养一百只绵羊，一年能收入一百两银子。
English: One ram and one ewe can produce two lambs at a time, so farmers and livestock in the north can raise a hundred sheep and earn a hundred and two silvers a year.

古文：一种羊唐末始自西域传来，外毛不甚蓑长，内毳细软，取织绒褐，秦人名曰山羊，以别于绵羊。
现代文：另外一种羊叫做 矞羊 ，唐代末期才从西域地区传入。这种羊外毛不是很长，内毛很细软，用来织绒毛布。陕西人把它叫做山羊，以此区别于绵羊。
English: Another kind of sheep is called the yakitori sheep, which was only introduced from the western region at the end of the Tang Dynasty. The outer hair of this sheep is not very long, and the inner hair is very soft, and is used to weave fluffy blankets. The Shaanxi people call it a goat to distinguish it from a sheep.

古文：此种先自西域传入临洮，今兰州独盛，故褐之细者皆出兰州。
现代文：这种羊先从西域地区传到甘肃临洮，现在以兰州为最多，所以细软的毛布都出自甘肃兰州，因此又名兰绒。
English: This kind of sheep was first brought from the western region to Linyi, Gansu, and now Lanzhou is the largest, so the soft blankets are all from Lanzhou, Gansu, and are therefore also known as lanzhou.

古文：一曰兰绒，番语谓之孤古绒，从其初号也。
现代文：少数民族把它叫做孤古绒，这是沿用它起先的名字。
English: Ethnic minorities call it the lone old lintel, which is a continuation of its original name.

古文：山羊毳绒亦分两等，一曰ㄐ绒，用梳栉ㄐ下，打线织帛，曰褐子、把子诸名色。一曰拔绒，乃毳毛精细者，以两指甲逐茎ㄎ下，打线织绒褐。
现代文：山羊的细毛绒也可以分为两种：一种叫做绒，是用梳子从羊身上梳下来的，打成线织成绒毛布，有褐子或把子等名称；另一种叫做拔绒，是细毛中比较精细的，用两个手指甲逐条从羊身上拔下，打成线织成绒毛布。
English: The goat's fine wool can also be divided into two types: one is called wool, which is combed from the sheep with a comb and woven into a wool blanket, with names such as brown or handle; the other is called plucked wool, which is more delicate in fine wool, plucked from the sheep with two fingernails one by one, and woven into a wool blanket.

古文：此褐织成，揩面如丝帛滑腻。
现代文：这样织成的毛布，摸起来像丝织品那样光滑柔软。
English: A blanket woven in this way feels as smooth and soft as silk.

古文：每人穷日之力打线只得一钱重，费半载工夫方成匹帛之料。
现代文：每人打线辛苦一天也只能得到一钱重的毛料，要花半年才够织成一匹织品的原料。
English: Each person can only get a dollar's worth of wool in a day of hard work, and it takes half a year to weave enough raw material into a single piece of fabric.

古文：若ㄐ绒打线，日多拔绒数倍。
现代文：如果是用掐绒打成线，一天能比拔绒多好几倍。
English: If you use felt to make a thread, you can make several times more thread a day than if you pull out the wool.

古文：凡打褐绒线，冶铅为锤，坠于绪端，两手宛转搓成。
现代文：打绒线的时候，用铅锤坠着线端，用手宛转揉搓而成。
English: When beating the floss, use a plumb bob to hit the end of the line and rub it with your hands.

古文：凡织绒褐机大于布机，用综八扇，穿经度缕，下施四踏轮，踏起经隔二抛纬，故织出文成斜现。
现代文：织绒毛布的机器，用综片八扇，经线从此通过，下面装四个踏轮，每踏起两根经线，才过一次纬线，因此就能织成斜纹。
English: The machine for knitting down blankets uses eight integrated panels, from which the warp passes through, and four treadwheels are installed below. For every two warp threads, only one weft thread passes through, so it is possible to weave a twill.

古文：其梭长一尺二寸，机织、羊种皆彼时归夷传来，故至今织工皆其族类，中国无典也。
现代文：现在用的梭长一尺二寸，机器织的方法和羊种都是当时从少数民族传来的，所以到现在织布工匠还全是那个民族的人，没有内地人。
English: The shuttle currently in use is a foot and two inches long, and the methods of machine weaving and the type of sheep were both introduced from ethnic minorities at that time. Therefore, to this day, the weaving craftsmen are all from that ethnic group, and there are no mainlanders.

古文：凡绵羊剪毳，粗者为毡，细者为绒。
现代文：从绵羊身上剪下的细毛，粗的能做毡子，细的可以做绒。
English: The fine wool cut from the sheep's body can be used to make braids, and the fine wool can be used to make wool.

古文：毡皆煎烧沸汤投于其中搓洗，俟其粘合，以木板定物式，铺绒其上，运轴赶成。
现代文：毡子都是将羊毛放到沸水中搓洗，等到黏合后，才用木板格成一定的式样，把绒铺在上面，转动机轴轧成。
English: The dice are made by rinsing wool in boiling water, and only after gluing are they made into a certain shape with a wooden lattice, the wool is spread on top, and the motor shaft is rolled into shape.

古文：凡毡绒白黑为本色，其余皆染色。
现代文：毡绒的本色是白与黑，其他颜色都是染成的。
English: The natural color of the satin is white and black, all other colors are dyed.

古文：其氍俞、氆鲁等名称，皆华夷各方语所命。
现代文：至于 氍毹 、 氆氇 等都是各地方的方言的称呼。
English: As for,  and so on, they are all local dialect names.

古文：若最粗而为毯者，则驽马诸料杂错而成，非专取料于羊也。
现代文：最粗的毯子，里面掺杂着各种劣马的毛，并不是用纯羊毛制成的。
English: The thickest blankets, which are mixed with the hair of all kinds of inferior horses, are not made of pure wool.

