古文：子墨子曰：天下从事者，不可以无法仪。无法仪而其事能成者，无有。
现代文：墨子说：天底下办事的人，不能没有法则；没有法则而能把事情做好，是从来没有的事。
English: Mozi said, "Those who do business under heaven cannot do without laws; it has never been possible to do things well without laws."

古文：虽至士之为将相者，皆有法。
现代文：即使士人作了将相，他也必须有法度。
English: Even if a statesman makes an appearance, he must have a legal basis.

古文：虽至百工从事者，亦皆有法。
现代文：即使从事于各种行业的工匠，也都有法度。
English: Even artisans engaged in a variety of industries are subject to the law.

古文：百工为方以矩，为圆以规，直以绳，衡以水，正以县。无巧工不巧工，皆以此五者为法。
现代文：工匠们用矩划成方形，用圆规划圆形，用绳墨划成直线，用悬锤定好偏正，不论是巧匠还是一般工匠，都要以这五者为法则。
English: Craftsmen use the moment to draw a square, use a circle to plan a circle, use rope ink to draw a straight line, and use a hammer to fix the deviation. Whether it is a craftsman or an ordinary craftsman, these five things should be the rule.

古文：巧者能中之，不巧者虽不能中，放依以从事，犹逾己。
现代文：巧匠能切合五者的标准，一般工匠虽做不到这样水平，但仿效五者去做，还是要胜过自身的能力。
English: Skilled craftsmen can meet the standards of the five elements. Although ordinary craftsmen cannot achieve such a level, they still have to surpass their own ability to imitate the five elements.

古文：故百工从事，皆有法所度。
现代文：所以工匠们制造物件时，都有法则可循。
English: So when craftsmen make objects, there are rules to follow.

古文：今大者治天下，其次治大国，而无法所度，此不若百工辩也。
现代文：现在大的如治天下，其次如治大国，却没有法则，这是不如工匠们能明辨事理。
English: Now the great ones rule the world, and the lesser ones rule the great nations, but they have no laws. This is not as good as the craftsmen who can discern the truth.

古文：然则奚以为治法而可？
现代文：那么，用什么作为治理国家的法则才行呢？
English: So what can be used as a rule for governing the country?

古文：当皆法其父母，奚若？
现代文：假若以自己的父母为法则何如？
English: What if your parents were the law?

古文：天下之为父母者众，而仁者寡。
现代文：天下做父母的很多，但仁爱的少。
English: There are many parents in the world, but there is little love.

古文：若皆法其父母，此法不仁也。
现代文：倘若人人都以自己的父母为法则，这实为效法不仁。
English: If everyone took their parents as a rule, it would be a bad example to follow.

古文：法不仁，不可以为法。
现代文：效法不仁，这自然是不可以的。
English: Of course, it is not acceptable to follow the example of others.

古文：当皆法其学，奚若？
现代文：假若以自己从学的师长为法何如？
English: What if you were to take your own teacher as an example?

古文：天下之为学者众，而仁者寡，若皆法其学，此法不仁也。
现代文：天下做师长的很多，但仁爱的少。倘若人人都以自己的师长为法则，这实为效法不仁。
English: There are many teachers in the world, but there is little benevolence. If everyone takes their teacher as a rule, this is actually a bad example.

古文：法不仁，不可以为法。
现代文：效法不仁，这自然是不可以的。
English: Of course, it is not acceptable to follow the example of others.

古文：当皆法其君，奚若？
现代文：假若以自己的国君为法则何如？
English: What if you made your own king the law?

古文：天下之为君者众，而仁者寡，若皆法其君，此法不仁也。
现代文：天下做国君的很多，但仁爱的少。倘若人人都以自己的国君为法则，这实为效法不仁。
English: There are many sovereigns in the world, but there is little benevolence. If everyone takes their sovereign as a rule, this is actually an imitation and not benevolence.

古文：法不仁，不可以为法。
现代文：效法不仁，这自然是不可以的。
English: Of course, it is not acceptable to follow the example of others.

古文：故父母、学、君三者，莫可以为治法。
现代文：所以父母、师长和国君三者，都不可以作为治理国家的法则。
English: Therefore, neither parents, nor teachers, nor the sovereign should be used as the rules for governing the country.

古文：然则奚以为治法而可？
现代文：那么用什么作为治理国家的法则才行呢？
English: So what can be used as a rule for governing the country?

古文：故曰：莫若法天。
现代文：最好是以天为法则。
English: It's best to let nature take its course.

古文：天之行广而无私，其施厚而不德，其明久而不衰，故圣王法之。
现代文：天的运行广大无私，它的恩施深厚而不自居，它的光耀永远不衰，所以圣王以它为法则。
English: The movement of heaven is vast and selfless, its bounty is deep and not self-serving, and its splendor never fades, so the Holy King takes it as a rule.

古文：既以天为法，动作有为，必度于天。
现代文：既然以天为法则，行动作事就必须依天而行。
English: Since heaven is the law, actions and deeds must be in accordance with heaven.

古文：天之所欲则为之，天所不欲则止。
现代文：天所希望的就去做，天所不希望的就应停止。
English: Do what God wants, and stop doing what God doesn't want.

古文：然而天何欲何恶者也？
现代文：那么天希望什么不希望什么呢？
English: So what does God want and what does He not want?

古文：天必欲人之相爱相利，而不欲人之相恶相贼也。
现代文：天肯定希望人相爱相利，而不希望人相互厌恶和残害。
English: God certainly wants people to love and benefit each other, but does not want people to hate and harm each other.

古文：奚以知天之欲人之相爱相利，而不欲人之相恶相贼也？
现代文：怎么知道天希望人相爱相利，而不希望人相互厌恶和残害呢？
English: How do we know that God wants people to love and benefit each other, and does not want people to hate and harm each other?

古文：以其兼而爱之，兼而利之也。
现代文：这是因为天对人是全爱和全利的缘故。
English: This is because Heaven is all-loving and all-beneficial to man.

古文：奚以知天兼而爱之，兼而利之也？
现代文：怎么知道天对人是全爱和全利呢？
English: How do you know that God is all-loving and all-beneficent?

古文：以其兼而有之，兼而食之也。
现代文：因为人类都为天所有，天全部供给他们吃的。
English: Because all human beings are owned by the heavens, and the heavens all provide them with food.

古文：今天下无大小国，皆天之邑也。
现代文：现在天下不论大国小国，都是天的国家。
English: Nowadays, all countries, big or small, are heavenly countries.

古文：人无幼长贵贱，皆天之臣也。
现代文：人不论长幼贵贱，都是天的臣民。
English: All people, no matter how old or young, high or low, are the subjects of heaven.

古文：此以莫不刍牛羊，豢犬猪，洁为酒醴粢盛，以敬事天。
现代文：因此人无不喂牛羊、养猪狗，洁净地准备好酒食祭品，用来诚敬事天。
English: Therefore, people always feed cattle and sheep, raise pigs and dogs, and cleanly prepare wine and food sacrifices to be used to sincerely respect the heavens.

古文：此不为兼而有之、兼而食之邪？
现代文：这难道不是全部地拥有和供给人食物？
English: Isn't that the whole point of owning and providing food?

古文：天苟兼而有食之，夫奚说不欲人之相爱相利也？
现代文：天既然全部地拥有和供给人食物，为何能说天不要人相爱相利呢？
English: Since God completely owns and supplies man with food, why can it be said that God does not want man to love and benefit each other?

古文：故曰：爱人利人者，天必福之；恶人贼人者，天必祸之。
现代文：所以说： 爱人利人的人，天必定给他降福；相互厌恶和残害人的人，天必定给他降祸。
English: Therefore, he said: "Heaven will surely bless those who love others and benefit others; and heaven will surely bring harm to those who hate each other and harm others."

古文：曰：杀不辜者，得不祥焉。
现代文：所以说：杀害无辜的人，会得到不祥后果。
English: So: killing innocent people has ominous consequences.

古文：夫奚说人为其相杀而天与祸乎？
现代文：为何说人若相互残杀，天就降祸于他呢？
English: Why is it said that if people kill each other, heaven will bring evil upon them?

古文：是以知天欲人相爱相利，而不欲人相恶相贼也。
现代文：这是因为知道天希望人相爱相利，而不希望人相互厌恶和残害。 
English: This is because they know that God wants people to love and benefit each other, and does not want people to hate and harm each other.

古文：昔之圣王禹汤文武，兼爱天下之百姓，率以尊天事鬼，其利人多，故天福之，使立为天子，天下诸侯皆宾事之。
现代文：以前的圣王禹、汤、周文王、周武王，对天下百姓全都爱护，带领他们崇敬上天，侍奉鬼神。他们给人带来的利益多，所以天降福给他们，使他们立为天子。天下的诸侯，都恭敬地服事他们。
English: The former holy kings Yu, Tang, Zhou Wen Wang, and Zhou Wu Wang loved all the people in the world, led them to worship heaven, and served ghosts and gods. They brought a lot of benefits to people, so heaven blessed them and made them sons of heaven. All the princes in the world served them respectfully.

古文：暴王桀纣幽厉，兼恶天下之百姓，率以诟天侮鬼。
现代文：暴虐的君王桀、纣、周幽王、周厉王，对于天下的百姓全部厌恶、憎恨，带领他们咒骂上天，侮辱鬼神。
English: The tyrannical kings Zou, Zou, Zhou Yu and Zhou Li detested and hated all the people in the world, and led them to curse heaven and insult ghosts and gods.

古文：其贼人多，故天祸之，使遂失其国家，身死为于天下僇，后世子孙毁之，至今不息。
现代文：他们残害的人多，所以天降祸给他们，使他们丧失了国家，身死还要受辱于天下。后代子孙责骂他们，至今不休。
English: They have destroyed many people, so the heavens have brought disaster on them, they have lost their country, and they will be humiliated by the world until the day they die. Their descendants scold them to this day.

古文：故为不善以得祸者，桀纣幽厉是也。爱人利人以得福者，禹汤文武是也。
现代文：所以做坏事而得祸的，桀、纣、周幽王、周厉王即是这类；爱人利人而得福的，禹、汤、周文王、周武王即是这类。
English: Therefore, those who do bad things and get into trouble are of the same type as Yu, Zou, Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang; those who love and benefit others and get blessed are of the same type as Yu, Tang, Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang.

古文：爱人利人以得福者有矣，恶人贼人以得祸者，亦有矣。
现代文：爱人利人而得福的是有的，厌恶人残害人而得祸的，也是有的！
English: There are those who love and benefit others and are blessed, and there are those who hate and harm others and are cursed!

