古文：或问曰： 神仙不死，信可得乎？ 
现代文：有人问： 神仙能长生不死，这真的可能做到吗？ 
English: Some people ask: Immortals can live forever, is it really possible?

古文：抱朴子答曰： 虽有至明，而有形者不可毕见焉。虽禀极聪，而有声者不可尽闻焉。虽有大章竖亥之足，而所常履者，未若所不履之多。虽有禹益齐谐之智，而所尝识者未若所不识之众也。
现代文：抱朴子回答说：就算视力最好的人，也不能把有形的事物全部看见；就算听力最好的人也不能把所有的声音都听见；就算拥有大章、竖亥那样的捷足，所走过的地方，还是比没走过的地方少；就算拥有大禹、伯益、章谐那样的智慧，所见识的，也比没见识过的少。
English: Bu Pu Zi replied, "Even if you have the best eyesight, you can't see all the tangible things; even if you have the best hearing, you can't hear all the sounds; even if you have the quickness of a great egret or a harpy egret, the places you have walked are still less than the places you haven't walked; even if you have the wisdom of a great egret, a great egret, or a great egret, what you have seen is less than what you haven't seen.

古文：万物云云，何所不有，况列仙之人，盈乎竹素矣。不死之道，曷为无之？ 
现代文：宇宙万物纷杂，什么没有呢？况且成仙的人已随处见于各种记载，不死之道，又怎么会没有呢？ 
English: The universe is full of all kinds of things, what is not there? Moreover, immortal people have been seen everywhere in various records. How can there be no way to immortality?

古文：於是问者大笑曰： 夫有始者必有卒，有存者必有亡。
现代文：于是问话的人大笑说： 有始则必有终，有存则必有亡。
English: Then the questioner laughed aloud and said: If there is a beginning, there must be an end; if there is a being, there must be a death.

古文：故三五丘旦之圣，弃疾良平之智，端婴随郦之辩，贲育五丁之勇，而咸死者，人理之常然，必至之大端也。
现代文：所以像三皇五帝、孔丘、周公那样的圣人，后稷、樗里子、张良、陈平那样的智者，端木赐、晏婴、随何、郦食其那样的辩才，孟贲、夏育、五丁那样的勇士，也都死了，这是人生的必然规律，是一定会来临的最后归宿。
English: Therefore, sages such as the Three Kings and Five Emperors, Confucius, and Zhou Gong, wise men such as Hou Xuan, Jia Li Zi, Zhang Liang, and Chen Ping, debaters such as Duan Mu Zi, Xuan Hui, Su He, and Xuan Zi, and warriors such as Meng Xuan, Xia Yu, and Wuding, have also died. This is an inevitable law of life, and it is a final destination that will surely come.

古文：徒闻有先霜而枯瘁，当夏而凋青，含穗而不秀，未实而萎零，未闻有享於万年之寿，久视不已之期者矣。
现代文：人们只听说过在霜降之前就枯萎，正值盛夏便落青，含孕着穗儿却不开花，没有结果实就凋零的事，还没有听说过有谁能享受万年之寿，长生久视而不死。
English: People have only heard of things that wither before the frost falls, that turn blue in the height of summer, that bear spikes but do not flower, that wither without fruit, and they have not heard of anyone who can enjoy eternal life and live long without dying.

古文：故古人学不求仙，言不语怪，杜彼异端，守此自然，推龟鹤於别类，以死生为朝暮也。
现代文：所以古人做学问不求成仙之术，言谈话语不涉及怪异的东西，杜绝那些不合正道的学说，遵守这种自然法则，把乌龟仙鹤排斥归为人以外的类别，把生死看作如朝暮一般短暂。
English: Therefore, the ancients did not seek immortality in learning, did not involve strange things in speech and conversation, put an end to those unorthodox doctrines, abided by this law of nature, excluded turtles and cranes as non-human categories, and regarded life and death as transient as the morning and evening.

古文：夫苦心约己，以行无益之事，镂冰雕朽，终无必成之功。未若摅匡世之高策，招当年之隆祉，使紫青重纡，玄牡龙跱，华毂易步趍，鼎餗代耒耜，不亦美哉？
现代文：若苦心约束自己，去做些没有益处的事，有如刻镂冰块，雕琢朽木一样，到头来也不会有任何成效的，不如施展出匡世济时的高明策略，得至毕生的宏福，使紫青绶带重新系在身上，用黑色公畜祝祭王朝的兴起，用华美的车子替代步行，用鼎中的美食取代田间的农耕，不也很好吗？
English: If you painstakingly restrain yourself to do something that is not beneficial, such as carving ice cubes and carving dead wood, it will not have any effect in the end. Isn't it better to use the clever strategy of displaying the auspicious time to obtain lifelong prosperity, reattach the purple and blue ribbon to your body, use black public animals to celebrate the rise of the dynasty, use gorgeous cars to replace walking, and replace farming in the fields with delicious food?

古文：每思诗人甫田之刺，深惟仲尼皆死之证，无为握无形之风，捕难执之影，索不可得之物，行必不到之路，弃荣华而涉苦困，释甚易而攻至难，有似丧者之逐游女，必有两失之悔，单张之信偏见，将速内外之祸也。
现代文：每当想起诗人做《甫田》讽刺国君，再深思孔子关于人 皆死 的论断，就不去做那些如同把握不具形态之风，捕捉难以捉摸之影，索求不可得到之物，行走不达目的之路，放弃荣华富贵而去涉足困苦，丢下唾手可得而去谋求艰难的事。这些就像 桑者之逐游女 的故事中说的那样，必然会两头受损而后悔；又好像单豹、张毅那样，固执偏信，必然会招致身内外的灾祸。
English: Whenever I think of the poet satirizing the sovereign in "Futian" and reflect on Confucius's assertion that all men are mortal, I will not do those things that are like grasping the formless wind, catching the elusive shadow, seeking the unobtainable, walking the road that does not reach the goal, giving up the glory and wealth to get involved in the hardships, and leaving the easy way to seek the difficult things. These, as said in the story of the Mulberry Wanderer, will inevitably be damaged and regret; and like the single leopard and Zhang Yi, stubborn bigotry will inevitably lead to internal and external disasters.

古文：夫班狄不能削瓦石为芒针，欧冶不能铸铅锡为干将。故不可为者，虽鬼神不能为也；不可成者，虽天地不能成也。
现代文：即使是公输班、墨翟，也不能把瓦石削成针尖；欧冶子也不能把铅锡铸成宝剑，所以说，做不到的事，即使鬼神也做不到；做不成的事，哪怕天地也做不成。
English: Even if it is a public conveyor or ink stone, it is not possible to sharpen the stone into a needle; the European smith cannot cast lead and tin into a sword. Therefore, even ghosts and gods cannot do what cannot be done; even heaven and earth cannot do what cannot be done.

古文：世间亦安得奇方，能使当老者复少，而应死者反生哉？
现代文：世间哪里能得到奇方，能使年老的人变回少年，本该死的人反而复生呢？
English: Where in the world can you get hold of a magic potion that can turn an old man back into a young man and bring back to life someone who should have died?

古文：而吾子乃欲延蟪蛄之命，令有历纪之寿，养朝菌之荣，使累晦朔之积，不亦谬乎？
现代文：而先生却想延长蟪蛄的寿命，让它活上一年；想保养朝菌的荣华，让它能活上一个月，这不是太荒谬了吗？
English: My husband, on the other hand, wants to extend the life of the earthworm, let it live for a year; wants to maintain the splendor of the morning fungus, let it live for a month, isn't that too absurd?

古文：愿加九思，不远迷复焉。 
现代文：希望你能多加思考，迷途知返，不要走得太远。
English: I hope you can think more, learn from your mistakes, and not go too far.

古文：抱朴子答曰： 夫聪之所去，则震雷不能使之闻，明之所弃，则三光不能使之见，岂輷磕之音细，而丽天之景微哉？
现代文：抱朴子回答说： 人要是丧失了听觉，那么震耳的的雷声也不能使他听到；丧失了视觉，那么日月星辰的光芒也不能让他看见，何况是磕碰的细小声音，天空中的细微景观呢？ 
English: "If a person loses his hearing, then the deafening thunder cannot make him hear; if he loses his sight, then the light of the sun, moon and stars cannot make him see, not to mention the small sounds of bumping, and the subtle landscape in the sky.

古文：而聋夫谓之无声焉，瞽者谓之无物焉。又况管弦之和音，山龙之绮粲，安能赏克谐之雅韵，暐晔之鳞藻哉？
现代文：所以聋子说世上没有声音，瞎子说世上没有东西，何况是管弦的和奏之音，衮服上绮丽的山龙图纹，他们又怎么能够欣赏和谐的雅致音韵、明丽的鳞藻图饰呢？
English: So the deaf say that there is no sound in the world, the blind say that there is nothing in the world, not to mention the orchestral chords, and the beautiful mountain dragon patterns on the robes, how can they appreciate the harmonious and elegant rhythms, and the bright scaly algae patterns?

古文：故聋瞽在乎形器，则不信丰隆之与玄象矣。而况物有微於此者乎？
现代文：所以说聋子和瞎子感觉到的只是有形的的物，却不相信天上有云师作画和日月星辰，更何况比这更微妙的事物呢？
English: So deaf and blind people can only perceive tangible objects, but they don't believe that there are sky painters and the sun, moon and stars in the sky, let alone things more subtle than that?

古文：暗昧滞乎心神，则不信有周孔於在昔矣。况告之以神仙之道乎？
现代文：昏暗愚昧滞留在心神，就不相信昔日曾有过周公、孔子，何况告诉他神仙之道呢？
English: If dim-wittedness lingers in one's mind, one will not believe that Zhou Gong and Confucius existed in the past, let alone tell him the way of the immortals.

古文：夫存亡终始，诚是大体。其异同参差，或然或否，变化万品，奇怪无方，物是事非，本钧末乖，未可一也。
现代文：世事有存必有亡，有始必有终，诚然大体如此，但是其间存在着不同的差异，有的这样，有的那样，变化万端，奇奇怪怪，没有一定的规律。本质相同的表现不同，根本相同的枝末相背，不能一概而论。
English: All things must have a beginning and an end. It is true that this is generally true, but there are different differences between them. Some are like this, some are like that. They are ever-changing, strange and strange, and there is no definite rule. The manifestations of the same essence are different, and the branches of the same essence are different from each other. It is impossible to generalize.

古文：夫言始者必有终者多矣，混而齐之，非通理矣。
现代文：说有始必有终的人很多，把千变万化的事物混同起来一样看待，不是通达之理。
English: There are many people who say that there is a beginning and an end. It is not logical to confuse ever-changing things and treat them the same way.

古文：谓夏必长，而荠麦枯焉。谓冬必凋，而竹柏茂焉。谓始必终，而天地无穷焉。谓生必死，而龟鹤长存焉。
现代文：说夏天万物必然生长，但是荠麦却在此时枯萎；说冬天万物必然凋谢，而竹柏却在此时丰茂；说有始必有终，而天地却无尽无穷；说有生必有死，而龟鹤却长生久存。
English: It is said that in summer, all things must grow, but buckwheat withers at this time; it is said that in winter, all things must wither, but bamboo and cypresses are lush at this time; it is said that there must be a beginning and an end, but heaven and earth are endless; it is said that there must be life and death, but cranes live forever.

古文：盛阳宜暑，而夏天未必无凉日也。极阴宜寒，而严冬未必无暂温也。
现代文：盛夏应该是炎热的，但夏天未必没有清凉的日子；严冬应该是寒冷的，但冬天未必没有短暂的温暖。
English: Midsummer should be hot, but summer does not necessarily lack cool days; severe winter should be cold, but winter does not necessarily lack short-term warmth.

古文：百川东注，而有北流之浩浩。坤道至静，而或震动而崩弛。
现代文：百川东流到海，但也有潺潺流水向北而去；地属坤道应静，但有时也会震动崩踏陷裂。
English: A hundred rivers flow eastward to the sea, but there are also turbulent waters flowing northward; the land belongs to Kun Dao should be quiet, but sometimes it will shake, collapse and crack.

古文：水性纯冷，而有温谷之汤泉；火体宜炽，而有萧丘之寒焰；重类应沈，而南海有浮石之山；轻物当浮，而牜羊柯有沈羽之流。
现代文：水本性寒冷，但是也有温谷的温泉；火本性炽热，但是也有萧丘的冷焰。重的东西应当下沉到水中，但南海却有浮石之山；轻的东西应当上浮到水面，可牂柯却有沉下羽毛的河水。
English: Water is cold by nature, but there are hot springs in the valley of Wen; fire is hot by nature, but there are cold flames in the hills. Heavy things should sink into the water, but the South Sea has a mountain of pumice; light things should float to the surface, but Shinko has a river of sinking feathers.

古文：万殊之类，不可以一概断之，正如此也久矣。
现代文：世上万物万类，不能用一种标准来一概而论。如此复杂已是久已有之的了。
English: There are all kinds of things in the world, and it is impossible to use one standard to generalize. It has been so complicated for a long time.

古文：有生最灵，莫过乎人。贵性之物，宜必钧一。
现代文：在有生命的东西中最有灵性的莫过于人，拥有最可贵灵性的人，应均齐划一。
English: Of all living things, nothing is more spiritual than man, and those who possess the most valuable spiritual qualities should all be the same.

古文：而其贤愚邪正，好丑脩短，清浊贞淫，缓急迟速，趋舍所尚，耳目所欲，其为不同，已有天壤之觉，冰炭之乖矣。
现代文：但是，人的贤明愚笨，奸邪正直，美丽丑陋，修长短矮，清白污浊，贞列婬荡，缓慢急切，迟钝迅速，对事物取舍的选择，耳目之需的要求，其间的不同，已有天壤之别，冰炭般相背逆了？
English: However, people's wisdom and stupidity, treachery and wickedness, honesty, beauty and ugliness, tall and short, clean and dirty, chaste and lascivious, slow and eager, slow and quick, choice of things to choose from, the requirements of eyes and ears, the difference between them, have been very different, and they are as opposite as ice and coal?

古文：何独怪仙者之异，不与凡人皆死乎？
现代文：那为什么单单对神仙不像凡人那样都死这点而感到疑怪呢？
English: So why be so suspicious of the mere fact that immortals don't die like mortals?

古文：若谓受气皆有一定，则雉之为蜃，雀之为蛤，壤虫假翼，川蛙翻飞，水蛎为蛉，荇苓为蛆，田鼠为鴽，腐草为萤，鼍之为虎，蛇之为龙，皆不然乎？
现代文：如果说万物接受元气形成的秉性都有是固定的，野鸡变成大蛤，鸟雀变成蛤蜊，幼虫长出美丽的翅膀，河里的虾蟆上下翻飞，水虿变成青蜓，荇苓生出蛆虫，田鼠化成鹌鹑鸟，腐草生出萤火虫，鼍变为虎，蛇变为龙，难道这不是事实吗？
English: If it is true that the propensity of all things to accept the formation of vitality is fixed, the pheasants turn into great crickets, the birds into crickets, the larvae grow beautiful wings, the shrimps in the river fly up and down, the leeches turn into maggots, the maggots give birth to aphids, the voles turn into ostriches, the rotten grass gives birth to fireflies, the maggots turn into tigers, and the snakes turn into dragons, isn't it a fact?

古文：若谓人禀正性，不同凡物，皇天赋命，无有彼此，则牛哀成虎，楚妪为鼋，枝离为柳，秦女为石，死而更生，男女易形，老彭之寿，殇子之夭，其何故哉？
现代文：如果说人秉承的纯正的天性，不同于凡俗的其他动物，上天将生命赋予人的时候，又不会厚此薄彼，那第公牛哀求变成老虎，楚地老妇变成大鼋，支离叔肘上生出柳枝，秦国女子变成石头，死去的人活过来，男女相互改变外形性别，老子、彭祖那样的长寿，而未成年而死的夭折，这些都是什么原因呢？
English: If we say that the pure nature of human beings is different from that of other ordinary animals, and when God gives life to human beings, He will not favor one over the other, then what are the reasons for the bull's supplication to become a tiger, the old woman in Chu to become a great egret, the willow branch sprouting from the uncle's elbow, the Qin woman to turn into stone, the dead to come back to life, men and women to change their appearance and gender, the long life like Lao Zi and Peng Zu, and the premature death of minors?

古文：苟有不同，则其异有何限乎？
现代文：如果说各人所秉承的天性不同，那么这种差异又有什么限制呢！
English: If each person's nature is different, then what are the limits of this difference!

古文：若夫仙人，以药物养身，以术数延命，使内疾不生，外患不入，虽久视不死，而旧身不改，苟有其道，无以为难也。
现代文：至于仙人，他们用药物养成身，用数术延长寿命，使得体内的疾病不生，体外的侵患不入，虽长生久活，而旧日的容颜不见异思迁改变。
English: As for the immortals, they use drugs to develop their bodies, and use mathematics to extend their lives, so that internal diseases do not occur, and external invasions do not enter the body. Although they live long, their old faces do not change.

古文：而浅识之徒，拘俗守常，咸曰世閒不见仙人，便云天下必无此事。
现代文：如果按照仙人之道去做，并不难做到。而那些见识浅薄的人，拘泥于世俗，墨守常规，都说世间没有见过仙人，便认为天下肯定不会有这种事。
English: If you follow the path of the hermit, it is not difficult to do. And those who are shallow-minded, stick to the mundane, stick to the routine, say that the world has not seen a hermit, they think that the world will certainly not have such a thing.

古文：夫目之所曾见，当何足言哉？
现代文：如果说人们都曾亲眼见过，那还有什么可说的呢？
English: If people have seen it with their own eyes, what else is there to say?

古文：天地之间，无外之大，其中殊奇，岂遽有限，诣老戴天，而无知其上，终身履地，而莫识其下。
现代文：天地之间，无边的广大，其中特异奇怪的东西，哪里会有限呢？人从生到死头顶青天，却不知天有多高；终生一直脚踏大地，却不知地有多厚。
English: Between heaven and earth, boundless vastness, among which are peculiar and strange things, where can there be a limit? People live from birth to death with their heads in the sky, but they do not know how high the sky is; they have been treading the earth all their lives, but they do not know how thick the earth is.

古文：形骸己所自有也，而莫知其心志之所以然焉。寿命在我者也，而莫知其脩短之能至焉。
现代文：形骸是自己所有的，却不知自己的心志为什么会是这样；寿命掌握在自己手中，却不知道它的长短能到多少岁，何况成仙的道理那么高远，道德那么幽深玄妙？
English: The skeleton is one's own, but one does not know why one's mind is like this; the life span is in one's own hands, but one does not know how old it can be, not to mention that the principle of immortality is so far-reaching, and morality is so profound and mysterious?

古文：况乎神仙之远理，道德之幽玄，仗其短浅之耳目，以断微妙之有无，岂不悲哉？
现代文：凭借自己那短浅的见识，来判断细微玄妙之道有无，岂不是太可悲了吗？
English: Isn't it too sad to rely on one's own short-sightedness to judge the existence or non-existence of subtle and mysterious ways?

古文：设有哲人大才，嘉遁勿用，翳景掩藻，废伪去欲，执太璞於至醇之中，遗末务於流俗之外，世人犹鲜能甄别，或莫造志行於无名之表，得精神於陋形之里，岂况仙人殊趣异路，以富贵为不幸，以荣华为秽汙，以厚玩为尘壤，以声誉为朝露，蹈炎飙而不灼，蹑玄波而轻步，鼓翮清尘，风驷云轩，仰凌紫极，俯栖昆仑，行尸之人，安得见之？
现代文： 假如有一个才能见识超越寻常堪称大用的人，隐居避世，隐藏身形，掩盖文思，废除虚伪的包装，去掉人的欲望，立身最淳朴的品质于至淳至厚之中，丢弃不重要的事物于世俗之外，世人尚且还很少能够甄别出，有人会在不显声名的情况下成就志向，会以粗鄙的外表和身体得到脱俗的精神。更何况仙人于凡人志趣悬殊、道路不同！仙人把富贵看成不幸，把荣华视为污秽，把贵重的玩物看成杨灰的尘土，把声名与美誉视为瞬逝的朝露；仙人踏着炽热的烈火不会被灼伤，踩着幽深的波涛而步履轻盈；鼓动双翅翱翔于天空，以长风为马，以云彩为车，上凌越于北极紫宫，下栖身于昆仑山岳，那些如行尸走肉的庸人，有怎能看见他们呢？
English: If one has the ability to see a person who is of great use beyond the ordinary, who lives in seclusion, hides his body, conceals his thoughts, abolishes hypocritical packaging, removes human desires, bases the most simple qualities in the most simple and thick, and discards unimportant things outside the world, the world is still rarely able to discern, some people will achieve their aspirations without fame, and will get a vulgar appearance and body. What's more, immortals have different interests and different paths from ordinary people! Immortals regard wealth as misfortune, regard glory as filth, regard valuable toys as poplar dust, and regard fame and reputation as

古文：假令游戏，或经人间，匿真隐异，外同凡庸，比肩接武，孰有能觉乎？
现代文：即令仙人偶尔遨游，有时经过人间，藏匿真容和特异，外表和凡人一样，即使人们和他们肩并着肩、脚碰着脚，又有谁能觉察得到呢？
English: Even if immortals occasionally travel, sometimes passing through the human world, hiding their true form and uniqueness, and their appearance is the same as that of ordinary people, even if people stand shoulder to shoulder with them and their feet touch, who can detect it?

古文：若使皆如郊閒两曈之正方，邛疏之双耳，出乎头巅。马皇乘龙而行，子晋躬御白鹤。或鳞身蛇躯，或金车羽服，乃可得知耳。
现代文：如果仙人都像郊间人那样两目瞳孔正方，像邛蔬那样两只耳朵长出头项，或者像马师皇那样骑蛟龙而行，像王子乔那样驾白鹤升天，或者像伏羲那样身生鳞、女娲那样长蛇身，或者乘金车、身着羽服，那么凡人就可以知道他们是仙人了。
English: If the immortals all have square pupils like the people in the suburbs, two ears like the lettuces, or ride on dragons like King Ma, ascend to heaven on a white crane like Prince Qiao, or have scales like Fuxi, snake-like bodies like Niang, or ride on a golden chariot and wear feathers, then ordinary people can know that they are immortals.

古文：自不若斯，则非洞视者安能觌其形，非彻听者安能闻其声哉？
现代文：如果不是这样，那么没有敏锐的洞察力的人怎么能看出他们的外形，没有透彻的听觉的人怎么能听出他们的声音呢？
English: If this is not so, then how can a person without keen insight see their appearance, and how can a person without a thorough sense of hearing hear their voice?

古文：世人既不信，又多疵毁，真人疾之，遂益潜遁。
现代文：世人既不相信有神仙，又常对他们横加指责、诋毁，修真得道的人厌恶非常，于是更加潜匿隐遁了。
English: The world does not believe in the existence of gods and spirits, but often accuses and slanders them. People who cultivate the true way are very disgusted, so they become even more hidden and secluded.

古文：且常人之所爱，乃上士之所憎。庸俗之所贵，乃至人之所贱也。
现代文：况且，常人所喜爱的，往往是道德高尚之人所憎恶的；庸俗人所看重的，往往是道德修养达到最高境界的人所鄙视的。
English: Moreover, that which is loved by the vulgar is often hated by the virtuous; that which is esteemed by the vulgar is often despised by the most virtuous.

古文：英儒伟器，养其浩然者，犹不乐见浅薄之人，风尘之徒。况彼神仙，何为汲汲使刍狗之伦，知有之何所索乎，而怪於未尝知也。
现代文：那些杰出的儒生，能担当大事的人才，养浩然正气的人，尚且不乐意和见识浅薄的人、沉迷红尘之辈打交道，何况那些仙人，为什么要急切地使那些如用之即弃的草狗之类的人知道什么样东西存在又值得他们去追求呢？
English: Those outstanding Confucians, who are capable of handling important matters, and who have a great sense of justice, are not yet willing to deal with shallow-minded people and those who are addicted to red dust, let alone those immortals. Why should they be anxious to let those who are like straw dogs that are discarded as soon as they are used know what kind of things exist and are worth their pursuit?

古文：目察百步，不能了了，而欲以所见为有，所不见为无，则天下之所无者，亦必多矣。
现代文：懂得自己所疑怪的只是未曾见过的呢？常人能看到百步之远，尚且不能一一尽了，却要把自己所见到的那一点断定为有，把看不到的断定为无，那么天下所不存在的东西，也必定太多了。
English: Do you understand that what you suspect is just something you haven't seen before? An ordinary person can see a hundred paces away, yet can't see everything, but you have to define what you see as something, and what you can't see as nothing. Then there must be too many things that don't exist in the world.

古文：所谓以指测海，指极而云水尽者也。
现代文：正像所谓用手指去测量大海的深度，手指触到的地方就说到底了。
English: Just like the so-called use of fingers to measure the depth of the sea, the place where the finger touches is the end.

古文：蜉蝣校巨鼇，日及料大椿，岂所能及哉？
现代文：蜉蝣去核查巨鳖之雄大，日及去估量大椿之岁数，岂是它们能做到的吗？
English: Is it possible for baboons to check the size and age of giant dragonflies and to estimate the age of giant camellias?

古文：魏文帝穷览洽闻，自呼於物无所不经，谓天下无切玉之刀，火浣之布，及著典论，尝据言此事。
现代文：魏文帝博闻尽鉴，自称对于事物无所不晓，曾说天下无切玉之刀、火浣之布，到他写《典论》时，还曾引经据典论及此事。
English: Emperor Wei Wenbo was well-informed and claimed to know everything about things. He once said that there is no such thing as a sharp sword or a flaming cloth in the world. When he wrote "The Classic," he also quoted the classic to discuss this matter.

古文：其閒未期，二物毕至。帝乃叹息，遽毁斯论。
现代文：之后不到一年，这两样东西都出现了，魏文帝因之叹息，马上推翻了前面的结论。
English: Less than a year later, both of these things appeared, and Wei Wendi's sigh immediately overturned the previous conclusion.

古文：事无固必，殆为此也。
现代文：凡事没有绝对的一定，大概就是指这种情况而言。
English: There's no such thing as a sure thing, at least in this case.

古文：陈思王著释疑论云，初谓道术，直呼愚民诈伪空言定矣。
现代文：陈思五著《释疑论》说：起初一说到道术，就肯定要说是愚弄百姓的骟人的空话无疑。
English: Chen Siwu's book "Interpretation of Doubts" said: At first, when it comes to Taoism, it is certain to be said that it is the empty talk of a liar who fools the people.

古文：及见武皇帝试闭左慈等，令断穀近一月，而颜色不减，气力自若，常云可五十年不食，正尔，复何疑哉？
现代文：等看到魏武帝试着把左慈关起来，令他辟谷近一个月，而左慈脸色没有憔悴，气力自如，还常说自己可以五十年不吃东西，事实正是如此，还有什么怀疑的呢？
English: When Emperor Wu of Wei tried to lock up Zuo Ci and made him stay away from the valley for nearly a month, Zuo Ci's face was radiant and his strength was unrivaled. He often said that he could not eat for fifty years, which is exactly the case. What else is there to doubt?

古文：又云，令甘始以药含生鱼，而煮之於沸脂中，其无药者，熟而可食，其衔药者，游戏终日，如在水中也。又以药粉桑以饲蚕，蚕乃到十月不老。又以住年药食鸡雏及新生犬子，皆止不复长。以还白药食白犬，百日毛尽黑。
现代文：又说：让甘始把药给活鱼含着，然后放在沸油中煎煮，那些没含药的，已熟透可食，那些含药的，却整日在沸油中游戏，就像在水里一样；又有，把药粉涂在桑叶上喂蚕，蚕活到十月不变老；还有，用驻年药喂小鸡和新生的小狗崽，它们都有停止发育不再长大；还用白药喂白狗，百日之内白毛都有变黑了。
English: He also said: Let Gan Zhi give medicine to live fish and then fry them in boiling oil. Those without medicine are ripe and edible. Those with medicine play in the boiling oil all day long, just like in water. On the other hand, apply the powder to mulberry leaves to feed silkworms, and the silkworms will live until October. Also, use perennial medicine to feed chicks and newborn puppies, and they will stop developing and no longer grow. Also, use white medicine to feed white dogs, and the white hair will turn black within 100 days.

古文：乃知天下之事，不可尽知，而以臆断之，不可任也。但恨不能绝声色，专心以学长生之道耳。
现代文：可知天下的事一个人不可能全都有都知晓，凭主观而臆断是不可信的，只恨自已不能绝声色，专心学习生之道。
English: We know that it is impossible for one person to know everything about the world, and it is not credible to make assumptions based on subjectivity. We can only hate ourselves and concentrate on learning the way of life.

古文：彼二曹学则无书不览，才则一代之英，然初皆谓无，而晚年乃有穷理尽性，其叹息如此。
现代文：那曹丕、曹植兄弟二人，论学问，可谓是无书不览；论才华，可算是一代精英，但最初都认为没有神仙，到了晚年才穷尽事理，彻悟物性，才有如此叹息。
English: The Cao Zhi and Cao Zhi brothers, in terms of learning, can be said to have no shortage of books; in terms of talent, they can be regarded as a generation of elites, but at first they all thought that there was no immortal, and only in their later years did they exhaust all rationality and thoroughly understand the nature of things, only to sigh so.

古文：不逮若人者，不信神仙，不足怪也。
现代文：那些赶不上他们的人，不相信神仙，也就不足为奇了。
English: It is not surprising that those who have not caught up with them do not believe in the gods.

古文：刘向博学则究微极妙，经深涉远，思理则清澄真伪，研覈有无，其所撰列仙传，仙人七十有馀，诚无其事，妄造何为乎？
现代文：刘向博学，研究问题究极奥妙，经深涉远；他善于思考，能明辨真为，研核有无。他所撰写的《列仙传》，所载仙人七十多位，假如根本没有这些事，他又何必去胡编乱造呢？
English: Liu Xiang is an erudite scholar, his research questions are extremely profound and far-reaching; he is good at thinking, can clearly distinguish the true from the false, and can research whether there is a core or not. The "Chronicles of the Immortals" written by him, which contains more than seventy immortals, if there are no such things, why would he have to fabricate and make things up?

古文：邃古之事，何可亲见，皆赖记籍传闻於往耳。
现代文：远古时的事，哪能儿能亲眼看见，都有是依赖记载于各种传记、书籍和以往的传闻罢了。
English: The events of ancient times, which no one can see with his own eyes, are all dependent on the biographies, books and rumors of the past.

古文：列仙传炳然其必有矣。
现代文：《列仙传》的记载清清楚楚，神仙之事必是存在的。
English: The records of "The Lives of the Immortals" are very clear. Immortals must exist.

古文：然书不出周公之门，事不经仲尼之手，世人终於不信。
现代文：然而此不出于周公之门，所记之事表经仲尼之手，世人始终不信。
English: However, this did not come from Zhou Gong's door, the recorded facts were written by Zhong Ni, and the world has always disbelieved.

古文：然则古史所记，一切皆无，何但一事哉？
现代文：既然如此，那古代史书所记载的全都有可以说是假的，又保止神仙这一件事呢？
English: That being the case, what about the fact that everything recorded in the ancient history books can be said to be false, and still preserve the immortals?

古文：俗人贪荣好利，汲汲名利，以己之心，远忖昔人，乃复不信古者有逃帝王之禅授，薄卿相之贵任，巢许之辈，老莱庄周之徒，以为不然也。
现代文：俗人贪图虚荣，追逐名利，以已炎心，忖度古人，于是也不相信古代有巢父、许由、老莱、庄周这种躲避帝王禅让、鄙薄卿相贵任的人，认为不会有这样的人。
English: The laity are greedy for vanity, pursue fame and fortune, and have a burning desire to surpass the ancients. Therefore, they do not believe that in ancient times there were Nest Father, Xu You, Lao Lai, Zhuang Zhou, who evaded the emperor's zen, and despised Bo Xie's important duties. They think that there will be no such person.

古文：况於神仙，又难知於斯，亦何可求今世皆信之哉？
现代文：更何况神仙，比这些人更难以理解，又怎么能要求今天的人都有相信呢？
English: Not to mention that immortals are more difficult to understand than these people, so how can people today be asked to believe in them?

古文：多谓刘向非圣人，其所撰录，不可孤据，尤所以使人叹息者也。
现代文：有很多人说刘向不是圣人，他所记载辑录的事情，不能单独作为凭证，这更让人叹息。
English: There are many people who say that Liu Xiang is not a saint, and the things he recorded cannot be used as evidence alone, which is even more saddening.

古文：夫鲁史不能与天地合德，而仲尼因之以著经。子长不能与日月并明，而扬雄称之为实录。
现代文：鲁国史官记载的国史不能与天地合德，孔子就对它加以整理修订而成《春秋》；司马迁的《史记》所记述虽然不能如日月一般清楚透彻，但扬雄还是称之为实录。
English: The national history recorded by the historian of the State of Lu could not be in harmony with heaven and earth, so Confucius arranged and revised it into "Spring and Autumn"; although the description of Sima Qian's "History" is not as clear and thorough as the sun and moon, Yang Xiong still calls it a true record.

古文：刘向为汉世之名儒贤人，其所记述，庸可弃哉？
现代文：刘向是汉代的名儒贤人，他所记述的怎能么可以弃之不信呢？
English: Liu Xiang was a famous Confucian sage in the Han Dynasty. How can what he wrote be discredited?

古文：凡世人所以不信仙之可学，不许命之可延者，正以秦皇汉武求之不获，以少君栾太为之无验故也。
现代文：大凡世人之所以不相信仙道可学，不同意寿命可以延长的，是因为秦始皇、汉武帝求仙而没能得到，因为李少君、栾大的作法没有应验的缘故。
English: The reason why ordinary people do not believe that the Way of the Immortal can be learned and do not agree that life can be prolonged is because the First Emperor of Qin and the Emperor of Han did not succeed in obtaining immortality, because the practices of Li Shaojun and Shida did not come to fruition.

古文：然不可以黔娄原宪之贫，而谓古者无陶朱猗顿之富。不可以无盐宿瘤之醜，而谓在昔无南威西施之美。
现代文：但是总不能因为黔娄、原宪的贫困，就认为古代没有陶朱、猗顿之类的富人；不能因为无盐、宿瘤的丑陋，就认为昔日没有南威、西施那样的美人。
English: However, it is impossible to think that there were no rich people in ancient times such as Tao Zhu and Zhengtong because of the poverty of Yan and Yuancheng; it is impossible to think that there were no beauties like Nanwei and Xishi in the past because of the ugliness of salt-free and pericarp.

古文：进趋尤有不达者焉，稼穑犹有不收者焉，商贩或有不利者焉，用兵或有无功者焉。况乎求仙，事之难者，为之者何必皆成哉？
现代文：努力向前还有达不到目的地的，种庄稼还有得不到收获的，商贩有时还有亏损的，打仗有时还有失败的，何况求仙之事是最难的，求仙之人怎能么会都有成功呢？
English: Efforts forward still can't reach the destination, planting crops still can't get the harvest, merchants sometimes still lose money, fighting wars sometimes still fail, not to mention that seeking immortality is the most difficult thing, how can people who seek immortality be successful?

古文：彼二君两臣，自可求而不得，或始勤而卒怠，或不遭乎明师，又何足以定天下之无仙乎？
现代文：像秦始皇、汉武帝两位皇帝和李少君、栾太两位臣子，自会有他们求而不得的原因，或许是开始勤求而后来怠惰，或许是没有逢遇名师，这又怎么能足以断定天下没有神仙呢？
English: Like Qin Shi Huang, the two emperors of Han Wudi, and the two courtiers of Li Shao Jun and Yu Taiming, they will have their own reasons for not being able to ask. Perhaps they began to work hard and then became lazy, or perhaps they did not meet a famous teacher. How can this be enough to conclude that there are no gods in the world?

古文：夫求长生，修至道，诀在於志，不在於富贵也。
现代文： 求长生不老，修炼成仙大道，决窍在于立志而不在于富贵。
English: Seeking immortality and cultivating the road to immortality, the key lies in determination, not in wealth.

古文：苟非其人，则高位厚货，乃所以为重累耳。
现代文：如果不是有志之人，就算地位高贵、财产丰厚，反而会成为沉重的累赘。
English: If you are not a motivated person, even if you have a noble status and rich property, it will become a heavy burden.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：学仙之法，欲得恬愉澹泊，涤除嗜欲，内视反听，尸居无心，而帝王任天下之重责，治鞅掌之政务，思劳於万几，神驰於宇宙，一介失所，则王道为亏，百姓有过，则谓之在予。
现代文：应该是淡泊恬静愉快，洗去杂念嗜好，内视反听，尸居无心。而帝王担负着天下的重责，治理繁忙的政务，因日理万机而思虑劳累，神思驰骋于宇宙万事。出现一点儿过失，帝王将相以 仁义 治天下之道就会被毁；百姓有了过失，帝王将相就得说责任在我。
English: It should be light-hearted, tranquil and happy, washing away all distracting thoughts and hobbies, looking inward and listening, and having no mind for the dead. But the emperor bears the heavy responsibilities of the world, manages busy government affairs, is thoughtfully tired due to all the circumstances of the day, and his thoughts gallop in all things of the universe. If there is a little fault, the way of the emperor to rule the world with benevolence and righteousness will be destroyed; if the people have a fault, the emperor will have to say that the responsibility is mine.

古文：醇醪汩其和气，艳容伐其根荄，所以翦精损虑削乎平粹者，不可曲尽而备论也。
现代文：香醇的美酒扰乱了他的和气，娇艳的美女伤害了他的根基，至于会削弱精气，损伤思虑，破坏平衡，减少精粹等等，就不再详尽一一论述了。
English: Fragrant wine disturbs his harmony, a beautiful woman injures his foundation, and as for what can weaken the spirit, damage the mind, destroy the balance, reduce the essence, and so on, it is no longer discussed in detail.

古文：蚊噆肤则坐不得安，虱群攻则卧不得宁。四海之事，何祗若是。
现代文：蚊虫叮咬，让人坐立不安；虱群攻击，使人卧不得宁，四海之内的事，何止如此？
English: Mosquitoes bite, making people restless; dragonflies attack, making people restless, things within the four seas, how much more so?

古文：安得掩翳聪明，历藏数息，长斋久洁，躬亲炉火，夙兴夜寐，以飞八石哉？
现代文：帝王们又怎能掩去聪明才智，念想脏腑，默数呼吸，长期斋戒身心洁净，亲自守在炼丹炉旁，起早迟眠，来炼制八石精华呢？
English: How could the emperors hide their wisdom and talent, think about their bowels, breathe silently, fast for a long time, keep their body and mind clean, and keep themselves by the alumina furnace, get up early and sleep late, to refine the eight-stone essence?

古文：汉武享国，最为寿考，已得养性之小益矣。
现代文：汉武帝在位的寿数最高，已经得到养生的小收益了。
English: Emperor Hanwu has the longest life expectancy on the throne, and has already received a small benefit from health care.

古文：但以升合之助，不供锺石之费，畎澮之输，不给尾闾之洩耳。
现代文：但是，升合这样少的资助，供不上钟石这样大的消费；靠田间小沟里的水，供不上尾闾这样大的泄流。
English: However, with such a small amount of funding, it is not possible to provide for such a large consumption of bells and stones; by relying on the water in the field ditch, it is not possible to provide for such a large outflow of tailings.

古文：仙法欲静寂无为，忘其形骸，而人君撞千石之锺，伐雷霆之鼓，砰磕嘈囐，惊魂荡心，百技万变，丧精塞耳，飞轻走迅，钓潜弋高。
现代文： 神仙的法术要求人寂静无为，忘掉自己的躯体，而人群却要撞击千石重的大钟，敲响雷霆万般的大鼓，轰轰隆隆，惊心动魄；百般伎俩，万种变化，使他丧失精力，充塞耳目；使轻捷的鸟飞走，使迅疾的兽跑掉；钓起水中深潜的鱼，射下空中高飞的鸟。
English: The magic of the immortals requires people to be silent and forget their bodies, while the crowd wants to hit the big clock weighing thousands of stones, ring the thunderous drums, rumble and thrill; a variety of tricks, all kinds of changes, make him lose energy and fill his ears and eyes; make the light bird fly away, make the fast beast run away; catch the fish that dives deep into the water and shoot down the bird that flies high in the air.

古文：仙法欲令爱逮蠢蠕，不害含气，而人君有赫斯之怒，芟夷之诛，黄钺一挥，齐斧暂授，则伏尸千里，流血滂沱，斩断之刑，不绝於市。
现代文：神仙的法术要求人要爱及虫豸，不去伤害有生命的东西，而人君一旦勃然震怒，就会有削除敌对的诛杀；黄钺一挥，利斧一授，就会横尸千里，血流滂沱；斩首断腰的行刑，不绝于市。
English: Immortal magic requires people to love and care for insects, not to harm living things, and once people are enraged, they will fight and kill each other; a swipe of the hammock, a sharp axe, will kill thousands of corpses, and blood will flow; beheading and execution will not cease in the city.

古文：仙法欲止绝臭腥，休粮清肠，而人君烹肥宰腯，屠割群生，八珍百和，方丈於前，煎熬勺药，旨嘉餍饫。
现代文：神仙的方法要求人要断绝臭腥，停食谷物，清理肠胃，而人君烹食牛羊牲畜，屠割一切生物；山珍海味，百味调和，丰盛的肴馔罗列在面前；用种种调料煎煮调制，美味佳肴，令人饱足。
English: The method of immortals requires people to break the stench, stop eating grains, and clean up the stomach, while people cook cattle, sheep and livestock, and slaughter all living things; mountain and sea delicacies, mixed with a variety of flavors, and rich dishes are lined up in front of them; cooked with various seasonings, delicious dishes, satisfying.

古文：仙法欲溥爱八荒，视人如己，而人君兼弱攻昧，取乱推亡，辟地拓疆，泯人社稷，駈合生人，投之死地，孤魂绝域，暴骸腐野，五岭有血刃之师，北阙悬大宛之首，坑生煞伏，动数十万，京观封尸，仰干云霄，暴骸如莽，弥山填谷。秦皇使十室之中，思乱者九。汉武使天下嗷然，户口减半。
现代文：神仙的法术要求人博爱四方，视人如已，而人君吞并弱小，攻取政治昏暗的国家，趁机着战乱，推翻别国的政权，开辟地域，拓宽疆土；灭掉别人的国家，驱聚那里的老百姓，把他们置于死地，使得孤独的鬼魂漂浮在极远的边地，暴露的尸骸丢失弃在凄寂的荒野；五岭有鲜血染红刀刃的军队，朝廷悬挂着大宛国君的首级；土埋活人、钉死降卒，动辄数十万人，还将敌人的尸体堆成高冢为 京观 ，高上去霄，而暴露的尸骸如同野草，填满山谷，秦始皇的暴政，使得十家人中，想造成反的就有九家；汉武帝的用兵，使天下怨声载道，户口减少了一半。
English: The magic of the immortals requires people to love the four directions, to regard people as they are, and people to annex the weak and small, to conquer the politically dim countries, to take advantage of the war chaos, to overthrow the regime of other countries, to open up the region, to expand the territory; to destroy other people's countries, to gather the people there, to put them to death, to make the lonely ghosts float in the far periphery, and to lose the exposed corpses in the desolate wilderness; the Wuling has the army of the blood-stained red blade, and the court hangs the head of the great king; to bury the living, to crucify the dead,

古文：祝其有益，诅亦有损。
现代文：祝寿能增加寿命，而诅咒能减少寿数。
English: Blessings increase longevity, while curses decrease it.

古文：结草知德，则虚祭必怨。
现代文：结草报答是因为知道对自己有恩德，但是连尸体都见不到的虚祭，也必然对用兵者产生怨恨。
English: The weaving of the reward is because they know that they are benefiting, but the false sacrifice, where even the corpse cannot be seen, is also bound to generate resentment against the person who used the soldiers.

古文：众烦攻其膏肓，人鬼齐其毒恨。
现代文：各种烦恼损伤着他身体的要害，人鬼又一同把他痛恨。
English: All kinds of troubles have damaged the key to his body, and ghosts and goblins hate him together.

古文：彼二主徒有好仙之名，而无修道之实，所知浅事，不能悉行。要妙深秘，又不得闻。又不得有道之士，为合成仙药以与之，不得长生，无所怪也。
现代文：那两个皇帝徒有好仙之名却无修道之实，就是他们所知道的关于求仙的那一点肤浅的事，沿且不能一一施行，仙道中那些高深的要点秘诀，又没得到，而且也没有得道之士为他们合成仙药来献上，他们不得长生，也就不足为怪了。
English: Those two emperors had the reputation of being good immortals, but they did not have the reality of religious practice. That is, the superficial things they knew about seeking immortals could not be carried out one by one. They did not obtain the high-level key points and secrets in the way of immortals, and they did not have anyone who had obtained the way to synthesize the elixir for them to offer. It is not surprising that they did not live forever.

古文：吾徒匹夫，加之罄困，家有长卿壁立之贫，腹怀翳桑绝粮之馁，冬抱戎夷後门之寒，夏有儒仲环堵之暎，欲经远而乏舟车之用，欲有营而无代劳之役，入无绮纨之娱，出无游观之欢，甘旨不经乎口，玄黄不过乎目，芬芳不历乎鼻，八音不关乎耳，百忧攻其心曲，众难萃其门庭，居世如此，可无恋也。
现代文： 我只是一个平民百姓，加上贫穷困乏，加上贫穷困乏，家中有如司马相如的空徒四壁，腹中有如象辄在桑荫下绝粮三日的饥饿，冬天有如戒夷夜里关在城门外而冻死的寒冷，夏天有如仲儒居陋被日光照射的酷热。想要跋涉远方，却缺乏舟船车马的费用；想要有所经营，却又没有可以使之代劳的役夫。进家来，没有绫罗绸缎的享受，出门去，没有游览观赏的快乐。美味佳肴不能亲口尝尝，彩色丝帛不能亲眼看看，芬香馥郁不能用鼻子嗅闻，五声八音不能用耳朵赏听。而千忧万愁时时袭击着心灵深处。千难万困经常聚集在自己家中，像这样活在世上，可以说没什么样可留恋了。
English: I am just a commoner, with poverty and hardship, with poverty and hardship, with an empty house like a horse and carriage, with four walls like a horse and carriage, with three days of hunger in my stomach like a baboon in the shade of the mulberry tree, with cold in winter like freezing to death outside the city gate in the night of the ban on foreigners, with scorching heat in summer like a villager's hut in the sun. I want to travel far away, but I lack the cost of a boat, a carriage and a horse; I want to do business, but I do not have a servant who can do it for me. When I enter my home, I do not enjoy

古文：或得要道之诀，或值不群之师，而犹恨恨於老妻弱子，眷眷於狐兔之丘，迟迟以臻殂落，日月不觉衰老，知长生之可得而不能修，患流俗之臭鼠而不能委。
现代文： 有的人得到了修道的要领和秘决，有的人逢遇到卓而不凡的老师，但却因离不开老妻弱子，眷恋于故巢墟丘，迟迟下不了决心，以至到死，才感叹日月匆匆，已不觉衰老。明明知道长生不死是可得之事，但却不去修炼；厌恶世俗的功名利禄，却又无法丢弃。
English: Some people have obtained the essentials and secrets of the practice, some people have met outstanding and extraordinary teachers, but because they can't leave their old wives and weak children, they are attached to the old nesting hill, they can't make up their minds, and even until death, they lament that the sun and moon are in a hurry, and they don't feel old. They clearly know that immortality is a obtainable thing, but they don't practice it; they hate worldly fame and fortune, but they can't discard it.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：爱习之情卒难遣，而绝俗之志未易果也。
现代文：因为一个人平时的爱好和习惯始终难以排队遣，而绝俗的志向又轻易不见成效。
English: Because a person's usual hobbies and habits are always difficult to line up, and unorthodox aspirations are easily ineffective.

古文：况彼二帝，四海之主，其所耽玩者，非一条也，其所亲幸者，至不少矣。
现代文：何况那秦始皇、汉武帝，贵为四海之主，他们所深爱玩赏罚的，就不止一种了，他们所亲幸的人，也极为多了。
English: What's more, the First Emperor of Qin and the Emperor of Han, who were the lords of the four seas, loved to play with rewards and punishments in more ways than one, and there were many people who were lucky to be close to them.

古文：正使之为旬月之斋，数日閒居，犹将不能，况乎内弃婉娈之宠，外捐赫奕之尊，口断甘肴，心绝所欲，背荣华而独往，求神仙於幽漠，岂所堪哉？
现代文：只让他斋戒一个月，闲居几天，尚未且做不到，何况是让他们离开宫内年轻貌美的宠姬，放弃宫外威武显赫的尊位，不吃甘美食物，断绝所有的欲念，舍弃荣华富贵，径身一人，到幽深寂静的境界中去追求成仙之道，岂是他们所能忍受的呢？
English: Just to make him fast for a month and stay idle for a few days, which has not yet been done and cannot be done, and furthermore, to make them leave the young and beautiful favorite in the palace, give up the powerful and prominent position outside the palace, do not eat sweet food, break all desires, give up glory and wealth, and go alone to the realm of deep silence to pursue the path of immortality, can they bear it?

古文：是以历览在昔，得仙道者，多贫贱之士，非势位之人。
现代文：因此，回顾往昔，得仙道的人大多是贫贱之士，而不是有权势地位的人。
English: Therefore, looking back at the past, most of the people who achieved immortality were poor people, not people in powerful positions.

古文：又栾太所知，实自浅薄，饥渴荣贵，冒干货贿，衒虚妄於苟且，忘祸患於无为，区区小子之奸伪，岂足以证天下之无仙哉？
现代文：再说，栾太所知道的，实在是很浅薄，他渴望荣华富贵，求取宝物钱财，苟且偷生地炫耀虚妄，在毫无作为之时已忘掉祸患，这么一个区区小子的奸诈欺骗行为，怎么能证实天下没有神仙呢？
English: Besides, what Xingtao knew was really very shallow. He longed for glory and wealth, sought treasures and money, covertly flaunted vanity, and had forgotten the disaster when he did nothing. How could the treacherous deception of such a little boy prove that there were no gods in the world?

古文：昔勾践式怒琏，戎卒争蹈火。楚灵爱细腰，国人多饿死。齐桓嗜异味，易牙蒸其子。宋君赏瘠孝，毁殁者比屋。
现代文：昔日勾践向愤怒的青蛙凭轼致敬，士兵卒们便争着赴汤蹈火；楚灵王喜欢细腰的女人，国中很多人因此而饿死；齐桓公爱吃奇珍异食，易牙便蒸了自己的儿子给他吃；宋国国君奖赏了一个因守孝悲伤过度而消瘦的人，于是国中因守孝悲伤而死的比比皆是。
English: Once upon a time, a monk paid homage to an angry frog with a gong, and soldiers fought to get into the fire; King Chuling liked women with thin waists, and many people in the country starved to death as a result; King Qi Huan loved to eat rare and exotic foods, and steamed his own son for him to eat; King Song Guo Guo rewarded a person who was emaciated due to excessive filial piety and sadness, so there were many deaths due to filial piety and sadness in the country.

古文：人主所欲，莫有不至。
现代文：为人君想要做的事，没有办不到的。
English: There is nothing you cannot do for someone who wants to do it.

古文：汉武招求方士，宠待过厚，致令斯辈，敢为虚诞耳。
现代文：汉武帝招求方士，对他们宠幸优待过厚，以至于使这些家伙胆敢用虚假荒诞的事进行欺骗。
English: Emperor Hanwu invited fortune-tellers and treated them so favourably that they dared these guys to cheat with false and absurd things.

古文：栾太若审有道者，安可得煞乎？
现代文：栾太如果确实有道，又怎么样会被杀死呢？
English: If there really was a way, how could the Empress Dowager be killed?

古文：夫有道者，视爵位如汤镬，见印绶如縗绖，视金玉如土粪，睹华堂如牢狱。
现代文：真正有道的人，把接受高官厚爵看得如受汤镬酷刑，把佩带金印紫绶看得如披粗丧服，把黄金白玉视为粪土，把华屋殿堂看成牢狱。
English: The truly virtuous people regard the acceptance of high-ranking officials and aristocrats as if they were subjected to torture, the wearing of gold-embossed purple ribbons as if they were wearing coarse mourning clothes, the gold and white jade as excrement, and the Huaya Hall of Fame as a prison.

古文：岂当扼腕空言，以侥倖荣华，居丹楹之室，受不訾之赐，带五利之印，尚公主之贵，耽沦势利，不知止足，实不得道，断可知矣。
现代文：哪里握着手腕说谎话，凭侥幸求得荣华富贵，信在富有丽堂皇的宫室，享受着难以计量的赏赐，佩戴着五利将军的大印，与高贵的公主攀亲，沉溺于权势利益之中，不知道停止和满足？
English: Where do you tell lies with your hand on your wrist, seek glory and wealth by chance, believe in a rich and magnificent palace, enjoy immeasurable rewards, wear the great seal of General Wuli, make friends with a noble princess, indulge in the interests of power, and do not know how to stop and be satisfied?

古文：按董仲舒所撰李少君家录云，少君有不死之方，而家贫无以市其药物，故出於汉，以假涂求其财，道成而去。
现代文：这种人实在是没有得道，这是绝对可以肯定的。 按照董仲舒所写的《李少君家录》所说，少君有长生不死的药方，但因家中贫困无钱买方上所列之药，于是出山到汉朝朝中，以便通过这种途径求得买药钱，道成之后便离去了。
English: According to "Li Shao Jun's Family Record" written by Dong Zhongshu, Shao Jun had a recipe for immortality, but due to poverty in his family, he did not have the money to buy the medicines listed above, so he went to the Han Dynasty in order to obtain the money to buy the medicines.

古文：又按汉禁中起居注云，少君之将去也，武帝梦与之共登嵩高山，半道，有使者乘龙持节，从云中下。云太乙请少君。
现代文：又按汉《禁中起居注》所说，少君临走时，汉武帝梦见与他一同簦嵩山，半路上，有使者乘着龙手持符节从云中下来，说太已请少君去。
English: According to the Han Dynasty's "Note on Living in the Forbidden City," when Shao Jun was about to leave, Emperor Wu of Han dreamed that he and Shao Jun were climbing Mount Song. Halfway up the mountain, an envoy descended from the clouds on a dragon, holding a rune, and said that the emperor had asked Shao Jun to go.

古文：帝觉，以语左右曰，如我之梦，少君将舍我去矣。
现代文：武帝醒后把梦对身边的人说了，说： 太君说要弃我而去了。 
English: After he woke up, Emperor Wu told the dream to the people around him, saying, "My wife said she wanted to abandon me and left.

古文：数日，而少君称病死。
现代文：几天以后，少君称病而死。
English: A few days later, Shokun died of illness.

古文：久之，帝令人发其棺，无尸，唯衣冠在焉。
现代文：过了一段时间，武帝让人打开少君的棺材，看到里面没有尸体，只有衣冠。
English: After some time, Emperor Wu had the coffin of the young prince opened, and saw that there was no body inside, only the crown.

古文：按仙经云，上士举形昇虚，谓之天仙。中士游於名山，谓之地仙。下士先死後蜕，谓之尸解仙。
现代文：按《仙经》上所说：上士能飞身升到天上，称为天仙；中士游于名山，称为地仙；下士先假死而后蜕变，称为解仙。
English: According to the "Book of Immortals," the staff sergeant can fly up to the sky and is called a celestial soul; the sergeant swims in famous mountains and is called a terrestrial soul; the corporal first fakes his death and then transforms into a celestial soul.

古文：今少君必尸解者也。
现代文：现在看起来，少君必属于尸解仙这一类了。
English: Now, it seems that Shoujun must belong to the category of "corpse-solving immortals."

古文：近世壶公将费长房去。及道士李意期将两弟子去，皆讬卒，死，家殡埋之。
现代文：近代的壶公带费长房离去，以及道士兵李意期带两个弟子离去，都有是假托猝死，家人将他们殡埋。
English: The modern Jugong leaving with Fei Changfang, as well as the Taoist soldier Li Yizhi leaving with two disciples, were all faked sudden deaths, and their families buried them.

古文：积数年，而长房来归。又相识人见李意期将两弟子皆在郫县。其家各发棺视之，三棺遂有竹杖一枚，以丹书於枚，此皆尸解者也。
现代文：过了几年，长房又回来了，又有熟识的人扑克见李意其带着两个弟子住在郫县，他们的家人都有开棺验看，发现三具棺材中都只有一根竹杖，杖上用朱红漆写了符，这些都有是尸解的仙人。
English: A few years later, Nagafusa came back, and people who were familiar with him saw Li Yichi and his two disciples living in Jixian. Their families all opened the coffins to inspect them, and found that there was only one bamboo cane in the three coffins, with characters written on the cane with vermilion lacquer. These were all mummified immortals.

古文：昔王莽引典坟以饰其邪，不可谓儒者，皆为篡盗也。相如因鼓琴以窃文君，不可谓雅乐主於淫佚也。
现代文：从前王莽曾引据三坟五典来掩饰自己人夺权篡位的奸邪，但能因此便说所有的儒生都是谋权篡位的窃贼；司马列相如因弹琴引得卓文君随他私奔，但不能因此就说所有的高雅音乐都是专使人纵欲放荡的。
English: Once upon a time, Wang Mang quoted the Three Graves and Five Classics to cover up the treachery of his people seizing power and usurping the throne, but he could therefore say that all Confucians were thieves who sought to usurp power; Sima Li Zi Ru for playing the piano led Zhuo Wenjun to run away with him, but he could not therefore say that all high-class music was designed to make people indulge in debauchery.

古文：噎死者不可讥神农之播穀，烧死者不可怒燧人之钻火，覆溺者不可怨帝轩之造舟，酗■者不可非杜仪之为酒。
现代文：噎死的人不能怪神农氏教人播种百谷，烧死的人不可迁怒于燧人氏发明钻木取火，翻船溺死的人不能怨黄帝制造成出舟船，酗洒闯祸的人不能非议杜康、仪狄酿造成出洒浆。
English: Those who choked to death should not blame Shennong for teaching people to sow grain, those who burned to death should not be angry at Shennong's invention of drilling wood to make fire, those who drowned in a capsized boat should not blame the Yellow Emperor for making a boat, and those who drank too much and got into trouble should not blame Du Kang and Yi Di for making beer.

古文：岂可以栾太之邪伪，谓仙道之果无乎？
现代文：怎能么可以因为栾太的奸邪伪诈，就说肯定没有仙道呢？
English: How can it be said that there is definitely no Fairy Tale because of the treachery and deceit of the Empress Dowager?

古文：是犹见赵高董卓，便谓古无伊周霍光。见商臣冒顿，而云古无伯奇孝己也。
现代文：这好比看见有赵高、董卓之类的奸臣，便说古代没有伊尹、周公、霍光那样的忠臣；看见有商臣、冒顿之类弑父的逆子，便说古代没有伯奇、孝已那样的孝子。
English: This is like seeing a treacherous vassal like Zhao Gao and Dong Zhuo, and then saying that in ancient times there were no loyal vassals like Yi Yin, Zhou Gong, and Huo Guang; seeing a traitorous son of a corrupt father like a merchant vassal, and then saying that in ancient times there were no filial sons like Bo Qi and Xiao Ya.

古文：又神仙集中有召神劾鬼之法，又有使人见鬼之术。
现代文：还有。〈神仙集〉中记载有召请神仙驱逐鬼魅的法术，以及使人看见鬼的法术。
English: Also, the "Collection of Immortals" contains spells for summoning immortals to drive away ghosts, as well as spells for making people see ghosts.

古文：俗人闻之，皆谓虚文。
现代文：凡俗人听说这些，都认为文章是在凭空捏造。
English: When ordinary people heard about this, they all thought that the article was fabricated out of thin air.

古文：或云天下无鬼神，或云有之，亦不可劾召。
现代文：有人说天下没有鬼神，有人说有，但不能驱逐或召请。
English: Some say that there are no ghosts and gods in the world, others say that there are, but they cannot be banished or summoned.

古文：或云见鬼者，在男为觋，在女为巫，当须自然，非可学而得。
现代文：有的人说能看见鬼的人，男的称 觋 ，女的称为 巫 ，这应是先天的本能，是学不来的。
English: Some people say that people who can see ghosts are called "ghosts" for men and "witches" for women. This should be an innate instinct that cannot be learned.

古文：按汉书及太史公记皆云齐人少翁，武帝以为文成将军。
现代文：《汉书》和《太史公记》中都讲到了齐国人少翁，汉武帝封存他为文成将军。
English: "Hanshu" and "Tai Shi Gong Ji" both mentioned the young man from Qi, and Emperor Wu of Han sealed him as General Wencheng.

古文：武帝所幸李夫人死，少翁能令武帝见之如生人状。
现代文：武帝的宠幸李夫人死后，少翁能使武帝重新看到她，如同活人一般；又能使武帝看见灶神。
English: After the death of Lady Li, the favorite of Emperor Wu, Shao Weng was able to make Emperor Wu see her again, as if she were alive; he was also able to make Emperor Wu see the Kitchen God.

古文：又令武帝见灶神，此史籍之明文也。
现代文：这此都有是史书上明文记载的。
English: All this is clearly recorded in the history books.

古文：夫方术既令鬼见其形，又令本不见鬼者见鬼，推此而言，其馀亦何所不有也。
现代文：方术即然能使鬼魂现形，又能使本来看不见鬼魂的看见鬼魂，照此推论，其余的事又有什么不可能的呢？
English: If a technique can make a ghost appear, and if it can make a ghost visible to someone who cannot see a ghost, then what other things are impossible?

古文：鬼神数为人间作光怪变异，又经典所载，多鬼神之据，俗人尚不信天下之有神鬼，况乎仙人居高处远，清浊异流，登遐遂往，不返於世，非得道者，安能见闻。
现代文：鬼神多次降临人间，光象怪异，行变化之事，而且经传典籍的记载中，也有很多有鬼神的证据，俗人尚且还不相信天下有鬼神，何况仙人幽居高远的地方，清高与世俗语的污浊不同流，升仙而去，不再返回尘世，不是得道的人，怎么能看到听到呢？
English: Ghosts and gods have descended to the human world many times, their lights are strange, they do things that change, and there is also a lot of evidence of ghosts and gods in the records of the classics. The laity still do not believe that there are ghosts and gods in the world, not to mention that the immortals live in high and distant places, the purity of high and the filth of secular language are different, they ascend to the gods and no longer return to the earthly world. How can people who are not enlightened see and hear?

古文：而儒墨之家知此不可以训，故终不言其有焉。俗人之不信，不亦宜乎？
现代文：而儒家墨家知道鬼神的事不能用来训诫世人，所以始终不说它有，那么世俗之人不信有鬼神，不是在情里之中吗？
English: And the Confucianists know that the matter of ghosts and gods cannot be used to admonish the world, so they always do not say that it exists, so secular people do not believe in ghosts and gods, is it not in the situation?

古文：惟有识真者，校练众方，得其徵验，审其必有，可独知之耳，不可强也。
现代文：只有辨识真相的人，考核选择众多方法，得到验证，才能验证鬼神的存在，但也只能自己知道，不能强求别人也这么认为。
English: Only those who can identify the truth can verify the existence of ghosts and gods, but they can only know for themselves and cannot force others to think the same way.

古文：故不见鬼神，不见仙人，不可谓世閒无仙人也。
现代文：所以，没见过鬼神，没看过仙人，不能认为世间就没有仙人。
English: Therefore, if you haven't seen ghosts and gods, if you haven't seen immortals, you can't think that there are no immortals in the world.

古文：人无贤愚，皆知己身之有魂魄，魂魄分去则人病，尽去则人死。
现代文：人无论聪明愚笨，都有知道自己身上有魂魄，魂魄离去一部分人就会生病，全部离去人就会死。
English: People, no matter how clever or stupid, know that they have a soul. If the soul leaves, some people will get sick, and all those who leave will die.

古文：故分去则术家有拘录之法，尽去则礼典有招呼之义，此之为物至近者也。
现代文：所以部分魂魄离去，术士就用捕招它的 拘录法；魂魄全部离去，〈仪礼〉中记有 招魂法 。这些是万物中最贴近人的事了。
English: Therefore, when a part of the soul departs, the sorcerer uses the method of arresting and recruiting it; when the whole soul departs, the method of summoning the soul is recorded in the "ritual." These are the things that are closest to people in all things.

古文：然与人俱生，至乎终身，莫或有自闻见之者也。
现代文：然而魂魄与人俱生，一直到死，没有人说自己人看见、听到过它的啊。
English: However, the soul is with people from birth to death, and no one says that they have seen or heard it.

古文：岂可遂以不闻见之，又云无之乎？
现代文：怎能么可以因为没听见看见，就说自己没有魂魄呢？
English: How can you say you don't have a soul because you can't hear or see?

古文：若夫辅氏报施之鬼，成汤怒齐之灵，申生交言於狐子，杜伯报恨於周宣，彭生讬形於玄豕，如意假貌於苍狗，灌夫守田蚡，子义掊燕简，蓐收之降於莘，栾侯之止民家，素姜之说谶纬，孝孙之著文章，神君言於上林，罗阳仕於吴朝，鬼神之事，著於竹帛，昭昭如此，不可胜数。然而蔽者犹谓无之，况长生之事，世所希闻乎！
现代文：至于在辅氏之战中结草报魏颗救女之恩的鬼魂；宋国先人成汤、伊尹为齐景公伐宋而愤怒，托梦显灵；晋国故太子申生的鬼魂遇狐突，告诉他秦将灭晋；杜伯无辜被杀，鬼魂向周宣王报仇；公子彭生托形于黑猪立啼，使齐襄公惊惧坠车受伤；赵王如意托形青狗咬伤吕后的腋窝而使其至死，以报被鸩杀之仇；灌夫、窦婴被权臣劾秦死罪，鬼魂一起拿着笞杖鞭打仇人田分；庄子仪被燕简公无辜杀害，鬼魂用朱杖将简公打死在车上，天上司刑之神蓐收梦给虢公，告诉他虢国将亡；神人栾侯常在百姓家中，帮其消灾免祸；素姜阐说谶纬；孝孙著述文章；神灵在上林苑对汉武帝讲话；罗陽县神王表在孙吴为官，这些关于鬼神的事，都有写在书上，明明白白，不可胜数，可那些受蒙蔽的人还是认为不有这些事，何况长生之事又是世人很少听到的呢？
English: As for the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts of the ghosts

古文：望使必信，是令蚊虻负山，与井蟆论海也。
现代文：要想使这些人一定相信这些仙人的存在，好比让蚊子牛虻背起大山，和井底的蛤蟆谈论大海。
English: Trying to convince these people of the existence of these fairies is like asking a gnat to lift a mountain and a toad to talk about the sea.

古文：俗人未尝见龙麟鸾凤，乃谓天下无有此物，以为古人虚设瑞应，欲令人主自勉不息，冀致斯珍也。况於令人之信有仙人乎！
现代文：世人从未见过蛟龙、麒麟、鸾鸟，就说天下没有这些东西，认为是古人虚设的应君主之德的祥瑞之物，借此来使人君自强不息，以求招至这些珍异之物，更何况是让他们相信有仙人呢？
English: The world has never seen a dragon, a unicorn, or an ostrich, so they say that there are none of these things in the world. They believe that these things were invented by the ancients as objects of auspiciousness in response to the monarch's virtue, in order to strengthen people's self-reliance in order to attract these rare things, not to mention to make them believe in immortals.

古文：世人以刘向作金不成，便谓索隐行怪，好传虚无，所撰列仙，皆复妄作。
现代文：世人因刘向炼制黄金不成，就说他是寻求传说中的隐僻和怪异之事，喜欢传播虚幻的东西，认为他写的《列仙传》也都是荒诞的故事。
English: Because Liu Xiang could not succeed in refining gold, the world said that he was looking for hidden and strange things in legends, liked to spread illusory things, and thought that the "Legends of the Immortals" he wrote were also absurd stories.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲啊！
English: How sad!

古文：此所谓以分寸之瑕，弃盈尺之夜光，以蚁鼻之缺，捐无价之淳钧，非荆和之远识，风胡之赏真也。斯朱公所以郁悒，薛烛所以永叹矣。
现代文：这就是所谓因分寸大的瑕疵，就丢掉尺大的夜名珠；因蚂蚁尘大的缺陷，便舍弃为无价之宝的淳钧剑。没有卞和献壁的远见卓识，没有风胡对剑的鉴赏眼光，这就是陶朱公所以郁抑不欢、薛烛所以总是叹息的原因啊！
English: This is the so-called because of the defect of large size, throw away the large size of the night name pearl; because of the defect of the ant dust, they abandon the priceless treasure of the chun xi sword. Without the foresight and foresight of the shovel and the offering wall, without the appreciation of the sword by the wind beard, this is the reason why Tao Zhu Gong is depressed and unhappy, and Xue candle is always sighing!

古文：夫作金皆在神仙集中，淮南王抄出，以作鸿宝枕中书，虽有其文，然皆秘其要文，必须口诀，临文指解，然後可为耳。
现代文：制作黄金的方法，都写在《神仙集》中，淮南王把它们抄录出来，著成《鸿宝枕中书》书中虽有制作方法，但重要的内容都有用隐秘的语言描述，必须亲口传授秘决，对着文章直接解释，然后才能炼制。
English: The methods of making gold were all written down in the "Collection of Immortals." King Huainan copied them down and wrote "The Book of the Pillow of the Great Treasure." Although there are methods of making gold in the book, the important contents are all described in secret language. The secret must be taught in person and explained directly to the article before it can be refined.

古文：其所用药，复多改其本名，不可按之便用也。
现代文：他所用的药物，大多都改变了原来的名称，不能按字面上的药名直接使用。
English: Most of the drugs he uses have changed their original names and cannot be used directly according to their literal names.

古文：刘向父德治淮南王狱中所得此书，非为师授也。
现代文：刘向的父亲是在处理淮南王谋反的案子时，在卷宗中得到这本书，不是由老师亲自传授的。
English: Liu Xiang's father obtained this book from the case file when he was handling the case of Huainan Wang's rebellion. It was not taught by the teacher himself.

古文：向本不解道术，偶偏见此书，便谓其意尽在纸上，是以作金不成耳。
现代文：刘向本不懂道术，偶然意外地见到这本书，就认为其中的意旨都写在纸上了，所以才炼金不成。
English: Liu Xiang didn't understand Daoism, and when he saw this book by chance, he thought that the meaning was all written on paper, which is why the alchemy didn't work.

古文：至於撰列仙传，自删秦大夫阮仓书中出之，或所亲见，然後记之，非妄言也。
现代文：至于他写《列仙传》是从秦大夫阮仓书中删选而成，有的说是他亲眼所见，然后记下来，并不是胡编妄言。
English: As for his writing "The Legend of the Immortals," it was selected from the book of Dr. Qin Ruan Cang, and some said that he saw it with his own eyes and then wrote it down, it was not a fabrication.

古文：狂夫童谣，圣人所择。刍荛之言，或不可遗。采葑采菲，无以下体，岂可以百虑之一失，而谓经典之不可用，以日月曾蚀之故，而谓悬象非大明哉？
现代文：童谣狂诞，圣人还要加以选择；草野之言，有的也不可全都遗弃；采集蔓菁和苤的叶子，不可连它的根也不要，怎么能因为百虑中有一次失误，就说经典不可按之施行；因为曾经发生过日蚀和月蚀，就说日月不是非常明亮呢？
English: The folly of children's rhymes is still to be chosen by the sages; some of the sayings of the grasslands cannot be completely abandoned; the leaves of cranberries and thistles cannot be collected, not even its roots. How can it be said that the classics cannot be implemented because of one mistake in a hundred considerations; because there have been eclipses of the sun and the moon, the sun and the moon are not very bright?

古文：外国作水精碗，实是合五种灰以作之。今交广多有得其法而铸作之者。
现代文：外国人制作水精碗，其实是合五百种灰作成的，当今交州、广州一带有很多人得到这种方法铸造水精碗。
English: Today, many people in the areas of Jiaozhou and Guangzhou have obtained this method of casting water essence bowls.

古文：今以此语俗人，俗人殊不肯信。乃云水精本自然之物，玉石之类。
现代文：现在如果把这件事告诉世俗之人，他们根本上就不信，他们认为水精是自然形成的，属于玉石之类的东西。
English: Now, if you tell this to secular people, they don't believe it at all. They think that water spirits are naturally formed and belong to things like jade.

古文：况於世间，幸有自然之金，俗人当何信其有可作之理哉？
现代文：何况世间侥幸有自然生成的金子，世人怎么会相信它是可由人工制作的道理呢？
English: Besides, the world is lucky enough to have naturally occurring gold, so how can the world believe that it can be artificially produced?

古文：愚人乃不信黄丹及胡粉，是化铅所作。又不信骡及駏驉，是驴马所生。云物各自有种。况乎难知之事哉？
现代文：愚人不相信黄丹和胡粉是熔化铅而成，也不信骡子和駏驉是骡马交配而生，认为每种物都有自己的种，何况是神仙这种难以知晓的事呢？
English: Fools do not believe that rambutan and gooseberry powder are made by melting lead, nor do they believe that hazelnuts and gooseberries are bred by mating horses. They think that each kind of thing has its own species, and what about things that are difficult to know, such as gods?

古文：夫所见少，则所怪多，世之常也。
现代文：见识的少，感受到奇怪的事就多，这是世之常理。
English: Seeing less, feeling more strange things, this is the common sense of the world.

古文：信哉此言，其事虽天之明，而人处覆甑之下，焉识至言哉？ 
现代文：这话说的多真切啊！这好比事情虽然像天空一样明朗，但如果人处在倒覆的甑下一样，怎么能会识别那些深切中肯的议论呢？
English: How true this is! It is as if things are as clear as the sky, but if one is under the yoke of the Upside Down, how can one discern the profound and pertinent discourses?

