古文：黄潜善，字茂和，邵武人。
现代文：黄潜善，字茂和，邵武人。
English: Huang Qianzen, Zha Maohe, Shao Wujin.

古文：擢进士第，宣和初，为左司郎。
现代文：考中进士，宣和初年，任左司郎。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was promoted to Sasiro in his first year.

古文：陕西、河东地大震，陵谷易处，徽宗命潜善察访陕西，因往视。
现代文：陕西、河东大地震，山陵峡谷都变了位置，徽宗命令黄潜善去察访灾情，于是他就去视察。
English: The major earthquakes in Shaanxi and Hedong, and the mountainous canyons have all changed their positions. Huizong ordered Huang Qianshan to inspect the disaster situation, so he went to inspect.

古文：潜善归，不以实闻，但言震而已。
现代文：黄潜善回京后，不报告实情，只说是地震而已。
English: After Huang Qianzen returned to Beijing, he did not report the truth, but only said that it was an earthquake.

古文：擢户部侍郎，坐事谪亳州，以徽猷阁待制知河间府。
现代文：他被提拔为户部侍郎，因事获罪被贬到亳州，以徽猷阁待制的身份为河间知府。
English: He was promoted to the position of the head of the household, but because of the crime, he was demoted to Bozhou, and became the governor of Kawama Prefecture with the status of being under house arrest.

古文：靖康初，金人入攻，康王开大元帅府，檄潜善将兵入援。
现代文：靖康初年，金人攻打宋朝，康王设大元帅府，用文书召黄潜善率兵去支援。
English: In the first year of Jingkang, the Jin people attacked the Song Dynasty, the Kang King set up a grand marshal's office, and used a document to summon Huang Xuanzen to lead the troops to support.

古文：张邦昌僣位，潜善趋白于帅府，王承制拜潜善为副元帅。
现代文：张邦昌当伪楚皇帝后，黄潜善到大元帅府告诉康王，康王秉承皇帝旨意任命黄潜善为副元帅。
English: After Zhang Bangchang became the pseudo-emperor of Chu, Huang Qianzen went to the Grand Marshal's Palace to tell King Kang, who, in accordance with the emperor's will, appointed Huang Qianzen as vice-marshal.

古文：二年，高宗即位，拜中书侍郎。
现代文：靖康二年，高宗即位，任命黄潜善为中书侍郎。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, and appointed Huang Xuanzen as the attendant of the imperial secretary.

古文：时上从人望，擢李纲为右相，纲将奏逐潜善及汪伯彦，右丞吕好问止之。
现代文：当时皇上顺从民心，提升李纲为右相，李纲将上奏驱逐黄潜善和汪伯彦，被右丞吕好问制止。
English: At that time, the emperor obeyed the people's will and promoted Li Gang as the right minister. Li Gang was going to expel Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Bohian, but was stopped by the right minister Lyu Haosheng.

古文：未几，潜善拜右仆射兼中书侍郎，纲遂罢。
现代文：不久，黄潜善被任命为右仆射兼中书侍郎，李纲被罢相。
English: Soon after, Huang Kuanzhen was appointed as the right-hand man and the secretary of the Central Committee, and Li Gang was dismissed from the position of the prime minister.

古文：御史张所言潜善奸邪，恐害新政，左迁所尚书郎，寻谪江州。
现代文：御史张所说黄潜善奸邪，恐怕有害新政，结果张所被降为尚书郎，不久被贬到江州。
English: As a result, Zhang was demoted to Shang Shulang, and was soon relegated to Jiangzhou.

古文：太学生陈东论李纲不可去，潜善、伯彦不可任，潜善恚。
现代文：太学生陈东认为李纲不可罢去，黄潜善、汪伯彦不可任用。
English: Chen Dong, a senior student, believed that Li Gangtou should not be dismissed, and Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian should not be appointed.

古文：会欧阳澈上书诋时事，语侵宫掖，帝谓其言不实，潜善乘间启杀澈并东诛之，识与不识皆为之垂涕，帝悔焉。
现代文：黄潜善怀恨在心。正巧欧阳澈上书诋毁时政，言语侵犯了后宫，皇上认为他的话不符事实，黄潜善乘机提出杀欧阳澈和陈东，他们二人被杀后，认识和不认识的，都为他们流泪，皇上也后悔。
English: Huang Qianshan harbored hatred in his heart. It just so happened that Ouyang Qian wrote a letter denigrating the current government, and his words violated the harem. The emperor thought that his words did not match the facts. Huang Qianshan took the opportunity to propose the killing of Ouyang Qian and Chen Dong. After the two of them were killed, both those who knew them and those who did not know them shed tears for them. The emperor also regretted it.

古文：明年，金人攻陕西，京东、山东盗起，潜善、伯彦匿不以闻。张遇焚真州，距行在六十里，内侍邵成章疏潜善、伯彦误国，成章坐除名。
现代文：第二年，金人攻打陕西，京东、山东盗贼兴起，黄潜善、汪伯彦不把这些报告给皇上，张遇烧真州，距高宗驻地六十里，内侍邵成章上疏说黄潜善、汪伯彦误国，邵成章因此获罪被除名。
English: In the second year, the Jin people attacked Shaanxi, and the Jingdong and Shandong thieves arose. Huang Xuan Zhen and Wang Bohian did not report these to the emperor. Zhang Yu burned Zhenzhou, sixty miles away from Gaozong's residence. The courtier Shao Chengzhang said that Huang Xuan Zhen and Wang Bohian were in the wrong country. Shao Chengzhang was convicted and removed from the list.

古文：御史马伸亦以劾潜善、伯彦得罪，谪监濮州酒税，道卒。
现代文：御史马伸也因弹劾黄潜善、汪伯彦而获罪，被贬为监濮州酒税，他在途中去世。
English: Goshima Shin was also found guilty of impeaching Huang Kuanshan and Wang Bohian, and was reduced to a prisoner of the state liquor tax. He died on the way.

古文：潜善进左仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：黄潜善任左仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: Huang Qian was appointed as the left-hand servant and the under-servant of Shao.

古文：郓、濮相继陷没，宿、泗屡警，右丞许景衡以扈卫单弱，请帝避其锋，潜善以为不足虑，率同列听浮屠克勤说法。
现代文：郓、濮二州相继陷没，宿、泗二州屡来警报，右丞许景衡认为皇上的扈卫单弱，请皇上躲避敌人，黄潜善认为不值得忧虑，率领同僚听僧人克勤说法。
English: Handan and Handan two prefectures were captured one after another, and Shandong and Handan two prefectures were repeatedly warned. Xu Jingheng, the right-hand man, thought that the emperor's defense was weak, and asked the emperor to avoid the enemy. Huang Xuanshan thought that it was not worth worrying, and led his colleagues to listen to the monk's diligence.

古文：俄泗州奏金人且至，帝大惊，决策南渡。
现代文：不久泗州奏报金人将到，皇上大惊，决定南下。
English: Soon, Bozhou reported that the gold person would arrive. The emperor was shocked and decided to go south.

古文：御舟已戒，潜善、伯彦方共食，堂吏大呼曰： 驾行矣。 乃相视苍黄鞭马南驰。
现代文：皇上的御舟已备好，黄潜善、汪伯彦正在一起吃饭，堂吏大声喊： 皇上出发了。 他俩互相看着仓皇策马南奔。
English: The emperor's boat was ready, and Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Bohian were having dinner together. The courtier shouted loudly, "The emperor has set off!" They both looked at each other as the emperor ran in a panic.

古文：都人争门而出，死者相枕藉，人无不怨愤。
现代文：京城人争着出城门，死者相连，没有不怨愤的。
English: The people of Kyoto are fighting to get out of the city, the dead are connected, and there is no one who is not angry.

古文：会司农卿黄锷至江上，军士闻其姓以为潜善也，争数其罪，挥刃而前，锷方辩其非是，而首已断矣。
现代文：正好司农卿黄锷来到江上，军士听说姓黄就以为是黄潜善，争相列举他的罪状，挥刀向前，黄锷正在申辩，但头已落下。
English: Just as the Secretary of Agriculture Huang Qi came to the river, the sergeant thought that the surname Huang was Huang Kuanshan when he heard the surname Huang. They fought to list his crimes and swung their swords forward. Huang Qi was arguing, but his head had fallen.

古文：帝渡瓜州，幸镇江，敌兵已蹑其后。
现代文：皇上渡过瓜洲，到达镇江，敌兵紧随在后。
English: The emperor crossed Guazhou and arrived at Zhenjiang, followed by the enemy soldiers.

古文：潜善、伯彦联疏言艰难之时，不敢具文求退。
现代文：黄潜善、汪伯彦一起上疏说在艰难的时候，不敢请求退职。
English: Huang Qianzen and Wang Bohian said together that in difficult times, they did not dare to ask for retirement.

古文：中丞张澄劾之，乃罢潜善为观文殿大学士、知江宁府，落职居衡州。
现代文：中丞张澄弹劾他，黄潜善被罢为观文殿大学士、江宁知府，贬职居住在衡州。
English: Vice-commander Zhang Cheng impeached him, and Huang Kuanzhen was dismissed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and the governor of Jiangning Province, and demoted to live in Hengzhou.

古文：郑瑴又论潜善、伯彦均于误国，而潜善之恶居多，王庭秀继以为言，责置英州。
现代文：郑珏又论奏黄潜善、汪伯彦都误国，黄潜善的罪恶占多数，王庭秀接着也这样说，黄潜善被贬责到英州安置。
English: Zheng Rong also said that Huang Xuan Zhen and Wang Bohian both misled the country, and Huang Xuan Zhen's crimes accounted for the majority. Wang Tingxiu also said that Huang Xuan Zhen was relegated to Yingzhou.

古文：谏官袁植乞斩之都市，帝不许。
现代文：谏官袁植请求在都市斩黄潜善，皇上不许。
English: The eunuch Yuan Zhi asked the emperor not to allow him to destroy the yellow potential in the city.

古文：寻卒于梅州。
现代文：不久，黄潜善在梅州去世。
English: Soon after, Huang Quesen died in Meizhou.

古文：潜善猥持国柄，嫉害忠良。
现代文：黄潜善把持国政，陷害忠良。
English: Huang Qianzen took control of state affairs and framed Zhongliang.

古文：李纲既逐，张悫、宗泽、许景衡辈相继贬死，宪谏一言，随陷其祸，中外为之切齿。
现代文：李纲被罢黜，张芀、宗泽、许景衡等相继被贬死，台谏官一旦上言，随后就被诬陷惹祸，中外十分愤恨。
English: Li Gang was ousted, Zhang Ye, Zong Ze, Xu Jingheng, etc. were killed one after another. Once the Taiwanese eunuch made a speech, he was subsequently framed for causing trouble. China and foreign countries were very angry.

古文：高宗末年有旨，潜善、余深、薛昂皆复官录后。
现代文：高宗末年有诏旨，对黄潜善、余深、薛昂都给以恢复官职、录用后代的恩惠。
English: In the last years of Gao Zong's life, he issued an imperial edict to reinstate Huang Kuanzhen, Yu Sheng and Xue Ang to their official posts and to employ their descendants.

古文：谏官凌哲言深、昂朋附蔡京，潜善专恣误国，今尽复三人恩数，恐政刑失平，忠义解体。
现代文：谏官凌哲上书说余深、薛昂朋附蔡京，黄潜善专权误国，现在恢复他三人的恩惠，恐怕政刑失去公平，忠义之人解体。
English: The eunuch Ling Zhe wrote that Yu Sheng, Xue Ang Peng, Cai Jing, and Huang Xuan Zhen had misled the country with their absolute power, and now he was restoring the favors of the three of them. I was afraid that the political punishment would lose its fairness, and the loyal people would disintegrate.

古文：诏以潜善尝任副元帅，特复元官，录一子。
现代文：皇上下诏认为黄潜善曾任副元帅，特别给以官复原职，录用一个儿子的待遇。
English: The Emperor's edict said that Huang Kuanzhen had served as a vice-marshal, and he was given the special treatment of being reinstated as an officer and having a son appointed.

古文：汪伯彦，字廷俊，徽之祁门人。
现代文：汪伯彦，字廷俊，徽州祁门人。
English: Wang Bohian, also known as Ting Jun, was a politician from Huizhou.

古文：登进士第，积官为虞部郎官。
现代文：考中进士，积累官职到虞部郎官。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination, and accumulated government posts, rising to the post of deputy to the Minister of State.

古文：靖康改元，召见，献河北边防十策，直龙图阁、知相州。
现代文：靖康元年，被召见，他献上河北边防十条策略，被任命为直龙图阁、相州知州。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, he was summoned to a meeting, where he presented a ten-point strategy for the defense of the Hebei border, and was appointed to the posts of Zhilong Tujiao and Xiangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：是冬，金人陷真定，诏徙真定帅司于相，俾伯彦领之。
现代文：当年冬，金人攻陷真定，皇上下诏迁真定帅府于相州，由汪伯彦统领。
English: In the winter of that year, the Jin people invaded and occupied Zhending, and the emperor ordered the relocation of Zhending's headquarters to the city of Xiangzhou, which was led by Wang Boyan.

古文：高宗以康王使金至磁，时金骑充斥，尝有甲马数百至城下，踪迹王所在。
现代文：高宗以康王的身份出使金国来到磁州，当时到处是金的骑兵，曾有数百名骑兵到磁州城下，追踪康王的行迹。
English: Gaozong, in his capacity as Kang Wang, sent Jin Guo to Magizhou. At that time, Jin's cavalry was everywhere. Hundreds of cavalrymen once went to Magizhou to track the whereabouts of Kang Wang.

古文：未几，王奉蜡书，开天下兵马大元帅府，以伯彦为副将。
现代文：汪伯彦马上用帛书请康王回相州，汪伯彦亲自背着装弓箭的袋子，他的部下在黄河边迎接康王。康王慰劳他说 ：以后见到皇上，一定首先推荐你做京兆尹。 汪伯彦从此成为康王的知心人。
English: Wang Bohian immediately asked King Kang to return to Xiangzhou with an imperial edict. Wang Bohian personally carried a bag containing bows and arrows, and his subordinates greeted King Kang on the edge of the Yellow River. King Kang consoled him by saying, "When I see the emperor in the future, I will certainly recommend you to be the Jing Zha Yin first." Wang Bohian became a confidant of King Kang.

古文：王引兵渡河，谋所向，言人人殊，伯彦独曰： 非出北门济子城不可。 王喜曰： 廷俊言是也。 既济，由大名历郓、济达于南京，奏为集英殿修撰。
现代文：不久，康王接到蜡书，设天下兵马大元帅府，以汪伯彦为副将。康王率兵渡河，谋划将去哪里，人人说的都不一样，汪伯彦独自认为 ：非出北城门渡过子城不可。 康王高兴地说： 廷俊说的对。 渡过子城后，由大名经郓、济二州到达南京。康王奏请让汪伯彦任集英殿修撰。
English: Soon after, King Kang received a wax book and set up the world's largest general staff of soldiers and horses, with Wang Baiyan as vice-general. King Kang led the troops across the river and planned where to go. Everyone said different things, but Wang Baiyan alone thought: It is necessary to go out of the north gate and pass through Zicheng. King Kang was pleased to say: Ting Jun was right. After passing through Zicheng, he arrived in Nanjing from Damena and Jizhou. King Kang requested that Wang Baiyan be appointed to compile and edit the book.

古文：北兵薄京城，钦宗诏：金人见议通和，康王将兵，毋得轻动。
现代文：金兵逼近京城，钦宗下诏：金人现在正商议通和，康王率兵，不可轻举妄动。
English: The Jin soldiers were approaching the capital, and Emperor Qin issued an edict: The Jin people are now negotiating a peace treaty, and King Kang and his soldiers should not act rashly.

古文：伯彦以为然。
现代文：汪伯彦认为可以。
English: Wang Bohiko thinks it can be done.

古文：宗泽曰： 女真狂谲，是欲款我师尔。如即信之，后悔何及乎！
现代文：宗泽说 ：女真人狂妄奸诈，是想缓兵；如果信任他们，后悔就来不及啦！
English: Sozawa said, "Neshinjin are arrogant and treacherous, they want to delay the troops; if you trust them, you won't have time to regret it!"

古文：宜亟进兵。 伯彦等难之。
现代文：应该立即进兵。 汪伯彦等阻挠他。
English: He should go into the army immediately. Wang Bohian and others obstructed him.

古文：及城破，金人逼二帝北行，张邦昌僣立，王闻之涕泣。
现代文：等京城被攻破，金人逼二帝北去，张邦昌僭位称帝，康王听到后流涕。
English: After the capital was breached, the Jin people forced the two emperors to go to the north, Zhang Bangchang was enthroned as emperor, and King Kang heard the rumor.

古文：明年春，王承制除伯彦显谟阁待制，升元帅，进直学士。
现代文：第二年春天，康王秉承皇帝旨意任命汪伯彦为显谟阁待制，升为元帅、直学士。
English: In the spring of the following year, King Kang, adhering to the emperor's will, appointed Wang Bohian as a member of the Xianmu Cabinet and promoted him to marshal and direct bachelor.

古文：高宗即位，擢知枢密院事。
现代文：高宗即位后，提拔他为知枢密院事。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：未几，拜右仆射。
现代文：不久，被任命为右仆射。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the right-handed shooter.

古文：方高宗初政，天下望治。
现代文：高宗刚即位，天下人盼望太平。
English: As soon as Gao Zonggang ascended the throne, people around the world hoped for peace.

古文：伯彦、潜善逾年在相位，专权自恣，不能有所经画。
现代文：汪伯彦、黄潜善一年后担任宰相，专权放任，不能提出什么施政方针。
English: A year later, Wang Bohian and Huang Qincheng became prime ministers. They were given full powers and were not allowed to propose any policies.

古文：御史谏官，下至韦布内侍，皆劾奏之。
现代文：御史谏官，下至百姓、内侍，都弹劾他们。
English: Historians, eunuchs, commoners, and chamberlains all denounced them.

古文：罢伯彦为观文殿大学士、知洪州，改提举崇福宫，寻落职居永州。
现代文：汪伯彦被罢为观文殿大学士、洪州知州，改为提举崇福宫，不久被贬职居住在永州。
English: Wang Bohian was dismissed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucius, Hongzhou and Zhizhou, and was instead promoted to Chongfu Palace. He was soon demoted and lived in Yongzhou.

古文：绍兴初，复职，知池州、江东安抚大使。
现代文：绍兴初年，恢复官职，任池州知州、江东安抚大使。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, he resumed his official position and served as the ambassador of Chizhou, Chizhou and Jiangdong pacification.

古文：言者弗置，乃诏以旧职奉祠，寻知广州。
现代文：台谏官认为不能这样安排汪伯彦，于是诏命他仍以旧的官职去管理宫观，不久任广州知州。
English: The Taiwanese eunuch thought that Wang Bohian could not be arranged in this way, so he ordered him to still manage Gongguan with his old official position, and soon he was appointed to Guangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：四年，帝追赠陈东、欧阳澈。
现代文：绍兴四年，皇上追褒陈东、欧阳澈。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoxing, the emperor praised Chen Dong and Ouyang Che.

古文：舍人王居正论伯彦、潜善不已，复褫前职。
现代文：舍人王居正不停地论奏汪伯彦、黄潜善，汪伯彦先前的官职也被罢去。
English: Wang Ju, a layman, is constantly talking about Wang Bohian and Huang Xuanzen, and Wang Bohian's previous official position has also been dismissed.

古文：七年，帝谓辅臣曰： 元帅旧僚，往往沦谢，惟汪伯彦实同艰难。
现代文：绍兴七年，皇上对辅臣说： 元帅府的旧僚属，往往都谢世了，只剩汪伯彦是共渡难关的。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, the emperor said to his aide-de-camp: The old colleagues of the Marshal's Office have often passed away, and only Wang Bohian is left to overcome the difficulties.

古文：朕之故人，所存无几，宜与牵复。 秦桧、张浚曰： 臣等已议曰郊恩取旨，更得天笔明其旧劳，庶几内外孚信。 始伯彦之未第也，受馆于王氏，桧尝从之学，而浚亦伯彦所引，故共赞焉。
现代文：我的故旧，所剩无几，应该恢复汪伯彦的官职。 秦桧、张浚说： 我们已商议在郊外祭天的时候取得圣旨，再得到上天对汪伯彦过去功劳的证明，这样就能使中外信服。 当初汪伯彦没中进士时，在王氏的馆舍，秦桧曾跟他学习，而张浚也是汪伯彦推荐的，所以他们一起替汪伯彦说好话。
English: There is not much left of my former life, and Wang Bohian's official position should be restored. Qin Zang and Zhang Jun said: We have already discussed obtaining the sacred decree at the time of the suburban festival, and then getting proof of Wang Bohian's past achievements from heaven, so that we can convince China and abroad. When Wang Bohian was not a junior high school student, Qin Zang had studied with him in the Wang family's library, and Zhang Jun was also recommended by Wang Bohian, so they spoke well of Wang Bohian together.

古文：九年，知宣州，过阙，帝谓桧曰： 伯彦便令之官，庶免纷纭。 又曰： 伯彦潜藩旧僚，去国七年。
现代文：绍兴九年，汪伯彦任宣州知州，他上朝拜见皇上，皇上对秦桧说： 对汪伯彦是随便任命的官职，希望能免去人们的议论。 又说 ：汪伯彦是康王府的旧僚，离开京城七年。
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, Wang Bohian was appointed to Xuanzhou and Zhizhou, and he went to the imperial court to see the emperor. The emperor said to Qin Yu: Wang Bohian is an arbitrarily appointed official position, hoping to avoid people's discussion. He also said: Wang Bohian is an old colleague of the Kangwangfu, and has left Beijing for seven years.

古文：汉之高、光不忘丰沛、南阳故旧，皆人情之常。 伯彦上所著《中兴日历》五卷，拜检校少傅、保信军节度使。
现代文：汉高祖、光武帝不忘丰、沛、南阳的故旧，这都是人之常情。 汪伯彦献上自己写的《中兴日历》五卷，他被任命为检校少傅、保信军节度使。
English: The ancestor of the Han Dynasty and Emperor Guangwu did not forget the ancient times of Feng, Pei and Nanyang, which is a common human feeling. Wang Bohian presented five volumes of the "ZTE Calendar" he wrote, and he was appointed as a junior school inspector and a military envoy of the Baoxin Army.

古文：十年，请祠，从之。
现代文：绍兴十年，他请求任管祠观的闲职，皇上准许。
English: In the tenth year of Shaoxing, he requested to be appointed as the administrator of the Ancestral Hall, and the emperor allowed him to do so.

古文：明年五月，卒，赠少师，谥忠定。
现代文：第二年五月去世，被追赠为少师，谥号 忠定 。
English: He died in May of the following year, and was posthumously awarded the title of Shoshi, with the posthumous name of Tadasada.

古文：初，伯彦既去相州，金人执其子军器监丞似，使割地以至相州，守臣赵不试固守不下，遂拘而北，久之乃还。
现代文：当初，汪伯彦已离开相州，金人抓住他的儿子军器监丞汪似，让他割地，包括相州。相州守臣赵不试坚守城池，金人就把汪似带到国内，很久他才回来。
English: At the beginning, Wang Bohian had already left Sanzhou, and Jinren grabbed his son, the military commissary Wang Xi, and made him divide the land, including Sanzhou. Sanzhou's governor Zhao did not try to hold on to the city, and Jinren brought Wang Xi to the country, and it was a long time before he returned.

古文：或云似之得归，伯彦实使人赎之。
现代文：有人说汪似能回来，实际是汪伯彦派人赎回的。
English: Some people said that Wang seemed to be able to return, but it was actually Wang Bohian who sent someone to redeem him.

古文：似后更名召嗣。
现代文：汪似后来改名叫汪召嗣。
English: Wang Xi later changed his name to Wang Shaoshi.

古文：秦桧，字会之，江宁人。
现代文：秦桧，字会之，江宁人。
English: Qin Hui, Zha Hui, Jiangning people.

古文：登政和五年第，补密州教授。
现代文：政和五年考中进士，补为密州教授。
English: He was promoted to a junior high school student in the middle of the five-year examination of politics and economics, and became a professor at the University of Michigan.

古文：继中词学兼茂科，历太学学正。
现代文：接着考中词学兼茂科，任太学学正。
English: After that, he took the junior high school entrance examination in composition, and was assigned to the senior high school of Taigaku.

古文：靖康元年，金兵攻汴京，遣使求三镇，桧上兵机四事：一言金人要请无厌，乞止许燕山一路；二言金人狙诈，守御不可缓；三乞集百官详议，择其当者载之誓书；四乞馆金使于外，不可令入门及引上殿。
现代文：靖康元年，金兵攻汴京，派使索求三镇，秦桧上书言兵机四事：一是说金人贪得无厌，请求只答应割燕山一路；二是说金人狡猾奸诈，不能放松守备；三是请求召集百官详细讨论，选择恰当的语言写入誓书；四是请求在城外设馆安置金使，不能让他入城和上殿。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, when the Jin soldiers attacked Beijing, they sent an envoy to ask for three towns, and Qin Yu sent a letter to say four things: one was that the Jin people were insatiably greedy and only agreed to cut Yanshan Road; the second was that the Jin people were cunning and treacherous and could not relax their guard; the third was a request to convene 100 officials to discuss in detail and choose the appropriate language to write in the oath; the fourth was a request to set up a hall outside the city to accommodate the Jin envoy, and could not let him enter the city and the upper hall.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有得到答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：除职方员外郎。
现代文：他任命为职方员外郎。
English: He was appointed to the position of outside counsel.

古文：寻属张邦昌为干当公事，桧言： 是行专为割地，与臣初议矛盾，失臣本心。 三上章辞，许之。
现代文：不久，隶属张邦昌为干当公事，秦桧说： 此行专为割地，与臣开始的议论相矛盾，不符我的心愿。 于是，三次上章辞职，皇上允许。
English: Soon after, when he was assigned to Zhang Bangchang for official business, Qin Yu said, "This trip is exclusively for the purpose of dividing the land, which contradicts the discussion begun by the vassal and is not in line with my wishes.

古文：时议割三镇以弭兵，命桧借礼部侍郎与程瑀为割地使，奉肃王以往。
现代文：当时议割太原、中山、河间三镇给金以求息兵，命秦桧假借礼部侍郎之名同程王禹一起为割地使，奉陪肃王到金营。
English: At that time, the three towns of Taiyuan, Zhongshan and Kawama were discussed to give money to Jin in order to appease the soldiers, and Qin Yu was ordered to pretend to be a waiter of the ceremonial department, together with Wang Yu, to be a land-division envoy, and to accompany Shu Wang to Jinying.

古文：金师退，桧、瑀至燕而还。
现代文：金兵退，秦桧、程王禹到燕京而返。
English: Jin Bing retreated, and Qin Hui and Cheng Wang Yu returned to Yanjing.

古文：御史中丞李回、翰林承旨吴幵共荐桧，拜殿中侍御史，迁左司谏。
现代文：御史中丞李回、翰林承旨吴千干一起推荐秦桧，他任命为殿中侍御史，升为左司谏。
English: Li Hui, the Vice-President of History, and Wu Qiangan, the Vice-President of History, together recommended Qin Yu, who was appointed as the Vice-President of History in the palace and promoted to the position of the Left Secretary of State.

古文：王云、李若水见金二酋归，言金坚欲得地，不然，进兵取汴京。
现代文：王云、李若水见金兵二元帅回来后说金兵坚持要宋割地，不然，就进取汴京。
English: After Wang Yun and Li Ruoshui saw the second marshal of the Jin soldiers return, they said that the Jin soldiers insisted on Song cutting the land, otherwise, they would enter Beijing.

古文：十一月，集百官议于延和殿，范宗尹等七十人请与之，桧等三十六人持不可。
现代文：十一月，召百官在延和殿商议对策，范宗尹等七十人同意割地给金，秦桧等三十六人不同意。
English: In November, hundreds of officials were summoned to discuss countermeasures at the Yanhe Hall. Seventy people, including Fan Zongyin, agreed to give money for land allocation, while thirty-six people, including Qin Hui, disagreed.

古文：未几，除御史中丞。
现代文：不久，任秦桧为御史中丞。
English: Soon after, Qin Yu was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：闰十一月，汴京失守，二帝幸金营。
现代文：闰十一月，汴京失守，徽、钦二帝被留在金营。
English: In leap November, Beijing was lost, and the imperial crest and Emperor Qin were left behind in Jinying.

古文：二年二月，莫俦、吴幵自金营来，传金帅命推立异姓。
现代文：靖康二年二月，莫俦、吴千干从金营回来，传金元帅之命要推立异姓为帝。
English: In February of the second year of Jingkang, Mogao and Wu Qiangan returned from Jin Ying, with orders from Marshal Jin to install a different emperor.

古文：留守王时雍等召百官军民共议立张邦昌，皆失色不敢答，监察御史马伸言于众曰： 吾曹职为争臣，岂容坐视不吐一辞？
现代文：留守王时雍等召百官军民共议立张邦昌，众人大惊失色不敢作答，监察御史马伸对众人说： 我们是谏臣，怎能坐视不吐一辞？
English: Wang Shiyong, who was left behind, summoned hundreds of officials, soldiers and citizens to discuss the establishment of Zhang Bangchang. Everyone was shocked and did not dare to answer. The supervisor, Gu Shima, said to the crowd: We are vassals, how can we sit back and not say a word?

古文：当共入议状，乞存赵氏。 时桧为台长，闻伸言以为然，即进状曰：
现代文：应当共进议状，请存赵氏。 当时秦桧为御史台长官，听到马伸的话也以为对，就进状说：
English: At that time, Qin Hui was the chief of the Imperial Historian's Office, and when he heard Ma Shin's words, he thought they were right, so he submitted a petition saying:

古文：桧荷国厚恩，甚愧无报。
现代文：秦桧受国厚恩，十分惭愧无以报答。
English: Qin Hui received a great favor from the state, but he was too ashamed to repay it.

古文：今金人拥重兵，临已拔之城，操生杀之柄，必欲易姓，桧尽死以辨，非特忠于主也，且明两国之利害尔。
现代文：现在金人拥重兵，占领城池，操生杀大权，一定要立异姓皇帝，秦桧冒死争辩，不只因忠于主上，是要讲明两国利害。
English: Now that the Kim people have a heavy army, occupy the city, and have the power to kill, they must set up a different name for the emperor, and Qin Yu dares to argue, not only because he is loyal to the Lord, but also to clarify the interests of the two countries.

古文：赵氏自祖宗以至嗣君，百七十余载。
现代文：赵氏自祖宗至嗣君，历一百七十多年。
English: The Zhao clan has existed for more than 170 years, from the ancestor to the heir.

古文：顷缘奸臣败盟，结怨邻国，谋臣失计，误主丧师，遂致生灵被祸，京都失守，主上出郊，求和军前。
现代文：忽因奸臣破坏盟约，与邻国结怨，谋臣失计，误主丧师，导致生灵遭难，京都失守，皇上出城，到军阵前求和。
English: Suddenly, because of the treacherous vassal, the treaty was broken, a grudge was formed with the neighboring country, the strategy of the vassal was miscalculated, the master and the disciple were mistaken, which led to the suffering of the living and the dead, Kyoto was lost, the emperor left the city and went to the front of the army to sue for peace.

古文：两元帅既允其议，布闻中外矣，且空竭帑藏，追取服御所用，割两河地，恭为臣子，今乃变易前议，人臣安忍畏死不论哉？
现代文：两元帅既已答应议和，布告中外，况且我方正空竭帑藏，搜集各种珍玩，奉于军前，割去两河土地，恭顺地做金国的臣子，今你们变更前面的和议，做臣下的怎能怕死不论呢？
English: Since the two marshals have agreed to negotiate peace and announce it to China and the world, and moreover, our side is exhausting its reserves, collecting all kinds of precious toys, serving in front of the army, cutting off two rivers of land, and obediently being a vassal of the Jin state, now you change the previous peace negotiations, how can you be afraid of death as a vassal?

古文：宋于中国，号令一统，绵地万里，德泽加于百姓，前古未有。
现代文：宋在中原，号令一统，国土万里，德泽加于百姓，前古未有。
English: The Song Dynasty was in the Central Plains, the call was unified, the country was vast, and de Zegas was added to the people, which was unprecedented in ancient times.

古文：虽兴亡之命在天有数，焉可以一城决废立哉？
现代文：虽然兴亡之命决定于天，怎可因一城得失决定废立呢？
English: Although the fate of a city's rise and fall is decided by the heavens, how can a city's rise and fall be decided by the heavens?

古文：昔西汉绝于新室，光武以兴；东汉绝于曹氏，刘备帝蜀；唐为朱温篡夺，李克用犹推其世序而继之。
现代文：从前，西汉亡于新室，光武中兴；东汉亡于曹氏，刘备称帝于蜀；唐被朱温篡夺，李克用还推算世序而继承它。
English: Once upon a time, the Western Han Dynasty died in Xinmuro, and Guangwu Zhongxing became emperor; the Eastern Han Dynasty died in Cao, and Liu Bei became emperor in Shu; Tang was usurped by Zhu Wen, and Li Ke used to calculate the line of succession to inherit it.

古文：盖基广则难倾，根深则难拔。
现代文：因为基广则难倾，根深则难拔。
English: Because it is difficult to tilt the foundation, and it is difficult to pull up the roots.

古文：张邦昌在上皇时，附会权幸，共为蠹国之政。
现代文：张邦昌在徽宗时，附会权臣，共同害国像对敌人那样恨他。
English: When Zhang Bangchang was in Huizong, he was attached to the association of powerful ministers, and together they harmed the country and hated him as they did the enemy.

古文：社稷倾危，生民涂炭，固非一人所致，亦邦昌为之也。
现代文：社稷倾危，生民涂炭，固然不是一人所致，也是张邦昌所为。
English: The society was in danger, and the people were suffering. Of course, it was not caused by one person, but also by Zhang Bangchang.

古文：天下方疾之如仇雠，若付以土地，使主人民，四方豪杰必共起而诛之，终不足为大金屏翰。
现代文：天下人正恨之如敌，若给他土地，让他统治人民，四方豪杰必会一起起事杀他，最终不能做大金的屏障。
English: The people of the world hate him like an enemy. If he is given land and allowed to rule the people, the heroes of the four quarters will surely rise up and kill him together. In the end, he cannot be a barrier to big money.

古文：必立邦昌，则京师之民可服，天下之民不可服；京师之宗子可灭，天下之宗子不可灭。
现代文：一定要立张邦昌，京师的百姓可服，天下的百姓则不可服；京师的宗子可灭，天下的宗子不可灭。
English: Zhang Bangchang must be established. The people of Beijing can obey him, but the people of the world cannot. The founder of Beijing can be destroyed, but the founder of the world cannot be destroyed.

古文：桧不顾斧钺之诛，言两朝之利害，愿复嗣君位以安四方，非特大宋蒙福，亦大金万世利也。
现代文：秦桧不顾斧钺之诛，讲明两朝利害，希望恢复钦宗的帝位以安天下，不只大宋蒙福，也对大金有万世之利。
English: Qin Hui disregarded the advice of his advisors and clearly stated the interests of the two dynasties. He hoped to restore the imperial throne of Qin Zong and bring peace to the world. This was not only a great blessing for the Song Dynasty, but also a great benefit for big money.

古文：金人寻取桧诣军前。
现代文：金人不久把秦桧弄到军中。
English: The goldsmith soon got Qin Yu into the army.

古文：三月，金人立邦昌为伪楚。
现代文：三月，金立张邦昌为伪楚皇帝。
English: In March, Jin established Zhang Bangchang as a pseudo-Chu emperor.

古文：邦昌遗金书请还孙傅、张叔夜及桧，不许。
现代文：张邦昌给金人送书请求放回孙傅、张叔夜及秦桧，金不允许。
English: Zhang Bangchang sent a letter to Jinren to request the return of Sun Fu, Zhang Shuya and Qin Yu, but Jinren did not allow it.

古文：初，二帝北迁，桧与傅、叔夜、何，司马朴从至燕山，又徙韩州。
现代文：起初，二帝随金兵北迁，秦桧和孙傅、张叔夜、何、司马朴跟从到燕山，又转移到韩州。
English: At first, the two emperors moved north with the Jin soldiers, and Qin Yu and Sun Fu, Zhang Shuya, He and Sima Pu followed them to Yanshan, and then moved to South Korea.

古文：上皇闻康王即位，作书贻粘罕，与约和议，俾桧润色之。
现代文：徽宗听说康王即位，写信给粘罕，与他约定和议，让秦桧润色文辞。
English: When Huizong heard that King Kang ascended to the throne, he wrote a letter to Mu Han and agreed to have a peaceful discussion with him, and let Qin Yu refine his words.

古文：桧以厚赂达粘罕。
现代文：秦桧用重贿巴结粘罕。
English: Qin Hui used heavy bribery to make a sticky situation.

古文：会金主吴乞买以桧赐其弟挞懒为任用，挞懒攻山阳，建炎四年十月甲辰，桧与妻王氏及婢仆一家，自军中取涟水军水砦航海归行在。
现代文：恰好金主吴乞买把秦桧赐给他的弟弟挞懒，秦桧为挞懒所用，挞懒攻打山阳，秦桧随军，建炎四年十月甲辰日，秦桧和妻子王氏及仆从一家，从军中取道涟水军水砦经海上返回行在临安。
English: It just so happened that the gold owner Wu Qibai gave the Qin Yu to his younger brother Zou Lazy. The Qin Yu was used by Zou Lazy, Zou Lazy attacked the mountains, Qin Yu followed the army, and in October of the fourth year of Jian Yan, Qin Yu, his wife Wang and his servants, took the road from the army to the military water fort and returned to Lin'an by sea.

古文：丙午，桧入见。
现代文：丙午日，秦桧朝见高宗。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Qin Hui met Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：丁未，拜礼部尚书，赐以银帛。
现代文：丁未日，被任命为礼部尚书，赏赐给银帛。
English: On the day of Ding Wei, he was appointed to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and was awarded the Silver Star.

古文：桧之归也，自言杀金人监己者奔舟而来。
现代文：秦桧回来，自称是杀了监视自己的金人，抢了小船才逃回的。
English: When Qin Hui returned, he claimed that he had killed the man who had been watching him and had only escaped by stealing a small boat.

古文：朝士多谓桧与、傅、朴同拘，而桧独归；又自燕至楚二千八百里，逾河越海，岂无讥诃之者，安得杀监而南？
现代文：朝臣多数认为秦桧与何、孙傅、司马朴一同被拘留，单只秦桧回来；再者从燕到楚相距二千八百里，跨河越海，怎能没有查问的，又怎能杀看守而逃？
English: Most of the courtiers believed that Qin Hui was detained together with He, Sun Fu, and Sima Pu, and only Qin Hui came back; furthermore, from Yan to Chu, there was a distance of 2,800 miles, crossing the river and the sea. How could they kill the guards and escape without questioning?

古文：就令从军挞懒，金人纵之，必质妻属，安得与王氏偕？
现代文：就算跟从挞懒，金人放回他，定会以他的妻为人质，他怎能与王氏同回？
English: Even if he were to follow the lazy man, if the gold were returned to him, he would certainly take his wife as a hostage. How could he return with Wang?

古文：惟宰相范宗尹、同知枢密院李回与桧善，尽破群疑，力荐其忠。
现代文：只有宰相范宗尹、同知枢密院李回与秦桧友好，尽释群疑，竭力保荐他的忠心。
English: Only the prime minister Fan Zongyin and the privy councilor Li Hui were friendly with Qin Yu, and tried their best to recommend his loyalty.

古文：未对前一日，帝命先见宰执。
现代文：秦桧入对的前一天，皇上命他先与宰执相见。
English: The day before Qin Xuan entered the court, the emperor ordered him to meet with Zai Rong first.

古文：桧首言 如欲天下无事，南自南，北自北 ，及首奏所草与挞懒求和书。
现代文：秦桧首倡 如欲天下无事，南自南，北自北 ，第一次上奏，就是他草拟的与挞懒求和书。
English: Qin Xizhou advocated that if there is nothing wrong in the world, south from south, north from north, and the first performance was his draft of the book for seeking peace with the lazy.

古文：帝曰： 桧朴忠过人，朕得之喜而不寐。
现代文：皇上说： 秦桧的忠心质朴超过别人，朕得到他高兴得夜不成寐；既听到二帝和母后的消息，又得到一个人才。 
English: The emperor said, "Qin Xuan's loyalty and simplicity surpasses that of others. I have made him so happy that he can't sleep at night. Not only did I hear the news of the two emperors and the empress dowager, but I also gained a talent.

古文：盖闻二帝、母后消息，又得一佳士也。 宗尹欲处之经筵，帝曰： 且与一事简尚书。 故有礼部之命。
现代文：范宗尹想把他安排为经筵官，皇上说： 先选一尚书职让他当。 
English: Fan Zongyin wanted to appoint him as a financial eunuch, and the emperor said, "First, choose a clerical post for him to hold."

古文：从行王安道、冯由义、水砦丁不异及参议官并改京秩，舟人孙靖亦补承信郎。
现代文：所以有任礼部尚书之命。跟从他的王安道、冯由义、水砦的丁及参议官都改为京官，船工孙靖也补官为承信郎。
English: Therefore, there was an order to appoint a ceremonial secretary. Wang Ando, Feng Yiyi, Ding of the Water Fort, and the councillor who followed him were all changed to Beijing officials, and the shipbuilder Sun Jing was also added as a successor.

古文：始，朝廷虽数遣使，但且守且和，而专与金人解仇议和，实自桧始。
现代文：开始，朝廷虽多次派使臣，与金也只是且守且和，而专与金人解仇议和，实从秦桧开始。
English: At the beginning, although the imperial court sent envoys many times, it was only to keep and make peace with Kim, but it was specifically to resolve the feud with Kim, and it actually began with Qin Zang.

古文：盖桧在金庭首唱和议，故挞懒纵之使归也。
现代文：因秦桧在金廷首倡和议，故挞懒放他回来。
English: Because Qin Hui was the first to advocate peace in Jinting, it was too lazy to let him come back.

古文：绍兴元年二月，除参知政事。
现代文：绍兴元年二月，他升为参知政事。
English: In February of the first year of Shaoxing, he was promoted to the post of co-governor.

古文：七月，宗尹罢。
现代文：七月，范宗尹罢相。
English: In July, Fan Zongyin resigned as premier.

古文：先是，范宗尹建议讨论崇宁、大观以来滥赏，桧力赞其议，见帝意坚，反以此挤之。
现代文：原来，范宗尹建议讨论崇宁、大观以来滥赏之事，秦桧极力赞成，见皇上坚决反对，秦桧反而以此为由排挤他。
English: Originally, Fan Zongyin proposed to discuss the matter of excessive rewards since Chongning and Taikan, Qin Yu strongly approved, but the emperor firmly opposed, and Qin Yu instead excluded him on this basis.

古文：宗尹既去，相位久虚。
现代文：范宗尹被罢，相位久虚。
English: Fan Zongyin was ousted, and the phase was short-lived.

古文：桧扬言曰： 我有二策，可耸动天下。 或问何以不言，桧曰： 今无相，不可行也。 八月，拜右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
现代文：秦桧扬言说： 我有二策，可耸动天下。 有人问他为何不说，秦桧说： 现在没有宰相，不能执行啊。 八月，任命为右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
English: Qin Yu threatened, "I have two strategies that can shake the world." When someone asked him why he did not say, Qin Yu said, "There is no prime minister at the moment, so I cannot carry it out." In August, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the Emperor, and he was also appointed as the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：九月，吕颐浩再相，桧同秉政，谋夺其柄，风其党建言： 周宣王内修外攘，故能中兴，今二相宜分任内外。 颐浩遂建都督府于镇江。
现代文：九月，吕颐浩再任宰相，秦桧和他共同秉政，秦桧谋夺吕颐浩权，让他的党羽造谣说 ：周宣王修内政、攘外敌，故能中兴，今二相应分管内政外政。 吕颐浩就在镇江建都督府。
English: In September, Lyu Binhao was reappointed as prime minister, and Qin Yu and him jointly upheld politics. Qin Yu plotted to seize Lyu Binhao's power, and let his party members spread rumors that: Zhou Xuan Wang repaired domestic affairs and drove out foreign enemies, so he was able to rejuvenate the country, and now he is in charge of domestic and foreign affairs. Lyu Binhao built the governor's office in Zhenjiang.

古文：帝曰： 颐浩专治军旅，桧专理庶务，如种、蠡之分职可也。 
现代文：皇上说： 吕颐浩专管军事，秦桧专管政务，像文种、范蠡那样分职也可以。 
English: The emperor said: Lv Yinghao is in charge of military affairs, Qin Hui is in charge of government affairs, and they can also be divided into different posts like Wen Xuan and Fan Hui.

古文：二年，桧奏置修政局，自为提举，参知政事翟汝文同领之。
现代文：绍兴二年，秦桧奏请设修政局，自为提举，参知政事翟汝文与他同领。
English: In the second year of Shaoxing, Qin Shuxo asked for the establishment of a political bureau to be set up, and promoted himself. He was accompanied by Zou Ruwen, the political advisor to the governor.

古文：未几，桧面劾汝文擅治堂吏，汝文求去；谏官方孟卿一再论之，汝文竟罢。
现代文：不久，秦桧弹劾翟汝文擅自处理堂吏，翟汝文请求离职；谏官方孟卿一再议论这件事，翟汝文竟被罢官。
English: Soon after, Qin Yu impeached Zou Ruwen for arbitrarily dealing with court officials, and Zou Ruwen requested to leave his post; Zou official Meng Qing repeatedly discussed the matter, and Zou Ruwen was actually dismissed.

古文：监察御史刘一止，桧党也，言： 宣王内修，修其所谓外攘之政而已。
现代文：监察御史刘一止，是秦桧的党羽，他说 ：宣王修内政，是修其所谓外攘之政。
English: Liu Yizhong, the inspector general of history, was a member of Qin Hui's party. He said: "The king's proclamation to improve domestic affairs is to improve his so-called foreign policy."

古文：今簿书狱讼、官吏差除、土木营缮俱非所当急者。 屯田郎曾统亦谓桧曰： 宰相事无不统，何以局为？ 桧皆不听。
现代文：现在簿书狱诉、官吏差除、土木营缮都不是急务。 屯田郎曾统也对秦桧说： 宰相无事不管，何必又设置修政局？ 秦桧都不听。
English: Now, book-writing, prison appeals, the expulsion of officials, and civil engineering repairs are not urgent tasks. Tondenro Zengtong also said to Qin Hui: If the prime minister does not care about anything, why set up the Political Reconstruction Bureau? Qin Hui did not listen.

古文：既而有议废局以摇桧者，一止及检讨官林待聘皆上疏言不可废。
现代文：不久，有议论废罢修政局动摇秦桧的，刘一止及检讨官林待聘都上疏说不能废。
English: Soon, there were discussions about abolishing the strike to shake the political situation in Qin Hui, but Liu Yijie and the review of the officials to be hired all said that it could not be abolished.

古文：七月，一止出台，除起居郎，盖自叛其说，识者笑之。
现代文：七月，刘一止被免去监察御史，任起居郎，因他说的话自相矛盾，有见识的人讥笑他。
English: In July, Liu Yicheng was removed from the position of inspector of imperial history and appointed as a curator. People with insight ridiculed him because his words contradicted each other.

古文：颐浩自江上还，谋逐桧，有教以引朱胜非为助者。
现代文：吕颐浩自江上还朝，谋划赶走秦桧，有人让他引用朱胜非为助。
English: Lv Yinghao, who had been in power since the Yangtze River, planned to drive out Qin Yu. Someone asked him to use Zhu Shengfei as an aid.

古文：诏以胜非同都督。
现代文：诏命朱胜非为同都督。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zhu Shengfei to be the same governor.

古文：给事中胡安国言胜非不可用，胜非遂以醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：给事中胡安国上书说朱胜非不可用，朱胜非就任醴泉观使兼侍读。
English: During the matter, Juan Guo sent a letter saying that Zhu Shengfei was not available, and Zhu Shengfei was not appointed as an attendant and attendant.

古文：安国求去，桧三上章留之，不报。
现代文：胡安国请求离职，秦桧三次上章挽留他，没有答复。
English: Hu'an Guo requested to leave the post, but Qin Hui detained him three times and there was no reply.

古文：颐浩寻以黄龟年为殿中侍御史，刘棐为右司谏，盖将逐桧。
现代文：吕颐浩又以黄龟年为殿中侍御史，刘蓒为右司谏，是为了赶走秦桧。
English: In order to drive away Qin Yu, Lv Hao also made the Yellow Turtle the year of the palace's history, and Liu Ye the right-hand man.

古文：于是江跻、吴表臣、程瑀、张焘、胡世将、刘一止、林待聘、楼炤并落职予祠，台省一空，皆桧党也。
现代文：于是江跻、吴表臣、程王禹、张焘、胡世将、刘一止、林待聘、楼火召都被免职去管理宫观，台省一空，这些人都与秦桧同党。
English: As a result, Jiang Renzhong, Wu Biao Zhen, Cheng Wang Yu, Zhang Xuan, Hu Shijiao, Liu Yizhong, Lin Zhijian, and Lou Hui Zhao were all dismissed from their posts to manage Gongguan, and Taiwan Province was completely emptied. These people were all members of the same party as Qin Hui.

古文：桧初欲倾颐浩，引一时名贤如安国、焘、瑀辈布列清要。
现代文：秦桧开始想排挤吕颐浩，于是召用一时名贤如胡安国、张焘、程王禹等布列清要。
English: Qin Hui began to want to oust Lü Binghao, so he called on famous sages such as Hu'an Guo, Zhang Hui, Cheng Wang Yu and others to set the agenda.

古文：颐浩问去桧之术于席益，益曰： 目为党可也。
现代文：吕颐浩问席益去掉秦桧的办法，席益说： 把他们看作朋党。
English: When Lv Yinghao asked Xi Yik how to get rid of Qin Hui, Xi Yik said: Treat them as friends.

古文：今党魁胡安国在琐闼，宜先去之。 盖安国尝问人材于游酢，酢以桧为言，且比之荀文若。
现代文：现在党魁胡安国是关键，应先除掉他。 因为胡安国曾问游酢谁是人才，游酢答以秦桧，并把他比荀文若。
English: Now the party leader Juan Guo is the key, he should be removed first, because Juan Guo once asked Youzu who is a talented person, Youzu replied with Qin Yu, and compared him to Yu Wenjun.

古文：故安国力言桧贤于张浚诸人，桧亦力引安国。
现代文：故胡安国极力说秦桧比张浚等人贤能，秦桧也极力推荐胡安国。
English: Therefore, Juan Guo strongly said that Qin Yu was more capable than Zhang Jun and others, and Qin Yu also strongly recommended Juan Guo.

古文：至是，安国等去，桧亦寻去。
现代文：此时，胡安国等离职，秦桧不久也罢相。
English: At this time, Juan Guo and others left the post, and Qin Hui soon resigned.

古文：桧再相误国，安国已死矣。
现代文：秦桧再任宰相害国时，胡安国已死。
English: When Qin Hui was reappointed as prime minister to harm the country, Huang Guo was already dead.

古文：黄龟年始劾桧专主和议，沮止恢复，植党专权，渐不可长，至比桧为莽、卓。
现代文：黄龟年最初弹劾秦桧专主和议，破坏恢复，结党专权，阴险奸诈，不会长久，以至把秦桧比作王莽、董卓。
English: In the Year of the Yellow Turtle, the impeachment of Qin Hui as the sole master of peace talks, the destruction of restoration, the formation of party dictatorship, the insidious treachery, will not last long, so much so that Qin Hui is compared to Wang Mang and Dong Zhuo.

古文：八月，桧罢，乃为观文殿学士、提举江州太平观。
现代文：八月，罢秦桧相位，任为观文殿学士，提举江州太平观。
English: In August, he was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and Jiangsu Taiping Confucianism was promoted.

古文：前一日，上召直学士院綦崈礼入对，示以桧所陈二策，欲以河北人还金国，中原人还刘豫。
现代文：前一天，皇上召直学士院綦宗山礼入宫奏对，给他看秦桧所陈二策，想把河北人还金国，中原人还刘豫。
English: On the previous day, the emperor summoned Zhi Zongshan, a member of the Academy of Sciences, to the palace to play a match and show him the two strategies devised by Qin Yu, who wanted to return the people of Hebei to Jin and the people of the Central Plains to Liu Yu.

古文：帝曰： 桧言 南人归南，北人归北 。
现代文：皇上说： 秦桧说 南人归南，北人归北 。
English: The emperor said, "Qin Hui said that the southerners should return to the south and the northerners should return to the north.

古文：朕北人，将安归？
现代文：朕是北人，将归哪儿？
English: I am a northerner. Where will I go?

古文：桧又言 为相数月，可耸动天下 ，今无闻。 崈礼即以上意载训辞，播告中外，人始知桧之奸。
现代文：秦桧又说 为相数月，可耸动天下 至今也没看到。 綦宗山礼就把皇上的意思写入训辞，布告中外，人们才知秦桧的奸邪。
English: Qin Zongli also said that it only takes a few months to stir up the whole world, which has not been seen until now. Zongzongli wrote the emperor's meaning into the eulogy and announced it to the world, and only then did people know about Qin Zongli's treachery.

古文：龟年等论桧不已，诏落职，榜朝堂，示不复用。
现代文：黄龟年等不停地议论秦桧，下诏罢秦桧相位，在朝堂公布，表示不再任用他。
English: In the Year of the Yellow Turtle and other years, Qin Hui was discussed incessantly, and the position of Qin Hui was abolished and announced in the imperial court, indicating that he would no longer be appointed.

古文：三年，韩肖胄等使还，洎金使李永寿、王翊偕来，求尽还北俘，与桧前议吻合。
现代文：绍兴三年，韩肖胄等出使金朝回来，金使李永寿、王翊同来，要求归还所有金朝俘虏，与秦桧先前言论吻合。
English: In the third year of Shaoxing, Han Xiaoqi and others sent envoys to the Kim dynasty to return, and the Kim envoys Li Yongshou and Wang Hui came together to demand the return of all Kim dynasty prisoners, which is consistent with Qin Hui's previous remarks.

古文：识者益知桧与金人共谋，国家之辱未已也。
现代文：有见识的人更知道秦桧与金人共谋，国家的耻辱没结束。
English: People with insight know that Qin Hui conspired with Kim Ren, and the country's shame is not over.

古文：五年，金主既死，挞懒主议，卒成其和。
现代文：绍兴五年，金主死后，挞懒主政，终成和议。
English: Five years ago in Shaoxing, after the death of the gold master, the laziness of the central government finally led to a peaceful discussion.

古文：二月，复资政殿学士，仍旧宫祠。
现代文：二月，秦桧复官为资政殿学士，仍为提举江州太平观。
English: In February, Qin Hui was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Capital and Political Affairs, and he was still promoted to the Jiangzhou Taiping Guan.

古文：六月，除观文殿学士、知温州。
现代文：六月，拜为观文殿学士、知温州。
English: In June, he graduated from the Academy of Fine Arts, Wenzhou.

古文：六年七月，改知绍兴府。
现代文：绍兴六年七月，改知绍兴府。
English: In July of the sixth year of Shaoxing, it was renamed Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：寻除醴泉观使兼侍读，充行宫留守；孟庾同留守，并权赴尚书、枢密院参决庶事。
现代文：不久，任命为醴泉观使兼侍读，充任行宫留守；孟庾同留守，并暂去尚书省、枢密院参决庶事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the attendant of the Emperor, and stayed at the Imperial Palace; Meng Jue also stayed at the Imperial Palace, and temporarily went to the Ministry of Education and the Privy Council to attend the general affairs.

古文：时已降诏将行幸，桧乞扈从，不许。
现代文：当时皇上下诏将要巡视，秦桧请求扈从，不许。
English: At that time, the Emperor was about to make a tour of inspection, and Qin Yu requested him not to do so.

古文：帝驻跸平江，召桧赴行在，用右相张浚荐也。
现代文：皇上驻跸平江，召秦桧赴行在，是张浚推荐的。
English: It was recommended by Zhang Jun that the emperor should stay in Suiping River and call Qin Hui to go there.

古文：十二月，桧以醴泉观兼侍读赴讲筵。
现代文：十二月，秦桧以醴泉观兼侍读赴讲筵。
English: In December, Qin Hui went to lecture on Qianquan and attended the lecture.

古文：七年正月，何藓使金还，得徽宗及宁德后讣，帝号恸发丧，即日授桧枢密使，恩数视宰臣。
现代文：绍兴七年正月，何藓出使金国返回，得到了徽宗及宁德后死讯。皇上痛哭，把死讯公布于众，当天命令秦桧为枢密使，恩宠和宰执一样。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Shaoxing, He Ying sent an envoy to return to Jin and received the news of the death of Huizong and Ningde. The emperor cried bitterly and announced the news of the death to the public. On the same day, he ordered Qin Yu to be a confidential envoy, and the grace was the same as the command.

古文：四月，命王伦使金国迎奉梓宫。
现代文：四月，命令王伦出使金国迎奉梓宫。
English: In April, Wang Lun was ordered to send an envoy to welcome Zi Gong to the State of Jin.

古文：九月，浚求去，帝问： 谁可代卿？ 浚不对。
现代文：九月，张浚请求离职，皇上问 ：谁可代替卿？ 张浚不回答。
English: In September, Zhang Jun requested to leave his post, and the emperor asked: Who can replace him? Zhang Jun did not answer.

古文：帝曰： 秦桧何如？ 浚曰： 与之共事，始知其暗。 帝曰： 然则用赵鼎。 鼎于是复相。
现代文：皇上问 ：秦桧怎么样？ 张浚说： 与他共事，才知他的昏暗。 皇上说 ：那就用赵鼎。 赵鼎因而恢复相位。
English: The emperor asked, "What about Qin Hui?" Zhang Jun said, "Only when you work with him do you know how dim he is." The emperor said, "Then use Zhao Ding." Zhao Ding thus restored the phase.

古文：台谏交章论浚，安置岭表。
现代文：台谏官相继上章议论张浚，张浚被安置到岭表。
English: The Taiwan magistrates successively discussed Zhang Jun in the last chapter, and Zhang Jun was placed in Ling table.

古文：鼎约同列救解。与张守面奏，各数千百言，桧独无一语。
现代文：赵鼎约同僚一起说情，他和张守当面上奏，说了很多，秦桧却一言不发。
English: Zhao Ding asked his colleagues to intercede together. He and Zhang Shou played face-to-face and talked a lot, but Qin Yu did not say a word.

古文：浚遂谪永州。
现代文：于是张浚被贬到永州。
English: As a result, Zhang Jun was demoted to Yongzhou.

古文：始，浚、鼎相得甚，浚先达，力引鼎。
现代文：原先，张浚和赵鼎相处很好，张浚先被重用之后力荐赵鼎。
English: Originally, Zhang Jun and Zhao Ding got along very well. After Zhang Jun was reused, he strongly recommended Zhao Ding.

古文：尝共论人才，浚剧谈桧善，鼎曰： 此人得志，吾人无所措足矣！ 浚不以为然，故引桧，共政方知其暗，不复再荐也。
现代文：他们曾一起谈论人才，张浚十分推崇秦桧，赵鼎说： 此人得志，我们就将手足无措啦！ 张浚不以为然，故而推荐秦桧，他们共事后方知他的昏暗，不再推荐他。
English: They had talked about talent together. Zhang Jun highly respected Qin Yu. Zhao Ding said, "If this person achieves his goal, we will be at our wits' end!" Zhang Jun did not agree, so he recommended Qin Yu. After they worked together, they knew his dimness and no longer recommended him.

古文：桧因此憾浚，反谓鼎曰： 上欲召公，而张相迟留。 盖怒鼎使挤浚也。
现代文：秦桧因此不满张浚，反过来对赵鼎说： 皇上想召用你，但张浚却从中作梗。 他是想激怒赵鼎，让赵鼎排挤张浚。
English: As a result, Qin Yu was dissatisfied with Zhang Jun, and in turn said to Zhao Ding: The emperor wanted to use you, but Zhang Jun stood in the way; he wanted to infuriate Zhao Ding and have Zhao Ding oust Zhang Jun.

古文：桧在枢府惟听鼎，鼎素恶桧，由是反深信之，卒为所倾。
现代文：秦桧在枢密府中只听命于赵鼎，赵鼎一向讨厌秦桧，由此反而对他深信不疑最终被他所害。
English: In the Privy Council, Qin Hui only obeyed the orders of Zhao Ding. Zhao Ding had always hated Qin Hui, and as a result, he was convinced that he would eventually be harmed by him.

古文：鼎与浚晚遇于闽，言及此，始知皆为桧所卖。
现代文：赵鼎和张浚以后在闽相遇，谈及这些，才知道都是被秦桧出卖的。
English: After Zhao Ding and Zhang Jun met in Handan, when they talked about these things, they knew that they had all been betrayed by Qin Yu.

古文：十一月，奉使朱弁以书报粘罕死，帝曰： 金人暴虐，不亡何待？ 桧曰： 陛下但积德，中兴固有时。 帝曰： 此固有时，然亦须有所施为，然后可以得志。 
现代文：十一月，奉使朱弁用书信报告说粘罕已死，皇上说： 金人暴虐，不亡还等待何时？ 秦桧说： 陛下只要积德，定有中兴时候。 皇上说： 这固然有时候，但也应有所作为，然后才能得志。 
English: In November, the envoy Zhu Ben used a letter to report that Muxian was dead, and the emperor said: "The gold man is tyrannical, how long must we wait before we die?" Qin Yu said: "Your Majesty, as long as you have virtue, there must be a time of rejuvenation." The emperor said: "Of course, this is sometimes, but you should also do something, and then you can achieve your goal."

古文：八年三月，拜右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：绍兴八年三月，任命秦桧为右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: In March of the eighth year of Shaoxing, Qin Zang was appointed as the right-hand man of Zhao, and the second-in-command and privy envoy of Zhao.

古文：吏部侍郎晏敦复有忧色，曰： 奸人相矣。 五月，金遣乌陵思谋等来议和，与王伦偕至。
现代文：吏部侍郎晏敦又面带忧愁地说 ：奸人为相了。 五月，金派乌陵思谋等来议和，与王伦同到。
English: The clerk's valet, Hao Dun, also said with a sad face: "The traitor has been caught. In May, Kim sent Wuling Sipo and others to discuss peace, and they came with Wang Lun.

古文：思谋即宣和始通好海上者。
现代文：乌陵思谋就是宣和时首先与宋通好海上的人。
English: Wuling Simao was the first person to communicate with Song at sea during the declaration of peace.

古文：议以吏部侍郎魏矼馆伴，矼辞曰： 顷任御史，尝言和议之非，今不可专对。 桧问矼所以不主和，矼备言敌情。
现代文：决定让吏部侍郎魏石工为馆伴，魏石工推辞说： 过去我任御史，曾说和议不对，现在不能专门陪金使议和。 秦桧问魏石工为什么不主张和议，魏石工详细讲了敌情。
English: It was decided to have Wei Shiguo, an attendant of the cadre department, as a companion of the museum, but Wei Shiguo declined, saying: In the past, I served as imperial historian, and I once said that it was wrong to discuss peace, but now I can't just accompany Jin to discuss peace. Qin Yu asked Wei Shiguo why he didn't advocate peace talks, and Wei Shiguo spoke in detail about the hostile situation.

古文：桧曰： 公以智料敌，桧以诚待敌。 矼曰： 第恐敌不以诚待相公尔。 桧乃改命。
现代文：秦桧说 ：公以智慧料敌，我以真诚待敌。 魏石工说： 只怕敌人不以真诚待相公啊。 秦桧就改命别人为馆伴。
English: Qin Hui said: "The public treats the enemy with wisdom, and I treat the enemy with sincerity." Wei Shiguo said: "I am afraid that the enemy will not treat the public with sincerity." Qin Hui changed his name to someone else as a museum companion.

古文：六月，思谋等入见。
现代文：六月，乌陵思谋等朝见皇上。
English: In June, Ulin Sipo and others went to see the emperor.

古文：帝愀然谓宰相曰： 先帝梓宫，果有还期，虽待二三年尚庶几。
现代文：皇上愀然对宰相说 ：先帝的梓宫，果真归还的日子即使等二三年也行。
English: The emperor bluntly said to the prime minister, "The former emperor's Azusa Palace, even if it takes two or three years, will be returned."

古文：惟是太后春秋高，朕旦夕思念，欲早相见，此所以不惮屈己，冀和议之速成也。 桧曰： 屈己议和，此人主之孝也。
现代文：只是太后年事已高，朕早晚思念，想早相见，故此不怕屈己，希望和议速成。 秦桧说 ：屈己议和，这是人主之孝；见主卑屈，心怀不平，这是人臣之忠。 
English: However, the empress dowager is getting old and I miss her more and more and want to see her sooner or later, so I'm not afraid to give in and hope for a speedy reconciliation.Qin Rong said, "If you give in and make peace, you are a filial son of the Lord; if you see the Lord humble himself, you will have a grudge, which is the loyalty of a vassal."

古文：见主卑屈，怀愤不平，此人臣之忠也。 帝曰： 虽然，有备无患，使和议可成，边备亦不可弛。 十月，宰执入见，桧独留身，言： 臣僚畏首尾，多持两端，此不足与断大事。
现代文：皇上说 ：即使这样，有备无患，就是和议能成，边备也不能松弛。 十月，宰执朝见皇上，秦桧独自留下，说： 臣僚畏首畏尾，多持两端，不值得和他们决断大事。若陛下决心讲和，请专与臣商议，不要让群臣干预。 
English: The emperor said, "Even so, if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even if there is no danger, even

古文：若陛下决欲讲和，乞颛与臣议，勿许群臣预。 帝曰： 朕独委卿。 桧曰： 臣亦恐未便，望陛下更思三日，容臣别奏。 又三日，桧复留身奏事，帝意欲和甚坚，桧犹以为未也，曰： 臣恐别有未便，欲望陛下更思三日，容臣别奏。 帝曰： 然。 又三日。桧复留身奏事如初，知上意确不移，乃出文字乞决和议，勿许群臣预。
现代文：皇上说 ：朕只托付卿一人来办。 秦桧说 ：臣也怕不妥，望陛下再考虑三天，容臣再奏。 过了三天，秦桧又留下奏事，皇上想议和的决心更坚定，秦桧仍认为不行，说 ：臣怕另有不妥，想请陛下再考虑三天，容臣再奏， 皇上说： 可以。 又过了三天，秦桧又留下奏事如初，知道皇上议和的决心不可动摇，于是，拿出文字请皇上决定和议，并不许群臣干预。
English: The emperor said, "I am only entrusting one person to do it." Qin Yu said, "I am also afraid that something is not right, I hope that Your Majesty will consider it for another three days, and that Your Majesty will reconsider." After three days, Qin Yu again left a report, and the emperor's determination to discuss peace was more firm. Qin Yu still thought it was not possible, said, "I am afraid that something else is not right, I want to ask Your Majesty to consider it for another three days, and I want You to reconsider," and the emperor said, "Yes." After another three days, Qin Yu again left a report, knowing that the emperor's

古文：鼎力求去位，以少傅出知绍兴府。
现代文：赵鼎力请辞职，就让他以少傅的身份出京为知绍兴府。
English: Zhao Dingli was asked to resign, so he was allowed to go to Beijing as a minor official to visit Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：初，帝无子。
现代文：起初，皇上没儿子。
English: At first, the emperor had no son.

古文：建炎末，范宗尹造膝有请，遂命宗室令懬择艺祖后，得伯琮、伯玖入宫，皆艺祖七世孙。
现代文：建炎末，范宗尹请立嗣子，于是，命宗室赵令旷挑选太祖后代，得到赵伯琮、赵伯玖，让他们进宫，他们都是太祖七世孙。
English: At the end of the construction, Fan Zongyin asked for an heir, so he ordered Zhao Lingyuan, the ancestral wife, to select the descendants of the great-grandfathers, get Zhao Boqin and Zhao Boqin, and let them enter the palace. They are all the seventh grandchildren of the great-grandfather.

古文：伯琮改名瑗，伯玖改名璩。
现代文：赵伯琮改名赵瑗，赵伯玖改名赵璩。
English: Zhao Boyu changed his name to Zhao Yao, Zhao Boyu changed his name to Zhao Yao.

古文：瑗先建节，封建国公。
现代文：赵瑗先被立为皇子，封为建国公。
English: Zhao Bingxian was elevated to the position of prince and given the title of founding prince.

古文：帝谕鼎专任其事。
现代文：皇上命赵鼎专管这事。
English: The emperor ordered Zhao Ding to take charge of the matter.

古文：又请建资善堂，鼎罢，言者攻鼎，必以资善为口实。
现代文：赵鼎请建资善堂，赵鼎被罢后，攻击他的人就以资善堂为借口。
English: After Zhao Ding was ousted, the people who attacked him used Zhaozhentang as an excuse.

古文：及鼎、桧再相，帝出御札，除璩节度使，封吴国公。
现代文：到赵鼎、秦桧再任宰相，皇上出御札，任赵璩为节度使，封为吴国公。
English: After Zhao Ding and Qin Hui were reappointed as prime ministers, the emperor issued an imperial edict, appointing Zhao Hui as the envoy of the festival and naming him the prince of Wu.

古文：执政聚议，枢密副使王庶见之，大呼曰： 并后匹嫡，此不可行。 鼎以问桧，不答。
现代文：执政在一起商议，枢密副使王庶见这种情况，大呼说： 后封的与先封的地位相同，这不行。 赵鼎因此问秦桧，秦桧不回答。
English: When they were deliberating together, the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, Wang Shizhu, saw this situation and shouted, "It is not possible for the latter to have the same status as the former." Zhao Ding therefore asked Qin Hui, but Qin Hui did not answer.

古文：桧更问鼎，鼎曰： 自丙辰罢相，议者专以此藉口，今当避嫌。 约同奏面纳御笔，及至帝前，桧无一语。
现代文：秦桧又问赵鼎，赵鼎说： 自丙辰罢相，议者专以这件事为借口，现在应避嫌。 他们约定一起上奏，当面接受御笔，等到皇上跟前，秦桧一言不发。
English: Qin Hui also asked Zhao Ding, and Zhao Ding said: "From the time of the emperor's dismissal, the councilors have used this matter as an excuse, and now they should avoid it. They agreed to play together, accept the imperial pen in person, and wait until the emperor came, Qin Hui did not say a word.

古文：鼎曰： 今建国在上，名虽未正，天下之人知陛下有子矣。
现代文：赵鼎说： 现在建国公位在上，虽未正名，天下人都知道陛下有儿子了。
English: Zhao Ding said, "Now that the founding of the People's Republic of China is at the top, although his name has not been legitimized, everyone in the world knows that His Majesty has a son.

古文：今日礼数不得不异。 帝乃留御笔俟议。
现代文：今日礼数不能没区别。 皇上就留下御笔等着商议。
English: Today, the number of courtesies cannot be the same. The Emperor left his pen and waited for discussion.

古文：明日，桧留身奏事。
现代文：第二天，秦桧留下奏事。
English: The next day, Qin Hui left a report.

古文：后数日，参知政事刘大中参告，亦以此为言。
现代文：以后几天，参知政事刘大中奏事。也说到这件事。
English: A few days later, Liu Dazhong, the vice-president of the CPC Central Committee, also mentioned this matter.

古文：故鼎与大中俱罢。
现代文：故而赵鼎和刘大中都被罢。
English: As a result, both Zhao Ding and Liu Dazhong were expelled.

古文：明年，璩卒授保大军节度使，封崇国公。
现代文：第二年，赵璩终于被任为保大军节度使，封崇国公。
English: In the second year, Zhao Wei was finally appointed as the envoy of the Great Army of the Great Patriotic War, and was awarded the title of Prince of the State.

古文：故鼎入辞，劝帝曰： 臣去后，必有以孝弟之说胁制陛下者。 出见桧，一揖而去，桧亦憾之。
现代文：赵鼎因此入宫告辞，劝皇上说： 臣走后，一定有用孝悌之说胁制陛下的。 出来看见秦桧，对他一揖就走开了，秦桧也对赵鼎不满。
English: As a result, Zhao Ding entered the palace to bid farewell, and advised the emperor, saying, "After the minister leaves, it must be useful to use filial piety to coerce your majesty." When he came out, he saw Qin Yu, and as soon as he saw him, he left. Qin Yu was also dissatisfied with Zhao Ding.

古文：鼎既去，桧独专国，决意议和。
现代文：赵鼎罢相后，秦桧独自掌权，决意议和。
English: After Zhao Ding dismissed the prime minister, Qin Hui took power alone and decided to negotiate a peace.

古文：中朝贤士，以议论不合，相继而去。
现代文：朝中贤士，因议论不合，相继被排挤出去。
English: The sages of the Middle Kingdom were successively ousted from their positions due to disagreements.

古文：于是，中书舍人吕本中、礼部侍郎张九成皆不附和议，桧谕之使优游委曲，九成曰： 未有枉己而能正人者。 桧深憾之。
现代文：这时，中书舍人吕本中、礼部侍郎张九成都不附会和议，秦桧借皇帝的名义把他们闲置起来，张九成说： 未有枉己而能正人者。 秦桧对他十分不满。
English: At this time, Lu Benzhong and Zhang Jiucheng, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department of the Chinese Academy of Letters, did not support the peace talks, and Qin Hui left them idle in the name of the emperor. Zhang Jiucheng said: "He who has not wronged himself but can be righteous." Qin Hui was very dissatisfied with him.

古文：殿中侍御史张戒上疏乞留赵鼎，又陈十三事论和议之非，忤桧。
现代文：殿中侍御史张戒上疏请留赵鼎，又陈十三件事论和议不对，与秦桧相抵触。
English: Zhang Jie, the attendant of history in the palace, asked Zhao Ding to stay, and Chen Jizhong's theory and discussion were not right, which contradicted Qin Yu's.

古文：王庶与桧尤不合，自淮西入枢庭，始终言和议非是，疏凡七上，且谓桧曰： 而忘东都欲存赵氏时，何遗此敌邪？ 桧方挟金人自重，尤恨庶言，故出之。
现代文：王庶和秦桧更是不和，从淮西到枢庭，始终说和议不行，七次上疏，并对秦桧说 ：你忘记在东都想保存赵氏时，是怎么被金人抓去的吗？ 当时秦桧靠金人的势力巩固自己的地位，特别恨王庶的话，因此把他赶出朝廷。
English: Wang Shizhe and Qin Yu were even more at odds. From Huaxi to the Inner Court, they always said that peace talks were not possible, seven times, and said to Qin Yu: Do you forget how you were captured by the Jin people when you wanted to preserve the Zhao clan in the East? At that time, Qin Yu relied on the power of the Jin people to consolidate his position. He especially hated Wang Shizhe's words, so he drove him out of the imperial court.

古文：枢密院编修官胡铨上疏，愿斩桧与王伦以谢天下。
现代文：枢密院编修官胡铨上疏，希望斩秦桧与王伦以谢天下。
English: The editor-in-chief of the Privy Council, Hu Yao Shang So, hoped to thank the world by killing Qin Yu and Wang Lun.

古文：于是上下汹汹。
现代文：于是朝中上下议论纷纷。
English: As a result, there was a lot of discussion in the morning.

古文：桧谬为解救，卒械送铨贬昭州。
现代文：秦桧竟为解脱自己，终把胡铨押送出朝贬到昭州。
English: In order to free himself, Qin Yu finally sent Hu Yao away from the imperial court to Zhaozhou.

古文：陈刚中以启贺铨，桧大怒，送刚中吏部，差知赣州安远县。
现代文：陈刚中因用书信致贺胡铨，激怒秦桧，被送到吏部处理，差派到赣州做安远知县。
English: Chen Gangzhong was sent to the personnel department for using a letter to congratulate Hu Yao, which angered Qin Yao, and was sent to Anyuan County in Zhangzhou.

古文：赣有十二邑，安远滨岭，地恶瘴深，谚曰： 龙南、安远，一去不转。 言必死也。
现代文：赣州有十二县，安远县濒临岭南，地恶瘴深，谚语说： 龙南、安远，一去不转。 说是必然死在这里。
English: There are twelve counties in Luzhou, and Anyuan County is on the edge of Lingnan, and the evil is very deep. A proverb says: "Longnan and Anyuan will never change. It is said that it is inevitable to die here."

古文：刚中果死。
现代文：陈刚中果然死在安远。
English: Chen Gangzhong did indeed die in Anyuan.

古文：寻以铨事戒谕中外。
现代文：不久以胡铨事告诫中外。
English: It was not long before China and other countries were admonished for the hoax.

古文：既而校书郎许忻、枢密院编修官赵雍同日上疏，犹祖铨意，力排和议。
现代文：不久，校书郎许忻、枢密院编修官赵雍同日上疏，仍承继胡铨的思想，力排和议。
English: Soon after, the school scribe Xu Xi and the editor of the Privy Council, Zhao Yong, resigned on the same day, still inheriting Hu Xi's thoughts and trying to arrange peace talks.

古文：雍又欲正南北兄弟之名，桧亦不能罪。
现代文：赵雍又想正宋金兄弟之名，秦桧也不能加罪。
English: Zhao Yong also wanted the name of the Zheng Song Jin brothers, and Qin Yu could not add to the crime.

古文：曾开见桧，言今日当论存亡，不当论安危。
现代文：曾开见秦桧，说今日当论存亡，不当论安危。
English: Qin Hui once said, "Today we should talk about survival, not about safety."

古文：桧骇愕，遂出之。
现代文：秦桧惊愕，就把他驱逐了。
English: Surprised, Qin Yu expelled him.

古文：司勋员外郎朱松、馆职胡珵张扩、凌景夏、常明、范如圭同上一疏言： 金人以和之一字得志于我者十有二年，以覆我王室，以弛我边备，以竭我国力，以懈缓我不共戴天之仇，以绝望我中国讴吟思汉之赤子，以诏谕江南为名，要陛下以稽首之礼。
现代文：司勋员外郎朱松、馆职胡王呈、张扩、凌景夏、常明、范如圭共同上疏说 ：金人用一和字在我朝得志十二年，覆我王室，弛我边备，竭我国力，缓和我不共戴天之仇，使我中国讴吟思汉之赤子绝望，以诏谕江南为名，要求陛下行跪拜之礼。
English: Zhu Song, Zhu Wangcheng, Zhang Zhan, Ling Jingxia, Changming and Fan Rugui, all of whom were members of the Department of Honors, jointly said: "In the twelfth year of my reign, the Jin people used the word "Wuhe" to cover my royal family, relax my border, exert our country's strength, alleviate my suffering from the curse of heaven, and make me despair of the baby of China's Yingxin Shihang. In the name of the Emperor of the South of the Yangtze River, I request His Majesty to kneel.

古文：自公卿大夫至六军万姓，莫不扼腕愤怒，岂肯听陛下北面为仇敌之臣哉！
现代文：自公卿大夫至六军百姓，没有不扼腕愤怒的，怎肯听任陛下对仇敌称臣呢？
English: From the court nobles and doctors to the people of the Six Armies, there is no one who is not angry, how would he listen to His Majesty's praise for the enemy?

古文：天下将有仗大义，问相公之罪者。 后数日，权吏部尚书张焘、吏部侍郎晏敦复、魏矼、户部侍郎李弥逊、梁汝嘉、给事中楼炤、中书舍人苏符、工部侍郎萧振、起居舍人薛徽言同班入奏，极言屈己之礼非是。
现代文：天下将有仗大义，问相公之罪的人。 过几天，权吏部尚书张焘、吏部侍郎晏敦复、魏石工、户部侍郎李弥逊、梁汝嘉、给事中楼火召、中书舍人苏符、工部侍郎萧振、起居舍人薛徽言同班入奏，极力讲屈己之礼不对。
English: In a few days, Zhang Zhen, the secretary of the authority department, Zhen Dunfu, the waiter of the authority department, Wei Shi, the mason, Li Mison, the waiter of the household department, Liang Ru Jia, the fireman of the middle floor, Su Fu, the waiter of the middle school, Xiao Zhen, the waiter of the work department, and Xue Huiyan, the waiter of the living room, will enter the class and try their best to say that it is not right to bow down.

古文：新除礼部侍郎尹焞独上疏，且移书切责桧，桧始大怒，焞于是固辞新命不拜。
现代文：新任礼部侍郎尹火享单独上疏，并致信谴责秦桧，秦桧大怒，因此尹火享坚持不接受新官职。
English: The newly-appointed etiquette officer, Yin Huo-cheng, went up the stairs alone and sent a letter condemning Qin Huo. Qin Huo was furious, so Yin Huo-cheng insisted that he would not accept the new post.

古文：奉礼郎冯时行召对，言和议不可信，至引汉高祖分羹事为喻。
现代文：奉礼郎冯时行被召对，说和议不可信，甚至引用汉高祖分羹的故事来加以说明。
English: Feng Shih-hong was summoned to explain that it was not credible to say peace talks, and even quoted the story of Henkel's ancestral soup to illustrate.

古文：帝曰： 朕不忍闻。 颦蹙而起。
现代文：皇上说 ：朕不忍心听。 就颦蹙而起，很不高兴。
English: The emperor said, "I can't bear to listen to it. I'm very unhappy."

古文：桧乃谪时行知万州，寻亦抵罪。
现代文：秦桧就贬冯时行知万州，不久也获罪。
English: Qin Hui denounced Feng Zhixing to Zhiwanzhou, and was soon found guilty.

古文：中书舍人勾龙如渊抗言于桧曰： 邪说横起，胡不择台官击去之。 桧遂奏如渊为御史中丞，首劾铨。
现代文：中书舍人勾龙如渊对秦桧说： 邪说纷起，为何不择台官击破它们。 秦桧就奏请勾龙如渊为御史中丞，勾龙如渊首先弹劾胡铨。
English: The person in charge of Chinese history, Goryong Ryukyuan, said to Qin Hui, "If there are so many evil theories, why don't you choose a Taiwanese official to break them down?" Qin Hui then asked Goryong Ryukyuan to be the official historian, and Goryong Ryukyuan was the first to impeach Hui.

古文：金使张通古、萧哲以诏谕江南为名，桧犹恐物论咎己，与哲等议，改江南为宋，诏谕为国信。
现代文：金使张通古、萧哲以诏谕江南为名，秦桧怕人们把罪责归咎于己，与萧哲等商量，改江南为宋，诏谕为国信。
English: The gold envoys Zhang Tonggu and Xiao Zhe called the edict "Jiangnan," but Qin Yu, afraid that people would blame him, consulted with Xiao Zhe and others to change "Jiangnan" to "Song" and "Edict" to "Guoxin."

古文：京、淮宣抚处置使韩世忠凡四上疏力谏，有 金以刘豫相待 之语，且言兵势重处，愿以身当之，不许。
现代文：京、淮宣抚处置使韩世忠四次上疏力谏，有 金以待刘豫之法待宋 的话，并说在敌人军事力量强的地方，愿率兵抵御，没被准奏。
English: Beijing and Huai Xuanfu's treatment made Han Shizhong slacken his efforts four times, and there was money to wait for Liu Yu's way to wait for Song's words, and said that in places where the enemy's military strength was strong, he was willing to lead troops to resist, but he was not allowed to play.

古文：哲等既至泗州，要所过州县迎以臣礼，至临安日，欲帝待以客礼，世忠益愤，再疏言： 金以诏谕为名，暗致陛下归顺之义，此主辱臣死之时，愿效死战以决胜败。若其不克，委曲从之未晚。 亦不许。
现代文：萧哲等已到泗州，要求他们所过州县用臣礼相迎，到临安那天，想让皇上以客礼相待，韩世忠更加愤怒，又上疏说： 金以诏谕为名，暗中却隐含要陛下归顺之义，在这主辱臣死之时，臣愿效力死战以决胜败；若不能克敌，委曲顺从也不晚。 也没准奏。
English: On the day of Lin'an, Han Shizhong was even more furious, and said: Kim, in the name of the edict, secretly implied that his majesty should submit to him. At the time of the death of this humiliated subject, the subject was willing to fight to the death in order to win a decisive victory; if he could not defeat the enemy, it was not too late to obey the edict. He was also not allowed to play.

古文：哲等既入境，接伴使范同再拜问金主起居，军民见者，往往流涕。
现代文：萧哲等已入境，接伴使范同以臣礼拜问金国皇帝的情况，看见的军民往往流泪。
English: Xiao Zhe and others have entered the country, and the accompanying envoy, Fan Tong Yixin, has inquired about the situation of the Emperor of Jin, and the soldiers and civilians who see it often shed tears.

古文：过平江，守臣向子諲不拜，乞致仕。
现代文：金使经过平江，守臣向子芁不去拜迎，请求辞职。
English: The envoy passed through the Pingjiang River, but Shoucheng did not go to greet him and asked him to resign.

古文：哲等至淮安，言先归河南地，且册上为帝，徐议余事。
现代文：萧哲等到淮安，说先归还河南地，并册皇上为帝，其余事慢慢商议。
English: Xiao Zhe waited until Huai'an, saying that he would first return Henan to the emperor, and the rest would be discussed slowly.

古文：桧至是欲上行屈己之礼，帝曰： 朕嗣守太祖、太宗基业，岂可受金人封册。 会三衙帅杨沂中、解潜、韩世良相率见桧曰： 军民汹汹，若之何？ 退，又白之台谏。
现代文：秦桧此时想让皇上行屈己之礼，皇上说 ：朕承太祖、太宗基业，岂可受金人册封。 恰好三衙统帅杨沂中、解潜、韩世良相继见秦桧说： 军民汹汹，怎么办？ 他们退下后，又告诉台谏。
English: At this time, Qin Hui wanted the emperor to bow to him, and the emperor said, "I am the heir to the great ancestor, the great founder of the dynasty, so how can I be awarded the title of gold person?" It just so happened that the commanders of the three armies, Yang Huizhong, Xie Xuan and Han Shiliang, saw Qin Hui successively and said, "What should we do if the soldiers and people are unruly?" After they retreated, they also told the emperor.

古文：于是勾龙如渊、李谊数见桧议国书事，如渊谓得其书纳之禁中，则礼不行而事定。
现代文：于是勾龙如渊、李谊多次会面秦桧商议接受国书之事，勾龙如渊说把金的国书先放在宫中，则不行臣礼而定此事。
English: As a result, Goryong Ryuyuan and Liyi met with Qin Yu several times to discuss the matter of accepting the imperial edict. Goryong Ryuyuan said that if the golden imperial edict was placed in the palace first, then the matter could not be decided by courtesy.

古文：给事中楼炤亦举 谅阴三年不言 事以告桧，于是定桧摄冢宰受书之议。
现代文：给事中楼火召也举 天下居丧，三年不言 的事告诉秦桧，于是，决定让秦桧以宰相的身份接受国书。
English: In the middle of the matter, Qin Hui was called to the fire, and the whole country mourned. He told Qin Hui what he had not said for three years. Therefore, it was decided to let Qin Hui accept the imperial edict as the prime minister.

古文：帝亦切责王伦，伦谕金使，金使亦惧而从。
现代文：皇上也责备王伦，王伦告诉金使，金使也害怕，同意秦桧代受国书。
English: The emperor also reproached Wang Lun. Wang Lun told the envoy that the envoy was also afraid and agreed to accept the imperial edict on behalf of Qin Hui.

古文：帝命桧即馆中见哲等受其书。
现代文：皇上命秦桧到金使住处与萧哲等相见并受国书。
English: The emperor ordered Qin Xuan to meet with Xiao Zhe and others at the residence of Jin Zhi and receive the imperial edict.

古文：金使欲百官备礼，桧使省吏朝服导从，以书纳禁中。
现代文：金使想让百官都参加受书仪式，秦桧让省吏身穿朝服为前导，接受国书放入宫中。
English: The gold envoy wanted all the officials to take part in the book-receiving ceremony. Qin Yu let the provincial officials, dressed in imperial robes, be the forerunners to receive the book and place it in the palace.

古文：先一日，诏金使来，将尽割河南、陕西故地，又许还梓宫及母兄亲族，初无需索。
现代文：前一天，诏金使上殿，金答应归还河南、陕西旧地，还回徽宗灵柩及母兄亲族，没有索要什么。
English: The day before, Emperor Zhao sent Jin to the Great Hall of the People. Jin promised to return the former territories of Henan and Shaanxi, and to return the coffin of Huizong and the relatives of his mother and brother. He did not ask for anything.

古文：以参知政事李光素有时望，俾押和议榜以镇浮言。
现代文：因参知政事李光素有威望，让他在和议书上签字以压制信。
English: Because of the prestige of the politician Li Guangsu, he was asked to sign the conciliatory motion in order to suppress the letter.

古文：又降御札赐三大将。
现代文：又降御札给三大将领。
English: He also surrendered his imperial insignia to the three great generals.

古文：九年，金人归河南、陕西故地，以王伦签书枢密院事，充迎奉梓宫、奉还两宫、交割地界使，蓝公佐副之。
现代文：绍兴九年，金人归还河南、陕西旧地，任用王伦为签书枢密院事，充迎奉梓宫、奉还两宫、交割地界使，蓝公佐为副使。
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, Jinren returned the old lands of Henan and Shaanxi, appointed Wang Lun as the signer of the letter of the Privy Council, fully welcomed Feng Zi Gong, honored the return of the two palaces, the delivery of the land boundary envoy, and the blue commissar as the deputy envoy.

古文：判大宗正事士〈亻褭〉、兵部侍郎张焘朝八陵。
现代文：判大宗正事赵士、兵部侍郎张焘朝拜八陵。
English: Zhao Shizhi, the grand marshal, and Zhang Xi, the attendant of the military department, paid homage to the eight mausoleums.

古文：帝谓宰执曰： 河南新复，宜命守臣专抚遗民，劝农桑，各因其地以食，因其人以守，不可移东南之财，虚内以事外。 帝虽听桧和而实疑金诈，未尝弛备也。
现代文：皇上对宰执说 ：河南刚恢复，当命守臣安抚遗民，劝课农桑，各自因地而食，因人而守，不能调动东南财富，虚内以事外。 皇上虽听从秦桧议和，但实际上也怀疑金人有诈，故不曾放松边备。
English: The emperor said to the grand vizier: Henan has just been restored, it is imperative to keep the vassals to appease the surviving people, and to advise the peasants and mulberry trees, each according to the place, because of the people, it is impossible to mobilize the wealth of Southeast Asia, and it is not necessary to do so. Although the emperor listened to Qin Xuan's peace talks, he actually suspected that Jin had fraud, so he did not relax the border.

古文：时张浚在永州，驰奏，力言以石晋、刘豫为戒，复遗书孙近，以 帝秦之祸，发迟而大 。
现代文：当时张浚在永州，赶快上奏，极力主张要以石晋、刘豫为戒，又给孙近写信，认为 在秦称帝的祸害，发现晚了祸患更大 。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun, who was in Yongzhou at the time, hurried to play the melody and strongly advocated that Shi Jin and Liu Yu should be taken as a warning. He also wrote a letter to Sun Qian, saying that it was a disaster to proclaim the emperor in Qin, and that it was a greater disaster to discover it too late.

古文：徐俯守上饶，连南夫帅广东，岳飞宣抚淮西，皆因贺表寓讽。
现代文：徐俯守上饶，连南夫帅广东，岳飞宣抚淮西，都借贺表进行讽谏。
English: Xu prostrated himself to guard Shangrao, Lian Nanfu commanded Guangdong, and Yue Fei preached to Huaxi, all of whom borrowed greeting cards to make ironic gestures.

古文：俯曰： 祸福倚伏，情伪多端。 南夫曰： 不信亦信，其然岂然？
现代文：徐俯说： 祸福相倚伏，情况变化多端。 连南夫说 ：不守信用也相信，他们说那样就能那样？
English: Xu Qian said: misfortune and fortune are intertwined, and the situation is ever-changing. Lian Nanfu said: Even if you don't keep your word, do you believe that you can do what they say?

古文：虽虞舜之十二州，皆归王化；然商於之六百里，当念尔欺！ 飞曰： 救暂急而解倒悬，犹之可也；欲长虑而尊中国，岂其然乎？ 他如秘书省正字汪应辰、樊光远、澧州推官韩纟川、临安府司户参军毛叔庆，皆言金人叵测；迪功郎张行成献《询荛书》二十篇，大意言自古讲和，未有终不变者，条具者皆豫备之策。桧悉加黜责，紃贬循州。
现代文：岳飞说 ：救暂急而解倒悬，议和还可；若为国家长久计，难道也这样吗？ 其他人如秘书省正字汪应辰、樊光远、澧州推官韩纟川、临安府司户参军毛叔庆，都说金人居心叵测；迪功郎张行成献上《询荛书》二十篇，大意讲自古讲和，没有始终不变的，并提出要对金人有所防备。秦桧把这些人都罢黜，韩纟川被贬到循州。
English: Yue Fei said: if it is urgent to save the situation and solve the deadlock, it is possible to discuss peace; if it is a long-term plan for the country, is it the same? Others, such as Wang Yingchen, secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Gao Guangyuan, Han Yechuan, governor of Zhangzhou, and Mao Shuqing, governor of Lin'an Province, all said that the Jin people had a bad heart; Di Gong Lang Zhang Xingcheng presented 20 articles of the "Inquiry of the Jin People" to the effect that since ancient times, peace had not always been unchanged, and proposed that precautions should be taken against the Jin people.

古文：七月，兀术杀其领三省事宗磐及左副元帅挞懒，拘王伦于中山府。
现代文：七月，兀术杀金领三省事宗磐及左副元帅挞懒，在中山府拘留了王伦。
English: In July, Gongshu killed the gold leader of the three provinces, Ji Zongban, and the left deputy marshal, Yao Lazy, and detained Wang Lun in Zhongshan Prefecture.

古文：盖兀术以归地为二人所主，将有他谋也。
现代文：兀术因归还宋地是他二人的主意，兀术将另有打算。
English: It was the two of them who came up with the idea of returning the Song Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, but Gongshu had other plans.

古文：伦尝密奏于朝，桧不之备，但趣伦进。
现代文：王伦曾把此事密奏于朝，秦桧不做防备，只催王伦去金国。
English: Wang Lun had secretly reported the matter to the imperial court, but Qin Hui did not take precautions and only urged Wang Lun to go to Jin.

古文：时韩世忠有乘懈掩击之请，桧言《春秋》不伐丧，与帝意合，遂已。
现代文：当时韩世忠请求乘敌不备，攻击敌人，秦桧以《春秋》不伐丧为借口，和皇上意见相合，此事也就作罢。
English: At that time, Han Shizhong requested to take advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness and attack the enemy. Qin Hui used "Spring and Autumn" as an excuse not to attack, which was in line with the emperor's opinion, and the matter was dropped.

古文：十年，金人果败盟，分四道入侵。
现代文：绍兴十年，金人果真背盟，分四路入侵。
English: After ten years in Shaoxing, the Jin people really reneged on the alliance and invaded in four directions.

古文：兀术入东京，葛王褎取南京，李成取西京，撒离喝趋永兴军。
现代文：兀术攻占东京，葛王赵取南京，李成取西京，撒离喝奔永兴军。
English: Ge Wang and Zhao captured Tokyo, Ge Wang and Zhao took Nanjing, Li Cheng took West Beijing, and the Yongxing Army fled.

古文：河南诸郡相继陷没。
现代文：河南各郡相继陷没。
English: Counties in Henan Province have fallen one after another.

古文：帝始大怪，下诏罪状兀术。
现代文：皇上大惊，下诏列举兀术罪状。
English: The emperor was shocked, and the following edict listed the crimes of sorcery.

古文：御史中丞王次翁奏曰： 前日国是，初无主议。事有小变，则更用他相，后来者未必贤，而排黜异党，纷纷累月不能定，愿陛下以为至戒。 帝深然之。
现代文：御史中丞王次翁上奏说 ：以前的国事，开始无人主议；现在事态稍有变化，就换宰相，后来者未必贤能，却排黜异党，乱纷纷地几个月也不能安定，希望陛下以此为戒。 皇上深信这话。
English: Wang Zi Weng, the Vice-Minister of History, said in his report: In the past, there was no one to preside over state affairs; now, if there is a slight change in the state of affairs, the prime minister will be changed, and the latter may not be able to do a good job, but he will have to exclude dissidents, and it will be chaotic and unstable for several months. I hope that His Majesty will take this as a warning. The Emperor is convinced of this.

古文：桧力排群言，始终以和议自任，而次翁谓无主议者，专为桧地也。
现代文：秦桧力排众议，始终以讲和为己任，而王次翁所说的无主议者，是专门替秦桧说话的。
English: Qin Hui always put himself in the forefront of public discussion, always taking it as his duty to speak and conciliate, while Wang Ziweng said that the person who had no main speaker was specifically speaking for Qin Hui.

古文：于是桧位复安，据之凡十八年，公论不能撼摇矣。
现代文：因此，秦桧相位得到巩固，据相位达十八年，公议不能摇撼。
English: Therefore, the Qin and Qiu phase has been consolidated. According to the phase of eighteen years, the public opinion cannot be shaken.

古文：六月，桧奏曰： 德无常师，主善为师。
现代文：六月，秦桧上奏说： 德无常师，主善为师。
English: In June, Qin Yu said in his last sermon: Virtue is a fickle teacher, but mastery is a good teacher.

古文：臣昨见挞懒有割地讲和之议，故赞陛下取河南故疆。
现代文：臣原来看挞懒有割地讲和之议，故而赞成陛下取河南故疆。
English: In the eyes of the vassals, it was too lazy to discuss peace, so they approved of His Majesty's taking of Henan's old territory.

古文：今兀术戕其叔挞懒，蓝公佐归，和议已变，故赞陛下定吊伐之计。
现代文：今兀术杀他叔挞懒，蓝公佐归来，和议已变，故而赞成陛下确定讨伐之计。
English: Now that the art of killing his uncle is sluggish, the Blue Commissar has returned, and the peace talks have changed, so I agree with His Majesty to determine the strategy of the crusade.

古文：愿至江上谕诸帅同力招讨。 卒不行。
现代文：望诏谕江上诸帅同力招讨。 终没实行。
English: He issued an edict calling on all the generals on the river to work together, but it was never carried out.

古文：闰六月，贬赵鼎兴化军，以王次翁受桧旨，言其规图复用也。
现代文：闰六月，赵鼎被贬到兴化军，因王次翁受秦桧指使，说赵鼎企图谋划得到任用。
English: In leap June, Zhao Ding was demoted to the Xinghua Army, because Wang Zi Weng was instructed by Qin Yu to say that Zhao Ding was trying to get appointed.

古文：言者不已，寻窜潮州。
现代文：上言者纷纷指责王次翁，不久，赵鼎被流放到潮州。
English: The petitioners accused Wang Zi Weng one after another, and Zhao Ding was soon exiled to Chaozhou.

古文：时张俊克亳州，王胜克海州，岳飞克郾城，几获兀术。
现代文：这时，张俊攻克亳州，王胜攻克海州，岳飞攻克郾城，差点儿活捉兀术。
English: At this time, Zhang Jun attacked Kezhu, Wang Sheng attacked Kehaizhou, and Yue Fei attacked Kezhu City, and almost captured Jiuyue alive.

古文：张浚战胜于长安，韩世忠胜于泇口镇，诸将所向皆奏捷，而桧力主班师。
现代文：张浚在长安取胜，韩世忠在氵加口镇取胜，诸将所到之处都取胜，而秦桧却力主撤兵。
English: Zhang Jun won in Chang'an, Han Shizhong won in Hokkakou Town, and all generals won everywhere they went, but Qin Hui insisted on withdrawing his troops.

古文：九月，诏飞还行在，沂中还镇江，光世还池州，锜还太平。
现代文：九月，诏岳飞回行在，杨沂中回镇江，刘光世回池州，刘钅奇回太平州。
English: In September, Zhaoyuefei returned to Zhenjiang, Yang Quanzhong returned to Zhenjiang, Liu Guangshi returned to Chizhou, and Liu Rongqi returned to Taiping.

古文：飞军闻诏，旗靡辙乱，飞口呿不能合。
现代文：岳飞军听到诏书，士气低落。岳飞十分惊愕。
English: When Yuefei's army heard the edict, their morale was low. Yuefei was very surprised.

古文：于是淮宁、蔡、郑复为金人有。
现代文：宋撤军后，淮宁、蔡、郑又被金兵占领。
English: After the withdrawal of the Song army, Huaining, Cai and Zheng were again occupied by the Jin soldiers.

古文：以明堂恩封桧莘国公。
现代文：在明堂举行仪式，封秦桧为莘国公。
English: A ceremony was held in Myeongdong, and Qin Zang was named the Prince of Zang.

古文：十一年，兀术再举，取寿春，入庐州，诸将邵隆、王德、关师古等连战皆捷。
现代文：绍兴十一年，兀术再次南下，攻占寿春、庐州，宋将邵隆、王德、关师古等连战皆捷。
English: In the eleventh year of Shaoxing, Zou Shu went south again and conquered Shuchun and Zhangzhou. Song generals Shao Long, Wang De, Guan Shigu and others were all successful in consecutive battles.

古文：杨沂中战拓皋，又破之。
现代文：杨沂中在拓皋又取胜。
English: Yang Jizhong won again in Tuobao.

古文：桧忽谕沂中及张俊遽班师。
现代文：秦桧忽然令杨沂中和张俊立即撤兵。
English: Qin Yu suddenly ordered Yang Yuzhong and Zhang Jun to withdraw immediately.

古文：韩世忠闻之，止濠州不进；刘锜闻之，弃寿春而归。
现代文：韩世忠听说，驻军濠州不前进；刘钅奇听说，放弃寿春而回。
English: Han Shizhong heard that the garrison in Bozhou would not advance; Liu Bingqi heard that they would give up Shuchun and return.

古文：自是不复出兵。
现代文：从此不再出兵。
English: Since then, no more troops have been sent.

古文：四月，桧欲尽收诸将兵权，给事中范同献策，桧纳之。
现代文：四月，秦桧想尽收诸将兵权，给事中范同献计，秦桧采纳。
English: In April, Qin Hui wanted to do his best to consolidate the military power of the generals, and gave the matter to Fan Tong, which was adopted by Qin Hui.

古文：密奏召三大将论功行赏，韩世忠、张俊并为枢密使，岳飞为副使，以宣抚司军隶枢密院。
现代文：秦桧密奏让皇上召三大将论功行赏，韩世忠、张俊同为枢密使，岳飞为副使，令宣抚司军隶属枢密院。
English: Qin Zhenmisu asked the emperor to summon the three great generals to discuss and reward the merits. Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun were both privy envoys, Yuefei was a deputy envoy, and the army was subordinated to the Privy Council.

古文：六月，拜左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，进封庆国公。
现代文：六月，拜秦桧为左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，进封庆国公。
English: In June, Bai Qinqian was appointed as a left-hand man, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and an envoy to Qing.

古文：《徽宗实录》成，迁少保，加封冀国公。
现代文：《徽宗实录》修成，又被升为少保，加封冀国公。
English: "Hui Zong Shih Lu" was completed, and he was promoted to Shao Bao and given the title of Jizhong Guogong.

古文：先是，莫将、韩恕使金，拘于涿州。
现代文：先前，莫将、韩恕出使金，被拘于涿州。
English: Previously, Mo Zheng and Han Shou were detained in Zhangzhou after they sent money.

古文：至是，兀术有求和意，纵之归。
现代文：此时，兀术有意求和，把他们放回。
English: At this time, Zou Shu deliberately summed up and put them back.

古文：桧复奏遣刘光远、曹勋使金，又以魏良臣为通问使。
现代文：秦桧又上奏派刘光远、曹勋使金，又以魏良臣为通问使。
English: Qin Yu also sent Liu Guangyuan and Cao Xun as envoys, and Wei Liangchen as an envoy.

古文：未几，良臣偕金使萧毅等来，议以淮水为界，求割唐、邓二州。
现代文：不久，魏良臣同金使萧毅等来，商议双方以淮水为界，让宋割唐、邓二州。
English: Soon, Wei Liangchen and the Jin envoy Xiao Yi came to discuss the two sides with Huai Shui as the boundary, and let Song divide Tang and Deng into two states.

古文：寻遣何铸报聘，许之。
现代文：不久，又派何铸报聘，答应金的条件。
English: Not long after, he sent He Jingzhu to recruit him, agreeing to the conditions of the money.

古文：十月，兴岳飞之狱。
现代文：十月，兴岳飞冤狱。
English: In October, Xingyue Fei was unjustly imprisoned.

古文：桧使谏官万俟禼论其罪，张俊又诬飞旧将张宪谋反，于是飞及子云俱送大理寺，命御史中丞何铸、大理卿周三畏鞫之。
现代文：秦桧让谏官万俟弹劾岳飞，张俊又诬告岳飞部将张宪谋反，于是岳飞及儿子岳云都被送到大理寺，命御史中丞何铸、大理卿周三畏审问他们。
English: Qin Yu had the eunuch Wan Yao impeach Yue Fei, and Zhang Jun also falsely accused Yue Fei's department of plotting against Zhang Xian. As a result, Yue Fei and his son Yue Yun were both sent to Dali Temple, where they were interrogated by the court historian He Shou and Dali's lord Shuzhong Ji.

古文：十一月，贬李光藤州，范同罢参知政事。
现代文：十一月，李光被贬到藤州，范同罢去参知政事。
English: In November, Li Guang was relegated to Fujian, and Fan Tong was removed from the post of political advisor.

古文：同虽附和议，以自奏事，桧忌之也。
现代文：范同虽附会和议，因他独自奏事，遭秦桧忌恨。
English: Although Fan Tong was a member of the conciliation committee, he was hated by Qin Hui because he made the report alone.

古文：十二月，杀岳飞。
现代文：十二月，杀岳飞。
English: In December, he killed Yuefei.

古文：桧以飞屡言和议失计，且尝奏请定国本，俱与桧大异，必欲杀之。
现代文：秦桧因岳飞多次说和议失计，并曾奏请立太子，这都和秦桧相悖，故秦桧定要杀他。
English: Because of Yuefei, Qin Yu repeatedly said that peace talks were miscalculated, and once asked for the crown prince, which was contrary to Qin Yu. Therefore, Qin Yu was determined to kill him.

古文：铸、三畏初鞫，久不伏；禼入台，狱遂上。
现代文：何铸、周三畏开始审问时，岳飞久不伏罪；万俟参加审问后，才定案。
English: When the interrogation of He Shou and Wednesday Dare began, Yue Fei did not commit the crime for a long time; the case was finalized only after Wan Qi participated in the interrogation.

古文：诬飞尝自言 己与太祖皆三十岁建节 为指斥乘舆，受诏不救淮西罪，赐死狱中。
现代文：诬称岳飞曾自言 己与太祖皆三十岁任节度使 这样的话，是谩侮皇上，又有受诏不救淮西之罪，被赐死狱中。
English: He falsely claimed that Yuefei had said that he and his grandfather were both appointed as the thirty-year-old festival envoys. If he said such a thing, it was a crime of insulting the emperor and of not being able to save Huaxi, and he was sentenced to death in prison.

古文：子云及张宪杀于都市。
现代文：他儿子岳云及张宪被杀于都市。
English: His sons, Yueyun and Zhang Xian, were killed in the city.

古文：天下冤之，闻者流涕。
现代文：天下认为他们冤枉，听到的人都流泪。
English: The world thinks they have been wronged, and everyone who hears about it bursts into tears.

古文：飞之死，张俊有力焉，语在《飞传》。
现代文：岳飞之死，张俊也参与其中，这些话在《岳飞传》中。
English: Zhang Jun was also involved in Yuefei's death. These words are in "Yuefei Biography."

古文：十二年，胡铨再编管新州。
现代文：绍兴十二年，胡铨又被贬到新州。
English: In the twelfth year of Shaoxing, Hu Yao was relegated to Xinzhou again.

古文：八月，徽宗及显肃、懿节二梓宫至行在。
现代文：八月，徽宗及显肃、懿节二灵柩至行在。
English: In August, the two souls of Huizong and Xianbu, as well as the two souls of the Dragon Boat Festival, will travel together.

古文：太后还慈宁宫。
现代文：太后还慈宁宫。
English: The empress dowager also toured the Jining Palace.

古文：九月，加太师，进封魏国公。
现代文：九月，加秦桧为太师，进封魏国公。
English: In September, Qin Hui was promoted to Grand Master, and he was made the Prince of Wei.

古文：十月，进封秦、魏两国公。
现代文：十月，进封秦、魏两国公。
English: In October, he entered the service of the Qin and Wei dynasties.

古文：桧以封两国与蔡京、童贯同，请改封母为秦、魏国夫人。
现代文：秦桧因封两国公与蔡京、童贯相同，请求改封他母亲为秦、魏国夫人。
English: Qin Hui requested that his mother's title be changed to Lady of Qin and Wei, as she had the same title as Cai Jing and Tong Quan.

古文：子熺举进士，馆客何溥赴南省，皆为第一。
现代文：他儿子秦火喜考中进士，馆客何溥赴尚书省，他们都考试第一。
English: His son, Qin Huoxi, passed the junior high school entrance examination, and the guest of the hall, He Jun, went to Shangshu, and they all took the first place in the examination.

古文：熺本王唤孽子，桧妻唤妹，无子，唤妻贵而妒，桧在金国，出熺为桧后。
现代文：秦火喜本是王日奂的庶子，秦桧妻是王日奂妹，无子，王日奂之妻显贵而妒忌，秦桧在金国时，以火喜为秦桧后代。
English: Qin Huoqi was originally the illegitimate son of King Rizhao. Qin Huoqi's wife was the younger sister of King Rizhao, and had no children. The wife of King Rizhao was distinguished and jealous. When Qin Huoqi was in Jin Province, Huoqi was the offspring of Qin Huoqi.

古文：桧还，其家以熺见，桧喜甚。
现代文：秦桧回来，他家带火喜来见，秦桧很高兴。
English: When Qin Hui returned, his family came to see him with great joy. Qin Hui was very happy.

古文：桧幸和议复成，益咎前日之异己者。
现代文：秦桧庆幸和议又成，更恨先前的异己分子。
English: Qin Yu was happy that the peace talks had been resumed, and he hated the former dissidents even more.

古文：先是，赵鼎贬潮州，王庶贬道州，胡铨再贬新州。
现代文：先是，贬赵鼎于潮州，王庶于道州，胡铨于新州。
English: First of all, Zhaozhao Ding in Chaozhou, Wang Zhi in Daozhou, and Hu Yao in Xinzhou.

古文：至是，皆遇赦永不检举。
现代文：此时，他们遇赦也永不再用。
English: At this point, if they are pardoned, they will never be used again.

古文：曾开、李弥逊并落职。
现代文：曾开、李弥逊都被罢。
English: Zeng Kai and Li Mison were both dismissed.

古文：张俊本助和议，居位岁余无去意，桧讽江邈论罢之。
现代文：张俊本助和议，但他居位一年多也无离开之意，秦桧就指使江邈弹劾他，罢他官。
English: Zhang Junsuke tried to make peace, but he had been in office for more than a year and had no intention of leaving. Qin Yu instructed Jiang Chen to impeach him and remove him from office.

古文：十三年，贺瑞雪，贺雪自桧始。
现代文：绍兴十三年，庆贺瑞雪，贺雪从秦桧开始。
English: In the 13th year of Shaoxing, the celebration of He Ruixue began, and the celebration of He Xue started from Qin Hui.

古文：贺日食不见，是后日食多书不见。
现代文：庆贺没出现日食，此后多写不见日食。
English: There was no eclipse to celebrate, and no more eclipses to write about after that.

古文：彗星常见，选人康倬上书言彗星不足畏，桧大喜，特改京秩。
现代文：彗星常出现，选人康倬上书说彗星出现不值得害怕，秦桧大喜，特改他为京官。
English: Comets often appear, and the candidate Kang Xi wrote a letter saying that the appearance of comets was not something to be afraid of. Qin Yu was overjoyed, and he was specially appointed as the Beijing official.

古文：楚州奏盐城县海清，桧请贺，帝不许。
现代文：楚州奏盐城县海水清澈，秦桧请求庆贺，皇上不许。
English: The sea water in Songyancheng County, Chuzhou, was crystal clear. Qin Hui asked for congratulations, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：知虔州薛弼言木内有文曰 天下太平年 ，诏付史馆。
现代文：知虔州薛弼说木头内有文字曰 天下太平年 ，下诏交付史馆。
English: Xue Yao from Zhigang County said that there was a message in the wood saying, "It is the year of the Taiping, the following edict will be delivered to the history museum."

古文：于是修饰弥文，以粉饰治具，如乡饮、耕籍之类节节备举，为苟安余杭之计，自此不复巡幸江上，而祥瑞之奏日闻矣。
现代文：于是开始粉饰太平，如各地推举贤能、天下百官躬耕之礼等又不断隆重举行，为苟安余杭之计，从此不再巡视江上，而祥瑞的奏报每天都有。
English: As a result, they began to whitewash Taiping. For example, the election of virtuous people in various regions and the ceremony of the world's best officials were held again and again. In order to maintain peace and tranquility, they no longer patrolled the river, but there were reports of prosperity every day.

古文：洪皓归自金国，名节独著，以致金酋室捻语，直翰苑不一月逐去。
现代文：洪皓从金回国，颇有名节，因他传达金帅室睰的话，直翰苑不到一个月就被逐去。
English: Hong Hao's return from Jin is quite famous. Because he conveyed the words of Jin Shuai Shuxuan, Zhihan Yuan was expelled in less than a month.

古文：室捻者，阁，粘罕之左右也。
现代文：室睰，是粘罕的心腹。
English: Muroko is the heart and soul of Mukihan.

古文：初，粘罕行军至淮上，桧尝为之草檄，为室捻所见，故因皓归寄声。
现代文：最初，粘罕军至淮上，秦桧曾替他草拟檄文，被室睰看见，故趁洪皓归来给他捎信。
English: At first, when the Mui Han army reached Huai Shang, Qin Yu had drafted a letter for him, which was seen by Muro Yu, so he took advantage of Hong Yu's return to send him a letter.

古文：桧意士大夫莫有知者，闻皓语，深以为憾，遂令李文会论之。
现代文：秦桧以为士大夫没有知道他的所作所为的，听到洪皓的话，深为不满，于是令李文会论奏他。
English: Qin Hui thought that Shi Daifu did not know what he had done, and was deeply dissatisfied when he heard Hong Yao's words, so he ordered Li Wenhui to criticize him.

古文：胡舜陟以非笑朝政下狱死，张九成以鼓唱浮言贬，累及僧宗杲，编配，皆以语忤桧也。
现代文：胡舜陟以取笑朝政罪下狱死，张九成以鼓动浮言罪被贬，并牵连僧宗杲，被编配到边远地区，都是因言语冒犯秦桧所致。
English: Hu Yao was imprisoned and died for the crime of making fun of the government, Zhang Jiucheng was condemned for the crime of inciting deception, and the monk Zong Yao was implicated and dispatched to a remote area, all of which were caused by offending Qin Yao with words.

古文：张邵亦坐与桧言金人有归钦宗及诸王后妃意，斥为外祠。
现代文：张邵也因与秦桧说金人有归钦宗及诸王后妃之意而获罪，被责为宫祠官。
English: Zhang Shao was also found guilty for saying with Qin Hui that the Jin people had the intention of returning to the Qin sect and the queens and queens, and was accused of being a palace priest.

古文：十四年，贬黄龟年，以前尝论桧也。
现代文：绍兴十四年，贬黄龟年，因他从前议论过秦桧。
English: In the 14th year of Shaoxing, he was relegated to the year of the yellow turtle, because he had previously discussed the Qin Dynasty.

古文：闽、浙大水，右武大夫白锷有 燮理乖谬 语，刺配万安军。
现代文：闽、浙发生大水灾，右武大夫白锷因说 燮理乖谬 的话，被刺配到万安军。
English: A major flood occurred in Handan and Zhejiang, and Dr. Yu Baiyao was assigned to the Wan'an Army for saying "unreasonable and absurd" words.

古文：太学生张伯麟尝题壁曰 夫差，尔忘越王杀而父乎 ，杖脊刺配吉阳军。
现代文：太学生张伯麟曾题壁说： 夫差，你忘了越王杀你的父亲吗？ 被杖脊刺配到吉阳军。
English: Zhang Bolin, a Taoist student, once wrote on the wall: "Husband, have you forgotten that King Yue killed your father? You were assigned to the Jiyang Army by the Stick-Backed Thorn.

古文：故将解潜罢官闲居，辛永宗总戎外郡，亦坐不附和议，潜窜南安死，永宗编置肇庆死。
现代文：宿将解潜罢官闲居，辛永宗被调到外郡，都因不附会和议而致，解潜被流放到南安死去，辛永宗被安置在肇庆死去。
English: As a result of not joining the peace talks, Shukou was banished to Nan'an, where he died, and Sin Yongzong was placed in Zhaoqing, where he died.

古文：赵鼎、李光皆再窜过海。
现代文：赵鼎、李光都被再次流放到海岛。
English: Both Zhao Ding and Li Guang were exiled to the island again.

古文：皓之罪由白锷延誉，光以在藤州唱和有讽刺及桧者，为守臣所告也。
现代文：对洪皓之罪，白锷加以传播，李光在藤州加以附和并有讽刺秦桧的地方，被守臣告发。
English: For the crime of flooding, Bai Ju spread it, Li Guang echoed it in Fujian and there was a place to satirize Qin Rui, which was denounced by Shouwen.

古文：先是，议建国公出阁，吏部尚书吴表臣、礼部尚书苏符等七人论礼与桧意异，于是表臣等以讨论不祥、怀奸附鼎皆罢。
现代文：原先，议定建国公出之事，吏部尚书吴表臣、礼部尚书苏符等七人论礼与秦桧不合，于是吴表臣等因讨论不详、怀奸附合赵鼎都被罢官。
English: Originally, it was agreed that the founding of the country would be issued, and seven people, including Wu Yobing, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, and Su Fu, the secretary of the Ministry of Etiquette, disagreed with Qin Hui on etiquette. As a result, Wu Yobing and others were all dismissed for unclear discussions, treachery and collusion with Zhao Ding.

古文：始，桧为上言：赵鼎欲立皇太子，是待陛下终无子也，宜俟亲子乃立。
现代文：开始，秦桧对皇上说：赵鼎想立皇太子，是认为陛下始终无子，应该等自己有子后再立太子。
English: At the beginning, Qin Yu said to the emperor: Zhao Ding wanted to establish a crown prince, because he thought that His Majesty had never had a son, and that he should wait until he had a son before establishing a crown prince.

古文：遂嗾御史中丞詹大方言鼎邪谋密计，深不可测，与范冲等咸怀异意，以徼无妄之福。
现代文：就怂恿御史中丞詹大方弹劾赵鼎邪谋密计，深不可测，与范冲等都怀异心，以邀功求福。
English: It is unfathomable that Zhao Ding plotted and conspired with Zhan Dafang to impeach Zhao Zhaozhong, and he and Fan Chong harbored heretical thoughts and sought good fortune by asking for merits.

古文：冲尝为资善翊善，故大方诬之。
现代文：范冲曾任资善祀翊善，因此詹大方诬告他。
English: Fan Chong had been appointed by Zizan to serve Zizan, so Zhan Dafang falsely accused him.

古文：其后监察御史王鎡言帝未有嗣，宜祠高禖，诏筑坛于圜丘东，皆桧意也。
现代文：后来，监察御史王说皇上没有子嗣，应祭祀媒神以求子，于是下诏在圆丘东筑坛，都是秦桧的主意。
English: Later, the king of supervisors said that the emperor had no son, and that he should offer a sacrifice to the matchmaker to ask for a son. Therefore, it was Qin Zhe's idea to build the altar at the east of the round mound.

古文：台州曾惇献桧诗称 圣相 。凡投献者以皋、夔、稷、契为不足，必曰 元圣 。
现代文：台州曾献诗给秦桧，称他为 圣相 ，凡投诗献文的人都认为皋、夔、稷、契都不如秦桧，必称 元圣 。
English: Taizhou once dedicated a poem to Qin Hui, calling him a sage, and everyone who contributed a poem thought that the,,, and 契 were not as good as Qin Hui, and must be called Yuan Sheng.

古文：桧乞禁野史。
现代文：秦桧请求禁止野史。
English: Qin Hui requests a ban on field histories.

古文：又命子熺以秘书少监、领国史，进建炎元年至绍兴十二年《日历》五百九十卷。
现代文：又任命秦火喜以秘书少监的身份负责修国史，进献建炎元年至绍兴十二年《日历》五百九十卷。
English: He also appointed Qin Huoxi to be responsible for the revision of national history as the secretary of the junior inspector, and dedicated the construction of 590 volumes of the "Calendar" from the first year of Yan to the 12th year of Shaoxing.

古文：熺因太后北还，自颂桧功德凡二千余言，使著作郎王扬英、周执羔上之，皆迁秩。
现代文：秦火喜趁太后从金返回之机，亲自歌颂秦桧的功德达二千多字，让著作郎王扬英、周执羔献上，他们二人也因此升官。
English: Qin Huoxi took the opportunity of the empress dowager's return from Jin to personally praise the merits of Qin Huo in more than two thousand words, and had the authors Lang Wang Yangying and Zhou Xilang present it. Both of them were promoted as a result.

古文：自桧再相，凡前罢相以来诏书章疏稍及桧者，率更易焚弃，日历、时政亡失已多，是后记录皆熺笔，无复有公是非矣。
现代文：从秦桧再任宰相后，凡过去罢相以来的诏书章疏稍有涉及秦桧的，基本都更改焚毁，日历、时政丢失很多，此后记录都出自秦火喜，不再有是非公论了。
English: After Qin Hui was reappointed as prime minister, all the edicts and decrees that had any connection to Qin Hui since he was ousted as prime minister were basically changed and burned, and many calendars and policies were lost. Since then, the records have all come from Qin Hui, and there is no longer any public debate about right and wrong.

古文：冬十月，右正言何若指程颐、张载遗书为专门曲学，力加禁绝，人无敢以为非。
现代文：冬十月，右正言何若指责程颐、张载遗书是专讲邪说，力加禁绝，人们不敢说不是。
English: In the winter of October, Right Upholder He Ruo accused Cheng Yu and Zhang Zai's last will and testament of being devoted to the teaching of evil doctrines and strongly prohibited it. People did not dare to say no.

古文：十五年，熺除翰林学士兼侍读。
现代文：绍兴十五年，拜秦火喜为翰林学士兼侍读。
English: In the 15th year of Shaoxing, Bai Qin Huoxi became a scholar and attendant of Hanlin University.

古文：四月，赐桧甲第，命教坊乐导之入，赐缗钱金绵有差。
现代文：四月，赐秦桧宅第，命用教坊乐为前导，使他迁入新居，赐缗钱金帛不等。
English: In April, he gave Qin Xuan a place in his home, ordered him to use the music of the church as a guide, made him move into a new home, and gave him money and gifts.

古文：六月，帝幸桧第，桧妻妇子孙皆加恩。
现代文：六月，皇上到秦桧家，对秦桧的妻子、儿媳、子孙都加恩。
English: In June, the emperor went to Qin Hui's home and was gracious to Qin Hui's wife, daughter-in-law, and grandchildren.

古文：桧先禁私史，七月，又对帝言私史害正道。
现代文：秦桧先禁私史，七月，又对皇上说私史害正道。
English: Qin Hui first banned private history, and in July, he told the emperor that private history harmed the righteous path.

古文：时司马伋遂言《涑水记闻》非其曾祖光论著之书，其后李光家亦举光所藏书万卷焚之。
现代文：此时司马亻及就说《涑水记闻》不是他曾祖司马光所著，之后，李光家亦把李光所藏的书烧了一万卷。
English: At this time, Sima Zhengyi said that "A Record of Surabaya" was not written by his ancestor Sima Guang. Later, Li Guang's family also burned 10,000 volumes of books that Li Guang had hidden.

古文：十月，帝亲书 一德格天 扁其阁。
现代文：十月，皇上亲自写 一德格天 的匾额赐给秦桧。
English: In October, the emperor personally wrote a letter to Qin Hui.

古文：十六年正月，桧立家庙。
现代文：绍兴十六年正月，秦桧建家庙。
English: In the first month of the 16th year of Shaoxing, Qin Yu built a family temple.

古文：三月，赐祭器，将相赐祭器自桧始。
现代文：三月，皇上赐给他祭器，赐将相祭器从秦桧开始。
English: In March, the emperor gave him an offering vessel, and the offering vessel for the pharaoh's consort started from the Qin Dynasty.

古文：先是，帝以彗星见求言。
现代文：先前，皇上因彗星出现诏求直言。
English: Earlier, the Emperor had demanded an explanation for the appearance of the comet.

古文：张浚上疏，言： 今事势如养大疽于头目心腹之间，不决不止，愿谋为豫备。
现代文：张浚上疏，说当今事势就像在头目心腹之中养大疽，不除掉就不能停止作恶，希望国家要谋求防御。
English: Zhang Jun Shangsu said that the current situation is like growing gangrene in the boss's confidant, and it is impossible to stop doing evil without eliminating it. He hoped that the country would seek defense.

古文：不然，异时以国与敌者，反归罪正议。 桧久憾浚，至是大怒，即落浚节钺，贬连州，寻移永州。
现代文：不然，他时卖国者，反而把罪过归于正确的言论。秦桧长久以来都不满张浚，此时大怒，马上削去张浚兵权，贬到连州，不久移到永州。
English: Otherwise, he was a traitor to the country, but attributed the crime to the correct speech. Qin Hui had long been dissatisfied with Zhang Jun, at this time he was furious, immediately cut off Zhang Jun's right to send troops, reduced to Lianzhou, and soon moved to Yongzhou.

古文：十七年，改封桧益国公。
现代文：绍兴十七年，改封秦桧为益国公。
English: In the seventeenth year of Shaoxing, he changed his title from Qin Yu to Yik Guo Gong.

古文：五月，移贬洪皓于英州。
现代文：五月，移贬洪皓于英州。
English: In May, it was relocated to Yingzhou.

古文：八月，赵鼎死于吉阳军。
现代文：八月，赵鼎死于吉阳军。
English: In August, Zhao Ding died in the Jiyang Army.

古文：是夏，先有赵鼎遇赦永不检举之旨，又令月申存亡，鼎知之，不食而卒。
现代文：这年夏，先有赵鼎遇赦永不再用的诏旨，又令月月汇报他的存亡，赵鼎知道后，绝食而死。
English: In the summer of this year, Zhao Ding was the first to be pardoned and never used again, and his survival was reported from month to month. After Zhao Ding found out, he died of starvation.

古文：自鼎之谪，门人故吏皆被罗织，虽闻其死而叹息者亦加以罪。
现代文：自赵鼎被贬，门人故吏皆被牵连，即使是听说他死了而叹息的人也被加罪。
English: Since Zhao Ding was dethroned, his disciples and officials have all been implicated, and even those who sighed when they heard that he was dead have been punished.

古文：又窜吕颐浩子摭于藤州。
现代文：又把吕颐浩的儿子吕摭流放到藤州。
English: He also exiled Lyu Biao, the son of Lyu Biao, to Fujian.

古文：十二月，进士施锷上《中兴颂》、《行都赋》及《绍兴雅》十篇，永免文解。
现代文：十二月，进士施锷上《中兴颂》、《行都赋》及《绍兴雅》十篇，歌颂时政，故给他永免文解的优待。
English: In December, the ten poems of "Zhongxing Ode," "Gangdu Fu" and "Shao Xingya" were published by the scholar Shi Xuan, praising the politics of the time, so he was permanently exempted from the preferential treatment of literary interpretation.

古文：自此颂咏导谀愈多。
现代文：从此颂咏献媚的人更多。
English: Since then, there have been more people to praise and flatter.

古文：赐百官喜雪御筵于桧第。
现代文：皇上在秦桧家里赐百官喜雪御筵。
English: The emperor bestowed on the family of Qin Hui a hundred officials to enjoy the snow.

古文：十八年，熺除知枢密院事，桧问胡宁曰： 外议如何？ 宁曰： 以为公相必不袭蔡京之迹。 五月，李显忠上恢复策，落军职，与祠。
现代文：绍兴十八年，拜秦火喜为知枢密院事，秦桧问胡宁： 外面有何议论？ 胡宁答 ：认为公相一定不承袭蔡京的做法。 五月，李显忠上奏恢复之计，被削去军职，给以宫祠之职。
English: In the 18th year of Shaoxing, Qin Hui asked Huning: "What are the discussions outside?" Huning replied: "I think that the public affairs minister must not follow the practice of Cai Jing." In May, Li Xianzhong proposed a restoration plan, and was stripped of his military post and given the post of palace shrine.

古文：六月，迪功郎王廷珪编管辰州，以作诗送胡铨也。
现代文：六月迪功郎王廷王圭被编管辰州，因他写诗送胡铨。
English: In June, Wang Ting Wang Gui, the poet laureate, was removed from his post as editor-in-chief of Chenzhou because he wrote a poem to send to Hu Yao.

古文：闰八月，福州言民采竹实万斛以济饥。
现代文：闰八月，福州说百姓采竹子的果实万斛、以此度饥荒。
English: In leap August, Fuzhou said that the people harvested bamboo fruit in large quantities, which led to famine.

古文：十一月，胡铨自新州移贬吉阳军，以作颂谤讪也。
现代文：十一月，胡铨从新州移贬到吉阳军，是因他做诗诽谤当朝。
English: In November, Hu Yao was demoted from Xinzhou to Jiyang Army because he slandered the Tang Dynasty in a poem.

古文：十九年，帝命绘桧像，自为赞。
现代文：绍兴十九年，皇上命绘秦桧像，并亲自做赞。
English: In the 19th year of Shaoxing, the emperor ordered the portrait of Qin Yu to be painted, and personally praised it.

古文：是岁，湖、广、江西、建康府皆言甘露降，诸郡奏狱空。
现代文：这年，湖、广、江西、建康府都说降了甘露，各郡都上奏说监狱已空。
English: This year, Hubei, Guangxi, Jiangxi and Jiankang provinces all said that they had reduced the number of prisoners, and all counties reported that the prisons were empty.

古文：帝尝语桧曰： 自今有奏狱空者，当令监司验实。
现代文：皇上曾对秦桧说 ：从今以后有上奏说监狱是空的，应令监司验实。
English: The emperor once said to Qin Zang: From now on, if there is a report that the prison is empty, the inspector should be ordered to verify it.

古文：果妄诞，即按治，仍命御史台察之。
现代文：若是欺妄之言，就治罪，命御史台负责监督。
English: If the words are deceptive, they will be punished, and the history station will be responsible for supervision.

古文：苟不惩戒，则奏甘露瑞芝之类，崇虚饰诞，无所不至。 帝虽眷桧，而不可蔽欺也如此。
现代文：若不惩戒，则奏甘露瑞芝之类，虚妄文饰之言，无所不至。 皇上虽宠秦桧，但也不完全受他的欺蔽。
English: If you don't discipline him, you'll end up with the likes of Ganlu Rizhi, who will say anything to get his way. Although the emperor favored Qin Zang, he wasn't completely deceived by him.

古文：十二月，禁私作野史，许人告。
现代文：十二月，禁止做野史，许人告发。
English: In December, it was forbidden to do field history, and many people reported it.

古文：二十年正月，桧趋朝，殿司小校施全刺桧不中，磔于市。
现代文：绍兴二十年正月，秦桧上朝，殿司小校施全刺秦桧不中，被斩杀于市。
English: In the first month of the 20th year of Shaoxing, in the morning of the Qin Dynasty, a pupil of Donsi Elementary School, who was not a member of the Qin Dynasty, was beheaded in the city.

古文：自是每出，列五十兵持长梃以自卫。
现代文：从此，秦桧每次出门，都有五十名士兵执长木棍侍卫。
English: From then on, every time Qin Hui went out, he was guarded by fifty soldiers holding long wooden sticks.

古文：是月，曹泳告李光子孟坚省记光所作私史，狱成，光窜已久，诏永不检举；孟坚编置峡州；朝士连坐者八人，皆落职贬秩；胡寅窜新州。
现代文：这月，曹泳告李光的儿子李孟坚检查记录李光所做私史，案成，李光被贬谪已很久，诏永不再用，李孟坚被编置到峡州；朝官连坐的八人，都被罢职贬秩，胡寅被流放到新州。
English: This month, Cao Yong told Li Guang's son Li Mengjian to check the records of Li Guang's personal history, which was completed. Li Guang had been demoted for a long time, Zhao would never be used again, and Li Mengjian was transferred to Xiaozhou. Eight members of the imperial court were dismissed and demoted, and Hu Yin was exiled to Xinzhou.

古文：泳由是骤用。
现代文：曹泳因此被立即起用。
English: As a result, Cao Yong was immediately appointed to the position.

古文：五月，秘书少监汤思退奏以桧存赵氏本末付史馆。
现代文：五月，秘书少监汤思退奏请把秦桧忠于赵氏的本末交付史馆。
English: In May, Tang Si, the secretary of the Young Supervisor, requested that Qin Hui's loyalty to the Zhao clan be handed over to the history museum.

古文：六月，熺加少保。
现代文：六月，秦火喜加官为少保。
English: In June, Qin Huoxi was promoted to the position of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：郑炜告其乡人福建安抚司机宜吴元美作《夏二子传》，指蚊、蝇也；家有潜光亭、商隐堂，以亭号潜光，有心于党李，堂名商隐，无意于事秦。
现代文：郑炜告发他的同乡福建安抚司机宜吴元美作《夏二子传》，指的是蚊子、苍蝇；吴家有潜光亭、商隐堂，把亭称为潜光，是有心党附李光，把堂名为商隐，是无意于附合秦桧。
English: Zheng Qi told his fellow Fujian pacifying driver Yi Wu Yuanmei about "The Tale of the Two Sons," referring to mosquitoes and flies; the Wu family had a hidden light pavilion, Shangyin Hall, and called the pavilion "hidden light," with the intention of the party to attach Li Guang, and named the hall "Shangyin," without the intention of attaching Qin Yu.

古文：故桧尤恶之。
现代文：因此秦桧更恨他。
English: Therefore, Qin Yu hated him even more.

古文：编管右迪功郎安诚、布衣汪大圭，斩有荫人惠俊、进义副尉刘允中，黥径山僧清言，皆以讪谤也。
现代文：编管右迪功郎安诚、平民汪大圭，斩有恩荫的惠俊、进义副尉刘纪中，刺配径山僧清言，都因诽谤秦桧而获罪。
English: Editor-in-chief U Di Gong Lang An Cheng, commoner Wang Da Gui, benefactor Huijun, Vice-Lieutenant Jin Yi Liu Jizhong, assassinated mountain monk Qing Yan, were all convicted of slandering Qin Hui.

古文：时桧疾愈，朝参许肩舆，二孙扶掖，仍免拜。
现代文：当时秦桧的病更重，上朝时允许他乘轿子，由他的二孙搀扶，并免于拜礼。
English: At that time, Qin Hui's illness was more serious. When he ascended to the throne, he was allowed to ride in a palanquin, supported by his two grandsons, and was exempt from worship.

古文：二十一年，朝散郎王扬英上书荐熺为相，桧奏扬英知泰州。
现代文：绍兴二十一年，朝散郎王扬英上书推荐秦火喜为相，秦桧上奏让王扬英知泰州。
English: In the 21st year of Shaoxing, Wang Yangying, the eldest son of Emperor Qin, recommended Qin Hui as his consort, and Wang Yangying learned about Taizhou from Qin Hui.

古文：二十二年，又兴王庶二子之奇之荀、叶三省、杨炜、袁敏求四大狱，皆坐谤讪。
现代文：绍兴二十二年，又兴王庶二子王之奇、王之荀及叶三省、杨炜、袁敏求四大狱，都是因为诽谤朝政罪。
English: In 22nd year of Shaoxing, Wang Xingwang's second son Wang Zhiqi, Wang Zhiyao, Ye San Zhou, Yang Hui, and Yuan Minqiu were all sentenced to four years in prison for the crime of slandering the imperial government.

古文：炜又以尝登李光、萧振之门，言时事也。
现代文：杨炜还有曾去李光、萧振家谈时事之罪。
English: Yang Hui is also guilty of going to the homes of Li Guang and Xiao Zhen to discuss current affairs.

古文：于是光永不检举，振贬池州。
现代文：于是李光永不再用，萧振被贬池州。
English: As a result, Li Guang was never used again, and Xiao Zhen was banished to Chizhou.

古文：二十三年，桧请下台州于谢伋家取綦崈礼所受御笔缴进。
现代文：绍兴二十三年，秦桧请求去台州谢亻及家取綦宗山礼所受御笔送还朝廷。
English: In the 23rd year of Shaoxing, Qin Hui requested to go to Taizhou Xie Hui and Iatori Zongshan Ceremonial Hall to receive the imperial pen and return it to the imperial court.

古文：桧初罢相，上有责桧语，欲泯其迹焉，是岁，进士黄友龙坐谤讪，黥配岭南；内侍裴咏坐指斥，编管琼州。
现代文：秦桧第一次罢相，皇上有指责秦桧的话，这是想收回御笔灭迹。这年，进士黄友龙以谤讪罪，被处以黥刑，发配到岭南；内侍裴咏以指斥罪，被编管到琼州。
English: Qin Hui's first retirement from the imperial court was prompted by the emperor's reproach of Qin Hui, who wanted to take back the imperial edict. In this year, Huang Youlong, a member of the imperial court, was punished with flogging and sent to Lingnan for the crime of slandering the emperor; and Pei Hui, an attendant of the imperial court, was punished with flogging and sent to Qiongzhou for the crime of rebuking the emperor.

古文：二十四年二月，杨炬以弟炜旧累死宾州，炬编管邕州。
现代文：绍兴二十四年二月，杨炬弟杨炜受牵连死在宾州，杨炬因而被编管邕州。
English: In February of the 24th year of Shaoxing, Yang Jia, Yang Jia's younger brother, was implicated and died in Pennsylvania. As a result, Yang Jia was transferred to Zhangzhou.

古文：何兑讼其师马伸发端上金人书乞存赵氏，为分桧功，兑编管英州。
现代文：何兑争辩说是他的老师马伸首先上书金人请存赵氏的，这就分了秦桧的功，故何兑被编管英州。
English: He argued that it was his teacher, Ma Shin, who first deposited the money with the Zhao family, which was the merit of Qin Hui. Therefore, He was put in charge of Yingzhou.

古文：三月，桧孙敷文阁待制埙试进士举，省殿试皆为第一，桧从子焞、焴、姻党周夤，沈兴杰皆登上第，士论为之不平。
现代文：三月，秦桧的孙子敷文阁待制秦埙考进士，省殿试都第一，秦桧的侄子秦火享、秦火育姻亲周夤、沈兴杰都成为进士，士论以此不平。
English: In March, Qin Hui's grandson, Shikibunge, who was preparing for the Qin Hui examination, was promoted to the first rank in the provincial palace examination. Qin Hui's nephew, Qin Huoqian, Qin Huoqian's in-laws, Zhou Qi and Shen Xingjie, were also promoted to the second rank. This caused a rift among the judges.

古文：考官则魏师逊、汤思退、郑仲熊、沈虚中、董德元也。
现代文：考官是魏师逊、汤思退、郑仲熊、沈虚中、董德元。
English: The examiners are Wei Shisong, Tang Siwei, Zheng Zhong Xiong, Shen Huizhong, and Dong De Yuan.

古文：师逊等初知贡举，即语人曰： 吾曹可以富贵矣。 及廷试，桧又奏思退为编排，师逊为详定。
现代文：魏师逊等刚知贡举，就对人说： 我们可得富贵了。 等到廷试时，秦桧又奏请让汤思退为编排，魏师逊为详定。
English: As soon as Wei Shisong and others knew about the tribute, they said to the people, "We can become rich and noble." When it came to the court trial, Qin Hui asked Tang Si to withdraw from the arrangement, and Wei Shisong was detailed.

古文：埙与第二人曹冠策皆攻专门之学，张孝祥策则主一德元老且及存赵事。
现代文：秦埙和第二人曹冠的策文都攻专门之学，张孝祥策文则是主一德元老并涉及保存赵氏事。
English: Qin Hui and the second person, Cao Guan, both wrote essays on special studies, while Zhang Xiaoxiang's essay was on the first German patriarch and involved the preservation of the Zhao dynasty.

古文：帝读埙策，皆桧、熺语，于是擢孝祥为第一，降埙第三。
现代文：皇上读到秦埙策文，都是秦桧、秦火喜的话，于是擢张孝祥为第一，降秦埙为第三。
English: When the emperor read Qin Yu's recommendation, it was all about Qin Yu and Qin Huoxi, so he promoted Zhang Xiaoxiang to the first and demoted Qin Yu to the third.

古文：未几，埙修撰实录院，宰相子孙同领史职，前所无也。
现代文：不久，秦埙为实录院修撰，宰相子孙同领史职，是前所未有的。
English: Soon after, Qin Hui became the editor of the Academy of Historical Records, and it was unprecedented for the children and grandchildren of a prime minister to hold the position of chief historian.

古文：六月，以王循友前知建康尝罪桧族党，循友安置藤州。
现代文：六月，因王循友原来知建康时曾对秦桧的族党治罪，故被安置藤州。
English: In June, Wang Xuyou was transferred to Fujian Province because he had previously known Jiankang to have committed crimes against Qin Hui's clan.

古文：八月，王趯为李光求内徙，趯编管辰州。
现代文：八月，王因替李光求情迁往内地，被编管于辰州。
English: In August, Wang was placed under house arrest in Chenzhou after moving to the mainland to intercede on behalf of Li Guang.

古文：郑玘、贾子展以会中有嘲谑讲和之语，玘窜容州，子展窜德庆府。
现代文：郑王己、贾子展因聚会时嘲谑讲和的话，郑王己被流放容州，贾子展被流放德庆府。
English: Zheng Wangji and Jia Zichen were exiled to Yongzhou and Jia Zichen was exiled to Deqing because they mocked Mao Zedong's speech of peace at the meeting.

古文：方畴以与胡铨通书，编置永州。
现代文：方畴因与胡铨通信，被编置永州。
English: Fang Zeng was transferred to Yongzhou for his correspondence with Hu Yao.

古文：十二月，魏安行、洪兴祖以广传程瑀《论语解》，安行编置钦州，兴祖编置昭州。
现代文：十二月，魏安行、洪兴祖因广泛传播程王禹的《论语解》，而魏安行被编置钦州，洪兴祖被编置昭州。
English: In December, Wei Anxing and Hong Xingzu were assigned to Qinzhou and Hong Xingzu to Zhaozhou for widely disseminating Cheng Wangyu's Analects of Confucius.

古文：又窜程纬，以其慢上无礼也。
现代文：又流放程纬，罪名是慢上无礼。
English: He also exiled Cheng Wei on the charge of being rude.

古文：帝尝谕桧曰： 近轮对者，多谒告避免。
现代文：皇上曾对秦桧说： 近来轮对者，大多请求避免。
English: The emperor once said to Qin Yu: Recently, most of the opponents have been asked to avoid.

古文：百官轮对，正欲闻所未闻，可令检举约束。 桧擅政以来，屏塞人言，蔽上耳目，凡一时献言者，非诵桧功德，则讦人语言以中伤善类。
现代文：百官轮对，正是想听听在宫中听不到的话，可令大家检举约束。 秦桧擅政以来，堵塞言路，蔽上耳目，凡一时献言者，不是歌颂秦桧的功德，就是造谣中伤善良的人。
English: It is precisely because they want to listen to what they cannot hear in the palace that they can make everyone report and restrict.Since Qin Hui was good at politics, he has blocked the way of speech, covered his ears and eyes, and anyone who speaks for a moment is either singing the praises of Qin Hui's merits, or creating rumors to slander good people.

古文：欲有言者恐触忌讳，畏言国事，仅论销金铺翠、乞禁鹿胎冠子之类，以塞责而已。
现代文：想说的又怕犯忌，畏谈国事，只用谈论销金铺翠，请禁鹿胎冠子类的话题来搪塞。
English: They are afraid of offending taboos, afraid to talk about national affairs, and only want to talk about selling money. Please ban topics such as deer fetuses.

古文：故帝及之，盖亦防桧之壅蔽也。
现代文：所以皇上过问这事，也是防秦桧的蒙蔽。
English: Therefore, if the emperor asked about this, it was also to prevent Qin Yu from being deceived.

古文：衢州尝有盗起，桧遣殿前司将官辛立将千人捕之，不以闻。
现代文：衢州曾有盗起，秦桧派殿前司将官辛立率领一千人去捕盗，没报告皇上。
English: There was a case of theft in Zhangzhou. Qin Yu sent the general Xin Li, the former secretary of the palace, to lead a thousand people to catch the thief, but he did not report to the emperor.

古文：晋安郡王因入侍言之，帝大惊，问桧，桧曰： 不足上烦圣虑，故不敢闻，盗平即奏矣。 退而求其故，知晋安言之，遂奏晋安居秀王丧不当给俸，月损二百缗，帝为出内帑给之。
现代文：晋安郡王进宫说这事，皇上大惊，问秦桧，秦桧说： 不值得上烦圣虑，故没敢汇报，平盗后立即奏报。 退下后探问原因，知是晋安郡王说的，就上奏说晋安郡王正居秀王丧不应给俸禄，使郡王每月少拿俸禄二百缗，皇上拿出内帑给他。
English: When the king of Jinan County came into the palace and said this, the emperor was shocked and asked Qin Yu. Qin Yu said, "It's not worth worrying about, so I didn't dare to report it. I reported it immediately after the theft." After stepping back and inquiring why, knowing that it was the king of Jinan County who said it, he reported that the king of Jinan County, Zhengju Xiuwang, should not be given a salary, so that the king of the county would receive a monthly salary of two hundred baht less. The emperor took out the money and gave it to him.

古文：二十五年二月，以沈长卿旧与李光启讥和议，又与芮烨共赋《牡丹诗》，有 宁令汉社稷，变作莽乾坤 之句，为邻人所告，长卿编置化州，烨武冈军。
现代文：绍兴二十五年二月，因沈长卿过去和李光讥讽和议，又和芮烨共赋《牡丹诗》，有 宁令汉社稷，变作莽乾坤 之句，被邻人告发，沈长卿被编置化州，芮烨被编置武冈军。
English: In February of the 25th year of Shaoxing, because of Shen Changqing's cynical and peaceful discussion with Li Guang in the past, and his co-authoring of "Peony Poem," there was "Ning Ling Han Society," which turned into a reckless sentence, and was denounced by neighbors, Shen Changqing was placed in Huazhou, and he was placed in the Wugang Army.

古文：静江有驿名秦城，知府吕愿中率宾僚共赋《秦城王气诗》以媚桧，不赋者刘芮、李燮、罗博文三人而已。愿中由此得召。
现代文：静江有一驿站叫秦城，知府吕愿中率宾客、僚属共赋《秦城王气诗》向秦桧献媚，不赋者只刘芮、李燮、罗博文三人，吕愿中因此被召用。
English: There is a station in Shijiang called Qincheng. Governor Lü Wanzhong led the guests and colleagues to present the "Qincheng King Qi Poem" to Qin Hui. The only ones who did not present the poem were Liu Hui, Li Hui, and Luo Bowen. Therefore, Lü Wanzhong was summoned.

古文：又张扶请桧乘金根车，又有乞置益国官属及议九锡者，桧闻之安然。
现代文：又有张扶请秦桧乘金根车，又有请求设置益国府官署和赐给秦桧九锡的，秦桧听到这些很泰然。
English: Zhang Fu also asked Qin Hui to ride the golden chariot, and there was also a request to set up the Yiguo prefectural government office and give Qin Hui nine tin, Qin Hui heard these very calmly.

古文：十月，申禁专门之学。以太庙灵芝绘为华旗，凡郡国所奏瑞木、嘉禾、瑞瓜、双莲悉绘之。
现代文：十月，再次禁止专门之学，把太庙的灵芝画成华旗，凡各地所奏的瑞木、嘉禾、瑞瓜、双莲都画出来。
English: In October, the special study was banned again, and the lingzhi of the imperial temple was drawn as a Chinese flag, and the auspicious trees, auspicious herbs, auspicious melons, and double lotuses played in various regions were all drawn.

古文：赵令衿观桧《家庙记》，口诵 君子之泽，五世而斩 ，为汪召锡所告。
现代文：赵令衿看秦桧的《家庙记》，顺口说出 君子之泽，五世而斩 ，被汪召锡告发。
English: Zhao Lingya looked at Qin Hui's "Family Temple Records" and blurted out, "Junzi Nozawa, the fifth generation to be beheaded," and was denounced by Wang Zhaoxi.

古文：御史徐嚞又论赵鼎子汾与令衿饮别厚赆，必有奸谋，诏送大理，拘令衿南外宗正司。
现代文：御史徐喜又论奏赵鼎之子赵汾为赵令衿送行并赠以礼物，一定有奸谋，诏送大理寺，把赵令衿关押在南外宗正司。
English: Grand Historian Xu Xi also said that Zhao Ding's son Zhao Yu sent Zhao Lingyu away and gave him a gift. There must have been a conspiracy to send Zhao Lingyu to Dali Temple and imprison Zhao Lingyu in Nanwai Zongzheng.

古文：桧于一德格天阁书赵鼎、李光、胡铨姓名，必欲杀之而后已。
现代文：秦桧在一德格天阁写着赵鼎、李光、胡铨的姓名，就想杀了他们。
English: Qin Hui wrote the names of Zhao Ding, Li Guang and Hu Yao on a tablet in the Dege Pavilion and wanted to kill them.

古文：鼎已死而憾之不置，遂欲孥戮汾。
现代文：赵鼎已死，秦桧感到遗憾，于是就想杀赵汾。
English: Zhao Ding was dead, Qin Yu felt sorry, so he wanted to kill Zhao Yu.

古文：桧忌张浚尤甚，故令衿之狱，张宗元之罢，皆波及浚。
现代文：秦桧特恨张浚，因此赵令衿一案，张宗元被罢，都波及到张浚。
English: Qin Yu especially hated Zhang Jun, so the case of Zhao Lingjun and Zhang Zongyuan's dismissal all affected Zhang Jun.

古文：浚在永州，桧又使其死党张柄知潭州，与郡丞汪召锡共伺察之。
现代文：张浚在永州，秦桧又派他的死党张炳知潭州，同郡丞汪召锡一起监视他。
English: Zhang Jun was in Yongzhou, and Qin Yu also sent his sworn enemy Zhang Jizhantanzhou to monitor him together with the county magistrate Wang Zhaoxi.

古文：至是，使汾自诬与浚及李光、胡寅谋大逆，凡一时贤士五十三人皆与焉。
现代文：这时，又让赵汾自诬与张浚、胡寅谋划叛乱，当时受牵连的贤士有五十三人。
English: At this time, he also allowed Zhao Qi to conspire with Zhang Jun and Hu Yin to plan a rebellion. At that time, there were fifty-three sages involved.

古文：狱成，而桧病不能书。
现代文：案成后，秦桧病重不能写字。
English: After the project was completed, Qin Yu was seriously ill and unable to write.

古文：是月乙未，帝幸桧第问疾，桧无一语，惟流涕而已。
现代文：这月二十一日，皇上去秦桧家看望他的病，秦桧无一语，只流涕而已。
English: On the 21st day of this month, the emperor went to Qin Yu's home to visit him for his illness. Qin Yu did not say a word, but only shed tears.

古文：熺奏请代居相位者，帝曰： 此事卿不当与。 帝遂命权直学士院沈虚中草桧父子致仕制。
现代文：秦火喜问谁可代任宰相，皇上说： 这事你不该参与。 皇上命权直学士院沈虚中草拟秦桧父子的退休制书。
English: Qin Huoxi asked who could take the place of the prime minister, and the emperor said, "You shouldn't be involved in this matter." The retirement policy of Qin Huo and his son was drafted in the middle of the Emperor's direct appointment academy.

古文：熺犹遣其子埙与林一飞、郑柟夜见台谏徐喜、张扶谋奏请己为相。
现代文：秦火喜还派他的儿子秦埙同林一飞、郑木冉晚上去见台谏官徐喜、张扶策划奏请自己为相。
English: Qin Huoxi also sent his sons Qin Yu Tonglin Yifei and Zheng Mulan to meet the Taiwanese magistrate Xu Xi in the evening, and Zhang Fuxi invited himself to be a witness.

古文：丙申，诏桧加封建康郡王，熺进少师，皆致仕，埙、堪并提举江州太平兴国宫。
现代文：二十二日，加封秦桧为建康郡王，秦火喜进为少师，皆退休，秦埙、秦堪并为提举江州太平兴国宫。
English: On the 22nd, Qin Hui was awarded the title of King of Jiankang County, Qin Huo Xijin was awarded the title of Junior Teacher, and both retired. Qin Hui and Qin Kan were also awarded the title of Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace.

古文：是夜，桧卒，年六十六。
现代文：当晚，秦桧去世，终年六十六岁。
English: That evening, Qin Yu passed away at the age of 66.

古文：后赠申王，谥忠献。
现代文：死后赠为申王，谥号 忠献 。
English: After his death, he was given the posthumous name Shen Wang, and his posthumous name was Zhongxian.

古文：桧两据相位者，凡十九年，劫制君父，包藏祸心，倡和误国，忘仇斁伦。
现代文：秦桧两次任宰相，共十九年，胁制皇上，包藏祸心，倡和误国，忘仇败伦。
English: Qin Hui served as prime minister twice, for a total of nineteen years, coercing the emperor, concealing evil intentions, advocating peace and misleading the country, and forgetting revenge and defeat.

古文：一时忠臣良将，诛锄略尽。
现代文：一时忠臣良将，被他诛锄略尽。
English: Once a loyal vassal and a good general, he was cheated out of everything.

古文：其顽钝无耻者，率为桧用，争以诬陷善类为功。
现代文：那些顽猾无耻的人，都被秦桧召用，他们争相以诬陷善人为功。
English: Those who are stubborn and shameless are all summoned by Qin Yu, and they vie for the honor of framing good people.

古文：其矫诬也，无罪可状，不过曰谤讪，曰指斥，曰怨望，曰立党沽名，甚则曰有无君心。
现代文：诬陷忠良，无罪可状，不过曰谤讪，曰指斥，曰怨望，曰立党沽名，甚至曰有无君心。
English: False accusation against a loyal person is not a crime, but slander, denunciation, resentment, slandering the party, and even having or not having the heart of a monarch.

古文：凡论人章疏，皆桧自操以授言者，识之者曰： 此老秦笔也。 察事之卒，布满京城，小涉讥议，即捕治，中以深文。
现代文：凡论人的章疏，都是秦桧亲自操纵并授意台谏官，知情的人说： 这是老秦的手笔。 各种暗探，布满京城，稍涉讥议，就被逮捕治罪。
English: Every chapter and verse about people was personally manipulated by Qin Hui and dictated to the eunuchs of Taiwan, and those in the know said: This is the handwriting of the old Qin. All kinds of spies, spread all over the capital, were arrested and punished for the slightest criticism.

古文：又阴结内侍及医师王继先，伺上动静。
现代文：又暗中结纳内侍及医师王继先，窥伺皇上的动静。
English: He also secretly bribed a chambermaid and physician, Wang Jixian, to spy on the emperor's movements.

古文：郡国事惟申省，无一至上前者。
现代文：地方上的事只申报到尚书省，没有一件报告皇上的。
English: Local affairs were only reported to Shangshu, and nothing was reported to the emperor.

古文：桧死，帝方与人言之。
现代文：秦桧死，皇上才对人说这些。
English: It was only after Qin Xuan's death that the emperor told people these things.

古文：桧立久任之说，士淹滞失职，有十年不解者。
现代文：秦桧创立宰相长期任用的说法，有才德的人很久不得官职或不能升迁，有十年没有提升的。
English: Qin Hui created the concept of the long-term appointment of the prime minister. Talented people are not allowed to hold an official post or be promoted for a long time, and some have not been promoted for ten years.

古文：附己者立与擢用。
现代文：附会自己的马上擢用。
English: He was immediately promoted by the association.

古文：自其独相，至死之日，易执政二十八人，皆世无一誉。
现代文：自他独自为相至死，执政换了二十八人，无一人得到世人赞誉。
English: Since his death, there have been twenty-eight changes of government, none of which have been praised by the world.

古文：柔佞易制者，如孙近、韩肖胄、楼炤、王次翁、范同、万俟禼、程克俊、李文会、杨愿、李若谷、何若、段拂、汪勃、詹大方、余尧弼、巫伋、章夏、宋朴、史才、魏师逊、施钜、郑仲熊之徒，率拔之冗散，遽跻政地。
现代文：献媚者及易控制者，如孙近、韩肖胄、楼火召、王次翁、范同、万俟、程克俊、李文会、杨愿、李若谷、何若、段拂、汪勃、詹大方、余尧弼、巫亻及、章夏、宋朴、史才、魏师逊、施钜、郑仲熊之徒，都是小官，而被提拔到要职。
English: The flatterers and those who were easily controlled, such as Sun Chien, Han Xiaoqi, Lou Hui Zhao, Wang Zi Weng, Fan Tong, Wan Hui, Cheng Ke Jun, Li Wen Hui, Yang Qian, Li Ruogu, He Ruo, Duan Hui, Wang Bo, Zhan Dafang, Yu Xi, Wu Xi, Zhang Xia, Song Pak, Shi Cai, Wei Shisong, Shi Yan, and Zheng Zhong Xiong's followers, were all minor officials, but were promoted to important positions.

古文：既共政，则拱默而已。
现代文：同秦桧共政，则拱手听命而已。
English: When he was in government with Qin Hui, he just did as he was told.

古文：又多自言官听桧弹击，辄以政府报之，由中丞、谏议而升者凡十有二人，然甫入即出，或一阅月，或半年即罢去。
现代文：他们多是言官，听任秦桧摆布，秦桧以政府要职回报他们，由中丞、谏议而升为执政者有十二人，但他们骤升骤降，有的只任一个月，有的任半年即被罢去。
English: Most of them were chancellors, at the mercy of Qin Hui, who rewarded them with important government positions. There were twelve people who rose from middle-ranking officials and advisers to governors, but their rise and fall was sudden. Some only lasted a month, while others were ousted after half a year.

古文：惟王次翁阅四年，以金人败盟之初持不易相之论，桧德之深也。
现代文：只有王次翁任期四年，是因为金人刚背弃盟约时，他提出不更换宰相的论调，秦桧很感激他的缘故。
English: Only Wang Zi Weng was given a four-year term, because when Jin Ren just reneged on the covenant, he put forward the argument of not replacing the prime minister. Qin Hui was very grateful to him.

古文：开门受赂，富敌于国，外国珍宝，死犹及门。
现代文：秦桧开门受贿，富敌于国，外国珍宝，他死后还有送到他家的。
English: Qin Hui opened the door to take bribes, enriched enemies of the country, foreign treasures, and after his death, they were sent to his home.

古文：人谓熺自桧秉政无日不锻酒具，治书画，特其细尔。
现代文：有人说秦火喜自秦桧秉政，没有一天不锻造酒具，置办书画，这只是小事而已。
English: Some people said that Qin Hui was pleased with Qin Hui's adherence to political principles. There was not a single day when he did not forge wine utensils or purchase paintings and calligraphy. This was just a trifle.

古文：桧阴险如崖阱，深阻竟叵测。
现代文：秦桧阴险如陷阱，深不可测。
English: Qin Hui's insidiousness is like a trap, unfathomable.

古文：同列论事上前，未尝力辨，但以一二语倾挤之。
现代文：同僚在皇上面前论事，不曾力辩，只用一二句话就能使人动摇并受到排挤。
English: Colleagues argue in front of the emperor, without arguing, with just a sentence or two, people can be shaken and pushed out.

古文：李光尝与桧争论，言颇侵桧，桧不答。
现代文：李光与秦桧争论，言语多侵侮秦桧，秦桧不反驳。
English: Li Guang argued with Qin Yu. He often insulted Qin Yu, but Qin Yu did not refute him.

古文：及光言毕，桧徐曰： 李光无人臣礼。 帝始怒之。
现代文：等李光说完，秦桧慢慢地说： 李光没有人臣礼仪。 皇上才迁怒李光。
English: After Li Guang finished speaking, Qin Yao slowly said: Li Guang does not have the etiquette of a vassal. The emperor only got angry with Li Guang.

古文：凡陷忠良，率用此术。
现代文：凡陷害忠良，大多用这个办法。
English: Those who set up Tadayoshi usually succeed in doing so.

古文：晚年残忍尤甚，数兴大狱，而又喜谀佞，不避形迹。
现代文：晚年更残忍，多次兴起大狱，而又喜欢谀佞，不避形迹。
English: In his later years, he was even more cruel, unleashing hell many times, but he also liked to gloat and did not shy away from his past.

古文：然桧死熺废，其党祖述余说，力持和议，以窃据相位者尚数人，至孝宗始荡涤无余。
现代文：虽然秦桧死，秦火喜废，但他的余党仍继承他的主张，力主和议，以此窃据相位者还有数人，至孝宗时才荡涤无余。
English: Although Qin Xuan died and Qin Hui was dethroned, his remaining party still inherited his ideas and advocated peace. There were a few people who stole the position by doing so, and it was only when Xiaozong took over.

古文：开禧二年四月，追夺王爵，改谥谬丑。
现代文：开禧二年四月，追夺秦桧王爵，改谥号为 谬丑 。
English: In April of the second year of the Heian period, he chased down the Qin Dynasty's Prince Qin and changed his name to "Hugo."

古文：嘉定元年，史弥远奏复王爵、赠谥。
现代文：嘉定元年，史弥远奏请恢复王爵，赠给谥号。
English: In the first year of Jiading, Shi Ya Yuanso asked Wang Jie to be reinstated and presented him with a posthumous title.

