古文：夏侯端，寿州寿春人，梁尚书左仆射详之孙也。
现代文：夏侯端，寿州寿春人，南朝梁尚书左仆射夏侯详的孙子。
English: Xia Houduan, Shouzhou Shouchunren, the grandson of the Southern Dynasty Liang Shangshu's left-hand man, shot Xia Houyou.

古文：仕隋为大理司直，高祖龙潜时，与其结交。
现代文：在隋朝任大理司直，唐高祖还未做皇帝时，曾与他相互往来。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, Dali Sizhi was appointed, and when Tang Gaozu was not yet emperor, he had dealings with him.

古文：大业中，高祖帅师于河东讨捕，乃请端为副。
现代文：隋大业年间，高祖率军队到山西黄河以东地区讨伐搜捕盗贼，请夏侯端为副将。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Gao Zu led the army to the area east of the Yellow River in Shanxi Province to search for and arrest thieves, and asked Xia Houdan to be the vice-general.

古文：时炀帝幸江都，盗贼日滋。
现代文：当时隋炀帝巡幸江都郡，盗贼一天天增多。
English: At that time, the Sui and Qin emperors were touring Jiangdu County, and the number of thieves was increasing day by day.

古文：端颇知玄象，善相人，说高祖曰： 金玉床摇动，此帝座不安。
现代文：夏侯端很精通天象，善于相面，他劝说高祖道： 金玉床摇动，这是帝座星不安稳。
English: Xia Houduan was well versed in celestial phenomena and good at face-to-face communication. He persuaded Gao Zuo: The jade bed is shaking, this is the instability of the constellation of the emperor.

古文：参墟得岁，必有真人起于实沉之次。
现代文：参宿适得其年，一定有真人天子出现在实沉星所对应的分野晋地。
English: It is the right year for the Betelgeuse, there must be a real person who appears in the corresponding field of the real sun.

古文：天下方乱，能安之者，其在明公。
现代文：天下正面临大乱，能安定天下的人就是您了。
English: The world is facing great turmoil. You are the one who can stabilize the world.

古文：但主上晓察，情多猜忍，切忌诸李，强者先诛，全才既死，明公岂非其次？
现代文：只是当今皇帝警觉精明，性情颇残暴猜忌，非常妒忌诸李，有才能的人更遭先杀，金才已经死了，您难道不是第二个？
English: But today's emperor is alert and shrewd, his temperament is rather cruel and suspicious, he is very jealous of Zhu Li, and talented people are killed first. Jin Cai has already died. Aren't you the second?

古文：若早为计，则应天福；不然者，则诛矣！ 
现代文：若是早做打算，还可顺应天赐福，否则的话，就要被杀掉。 
English: If you make a plan early, you can still comply with God's blessing, otherwise, you will be killed.

古文：高祖深然其言。
现代文：高祖认为他的话很对。
English: Gaozu thought his words were right.

古文：及义师起，端在河东，为吏所捕，送于长安，囚之。
现代文：当义军起事时，夏侯端在黄河以东地区被官吏捕捉住了，送到长安囚禁了起来。
English: When the rebels revolted, Xia Houduan was caught by officials in the area east of the Yellow River and sent to Chang'an for imprisonment.

古文：高祖入京城，释之。引入卧内，与语极欢，授秘书监。
现代文：高祖进入长安，把他放出来，引进自己的寝室里，两人交谈甚欢。授官秘书监。
English: Gao Zu entered Chang'an, let him out, brought him into his bedroom, and the two had a very pleasant conversation.

古文：属李密为王世充所破，以众来降，关东之地，未有所属。端固请往招谕之，乃加大将军，持节为河南道招慰使。
现代文：时逢李密被王世充打败，带领部众来投降，函谷关以东地区还没有归属哪一方，夏侯端一再请求前往劝说招安，于是加号大将军，持符节任河南道招慰使。
English: At that time, Li Mi was defeated by Wang Shichong and led his troops to surrender. The area east of the Huan Valley Pass had not yet belonged to any side. Xia Houdan repeatedly requested to go to persuade and invite peace, so he was promoted to the rank of general and held the position of Henan Province to invite peace.

古文：至黎阳，李勣发兵送之，自澶水济河，传檄郡县，东至于海，南至于淮，二十余州，并遣使送款。
现代文：到黎阳后，李责力派兵送他；从澶水渡黄河，传递檄文给各郡县，东到海边，南到淮水，共二十多州，全都要派人交送迎款。
English: After arriving in Liyang, Li Rongli sent soldiers to see him off; from Surabaya to cross the Yellow River, to deliver the imperial edict to all counties, east to the seaside, south to Huai Shui, a total of more than 20 states, all have to send people to receive the money.

古文：行次谯州，会亳州刺史丁叔则及汴州刺史王要汉并以所部降于世充，路遂隔绝。
现代文：走到谯州，遇上亳州刺史丁叔则与汴州刺史王要汉都率领自己的部队投降了王世充，路途便被阻隔了。
English: When he came to Zhangzhou, he met Zhangzhou Jinshi Dingjun and Zhangzhou Jinshi Wangya Han, both of whom led their troops to surrender to Wang Shichong, and the road was blocked.

古文：端素得众心，所从二千人，虽粮尽，不忍委去。
现代文：夏侯端平素很得人心，跟随他的二千人，虽然遇上粮食断绝的困境，也不忍心离他而去。
English: Xia Hou Duan Ping was very popular, and the two thousand people who followed him did not have the heart to leave him, even though they were in the predicament of running out of food.

古文：端知事必不济，乃坐泽中，尽杀私马，以会军士。因歔欷曰： 今王师已败，诸处并没，卿等土壤，悉皆从伪，特以共事之情，未能见委。
现代文：夏侯端知道事情的确难以成功，于是坐在水草丛杂处，杀掉自己的马宴集军士们，他欷流泪道： 如今皇帝的军队已被打败，各处都已陷落，你们的土地也都被敌伪所占有，只是因为共事的情谊，未能弃我而去。
English: Xia Houduan knew that things were indeed difficult to succeed, so he sat in the tangle of water and grass, killed his horse and gathered the soldiers. He shed tears and said: Now the emperor's army has been defeated, everywhere has fallen, and your land has been occupied by the enemy. It is only because of the friendship of working together that he could not abandon me.

古文：然我奉王命，不可从。
现代文：然而我奉帝王之命，又不能随你们而去。
English: However, I have been ordered by the Emperor to leave, but I cannot follow you.

古文：卿有妻子，无宜效我。可斩吾首，持归于贼，必获富贵。 
现代文：你们都有妻儿老小，不必效法于我，你们可以砍下我的头，带去投降贼寇，必定会获取富贵。 
English: You all have wives and children. You don't have to follow my example. You can cut off my head, take it with you to surrender to the bandits, and you will certainly acquire wealth.

古文：众皆流涕。
现代文：众人不禁都流下了眼泪。
English: Everyone could not help but shed tears.

古文：端又曰： 卿不忍见杀，吾当自刎。 
现代文：夏侯端又说： 你们不忍心杀我，我当自刎。 
English: Xia Houfang also said, "You don't have the heart to kill me, I should kill myself."

古文：众士抱持之，皆曰： 公于唐家，非有亲属，但以忠义之故，不辞于死。
现代文：众军士连忙抱住他，都说： 你对于唐朝宗室，并非沾亲带故，只是因为忠义的缘故，便不辞一死。
English: All the sergeants quickly hugged him and said, "You are not related to the Tang Dynasty, but because of your loyalty, you are willing to die."

古文：诸人与公共事，经涉艰危，岂有害公而取富贵！ 
现代文：大家与您共事，一道经历艰难险阻，岂有害您去获取富贵的道理！ 
English: If everyone works with you and experiences hardships and obstacles together, won't it be harmful to your pursuit of wealth?

古文：复与同进。
现代文：便依然与他一道前进。
English: They still went forward with him.

古文：潜行五日，馁死者十三四；又为贼所击，奔溃相失者大半。
现代文：隐蔽地行走了五天，饿死的人十个里有三四个，又被贼寇攻击，溃败逃散了一大半。
English: They walked in secret for five days, and three or four out of ten people died of starvation. They were attacked by thieves and robbers, and most of them fled in defeat.

古文：端唯与三十余人东走，采生莹豆而食之。犹持节与之俱卧起，谓众人曰： 平生不知死地乃在此中。
现代文：夏侯端仅与三十多人继续向东走，采摘野绿豆生食充饥，他依然手持符节毫不懈怠，不论躺卧行走都不离身，他对众人说道： 我平生不知道死地竟在这里。
English: Xia Houduan only continued to walk eastward with more than 30 people, picking wild green beans and raw food to satisfy his hunger. He still did not slack off holding the rune, and did not leave his body even when lying down or walking. He said to the people: I have never known death to be here.

古文：我受国恩，所以然耳，今卿等何乃相伴死乎！
现代文：我受有国恩，所以应当这样，如今你们为何也要陪我而死！
English: I have the favour of the state, so this is how it should be, now why do you want to die with me!

古文：可散投贼，犹全性命。
现代文：你们可以分散投奔贼寇，那还可以保全性命。
English: You can scatter to join the bandits, and you can still save your lives.

古文：吾当抱此一节，与之俱殒。 
现代文：我当抱着这符节，与符节一道殒灭。 
English: I shall embrace this rune and perish with it.

古文：众又不去。
现代文：众人还是不肯离去。
English: People still refused to leave.

古文：属李公逸为唐守杞州，闻而勒兵迎馆之。
现代文：当时李公逸为唐朝镇守杞州，他知道夏侯端的情况后率领军队把他接去安置在宾馆里。
English: At that time, Li Gongyi was the Tang Dynasty town guarding Bozhou. After he knew the situation of Xia Houdan, he led the army to pick him up and place him in a hotel.

古文：于时河南之地，皆入世充，唯公逸感端之义，独坚守不下。
现代文：此时黄河以南地区，都被王世充所占领，只有李公逸被夏侯端忠义所感，独自坚守城池未被攻取。
English: At this time, the areas south of the Yellow River were all occupied by Wang Shichong. Only Li Gongyi was loyal to Xia Houduan and held the city alone without being captured.

古文：世充遣使召端，解衣遗之。礼甚厚，仍送除书，以端为淮南郡公、吏部尚书。
现代文：王世充派遣使者召请夏侯端，脱下自己的衣服送给他，礼物丰厚，还发给他授官诏书，封夏侯端为淮南郡公、吏部尚书。
English: Wang Shichong sent an envoy to summon Xia Houdan, took off his clothes and gave him a rich gift. He also issued him an official certificate, and made Xia Houdan a public official of Huainan County and a member of the cadre department.

古文：端对其使者曰： 夏侯端天子大使，岂受王世充之官！
现代文：夏侯端对王世充的使者说： 我夏侯端是天子的大使，岂能接受王世充的官职！
English: Xia Houdan said to Wang Shichong's envoy: I, Xia Houdan, am the ambassador of the Son of Heaven, how can I accept Wang Shichong's official post!

古文：自非斩我头将往见汝，何容身苟活而屈于贼乎！ 
现代文：自然不砍下我的头带去见世充的话，又怎能容忍苟活偷生而屈服于贼寇呢！ 
English: Of course, if you don't cut off my head and take it to the world, how can you tolerate living a secret life and succumbing to thieves and robbers!

古文：遂焚其书，拔刀斩其所遗衣服。
现代文：说完烧掉了王世充的诏书，拔刀斩烂他送的衣服。
English: After saying this, he burned Wang Shicheng's edict and cut up the clothes he had sent with a knife.

古文：因发路西归，解节旄怀之，取竿加刃，从间道得至宜阳。
现代文：于是起程西归，解下节仗顶端的旄牛尾揣到怀里，把节仗的竿用刀劈了，从小路走到了宜阳。
English: So he started his journey westward, took the yakitori at the top of the festival into his arms, cut the festival pole with a knife, and walked from the path to Yiyang.

古文：初，山中险峻，先无蹊径，但冒履榛梗，昼夜兼行，从者三十二人，或坠崖溺水、遇猛兽而死又半，其余至者，皆鬓发秃落，形貌枯瘠。
现代文：当初，山中地形险峻，根本没有路径，只好在草木丛生阻塞不通的地方，昼夜兼行。跟随夏侯端的三十二个人，有的坠崖溺水而死，有的遇到猛兽而遭难，又失去一半人，其余到达宜阳的，都鬓发脱落，形容枯槁。
English: At first, the terrain in the mountains was steep and there was no path at all, so they had to walk day and night in places where the thick vegetation made it impassable. The thirty-two people who followed Xia Houdan, some fell off the cliff and drowned, some encountered beasts of prey and were in distress, losing half of them, and the rest who reached Yiyang, were all bald and described as withered.

古文：端驰驿奉见，但谢无功，殊不自言艰苦。
现代文：夏侯端骑驿马急驰入京拜见皇上，只是道歉无功而回，一点也不谈一路的艰难困苦。
English: Xia Hou Duan rode a horse and galloped into Beijing to visit the emperor. He only apologized and returned without success, and did not talk at all about the hardships along the way.

古文：高祖悯之，复以为秘书监。
现代文：高祖悯恤他，又封他为秘书监。
English: Gao Zu took pity on him and made him a secretary supervisor.

古文：俄出为梓州刺史。所得料钱，皆散施孤寡。
现代文：不久后出任梓州刺史，他将俸禄外所得食料钱，都分散送给孤儿寡妇。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Zizhou, and he distributed the food money he received in addition to his salary to orphans and widows.

古文：贞观元年病卒。
现代文：贞观元年病逝。
English: Zhenguan died of illness in the first year of the year.

古文：刘感，岐州凤泉人，后魏司徒高昌王丰生之孙也。
现代文：刘感，岐州凤泉人，北魏司徒高昌王刘丰生的孙子。
English: Liu Xuan, a native of Fengquan, Qizhou, was the grandson of Liu Fengsheng, King of Gaochang in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：武德初，以骠骑将军镇泾州。薛仁杲率众围之。感婴城拒守，城中粮尽，遂杀所乘马以分将士，感一无所啖，唯煮马骨取汁，和木屑食之。
现代文：武德初，以骠骑将军名号镇守泾州，薛仁杲率领军队围攻泾州，刘感环城固守御敌，城中粮食都吃光了，便杀所骑的马分给将士们，刘感却一点也不吃，只是取些马骨煮水，掺和些木屑一并吃下去。
English: At the beginning of Wudeh, he guarded Bozhou with the name of a cavalry general, Xue Renjun led the army to besiege Bozhou, Liu Xuanhuan firmly defended the city against the enemy. The food in the city was all eaten up, so he killed the horse he was riding and gave it to the soldiers. Liu Xuan did not eat at all, but took some horse bones and boiled water, mixed with some wood chips and ate it together.

古文：城垂陷者数矣。
现代文：城池多次差点儿陷落。
English: The castle almost fell several times.

古文：长平王叔良援兵至，仁杲解围而去。
现代文：长平王李叔良援兵到了，仁杲才撤兵离去。
English: Changping King Li Shuliang's reinforcements arrived, and it was only then that Nian withdrew his troops.

古文：感与叔良出战，为贼所擒。
现代文：刘感与叔良出战，被叛贼擒获。
English: Liu Xuan fought with Uncle Liang and was captured by the traitors.

古文：仁杲复围泾州，令感语城中云： 援军已败，徒守孤城，何益也！
现代文：仁杲又包围了泾州城，强令刘感对城中人喊话： 援军已败，你们白白地驻守孤城有什么用？
English: Renzhong also encircled Zhangzhou City, forcing Liu Xuan to shout to the people in the city: The reinforcements have been defeated, what is the use of you guarding the lonely city in vain?

古文：宜早出降，以全家室。 
现代文：应该早早投降，以保全家室。 
English: He should have surrendered earlier to save his family.

古文：感许之。
现代文：刘感答应了。
English: Liu Xuan agreed.

古文：及至城下，大呼曰： 逆贼饥饿，亡在朝夕！
现代文：等到了城下，刘感却大声喊道： 逆贼已是饥饿之军，亡在旦夕！
English: When he reached the outskirts of the city, Liu Xuan shouted loudly: "The traitors are already a starving army, they will die soon!"

古文：秦王率数十万众，四面俱集，城中勿忧，各宜自勉，以全忠节！ 
现代文：秦王李世民率领几十万大军，正四面聚集而来，城中不要担心，各人应该自勉，以全忠义大节！ 
English: Qin King Li Shimin, leading hundreds of thousands of troops, is gathering on all sides. Don't worry in the city, everyone should be self-disciplined and celebrate the big festival with full loyalty!

古文：高祖叹曰： 吾负善相，善相不负吾。 封其子为襄城郡公。
现代文：仁杲非常愤怒，把刘感抓到城墙边，从脚到膝盖半截身子埋在地下，然后驰马射杀他，刘感至死声色俱厉。叛贼被扫平后，高宗悬赏得到了刘感的尸体，以少牢的礼仪祭祀他，追赠瀛州刺史，封爵平原郡公，谥号为忠壮。
English: Rinchen was very angry. He grabbed Liu Xuan to the edge of the city wall and buried him in the ground from his feet to his knees, and then shot him on horseback. Liu Xuan was furious until he died. After the traitor was wiped out, Gaozong offered a reward to get Liu Xuan's body, and worshiped him with the etiquette of a minor prisoner. He was posthumously awarded the title of Zhangzhou Jishi, knighted as the governor of Pingyuan County, and his nickname was Zhongzhuang.

古文：李玄通，雍州蓝田人。
现代文：让他的儿子承袭官职与爵位，并赐给田地房宅。李玄通，雍州蓝田人。
English: Let his son inherit the official post and title, and give him a farmhouse. Li Xuan Tong, a resident of Lantian, Yongzhou.

古文：仕隋鹰扬郎将。
现代文：在隋朝任职，号鹰扬郎将。
English: He served in the Sui Dynasty and was called Ying Yang Lang.

古文：义兵入关，率所部归国，累除定州总管。
现代文：李唐军队进入函谷关，率领部属归唐，后授官定州总管。
English: Li Tang's army entered the Hanzhong Pass, and Tang was assigned to lead the troops, and later he was given the post of the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：刘黑闼反叛，攻之，城陷被擒。
现代文：刘黑闼反叛，攻打定州，州城陷落而被擒获。
English: Liu Heixuan rebelled, attacked Dingzhou, and was captured after the fall of the city.

古文：黑闼重其才，欲以为大将，玄通叹息曰： 吾荷朝恩，作籓东夏，孤城无援，遂陷虏庭。
现代文：黑闼重视他的才能，想任用他为大将，玄通叹息道： 我蒙受朝廷大恩，在中国东部总领一方军府，孤城无援，于是身陷贼廷。
English: Heihe attaches importance to his talent and wants to appoint him as a general. Xuantong sighed and said, "I have been greatly blessed by the imperial court. As the commander of a military base in eastern China, I was alone and helpless, so I was trapped by the kleptocracy.

古文：当守臣节，以忠报国，岂能降志，辄受贼官。 
现代文：如今当保持人臣节操，以忠诚报答国家，岂能挫抑志气，竟接受叛贼的官职。 
English: Today, when it is time to maintain the discipline of a vassal and repay the country with loyalty, how can one break one's spirit and accept the post of a traitor?

古文：拒而不受。
现代文：便拒不接受。
English: He refused to accept it.

古文：故吏有以酒食馈之者，玄通曰： 诸君哀吾困辱，故以酒食来相宽慰，吾当为诸君一醉。 
现代文：他过去的属吏有人拿酒食馈赠给他，他便说： 各位哀悯我窘迫受辱，因而送酒食来宽慰我，我应该与各位一醉方休。 
English: When some of his former subordinates presented him with gifts of food and drink, he said: "Gentlemen, if you feel sorry for my embarrassment and humiliation, and therefore send me food and drink to console me, I should get drunk with you all.

古文：遂与乐饮。谓守者曰： 吾能舞剑，可借吾刀。 
现代文：于是一起宴乐饮酒，他对守卫的人说： 我能舞剑以助兴，你可把刀剑借我一用。 
English: So while they were drinking and making merry, he said to the guard, "I can perform a sword dance to amuse you, you can borrow my sword."

古文：守者与之。
现代文：守卫的人就把刀给了他。
English: The guard gave him the knife.

古文：及曲终，太息而言： 大丈夫受国厚恩，镇抚方面，不能保全所守，亦何面目视息世间哉！ 
现代文：曲终之时，他大声长叹： 大丈夫受国家厚恩，镇守抚恤一方，不能保全戍守之地，又有何面目活在人世间！ 
English: At the end of the song, he sighed loudly: It's okay to be favored by the state, to keep the pension, but you can't keep the place you keep, and what kind of face to live in the world!

古文：少孤贫，事母甚谨，博通《五经》，而謇傲独行。
现代文：随即剖腹而死。高祖听说后为他痛心流泪，授给他儿子李伏护大将官职。王义方，泗州涟水人。年少时失父家贫，侍奉母亲很恭谨，广泛通晓《五经》，正直傲世不随俗浮沉。
English: Then he died of a ruptured appendix. After hearing of this, Gaozhu shed tears of sorrow for him and gave his son the post of General Li Fuguo. Wang Yifang, a native of Lishu, Zhangzhou. He lost his father when he was young and his family was poor. He served his mother very respectfully. He was well versed in the "Five Classics" and was honest and did not follow the world's ups and downs.

古文：初举明经，因诣京师，中路逢徒步者，自云父为颍上令，闻病笃，倍道将往焉，徒步不前，计无所出。
现代文：当初考中明经科，便前往京城长安，中途遇到一个徒步赶路的人，自称父亲为颍上县令，听说父亲病重，要兼程前往，目前却只能徒步赶路，难以前行，毫无办法。
English: At the beginning of the examination of the middle school, he went to the Beijing city of Chang'an. On the way, he met a person who rushed on foot. He claimed that his father was the county magistrate of Jianyang. He heard that his father was seriously ill and wanted to travel part of the way. At present, he can only rush on foot. It is difficult to travel, there is no way.

古文：义方解所乘马与之，不告姓名而去。
现代文：王义方解下自己骑的马交给他，没有告诉他姓名就离开了。
English: Wang Yifang dismounted his horse and handed it to him, and left without telling him his name.

古文：俄授晋王府参军，直弘文馆。
现代文：不久授官晋王府参军，在弘文馆任职。
English: He was soon commissioned into the army by the Jin royal court and served in the Korean Literature Museum.

古文：特进魏征甚礼之，将以侄女妻之。
现代文：特进魏征对他很尊敬，准备把侄女嫁给他。
English: Wei Zheng, the special envoy, respected him very much and was ready to marry his niece to him.

古文：义方竟娶征之侄女，告人曰： 昔不附宰相之势，今感知己之言故也。 
现代文：义方终于娶了魏征的侄女，告诉别人说： 从前我是不依附宰相的权势，如今是被知己的话感动所以如此。 
English: Yifang finally married Wei Zheng's niece, and told others: In the past, I did not rely on the prime minister's power, but now I am moved by the words of my friend, so that's why.

古文：转太子校书。
现代文：转任太子校书。
English: He was transferred to the position of the prince's schoolteacher.

古文：无何，坐与刑部尚书张亮交通，贬为儋州吉安丞。
现代文：没多久，因与刑部尚书张亮有交往而获罪，贬为儋州吉安县丞。
English: Not long after, he was found guilty of having dealings with the head of the criminal investigation department, Zhang Liang, and was demoted to the position of Zhangzhou Ji'an County magistrate.

古文：行至海南，舟人将以酒脯致祭。义方曰： 黍稷非馨，义在明德。 
现代文：走到海南，划船的人准备用酒肉进行祭祀，义方说： 黍稷谷物并不馨香，祭祀馨香之义全在完美的德性。 
English: When they arrived in Hainan, the rowers were preparing to make a sacrifice of meat and wine. Yifang said, "Grain stew is not fragrant. The meaning of the sacrificial incense is all in the perfect virtue."

古文：乃酌水而祭，为文曰： 思帝乡而北顾，望海浦而南浮。
现代文：于是取水来进行祭祀，还写了一篇文章： 思念京城而向北眺望，遥望海口却将向南漂流。
English: So he fetched water to perform a ritual, and also wrote an article: I miss the capital and look north, but when I look at Haikou from a distance, it drifts south.

古文：必也行愆诸己，义负前修。
现代文：被自身行为所牵累，有负前贤大义，那是必然的啊！
English: It is inevitable to be affected by one's own actions and to be prejudiced against the past, the wise, and the righteous.

古文：长鲸击水，天吴覆舟。
现代文：大鲸击水，水神倾覆小舟。
English: The great whale hits the water, the water god capsizes the small boat.

古文：因忠获戾，以孝见尤。
现代文：因忠而获罪，尽孝反遭罚。
English: Guilty for loyalty, punished for filial piety.

古文：四维雾廓，千里安流。
现代文：四方云雾辽阔绵远，千里水波静静流淌。
English: The clouds stretch far and wide in all directions, and thousands of miles of water waves quietly flow.

古文：灵应如响，无作神羞。 
现代文：世间万事的因果报应如声之随风，不要当作神灵的羞辱。 
English: The karmic retribution of all things in the world is like the sound of the wind, do not take it as a humiliation of the gods.

古文：时当盛夏，风涛蒸毒，既而开霁，南渡吉安。
现代文：当时正值盛夏，风涛闷热而猛烈。随后天转晴和，于是南渡大海到达了吉安。
English: At that time, it was midsummer, and the wind was sweltering and fierce. Then the weather turned fine, so Nandu Haiya arrived in Ji'an.

古文：蛮俗荒梗，义方召诸首领，集生徒，亲为讲经，行释奠之礼；清歌吹籥，登降有序，蛮酋大喜。
现代文：南蛮之地田野荒芜道路梗塞，义方召来地方首领，集中起学生门徒，亲自为他们讲授经书，举行祭祀先圣先师的礼仪，清歌短笛合鸣，老少尊卑有序，少数民族的酋长们十分高兴。
English: In the land of southern barbarism, the fields are barren, the roads are blocked, the local leaders have been summoned by the righteous side, the students and disciples have been concentrated, the scriptures have been personally taught to them, the ritual of sacrificing the first saint and forerunner has been held, the Qing song and the piccolo have rung in unison, the respect for the old and the young has been orderly, and the ethnic minority chiefs are very happy.

古文：贞观二十三年，改授洹水丞。
现代文：贞观二十三年，改授洹水县丞。
English: In the 23rd year of Zhenguan, he was re-awarded the title of Ershui County magistrate.

古文：时张亮兄子皎，配流在崖州，来依义方而卒。临终托以妻子及致尸还乡。
现代文：此前张亮的侄子张皎流放到崖州，前来依附义方，这时正好去世，临终前把妻小托付给义方，并希望帮忙把自己的遗体运回故乡。
English: Previously, Zhang Liang's nephew Zhang Qian was exiled to Yanzhou and came to adhere to Yifang. At that time, he passed away. Before his death, he entrusted his wife Xiao to Yifang and hoped to help transport his body back to his hometown.

古文：义方与皎妻自誓于海神，使奴负柩，令皎妻抱其赤子，乘义方之马，身独步从而还。
现代文：义方与张皎的妻子一道向海神发过誓后，吩咐仆役抬着灵柩，让张皎的妻子抱着婴儿骑上自己的马，自己则步行跟随，一同北归。
English: After making an oath to the sea god together with Zhang Ye's wife, Yifang ordered the servant to carry the coffin, let Zhang Ye's wife hold the baby and ride on his horse, while he followed on foot, and returned north together.

古文：先之原武葬皎，告祭张亮，送皎妻子归其家而往洹水。
现代文：他先到原武县安葬了张皎，祭告了张亮，送张皎的妻儿回了家，这才往洹水县去。
English: He first went to Hara-Bu County to bury Zhang Ye, to pay his respects to Zhang Liang, and to send Zhang Ye's wife and children back home, before going to Surabaya County.

古文：转云阳丞，擢为著作佐郎。
现代文：后转任云阳县丞，提拔为著作佐郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Yunyang County magistrate, and was promoted to the post of "Written Saro."

古文：显庆元年，迁侍御史。
现代文：显庆元年，升任侍御史。
English: In the first year of the Henki era, he was promoted to the position of Samurai Governor.

古文：时中书侍郎李义府执权用事，妇人淳于氏有美色，坐事系大理，义府悦之，托大理丞毕正义枉法出之。
现代文：当时中书侍郎李义府掌权执政。有个妇女淳于氏长得很美，因获罪被囚禁在大理寺，义府看上了这个女子，托大理丞毕正义违法把她弄出了监狱。
English: At that time, Li Yifu, the secretary of the Central Committee, was in power. There was a woman named Jun Yu who was very beautiful and was imprisoned in Dali Temple for a crime. Yifu took a liking to this woman, and got her out of prison through justice.

古文：高宗又敕给事中刘仁轨、侍御史张伦重按其事。
现代文：后来高宗命令给事中刘仁轨、侍御史张伦重新审理这件案子。
English: Later, Gao Zong ordered the case to be re-examined by Liu Renzhong and the attendant Zhang Lun.

古文：正义自缢。
现代文：毕正义自杀身亡。
English: Bi Zhengyi committed suicide.

古文：高宗特原义府之罪。
现代文：高宗特地饶恕了李义府的罪行。
English: Gao Zong specially pardoned Li Yifu's crime.

古文：义方以义府奸蠹害政，将加弹奏，以问其母。
现代文：义方则认为李义府奸邪害政，准备上奏章弹劾义府，便征求他母亲的意见。
English: Yifang, on the other hand, believed that Li Yifu had committed treason and harmed politics, and asked his mother's opinion when he was preparing to file a petition to impeach Yifu.

古文：母曰： 昔王陵母伏剑成子之义，汝能尽忠立名，吾之愿也，虽死不恨！ 
现代文：母亲说： 从前王陵的母亲以剑自杀成就了儿子的义举，你如今能竭尽忠诚树立声名，这是我的愿望，就是死我也没有遗恨。 
English: His mother said, "Once upon a time, Wang Ling's mother committed suicide with a sword to accomplish her son's righteous deed. Now you can do your best to be loyal and make a name for yourself. This is my wish. Even if I die, I will have nothing to regret."

古文：义方乃先奏曰：
现代文：义方于是先呈上一个奏章，上面写道：
English: Yoshikata then first presented a musical score, which read:

古文：臣闻春莺鸣于献岁，蟋蟀吟于始秋，物有微而应时，人有贱而言忠。
现代文： 臣下听说黄莺鸣啭于一年之始，蟋蟀细吟于初秋之际，物虽微小而顺应时令，人虽微贱而言语忠诚。
English: It is said that the Yellow Kite chirps at the beginning of the year and the White Kite chirps at the beginning of autumn. Although they are small, they adapt to the seasons, and although they are humble, they are loyal to the language.

古文：臣去岁冬初，云阳下县丞耳。
现代文：我去年初冬，还是云阳下县县丞。
English: At the beginning of last winter, I was still a county magistrate in Yunyang County.

古文：今春及夏，陛下擢臣著作佐郎，极文学之清选。
现代文：今年春夏之交，皇上就提升我为著作佐郎，这是文学官职中极为清要的职务。
English: At the turn of this spring and summer, the emperor promoted me to Shososaro, which is an extremely important post in the literary office.

古文：未几，又拜臣侍御史，滥朝廷之雄职。
现代文：不久，又授任我为侍御史，实在是滥用了朝廷显要职位。
English: Soon after, I was also appointed to the position of courtier-historian, which was really an abuse of a prominent position in the imperial court.

古文：顾视生涯，陨首非报，唯欲有犯无隐，以广天听。
现代文：回顾平生，就是抛头颅也无法报答恩泽，只想发现犯法的就决不隐瞒，以扩大皇上的视听。
English: Looking back on my life, even if I were to throw away my head, I would not be able to repay the favor. If I only wanted to discover a violation of the law, I would never hide it in order to expand the emperor's audio-visual.

古文：伏以李义府枉杀寺丞，陛下已赦之，臣不应更有鞫问。
现代文：近来有李义府错杀大理寺丞，皇上已赦免了他，臣下本不应再行查问。
English: Recently, Li Yifu mistakenly killed Daliji Rong, the emperor has pardoned him, the vassal should not have investigated further.

古文：然天子置三公、九卿、二十七大夫、八十一元士，本欲水火相济，盐梅相成，然后庶绩咸熙，风雨交泰。
现代文：然而皇帝设置三公、九卿、二十七大夫、八十一元士，本来就是希望有如同水火般的互相辅助，有如盐梅式的咸酸相成，方能万事兴盛，风调雨顺，时运亨通。
English: However, the emperor set up the three princes, nine lords, twenty-seven doctors, and eighty-one officials, originally hoping to have mutual assistance like water and fire, like salt and plum-style salt and acid, so that everything can prosper, the weather will be good, and the time will be prosperous.

古文：亦不可独是独非，皆由圣旨。
现代文：也不能独自认定是与非，一切都由圣上旨意决定。
English: You can't be the sole judge of right and wrong, everything is determined by the divine will.

古文：昔唐尧失之于四凶，汉祖失之于陈豨，光武失之于逢萌，魏武失之于张邈。
现代文：从前唐尧有失于任用诨敦等四个凶人，汉高祖失于任用陈，光武帝在用逢萌上失误，魏武帝有失于任用张邈。
English: In the past, the Tang Dynasty lost out on the appointment of four murderers such as Shandong, the Han Dynasty lost out on the appointment of Chen, the Guangwu Dynasty lost out on the appointment of Fengmeng, and the Wei Dynasty lost out on the appointment of Zhangye.

古文：此四帝者，英杰之主，然失之于前，得之于后。
现代文：这四个帝王，都是英明杰出的君主，然而有失在前，而有得于后。
English: These four emperors were all wise and outstanding monarchs. However, they had their advantages and disadvantages.

古文：今陛下继圣，抚育万邦，蛮陬夷落，犹惧疏网。况辇毂咫尺，奸臣肆虐，足使忠臣抗愤，义士扼腕。
现代文：当今陛下继承圣人事业，抚育万邦，少数民族偏远的村落，尚且惧怕大唐刑法，何况京师咫尺之地，奸臣恣行暴虐，足令忠臣抗颜激愤、义士扼腕痛恨。
English: Today, His Majesty inherits the cause of saints, nurtures all nations, ethnic minorities in remote villages, and still fears the criminal law of the Great Tang Dynasty, not to mention the land where the capital is just a stone's throw away, treacherous vassals arbitrarily commit tyranny, loyal vassals resist and are enraged, and righteous people hate each other.

古文：纵令正义自缢，弥不可容，便是畏义府之权势，能杀身以灭口。
现代文：即使是正义自缢身亡事，也完全不能容忍，那就是畏惧义府的权势，于是杀身灭口。
English: Even if justice commits suicide, it is completely intolerant, that is, it is afraid of the power of the Yifu, so it kills itself.

古文：此则生杀之威，上非王出；赏罚之柄，下移佞宠。
现代文：这样就是生杀的威力，上不出自于君主；赏罚的权柄，下移至于宠佞之臣。
English: Such is the power of life and death, which does not emanate from the sovereign; the power of reward and punishment, which descends to the favoured vassal.

古文：臣恐履霜坚冰，积小成大，请重鞫正义死由，雪冤气于幽泉，诛奸臣于白日。
现代文：我恐怕履霜当知严寒冰冻将至，积小便会成大，应当防微杜渐。请重新查询正义的死因，以便洗雪冤气于九泉幽冥，诛杀奸臣于光天化日之下。 
English: I am afraid that when I know that severe cold and freezing will come, the accumulation of urine will become large, and it should be prevented. Please re-inquire the cause of death of justice, so as to wash the snow of anger in the dark, and kill the traitor in broad daylight.

古文：及廷劾义府，曰：臣闻附下罔上，圣主之所宜诛；心狠貌恭，明时之所必罚。
现代文：王义方便在朝廷上弹劾义府道： 我听说笼络下属欺骗皇上的人，圣明的君主应该加以杀戮；心地狠毒貌似谦恭的人，清明之时一定要予以惩罚。
English: I have heard that those who entice subordinates to deceive the emperor should be killed by the saintly monarch; those who are cruel-hearted and seem to be humble must be punished when they are sober.

古文：是以隐贼掩义，不容唐帝之朝；窃幸乘权，终齿汉皇之剑。
现代文：因此包庇恶人掩抑正义，不能容于唐帝国圣朝；窃取宠幸玩弄权势，终将被汉皇之剑所刃。
English: Therefore, hiding evildoers and suppressing justice cannot be tolerated in the Holy Dynasty of the Tang Empire; stealing favors and playing with power will eventually be cut by the sword of the Han Emperor.

古文：中书侍郎李义府，因缘际会，遂阶通显。
现代文：中书侍郎李义府，因碰上了机会，于是位望通显。
English: Li Yifu, the chancellor's page, seized the opportunity, and his position became apparent.

古文：不能尽忠竭节，对扬王休，策蹇励驽，祗奉皇眷，而反凭附城社，蔽亏日月，请托公行，交游群小。
现代文：却不能竭忠尽节，在皇帝面前进对效力，也不能鞭策驽钝之马，以敬奉皇室；反而凭借权势，一手遮天，私下请托官员，结交众小人。
English: However, he could not be loyal to the emperor, nor could he be effective in the face of the emperor, nor could he whip his horse to worship the royal family. Instead, he relied on his power to cover the sky with one hand, privately solicit officials, and make friends with many villains.

古文：贪冶容之美，原有罪之淳于；恐漏泄其谋，殒无辜之正义。
现代文：贪恋美色，赦免有罪的淳于氏；惟恐密谋泄漏，害死无辜的正义。
English: He is greedy for beauty and pardons the guilty, but is afraid of conspiring to leak and kill innocent justice.

古文：虽挟山超海之力，望此犹轻；回天转日之威，方斯更劣。
现代文：即使有挟泰山超北海的力量，与此相比还显得轻微；就是有回天转日的威力，面对此事也觉得低下。
English: Even if there is the power of Mount Tai over the North Sea, it still seems slight compared to this; even if there is the power of turning the world upside down, I feel low in the face of this matter.

古文：此而可恕，孰不可容！
现代文：这样的情况如果也可以宽恕，那什么事情不能容忍！
English: If such a situation can be forgiven, then what cannot be tolerated!

古文：金风届节，玉露启涂，霜简与秋典共清，忠臣将鹰鹯并击。
现代文：金风届时而至，玉露出现于路途。御史弹劾的奏章与秋官的刑法一样清白公正，忠臣带着勇猛的鹰一同出击。
English: The golden wind arrived at that time, and the dew appeared on the road. The impeachment report was as innocent and fair as the criminal law of the autumn official, and the loyal retainer attacked with the brave eagle.

古文：请除君侧，少答鸿私，碎首玉阶，庶明臣节。
现代文：请清除国君身边的小人，以稍稍报答鸿大的皇恩，甘愿碎首于玉阶之下，希望能表明臣下的贞节。 
English: Please remove the villains around the sovereign, repay the great imperial grace with a little bit, be willing to break your head under the jade steps, and hope to show the chastity of your subjects.

古文：高宗以义方毁辱大臣，言词不逊，左迁莱州司户参军。
现代文：高宗则认为王义方诽谤侮辱了大臣，言词不恭敬，把他贬谪到莱州任司户参军。
English: Gao Zong, on the other hand, believed that Wang Yifang had slandered and insulted the minister, and that his words were disrespectful, and demoted him to Laizhou to join the army as a steward.

古文：秩满，家于昌乐，聚徒教授。
现代文：任职期满，他便迁家到昌乐县居住，聚集门徒传授学业。
English: At the end of his term of office, he moved to Changle County to live and gather disciples to teach.

古文：母卒，遂不复仕进。
现代文：母亲去世，他便不再做官。
English: After his mother's death, he retired from the civil service.

古文：总章二年卒，年五十五。
现代文：总章二年去世，时年五十五岁。
English: The general died two years later, at the age of 55.

古文：撰《笔海》十卷、文集十卷。
现代文：撰有《笔海》十卷、文集十卷。
English: He is the author of ten volumes of "Pen Sea" and ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：门人何彦光、员半千为义方制师服，三年丧毕而去。
现代文：弟子何彦光、员半千以师礼为王义方服丧，三年服除才离去。
English: Disciple He Yankuang and half a thousand members paid their respects to Wang Yifang with a teacher's salute, and only left after serving a three-year suspension.

古文：半千者，齐州全节人也。
现代文：员半千是齐州全节县人，奉事义方有十多年。
English: The half-thousand members are from all sections of Qi Prefecture, and have served the cause of righteousness for more than ten years.

古文：王同皎，相州安阳人，陈侍中、驸马都尉宽之曾孙。
现代文：王同皎，相州安阳县人，陈朝侍中、驸马都尉王宽的曾孙。
English: Wang Tongyao, a native of Anyang County, Xiangzhou, is the great-grandson of Wang Guang, a chamberlain in the Chen Dynasty and a lieutenant of the Horse Guards.

古文：其先自琅邪仕江左，陈亡，徙家河北。
现代文：他的先祖从琅笽郡到江左做官，陈朝灭亡，迁家到黄河以北地区。
English: His ancestors came to Jiangzao from Jixian County to work as officials. After the fall of the Chen Dynasty, they moved to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：同皎，长安中尚皇太子女定安郡主。授朝散大夫，行太子典膳郎。
现代文：王同皎，长安年间娶皇太子的女儿定安郡主为妻，授官朝散大夫，任职太子典膳郎。
English: Wang Tongyu, who married the crown prince's daughter, Princess Ding'an, in the Chang'an era, was awarded the post of Chosan doctor and served as the crown prince's butler.

古文：敬晖等讨张易之兄弟也。遣同皎与右羽林将军李多祚迎太子于东宫，请太子至玄武门指麾将士。
现代文：敬晖等人讨伐张易之兄弟时，派同皎与右羽林将军李多祚从东宫接出太子，请太子到玄武门指挥将士。
English: When Jing Xi and others were fighting against Zhang Yi's brothers, he sent his comrade and General Li Duojun of the Right Feather Forest to fetch the prince from the East Palace and invite the prince to the Xuanwu Gate to command the soldiers.

古文：太子初拒而不许，同皎讽谕切至，太子乃就驾。
现代文：太子开始时拒不答应，同皎极力委婉劝说，太子才登车前往。
English: At the beginning, the prince refused to agree, and his peers tried their best to gently persuade him to board the train.

古文：以功授右千牛将军，封琅邪郡公，赐实封五百户。
现代文：以功绩授官右千牛将军，封爵琅笽郡公，赐给五百户的封地以食租税。
English: He was awarded the title of General U Chien Niu for his distinguished service, given the title of Duke of Shixian County, and granted 500 households of his fiefs with tax exemptions.

古文：及郡主进封为公主，拜同皎为驸马都尉。
现代文：到郡主进封为公主时，授予同皎驸马都尉官职。
English: When the princess was enthroned as a princess, he conferred the official position of lieutenant to his equerry.

古文：寻加银青光禄大夫，迁光禄卿。
现代文：不久加官银青光禄大夫，迁任光禄卿。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of silver Qing Guanglu doctor and transferred to the post of Guanglu minister.

古文：神龙二年，同皎以武三思专权任势，谋为逆乱，乃招集壮士，期以则天灵驾发引，劫杀三思。
现代文：神龙二年，同皎因武三思专权横行，密谋反叛，便招集勇士，希望借武则天灵车启行，执绋前导的机会，劫持杀掉武三思。
English: In the second year of the Dragon God, when his peers conspired to rebel against Wu Sanxi's arbitrary power, he summoned warriors, hoping to use Wu Zetian's hearse to start the journey, seize the opportunity to lead the way, and kidnap and kill Wu Sanxi.

古文：同谋人抚州司仓冉祖雍，具以其计密告三思。
现代文：同谋人抚州的司仓冉祖雍，把他们的计划全部向武三思秘密告发了。
English: Ran Zuyong, the secretary of the conspirators in Fuzhou, secretly reported all their plans to Wu Sansi.

古文：三思乃遣校书郎李悛上言： 同皎潜谋杀三思后，将拥兵诣阙，废黜皇后。 
现代文：三思便让校书郎李悛上书说： 同皎密谋杀掉武三思后，便要聚集军队直入朝廷，废除罢黜君主。 
English: San Si then asked the school scribe, Li Yan, to write a letter saying: After the murder of Wu San Si by his classmates, he wanted to gather an army to march straight into the imperial court and abolish the monarchy.

古文：帝然之，遂斩同皎于都亭驿前，籍没其家。
现代文：皇帝相信了三思的话，便将同皎斩首于都亭驿前，把他家的财物没收入官。
English: The emperor believed his words and beheaded him in front of the capital's main hall, leaving his family's belongings to the officials.

古文：临刑神色不变，天下莫不冤之。
现代文：同皎临刑时神色丝毫不变，天下人没有不认为他冤枉的。
English: His countenance did not change in the slightest when he was sentenced, and there was no one in the world who did not think he was innocent.

古文：睿宗即位，令复其官爵。
现代文：睿宗即位后，下令恢复同皎的官职与爵位。
English: After Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, he ordered the restoration of the peer's official post and peerage.

古文：执冉祖雍、李悛，并诛之。
现代文：并逮捕了冉祖雍、李悛，把他们一起杀了。
English: They also arrested Ran Zuyong and Li Yao and killed them together.

古文：初与同皎叶谋，有武当丞周憬者，寿州寿春人也。
现代文：当初与王同皎一同谋划的人，有武当县丞周憬，寿州寿春人。
English: At the beginning, the people who planned with Wang Tongyao included Wudang County's Zhou Zhao and Shoushou County's Shou Chunren.

古文：事既泄，遁于比干庙中，自刎而死。
现代文：事情败露后，逃到比干庙中，自刎而死。
English: After the affair came to light, he fled to the Bikan Temple and hanged himself.

古文：可赠谏议大夫，仍令备礼改葬，特授一子官。 
现代文：临终前，他对身边的人说道： 比干是古代的忠臣。
English: Before his death, he said to the people around him: Bi Gan is an ancient loyalist.

古文：先是，定州人郎岌，亦备陈韦庶人及宗楚客将为逆乱之状，中宗不纳，而韦庶人劝杖杀之。
现代文：倘若神明的造化耳聪目明的话，应该知道我周憬忠诚而死。韦后扰乱朝纲，宠信重用邪佞小人，武三思触犯皇上造反作乱，虐待杀害忠良之人，我知道他们灭亡的时间不会久长。可把我的头悬挂在京城城门之上，好让我看着他们身首异门而出。 
English: If the creatures of the gods had sharp ears and eyes, they would know that I died because I was loyal to Zhou Xiang. Wei Hou disrupted the imperial system, favored and used evil villains, and Wu Sansi offended the emperor, rebelled, abused, and killed loyal people. I knew that their time of death would not be long. I could hang my head above the gate of the capital, so that I could watch them go out of the gate.

古文：睿宗即位，追赠谏议大夫。安金藏，京兆长安人，初为太常工人。
现代文：后来事情的发展一切都如他所说。安金藏，京兆长安人，开始时为太常工人。
English: Later, everything developed as he said. An Jincang, a resident of Beijing-Shanghai-Chang'an, started out as a regular worker.

古文：载初年，则天称制，睿宗号为皇嗣。
现代文：载初年间，武则天行使皇帝职权，睿宗称为皇嗣。
English: In the first year of the Zhou Dynasty, Wu Zetian began to exercise the powers of the emperor, and Ruizong was called the imperial heir.

古文：少府监裴匪躬、内侍范云仙并以私谒皇嗣腰斩。
现代文：少府监裴匪躬、内侍范云仙都是因私下拜谒皇嗣而被腰斩的。
English: Shofu supervisor Pei Gangmoi and chambermaid Fan Yunxian were both beheaded for privately bowing to the emperor's heir.

古文：自此公卿已下，并不得见之，唯金藏等工人得在左右。
现代文：从此公卿以下官员，都不能会见皇嗣，只有金藏等工人能够在睿宗左右行动。
English: From then on, officials below court nobles were not allowed to meet the imperial heir, and only workers such as Jinzang could act around Ruizong.

古文：或有诬告皇嗣潜有异谋者，则天令来俊臣穷鞫其状。
现代文：有人诬告皇嗣有暗中谋反的事，武则天下令让来俊臣穷究审查谋反情形。
English: Someone falsely accused the heir to the throne of secretly plotting a rebellion, and Emperor Wu ordered his ministers to investigate and examine the circumstances of the plot.

古文：左右不胜楚毒，皆欲自诬，唯金藏确然无辞，大呼谓俊臣曰： 公不信金藏之言，请剖心以明皇嗣不反。 
现代文：睿宗左右的工人不能忍受审讯的痛苦，都想认罪屈招，只有金藏坚决不招供，大声对来俊臣喊道： 您不相信我金藏的话，请让我剖出心来以明白显示皇嗣的不反。 
English: The workers around Ruizong could not bear the pain of the interrogation and all wanted to plead guilty. Only Jin Cang resolutely refused to confess, shouting loudly to the young minister: "You don't believe me, Jin Cang, please let me cut out my heart to clearly show the emperor's loyalty."

古文：即引佩刀自剖其胸，五藏并出，流血被地，因气绝而仆。
现代文：随即拔出佩刀自剖胸部，五脏六腑一起滚出，血流遍地，立刻断气倒到地上。
English: He then pulled out a knife to cut open his chest, and his five organs and six glands rolled out together. Blood flowed all over the ground, and he immediately collapsed to the ground.

古文：则天闻之，令舆入宫中，遣医人却内五藏，以桑白皮为线缝合，傅之药。
现代文：武则天听说后，让人用轿子抬着急忙赶进宫中来，派医生把金藏的五脏六腑都放回胸腔中，用桑白皮做线进行缝合，然后敷上药。
English: After Wu Zetian heard about this, he had a man carry the cow into the palace in a hurry on a palanquin. He sent a doctor to put Jin Zang's entrails back into his chest cavity, sew them together with mulberry skin, and then apply medicine.

古文：经宿，金藏始甦。
现代文：经过一夜的时间，金藏才舒醒过来。
English: After a night's sleep, Jinzang finally woke up.

古文：则天亲临视之，叹曰： 吾子不能自明，不如尔之忠也！ 
现代文：武则天亲自前去看望他，叹道： 我的儿子不能自我表白，不如你的忠诚。 
English: Wu Zetian went to see him in person and sighed, "My son can't express himself, he's not as loyal as you."

古文：即令俊臣停推，睿宗由是免难。
现代文：便命令来俊臣停止审讯，睿宗因此免除了灾难。
English: He then ordered his courtiers to stop the interrogation, thus sparing Ruizong from disaster.

古文：金藏，神龙初丧母，寓葬于都南阙口之北，庐于墓侧，躬造石坟石塔，昼夜不息。
现代文：神龙初丧母，他把母亲寄葬在京城南面的阙口以北，在墓旁造倚庐住下，亲自建造石坟石塔，昼夜不停。
English: When Shenlong first lost his mother, he buried her north of the gateway on the south side of the capital. He built a stone tomb and a stone tower himself, day and night.

古文：原上旧无水，忽有涌泉自出。
现代文：那片开阔平坦的地上本来没有水，忽然间有泉水自行涌出。
English: There was no water on that wide, flat piece of land, but suddenly a spring sprang up of its own accord.

古文：又有李树盛冬开花，犬鹿相狎。
现代文：又有李树于盛冬时节开花，狗和鹿相狎相亲的奇异事情发生。
English: There are also plum trees that bloom in the dead of winter, and strange things happen when dogs and deer mate.

古文：本道使卢怀慎上闻，敕旌表其门。
现代文：本道使卢怀慎上书禀报君主，敕诏命在他门前立牌坊以表彰他的孝行。
English: The emperor ordered Lu Huaixin to write a letter to inform the monarch, and ordered him to erect a plaque in front of his door to commend his filial piety.

古文：景云中，累迁右武卫中郎将。
现代文：景云年间，迁升为右武卫中郎将。
English: During the Jingyun era, he was promoted to Ubu-e no chujo (Middle Captain of the Right Division of Middle Guards).

古文：玄宗即位，追思金藏忠节，下制褒美，擢拜右骁卫将军，乃令史官编次其事。
现代文：玄宗即位，追念金藏忠孝有节操，下诏书褒奖赞美，提拔为右骁卫将军，还下令让史官把他的事迹编入史册。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended the throne, commemorated the memory of Jinso's loyalty and filial piety, issued an edict praising and commending him, promoted him to General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and ordered the historian to record his deeds in the historical record.

古文：开元二十年，又特封代国公，仍于东岳等诸碑镌勒其名。
现代文：开元二十年，又特为封爵代国公，还在东岳泰山等处各石碑上镌刻他的名字。
English: In the 20th year of the first year of the year, he was also specially knighted as the acting governor, and his name was also engraved on stone tablets in Taishan, Dongyue and other places.

古文：竟以寿终，赠兵部尚书。
现代文：最后以寿终，追赠兵部尚书。
English: At the end of his life, he was posthumously awarded the Heibu Shojo.

