古文：刘焉字君郎，江夏竟陵人也，汉鲁恭王之后裔，章帝元和中徙封竟陵，支庶家焉。
现代文：刘焉，字君郎，江夏郡竟陵县人，是西汉鲁恭王的后裔，东汉章帝元和年间转封到竟陵，是宗族的旁支血脉。
English: Liu Yan, also known as Jun Lang, a native of Jingling County, Jiangxia County, is a descendant of the Western Han Dynasty's King Lu Gong. He was transferred to Jingling during the Eastern Han Dynasty's Emperor Zhang Yuan's reign. He is a collateral bloodline of the clan.

古文：焉少仕州郡，以宗室拜中郎，后以师祝公丧去官。居阳城山，积学教授，举贤良方正，辟司徒府，历雒阳令、冀州刺史、南阳太守、宗正、太常。
现代文：刘焉年轻的时候在州郡做官，因为宗氏子弟的身份被任命为中郎，后来为老师司徒祝恬守丧而离职，居住在阳城山，研究学问，招徒讲学，举荐贤良方正的人才，被征召至司徒府，曾担任过洛阳县令，冀州刺史，南阳太守，宗正、太常等职位。
English: When Liu Yan was young, he worked as an official in Zhoushu County. Because of his status as a son of the Zong clan, he was appointed as a middle-ranking official. Later, he left his post to attend the funeral of his teacher, Sitou Zhu, and lived in Yangcheng Mountain. He studied, recruited and lectured, and recommended talented people from Fangzheng. He was conscripted to Sitou Prefecture. He served as Luoyang County Governor, Jizhou County Chief Historian, Nanyang Governor, Zongzheng, Taichang and other positions.

古文：焉睹灵帝政治衰缺，王室多故，乃建议言： 刺史、太守，货赂为官，割剥百姓，以致离叛。
现代文：刘焉目睹汉灵帝末年政治衰微，王室很多变故，就向朝廷建议说： 刺史、太守都是行贿买官，剥削百姓，导致百姓的叛离。
English: Liu Yan witnessed the political decline of Han Lingdi at the end of his life and the many changes in the royal family, so he suggested to the imperial court that: Sashi and Taizhou were bribing officials, exploiting the people, and leading to the people's defection.

古文：可选清名重臣以为牧伯，镇安方夏。 
现代文：应该挑选那些清廉的朝中重臣担任州郡的长官，以镇守地方。 
English: Those incorruptible senior vassals of the imperial court should be selected to serve as prefects of prefectures and counties, and to guard localities.

古文：焉内求交址牧，欲避世难。
现代文：就刘焉请求担任交趾牧，想要躲避当时的动乱。
English: At Liu Yan's request, he took on the role of koji-maki, wanting to avoid the turmoil at the time.

古文：议未即行，侍中广汉董扶私谓焉曰： 京师将乱，益州分野有天子气。 
现代文：事情还在商议中，没有实行，侍中广汉人董扶私下对刘焉说： 京城即将动乱，益州地区出现天子之气。 
English: The matter is still under discussion, but has not been implemented. The attendant, the Guanghan person, Dong Fu privately said to Liu Yan: The capital is about to be in turmoil, and there is the spirit of the Son of Heaven in the Yizhou area.

古文：焉闻扶言，意更在益州。
现代文：刘焉听了董扶的话，就更想要去益州。
English: After listening to Dong Fu's words, Liu Yan wanted to go to Yizhou even more.

古文：会益州刺史郤俭赋敛烦扰，谣言远闻，而并州杀刺史张壹，凉州杀刺史耿鄙，焉谋得施。
现代文：刚好益州刺史郤俭征收赋税非常繁重，百姓的怨言流传很广，而并州地区杀害了刺史张壹，凉州州地区有人杀害了刺史耿鄙，刘焉的愿望得以实行。
English: It just so happened that in Yizhou, Zhang Shizhen imposed very heavy taxes, and the people's complaints were widely circulated. However, in Binzhou, Zhang Yizhen was killed, and in Liangzhou, Geng Ni was killed, and Liu Yan's wish was carried out.

古文：出为监军使者，领益州牧，封阳城侯，当收俭治罪；扶亦求为蜀郡西部属国都尉，及太仓令巴西赵韪去官，俱随焉。
现代文：他出京担任监军使者，兼任益州牧，被封为阳城侯，奉命将郤俭收押治罪；董扶也请求担任蜀郡西部蜀国的都尉，刚好太仓令巴西人赵韪离职，也跟着刘焉西行。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as an envoy to supervise the army, concurrently served as the pastor of Yizhou, was named the mayor of Yangcheng, and was ordered to arrest and punish Zou Jian; Dong Fu also requested to serve as the captain of the western part of Shu County, and just as Taicang ordered the Brazilian Zhao Jian to leave the post, he also followed Liu Yan to the west.

古文：是时益州逆贼马相、赵祗等于绵竹县自号黄巾，合聚疲役之民，一二日中得数千人，先杀绵竹令李升，吏民翕集，合万余人，便前破雒县，攻益州杀俭，又到蜀郡、犍为，旬月之间，破坏三郡。
现代文：当时益州的反贼马相、赵祗等人在绵竹县自号黄巾军，召集疲于劳役的百姓，一两天之内就招募到数千人，他们先杀害了绵竹县令李升，官吏百姓都依附他们，集合了一万多人之后就前去攻破雒县，并攻进益州，杀了郤俭，又进发到蜀郡、犍为，一个月之内，就接连攻破了三个郡。
English: At that time, the anti-thieves Ma Xiang, Zhao Wei and others in Yizhou called themselves the Yellow Turban Army in Mianzhu County and gathered the people who were tired of labor service. Within a day or two, they recruited thousands of people. They first killed Li Sheng, the Mianzhu County commander, and the officials and people all followed them. After gathering more than 10,000 people, they went to break through Jixian County, and invaded Yizhou, killed Hao Jian, and went to Shu County and Yiwu. Within a month, they broke through three counties in succession.

古文：相自称天子，众以万数。
现代文：马相自称为天子，手下有一万多人。
English: Maso calls himself the son of heaven and has more than 10,000 people under his command.

古文：州从事贾龙领兵数百人在犍为东界，摄敛吏民，得千余人，攻相等，数日破走，州界清静。
现代文：州中从事贾龙率领几百家兵在犍为的东边招募官吏百姓，得到了一千多人，随后进攻马相等，几天之后马相就被攻破撤退，州郡就安定下来。
English: In the middle of the state, Jia Long led several hundred soldiers to recruit officials and people on the east side of Xingwei, and obtained more than a thousand people. Then he attacked Matsuo. A few days later, Matsuo was defeated and retreated, and the state and county settled down.

古文：龙乃选吏卒迎焉。焉徙治绵竹，抚纳离叛，务行宽惠，阴图异计。
现代文：贾龙就挑选官吏前去迎接刘焉，刘焉将府衙转移到绵竹，招纳安抚叛离的百姓，表面上对他们实行恩惠，但暗中怀着其他的图谋。
English: Jialong selected officials to meet Liu Yan, who moved the capital to Mianzhu, recruited and pacified the rebellious people, and ostensibly granted them favors, but secretly harbored other plans.

古文：张鲁母始以鬼道，又有少容，常往来焉家，故焉遣鲁为督义司马，住汉中，断绝谷阁，杀害汉使。
现代文：张鲁的母亲最开始因创立五斗米道而发迹，又比较有姿色，经常和刘焉家中来往，所以刘焉派张鲁担任督义司马，驻守在汉中，断绝山间的道路，并杀死汉朝派来的使者。
English: Zhang Lu's mother initially made a fortune by founding the Wudu Rice Route. She was also rather attractive and often visited Liu Yan's home. Therefore, Liu Yan sent Zhang Lu to serve as the inspector of Yishima, stationed in Hanzhong, cut off the road between the mountains, and killed the envoy sent by the Han Dynasty.

古文：焉上书言米贼断道，不得复通，又托他事杀州中豪强王咸、李权等十余人，以立威刑。
现代文：刘焉上奏朝廷说是米贼截断了山路，不能再通行，又假托他事杀害了州中的豪强王咸、李权等十多个人，以树立他的威严。
English: Liu Yan reported to the imperial court that the U.S. bandits had cut off the mountain road, making it impassable, and that he had killed more than ten people, including the powerful Wang Xian and Li Quan, in order to establish his authority.

古文：犍为太守任岐及贾龙由此反攻焉，焉击杀岐、龙。
现代文：犍为郡太守任岐以及贾龙因此出兵攻打刘焉，刘焉杀死了任岐、贾龙两人。
English: As a result, Renqi and Jia Long, who were the county governors, sent troops to attack Liu Yan. Liu Yan killed Renqi and Jia Long.

古文：焉意渐盛，造作乘舆车具千乘。
现代文：刘焉的想法越来越强烈，就制造了一千多辆辇车。
English: Liu Yan's idea became stronger and stronger, and more than a thousand cars were made.

古文：荆州牧刘表表上焉有似子夏在西河疑圣人之论。
现代文：荆州牧刘表上奏朝廷说，刘焉有像过去子夏在西河时怀疑圣人的言论。
English: Jingzhou herdsman Liu tabled a petition to the imperial court, saying that Liu Yan had made remarks that were similar to those made by Zixia in the past when she doubted the sage in the West River.

古文：时焉子范为左中郎将，诞治书御史，璋为奉车都尉，皆从献帝在长安，惟子别部司马瑁素随焉。
现代文：当时刘焉的儿子刘范担任左中郎将，刘诞担任治书御史，刘璋担任奉车都尉，都跟随汉献帝在长安，只有他的侄子别部司马瑁一直跟随在刘焉身边。
English: At that time, Liu Yan's son, Liu Fan, served as the left middle-rank general, Liu Xing served as the book-keeping officer, and Liu Yao served as the driver of the carriage. They all followed Han Xian in Chang'an. Only his nephew, Beibe Sima Yao, always followed Liu Yan.

古文：献帝使璋晓谕焉，焉留璋不遣。
现代文：汉献帝就派刘璋明示刘焉，刘焉将刘璋扣下不放回。
English: Emperor Han Xian sent Liu Bei to tell Liu Yan that Liu Yan would not let Liu Bei back in.

古文：时征西将军马腾屯郿而反，焉及范与腾通谋，引兵袭长安。
现代文：当时，征西将军马腾据守郿郡反叛，刘焉跟刘范与马腾和谋出兵攻打长安。
English: At that time, the Western Conquest general Ma Teng rebelled against the county of Gu, and Liu Yan and Liu Fan made peace with Ma Teng and sent troops to attack Chang'an.

古文：范谋泄，奔槐里，腾败，退还凉州，范应时见杀，于是收诞行刑。
现代文：刘范的谋划泄露，逃奔到槐里，马腾兵败，退回到凉州，刘范不久之后就被杀，朝廷将刘诞收押处死。
English: Liu Fan's plan leaked out, he fled to Yili, Ma Teng was defeated, and he retreated to Liangzhou. Liu Fan was killed soon after, and the imperial court put Liu Xizhe under arrest and executed him.

古文：议郎河南庞羲与焉通家，乃募将焉诸孙入蜀。
现代文：议郎河南人庞羲跟刘焉是儿女亲家，就派人将刘焉的孙子们送到蜀地。
English: The Henan leader Pang Xuan and Liu Yan are relatives, so he sent someone to take Liu Yan's grandchildren to Shu.

古文：时焉被天火烧城，车具荡尽，延及民家。
现代文：当时刘焉的住宅被天火烧毁，他所制造的车具用品都被烧尽，殃及到周围的百姓家。
English: At that time, Liu Yan's house was burned down by the fire, and the vehicles and supplies he made were all burned out, affecting the surrounding people's homes.

古文：焉徙治成都，既痛其子，又感祆灾，兴平元年，痈疽发背而卒。
现代文：刘焉就将治所转移到成都，既痛心他的孩子受害，又担心天降灾祸，兴平元年，因为背上的痈疽发作而死。
English: Liu Yan transferred the treatment center to Chengdu, both saddened by the suffering of his children and worried about the natural disaster. In the first year of Xingping, he died because of the onset of gangrene on his back.

古文：州大吏赵韪等贪璋温仁，共上璋为益州刺史，诏书因以为监军使者，领益州牧，以韪为征东中郎将，率众击刘表。
现代文：州中的大员赵韪等人看到刘璋性情宽和，就共同上表，请求封刘璋为益州刺史，皇帝下诏封他为监军使者，兼领益州牧，并任命赵韪为征东中郎将，派他率军攻打刘表。
English: Seeing Liu Bei's amiable disposition, Zhao Jun and others in the prefecture jointly petitioned the emperor to appoint Liu Bei as the governor of Yizhou, and the emperor appointed him as the envoy to supervise the army and the leader of Yizhou, and appointed Zhao Jun as the general of the Eastern Expedition, and sent him to lead the army to attack Liu Bei.

古文：璋，字季玉，既袭焉位。而张鲁稍骄恣，不承顺璋，璋杀鲁母及弟，遂为仇敌。
现代文：刘璋，字季玉，刘璋继承刘焉的地位之后，张鲁渐渐的骄横恣意，不顺从刘璋的意思，刘璋就杀死了张鲁的母亲及弟弟，两人就结成了仇敌。
English: After Liu Han, surnamed Ji Yu, and Liu Han inherited Liu Yan's position, Zhang Lu gradually became arrogant and arbitrary, and disobeyed Liu Han's will. Liu Han killed Zhang Lu's mother and brother, and the two became enemies.

古文：璋累遣庞羲等攻鲁，所破。
现代文：刘璋多次派遣庞羲等人进攻张鲁，都被张鲁打败。
English: Liu Bei repeatedly sent Pang Jun and others to attack Zhang Lu, but they were all defeated by Zhang Lu.

古文：鲁部曲多在巴西，故以羲为巴西太守，领兵御鲁。
现代文：张鲁的部队大多在巴西郡，所以刘璋就任命庞羲为巴西太守，让他率兵抵抗张鲁。
English: Most of Zhang Lu's troops were in Brazil County, so Liu Bei appointed Pang Jun as the governor of Brazil and let him lead the troops to resist Zhang Lu.

古文：后羲与璋情好携隙，赵韪称兵内向，众散见杀，皆由璋明断少而外言入故也。
现代文：后来庞羲和刘璋的关系出现嫌隙，赵韪就举兵反叛刘璋，后来因为部众离散而被杀，都因为刘璋不能明断是非并常听小人谗言。
English: Later, there was a rift in the relationship between Pang Juan and Liu Juan. Zhao Juan raised an army to rebel against Liu Juan. Later, he was killed because his followers were dispersed, all because Liu Juan could not clearly distinguish between right and wrong and often listened to the criticism of villains.

古文：璋闻曹公征荆州，已定汉中，遣河内阴溥致敬于曹公。加璋振威将军，兄瑁平寇将军。
现代文：刘璋得知曹公征讨荆州，已经平定了汉中，就派遣河内人阴溥向曹公表达敬意，曹公加封刘璋为振威将军，他的兄长刘瑁为平寇将军。
English: When Liu Bei learned that Cao Gong's campaign against Jing Province had already settled the Han Dynasty, he sent the Hanoi people Yin Yi to pay his respects to Cao Gong. Cao Gong appointed Liu Bei as General Zhenwei, and his brother Liu Bei as General Pingko.

古文：瑁狂疾物故。
现代文：刘瑁因为发癫狂病去世。
English: Liu Hui died of hysteria.

古文：璋复遣别驾从事蜀郡张肃送叟兵三百人并杂御物于曹公，曹公拜肃为广汉太守。
现代文：刘璋又派遣别驾从事蜀郡人张肃将三百老兵和各类皇家杂物都送给曹公，曹公任命张肃为广汉太守。
English: Liu Bei also sent Zhang Su, a man from Shu County, to send 300 veterans and all kinds of royal sundries to Cao Gong. Cao Gong appointed Zhang Su as the governor of Guanghan.

古文：璋复遣别驾张松诣曹公，曹公时已定荆州，走先主，不复存录松，松以此怨。
现代文：刘璋又派遣别驾张松拜见曹公，曹公这时已经平定了荆州，攻破了刘备，没有再任用张松，张松因此生怨。
English: Liu Bei also sent Zhang Song to pay homage to Cao Gong. Cao Gong had already pacified Jingzhou, defeated Liu Bei, and did not reappoint Zhang Song, which caused Zhang Song's resentment.

古文：会曹公军不利赤壁，兼以疫死。
现代文：刚好曹操的军队在赤壁失利，再加上士兵因瘟疫死亡的很多。
English: Cao Cao's army had just been defeated at Chibi, and many soldiers had died from the plague.

古文：松还，疵毁曹公，劝璋自绝，因说璋曰： 刘豫州，使君之肺腑，可与交通。 
现代文：张松回来，诋毁曹操，劝说刘璋跟曹操断绝关系，他对刘璋说： 刘豫州是您的宗室兄弟，可以跟他联络。 
English: Zhang Song returned, slandered Cao Cao, and persuaded Liu Ye to break off relations with Cao Cao. He said to Liu Ye: "Liu Yuzhou is your brother-in-law, you can contact him.

古文：璋皆然之，遣法正连好先主，寻又令正及孟达送兵数千助先主守御，正遂还。
现代文：刘璋也认为是这样，就派法正前去跟刘备交好，不久又派法正和孟达送了几千士兵给刘备，以助他守卫，随后法正就回来了。
English: Liu Bei also thought so, so he sent Fa Zheng forward to make friends with Liu Bei, and soon sent Fa Zheng and Meng Da to send several thousand soldiers to Liu Bei to help him guard, and then Fa Zheng returned.

古文：后松复说璋曰： 今州中诸将庞羲、李异等皆恃功骄豪，欲有外意，不得豫州，则敌攻其外，民攻其内，必败之道也。 
现代文：张松又劝说刘璋： 现在州中的将领庞羲，李异等人都居功自傲，心中怀有阴谋，如果不能得到刘豫州的帮助，那么就会出现外有强敌入侵，内有百姓骚乱的情况，是一定会失败的。 
English: Zhang Song also persuaded Liu Ye: Now the generals Pang Jun, Li Ying and others in the state are proud of their achievements and harbor conspiracies in their hearts. If they can't get help from Liu Yuzhou, then there will be a strong enemy invasion from the outside and people's riots from the inside, and they will definitely fail.

古文：璋又从之，遣法正请先主。璋主簿黄权陈其利害，从事广汉王累自倒县于州门以谏，璋一无所纳，敕在所供奉先主，先主入境如归。
现代文：刘璋又听从了张松的话，派法正延请刘备，刘璋的主簿黄权向刘张陈说迎接刘备的利害，从事广汉人王累将自己倒挂在州门城墙上向刘璋进谏，刘璋全都没有接纳，并下令刘备所到之处都要好好招待，刘备进入益州好像返回故乡。
English: Liu Bei also listened to Zhang Song's words and sent Fa Zheng to invite Liu Bei. Huang Quan, Liu Bei's master, told Liu Zhang Chen to meet Liu Bei's interests, and engaged in Guanghan people Wang Lei to hang himself upside down on the city wall of the State Gate to enter Liu Bei. Liu Bei did not accept it, and ordered Liu Bei to be well invited everywhere he went. Liu Bei entered Yizhou as if he was returning to his hometown.

古文：先主至江州，北由垫江水诣涪。去成都三百六十里，是岁建安十六年也。
现代文：刘备到了江州北面，再经由垫江水路到涪县，距离成都三百六十里，这一年是建安十六年。
English: Liu Bei arrived in the north of Jiangzhou, and then passed through the Mat River waterway to Min County, 360 miles away from Chengdu. This year is the 16th year of Jian'an.

古文：璋率步骑三万余人，车乘帐幔，精光耀目，往就与会先主所将将士。更相之适，欢饮百余日。
现代文：刘璋率领步兵三万余人，车马帷幔，非常光彩夺目，前去跟刘备相会；刘备所率领的将士也依次前往迎接，两方宴会一百多天。
English: Liu Bei led more than thirty thousand infantrymen, and they went to meet Liu Bei. The soldiers led by Liu Bei also went to meet him, and the two sides had a banquet for more than one hundred days.

古文：璋资给先主，使讨张鲁，然后分别。
现代文：刘璋向刘备提供物资，让他去征讨张鲁，然后两人分别。
English: Liu Ye provided Liu Bei with supplies and asked him to go and negotiate with Zhang Lu, after which the two separated.

古文：明年，先主至葭萌，还兵南向，所在皆克。
现代文：第二年，刘备到了葭萌，率军往南攻打刘璋，所到的地方都攻克了。
English: In the second year, Liu Bei arrived in Qimeng and led his army to attack Liu Bei in the south. He conquered everywhere he went.

古文：十九年，进围成都数十日，城中尚有精兵三万人，谷帛支一年，吏民咸欲死战。
现代文：建安十九年，刘备进军围困成都数十天，当时城中还有三万精锐士兵，粮食布帛可供应一年，城中的官吏百姓都想要跟刘备决一死战。
English: In the 19th year of Jianan, Liu Bei marched into and besieged Chengdu for dozens of days. At that time, there were still 30,000 elite soldiers in the city, and the grain and cloth could be supplied for one year. The officials and people in the city all wanted to fight Liu Bei to the death.

古文：璋言： 父子在州二十余年，无恩德以加百姓。百姓攻战三年，肌膏草野者，以璋故也，何心能安！ 
现代文：刘璋说： 我父子两人在益州二十多年，对百姓没有施加恩德，百姓攻战三年，很多人抛尸荒野，都是因为我刘璋的缘故，我心中怎么能安稳呢？ 
English: Liu Yao said: My father and son have been in Yizhou for more than 20 years, and they have not been kind to the people. The people have been fighting for three years, and many people have thrown corpses into the wilderness, all because of me, Liu Yao. How can I be stable in my heart?

古文：遂开城出降，群下莫不流涕。
现代文：于是打开城门出城投降，部下没有不流泪的。
English: So he opened the city gate and went out of the city to surrender. His men did not leave without shedding tears.

古文：先主迁璋于南郡公安，尽归其财物及故佩振威将军印绶。
现代文：刘备将刘璋迁到南郡公安县，并将他的财物和原来所佩戴的振威将军的印信收归所有。
English: Liu Bei moved Liu Hui to Nan County Public Security County, and took possession of his property and the seal letter of General Zhenwei originally worn.

古文：孙权杀关羽，取荆州，以璋为益州牧，驻秭归。
现代文：孙权杀了关羽，夺取了荆州，任命刘璋为益州牧，驻守在秭归。
English: Sun Quan killed Guan Yu, captured Jingzhou, appointed Liu Ye as the herdsman of Yizhou, and stationed in Xinggui.

古文：璋卒，南中豪率雍闿据益郡反，附于吴。
现代文：刘璋去世后，南中的豪强雍闿拒守益郡反叛，依附于东吴。
English: After Liu Bei's death, the powerful Yongzheng of the Southern Middle Kingdom refused to rebel against Shouyi County and clung to Dongwu.

古文：权复以璋子阐为益州刺史，处交、益界首。
现代文：孙权又任命刘璋的儿子刘阐为益州刺史，地处于交州益州的分界。
English: Sun Quan also appointed Liu Yao's son Liu Yan as the governor of Yizhou, which was located on the border between Jiaozhou and Yizhou.

古文：丞相诸葛亮平南土，阐还吴，为御史中丞。
现代文：蜀地的丞相诸葛亮平定了南方，刘阐逃回东吴，担任御史中丞。
English: Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, pacified the south, while Liu Ying fled back to Eastern Wu and served as the vice-premier.

古文：初，璋长子循妻，庞羲女也。
现代文：当初，刘璋的长子刘循取庞羲的女儿为妻。
English: At first, Liu Xuan's eldest son Liu Xun took the daughter of Pang Xuan as his wife.

古文：先主定蜀，羲为左将军司马，璋时从羲启留循，先主以为奉车中郎将。
现代文：刘备平定蜀地后，庞羲被任命为左将军司马，当时刘璋听从庞羲的意见，将刘循留下，刘备任命刘循为奉车中郎将。
English: After Liu Bei subdued Shu, Pang Jun was appointed as the commander of the left general Sima. At that time, Liu Jun listened to Pang Jun's opinion and left Liu Xun behind. Liu Bei appointed Liu Xun as the commander of the middle guard.

古文：是以璋二子之后，分在吴、蜀。
现代文：因此刘璋两个儿子的后代分别处在吴、蜀两国。
English: Therefore, the descendants of Liu Bei's two sons are located in Wu and Shu, respectively.

古文：评曰：昔魏豹闻许负之言则纳薄姬于室，刘歆见图谶之文则名字改易，终于不免其身，而庆钟二主。
现代文：评曰：过去魏豹听从了许负的话，就将薄姬纳为妾室，刘歆看到了图文上的预言，就改换名字，但最终也没有能幸免于难，并和二主庆贺。
English: The commentary said: In the past, Wei Pan listened to Xu Hong's words and made Bo Jianlu his concubine, and Liu Yao saw the prophecy on the picture and text and changed his name, but in the end, he did not survive, and celebrated with the two masters.

古文：此则神明不可虚要，天命不可妄冀，必然之验也。
现代文：这说明神明不可以要求，天意不能妄图期盼，这是一定会应验的。
English: This shows that gods cannot be asked for, and providence cannot be expected in vain. This will surely come to pass.

古文：而刘焉闻董扶之辞则心存益土，听相者之言则求婚吴氏，遽造舆服，图窃神器，其惑甚矣。
现代文：而刘焉听从了董扶的话，就将益州作为据守的地区，听从了看相者的话，就向吴氏求亲，假造车马服饰，暗中图谋神器，这很令人疑惑。
English: But Liu Yan listened to the words of Dong Fu and took Yizhou as the area to be defended, and listened to the words of the eyewitnesses and asked the Wu clan for a relative, made fake chariot and horse costumes, and secretly plotted the artifact, which is very puzzling.

古文：璋才非人雄，而据土乱世，负乘致寇，自然之理，其见夺取，非不幸也。
现代文：刘璋的才干并不是人间豪杰，但在乱世据守一方，最终招致敌寇，这是自然的常理，他最后被夺取地盘和封号，不是他的不幸。
English: Liu Xuan's talent is not that of a world-class hero, but in a turbulent world, he stood his ground and eventually invited the enemy to invade. This is a natural common sense. It is not his misfortune that he was finally deprived of his territory and name.

