古文：长沙有人，忘其姓名，家住江边。
现代文：长沙郡有一人，忘记他的姓名了，家住在江河岸边。
English: In Changsha County, there was a man, I forget his name, who lived on the banks of a river.

古文：有女子渚次浣衣，觉身中有异，后不以为患，遂妊身。
现代文：有一个女子，到江中的小岛上洗衣服，感觉自己的身体肚腹中有些异常，又不以为是疾病。
English: There was a woman who went to wash clothes on a small island in the river and felt something abnormal in her stomach, but did not think it was an illness.

古文：生三物，皆如鮧鱼。
现代文：这个女子于是就怀了身孕，生下来三个东西，全都像鲇鱼一样。
English: The woman became pregnant and gave birth to three things, all of which resembled eels.

古文：女以己所生，甚怜异之。乃著澡盘水中养之。
现代文：这个女子认为是自己所生的，对它们非常怜异，就放在沐浴盆子的水中喂养。
English: The woman, who believes she gave birth to the cubs, is very fond of them and feeds them in a basin of water.

古文：经三月，此物遂大，乃是蛟子。
现代文：经过了三个月，它们逐渐长大，原来是蛟子。
English: After three months, they gradually grew up and turned out to be lice.

古文：各有字，大者为 当洪 ，次者为 破阻 ，小者为 扑岸 。
现代文：它们各有名字：老大叫 当洪 ，老二叫 破阻 ，最小的叫 扑岸 。
English: They each have a name: the eldest is called Danghong, the second is called Breakthrough, and the youngest is called Po Kiang.

古文：天暴雨水，三蛟一时俱去，遂失所在。
现代文：一天，天空下起暴雨，三个蛟子同时都离去了，于是就不知道它们到哪里去了。
English: One day, when it rained heavily, the three mules all left at the same time, and no one knew where they had gone.

古文：后天欲雨，此物辄来。
现代文：后来天空要下雨时，这些蛟子总要回来。
English: Later, when the sky is about to rain, these lice always want to come back.

古文：女亦知其当来，便出望之。
现代文：这个女子也知道它们要回来，就走出屋门外去眺望它们。
English: The woman knew they were coming, too, and went outside to watch them.

古文：蛟子亦举头望母，良久方去。
现代文：蛟子们也抬起头来眺望母亲，很久才离去。
English: The pups also looked up at their mother, before leaving for a long time.

古文：经年后，女亡，三蛟子一时俱至墓所哭之，经日乃去。
现代文：过了一年之后，这个女子死亡了。三个蛟子一齐都来到坟墓前哭吊母亲，整整一天才离去。
English: A year later, the woman died, and the three mules came to the grave to weep over their mother, and did not leave for a whole day.

古文：闻其哭声，状如狗嗥。
现代文：听它们哭的声音，就像是狗的嗥叫声。
English: The sound of their crying is like the howling of a dog.

古文：安城平都县尹氏，居在郡东十里日黄村，尹佃舍在焉。
现代文：安城郡平都县有个姓尹的人，生活在郡城东面十里的日黄村，他的土地和住宅都在那里。
English: There is a man surnamed Yin in Pingdu County, Ancheng County, who lives in Nihwang Village, ten miles east of the county seat. His land and residence are all there.

古文：元嘉二十三年六月中，尹儿年十三，守舎，见一人年可二十许，骑白马，张伞，及从者四人，衣并黄色，从东方而来。
现代文：元嘉二十三年的六月间，尹家十三岁的儿子在家守屋，看见一个年龄在二十岁左右的人，骑着白马打着伞，与四个随从的人，都身穿黄色的衣服，从东方过来。
English: In June of the 23rd year of the Yuan Jia, the 13-year-old son of the Yin family was at home watching the house and saw a man of about 20 years old, riding a white horse with an umbrella, and four followers, all wearing yellow clothes, coming from the east.

古文：至门，呼尹儿： 来暂寄息。 因入舍中庭下，坐床，一人捉伞覆之。
现代文：到了门口，招呼尹家儿子： 我们来你家暂时借宿休息。 他们因此进入房屋的庭院中下马，在床上坐下，一个随从拿起伞来把那年轻人遮住。
English: When they got to the door, they called out to Yin's son, "We've come to your house to stay and rest for a while," so they dismounted in the courtyard of the house, sat down on the bed, and one of the attendants took up an umbrella to cover the young man.

古文：尹儿看其衣，悉无缝，马五色斑，似鳞甲而无毛。
现代文：尹家儿子看到他们的衣服全都没有线缝，那马五彩斑纹，好像是鳞甲而没有毛。
English: Yin Jia's son saw that all of their clothes had no seams, and that horses had multicolored stripes, as if they were scaly and had no hair.

古文：有顷，雨气至。此人上马去，回顾尹儿曰： 明日当更来。 尹儿观其去，西行，蹑虚而渐升，须臾，云气四合。白昼为之晦暝。
现代文：过了很短的时间，下雨的迹象到来，这个年轻人上马要离开，回头对尹家儿子说： 明天我们还要来。 尹家儿子看着他们离开，往西方走去，踩着天空渐渐升腾。不一会儿，云雾烟气从四方合拢来，白天因此而变得阴暗起来。
English: After a short time, the signs of rain came, the young man got on his horse to leave, turned back to Yin Jia's son and said, "Tomorrow we will still come." Yin Jia's son watched them leave, walked to the west, stepped on the sky and gradually rose. Soon, the clouds of smoke closed in from all sides, and the day became dark because of it.

古文：明日，大水暴出，山谷沸涌，丘壑淼漫。
现代文：第二天，洪水凶猛爆发而出，山谷翻滚汹涌，山丘沟壑大水漫无边际。
English: The next day, the floodwaters erupted ferociously, the valleys roiled violently, the hills and ravines were full of water.

古文：将淹尹舍，忽见大蛟长三丈余，盘屈庇其舍焉。
现代文：尹家住宅将要被淹没的时刻，忽然出现一条三丈多长的大蛟龙，盘屈着身体护住了尹家的房舍。
English: At the time when Yin's house was about to be submerged, a three-story-tall dragon suddenly appeared, bending down to protect Yin's house.

古文：武昌虬山有龙穴，居人每见虬飞翔出入。
现代文：武昌郡的虬山上有一个龙住的水洞，居住在那里的人经常看到一条神奇的虬龙飞进飞出。
English: There is a dragon-inhabited water cave on Lushan Mountain in Wuchang County. The people who live there often see a magical dragon flying in and out.

古文：岁旱祷之，即雨。
现代文：人们在干旱的年辰向它祷告，天立即就会下雨。
English: People pray to it in times of drought, and rain falls immediately.

古文：后人筑塘其下，曰 虬塘 。
现代文：后来人们在它住的水洞下面修筑起了堤坝，取名叫 虬塘 。
English: Later, people built an embankment under the water cave where it lived, and named it Qutang.

古文：吴兴人章苟者，五月中，于田中耕，以饭置菰里，每晚取食，饭亦已尽。
现代文：吴兴郡有个叫章苟的人，五月间在田中耕作，他把自己带的饭菜放置在菇丛之中，每到晚上去取出来吃，所放置的饭菜已经全没了。
English: In Wuxing County, there is a man named Zhang Guo. In May, he was working in a rice field. He placed the food he brought with him among the mushroom bushes. Every evening, he went to take it out and eat it. The food he had placed was all gone.

古文：如此非一。
现代文：这种事发生了不止一次。
English: This happened more than once.

古文：后伺之，见一大蛇偷食。
现代文：后来他悄悄去察看，看到一条大蛇偷吃他的饭菜。
English: He then went to take a closer look and saw a large snake stealing his food.

古文：苟遂以鈠斫之，蛇便走去。
现代文：章苟于是就用锄头去砍那蛇，那条蛇就逃走了。
English: Zhang Guo then used a hoe to cut the snake, and the snake ran away.

古文：苟逐之，至一坂，有穴，便入穴。
现代文：章苟去追赶它，到了一个山坡上，有一个洞穴，那蛇就钻进了洞穴中，只听到有哭啼的声音说： 砍伤我了！ 
English: Zhang Gou went to chase it. When he reached a cave on a hillside, the snake burrowed into the cave. All he heard was a crying voice saying: "You've cut me!

古文：但闻啼声云： 斫伤我某甲。 或言： 何如？ 或云： 付雷公，令霹雳杀奴。 须臾，云雨冥合，霹雳覆苟上。
现代文：有的在说： 应该怎么办？ 有的在说： 交给雷公用霹雳把那奴才打死。 不一会儿，乌云阴雨昏暗闭合，霹雳直往章苟身上打。
English: Some were saying, "What should we do?" Some were saying, "Let Lei Gong beat that ruffian to death with a pickaxe." Soon, the dark clouds closed in, and the pickaxe went straight for Zhang Guo's body.

古文：苟乃跳梁大骂曰： 天使！
现代文：章苟于是就大跳起来叫骂道： 天公老爷！
English: Zhang Guo then jumped up and shouted an insult: Heavenly Father!

古文：我贫穷，展力耕恳。
现代文：我贫寒穷困，施展全力勤勤恳恳耕作。
English: I am poor and destitute, and I do my best to cultivate diligently.

古文：蛇来偷食，罪当在蛇，反更霹雳我耶？
现代文：蛇来偷我的饭菜吃，应当是蛇的罪过，为什么反而还要用霹雳来打我呢？
English: If a snake steals my food and eats it, it must be the snake's fault, so why does it have to beat me with a pestle?

古文：乃无知雷公也。
现代文：你是个无知的雷公啊！
English: You are an ignorant thunder god!

古文：雷公若来，吾当以鈠斫汝腹。 须臾，云雨渐散，转霹雳向蛇穴中，蛇死者数十。
现代文：雷公如果来了，我一定要用锄头砍你的肚腹！ 不一会儿，乌云阴雨渐渐散开，霹雳转而向蛇的洞穴里打去，被打死的蛇有好几十条。
English: If the thunder god comes, I will surely cut your stomach with a hoe! In a short while, the dark clouds and rain gradually dispersed, and the dragonfly turned to fight in the snake cave. There were dozens of snakes that were killed.

古文：吴末，临海人入山射猎，为舍住。
现代文：三国东吴的末年，临海郡有个人进入山里去用弓箭打猎，在山里修建了一间房屋来住。
English: At the end of the Three Kingdoms period, a man from Linhai County went into the mountains to hunt with a bow and arrow and built a house to live in.

古文：夜中，有一人，长一丈，著黄衣，白带，径来谓射人曰： 我有仇，克明日当战。
现代文：夜里，有一个人身高一丈，身穿着黄色的衣服，系着白色的腰带，径直来对这个射猎的人说： 我有仇人，约好在明天决战。
English: During the night, a tall man, dressed in yellow and wearing a white belt, came straight up to the hunter and said: "I have an enemy, and we are going to have a showdown tomorrow.

古文：君可见助，当厚相报。 射人曰： 自可助君耳，何用谢为。 答曰： 明日食时，君可出溪边。
现代文：你可以来给我帮助，定当给你丰厚的报答。 射猎人说： 我自然可以帮助你，哪里用得着你给我答谢。 黄衣人回答说： 明天早饭的时候，你可以出来到溪河边上。
English: You can come and help me, and I will reward you handsomely.The archer said, "Of course, I can help you, and you can thank me if you need to."The man in yellow replied, "Tomorrow at breakfast time, you can go out to the edge of the stream."

古文：敌从北来，我南往应。
现代文：仇人从北面过来，我从南面前去应战。
English: The enemy came from the north, and I went to meet the challenge from the south.

古文：白带者我，黄带者彼。 射人许之。
现代文：系白色腰带的是我，系黄色腰带的是仇人。 射猎人答应了。
English: I wore the white belt and my enemy wore the yellow belt. The marksman agreed.

古文：明出，果闻岸北有声，状如风雨，草木四靡。
现代文：射猎人第二天出去，果然听见溪河北岸传来声音，如同风雨的声音一样，草丛树木向四面倒下。
English: The hunter went out the next day, and sure enough, he heard a sound from the north bank of the stream, like the sound of wind and rain, the grass and trees falling down.

古文：视南亦尔。
现代文：看南面也是这样。
English: It's the same looking south.

古文：唯见二大蛇，长十余丈，于溪中相遇，便相盘绕。 白蛇势弱。
现代文：只看见两条大蛇，有十多丈长，在溪河中间相遇，耕互相缠绕。
English: I only saw two large snakes, more than ten feet long, meeting in the middle of the stream and winding around each other.

古文：射人因引弩射之，黄蛇即死。
现代文：系白色腰带的蛇力量弱，射猎人因此拉开弓箭射过去，系黄色腰带的蛇立即死去。
English: The snake with the white belt was weak, so the archer pulled out his bow and arrow and shot it. The snake with the yellow belt died immediately.

古文：日将暮，复见昨人来，辞谢云： 住此一年猎，明年以去，慎勿复来，来必为祸。 射人曰： 善。 遂停一年猎，所获甚多，骤至巨富。
现代文：天色快要黑的时候，射猎人看见昨天的那人又来了，向射猎人辞别答谢道： 你住在这里打一年猎，明年就离开这里，千万不要再回来，再来一定有灾祸。 射猎人说： 好的。 于是在这里停留打猎一年，所收获的非常丰富，他家达到了巨富。
English: When it was almost dark, the marksman saw the man from yesterday coming again. He said goodbye and thanked the marksman, saying, "You live here and hunt for one year, then leave here the next year. Don't ever come back, there will be a disaster again." The marksman said, "Okay." So he stayed here and hunted for one year. The harvest was very rich, and his family became very wealthy.

古文：数年后，忽忆先所获多，乃忘前言，复更往猎。
现代文：几年之后，射猎人忽然回想起从前所收获的那么多，就忘掉了以前系白腰带人所说的话，又再前往那个地方去打猎。
English: A few years later, the archer suddenly remembered how much he had harvested in the past, forgot what the white belt had said, and went hunting in that place again.

古文：见先白带人告曰： 我语君勿复更来，不能见用。
现代文：射猎人见到从前那个系白腰带的人来告诉他说： 我嘱咐你不要再来，你却不能听我的话。
English: The marksman saw the man with the white sash who had come to tell him: "I told you not to come back, but you wouldn't listen to me.

古文：仇子已大，今必报君。
现代文：仇人的孩子已经长大了，如今一定会来找你报仇。
English: The enemy's child has grown up, and now he will surely come to you for revenge.

古文：非我所知。
现代文：你不是我的知交。 
English: You're not my best friend.

古文：射人闻之，甚怖，便欲走。
现代文：射猎人听了非常恐惧，想要离开。
English: The marksman was horrified and wanted to leave.

古文：乃见三乌衣人，皆长八尺，俱张口向之，射人即死。
现代文：这时就看见三个身穿黑衣的人，全都有八尺高，全部张开嘴对准射猎人，射猎人立即死去。
English: That's when they saw three black-clad men, all eight feet tall, all open their mouths at the shooter, who died instantly.

古文：元嘉中，广州有三人，共入山中伐木。
现代文：南朝的元嘉年间，广州府有三个人，一同到山中去砍伐树木。
English: In the Yuan Jia years of the Southern Dynasty, three people from Guangzhou went to the mountains to cut down trees.

古文：忽见石窠中有二卵，大如升，取煮之，汤始热，便闻林中如风雨声。
现代文：他们忽然在一个石窠里看见有两枚蛋，像升那么大。他们取出蛋来用水煮，水刚刚开始烧热，就听见树林里像有风雨的声音一样。
English: Suddenly they saw two eggs, as big as cranes, in a stone urn. They took the eggs out and boiled them in water. As soon as the water began to boil, they heard what sounded like a storm in the forest.

古文：须臾，有一蛇，大十围，长四五丈，径来，于汤中衔卵去。
现代文：不一会儿，出现一条蛇，有十围那样粗，身长四五丈，径直爬过来在水中把蛋衔起走了。
English: Soon, a snake appeared, about ten times as thick and four or five times as long, and it crawled straight over to pick up the tail of the egg in the water.

古文：三人无几皆死。
现代文：三个人没多久全死了。
English: All three died soon after.

古文：晋太元中，有士人嫁女于近村者，至时，夫家遣人来迎女。女家别遣发，又令乳母送之。
现代文：东晋太元年间，有一个官宦人家将女儿嫁到附近的村子里。到了出嫁的时候，丈夫家派人前来迎娶，女家好生打发迎娶的人，并叫女儿的乳母陪送女儿出嫁。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, a court official sent his daughter to a nearby village to get married. When it was time to get married, the husband's family sent someone to come and get married, and the woman's family was kind enough to send someone to get married, and asked her daughter's nanny to accompany her daughter to get married.

古文：既至，重车累阁，拟于王侯。
现代文：到了丈夫家，重重门户层层阁楼，可与王侯之家相比拟。
English: When I arrived at my husband's house, there were many portals and attics, which can be compared to a prince's house.

古文：廊柱下，有灯火，一婢子严妆直守。后房帷帐甚美。
现代文：走廊的柱子下点有灯火，一排婢女打扮得很整洁地守候在那里，后房的帷帐非常漂亮。
English: The lamps were lit under the pillars in the corridor, a row of maids waited there neatly dressed, and the curtains in the back room were very beautiful.

古文：至夜，女抱乳母涕泣，而口不得言。
现代文：到了夜里，女儿抱着乳母流着眼泪哭泣着，而嘴里说不出话来。
English: By nightfall, she was crying and holding her nanny in her arms, unable to speak.

古文：乳母密于帐中以手潜摸之，得一蛇，如数围柱，缠其女，从足至头。
现代文：乳母秘密地在帷帐中用手悄悄地摸她，却摸到一条蛇，有像几围那么粗，缠住女儿，从脚到头都被缠着。
English: The nurse secretly touched her with her hand in the curtain, but she felt a snake, as thick as several circles, entangling her daughter, from her feet to her head.

古文：乳母惊走出外。柱下守灯婢子，悉是小蛇，灯火乃是蛇眼。
现代文：乳母惊吓得走出屋外，走廊柱子下守灯的婢女，都是小蛇，灯火原来是蛇的眼睛。
English: The nanny was so frightened that she went outside, and the maidservants guarding the lamp under the corridor pillar were all small snakes. The lamp was originally a snake's eye.

古文：晋咸康中，豫州刺史毛宝戍邾城。
现代文：东晋成康年间，豫州刺史毛宝驻守在邾县县城。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Mao Bao, the Governor of Yuzhou, was stationed in the county seat of Jixian.

古文：有一军人于武昌市，见人卖一白龟子，长四五寸，洁白可爱，便买取持归。
现代文：有一个军人在武昌的集市上看到一个人在卖一个小白龟，小白龟有四五寸长，洁白得很可爱，就买下拿回来，把它放在瓮中喂养。
English: A soldier saw a man selling a small white turtle at a bazaar in Wuchang. The small white turtle was four or five inches long and very white, so he bought it back and put it in his beak to feed it.

古文：著瓮中养之，七日渐大，近欲尺许。
现代文：小白龟七天渐渐就长大了，接近长到一尺左右。
English: Little white turtle seven days gradually grew up, close to grow to a foot or so.

古文：其人怜之，持至江边，放江水中，视其去。
现代文：这个军人怜悯小白龟，把它拿到江边，放入江水之中，看着它游走。
English: The soldier took pity on the small white turtle, took it to the edge of the river, put it in the water and watched it swim away.

古文：后邾城遭石季龙攻陷，毛宝弃豫州，赴江者莫不沉溺。
现代文：后来邾城遭受石季龙攻陷，毛宝丢弃豫州，逃到江中的人没有不沉没淹死的。
English: Later, Shicheng was conquered by Shiji Long, Mao Bao abandoned Yuzhou, and those who fled to the river drowned.

古文：于时所养龟人，被铠持刀，亦同自入。
现代文：在这个时候那个喂养白龟的军人，穿着铠甲手持战刀，也一同跳进江水中。
English: At this time, the soldier who was feeding the white turtle, wearing armor and holding a sword, also jumped into the river.

古文：既入水中，觉如堕一石上，水裁至腰。
现代文：跳进水中后，感觉像落在了一块石头上，江水只是淹至腰间。
English: After jumping into the water, I felt like I landed on a rock. The river water only reached my waist.

古文：须臾，游出，中流视之，乃是先所放白龟，甲六七尺。
现代文：不一会儿，浮出了水面，到了江心一看，原来是先前放走的白龟，龟甲已有六七尺。
English: After a while, it surfaced, and when it reached the middle of the river, it turned out to be a white turtle that had been released earlier. The turtle shell was already six or seven feet long.

古文：既抵东岸，出头视此人，徐游而去。中江，犹回首视此人而没。
现代文：到达东岸后，白龟伸出头来看着这个军人，慢慢地游开而去，游到江心，还看了看这个军人才沉入了水中。
English: After reaching the east bank, the white turtle stretched out his head to look at the soldier, slowly swam away, swam to the center of the river, and watched the soldier sink into the water.

