古文：秦、魏为与国。齐、楚约而欲攻魏，魏使人求救于秦，冠盖相望，秦救不出。
现代文：秦国、魏国结为盟国，齐国、楚国相约要攻打魏国，魏国派人向秦国求救，道路上魏国使者车子的顶盖彼此都望得见，秦国的救兵就是不出动。
English: Qin and Wei formed an alliance. Qi and Chu agreed to attack Wei. Wei sent people to Qin for help. On the road, the top cover of Wei's envoy's car was visible to both sides. Qin's rescuers did not move.

古文：魏人有唐且者，年九十余，谓魏王曰： 老臣请出西说秦，令兵先臣出，可乎? 
现代文：魏国有个叫唐且的人，年纪有九十多岁了，他对魏王说： 老臣请求出使西方游说秦王，让救兵先于老臣从秦国出发，可以吗？ 
English: There was a man in Wei called Tang Qi, who was more than ninety years old. He said to the Wei king, "Is it okay for the old minister to request that he send an envoy to the West to lobby the Qin king to let the rescuers leave Qin ahead of the old minister?"

古文：魏王曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：魏王说： 好吧。 
English: Wei Wang said: Okay.

古文：遂约车而遣之。
现代文：于是准备车辆送佑出发。
English: Preparations were then made for the vehicles to drive them away.

古文：唐且见秦王，秦王曰： 丈人芒然乃远至此，甚苦矣。
现代文：唐且见到了秦王，秦玉说： 老先生疲惫不堪地从远方来到这里，很辛苦了。
English: Tang also met with Qin Wang, Qin Yu said: The old gentleman came here from afar, exhausted, and it was very hard.

古文：魏来求救数矣，寡人知魏之急矣。 
现代文：魏国派人来求救已经好多次了，寡人知道魏国情况紧急。 
English: The state of Wei has sent people to call for help many times. Few people know that the situation in Wei is urgent.

古文：唐且对曰： 大王已知魏之急而救不至者，是大王筹策之臣无任矣。
现代文：唐且回答说： 大王已经知道魏国情况紧急却不派救兵，这是为大王出谋划策的臣予太无能了。
English: Tang replied, "The Great King already knew that the situation in Wei was urgent, but he did not send rescuers. This shows that the vassals who advised the Great King were too incompetent.

古文：且夫魏一万乘之国，称东藩，受冠带，祠春秋者，以为秦之强足以为与也。
现代文：再说魏国是一个拥有万辆兵车的大国，自称为秦国东方的藩国，接受秦国的冠带制度，每年春秋祭祀送来供品，认为凭秦国的强大足可以成为盟国。
English: Moreover, Wei was a large country with ten thousand chariots. It called itself a vassal state to the east of Qin, accepted the crown and sash system of Qin, and sent offerings every spring and autumn, believing that it could become an ally with the strong foot of Qin.

古文：今齐、楚之兵已在魏郊矣，大王之救不至，魏急则且割地而约齐、楚，王虽欲救之，岂有及哉?
现代文：现在齐国、楚国的军队已到了魏都的郊外，大王的救兵还没有赶到，魏国一旦形势紧急就将割让土地与齐国、楚国定约，大王即使想救魏国，哪里还来得及呢？
English: Now the armies of Qi and Chu have reached the outskirts of the Wei capital, and the great king's rescuers have not yet arrived. Once the situation becomes urgent, Wei will cede land to Qi and Chu. Even if the great king wants to save Wei, how can he do it in time?

古文：是亡一万乘之魏，而强二敌之齐、楚也。
现代文：这将是失去了一个拥有万辆兵车的盟国魏国，而且增强了齐、楚两个敌国。
English: This would be the loss of an ally, Wei, which had 10,000 chariots, and the strengthening of two enemy countries, Qi and Chu.

古文：窃以为大王筹策之臣无任矣。 
现代文：匝下私下认为替大王出谋划策的臣子太无能了。 
English: Privately, his subordinates thought that the vassal who was making plans for the great king was too incompetent.

古文：秦王喟然愁悟，遽发兵，日夜赴魏，齐、楚闻之，乃引兵而去。
现代文：秦王感叹悔悟，马上发兵，日夜兼程奔赴魏国。齐国、楚国听说后，就收兵撤离了。
English: King Qin sighed with remorse and immediately dispatched an army, rushing to Wei both day and night. After hearing about Qi and Chu, he withdrew his troops.

古文：魏氏复全，唐且之说也。
现代文：魏国能够再次得以保全，全仗唐且游说的结果。
English: Wei could once again be preserved, all thanks to Tang's lobbying.

