古文：萧昕遗尺潭刘贯词韦氏任顼赵齐嵩
现代文：萧昕遗尺潭刘贯词韦氏任顼赵齐嵩
English: Xiao Wei's legacy Liu Gangli, Wei's appointment of Zhao Qisong

古文：萧昕
现代文：萧昕
English: Xiao Yao

古文：唐故兵部尚书萧昕常为京兆尹。
现代文：唐朝旧兵部尚书萧昕曾经当过京兆尹。
English: Xiao Wei, a former military commander of the Tang Dynasty, once served as the leader of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：时京师大旱，炎郁之气，蒸为疾厉。
现代文：他当京兆尹的时候，京城里大旱，炎热郁闷之气，蒸变成一种病害。
English: When he was Jing Zhaoyun, there was a drought in the capital, and the hot and gloomy atmosphere turned into a disease.

古文：代宗命宰臣，下有司祷祀山川，凡月余，暑气愈盛。
现代文：代宗皇帝命令大小臣子官吏们祷告祭祀于山川。一共一个多月，热气更盛大。
English: Emperor Daizong ordered the ministers and officials to pray and offer sacrifices in the mountains and rivers. It lasted for more than a month, and the enthusiasm was even greater.

古文：时天竺僧不空三藏居于静住寺。
现代文：那时候天竺国的和尚不空三藏住在静住寺。
English: At that time, the monks of the Celestial Empire lived in the Tranquility Temple.

古文：三藏善以持念召龙兴云雨。
现代文：这个三藏和尚善于用念咒的办法把龙召唤出来兴云布雨。
English: This Sanzang monk is good at using the method of chanting to summon the dragon out of the clouds.

古文：昕于是诣寺，谓三藏曰： 今兹骄阳累月矣，圣上悬忧，撤乐贬食，岁凶是念，民瘵为忧。
现代文：萧昕于是到了寺中，对三藏和尚说： 现在这里炎热的阳光连连晒了一个月了，皇上很担心，撤了音乐，减了饭食，担心年头不好，担心百姓生病。
English: So Xiao Yao went to the temple and said to the Three Tibetan Monks: "The hot sun has been shining here for a month now. The emperor is very worried. He has withdrawn the music, reduced the meals, is worried about the bad weather, and is worried about the people getting sick.

古文：幸吾师为结壇场致雨也。 
现代文：希望您设置一个坛场求一场雨好吗？ 
English: Would you like to set up an altar to pray for rain?

古文：三藏曰： 易与耳。然召龙以兴云雨，吾恐风雷之震，有害于生植，又何补于稼穑耶。 
现代文：三藏说： 求场雨不难，但是召唤龙出来兴云下雨，我怕风雷震荡得太厉害，对生民植物有害，又怎么能对庄稼的春种秋收有所补救呢？ 
English: Sanzang said: It is not difficult to look for rain, but it is difficult to call a dragon to come out and make it rain. I am afraid that the wind and thunder will shake too much, which will be harmful to people and plants. How can we remedy the spring planting and autumn harvest of crops?

古文：昕曰： 迅雷甚雨，诚不能滋百谷，适足以清暑热，而少解黔首之病也。
现代文：萧昕说： 迅雷急雨，确实不能滋润庄稼，恰好能够清除暑热，而略微解除百姓的病患。
English: Xiao Wei said: Rapid thunderstorms and torrential rains can't really moisten the crops, but they can remove the heat and slightly relieve the people's illnesses.

古文：愿无辞焉。 
现代文：请您不要推辞了。 
English: Please don't refuse.

古文：三藏不获已，乃命其徒，取华木皮仅尺余，缵小龙于其上，而以炉瓯香水置于前。三藏转咒，震舌呼祝。
现代文：三藏不得已，就让他的徒弟取来近一尺长的一块桦树皮，在上面承接着一条小龙，把炉火、盆和香水放到前边，三藏转入念咒，大声祷告。
English: As a last resort, Sanzang asked his apprentice to take a piece of eucalyptus bark nearly a foot long, attach a small dragon to it, put the fire, basin and perfume in front of him. Sanzang turned to chanting and prayed loudly.

古文：咒者食顷，即以缵龙授昕曰： 可投此于曲江中，投讫亟还，无冒风雨。 
现代文：一顿饭的时间之后，他就把桦树皮上的龙交给萧昕说： 可以把它投到曲江里去，投完要马上返回来，不要被风雨吹着淋着。 
English: After a meal, he gave the dragon on the eucalyptus bark to Xiao Yao and said, "You can cast it into the Qujiang River. After casting it, you should come back immediately. Don't get wet from the wind and rain."

古文：昕如言投之。旋有白龙才尺余，摇鬣振鳞自水出。俄而身长数丈，状如曳素。倏忽亘天。
现代文：萧昕像他说的那样把龙投到江里去，随即就有一条才一尺多长的小白龙摇鬣振鳞从水中出来，一会儿就长到几丈长，宛如一条白色丝绸，忽然间横贯高天。
English: Xiao Yao threw the dragon into the river as he said, and immediately a small white dragon, just over a foot long, came out of the water, and in a moment it grew to several feet long, like a piece of white silk, suddenly stretching across the sky.

古文：昕鞭马疾驱，未及数十步，云物凝晦，暴雨骤降。
现代文：萧昕打马急驰，追了不到几十步，云气凝聚，物象晦暗，骤然间降下暴雨。
English: Xiao Yao's horse galloped rapidly, chasing less than dozens of steps, the clouds condensed, the objects were dark, and a rainstorm suddenly fell.

古文：比至永崇里，道中之水，已若决渠矣。
现代文：等到他到了永崇里，道上的水已经像江河决口一样了。
English: By the time he reached Yongzhongli, the water on the road had become like a river estuary.

古文：遗尺潭
现代文：遗尺潭
English: Ruins of Shakotan

古文：昆山县遗尺潭，本大历中，村女为皇太子元妃，遗玉尺，化为龙，至今遂成潭。
现代文：昆山县遗尺潭，本来是大历年间，一名村女成为皇太子的元妃，元妃遗失了玉尺，玉尺变化成龙，到现在就变成了深潭。
English: Kunshan County's Yu Shaku-tan was originally a village woman who became the princess of the crown prince during the Great Calendar. The princess lost Yu Shaku, Yu Shaku changed into a dragon, and now it has become a deep pool.

古文：刘贯词
现代文：刘贯词
English: Liu Gangzhi

古文：唐洛阳刘贯词，大历中，求丐于苏州，逢蔡霞秀才者精彩俊爽。
现代文：唐朝时，洛阳人刘贯词，大历年中，在苏州要饭，遇上一个潇洒英俊的名叫蔡霞的秀才。一相见。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Luoyang resident Liu Gangzhi, in the middle of the year of the lunar calendar, was begging for food in Suzhou when he met a dashing and handsome genius named Cai Xia.

古文：一相见，意颇殷勤，以兄呼贯词。
现代文：蔡霞的态度就非常殷勤，称刘贯词为兄长。
English: Cai Xia's attitude was very courteous, calling Liu Kangzhi her elder brother.

古文：既而携羊酒来宴。
现代文：接着，他又携带着羊肉和酒来宴请刘贯词。
English: Next, he brought mutton and wine to invite Liu Gangzhi to a banquet.

古文：酒阑曰： 兄今泛游江湖间，何为乎？ 
现代文：酒将残尽的时候，他问道： 兄长现在泛游江湖之间，干什么呢？ 
English: When the wine ran out, he asked: "What is your brother doing now, wandering all over?

古文：曰： 求丐耳。 
现代文：刘贯词说： 要饭罢了！ 
English: Liu Guanzhi said: It's just asking for a meal!

古文：霞曰： 有所抵耶，泛行郡国耶？ 
现代文：蔡霞说： 能要得够吃吗？广泛地到各大城邑中去要吗？ 
English: Cai Xia said: Can you get enough to eat? Do you want to go to major cities and towns extensively?

古文：曰： 蓬行耳。 
现代文：刘贯词说： 像蓬草那样，走到哪里就在哪里要罢了。 
English: Liu Gangzhi said, "Like a pengcao, I just want to go wherever I go."

古文：霞曰： 然则几获而止。 曰： 十万。 
现代文：蔡霞说： 那么你要到多少才能拉倒呢？ 刘贯词说： 十万。 
English: Cai Xia said, "So how much do you have to pull down?" Liu Gangzhi said, "One hundred thousand."

古文：霞曰： 蓬行而望十万，乃无翼而思飞者也。
现代文：蔡霞说： 像蓬草那样飘到哪里算哪里，还指望要到十万，这是没有翅膀就想飞。
English: Cai Xia said: "It doesn't matter how far you float like a pengcao, you still hope to reach 100,000, which is like trying to fly without wings.

古文：设令必得，亦废数年。
现代文：假设一定能要到，亦要废弃多少年的时间。
English: Assuming it can be done, how much time will have to be wasted?

古文：霞居洛中左右，亦不贫，以他故避地，音问久绝。
现代文：我住在洛中附近，家里也不穷，因为别的原因避到此地，音讯早就断了。
English: I live near Los Angeles, my family is not poor, I avoided this place for other reasons, and the news has long been broken.

古文：意有所恳，祈兄为回。途中之费，蓬游之望，不掷日月而得。
现代文：我诚心试意地希望兄长能回去，路上的盘费，飘游的愿望，用不多长时间就都能得到。怎么样？ 
English: I sincerely and tentatively hope that my brother can go back. The cost of the road, the desire to wander, can be obtained in a short time. How about it?

古文：如何？ 曰： 固所愿耳。 
现代文：刘贯词说： 这是我很愿意的。 
English: Liu Guanzhi said: I am very willing to do this.

古文：霞于是遗钱十万，授书一缄，白曰： 逆旅中遽蒙周念，既无形迹，辄露心诚。
现代文：于是蔡霞赠送十万钱给刘贯词，又交给他一封书信，交待道： 在客栈里突然有了一个周济你的想法，就忘了仪容礼貌，立即就表露出内心的真诚。
English: So Cai Xia presented 100,000 yuan to Liu Gangzhi, and also handed him a letter, saying: In the inn, I suddenly had an idea to give you money, so I forgot my manners and immediately showed my sincerity.

古文：霞家长鳞虫，宅渭桥下，合眼叩桥柱，当有应者，必邀入宅。
现代文：我家长是鳞虫，住在渭桥下边。你合上眼睛敲打桥柱，会有人答应的，一定邀请你进屋。
English: My parents are scale insects and live under the bridge. If you close your eyes and tap on the bridge pillar, someone will surely invite you in.

古文：娘奉见时，必请与霞少妹相见。
现代文：我娘接见你的时候，你一定要请求与我小妹相见。
English: When my daughter sees you, you must ask to see my little sister.

古文：既为兄弟，情不合疏。
现代文：既然是兄弟，感情不应该疏远。
English: Since they are brothers, their feelings should not be estranged.

古文：书中亦令渠出拜。
现代文：信中也让她出来拜见你。
English: The letter also asked her to come out to see you.

古文：渠虽年幼，性颇慧聪，使渠助为主人，百缗之赠，渠当必诺。 
现代文：她虽然年纪小，但是性情特别聪慧，让她帮助，作为主人，赠送一百缗钱，她是一定能答应的。 
English: Although she is young, she has a particularly clever disposition. If you ask her to help, as the owner, she will definitely be able to accept a gift of one hundred baht.

古文：贯词遂归。
现代文：刘贯词于是回归故乡。
English: Liu Gangzhi then returned to his hometown.

古文：到渭桥下，一潭泓澄，何计自达？
现代文：来到渭桥下，看到正是一潭深广澄澈的水。
English: When I came under the bridge, I saw a pool of deep, wide and clear water.

古文：久之，以为龙神不当我欺，试合眼叩之。
现代文：用什么办法能到里面呢？许久，认为龙神不应该欺骗我，就试探着闭上眼睛敲那桥柱。
English: For a long time, thinking that the Dragon God should not deceive me, I tried closing my eyes and knocking on the bridge pillar.

古文：忽有一人应，因视之，则失桥及潭矣。有朱门甲第，楼阁参差。
现代文：忽然有一人答应，他就睁眼看去，而没有桥和潭了，有的是一所朱红大门的宅院。宅院楼阁参差，很壮观。
English: Suddenly, one person said yes, and he opened his eyes to see that there was no bridge or pool, but only a courtyard with a vermilion gate. The courtyard courtyard is very spectacular.

古文：有紫衣使拱立于前，而问其意。
现代文：有一个紫衣使者站在门前，拱手问他的来意。
English: A messenger in purple stood in front of the door and asked him what he wanted.

古文：贯词曰： 来自吴郡，郎君有书。 
现代文：刘贯词说： 我来自吴郡，带来了你家郎君的一封书信。 
English: Liu Guanzhi said: I am from Wu County, and I have brought a letter from your son.

古文：问者执书以入。顷而复出曰： 太夫人奉屈。 
现代文：那人拿着书信进去，不一会儿又出来，说： 太夫人请你进去。 
English: The man went in with the letter, came out again a moment later, and said, "Madame invites you in."

古文：遂入厅中。
现代文：于是进入到客厅里。
English: So he went into the living room to sing.

古文：见太夫人者年四十余，衣服皆紫，貌可爱。
现代文：太夫人有四十多岁，衣服全是紫的，容貌俊美可爱。
English: She was in her forties, dressed all in purple, with a lovely face.

古文：贯词拜之，太夫人答拜。
现代文：刘贯词拜见她。她也答拜。
English: Liu Guanzhih bowed to her, and she bowed back.

古文：且谢曰： 儿子远游，久绝音耗，劳君惠顾，数千里达书。
现代文：而且致谢说： 我儿子远游异乡，久绝音信，有劳您看得起，几千里把书信送到。
English: In addition, he expressed his gratitude, saying, "My son has been traveling far away from home and has not heard from me for a long time. I am grateful to you for sending letters to him from thousands of miles away.

古文：渠少失意上官，其恨未减。
现代文：他和上司不大相投，怨恨不减。
English: He and his boss don't see eye to eye, and the rancor is not abating.

古文：一从遁去，三岁寂然。
现代文：自从他出走，三年来家里一直很寂寞。
English: It's been a lonely three years at home since he left.

古文：非君特来，愁绪犹积。 
现代文：如果不是您特意前来，我的愁绪还在增加呢。 
English: If it wasn't for you coming, I'd be even more depressed.

古文：言讫命坐。
现代文：说完，她让刘贯词坐下。
English: When she had finished, she asked Liu Guanzhong to sit down.

古文：贯词曰： 郎君约为兄弟，小妹子即贯词妹也，亦当相见。 
现代文：刘贯词说： 郎君和我约为兄弟，他的小妹就是我的小妹，也应该见她一见。 
English: Liu Guanzhi said, "My brother-in-law and I are almost brothers. His little sister is my little sister, and I should meet her.

古文：夫人曰： 儿子书中亦言。
现代文：夫人说： 我儿子信中也说了。
English: My wife said: My son also said that in his letter.

古文：渠略梳头，即出奉见。 
现代文：她略微地梳梳头，马上就出来见你。 
English: She'll comb her hair a little and be out to see you in a minute.

古文：俄有青衣曰： 小娘子来。 
现代文：不一会儿，一个婢女说道： 小娘子出来了！ 
English: After a while, one of the maids said, "The little girl has come out!"

古文：年可十五六，容色绝代，辨慧过人。
现代文：只见她年龄约有十五六岁，容色美丽，是个绝代佳人。
English: I saw that she was about fifteen or sixteen years old, with a beautiful face. She was a great beauty.

古文：既拜，坐于母下。
现代文：她巧言狡黠，拜见之后便坐到母亲的下首。
English: She was wily, and after the meeting, she sat on her mother's lap.

古文：遂命具馔，亦甚精洁。
现代文：于是令人准备酒饭。饭菜精美干净。
English: As a result, people prepare sake and rice. Meals are beautifully clean.

古文：方对食，太夫人忽眼赤，直视贯词。
现代文：刚开始吃饭，太夫人忽然间眼珠子发红，直瞅着刘贯词。
English: At the beginning of the meal, Mrs. Liu's eyes suddenly turned red, and she stared at Mr. Liu.

古文：女急曰： 哥哥凭来，宜且礼待。况令消患，不可动摇。 
现代文：女儿急忙说： 哥哥来到咱家，应该以礼相待，况且让他消除祸患，不能动摇。 
English: The daughter hurriedly said, "When my brother comes to our home, he should be treated with courtesy. Moreover, he should be allowed to eliminate the evil. We cannot waver.

古文：因曰： 书中以兄处分，令以百缗奉赠。
现代文：于是就说： 信中由哥哥嘱咐，让我赠给你一百缗钱。
English: Then he said, "My brother told me to give you a hundred baht.

古文：既难独举，须使轻赍。
现代文：既然难以独自供养，必须多少给一些馈赠。
English: Since it is difficult to support oneself, it is necessary to give some gifts.

古文：今奉一器，其价相当。可乎？ 
现代文：现在送给你一件东西，价钱相当，可以吗？ 
English: Now, can I give you something for the same price?

古文：贯词曰： 已为兄弟，寄一书札，岂宜受其赐？ 
现代文：刘贯词说： 已经是兄弟，寄一封书信，难道还应该接受赏赐吗？ 
English: Liu Guanzhi said, "If you are already a brother and send a letter, should you still be rewarded?

古文：太夫人曰： 郎君贫游，儿子备述。今副其请，不可推辞。 
现代文：太夫人说： 郎君贫游，儿子在信中说得很详细，现在这样做与他的请求相符，你就不要推辞了。 
English: The lady-in-law said, "Brother-in-law, your son said it in detail in his letter. Now that it is in line with his request, you should not refuse."

古文：贯词谢之。
现代文：刘贯词表示感谢。
English: Liu Gangzhi expressed his thanks.

古文：因命取镇国碗来，又进食。
现代文：于是就让人取来了一只 镇国碗 。继续吃饭。
English: So someone fetched a "Zhenguo bowl" and the meal continued.

古文：未几，太夫人复瞪视眼赤，口两角湿下。
现代文：不一会儿，太夫人又瞪起红红的眼珠子，口里流出涎水。
English: After a while, the lady glared at her with red-rimmed eyes, and saliva flowed from her mouth.

古文：女急掩其口曰： 哥哥深诚托人，不宜如此。 
现代文：女儿急忙捂住她的口说： 哥哥很真诚地托人来送信，不应该这样。 
English: Her daughter quickly covered her mouth and said, "My brother sincerely asked someone to send the letter. It's not right.

古文：乃曰： 娘年高，风疾发动，祗对不得。
现代文：于是就对刘贯词说： 我娘年纪大了，风病发作，不能对她恭敬。
English: So he said to Liu Gangzhi, "My daughter is old and has come down with a cold, so I can't show her respect.

古文：兄宜且出。 
现代文：你应该先出去。 
English: You should go out first.

古文：女若惧者，遣青衣持碗，自随而授贯词曰： 此罽宾国碗，其国以镇灾厉。
现代文：女儿好像害怕的样子，让一个婢女拿着镇国碗，自己也跟出来交给刘贯词说： 这是罽宾国的碗，他们国家用它镇压灾难鬼疠。
English: As if she were afraid, her daughter asked a maid to take the bowl of the town and country, and she also came out and handed it to Liu Gang, saying, "This is the bowl of the country of Zhibing, and their country uses it to suppress the evil spirits."

古文：唐人得之，固无所用。得钱十万，可货之。
现代文：唐朝人得到它，本来没有用的，能卖上十万钱，就可以把它卖了，不到十万不能卖。
English: When the Tang Dynasty people got it, it was useless. If they could sell it for 100,000 yuan, they could sell it. If it was less than 100,000 yuan, they couldn't sell it.

古文：其下勿鬻。某缘娘疾，须侍左右，不遂从容。 
现代文：我因为娘有病，必须侍奉于左右，不能从从容容地做成什么事。 
English: Because of my daughter's illness, I have to serve both the left and the right, and I can't do anything easily.

古文：再拜而入。
现代文：她对贯词行了再拜礼，回家而去。
English: She bowed to the words and went home.

古文：贯词持碗而行，数步回顾，碧潭危桥，宛似初到。
现代文：刘贯词拿着那只碗走出几十步，回头一看，碧绿的水，陡峭的桥，和刚来时一样。
English: Liu Gangzhi took the bowl and walked out a few dozen steps. Looking back, the turquoise water and the steep bridge were the same as when he first arrived.

古文：视手中器，乃一黄色铜碗也。
现代文：看看手中的碗，乃是一个黄色铜碗，它的价钱只不过三五环罢了。
English: Look at the bowl in your hand. It's a yellow copper bowl, and it's worth only three to five ringgit.

古文：其价只三五环耳，大以为龙妹之妄也。执鬻于市，有酬七百八百者，亦酬五百者。
现代文：他很不相信，认为龙妹胡说八道。他拿着碗到市上去卖。有给价七百八百的，也有给价五百的。
English: He didn't really believe it and thought that Long Mei was talking nonsense. He took the bowl to the market to sell it. There was a price of seven hundred and eight hundred, and there was also a price of five hundred.

古文：念龙神贵信，不当欺人。日日持行于市。
现代文：考虑到龙神着重信誉，不应该骗人，就天天拿着这只碗走在市上。
English: Taking into account that the Dragon God emphasizes credibility and should not deceive people, he walks around the market with this bowl every day.

古文：及岁余，西市店忽有胡客来，视之大喜，问其价。贯词曰： 二百缗。 
现代文：等到一年多以后，西市店中忽然来了一个胡客，胡客见了碗非常惊喜，就打听它的价钱。刘贯词说： 二百缗。 
English: After waiting for more than a year, a customer suddenly came to the West City store. The customer was very surprised to see the bowl and asked about its price. Liu Gangzhi said: Two hundred baht.

古文：客曰： 物宜所直，何止二百缗？
现代文：胡客说： 这东西应有价值，何止二百缗？
English: Hooker said: This thing should be worth, how many more than two hundred baht?

古文：尚非中国之宝，有之何益？
现代文：况且它还不是中国的宝物，有它有什么好处？
English: Moreover, it is not yet a treasure of China, what is the benefit of having it?

古文：百缗可乎？ 
现代文：一百缗可以吗？ 
English: Can I have a hundred baht?

古文：贯词以初约只尔，不复广求，遂许之交受。
现代文：刘贯词因为当初约定的只是这样，不再多求。就卖了出去。
English: Liu Gangzhi sold out because the original agreement was just that, not to ask for more.

古文：客曰： 此乃罽宾国镇国碗也。
现代文：胡客说： 这是罽宾国的镇国碗。
English: Hu Ke said: This is the Zhen Guo bowl of Zibo.

古文：在其国，大禳人患厄。此碗失来，其国大荒，兵戈乱起。
现代文：在他们国家，特别盛行免除灾难的祭祷活动，这只碗丢失了，国家就闹饥茺，就发生兵戈之乱。
English: In their country, especially prevalent is the ritual of praying for deliverance from calamity. If this bowl is lost, the country will suffer from famine, and there will be war and chaos.

古文：吾闻为龙子所窃，已近四年，其君方以国中半年之赋召赎。
现代文：我听说是被一个龙子偷去了，已将近四年了。他们的国君正用全国半年的税赋往回赎它。
English: I was told that it had been stolen by a dragon for nearly four years, and that their sovereign was using half a year's national taxes to buy it back.

古文：君何以致之？ 
现代文：你是怎么弄到的？ 
English: How did you get it?

古文：贯词具告其实。
现代文：刘贯词把实际情况详细地告诉了胡客。
English: Liu Gangzhi told Hu Ke the actual situation in detail.

古文：客曰： 罽宾守龙上诉，当追寻次，此霞所以避地也。
现代文：胡客说： 罽宾国的守龙上诉，应该追寻到此，这是蔡霞之所以避身异地的原因。
English: Hu Ke said: "The appeal of Guolong of Zibo Province should be traced to here. This is the reason why Cai Xia avoids other places.

古文：阴冥吏严，不得陈首，藉君为由送之耳。
现代文：阴冥的官吏严厉，他不敢露头，就借着你的力量把它送走而已。
English: The shady official is so strict that he dares not show his face, so you have to use your strength to send him away.

古文：殷勤见妹者，非固亲也，虑老龙之馋，或欲相陷，以其妹卫君耳。
现代文：殷勤地让你见她妹妹，不是他本来就亲近你，而是考虑到老龙嘴馋，怕你被吃掉，让他妹妹保护你罢了。
English: If he is so eager to let you meet her sister, it's not because he's close to you, but because he's afraid you'll be eaten and he wants his sister to protect you.

古文：此碗既出，渠亦当来，亦消患之道也。
现代文：这只碗既然已经出现，他也应该回来了，也是消除祸患的一条道路。
English: Since this bowl has appeared, he should also come back, and it is also a way to eliminate the scourge.

古文：五十日后，漕洛波腾，浼灂晦日，是霞归之候也。 
现代文：过五十天之后，洛水大波涌起，雨天灰暗，这就是蔡霞回来的征候。 
English: Fifty days later, the waves of Luo Shui surged and the rainy weather was gray, which was the sign of Cai Xia's return.

古文：曰： 何以五十日然后归？ 
现代文：刘贯词问： 为什么要五十天以后回来？ 
English: Liu Gangzhi asked: Why come back after fifty days?

古文：客曰： 吾携过岭，方敢来复。 
现代文：胡客说： 我带着碗过岭，他才敢回来。 
English: Hooker said: I carried the bowl over the ridge, he dared to come back.

古文：贯记之，及期往视，诚然矣。
现代文：刘贯词记着，等到五十天后去一看，确实是那样。
English: Liu Guanzhong memorized the words and waited for fifty days to take a look. It was indeed like that.

古文：韦氏
现代文：韦氏
English: The Wei Clan

古文：京兆韦氏，名家女也，适武昌孟氏。
现代文：京兆人韦氏，是一名家的女儿，嫁给武昌的孟氏。
English: Ms. Wei, a resident of Jingzhao, is the daughter of a family, married to Mr. Meng from Wuchang.

古文：唐大历末，孟与妻弟韦生同选，韦生授扬子县尉，孟授阆州录事参军，分路之官。
现代文：唐大历年末，孟氏与内弟韦生同时入选，韦生被授扬子县尉，孟氏被授阆州录事参军，分别上路赴官。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Meng and his brother-in-law Wei Sheng were elected at the same time. Wei Sheng was awarded the title of Yangzi County Lieutenant, and Meng Sheng was awarded the title of Zhangzhou Recorder to join the army. They went on their way to the office separately.

古文：韦氏从夫入蜀，路不通车舆，韦氏乘马，从夫至骆谷口中，忽然马惊，坠于岸下数百丈。
现代文：韦氏从夫到蜀地去，蜀道上不通车子，韦氏只好骑马。跟着丈夫走到骆谷口中，忽然马被惊，她掉到岸下几百丈深的地方。
English: Ms. Wei went to Shudi from her husband. There was no car access on Shudi Road, so Ms. Wei had to ride a horse. She followed her husband to the middle of Luohu Valley. Suddenly, the horse was startled, and she fell several hundred feet below the shore.

古文：视之杳黑，人无入路。
现代文：往下一望，黑幽幽的，没有人可以下去的道路。
English: Looking down, the road is dark and quiet, and no one can go down it.

古文：孟生悲号，一家恸哭，无如之何。遂设祭服丧舍去。
现代文：孟氏悲号，全家恸哭，也不能怎么样，就设供品祭奠，穿丧服戴孝，舍她而去。
English: Meng's sad cry, the whole family crying, can't do anything, so they set up an offering ceremony, wear mourning clothes and filial piety, and leave her.

古文：韦氏至下，坠约数丈枯叶之上，体无所损，初似闷绝，少顷而苏。
现代文：再说韦氏，她掉到大约几丈厚的枯烂树叶上，身上没有受伤。起初好像闷死过去，不一会儿就醒了。
English: As for Ms. Wei, she fell onto the dead leaves, which were about several feet thick, and was not injured. At first, she seemed to have suffocated, but she woke up soon after.

古文：经一日，饥甚，遂取木叶裹雪而食。
现代文：经过一天，她非常饥饿，就拿树叶裹上雪吃。
English: After a day, she was so hungry that she ate leaves wrapped in snow.

古文：傍视有一岩罅，不知深浅。
现代文：往旁边一看，有一条岩缝，不知有多深。
English: Looking to the side, there is a crevice, I don't know how deep it is.

古文：仰视坠处，如大井焉。分当死矣。
现代文：仰视掉下来的地方，像一口大井，按理说早该死了。
English: Looking up at the place where I fell, like a big well, I should have died a long time ago.

古文：忽于岩谷中，见光一点如灯，后更渐大，乃有二焉。
现代文：她忽然从岩谷中，看见有一点光亮像灯，后来还渐渐变大。竟然是两点光亮。
English: Suddenly, from the rocky valley, she saw a point of light like a lamp, which gradually grew larger. It turned out to be two points of light.

古文：渐近，是龙目也。
现代文：渐渐近了，这才看清，原来是龙眼睛。
English: As I got closer, I realized it was a dragon's eye.

古文：韦惧甚，负石壁而立。
现代文：韦氏非常害怕，背着石壁而立。
English: Mr. Wei was very scared and stood with his back against the stone wall.

古文：此龙渐出，可长五六丈。至穴边，腾孔而出。
现代文：此龙渐渐出来，有五六丈长，到了洞穴边，腾起身来从孔中飞出去。
English: The dragon gradually emerged, about five or six feet long, reached the edge of the cave, stood up and flew out of the hole.

古文：顷又见双眼，复是一龙欲出。
现代文：顷刻间又看见一双眼睛，又有一条龙想要出去。
English: In an instant, he saw another pair of eyes and another dragon trying to get out.

古文：韦氏自度必死，宁为龙所害。候龙将出，遂抱龙跨之。
现代文：韦氏自己估计必死无疑，宁肯被龙伤害，等着龙将出去的时候，一下子就把龙抱住，跨到龙身上去。
English: Mr. Wei himself estimated that he would die without a doubt. He would rather be hurt by the dragon. When the dragon was about to go out, he suddenly hugged the dragon and stepped on the dragon.

古文：龙亦不顾，直跃穴外，遂腾于空。
现代文：龙也没理会她。直接跃到洞穴之外。于是就腾飞于空中。
English: The dragon ignored her and leapt straight out of the cave, soaring into the air.

古文：韦氏不敢下顾，任龙所之。
现代文：韦氏不敢往下看，任龙愿意到哪就到哪。
English: Wei did not dare to look down. Renlong could go wherever he wanted.

古文：如半日许，意疑已过万里。
现代文：好像是半天左右，她心里怀疑已经飞过万里，就睁眼往下看。
English: It seemed to be about half a day, and she suspected in her heart that she had flown thousands of miles, so she opened her eyes and looked down.

古文：试开眼下视，此龙渐低。又见江海及草木。
现代文：这条龙渐渐飞得低了，又看到了江海和草木。
English: Gradually, the dragon flew lower, and saw the river, the sea, and the trees.

古文：其去地度四五丈，恐负入江，遂放身自坠，落于深草之上。良久乃苏。
现代文：她离地大约四五丈高，怕自己被龙背到江里去，就纵身自己掉下来，正好落到深草之上，好久之后才醒。
English: She was about four or five feet above the ground, and afraid of being dragged into the river by the dragon, she threw herself down and fell right onto the deep grass, only to wake up a long time later.

古文：韦氏不食，已经三四日矣，气力渐惫。
现代文：韦氏已经三四天没吃东西了，气力渐渐疲乏，走路的速度极慢。
English: Mr. Wei has not eaten for three or four days, his strength is getting tired, and his walking speed is very slow.

古文：徐徐而行，遇一渔翁，惊非其人。
现代文：遇上一位老渔翁，老渔翁惊讶她不是人。
English: When he met an old fisherman, the old fisherman was surprised that she wasn't human.

古文：韦氏问此何所，渔翁曰： 此扬子县。 
现代文：韦氏问这是什么地方。渔翁说这是扬子县。
English: Wei asked where it was, and the fisherman said it was Yangtze County.

古文：韦氏私喜，曰： 去县几里？ 
现代文：韦氏暗自惊喜，说： 这儿离县邑多远？ 
English: Mr. Wei was secretly surprised and said: How far is it from the county seat?

古文：翁曰： 二十里。 
现代文：渔翁说二十里。
English: The fisherman said it was twenty miles.

古文：韦氏具述其由，兼饥渴。
现代文：韦氏详细地讲述了她的来由，又加上饥渴，老渔翁感到同情而又惊异。
English: Mr. Wei described her background in detail, adding that she was hungry and thirsty, which made the old fisherman feel sympathetic and surprised.

古文：渔翁伤异之，舟中有茶粥，饮食之。韦氏问曰： 此县韦少府上未到？ 
现代文：老渔翁的船上有茶粥，就给她吃。韦氏问道： 这个县的韦少府到任没有？ 
English: The old fisherman had porridge on his boat, so he gave it to her to eat. Wei asked, "Has Wei Shaofu from this county arrived yet?"

古文：翁曰： 不知到未。 
现代文：渔翁说不知道到没到。
English: The fisherman said that he didn't know if it had arrived.

古文：韦氏曰： 某即韦少府之妹也。倘为载去，至县当厚相报。 
现代文：韦氏说： 我就是韦少府的姐姐，如果你能把我载去，到了县府一定好好报答。 
English: Wei said: I am the sister of Wei Shaofu. If you can take me there, you will be rewarded well when you get to the county seat.

古文：渔翁与载至县门。
现代文：老渔翁把她载到县府门外。
English: The old fisherman carried her to the gate of the prefectural government.

古文：韦少府已上数日矣。
现代文：韦少府已经上任多日了。
English: Wei Shaofu has been in office for several days.

古文：韦氏至门，遣报孟家十三姊。
现代文：韦氏到门前，让进去报告说孟家十三姐来了。
English: Mr. Wei went to the front door, let him in and reported that the thirteenth sister of the Meng family had arrived.

古文：韦生不信，曰： 十三姊随孟郎入蜀，那忽来此？ 
现代文：韦生不信，说： 十三姐跟着孟郎入蜀地去了，哪能忽然上这儿来！ 
English: Wei Sheng didn't believe it and said, "The thirteenth sister followed Meng Lang into Shu, how can she suddenly come here!

古文：韦氏令具说此由，韦生虽惊，亦未深信。
现代文：韦氏让传话人详细地述说因由。韦生虽然吃惊，也没有深信。
English: Ms. Wei asked the caller to explain the reason in detail. Ms. Wei, although surprised, was not convinced.

古文：出见之，其姊号哭，话其迍厄，颜色痿瘁，殆不可言。
现代文：出来一看，他姐姐号哭起来，述说她的苦难遭遇，颜色萎靡憔悴，简直不可言状。
English: On emerging, his sister burst into tears, recounting her ordeal, her face discoloured beyond words.

古文：乃舍之将息，寻亦平复。
现代文：于是让她进屋休息。不久也就平复了。
English: So she was allowed to go inside and rest. She soon recovered.

古文：韦生终有所疑。
现代文：韦生始终有所怀疑。
English: Wesson always had his doubts.

古文：后数日，蜀中凶问果至，韦生意乃豁然，方更悲喜。
现代文：后几日，蜀中的凶信果然到了，韦生心里这才开朗起来，才更加悲喜交加。
English: In the next few days, Shu's bad faith finally came to fruition, and Wei Sheng's heart became more cheerful, and he was even more sad and happy.

古文：追酬渔父二十千，遣人送姊入蜀。
现代文：他酬谢老渔翁二十千钱，派人把姐姐送往蜀地。
English: He rewarded the old fisherman with twenty thousand yuan and sent someone to take his sister to Shu.

古文：孟氏悲喜无极。
现代文：孟氏悲喜无比。
English: Meng's grief and joy are incomparable.

古文：后数十年，韦氏表弟裴纲，贞元中，犹为洪州高安尉。自说其事。
现代文：几十年后，韦氏的表弟裴纲，贞元年中，还做洪州的高安尉，他亲口讲述了这件事。
English: Decades later, Wei's cousin Pei Gang, who was a high-ranking security officer in Hongzhou in the mid-19th century, recounted the incident in person.

古文：任顼
现代文：任顼
English: 任

古文：唐建中初，有乐安任顼者，好读书，不喜尘俗事，居深山中，有终焉之志。
现代文：唐朝建中年初，乐安有一个叫任顼的人，好读书，不喜欢尘寰俗事，居住在深山之中，有老死深山的志向。
English: At the beginning of the middle of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Ren Zhuang in Le An. He was fond of reading, disliked the mundane, lived in the mountains, and aspired to live in the mountains forever.

古文：尝一日，闭关昼坐。
现代文：曾经有那么一天，他关上门，大白天坐于家中，有一个老头敲门前来拜访他。
English: One day, he was sitting at home in broad daylight with the door closed, when an old man knocked on the door to pay him a visit.

古文：有一翁叩门来谒，衣黄衣，貌甚秀，曳杖而至。
现代文：那老头穿黄色衣服，相貌很俊秀，拄着拐杖而来。
English: The old man was dressed in yellow, good-looking, and came on crutches.

古文：顼延坐与语。
现代文：任顼把他迎进来，坐下来与他说话。
English: Ren Yao welcomed him in and sat down to talk with him.

古文：既久，顼讶其言讷而色沮，甚有不乐事。
现代文：谈了半天，任顼对他语言迂讷脸色沮丧感到惊讶，看样子他心中有很不高兴的事。
English: After talking for half a day, Ren Hao was surprised by his languid and dejected face. He seemed to have something very unhappy in his heart.

古文：因问翁曰： 何为而色沮乎？
现代文：于是就问他说： 为什么脸色如此沮丧呢？
English: So they asked him, "Why does your face look so sad?"

古文：岂非有忧耶？
现代文：莫非有愁事吗？
English: Isn't there something sad about that?

古文：不然，是家有疾而翁念之深耶？ 
现代文：不然，就是你家里有病人，你惦记得太厉害了？ 
English: Otherwise, even if you have a sick person at home, don't you remember how terrible it was?

古文：老人曰： 果如是。吾忧俟子一问固久矣。且我非人，乃龙也。
现代文：老人说： 果真是这样，我忧愁地等候你问我已经等了很久了，而且我不是人，是龙。
English: The old man said, "Indeed it is so, I have been anxiously waiting for you to ask me, I have been waiting for a long time, and I am not a man, I am a dragon."

古文：西去一里有大湫，吾家之数百岁，今为一人所苦，祸且将及。
现代文：往西去一里，有一个大水池，我家在这住了几百年，现在被一个人所苦，祸事就要来了。
English: A mile to the west, there is a large pool. My family has lived here for hundreds of years, and now we are being tormented by one person. Disaster is coming.

古文：非子不能脱我死，辄来奉诉。
现代文：除了你，谁也不能让我摆脱死亡。
English: No one can save me from death but you.

古文：子今幸问我，故得而言也。 
现代文：所以就来求你，有幸你现在就问我，因此就能说出来了。 
English: So I'm asking you, you're lucky you're asking me now, so you can say it.

古文：顼曰： 某尘中人耳，独知有诗书礼乐，他术则某不能晓。
现代文：任顼说： 我是尘俗中人，只知道有诗书礼乐，其它术业我就不懂了。
English: Ren Wei said: I am a man of the world, I only know poetry, ritual music, I don't understand other arts.

古文：然何以脱翁之祸乎？ 
现代文：这样怎么能使你摆脱灾祸呢？ 
English: How then can you escape the disaster?

古文：老人曰： 但授我语，非藉他术，独劳数十言而已。 
现代文：老人说： 只要我把话告诉你，不用借助其它道术，只劳你说几十个字罢了。 
English: The old man said, "As long as I tell you the words, you don't need to use any other techniques, just say a few dozen words.

古文：顼曰： 愿受教授。 
现代文：任顼说： 那就教我吧。 
English: Ren Yao said, "Then teach me."

古文：翁曰： 后二日，愿子为我晨至湫上。
现代文：老头说： 两天之后，请你早晨为我到大水池来一趟。
English: The old man said, "In two days' time, please come to the pond for me in the morning.

古文：当亭午之际，有一道士自西来者，此所谓祸我者也。
现代文：正当中午的时候，有一个道士自西而来，他就是所说的祸害我的人。
English: At midday, a Taoist monk came from the west. He was the one who was said to have harmed me.

古文：道士当竭我湫中水，且屠我。
现代文：道士会把我池中水弄干，而且杀我。
English: The Taoist will dry up the water in my pond and kill me.

古文：子伺其湫水竭，宜厉声呼曰： 天有命，杀黄龙者死？
现代文：等到池水干了，你就尖声喊道： 上天有命令，杀黄龙者死！ 
English: When the water in the pond was dry, you shrieked, "God has given the order to kill the dragon!"

古文：言毕，湫当满，道士必又为术，子因又呼之。
现代文：说完了，水池应当又满了。道士一定又施法术，你就再喊。
English: When you've finished, the pool should be full again. The priest must have cast another spell, so shout again.

古文：如是者三，我得完其生矣。
现代文：如此喊三次，我就能保全性命了。
English: If I yell that three times, I can save my life.

古文：必重报。幸无他为虑。 
现代文：我一定重重地报答你，希望不要有其它顾虑。 
English: I will definitely repay you, and I hope you have no other worries.

古文：顼诺之。已而祈谢甚恳。久之方去。
现代文：任顼答应了他，而后他乞求致谢特别恳切，老半天才离去。
English: Ren Hao agreed, and then he begged for thanks very earnestly. It took him half a day to leave.

古文：后二日，顼遂往山西，果有大湫，即坐于湫旁以伺之。
现代文：两天后，任顼就来到山西，果然有一个大水池。他就坐在水池旁边等着。
English: Two days later, Ren Yao came to Shanxi, and sure enough, there was a large pool. He sat next to the pool and waited.

古文：至当午，忽有片云，自西冉冉而降于湫上。
现代文：到了正午，忽然有一片云，从西慢慢地飘来，缓缓降到水池边。
English: At noon, all of a sudden, a cloud slowly drifted in from the west and slowly descended to the edge of the pool.

古文：有一道士自云中下，颀然而长，约丈余，立湫之岸，于袖中出墨符数道投湫中。
现代文：有一个道士从云中走出来。
English: A Taoist came out of the clouds.

古文：顷之，湫水尽涸，见一黄龙，帖然俯于沙。
现代文：这道士身体颀长，大约一丈还多。道士立在池边，从袖子里取出几张墨色符扔到池中，立刻，池水全部干涸。但见一条黄龙紧贴着池底俯卧在泥沙之中。
English: The Taoist monk was tall and slender, about three feet tall. Standing on the edge of the pool, he took out a few ink symbols from his sleeve and threw them into the pool. Immediately, the water dried up completely. However, he saw a yellow dragon lying at the bottom of the pool, face down in the muddy sand.

古文：顼即厉声呼： 天有命，杀黄龙者死！ 
现代文：任顼立即大声喊道： 上天有命令，杀黄龙的死！ 
English: Ren Yao immediately shouted loudly: Heaven has ordered the death of the Yellow Dragon!

古文：言讫，湫水尽溢。
现代文：喊完，池水马上又涨满。
English: After shouting, the pool water immediately filled up again.

古文：道士怒，即于袖中，出丹字数符投之。
现代文：道士生气了，就从袖中又取出几张红字符投到池中，池水又干了。
English: The Taoist got angry and took out a few more red characters from his sleeve and threw them into the pool. The pool was dry again.

古文：湫水又竭，即震声呼，如前词。
现代文：任顼又尖声大喊，喊法和刚才一样。
English: Ren Xuan screamed again, shouting the same way as before.

古文：其水再溢，道士怒甚。
现代文：池水就又满了。
English: The pond is full again.

古文：凡食顷，乃出朱符十余道，向空掷之，尽化为赤云，入湫。
现代文：道士气坏了，一共不到一顿饭的工夫，就取出十多张红色符向空中抛去，红符全都化成红云，红云落到池中，池水再一次枯竭。
English: Morale was low, and in less than the time it takes to eat a meal, the camel took out more than ten red symbols and threw them into the air. The red symbols all turned into red clouds, and the red clouds fell into the pool, and the pool was once again depleted of water.

古文：湫水即竭，呼之如前词。湫水又溢。
现代文：任顼照样再高喊一次，池水再一次溢满。
English: Ren Yao still shouted once more, and the pool overflowed once more.

古文：道士顾谓顼曰： 吾一十年始得此龙为食，奈何子儒士也，奚救此异类耶？ 
现代文：道士看着任顼说： 我花费了十年的功夫才弄到这条龙吃，你一个读书人，为什么还要救它这个异类呢？ 
English: The Taoist priest looked at Ren Yao and said, "It took me ten years of hard work to get this dragon to eat, you are a reader, why would you want to save it, this alien?

古文：怒责数言而去。
现代文：他愤怒地责备了几句便离去了。
English: He left after a few angry words of reproach.

古文：顼亦还山中。
现代文：任顼也回到山中。
English: Ren Xi also returned to the mountains.

古文：是夕，梦前时老人来谢曰： 赖得君子救我。不然，几死道士手。
现代文：这天晚上，任顼梦到前几天那个老头对他说： 全仗您救了我，不然的话我已经死在道士手上了。
English: That night, Ren Yao dreamed that the old man told him a few days ago: "You saved me all the way, otherwise I would have died at the hands of the Taoists."

古文：深诚所感，千万何言。今奉一珠，可于湫岸访之，用表我心重报也。 
现代文：我心里实在是感恩戴德，千言万语难以表达这种心情，现在奉献您一颗珍珠，可以在池边找到，用来表示我感恩重报之心。 
English: In my heart, I am truly grateful. It is difficult to express this feeling in a thousand words. Now, I would like to offer you a pearl, which can be found by the pool, to express my heartfelt gratitude.

古文：顼往寻之，果得一粒径寸珠，于湫岸草上，光耀洞澈，殆不可识。
现代文：任顼到池边一找，果然在池边草丛中找到一颗径寸的大珍珠，光亮耀眼，洞澈润洁，没人知它的价值。
English: Ren Yao went to the edge of the pond to look for it, and sure enough, he found a large diameter pearl in the bushes by the edge of the pond. It was bright and dazzling, clear and moist, and no one knew its value.

古文：顼后特至广陵市，有胡人见之曰： 此真骊龙之宝也，而世人莫可得。 
现代文：任顼特意把它拿到广陵市上去卖，有一个胡人看到了说道： 这是真正的骊龙之宝，而世人没有能得到的。 
English: Ren Rong deliberately took it to Guangling City to sell it, and a Hu person saw it and said: This is a real dragon treasure, and the world can't get it.

古文：以数千万为价而市之。
现代文：胡人用数千万的价钱把珍珠买了去。
English: Hu used tens of millions of yuan to buy the pearl.

古文：赵齐嵩
现代文：赵齐嵩
English: Zhao Qisong

古文：贞元十二年，赵齐嵩选授成都县尉，收拾行李兼及仆从，负札以行，欲以赴任。
现代文：贞元十二年，赵齐嵩被选授为成都县尉，收拾行李，率领仆从，带着公文上路，前去赴任。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhao Qisong was selected as the Chengdu County Lieutenant. He packed his bags, led his servants, and went on the road with official documents to take up the post.

古文：然栈道甚险而狭，常以马鞭拂小树枝，遂被鞭梢缴树，猝不可脱，马又不住，遂坠马。
现代文：然而栈道非常高险而且狭窄，常常用马鞭子拂到小树枝，于是鞭梢绞到树上，一时解不下来。而马又不能停下，就掉到马下。
English: However, the path is very steep and narrow, and the horse whip is often used to whip small branches, so the whip ends are twisted to the tree and cannot be released for a while. And the horse cannot stop and falls under the horse.

古文：枝柔叶软，不能碍挽，直至谷底，而无所损。
现代文：树的枝叶柔软轻细，不能把他拦住，他便一直滚到谷底。但是他并没有受伤。
English: The tree's limbs were too soft and light to stop him and he rolled to the bottom of the valley, but he was unhurt.

古文：视上直千余仞，旁无他路，分死而已。
现代文：往上一看，石壁直上一千多仞，旁边也没有路，按理是非死不可了。
English: Looking up, the stone wall is straight with more than a thousand folds, and there is no road next to it. Logically, it is inevitable.

古文：所从仆辈无计，遂闻于官而归。
现代文：跟来的仆从们无计可施，就把这事报了官，然后就回去了。
English: The servants who were with him could do nothing, but reported the matter to the magistrates, and then returned home.

古文：赵子进退无路，坠之翌日，忽闻雷声殷殷，乃知天欲雨。
现代文：赵齐嵩进退无路。第二天，他忽然听到雷声大作，才知道天要下雨。
English: Zhao Qisong was at a loss. The next day, he suddenly heard thunder and knew it was going to rain.

古文：须臾，石窟中云气相旋而出。
现代文：不一会儿，一个石洞中云气翻腾涌出，有一条赤斑巨蛇随着云气显露出来。
English: In a short while, a red-spotted giant snake emerged from a cave, accompanied by billowing clouds.

古文：俄而随云有巨赤斑蛇，粗合拱，鳞甲焕然。摆头而双角出，蜿身而四足生。奋迅鬐鬣，摇动首尾。乃知龙也。
现代文：这蛇有合抱粗。鳞甲焕然有光。它摆头露出双角，屈身露出四脚，鬐鬣振奋，头尾齐摇，这才知道这是龙。
English: The snake had a coarse crest. Its scales were radiant with light. It swung its head to reveal its double horns, bent down to reveal its four legs, its beak quivered with excitement, and its head and tail swayed in unison. Only then did I know that it was a dragon.

古文：赵生自念曰： 我住亦死，乘龙出亦死，宁出而死。 
现代文：赵齐嵩心中想道： 我在这等着也是死，我乘龙出去也是死，我宁肯出去死！ 
English: Zhao Qisong thought to himself, "I'll die if I wait here, I'll die if I go out on the dragon, I'd rather go out and die!"

古文：攀龙尾而附其身，龙乘云直上，不知几千仞，赵尽死而攀之。
现代文：于是他抓住龙尾，趴到龙身上去。龙乘云直上，不知已飞上几千仞高。赵齐嵩拼死地抓住不放。
English: So he grabbed the dragon's tail and lay down on the dragon. The dragon flew straight up through the clouds, and I don't know how high it flew, but it was thousands of meters high. Zhao Qisong desperately held onto the dragon.

古文：既而至中天，施体而行。
现代文：然后到了高空，龙蜿蜒而行，赵齐嵩这才能跨上去。
English: Then, when he reached the high sky, the dragon meandered, and Zhao Qisheng could only step on it.

古文：赵生方得跨之，必死于泉矣。南视见云水一色，南海也。
现代文：一定要死到泉水中去了。向南看水天一色，那是南海。
English: You must die in the spring water. If you look south, the water is the same color as the sky. That's the South China Sea.

古文：生又叹曰： 今日不葬于山，卒于泉矣。 
现代文：赵齐嵩叹道： 今天不死在山上，死到泉里了！ 
English: Zhao Qisong sighed and said, "Today I won't die on the mountain, I'll die in the spring!"

古文：而龙将到海，飞行渐低。
现代文：然而龙将到海的时候，飞行渐渐降低。
English: However, when the dragon is about to go to the sea, the flight gradually decreases.

古文：去海一二百步，舍龙而投诸地。
现代文：离海还有一二百步，他就撒开手从龙身上跳下来。
English: When he was one or two hundred paces from the sea, he threw up his hands and jumped down from the dragon.

古文：海岸素有芦苇，虽堕而靡有所损。
现代文：海边一向有芦苇，他虽然跳下来却没有摔伤。
English: There had always been reeds on the seashore, and although he jumped down, he didn't get hurt.

古文：半日，乃行路逢人，问之。曰： 清远县也。 
现代文：半天才路遇一人，一打听，这地方是清远县。
English: Half a day later, I met a person on the road. Upon inquiry, this place is Qingyuan County.

古文：然至于县，且无伴从凭据，人不之信，不得缱绻。
现代文：但是到了县衙之后，他身边没有伴从凭据，人家不相信他，不能向人陈述自己的际遇。
English: However, when he arrived at the county government, he did not have any accompanying documents with him. People did not believe him and he could not tell anyone about his experience.

古文：迤逦以至长安，月余日，达舍。家内始作三七斋，僧徒大集。
现代文：走许多日子到了长安，一个多月到了家。家里正给他 烧三七 ，僧徒大集。
English: He walked for many days to get to Chang'an, and it took him more than a month to get home. His family was in the process of giving him "Burning the Thirty-Seven," a large collection of Buddhist scriptures.

古文：忽见赵生至，皆惊恐奔曰： 魂来归。 
现代文：人们忽然发现赵齐嵩来了，都吓得撒腿就跑，说是他的魂回来了。
English: People suddenly discovered that Zhao Qisheng had come, and they were so scared that they ran away, saying that his soul had returned.

古文：赵生当门而坐，妻孥辈亦恐其有复生。云： 请于日行，看有影否。 
现代文：赵齐嵩迎门坐下，妻儿老小也怕他是死而复生，说： 请你到阳光下走一走，看你有没有影子。 
English: Zhao Qisheng opened the door and sat down. His wife and children were also afraid that he had come back from the dead. They said, "Please take a walk in the sunshine to see if you have a shadow."

古文：赵生怒其家人之诈恐，不肯于日行。疏亲曰： 若不肯日中行，必是鬼也。 
现代文：赵齐嵩很生气，不肯到阳光里去走。疏远的亲属便说： 如果他不肯到阳光下走走，那就一定是鬼！ 
English: Zhao Qisong was very angry and refused to go out in the sun. His estranged relatives said: If he refuses to go out in the sun, then he must be a ghost!

古文：见赵生言，犹云： 乃鬼语耳。 
现代文：见到他说话，还说这是鬼在讲话。
English: And when they saw him speak, they said, It is the voice of a demon.

古文：良久，自叙其事，方大喜。
现代文：许久，赵齐嵩自己详尽地述说了死里逃生的过程，人们这才大喜。
English: For a long time, Zhao Qisheng himself described in detail the process of escaping death, which made people very happy.

古文：行于危险，乘骑者可以为戒也。
现代文：骑马走在危险之中的人，可以引以为戒呀！
English: If you are riding a horse and are in danger, you can take it as a warning!

