古文：刘温叟，字永龄，河南洛阳人。
现代文：刘温叟字永龄，河南洛阳人。
English: Liu Wenjun, surnamed Yongling, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：性重厚方正，动遵礼法。
现代文：为人厚重方正，举动遵循礼法。
English: He is a heavy-set, square-jawed man, and his behavior follows the etiquette.

古文：唐武德功臣政会之后。
现代文：是唐朝武德功臣刘政会的后代。
English: He was a descendant of Liu Zhenghui, a military hero of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：叔祖崇望，相昭宗。
现代文：其叔祖刘崇望，任唐昭宗的宰相。
English: His great-uncle, Liu Chongwang, was the prime minister of Tang Zhaozong.

古文：父岳，后唐太常卿。
现代文：其父刘岳，任后唐太常卿。
English: His father, Liu Yue, later became the First Consul of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：温叟七岁能属文，善楷隶。
现代文：温叟七岁就能写文章，擅长楷书、隶书书法。
English: At the age of seven, Wen Wei can write articles, and is good at block letters and cursive handwriting.

古文：岳时退居洛中，语家人曰： 吾儿风骨秀异，所未知者寿耳。今世难未息，得与老夫皆为温、洛之叟足矣。 故名之温叟。
现代文：刘岳退居洛中时，对家人说： 我的儿子风骨秀异，不能预知的只是寿命长短罢了，当今世道混乱，我儿能够与我都成为温、洛之间的老叟则足矣。 所以给他取名为温叟。
English: When Liu Yue retired to Luo Zhong, he said to his family: My son's temperament is excellent. The only thing that cannot be predicted is the length of his life. In today's chaotic world, it is enough for my son to be able to become an old friend between Wen and Luo with me. So I named him Wen Yu.

古文：以荫补国子四门助教，河南府文学。
现代文：因祖辈功劳补任国子四门助教、河南府文学。
English: Due to the merits of his ancestors, he was appointed as the assistant professor of the four schools of Kuniko and literature of Henan Prefecture.

古文：清泰中，为左拾遗、内供奉。
现代文：清泰年间，任左拾遗、内供奉。
English: During the Qing and Tai Dynasties, Ren Zuo collected relics and offered them to the emperor.

古文：以母老乞归就养，改监察御史，分司。
现代文：因母亲年老请求归家养老，改任监察御史，分府视事。
English: Due to his mother's request that he return home to care for her in her old age, he was reassigned to the position of inspector general of history, in charge of the branch office.

古文：时台署废弛，温叟作新之。
现代文：当时台署废弛，温叟加以革新。
English: At that time, the Taiwan Affairs Office was in disrepair and needed to be revamped.

古文：未几，召为右补阙。
现代文：不久，召他入朝任右补阙。
English: Soon after, he was called to the imperial court to serve as the right assistant regent.

古文：晋初，王松权知青州，表为判官，加朝散阶。
现代文：后晋初年，王松权任知青州，上表推荐他任判官，加任朝散官。
English: In the first year of the Later Jin Dynasty, Wang Songquan was appointed to Zhicheng and Qingzhou. The above table recommended that he be appointed as a judge, and he was also appointed as a courtier.

古文：入为主客员外郎。
现代文：入朝任主客员外郎。
English: He entered the imperial court as the chief guest attendant, Wairo.

古文：少帝领开封尹，奏为巡官，命典文翰，又改广晋府巡官。
现代文：后晋少帝任开封府尹时，上奏推荐他为巡官，命令他掌管文翰，又改任广晋府巡官。
English: Later, when the Young Emperor Jin was appointed as the inspector of Kaifeng Prefecture, Shangso recommended him as the inspector and ordered him to be in charge of Wenhan. He was also appointed as the inspector of Guangjin Prefecture.

古文：少帝即位，拜刑部郎中，赐金紫。
现代文：少帝即皇帝位后，授任他为刑部郎中，赐金紫朝衣。
English: After the enthronement of the young emperor, he was appointed as a member of the Department of Justice, and was given a gold and purple imperial robe.

古文：改都官郎中，充翰林学士。
现代文：改任都官郎中，充任翰林学士。
English: He was reappointed as a junior official of the capital and appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：初，岳仕后唐，尝居内署，至是温叟复居斯任，时人荣之。
现代文：当初，刘岳在后唐任职，曾经官居内署，到这时温叟又任此职，当时人都感到刘家很荣幸。
English: At first, Liu Yue held a post in the late Tang Dynasty. He was once an official in the residence department. At that time, Wen Qi also held this post. At that time, everyone felt that the Liu family was very honored.

古文：温叟既受命，归为母寿，候立堂下。
现代文：温叟受命后，回家为母亲祝寿，在堂下站着等候。
English: After receiving the order, Wen Rong went home to wish his mother a happy birthday and stood waiting under the hall.

古文：须臾闻乐声，两青衣举箱出庭，奉紫袍、兼衣，母命卷帘见温叟曰： 此即尔父在禁中日内库所赐者。 温叟拜受泣下，退开影堂列祭，以文告之。
现代文：不久听见音乐声，两个青衣人举箱走出庭堂，向温叟献上紫袍、缣衣，他的母亲命卷开帘帷见温叟说 ：这是你父亲在宫中时内库赏赐的。 温叟跪拜接受时泪如雨下，退到开影堂列祭时，用文章告祭。
English: Soon they heard the sound of music, and two men in blue coats came out of the courtyard, lifting a box, and presented a purple robe and a long robe to Onmyo. His mother opened the curtain to see Onmyo and said, "This was given to you by your father when he was in the palace." Onmyo's tears rained down as he knelt to receive it, and when he retired to the Kaieido Hall for the offering, he announced the offering with an article.

古文：母感怆累日，不忍见温叟。
现代文：他的母亲伤感了好几天，不忍心见温叟。
English: His mother felt sad for several days and could not bear to see him.

古文：岁满，加知制诰。
现代文：一年后，加任知制诰。
English: A year later, he was given the additional post of Chisei Shosei.

古文：契丹入汴，温叟惧，随契丹北迁，与承旨张允共上表求解职。
现代文：契丹军队攻入汴京，温叟畏惧，跟随契丹兵迁到北边，与承旨张允共同上表请求解除职务。
English: The Khitan army invaded Beijing, and Wen Jiabao, afraid, followed the Khitan soldiers to the north, and jointly petitioned Zhang Yun to be relieved of his duties.

古文：契丹主怒，欲出允等为县令。
现代文：契丹主大怒，打算把张允等人调出京城任县令。
English: The Khitan lord was furious and planned to transfer Zhang Yun and others out of Beijing to serve as county magistrates.

古文：赵延寿曰： 若学士才不称职求解者，守本官可也，不可加贬出。 遂得罢职出院。
现代文：赵延寿说 ：如果学士才能不称职请求解职者，可以仍任本官，不能贬出。 于是得以罢免职务出翰林院。
English: Zhao Yanshou said, "If an academician is incompetent and requests to be dismissed, he can still remain in his position and cannot be dismissed, so he can be dismissed from the position and leave Hanlin Academy."

古文：汉祖南下，温叟自洛从至郑州，称疾不行。
现代文：后汉高祖南下时，温叟从洛阳跟从到郑州后，称病不行。
English: Later, when the founder of the Han Dynasty Gaozu went to the south, after Wen Qi followed him from Luoyang to Zhengzhou, he said that he was not well.

古文：及入汴，温叟久之方至，授驾部郎中。
现代文：进入汴京后，温叟很迟才到来，授任他为驾部郎中。
English: After entering Beijing, Wen Jiabao arrived very late and was appointed as the driver's assistant.

古文：周初，拜左谏议大夫，逾年，改中书舍人，加史馆修撰，判馆事。
现代文：后周初期，任左谏议大夫。一年后，改任中书舍人，加任史馆修撰，判馆事。
English: At the beginning of the second week, he was appointed as the doctor of Zuoying discussion. A year later, he was reassigned as the librarian of the Central Library, and he was also appointed as the reviewer of the history library and the judge of the library affairs.

古文：显德初，迁礼部侍郎、知贡举，得进士十六人。
现代文：显德初年，升任礼部侍郎、知贡举，录取进士十六名。
English: In the first year of Hende, he was promoted to the position of etiquette attendant, and received 16 new recruits.

古文：有谮于帝者，帝怒，黜十二人，左迁太子詹事。
现代文：有人向皇帝诬陷他们，皇帝发怒，斥除其中十二人，把温叟贬任为太子詹事。
English: Someone slandered them to the emperor, and the emperor became angry, expelled twelve of them, and relegated Wen Qi to the position of Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：温叟实无私，后数年，其被黜者相继登第。
现代文：温叟实际上并无私心，后来几年，被斥除的人相继考中。
English: In fact, Wen Jiabao was not selfless. In the following years, those who were expelled took the middle school entrance examination one after another.

古文：温叟与张昭同修汉隐帝及周祖实录，恭帝即位，迁工部侍郎兼判国子祭酒事。
现代文：温叟与张昭共同修撰后汉隐帝及周太祖实录，恭帝即位，升任他为工部侍郎兼判国子祭酒事。
English: After Emperor Han Ying and Emperor Zhou Taizu jointly compiled the historical records, Emperor Gong ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to the position of the chamberlain of the work department and the judge of the National Children's Festival.

古文：宋初，改刑部。
现代文：宋朝初期，改任刑部侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was reassigned to the position of an attendant of the Department of Justice.

古文：建隆九年，拜御史中丞。
现代文：建隆元年，任御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianlong, he was appointed as Goshi chujo.

古文：丁内艰，退居西洛，旋复本官。
现代文：遭母丧，退居西洛，不久恢复本官。
English: After his mother's death, he retired to Silo and soon resumed his post.

古文：三年，兼判吏部铨。
现代文：建隆三年，兼任判吏部铨。
English: In the third year of Jianlong, he also served as the chief judge.

古文：因上言曰： 伏见两京百司，渐乏旧人，多隳故事。
现代文：于是向皇上进言说 ：我见两京各部门，慢慢缺乏旧臣，大多毁掉旧制。
English: Therefore, he made a suggestion to the emperor, saying, "I see that the departments in the two capitals are slowly running out of old retainers, and most of them are destroying the old system.

古文：虽检阅具存于往册，而举行须在于攸司。
现代文：虽然检阅时旧制仍存在于以往的典籍，但是行动必须在主管部门。
English: Although the old system still exists for the inspection of old books, action must be taken by the competent authorities.

古文：盖因年限得官，归司者例与减选；冬集赴调，授任者寻又出京。
现代文：因年限已满应得官，到吏部时照例要减选；冬季集中赴调，授官者不久又出京城。
English: Due to the expiration of the term of office, when they arrived at the cadre department, they had to be elected as usual; in the winter, they were transferred to the capital, and those who were awarded the post soon left the capital.

古文：兼有裁满初官，不还旧局，但称前资，用图免役。
现代文：还有人初官满期被裁，不回到原来的官署，只声称前任官职，以图免除赋役。
English: There were also people who were dismissed at the end of their first term of office and did not return to their original government office, but only claimed their previous official position in an attempt to be exempted from military service.

古文：又有尝因停任，切欲归司，而元敕不该，无由复职。
现代文：又有人曾经因故停任，急欲回到吏部，而又不具备元敕，无法复职。
English: There were also people who had been suspended for some reason and were eager to return to the personnel department, but they did not have the original certificate and could not be reinstated.

古文：遂使在司者失于教习，历事者难于追还。
现代文：于是使得在任者失于教习，管事者难于追还。
English: As a result, the incumbent loses interest in teaching, and it is difficult for the administrator to catch up.

古文：伏望自今诸司职掌，除官勒留及归司者，如理减外欠三选以下，仍须在司执行公事，及三十月即许赴集；如理选外欠三选以上，及在官不成资考者，即准元敕处分。
现代文：我希望从今以后各部门的任务，授官留任及回吏部待职的，按例减免外官欠任三选以下的，仍然须吏部执行公事，到三十个月后就允许赴吏部集中，按理减免外官欠任三选以下的，以及在任没有通过考核的，就按照元敕处理。
English: I hope that from now on, the tasks of each department, awarding officials to remain in office and returning to the Ministry of Public Administration to wait for duty, according to the usual reduction and exemption of foreign officials under three elections, still need the Ministry of Public Administration to carry out public affairs, and after thirty months will be allowed to go to the Ministry of Public Administration to concentrate, according to the principle of reduction and exemption of foreign officials under three elections, and those who have not passed the assessment, will be dealt with according to the principle.

古文：若在任停官及在司停职者，经恩后于刑部出给雪牒，却勒归司，如无阙员，即令守阙，余依敕格处分。
现代文：如果是在任停官以及在有关部门停职的，经恩准后由刑部出给雪牒，勒令到吏部报到，如果没有空缺，就让他候缺，其余的依照敕令处理。 
English: In the case of a suspended official in office or a suspended official in a relevant department, the criminal investigation department will issue a written order to report to the personnel department, and if there is no vacancy, he will be placed on standby, and the rest will be handled in accordance with the royal order.

古文：一日晚归由阙前，太祖方与中黄门数人偶登明德门西阙，前驺者潜知之，以白温叟。
现代文：一天晚上回家从宫前走过，太祖正与中黄门数人偶然登明德门西楼，温叟的前导人员偷偷地知道了，告诉他。
English: One evening, when he was walking home from the front of the palace, Taizu and several people from Zhonghuangmen accidentally entered the west building of Mingdemen, and the foreman of Wenju secretly found out and told him.

古文：温叟令传呼如常过阙。
现代文：温叟下令像平常过皇宫那样传呼。
English: Wen Jiabao ordered that the call go out through the palace as usual.

古文：翌日请对，具言： 人主非时登楼，则近制咸望恩宥，辇下诸军亦希赏给。
现代文：第二天朝见时，温叟说： 人主登楼非时，则近臣都希望得到宽恕，护卫诸军也希望得到赏赐。
English: The next day, when they met in the morning, Wen Wei said, "When the master of a man climbs into a building and does something wrong, his close vassals all hope to be forgiven, and the guards and soldiers also hope to be rewarded.

古文：臣所以呵导而过者，欲示众以陛下非时不登楼也。 太祖善之。
现代文：我之所以呵道而过，是想向人暗示你不是时候不会登楼啊。 太祖认为他做的对。
English: The reason why I passed by was to suggest to people that you wouldn't go upstairs if it wasn't the right time.

古文：宪府旧例，月赏公用茶，中丞受钱一万，公用不足则以赃罚物充。
现代文：御史府旧例，每月赏给公用茶、御史中丞得钱一万，公用不足就以罚款补充。
English: As was the case at the Imperial Household Agency in the past, tea for public use and Imperial Junior High School students were rewarded with 10,000 yen per month, and any shortfall in public use was compensated with a fine.

古文：温叟恶其名不取。
现代文：温叟厌恶罚款之名而不取用。
English: Wen Jiabao disliked the name of the fine and did not use it.

古文：任台丞十二年，屡求代。
现代文：任台丞十二年，多次求人自代。
English: He has been in office for 12 years and has repeatedly asked for a successor.

古文：太祖难其人，不允。
现代文：太祖难找合适人选，不允许。
English: It is difficult for the great-grandfather to find a suitable candidate, and it is not allowed.

古文：开宝四年被疾，太祖知其贫，就赐器币，数月卒，年六十三。
现代文：开宝四年染病，太祖知道他贫穷，到他家里赏赐器币，几个月后去世，终年六十三岁。
English: In the fourth year of Kai Bao's illness, the great-grandfather knew he was poor and went to his house to give him money. He died a few months later, at the age of 63.

古文：温叟事继母以孝闻，虽盛暑非冠带不敢见。
现代文：温叟侍候继母孝顺闻名，即使是大热天不戴帽穿衣不敢相见。
English: Even on a hot day, if you don't wear a hat, you won't be able to see each other.

古文：五代以来，言执礼者惟温叟焉。立朝有德望，精赏鉴，门生中尤器杨徽之、赵邻几，后皆为名士。
现代文：五代以来，说到遵从礼法的只有温叟，在朝任官时有德望，精于鉴赏，门生中尤其器重杨徽之、赵邻几，后来二人都成为名士。
English: Since the fifth generation, when it comes to obeying the etiquette, only Wen Xuan, who had a reputation for virtue when he was appointed to the imperial court, was good at appreciation. Among his disciples, Yang Huizhi and Zhao Rongji were particularly valued, and both of them later became celebrities.

古文：范杲幼时，尝以文贽温叟，大加称奖，以女妻之。
现代文：范杲年轻时，曾经拿文章拜见温叟，温叟大为称赞他，并把女儿嫁给他。
English: When Fan Wei was young, he once took an article to meet Wen Wei, who praised him greatly and married his daughter to him.

古文：太宗在晋邸，闻其清介，遣吏遗钱五百千，温叟受之，贮厅西舍中，令府吏封署而去。
现代文：太宗在任晋王时，听说他清介，派人送给他钱五百千，温叟接受下来，存放在厅西舍房中，命令府吏封署后离去。
English: When Taizong was serving as the king of Jin, he heard that he was the assistant of the Qing Dynasty and sent someone to give him five hundred thousand yuan. Wen Qi accepted the money and stored it in the west wing of the palace. He ordered the officials to seal the office and then leave.

古文：明年重午，又送角黍、执扇，所遣吏即送钱者，视西舍封识宛然，还以白太宗。
现代文：第二年重午节，又派人送去角黍、执扇，所派的人正好是去年送钱的人，看见西舍封记还在，回来后告诉太宗。
English: On the second year's Mid-Autumn Festival, someone else was sent to deliver the horned gourd and the fan. The person sent was exactly the same person who had delivered the money last year. When he saw that the seal of Xishe was still there, he came back and told Taizong.

古文：太宗曰： 我钱尚不用，况他人乎？
现代文：太宗说： 我的钱他尚且不用，何况是他人的钱？
English: Taizong said, "He doesn't even use my money, let alone other people's money?

古文：昔日纳之，是不欲拒我也；今周岁不启封，其苦节愈见。 命吏辇归邸。
现代文：从前接受下来，是不想拒绝我；现在过了一年还不启封，他的清节越是明显。 命令官吏把所送物品载回。
English: In the past, when he accepted, he didn't want to refuse me; now, a year has passed and he still hasn't opened the envelope, the more obvious his chastity is.

古文：是秋，太宗侍宴后苑，因论当世名节士，具道温叟前事，太祖再三赏叹。
现代文：这年秋天，太宗在后苑侍奉太祖用宴，在谈论当世有名的清节之士时，详细讲述了刘温叟以前的事情，太祖再三叹赏。
English: In the autumn of that year, Emperor Taizong served a banquet for Emperor Taizu in the backyard. When talking about the famous Qing Dynasty heroes, he recounted in detail the events before Liu Wenqi, which Emperor Taizu repeatedly praised.

古文：雍熙初，子炤罢徐州观察推官待选，以贫诣登闻求注官。
现代文：雍熙初年，他的儿子刘癤被罢免徐州观察推官待选，因为家贫到朝廷请求注官。
English: In the first year of Yongxi, his son Liu Hui was removed from the post of Xuzhou Supervisor and put up for election. Because of his family's poverty, he went to the imperial court to request an appointment.

古文：及引对，太宗问谁氏子，炤以温叟对。
现代文：到引对皇上时，太宗问他是谁的儿子，刘癤回答是温叟。
English: When he was brought before the emperor, Emperor Taizong asked whose son he was. Liu Bei replied that he was Wen Zhuang.

古文：太宗愀然，召宰相语其事，且言当今大臣罕有其比。
现代文：太宗很悲伤，召宰相来谈他的事，并且说当今大臣很少能与他家相比。
English: Tai Zong was very sad and called the Prime Minister to talk about him, and said that today's ministers can rarely be compared to his family.

古文：因问： 炤当得何官？ 宰相言： 免选以为厚恩。 帝曰： 其父有清操，录其子登朝，庶足示劝。 擢炤太子右赞善大夫，历判三司理欠、凭由司，江南转运司，入朝为司封郎中。
现代文：于是问他 ：癤应得任什么官？ 宰相说 ：免除待选作为厚恩。 太宗说 ：他的父亲有清操，录用他的儿子入朝做官，来表示劝勉。 提升癤为太子右赞善大夫，历任判三司理欠、凭由司、江南转运司，入朝任司封郎中。
English: Then he asked, "What kind of official should Zou be appointed to?" The prime minister said, "To be exempted from standing for election as a favor." Taizong said, "His father had the virtue of chastity and hired his son to enter the imperial court as an official to show his encouragement." Zou was promoted to the position of the Prince Uzenzen doctor, and successively held the position of the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, the Second Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Transportation of the Southern Yangtze River, and was appointed to the position of the Second Secretary of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：炳、烨并进士及第。
现代文：温叟的另两个儿子刘炳、刘烨都考中进士。
English: The other two sons of Wen Kun, Liu Kun and Liu Kun, have all passed the junior high school entrance examination.

