古文：汉武帝东方朔毛宝孔愉宗叔林桓邈刘枢蔡喜夫刘沼刘之亨严泰程灵铣韦丹熊慎王行思陈弘泰
现代文：汉武帝东方朔毛宝孔愉宗叔林桓邈刘枢蔡喜夫刘沼刘之亨严泰程灵铣韦丹熊慎王行思陈弘泰
English: Emperor Hanwu of the East, Shao Mao of the East, Bao Kongyu of the East, Zong Shulin of the East, Huan Qi of the East, Liu Zuo of the East, Cai Qifu of the East, Liu Numa of the East, Liu Zhiheng of the East, Yan Tai of the East, Cheng Ling of the East, Wei Dan, Xiong Sheng of the East, Wang Xing of the East, Chen Hongtai of the East

古文：汉武帝
现代文：汉武帝
English: Emperor Hanwu

古文：昆明池，汉武帝凿之，习水战。
现代文：昆明池是汉武帝令人开凿出来的，为了演习水战。
English: Kunming Pond was dug out by Emperor Hanwu to practice naval warfare.

古文：中有灵沼神池，云：尧时洪水，停船此池，池通白鹿原，人钓鱼于原，纶绝而去。
现代文：其中有个灵沼池。据传说，尧帝时闹洪水，尧帝在这个池里停过船，池水直通白鹿原，有人在白鹿原钓鱼，鱼弦断了鱼跑了。
English: One of them is Lingnuma Pond. According to legend, Emperor Gao caused a flood. Emperor Gao stopped a boat in this pond, and the water of the pond went straight to Shirakawara. Someone was fishing in Shirakawara, and the fish broke the fishing line and ran away.

古文：鱼梦于武帝，求去其钩。
现代文：鱼托梦给汉武帝，请求他把鱼钩拿下来。
English: He gave the fish to Emperor Hanwu and asked him to take down the hook.

古文：明日，帝游戏于池，见大鱼衔索，曰： 岂非昨所梦乎？ 
现代文：第二天，汉武帝在灵沼池游玩，看见一条大鱼含着绳索。自言自语说： 难道是昨天梦到的那条鱼吗？ 
English: The next day, Han Wudi was playing in the Lingnuma Pool and saw a big fish with a rope. He said to himself, "Could it be the fish I dreamed about yesterday?"

古文：取鱼去钩而放之，帝后得明珠。
现代文：于是抓住鱼把鱼钩拿下来放了。汉武帝后来得到一颗夜明珠。
English: So he caught the fish, took down the hook and released it. Later, Emperor Han Wu got a pearl.

古文：东方朔
现代文：东方朔
English: Dongfangshuo

古文：汉武帝宴于未央，方啖黍臛，忽闻人语云： 老臣冒死自诉。 
现代文：汉武帝在未央宫设宴。正要吃饭菜，忽然听到有人说： 老臣冒死前来自诉。 
English: Emperor Hanwu held a banquet at the Weiyang Palace. He was about to eat the dishes when he suddenly heard someone say: "The old minister dared to sue before he died."

古文：不见其形。寻觅良久，梁上见一老翁，长八九寸，面目赪皱，须发皓白，拄杖偻步，笃老之极。
现代文：但见不到人形，找了好半天，才在房梁上看见一个老翁，身子只有八九寸长，红色面庞皱纹很多，须发都是银白的，拄着拐杖佝偻着腰走路，实在太老了。
English: But I couldn't see the doll, and it took me a long time to find it, until I saw an old man on the beam of the house. His body was only eight or nine inches long, his red face had many wrinkles, his hair was silver-white, and he walked with a cane around his waist. He was really too old.

古文：帝问曰： 叟姓字何？居在何处？
现代文：武帝问： 老人姓什么，怎么称呼，家在哪里？
English: Emperor Wu asked: What is the old man's surname, what is his name, and where is his home?

古文：何所病苦？
现代文：有什么病苦对我说呢？ 
English: What does my illness say to me?

古文：而来诉朕？ 翁缘柱而下，放杖稽首，嘿而不言。
现代文：老翁顺着柱子下来，放下拐杖磕头，只是叹气而不说话。
English: The old man walked down the pillar, put down his crutch and bowed his head, only sighing and not speaking.

古文：因仰头视屋。俯指帝脚，忽然不见。
现代文：然后仰起头看屋，又俯下身子指武帝的脚，忽然间就不见了。
English: Then he raised his head to look at the house, bent down again to point at Emperor Wu's feet, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：帝骇愕，不知何等，乃曰： 东方朔必识之。 
现代文：武帝又惊讶又奇怪，不知怎么回事。然后说： 东方朔一定知道。 
English: Emperor Wu was surprised and puzzled. He didn't know what was going on. Then he said, "Dongfang Shuo must know."

古文：于是召方朔以告，朔曰： 其名为藻，水木之精，夏巢幽林，冬潜深河，陛下顷日，频兴造宫室，新伐其居，故来诉耳。
现代文：于是召来东方朔把刚才的事告诉了他。东方朔说： 他的名叫藻，是水木的精华，夏天住在幽深的山林，冬天潜藏在深河里，陛下您连日频繁地兴造宫室，斩伐了他的居所，所以才来诉说。
English: So he summoned Dongfang Shuo to tell him what had just happened. Dongfang Shuo said, "His name is Cao, he is the essence of water and wood, he lives in the deep mountain forest in summer and hides in the deep river in winter. Your Majesty, you have frequently built a palace room day after day and chopped down his residence, that is why I have come to tell you."

古文：仰头看屋，而复俯指陛下脚者，足也。愿陛下宫室足于此。 
现代文：仰头看屋，又俯身指脚，足的意思。希望陛下兴建的宫室到这就足了。 
English: He looked up at the house, then bent down and pointed to his feet, meaning his feet. He hoped that the palace built by His Majesty would be enough.

古文：帝感之，既而息役。
现代文：武帝到瓠子河，听到水底下有奏乐唱歌的声音。
English: Emperor Wu went to the Lazy River and heard the sound of music and singing under the water.

古文：幸瓠子河，闻水底有弦歌声，前梁上翁及年少数人，绛衣素带，缨佩甚鲜，皆长八九寸，有一人长尺余，凌波而出，衣不沾濡，或有挟乐器者，帝方食，为之辍膳，命列坐于食案前。
现代文：前面那个在梁上的老翁和很多少年人，穿着绛色的衣服扎着素带，带子和佩环都很新鲜漂亮。身长也都八九寸，有一个一尺多长的人，冲击了波浪出来，衣服也没有沾湿，还有携带乐器的。武帝正要吃饭，看他们来了也就不吃了，让他们排列坐在饭桌前。
English: The old man on the beam in front of him and a lot of young people were wearing navy-colored clothes tied with plain ribbons. The ribbons and lapel pins were fresh and beautiful. They were all eight or nine inches tall. There was a man more than a foot long, who came out of the waves, his clothes were not wet, and he was carrying a musical instrument. Emperor Wu was about to eat, but he didn't eat when he saw them coming, so he made them sit in a row at the dining table.

古文：帝问曰： 闻水底奏乐，为是君耶？ 
现代文：武帝问： 我听到水底奏乐，是你们吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked: I hear underwater music, is it you?

古文：老翁对曰： 老臣前昧死归诉，幸蒙陛下天地之施，即息斧斤，得全其居，不胜欢喜。故私相庆乐耳。 
现代文：老翁回答说： 老臣前次冒死去诉说，幸亏蒙受了陛下施给天地那么大的恩惠，立刻停止修建宫室，使我们居住的地方保存下来，我们特别高兴，所以私下庆贺就是了。 
English: The old man replied, "The old minister risked his life the last time to tell us that, thanks to the great favor that His Majesty bestowed on heaven and earth, he immediately stopped the construction of the palace and preserved the place where we live. We are particularly happy, so we can celebrate privately."

古文：帝曰： 可得奏乐否？ 
现代文：武帝说： 可以演奏给我听听吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Can you play for me?

古文：曰： 故赍乐来，安敢不奏。 
现代文：回答说： 所以我们带乐器来了，怎么敢不演奏呢？ 
English: He replied: That's why we came with our instruments, how dare we not play?

古文：其最长人便弦而歌，歌曰： 天地德兮垂至仁，愍幽魄兮停斧斤，保窟宅兮庇微身，愿天子兮寿万春。 
现代文：那个最长的人便弹弦而唱，歌词是： 天地的德啊垂降了大仁，怜悯幽魂啊停了斧锤；保住了窟宅啊庇佑了微身，祝愿天子啊寿命万年。 
English: The longest man then strummed the strings and sang, the lyrics being: "Heaven and earth's virtue, ah, droop down the almighty, mercy and ghost, ah, stop the axe hammer; keep the cave house, ah, protect and bless the tiny body, wish the heavenly son, ah, longevity for a thousand years."

古文：歌声小大，无异于人，清彻绕越梁栋。
现代文：歌声的大小和人没有什么区别。清澈悦耳的歌声绕梁越栋。
English: There is no difference between the size of the singing voice and the person. The clear and pleasant singing voice goes around the beam.

古文：又二人鸣管抚节，调契声谐。
现代文：又有两个人吹着箫笛，声调默契和谐。
English: Two others are playing the reed flute, their voices blending harmoniously.

古文：帝欢悦，举觞并劝曰： 不德不足当雅贶。 
现代文：武帝又高兴又愉快，举起酒杯并劝说： 我没有什么仁德不值你们这样称赞。 
English: Emperor Wu was happy and cheerful, raised his glass and persuaded: I have no benevolence that is not worthy of your praise.

古文：老翁等并起拜受爵，各饮数升不醉，献帝一紫螺壳，中有物，状如牛脂。
现代文：老翁等人全都起来行礼接过酒杯，各饮几升酒也不醉，献给武帝一个紫色的海螺壳，里面有东西，好象牛油。
English: The old man and the others all stood up and saluted and took the wine glasses. Each of them drank several liters of wine without getting drunk. They presented Emperor Wu with a purple conch shell with something in it, like butter.

古文：帝问曰： 朕暗无以识此物。 
现代文：武帝问： 我太糊涂不认识这种东西。 
English: Wu Di asked: I am too confused to recognize such a thing.

古文：曰： 东方生知之耳。 
现代文：他们说： 东方先生知道。 
English: They said: Mr. Dongfang knows.

古文：帝曰： 可更以珍异见贻。 
现代文：武帝说： 可以再拿来奇珍异宝我看看吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Could I have another look at the treasures?"

古文：老翁顾命取洞穴之宝，一人受命，下没渊底，倏忽还到，得一大珠，经数寸，明耀绝世，帝甚爱玩。
现代文：老翁回头命令去拿洞穴之宝。一个人接受命令，下去没于渊底，一转眼又回来了，拿来一颗大珍珠，直径有几寸，光明闪耀举世无双，武帝很爱惜拿过来赏玩。
English: The old man looked back and ordered to take the treasure of the cave. A person accepted the order, went down to the bottom of the abyss, and came back in a blink of an eye, bringing a large pearl, a few inches in diameter, shining like nothing else in the world. Emperor Wu was very fond of taking it and enjoying it.

古文：翁等忽然而隐，帝问朔： 紫螺壳中何物？ 
现代文：老翁等人忽然隐去。武帝问东方朔，紫螺壳中是什么东西。
English: The old man and the others suddenly disappeared. Emperor Wu asked Dongfang Shuo what was in the purple conch shell.

古文：朔曰： 是蛟龙髓，以傅面，令人好颜色。
现代文：东方朔说： 是蛟龙的骨髓，用来涂脸，可以使人的脸色好看。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: It is the bone marrow of the dragon, used to paint the face, can make people's face look good.

古文：又女子在孕，产之必易。 
现代文：还有，如果女子怀孕，用了它产小儿会很容易。 
English: Also, if a woman is pregnant, it will be easy to have a baby with it.

古文：会后宫产难者，试之，殊有神效。
现代文：以后宫中有难产的，试验一下，非常有神效。
English: After that, if there is a difficult birth in the uterus, try it, it is very effective.

古文：帝以脂涂面，便悦泽。
现代文：武帝用那油涂面，脸面就细腻滑润又有光泽。
English: Emperor Wu used the oil to paint his face, which became delicate, smooth and shiny.

古文：又曰： 何以此珠名洞穴珠？ 
现代文：武帝又说： 为什么这珍珠叫洞穴珠呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu also said, "Why is this pearl called the Cave Pearl?"

古文：朔曰： 河底有一穴，深数百丈，中有赤蚌，蚌生珠，故以名焉。 
现代文：东方朔说： 河底下有一个洞穴，几百尺深，穴洞中有一个红色的蚌，蚌产珍珠，所以用这个名。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: There is a cave under the river, several hundred feet deep. There is a red dragonfly in the cave, which produces pearls, hence the name.

古文：帝既深叹此事，又服朔之奇识。
现代文：武帝既深深感叹这件事，又佩服东方朔学问的奇异。
English: Emperor Wu not only deeply lamented this event, but also admired the strangeness of Oriental learning.

古文：毛宝
现代文：毛宝
English: Mao Bao

古文：晋咸康中，豫州刺史毛宝戍邾城。
现代文：晋咸康年间，豫州刺史毛宝驻守邾城。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Mao Bao, the Governor of Yuzhou, was stationed in the county seat of Jixian.

古文：有一军人，于武昌市买得一白龟，长四五寸，置瓮中养之，渐大，放江中。
现代文：有一个当兵的，在武昌集市上买回来一只白龟。长四五寸，放到大缸里养着，渐渐长大了，就把它放回江里去。
English: There was a soldier who bought a white turtle at the Wuchang bazaar. It was four or five inches long and was kept in a large tank. When it grew up, it was put back into the river.

古文：乃是先放白龟，既得至岸，回顾而去。
现代文：后来邾城遭到石氏进攻而败，逃到江里去的人没有不淹死的。那个养龟的人披着铠甲也跳到江里，觉得好象落到一块石头上，过了一会儿一看，原来是以前放到江里的白龟，靠它就上了对岸，回头看那龟已经走了。
English: Later, Shicheng was attacked and defeated by the Shi clan, and those who fled to the river did not escape without drowning. The turtle keeper also jumped into the river wearing armor, feeling as if he had fallen on a stone. After a while, he saw that it was the white turtle that had been placed in the river before, and he used it to get to the opposite bank. Looking back, he saw that the turtle had already left.

古文：孔愉
现代文：孔愉
English: Kong Rong

古文：孔愉尝至吴兴余不亭，见人笼龟于路，愉买而放之。至水，反顾视愉。
现代文：孔愉曾经到过吴兴余不亭，见有一个人在路上用笼子装着龟，孔愉就买下来放了它，到水里时那龟回头看孔愉。
English: Kong Yu once visited Wu Xingyubuting. He saw a man carrying a turtle in a cage on the road. Kong Yu bought it and released it. When he got into the water, the turtle looked back at Kong Yu.

古文：及封此亭侯而铸印，龟首回屈，三铸不正，有似昔龟之顾，灵德感应如此。
现代文：等到孔愉被封为亭侯铸印的时候，龟头总是往回弯，铸了三次都不正，好象以前放那个龟回头的模样。
English: By the time Kong Yue was sealed as the prince's seal, the turtle's head was always bent back, and it was cast incorrectly three times, as if the turtle's head had been placed there before.

古文：愉悟，乃取而佩焉。
现代文：孔愉终于明白了这是灵德感应到这地步，就拿来那铸印带上了。
English: Kong Yu finally understood that this was Lingde's inspiration to this point, so he took the seal and put it on.

古文：宗叔林
现代文：宗叔林
English: Zong Shulin

古文：晋阳守宗叔林，得十头龟，付厨曰： 每日以二头作赪。 
现代文：晋阳太守宗叔林。得到十头龟。他交给厨师说： 每天用两头作肉羹。 
English: Zongshulin, the governor of Jinyang, received a ten-headed turtle. He handed it to the chef and said, "Make meat soup with two tails every day."

古文：其夜梦十丈夫，皂衣袴褶，扣头求哀。
现代文：当天夜晚梦到十个男人，穿着黑衣裤褂，磕头哀求饶命。
English: That night, I dreamed of ten men, dressed in black trousers and shorts, with their heads bowed, begging for their lives.

古文：明夜，复梦八人求命，方悟，乃放之。
现代文：第二天晚上又梦见八个人请求饶命。宗叔林这才明白了。
English: The next night, he had another dream of eight people pleading for their lives to be spared. That's when Zongshulin understood.

古文：后梦八人来谢。
现代文：于是放了剩下的八个龟。后来又梦见八个人来拜谢。
English: So he released the remaining eight turtles. Later, he dreamed of eight people coming to thank him.

古文：桓邈
现代文：桓邈
English: Kanazawa

古文：桓邈为汝南，郡人赍四乌鸭作礼。
现代文：桓邈任汝南郡守。郡里有人带来四只乌鸭作礼物，桓邈的大儿子梦见四个乌衣人请求救命。
English: One day, his subordinates brought him four black ducks as a gift.

古文：大儿梦四乌衣人请命，觉，忽见鸭将杀，遂救之，买肉以代。
现代文：醒了，忽然看见四只鸭将被杀死，马上救了它们，买肉代替。
English: When he woke up, he suddenly saw four ducks about to be killed. He immediately saved them and bought meat instead.

古文：还梦四人来谢而去。
现代文：又梦到四人来拜谢然后走了。
English: Afterwards, he dreamed that the four men came to thank him.

古文：刘枢
现代文：刘枢
English: Liu Zu

古文：宋文帝元嘉三年春，彭城刘枢，字正一，自江陵归鄂下，宿上明洲。时夜月微明，吟宴次，忽二人扣舟，高呼正一，云： 我自鄂下来，要见正一。 
现代文：宋文帝元嘉三年春天，彭城的刘枢，字正一，从江陵回到鄂下，在上明洲留宿，那时夜晚的月亮刚刚升起来，他吟宴了一回，忽听有二人敲舟，高喊正一，说： 我们从鄂下来。要见正一。 
English: In the spring of the third year of Song Wendi Yuanjia, Liu Zu of Pengcheng, the character Zheng Yi, returned from Jiangling to Heshan and stayed in Shangmingzhou. At that time, the moon had just risen in the evening. He had a banquet, and suddenly heard two people knocking on the boat, shouting Zheng Yi, saying: We are coming down from Heshan. We want to see Zheng Yi.

古文：枢引首望之，于岸下见二人，各长五尺余，容貌华饰皆白服，便出与语。
现代文：刘枢抬头望去，见有两个人在岸上，各身长五尺多，容貌俊美装饰华丽，都穿白色衣服。
English: Liu Zu looked up and saw two people on the shore, each more than five feet long, handsome and well-decorated, all wearing white clothes.

古文：乃语枢曰： 久欲奉谒，今会良时。 
现代文：刘枢就出来和他们说话。那二人对刘枢说： 早就想来拜见你，今天正好是美景良时。 
English: Liu Zu came out to talk to them. The two said to Liu Zu: "I've wanted to visit you for a long time. Today is just the right time to see the beautiful scenery."

古文：枢曰： 卿自鄂下来，有何相谓？ 
现代文：刘枢说： 你们从鄂下来，有什么见教？ 
English: Liu Zu said: You come from Hubei, what do you want to learn?

古文：一人曰： 闻君儒者也，故修谒耳。 
现代文：一人说： 听说你是很有学问的人，所以要拜见你。 
English: One of them said, "I have heard that you are a very learned man, so I want to pay you a visit."

古文：遂与同宴。
现代文：于是共同饮宴。
English: So they had a banquet together.

古文：夜阑，二人俱醉，于饮处便卧。
现代文：夜深了，那二人都醉了，就在喝酒的地方躺下。
English: It was late at night, and the two men, both drunk, lay down where they had been drinking.

古文：枢甚异之，及左右，皆相目不敢言，乃以被覆之。
现代文：刘枢很觉奇怪，看看左右的人，都相互使眼色而不敢说话。就用被给那二人盖上。
English: Liu Zu felt very strange. When he looked at the people to his left and right, they were all staring at each other, not daring to speak. He covered the two of them with a blanket.

古文：及明尚寝，欲唤，因举被，见二鱼各长五六尺，眼虽动而甚困矣，不敢杀，乃舁致江中。
现代文：到天亮了还睡着，刘枢想唤醒他们，把被掀起来，见有两条鱼各长五六尺，眼睛虽然动弹但还是显得很困。刘枢不敢杀鱼，就抬起来放回江中。
English: At dawn, still asleep, Liu Zu wanted to wake them up. He lifted the quilt and saw two fish, each five or six feet long. Although his eyes moved, he still looked sleepy. Liu Zu did not dare to kill the fish, so he lifted it and put it back into the river.

古文：是夕，枢梦二人衣白衣，各执一珠，放枢卧前，不语而去。
现代文：这天晚上，刘枢梦到二人穿着白衣服。每人拿一颗珍珠，放在刘枢的床前，没有说话就走了。
English: That night, Liu Zu dreamed of two people dressed in white. Each of them took a pearl, placed it in front of Liu Zu's bed, and left without a word.

古文：夜有大鼠，浮水而来，伏喜夫奴床角，奴愍而不犯，每以饭与之。
现代文：等到天亮，枕前发现两颗珠各有一寸直径，这是双白鱼呀。蔡喜夫宋朝景平年间，东阳发大水。永康人蔡喜夫在南垄避水。夜间有个大鼠浮水过来，趴伏在喜夫奴仆的床角处，仆奴怜悯它没有动它。每次吃饭都给它些吃。
English: At dawn, two pearls, each with a diameter of one inch, were found in front of the pillow. This was a pair of white fish. Cai XifuDuring the Song, Qing and Ping dynasties, the eastern sun caused a lot of water. Cai Xifu, who was always healthy, avoided the water in Nan Reng. At night, a rat floated over and lay down in the corner of the bed of Cai Xifu's servant. The servant pitied it and did not move it. Every time he ate, he gave it some food.

古文：水势既退，喜夫得返故居，鼠以前脚捧青囊，囊有三寸许珠，留置奴床前，啾啾状如欲语也。
现代文：水势退下去以后，喜夫能返回故居了。那鼠用前脚捧着个青色的袋子，袋子里有个三寸直径大小的珍珠，留放在奴仆的床前。发出啾啾的声音好象人说话似的。
English: After the water had receded, Kif was able to return to his former home. The rat held a blue bag with its front paws. In the bag, there was a pearl with a diameter of three inches, which was left in front of the servant's bed. It made a chirping sound as if it were speaking.

古文：刘沼
现代文：刘沼
English: Liu Numa

古文：秣陵令中山刘沼，梁天监三年，为建康监。
现代文：秣陵县令中山人刘沼，在梁天监三年，作建康监。
English: Liu Numa, an official of Fuling County and a native of Zhongshan, worked as a construction health inspector for three years under Liang Tianjun.

古文：与门生作食次，灶里得一龟，长尺许，在灰中，了不以燔炙为弊，刘为设斋会，放之于娄湖，刘俄迁秣陵令。
现代文：在家里同门生作饭时，在锅灶里得到一只龟。长有一尺左右，趴在灰中，好像不把被烧烤放在心上。于是刘沼为龟摆设了斋会，把龟放到娄湖里。刘沼不久就升迁为秣陵县令。
English: At home, when cooking with his students, he got a turtle in the stove. It was about a foot long, lying in the ashes, as if it did not care about being grilled. So Liu Numa set up a banquet for the turtle and put the turtle in Wuhu. Liu Numa was soon promoted to the order of Fuling County.

古文：刘之亨
现代文：刘之亨
English: Liu Zhiheng

古文：梁刘之亨仕南郡，尝梦二人姓李，诣之亨乞命，之亨不解其意。
现代文：梁刘之亨在南郡作官。曾梦到两个姓李的人，在刘之亨面前请求饶命。之亨不明白是什么意思。
English: Liang Liu Zhiheng works as an official in Nan County. He once had a dream about two people with the surname Li, who pleaded for their lives in front of Liu Zhiheng. He did not understand what it meant.

古文：既明，有人遗生鲤两头，之亨曰： 必梦中所感。 
现代文：天明后，有人赠送给之亨两头生鲤。之亨说： 一定是梦中有所感应。 
English: After daybreak, someone gave him a gift of two raw oysters. He said, "It must have come to me in a dream."

古文：乃放之。
现代文：就放了两头鲤鱼。
English: and released two eels.

古文：其夕梦二人谢恩云： 当令君延一算。 
现代文：那天晚上梦到二人来谢恩并说： 应当使君延长一算。 
English: That night I had a dream that two people came to thank me and said, "You should extend your contract."

古文：严泰
现代文：严泰
English: Yan Tai

古文：陈宣帝时，扬州人严泰，江行逢渔舟。问之，云： 有龟五十头。 
现代文：陈宣帝时，扬州有个人叫严泰，他乘船在江中航行正碰上打渔的船，就问打到什么了，船上的渔人回答说： 有五十头龟。 
English: At the time of Emperor Chen Xuan, there was a man in Yangzhou named Yan Tai. He was sailing on a boat in the river when he encountered a fishing boat. He asked what he had hit. The fisherman on the boat replied, "There are fifty turtles."

古文：泰用钱五千赎放之，行数十步，渔舟乃覆。
现代文：严泰就用五千钱买下龟然后放了。刚离开那渔船几十步远，那渔船就翻了。
English: Yan Tai bought a turtle for 5,000 yuan and released it. Just a few dozen steps away from the fishing boat, the boat capsized.

古文：其夕，有乌衣五十人，扣泰门，谓其父母曰： 贤郎附钱五千，可领之，缗皆濡湿。 
现代文：当天晚上，有五十个穿黑衣服的人敲严泰家的门，对严泰的父母说： 您的儿子付出了五千钱，现在可以拿回去了。 
English: That evening, fifty people dressed in black knocked on the door of Yan Tai's home and said to Yan Tai's parents: Your son has paid five thousand yuan, and now he can take it back.

古文：父母虽受钱，怪其无由。
现代文：串钱的丝绳还是湿的。严泰的父母虽然接受了钱，但奇怪的是没有缘由。
English: The string of money was still wet. Although Yan Tai's parents accepted the money, there was strangely no reason for it.

古文：及泰归问，乃说赎龟之异。
现代文：等到严泰回来问他，他就说了花钱赎龟等奇事。
English: When Yan Tai came back and asked him about it, he told him about spending money to ransom a turtle and other wonders.

古文：因以其居为寺，里人号曰严法寺。
现代文：后来就用他的家作了寺院。邻里称为严法寺。
English: Later, his house was used as a temple, and the neighborhood became known as Yanpo-ji.

古文：程灵铣
现代文：程灵铣
English: Cheng Lingyao

古文：歙州歙县黄墩湖，其湖有蜃，常为吕湖蜃所斗，湖之近村有程灵铣者，卓越不羁，好勇而善射。
现代文：歙州歙县有个黄墩湖，这湖里有蜃，常常被吕湖的蜃斗败。靠近黄墩湖边有个村子。村中有个叫程灵铣的人，卓越不受约束，勇敢又善于射箭。
English: There is a Huangpi Lake in Luzhou's Luzhou County. There are cormorants in this lake, and they are often defeated by cormorants from the Lugu Lake. There is a village near the Huangpi Lake. There is a man in the village called Cheng Lingyao, who is outstandingly unconstrained, brave and good at archery.

古文：梦蜃化为道士，告之曰： 吾甚为吕湖蜃所厄，明日又来，君能助吾，必厚报。 
现代文：他梦见蜃变成道士，告诉灵铣说： 我被吕湖的蜃害苦了，明天还要来，你能帮助我，我一定重重报答你。 
English: He dreamt that Zou had become a Taoist, and told Lingzhu: "I have been harmed by Zou of Lugu Lake, and I will come again tomorrow. If you can help me, I will repay you many times over."

古文：灵铣遂问： 何以自别？ 
现代文：灵铣就问： 怎么识别你们呢？ 
English: The coffin asked: How can I recognize you?

古文：道人曰： 束白练者吾也。 
现代文：道人说： 扎着白带子的是我。 
English: The Taoist said, "I am the one wearing the white ribbon."

古文：既异之，明日与村人少年，鼓噪与湖边，须臾，波涛涌激，声若雷霆，见二牛相驰，其一甚困，而腹肚皆白。灵铣弯弓射之，正中后蜃，俄而水变为血，不知所之，其伤蜃遂归吕湖，未到而毙，后人名其死处为蜃滩，吕湖亦从此渐涨塞，今才余寻丈之广。
现代文：灵铣很奇怪。第二天和村中的少年们在湖边玩，不一会儿，湖面波涛汹涌，声若雷霆，看见两头牛互相追赶搏斗，其中一个显然很困顿了，它的肚腹处是白色的，灵铣这时弯弓搭箭射去，正中后一个蜃，立刻，水变成了血，不知道都哪里去了，那个受伤的蜃就回归吕湖，但是，还没走到就死了。后来人们给那蜃死的地方起名叫蜃滩。吕湖也从此被堵塞了，现在才剩下一丈多宽。
English: The coffin is very strange. The next day, I was playing with the boys in the village by the lake. Soon, the lake was choppy and thunderous. I saw two cows chasing each other and fighting. One of them was obviously very tired, its belly was white. At this time, the coffin was shot with a bow and arrow. Immediately, the water turned into blood. I don't know where it all went. The injured coffin returned to Lugu Lake, but it died before it got there. Later, people called the place where it died Lugu Beach. Lugu Lake has since been blocked, and now it is only a few feet wide.

古文：居岁余，灵铣偶出，有一道人诣其母求食，食讫曰： 劳母设食，无以报之，今贫窭到此，当为求善墓地。
现代文：住了一年多，灵铣有一次偶尔外出，有一个道人到他母亲那里讨饭，吃完饭说： 麻烦你给我准备饭吃，没有什么作报答，现在贫穷到这种地步，我只能给你们找个好墓地了。 
English: After living there for more than a year, the coffin once went out occasionally. A Taoist went to his mother to beg for food. After eating, he said, "Please prepare a meal for me. I have nothing to give in return. I am so poor now that I can only find a good cemetery for you."

古文：使母随行上山，以白石识其地。 
现代文：让灵铣母亲随着他走上山，用白石在地只作了个记号。
English: Let the mother of the coffin follow him up the mountain and make a mark on the ground with a white stone.

古文：曰： 葬此可以暴贵矣，寻而灵铣还。 
现代文：说： 墓葬在这个地方可以大贵呀！ 。不多时间，灵铣就回来了。
English: He said: "It can be very expensive to be buried in this place!" Not long after, the coffin came back.

古文：母语之，灵铣驰求之，了无所见。
现代文：母亲就告诉他刚才的事，灵铣就跑出去找，连影儿也没有。
English: His mother told him what had just happened, and he ran out to look for the coffin, but there was no sign of it.

古文：遂迁葬于其所，后侯景作乱，率郡乡万余众，保据新安，遂随陈武帝平贼，累有奇功，军中谓之程虎。
现代文：于是就把祖坟迁到作了记号的地方。后来侯景叛乱，灵铣率领郡中乡亲一万多人，保卫了新安，又随陈武帝扫平贼寇，多次建立奇功、军中的人都称他 程虎 。
English: Therefore, he moved the ancestral grave to the place where the mark was made. Later, Houjing rebelled, Lingya led more than 10,000 people in the county to defend Xin'an, and followed Emperor Chen Wu to sweep away the bandits. He repeatedly achieved miraculous feats, and people in the army called him Chenghu.

古文：及陈武受梁禅，灵铣以佐命功臣，与周文昱、侯安都为三杰，如汉之萧张焉，后官止丹阳尹，按灵铣宅湖东二里，宅南有楮树，其大数十围，树有灵，今村人数有祈祷，其祝辞号为 千年树 。
现代文：等到陈武帝作皇帝，灵铣凭伏辅佐皇帝是有功之臣，同周文昱、侯安都并为三杰，好比是汉朝的萧何、张良。以后官升到丹阳尹为止，灵铣建宅在湖东二里的地方，宅南边有棵楮树，很大，有几十围那么粗。这棵楮树很有灵验。现在村里有很多人到那里祈祷，他们的祝辞中都称这棵树叫千年树。
English: When Emperor Chenwu became emperor, Linglong followed Emperor Fufu as a meritorious vassal, and Zhou Wenzhong and Hou Andu as three outstanding vassals, just like Xiao He and Zhang Liang in the Han Dynasty. Later, the officials were promoted to Danyang and Yin. Linglong built a house two miles east of the lake. On the south side of the house, there was a large eucalyptus tree, as thick as several tens of fathoms. This eucalyptus tree was very effective. Now, many people in the village go there to pray. In their greetings, they all call this tree the Millennium Tree.

古文：其墓在湖西北黄牢山下，故检校刑部郎中程皓，即其后也。
现代文：灵铣的墓在黄墩湖西北黄牢山下。已故的检校刑部郎中程皓就是他的后人。
English: Lingya's grave is at the foot of Huangliao Mountain in the northwest of Huanglong Lake. The late vice-minister of education, Lang Zhongcheng, is his descendant.

古文：韦丹
现代文：韦丹
English: Vedanta

古文：唐江西观察史韦丹，年近四十，举五经未得。
现代文：唐朝江西观察使韦丹，年近四十科举不中。
English: The Tang Dynasty's observation of Jiangxi made Wei Dan, nearly forty years old, fail to pass the imperial examinations.

古文：尝乘蹇驴，至洛阳中桥，见渔者得一鼋，长数尺，置于桥上，呼呻余喘，须臾将死。
现代文：曾骑着跛驴到洛阳中桥。正好看见打渔的人捉到一只大鼋，有几尺长，放在桥上，那只鼋只有微弱地喘息呼吸，不一会儿就会死。
English: I once rode a donkey to the Luoyang Middle Bridge. I happened to see a fisherman catch a big toad, a few feet long, and put it on the bridge. The toad only breathed weakly and would die in a moment.

古文：群萃观者，皆欲买而烹之，丹独悯然，问其直几何，渔曰： 得二千则鬻之。 
现代文：很多人聚集围观，都要买了回去作菜吃，唯独韦丹怜悯它。问渔人鼋值多少钱。渔人说： 给我二千钱我就卖给你。 
English: Many people gathered around to watch, and they all wanted to buy it to go back to cook and eat, but Vedan took pity on it. He asked the fisherman how much it was worth. The fisherman said, "Give me two thousand dollars and I'll sell it to you."

古文：是时天正寒，韦衫袄裤。
现代文：当时天气寒冷，韦丹只有随身的衣裤，没有什么可当的。
English: At that time, the weather was cold, and Wei Dan only had the clothes and trousers he was carrying with him. There was nothing to wear.

古文：无可当者，乃以所乘劣卫易之。既获，遂放于水中，徒行而去。
现代文：就用他骑的驴换了那只龟，得到它以后马上就放到水里去了。韦丹只好徒步而去。
English: He exchanged the donkey he was riding for the turtle, and immediately after getting it, he put it in the water. Vedan had to walk away.

古文：时有胡芦先生，不知何所从来，行止迂怪，占事如神。
现代文：那时有个胡芦先生不知道他从什么地方来，行动迟缓奇怪。但他会占卜，料事如神。
English: At that time, there was a Mr. Hooray who didn't know where he came from and was strangely sluggish, but he could tell fortunes and was very good at it.

古文：后数日，韦因问命，胡芦先生倒屣迎门，欣然谓韦曰： 翘望数日，何来晚也。 
现代文：过了几天，韦丹去算命，胡芦先生倒穿着鞋在门前迎接，很高兴地对韦丹说： 翘首而望好几天了，为什么来得这么晚？ 
English: A few days later, Wei Dan went to tell fortunes, and Mr. Hu Lue greeted him in front of the door with his shoes on. He said happily to Wei Dan, "I've been looking forward to this for several days, why did you come so late?"

古文：韦曰： 此来求谒。 
现代文：韦丹说： 我这次来拜见你，是求你给我算命。 
English: Vedan said: I have come to see you this time to ask you to tell me my fortune.

古文：先生曰： 我友人元长史。
现代文：胡芦先生说： 我的朋友元长史，提起你的美德来不容我插嘴。
English: Mr. Hu Lu said: My friend, Yuan Changshi, don't let me interrupt you by mentioning your virtues.

古文：谈君美不容口，诚托求识君子，便可偕行。 
现代文：他诚恳地托我认识你，咱们一块儿去吧。 
English: He asked me sincerely to get to know you. Let's go together.

古文：韦良久思量，知闻间无此官族，因曰： 先生误，但为某决穷途。 
现代文：韦丹思虑了半天，在自己知道的人里面，从来也没有听说过有这么一个官。因此他就说： 先生错了，只给我算算命运就行了。 
English: Vedan thought about it for a long time. Of all the people he knew, he had never heard of such an official. So he said, "The teacher is wrong. I just need to calculate my fate."

古文：胡芦曰： 我焉知，君之福寿，非我所知。元公即吾师也，往当自详之。 
现代文：胡芦先生说： 我哪里知道？您的福寿不是我所能知道的，元公就是我的师傅，去了当然就能知道详情。 
English: Mr. Hu Lu said, "How do I know? Your good fortune is not something I can know. The former emperor is my master. Of course, I can know the details when I go there."

古文：相与策杖至通利坊，静曲幽巷，见一小门，胡芦光生即扣之。
现代文：韦丹就和胡芦先生柱着拐杖到通利坊去，道路曲折，街巷幽静，见到一个小门，胡芦先生就敲门。
English: Vedan and Mr. Hu Lue went to Tongli Fang on crutches. The road was winding, the streets were quiet. When they saw a small door, Mr. Hu Lue knocked on it.

古文：食顷，而有应门者开门延入，数十步，复入一板门，又十余步，乃见大门，制度宏丽，拟于公侯之家。
现代文：吃一顿饭的工夫，有人答应，开门请他们进去。走了几十步，又进了一个板门，再走十多步，才看见大门。建筑宏伟壮丽，是模仿公侯的家院建造的。
English: While eating a meal, someone agreed and opened the door to invite them in. After walking a few dozen steps, they entered a panel door, and after walking more than ten steps, they saw the gate. The magnificent building was built to imitate the duke's home.

古文：复有丫鬟数人，皆及妹美，先出迎客，陈设鲜华，异香满室。
现代文：然后又有几个丫鬟，都美丽非凡。她们先出来迎客，客厅陈设新鲜华丽，异香满室。
English: Then there were several maids of honour, all of them extraordinarily beautiful. They came out first to welcome the guests, the living room was decorated with fresh and gorgeous furnishings, and the room was filled with exotic fragrances.

古文：俄而有一老人，须眉皓然，身长七尺，褐裘韦带，从二青衣而出。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个老人，须眉银白，身长七尺，粗布大衣，奇特的带子。
English: Soon, there was an old man with a silver-white mustache, seven feet tall, a coarse cloth coat, and a strange belt.

古文：自称曰： 元濬之。 
现代文：随两个青衣出来，自称叫元濬之。
English: He came out with two young men and called himself Yuan Shizhi.

古文：向韦尽礼先拜。
现代文：向韦丹大礼先拜。
English: A big salute to Vedanta.

古文：韦惊，急趋拜曰： 某贫贱小生，不意丈人过垂采录，韦未喻。 
现代文：韦丹很惊慌。急忙向前拜礼说： 我是个贫贱的书生，没想到老人过于看重，我到现在也不明白。 
English: Wei Dan was very alarmed. He hurried forward and said: I am a poor student, I didn't expect the old man to be too important, I still don't understand.

古文：老人曰： 老夫将死之命，为君所生，恩德如此，岂容酬报。
现代文：老人说： 老夫就要死去的命。被君所救。这么大的恩德，难道还不应该酬谢报答吗？
English: The old man said, "My husband is about to die. I was saved by you. With such a great favor, shouldn't I be rewarded?

古文：仁者固不以此为心，然受恩者思欲杀身报效耳。 
现代文：讲仁义的人不把这事放在心上。然而受恩的人就想要用死来报效了。 
English: The man of mercy does not lay it to heart, but the man of favor is ready to die for it.

古文：韦乃矍然，知其鼋也，然终不显言之，遂具珍羞，流连竟日，既暮，韦将辞归，老人即于怀中出一通文字，授韦曰： 知君要问命，故辄于天曹，录得一生官禄行止所在，聊以为报，凡有无，皆君之命也，所贵先知耳。 
现代文：韦丹一下子明白了，知道他就是鼋，然而始终没有明白地说出来。于是老人准备了珍奇的饭菜，流连了一整天，到了傍晚，韦丹要告辞回去，老人就从怀里拿出一卷文字，送给韦丹说： 我知道你要问命运如何，所以我到天曹去记录了你一生的官禄和行止的地方，就算是报答吧！这里的有和无，都是你的命运决定的，贵在预先知道就是了。 
English: So the old man prepared a rare meal and lingered for a whole day. In the evening, when Wei Dan was about to leave, the old man took out a roll of writing from his arms and gave it to Wei Dan, saying: "I know you want to ask about your fate, so I went to Tian Cao to record your life's official position and actions. Even if it is a reward! What is here and what is not, is determined by your fate. You just have to know in advance."

古文：又谓胡芦先生曰： 幸借吾五十千文，以充韦君改一乘，早决西行，是所愿也。 
现代文：又对胡芦先生说： 最好借给我五千文钱，用来给韦君改换一个坐骑，早日决定西行是我的愿望啊。 
English: He also said to Mr. Hu Lu: It is best to lend me five thousand yuan to change a mount for Wei Jun. It is my wish to decide to go west as soon as possible.

古文：韦再拜而去。
现代文：韦丹拜了两拜而去。
English: Vedan bowed twice and left.

古文：明日，胡芦先生载五十缗至逆旅中，赖以救济。
现代文：第二天，胡芦先生装了五十缗钱来到旅馆，作为救济。
English: The next day, Mr. Hu Lu came to the hotel with 50 baht in cash as relief.

古文：其文书具言：明年五月及第；又某年平判入登科，受咸阳尉；又明年登朝，作某官。如是历官一十七政，皆有年月日。
现代文：那卷文书上写着，明年五月中举，又某年平判进入登科之列、受咸阳县尉。又过一年进朝廷，作某官，象这样历任官十七次，都有年月，最后调任江西观察使，官衔到御史大夫。
English: The document said that he would be promoted to middle rank in May of the next year, and in a certain year he would be promoted to the rank of lieutenant of Xianyang County, and in another year he would enter the imperial court and serve as a certain official. There were seventeen such officials, all with years, and finally he would be transferred to the post of Jiangxi observation envoy, with the official rank of imperial historian.

古文：最后年迁江西观察使，至御史大夫，到后三年，厅前皂荚树花开，当有迁改北归矣，其后遂无所言。
现代文：到最后三年，厅前的皂荚树开花，应当是调任改官北归了，以后再就没有写什么了。韦丹平常象宝贝一样带着它。
English: In the last three years, when the soap elm tree in front of the office bloomed, it must have been because he had been transferred to a new post in the north, and there was nothing to write about after that. Vedan usually carried it with him like a treasure.

古文：韦常宝持之。自五经及第后，至江西观察使。每授一官，日月无所差异。
现代文：自从科举考中后，一直到江西任观察使，每次被授一官，日月时间没有差错。
English: Since the middle school entrance examination, he has been appointed as an observation envoy to Jiangxi, and has been awarded one post each time. There is no error in the time of the sun and the moon.

古文：洪州使厅前，有皂荚树一株，岁月颇久，其俗相传，此树有花，地主大忧。
现代文：洪州刺史厅堂前面，有一株皂荚树，年深日久了。民间传说：此树开花，地主大忧。 
English: In front of the hall of the Hongzhou History Hall, there is a saponin tree, which has been around for a long time. Folklore: this tree is in bloom, and the landowner is worried.

古文：元和八年，韦在位，一旦树忽生花，韦遂去官，至中路而卒，初韦遇元长史也，颇怪异之。后每过东路，即于旧居寻访不获。
现代文：元和第八年，韦丹在位，有一天早晨皂荚树忽然开花了，韦丹于是辞去官职，在回家的中途就死了。当初韦丹遇到元长史，很觉怪异，以后每次经过东路，就到旧居去寻访，但总也寻访不到。
English: In the eighth year of Yuan and Wei Dan's reign, one morning, the soap birch suddenly bloomed. Wei Dan then resigned from his official post and died on his way home. When Wei Dan first met Yuan Changshi, he felt very strange. After that, every time he passed the East Road, he went to the old residence to visit, but he could not find it.

古文：问于胡芦先生，先生曰： 彼神龙也，处化无常，安可寻也？ 
现代文：到胡芦先生那儿去问，先生说： 那是神龙呀，变化无常，怎么能找到呢？ 
English: He went to Mr. Hu Lu and asked him about it. Mr. Hu Lu said, "It's a divine dragon. It's fickle. How can I find it?"

古文：韦曰： 若然者，安有中桥之患？ 
现代文：韦丹说： 如果是那样，怎么能有中桥之祸呢？ 
English: Vedan said: If that is the case, how can there be a bridge disaster?

古文：胡芦曰： 迍难困厄，凡人之与圣人，神龙之于蛆蠕；皆一时不免也，又何得异焉？ 
现代文：胡芦先生说： 遭遇困难险恶，凡人和圣人，神龙和最小的动物，都是不能避免的，又有什么奇怪的呢？ 
English: Mr. Hu Lu said: Encountering difficulties and dangers is unavoidable for mortals and saints, divine dragons and the smallest animals. What is strange about it?

古文：熊慎
现代文：熊慎
English: Xiong Shen

古文：唐豫章民有熊慎者，其父以贩鱼为业，尝载鱼宿于江浒。闻船内千百念经佛声，惊而察之，乃船中诸鱼也。
现代文：唐朝豫章有个叫熊慎的平民，他的父亲以贩卖鱼为职业，曾经装载着鱼在江边住宿，听到船仓里有念佛经的声音，吃了一惊，到处察看，原来是船中的那些鱼。长叹着， 太奇怪了。 
English: There was a commoner named Xiong Sheng in Yuzhang of the Tang Dynasty. His father was a fishmonger by profession. He used to load fish and stay at the riverside. He was surprised to hear the sound of chanting Buddhist scriptures in the ship's hold. He looked around and saw that it was those fish in the ship. He sighed. It was so strange.

古文：遂叹异而悉取放之，不复以渔为业。
现代文：然后就全都放了，从此不再贩鱼了。后来在南京卖烧柴，生活非常穷苦。
English: Then they were all released, and from then on he no longer sold fish. Later, he sold firewood in Nanjing, and his life was very poor.

古文：后鬻薪于石头，穷苦至甚，尝暮宿于江上。忽见沙中光焰高尺余，就掘之，得黄金数斤。明日，赍诣都市货之。市人云： 此所谓紫磨金也。 
现代文：有一天晚上睡在船上，忽然见岸上的沙滩里发出一尺多高的光焰，就挖发光的地方，挖出来几斤黄金。第二天，到都市去买，市上的人说： 这就是所说的紫磨金。
English: One night, while sleeping on the boat, he suddenly saw a foot-tall flame emitting from a crocodile on the beach. He dug into the glowing area and dug out several pounds of gold. The next day, when he went to the city to buy it, the people in the market said, "This is the so-called purple gold."

古文：酬缗数十万，熊氏由此殖产钜富，子孙于今存焉。
现代文：给了数十万缗的酬金，熊家从此发展成为巨富。熊家的子孙现在还在那里。
English: He gave hundreds of thousands of baht as an honorarium, and the Kumas became very rich. Their descendants are still there.

古文：王行思
现代文：王行思
English: Wang Xingshi

古文：伪蜀渠阳隣山，有富民王行思，尝养一马，甚爱之，刍粟喂饲，倍于他马。
现代文：前蜀渠阳隣山，有一个富家百姓王行思。曾经养了一匹马，特别爱护它，马小的时候就用精饲料喂养，超过其它马的一倍。
English: In front of Shuqiyang Mountain, there is a rich peasant Wang Xinglu. He once raised a horse and took special care of it. When the horse was small, it was fed with refined feed, more than double that of other horses.

古文：一日因乘往本郡，遇夏潦暴涨，舟子先渡马，回舟以迎王氏。
现代文：一天，骑着那匹马到郡中去，正遇到江水突然上涨。撑船的人先把马渡过去，回来再渡王氏过江，到江中间时大风掀起波浪把船掀翻了。
English: One day, riding the horse to the middle of the county, he was encountering a sudden rise in the river. The paddlers first crossed the horse, came back and then crossed the Wang River. When they reached the middle of the river, a strong wind raised the waves and overturned the boat.

古文：至中流，风起船覆，其马自岸奔入骇浪，接其主。苍茫之间，遽免沉溺。
现代文：那匹马从岸上奔跑到大浪中接它的主人，在苍茫的大波浪中，立刻免于沉溺。
English: The horse ran ashore to meet its owner in the surf and was instantly saved from drowning in the choppy waters.

古文：陈弘泰
现代文：陈弘泰
English: Chen Hongtai

古文：伪蜀广都县百姓陈弘泰者，家富于财。
现代文：前蜀广都县百姓陈弘泰，家里很有钱。
English: Chen Hongtai, a former villager from Shuguangdu County, came from a wealthy family.

古文：尝有人假贷钱一万，弘泰征之甚急。
现代文：曾有人向他借钱一万。弘泰追要很急。
English: Someone once lent him ten thousand yuan. Hong Tai is in a hurry to catch up.

古文：人曰： 请无虑，吾先养虾蟆万余头，货之，足以奉偿。 
现代文：那人说： 请不要担心，吾以前养了万余头虾蟆，我卖了以后完全可以偿还你。 
English: The man said, "Please don't worry. I used to raise more than 10,000 shrimp, and I can fully repay you after I sell them.

古文：泰闻之恻然，已其债，仍别与钱十千，令悉放虾蟆于江中。
现代文：陈弘泰听了以后有了恻隐之心，免了债，另外给那人十千钱，让人把虾蟆全都放到江里去。
English: After listening to Chen Hongtai, he had a compassionate heart and forgave the debt. In addition, he gave the man ten thousand yuan and told him to put all the shrimp into the river.

古文：经月余，泰因夜归，马惊不进，前有物光明，视之，乃金虾蟆也。
现代文：经过一个多月，一次陈弘泰晚上回家，骑的马受惊不肯前进，原来是前面有发光的东西。仔细一看，是金虾蟆。
English: After more than a month, Chen Hongtai came home in the evening once. The horse he was riding was frightened and refused to go forward. It turned out to be a glowing object in front. On closer inspection, it was a golden shrimp.

