古文：○元善
现代文：○元善
English: ○Motozen

古文：元善，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：元善，河南洛阳人。
English: Yuan Zhen, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：祖叉，魏侍中。
现代文：祖父元叉，是西魏侍中。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Zha, was a samurai in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：父罗，初为梁州刺史，及叉被诛，奔于梁，官至征北大将军、青冀二州刺史。
现代文：父亲元罗，最初担任梁州刺史，到元叉被杀时，逃到梁国，官至征北大将军、青冀两州的刺史。
English: His father, Yuan Luo, initially served as the governor of Liangzhou. When Yuan Luo was killed, he fled to Liang Province and became the general of the Northern Expedition and the governor of Qinghai and Hebei Provinces.

古文：善少随父至江南，性好学，遂通涉五经，尤明《左氏传》。
现代文：元善年幼时跟着父亲到江南，他天性好学，于是通读了五经，尤其精通《左传》。
English: When he was young, Yuan Zhen followed his father to the south of the Yangtze River. He was naturally eager to learn, so he read through the Five Classics, and was particularly proficient in "Zhuan."

古文：及侯景之乱，善归于周。
现代文：侯景之乱时，元善到了周国。
English: During the Houjing Rebellion, Yuan Sheng went to Zhou Province.

古文：武帝甚礼之，以为太子宫尹，赐爵江阳县公。
现代文：周武帝十分敬重他，让他做了太子宫尹，赐爵为江阳县公。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu respected him very much and made him the Crown Prince Gongyin and gave him the title of Duke of Jiangyang County.

古文：每执经以授太子。
现代文：他常常拿经书教授太子。
English: He often took sutras to teach the prince.

古文：开皇初，拜内史侍郎，上每望之曰： 人伦仪表也。 
现代文：开皇初年，做内史侍郎。高祖每当看见他就说： 一表人才啊！ 
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he served as Naishi no Samurai. Whenever Gaozu saw him, he would say, "What a great talent!"

古文：凡有敷奏，词气抑扬，观者属目。
现代文：凡是陈述事理的奏书，读来抑扬顿挫，令人注目相看。
English: All the books that state the facts of the case, when read aloud, are eye-catching and eye-opening.

古文：陈使袁雅来聘，上令善就馆受书，雅出门不拜。
现代文：陈国派使臣袁雅来问候，皇上命元善到馆舍中接受国书，袁雅出门时见元善却不行礼。
English: Chen Guo sent his envoy Yuan Ya to offer greetings. The emperor ordered Yuan Ya to come to the palace to receive the imperial edict. Yuan Ya was rude to Yuan Ya when he saw him.

古文：善论旧事有拜之仪，雅不能对，遂拜，成礼而去。
现代文：元善说过去办事有敬拜的礼节，袁雅无话可答，就向他下拜，行礼后就离去了。
English: Yuan Ya had nothing to say, so she bowed to him and left after performing the salute.

古文：后迁国子祭酒。
现代文：后来又升为国子祭酒。
English: It was later renamed Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：上尝亲临释奠，命善讲《孝经》。
现代文：皇上曾经到学校行拜师之礼，命元善讲《孝经》。
English: The Emperor once went to a school to pay homage to a teacher, and Myogenzen gave a lecture on the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：于是敷陈义理，兼之以讽谏。
现代文：于是元善详细陈说书中的内容与道理，同时又用含蓄的话来劝谏皇上。
English: As a result, Gensen detailed the contents and principles of the book, and at the same time used subtle words to persuade Emperor Zou.

古文：上大悦曰： 闻江阳之说，更起朕心。 
现代文：皇上十分高兴地说： 听了江阳县公的一番话，令人振奋。 
English: The emperor was very pleased and said, "Listening to Jiangyang County's speech was very exciting.

古文：赉绢百匹，衣一袭。
现代文：皇上赏给了元善一百匹绢，一套衣服。
English: The emperor rewarded him with one hundred horses and a set of clothes.

古文：善之通博，在何妥之下，然以风流醖藉，俯仰可观，音韵清朗，听者忘倦，由是为后进所归。
现代文：元善的精通广博，次于何妥，但是他风流蕴藉，举止潇洒，话音清楚明朗，听的人可以忘记疲倦，因此后辈们都纷纷来到他的门下。
English: The proficiency of Genzen is extensive, second only to He Tuo, but his style is rich, his demeanor is dashing, his voice is clear and clear, and the listener can forget fatigue, so the younger generation have come to his door.

古文：妥每怀不平，心欲屈善。
现代文：何妥时常心中不服，想使元善折服。
English: He was always dissatisfied with what he did, and wanted to make Yuan Zhen wear it.

古文：因善讲《春秋》，初发题，诸儒毕集。
现代文：因为元善讲《春秋》，刚一开讲，儒生们就全到齐了。
English: Because Yuan Zhen spoke about "Spring and Autumn," as soon as he began to speak, the Confucians were all there.

古文：善私谓妥曰： 名望已定，幸无相苦。 
现代文：元善私下对何妥说： 人的名望已经决定，希望你不要使我为难。 
English: In private, Yuan Shan said to He Zuo, "People's reputation has already been decided. I hope you won't embarrass me."

古文：妥然之。
现代文：何妥答应了。
English: He readily agreed.

古文：及就讲肆，妥遂引古今滞义以难，善多不能对。
现代文：到了讲学的场所，何妥便援引古今的疑难来发难，元善大多不能回答。
English: When they arrived at the lecture venue, Ho To invoked ancient and modern difficulties to raise difficulties, and Yuan Sheng could not answer most of them.

古文：善深衔之，二人由是有隙。
现代文：元善心里很忌恨，两个人因此有隔阂。
English: Genzen has a lot of hatred in his heart, and the two are estranged as a result.

古文：善以高颎有宰相之具，尝言于上曰： 杨素粗疏，苏威怯芃，元胄、元旻，正似鸭耳。
现代文：元善认为高赹有做宰相的才能，曾经对皇上说： 杨素粗俗，苏威怯懦，元胄、元，是如同鸭子一样的小人。
English: Genzon thought that Gao Gan had the talent to be the prime minister, and once said to the emperor: Yang Su is vulgar, Su Wei is cowardly, and Genzon and Gen are small people like ducks.

古文：可以付社稷者，唯独高颎。 
现代文：可以交给国家大事的人，只有高赹。 
English: Only sorghum can be entrusted to the company.

古文：上初然之，及颎得罪，上以善之言为颎游说，深责望之。
现代文：皇上当时认为是对的，到了高赹有了罪过，皇上因为元善曾经为高赹说过话，很是责怪抱怨他。
English: At that time, the emperor thought it was right that he had sinned when he came to Gao Xuan. The emperor blamed and complained about him because Yuan Shan had spoken for Gao Xuan.

古文：善忧惧，先患消渴，于是疾动而卒，时年六十。
现代文：元善忧虑害怕，以前就患有消渴病，于是病重而死，死时六十岁。
English: Yuan Sheng was worried and afraid. He had suffered from thirst-quenching disease before, so he became seriously ill and died at the age of sixty.

古文：○辛彦之
现代文：○辛彦之
English: ○Hirohiko Shimo

古文：辛彦之，陇西狄道人也。
现代文：辛彦之是陇西狄道人。
English: Ji Ming also wrote: The minister heard that generosity is to be widely covered, and love is to care for everyone.

古文：祖世叙，魏凉州刺史。
现代文：祖父辛世叙，西魏凉州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Xin Shixiu, was a historian of Liangzhou in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：父灵辅，周滑州刺史。
现代文：父亲辛灵辅，北周渭州刺史。
English: His father, Xin Lingfu, was a historian of the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：彦之九岁而孤，不交非类，博涉经史，与天水牛弘同志好学。
现代文：辛彦之九岁时父亲去世，他不与不三不四的人交往，广泛涉猎经史之书，与天水的牛弘志同道合，爱好学习。
English: His father died when Shinhiko was nine years old. He did not socialize with many people, read a lot of books on history, shared the same path as Tensui's Niu Hongzhi, and loved to study.

古文：后入关，遂家京兆。
现代文：后进入关内，在京兆定居。
English: Later, he moved to Guennai and settled in Keicho.

古文：周太祖见而器之，引为中外府礼曹，赐以衣马珠玉。
现代文：周太祖器重他，召引他做中外府礼曹，赏赐给他衣马珠玉。
English: Zhou Taizhu respected him, called him to be a courtesy caller at home and abroad, and rewarded him with clothes, horses and jewels.

古文：时国家草创，百度伊始，朝贵多出武人，修定仪注，唯彦之而已。
现代文：当时国家初创，各种制度、礼仪还没有健全，而朝中大臣大多是行武出身，修定礼仪典章，只有辛彦之而已。
English: At that time, when the country was in its infancy, various systems and etiquette were not yet sound, and most of the ministers of the DPRK and China were from martial arts, and only Xin Yan was the only one to revise the etiquette and ceremony.

古文：寻拜中书侍郎。
现代文：太祖不久拜辛彦之为中书侍郎。
English: The great-grandfather soon asked Shinhiko Koto to be his junior high school secretary.

古文：及周闵帝受禅，彦之与少宗伯卢辩专掌仪制。
现代文：周闵帝即位后，辛彦之与少宗伯卢辩专管礼仪制度。
English: After Emperor Zhou Enlai ascended to the throne, Xin Yanzhi and Shao Zong Bo Lu argued over the etiquette system.

古文：明、武时，历职典祀，太祝、乐部、御正四曹大夫，开府仪同三司。
现代文：周明帝、周武帝年间，辛彦之历任典祀、太祝、乐部、御正四曹大夫，封开府仪同三司。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Zhouming and Emperor Zhouwu, Xinhan was successively appointed as ceremonial priest, grand celebrant, overseer of the imperial household, the fourth-ranked official, and the third-ranked official in charge of opening ceremonies.

古文：奉使迎突厥皇后还，赉马二百匹，赐爵龙门县公，邑千户。
现代文：辛彦之奉命迎接突阙皇后回朝后，皇上赠给他二百匹马，封为龙门县公，食邑千户。
English: After he was ordered to welcome the Empress Tujia back to the imperial court, the emperor gave him two hundred horses and made him the governor of Longmen County, with food for a thousand households.

古文：寻进爵五原郡公，加邑千户。
现代文：不久，晋爵为五原郡公，增加食邑一千户。
English: Soon after, Jinjie became the county magistrate of Wuhara County, increasing the number of food villages by a thousand.

古文：宣帝即位，拜少宗伯。
现代文：周宣帝即位后，授彦之为少宗伯。
English: After Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended the throne, he was given the title of Shosongbo.

古文：高祖受禅，除太常少卿，改封任城郡公，进位上开府。
现代文：隋高祖即位后，升辛彦之为太常少卿，改封任城郡公，进位上开府。
English: After the enthronement of Sui Gaozu, Sheng Xinyan was promoted to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing, and was appointed to the position of Chenggongguo. He was promoted to the position of Shangfu.

古文：寻转国子祭酒。
现代文：不久调任国子祭酒。
English: He was soon transferred to brew the Kuniko Matsuri sake.

古文：岁余，拜礼部尚书，与秘书监牛弘撰《新礼》。
现代文：一年多后，高祖拜辛彦之为礼部尚书，和秘书监牛弘作《新礼》一书。
English: More than a year later, Gao's ancestor, Bai Xinhan, wrote a book on etiquette, and his secretary, Guan Niu Hong, wrote a book on "New Rites."

古文：吴兴沈重名为硕学，高祖尝令彦之与重论议，重不能抗，于是避席而谢曰： 辛君所谓金城汤池，无可攻之势。 
现代文：吴兴人沈重有博学之名，高祖曾令辛彦之与沈重辩论学问，沈重辩不过他，于是退席谢罪说： 辛君的学识就像金城汤池，我无法攻破它。 
English: Wu Xingren Shengzhu has a reputation for erudition. Gao Zu once made Xin Yanzhu debate with Shengzhu about learning. Shengzhu couldn't argue with him, so he left the table and said: Xin Jun's knowledge is like a pot of gold, I can't break it.

古文：高祖大悦。后拜随州刺史。
现代文：高祖大喜，后拜辛彦之为隋州刺史。
English: Gao Zu was overjoyed, and later paid homage to Xin Yan as the history of Suizhou.

古文：于时州牧多贡珍玩，唯彦之所贡，并供祭之物。
现代文：当时各州的长官大都向朝廷上贡珍宝玩物，只有辛彦之上贡的都是祭礼之物。
English: At that time, most of the governors of the states paid tribute to the imperial court with precious toys, but only the tribute paid to Shinhiko was made up of ceremonial objects.

古文：高祖善之，顾谓朝臣曰： 人安得无学！彦之所贡，稽古之力也。 
现代文：高祖非常喜欢，对朝臣说： 人怎么能没有学问，辛彦之的上贡方式，很有古人的遗风。 
English: Gaozu liked it very much, and said to the courtier: How can a person have no learning? Xin Yan's way of paying tribute is a legacy of the ancients.

古文：迁潞州刺史，前后俱有惠政。
现代文：辛彦之调任潞州刺史，他前后任职之处，都有仁政之名。
English: Xin Yanzhi was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, and wherever he served, he was known as a benevolent ruler.

古文：彦之又崇信佛道，于城内立浮图二所，并十五层。
现代文：辛彦之信仰佛教，在城内修佛寺两所，都高十五层。
English: Shinhiko believed in Buddhism and built two Buddhist temples in the city, both of which were fifteen stories high.

古文：开皇十一年，州人张元暴死，数日乃苏，云游天上，见新构一堂，制极崇丽。
现代文：开皇十一年，潞州人张元突然死去，几天后却意外地活了。张元说他云游天上，看见一所新建的房子，建制相当华丽。
English: In the eleventh year of the emperor's reign, Zhang Yuan, a native of Zhangzhou, died suddenly, but unexpectedly survived a few days later. Zhang Yuan said that he traveled to the sky and saw a newly built house, the structure was quite gorgeous.

古文：元问其故，人云潞州刺史辛彦之有功德，造此堂以待之。
现代文：张元问是怎么回事，人们说，这是潞州刺史辛彦之有功德，建造这所殿堂迎接他。
English: Zhang Yuan asked what was going on, and people said that it was the merit of Zhangzhou Jishi Xinyan to build this hall of fame to welcome him.

古文：彦之闻而不悦。
现代文：辛彦之听了并不高兴。
English: She was not happy to hear this.

古文：其年卒官。谥曰宣。
现代文：这一年他死在任上。谥为 宣 。
English: He died in office that year.

古文：彦之撰《坟典》一部，《六官》一部，《祝文》一部，《新要》一部，《新礼》一部，《五经异义》一部，并行于世。
现代文：辛彦之撰写的《坟典》一部，《六官》一部，《祝文》一部，《礼要》一部，《新礼》一部，《五经异义》一部，都流传于世。
English: One part of the "Grave Book," one part of the "Six Officials," one part of the "Congratulation," one part of the "Rite," one part of the "New Rite," and one part of the "Heterodoxy of the Five Classics" have been passed down to the world.

古文：有子仲龛，官至猗氏令。
现代文：他有个儿子叫辛仲龛，官至猗氏县令。
English: He had a son named Xin Zhongyao, who rose to the rank of county magistrate.

古文：何妥萧该包凯何妥，字栖凤，西城人也。
现代文：○何妥何妥，字栖凤，西城人。
English: ○何妥何妥,字栖凤,西城人.

古文：父细胡，通商入蜀，遂家郫县，事梁武陵王妃，主知金帛，因致巨富，号为西州大贾。
现代文：他的父亲细胡因经商进入西蜀，于是就在郫县安家，侍奉梁朝武陵王萧纪，主管金帛交易，因而成为巨富，号称 西州大贾 。
English: His father, Xie Hu, came to Xishu for business, so he made his home in Jixian County. He served the Liang Dynasty's King of Wuling, King Xiao Ji, and was in charge of the gold ingot trade, thus becoming a very rich man, known as Xizhou Dajia.

古文：妥少机警，八岁游国子学，助教顾良戏之曰： 汝既姓何，是荷叶之荷，为是河水之河？ 
现代文：何妥小时就机警聪敏。八岁，游国子学，助教顾良对他开玩笑说： 你既然姓何，不知是 荷叶 之 荷 ？还是 河水 之 河 ？ 
English: At the age of eight, when he was studying under Yu Guozhi, assistant teacher Gu Liang joked with him, "Since your last name is what, I don't know if it's "Lotus Leaf" or "River"?"

古文：应声答曰： 先生姓顾，是眷顾之顾，是新故之故？ 
现代文：何妥应声说道： 光生姓顾，不知是 眷顾 之 顾 ，还是 新故 之 故 ？ 
English: Ho Tso replied, "I don't know if my surname, Gu, is the result of patronage, or the result of a new family tradition.

古文：众咸异之。
现代文：众人都为他的灵活机变感到诧异。
English: Everyone was amazed by him.

古文：十七，以技巧事湘东王，后知其聪明，召为诵书左右。
现代文：十七岁时，何妥因灵巧机敏侍奉湘东王萧绎。后来，湘东王知道他聪敏，又召为诵书，侍奉于左右。
English: At the age of seventeen, because of his dexterity and astuteness, He Tuo served the king of eastern Hunan, Xiao Yuanzhang. Later, the king of eastern Hunan knew that he was intelligent and called him to read books, and he served around him.

古文：时兰陵萧亦有俊才，住青杨巷，妥住白杨头，时人为之语曰： 世有两俊，白杨何妥，青杨萧。 
现代文：当时兰陵人萧也有隽才，住在青杨巷；何妥住在白杨头。人们因此就说： 当今世上有俩隽才：一个是白杨头何妥，一个是青杨巷萧。 
English: At that time, the Lanling people Xiao also had two talents, living in Qingyang Lane; He Tuo lived in Poplar Head. Therefore, people said: Today there are two talents in the world: one is Poplar Head He Tuo, and the other is Qingyang Lane Xiao.

古文：其见美如此。
现代文：他就是如此受到世人赞誉。
English: That's how he's celebrated.

古文：江陵陷，周武帝尤重之，授太学博士。
现代文：江陵沦陷后，周武帝特别器重他，命他为太学博士。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Emperor Zhou paid special attention to him and appointed him as Doctor of Science.

古文：宣帝初欲立五后，以问儒者辛彦之，对曰： 后与天子匹体齐尊，不宜有五。 
现代文：后宣帝继位，打算同时册封五个后妃，以此征求儒生辛彦之的意见。辛彦之回答道： 皇后和天子同是尊贵之躯，不可同时立五个。 
English: After Emperor Xuan's enthronement, he planned to have five concubines at the same time, so he sought the opinion of the Confucian scholar Xin Yan. Xin Yan replied: The Empress and the Son of Heaven are the same noble body, and it is not possible to have five concubines at the same time.

古文：妥驳曰： 帝喾四妃，舜又二妃，亦何常数？ 
现代文：何妥驳斥说： 上古帝喾有四个妃子，舜也有两个。后妃哪有什么定数呢？ 
English: He Tuo refuted: The ancient emperors had four concubines, and empresses also had two. What is the fixed number of concubines?

古文：由是封襄城县伯。
现代文：因此，何妥被封为襄城县伯。
English: Therefore, He Tuo was awarded the title of Xiangcheng County magistrate.

古文：高祖受禅，除国子博士，加通直散骑常侍，进爵为公。
现代文：隋高祖受禅，何妥被授予国子博士，兼通直散骑常侍，晋爵为公。
English: Sui Gao's ancestor was a Zen practitioner, He Tuo was awarded the title of Doctor of the State, and he was also a knight of the Imperial Court.

古文：妥性劲急，有口才，好是非人物。
现代文：何妥生性急躁，也颇具口才，喜欢评议人物。
English: He is quick-tempered, eloquent, and likes to comment on others.

古文：时纳言苏威尝言于上曰： 臣先人每诫臣云，唯读《孝经》一卷，足可立身治国，何用多为！ 
现代文：当时，纳言苏威曾对皇上说： 我的先父常常告诫我说，只要通读《孝经》一卷，就足以立身治国，何必多学！ 
English: At that time, Nagan Su Wei once said to the emperor: My forefather often warned me that as long as I read through one volume of the Filial Piety Sutra, it would be enough to stand up and govern the country. Why should I study more?

古文：上亦然之。
现代文：皇上觉得他说得在理。
English: The Emperor thought he was right.

古文：妥进曰： 苏威所学，非止《孝经》。
现代文：何妥为此向皇上进言道： 苏威所学，不只《孝经》一卷。
English: For this reason, He Zuo said to the emperor: What Su Wei learned was more than just one volume of the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：厥父若信有此言，威不从训，是其不孝。若无此言，面欺陛下，是其不诚。
现代文：他的先父倘若确实说过这话，那么，苏威就没有听从父训，这说明他不孝顺；假如他父亲根本没有说过这番话，那么，他就是公然在皇上面前说谎话，这说明他不忠诚。
English: If his father really said this, then Su Wei did not follow his father's teachings, which means that he is not loyal; if his father did not say this at all, then he is openly lying in front of the emperor, which means that he is not loyal.

古文：不诚不孝，何以事君！
现代文：既不忠，又不孝，这种人怎么能侍奉皇上？
English: Both disloyal and unfilial, how can such a person serve the emperor?

古文：且夫子有云： 不读《诗》无以言，不读《礼》无以立。 
现代文：况且孔子曾经说过： 不读《诗经》，就无话可讲；不读《礼记》，就不能立身行事。 
English: Moreover, Confucius once said: If you do not read the "Book of Songs," you have nothing to say; if you do not read the "Book of Rites," you cannot stand up and act.

古文：岂容苏绰教子独反圣人之训乎？ 
现代文：苏绰教子怎么竟然违反圣人的训导呢？ 
English: How could Su Qiao's godson go so far as to violate the sage's teachings?

古文：威时兼领五职，上甚亲重之，妥因奏威不可信任。
现代文：苏威当时身兼五职，皇上十分亲近、器重他。何妥因此对皇上说，苏威不可信任。
English: At that time, Su Wei held five posts. The emperor was very close to him and held him in high esteem. Therefore, He Tuo told the emperor that Su Wei could not be trusted.

古文：又以掌天文律度，皆不称职，妥又上八事以谏：其一事曰：臣闻知人则哲，惟帝难之。
现代文：又因为主管天文、律度的都不称职，何妥又提出八件事向皇上奏道：其一，我听说善于识别人才的就是贤哲，一国之君要做到这点就更加困难。
English: Also, because the person in charge of astronomy and rhythm was incompetent, Ho To proposed eight things to report to the emperor: First, I heard that a person who is good at recognizing talent is a sage, and it is more difficult for the ruler of a country to do this.

古文：孔子曰： 举直错诸枉则民服，举枉错诸直则民不服。 
现代文：孔子说： 正直的人放在邪恶的人上面，百姓就会信服；反之，把邪恶的人放在正直的人上面，百姓就不会信服。 
English: Confucius said: If you put an honest person on top of an evil person, the people will be convinced; on the other hand, if you put an evil person on top of an honest person, the people will not be convinced.

古文：由此言之，政之治乱，必慎所举，故进贤受上赏，蔽贤蒙显戮。
现代文：由此看来，政治安定，必须慎重地选拔、使用人才。所以，推荐贤才的受重赏，埋没贤才的应杀戮。
English: From this point of view, political stability requires careful selection and use of talent. Therefore, recommending talents should be highly rewarded, and burying talents should be killed.

古文：察今之举人，良异于此，无论谄直，莫择贤愚。心欲崇高，则起家喉舌之任；意须抑屈，必白首郎署之官。
现代文：看看现在的用人情况，确实不同此，不管是奸佞还是正直，也不管是贤能还是愚笨，他们对于想要推崇的人，一启用就委以重任；对于想要压抑排挤的人，就叫他到老也只能做个郎官这样的小官。
English: Looking at the current employment situation, it is indeed different. Regardless of whether they are traitors or honest, and regardless of whether they are capable or stupid, they assign heavy responsibilities to those they want to promote as soon as they are appointed; for those who want to suppress the exclusion, they let him only be a minor official like a steward until old age.

古文：人之不服，实由于此。
现代文：人们不能心服，实在是因此而造成的呀。
English: People are not convinced, that's why.

古文：臣闻爵人于朝，与士共之，刑人于市，与众弃之。
现代文：我听说在朝廷上授予爵位，是希望大家都奖赏他；在大街杀人，是希望人们都能唾弃他。
English: I have heard it said that a man who bestows a title of nobility on the court expects everyone to reward him; a man who kills in the street expects everyone to despise him.

古文：伏见留心狱讼，爱人如子，每应决狱，无不询访群公，刑之不滥，君之明也。
现代文：我看皇上十分关注诉讼案件，爱民如子，每次处理案件，无不亲自征求大家的意见，不滥用刑法，这是皇上的圣明之处啊！
English: I think that the emperor is very concerned about litigation cases, loves the people like a son, and every time he handles a case, he always personally solicits everyone's opinions and does not abuse the criminal law. This is the emperor's sacred place!

古文：刑既如此，爵亦宜然。
现代文：对待诉讼案件能如此，授人爵位也应该如此。
English: If litigation can be treated in this way, so should knighthoods.

古文：若有懋功简在帝心者，便可擢用。
现代文：如果您心里记着谁有什么丰功伟绩，就可以提拔、重用。
English: If you keep in mind who has what great achievements, you can promote and reuse.

古文：自斯以降，若选重官，必须参以众议，勿信一人之举；则上不偏私，下无怨望。
现代文：从这以下，如要选拔重要官员，必须广泛征求大家的意见，不应该偏信某一个人的推举。那么，在上者不徇私，在下者无报怨。
English: From this, if you want to select important officials, you must widely solicit everyone's opinions, and you should not be partial to the nomination of a particular person. Then, there is no selfishness in the upper, and there is no complaint in the lower.

古文：其二事曰：孔子云： 是察阿党，则罪无掩蔽。 
现代文：其二，孔子说： 经常审查朋党，那么，罪人就无人袒护了。 
English: Secondly, Confucius said: If you constantly examine your friends, then there will be no one to protect the guilty.

古文：又曰： 君子周而不比，小人比而不周。 
现代文：孔子又说： 君子讲团结而不互相勾结，小人互相勾结却不讲团结。 
English: Confucius also said: Noblemen speak of unity without colluding with each other, villains collude with each other but do not speak of unity.

古文：所谓比者，即阿党也。
现代文：这里所所说的勾结，就是结党营私。
English: The collusion referred to here is the formation of a party.

古文：谓心之所爱，既已光华荣显，犹加提挈；心之所恶，既已沈滞屈辱，薄言必怒。
现代文：他们对心里所喜欢的人，即使他已经荣华富贵，仍然加以提挈；对心里所厌恶的人，即使他已经处于卑微、屈辱的境地，也要拼命加以诋毁。
English: They still praise the person they like in their hearts, even if he is already prosperous and rich; and they try their best to discredit the person they dislike in their hearts, even if he is already in a lowly and humiliating situation.

古文：提挈既成，必相掩蔽，则欺上之心生矣；屈辱既加，则有怨恨，谤讟之言出矣。
现代文：那些小人一旦被提拔重用，必定相互勾结、袒护，那么，欺君之心顿生；而那些官卑职小的人既然身受屈辱，就必然会生怨气，怨言自然就产生了。
English: Once those villains are promoted and reused, they must collude with each other and protect each other, so the heart of the tyrant is suddenly born; and since those people with low-ranking positions suffer humiliation, they will inevitably become resentful, and complaints will naturally arise.

古文：伏愿广加逖访，勿使朋党路开，威恩自任。
现代文：诚望您能广泛查访，不要使小人结党营私成为一种风气，应亲自施以恩威。
English: I sincerely hope that you will be able to make extensive visits, and do not make it a custom for villains to form cliques. You should personally show your grace.

古文：有国之患，莫大于此。
现代文：国家的忧患，没有比这更大的了。
English: There is no greater sorrow for the nation.

古文：其三事曰：臣闻舜举十六族，所谓八元、八恺也。
现代文：其三，我听说舜曾举荐十六个人，即所谓 八元 、 八恺 。
English: Thirdly, I heard that Zou had recommended sixteen people, that is, the so-called eight yuan, eight yuan.

古文：计其贤明，理优今日，犹复择才授任，不相侵滥，故得四门雍穆，庶绩咸熙。
现代文：我想他的贤明，要比今天的人高，但舜仍然择才而用，不致混乱，才使国家四境安定，各种事功都作得好。
English: I think his wisdom is higher than that of today's people, but he still selects talent, avoids chaos, stabilizes the country in all directions, and does all kinds of things well.

古文：今官员极多，用人甚少，有一人身上乃兼数职，为是国无人也？
现代文：而今官职极多，但用的人却很少，有人身兼数职。是国家缺少人才？
English: Today, there are a lot of government posts, but very few people working in them. Some people hold several posts at the same time. Is the country lacking talent?

古文：为是人不善也？
现代文：还是人才都不行？
English: Or is it not possible to attract talent?

古文：今万乘大国，髦彦不少，纵有明哲，无由自达。
现代文：如此大国，有才能的人确实不少，可是，他们纵使有才能，也缺乏仕进的机会。
English: In such a large country, there are indeed many talented people, but even if they are talented, they lack the opportunity to advance.

古文：东方朔言曰： 尊之则为将，卑之则为虏。 
现代文：东方朔曾说： 器重，他会成为将帅；鄙弃，他就只能成为奴隶。 
English: Dongfang Shuo once said: If he is a heavyweight, he will become a general; if he is despised, he can only become a slave.

古文：斯言信矣。
现代文：的确如此啊。
English: That's exactly right.

古文：今当官之人，不度德量力，既无吕望、傅说之能，自负傅岩、滋水之气，不虑忧深责重，唯畏总领不多，安斯宠任，轻彼权轴，好致颠蹶，实此之由。
现代文：现在的一些官员，不考虑自己的德行和才能，既没有吕望、傅说的才能，却自负有傅岩、滋水的傲气，不考虑责任重大，而只怕管的事不多，安于宠幸，玩忽职守，终致失败，实在是上述原因所造成的。
English: Some present-day officials, regardless of their own virtues and talents, do not have the talent of Lvang or Fu, but they are proud of having Fuyan and Shishui. They do not consider their responsibilities to be great, but are only afraid to manage a few things. They are content with their favors, neglect their duties, and eventually fail. It is really caused by the above reasons.

古文：《易》曰： 鼎折足，覆公餗，其形渥，凶。 
现代文：《易经》说： 鼎的脚一旦折断，里面的食物就会倾出，那情形一定狼藉不堪。 
English: "I Ching" Ding Gua Jiuzhong said in his eulogy: "Ding Gua Jiuzhong has broken its foot, overthrown the duke's food, symbolized the overthrow of the homeland, suffered humiliation, four very vicious.

古文：言不胜其任也。
现代文：这就是说，那些脚本来就不胜重任。
English: This is the danger of saying that talent is not enough to be competent!

古文：臣闻穷力举重，不能为用。
现代文：我听说需要竭尽全力才能举重的人，不能委以重任。
English: I've heard it said that if you have to work hard to lift weights, you can't delegate.

古文：伏愿更任贤良，分才参掌，使各行有余力，则庶事康哉。
现代文：我恳请您另选贤良，并依据各自的才能让他们分管有关事务，使之各有余力。诚如此，凡事就能获得成功。
English: I implore you to choose good men and women and put them in charge of the affairs according to their respective abilities, so that they can do their best. In this way, everything will be successful.

古文：其四事曰：臣闻《礼》云： 析言破律，乱名改作，执左道以乱政者杀。 
现代文：其四，我听说《礼记》上曾说： 析言、破律、乱名、改作，搞旁门左道而扰乱政治者必须杀头。 
English: Fourthly, I heard that the "Rituals" once said: "Those who make comments, break the law, change the name, and alter the work, and those who go astray and disturb politicians must be killed."

古文：孔子曰： 仍旧贯，何必改作。 
现代文：孔子说： 沿袭旧的习惯、制度，何必改作。 
English: Confucius said, "If you follow the old habits and systems, why change them?

古文：伏见比年以来，改作者多矣。
现代文：我发现这么多年来，改作的实在太多了。
English: I find that over the years, there have been too many adaptations.

古文：至如范威漏刻，十载不成；赵翊尺称，七年方决。公孙济迂诞医方，费逾巨万；徐道庆回互子午，糜耗饮食。常明破律，多历岁时；王渥乱名，曾无纪极。张山居未知星位，前已蹂藉太常；曹魏祖不识北辰，今复辚轹太史。
现代文：至如范威改作漏刻仪，十年也没成功；赵翊改进尺秤，历时七年才定下来；公孙济研制医方，迂腐荒诞，结果耗资巨万；徐道庆根本就不懂地理，白白地耗废国家的俸禄；常明更改历法，历经数载；王渥更改官名与物名，曾使许多文物失去了标准和法度；张山居本来就不知道星位，此前在太常寺指手划脚；曹魏祖也不知北斗，而今居然官居太史。
English: So far, Fan Wei changed to a leaky carving instrument, which did not succeed for ten years; Zhao Wei improved the ruler and scale, which took seven years to settle down; Gong Sunji developed a medical method, pedantic and absurd, and the result cost a huge amount of money; Xu Daoqing did not understand geography at all, and wasted the country's salary; Changming changed the calendar, which took several years; Wang Wou changed the official name and the name of the object, which caused many cultural relics to lose their standard and legal status; Zhang Shanyu did not know the position of the stars originally, before he pointed his finger at Tai Chang Temple; Cao Wei Zu

古文：莫不用其短见，便自夸毗，邀射名誉，厚相诬罔。
现代文：他们这些人没有谁不是凭借可怜的迂见，妄自尊大，沽名钓誉，且相互诋毁、欺蒙的。
English: There is no one among them who does not rely on pitiful circumlocution, arrogance, name-calling, and slandering and deceiving each other.

古文：请今日已后，有如此者，若其言不验，必加重罚，庶令有所畏忌，不敢轻奏狂简。
现代文：我请求从今以后，如有这类情况的，如其言得不到验证，必须加以重罚，庶可使他们有所畏惧，不敢轻率地上奏简章。
English: I ask that from now on, if there are such cases, if their words are not verified, they must be severely punished, so that they will be afraid to play the jingle.

古文：其余文多不载。
现代文：其他文字多不记载。
English: Other characters are mostly not recorded.

古文：时苏威权兼数司，先尝隐武功，故妥言自负傅岩、滋水之气，以此激上。
现代文：当时苏威权兼数司，而先前曾隐居武功县，所以何妥说他自负有傅岩、滋水之气，以此引起皇上注意。
English: At that time, Su Wai Quan was also the chief of the Department of Mathematics, and he had previously lived in seclusion in Wukong County. Therefore, He Tuo said that he was proud to have the air of Fuyan and nourishing water, which attracted the attention of the emperor.

古文：书奏，威大衔之。
现代文：何妥书上奏给皇上后，苏威对他怀恨至极。
English: After delivering the final report to the emperor, Su Wei harbored the utmost hatred for him.

古文：十二年，威定考文学，又与妥更相诃诋。
现代文：开皇十二年，苏威定考文学，又与何妥互相诋毁、攻击。
English: In the 12th year of the Emperor's reign, Su Wei sat for the examination of literature, and he and He Tuo slandered and attacked each other.

古文：威勃然曰： 无何妥，不虑无博士！ 
现代文：苏威勃然大怒说： 没有何妥，不必担心无国子学博士！ 
English: Su Wei flew into a rage and said, "There's nothing to worry about, there's no need to worry about Dr. Wu Guozi!"

古文：妥应声曰： 无苏威，亦何忧无执事！ 
现代文：何妥应声说： 无苏威，也不必担心无人管理国家大事！ 
English: Ho Tso echoed: Without Su Wei, there is no need to worry about no one managing national affairs!

古文：由是与威有隙。
现代文：因此，何妥与苏威有矛盾。
English: Therefore, there is a contradiction between He Zuo and Su Wei.

古文：其后上令妥考定钟律，妥又上表曰：
现代文：这以后，皇上命令何妥考定钟律，何妥又上表奏道：我听说人世间光明，就会产生礼乐；地府幽冥，就会产生鬼神。
English: After this, the emperor ordered He Tuo to determine the clock's time, and He Tuo played the music again, saying, "I have heard that when there is light in the world, there will be music; when there is darkness in the underworld, there will be ghosts and gods.

古文：臣闻明则有礼乐，幽则有鬼神，然则动天地，感鬼神，莫近于礼乐。又云乐至则无怨，礼至则不争，揖让而治天下者，礼乐之谓也。
现代文：那么，能感动天地鬼神的，没有什么能和礼乐相比。我又听说礼乐推行到一定程度，就会使人民无怨无争，拱手之间天下即可安定，这就是礼乐产生的效应。
English: Then, there is nothing that can move the heavens and the earth, nothing that can be compared to the ritual music. I also heard that if the ritual music is promoted to a certain extent, it will make the people have no complaints and disputes, and the world can be stable. This is the effect produced by the ritual music.

古文：臣闻乐有二，一曰奸声，二曰正声。
现代文：我听说，音乐有两类：一类是奸声，另一类是正声。
English: I've heard it said that there are two types of music: one kind of noise and another kind of positive sound.

古文：夫奸声感人而逆气应之，逆气成象而淫乐兴焉。
现代文：大凡奸声动人，就让人增长邪气，邪气进一步扩展，淫乐于是产生了。
English: If the great villain's voice is moving, it will make people grow evil, evil will further expand, and so lust will arise.

古文：正声感人而顺气应之，顺气成象而和乐兴焉。
现代文：正声动人，就会产生顺气，顺气进一步扩展，和乐于是产生了。
English: Being affected by the music of the righteous, the prosperity is reflected, the prosperity is influenced, and the harmonious music is promoted.

古文：故乐行而伦清，耳目聪明，血气和平，移风易俗，天下皆宁。
现代文：所以好的音乐一旦风行，就会使伦理清白，耳目聪明，血气和平，移风易俗，天下安宁。
English: Therefore, if happiness can be practiced, people can be clearly classified and not confused with each other; the ears and eyes are clear and not disturbed by evil voices and evil colors; the blood is peaceful and the violence is stopped; the customs are easy to move and belong to simplicity, and everyone in the world can enjoy peace.

古文：孔子曰： 放郑声，远佞人。 
现代文：孔子说： 抛弃郑声，疏远奸人。 
English: Confucius said: Abandon Zheng Xing, alienate traitors.

古文：故郑、卫、宋、赵之声出，内则发疾，外则伤人。
现代文：因而郑、卫、宋、赵之声一出现，对己则可以引发邪恶，对外则伤害他人。
English: Therefore, as soon as the voices of Zheng, Wei, Song and Zhao appear, they can cause evil to themselves and harm others to the outside world.

古文：是以宫乱则荒，其君骄；商乱则陂，其官坏；角乱则忧，其人怨；徵乱则哀，其事勤；羽乱则危，其财匮。
现代文：所以，宫调泛滥就会荒淫，他的国君也变得骄奢淫逸；商调泛滥就会产生邪恶，官员们也就贪赃枉法；角调泛滥就会产生忧患，百姓就会有怨愤之心；徵调泛滥就会产生哀怨之情，那么国家必定会祸事蜂起；羽调一乱会出现危险，那么国家一定财源匮乏。
English: Therefore, if the palace is overflowing, there will be debauchery, and his sovereign will become arrogant and debauched; if the business is overflowing, there will be evil, and the officials will be greedy; if the square is overflowing, there will be sorrow, and the people will be resentful; if the square is overflowing, there will be sorrow, and the country will certainly be in trouble; if the square is chaotic, there will be danger, and the country will certainly lack financial resources.

古文：五者皆乱，则国亡无日矣。
现代文：如果五调都乱了，那么离国家灭亡的日子就不远了。
English: If all five are out of kilter, then the day of the country's demise is not far off.

古文：魏文侯问子夏曰： 吾端冕而听古乐则欲寐，听郑、卫之音而不知倦，何也？ 
现代文：魏文侯问子夏说： 我恭恭敬敬地听古乐却想睡觉，听郑国、卫国的音乐反而不知疲倦，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wei Wenhou asked Zixia: Why is it that I respectfully listen to ancient music but want to sleep, but listen to the music of Zheng Guo and Wei Guo tirelessly?

古文：子夏对曰： 夫古乐者，始奏以文，复乱以武，修身及家，平均天下。
现代文：子夏回答说： 一般说来，古乐以《文始》为先，《大武》为后，常听古乐可以修养身心，治理家国，并使天下平均。
English: Zixia replied, "Generally speaking, ancient music starts with "Wenxin" and ends with "Da Wu." Frequent listening to ancient music can cultivate one's mind and body, govern one's country, and make the world more equal.

古文：郑、卫之音者，奸声以乱，溺而不止，飖杂子女，不知父子。
现代文：郑国、卫国的音乐，因为是邪恶之声，所以常常扰乱纲常，如果沉溺其中，不可自拔，就会混杂子女，不分父子。
English: The music of Zheng Guo and Wei Guo, because it is the voice of evil, often disturbs the balance. If you indulge in it, you cannot extricate yourself, it will confuse your children, regardless of father and son.

古文：今君所问者乐也，所爱者音也。
现代文：现今您所问的是乐，而所爱的是音。
English: Now you are asking about music, and what you love is sound.

古文：夫乐与音，相近而不同，为人君者，谨审其好恶。 
现代文：乐与音固然相近，但不相同。作为一国之君，要谨慎对待自己的好恶。 
English: Although music and sound are similar, they are not the same. As the ruler of a country, you should be careful about your likes and dislikes.

古文：案圣人之作乐也，非止苟悦耳目而已矣。
现代文：考究古人制定礼乐的动机，不只是让人悦耳而已。
English: Studying the motives of the ancients in formulating ritual music is not just pleasing to the ear.

古文：欲使在宗庙之内，君臣同听之则莫不和敬；在乡里之内，长幼同听之则莫不和顺；在闺门之内，父子同听之则莫不和亲。
现代文：旨在让君臣在朝廷内同听，那么，君臣就没有不和睦、亲近的；在乡里同听，那么，长幼就没有不和顺的；父子在家中同听，那么，就没有不和睦亲近的。
English: The aim is to let the princes and ministers listen together in the court, then there will be no disharmony and closeness between the princes and ministers; listen together in the countryside, then there will be no disharmony between the elders and the children; listen together at home, then there will be no disharmony and closeness.

古文：此先王立乐之方也。
现代文：这就是先王制定礼乐的道理啊！
English: This is the reason why the first king established the music of the rite!

古文：故知声而不知音者，禽兽是也，知音而不知乐者，众庶是也。
现代文：所以，只懂得声色而不懂得音乐的，是禽兽；只了解音乐而不知道音乐的，是普通平民。
English: Therefore, those who only understand the timbre but not the music are beasts; those who only understand the music but do not know the music are ordinary civilians.

古文：故黄钟大吕，弦歌干戚，僮子皆能儛之。
现代文：所以，董钟大吕、弦歌干戚，童子都能跟着跳舞。
English: Therefore, Dong Zhong Dairu, the stringed song is related to the dance, and the boy can dance with it.

古文：能知乐者，其唯君子！
现代文：真正通晓礼乐的只有君子！
English: Only a gentleman can truly understand ceremonial music!

古文：不知声者，不可与言音，不知音者，不可与言乐，知乐则几于道矣。
现代文：对于不通声乐的，不可和他谈礼乐；对于不懂音乐的，不可和他谈礼乐。一个人如果通晓了音乐，就差不多达到最高境界了。
English: If you don't know vocal music, you can't talk to him about liturgical music; if you don't know music, you can't talk to him about liturgical music. If a person knows music, he has almost reached the highest level.

古文：纣为无道，太师抱乐器以奔周。
现代文：商纣王为政无道，太师抱上乐器投奔周王。
English: The merchant Wang had no choice but to become a politician, so the Grand Master took the musical instrument and ran to King Zhou.

古文：晋君德薄，师旷固惜清徵。
现代文：晋平公寡德，师旷因此特别珍惜音乐，不肯弹奏。
English: The monarch of Jin was deficient in virtue, and Shige was a pitiful and limpid conscript.

古文：上古之时，未有音乐，鼓腹击壤，乐在其间。
现代文：上古的时候，没有音乐，只会拍肚皮，以脚跺地，乐在其中。
English: In ancient times, when there was no music, clapping one's hands to one's stomach or beating the soil was considered music.

古文：《易》曰： 先王作乐崇德，殷荐之上帝，以配祖考。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 先王制作礼乐，目的是为了推崇道德，向天帝表明耿耿忠心，并同时祭祀祖宗。 
English: "Yi" said: The ancient emperors made music that advocated virtue, and diligently recommended it to the heavens to share with their ancestors.

古文：至于黄帝作《咸池》，颛顼作《六茎》，帝喾作《五英》，尧作《大章》，舜作《大韶》，禹作《大夏》，汤作《大濩》，武王作《大武》，从夏以来，年代久远，唯有名字，其声不可得闻。
现代文：至于黄帝作的《咸池》、颛顼作的《六茎》、帝喾作的《五英》、尧作的《大章》、舜作的《大韶》、禹作的《大夏》、商汤作的《大护》、武王作的《大武》，从夏朝以来，因年代久远，只留下名称，乐声听不到了。
English: As for the "Hammered Pool" composed by the Yellow Emperor, the "Six Stems" composed by the Zou Emperor, the "Five Yings" composed by the Zou Emperor, the "Great Chapter" composed by the Zou Emperor, the "Great Dragon" composed by the Zou Emperor, the "Great Summer" composed by the Yu Emperor, the "Great Protection" composed by the Shang Tang Emperor, and the "Great Warrior" composed by the King Wu, since the Xia Dynasty, due to the long history, only the name has been left, and the music has not been heard.

古文：自殷至周，备于《诗》《颂》。
现代文：从商代到周代，音乐集中在《诗经》中。
English: From the Shang Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty, music was concentrated in the "Book of Songs."

古文：故自圣贤已下，多习乐者，至如伏羲减瑟，文王足琴，仲尼击磬，子路鼓瑟，汉高击筑，元帝吹箫。
现代文：所以，从圣贤以下，大多通晓音乐。譬如伏羲氏减瑟、周文王足琴、孔子击磬、子路弹瑟、汉高祖击筑、汉元帝。
English: Therefore, since the sages of Shenming, there have been many people who have studied music, such as Fuxiong reducing the strings, King Wen supplementing the strings, Confucius striking the gong, Zilu playing the zither, Han Gaozu striking the zhu, and Emperor Han Yuan blowing the gong.

古文：汉高祖之初，叔孙通因秦乐人制宗庙之乐。
现代文：汉高祖初年，叔孙通因袭秦人制定了汉代宗庙里所使用的音乐。
English: In the first year of the founder of the Han Dynasty, his great-uncle and great-great-grandson Tong Rong, a descendant of the Qin Dynasty, developed the music used in the Han Dynasty's ancestral temples.

古文：迎神于庙门，奏《嘉至》之乐，犹古降神之乐也。
现代文：迎神于庙门时，奏《嘉至》乐，如同古代迎神时所奏的音乐。
English: When welcoming the deity at the temple gate, "Jia Zi" music is played, just like the music played when welcoming the deity in ancient times.

古文：皇帝入庙门，奏《永至》之乐，以为行步之节，犹古《采荠》、《肆夏》也。
现代文：皇帝进入宗庙，奏《永至》乐，以合行走时的节奏，如同古代的《采荠》、《肆夏》乐。
English: The emperor entered the ancestral temple and played the music of "Eternity" to match the rhythm of walking, just like the ancient music of "Cherry-picking" and "Summer."

古文：乾豆上荐，奏《登歌》之乐，犹古清庙之歌也。
现代文：乾豆上献，奏登歌之乐，如同古代的清庙歌。
English: Dried beans are offered, and the music of the ascending song is played, just like the ancient Qing temple song.

古文：《登歌》再终，奏《休成》之乐，美神飨也。
现代文：奏完登歌乐，奏《休成》乐，以赞美鬼神之祭。
English: After the performance of the ascending song, the music of "Resting" was played to praise the festival of ghosts and gods.

古文：皇帝就东厢坐定，奏《永安》之乐，美礼成也。
现代文：皇帝在东厢坐定后，奏《永安》乐，以赞美礼仪的完备。
English: After the emperor was seated in the east compartment, he played "Yongan" music to praise the perfection of the etiquette.

古文：其《休成》、《永至》二曲，叔孙通所制也。
现代文：《休成》、《永至》二曲，为叔孙通所作。
English: Among them, two pieces of music, "Hiatus" and "Forever," were produced by Uncle Sun Tong.

古文：汉高祖庙奏《武德》、《文始》、《五行》之儛，当春秋时，陈公子完奔齐，陈是舜后，故齐有《韶》乐，孔子在齐闻《韶》，三月不知肉味是也。
现代文：汉高祖庙奏的是《武德》、《文始》、《五行》舞乐。春秋时，陈国公子完投奔到齐国，陈国人是舜的后裔，因此，齐国也就有了韶乐。因此，孔子在齐国听了韶乐后，竟觉得数月不知肉的滋味。
English: The ancestral temple of Henkel played the "Wu De," "Wen Shi Zi" and "Wu Xing" dance music. In the spring and autumn, Chen Guo Gongzi went to Qi. Chen Guo Gongzi was a descendant of Gong, so Qi also had Gong music. Therefore, after listening to Gong music in Qi, Confucius actually felt that he did not know the taste of meat for several months.

古文：秦始皇灭齐，得齐《韶》乐。
现代文：秦始皇消灭齐国，得到齐国的韶乐。
English: Qin Shihuang destroyed Qi and gained the pleasure of Qi.

古文：汉高祖灭秦，《韶》传于汉，高祖改名《文始》，以示不相袭也。
现代文：汉高祖继而灭秦，韶乐于是传到汉，只不过高祖将它改名为《文始》，以显示不因袭前人。
English: The Han Emperor Gao Zu went on to destroy the Qin Dynasty, and the music spread to the Han Dynasty. However, Gao Zu changed its name to "The Beginning of the Text" to show that it was not influenced by its predecessors.

古文：《五行儛》者，本周《大武》乐也，始皇改曰《五行》。
现代文：《五行》舞本是周代《大武》乐，始皇改名为《五行》。
English: "Five Elements" is based on Zhou Dynasty's "Great Warrior" music, and was renamed "Five Elements" by the first emperor.

古文：及于孝文，复作四时之亻舞，以示天下安和，四时顺也。
现代文：到汉孝文帝时，又制作春、夏、秋、冬四时舞乐，以显示天下平安和顺，四时风调雨顺。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen of the Han Dynasty, dance music was also produced for the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter to show that the world was peaceful and harmonious, and the weather was good at all four seasons.

古文：孝景采《武德儛》以为《昭德》，孝宣又采《昭德》以为《盛德》，虽变其名，大抵皆因秦旧事。
现代文：孝景帝时依据《武德》舞创制《昭德》舞，孝宣帝又依据《昭德》舞创制《盛德》舞，虽然几易其名，然而大多沿袭秦代。
English: Emperor Xiaojing created the "Zhao De" dance based on the "Wu De" dance, and Emperor Xiaoxuan created the "Sheng De" dance based on the "Zhao De" dance. Although they changed their names several times, they mostly followed the Qin Dynasty.

古文：至于魏、晋，皆用古乐。
现代文：到了魏、晋时期，所采用的都是古乐。
English: In the Wei and Jin dynasties, ancient music was used.

古文：魏之三祖，并制乐辞。
现代文：魏初三朝皇帝都创制过乐辞。
English: The three forefathers of Wei all produced musical lyrics.

古文：自永嘉播越，五都倾荡，乐声南度，是以大备江东。
现代文：自从永嘉年间王室迁移，京城倾废，乐声传到南方，因此，古乐大备于江南。
English: Since the royal family moved during the Yongjia era, the capital was abandoned, and the music spread to the south, so the ancient music was prepared in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：宋、齐已来，至于梁代，所行乐事，犹皆传古，三雍四始，实称大盛。
现代文：宋、齐以来，及至梁代，所行礼乐之事，还是古乐。三雍、四始，当时的确盛行。
English: Since the Song and Qi dynasties, and up to the Liang Dynasty, the ceremonial music performed was still ancient music. Sanyong and Yixi were indeed popular at that time.

古文：及侯景篡逆，乐师分散，其四儛、三调，悉度伪齐。
现代文：等到侯景篡权反叛，乐师四处分散，其四舞、三调都流传到北齐。
English: When Hou Jing rebelled against the usurpation of power, the musicians were scattered everywhere, and their four dances and three tunes were spread to Beiqi.

古文：齐氏虽知传受，得曲而不用之于宗庙朝廷也。
现代文：北齐人虽然知道传授，但得到后并没有用在宗庙朝廷上。
English: Although the Qi Dynasty knew how to teach and learn, it did not use the music in the ancestral temple and the imperial court after obtaining it.

古文：臣少好音律，留意管弦，年虽耆老，颇皆记忆。
现代文：我年轻时就爱好音律，留心于管弦。现在虽然年事已高，差不多都还记得。
English: From a young age, he was fond of musical rhythms and paid attention to instrumental music. Even though he is old, he can still remember everything.

古文：及东土克定，乐人悉返，访其逗遛，果云是梁人所教。
现代文：当东土平定，乐师返回家园，我前去进行查访，果真说是梁人所教。
English: When the East was pacified and the musicians returned home, I went to investigate and found that it was indeed Liang who had taught them.

古文：今三调、四儛并皆有手，虽不能精熟，亦颇具雅声。
现代文：现在《三调》、《四舞》都有一些能手，虽然他们不算很熟练，但也很有些雅声。
English: Now, "Three Tunes" and "Four Dances" have some experts, although they are not very skilled, but they also have some elegance.

古文：若令教习传授，庶得流传古乐。
现代文：如果让他们教习传授，还可使古乐流传。
English: If they are allowed to teach and pass on their knowledge, it is hoped that ancient music can be passed on.

古文：然后取其会归，撮其指要，因循损益，更制嘉名。
现代文：然后，将它们收集起来，摘其精要，根据发展情况加以增减，重新确定好的名称。
English: Then, collect them, extract their essence, add and subtract according to the development situation, and redefine the good name.

古文：歌盛德于当今，传雅正于来叶，岂不美与！
现代文：歌颂皇上的盛德，将雅正之风传于后世，这难道不是很好的事情吗？
English: Isn't it a good thing to sing the praises of the emperor's virtue and pass on the tradition of elegance to future generations?

古文：谨具录三调、四舞曲名，又制歌辞如别。
现代文：我谨抄录三调、四舞的曲名，另制作一些其他的歌辞。
English: I have carefully copied the titles of the three-part and four-part choruses, and have also prepared some other lyrics.

古文：其有声曲流宕，不可以陈于殿庭者，亦悉附之于后。
现代文：其中有些声曲流宕，不能用之于朝廷的，也一并附在后面。
English: Those pieces that have been passed down but cannot be played in the hall of fame are also listed in the appendix below.

古文：书奏，别敕太常取妥节度。
现代文：奏表上给皇上后，皇上又命太常寺归何妥管辖。
English: After the report was submitted to the emperor, the emperor also ordered Taijo-ji Temple to be placed under the jurisdiction of He Tuo.

古文：于是作清、平、瑟三调声，又作八佾、《鞞》、《铎》、《巾》、《拂》四舞。
现代文：于是作清、平、瑟三调声，又作八佾及《革卑》、《铎》、《巾》、《拂》四舞。
English: As a result, he created three tunes: clear, flat and soft, as well as eight rhythms and four dances: "Gakubi," "Shi," "Wan" and "Ishi."

古文：先是，太常所传宗庙雅乐，数十年唯作大吕，废黄钟。
现代文：在此之前，太常寺所流传的宗庙雅乐，几十年来只作大吕，废弃了黄钟。
English: Prior to this, the ancestral temple's elegant music, which had been passed down at Taiji Temple, had only been played for decades, and the yellow bell had been abandoned.

古文：妥又以深乖古意，乃奏请用黄钟。
现代文：何妥又认为这种做法违背了古人的初衷，于是上奏皇上请求再度使用黄钟。
English: He Tuo also believed that this practice violated the original intention of the ancients, so he appealed to the emperor to request the use of the yellow bell again.

古文：诏下公卿议，从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏命令众卿讨论，众卿都同意这种做法。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict to let the nobles discuss the matter, and they accepted the proposal.

古文：俄而妥子蔚为秘书郎，有罪当刑，上哀之，减死论。
现代文：不久，何妥的儿子何蔚做秘书郎，犯罪应当斩首，皇上同情他，减免了他的死罪。
English: Soon after, He Tuo's son, He Wei, who worked as a secretary, was sentenced to be beheaded. The emperor sympathized with him and commuted his death sentence.

古文：是后恩礼渐薄。
现代文：从此对何妥的恩遇日渐淡薄。
English: After that, Ho To's favours dwindled.

古文：六年，出为龙州刺史。
现代文：开皇六年，何妥出任龙州刺史。
English: Six years after the emperor's enthronement, he was appointed to the post of Longzhou chief historian.

古文：时有负笈游学者，妥皆为讲说教授之。为《刺史箴》，勒于州门外。
现代文：当时，常常有一些背着书箱四处求学的人，何妥都亲自给他们讲学。他写了《刺史箴》，雕刻在州门外。
English: At that time, there were often some people who carried a bookcase around to study, and He Tuo lectured to them in person. He wrote "Jing Shi Zhen" and carved it outside the state gate.

古文：在职三年，以疾请还，诏许之。
现代文：任刺史三年后，因病请求还京，皇上有诏同意。
English: After three years in office, he requested to return to Beijing due to illness, and was permitted to do so by imperial decree.

古文：复知学事。
现代文：后又主管学事。
English: to take back control of the school.

古文：时上方使苏夔在太常，参议钟律。
现代文：当时，皇上让苏夔在太常寺任职，参与商定钟律。
English: At that time, the emperor asked Su Shi to work at Taizho-ji Temple and take part in agreeing on the bell rhythms.

古文：夔有所建议，朝士多从之，妥独不同，每言夔之短。
现代文：苏夔提出了一些建议，朝中官员大都赞同，惟有何妥不赞同，常常揭苏夔的短处。
English: Su Shi put forward some suggestions, which were mostly approved by the officials of the DPRK and China, but there were some disagreements, which often exposed the shortcomings of Su Shi.

古文：高祖下其议，朝臣多排妥。
现代文：隋高祖让朝中官员再议，朝臣大都反对何妥。
English: Sui Gaozu asked the officials of the dynasty to reconsider, but most of the courtiers were against it.

古文：妥复上封事，指陈得失，大抵论时政损益，并指斥当世朋党。
现代文：何妥又上密奏给皇上，指陈得失，大抵说的是时政得失，并指责当时的朋党。
English: What's the point of writing a secret report, pointing out the gains and losses of the statement, probably talking about the gains and losses of the current government, and reprimanding those who formed a faction of the party.

古文：于是苏威及吏部尚书卢恺、侍郎薛道衡等皆坐得罪。
现代文：于是，苏威和吏部尚书卢恺、侍郎薛道衡等都因此获罪。
English: As a result, Su Wei, the official Shang Shulun, the chamberlain Xue Daoheng, and others were all implicated and convicted.

古文：大业六年卒，时年六十七。刘炫为之请谥，朝廷不许。
现代文：后被任命为伊州刺史，何妥没去上任。不久，又被授为国子祭酒。死于任上。谥号肃。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Izu Province, but he did not take up the post. Soon after, he was awarded the title of national son. He died in office. His posthumous name was Su.

古文：○刘炫
现代文：他一生中撰写了《周易讲疏》十三卷，《孝经义疏》三卷，《庄子义疏》四卷，以及和沈重等撰写的《三十六科鬼神感应等大义》九卷，《封禅书》一卷，《乐要》一卷，其他文集十卷，都流行于世。○刘炫
English: During his lifetime, he wrote thirteen volumes of "Zhou Yi Lectures," three volumes of "Xiao Jing Yi Lectures," four volumes of "Zhuang Zi Yi Lectures," nine volumes of "Thirty-six Science and Spirit Induction and Other Great Teachings," one volume of "Feng Zenshu," one volume of "Music Essentials," and ten volumes of other collections, all of which are popular in the world. ○ Liu Xuan

古文：刘炫，字光伯，河间景城人也。
现代文：刘炫字光伯，河间景城人。
English: Liu Xuan Zi Guang Bo, a native of Jingcheng, Hebei Province.

古文：少以聪敏见称，与信都刘焯闭户读书，十年不出。
现代文：少年以聪慧敏捷为人称道，与信都的刘焯潜心读书，十年不曾出门。
English: The boy was praised for his intelligence and agility. He devoted himself to studying with Liu Xuan of Xindu and did not go out for ten years.

古文：炫眸子精明，视日不眩，强记默识，莫与为俦。
现代文：刘炫眼睛非常明亮有神，看太阳都不昏花，他的识记能力很强，没有谁能与他相比。
English: Liu Xuan's eyes are very bright, he is not dazzled by the sun, his memory is strong, he remembers silently, and no one can compare with him.

古文：左画方，右画圆，口诵，目数，耳听，五事同举，无有遗失。
现代文：他左手画方形，右手画圆形，口里诵读，眼睛识数，耳朵倾听，五件事情同时做，没有一事遗漏或失误。
English: He can draw a square with his left hand and a circle with his right hand, read with his mouth, count with his eyes, listen with his ears, and do five things at the same time without missing or making a mistake.

古文：周武帝平齐，瀛州刺史宇文亢引为户曹从事。后刺史李绘署礼曹从事，以吏干知名。
现代文：周武帝平定齐国之后，瀛州刺史宇文亢让他任户曹从事，后来的刺史李绘又任他为礼曹从事，以吏才出名。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wu had subdued Qi, Yuwen Zang, the governor of Zhangzhou, appointed him as a household official. Later, the governor of Zhangzhou, Li Bing, also appointed him as a ceremonial official. He was famous for being a bureaucrat.

古文：岁余，奉敕与著作郎王劭同修国史。
现代文：一年多后，奉皇帝诏令与著作郎王劭一起编国史。
English: More than a year later, by imperial decree, he compiled a national history together with the author Lang Wangyu.

古文：俄直门下省，以待顾问。
现代文：不久出任门下省，以备为皇上顾问。
English: He was soon appointed to a subordinate ministry in preparation for becoming an adviser to the emperor.

古文：又与诸术者修天文律历，兼于内史省考定群言，内史令博陵李德林甚礼之。
现代文：又与诸位术士编修天文、历法，还在内史省兼任考核评定群臣的职务，内史令李德林，是博陵人，很尊重他。
English: He also compiled astronomy and calendars with various magicians, and also served as the assessment and evaluation of ministers in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Li Delin, the Minister of Internal Affairs, is from Boling and respects him very much.

古文：炫虽遍直三省，竟不得官，为县司责其赋役。
现代文：刘炫虽然在三省都任过职，竟然没有得到官位，还被县司责成交赋税服劳役。
English: Although Liu Xuan had served in the three provinces of Zhongshu, Menzhu and Inner History, he did not get an official post and was punished by the county magistrate with taxation and labor service.

古文：炫自陈于内史，内史送诣吏部，吏部尚书韦世康问其所能。炫自为状曰： 《周礼》、《礼记》、《毛诗》、《尚书》、《公羊》、《左传》、《孝经》、《论语》孔、郑、王、何、服、杜等注，凡十三家，虽义有精粗，并堪讲授。
现代文：他向内史陈述了这件事，内史将此事转告给吏部，吏部尚书韦世康询问他有什么才能，刘炫自我陈述说： 《周礼》、《礼记》、《毛诗》、《尚书》、《公羊》、《左传》、《孝经》、《论语》以及孔安国、郑玄、王肃、何休、服虔、杜预等人的注，总共十三家，虽然掌握的意义有精细粗略之分，但都能够讲解传授。
English: He reported the matter to the internal history department, which relayed the matter to the personnel department. The personnel department asked Liu Xuan what talents he had. Liu Xuan self-reported: "Zhou Li," "Li Ji," "Mao Shi," "Shang Shu," "Ram," "Zhuan," "Xiao Jing," "Analects" and the notes of Kong An Guo, Zheng Xuan, Wang Su, He Xiu, Zhu Qian, Du Yu and others, a total of thirteen, although the meaning of mastery is fine and rough, but they are able to explain and teach.

古文：《周易》、《仪礼》、《谷梁》，用功差少。
现代文：《周易》、《礼仪》、《毂梁》，所下功夫就稍差一些。
English: "Zhou Yi," "Etiquette" and "Jing Liang" are a little worse.

古文：史子文集，嘉言美事，咸诵于心。
现代文：史书诸子文集中的美好的言辞和事情，都牢记在心。
English: The beautiful words and events in the history books and children's anthologies are all kept in mind.

古文：天文律历，穷核微妙。
现代文：天文、历法等方面，也能穷尽其细微之处。
English: In astronomy, calendar and other aspects, it can also exhaust its subtleties.

古文：至于公私文翰，未尝假手。 
现代文：至于公文、信札，也未曾让别人代过劳。 
English: As far as the public and private articles are concerned, they have never been done with the help of others.

古文：吏部竟不详试，然在朝知名之士十余人，保明炫所陈不谬，于是除殿内将军。
现代文：吏部竟然不再详细测试，但是，在朝廷中的较为有名的十多人，担保证明刘炫所陈述的没有虚假，就这样，刘炫被授予殿内将军之职。
English: However, more than ten famous people in the imperial court vouched that Liu Xuan's statement was not false, and thus, Liu Xuan was awarded the post of general of the palace.

古文：时牛弘奏请购求天下遗逸之书，炫遂伪造书百余卷，题为《连山易》、《鲁史记》等，录上送官，取赏而去。
现代文：当时，牛弘奏请皇上在全国购买散失在民间的书籍，刘炫于是伪造了一百多卷，题名为《连山易》、《鲁史记》等，抄录后送到官府，领取奖赏而去。
English: At that time, Niu Hongso asked the emperor to purchase books that were scattered throughout the country. Liu Xuan then forged more than a hundred volumes, entitled "Lianshan Yi," "Lu Shi Ji" and so on, copied and sent to the government, received the reward and left.

古文：后有人讼之，经赦免死，坐除名，归于家，以教授为务。
现代文：后来有人控告他，经过特赦免去一死。他因此被除名，就回到家里，以讲学授徒为业。
English: Later, someone accused him, and after a special pardon, he died. He was therefore expelled, and he returned home to his career as a lecturer.

古文：太子勇闻而召之，既至京师，敕令事蜀王秀，迁延不往。
现代文：太子杨勇听说此事就召见他，等他到了京城，皇帝又诏令他侍奉蜀王杨秀，他故意拖延不到任。
English: When Prince Yang Yong heard about this, he summoned him. When he arrived in Beijing, the emperor ordered him to serve Yang Xiu, the King of Shu. He deliberately delayed taking office.

古文：蜀王大怒，枷送益州。
现代文：蜀王大怒，将他戴上刑具送往益州。
English: Shu Wang flew into a rage and sent him to Yizhou wearing a torture device.

古文：既而配为帐内，每使执杖为门卫。
现代文：没有多久，把他分派做了侍卫，让他拿着兵器当门卫。
English: Before long, he was assigned to be an attendant, and let him hold weapons as a doorman.

古文：俄而释之，典校书史。炫因拟屈原《卜居》，为《筮途》以自寄。
现代文：不久放出，让他主管校对书籍等事，刘炫因此模仿屈原《卜居》作了一篇《筮涂土》来自我寄托。
English: Soon released, let him be in charge of proofreading books and other things, so Liu Xuan imitated Qu Yuan's "Buju" and made a "Dragonfly-coated Soil" from me.

古文：及蜀王废，与诸儒修定《五礼》，授旅骑尉。
现代文：等到蜀王被废，刘炫与群儒们一起修定《五礼》，授予旅骑尉之职。
English: When Shu Wang was abolished, Liu Xuan revised the "Five Rites" with the Confucian scholars and awarded him the post of brigadier.

古文：吏部尚书牛弘建议，以为礼诸侯绝傍期，大夫降一等。
现代文：吏部尚书牛弘提出建议，认为应该礼遇诸侯而绝旁枝，大夫要降一等。
English: Shangshu Niuhong from the personnel department suggested that courteous treatment of princes should be avoided, and doctors should be downgraded one rank.

古文：今之上柱国，虽不同古诸侯，比大夫可也，官在第二品，宜降傍亲一等。
现代文：现在的上柱国，虽然不同于古代的诸侯，与大夫相比照是可以的，官职在第二品，应当降旁亲一等。
English: Although the present Shangzhu countries are different from the ancient princes, it is possible to compare with the doctors. The official position is in the second grade, and the collateral relatives should be lowered to the first grade.

古文：议者多以为然。
现代文：议论者多数人认为应该这样。
English: Most commentators believe that this is correct.

古文：炫驳之曰： 古之仕者，宗一人而已，庶子不得进。由是先王重適，其宗子有分禄之义。
现代文：刘炫反驳他们说： 古代做官的，只是直系一人罢了，旁系子弟不得做官，因此先王注重嫡亲，其宗子有分别授禄的主张。
English: Liu Xuan refuted them, saying, "In ancient times, there was only one official in the direct line, and the children of the collateral line were not allowed to be officials. Therefore, the first king paid attention to the direct relatives, and his son-in-law had the idea of awarding the honor separately.

古文：族人与宗子虽疏远，犹服缞三月，良由受其恩也。
现代文：旁系和直系比虽然疏远一些，但还要穿三个月的丧服，确实是由于享受到了恩惠。
English: The collateral line is more distant than the direct line, but the fact that they have to wear mourning clothes for three months is really due to the grace they have received.

古文：今之仕者，位以才升，不限適庶，与古既异，何降之有。
现代文：现在做官，地位凭借才干而升迁，不受直系旁系的限制，与古代已经不同了，还有什么降不降呢？
English: It is different from the ancient times to be an official now, the position is promoted by virtue of talent, and is not subject to the restrictions of direct and collateral lines. What else is there to reduce or not reduce?

古文：今之贵者，多忽近亲，若或降之，民德之疏，自此始矣。 
现代文：现在地位尊贵的人，多数忽略了近亲，假如再降低一等，那么人们道德意识的衰微，就会从此开始了。 
English: Nowadays, most people of high status ignore their close relatives. If we lower the status one notch, then the decline of people's moral consciousness will begin from here.

古文：遂寝其事。
现代文：于是这件事就作罢了。
English: So they dropped the matter.

古文：开皇二十年，废国子四门及州县学，唯置太学博士二人，学生七十二人。
现代文：开皇二十年，皇帝废除国子四门以及州学县学，只设太学博士二人，学生七十二人。
English: In the 20th year of the Emperor's reign, the Emperor abolished the four national schools and the prefectural schools. Only two doctors of science and seventy-two students were set up.

古文：炫上表言学校不宜废，情理甚切，高祖不纳。
现代文：刘炫向皇帝上书，认为学校不应该废除，情理非常恳切，高祖没有采纳。
English: Liu Xuan wrote a letter to the emperor, arguing that the school should not be abolished. The reason was very sincere, but Gaozhu did not adopt it.

古文：开皇之末，国家殷盛，朝野皆以辽东为意。
现代文：开皇末年，国家兴盛，朝廷内外都有攻取辽东的意图。
English: In the last years of the emperor's reign, the country was prosperous, and both inside and outside the imperial court had the intention of conquering Liaodong.

古文：炫以为辽东不可伐，作《抚夷论》以讽焉，当时莫有悟者。
现代文：刘炫认为辽东不能攻伐，作《抚夷论》来讽谏这件事，当时谁也没有认识过来。
English: Liu Xuan thought that Liaodong could not be attacked, so he wrote "Fujii Theory" to ridicule this matter. At that time, no one recognized him.

古文：及大业之季，三征不克，炫言方验。
现代文：等到大业末年，三次攻伐都没有取胜，刘炫的话才得到证实。
English: In the final years of his career, Liu Xuan's words were only confirmed when he failed to win any of his three conquests.

古文：炀帝即位，牛弘引炫修律令。
现代文：炀帝继位，牛弘召引刘炫修订法律政令。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan ascended to the throne, and Niu Hong used Liu Xuan to revise the Criminal Law.

古文：高祖之世，以刀笔吏类多小人，年久长奸，势使然也。
现代文：高祖在世时，由于文官大多是卑鄙之人，时间长了滋长奸诈，是时势使他们变成了这样。
English: When Gao Zu was alive, because most of the civil servants were despicable people, the time grew long and treacherous, and it was the situation that made them become like this.

古文：又以风俗陵迟，妇人无节。
现代文：又因为社会风气越来越坏，妇女不守节。
English: And because the social climate is getting worse and worse, women no longer observe the festival.

古文：于是立格，州县佐史，三年而代之，九品妻无得再醮。
现代文：于是定下制度，州县的僚属，三年更换一次，九品以上官职的妻子不能再嫁。
English: As a result, a system was established in which the subordinates of prefectural and county officials were to be replaced once every three years, and the wives of officials above the ninth grade could not remarry.

古文：炫著论以为不可，弘竟从之。
现代文：刘炫写文章论述不能这样做，牛弘接受了他的意见。
English: Liu dazzled with book theory and thought that this was unacceptable, and Niu Hong actually followed his advice.

古文：诸郡置学官，及流外给廪，皆发自于炫。
现代文：各郡都设置学官。在外读书的人也按时发放补贴，这些都是从刘炫开始的。
English: All counties have set up school officials. People who study abroad are also paid subsidies on time, all of which began with Liu Xuan.

古文：弘尝从容问炫曰： 案《周礼》士多而府史少，今令史百倍于前，判官减则不济，其故何也？ 
现代文：牛弘曾对刘炫闲谈说： 按《周礼》记载士多而官吏少，现在府吏长史等官比以前的多百倍，处理政务的僚属们一旦减少就不够用，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Niu Hong once said to Liu Xuan casually: According to the "Weekly Ritual," there are more scholars and fewer officials. Now, there are a hundred times more government officials such as the chief historian than before. Once the number of colleagues and subordinates handling government affairs is reduced, it is not enough. What is the reason for this?

古文：炫对曰： 古人委任责成，岁终考其殿最，案不重校，文不繁悉，府史之任，掌要目而已。
现代文：刘炫回答说： 古人委任专人办事，年末以考核为准，案件不再重新核对，文辞也不过于繁杂详尽，长官的责任，只掌握重要的东西罢了。
English: Liu Xuan replied: The ancients appointed a special person to handle affairs, and the assessment at the end of the year was the standard. Cases were no longer re-checked, and the wording was not too complex and detailed. The responsibility of the chief was only to grasp the important things.

古文：古今不同，若此之相悬也，事繁政弊，职此之由。 
现代文：现在的僚属总要反复研究。假使某个案件还不够成熟，不够周密，将会不远万里去追查核实百年之久的旧案，所以有谚说： 老吏抱案死。 
English: If a case is not mature enough, not thorough enough, it will not be far away to track down and verify a hundred-year-old case, so there is a saying: Old officials die with a case.

古文：弘又问： 魏、齐之时，令史从容而已，今则不遑宁舍，其事何由？ 
现代文：古今不同，悬殊相差这样大，事情繁杂政治弊端重重，是此为缘故。 牛弘又问： 魏、齐的时候，府令长史办事从容，现在却没有一点闲暇，这又是什么原因呢？ 
English: This is the reason why there is such a large disparity between the past and the present, and why things are complicated and full of political drawbacks.Niu Hong also asked: When Wei and Qi, the prefectural governor Changshi worked with ease, but now there is no leisure at all, what is the reason for this?

古文：炫对曰： 齐氏立州不过数十，三府行台，递相统领，文书行下，不过十条。
现代文：刘炫回答说： 齐朝设立州府不过几十个，三府行台，顺次地统领着，下达文告之类的，也不过十余条。
English: Liu Xuan replied: There were only a few dozen prefectures established during the Qi Dynasty. The three prefectures ruled the country successively, and there were only a dozen or so announcements.

古文：今州三百，其繁一也。
现代文：现在的州府有几百个，这是第一繁杂。
English: There are hundreds of state capitals now, and this is the most complicated.

古文：往者州唯置纲纪，郡置守丞，县唯令而已。
现代文：过去州府只设置法纪纲要，郡府只设置守丞，县衙只有县令罢了。
English: In the past, the prefectural government only set up a legal discipline outline, the county government only set up a governor, and the county government only set up a county ordinance.

古文：其所具僚，则长官自辟，受诏赴任，每州不过数十。
现代文：至于其他的差役幕僚，就由各自长官聘任，接受诏令上任，而且每个州也不过几十个人。
English: As for the other staff officers, they are appointed by their respective governors, receive the imperial decree to take office, and there are only dozens of people in each state.

古文：今则不然，大小之官，悉由吏部，纤介之迹，皆属考功，其繁二也。
现代文：现在却不是这样了，大大小小的官员，全部由吏部委任，非常细小的事情，都属于考核的对象，这是第二繁杂。
English: Now, however, this is no longer the case. Officials, big and small, are all appointed by the Personnel Department, and very small things are the object of assessment. This is the second complexity.

古文：省官不如省事，省事不如清心。官事不省而望从容，其可得乎？ 
现代文：减少官员不如减少事情，减少事情不如心里清静，官员的事情不减少而希望从容办事，怎么可能呢？ 
English: How is it possible that reducing officials is not as good as reducing things, reducing things is not as good as being calm in the heart, and officials do not reduce things but hope to do things at their own pace?

古文：弘甚善其言而不能用。
现代文：牛弘很称赞他的主张，但是并没有采用。
English: Ushihiro very much appreciates Liu Xuan's remarks, but cannot accept them.

古文：纳言杨达举炫博学有文章，射策高第，除太学博士。
现代文：任纳言的杨达推荐刘炫，说他学识渊博又有文采，经考试名列前茅，被授予太学博士。
English: Nagan Yangda recommended Liu Xuan, who was well-educated, literate, and a high school student, to be appointed as a Doctor of Science.

古文：衔恨泉壤，实在兹乎？
现代文：一年多以后，因其官阶太低而离职，回到长平。
English: After more than a year, he left the post because his rank was too low and returned to Changping.

古文：其深恨一也。
现代文：奉皇帝诏令追赶刘炫去见皇上。
English: This is deeply resented.

古文：时在郡城，粮饷断绝，其门人多随盗贼，哀炫穷乏，诣郡城下索炫，郡官乃出炫与之。炫为贼所将，过城下堡。
现代文：因有人说他没有好的品行，炀帝也就罢了，刘炫就回到了河间老家。这个时候，群盗蜂起，粮食价格暴涨，经书中的大道理无法传播，教化传授无法进行。刘炫与妻子儿女相距百里，音信断绝，心中苦闷而又不得志。刘炫在郡城，粮食断绝。他的门人大多跟随盗贼，可怜刘炫穷苦匮乏，就到郡城下面向郡官索要刘炫，郡官方才放出了他。刘炫被盗贼裹胁，过城堡。
English: Because some people said that he didn't have a good moral character, Emperor Zhaotong was enough, and Liu Xuan returned to his hometown in Hema. At this time, the bandits rose up, grain prices skyrocketed, the great principles in the scriptures could not be spread, and the teaching and enlightenment could not be carried out. Liu Xuan was separated from his wife and children by a hundred miles, the news was cut off, and he was distressed and discouraged. Liu Xuan was in the county seat, the grain was cut off. Most of his disciples followed the thieves, pitying Liu Xuan's poverty and scarcity. They went to the county seat to ask the county

古文：未几，贼为官军所破，炫饥饿无所依，复投县城。
现代文：没有多久，盗贼被官军所攻破，刘炫饥饿又没有依靠，又投奔到县城。
English: It didn't take long for the thieves to be defeated by the government army. Hungry and without any support, Liu Xuan rushed back to the county seat.

古文：长吏意炫与贼相知，恐为后变，遂闭门不纳。是时夜冰寒，因此冻馁而死，时年六十八。
现代文：长吏认为刘炫曾与贼有关系，害怕发生变故，就不放他进城，这时候的夜非常寒冷，于是在寒冷和饥饿中死去，时年六十八岁。
English: The magistrate thought that Liu Xuan had had a relationship with a thief. Fearing that something would go wrong, he would not let him enter the city. It was a very cold night, so he died of cold and hunger, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：其后门人谥曰宣德先生。
现代文：其后他的门人给他加谥号叫 宣德先生 。
English: Later, his disciples gave him the nickname Mr. Xuande.

古文：炫性躁竞，颇俳谐，多自矜伐，好轻侮当世，为执政所丑，由是官途不遂。
现代文：刘炫性情急躁而又争强好胜，也很幽默诙谐，又爱自大自夸，喜欢轻慢当世之士，被执政者所瞧不起，因此仕途不通达。
English: Liu Xuan is quick-tempered and competitive. He is also humorous and witty. He is arrogant and boastful, and likes to belittle contemporary people. He is despised by those in power, so his career is unattainable.

古文：著《论语述议》十卷，《春秋攻昧》十卷，《五经正名》十二卷，《孝经述议》五卷，《春秋述议》四十卷，《尚书述议》二十卷，《毛诗述议》四十卷，《注诗序》一卷，《算术》一卷，并行于世。
现代文：他的著作有《论语述议》十卷，《春秋攻昧》十卷，《五经正名》十二卷，《孝经述议》五卷，《春秋述议》四十卷，《尚书述议》二十卷，《毛诗述议》四十卷，《注诗序》一卷，《算术》一卷，都流传于世。
English: His works, including Ten Volumes of "Discourse on Discourse," Ten Volumes of "The Spring and Autumn Offensive," Twelve Volumes of "The Five Classics," Five Volumes of "The Filial Piety Discourse," Forty Volumes of "The Spring and Autumn Discourse," Twenty Volumes of "The Shang Shu Discourse," Forty Volumes of "The Mao Poetry Discourse," One Volume of "The Annotation of Poetry," and One Volume of "The Arithmetic," have been passed down to the world.

