古文：古之善理者不师，善师者不陈，善陈者不战，善战者不败，善败者不亡。昔者，圣人之治理也，安其居，乐其业，至老不相攻伐，可谓善理者不师也。
现代文：古代善于治理国家懂得治国规律的君主是不依赖军队这种国家机器的，具有军事才能善于用兵的将帅也不以战争，摆开交战的阵势为最终目标，善于布阵的将帅根本不用向对方发起攻击就能获胜，不以兵戎相见为乐事，善于指挥战斗的人则能永远立于不败之地，善于接受失败的将帅则不会陷于败亡之地。英明的君主治理天下，主要是让老百姓生活安定，勤于工作，人们安居乐业，不发生任何不愉快的纠纷，这就是上面所说的 善理者不师也 的意思。
English: In ancient times, the monarchs who were good at governing the country and understood the rules of governing the country did not rely on the state apparatus such as the army. The generals who had military ability and were good at using soldiers did not take war and setting up a warring position as the ultimate goal. The generals who were good at setting up positions could win without attacking the other side at all. They did not take pleasure in meeting each other, and those who were good at commanding battles could always stand in an invincible position. The generals who were good at accepting defeat would not fall into a place of defeat. The wise monarchs governed the world, mainly to let the people live a stable life,

古文：若舜修典刑，咎繇作士师，人不干令，刑无可施，可谓善师者不陈。
现代文：上古时代，舜修刑典，还让大臣皋陶作了掌理刑法的官员，可是老百姓无人冒犯法令，因此也就不用对任何人施加刑法，这就是 善师者不陈 的意思。
English: In ancient times, the Penal Code was revised, and the minister, Juntao, was appointed as the official in charge of criminal law. However, no ordinary people violated the law, so there was no need to impose criminal law on anyone. This is what the good teacher meant.

古文：若禹伐有苗，舜舞干羽而苗民格，可谓善陈者不战。
现代文：大禹征伐的苗族，只派舜手持舞蹈用的干盾、羽扇就征服了有苗族人，这就是 善陈者不战 的意思。
English: The Miao people, who were conquered by Dayu, conquered the Miao people with nothing more than dry shields and feather fans, which were used for dancing. This is the meaning of "good old men don't fight."

古文：若齐桓南服强楚，北服山戎，可谓善战者不败。
现代文：齐桓公在南讨楚国，北伐山戎的过程中，英勇善战，所向无敌，这就是 善战者不败 的意思。
English: In the process of conquering the Chu Kingdom in the south and conquering the mountains in the north, Prince Qi Huan fought bravely and well, and was invincible. This is the meaning of "good fighters are undefeated."

古文：若楚昭遭祸，奔秦求救，卒能返国，可谓善败者不亡矣。
现代文：楚昭王时楚国受到吴国的侵犯，楚昭王立刻逃到秦国求救，后事又返回了秦国，这就是 善败者不亡 的意思。
English: When King Chu Zhao's Chu Kingdom was invaded by the State of Wu, King Chu Zhao immediately fled to the State of Qin for help, and later returned to the State of Qin. This is the meaning of "good losers never die."

