古文：凡与敌对垒，我欲袭敌，须丛草杂木，多张旗帜，以为人屯。使敌备东，而击其西，则必胜。
现代文：凡是与敌人对垒相抗，我方如果要袭击敌人，必须堆聚草木为障，多悬挂旗帜，伪装成到处都有驻兵的样子，从而造成敌人在东边防守，我就袭击敌人西方，这样就一定能够取得胜利。
English: If we want to attack the enemy, we must pile up vegetation as obstacles, hang more flags, and disguise ourselves as if there are soldiers stationed everywhere, thus causing the enemy to defend in the east, I will attack the enemy in the west, so I will definitely be able to win.

古文：或我欲退，伪为虚阵，设留而退，敌必不敢追我。
现代文：如果我方打算撤兵，也要设置假阵地，伪装成留有驻军的样子，然后再悄悄撤退，这样敌人必定不敢贸然追我。
English: If we plan to withdraw, we should also set up a fake position, disguise it as a garrison, and then quietly withdraw, so that the enemy will not dare to chase me.

古文：法曰： 众草多障者，疑也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 在丛草中多置障碍物，是为迷惑敌人而设下的疑阵。 
English: As stated in the Art of War, placing multiple obstacles in the undergrowth is a strategy to confuse the enemy.

古文：《北史》：周武帝东征，以宇文宪为前锋，守雀鼠谷。
现代文：据《北史》记载，周武帝宇文邕率军东进讨伐北齐，以齐王宇文宪所部为前锋，进驻于雀鼠谷。
English: According to the "Northern History," Emperor Wu of Zhou led his army eastward to fight against the Northern Qi, with the Qi Wang Yuwen Constitution Research Institute as the vanguard, stationed in the Sparrow Mouse Valley.

古文：帝亲临围晋州，齐主闻晋州被围，亦自来援。
现代文：周武帝亲临前线指挥部队围攻晋州，北齐后主高纬获悉晋州被围的消息后，也亲自率军前来救援。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu personally led the front-line command troops to besiege Jinzhou. After the Northern Qi Emperor Gao Liang learned the news that Jinzhou was besieged, he personally led the army to come to the rescue.

古文：时陈王纯屯千里径，大将军永昌公椿屯鸡栖原，大将军宇文盛守汾水关，并受宪节度。
现代文：当时，北周军的部署是：陈王宇文纯所部屯驻千里径，大将军永昌公宇文椿屯驻鸡牺原，大将军宇文盛所部屯驻汾水关，以上各路兵马都受齐王宇文宪统一指挥。
English: At that time, the deployment of the Northern Zhou Army was as follows: the headquarters of Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong was stationed in Qianli, the headquarters of General Yongchang Gong Yu Wenzhong was stationed in Qishu Yuan, and the headquarters of General Yu Wensheng was stationed in Shishuiguan. All of the above-mentioned troops and horses were under the unified command of Qi Wang Yu Wenzhen.

古文：密谓椿曰： 兵者，诡道。
现代文：宇文宪秘密对宇文椿说： 用兵打仗，是一种诡诈多变的行动。
English: Uwen Xian secretly said to Uwen Tsubaki: Fighting with soldiers is a treacherous and changeable action.

古文：汝今为营，不须张幕，可伐柏为庵，示有所处。
现代文：你现在设置营垒，不必张设军帐帷幕，可以砍伐柏树搭成草屋，伪装成有兵居住的样子。
English: Now that you've set up your camp, you don't have to put up tents and curtains. You can cut down cypress trees and build straw huts, disguised as living quarters for soldiers.

古文：兵去之后，贼至犹疑。 
现代文：等我军撤走后，敌人见到草屋仍然会疑惑不敢前进。 
English: After our army withdraws, the enemy will still hesitate to advance when they see the grass hut.

古文：时齐主分兵向千里径，又遣众出汾水关，自帅大军与椿对。
现代文：这时，齐后主高纬派遣兵力万人向千里径进攻，又派一部兵力进击汾水关，他自己则亲率主力进至鸡栖原与宇文椿部对抗。
English: At this time, Master Gaowei sent a force of ten thousand men to attack Qianli, and sent another force to attack Shishiguan, while he himself led the main force to confront Uwen Tsubaki.

古文：椿告齐兵急，宪自往救之。
现代文：宇文椿把齐军来攻的紧急消息报告给宇文宪，宇文宪亲自率援兵来解救宇文椿。
English: Uwenqin reported the urgent news of the Qi army's attack to Uwenqin, who personally led reinforcements to rescue Uwenqin.

古文：会军败，齐追逐，师夜引还。
现代文：但当他赶到鸡栖原时，恰值宇文椿奉周武帝命令率兵连夜退还。
English: However, when he arrived at Chikusihara, it was just in time for Uwen Tsubaki to return the soldiers overnight on the orders of Emperor Zhou.

古文：齐人果以柏庵为帐幕之备，遂不敢进。
现代文：追击中的齐军，当其看到以柏树枝搭设的草屋时，果然误认为是周军设伏备敌之所，于是望而生怯不敢继续前进了。
English: When the pursuing Qi army saw the grass hut built with cypress branches, they mistakenly thought it was a place for the Zhou army to ambush the enemy, so they were scared and did not dare to move forward.

古文：翌日始悟。
现代文：等到第二天，才发现上当了。
English: It wasn't until the next day that I realised I'd been duped.

