古文：黄帝问于少师曰：余闻人之生也，有刚有柔，有弱有强，有短有长，有阴有阳，愿闻其方。
现代文：黄帝问少师说：我听说人体的先天禀赋，性情有的刚、有的柔，体质有的强、有的弱，寿命有的长、有的短，其中都有阴阳的区别，我想听你谈谈其中的道理。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked the young master, "I have heard that there are innate endowments in the human body. Some people's dispositions are hard and some are soft. Some people's physiques are strong and some are weak. Some people have a long life and some have a short life. Among them, there is a difference between yin and yang. I would like to hear you talk about the reason for this."

古文：少师答曰：阴中有阴，阳中有阳，审知阴阳，刺之有方。
现代文：少师答道：就人体的阴阳而论，阴中还有阴，阳中还有阳。
English: The young master replied: As far as the yin and yang of the human body are concerned, there is still yin in the yin and yang in the yang.

古文：得病所始，刺之有理。谨度病端，与时相应。
现代文：只有全面了解阴阳，针刺才会有合适的方法；只有知道得病始于阴还是阳，针刺才能符合理法。
English: Only by comprehensively understanding yin and yang can acupuncture have a suitable method; only by knowing whether the disease begins with yin or yang can acupuncture conform to the laws of reason.

古文：内合于五脏六腑，外合于筋骨皮肤。是故内有阴阳，外亦有阴阳。
现代文：谨慎地推测病因，认真揣摩发病与四时气候的相应关系，在内要符合五脏六腑，在外要符合筋骨皮肤，所以体内脏腑有阴阳，体表筋骨皮肤亦有阴阳。
English: Carefully speculate on the cause of the disease, carefully calculate the corresponding relationship between the onset of the disease and the four o'clock climate, and match the internal organs with the external musculoskeletal skin. Therefore, the internal organs have yin and yang, and the body surface musculoskeletal skin also has yin and yang.

古文：在内者，五脏为阴，六腑为阳；在外者，筋骨为阴，皮肤为阳。
现代文：在体内五脏为阴，六腑为阳；在体表筋骨为阴，皮肤为阳。
English: In the body, the five viscera are yin and the six glands are yang; on the surface of the body, the muscles and bones are yin and the skin is yang.

古文：故曰： 病在阴之阴者，刺阴之荥俞，病在阳之阳者，刺阳之合。病在阳之阴者，刺阴之经。病在阴之阳者，刺络脉。 
现代文：因此说： 病在阴中之阴的五脏，可刺阴经的荥穴和输穴；病在阳中之阳的皮肤，可刺阳经的合穴；病在阳中之阴的筋骨，可刺阴经的经穴；病在阴中之阳的六腑，可刺络穴。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: the five viscera of the yin in the yang can pierce the acupoints of the yang in the yang; the skin of the yang in the yang can pierce the acupoints of the yang in the yang; the sinews and bones of the yang in the yang can pierce the acupoints of the yang in the yang; the six gills of the yang in the yang in the yang can pierce the acupoints.

古文：病有形而不痛者，阳之类也；无形而痛者，阴之类也。
现代文：因此说： 疾病的性质由于发病部位不同而异，病在体表，由于外感邪气引起的属阳，称为风；病在体内，由于病邪在内，使气血阻滞不畅的属阴，称为痹；如果表里阴阳俱病的，称为风痹 。
English: Therefore, it is said that: the nature of the disease varies according to the different parts of the onset, the disease on the surface of the body, due to the external evil caused by the yang, is called wind; the disease in the body, due to the disease, so that the qi and blood block is not smooth, is called palsy; if the surface is sick with yin and yang, it is called wind palsy.

古文：无形而痛者，其阳完而阴伤之也。急治其阴，无攻其阳。
现代文：再从疾病的症状来分析，如果有外在形体的症状而没有内脏疼痛症状的，多属于阳症；没有外在形体的症状而有内脏疼痛症状的，多属于阴症。
English: Then analyze from the symptoms of the disease. If there are symptoms of the external body but no symptoms of visceral pain, it is mostly a positive symptom; if there are no symptoms of the external body but symptoms of visceral pain, it is mostly a negative symptom.

古文：有形而不痛者，其阴完而阳伤之也。急治其阳，无攻其阴。
现代文：由于体表无病而内脏受伤，当速治其里，不要误治其表；由于内脏无病而体表受伤的，当速治其表，不要误治其里。
English: As there is no disease on the surface of the body, but the internal organs are injured, it is necessary to quickly treat the inside, do not mistreat the outside; as there is no disease on the internal organs, but the body is injured, it is necessary to quickly treat the outside, do not mistreat the inside.

古文：阴阳俱动，乍有形，乍无形，加以烦心，命曰阴胜其阳。此谓不表不里，其形不久。
现代文：如果表里同时发病，症状忽见于体表，忽见于内脏，再加上病者心情烦躁不安，是内脏病甚于体表病，这就是病邪不单纯在表，也不单纯在里，属于表里同病，故预后不良。
English: If the disease occurs simultaneously on the surface, the symptoms are suddenly seen on the surface of the body, suddenly seen on the internal organs, and the patient's mood is irritable and uneasy, it is an internal disease rather than a body surface disease. This means that the disease is not purely on the surface, nor purely in the body, but belongs to the same disease on the surface, so the prognosis is poor.

古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：余闻形气之病先后外内之应奈何？
现代文：黄帝问伯高说：我听说人的形体与脏器发病有先后，其内外相应的情况如何呢？
English: Huangdi asked Bo Gao, "I heard that the human body and organs are affected first. What is the corresponding situation inside and outside the body?"

古文：伯高答曰：风寒伤形，忧恐忿怒伤气。
现代文：伯高回答说：风寒之邪，多伤于人的外在形体；忧恐愤怒等情志变化，多伤及内在脏气。
English: He replied: The evil of wind and cold mostly hurt people's external form; emotional changes such as worry, fear and anger often hurt people's internal filth.

古文：气伤臓，乃病臓。寒伤形，乃应形。风伤筋脉，筋脉乃应。
现代文：凡七情之气伤脏，则病变部位应在内脏；外感寒邪伤形，则发生疾病应在形体；风邪直接伤及筋脉，则筋脉也就相应地发生病变。
English: Where the qi of the seven emotions is dirty, the lesion site should be in the viscera; if the external sensation is cold and deformed, the disease should occur in the body; if the cold directly injures the myometrium, the myometrium will also develop lesions accordingly.

古文：此形气外内之相应也。
现代文：由此可见，病邪与所伤部位的形气，是内外相应的。
English: From this, it can be seen that the disease and the shape of the injured area are internally and externally corresponding.

古文：黄帝曰：刺之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：如何进行针刺治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How can acupuncture be used to treat aphasia?

古文：伯高答曰：病九日者，三刺而已；病一月者，十刺而已，多少远近，以此衰之。
现代文：伯高回答说：大抵病为九天，针治三次就会好；病已一月，针治十次可以好。病程的远近或时间的多少，都可根据这三天针一次的方法来计算。
English: He replied, "In most cases, the illness lasts for nine days, and it will get better with three injections; if the illness has lasted for one month, it can get better with ten injections. The extent of the illness or the amount of time can be calculated according to the method of one injection every three days.

古文：久痹不去身者，视其血络，尽出其血。
现代文：至于邪气内阻，久而不愈之病，可仔细观察病人的血络，针刺血络出尽其恶血。
English: As for evil qi internal obstruction, a long-lasting disease, you can carefully observe the patient's bloodstream. Pinching the bloodstream will bring out all the bad blood.

古文：黄帝曰：外内之病，难易之治，奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：内外之病治疗上难易的情况是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What are the difficult and easy conditions for the treatment of internal and external diseases?

古文：伯高答曰：形先病而未入臓者，刺之半其日。
现代文：伯高回答说：外形先受病而尚未伤及内脏的，针治次数可以根据已病的日数减半计算。
English: Burgau replied: If the appearance is affected first and the internal organs have not yet been injured, the number of acupuncture treatments can be halved according to the number of days of illness.

古文：臓先病而形乃应者，刺之倍其日。
现代文：如果内脏先受病而后相应及于外形的，针刺次数则应当加倍计算。
English: If the viscera are affected first and then corresponding to the shape, the number of needles should be doubled.

古文：此月内难易之应也。
现代文：这是说疾病部位有内外之分，而治疗上也有难易的区别。
English: This means that there are internal and external parts of the disease site, and there are also difficult and easy differences in treatment.

古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：余闻形有缓急，气有盛衰，骨有大小，肉有坚脆，皮有厚薄，其以立寿夭，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问伯高说：我听说人的外形有缓急，正气有盛衰，骨骼有大小，肌肉有坚实与松软，皮肤有厚薄，从这些方面怎样来确定人是长寿还是夭折呢？
English: Huangdi asked Baogao, "I have heard that a person's appearance has its priorities, righteous spirit has its rise and fall, bones have size, muscles have firmness and softness, and skin has thickness and thinness. From these aspects, how can we determine whether a person has a long life or died young?

古文：伯高答曰：形与气相任则寿，不相任则夭。
现代文：伯高回答说：外形与正气相称的就长寿；不相称的就短命。
English: He replied, "Those whose appearance is in accordance with righteousness will live long; those whose appearance is not in accordance with righteousness will live short."

古文：皮与肉相果则寿，不相果则夭，血气经络，胜形则寿，不胜形则夭。
现代文：皮肤与肌肉相互包裹就长寿；不能相互包裹的就短命。内在血气经络的状态比外在形体的状态好就长寿；不如形体的就短命。
English: If the skin and muscles are wrapped around each other, life is long; if they cannot be wrapped around each other, life is short. If the condition of the internal blood and gas meridians is better than that of the external body, life is long; if it is worse than that of the body, life is short.

古文：黄帝曰：何谓形之缓急？
现代文：黄帝说：什么叫做形体的缓急呢？
English: Huangdi said: What is the priority of the body?

古文：伯高答曰：形充而皮肤缓者则寿，形充而皮肤急者则夭，形充而脉坚大者顺也，形充而脉小以弱者气衰，衰则危矣。
现代文：伯高回答说：外形壮实而皮肤柔软的就长寿；外形虽盛而皮肤紧绷、缺少弹性的就短命。外形壮实而脉象坚大有力的是气顺就长寿；外形虽盛而脉象弱小无力的为气衰，气衰是危险的。
English: He replied, "Strong body and soft skin means long life; strong body and tight skin and lack of elasticity means short life; strong body and strong blood means long life; strong body and weak blood means short life, and short life is dangerous."

古文：若形充而颧不起者骨小，骨小则夭矣。
现代文：如果外形虽盛而颧骨不突起，这样的人骨骼弱小，骨骼弱小的就短命。
English: If, in spite of his large stature, the shinbone does not protrude, such a person has weak bones, and weak bones are short-lived.

古文：形充而大年，肉䐃坚而有分者肉坚，肉坚则寿矣。形充而大，肉无分理不坚者肉脆，肉脆则夭矣。
现代文：如外形壮实，而臀部肌肉丰满结实并且纹理分明的人，说明他的肌肉坚实，肌肉坚实的人就长寿；外形虽盛而臀部肌肉纹理不分明、肌肉不坚实的人，叫肉脆，肉脆的人就短命。
English: If a person has a solid appearance, but the muscles of the buttocks are plump and firm and have a clear texture, it means that his muscles are solid, and a person with solid muscles will live a long life; if a person has a solid appearance, but the muscles of the buttocks are indistinct and the muscles are not solid, it means that the flesh is brittle, and a person with brittle flesh will live a short life.

古文：此天之生命，所以立形定气而视寿夭者，必明乎此。立形定气，而后以临病人，决生死。
现代文：这是人的先天禀赋不同造成的，如果要确定形体与正气的状态，从而推断其长寿或夭折，就一定要明白这种判断形气的方法，凭借它去观察病人、判断生死。
English: This is caused by the difference in people's innate endowment. If you want to determine the state of the body and the righteous spirit, and thus deduce its longevity or premature death, you must understand this method of judging the body and spirit, and use it to observe the patient and judge life and death.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻寿夭，无以度之。
现代文：黄帝说：我已听过关于寿夭的区别，但究竟怎样来推度、预测呢？
English: Huang Di said: I have heard about the difference in longevity, but how can we deduce and predict it?

古文：伯高答曰：墙基卑，高不及其地者，不满三十而死。
现代文：伯高回答说：如果耳边四周的骨骼平陷，高度还不及耳前的肌肉，不满三十岁就会死亡。
English: "If the bones around the ear are flattened and they are not as tall as the muscles in front of the ear, you will die before the age of 30," he said.

古文：其有因加疾者，不及二十而死也。
现代文：如果再加上疾病的影响，不到二十岁就会有死亡的可能。
English: If you add the effects of disease, you can expect to die before the age of twenty.

古文：黄帝曰：形气之相胜，以立寿夭奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：从形与气的相胜情况，如何来决定寿夭呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How can one determine one's longevity based on one's form and qi?"

古文：伯高答曰：平人而气胜形者寿；病而形肉脱，气胜形者死，形胜气者危矣。
现代文：伯高回答说：健康人正气胜过外形的就会长寿；病人肌肉已经极度消瘦，虽然正气胜过外形，也终将不免要死亡；如果外形胜过正气，则是很危险的。
English: He replied, "A healthy person whose virtue outweighs his appearance will live a long life; a sick person whose muscles have become extremely thin, although his virtue outweighs his appearance, will eventually die; if his appearance outweighs his virtue, it will be very dangerous."

古文：黄帝曰：余闻刺有三变，何谓三变？
现代文：黄帝说：我听说刺法有三变，什么叫三变呢？
English: Huang Di said: I heard that there are three changes in the way of stabbing, what are the three changes?

古文：伯高答曰：有刺营者，有刺卫者，有刺寒痹之留经者。
现代文：伯高回答说：有刺营分，刺卫分，刺寒痹羁留于经络三种。
English: He replied, "There are three kinds of meridians: the meridional meridian, the meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional meridional mer

古文：黄帝曰：刺三变者奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：这三种刺法是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What are these three methods of pricking?"

古文：伯高答曰：刺营者出血，刺卫者出气，刺寒痹者内热。
现代文：伯高回答说：刺营分时要疏通其血，刺卫分时要调和其气，刺寒痹时要使热气纳于内。
English: He replied, "When stabbing, the blood should be diluted, when stabbing, the spirit should be harmonized, and when stabbing, the heat should be absorbed.

古文：黄帝曰：营卫寒痹之为病奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：营分、卫分、寒痹的病状如何呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the condition of Yingwen, Weiwen, and Qianliao?"

古文：伯高答曰：营之生病也，寒热少气，血上下行。
现代文：伯高回答说：营分病多出现寒热往来，呼吸少气，血上下妄行。
English: He replied, "Camping sickness is mostly caused by cold and fever, shortness of breath, and blood rushing up and down.

古文：卫之生病也，气痛时来时去，怫忾贲响，风寒客于肠胃之中。
现代文：卫有病则痛无定处，也不定时，胸腹会感到满闷或者窜动作响，这是风寒侵袭于肠胃所致。
English: In Wei's disease, the pain is not localized, and it is not regular. The chest and abdomen will feel stuffy or throbbing, which is caused by the cold wind invading the stomach and intestines.

古文：寒痹之为病也，留而不去，时痛而皮不仁。
现代文：寒痹的病状，多由病邪久留而不解，因此时常感到筋骨作痛，甚或皮肤麻木不仁。
English: The pathological condition of cold paralysis is often caused by a long-term illness, so you often feel muscle and bone pain, or even numbness of the skin.

古文：黄帝曰：刺寒痹内热奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：刺寒痹怎样才能使躯体内部产生热感？
English: Huang Di said: How can the biting cold produce a feeling of heat inside the body?

古文：伯高答曰：刺布衣者，以火焠之。刺大人者，以药熨之。
现代文：伯高回答说：对一般体质比较好的劳动者病人，可用烧红的火针刺治，而对养尊处优体质较差的病人，则多用药熨。
English: He replied, "For the laborer patients with good general physique, red-hot needles can be used for treatment, while for the patients with poor physique, more drugs are used.

古文：黄帝曰：药熨奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：药熨的方法怎样？
English: Huang Di said: What is the method of medicine ironing?

古文：伯高答曰：用淳酒二十斤，蜀椒一斤，干姜一斤，桂心一斤，凡四种，皆㕮咀，渍酒中，用绵絮一斤，细白布四丈，并内酒中，置酒马矢熅中，封涂封，勿使泄。五日五夜，出绵絮曝干之，干复渍，以尽其汁。
现代文：伯高回答说：用醇酒二十升，蜀椒一升，干姜、桂心各一斤。共四种药，都捣碎，浸在酒中。再用丝绵一斤，细白布四丈，一齐纳入酒中。把酒器加上盖，并用泥封固，不使泄气，放在燃着的干马粪内煨，经过五天五夜，将细布与丝绵取出晒干，干后再浸入酒内，如此反复地将药酒浸干为度。
English: He replied, "Twenty liters of wine, one liter of cayenne pepper, one kilo each of dried ginger and cinnamon. A total of four kinds of medicine, all mashed and soaked in wine. Then use one kilo of silk and four lengths of fine white cloth, all of which are included in the wine. Put the lid on the wine container, seal it with mud, do not let it deflate, and place it in the burning dry horse manure. After five days and five nights, remove the fine cloth and silk to dry in the sun, and then soak it in the wine after drying. In this way, the medicinal wine is repeatedly soaked to the degree

古文：每渍必晬其日，乃出干。
现代文：每次浸的时间要一整天，然后拿出来再晒干。
English: It takes a whole day to soak each time, and then take it out and dry it.

古文：干，并用滓与绵絮，复布为复巾，长六七尺，为六七巾，则用之生桑炭炙巾，以熨寒痹所刺之处，令热入至于病所，寒复炙巾以熨之，三十遍而止。
现代文：等酒浸干后，将布做成夹袋，每个长六到七尺，共做成六七个，将药渣与丝绵装入袋内。用时取生桑炭火，将夹袋放在上面烘热，熨敷于寒痹所刺的地方，使得热气能深透于病处。夹袋冷了再将其烘热。如此熨敷三十次，每次都使患者出汗。
English: After the wine is soaked and dried, the cloth is made into a pouch, each of which is six to seven feet long, making a total of six or seven. The drug residue and silk are loaded into the bag. A mulberry charcoal fire is used to create a mulberry charcoal fire, and the pouch is placed on it to heat it. It is pressed on the place where the cold sore is, so that the hot air can penetrate deep into the diseased area. When the pouch is cold, it is heated again. This is pressed thirty times, causing the patient to sweat every time.

古文：汗出以巾拭身，亦三十遍而止。
现代文：出汗后用手巾揩身，也需要三十遍。
English: After sweating, use a hand towel to wipe your body. It also needs to be washed thirty times.

古文：起步内中，无见风。
现代文：并令患者在室内行走，但不能见风。
English: The patients were also asked to walk indoors, but they could not see the wind.

古文：每刺必熨，如此病已矣。此所谓内热也。
现代文：按照这样的方法，每次针治时，再加用熨法，病就会好了。这就是 内热 的方法。
English: According to this method, every time the needles are used, and then the iron method is used, the disease will be cured. This is the method of internal heat.

