古文：张应释道安周闵王懿谢敷僧法洪刘式之刘龄陈安居马处伯
现代文：张应释道安周闵王懿谢敷僧法洪刘式之刘龄陈安居马处伯
English: Zhang Ying explained the Dao'an, Zhou, Wang, Qian, Xie, Shiji monk, Fa Hong, Liu Shi, Liu Ling, Chen An, Juma, and Bo

古文：张应
现代文：张应
English: Zhang Ying

古文：晋张应，历阳人，本事俗神，鼓舞淫祀。
现代文：晋朝的张应，是历阳人。原来信奉俗神，大力祭祀。
English: Zhang Ying of the Jin Dynasty was from Liyang. Originally, he believed in secular gods and made great sacrifices to them.

古文：咸和八年，移居芜湖。
现代文：咸和八年，移居于芜湖。
English: In the eighth year of the Haman period, he moved to Wuhu.

古文：妻得病，应请祷备至，财产略尽。
现代文：他的妻子得病，张应请求祈祷备至，财产都用尽。
English: When his wife fell ill, Zhang was asked to pray to be prepared, and his resources were exhausted.

古文：妻法家弟子也，谓曰： 今病日困，求鬼无益，乞作佛事。 
现代文：妻子是法家的弟子，对他说： 今日病重，求鬼也没有什么益处，求作佛事。 
English: His wife, a disciple of the Dharma family, said to him, "Today I am seriously ill. It is of no use to pray to ghosts or to do Buddhist rituals.

古文：应许之，往精舍中，见竺昙铠，谓曰： 佛如愈病之药，见药不服，虽事无益。 
现代文：张应答应了他。到寺院里，看见竺昙铠，对他说： 佛就像治病的药一样，看见药不吃，既使做也没有好处。 
English: Zhang Ying agreed. When he went to the temple, he saw the baboon and said to him, "Buddha is like a medicine to cure diseases. If you don't take medicine when you see it, it's no good even if you do."

古文：应许当事佛，昙谓期明日当往。
现代文：张应答应事佛，昙铠相约明日前去。
English: Zhang Ying agreed to consult the Buddha, and they made an appointment to go tomorrow.

古文：应归，夜梦见人长丈余，从南来，入门曰： 此家何乃尔不净？ 
现代文：张应回去，夜里梦见一个人一丈多高，从南面来，进入门内说： 你家为什么这样不洁净？ 
English: Zhang Ying went back, and in the night dreamed of a man as tall as a man, coming from the south, entering the door and saying: Why is your home so unclean?

古文：见昙铠随后曰： 始欲发意，未可责之。 
现代文：只见昙铠跟着后面说： 才开始想要洁净，不可责怪他。 
English: The baboon followed and said, "He's just starting to want to be clean, don't blame him."

古文：应眠觉，便秉火作高座及鬼子母座。
现代文：张应睡醒了，便拿着火炬到高座以及鬼子母座。
English: Zhang Ying woke up and took the torch to the high seat and the demon mother seat.

古文：昙铠明往，应说其梦，遂受五戒，屏除神影，大设福供。
现代文：第二天昙铠来，张应给他说梦。于是受五戒，拆除神影，大设福供。
English: The next day, Zhang Ying told him about his dream. So he received the Five Precepts, dismantled the ghosts, and made a large offering of blessings.

古文：妻病有间，寻即痊愈。
现代文：他的妻子的病过了一段时间后，就全都好了。
English: After his wife had been ill for a while, everything was fine.

古文：咸康二年，应至马沟市盐，还泊芜湖，夜宿，梦见三人，以钩钓之，应曰： 我佛弟子。 
现代文：咸康二年，张应到马沟去买盐，回来停泊在芜湖。夜里梦见三个人，用钩钓他，张应说： 我是佛家弟子。 
English: In the second year of Xiankang, Zhang Ying went to Magou to buy salt, came back and anchored in Lugu Lake. At night, he dreamed of three people and fished him with a hook. Zhang Ying said: I am a Buddhist disciple.

古文：牵终不置，曰： 奴判走多时。 
现代文：那几个人拉着始终不放，并说： 已经判定并奔走了好多时候了。
English: Those few people never let go, and said: It has been decided and rushed for a long time.

古文：应恐，谓曰： 放我，当与君一升酒。 
现代文：张应害怕，对他们说： 放开我，当给你一升酒。 
English: Zhang Ying was afraid and said to them, "Let me go. I'll give you a liter of wine."

古文：钓人乃放之，谓应曰： 但畏后人复取汝耳。 
现代文：钓的人就放了他，并对张应说： 只是怕后人再来抓你罢了。 
English: The fisherman let him go and said to Zhang Yinglu, "I'm just afraid that future generations will catch you again."

古文：眠竟，腹泄痢，达家大困。应曰： 昙铠阔绝已久。 
现代文：张应睡醒了腹痛泄痢，到家后更重，张应说： 昙铠已阔别很久了。 
English: Zhang Ying woke up with abdominal pain and diarrhea, and it was even worse when she got home. Zhang Ying said: "It's been a long time since I've been here.

古文：病甚，遣请之，适值不在，应寻气绝，数日而苏。
现代文：病重，就派人去请他，正赶上他不在，张应不久气绝，几日后复苏。
English: He was seriously ill, so they sent someone to fetch him. When they arrived, he was not there. Zhang Ying soon passed away, but was revived a few days later.

古文：说有数人，以钩钓之将北去，下一坂岸，盛有镬汤刀剑楚毒之具，应悟是地狱，欲呼师名，忘昙铠字，但唤 和尚救我 ，亦时唤佛。
现代文：说有几个人，用钩钓他向北去，走下一个山坡，设有镬汤刀剑楚毒的刑具。张应明白是地狱，就想喊师傅的名字、忘记了昙铠名，只是喊 和尚救我 ，也时常喊佛。
English: He said that there were several people who used hooks to lure him to the north, and he walked down a hillside equipped with poisoned torture tools. Zhang Ying understood that it was hell, so he wanted to call the master's name, but he forgot the nickname and just called "Monk, save me," and often called "Buddha."

古文：有顷，一人从西方，长丈余，执金杵欲撞，钓人皆怖散。长人引应去，谓曰： 汝命尽，不复久生，可暂还家，颂呗三偈，并取和尚名字，三日当复命过，即生天矣。 
现代文：过了一会，一个人从西方来，一丈多高，拿着金杵想要撞，钓人都害怕走散，长人领着张应离去，对他说： 你的寿命已尽了，不能再活多久了，你可暂且回家，颂唱三个唱词，并取个和尚的名字，三天后命就当尽了，就升天了。 
English: After a while, a man came from the west. He was very tall. He was holding a golden gong and wanted to strike. The fishermen were afraid to stray. The elders led Zhang Ying away and said to him, "Your life is over. You can't live much longer. You can go home for the time being, sing three hymns, and take the name of a monk. After three days, your life will be over, and you will ascend to heaven."

古文：应即复苏，三日之中，持斋颂呗，遣人将疏取昙铠名。
现代文：张应就复苏了，三天之中，他持斋颂唱，派人焚化祝告文并取用昙铠。
English: Zhang Ying recovered, and over the course of three days, he fasted and chanted, and sent someone to burn the congratulatory message and collect the money.

古文：至日食毕，礼佛赞呗，与家人辞别，澡沐冠带，如睡而亡。
现代文：到了这一天吃完饭，对佛礼拜赞唱，又和家人辞别，沐浴更衣，像睡觉一样地死了。
English: On this day, after eating, chanting Buddha's praises, bidding farewell to his family, bathing and changing clothes, he died as if he were sleeping.

古文：释道安
现代文：释道安
English: Shaku Doan

古文：东晋恒山沙门释道安者，经石赵之乱，避地于襄阳。
现代文：东晋恒山沙门的和尚道安，经过了石赵的战乱，躲避于襄阳。
English: The monk Dao An of East Jin Hengshan Shamen passed through the war in Shizhao and took refuge in Xiangyang.

古文：註般若道行密迹诸经析。疑甄解二十余卷，恐不合理，乃誓曰： 若所说不违理者，当见瑞相。 
现代文：注析般若道行密迹各经，解释疑问二十多卷，害怕不合情理，于是发誓说： 如果说的不违背情理，应当看到佛像。 
English: Commentary on the Prajnaparamita Sutra, explanation of more than twenty volumes of doubts, fear of unreasonableness, so he swore: If it does not go against reason, you should see the Buddha statue.

古文：乃梦见一道人，头白眉长，语安曰： 君所注经，殊合道理，我不得入泥洹，住在西域，当相助弘道，可时设食也。 
现代文：于是就梦见一个道人，白头发长眉毛，对道安说： 你所注释的经书，非常合于道理。我避免了进入迷途，我住在西域，就当资助弘道，可时常设斋食。 
English: Then I dreamt of a Taoist, with white hair and long eyebrows, who said to Tao An, "The scriptures you have commented on are very reasonable. I have avoided going astray. I live in the western region, so I should support the propagation of Taoism, but I can always fast."

古文：后远公云： 昔和尚所梦，乃是宾头卢也。 
现代文：后远公说： 和尚梦见的就是宾头卢。 
English: Houyongong said, "What the monk saw in his dream was Bin Tou Lu."

古文：于是立座享之，遂成永则。
现代文：于是就立了牌座供奉他，就成了永远的规则。
English: So they set up a table to honor him, and it became a permanent rule.

古文：周闵
现代文：周闵
English: Zhou Ying

古文：周闵，汝南人，晋护军，世奉佛法。
现代文：周闵是汝南人，晋朝时任护军，一生奉佛法。
English: Zhou Yi was from the south of the country. He served as a military escort during the Jin Dynasty and practiced Buddhism throughout his life.

古文：苏峻之乱，邑人皆东西播迁，闵家有大品一部，以半幅八丈素，反复书之，又有他经数部，大品亦杂在其中。
现代文：苏峻的战乱，城邑人都东西迁移。闵家有一部大品般若经，用半幅八丈白布，反复写着，又有其他经书几部，大品也夹在当中。
English: During the Sushun War, people in the city moved from east to west. The family had a large copy of the Prajnaparamita Sutra, which they repeatedly wrote on a half-width, eight-foot-tall white cloth. They also had several other scriptures, with the large copy sandwiched in between.

古文：既当避难单行，不能得尽持去，尤惜大品，不知在何部中，仓卒而去，徘徊叹惋。
现代文：马上就要避难而独行，不能够完全拿走它们。尤其惋惜的是大品，不知道在哪部经中，匆忙而去，来回行走叹息。
English: I immediately had to take refuge and walk alone, unable to completely take them away. I especially regretted the large ones, I don't know in which sutra, hurried away, walking back and forth and sighing.

古文：不觉大品忽自出外，闵惊喜持去，周氏遂世宝之。至今尚在。
现代文：不知不觉大品忽然自己出来。周闵惊喜地拿着走了。周家也世代把它当作宝物，至今还在。
English: Unconsciously, the large item suddenly came out by itself. Zhou Yi took it away in surprise. The Zhou family has also treasured it for generations, and it is still there.

古文：一说云，周嵩妇胡母氏有素书大品，其素广五寸，而大品一部尽在焉。
现代文：另一个说法是周嵩妇胡母氏有白布写着大品，那个白布宽五寸，而一部大品都写在上面。
English: Another theory is that Zhou Song's wife, Hu Mu, had a white cloth with a large article written on it. The white cloth was five inches wide, and a large article was written on it.

古文：又尝遇火，不暇取经，及屋尽火灭，得之于灰烬之下，俨然如故。
现代文：又同时兼有舍利，银瓶放在那里，并且封闭在深箱子中。永嘉之乱时，胡母氏当时避兵乱南逃，经书及舍利自然跳出箱子外面，于是找到了并揣着它，及渡过江东。
English: At the same time, there was also a reliquary. The silver jar was placed there and sealed in a deep box. During the Yongjia Rebellion, when the Humo clan was fleeing south to avoid the soldiers, the scriptures and the reliquary naturally jumped out of the box, so they found and carried it, and crossed the East River.

古文：会稽王道子就嵩曾孙云求以供养，后常暂在新渚寺。
现代文：又曾经遇到火灾，没来得及取经书。等屋里的火全灭了，在灰烬下找到了经书，还和原来的一样。
English: There was another time when there was a fire, and they didn't have time to retrieve the scriptures. When the fire in the house was completely extinguished, they found the scriptures under the ashes, and they were still the same as before.

古文：刘敬叔云： 曾亲见此经，字如麻子，点画分明，新渚寺今天安是也，此经盖得道僧慧则所写也。 
现代文：会稽的王道子靠周嵩的曾孙云求来供奉，以后常常暂住在新渚寺，刘敬叔说： 曾亲眼看见这经书，字像麻子一样。点画分明。新渚寺现在的天安就是，这部经书大概是得道僧慧则所写的。 
English: The auditor Wang Daozi relied on Zhou Song's great-grandson Yun Cui to offer worship, and later often temporarily lived in Xinzhu Temple. Liu Jing said: I once saw this scripture with my own eyes, the words are like pointers. The dots are clear. Xinzhu Temple is now Tian'an, and this scripture was probably written by the Taoist monk Huizi.

古文：或云： 尝在简靖，道尼转诵。 
现代文：有的说： 曾经在简靖那，道尼转诵。 
English: Some said, "Downey used to recite it in Jianjing."

古文：王懿
现代文：王懿
English: Wang Yao

古文：晋王懿字仲德，太原人，为车骑将军，世信佛法。
现代文：晋朝王懿字仲德，是太原人，做车骑将军，一生信奉佛法。
English: The king of the Jin Dynasty, Zhaozhong De, was from Taiyuan. He was a chariot and cavalry general and believed in Buddhism all his life.

古文：父黄，为中山太守，为丁岑所害。
现代文：父亲，做中山太守，被丁岑所陷害。
English: His father, the governor of Zhongshan, was framed by Ding Xi.

古文：懿与兄侍母南归，登涉饥疲，绝粮无计，唯归心三宝。
现代文：王懿和他的哥哥侍奉母亲南归，登岸跋涉后饥饿疲劳，没有粮食毫无办法。
English: Wang Yao and his brother were serving their mother, a returnee from the south. After trekking ashore, they were exhausted from hunger. Without food, there was nothing they could do.

古文：忽见一童子牵青牛，见懿等各与一饭，因忽不见。
现代文：他只是诚心依靠佛、法、僧。忽然看见一个童子牵着一头青牛，看见王懿等各给他们饭吃，又忽然不见了。
English: He just sincerely relied on Buddha, Dharma, and monks. Suddenly, he saw a boy leading a young cow, saw Wang Yao and others giving them food to eat, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：时积雨大水，懿前望浩然，莫知揭厉。
现代文：当时暴雨大水，王懿前望茫然，不知如何对待这场灾患。
English: At that time, there was heavy rain and high water, and Wang Xuan looked ahead in a daze, not knowing how to deal with the disaster.

古文：俄有一白狼驯绕其前，过水复返，似欲引导，如此者三。
现代文：不一会就有一只白狼驯顺地围绕在他面前，过水后又返回来，好像要做引导似的。
English: Soon a white wolf meekly circled in front of him, crossing the water and returning as if to guide him.

古文：于是随狼行，水才至膝，得路归朝。
现代文：像这样三遍，于是就跟着狼走，水才到膝盖，得路回朝。
English: He did this three times, and then he followed the wolf until the water was up to his knees and he had to find his way back to the morning.

古文：后自五兵尚书为徐州刺史，尝欲设斋，宿昔洒扫，盛列香花经像。
现代文：以后从五兵尚书转为徐州刺史，曾经想要设斋，当夜便清扫，摆上香花经像。
English: Later, it was changed from Wufeng Shangshu to Xuzhou Zhishi. Once, when they wanted to set up a temple, they cleaned it that night and put up the incense sutra statue.

古文：忽闻法堂有经呗声，清婉流畅，懿遽往视，见五沙门在佛座前，神仪伟异，懿心甚钦敬。
现代文：忽然听到法堂上有诵经的声音，清婉流畅。王懿急忙去看，看见五个僧人在佛座前，神态仪表伟异。
English: Suddenly, Wang Yao heard the sound of chanting in the Dharma hall. It was clear and smooth. Wang Yao hurried to look and saw five monks in front of the Buddha's throne. Their appearance was very different.

古文：沙门顾盼依然，瞻礼未竟，皆竦身飞空而去，亲宾见者，倍增信悟。
现代文：王懿心里非常钦敬，僧人顾盼依旧，看到施礼未完，都竦身而飞上天去，亲戚、宾客看见的人，更加相信醒悟了。
English: Wang Yao was very respectful in his heart, and the monks still looked forward to it. When they saw that the almsgiving was not finished, they all bowed down and flew up to the sky. Relatives and guests saw people who were more convinced that they had woken up.

古文：谢敷
现代文：谢敷
English: Thank you.

古文：谢敷字庆绪，会稽山阴人，镇军将军輶之兄子也。
现代文：谢敷字庆绪，是会稽山阴人，是镇军将军輶的哥哥的儿子。
English: Xie Shiji Zi Qingxu is the son of the brother of the town's general Zou, and is a member of the town's audit committee.

古文：少有高操，隐于东山，笃信大法，精勤不倦。
现代文：年少有高洁的情操，隐居于东山，非常忠信大法，精勤不倦。
English: At a young age, he had a noble and pure spirit, lived in seclusion in Dongshan, was very loyal to Dafa, and was diligent and tireless.

古文：手写首楞严经，尝置都下白马寺中，寺为邻火所延，什物余经，并成煨烬，而此经止烧纸头界画外而已，文字悉存，无所毁失。
现代文：亲手写首楞严经，曾经放在白马寺中，寺被邻居的火所延烧，东西和其他的经书，都烧为灰烬，而只有这部经书只烧了纸头界画的外面而已，文字全都存在，没有什么毁坏。
English: I hand-wrote the first chapter of the Rigveda, which was once placed in the White Horse Temple. The temple was burned by a neighbor's fire. Everything and other scriptures were burned to ashes, but only this scripture burned only the outside of the paper header. The text is all there, nothing is destroyed.

古文：敷死时，友人疑其得道，及闻此经，弥加惊异。
现代文：谢敷死的时候，他的朋友疑心他已得道，等到听说这部经书的来历，就更加惊异了。
English: When Xie Shiji died, his friends suspected that he had been enlightened, and when they heard the origin of this scripture, they were even more surprised.

古文：僧法洪
现代文：僧法洪
English: The monk Fohong

古文：晋世沙门僧法洪在瓦官寺。
现代文：晋朝僧人法洪住在瓦官寺，义熙十二年，当时官府禁止镕铸，法洪本想铸造六丈高的金像。
English: Fa Hong, a monk of the Jin Dynasty, lived in the Wakan Temple. In the 12th year of Yixi, when the government banned the casting of ingots, Fa Hong originally wanted to cast a six-meter-high gold statue.

古文：义熙二十年，时官禁镕铸，洪元发心铸丈六金像，私铸竟，犹在模，所司知觉，收洪楚械。洪念观音，每日百遍，忽梦所铸金像往狱，手摩头曰： 无虑。 
现代文：私下里铸成了，还在模子中，所主管的人发觉，就抓法洪带上刑械。法洪念观音经。每天念一百遍，忽然梦见所铸的金像到了狱中，手摩着他的头说： 不要忧虑。 
English: When the person in charge found out that the statue had been cast in secret and was still in the mold, he arrested Fahong and brought in the torture equipment. Fahong recited the Guanyin Sutra. He recited it a hundred times a day. Suddenly, he dreamed that the gold statue he had cast was in prison. He rubbed his head and said, "Don't worry."

古文：其像胸前方一尺许，铜色燋沸。
现代文：他的金像的胸前一尺左右，铜色烧焦而滚沸。
English: A foot or so in front of the chest of his golden statue, the copper color is scorched and boiling.

古文：当洪禁日，国家牛马不肯入栏，时以为怪。
现代文：当法洪关押的日子里，国家的牛马不肯入栏。当时都认为很奇怪。
English: In the days when Fahong was imprisoned, the country's cattle and horses refused to enter the corral, which was considered very strange at the time.

古文：旬日有赦，洪得免，像即破模而自现也。
现代文：十天后有赦命，法洪才获免，铜像也就破模而自己出来了。
English: After ten days, he was pardoned and released, and the bronze statue broke the mold and came out on its own.

古文：刘式之
现代文：刘式之
English: Liu Shizhi

古文：彭城刘式之，常供养一金像，无故失去，不知所在。
现代文：彭城的刘式之，常常供养一金像，无缘无故失去了金像，不知在哪里。
English: Liu Shih-chih of Pengcheng, who often provided a gold statue, lost the gold statue for no reason and does not know where it is.

古文：式之夙夜思愆自责，至念冥通，经百日后，其像忽然自现本座，神光照室。
现代文：式之整夜思罪而自责，诚挚的念头通神，过了一百天后，那个金像忽然自己出现在座上，神光照满全屋。
English: After a hundred days, the golden statue suddenly appeared on the throne, and the divine light filled the whole house.

古文：全家惊喜，倍加倾心。
现代文：全家人都非常惊喜，更加倍精心供奉。
English: The whole family was very surprised and made a more elaborate offering.

古文：刘龄
现代文：刘龄
English: Liu Ling

古文：宋刘龄，不知何许人，居晋陵东路城村，颇奉佛法，于宅中立精舍，时设斋。
现代文：宋朝刘龄，不知哪里的人，居在晋陵东路城村，非常信奉佛法。在宅院里立了一个做佛事的房屋，当时设了斋戒。
English: Song Dynasty Liu Ling, who lived in Jinling East Road Urban Village, was a devout believer in Buddhism. He built a house for Buddhist rituals in his courtyard, and instituted a fast at that time.

古文：元嘉九年三月二十七日，父暴亡，时巫祝并云： 家当更有三人丧亡。 
现代文：元嘉九年三月二十七日。父亲暴死，当时的巫祝都说： 家里当还有三个人将死亡。 
English: On March 27th, the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, when his father died suddenly, the sorcerers and fortune-tellers at that time all said, "There are still three people in our family who will die."

古文：邻家有事道祭酒魏巨，常为章符诳诱村里，语龄曰： 君家丧祸未已，由奉不明神也。若改事大道，必蒙福佑。不改意者，将灭其门。 
现代文：邻居家有一个信道教的祭酒叫魏巨的。常常用章符在村里行骗。他告诉刘龄说： 你家的丧祸还没完，是因信奉了不明之神，如果改成事奉大道，一定能蒙福庇佑，不改的话，将灭他的满门。 
English: A neighbor's family had a Taoist sacrificial wine named Wei Jiu. He often cheated in the village with symbols. He told Liu Ling: The tragedy of your family is not over, it is because you believe in an unknown god. If you change to serve the road, you will certainly be blessed and protected. If you do not change, his door will be destroyed.

古文：龄遂敬延祭酒，罢不奉法。
现代文：于是刘龄就敬请祭酒，停止不奉佛法。
English: So Liu Ling respectfully asked for the sacrificial wine and stopped not following the Dharma.

古文：巨云： 宜焚经像，灾乃当除耳。 
现代文：魏巨说： 应当焚烧经像，灾祸才当消除了。
English: Wei Jiu said: It is necessary to burn the sutra, and only then can the evil be eliminated.

古文：遂爇精舍，炎炽移日，唯屋而已，经像幡座，俨然如故。
现代文：于是就点燃了佛事舍，火焰旺盛烧了一天，只是烧毁了屋子而已，经像和幡座，依然如故。
English: As a result, the Buddhist house was set on fire, and the flames burned for a whole day. The house was only destroyed, but the sutras and the altar remain as they were.

古文：像于中夜，大放赤光，其时诸祭酒有二十许人，有惧灵验密委去者。
现代文：佛像在夜里，大放红光，当时各位祭酒有二十多，有的害怕他的灵验而偷偷地溜走了的。
English: The Buddha statue glowed red in the night. At that time, there were more than twenty sacrificial wine, and some were afraid of his effectiveness and secretly slipped away.

古文：巨等师徒意犹不止，被发禹步，执持刀索，云： 斥佛还故国，不得留中夏为民害也。 
现代文：魏巨等师徒执意不停，披发移步，执拿刀绳说： 你这佛还回你原来的地方去！不能留在中夏成为祸害！ 
English: Wei Jiu and the other teachers and disciples kept persevering, pulling their hair and moving, holding the knife and rope and saying: You, this Buddha, go back to your original place! You can't stay in Zhongxia and become a scourge!

古文：龄于其处，如有人殴打，顿仆于地，家人扶起，方余气息，遂痿躄不能行。
现代文：刘龄在那个地方，就像有人殴打他，立刻趴在地上，家人扶他，才出了一口气，于是就萎缩不能行走。
English: Liu Ling in that place, as if someone had beaten him, immediately lay down on the ground, his family members helped him, and only then did he get a breath, so he shrank and could not walk.

古文：魏巨体内发疽，日出血三升，不一月苦死。
现代文：魏巨也体内生了毒疮，每天出三升的血，不到一个月便痛死。
English: Wei Jiu also developed poisonous sores in his body, and he bled three liters of blood every day. He died of pain in less than a month.

古文：自外同伴，并患癞疾，邻人东安太守水立和，传于东阳，时多见者。
现代文：以外的同伴，也都患了癞病。邻人东安太守水立和，在东阳传播，当时有很多人亲眼看到。
English: Other companions also suffered from rickets. Neighbour Dong'an Taishou Shui Lihe spread the disease in Dongyang, and many people saw it with their own eyes.

古文：陈安居
现代文：陈安居
English: Chen Anju

古文：宋陈安居，襄阳县人也。
现代文：宋朝陈安居，是襄阳县人，伯父年少事奉巫俗。
English: Chen Anju lived during the Song Dynasty. He was from Xiangyang County, and his uncle served as a wizard at a young age.

古文：伯父少事巫俗，鼓舞祭祀，神像盈宅。
现代文：鼓舞祭祀，神像满屋。
English: Inspire a ritual, and a house full of statues will appear.

古文：父独敬信释法，恒自斋戒。
现代文：他的父亲独敬信释法。常常自己斋戒。
English: His father was a devout Muslim and often fasted himself.

古文：世父无子，以安居绍焉。
现代文：伯父没有儿子，把安居做为继承人。
English: My uncle had no son, so he named Anju as his heir.

古文：安居虽即伯舍，而理行精至，废绝淫祀。
现代文：安居虽然住在伯父家，而言行谨慎，废绝一切非礼祭祀。
English: Although he lived safely at his uncle's house, he exercised caution and abolished all non-ritual sacrifices.

古文：忽得病发狂，则为謌神之曲，迷闷邪僻，如此弥岁，而执心愈固，常誓曰： 若我所执之志，偶当亏夺者，必先自脔截四体，乃就其事。 
现代文：忽然得病发狂。就唱神之曲子，迷闷而不正常，像这样整一年，而思想更加固执，常常发誓说： 如果我坚持的志向被夺去时，我一定先截断四肢，才能办到。 
English: All of a sudden, I fell ill and went mad. I sang God's music, delirious and abnormal, like this for a whole year, but my thoughts were more stubborn, and I often swore: If my persistent ambition is taken away, I must first amputate my limbs before I can do it.

古文：家人并见之，安居不听。经三年，病发死，但心下微暖，家不敢殓。
现代文：家人都劝他。安居不听，过了三年，发病而死，只是心口处还暖热，家人不敢入殓他。
English: His family tried to persuade him, but he did not listen. After three years, he died of an illness, but his heart was still warm, and his family did not dare to bury him.

古文：至七日夜，守者觉尸足间，如有风来，飘动衣衾，苏而有声。家人初惧尸蹶，皆走避之。既而稍能转动，仍求水浆。
现代文：到了第七天的夜里，守候的人发觉尸体的脚间，像有风吹来，飘动衣被，便苏醒而有声，家人起初害怕尸体起尸，都逃跑躲避，过了一会他稍能转动，并要水浆。
English: On the night of the seventh day, the watchman found the corpse's feet, like the wind blowing, the quilt fluttering, he woke up and there was a sound. At first, the family members were afraid of the corpse, they all ran away. After a while, he could move a little and asked for water.

古文：家人喜，问从何来，安居具说所经。
现代文：家人高兴，问他从什么地方来。安居把经过都跟他们说了。
English: The family was delighted and asked him where he had come from. Anju told them everything that had happened.

古文：初见有人若使者，侍从数十人，呼去。
现代文：起初看见有人像使者，侍从几十人，喊他去。
English: At first he saw someone who looked like an emissary, accompanied by dozens of people, calling him to go.

古文：从者欲缚之，使者曰： 此人有福，未可缚也。 
现代文：跟从的人想绑他，使者说： 这个人有福，不可以绑他。 
English: His followers wanted to tie him up, but the angel said, "This man is a blessed man; do not tie him up."

古文：行可百余里，至一城府，屋宇甚整，使者将至府所，如局司之处。
现代文：走了约一百多里路，到了一个城府，房屋很整齐。使者将要到府所，像局司那个地方。
English: After traveling more than a hundred miles, they arrived at a city government, where the buildings were very neat. The emissaries were going to the government, just like the bureau chief.

古文：俄有人授纸笔，令安居曰： 可疏二十四通死名。 
现代文：不一会有人拿来纸笔，对安居说： 可以写出二十四死名。
English: After a while, someone brought a pen and paper and said to Anju, "You can write down the names of twenty-four dead people."

古文：安居如言疏名成数通。
现代文：安居就像他说的供写出通死名来。
English: Anju is, as he says, writing his own obituary.

古文：有一人从内出，扬声大呼曰： 安居可入。
现代文：有一个人从里面出来。高声呼喊到： 安居可以进来！ 
English: A man came out from inside, shouting at the top of his voice: Anju can come in!

古文：既入，称有教付刺奸。
现代文：安居就进去，称有令铲除奸恶。
English: Anju went in and said that he had been ordered to eradicate the evil.

古文：狱吏两人，一云： 与大械。 一云： 此人颇有福，只可三尺械。 
现代文：狱吏两人，一个说： 给他一个大的刑械， 一个说： 这个人很有福，只可给他三尺的刑械。 
English: The two jailers, one said, "Give him a large torture instrument," and the other said, "This man is very lucky, he can only give him a three-foot torture instrument."

古文：议论不决，乃共视文书，久之，遂与三尺械。
现代文：议论不决，就共同看文书，很久才给他三尺刑械。
English: When they couldn't reach a decision, they looked at the documents together, and it took a long time before they gave him the three-foot torture device.

古文：少顷，见一贵人，翼从数十，形貌都雅，谓安居曰： 汝那得来？ 
现代文：不一会，又见一贵人，跟从的人几十个，形貌都很文雅，对安居说： 你从哪里来。 
English: After a while, I saw a nobleman again, followed by dozens of people, all of whom were elegant in appearance. He said to Anju, "Where did you come from?"

古文：安居具陈所由。
现代文：安居把缘由告诉了他们。
English: Anju told them the reason.

古文：贵人曰： 汝伯有罪，但宜录治，以先殖小福，故今得击散乃敢告诉。
现代文：贵人说： 你的伯父有罪，应当治罪，因为他有点小福分，今天打散才敢告诉你。
English: The nobleman said, "Your uncle is guilty, and ought to be punished, for he is a little blessed, and only dared to tell you about it today.

古文：吾与汝父幼少有旧，见汝依然，可随我共游观也。 
现代文：我和你的父亲幼少有交情，看见你也是这样，可跟我共同参观。
English: I was friends with your father when I was young, and I see you are the same way, so you can visit with me.

古文：狱吏不肯释械，曰： 府君无教，不敢专辄。 
现代文：狱吏不肯去掉刑械，说： 府君不让，不敢专行 。
English: The warden refused to remove the torture equipment, saying: "The governor won't allow it, he doesn't dare to do it himself."

古文：贵人曰： 但付我，不使走逸也。 
现代文：贵人说： 只交给我，不会给他逃走。 
English: The nobleman said, "Just give him to me, I won't let him run away."

古文：乃释之。贵人将安居遍至诸地狱，备见若楚，略与经文相符。
现代文：于是就卸下刑械，贵人带安居走遍了所有的地狱，全都看见了他们的苦楚，大致和经文说的相符。
English: So they unloaded the torture equipment, and the noblemen walked through all the hells with their families, and everyone saw their suffering, which was roughly in line with what the scriptures said.

古文：游历未竟，有传教来云： 府君唤安居。 
现代文：游览未完，传来命令说： 府君叫安居。 
English: Before the tour was over, an order came saying: "Fujun, stay safe."

古文：安居惶惧，求救于贵人。
现代文：安居恐慌害怕，向贵人求救。
English: Anju panics and is afraid, and begs the noblewoman for help.

古文：贵人曰： 汝自无罪，但以实对，必无忧也。 
现代文：贵人说： 你本来没罪，只要以实相对，一定没有忧虑。 
English: The nobleman said, "You are not guilty. As long as you tell the truth, there will be no worries.

古文：安居至门，见有桎梏者数百，一时俱进，安居在第三。至阶下，一人冠冕立于囚前，读罪簿。
现代文：安居进了门，看见戴刑具者几百人，一时都进来。安居在第三位，到了阶下，一个人带着冠冕站在囚徒前，读有罪的簿子。
English: Anju entered the door and saw hundreds of people wearing instruments of torture, all coming in at once. Anju was in the third place, and when he reached the bottom, a man with a crown stood in front of the prisoners and read the guilty book.

古文：其第一措行，昔者娶妻之始，夫妇为誓，有子无子，终不相弃。而其人本是祭酒，尝亦奉道供化，徒众中得一女弟子，因而奸之，遂弃本妻，妻尝诉冤。
现代文：第一个人的罪错，过去刚娶妻的时候，夫妇发誓，有子无子，始终不相背弃，而他本是祭酒，也曾奉道供化，在众徒中得到了一个女弟子，因而强奸了她，就抛弃了原妻，他的妻子曾经诉冤。
English: The first man's sin, in the past, when he first married his wife, the couple swore that they had no children and would never betray each other, and he had been a sacrificial wine, and he had also preached, and he had a female disciple among the disciples, so he raped her, and he abandoned his former wife, and his wife had complained.

古文：府君曰： 汝夫妇违誓，大义不终，罪一也；师资义著在三，而奸之，是父子相淫，无以异也，付法局详刑。 次读第二女人辞牒，忘其姓名，云：家在南阳冠军县黄水里，家安爨器于灶口，而此妇眠婴儿于灶上，匍匐走行，粪污爨器中。此妇还见，即请谢神祗，盥洗精洁。
现代文：就是和犯了父子相淫罪，没有什么不同的，交给法局详审量刑。 其次读第二个女人的辞状，忘了她的姓名，说，家在南阳冠军县黄水里，家里安焦尾琴于灶口，而这个妇女让婴儿睡在灶上，婴儿匍匐爬行，粪便污染到焦尾琴里，这个妇人回来看见就请求神祗谢罪，并且浇水清洗干净。
English: Next, I read the letter of the second woman, I forgot her name, saying that her home was in Huangshui, Champion County, Nanyang, and the family's dulcimer was on the stove, but this woman let the baby sleep on the stove, the baby's cocoon crawled, and the feces contaminated the dulcimer, and when this woman came back and saw it, she asked God to forgive the sin, and watered it to clean it.

古文：而其舅每骂此妇，言无有天道鬼神，致此恶妇，得行污秽。
现代文：而她的公公常骂这个妇人，说没有天地鬼神，使这个有罪恶的女人，才做出这样污秽的事。
English: And her father-in-law often scolded the woman, saying that there was no heaven, earth, or spirit to make this sinful woman do such a filthy thing.

古文：司命闻知，故录送之。
现代文：司命听说后，就要把她送来了。
English: When the magistrate heard about it, he had to send her away.

古文：府君曰： 眠灶非过，小儿无知，又且已请谢神，是无罪矣。
现代文：府君说： 睡在灶上没有过错，小孩无知，并且她又向神请了罪，也就没有罪了。
English: Fuchun said: Sleeping on the stove is not wrong, the child is ignorant, and she also asked God for a sin, so there is no sin.

古文：舅骂无道，诬谤幽灵，可录之来，须臾而至。
现代文：公公骂无道，诬谤幽灵，可以把他抓来。 
English: If the father-in-law curses and slanders the ghost, he can be arrested.

古文：次到安居，阶下人具读明牒，为伯所诉。
现代文：不一会把他抓来了。再轮到安居了，阶下的人读凭证，为他的伯父申诉。
English: He was arrested soon after, and when it was his turn to live in a safe house, his subordinates read the certificates and appealed for his uncle.

古文：府君曰： 此人事佛，大德人也。
现代文：府君说： 这个人奉佛事，是个有功德的人。
English: The prefect said, "This man is a Buddhist and a man of merit.

古文：其伯杀害无辜，訾诳百姓，罪宜穷治，以其有小福，故未加之罪耳，今复谤诉无辜，敕催录取来。 
现代文：他的伯父杀害无辜，欺骗百姓，应当治罪，又因他有小的福事，所以没有给他加罪，现在又诽谤无辜。赶快抓他来。 
English: His uncle killed innocent people, deceived the people, and should be punished, and because he had a small blessing, he did not add to his guilt, and now he slanders the innocent. Arrest him quickly.

古文：已而府君遣安居还：若可去，善成胜业，可寿九十三，努力勉之，勿复更来。
现代文：然后府君打发安居回去并说，如可以回去后，善成正业，可延寿到九十三岁。努力勤勉，不要再来了。
English: Then the governor sent Anju back and said, if you can go back and do a good job, you can extend your life to ninety-three years old. Work hard and don't come back.

古文：将离府，局司云： 君可拔却死名。 
现代文：安居将要离府，局司说，你可拿掉你的死名。 
English: When Anju was about to leave the house, the bureau chief said, "You can take off your dead name."

古文：于是安居以次抽名既毕，而至向游贵人所。
现代文：于是安居按顺序抽完自己的死名，而到了同游的贵人的住处，贵人也到了，说： 知道你没有别的罪让你回去，很好。
English: So Anju finished drawing his own name in order and went to the dwelling of the nobleman who was traveling with him. The nobleman also arrived and said, "It's good to know that you have no other sin to make you go back.

古文：贵人亦至云： 知汝无他罪得还，甚善，力修功德，身福微，不辨生天，受报于此，辅佐府君，亦优游富贵，神道之美。吾家在宛，姓某名某，君还为吾致意，尊奉法戒，勿犯偏禁，可具以所见示语之也。 
现代文：你力修功德。我自身福小，不能生在天上，在这里受报应，辅佐府君，也悠闲富贵，是神道之美。吾家在宛，姓某名某，你回去之后替我致意，让家人尊奉法戒，不要犯偏禁之事，可把你所看到的说给他们听。 
English: I myself am too blessed to be born in heaven, so I will be punished here. In addition, Sappu-kun is also leisurely and rich, which is the beauty of Shinto. My family is in Wan, and my last name is So-and-so. When you return, pay your respects for me, and ask your family members to respect the precepts of the Dharma, not to commit forbidden things, and to tell them what you have seen.

古文：乃以三人力士送安居，出门数百步，传教送符与安居，谓曰： 君可持此符，经关戍次，以示之，勿辄偷过，偷过有罪谪也。
现代文：于是用三个力士送安居，出了门几百步，传教送符给安居，对他说： 你可拿着这符，路过关卡，把符给他们看，就不用总是偷过，偷过有罪被贬谪。
English: So he sent Anju away with three wrestlers, walked a few hundred paces out of the door, and gave Anju a missionary certificate, saying to him, "You can take this certificate, pass through the checkpoints, show them the certificate, and you won't always have to steal, and be condemned for stealing."

古文：若有水碍，可以此符投水中，即得过矣。 
现代文：如果有水当路，可以把这符扔到水中，就能够过去了。 
English: If there's water in the way, you can throw it into the water and it will pass.

古文：安居受符而归，行久之，阻大江不得渡，安居依言投符，矇然如眩，乃是其家庭中也。
现代文：安居拿着符而归了，走了很久，被大江所阻而不能过，安居就按他说的话扔符，什么也不见只觉一阵晕眩，睁开眼一看是到了他家的院子中。
English: Anju returned with the amulet. After walking for a long time, he was blocked by the river and could not pass. Anju threw the amulet according to his words. He did not see anything but felt dizzy for a while. When he opened his eyes, he was in the courtyard of his house.

古文：正闻家中号恸，所送三人，勒还就身，安居闻其身臭秽，曰： 吾不复能归。 
现代文：正听见家人哭悲，所送他的三个人，命他附身还生。安居闻到他的尸身上有臭秽味说： 吾不能再回来了。 
English: As he was listening to his family's cries of grief, the three people who had sent him were still alive. Anju smelled the foul smell on his corpse and said, "I can't go back."

古文：此人乃强排之，仆于尸脚上。
现代文：那人就强行推他，倒在尸体的脚上，安居即复活了。
English: And he thrust him violently away, and he fell on his feet, and was restored to life.

古文：安居既愈，欲验黄水妇人，特往冠军县寻问，果有此妇。相见依然，如有旧识，云： 已死得生，舅即以其日亡。 说所闻见，与安居悉同。
现代文：他想验证一下黄水妇人的事，就特意去冠军县寻问，果然有这个妇女，相见后还是那样，像旧相识似的说： 已死而复生，公公也就在那一天死了，所见所闻，和安居相同。
English: He wanted to verify the matter of the Huangshui woman, so he specifically went to Champion County to inquire. Sure enough, there was this woman, and after seeing each other, she was still like that, saying like an old acquaintance: He died and came back to life, and his father-in-law also died that day. What he saw and heard was the same as living in peace.

古文：安居果寿九十三也。
现代文：安居果然寿到九十三岁。
English: He lived to the ripe old age of 93.

古文：马处伯
现代文：马处伯
English: Ma Jianbo

古文：宋马处伯，巴西阆中人也。少信佛法，尝作宣汉县令。
现代文：宋朝马处伯，是巴西阆中人，少年信奉佛法，曾作宣汉县县令。
English: Song Chaoma, a junior high school student from Brazil, was a believer in Buddhism and once served as the county magistrate of Xuanhan County.

古文：元嘉十二年，七月夜，梦见天际有三人，长二丈余，姿容严厉，临云下观，诸天妓乐，盈于空中，告曰： 汝厄在荆楚，戊寅之年，八月四日。
现代文：元嘉十二年、七月的一夜，梦见天际有三个人，两丈多高，姿容严厉，临云下看，诸天上的伎女之乐，布满空中，告诉处伯说： 你的噩运在荆楚，戊寅之年八月四日。
English: On a night in July of the 12th year of the Yuan Jia, he dreamed that there were three people in the sky. They were as tall as he was, and their appearance was stern. Looking down from the clouds, the music of the conjurers in the heavens filled the air. He told his assistant, "Your bad luck is in Jing Chu. August 4th, the year of Wu Yin."

古文：若处山泽，其祸克消。人中斋戒，亦可获免。
现代文：如果处在山水边，那个灾祸就可消逝；人中斋戒，也可以获免。
English: If you are on the edge of a mountain or stream, that calamity can disappear; if you are fasting, you can also be spared.

古文：若过此期，当悟道也。 
现代文：如果过了这个时期，就能通道。 
English: If you pass this period, you will be able to pass.

古文：时俯见相识杨暹等八人，并着锁械。
现代文：当时低头看见相识的杨暹等八个人都被锁着刑械，又看见道士胡辽，半身出空中。
English: At that time, I looked down and saw eight people, including my acquaintance Yang Siam, all chained to the torture machine. I also saw Taoist priest Hu Liao, half of his body in the air.

古文：又见道士胡辽，半身出空，天际人皆记八人命尽年月，唯语辽曰： 若能修立功德，犹可延长也。 暹等皆如期而亡。辽益惧，奉法山居，勤励弥至。
现代文：天际人都记着八个人命尽的年月，只对胡辽说： 你如果能修建功德，还可延长寿命。 暹等人都按期而死了，胡辽更加害怕，居住在山上奉法，更加勤奋诚至。
English: The sky people all remembered the years of the eight people's lives, and only said to Hu Liao: If you can build merit, you can also extend your life. Siam and others all died on schedule, Hu Liao was more afraid, lived in the mountains to practice the law, and was more diligent and sincere.

古文：处伯后为梁州西曹掾，州将萧思话也。
现代文：处伯以后为梁州西曹掾，州将萧思说他将转到南蛮任职，被任命为行参军。
English: He later became Liangzhou West Caoqi, and Governor Xiao Si said that he would transfer to Nanban and was appointed to join the army.

古文：萧转南蛮，复命为行参军，处伯思荆楚之言，心甚惧，求萧解职，将适衡山，萧苦不许。
现代文：处伯想天际人说到荆楚之祸，心里非常害怕，请求萧解除职务，将要到衡山去，萧苦苦不应。
English: The magistrate thought that the celestial being mentioned the calamity of Jingchu, and he was very afraid in his heart. He asked Xiao to relieve him of his duties, and he was going to Hengshan. Xiao should not have to suffer.

古文：十三年即戊寅岁也，六月末得病，至八月危笃。其日黄昏后，忽朗然彻视，遥见西方有三人行，长可二丈。
现代文：十三年即戊寅年，六月得病，到了八月病更重，那天的黄昏后，忽然眼前豁然开朗，远远的看见西方有三个人，可有二丈高。
English: In the thirteenth year, that is, the year of Wu Yin, she fell ill in June, and became more seriously ill in August. After dusk that day, her eyes suddenly brightened, and she saw three people in the west in the distance, who could be as tall as two storeys.

古文：前一人衣袷垂鬓，项有光，后二人姿质金耀，仪相端备，列于空中，去地数仞，处伯委悉详视，犹是前所梦者也。
现代文：前一个人穿着长衣垂发，脖子上有光。后两个人姿态气质金光耀眼，仪表容貌端正，站在空中，距地有几丈。处伯仔细地看，还是前次所梦见的人，一会就不见了。
English: The first man was wearing a long robe, with his hair hanging down and a halo around his neck. The other two men had a dazzling, golden appearance and were standing in the air, a few feet above the ground. My mother-in-law took a closer look and saw that it was still the man from the previous dream, but he disappeared in an instant.

古文：顷之不见，余芳移时方歇，同居小大，皆闻香气，因而流汗，病即小差。
现代文：留下的芳香走的时候才停止，在一起住的老小，都闻到了香气。处伯因而流汗，病也就稍好了些。
English: The fragrance left behind only stopped when he left, and both the old and the young, who lived together, smelled the fragrance. His genitals sweated because of it, and his illness got a little better.

古文：处伯所居颇卑陋，于时自觉处在殿堂，廊壁焕耀，皆是珍宝，俄即所患平复。
现代文：处伯所居的地方很简陋，当时自己觉得像处在殿堂一样，廊壁生辉，都是珍宝。不一会所得的病就全好了。
English: The place where my uncle lived was very humble. At that time, I felt like I was in a temple. The hallway walls were gleaming, and everything was precious. The illness I had was completely cured in no time.

