古文：仲尼称《易》有君子之道四焉，曰 卜筮者尚其占 。
现代文：◆方术列传，序，孔子谈到《易经》上说有 君子之道 四项，其一就是用龟甲或筮草进行占卜。
English: Confucius talked about the "I Ching" and said that there are four ways to be a gentleman, one of which is to use tortoise shell or wormwood for divination.

古文：占也者，先王所以定祸福，决嫌疑，幽赞于神明，遂知来物者也。
现代文：所谓 占 ，先王用来预测祸福，决定疑难，让神明作指示，决定未来一切的意思。
English: The so-called "Zhan," the meaning of which was used by the ancients to predict misfortune and fortune, decide difficulties, let the gods give instructions, and decide everything in the future.

古文：若夫阴阳推步之学，往往见于坟记矣。
现代文：像那些阴阳家推测未来的学说，古书上记载的不少。
English: There are many theories recorded in ancient books that speculate on the future like those of the yin and yang school.

古文：然神经怪牒、玉策金绳，关扃于明灵之府、封縢于瑶坛之上者，靡得而窥也。
现代文：但是神经怪牒，玉策金绳，隐藏在神秘的地方，封锁在瑶坛之上的，现在是见不着了。
English: But the nervous monster, the jade jade rope, hidden in a mysterious place, sealed above the altar, is now out of sight.

古文：至乃《河》、《洛》之文，龟龙之图，箕子之术，师旷之书，纬候之部，钤决之符，皆所以探抽冥赜、参验人区，时有可闻者焉。
现代文：至于河图洛书，龟龙图像，箕子的方术，师旷的秘本，纬侯之类，钤决的符，都是用来推测未知之数，参验人事的吉凶，有时还听到一些。
English: As for the River Tulou Book, the Turtle and Dragon Image, the Dice Strategy, the Secret Book of Shiguang, the Weihou, and so on, and the Decisive Symbols, they are all used to speculate on unknown numbers, to participate in the examination of personnel affairs, and sometimes to hear some.

古文：其流又有风角、遁甲、七政、元气、六日七分、逢占、日者、挺专、须臾、孤虚之术，乃望云省气，推处祥妖，时亦有以效于事也。
现代文：它们的流派很多，像风角、遁甲、七政、元年、六日七分、逢占、日者、挺专、须臾、孤虚之术等，以及那些望云省气，推断好坏，有时似乎有些灵验。
English: There are many schools of them, such as the wind angle, the armour, the seven politics, the first year, the six days and seven minutes, the coincidence, the day, the specialization, the whispers, the art of solitude, and so on, as well as those who look at the clouds and reflect, infer good and bad, and sometimes seem to be somewhat effective.

古文：而斯道隐远，玄奥难原，故圣人不语怪神，罕言性命。
现代文：可是这类东西毕竟有些渺茫，高深玄妙，颇难探究，所以孔子不讲怪、神之类，很少谈到性命。
English: But after all, these things are somewhat vague, profound, and difficult to explore, so Confucius did not talk about monsters, gods, and the like, and rarely talked about life.

古文：或开末而抑其端，或曲辞以章其义，所谓 民可使由之，不可使知之 。
现代文：有时提到结尾不讲其来源，有时转弯抹角说说大意，就是让人们照着做，而不让人知道其中的道理吧！
English: Sometimes the ending is mentioned without mentioning its source, and sometimes the twist and turn is to let people do as they please, without letting them know the reason!

古文：汉自武帝颇好方术，天下怀协道艺之士，莫不负策抵掌，顺风而届焉。
现代文：汉朝自武帝起很喜欢方术之类的东西，天下懂得方术的人，没有不背着书策，闻风而来的。
English: The Han Dynasty, from Emperor Wu onwards, was very fond of things such as the art of the square, and there was no one in the world who knew the art of the square who did not carry the strategy of the book behind his back and smell the wind.

古文：后王莽矫用符命，及光武尤信谶言，士之赴趣时宜者，皆骋驰穿凿，争谈之也。
现代文：后来王莽假托符命来篡位，到了东汉光武更信谶言，一些赶时兴的人，都跑到皇帝身边穿凿附会，高谈阔论。
English: Later, Wang Mang tried to usurp the throne with a false token, and when he arrived in the Eastern Han Dynasty, Guangwu believed him more, and some people who were in a hurry ran to the emperor's side to wear a chisel and talk about it.

古文：故王梁、孙咸，名应图箓，越登槐鼎之任；郑兴、贾逵，以附同称显；恒谭、尹敏，以乖忤沦败。
现代文：所以王梁、孙咸凭着图做了大司空、大司马，郑兴、贾逵因为附和得当而名显一时，桓谭、尹敏因唱反调而遭到失败。
English: Therefore, Wang Liang and Sun Xian used the map to become the great diviners of the sky and the great diviners of the horse, Zheng Xing and Jia Wei became famous for their appropriate harmony, and Huan Tan and Yin Min were defeated for singing the opposite tune.

古文：自是习为内学，尚奇文，贵异数，不乏于时矣。
现代文：从此以后，研究占卜之学，钻研奇文异数的人，就多得很了。
English: Since then, there have been many people who have studied divination and studied the magic numbers.

古文：是以通儒硕生，忿其奸妄不经，奏议慷慨，以为宜见藏摈。
现代文：因此一些有识之士，看到这些怪诞不经的东西十分气忿，纷纷向皇帝慷慨陈词，认为必须抛弃。
English: Therefore, some wise men, seeing these grotesque things, were very angry and made generous statements to the emperor, saying that they must be abandoned.

古文：子长亦云： 观阴阳之书，使人拘而多忌。 
现代文：司马迁也说： 看了阴阳家的书，使人们受到拘束多有忌讳。 
English: Sima Qian also said: After reading the book of Yin and Yang, there are many taboos that cause people to be restrained.

古文：盖为此也。
现代文：就是针对这些说的。
English: That's what I'm talking about.

古文：夫物之所偏，未能无蔽。虽云大道，其硋或同。
现代文：任何事物都有偏颇，不能没有毛病，就是圣人之道，大致也是如此。
English: Everything is biased and cannot be faultless, even the way of the sage.

古文：若乃《诗》之失愚，《书》之失诬。
现代文：有人指责《诗经》的缺点太真实了，近似愚蠢；《书经》的历史记载又欠真实，近似夸大。
English: Some people accuse the shortcomings of the "Book of Songs" of being too true, similar to stupidity; the historical records of the "Book of Songs" are not true, similar to exaggeration.

古文：然则数术之失，至于诡俗乎？
现代文：然则数术的缺点，不就是诡秘欺人吗？
English: But aren't the shortcomings of the art of arithmetic nothing more than deception?

古文：意者多迷其统，取遣颇偏，甚有虽流宕过诞亦失也。中世张衡为阴阳之宗，郎顗咎征最密，余亦班班名家焉。
现代文：如果只讲温柔敦厚的诗教而去掉某些愚昧之处，就深深懂得《诗经》了；读通了唐虞三代的历史而不追究那些诬枉之处，就深深懂得《书经》了；术数只取其变化的规律而不信那些诡俗之辞，那就深深了解术数之奥妙了。古人说 ：如果不是真正懂得道理的人，大道不会平空实行。 
English: If you only speak of gentle and thoughtful poetic teachings and remove some foolishness, you will deeply understand the "Book of Poems"; if you read through the history of the three generations of Tang Yu without investigating those falsifications, you will deeply understand the "Book of Books"; if you only take the rules of its changes and do not believe those vulgar words, then you will deeply understand the mystery of the number of operations. The ancients said: If you are not a person who truly understands the truth, the road will not be flat.

古文：其徒亦有雅才伟德，未必体极艺能。
现代文：意思是说多数人在头绪多端中迷失了方向，因此偏离正道太远了。
English: It means that most people have lost their way in the maze of clues and are too far off track.

古文：今盖纠其推变尤长，可以弘补时事，因合表之云。
现代文：张衡算是阴阳家的正宗，郎岂页研究过咎征兆最细密，此外还有不少名家，他们也有才华，但是钻研还欠功夫。现在就一些长于推变，可以弘补时事的人，表彰在这里。
English: Zhang Heng is considered to be the true master of yin and yang. Lang Xizhe has studied the signs and symptoms of the most detailed. In addition, there are many famous families. They are also talented, but they do not have enough effort to study. Now there are some people who are good at pushing change and can promote current affairs. The award is here.

古文：任文公，巴郡阆中人也。
现代文：◆任文公传，任文公，巴郡阆中人。
English: ◆ Ren Wenkong Chuan, Ren Wenkong, a middle-aged man from Ba County.

古文：父文孙，明晓天官风角秘要。
现代文：父亲任文孙，懂得天官风角秘要。
English: His father was a great-grandson of Emperor Wenzong, and he knew the secrets of the imperial court.

古文：文公少修父术，州辟从事。
现代文：文公年轻时学习父亲那一套，州里召他做从事。
English: When he was young, Wen Gong learned from his father, and was called by the state to be a carpenter.

古文：哀帝时，有言越巂太守欲反，刺史大惧，遣文公等五从事检行郡界，潜伺虚实。
现代文：哀帝时，有人说越辒太守想造，刺史非常害怕，派文公等五位从事检查郡的边界，偷看虚实情况。
English: At the time of mourning for the emperor, some people said that the Yue Ying Taishou wanted to build it, and Sashi was very afraid. He sent five people, including Meng Gong, to inspect the county's borders and peek at the true situation.

古文：共止传舍，时，暴风卒至，文公遽趣白诸从事促去，当有逆变来害人者，因起驾速驱。
现代文：他们一同住在客舍，当时暴风猝然到来，文公连忙叫其他从事离开，说是将有逆变来害人的，于是赶着马车快跑。
English: They were living together in a guest house, when a storm suddenly arrived. Wengong hurriedly told the others to leave, saying that there would be a reversal to harm people, so he ran fast with the carriage.

古文：诸从事未能自发，郡果使兵杀之，文公独得免。
现代文：那些从事不能快走，郡果派兵杀了他们，文公一人得免。
English: Those who couldn't run away quickly were killed by soldiers sent by Guoguo, and only Wenguang was spared.

古文：后为治中从事。时，天大旱，白刺史曰： 五月一日，当有大水。其变已至，不可防救，宜令吏人豫为其备。 
现代文：后来文公做了治中从事，当时大旱，向刺史报告 ：五月一日，当有大水，其变已至，不可防救，应叫官吏百姓早作准备。 
English: Later, when Wen Gong was engaged in the mid-term reform, there was a severe drought at that time, and he reported to Zhishi: On May 1, when there was heavy water, it had become unavoidable, and officials and people should be asked to make preparations early.

古文：刺史不听，文公独储大船。百姓或闻，颇有为防者。到其日旱烈，文公急命促载，使白刺史，刺史笑之。
现代文：刺史不听，文公独自准备一条大船，百姓有的听到了，有作防备的，到了最旱的时候，文公急命搬走，派人报告刺史，刺史一笑了之。
English: Zhishi didn't listen, and Wengong prepared a big boat on his own. Some of the people heard, and some took precautions. When it was the driest, Wengong hurriedly moved away, sent someone to report to Zhishi, and Zhishi laughed at him.

古文：日将中，天北云起，须臾大雨，至晡时，湔水涌起十余丈，突坏庐舍，所害数千人。
现代文：日将正中，天北云起，不久大雨，至傍晚时，湔水陡涨十余丈，冲坏房屋，受害的达数千人。
English: In the middle of the day, the sky was cloudy, and heavy rain soon began. By the evening, the floodwaters had risen more than ten feet, destroying houses and injuring thousands of people.

古文：文公遂以占术驰名。
现代文：文公于是因占卜术著了名。
English: Wengong then became famous for his divination.

古文：辟司空掾。
现代文：召为司空掾。
English: He was called up to be an air vice-marshal.

古文：平帝即位，称疾归家。
现代文：平帝即位，称病回家。
English: When Emperor Ping ascended the throne, he went home saying he was ill.

古文：王莽篡后，文公推数，知当大乱，乃课家人负物百斤，环舍趋走，日数十，时人莫知其故。
现代文：王莽篡位后，文公推数，知道大乱将至，于是训练家人背百斤东西，绕着房屋跑步，每天跑几十趟，当时人不知其缘故。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, Wen Gong pushed the number, knowing that chaos would come, so he trained his family to carry hundreds of pounds of things and run around the house, running dozens of times a day. At that time, people did not know the reason.

古文：后兵寇并起，其逃亡者少能自脱，惟文公大小负粮捷步，悉得完免。
现代文：后来兵寇并起，那些逃亡的人很少能脱身的，只有文公一家大小背粮走得很快，全部得到完免。
English: Later, when the warlords and invaders joined forces, those who fled were rarely able to escape. Only the Wengong family, who had to carry grain in their backpacks, were able to get away quickly, and they were all completely spared.

古文：遂奔子公山，十余年不被兵革。
现代文：于是奔到子公山，十余年不被兵革所害。
English: As a result, he ran to Zigong Mountain and was not harmed by the war for more than ten years.

古文：公孙述时，蜀武担石折。
现代文：公孙述时，四川武担山石头折断。
English: When the great-grandson was recounting, the stone of Wudang Mountain in Sichuan was broken.

古文：文公曰： 噫！
现代文：文公说： 唉！
English: Wengong said: Alas!

古文：西州智士死，我乃当之。 
现代文：西州智士死，我便碰上了。 
English: After the death of Xizhou Zhi Shi, I ran into Wu Wu.

古文：自是常会聚子孙，设酒食。后三月果卒。
现代文：从此常会聚子孙，设酒食，后三月果然死去。
English: From then on, he would often gather with his children and grandchildren, drink wine and eat, and finally died in March.

古文：故益部为之语曰： 任文公，智无双。 
现代文：所以益部人有句话说： 任文公，智无双。 
English: That's why people in the Ministry of Public Security have a saying: Ren Wenguang is a man of unparalleled wisdom.

古文：郭宪字子横，汝南宋人也。
现代文：郭宪传，郭宪字子横，汝南宋人。
English: Guo Xian Chuan, Guo Xian Zizi Heng, Ru Nan Song Dynasty.

古文：少师事东海王仲子。
现代文：少年时拜东海王仲子为师。
English: When he was a boy, he studied under the East Sea King Nakako.

古文：时，王莽为大司马，召仲子。仲子欲往。
现代文：当时王莽做大司马，召仲子去，仲子想去。
English: At that time, Wang Mang was the chief steward and summoned Zhongzi to go, and Zhongzi wanted to go.

古文：宪谏曰： 礼有来学，无有往教之义。
现代文：郭宪谏阻道： 按礼，只有来学的，没有去教的。
English: Guo Xianqi objected: According to the etiquette, only those who come to study, not to teach.

古文：今君贱道畏贵，窃所不取。 
现代文：今君贱道畏贵，私下所不赞同。 
English: I do not agree with you in private.

古文：仲子曰： 王公至重，不敢违之。 
现代文：仲子说： 王公是最重要的人物，不敢违抗。 
English: Nakako said, "Wang Gong is the most important person, I dare not defy him.

古文：宪曰： 今正临讲业，且当讫事。 
现代文：宪说： 现在正是讲业之时，应把事情办完。 
English: He said: Now is the time to do the work, we should get things done.

古文：仲子从之，日晏乃往。
现代文：仲子听从了，日晏才去。
English: Nakako obeyed, and Nichirei went.

古文：莽问： 君来何迟？ 
现代文：王莽问： 君为什么迟到？ 
English: Wang Mang asked: Why are you late?

古文：仲子具以宪言对，莽阴奇之。
现代文：仲子把郭宪的话作答，王莽暗自惊奇。
English: When Nakako replied to Guo Xian's words, Wang Mang was surprised.

古文：及后篡位，拜宪郎中，赐以衣服。
现代文：等到后来篡了位，拜郭宪做郎中，赐以衣服。
English: Later, when he usurped the throne, he asked Guo Xian to be his son-in-law and gave him clothes.

古文：宪受衣焚之，逃于东海之滨。
现代文：郭宪受了衣烧掉了，逃到东海之滨。
English: Guo Xian was burned alive and fled to the coast of the East China Sea.

古文：莽深忿恚，讨逐不知所在。
现代文：王莽十分痛恨，想追赶又不知他在何处。
English: Wang Mang hated him so much that he wanted to chase him and didn't know where he was.

古文：光武即位，求天下有道之人，乃征宪拜博士。
现代文：光武即位，寻求天下有道之人，于是召宪为博士。
English: When Guangwu ascended the throne, he was looking for a virtuous person in the world, so he summoned Xian to become a doctor.

古文：再迁，建武七年，代张堪为光禄勋。
现代文：再升迁，建武七年，代张堪做光禄勋。
English: He was promoted again, and in the seventh year of Jianwu, he was awarded the Medal of Honor on behalf of Zhang.

古文：从驾南郊。
现代文：从驾到南郊。
English: From the drive to the southern suburbs.

古文：宪在位，忽回向东北，含酒三潠。
现代文：郭宪在位，忽然回顾东北，含酒喷了三口。
English: Guo Xian in power, suddenly looking back to the northeast, sprayed three mouthfuls of wine.

古文：执法奏为不敬。
现代文：执法之士奏为不敬之举。
English: It's disrespectful to law enforcement.

古文：诏问其故。
现代文：皇上诏问其故。
English: The Emperor inquired about his death.

古文：宪对曰： 齐国失火，故以此厌之。 
现代文：宪答道： 齐国失火，所以用此压之。 
English: Xian replied, "Qi Province is on fire, so we have to use this to suppress it."

古文：后齐果上火灾，与郊同日。
现代文：后来齐国果上报有火灾，与往郊之日期相同。
English: Later, a fire was reported in Qiguogou, the same date as the one in the suburbs.

古文：八年，车驾西征隗嚣。宪谏曰： 天下初定，车驾未可以动。 
现代文：八年，车驾西征隗嚣，郭宪谏道 ：天下刚刚安定，车驾不可行动。 
English: Eight years later, Guo Xianxuan said, "The world has just stabilized, and driving a car is not allowed."

古文：宪乃当车拔佩刀以断车靷。
现代文：郭宪立即拔出刀砍断车革引。
English: Guo Xian immediately pulled out a knife to cut off the leather lead.

古文：帝不从，遂上陇。
现代文：帝不听从，于是上了陇。
English: The emperor didn't listen, so he was beheaded.

古文：其后颍川兵起，乃回驾而还。
现代文：后来颍川兵起，才回驾而还。
English: Later, the Hechuan soldiers rose up, only to drive back and fight back.

古文：帝叹曰： 恨不用子横之言。 
现代文：帝叹道 ：后悔不用子横的话。 
English: Emperor sighed and said, "You don't have to lie to me to regret it."

古文：时，匈奴数犯塞，帝患之，乃召百僚廷议。
现代文：当时匈奴数次进犯边塞，帝很担心，于是召百僚在朝廷议论。
English: At that time, the Xiongnu attacked the border fortress several times. The emperor was very worried, so he summoned a hundred officials to discuss the matter in the imperial court.

古文：宪以为天下疲敝，不宜动众。
现代文：郭宪认为天下疲敝，不应兴师动众。
English: Guo Xian believes that the world is tired and should not encourage teachers to mobilize.

古文：谏争不合，乃伏地称眩瞀，不复言。
现代文：谏争不合旨意，于是伏地称头昏，不再说话。
English: The quarrel was not in accordance with his will, so he fell to the ground and said that he was dizzy and no longer spoke.

古文：帝令两郎扶下殿，宪亦不拜。
现代文：皇帝派两郎扶下殿，郭宪也不拜。
English: The emperor sent the two brothers to support the lower court, and Guo Xian did not bow.

古文：帝曰： 常闻 关东觥觥郭子横 ，竟不虚也。 
现代文：皇上说： 常听说 关东觥觥郭子横 ，这话一点不假。 
English: The emperor said, "I have often heard that the Kanto region is surrounded by castles, and this is absolutely true.

古文：宪遂以病辞退，卒于家。
现代文：郭宪于是以病辞退，死在家中。
English: Guo Xian then resigned due to illness and died at home.

古文：许杨字伟君，汝南平舆人也。
现代文：许杨传，许杨字伟君，汝南平兴人。
English: Xu Yang Chuan, Xu Yang Zi Wei Jun, Ru Nanping Xingren.

古文：少好术数。
现代文：年轻时喜欢术数。
English: When he was young, he liked to count.

古文：王莽辅政，召为郎，稍迁酒泉都尉。
现代文：王莽辅政时，召他为郎，不久升为酒泉都尉。
English: When Wang Mang was a vice-premier, he called him his son-in-law, and he was soon promoted to lieutenant of Jiuquan.

古文：及莽篡位，杨乃变姓名为巫医，逃匿它界。
现代文：等到王莽篡位，许杨就改姓名做巫医，逃匿到别处。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the throne, Xu Yang changed his name to a witch doctor and fled to another place.

古文：莽败，方还乡里。
现代文：王莽失败，才回乡里。
English: Wang Mang failed and returned to his hometown.

古文：汝南旧有鸿陂，成帝时，丞相翟方进奏毁败之。
现代文：汝南旧有鸿谷阝陂，成帝时，丞相翟方进奏请毁败它。
English: There used to be a vast valley in southern Ryukyu, but when Emperor Go-Shirakawa came to power, he asked the prime minister to destroy it.

古文：建武中，太守邓晨欲修复其功。闻杨晓水脉，召与议之。
现代文：建武年间，太守邓晨想修复其功，听说许杨知道水脉，召来与他商量。
English: During the Jianwu period, Emperor Deng Chen wanted to repair his work. He heard that Xu Yang knew the water vein and summoned him to discuss with him.

古文：杨曰： 昔成帝用方进之言，寻而自梦上天，天帝怒曰： 何故败我濯龙渊？ 
现代文：许杨说： 从前成帝用方进的话，不久自己梦见上天，天帝发怒道： 为什么败我濯龙渊？ 
English: Xu Yang said: Once upon a time, Emperor Cheng used the word "Fangjin" (方进), and soon he dreamed of heaven. The Heavenly Emperor became angry and said: "Why did I defeat the Dragon Abyss?

古文：是后民失其利，多致饥困。
现代文：从此以后百姓失其利，多致饥困。
English: Since then, the people have lost their profits and suffered from hunger.

古文：时有谣歌曰： 败我陂者翟子威，饴我大豆，亨我芋魁。
现代文：当时有歌谣道 ：败我陂者翟子威，饴我大豆，烹我芋魁。
English: At that time, there was a ballad saying, "The one who defeats me will be called Ziwei, the one who beats me will be called Soybean, and the one who beats me will be called Imo-kui."

古文：反乎覆，陂当复。 
现代文：反手覆，陂当复。 
English: I don't have any yam to eat.

古文：昔大禹决江疏河，以利天下。明府今兴立废业，富国安民，童谣之言，将有征于此。
现代文：从前大禹决江疏河以利天下，明府今日兴立废业，富国安民，童谣的话，将有效验在这里。
English: In the past, Dayu used to dredge rivers and dredge rivers to benefit the world. Today, Myeongpook is establishing a waste industry, enriching the country and ensuring the safety of the people. In the words of a nursery rhyme, this is where it will be put to the test.

古文：诚愿以死效力。 
现代文：确愿为这出死力。 
English: I'm willing to die for this.

古文：晨大悦，因署杨为都水掾，使典其事。
现代文：邓晨大喜，于是署许杨为都水掾，使他掌管这事。
English: Deng Chen was overjoyed, so he put Xu Yang in charge of the matter.

古文：杨因高下形势，起塘四百余里，数年乃立。
现代文：许杨顺地势高下，起塘四百余里，数年才建成。
English: Xu Yangshun is at the top of the country, and the pond is more than four hundred miles long. It was only built a few years ago.

古文：百姓得其便，累岁大稔。
现代文：百姓得到了好处，连年丰收。
English: The people have benefited, with bumper harvests year after year.

古文：初，豪右大姓因缘陂役，竞欲辜较在所，杨一无听，遂共谮杨受取赇赂。
现代文：起初，豪右大姓为了修陂的劳役，争想总揽那块地方的大权，许杨一概不听，于是共同诬杨受了贿赂。
English: At first, for the labor service of repairing the pier, Hao Yu's eldest son, Hao Yu, wanted to take over the power of the place, but Xu Yang did not listen at all, so they jointly bribed Yang.

古文：晨遂收杨下狱，而械辄自解。
现代文：邓晨就将许杨关进狱中。可是手铐等自然解脱。
English: Deng Chen put Xu Yang in prison. However, the handcuffs and other things were naturally released.

古文：狱吏恐，遽白晨。
现代文：狱吏害怕，马上报告邓晨。
English: The warden was scared and immediately reported to Deng Chen.

古文：晨惊曰： 果滥矣。太守闻忠信可以感灵，今其效乎！ 
现代文：邓晨惊道： 果然搞坏了，太守听说忠信可以感动神灵，现在应验了吗？ 
English: Deng Chen said in surprise, "It's really gone wrong. The daimyō heard that loyalty can move the gods. Has it come true now?"

古文：即夜出杨，遣归。
现代文：立即在当晚放出许杨，让他回家。
English: They immediately released Xu Yang that night and let him go home.

古文：时天大阴晦，道中若有火光照之，时人异焉。
现代文：时天大阴暗，路上像有火光照着他，当时人觉得很怪。
English: It was very dark at the time, and the road was lit up like a beacon, which seemed strange at the time.

古文：后以病卒。
现代文：后来许杨因病死去。
English: Xu Yang later died of illness.

古文：晨于都宫为杨起庙，图画形像，百姓思其功绩，皆祭祀之。
现代文：邓晨在都宫替许杨建起庙宇，画着肖像，百姓思念其功绩，都去祭祀他。
English: Deng Chen built a temple for Xu Yang Rong in the Imperial Palace, painted portraits, and the people thought about his achievements and went to worship him.

古文：高获字敬公，汝南新息人也。
现代文：高获传，高获字敬公，汝南新息人。
English: Gao Guozhong, Gao Guozhong, Gao Guozhong, Gao Guozhong, Gao Guozhong.

古文：为人尼首方面。
现代文：相貌是面部四方高中间低。
English: Facial appearance is squarish with high, medium and low.

古文：少游学京师，与光武有旧。
现代文：少时在京师游学，与光武帝有旧。
English: As a young boy, he studied in Beijing and became close friends with Emperor Guangwu.

古文：师事司徒欧阳歙。
现代文：拜过司徒欧阳歙为老师。
English: He once called upon Stu Ouyang as his teacher.

古文：歙下狱当断，获冠铁冠，带鈇锧，诣阙请歙。
现代文：欧阳歙坐牢当判刑，高获戴着铁帽子，带着刑具，到朝廷请求赦歙。
English: Ouyang Yao was sentenced to prison, and Gao Weng, wearing an iron hat and carrying a torture device, went to the imperial court to ask for pardon.

古文：帝虽不赦，而引见之。
现代文：帝虽然不赦歙，而引见高获。
English: Although the emperor did not pardon him, he received high praise.

古文：谓曰： 敬公，朕欲用子为吏，宜改常性。 
现代文：对高说： 敬公，朕想用你做吏，应改常性才好。 
English: He said to Gao, "Respectfully sir, I want to use you as an official, so you should change your habitual behavior."

古文：获对曰： 臣受性于父母，不可改之于陛下。 出便辞去。
现代文：高获答道： 臣受性于父母，不可在陛下这里有改变。 
English: Gao Zu replied: A vassal's nature comes from his parents, and there can be no change in His Majesty.

古文：三公争辟，不应。
现代文：出来便告辞而去。三公争着召他，不答应。
English: When he came out, he said good-bye and left. The three nobles tried to call him, but he did not answer.

古文：后太守鲍昱请获，既至门，令主簿就迎，主簿但使骑吏迎之，获闻之，即去。
现代文：后来太守鲍昱请获，到了门口，派主簿去迎接，主簿只使骑吏去迎接，高获听了，即离去。
English: Later, when the grand marshal Bao Wei arrived at the gate, he invited Gao Hui to meet him, and sent the master book to meet him. The master book only sent the cavalry to meet Gao Hui, and Gao Hui listened to Gao Hui and left.

古文：昱遣追请获，获顾曰： 府君但为主簿所欺，不足与谈。 
现代文：鲍昱追请高获，高获回头道： 府君只被主所欺，不足与谈。 
English: Bao Wei chased Gao Rui, Gao Rui turned back and said, "Fujun was only deceived by the Lord, and it was not enough to talk to him.

古文：遂不留。
现代文：便不留下。
English: They don't stay.

古文：时郡境大旱。获素善天文，晓遁甲，能役使鬼神。
现代文：当时郡境大旱，高获素来会天文，晓得遁甲，能够役使鬼神。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the county. Gao Gao had always been interested in astronomy and knew armour, so he was able to help the ghosts and gods.

古文：昱自往问何以致雨，获曰： 急罢三部督邮，明府当自北出，到三十里亭，雨可致也。 
现代文：鲍昱自己前去请问怎么才能得到雨，高获说： 立即免去三部督邮，明府当自北出，到三十里亭，雨可以来。 
English: Bao Tong himself went to ask how to get rain, Gao Yu said: Immediately get rid of the three post offices, the Ming government should come from the north to Sanli Ting, the rain can come.

古文：昱从之，果得大雨。
现代文：鲍显依从了，果然得到大雨。
English: Bao Xian obeyed and got heavy rain.

古文：每行县，辄轼其闾。
现代文：每次行县，常以礼轼其闾。
English: Every time he visits a county, he often concludes with a bow.

古文：获遂远遁江南，卒于石城。
现代文：高获就远逃到江南，死在石城。
English: Gao Fu fled to the south of the Yangtze River and died in Shicheng.

古文：石城人思之，共为立祠。
现代文：石城人思念他，大家替他立祠。
English: The people of Shicheng miss him, and everyone has set up a shrine for him.

古文：王乔者，河东人也。
现代文：王乔传，王乔，河东人。
English: Wang Qiao Chuan, Wang Qiao, a person from Hedong.

古文：显宗世，为叶令。
现代文：显宗时，做了叶县县令。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuanzong, he issued the Ye County edict.

古文：乔有神术，每月朔望，常自县诣台朝。
现代文：王乔有神仙之术，每月初一、十五，常从叶县到朝廷禁省朝见皇上。
English: Wang Qiao had the skill of a god. On the first and fifteenth day of every month, he would often travel from Ye County to the Imperial Palace to see the emperor.

古文：帝怪其来数，而不见车骑，密令太史伺望之。
现代文：皇帝看他来得很快，但未见到他的车马，很觉奇怪，便秘密叫太史侦察伺望他的行踪。
English: The emperor was surprised because he was so diligent in entering Beijing, and every time he came, he did not ride a horse or take a car, he secretly ordered the official to secretly inspect.

古文：言其临至，辄有双凫从东南飞来。
现代文：太史报告说，王乔到来时，常有两只水鸟从东南飞来。
English: Taishi reported that when Wang Qiao arrived, there were often two water birds flying from the southeast.

古文：于是候凫至，举罗张之，但得一只舄焉。
现代文：于是皇上叫人张开罗网，捕捉水鸟，只得到一只鞋。
English: So the emperor had a net cast to catch the water fowl, but only one shoe was caught.

古文：乃诏上方讠尔视，则四年中所赐尚书官属履也。每当朝时，叶门下鼓不击自鸣，闻于京师。
现代文：检查那鞋，是四年中赐给尚书官属的鞋。每当王乔上朝时，叶县门下的鼓不击却自己响着，京师可听得见。
English: Check that shoe, it is the shoe given to Shang Shucuan in four years. Every time when Wang Qiao ascended to the throne, the drum under Ye Xian's door did not beat, but rang by itself, and the capital master could hear it.

古文：后天下玉棺于堂前，吏人推排，终不摇动。
现代文：后来，从天上降下一口玉棺到堂前，吏人上前推抬，没法子摇得动。
English: Later, a jade coffin was lowered from the sky to the front of the hall, and the officials pushed it forward. There was no way to shake it.

古文：乔曰： 天帝独召我邪？ 
现代文：王乔说： 上天单独召我吗？ 
English: Wang Qiao said: Did God call me alone?

古文：乃沐浴服饰寝其中，盖便立覆。
现代文：于是洗干净身子，穿好衣服睡进棺中，盖子马上罩住了。
English: So he washed himself, put on his clothes and fell asleep in the coffin, which was immediately covered with a lid.

古文：宿昔葬于城东，土自成坟。
现代文：过了两夜，把棺埋在城东，泥土自然成了坟堆。
English: After two nights, the coffin was buried in the east of the city, and the dirt naturally became a grave.

古文：其夕，县中牛皆流汗喘乏，而人无知者。
现代文：当晚，县中的牛都流着汗，喘着气，而人们不知是怎么回事。
English: That night, the cows in the county were all sweating and panting, and people didn't know what was going on.

古文：百姓乃为立庙，号叶君祠。
现代文：百姓替他立庙，叫叶君祠。
English: The people built a temple for him, called Ye Jun Shrine.

古文：牧守每班录，皆先谒拜之。
现代文：地方官吏每次到任，首先得拜见它。
English: Every time a local official takes office, the first thing he has to do is to visit it.

古文：吏人祈祷，无不如应。
现代文：吏人有事祈祷，很有灵验。
English: The magistrate had something to pray about, and it worked.

古文：若有违犯，亦立能为祟。
现代文：如有违犯神意，也立即降灾。
English: If there is a violation of God's will, the disaster will be reduced immediately.

古文：帝乃迎取其鼓，置都亭下，略无复声焉。
现代文：皇帝于是将叶县的鼓取来放在都亭下面，从此再也没有响声。
English: The emperor then placed the drum of Ye County under the capital pavilion, and from then on there was no sound.

古文：或云此即古仙人王子乔也。
现代文：有人说这就是古代仙人王子乔。
English: Some say that this is the ancient fairy tale Prince Joe.

古文：谢夷吾字尧卿，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：谢夷吾传，谢夷吾字尧卿，会稽山阴人。
English: Xie Yiwu Chuan, Xie Yiwu Zi Jianqing, is a member of the Shanyin Association.

古文：少为郡吏，学风角占候。
现代文：年轻时做郡吏，学风角占候。
English: When he was young, he worked as a county official and learned to read people's moods.

古文：太守第五伦擢为督邮。
现代文：太守第五伦提升他做督邮。
English: He was promoted to postmaster-general by the 5th governor of Taizhou.

古文：时，乌程长有臧衅，伦使收案其罪。
现代文：当时乌程长有贪赃罪，第五伦派他关押乌程长并审理其罪。
English: At that time, Ucheng Chang was guilty of embezzlement, and the Fifth Circuit ordered him to detain Ucheng Chang and try him for his crime.

古文：夷吾到县，无所验，但望阁伏哭而还。
现代文：夷吾到县后，没有查验，只望阁伏哭而回。
English: After I arrived in the county, there was no inspection, and I only went back to the pavilion to cry.

古文：一县惊怪，不知所为。
现代文：一县人惊怪，不知是干什么。
English: People in one prefecture were surprised and didn't know what to do.

古文：及还，白伦曰： 窃以占候，知长当死。近三十日，远不过六十日，游魂假息，非刑所加，故不收之。 
现代文：等到回来，报告第五伦说： 我用占候，知道乌程长会死，近在三十天，远不过六十天，游魂假息，不用刑罚加身，所以不逮捕他。 
English: When he came back, he reported to the fifth monk, "I used divination to know that Ucheng would die in about thirty days, but not more than sixty days, so I did not arrest him.

古文：伦听其言，至月余，果有驿马赍长印绶，上言暴卒。
现代文：第五伦听了他的话，到一月有余，果然有驿马送来乌程长的印绶，说是他暴病死去。
English: After listening to his words, it was more than a month before a courier came with a sealed envelope from Wujing, saying that he had died of a violent illness.

古文：伦以此益礼信之。
现代文：第五伦因此更加有礼而信服谢了。
English: This made the fifth monk more polite and convinced.

古文：举孝廉，为寿张令，稍迁荆州刺史，迁钜鹿太守。
现代文：谢夷吾被举为孝廉，做了寿张令，不久升为荆州刺史，升为巨鹿太守。
English: Xie Yiguo was elevated to the title of filial piety and made the Shou Zhangling, and was soon promoted to the Jingzhou Shishi, and then to the Jiu Degu Taimou.

古文：所在爱育人物，有善绩。
现代文：所到之处爱护人物，有好政绩。
English: He is well-liked wherever he goes and has a good political record.

古文：及伦作司徒，令班固为文荐夷吾曰：
现代文：后来第五伦做了司徒，叫班固写文推荐谢夷吾道： 臣听说尧用了稷、契，政治兴隆太平；舜用皋陶，政治雍熙。
English: Later, the fifth Lun became a disciple and asked Banggu to write an article recommending Xie Yi to our way: The minister heard that the use of the  and 契 brought political prosperity and peace; the use of the  and Tao brought political prosperity.

古文：臣闻尧登稷、契，政隆太平；舜用皋陶，政致雍熙、殷、周虽有高宗、昌、发之君，犹赖傅说、吕望之策，故能克崇其业，允协大中。
现代文：殷、周虽有高宗、文王、武王等君主，还靠有傅说、吕望的策略，所以能光崇其业，允协大中。
English: Although Yin and Zhou had emperors such as Gaozong, King Wen, and King Wu, they still relied on the strategy of having Fu say and Lvang, so they were able to glorify their cause and agree with the great middle.

古文：窃见钜鹿太守会稽谢夷吾，出自东州，厥土涂泥，而英姿挺特，奇伟秀出。
现代文：我私下看见巨鹿太守会稽谢夷吾，出自东州，厥土涂泥，而英姿挺特，奇伟秀出。
English: Privately, I saw that the giant deer was from Dongzhou, and was made of mud, but he was handsome and had a great appearance.

古文：才兼四科，行包九德，仁足济时，知周万物。
现代文：才兼四科，行包九德，仁心足以济时，智慧周及万物。
English: talent and four disciplines, nine virtues, benevolence enough to save time, wisdom and all things.

古文：加以少膺儒雅，韬含六籍，推考星度，综校图录，探赜圣秘，观变历征，占天知地，与神合契，据其道德，以经王务。
现代文：加以少时即知儒雅，韬含六籍，推考星度，综校图录，研究圣秘，观察变异，占天知地，与神合契，据其道德，以经王务。
English: In addition, he learned Confucianism at a young age, has six alphabets, deduced the constellations, compiled the school catalogue, studied the sacred secrets, observed the variations, knew the heavens and the earth, made a covenant with God, and governed his kingdom according to his morality.

古文：昔为陪隶，与臣从事，奋忠毅之操，躬史鱼之节，董臣严纲，勖臣懦弱，得以免戾，实赖厥勋。
现代文：从前做陪隶，与臣从事，奋其忠毅的操守，躬行史鱼的气节，帮助我振纪纲，除懦弱，我得免罪戾，实靠他的功劳。
English: In the past, when I was an attendant, I was engaged with a vassal, I tried my best to be loyal, I followed the spirit of the historical fish, and helped me maintain discipline. In addition to my cowardice, I was absolved of my crime, thanks to his merit.

古文：及其应选作宰，惠敷百里，降福弥异，流化若神，爰牧荆州，威行邦国。
现代文：等他应选作宰，惠及百里，降福弥异，流化有神，于是做荆州刺史，威行邦国。
English: When he was chosen to be the slaughterer, he benefited hundreds of li, reduced fortune and difference, and became a god, so he became the history of Jingzhou and ruled the country.

古文：奉法作政，有周、召之风；居俭履约，绍公仪之操。
现代文：奉法行政，有周公、召公的风度；平日俭约，继承公仪的操守。
English: Law-abiding administration, with the demeanor of being pro-government and pro-civil service; being frugal in everyday life, inheriting the ethics of public ceremonies.

古文：寻功简能，为外台之表；听声察实，为九伯之冠。迁守钜鹿，政合时雍。
现代文：从能力方面，可做外台之表；听声察实，可为九州之冠，迁守巨鹿，政合时和。
English: In terms of ability, it can be a watcher of the outside world; listening to the truth, it can be the crown of Kyushu, the relocation of the giant deer, and the coincidence of politics.

古文：宜当拔擢，使登鼎司。上令三辰顺轨于历象，下使五品咸训于嘉时，必致休征克昌之庆，非徒循法奉职而已。
现代文：德量绩谋，有伊尹、吕尚、管仲、晏婴的才能，阐弘道奥，同史苏、京房等人不相上下。虽然黾勉公务，而身出心隐，不求名声远扬，不求宠锡，心存谦逊，演志箕山。与古贤相比，实有伦序；和今人相较，超凡脱俗。的确是社稷之大龟，大汉的栋梁，应该提拔，使登鼎司，上使三辰顺轨，下使五品咸训，一定会得幸福，不只是守法奉职而已。
English: He has the ability to measure merit, and has the talent of Yi Yin, Lushang, Guanzhong, and Xing Bao, and is on a par with Shi Su and Jing Fang. Although he is diligent in his official duties, he comes from a hidden heart, does not seek fame, does not seek favor, and is humble. Compared with the ancient sages, he is truly virtuous; compared with today's people, he is transcendent. Indeed, he is the big turtle of the society, the pillar of the big man. He should be promoted, so that Deng Ding Di, Shang Di Sanchen Shun Railway, and the lower five grades of Xianxun,

古文：臣以顽驽，器非其畴，尸禄负乘，夕惕若厉。愿乞骸骨，更授夷吾，上以光七曜之明，下以厌率土之望，庶令微臣塞咎免悔。
现代文：臣以顽驽之才，器量非他同类，尸位素餐，非常警惕，愿请求退职，让位给夷吾，上以光七曜之明，下以满足人民的希望，庶乎使臣无悔。 
English: The minister, with his tenacious talent and unparalleled ability, is very alert, and is willing to ask for retirement and give up his position to Igo. He has no regrets about fulfilling the hopes of the people.

古文：后以行春乘柴车，从两史，冀州刺史上其仪序失中，有损国典，左转下邳令。
现代文：后来行春时乘柴车，跟着两吏，冀州刺史上奏说他仪序失中，有损国典，将他降为下邳令。
English: Later, during the Spring Festival, he rode a chariot of firewood, followed by two officials from the Jizhou Province, who told him that he had lost the order of the ceremony, which was detrimental to the national code, and reduced him to a lower-ranking official.

古文：豫克死日，如期果卒。
现代文：他预先知道死的日子，如期果然死去。
English: He knew the day of his death in advance and died as expected.

古文：敕其子曰： 汉末当乱，必有发掘露骸之祸。 
现代文：遗嘱其子道 ：汉朝末年当乱，必有掘坟露尸之祸到来。 
English: Testament of his son: When the Han Dynasty was in turmoil at the end of the year, there was bound to be a grave-digging disaster.

古文：使悬棺下葬，墓不起坟。
现代文：叫儿子用悬官下葬，不留坟顶。
English: He ordered his son to be buried with a casket, leaving no headstone.

古文：时，博士勃海郭凤亦好图谶，善说灾异，吉凶占应。
现代文：当时博士勃海郭凤也好图谶，善说灾异，吉凶占卜很应验。
English: At that time, Dr. Bo Hai Guofeng was good at divination, good at predicting calamities, and good at divination.

古文：先自知死期，豫令弟子市棺敛具，至其日而终。
现代文：先自知死期，预先叫弟子买好棺材殓具，到那天死去。
English: Knowing ahead of time when he would die, he asked his disciple to buy a coffin and bedding in advance, so that he would die on that day.

古文：杨由字哀侯，蜀郡成都人也，少习《易》，并七政、元气、风云占候。
现代文：杨由传，杨由字哀侯，蜀郡成都人。少年时学习《易经》，还有七政、元气、风云占候等。
English: Yang Yu Chuan, Yang Yu Zi Ma Hou, Shu County, Chengdu. He studied the "I Ching" when he was a boy, as well as the "Seven Politics," "Genki" and "Weather Forecasting."

古文：为郡文学掾。
现代文：做了郡文学掾。
English: He was appointed as the county literary scholar.

古文：时，有大雀夜集于库楼上，太守廉范以问由。由对曰： 此占郡内当有小兵，然不为害。 
现代文：当时有大雀晚上集于库楼上，太守廉范问杨由，由答道 ：按占卜郡内当有小兵，但不为害。 
English: At that time, there was a large flock of sparrows that gathered on the upper floor of the storehouse at night. When Yang Yu was asked about this, Yang Yu replied, "According to divination, there should be small soldiers in the county, but they will not do any harm."

古文：后二十余日，广柔县蛮夷反，杀伤长吏，郡发库兵击之。
现代文：后二十多天，广柔县蛮夷造，杀伤长吏，郡里调集库兵攻打他们，祸乱平息。
English: After more than twenty days, Guangru County barbarians built, killed and injured officials, the county mobilized the Ku soldiers to attack them, and the calamity subsided.

古文：又有风吹削哺，太守以问由。
现代文：又有风吹削哺，太守又问杨由。
English: The wind blew again, and the daimyō asked Yang Yu again.

古文：由对曰： 方当有荐木实者，其色黄赤。 
现代文：由答道： 正当有荐木实的人，他的颜色黄。 
English: Yu replied, "The color of a person who has a solid recommendation is yellow."

古文：顷之，五官掾献橘数包。
现代文：不久，五官掾献桔数包。
English: Soon, officials from five ministries presented several bags of oranges.

古文：由尝从人饮，敕御者曰： 酒若三行，便宜严驾。 
现代文：杨由曾经到人家喝酒，他对车夫说： 饮酒如果三行时，就应赶快起身。 
English: Yang Yu once went to someone's house to drink alcohol. He said to the driver, "If you are going to drink alcohol, you should get up as soon as possible.

古文：既而趣去。
现代文：不久催着离开。
English: They were soon ushered away.

古文：后主人舍有斗相杀者，人请问何以知之。
现代文：后来主人房后有人斗殴相杀，人问杨由怎么知道。
English: Later, someone got into a fight and killed each other behind the owner's house, and people asked Yang Yu how he knew.

古文：由曰： 向社中木上有鸠斗，此兵贼之象也。 
现代文：由答道： 刚才土地庙中树上有斑鸠打架，这就是兵贼的兆头哩。 
English: Yu replied, "Just now, there were turtledoves fighting in the trees of the local temple. That's a sign of a bandit.

古文：其言多验。
现代文：他的话多有应验。
English: Most of the promises of the peace treaty have been fulfilled.

古文：著书十余篇，名曰《其平》。
现代文：杨由著书十多篇，名叫《其平》。
English: Yang Yu has written more than ten books, called "Qiping."

古文：终于家。
现代文：死在家中。
English: He ended up staying at home.

古文：李南字孝山，丹阳句容人也。
现代文：李南传，李南字孝山，丹阳勾容人。
English: Li Nan Chuan, Li Nan Zi Xiaoshan, Danyang Goryong Ren.

古文：少笃学，明于风角。
现代文：少时好学，对风角很明白。
English: Sometimes eager to learn, very aware of the wind direction.

古文：和帝永元中，太守马棱坐盗贼事被征，当诣廷尉，吏民不宁，南特通谒贺。
现代文：和帝永元年间，太守马棱因盗贼案被召，当到廷尉那里去法办，官吏人民都不安，李南特通谒道贺。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, the grand marshal Ma Ren was summoned because of a theft case. When he went to the court to go to the court, the officials and people were uneasy, and Li Nante went to congratulate him.

古文：棱意有恨，谓曰： 太守不德，今当即罪，而君反相贺邪？ 
现代文：马棱有些不高兴，对李南说： 太守不道德，现在当办罪，可是你为什么反而贺我呢？ 
English: Unhappy, Ma Ren said to Li Nan, "It's immoral to be too conservative, now you have to deal with the crime, but why are you congratulating me?

古文：南曰： 旦有善风，明日中时，应有吉问，故来称庆。 
现代文：李南说： 早上有好风，明天中午应有好消息到，所以来祝贺。 
English: Li Nan said, "There is a good wind in the morning, so there should be good news at noon tomorrow, so come and congratulate.

古文：旦日，棱延望景晏，以为无征；至晡，乃有驿使赍诏书原停棱事。
现代文：第二天早上，马棱伸颈望日影，认为不灵；到了中午，竟有驿使诏书原谅马棱的案情。
English: The next morning, Ma Ren craned his neck to look at the shadow of the sun, thinking that it was not working; at noon, there was actually an imperial edict to forgive Ma Ren's case.

古文：南问其迟留之状。
现代文：李南问为什么迟到。
English: Li Nan asked why he was late.

古文：使者曰： 向度宛陵浦里方亢，马踠足，是以不得速。 
现代文：使者说 ：前日经过宛陵浦里癏过渡时，马折了足，因此不能快速到达。 
English: The messenger said, "The horse broke its leg the day before when passing through Wanling Puli Pass, so it couldn't get there quickly.

古文：棱乃服焉。
现代文：马棱才心服。
English: Ma Rencai was convinced.

古文：后举有道，辟公府，病不行，终于家。
现代文：后来举为有道之士，召入公府，因病不能成行，死在家中。
English: Later, he was named a Taoist, summoned to the government office, but was unable to travel due to illness, and died at home.

古文：南女亦晓家术，为由拳县人妻。
现代文：李南的女儿也晓得家术，做了由拳县人的妻子。
English: The daughter of Li Nan also knows the family art, and has become the wife of a person from Yue County.

古文：晨诣爨室，卒有暴风，妇便上堂从姑求归，辞其二亲。姑不许，乃跪而泣曰： 家世传术，疾风卒起，先吹灶突及井，此祸为妇女主爨者，妾将亡之应。 
现代文：早上到厨房，猝然有暴风发作，妇便上堂屋向婆婆告假回去，辞别父母，婆婆不许可，媳妇便跪着哭诉道： 我家专祖传法术，疾风猝起，先吹灶屋烟囱和井架，这祸必降到厨房主持炊事的妇女，这是我将死的预兆。 
English: In the morning, when she went to the kitchen, a sudden storm broke out. The woman went to the hall to tell her mother-in-law that she was going back on leave. She said goodbye to her parents, but her mother-in-law did not allow it. The daughter-in-law then knelt down and cried, saying: My family has a special ancestral spell. When a sudden gale blows, it first blows the kitchen chimney and the derrick. This calamity will fall on the woman who is in charge of the kitchen. This is an omen of my death.

古文：因著其亡日。
现代文：于是说明她的死期。
English: This explains the time of her death.

古文：乃听还家，如期病卒。
现代文：婆婆于是让她回去，如期果然病死了。
English: Her mother-in-law then asked her to go back, and she died of illness as expected.

古文：李郃字孟节，汉中南郑人也。
现代文：李郃传，李郃字孟节，汉中南郑人。
English: Li Yu Chuan, Li Yu Zi Meng Jie, Han Zhongnan Zheng Ren.

古文：父颉，以儒学称，官至博士。
现代文：父亲李颉，以儒学著称，官做到博士。
English: His father, Li Lan, was famous for his Confucianism and was promoted to the rank of doctor.

古文：郃袭父业，游太学，通《五经》。
现代文：李郃继承父业，游太学，通晓《五经》。
English: Li Qian inherited his father's business, traveled extensively, and was well versed in the "Five Classics."

古文：善《河》、《洛》风星，外质朴，人莫之识。
现代文：长于《河洛》风星，外表质朴，别人都不懂。
English: Longer than the "Halo" wind star, the appearance is simple, others do not understand.

古文：县召署幕门候吏。
现代文：县召他做幕门候吏。
English: The county called him to be a curtain gate attendant.

古文：和帝即位，分遣使者，皆微服单行，各至州县，观采风谣。
现代文：和帝即位，分派使者，都穿便服单独行动，各人到州县，观采风谣。
English: Emperor enthroned, dispatched envoys, all dressed in civilian clothes to act alone, each person went to the state and county to watch the folklore.

古文：使者二人当到益部，投郃候舍。
现代文：使者两人当到益部，投到李郃候舍。
English: The two envoys went to the Ministry of Finance and went to Li Xun's waiting house.

古文：时，夏夕露坐，郃因仰观，问曰： 二君发京师时，宁知朝廷遣二使邪？ 
现代文：这时正是夏天晚上在外乘凉，李郃便仰观天上，问道 ：你们两位从京师出发时，知道朝廷派了两位使者吗？ 
English: At that time, it was a summer evening, when it was cool outside. Li Qiye looked up at the sky and asked: When you two set out from Beijing, did you know that the imperial court had sent two emissaries?

古文：二人默然，惊相视曰： 不闻也。 
现代文：两人默不作声，惊讶地互相对看一下答道 ：没有听说过。 
English: The two fell silent, looked at each other in surprise, and replied, "I've never heard of it."

古文：问何以知之。
现代文：并问 ：你怎么知道的？ 
English: Ask him how he knows.

古文：郃指星示云： 有二使星向益州分野，故知之耳。 
现代文：李郃指着星星告诉他们 ：有二使星向益州分野，所以知道哩。 
English: Li Yao pointed to the stars and told them: There are two shooting stars in the direction of Yizhou, so I know.

古文：后三年，其使者一人拜汉中太守，郃犹为吏。太守奇其隐德，召署户曹史。
现代文：过后三年，其使者中有一人拜为汉中太守，李郃还在汉中为吏，太守认为李郃有隐德，召李郃做户曹史。
English: Three years later, one of his emissaries was worshipped as the emperor of the Han Dynasty, and Li Xun was still an official in the Han Dynasty. The emperor thought that Li Xun had hidden virtues and called Li Xun to become Cao Shi.

古文：时，大将军窦宪纳妻，天下郡国皆有礼庆，郡亦遣使。
现代文：当时大将军窦宪纳妻，天下郡国都送礼庆贺，郡里也派使者前往。
English: At that time, the wife of General Dou Xiana, the county and the country all sent gifts and congratulations, and the county also sent an envoy.

古文：郃进谏曰： 窦将军椒房之亲，不修礼德，而专权骄恣，危亡之祸可翘足而待。愿明府一心王室，勿与交通。 
现代文：李郃进谏道 ：窦将军是皇后的弟弟，不修礼德，而专权骄傲放肆，危亡之祸马上要到，希明府一心忠于王室，莫与他交往。 
English: Li Yujin: General Dou is the younger brother of the empress. He is immoral, and the autocracy is proud and impudent. The calamity of death is imminent. Xi Mingfu is loyal to the royal family and must not associate with him.

古文：太守固遣之，郃不能止。请求自行，许之。
现代文：太守坚决派人前去，李郃不能阻止，请求自行，同意了。
English: The daimyō resolutely sent someone forward, and Li Yiming, unable to stop him, asked to go on his own and agreed.

古文：郃遂所在留迟，以观其变。
现代文：李郃于是所在留迟，来观其变化。
English: So Li Yao stayed there to see the changes.

古文：行至扶风，而宪就国自杀，支党悉伏其诛。
现代文：走到扶风，而窦宪到封地自杀，他的党羽全部被杀。
English: He went to Fu Feng, while Dou Xian committed suicide in his fiefdom, and all of his followers were killed.

古文：凡交通宪者，皆为免官，唯汉中太守不豫焉。
现代文：凡与窦宪有交往的人，都被免官，只有汉中太守没有关系。
English: All those who had dealings with Dou Xian were dismissed from their posts, except for the Han Middle Empress Dowager.

古文：郃岁中举孝廉，五迁尚书令，又拜太常。
现代文：李郃岁中举为孝廉，五次升迁做了尚书令，又拜为太常。
English: Li Jian was promoted to Xiaolian in his junior year, promoted five times to Shang Shuling, and worshipped as Taizang.

古文：元初四年，代袁敞为司空，数陈得失，有忠臣节。
现代文：元初四年，代替袁敞做司空，数次陈述政事得失，有忠臣的气节。
English: In the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, he replaced Yuan Zhan as the Secretary of the Air Force. He made several statements on the gains and losses of the government, and had the temperament of a loyal subject.

古文：在位四年，坐请托事免。
现代文：在位四年，因请托事被免官。
English: After four years in office, he was removed from office for soliciting a favor.

古文：安帝崩，北乡侯立，复为司徒。
现代文：安帝死后，北乡侯立，又用李郃为司徒。
English: After the death of An Di, Beixiang Hou Li used Li Yao as a tutor.

古文：及北乡侯病，郃阴与少府河南陶范、步兵校尉赵直谋立顺帝，会孙程等事先成，故郃功不显。
现代文：等到北乡侯生病，李郃暗地与少府河南陶范、步兵校尉赵直谋立顺帝，正逢孙程等事先成功，所以李郃的功劳不显著。
English: When Bei Xiang Hou fell ill, Li Qian secretly conspired with Tao Fan, the shofu of Henan Province, and Zhao Zhizhi, an infantry lieutenant, to establish Shun Emperor. Sun Cheng and others were successful in advance, so Li Qian's contribution was not significant.

古文：明年，坐吏民疾病，仍有灾异，赐策免。
现代文：第二年，因为吏民疾病，仍有灾异，赐第免官。
English: In the second year, because of the illness of officials and people, there were still disasters, and Dai was dismissed.

古文：将作大匠翟酺上郃 潜图大计，以安社稷 ，于是录阴谋之功，封郃涉都侯，辞让不受。
现代文：将佐大匠翟上书说李郃 潜图大家，以安社稷 。于是录阴谋之功，封李郃为涉都侯，李郃辞让不受。
English: General Zasa Daishi wrote a letter saying that Li Xi was the hidden map of everyone, with Anshao. So he recorded the conspiracy, sealed Li Xi as the mayor of the capital, and Li Xi's resignation was not accepted.

古文：官至奉车都尉。
现代文：八十多岁，死在家中。
English: He was in his eighties and died at home.

古文：段翳字元章，广汉新都人也。
现代文：门人上党冯胄独自制了丧服，守心丧三年，当时人很觉奇怪。段翳传，段翳字元章，广汉新都人。
English: The gatekeeper of the party, Feng Yu, made the mourning clothes by himself. He kept the mourning for three years. At that time, people felt very strange. Duan Yu Chuan, Duan Yu Zi Yuan Zhang, Guanghan Xindu people.

古文：习《易经》，明风角。
现代文：学习《易经》，明风角。
English: Study "I Ching," the bright wind angle.

古文：时有就其学者，虽未至，必豫知其姓名。
现代文：当时有到那里学习的人，即使人没有到，他一定预先知道他的姓名。
English: There were people studying there at that time, and even if no one came, he must have known his name in advance.

古文：尝告守津吏曰： 某日当有诸生二人，荷担问翳舍处者，幸为告之。 
现代文：曾经告诉守津吏道 ：某日会有两个学生，挑着行李打听我的住处，希望你告诉他们。 
English: He once told Moritsuna officials, "One day, there will be two students who will pick up their luggage and ask where I live. I hope you will tell them."

古文：后竟如其言。
现代文：后来果然像他所讲的那样。
English: It turned out to be just as he said.

古文：又有一生来学，积年，自谓略究要术，辞归乡里。翳为合膏药，并以简书封于筒中，告生曰： 有急发视之。 
现代文：又有一个学生来学习，学了几年，自己认为略究要术了，辞归乡里，段翳替他合一剂膏药，并用简书封在筒中，告学生说 ：有急事打开看看。 
English: Another student came to study. After several years of study, he thought it was time to learn a little about the art. He resigned to return to his hometown. Duan Qian made a plaster for him and sealed it in a tube with a booklet. He told the student, "There is an emergency, open it and have a look."

古文：生到葭萌，与吏争度，津吏楇破从者头。
现代文：学生到了葭萌，与吏争渡，津吏打破了从者的头。
English: When the students arrived in Qimeng, they fought with the officials, and the officials in Jin broke the follower's head.

古文：生开筒得书，言到葭萌，与吏斗头破者，以此膏裹之。
现代文：学生便打开筒子得了信，信中说，到了葭萌，与吏相斗头打破的，用这膏药裹之。
English: The student then opened the tube and received a letter. The letter said that if a student broke his or her neck in a fight with an official, they should wrap it in this plaster.

古文：生用其言，创者即愈。
现代文：学生听了他的话，受伤者立即好了。
English: The students listened to his words, and the injured recovered immediately.

古文：生叹服，乃还卒业。
现代文：学生叹服，于是打转完成了学业。
English: The student sighed with relief, so he turned around and finished his studies.

古文：翳遂隐居窜迹，终于家。
现代文：段翳于是隐居不露踪迹，死在家中。
English: As a result, Duan Yu went into seclusion and died at home.

古文：廖扶字文起，汝南平舆人也。
现代文：廖扶传，廖扶字文起，汝南平舆人。
English: Liao Fu Chuan, Liao Fu Zi Wen Chi, Ru Nanping Shih Ren.

古文：习《韩诗》、《欧阳尚书》，教授常数百人。
现代文：学习《韩诗》、《欧阳尚书》，教授经常数百人。
English: There are often hundreds of professors studying "Korean Poetry" and "Song of the Western Yang Dynasty."

古文：父为北地太守，永初中，坐羌没郡下狱死。扶感父以法丧身，惮为吏。
现代文：父亲做北地太守，永初年间，因为羌人犯郡被下狱死，廖扶感到父亲因法死去，怕做吏。
English: His father was the governor of the North, and during the Yongchun era, because he was sent to prison and died, Liao Fu felt that his father died because of the law, and he was afraid to be an official.

古文：及服终而叹曰： 老子有言： 名与身孰亲？ 
现代文：到了服丧完毕叹道 ：老子说过 ：名与身谁亲？ 
English: When the funeral was over, he sighed and said, "Lao Tzu said, 'Who is closer to one's name than to one's body?'

古文：吾岂为名乎！ 
现代文：我难道为名？ 
English: Do I sing for the glory of it?

古文：遂绝志世外。
现代文：于是绝志世外。
English: As a result, he decided to leave the world.

古文：专精经典，尤明天文、谶纬，风角、推步之术。
现代文：专攻经典，尤其研究天文、谶纬、风角、推步之术。
English: He specializes in the classics, especially in the study of astronomy, compass, wind angle, and the art of pushing.

古文：州郡公府辟召，皆不应。
现代文：州郡公府征召他，都不应。
English: The state and county should not have drafted him.

古文：就问灾异，亦无所对。
现代文：即使问及灾异，也无所对答。
English: Even when asked about the disaster, there was no answer.

古文：扶逆知岁荒，乃聚谷数千斛，悉用给宗族姻亲，又敛葬遭疫死亡不能自收者。
现代文：廖扶推知年岁饥荒，于是聚谷数千斛，全部用来给宗族姻亲，又殓葬那些遭疾死亡不能自收骸骨的人。
English: Liao Fuxi knew about the years of famine, so he gathered thousands of skulls from the valley, all of which were used to give to the clan in-laws, and to bury those who died of illness and could not collect their own skeletons.

古文：常居先人冢侧，未曾入城市。
现代文：常住在先人坟旁，不曾进入城市。
English: He often lived next to the graves of his ancestors and never went into the city.

古文：太守谒焕，先为诸生，从扶学。后临郡，未到，先遣吏修门人之礼，又欲擢扶子弟，固不肯，当时人因号为北郭先生。
现代文：太守名叫谒焕，先为诸生，从廖扶学习，后来到了郡，未到任，先派吏门人之礼，又想提拔廖扶的子弟，廖扶坚决不肯，当时人于是称他为北郭先生。
English: The daimyō was named Zou Huan. He was the first of his generation to study under Liao Fu. Later, he came to the county. Before he took office, he sent an official to congratulate him. He also wanted to promote Liao Fu's son, but Liao Fu resolutely refused. At that time, people called him Mr. Beiguo.

古文：年八十，终于家。
现代文：年八十岁，死在家中。
English: On the 15th of this month, he died without illness, and scholars believe that he was a man who understood the fate of the world.

古文：二子，孟举、伟举，并知名。
现代文：两个儿子，孟举、伟举，都很著名。
English: His two sons, Meng Jiu and Wei Jiu, are both famous.

古文：折像字伯式，广汉雒人也。
现代文：折像传，折像字伯式，广汉雒人。
English: Origami biography, origami character Bo style, Guanghan Xingren.

古文：其先张江者，封折侯，曾孙国为郁林太守，徙广汉，因封氏焉。
现代文：他的先辈张江，封为折侯。曾孙张国做了郁林太守，迁到广汉，于是封氏在这里。
English: His ancestor, Zhang Jiang, was a fief of Orifu. His great-grandson, Zhang Guo, became the governor of Yulin and moved to Guanghan, so the Fong clan came here.

古文：国生像。
现代文：张国生了折像。
English: Zhang Guosheng has a folding portrait.

古文：国有资财二亿，家僮八百人。
现代文：张国有资财二亿，家僮八百人。
English: Zhang has 200 million state-owned assets and 800 family members.

古文：像幼有仁心，不杀昆虫，不折萌牙。
现代文：折像幼时即有仁心，不杀昆虫，不折嫩芽。
English: When he was young, he had a benevolent heart, he did not kill insects, and he did not break shoots.

古文：能通《京氏易》，好黄、老言。
现代文：能通晓《京氏易》，好黄帝、老子之言。
English: Be able to understand "Kyo Shi Yi," the words of Huang Di and Lao Zi.

古文：及国卒，感多藏厚亡之义，乃散金帛资产，周施亲疏。
现代文：等国死后，感觉到老子说的 多藏必厚亡 的道理，于是分散金帛财产，周济亲疏之人。
English: After the death of such a country, he felt the truth of Lao Zi's saying that the more you hide, the more you will die, so he dispersed the gold ingot property and gave alms to the relatives.

古文：或谏像曰： 君三男两女，孙息盈前，当增益产业，何为坐自殚竭乎？ 
现代文：有人劝折像道 ：你有三个儿子两个女儿，孙辈满堂，应当增加产业，为什么自己把家产搞光呢？ 
English: Some people advised him: "You have three sons and two daughters, and grandchildren galore. You should increase your property. Why are you running out of property?"

古文：像曰： 昔斗子文有言： 我乃逃祸，非避富也。 
现代文：像说 ：从前斗子文有句话： 我是逃祸，不是避富哩。 
English: For example, there is a saying in the Dou Zi Wen: "I am escaping disaster, not avoiding wealth."

古文：吾门户殖财日久，盈满之咎，道家所忌。
现代文：我家积财时间很久，盈满的过错，是道家最忌讳的。
English: My family has been accumulating wealth for a long time, and the fault of overflowing is the most taboo for Taoists.

古文：今世将衰，子又不才。
现代文：今世道将衰，儿子又没有才能。
English: This world is going to hell in a handbasket, and my son has no talent.

古文：不仁而富，谓之不幸。
现代文：不仁而富，叫做不幸。
English: Wealth without mercy is called misfortune.

古文：墙隙而高，其崩必疾也。 
现代文：墙有缝隙而高耸，一定会快速崩溃哩！ 
English: If a wall is high and has gaps, it is sure to collapse quickly!

古文：智者闻之，咸服焉。
现代文：聪明的人听了这番话都服他。
English: When the wise men heard this, they obeyed him.

古文：自知亡日，召宾客九族饮食辞诀，忽然而终。
现代文：自己知道死亡的日子，召集宾客九族饮食后告别，突然死去。
English: He knew the day of his death, gathered guests from nine ethnic groups for a meal, said goodbye, and died suddenly.

古文：时年八十四。家无余资，诸子衰劣如其言云。
现代文：时年八十四岁，家无多余财产，几个儿子衰劣像他父亲说的那样。
English: Eighty-four years old at the time, the family had no surplus property, and several sons had deteriorated as his father had said.

古文：樊英字季齐，南阳鲁阳人也。
现代文：樊英传，樊英字季齐，南阳鲁阳人。
English: Gong Ying Chuan, Gong Ying Zi Ji Qi, Nanyang Lu Yang Ren.

古文：少受业三辅，习《京氏易》，兼明《五经》。
现代文：少时在三辅学习，学了《京氏易》，兼学《五经》。
English: When he was a boy, he studied at Sanfu, and learned "Keishi Yi" and "Five Classics" at the same time.

古文：又善风角、星算，《河》、《洛》七纬，推步灾异。
现代文：又善于风角、星算，《河洛》七纬，推步灾异。
English: He is also good at wind angle, star calculation, "Helo" seven latitudes, and pushing disaster.

古文：隐于壶山之阳，受业者四方而至。
现代文：隐居在壶山之阳，受业的人从四方赶来。
English: He lives in seclusion in the sun of Kuchuzan, and people come from all over the country to be trained by him.

古文：州郡前后礼请，不应；公卿举贤良方正、有道，皆不行。
现代文：州郡前后礼请他出山，他不答应。公卿举他做贤良方正、有道，都不行。
English: The prefectural and county officials repeatedly invited him to leave the mountain, but he did not agree. The nobles could not make him into a virtuous, upright, and virtuous man.

古文：尝有暴风从西方起，英谓学者曰： 成都市火甚盛。 
现代文：曾经有暴风从西方起，樊英对学生说 ：成都市火很大。 
English: Once there was a storm from the west, and Hao Ying said to the students: Chengdu is on fire.

古文：因含水西向漱之，乃令记其日时。
现代文：于是含水向西方漱去，并叫学生记下某日某时。
English: The water was then rinsed to the west, and the students were asked to write down the date and time.

古文：客后有从蜀都来，云 是日大火，有黑云卒从东起，须臾大雨，火遂得灭 。
现代文：后来有客从四川来，说道： 今天大火，有黑云猝然从东方升起，一会儿下大雨，火才得灭。 
English: Later, a guest from Sichuan came and said, "Today there was a big fire, a black cloud suddenly rose from the east, and it rained heavily for a while before the fire was extinguished.

古文：于是天下称其术艺。
现代文：于是天下称赞他的术艺高超。
English: As a result, the whole world praised his superb skills.

古文：安帝初，征为博士。
现代文：安帝初年，召樊英为博士。
English: In the first year of An Di, Zou Ying was appointed as a doctor.

古文：至建光元年，复诏公车赐策书，征英及同郡孔乔、李昺、北海郎宗、陈留杨伦、东平王辅六人，唯郎宗、杨伦到洛阳，英等四人并不至。
现代文：到了建光元年，又诏公车赐策书，召樊英和同郡的孔乔、李曰内、北海郎宗、陈留杨伦、东平三辅六人，只有郎宗、杨伦到了洛阳，樊英等四人没有到。
English: In the first year of the Jianguang era, the official bus also issued a policy document, summoning six people, including Gong Qiao, Li Zhanai, Beihai Lang Zong, Chen Rui Yang Lun, and Dongping Sanfu, to Luoyang. Only Lang Zong and Yang Lun arrived in Luoyang, and four people, including Gong Ying, did not arrive.

古文：永建二年，顺帝策书备礼，玄纁征之，复固辞疾笃。
现代文：永建二年，顺帝策书备礼，用玄纟熏召他，又坚决辞以病重。
English: In the second year of Yongjian, Emperor Shun wrote a book to prepare for the ceremony, summoned him with the imperial scepter, and resolutely resigned due to serious illness.

古文：乃诏切责郡县，驾载上道。
现代文：于是诏书责成郡县，驾载上路。
English: Therefore, the edict ordered the county to take the vehicle on the road.

古文：英不得已，到京，称疾不肯起。
现代文：樊英不得已，到了京都，称病不肯起来。
English: As a last resort, Hao Ying arrived in Kyoto, saying that she was ill and did not want to get up.

古文：乃强舆入殿，犹不以礼屈。
现代文：于是勉强用车子载入殿，还是不用礼相屈。
English: As a result, they were forced to use a car to enter the hall, but they still didn't have to bow to protocol.

古文：帝怒，谓英曰： 朕能生君，能杀君；能贵君，能贱君；能富君，能贫君。
现代文：皇帝发了火，对英说 ：我能让你活，也能杀掉你；能使你贵，也能使你贱；能使你富，也能使你贫。
English: The emperor lit a fire and said to Ying, "I can let you live or I can kill you; I can make you rich or I can make you poor.

古文：君何以慢朕命？ 
现代文：你为什么怠慢我的命令？ 
English: Why do you disobey my orders?

古文：英曰： 臣受命于天。
现代文：樊英说： 臣受命于天。
English: Zou Ying said, "Ministers are ordered by heaven.

古文：生尽其命，天也；死不得其命，亦天也。
现代文：活完了性命，是天；死不得其命，也是天。
English: To live out one's life is heaven; to die before one's death is also heaven.

古文：陛下焉能生臣，焉能杀臣！
现代文：陛下怎能使我活，怎能杀我！
English: How can your majesty let me live, how can you kill me!

古文：臣见暴君如见仇雠，立其朝犹不肯，可得而贵乎？
现代文：臣见暴君如见了仇人，站在他的朝廷还不肯，可得而贵么？
English: If a tyrannical vassal sees an enemy and does not want to stand in his court, is it worth the price?

古文：虽在布衣之列，环堵之中，晏然自得，不易万乘之尊，又可得而贱乎？
现代文：虽然我生在布衣之士的行列，住在一堵墙之中，但是安然自得，用万乘之尊来换我还不肯，又怎能得贱呢？
English: Although I was born in the ranks of the people of the cloth and live in the middle of a wall, I am at peace with myself. I am not willing to exchange the respect of the Almighty for it. How can I be cheap?

古文：陛下焉能贵臣，焉能贱臣！
现代文：陛下怎能使我贵，使我贱！
English: How can Your Majesty make me expensive, make me cheap!

古文：臣非礼之禄，虽万钟不受；若申其志，虽箪食不厌也。
现代文：臣对非礼的俸禄，即使有万钟之粟我还不肯受；如果我的志得申张，即使用竹篮子装饭也不感到可厌哩。
English: I would not accept even the tiniest amount of money from a vassal, even if the vassal treated me with disrespect; I would not even find it distasteful to use a bamboo basket to pack rice, if I had the will to do so.

古文：陛下焉能富臣，焉能贫臣！ 
现代文：陛下怎能使我富足，使我贫困呢？ 
English: How can your majesty enrich me and impoverish me?

古文：帝不能屈，而敬其名，使出就太医养疾，月致羊、酒。
现代文：皇上不能使他屈服，而尊敬他的名气，让他出来到太医院养病，每月送羊酒等物给他。
English: The emperor could not make him submit, but respected his reputation, let him come out to Tai Hospital to recover, and sent him sheep wine and other things every month.

古文：至四年三月，天子乃为英设坛席，令公车令导，尚书奉引，赐几杖，待以师傅之礼，延问得失。
现代文：到了四年三月，天子才替樊英设坛席，令公车开路，尚书作向导，赐几杖，以师傅之礼待他，向他请教政治的得失。
English: It was not until March of the fourth year that the heavenly son set up a altar seat for Xing Ying, opened the road for the bus, gave him a book as a guide, gave him a few sticks, treated him with the courtesy of a master, and asked him about the political gains and losses.

古文：英不敢辞，拜五官中郎将。
现代文：樊英不敢辞，被拜为五官中郎将。
English: Hao Ying did not dare to resign and was worshipped as the general of the five officials.

古文：数月，英称疾笃，诏以为光禄大夫，赐告归。
现代文：几个月后，英称病重，诏以他为光禄大夫，赐假让他回去。
English: A few months later, Ying said that he was seriously ill and gave him leave to go back, calling him Dr. Guanglu.

古文：令在所送谷千斛，常以八月致牛一头，酒三斛；如有不幸，祠以中牢。
现代文：并命令他所在之处送谷千斛，常在八月送牛一头，酒三斛，如有不幸发生，用中牢之礼祭奠。
English: He was also ordered to send a thousand yakitori to wherever he was, and often in August he would send a cow and three yakitori of sake. In case of misfortune, he would use the ceremony of a medium-security prison.

古文：英辞位不受，有诏譬旨，勿听。
现代文：樊英辞位不受，有诏譬旨不听。
English: The imperial edict is not accepted, and the imperial edict is not heeded.

古文：英初被诏命，佥以为必不降志，及后应对，又无奇谟深策，谈者以为失望。
现代文：樊英开始被诏命，大家以为他一定不会降志屈从，等到后来与皇上应对，又没有出什么奇谋深策，议论的人认为失望。
English: When Emperor Gao Ying was given the imperial command, everyone thought that he would not give in. However, when he later had to deal with the emperor, he did not come up with any cunning plan. The people who discussed this were disappointed.

古文：初，河南张楷与英俱征，既而谓英曰： 天下有二道，出与处也。
现代文：起初，河南张楷与樊英一道被召，既而对英说： 天下有两条路，即出来和不出来。
English: At first, Henan Zhang Kai was called together with Zou Ying, and he said to Ying: There are two ways under heaven, that is, to come out and not to come out.

古文：吾前以子之出，能辅是君也，济斯人也。
现代文：我从前以为你出来，能辅助国君，救济这些百姓。
English: I used to think that if you came out, you would be able to assist the sovereign and help these people.

古文：而子始以不訾之身，怒万乘之主；及其享受爵禄，又不闻匡救之术，进退无所据矣。 
现代文：可是你开始用不怕诋毁之身，激怒万乘之主，等到享受了爵禄之后，又没有听说有什么匡时救世的方法，进退没有根据了。 
English: However, when you begin to use the body that is not afraid of being slandered to provoke the anger of the Lord of all creation, and when you have enjoyed the peerage, you have not heard of any way to save the world, and there is no reason to advance or retreat.

古文：英既善术，朝廷每有灾异，诏辄下问变复之效，所言多验。
现代文：樊英既善方术，朝廷每有灾异现象，诏常下问变复之效，所说的多有灵验。
English: Xing Ying was a good tactician, and whenever there was a disaster or unusual phenomenon, the imperial court often asked about the effect of change, and what he said was mostly effective.

古文：初，英著《易章句》，世名樊氏学，以图纬教授。
现代文：起初，樊英著有《易章句》，世名樊氏学，用图纬教授学生。
English: At first, Zou Ying Rong authored "Easy Chapters and Sentences," world-renowned Zou's study, teaching students with graphs.

古文：颍川陈寔，少从英学。
现代文：颍川陈萛少时从樊英学习。
English: When he was young, Chen Yao learned from Zou Ying.

古文：尝有疾，妻遣婢拜问，英下床答拜。
现代文：曾经樊英生病，妻派丫头拜问，樊英一定下床答拜。
English: Once, when Gong Ying was ill, his wife sent a maid to pray for him. Gong Ying would get out of bed and pray for him.

古文：寔怪而问之。
现代文：陈萛觉得奇怪而问他。
English: Chen Yao felt strange and asked him.

古文：英曰： 妻，齐也。共奉祭祀，礼无不答。 
现代文：英说 ：妻，是齐的意思，供奉祭祀，按礼没有不答拜的。 
English: Ying said: "Wife, which means all, is to offer sacrifices, and there is no one who does not respond according to the ritual.

古文：其恭谨若是。
现代文：他的恭谨就是这样。
English: That's how respectful he is.

古文：年七十余，卒于家。
现代文：年七十多岁，死于家中。
English: He was in his seventies and died at home.

