古文：兵问曰：交和而舍，粮食均足，人兵敌衡，客主两惧。
现代文：兵家问道： 两军对垒，双方粮食都很充足，兵员人数和武器也相当，双方彼此都畏惧对方。
English: The soldier asked: "The two armies are facing each other, both sides have enough food, the number of soldiers and weapons are equal, and both sides are afraid of each other.

古文：敌人圆阵以胥，因以为固，击：击此者，三军之众分而为四五，或傅而佯北，而示之惧。
现代文：这时，敌军布下圆阵固守待战，怎么攻击敌军呢？ 孙膑道： 攻击这样的敌军，可以把本方军兵分成四五路，有的军兵与敌军稍一接触就假装败逃，装出十分畏惧敌军的样子。
English: At this time, the enemy troops have set up a circular formation and are standing by for battle. How should we attack the enemy troops? Sun Yat-sen said, "To attack such enemy troops, we can divide our troops into four or five groups. Some soldiers will pretend to flee as soon as they come into contact with the enemy troops, pretending to be very afraid of the enemy troops.

古文：彼见我惧，则遂分而不顾。
现代文：敌军见我军畏惧，就会毫无顾忌地分兵追击我军。
English: If the enemy sees that our army is afraid, it will pursue our army without any scruples.

古文：因其乱毁其固。驷鼓同举，五遂俱傅。五遂俱至，三军同利。
现代文：我军就可以乘放军乱而毁掉其坚固的阵地，随即驱动战车，擂响战鼓，五路军兵齐发，全军协同攻击敌军了。
English: Our army can take advantage of the outbreak of military disorder to destroy its strong positions, and then drive the chariots, sound the drums of war, the soldiers of the five armies go out in unison, and the whole army attacks the enemy together.

古文：此击圆之道也。
现代文：这就是击破敌军圆阵的办法。 
English: This is the way to break through the enemy's circle.

古文：交和而舍，敌富我贫，敌众我少，敌强我弱，其来有方，击之奈何？
现代文： 两军对垒时，敌方很富，我方很穷，敌军兵多，我军兵少，敌强我弱，敌军用方阵向我方进攻，我军该如何抗击敌军呢？ 
English: When the two armies are facing each other, the enemy is very rich, we are very poor, the enemy has many soldiers, we have few soldiers, the enemy is strong and we are weak, and the enemy attacks us in a phalanx. How should our army fight the enemy?

古文：曰：击此者，□阵而□之，规而离之，合而佯北，杀将其后，勿令知之。此击方之道也。
现代文：孙膑说： 抗击这样的敌军，使集中的敌军分散，一接触就假装败逃，然后伺机从后面攻击敌军，但要注意不让敌军事先察觉。这就是攻破敌军方阵的办法。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said: "Fight against such enemy forces, disperse the concentrated enemy forces, pretend to flee as soon as contact is made, and then wait for an opportunity to attack the enemy forces from behind, but be careful not to let the enemy forces be detected first. This is the way to break through the enemy's military formation.

古文：交和而舍，敌人既众以强，劲捷以刚，锐阵以胥，击之奈何？
现代文： 两军对垒时，敌军人数既多又强，勇猛、敏捷，并且列成锐阵准备与我军交战，该如何抗击这样的敌军？ 
English: When the two armies face each other, the enemy troops are numerous and strong, brave and agile, and are lined up in a sharp line to prepare to fight with our army. How should we fight against such enemy troops?

古文：击此者，必三而离之，一者延而衡，二者恐而下惑，下上既乱，三军大北。
现代文：孙膑说： 抗击这样的敌军，要把本方的军队分成三部分，以便调动、分散敌军。用本方一部分军兵与敌军周旋抗衡，阻滞敌军；第二部分军兵从而造成敌军将领恐惧，士兵惶惑，上下混乱，敌军必将全军大败。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: To fight against such an enemy army, it is necessary to divide one's own army into three parts in order to mobilize and disperse the enemy army. Use one part of one's own army to compete with the enemy army and block the enemy army; the second part of the army will thus cause the enemy generals to be afraid, the soldiers to be confused, and the upper and lower ranks to be confused. The enemy army will surely defeat the whole army.

古文：此击锐之道也。
现代文：这就是击破敌军锐阵的办法。 
English: This is the way to break through the enemy's sharp line.

古文：交和而舍，敌既众以强，延阵以衡，我阵而待之，人少不能，击之奈何？
现代文： 两军对垒时，敌军人数多而且强大，布成阵势与我军交战，我军也列阵等待，但我军兵力太少，无法抗击敌军，该怎么办呢？ 
English: When the two armies are facing each other, the enemy troops are numerous and powerful. They have formed a formation to fight against our army. Our army is also waiting in line, but our army is too small to resist the enemy. What should we do?

古文：击此者，必将三分我兵，练我死士，二者延阵张翼，一者材士练兵，期其中极。
现代文：孙膑说： 抗击这样的敌军，要把本方军队分成三部分，并且要特别选出一部分精兵组成敢死队。用三部分中的两路军兵列成阵势，张开两翼，再用精兵组成的敢死队攻击敌军中枢，务求一击必中。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: To fight against such an enemy army, it is necessary to divide one's own army into three parts, and to specially select a part of the elite soldiers to form a death squad. With the soldiers of the two armies in the three parts, form a formation, open the two wings, and then use the death squad composed of elite soldiers to attack the enemy's center, so as to hit the target.

古文：此杀将击衡之道也。
现代文：这就是击杀敌军统兵将领，击破敌军攻击阵势的办法。 
English: This is the way to kill the enemy's general and break the enemy's attacking position.

古文：交和而舍，我人兵则众，车骑则少，敌人十倍，击之奈何？
现代文： 两军对垒时，我军人数多，但战车、骑兵少，敌军战车和骑兵是我军的倍，该怎么与敌军交战呢？ 
English: When the two armies are facing each other, our army is more numerous, but has fewer chariots and cavalry, while the enemy's chariots and cavalry are double that of our army. How should we fight the enemy?

古文：击此者，当保险带隘，慎避广易。故易则利车，险则利徒。
现代文：孙膑说： 和这样的敌军交战，要占据险要地形，利用狭长的隘口，千万要避开开阔平坦的地带，因为开阔平坦地带有利于战车冲击，而险要隘口有利于步兵作战。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: "When fighting such enemy forces, it is necessary to occupy the critical terrain, take advantage of the narrow and long passes, and avoid the open and flat areas, because the open and flat areas are conducive to the impact of chariots, while the critical passes are conducive to infantry combat.

古文：此击车之道也。
现代文：这就是打败战车敌军的办法。 
English: This is the way to defeat enemy chariots.

古文：交和而舍，我车骑则众，人兵则少，敌人十倍，击之奈何？
现代文： 两军对垒时，我军战车和骑乓多，但步兵少，而敌军步兵多，是我军的倍，该如何与敌军作战呢？ 
English: When the two armies face each other, our army has more chariots and cavalry, but fewer infantry, while the enemy army has more infantry, which is twice that of our army. How should we fight with the enemy army?

古文：击此者，慎避险阻，决而导之，抵诸易。敌虽十倍，便我车骑，三军可击。
现代文：孙膑说： 和这样的敌军交战，千万要避开险阻地带，想方设法把敌军引到平坦开阔地带去决战。敌军步兵虽是我军倍，但开阔平坦地区便于我军战车和骑兵冲击，这样就可将敌军全部击败了。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "When fighting such an enemy army, you must avoid the danger zone and try your best to lead the enemy army to a flat and open area to fight a decisive battle. Although the enemy infantry is twice the size of our army, the open and flat area is convenient for our army's chariots and cavalry to attack, so that the enemy army can be completely defeated.

古文：此击徒人之道也。
现代文：这就是打败放军步兵的办法。 
English: This is the way to defeat the foot soldiers of the Liberation Army.

古文：交和而舍，粮食不属，人兵不足俧，绝根而攻，敌人十倍，击之奈何？
现代文： 两军对垒时，我军粮食不足，人员和兵器又补给不上，而且是远离自己的根据地去攻击敌军，而敌军兵力又是我军的倍，该怎样对敌作战呢？ 
English: When the two armies are facing each other, our army is short of food, and we cannot replenish our manpower and weapons. Moreover, we are attacking the enemy far from our base, and the enemy's troop strength is twice that of our army. How should we fight against the enemy?

古文：曰：击此者，敌人既□而守阻，我反而害其虚。
现代文：孙膑说： 对这样的敌军作战，  两军对垒时，敌军将领勇猛无畏，敌军兵多而强，阵地十分坚固，全军将士都很勇敢，没有后顾之忧。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: When fighting against such an enemy army, when the two armies face each other, the enemy generals are brave and fearless, the enemy soldiers are numerous and strong, the positions are very strong, the soldiers of the whole army are very brave, and there is no worry.

古文：此击争□之道也。交和而舍，敌将勇而难惧，兵强人众自固，三军之士皆勇而无虑，其将则威，其兵则武，而理强粮瞍，诸侯莫之或待。击之奈何？曰：击此者，告之不敢，示之不能，坐拙而待之，以骄其意，以惰其志，使敌弗识。
现代文：敌军将领威武，士兵勇敢善战，后方人员强干，粮食供应充足，诸候中无人敢与之争锋。
English: The enemy generals are powerful, the soldiers are brave and good at fighting, the rear personnel are strong, the grain supply is sufficient, and no one in the states dares to compete with them.

古文：因击其不□，攻其不御，压其骀，攻其疑。
现代文：该怎么与这样的敌军抗争呢？ 
English: How can we fight against such an enemy?

古文：彼既贵既武，三军徙舍，前后不相睹，故中而击之，若有徒与。
现代文：孙膑说： 和这样的敌军抗争，可以公开宣布不敢与其抗争，明白显示出没有能力与其抗争，装出完全对其屈服的样子，从而使敌军产生骄傲情绪，松懈斗志，要让敌军看不出我方的真实意图。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: To fight against such an enemy army, we can openly declare that we dare not fight against it, clearly show that we are unable to fight against it, and pretend to completely surrender to it, thus causing the enemy army to have a proud mood, loose fighting spirit, and let the enemy army not see our true intentions.

古文：此击强众之道也。交和而舍，敌人保山而带阻，我远则不接，近则无所，击之奈何？
现代文：然后出其不意，攻其无备，趁敌军懈怠和疑虑之际，对敌军发动攻击。敌军虽然又富又勇敢，但全军离开营地，行军迁移，前后不能相互照应，这时，我军可以趁机拦腰截击敌军，很容易将其打败。
English: Then, taking advantage of the enemy's slackness and doubts, we launched an attack on the enemy. Although the enemy was rich and brave, the whole army left the camp, marched and moved, and could not keep up with each other. At this time, our army could take the opportunity to intercept the enemy and easily defeat it.

古文：击此者，彼敛阻移□□□□□则危之，攻其所必救，使离其固，以揆其虑，施伏设援，击其移庶。
现代文：这就是打败强敌的办法。  两军对垒时，敌军凭借山地险要地形据守，阻止我军前进，我军如离敌军远就无法接触敌军，离敌军近了又没有依托之地，该怎样与这样的敌军交战呢？ 
English: This is the way to defeat a strong enemy. When the two armies face each other, the enemy forces rely on the mountainous terrain to defend themselves and prevent our army from advancing. If our army is far away from the enemy army, it cannot contact the enemy army. If it is close to the enemy army and there is no place to rely on, how should we fight with such an enemy army?

古文：此击保固之道也。交和而舍，客主两阵，敌人形箕，计敌所愿，欲我陷覆，击之奈何？
现代文：孙膑说： 与这样的敌军交战，要攻击敌军必定要救援的地方，从而牵敌军离开其坚固的阵地，并预先算计好敌军的计划，部署好伏兵和援军，在敌军移动时对其发动攻击。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: "When engaging such an enemy, it is necessary to attack the place where the enemy must be rescued, so as to lead the enemy away from its strong position, and calculate the enemy's plan in advance, deploy ambushes and reinforcements, and attack the enemy when it moves.

古文：击此者，渴者不饮，饥者不良，三分用其二，期于中极，彼既□□，材士练兵，击其两翼，□彼□喜□□三军大北。此击箕之道也。
现代文：孙膑说： 对抗这样的敌军，要像口渴的人不喝水，饥饿的人不吃饭一样，不受敌军引诱，不中敌军圈套。用本方三分之二的兵力，去攻击敌军的中枢要害，待敌军之时，派出精兵去攻击敌阵两翼。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: "Against such an enemy army, it is necessary to be like a thirsty person who does not drink water and a hungry person who does not eat, not to be lured by the enemy army and not to fall into the enemy's trap. Use two-thirds of your own troops to attack the enemy's central key, and when waiting for the enemy army, send elite soldiers to attack the two wings of the enemy.

