古文：许宣平刘清真张殖萧静之朱孺子
现代文：许宣平刘清真张殖萧静之朱孺子
English: Xu Xuanping, Liu Halai, Zhang Xuan, Xiao Jing's Zhu Xunzi

古文：许宣平
现代文：许宣平
English: Xu Xuanping

古文：许宣平，新安歙人也。
现代文：许宣平是新安歙县人。
English: Xu Xuanping is from Xin'anlu County.

古文：唐睿宗景云中，隐于城阳山南坞，结庵以居。
现代文：唐睿宗景云年间，他隐居在城阳山的南坞，盖了一座茅草房。
English: During the Tang Ruizong Jingyun years, he lived in seclusion in the south dock of Chengyang Mountain and built a thatched house.

古文：不知其服饵，但见不食。
现代文：不知他在进行服食，只知他不吃饭。
English: I didn't know he was on a diet, I just knew he wasn't eating.

古文：颜色若四十许人，行如奔马。
现代文：他的脸色像四十来岁的人，走起路来像奔跑的马。
English: He has the face of a man in his forties and walks like a galloping horse.

古文：时或负薪以卖，担常挂一花瓠及曲竹杖，每醉腾腾拄之以归。独吟曰： 负薪朝出卖，沽酒日西归。
现代文：他有时候担着柴到城里来卖，柴担上常常挂着一只花葫芦和一根弯曲的竹杖，常常醉后腾腾地拄着竹杖回山，独自吟唱道： 负薪朝出卖，沽酒日西归。
English: He sometimes carried firewood to the city to sell, often with a flower gourd and a bent bamboo cane hanging on the firewood, and often after getting drunk, he would return to the mountain with a bamboo cane, chanting alone: "Sell in the morning for a low salary, and return home drunk."

古文：路人莫问归何处，穿入白云行翠微。 
现代文：路人莫问归何处，穿入白云行翠微。 
English: Passers-by can't help but wonder where they are going, as they walk through the white clouds.

古文：尔来三十余年，或拯人悬危，或救人疾苦。
现代文：三十多年来，有时候他把人从危难中拯救出来，有时候他把人从疾病中救治出来，很多城里人都去拜访他。
English: For more than 30 years, sometimes he saved people from danger, sometimes he cured people from illness, and many people from the city came to visit him.

古文：城市人多访之，不见，但览庵壁题诗云： 隐居三十载，石室南山巅。
现代文：并不能见到他，只见到他住的小草房的墙壁上题诗说： 隐居三十载，石室南山巅。
English: I couldn't see him, only the poem inscribed on the wall of the small grass hut where he lived: "Secluded for thirty years, stone room at the top of the South Mountain."

古文：静夜玩明月，明朝饮碧泉。
现代文：静夜玩明月，明朝饮碧泉。
English: Playing with the bright moon at night, drinking hot springs in the morning.

古文：樵人歌垅上，谷鸟戏岩前。
现代文：樵人歌垅上，谷鸟戏岩前。
English: The egrets sing, the cuckoos play in front of the rock.

古文：乐矣不知老，都忘甲子年。 
现代文：乐矣不知老，都忘甲子年。 
English: I don't know how old I am, but I can't forget the Year of the Rooster.

古文：好事者多咏其诗。
现代文：许多好事者都诵读他的诗，使他的诗在长安盛行一时。
English: Many well-wishers read his poems, making his poems popular in Chang'an for a while.

古文：有时行长安，于驿路洛阳同华间传舍是处题之。
现代文：在官道上从洛阳到同华之间的传舍里，到处题着他的诗。
English: His poem is inscribed everywhere in the mission house, which stretches from Luoyang to Tonghua on the official road.

古文：天宝中，李白自翰林出，东游经传舍，览诗吟之，嗟叹曰： 此仙诗也。 
现代文：天宝年间，李白从翰林院出来，向东游历路过传舍，看了他的诗吟咏之后，感叹地说： 这是神仙的诗啊！ 
English: During the Tenpo era, Li Bai came out of the Hanlin Academy and traveled eastward past the missionary house. After seeing his poem, he said with admiration: This is a poem of the immortals!

古文：及诘之于人，得宣平之实。
现代文：于是李白就向别人打听这是谁写的诗，知道了许宣平的情况。
English: So Li Bai asked others who had written the poem and found out about Xu Xuanping.

古文：白于是游及新安，涉溪登山，累访之不得。乃题其庵壁曰：我吟传舍诗，来访真人居。
现代文：李白于是就到新安游历，越岭翻山，多次求访也没有找到许宣平，就在他的小草房的墙壁上题诗道： 我吟传舍诗，来访真人居。
English: Li Bai then traveled to Xin'an, climbed over the mountains, and did not find Xu Xunping after many visits. He inscribed a poem on the wall of his small grass hut: I am reciting a poem, visiting real people.

古文：烟岭迷高迹，云林隔太虚。
现代文：烟岭迷高迹，云林隔太虚。
English: The Smoky Mountains are too high, and the clouds are too thin.

古文：窥庭但萧索，倚柱空踌躇。
现代文：窥庭但萧索，倚柱空踌躇。
English: Peering at the garden, but it is desolate, leaning against the pillar, hovering in the sky.

古文：应化辽天鹤，归当千岁余。 
现代文：应化辽天鹤，归当千岁余。 
English: It should be Liao Tianhe, and it should be more than a thousand years old.

古文：是冬野火燎其庵，莫知宣平踪迹。
现代文：这年冬天，野火烧了这所茅草房。不知道许宣平的行踪。
English: This winter, a wildfire burned down the thatched house. Xu Xuanping's whereabouts are unknown.

古文：百余年后，咸通七年。郡人许明奴家有妪。常逐伴入山采樵，独于南山中见一人坐石上，方食桃，甚大。
现代文：一百多年以后，咸通七年，郡中人许明奴家有一位老妇人，曾经结伴进山打柴，独自在南山中见到一个人坐在石头上，正在吃桃。桃子很大。
English: More than a hundred years later, seven years after Hamdangdong, there was an old woman in the family of Xu Mingnu, a resident of the county, who once went into the mountains to collect firewood with a companion, and alone in the Nanshan Mountains saw a person sitting on a stone, eating a peach. The peach was very large.

古文：问妪曰： 汝许明奴家人也？
现代文：那人问老妇人说： 你是许明奴家的人吧？
English: The man asked the old woman, "Are you a member of the Xu Mingnong family?"

古文：我明奴之祖宣平。 
现代文：我是许明奴的祖先许宣平。 
English: I am Xu Mingnu's ancestor Xu Xuanping.

古文：妪言： 常闻已得仙矣！ 曰： 汝归，为我语明奴，言我在此山中。
现代文：老妇人说她曾经听说他已经成仙了，他说： 你回去，替我对许明奴说，我在这山里头。
English: The old woman said that she had once heard that he had become immortal. He said, "Go back and speak to Xu Mingnong for me. I am in this mountain."

古文：与汝一桃食之，不可将出。
现代文：我给你一个桃吃，不能拿出去。
English: I'll give you a peach to eat, but you can't take it out.

古文：山虎狼甚多，山神惜此桃。 
现代文：这山里虎狼很多，山神很珍惜这桃子。 
English: There are many tigers and wolves in this mountain, and the mountain gods cherish this peach.

古文：妪乃食桃，甚美，顷之而尽。宣平遣妪随樵人归家言之，明奴之族甚异之，传闻于郡人。
现代文：许宣平打发老妇人和打柴的人们一起回家说了此事。许明奴的家族非常惊异，全郡的人都传闻此事。
English: Xu Xuanping sent the old woman to go home with the woodcutters and told them about it. Xu Mingnu's family was very surprised, and the whole county heard about it.

古文：其后妪却食，日渐童颜，轻健愈常。
现代文：后来老妇人就不爱吃饭，一天比一天年轻，比平常轻捷健壮。
English: Later, the old woman didn't like to eat. Day by day, she became younger, lighter and stronger than usual.

古文：中和年已后，兵荒相继，居人不安，明奴徙家避难，妪入山不归。
现代文：中和年以后，连连发生兵乱，百姓不安。许明奴搬家避难，老妇人进山就再没有回来。
English: After the Chinese Civil War, there were repeated military conflicts, and the people were uneasy. Xu Mingnu moved to take refuge, and the old woman went into the mountains and never came back.

古文：今人采樵，或有见其妪，身衣藤叶，行疾如飞。
现代文：现在有人进山打柴，有见到那位老妇人的。她身穿藤叶，行走如飞。
English: Now, when people go into the mountains to collect firewood, they sometimes see the old woman. She is dressed in vine leaves and walks like the wind.

古文：逐之，升林木而去。
现代文：追赶她，她就升到林木之上离去。
English: He chased her and she climbed into the trees and ran away.

古文：刘清真
现代文：刘清真
English: Liu Halin

古文：唐天宝中，有刘清真者，与其徒二十人于寿州作茶，人致一驮为货。至陈留遇贼，或有人导之令去魏郡，清真等复往。
现代文：唐代天宝年间，有一个叫刘清真的人，与他的同伴们共二十人在寿州作茶叶生意，每人赶着一匹马驮着货物到外地去卖，走到陈留遇贼寇，有人开导他们，让他们去魏郡。刘清真等人又到魏州去。
English: During the Tenpo era of the Tang Dynasty, a man named Liu Halai and his companions, a total of twenty, were engaged in the tea business in Shoushou. Each of them drove a horse to carry the goods to other places to sell. When they came to Chenliu, they encountered bandits. Someone enlightened them and told them to go to Weishun. Liu Halai and others went to Weizhou.

古文：又遇一老僧，导往五台。
现代文：路上遇到一位老和尚，开导他们到五台山去。
English: On the way, they met an old monk who told them to go to Mount Wutai.

古文：清真等畏其劳苦，五台寺尚远，因邀清真等还兰若宿。
现代文：清真等人怕劳苦，因为此地离五台山还很远。于是老和尚请他们回到寺庙里先住下。
English: Kiyoshin and the others are afraid of hard work, because this place is still far away from Mount Wutai. So the old monk asked them to go back to the temple and live there first.

古文：清真等私议，疑老僧是文殊师利菩萨，乃随僧还。行数里，方至兰若。
现代文：刘清真等人私下议论，怀疑老和尚是文殊师利菩萨，就跟着和尚回来，走了几里，来到庙中。
English: Liu Halai and others had a private discussion and suspected that the old monk was Manjusri Bodhisattva, so they followed the monk back, walked a few miles, and came to the temple.

古文：殿宇严净，悉怀敬肃，僧为说法，大启方便。
现代文：庙里的殿宇庄严洁净，他们都肃然起敬。老和尚为他们说法，大讲特讲。
English: The temple hall in the temple is solemn and clean, they are all awestruck. The old monk said for them, big talk special talk.

古文：清真等并发心出家，随其住持。
现代文：对各种程度不同的人，采取不同的教化方式，以让他们形成信念。
English: Different levels of people are indoctrinated in different ways to form their beliefs.

古文：积二十余年，僧忽谓清真等曰： 有大魔起，汝辈必罹其患，宜先为之防；不尔，则当败人法事。 
现代文：刘清真等人都有了出家的念头，跟着老和尚住持在这庙里，一共二十多年。老和尚忽然对刘清真等人说： 有一个大磨难出现，你们一定会遭到它的祸害，应该先为你们预防一下。不然，就会败坏人们的诵经、斋戒等佛事。 
English: The old monk suddenly said to Liu Halin and the others, "A great tribulation is coming, and you will certainly be afflicted by it. You should take precautions first. Otherwise, it will corrupt people's chanting, fasting, and other Buddhist practices."

古文：因令清真等长跪，僧乃含水遍喷，口诵密法。
现代文：于是他让刘清真等人跪下，他口中含着水逐个喷他们，口中还念着秘诀。
English: So he made Liu Halai and the others kneel down. He sprayed them one by one with water in his mouth and recited the secret.

古文：清真等悉变成石，心甚了悟，而不移动。
现代文：刘清真等人全变成了石头。他们心中什么都明白，却不能移动。
English: Liu Halai and the others were all turned to stone. They understood everything in their hearts, but they could not move.

古文：须臾之间，代州吏卒数十人，诣台有所收捕，至清真所居，但见荒草及石，乃各罢去。
现代文：不久，代州的几十个吏卒，到五台山寺庙去捕捉什么人，走到刘清真等人住的地方，只见有荒草和石头，就各自作罢离去。
English: Soon, dozens of officials in Daizhou went to Wutaishan Temple to catch someone, and when they came to the place where Liu Halai and others lived, they saw only grass and stones, and they left separately.

古文：日晚，老僧又来，以水噀清真等成人，清真等悟其神灵，知遇菩萨，悉兢精进。
现代文：一个多月以后，老和尚说： 现在又要有一个大磨难出现，一定会大力搜索你们，那该怎么办呢？
English: After more than a month, the old monk said, "Now, another great tribulation is about to occur. I will surely search for you vigorously. What should I do then?"

古文：后一月余，僧云： 今复将魔起，必大索汝，其如之何，吾欲远送汝，汝俱往否？ 
现代文：我想把你们送到一个很远的地方去，你们是不是都愿意去？ 刘清真等人都愿意。
English: I want to send you to a faraway place. Are you all willing to go? Liu Halin and others are willing.

古文：清真等受教，僧悉令闭目，戒云： 第一无窃视，败若大事。
现代文：老和尚让他们全都闭上眼睛，警告说： 最重要的是不要偷看，败坏了你们的大事。
English: The old monk told them all to close their eyes and warned: "Above all, don't peep, it will ruin your big day."

古文：但觉至地，即当开目。
现代文：只要觉得到了地面，就可以睁开眼睛。
English: As soon as you feel you are on the ground, you can open your eyes.

古文：若至山中，见大树，宜共庇之。
现代文：如果到了山中，看到一棵大树，应该共同在树下躲避。
English: If you get to the mountains and see a large tree, you should all take shelter under it.

古文：树有药出，亦宜哺之。 
现代文：树上有药长出来，也应该吃了它。 
English: There is medicine growing on the tree, so you should eat it.

古文：遂各与药一丸云： 食此便不复饥，但当思惟圣道，为出世津梁也。 
现代文：于是分别给他们每人一丸药，说： 吃了这药就不再知道饥饿，应该想只有圣道才是超脱尘世的桥梁。 
English: So he gave each of them a pill and said, "If you take this pill, you will no longer know hunger. You should think that only the holy path is a bridge to transcend the world."

古文：言讫作礼，礼毕闭目，冉冉上升，身在虚空。
现代文：说完他们就行礼，行完礼就闭上眼睛。他们觉得自己在冉冉上升，身体飘在虚空之中。
English: When they have finished speaking, they bow, and when they have done so, they close their eyes. They feel themselves rising, their bodies floating in the void.

古文：可半日许，足遂至地。
现代文：大约半天左右，脚就碰到地面。
English: After about half a day or so, my feet hit the ground.

古文：开目，见大山林。
现代文：睁开眼，见到一片大山林。
English: I opened my eyes and saw a large mountain forest.

古文：或遇樵者，问其地号，乃庐山也。
现代文：有人遇上砍柴的，问那地方的名称，原来是庐山。
English: When someone met a woodcutter and asked the name of the place, it turned out to be Lushan.

古文：行十余里，见大藤树，周回可五六围，翠阴蔽日。
现代文：走了十几里，看见一棵大藤树，有五六围粗，绿荫遮蔽太阳。
English: After walking more than ten miles, I saw a large wisteria tree, five or six times as thick, with a green shade covering the sun.

古文：清真等喜云： 大师所言奇树，必是此也。 
现代文：刘清真等高兴地说： 大师说的那棵奇树，一定是这棵树！ 
English: Liu Halai and the others said happily: "The strange tree that the master said must be this tree!

古文：各薙草而坐。
现代文：各自拔草坐到树下。
English: They pulled up the weeds and sat down under the tree.

古文：数日后，树出白菌，鲜丽光泽，恒飘飘而动。
现代文：几天后，大树上长出白菌。白菌很鲜丽，有光泽，总是轻飘飘地在动。
English: A few days later, white fungus sprouted on the tree. The white fungus was very beautiful, shiny, and always fluttering and moving.

古文：众相谓曰： 此即大师所云灵药。 采共分食之。
现代文：众人互相说： 这就是大师说的那灵药，采下来咱们共同分着吃。 
English: Everyone said to each other, "This is the elixir that the master spoke of. Let's harvest it and share it."

古文：中有一人，绐而先食尽。
现代文：其中有一个人，欺骗了大家，自己先把那菌吃光了。
English: One of them tricked everyone by eating all the bacteria first.

古文：徒侣莫不愠怒，诟责云： 违我大师之教。 
现代文：伙伴们没有不生气的，斥骂道： 你违背了大师对我们的教导！ 
English: My friends were furious and scolded me: "You have violated our master's teachings!"

古文：然业已如是，不能殴击。
现代文：但是已经如此了，也不能打他。
English: But that's the way it is, you can't hit him.

古文：久之，忽失所在，仰视在树杪安坐。
现代文：时间长了，那人忽然不见了。抬头一看，他在树梢上安安稳稳地坐着。
English: After a long time, the man suddenly disappeared, and when I looked up, he was sitting safely in the treetops.

古文：清真等复云： 君以吞药故能升高。 
现代文：刘清真等又说： 你因为吞了药，所以才能升高。 
English: Liu Halai and others also said: You can only get high because you swallowed the medicine.

古文：其人竟不下。
现代文：那人到底不肯下来。
English: The man would not come down at all.

古文：经七日，通身生绿毛。忽有鹤翱翔其上。
现代文：经过七天，那人通身长出绿毛，忽然有一只仙鹤翱翔在他的头上。
English: After seven days, the man had green hair all over his body, and suddenly a crane flew over his head.

古文：因谓十九人云： 我诚负汝，然今已得道，将舍汝，谒帝于此天之士。
现代文：于是他对十九个人说： 我实在是对不起大家，但是现在已经成仙了。将要离开大家，到天上去谒见玉帝。
English: Then he said to the nineteen people, "I'm really sorry for everyone, but I've become immortal now. I'm going to leave everyone and go to heaven to see the Jade Emperor."

古文：宜各自勉，以成至真耳。 
现代文：各位应该各自勤勉努力，成为最好的神仙。 
English: Each of you should work diligently to become the best immortal.

古文：清真等邀其下树执别。仙者不顾，遂乘云上升，久久方灭。
现代文：刘清真等请他下来与大家握手告别，他看也不看，就乘着云朵上升，好长时间才消逝。
English: Liu Halin and others invited him to come down to shake hands with everyone and say goodbye. Whether he looked or not, he ascended on the clouds and took a long time to disappear.

古文：清真等失药，因各散还人间。
现代文：刘清真等人因为失去灵药，就只好各自散开回到人间。
English: Liu Halai and others had to scatter back to the human world because they had lost the elixir.

古文：中山张伦，亲闻清真等说云然耳。
现代文：中山的张伦，亲自听到刘清真等人说的这件事。
English: Zhang Lun from Zhongshan personally heard Liu Halin and others say this.

古文：张殖
现代文：张殖
English: Zhang Shuang

古文：张殖，彭州导江人也。
现代文：张殖是彭州导江人。
English: Zhang Rong is a Pengzhou river guide.

古文：遇道士姜玄辨，以六丁驱役之术授之。
现代文：他遇到道士姜玄辨，姜玄辨就把 六丁驱役 的法术传授给他。
English: He met the Taoist priest, Jiang Xuanban, who taught him the magic of the Six Dynasties Drive.

古文：大历中，西川节度使崔宁，尝有密切之事差人走马入奏。
现代文：大历年间，西川节度使崔宁，曾经有秘密紧急的事，派人骑马奔京中奏报。
English: During the great calendar year, the West River Festival made Trai Ning, who once had a secret urgent matter, send someone on horseback to Beijing to report.

古文：发已三日，忽于案上文籍之中，见所奏表净本犹在；其函中所封，乃表草耳。
现代文：出发已经三日，忽然在桌案上的文籍当中，见所奏报的奏章誊清本还在桌案上，那函中封的是奏章的草稿而已。
English: It's been three days since the departure, and suddenly, among the literature on the desk, the transcript of the report is still on the desk, and the enclosed letter is just a draft of the transcript.

古文：计人马之力，不可复迫，忧惶不已，莫知其计。
现代文：估计一下人马的速度，不可能再追上了。崔宁又愁又怕，坐卧不安，不知该怎么办。
English: Estimating the speed of man and horse, it is impossible to catch up. Trining is worried and afraid, restless, and does not know what to do.

古文：知殖术，召而语之。
现代文：他知道张殖会法术，就把他找来对他讲了。
English: He knew about Zhang Xuanhui's magic, so he found him and told him about it.

古文：殖曰： 此易耳，不足忧也。 
现代文：张殖说： 这很容易，不值得发愁。 
English: Zhang Rong said: It's easy, it's not worth worrying about.

古文：乃炷香一炉，以所写净表置香烟上，忽然飞去。
现代文：于是他点燃一炉香，把誊清的奏章放在香烟上。奏章忽然飞去。
English: So he lit a stick of incense and put the crisp score on the cigarette. The score suddenly flew away.

古文：食顷，得所封表草坠于殖前。
现代文：一顿饭的时间，那所封的奏章草稿落到张殖面前。
English: At the time of a meal, the draft of the score of that seal fell in front of Zhang Xuan.

古文：及使回问之，并不觉。进表之时，封题印署如故。
现代文：等到使者回来一问，使者并没发觉，递上奏章的时候，封函上的题字和印章和原来一样。
English: When the envoy came back to ask, the envoy did not notice that when the score was handed over, the inscription and seal on the envelope were the same as the original.

古文：崔公深异之，礼敬殊常。
现代文：崔宁深感惊异，对张殖非常敬重。
English: Deeply surprised, Cui Ning had great respect for Zhang Sheng.

古文：问其所受道之由。
现代文：他问张殖是怎样学会道术的。
English: He asked Zhang Xuan how he learned Daoism.

古文：云： 某师姜玄辨，至德中，于九龙观舍力焚香数岁，因拾得残缺经四五纸，是太上役使六丁法，咒术备足，乃选深山幽谷无人迹处，依法作坛持咒，昼夜精勤。
现代文：张殖说： 我的老师是姜玄辨。至德年间，老师姜玄辨在九龙观下力气烧了几年香，因为拾到四五页残缺的经书纸片，上面书写的是太上的 役使六丁 法，咒语法术很完备。于是他就到深山幽谷中选了一个没有人迹的地方，依照那上面叙述的方法制作法坛，拿着咒语，不分昼夜地精心研究，勤奋练习。
English: Zhang Rong said, "My teacher is Jiang Xuanfan. During his stay in Germany, his teacher, Jiang Xuanfan, had been burning incense for several years under the view of Kowloon, because he picked up four or five pages of incomplete pieces of scripture paper, on which was written the supreme six-syllable spell, and the spell was very complete. So he went to a remote place in the deep mountains and valleys, made a magic altar according to the method described above, took the spell, carefully studied it day and night, and practiced diligently.

古文：本经云，一十四日，玄辨为九日而应。
现代文：本来经文上说要十四天才能见效，而老师姜玄辨作了九天就应验了。
English: Originally, the text said that it would take fourteen days to take effect, but the teacher Jiang Xuanbin fulfilled it in nine days.

古文：忽有黑风暴雨，惊骇于人，视之雨下，而坛场不湿。
现代文：忽然出现了黑风暴雨，令人害怕。一看，下雨了。但是坛场没被浇湿。
English: Suddenly, there was a black rainstorm, which was frightening. At first glance, it was raining, but the altar was not wet.

古文：又有雷电霹雳，亦不为惊惧。
现代文：又有雷电霹雳，他也不惊慌。
English: There was another clap of thunder and lightning, but he did not panic.

古文：良久，见奇形异状鬼神绕之，亦不为畏。
现代文：许久，便有奇形怪状的鬼神围绕着他，他也不害怕。
English: For a long time, the strangely shaped ghosts and spirits surrounded him, and he was not afraid.

古文：须臾，有铁甲兵士数千，金甲兵士数千，瞰噪而下，亦不惊怖。
现代文：一会儿，有几千名铁甲兵士，几千名金甲兵士，向下看着，吵嚷着降落下来。
English: In a moment, there were thousands of iron-clad soldiers, thousands of gold-clad soldiers, looking down, clamoring to land.

古文：久之，神兵行列，如有所候。
现代文：他还是不怕。过了一会儿，神兵站成排，好像在等候什么人。
English: He was still not afraid. After a while, the divine soldiers stood in rows as if they were waiting for someone.

古文：即有天女，著绣履绣衣，大冠佩剑立，向玄辨曰： 既有呼召，有何所求。 
现代文：立即就有一位天女，穿着绣花鞋绣花衣，戴着高大的帽子，佩带宝剑，站在那里。她问姜玄辨说： 既然有招呼，你有什么要求吗？ 
English: Immediately, there was a heavenly maiden, wearing embroidered shoes and embroidered clothes, wearing a tall hat and carrying a sword, standing there. She asked Jiang Xuanbin: Since there is a greeting, do you have any request?

古文：玄辨以术数为请。
现代文：姜玄辨便要求教他道术。
English: Jiang Xuanbin then asked him to teach him Taoism.

古文：六丁兵仗，一时隐去。
现代文：这时再看，神兵、武器，一时全都隐去了。
English: At this time, looking back, the divine soldier, the weapon, all disappeared at once.

古文：自此每日有一丁侍之。凡所征求，无不立应，以术授殖。 
现代文：从此，每天只有一名兵丁侍候他，凡是有什么要求，没有不立刻答应的。
English: From then on, only one soldier waited on him every day, and no request he made was not immediately granted.

古文：谓曰： 术之与道，相须而行。
现代文：后来他又把道术传授给我。他对我说： 术和道，是相辅相成。
English: Later, he taught me Daoism. He said to me, "Daoism and Daoism complement each other.

古文：道非术无以自致，术非道无以延长。若得术而不得道，亦如欲适万里而足不行也。
现代文：道没有术不能自己成功；术没有道不能维持长久；如果得术而不得道，也就像想要到达万里之地而脚不走路。
English: A path without a technique cannot succeed on its own; a technique without a path cannot last long; if you have a technique but no path, it's like trying to reach a place thousands of miles away without walking.

古文：术者虽万端隐见，未除死箓。固当栖心妙域，注念丹华，立功以助其外，炼魄以存其内，内外齐一，然后可适道，可以长存也。
现代文：术，尽管它变化万端，时隐时现，但是自己的名字还没从死册上除去，就一定要潜心到妙境中，一心想着炼丹，磨炼功力作为身外的辅助，修养心神作为内因的保障，内外一致，然后可以得道，可以保持长久。
English: As for the technique, although it is ever-changing, ever-present, but your name has not been removed from the death register, you must immerse yourself in the wonderful situation, concentrate on the alchemy, hone the power as an external aid, cultivate the mind and spirit as a guarantee of internal causes, and be consistent inside and outside, and then you can get the way, and you can keep it for a long time.

古文：峨眉山中，神仙万余人，自皇人统领，置宫府，分曹属，以度于人。
现代文：峨眉山中，有一万多名神人，自有天帝统领，还设置宫府，分立官署，用来超度人们。
English: In Mount Emei, there are more than ten thousand gods and goddesses. They have their own heavenly emperors to rule over them. They also set up a palace government and a separate government office to rule over the people.

古文：吾与汝观道之纤芥，未造其玄微。
现代文：我和你见到的道术还是微不足道的，未到达那玄妙精微的境地。
English: The Daoism that you and I have seen is still insignificant, and has not yet reached that subtle and delicate state.

古文：龙蛇之交，与汝入洞府，朝真师，庶可以讲长生之旨也。 
现代文：在龙年和蛇年交替的时候，我和你一块入洞府，去拜见一位真正的仙师，可以给咱们讲一讲长生的要旨呢！ 
English: When the year of the dragon and the year of the snake alternate, I will go with you to the cave palace to visit a true sage, who can tell us the essence of longevity!

古文：师玄辨隐去二十余岁。
现代文：老师姜玄辨隐去二十多年。
English: Teacher Jiang Xuan has been teaching for more than 20 years.

古文：此年龙蛇之交，当随师登峨眉，入洞天，不久往矣。 
现代文：今年正是龙蛇交会的时候，应当跟着老师登峨眉山，进洞天。不久便要去了。 
English: This year, it is the time of the Dragon and Snake Fair, and I should follow my teacher to climb Mount Emei and enter the cave heaven. I will go there soon.

古文：是年大历十二年丁巳，殖与玄辨隐去，不复见。
现代文：这一年是大历十二年，丁巳岁，张殖和姜玄辨都隐去了，不再出现在人间。
English: This year is the twelfth year of the lunar calendar, Ding Si is 30 years old, Zhang Xuan and Jiang Xuanban have both disappeared and no longer appear in the world.

古文：萧静之
现代文：萧静之
English: Xiao Jingzhi

古文：兰陵萧静之，举进士不第。
现代文：兰陵的萧静之，参加进士考试没有考中。
English: Lanling's Xiao Jingzhi did not pass the entrance examination.

古文：性颇好道，委书策，绝粒炼气，结庐漳水之上，十余年而颜貌枯悴，齿发凋落。
现代文：他生性很喜欢道术，就扔掉了书本，不吃饭，专心炼气。他在漳水边上盖了房子。炼了十几年之后，他的容颜变得枯干憔悴，牙齿和头发全都掉了。
English: He was naturally very fond of Taoism, so he threw away his books, skipped meals, and concentrated on refining qi. He built a house on the edge of Surabaya. After refining for more than ten years, his face became withered and haggard, and his teeth and hair all fell out.

古文：一旦引镜而怒，因迁居邺下，逐市人求什一之利。数年而资用丰足，乃置地葺居。
现代文：一天早晨他一照镜子就生气了。于是他迁居到邺下，跟随着商人们去求取那十分之一的小利，几年就衣食丰足，吃穿不愁了。
English: One morning he was angry when he looked in the mirror, so he moved in with his uncle and followed the tradesmen to get the tithe, and for a few years he was well fed and clothed.

古文：掘得一物，类人手，肥而且润，其色微红。
现代文：于是他就买地，盖房子。盖房子的时候，从地里挖出来一种东西。那东西样子像人手，肥胖而且光润，颜色微红。
English: So he bought land and built a house. While building the house, he dug something out of the ground. It looked like a human hand, fat and shiny, with a reddish hue.

古文：叹曰： 岂非太岁之神，将为祟耶？ 
现代文：他叹道： 难道这是太岁神？它要作祟吗？ 
English: He sighed, "Is this the god of longevity? Does it want to be a curse?

古文：即烹而食之，美，既食尽。
现代文：他就把那东西煮着吃了。味道很美。
English: He cooked it and ate it. It was delicious.

古文：逾月而齿发再生，力壮貌少，而莫知其由也。
现代文：吃光之后，过了一个月，他的牙齿和头发又长出来了，力气也壮了，相貌也年轻了。但他不知这是为什么。
English: After eating it all, a month later, his teeth and hair had grown back, his strength had increased, and he looked younger, but he didn't know why.

古文：偶游邺都，值一道士，顾静之骇而言曰： 子神气若是，必尝饵仙药也。 
现代文：他偶然到邺都一游，遇上一位道士。道士看着他吃惊地说： 你的气色这样好，一定是曾经吃过仙药！ 
English: By chance, he made a trip to Shendu and met a Taoist. The Taoist looked at him in surprise and said, "You look so good, you must have eaten the elixir!"

古文：求诊其脉焉，乃曰： 子所食者肉芝也，生于地，类人手，肥润而红。
现代文：道士给他摸了摸脉，就说： 你吃的是肉芝。肉芝这东西生在地下，像人手，肥实光润而且发红。
English: The spiritualist felt his pulse and said, "What you're eating is meat mushroom. This meat mushroom is born in the ground, like a human hand. It's rich, shiny and red.

古文：得食者寿同龟鹤矣。
现代文：能吃到肉芝的人，他就和龟、鹤那样长寿了。
English: People who can eat meat and grass live as long as turtles and cranes.

古文：然当深隐山林，更期至道，不可自混于臭浊之间。 
现代文：但是应当隐居到深山老林之中，去修炼更高的道术，不能自己混杂在世俗的腥臭浑浊之间。 
English: However, they should live in seclusion in the deep mountains and old forests to cultivate higher Taoism, and they should not mingle with the worldly filth and filth.

古文：静之如其言，舍家云水，竟不知所之。
现代文：萧静之像道士说的那样去做，舍家做了游方道士，后来就不知他到哪儿去了。
English: Xiao Jingzhi did as the Taoist said, and She Jia became a You Fang Taoist. Later, he did not know where he had gone.

古文：朱孺子
现代文：朱孺子
English: Zhu Yanzi

古文：朱孺子，永嘉安国人也。
现代文：朱孺子是西晋怀帝永嘉时期安国人。
English: Zhu Yanzi was a native of An Guo during the reign of Emperor Huai of the Western Jin Dynasty.

古文：幼而事道士王玄真，居大箬岩。
现代文：他从小就侍奉道士王玄真，住在大箬岩。
English: He has been serving the Taoist priest Wang Xuan Zhen since he was a child and lives in Dalatangyan.

古文：深慕仙道，常登山岭，采黄精服饵。
现代文：他很羡慕成仙得道，经常登上山岭，采黄精服用。
English: He admires Chengxiantu Dao very much, and often climbs mountains to collect and take Huangjing.

古文：一日，就溪濯蔬，忽见岸侧有二小花犬相趂。
现代文：有一天，他在溪边洗菜，忽然看见有两只小花狗互相追逐。
English: One day, he was washing vegetables by a stream and suddenly saw two little flower dogs chasing each other.

古文：孺子异之，乃寻逐入枸杞丛下。
现代文：他很惊奇，就去寻追，追到一丛枸杞下不见了。
English: Surprised, he ran after it and chased it until it disappeared under a clump of thorns.

古文：归语玄真，讶之。
现代文：他回来告诉了王玄真。
English: He came back and told Wang Xuanzhen.

古文：遂与孺子俱往伺之，复见二犬戏跃，逼之，又入枸杞下。
现代文：王玄真也感刻惊讶，就和朱孺子一块去等候，又看见两只小花狗嬉戏跳跃。他们逼近小狗。小狗又跑进枸杞丛下不见了。
English: Wang Xuanzhen was also surprised, so he went to wait with Zhu Yanzi and saw two small flower dogs playing and jumping. They approached the small dogs. The small dogs ran into the bushes and disappeared.

古文：玄真与孺子共寻掘，乃得二枸杞根，形状如花犬，坚若石。
现代文：王玄真和朱孺子共同寻找、挖掘，就挖到了两根枸杞根。两条根的样子像花狗，坚硬如石。
English: Wang Xuanzhen and Zhu Yizi searched and dug together, and they dug up two roots. The two roots looked like a flower dog, hard as stone.

古文：洗挈归以煮之。
现代文：他们把它洗净拿回来煮。
English: They wash it, take it back and cook it.

古文：而孺子益薪看火，三日昼夜，不离灶侧。
现代文：朱孺子添柴看火，整整三个昼夜没离开灶边。
English: Zhu Yizi added firewood and watched the fire, and did not leave the kitchen for three days and nights.

古文：试尝汁味，取吃不已。
现代文：他试尝那汤汁的味道，不断地尝，不断地吃。
English: He tastes the broth, keeps tasting it, keeps eating it.

古文：及见根烂，告玄真来共取，始食之。
现代文：等到发现两条根煮烂了，就告诉王玄真来一块往外拿，然后开始吃。
English: When he found that the two roots were cooked, he told Wang Xuanzhen to take one piece out and then began to eat it.

古文：俄倾而孺子忽飞升在前峰上。
现代文：顷刻间朱孺子忽然飞升到前面的山峰上。
English: In an instant, Zhu Yizi suddenly flew up to the mountain peak in front.

古文：玄真惊异久之。
现代文：王玄真惊奇了老半天。
English: Wang Xuanzhen surprised everyone.

古文：孺子谢别玄真，升云而去。
现代文：朱孺子谢别了王玄真，升空驾云而去。
English: Zhu Xi Zi said goodbye to Wang Xuan Zhen and flew away.

古文：到今俗呼其峰为童子峰。
现代文：到现在当地人叫那山峰是童子峰。
English: To this day, the locals call that peak Tongzifeng.

古文：玄真后饵其根尽。不知年寿，亦隐于岩之西陶山。
现代文：王玄真后来把那根吃了，不知他活了多大岁数，也隐居到大箬岩之西的陶山。
English: Wang Xuanzhen later ate that root, and I don't know how many years he lived. He also lived in seclusion on Mount Tao, west of the Big Rock.

古文：有采捕者，时或见之。
现代文：有些采药打猎的人，有时能见到他。
English: He can sometimes be seen by some people who are hunting for medicinal mushrooms.

