古文：燕王卢绾反，高帝使樊哙以相国将兵击之。
现代文：原文西汉初期，燕王卢绾发动叛乱，高祖刘邦正在生病，就命令樊哙以相国的身份领兵出击。
English: In the early days of the Western Han Dynasty, Yan King Lu Wei launched a rebellion, and Gaozu Liu Bang was ill, so he ordered Yan to lead the troops to attack as a partner country.

古文：既行，人有短恶哙者，高帝怒，曰： 哙见吾病，乃几吾死也！ 
现代文：即将出发的时候，有人散布流言飞语，诬告樊哙，刘邦大怒说： 樊哙见我生病，竟然盼望我死！ 
English: When they were about to leave, someone spread rumors and made false accusations against Liu Bang. Liu Bang was furious and said, "You saw that I was sick and actually hoped that I would die!

古文：用陈平计，召绛侯周勃受诏床下，曰： 平乘驰传，载勃代哙将。
现代文：便用陈平的计谋，召绛侯周勃受诏于床前，命令道： 陈平驾驭急命驿车，速载周勃到樊哙军中去代替他的职务。
English: He then used Chen Ping's stratagem to summon the warlord Zhou Bo to his bedside and ordered: "Chen Ping, drive the emergency carriage and quickly carry Zhou Bo to the warlord's army to take his place.

古文：平到军中，即斩哙头！ 
现代文：陈平到樊哙军之后，要立即将樊哙斩首。 
English: Chen Ping was to be beheaded as soon as he arrived at the Wei army.

古文：二人既受诏行，私计曰： 樊哙，帝之故人，功多。又吕后女弟女嬃夫，有亲且贵。帝以忿怒故欲斩之，即恐后悔，宁囚而致上，令上自诛之。 
现代文：陈周二人受过诏后，私下商议说： 樊哙是皇帝的故亲，平生功绩颇多，又是吕后妹妹吕媭的丈夫，既亲且贵，皇帝在情绪激愤之时想要斩杀樊哙，恐怕之后会后悔。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Chen Zhou and the two privately discussed: Zou is the emperor's deceased relative, with a lot of achievements in his lifetime. He is also the husband of Lv Ying, the sister of Lv Hou. He is both close and valuable. When the emperor was angry, he wanted to kill Zou. I'm afraid he would regret it later.

古文：平至军，为坛，以节召樊哙。
现代文：我们不如把樊哙拘禁起来押送给陛下，让陛下亲自把樊哙诛杀。 
English: We might as well take him into custody and escort him to His Majesty, so that His Majesty can personally kill him.

古文：哙受诏节，即反接载槛车诣长安，而令周勃代，将兵定燕。
现代文：陈平到了樊哙军中后，令人做坛，以节杖召来樊哙。樊哙拜受诏节后，就反缚其臂乘坐囚禁犯人的槛车到长安去，于是周勃代替樊哙领兵定燕。
English: After Chen Ping reached the middle of the Wei army, he had a altar made and summoned Wei with a staff. After Wei worshiped and received the imperial edict, he tied his arm against his back and took the prisoner's carriage to Chang'an, so Zhou Bo took the place of Wei leader Ding Yan.

古文：平行，闻高帝崩，平恐吕后及吕嬃怒，乃驰传先去。
现代文：陈平囚樊哙行之路上，听说皇帝驾崩，恐怕吕后和吕媭迁怒于他，就让囚车先去长安。
English: When Chen Ping was on his way to Chang'an, he heard that the emperor had died, and fearing that Lv Hou and Lv Wei would be angry with him, he let the prisoner car go to Chang'an first.

古文：逢使者，诏平与灌婴屯于荥阳。
现代文：后来，陈平遇到朝廷使者，命令陈平与灌婴驻守荣阳。
English: Later, Chen Ping encountered an emissary from the imperial court, who ordered Chen Ping and Guan Yu to stay in Rongyang.

古文：平受诏，立复驰至宫，哭殊悲，因奏事丧前。
现代文：陈平接受诏书后，立刻急忙进宫，大声痛哭，趁着出丧之前向太后禀奏前事。
English: After Chen Ping accepted the imperial rescript, he immediately rushed into the palace, cried loudly and bitterly, and took the opportunity to recount the previous events to the empress dowager before leaving for the funeral.

古文：吕太后哀之，曰： 君出休矣。 
现代文：吕太后对陈平表示了同情，说： 你出去的这件事就算了吧！ 
English: Empress Dowager Lv expressed her sympathy to Chen Pingwu, saying, "Forget about your going out!

古文：平因固请，得宿卫中，太后乃以为郎中令，曰： 傅教帝。 
现代文：陈平趁此坚持请求太后让他任住宿宫中的护卫一职，于是太后任命他为郎中令，负责掌管宫殿护卫，太后并且说： 你还要教导、辅佐皇帝。 
English: Taking advantage of this, Chen Ping insisted on asking the empress dowager to let him serve as an escort in the residential palace. Therefore, the empress dowager appointed him as the second-in-command, in charge of the palace escort. The empress dowager also said: You must also teach and assist the emperor.

古文：是后吕嬃谗乃不得行。
现代文：但此后因受到吕媭的谗言而未能这样执行。
English: However, after that, he was unable to do so due to criticism from Lü Gan.

古文：谗祸一也，度近之足以杜其谋，则为陈平；度远之足以消其忌，则又为刘琦。
现代文：评译同样是遭到谗言的祸患，考虑到应在近处以杜绝他人的阴谋，这是陈平的做法；认为应躲到远处以平息他人的猜忌，这是刘琦的做法。
English: Reviewing translations is also a scourge of criticism. Considering that one should be nearby to prevent others' plots, this is Chen Ping's approach; believing that one should hide in the distance to calm others' suspicions, this is Liu Wei's approach.

古文：宜近而远，宜远而近，皆速祸之道也。
现代文：该近而远，该远而近，这些都会加速祸害的降临。
English: The near and the far, the far and the near, these will accelerate the arrival of the scourge.

古文：刘表爱少子琮，琦惧祸，谋于诸葛亮，亮不应。
现代文：刘表喜爱小儿子刘琮，长子刘琦害怕会有祸事降临自身，便找诸葛亮询问计策，诸葛亮却一直没有回答他。
English: Liu Biao loved his younger son Liu Yao, and his eldest son Liu Yao was afraid that something bad would happen to him, so he asked Zhuge Liang for advice, but Zhuge Liang never answered him.

古文：一日相与登楼，去梯，琦曰： 今日出君之口，入吾之耳，尚未可以教琦耶？ 
现代文：有一天，两人一起登楼，上楼之后，刘琦让人把梯子拿掉，对诸葛亮说： 现在从您口中说出的话，只会进入我的耳朵，绝对不会有第三者听到，您还不能教我吗？ 
English: One day, the two of them went upstairs together. After going upstairs, Liu Wei had the ladder removed and said to Zhuge Liang: The words that come out of your mouth now will only enter my ears, there will never be a third party to hear them. Can't you still teach me?

古文：亮曰： 子不闻申生在内而危，重耳在外而安乎？ 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 你没听说过同为晋献公的儿子，申生留在国内是危险的，重耳逃到国外反而安全了吗？ 
English: Zhuge Liang said, "Haven't you heard of the son of the same Jin Xian Gong, Shen Shen, that it is dangerous to stay in the country, but it is safe to flee abroad?"

古文：琦悟，自请出守江夏。
现代文：刘琦恍然大悟，于是自请外放镇守江夏。
English: Liu Yao suddenly realized, so he asked to be sent out to guard Jiangxia.

