古文：任法官者為吏，貲二甲。
现代文：保举曾被撤职永不叙用的人为吏，罚二甲。
English: Those who have been removed from their posts and will never be promoted will be punished with a fine of up to two years.

古文：有興，除守嗇夫、佐居守者，上造以上不從令，貲二甲。
现代文：战争时征发军队，任命留守的代理啬夫和佐，爵在上造以上的人不服徒命令，罚二甲。
English: During the war, the army was requisitioned and dispatched, and those who did not obey the order were punished with a two-year fine.

古文：除士吏、發弩嗇夫不如律，及發弩射不中，尉貲二甲。
现代文：任用士吏或发弩啬不合法律规定，以及发弩射不中目标，县尉应罚二甲。
English: County lieutenants should be fined two times for appointing officials or issuing orders that are not in accordance with the law, as well as issuing orders that do not hit the target.

古文：發弩嗇夫射不中，貲二甲，免，嗇夫任之。
现代文：发弩啬夫射不中目标，应罚二甲，免职，由县啬夫另行保举。
English: If a miser fails to hit the target, he shall be fined two times, removed from office, and promoted by the county miser.

古文：駕騶除四歲，不能駕御，貲教者一盾；免，賞四歲戍。
现代文：驾驺已任用四年，仍不能驾车，罚负责教练的人一盾；驾驺本人应免职，并补服四年内应服的徭戌。
English: If a driver who has been appointed for four years is still unable to drive, the person in charge of the coach shall be fined one rupee; the driver himself shall be relieved of his duties and make up the fine that should be paid within four years.

古文：除吏律為聽命書，法弗行，耐為侯；不辟席立，貲二甲，法。
现代文：装作听朝廷的命书，实际废置不予执行，应耐为候；听命书时不下席站立，罚二甲，撤职永不叙用。
English: Pretend to listen to the imperial court's order, the actual abolition will not be implemented, should be patient; when listening to the order, do not stand up from the seat, two penalties, dismissal will never be used.

古文：游士在，亡符，居縣貲一甲；卒歲，責之。
现代文：游士居留而无凭证，所在的县罚一甲；居留满一年者，应加诛责。
English: If a wanderer stays without a certificate, the county where he is shall impose a fine of one kopeck; if he stays for more than one year, he shall be subject to additional punishment.

古文：有為故秦人出，削籍，上造以上為鬼薪，公士以下刑為城旦。
现代文：有帮助秦人出境，或除去名籍的，上造以上罚为鬼薪，公士以下刑为城旦。
English: Those who have helped Qin people leave the country, or have removed their names and surnames, will be punished with a ghost salary if they are above the rank of Shangzong, and with a city penalty if they are below the rank of Gongzhi.

古文：游士律當除弟子籍不得，置任不審，皆耐為侯。
现代文：如有不适当地将弟子除名，或任用保举弟子不当者，均耐为候。
English: If a disciple is improperly expelled, or if a disciple is improperly appointed or promoted, both will be tolerated.

古文：使其弟子贏律，及治之，貲一甲；革，二甲。
现代文：役使弟子超出法律规定，及加以笞打，应罚一甲；打破皮肤，罚二甲。
English: If a disciple is forced beyond the legal provisions and is beaten, he shall be fined one point; if his skin is broken, he shall be fined two points.

古文：除弟子律故大夫斬首者，。
现代文：本为大夫而在陈前斩首，应加流放。
English: The doctor who beheaded Chen should be exiled.

古文：分甲以為二甲蒐者，耐。
现代文：在大蒐时以一支军队分充两支，应加耐刑。
English: At the time of the grand search, one army should be divided into two, and the punishment should be increased.

古文：縣毋敢包卒為弟子，尉貲二甲，免；令，二甲。
现代文：县不准把卒藏为弟子，违者县尉罚二甲，免职；县令罚二甲。
English: The county is not allowed to make a graduate student a disciple, and the offender will be fined two county ranks and removed from office; the county order will be fined two county ranks.

古文：輕車、張、引強、中卒所載傅〈傳〉到軍，縣勿奪。
现代文：轻车、张、引强、中卒用专车运送到军的物资，县不得截夺。
English: The county is not allowed to intercept the materials transported to the army by light vehicles, Zhang, Qiangqiang, and junior high school students.

古文：奪中卒傳，令、尉貲各二甲。
现代文：夺取中卒传送的物资，县令、县尉罚二甲。
English: Seizure of materials sent by junior high school students is punishable by up to two years in prison according to the county ordinance and the county magistrate.

古文：驀馬五尺八寸以上，不勝任，奔摯不如令，縣司馬貲二甲，令、丞各一甲。
现代文：蓦马体高应在五尺八寸以上，如不堪使用，在奔驰和羁系时不听指挥，县司马罚二甲，县令、丞各罚一甲。
English: The stallion's body height should be more than five feet eight inches. If the stallion is not fit for use and does not listen to commands when being ridden, the county steward will be fined two koku, and the county magistrate and the county magistrate will each be fined one koku.

古文：先賦驀馬，馬備，乃粼從軍者，到軍課之，馬殿，令、丞二甲；司馬貲二甲，法。
现代文：先征取蓦马，马数已足，即在从军人员中选用骑士。到军后进行考核，马被评为下等，县令、丞罚二甲；司马评为下等革职永不叙用。
English: The first thing to do is to conscript the horses, and when the number of horses is sufficient, the knights will be selected from the military personnel. After arriving in the army, the horses will be assessed, and the horses will be rated as inferior, and the county magistrate and the county magistrate will be fined twice; the magistrate will be rated as inferior and will never be demoted.

古文：吏自佐、史以上負從馬、守書私卒，令市取錢焉，皆。
现代文：自佐、史以上的官吏有驮运行李的马和看守文书的私卒，用以贸易牟利，均加流放。
English: Self-supporting and senior officials with horses to carry luggage and private guards to guard documents, who were used to make profits from trade, were also exiled.

古文：不當稟軍中而稟者，皆貲二甲，法；非吏，戍二歲；徒食、敦長、僕射弗告，貲戍一歲；令、尉、士吏弗得，貲一甲。
现代文：不应自军中领粮而领取的，皆罚二甲，撤职永不叙用；如不是官吏，罚戌边二年。一起吃军粮的军人、屯长和仆射不报告，罚戌边一年；县令、县尉、士吏没有察觉，罚一甲。
English: Those who should not have received the rations from the army but did so, shall all be fined 2 kopecks, removed from their posts and never demoted; if they are not government officials, they shall be fined 2 years; if they are soldiers, governors and subordinates who eat military rations together and do not report it, they shall be fined 1 year; if they are county magistrates, county lieutenants or officials who did not notice, they shall be fined 1 kopeck.

古文：稟卒兵，不完善，丞、庫嗇夫、吏貲二甲，法。敢深益其勞歲數者，貲一甲，棄勞。
现代文：军人在领粮地方和路经的县出卖军粮，罚戌边二年；同属一车一起吃军粮的军人、屯长和仆射不报告，罚戌边一年；县司空、司空佐史、给军卒兵器，质量不好，丞及库的啬夫和吏均罚二甲，撤职永不叙用。擅敢增加劳绩天数的，罚一甲，并取消其劳绩。
English: Military personnel who sell military rations in grain-receiving areas and counties they pass through shall be fined not more than two years; military personnel who eat military rations together in the same vehicle and do not report to the commander and subordinates shall be fined not more than one year; county air marshal and air marshal Sashi shall be fined not more than two grades for the poor quality of weapons given to military cadets, and the miserly officers and officials of the general staff and treasury shall be fined not more than one grade for the poor quality of weapons given to military cadets, and shall never be demoted. Those who dare to increase the number of days of service shall be

古文：中勞律臧皮革橐突，貲嗇夫一甲，令、丞一盾。
现代文：贮藏的皮革被虫咬坏，罚该府库的啬夫一甲，令、丞一盾。
English: The leather stored there was damaged by insects, and the miser of the prefectural treasury was fined one ryo, one ryo, and one ryoun.

古文：臧律省殿，貲工師一甲，丞及曹長一盾，徒絡組廿給。
现代文：考查时产品被评为下等，罚工师一甲，丞和曹长一盾，徒络组二十根。
English: At the time of inspection, the product was rated as inferior, with a penalty of one for the engineer, one for the technician, one for the technician, and twenty for the technician.

古文：省三歲比殿，貲工師二甲，丞、曹長一甲，徒絡組五十給。
现代文：三年连续被评为下等，罚工师二甲，丞和曹长一甲，徒络组五十根。
English: For three years in a row, it was rated as the lowest grade, with a penalty of 2 koku for the foreman, 1 koku for the foreman, and 50 koku for the foreman.

古文：非歲紅及毋命書，敢為它器，工師及丞貲各二甲。
现代文：不是本年度应生产的产品，又没有朝廷的命书，而擅敢制作其他器物的，工师和丞各罚二甲。
English: Not the product that should be produced this year, and without the order of the imperial court, but daring to produce other goods, the craftsman and the craftsman are each fined two points.

古文：縣工新獻，殿，貲嗇夫一甲，縣嗇夫、丞、吏、曹長各一盾。
现代文：各县工官新上交的产品，评为下等，罚该工官的啬夫一甲，县啬夫、丞、吏和曹长各一盾。
English: The products newly delivered by each county engineer were rated as inferior, and the miser of the engineer was fined one ryo, and the miser of the county, joe, official and chief inspector were fined one ryo each.

古文：城旦為工殿者，治人百。
现代文：城旦做工而被评为下等，每人答打一百下。
English: After working in the city for a while, they were rated as inferior, and each of them received a hundred lashes.

古文：大車殿，貲司空嗇夫一盾，徒治五十。
现代文：所造大车评为下等，罚司空啬夫一盾，徒各笞打五十下。
English: The coach he built was rated as inferior, and the magistrate fined him one rupee for being a cheapskate, and each of them received fifty lashes.

古文：園殿，貲嗇夫一甲，令、丞及佐各一盾，徒絡組各廿給。
现代文：漆园评为下等，罚漆园的啬夫一甲，县令、丞及佐各一盾，徒络组各二十根。
English: The lacquer garden was rated as inferior, and the miser of the lacquer garden was fined one koku, the county magistrate, the senator, and the senator were fined one gong each, and the two groups were fined twenty gongs each.

古文：園三歲比殿，貲嗇夫二甲而法，令、丞各一甲。
现代文：漆园三年连续被评为下等，罚漆园的啬夫二甲，并撤职永不叙用，县令、丞各罚一甲。
English: The lacquer garden has been rated as inferior for three consecutive years, and the penalty for the lacquer garden's miser is two, and it will never be demoted, and the county magistrate and the county magistrate will each be fined one.

古文：采山重殿，貲嗇夫一甲，佐一盾；三歲比殿，貲嗇夫二甲而法。
现代文：采矿两次评为下等，罚其啬夫一甲，佐一盾；三年连续评为下等；罚其啬夫二甲，并撤职永不叙用。
English: Mining was twice rated as inferior, and the miser was fined one rupee and one rupee; it was rated as inferior for three consecutive years; the miser was fined two rupees, and he was removed from his post and will never be promoted.

古文：殿而不負費，勿貲。
现代文：评为下等而无亏欠的，则不加责罚。
English: Those who are rated as inferior but not deficient will not be punished.

古文：賦歲紅，未取省而亡之，及弗備，貲其曹長一盾。
现代文：收取每年规定的产品，在尚未验收时就丢失了，以及不能足数的，罚其曹长一盾。
English: If the products specified in each year are received but lost before being inspected and accepted, or if the quantity is insufficient, the offender shall be fined Cao Chang Yidun.

古文：大官、右府、左府、右采鐵、左採鐵課殿，貲嗇夫一盾。
现代文：太官、右府、左府、右采铁在考核中评为下等，均罚其啬夫一盾。
English: Dignitaries, Right, Left, and Right Iron Miners were rated as inferior in the assessment, and they were all fined one dong for being stingy.

古文：工擇榦，榦可用而久以為不可用，貲二甲。
现代文：工匠选择夯墙用的立木，立木本可使用而标上不可使用的记号，罚二甲。
English: The craftsman selects the standing timber for the curtain wall. The standing timber can be used, but it is marked with a sign that it cannot be used. The penalty is 2 points.

古文：工久榦曰不可用，負久者，久者謁用之，而貲工曰不可者二甲。
现代文：工匠在立木上标记为不可使用，以致不敷装设者的需要，装设者经过报请仍使用了，应罚认为不可使用的工匠二甲。
English: An artisan who marks a tree stump as unusable, so that it does not meet the needs of the installer, and the installer still uses it after reporting it, shall be fined twice the amount of the artisan who considers it unusable.

古文：射虎車二乘為曹。
现代文：射虎车以两辆为一组。
English: Two tiger-shooting cars form a group.

古文：虎未越泛蘚，從之，虎環，貲一甲。
现代文：虎没有弃掉肉饵走开，就加以追逐，使虎逃回，罚一甲。
English: If the tiger does not abandon the carcass and walks away, chase it and make the tiger run back, one point will be imposed.

古文：虎失，不得，車貲一甲。
现代文：虎逃走，没有猎获，每车罚一甲。
English: If the tiger escapes and is not caught, each car will be fined one carat.

古文：虎欲犯，徒出射之，弗得，貲一甲。
现代文：虎要进犯，出车徒步射虎，没有猎获，罚一甲。
English: If the tiger wants to attack, go out and shoot the tiger on foot. If the tiger is not hunted, it will be fined.

古文：豹旞，不得，貲一盾。
现代文：豹逃走，没有猎获，罚一盾。
English: If the leopard escapes and is not caught, it will be fined one shilling.

古文：公車司馬獵律傷乘輿馬，夬革一寸，貲一盾；二寸，貲二盾；過二寸，貲一甲。
现代文：伤害了乘舆马，马皮破伤一寸，罚一盾；二寸，罚二盾；超过二寸，罚一甲。
English: If a rider injures a horse, and the horse's hide is damaged by one inch, he will be fined one rupee; if it is two inches, he will be fined two rupees; if it exceeds two inches, he will be fined one rupee.

古文：課駃騠，卒歲六匹以下到一匹，貲一盾。
现代文：考核駃騠，满一年所驯教数在六匹以下以至一匹，罚一盾。
English: According to the assessment, if the number of horses trained in a year is less than six or more than one, a fine of one yuan will be imposed.

古文：志馬舍乘車馬後，毋敢炊飭，犯令，貲一盾。
现代文：特马应养于驾车的马的后面，不准加以鞭打，违反这一法令的罚一盾。
English: The horse must be kept behind the driving horse and must not be whipped. Violation of this law is punishable by a fine.

古文：已馳馬不去車，貲一盾。
现代文：已经驾车奔驰的马，不及时卸套，罚一盾。
English: If a horse that has been driving a Mercedes fails to remove its harness in time, it will be fined one rupee.

古文：膚吏乘馬篤、，及不會膚期，貲各一盾。
现代文：评比吏的乘马，马行迟缓，以及评比时不来参加，均罚一盾。
English: The judge riding a horse, riding a horse slowly, and not coming to participate in the judging will all be fined one rupee.

古文：馬勞課殿，貲廄嗇夫一甲，令、丞、佐、史各一盾。
现代文：马服役的劳绩被评为下等，罚厩啬夫一甲，令、丞、佐、史各一盾。
English: Ma's performance in military service was rated as inferior, and he was fined one koku for being a stingy husband, and one ryo, jo, subaltern, and historian ryo, jo, subaltern, and historian ryo, jo, subaltern, and historian ryo.

古文：馬勞課殿，貲皂嗇夫一盾。
现代文：马服役的劳绩被评为下等，罚皂啬夫一盾。
English: Ma's performance in military service was rated as inferior, and he was fined one rupee.

古文：牛大牝十，其六毋子，貲嗇夫、佐各一盾。
现代文：成年母牛十头，其中六头不生小牛，罚啬夫、佐各一盾。
English: If six out of ten adult cows do not give birth to a calf, the miser will be fined one shield in Saka.

古文：羊牝十，其四毋子，貲嗇夫、佐各一盾。
现代文：母羊十头，其中四头不生小羊，罚啬夫、佐各一盾。
English: Ten ewes, four of which did not give birth to a lamb, punished the miser with a shield each.

古文：牛羊課匿敖童，及占不審，典、老贖耐，百姓不當老，至老時不用請，敢為酢偽者，貲二甲；典、老弗告，貲各一甲；伍人，戶一盾，皆之。
现代文：隐匿成童，及申报废疾不破实，里典、伍老应赎耐。百姓不应免老，或已应免老而不加申报、敢弄虚作假的，罚二甲；里典、伍老不加告发，各罚一甲；同伍的人，每家罚一盾，都加以流放。
English: People should not be exempted from old age, or have been exempted from old age without declaration, if they dare to make a false report, they will be fined two carats; if they do not report, they will be fined one carat; if they do not report, they will be fined one guilder; if they do not report, they will be fined one guilder; if they do not report, they will be exiled.

古文：傅律。徒卒不上宿，署君子、敦長、僕射不告，貲各一盾。
现代文：徒卒不到岗位值宿警衔，署君子、屯长、仆射不报告，各罚一盾。
English: If a footman fails to report to his post as a duty-stationed policeman, the station master, the head of the station, and the footman do not report, they will each be fined one ryo.

古文：宿者已上守除，擅下，人貲二甲。
现代文：宿卫者已上以殿阶警衙，擅自下岗，每人罚二甲。
English: The night watchman, who had been promoted to the rank of palace guard, left his post without permission, and was fined 2 kopecks each.

古文：冗募歸，辭曰日已備，致未來，不如辭，貲日四月居邊。
现代文：应蓦的军士回乡，声称服役期限已满，但是证明其服役期满的文券未到，这种情况与本人所说不符，罚居边服役四个月。
English: The discharged sergeant returned to his hometown, claiming that his service period had expired, but the certificate proving the expiration of his service period had not arrived, which was inconsistent with what he said. He was sentenced to four months of service.

古文：軍新論攻城，城陷，尚有棲未到戰所，告曰戰圍以折亡，者，耐；敦長、什伍智弗告，貲一甲；稟伍二甲。
现代文：军中就最近攻城的功绩论赏，如有城陷时迟到没有进入战场，报告说在围城作战中死亡而弄虚作假的，应处耐刑；屯长、同什的人知情不报，罚一甲、同伍的人，罚二甲。
English: The army will discuss and reward the merits of the recent siege of the city. If you are late to enter the battlefield when the city falls, if you report that you died in the siege battle and falsify it, you should be punished with a long sentence; if the commander and his men do not report it, they will be fined one point, and if they are in the same army, they will be fined two points.

古文：敦表律。戰死事不出，論其後。
现代文：在战争中死事不屈，应将爵授予其子。
English: He fought tirelessly in the war, and the title should be conferred on his son.

古文：有後察不死，奪後爵，除伍人；不死者歸，以為隸臣。
现代文：如后来察觉该人未死，应实在夺其子的爵位，并惩治其同伍的人；那个未死的人回来，作为隶臣。
English: If it is later discovered that the person is not dead, he should indeed deprive his son of his title and punish his companions; the undead person returns as a vassal.

古文：寇降，以為隸臣。
现代文：敌寇投降的，作为隶臣。
English: The enemy corsair surrendered as a vassal.

古文：捕律曰：捕人相移以受爵者，耐。
现代文：把所捕的人转交他人，备以骗取爵位的，处以耐刑。
English: If the arrested person is handed over to someone else in preparation for defrauding a peerage, the punishment will be a suspended sentence.

古文：求勿令送逆為它，令送逆為它事者，貲二甲。
现代文：不准命求盗去做送迎或其他事务，有命求盗做送迎或其他事务的，罚二甲。
English: It is not allowed to steal to do pick-up or other services. If you steal to do pick-up or other services, you will be fined 2 points.

古文：戍律曰：同居毋并行，縣嗇夫、尉及士吏行戍不以律，貲二甲。
现代文：同居者不要同时征服边戌，县啬夫、县尉和士吏如不依法征发边戌，罚二甲。
English: Those who live together should not conquer the borderlands at the same time. If county officials, county lieutenants and officials do not collect and issue borderlands according to law, they will be fined two points.

古文：戍者城及補城，令姑堵一歲，所城有壞者，縣司空署君子將者，貲各一甲；縣司空佐主將者，貲一盾。
现代文：服边戌者筑城和修城，都要叫他们担保城垣一年，所筑如有毁坏，率领戌者的县司空署君子各罚一甲；主管率领的县司空佐罚一盾。
English: For those who build and repair the city, they should be required to guarantee the city wall for one year. If there is any damage to the building, the officials of the County Civil Aeronautics Administration who lead the demolition will each be fined one rupee; the County Civil Aeronautics Assistant who leads the supervisor will be fined one rupee.

古文：令戍者勉補繕城，署勿令為它事；已補，乃令增塞埤塞。縣尉時循視其攻及所為，敢令為它事，使者貲二甲。
现代文：要命服边戌者全力修城，所属地段不得叫他们做其他事务；城已修好，就命他们把要害处加高加厚，县尉应经常巡视工程和他们在做什么，有敢叫他们做其他事务的，役使他们的人应罚二甲。
English: Those who obey the orders of the border guards should do their best to rebuild the city, and they should not be asked to do other things in their own areas. Once the city has been repaired, they should be ordered to increase the height and thickness of the critical areas. The county lieutenant should regularly inspect the project and what they are doing. If they dare to ask them to do other things, the person who serves them should be fined two points.

