古文：桓公曰， 天下之朝夕可定乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 天下的物价涨跌可以使之停止么？ 
English: Kanko said: Can the rise and fall of prices around the world be stopped?

古文：管子对曰： 终身不定。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 永远不应当使之停止。 
English: Guanzhong replied: It should never be stopped.

古文：桓公曰： 其不定之说，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 其永远不应使之停止的有关理论，可以讲给我听听么？ 
English: He said, "Can you tell me about the theory that it should never be stopped?"

古文：管子对曰： 地之东西二万八千里，南北二万六千里。
现代文：管仲回答说： 国土的东西距离二万八千里，南北二万六千里。
English: Guanzhong replied, "The east-west width of the land is 28,000 li, and the north-south length is 26,000 li.

古文：天子中而立，国之四面，面万有余里。民之入正籍者亦万有余里。
现代文：天子在中央，国之四面，每面距离都有一万多里，百姓交纳贡赋远的也要走一万多里。
English: The Son of Heaven is in the center, and the four sides of the country are more than ten thousand miles away from each other, and the people have to pay more than ten thousand miles to go far away.

古文：故有百倍之力而不至者，有十倍之力而不至者，有倪而是者。
现代文：因此，有用百倍的劳力而送不到的，有用十倍劳力而送不到的，也有转瞬即到的。
English: Therefore, there are things that can't be sent by using a hundred times more labor, and there are things that can't be sent by using ten times more labor, but they will arrive in the blink of an eye.

古文：则远者疏，疾怨上。
现代文：距离远的关系也就疏远，怨恨君主。
English: A distant relationship is an estranged one, and resentment of the monarch ensues.

古文：边境诸侯受君之怨民，与之为善，缺然不朝，是无子塞其涂。
现代文：边境诸侯收罗这些怨民，同他们亲善拉拢，以致缺空不来朝拜。
English: The border lords invited these malcontents and befriended them, so that they did not come to pay homage.

古文：熟谷者去，天下之可得而霸？ 
现代文：这种情况等于是天子自己阻塞了统治的通道。
English: This situation is tantamount to the heavenly son himself blocking the channel of rule.

古文：桓公曰： 行事奈何？ 
现代文：精通粮食经济的官员都走了，还能够掌握天下什么事情？ 桓公说： 该怎么办？ 
English: Kanko said: What is the specific approach?

古文：管子对曰： 请与之立壤列天下之旁，天子中立，地方千里，兼霸之壤三百有余里，佌诸侯度百里，负海子男者度七十里，若此则如胸之使臂，臂之使指也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 请在天下四方建立 壤列 制度，天子在中央，统治地方千里，大诸侯国三百多里，普通诸侯国大约百里，靠海的子爵、男爵大约七十里。这样就像胸使用臂，臂使用指一样方便。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Please establish a system of soil rows in the four quarters of the world. The Son of Heaven is in the center, ruling thousands of miles of land, the great principalities more than three hundred miles, the ordinary principalities about a hundred miles, and the viscounts and barons by the sea about seventy miles. This is as convenient as the chest using the arm and the arm using the finger.

古文：然则小不能分于民，准徐疾羡不足，虽在下不为君忧。
现代文：那么，小财小利都不会被民侵占，调节供求缓急，利用物价高低，虽在基层也不至给君主带来忧虑了。
English: Then, small wealth and small profits will not be occupied by the people, adjusting the supply and demand priorities, and taking advantage of the high and low prices, although at the grassroots level, it will not bring worries to the monarch.

古文：夫海出泲无止，山生金木无息，草木以时生，器以时靡币，泲水之盐以日消。
现代文：海不断出产盐，山不断出产金属和木材，草木到时生长，器物到时毁灭，海盐也会到时候用完。
English: The sea is constantly producing salt, the mountains are constantly producing metal and wood, the plants and trees are growing at the right time, the utensils are destroyed at the right time, and the sea salt will run out at the right time.

古文：终则有始，与天壤争，是谓立壤列也。 
现代文：就是完了又会重新开始，与天地的运动变化并行不止，这就是建立 壤列 制度来永远利用物价涨跌的理论。 
English: This is the theory of establishing a system to take advantage of the rise and fall of prices forever.

古文：武王问于癸度曰： 贺献不重，身不亲于君；左右不足，友不善于群臣。
现代文：周武王曾问癸度说： 对天子的献礼不丰厚，天子就不亲近；在朝中左右没什么朋友，在群臣里就没有地位，跟群臣无法交往。
English: King Zhou Wu once asked Xindu, "If you don't make a rich offering to the Son of Heaven, you won't be close to the Son of Heaven; if you don't have many friends in and around the court, you won't have a place among the courtiers, and you won't be able to socialize with the courtiers."

古文：故不欲收穑户籍而给左右之用，为之有道乎？ 
现代文：如不想挨家挨户征税又想花钱在朝中交到朋友，该怎么办呢？ 
English: If you don't want to be taxed door-to-door and want to spend money to make friends in the morning, what should you do?

古文：癸度对曰： 吾国者衢处之国也，远秸之所通、游客蓄商之所道，财物之所遵。
现代文：癸度回答说： 我国是四通八达的国家，远道交纳赋税从这里通过，游客蓄商从这里经过，资财货物从这里转运。
English: Xingdu replied, "Our country is a country that is accessible to all corners of the world. The long-distance tax payment passes through here, the tourists and traders pass through here, and the capital and goods are transported from here.

古文：故苟入吾国之粟，因吾国之币，然后，载黄金而出。
现代文：因此，只要他们来我们国家卖粮食，赚取我国的货币，然后，一定会再把我国的货币兑换成黄金运出境。
English: Therefore, as long as they come to our country to sell grain and earn our currency, then they will definitely convert our currency into gold and ship it out of the country.

古文：故君请重重而衡轻轻，运物而相因，则国策可成。
现代文：所以，君上要将黄金对本国货币升值，其他进口货物相应贬值，国家的理财政策就成功了。
English: Therefore, the emperor wanted gold to appreciate against the domestic currency, and other imported goods to depreciate accordingly, and the country's financial management policy was successful.

古文：故谨毋失其度，未与民，可治？ 
现代文：所以，要谨慎不要失去分寸，否则，怎么能治理百姓？ 
English: Therefore, we must be careful not to lose our sense of proportion. Otherwise, how can we govern the people?

古文：武王曰： 行事奈何？ 
现代文：武王说： 具体做法如何？ 
English: Wu Wang said: What is the specific approach?

古文：癸度曰： 金出于汝、汉之右衢，珠出于赤野之末光，玉出于禺氏之旁山。
现代文：癸度说： 黄金产在汝河、汉水的右面一带，珍珠产在赤野的末光，玉产在禺氏的旁山。
English: Xingdu said: Gold is produced in the right side of the Yue River and the Han River, pearls are produced in the twilight of the Akano, and jade is produced in the mountains near the Xing clan.

古文：此皆距周七千八百余里，其涂远，其至阨。
现代文：这些东西都与周朝中央相距七千八百里，路途遥远，运来困难。
English: All of these things are 7,800 miles away from the center of Zhou Dynasty, which is a long way and difficult to transport.

古文：故先王度用于其重，因以珠玉为上币，黄金为中币，刀布为下币。
现代文：所以先王分别根据这些货物的获取难易程度来定他的价值，把珠玉定为上等货币，黄金定为中等货币，刀布作为下等货币。
English: Therefore, the first king separately determined his value according to the difficulty of obtaining these goods, and set the jewel as the superior currency, the gold as the medium currency, and the knife cloth as the inferior currency.

古文：故先王善高下中币，制下上之用，而天下足矣。 
现代文：先王就是妥善掌握黄金价格的高低，用来控制下币刀布和上币珠玉的作用，这就满足天下需要了。 
English: The first king is to properly grasp the level of gold prices, used to control the role of the lower coin knife cloth and the upper coin jewel, which will meet the needs of the world.

古文：桓公曰， 衡谓寡人曰： 一农之事必有一耜、一铫。
现代文：桓公说： 衡对我讲： 一个农夫的生产，必须有犁、大锄、镰、小锄？
English: Huan Gong said: Heng told me: A farmer's production must have straw, large straw, straw and small straw?

古文：一镰、一鎒、一椎、一铚，然后成为农。一车必有一斤、一锯、一釭、一钻、一凿、一銶、一轲，然后成为车。
现代文：短镰等工具，然后才能成为农夫。一个造车工匠，必须有斧、锯、铁钉、钻、凿、钵和轴铁等工具，然后才能成为车匠。
English: A wheelwright must have tools such as axes, saws, nails, drills, chisels, picks, and spindles before he can become a wheelwright.

古文：一女必有一刀、一锥、一箴、一鉥，然后成为女。
现代文：一个女工，必须有刀、椎、针、长针等工具，然后才能成为女工。
English: A female worker must have tools such as knives, pliers, needles, and long needles before she can become a female worker.

古文：请以令断山木，鼓山铁。是可以无籍而用尽。  
现代文：请下令砍伐树木，鼓炉铸铁，这就可以不征税而保证财用充足。 
English: Please order the felling of trees, the drum furnace cast iron, which can be tax-free and ensure sufficient financial resources.

古文：管子对曰： 不可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 不可以。
English: The pipe answered, "No."

古文：今发徒隶而作之，则逃亡而不守；发民，则下疾怨上，边竟有兵则怀宿怨而不战。
现代文：如果派罪犯去开山铸铁，那就会逃亡而无法控制。如果征发百姓，那就会怨恨国君；一旦边境发生战事，则必怀宿怨而不肯为国出力。
English: If criminals are sent to open cast-iron mountains, they will flee and cannot be controlled; if people are conscripted, they will resent the sovereign; if there is a war on the border, they will harbor old grudges and refuse to contribute to the country.

古文：未见山铁之利而内败矣。
现代文：开山冶铁未见其利，而国家反遭 内败 了。
English: The opening of the mountain metallurgical iron found no benefit, and the country, on the other hand, suffered internal defeat.

古文：故善者不如与民，量其重，计其赢，民得其十，君得其三。
现代文：所以，良好的办法不如交给民间经营，算好它的产值，计算它的赢利，由百姓分利七成，君主分利三成。
English: Therefore, a good method is to entrust it to non-governmental management, calculate its output value, calculate its profit, and distribute 70% of the profits to the people and 30% to the monarch.

古文：有杂之以轻重，守之以高下。
现代文：国君再把轻重之术运用在这个过程，用价格政策加以掌握。
English: The sovereign then applied the art of gravity to this process, using price policy to control it.

古文：若此，则民疾作而为上虏矣。 
现代文：这样，百姓就奋力劳动而甘听君主摆布了。 
English: In this way, the people work hard and are at the mercy of the monarch.

古文：桓公曰： 请问壤数。 
现代文：桓公说： 请问适应土地条件的理财方法。 
English: Kanko said: Please find a financial management method that suits the land conditions.

古文：管子对曰： 河诸侯，亩钟之国也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 近河沃土的诸侯国，是亩产一钟的国家。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Countries with fertile soil near rivers are countries with one-minute production per mu.

古文：皟，山诸侯之国也。
现代文：沙石之地，是山地的诸侯国。
English: The land of sand and stone is a mountainous vassal state.

古文：河诸侯常不胜山诸侯之国者，豫戒者也。 
现代文：但近河沃土的诸侯国反而常常赶不上山地诸侯国，这就是由于 预有所备 。 
English: However, the vassal states with fertile soil near rivers often cannot keep up with the mountainous vassal states, which is due to preparation.

古文：桓公曰： 此若言何谓也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这话是什么意思呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What does that mean?

古文：管子对曰： 夫河诸侯，亩钟之国也，故谷众多而不理，固不得有。
现代文：管仲回答说： 近河沃土的诸侯国，是亩产高达一钟的国家，粮多而不加管理，当然不能维持。
English: Guanzhong replied, "The vassal states with fertile soil near rivers are the countries with the highest output per mu. Without management, they have too much grain, and of course, they cannot sustain themselves.

古文：至于山诸侯之国、则敛蔬藏菜，此之谓豫戒。 
现代文：至于山地的诸侯国，则是节约粗米，贮藏蔬菜，这个就叫作 预有所备 。 
English: As for the mountainous vassal states, they conserve coarse rice and store vegetables, which is called "pre-preparedness."

古文：桓公曰： 壤数尽于此乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 适应土地条件的理财方法就到此为止了么？ 
English: Kanko said: Is this the end of financial management methods that adapt to land conditions?

古文：管子对曰： 未也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 没有。
English: Guan Sheng replied, "No."

古文：昔狄诸侯，亩钟之国也，故粟十钟而锱金，程诸侯，山诸侯之国也，故粟五釜而锱金。
现代文：从前有个狄诸侯，是亩产一钟粮食的国家，所以粮食十钟卖价才一锱金。另外有个程诸侯，是山地的诸侯国，所以粮食五釜卖价就是一锱金。
English: Once upon a time, there was a Di vassal state, a country where a mu yielded one ounce of grain, so the selling price of ten ounces of grain was only one shekel of gold. In addition, there was a Cheng vassal state, a mountainous vassal state, so the selling price of five kettles of grain was one ounce of gold.

古文：故狄诸侯十钟而不得倳戟，程诸侯五釜而得倳戟，十倍而不足，或五分而有余者，通于轻重高下之数。
现代文：问题是狄诸侯十钟而不能建立军队，程诸侯半钟而能建立。或十倍而不足，或五分而有余，原因全在于通晓轻重之术和物价高低的理财方法。
English: The problem is that Di princes can't build an army in ten minutes, but Cheng princes can build it in half an hour. Or ten times but not enough, or five times but more, the reason is all in the skill of knowing the weight and the high price of the financial management method.

古文：国有十岁之蓄，而民食不足者，皆以其事业望君之禄也。君有山海之财，而民用不足者，皆以其事业交接于上者也。故租籍，君之所宜得也；正籍者，君之所强求也。
现代文：国家有十年的粮食贮备，而人民的粮食还不够吃，人们就想用自己的事业求取君主的俸禄；国君有经营山海盐铁的大量收入，而人民的用度还不充足，人们就想用自己的事业换取君主的金钱。 租籍 是君主应得的， 正籍 是君主强征的。
English: The state has a ten-year grain reserve, but the people's grain is not enough to eat, so people want to use their own business to seek the monarch's salary; the sovereign has a large amount of income from the operation of mountains, seas, salt and iron, but the people's consumption is not sufficient, so people want to use their own business to exchange for the monarch's money.

古文：亡君废其所宜得而敛其所强求，故下怨上而令不行。
现代文：亡国之君，废其所应得而取其所 强征 ，故百姓怨恨君主而政令无法推行。
English: The people resented the monarch and the decree could not be carried out because the ruler of the defeated country had taken what he had earned by force instead of giving up what he deserved.

古文：民，夺之则怒，予之则喜。民情固然。
现代文：百姓是予之则喜，夺之则怒，人情无不如此。
English: The people are pleased when they are given something, and angry when they are deprived of it. This is human nature.

古文：先王知其然，故见予之所，不见夺之理。
现代文：先王懂得这个道理，所以在给予人民利益时，要求形式鲜明；在夺取人民利益时，则要求不露内情。
English: The previous king understood this principle, so when giving benefits to the people, he required a clear form; when seizing the people's interests, he required not to reveal the inside story.

古文：故五谷粟米者，民之司命也；黄金刀布者，民之通货也。
现代文：粮食，是人民生命的主宰；货币，是人民的交易手段。
English: Grain is the mainstay of people's lives; money is the people's means of transaction.

古文：先王善制其通货以御其司命，故民力可尽也。 
现代文：先王就是善于利用流通手段来控制主宰人民生命的粮食，所以就把百姓力量完全使用起来了。 
English: The previous king was good at using the means of circulation to control the grain that dominated people's lives, so he fully used the power of the people.

古文：管子曰： 泉雨五尺，其君必辱；食称之国必亡，待五谷者众也。
现代文：管仲说： 好雨入地五尺，国君就说话不灵。吃食足够的国家，反而必亡。
English: Guanzhong said: If a good rain falls five feet into the ground, the ruler will not be able to speak well. If a country has enough food, it will die.

古文：故树木之胜霜露者不受令于天，家足其所者不从圣人。
现代文：这都是因为手里备有余粮的人多起来了。所以，不怕霜露的树木，不受天的摆布，自家能满足需求的人们，不肯服从君主。
English: This is because the number of people with surplus grain in their hands has increased. Therefore, people who are not afraid of frost and dew, who are not at the mercy of the sky, and who can meet their own needs, do not want to obey the monarch.

古文：故夺然后予，高然后下，喜然后怒，天下可举。 
现代文：所以，先夺取而后给予，先提高物价而后降低，先使百姓不满然后再使之喜悦，天下事就好办了。 
English: Therefore, first to seize and then to give, first to raise prices and then to lower them, first to make the people dissatisfied and then to make them happy, everything is easy to do.

古文：桓公曰： 强本节用，可以为存乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 加强农业，节约开支，就可以使国家不亡么？ 
English: Kankong said, "If we strengthen agriculture and save expenses, can we make the country immortal?"

古文：管子对曰， 可以为益愈，而未足以为存也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 可以使经济情况更好些，而不能保证不亡。
English: Guanzhong replied: We can make the economic situation better, but we cannot guarantee our survival.

古文：昔者纪氏之国强本节用者，其五谷丰满而不能理也，四流而归于天下。
现代文：从前，纪氏的国家就是加强农业节约开支的，但粮食丰富而不能经营管理，粮食便四下外流而归于天下各国。
English: In the past, Ji's country used to strengthen agricultural conservation and expenditure, but grain was abundant and could not be managed. Grain was exported to all countries in the world.

古文：若是，则纪氏其强本节用，适足以使其民谷尽而不能理，为天下虏。
现代文：这样，纪氏虽加强农业节约开支，但不能经营管理，恰恰使他的百姓粮食外流净尽而成为天的俘虏。
English: In this way, although Ji strengthened agricultural savings and expenditure, he could not operate and manage, which made his people run out of grain and become prisoners of the sky.

古文：是以其国亡而身无所处。
现代文：因而他自己也国亡而无处容身。
English: As a result, his own country was destroyed and he had nowhere to go.

古文：故可以益愈而不足以为存，故善为国者，天下下，我高；天下轻，我重；天下多，我寡。
现代文：所以说只能使经济情况更好些，而不能保证不亡。所以善于主持国家的，总是在各国物价降低时，我则使它提高；各国轻视此种商品时，我则重视；各国市场供过于求时，我则通过囤积使之供不应求。
English: Therefore, it can only make the economic situation better, but it cannot guarantee survival. Therefore, if I am good at presiding over the country, I will always raise the price of goods in various countries when the price is lowered; when countries despise such goods, I will attach importance to them; when supply exceeds demand in the markets of various countries, I will make supply fall short of demand through hoarding.

古文：然后可以朝天下。 
现代文：这然后就可以统率天下了。 
English: Then we can rule the world.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人欲毋杀一士，毋顿一戟，而辟方都二，为之有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我要求不死一人，不动一哉而开凿大蓄水池两个，有办法做到么？ 
English: Huan Gong said, "I asked that one person not die, and that two large reservoirs be excavated without moving. Is there a way to do this?"

古文：管子对曰： 泾水十二空，汶、渊、洙浩满，三之於。
现代文：管仲回答说： 把小水按地形高下加以控制，汶、泗、洙、沿诸水的水量即可增加三倍。
English: Guanzhong replied: By controlling the small water according to the height of the terrain, the amount of water can be increased by three times.

古文：乃请以令使九月种麦，日至日获，则时雨未下而利农事矣。 
现代文：于是请下令九月种麦，翌年夏至收割。这样，在时雨未到之前，就有利于农事灌溉了。 
English: Therefore, please issue an order to plant wheat in September and harvest in the summer solstice of the following year. In this way, it will be beneficial for agricultural irrigation before the rainy season arrives.

古文：桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：桓公说： 可以。 
English: Kaneko said, "Yes."

古文：令以九月种麦，日至而获。
现代文：便下令九月种麦，翌年夏至收割。
English: He ordered wheat to be sown in September and harvested from the summer solstice the following year.

古文：量其艾、一收之积中方都二。
现代文：计算收获数量，一年收成的积蓄就等于大蓄水池两个。
English: Calculating the amount of harvest, the savings of one year's harvest is equal to two large cisterns.

古文：故此所谓善因天时，辨于地利而辟方都之道也。
现代文：所以这就是所谓善用天时，明察地利而开凿大蓄水池的方法。
English: Therefore, this is the so-called method of making good use of time and space to excavate a large reservoir.

古文：管子入复桓公曰： 终岁之租金四万二千金，请以一朝素赏军士。 
现代文：管仲向桓公报告说： 全年的地租金额将得四万二千斤黄金，请在一天内全部预赏给战士。 
English: Guanzhong reported to Huan Gong: The amount of land rent for the whole year will be as high as 42,000 kg of gold. Please reward all the soldiers within one day.

古文：桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：桓公说： 可以。 
English: Kaneko said, "Yes."

古文：以令至鼓期于泰舟之野期军士。
现代文：便下令准备鼓旗于泰州之野召集军队战士。
English: He then ordered to prepare drums and flags to rally the army soldiers in the fields of Taizhou.

古文：桓公乃即坛而立，宁戚、鲍叔、隰朋、易牙，宾须无皆差肩而立。
现代文：桓公站在台上，宁戚、鲍叔、隰朋、易牙、宾须无都依次挨肩而立。
English: Kuan Kung stood on the stage, and Ning Qi, Bao Shu, Yao Peng, Yi Ya, and the guests all stood shoulder to shoulder in turn.

古文：管子执枹而揖军士曰： 谁能陷陈破众者，赐之百金。 
现代文：管仲拿着鼓槐向战士拱手为礼说： 谁能陷阵攻破敌众，赏黄金百斤。 
English: Holding the cymbals, Guanzhong bowed to the soldiers and said, "Whoever can defeat the enemy and win a hundred pounds of gold."

古文：三问不对。
现代文：三次发问无人回答。
English: No one answered the question three times.

古文：有一人秉剑而前，问曰： 几何人之众也？ 管子曰： 千人之众。 
现代文：有一战士执剑向前询问说： 多少敌众呢？管仲说： 千人之众。 
English: A soldier holding a sword stepped forward and asked, "How many enemy troops are there?" Guanzhong said, "Thousands."

古文： 千人之众，臣能陷之。 
现代文： 千人之众，我可以攻破。 
English: A thousand people, I can break through.

古文：赐之百金。
现代文：于是赏给他一百斤黄金。
English: So he rewarded her with a hundred kilos of gold.

古文：管子又曰： 兵接弩张，谁能得卒长者，赐之百金。 
现代文：然后管仲又发问说： 在兵接管张的交战当中，谁能擒获敌军的卒长，赏黄金百斤。 
English: Then Guanzhong asked again, "Among the soldiers who took over Zhang's battle, who could capture the enemy's petty officer and be rewarded with a hundred pounds of gold?"

古文：问曰： 几何人卒之长也？ 
现代文：下面又询问说： 是多少人的卒长呢？ 
English: Then he inquired: "How many officers are there?"

古文：管子曰： 千人之长。 
现代文：管仲说： 一千人的卒长。 
English: Guanzhong said, "A captain of a thousand men is enough.

古文： 千人之长，臣能得之。 
现代文： 千人的卒长，我可以擒到。 
English: The captain of a thousand men, I can find him.

古文：赐之百金。
现代文：于是赏给一百斤黄金。
English: So he rewarded her with a hundred kilos of gold.

古文：管子又曰： 谁能听旌旗之所指，而得执将首者，赐之千金。 
现代文：管仲又发问说： 谁能按旌旗所指的方向，而得到敌军大将的首级，赏黄金千斤。 
English: Guanzhong also asked, "Whoever can get the head of the enemy general by following the direction indicated by the banner, will be awarded a gold coin."

古文：言能得者垒千人，赐之人千金。
现代文：回答可以得到的共有十人，每人都赏给一千斤黄金。
English: A total of ten people were able to answer the question, and each of them was rewarded with a thousand kilos of gold.

古文：其余言能外斩首者，赐之人十金。
现代文：其余凡自说能够在外杀敌的，都赏给每人黄金十斤。
English: The rest, who claimed to be able to kill the enemy outside, were awarded ten kilos of gold each.

古文：一朝素赏，四万二千金廓然虚。
现代文：一早上的 预赏 ，四万二千斤黄金都光了。
English: The morning's reserve of 42,000 kilos of gold is gone.

古文：桓公惕然太息曰： 吾曷以识此？ 
现代文：桓公忧惧地叹息说： 我怎能理解这项措施呢？ 
English: "How can I understand this measure?" said Prince Kan with a worried sigh.

古文：管子对曰： 君勿患。
现代文：管仲回答说： 君上不必忧虑。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Don't worry, Your Majesty.

古文：且使外为名于其内，乡为功于其亲，家为德于其妻子。若此，则士必争名报德，无北之意矣。
现代文：让战士在外荣显于乡里，在内报功于双亲，在家有德于妻子，这样，他们必然要争取名声，图报君德，没有败退之心了。
English: Let the soldiers show their glory in the countryside, show their merits to their parents in private, and show their virtues to their wives at home. In this way, they will inevitably strive for fame, show their virtues, and have no heart of defeat.

古文：吾举兵而攻，破其军，并其地，则非特四万二千金之利也。 
现代文：我们举兵作战，能够攻破敌军，占领敌人土地，那就不只限于四万二千金的利益了。 
English: If we raise an army and fight, if we are able to break through the enemy army and occupy the enemy's land, then the benefits are not limited to 42,000 gold.

古文：五子曰： 善。 
现代文：五人都说： 好。 
English: And all five said, "Amen."

古文：桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：桓公也接着说： 可以。 
English: Kaneko said, "Yes."

古文：乃诫大将曰： 百人之长，必为之朝礼；干人之长，必拜而送之，降两级。
现代文：于是又告诫军中大将们说： 凡统领百人的军官拜见你们时，一定要按访问的礼节相待；统领干人的军官拜见你们时，一定要下阶两级拜而送之。
English: He then admonished the generals, saying, "When an officer commanding a hundred men pays you a visit, you must treat him according to the etiquette of a visit; when an officer commanding a hundred men pays you a visit, you must send him on his way with two bows."

古文：其有亲戚者，必遗之酒四石，肉四鼎；其无亲戚者，必遗其妻子酒三石，肉三鼎。 
现代文：他们有父母的，一定要赏给酒四石、肉四鼎。没有父母物，一定要赏给妻子酒三石，肉三鼎。 
English: If they have parents, they must reward their wives with four kilos of wine and three pounds of meat. If they do not have parents, they must reward their wives with three kilos of wine and three pounds of meat.

古文：行教半岁，父教其子，兄教其弟，妻谏其夫，曰： 见其若此其厚，而不死列陈，可以反于乡乎？ 
现代文：这个办法实行才半年，百姓中父亲告诉儿子，兄长告诉弟弟，妻子劝告丈夫，说： 国家待我们如此优厚，若不死战于前线，还可以回到乡里来么？ 
English: This measure has only been in place for half a year. Fathers are telling their sons, brothers are telling their brothers, and wives are advising their husbands, saying: "The state treats us so well. If we don't die on the front line, can we still come back to the countryside?"

古文：桓公终举兵攻莱，战于莒必市里。
现代文：桓公终于举兵攻伐莱国，作战于莒地的必市里。
English: King Kan finally raised an army to invade Balai and fought in the city of Bishiri in Shunde.

古文：鼓旗未相望，众少未相知，而莱人大遁。
现代文：结果是旗鼓还没有互相看到，军队多少还没有互相了解，莱国军队就大败而逃。
English: The result was that the drums and drums had not yet seen each other, the armies had not yet understood each other to any extent, and the Laotian army was defeated and fled.

古文：故遂破其军，兼其地，而虏其将。
现代文：于是便破其军队，占其土地而虏其将领。
English: So they defeated his army, occupied his land and captured his generals.

古文：故未列地而封，未出金而赏，破莱军，并其地，擒其君。
现代文：因此，还没有等到拿出土地封官，也没有等到拿出黄金行赏，便攻破了莱国的队伍，吞并了莱国的土地，擒获了他们的国君。
English: Therefore, they did not wait to take out the land to seal the officials, nor did they wait to take out the gold to reward, they broke through the ranks of Laos, annexed the land of Laos, and captured their kings.

古文：此素赏之计也。
现代文：这便是预先行赏的计策。
English: This is the strategy of advance reward.

古文：桓公曰： 曲防之战，民多假贷而给上事者。寡人欲为之出赂，为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 曲防战役时，百姓有很多借债来供给国家军费的，我想替他们出钱偿还，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Huan Gong said: During the Qigong Defense Campaign, the people borrowed a lot of money to supply the national military expenses. I want to pay for them. What should I do?

古文：管子对曰： 请以令：令富商蓄贾百符而一马，无有者取于公家。
现代文：管仲回答说： 请您下令：令富商蓄贾凡握有百张债券的献马一匹，无马者可以向国家购买。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Please give the order: Let Jia Fan, a wealthy businessman, hold a hundred bonds to donate a horse. Those who do not have a horse can buy one from the state."

古文：若此，则马必坐长而百倍其本矣。
现代文：这样，马价一定自然上涨到百倍之多。
English: In this way, the horse price will naturally rise to as much as a hundred times.

古文：是公家之马不离其牧皂，而曲防之战赂足矣。 
现代文：这也就是说，国家的马匹还没有离开马槽，曲防战役的费用就足够偿还了。 
English: That is to say, the country's horse has not yet left the stable, and the cost of the war of resistance is enough to repay.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 崇弟、蒋弟，丁、惠之功世，吾岁罔，寡人不得籍斗升焉，去。
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 祟弟、蒋弟、丁、惠等四家功臣的后裔，我是全年得不到他们什么东西的，不能征收一斗一升的租税，这项收入要除掉。
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong and said, "I am the descendant of four meritorious vassals, including Cangdi, Jiangdi, Ding and Hui, and I can't get anything from them throughout the year. I can't collect one dou and one liter of tax. I have to get rid of this income."

古文：菹菜、咸卤、斥泽、山间不为用之壤，寡人不得籍斗升焉，去一。
现代文：荒草地、盐碱地、盐碱水泽及高低不平的山地，我也不能征收到一斗一升。
English: Wild grassland, saline-alkali land, saline-alkali marshes and uneven mountainous land, I can not collect one bucket and one liter.

古文：列稼缘封十五里之原，强耕而自以为落，其民寡人不得籍斗升焉。
现代文：这项收入又要除掉。庄稼布满在边境十五里的平原上，但这是一些人强行耕种而自建的村落，对他们我也不能征收到一斗一升。
English: Crops cover the plains fifteen miles from the border, but these are villages that some people have built themselves by forced cultivation, and I can't collect a dowel and a liter from them.

古文：则是寡人之国，五分而不能操其二，是有万乘之号而无干乘之用也。
现代文：这就是说，我的国家，五分收入还不能掌握二分，简直是有万乘之国的名，而没有干乘之国的实。
English: That is to say, my country, which can't even manage two-fifths of the national income, is simply a country with the name of a country of universal suffrage, but without the reality of a country of universal suffrage.

古文：以是与天子提衡，争秩于诸侯，为之有道乎？ 
现代文：以这样的条件同天子并驾齐驱，同诸侯争夺地位，还有什么办法么？ 
English: Under such conditions, is there any other way to keep pace with the Son of Heaven and compete for status with the princes?

古文：管子对曰： 唯籍于号令为可耳。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 只有在号令上想办法才行。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Only if you can find a way to give the order."

古文：桓公曰， 行事奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 做法如何？ 
English: Kanko said, "What's the procedure?"

古文：管于对曰： 请以令发师置屯籍农，十钟之家不行，百钟之家不行，千钟之家不行。
现代文：管仲回答说： 请下令派遣军队去边疆屯田务农，但规定家存十钟粮食的可以不去，家存百钟粮食的可以不去，家存干钟的更可以不去。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Please issue an order to send troops to the frontier to farm, but stipulate that those who have ten ounces of grain can not go, those who have a hundred ounces of grain can not go, and those who have a dry ounce can not go.

古文：行者不能百之一，千之十，而囷窌之数皆见于上矣。
现代文：这样，去的人不会有百分之一或干分之十，而各家粮仓的存粮数字则全部被国家知道了。
English: In this way, no more than one percent or one tenth of a percent of the people will go, and the grain storage figures of each granary will be fully known by the state.

古文：君案囷窌之数，令之曰： 国贫而用不足，请以平价取之子，皆案囷窌而不能挹损焉。 
现代文：君上再根据各家的数字发令说： 朝廷困难而财用不足，要按照平价向你们征购粮食。你们要按照粮仓的数字完全售出而不得减少。 
English: The sovereign then issued an order based on the figures of each family, saying: "The Imperial Court is experiencing difficulties and is short of funds, and it is necessary to purchase grain from you according to the parity price. You must completely sell according to the number of grain silos and must not reduce it.

古文：君直币之轻重以决其数，使无券契之责，则积藏囷窌之粟皆归于君矣。
现代文：然后，君上按照所值货币的多少来算清钱数付款，使国家不再拖欠购粮单据上的债务。这就使各家粮仓积藏的存粮全部归于国君了。
English: Then, the sovereign calculated the amount of money according to the amount of the value of the currency and cleared the payment, so that the country would no longer default on the debt on the grain purchase documents. This made the grain stored in the grain silos of each family all belong to the sovereign.

古文：故九州无敌，竟上无患。 
现代文：这样，就可以做到九州无敌，国境安全无患。 
English: In this way, we can make Kyushu invincible and ensure border security.

古文：令曰： 罢兵归农，无所用之。 
现代文：桓公说： 罢兵归农，这些粮食岂不没有用处了么？ 
English: Kanko said, "If the soldiers were to return to farming, wouldn't this grain be useless?

古文：管子曰： 天下有兵，则积藏之粟足以备其粮；天下无兵，则以赐贫甿，若此则菹菜、咸卤、斥泽、山间之壤无不发草：此之谓籍于号令。 
现代文：管仲说： 一旦天下发生战争，则贮备的粮食可以作为军粮；天下无事，则用来帮助贫困农民生产，这样，荒草地、盐碱地、盐碱水泽以及高低不平的山地，就没有不开辟耕种的了。
English: Guanzhong said: Once there is a war in the world, the stored grain can be used as military grain; if there is nothing wrong in the world, it will be used to help poor farmers produce. In this way, there is no need to open up the barren grassland, saline land, saline water and uneven mountainous land.

古文：管子曰： 滕鲁之粟釜百，则使吾国之粟釜千；滕鲁之粟四流而归我、若下深谷者。
现代文：这些做法叫作在号令上谋取国家收入。 管仲说： 滕国和鲁国的粮食每釜一百钱，假如把我国粮价提高为每釜一千钱，滕、鲁的粮食就将从四面向我国流入，有如水向深谷里面流一样。
English: Guanzhong said: If the grain price in our country is raised to one thousand yuan per kettle, the grain from Teng and Lu will flow into our country from four directions, just as water flows into a deep valley.

古文：非岁凶而民饥也，辟之以号令，引之以徐疾，施平其归我若流水。 
现代文：这并不是因为我们有灾荒而百姓饥饿，而是运用了号令来招引，利用并掌握供求缓急来吸收，粮食就不断地象流水一样来到我国了。 
English: This is not because we have disaster and famine and the people are hungry, but by using the call to attract, use and grasp the supply and demand priorities to absorb, grain has continuously come to our country like running water.

古文：桓公曰： 吾欲杀正商贾之利而益农夫之事，为此有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我想削减商人赢利而帮助农民生产，有办法么？ 
English: Huan Gong said: I want to reduce the profit of merchants and help farmers to produce, is there any way?

古文：管子对曰： 粟重而万物轻，粟轻而万物重，两者不衡立。
现代文：管仲回答说： 粮价高，其他物资的价格就低；粮价低，其他物资的价格就高。两者升降的趋势相反。
English: Guanzhong replied: "When grain prices are high, the prices of other materials are low; when grain prices are low, the prices of other materials are high. The upward and downward trends of the two are opposite.

古文：故杀正商贾之利而益农夫之事，则请重粟之价金三百。
现代文：所以要削减商人赢利而帮助农民生产，就请把每釜粮食的价格提高三百钱。
English: Therefore, in order to reduce the profits of merchants and help farmers to produce, please raise the price of each pot of grain by three hundred yuan.

古文：若是则田野大辟，而农夫劝其事矣。 
现代文：如此则荒地广为开垦，农夫也努力耕种了。 
English: As a result, the wasteland has been extensively reclaimed and farmers have made efforts to cultivate it.

古文：桓公曰： 重之有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 提高粮价用什么方法？ 
English: Kanko said: What method should be used to raise grain prices?

古文：管子对曰： 请以令与大夫城藏，使卿、诸侯藏千钟，令大夫藏五百钟，列大夫藏百钟，富商蓄贾藏五十钟，内可以为国委，外可以益农夫之事。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 请命令大夫们都来存粮，规定卿和附庸诸侯贮藏一千钟，令大夫贮藏五百钟，列大夫贮藏百钟，富商蓄贾贮藏五十钟。内可以作为国家的贮备，外就可以帮助农民的生产。 
English: Guanzhong replied: "Please order all the doctors to store grain, stipulate that the lords and vassals of the lords store one thousand bells, order the doctors to store five hundred bells, the doctors to store one hundred bells, and the rich merchants to store fifty bells. The inside can be used as state storage, and the outside can help farmers' production.

古文：桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：桓公说： 好。 
English: Kan said, "That's great!

古文：下令卿诸侯令大夫城藏。
现代文：便下令卿诸侯、令大夫等人贮藏粮食。
English: He then ordered nobles, lords, and doctors to store grain.

古文：农夫辟其五谷，三倍其贾。则正商失其事，而农夫有百倍之利矣。
现代文：农民们大种其五谷，粮提高三倍，专事经商的商人几乎亏本，而农民得有百倍的赢利。
English: The farmers planted a large amount of grain, and the grain yield tripled. The merchants who specialized in business were almost at a loss, while the farmers made a hundredfold profit.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 衡有数乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 平衡供求有定数么？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: Is there a constant for the balance of supply and demand?

古文：管子对曰： 衡无数也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 平衡供求没有定数。
English: Guanzhong replied: There is no constant for the balance of supply and demand.

古文：衡者使物一高一下，不得常固。 
现代文：平衡供求，就是要使物价有高有低，不经常固定在一个数字上。 
English: To balance supply and demand, it is necessary to keep prices high and low, and not always fixed at a single figure.

古文：桓公曰： 然则衡数不可调耶？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那么，平衡供求的数字就不能调整划一了么？ 
English: Kanko said: So, can't the figures for the balance of supply and demand be adjusted uniformly?

古文：管子对曰： 不可调。调则澄。澄则常，常则高下不贰，高下不贰则万物不可得而使固。 桓公曰： 然则何以守时？ 
现代文：管仲回答说： 不能调整划一，调整划一就静止了，静止则没有变化，没有变化则物价升降没有差别，没有差别各种商品都不能被我们掌握利用了。 桓公说： 那么，怎样掌握物价升降的时机？ 
English: Guanzhong replied, "We can't adjust uniformly; if we adjust uniformly, it will be static; if it is static, there will be no change; if there is no change, there will be no difference in the rise and fall of prices; if there is no difference, all kinds of commodities can't be mastered and used by us."

古文：管子对曰： 夫岁有四秋，而分有四时。
现代文：管仲回答说： 一年有四个取得收益时机，分在四季。
English: Guanzhong replied: There are four opportunities to make profits in a year, divided into four seasons.

古文：故曰：农事且作，请以什伍农夫赋耜铁，此之谓春之秋。
现代文：就是说，农事刚开始时，让农民按什、伍互相担保，向他们预售农具，这叫作春天的时机。
English: That is to say, at the beginning of the agricultural work, the farmers were asked to guarantee each other and pre-sell agricultural tools to them. This is called the spring time.

古文：大夏且至，丝纩之所作，此之谓夏之秋。
现代文：大夏将到，是织丝绸做丝絮的时节，这叫作夏天的时机。
English: The summer is coming. It is the season for weaving silk and making lint. This is called the time of summer.

古文：而大秋成，五谷之所会，此之谓秋之秋。
现代文：而到了大秋，是五谷全收时节，这叫作秋天的时机。
English: But in late autumn, it is the time of the full harvest of grain, which is called the time of autumn.

古文：大冬营室中，女事纺织缉缕之所作也，此之谓冬之秋。
现代文：大冬在室内劳动，是妇女纺织的时节，这叫作冬天的时机。
English: The winter is the time for women to work indoors, for weaving, and this is called the winter season.

古文：故岁有四秋，而分有四时。已有四者之序，发号出令，物之轻重相什而相伯。
现代文：所以，一年有四个取得收益时机，恰好分在四季，既然了解这四时的顺序，就可以运用国家号令，使物价有十倍、百倍的升降。
English: Therefore, there are four opportunities to make profits in a year, which are exactly divided into four seasons. Since you understand the order of these four hours, you can use the national command to make prices rise and fall tenfold or a hundredfold.

古文：故物不得有常固。
现代文：所以，物价不能经常固定于一点。
English: Therefore, prices cannot always be fixed at one point.

古文：故曰衡无数。 
现代文：所以说，不同时期的平衡供求没有定数。 
English: Therefore, there is no constant for the balance of supply and demand in different periods.

古文：桓公曰， 皮干筋角竹箭羽毛齿革不足，为此有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我国缺少皮、骨；筋、角、竹箭、羽毛、象牙和皮革等项商品，有办法解决么？ 
English: Huan Gong said: Our country lacks leather, bone, sinew, horn, bamboo arrow, feather, ivory and leather. Is there any way to solve this?

古文：管子曰： 惟曲衡之数为可耳。 桓公曰， 行事奈何？ 
现代文：管仲回答说： 只有多方收购的办法才行。 桓公说： 具体做法如何？ 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Only the multi-party acquisition method will work." Huan Gong said, "What is the specific approach?"

古文：管子对曰： 请以令为诸侯之商贾立客舍，一乘者有食，三乘者有刍菽，五乘者有伍养。
现代文：管仲回答说： 请下令为各诸侯国的商人建立招待客栈，规定拥有四马所驾一车的商人，免费吃饭；有十二匹马三辆车的商人，还外加供应牲口草料；有二十匹马所驾五辆大车的商人，还给他配备五个服务人员。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Please issue an order to set up a guest inn for the merchants of the various provinces, stipulating that the merchant who owns a car driven by four horses should eat free of charge; the merchant who has twelve horses and three cars should also supply animal fodder; the merchant who has twenty horses and drives five large cars should also equip him with five service personnel.

古文：天下之商贾归齐若流水。 
现代文：天下各国的商人就会象流水一样聚到齐国来。 
English: Merchants from all over the world will flock to Qi like water.

