古文：《齐民要术》：收黑鲁椹，即日以水淘取，晒燥。
现代文：《齐民要术》：采收黑鲁桑葚，当天用水淘洗净，取出、晒干，还是将种子播种在畦中。
English: "Qimin Yaoshu": Harvest black mulberry pods, wash them with water on the same day, take them out, dry them in the sun, or sow the seeds in the pods.

古文：仍畦种；治畦下种，一如葵法。
现代文：作畦和播种的方法，完全和种葵是一样的。
English: The method of cultivation and sowing is exactly the same as that of sunflowers.

古文：常薅令净。
现代文：桑畦应经常将草薅干净。
English: Mulberries should be mown regularly.

古文：《汜胜之书》曰：种桑法：五月取椹著水中，即以手渍之，以水洗取子，阴干。
现代文：《氾胜之书》说：种桑法：五月采收桑葚，浸入水中，用手揉搓溃烂用水洗净，取出种子，阴干。
English: "The Book of Flooding Victory" says: Mulberry planting method: harvest mulberry shoots in May, soak in water, rub with hands, wash with water, remove seeds, and dry in the shade.

古文：治肥田十亩，荒田久不耕者尤善，好耕治之。
现代文：准备好十亩肥沃的良田，若有多年不耕的荒地更好，好好地翻耕耧耙。
English: Prepare ten mu of fertile good fields. If there are wastelands that have not been cultivated for many years, it is better to plough them well.

古文：每亩以黍、椹子各三升合种之。
现代文：每亩用三升黍子和三升桑种混合在一起种下去。
English: Each mu is planted with three liters of hazelnuts and three liters of mulberry seeds mixed together.

古文：黍桑当俱生。锄之，桑令稀疏调适。
现代文：让黍和桑同时生长，并进行耕种锄草，使桑苗稀疏适当。
English: Let the alfalfa and mulberry grow at the same time, and cultivate the alfalfa, so that the mulberry seedlings are sparse and appropriate.

古文：黍熟，获之。
现代文：黍子成熟，便进行收刈。
English: When the hazelnuts are ripe, they are harvested.

古文：桑生正与黍高平，因以利镰摩地刈之，曝令燥。
现代文：这时桑苗正和黍一样高，用锋利的镰刀，将黍和桑同时贴近地面刈倒。
English: At this time, the mulberry seedling is as tall as the alder, and with a sharp sickle, the alder and the mulberry are cut down close to the ground.

古文：后有风调，放火烧之。
现代文：让太阳晒干，此后遇上合适的风向，便放火烧掉。
English: Let the sun dry it, and then, if the wind is right, set it on fire.

古文：桑至春生，一亩食三箔蚕。
现代文：桑到来年春天便会重新生长起来，一亩桑足够饲养三箔蚕。
English: Mulberry will grow again next spring, and one mu of mulberry is enough to raise three-foiled silkworms.

古文：《四时类要》：种桑，如种葵法。
现代文：《四时类要》：种桑和种葵的方法一样。
English: "Four-time class essentials": the method of planting mulberry is the same as that of planting sunflower.

古文：土不得厚，厚即不生，待高一尺，又上粪土一遍。
现代文：覆土不能厚，土厚了，便不会出苗。苗高一尺时，再追施一次粪肥。
English: The soil should not be too thick. If the soil is too thick, seedlings will not grow. When the seedlings are one foot tall, apply manure again.

古文：《务本新书》：四月种椹，二月种旧椹亦同。
现代文：《务本新书》：四月种桑葚，二月种陈的桑葚亦同此法。
English: "Ryuhon Shinsho": Mulberries planted in April and harvested in February are also grown using this method.

古文：东西掘畦，熟粪和土，耧平，下水；水宜湿透，然后布子。
现代文：按照东西的方向掘地作畦，用熟腐好的粪肥和土混合在一起，耧耙平，灌水。水要浇透以后再撒种子。
English: According to the east-west direction, dig the ground to make a plough, mix the well-rotted manure with the soil, level it, and water it. The water should be poured through before sowing the seeds.

古文：或和黍子同种，椹藉黍力，易为生发，又遮日色。
现代文：也可以将黍子和桑椹同时种下去，桑子可借着黍子的力量，容易生长出苗，黍还可以为桑苗遮蔽阳光。
English: Mulberries can also be planted with hazelnuts and mulberries at the same time. Mulberries can easily grow seedlings with the power of hazelnuts, and hazelnuts can also shade the sun for the mulberry seedlings.

古文：或预于畦南、畦西种檾，后藉檾阴遮映夏日。
现代文：也可以预先在桑畦的南面和西面种苘庥，以后，可借苘麻的阴影遮蔽夏季的烈日。
English: You can also plant nettle in advance on the south and west sides of the mulberry. Later, you can use the shade of the nettle to shade the hot summer sun.

古文：长至三二寸，旱则浇之。
现代文：桑苗长到二三寸高时，天旱无雨便应当浇水。
English: When mulberry seedlings grow to a height of two or three inches, they should be watered if there is no rain.

古文：若不杂黍种，须旋搭矮棚于上，以箔覆盖，昼舒夜卷。
现代文：如果不是桑黍混种的，便要随时在畦上搭架矮棚，用箔子盖在棚上。白天将箔展开，夜间将箔卷起。
English: If it is not a mulberry mixed crop, it is necessary to set up a low shelf on the stalk at any time and cover it with foil. During the day, the foil is unfolded, and at night the foil is rolled up.

古文：处暑之后不须遮蔽。
现代文：至 处暑 节气过后，便不用继续遮蔽。
English: After the summer solstice, there is no need to continue to cover up.

古文：至十月之后，桑与黍秸同时刈倒，顺风烧之。
现代文：凡是桑和黍混种的，十月以后，桑和黍秸都要同时刈倒，遇有顺风，放火烧掉。
English: After October, all mulberry and alfalfa hybrids must be cut down at the same time, and if there is a tailwind, they must be set on fire.

古文：仍糁粪土、蔽灰。
现代文：另外，还应在畦中撒施粪土和陈灰。
English: In addition, manure and old ash should be sprinkled in the straw.

古文：春暖荣茂，次年移栽。
现代文：来年春，滋生繁茂，下一年便可移栽。
English: The following spring, the cucumbers will grow profusely and can be transplanted the following year.

古文：一法：熟地先耩黍一垄。
现代文：一法：在柔熟的土地上，先用耧耩条播黍子一垄。
English: First method: On soft soil, first sow a row of hazelnuts with a row of hazelnuts.

古文：另搓草索，截约一托，以水浸软，面饭汤更妙。
现代文：另外搓粗草索，截成约一托长的许多小段，用水浸软，如用面汤饭汤浸更好。
English: In addition, the coarse grass rope, cut into many small sections of about one support length, is soaked with water and softened. It is better to soak it with noodle soup.

古文：索两头，各歇三四寸，中间匀抹湿椹子十余粒，将索卧于黍垄内，索两头以土厚压，中间糁土薄覆。
现代文：每截草索的两端各留出三四寸，中间均匀地抹上十多粒湿椹子，将草索平卧着放入黍垄中，草索两端用土压厚些，中间一段薄薄地撒土覆盖。
English: The two ends of each cut grass rope are set aside three to four inches, the middle of the rope is evenly smeared with more than ten wet dice, and the grass rope is laid flat in the ridge. The grass rope is pressed with soil at both ends, and the middle section is covered with soil.

古文：隔一步或两步，依上卧一索。四面取齐成行。
现代文：每隔一步或两步，依照上法卧置草索一截，使前后左右对齐成行。
English: At intervals of one or two steps, a section of the grass rope should be placed horizontally in accordance with the above method, so that the front and back are aligned to form a line.

古文：久旱宜浇。
现代文：天旱的时间久了，便进行浇水。
English: After a long period of drought, watering was carried out.

古文：十月，刈烧，加粪如前。
现代文：到十月以后，将黍桑同时刈倒、顺风放火、为苗圃加粪等事，如同前法。
English: After October, it will be the same as the previous method, such as cutting down the mulberry, setting fire to the wind, and adding manure to the nursery.

古文：冬春拥雪盖粪，清明前后扫去。
现代文：冬季和春季要给苗圃拥雪、盖粪，清明节前后扫去。
English: In winter and spring, the nursery should be covered with snow and manure, and swept before and after the Tomb-Sweeping Day.

古文：霖雨时，觑稀稠移补。
现代文：霖雨季节，根据桑苗的稀稠移苗补栽。
English: During the rainy season, transplant seedlings according to the thinness of the mulberry seedlings.

古文：比之畦种旋移，省力，决活，早二年得力。
现代文：此法比畦种育苗移栽要省力气，而且肯定可以成活，还可以提早两年长成桑树。
English: This method is more labor-saving than transplanting alfalfa seedlings, and it can certainly survive, and it can also grow into mulberry two years earlier.

古文：如旧有椹，春种更妙。
现代文：如有存留的陈葚，能够春天播种更好。
English: If there are any old sprouts left, it is better to sow them in spring.

古文：后宜筑围墙固护。
现代文：苗长成后，应修筑围墙妥加保护。
English: After the seedlings grow, a fence should be built to provide proper protection.

古文：或虑索繁碎，以黍椹相和，于葫芦内点种，过处，用帚扫匀。
现代文：如果考虑到搓草索播种，太过烦琐细碎，可以将黍和葚拌和放在葫芦里点播，点种过的地方，用扫帚扫匀。
English: If it is considered that sowing rushes is too cumbersome and finely chopped, it is possible to sow them by stirring and stirring and placing them in a gourd, and then sweeping the planted area with a broom.

古文：或虑天旱，宜就黍垄内，拨土平匀，顺垄作区，下水种之。
现代文：如果考虑到天旱，便可将黍垄中的土拨弄平匀，顺着黍垄作成许多小区，先用水浇过再下种。
English: If the drought is taken into account, the soil in the reed bed can be smoothed out, and many small areas can be created along the reed bed, first watered and then planted.

古文：又法，春月，先于熟地内东西成行，匀稀种檾。
现代文：还有一种方法：春季先在耕耙过的熟地中，按照东西方向，播种上一行行稠稀适度的苘麻。
English: There is another method: in the spring, sow a row of moderately thick and thin nettles in the east-west direction in the cultivated and mature land.

古文：次将桑椹与蚕沙相和或炒黍谷亦可，趁逐雨后，于檾北单耩或点种。
现代文：其次将桑葚同蚕屎拌和，或同炒过的黍子拌和也可以，趁着天雨过后，在苘行的北面用独脚耩下种或点种均可。
English: Secondly, it is also possible to mix mulberry straw with silkworm droppings, or with roasted hazelnuts. After the rain, you can use a single-legged plough to sow or spot-sow in the north of the meadow.

古文：比之搭矮棚、与黍同种，缘躲阴高密，又透风露。
现代文：此法同搭矮棚、与黍同种相比，苘麻的阴影既高又密，又通风透露。
English: Compared with the same species of nettle, the shade of nettle is both high and dense, and it is also ventilated.

古文：虽种十数亩，亦不甚委曲费力。
现代文：故虽多种至十多亩，也不会觉得多么麻烦费力气。
English: Therefore, although there are many varieties up to more than ten mu, they will not feel how troublesome and laborious it is.

古文：《士农必用》：畦种与前法同。
现代文：《士农必用》：畦种法和前面讲的一样。
English: "Essential for farmers and workers": the two-crop method is the same as the one mentioned above.

古文：种子，宜新不宜陈。
现代文：种子要用新的葚，不要用旧的葚。
English: Use new stalks for seeds, not old stalks.

古文：新椹种之为上；隔年春种，多不生。
现代文：用新葚种是最好的，隔年的陈葚春天种，多半不会出苗。
English: It is best to use new chrysanthemum seeds. If you plant old chrysanthemum seeds in the spring of the following year, they will most likely not produce seedlings.

古文：荫畦搭棚为上，躲麻次之，黍苗又次之。
现代文：采用搭矮棚的荫畦种葚为最好，用苘麻遮荫稍次，用黍苗遮荫为最次。
English: It is best to use the shade of a shed to grow lettuce, shade with nettles for a short time, and shade with sprouts for the longest time.

古文：桑芽出，间令相去五七寸。营造尺寸也，他仿此。
现代文：桑芽出土后，进行间苗，使株距保持在五至七寸之间。 寸 ，为营造尺的寸，他处同此。
English: After the mulberry buds are unearthed, the seedlings are interplanted so that the distance between the plants remains between five and seven centimeters.

古文：频浇。
现代文：时常浇水。
English: Water regularly.

古文：过伏，可长至三尺。
现代文：伏天过后可长到三尺高。
English: It can grow up to three feet tall after the rainy season.

古文：割去檾麻。
现代文：可将苘麻刈去。
English: The nettles can be trimmed off.

古文：至十月内，附地割了；撒乱草，走火烧过。
现代文：到十月内将桑苗在贴近地面处割倒，地上撒上些乱草，走火烧一遍。
English: By October, cut down the mulberry seedlings close to the ground, sprinkle some weeds on the ground, and burn them again.

古文：火不可大，恐损根。
现代文：火不能过大，怕烧坏了苗根。
English: The fire should not be too big, for fear of burning the seedling roots.

古文：粪草盖。
现代文：用粪和草覆盖。
English: Covered with dung and grass.

古文：至来春，杷耧去粪草，浇。
现代文：等到来年春天，用耙子把粪草耧去，浇水。
English: In the spring of the following year, use a rake to sweep away the dung and water the grass.

古文：每一科，自出芽三数个；留旺者一条。
现代文：每一科自会生出三数个芽来，选生长旺盛的留下一条。
English: Each branch will produce three or more buds, and one will be selected for vigorous growth.

古文：已成根，则不须荫，可频浇。
现代文：桑苗已长成根株，可不必遮荫，只须常浇水。
English: Mulberry seedlings have grown into roots, but they don't need shade, just frequent watering.

古文：至秋，鲁桑可长五七尺，荆桑可长三四尺。
现代文：到秋后，鲁桑可长到五至七尺高，荆桑可长到三四尺高。
English: After autumn, Rusan can grow up to five to seven feet tall, and Jingzang can grow up to three or four feet tall.

古文：鲁桑可移为地桑，荆桑可移入园养之。
现代文：鲁桑可以移栽成地桑，荆桑可以移栽到桑园中去培养。
English: Rusan can be transplanted into ground mulberry, and wisteria can be transplanted into the mulberry garden for cultivation.

