古文：安王友宁，字安仁，少习诗礼，长喜兵法，有倜傥之风。
现代文：安王朱友宁，字安仁。小时学习诗书礼乐，长大喜爱兵法，有洒脱不羁的风度。
English: An Wang Zhu Youning, also known as An Ren. He studied poetry, calligraphy and music at an early age, grew up to love the art of war, and had an uninhibited demeanor.

古文：太祖镇汴，累署军职，每因出师，多命统骁果以从。
现代文：太祖镇守汴州时，朱友宁历任军中职务，每次跟太祖出征，大多统领骁勇之士相随。
English: When Taizu was in charge of the defense of Bozhou, Zhu Youning held various positions in the military. Every time he went to war with Taizu, he was accompanied by most of the brave men of the Bozhou army.

古文：及擒秦宗权，太祖令友宁轞送宗权西献于长安，诏加检校右散骑常侍、行右监门卫将军。
现代文：到抓获秦宗权时，太祖令友宁用囚车押送秦宗权向西到长安献上，唐朝天子诏令加封朱友宁为检校右散骑常侍、代理右监门卫将军。
English: When Qin Zongquan was captured, the Great Ancestor ordered Youning to escort Qin Zongquan westward to Chang'an in a prison wagon, and Zhu Youning was appointed as the right cavalryman of the inspection of the school and the acting right guard of the gate.

古文：自是继立军功，累官至检校司空兼龚、柳二州刺史。
现代文：从此接连建立军功，历官至检校司空兼龚州、柳州刺史。
English: Since then, the military merit has been established one after another, and the officials have been promoted to the school inspector, including the superintendent of the school, the superintendent of the school, the superintendent of the school, and the superintendent of the school.

古文：太祖驻军岐下，遣友宁领所部兵先归梁苑，以备守御。
现代文：太祖驻军岐下时，派朱友宁领部下士兵先回大梁准备防守。
English: When the great-grandfather was stationed in Qishita, he sent the soldiers under the leadership of Zhu Youning back to the girders to prepare for defense.

古文：属青帅王师范构乱，以关东诸镇兵悉在岐、陇，欲乘虚窃发，自齐、鲁至于华下，罗布奸党，皆诈以委输贡奉为名，阴与淮夷、并门结好。
现代文：遇上青州主帅王师范作乱，因为函谷关以东各镇的兵马全在岐下、陇州，王师范想乘机暗自发兵，从齐州、鲁州到华下，遍布奸党，都假称以运输朝廷贡奉为名，暗中与淮南吴国和并门贼寇结为友好。
English: Wang Shifan, the coach of Qingzhou, caused a disturbance, because all the soldiers and horses of the towns east of the Hangeul Pass were in Qizhou and Zhangzhou. Wang Shifan wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to secretly send troops. From Qizhou and Luzhou to Lower China, there were all kinds of traitors, all pretending to transport tribute to the imperial court, and secretly making friends with Huainan, Wuzhou and the annexationists.

古文：会有青人诣裴迪言其状，迪以事告，友宁不俟命乃率兵万余人东讨。
现代文：逢上青州人拜见裴迪，描述了这一情况，裴迪将事情上报，朱友宁不等下令就率领士兵一万多人往东征讨。
English: Whenever someone from Qingzhou met with Pedi and described the situation, Pedi reported the matter to the authorities, and Zhu Youning promptly gave the order to lead more than ten thousand soldiers to the east to investigate.

古文：师范遣其弟将兵围齐州。友宁引兵救之，青寇大败，夺马四千蹄，斩首数千级。
现代文：王师范派他弟弟领兵包围齐州，朱友宁领兵救援齐州，青州贼寇大败，梁军夺得战马四千匹，斩杀数千人。
English: Wang Shifan sent his younger brother to lead the army to encircle Qizhou, Zhu Youning led the army to rescue Qizhou, the Qingzhou bandits were defeated, Liang's army captured four thousand horses and killed thousands of people.

古文：及昭宗归长安，朝廷议迎驾功，友宁授岭南西道节度使，加特进、检校司徒，赐号迎銮毅勇功臣。
现代文：到昭宗回到长安，朝廷议定迎驾的功劳，朱友宁被授与岭南西道节度使，加封特进、检校司徒，赐与迎銮毅勇功臣名号。
English: When Zhaozong returned to Chang'an, the imperial court agreed on the merits of the welcome, and Zhu Youning was awarded the Lingnan West Road Festival Envoy, the special envoy, the school inspector, and the title of the hero.

古文：时青寇数千，越险潜伏，欲入兗州。
现代文：这时青州贼寇数千之众，越过险阻潜伏下来，想进入兖州。
English: At this time, thousands of thieves and robbers from Qingzhou sneaked through the dangerous obstacles and wanted to enter Zhangzhou.

古文：友宁知之，伏兵于兗南邀之，大破贼众，竟无免者。
现代文：朱友宁知悉后，在兖州南部埋伏士兵以拦击他们，大败贼众，没有能够逃脱的。
English: After Zhu Youning learned of this, he ambushed soldiers in the southern part of Ganzhou to stop them. The bandits were defeated, and no one was able to escape.

古文：及进迫寇垒，与青人战于石楼，王师小却，友宁旁自峻阜驰骑以赴敌，所乘马蹶而仆，遂没于阵。
现代文：从此兖州城危急，朱友宁督监各军进逼营丘，首先攻打博昌县，一个多月不能攻下。太祖大怒，派刘捍督战，朱友宁于是抓来十万民夫，各令他们背着木头石块，牵着牛和驴子，在博昌城南筑造土山。当民夫来到后，朱友宁将人畜木石混在一起筑成一座山，人畜哀嚎的声音，几十里外都能听见。
English: From then on, Bozhou was in a critical situation. Zhu Youning, the supervisor of all the armies, marched into the camp hill and first attacked Bochang County, which could not be conquered for more than a month. The great-grandfather was furious and sent Liu Han to fight. Zhu Youning then captured one hundred thousand peasants, each of whom was ordered to carry wood and stones, lead cattle and donkeys, and build a mound of earth in the south of Bochang City. When the peasants came, Zhu Youning mixed human and animal wood and stone together to build a mountain. The sound of human and animal wailing could be heard dozens of miles away.

古文：友宁将战之前日，有大白蛇蟠于帐中，友宁心恶之，既而果遇祸焉。
现代文：不久博昌城攻下，城中人全被屠杀，清河因而堵塞不流。到进逼敌寇营垒时，与青州人在石楼交战，朝廷军队被打退，朱友宁从附近险峻的山路奔马迎战敌人，坐骑跌倒而被摔下来，于是死于阵中。
English: Not long after, Bochang City was captured, and everyone in the city was slaughtered. As a result, the Qinghe River was blocked and did not flow. When they entered the enemy camp, they fought with the Qingzhou people in the stone tower, and the imperial army was repulsed. Zhu Youning ran from the nearby steep mountain road to meet the enemy, fell off his horse and was thrown down, and died in the battle.

古文：密王友伦，幼聪悟，喜笔札，晓声律。
现代文：密王朱友伦，小时聪明颖悟，喜爱文笔，懂得音律。
English: Zhu Yulun, the king of the Ming Dynasty, was clever and insightful at an early age, loved writing, and knew musical notation.

古文：及长，好骑射，有经度之智，太祖每奇之，曰： 吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：到长大后，爱好骑马射箭，有指挥治理的谋略，太祖常感到惊奇，说： 这是我家的千里驹啊。 
English: When he grew up, he was fond of horse riding, archery, and had a strategy of command and control. Grandfather was often surprised and said, "This is my family's thousand-mile journey."

古文：年十九，为宣武军校。
现代文：年十九岁时，任宣武军军校。
English: At the age of nineteen, he was appointed to the Xuanwu Military Academy.

古文：景福初，充元从骑军都将，寻表为右武卫将军，渐委戎事。太祖征兗、郓，友伦勒所部兵收聚粮谷，以济军须。
现代文：景福初年，兼任元从骑军都将，接着上奏朝廷任右武卫将军，逐渐让他参与军事，太祖征伐兖州、郓州时，朱友伦领部下士兵收聚粮食，以接济军中所需。
English: In the first year of Gingfu's reign, Yuan, who was also the commander of the cavalry, was promoted to the position of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard. Gradually, he was allowed to participate in the military. When the Great Ancestor conquered Bozhou and Zhangzhou, the soldiers under the command of Zhu Yulun gathered grain to help the army.

古文：幽、沧军至内黄，友伦前锋夜渡河击贼，夺马千匹，擒斩甚众。
现代文：幽州、沧州军队攻到内黄时，朱友伦前锋夜渡黄河攻击贼寇，夺得战马千匹，俘获斩杀晋军很多人。
English: When the Yuzhou and Cangzhou armies attacked Inner Huanglong, Zhu Youlun, the vanguard, crossed the Yellow River at night to attack the bandits, captured thousands of horses, and captured and killed many Jin soldiers.

古文：因引兵往八议关，卒逢晋军万余骑，友伦乃分布兵士，多设疑军。因声鼓誓众，士伍奋跃，追斩数十里。
现代文：因便领兵前往八议关，突然遭遇晋军一万多骑兵，朱友伦于是分布兵士，设置许多疑军，并击鼓激励部众，士兵奋勇向前，追击斩杀数十里。
English: Because of this, he led the soldiers to the Eight Controversies Pass, and suddenly encountered more than ten thousand cavalrymen of the Jin army. Zhu Yulun then distributed soldiers, set up many suspicious troops, and drummed to encourage the troops. The soldiers bravely advanced and chased and killed dozens of miles.

古文：其后，李罕之请以上党来归，为晋军所围。
现代文：此后李罕之请求献出上党归降梁军，被晋军包围。
English: After that, at the request of Li Han, the Liang army surrendered and was surrounded by the Jin army.

古文：太祖遣友伦总步骑数万，越险救应，遂大破晋军。
现代文：太祖派朱友伦总领步兵骑兵几万人，越过险阻救援李罕之，于是大败晋军。
English: The great-grandfather sent Zhu Yulun, the general leader of infantry and cavalry, tens of thousands of people to rescue Li Hanzhi across the obstacles, and then defeated the Jin army.

古文：唐朝加检校司空、守藤州刺史。
现代文：唐朝加封他为检校司空，守藤州刺史。
English: The Tang Dynasty added him as the inspector of schools, guarding the history of Fujian.

古文：天复元年，岐、陇用兵，晋人乘虚侵于北鄙。
现代文：天复元年，岐下、陇州发生战争，晋人乘虚侵扰北部边境。
English: In the first year of the Tenpō era, a war broke out in Kisaka and Banzhou, and the Jin people invaded the northern border on a false pretext.

古文：友伦率徒兵三万径往矾山，晋人望尘奔逸。
现代文：朱友伦率领步兵三万直扑矾山，晋军望风而逃。
English: Zhu Yulun led 30,000 infantrymen to attack Shaoshan, and the Jin army fled.

古文：友伦与氏叔琮等蹑其辙，追至太原，摩垒挑战，获牛马万余。
现代文：朱友伦与氏叔琮等视其车迹追踪，一直追到太原，兵临城下挑战，夺得牛马一万余。
English: Zhu Yulun and his uncles and aunts followed his car tracks and chased him all the way to Taiyuan. The soldiers challenged him outside the city and captured more than 10,000 cattle and horses.

古文：二年，领所部兵西赴凤翔，前后累接战。
现代文：二年，率领部下士兵西赴凤翔，先后屡次作战。
English: Two years later, he led his soldiers westward to Fengxiang, where they repeatedly fought.

古文：三年，昭宗归长安，制授友伦宁远军节度使、检校司徒，赐号迎銮毅勇功臣。
现代文：三年，昭宗回到长安，诏授朱友伦为宁远军节度使、检校司徒，赐与迎銮毅勇功臣名号。
English: Three years later, when Zhaozong returned to Chang'an, he gave Zhu Yulun the title of "Ningyuan military festival envoy" and "school inspector" and gave him the title of "Yingyao Yi Yong hero."

古文：于是存追封朗王，友宁追封安王，友伦追封密王。
现代文：到太祖东归时，留下朱友伦警卫京城。一年多后，因会同宾客踢球，从马上摔下来死了。
English: When the great-grandfather returned to the East, he left Zhu Yulun to guard the capital. More than a year later, he fell off his horse and died because he was playing football with guests.

古文：郴王友裕，字端夫，太祖长子也。
现代文：昭宗停止上朝一日，诏令赠他为太傅，归葬在砀山县。郴王朱友裕，字端夫，是太祖的长子。
English: Zhaozong stopped on the morning of the previous day. The imperial edict gave him the title of Taifu, and he was buried in Lushan County. Zhu Youyu, the eldest son of Taifu, was the eldest son of Taifu.

古文：幼善射御，从太祖征伐，性宽厚，颇得士心。
现代文：小时精于射箭骑马，跟随太祖征战，性情宽厚，很得士兵拥戴。
English: He was good at archery and horseback riding, followed his great-grandfather to war, and had a generous disposition. He was very popular with the soldiers.

古文：唐中和中，太祖会并帅李克用攻围华州，贼将黄鄴固守甚坚。
现代文：唐朝中和年间，太祖会同并州主帅李克用围攻华州，贼将黄邺防守极严。
English: In the middle and middle of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Taizu together with the unified state coach Li Ke besieged Huazhou, and the thieves defended Huangpi very strictly.

古文：俄有一人登陴大詈，克用令北骑连射，终不能中，命友裕射之，应弦而毙。
现代文：忽然有一贼人登上城墙大骂，李克用令蕃族骑兵接连射击，始终不能射中；再命朱友裕射击他，贼兵应弦而倒。
English: Suddenly, a thief climbed onto the city wall to curse loudly. Li Ke ordered the Yi cavalry to fire one after another, but they could not hit the target. He then ordered Zhu Youyu to fire at him, and the thief fell to the ground.

古文：大军喜噪，声震山谷，克用因以良弓百矢遗焉。
现代文：大军欢呼呐喊，声震山谷，李克用于是将良弓和一百支箭送给友裕。
English: The army cheers and shouts, and the valley is shaken. Li Ke used it to give a good bow and a hundred arrows to Tomoyasu.

古文：太祖镇汴，表为宣武军牙校。
现代文：太祖镇守汴州时，表奏朝廷任朱友裕为牙校。
English: When Taizu Zhen was in charge of Bozhou, Zhu Youyu was appointed as the dental school.

古文：及蔡贼殄灭，朝廷议功，加检校左仆射，寻为牙内马步都指挥使。景福元年，总大军伐徐。
现代文：到蔡州贼寇被消灭后，朝廷论功，加封他为检校左仆射，接着任牙内马军步军都指挥使，景福元年，总领大军攻打徐州。
English: After the corsairs in Caizhou were eliminated, the imperial court praised his performance and awarded him the title of "school inspector and left-hand man," and then he commanded the infantry of the Inner Mongolian Army. In the first year of Gingfu, he led the army to attack Xuzhou.

古文：时硃瑾领兗、郓之众，为徐戎外援，阵于彭门南石佛山下。
现代文：当时朱瑾带领兖州、郓州的部众，作为徐州军队的外援，在彭门以南的石佛山下列阵。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi led the people of Ganzhou and Ganzhou, as foreign aid to the Xuzhou army, to form a line below Shifoshan, south of Pengmen.

古文：友裕纵兵击之，斩获甚众，瑾领残党宵遁。
现代文：朱友裕指挥部队攻击朱瑾，杀死和俘虏敌人极多，朱瑾带着残部在夜晚逃走。
English: Zhu Youyu led the troops to attack Zhu Xi, killed and captured many enemies, and Zhu Xi fled with the remnants in the night.

古文：时都虞候硃友恭羽书闻于太祖，诬友裕按兵不追贼，太祖大怒，因驿骑传符，令裨将庞师古代友裕为帅，仍令按劾其事。
现代文：这时都虞候朱友恭用羽毛急信告诉太祖，诬告朱友裕按兵不追击逃寇，太祖大怒，于是通过驿骑传授符节信件，令偏将庞师古代替朱友裕任主帅，并令庞师古审劾朱友裕的过失。
English: At this time, Zhu Youqiong, the prefectural governor, told the great-grandfather in a feathered express letter that he had falsely accused Zhu Youyu of not pursuing the fleeing bandits. The great-grandfather was furious, so he passed on the rune letters through the rider, and ordered Pang Shigu Ancient to be the coach for Zhu Youyu, and ordered Pang Shigu Ancient to impeach Zhu Youyu's fault.

古文：会使人误致书于友裕，友裕惧，遂以数骑遁于山中。
现代文：恰巧使者误将符信传给了朱友裕，友裕害怕，于是带着几位骑兵逃往山中。
English: It just so happened that the messenger mistakenly passed the letter to Zhu Youyu, who was afraid and fled to the mountains with several cavalrymen.

古文：寻诣广王于辉州，以诉其冤。
现代文：接着到辉州找广王朱全昱，申诉冤屈。
English: He then went to Huizhou to look for Guangwang Zhu Quanzhang to lodge a complaint.

古文：赖元贞皇后闻而召之，令束身归汴，力为营救，太祖乃舍之，令权知许州。
现代文：元贞皇后闻讯而传召他，令他缚着自己回到汴京请罪，元贞皇后从旁极力营救，太祖才释放了他，令他临时主管许州。
English: Upon hearing the news, Empress Yuanzheng summoned him and made him tie himself up and return to Beijing to plead guilty. Empress Yuanzheng tried her best to rescue him, but the great-grandfather released him and made him the temporary head of Xuzhou.

古文：乾宁二年，加检校司空，寻为武宁军节度留后。
现代文：乾宁二年，加封为检校司空，接着任武宁军节度留后。
English: In the second year of Qianning, he was appointed as the inspector of the school, and then as the commander of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：四年，太祖下东平，改天平军留后，加检校司徒。
现代文：四年，太祖攻下东平，朱友裕改任天平军留后，加封为检校司徒。
English: Four years later, when the Great Ancestor conquered Dongping, Zhu Youyu was transferred to the Tianping Army, and after he stayed there, he was assigned as a school inspector.

古文：光启元年，再领许州。
现代文：光化元年，再次统领许州。
English: In the first year of the Gwanghwa era, he once again ruled Gwangju.

古文：天复初，为奉国军节度留后。
现代文：天复初年，任奉国军节度留后。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, he was appointed as the commander of the National Army.

古文：太祖兼镇河中，以友裕为护国军节度留后，寻迁华州节度使，加检校太保、兴德尹。
现代文：太祖兼统河中时，以朱友裕为护国军节度留后，接着迁任华州节度使，加封为检校太保、兴德尹。
English: When the great-great-grandfather was in the middle of the Unification River, he stayed with Zhu Youyu as the commander of the National Defense Force, and then he was transferred to be the commander of the Huazhou National Defense Force, and he was also assigned to be the inspector of the school and Xing Deyin.

古文：天祐元年七月，兼行营都统，领步骑数万，经略邠、岐。
现代文：天元年七月，兼任行营都统，率领步兵骑兵几万人，攻打州、岐下。
English: In July of the year of heaven and earth, he also served as the commander of the camp, and led tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to attack Suzhou and Qishita.

古文：十月，友裕有疾，将校乃谋旋师，寻卒于梨园，归葬东京。
现代文：十月，朱友裕生病，将校们于是商议回师，不久朱友裕死在梨园，运回东京安葬。
English: In October, Zhu Youyu fell ill, and the officers discussed returning him to his division. Soon after, Zhu Youyu died in Liyuan and was transported back to Tokyo for burial.

古文：开平初，追赠郴王。
现代文：开平初年，追赠为郴王。
English: In the first year of Kaiping, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shao Wang.

古文：友珪，小字遥喜，母失其姓，本亳州营妓也。
现代文：乾化三年，又追赠为太师。庶人朱友珪，小名叫遥喜。母亲不知姓氏，本是亳州军妓。
English: After three years of drying, he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master. He was a commoner named Zhu Youyao, and his nickname was Yaoki. His mother did not know his last name, but she was originally a military prostitute from Zhangzhou.

古文：唐光启中，帝徇地亳州，召而侍寝。
现代文：唐朝光启年间，太祖巡行亳州，召她陪睡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Guangqi of the Tang Dynasty, the great-grandfather toured Bozhou and invited her to sleep with him.

古文：月余，将舍之而去，以娠告。
现代文：一个多月后准备离她而去，她告诉太祖说已有身孕。
English: More than a month later, as she was preparing to leave her, she told her grandfather that she was pregnant.

古文：是时，元贞皇后贤而有宠，帝素惮之，由是不果携归大梁，因留亳州，以别宅贮之。
现代文：这时，元贞张皇后贤德而得宠，太祖一向畏惧她，因此最后还是没把这军妓带回大梁，仍留在亳州，在别宅蓄养她。
English: At this time, Yuan Zhen Zhang was favored by the queen's virtue, and the great-grandfather was always afraid of her. Therefore, in the end, he did not bring the prostitute back to Dalian, but remained in Zhangzhou and raised her in another house.

古文：及期，妓以生男来告，帝喜，故字之曰遥喜。
现代文：到产期后，军妓告诉太祖生下男孩，太祖很高兴，所以给他取小名叫遥喜。
English: After giving birth, the courtesan told the great-grandfather that she had given birth to a boy. The great-grandfather was very happy, so he gave him a little name, Haruki.

古文：后迎归汴。
现代文：后来接到汴京。
English: Later, I received a call from Beijing.

古文：受禅后封郢王。
现代文：太祖受禅称帝后封朱友王圭为郢王。
English: The great-great-grandfather received the title of the emperor's empress Dowager Zhu Youwang Gui as the Dragon King.

古文：开平四年十月，为检校司徒，充左右控鹤都指挥使，兼管四蕃将军。
现代文：开平四年十月，封检校司徒，充任左右控鹤军都指挥使，兼管四蕃将军。
English: In October of the 4th year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the inspector of the inspection school, and served as the commander of the left and right control cranes, and also the general of the four egrets.

古文：乾化元年，充诸军都虞候。
现代文：乾化元年，充任诸军都虞候。
English: In the first year of the Qianhua era, he was appointed as the leader of all the armies.

古文：二年，弑太祖篡位，均王以兵讨之，自杀，追废为庶人。
现代文：二年，杀害太祖篡夺帝位，均王领兵征讨他，朱友王圭自杀，追废为庶人。
English: Two years later, he killed his great-grandfather and usurped the imperial throne. King Jun led an army to subjugate him. Zhu Youwang Gui committed suicide and was deposed as a commoner.

