古文：魏武将见匈奴使，自以形陋，不足雄远国，使崔季圭代，帝自捉刀立床头。
现代文：魏武帝曹操将要接见匈奴的使节。他自认为相貌丑陋，不能对远方国家显示出自己的威严，便叫崔季珪代替，自己却握着刀站在崔季珪的坐床边。
English: Emperor Cao Cao of Wei and Wu was about to receive an envoy from the Xiongnu. He thought that his appearance was ugly and that he could not show his majesty to a faraway country, so he asked Cui Jizhe to take his place. Instead, he stood at Cui Jizhe's bedside holding a sword.

古文：既毕，令间谍问曰： 魏王何如？ 
现代文：接见后，曹操派密探去问匈奴使节说： 你看魏王怎么样？ 
English: After the meeting, Cao Cao sent a spy to ask the Hun envoy: What do you think of the Wei king?

古文：匈奴使答曰： 魏王雅望非常，然床头捉刀人，此乃英雄也。 
现代文：匈奴使节回答说： 魏王的崇高威望非同一般，可是床边握刀的人，这才是英雄啊。 
English: The Xiongnu envoy replied, "The prestige of the Wei king is very high, but the one who holds the sword at his bedside is the hero."

古文：魏武闻之，追杀此使。
现代文：曹操听说后，趁使节回国，派人追去杀了他。
English: When Cao Cao heard about this, he took advantage of the envoy's return to China and sent someone to chase and kill him.

古文：何平叔美姿仪，面至白；魏明帝疑其傅粉。正夏月，与热汤饼。
现代文：何平叔相貌很美，脸非常白。魏明帝怀疑他脸上搽了粉，想查看一下，当时正好是夏天，就给他吃热汤面。
English: Uncle He Ping looked very beautiful, his face was very white. Wei Mingdi suspected that he had powder on his face and wanted to check it out. It was summer at the time, so he gave him hot soup noodles.

古文：既啖，大汗出，以朱衣自拭，色转皎然。
现代文：吃完后，大汗淋漓，自己撩起红衣擦脸，脸反而更加光洁。
English: After eating, he was drenched in sweat. He pulled up his red coat to wipe his face, and his face became even more radiant.

古文：魏明帝使后弟毛曾与夏侯玄共坐，时人谓 蒹葭倚玉树 。
现代文：魏明帝叫皇后的弟弟毛曾和夏侯玄并排坐在一起，当时的人评论说，这是芦苇倚靠着玉树。
English: Emperor Wei Ming ordered the queen's brother Mao Zeng and Xia Houxuan to sit side by side. People at the time commented that this was a reed reclining against a jade tree.

古文：时人目 夏侯太初朗朗如日月之入怀，李安国颓唐如玉山之将崩 。
现代文：当时的人评论夏侯太初好像怀里揣着日月一样光彩照人，李安国精神不振，像玉山将要崩塌一样。
English: People at the time commented that Xia Houtao looked like he was holding the sun and the moon in his arms at the beginning of the year, and Li Anguo's spirit was weak, like Yushan was about to collapse.

古文：嵇康身长七尺八寸，风姿特秀。
现代文：嵇康身高七尺八寸，风度姿态秀美出众。
English: Gong Kang is seven feet and eight inches tall, with an outstandingly beautiful demeanor.

古文：见者叹曰： 萧萧肃肃，爽朗清举。 
现代文：见到他的人都赞叹说： 他举止潇洒端正，气质超凡脱俗。 
English: People who saw him were full of praise, saying, "He has a dashing and neat demeanor, and his temperament is out of this world.

古文：或云： 肃肃如松下风，高而徐引。 
现代文：有人说： 他像松树间沙沙作响的风声，高远而舒缓悠长。 
English: Someone said: He is like the wind rustling through the pines, high and long.

古文：山公曰： 嵇叔夜之为人也，岩岩若孤松之独立；其醉也，傀俄若玉山之将崩。 
现代文：山涛评论他说： 嵇康的为人，像挺拔的孤松傲然独立；他的醉态，像高大的玉山快要倾倒。 
English: Shantao commented on him: "As a person, Zou Kang is like a tall lone pine tree, proudly independent; his drunken state is like a tall jade mountain about to topple.

古文：裴令公目： 王安丰眼烂烂如岩下电。 
现代文：中书令裴楷评论安丰侯王戎说： 他目光灼灼射人，像岩下闪电。 
English: Commenting on Anfeng Marquis Wang Rong, the Chinese scribe Pei Kai said: His gaze shines brightly, like lightning under a rock.

古文：潘岳妙有姿容，好神情。
现代文：潘岳有好的容貌和优雅的神态风度。
English: Pan Yue has good looks and an elegant demeanor.

古文：少时挟弹出洛阳道，妇人遇者，莫不连手共萦之。
现代文：年轻时夹着弹弓走在洛阳大街上，遇到他的妇女无不手拉手将他围困在中间。
English: When he was young, he walked down the streets of Luoyang with a slingshot in his hand. The women who met him would all hold hands and surround him in the middle.

古文：左太冲绝丑，亦复效岳游遨，于是群妪齐共乱唾之，委顿而返。
现代文：左思外貌丑陋，也学潘岳到处游逛，遇见他的妇女们就都向他乱吐唾沫，弄得他垂头丧气地回家。
English: Zuo Si, ugly in appearance, also wandered around like Pan Yue, and the women who met him spit at him, causing him to go home dejected.

古文：王夷甫容貌整丽，妙于谈玄，下捉白玉柄麈尾，与手都无分别。
现代文：王夷甫容貌端庄、漂亮，善于谈玄，平常总拿着白玉柄拂尘，白玉的颜色和他的手一点也没有分别。
English: Wang Yifu has a dignified and beautiful appearance, and is good at talking about the occult. He usually brushes the dust with a white jade handle. The color of the white jade is no different from his hand.

古文：潘安仁、夏侯湛并，有美容，喜同行，时人谓之 连璧 。
现代文：潘岳和夏侯湛两人都有很好的姿容，常常一同行走，当时人们评论他们是 连璧 。
English: Pan Yue and Xia Houtan both have good figures and often walk together. At that time, people commented that they were a "match made in heaven."

古文：名士传曰： 楷病困，诏遣黄门郎王夷甫省之，楷回眸属夷甫云： 竟未相识。 
现代文：中书令裴楷容貌俊美。有一次生了病，非常疲乏，晋惠帝派王夷甫去看望他。这时裴楷正向着墙躺着，听说王夷甫奉命来到，就勉强回过头来看看他。
English: Once, when he was ill and very tired, Emperor Jinhui sent Wang Yifu to visit him. At that time, Baikai was lying against the wall. When he heard that Wang Yifu had been ordered to come, he reluctantly turned around to look at him.

古文：夷甫还，亦叹其神俊。 有人语王戎曰： 嵇延祖卓卓如野鹤之在鸡群。 
现代文：王夷甫告辞出来后，告诉别人说： 他双目闪闪，好像山岩下的闪电；可是精神分散，身体确实有点不舒服。 有人对王戎说： 嵇延祖气度不凡，在人群中就像野鹤站立在鸡群中一样。 
English: After Wang Yifu left, he told others: His eyes were shining, like lightning under a mountain rock; however, his mind was scattered and his body was indeed a bit uncomfortable.Someone said to Wang Rong: "Zhen Yanzu has an extraordinary temperament, and in a crowd he is like a wild crane standing in a flock of chickens.

古文：答曰： 君未见其父耳！ 
现代文：王戎回答说： 那是因为你没有见过他的父亲罢了！ 
English: Wang Rong replied, "That's because you haven't met his father!"

古文：裴令公有俊容仪，脱冠冕，粗服乱头皆好。时人以为 玉人 。
现代文：中书令裴叔则仪表出众，即使脱下礼帽，穿着粗陋的衣服，头发蓬松，也都很美，当时人们说他是玉人。
English: People said that Uncle Pei was a jade person at that time. He was said to be handsome even if he took off his ceremonial hat, wore coarse clothes, and had fluffy hair.

古文：见者曰： 见裴叔则如玉山上行，光映照人。 
现代文：见到他的人说： 看见裴叔则，就像在玉山上行走，感到光彩照人。 
English: People who saw him said, "Seeing Uncle Pei was like walking on top of a jade mountain. I felt radiant."

古文：刘伶身长六尺，貌甚丑悴，而悠悠忽忽，土木形骸。
现代文：刘伶身高有四五尺，相貌非常的丑陋和憔悴，可是他悠闲自在又不修边幅显得很质朴自然。
English: Liu Yao is four or five feet tall, and his appearance is very ugly and haggard, but his laid-back and unkempt appearance is very simple and natural.

古文：骠骑王武子是卫玠之舅，俊爽有风姿，见玠辄叹曰： 珠玉在侧，觉我形秽！ 
现代文：骠骑将军王武子是卫玠的舅舅，容貌俊秀，精神清爽，很有风度仪表。他每见到卫玠，总是赞叹说： 珠玉在身边，就觉得我自己的形象丑陋了！ 
English: The cavalry general Wang Wuzi was the uncle of Wei Zheng. He was handsome, had a refreshing spirit, and was very personable. Whenever he saw Wei Zheng, he always admired him and said, "When I am around Zhu Yu, I feel that my own image is ugly!"

古文：有人诣王太尉，遇安丰、大将军、丞相在坐；往别屋见季胤、平子。
现代文：有人去拜访太尉王衍，遇到安丰侯王戎、大将军王敦、丞相王导在座；到另一个房间去，又见到王季胤、王平子。
English: Someone went to visit Lieutenant Wang Yan and found Anfeng Prince Wang Rong, General Wang Dun, and Prime Minister Wang Dao sitting there; they went to another room and saw Wang Jitian and Wang Pingzi.

古文：还，语人曰： 今日之行，触目见琳琅珠玉。 
现代文：回家后，告诉别人说： 今天走这一趟，满眼都是珠宝美玉。 
English: After returning home, tell others: "I went on this trip today, and my eyes were full of beautiful jewels.

古文：王丞相见卫洗马曰： 居然有羸形，虽复终日调畅，若不堪罗绮。 
现代文：丞相王导看见太子洗马卫玠，说： 身体显然很瘦弱，虽然整天很和适舒畅，也还是像弱不胜衣。 
English: When the chancellor Wang Du saw the prince washing Ma Weiqian, he said: "His body is obviously very thin and weak. Although he is very comfortable all day long, he still looks like a weakling.

古文：王大将军称太尉： 处众人中，似珠玉在瓦石间。 
现代文：大将军王敦称赞太尉王衍说： 他处在众人之中，就像将珠玉放在瓦砾石块中间。 
English: Major General Wang Dun praised Lieutenant Wang Yan, saying: "He is in the midst of the crowd, like placing a jewel in the middle of a rubble block.

古文：庾子嵩长不满七尺，腰带十围，颓然自放。
现代文：庾子嵩身高不足五尺，腰带却有十围大小，可是他本性和顺，纵情放达。
English: Zou Zi is less than five feet tall, but his belt is ten sizes bigger. However, his nature is gentle and he indulges in pleasure.

古文：卫玠从豫章至下都，人久闻其名，观者如堵墙。
现代文：卫玠从豫章郡到京都时，人们早已听到他的名声，出来看他的人围得像一堵墙。
English: When Wei Wei came from Yuanzhang County to Kyoto, people had already heard of his fame, and the people who came out to see him were surrounded like a wall.

古文：玠先有羸疾，体不堪劳，遂成病而死。
现代文：卫玠本来就有虚弱的病，身体受不了这种劳累，终于形成重病而死。
English: Wei Wei had a debilitating illness, his body could not stand the strain, and he eventually became seriously ill and died.

古文：时人谓 看杀卫玠 。
现代文：当时的人说是看死了卫玠。
English: People at the time said they had seen the end of the garrison.

古文：周伯仁道桓茂伦： 嵚崎历落可笑人。 
现代文：周伯仁称赞桓茂伦： 高大英俊，举止潇洒，是个招人喜爱的人。 
English: Zhou Boren praised Kan Maolun: Tall and handsome, with a dashing demeanor, he is a beloved person.

古文：或云谢幼舆言。
现代文：有人说这是谢幼舆说的话。
English: Some people say that this is what Xie Youyou said.

古文：周侯说王长史父：形貌既伟，雅怀有概，保而用之，可作诸许物也。
现代文：武城侯评论长史王濛的父亲： 身体既魁梧，又有高雅的情怀、不凡的风度，保持并发扬这些特长，一切事情都是可以办到的。 
English: Wucheng marquis commented on the father of Shi Wangyao: He has a strong body, elegant feelings, and extraordinary demeanor. Maintain and develop these strengths, and everything can be done.

古文：祖士少见卫君长云： 此人有旄仗下形。 
现代文：祖士少见到卫君长，说： 这个人有将帅的风度。 
English: Grandfather rarely saw Wei Junlong, said: This man has the demeanor of a general.

古文：石头事故，朝廷倾覆。
现代文：石头城事变发生，朝廷倾覆了。
English: The Stone Town Incident occurred, and the imperial court was overthrown.

古文：温忠武与庾文康投陶公求救，陶公云： 肃祖顾命不见及，且苏峻作乱，衅由诸庾，诛其兄弟，不足以谢天下。 
现代文：温峤和庾亮投奔陶侃求救。陶侃说： 先帝的遣诏并没有涉及我。再说苏峻作乱，事端都是由庾家的人挑起的，就是杀了庾家兄弟，也不足以向天下人谢罪。 
English: Wen Xuan and Yao Liang rushed to Tao Kan for help. Tao Kan said: The previous emperor's edict did not involve me. Moreover, Su Jun made a mess, the incident was provoked by the people of the Xing family, that is, he killed the brothers of the Xing family, and it is not enough to thank the world.

古文：于时庾在温船后闻之，忧怖无计。
现代文：这时庾亮正在温峤的船后，听见这些话，既发愁，又害怕，无计可施。
English: At this time, Luo Liang was on the back of the warm boat, and when he heard these words, he was both worried and afraid, and there was nothing he could do.

古文：别日，温劝庾见陶，庾犹豫未能往，温曰： 溪狗我所悉，卿但见之，必无忧也！ 
现代文：有一天，温峤劝庾亮去见一见陶侃，庾亮很犹豫，不敢去。温峤说： 那溪狗我很了解，你只管去见他，一定不会出什么事的。 
English: One day, Wen Xuan advised Zou Liang to go and see Tao Kan. Zou Liang was very hesitant and did not dare to go. Wen Xuan said, "I know that Creek Dog very well. You just go and see him, nothing will happen."

古文：庾风姿神貌，陶一见便改观。谈宴竟日，爱重顿至。
现代文：庾亮那非凡的风度仪表，使得陶侃一见便改变了原来的看法；和庾亮畅谈欢宴了一整天，对庾亮的爱慕和推重一下子达到了顶点。
English: Luo Liang's extraordinary demeanor and appearance made Tao Kan change his original opinion at first sight; he talked and feasted with Luo Liang for a whole day, and his love and support for Luo Liang suddenly reached its peak.

古文：庾太尉在武昌，秋夜气佳景清，使吏殷浩、王胡之之徒登南楼理咏。
现代文：太尉瘦亮在武昌任上的时候，正值秋夜天气凉爽、景色清幽，他的属官殷浩、王胡之等人一起登上南楼吟诗咏唱。
English: When Captain Lean Liang took office in Wuchang, it was autumn evening, the weather was cool and the scenery was serene. His subordinates Yin Hao, Wang Hu Zhi and others ascended the south tower to chant and sing.

古文：音调始遒，闻函道中有屐声甚厉，定是庾公。
现代文：正在吟兴高昂之时，便听见楼梯上传来响亮的木屐声，大家料定是庚亮来了。
English: While the chanting was in full swing, they heard the sound of a loud wooden gong coming from the staircase. Everyone assumed it was Geng Liang.

古文：俄而率左右十许人步来，诸贤欲起避之。
现代文：稍后，庾亮果然带着十余个人走来，大家就想起身回避。
English: A little later, Hao Liang did indeed come with more than ten people, and everyone remembered to avoid him.

古文：公徐云： 诸君少住，老子于此处兴复不浅！ 
现代文：庾亮慢条斯理地说道： 诸君暂且留步，老夫对这方面兴趣也不浅。 
English: Hao Liang said slowly and rationally, "Let's take a step back for a moment. My husband is also interested in this area.

古文：因便据胡床，与诸人咏谑，竟坐甚得任乐。
现代文：于是就坐在交椅上，和大家一起吟咏、谈笑，满座的人都能尽情欢乐。
English: So he sat on a chair and sang and laughed with everyone, and everyone in the auditorium was able to enjoy themselves.

古文：后王逸少下，与丞相言及此事。
现代文：后来王羲之到建康，和丞相王导谈到这件事。
English: Later, Wang Xizhi went to Jiankang and discussed the matter with the prime minister Wang Du.

古文：丞相曰： 元规尔时风范，不得不小颓。 
现代文：王导说： 庾亮那时的风范，大约也不得不略略损减一点吧。 
English: Wang Du said, "Hao Liang's demeanor at that time probably had to be slightly reduced.

古文：右军答曰： 唯丘壑独存。 
现代文：王逸少回答说： 唯独幽深的情趣还保留着。 
English: Wang Yishao replied, "Only the profound taste of the dragonfly is still preserved."

古文：王敬豫有美形，问讯王公。
现代文：王敬豫容貌姣好。
English: Wang Jingyuan is good-looking.

古文：王公抚其肩曰： 阿奴恨才不称！ 
现代文：有一次去向父亲王导请安，王导拍着他的肩膀说： 遗憾的是你的才能和形貌不相称。 
English: Once he went to greet his father, Wang Du, who patted him on the shoulder and said, "Unfortunately, your talent is not commensurate with your appearance."

古文：又云： 敬豫事事似王公。 
现代文：有人说： 敬豫样样都像王公。 
English: Some people say: "He is like a king in every way."

古文：王右军见杜弘治，叹曰： 面如凝脂，眼如点漆，此神仙中人。 
现代文：右军将军王羲之见到杜弘治，赞叹说： 脸像凝脂一样白嫩，眼睛像点上漆一样黑亮，这是神仙里头的人。 
English: When the right-wing general Wang Xizhi saw Du Hongzhi, he said with admiration: "His face is as white and tender as gelled fat, and his eyes are as black and bright as if they were painted on. This is a man from the realm of the gods."

古文：时人有称王长史形者，蔡公曰： 恨诸人不见杜弘治耳！ 
现代文：当时有人称赞长史王濛的相貌，司徒蔡谟说： 可惜这些人没有见过杜弘治啊！ 
English: At that time, some people praised the appearance of Changshi Wang Yao, and Szeto Zaimu said: Unfortunately, these people have not seen Du Hongzhi!

古文：刘尹道桓公：鬓如反猬皮，眉如紫石棱，自是孙仲谋、司马宣王一流人。
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔评论桓温说： 双鬓像刺猬毛竖起，眉棱像紫石棱一样有棱有角，确实是孙仲谋、司马宣王一类的人。 
English: Commenting on Huan Wen, Danyang Yin Liu Yao said, "His cheekbones stand up like a bristle, and his eyebrows are angular like a purple stone. He is truly a person like Sun Zhongmo and Sima Xuanwang.

古文：王敬伦风姿似父，作侍中，加授桓公公服，从大门入。
现代文：王敬伦仪表风度像他父亲，任侍中，这时桓温也加授侍中穿着官服从大门进官署。
English: Wang Jielun had the same appearance and demeanor as his father, and was appointed as an attendant. At that time, Kuan Wen also assigned an attendant to wear an official dress and enter the government office through the gate.

古文：桓公望之，曰： 大奴固自有凤毛。 
现代文：桓温望见他，说： 大奴的确有他父亲的风采。 
English: Kuan Wen looked at him and said, "The great slave indeed has the grace of his father."

古文：林公道王长史： 敛衿作一来，何其轩轩韶举！ 
现代文：支道林评论长史王濛说： 他收拢衣襟站起来时，仪态是多么的优美啊！ 
English: Shi Wangyao, chief commentator of the Branch Road Forest, said: When he stood up with his shirt pulled up, his posture was so graceful!

古文：时人目王右军： 飘如游云，矫若惊龙。 
现代文：当时的人评论有军将军王羲之说： 像浮云一样飘逸，像惊龙一样矫捷。 
English: At that time, people commented on the military general Wang Xizhi, saying: Like floating clouds, it is as agile as a dragon.

古文：王长史尝病，亲疏不通。
现代文：长史王濛有一次生了病，无前来探病者无论亲疏，都不许通报打扰。
English: Wang Yao, the chief historian, once fell ill. Anyone who did not come to see him, regardless of whether they were relatives or strangers, was not allowed to disturb him.

古文：林公来，守门人遽启之曰： 一异人在门，不敢不启。 
现代文：一天支道林来了，守门人立刻去禀报王濛说： 有一个相貌特别的人来到门口，我不敢不进来禀报。 
English: One day, a branch of the forest came, and the gatekeeper immediately went to report to Wang Yao, saying, "A person with a special appearance has come to the gate. I dare not not come in to report."

古文：王笑曰： 此必林公。 
现代文：王濛笑道： 这一定是林公。 
English: Wang Yao said with a smile: This must be Lin Gong.

古文：或以方谢仁祖不乃重者。
现代文：有人拿别人来和谢仁祖并列而不那样看重他。
English: Some people put others on the same level as Tsering Zu and do not value him as much.

古文：桓大司马曰： 诸君莫轻道，仁祖企脚北窗下弹琵琶，故自有天际真人想。 
现代文：大司马桓温说： 诸位不要轻易评论，仁祖跷起脚在北窗下弹琵琶的时候，确是有飘飘欲仙的情意。 
English: Daishi Ma Kan-Wen said, "Ladies and gentlemen, don't be so quick to comment. When Rinzai stood on tiptoe to play the lute under the north window, he really had the mood of a wandering nymph.

古文：王长史为中书郎，往敬和许。
现代文：王濛做中书郎时，有一次到尚书省去见王洽。
English: When Wang Qian was a middle school teacher, he once went to Shangshu to meet Wang Ciao.

古文：尔时积雪，长史从门外下车，步入尚书，著公服。
现代文：当时满地积雪，王濛穿着朝服，在门外下车，走入尚书省中。
English: At that time, the ground was covered with snow. Wearing a royal robe, Wang Yao got off the train outside the gate and walked into the middle of Shangshu Province.

古文：敬和遥望，叹曰： 此不复似世中人！ 
现代文：王洽远远地看着，赞叹道： 他不像是凡尘中的人啊！ 
English: Wang Ciao watched from a distance and marveled, "He doesn't look like an ordinary person!"

古文：简文作相王时，与谢公共诣桓宣武。
现代文：简文帝任丞相时，和谢安一起去看望桓温。
English: When Emperor Jianwen was serving as chancellor, he and Xie An went to visit Kuan Wen together.

古文：王珣先在内，桓语王： 卿尝欲见相王，可住帐里。 
现代文：这时王珣已经先在桓温那里，桓温对王珣说： 你过去想看看相王，现在可以留在帷幔后面。 
English: At this time, Wang Yao was already in front of Kuan Wen. Kuan Wen said to Wang Yao, "You wanted to see the king, now you can stay behind the curtain."

古文：二客既去，桓谓王曰： 定何如？ 
现代文：两位客人走了以后，桓温问王珣说： 相王究竟怎么样？ 
English: After the two guests left, Kuan Wen asked Wang Yao and said, "What about King Ai?

古文：王曰： 相王作辅，自然湛若神君，公亦万夫之望。不然，仆射何得自没？ 
现代文：王珣说： 相王任丞相，自然像神灵一样清澈，公也是万民的希望，不然，仆射怎么会自甘藏拙呢！ 
English: Wang Yao said: When a king appoints a prime minister, the appointment is naturally as clear as a god's spirit, and the public is the hope of all the people. Otherwise, how could the puppeteer hide himself?

古文：海西时，诸公每朝，朝堂犹暗；唯会稽王来，轩轩如朝霞举。
现代文：海西公称帝时，大臣们每次早朝，殿堂还很暗，只有会稽王来了，他气宇轩昂，就像朝霞高高升起一样。
English: When Emperor Haisi was proclaimed, the ministers left early every morning, and the hall was still dark. Only the King of Auditors came, and he was in high spirits, just like the rising morning haze.

古文：谢车骑道谢公： 游肆复无乃高唱，但恭坐捻鼻顾睐，便自有寝处山泽闲仪。 
现代文：车骑将军谢玄称道谢安： 一旦纵情游乐，又无须放声高唱，只是端坐捏鼻作洛下书生咏，顾盼自如，就会有栖止于山水草泽间的仪态。 
English: Horseman General Xie Xuan praised Xie An: "Once you indulge in pleasure, you don't have to sing loudly, but just sit down and pinch your nose to make a calligraphy, look at it freely, and you will have the posture of dwelling in the landscape.

古文：谢公云： 见林公双眼，黯黯明黑。 
现代文：谢安说： 我觉得支道林的双眼，漆黑明亮，能照亮黑暗的地方。 
English: Xie An said, "I feel that the eyes of the tributary forest are dark and bright, and can illuminate the dark places.

古文：孙兴公见林公： 棱棱露其爽。 
现代文：孙兴公也觉得支道林是： 威严的眼神里透露出高尚的风度和气概。 
English: Sun Xinggong also felt that the branch forest was: The majestic eyes revealed a noble demeanor and spirit.

古文：庾长仁与诸弟入吴，欲住亭中宿。
现代文：庾长仁和弟弟们过江到吴地，途中想在驿亭里住宿。
English: Zou Changren and his brothers crossed the river to Wudi, and wanted to stay in the pavilion on the way.

古文：诸弟先上，见群小满屋，都无相避意。
现代文：几个弟弟先进去，看见满屋都是平民百姓，这些人一点回避的意思也没有。
English: A few younger brothers went in first and saw that the house was full of civilians, who had no intention of avoiding them.

古文：长仁曰： 我试观之。 
现代文：长仁说： 我试着进去看看。 
English: Nagahito said, "I'll try to go in and take a look."

古文：乃策杖将一小儿，始入门，诸客望其神姿，一时退匿。
现代文：于是就拄着拐杖，扶着一个小孩，刚进门，旅客们望见他的神采，一下子都躲开了。
English: So he was on crutches, holding a child, and as soon as he entered the door, the passengers saw his spirit and all of a sudden fled.

古文：有人叹王恭形茂者，云： 濯濯如春月柳。 
现代文：有人赞赏王恭形貌丰满美好，说： 像春天的杨柳一样婀娜多姿。 
English: Some people appreciated Wang Gong's plump and beautiful appearance, saying: Like the spring willow, she is graceful and multi-faceted.

