古文：清泰二年春正月丙申朔，帝御明堂殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：清泰二年一月一日，末帝到明堂殿接受朝贺，仪仗侍卫排列整肃。
English: On January 1st, the second year of the Qing Dynasty, the late emperor went to the Ming Hall to receive morning greetings, and the ceremonial guards lined up for purification.

古文：乙巳，中书门下奏： 遇千春节，凡刑狱公事奏覆，候次月施行。
现代文：十日，中书门下奏道： 遇千春节时，凡是刑狱公事上奏答复，都等到下个月施行。
English: On the 10th, a notice was posted on the door of the Central Registry Office: In the event of the Chinese New Year, all replies to the notice of imprisonment would not be implemented until next month.

古文：今后请重系者即候次月，轻系者即节前奏覆决遣。 
现代文：今后请把犯重罪的放到下个月处理，犯轻罪的在千春节前奏复决定。 
English: In the future, please postpone the handling of those who have committed serious crimes to the next month, and those who have committed misdemeanors should submit a decision before the Spring Festival.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊申，宗正寺奏： 北京、应州、曹州诸陵，望差本州府长官朝拜。
现代文：十三日，宗正寺上奏： 北京、应州、曹州几处陵墓，希望派本州府长官朝拜。
English: On the 13th, Sojo-ji Temple announced that there were several mausoleums in Beijing, Yingzhou, and Caozhou, and hoped to send the governor of Honshu to pay homage.

古文：《五代会要》载宗正寺原奏云：北京永兴、长宁、建极三陵，应州遂、衍、奕三陵，准曹州温陵例，下本州府官朝拜。雍、坤、和、徽四陵，差太常宗正卿朝拜。 
现代文：雍、坤、和、徽四陵，派太常宗正卿朝拜。 
English: The four mausoleums of Yong, Kun, He and Hui worshiped the emperor Taizhong Zhengqing.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己酉，北京奏，光禄卿致仕周元豹卒。
现代文：十四日，北京上奏，退休的光禄卿周元豹去世。
English: On the 14th, at the opening ceremony in Beijing, retired Guangluqing Zhou Yuanbao passed away.

古文：庚申，鄴都进天王甲。
现代文：二十五日，邺都献上天王甲。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, they all presented Tianwangjia.

古文：帝在籓时，有相士言帝如毗沙天王，帝知之，窃喜。
现代文：末帝还在藩国时，有算命的人说末帝像毗沙天王，末帝知道后，心中暗自高兴。
English: When the last emperor was still in the domain, some fortune-tellers said that the last emperor was like the King of Persia. After knowing this, the last emperor was secretly happy.

古文：及即位，选军士之魁伟者，被以天王甲，俾居宿卫，因诏诸道造此甲而进之。
现代文：等到登皇帝位，便从军士中挑选身材魁梧的，披上天王甲，命他们在身边守卫，并下诏各道造这种甲胄进上。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne, he selected the heaviest-built soldiers from among the sergeants, draped them in armor, ordered them to guard around him, and ordered them to make this kind of armor.

古文：三司奏，添征蚕盐钱及增曲价。
现代文：三司上奏，添征蚕盐钱以及增加酒曲的价格。
English: The third section is played, the silkworm salt money is added, and the price of the wine song is increased.

古文：癸卯，以静海军节度使、检校太师、兼中书令、安南都护钱元球为留守太保，余如故。
现代文：在这之前酒曲一斤八十文，增到一百五十文。三十日，云州节度使张温调到晋州镇守，任西京留守安重霸为云州节度使。二月五日，定州节度使、兖王李从温调到兖州镇守。
English: On the 30th, Zhang Wen was transferred to Jinzhou Town Guard by Yunnan Festival, and An Chongba, who stayed in West Beijing, was appointed as Yunnan Festival Guard. On the 5th of February, Dingzhou Festival Guard, Zou Wang Li was transferred from Wenzhou to Yinzhou Town Guard.

古文：丙午，以给事中赵光辅为右散骑常侍。
现代文：二十四日，宰臣卢文纪等奉上皇妣鲁国太夫人谥号称宣宪皇太后，请选日子册命。末帝同意了。
English: On the 24th, the Vice-Minister Lu Wenji and others presented the title of the Empress Dowager Xuan Lu to the Empress Dowager Xuan, and asked her to choose a date for the appointment. The last emperor agreed.

古文：戊申，皇妹魏国夫人石氏封晋国长公主，齐国公主赵氏封燕国长公主。
现代文：三月四日，已故太子太保赵凤被追赠太傅。十四日，皇妹魏国公主石氏封为晋国长公主，齐国公主赵氏封为燕国长公主。
English: On March 4, the late Crown Prince Taibao Zhao Feng was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu. On the 14th, the imperial sister Wei Princess Shishi Feng was named the First Princess of Jin Province, and Qi Princess Zhao Feng was named the First Princess of Yan Province.

古文：己酉，有司上言： 宣宪皇后未及山陵，权于旧陵所建庙。 
现代文：十五日，有官员上奏说： 宣宪皇后还没葬进山陵，请暂且在旧陵建庙。 
English: On the 15th, an official made a report saying, "Since Empress Xuancheng has not yet been buried in a mausoleum, please build a temple in the old mausoleum for the time being."

古文：庚申，以镇州节度使、知军府事董温琪为镇州节度使、检校太保。壬戌，以左右彰圣都指挥使、富州刺史安审琦领楚州顺化军节度使，军职如故。
现代文：末帝同意了。十七日，功德使上奏： 每年皇上诞辰纪念日，各州府推荐和尚道士，其中和尚尼姑想设立讲论科、讲经科、表白科、文章应制科、持念科、禅科、声赞科，道士想设立经法科、讲论科、文章应制科、表白科、声赞科、焚修科，以便试试他们能不能做好。 末帝同意。二十八日，任左右彰圣都指挥使、富州刺史安审琦领楚州顺化军节度使，军职仍保留。
English: On the 17th, the merits and demerits came into play: Every year, on the anniversary of the emperor's birthday, the prefectures recommended monks and Taoists, among which the monks and nuns wanted to set up a lecture course, a sermon course, a speech course, a writing course, a meditation course, a Zen course, and a praise course, and the Taoists wanted to set up a law course, a lecture course, a writing course, a speech course, a praise course, and a burning course, so as to try whether they could do a good job. The emperor agreed. On the 28th, he was appointed the commander of the left and right sides of the holy city

古文：审琦受闵帝命西征，至凤翔而降，故有是命。
现代文：安审琦受闵帝派遣西征，一到凤翔敌人便投降了，所以有这次任命。
English: Emperor Anxin sent him to the Western Expedition, but the enemy surrendered as soon as he arrived in Fengxiang, which is why he was appointed this time.

古文：是月，太常丞史在德上疏言事，其略曰： 朝廷任人，率多滥进，称武士者，不闲计策，虽被坚执锐，战则弃甲，穷则背军；称文士者，鲜有艺能，多无士行，问策谋则杜口，作文字则倩人。
现代文：这个月，太常丞史在德上疏陈述事情，大致说道： 朝廷用人，常常用得很滥。称作武士的，不熟悉计谋策略，虽然披坚甲执锐器，一交战就丢弃武器，若形势急迫就背叛。称作文士的，很少有才能，而且大多没有操守，向他们问计策谋划只有闭嘴的本事，要他们写文章也只能请别人代笔。
English: This month, Taejongjose stated the matter in a dignified manner, saying roughly: The court employs people and often uses them excessively. Those who are called samurai are not familiar with strategy and tactics, although they wear strong armor and sharp tools, they discard their weapons as soon as they fight, and if the situation is urgent, they will betray. Those who are called scribes have few talents, and most of them have no integrity. If you ask them about strategy and planning, they only have the ability to keep their mouths shut. If you want them to write an article, you can only ask someone else to write it.

古文：所谓虚设具员，枉耗国力。
现代文：这就是人们说的虚设无用之人，枉费国家财力。
English: This is what people call a useless person, wasting the country's resources.

古文：逢陛下惟新之运，是文明革弊之秋，臣请应内外所管军人，凡胜衣甲者，请宣下本部大将一一考试武艺短长，权谋深浅。
现代文：适逢陛下维新天命，正是文明革除弊端之时。我想请所有内外所管军人，凡能穿上军装的，请指示本部大将一个一个地考试他们武艺的高低、智谋的深浅。
English: I would like to invite all military personnel in charge at home and abroad, who can put on a military uniform, to instruct the general of the headquarters to examine the level of their martial arts and the depth of their wisdom one by one.

古文：居下位有将才者便拔为大将，居上位无将略者移之下军。
现代文：地位低下而有将才的人可以提拔为大将，地位高上而无将略的人转到下军。
English: People with low status and talent can be promoted to general, and people with high status and no talent can be transferred to the lower army.

古文：其东班臣僚，请内出策题，下中书令宰臣面试。
现代文：那些文官，请朝廷出考试题目，由中书令宰臣面试。
English: Those civil servants, please ask the court to come up with an exam question, and let the vice-minister be interviewed by the Chinese government.

古文：如下位有大才者便拔居大位，处大位无大才者即移之下僚。 
现代文：如有官小而有大才的应提拔当大官，当大官而没大才的则转到当小官。 
English: If there are minor officials with great talent, they should be promoted to major officials. If there are major officials without great talent, they should be transferred to minor officials.

古文：其疏大约如此。
现代文：书奏所说大意如此。
English: This is the gist of what Shosei said.

古文：卢文纪等见其奏不悦，班行亦多愤悱，故谏官刘涛、杨昭俭等上疏，请出在德疏，辨可否宣行，中书覆奏亦驳其错误。
现代文：卢文纪等人见了奏书不高兴，朝廷其他官员很多人也愤愤然，所以谏官刘涛、杨昭俭等人上奏，请拿出史在德的奏书，辨清是否可以宣布施行，中书也回奏驳斥史在德奏书的错误。
English: Lu Wenji and others were not happy to see the report, and many other officials of the imperial court were also indignant. Therefore, eunuchs Liu Tao, Yang Zhaojian and others appealed. Please take out Shi Zaide's report to see if it can be announced. The Chinese report also responded to refute the error of Shi Zaide's report.

古文：帝召学士马裔孙谓曰： 史在德语太凶，其实难容。
现代文：末帝召见学士马裔孙对他说： 史在德说话太直，令人难以接受。
English: The last emperor summoned the scholar Ma Zi Sun and said to him: Shi Zi De's speech was too straightforward, which was hard to accept.

古文：朕初临天下，须开言路，若朝士以言获罪，谁敢言者！
现代文：朕刚刚治理天下，必须广开言路，如果朝中官员因说话而获罪，谁还敢说话了！
English: I have just governed the world. I must speak out. If officials of the DPRK and China are punished for speaking out, who will dare to speak out?

古文：左补阙刘涛等奏，太常丞史在德所上章疏，中书门下驳奏，未奉宣谕，乞特施行，分明黜陟。朕常览贞观故事，见太宗之治理，以贞观升平之运；太宗明圣之君，野无遗贤，朝无阙政，尽善尽美，无得而名。
现代文：你代朕写诏书，不要加给史在德罪名。 诏书说： 朕经常阅览贞观故事，见唐太宗治理国家，凭着贞观年间升平的国运，太宗这样圣明的君主，以致民间没有遗漏的贤才，朝廷没有缺失的政事，尽善尽美，简直没法用言辞形容。
English: The imperial edict said: I have often read the story of Zhenguan, and I have seen that the Tang Emperor Taizong governed the country, and the national fortune was leveled during the Zhenguan era, and Taizong was such a saintly monarch, so that the people did not miss the genius, and the court did not miss the political affairs, and it was perfect and perfect, and it was almost impossible to describe it with words.

古文：而陕县丞皇甫德参辄上封章，恣行讪谤，人臣无礼，罪不容诛，赖文贞之弥缝，恕德参之狂瞽。
现代文：当时陕县县丞皇甫德参动不动就上书，恣意诽谤讥刺，作为人臣这样无礼，罪不容诛，全靠文贞在中间弥合，饶恕了皇甫德参的狂妄。
English: At that time, Emperor Fu Desheng, the prefectural governor of Shaanxi County, did not hesitate to write a letter, arbitrarily slandering and ridiculing, as a vassal, such rudeness was unacceptable, and it was entirely up to Wen Zhen to bridge the gap in the middle and forgive the arrogance of Emperor Fu Desheng.

古文：魏征奏太宗曰： 陛下思闻得失，只可恣其所陈，若所言不中，亦何损于国家。 
现代文：魏征对太宗上奏说 ：陛下如想听到事情的得失，尽可随他说去，如果所说不合实际，也对国家没有损害。 
English: Wei Zheng said to Emperor Taizong: If your majesty wants to hear the pros and cons of the matter, you can do whatever he says. If what he says is not realistic, it will not harm the country.

古文：朕每思之，诚要言也。遂得下情上达，德盛业隆，太宗之道弥光，文贞之节斯著。
现代文：朕每想到这里，觉得这确实是重要的话呀，这样能使下面情况反映到上面，使德业兴盛，太宗的政绩更加光辉，文贞之节操更加显著。
English: Every time I think about this, I feel that this is indeed an important statement. This can make the following situation reflect on the above, make virtue flourish, Taizong's political achievements more brilliant, and the discipline of literature and chastity more prominent.

古文：朕惟寡昧，获奉宗祧，业业兢兢，惧不克荷，思欲率循古道，简拔时材。
现代文：朕是寡闻愚昧之人，得以继承皇位，兢兢业业，惟恐不能承担重任，深愿遵循古时治国之道，选拔当代人材。
English: I am a little-known and ignorant person. I was able to succeed to the throne through hard work. I am afraid that I cannot take on the heavy responsibility. I am willing to follow the ancient way of governing the country and select contemporary talents.

古文：怀忠抱直之人，虚心渴见，便佞诡随之说，杜耳恶闻。
现代文：忠诚耿直的人，朕虚心渴望见到；奸佞诡诈的话，朕塞耳不愿听从。
English: Faithful and upright, I humbly long to see; treacherous and deceitful, I refuse to hear.

古文：史在德近所献陈，诚无避忌，中书以文字纰缪，比类僭差，改易人名，触犯庙讳，请归宪法，以示戒惩。
现代文：史在德近来所说的话，的确直言不讳，中书挑剔他文字的谬误，比作僭越；改换人名，触犯庙讳，请求依法予以惩戒。
English: What Shi Zhengde said recently was indeed outspoken, the Chinese book criticized the fallacy of his writing, likened it to embezzlement; changed his name, violated the temple taboo, and requested that he be punished according to law.

古文：盖以中书既委参详，合尽事理，朕缵承前绪，诱劝将来。
现代文：由于中书已经加以详察，应该合理可信。但朕要继承前人的做法，以劝慰今后进言之人。
English: Since the document has been examined in detail, it should be reasonable and credible. However, I would like to follow the practice of my predecessors in order to comfort those who make suggestions in the future.

古文：多言数穷，虽圣祖之所戒，千虑一得，冀愚者之可从。
现代文：多说话会出错，虽然是圣人也要注意，千虑总有一得，即使是愚者的话也可听从。
English: If you talk too much, you will make mistakes. Even if you are a saint, you should be careful. There is always something to be gained from every effort. Even a fool can be listened to.

古文：因览文贞之言，遂宽在德之罪，已令停寝，不遣宣行。
现代文：因为读了文贞的话，所以宽恕史在德之罪，已下令停止对他的追究，他的奏疏也不用宣布施行。
English: Because he read Wen Zhen's words, he pardoned Shi Zhe De's crime, ordered to stop the investigation against him, and did not have to announce his resignation.

古文：刘涛等官列谏垣，宜陈谠议，请定短长之理，以行黜陟之文。
现代文： 刘涛等人身为谏官，应进坦荡正直的建议，却争执史在德奏疏的长短，要对他进行贬斥。
English: Liu Tao and others, as eunuchs, should make candid and honest suggestions, but dispute the length of history in virtue, and they should disparage him.

古文：本判官一年加阶，二年改试衔，三年转官。
现代文：以前魏征请奖赏皇甫德参，现在刘涛等人却请贬责史在德，事情相同说的话不同，相差多么大！
English: In the past, Wei Zheng would reward the Emperor Fu De Zang, but now Liu Tao and others would criticize Shi Zeng. The same thing is said differently, how big is the difference!

古文：本曹官省限内了绝，与试衔。
现代文：如果议论谁公平，恐怕会影响广开言路。
English: If we talk about who is fair, I'm afraid it will have an impact on opening up the discussion.

古文：诸节级三年内并了绝者，与赏钱三十贯。
现代文：现在朝廷初步得到治理，俊杰人才都已收齐，留一个史在德不算多，去掉一个史在德不算少，如果可以起到劝慰惩戒作用，朕还忧虑什么呢！
English: Now that the imperial court has been initially governed, and the talented people have all been gathered together, it is not too much to leave a history in virtue, and it is not too little to remove a history in virtue. If it can play a role of consolation and discipline, what should I worry about?

古文：其责罚依天成四年五月五日敕施行。 从之。
现代文：但因史在德是对朝廷忠诚才说这些话，按理难以贬斥，刘涛等人的上奏，朕也宽容对待，应体谅宽弘，尽心尽力，凡是在下百官，都听从朕的话。 
English: However, because Shi Zhende was loyal to the imperial court, he said these words. It is difficult to refute them. I am also tolerant of the overtures of Liu Tao and others. I should be considerate of Guanghong and do my best. All the lower-ranking officials should listen to my words.

古文：癸未，御史中丞卢损等进清泰元年以前十一年制敕，堪悠久施行者三百九十四道，编为三十卷。
现代文：四月十九日，御史中丞卢损等人进献清泰元年以前十一年所制定的敕书中可以永久施行的三百九十四道，编为三十卷。
English: On April 19th, the Imperial Historian Lu Zi and others presented the Thirty-Nine Hundred and Forty-Four Ways, compiled into thirty volumes, which can be permanently implemented in the imperial edict established eleven years before the first year of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：其不中选者，各令所司封闭，不得行用。
现代文：其中不中选的，命各有关部门封存，不再实行。
English: Those that are not selected will be ordered to be sealed by the relevant departments and will no longer be implemented.

古文：诏其新编敕如可施行，付御史台颁行。
现代文：下诏说新编敕书如可以施行，就交付御史台颁布施行。
English: The following edict said that if the newly compiled imperial edict could be enforced, it would be handed over to the Imperial Historical Records Office for promulgation and enforcement.

古文：以宰相卢文纪兼太微宫使，弘文馆大学士姚顗加门下侍郎，监修国史张延朗兼集贤殿大学士。
现代文：任宰相卢文纪兼太微宫使，任弘文馆大学士姚岂页加门下侍郎，任监修国史张延朗兼集贤殿大学士。
English: Lu Wenji, the prime minister, also served as the envoy to the Imperial Palace, Yao Qizhe, a scholar of the Hongwen Museum, served as a footman, and Zhang Yanlang, a supervisor of the national history and a scholar of the Jixian Palace, served as a scholar.

古文：五月丙申，新州、振武奏，契丹寇境。
现代文：五月三日，新州、振武报告，契丹侵犯边境。
English: On May 3, Xinzhou and Zhenwu reported that the Khitan invaded the border.

古文：乙巳，诏： 天下见禁囚徒，自五月十二日以前，除十恶五逆、放火烧舍、持仗杀人、官典犯赃、伪行印信、合造毒药并见欠省钱外，罪无轻重，一切释放。 
现代文：十二月，下诏说： 天下被监禁的囚徒，自五月十二日以前，除十恶五逆、放火烧房，持刀杀人、官吏犯赃、伪造印章，合造毒药以及拖欠官钱以外，罪无论轻重，全都释放。 
English: In December, the following edict was issued: "All prisoners who have been incarcerated since before May 12th, regardless of the severity of their crimes, will be released, with the exception of the ten evils and five vices, setting fire to houses, killing people with knives, committing crimes against officials, forging seals, concocting poisons, and defaulting on government money."

古文：庚戌，诏不得贡奉宝装龙凤雕镂刺作组织之物。中书奏： 准敕，凡庙讳但回避正文，其偏旁文字不在减少点画。
现代文：十七日，中书上奏： 按照敕书，凡是庙讳只须回避正文，其偏旁文字不用减少点画。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the imperial edict was issued: According to the imperial edict, all temple taboos only need to avoid the main text, and the side text does not need to be reduced.

古文：癸亥，以六军诸卫判官、给事中张允为右散骑常侍。
现代文：下诏说： 同偏旁的文字，读音相差很大，只须回避与  读音完全相同的字，不用全改。
English: The next edict said: The pronunciation of the words next to each other is very different, so you only need to avoid the words with the same pronunciation, and do not need to completely change them.

古文：六月甲子朔，新州上言，契丹入寇。
现代文：杨檀赐名叫杨光远，其余依旧。 六月一日，新州报告，契丹入侵。
English: Yang Guangyuan is the name of Yang Danzi, and the rest is still the same. On June 1, Xinzhou Report, Khitan invasion.

古文：乙丑，有司上言，宣宪皇太后陵请以顺从为名，从之。
现代文：二日，有关官员上奏说，宣宪皇太后陵墓以 顺 为名，末帝同意了。
English: On the second day, the relevant officials reported that the mausoleum of the Empress Dowager Xuan Xian was named Shun, and the late emperor agreed.

古文：振武奏，契丹二万骑在黑榆林。
现代文：振武报告，二万契丹骑兵出现在黑榆林。
English: Zhenwu reports that twenty thousand Khitan cavalry have appeared in the Black Forest.

古文：丁卯，以太子少保致仕硃汉宾卒废朝。
现代文：四日，因退休的太子少保朱汉宾去世停止上朝。
English: On the 4th, due to the death of the retired Crown Prince Shobao Zhu Hanbin, the Shang Dynasty came to an end.

古文：壬申，命史官修撰明宗实录。
现代文：九日，命令史官修撰明宗实录。
English: On the 9th, he ordered the historian to compile a record of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：契丹寇应州。
现代文：契丹侵犯应州。
English: Khitan invade Yingzhou.

古文：以新州节度使杨汉宾为同州节度使，以前晋州节度使翟璋为新州节度使。
现代文：任新州节度使杨汉宾为同州节度使，任前晋州节度使翟璋为新州节度使。
English: The appointment of Yang Hanbin as the new state festival makes him the festival ambassador of the same state, and the former Jinzhou festival makes him the new state festival ambassador.

古文：庚辰，北面招讨使赵德钧奏，行营马步军都虞候、定州节度使杨光远，行营排阵使、邢州节度使安审琦帅本军至易州，见进军追袭契丹次。
现代文：十七日，北面招讨使赵德钧上奏，行营马步军都虞候、定州节度使杨光远，行营排阵使、邢州节度使安审琦率本军到达易州，现在正在进军追袭契丹的行军途中。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Deyu led the army to Yizhou, Yang Guangyuan led the camp-marching horse-marching army, Yang Guangyuan led the camp-marching platoon, and An Ji led the camp-marching horse-marching army to Yizhou. Now they are on the way of marching to pursue the Khitan.

古文：河东节度使石敬瑭奏，边军乏刍粮，其安重荣巡边兵士欲移振武就粮。
现代文：河东节度使石敬瑭上奏，边防军缺乏粮草，他手下安重荣的巡边兵士想转移到振武补充粮食。
English: The Eastern Hedong Festival made Shi Jingjun's trumpet sound, the border troops lacked grain and grass, and his subordinate An Chongrong's patrol soldiers wanted to transfer to Zhenwu to supplement grain.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：寻又奏，怀、孟租税，请指挥于忻、代州输纳。
现代文：不久又上奏，怀、孟二州的租税，请指挥由忻州、代州输送缴纳。
English: Not long after, the tax of Huai and Meng two states was played, and the conductor was asked to convey and pay the tax from Zhangzhou and Daizhou.

古文：朝廷以边储不给，诏河东户民积粟处，量事抄借，仍于镇州支绢五万匹，送河东充博采之直。
现代文：朝廷因为边防储备不够，下诏令河东储藏有粮食的百姓，按量抄收借取，并在镇州支付绢丝五万匹，送到河东充作广泛采购粮食的抵价物。
English: Due to insufficient border defense reserves, the imperial court issued a decree ordering the people in Hedong who had stored grain to copy and borrow according to the amount, and to pay fifty thousand reeds in Zhenzhou to be sent to Hedong as compensation for the extensive purchase of grain.

古文：是月，北面转运副使刘福配镇州百姓车子一千五百乘，运粮至代州。
现代文：这个月，北面转运副使刘福配以镇州百姓车子一千五百辆，把粮食运到代州。
English: This month, Liu Fu, the vice-envoy of the northern transshipment, transported the grain to Daizhou with 1,500 Zhenzhou people's cars.

古文：时水旱民饥，河北诸州困于飞挽，逃溃者甚众，军前使者继至，督促粮运，由是生灵咨怨。
现代文：此时水灾旱灾相连，百姓饥饿，黄河以北各州被运粮搞得十分困敝，逃散的人很多，军队的使者接连来到，督促运粮，因此百姓怨声更大。
English: At this time, floods and droughts were linked, the people were starving, the states north of the Yellow River were very distressed by grain transportation, many people fled, the army's envoys came one after another to urge grain transportation, so the people complained louder.

古文：辛巳，诏诸州府署医博士。
现代文：十八日，下诏要各州府设置医博士。
English: On the 18th, the next edict required all prefectures to set up medical doctors.

古文：丙戌，以前许州节度使李从昶为右龙武统军，以前彰国军节度使沙彦珣为右神武统军。
现代文：二十三日，任前许州节度使李从昶为右龙武统军，任前彰国军节度使沙彦王旬为右神武统军。
English: On the 23rd, the former Xuzhou Festival made Li Conglu the right dragon military unification army, and the former Zhangguo Army Festival made Shajian Wangjun the right divine military unification army.

古文：潞王闻，益疑之。御史中丞卢损奏： 准天成二年七月敕，每月首、十五日入阁，罢五日起居。
现代文：七月四日，石敬瑭报告，斩杀挟马都指挥使李晖等三十六人，因为他们谋划叛乱。当时石敬瑭带兵驻守忻州，一天，军士喧哗，突然高呼万岁，于是斩李晖等人制止喧哗。御史中丞卢损上奏 ：按照天成二年七月敕书所说，每月初一、十五日入阁，免去五日问候起居。
English: On the 4th of July, Shi Jinglian reported that he had killed 36 people, including the commanding officer of the Horse Guards Brigade, Li Jun, because they were plotting a rebellion. At that time, Shi Jinglian was stationed in Zhangzhou with soldiers. One day, the sergeants were noisy and suddenly shouted "long live," so he killed Li Jun and others to stop the noise. According to the July imperial rescript of Tiancheng II, he entered the cabinet on the 1st and 15th of each month, eliminating the five-day greeting.

古文：臣以为中旬排仗，有劳圣躬，请只以月首入阁，五日起居依旧。
现代文：臣以为中旬排列仪仗，有劳皇上，请允许只须每月第一天入阁，五日起居依旧。
English: The vassals thought that the battle of honour would be arranged in the middle of the month, but the emperor was in a hurry. Please allow me to enter the cabinet only on the first day of each month, and remain in the cabinet on the fifth day.

古文：又准天成三年五月、长兴二年七月敕，许诸州节度使带使相岁荐僚属五人，余荐三人，防御、团练使荐二人，今乞行厘革。
现代文：又按照天成三年五月、长兴二年七月敕书所说，允许各州节度使以及使相每年推荐僚属五人，其余推荐三人，防御、团练使推荐二人，现请求予以革除。
English: In addition, according to the May 3rd, Tiancheng Year 3 and July 2nd, Changxing Year 2 imperial decrees, the state festival envoys and envoys are allowed to recommend five subordinates each year, the rest recommend three, and the defense and group training envoys recommend two. We are now requesting that they be removed.

古文：又长兴二年八月敕，州县佐官差充马步判官，仍同一任，乞行止绝，依旧衙前选补。 
现代文：又有长兴二年八月敕书，州县佐官兼任马步判官，一身两任，请予以禁止，依旧在衙门挑选人专任补充。 
English: There is also a letter from Changxing in August of the second year, the state and county adjutant also serves as a horse judge, one person and two positions, please prohibit it, and still select people full-time in the gate.

古文：诏曰： 今后籓臣带使相许荐三人，余荐二人，直属京防御、团练使荐一人，余并从之。 
现代文：下诏说 ：今后藩臣以及使相允许荐三人，其余允许荐二人，直属京防御、团练使允许荐一人，其余一并依从这个标准。 
English: The following edict said: In the future, the ministers of the domain and the envoys are allowed to recommend three people, and the rest are allowed to recommend two people. The envoys directly responsible for the defense of Beijing and the group training are allowed to recommend one person, and the rest all follow this standard.

古文：丁酉，回纥可汗仁美遣使贡方物。
现代文：五日，回纥可汗仁美派使进贡特产。
English: On the fifth day, the Khans sent tribute special products.

古文：西京弓弩指挥使任汉权奏，六月二十一日与川军战于金州之汉阴，王师不利，其部下兵士除伤痍外，已至凤翔。
现代文：西京弓弩指挥使任汉权报告，六月二十一日与川军在金州的汉阴交战，我方失利，部下士兵除伤病员外，已到凤翔。
English: The commander of the Western Capital, Xi Jing Yuchang, sent a report to Han Quan. On June 21st, he fought with the Sichuan Army in Jinzhou, Hanyin. Our side was defeated, and our soldiers, except for the wounded and sick, have arrived in Fengxiang.

古文：先是，盩啡镇将刘赟引军入川界，为蜀将全师郁所败。金州都监崔处讷重伤，诸州屯兵溃散。
现代文：这之前，銩稨镇将刘斌贝带部队进入川界，被蜀将全师郁击败，金州都监崔处讷受重伤，各州驻军溃散。
English: Prior to this, Shuzhen led Liu Binbei's troops into the Sichuan region, and was soundly defeated by Shu's entire division. Cui Shunna, the governor of Jinzhou, was seriously injured, and the garrisons of various states were dispersed.

古文：金州防御使马全节收合州兵，固守获全。
现代文：金州防御使马全节收集州兵，固守获得保全。
English: The defense of the Golden State made the horse collect the National Guard in the whole section, and the adherence was preserved.

古文：以枢密使刘延皓为天雄军节度使。
现代文：任枢密使刘延皓为天雄军节度使。
English: Appointed the privy envoy Liu Yanqi as the chief envoy of the Tianxiong Army.

古文：甲辰，以右神武统军沙彦珣权知云州。
现代文：十二日，任右神武统军沙彦王旬暂时主管云州。
English: On the 12th, the Right Shenwu United Army's Shajian Wangjun was temporarily put in charge of Yunnan.

古文：乙巳，以徐州节度使张敬达充北面行营副总管。
现代文：十三日，任徐州节度使张敬达兼任北面行营副总管。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Jinda, the Xuzhou Festival delegate, also served as the deputy head of the North Side Campaign.

古文：时契丹入边，石敬瑭屡请益兵，朝廷军士多在北鄙，俄闻忻州诸军呼噪，帝不悦，乃命敬达为北军之副，以减敬瑭之权也。
现代文：此时契丹侵入边境，石敬瑭多次请求增兵，朝廷军士大多在北部边地，前不久听说忻州各军喧哗呐喊石敬瑭万岁，末帝知道了不高兴，于是命张敬达为北军副总管，用来减弱石敬瑭的权势。
English: At this time, the Khitan invaded the border, Shi Jingta repeatedly requested an increase in troops, and most of the imperial sergeants were on the northern border. Not long ago, he heard that all the troops in Zhangzhou were shouting "long live Shi Jingta," and the last emperor knew that he was not happy, so he appointed Zhang Jingda as the deputy chief of the Northern Army to weaken the power of Shi Jingta.

古文：丁巳，宰臣卢文纪等上疏，其略曰：
现代文：二十五日，宰臣卢文纪等人上书，大致说：
English: On the 25th, Vice-Minister Lu Wenji and others submitted a letter, saying roughly:

古文：臣近蒙召对，面奉天旨： 凡军国庶事，利害可否，卿等合尽言者。 
现代文： 臣近来承蒙皇上召见，当面听到皇上说 ：凡是军国大小之事，利害与否，你们应该全部说出来。 
English: A vassal was recently summoned by the emperor and said to the emperor in person: "You should speak out on all matters of military importance, whether it is in your interest or not.

古文：臣等谬处台衡，奉行制敕，但缘事理，互有区分，军戎不在于职司，钱谷非关于局分，苟陈异见，即类侵官。
现代文：臣等处在重要位置，奉皇上之命制定敕书，只依照事理而做，互相有职责上的区分，军队之事不在职权范围内，钱粮之事也不属于份内，如果陈说不同的意见，便像是侵权行为。
English: The vassals are in an important position, they are ordered by the emperor to draw up the edict, they only do it according to the facts, there is a distinction in responsibilities, the army is not within the scope of authority, the matter of money and grain is not part of it, if they present different opinions, it will be like an infringement.

古文：况才不济时，职非经远，因五日起居之例，于两班旅见之时，略获对扬，兼承顾问。
现代文：况且我们才能不够有助于时世，见识又不够经营远略，因循五日一起居的旧例，在文武两班朝拜晋见之时，略微能对答一些话，回答皇上的咨询。
English: Moreover, our ability is not enough to contribute to the times, and our insight is not enough to manage far-reaching strategies. Following the old example of living together for five days, when the two classes of scholars and soldiers visit the emperor, they can slightly answer some words and answer the emperor's inquiry.

古文：卫士周环于阶陛，庶臣罗列于殿庭，四面聚观，十手所指，臣等苟欲各伸愚短，此时安敢敷陈。
现代文：卫士在阶陛周围站立，庶臣在殿廷两边排列，四面聚观，十手所指，臣等即使想各抒己见，这时怎么敢随意陈说？
English: The guards stand around His Majesty, the vassals line up on both sides of the palace, and gather on all sides to watch. Even if the vassals want to express their own opinions, how dare they freely express them?

古文：韩非昔惧于说难，孟子亦忧于言责。
现代文：韩非昔日因进言之难而害怕，孟子也因受应对之责而忧虑。
English: Han Fei used to be afraid because of the difficulty of speech, Mencius was also worried because of the responsibility of speech.

古文：臣窃奉本朝故事，肃宗初平寇难，再复寰瀛，颇经涉于艰难，尤勤劳于委任。
现代文：臣等奉行本朝政事，唐朝肃宗刚平定安史之乱，再度收复天下时，因经历过艰难，尤其勤于听政咨询。
English: When the Sui and Zong dynasties of the Tang Dynasty had just put down the Anshi Rebellion and regained control of the country, they were particularly diligent in listening to political advice because of the hardships they had experienced.

古文：每正衙奏事，则泛咨访于群臣；及便殿询谋，则独对扬于四辅。
现代文：每当在正衙公开听取上奏言事时，总是广泛向群臣咨询，而在便殿商量谋划时，则仅仅与身边的辅佐大臣们对话。
English: Whenever he delivers a speech at a formal public hearing, he always consults widely with his ministers, but when he discusses and plans, he only talks with the assistant ministers around him.

古文：自上元年后，于长安东内置延英殿，宰臣如有奏议，圣旨或有特宣，皆于前一日上闻。
现代文：从肃宗上元年以后，在长安东大内置延英殿，宰臣如有奏议，圣旨或有特宣，都在前一天就有所闻。
English: Since the first year of Su Zong's reign, Yan Ying-den has been built in Chang'an East University. If there is a petition, a sacred edict or a special proclamation from the vice-chancellor, it will be heard the day before.

古文：对御之时，只奉冕旒，旁无侍卫。
现代文：见面之时，只侍奉皇上，旁边没有卫士。
English: At the time of the meeting, only the emperor was served, and there was no guard next to him.

古文：献可替否，得曲尽于讨论：舍短从长，故无虞于漏泄。
现代文：劝善规过，可以尽情讨论；舍短取长，不必担心泄密。
English: Persuasion is good, you can discuss as much as you like; you don't have to worry about leaking secrets.

古文：君臣之际，情理坦然。
现代文：君臣之间，情理上很坦然。
English: Between princes and ministers, the situation is very calm.

古文：伏望圣慈，俯循故事，或有事关军国，谋系否臧，未果决于圣怀，要询访于臣辈，则请依延英故事，前一日传宣。
现代文：希望皇上仁慈依照过去事例，有时事关军国大事，谋划不定，皇上不能下决心，要询问臣等，则请依延英殿故事，在前一天传宣。
English: It is hoped that the Emperor's benevolence will follow the example of the past. Sometimes things are related to military and national affairs, plans are uncertain, and the Emperor cannot make up his mind. If you want to inquire about your vassals, please follow the story of Yan Ying Dian and announce it the day before.

古文：或臣等有所听闻，切关利害，难形文字，须面敷扬，臣等亦依故事，前一日请开延英。
现代文：有时臣等听说了些什么，关系到利害大事，难于形成文字，必须当面陈说，臣等也依旧例，在前一天请开延英殿。
English: Sometimes, what the ministers and others have heard is related to an important event, and it is difficult to form words, and it must be said in person. The ministers and others are still the example, please open Yan Ying on the previous day.

古文：当君臣奏议之时，只请机要臣僚侍立左右。
现代文：当君臣奏议时，只请机要臣僚侍立左右。
English: When the emperor and his ministers are debating, only the most important ministers should be allowed to stand to the right and left.

古文：兼乞稍霁威严，恕臣荒拙，虽乏鹰鹯之效，庶尽葵藿之心。
现代文：乞求皇上稍释威严饶恕臣等的荒拙，我们虽然缺乏雄鹰搏击的能力，却能尽到葵花向日的情意。 
English: I begged the emperor to loosen his majesty for a moment and forgive the clumsiness of his ministers. Although we lacked the ability to fight like eagles, we were able to fulfill the sunflower's wish for the sun.

古文：诏曰： 卿等济代英才，镇时硕德，或缔构于兴王之日，或经纶于缵圣之时，盐梅之任俱崇药石之言并切，请复延英之制，以伸议政之规。
现代文：末帝下诏说： 你们都是济世的英才，治时的大贤，有的是在王业初兴时就参与其事，有的是在皇位传承时出过大力，辅佐之功都很大，良药苦口之言很恳切，请恢复延英殿制度，以伸张议政的规范。
English: The last emperor said in his imperial edict: "You are all great talents for the world and great sages for the times. Some of you took part in the early days of the king's career, and some of you made great efforts during the imperial succession. All of you have contributed a great deal to the success of the imperial succession. Your words of good medicine and bitter words are very sincere. Please restore the Yan Ying palace system to uphold the norms of political deliberation.

古文：而况列圣遗芳，皇朝盛事，载详征引，良切叹嘉。
现代文：况且是各位先皇遗下规矩，是皇朝盛事，详细征引，的确值得叹赏。
English: Moreover, it is the rules left by the first emperors, it is a grand event of the imperial dynasty, detailed enlistment, it is really worth admiring.

古文：恭惟五日起居，先皇垂范，俟百僚之俱退，召四辅以独升，接以温颜，询其理道，计此时作事之意，亦昔日延英之流。
现代文：想来五日一起居，是先皇留下的规制，等到百官都退下，召四辅单独升殿，以温和的言语交谈，询问道理，商量急需解决的问题，也是昔日延英殿的流风遗响。
English: Wanting to live together for five days is a regulation left behind by the first emperor. When all the officials had retired, the four attendants were called to the hall alone, and they conversed with gentle words, inquired about the truth, and discussed the problems that urgently needed to be solved. It is also the lingering effects of the former Yan Ying Hall.

古文：朕叨获嗣承，切思遵守，将成其美，不爽兼行。
现代文：朕接承大位，切实想遵守先法，将成其美事，不使兼听与偏信相冲突。
English: If I succeed to the throne and earnestly want to abide by the previous law, it will be a beautiful thing, and I will not make simultaneous listening conflict with partial belief.

古文：其五日起居，仍令仍旧，寻常公事，亦可便举奏闻。
现代文：其五日一起居，仍然照旧，一般的公事，也可以随便奏上。
English: Their five-day cohabitation is still the same as before, and general business affairs can also be played casually.

古文：或事属机宜，理当秘密，量事紧慢，不限隔日，及当日便可于阁门祗候，具榜子奏闻。
现代文：有时事关机要，理当保密，看事情的紧急与否，不限隔日，在当天就可在阁门等候，写成状子奏闻。
English: Sometimes things need to be shut down, and they should be kept confidential. Depending on whether the matter is urgent or not, you can wait at the attic on the next day, and write a status report on the same day.

古文：请面敷扬，即当尽屏侍臣，端居便殿，伫闻高议，以慰虚怀。
现代文：请求面见言谈，即应当摒退侍臣，端坐便殿，听取议论，以勉慰宰臣。
English: If you ask for a face-to-face meeting, you should dismiss the vassal, sit in the hall, listen to the discussion, and try to comfort the vassal.

古文：朕或要见卿时，亦令当时宣召，但能务致理之实，何必拘延英之名。
现代文：朕有时要见你们，也令当时宣召，只要能做到致理之实，何必拘泥于延英殿之名。
English: I sometimes want to see you, and I also made a call at that time, as long as it can be done reasonably, why not stick to the name of Yan Ying Dian.

古文：有事足可以讨论，有言足可以陈述，宜以沃心为务，勿以逆耳为虞。
现代文：有事尽可以讨论，有话尽可以陈述，应以交心为要务，不以逆耳为担忧。
English: Everything can be discussed, everything can be said, and it should be a matter of heart-to-heart communication, not a matter of turning a deaf ear.

古文：勉罄谋猷，以裨寡昧。 
现代文：勉力倾尽谋略，以补足朕的寡昧。 
English: I tried my best to devise a strategy to make up for my lack of knowledge.

古文：帝性仁恕，听纳不倦，尝因朝会谓卢文纪等曰： 朕在籓时，人说唐代为人主端拱而天下治，盖以外恃将校，内倚谋臣，故端拱而事办。
现代文：末帝性情仁恕，听取采纳别人的话不知疲倦，曾在朝会时对卢文纪等人说： 朕在藩地时，听人说唐代为皇帝的端坐拱手无所作为就能使天下大治，大概是外面依靠将军校官，里面依靠谋臣，所以端坐拱手而事情就办好了。
English: The last emperor had a forgiving nature and was tireless in listening to and adopting the words of others. He once said to Lu Wenji and others at a court meeting: When I was in the domain, I heard that the emperor of the Tang Dynasty could make the world great by sitting back and doing nothing. He probably relied on generals and school officials on the outside and advisers on the inside, so he sat back and did nothing and things were done.

古文：朕荷先朝鸿业，卿等先朝旧臣，每一相见，除承奉外，略无社稷大计一言相救，坐视朕之寡昧，其如宗社何！ 
现代文：朕承受前朝大业，你们是前朝旧臣，每次相见，除承奉外，没一点国家大计的话说给我听，坐视朕的孤陋寡闻，这对得起祖宗社稷吗？ 
English: I have inherited the great cause of the former government. You are former ministers of the former government. Every time you meet, you have nothing to say to me about the country's grand plan except to serve me. You just sit and watch me. Is this worthy of your ancestors?

古文：文纪等引咎致谢，因奏延英故事，故有是诏。
现代文：卢文纪等人引咎致歉，因而上书述说延英殿旧事，所以也就有了这个诏书。
English: Lu Wenji and others apologized for the accusation, and as a result, the old story of Yan Ying Dian was written about, which is why this edict was issued.

古文：八月庚午，滑州节度使高允韬卒。
现代文：八月八日，滑州节度使高允韬去世。
English: On August 8th, Gao Yunjun passed away during the celebration of the Nanzhou Festival.

古文：壬申，以右卫上将军王景戡为左卫上将军，以右神武统军娄继英为右卫上将军。
现代文：十日，任右卫上将军王景戡为左卫上将军，任右神武统军娄继英为右卫上将军。
English: On the 10th, Wang Jingyao, who was appointed as the right guard general, was appointed as the left guard general, and Zou Jiying, who was appointed as the right Shinto military commander, was appointed as the right guard general.

古文：己卯，以西上阁门使、行少府少监兼通事舍人苏继颜为司农卿，职如故。
现代文：十七日，任西上阁门使、行少府少监兼通事舍人苏继颜为司农卿职务如旧。
English: On the 17th, Su Jian, who had been appointed as the west cabinet minister, acting as the minor prefectural inspector and secretary, was promoted to the position of the secretary of agriculture, which was the same as before.

古文：辛巳，以权知云州、右神武统军沙彦珣为云州节度使。
现代文：十九日，任临时云州主管、右神武统军沙彦王旬为云州节度使。
English: On the 19th, the temporary head of Yunnan, the Right Shenwu United Army, Shajian Wangjun, was appointed as the Yunnan Festival Envoy.

古文：鄴都杀人贼陈延嗣并母、妹、妻等并弃市。
现代文：邺都杀人贼寇陈延嗣和其母亲、妹妹、妻子等一起被公开处决。
English: Shidu murderer and thief Kou Chen Yanji was publicly executed along with his mother, sister, and wife.

古文：延嗣父子相承，与其妹、妻于诸州郡诱人杀之，而夺其财，前后被杀者数百人，至是事泄而诛之。
现代文：陈延嗣父子相承，与其妹妹、妻子在各州郡诱杀他人，夺取钱财，前后被杀的有几百人，到现在事情泄漏而被处决。
English: Chen Yanxi, father and son, together with his sister and wife, lured and killed people in all prefectures and counties, and seized money and property. Hundreds of people were killed before and after, and until now the matter has been leaked and executed.

古文：癸未，以前潞州行军司马陈元为将作监，以元善医，故有是命。
现代文：二十一日，任前潞州行军司马陈元为将作监，因为陈元精通医术，所以有这次任命。
English: On the 21st, Chen Yuanwei, the former secretary of the Bozhou March, will be the supervisor, because Chen Yuan is proficient in medicine, so there is this appointment.

古文：丁亥，以洺州团练使李彦舜为义武军节度使、检校太傅。
现代文：二十五日，任氵名州团练使李彦舜为义武军节度使、检校太傅。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Li Yanjun, who was appointed as the delegate of the Mingzhou group training, became the delegate of the festival of the volunteer army and the inspector of the school.

古文：太原奏，达靼部族于灵邱安置。
现代文：太原报告，鞑靼部族迁居在灵丘。
English: Taiyuan reported that the Tatar tribe had moved to Lingqiu.

古文：己丑，以太子少保致仕戴思远卒废朝。
现代文：二十七日，因为退休的太子少保戴思远去世而停止上朝。
English: On the 27th, because the retired Crown Prince Shobo Daisuke passed away, he stopped ascending to the throne.

古文：庚寅，以前兗州节度使杨汉章为左神武统军，以前邢州节度使康思立为右神武统军。
现代文：二十八日，任前兖州节度使杨汉章为左神武统军，任前邢州节度使康思立为右神武统军。
English: On the 28th, Yang Hanzhang, the former Bozhou Festival, made Yang Hanzhang the left Shenwu unified army, and Kang Sili, the former Bozhou festival, made Kang Sili the right Shenwu unified army.

古文：潞州奏，前云州节度使安重霸卒。
现代文：潞州报告，前云州节度使安重霸去世。
English: Zhangzhou reported that the previous Yunnan Festival caused the death of An Chongba.

古文：九月己亥，以河阳节度使、侍卫马军都指挥使安从进为襄州节度使；以襄州节度使赵在礼为宋州节度使。
现代文：九月八日，以河阳节度使、侍卫马军都指挥使安从进为襄州节度使，任襄州节度使赵在礼为宋州节度使。
English: On September 8th, with the festival envoys from Heyang and the guards from Ma Jun both in command, he appointed An Congjin as the festival envoy from Xiangzhou, and appointed Zhao Zaili as the festival envoy from Songzhou.

古文：癸卯，以忠正军节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使宋审虔为河阳节度使，典军如故。
现代文：十二日，任忠正军节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使宋审虔为河阳节度使，和以前一样管理军队。
English: On the 12th, Ren Zhongzheng, the military envoy of the festival, commanded the guards and the marching troops to make Song Qianqian the festival envoy of Heyang, and managed the army as before.

古文：己酉，礼部贡院奏： 进士请夜试，童子依旧表荐，重置明算道举。
现代文：十八日，礼部贡院上奏： 请安排进士夜里考试，童子依旧上表推荐，重新设置明算道举。
English: On the 18th, the Ministry of Ceremonies and Tribute to the Academy made the following announcement: Please arrange the entrance examination at night, the boy is still recommended in the table above, and re-set the calculation.

古文：举人落第后，别取文解。
现代文：举人落选后，别取文解。
English: Don't ask for an explanation after a candidate is voted out.

古文：五科试纸，不用中书印，用本司印。 
现代文：五科试纸，不用中书印，用本司印。 
English: Five subjects test paper, do not use Chinese printing, use our printing.

古文：并从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：以宣徽南院使房暠为刑部尚书，充枢密使；以宣徽北院使、充枢密副使刘延朗为宣徽南院使，充枢密副使。
现代文：任宣徽南院使房詗为刑部尚书、兼枢密使；任宣徽北院使、兼枢密副使刘延朗为宣徽南院使、兼枢密副使。
English: The Southern Court of Xuanhui appointed Fang Qi as the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law and the privy councilor; the Northern Court of Xuanhui appointed Liu Yanlang as the secretary of the Southern Court of Xuanhui and the deputy secretary of the privy councilor.

古文：丙辰，以左仆射李愚卒废朝。
现代文：二十五日，因为左仆射李愚去世而停止上朝。
English: On the 25th, he stopped going to the court because his left-hand man, Li Gu, had passed away.

古文：冬十月丁卯，幸崇道宫、甘泉亭。
现代文：十月六日，末帝到崇道宫、甘泉亭。
English: On October 6th, the late emperor arrived at the Sudo Palace and Kanzen-tei.

古文：己巳，以左卫上将军李顷为左领军上将军。
现代文：八日，任右卫上将军李顷为左领军上将军。
English: On the 8th, Li He, who had been appointed as the Right Division's senior general, became the left division's senior general.

古文：北面行营总管石敬瑭奏，自代州归镇。
现代文：北面行营总管石敬瑭报告说从代州回到驻地。
English: The head of the camp in the north, Shi Jingyao, reported that he had returned to the camp from Daizhou.

古文：庚午，以晋州节度使张温卒废朝。
现代文：九日，因为晋州节度使张温去世而停止上朝。
English: On the 9th, because of the Jinzhou Festival, Zhang Wen passed away and the procession stopped.

古文：甲戌，幸赵延寿、张延朗第。
现代文：十三日，末帝到赵延寿、刘延朗家中。
English: On the 13th, the late emperor went to the home of Zhao Yanshou and Liu Yanlang.

古文：丁丑，以端明殿学士、兵部侍郎李专美为秘书监，充宣徽北院使。
现代文：十六日，任端明殿学士、兵部侍郎李专美为秘书监，充宣徽北院使。
English: On the 16th, Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate and Hyobu chamberlain Li Zhenmei was appointed as the secretary supervisor and appointed as the envoy of Hui Beiyuan.

古文：帝闻之，以为横海留后。
现代文：二十九日，任左谏仪大夫唐氵内为左散骑常侍。
English: On the 29th, Tang Xunai, the doctor of Zuoqi, was appointed as the left rider's attendant.

古文：渤海国遣使朝贡。十二月戊辰，禁用铅钱。
现代文：十一月九日，任左骁卫上将军赤阝琼为左金吾上将军，任光禄卿王玟为太子宾客。十二月七日，禁止使用铅钱。
English: On November 9th, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards,

古文：壬申，以中书侍郎兼兵部尚书、充枢密使韩昭允为检校司空、同平章事，充河中节度使。
现代文：十一日，任中书侍郎兼兵部尚书、充枢密使韩昭裔为检校司空、同平章事，兼河中节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Han Zhaoxiang, who was appointed as the junior secretary and the secretary of the military department and the envoy of the imperial court, was appointed as the inspector of the school, the secretary of Tongping, and the secretary of the festival in the middle of the river.

古文：甲戌，以宗正少卿李延祚为将作监致仕。
现代文：十三日，任宗正少卿李延祚为将作监后退休。
English: On the 13th, Li Yanjun, who was appointed as Zongzheng Shaoqing, will retire after serving as supervisor.

古文：丁丑，故武安军州节度使、累赠太傅刘建峰赠太尉，从湖南之请也。
现代文：十六日，赠已故武安军州节度使、累赠太傅刘建峰为太尉，这是听从湖南的请求而做的。
English: On the 16th, the late Wu'an Junzhou Festival envoy was presented, and the Taifu Liu Jianfeng was awarded the rank of Taifu. This was done at the request of Hunan.

古文：戊寅，太常奏： 来年正月一日上辛，祀昊天上帝于圆丘，依礼大祠不朝。 
现代文：十七日，太常上奏： 明年一月一日上辛，到圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，依据礼仪大祠时不上朝。 
English: On the 17th day of the lunar month, the following ritual will be performed: On the 1st day of the lunar month of the next year, go to the round mound to offer sacrifices to the God of Heaven, and according to the etiquette of the great shrine, do not go to the morning.

古文：诏曰： 祀事在质明前，仪仗在日出后，事不相妨，宜依常年受朝。 
现代文：下诏说： 祭祀是在天亮前，仪仗在太阳出来之后，互相不妨碍，应该依照常年所做的受朝贺。 
English: The next edict said: Sacrifices are to be made before dawn, and ceremonial battles after the sun has risen. They do not interfere with each other, and people should receive morning greetings according to what they have been doing all year round.

古文：壬午，以翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎程遂为兵部侍郎；翰林学士、工部侍郎崔棁为户部侍郎；翰林学士、中书舍人和凝为工部侍朗，并依前充职。
现代文：二十一日，任翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎程遂为兵部侍郎，任翰林学士、工部侍郎崔木兑为户部侍郎，任翰林学士、中书舍人和凝为工部侍郎，并兼任以前的职务。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Cheng, who was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin and a chamberlain of the household, became a chamberlain of the military department, Cui, who was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin and a chamberlain of the engineering department, became a chamberlain of the household department, and Cheng, who was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, a scholar of Chinese literature and a chamberlain of the engineering department, became a chamberlain of the engineering department, and also held the previous positions.

古文：乙酉，以前秘书监杨凝式为兵部侍郎。
现代文：二十八日，任前同州节度冯道为司空。
English: On the 28th, Feng Dao, the former festival director of the same prefecture, became the secretary.

