古文：宦者下李辅国，本名静忠，以阉奴为闲厩小儿。
现代文：李辅国本名静忠，以太监充当管御用车马的小当差。
English: Li Fuguo's real name was Jingzhong, and he served as a minor official in charge of the royal carriage and horses.

古文：貌儜陋，略通书计。事高力士，年四十馀，使主厩中簿最。
现代文：相貌瘦弱丑陋，粗通文字与筹算，在高力士手下服侍，四十余岁时，让他主管养马的账务。
English: Thin and ugly, with a rough grasp of words and calculations, he served under Corix, and when he was more than forty years old, he put him in charge of the horse-breeding accounts.

古文：王鉷为使，以典禾豆，能检擿耗欺，马以故肥，荐之皇太子，得侍东宫。
现代文：王钅共任闲厩使时，让他掌管饲料，他能选用饲料并降低对饲料的损耗，马因而养得肥壮，推荐给皇太子，得以服役于东宫。
English: When Wang Qian served as an idle stable attendant, he put him in charge of the feed. He could choose the feed and reduce the loss of feed. As a result, the horse grew fat, was recommended to the crown prince, and was able to serve in the East Palace.

古文：陈玄礼等诛杨国忠，辅国豫谋，又劝太子分中军趋朔方，收河、陇兵，图兴复。
现代文：陈玄礼等杀杨国忠，辅国参与谋划，又劝说太子李亨以主力速驻朔方，收集河、陇兵力，以图复兴。
English: Chen Xuanli and others killed Yang Guozhong, and the auxiliary states participated in the planning. They also persuaded the prince Li Heng to quickly stay in the Shuo side with the main force, collect the river and river troops, and try to revive.

古文：太子至灵武，愈亲近，劝遂即位系天下心。擢家令，判元帅府行军司马。
现代文：太子到达灵武，更亲近李辅国，李劝太子马上即帝位以维系天下人心，被选拔为家令，兼元帅府行军司马。
English: When the prince arrived in Lingwu, he was closer to Li Yu Province. Li advised the prince to immediately ascend the throne in order to maintain the hearts of the people of the world. He was selected as the master of the house and the marshal of the army.

古文：肃宗稍稍任以肱膂事，更名护国，又改今名。
现代文：肃宗逐渐委以辅弼重任，改名为护国，后又改今名。
English: Su Zong gradually took on more and more responsibilities, changing his name to Protector of the Country, and later to his current name.

古文：凡四方章奏、军符、禁宝一委之。
现代文：凡各方奏章、军符、玉玺，一概交他掌管。
English: He was put in charge of all the medals, military insignia, and jade urns.

古文：辅国能随事龊龊谨密，取人主亲信，而内深贼未敢肆。
现代文：辅国能遇事谨慎周密，博取皇帝信任，而内心深藏奸诈未敢放肆。
English: Auxiliary countries can be cautious and meticulous in dealing with matters, win the trust of the emperor, and do not dare to be impudent.

古文：不啖荤，时时为浮屠诡行，人以为柔良，不忌也。
现代文：不吃荤，经常做出僧人的诡异行为，人们以为他柔顺善良，不疑忌他。
English: He doesn't eat gourds, and often behaves strangely like a monk. People think he's gentle and kind, and they don't hesitate to shun him.

古文：帝还京师，拜殿中监，闲厩、五坊、宫苑、营田、栽接总监使，兼陇右群牧、京畿铸钱、长春宫等使，少府、殿中二监，封成国公，实封户五百。
现代文：肃宗回京，任命他为殿中监、闲厩、五坊、宫苑、营田、栽接总监使，兼任陇右群牧、京畿铸钱、长春宫等使，及少府、殿中二监，封爵成国公，食邑实封五百户。
English: Su Zong returned to Beijing and appointed him as the palace superintendent, the superintendent of the leisure stables, the five courtyards, the palace gardens, the yakitori, the superintendent of the planting, the superintendent of the right herd, the Gyeonggi Foundry, the Changchun Palace, and so on, and the junior prefect, the second superintendent of the palace, the knight of the country, and the 500 households of the food village.

古文：宰相群臣欲不时见天子，皆因辅国以请，乃得可。
现代文：宰相群臣有急事想见天子，都由辅国去请示，才得到许可。
English: When the prime minister and his ministers had urgent business and wanted to see the emperor, they had to ask permission from the vassal states before receiving permission.

古文：常止银台门决事。
现代文：辅国常在银台门决定政事。
English: Fu Guo often made political decisions at the gate.

古文：置察事听儿数十人，吏虽有秋豪过，无不得，得辄推讯。
现代文：设置察事耳目数十人，官吏虽只很小的过失，没有不知道的，知道了就推究审讯。
English: Dozens of inspectors have been set up, and although officials have only made minor mistakes, there is nothing they don't know, and if they know, they will investigate and interrogate.

古文：州县狱讼，三司制劾，有所捕逮流降，皆私判臆处，因称制敕，然未始闻上也。
现代文：州县民刑案件，三司裁断后，有逮捕流放贬降的，都由辅国擅自主观判处，还说是皇上旨意，但却未曾报告皇上。
English: In the case of state and county civil punishment cases, after the three departments make a decision, if there is an arrest, banishment or demotion, it will be arbitrarily sentenced by the auxiliary state. It is also said to be the emperor's will, but it has not been reported to the emperor.

古文：诏书下，辅国署已乃施行，群臣无敢议。
现代文：皇上下诏书，必须经辅国的签署，才能执行，群臣不敢有所议论。
English: The imperial edict must be signed by the supporting countries before it can be implemented, and the ministers dare not discuss it.

古文：出则介士三百人为卫。
现代文：外出则有武士三百人为护卫。
English: When they go out, they are escorted by three hundred samurai.

古文：贵幸至不敢斥官，呼五郎。
现代文：王公大臣乃至于不敢直呼其官名，称他为 五郎 。
English: Minister Wang Gong didn't even dare to call him by his official title, calling him Goro.

古文：李揆当国，以子姓事之，号 五父 。
现代文：李揆为相时，对他执子弟礼，尊称 五父 。
English: When Li Yao was the crown prince, he treated him with filial piety and called him the "fifth father."

古文：帝为娶元擢女为妻，擢以故为梁州长史，弟兄皆位台省。
现代文：肃宗为他娶元擢之女为妻，元擢因而被任为梁州长史，弟兄都位居中枢要职。
English: Su Zong married the daughter of Yuan Zang as his wife, and Yuan Zang was appointed the governor of Liang Province. His brothers all held important posts.

古文：李岘辅政，叩头言： 且乱国。 
现代文：李岘为相后，向皇帝叩头进言： 辅国专权，必将乱国。 
English: After Li Qiye became the crown prince, he kowtowed to the emperor and said, "Supplementary state power will surely bring chaos to the country."

古文：于是诏敕不由中书出者，岘必审覆，辅国不悦。
现代文：于是决定，今后皇帝诏敕不是从中书省发出的，李岘必须审查奏复，辅国因而不悦。
English: As a result, it was decided that in the future, the Emperor's rescript would not be issued by the Chinese Calligraphy Province, and Li Xi would have to review the reply, which made the auxiliary state unhappy.

古文：时太上皇居兴庆宫，帝自复道来起居，太上皇亦间至大明宫，或相逢道中。
现代文：这时太上皇玄宗皇帝居兴庆宫，皇帝常经天桥来请安，太上皇间或也到大明宫看皇帝，有时父子相逢道中。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong was staying at the Xingqing Palace. The emperor often came to the skybridge to ask for good luck. The empress dowager might also go to the Daming Palace to see the emperor. Sometimes father and son met on the road.

古文：帝命陈玄礼、高力士、王承恩、魏悦、玉真公主常在太上皇左右，梨园弟子日奏声伎为娱乐。
现代文：皇帝命陈玄礼、高力士、王承恩、魏悦、玉真公主常在太上皇左右侍奉，使梨园弟子每日奏乐歌舞以为娱乐。
English: The emperor ordered Chen Xuanli, Gao Lixi, Wang Cheng'en, Wei Yue, and Princess Yuzhen to often serve around the empress dowager, so that the disciples of Liyuan would play music and dance every day for entertainment.

古文：辅国素微贱，虽暴贵，力士等犹不为礼，怨之，欲立奇功自固。
现代文：辅国出身微贱，虽暴发富贵，高力士等对他还是不尊重，便心怀怨恨，想建奇功来巩固自己的地位。
English: Although he was born in a low-ranking country, he became rich and powerful, but Gao Lixin and others still did not respect him, so he harbored resentment and wanted to build a miracle to consolidate his position.

古文：初，太上皇每置酒长庆楼，南俯大道，因裴回观览，或父老过之，皆拜舞乃去。
现代文：当初，太上皇常常设酒宴于长庆楼，南向俯看大道，徘徊观赏，有时百姓父老从楼下经过，都拜舞后才离去。
English: At the beginning, the Emperor used to hold wine feasts in Changqing Building, and he would look down the avenue to the south and linger to watch. Sometimes, the common people would pass by downstairs, and they would all bow and dance before leaving.

古文：上元中，剑南奏事吏过楼下，因上谒，太上皇赐之酒，诏公主及如仙媛主之，又召郭英乂、王铣等饮，赉予颇厚。
现代文：上元年间，剑南道进京奏事的官吏经过楼下，就上楼拜见，太上皇赐以酒宴，命玉真公主和如仙媛做主人招待，又召来郭英耣、王铣等人饮酒，赏赐颇为丰厚。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, the officials of Jian Nan Dao who were on their way to Beijing passed downstairs and went upstairs to pay their respects. The emperor gave them a wine banquet, ordered Princess Yujin and Princess Ruxian to be the hosts, and invited Guo Yingyao, Wang Yao and others to drink. The reward was quite rich.

古文：辅国因妄言于帝曰： 太上皇居近市，交通外人，玄礼、力士等将不利陛下，六军功臣反侧不自安，愿徙太上皇入禁中。 
现代文：辅国因而向皇帝乱说道： 太上皇住处接近街市，与外面的人交结，陈玄礼、高力士等将对陛下不利，六军中的功臣忧惧不安，请将太上皇迁入宫中。 
English: As a result, the auxiliaries said to the emperor, "The emperor's residence is close to the street market, and there is contact with people outside. Chen Xuanli and Gao Lixi will be unfavorable to his majesty. The heroes in the Six Armies are worried and uneasy. Please move the emperor into the palace."

古文：帝不寤。
现代文：皇帝不解。
English: The emperor was puzzled.

古文：先时，兴庆宫有马三百，辅国矫诏取之，裁留十马。
现代文：先前，兴庆宫有马三百匹，辅国诈称皇帝诏令取走，只留下十匹。
English: Previously, there were three hundred horses in the Xingqing Palace, but the auxiliary country falsely claimed that the emperor had ordered them to be taken away, leaving only ten horses.

古文：太上皇谓力士曰： 吾儿用辅国谋，不得终孝矣。 
现代文：太上皇对高力士说： 我儿任用辅国计谋，对我不能尽孝了。 
English: The Empress Dowager said to Goryeo's Gao Lijun: My son has been appointed as an assistant to the State Counsellor, and he can no longer be a filial son to me.

古文：会帝属疾，辅国即诈言皇帝请太上皇按行宫中，至睿武门，射生官五百遮道，太上皇惊，几坠马，问何为者，辅国以甲骑数十驰奏曰： 陛下以兴庆宫湫陋，奉迎乘舆还宫中。 
现代文：时逢肃宗有病，辅国就谎称皇上请太上皇巡行宫中，走到睿武门，遇射生官五百人挡道，太上皇惊恐，几乎落马，问这是干什么，辅国领武装骑士数十名纵马跑来上奏说： 皇上因兴庆宫低下简陋，我们迎接太上皇回宫住。 
English: When Su Zong was ill, the auxiliary state falsely claimed that the emperor invited the emperor to the palace, walked to the Ruiwu Gate, and encountered five hundred shooters blocking the way. The emperor was alarmed and almost fell off his horse. When asked what this was, dozens of armed knights led by the auxiliary state ran up and said: "Because the Xingqing Palace is low and simple, we welcome the emperor back to the palace.

古文：力士厉声曰： 五十年太平天子，辅国欲何事？ 
现代文：高力士厉声说： 皇上是五十年太平天子，辅国你想干什么？ 
English: Colossus snapped, "It's been fifty years since the emperor ascended to the throne, Taiping Tianzi. What do you want to do as an auxiliary country?

古文：叱使下马，辅国失辔，骂力士曰： 翁不解事！ 
现代文：大声呵斥令其下马，辅国失落了马缰，骂力士说： 老头儿不懂事！ 
English: He shouted at the wrestler to get off his horse, and the assistant lost his stirrup. He cursed the wrestler and said, "The old man doesn't know what he's doing!"

古文：斩一从者。
现代文：杀了一个侍从。
English: He killed a servant.

古文：力士呼曰： 太上皇问将士各好在否！ 
现代文：高力士大喊说 ：太上皇问各位将士好！ 
English: Koryoshi shouted, "The Emperor sends his greetings to the generals!"

古文：将士纳刀虖万岁，皆再拜。
现代文：将士们都收刀高呼万岁，一齐向太上皇行再拜大礼。
English: The soldiers all clasped their swords and shouted "long live" as they made a grand salute to the Emperor.

古文：力士复曰： 辅国可御太上皇马！ 
现代文：高力士又说 ：辅国来牵太上皇马！ 
English: Kaurismäki also said: "Supplementary countries are coming to draw too close to Real Madrid!"

古文：辅国靴而走，与力士对执辔还西内，居甘露殿，侍卫才数十，皆尪老。
现代文：辅国于是步行与高力士各在一边牵着太上皇马缰，回到太极宫，住在甘露殿，侍卫才几十人，都是老弱残兵。
English: As a result, Fu Guo and Gao Lixi each walked to one side holding the imperial horse of the Empress Dowager, returned to the Taiji Palace, and lived in the Nectar Hall. There were only a few dozen attendants, all of whom were old and weak soldiers.

古文：太上皇执力士手曰： 微将军，朕且为兵死鬼。 
现代文：太上皇拉着高力士的手说 ：要不是将军，朕将成为刀下鬼了。 
English: The Empress Dowager tugged at Koryoshi's hand and said, "If it weren't for the general, I would be a ghost under the sword."

古文：左右皆流涕。
现代文：左右的人都流泪。
English: People on both sides were in tears.

古文：又曰： 兴庆，吾王地，数以让皇帝，帝不受。今之徙，自吾志也。 
现代文：太上皇又说 ：兴庆宫是我封王时的住地，几次要让给皇帝，他不接受，今日之搬迁，本来就是我的意愿。 
English: The Empress Dowager also said, "Xingqing Palace was my residence when I was crowned king. I had to give it to the emperor several times, but he did not accept it. Today's relocation was my original intention.

古文：俄而流承恩播州，魏悦氵奏州，如仙媛归州，公主居玉真观；更料后宫声乐百馀，更侍太上皇，备洒扫；诏万安、咸宜二公主视服膳。
现代文：不久，流放王承恩于播州，流放魏悦于溱州，流放如仙媛于归州，令玉真公主出居玉真观；皇帝另选后宫声乐艺人百余人，轮流侍奉太上皇，并备洒扫之役；令万安、咸宜两公主照顾上皇的服饰饮食。
English: Soon, Wang Cheng'en was exiled to Banzhou, Wei Yue was exiled to Ganzhou, and Ru Xianyuan was exiled to Guizhou, so that Princess Yuzhen came to live in Yuzhenguan; the emperor also selected more than a hundred harem vocal artists to take turns serving the emperor and prepare for the role of sprinkling and sweeping; the two princesses Wan'an and Xianyi took care of the emperor's clothing and diet.

古文：自是太上皇怏怏不豫，至弃天下。
现代文：从此太上皇郁郁寡欢，以至辞世。
English: From then on, the Emperor was unhappy and depressed until his death.

古文：辅国以功迁兵部尚书。
现代文：李辅国以有功升为兵部尚书。
English: Li Yu-kuo promoted meritorious soldiers to the highest ranks of the military.

古文：南省视事，使武士戎装夹道，陈跳丸舞剑，百骑前驱，御府设食，太常备乐，宰相群臣毕会。
现代文：赴尚书省上任时，使武士全副武装夹道侍卫，还有艺人表演跳丸舞剑杂技，百名骑兵开道，御厨供奉食品，太常寺设乐队奏乐，宰相和群臣都集中了。
English: When he went to Shangshu Province to take office, he had samurai in full armour escort the procession, entertainers performed acrobatics, a hundred cavalrymen led the procession, food was provided by the imperial kitchen, an orchestra was set up at Taizho-ji Temple to play music, and the prime minister and his ministers were all gathered together.

古文：既得志，乃厌然骄觖，求宰相，帝重违曰： 卿勋力何任不可，但群望未一，如何？ 
现代文：李辅国得志之后，更加骄纵而野心勃勃，请求担任宰相，皇帝面有难色说： 以你的功勋能力，什么官职不可以担任呢？但大家意见不一致，怎么办呢？ 
English: After Li Yu's rise to power, he became even more arrogant and ambitious. He asked to be appointed as prime minister. The emperor looked puzzled and said, "With your merits and abilities, what official position can you not hold? But everyone disagrees, what should you do?

古文：辅国遂讽宰相裴冕使联表荐己。
现代文：李辅国就暗示宰相裴冕，让大臣们联名上表推荐自己。
English: Li Yuxuo hinted that Prime Minister Fei Guan Rong, let the ministers jointly recommend themselves.

古文：帝密擿萧华使喻止冕。
现代文：皇帝密令肖华去告诉裴冕不要这样做。
English: The emperor secretly ordered Xiao Hua to tell Fei Guanzhong not to do this.

古文：张皇后数疾其颛，帝寝疾，太子监国，后召太子，将诛辅国及程元振，太子不从，更召越王、兗王图之。
现代文：张皇后常憎恨李辅国的专擅，皇帝卧病，太子代理国政，皇后召太子来，请杀李辅国及程元振，太子不同意，又召越王、兖王商议。
English: Empress Zhang often resented the autocratic rule of Li Fuguo. When the emperor was ill and the crown prince acted as the representative of state affairs, the empress summoned the crown prince and asked him to kill Li Fuguo and Cheng Yuan Zhen. When the crown prince disagreed, she also summoned Yue Wang and Zou Wang for discussion.

古文：元振告辅国，即伏兵凌霄门，迎太子，伺变，是夜捕二王及中人硃辉光、马英俊等囚之，而杀后它殿。
现代文：程元振将此事告诉李辅国，李辅国就在凌霄门设下伏兵，迎候太子，伺机作变，当晚，逮捕两王及中人朱辉光、马英俊等加以囚禁，而杀张皇后于别殿。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen told the matter to Li Shuo. Li Shuo set up an ambush at Lingxiao Gate to welcome the prince and wait for an opportunity to make a change. That night, he arrested the two kings and the middlemen Zhu Huiguang and Ma Yingjun and imprisoned them, and killed Queen Zhang in the palace.

古文：代宗立，辅国等以定策功，愈跋扈，至谓帝曰： 大家弟坐宫中，外事听老奴处决。 
现代文：代宗即位，李辅国等人以决策有功，更加跋扈，以至于对皇帝说： 陛下只管坐在宫中，外面的事听由老奴处理。 
English: When the daimyō ascended the throne, Li Shuoguo and others made great achievements in decision-making and were even more powerful, so much so that they said to the emperor: Your majesty should just sit in the palace, and let the slaves handle the outside affairs.

古文：帝矍然欲翦除，而惮其握兵，因尊为尚父，事无大小率关白，群臣出入皆先诣辅国，辅国颇自安。
现代文：皇帝惊觉想除掉他，但畏惧他掌握着兵权，因而尊称他为尚父，事无大小都告诉他，群臣出入宫中都先到李辅国那儿，他很安然自得。
English: The emperor was surprised and wanted to get rid of him, but feared that he held the military power, so he called him his father, and told him that in all matters, the courtiers went to the palace first, and he was very comfortable.

古文：又册进司空兼中书令，实封户八百。
现代文：皇帝又提升他为司空兼中书令，食邑实封八百户。
English: The emperor also promoted him to Siku and Chushiro, and 800 households in Shoku village were sealed.

古文：未几，以左武卫大将军彭体盈代为闲厩、嫩牧、苑内、营田、五坊等使，以右武卫大将军药子昂代判元帅行军司马，赐辅国大第于外。
现代文：不久，皇帝以左武卫大将军彭体盈接替了李辅国的闲厩、群牧、苑内、营田、五坊等使的职务，以右武卫大将军药子昂代替李辅国兼元帅行军司马，在宫外赐给李辅国一所大宅第。
English: Soon after, the emperor appointed General Peng Ti Ying of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards to take over the duties of Li Yu's envoys in charge of the stables, herdsmen, courtyards, campgrounds, and five villages. He also appointed General Yao Zi'ang of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards to take over Li Yu's position as the marshal of the marching army, and gave Li Yu's troops a mansion outside the palace.

古文：中外闻其失势，举相贺。
现代文：朝野听说他失去权势，都互相庆贺。
English: When Asano heard that he had lost power, they all congratulated each other.

古文：辅国始惘然忧，不知所出，表乞解官。
现代文：李辅国这才感到失意而忧愁，没了主意，上表请求免官。
English: It was only then that Li Fuguo felt frustrated and sad, lost his nerve, and requested to be relieved of his post.

古文：有诏进封博陆郡王，仍为司空、尚父，许朝朔望。
现代文：皇帝下诏进封他为博陆郡王，仍为司空及尚父，准许初一、十五上朝。
English: The emperor decreed that he should be the king of Bolu County, and he was still the son of Siku and his father. He was allowed to ascend to the throne on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：辅国欲入中书作谢表，阍者不内，曰： 尚父罢宰相，不可入。 
现代文：李辅国想进中书省给皇上写谢表，守门人不让进，说： 尚父的宰相职务已罢免，不能进。 
English: When Li Fuguo wanted to enter the Ministry of Literature to write a letter of thanks to the emperor, the gatekeeper would not let him in, saying: His father's post of prime minister has been removed, he cannot enter.

古文：辅国气塞，久乃曰： 老奴死罪，事郎君不了，请地下事先帝矣！ 
现代文：辅国气得说不出话来，好久才说 ：老奴该死，侍候不了郎君了，请让老奴到九泉之下去侍奉先帝吧！ 
English: Fu Guoqi was speechless, and it took him a long time to say: "The old man should die, he can't serve his son-in-law, please let the old man go to Jiuquan to serve the former emperor!"

古文：帝优辞谕遣。
现代文：皇帝好言劝慰，让他回去。
English: The emperor said good words of consolation and let him go back.

古文：有韩颖、刘烜善步星，乾元中待诏翰林，颖位司天监，烜起居舍人，与辅国暱甚。
现代文：韩颖、刘火亘善于观测星象，乾元年间为翰林院待诏，韩颖做司天监，刘火亘做起居舍人，与李辅国非常亲密。
English: Han Ying and Liu Huowuang were good at observing the stars. During the Qianyuan period, Han Ying was a member of the Hanlin Academy, and Liu Huowuang was a layman. Han Ying and Liu Huowuang were very close to Li Yueguo.

古文：辅国领中书，颖进秘书监，烜中书舍人，裴冕引为山陵使判官，辅国罢，俱流岭南，赐死。
现代文：辅国为中书令时，韩颖升为秘书监，刘火亘升为中书舍人，裴冕推荐为山陵使判官，李辅国罢官后，都被流放岭南，赐令自尽。
English: When the Auxiliary State was the Chinese imperial court, Han Ying Sheng was appointed as the secretary supervisor, Liu Huawang Sheng was appointed as the Chinese imperial court clerk, Pei Guan recommended as the mountain and mausoleum envoy adjudicator, and after the dismissal of Li Yu Guo, they were all exiled to Lingnan and ordered to commit suicide.

古文：自辅国徙太上皇，天下疾之，帝在东宫积不平。
现代文：自从李辅国迫使玄宗搬迁，天下人都恨他，代宗当太子时，内心就积累了愤懑不平。
English: Ever since the State of Li Yu forced Xuanzong to relocate, the whole world hated him. When Daizong was crown prince, he accumulated resentment in his heart.

古文：既嗣位，不欲显戮，遣侠者夜刺杀之，年五十九，抵其首溷中，殊右臂，告泰陵。
现代文：即帝位后，不想公开杀他，派遣侠客夜间杀死了他，时年五十九岁，割下头颅扔入厕中，断其右臂，祭告于玄宗陵。
English: Immediately after his accession to the throne, he did not want to kill him openly, so he sent a knight to kill him at night. He was fifty-nine years old at the time, cut off his head and threw it into the toilet, broke his right arm, and sacrificed it in the Mausoleum of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：然犹秘其事，刻木代首以葬，赠太傅，谥曰丑。
现代文：但仍然隐秘此事，用木头刻了一个头颅来下葬，追赠太傅，定其谥号为丑。
English: However, the matter remained secret. A head was carved out of wood for burial, and Taifu was posthumously given the posthumous name Ugly.

古文：后梓州刺史杜济以武人为牙门将，自言刺辅国者。
现代文：后来梓州刺史杜济，以武夫为牙门将，自称是刺杀辅国的人。
English: Later, Zizhou assassinated Shi Duji, with Wufu as the gatekeeper, claiming to be the person who assassinated Fu Guo.

古文：王守澄者，史亡所来。
现代文：王守澄，史籍中没有他出身的记载。
English: Wang Shoucheng, there is no record of his birth in historical records.

古文：元和中监徐州军，召还。
现代文：元和年间，曾监徐州军，后来召回。
English: During the Yuan and Zhou Dynasties, he was once the inspector of the Xuzhou Army, but was later recalled.

古文：方宪宗喜方士说，诏天下求其人，宰相皇甫镈、左金吾将军李道古等白见杨仁昼、浮屠大通。
现代文：那时，宪宗沉溺于方士之说，诏令天下访求方士，宰相皇甫、左金吾将军李道古等人说见到杨仁昼及佛教徒大通。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianzong indulged in the teachings of the Buddhists, and issued an imperial edict ordering the whole country to visit the Buddhists. The Prime Minister Huang Fu, General Zuo Kingu Li Daogu, and others said that they had seen Yang Rintong and Buddhist Datong.

古文：仁昼更姓名曰柳泌，大通自言寿百五十岁，有不死药，并待诏翰林。
现代文：杨仁昼改名为柳泌，大通自称已一百五十岁，有不死之药。皇帝让他两人并为待诏翰林。
English: Yang Ren Ren Ren changed his name to Liu Xuan, and Datong claimed to be a hundred and fifty years old and to have the elixir of life. The emperor let the two of them go and waited for the imperial edict.

古文：虢人田元佐言有秘方，能化瓦砾为黄金，诏除虢令，与董景珍、李元戢皆介泌、大通荐于天子，天子惑其说。
现代文：虢人田元佐自称有秘方，可以将瓦砾炼为黄金，皇帝下诏任他为虢县县令，他与董景珍、李元戢均依赖柳泌、大通推荐给天子，天子信以为真。
English: Tian Yuanzuo, a native of Hunan, claimed to have a secret recipe that could turn rubble into gold. The emperor made him the county magistrate of Hunan. He, Dong Jingzhen, and Li Yuanxuan all relied on Liu Xiu and Datong to recommend them to the emperor, who believed them to be true.

古文：泌以金石进帝饵之，躁甚，数暴怒，恚责左右，踵得罪，禁中累息，帝自是不豫。
现代文：柳泌将所炼金石药进奉天子，皇帝服用后，日加燥渴，脾气也变暴躁了，多次狂怒，斥责左右，无辜就能获罪，宫廷内人人屏息，不敢随便行动说话。
English: Liu Xiu dedicated the alchemy stone medicine to the heavenly son, and after the emperor took it, his thirst increased day by day, his temper also became irritable, he was furious many times, he scolded and rebuked, the innocent could be convicted, everyone in the court held their breath, and dared not act or speak casually.

古文：十五年，罢元会，群臣危恐，会义成刘悟来朝，赐对麟德殿，悟出曰： 上体平矣。 
现代文：皇帝也从此生了病。元和十五年，元旦日的大朝会因皇帝病而作罢，群臣莫不惶恐不安。正好义成节度使刘悟来朝见，皇帝赐他麟德殿相见。刘悟出来后，对大家说： 皇上龙体平安。 
English: The emperor also fell ill from then on. In the 15th year of the Yuan and 15th years, the Grand Imperial Assembly on New Year's Day was cancelled due to the emperor's illness, and the courtiers were worried. It was just the Yicheng Festival that made Liu Wugu come to see the emperor, and the emperor gave him the Lin De Hall to meet. After Liu Wugu came out, he said to everyone: The emperor's dragon body is safe.

古文：内外乃安。
现代文：内外才放心，各自回去。
English: Everyone should rest assured and go back home.

古文：是夜，守澄与内常侍陈弘志弑帝于中和殿，缘所饵，以暴崩告天下，乃与梁守谦、韦元素等定册立穆宗。
现代文：这天晚上，王守澄与内常侍陈弘志，将皇帝在中和殿杀死，借皇帝平日服用金丹事，以皇上误服金丹，毒发暴崩告谕天下。接着，与梁守谦、韦元素等人册立太子恒即位，是为穆宗。
English: On this evening, Wang Shoucheng and his chief chamberlain Chen Hongzhi killed the emperor in Zhonghe Hall, and used the emperor's daily consumption of gold and silver to announce to the world that the emperor had taken the wrong amount of gold and silver and died violently. Then, together with Liang Shoucheng and Wei Ye, they proclaimed the enthronement of Crown Prince Heng, who was Mu Zong.

古文：俄知枢密事。
现代文：不久，任王守澄知枢密事。
English: Soon, Wang Shoucheng learned the secret.

古文：文宗嗣位，守澄有助力，进拜骠骑大将军。
现代文：文宗即位，王守澄曾助了一把力，于是进任他为骠骑大将军。
English: When Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne, Wang Shoucheng helped him, and he was appointed as the general of cavalry.

古文：帝疾元和逆罪久不讨，故以宋申锡为宰相，谋因事除之，不克，更因其党郑注、李训乘其罅，于是流杨承和于驩州，韦元素象州。
现代文：文宗皇帝对元和之乱逆党还在，且气焰嚣张，心内愤恨，所以任翰林学士宋申锡为宰相，想借事将王守澄除掉，没能成功，反被其党羽郑注、李训利用了机会，不得不将杨承和流放州、韦元素流放象州。
English: Emperor Wenzong's rebellion against Yuan He was still going on, and he was full of arrogance and resentment. Therefore, he appointed Hanlin Scholar Song Shenxi as prime minister to remove Wang Shoucheng, but he did not succeed. On the other hand, his party members Zheng Zhu and Li Xun took advantage of the opportunity and had to exile Yang Chenghe to Zhouzhou and Wei Ye to Xiangzhou.

古文：遣中人刘忠谅追杀元素于武昌，承和次公安赐死。
现代文：又派中人刘忠谅将韦元素追杀在武昌，杨承和到达公安即赐死。
English: He also sent Liu Zhongren, a mid-level official, to hunt down and kill Wei Element in Wuchang, and Yang Chenghe was sentenced to death upon arrival at the police station.

古文：始，克明谋逆，母禁不许。文宗立，嘉母忠，赐钱千缗、绢五百匹，给婢二人。
现代文：李训又胁迫王守澄以左右神策军观军容使的身份出宫回家，又派内养送鸩酒给王守澄赐死。事情十分秘密，当时无人知道。王守澄死后，追赠扬州大都督。
English: Li Xun also coerced Wang Shoucheng to leave the palace and return home as the envoy of the left and right divine strategist and military observer, and sent him to raise and send yakitori to Wang Shoucheng to give him death. The matter was very secret, and no one knew about it at the time. After Wang Shoucheng died, he was posthumously given the title of Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：田令孜，字仲则，蜀人也，本陈氏。
现代文：他的弟弟王守涓从徐州监军被召回，死于中牟。田令孜，字仲则，蜀地人氏，本姓陈。
English: His younger brother, Wang Shouqi, was recalled from the Xuzhou Supervision Army and died in Zhongmou, Tianlingzi, Zhongzhe, Shu, surnamed Chen.

古文：咸通时，历小马坊使。
现代文：咸通年间，任小马坊使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiantong, he served as a pony messenger.

古文：僖宗即位，擢令孜左神策军中尉，是时西门匡范位右中尉，世号 东军 、 西军 。
现代文：僖宗即位，升为左神策军中尉。当时，西门匡范任神策军右中尉，时人称他们两人为 东军 、 西军 。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the Left Divine Defense Force. At that time, Ximen Kuangfan served as the right lieutenant of the Divine Defense Force. At that time, people called the two of them the Eastern Army and the Western Army.

古文：帝冲騃，喜斗鹅走马，数幸六王宅、兴庆池与诸王斗鹅，一鹅至五十钱。
现代文：皇帝年轻不懂事，喜欢斗鹅跑马，多次到六王家中或兴庆池与诸王斗鹅，一鹅的输赢多到五十万钱。
English: The young and inexperienced emperor liked to fight geese and race horses. He often went to the Six Kings' House or the Xingqing Pool to fight geese with the kings. The winner of one goose could win as much as 500,000 yuan.

古文：与内园小儿尤昵狎，倚宠暴横。
现代文：与内园的小儿更是亲昵，致使这些人倚仗宠幸，专横暴虐。
English: With the children of the inner garden, they are even more intimate, causing these people to be favored and tyrannical.

古文：始，帝为王时，与令孜同卧起，至是以其知书能处事，又帝资狂昏，故政事一委之，呼为 父 。
现代文：起先，皇帝还是普王时，在普王府就与田令孜朝夕相亲，即帝位后，认为田令孜能知书，有谋略，善处事，再加上皇帝本身昏庸，只知逸乐，因此将政事全部交给他，且称他为 阿父 。
English: At first, when the emperor was still King Pu, he was on a blind date with Tian Lingzi in the morning and evening at the King Pu's palace. That is, after the imperial throne, he thought that Tian Lingzi was able to know books, had a strategy, and was good at doing things. In addition, the emperor himself was dim-witted and only knew pleasure. Therefore, he handed over all political affairs to him, and called him father.

古文：而荒酣无检，发左藏、齐天诸库金币，赐伎子歌儿者日巨万，国用耗尽。
现代文：自己则沉溺玩乐，不知检点。拿出左藏、齐天各库藏的金币，赐给倡优歌儿伎子的钱每日好几万，国用为之耗尽。
English: On the other hand, he indulged in play and did not know where to check. He took out the gold coins from the left and right side of the treasure, and gave tens of thousands of money every day to Zhanyou Qiaoqi, and the state was exhausted.

古文：令孜语内园小儿尹希复、王士成等，劝帝籍京师两市蕃旅、华商宝货举送内库，使者监閟柜坊茶阁，有来诉者皆杖死京兆府。
现代文：田令孜对内园的小儿尹希复、王士成等人说，要他们劝皇帝登记京师两市的蕃华商贾，要他们将所有的宝货都送入内库，又派使者监督那些柜坊茶阁，遇有来陈诉的，都交给京兆尹打死。
English: Tian Lingzi told the children of the inner garden, Yin Xifu, Wang Shicheng and others, that they should persuade the emperor to register the Chinese merchants in the two cities of Beijing and Shijiazhuang, that they should send all the treasures into the inner vault, and send an envoy to supervise those teahouses. In case of complaints, they should be handed over to Jing Zhaoyun to be beaten to death.

古文：令孜知帝不足惮，则贩鬻官爵，除拜不待旨，假赐绯紫不以闻。
现代文：田令孜知道皇帝不是害怕，于是贩卖官爵，升官、任官全不必等皇帝降旨，赐官绯衣紫袍也不报告皇帝。
English: Tian Lingze knew that the emperor was not afraid, so he did not have to wait for the emperor to issue an order before selling official titles, promotions, and appointments, and he did not report to the emperor when he was given an official robe.

古文：百度崩弛，内外垢玩。
现代文：所有制度全都废弛，内外串通作弊玩权。
English: All systems are completely useless. Internal and external collusion, cheating, and power play are rampant.

古文：既所在盗起，上下相掩匿，帝不及知。
现代文：后来各处盗贼蜂起，上下相互掩盖隐瞒，皇帝全然不知道。
English: Later, thieves rose up everywhere, and the upper and lower echelons covered up and concealed each other, and the emperor did not know at all.

古文：是时贤人无在者，惟佞鄙沓贪相与备员，偷安噤默而已。
现代文：那时朝中正直的贤人一个也没有，而那些奸邪贪鄙枉法的人把持朝廷，大家都缄默偷安。
English: At that time, there was not a single honest and wise person in the imperial court, while those who were perfidious, greedy and despised the law controlled the imperial court. Everyone was silent.

古文：左拾遗侯昌蒙不胜愤，指言竖尹用权乱天下，疏入，赐死内侍省。
现代文：左拾遗侯昌蒙不胜愤慨，上书直言宦官滥用权势以乱天下。他的奏疏送进去，竟将他赐死于内侍省。
English: The widower of Zuo Zhi, Chang Meng, was outraged and wrote a letter bluntly saying that the eunuch had abused his power to create chaos in the world. His report was sent to the imperial court, and he was given the title of Naishi no sho (Minister of the Inner Palace).

古文：宰相卢携素事令孜，每建白，必阿邑倡和。
现代文：宰相卢携，一向视田令孜意旨行事，每当田令孜对皇帝说什么或提出什么建议，卢携一定谄谀附和。
English: Prime Minister Lu Tzu always acted in accordance with Tian Lingzi's wishes. Whenever Tian Lingzi said anything to the emperor or made any suggestions, Lu Tzu would certainly agree.

古文：初，黄巢求广州，愿罢兵，携欲宠高骈，使有功，不听贼。
现代文：起初，黄巢提出要任广州节度使，以罢兵停战为交换条件。而卢携想让高骈建功得宠，不同意黄巢的要求。
English: At first, Huang Chao proposed to be appointed as Guangzhou's festival envoy, in exchange for a military strike and an armistice. Lu Ting wanted to make Gao Yujian a favorite, and did not agree to Huang Chao's request.

古文：因又易置关东诸节度，贼乘之，陷东都。
现代文：为此又调换了关东的各节度使，黄巢乘机攻陷了东都洛阳。
English: To this end, the Kanto governors were replaced, and Huang Chao seized the opportunity to capture the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：令孜急，归罪携，奉帝西幸，步出金光门，至咸阳沙野，军十馀骑呼曰： 巢为陛下除奸臣，乘舆今西，秦中父老何望？
现代文：田令孜着急了，归罪卢携，扶拥皇帝西去。一行人走出金光门，到了咸阳沙野，有十多个骑兵对皇帝大声喊道 ：黄巢是替陛下铲除奸臣，皇上今日西行，秦中父老百姓还有何依靠？
English: Tian Ling Zi was anxious, blamed Lu Zi, and supported the emperor to go west. The group walked out of the Golden Gate and arrived at the Hamyang Sand Field. More than ten cavalrymen shouted to the emperor: Huang Chao is to root out the treacherous vassals for His Majesty. The emperor is going west today. What else can the people of Qin Zhong Bao rely on?

古文：愿还宫。 
现代文：请陛下回宫指挥。 
English: Your Majesty, please return to the palace to take command.

古文：令孜叱之，以羽林骑驰斩，即以羽林白马载帝，昼夜驰，舍骆谷。
现代文：田令孜喝斥他们，并要羽林军将他们都追赶斩杀。当即就让皇帝骑上羽林军的白马，昼夜奔驰，直到骆谷才停下休息。
English: Tian Lingzi shouted at them and told the Ulin Army to chase them down and kill them all. Immediately, he let the emperor ride the white horse of the Ulin Army and gallop day and night until he stopped to rest in Luogu.

古文：时陈敬瑄方节度西川，令孜兄也，故请帝幸蜀。
现代文：那时，陈敬蠧正任西川节度使，陈敬蠧，是田令孜的亲哥哥。因此，田令孜请皇帝到四川去。
English: At that time, Chen Jingyao was serving as the envoy to the West River Festival, and Chen Jingyao was Tian Lingzi's elder brother. Therefore, Tian Lingzi invited the emperor to go to Sichuan.

古文：有诏以令孜为十军十二卫观军容制置左右神策护驾使。
现代文：皇帝诏令任田令孜为十军十二卫观军容制置左右神策护驾使。
English: The emperor issued a decree to appoint Tian Lingzi as the commander of the Ten Armies and the Twelve Guardians of the North.

古文：至成都，进左金吾卫上将军，兼判四卫事，封晋国公。
现代文：到了成都，晋升田令孜为金吾卫上将军，兼判四卫军，封爵晋国公。
English: When he arrived in Chengdu, he was promoted to the rank of General of the King's Guard, awarded the title of the Fourth Guards Army, and knighted as the Prince of Jin Province.

古文：帝见蜀狭陋，稍郁郁，日与嫔侍博饮，时时攘袂北望，怊然流涕。
现代文：皇帝见蜀地狭小褊隘，心中郁郁不乐，每日只是和嫔妃内侍赌博宴饮，常常捋臂北望，怆然泪下。
English: When the emperor saw the small and narrow land of Shu, his heart was depressed and unhappy. Every day, he just gambled and feasted with the concubines of the Empress Dowager. He often gazed northward with his arm and burst into tears.

古文：令孜伺间开释，呼万岁，帝为怡悦，因盛称郑畋、王鐸、程宗楚、李铤、敬瑄方并力，贼不足虞。帝曰： 善。 
现代文：田令孜遇有机会就向皇帝报告何处战胜，何人有功，为之解说，并呼万岁。皇帝也因而龙颜大悦。田令孜盛赞郑畋、王铎、程宗楚、李钅延、陈敬蠧并力抗敌，贼人不足为虑。皇帝说 ：好。 
English: When Tian Lingzi had the opportunity, he reported to the emperor where to win and who had made contributions, explained the reasons, and shouted "long live." The emperor was greatly pleased. Tian Lingzi praised Zheng Qi, Wang Qi, Cheng Zong Chu, Li Yu Yan, and Chen Jing Qi for their joint efforts to resist the enemy, and worried that they were not enough. The emperor said, "Good."

古文：初，成都募陈许兵三千，服黄帽，名 黄头军 ，以捍蛮。
现代文：当初，成都招募了陈许兵三千人，都戴黄帽子，号称 黄头军 ，是用来防御蛮人的。
English: At first, Chengdu recruited three thousand soldiers of Chen Xu, all wearing yellow hats, known as the Yellow Army, to defend against the barbarians.

古文：帝至，大劳将士，扈从者已赐，而不及黄头军，皆窃怨令孜。
现代文：皇帝到成都后，慰劳将士们甚厚。从京都扈从而来的人先已赏赐过了，但所得比不上黄头军，于是都暗暗埋怨田令孜。
English: After the emperor arrived in Chengdu, the consolations were plentiful. Those who came from Kyoto had already been rewarded, but the income was not as good as that of the Yellow Army, so they all secretly resented Tian Lingzi.

古文：令孜置酒会诸将，以黄金樽行酒，即赐之。
现代文：田令孜明白，就设酒宴会请诸将，用黄金壶盛酒，就将这些金壶赐给众将领。
English: Tian Lingzhe understood, so he set up a wine banquet to invite the generals, served wine in golden jugs, and gave these golden jugs to the generals.

古文：黄头将郭琪不肯饮，曰： 军容能易偏惠，均众士，诚大愿也。 
现代文：黄头将郭琪不肯喝，说： 如果军容使能改变偏惠部分人，而使所有将士都能沐恩，我将万分感谢。 
English: Guo Qi, the yellow-haired general, refused to drink it, saying, "If the military reform can change the favoritism of some people, and make all soldiers feel grateful, I will be very grateful."

古文：令孜目曰： 君有功邪？ 
现代文：田令孜盯着他，问 ：你建过功劳吗？ 
English: Tian Lingzi stared at him and asked, "Have you ever won any awards?"

古文：答曰： 战党项，薄契丹，数十战，此琪之功。 
现代文：那黄头将答 ：与党项交战，逼退契丹，大小经历几十战。这就是我郭琪的战功。 
English: The yellow-haired general replied: I fought with the Party, forced the Khitan to retreat, and experienced dozens of battles. This is my Guo Qi's war achievement.

古文：令孜嘻，怒曰： 知之。 
现代文：田令孜勉强压住怒火说 ：我知道了。 
English: Tian Lingzi barely suppressed his anger and said: I know.

古文：密以■注酒中，琪饮已，驰归，杀一婢，吮血得解。
现代文：就在他的酒中偷放了毒鸩。郭琪喝了后，飞驰回家，杀了一个婢女，喝了她的血，这才解了毒得不死。
English: After drinking it, Guo Qi raced home, killed a maid, and drank her blood. Only then was she cured of the poison and did not die.

古文：因夜烧营，剽城邑，敬瑄讨败之，奔广都，遂走高骈所。
现代文：于是郭琪半夜烧毁营地，剽夺城邑。陈敬蠧发兵攻打，郭琪败，逃奔广都，后来去依附高骈。
English: As a result, Guo Qi burned down the camp in the middle of the night and seized the towns. Chen Jingyao sent troops to attack, Guo Qi was defeated and fled to Guangdu, and later went to attach Gaochun.

古文：帝闻变，与令孜保东城自守，群臣不得见。
现代文：皇帝听说发生变乱，与田令孜保东城，登楼闭门自守，群臣均见不到皇帝。
English: When the emperor heard that there had been a disturbance, he ordered his troops to guard the eastern city, and went upstairs to lock the doors and keep to himself. None of his ministers were able to see the emperor.

古文：左拾遗孟昭图请对，不召，因上疏极陈： 君与臣一体相成，安则同宁，危则共难。
现代文：左拾遗孟昭图请求面见皇帝，也不召见，于是孟昭图送进奏疏恳切陈述 ：君与臣是一体的两个方面，国安，大家都太平，国危，则大家都蒙难。
English: Meng Zhaotu requested to meet the emperor, but was not invited, so Meng Zhaotu sent a solemn statement: You and your subjects are one in two aspects, national security, everyone is at peace, and national crisis, everyone is in trouble.

古文：昔日西幸，不告南司，故宰相、御史中丞、京兆尹悉碎于贼，唯两军中尉以扈乘舆得全。
现代文：当日皇帝西巡，没有通知南司，所以宰相、御史中丞、京兆尹都陷于贼手，只有两军中尉因扈从护驾得以保全。
English: On the day of the emperor's inspection of the west, no notice was given to Nanshi, so the prime minister, Goshi Chujo, and Jing Zhaoyun all fell into the hands of thieves, and only the lieutenants of the two armies were able to be saved due to the protection of the escort.

古文：今百官之在者，率冒重险出百死者也。
现代文：现在百官中能在此地的，都是冒千难万险死里逃生才到达的。
English: Of all the officials who can be here now, only those who have risked everything to survive have reached this place.

古文：昨昔黄头乱，火照前殿，陛下惟与令孜闭城自守，不召宰相，不谋群臣，欲入不得，求对不许。
现代文：日前黄头军叛乱，前殿遭火，陛下只与田令孜闭城自守，不召见宰相，不与群臣商议。众臣欲入不得，求见不许。
English: A few days ago, the Yellow Army rebelled, and the front hall was set on fire. His Majesty only closed the city with Tian Lingzi to defend himself, did not summon the prime minister, and did not consult with the group of ministers. The ministers were not allowed to enter, and they were not allowed to ask for a meeting.

古文：且天下者，高祖、太宗之天下，非北司之天下；陛下固九州天子，非北司之天子。
现代文：再说，天下，是高祖、太宗创立的天下，不是北司的天下；陛下，是全九州的天子，不是北司的天子。
English: Furthermore, the world is the world founded by Gaozu and Taizong, not the world of Hokusai; Your Majesty is the godson of all of Kyushu, not the godson of Hokusai.

古文：北司岂悉忠于南司？
现代文：北司难道全都比南司更忠心？
English: Are the Northern Division all more loyal than the Southern Division?

古文：廷臣岂无用于敕使？
现代文：廷臣难道都不如敕使有用？
English: Aren't courtiers more useful than magistrates?

古文：文宗时，宫中灾，左右巡使不到，皆被显责，安有天子播越，而宰相无所豫，群司百官弃若路人？
现代文：文宗时，宫中有灾，左右巡使不到，都受到严厉的斥责。哪有天子被迫流离失所，而宰相不参与弭祸、群司百官都弃若路人的？
English: At the time of Emperor Wenzong, there was a disaster in the palace, the left and right couriers could not get there, and they were all severely reprimanded. Which heavenly son was forced to be displaced, while the prime minister did not participate in the calamity, and hundreds of officials abandoned passers-by?

古文：已事诚不足谏，而来者冀可追也。 
现代文：过去的事已经过去了，但对未来，还得好好打算。 
English: The past is over, but we still have to plan for the future.

古文：疏入，令孜匿不奏，矫诏贬昭图嘉州司户参军，使人沈于蟆颐津。
现代文：奏疏送进去，田令孜隐匿不报告，却假冒皇帝名义下诏书贬孟昭图为嘉州司户参军，又派人将他淹死在蟆颐津。
English: When he was escorted in, Tian Lingzi hid and did not report, but issued an imperial edict in the name of the emperor, denouncing Meng Zhaotu for joining the army as the governor of Jiazhou, and sent someone to drown him in Shuijin.

古文：初，昭图知正言必见害，谓家隶曰： 大盗未殄，宦竖离间君臣，吾以谏为官，不可坐观覆亡，疏入必死，而能收吾骸乎？ 
现代文：在上奏疏之前，孟昭图心中完全明白说正义之言定会遭害，对他家的仆人说： 大盗未灭，阉竖离间君臣。我是谏官，不可坐视国家覆亡，我的奏疏送上去，我必死无疑，到那时，你能去为我收尸吗？ 
English: Before going to the funeral, Meng Zhaotu knew perfectly well in his heart that his words of justice would be harmed. He said to the servants of his family: "The great thief has not yet died, and there is a rift between princes and ministers. I am a eunuch, I cannot sit idly by and watch the country fall into ruin. If I go to the funeral, I will undoubtedly die. At that time, can you go and collect my body?"

古文：隶许诺，卒葬其尸。朝廷痛之。
现代文：仆人答应。至此，为他收敛埋葬，整个朝廷都为之痛惜。
English: The servant agreed. At this point, he was buried, and the entire court deplored it.

古文：贼平，令孜以王鐸为儒臣且无功，而首谋召沙陀者，杨复光也，欲归重北司，故罢鐸都统，以复光功第一。
现代文：黄巢乱平，田令孜因王铎是文臣，且无战功，而第一个提议召沙陀兵来助战的是杨复光，想归大功于北司，所以罢了王铎的都统职务，论杨复光为第一功。
English: Huang Chao was in turmoil, and there was no war achievement because Wang Xi was a scholar, while Yang Fuguang was the first to propose calling up Satow soldiers to help in the war. He wanted to give great credit to the Northern Division, so Wang Xi's capital unification position was eliminated, and Yang Fuguang was considered to be the first achievement.

古文：又忌复光且逼己，故薄其赏。
现代文：事后又担心杨复光会排挤自己，所以赏赐不厚，加官不高。
English: After the fact, he was worried that Yang Fuguang would push himself out, so the reward was not thick and the promotion was not high.

古文：自谓帷幄决胜，系王室轻重，出入倨甚。
现代文：田令孜自称他决策于帷幄之内，能取胜于千里之外，王室安危轻重，全系于他一身。所以出入时十分倨傲。
English: Tian Lingze claimed that his decision-making was inside the curtain, he could win over thousands of miles away, and the royal family's safety and security were all up to him. So he was very proud when he went in and out.

古文：会复光死，大喜，即罢复恭枢密使。
现代文：其时，杨复光死，田令孜去了一块心病，即刻罢了他弟弟杨复恭枢密使的官职。
English: At that time, Yang Fuguang died, and Tian Lingzi suffered a heart attack and immediately dismissed his brother Yang Fukong from the post of the imperial envoy.

古文：中人曹知悫者，富家子，颇沈鸷。贼在长安，知悫以清、浊二谷之人倚山为屯，不屈贼。
现代文：中人曹知悫，是个富家子弟，为人深沉且有勇谋，贼在长安时，曹知悫带清、浊两谷的人倚山屯守，不降贼人。
English: The middle man, Cao Zhisheng, was the son of a rich family. He was a deep-rooted person and had a courageous strategy. When the bandits were in Chang'an, Cao Zhisheng led the people from the Qing and Han dynasties to stay in the mountains and not surrender to the bandits.

古文：阴教士卒变衣服、言语与贼类者，夜入长安攻贼营，贼大惧。
现代文：暗中教一些口音同于贼人的士兵换上贼兵的衣服，夜里入长安袭击贼营，贼人大惊。
English: He secretly taught some soldiers with the same accent as the bandits to put on the bandits' clothes and enter Chang'an at night to attack the bandits' camp. The bandits were shocked.

古文：帝闻，赐金紫，擢内常侍。
现代文：皇帝听说后，赐给金鱼紫袍，升为内常侍。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he gave the goldfish a purple robe and promoted it to the status of a regular attendant.

古文：闻帝将还，因大言： 我且拥众大散关下，阅群臣可归者纳之。 
现代文：曹知悫听说皇帝要回京了，曾夸口说： 我将要列兵大散关下，审查群臣，只让那些可以回来的人入关。 
English: When Cao Zhisheng heard that the emperor was returning to Beijing, he boasted: "I will send soldiers to scatter the courtiers, examine the courtiers, and only allow those who can return to enter the courthouse."

古文：令孜谓然，密令王行瑜以邠州兵度嵯峨山，袭杀其众。
现代文：田令孜嘴上说好，可秘密派王行瑜率领州的兵马度过嵯峨山，袭击曹知悫，把他们全杀了。
English: Tian Lingzi said yes with his lips, but secretly sent Wang Xingyu to lead the state's soldiers and horses through the towering mountains, attacked Cao Zhisheng, and killed them all.

古文：由是益自肆，禁制天子不得有所主断。
现代文：从此，更加肆无忌惮，钳制天子，不让皇帝有自己的主张决断。
English: From then on, he became even more unscrupulous, tampering with the emperor and not allowing the emperor to make his own decisions.

古文：帝以其专，语左右辄流涕。
现代文：皇帝受其控制，与左右谈起就流泪饮泣。
English: The emperor was under his control, and he shed tears and wept when he talked to the left and right.

古文：复光部将鹿晏弘、王建等，以八都众二万取金、洋等州，进攻兴元，节度使牛顼奔龙州，晏弘自为留后，以建及张造、韩建等为部刺史。
现代文：杨复光的部将鹿晏弘、王建等人率领八都的人马二万，攻取了金州、洋州等地，进而攻打兴元，节度使牛顼逃奔龙州，鹿晏弘就自任留后，任王建、张造、韩建等人为都刺史。
English: Yang Fuguang's generals, Lu Jianhong, Wang Jian and others, led 20,000 men and horses from the eight capital cities and captured Jinzhou, Yangzhou and other places, and then attacked Xingyuan. Caution caused the cattle to flee to Longzhou. After Lu Jianhong stayed in his post, Ren Wang Jian, Zhang Zong, Han Jian and others made history.

古文：帝还，惧见讨，引兵走许州。
现代文：皇帝将回京，鹿晏弘怕遭讨伐，于是带领人马前去许州。
English: The emperor was about to return to Beijing, and Degu Sheng Hong was afraid of being attacked, so he led his men to Xuzhou.

古文：王建率义勇四军迎帝西县，复以建及韩建等主之，号 随驾五都。 
现代文：王建则率领了义勇四军到西县迎接圣驾。皇帝仍让王建及韩建等人带领他们的队伍，称之为 随驾五都 。
English: Wang Jian, on the other hand, led the four armies of volunteers to West County to welcome the Holy Carriage. The emperor still let Wang Jian and Han Jian and others lead their teams, calling them the Five Carriage Cities.

古文：令孜以复光故，才授诸卫将军，皆养为子。
现代文：田令孜因杨复光的缘故，才封他们为诸卫将军，且收他们为养子。
English: It was because of Yang Fuguang that Tian Lingzi made them generals of the Imperial Guards and adopted them as his sons.

古文：别募神策新军，以千人为都，凡五十四都，分左右为十军统之。
现代文：另行召神策新军，以一千人为一都，一共五十四都，分为左右十军统辖。
English: On the other hand, he called for a new army, with a thousand people as a capital, a total of fifty-four capitals, divided into left and right ten armies.

古文：又遣亲信觇诸镇，不附己者以罪除徙。
现代文：又派出亲信暗察各镇，有不附从自己的都找个罪名把他们除掉或贬谪。
English: He also sent his cronies to inspect every town and find a crime to get rid of or disparage anyone who didn't follow his lead.

古文：养子匡祐宣慰河中，王重荣厚为礼，基祐傲甚，举军怒，重荣因数令孜罪，责其无礼，监军和解乃去。
现代文：田令孜的养子匡去宣慰河中军，王重荣招待甚周，执礼甚恭，但匡极为倨傲，全军都被激怒。王重荣于是一一指责田令孜罪状，斥责匡的无礼，监军从中调解才罢。
English: Tian Lingzi's adopted son Kuang went to console the middle-of-the-river troops. Wang Chong Rong invited Kuang very often and gave him a very respectful salute, but Kuang was extremely proud, and the entire army was enraged. Wang Chong Rong then accused Tian Lingzi of guilt and reprimanded Kuang for his rudeness, and it was up to the supervisors to mediate.

古文：匡祐还，诉令孜，且劝图之。
现代文：匡回来后，将此事告诉田令孜，劝田令孜除掉王重荣。
English: After Kuang returned, he told the matter to Tian Lingzi and advised Tian Lingzi to get rid of Wang Chong Rong.

古文：令孜白以两盐池归盐铁使，即自兼两池榷盐使。
现代文：田令孜向皇帝奏请将安邑、解县两盐池交由盐铁使，收赋做军需。他自己则兼两池的榷盐使。
English: Tian Ling Zi reported to the emperor to request that the two salt ponds in An'yun and Xie County be handed over to the salt and iron envoy, and that he should receive the military pay. He himself was also the salt envoy of the two ponds.

古文：重荣不奉诏，表暴令孜十罪。
现代文：王重荣不肯奉诏，且上表检举田令孜十大罪状。
English: Wang Chong Rong refused to obey the edict, and the ten major charges against Tian Rongzi were listed on the indictment.

古文：令孜自将讨重荣，率邠宁硃玫、凤翔李昌符，合鄜、延、灵、夏等兵凡三万，壁沙苑。
现代文：田令孜乃自己带兵讨伐王重荣，征调了宁节度使朱玫、凤翔节度使李昌符，会同、延、灵、夏等州的兵共三万人，屯兵沙苑。
English: Tian Lingzi himself led an army to fight against Wang Chung Rong, and transferred Ning Jiedu to Zhu Mei, Feng Xiang Jiedu to Li Changfu, together with 30,000 soldiers from Yan, Ling, Xia and other states, and stationed in Shayuan.

古文：重荣说太原李克用连和，克用上书请诛令孜、玫，帝和之，不从。
现代文：王重荣劝说太原李克用联合打田令孜。李克用上书奏请诛杀田令孜、朱玫。皇帝从中调和，未能成功。
English: Wang Chong Rong persuaded Taiyuan Li Ke to use the joint attack on Tian Lingzi. Li Ke used the letter to request the killing of Tian Lingzi and Zhu Mei. The emperor tried to mediate, but was unsuccessful.

古文：大战沙苑，王师败。
现代文：两军在沙苑大战，王师败，朱玫逃回州。
English: The two armies fought in the Battle of Sha Yuan. Wang Shi was defeated, and Zhu Mei fled back to the state.

古文：玫走还邠州，与昌符皆耻为令孜用，还与重荣合。
现代文：朱玫与李昌符两人都耻于替田令孜效力，于是回兵与王重荣联手。
English: Both Zhu Mei and Li Changfu were ashamed of their efforts on behalf of Tian Lingzi, so Hui He and Wang Chong Rong joined forces.

古文：神策兵溃还，略所过皆尽。
现代文：神策军溃败而退，在回京路上一路抢掠，尽成废墟。
English: Shinsaka's army was routed and retreated. On the way back to Kyoto, they looted and pillaged their way to ruin.

古文：克用逼京师，令孜计穷，乃焚坊市，劫帝夜启开远门出奔。
现代文：李克用逼近京师，田令孜窘困无法，于是在坊市纵火，劫持皇帝夜里打开开远门出逃。
English: Li Ke used the approaching Beijing division, Tian Lingzi could not be embarrassed, so he set fire to the city of Fang, kidnapped the emperor in the night, opened the far door and fled.

古文：自贼破长安，火宫室、舍庐十七，后京兆王徽葺复粗完，至是令孜唱曰： 王重荣反。 
现代文：自从黄巢攻陷长安，烧毁宫室房舍十分之七。后来京兆尹王徽修治补葺才有个大概。这时田令孜喊叫 ：王重荣造反了。 
English: Since Huang Chao's invasion of Chang'an, seven-tenths of the palace buildings have been burned down. Later, King Jingzhao, Yin, and Wang Hui repaired and repaired only about one-tenth. At this time, Tian Lingzi shouted: Wang Chong Rong rebelled.

古文：命火宫城，唯昭阳、蓬莱三宫仅存。
现代文：下令焚烧宫城，致使仅有昭阳、蓬莱等三宫存留。
English: An order was issued to burn Miyagi, as a result of which only three palaces, including Shoyang and Penglai, remained.

古文：王建以义勇四军扈帝，夜乱牢水，遂次陈仓。
现代文：王建带领义勇四军护卫皇帝，夜里经牢水，到达陈仓休息。
English: Wang Jian led the four armies of volunteers to escort the emperor, and passed through the water in the night and arrived at Chen Cang to rest.

古文：克用还河中，玫畏克用且偪，与重荣连章请诛令孜，而驻凤翔。
现代文：李克用回到河中，朱玫害怕李克用威势相逼，与王重荣联合上书奏请诛杀田令孜，自己则兵驻凤翔。
English: Li Ke used to go back to the river, but Zhu Mei was afraid that Li Ke would use his power to force her, so he and Wang Chung Rong jointly wrote a letter asking Li Ke to kill Tian Lingzi, while he stationed his troops in Fengxiang.

古文：令孜请帝幸兴元，帝不从，令孜以兵入寝，逼帝夜出，郡臣无知者，宰相萧遘等皆不及从。
现代文：田令孜请皇帝去兴元，皇帝不肯。田令孜乃派兵夜里突入皇帝寝宫，劫驾而去。群臣无一人知晓，连宰相萧遘等人都未能跟随。
English: Tian Lingzi asked the emperor to go to Xingyuan, but the emperor refused. Tian Lingzi sent soldiers to break into the emperor's bedchamber at night and took him away. None of the courtiers knew, and even Prime Minister Xiao Wei and others could not follow.

古文：玫劝兴元节度使石君涉焚阁道，绝帝西意。
现代文：朱玫鼓励兴元节度使石君涉焚毁阁道，断绝皇帝西去的主意。
English: Zhu Mei encouraged the Xingyuan Festival to make Shijun wade in and burn down the pavilion road, and cut off the emperor's idea of going west.

古文：遘恶令孜劫质天子，生方镇之难，使玫进迎乘舆。
现代文：萧遘怨恨田令孜劫持天子，造成方镇的变乱，派朱玫去追还皇帝乘舆。
English: Xiao Yao resented Tian Lingzi's abduction of Tian Zi, which caused turmoil in Fangzhen, and sent Zhu Mei to recover Emperor Rongning.

古文：玫引兵追行在，败兴凤杨晟军，帝次梁、洋，稍引而南，玫兵及中营，左右被剽戮者不胜计。
现代文：朱玫领兵追赶，打败兴凤杨晟军。皇帝到达梁州、洋州，转向南行，朱玫兵追及中营，杀戮无数。
English: Zhu Mei led the troops to chase and defeat the troops of Xing Feng and Yang Hui. The emperor reached Liangzhou and Yangzhou and turned to the south. Zhu Mei's soldiers chased the middle camp and killed countless people.

古文：令孜惧人图己，蒙面以行。
现代文：田令孜怕有人谋害自己，蒙着脸前行。
English: Tian Lingzhe was afraid that someone was plotting to kill him, so he went ahead with his face covered.

古文：使王建长剑五百清道，囊传国玺授之。
现代文：沿途多有盗贼，派王建率领长剑手五百人前驱清道。皇帝将传国宝玺交给王建，要他背着。
English: There were many thieves along the way, so the emperor sent Wang Jian and five hundred swordsmen to clear the way. The emperor gave Wang Jian the national treasure and asked him to carry it on his back.

古文：次大散关，道险涩，帝危及难数矣。
现代文：一行人到达大散关，道路险阻，皇帝多次几乎遭难。
English: The party arrived at the Great Pass, the road was dangerous, and the emperor was almost in trouble several times.

古文：分军守灵壁，亢追兵。
现代文：于是分军屯守灵壁，抵御追兵。
English: As a result, a detachment of troops was stationed to guard the spiritual wall and fend off the pursuers.

古文：玫长驱蹑帝，帝以阁道毁，走它道，困甚，枕王建膝且寐，觉而饭，仅能至兴元。
现代文：朱玫长驱跟随追赶皇帝，皇帝因阁道被焚，改走别的路，十分疲惫。便枕在王建膝上，小睡片刻，醒后才能进食，最后到达兴元。
English: Zhu Mei Changfu followed the pursuing emperor. The emperor was very tired after being burned on the pavilion road and had to take a different route. He rested his pillow on Wang Jian's lap and took a short nap. He could only eat when he woke up, and finally arrived in Xingyuan.

古文：玫、重荣表诛令孜，安尉群臣。
现代文：朱玫、王重荣上表请诛田令孜，安慰群臣。
English: Zhu Mei and Wang Chung Rong went up to the table to ask Putian Lingzi to comfort the ministers.

古文：诏以令孜为剑南监军使，留不去。
现代文：皇帝下诏任田令孜为剑南监军使，但却不去赴任。
English: The emperor issued an edict appointing Tian Lingzi as the military inspector of Jiannan, but he did not go to the post.

古文：重荣请幸河中，令孜沮而止。
现代文：王重荣请皇帝去河中，田令孜百般阻挠，未能成行。
English: Wang Chong Rong invited the emperor to go to the middle of the river, but Tian Lingzhe obstructed him in every possible way, and he was unable to go.

古文：宰相遘率群臣在凤翔者表令孜颛国煽祸，惑小人计，交乱群帅，请诛之。
现代文：宰相萧遘率群臣中在凤翔的一起联名上书检举田令孜专国酿祸，用奸邪之计，挑拨将帅，致使乱起，请求依法诛之。
English: Prime Minister Xiao Jun and a group of ministers jointly wrote to Feng Xiang to accuse Tian Lingzi of bringing disaster to the country, using treacherous tactics to instigate generals, causing turmoil, and requesting that he be punished according to law.

古文：帝不及省，且诏重荣饷粮十五万斛给行在，重荣以令孜在，不奉命。
现代文：皇帝还未及审理，就诏令王重荣运饷粮十五万斛到行宫。王重荣因田令孜在那里，不肯奉命。
English: The emperor did not have time to hear the case, so he ordered Wang Chung Rong to transport 150,000 catties of grain to the imperial palace. Wang Chung Rong refused to obey the order because he was already there.

古文：玫乃奉嗣襄王煴即伪位。
现代文：朱玫则拥奉嗣襄王誰即帝位。
English: Zhu Mei, on the other hand, favors the imperial throne for his heir, King Xiang.

古文：玫败，帝乃得还京师。
现代文：直至朱玫败亡，皇帝才得重返京师。
English: It was not until the defeat of Zhu Mei that the emperor had to return to Beijing.

古文：始，帝入蜀，诸王徒步以从，寿王至斜谷不能进，令孜驱使前，王谢足且拘，得马可济。
现代文：当初，皇帝入蜀，诸王都徒步跟随。寿王走到斜谷走不动了，田令孜来督促他跟上来，寿王说足扭伤了，如有马那就能跟上。
English: At first, when the emperor entered Shu, all the kings followed on foot. When Shouwang walked to the valley, he could not walk. Tian Lingzhe urged him to keep up. Shouwang said that his foot was sprained, and if he had mana, he could keep up.

古文：令孜怒抶王，强之行，王耻之。
现代文：田令孜发怒，举鞭便打，强迫寿王行走。
English: Tian Lingzi became angry, raised his whip and beat him, forcing Shouwang to walk.

古文：及帝病，中外属寿王，令孜入候帝曰： 陛下记臣否？ 
现代文：寿王深以为耻。及至皇帝病了，朝内外都属意寿王继立，田令孜入宫侍候皇帝时问 ：陛下还记得臣么？ 
English: Shouwang was deeply ashamed. When the emperor fell ill, Shouwang succeeded to the throne. When Tian Lingzi entered the palace to wait for the emperor, he asked, "Does your majesty still remember your vassal?"

古文：帝直视不能语。
现代文：皇帝双眼盯着不语。
English: The emperor stared in silence.

古文：令孜自署剑南监军使，阅拱宸奉銮军自卫，昼夜驰入成都，固表解官求医药，诏可。
现代文：田令孜自封为剑南监军使，调天子的奉銮军自卫，昼夜兼程，驰入成都。上表只称辞官求医，诏令同意。
English: Tian Lingzi self-appointed as the Jiannan Supervisor of Military Envoys, transferred to the Fenghuang Army for self-defense, traveled day and night, and rushed into Chengdu. The above table only said that the dictionary officer sought medical treatment, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：俄削官爵，长流儋州，然犹依敬瑄不行。
现代文：不久被削官爵，流放儋州，但他仍依靠陈敬蠧而不走。
English: He was soon stripped of his title and exiled to Ganzhou, but he still relied on Chen Jingyao and did not leave.

古文：王即位，是为昭宗。
现代文：寿王即位，是为昭宗。
English: Shouwang's ascension to the throne was for Akimune.

古文：杨复恭代为观军容使，出王建为壁州刺史。
现代文：杨复恭代为观军容使，王建出京任壁州刺史。
English: Yang Fuxiong served as an envoy to observe the military parade, and Wang Jiande was sent to Beijing to serve as an envoy to Bishu.

古文：建取利州，自署防御使，因略定阆、邛、蜀、黎、雅等州，诏即置永平军，拜建节度使。
现代文：王建攻取了利州，自己设置防御使，接着攻下阆、邛、蜀、黎、雅等州，皇帝诏令即以邛、蜀、黎、雅四州设置永平军，任王建为节度使。
English: Wang Jian conquered Lizhou, set up his own defense force, and then conquered Shandong, Yunnan, Shandong, Shandong, Lijiang and Ya provinces. The emperor issued a decree to set up the Yongping Army in the four provinces of Shandong, Shandong, Lijiang and Ya, and appointed Wang Jian as the defense force.

古文：令孜谋与建连衡亢朝廷，且曰 吾子也 ，书召之。
现代文：田令孜想与王建联手对抗朝廷，还说： 王建，是我儿子。 写信召王建。
English: Tian Lingzhe wanted to join forces with Wang Jian to fight against the imperial court, and said, "Wang Jian is my son.

古文：建喜，将至，复却之。
现代文：王建很高兴，带领麾下前往。
English: Wang Jian was very pleased and led his subordinates to go.

古文：建怒，进围成都。
现代文：将到，陈敬暄不让进关。
English: Chen Jingyao will be denied entry.

古文：令孜登城谢建曰： 老夫久相厚，何见困？ 
现代文：王建很生气，将兵包围了成都，田令孜登上城楼，对王建说 ：老夫一向待你不薄，现在为何要困我？ 
English: Wang Jian was very angry. The soldiers surrounded Chengdu. Tian Lingze went up to the city tower and said to Wang Jian: "The old man has always treated you well, why should I be troubled now?"

古文：答曰： 父子恩，何敢忘！
现代文：王建说 ：父子之恩，我哪敢忘记！
English: Wang Jian said, "How dare I forget the kindness of my father and son!"

古文：顾父自绝朝廷，苟改图，则父子如初。 
现代文：只是父亲您自绝于朝廷，如能改过，我们依然父子如初。 
English: It's just that your father has recused himself from the imperial court. If we can change that, we'll still be father and son as we were before.

古文：令孜曰： 吾欲面计事。 
现代文：田令孜说 ：我要和你当面商议。 
English: Tian Lingzi said: I want to discuss with you face to face.

古文：建然许，令孜夜负印节授建，明日入成都，囚令孜碧鸡坊。
现代文：夜里，田令孜带了符印旌节交给王建。第二天，王建入成都，将田令孜囚禁在碧鸡坊。
English: In the evening, Tian Lingzi took the seal of the Dragon Boat Festival to Wang Jian. The next day, Wang Jian entered Chengdu and imprisoned Tian Lingzi in Bijichifang.

古文：始，右神策统军宋文通为诸军所疾，令孜因事召见，欲杀之。
现代文：以前，右神策统军宋文通遭诸军忌恨，田令孜因事召见他，打算就此杀了他。
English: In the past, Song Wentsong of the Right Divine Policy and Unification Army was hated by all the armies. Tian Lingzi summoned him because of this and planned to kill him.

古文：既见，乃欣然更养为子，名彦宾，即李茂贞也，故独上书雪其罪，诏为湖南监军。
现代文：及至见到他，很喜欢他收他为养子，名彦宾，也就是李茂贞。李茂贞上书为田令孜申诉无罪，诏令为湖南监军。
English: When I met him, I liked him very much for adopting me as his adopted son, my name is Yanbin, also known as Li Maozhen. Li Maozhen submitted a letter of appeal for Tian Lingzhe's innocence, and Dalirei for Hunan Supervision Army.

古文：凡二岁，与敬瑄同日死。
现代文：两年后，与陈敬暄同日死。
English: Two years later, he died on the same day as Chen Jingyao.

古文：临刑，裂帛为絙，授行刑者曰： 吾尝位十军容，杀我庸有礼！ 
现代文：临刑时，撕绸子搓为绳索，交给行刑者说： 我曾任十军容，杀我岂得无礼！ 
English: When he was about to be executed, he tore a piece of silk and made it into a rope and handed it to the executioner, saying: "I once commanded ten legions. It would be impolite to kill me!"

古文：因教缢人法，既死，而色不变。
现代文：且教缢杀人的方法，据说田令孜死后面色均不变。
English: He also taught them how to kill people, and it is said that after Tian Lingzi's death, all of them remained the same.

古文：乾宁中，诏复官爵。
现代文：乾宁年间，诏令恢复官爵。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianning, the imperial edict restored official titles.

