古文：桓公曰： 地数可得闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 利用地理条件的理财方法，可以讲给我听听么？ 
English: Huan Gong said: Can you tell me about the financial management method using geographical conditions?

古文：管子对曰： 地之东西二万八千里，南北二万六千里。
现代文：管仲回答说： 土地的东西广度二万八千里，南北长度二万六千里。
English: Guanzhong replied, "The east-west width of the land is 28,000 li, and the north-south length is 26,000 li.

古文：其出水者八千里，受水者八千里，出铜之山四百六十七山，出铁之山三千六百九山。
现代文：其中山脉八千里，河流八千里，出铜的矿山四百六十七处，出铁的矿山三干六百零九处。
English: Among them, there are eight thousand miles of mountains, eight thousand miles of rivers, 467 mines producing copper, and 3,609 mines producing iron.

古文：此之所以分壤树谷也，戈矛之所发，刀币之所起也。
现代文：所有这些，是人们分别土地种植粮食的条件，也是兵器和钱币的最初来源。
English: All these are the conditions for people to grow food separately from the land, and are also the original source of weapons and coins.

古文：能者有余，拙者不足。
现代文：善于利用这些条件的，财用有余；不善于利用的，财用不足。
English: If you are good at taking advantage of these conditions, you will have more than enough money; if you are not good at taking advantage of them, you will not have enough money.

古文：封于泰山，禅于梁父，封禅之王七十二家，得失之数，皆在此内。
现代文：古今封泰山、禅梁父的七十二代君王，他们得失的规律都在这里面。
English: The seventy-two generations of emperors from ancient times to the present who have held the title of Mount Tai and the title of Zen Liang father, all of their rules of gain and loss can be found here.

古文：是谓国用。 
现代文：这叫国家的财政。 
English: It's called the nation's finances.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓得失之数皆在此？ 
现代文：桓公说： 为什么说他们得失的规律都在这里？ 
English: Kanko said, "Why do you say that the patterns of their gains and losses are all here?"

古文：管子对曰： 昔者桀霸有天下而用不足，汤有七十里之薄而用有余。
现代文：管仲回答说： 从前，夏梁霸有全部天下而财用不足，商汤只有 薄 地七十里而财用有余。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Once upon a time, Xia Liangba had all the land in the world, but not enough money, and Shang Tang had only 70 li of land, but more money.

古文：天非独为汤雨菽粟，而地非独为汤出财物也。伊尹善通移、轻重、开阖、决塞，通于高下徐疾之策，坐起之费时也。
现代文：并不是天专为商场降下粮食，也不是地专为商汤长出财物，而是由于伊尹善于经营交换、善于轻重之术、善于由国家掌握经济的开闭与决塞，伊尹还精通物价高低和号令缓急的政策来集中操纵这些条件。
English: It is not that the heavens drop grain for the market, nor the earth grow wealth for the market, but because Yi Yin is good at managing exchanges, good at the art of weighting, and good at controlling the opening and closing of the economy by the state. Yi Yin is also proficient in the policy of high and low prices and ordering priorities to centrally manipulate these conditions.

古文：黄帝问于伯高曰： 吾欲陶天下而以为一家，为之有道乎？ 
现代文：从前，黄帝也曾问过伯高说： 我想把天下结合为一家，有办法么？ 
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor also asked Bogao: "I want to unite the world as one family, is there any way?"

古文：伯高对曰： 请刈其莞而树之，吾谨逃其蚤牙，则天下可陶而为一家。 
现代文：伯高回答说： 请除掉各地矿山上的杂草而树立国有的标记，我们努力铲除各地的武装势力，天下就可以合为一家。 
English: Burgau replied: "Please remove the weeds from the mines around the country and establish a national mark. We will work hard to eradicate armed forces around the country, and the world can unite as one."

古文：黄帝曰： 此若言可得闻乎？ 
现代文：黄帝说： 这个道理能进一步讲讲么？ 
English: Huang Di said: Can this principle be further explained?

古文：伯高对曰： 上有丹砂者下有黄金，上有慈石者下有铜金，上有陵石者下有铅、锡、赤铜，上有赭者下有铁，此山之见荣者也。
现代文：伯高回答说： 山地表面上有丹沙的下有金矿，表面有慈石的下有铜矿，表面有陵石的下有铅、锡、红铜，表面有赤土的下有铁矿，这都是山上出现矿苗的情况。
English: He replied, "On the surface of the mountain, there are gold ores under the sediment, copper ores under the cinnabar, lead, tin, and copper beneath the dolomite, and iron ores under the red soil. All of these are examples of mineral seedlings appearing on the mountain.

古文：苟山之见其荣者，君谨封而祭之。
现代文：如发现山有矿苗，国君就应当严格封山而布置祭祀。
English: If it is found that there are mineral seedlings on the mountain, the sovereign should strictly close the mountain and arrange sacrifices.

古文：距封十里而为一坛，是则使乘者下行，行者趋。
现代文：离封山十里之处造一个祭坛，使乘车到此者下车而过，步行到此者快步而行。
English: Build an altar ten miles away from the mountain, so that those who come by car can get off and walk past, and those who come on foot can walk quickly.

古文：若犯令者，罪死不赦。
现代文：违令者死罪不赦。
English: Violators of the order will be sentenced to death.

古文：然则与折取之远矣。 
现代文：这样人们就不敢随便开采了。 
English: In this way, people do not dare to mine casually.

古文：修教十年，而葛卢之山发而出水，金从之。蚩尤受而制之，以为剑、铠、矛、戟，是岁相兼者诸侯九。
现代文：然而黄帝行此禁令仅在第十个年头，葛卢山山洪过后，露出金属矿石，竟被蚩尤接管而控制起来，蚩尤制造了剑、销、矛、戟，这年与九个诸侯国发生兼并战争。
English: However, it was only in the tenth year that the Yellow Emperor implemented this ban. After the mountain torrents in the Qilu Mountains, metal ores were exposed, but they were actually taken over and controlled by Qiu You. Qiu You made swords, pins, spears, and halberds. In this year, there was an annexation war with nine principalities.

古文：故天下之君顿戟一怒，伏尸满野。
现代文：雍狐山山洪过后，露出金属矿石，也被蚩尤接管而控制起来，蚩尤制造了著名的戟和戈，这年与十二个诸侯国发生兼并战争。
English: After the mountain torrents of Yongfushan, metal ores were exposed, and it was also taken over and controlled by Xinyu. Xinyu made the famous war of annexation, and this year there was a war of annexation with twelve principalities.

古文：此见戈之本也。 桓公问于管子曰： 请问天财所出？地利所在？ 
现代文：因此，天下各国国君顿戟一怒，形成伏尸遍野的局面，这种矿权分散的结果简直是大战的根源。 桓公问管仲说： 请再谈谈天然的资源从那里来？地下的财利在那里？ 
English: As a result, the sovereigns of all countries around the world were suddenly enraged, creating a situation of dead bodies everywhere. The result of this dispersion of mineral rights was simply the root cause of the Great War. Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: Please talk about where the natural resources come from? Where is the underground wealth?

古文：管子对曰： 山上有赭者其下有铁，上有铅者其下有银。
现代文：管仲回答说： 山地表面上有赤土的下有铁矿，表面有铅的下有银矿。
English: Guanzhong replied, "If there is red soil on the surface of the mountain, there will be iron ore underneath, and if there is lead on the surface, there will be silver ore underneath.

古文：一曰： 上有铅者其下有鉒银，上有丹砂者其下有鉒金，上有慈石者其下有铜金。 
现代文：另一种说法是： 表面有铅的下有主银，表面有丹沙的下有鉒金，表面有慈石的下有铜。 
English: Another way of saying this is: If the surface has lead, the main silver will be under it, if the surface has sand, the main gold will be under it, and if the surface has cinnamon, the main copper will be under it.

古文：此山之见荣者也。
现代文：这些都是山上出现矿苗的情况。
English: These are all cases of mineral seedlings appearing on the mountain.

古文：苟山之见荣者，谨封而为禁。
现代文：如发现山有矿苗，国家就应当严格封山而禁人出入。
English: If it is found that there are mineral seedlings on the mountain, the state should strictly close the mountain and prohibit people from entering.

古文：有动封山者，罪死而不赦。
现代文：有破坏封山的死罪不赦。
English: There is no pardon for the capital crime of damaging the mountain.

古文：有犯令者，左足入、左足断；右足入，右足断。
现代文：有犯令的，左脚踏进，砍掉左脚；有脚踏进，砍掉有脚。
English: If there is an order, step in with your left foot and cut off your left foot; step in with your foot and cut off your foot.

古文：然则其与犯之远矣。
现代文：这样人们就不敢触犯禁令了。
English: This way, people will not dare to violate the ban.

古文：此天财地利之所在也。 
现代文：因为这正是天地财利资源之所在。 
English: Because this is exactly where the world's financial resources lie.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 以天财地利立功成名于天下者谁子也？ 
现代文：桓公又问管仲说： 以利用天地财利资源立功成名于天下的，有谁？ 
English: Kan also asked Guanzhong, "Who has made a name for themselves in the world by exploiting the resources of heaven and earth?

古文：管子对曰： 文武是也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 周文王和周武王。 桓公说： 这话是什么涵义？ 
English: Guanzhong replied, "King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu are not the same." Huan Gong said, "What is the meaning of this?"

古文：桓公曰： 此若言何谓也？ 管子对曰： 夫玉起于牛氏边山，金起于汝汉之右洿，珠起于赤野之末光。
现代文：管仲回答说： 玉产在牛氏的边山，黄金产在汝河、汉水的右面洼地一带，珍珠产在赤野的末光一带。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Jade is produced in the mountains on the outskirts of Niu, gold is produced in the right-hand depressions of the Ye River and Han River, and pearls are produced in the twilight area of Akano.

古文：此皆距周七千八百里，其涂远而至难。
现代文：这些东西部与周朝中央相距七千八百里，路远而难得。
English: The distance between these eastern and western parts and the central part of Zhou Dynasty is 7,800 miles, which is a long way and rare.

古文：故先王各用于其重，珠玉为上币，黄金为中币，刀布为下币。
现代文：所以先王区别它们的贵重程度，规定珠玉为上等货币，黄金为中等货币，刀布为下等货币。
English: Therefore, the first king distinguished their degree of preciousness, stipulating that jewels were superior currency, gold was medium currency, and cloth was inferior currency.

古文：令疾则黄金重，令徐则黄金轻。
现代文：国家号令急就会导致金价上涨，号令缓则金价下跌。
English: If the state issues an urgent order, the price of gold will rise. If the order is delayed, the price of gold will fall.

古文：先王权度其号令之徐疾，高下其中币而制下上之用，则文武是也。 
现代文：先王能够考虑号令的缓急，调节黄金价格的高低，而控制下币刀布和上币珠玉的作用，那就是周文王和周武王了。 
English: Zhou Wenwang and Zhou Wuwang were able to consider the priority of the order, adjust the level of the gold price, and control the role of the lower coin cloth and the upper coin jewel.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 吾欲守国财而毋税于天下，而外因天下，可乎？ 
现代文：桓公对管仲说： 我要保住国内资源，不被天下各国捞取，反而要外取于天下，可以么？ 
English: Huan Gong said to Guanzhong: I want to keep domestic resources, not to be exploited by all countries in the world, but to be exploited by all countries in the world, is that okay?

古文：管子对曰： 可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 可以。
English: Guanzhong replied: Yes.

古文：夫水激而流渠，令疾而物重。
现代文：水流激荡则流势湍急，征收的号令急则物价上升。
English: When the water is turbulent, the current is rapid, and when it is urgent to collect, the price will rise.

古文：先王理其号令之徐疾，内守国财而外因天下矣。 
现代文：先王就是掌握号令的缓急，对内据守国财而对外取之于天下的。 
English: The late king was the master of the order of priority, protecting the national wealth internally and taking it from the outside world.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 其行事奈何？ 
现代文：桓公继续问管仲说： 他们是怎么做的？ 
English: Huan Gong continued to ask Guanzhong: How did they do it?

古文：管子对曰： 夫昔者武王有巨桥之粟贵籴之数。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 从前，武王曾用过提高巨桥仓粮食价格的办法。 
English: Guanzhong replied: In the past, King Wu had used the method of raising the grain price of the huge bridge warehouse.

古文：桓公曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 做法如何？ 
English: Kanko said, "What's the procedure?"

古文：管子对曰： 武王立重泉之戍，令曰： 民自有百鼓之粟者不行。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 武王故意设立了一种 重泉 的兵役，下令说： 百姓自家储粮一百鼓的，可以免除此役。 
English: Guanzhong replied: King Wu deliberately set up a heavy-handed military service, ordering: People who have a hundred drums of grain stored at home can be exempted from this service.

古文：民举所最粟以避重泉之戍，而国谷二什倍，巨桥之粟亦二什倍。
现代文：百姓便尽其所有来收购粮食以逃避这个兵役，从而国内粮价上涨二十倍，巨桥仓的粮价也随之贵二十倍。
English: The people did everything they could to buy grain to avoid this military service, so that the domestic grain price rose twenty times, and the grain price of the huge bridge warehouse was also twenty times more expensive.

古文：武王以巨桥之粟二什倍而市缯帛，军五岁毋籍衣于民。以巨桥之粟二什倍而衡黄金百万，终身无籍于民。
现代文：武王用此二十倍的巨桥仓粮食收入购买丝帛，军队可以五年不向民间征收军服；用此项收入购买黄金百万斤，那就终身不必向百姓收税了。
English: King Wu used this twenty-fold huge bridge warehouse grain income to buy silk cocoons, the army can not levy military uniforms from the people for five years; use this income to buy a million catties of gold, then there is no need to collect taxes from the people for life.

古文：准衡之数也。 
现代文：这就是 准衡 的理财之法。 
English: This is Quanheng's method of financial management.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 今亦可以行此乎？ 
现代文：桓公接着问： 现在也可以照此办理么？ 
English: Prince Kan went on to ask: Can this also be done now?

古文：管子对曰： 可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 可以。
English: Guanzhong replied: Yes.

古文：夫楚有汝汉之金，齐有渠展之盐，燕有辽东之煮。
现代文：楚国有汝、汉所产的黄金，齐国有渠展所产的盐，燕国有辽东所煮的盐。
English: Chu has the gold produced by Ru and Han, Qi has the salt produced by Quzhan, and Yan has the salt boiled by Liaodong.

古文：此三者亦可以当武王之数。
现代文：运用这三者也可以相当于武王的理财之法。
English: The use of these three can also be equivalent to King Wu's method of financial management.

古文：十口之家，十人咶盐，百口之家，百人咶盐。
现代文：一个十口之家就有十人吃盐，百口之家就有百人吃盐。
English: In a family of ten, ten people eat salt, and in a family of a hundred, a hundred people eat salt.

古文：凡食盐之数，一月丈夫五升少半，妇人三升少半，婴儿二升少半。
现代文：关于吃盐的数量，每月成年男子近五升，成年女子近三升，小孩近二升。
English: With regard to the amount of salt consumed, adult men consume almost five litres per month, adult women almost three litres, and children almost two litres.

古文：盐之重，升加分耗而釜五十，升加一耗而釜百，升加十耗而釜千。
现代文：如每升盐价提高半钱，每釜就增加五十钱；每升提高一钱，每釜就是百钱；每升提高十钱，每釜就是干钱。
English: If the price of salt is raised by half a penny per litre, each pot will increase by fifty cents; if it is raised by a penny per litre, each pot will be a hundred dollars; if it is raised by ten dollars per litre, each pot will be dry money.

古文：君伐菹薪煮泲水为盐，正而积之三万钟，至阳春请籍于时。 
现代文：君上若下令砍柴煮盐，征集起来使之达三万钟，阳春一到，就可以在盐的 时价 上取得收入了。 
English: If the ruler ordered to cut wood to boil salt, and collect it to make it up to thirty thousand bells, as soon as the spring arrived, they could earn income on the current price of salt.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓籍于时？ 
现代文：桓公说： 何谓在盐的时价上取得收入？ 
English: Kanko said: What does it mean to earn income from the current price of salt?

古文：管子曰： 阳春农事方作，令民毋得筑垣墙，毋得缮冢墓；丈夫毋得治宫室，毋得立台榭；北海之众毋得聚庸而煮盐。
现代文：管仲回答说： 在阳春农事开始时，命令百姓不许筑墙垣，修坟墓，大夫不可营建宫室台树，同时也命令北海居民一律不准雇人煮盐。
English: Guanzhong replied: At the beginning of the Yangchun Agricultural Revolution, the people were ordered not to build walls and repair graves, and the doctors were not allowed to build palatial buildings. At the same time, the Beihai residents were ordered not to hire anyone to boil salt.

古文：然盐之贾必四什倍。
现代文：那么，盐价必然上涨四十倍。
English: Then the price of salt will rise forty times.

古文：君以四什之贾，修河、济之流，南输梁、赵、宋、卫、濮阳。
现代文：君上用这涨价四十倍的食盐，沿着黄河、济水流域，南运到梁、赵、宋、卫和濮阳等地出卖。
English: The emperor used the salt, which had increased in price by forty times, to transport it south along the Yellow River and the Jishui River basin to Liang, Zhao, Song, Wei and Fenyang, where it was sold.

古文：恶食无盐则肿，守圉之本，其用盐独重。
现代文：粗食无盐则人们浮肿，保卫自己国家，用盐特别重要。
English: Rough food without salt makes people puffy. To defend one's country, salt is especially important.

古文：君伐菹薪煮泲水以籍于天下，然则天下不减矣。 
现代文：君上通过砍柴煮盐以取得收入于天下，那么，天下就无法削弱我们了。 
English: Your Excellency earns income by chopping wood and boiling salt for the world, so the world cannot weaken us.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 吾欲富本而丰五谷，可乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 我想富国而只是丰产粮食，可以么？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: I want to be a rich country, but only produce abundant grain, is that okay?

古文：管子对曰： 不可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 不可以。
English: The pipe answered, "No."

古文：夫本富而财物众，不能守，则税干天下；五谷兴丰，巨钱而天下贵，则税于天下。
现代文：国富而财物繁多，不能经营掌握，则将被天下各国捞取；粮食丰产，我们贱而别国贵，也将被天下各国捞取。
English: If a country is rich and has a lot of wealth, but cannot manage and control it, it will be exploited by all countries in the world; if a country has abundant grain, but we are cheap and other countries are expensive, it will also be exploited by all countries in the world.

古文：然则吾民常为天下虏矣。
现代文：那样，我国百姓就成为天下各国经虏掠的对象了。
English: In that case, our people will become the object of plunder by all countries in the world.

古文：夫善用本者，若以身济于大海，观风之所起。天下高则高，天下下则下。
现代文：善于治国的人，就象大海行船一样，观察风势的起源，天下各国粮价高我们就高，粮价低我们就低。
English: Those who are good at governing the country, just like sailing on the sea, observe the origin of the wind. If the grain prices of all countries in the world are high, we are high, and if the grain prices are low, we are low.

古文：天下高我下，则财利税于天下矣。 
现代文：如果天下各国粮价高而我们独低，我们的财利就将被天下各国捞取去了。 
English: If the grain prices of all countries in the world are high and we are the only ones with low prices, our profits will be taken by all countries in the world.

古文：桓公问于管子曰， 事尽于此乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 理财之事就到此为止了么？ 
English: Kan Gong asked Guanzhong: Is this the end of the financial management?

古文：管子对曰： 未也。
现代文：管伸回答说： 没有。
English: Guan Sheng replied, "No."

古文：夫齐衢处之本，通达所出也，游子胜商之所道。
现代文：齐国是一地处交通要冲的国家，是四通八达的地方，从而是游客富商的必经之处。
English: Qi Province is a country that is located in the middle of the traffic, it is a place that can be reached from all directions, so it is a must-visit place for tourists and rich businessmen.

古文：人求本者，食吾本粟，因吾本币，骐骥黄金然后出。
现代文：外人来到我国，吃我们的粮食，用我们的钱币，然后，好马和黄金也就提供出来了。
English: Foreigners came to our country, ate our grain, used our money, and then good horses and gold were provided.

古文：令有徐疾，物有轻重，然后天下之宝壹为我用。
现代文：我们掌握号令要有缓有急，掌握物价要有高有低，然后天下的宝物都可以为我所用。
English: We must grasp the urgency of the command, grasp the high and low prices, and then the treasures of the world can be used by me.

古文：善者用非有，使非人。 
现代文：善治国者，可以使用不是他自己所有的东西，也可以役使不是他自己管辖的臣民。 
English: A good statesman can use what he does not own, and can serve subjects he does not govern.

