古文：夫人之常数，太阳常多血少气，少阳常少血多气，阳明常多气多血，少阴常少血多气，厥阴常多血少气，太阴常多气少血，此天之常数。
现代文：人体各经脉气血多少，是有一定的正常数量比例的：太阳经脉常多血少气，少阳经脉常少血多气，阳明经脉常多气多血，少阴经脉常少血多气，厥阴经脉常多血少气，太阴经脉常多气少血，这是先天给予正常人的气血数量比例。
English: The amount of qi and blood in each meridian of the human body has a certain normal quantity ratio: the solar meridian often has more blood and less gas, the yang meridian often has less blood and more gas, the yang-ming meridian often has more gas and more blood, the yin-yang meridian often has less blood and more gas, the yang-yin meridian often has more blood and less gas, and the yin-yang meridian often has more gas and less blood. This is the proportion of qi and blood given to normal people by nature.

古文：足太阳与少阴为表里，少阳与厥阴为表里，阳明与太阴为表里，是为足阴阳也。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经与足少阴肾经互为表里，足少阳胆经与足厥阴肝经互为表里，足阳明胃经与足太阴脾经互为表里，这是足三阳经和足三阴经之间的表里配合关系。
English: The foot-solar-bladder meridian and the foot-lower-yin-kidney meridian are both inside the surface, the foot-lower-yang-bile meridian and the foot-jujube-yin-liver meridian are both inside the surface, and the foot-solar-bright-stomach meridian and the foot-too-shiny-spleen meridian are both inside the surface. This is the inside-surface coordination relationship between the foot-solar-yang meridian and the foot-solar-yin meridian.

古文：手太阳与少阴为表里，少阳与心主为表里，阳明与太阴为表里，是为手之阴阳也。
现代文：手太阳小肠经和手少阴心经互为表里，手少阳三焦经与手厥阴心包经互为表里，手阳明大肠经与手太阴肺经互为表里，这是手三阳经和手三阴经之间的表里配合关系。
English: The hand-sun small intestine meridian and the hand-small yin heart meridian are inside each other, the hand-small yang three-focal meridian and the hand-small yin heart meridian are inside each other, and the hand-small yang large intestine meridian and the hand-small yin lung meridian are inside each other. This is the inside-outside cooperation relationship between the hand-small yang three-focal meridian and the hand-small yang three-focal meridian.

古文：今知手足阴阳所苦，凡治病必先去其血，乃去其所苦，伺之所欲，然后泻有余，补不足。
现代文：当知道了疾病发生在十二经脉的那一条经脉，凡是治疗疾病的针刺方法就是，必须先刺出其血，以减轻其病苦，再诊察其病情的虚实，然后泻其有余之实邪，补其不足的气血。
English: When you know the meridian in which the disease occurs in the twelve meridians, any acupuncture method for treating the disease is to first prick out the blood to alleviate the suffering of the disease, and then diagnose the truth and falsity of the disease, and then relieve the excess real evil and replenish the insufficient qi and blood.

古文：欲知背俞，先度其两乳间，中折之，更以他草度去半已，即以两隅相拄也。乃举以度其背，令其一隅居上，齐脊大椎，两隅在下，当其下隅者，肺之俞也。
现代文：要想知道背部五脏俞穴的位置，先用草梗一根，度量两乳之间的距离，再从正中对折，另一草梗与前草梗同样长度，折掉一半之后，拿来支撑第一根草梗的两头，就成了一个等腰三角形，然后用它丈量病人的背部，使其一个角朝上，和脊背部大椎穴相平，另外两个角在下，其下边左右两个角所指部位，就是肺俞穴所在。
English: If you want to know the location of the five viscera in the back, first use a grass stalk to measure the distance between the two breasts, then fold it in half from the middle. The other grass stalk is the same length as the front grass stalk. After folding it in half, use it to support the two ends of the first grass stalk to form an isosceles triangle. Then use it to measure the patient's back, so that one corner faces up and is level with the large vertebral hole in the dorsal spine, the other two corners are at the bottom, and the parts indicated by the two corners on the lower left and right are where the alveoli are located.

古文：复下一度，心之俞也。复下一度，左角肝之俞也，右角脾之俞也。
现代文：再把上角移下一度，放在两肺俞连线的中点，则其下左右两角的位置是心俞的部位。再移下一度，左角是肝俞，右角是脾俞。
English: Move the upper corner down one more time and place it at the midpoint of the connection between the two pulmonary fistulas, then the position of the lower left and right corners is the part of the heart fistula. Move it down one more time and the left corner is the liver fistula and the right corner is the spleen fistula.

古文：复下一度，肾之俞也。
现代文：再移下一度，左右两角是肾俞。
English: Move down one more time, and the left and right corners are the renal pelvis.

古文：是谓五脏之俞，灸刺之度也。
现代文：这就是五脏俞穴的部位，为针刺、艾炙的取穴方法。
English: This is the site of the five viscera, and is the method of acupuncture and aconite.

古文：形乐志苦，病生于脉，治之以灸刺。
现代文：形体安逸但精神苦闷的人，病多发生在血脉，治疗时宜用针刺或艾炙。
English: People who are physically comfortable but mentally distressed, the disease mostly occurs in the blood, and it is appropriate to use acupuncture or aconite when treating.

古文：形乐志乐，病生于肉，治之以针石。
现代文：形体安逸而精神也愉快的人，病多发生在肌肉，治疗时宜用针刺或砭石刮痧。
English: People who are physically comfortable and mentally happy, the disease mostly occurs in the muscles, and it is advisable to use acupuncture or flint scraping when treating.

古文：形苦志乐，病生于筋，治之以熨引。
现代文：形体劳苦但精神很愉快的人，病多发生在筋膜，治疗时宜用热敷或导引。
English: For people who are physically exhausted but mentally happy, the disease mostly occurs in the fascia, and it is advisable to use heat or guidance during treatment.

古文：形苦志苦，病生于咽嗌，治之以百药。
现代文：形体劳苦而精神又很苦恼的人，病多发生在咽喉部，治疗时宜用药物。
English: For people who are physically exhausted and mentally distressed, the disease mostly occurs in the throat, and medication should be used for treatment.

古文：形数惊恐，经络不通，病生于不仁，治之以按摩醪药。
现代文：屡受惊恐的人，经络因气机紊乱而不通畅，病多为麻木不仁，治疗时宜用按摩和药酒。
English: People who are often frightened, the meridians are not smooth due to the disorder of the qi machine, and the disease is mostly insensitive. Massage and medicinal liquor should be used for treatment.

古文：是谓五形志也。刺阳明，出血气。刺太阳，出血恶气。刺少阳，出气恶血。刺太阴，出气恶血。刺少阴，出气恶血。刺厥阴，出血恶气也。
现代文：刺阳明经，可以出血出气；刺太阳经，可以出血，而不宜伤气；刺少阳经，只宜出气，不宜出血；刺太阴经，只宜出气，不宜出血；刺少阴经，只宜出气，不宜出血；刺厥阴经，只宜出血，不宜伤气。
English: If you prick the Yang Mingjing, you can bleed out the qi; if you prick the Sun Jing, you can bleed out the qi, but you should not hurt the qi; if you prick the Shao Yangjing, you should only bleed out the qi, but not the blood; if you prick the Ta Yinjing, you should only bleed out the qi, but not the blood; if you prick the Shao Yinjing, you should only bleed out the qi, but not the blood; if you prick the Shao Yinjing, you should only bleed out the qi, but not the blood; if you prick the

