古文：郑和，云南人，世所谓三保太监者也。
现代文：郑和，云南人，即世人所称的三保太监。
English: Zheng He, a native of Yunnan, is known to the world as the Three Imperial Guards Eunuch.

古文：初事燕王于藩邸，从起兵有功。累擢太监。
现代文：最初在燕王府侍候燕王，后来随从起兵有功，累升为太监。
English: At first, he waited for King Yan at the palace of King Yan. Later, he was promoted to eunuch for his meritorious service in the army.

古文：成祖疑惠帝亡海外，欲踪迹之，且欲耀兵异域，示中国富强。
现代文：成祖怀疑惠帝流亡海外，想寻找他的踪迹，并想向海外炫耀武力，显示中国的富强。
English: Cheng Zu suspected that Hui Di was in exile overseas, and wanted to find his trace, and wanted to show off force overseas, showing China's wealth and strength.

古文：永乐三年六月，命和及其侪王景弘等通使西洋。
现代文：永乐三年六月命郑和与搭档王景弘等人出使西洋。
English: In June of the third year of Yongle, Zheng He and his partner Wang Jinghong were sent to the West.

古文：将士卒二万七千八百余人，多赍金币。造大舶，修四十四丈、广十八丈者六十二。
现代文：他率领士卒二万七千八百余人，带上许多金币，同时为此建造了六十二艘长四十四丈、宽十八丈的大船。
English: He led more than twenty-seven thousand eight hundred soldiers and soldiers, and brought a lot of gold coins. At the same time, he built sixty-two large ships with a length of forty-four meters and a width of eighteen meters.

古文：自苏州刘家河泛海至福建，复自福建五虎门扬帆，首达占城，以次遍历诸番国，宣天子诏，因给赐其君长，不服则以武慑之。
现代文：他们从苏州刘家河出发，泛海到福建，又从福建五虎门扬帆启航，首先到达占城，以后逐个走遍各个番国，向他们宣布天子的诏令，并向他们的君长赐赠礼物，如有不服便以武力相威胁。
English: They set out from Suzhou's Liu Jiahe, sailed across the sea to Fujian, and set sail from Fujian's Wuhumen. They first reached the city of Zhan, and then traveled through each of the five provinces, announcing to them the edict of the Son of Heaven, giving gifts to their rulers, and threatening them with force if they did not comply.

古文：五年九月，和等还，诸国使者随和朝见。和献所俘旧港酋长。
现代文：五年九月，郑和等人回国，各番国的使者也随郑和来京朝见，郑和献上俘虏的旧港酋长，皇上非常高兴，分别给予了封赏。
English: In September of the fifth year, Zheng He and others returned to China, and the emissaries of various countries also followed Zheng He to Beijing to meet the imperial court. Zheng He presented the captives of the old port chiefs. The emperor was very pleased and gave the reward separately.

古文：帝大悦，爵赏有差。旧港者，故三佛齐国也，其酋陈祖义，剽掠商旅。
现代文：旧港即原来的三佛齐国。酋长陈祖义，抢掠商旅。
English: The old port is the original Three Buddhas of Qi. Chief Chen Zuyi, robbing merchants.

古文：和使使招谕，祖义诈降，而潜谋邀劫。和大败其众，擒祖义，献俘，戮于都市。
现代文：郑和派使者去招安，陈祖义诈降，而阴谋抢劫郑和船队，郑和将他们打得大败，擒获陈祖义，将他押至朝廷，斩首。
English: Zheng He sent an envoy to invite An, Chen Zuyi betrayed and plotted to rob Zheng He's fleet, Zheng He defeated them, captured Chen Zuyi, sent him to the imperial court, and beheaded him.

古文：六年九月，再往锡兰山。
现代文：六年九月郑和再往锡兰山。
English: In September, Zheng He went to Mount Ceylon again.

古文：国王亚烈苦柰儿诱和至国中，索金币，发兵劫和舟。
现代文：国王亚烈苦柰儿将郑和引诱到国中，索要金币，并发兵抢劫郑和船只。
English: King Yarekutiel lured Zheng He into the country, demanded gold coins, and sent soldiers to rob Zheng He's ships.

古文：和觇贼大众既出，国内虚，率所统二千余人，出不意攻破其城，生擒亚烈苦柰儿及其妻子官属。
现代文：郑和侦察到敌人大兵已出，国内空虚，便率领二千多人，出其不意地攻破其都城，生擒亚烈苦柰儿和他的妻儿官属。
English: Zheng He detected that the enemy soldiers had left and the country was empty, so he led more than two thousand people to unexpectedly break through his capital city, and killed his son and his wife and children.

古文：劫和舟者闻之，还自救，官军复大破之。
现代文：去抢劫郑和船只的人听到消息后，退回自救，又被官军杀得大败。
English: When the people who went to rob Zheng He's ship heard the news, they retreated to save themselves, and were defeated by the government army.

古文：九年六月献俘于朝。帝赦不诛，释归国。
现代文：九年六月向朝廷献俘，皇上赦免不杀，将他们释放回国。
English: In June of the ninth year, he offered the captives to the imperial court, and the emperor pardoned them without killing them and released them back to the country.

古文：是时，交阯已破灭，郡县其地，诸邦益震詟，来者日多。
现代文：这时候，交趾已被破灭，朝廷在那里设置郡县，各邦国更加震恐，来朝见的一天比一天多。
English: At this time, the friendship has been broken, the imperial court has set up counties there, the states are more shocked, and there is more than one day to see the DPRK.

古文：十年十一月，复命和等往使，至苏门答剌。
现代文：十年十一月又命郑和等人出使，到苏门答剌。
English: In November of the tenth year, Zheng He and others were ordered to go to Sumen to reply.

古文：其前伪王子苏干剌者，方谋弑主自立，怒和赐不及己，率兵邀击官军。和力战，追擒之喃渤利，并俘其妻子，以十三年七月还朝。帝大喜，赉诸将士有差。
现代文：其前伪王子苏干剌，刚刚阴谋杀死国王自立，他恨郑和没有给他赏赐，率兵迎击官军，郑和率军奋战，追到喃渤利抓住了苏干剌，并俘获了他的妻子儿女。十三年七月回国，皇上非常高兴，给各将士分别进行了奖赏。
English: The former pseudo-prince Su Gansu, who had just conspired to kill the king, stood up for himself. He hated Zheng He for not giving him a reward. He led the troops to meet the official army. Zheng He led the army to fight. He chased Muranyili, caught Su Gansu, and captured his wife and children. In July of the thirteenth year, the emperor returned to China, very happy, and rewarded each soldier separately.

古文：十四年冬，满剌加、古里等十九国咸遣使朝贡，辞还。
现代文：十四年冬，满剌加、古里等十九国都派使者来朝贡，不久，辞归各自的番国。
English: In the winter of the fourteenth year, nineteen countries including Manchukuo and Guri sent envoys to pay tribute, and soon they resigned to their respective vassal states.

古文：复命和等偕往，赐其君长。
现代文：皇上又命郑和等人随他们前往，赏赐其君长。
English: The emperor also ordered Zheng He and others to go with them to reward their monarch.

古文：十七年七月还。
现代文：十七年七月回国。
English: He returned to Japan in July 1917.

古文：十九年春复往，明年八月还。
现代文：十九年春又前往，第二年八月回。
English: He visited again in the spring of 1919, and again in August of the following year.

古文：二十二年正月，旧港酋长施济孙请袭宣慰使职，和赍敕印往赐之。比还，而成祖已晏驾。
现代文：二十二年正月，旧港酋长施济孙请承袭宣慰使职位，郑和带上赐印前往赐封，等他回来时，成祖已逝世了。
English: In the first month of the 22nd year, the chief of the old port, Shi Jisun, asked to inherit the position of the consoler, Zheng He took the seal to the seal, and when he returned, Cheng Zu had passed away.

古文：洪熙元年二月，仁宗命和以下番诸军守备南京。
现代文：洪熙元年二月，仁宗命郑和用出使番国的部队守备南京。
English: In February of the first year of Hongxi, Zheng He sent troops to defend Nanjing.

古文：南京设守备，自和始也。
现代文：南京设守备即从郑和开始。
English: Nanjing set up defensive preparations, starting with Zheng He.

古文：宣德五年六月，帝以践阼岁久，而诸番国远者犹未朝贡，于是和、景弘复奉命历忽鲁谟斯等十七国而还。
现代文：宣德五年六月，皇上因登基多年，而番国中较远的还没来朝贡，于是郑和、王景弘又奉命出访忽鲁谟斯等十七国而还。
English: In June of the 5th year of Xuande, the emperor had been on the throne for many years, and the more distant of the vassal states had not yet come to pay tribute, so Zheng He and Wang Jinghong were ordered to visit 17 countries such as Hurrumuth.

古文：和经事三朝，先后七奉使，所历占城、爪哇、真腊、旧港、暹罗、古里、满剌加、渤泥、苏门答剌、阿鲁、柯枝、大葛兰、小葛兰、西洋琐里、琐里、加异勒、阿拨把丹、南巫里、甘把里、锡兰山、喃渤利、彭亨、急兰丹、忽鲁谟斯、比剌、溜山、孙剌、木骨都束、麻林、剌撒、祖法儿、沙里湾泥、竹步、榜葛剌、天方、黎伐、那孤儿，凡三十余国。所取无名宝物，不可胜计，而中国耗废亦不赀。
现代文：郑和历事三朝，先后七次奉命出使，足迹遍及占城、爪哇、真腊、旧港、暹罗、古里、满剌加、渤泥、苏门答剌、阿鲁、柯枝、大葛兰、小葛兰、西洋琐里、琐里、加异勒、阿拨把丹、南巫里、甘把里、锡兰山、喃渤利、彭亨、急兰丹、忽鲁谟斯、比剌、溜山、孙剌、木骨都束、麻林、剌撒、祖法儿、沙里湾泥、竹步、榜葛剌、天方、黎伐、那孤儿，凡三十余国，所取回的无名宝物，不可胜数，而中国的耗费也无法估算。
English: Zheng He's history spans three dynasties. He was ordered to go on seven missions successively. His footprints can be found all over Chamcheng, Java, Jinla, the Old Port, Siam, Guli, Manchukuo, Sumatra, Aru, Kochi, Greater Gulen, Lesser Gulen, Western Zhori, Zhori, Qayr al-Din, Southern Wuli, Gangtari, Mount Ceylon, Murrumbili, Pengheng, Qulan, Khurrumus, Bijan, Yushan, Sun Yat, Mokotsu, Ma Lin, Caesar, Zafar, Shaari Bay mud

古文：自宣德以还，远方时有至者，要不如永乐时，而和亦老且死。
现代文：从宣德以后，远方番国还偶尔有到来的，但总的已不如永乐时期，而这时郑和也老而将死了。
English: Since Xuan De, there have been occasional visits from distant countries, but they are generally not as good as in the Yongle period, when Zheng He was also on the verge of death.

古文：自和后，凡将命海表者，莫不盛称和以夸外番，故俗传三保太监下西洋，为明初盛事云。
现代文：自郑和之后，凡奉命出使海外的，无不称赞郑和的事迹，借以向外番夸耀。所以人们盛传三保太监下西洋，为明初的一大盛事。
English: Since Zheng He, all those who were ordered to go overseas have praised Zheng He's deeds to boast to the outside world. Therefore, it is widely rumored that the departure of the Sanbo Eunuchs to the West was a great event at the beginning of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：当成祖时，锐意通四夷，奉使多用中贵。
现代文：成祖时期，朝廷锐意通使四夷，所派的使者多用宦官显贵。
English: During the Chengzu period, the imperial court sent emissaries to the four provinces, and the emissaries sent were mostly eunuchs.

古文：西洋则和、景弘，西域则李达，迤北则海童，而西番则率使侯显。
现代文：西洋则用郑和、王景弘，西域则用李达，迤北则用海童，而西番则都用侯显。
English: Zheng He and Wang Jinghong are used in the West, Li Da in the West, Haidong in the North, and Hou Xian in the West.

古文：侯显者，司礼少监。
现代文：侯显是司礼监少监。
English: Hou Xian is a deputy superintendent of the Department of Ceremonies.

古文：帝闻乌思藏僧尚师哈立麻有道术，善幻化，欲致一见，因通迤西诸番。乃命显赍书币往迓，选壮士健马护行。
现代文：皇上听说乌思藏僧人尚师哈立麻有道术，善于幻化之术，想招来一见，也想顺便沟通迤西各番国，于是命侯显带上书信和金币去迎接哈立麻，并挑选了壮士和健马为他护行。
English: The emperor had heard that the Wuxi Tibetan monk, Shanshi Halima, was good at magic and illusion, and he wanted to meet him, and also wanted to communicate with the countries in western Shaanxi Province. Therefore, he brought a letter and gold coins to meet Halima, and selected a strong man and a horse to escort him.

古文：元年四月奉使，陆行数万里，至四年十二月始与其僧偕来，诏驸马都尉沐昕迎之。
现代文：永乐元年四月侯显奉命出使，陆行数万里，到四年十二月才与僧人一同回来。皇上命驸马都尉沐昕去迎接。
English: In April of the first year of Yongle, Hou Xian was ordered to go on a mission, traveling tens of thousands of miles overland. He did not return with the monks until December of the fourth year. The emperor ordered Ma Du Fu to meet him.

古文：帝延见奉天殿，宠赉优渥，仪仗鞍马什器多以金银为之，道路烜赫。
现代文：皇上在奉天殿接见尚师，对他很尊宠，赏赐非常优厚，仪仗鞍马什器多是金银做成，一路非常煊赫。
English: The emperor received Shang Shih at the Bongten Hall, held him in high esteem, and rewarded him very generously. The ceremonial saddle-mashers were mostly made of gold and silver, and they were very beautiful.

古文：五年二月建普度大斋于灵谷寺，为高帝、高后荐福。或言卿云、天花、甘露、甘雨、青鸟、青狮、白象、白鹤及舍利祥光，连日毕见，又闻梵呗天乐自空而下。
现代文：五年二月在灵谷寺设普渡大斋，为高帝、高后荐福，有人说卿云、天花、甘露、甘雨、青鸟、青狮、白象、白鹤以及舍利祥光连日都有显现，还听到梵呗天乐从天上传下来。
English: In February of the fifth year, the Purdue Great Feast was held at Linggu Temple, and blessings were recommended for Emperor Gao and Empress Gao. Some people said that Qingyun, smallpox, nectar, sweet rain, blue bird, blue lion, white elephant, white crane, and Sheli Xiangguang appeared day after day, and they also heard the music of the gods coming down from heaven.

古文：帝益大喜，廷臣表贺，学士胡广等咸献《圣孝瑞应歌》诗。
现代文：皇上更加高兴。廷臣上表恭贺，学士胡广等人都献上《圣孝瑞应歌》诗。
English: The Emperor was even more pleased. The courtiers came forward to offer their congratulations, and the scholar Hu Guang and others all presented poems of "Song of St. Xiao Rui."

古文：乃封哈立麻万行具足十方最胜圆觉妙智慧善普应祐国演教如来大宝法王西天大善自在佛，领天下释教，给印诰制如诸王，其徒三人亦封灌顶大国师，再宴奉天殿。
现代文：于是封哈立麻为万行具足十方最胜圆觉妙智慧善普应佑国演教如来大宝法王西天大善自在佛，总领天下佛教，并像藩王一样印给制诰。他的徒弟三人也被封为灌顶大国师，在奉天殿再次受到宴请。
English: As a result, Harima was awarded the title of "the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions, the most complete in ten directions."

古文：显以奉使劳，擢太监。
现代文：侯显也因出使有功劳，升为太监。
English: Hou Xian was also promoted to eunuch due to his meritorious service as an envoy.

古文：十一年春复奉命，赐西番尼八剌、地涌塔二国。
现代文：十一年春侯显又奉命出使，赐给西番尼八剌、地涌塔二国。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Hou Hsien was also ordered to send an envoy to give the two kingdoms of Bajiao and Jiwung Pagodas to Sibani.

古文：尼八剌王沙的新葛遣使随显入朝，表贡方物。诏封国王，赐诰印。
现代文：尼八剌国王沙的新葛派使者随侯显来朝见，上表进贡土产，皇上封其为国王，赐给诰令和印章。
English: An emissary of the Shingate faction of King Saba of Niamey came to the court with Hou Xian, presented tribute and local products, and the emperor made him king and gave him the imperial decree and seal.

古文：十三年七月，帝欲通榜葛剌诸国，复命显率舟师以行，其国即东印度之地，去中国绝远。
现代文：十三年七月，皇上想沟通榜葛剌等国，又命侯显率领船队出使，这个国家即东印度之地，距中国很遥远。
English: In July 13th, the emperor wanted to communicate with countries such as Pan Gejun, and ordered Hou Xian to lead the fleet. This country, East India, is very far away from China.

古文：其王赛佛丁遣使贡麒麟及诸方物。
现代文：国王赛佛丁派使者进贡麒麟及其他土产。
English: King Saifuddin sent an envoy to pay tribute to Kirin and other local products.

古文：帝大悦，锡予有加。
现代文：皇上很高兴，赐给很丰厚。
English: The Emperor was very pleased and gave him a very rich present.

古文：榜葛剌之西，有国曰沼纳朴儿者，地居五印度中，古佛国也，侵榜葛剌。
现代文：榜葛剌的西边，有个国家叫沼纳朴儿，位居五印度之中，是古代佛国，入侵榜葛剌。
English: To the west of Phang Nga, there is a country called Muna Pore, one of the Five Indies, the ancient Buddhist country, which invaded Phang Nga.

古文：赛佛丁告于朝。
现代文：赛福丁报告朝廷。
English: Saifuddin reports to the court.

古文：十八年九月命显往宣谕，赐金币，遂罢兵。
现代文：十八年九月皇上命侯显前往宣布圣谕，赐给金币，沼纳朴儿于是罢兵。
English: In September 18th, the emperor ordered Hou Hsien to go to announce the edict and give gold coins, and Muna Pour went on strike.

古文：宣德二年二月复使显赐诸番，遍历乌斯藏、必力工瓦、灵藏、思达藏诸国而还。
现代文：宣德二年二月又命侯显赏赐各番国，侯显历经乌斯藏、必力工瓦、灵藏、思达藏等国而还。
English: In February of the second year of Xuande, Hou Hsien was also ordered to reward all the countries. Hou Hsien went through the countries of Wuzang, Bili, Lingzang, and Sida.

古文：途遇寇劫，督将士力战，多所斩获。
现代文：途中遇到强盗行劫，侯显率领将士奋战，斩获不少敌人。
English: Encountering robberies on the way, Hou Xian led the generals to fight hard and gained a lot of enemies.

古文：还朝，录功升赏者四百六十余人。
现代文：回国后，立功升赏的有四百六十余人。
English: After returning to China, more than four hundred and sixty people received awards for meritorious service.

古文：显有才辨，强力敢任，五使绝域，劳绩与郑和亚。
现代文：侯显能言善辩，坚强而敢于任事，五次出使绝域，功劳仅次于郑和。
English: Hou Xian could speak well, was strong and dared to take on responsibilities. He was sent on missions five times, second only to Zheng He.

古文：金英者，宣宗朝司礼太监也，亲信用事。
现代文：金英，是宣宗朝的司礼太监，因受宣宗宠信而得以弄权。
English: Jin Ying was a ceremonial eunuch of the Xuan Zong Dynasty, and was able to gain power because he was favored by Xuan Zong.

古文：宣德七年赐英及范弘免死诏，辞极褒美。
现代文：宣德七年，宣宗赐给金英和范弘免死诏，诏书中极尽褒美之辞。
English: In the seventh year of Xuande's reign, Emperor Xuanzong granted Jin Ying and Fan Hong exemption from death. In the edict, he was very complimentary.

古文：英宗立，与兴安并贵幸。
现代文：英宗即位后，金英和兴安并受宠爱，地位很高。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, Kim Yingzong and Emperor Heungan were both loved and held high positions.

古文：及王振擅权，英不敢与抗。
现代文：到王振专权时，金英不敢与他抗衡。
English: When it came to Wang Zhen's absolute power, Jin Ying did not dare to oppose him.

古文：正统十四年夏旱，命英理刑部、都察院狱囚，筑坛大理寺。
现代文：正统十四年夏闹干旱，皇上命金英审理刑部、都察院的囚犯，筑坛在大理寺。
English: In the summer of the 14th year of the Juche era, there was a drought, and the emperor ordered Jin Ying to try prisoners from the Criminal Investigation Department and the Criminal Investigation Institute, and to build a altar at Dali Temple.

古文：英张黄盖中坐，尚书以下左右列坐。
现代文：金英打着黄伞在中间就座，尚书以下官员在他左右列坐。
English: Jin Ying, holding a yellow umbrella, took a seat in the middle, and the officials following Shang Shu sat on his right and left.

古文：自是六年一审录，制皆如此。
现代文：此后每六年就审案一次，每次都仿这次的制度。
English: Since then, cases have been tried once every six years, and the system used this time has been replicated each time.

古文：其秋，英宗北狩，中外大震。
现代文：这年秋，英宗北狩，朝廷内外大震。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Northern Expedition of Emperor Yingzong caused a great earthquake both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：郕王使英、安等召廷臣问计。
现代文：成阝王派金英、兴安等人召廷臣来商议对策。
English: King Chengyu sent Jin Ying, Xing An and others to summon courtiers to discuss countermeasures.

古文：侍读徐珵倡议南迁，安叱之，令扶珵出，大言曰： 敢言迁者斩！ 
现代文：侍读徐王呈提议南迁，兴安大声呵斥他，命人扶他出去，并大声说道： 敢说迁都的斩首！ 
English: Attendant Xu Wangchen proposed to move south, Xing'an shouted at him, ordered someone to help him out, and said loudly: Dare to say that the capital will be moved!

古文：遂入告太后，劝郕王任于谦治战守。
现代文：随后他便入宫禀告太后，劝成阝王任用于谦治理战守事宜。
English: Subsequently, he went to the palace to inform the empress dowager, and persuaded King Chengyu to appoint him to modestly manage the defense affairs.

古文：或曰叱珵者，英也。
现代文：有人说呵斥徐王呈的是金英。
English: Some say it was Jin Ying who rebuked Xu Wangcheng.

古文：也先入寇，至德胜门，景帝敕安与李永昌同于谦、石亨总理军务。
现代文：也先入侵，到了德胜门外，景帝敕令兴安和李永昌同于谦、石亨一起总理军务。
English: They also invaded first, and when they arrived outside the Desheng Gate, Emperor Jing ordered Xing'an and Li Yongchang, together with Yu Qian and Shi Heng, to take over the prime minister's military affairs.

古文：永昌，亦司礼近侍也。
现代文：李永昌也是司礼监近侍宦官。
English: Li Yongchang is also a close attendant and eunuch of the chief eunuch.

古文：景泰元年十一月，英犯赃罪，下狱论死。
现代文：景泰元年十一月金英犯贪污罪，被投进监狱，判了死刑。
English: In November of the same year, Jin Ying was convicted of corruption and sentenced to death.

古文：帝令禁锢之，终景帝世废不用，独任安。
现代文：皇上命将他禁锢，景帝一朝他被废而不用，唯独信任兴安。
English: The emperor ordered him to be imprisoned. Once he was deposed, Emperor Jing did not need him, but trusted Xingan.

古文：也先遣使议和，请迎上皇，廷议报使。
现代文：也先派使者来议和，请求朝廷迎回上皇，廷臣意见是派使者酬答。
English: He also first sent an envoy to discuss peace and request the imperial court to welcome back the retired emperor. The opinion of the courtiers was to send an envoy as a reward.

古文：帝不怿，令安出，呼群臣曰： 公等欲报使，孰可者？
现代文：皇上不高兴，令兴安出去见廷臣，兴安大声对群臣说 ：诸公想派使者酬答，但谁能担任？
English: The emperor was not happy, so he ordered Xing'an to go and see the courtiers. Xing'an shouted to the courtiers, "The princes want to send an envoy as a reward, but who can do it?

古文：孰为文天祥、富弼！ 
现代文：谁能做文天祥、富弼？ 
English: Who can do the work of Wen Tianxiang and Fuxun?

古文：词色俱厉。
现代文：他说得声色俱厉。
English: He's talking a lot of smack.

古文：尚书王直面折之，安语塞。
现代文：尚书王直当面驳斥他，兴安哑口无言。
English: Shang Shu Wang refuted him to his face, leaving Xing An speechless.

古文：及遣都给事中李寔往，敕书不及迎上皇。
现代文：后来派都给事中李萛出使时，敕书中没有提到迎接上皇之事。
English: Later, when dispatching envoys to Li Hongzhang, there was no mention of welcoming the emperor in the dispatch.

古文：寔惊，走白内阁，遇安。安复诟曰： 若奉黄纸诏行耳，他何预！ 
现代文：李萛很吃惊，跑去告诉内阁，遇到兴安，兴安又骂他说： 你只管奉黄纸诏书行事，其他的不用管。 
English: Li Yan was very surprised and ran to tell the cabinet. When he met Xing'an, Xing'an scolded him and said, "You only need to act according to the edict on yellow paper. You don't need to worry about anything else."

古文：及易储诸，人遂疑安预谋矣。
现代文：后来更换太子时，人们便怀疑兴安参预了策划。
English: Later, when the crown prince was replaced, people suspected that Heung An was involved in the planning.

古文：安有廉操，且知于谦贤，力护之。
现代文：兴安有廉洁的品德，并知道于谦有贤才，极力保护他。
English: Xing'an has a clean moral character, and knows that he has a talent in modesty, and tries his best to protect him.

古文：或言帝任谦太过，安曰： 为国分忧如于公者，宁有二人！ 
现代文：有人说皇上对于谦信任得太过分，兴安说： 像于公这样为国分忧的，哪儿还有第二人？ 
English: Some people said that the emperor's trust in Qian was too much. Xing'an said, "If there is someone who cares for the country as much as Yu Gong, where is the second person?

古文：英宗复辟，盖磔景帝所用太监王诚、舒良、张永、王勤等，谓其与黄〈王厷〉构邪议，易太子，且与于谦、王文谋立外藩。
现代文：英宗复辟后，尽将景帝所信任的太监王诚、舒良、张永、王勤等人肢解，说他们与黄耉捏造邪议，更换太子，并与于谦、王文图谋拥立在外的藩王。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, he did his best to dismember the eunuchs Wang Cheng, Shuliang, Zhang Yong, Wang Qin and others who were trusted by Emperor Jing, saying that they and Huang Qi fabricated evil opinions, replaced the prince, and plotted with Yu Qian and Wang Wen to support the kings of the outside.

古文：于是给事、御史皆言安与诚、良等为党，宜同罪。
现代文：于是给事中、御史都说兴安与王诚、舒良是同党，应当同罪。
English: As a result, during the case, the court historian said that Xing'an was a member of the same party as Wang Cheng and Shuliang, and should be charged with the same crime.

古文：英宗复辟，磔忠及平，而赠浪太监。王振，蔚州人。
现代文：兴安笃信佛教，临死前遗命将骨头舂成灰，以供奉浮屠。王振，蔚州人。
English: Xing'an was a devout believer in Buddhism. Before his death, he left instructions for his bones to be ground into ashes to be offered as a sacrifice. Wang Zhen, a native of Ulshu.

古文：少选入内书堂。
现代文：少时选入内书堂。
English: At a young age, he was elected to the inner study hall.

古文：侍英宗东宫，为局郎。
现代文：在东宫侍奉英宗，任局郎。
English: He served as a secretary to Emperor Eiso in the East Palace.

古文：初，太祖禁中官预政。自永乐后，渐加委寄，然犯法辄置极典。
现代文：当初，太祖禁止宦官参预政事，自永乐以后，对宦官逐渐加以重用，但对犯法者常判以极刑。
English: At first, the great-grandfather forbade eunuchs to participate in political affairs. Since Yongle, eunuchs have gradually been reused, but those who violate the law are often sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：宣宗时，袁琦令阮巨队等出外采办。事觉，琦磔死，巨队等皆斩。
现代文：宣宗时，袁琦命令阮巨队等人出外采办，被发觉后，袁琦被肢解，阮巨队等人都被斩首。
English: At the time of the promulgation of the Constitution, Yuan Shao ordered Ruan Jiuquan and others to go out to purchase it. After being discovered, Yuan Shao was dismembered, and Ruan Jiuquan and others were beheaded.

古文：又裴可烈等不法，立诛之。
现代文：另外，裴可烈等人犯法，立即被诛死。
English: In addition, Pei Keli and others broke the law and were immediately strangled.

古文：诸中官以是不敢肆。
现代文：宦官们因此不敢放肆。
English: The eunuchs therefore did not dare to be presumptuous.

古文：及英宗立，年少。振狡黠得帝欢，遂越金英等数人掌司礼监，导帝用重典御下，防大臣欺蔽。
现代文：英宗即位后，因年纪小，狡黠的王振博得了皇上的欢心，他于是越过金英等人执掌司礼监，教唆皇上用重刑管理臣下，以防大臣蒙蔽皇上。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, the young and cunning Wang Zhengang won the Emperor's favor. He then bypassed Jin Ying and others to take charge of the ceremonial supervisor, and advised the Emperor to use heavy punishment to manage his vassals in order to prevent the minister from deceiving the Emperor.

古文：于是大臣下狱者不绝，而振得因以市权。
现代文：于是大臣们被下狱的不断，而王振因此得以弄权。
English: As a result, ministers were constantly sent to prison, and Wang Zhen was thus able to seize power.

古文：然是时，太皇太后贤，方委政内阁。
现代文：但那时候，太皇太后贤明，正委政于内阁。
English: But at that time, the Empress Dowager Zhenming was in charge of the cabinet.

古文：阁臣杨士奇、杨荣、杨溥，皆累朝元老，振心惮之未敢逞。
现代文：内阁大臣杨士奇、杨荣、杨溥，都是累朝元老，王振心中忌惮他们，所以不敢肆意妄为。
English: Cabinet ministers Yang Shichi, Yang Rong, and Yang Hui were all veterans of the Joseon Dynasty. Wang Zhen was afraid of them, so he did not dare to act recklessly.

古文：至正统七年，太皇太后崩，荣已先卒，士奇以子稷论死不出，溥老病，新阁臣马愉、曹鼐势轻，振遂跋扈不可制。
现代文：到正统七年，太皇太后逝世，而杨荣先已逝世，杨士奇因儿子杨稷被判了死罪而居家不出，杨溥也已老病，新的阁臣马愉、曹鼐名望较轻，王振遂专横跋扈，不可控制。
English: In the seventh year of orthodoxy, the great empress dowager died, while Yang Rongxian had already died, Yang Shichi did not stay at home because his son Yang Xuan was sentenced to death, Yang Xuan had also been ill for a long time, the new cabinet ministers Ma Yue and Cao Xuan were less famous, and Wang Zhensu was imperious and uncontrollable.

古文：作大第皇城东，建智化寺，穷极土木。
现代文：他在皇城东面建宏大的府第，修建智化寺，耗资巨大。
English: To the east of the imperial city, he built a grand palace and the Chihaku-ji Temple at great expense.

古文：兴麓川之师，西南骚动。
现代文：又兴兵征讨麓川，西南为之骚动。
English: In addition, soldiers were conscripted to fight against Luchuan, and the southwestern region was in turmoil.

古文：侍讲刘球因雷震上言陈得失，语刺振。
现代文：侍读刘球因发生雷震而上疏陈述政事得失，指责王振。
English: As a result of the thunderstorm, Liu Qiu, an attendant, rushed to the scene to report on the political gains and losses, and blamed Wang Zhen.

古文：振下球狱，使指挥马顺支解之。
现代文：王振便将刘球投进监狱，派指挥使马顺将他肢解。
English: Wang Zhen then threw Liu Qiu into prison and sent a commander to have Ma Shun dismember him.

古文：大理少卿薛瑄、祭酒李时勉素不礼振。振摭他事陷瑄几死，时勉至荷校国子监门。
现代文：大理寺少卿薛蠧、祭酒李时勉素来瞧不起王振，王振便借别的过错将薛蠧陷害得几乎至死，而李时勉竟被枷锁在国子监门前。
English: Xue Yao, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, and Li Shimin, the head of the sacrificial wine, had always looked down on Wang Zhen. Wang Zhen took advantage of another fault to frame Xue Yao almost to death, while Li Shimin was shackled in front of the gate of the provincial prison.

古文：御史李铎遇振不跪，谪戍铁岭卫。
现代文：御史李铎碰到王振不下跪，被贬往铁岭卫戍守。
English: Wang Zhen could not kneel when he met the imperial historian Li Yao, and was relegated to guarding the Tieling Garrison.

古文：驸马都尉石璟詈其家阉，振恶贱己同类，下璟狱。
现代文：驸马都尉石瞡骂家中的阉人，王振恨他轻贱自己的同类，将石瞡投进监狱。
English: Wang Zhenhong despised him for belittling his own kind, and threw him into prison.

古文：怒霸州知州张需禁饬牧马校卒，逮之，并坐需举主王铎。
现代文：他恨霸州知州张需禁饬牧马校卒，将他逮捕，并将选拔他的恩师王铎一并治罪。
English: He hated Zhang Zhe, the governor of Zhizhou, and wanted to imprison him, arrest him, and punish his mentor, Wang Xi, who had selected him.

古文：又械户部尚书刘中敷，侍郎吴玺、陈瑺于长安门。
现代文：又将户部尚书刘中敷、侍郎吴玺、陈王常铐在长安门。
English: He also placed the head of the household, Shangshu Liu Zhongshiki, and the attendants Wu Qi and Chen Wang Changqi at Chang'an Gate.

古文：所忤恨，辄加罪谪。
现代文：凡是触犯了他或者他所恨的人，都被加罪贬职。
English: Anyone who offended him or whom he hated was punished and demoted.

古文：内侍张环、顾忠、锦衣卫卒王永心不平，以匿名书暴振罪状。
现代文：宦官张环、顾忠，锦衣卫卒王永心中不平，以匿名信揭露王振的罪行。
English: The eunuchs Zhang Huan and Gu Zhong, and the eunuch Wang Yong were not happy, and they sent an anonymous letter to expose Wang Zhen's crime.

古文：事发，磔于市，不覆奏。
现代文：事发之后，他们都被押到市场肢解，不复奏皇上。
English: After the incident, they were all taken to the market to be dismembered, without reporting to the emperor.

古文：帝方倾心向振，尝以先生呼之。
现代文：皇上正倾心向着王振，曾经称他为先生。
English: The emperor was falling in love with Wang Zhen and used to call him "sir."

古文：赐振敕，极褒美。
现代文：赐给王振的敕书，极尽了褒美之辞。
English: The imperial edict given to Wang Zhen was the ultimate in words of praise.

古文：振权日益积重，公侯勋戚呼曰翁父。
现代文：王振的权势越来越大，公侯勋戚称他为 翁父 。
English: Wang Zhen's influence grew stronger and stronger, and the prince's relatives called him "Uncle Wang."

古文：畏祸者争附振免死，赇赂辏集。
现代文：惧祸之徒争相依附王振，企望免于一死，以致向他贿赂的人不断。
English: Evil-doers vie for Wang Zhen's allegiance, hoping to avoid certain death, so that those who bribe him continue to prosper.

古文：工部郎中王祐以善谄擢本部侍郎，兵部尚书徐晞等多至屈膝。
现代文：工部郎中王佑因善于巴结被提升为本部侍郎，兵部尚书徐等人多对他屈膝行礼。
English: Wang You, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Works, was promoted to the vice-minister of the headquarters because he was good at flattery, and many people such as the Minister of Military Affairs, Shang Shuxu, curtsied to him.

古文：其从子山、林至荫都督指挥。
现代文：他的侄子王山、王林获荫任至都督指挥。
English: His nephews, Wang Shan and Wang Lin, were appointed as governors and commanders.

古文：私党马顺、郭敬、陈官、唐童等并肆行无忌。
现代文：私党马顺、郭敬、陈官、唐童等人也肆行无忌。
English: My party, Ma Shun, Guo Jing, Chen Guan, Tang Tong and others also went wild.

古文：久之，构衅瓦剌，振遂败。
现代文：后来，与瓦剌构祸，王振这才败了。
English: Later, Wang Zhen was defeated in a battle with Varan.

古文：瓦剌者，元裔也。
现代文：瓦剌是元朝的后裔。
English: Vaju is a descendant of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：十四年，其太师也先贡马，振减其直，使者恚而去。
现代文：十四年，瓦剌太师也先来贡马，王振压低马价，使者愤怒而去。
English: In the 14th year, Wawang Taishi also came to pay tribute to the horse, Wang Zhen suppressed the low price of the horse, and the messenger left in anger.

古文：秋七月，也先大举入寇，振挟帝亲征。
现代文：秋七月，也先大举入侵，王振挟皇上亲征。
English: In autumn and July, Wang Zhenxiang personally led an invasion.

古文：廷臣交谏，弗听。
现代文：廷臣纷纷谏阻，皇上不听。
English: The courtiers resisted one after another, but the Emperor would not listen.

古文：至宣府，大风雨，复有谏者，振益虓怒。
现代文：到了宣府后，赶上大风雨，又有人进谏，王振更加狂怒。
English: After arriving at Xuanwu, Wang Zhen was even more furious when he caught up with the heavy wind and rain and there were still people trapped in the quake.

古文：成国公朱勇等白事，咸膝行进。
现代文：成国公朱勇等人向他请示汇报，都膝行而前。
English: Chengguogong Zhu Yong and others asked him for a report, and they all walked forward.

古文：尚书邝埜、王佐忤振意，罚跪草中。
现代文：尚书邝聎、王佐触怒王振，被罚跪草中。
English: Shang Shuxuan and Wang Zuo incurred the wrath of Wang Zhen and were ordered to kneel in the grass.

古文：其党钦天监正彭德清以天象谏，振终弗从。
现代文：他的党羽钦天监正彭德清借天象劝谏，王振也不听从。
English: Wang Zhen did not listen to his followers, including Qin Tianjun Zheng, Peng Deqing, who persuaded him with the help of celestial elephants.

古文：八月己酉，帝驻大同，振益欲北。
现代文：八月己酉，皇上驻跸大同，王振更想北上。
English: In August, the emperor was in Datong, and Wang Zhen wanted to go to the north.

古文：镇守太监郭敬以敌势告，振始惧。
现代文：镇守太监郭敬告诉他说敌势很强，王振这才害怕了。
English: The town guard eunuch Guo Jing told him that the enemy was very strong, and Wang Zhen was afraid.

古文：班师，至双寨，雨甚。
现代文：回师，到达双寨，雨很大。
English: Back to school, arrived in Shuangzhai, it was raining heavily.

古文：振初议道紫荆关，由蔚州邀帝幸其第，既恐蹂乡稼，复改道宣府。
现代文：王振最初想取道紫荆关，经蔚州邀请皇上幸临他的家乡，又恐怕人马践踏家乡的庄稼，便又改道宣府。
English: Wang Zhen initially wanted to take the road of Bauhinia Pass, and invited the emperor to visit his hometown through Ulshu, but he was afraid that people and horses would trample the crops of his hometown, so he changed the road to Xuanfu.

古文：军士纡回奔走，壬戌始次土木。
现代文：士兵们迂回奔走，壬戌才到土木堡。
English: The soldiers made a detour, and eventually arrived at the earthen fort.

古文：瓦剌兵追至，师大溃。
现代文：瓦剌兵追到，官军大败。
English: The government army suffered a crushing defeat when the Varangians caught up with them.

古文：帝蒙尘，振乃为乱兵所杀。
现代文：皇上被俘，王振竟被乱军所杀。
English: The emperor was captured, and Wang Zhen was killed by the rebels.

古文：败报闻，百官恸哭，都御史陈镒等廷奏振罪，给事中王竑等立击杀马顺及毛、王二中官。
现代文：败报传到朝廷，百官恸哭，都御史陈镒等人在朝廷上奏告王振的罪行，给事中王等人当场打死马顺和毛、王这两名宦官。
English: The defeat was reported to the imperial court, and hundreds of officials wept. The governor of the capital, Chen Xi, and others reported Wang Zhen's crime to the imperial court, and Wang and others killed the two eunuchs, Ma Shun and Mao, and Wang on the spot.

古文：郕王命脔王山于市，并振党诛之，振族无少长皆斩。
现代文：成阝王命将王山押往市场碎尸，并诛杀王振的其他党羽，王振家族不分老少全部斩首。
English: Chengyu Wang ordered Wang Shan to be taken to the market to be dismembered, and Wang Zhen's other party members were killed. Wang Zhen's entire family, young and old, were beheaded.

古文：振擅权七年，籍其家，得金银六十余库，玉盘百，珊瑚高六七尺者二十余株，他珍玩无算。
现代文：王振专权七年，抄没他的家时，获得金银六十余库，玉盘一百只，高六七尺的珊瑚二十余株，其他珍玩无数。
English: During the seven years of Wang Zhen's exclusive right, when his home was confiscated, he obtained more than sixty gold and silver vaults, one hundred jade plates, more than twenty coral plants with a height of sixty-seven feet, and countless other treasures.

古文：先是，郭敬镇大同，几造箭镞数十瓮，以振命遗瓦剌，瓦剌辄报以良马。
现代文：当初，郭敬镇守大同，每年制造箭簇数十瓮，遵王振之命送给瓦剌，瓦剌常以良马作为回报。
English: At the beginning, Guo Jing, the town guard of Datong, made dozens of arrow clusters every year, and sent them to Wawu according to Wang Zhen's order. Wawu often rewarded him with good horses.

古文：及帝亲征，西宁侯宋瑛、驸马都尉井源为前锋，遇敌阳和，敬又挠使败。
现代文：到皇上亲征时，西宁侯朱瑛、驸马都尉井源为前锋，在阳和遇上敌人，郭敬又扰乱军情，致使官军吃了败仗。
English: At the time of the Emperor's personal enlistment, the Xining Hou Zhu Ying and the Yunnan Ma Du Fu Jingyuan were the forwards. When they met the enemy in Yanghe, Guo Jing also disrupted the military situation, resulting in the defeat of the official army.

古文：至是逃归，亦坐诛。
现代文：这时候他逃了回来，也被诛杀。
English: At this time he ran back and was also beaten to death.

古文：英宗复辟，顾念振不置。
现代文：英宗复辟后，仍对王振怀念不已。
English: After the restoration of the Yingzong, Wang Zhen was still fondly remembered.

古文：用太监刘恒言，赐振祭，招魂以葬，祀之智化寺，赐祠曰精忠。
现代文：他采纳太监刘恒的建议，给王振赐祭，将他招魂下葬，供在智化寺祭祀，赐祠堂名 精忠 。
English: He accepted the suggestion of the eunuch Liu Heng to offer a sacrifice to Wang Zhen, summon his soul to be buried, offer it for sacrifice at Zhihua Temple, and give the ancestral hall the name Jingzhong.

古文：而振门下曹吉祥复以夺门功，有宠颛政。
现代文：而王振的门下曹吉祥又因夺门之功，受到宠爱，得以专权。
English: However, Cao Jixiang, a disciple of Wang Zhen, was favored due to his success in capturing the gate, and was granted exclusive power.

古文：曹吉祥，滦州人。
现代文：曹吉祥，滦州人。
English: Cao Jixiang, from Zhangzhou.

古文：素依王振。
现代文：一向依附王振。
English: He has always been attached to Wang Zhen.

古文：正统初，征麓川，为监军。
现代文：正统初年征讨麓川时，他任监军。
English: He was in charge of supervising the troops during the first year of the Legitimation Campaign against the Luchuan River.

古文：征兀良哈，与成国公朱勇、太监刘永诚分道。
现代文：征兀良哈时，与成国公朱勇、太监刘永诚分道进兵。
English: When Liangha was conscripted, he and Zhu Yong, the prince of Chengguo and Liu Yongcheng, the eunuch, went their separate ways to join the army.

古文：又与宁阳侯陈懋等征邓茂七于福建，吉祥每出，辄选达官、跳荡卒隶帐下，师还畜于家，故家多藏甲。
现代文：他又与宁阳侯陈懋等人往福建征讨邓茂七。曹吉祥每次出行，常选择达官、跳荡锐卒隶属于帐下，班师后便将他们畜养于家中，所以家中多藏有甲兵。
English: He also went to Fujian with Ningyang lord Chen Qi and others to recruit Deng Maoshu. Every time Cao Jixiang traveled, he often chose high-ranking officials and swashbuckling soldiers to be subordinate to the account, and then raised them at home after the class, so there were mostly A soldiers in his home.

古文：景泰中，分掌京营。
现代文：景泰年间，他分掌京营。
English: During the Jing Tai years, he was in charge of the Beijing camp.

古文：后与石亨结，帅兵迎英宗复位。
现代文：后与石亨勾结，率兵迎接英宗复位。
English: Later, he colluded with Shi Heng and led the troops to welcome the restoration of Emperor Yingzong.

古文：迁司礼太监，总督三大营。
现代文：升为司礼太监，总督三大营。
English: He was promoted to the position of eunuch and governor of the Three Great Camps.

古文：嗣子钦，从子铉、钅睿等皆官都督，钦进封昭武伯，门下厮养冒官者多至千百人，朝士亦有依附希进者，权势与石亨埒，时并称曹、石。
现代文：他的嗣子曹钦、侄子铉、铎、钅睿等人都官任都督，曹钦进封为昭武伯。他的门下食客冒官的多至成百上千人，朝中士大夫也有依附于他希求晋升的人。他的权势与石亨相当，时人并称为 曹石 。
English: His heir, Cao Qin, and his nephews, Zou, Zou, and Zhaorai, were all appointed as provincial governors, and Cao Qin was given the title of Shouwu Bo. There were as many as hundreds of thousands of diners who became officials under him, and there were also people who wanted to be promoted who were attached to him. His power was equivalent to that of Shi Heng, and he was also known as Cao Shi.

古文：二人恶言官有言，共谮于帝，命吏部尚书王翱察核年三十五以上者留，不及者调用。
现代文：两人厌恶言官的弹劾，便一同到皇上面前献谗言，命吏部尚书王翱检核言官年三十五岁以上的留用，不到三十五岁的则调任。
English: The two disliked the impeachment of the speaker, so they went to the emperor together to offer their advice. Shang Shouwang of the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's

古文：于是给事何玘等十三人改州判官，御史吴祯等二十三人改知县。
现代文：于是给事中何王己等十三人改任州判官，御史吴祯等二十三人改任知县。
English: As a result, thirteen people, including He Wangji, were appointed as county magistrates, and twenty-three people, including Goshi Wu Xi, were appointed as county magistrates.

古文：会有风雷雨雹之变，帝乃悟，悉还其职。
现代文：正好有风雷雨雹之变，皇上才醒悟过来，全部给他们恢复原职。
English: It was only after a series of ups and downs that the emperor came to his senses and restored them all to their original positions.

古文：未几，二人争宠有隙，御史杨瑄、张鹏劾之，吉祥乃复与亨合，乘间醖帝。
现代文：不久，两人因争宠发生矛盾，御史杨蠧、张鹏弹劾他们，吉祥于是又与石亨联合，乘间向皇上诉说。
English: Soon after, the two of them had a conflict due to their rivalry for the favor of the emperor. Gu Shi Yang Xuan and Zhang Peng impeached them, and Gu Xiang then joined forces with Shi Heng to appeal to the emperor.

古文：帝为下瑄等诏狱，而逮治阁臣徐有贞、李贤等。
现代文：皇上为他们将杨蠧等人投进诏狱，并将内阁大臣徐有贞、李贤等人逮捕治罪。
English: The emperor threw Yang Xuan and others into the imperial prison for them, and arrested and punished the cabinet ministers Xu Yuzhen and Li Xian.

古文：事具贤传。
现代文：事详《李贤传》。
English: Details in "Biography of Li Xian."

古文：承天门灾，帝命阁臣岳正草罪己诏，诏语激切。
现代文：承天门发生火灾，皇上命内阁大臣岳正起草罪诏，岳正在诏书中用词相当激切。
English: A fire broke out at the Choten Gate, and the emperor's cabinet minister, Yue Zheng, was drafting a criminal edict. Yue Zheng's words in the edict were quite violent.

古文：吉祥、亨复醖正谤讪，帝又谪正。
现代文：吉祥、石亨便又诬告岳正诽谤皇上，皇上又将岳正贬职。
English: Kissho and Ishihiro then falsely accused Yue Zheng of slandering the emperor, and the emperor demoted Yue Zheng.

古文：焰益张，朝野仄目。
现代文：吉祥的势力更加嚣张，朝野为之侧目。
English: The auspicious forces are more arrogant, and Asano is looking sideways.

古文：久之，帝觉其奸，意稍稍疑。
现代文：后来，皇上觉察到了他的奸情，心中稍稍起了怀疑。
English: Later, the Emperor became aware of his treachery, and a slight doubt arose in his mind.

古文：及李贤力言夺门非是，始大悟，疏吉祥。
现代文：到李贤极力申述 夺门 事件不对后，皇上才大悟，疏远了吉祥。
English: It was only after Li Xian strenuously complained that the incident of seizing the gate was wrong that the emperor came to his senses and distanced himself from Jixiang.

古文：无何，石亨败，吉祥不自安，渐蓄异谋，日犒诸达官，金钱、穀帛恣所取。
现代文：不久，石亨败，曹吉祥心中不安，逐渐蓄藏异谋，每天犒赏那些达官，金钱、谷帛任其所取。
English: Soon, Shiheng was defeated, and Cao Jixiang was uneasy in his heart, gradually accumulating conspiracies, and rewarding those high-ranking officials with money and grain every day.

古文：诸达官恐吉祥败而己随黜退也，皆愿尽力效死。
现代文：那些达官害怕曹吉祥败后自己也遭废黜，都表示愿意尽力效死。
English: Those high-ranking officials were afraid of being deposed themselves after Cao Jixiang's defeat, and they all expressed their willingness to do their best to die.

古文：钦问客冯益曰： 自古有宦官子弟为天子者乎？ 
现代文：曹钦问门客冯益道 ：自古以来有宦官子弟做天子的吗？ 
English: Cao Qin asked his disciple Feng Yiduo: Since ancient times, has there been a eunuch's son as the son of heaven?

古文：益曰： 君家魏武，其人也。 
现代文：冯益说： 您家魏武帝曹操，就是其人。 
English: Feng Yi said: Your Wei Emperor Cao Cao, is the man.

古文：钦大喜。
现代文：曹钦大喜。
English: Cao Qin was overjoyed.

古文：天顺五年七月，钦私掠家人曹福来，为言官所劾。
现代文：天顺五年七月，曹钦私自拷打家人曹福来，被言官弹劾。
English: In July of the fifth year of Tianshun, Cao Qin personally tortured his family member Cao Fulai, and was impeached by the speaker.

古文：帝令锦衣指挥逮杲按之，降敕遍谕群臣。
现代文：皇上令锦衣卫指挥逯杲调查这事，并下敕通谕群臣。
English: The emperor ordered Jin Rongwei to investigate the matter, and sent an encyclical to his ministers.

古文：钦惊曰： 前降敕，遂捕石将军。
现代文：曹钦惊道： 前次下敕，便逮捕石将军。
English: Cao Qin said in surprise, "The last time I made an order, I arrested General Shi.

古文：今复尔，殆矣。 
现代文：现在又这样，完了。 
English: Now it's like this again, it's over.

古文：谋遂决。
现代文：便下了谋反的决心。
English: He then made up his mind to rebel.

古文：是时甘、凉告警，帝命怀宁侯孙镗西征，未发。
现代文：当时甘、凉告急，皇上命怀远侯孙镗西征，还没有出发。
English: At that time, Gan and Liang were in a hurry, and the emperor's order to go to the west with the distant marquis Sun Yat-sen had not yet started.

古文：吉祥使其党掌钦天监太常少卿汤序择是月庚子昧爽，钦拥兵入，而已以禁军应之。
现代文：曹吉祥命党羽执掌钦天监的太常寺少卿汤序选择这个月庚子黎明时分起事，到时曹钦拥兵入城，而自己率禁军响应。
English: Cao Jixiang ordered the party members to choose Tang Zi, the Shaoqing of Taizhong Temple, who was in charge of Qin Tianjun, to rise up at dawn of this month. At that time, Cao Qin's army entered the city, and he led the forbidden army to respond.

古文：谋定，钦召诸达官夜饮。
现代文：计划已定，曹钦召达官们晚上来喝酒。
English: The plan was set. Cao Qin invited the high-ranking officials to come and drink in the evening.

古文：是夜，镗及恭顺侯吴瑾俱宿朝房。
现代文：这天晚上，孙镗和恭顺侯吴瑾都在朝房过夜。
English: That evening, both Sun Yat-sen and Gong Shun Hou Wu Yi spent the night in the morning room.

古文：达官马亮恐事败，逸出，走告瑾。
现代文：达官马亮害怕事情失败，逃了出来，跑去告诉吴瑾。
English: The official, Ma Liang, was afraid that things would fail, so he escaped and ran to tell Wu Yao.

古文：瑾趣镗由长安右门隙投疏入。
现代文：吴瑾催促孙镗由长安右门的门缝将奏疏投进去。
English: Wu Yao urged Sun Yao to throw the cymbals through the cracks in the right door of Chang'an.

古文：帝急絷吉祥于内，而敕皇城及京城九门闭弗启。
现代文：皇上急忙在内宫拘捕曹吉祥，并下令将皇城和京城九门全部关闭。
English: The emperor quickly arrested Cao Jixiang in the inner palace and ordered the imperial city and the nine gates of the capital to be closed.

古文：钦知亮逸，中夜驰往逮杲家，杀杲，斫伤李贤于东朝房。以杲头示贤曰： 杲激我也。 
现代文：曹钦知道马亮逃跑后，半夜驰往逯杲家，杀逯杲，又在东朝房砍伤李贤，将逯杲的头给李贤看，说： 这是逯杲激我。 
English: Cao Qin knew that after Ma Liang's escape, he rushed to Li Xuan's home in the middle of the night and killed him. He also slashed Li Xian at the East Palace, and showed Li Xian the head of Ma Liang, saying, "This is what provoked me."

古文：又杀都御史寇深于西朝房。攻东、西长安门不得入，纵火。
现代文：又在西朝房杀都御史寇深。东、西长安门攻不开，便纵火焚烧。
English: He also killed the capital's governor, Shikoshin, in the West Court. When the East and West Chang'an Gates could not be opened, they were set on fire.

古文：守卫者拆河壖砖石塞诸门。
现代文：守卫的人拆河岸的砖石来堵城门。
English: The guards are tearing up the masonry of the riverbank to block the gates.

古文：贼往来叫呼门外。
现代文：贼往来呼叫于门外。
English: Thieves are calling outside the door.

古文：镗遣二子急召西征军击钦于东长安门。
现代文：孙镗派两个儿子赶紧召来西征军在东长安门攻击曹钦。
English: Sun Yat-sen sent his two sons to quickly summon the Western Expeditionary Force to attack Cao Qin at the East Chang'an Gate.

古文：钦走攻东安门，道杀瑾。
现代文：曹钦跑去攻打东安门，途中杀死吴瑾。
English: Cao Qin ran to attack Dong'an Gate, killing Wu Gan on the way.

古文：复纵火，门毁。
现代文：又纵火，门被烧毁。
English: There was another fire and the door was destroyed.

古文：门内聚薪益之，火炽，贼不得入。
现代文：门内收集木柴往火里加，火势更旺，贼无法进去。
English: Collecting firewood inside the door and adding it to the fire, the fire is more vigorous, and the thief cannot get in.

古文：天渐曙，钦党稍稍散去。
现代文：天渐亮了，曹钦的党羽渐渐散去。
English: The sky gradually brightened, and Cao Qin's followers gradually dispersed.

古文：镗勒兵逐钦，斩铉、钅睿，镗子軏斫钦中膊。
现代文：孙镗领兵追逐曹钦，斩杀曹铉、曹钅睿，孙镗的儿子车兀砍中曹钦的胳膊。
English: Sun Yat-sen led his soldiers to chase Cao Qin, and killed Cao Yat-sen and Cao Pi Rui. Sun Yat-sen's son, Cha Yu, chopped off Cao Qin's arm.

古文：钦走突安定诸门，门尽闭。
现代文：曹钦跑去突击安定等门，但门都全部关闭。
English: Cao Qin ran to storm the stable and waiting doors, but the doors were all closed.

古文：奔归家，拒战。
现代文：他奔回家中，与官军对抗。
English: He ran home and confronted the government troops.

古文：会大雨如注，镗督诸军大呼入，钦投井死。
现代文：正好大雨如注，孙镗督领各军大呼而入，曹钦投井而死。
English: Just as it was raining heavily, Sun Yat-sen led all the armies to rush in, and Cao Qin fell into a well and died.

古文：遂杀铎，尽屠其家。
现代文：遂杀曹铎，尽将其家属屠杀。
English: He then killed Cao Wei and slaughtered all of his family members.

古文：越三日，磔吉祥于市。
现代文：过了三天，将曹吉祥押往市场肢解。
English: Three days later, Cao Jixiang was taken to the market to be dismembered.

古文：汤序、冯益及吉祥姻党皆伏诛。
现代文：汤序、冯益以及曹吉祥的姻亲党羽全部被诛杀。
English: Tangzhu, Feng Yi and Cao Jixiang's in-laws were all killed.

古文：马亮以告反者，授都督。
现代文：马亮因为告发造反的人，被授予都督。
English: Ma Liang was awarded the title of governor-general for denouncing the rebels.

古文：英宗始任王振，继任吉祥，凡两致祸乱。
现代文：英宗最初信任王振，继而信任曹吉祥，两次都导致祸乱。
English: Yingzong initially trusted Wang Zhen and then trusted Cao Jixiang, both of which led to disaster.

古文：其他宦者若跛儿干、亦失哈、喜宁、韦力转、牛玉之属，率凶狡。
现代文：其他宦官如跛儿干、亦失哈、喜宁、韦力转、牛玉等人，也都凶狠狡猾。
English: Other eunuchs, such as Xie Ergan, Yibou Ha, Xining, Wei Lituan, Niu Yu and others, are also ferociously cunning.

古文：土木之败，跛儿干、喜宁皆降敌。
现代文：土木堡之败，跛儿干、喜宁都投降了敌人。
English: After the defeat of the earthwork fort, both Shielkan and Xining surrendered to the enemy.

古文：跛儿干助敌反攻，射内使黎定。
现代文：跛儿干助敌反攻，射中内使黎定。
English: Zou Er assisted the enemy's counter-offensive, and shot Li Ding in the middle.

古文：既又为敌使至京，有所需索，景帝执而诛之。
现代文：后来又作为敌人的使者到京师，提出各种要求，皇上将他拘拿诛杀。
English: Later, as an emissary of the enemy, he came to the capital and made various demands. The emperor arrested him and killed him.

古文：喜宁数为也先画策，索赏赐，导入边寇掠。
现代文：喜宁多次为也先出谋划策，索要赏赐，教他入侵边疆地区抢掠。
English: On many occasions, Xi Ning also made suggestions for him first, asked for rewards, and taught him to invade and plunder the frontier areas.

古文：上皇患之，言于也先；使宁还京索礼物，而命校尉袁彬以密书报边臣。
现代文：上皇很忧虑，便对也先说，让他派喜宁回京索取礼物，同时又命校尉袁彬以密书报告守边大臣。
English: The emperor was very worried, so he first said to him, let him send Xining back to Beijing to ask for a gift, and at the same time ordered Lieutenant Yuan Bin to report to the border guard minister in a secret letter.

古文：至独石，参将杨俊擒宁送京师，景泰元年二月磔于市。
现代文：喜宁到了独石，参将杨俊将他擒获，送到京师，景泰元年二月将他押到市场肢解。
English: When Xining arrived in Dokdo, the commander Yang Jun captured him and sent him to the capital, Beijing. In February of the same year, Jing Tai pushed him to the market to dismember him.

古文：亦失哈镇辽东。
现代文：亦失哈镇守辽东。
English: He also lost control of the Liaodong Province.

古文：敌犯广宁，亦失哈禁官军勿出击。
现代文：敌人侵犯广宁，亦失哈禁止官军出击。
English: The enemy invaded Guangning, and the government army was forbidden to attack.

古文：百户施带儿降敌，为脱脱不花通于亦失哈。
现代文：百户施带儿投降敌人，替脱脱不花与亦失哈交通。
English: Hundreds of families were forced to surrender to the enemy, and it cost nothing to get rid of them.

古文：正统十四年冬，带儿逃归，巡按御史刘孜并劾亦失哈及他不法事。
现代文：正统十四年冬，施带儿逃了回来，巡按御史刘孜一并弹劾亦失哈及其他违法的事情。
English: In the winter of the 14th year of the orthodoxy, Shih Tiao'er escaped and came back, and the inspector Liu Ze was impeached, and other illegal things happened.

古文：景帝命诛带儿，而置亦失哈不问。
现代文：景帝命将施带儿诛杀，而将亦失哈放过不问。
English: Emperor Jing's order was to kill Shih Tiao'er, but Shih Tiao let him go without question.

古文：韦力转者，性淫毒，镇守大同，多过恶。
现代文：韦力转，性淫毒，镇守大同期间，多有过恶。
English: Wei Lituan, sexual lewdness, during the town guard Datong period, there were more evils.

古文：衔军妻不与宿，杖死其军。
现代文：他心恨军士的妻子不与他睡觉，便杖杀那位军士。
English: He hated that the sergeant's wife wouldn't sleep with him, so he killed the sergeant.

古文：又与养子妻淫戏，射杀养子。
现代文：他又与养子的妻子淫戏，射杀养子。
English: He also fornicated with his adopted son's wife and shot his adopted son.

古文：天顺元年，工部侍郎霍瑄发力转僣用金器若王者，及强娶所部女为妾诸不法事。
现代文：天顺元年，工部侍郎霍蠧揭发了韦力转僭用王爷才能使用的金器，以及强娶所部的女儿为妾等不法事。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the chamberlain of the work department, Huo Jun, exposed the illegalities of Wei Li's use of gold objects that could only be used by princes, as well as the forced marriage of Shobu's daughter as a concubine.

古文：帝怒，执之下锦衣卫狱，既而宥之。
现代文：皇上大怒，将他拘捕，投进锦衣卫监狱，过后又宽宥了他。
English: The emperor was furious, arrested him, threw him into the Jinwei Prison, and later pardoned him.

古文：牛玉事，详《吴废后传》。
现代文：牛玉的事迹，详见《吴废后传》。
English: The story of NiuYu can be found in detail in "The Legend of Wu Wasted."

古文：其与吉祥分道征兀良哈者刘永诚，永乐时，尝为偏将，累从北征。
现代文：与曹吉祥分道征讨兀良哈的刘永诚，永乐时期，曾经作为偏将，多次随从北征。
English: Liu Yongcheng, who separated from Cao Jixiang to lead the Northern Expedition, once followed the Northern Expedition as a partial general during the Yongle Period.

古文：宣德、正统中，再击兀良哈。
现代文：宣德、正统年间，再讨兀良哈。
English: During the years of Xuande and orthodoxy, it was time to discuss Han Liangha again.

古文：后监镇甘、凉，战沙漠，有功。
现代文：后来监镇甘、凉，征战于沙漠，有功劳。
English: Later, Guanzhen Gan, Liang, fought in the desert, have merit.

古文：景泰末，掌团营。
现代文：景泰末年，执掌团营。
English: At the end of Jing Tai's life, he was in charge of the troupe.

古文：英宗复辟，勒兵从，官其嗣子聚。
现代文：英宗复辟后，他率兵追随，嗣子刘聚因此得以封官。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, he led the troops to follow him, and his heir Liu Ju was thus able to seal the official.

古文：成化中，永诚始卒。
现代文：成化年间，永诚才去世。
English: It was not until the year of Chenghua that Yongcheng passed away.

古文：怀恩，高密人，兵部侍郎戴纶族弟也。
现代文：怀恩，高密人，兵部侍郎戴纶的族弟。
English: Wynn, a member of the Gaomi clan, was the younger brother of the Hyobushiburo Daiyu.

古文：宣宗杀纶，并籍恩父太仆卿希文家。
现代文：宣宗杀死戴纶后，并将怀恩的父亲太常寺卿戴希文抄家。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong killed Dai Ye, he also seized the house of Wynn's father, Dai Xiwen, Lord of Taiji Temple.

古文：恩方幼，被宫为小黄门，赐名怀恩。
现代文：怀恩当时年幼，被施以宫刑作为小黄门，赐名怀恩。
English: Wine was young at the time, and was given the name Wine as a punishment for being a small yellow door.

古文：宪宗朝，掌司礼监。
现代文：宪宗一朝，他执掌司礼监。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gensong, he was in charge of the chief etiquette officer.

古文：时汪直理西厂，梁芳、韦兴等用事。恩班在前，性忠鲠无所挠，诸阉咸敬惮之。
现代文：当时汪直管西厂，梁芳、韦兴等人专权用事，怀恩级别在他们之上，他个性忠诚耿直，不屈不挠，这帮阉官都很敬畏他。
English: At that time, Wang was directly in charge of the West Factory, and Liang Fang, Wei Xing and others were in charge of exclusive affairs. Wynn's level was higher than theirs. His personality was loyal and unyielding. These eunuchs were all in awe of him.

古文：员外郎林俊论芳及僧继晓下狱，帝欲诛之，恩固争。
现代文：员外郎林俊将梁芳和僧人继晓判罪入狱，皇上想杀了他，怀恩坚持力争。
English: The courtier Lin Jun sentenced Liang Fang and the monk Jixiao to prison. The emperor wanted to kill him, but Wynn insisted.

古文：帝怒，投以砚曰： 若助俊讪我。 
现代文：皇上大怒，将砚台投向怀恩，说 ：你助林俊诽谤我！ 
English: The emperor was furious and threw the ring to Wine, saying: You helped Lin Jun slander me!

古文：恩免冠伏地号哭。
现代文：怀恩免冠伏在地上号哭。
English: Wynn dropped to the ground, crying.

古文：帝叱之出。
现代文：皇上将他叱出。
English: The emperor scolded him.

古文：恩遣人告镇抚司曰： 汝曹谄芳倾俊。俊死，汝曹何以生！ 
现代文：怀恩派人告诉镇抚司说 ：你们巴结梁芳排挤林俊，林俊死了，你们又怎么活下去？ 
English: Wynn sent someone to tell the town marshal: "You are trying to get Liang Fang to oust Lin Jun. Lin Jun is dead, how can you live?

古文：径归，称疾不起。
现代文：他径自回家，称病不出。
English: He went straight home, saying he was not feeling well.

古文：帝怒解，遣医视恩，卒释俊。
现代文：皇上怒意消除后，派医生去探视怀恩，最后释放了林俊。
English: After the emperor's anger subsided, he sent a doctor to visit Wine, and finally released Lin Jun.

古文：会星变，罢诸传奉官。
现代文：正好有星变发生，皇上罢设各传奉官。
English: Just as a star change occurs, the emperor suspends all missionaries.

古文：御马监王敏请留马房传奉者，帝许之。
现代文：御马监王敏请求保留马房传奉官，皇上批准了。
English: Wang Min, the overseer of horses, requested that the post of equestrian preacher be retained, and the emperor approved.

古文：敏谒恩，恩大骂曰： 星变，专为我曹坏国政故。
现代文：王敏去拜见怀恩，怀恩大骂他道： 发生星变，完全是我们这帮人败坏国政的结果。
English: Wang Min went to see Wine, and Wine scolded him, saying, "The star change is entirely the result of our group corrupting state affairs.

古文：今甫欲正之，又为汝坏，天雷击汝矣！ 
现代文：现在刚刚想改正，又被你破坏了，你要挨天打五雷轰！ 
English: Just now I wanted to correct it, but you ruined it again. You're going to hit the sky with thunder and lightning!

古文：敏愧恨，遂死。
现代文：王敏又愧又恨，不久死去。
English: Wang Min was both ashamed and disgusted, and died soon after.

古文：进宝石者章瑾求为锦衣卫镇抚，恩不可，曰： 镇抚掌诏狱，奈何以贿进。 
现代文：进贡宝石的章瑾请求做锦衣卫镇抚使，怀恩不答应，说： 镇抚使掌管诏狱，怎能通过贿赂得进？ 
English: The tributary of the gemstone, Zhang Jun, asked to be the Jin clothing, Wei and Zhen Fuzhi, but Hui En did not agree, saying: Zhen Fuzhi is in charge of the imperial prison, how can he get in through bribery?

古文：当是时，尚书王恕以直谏名，恩每叹曰： 天下忠义，斯人而已。 
现代文：那时候，尚书王恕以敢于直谏闻名，怀恩每每叹息说： 天下忠义之士，只此人而已。 
English: At that time, King Shang Shuxu was famous for daring to be forthright. Wai Yan sighed and said, "He is the only loyal person in the world."

古文：宪宗末，惑万贵妃言，欲易太子，恩固争。
现代文：宪宗末年，皇上被万贵妃所迷惑，想更换太子，怀恩坚持力争。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Gensong, the emperor was confused by Princess Mangui and wanted to change the crown prince, but Wain insisted.

古文：帝不怿，斥居凤阳。
现代文：皇上很不高兴，将他斥往凤阳居住。
English: The emperor was very displeased and banished him to live in Fengyang.

古文：孝宗立，召归，仍掌司礼监，力劝帝逐万安，用王恕。
现代文：孝宗即位后，怀恩被召回，仍执掌司礼监，力劝皇上逐出万安，任用王恕。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Wai Yan was recalled and remained in charge of the superintendent of ceremonies, urging the emperor to expel Wan'an and appoint Wang Ji.

古文：一时正人汇进，恩之力也。
现代文：一时间正人聚集于朝廷，这都是怀恩的功劳。
English: For a while, the right people gathered at the imperial court, all thanks to Wine.

古文：卒，赐祠额曰显忠。
现代文：他去世后，皇上赐给祠额叫 显忠 。
English: After his death, the emperor gave the shrine the name Hsien Chung.

古文：同时有覃吉者，不知所由进，以老阉侍太子。
现代文：当时还有个叫覃吉的，不知道他怎么进的宫，他作为老阉官，得以侍奉太子。
English: At that time, there was also a man named Shunji, I don't know how he got into the palace, but as an old eunuch, he was able to serve the crown prince.

古文：太子年九岁，吉口授《四书》章句及古今政典。
现代文：太子年方九岁，覃吉向他口授《四书》章句以及古今政典。
English: When the prince was nine years old, Yan Ji dictated to him the chapters of the "Four Books" as well as the ancient and modern political codes.

古文：宪宗赐太子庄田，吉劝毋受，曰： 天下皆太子有也。 
现代文：宪宗赐给太子庄田，覃吉劝他不要接受，说 ：天下都是太子所有。 
English: Kenzong gave it to Prince Shoda, but Shunji advised him not to accept it, saying, "All the land belongs to the prince."

古文：太子偶从内侍读佛经，吉入，太子惊曰： 老伴来矣。 
现代文：太子偶尔跟别的宦官读佛经，覃吉刚走进去，太子惊道： 老伴来了！ 
English: Occasionally, the prince would read Buddhist scriptures with other eunuchs. As soon as Han Ji walked in, the prince exclaimed in surprise, "My wife is here!"

古文：亟手《孝经》。
现代文：赶紧拿起《孝经》。
English: Quickly pick up "The Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：吉跪曰： 太子诵佛书乎？ 
现代文：覃吉跪下说 ：太子在诵读佛经吗？ 
English: Hao Ji knelt down and said, "Is the prince reciting Buddhist scriptures?"

古文：曰： 无有。
现代文：太子说 ：没有。
English: Wang Qie replied: No.

古文：《孝经》耳。 
现代文：是读的《孝经》。 
English: is the reading of the "Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：吉顿首曰： 甚善。
现代文：覃吉叩头说 ：很好。
English: The henchman said, "That's good."

古文：佛书诞，不可信也。 
现代文：佛书荒诞，不可信。 
English: Buddhist books are absurd and not to be trusted.

古文：弘治之世，政治醇美，君德清明，端本正始，吉有力焉。
现代文：弘治之世，政治淳美，君德清明，根本端正，覃吉对此是有功劳的。
English: In the world of Hongzhi, politics is beautiful, morality is clear, and the fundamentals are correct. Xingji is responsible for this.

古文：汪直者，大藤峡瑶种也。
现代文：汪直，是大藤峡瑶人。
English: Wang Zhi is from Dafuji Gorge.

古文：初给事万贵妃于昭德宫，迁御马监太监。
现代文：最初在昭德宫侍奉万贵妃，后升任御马监太监。
English: At first, he served Princess Mangui at the Zhodok Palace, and later he was promoted to the post of imperial equestrian inspector and eunuch.

古文：成化十二年，黑眚见宫中，妖人李子龙以符术结太监韦舍私入大内，事发，伏诛。
现代文：成化十二年，有黑眚现于宫中，妖人李子龙用巫术勾结太监韦舍私自进入大内，事发后被诛杀。
English: In the twelfth year of Chenghua, a black dragonfly appeared in the palace. The sorcerer Li Zilong used sorcery to collude with the eunuch Wei She to secretly enter the Great Palace, and was killed after the incident.

古文：帝心恶之，锐欲知外事。
现代文：皇上心中很讨厌这件事，急于想了解外面的事情。
English: In his heart, the Emperor hated this and was anxious to know what was going on outside.

古文：直为人便黠，帝因令易服，将校尉一二人密出伺察，人莫知也，独都御史王越与结欢。
现代文：汪直为人狡猾聪明，皇上于是令他改换服装，带一两名校尉秘密出去侦察。人们都不知道，只有都御史王越与他相交甚欢。
English: Wang Zhi was a cunning and clever man, so the emperor ordered him to change his clothes and secretly go out to scout with one or two lieutenants. People did not know that only the governor of the capital, Wang Yue, was very pleased with him.

古文：明年设西厂，以直领之，列官校刺事。
现代文：第二年设立西厂，由汪直统领，设立官校刺探消息。
English: In the second year, the west factory was established, headed by Wang Zhi, and the establishment of a government school was reported.

古文：南京镇监覃力朋进贡还，以百艘载私盐，骚扰州县。
现代文：南京镇监覃力朋上京进贡后回去，用一百艘船只载运私盐，骚扰所过州县。
English: After going to Beijing to pay tribute, Nanjing Town Supervisor Xing Libang went back and used a hundred ships to transport the smuggled salt, harassing the station across the prefectures.

古文：武城县典史诘之，力朋击典史，折其齿，射杀一人。
现代文：武城县典史责问他，反倒被覃力朋击打，牙齿被打断，另有一人被射杀。
English: He was reprimanded by Wucheng County's official historian, but was instead beaten by the police, his teeth were broken, and another person was shot to death.

古文：直廉得以闻，逮治论斩。
现代文：汪直查访得知，报告了皇上，结果覃力朋被逮捕，判了斩刑。
English: Wang Zhiqian learned from the visit and reported to the emperor. As a result, Yan Lihong was arrested and sentenced to beheading.

古文：力朋后得幸免，而帝以此谓直能摘奸，益幸直。
现代文：覃力朋后来侥幸得免，而皇上通过这件事以为汪直能探知奸情，更加宠爱他。
English: Later, Yan Lihong was spared by a fluke, and the emperor thought that Wang Zhi could detect treachery through this matter, and he loved him even more.

古文：直乃任锦衣百户韦瑛为心腹，屡兴大狱。
现代文：汪直于是用锦衣卫百户韦瑛为心腹，屡兴大狱。
English: Wang Zhi then used Jin Yi Wei Hyakujo Wei Ying as a confidant and repeatedly went to prison.

古文：建宁卫指挥杨晔，故少师荣曾孙也，与父泰为仇家所告，逃入京，匿姊夫董玙所。
现代文：建宁卫指挥使杨晔，是原少师杨荣的曾孙，与父亲杨泰被仇家所告，逃入京师，躲在姐夫董的住所。
English: Jian Ningwei's commander Yang Wei, the great-grandson of the original minor master Yang Rong, and his father Yang Tai were accused by their enemies, fled to Beijing and hid in the residence of his brother-in-law Dong.

古文：玙为请瑛，瑛阳诺而驰报直。
现代文：董为他们向韦瑛求情，韦瑛假装答应，而后飞马报告汪直。
English: Dong pleaded with Wei Ying for them, Wei Ying pretended to agree, and then Pegasus reported to Wang Zhi.

古文：直即捕晔、玙考讯，三琶之。
现代文：汪直立即逮捕杨晔和董来审问，三次 琶 他们。
English: Wang Zhi immediately arrested Yang Hui and Dong to interrogate them, and beat them three times.

古文：琶者，锦衣酷刑也。骨节皆寸解，绝而复苏。
现代文：琶，是锦衣卫的一种酷刑，被琶后人的骨节都寸断，昏死过去又疼醒过来。
English: The lute was a form of torture for Jin Ribei. After being beaten with the lute, his bones and joints were broken, and he passed out and woke up in pain.

古文：晔不胜苦，妄言寄金于其叔父兵部主事士伟所。
现代文：杨晔不堪忍受这种痛苦的折磨，妄言有黄金寄存在他的叔父兵部主事杨士伟处。
English: Unable to bear such a painful ordeal, Yang Hui falsely claimed that the gold was deposited with his uncle Yang Shiwei, the head of the military department.

古文：直不复奏请，捕士伟下狱，并掠其妻孥。
现代文：汪直不奏请皇上，将杨士伟逮捕入狱，并掠去他的妻儿。
English: Wang Zhi did not heed the emperor's request, arrested Yang Shiwei and imprisoned him, and abducted his wife and child.

古文：狱具，晔死狱中，泰论斩，士伟等皆谪官，郎中武清、乐章，行人张廷纲，参政刘福等皆无故被收案。
现代文：后来定案，杨晔已死于狱中，杨泰论斩，杨士伟等人都被贬官，郎中武清、乐章，行人张廷纲，参政刘福等人都无故被收进本案之中。
English: Later, the case was finalized, Yang Hui had died in prison, Yang Taixuan was beheaded, Yang Shihwei and others were demoted, and his son-in-law Wu Qing, music composer, passerby Zhang Tinggang, and politician Liu Fu and others were all included in the case without reason.

古文：自诸王府边镇及南北河道，所在校尉罗列，民间斗詈鸡狗琐事，辄置重法，人情大扰。
现代文：从各个王府、边镇到南北河道，到处都布有校尉，民间斗骂鸡狗之类的琐事，也被治以重法，人情大受扰乱。
English: From various royal residences and border towns to the Nanbei River, there are schoolmasters everywhere. Trivial matters, such as people fighting and cursing chickens and dogs, are also treated as serious crimes, and people's feelings are greatly disturbed.

古文：直每出，随从甚众，公卿皆避道。
现代文：汪直每次出行，随从很多，公卿大夫都避于道旁。
English: Every time Wang Zhi travels, he has a lot of followers, and the noble doctor avoids the roadside.

古文：兵部尚书项忠不避，迫辱之，权焰出东厂上。
现代文：兵部尚书项忠不避，汪直折辱他，权焰出于东厂之上。
English: Shang Shujian of the Military Department did not avoid loyalty, Wang Zhiren insulted him, and the flames of power rose above the East Factory.

古文：五月，大学士商辂与万安、刘珝、刘吉奏其状。
现代文：五月，大学士商辂和万安、刘王羽、刘吉上奏汪直的行状。
English: In May, university scholars and merchants He Wan'an, Liu Wangyu, and Liu Jizhong played the role of Wang Zhi.

古文：帝震怒，命司礼太监怀恩、覃吉、黄高至阁下，厉色传旨，言： 疏出谁意？ 
现代文：皇上大怒，命司礼监太监怀恩、覃吉、黄高到内阁，他们脸色严厉地传圣旨问道 ：这奏疏是出于谁的主意？ 
English: The emperor was furious. The overseers of the imperial court, the eunuchs Huai'en, Baiji, and Huang Gao, were summoned to the cabinet. With stern faces, they proclaimed the imperial edict and asked, "Whose idea was it to play the flute?"

古文：辂口数直罪甚悉，因言： 臣等同心一意，为国除害，无有先后。 
现代文：商辂很详尽地口数汪直的罪行，并说道： 臣等同心一意，为国除害，没有先后之分。 
English: He spoke in great detail about the crimes of Wang Zhi, and said: The vassals are of one mind, to eliminate harm to the country, there is no priority.

古文：珝慷慨泣下。
现代文：刘王羽等人慷慨而泣。
English: Liu Wangyu and others generously wept.

古文：恩遂据实以奏。
现代文：怀恩于是据实上奏。
English: Wynn then played on.

古文：顷之，传旨慰劳。
现代文：不久，皇上传旨慰劳汪直。
English: Soon, the emperor sent an order to comfort Lao Wang Zhi.

古文：翼日，尚书忠及诸大臣疏亦入。
现代文：第二天，尚书项忠以及其他大臣的奏疏也呈入了。
English: The next day, the reports of Shang Shuxiangzhong and other ministers were also submitted.

古文：帝不得已，罢西厂，使怀恩数直罪而宥之，令归御马监，调韦瑛边卫，散诸旗校还锦衣。
现代文：皇上不得已，罢设西厂，派怀恩去历数汪直的罪状后宽宥了他，令他回到御马监，将韦瑛调往边防卫所，并将各个旗校遣回锦衣卫。
English: The emperor had no choice but to close down the West Factory, and after sending Wai Yan to investigate Wang Zhi's crimes, he pardoned him, ordered him to return to the Horse Guards, transferred Wei Ying to the Frontier Defense Station, and sent all the flag schools back to Jin Yi Wei.

古文：中外大悦。
现代文：朝廷内外人心大快。
English: These measures made the morning and evening people's hearts beat faster.

古文：然帝眷直不衰。
现代文：但皇上对汪直的宠爱不衰。
English: However, the emperor's fondness for Wang Zhi continued unabated.

古文：直因言阁疏出司礼监黄赐、陈祖生意，为杨晔报复。
现代文：汪直于是说内阁的奏章是司礼监黄赐、陈祖生的主意，目的是为杨晔报仇。
English: Wang Zhi then said that the cabinet's report was the idea of the chief eunuch Huang Qi and Chen Zusheng, and the purpose was to take revenge for Yang Xuanrou.

古文：帝即斥赐、祖生于南京。
现代文：皇上马上将黄赐、陈祖贬斥南京。
English: The emperor immediately sent Huang Zhi and Chen Zu to denounce Nanjing.

古文：御史戴缙者，佞人也，九年秩满不得迁。窥帝旨，盛称直功。
现代文：御史戴缙是个佞人，任满九年不得升迁，他窥探出皇上的心意，盛赞汪直的功劳。
English: The imperial historian Dai Zheng was an eunuch who was not allowed to be promoted after nine years in office. He spied out the emperor's intentions and praised Wang Zhi's achievements.

古文：诏复开西厂，以千户吴绶为镇抚，直焰愈炽。
现代文：皇上下诏重开西厂，以千户吴绶为镇抚使，汪直的气焰更炽。
English: The emperor issued an edict to reopen the west factory, with Qianhu Wuyi as the governor, and Wang Zhi's enthusiasm became even more ardent.

古文：未几，令东厂官校诬奏项忠，且讽言官郭镗、冯贯等论忠违法事。
现代文：过了不久，他令东厂官校上书诬告项忠，并暗示言官郭镗、冯贵等人论奏项忠违法的事情。
English: Soon after, he ordered the East Factory Government School to write a letter to falsely accuse Xiangzhong, and hinted that the spokesman Guo Wei, Feng Gui and others would talk about the illegal things of Xiangzhong.

古文：帝命三法司、锦衣卫会问。
现代文：皇上命三法司、锦衣卫会审。
English: Emperor's order three legal departments, brocade guards will be audited.

古文：众知出直意，无敢违，竟勒忠为民。
现代文：众人知道这是出于汪直的主意，不敢违抗，竟将项忠勒令为民。
English: Everyone knew that this was Wang Zhi's idea, and they did not dare to disobey him, but they ordered Xiang Zhongle to become a citizen.

古文：而左都御史李宾亦失直旨褫职，大学士辂亦罢去。
现代文：而左都御史李宾因违背汪直的旨意被撤职，大学士商辂也被罢免。
English: However, Li Bin, the governor of the Left Capital, was dismissed for violating Wang Zhi's will, and the university's vice-president, Shang Tao, was also dismissed.

古文：一时九卿劾罢者，尚书董方、薛远及侍郎滕昭、程万里等数十人。
现代文：一时间九卿受弹劾罢免的，有尚书董方、薛远以及侍郎滕昭、程万里等数十人。
English: For a time, nine nobles were impeached and removed from office, including Shang Shufang, Xue Yuan, and his attendants Teng Zhao and Cheng Wanli.

古文：以所善王越为兵部尚书兼左都御史，陈钺为右副都御史巡抚辽东。
现代文：汪直以他所交好的王越为兵部尚书兼左都御史，陈钺为右副都御史兼辽东巡抚。
English: Wang Zhi took his good friend Wang Yue as the head of the military department and left-wing capital historian, and Chen Xi as the right-wing deputy capital historian and Liaodong governor.

古文：十五年秋，诏直巡边，率飞骑日驰数百里，御史、主事等官迎拜马首，箠挞守令。
现代文：十五年秋，诏令汪直巡视边防，他率领轻骑日驰数百里，御史、主事等官员都迎拜于马首，一些守将受到鞭挞。
English: In the autumn of the fifteenth year, Wang Zhizhi was ordered to patrol the border, and he led a light cavalry for hundreds of miles a day. Officials such as the chief historian and the leading official all bowed to the horse's head, and some guards would be whipped.

古文：各边都御史畏直，服櫜鞬迎谒，供张百里外。
现代文：各边塞的都御史害怕汪直，都佩带弓箭前往迎谒，在百里之外设帐等候。
English: The prefectural governors of all the border towns were afraid of Wang Zhi, so they all went to meet him with bows and arrows and set up tents a hundred miles away to wait for him.

古文：至辽东，陈钺郊迎蒲伏，厨传尤盛，左右皆有贿。
现代文：到了辽东，陈钺到郊外迎接，匍伏在地，供应的饮食尤为丰盛，甚至汪直左右的人都得到贿赂。
English: When they arrived in Liaodong, Chen Xi went to the suburbs to welcome them, and lay down on the ground. The food was particularly rich, and even people around Wang Zhi were bribed.

古文：直大悦。
现代文：汪直很高兴。
English: Wang Zhi is very happy.

古文：惟河南巡抚秦纮与直抗礼，而密奏直巡边扰民。
现代文：只有河南巡抚秦与汪直抗礼，并密奏汪直巡边扰民。
English: Only the Henan governor Qin and Wang Zhi protested, and secretly played Wang Zhi's border patrol to disturb the people.

古文：帝弗省。
现代文：皇上不理。
English: The emperor did not reflect.

古文：兵部侍郎马文升方抚谕辽东，直至不为礼，又轻钺，被陷坐戍，由是直威势倾天下。
现代文：兵部侍郎马文升正在辽东抚谕，汪直到后，他不以礼相迎，又轻视陈钺，结果被陷害罚去戍边。从此汪直威势倾天下。
English: The attendant of the military department, Ma Wensheng, was in the east of Liaodong Province, and when Wang finally arrived, he did not greet him with courtesy, but also despised Chen Xuan. As a result, he was framed and punished. From then on, Wang Zhiwei dominated the world.

古文：直年少喜兵。
现代文：汪直正年轻，喜好武事。
English: Wang Zhizheng is young and likes martial arts.

古文：陈钺讽直征伏当加，立边功自固。
现代文：陈钺暗示汪直征讨伏当加，建立边功以巩固自己的地位。
English: Chen Yao suggested that Wang Zhizheng fight against Vodangga and establish a frontier to consolidate his position.

古文：直听之，用抚宁侯朱永总兵，而自监其军。
现代文：汪直听从了，便用抚宁侯朱永为总兵，自任监军。
English: When Wang Zhi obeyed, he appointed Zhu Yong, a Fuxing peasant, as the commander-in-chief and himself as the supervisor of the troops.

古文：师还，永封保国公，钺晋右都御史，直加禄米。
现代文：回师后，朱永封为保国公，陈钺晋升为右御史，汪直得增禄米。
English: After returning to his teacher, Zhu Yongfeng was promoted to the position of Guo Guogong, Chen Qi was promoted to the position of Yu Mi Shi, and Wang Zhizhong was promoted to the position of Zeng Lu.

古文：又用王越言，诈称亦思马因犯边。
现代文：他又采纳王越的建议，诈称亦思马因侵犯边疆。
English: He also adopted Wang Yue's suggestion and falsely claimed that Yishima had violated the border.

古文：诏永同越西讨，直为监军。
现代文：诏令朱永与王越一同征讨，汪直为监军。
English: The emperor ordered Zhu Yong and Wang Yue to go on a campaign together, with Wang Zhi as the overseer.

古文：越封威宁伯，直再加禄米。已，伏当加寇辽东，亦思马因寇大同，杀掠甚众。
现代文：王越被封为威宁伯，汪直再增加禄米，后来伏当加入侵辽东，亦思马因入侵大同，杀掠很多。
English: Wang Yue was given the title of Wening Bo, and Wang Zhi further increased the amount of loot. Later, Fudang joined the invasion of Liaodong, and Sima invaded Datong, killing and plundering many.

古文：辽东巡按强珍发钺奸状，直右钺谪珍。
现代文：辽东巡按强珍揭发陈钺的奸状，汪直护着陈钺而将强珍贬职。
English: The Liaodong patrol pressed Qiang Zhen to expose Chen Zhe's treachery, and Wang Zhizhong protected Chen Zhe and demoted Qiang Zhen.

古文：于是恶直者，指王越、陈钺为二钺。
现代文：于是憎恶汪直的人，称王越、陈钺为二钺。
English: As a result, people who hated Wang Zhi called Wang Yue and Chen Yao the two cormorants.

古文：小中官阿丑工俳优，一日于帝前为醉者谩骂状。
现代文：小宦官阿丑善演滑稽戏，一天他在皇上面前扮演一个醉汉谩骂的样子。
English: Little eunuch Ugly is good at burlesque. One day he plays the role of a drunken reviler in front of the emperor.

古文：人言驾至，谩如故。言汪太监至，则避走。曰： 今人但知汪太监也。 
现代文：有人说皇上来了，他仍旧谩骂，而一听说汪太监来了，他拔腿就走，说 ：现在的人都只知道汪太监。 
English: Some people say that when the emperor came, he was still abusive, but as soon as he heard that Wang Yijun was coming, he left, saying, "Nowadays, people only know Wang Yijun."

古文：又为直状，操两钺趋帝前。旁人问之，曰： 吾将兵，仗此两钺耳。 
现代文：他又扮成汪直的样子，手持两把钺跑到皇上面前，旁人说他，他说： 我带兵，就是仗着这两把钺。 
English: He also pretended to be Wang Zhi, and ran in front of the emperor with two maces in his hand. Someone else said of him, "I lead the soldiers by means of these two maces."

古文：问何钺，曰： 王越、陈钺也。 
现代文：旁人问是什么钺，他说： 王越和陈钺。 
English: When asked by a bystander what they were, he said: "Wang Yue and Chen Yao."

古文：帝听然而笑，稍稍悟，然廷臣犹未敢攻直也。
现代文：皇上听后笑了，渐渐领悟了他的意思，但廷臣还不敢攻击汪直。
English: After listening, the emperor smiled and gradually understood his meaning, but the courtiers still dared not attack Wang Zhi.

古文：会东厂尚铭获贼得厚赏，直忌，且怒铭不告。
现代文：正好东厂的尚铭因擒获贼人获得丰厚的奖赏，汪直很妒嫉，又恨尚铭不告诉他。
English: Just as Shang Ming of the East Factory received a rich reward for capturing a thief, Wang Zhi was very jealous and hated Shang Ming for not telling him.

古文：铭惧，乃廉得其所泄禁中秘语奏之，尽发王越交通不法事，帝始疏直。
现代文：尚铭害怕了，便将查访到的汪直所泄露的宫中秘语上奏皇上，还全部揭发与王越交往不法的事情，皇上这才疏远汪直。
English: Shang Ming was afraid, so he reported to the emperor the secret words of the palace leaked by Wang Zhi, who had visited the palace. He also revealed all the illegal affairs with Wang Yue, which alienated Wang Zhi.

古文：十七年秋，命直偕越往宣府御敌。
现代文：十七年秋，皇上命汪直偕同王越前往宣府御敌。
English: In the autumn of the seventeenth year, the emperor ordered Wang Zhaojun and Wang Yue to go to Xuanfu to fight the enemy.

古文：敌退，直请班师。
现代文：敌人退走后，汪直请求班师。
English: After the enemy retreated, Wang Zhi asked his squadron to return.

古文：不许，徙镇大同，而尽召将吏还，独留直、越。
现代文：皇上不许，将他调往大同镇守，而将其他将吏全部召回，只留下汪直和王越。
English: The emperor did not allow it, and he was transferred to the Datong town guard, while all other officers were recalled, leaving only Wang Zhi and Wang Yue.

古文：直既久镇不得还，宠日衰。
现代文：汪直既然久在边镇不得回朝，宠爱自然日衰。
English: Since Wang Zhi has been in the border town for a long time and is not allowed to return to the morning, he loves the natural sunset.

古文：给事御史交章奏其苛扰，请仍罢西厂。
现代文：给事中和御史纷纷上奏汪直苛刻扰乱的情况，请求仍旧罢设西厂。
English: In the case of Wang Zhi's harsh disruption of the situation, the request is still to suspend the west plant.

古文：阁臣万安亦力言之。
现代文：内阁大臣万安也力持这一建议。
English: Cabinet Minister Wan An also strongly supports this proposal.

古文：而大同巡抚郭镗复言直与总兵许宁不和，恐误边事。
现代文：而大同巡抚郭镗又说汪直与总兵许宁不和，恐怕耽误边事。
English: But Datong governor Guo Wei also said that Wang Zhi and general Xu Ning were not on good terms, and he was afraid of delaying things.

古文：帝乃调直南京御马监，罢西厂不复设。
现代文：皇上于是将汪直调往南京御马监，罢设西厂。朝廷内外一片喜悦。
English: Therefore, the emperor transferred Wang Zhi to Nanjing Mima Supervisor and set up the West Factory. There was great joy inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：中外欣然。寻又以言官言，降直奉御，而褫逐其党王越、戴缙、吴绶等。
现代文：不久又因言官的言论，将汪直降为奉御，而将他的党羽王越、戴缙、吴绶等人撤职逐出。
English: Soon, because of the speech of the spokesman, Wang Zhiguo was demoted to the position of minister, and his party members Wang Yue, Dai Jun, Wu Jun and others were removed from their posts.

古文：陈钺已致仕，不问。
现代文：陈钺已经退休，不再问罪。
English: Chen Yao has retired and no longer faces criminal charges.

古文：韦瑛后坐他事诛，人皆快之，然直竟良死。
现代文：韦瑛后来因犯别的罪被诛，人人称快，但汪直竟得良死。
English: Wei Ying was later arrested for committing another crime. Everyone was happy, but Wang Zhi actually died a good death.

古文：缙由御史不数年至南京工部尚书。
现代文：戴缙任御史不几年便升到南京工部尚书。
English: Within a few years of his appointment to the position of Imperial Historian, Dai Yan was promoted to the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：越、钺颇以材进。
现代文：王越、陈钺颇以才能得进。
English: Wang Yue and Chen Yao were able to get in with their talent.

古文：缙无他能，工侧媚而已。
现代文：戴缙没有别的才能，只是工于讨好献媚而已。
English: Dai Yao has no other talent but to be a flatterer.

古文：西厂废，尚铭遂专东厂事。
现代文：西厂废除后，尚铭遂独专东厂事务。
English: After the abolition of the West Plant, Shang Ming finally took over the affairs of the East Plant.

古文：闻京师有富室，辄以事罗织，得重贿乃已。
现代文：他一听说京师有哪一家富裕，便给他罗织罪名，索得重贿才罢休。
English: As soon as he heard that there was a wealthy family in Beijing Division, he fabricated charges against him and solicited heavy bribes before giving up.

古文：卖官鬻爵，无所不至。
现代文：他卖官鬻爵，无所不为。
English: He's a bureaucrat and a nobleman, he can do anything.

古文：帝寻觉之，谪充南京净军，籍其家，辇送内府，数日不尽。而陈准代为东厂。
现代文：皇上不久察觉后，将他贬往南京充净军，并抄了他的家，财物用人力车拉进内府，几天都没运完，而用陈准代领东厂。
English: Soon after the emperor became aware of this, he banished him to Nanjing to join the purification army, and confiscated his home. He used rickshaws to pull his belongings into the Inner Palace, which took several days to transport, and used Chen Jun to lead the East Factory.

古文：准素善怀恩，既代铭，诫诸校尉曰： 有大逆，告我。
现代文：陈准素与怀恩交好，他取代尚铭后，便告诫各校尉道： 有大逆之事，就告诉我。
English: Chen Junsu befriended Wynn. After he replaced Shang Ming, he admonished the captains: "If there is anything wrong, let me know."

古文：非是，若勿预也。 
现代文：不是这类事情，你们不要干预。 
English: It's not that kind of thing. You don't interfere.

古文：都人安之。
现代文：都城官民得以安宁。
English: Officials and citizens in the capital were able to enjoy peace.

古文：梁芳者，宪宗朝内侍也。
现代文：梁芳，是宪宗朝的宦官。
English: Liang Fang was a eunuch of the Qianzong Dynasty.

古文：贪黩谀佞，与韦兴比。
现代文：他为人贪婪，善于奉承谄媚。与韦兴相类似。
English: He is greedy and good at flattery. He is similar to Wei Xing.

古文：而谄万贵妃，日进美珠珍宝悦妃意。
现代文：为了巴结万贵妃，他每天进献美珠珍宝以取悦贵妃。
English: In order to ingratiate himself with the princess, he presented precious jewels every day to please the princess.

古文：其党钱能、韦眷、王敬等，争假采办名，出监大镇。
现代文：他的党羽钱能、韦眷、王敬等人，争相借采办之名，出去监镇大镇。
English: His followers Qian Neng, Wei Yan, Wang Jing and others vied with each other to borrow the name of the procurement office and go out to supervise the town of Dashen.

古文：帝以妃故，不问也。
现代文：皇上因贵妃的缘故，对他们不闻不问。
English: For the sake of the princess, the emperor ignored them.

古文：妖人李孜省、僧继晓皆由芳进，共为奸利。
现代文：妖人李孜省、僧人继晓都通过梁芳获得进身，共谋奸利。
English: Li Ze, a demon, and Jixiao, a monk, both gained advancement through Liang Fang and conspired to make money.

古文：取中旨授官，累数千人，名传奉官，有白衣躐至太常卿者。
现代文：他取圣旨授官，累计达数千人，名叫传奉官，有的由平民骤然升到太常寺卿的。
English: He made thousands of people officials by imperial order, and they were called chokan, and some of them were suddenly promoted from commoners to chief priests of Taejō-ji.

古文：陕西巡抚郑时论芳被黜，陕民哭送之。
现代文：陕西巡抚郑时因论奏梁芳而被废黜，陕西百姓哭着为他送行。
English: Zheng Shi, the governor of Shaanxi, was deposed because of his criticism of Liang Fang, and the people of Shaanxi sent him away in tears.

古文：帝闻颇悔，斥传奉官十人，系六人狱，诏自后传旨授官者俱覆奏，然不罪芳也。
现代文：皇上听说后颇为后悔，斥退了十名传奉官，将六人关进监狱，诏令今后凡是传旨授官的，都要复奏，但并不给梁芳加罪。
English: After hearing about this, the emperor was quite regretful. He dismissed ten of the missionaries and put six of them in prison. He issued a decree that in the future, anyone who gave orders to the missionaries would be punished, but he did not punish Liang Fang.

古文：刑部员外郎林俊以劾芳及继晓下狱。
现代文：刑部员外郎林俊因弹劾梁芳和继晓而入狱。
English: Warden Wai Lang Lin Jun went to prison for impeaching Liang Fang and Ji Xiao.

古文：久之，帝视内帑，见累朝金七窖俱尽，谓芳及韦兴曰： 糜费帑藏，实由汝二人。 
现代文：不久，皇上视察内府仓库，见累朝积蓄的七窖黄金都用完了，对梁芳和韦兴说 ：浪费库藏，实是你们二人。 
English: Soon, the emperor inspected the warehouse in Nefu and saw that the seven cellars of gold accumulated over the years had all been used up. He said to Liang Fang and Wei Xing: "You two are wasting the treasure.

古文：兴不敢对。
现代文：韦兴不敢回答。
English: Wei Xing did not dare to answer.

古文：芳曰： 建显灵宫及诸祠庙，为陛下祈万年福耳。 
现代文：梁芳说 ：修建显灵宫以及各个祠庙，都是为陛下祈祷万年之福嘛。 
English: Liang Fang said: "The construction of the Xianling Palace and the various ancestral temples are all prayers for the eternal happiness of His Majesty."

古文：帝不怿曰： 吾不汝瑕，后之人将与汝计矣 。
现代文：皇上不高兴地说： 我不挑你的过失，但后来人将会与你计较。 
English: The emperor was displeased and said, "I will not find fault with you, but later people will quarrel with you."

古文：芳大惧，遂说贵妃劝帝废太子，而立兴王。
现代文：梁芳非常害怕，便说服贵妃劝皇上废太子，另立兴王。
English: Liang Fang was very afraid, so he persuaded Guifei to persuade the emperor to abolish the crown prince and set up another king, Xing Wang.

古文：会泰山累震，占者言应在东朝。
现代文：正好泰山多次发生地震，占卜的人说这是应在东宫。
English: It just so happens that Mount Tai has been hit by several earthquakes, and soothsayers say that this is due to the East Palace.

古文：帝惧，乃止。
现代文：皇上害怕而止。
English: The Emperor was afraid and stopped.

古文：孝宗立，谪芳居南京，寻下狱，兴亦斥退。
现代文：孝宗即位后，将梁芳贬居南京，不久又将他下狱，韦兴也被斥退。
English: After the enthronement of Xiaozong, Liang Fang was relegated to Nanjing, and he was soon sent to prison. Wei Xing was also expelled.

古文：正德初，群阉复荐兴司香太和山，兼分守湖广行都司地方。
现代文：正德初年，阉宦们又推荐韦兴到太和山管香火，兼分守湖广行都司地方。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, the scholars also recommended Wei Xing to go to Taihe Mountain to make incense, and also to go to Shouhu, Guangxing and Dushi.

古文：尚书刘大夏、给事中周玺、御史曹来旬谏，不听。
现代文：尚书刘大夏、给事中周玺、御史曹来旬劝谏，皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to Liu Daxia, Zhou Qi, and Gu Shi Cao, who came to advise him.

古文：兴遂复用，而芳卒废以死。
现代文：韦兴于是被重新起用，而梁芳一直被废到死。
English: Wei Xing was then reinstated, while Liang Fang was scrapped to death.

古文：钱能，芳党也。
现代文：钱能，是梁芳的党羽。
English: Qian Neng is a member of Liang Fang's party.

古文：宪宗时，郑忠镇贵州，韦朗镇辽东，能镇云南，并恣纵，而能尤横。
现代文：宪宗时，郑忠镇守贵州，韦朗镇守辽东，钱能镇守云南，都很恣意妄为，而钱能尤为骄横。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Zheng Zhong guarded Guizhou, Weilang guarded Liaodong, and Qian Neng guarded Yunnan, all of which were arbitrary, and Qian Neng was particularly arrogant.

古文：贵州巡抚陈宣劾忠，因请尽撤诸镇监，帝不允。
现代文：贵州巡抚陈宣弹劾郑忠，并请全部撤回各个镇监，皇上不许。
English: Chen Xuan, the governor of Guizhou, impeached Zheng Zhong and asked all the town supervisors to withdraw. The emperor would not allow this.

古文：而云南巡按御史郭阳顾上疏誉能，请留之云南。
现代文：而云南巡按御史郭阳却上疏赞誉钱能，请求将他留在云南。
English: However, Guo Yang, Yunnan's inspector general, praised Qian Neng and asked him to stay in Yunnan.

古文：旧制，安南贡道出广西，后请改由云南，弗许也。
现代文：按原来的制度，安南进贡取道广西，后来钱能请改经云南，没被批准。
English: According to the original system, Annan paid tribute to Guangxi, and later the money could be changed to Yunnan, which was not approved.

古文：能诈言安南捕盗兵入境，请遣指挥使郭景往谕其王，诏从之。
现代文：钱能遂诈称安南的捕盗兵越境，请派遣指挥使郭景前往谕告国王，皇上下诏依从。
English: Qian Neng finally fraudulently claimed that Annan's raiders had crossed the border. Please send a commander to send Guo Jing to tell the king, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：能遂令景以玉带、彩缯、犬马遗王，绐其贡使改道云南。
现代文：钱能于是令郭景赠给安南国王玉带、彩缯和犬马，哄骗他朝贡使者要改道云南。
English: Qian Neng then ordered Guo Jing to present the king of Annan with a jade belt, a colored scepter and a dog and horse, and to trick his envoy to pay tribute into changing his route to Yunnan.

古文：边吏格之不得入，乃去。
现代文：由于守边官员阻拦，使者不能入境，这才离去。
English: The envoy could not enter the country due to the obstruction of border officials, and then left.

古文：复遣景与指挥卢安等索宝货于干崖、孟密诸土司，至逼淫曩罕弄女孙，许为奏授宣抚。
现代文：钱能又派郭景和指挥卢安等人向干崖、孟密等土司索要宝货，甚至逼淫曩罕弄的孙女，许诺为他奏请授给宣抚使一职。
English: Qian Neng also sent Guo Jing and commander Lu'an and others to demand treasures from the governors such as Gan Yap and Meng Mi, and even forced his granddaughter, who was a prostitute, to promise to play for him and grant him the post of the procurator.

古文：逾三年，事发。
现代文：过了三年，事发。
English: Three years later, something happened.

古文：诏巡抚都御史王恕廉之，捕景，景赴井死。
现代文：诏令巡抚都御史王恕调查此事，逮捕郭景，郭景投井而死。
English: The governor of the capital, Wang Shi, was ordered to investigate the matter, arrest Guo Jing, and Guo Jing threw himself into a well and died.

古文：再遣刑部郎中锺蕃往按，事皆实。
现代文：再派刑部郎中钟蕃前往按察，事情属实。
English: He then sent the head of the criminal investigation department, Zhong Qi, to investigate, and found that the matter was true.

古文：帝宥能，而致其党九人于法。
现代文：皇上宽宥了钱能，而将他的九名党羽依法从事。
English: The emperor pardoned Qian Neng and sent nine members of his party to prison in accordance with the law.

古文：指挥姜和、李祥不就逮，能复上疏为二人求宥，帝曲从之。
现代文：指挥姜和、李祥不主动就逮，钱能又上疏请求宽宥这两人，皇上曲意依从了。
English: Conductors Jiang He and Li Xiang were arrested if they did not take the initiative. Qian Neng went to Shang Shu again to ask for forgiveness for these two people, and the emperor complied.

古文：巡按御史甄希贤复劾能杖守矿千户一人死，亦不罪。
现代文：巡按御史甄希贤又弹劾钱能将守矿千户一人杖打死，皇上也不加罪。
English: The emperor did not add to his guilt when he ordered the inspector of history, Zhen Xixian, to impeach Qian for beating a guard of mines to death.

古文：召归，安置南京。
现代文：皇上将他召回，安置在南京。
English: The emperor recalled him and placed him in Nanjing.

古文：复夤缘得南京守备。
现代文：钱能又靠巴结得任南京守备。
English: Qian Neng once again relied on a flunky to get the post of Nanjing garrison.

古文：时恕为南京参赞尚书，能心惮恕不敢肆。
现代文：当时王恕任南京参赞尚书，钱能因顾忌他而不敢放肆。
English: At that time, Wang Shuren was Nanjing Counsellor Shang Shu. Qian Neng was afraid of him and did not dare to be reckless.

古文：久之卒。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died a long time later.

古文：韦眷、王敬亦芳党。
现代文：韦眷、王敬也是梁芳党羽。
English: Wei Yan and Wang Jing are also members of Liang Fang's party.

古文：眷为广东市舶太监，纵贾人通诸番，聚珍宝甚富。
现代文：韦眷任广东市舶太监，纵容商人与各藩国往来，聚敛的珍宝极多。
English: Wei Yan served as Guangdong's shipping eunuch, allowing merchants to have dealings with various provinces, and amassing a great number of treasures.

古文：请以广南均徭户六十隶市舶。
现代文：他请将广南均徭户六十户隶属于市舶提举司。
English: He asked that the 60 households in Guangnan be subordinated to the Municipal Bureau of Shipping.

古文：布政使彭韶争之，诏给其半。
现代文：布政使彭韶反对，诏令拨给一半。
English: Bu Zheng asked Peng Yao to oppose it, and the imperial edict allocated half of the land to the emperor.

古文：眷又诬奏布政使陈选，被逮道卒，自是，人莫敢逆眷者。
现代文：韦眷又上奏诬告布政使陈选，致使陈选被捕，死于途中。此后人们都不敢违抗韦眷。
English: Wei Yan also made a false accusation against Chen Zheng, the political envoy, resulting in Chen Zheng being arrested and dying on the way. After that, people did not dare to defy Wei Yan.

古文：弘治初，眷因结蔡用妄举李父贵冒纪太后族，降左少监，撤回京。
现代文：弘治初年，韦眷因为勾结蔡用胡乱推举李父贵冒充纪太后的亲族，被降为左少监，撤回京师。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Wei Yan, because of colluding with Cai Yu to arbitrarily nominate Li Chigui, posing as a relative of Empress Dowager Ji, was demoted to Junior Left Supervisor and withdrawn from Beijing Division.

古文：事详《纪太后传》。
现代文：事详《纪太后传》。
English: The details of the story are told in the "Biography of the Grand Duchess."

古文：王敬好左道，信妖人王臣。
现代文：王敬喜好旁门左道，相信妖人王臣。
English: Wang Jing likes the side door and the left path, and believes in the demon Wang Chen.

古文：使南方，挟臣同行。
现代文：他出使南方，挟王臣同行。
English: He was dispatched to the south, accompanied by Wang Chen.

古文：伪为诏，括书画、古玩，聚白金十万余两。
现代文：他伪造诏书，搜刮书画、古玩，聚敛白金十万余两。
English: He forged imperial edicts, scavenged books, paintings and antiques, and amassed more than 100,000 taels of platinum.

古文：至苏州，召诸生使录妖书，且辱之。
现代文：他到苏州后，召来诸生徒，叫他们抄录妖书，还侮辱他们。
English: After he arrived in Suzhou, he summoned the students, asked them to copy the occult books, and insulted them.

古文：诸生大哗。
现代文：生徒们纷纷吵闹。
English: The students are making a lot of noise.

古文：巡抚王恕以闻。
现代文：巡抚王恕汇报皇上。
English: The governor Wang Shou reported to the emperor.

古文：东厂尚铭亦发其事。
现代文：东厂的尚铭也揭发这件事。
English: Shang Ming of the East Factory also exposed the affair.

古文：诏斩臣，而黜敬充孝陵卫净军。
现代文：诏令斩杀王臣，而将王敬废黜，发往孝陵卫充净军。
English: The imperial edict ordered Wang Chen to be killed and Wang Jing to be deposed and sent to the Xiaoling Weizhong Purification Army.

古文：何鼎，余杭人，一名文鼎，性忠直。
现代文：何鼎，余杭人，一名文鼎，个性忠诚正直。
English: He Ding, Yu Hangren, a literati, has a loyal and honest personality.

古文：弘治初，为长随，上疏请革传奉官，为侪辈所忌。
现代文：弘治初年，他作为长史，上疏请革除传奉官，为同辈所忌。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, he, as the head of the school, was asked by the superiors to be removed from his post as a missionary, which was regretted by his peers.

古文：寿宁侯张鹤龄兄弟出入宫禁，尝侍内庭宴。
现代文：寿宁侯张鹤龄兄弟出入宫禁，曾经在内廷宴席陪坐。
English: Shuning marquess Zhang Hailing's brothers were banned from entering and leaving the palace, and they once sat at the inner court banquet.

古文：帝如厕，鹤龄倚酒戴帝冠，鼎心怒。
现代文：皇上上厕所，张鹤龄仗着酒气戴上皇冠，何鼎心里很愤怒。
English: When the emperor went to the toilet, Zhang Hailing put on the crown with the help of alcohol. He Ding was very angry.

古文：他日鹤龄复窥御帷，鼎持大瓜欲击之，奏言： 二张大不敬，无人臣礼。 
现代文：后来有一天，张鹤龄又窥视皇上帷帐，何鼎拿起瓜想打他，奏告皇上说： 二张极为不敬，没有人臣之礼。 
English: Later, one day, Zhang Hailing peered at the emperor's curtain again. He Ding picked up a melon and wanted to hit him. He reported to the emperor, saying, "The two pictures are extremely disrespectful, and there is no courtier's salute."

古文：皇后激帝怒，下鼎锦衣狱。
现代文：皇后激怒皇上，将何鼎投入锦衣卫监狱。
English: The empress enraged the emperor and threw He Ding into the Jinwei Prison.

古文：问主使，鼎曰： 有。 
现代文：审问他有没有人主使，他说： 有。 
English: Asked if he had an accomplice, he said: "Yes.

古文：问为谁，曰： 孔子、孟子也。 
现代文：问是谁，他说 ：孔子和孟子。 
English: Asked who, he said: "Confucius and Mencius."

古文：给事中庞泮、御史吴山及尚书周经、主事李昆、进士吴宗周先后论救，帝以后故，俱不纳。
现代文：给事中庞泮、御史吴山和尚书周经、主事李昆、进士吴宗周先后上书相救，皇上因皇后的缘故，都不采纳。
English: In the midst of the situation, Pang Quan, the warden Wu Shan, the monk Shu Zhou Jing, the master Li Kun, and the priest Wu Zong Zhou successively sent letters to help, but the emperor did not accept them for the sake of the queen.

古文：后竟使太监李广杖杀鼎。
现代文：皇后竟派太监李广杖杀何鼎。
English: The empress actually sent the eunuch Li Guangjie to kill He Ding.

古文：帝追思之，赐祭勒其文于碑。
现代文：皇上怀念他，为他赐祭，并将祭文刻在石碑上。
English: The emperor remembered him, gave a sacrifice for him, and engraved the sacrificial text on a stone tablet.

古文：是时，中官多守法，奉诏出镇者，福建邓原、浙江麦秀、河南蓝忠、宣府刘清，皆谦洁爱民。
现代文：这时期，宦官多守洁，奉诏出镇的，像福建的邓原、浙江的麦秀、河南的蓝忠、宣府的刘清，都廉洁爱民。
English: During this period, eunuchs were more likely to be honest and love the people, such as Deng Yuan of Fujian, Mai Xiu of Zhejiang, Lan Zhong of Henan, and Liu Qing of Xuanfu.

古文：兵部上其事，赐敕旌励。
现代文：兵部上奏他们的事迹，皇上敕令表彰奖励。
English: Their deeds were reported to the military department, and they were commended and awarded by imperial decree.

古文：又有司礼太监萧敬者，历事英宗、宪宗，谙习典故，善鼓琴。
现代文：还有一个司礼监太监，叫萧敬，他历事英宗、宪宗二朝，熟谙典故，并善于鼓琴。
English: There was also a ceremonial supervisor and eunuch named Xiao Jing, who had lived through the two dynasties of Yingzong and Kenzong, was familiar with allusions, and was good at playing the gong.

古文：帝尝语刘大夏曰： 萧敬朕所顾问，然未尝假以权也。 
现代文：皇上曾对刘大夏说： 萧敬是朕的顾问，但朕不曾让他掌权。 
English: The emperor once said to Liu Daxia: Xiao Jing is my adviser, but I did not let him take power.

古文：独李广、蒋琮得帝宠任，后二人俱败，而敬至世宗朝，年九十余始卒。
现代文：唯独李广、蒋琮得到皇上的信任，后来两人俱败，而萧敬直到世宗朝，活了九十多岁才去世。
English: However, only Li Guang and Chiang Kai-shek gained the emperor's trust, and later both of them were defeated, while Xiao Jing did not die until the reign of King Sejong, when he was more than ninety years old.

古文：李广，孝宗时太监也。
现代文：李广，是孝宗时太监。
English: Li Guang was the eunuch of Xiaozong.

古文：以符箓祷祀蛊帝，因为奸弊，矫旨授传奉官，如成化间故事，四方争纳贿赂。
现代文：他以符祷祀蛊惑皇上，借以为奸作弊。与成化年间的故事一样，他假传圣旨封授传奉官，四方争相向他献贿。
English: He bewitched the emperor with incantations and invocations, by means of which he cheated the emperor. As in the story of the Chenghua years, he falsely transmitted the imperial edict to confer the title of missionary, and four parties vied with each other to offer him bribes.

古文：又擅夺畿内民田，专盐利巨万。
现代文：他又擅自侵夺畿内民田，独吞盐利达数万。
English: He also invaded and seized people's fields in the Kinai region without permission, devouring tens of thousands of tons of salt.

古文：起大第，引玉泉山水，前后绕之。
现代文：他兴建宏大的府第，还引来玉泉山的水，前后环绕。
English: He built a magnificent prefecture, and also attracted the water of Jade Spring Mountain, surrounding it back and forth.

古文：给事叶绅、御史张缙等交章论劾，帝不问。
现代文：给事中叶绅、御史张缙等人纷纷弹劾他，皇上不问。
English: The Emperor did not question Zhongye Sheng, Mishi Zhang Ye and others who impeached him one after another.

古文：十一年，广劝帝建毓秀亭于万岁山。
现代文：十一年，李广劝皇上在万岁山兴建毓秀亭。亭落成后，幼公主夭折。
English: In the eleventh year, Li Guang advised the emperor to build the Juxiu Pavilion on Mount Wanli. After the pavilion was completed, the young princess died young.

古文：亭成，幼公主殇，未几，清宁宫灾。日者言广建亭犯岁忌，太皇太后恚曰： 今日李广，明日李广，果然祸及矣。 广惧自杀。
现代文：不久，清宁宫失火。占卜的人说李广建亭犯了岁忌，太皇太后怒道： 今日李广，明日李广，果然祸来了。 李广惧而自杀。
English: Soon after, the Qingning Palace caught fire. The soothsayers said that Li Guangjianting had made the New Year's Day. The Empress Dowager angrily said: Today Li Guang, tomorrow Li Guang, the disaster has come. Li Guang was afraid and committed suicide.

古文：帝疑广有异书，使使即其家索之，得赂籍以进，多文武大臣名，馈黄白米各千百石。
现代文：皇上怀疑李广有异书，派使者到他家去搜寻，使者获得贿赂名册呈给皇上，上面多有文武大臣的名字，馈送的黄米和白米各有千百石不等。
English: The emperor suspected that Li Guang had forged documents and sent an emissary to his house to search for them. The emissary obtained a bribe register and presented it to the emperor. On it were the names of many ministers of literature and armed forces. The amount of yellow and white rice sent varied by hundreds of koku.

古文：帝惊曰： 广食几何，乃受米如许。 
现代文：皇上惊道 ：李广吃得多少，为何接受那么多的粮米？ 
English: The emperor said in surprise, "How much did Li Guang eat? Why did he accept so much grain and rice?"

古文：左右曰： 隐语耳，黄者金，白者银也。 
现代文：左右的人说 ：这是隐语，黄米指黄金，白米指白银。 
English: People on both sides said, "This is hidden language. Yellow rice means gold, and white rice means silver."

古文：帝怒，下法司究治。
现代文：皇上大怒，交给法司穷加治罪。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered the magistrate to punish him severely.

古文：诸交结广者，走寿宁侯张鹤龄求解，乃寝勿治。
现代文：那些交结李广的人，纷纷跑到寿宁侯张鹤龄处请求调解，皇上才停止追究。
English: Those who had come into contact with Li Guang ran to Shuning marquis Zhang He Ling's place to request mediation. Only then did the emperor stop the investigation.

古文：广初死时，司设监太监为请祠额葬祭，及是以大学士刘健等言，罢给祠额，犹赐祭。
现代文：李广刚死时，司设监太监为他请求祠堂匾额并赐祭，至此因为大学士刘健的反对，不给祠额，但仍给赐祭。
English: When Li Guang had just died, the superintendent of the eunuchs asked the ancestral hall to give him an offering, but because of the opposition of the university scholar Liu Jian, they did not give him an offering, but still gave him an offering.

古文：蒋琮，大兴人。
现代文：蒋琮，大兴人。
English: Chiang Kai-shek, Daxing people.

古文：孝宗时，守备南京。
现代文：孝宗时任南京守备。
English: At the time, Takamune was in charge of the defense of Nanjing.

古文：沿江芦场，旧隶三厂。
现代文：沿江的芦场，原来隶属于三厂。
English: The reed fields along the river used to belong to three factories.

古文：成化初，江浦县田多沉于江，而濒江生沙洲六，民请耕之，以补沉江田额。
现代文：成化初年，江浦县的田地大多沉入江中，而临江生出六个沙洲，百姓请前往耕种，以弥补沉没江中的田地数额。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, most of the fields in Jiangpu County sank into the river, and six sandbanks were created next to the river. People were asked to go farming to make up for the amount of fields that sank into the river.

古文：洲与芦场近，又瓦屑坝废地及石城门外湖地，故不隶三厂。
现代文：沙洲靠近芦场，而瓦屑坝的废地和石城门外的湖地，也不隶属于三厂。
English: The sandbar is close to the reed field, while the waste land of the shingle dam and the lake outside Shichengmen are not affiliated with the three factories.

古文：太监黄赐为守备时，受奸民献，俱指为芦场，尽收其利。
现代文：太监黄赐任守备时，接受奸民的奉献，将这些地方都指为芦场，尽收其利。
English: When the eunuch Huang was given the duty of guarding, he accepted the dedication of the traitors, pointed out these places as the reed field, and made the most of it.

古文：民已失业，而岁额租课仍责偿之民。
现代文：百姓已经失业，而前年所定的租税仍然向百姓征收。
English: The people have lost their jobs, but the tax imposed the previous year is still levied on the people.

古文：孝宗立，县民相率醖于朝，下南京御史姜绾等覆按。
现代文：孝宗即位后，县里百姓相继向朝廷投诉，皇上将此事交给南京御史姜绾等人调查。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, the people of the county successively complained to the imperial court, and the emperor handed the matter over to Nanjing goshi Jiang Yu and others for investigation.

古文：弘治二年，绾等劾琮与民争利，且用揭帖抗诏旨。
现代文：弘治二年，姜绾等人弹劾蒋琮与百姓争利，并且使用揭帖违抗圣旨。
English: In the second year of Hongzhi, Jiang Chen and others impeached Jiang Chen for competing with the people for profits, and used the postcard to defy the holy will.

古文：琮条辨绾疏，而泛及御史刘恺、方岳等及南京诸司违法事。
现代文：蒋琮上书对姜绾的奏疏进行辩驳，并涉及到御史刘恺、方岳等人以及南京各部门的违法之事。
English: Jiang Rong's letter refuted Jiang Rong's slander, and involved the illegal activities of the imperial historian Liu Rong, Fang Yue and others, as well as various departments in Nanjing.

古文：给事中韩重因星变请斥琮及太监郭镛等，以弭天怒，未报。
现代文：给事中韩重借星变请求斥退蒋琮和太监郭镛等人，以消弭上天的愤怒，但不见回报。
English: In the middle of the matter, Han Chong borrowed the star change request to expel Jiang Yu and the eunuch Guo Yu and others, in order to eliminate the anger of heaven, but there was no return.

古文：而太监陈祖生复奏户部主事卢锦、给事中方向私种南京后湖田事。
现代文：而太监陈祖生又上奏户部主事卢锦、给事中方向私自耕种后湖的田地。
English: But the eunuch Chen Zusheng also appealed to the head of the household department, Lu Jin, to give him the direction to cultivate the fields of Houhu.

古文：后湖者，洪武时置黄册库其中，令主事、给事中各一人守之，百司不得至。
现代文：后湖这个地方，洪武时期在湖中设置黄册库，令主事、给事中各一人守护，百官不得进去。
English: In the Hongwu period, a yellow book library was set up in the lake at this place in Houhu, with one person guarding the main business and one person guarding the side business. A hundred officials were not allowed to enter.

古文：岁久湖塞，锦、向于湖滩稍种蔬伐苇，给公用，故为祖生所奏。
现代文：后来岁久湖塞，卢锦、方向便在湖滩稍伐掉些芦苇，种上蔬菜，供给公用，所以才被陈祖生所奏。
English: Later, when the lake was blocked for a long time, Lu Jin and the director cut down some reeds on the beach, planted vegetables and provided them for public use, so they were played by Chen Zusheng.

古文：事下南京法司。
现代文：这事下到南京法司。
English: The matter was referred to the Nanjing Law Office.

古文：适郭镛奉使两广，道南京，往观焉。
现代文：正好郭镛奉使出使两广，经过南京，便前往观赏。
English: Just as Guo Wei was dispatched to the two provinces, he passed through Nanjing and went to watch.

古文：御史纮等因劾镛擅游禁地。
现代文：御史孙等人便弹劾郭镛擅自游览禁地。
English: Goshisun and others then impeached Guo Jun for visiting the forbidden land without permission.

古文：镛怒，归醖于帝，言府尹杨守随勘锦、向失出，御史不劾奏，独绳内臣。
现代文：郭镛大怒，回来向皇上申诉，说府尹杨守随勘查卢锦、方向的事情失实，御史不弹劾，却唯独绳治宦官。
English: Guo Yao was furious and came back to complain to the emperor, saying that the governor Yin Yangshuo had misrepresented the matter of following the survey of Lu Jin and the direction, and that the governor did not impeach, but only ruled the eunuchs.

古文：帝乃遣太监何穆、大理寺少卿杨谧再勘后湖田，并覆绾、琮讦奏事。
现代文：皇上于是派遣大臣何穆、太理寺少卿杨谧再去勘查后湖田之事，并审查姜绾、蒋琮上奏互相攻击的事。
English: The emperor then sent the minister He Mu and the junior secretary of the Tai Li Temple, Yang Qi, to investigate the situation in Houhu again, and to examine the matter of Jiang Chen and Chiang Kai-shek attacking each other.

古文：明年，奏上，褫锦职，谪守随、向以下官有差。
现代文：第二年，何穆等人的奏章上呈后，皇上将卢锦革职，杨守随、方向以下的官员被降职。
English: In the second year, after He Mu and others submitted their report, the imperial general Lu Jin was demoted, and officials below Yang Shouxu and Xiang were demoted.

古文：又勘琮不当受献地，私嘱勘官，所讦事皆诬，绾等劾琮亦多不实，并宜逮治。
现代文：又勘查出蒋琮不当接受奉献的田地，以及私下嘱托勘查官员，他所攻击的事也都不真实，而姜绾等人对蒋琮的弹劾也多不符合事实，都应将他们逮捕法办。
English: It was also found that the fields to which Chiang Kai-shek improperly accepted donations, as well as the privately commissioned survey officials, were not true, and the impeachment of Chiang Kai-shek by Jiang Kai-shek and others did not conform to the facts. They should all be arrested and prosecuted.

古文：诏逮绾等。
现代文：诏令逮捕姜绾等人。
English: The imperial edict ordered the arrest of Jiang Yu and others.

古文：御史伊宏、给事中陈璚等皆言不宜以一内臣而置御史十人于狱，不听。
现代文：御史伊宏、给事中陈王等人都说不宜因为一个宦官而将十名御史投进监狱，皇上不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to Imperial Historian Yi Hong, the person in charge of the case, Chen Wang, and others, who all said that it was not appropriate to throw ten Imperial Historians into prison because of one eunuch.

古文：绾等镌级调外，而宥琮不问。
现代文：姜绾等人被降级调任外官，而蒋琮得以宽宥不问。
English: Jiang Hui and others were demoted and transferred to the position of foreign minister, while Jiang Hui was pardoned without question.

古文：时刘吉窃柄，素恶南京御史劾己，故兴此狱。
现代文：当时刘吉窃权，一向厌恶南京的御史弹劾自己，所以造了这场案件。
English: At that time, Liu Ji stole power, and he always disliked the governor of Nanjing to impeach himself, so he created this case.

古文：尚书王恕、李敏，给事中赵竑，御史张宾先后言琮、绾同罪异罚，失平，亦不纳。
现代文：尚书王恕、李敏，给事中赵，御史张宾先后说蒋琮和姜绾同罪而异罚，有失公平，皇上也不采纳。
English: Shangshu Wang Xie, Li Min, Zhao in the case, and the imperial historian Zhang Bin successively said that Jiang Chen and Jiang Chen were punished differently for the same crime, which was unfair, and the emperor did not accept it.

古文：琮由是益无忌。
现代文：蒋琮因此更加毫无顾忌。
English: As a result, Chiang Kai-shek became even more reckless.

古文：久之，广洋卫指挥石文通奏琮僣侈杀人，掘聚宝山伤皇陵气，及殴杀商人诸罪。
现代文：后来，广洋卫指挥使石文通上奏蒋琮奢侈杀人，挖掘聚宝山伤了皇陵的气脉，以及殴打杀害商人等罪。
English: Later, the commanding officer of Guangyangwei made Shi Wentong play the role of Chiang Kai-shek's extravagant murder, the excavation of the Jubao Mountain, which injured the atmosphere of the imperial mausoleum, and the beating and killing of merchants.

古文：琮竟免死，充孝陵净军。
现代文：蒋琮竟得免死，发往孝陵充净军。
English: Chiang Kai-shek was actually spared from death and sent to the Xiaoling Zhengtong Army.

古文：刘瑾，兴平人。
现代文：刘瑾，兴平人。
English: Liu Wei, a member of the Xingping people.

古文：本谈氏子，依中官刘姓者以进，冒其姓。
现代文：本姓谈，因为依附一位刘姓宦官得以入宫，遂冒刘姓。
English: As for his family name, because he was able to enter the palace by relying on a eunuch surnamed Liu, he changed his family name to Liu.

古文：孝宗时，坐法当死，得免。已，得侍武宗东宫。
现代文：孝宗时，他犯了罪，依法当被处死，后得赦免，其后得以在东宫侍奉武宗。
English: During the reign of Takamune, he committed a crime for which he was legally sentenced to death. He was later pardoned and allowed to serve Takamune in the East Palace.

古文：武宗即位，掌钟鼓司，与马永成、高凤、罗祥、魏彬、丘聚、谷大用、张永并以旧恩得幸，人号 八虎 ，而瑾尤狡狠。
现代文：武宗即位后，他执掌钟鼓司，与马永成、高凤、罗祥、魏彬、丘聚、谷大甲、张永一起以旧恩获得武宗宠幸，人称 八虎 ，而刘瑾尤为狡猾凶狠。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he held the post of bell and drum master, and together with Ma Yongcheng, Gao Feng, Luo Xiang, Wei Bin, Qiu Ju, Gu Dajia, and Zhang Yong, he won the favor of Emperor Wuzong with the old grace. He was known as the Eight Tigers, and Liu Ye was particularly cunning and fierce.

古文：尝慕王振之为人，日进鹰犬、歌舞、角之戏，导帝微行。
现代文：他曾仰慕王振的为人，每天向皇上进献鹰犬、歌舞、摔跤等游戏，引导皇上微服出行。
English: He used to admire Wang Zhen as a person, and every day he presented the eagle dog, song and dance, wrestling and other games to the emperor, and guided the emperor to travel.

古文：帝大欢乐之，渐信用瑾，进内官监，总督团营。
现代文：皇上玩得很痛快，渐渐地信用刘瑾，将他调进内官监，总督团营。
English: The emperor enjoyed the game very much and gradually trusted Liu Bei, transferring him to the camp of the inspector general and the governor.

古文：孝宗遗诏罢中官监枪及各城门监局，瑾皆格不行，而劝帝令内臣镇守者各贡万金。
现代文：孝宗遗诏要废除宦官监枪和各城门监局，刘瑾都加以阻止，不予执行。不仅如此，他还劝皇上下令凡是宦官镇守的都要进贡一万两黄金。
English: In his last will and testament, Emperor Xiaozong wanted to abolish the eunuch's prison and all city gate supervision bureaus, but Liu Bei stopped him from carrying out his wishes. Moreover, he also advised the emperor to order all eunuchs to pay a tribute of ten thousand taels of gold.

古文：又奏置皇庄，渐增至三百余所，畿内大扰。
现代文：他又奏请设置皇庄，使皇庄数目增加到三百多所，使京畿地区大受干扰。
English: He also requested the establishment of imperial villas, increasing the number of imperial villas to more than three hundred, which greatly disturbed the Gyeonggi region.

古文：外廷知八人诱帝游宴，大学士刘健、谢迁、李东阳骤谏，不听。
现代文：外廷知道这八个人引诱皇上游乐，大学士刘健、谢迁、李东阳多次进谏，皇上都不听。
English: The outer court knew that these eight people were luring the emperor to play. University scholars Liu Jian, Xie Qian, and Li Dongyang repeatedly entered the palace, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：尚书张升，给事中陶谐、胡煜、杨一瑛、张襘，御史王涣、赵佑，南京给事御史李光翰、陆昆等，交章论谏，亦不听。
现代文：尚书张升，给事中陶谐、胡煜、杨一瑛、张礻会，御史王涣、赵佑，南京给事中、御史李光翰、陆昆等人，也纷纷上书论谏，也不听。
English: Zhang Sheng of Shangshu, Tao Yun, Hu Ying, Yang Ying, Zhang Yinghui, Wang Yao, Zhao You, Li Guanghan of Nanjing, Lu Kun and others also wrote books on the subject, but they did not listen.

古文：五官监候杨源以星变陈言，帝意颇动。
现代文：五官监候杨源借星象有变上书谏言，皇上颇为心动。
English: Yang Yuan, the supervisor of the five departments, borrowed a star to write a letter to the emperor, and the emperor was quite moved.

古文：健、迁等复连疏请诛瑾，户部尚书韩文率诸大臣继之。
现代文：刘健、谢迁等又连连上书，请求诛杀刘瑾，户部尚书韩文也率领一帮大臣支持。
English: Liu Jian, Xie Qian and others repeatedly submitted letters, requesting the killing of Liu Ye, and the head of the household, Shangshu Hanwen, also led a group of ministers to support.

古文：帝不得已，使司礼太监陈宽、李荣、王岳至阁，议遣瑾等居南京。
现代文：皇上不得已，便派司礼监太监陈宽、李荣、王岳到内阁，建议将刘瑾遣到南京居住。
English: As a last resort, the emperor sent the eunuchs Chen Guang, Li Rong, and Wang Yue to the cabinet to recommend that Liu Xuan be sent to Nanjing to live.

古文：三反，健等执不可。尚书许进曰： 过激将有变。 
现代文：他们三次往返，刘健等人都不同意，尚书许进说： 做得过激会发生变故。 
English: They went back and forth three times, but Liu Jian and others did not agree. Shang Shuxu Xijin said, "If you are too enthusiastic, things will go wrong."

古文：健不从。
现代文：刘健不听。
English: Liu Jian did not listen.

古文：王岳者，素謇直，与太监范亨、徐智心嫉八人，具以健等语告帝，且言阁臣议是。健等方约文及诸九卿诘朝伏阙面争，而吏部尚书焦芳驰白瑾。
现代文：王岳为人一向正直，与太监范亨、徐智都憎恨八虎，他将刘健等人的话都转告了皇上，并且说阁臣的建议为是，刘健等人正在约韩文等九卿大臣到朝廷伏阙面争，而吏部尚书焦芳赶紧报告了刘瑾。
English: Wang Yue had always been an honest person. He hated the Eight Tigers along with eunuchs Fan Heng and Xu Zhi. He conveyed the words of Liu Jian and others to the emperor, and said that the suggestion of the cabinet minister was that Liu Jian and others were arranging for Han Wen and other nine ministers to come to the imperial court for a face-to-face dispute, and the personnel department Shang Shujiao Fang quickly reported Liu Yao.

古文：瑾大惧，夜率永成等伏帝前环泣。
现代文：刘瑾非常害怕，连夜率马永成等人围着皇上哭泣，拜倒在地，皇上受到感动。
English: Liu Ye was very scared, and Ma Yongcheng and others wept all night around the emperor, prostrated themselves on the ground, and the emperor was moved.

古文：帝心动，瑾因曰： 害奴等者王岳。岳结阁臣欲制上出入，故先去所忌耳。且鹰犬何损万几。
现代文：刘瑾随即说： 陷害奴才等人的是王岳，王岳勾结内阁大臣想限制皇上出入，所以先要把他们所忌恨的人除掉，况且飞鹰猎犬何损于国事？
English: Liu Ye immediately said: It was Wang Yue who set up the slaves and others. Wang Yue colluded with the cabinet minister to restrict the emperor's entry and exit, so first they had to get rid of the people they hated. Besides, what harm did the eagle-hunting dog do to state affairs?

古文：若司礼监得人，左班官安敢如是。 
现代文：如果司礼监任用得人，这帮文官怎敢这样！ 
English: If the chief procurator is appointed by someone else, how dare these civil servants do this!

古文：帝大怒，立命瑾掌司礼监，永成掌东厂，大用掌西厂，而夜收岳及亨、智充南京净军。
现代文：皇上大怒，马上命刘瑾掌司礼监，马永成掌东厂，谷大用掌西厂，并连夜收捕王岳和范亨、徐智，发往南京充军。
English: The emperor was so angry that he immediately ordered Liu Bei to take charge of the ceremonial supervisor, Ma Yongcheng to take charge of the east factory, and Gu Datong to take charge of the west factory. Wang Yue, Fan Heng, and Xu Zhi were arrested overnight and sent to Nanjing to join the army.

古文：旦日诸臣入朝，将伏阙，知事已变，于是健、东阳皆求去。
现代文：第二天早上大臣们来朝见，将要伏阙请愿，知道事情已变，于是刘健、谢迁、李东阳都请求辞职。
English: The next morning, the ministers came to see the prime minister, they were going to petition him, they knew that things had changed, so Liu Jian, Xie Qian and Li Dongyang all asked to resign.

古文：帝独留东阳，而令焦芳入阁，追杀岳、亨于途，箠智折臂。
现代文：皇上唯独留下李东阳，而令焦芳入内阁，又派人追杀王岳、范亨于途中，将徐智手臂打断。
English: The emperor only left Li Dongyang, and made Jiao Fang join the cabinet, and sent someone to chase Wang Yue and Fan Heng on the way, breaking Xu Zhi's arm.

古文：时正德元年十月也。
现代文：这时是正德元年十月。
English: It was October of the first year of the Zhengde era.

古文：瑾既得志，遂以事革韩文职，而杖责请留健、迁者给事中吕翀、刘郤及南京给事中戴铣等六人，御史薄彦徽等十五人。守备南京武靖伯赵承庆、府尹陆珩、尚书林瀚，皆以传翀、郤疏得罪，珩、瀚勒致仕，削承庆半禄。
现代文：刘瑾得志后，便借故将韩文革职，杖罚请求留用刘健、谢迁的给事中吕羽中、刘耊和南京给事中戴铣等六人，御史薄彦徽等十五人，守备南京武靖伯赵承庆、府尹陆珩、尚书林瀚，都因传递吕羽中，刘耊的奏疏而获罪，陆珩、林瀚被勒令辞职，赵承庆被削去一半俸禄。
English: After Liu Wei was promoted, he took advantage of the situation to request Liu Jian and Xie Qian to remain in charge of the Korean Cultural Revolution, and six people, including Lu Yu Zhong, Liu Wei and Nanjing, wore shackles during the transfer ceremony. Fifteen people, including Gu Shi Bo Yanhui, guarded Nanjing Wujing Bo Zhao Chengqing, Fu Yin Lu Wei and Shang Shulin Han, all of whom were convicted for passing on Lu Yu Zhong and Liu Wei's insubordination. Lu Wei and Lin Han were ordered to resign, and Zhao Chengqing was docked half of his salary.

古文：南京副都御史陈寿，御史陈琳、王良臣，主事王守仁，复以救铣等谪杖有差。
现代文：南京副都御史陈春，御史陈琳、王良臣，主事王守仁，又因救戴铣等人而被贬职或杖打。
English: Chen Chun, the vice-governor of Nanjing, Chen Lin, Wang Liangchen, and Wang Shuren, the director, were also demoted or caned for rescuing people wearing shackles.

古文：瑾势日益张，毛举官僚细过，散布校尉，远近侦伺，使人救过不赡。因颛擅威福，悉遣党阉分镇各边。
现代文：刘瑾权势日益嚣张，他吹毛求疵地挑官员们的细微过失，四处派出校尉，远近侦探，还不许别人相救说情，他于是专作威福，把亲信宦官派往各边塞镇守。
English: Liu Bei's power became increasingly arrogant. He nitpicked the minor faults of officials, sent captains everywhere, sent detectives far and near, and did not allow others to help and intercede. He then dedicated himself to wifu, and sent his trusted eunuchs to guard the border towns.

古文：叙大同功，迁擢官校至一千五百六十余人，又传旨授锦衣官数百员。
现代文：在叙大同功时，他提升官校达一千五百六十余人，还传圣旨给数百人授予锦衣官。
English: During his time as a Tonggong of Syuda University, he promoted more than 1,560 people from the official school, and also preached the holy will to award hundreds of people with brocade officers.

古文：《通鉴纂要》成，瑾诬诸翰林纂修官誊写不谨，皆被谴，而命文华殿书办官张骏等改誊，超拜官秩。骏由光禄卿擢礼部尚书，他授京卿者数人，装潢匠役悉授官。
现代文：《通鉴纂要》编成，刘瑾诬陷翰林编修官们抄写不清，使他们都受到了谴责。而后他命文华殿书办官张骏等人重抄，给予越级升官，张骏由光禄寺卿升为礼部尚书，其他有几个被授予高级京官，甚至连装潢工匠杂役之人也得以授官。
English: After the compilation of the "Compendium of General Studies" was completed, Liu Bei accused the Hanlin editors and reviewers of copying unclearly, and they were all condemned. Later, he ordered the bookkeeper of the Palace of Literature, Zhang Qi, and others to re-copy and give them higher-ranking promotions. Zhang Qi was promoted from the Guanglu Temple to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and several others were awarded high-ranking Beijing officials. Even the decoration craftsmen and miscellaneous workers were awarded positions.

古文：创用枷法，给事中吉时，御史王时中，郎中刘绎、张玮，尚宝卿顾璿，副使姚祥，参议吴廷举等，并摭小过，枷濒死，始释而戍之。其余枷死者无数。
现代文：他创用枷法，给事中吉时，御史王时中，郎中刘绎、张玮，尚宝卿顾璇，副使姚祥，参议吴延举等人，都被抓住小错，枷到快死了才解下枷锁，遣去戍边，其他被枷死的无数。
English: He pioneered the use of the yoke method, giving the things in the middle of the auspicious time, the king of history in the middle of the time, the vassals of Liu Yu, Zhang Ye, Shang Baoqing Gu Ye, the deputy envoy of Yao Xiang, the councillor of Wu Yanju and others, were all caught in a small mistake, the yoke was almost dead before the yoke was released, and the yoke was sent away, and countless others were killed by the yoke.

古文：锦衣狱徽纆相属。
现代文：锦衣卫狱中关满了囚徒。
English: The brocade prison is full of prisoners.

古文：恶锦衣佥事牟斌善视狱囚，杖而锢之。府丞周玺、五官监候杨源杖至死。
现代文：他讨厌锦衣卫佥事牟斌善待囚犯，将他杖打并不准他再出来做官，府丞周玺、五官监候杨源被杖打至死。
English: He disliked the guards, who treated prisoners well, beating him with a cane and not allowing him to work as an official again. The prefectural governor, Zhou Qi, and the inspector of the five departments, Yang Yuan, were beaten to death with a cane.

古文：源初以皇变陈言，罪瑾者也。
现代文：杨源就是当初借星象有变上书谏言，请加罪给刘瑾的那位。
English: Yang Yuan is the one who originally borrowed the star elephant to change the written criticism, please add a crime to Liu Yao.

古文：瑾每奏事，必侦帝为戏弄时。
现代文：刘瑾每次奏事，总是趁皇上正在玩游戏的时候。
English: Every time Liu Ye made a report, he always took advantage of the time when the emperor was playing games.

古文：帝厌之。亟麾去曰： 吾用若何事，乃溷我！ 
现代文：皇上心烦他，赶紧挥手让他走开，说 ：我用你干什么？别来搅我！ 
English: The Emperor was annoyed with him and quickly waved his hand to make him go away, saying: "What am I doing with you? Don't bother me!"

古文：自此遂专决，不复白。
现代文：从此刘瑾便独断专行，不再汇报皇上。
English: From then on, Liu Bei acted on his own and no longer reported to the emperor.

古文：二年三月，瑾召群臣跪金水桥南，宣示奸党，大臣则大学士刘健、谢迁，尚书则韩文、杨守随、张敷华、林瀚，部曹则郎中李梦阳，主事王守仁、王纶、孙磐、黄昭，词臣则检讨刘瑞，言路则给事中汤礼敬、陈霆、徐昂、陶谐、刘郤、艾洪、吕翀、任惠、李光翰、戴铣、徐蕃、牧相、徐暹、张良弼、葛嵩、赵士贤，御史陈琳、贡安甫、史良佐、曹闵、王弘、任诺、李熙、王蕃、葛浩、陆昆、张鸣凤、萧乾元、姚学礼、黄昭道、蒋钦、薄彦徽、潘镗、王良臣、赵佑、何天衢、徐珏、杨璋、熊卓、朱廷声、刘玉等，皆海内号忠直者也。
现代文：二年三月，刘瑾召集群臣，让他们都跪到金水桥南，然后宣布奸党名单。大臣则有大学士刘健、谢迁；尚书则有韩文、杨守随、张敷华、林瀚；各部属官则有郎中李梦阳，主事王守仁、王纶、孙磐、黄昭；词臣则有检讨刘瑞；言官则有给事中汤礼敬、陈霆、徐昂、陶谐、刘耊、艾洪、吕羽中、任惠、李光翰、戴铣、徐蕃、牧相、徐暹、张良弼、葛嵩、赵士贤，御史陈琳、贡安甫、史良佐、曹闵、王弘、任诺、李熙、王蕃、葛浩、陆昆、张鸣凤、萧乾元、姚学礼、黄昭道、蒋钦、薄彦徽、潘镗、王良臣、赵佑、何天衢、徐珏、杨璋、熊卓、朱廷声、刘玉等，都是海内号称为忠诚正直的人。
English: In March of the second year, Liu Bei called up a group of ministers and made them all kneel to the south of Jinshui Bridge, and then announced the list of traitors. The ministers were the university scholars Liu Jian and Xie Qian; the scholars were Han Wen, Yang Shouzui, Zhang Shikhua, and Lin Han; the subordinate officials of each department were the vice-minister Li Mengyang, and the principals Wang Shouren, Wang Hui, Sun Ban, and Huang Zhao; the vice-ministers were to review Liu Rui; and the spokesmen were Zhong Tang Lijian, Chen Ting, Xu Ang, Tao Jun, Liu Hu

古文：又令六科寅入酉出，使不得息，以困苦之。令文臣毋辄予封诰，痛绳文吏。
现代文：他又令六科官员寅时入朝工作，酉时退朝下班，使他们得不到休息，借以惩罚他们，他下令不要动辄便给文臣诰封，对文官要严加约束。
English: He also ordered the officials of the six sciences to work in the imperial court in the morning and leave the imperial court in the afternoon, so that they could not have a rest, in order to punish them. He ordered that they should not act rashly, and then he sealed them, and the civil servants should be strictly restrained.

古文：宁王宸濠图不轨，赂瑾求复护卫，瑾予之，濠反谋遂成。
现代文：宁王朱宸濠图谋不轨，贿赂刘瑾请求重给护卫。刘瑾给了他，使朱宸濠得以实施造反阴谋。
English: Zhu Xi, the king of Ning, schemed and bribed Liu Bei to ask for a second escort, which Liu Bei gave him, enabling Zhu Xi to carry out the rebellion.

古文：瑾不学，每批答章奏，皆持归私第，与妹婿礼部司务孙聪、华亭大猾张文冕相参决，辞率鄙冗，焦芳为润色之，东阳頫首而已。
现代文：刘瑾不学习，每逢批答章奏文书，都拿回自己家中，与妹夫礼部司务孙聪、华亭奸猾之徒张文冕一起商议决定，辞句都很粗俗冗长，之后焦芳为他润色，而李东阳唯有点头而已。
English: Liu Yao did not study, and whenever he received a letter of commendation, he took it back to his home. He discussed the decision with his brother-in-law, Sun Cong, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Zhang Wenquan, the treacherous villain of Huating. The words were all vulgar and lengthy, and then Jiao Fang polished them for him, while Li Dongyang only had a little head.

古文：当是时，瑾权擅天下，威福任情。
现代文：那时候，刘瑾权倾天下，任意作威作福。
English: At that time, Liu Bei's power spread all over the world, and he arbitrarily used his power for his own benefit.

古文：有罪人溺水死，乃坐御史匡翼之罪。
现代文：有个犯人溺水死了，他便将御史匡翼判罪。
English: When a prisoner drowned, he convicted Mishi Kuangyi.

古文：尝求学士吴俨贿，不得，又听都御史刘宇谗，怒御史杨南金，乃以大计外吏奏中，落二人职。
现代文：他曾向学士吴俨索取贿赂，得不到，又听信都御史刘宇的谗言，恨御史杨南金，便借考核外官之机上书将两人中伤，撤了他们的职。
English: He had asked for a bribe from the bachelor Wu Xuan, but he did not get it. He also listened to the advice of the governor of the capital, Liu Yu, and hated the governor of the capital, Yang Nankin, so he slandered the two men with a letter on the machine of the foreign minister of examination and removed them from their posts.

古文：授播州土司杨斌为四川按察使。令奴婿闾洁督山东学政。
现代文：授播州土司杨斌为四川按察使，令家奴的夫婿提督山东学政。
English: Yang Bin, the governor of Zhuhai and Hebei Province, was the inspector general of Sichuan Province, and his son-in-law Admiral Shandong Xuemei.

古文：公侯勋戚以下，莫敢钧礼，每私谒，相率跪拜。
现代文：自公侯勋臣外戚以下，都不敢与他分庭抗礼，每次私下谒见刘瑾，都相继跪拜。
English: Even princes, princes' sons, courtiers, and their relatives did not dare to stand up to him. Every time they saw Liu Bei in private, they all knelt down in succession.

古文：章奏先具红揭投瑾，号红本，然后上通政司，号白本，皆称刘太监而不名。
现代文：臣民所上的章奏，先具红皮揭帖投给刘瑾，称红本，然后交通政司，称白本。章奏都称他为刘太监而不书其名。
English: The chapters on subjects were first given to Liu Xuan with a red leather postcard, called the Red Book, and then to the Secretary of Transportation, called the White Book. The chapters all called him Liu Eunuch without writing his name.

古文：都察院奏谳误名瑾，瑾怒詈之，都御史屠滽率属跪谢乃已。
现代文：都察院上奏狱案时，误写了刘瑾的名字，刘瑾怒骂他们，都御史屠氵庸率领下属下跪道歉，这才罢了。
English: When the prison case was reported to the Duka, Liu Yao's name was misspelled, Liu Yao scolded them, and Dui Shi Tu Yong led his subordinates to kneel down and apologize. That's all.

古文：遣使察核边仓，都御史周南、张鼐、马中锡、汤全、刘宪，布政以下官孙禄、冒政、方矩、华福、金献民、刘逊、郭绪、张翼，郎中刘绎、王荩等，并以赦前罪，下狱追补边粟，宪至瘐死。
现代文：他派使者察核边防仓储，都御史周南、张鼐、马中锡、汤全、刘宪，布政使以下官员孙禄、冒政、方矩、华福、金献民、刘逊、郭绪、张翼，郎中刘绎、王荩等人，被新罪旧罪一起算，逮入狱中，罚补边粮，刘宪竟死于狱中。
English: He sent an envoy to inspect the nuclear border defense storage, and the following officials, Sun Lu, Hong Zheng, Fang Rui, Hua Fu, Jin Xianmin, Liu Xun, Guo Xu, Zhang Ying, Liu Yu, and Wang Yao, were charged with the new crime and the old crime at the same time, arrested in prison, fined and compensated for the border grain, and Liu Xian died in prison.

古文：又察盐课，杖巡盐御史王润，逮前运使甯举、杨奇等。
现代文：他又检察盐税，杖打巡盐御史王润，逮捕前盐运使宁举、杨奇等人。
English: He also inspected the salt tax, beat the patrol salt inspector Wang Run with a cane, and arrested former salt transport envoys Ning Jiu and Yang Qi.

古文：察内甲字库，谪尚书王佐以下百七十三人。
现代文：检察内甲字库时，将尚书王佐以下一百七十三人贬职。
English: During the inspection of the A-character database, 173 people, including Wang Zuo Shangshu, were demoted.

古文：复创罚米法，尝忤瑾者，皆擿发输边。
现代文：他又创罚米法，凡是曾忤逆过他的人，都被罚发米输边。
English: He also created the penalty rice law, and all those who had rebelled against him were fined.

古文：故尚书雍泰、马文升、刘大夏、韩文、许进，都御史杨一清、李进、王忠，侍郎张缙，给事中赵士贤，任良弼，御史张津，陈顺、乔恕、聂贤、曹来旬等数十人悉破家，死者系其妻孥。
现代文：原尚书雍泰、马文升、刘大夏、韩文、许进，都御史杨一清、李进、王忠，侍郎张缙，给事中赵士贤、任良弼，御史张津、陈顺、乔恕、聂贤、曹来旬等数十人都被破家，死了的人还要拘押其妻儿。
English: The original Shangshu Yongtai, Ma Wensheng, Liu Daxia, Hanwen, Xu Jin, the imperial governors Shi Yang Yiching, Li Jin, Wang Zhong, the attendant Zhang Qi, and the attendants Zhao Shixian, Ren Liangqi, the imperial governors Zhang Jin, Chen Shun, Qiaozhong, Jian Xian, Cao Laijun, and dozens of others were broken up, and the dead people also had their wives and children detained.

古文：其年夏，御道有匿名书诋瑾所行事，瑾矫旨召百官跪奉天门下。瑾立门左诘责，日暮收五品以下官尽下狱。
现代文：这年夏天，科道有匿名信诋毁刘瑾的所作所为，刘瑾假传圣旨召集百官，让他们跪到奉天门下，刘瑾站在门口左边责问群臣，到傍晚时将五品以下官员全部投进监狱。
English: In the summer of that year, there was an anonymous letter from the Chinese Academy of Sciences that slandered Liu Xuan's actions. Liu Xuan falsely preached the holy will to gather hundreds of officials and made them kneel under the Gate of Heaven. Liu Xuan stood on the left side of the doorway and scolded the ministers. By the evening, he had thrown all officials below the fifth grade into prison.

古文：明日，大学士李东阳申救，瑾亦微闻此书乃内臣所为，始释诸臣。
现代文：第二天，大学士李东阳出面相救，而刘瑾也稍稍听说这信是宦官写的，这才释放了诸臣。
English: The next day, the university scholar Li Dongyang came to the rescue, and Liu Ye also heard that the letter was written by a eunuch, which freed the ministers.

古文：而主事何釴、顺天推官周臣、进士陆伸已暍死。
现代文：但主事何钱、顺天府推官周臣、进士陆伸已经中暑死了。
English: However, the main person in charge, Qian Qian, the Shuntian prefectural governor, Zhou Chen, and the junior officer, Lu Shin, had already died of heatstroke.

古文：是日酷暑，太监李荣以冰瓜啖群臣，瑾恶之。
现代文：那天天气酷热，太监李荣给群臣吃冰镇瓜片，刘瑾很讨厌他。
English: On that day, the weather was extremely hot. The eunuch Li Rong fed iced melon slices to the ministers. Liu Bei hated him very much.

古文：太监黄伟愤甚，谓诸臣曰： 书所言皆为国为民事，挺身自承，虽死不失为好男子，奈何枉累他人。 
现代文：太监黄伟非常气愤，对群臣说： 信上所说的都是为国为民的事，是谁写的就挺身承认，哪怕死了也不失为好儿男，干嘛冤枉连累别人！ 
English: The eunuch Huang Wei was very angry and said to the ministers: What is said in the letter is for the country and the people. Whoever wrote it should come forward and admit it. Even if he dies, he is still a good man. Why should he wrong others?

古文：瑾怒，即日勒荣闲住，而逐伟南京。
现代文：刘瑾大怒，当天就勒令李荣闲住，将黄伟逐往南京。
English: Liu Bei was so angry that he ordered Li Rong to stay idle that day and banished Huang Wei to Nanjing.

古文：时东厂、西厂缉事人四出，道路惶惧。
现代文：当时东厂、西厂侦缉人员四出，道路上人心惶惶。
English: At that time, investigators from the East Plant and West Plant were on the scene, and people were panicking on the road.

古文：瑾复立内行厂，尤酷烈，中人以微法，无得全者。
现代文：刘瑾又设立内行厂，它尤为残酷，借法律细微之处伤人，被害者没有能保全的。
English: Liu Wei also set up a concubine factory, which is particularly cruel, using the subtleties of the law to hurt people, and the victims have nothing to protect.

古文：又悉逐京师客佣，令寡妇尽嫁，丧不葬者焚之，辇下汹汹几致乱。
现代文：他又把在京客居和佣工的人全部驱逐出去，令寡妇全部再嫁，停殡还不下葬的将其焚烧掉，以致京城纷扰，几乎酿出祸乱。
English: He also expelled all the people who lived in guest houses and domestic workers in Beijing, made all the widows remarry, stopped the funeral and burned those who were not buried, so that the capital was disturbed and almost led to disaster.

古文：都给事中许天锡欲劾瑾，惧弗克，怀疏自缢。
现代文：都给事中许天锡想弹劾刘瑾，却不胜恐惧，怀装奏疏，上吊自杀了。
English: In the midst of it all, Xu Tianxi wanted to impeach Liu Bei, but he was overcome with fear, dressed in poor taste, and hanged himself.

古文：瑾故急贿，凡入觐、出使官皆有厚献。
现代文：刘瑾原来急于索贿，凡官员入京朝见、出使，对他都有丰厚的贡献。
English: Originally, Liu Bei was eager to solicit bribes. All officials who came to Beijing to meet with the imperial court and send envoys made great contributions to him.

古文：给事中周钥勘事归，以无金自杀。
现代文：给事中周钥办事回来，因无金自杀。
English: In the middle of the job, Zhou Key returned from the job and committed suicide because he had no money.

古文：其党张彩曰： 今天下所馈遗公者，非必皆私财，往往贷京师，而归则以库金偿。
现代文：其党徒张彩说 ：如今天下所馈送给您的，并不都是私财。他们往往先在京师借贷，回去后再拿府库金钱来偿还。
English: Zhang Cai, one of his party members, said, "The money given to you today is not all private money. They often borrow money in Beijing first, and repay it with money from the government treasury after returning home.

古文：公奈何敛怨贻患。 
现代文：您何必敛怨恨而遗下祸患呢？ 
English: Why shouldst thou hold a grudge, and leave evil in thy wake?

古文：瑾然之。
现代文：刘瑾赞同他的意见。
English: Liu Wei agreed with his opinion.

古文：会御史欧阳云等十余人以故事入赂，瑾皆举发致罪。
现代文：正好御史欧阳云等十余人照老规矩来献贿，刘瑾全部揭发了他们，使他们都获了罪。
English: It just so happened that more than ten people, including the imperial historian Ouyangyun, had offered bribes according to the old rules. Liu Ye exposed all of them, and they were all found guilty.

古文：乃遣给事、御史十四人分道盘察，有司争厚敛以补帑。
现代文：他于是派给事中、御史十四人分道巡察，有关官员都争相聚敛钱财来填补府库。
English: He then sent fourteen people to inspect the roads, and the relevant officials scrambled to collect money to fill the government coffers.

古文：所遣人率阿瑾意，专务搏击，劾尚书顾佐、侣钟、韩文以下数十人。
现代文：派出的人都迎合刘瑾的心意，专务打击，他们弹劾尚书顾佐、侣钟、韩文以下数十人。
English: The dispatched people all catered to Liu Wei's wishes and were dedicated to cracking down. They impeached dozens of people including Shangshu Guzao, Rui Zhong and Hanwen.

古文：浙江盐运使杨奇逋课死，至鬻其女孙。
现代文：浙江盐运使杨奇已死，但还拖欠税额，其孙女竟被出卖。
English: Yang Qi, the Zhejiang salt transport operator, is dead, but he still owes tax arrears, and his granddaughter has been betrayed.

古文：而给事中安奎、潘希曾，御史赵时中、阮吉、张彧、刘子厉，以无重劾下狱。
现代文：而给事中安奎、潘希曾，御史赵时中、阮吉、张、刘子厉，因没有提出重大弹劾案而被下狱。
English: However, Ankui, Pan Xizeng, Gu Shi Zhao Shizhong, Ruan Ji, Zhang and Liu Zili, who were involved in the case, were sent to prison for not filing a major impeachment case.

古文：奎、彧枷且死，李东阳疏救，始释为民。
现代文：安奎、张被枷到快死了，得李东阳上疏营救，才被释放为民。
English: Ankui and Zhang were chained until they were about to die, but Li Dongyang came to their rescue and they were released as civilians.

古文：希曾等亦皆杖斥，忤意者谪斥有差。
现代文：潘希曾等人也被杖罚，忤逆者分别受到贬斥。
English: Pan Xi Zeng and others were also punished with a cane, and those who rebelled were separately reprimanded.

古文：又矫旨籍故都御史钱钺、礼部侍郎黄景、尚书秦纮家。
现代文：他又假传圣旨，抄原都御史钱钺、礼部侍郎黄景、尚书秦绂的家。
English: He also falsely transmitted the imperial edict, copying the original to the imperial historian Qian Qi, the etiquette attendant Huang Jing, and the family of the scholar Qin Xi.

古文：凡瑾所逮捕，一家犯，邻里皆坐，或瞰河居者，以河外居民坐之。
现代文：凡刘瑾所逮捕的，一家犯罪邻里都被连坐，有的住河岸上的，便以河对岸的居民连坐。
English: All of those arrested by Liu Wei were detained together with a criminal neighbor, and some who lived on the riverbank were detained together with residents on the other side of the river.

古文：屡起大狱，冤号遍道路。
现代文：他屡兴大狱，人民号哭喊冤，遍满道路。
English: He has repeatedly unleashed hell, and the people's cries of injustice have filled the roads.

古文：《孝宗实录》成，翰林预纂修者当迁秩，瑾恶翰林官素不下己，调侍讲吴一鹏等十六人南京六部。
现代文：《孝宗实录》修成，参预纂修的翰林应当升迁，刘瑾厌恶这些翰林官一向对他不敬，便将侍讲吴一鹏等十六人调往南京六部。
English: After the completion of "The True Record of the Filial Piety," the scholars who had participated in the preparatory work should be promoted. Liu Bei was disgusted with these scholars who had always been disrespectful to him, so he transferred 16 people, including the assistant lecturer Wu Yipeng, to the Sixth Division of Nanjing.

古文：是时，内阁焦芳、刘宇，吏部尚书张彩，兵部尚书曹元，锦衣卫指挥杨玉、石文义，皆为瑾腹心。
现代文：这时候，内阁焦芳、刘宇，吏部尚书张彩，兵部尚书曹元，锦衣卫指挥杨玉、石文义，都是刘瑾的心腹。
English: At this time, the cabinet of Jiao Fang and Liu Yu, the personnel department of Shangshu Zhang Cai, the military department of Shangshu Cao Yuan, and the commanding officers of Jin Yi Wei, Yang Yu and Shi Wenyi, were all the henchmen of Liu Bei.

古文：变更旧制，令天下巡抚入京受敕，输瑾赂。
现代文：他更改旧制，命令天下巡抚入京接受敕令，给他献贿。
English: He changed the old system and ordered the governor of the whole country to come to Beijing to accept the imperial order and offer him a bribe.

古文：延绥巡抚刘宇不至，逮下狱。
现代文：延绥巡抚刘宇不到，被逮入狱。
English: Yancheng patrolman Liu Yu failed to arrive and was arrested and jailed.

古文：宣府巡抚陆完后至，几得罪，既赂，乃令试职视事。
现代文：宣府巡抚陆完晚到，几乎得罪，献贿后，才令他试职理事。
English: Lu, the procurator of Xuanwu, arrived late, almost offended, and only after offering a bribe was he allowed to try out for the post of director.

古文：都指挥以下求迁者，瑾第书片纸曰 某授某官 ，兵部即奉行，不敢复奏。
现代文：都指挥以下请求升迁的，刘瑾片纸书上 某授某官 ，交给兵部，兵部即奉命执行，不敢再奏告皇上。
English: They all directed the following requests for promotion, Liu Ye's piece of paper with the title "A certain award to a certain official" was handed over to the military department, and the military department was ordered to carry it out and did not dare to report it to the emperor again.

古文：边将失律，赂入，即不问，有反升擢者。
现代文：边防将领犯了法，只要献给贿赂，即可不问，有的反倒获得升迁。
English: The border guard generals have broken the law, as long as they are dedicated to bribery, they can not ask, but some have been promoted.

古文：又遣其党丈边塞屯地，诛求苛刻。
现代文：他又派遣党羽丈量边塞屯地，责罚和索求都很苛刻。
English: He also dispatched party members to survey the border settlement, and the punishment and demands were very harsh.

古文：边军不堪，焚公廨，守臣谕之始定。
现代文：边防军不堪忍受，焚烧了公署，镇守大臣劝解，才平息下来。
English: The border guards were unbearable, they burned the public office, and it took the town's defense minister to persuade them to calm down.

古文：给事中高淓丈沧州，所劾治六十一人，至劾其父高铨以媚瑾。又以谢迁故，令余姚入毋授京官。
现代文：给事中高氵芳到沧州丈量，弹劾惩治了六十一人，甚至还弹劾了他的父亲高铨来取媚于刘瑾，刘瑾又因谢迁的缘故，命令余姚人不得授予京官。
English: In the matter, Gao Yifang went to Cangzhou to measure, impeachment punished sixty-one people, and even impeached his father Gao Yifang to flatter Liu Bei. Liu Bei also ordered Yuyao people not to be awarded Beijing officials because of Xie Qian.

古文：以占城国使人亚刘谋逆狱，裁江西乡试额五十名，仍禁授京秩如余姚，以焦芳恶彭华故也。
现代文：因占城国使者亚刘谋反一案，便裁减江西乡试名额五十名，并像余姚一样禁止授给京官，原因是焦芳讨厌彭华。
English: As a result of the case of occupying the city-state emissary Ya Liu for plotting a rebellion, the number of Jiangxi township probationers was reduced by fifty, and like Yu Yao, it was forbidden to award Beijing officials, because Jiao Fang hated Peng Hua.

古文：瑾又自增陕西乡试额至百名，亦为芳增河南额至九十五名，以优其乡士。
现代文：刘瑾又擅自将陕西乡试名额培加到一百名，还为焦芳将河南的名额增加到九名，以优待家乡的读书人。
English: Liu Wei also arbitrarily increased the number of Shaanxi township examination places to one hundred, and also increased the number of places in Henan to nine for Jiao Fang, giving preferential treatment to readers in his hometown.

古文：其年，帝大赦，瑾峻刑自如。
现代文：这年，皇上大赦天下，但刘瑾仍施行严刑峻法。
English: This year, Emperor Taizong pardoned the whole world, but Liu Bei still implemented the Severe Penal Code.

古文：刑部尚书刘璟无所弹劾，瑾诟之。璟惧，劾其属王尚宾等三人，乃喜。
现代文：刑部尚书刘瞡没做任何弹劾，刘瑾臭骂他，刘瞡害怕了，便弹劾属下王尚宾等三人，刘瑾这才高兴了。
English: The Criminal Investigation Department's Shangshu Liu Yao did not do any impeachment, but Liu Yao scolded him. Liu Yao was afraid, so he impeached his subordinate Wang Shangbin and three others. This made Liu Yao happy.

古文：给事中郗夔核榆林功，惧失瑾意，自缢死。
现代文：给事中郗夔核实榆林功绩，害怕不合刘瑾心意，上吊而死。
English: In order to verify the merits of Yulin, he was afraid that it would not be in line with Liu Bei's will, and he hanged himself.

古文：给事中屈铨、祭酒王云凤请编瑾行事，著为律令。
现代文：给事中屈铨、祭酒王云凤请求将刘瑾所办的事编成册，写进国家法令。
English: During the ceremony, Qu Qi and Yun Feng, the king of the sacrificial wine, requested that the matter handled by Liu Bei be compiled into a book and written into the national law.

古文：五年四月，安化王寘鐇反，檄数瑾罪。
现代文：五年四月，安化王置钅番反叛，发檄文历数刘瑾的罪行。
English: In April of the fifth year, Anhua Wang Jizhe led a rebellion, and issued a proclamation to punish Liu Bei for his crimes.

古文：瑾始惧，匿其檄，而起都御史杨一清、太监张永为总督，讨之。
现代文：刘瑾开始害怕了，他藏起檄文，起用都御史杨一清、太监张永为总督，前往征讨。
English: Liu Bei began to be afraid. He hid the imperial edict, appointed the governor of the capital, Shi Yang Iqing, and the eunuch, Zhang Yong, as governors, and went to investigate.

古文：初，与瑾同为八虎者，当瑾专政时，有所请多不应，永成、大用等皆怨瑾。
现代文：当初，与刘瑾同为八虎的人，在刘瑾专政时期，他们有所请求，刘瑾都不答应，马永成、谷大用等于是都怨恨刘瑾。
English: At the beginning, people who were the same as Liu Bei as the eight tigers, during the period of Liu Bei's dictatorship, they had requests, but Liu Bei did not agree to them. Ma Yongcheng and Gu Dayong both resented Liu Bei.

古文：又欲逐永，永以谲免。
现代文：刘瑾还想驱逐张永，张永耍了手段才得以避免。
English: Liu Wei also wanted to expel Zhang Yong, but Zhang Yong played tricks to avoid it.

古文：及永出师还，欲因诛瑾，一清为画策，永意遂决。
现代文：等到张永出兵回来时，便想借机诛杀刘瑾。杨一清为他做了筹划，张永遂下了决心。
English: When Zhang Yong returned from the expedition, he wanted to take the opportunity to kill Liu Ye. Yang Yiqing made a plan for him, and Zhang Yong finally made up his mind.

古文：瑾好招致术士，有俞日明者，妄言瑾从孙二汉当大贵。
现代文：刘瑾好招纳方术士，有个叫俞日明的，妄说刘瑾的从孙二汉当大贵。
English: Liu Ye was good at recruiting sorcerers from Fang. There was a man named Zou Ilming, who falsely said that Liu Ye was a great nobleman from Sun Erhan.

古文：兵仗局太监孙和数遗以甲仗，两广镇监潘午、蔡昭又为造弓弩，瑾皆藏于家。
现代文：兵仗局太监孙和多次送给刘瑾甲仗，两广镇监潘午、蔡昭又为他制造弓弩，刘瑾都把它们藏在家中。
English: Sun He, the eunuch of the Bureau of Military Affairs, repeatedly gave Liu Xing Jia Jian, and Pan Wu and Cai Zhao, the inspectors of the two Guang towns, also made bow and arrow for him, and Liu Xing hid them in his home.

古文：永捷疏至，将以八月十五日献俘，瑾使缓其期。
现代文：张永捷报传到朝廷，将于八月十五日献俘。刘瑾要他推迟日期，张永担心有变，便提前进京。
English: It was reported to the imperial court that Zhang Yongjie would offer himself as a prisoner of war on August 15. Liu Bei asked him to postpone the date, but Zhang Yongjie, fearing a change, entered Beijing ahead of schedule.

古文：永虑有变，遂先期入，献俘毕，帝置酒劳永，瑾等皆侍。及夜，瑾退，永出寘鐇檄，因奏瑾不法十七事。
现代文：献俘完毕后，皇上设酒慰劳张永，刘瑾等人也侍坐。到了晚上，刘瑾退下，张永便拿出置钅番的檄文，并上奏刘瑾十七件违法事。
English: After the dedication ceremony, the emperor offered wine to Zhang Yong, and Liu Ye and others were also present. In the evening, when Liu Ye withdrew, Zhang Yong took out the imperial edict, and reported to Liu Ye seventeen illegal things.

古文：帝已被酒，俯首曰： 瑾负我。 
现代文：皇上已有了几分酒意，低头说道： 刘瑾辜负了我。 
English: The emperor had already had a few drinks and bowed his head and said: Liu Ye has failed me.

古文：永曰： 此不可缓。 
现代文：张永说 ：事不宜迟。 
English: Zhang Yong said: It is not appropriate to be late.

古文：永成等亦助之。
现代文：马永成等人也在帮腔。
English: Ma Yongcheng and others are also helping.

古文：遂执瑾，系于菜厂，分遣官校封其内外私第。
现代文：于是捉拿刘瑾，将他关在菜厂，并分派官校查封其内外私宅。
English: So they arrested Liu Yao, locked him up in a vegetable factory, and ordered the government school to seal up his private homes inside and out.

古文：次日晏朝后，帝出永奏示内阁，降瑾奉御，谪居凤阳。
现代文：第二天日落后，皇上将张永的奏章出示内阁，将刘瑾降为奉御，调到凤阳居住。
English: After sunset the next day, the emperor presented Zhang Yong's report to the cabinet, demoted Liu Ye to the position of vassal, and transferred him to Fengyang.

古文：帝亲籍其家，得伪玺一，穿宫牌五百及衣甲、弓弩、哀衣、玉带诸违禁物。又所常持扇，内藏利匕首二。
现代文：皇上亲自查抄他的家，获得伪玺一枚，穿宫牌五百块以及衣甲、弓弩、衮衣、玉带等违禁物品，又在他所经常拿的扇子中，发现两把锋利的匕首。
English: The emperor personally inspected his home and obtained a fake shovel, five hundred imperial medals, as well as prohibited items such as armor, bows and arrows, embroidered clothing, and jade belts. In addition, two sharp daggers were found among the fans he often carried.

古文：始大怒曰： 奴果反。 
现代文：皇上这才大怒，说： 这奴才果然要造反。 
English: This made the Emperor very angry, and he said, "This rascal really wants to rebel."

古文：趣付狱。
现代文：立即将他押到监狱。
English: Take him to jail immediately.

古文：狱具，诏磔于市，枭其首，榜狱词处决图示天下。
现代文：定案之后，皇上命令将他押到闹市肢解，悬头示众，并将他的罪状和处决图榜示天下。
English: After the case was decided, the emperor ordered that he be taken to the downtown area, dismembered, his head displayed, and his charges and execution schedule shown to the world.

古文：族人、逆党皆伏诛。
现代文：他的族人、党羽全被诛杀。
English: All of his relatives and followers were killed.

古文：张彩狱毙，磔其尸。
现代文：张彩死于狱中，于是将他的尸体肢解。
English: Zhang Cai died in prison, so they dismembered his body.

古文：阁臣焦芳、刘宇、曹元而下，尚书毕亨、朱恩等，共六十余人，皆降谪。
现代文：内阁大臣焦芳、刘宇、曹元以下，尚书毕亨、朱恩等共六十余人，全被降职。
English: Cabinet ministers Jiao Fang, Liu Yu, Cao Yuan and below, Shangshu Biheng, Zhu En and others, a total of more than 60 people, were all demoted.

古文：已，廷臣奏瑾所变法，吏部二十四事，户部三十余事，兵部十八事，工部十三事，诏悉厘正如旧制。
现代文：其后，廷臣上奏刘瑾所变更的法令，计有吏部二十四事，户部三十余事，兵部十八事，工部十三事，皇上都令按旧制改正。
English: Subsequently, the courtier reported to Liu Bei the amended decrees, including 24 matters of the cadre department, more than 30 matters of the household department, 18 matters of the military department, and 13 matters of the engineering department, and the imperial order was corrected according to the old system.

古文：张永，保定新城人。
现代文：张永，保定新城人。
English: Zhang Yong, from Baoding New Town.

古文：正德初，总神机营，与瑾为党。
现代文：正德初年，总领神机营，与刘瑾结党。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, the general leader of the Shenji battalion, and Liu Xuan formed a party.

古文：已而恶其所为，瑾亦觉其不附己也，言于帝，将黜之南京。
现代文：后来他厌恶刘瑾的所作所为，刘瑾也察觉他不依附自己，便叫皇上将张永贬退到南京。
English: Later, he detested what Liu Bei had done, and Liu Bei also noticed that he was not attached to him, so he ordered the emperor's general Zhang Yong to retreat to Nanjing.

古文：永知之，直趋帝前，诉瑾陷己。
现代文：张永知道后，径直跑到皇上面前，控诉刘瑾陷害他。
English: After Zhang Yong found out, he ran straight to the emperor and accused Liu Ye of framing him.

古文：帝召瑾与质，方争辩，永辄奋拳殴瑾。
现代文：皇上召刘瑾来对质，正在争辩，张永便奋力挥拳殴打刘瑾。
English: The emperor summoned Liu Ye to confront him, and while they were arguing, Zhang Yong vigorously punched and beat Liu Ye.

古文：帝令谷大用等置酒为解，由是二人益不合。
现代文：皇上令谷大用设酒为他们调解，从此两人更加不和。
English: Emperor Lingya used wine to mediate between them, and from then on, the two became even more estranged.

古文：及寘鐇反，命永及右都御史杨一清往讨。
现代文：到置钅番造反时，皇上命张永和右都御史杨一清前往讨伐。
English: At the time of the rebellion, the emperor ordered Zhang Yong and Yang Iqing, the governor of the right capital, to go to the crusade.

古文：帝戎服送之东华门，赐关防、金瓜、钢斧以行，宠遇甚盛。
现代文：皇上戎服送他到东华门，赐给他关防、金瓜、钢斧上路，宠爱甚盛。
English: The emperor's military uniform sent him to Donghua Gate, and gave him a pass, a gold melon, and a steel axe to go on the road. He loved it very much.

古文：瑾亦忌之，而帝方永，不能间也。
现代文：刘瑾也妒嫉他，不过皇上正向着张永，无法离间他们。
English: Liu Bei was also jealous of him, but the emperor was on Zhang Yong's side and could not separate them.

古文：师出，寘鐇已擒，永遂率五百骑抚定余党。
现代文：部队出发后，置钅番已经被擒，张永遂率领五百骑兵抚定余党。
English: After the departure of the troops, Zhang Yongsui led five hundred cavalrymen to escort the remaining party.

古文：还次灵州，与一清言，欲奏瑾不法事。
现代文：回到灵州时，张永对杨一清说他想上奏刘瑾不法之事。
English: When he returned to Lingshou, Zhang Yong told Yang Yixing that he wanted to expose Liu Ye's illegal activities.

古文：一清曰： 彼在上左右，公言能必入乎？
现代文：杨一清说 ：他在皇上左右，您的话一定能传进去吗？
English: Yang Iqing said, "He is close to the emperor. Will your words get through to him?"

古文：不如以计诛之。 
现代文：不如以计诛灭他。 
English: It would be better to annihilate him.

古文：因为永画策，永大喜，语详一清传。
现代文：便为张永画策，张永大喜。语详《杨一清传》。
English: It was Zhang Yong's idea, and Zhang Yong was overjoyed. The story is detailed in "The Biography of Yang Iqing."

古文：是时，瑾兄都督同知景祥死，京师籍籍谓瑾将以八月十五日俟百官送葬，因作乱。
现代文：这时候，刘瑾的哥哥都督同知景祥死了，京师到处传言刘瑾将在八月十五日趁百官来送葬而作乱。
English: At this time, Liu Yao's brother, the governor of the capital, Tongzhi Jingxiang, died, and rumors spread throughout Beijing that Liu Yao would take advantage of the hundreds of officials coming to the funeral on August 15 to cause a riot.

古文：适永捷疏至，将以是日献俘，瑾使缓其期，欲俟事成并擒永。
现代文：正好张永的捷报传到，也将在这一天献俘，刘瑾让他推迟日期，想等事成之后一并擒拿张永。
English: The news of Zhang Yong's victory had just arrived, and he was also going to be captured on this day. Liu Bei asked him to postpone the date, and wanted to capture Zhang Yong together after everything was done.

古文：或以告永，永先期入献俘，是夜遂奏诛瑾。
现代文：有人将此事告诉了张永，张永便先期入京献俘，当天晚上便上奏诛杀刘瑾。
English: Someone told Zhang Yong about this. Zhang Yong went to Beijing in advance to offer a sacrifice, and that evening he went to the battlefield to kill Liu Ye.

古文：于是英国公张懋、兵部尚书王敞等，奏永辑宁中外，两建奇勋，遂封永兄富为泰安伯、弟容为安定伯。
现代文：于是英国公张懋、兵部尚书王敞等人上奏张永抚宁中外，两建奇功，皇上便封张永的哥哥张富为泰安伯、弟张容为安定伯。
English: As a result, the British official Zhang Xuan, the military officer Shang Shu Wang Chang and others presented Zhang Yong Fu Ning to the emperor, and the emperor awarded Zhang Yong's brother Zhang Fu as Tai An Bo and his brother Zhang Rong as Yan Yan Bo.

古文：涿州男子王豸尝刺龙形及 人王 字于足，永以为妖人，擒之。
现代文：涿州一男子王豸曾在脚上刺龙形和 人王 两字，张永以为是妖人，抓了他。
English: A man in Zhangzhou, Wang Yao, once had the words "dragon-shaped" and "human king" tattooed on his foot. Zhang Yong thought he was a demon and arrested him.

古文：兵部尚书何鉴乞加永封，下廷臣议。
现代文：兵部尚书何鉴乞请给张永加封，皇上交给廷臣议论。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs asked Zhang Yong to seal the document, and the emperor gave it to the courtiers for discussion.

古文：永欲身自封侯，引刘永诚、郑和故事风廷臣，内阁以非制格之。
现代文：张永想给自己封侯，便引刘永诚、郑和的故事暗示廷臣，内阁以不符合制度反对。
English: Zhang Yong wanted to give himself the title of prince, so he quoted the stories of Liu Yongcheng and Zheng He, implying that the courtier and the cabinet were not in line with the system.

古文：永意沮，乃辞免恩泽。
现代文：张永心情沮丧，便辞去皇上恩泽。
English: Zhang Yong was depressed, so he resigned from the Emperor's favor.

古文：吏部尚书杨一清言宜听永让，以成其贤，事竟已。
现代文：吏部尚书杨一清说宜听从张永的辞让，以成其贤名，这事竟这么定了。
English: Yang Yiching, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, said that it was appropriate to listen to Zhang Yong's resignation in order to make a name for himself. This is how the matter turned out.

古文：久之，坐库官盗库银事，闲住。
现代文：后来，张永因犯管下仓库官员偷盗库银之罪，被闲住。
English: Later, Zhang Yong was detained for the crime of stealing the treasury silver by the warehouse officials under his supervision.

古文：九年，北边有警，命永督宣府、大同、延绥军御之，寇退乃还。
现代文：九年，北边有警报，皇上命张永督领宣府、大同、延绥的军队抵御，敌人退走后才回来。
English: In the ninth year, there was an alarm in the north, and the emperor ordered Zhang Yongdu to lead the armies of Xuanfu, Datong and Yancheng to resist, and only returned after the enemy had retreated.

古文：宁王宸濠反，帝南征，永率边兵二千先行。
现代文：宁王朱宸濠造反，皇上南征，张永率两千边防兵先行。
English: King Zhu Xi of Ning rebelled, the emperor marched south, and Zhang Yong led two thousand border guards ahead.

古文：时王守仁已擒宸濠，槛车北上。
现代文：当时王守仁已经擒获了朱宸濠，押着槛车北上。
English: At that time, Wang Shouren had already captured Zhu Rong and was heading north with a barge.

古文：永以帝意遮守仁，欲纵宸濠于鄱阳湖，俟帝至与战。
现代文：张永遵从皇上的意思拦住王守仁，想将朱宸濠放到鄱阳湖，等皇上来后与他交战。
English: Zhang Yong followed the emperor's will to stop Wang Shuren and wanted to put Zhu Xi in Poyang Lake, and then fight him when the emperor came up.

古文：守仁不可，至杭州诣永。
现代文：王守仁不同意，到杭州去见张永。
English: Wang Shouren disagreed and went to Hangzhou to meet Zhang Yong.

古文：永拒不见，守仁叱门者径入，大呼曰： 我王守仁也，来与公议国家事，何拒我！ 
现代文：张永拒而不见，王守仁呵叱守门的人，径直闯了进去，大声说道： 我是王守仁，来与您商议国家大事，为什么拒我于门外？ 
English: Zhang Yong refused to see him, but Wang Shouren scolded the gatekeeper and went straight in, saying loudly: I am Wang Shouren, I have come to discuss national affairs with you, why do you keep me outside the door?

古文：永为气慑。
现代文：张永为之慑服。
English: Zhang Yong shrugged it off.

古文：守仁因言江西荼毒已极，王师至，乱将不测。
现代文：王守仁进而说江西所受的苦难已经很深，王师再一来，将有不测之祸。
English: Wang Shouren went on to say that the suffering of Jiangxi is already very deep, and if Wang Shi comes again, there will be an unforeseen disaster.

古文：永大悟，乃曰： 群小在侧，永来，欲保护圣躬耳，非欲攘功也。 
现代文：张永大悟，于是说： 有一群小人在皇上身边，我张永来，只是想保护圣驾而已，不是想邀功。 
English: Zhang Yongdaigwu then said, "There is a group of villains around the emperor. I, Zhang Yonglai, only want to protect the emperor, not to seek credit.

古文：因指江上槛车曰： 此宜归我。 
现代文：便指着江上的槛车道 ：这个应该交给我。 
English: He then pointed to the threshold lane on the river: This should be handed over to me.

古文：守仁曰： 我何用此。 
现代文：王守仁说 ：我怎么用得着这个？ 
English: Wang Shouren said, "How can I use this?"

古文：即付永，而与永偕还江西。
现代文：随即交给张永，而后与张永一同回到江西。
English: He immediately handed it over to Zhang Yong, and then returned to Jiangxi with Zhang Yong.

古文：时太监张忠等已从大江至南昌，方穷治逆党，见永至，大沮。
现代文：当时太监张忠等人已经从大江到达南昌，正在穷治逆党，见到张永到来，大为沮丧。
English: At that time, the eunuch Zhang Zhong and others had already arrived in Nanchang from the Dajiang River and were trying to suppress the rebellious party. Seeing Zhang Yong's arrival, they were greatly dismayed.

古文：永留数旬，促忠同归，江西赖以安。
现代文：张永留下数旬，催促张忠一同回去，江西赖此得以安宁。
English: Zhang Yong stayed for a few days and urged Zhang Zhong to go back with him. Jiangxi was thus able to enjoy peace.

古文：忠等屡谗守仁，亦赖永营解获免。
现代文：张忠等人多次陷害王守仁，也赖张永为他解救而获免。
English: Zhang Zhong and others repeatedly framed Wang Shouren, and he was freed thanks to Zhang Yong's rescue.

古文：武宗崩，永督九门防变。
现代文：武宗逝世后，张永提督九门防止变故发生。
English: After the death of Emperor Wuzong, Admiral Zhang Yong went to Nine Gates to prevent the accident from happening.

古文：世宗立，御史萧淮奏谷大用、丘聚辈蛊惑先帝，党恶为奸，并及永。
现代文：世宗即位，御史萧淮上奏谷大用、丘聚之辈蛊惑先帝，党恶为奸，并且涉及到张永。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, Grand Historian Xiao Huai ascended to the throne and played a major role in the valley, the members of the hill gathered to seduce the former emperor, the evil party was a traitor, and it involved Zhang Yong.

古文：诏永闲住。
现代文：诏令张永闲住。
English: The emperor ordered Zhang Yong to live in idleness.

古文：已而淮复劾永在江西不法事，再降永奉御，司香孝陵，然永在江西，实非有不法也。
现代文：过后萧淮又弹劾张永在江西不法之事，皇上再将张永降为奉御，到孝陵司香，但张永在江西时，实没有犯不法之事。
English: Later, Xiao Huai also impeached Zhang Yong for illegal activities in Jiangxi, and the emperor then demoted Zhang Yong to the position of vassal to the Xiaoling Emperor, but Zhang Yong did not actually commit any illegal activities while in Jiangxi.

古文：嘉靖八年，大学士杨一清等言，永功大，不可泯，乃起永掌御用监，提督团营。
现代文：嘉靖八年，大学士杨一清等人说张永功大，不可泯灭，皇上于是起用张永掌管御用监，提督团营。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, Yang Iqing, a university scholar, and others said that Zhang Yonggong was great and could not be extinguished. The emperor then appointed Zhang Yong to be in charge of the imperial inspector and the admiral's battalion.

古文：未几卒。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：谷大用者，瑾掌司礼监时提督西厂，分遣官校远出侦事。
现代文：谷大用，刘瑾掌管司礼监时，他提督西厂，分遣官校远出刺探消息。
English: When Liu Wei was in charge of the Department of Ceremonial Supervision, he was the admiral of the West Factory, and dispatched officers to the school to spy out the news.

古文：江西南康民吴登显等，五月五日为竞渡，诬以擅造龙舟，籍其家，天下皆重足屏息。
现代文：江西南康百姓吴侠显等人，五月五日做龙舟竞渡，大用诬告他们擅造龙舟，将其抄家，致使天下的人都住足屏息，十分害怕。
English: On May 5th, Wu Xiaoxian and other well-to-do people in southwest Jiangsu Province held a dragon boat race. They falsely accused them of building a dragon boat without authorization and ransacked their homes, causing people all over the world to hold their breath and be very afraid.

古文：建鹰房草场于安州，夺民田无数。
现代文：他在安州建鹰房和草场，侵夺民田无数。
English: He built an eagle house and a pasture in Anzhou and invaded countless people's fields.

古文：瑾诛，大用辞西厂。
现代文：刘瑾被诛杀后，大用辞去西厂。
English: After Liu Wei was beaten to death, Dajie resigned from the West Factory.

古文：未几，帝复欲用之，大学士李东阳力谏乃止。
现代文：不久，皇上又想用他，大学士李东阳极力劝谏，这才罢了。
English: Soon, the emperor wanted to use him again, and the university scholar Li Dongyang tried his best to persuade him, but that was all.

古文：六年，刘六、刘七反，命大用总督军务，偕伏羌伯毛锐、兵部侍郎陆完讨之。
现代文：六年，刘六、刘七造反，皇上命谷大用总督军务，与伏羌伯毛锐、兵部侍郎陆完前往征讨。
English: In the sixth year, Liu VI and Liu VII rebelled, and Emperor Meidani dispatched the Governor-General of Military Affairs, Fusheng Bo Maorui, and the War Department Attendant, Lu Gan, to fight against them.

古文：大用驻临清，召边将许泰、郤永、江彬、刘晖等入内地，听调遣。
现代文：大用驻扎临清，将边防将领许泰、却永、江彬、刘晖等召入内地，听从他的调遣。
English: Dawei was stationed in Linqing, and summoned the border guard generals Xu Tai, Chaoyong, Jiang Bin, Liu Ye, etc. to the mainland and obeyed his dispatch.

古文：久之无功，会贼过镇江狼山，遇飓风舟覆，陆完兵至歼之，遂封大用弟大亮为永清伯。
现代文：他们历久无功，正值贼人经过镇江狼山，遇上飓风翻船，陆完的部队赶去歼灭，皇上于是封大用的弟弟大亮为永清伯。
English: They have been unsuccessful for a long time. Just as the thieves were passing through the Zhenjiang River and the Wolf Mountain, a hurricane overturned the ship, and the land-based troops rushed to annihilate them. The emperor then appointed Dai Liang, the younger brother of the emperor, as Yongqing Bo.

古文：而先是平寘鐇时，其兄大宽已封高平伯矣，义子冒升赏者，不可胜纪。
现代文：在此之前平置钅番时，他的哥哥大宽已封为高平伯了，而他的义子中冒得升赏的，不可胜数。
English: Prior to this, when he was appointed to the position, his older brother, Da Kuan, had already been given the title of Gao Ping Bo, and there are countless examples of his sons-in-law who have received the award.

古文：世宗立，以迎立功赐金币。
现代文：世宗即位，大用以迎立之功获赐金币。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he was awarded a gold coin for his contribution to the enthronement.

古文：正德时御马太监，与司礼张雄、东厂张锐并侍豹房用事，时号三张，性皆凶悖。
现代文：给事中阎闳极力弹劾他，不久他被降为奉御，住在南京。后来，被召去守康陵。嘉靖十年将他抄家。张忠，霸州人，正德时任御马监太监，与司礼监的张雄、东厂的张锐一起在豹房侍奉，专权用事，当时号称 三张 ，都很凶狠狂悖。
English: In the middle of the matter, Yan Xun tried his best to impeach him, and soon he was reduced to a servant and lived in Nanjing. Later, he was called to guard Kangling. Jia Jing took him home for ten years. Zhang Zhong, a resident of Bazhou, was the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch of the e

古文：忠利大盗张茂财，结为弟，引入豹房，侍帝蹴鞠。
现代文：张忠贪大盗张茂的财富，与他结为兄弟，将他引入豹房，陪皇上蹴鞠。
English: Zhang Zhong, who coveted the wealth of the great thief Zhang Mao, became his brother and brought him to the Leopard Room to play football with the emperor.

古文：而雄至怨其父不爱己致自宫，拒不见。
现代文：而张雄甚至怨恨父亲不爱他而自己阉割自己，并且拒不与父亲相见。
English: Zhang Xiong even resented his father for not loving him and castrated himself, and refused to meet his father.

古文：同侪劝之，乃垂帘杖其父，然后相抱泣，其无人理如此。
现代文：同辈劝他，他便垂下竹帘杖打父亲，然后两人又相抱痛哭，他就是这样没有人理。
English: When his peers tried to dissuade him, he lowered his bamboo cane to hit his father, and then the two of them hugged each other and cried bitterly. This was how he treated people.

古文：锐以捕妖言功，加禄至一百二十石。
现代文：张锐以捉拿妖人惑众之功，被加俸禄到一百二十石。
English: Zhang Rui was given a bonus of 120 koku for his role in capturing the demon and deceiving the public.

古文：每缉事，先令逻卒诱人为奸，乃捕之，得贿则释，往往以危法中人。
现代文：他每次侦缉，先令缉捕兵引诱别人为奸，然后加以逮捕，索得贿赂便释放，往往以违法整人。
English: Every time he made an investigation, he ordered the soldiers to entice others to commit crimes, then arrested them, solicited bribes and released them, often breaking the law.

古文：三人并交通宸濠，受臧贤、钱宁等贿，以助成其叛。
现代文：三人都与朱宸濠交通，接受臧贤、钱宁等人的贿赂，促成他们的反叛。
English: All three of them communicated with Zhu Xi, accepted bribes from Yu Xian, Channing and others, and promoted their rebellion.

古文：宁王反，忠劝帝亲征。
现代文：宁王造反后，张忠劝皇上亲征。
English: After Ning Wang rebelled, Zhang Zhong advised the emperor to personally lead the army.

古文：其遮王守仁捷，欲纵宸濠鄱阳，待帝自战，皆忠之谋也。
现代文：而阻拦王守仁的捷报，想将朱宸濠放往鄱阳湖，等皇上来再与他交战，都是张忠出的主意。
English: However, it was Zhang Zhongyue's idea to block Wang Shuren's successful report, to release Zhu Xi to Poyang Lake, and to wait for the emperor to come up and fight him again.

古文：是时，又有吴经者，尤亲暱。
现代文：这时候，还有个吴经，尤其受到皇上亲昵。
English: At this time, there was also a Wu Jing, which was especially favored by the emperor.

古文：帝南征，经先至扬州。
现代文：皇上南征时，吴经先到扬州。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, Wu Jing went to Yangzhou first.

古文：尝夜半燃炬通衢，遍入寡妇、处女家，掠以出，号哭震远近，许以金赎，贫者多自经。
现代文：他曾经半夜在街上到处点燃火炬，闯进所有寡妇、处女的家中，将她们抢出来，号哭之声远近可闻。吴经允许用金钱赎回，结果家贫的妇女多上吊自杀。
English: He once lit torches everywhere in the streets in the middle of the night, broke into the homes of all widows and virgins, snatched them out, and the sound of crying could be heard far and wide. Wu was allowed to redeem them with money, and as a result, many poor women hanged themselves.

古文：先是，又有刘允者，以正德十年奉敕往迎乌斯藏僧，所赍金宝以百余万计。
现代文：早先，还有一个叫刘允的，他在正德十年奉命前往迎接乌斯藏僧人，所带的金银宝物以百余万计。
English: Earlier, there was also a man named Liu Yun, who was ordered to go to Zhengde for ten years to meet the Uss Tibetan monks, bringing with him more than one million gold and silver treasures.

古文：廷臣交章谏，不听。
现代文：廷臣纷纷劝谏，皇上不听。
English: The courtiers tried to persuade him, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：允至成都，治装几余，费又数十万，公私匮竭。
现代文：刘允到了成都后，治理行装费了一年多时间，又花了数十万钱，公私财物为之匮竭。
English: After Liu Yun arrived in Chengdu, it took more than a year to set up the governance line, spent hundreds of thousands of money, and was depleted of public and private assets.

古文：既至，为番人所袭。允走免，将士死者数百人，尽亡其所赍。
现代文：到达后，被番人袭击，刘允逃了出来，将士死了数百人，所带的财宝全部丧失。
English: After arriving, he was attacked by the guards, Liu Yun escaped, hundreds of soldiers died, and all the treasures he brought with him were lost.

古文：及归，武宗已崩，世宗用御史王钧等言，张忠、吴经发孝陵卫充军，张雄、张锐下都察院鞫治、允亦得罪。
现代文：回来后，武宗已经去世，世宗采纳御史王钧等人的建议，将张忠、吴经发往孝陵卫充军，张雄、张锐下到都察院审判，刘允也有罪。
English: After returning, Wu Zong had already passed away. Shizong adopted the suggestion of Wang Xi and others to send Zhang Zhong and Wu Jing to Xiaoling Weichong Army, Zhang Xiong and Zhang Rui to Duza Academy for trial, and Liu Yun was also guilty.

古文：世宗习见正德时宦侍之祸，即位后御近侍甚严，有罪挞之至死，或陈尸示戒。
现代文：世宗熟知正德时期宦官之祸，即位之后对近侍宦官管得很严，有罪的被鞭挞致死，有的甚至还要陈尸，以示警戒。
English: Shizong was well-acquainted with the woes of eunuchs in the Zhengde period. After he ascended the throne, he strictly controlled his close attendants and eunuchs. The guilty ones were flogged to death, and some even had their corpses chiseled as a warning.

古文：张佐、鲍忠，麦福、黄锦辈，虽由兴邸旧人掌司礼监，督东厂，然皆谨饬不敢大肆。
现代文：张佐、鲍忠、麦福、黄锦之辈，虽然是兴邸旧人入掌司礼监，提督东厂，但都谨慎办事，不敢放肆。
English: Zhang Zuo, Baozhong, Maifu and Huang Jin, although they are the old people of Xingti who are in charge of the ceremonial supervisor and the admiral of the East Factory, they are all cautious and dare not be reckless.

古文：帝又尽撤天下镇守内臣及典京营仓场者，终四十余年不复设，故内臣之势，惟嘉靖朝少杀云。
现代文：皇上又全部撤回在全国各地镇守的、以及掌管京营仓场的宦官，以后在他在位的四十余年间不再设立，所以宦官的势力只在嘉靖一朝稍为衰落。
English: The emperor also withdrew all the eunuchs who guarded towns across the country, as well as the eunuchs who were in charge of warehouses in Beijing. After that, they were no longer established during the more than forty years of his reign, so the power of eunuchs only slightly declined during the Jiajing Dynasty.

