古文：◎礼八
现代文：礼八
English: Reihachi

古文：册皇后仪册皇太子及皇太子妃仪册亲王及王妃仪皇帝加元服仪册皇太子皇子冠礼品官冠礼庶人冠礼
现代文：册皇后仪册皇太子及皇太子妃仪册亲王及王妃仪皇帝加元服仪册皇太子皇子冠礼品官冠礼庶人冠礼
English: Order of the Empress Order of the Crown Prince and Crown Princess Order of the Crown Prince and Crown Princess Order of the Emperor Order of the Crown Prince Order of the Crown Prince Order of the Crown Prince Order of the Crown Prince Order of the Crown Prince Order of the Crown Prince Order of the Crown Prince Order of the Crown Prince

古文：册皇后仪
现代文：册皇后仪
English: of Empress Dowager Yi

古文：古者立后无册命礼。
现代文：古代立帝后无册命的礼仪。
English: After the establishment of the emperor in ancient times, the etiquette of not writing down one's name prevailed.

古文：至汉灵帝立宋美人为皇后，始御殿，命太尉持节，奉玺绶，读册。
现代文：到汉灵帝立宋美人为皇后，开始驾临宫殿，命令太尉持节，捧宝玺绶带，宣读册书。
English: When Emperor Han Ling established Song Mei as empress, he began to arrive at the palace, ordered the captain to hold the festival, hold the treasure ribbon, and read the book.

古文：皇后北面称臣妾，跪受。
现代文：皇后朝北称臣妾，跪着接受册封。
English: The Empress Chouhoku declared herself a vassal and concubine, kneeling to receive the title.

古文：其后沿为定制，而仪文代各不同。
现代文：以后沿用为固定的制度，而礼仪文字各代不同。
English: Later, it was used as a fixed system, but the etiquette texts varied from generation to generation.

古文：明仪注大抵参唐、宋之制而用之，太祖初，定制。
现代文：明朝制度大抵参考唐、宋制度而采用。太祖初年，规定制度。
English: The Ming Dynasty system was mostly adopted with reference to the Tang and Song systems. In the first year of the Emperor Taizu, the system was established.

古文：凡册皇后，前期三日斋戒，遣官祭告天地、宗庙。
现代文：凡是册立皇后，前三天斋戒沐浴，派官员祭告天地、宗庙。
English: Whenever an empress is enthroned, she fasts and bathes for the first three days, and sends officials to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth and the ancestral temple.

古文：前一日，侍仪司设册宝案于奉天殿御座前，设奉节官位于册案之东，掌节者位于其左，稍退，设承制官位于其南，俱西向。
现代文：前一天，侍仪司在奉天殿御座前设册宝案，在册案东面设奉节官位，掌节的人位于他的左边，稍微退后，在他的南面设承制官位，都向西。
English: The day before, the Master of Ceremonies set up the register of treasures in front of the throne of the Imperial Household Agency, and the official position of the ceremony was set up on the east side of the register, and the person in charge of the ceremony was located on his left, slightly back, and the official position of the succession system was set up on his south side, all facing west.

古文：设正副使受制位于横街于南，北向。
现代文：在横街南面设正副使受制位，面向北。
English: On the south side of the cross street, a checkpoint will be set up, facing north.

古文：设承制宣制官位于其北，设奉节奉册奉宝官位于其东北，俱西向。
现代文：在他的北面设承制宣制官位，在他的东北面设奉节奉册奉宝官位，都面向西。
English: To the north of him, there is the official position of the emperor, and to the northeast of him, there is the official position of the emperor, both facing west.

古文：设正副使受册宝褥位于受制位之北，北向。
现代文：在受制位以北设正副使受册宝褥位，面向北。
English: To the north of the position of the receiver, the positions of the front and back of the receiver are set, facing north.

古文：典仪二人位丹陛上南，赞礼二人位正副使北，知班二人位赞礼之南，俱东西相向。
现代文：典仪二人位于台阶上南边，赞礼二人位于正副使的北面，知班二人位于赞礼的南面，都东西相向。
English: The two persons for the ceremony are located on the south side of the steps, the two persons for the praise are located on the north side of the chief and deputy envoys, and the two persons for the examination are located on the south side of the praise, all facing east and west.

古文：百官及侍从位，如朝仪。
现代文：百官以及侍从位，按朝廷礼仪设置。
English: Hundreds of officials and attendants were seated according to imperial court etiquette.

古文：是日早，列卤簿，陈甲士，设乐如仪。
现代文：这天早上，陈列扈从仪仗，陈设甲士，按礼仪设音乐。
English: In the morning of the day, there was a display of swords from the ceremonial war, a display of armour, and music according to the etiquette.

古文：内官设皇后受册位及册节宝案于宫中，设香案于殿上，设权置册宝案于香案前，设女乐于丹陛。
现代文：太监在宫中设皇后受册位以及册节宝案，在殿上设香案，在香案前设权置册宝案，在丹陛上设女乐。
English: In the palace, the eunuch set up the registration of the queen and the registration of the festival treasure, set up the incense case in the hall, set up the right to purchase the registration treasure before the incense case, and set up the female music in the palace.

古文：质明，正副使及百官入。
现代文：天刚亮，正副使及百官进入。
English: At first light, the ambassador, vice-ambassadors and hundreds of officials entered.

古文：鼓三严，皇帝衮冕御奉天殿。
现代文：击鼓三通，皇帝穿衮冕服到奉天殿。
English: The emperor wore the imperial crown and rode to the Hall of Heaven.

古文：礼部官奉册宝，各置于案。
现代文：礼部官员捧着册书和宝玺，各自放在案上。
English: Officials from the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies hold the register and the treasure map, each placed on a case.

古文：诸执事官各人就殿上位立。
现代文：众执事官各自进入，到殿上各自的位置站立。
English: The deacons entered individually and stood in their respective positions in the nave.

古文：乐作，四拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：奏乐，拜四拜。起身，音乐停止。
English: Play music, bow four times. Get up, the music stops.

古文：承制官奏发皇后册宝，承制讫，由中门出，降自中陛，至宣制位，曰 有制 。
现代文：承制官奏唱开启皇后册书和宝玺，承受皇帝制命结东，从中门出，自中门台阶下来，到宣读制命的位置，声称 有制 。
English: The imperial commanding officer sang and opened the book of the empress's record and the treasure map, received the emperor's command to the east, went out from the middle gate, came down from the steps of the middle gate, to the position where the command was read out, and declared that there was a command.

古文：正副使跪，承制官宣制曰： 册妃某氏为皇后，命卿等持节展礼。 
现代文：正副使跪下，承制官宣读制命说： 册封妃某氏为皇后，命令你等持节展礼。 
English: The chief and deputy envoys kneeled down, and the officer-in-charge read out the order: "Celebrate the enthronement of a certain lady as empress, and order you to hold a festival.

古文：宣毕，由殿西门入。
现代文：宣读完毕，由殿西门进入。
English: After the reading, enter through the west gate of the hall.

古文：正副使俯伏，兴。
现代文：正副使俯伏，起身。
English: General and Vice Admiral bow down and stand up.

古文：执事者举册宝案，由中门出，降自中陛。
现代文：执事人举着册宝案，从中门出外，自中间台阶下来。
English: The steward held up the record of the treasure, walked out from the middle gate, and came down from the middle steps.

古文：奉节官率掌节者前导，至正副使褥位，以案置于北。
现代文：奉节官率领掌节的人在前面引导，到正副使褥位，将案放在北面。
English: The person in charge of the festival, led by the official in charge of the festival, led the people in front, to the front and back seats, and placed the case on the north side.

古文：掌节者脱节衣，以节授奉节官。
现代文：掌节官脱下节衣，将节交给奉节官。
English: The person in charge of the festival will take off the festival clothes and hand the festival over to the person in charge of the festival.

古文：奉节官以授正使，正使以授掌节者，掌节者跪受，兴，立于正使之左。
现代文：奉节官把它交给正使，正使把它交给掌节官，掌节官跪着接受。起身，站在正使左边。
English: The officiant gives it to the minister, the minister gives it to the officiant, the officiant kneels to receive it. Get up and stand to the left of the officiant.

古文：奉节官退。
现代文：奉节官退。
English: Fengjie retired from the post.

古文：引礼引正使诣受册位，奉册官以册授正使，正使跪受，置于案。
现代文：引礼官引正使到受册位，奉册官拿着册文交给正使，正使跪着接受，放在案上。
English: The usher leads the officiant to the place to be registered, the officiant takes the register and hands it to the officiant, the officiant kneels to accept it and place it on the case.

古文：退，复位。
现代文：退下，回到原位。
English: Step back, return to your original position.

古文：副使受宝亦如之。
现代文：副使接受实玺也如此。
English: The same is true for the vice-envoy receiving the actual cheque.

古文：乐作，正副使四拜。
现代文：奏乐，正副使拜四拜。
English: For the music, the principal and vice-principal bowed four times.

古文：兴，乐止。
现代文：起身，音乐停止。
English: Get up, the music stops.

古文：正使随册，副使随宝，掌节者前导，举案者次之，乐作。
现代文：正使跟随册书，副使跟随宝玺，掌节官在前引导，举案官稍后，奏乐。
English: The chief clerk follows the record book, the deputy clerk follows the treasure map, the chief section officer guides in front, the case officer comes later, and music is played.

古文：出奉天门，乐止。
现代文：出奉天门，音乐停止。
English: The music stopped.

古文：侍仪奏礼毕，驾兴，百官出。
现代文：侍仪奏唱礼仪完毕，皇帝起身，百官退出。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor stood up and the officials left.

古文：掌节者加节衣，奉册宝官皆搢笏，取册宝置龙亭内，仪仗大乐前导，至中宫门外，乐作。
现代文：掌节官加节衣，奉册宝官都插笏板，取册书宝玺放在龙亭内，仪仗、大乐在前面引导，到中官门外，奏乐。
English: The chief celebrant put on a festive robe, and the officials who received the book inserts a plaque, and the book inserts are placed in the dragon pavilion. The ceremonial battle and the grand music are led in front, and the music is played outside the door of the middle official.

古文：皇后具九龙四凤冠，服祎衣，出閤，至殿上，南向立。
现代文：皇后戴九龙四凤冠，穿祭礼服，出阁，到殿上，向南站立。
English: The empress, wearing the Nine Dragons and Four Pheasants Crown and a ceremonial dress, came out of the pavilion, walked to the palace, and stood facing south.

古文：乐止，正副使奉册宝权置于门外所设案上。
现代文：音乐停止，正副使捧册书和宝玺暂且放在门外所设的案上。
English: The music stopped, and the prefects and vice-prefects placed a pile of books and treasures on a table set up outside the door.

古文：引礼引正副使及内使监令俱就位。
现代文：引礼官导引正副使以及内使监令都就位。
English: The usher-in, the usher-out, the usher-in-chief and the usher-in-chief are in place.

古文：正使诣内使监令前，称册礼使臣某，副使臣某，奉制授皇后册宝。
现代文：正使到内使监令前，称册礼使臣某，副使臣某，秉承制命授给皇后册书、宝玺。
English: Just before the envoys arrived at the Imperial Palace, a certain envoy and a certain vice-envoy were given the order to present the empress with the books and treasures.

古文：内使监令入告皇后，出，复位。
现代文：内使监令进入禀告皇后，出来，回到原位。
English: The envoy went in to inform the queen, came out, and returned to his original position.

古文：引礼引内外命妇入就位。
现代文：引礼官导引内外命妇进入各自的位置。
English: The usher leads the inner and outer maids of honor into their respective positions.

古文：正使奉册授内使监令，内使监令跪受，以授内官。
现代文：正使捧册授予内使监令，内使监令跪着接受，交给太监。
English: The eunuch was holding a book of the envoy's orders. The envoy's orders were accepted on his knees and handed to the eunuch.

古文：副使授宝亦如之。
现代文：副使授实玺也如此。
English: The same is true for Vice-Envoy Zhu Shizhong.

古文：各复位。
现代文：各自回到原位。
English: They all returned to their original positions.

古文：内使监令率奉册奉宝内官入，各置于案。
现代文：内使监令率领奉册奉宝太监进入，各自置于案上。
English: The envoy led by the magistrate and the eunuchs entered and placed their respective cases on the table.

古文：尚仪引皇后降陛，诣庭中位立。
现代文：尚仪官导引皇后下台阶，到庭中位置站立。
English: Shang Yi Guan led the empress down the steps and stood in the middle of the courtyard.

古文：内官奉册宝立于皇后之东西。
现代文：太监捧册书、寅玺站在皇后的东西两边。
English: The eunuch is holding a book, and the egret is standing on both sides of the queen.

古文：内使监令称 有制 ，尚仪奏拜。
现代文：内使监令称 有制 ，尚仪官上奏礼拜。
English: The envoy's supervision order said that there was a system, but the ceremony was performed by the officials.

古文：皇后拜，乐作。
现代文：皇后拜，奏乐。
English: Queen's prayer, music.

古文：四拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Bow four times, stand up, and the music stops.

古文：宣制讫，奉册内官以册授读册内官读讫，以授内使监令。
现代文：宣制完毕，奉册太监将册书交给读册太监读完，交给内使监令。
English: After the proclamation is completed, the eunuch will hand over the book to the eunuch reading the book. After reading, it will be handed over to the overseer.

古文：内使监令跪以授皇后，皇后跪受，以授司言。
现代文：内使监令跪着交给皇后，皇后跪着接受，把它交给司言。
English: Kneeling, the envoy handed the order to the empress. Kneeling, the empress accepted it and handed it to the councillor.

古文：奉宝如前仪。
现代文：进奉宝玺如同前边的礼仪。
English: Adhering to the treasure basket is just like the previous etiquette.

古文：受讫，以授司宝。
现代文：接受完毕，交给司宝官。
English: Once accepted, it is handed over to the Treasure Custodian.

古文：尚仪奏拜，皇后拜如前。
现代文：尚仪官奏唱礼拜，皇后如以前一样下拜。
English: The courtier sang a hymn, and the queen bowed as before.

古文：内使监令出，诣正副使前，称 皇后受册礼毕 。
现代文：内使监令出来，到正副使面前，称 皇后受册礼完毕 。
English: The envoy's supervisor came out and went in front of the chief and deputy envoys, saying that the queen had completed the registration ceremony.

古文：使者退诣奉天殿横街南，北面西上立，给事中立于正副使东北，西向。
现代文：使者退回到奉天殿横街南，面向北站立以西为上，给事中站在正副使的东北面，面向西。
English: The envoys retreated to the south side of Bong Tian Dian Street, facing north, standing with the west facing up, and standing in the northeast side of the chief and deputy envoys, facing west.

古文：正副使再拜复命曰： 奉制册命皇后礼毕。 
现代文：正副使行再拜礼复命说： 秉承制命册命皇后礼仪完毕。 
English: The chief and deputy envoys then performed the ritual, and in reply to the order said, "Adhering to the system of the Book of Life, the Queen's ritual is complete."

古文：又再拜，给事中奏闻，乃退。
现代文：又行再拜礼。给事中奏报，于是退下。
English: He bowed again, gave a report, and then withdrew.

古文：皇后既受册宝，升座。
现代文：皇后接受册书和宝玺后，登上座位。
English: After receiving the register and the brooch, the empress took her seat.

古文：引礼引内命妇班首一人，诣殿中贺位跪，致词曰： 兹遇皇后殿下膺受册宝，正位中宫，妾等不胜欢庆，谨奉贺。 
现代文：引礼官导引内命妇班首领一人，到殿中庆贺位置跪下，致词说： 正遇皇后殿，接受册书和宝玺，端居中宫皇后位。我等非常欢喜庆贺，谨表庆贺。 
English: The usher led one of the leaders of the designated women's class to kneel in a celebratory position in the middle of the hall and made a speech saying, "I am standing in front of the Empress's Hall, receiving the register and the treasure scepter, and ending up as the Empress of the Middle Court. I am very happy to celebrate, and I would like to express my congratulations."

古文：赞拜，乐作。
现代文：赞唱行拜贺礼，奏乐。
English: The hymns, the prayers, the music.

古文：再拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：行再拜礼，起身，音乐停止。
English: Come to worship again, get up, the music stops.

古文：退，复位。
现代文：退下，返回原位。
English: Step back, return to your original position.

古文：又引外命妇班首一人，入就殿上贺位，如内命妇仪。
现代文：又导引外命妇班首领一人，进入殿上庆贺位，如同内命妇礼仪。
English: In addition, one of the leaders of the foreign-appointed women's squad was guided into the hall to celebrate, just like the inner-appointed women's etiquette.

古文：礼毕俱出。
现代文：行礼完毕都退出。
English: After the salute, everyone exited.

古文：皇后降座，乐作。
现代文：皇后下座，奏乐。
English: The queen steps down from the throne and the music begins.

古文：还閤，乐止。
现代文：返回后宫，音乐停止。
English: Back in the harem, the music stops.

古文：次日，百官上表笺称贺。
现代文：次日，百官上表笺称贺。
English: The next day, hundreds of officials lined up to congratulate him.

古文：皇帝御殿受贺，如常仪。
现代文：皇帝到宫殿接受庆贺，如同常仪。
English: The emperor went to the palace to receive congratulations, as is customary.

古文：遂卜日，行谒庙礼，先遣官用牲牢行事，告以皇后将祗见之意。
现代文：于是占卜日子。举行拜谒太庙礼。先派官用牲牢告祭，告以皇后恭敬拜见的心意。
English: Therefore, on the day of divination, a temple ceremony was held to pay homage to the Empress Dowager. First, an official was dispatched to offer a sacrifice with a sacrificial animal, expressing the Queen's wish to pay a respectful visit.

古文：前期，皇后斋三日，内外命妇及执事内官斋一日。
现代文：拜期之前，皇后斋戒三天，内外命妇以及执事内官斋戒一天。
English: Before the prayer period, the empress fasted for three days, and the empress dowager and the deaconess fasted for one day.

古文：设皇后拜位于庙门外及庙中，设内命妇陪祀位于庙庭南，外命妇陪祀位于内命妇之南。司赞位皇后拜位之东西，司宾位内命妇之北，司香位香案右。
现代文：在庙门外及庙中设皇后行礼位置，在宗庙南设内命妇陪从祭祀位，在内命妇南面设外命妇陪同祭祀位。司赞位在皇后行拜礼位的东西面，司宾位在内命妇以北，司香位在香案右边。
English: Outside the temple gate and in the temple, there is a place for the empress to perform the ritual, in the south of the ancestral temple, there is a place for the inner empress to accompany the ritual, in the south of the inner empress, there is a place for the outer empress to accompany the ritual, in the east and west of the empress to perform the ritual, in the north of the inner empress, and in the right of the incense.

古文：陈盥洗于阶东，司盥洗官位其所。
现代文：在台阶东面陈放盥洗用具，司盥洗官位置在这个地方。
English: On the east side of the steps, there is a display of toilet articles. This is the location of the chief lavatory attendant.

古文：至日，内外命妇各翟衣集中宫内门外。
现代文：这一天，内外命妇各自穿翟衣集中在宫内门外。
English: On this day, empresses at home and abroad, each dressed in ceremonial robes, gathered outside the palace gate.

古文：皇后具九龙四凤冠，服祎衣。
现代文：皇后戴九龙四凤冠，穿祭衣。
English: The empress wears the Nine Dragons and Four Pheasants Crown and a ceremonial robe.

古文：出内宫门，升舆，至外门外降舆，升重翟车。
现代文：出内宫门，登舆，到外门外下舆，登上重翟车。
English: Go out of the inner palace gate, climb up, go out of the outer gate, climb down, and board the heavy carriage.

古文：鼓吹设而不作。
现代文：鼓吹乐陈设而不演奏。
English: Preachers set up the music without playing it.

古文：尚仪陈仪卫，次外命妇，次内命妇，皆乘车前导。
现代文：尚仪官陈设仪卫，其次是外命妇，其次是肉命妇，都乘车在前引导。
English: The chief etiquette officer, followed by the maids of honor, and then the maids of honor, all rode in front to guide the procession.

古文：内使监扈从，宿卫陈兵仗前后导从。
现代文：内使监跟从，宿卫陈兵械器杖在前面引导后面随从。
English: The envoy supervisor followed, and the guard Chen Weapon Stick led the way in front and followed behind.

古文：皇后至庙门，司宾引命妇先入。
现代文：皇后到了庙门，司宾官引导命妇先进入。
English: When the empress arrived at the temple gate, the steward guided her to enter first.

古文：皇后降车，司赞导自左门入，就位，北向立。
现代文：皇后下车，司赞官引导从左门进入，到拜位，向北站立。
English: The empress alighted from the car, and was guided by the imperial secretary to enter through the left door, go to the place of worship, and stand facing north.

古文：命妇各就位，北向立。
现代文：命妇各自就位，向北站立。
English: The bridesmaids took their places and stood facing north.

古文：司赞奏拜，司宾赞拜，皇后及命妇皆再拜，兴。
现代文：司赞奏唱礼拜，司宾赞唱行拜礼，皇后以及命妇都拜两拜，起身。
English: The steward sang a hymn, the steward sang a hymn, the queen and the lady-in-waiting both bowed twice and stood up.

古文：司赞请诣盥洗位，盥手帨抉手，由东陛升，至神位前。
现代文：司赞请求到盥洗位置，洗手擦手，由东台阶升登，到神位前。
English: The scribe requested to go to the washing position, wash his hands and wipe his hands, and ascend from the east steps to the throne.

古文：司赞奏上香者三，司香捧香于右，皇后三上讫，导复位，赞拜如前。
现代文：司赞奏唱上香三次，司香在右边捧着香，皇后上香三次结东，引导回到原位，像以前一样赞唱行拜礼。
English: The deacon sings the incense three times, the deacon holds the incense in his right hand, and the queen holds the incense three times, leading the way back to the original position, chanting and praying as before.

古文：司赞奏礼毕，皇后出自庙之左门，命妇以次出。
现代文：司赞奏唱行礼完毕，皇后从宗庙左门出，命妇依次出来。
English: After the sermon, the empress came out from the left door of the ancestral temple, followed by the empress dowager.

古文：皇后升车，命妇前导，如来仪。
现代文：皇后登车，命妇在前面引导，如同来时礼仪。
English: The empress boarded the carriage, and the lady-in-waiting led the way, as is the custom.

古文：过庙，鼓吹振作，皇后入宫。
现代文：经过宗庙时，鼓吹吹奏，皇后入宫。
English: When passing through the ancestral temple, the drum is played and the empress enters the palace.

古文：是日，皇帝宴群臣于谨身殿，皇后宴内外命妇于中宫。皆如正旦宴会仪。
现代文：这一天，皇帝在谨身殿招待群臣，皇后在中官宴请内外命妇，都如同正旦宴会的礼仪。
English: On this day, the emperor invited his ministers in the hall of honor, and the empress invited her ladies-in-waiting both at home and abroad at the banquet, both of which were like the etiquette of a formal banquet.

古文：及成祖即位，册皇后徐氏，其制小异。
现代文：等到成祖即位，册封皇后徐氏，它的礼制有细微差异。
English: When Emperor Chengzu ascended the throne and enthroned Empress Xu, there was a slight difference in the etiquette.

古文：皇帝皮弁服御华盖殿，翰林院官以诏书用宝讫，然后御奉天殿，传制皇后受册。
现代文：皇帝穿皮弁服到华盖殿，翰林院官以诏书盖上实玺，然后到奉天殿，传制命皇后接受册书。
English: The emperor put on a leather jacket and went to the Huagai Hall, and the Hanlin academician put a seal on the real seal with an edict, and then went to the Bongtian Hall to convey the order to the empress to accept the register.

古文：礼毕，翰林官以诏书授礼部官，礼部官奉诏书于承天门开读。
现代文：典礼结东，翰林官把诏书交给礼部官员，礼部官员在承天门捧诏书宣读。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the Hanlin official handed the imperial rescript to the official of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the official of the Ministry of Ceremonies held the imperial rescript at the Gate of Heaven and read it aloud.

古文：皇帝还宫，率皇后具服诣奉先殿谒告毕。
现代文：皇帝回宫，率领皇后穿着礼服到奉先殿拜谒祭告完毕。
English: The emperor returned to the palace and led the empress, dressed in ceremonial robes, to the front hall to announce that the memorial service was over.

古文：皇后具服于内殿，俟皇帝升座。
现代文：皇后在内殿穿礼服，等皇帝登上座位。
English: The empress put on her gown in the inner hall and waited for the emperor to take his seat.

古文：赞引女官导诣拜位，行谢恩礼，乐作。
现代文：赞引女官引导到行礼位置，举行谢恩礼，奏乐。
English: The maids of honor are led to the position of saluting, a thanksgiving is held, and music is played.

古文：八拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：拜八拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Say your prayers, stand up, and the music stops.

古文：礼毕。
现代文：礼仪结东。
English: Etiquette is everything.

古文：次日，皇帝皇后受贺宴会，如前仪。
现代文：次日，举行皇帝、皇后接受庆贺宴会，如同以前礼仪。
English: The next day, the Emperor and Empress held a banquet to celebrate their accession, as was the custom in the past.

古文：天顺八年，增定亲王于皇帝前庆贺，次诣皇太后庆贺，次诣皇后前八拜仪。
现代文：天顺八年，增加制定亲王在皇帝前厦贺，再到皇太后前庆贺，再到皇后前行八拜礼仪。
English: In the eighth year of Tianshun, the prince's greeting in front of the emperor, the celebration in front of the empress dowager, and the eight prostrations in front of the empress were added.

古文：嘉靖十三年，册皇后方氏，礼臣具仪注，有谒告内殿仪，无谒告太庙世庙之礼，帝命议增。
现代文：嘉靖十三年，册立皇后方氏，礼臣准备礼仪程序，有谒告内殿仪，没有谒告太庙、世庙的礼仪，皇帝命令议论增加。
English: In the 13th year of Jiajing, the empress Fang clan was established, the courtiers prepared the etiquette procedures, there was an obituary for the inner hall, but there was no obituary for the temple and the temple etiquette, and the emperor ordered the discussion to increase.

古文：于是礼臣以仪上。
现代文：于是礼臣呈上礼仪。
English: So the courtier presented the etiquette.

古文：先期斋三日，所司陈设如时祫仪。
现代文：此前斋戒三天，有关部门陈设如同时节合祭仪。
English: Previously, fasting for three days, the relevant departments set up such as simultaneous festival rituals.

古文：至日，皇帝御辂，皇后妃御翟车，同诣太庙。
现代文：到了这一天，皇帝坐辖车，皇后妃坐翟车，一同到太庙。
English: On this day, the Emperor rode in the imperial carriage and the Empress rode in the imperial carriage to the Imperial Temple.

古文：命官奉七庙主升神座讫。
现代文：命官捧着七庙牌位升上神座。
English: The commanding officer holding the seven temple plaques ascended to the throne.

古文：皇帝奉高皇帝主，皇后奉高皇后主，出升神座。
现代文：皇帝捧着高皇帝的牌位，皇后捧着高皇后的牌位，出去升上神座。
English: The emperor holds the card of the high emperor, the empress holds the card of the high empress, and goes out to ascend to the throne.

古文：迎神、上香、奠帛、祼献，乐作止，皆如仪。
现代文：迎神、上香、祭奠帛、以香汤灌地进献，奏乐，停止奏乐，都按礼仪进行。
English: Welcoming the deity, offering incense, holding a memorial service, pouring incense into the ground, playing music, and stopping to play music are all performed according to etiquette.

古文：次诣世庙行礼，同上仪。
现代文：又到世庙行礼，如同以上礼仪。
English: They also went to the World Temple to perform the rites, just like the above rites.

古文：隆庆元年增定，颁诏次日，命妇行见皇后礼。
现代文：隆庆元年增定，颁布诏书的第二天，命妇行见皇后礼。
English: In the first year of the Longqing Emperor's reign, the imperial edict was amended, and the day after the edict was promulgated, the empress was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：册妃之仪。
现代文：册封妃的礼仪。
English: The etiquette of crowning a princess.

古文：自洪武三年册孙氏为贵妃，定皇帝不御殿，承制官宣制曰： 妃某氏，特封某妃，命卿等持节行礼。 
现代文：从洪武三年册封孙氏为贵妃，决定皇帝不到殿上，承制官宣读制命说： 妃某氏，特封某妃，命你等持节行礼。 
English: From the third year of the reign of Hongwu, the emperor decided not to come to the palace, and the imperial commanding officer read out the commanding order, saying: "Princess So-and-so, special envoy So-and-so, it is your duty to keep the festival."

古文：但授册，无宝，馀并如中宫仪。
现代文：只授册书，没有宝玺，其余的都如同中宫皇后的礼仪。
English: There is only the registration book, no treasure map, and the rest is like the etiquette of the Empress Dowager.

古文：永乐七年，定册妃礼。
现代文：永乐七年制定册封妃礼。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongle Emperor's reign, the enthronement ceremony was held.

古文：皇帝皮弁服御华盖殿，传制。
现代文：皇帝穿皮弁服到华盖殿，传制命。
English: The emperor donned a fur coat and went to the Huagai Palace to receive the order.

古文：至宣宗立孙贵妃，始授宝，宪宗封万贵妃，始称皇，非洪武之旧矣。
现代文：到宣宗立孙贵妃，开始授宾玺，宪宗封万贵妃，开始称皇，并非洪武旧有的制度。
English: It wasn't the old system of Hongwu until the Emperor Xuan Zong established Sun Guifei and began to bestow the title of "guest of honor," and the Emperor Xian Zong created the title of "Man Guifei" and began to praise the emperor.

古文：嘉靖十年，帝册九嫔，礼官上仪注。
现代文：嘉靖十年，皇帝册封九嫔，礼官上呈礼节仪程。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing era, the emperor was awarded nine imperial titles, and the etiquette of the etiquette was introduced.

古文：先日，所司陈设仪仗如朔望仪。
现代文：前一天，有关部门按照朔望祭日的礼仪陈设仪仗。
English: The day before, the relevant departments set up a ceremonial battle in accordance with the etiquette of the New Year's Eve festival.

古文：至期，皇帝具衮冕，告太庙、世庙讫，易皮弁服，御华盖殿。
现代文：到了这天，皇帝穿衮冕服，祭告完太庙、世庙，换上皮弁服，到华盖殿。
English: On this day, the emperor put on his coronation robe, completed the ritual of the Great Temple and the World Temple, changed into a leather bento, and went to the Huagai Palace.

古文：百官公服入行礼。
现代文：百官穿公服入殿行礼。
English: Hundreds of officials wear official uniforms to enter the temple.

古文：正、副使朝服承制，举节册至九嫔宫。
现代文：正、副使穿朝服秉承制命，举着节册到九嫔宫。
English: The chief and deputy envoys wore imperial robes, adhered to the imperial edict, and marched to the Jiuyuan Palace holding the festival book.

古文：九嫔迎于宫门外，随至拜位。
现代文：九嫔在宫门外迎接，随后到了行礼位置。
English: The nine concubines greeted them outside the palace gate and then went to the place where they were to bow.

古文：女官宣册，九嫔受册，先后八拜。
现代文：女官宣读册书，九嫔受册，先后拜八拜。
English: The court lady read out the register, nine nuns received the register, and eight nuns bowed in succession.

古文：送节出宫门复命。
现代文：送节出宫门回复命令。
English: The order to return to the palace gate on the day of the festival.

古文：九嫔随具服候，皇后率诣奉先殿谒告，及诣皇帝、皇后前谢恩，俱如册妃礼。
现代文：九嫔随着穿礼服等侯，皇后率领她们到奉先殿行礼告祭，并到皇帝、皇后面前谢恩，都如同册妃礼。
English: The nine concubines waited for their turn to wear the ceremonial robes, and the empress led them to the Funzen-den to make a ceremonial offering, and to thank the emperor and empress in front of them, all of which was like a princess ceremony.

古文：惟圭用次玉，谷文、银册少杀于皇妃五分之一。
现代文：只是圭用次玉，谷文、银册比皇妃少五分之一。
English: However, Gui used the second ball, and Gu Wen and Yin Xuan were one-fifth less than the empress.

古文：二十年，册德妃张氏，以妃将就室，而帝方静摄，不传制，不谒告内殿，馀并如旧。
现代文：二十年，册封德妃张氏。因妃将要就室，而皇帝摄养不临朝办事，不传制命，不拜祭告事内殿，其余的都按旧礼制进行。
English: Twenty years later, the Zhang family was granted the title of German Empress. Because the empress was about to marry, the emperor did not come to the imperial court to do business, did not pass on the imperial edict, did not worship, and did not report to the inner court, the rest was carried out according to the old ritual system.

古文：册皇太子及皇太子妃仪
现代文：册皇太子及皇太子妃仪
English: Crown Prince and Crown Princess

古文：自汉代始称皇太子，明帝始有临轩、册拜之仪。
现代文：从汉代开始称皇太子，明帝纔开始有临轩册拜之礼仪。
English: From the Han Dynasty, the crown prince began to be called, and the Ming Dynasty began to have the etiquette of worshiping the emperor.

古文：唐则年长者临轩册授，幼者遣使内册。
现代文：唐代由年长的临轩册授，年幼的只是派使者用内册。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the elder Lin Xuan was the one who taught the book, while the younger ones only sent emissaries to use the inner book.

古文：宋惟用临轩。
现代文：宋祇用皇帝临轩之礼。
English: Song Ji used the Emperor Linxuan's salute.

古文：元惟用内册，不以长幼。
现代文：元代祇用内册不分长幼。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, it was customary to use the inner book regardless of age.

古文：明兴，定制，册皇太子，所司陈设如册后仪。
现代文：明代建国定下制度，册立皇太子，有关部门如册立皇后的礼仪一样陈设。
English: A system was established in the founding of the country in the Ming Dynasty, and the crown prince was appointed, and the relevant departments were set up in the same way as the etiquette of appointing the empress.

古文：设皇太子拜位于丹陛上。
现代文：在丹陛上设皇太子行拜礼的位置。
English: A place of worship for the crown prince has been set up at His Majesty Prince Dan.

古文：中严，皇帝衮冕御谨身殿，皇太子冕服俟于奉天门。
现代文：中庭戒严，皇帝穿衮冕服到谨身殿，皇太子穿冕服等候在奉天门。
English: The atrium was placed under martial law. The emperor wore a coronation robe to the Hall of Honor, while the crown prince wore a coronation robe and waited at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：外办，皇帝升奉天殿，引礼导皇太子入奉天东门。
现代文：警卫官禁，皇帝登奉天殿，引礼官引导皇太子进入奉天东门。
English: The guards were banned, the emperor ascended to the Fengtian Hall, and the usher led the crown prince into the East Gate of Fengtian.

古文：乐作，由东阶升至丹陛位，乐止。
现代文：奏乐，由东阶登上丹陛位置，音乐停止。
English: music, from the east steps to ascend to the position of Danzhong, the music stops.

古文：百官各就丹墀位。
现代文：百官各自到丹墀的拜位。
English: Hundreds of officials went to pay homage to Dangun.

古文：乐作，皇太子再拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：奏乐，皇太子行再拜礼，起身，音乐停止。
English: The music played, the crown prince bowed again, stood up, and the music stopped.

古文：承制官由殿中门出，立于门外，曰： 有制 。
现代文：承制官从殿中门出，站在门外，说： 有制命。 
English: And the captain of the guard went out of the gate of the house, and stood at the door without, and said, There is a decree.

古文：皇太子跪。
现代文：皇太子跪下。
English: The crown prince kneels down.

古文：宣制曰： 册长子某为皇太子。 
现代文：宣读制命说： 册立长子某为皇太子。 
English: The establishment order was read out, saying: "List the eldest son as the crown prince."

古文：皇太子俯伏，兴，乐作。
现代文：皇太子俯伏，起身，奏乐。
English: The crown prince prostrated, stood up, and played music.

古文：再拜。乐止。
现代文：行再拜礼，音乐停止。
English: After the service, the music stops.

古文：引礼导皇太子由殿东门入，乐作。
现代文：引礼官引导皇太子从殿东门进入，奏乐。
English: The usher leads the crown prince through the east gate of the hall, and the music begins.

古文：内赞导至御座前，乐止。
现代文：内赞官引导到御座前，音乐停止。
English: The music stopped as the Vice-Chamberlain led them to the throne.

古文：内赞赞跪，赞宣册。
现代文：内赞官赞唱跪下，赞唱宣读册书。
English: The Vice-Chancellor kneeled down to sing the anthem, and the anthem was read aloud.

古文：宣毕，赞搢圭，赞授册。
现代文：宣读完，赞唱插圭，赞唱授册书。
English: After the reading, there was a chorus of hymns, including a hymn to the registration book.

古文：皇太子搢圭，跪受册，以授内侍。
现代文：皇太子插圭，跪着接册书，交给内侍。
English: The Crown Prince stepped in, knelt down to receive the register, and handed it to the chambermaid.

古文：复赞授宝，如授册仪。
现代文：又赞唱授宝玺，如同授册书礼仪。
English: They also sing praises for the bestowal of treasures, just like the etiquette of the register.

古文：赞出圭，皇太子出圭，俯伏，兴，由殿东门出。
现代文：赞唱抽出圭，皇太子拿出圭，俯伏，起身，从殿东门出。
English: After singing a hymn, the crown prince took out his clavicle, prostrated himself, stood up, and walked out of the east gate of the hall.

古文：执事官举节册宝随出。
现代文：执事官举着节册书、实玺跟随出去。
English: The deacon, holding up the festival book, and the real urn, followed.

古文：皇太子复位，乐作。
现代文：皇太子返回原位，奏乐。
English: The crown prince returns to his original position and the music begins.

古文：四拜兴，乐止。
现代文：拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Bow four times, stand up, and the music stops.

古文：由东阶降，乐作。
现代文：从东台阶下来，奏乐。
English: Come down the east steps to the music.

古文：至奉天门，乐止。
现代文：到奉天门，音乐停止。
English: At the Fengtian Gate, the music stops.

古文：仪仗、鼓乐迎册宝至文华殿，持节官持节复命，礼部官奉诏书赴午门开读，百官迎诏至中书省，颁行。
现代文：仪仗、鼓乐迎册书、宝玺到文华殿。持节官持节复命，礼部官员捧着诏书到午门宣读旨意，百官到中书省迎接诏令，颁布施行。
English: A ceremonial battle, drumming and music welcomed the imperial rescript and treasure map to the Palace of Literature. The officials of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies carried the imperial rescript to the afternoon gate to read the will, and hundreds of officials came to the Ministry of Literature to welcome the imperial rescript and promulgate it.

古文：侍仪奏礼毕，驾兴，还宫。
现代文：侍仪上奏典礼完毕，皇帝起身，回宫。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor got up and returned to the palace.

古文：皇太子诣内殿，候皇后升座，行朝谢礼，四拜，恭谢曰： 小子某，兹受册命，谨诣母后殿下恭谢。 
现代文：皇太子到内殿，等候皇后升登座位，举行朝谢礼，拜四拜，恭敬地谢道： 小子某，正受册命，恭敬地到母后殿下谢恩。 
English: The crown prince went to the inner hall, waited for the empress to ascend to her seat, held a morning thanksgiving service, bowed four times, and respectfully thanked: "Kobuko, you are receiving your appointment, respectfully thank your mother, the empress."

古文：复四拜，礼毕。
现代文：又拜四拜，礼仪结东。
English: After another four prostrations, the ritual ends.

古文：亲王、世子、郡王俟于文华殿陛上。
现代文：亲王、世子、郡王在文华殿台阶上等候。
English: The prince, heir apparent, and crown prince wait on the steps of the Palace of Literature.

古文：皇太子升座，亲王以下由东陛升，就拜位四拜。
现代文：皇太子登上座位，亲王以下从东台阶升登，到行礼位拜四拜。
English: The Crown Prince ascended to his seat, and those below the Prince ascended from the east steps and bowed four times at the bowing position.

古文：长王恭贺曰： 小弟某，兹遇长兄皇太子荣膺册宝，不胜欣忭之至，谨率诸弟诣殿下称贺。 
现代文：最年长的王庆贺说： 小弟某，正遇长兄皇太子荣受册书、宝玺，不胜喜悦之至，恭敬地率领众弟到殿下称贺。 
English: The eldest, Wang Qing He, said: "My younger brother, upon meeting his eldest brother, the crown prince, was overjoyed. He respectfully led all his younger brothers to congratulate His Royal Highness.

古文：贺毕，皆四拜。
现代文：祝贺完毕，都拜四拜。
English: After the congratulations, everyone bowed four times.

古文：皇太子兴，以次出。
现代文：皇太子起身，依次出去。
English: The crown prince got up and went out in turn.

古文：诸王诣中宫四拜，长王致词贺毕，皆四拜出。
现代文：诸王到中官皇后处拜四拜，年长之王致完贺词，都拜四拜出去。
English: All the kings bowed four times when they arrived at the office of the Vice-Commander-in-Chief's Empress, and the elder king bowed four times when he finished his congratulatory message.

古文：是日，皇太子诣武英殿见诸叔，行家人礼，四拜，诸叔西向坐受。
现代文：这天，皇太子到武英殿见众叔，行家人礼，拜四拜，众叔面向西坐着受礼。
English: On this day, the Crown Prince went to the Imperial Palace to meet his uncles. They performed the family ritual, bowed four times, and the uncles sat facing west to receive the salute.

古文：见诸兄，行家人礼，二拜，诸兄西向立受。
现代文：见众兄，行家人礼，拜二拜，众兄向西站着受樘。
English: See all the brothers, perform the family ritual, pray two prayers, and all the brothers stand facing west to receive the funeral rites.

古文：次日，百官进表笺庆贺，内外命妇庆贺中宫，如常仪。
现代文：第二天，百官上表文庆贺，内外命妇向中宫皇后庆贺，如同常仪。
English: The next day, hundreds of officials issued congratulatory messages, and empresses at home and abroad congratulated the Empress, as is customary.

古文：乃择日，太子谒太庙。
现代文：于是选择日期，太子祭拜太庙。
English: Therefore, the date was chosen, and the crown prince paid homage to the Imperial Temple.

古文：洪武二十八年，皇太子、亲王俱授金册，不用宝。
现代文：洪武二十八年，皇太子、亲王都授给金册，不用宝玺。
English: In the 28th year of Hongwu, the crown prince and the prince were awarded the golden book, without using the treasure.

古文：永乐二年定，先三日斋戒，遣官祭告天地、宗庙，受册宝毕，先诣太庙谒告，后至奉天殿谢恩，乃入谢中宫。
现代文：永乐二年规定，前三天斋戒，派官祭告天地、宗庙，接受册书、宝玺完毕，先到太庙拜谒祭告，后到奉天殿谢恩，再入内谢中宫皇后。
English: According to the regulations of the second year of Yongle, the first three days of fasting, sending officials to tell the world and the ancestral temple, accepting the record book, and completing the treasure, first go to the Great Temple to worship and tell the world, then go to the Heavenly Palace to thank, and then enter the Inner Palace to thank the Empress.

古文：二十二年十月，册东宫，以梓宫在殡，乐设而不作。
现代文：永乐二十二年十月，册封东宫太子，因皇帝灵柩正停留待葬，设乐而不演奏。
English: In October of the 22nd year of Yongle, he was crowned the prince of the East Palace, because the emperor's coffin was staying to be buried, he did not play music.

古文：奉先殿行礼毕，仍诣几筵谒告。
现代文：在奉先殿举行完典礼，仍到灵座拜谒祭告。
English: After the ceremony was held in the Bokusen-den, they still went to the shrine to pay their respects.

古文：宣德二年十一月，皇子生，群臣表请立太子，三年二月行礼，以太子尚幼，乃命正、副使授册宝于文华门。
现代文：宣德二年十一月，皇子出生，群臣上表请求立太子。三年二月行礼，因太子还幼小，就命令正、副使在文华门授册书和宝玺。
English: In November of the second year of Xuande, the prince was born, and the courtiers went to the table to request the establishment of the prince. In February of the third year, because the prince was still young, he ordered the chief and deputy envoys to hand in the registration book and treasure at the Wenhua Gate.

古文：成化十一年以册立皇太子礼成，文武官分五等，赐彩缎有差。
现代文：成化十一年，因册立皇太子礼成，文武官分为五等，赐给不同数量的彩缎。
English: In the eleventh year of Chenghua, as a result of the establishment of the Crown Prince Li Cheng, the civil and military officers were divided into five classes and given different numbers of color badges.

古文：嘉靖十八年二，月册东宫，帝诣南郊告上帝，诣太庙告皇祖，自北郊及列圣宗庙以下皆遣官。
现代文：嘉靖十八年二月，册封东宫太子，皇帝到南郊祭告上帝，到太庙祭告皇祖，从北郊以及历代帝王宗庙以下都派遣官员祭告。
English: In February of the 18th year of Jiajing, he was crowned the prince of the East Palace. The emperor went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to God, to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices to the emperor's ancestors, and sent officials from the northern suburbs and from the ancestral temple of successive emperors to offer sacrifices.

古文：时太子方二岁，保姆奉之，迎册宝于文华殿门，诣皇帝前谢恩，皇后、贵妃代太子八拜。
现代文：当时太子正二岁，由宫人抱着，在文化殿门迎册书和宝玺，到皇帝面前谢恩，皇后、贵妃代替太子拜八拜。
English: At that time, the prince was just two years old. He was held by the palace staff, and received the record book and the treasure map at the gate of the Cultural Palace. He thanked the emperor, and the empress and the noblewoman bowed eight times in place of the prince.

古文：诣皇后前，贵妃代八拜。
现代文：到皇后面前，贵妃代替拜八拜。
English: In front of the empress, the empress dowager bowed eight times.

古文：诣贵妃前，保姆代四拜。
现代文：到贵妃面前，保姆代替拜四拜。
English: In front of the princess, the nanny bowed four times instead of bowing.

古文：馀如常仪。
现代文：其余的如同常仪。
English: The rest is business as usual.

古文：其皇太子妃受册，与皇太子同日传制。
现代文：皇太子妃受册书，与皇太子同日传制命。
English: The Crown Princess received the certificate of registration and received the order of succession on the same day as the Crown Prince.

古文：节册将至内殿，妃降自东阶，迎置于案。
现代文：节册即将到内殿，妃从东阶下来，迎接放置在案上。
English: The festival book is about to arrive at the inner hall, and the empress comes down from the east steps to greet it and place it on the case.

古文：赞就拜位，赞跪，妃跪。
现代文：赞唱到行礼位置，赞唱跪下，妃跪下。
English: Chant to the position of salute, chant kneel, kneel.

古文：赞宣册，女官跪取册，立宣毕。
现代文：赞唱宣读册书，女官跪着取册书，站着宣读完毕。
English: The anthem was sung as the books were read aloud. The maids of honor knelt down to take the books and stood up when the reading was over.

古文：赞授册，赞搢圭。
现代文：赞唱授册书，赞唱插圭。
English: Sing praises to the handbook, sing praises to the preface.

古文：女官以册授妃，妃搢圭，受册讫，以授女官。
现代文：女官拿册书交给妃，妃插圭，接受册书后，交给女官。
English: The lady-in-waiting took the book and handed it to the princess, who read it aloud. After accepting the book, she handed it to the lady-in-waiting.

古文：女官跪受，捧立。
现代文：女官跪着接受，捧着站立。
English: The female officer kneels to receive it, and stands holding it.

古文：赞出圭，兴，四拜。
现代文：赞唱抽出圭，起身，拜四拜。
English: Sing a hymn, stand up, bow four times.

古文：礼毕，内官持节出，妃送至殿外，正副使持节复命。
现代文：礼仪完毕，太监持节出来，妃送到殿外，正副使持节覆命。
English: After the ceremony, the eunuch came out to hold the festival, the princess was sent outside the palace, and the principal and vice-principal were sent to hold the festival and die.

古文：是日，妃具礼服诣奉先殿行谒告礼。
现代文：这天，妃穿着礼服到奉先殿举行拜谒告礼。
English: On this day, the empress wore a ceremonial dress to the Funzen-den to hold a memorial service.

古文：随诣宫门，俟皇帝、皇后升座，入谢恩，行八拜礼。
现代文：跟着到了官门，等待皇帝、皇后升座，进入谢恩，行八拜礼。
English: They followed him to the official gate, waited for the emperor and empress to ascend to the throne, entered the hall of fame, and performed eight prostrations.

古文：又诣各宫皇妃前，行四拜礼。
现代文：又到各宫皇妃面前，行四拜礼。
English: He also went to each palace to bow four times before the empress.

古文：还宫，诣皇太子前，亦四拜。
现代文：返回宫，到皇太子面前，也拜四拜。
English: He returned to the palace and bowed four times in front of the crown prince.

古文：礼毕，升座，王妃、公主、郡主及外命妇，于丹墀拜贺如仪。
现代文：行礼结东，升登座位，王妃、公主、郡主以及外命妇，在丹墀按礼仪行礼庆贺。
English: After the formalities, the crown prince, princess, grand duchess, and foreign empress ascended to the throne. They celebrated in accordance with the etiquette in Dangdang.

古文：册亲王及王妃仪
现代文：册亲王及王妃仪
English: The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge

古文：汉册亲王于庙。
现代文：汉代在太庙册封亲王。
English: Princes in the Han Dynasty were crowned in the Great Temple.

古文：唐临轩册命，礼极详备。
现代文：唐代在前殿册封，礼仪极其详备。
English: The Tang Dynasty was sealed in the front hall, and the etiquette was extremely detailed.

古文：宋有册命之文，皆上表辞免，惟迎官诰还第。
现代文：宋代有册封文章，都上表推辞免去册封，只是迎受官诰返回住处。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there were articles that were officially sealed, and all of them were exempted from being officially sealed, but they were welcomed by officials to return to their residences.

古文：元亦降制命之，不行册礼。
现代文：元代也降制命封，不行册封礼。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, the life seal was also lowered, and the ceremonial seal was no longer allowed.

古文：明洪武三年定制，册命亲王，先期告宗庙，所司陈设如册东宫仪。
现代文：明洪武三年规定制度，册封亲王，事前祭告宗庙，有关部门按册封东宫太子的礼仪陈设。
English: The Ming-Hongwu three-year regulation system, the enthronement of the prince, the pre-announcement of the ancestral temple, and the relevant departments set up the etiquette of the enthronement of the East Palace prince.

古文：至日，皇帝御奉天殿，皇太子、亲王由奉天东门入。
现代文：到了这天，皇帝到奉天殿，皇太子、亲王从奉天东闩进入。
English: On this day, the emperor went to the Temple of Heaven, and the crown prince and prince entered from the East Gate of Heaven.

古文：乐作，升自东陛。
现代文：奏乐，从东台阶升登。
English: music, ascending the east steps.

古文：皇太子由殿东门入，内赞导至御前，侍立位。
现代文：皇太子从殿东门进入，内赞引导到皇帝面前，在拜位上侍立。
English: The crown prince entered from the east gate of the hall, and was led by the Neizan into the presence of the emperor, where he stood at the altar.

古文：亲王入至丹陛拜位，乐止。
现代文：亲王进入到丹陛上的行礼位置，音乐停止。
English: The music stops as the Prince moves into the position of saluting His Majesty.

古文：赞拜，乐作。
现代文：赞唱行礼，奏乐。
English: The hymns, the prayers, the music.

古文：再拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：行再拜礼，起身，音乐停止。
English: Come to worship again, get up, the music stops.

古文：承制官承制如仪，诸王皆跪，宣制曰： 封皇子某为某王，某为某王。 
现代文：承制官按礼仪秉承制命，众王都跪下，宣读制命说： 册封皇子某为某王，某为某王。 
English: According to the etiquette, the vetting officer adhered to the vetting order, and all the kings knelt down and read out the vetting order, saying: "The crown prince is a certain king, a certain king."

古文：宣毕，诸王俯伏，兴。
现代文：宣读完，众王俯伏，起身。
English: After the reading, the kings bowed down and rose.

古文：赞拜，乐作。
现代文：赞唱行拜礼，奏乐。
English: The hymns, the prayers, the music.

古文：再拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：行再拜礼，起身，音乐停止。
English: Come to worship again, get up, the music stops.

古文：引礼导王由殿东外入，乐作。
现代文：引礼官引导王从殿东外面进入，奏乐。
English: The usher leads the king into the hall from the east, and the music begins.

古文：内赞引至御座前拜位，乐止。
现代文：内赞官引导到皇帝座前的礼拜位置，音乐停止。
English: The chancellor led them to the place of worship in front of the emperor's throne, and the music stopped.

古文：王跪。
现代文：王跪下。
English: Wang knelt down.

古文：赞授册，捧册官以册授读册官，读讫，以授丞相。
现代文：赞唱授予册书，捧册官拿册书授给读册官，宣读完毕，交给丞相。
English: The anthem is sung to award the record book, the official holding the record book takes the record book and awards it to the official reading the record book, and after it is read out, it is handed over to the prime minister.

古文：丞相授王，王搢圭受，以授内使。
现代文：丞相交给王，王插圭接受，把它交给太监。
English: The chancellor gave it to the king, the king accepted it and gave it to the eunuch.

古文：授宝如上仪。
现代文：授宝玺也如同上面的礼仪。
English: The bestowal of treasures is also done according to the above etiquette.

古文：讫，王出圭，俯伏，兴。
现代文：结东，王拿出圭，俯伏，起身。
English: Tie Dong, Wang take out Gui, prostrate, stand up.

古文：引礼导王出，复位。
现代文：引礼官引导王出去，返回原位。
English: The usher led Wang out and back to his original position.

古文：以次引诸王入殿，授册宝如仪。
现代文：依次引导众王入殿，按礼仪授予册书和宝玺。
English: He led the kings into the hall in turn, and presented the scroll and the treasure to them according to the etiquette.

古文：内使以册宝置彩亭讫，赞拜，乐作。
现代文：太监把册书和宝玺放置在彩亭，做完之后赞唱行拜礼，奏乐。
English: The eunuch placed the record book and the treasure map in the pavilion, and after doing so, he sang hymns, performed prayers, and played music.

古文：诸王皆四拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：众王都拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: The kings bowed, rose, and the music stopped.

古文：内使举亭前行，亲王由东阶降，乐作。
现代文：太监举着彩亭在前行走，亲王从东面台阶上下来，奏乐。
English: The eunuch walks in front holding up the pavilion. The prince comes down from the eastern steps and plays music.

古文：出奉天东门，乐止。
现代文：出奉天东门，音乐停止。
English: The East Gate of the Temple of Heaven is opened, and the music stops.

古文：礼部尚书请诏书用宝，赴午门开读。
现代文：礼部尚书请求诏书用宝玺，到午门展开宣读。
English: The etiquette department requested that the imperial edict be read aloud at the noon gate, using a treasure casket.

古文：礼毕，皇帝还宫，皇太子出。
现代文：礼仪完毕，皇帝回宫，皇太子退出。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor returned to the palace, and the crown prince withdrew.

古文：王年幼，则遣官赍册宝授之。
现代文：王年幼，就派遣官员拿着册书和宝玺交给他。
English: When the king was young, he sent an official to take the book and the treasure and give it to him.

古文：丞相承制至王所，东北立，西南向，宣制。
现代文：丞相承接制命到王的住所，在东北方站立，面向西南，宣读制命。
English: The chancellor received the order to go to the king's residence, stood in the northeast, facing southwest, and read out the order.

古文：最幼者行保抱之礼。
现代文：最年幼的王则由保姆抱着举行礼仪。
English: The youngest king was held in the arms of his nanny for the ceremony.

古文：是日，亲王朝谢皇后、太子，与东宫受册朝谢同。
现代文：这天，亲王朝见拜谢皇后、太子，礼仪与东宫太子接受册书朝谢相同。
English: On this day, the pro-dynasty met with the Empress and the Crown Prince, and the etiquette was the same as that of the Crown Prince receiving the morning thanks.

古文：亲王各自行贺，幼者诣长者，行四拜礼。
现代文：亲王各自进行庆贺，年幼的拜访年长的，行四拜礼。
English: The princes celebrate individually, the younger ones visit the older ones, and there are four church services.

古文：百官诣亲王贺，亦行四拜礼。
现代文：百官到亲王那儿庆贺，也行四拜礼。
English: Hundreds of officials came to the prince to celebrate, and they also made four prostrations.

古文：丞相至殿上跪，文武官于庭中。
现代文：丞相到殿上跪下，文武官员站在庭中。
English: The chancellor knelt in front of the hall, while the civil and military officials stood in the courtyard.

古文：丞相致词曰： 某官某等，兹遇亲王殿下荣膺册宝，封建礼成，无任欣忭之至。 
现代文：丞相致词说： 某官某等，正遇亲王殿下荣受册书和寅玺，封邦建国的礼仪完成，不胜喜悦之至。 
English: In his speech, the prime minister said: It is a great joy for certain officials to meet with His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince to receive the certificate of registration and investiture, and to see the completion of the ceremony of founding the feudal state.

古文：贺毕，丞相及百官复四拜。
现代文：庆贺完毕，丞相及百官又拜四拜。
English: After the celebration, the prime minister and hundreds of officials bowed four times.

古文：次日，皇太子冕服于奉天殿朝贺皇帝，太子致词曰： 长子某，兹遇诸弟某等受封建国，谨诣父皇陛下称贺。 
现代文：第二日，皇太子穿冕服到奉天殿向皇帝庆贺。太子致词说： 长子某，正遇到众弟某等受封邦建藩国，谨向父皇陛下称贺。 
English: On the second day, the crown prince wore a coronation robe to the Bongten Hall to congratulate the emperor. The crown prince said in a speech: The eldest son, who is encountering his brothers, who are subject to feudal states and building a feudal state, would like to congratulate his father, His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：贺中宫，致词曰： 谨诣母后殿下称贺。 
现代文：庆贺中宫皇后，致词说： 谨向母后殿下称贺。 
English: congratulating the Empress of the Middle Court, he said in his speech: "I would like to congratulate Her Royal Highness the Queen Mother.

古文：百官进表笺贺皇帝及中宫、东宫，如东宫受册仪。
现代文：百官进表文庆贺皇帝及中宫皇盾、东宫太子，到东宫行接受册书的礼仪。
English: It is the etiquette for the hundred officials to present a congratulatory letter to the emperor and the middle palace crown prince and the eastern palace prince, and to go to the eastern palace to receive the registered book.

古文：内外命妇贺中宫，致词曰： 妾某氏等，兹遇亲王受封建国，恭诣皇后殿下称贺。 
现代文：内外命妇庆贺中宫皇后，致词说： 妾某氏等，正遇亲王受封建藩国，恭敬地来向皇后点下庆贺。 
English: The empresses at home and abroad congratulated the Empress of the Middle Palace, and said in a speech: The concubines of a certain clan, who are meeting the prince of the feudal domain, respectfully came to congratulate the empress.

古文：是日，百官及命妇各赐宴。
现代文：这天，百官以及命妇各自赐宴。
English: On this day, the dignitaries and empresses each gave a banquet.

古文：择日，诸王谒太庙。
现代文：选择吉日，众王拜祭太庙。
English: Choose an auspicious day, and kings will pay homage to the temple.

古文：时秦、晋、燕、楚、吴五王皆长，而齐、潭、赵、鲁四王方幼，故兼具其制。
现代文：当时秦、置、燕、楚、昊五王都年长，而齐、潭、赵、鲁四王正年幼，所以都同时施行礼制。
English: At that time, the five kings of Qin, Jie, Yan, Chu, and Hao were all elderly, while the four kings of Qi, Tan, Zhao, and Lu were young, so they all practiced etiquette at the same time.

古文：靖江王则以亲王封，故视秦、晋仪。
现代文：靖江王则以亲王身份受封号，故礼仪等同秦王、晋王。
English: King Jingjiang received the title of prince, so the etiquette is the same as that of King Qin and King Jin.

古文：二十八年定制，亲王嫡长子，年十岁，授金册宝，立为王世子。
现代文：洪武二十八年决定制度，亲王嫡长子，年龄十岁，授给金册宝，立为王世子。
English: In the 28th year of Hongwu, the system was decided, and the eldest son of the prince, who was ten years old, was awarded the Golden Book and became the king's heir.

古文：次嫡及庶子皆封郡王。
现代文：次嫡子以及妾生之子都封号郡王。
English: The second legitimate son and the concubine's son were both given the title of county king.

古文：凡王世子必以嫡长，王年三十，正妃未有嫡子，其子止为郡王。
现代文：凡是王世子必须是嫡长子，王时年三十岁，正妃没有嫡子，王的儿子只是郡王。
English: All royal heirs must be the eldest legitimate son. The king was thirty years old at the time, and the princess had no legitimate son. The king's son was only the county king.

古文：待王与正妃年五十无嫡子，始立庶长子为王世子，袭封。
现代文：等到王与正妃年纪已五十岁而没有嫡子，才立庶长子为王世子，袭封爵。
English: It was not until the king and the princess were fifty years old and had no legitimate son that the eldest illegitimate son became the king's heir and received a peerage.

古文：朝廷遣人行册命之礼。
现代文：朝廷派人行册封礼仪。
English: The Imperial Court sent someone to perform the book-sealing ceremony.

古文：成化末，封兴、岐、益、衡、雍五王，帝亲告奉先殿，遣使就各王府册之，罢临轩礼。
现代文：成化末年，封兴、岐、益、衡、雍五王，皇帝亲自祭告奉先殿，派遣使者到各王府册封，罢除临轩礼。
English: At the end of Chenghua's reign, the five kings, including Fu Xing, Qi, Yi, Heng and Yong, were proclaimed by the emperor himself, and envoys were sent to all the royal courts to confer the titles and abolish the Lin Xuan ceremony.

古文：而诸王当袭封者，俱于岁终遣官册封。
现代文：而众王应当袭封的，都于年终派遣官员册封。
English: However, all the kings who should have been crowned sent officials to be crowned at the end of the year.

古文：嘉靖中，改于孟春，著为令。
现代文：嘉靖年间，改在初春，写成法令。
English: During the Jiajing period, it was changed to early spring, and it was written into a decree.

古文：册王妃与册太子妃仪同。
现代文：册封王妃礼仪与册封太子妃礼仪相同。
English: The protocol for the investiture of a princess is the same as that for a crown prince.

古文：册公主仪。
现代文：册封公主的礼仪。
English: The ceremony of crowning a princess is over.

古文：洪武九年七月，命使册公主。
现代文：洪武九年七月，命令使者册封公主。
English: In July of the ninth year of Hongwu, the envoy was ordered to crown the princess.

古文：设册案于清乾宫御座之东南，册用银字镀金。
现代文：在干清官御座东南设册案，册书是用银字镀金。
English: A register was set up in the south-east of the Imperial Throne Hall in the Qing Dynasty. The register was written in silver and gilded.

古文：皇帝、皇后升御座，遣使捧册传制如仪。
现代文：皇帝、皇后登御座，按礼仪派遣使者捧册书传达制命。
English: The emperor and empress ascended the throne, and according to the etiquette, sent an envoy with a book to convey the command.

古文：使者至华盖殿，公主拜受，其仪略与册太子妃同。
现代文：使者到华盖殿，公主行拜礼接受，礼仪大略与册封太子妃相同。
English: The envoys went to the Huagai Palace, where the princess received them with a ceremony. The etiquette was roughly the same as for the crown princess.

古文：凡皇姑曰大长公主，皇姊妹曰长公主，皇女曰公主，亲王女曰郡主，郡王女曰县主，孙女曰郡君，曾孙女曰县君，玄孙女曰乡君。
现代文：凡是皇姑称大长公主，皇帝的姐妹称长公主，皇帝的女儿称公主，亲王的女儿称郡主，郡王的女儿称县主，孙女称郡君，曾孙女称县君，玄孙女称乡君。
English: The imperial aunt is called the eldest princess, the emperor's sister is called the eldest princess, the emperor's daughter is called the princess, the prince's daughter is called the princess, the prince's daughter is called the county head, the granddaughter is called the county head, the great-granddaughter is called the county head, and the great-granddaughter is called the country head.

古文：郡主以下，受诰封，不册命。
现代文：郡主以下，接受诰命封典，不册封。
English: Princes and princesses below receive a special seal, but are not given a title.

古文：皇帝加元服仪
现代文：皇帝加元服仪
English: The Emperor's New Year's Eve Service

古文：古者冠必于庙，天子四加。
现代文：古代加冠必定在庙中，天子四次加冠。
English: The ancient crowning must be in the temple, and the Son of Heaven crowned four times.

古文：魏以后始冠于正殿，又以天子至尊，礼惟一加，历代因之。
现代文：魏以后开始在正殿加冠，又因天子最尊贵，礼只有一次加冠，历代沿袭。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, crowning began at the main hall, and because the emperor was the most honored, there was only one crowning ceremony, which was followed down through the ages.

古文：明洪武三年定制。
现代文：明洪武三年确定制度。
English: The Ming, Hongwu and Three-Year Determination System.

古文：先期，太史院卜日，工部制冕服，翰林院撰祝文，礼部具仪注。
现代文：此前，太史院占卜日期，工部制作冕服，翰林院撰写祝文，礼部制定礼节礼仪。
English: Previously, the Department of History had divined the date, the Department of Engineering had made the coronation robe, the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences had written the congratulatory message, and the Department of Etiquette had formulated the etiquette.

古文：中书省承制，命某官摄太师，某官摄太尉。
现代文：中书省秉承制命，命令某官代理太师，某官代理太尉。
English: The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, adhering to the system of command, ordered a certain official to act as the acting master and a certain official to act as the acting lieutenant.

古文：既卜日，遣官告天地、宗庙。
现代文：既已占卜日子，派遣官员告祭天地、宗庙。
English: Since the day of divination, officials have been dispatched to offer sacrifices to heaven, earth, and the ancestral temple.

古文：前一日，内使监令陈御冠席于奉天殿正中，其南设冕服案及香案宝案。
现代文：前一天，内使监令在奉天殿正中陈设御冠席，南面陈设冕服案以及香案宝案。
English: The day before, the Inner Mission Supervisor ordered the crown seat to be set up in the middle of the main hall of the Bongten Hall, and the crown suit and the incense treasure case to be set up on the south side.

古文：侍仪司设太师、太尉起居位于文楼南，西向，设拜位于丹墀内道，设侍立位于殿上御席西，设盥洗位于丹陛西。
现代文：侍仪司在文楼以南陈设太师、太尉的起居位，面向西，在赤色丹墀内道陈设褴拜位，在殿上御席西面陈设侍立位，在丹陛西面陈设盥洗位。
English: The Master of Ceremonies set up the sitting and standing positions for the Grand Master and the Grand Lieutenants in the south of the Literature Building, facing west, the place for prostration in the red inner courtyard of the Dan Pavilion, the place for the attendants to stand in the west side of the throne room, and the place for the toilet in the west side of the Dan Pavilion.

古文：其百官及诸执事位次如大朝仪。
现代文：百官以及办事人的位次如同大型朝拜仪。
English: The ranks of hundreds of officials and clerks are like a large-scale worship service.

古文：是日质明，鼓三严，百官入。
现代文：这天天刚亮，击鼓三通，百官进入。
English: It was just after dawn, the drums were beating, and hundreds of officials were entering.

古文：皇帝服空顶帻、双童髻、双玉导、绛纱袍，御舆以出。
现代文：皇帝穿空顶愤、双童髻、双玉导、绛纱袍，由御舆载着出来。
English: The emperor put on a gauze gown, a pair of children's shoes, a pair of jade shoes, and a silk robe, and was carried out by the queen.

古文：侍卫警跸奏如仪。
现代文：侍卫按仪礼清道戒严奏乐。
English: The guards played music in accordance with the rite of martial law.

古文：皇帝升座。
现代文：皇帝登上座位。
English: The emperor climbed into his seat.

古文：鸣鞭报时讫，通班赞各供事。
现代文：挥鞭报时，通班赞唱各自供奉事。
English: During the flag-waving ceremony, the whole class sang hymns and offered their services.

古文：太师太尉先入，就拜位，百官皆入。
现代文：太师、太尉先进入，到行礼位，百官都进入。
English: The daishi and the taifu enter first, and all the officials enter after they have performed the formalities.

古文：赞拜，乐作。
现代文：赞唱行拜礼，奏乐。
English: The hymns, the prayers, the music.

古文：四拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Bow four times, stand up, and the music stops.

古文：引礼导太师先诣盥洗位，搢笏盥帨讫，出笏，由西陛升。
现代文：引礼官引导太师先到盥洗位，插上笏板盥洗擦拭，拿出笏板，从西台阶上升。
English: The usher led the Grand Master to the washing place first, plugged in the washing and wiping board, took out the wiping board, and climbed up from the west steps.

古文：内赞接引至御席西，东向立。
现代文：内赞官接待引导到御席西面，向东站立。
English: The Vice-Chancellor was led to the west side of the throne for the reception and stood facing east.

古文：引礼复导太尉盥搢讫，入立于太师南。
现代文：引礼官又引导太尉盥洗擦拭，进入站在太师南面。
English: The usher also guided the eunuch to wash and wipe his face, and he entered the south side of the eunuch.

古文：侍仪奏请加元服。
现代文：侍仪奏请加冠。
English: Please add a crown for the waitress.

古文：太尉诣皇帝前，少右，跪搢笏。
现代文：太尉到皇帝面前，稍微向右，跪着插上笏板。
English: The captain went to the emperor, slightly to the right, knelt down and inserted the cutting board.

古文：脱空顶帻以授内使，置于箱。
现代文：脱下空顶愤巾交给太监，放在箱子里。
English: Take off the empty cap and hand it to the eunuch and put it in the box.

古文：进栉设纚毕，出笏，兴，退立于西。
现代文：进献梳头用的栉和东发的缆后，抽出笏板，起身，退着站在西面。
English: After donating the comb and the east-facing cable, pull out the cutting board, stand up, step back and stand on the west side.

古文：太师前，北向立。
现代文：太师上前，向北站立。
English: The Grand Master stepped forward and stood facing north.

古文：内使监令取冕立于左，太师祝曰： 令月吉日，始加元服，寿考维祺，以介景福。 
现代文：内使监令取出冕站在左面，太师祝贺说： 美好日子，开始加冠。长寿幸福，来求取大福。 
English: The envoy stood on the left and congratulated the emperor, saying, "It's a beautiful day, let's start adding crowns. Long life and happiness, let's seek great fortune."

古文：内使监令捧冕，跪授太师。
现代文：内使监令捧着冕，跪着交给了太师。
English: Holding the crown in his hand, the envoy handed it to the Grand Master on his knees.

古文：太师搢笏，跪受冕。
现代文：太师插上笏板，跪下接受冕。
English: The Grand Master inserted the cutting board and knelt down to receive the crown.

古文：加冠、加簪缨讫，出笏，兴，退立于西。
现代文：加冠、加簪缨后，抽出笏板，起身，退着站在西面。
English: After adding the crown and filling, pull out the cutting board, stand up, step back and stand on the west side.

古文：御用监令奏请皇帝著衮服，皇帝兴，著衮服。
现代文：御用监令奏请皇帝穿衮服，皇帝起身，穿衮服。
English: The imperial inspector asked the emperor to put on the imperial robe. The emperor got up and put on the imperial robe.

古文：侍仪奏请就御座，内赞赞进醴，乐作。
现代文：侍仪奏请到御座，内赞赞唱进献美酒，奏乐。
English: Attendants please come to the throne, sing praises, present wine, and play music.

古文：太师诣御前北面立，光禄卿奉酒进授太师，太师搢笏受酒，祝曰： 甘醴惟厚，嘉荐令芳。
现代文：太师到御前北面站立，光禄卿捧着酒上前交给太师，太师插上笏板接酒，祝贺说： 甘甜的酒醇厚，好的祭品芳香。
English: Daishi came to stand in front of the north side of the palace, and Lord Guanglu held the wine and handed it to Daishi. Daishi inserted the cutting board to receive the wine and congratulated: "The sweet wine is mellow, and the good offerings are fragrant."

古文：承天之休，寿考不忘。 
现代文：接受上天的美德，永远长寿。 
English: With the blessing of God, Emperor Topi will always be remembered for his beauty.

古文：祝讫，跪授内使。
现代文：祝贺完毕，跪着交给太监。
English: After the congratulations, he kneeled down and handed it to the eunuch.

古文：内使跪受酒，捧进。
现代文：太监跪着接酒，捧着进奉。
English: The eunuch kneeled to receive the wine, holding it in his hand.

古文：皇帝受，祭少许，啐酒讫，以虚盏授内使，乐止。
现代文：皇帝接受，祭了少许酒，小小地饮了一口酒以后，把空酒杯交给太监，音乐停止。
English: The emperor accepted, offered a little wine, drank a small sip of wine, handed the empty glass to the eunuch, and the music stopped.

古文：内使受盏降，授太师。
现代文：太监接酒盏下阶，交给太师。
English: The eunuch takes the chalice from the lower echelon and hands it to the grand master.

古文：太师受盏兴，以授光禄卿，光禄卿受盏退。
现代文：太师接酒盏后起身，交给光禄卿，光禄卿接了酒盏退下。
English: After receiving the goblet, the Grand Master stood up and handed it to Lord Guanglu. Lord Guanglu accepted the goblet and stepped down.

古文：太师出笏，退，复位。
现代文：太师抽出笏板，退下，返囤原位。
English: Master pulls out the chopping board, steps back, and returns the chopsticks to their original position.

古文：内赞导太师太尉出殿西门，乐作，降自西阶。
现代文：内赞官引导太师、太尉出殿的西门，奏乐，从西台阶下。
English: The Naizan guides the Grand Master and the Second Lieutenant out of the hall, and the West Gate, accompanied by music, descends from the West Steps.

古文：引礼导至丹墀拜位，乐止。
现代文：引礼官引导到丹墀的礼拜位置，音乐停止。
English: The usher leads them to Dantzen's place of worship, and the music stops.

古文：赞拜，乐作。
现代文：赞唱行拜礼，奏乐。
English: The hymns, the prayers, the music.

古文：太师太尉及文武官皆四拜，兴，乐止。
现代文：太师、太尉以及文武官员都行礼拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: The daishi, the taifu, and the civil and military officials all bowed four times, stood up, and the music stopped.

古文：三舞蹈，山呼，俯伏，兴，乐作。
现代文：行舞蹈礼三次，山呼万岁，俯伏，起身，奏乐。
English: Perform a dance ritual three times, chant "long live the mountain," prostrate, stand up, and play music.

古文：复四拜，乐止。
现代文：又拜四拜，音乐停止。
English: Another four bows, and the music stops.

古文：礼毕，皇帝兴，鸣鞭，乐作。
现代文：礼仪结东，皇帝起身，挥鞭肃静，奏乐。
English: After the etiquette, the emperor stood up, waved the whip, and played music.

古文：入宫，乐止。
现代文：进宫，音乐停止。
English: Entering the palace, the music stops.

古文：百官出。
现代文：百官退出。
English: Hundreds of officials have quit.

古文：皇帝改服通天冠、绛纱袍，拜谒太后，如正旦仪。
现代文：皇帝改戴通天冠、穿绛色纱袍，拜见太后，如同正月初一日的礼仪。
English: The emperor changed into a crown and a gauze gown to visit the empress dowager, just like the etiquette on the first day of the first lunar month.

古文：择日谒太庙，与时祭同。
现代文：选择日期拜祭太庙，与四时祭祀相同。
English: The choice of the date to pay homage to the temple is the same as the four-hour ritual.

古文：明日，百官公服称贺，赐宴谨身殿。
现代文：第二天，百官穿公服称贺，在谨身殿赐宴。
English: The next day, hundreds of officials wore official uniforms to celebrate the occasion and held a banquet at the Imperial Palace.

古文：万历三年正月，帝择日长发，命礼部具仪。
现代文：万历三年正月，皇帝选择吉日行长发祭，命令礼部准备礼仪。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Wanli era, the emperor chose the auspicious day to hold the Long Hair Festival and ordered the ceremonial department to prepare the etiquette.

古文：大学士张居正等言： 礼重冠婚，皇上前在东宫已行冠礼，三加称尊，执爵而酳。
现代文：大学士张居正等人说： 礼重视冠礼与婚礼，皇帝以前在东宫已举行冠礼，三次加礼而称尊号，执爵饮酒并行用酒荡口之礼。
English: Zhang Juzheng, a university scholar, and others said: "Ceremony attaches importance to coronation and wedding. The emperor had previously held a coronation in the East Palace, three times adding a salute and calling it the honorific title, and the duke drank alcohol and used a wine swilling salute.

古文：巨礼既成，可略其细。不必命部臣拟议。
现代文：大礼已完成，可以省略细微的地方，不必命令礼部大臣拟定礼仪。
English: Now that the grand ceremony has been completed, it is possible to omit minor details, and there is no need to order the Minister of Ceremonies to draw up the etiquette.

古文：第先期至奉先殿、弘孝殿、神霄殿以长发告。
现代文：只在事先到奉先殿、弘孝殿、神霄殿用长发祭告。
English: It is only necessary to go to the Bosen-den, the Hongko-den, and the Shinsyo-den in advance to announce the long hair festival.

古文：礼毕，诣两宫皇太后，行五拜三叩头礼，随御乾清宫受贺。 
现代文：礼仪结东，拜见两宫皇太后，行五拜三叩头礼仪，随着到干清宫接受庆贺。 
English: After the etiquette ceremony, they will visit the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces, perform the five prostrations and three kowtows, and receive congratulations as they arrive at the Imperial Palace.

古文：帝是之，遂著为令。
现代文：皇帝同意了，于是写成法令。
English: The emperor agreed, and a decree was issued.

古文：皇太子皇子冠礼
现代文：皇太子皇子冠礼
English: Crown Prince's coronation ceremony

古文：搢笏，盥帨，出笏，乐止。
现代文：子进入来到冠席，两位内侍在两旁侍奉，东宫官跟在后面，奏乐。来到席位面向西南，音乐停止。
English: The prince entered and came to the crown seat, the two chambermaids served on both sides, the East Palace official followed behind, playing music. When he came to the seat facing southwest, the music stopped.

古文：升自西阶，执事者奉折上巾进，宾降一等受之。
现代文：宾、赞依次到洗涤的巷前，奏乐。插上笏板，洗盥并用巾擦拭，抽出笏板，音乐停止。从西面台阶升登，主事人捧持折上巾进献，礼宾降一级台阶接受。
English: The guest and the guest of honor go to the washing lane in turn and play music. Plug in the cutting board, wash and wipe it with a towel, pull out the cutting board, and the music stops. Climb up from the west steps, the host holds the folded napkin and presents it, and the concierge accepts it one step down.

古文：右执项，左执前，进太子席前，北面祝毕，跪冠，乐作。
现代文：右手拿着冠的后部，左手拿着冠的前部，到太子席前进献，面向北祝祷完毕，跪着加冠，奏乐。
English: With the right hand holding the back of the crown, with the left hand holding the front of the crown, go forward to the throne and offer it, facing north. After the prayer, kneel, add the crown and play music.

古文：宾兴，席南北面立。
现代文：礼宾起身，在席的南面向北站立。
English: The concierge got up and stood on the south side of the table, facing north.

古文：赞冠者进席前，北面跪，正冠，兴，立于宾后。
现代文：赞唱加冠的人上席前，面向北跪着，端正冠，起身，站在礼宾的后面。
English: The person singing the praises of the crowning goes to the front of the table, kneels facing north, straightens the crown, gets up, and stands behind the protocol.

古文：内侍跪进服，皇太子兴，服讫，乐止。
现代文：内侍跪着进献服饰，皇太子起身，穿好衣服，音乐停止。
English: The chambermaid knelt down to put on the vestments, the crown prince got up and dressed, and the music stopped.

古文：宾揖皇太子复坐。
现代文：礼宾向皇太子行揖礼后又坐下。
English: The protocol officer bowed to the Crown Prince and then sat down.

古文：宾赞降，诣罍洗讫，赞进前跪，脱折上巾，置于箱，兴，以授内侍。
现代文：宾、赞下台阶，到昙处洗手后，赞礼上前跪下，取下折上巾，放在箱子里，起身，交给内侍。
English: After washing hands, guests should kneel down, remove the folded shawl, put it in a box, stand up, and hand it to the chambermaid.

古文：执事者奉远游冠进，宾降二等受之，乐作，进冠如前仪。
现代文：主事人捧着远游冠进献，礼宾降雨级台阶接受，奏乐，如同前面礼仪进献冠。
English: The officiant holds the traveling crown and presents it, the concierge accepts the rain-level steps, and the music is played, as in the previous etiquette.

古文：赞进前，北面跪，簪结纮，内侍跪进服，乐止。
现代文：礼赞上前，面向北跪下，在簪上结带子，内侍跪着进献服饰，音乐停止。
English: The celebrant comes forward, kneels facing north, ties a ribbon on the urn, the chambermaid kneels and puts on the votive vestments, and the music stops.

古文：宾揖皇太子复坐。
现代文：礼宾向皇太子行揖礼后又坐下。
English: The protocol officer bowed to the Crown Prince and then sat down.

古文：又诣罍洗，赞脱冠，执事者奉衮冕进，宾降三等受之，乐作。
现代文：又到韩处洗手，赞脱冠，执事的人捧上充冕服进献，礼宾降三级台阶接受，奏乐。
English: They also went to the Korean Affairs Office to wash their hands, sing praises, take off their crowns, the deacon presented them with crown-adorned robes, the concierge descended three steps to accept them, and music was played.

古文：进冠结纮，内侍跪进服，如前仪，乐止。
现代文：在冠上结带子进上，内侍脆着进献服饰如同前面的礼仪，音乐停止。
English: After tying the ribbon on the crown, the chambermaid enters wearing the ceremonial attire, as in the previous ritual, and the music stops.

古文：太常博士导皇太子降自东阶，乐作。
现代文：太常博士引导皇太子从东台阶下，奏乐。
English: Dr. Taejong led the crown prince from under the east steps to play music.

古文：由西阶升，即醴席，南向坐，乐止。
现代文：由西台阶上，到酒席，向南坐，音乐停止。
English: From the west steps, to the bar, sit down to the south, the music stops.

古文：宾诣罍洗盥帨讫，赞冠者取爵、盥爵、帨爵，诣司尊所酌醴，授宾。
现代文：宾到洗涤的昙前洗手擦拭完毕，赞唱加冠的人拿起酒杯，洗涤爵，擦拭爵，到司尊处斟酒，交给礼宾。
English: After the guests have finished washing and wiping their hands before washing the gong, the person who sings and crowns picks up the wine glass, washes the gong, wipes the gong, pours the wine at the dignitary's place, and hands it to the concierge.

古文：宾受爵，跪进于皇太子。
现代文：礼宾接受爵，跪着进献给皇太子。
English: The concierge receives a knighthood and kneels before the crown prince.

古文：祝毕，皇太子搢圭，跪受爵，乐作。
现代文：祝祷完毕，皇太子插上圭，跪着接过爵，奏乐。
English: After the prayers, the Crown Prince inserted the cymbals, kneeled down to receive the cymbals, and played the music.

古文：饮讫，奠爵，执圭。
现代文：饮完酒，奠献爵，拿起圭。
English: When you have finished drinking, pay your respects to the dead and take up the torch.

古文：进馔者奉馔于前，皇太子搢圭，食讫，执圭，兴，乐止。
现代文：进献饭食的人捧着饭食上前，皇太子插上圭，吃完后，拿起圭，起身，音乐停止。
English: The person presenting the meal comes forward holding the meal. The crown prince inserts a cymbal. After eating, he picks up the cymbal, stands up, and the music stops.

古文：彻爵与馔。
现代文：撤掉酒爵与饭食。
English: Take away the wine and the food.

古文：博士导皇太子降自西阶，至殿东房，易朝服，诣丹墀拜位，北向。
现代文：博士引导皇太子从西面台阶降下，到殿的东房，换上朝服，到丹墀行礼位置，面向北。
English: The doctor guided the crown prince down from the west steps, to the east room of the hall, to change into the imperial robes, to the danjiri position, facing north.

古文：东宫官属各复拜位。
现代文：东宫太子的属官各自回到行礼位置。
English: The officials of the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court each returned to the position of saluting.

古文：宾赞诣皇太子位稍东，西向。
现代文：宾、赞到皇太子的位置稍向东的地方，面向西。
English: Guests praised the fact that the position of the crown prince was slightly to the east, facing west.

古文：宾少进字之辞曰： 奉敕字某。 
现代文：礼宾稍微上前献字之辞说： 奉敕令取字某。 
English: The concierge stepped forward a little and said, "I've been ordered to take a certain letter."

古文：皇太子再拜，跪听宣敕。
现代文：皇太子行再拜礼，跪着听宣读敕令。
English: The crown prince bowed again and knelt to listen to the reading of the imperial edict.

古文：复再拜，兴。
现代文：又行再拜礼，起身。
English: Say your prayers again and get up.

古文：进御前跪奏曰： 臣不敏，敢不祗承。 
现代文：到皇帝面前跪着上奏说： 臣不聪明敏悟，岂敢不敬奉帝命。 
English: Kneeling in front of the emperor, he recited: "If a vassal is not clever and perceptive, how can he dare to disobey the emperor's order?"

古文：奏毕，复位。
现代文：奏完，返回原位。
English: After playing, return to the original position.

古文：侍立官并降殿复位，四拜礼毕，皇帝兴。
现代文：侍立官员都下殿返回原位，拜四拜礼结东，皇帝起身。
English: The attendants and officials all returned to their original positions in the lower hall, and the emperor stood up after the four prostrations.

古文：内给事导皇太子入内殿，见皇后，如正旦仪。
现代文：内给事官引导皇太子进入内殿，拜见皇后，如同正月旦日的礼仪。
English: An official from the Ministry of the Interior guided the Crown Prince into the inner hall to meet the Empress, as is the custom on the first day of the new year.

古文：明日谒庙，如时享礼。
现代文：第二天拜谒太庙，如同四时祭享的礼仪。
English: The next day, they paid homage to the Jingtai Temple, just like the four o'clock ceremony.

古文：又明日，百官朝服诣奉天殿称贺，退易公服，诣东宫称贺，锡宴。
现代文：又遇了一天，百官穿着朝服到奉天殿称贺，退下换公服，到东宫称贺，东官太子赐宴。
English: On another day, hundreds of officials dressed in imperial robes went to the Bongten Hall to offer their congratulations, withdrew to change into their official robes, went to the East Palace to offer their congratulations, and were given a banquet by the Crown Prince of Dongguan.

古文：成化十四年，续定皇太子冠礼。
现代文：成化十四年，续定皇太子的加冠礼。
English: In the fourteenth year of Chenghua, the crowning ceremony of the crown prince was renewed.

古文：先日，设幕次于文华殿东序，设节案、香案、冠席、醴席、盥洗、司尊所等，具如仪。
现代文：前一天，在文华殿东厢房设帷帐，设节案、香案、冠席、酒席、盥洗、司尊处所等，都按礼仪准备。
English: The day before, the curtains were set up in the east wing of the Hall of Literature, and the ceremonial table, incense table, crown table, wine table, baptismal font, and the location of the patriarch were all prepared according to etiquette.

古文：内侍张帷幄，陈袍服、皮弁服、衮服、圭带、舄、翼善冠、皮弁、九旒冕。
现代文：内侍张挂帷帐，陈设袍服、皮弁服、衮服、圭带、舄、翼善冠、皮弁、九旒冕。
English: The chambermaid hung the curtain, and displayed the robe, flapper, cassock, sash, cape, winged crown, flapper, and nine crowns.

古文：质明，皇帝御奉天殿传制，遣官持节。
现代文：天刚亮，皇帝到奉天殿传达制命，派遣官员持节。
English: At first light, the emperor went to Bongtianden to convey the command and dispatched officials to celebrate the festival.

古文：皇太子迎于文华殿门外，捧入，置于案，退。
现代文：皇太子在文华殿门外迎接，捧节进入，放在节案上，退下。
English: The Crown Prince was greeted outside the gates of the Palace of Literature and Art. He entered holding the festival, placed it on the festival program, and left.

古文：礼部官导皇太子诣香案前，乐作。
现代文：礼部官员引导皇太子到香案前，奏乐。
English: Officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies led the Crown Prince to the incense altar, where they played music.

古文：四拜，乐止。
现代文：拜四拜，音乐停止。
English: After four bows, the music stops.

古文：行初加冠礼。
现代文：举行初次加冠礼。
English: The first crowning ceremony was held.

古文：内侍奉翼善冠，宾祝曰： 吉月令辰，乃加元服。
现代文：内侍捧着翼善冠，礼宾祝祷说： 吉利的月份、吉利的时展，于是举行加冠礼。
English: The chambermaid held the Wings of Goodness Crown, and the concierge said a prayer: "For the auspicious month, for the auspicious time," and the crowning ceremony was held.

古文：懋敬是承，永介景福。 
现代文：继续勉励戒慎，永远求取大福。 
English: Continue to encourage prudence and always seek great fortune.

古文：乐作。
现代文：奏乐。
English: The music plays.

古文：宾跪进冠，兴，乐止。
现代文：礼宾跪着进献冠，起身，音乐停止。
English: The concierge knelt down to present the crown, stood up, and the music stopped.

古文：礼部官启易服，皇太子入幄，易袍服出，启复坐。
现代文：礼部官员禀告换衣服，皇太子进入帷帐，换袍服出来，禀告返回坐下。
English: An official from the Ministry of Ceremonies announces a change of clothes, the crown prince enters the curtain, comes out to change his robe, announces his return and sits down.

古文：行再加冠礼。
现代文：进行第二次加冠礼。
English: The second crowning takes place.

古文：内侍奉皮弁，宾祝曰： 冠礼申举，以成令德。
现代文：内侍捧皮弁，礼宾祝祷说： 冠礼已经举行，以成就美德。
English: The chambermaid held up a leather bib, and the concierge said in a prayer: "The coronation has taken place, for the achievement of virtue.

古文：敬慎威仪，惟民之式。 
现代文：恭敬慎重、庄重威严，作百姓的榜样。 
English: Respectful, prudent, solemn and dignified, he set an example for the people.

古文：冠毕，入幄，易皮弁服舄出，启复坐。
现代文：加冠完毕，进入帷帐，换上皮弁服、舄出来，禀报返回坐下。
English: After crowning, enter the curtain, change into the leather gown, take off the robe, return to the table and sit down.

古文：行三加冠礼。
现代文：进行第三次加冠礼。
English: The third crowning takes place.

古文：内侍奉冕旒，宾祝曰： 章服咸加，饬敬有虔。
现代文：内侍捧着冕旒，礼宾祝祷说： 章服都已加上，恭敬虔诚。
English: The lady-in-waiting held the crown and scepter, and the concierge said in prayer: "The ceremonial robes have all been added, reverence and piety.

古文：永固皇图，于千万年。 
现代文：疆土永远牢固，千万年不变。 
English: The territory is forever firm and unchanging for tens of thousands of years.

古文：冠毕，入幄，易衮服出，启复坐。
现代文：加冠礼完毕，进入帷帐，换上衮服出来，禀告返回坐下来。
English: After the crowning ceremony, enter the curtain, change into mourning clothes, come out, return to the obituary and sit down.

古文：行醮礼，皇太子诣醴席，乐作。
现代文：行醮礼，皇太子来到酒醴席，奏乐。
English: After bowing, the crown prince came to the banquet and played music.

古文：即坐，乐止。
现代文：就坐，音乐停止。
English: Sit down, the music stops.

古文：光禄寺官举醴案，乐作。
现代文：光禄寺官员举酒醴案，奏乐。
English: Officials of Koroku-ji Temple raise sake cups and play music.

古文：赞酌醴授宾，宾执爵诣席前，乐止。
现代文：赞唱斟酒交给礼宾，礼宾拿爵到席前，音乐停止。
English: After the hymn, the wine is poured and handed over to the concierge. The concierge takes the baron to the front of the table, and the music stops.

古文：宾祝曰： 旨酒孔馨，加荐再芳。
现代文：礼宾视祷说： 美酒很馨香，祭献更芳香。
English: The concierge said, "The wine is very fragrant, and the offering is even more fragrant.

古文：受天之福，万世其昌。 
现代文：接受上天的福禄，万世盛昌。 
English: Accept the blessings of heaven, and you will prosper for all eternity.

古文：宾跪进爵，皇太子搢圭，受爵，置于案。
现代文：礼宾跪着进献爵，皇太子插上圭，接受爵，放到案上。
English: The protocol officer knelt down to offer a knighthood, the crown prince inserted his hand, accepted the knighthood, and placed it on the case.

古文：教坊司作乐，奏《喜千春之曲》。
现代文：教坊司奏乐，奏《喜千春之曲》。
English: The music teacher played "The Song of Spring."

古文：次启进酒，皇太子举爵饮讫，奠爵于案，乐止。
现代文：其次察告进酒，皇太子举爵喝完酒，放置爵在案上，音乐停止。
English: Next, there was an accusation of drinking. The crown prince finished the wine, placed the award on the case, and the music stopped.

古文：光禄寺官进馔，乐作。
现代文：光禄寺官员进献饭食，奏乐。
English: Officials from Koroku-ji Temple present food and play music.

古文：至案，乐止。
现代文：到食案，音乐停止。
English: Come meal time, the music stops.

古文：馔讫，出圭，彻案，宾赞复位。
现代文：吃完，拿出圭，撤掉食案，宾、赞回到原位。
English: After eating, take out Gui, remove the meal plan, and the guests and supporters return to their original positions.

古文：鸣赞赞受敕戒。
现代文：呜赞赞唱接受警戒敕令。
English: A chorus of cheers greeted the alert.

古文：皇太子降阶，乐作。
现代文：皇太子下台阶，奏乐。
English: The crown prince descends the steps to the music.

古文：至拜位，乐止。
现代文：至行拜礼的位置，音乐停止。
English: At the place of worship, the music stops.

古文：宣敕戒官诣皇太子前稍东，西向立，曰 有制 。
现代文：宣读敕戒官到皇太子面前稍东地方，面向西站立，说 有制命 。
English: After reading out the precepts, the eunuch went to a place slightly east of the crown prince, stood facing west, and said, "I have a command."

古文：皇太子跪，宣敕戒曰： 孝事君亲，友于兄弟。
现代文：皇太子跪下，宣读敕戒说： 孝敬地事奉君亲，友爱兄弟。
English: The crown prince knelt down and read out the precepts, saying: "Honor your relatives, love your brothers.

古文：亲贤爱民，居由仁义。
现代文：亲近贤人，爱护百姓，做事有仁义。
English: Be close to the wise, love the people, and do things with benevolence.

古文：毋怠毋骄，茂隆万世。 
现代文：不要懈怠骄傲，万世强盛。 
English: Don't slack off, be proud, and prosper forever.

古文：乐作。
现代文：奏乐。
English: The music plays.

古文：四拜兴，乐止。
现代文：拜四拜，起身，音乐停止。
English: Bow four times, stand up, and the music stops.

古文：持节官捧节出，乐作。
现代文：持节官捧节出来，奏乐。
English: The festival officials come out to hold the festival and play music.

古文：皇太子送节至殿门外，还东序。
现代文：皇太子将节送到殿门外，返回东厢房。
English: The Crown Prince took the festival outside the palace gates and returned to the East Wing.

古文：内侍导还宫，乐止。
现代文：内侍引导回宫，音乐停止。
English: The chambermaid leads the way back to the palace, and the music stops.

古文：宾赞等官持节复命，余如旧仪。
现代文：宾、赞等官员持节复命，其余的如同旧有礼仪。
English: Officials such as guests and dignitaries were allowed to return with their orders, and the rest followed the old etiquette.

古文：是日，皇太子诣皇太后、皇帝、皇后前谢，俱行五拜三叩头礼，用乐。
现代文：这一天，皇太子到皇太后、皇帝、皇后面前谢恩，都行五拜三叩头礼，用乐。
English: On this day, the crown prince thanked the empress dowager, the emperor, and the empress in front of them, and they all performed the five bowing and three kowtowing, and had fun.

古文：明日，皇帝及皇太子受群臣贺，如仪。
现代文：第二天，皇帝及皇太子接受群臣庆贺，按照仪礼进行。
English: The next day, the emperor and the crown prince received the congratulations of the courtiers, which was carried out according to the ceremony.

古文：皇子冠礼。
现代文：皇子加冠礼。
English: The crowning of the prince.

古文：初加，进网巾，祝词曰： 兹惟吉日，冠以成人。
现代文：初次加冠，进献网巾，祝贺词说： 正是这吉利日子，加冠成人。
English: The first crowning, the presentation of the net, the congratulatory words said: It is this auspicious day, the crowning of adults.

古文：克敦孝友，福禄来骈。 
现代文：能敦厚孝敬友爱，福禄都来。 
English: If you can be considerate, filial, respectful and friendly, you will be blessed.

古文：再加，进翼善冠，祝词曰： 冠礼斯举，宾由成德。
现代文：第二次加冠，进献翼善冠，祝贺词说： 冠礼举行，实在是为了成就德行。
English: The second crowning ceremony, the presentation of wings and good crowns, and the congratulatory speech said: The crowning ceremony was held in order to achieve virtue.

古文：敬慎威仪，维民之则。 
现代文：恭敬谨慎庄重威严，是百姓的榜样。 
English: Respectful, discreet, dignified and majestic, he is a role model for the people.

古文：三加，进衮冕，祝词曰： 冠至三加，命服用章。
现代文：第三次加冠，进献衮服和冕，祝贺说： 加冠礼至第三次，命服用花纹的章服。
English: For the third time, the crowning ceremony was held, with the presentation of robes and crowns, and congratulations were offered: For the third time, the crowning ceremony was held, and the ceremonial robes with patterns were worn.

古文：敬神事上，永固藩邦。 
现代文：敬仰神灵侍奉君上，永远巩固藩国。 
English: Worship the gods, serve the emperor, and consolidate the domain forever.

古文：酌醴祝曰： 旨酒嘉荐，载芬载芳。
现代文：斟酒祝贺说： 美酒进献，芳香无比。
English: When pouring the wine, he congratulated, "This is a fine wine, with an incomparable aroma.

古文：受兹景福，百世其昌。 
现代文：受此大福，百世昌盛。 
English: By receiving this blessing, you will prosper for a hundred generations.

古文：敕戒词曰： 孝于君亲，友于兄弟。
现代文：敕令告诫的言词说： 孝敬君主亲人，友爱兄弟。
English: The words of the imperial edict admonished: "Be filial to the relatives of the monarch, and fraternal brothers.

古文：亲贤爱民，率由礼义。毋溢毋骄，永保富贵。 
现代文：亲贤人爱百姓，全按礼义行事不要遇度骄傲，永保富贵。 
English: The wise and virtuous love the people, act in accordance with propriety, do not be too proud, and always be rich and noble.

古文：其陈设执事及传制谒谢，并如皇太子仪。
现代文：它的陈设、主事人以及传达制命、拜谢，全部如同皇太子的礼仪。
English: Its decoration, the person in charge, and the transmission of orders and thanksgiving are all like the etiquette of the crown prince.

古文：初，皇子冠之明日，百官称贺毕，诣王府行礼。
现代文：当初，皇子加冠的第二天，百官称贺完毕，到王府行礼。
English: At first, the day after the crowning of the prince, hundreds of officials said that the celebration was over and went to the royal palace to pay their respects.

古文：成化二十三年，皇子冠之次日，各诣奉天门东庑序坐，百官常服四拜。
现代文：成化二十三年，皇子加冠的第二天，各自到奉天门东面周屋厢房坐下，百官穿常服拜四拜。
English: In the 23rd year of Chenghua, on the second day of the crowning of the prince, they each went to the east side of the Fengtian Gate to sit down in the Zhouyuan room, and the hundred officials wore ordinary clothes and bowed four times.

古文：万历二十九年，礼部尚书冯琦言： 旧制皇太子冠，设冠席、醴席于文华殿内。
现代文：万历二十九年，礼部尚书冯琦说： 旧有制度，皇太子加冠，在文华殿内陈设冠席、酒醴席。
English: In the 29th year of the Wanli calendar, the ceremonial department's Shangshu Feng Yu said: The old system, the crown prince added a crown, set up a crown seat and a wine table in the Wenhua Hall.

古文：今文华殿为皇上临御遣官之地，则皇太子冠醴席，应移于殿之东序。
现代文：现在文华殿是皇上临朝派遣官员的地方，而皇太子的冠席、酒醴席，应搬到殿的东厢房。
English: Now, the Palace of Literature and Culture is the place where the emperor dispatches officials to the imperial court, and the crown prince's seat and banquet should be moved to the east wing of the palace.

古文：又亲王冠，旧设席于皇极门之东庑。
现代文：又亲王加冠，原来设席在皇极门的东面周屋。
English: In addition, the crown prince was crowned, and the original seat was set up in the east side of the imperial gate.

古文：今皇太子移席于殿东序，则亲王应移席于殿西序。 
现代文：现在皇太子将冠席移到殿的东厢房，则亲王的冠席、酒醴席应移到殿的西厢房。 
English: Now that the crown prince has moved the crown seat to the east wing of the hall, the prince's crown seat and banquet seat should be moved to the west wing of the hall.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永乐九年十一月，命皇太子嫡长子为皇太孙，冠于华盖殿，其仪与皇太子同。
现代文：永乐九年十一月，命令皇太子的嫡长子为皇太孙，在华盖殿加冠，礼仪与皇太子相同。
English: In November of the ninth year of Yongle, he ordered the eldest son of the crown prince to be the grandchild of the crown prince, and crowned him in the Huagai Hall, with the same etiquette as the crown prince.

古文：品官冠礼
现代文：品官冠礼
English: The investiture ceremony

古文：古者男子二十而冠，大夫五十而后爵，故无大夫冠礼。
现代文：古代男子二十岁行冠礼，大夫五十岁后加爵弁，所以没有大夫加冠礼。
English: In ancient times, men were crowned at the age of twenty, and doctors were knighted after the age of fifty, so there was no need for doctors to be crowned.

古文：唐制，三加，一品之子以衮冕，逮九品之子以爵弁，皆仿士礼而增益之。
现代文：唐代制度，三次加冠，一品官的儿子用衮衣冕服，到九品官的儿子加爵弁，都是仿照士礼而增加的。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the system of crowning three times, the son of a first-ranked official wearing a crowned robe, and the son of a ninth-ranked official wearing a crowned robe, were all increased in imitation of the scholarly etiquette.

古文：明洪武元年定制，始加缁布冠，再加进贤冠，三加爵弁。
现代文：明洪武元年规定制度，开始加缁布冠，第二次加进贤冠，第三次加爵弁。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Hongwu of the Ming Dynasty, the system was established. The crown of cloth was added first, the crown of virtue was added second, and the crown of peerage was added third.

古文：其仪，前期择日，主者告于家庙，乃筮宾。
现代文：它的礼仪，此前选择日期，主者在家庙祭告，于是占卜礼宾。
English: It's etiquette, after choosing the date, the host announces it in the home temple, and then the divination protocol begins.

古文：前二日，戒宾及赞冠者。
现代文：前两天，约请礼宾以及赞冠者。
English: The first two days, invite the protocol and praise the winner.

古文：明日，设次于大门外之右，南向。
现代文：第二天，在大门外右边设帷帐，面向南。
English: On the second day, a curtain was set up on the right outside the gate, facing south.

古文：至日，夙兴，设洗于阼阶东南，东西当东霤，六品以下当东荣，南北以堂深。
现代文：到了这天，早起，在东阶的东南陈设洗涤用具，东西对着东溜，六品以下官员则在正对东面房檐的地方，南北和房堂一样深。
English: On this day, early in the morning, washing utensils were set up in the southeast of the east steps, facing east and west, and officials below the sixth grade were in the place directly opposite the east eaves, as deep as the hall from north to south.

古文：罍水在洗东，加勺幂。
现代文：彝水在洗涤器的东面，加上勺，用幂布盖着。
English: Sprinkle water on the east side of the scrubber, add a ladle and cover with a dishcloth.

古文：篚在洗西南。
现代文：筐篚在洗涤器的西南。
English: The casing is in the southwest of the scrubber.

古文：肆实巾一于篚，加幂。
现代文：铺一块巾在筐里，加幂布盖着。
English: Put a piece of cloth in the basket and cover it with more cloth.

古文：设席于东房西牖下，陈服于席东，领北上。
现代文：在东房西窗下设席，在席的东面陈放礼服，衣领朝北。
English: Seats are set up under the west window of the east wing, and ceremonial robes with north-facing collars are displayed on the east side of the seats.

古文：莞筵四，加藻席四，在南。
现代文：莞草席子四张，加上四张藻编席子，放在南面。
English: Four Guan grass mats, plus four algae mats, are placed on the south side.

古文：侧尊甒醴在服北，加勺幂，设坫在尊北。
现代文：侧尊、瓶酒在衣服北面，加勺，用幂布盖着，在酒尊的北面设置放物品的土台。
English: Side image, bottle of wine on the north side of the clothes, plus a spoon, covered with a piece of cloth, and a base for placing items on the north side of the image.

古文：四品以下，设篚无坫，馔陈于坫北。
现代文：四品以下官，设有筐篚无土台，在土台的北面放饭食。
English: There are four dishes below the table, a basket without a base, and food on the north side of the base.

古文：设先于东房，近北。
现代文：在东房设置洗涤器，靠近北面。
English: Set up the scrubber in the east room, near the north wall.

古文：罍在洗西，篚在洗东北，肆实以巾。
现代文：昙放在洗涤器的西面，筐放在洗涤器的东北，把巾铺在里面。
English: Place the basket on the west side of the scrubber, the basket on the northeast side of the scrubber, and spread the towel inside.

古文：质明，宾赞至门外，掌次者引之次。
现代文：天刚亮，宾、赞来到门外，掌管帷帐的人引导到帷帐。
English: At first light, the guests and guests came to the door, and the person in charge of the curtain led them to the curtain.

古文：宾赞公服，诸行事者各服其服，就位。
现代文：宾、赞穿着公服，众办事的人各自穿上他们的礼服，就位。
English: The guests and dignitaries were dressed in official uniforms, and the officials put on their ceremonial robes and took their places.

古文：冠各一笥，人执之，侍于西阶之西，东面北上。
现代文：冠各放一筐内，人拿着，在西台阶西面等待，面向东以北为上。
English: The crowns are each placed in a basket, held by a person, waiting on the west side of the west steps, facing east to north.

古文：设主席于阼阶上，西面；设宾席于西阶，东面；冠者席于主者东北，西面。
现代文：在东台阶上设主席席位，面向西；在西面台阶上设宾席，面向东；加冠人的席位在主席的东北，面向西。
English: The chairman's seat is located on the east steps, facing west; the guest's seat is located on the west steps, facing east; and the crowned person's seat is in the northeast of the chairman, facing west.

古文：主者公服立于阼阶下，当东序，西面。
现代文：主者穿着公服站在东面台阶上，面对东厢房，面朝西。
English: The owner, dressed in his official uniform, stood on the east steps, facing the east wing, facing west.

古文：诸亲公服立于罍洗东南，西面北上。
现代文：众亲人穿着公服站在昙和洗器的东南，面向西以北马上，从北到南按尊卑排列。
English: Wearing their official uniforms, all the relatives stood in the southeast of the wash basin and washer, facing west to north. They were arranged from north to south according to their rank.

古文：尊者在别室。
现代文：尊贵的人在另一屋中。
English: The dignitaries are in the other room.

古文：傧者公服立于门内道东，北面。
现代文：导引的人穿着公服站在门内道东，面向北。
English: The guide, dressed in official uniform, was standing on the east side of the inner gate, facing north.

古文：冠者双童髻、空顶帻、双玉导、彩褶、锦绅、乌皮履，六品以下，导不以玉，立于房中，南面。
现代文：加冠的人梳双童髻、戴空顶愤巾、用双玉导、服彩褶、系锦带、穿乌皮鞋，六品以下，导不用玉，站在房中，面向南。
English: The crowned person combs double children's hair, wears an empty head scarf, uses a double jade guide, wears colorful clothes, wears brocade, wears black leather shoes, six or less, the guide does not use jade, stands in the room, facing south.

古文：主者、赞冠者公服立于房内户东，西面。
现代文：主者、赞冠者在房内门东穿公服站立，面向西。
English: The host and the champion stand at the east door of the room in their official uniforms, facing west.

古文：宾及赞冠者出次，立于门西，东面北上。
现代文：礼宾以及赞冠者出帷帐，站在门的西面，面向东，以北为上。
English: The concierge and the celebrant came out of the curtain and stood on the west side of the door, facing east, with north facing up.

古文：傧者进受命，出立门东，西面，曰： 敢请事。 
现代文：导引的人进去接受命令，出来站在门东，面向西，说： 请吩咐。 
English: The guide went in to take orders, came out and stood on the east side of the door, facing west, and said, "Please give the order."

古文：宾曰： 某子有嘉礼，命某执事。 
现代文：礼宾说： 某子有嘉礼，命某人主持。 
English: The concierge said, "Someone has a commendation ceremony and has ordered someone to preside over it.

古文：傧者入告，主者迎宾于大门外之东，西面，再拜，宾答拜。
现代文：导引者进去报告，主者在大门外东面迎接宾，面朝西，行再拜礼，礼宾回拜。
English: The guide goes in to report, and the host greets the guests on the east side outside the gate, facing west. The procession bows again, and the guests bow again.

古文：主者揖赞冠者，赞冠者报揖。
现代文：主者拜揖赞冠者，赞冠者回礼。
English: The host bowed to the winner, and the winner bowed back.

古文：又揖宾，宾报揖。
现代文：又拜揖礼宾，礼宾回礼。
English: Another courtesy call, courtesy call back.

古文：主者入，宾赞次入，及内门至阶。
现代文：主者进入，宾、赞冠者接着进入，及内门到台阶。
English: The host enters, followed by guests and admirers, and the inner door to the steps.

古文：主者请升，宾三辞，乃升。
现代文：主者请求升登，礼宾推辞三次，纔升登。
English: The host asked to be promoted, the concierge declined three times, and so on.

古文：主者自阼阶，立于席东，西向；宾自西阶，立于席西，东向。
现代文：主者从东台阶，站在席位的东面，面向西；礼宾从西台阶，站在席位的西面，面向东。
English: The master steps from the east, stands on the east side of the seat, facing west; the concierge steps from the west, stands on the west side of the seat, facing east.

古文：宾赞冠者及庭，盥于洗，升自西阶，入于东房，立于主赞冠者之南，西面。
现代文：宾、赞冠者到庭，在洗器处洗手，从西毫阶上升，进入东房，站在主赞冠者南面，面向西。
English: The guests and praisers arrive at the courtyard, wash their hands at the dishwashing place, rise from the west side, enter the east room, and stand on the south side of the main praiser, facing west.

古文：主赞冠者导冠者立于房外之西，南面。
现代文：主赞冠者引导加冠的人站在房外的西面，面朝南。
English: The chief celebrant leads the crowned person to stand outside the room on the west side, facing south.

古文：宾赞冠者取纚栉簪，跪奠于筵南端，退立于席北，少东，西面。
现代文：宾赞冠者拿着东发的帛、栉和簪，跪着进献在席的南端，退后站立在席的北边，稍靠东，面朝西。
English: The winner of the panzan, holding the shovel, pickaxe and hoe with the east wind, kneeled forward at the south end of the seat, stepped back and stood on the north side of the seat, slightly to the east, facing west.

古文：宾揖冠者，冠者进升席，西向坐。
现代文：宾向加冠的人行拱手礼，加冠的人进入升上坐席，向西坐下。
English: The guests bow to the crowned person, and the crowned person enters, rises to the seat, and sits down to the west.

古文：宾赞冠者进筵前，东西跪，脱双童髻，栉毕，设纚，兴，复位立。
现代文：宾赞冠者到席前，面向东跪下，解脱冠者双童髻，栉理头发，扎上东发的帛，起身，回到原位站立。
English: The winner of the ping zang went to the front of the table and knelt down facing east. The winner of the liberation of the double-child yakitori, straightened his hair, tied the yakitori of the east hair, got up, and stood back to the original position.

古文：宾降至罍，洗盥讫，诣西阶。
现代文：宾下台阶来到垒处，洗盥结东，到西台阶。
English: The guests come down the steps to the base, wash and tie the east, and go to the west steps.

古文：主者立于席后西面，宾立于西阶上，东面。
现代文：主持站在席后的西面，宾站在西面台阶上，面朝东。
English: The host stands on the west side behind the table, and the guest stands on the west steps, facing east.

古文：执缁布冠者升，宾降一等受之，右执项，左执前，进冠者筵前，东向立。
现代文：拿缁布冠的人升登，宾下降一级台阶接受，右手拿着冠的后部，左手拿冠的前部，到加冠的人席前，向东站立。
English: The person holding the woven cloth crown ascends, and the guest descends one step to accept, holding the back of the crown in his right hand and the front of the crown in his left hand, to the crowned person's seat, standing to the east.

古文：祝用士礼祝词，祝毕，跪冠。
现代文：祝用士礼唱祝词，祝祷结东，跪下加冠。
English: I wish you to use the ceremony to sing a congratulatory speech, conclude with a prayer, kneel down and add a crown.

古文：兴，复位。
现代文：起身，回到原位。
English: Get up and return to your original position.

古文：宾赞冠者进筵前，东面跪，结缨，兴，复位。
现代文：宾赞冠者到席前，面向东跪下，结上缨带，起身，返回膘位。
English: The winner of the prize goes to the front of the table, kneels facing east, ties the ribbon, gets up and returns to his seat.

古文：冠者兴，宾揖之适房，宾主皆坐。
现代文：加冠的人起身，宾拱手到房中，宾与主都坐下。
English: The person crowning gets up, the guest goes into the room, and both the guest and the host sit down.

古文：冠者衣青衣素裳出户西，南面立，宾主俱兴。
现代文：加冠的人穿青色上衣白色下裳出门西，向南站立，宾主都站起来。
English: The crowned person, wearing a blue blouse and white underclothes, went out to the west and stood facing south. The guests all stood up.

古文：宾揖冠者，冠者进升席，西向坐。
现代文：宾向加冠的人行拱手礼，加冠的人进入升上坐席，向西坐下。
English: The guests bow to the crowned person, and the crowned person enters, rises to the seat, and sits down to the west.

古文：宾赞冠者跪，脱缁布冠，栉毕，设纚。
现代文：宾赞冠者跪下，脱下缁布冠，栉理头发完毕，用帛东发。
English: The winner kneels down, takes off his cloth crown, has his hair cut, and combs his hair with a comb.

古文：宾进进贤冠，立祝，如初加礼。
现代文：宾献上进贤冠，站着祝福，如同初加礼。
English: The guests present the crown of merit and stand to recite the blessing, just like at the beginning of a new year.

古文：祝毕，跪冠，兴，复位。
现代文：改变 万年 为 永年 。
English: Change "ten thousand years" to "forever."

古文：宾赞冠者跪，脱进贤冠，栉毕，设纚。
现代文：改变 胡福 为 遐福 。祝福完毕，跪下加冠，起身，回到原位。宾赞冠者跪下，脱进贤冠，栉理头发结东，用帛东发。
English: After the blessing is over, kneel down and add a crown, stand up, and return to the original position. The winner kneels down, takes off the crown of virtue, combs his hair to the east, and combs his hair to the east.

古文：宾进爵弁，立祝，如再加礼。
现代文：宾献上爵弁，站着祝福，如第二次加冠的礼仪。
English: The guest presents a knighthood and stands to recite a blessing, as in the second crowning ceremony.

古文：宾赞冠者，设簪结缨如前。
现代文：宾赞冠者如前面所述设发簪结缨带。
English: As mentioned above, the winner of the Binzang will wear a hair band with a knot.

古文：冠者适房，著爵弁之服出。
现代文：加冠的人到房中，穿着爵弁服出来。
English: The crowned person goes into the room and comes out dressed in a knight's robe.

古文：主赞冠者彻纚栉及筵，入于房。
现代文：主赞冠者撤掉东发帛、栉以及坐席，进入房中。
English: The chief praiser removed the kimono, robe and seat and entered the room.

古文：又设筵于室户西，南向。
现代文：又在屋门西铺设坐席，面向南。
English: In addition, seats were laid on the west side of the door, facing south.

古文：冠者出房户西，南面立。
现代文：加冠的人出房户门西，向南站立。
English: Those who were crowned went out of the house to the west of the door and stood facing south.

古文：主赞洗觯于房，酌醴出，南面立。
现代文：主赞在房中洗酒杯，斟酒出来，向南站立。
English: The chairman washed the wine glasses in the room, poured out the wine, and stood facing south.

古文：宾揖冠者就筵西，南面立。
现代文：宾向加冠的人拱手到席西，向南站立。
English: The guests bowed to the crowned person and moved to the west side of the seat, facing south.

古文：宾受醴，进冠者筵前，北面立。
现代文：宾接受酒醴，到加冠人的席前，向北站立。
English: The guest accepts the gong, goes to the seat of the crowned person, and stands facing north.

古文：祝毕，冠者拜受觯，宾复西阶上答拜。
现代文：祝福完毕，加冠的人礼拜接受酒杯，宾又从西台阶上升回礼。
English: After the blessing, the person receiving the crown receives a glass of wine, and the guest returns the salute from the west steps.

古文：执馔者进馔于筵，冠者左执觯，右取脯，祭于笾豆间。
现代文：送饭食的人进献饭食于席上，加冠的人左手拿着酒杯，右手取脯，在篷和豆之间祭奠。
English: The person who brings the food offers the food at the table. The person who crowns the meal holds a wine glass in his left hand, takes the gong in his right hand, and prays between the canopy and the bean.

古文：赞者取胏一以授冠者，奠觯于荐西以祭。
现代文：赞者拿一块干肉交给加冠的人，放置酒杯于垫席的西面祭奠。
English: The celebrant takes a piece of dried meat and gives it to the person crowned, and places a wine glass on the west side of the mat.

古文：冠者坐取觯，祭醴，奠觯，再拜，宾答拜。
现代文：加冠的人坐着取酒杯，祭洒酒醴，放下酒杯，行再拜礼，宾回拜。
English: The crowned person sits to take the wine glass, sprinkles the wine goblet, puts down the wine glass, bows again, and the guests bow back.

古文：冠者执觯兴，宾主俱坐。
现代文：加冠的人拿着酒杯站起来，宾主都坐下。
English: The crowned person stands up with a glass of wine, and the guests all sit down.

古文：冠者升筵，跪奠觯于荐东。
现代文：加冠的人升到坐席上，跪着放置酒杯在垫席的东面。
English: The crowned person rises to the seat, kneels and places the wine glass on the east side of the cushion.

古文：兴，进，北面跪取脯，降自西阶。
现代文：起身，进前，向北跪下拿取脯，从西台阶下来。
English: Get up, go forward, kneel to the north to take the anchor, and come down from the west steps.

古文：入见母，进奠脯于席前。退，再拜出。
现代文：进入拜见母亲，在席前进献脯。退下，行再拜礼，出来。
English: Enter to meet the mother, go forward to offer the rosary at the table. Retreat, go back to worship, come out.

古文：母不在，则使人受脯于西阶下。
现代文：如果母亲不在，就派人在西台阶下接受脯。
English: If the mother is not there, someone is sent to receive the ashes at the foot of the west steps.

古文：初，冠者入见母，宾主俱兴。
现代文：最初，加冠的人进去拜见母亲，宾主都起身。
English: At first, the crowned man went in to see his mother, and all the guests got up.

古文：宾降，当西序东面立，主者降，当东序西面立。
现代文：宾下阶，在西厢房前面朝东站立，主持下阶，在东厢房前面向西站立。
English: The guests on the lower level should stand facing east in front of the west wing, and the host on the lower level should stand facing west in front of the east wing.

古文：冠者出，立于西阶东，南面。
现代文：加冠的人出来，站在西台阶东面，面朝南。
English: The crowned one came out and stood on the east side of the west steps, facing south.

古文：宾少进字之，辞同士礼。
现代文：宾稍居于前进献字，言辞与士礼相同。
English: The guest stands slightly forward to offer a toast, and the words are the same as the ceremony.

古文：冠者再拜，跪曰： 某不敏，夙夜祗承。 
现代文：加冠的人行再拜礼，跪着说： 某不聪明，早晚敬奉教诲。 
English: The crowned person goes and worships again, kneeling and saying: "Someone is not clever, sooner or later he will respect and follow the teachings."

古文：宾出，主者送于内门外，西向，请礼从者。
现代文：宾出来，主者送到内门外，面向西，请礼待陪从的人。
English: When the guests come out, the host sends them outside the inner gate, facing west. Please be courteous to those accompanying you.

古文：宾就次，主者入。
现代文：宾进入帷帐，主者进入。
English: The guest enters the curtain, the host enters.

古文：初，宾出，冠者东面见诸亲，诸亲拜之，冠者答拜。
现代文：开初，宾出来，加冠的人面向东拜见众亲人。众亲人向他礼拜，加冠的人回拜。
English: At the beginning of the ceremony, the guests came out, and the person receiving the crown faced east and bowed to the relatives. The relatives bowed to him, and the person receiving the crown bowed back.

古文：冠者西向拜宾赞，宾赞亦答拜。
现代文：加冠的人面向西拜宾赞，宾赞也回拜。
English: The person crowned faces west to pay homage to Bintzan, and Bintzan also pays homage to him.

古文：见诸尊于别室，亦如之。
现代文：在另一室内拜见众尊长，也如此行礼。
English: In the other room, when you meet the elders, do the same.

古文：宾主既释服，入醴席，一献讫，宾与众宾出次，立于门东，西面。
现代文：宾主已脱下礼服，进入酒席，进献一次后，宾与众宾出帷帐，在门东站立，面向西。
English: The guest has taken off his gown and entered the banquet. After the first presentation, the guest and all the guests come out of the curtain and stand at the east of the door, facing west.

古文：主者出揖宾，宾报揖。
现代文：主者出来向宝行拱手礼，宾回拱手礼。
English: The host came out and bowed to Bao Xing, and the guest bowed back.

古文：主者先入，宾及众宾从之。
现代文：主者先进入，宾以及众宾跟从。
English: The host enters first, followed by the guest and all the guests.

古文：至阶，宾立于西阶上，主者立于东阶上，众宾立于西阶下。
现代文：到台阶，宾站在西台阶上，主者站在东台阶上，众宾站在西台阶下。
English: At the steps, the guests stood on the west steps, the host stood on the east steps, and the guests stood at the bottom of the west steps.

古文：主者授币篚于宾赞，复位，还阼阶上，北面拜送。
现代文：主者将缯帛放在筐子里交给宾赞，回到原位，回到东台阶上，向北拜送。
English: The host placed the urn in a basket and handed it to Binzan. He returned to his original position, back on the east steps, and bowed to the north.

古文：宾赞降自西阶，主者送宾于大门外，西面，再拜而入。
现代文：宾赞从西台阶下来，主者送宾送到大门外，面向西，拜两拜而进入。
English: Binzan came down from the west steps, the host escorted the guests to the outside of the gate, facing west, and entered after two bows.

古文：孤子则诸父诸兄戒宾。
现代文：孤儿就由众父、兄预先通告约定宾。
English: In the case of orphans, it is up to the fathers and brothers to inform the agreed guests in advance.

古文：冠之日，主者紒而迎宾，冠于阼阶下，其仪亦如之。
现代文：加冠那天，主者结发迎宾，在东阶下加冠，它的礼仪也如此。
English: On the day of crowning, the host will wear a crown to welcome the guests, and a crown will be crowned under the east step, and the same is true for its etiquette.

古文：明日见庙，冠者朝服入南门中庭道西，北面再拜出。
现代文：第二天拜见宗庙，加冠的人穿着朝服进入南门中庭道西面，朝北拜两拜后退出。
English: The next day, they visited the ancestral temple, and the crowned person entered the west side of the south gate courtyard road wearing a court dress, and bowed to the north for two bows before exiting.

古文：庶人冠礼
现代文：庶人冠礼
English: The commoner's coronation

古文：古冠礼之存者惟士礼，后世皆推而用之。
现代文：古代加冠礼留存的只有士礼，后世都推演使用。
English: Of the ancient crowning rites, only the judge's rite has been preserved, and it has been used in subsequent generations.

古文：明洪武元年诏定冠礼，下及庶人，纤悉备具。
现代文：明洪武元年，下诏定冠礼，下及平民，细致完备。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Hongwu of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial edict decreed that the coronation ceremony should be performed by commoners.

古文：然自品官而降，鲜有能行之者，载之礼官，备故事而已。
现代文：然而自有品级的官员以下，很少有能举行的，礼官记载的，不过是保存旧例罢了。
English: However, below officials of their own rank, there are very few that can be held, and those recorded by the etiquette officer are nothing more than the preservation of old practices.

古文：凡男子年十五至二十，皆可冠。
现代文：凡是男子年龄在十五到二十之间，都可加冠。
English: Any male between the ages of fifteen and twenty can be crowned.

古文：将冠，筮日，筮宾，戒宾，俱如品官仪。
现代文：将要加冠，卜择日期，卜择宾，预先通告约定宾，都按品级官的礼仪进行。
English: The crowning will be done, the date will be chosen, the guests will be chosen, and the guests will be announced in advance, all according to the etiquette of the grade officials.

古文：是日，夙兴，张幄为房于厅事东，皆盛服。
现代文：行冠礼这天，早起，在堂屋东张设帷帐为房子，都穿隆重礼服。
English: On the day of the coronation, they got up early and set up a curtain as a house in the east of the hall. They all wore ceremonial dresses.

古文：设盥于阼阶下东南，陈服于房中西牖下。
现代文：在东面台阶下的东南设盥洗处，在房中西窗下陈设服饰。
English: To the south-east, under the steps on the east side, there is a lavatory, and in the middle of the room, under the west window, there is a display of clothing.

古文：席二在南，酒在服北次。
现代文：在南边设二张席，酒放在服饰的北面。
English: There are two seats on the south side, and the wine is placed on the north side of the dress.

古文：幞头巾帽，各盛以盘，三人捧之，立于堂下西阶之西，南向东上。
现代文：幞头巾帽，各自用盘盛放，三个人捧着，在堂下西阶的西面站立，面向南，以东为上。
English: Three people, each holding a skullcap, stand on the west side of the west steps of the hall, facing south, with east facing up.

古文：主人立于阼阶下，诸亲立于盥东，傧者立于门外以俟宾。
现代文：主人站在东阶下，众亲人站在盥洗处的东面，导从的人站在门外等待宾。
English: The host stood at the bottom of the east steps, all the relatives stood to the east of the lavatory, and the guide stood outside the door waiting for the guests.

古文：冠者双紒袍，勒帛素履待于房。
现代文：加冠的人穿双纷袍，勒帛素鞋在房中等待。
English: The crowning person wears a double-layered robe, and the shoes are waiting in the room.

古文：宾至，主人出迎，揖而入。
现代文：宾到，主人出来迎接，行拱手礼进入。
English: When a guest arrives, the host comes out to greet them and enters with a bow.

古文：坐定，冠者出于房，执事者请行事。
现代文：坐好之后，加冠的人从房中出来，执事者请求开始行礼。
English: After they were seated, the crowned came out of the room and the deacon asked them to begin the procession.

古文：宾之赞者取栉总篦幧头，置于席南端。
现代文：赞唱仪程的宾取出栉、总、篦、帏头，放在席的南端。
English: The guests who are going to sing the praises of the ceremony should take out the gong, gong, gong and gong head and place them at the southern end of the table.

古文：宾揖冠者，即席西向坐。
现代文：宾向加冠的人拱手，到席上向西坐下。
English: The guest gives up his hand to the crowned one, goes to the table and sits down to the west.

古文：赞者为之栉，合紒施总，加幧头。
现代文：赞礼的人替他栉发，东发施总，加上橾头。
English: Those who praised him gave him a round of applause, and then a round of general applause, and then a round of applause.

古文：宾降，主亦降，立于阼阶下。
现代文：宾下阶，主人也下阶，站在东阶下。
English: When the guest steps down, the host also steps down, standing at the bottom of the east step.

古文：宾盥，主人揖让，升自西阶，复位。
现代文：宾洗盥，主人拱手相让，从西阶上升，返回原位。
English: Bin Zhaojun, the master conceded, rose from the west steps, and returned to his original position.

古文：执事者进巾，宾降一等受之，诣冠者席前，东向。
现代文：执事者进献头巾，宾下一阶接受，到加冠的人席前，面向东。
English: The officiant presents the turban, and the guests receive it from the next row, in front of the crowning chair, facing east.

古文：祝词同品官。
现代文：祝词与品级官员相同。
English: The eulogy was the same as that of the rank and file officers.

古文：祝讫，跪著巾。
现代文：祝福完毕，跪着戴巾。
English: After the blessing, kneel and wear a headscarf.

古文：兴，复位。
现代文：起身，回到原位。
English: Get up and return to your original position.

古文：冠者兴，宾揖之入房，易服，深衣大带，出就冠席。
现代文：加冠的人站起，宾向他拱手请入房中，换衣服，穿探衣系大带，出房来到加冠席。
English: The crowning person stood up, and the guest invited him to enter the room, change clothes, wear a loose-fitting dress with a large belt, and come out of the room to the crowning seat.

古文：宾盥如初。
现代文：宾如同最初时洗手。
English: Bin washes his hands as before.

古文：执事者进帽，宾降二等受之。
现代文：执事者进献帽子，宾下雨阶接受。
English: The officiant presents the hat, and the guest accepts it.

古文：进祝，跪，冠讫，兴，复位。
现代文：进前祝福，跪下，加冠完毕，起身，返回原位。
English: Forward blessing, kneel down, crowning finished, get up, return to the original position.

古文：揖冠者入房，易服，襕衫要带，出就冠席。
现代文：向加冠人拱手请进房中，改换衣服，穿栏衫，系腰带，出房来到加冠席。
English: Please enter the room, change clothes, wear a T-shirt, wear a belt, and come out of the room to the crown seat.

古文：宾盥如初。
现代文：宾洗手如初。
English: Bin washes his hands as before.

古文：执事者进幞头，宾降三等受之。
现代文：主事人进献幞头，宾下三阶接受。
English: The host presents the steamed buns, and the guests in the third row accept them.

古文：进祝，跪，冠讫，兴，复位。
现代文：进前祝福，跪下，加冠完毕，起身，返回原位。
English: Forward blessing, kneel down, crowning finished, get up, return to the original position.

古文：揖冠者入房，易公服出。
现代文：拱手请加冠人入房中，换公服出来。
English: Please enter the room and change out of your work clothes.

古文：执事者彻冠席，设醴席于西阶，南向。
现代文：执事者撤掉冠席，在西台阶上设酒席，面向 南。
English: The deacon removed the crown seat and set up a bar on the west steps, facing south.

古文：赞者酌醴出房，立于冠者之南。
现代文：赞礼的人斟酒出房，站在加冠人的南面。
English: The celebrant pours out the wine and stands to the south of the crowned one.

古文：宾揖冠者即席，西向立。
现代文：宾向加冠的人拱手到席上，面向西站立。
English: The guest hands over the crown to the crowned person and stands facing west.

古文：宾受醴，诣席前北面祝。
现代文：宾接受甜酒，到席前面向北祝福。
English: Guests receive the dessert wine, and before arriving at the table, they face north for a blessing.

古文：冠者拜受，宾答拜。
现代文：加冠的人行拜礼接受，宾回拜。
English: The crowned person goes to receive the prayer, and the guest returns the prayer.

古文：执事者进馔，冠者即席坐，饮食讫，再拜。
现代文：主事人进饭食，加冠的人到席上坐下，吃完饭，行再拜礼。
English: The host eats the meal, and the person crowned goes to the table, sits down, finishes the meal, and then performs the prayer.

古文：宾答拜。
现代文：宾回拜。
English: Sit down, put down the wine goblet, bow, take the goblet and stand up.

古文：冠者离席，立于西阶之东，南向。
现代文：加冠的人离开席位，站在西阶的东面，向南。
English: The crowned man left his seat and stood on the east side of the west steps, facing south.

古文：宾字之，如品官词。
现代文：宾取字，言词如同品官。
English: Words are like courtesans.

古文：冠者拜，宾答拜。
现代文：加冠的人行拜礼，宾回拜。
English: The crowned go to worship, the guests go back to worship.

古文：冠者拜父母，父母为之起。
现代文：加冠的人拜父母，父母为此起身。
English: Those who receive the crown pay homage to their parents, and their parents get up in arms about it.

古文：拜诸父之尊者，遂出见乡先生及父之执友。
现代文：拜众伯叔父中尊贵的人，于是出来拜见乡先生以及父亲的好友。
English: He paid homage to the noblest of his uncles, and then went out to pay homage to Mr. Township and his father's best friend.

古文：先生执友皆答拜。
现代文：乡先生、父亲的好友都回拜。
English: Mr. Township and my father's good friend both bowed back.

古文：宾退，主人请礼宾，固请，乃入，设酒馔。
现代文：宾退下，主人请礼待宾，坚决请求，宾纔进入，摆设酒饭。
English: When the guests leave, the host should treat the guests with courtesy and make a firm request. When the guests enter, the table should be set with food and drink.

古文：宾退，主人酬宾赞，侑以币。
现代文：宾退，主人酬谢宾赞，用缯帛酬答。
English: When the guests leave, the host will reward them with a "Xie Bin Zang" (Thank you, thank you) and a "Xiao Zang" (Thank you, thank you).

古文：礼毕，主人以冠者见于祠堂，再拜出。
现代文：礼仪完毕，主人带加冠的人拜祠堂，行再拜礼后出来。
English: After the ceremony, the host and the crowned person pay homage to the ancestral hall, and then come out after the service.

