古文：初，叔向晋大夫羊舌肸欲娶于申公巫臣氏，其母欲娶其党。
现代文：原文春秋时，晋大夫叔向想娶申公巫臣的女儿为妻，可是叔向的母亲却希望他娶自己娘家的人。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Dr. Jin's uncle Xiang wanted to marry the daughter of Shengong Wuxian as his wife, but his uncle's mother wanted him to marry someone from her own family.

古文：叔向曰： 吾母多而庶鲜，吾惩舅氏矣。 
现代文：叔向说： 我的庶母虽然很多，但是庶兄弟却很少，我讨厌亲上加亲。 
English: Uncle Xiang said, "Although I have many stepmothers, I have very few stepbrothers. I don't like to have more than one.

古文：其母曰： 子灵之妻夏姬也杀三夫、一君、一子，而亡一国两卿矣，可无惩乎？
现代文：他母亲说： 子灵的妻子夏姬害死了三个丈夫、一个国君、一个儿子，导致一个国家和两位卿大夫灭亡，这还不够可怕吗？
English: His mother said: Isn't it terrible enough that Zi Ling's wife, Xia Ji, caused the death of three husbands, a sovereign, and a son, leading to the destruction of a country and two noble doctors?

古文：吾闻之：甚美必有甚恶。
现代文：我听说：世上出现过分美丽的女人，必然有凶险万端的祸事伴随而来。
English: I've heard it said that the appearance of an excessively beautiful woman in the world is inevitably accompanied by terrible misfortune.

古文：昔有仍氏生女，发黑而美，光可以鉴，名曰玄妻。
现代文：古时的有仍氏生了个女儿，一头青丝又黑又美，光可鉴人，人称她为玄妻。
English: In ancient times, there was a woman named Yoshinobu who gave birth to a daughter. She was dark and beautiful with a fair complexion. People called her the bridegroom's wife.

古文：乐正后夔取之，生伯封，实有豕心，贪惏无厌，忿颣无期，谓之封豕。
现代文：后来乐正后夔娶她为妻，生了个儿子名叫伯封。这儿子的性情像猪一样，贪婪无厌，凶狠无度，所以人们给他取了一个 封豕 的外号。
English: Later, Le Zhenghou married her and had a son named Baofeng. This son's temperament was like that of a pig, insatiable and ferocious, so people gave him the nickname of "Feng Xuan."

古文：有穷后羿灭之，夔是以不祀。
现代文：后来有穷国的后羿把伯封杀了，从此夔氏断了香火。
English: Later, Hou Yi of a poor country killed Bo Hui, and from then on, the Zou clan was cut off from incense.

古文：今三代之亡，共子之废，皆是物也，汝何以为哉？
现代文：天生的美人足以迷惑人心，假使没有完美的品德，一定会带来灾祸。 
English: Natural beauty is enough to confuse people, if there is no perfect character, it will surely bring disaster.

古文：夫有尤物，足以移人，苟非德义，则必有祸。 
现代文：叔向听了母亲的话，觉得害怕，就打消娶申公巫臣的女儿为妻的念头。
English: Uncle Xiang listened to his mother's words and felt scared, so he gave up the idea of marrying the daughter of Shengong Wiccan as his wife.

古文：叔向惧，不敢取。
现代文：可是晋平公却强逼叔向娶申公巫臣的女儿。
English: However, Lord Jinpyeong forced his uncle to marry the daughter of Lord Shin.

古文：平公强使取之。生伯石。
现代文：婚后生了个儿子名叫伯石。
English: After marriage, she gave birth to a son named Bo Shi.

古文：伯石始生，叔向之母视之，及堂，闻其声而还，曰： 是豺狼之声也!
现代文：当伯石出生时，叔向的母亲前去探视，才到堂前，听见婴儿的哭声就掉头而走，说： 这哭声简直像豺狼的声音！
English: When Bo Shi was born, Uncle Xiang's mother went to visit him, but when she got to the front of the hall, she heard the baby's cries and turned away, saying, "This crying is just like the sound of a wolf howling!"

古文：狼子野心，非是，莫丧羊舌氏矣。 
现代文：狼子野心，如果有了他，恐怕我们羊舌家会灭亡。 
English: Werewolf ambition. If we have him, I'm afraid we sheep-tongue people will perish.

古文：遂弗视。
现代文：她因而不肯探视孙子。
English: She therefore refuses to visit her grandson.

