古文：皇后历吉凶之常，以辨雌雄之节，乃分祸福之向。
现代文：黄帝能够洞彻吉凶的先兆、辨析《雌节》与《雄节》这关于治国修身的两种基本处世规则，所以能够分清导致福祸的原因所在。
English: The Yellow Emperor was able to decipher the precursors of auspicious and inauspicious signs, and to distinguish between the "female section" and the "male section," the two basic rules of conduct for governing the country and cultivating the body, so he was able to distinguish the causes of good and evil.

古文：宪傲骄倨，是谓雄节；委燮恭俭，是谓雌节。
现代文：举凡自我炫耀、自以为是、自我夸耀，倨慢不逊，都称之为 雄节 ；举凡宛顺、温和、谦恭、卑让的，都称之为 雌节 。
English: Those who are self-aggrandizing, self-righteous, self-aggrandizing, and arrogant are called male; those who are submissive, gentle, humble, and humble are called female.

古文：夫雄节者，盈之徒也。雌节者，兼之徒也。
现代文：所谓 雄节 ，大抵属于自满的范畴；所谓 雌节 ，大抵属于谦逊的范畴。
English: The so-called male section usually belongs to the category of complacency; the so-called female section usually belongs to the category of modesty.

古文：夫雄节以得，乃不为福；雌节以亡，必将有赏。
现代文：依仗 雄节 ，假使偶有所得的话，并不意味着即是福吉；立足于 雌节 ，如果一时有所损失的话，那么最终也必然会有善报。
English: Relying on the male section, if there is occasional gain, it does not mean that it is Fudge; based on the female section, if there is a temporary loss, then there will inevitably be a good reward in the end.

古文：夫雄节而数得，是谓积殃；凶忧重至，几于死亡。
现代文：如果依仗 雄节 屡有收获，那也只能视为积累祸因，最终是忧虑凶险并濒临死亡。
English: If there is a lot of gain by relying on males, it can only be regarded as an accumulation of evils, and ultimately it is anxiety, danger and near death.

古文：雌节而数亡，是谓积德，慎戒毋法，大禄将极。
现代文：如果立足 雌节 而常有所失，这正是积累福德的过程；谨慎地戒备自己而不背离 雌节 ，大福就必然会来至。
English: If you often lose something based on the female node, this is precisely the process of accumulating merit; if you carefully guard yourself without deviating from the female node, great fortune will inevitably come.

古文：凡彼祸难也，先者恒凶，后者恒吉。
现代文：关于祸福的趋向，凡是先动者大抵都有祸凶，而后发者一般都有福吉。
English: With regard to the trend of misfortune and good fortune, those who act first usually have misfortune and evil, while those who act later generally have misfortune and good fortune.

古文：先而不凶者，恒备雌节存也。
现代文：然而有时也会发生先动而无凶祸的特殊现象，这是因为恒久地执守雌节、雄节不失的缘故。
English: However, sometimes there is also a special phenomenon of pre-emptive and harmless, which is due to the reason of permanently adhering to the female section and male section.

古文：后而不吉者，是恒备雄节存也。
现代文：有时也会发生后发而无吉福的特殊现象，这是因为顽固的依恃雌节、雄节未去的缘故。
English: Sometimes there is also a special phenomenon of late onset and no good luck, which is due to the stubborn clinging of the female and male nodes.

古文：先亦不凶，后亦不凶，是恒备雌节存也。
现代文：有时还会出现先动也无凶祸、后动也无凶祸的特别情况，这也是恒久地持守雌节、雌节不失的缘故。
English: Sometimes there is a special situation where there is no harm in moving first and no harm in moving later, which is also the reason for permanently holding the stallion and not losing the stallion.

古文：先亦吉，后亦不吉，是恒备雄节存也。
现代文：有时又会出现先发也无吉福、后发也无吉福的特别情况，这仍是顽固的依恃雄节、雄节未去的缘故。
English: Sometimes there will be a special situation where there is no good luck for the first move and no good luck for the second move. This is still due to the stubborn clinging to the stallion and the stallion not going away.

古文：凡人好用雄节，是谓妨生。大人则毁，小人则亡。
现代文：大抵好用雄节的，都可以说是有害于生存，作为统治者则会毁灭，作为一般百姓则会亡身。
English: For the most part, it can be said that those who are good at using stamens are harmful to survival. As rulers, they will be destroyed, and as ordinary people, they will die.

古文：以守不宁，以作事不成。以求不得，以战不克。
现代文：雄节，守国则不安，做事则不会成功，求取则无获，征国则无胜。
English: In the male section, defending the country is uneasy, doing things will not be successful, there is no gain in seeking, and there is no victory in conquering the country.

古文：厥身不寿，子孙不殖。
现代文：其自身不会长寿，子孙也不会蕃衍。
English: He will not live long, nor will his descendants.

古文：是谓凶节，是谓散德。
现代文：所以这种雄节实为 凶节 ，结果是在散失其德。
English: Therefore, this kind of male festival is actually a "bad" festival, and as a result, it is losing its virtue.

古文：凡人好用雌节，是谓承禄。
现代文：而凡好用雌节的，都可以说是在承接福禄。
English: And anyone who is good at using the female section can be said to be undertaking a good fortune.

古文：富者则昌，贫者则谷。
现代文：作为在上位的富者因之昌盛，作为在下位的贫者因之得到足够的衣食供给。
English: As a result, the rich at the top prospered, and the poor at the bottom received sufficient food and clothing supplies.

古文：以守则宁，以作事则成。
现代文：采用雌节，守国则安，做事则成功。
English: If the female section is adopted, the country will be protected, and the work will be successful.

古文：以求则得，以战则克。
现代文：求取则有收获，征战则胜。
English: Seek and you will find, fight and you will win.

古文：厥身则寿，子孙则殖。
现代文：不但其自身会长寿，子孙也会蕃衍。
English: Not only will they live longer, but their children and grandchildren will also live longer.

古文：是谓吉节，是谓囗德。
现代文：所以这种雌节实为 吉节 ，结果便是积聚其德。
English: Therefore, this female knot is actually a lucky knot, and the result is the accumulation of its virtue.

古文：故德积者昌，殃积者亡。
现代文：因此说，积聚其德的会昌盛，积累祸殃的会灭亡。
English: Therefore, it is said that those who accumulate virtue will prosper, and those who accumulate evil will perish.

古文：观其所积，乃知祸福之向。
现代文：考察他是积殃还是积德，便可以预测祸福的趋向了。
English: By examining whether he has accumulated misfortune or accumulated virtue, it is possible to predict the trend of misfortune and good fortune.

