古文：禽子再拜再拜曰： 敢问适人强弱，遂以傅城，后上先断，以为法程；斩城为基，掘下为室。
现代文：译文禽滑厘行了两次再拜礼，然后说： 请问，如果敌兵强悍，以致攀爬我方城墙，对后上者实行当场斩首，作为军法，同时在城下挖壕沟，筑土山，在城下掘隧道。
English: Then he said, "Please, if the enemy soldiers are so strong that they climb our city walls, we should execute them on the spot, as a military law, and at the same time dig trenches under the city, build mounds of earth, and dig tunnels under the city.

古文：前上不止，后射既疾，为之奈何？ 
现代文：前面敌兵攀爬不止，后面的弓箭又一个劲猛射，这种情况该如何对付呢？ 
English: The enemy soldiers in front are climbing more and more, and the bows and arrows in the back are shooting fiercely. How should we deal with this situation?

古文：子墨子曰：子问蛾傅之守邪？
现代文：墨子回答说：你问的是对付敌人像蚂蚁一样爬城的防守战法吗？
English: Mozi replied, "Are you asking about the defensive tactics to deal with the enemy crawling like ants?"

古文：蛾傅者，将之忿者也。守为行临射之，校机藉之，擢之，太氾迫之，烧荅覆之，沙石雨之，然则蛾傅之攻败矣。
现代文：依仗人多势众、驱赶士兵像蚂蚁般强行攻城，这不过是敌将恼怒发急之下不理智的举措罢了，守城一方只须要加筑临时的城垛，居高临下向爬城的敌人射击，用 技机 投掷攻敌，并拔掉敌方爬城的器具，用火把、滚烫开水倾倒制服城下的敌兵，用点燃的名叫 荅 的战具从城上下罩敌人，沙石象雨点般向敌人头上打，这样一来，像蚂蚁般攀爬城墙的强行攻城法就失败了。
English: Relying on a large number of people and driving soldiers to attack the city like ants, this is just an irrational measure taken by the enemy in a hurry. The defending side only needs to build temporary battlements, shoot at the enemy climbing the city from a high position, throw the attacking enemy with a technique machine, and remove the enemy's climbing equipment, dump the uniformed enemy soldiers under the city with torches and boiling water, cover the enemy from the city with lighted war equipment called, and hit the enemy's head with sand and stones like raindrops. As a result, the forced attack method of climbing the city wall like ants has failed.

古文：备蛾傅为县脾，以木板厚二寸，前后三尺，旁广五尺，高五尺，百折为下磨车，转径尺六寸，令一人操二丈四方，刃其两端，居县脾中，以铁璅，敷县二脾上衡，为之机，令有力四人下上之，弗离。
现代文：为防备敌人像蚂蚁般爬城强攻，可制做悬滑车，这种车用二寸厚的木板做成，前后各三尺宽，两旁宽五尺，高五尺，还要制造能够上下滑动的悬滑车箱，所用辘轳的轮子直径为一尺六寸，派一个士兵拿一支长矛站在车箱中，矛长二丈四尺，两端都制成刃口。用铁链套住悬滑车上部的横梁，装上辘轳，派四个强壮有力的兵士转动辘轳使人同车箱急速地上升或下降，不要停留。
English: In order to prevent the enemy from climbing the city like ants, it is possible to make a hang-glider. This kind of vehicle is made of two-inch-thick wooden boards, three feet wide in front and behind, five feet wide on both sides, and five feet high. It is also necessary to make a hang-glider box that can slide up and down. The wheels used are one foot and six inches in diameter. Send a soldier to stand in the box with a spear. The spear is two feet long and four feet long, and both ends are made into a cutting edge. Chain the upper beam of the hang-glider with a chain, install a hoop, and send four strong

古文：施县脾，大数二十步一，攻队所在六步一。
现代文：这种悬滑车在一段地段每隔二十步置一架，在敌人所攻击的区域，每六步一架。
English: One of these vehicles is placed every twenty paces in a section, and one every six paces in the area attacked by the enemy.

古文：为絫荅，广从丈各二尺，以木为上衡，以麻索大遍之，染其索涂中，为铁鏁，钩其两端之县。
现代文：制做 ■荅 ，长和宽各一丈二尺，上面的横梁以木制成，用大麻绳系住，麻绳要在泥水中浸泡；装备铁链，钩住两头的吊环。
English: It was made of straw, two feet high and two feet wide. The upper beam was made of wood and tied with hemp rope, which had to be soaked in muddy water. It was equipped with a chain and a hanging loop at both ends.

古文：客则蛾傅城，烧荅以覆之连■、抄大皆救之。
现代文：如果敌人像蚂蚁般爬城硬攻，就点燃 荅 从上往下罩敌人。此外， 连■ 、沙灰等物都可供解救攻城用。
English: If the enemy climbs the city like an ant and attacks hard, light a bonfire to cover the enemy from top to bottom. In addition, even ■, sand ash and other things can be used to relieve the siege.

古文：以车两走，轴间广大，以圉犯之，■其两端以束轮，遍遍涂其上，室中以榆若蒸，以棘为旁，命曰火捽，一曰传汤，以当队。
现代文：配备两个车轮，让两轮轴之间的距离长一些，用 圉 固定，并将两头熔合使两轮束成一体，到处涂上泥，在里面塞满榆树枝叶和麻梗等易燃物，两边布装荆棘，这个装置被称之为 火捽 ，又叫 传汤 ，用来布置在敌人的主攻区域。
English: Equipped with two wheels, so that the distance between the axles of the two wheels is longer, fixed with a hoe, and the two ends are fused so that the two wheels are bundled into one, coated with mud everywhere, stuffed with flammable materials such as eucalyptus branches and leaves and pockmarks, and equipped with thorns on both sides, this device is called a flamethrower, also known as a soup, used to be arranged in the enemy's main attack area.

古文：客则乘队，烧传汤，斩维而下之，令勇士随而击之，以为勇士前行，城上辄塞坏城。
现代文：假如敌人结队登城，就点燃 传汤 ，砍断上面的吊绳让它滚下去，并命令勇士以汤开路反击敌人。城墙一有破坏应立即派人迅速填塞抢修。
English: If the enemy marches up to the city in a group, he will set fire to the soup, cut the rope to let it roll down, and order the warriors to use the soup to fight back against the enemy. If there is any damage to the city wall, someone should be sent immediately to repair it.

古文：城下足为下说镵杙，长五尺，大圉半以上，皆剡其末，为五行，行间广三尺，貍三尺，大耳树之。
现代文：在城外墙根埋植锋利的木桩，长五尺，大一围半以上，末端都要削尖，共埋五行，行距三尺，深埋三尺，要犬牙交错般地埋栽。
English: At the base of the wall outside the city, sharpened wooden stakes are planted. The stakes are five feet long, with a circumference of more than one-and-a-half feet. The ends must be sharpened. A total of five rows are planted, with a row spacing of three feet and a depth of three feet. The stakes should be interlaced.

古文：为连殳，长五尺，大十尺。梃长二尺，大六寸，索长二尺。
现代文：造 连殳 ，长五尺，宽十尺。 梃 长二尺，宽六寸，绳索长二尺。
English: And he made the candlestick of five cubits, and the breadth of it ten cubits; and the candlestick of two cubits, and the breadth of it six cubits; and the cords of the candlestick two cubits.

古文：椎，柄长六尺，首长尺五寸。
现代文：椎，柄六尺，头部长一尺五寸。
English: Spine, handle six feet long, head one foot five inches long.

古文：斧，柄长六尺，刃必利，皆■其一后。
现代文：斧子，柄长六尺，斧口一定要锋利。 答 ，宽一丈二尺，长一丈六尺，悬挂在前面横梁四寸处。
English: An axe with a handle six feet long, and the axe-head must be sharp. Answer: two feet wide and six feet long, hanging from a four-inch beam in front.

古文：荅广丈二尺，□□丈六尺，垂前衡四寸，两端接尺相覆，勿令鱼鳞三，著其后行中央木绳一，长二丈六尺。
现代文：两头衔接的地方要相互搭连一尺左右，但不要象鱼鳞那样交错。在后横梁的中间系上一根大绳，长二丈六尺。
English: The places where the two ends meet should be connected to each other by about a foot, but not staggered like fish scales. In the middle of the back beam, tie a large rope, two feet long.

古文：荅楼不会者以牒塞，数暴干，荅为格，令风上下。
现代文：如果有不密合的地方就用版片填塞，要多曝晒，使其干燥， 荅 要制成格栅，能使空气流通。
English: If there is a place that does not fit tightly, fill it with the plate with foam. It should be exposed to more sunlight to dry it. It should be made into a grille to allow air circulation.

古文：堞恶疑坏者，先貍木十尺一枚一，节坏，■植，以押虑卢薄于木，卢薄表八尺，广七寸，经尺一，数施一击而下之，为上下釫而■之。经一。
现代文：如果城墙倒塌了，就树起木桩，在木桩上压上横木，横木长八尺，宽七寸，侧高一尺，一锤又一锤地将木桩打下去，然后用马钉钉牢。
English: And if the wall fall, then they shall make the woodpile, and upon the woodpile shall lay a board eight feet long, and seven inches broad, and a foot high: and they shall beat the woodpile with hammer upon hammer, and fasten it with nails.

古文：钧、禾楼、罗石。县荅植内，毋植外。
现代文：钩、木楼、■石都要备好。 荅 要悬挂在柱子靠里的一面，不要悬挂在柱子靠外的一面。
English: Be ready with hooks, timber and stone.  Hang from the inside of the pillar, not the outside.

古文：杜格，貍四尺，高者十丈，木长短相杂，兑其上，而外内厚涂之。
现代文：再布置 柞格 ，埋入四尺，露出地面高的以十尺为限，木头长短相间，交错置布，头部削尖，四周涂上厚厚的泥。
English: Re-arrange the frame, burying four feet, exposing the ground height of ten feet as a limit, the length of the wood is short, the cloth is interlaced, the head is sharpened, and thick mud is applied all around.

古文：为前行行栈，县荅。
现代文：制做行栈，悬挂烧荅。
English: made into a row of stacks, hung with burning coils.

古文：隅为楼，楼必曲里。
现代文：在城角建楼，楼要多层。
English: If you want to build a multi-storey building, you should build it in the corner of the city.

古文：土五步一，毋其二十畾。
现代文：备土，五步一堆，每堆不少于二十笼。
English: Prepare soil, five paces a pile, each pile not less than twenty cages.

古文：爵穴十尺一，下堞三尺，广其外。
现代文：打爵穴，每十尺一个，开在矫墙下部三尺处，外面的口要稍大一些。
English: Punching holes, one every ten feet, open at the bottom three feet of the retaining wall, the outer mouth should be slightly larger.

古文：转■城上，楼及散与池，革盆。
现代文：转■城上，须备设行楼，杀，水池和盛水用的皮盆。
English: On the castle, it is necessary to prepare a carriage house, mortuary, cistern and water basin.

古文：若转，攻卒击其后，煖失，治。
现代文：假如敌兵爬城，而担负攻击任务的士兵不能及时出击，贻误战机按军法处置。
English: If the enemy soldiers climb the city, and the soldiers responsible for the attack cannot attack in time, the delaying fighter will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：车革火。
现代文：还要用火烤烟薰
English: It also needs to be smoked over a fire.

古文：凡杀蛾傅而攻者之法，置薄城外，去城十尺，薄厚十尺，伐操之法，大小尽木断之，以十尺为断，离而深貍坚筑之，毋使可拔。二十步一杀，有■，厚十尺。
现代文：疑 虑 衍文。 表 应作 袤 。 经尺一 应作 径一尺 。疑 经一 为衍文； 钧 应作 钩 。 禾 应作 木 。 罗 应作 ■ 。 杜 应作 柞 。 曲里 应作 再重 。 其 应作 下 。 转 应作 傅 。 煖 应作 缓 。 操 应作 薄 。 ■ 应作 鬲 。 步 应作 尺 。 捣 应作 楬 。 椅 应作 樴 。 车 应作 熏 。 哭 应作 师 ； 榆 应作 逃 。
English: Doubt is a derivative. The table should be. The yardstick should be. The doubt is a derivative;  should be. The wheat should be. The loaf should be. The dough should be. The cake should be. The music should be. It should be. The wheel should be. The drill should be. The step should be. The pounding should be. The chair should be. The cart should be. The crying should be. The fleeing should be.

