古文：古之儒者，博学乎《六艺》之文。
现代文：古代的儒者，对《六艺》文章都广泛学习。
English: The ancient Confucians studied the "Six Arts" articles extensively.

古文：《六艺》者，王教之典籍，先圣所以明天道，正人伦，致至治之成法也。
现代文：《六艺》，是王教的经典，先圣用来明天道，正人伦，达到天下大治的成法。
English: "Six Arts" is the classic of Wang Jiao. It is used by the first saints to practice the Way of Tomorrow, the Righteous Path, and to achieve the world's great rule.

古文：周道既衰，坏于幽、厉，礼乐征伐自诸侯出，陵夷二百余年而孔子兴，衷圣德遭季世，知言之不用而道不行，乃叹曰： 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫！ 
现代文：周道衰微，坏于幽厉之时，礼乐征伐出自诸侯，衰落二百多年后孔子兴起，因圣德遭逢末世，智言不被用，大道不能通行，于是慨叹道： 凤鸟不来，河不出图，我算了吧！ 
English: When Zhou Dao was in decline, it was worse than a ghost town. Ritual music came from the provinces. After more than 200 years of decline, Confucius arose. Due to the end of the world, wisdom was not used, and the avenue could not be passed. So he sighed: If the phoenix bird does not come, and the river does not appear, I will forget it!

古文： 文王既没，文不在兹乎？ 
现代文： 文王已死，文章之事岂不在此乎？ 
English: King Wen is dead. Isn't that what writing is all about?

古文：于是应聘诸侯，以答礼行谊。
现代文：于是应聘于诸侯，以答礼行义。
English: As a result, he applied for a position in the lordship, and answered with courtesy.

古文：西入周，南至楚，畏匡厄陈，奸七十余君。
现代文：向西入周，向南到楚，受惊于匡，断粮于陈，干谒七十多个国君。
English: To the west into the Zhou, to the south into the Chu, frightened by the Kuang, deprived of food by the Chen, more than seventy sovereigns were wiped out.

古文：适齐闻《韶》，三月不知肉味；自卫反鲁，然后乐正，《雅》、《颂》各得其所。
现代文：到齐听到《韶》乐，三月不知肉味；从卫返鲁，然后音乐得以修正，《雅》《颂》各得其所。
English: When all listen to the music of "Shu" music, March does not know the taste of meat; from Wei back to Lu, then the music can be corrected, "Ya" "Ode" each has its place.

古文：究观古今篇籍，乃称曰： 大哉，尧之为君也！
现代文：探查古今篇籍，于是称赞道： 尧做君主真伟大啊！
English: After researching ancient and modern books, he praised: "It's great to be a monarch!

古文：唯天为大，唯尧则之。
现代文：衹有天最大，尧效法它。
English: If you have the greatest talent, emulate it.

古文：巍巍乎其有成功也，焕乎其有文章！ 又曰： 周监于二代，郁郁乎文哉！吾从周。 于是叙《书》则断《尧典》，称乐则法《韶舞》，论《诗》则首《周南》。
现代文：他的成就多么高啊，他的礼乐法度多么美好啊！ 又说： 周追视二代，文章隆盛，我赞同周。 于是整述《书》便从《尧典》开始，称乐便以《韶舞》为法，论《诗》则以《周南》为首。
English: He also said: Zhou pursued the second generation, the article is flourishing, I agree with Zhou. Therefore, the entire description of the "Book" began with the "Shu Dynasty," the music was called "Shu Dance" as the law, and the "Poetry" was led by "Zhou Nan."

古文：缀周之礼，因鲁《春秋》，举十二公行事，绳之以文、武之道，成一王法，至获麟而止。
现代文：连结周礼，循鲁《春秋》，列举十二公的行事，用文武之道为标准，成为一统王法，到获麟为止。
English: Connect the weekly rituals, follow Lu's "Spring and Autumn," enumerate the actions of the twelve princes, use the way of literature and martial arts as the standard, become a unified king's law, and obtain the unicorn.

古文：盖晚而好《易》，读之韦编三绝，而为之传。
现代文：晚年喜欢《易》，读《易》次数太多而使连缀竹简的皮带断了好几次，为之作传。
English: In his later years, he liked "Yi" and read "Yi" so many times that he broke the belt that was attached to the bamboo strips several times in order to pass it on.

古文：皆因近圣之事，以立先王之教，故曰： 述而不作，信而好古 ； 下学而上达，知我者其天乎！ 
现代文：都是以近代圣王之事，来确立先王之教。所以说： 传承而不创新，诚信而好古；  下学人事，上达天命，知道我的大概是天吧！ 
English: Therefore, it is said, "Inheritance without innovation, integrity with antiquity; learning personnel, ascending to the Mandate of Heaven, knowing me is probably heaven!"

古文：仲尼既没，七十子之徒散游诸侯，大者为卿相师傅，小者友教士大夫，或隐而不见。
现代文：孔子去世以后，七十弟子散游诸侯，位高者为卿相师傅，位低者成为士大夫的师友，有的遁世隐身。
English: After the death of Confucius, his seventy disciples wandered all over the provinces. Those with high rank became his teachers, those with low rank became his teachers' friends, and some remained incognito.

古文：故子张居陈，澹台子羽居楚，子夏居西河，子贡终于齐。
现代文：所以上亟在速，澹台子羽在楚，王夏在垩河，子贡死在齐。
English: Therefore, it is urgent to speed up the above, Zidaizi Yu is in Chu, Wang Xia is in Luhe, and Zigong is dead.

古文：如田子方、段干木、吴起、禽滑氂之属，皆受业于子夏之伦，为王者师。
现代文：像田子方、段干木、吴起、禽滑牦等，都受业于子夏之辈，做王的老师。
English: Like Tian Zi Fang, Duan Dry Wood, Wu Qi, and Ying Nuxiao, they were all taught by Zixia's generation, and they were the king's teachers.

古文：是时，独魏文侯好学。
现代文：这时，衹有魏文侯好学。
English: At this time, Wei Wenhou was eager to learn.

古文：天下并争于战国，儒术既黜焉，然齐鲁之间学者犹弗废，至于威、宣之际，孟子、孙卿之列咸遵夫子之业而润色之，以学显于当世。
现代文：战国时天下纷争，儒术被贬斥，然而齐鲁之地的学者还未废大道，到威、宣之际，孟子、孙卿等都遵循夫子的大业并加以润色，以学问著称于当世。
English: During the Warring States period, there were disputes all over the world, and Confucianism was disparaged. However, scholars in the land of Qilu had not yet abandoned the road. When they came to Wei and Xuan, Mencius, Sun Ching, and others followed the great cause of the master and polished it. They are famous for their learning in the present world.

古文：及至秦始皇兼天下，燔《诗》、《书》，杀术士，六学从此缺矣。
现代文：等到秦始皇兼并天下，焚烧《诗》《书》，杀害术士，六学便从此残缺了。
English: By the time the First Emperor of Qin annexed the whole country, burned "Poetry" and "Books" and killed the sorcerers, the six schools were no longer in existence.

古文：陈涉之王也，鲁诸儒持孔氏礼器往归之，于是孔甲为涉博士，卒与俱死。
现代文：陈涉称王时，鲁国的儒士拿着孔氏礼器去归依他，于是孔甲成了陈涉的博士，最终和他一起死难。
English: When Chen Zhan proclaimed himself king, the Confucianists of Lu took the ceremonial object of Kong to him, and so Kong Jia became Chen Zhan's doctor, and eventually died with him.

古文：陈涉起匹夫，驱適戍以立号，不满岁而灭亡，其事至微浅，然而搢绅先生负礼器往委质为臣者何也？
现代文：陈涉起身于匹夫，驱使谪戍而自立国号，不满一年就灭亡了，这本是很微浅的事，然而揞绅先生背着礼器委质为臣，是为什么呢？
English: It was a very trivial matter for Chen Tang to be born in a peasant family, drive the Yao to become an independent country, and perish in less than a year. However, Mr. Zou Sheng was a vassal with a ceremonial instrument behind him. Why was that?

古文：以秦禁其业，积怨而发愤于陈王也。
现代文：因为秦禁绝这项事业，心中积怒而依靠陈王来发泄。
English: Because Qin forbade this undertaking, he was angry and relied on Chen Wang to vent his anger.

古文：及高皇帝诛项籍，引兵围鲁，鲁中诸儒尚讲诵习礼，弦歌之音不绝，岂非圣人遗化好学之国哉？
现代文：等到高皇帝杀项籍，率兵围鲁，鲁地儒士还在讲诵习礼，弦歌之声不断，难道不是圣人遣化的好学之国吗？
English: Wait until Emperor Gao killed Xiangren and led his troops to encircle Lu. The Lu Confucians were still chanting rituals, and the sound of stringed songs continued. Wasn't it a country of saints and scholars?

古文：于是诸儒始得修其经学，讲习大射乡饮之礼。
现代文：于是诸儒才能开始修习经学，讲习大射、乡饮之礼。
English: As a result, the Confucianists were able to begin to study the scriptures, and to learn the etiquette of shooting and drinking in the countryside.

古文：叔孙通作汉礼仪，因为奉常，诸弟子共定者，咸为选首，然后喟然兴于学。
现代文：叔孙通制作汉礼仪，因此做了奉常，诸弟子一起参与制定的人，都成为选首，然后学术喟然而兴。
English: Uncle Sun Tong made the Han etiquette, so he did the duty, and all the disciples who participated in the formulation together became the first choice, and then the academic rejuvenation.

古文：然尚有干戈，平定四海，亦未皇庠序之事也。
现代文：然而仍有战事，要平定四海，也没有来得及兴办庠序之事。
English: However, there were still battles to be fought and the four seas to be pacified, and there was no time to set up a chain of command.

古文：孝惠、高后时，公卿皆武力功臣。
现代文：孝惠、高后时，公卿们都是武力功臣。
English: At the time of Xiao Hui and Gao Guo, the nobles were all military heroes.

古文：孝文时颇登用，然孝文本好刑名之言。
现代文：孝文时稍有进用，但孝文本来喜好刑名之学。
English: Xiaowen was a little ahead of his time, but Xiaowen was originally fond of the study of surnames.

古文：及至孝景，不任儒，窦太后又好黄、老术，故诸博士具官待问，未有进者。
现代文：到了孝景，不任用儒生，窦太后又喜好黄老之术，所以诸博士备官待问，没有进用的。
English: When it came to Xiaoqing, Confucian scholars were not appointed, and Empress Dowager Dou was fond of Huanglao's art, so the doctors were prepared to be asked, but were not used.

古文：汉兴，言《易》自淄川田生；言《书》自济南伏生；言《诗》，于鲁则申培公，于齐则辕固生，燕则韩太傅；言《礼》，则鲁高堂生；言《春秋》，于齐则胡毋生，于赵则董仲舒。
现代文：汉兴起，淄川田生讲《易》；济南伏生讲《书》；讲《诗》，在鲁是申培公，在齐是辕固生，在燕是韩太傅；讲《礼》，则是鲁高堂生；讲《春秋》的，在齐是胡毋生，在赵是董仲舒。
English: At the rise of the Han Dynasty, Lu Chuan Tian Sheng spoke of "Yi"; Jinan Fusheng spoke of "Book"; spoke of "Poetry"; in Lu, Shen Peiguo; in Qi, Gong Gusheng; in Yan, Han Taifu; spoke of "Rite," Lu Gaotang Sheng; spoke of "Spring and Autumn," in Qi, Hu Bai Sheng; in Zhao, Dong Zhongshu.

古文：及窦太后崩，武安君田蚡为丞相，黜黄老、刑名百家之言，延文学儒者以百数，而公孙弘以治《春秋》为丞相，封侯，天下学士靡然乡风矣。
现代文：等到宝太后崩，武安君田蚶做丞相，排斥黄老、刑名百家言论，延用文学儒士数百人，公孙弘因研究《春秋》而做了丞相封侯，天下学士纷纷效仿。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Wu'an Jun Tianjun became the prime minister, repelled Huang Lao and hundreds of schools of thought, continued to use hundreds of literary Confucianists, Gongsun Hong became the prime minister due to his study of "Spring and Autumn," and the world's scholars followed suit.

古文：弘为学官，悼道之郁滞，乃请曰： 丞相、御史言：制曰 盖闻导民以礼，风之以乐。
现代文：公孙弘是学官，伤心大道的衰微，于是奏请说： 丞相、御史说：制书说 听说要以礼指导人民，以乐施行教化。
English: Gongsunhiro was a scholar, saddened by the decline of the avenue, so he wrote a petition saying: "Minister of Justice, Your Excellency, said: Bookmaking said: I heard that people should be guided by etiquette and educated by music.

古文：婚姻者，居室之大伦也。
现代文：婚姻，是居室的大伦。
English: Marriage is a big deal in the bedroom.

古文：今礼废乐崩，朕甚愍焉，故详延天下方闻之士，咸登诸朝。
现代文：现在礼崩乐坏，朕很感伤，所以延用天下有道博闻之士，都录用于朝廷。
English: Now that the ceremony is over, I am very sad, so I am using the world's most learned people, all recorded for the imperial court.

古文：其令礼官劝学，讲议洽闻，举遗兴礼，以为天下先。
现代文：应当令礼官劝学，讲释经义，广博见闻，举求遣逸，兴盛礼仪，作天下的榜样。
English: The etiquette officials should be urged to learn, explain the meaning of the sutras, widely read and heard, give advice and seek guidance, and make the etiquette prosperous, so as to set an example for the world.

古文：太常议，予博士弟子，崇乡里之化，以厉贤材焉。 
现代文：太常建议，授予博士弟子，崇尚乡里教化，以劝勉贤才。 
English: It is often suggested to award doctoral disciples, advocate rural education, and encourage talents.

古文：谨与太常臧、博士平等议，曰：闻三代之道，乡里有教，夏曰校，殷曰庠，周曰序。
现代文：谨与太常臧、博士平等商议道：听说三代之道，乡里有教育之所，夏称校，殷称庠，周称序。
English: I would like to discuss with Tai Changjun and Dr. Mao on an equal footing: I have heard that there are three generations, there is an educational institution in the village, the summer is called school, the autumn is called summer, and the week is called order.

古文：其劝善也，显之朝廷；其惩恶也，加之刑罚。
现代文：劝勉善行，使之昭显于朝廷；惩治恶行，便施以刑罚。
English: They encourage a good man and make him famous; they punish an evil man and bring him to trial.

古文：故教化之行也，建首善自京师始，由内及外。
现代文：所以教化的实行，建立首善从京师开始，由内及外。
English: Therefore, the implementation of indoctrination should first start from the capital to set an example, and then spread from the capital to the local areas.

古文：今陛下昭至德，开大明，配天地，本人伦，劝学兴礼，崇化厉贤，以风四方，太平之原也。
现代文：现在陛下昭明至德，开大明，配天地，以人伦为本，劝学兴礼，崇尚教化，勉励贤才，来教化四方，这是太平的本源。
English: Now, His Majesty has made it clear that he is the most virtuous, the most enlightened, the most worthy of heaven and earth, the one who is based on human relations, the one who exhorts people to study and worship, the one who advocates enlightenment, and the one who encourages the wise to enlighten the four directions. This is the source of peace.

古文：古者政教未洽，不备其礼，请因旧官而兴焉。
现代文：古代政教没有普遍，礼仪不完备，请利用旧学官而兴起它。
English: The ancient political education was not harmonious, and the etiquette was not complete. Now, it is requested to use the original official position to flourish it.

古文：为博士官置弟子五十人，复其身。
现代文：为博士官设置弟子五十人，免除其徭役。
English: Please assign fifty disciples to doctoral officers and exempt them from paying taxes.

古文：太常择民年十八以上、仪状端正者，补博士弟子。
现代文：太常选择十八岁以上仪容端庄的人，补充博士弟子。
English: Too often, people over the age of eighteen with a dignified appearance are chosen to supplement doctoral students.

古文：郡国县官有好文学、敬长上、肃政教、顺乡里、出入不悖，所闻，令、相、长、丞上属所二千石。
现代文：郡国县官有爱好文献经典，敬重长上，恭守政教，顺行乡里，出入不违礼的，听说后，县令国相县长县丞报告所属的二千石。
English: County and prefectural officials who have a penchant for literature and classics, respect their superiors, respect politics and religion, travel along the countryside, and enter and leave without violating etiquette, after hearing this, the prefectural governor, the prefectural governor, the prefectural governor, and the prefectural governor report the 2,000 koku they belong to.

古文：二千石谨察可者，常与计偕，诣太常，得受业如弟子。
现代文：二千石谨慎察看，认为可以的，就与推荐的官吏一起，到太常去，就能够像弟子一样受业。
English: If they think it is possible, they will go to Taifang together with the recommended officials, so that they can be trained like disciples.

古文：一岁皆辄课，能通一艺以上，补文学掌故缺；其高第可以为郎中，太常籍奏。
现代文：第一年都专学一门，能通学一艺以上，补充文学掌故的空缺；高第可以为郎中，太常编选名册奏上。
English: In the first year, all of them majored in one subject, and were able to attend school for at least one art, supplementing the vacancies in the literature department; Gao Di could be a junior high school student, and he was listed in the roster of regular students.

古文：即有秀才异等，辄以名闻。其不事学若下材，及不能通一艺，辄罢之，而请诸能称者。
现代文：如果有奇异的人才，便单独具名上奏，那些不事学问的下才，以及不能精通一艺的，便免去资格，再请求能胜任的。
English: If there are extraordinary talents, they will singly nominate the best, those who are not learned, and those who are not proficient in one art, will be exempt from qualification, and then ask for those who are competent.

古文：巨谨案诏书律令下者，明天人分际，通古今之谊，文章尔雅，训辞深厚，恩施甚美。
现代文：臣谨案所颁发的诏书律令，分明天人之别，沟通古今道理，文章雅正，训辞深厚，恩泽宏美。
English: The Imperial Rescript issued by the Emperor Jianzhong is distinguished from others, communicates ancient and modern principles, the article is elegant, the exhortation is profound, and the reward is magnificent.

古文：小吏浅闻，弗能究宣，亡以明布谕下。
现代文：小吏见闻浅薄，不能深刻宣传，无法明白颁布晓谕下民。
English: Petty officials have a shallow knowledge, cannot carry out in-depth propaganda, and cannot clearly issue instructions to the people.

古文：以治礼掌故以文学礼义为官，迁留滞。
现代文：因治礼掌故之官本以有文学习礼义为职，应该迁擢留滞的人才。
English: The officials who are retiring due to the administration of etiquette should be replaced with talented people who have studied etiquette and etiquette.

古文：请选择其秩比二百石以上及吏百石通一艺以上补左右内史、太行卒史，比百石以下补郡太守卒史，皆各二人，边郡一人。
现代文：请选择其俸禄相当二百石以上以及吏百石精通一艺以上者补左右内史、大行卒吏，相当百石以下的补郡太守卒史，都是每郡二人，边郡一人。
English: Please select the salary equivalent to 200 koku or more, and the officials with 100 koku or more who are proficient in one art to supplement the internal history of the left and right, the high-ranking officials, and the county governors with less than 100 koku, there are two people in each county, and one person in the border county.

古文：先用诵多者，不足，择掌故以补中二千石属，文学掌故补郡属，备员。
现代文：先录用诵经多的，不足，就选择掌故来补中二千石属，文学掌故补郡属，以配足名额。
English: First of all, if there is too much chanting and not enough chanting, they will choose the middle school to make up for the middle school, and the county to make up for the county to make up for the quota.

古文：请著功令。
现代文：请着于功令。
English: Please include this in the regulations for the examination of candidates for the post of academician.

古文：它如律令。 
现代文：其他的一如律令。 
English: The rest is as it should be.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：下诏说： 可以 。
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：自此以来，公卿大夫士吏彬彬多文学之士矣。
现代文：从这以后，公卿大夫士吏多文雅贤良文学之士。
English: From then on, he became a court noble, a doctor, a man of letters, a man of elegance, and a man of fine literature.

古文：昭帝时举贤良文学，增博士弟子员满百人，宣帝末增倍之。
现代文：昭帝的时候举荐贤良文学，增加博士弟子满一百人，宣啻末年又增加了一倍。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhao, he recommended virtuous literature and increased the number of doctoral disciples to a hundred, and doubled it again in the last years of his reign.

古文：元帝好儒，能通一经者皆复。
现代文：亘查喜好儒学，能精通一经的都免除徭役。
English: Wuchao likes Confucianism, and those who can master it are exempt from serving as eunuchs.

古文：数年，以用度不足，更为设员千人，郡国置《五经》百石卒史。
现代文：数年后，因为用度不足，改为设员一千人，郡国设置《五经》百石卒史。
English: A few years later, due to insufficient use, it was changed to 1,000 members, and the county government set the "Five Classics" to 100 koku.

古文：成帝末，或言孔子布衣养徒三千人，今天子太学弟子少，于是增弟子员三千人。
现代文：成帝末年，有人说孔子以平民身份养弟子三千人，现在天子太学弟子太少，于是增加弟子至三千人。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Chengdu, it was said that Confucius had raised 3,000 disciples as a commoner, but now Emperor Taigong had too few disciples, so he increased the number of disciples to 3,000.

古文：岁余，复如故。
现代文：一年多后，又恢复旧制。
English: More than a year later, the old system was restored.

古文：平帝时王莽秉政，增元士之子得受业如弟子，勿以为员，岁课甲科四十人为郎中，乙科二十人为太子舍人，丙科四十人补文学掌故云。
现代文：平帝时王莽执政，增加元士的子弟可以像弟子一样受业，不算作定员数中，岁课甲科四十人做郎中，乙科二十人做太子舍人，丙科四十人补文学掌故。
English: When Emperor Ping was in power, Wang Mang added that the children of Yuan Shizhu could be trained like disciples, and were not counted as part of the fixed number of students. In Grade A, forty students became junior scholars, in Grade E, twenty students became princes, and in Grade C, forty students became scholars.

古文：自鲁商瞿子木受《易》孔子，以授鲁桥庇子庸。
现代文：从鲁商瞿子木受《易》于孔子，传授给鲁桥庇子庸。
English: "Yi" was taught to Luqiao Pei Zi Rong by Confucius from Luqiao Pei Zi Mu.

古文：子庸授江东馯臂子弓。
现代文：子庸传给江束肝臂子弓。
English: Ziyong passed on the art of bow making to Jiang Zucai.

古文：子弓授燕周丑子家。
现代文：子弓传给燕周丑子家。
English: Ziyu was passed down to the Yan Zhou Ugly Goat family.

古文：子家授东武孙虞子乘。
现代文：子家传给东武孙虞子乘。
English: The family was passed down to the Tobu grandson, Yu Zizhong.

古文：子乘授齐田何子装。
现代文：子乘传给齐田何子装。
English: Zojiri was passed on to Saida Koshigo.

古文：及秦禁学，《易》为筮卜之书，独不禁，故传受者不绝也。
现代文：至秦禁学，《易》是筮的书，惟独它不被禁绝，所以传受不断。
English: Until the Qin Dynasty banned it, Yi was a rare book. However, it was not banned, so it has been passed down continuously.

古文：汉兴，田何以齐田徙杜陵，号杜田生，授东武王同子中、雒阳周王孙、丁宽、齐服生，皆著《易传》数篇。
现代文：汉兴起后，田何因为是旧齐国的田氏之族而被迁至杜陵，号为杜田生，传给束武王同子中、雒阳周王孙、丁宽、齐服生，都作了《易传》数篇。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, Tian He was moved to Du Ling because he was a member of the Tian clan in the former Qi state. He was given the name Du Tian Sheng, which was passed down to Saku Wang's middle son, Shenyang Zhou Wang's grandson, Ding Kuan and Qi Fu Sheng, all of whom wrote several "Easy Transmission" stories.

古文：同授淄川杨何，字叔元，元光中征为太中大夫。
现代文：王回传给箠则握包，字叔元，元光中征做太中大夫。
English: Wang Hui passed it on to Zou, who was given the title "Uncle Yuan," and Yuan Guang was recruited to be the First Vice-Premier.

古文：齐即墨城，至城阳相。
现代文：齐即墨成，宫至城阳相。
English: Qi is ink, and the palace is the city and the sun.

古文：广川孟但，为太子门大夫。
现代文：广川孟但，做了太子门大夫。
English: Hirokawa Mengdan, who became the prince's doctor.

古文：鲁周霸、莒衡胡、临淄主父偃，皆以《易》至大官。
现代文：昼旦灵、莒衡胡、临淄主父偃，都因《易》做了大官。
English: During the day, Dangdangling, Yu Henghu, Linyi's father Yu, all became high-ranking officials because of "Yi."

古文：要言《易》者本之田何。
现代文：简要讲《易》起源于何田。
English: Briefly speaking, "Yi" originated in Hota.

古文：丁宽字子襄，梁人也。
现代文：丁宽字子襄，梁国人。
English: Ding Kuan Zi Xiang, Liang Guozhong.

古文：初，梁项生从田何受《易》，时宽为项生从者，读《易》精敏，才过项生，遂事何。
现代文：起初銮更生随旦包学《易》，当时丁宽是项生的随从，读《易》精敏，才能超过蔓生，于是事奉旦包。
English: At first, Gong Gensheng studied "Yi" with Dang Bao. At that time, Ding Guang was a follower of Xiang Sheng. He could read "Yi" very well, so he could surpass Dang Sheng. Therefore, he served Dang Bao.

古文：学成，何谢宽。
现代文：学成后，旦包让丁宽离去。
English: After learning, Dang Bao let Ding Guang leave.

古文：宽东归，何谓门人曰： 《易》以东矣。 
现代文：丁宽回到东方，田何对门人说： 《易》到了东方了。 
English: When Ding Kuan returned to the East, Tian He said to the gatekeeper: "Yi" has arrived in the East.

古文：宽至雒阳，复从周王孙受古义，号《周氏传》。
现代文：工宽到费陨，又跟旦王瑟学古义，号称《周氏传》。
English: The width of the work is so wide that it costs a fortune, and he also studies the ancient classics with Tang Wangse, known as "The Biography of Zhou."

古文：景帝时，宽为梁孝王将军距吴、楚，号丁将军，作《易说》三万言，训故举大谊而已，今《小章句》是也。
现代文：墓壶时，工宽为銮画王率军抗拒吴楚，号为丁将军，作《易说》三万字，解释字义，举其大义而已，就是现在的《小章句》。
English: At the time of the tomb, Gongguan led the army to resist Wu Chu under the name of General Ding. He wrote 30,000 words of "Easy to Say," explaining the meaning of the characters, but only giving its major meaning, which is now "Small Chapter and Sentence."

古文：宽授同郡砀田王孙。
现代文：工宣传给同郡彊旦王瑟。
English: workers' propaganda to the county's Xidan Wangxu.

古文：王孙授施雠、孟喜、梁丘贺。
现代文：王瑟传给施鲢、垂喜、銮丘贺。
English: Wang Xie passed it on to Shifang, Tuxi and Qiuqiuhe.

古文：繇是《易》有施、孟、梁丘之学。
现代文：由此《易》有施、孟、梁丘之学。
English: As a result, "Yi" has the learning of Shi, Meng and Liangqiu.

古文：施雠字长卿，沛人也。
现代文：施雠字长卿，沛人。
English: Shifu Zi Changqing, Pei Ren.

古文：沛与砀相近，雠为童子，从田王孙受《易》。
现代文：沛和砀很近，施雠是小孩时，跟旦旦噩学《易》。
English: Pei and Diao are very close. When Shi Diao was a child, he studied "Yi" with Diao Diao.

古文：后雠徙长陵，田王孙为博士，复从卒业，与孟喜、梁丘贺并为门人。
现代文：后来筵垡迁移到星陆，田王孙做了博士，又跟他完成了学业，和昼喜、梁丘贺都是门人。
English: Later, Zou migrated to Xinglu, Tian Wangsun became a doctor, and completed his studies with him. He, Rongxi, and Liang Qiuhe were all disciples.

古文：谦让，常称学废，不教授。
现代文：他很谦让，常自称学业荒废，不传授。
English: He is very humble, often claiming that his studies were wasted and that he did not want to teach.

古文：及梁丘贺为少府，事多，乃遣子临分将门人张禹等从雠问。
现代文：等梁丘贺做了少府，事务多，就派儿子梁丘临带着门人张禹等到施雠那裹问学。
English: When Liang Qiu He became a minor prefect and had many affairs, he sent his son Liang Qiu Lin and his disciple Zhang Yu to Shifang to inquire about the school.

古文：雠自匿不肯见，贺固请，不得已乃授临等。
现代文：施雠躲起来不肯见，梁丘贺坚决请求，不得已才传授梁丘临等。
English: Shi Qian hid and refused to see him, Liang Qiu He made a firm request, and had no choice but to teach Liang Qiu Lin.

古文：于是贺荐雠： 结发事师数十年，贺不能及。 
现代文：于是梁丘贺推荐施雠： 从结发起事奉老师数十年，梁丘贺比不上他。 
English: As a result, Liang Qiu He recommended Shi Yan: Liang Qiu He has served as a teacher for decades from the beginning.

古文：诏拜雠为博士。
现代文：韶拜施雠为博士。
English: Zibo Shiqian became a doctor.

古文：甘露中与《五经》诸儒杂论同异于石渠阁。
现代文：甘露中和《五经》诸儒在石渠阁共议同异。
English: In the Stone Canal Pavilion, the Confucianists in the middle of the Nectar of the Lotus and the Confucianists in the Five Classics discussed their differences.

古文：雠授张禹、琅邪鲁伯。
现代文：施雠传给张禹、琅邪鲁伯。
English: Shi Xuan passed it on to Zhang Yu and Zou Yalube.

古文：伯为会稽太守，禹至丞相。
现代文：鲁伯是会稽太守，张禹官至丞相。
English: Lu Bo was the Censor-in-Chief, and Zhang Yukan was the Prime Minister.

古文：禹授淮阳彭宣、沛戴崇子平。
现代文：张禹传给淮阳彭宣、沛戴崇子平。
English: Zhang Yu passed it on to Huaiyang Peng Xuan and Pei Dai Chong Ziping.

古文：崇为九卿，宣大司空。
现代文：戴崇做九卿，彭宣做大司空。
English: Dai Chong will be the Nine Lords, and Peng Xuan will be the Great Empress Dowager.

古文：禹、宣皆有传。
现代文：张禹、彭宣都有传。
English: Zhang Yu and Peng Xuan are both said to have been involved.

古文：鲁伯授太山毛莫如少路、琅邪邴丹曼容，著清名。
现代文：鲁伯传给太山毛莫如少路、琅邪邴丹曼容，以清名著称。
English: It was passed down from Lu Bo to Taishan Mao Moruo Shao Luo, and from Lu Bo to Shao Luo Shao Luo, and is famous for its clear name.

古文：莫如至常山太守。
现代文：莫如官至常山太守。
English: There is no better position than the governor of Mt. Jōsō.

古文：此其知名者也。
现代文：这些都是知名的人。
English: These are well-known people.

古文：由是施家有张、彭之学。
现代文：从此施家有张、彭之学。
English: Since then, the Shi family has Zhang and Peng's learning.

古文：孟喜字长卿，东海兰陵人也。
现代文：孟喜字长卿，束海兰陵人。
English: Meng Xizhongqing, the founder of Lanling.

古文：父号孟卿，善为《礼》、《春秋》，授后苍、疏广。
现代文：父亲号孟卿，擅长《礼》、《春秋》，传授给后苍、疏广。
English: His father's name was Meng Qing, and he was good at "Rite" and "Spring and Autumn," which he passed on to his children.

古文：世所传《后氏礼》、《疏氏春秋》，皆出孟卿。
现代文：后世所传的《后氏礼》、《疏氏春秋》，都出自孟卿。
English: "Gou Shi Li" and "Sao Shi Chun Qiu," which have been passed down from generation to generation, were both written by Meng Qing.

古文：孟卿以《礼经》多、《春秋》烦杂，及使喜从田王孙受《易》。
现代文：孟卿因《礼经》内容多，《春秋》烦杂，便让孟喜跟田王孙学《易》。
English: Meng Xing let Meng Xi study "Yi" with Tian Wangsun because "Li Jing" had a lot of content and "Spring and Autumn" was boring.

古文：喜好自称誉，得《易》家候阴阳灾变书，诈言师田生且死时枕喜膝，独传喜，诸儒以此耀之。
现代文：孟喜喜好自吹，得到《易》家候阴阳灾变书，伪称老师田生将死时枕着孟喜膝，单独传给孟喜，诸儒因此夸耀他。
English: Meng Xi liked to boast that he had obtained the "Yi" family waiting for the Yin and Yang cataclysmic book, and falsely claimed that the teacher Tian Sheng would die with Meng Xi's knee on his pillow and pass it on to Meng Xi alone. All Confucian scholars praised him for this.

古文：同门梁丘贺疏通证明之，曰： 田生绝于施雠手中，时喜归东海，安得此事？ 
现代文：同门梁丘贺分辩其伪道： 田生死在施雠手中，当时孟喜回到东海，怎么会有此事？ 
English: Fellow disciple Liang Qiuhe argued his false way: Tian Sheng died at the hands of Shi Yan, when Meng Xi returned to the East China Sea, how could this happen?

古文：又蜀人赵宾好小数书，后为《易》，饰《易》文，以为 箕子明夷，阴阳气亡箕子；箕子者，万物方荄兹也。 
现代文：又蜀人赵宾喜好小数书，后学《易》，修饰《易》文，以为 箕子明夷，阴阳气灭亡了箕子；箕子，是万物根菱滋茂。 
English: Zhao Bin, also from Shu, liked decimal books and later studied Yi and embellished Yi texts. He thought that yang and yin had perished, while yin and yang had flourished. Yang was the root of all things.

古文：宾持论巧慧，《易》家不能难，皆曰 非古法也 。
现代文：赵宾立论巧慧，《易》家不能非难，都说 不是古法 。
English: Zhao Binli talked about cleverness, and the Yi family could not be blamed, they all said that it was not an ancient law.

古文：云受孟喜，喜为名之。
现代文：说是受于孟喜，孟喜为他称说。
English: It was inspired by Meng Xi, and Meng Xi claimed it as his own.

古文：后宾死，莫能持其说。喜因不肯仞，以此不见信。
现代文：后来赵宾死了，没人能掌握其学说，孟喜于是不肯称说，因此不被信服。
English: Later, Zhao Bin died, and no one could grasp his theory, so Meng Xi refused to say it, so he was not convinced.

古文：喜举孝廉为郎，曲台署长，病免，为丞相椽。
现代文：孟喜举荐孝廉为郎，曲台署长，因病免职，为丞相掾。
English: Meng Xiqiu recommended Xiaolian as his son, director of the Qudai, but he was removed from his post due to illness and became chancellor.

古文：博士缺，众人荐喜。
现代文：博士缺员，众人推举孟喜。
English: There is a shortage of doctoral candidates, and everyone is nominating Meng Xi.

古文：上闻喜改师法，遂不用喜。
现代文：皇上听说孟喜改了师法，便不任用孟喜。
English: When the emperor heard that Meng Xi had changed his teaching method, he did not appoint Meng Xi.

古文：喜授同郡白光少子、沛翟牧子兄，皆为博士。
现代文：孟喜传给同郡白光少子、沛翟牧子兄，都做了博士。
English: Meng Xi passed on to the county's Bai Guang's younger son and Pei Yao's elder brother, both of whom became doctors.

古文：由是有翟、孟、白之学。
现代文：由此有翟、孟、白之学。
English: This led to the study of Tao, Mencius, and Bai.

古文：梁丘贺字长翁，琅邪诸人也。
现代文：梁丘贺字长翁，琅邪诸人。
English: Liang Qiu congratulated Zi Chang Weng, and condemned all evil-doers.

古文：以能心计，为武骑。
现代文：因为会心算，做了武骑。
English: Because he did mental arithmetic, he ended up as a warrior.

古文：从太中大夫京房受《易》。
现代文：跟太中大夫塞废学《易》。
English: Don't study "Yi" with Dr. Taizhong.

古文：房者，淄川杨何弟子也。
现代文：塞崖是渺山杨何的弟子。
English: Sayaka is a disciple of Myoshan Yang He.

古文：房出为齐郡太守，贺更事田王孙。
现代文：京房出去做了齐郡太守，梁丘贺改而事奉田王孙。
English: Kyofusa went out to become the governor of Qi County, and Liang Qiuhe went to serve Tian Wangsun.

古文：宣帝时，闻京房为《易》明，求其门人，得贺。
现代文：宣帝时，听说京房研究《易》很透彻，找其门人，找到了梁丘贺。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan, I heard that Jingfang studied "Yi" very thoroughly, looked for his disciple, and found Liang Qiuhe.

古文：贺时为都司空令。坐事，论免为庶人。
现代文：梁丘贺当时是都司空令，因事获罪被免为庶人。
English: At the time, Liang Qiuhe was an air marshal, but he was acquitted of the crime and became a commoner.

古文：待诏黄门数入说教侍中，以召贺。
现代文：在黄门待诏多次入内为诸侍中说经教授，因此召见梁丘贺。
English: At the Yellow Gate, he repeatedly entered the palace as a professor of Chinese classics for the attendants, so he summoned Liang Chugao.

古文：贺人说，上善之，以贺为郎。
现代文：梁丘贺入廷说经，皇上认为好，任命为郎。
English: Liang Qiu He entered the court and said that the emperor thought it was good and appointed him as his son.

古文：会八月饮酎，行祠孝昭庙，先驱旄头剑挺堕坠，首垂泥中，刃乡乘舆车，马惊。
现代文：适逢八月饮酎，天子出行祭祀孝昭庙，先驱旄头骑兵的剑脱出来坠落地上，剑首落在泥中，刃对着乘舆车，马受惊。
English: It coincided with the drinking of liquor in August, the heavenly son traveling to the sacrifice of the Xiao Zhao Temple, the sword of the pioneer Shantou cavalry came off and fell to the ground, the sword head fell in the mud, the blade was facing the public car, and the horse was frightened.

古文：于是召贺筮之，有兵谋，不吉。
现代文：于是召梁丘贺占筮此事，有兵谋之事，不吉。
English: Therefore, it was ill-fated to call Liang Qiuhe to take charge of the matter.

古文：上还，使有司侍祠。
现代文：皇上回去了，让有司代理祠事。
English: The emperor went back and asked Yuji to act as the representative of the ancestral shrine.

古文：是时，霍氏外孙代郡太守任宣坐谋反诛，宣子章为公车丞，亡在渭城界中，夜玄服入庙，居郎间，执戟立庙门，待上至，欲为逆。
现代文：这时霍氏外孙代郡太守任宣因谋反被杀，任宣的儿子任章是公车丞，逃亡在渭城界内，夜裹穿着玄服入庙，混在郎中间，拿着戟站在庙门，等待皇上到来，准备作乱。
English: At this time, Ren Xuan, the grandchild of the Huo clan and the grand marshal of the county, was killed for plotting a rebellion. Ren Xuan's son, Ren Zhang, was a bus driver and fled within the city limits. He entered the temple at night, wearing a ceremonial dress, mingled with the lords, and stood at the temple gate with a scepter, waiting for the emperor to arrive and preparing to make trouble.

古文：发觉，伏诛。
现代文：被发觉，判处死刑。
English: He was found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：故事，上常夜入庙，其后待明而入，自此始也。
现代文：以前，皇上常在晚上入庙，以后等到天明才入庙，是从此开始的。
English: In the past, emperors often entered the temple in the evening, and later waited until dawn to enter the temple. This is where it all began.

古文：贺以筮有应，由是近幸，为太中大夫，给事中，至少府。
现代文：梁丘贺因为占筮灵验，由此近幸，为太中大夫，给事中，官至少府。
English: Because Liang Chuga's prediction was successful, he was fortunate enough to be appointed as the First Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports and Tourism.

古文：为人小心周密，上信重之。
现代文：为人小心周密，皇上很器重他。
English: He was a careful man, and the Emperor held him in high esteem.

古文：年老终官。
现代文：年老死于宫任上。
English: He died of old age in the palace.

古文：传子临，亦入说，为黄门郎。
现代文：传授儿子梁丘临，也入朝说经，做了黄门郎。
English: His son, Liang Qulin, who passed on the teachings, also entered the imperial court to recite scriptures and became Huangmenro.

古文：甘露中，奉使问诸儒于石渠。
现代文：甘露中，奉使命在石渠聘问诸儒。
English: In the middle of the nectar, he was sent on a mission to question the Confucianists at the stone canal.

古文：临学精孰，专行京房法。
现代文：梁丘临学问精熟，专通京房之法。
English: Liang Qiaolin is well-versed in learning, and is an expert in the law of the capital room.

古文：琅邪王吉通《五经》，闻临说，善之。
现代文：琅邪王吉通晓《五经》，听到梁丘临的学说，以为很好。
English: He had read the "Five Classics" and thought Liang Qulin's teachings were very good.

古文：时，宣帝选高材郎十人从临讲，吉乃使其子郎中骏上疏从临受《易》。
现代文：当时宣帝选拔高材郎十人随梁丘临讲经，王吉就让其儿子郎中王骏上疏跟梁丘临学《易》。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan selected ten high-caliber disciples to attend Liang Qiu's sermon, and Wang Ji asked his son, the second-born, Wang Xuanqiao, to attend Liang Qiu's study of the Yi.

古文：临代五鹿充宗君孟为少府，骏御史大夫，自有传。
现代文：梁丘临代替五鹿充宗君孟做少府，王骏为御史大夫，各自有传。
English: Liang Qulin replaced Woluqongzongjun Meng as the minor prefect and Wang Qi as the grand secretary, both of which have their own legends.

古文：充宗授平陵士孙张仲方、沛邓彭祖子夏、齐衡咸长宾。
现代文：充宗传给平陵士孙张仲方、沛邓彭祖子夏、齐衡咸长宾。
English: It was passed down to the sons of the Taira clan, Zhang Zhongfang, Pei Dunpeng, Zu Zixia and Qi Heng Xian Changbin.

古文：张为博士，至扬州牧，光禄大夫给事中，家世传业。彭祖，真定太傅。咸，王莽讲学大夫。
现代文：士孙张是博士，官至扬州牧，光禄大夫给事中，家中世代传业；彭祖，是真定太傅；衡咸，是王莽的讲学大夫。
English: Zhang Shishun is a doctor, Yangzhou pastoral official, Dr. Guanglu is a doctor, and the family has been passed down for generations; Peng Zu is a doctor; Heng Xian is a doctor of Wang Mang.

古文：由是梁丘有士孙、邓、衡之学。
现代文：从此梁丘有士孙、邓、衡之学。
English: Since then, Liangqiu has had scholars such as Sun, Deng and Heng.

古文：京房受《易》梁人焦延寿。
现代文：京房学《易》于梁人焦延寿。
English: Kyofusa's "Yi" is about the life of Liang Zhenjiao.

古文：延寿云尝从孟喜问《易》。
现代文：延寿说曾向孟喜问《易》。
English: Yan Shou said that he had asked Meng Xi about "Yi."

古文：会喜死，房以为延寿《易》即孟氏学，翟牧、白生不肯，皆曰非也。
现代文：赶上孟喜死了，京房以为延寿《易》就是孟氏学，翟牧、白生不认可，都说不是。
English: When Meng Xi died, Jingfang thought that "Yi" was Meng's learning, while Gongmu and Bai Sheng did not recognize it and both said that it was not.

古文：至成帝时，刘向校书，考《易》说，以为诸《易》家说皆祖田何、杨叔元、丁将军，大谊略同，唯京氏为异，党焦延寿独得隐士之说，托之孟氏，不相与同。
现代文：到成帝时，刘向校书，考察《易》说，认为各《易》家学说都起源于田何、杨叔元、丁将军，大义略同，衹有京氏不同，或许是焦延寿独得隐士的学说，假托为孟氏，不和它们一样。
English: At the time of Emperor Chengdu, Liu Xiangshu wrote to the school and examined the "Yi" saying that the teachings of each "Yi" family originated from Tian He, Yang Shuyuan, and General Ding, and they were slightly similar, but different from the Beijing family, perhaps the teachings of Jiao Yanshou's unique hermit, if it was the Meng family, it was not the same as them.

古文：房以明灾异得幸，为石显所谮诛，自有传。
现代文：京房因明了灾异得宠，被石显诬陷而死，自有传。
English: Kyofusa was favored because he understood the calamity, and died after being framed by Ishi Hsien, according to his own legend.

古文：房授东海殷嘉、河东姚平、河南乘弘，皆为郎、博士。
现代文：京房传给束海殷嘉、河东姚平、河南乘弘，都做了郎、博士。
English: Kyofo was passed down to Sokha Hai Yinjia, Hedong Yao Ping, and Henan Jianhong, all of whom became masters and doctors.

古文：由是《易》有京氏之学。
现代文：从此《易》有京氏之学。
English: Since then, "Yi" has been taught by Kyouji.

古文：长于卦筮，亡章句，徒以《彖》、《象》、《系辞》十篇文言解说上下经。
现代文：费直字旦茧，塞基人。研究《易》做了郎，官至里父令。擅长卦筮，不解释章句，衹用彖象系辞十篇文言解说上下经。
English: He was a member of the Saiki clan. He studied "Yi" (易) as a child, and became a government official under his father's orders. He was good at "gua zi" (卦), and did not explain the chapters and sentences, but explained the ten texts of the Sutra of Confucius with the help of the "xiang keji" (象系辞).

古文：琅邪王璜平中能传之。
现代文：遮邪旦董王生能传解它。
English: Even the devil himself, Mr. Tung, can interpret it.

古文：璜又传古文《尚书》。
现代文：旦羹又传解古文《尚书》。
English: In addition, Tan-chan interpreted the ancient text "Shangshu."

古文：高相，沛人也。
现代文：高相，沛人。
English: Good looks, great personality.

古文：治《易》与费公同时，其学亦亡章句，专说阴阳灾异，自言出于丁将军。
现代文：研究《易》和费公同时，他的学说也不解释章句，专讲阴阳灾异，自称出自丁将军。
English: While studying "Yi" and Feigong, his theory does not explain the chapters and sentences, but only talks about yin and yang disasters, and claims to be from General Ding.

古文：传至相，相授子康及兰陵毌将永。
现代文：传到高相后，高相传给儿子高康和兰陵毋将永。
English: After being passed down to Gao Xiang, Gao Xiang passed it down to his sons Gao Kang and Lanling, but it won't last forever.

古文：康以明《易》为郎，永至豫章都尉。
现代文：高康因明了《易》而做了郎，毋将永官至豫章都尉。
English: As a result of his understanding of Yi, Gaokang became a vassal, and eventually rose to the permanent position of Captain Yuanzhang.

古文：及王莽居摄，东郡太守翟谊谋举兵诛莽，事未发，康候知东郡有兵，私语门认，门人上书言之。
现代文：到王莽居摄，东郡太守翟谊谋划起兵杀王莽，事情还未发起，高康候察得知束郡有兵事，私自告诉了门人，门人上书报告了此事。
English: According to Wang Mangju's photo, Dong County's grand marshal Shanyi was plotting to raise an army to kill Wang Mang, but the matter had not yet been initiated. Gao Kang, who was waiting for the investigation, learned that there was a military affair in Sok County, and privately told the gatekeeper. The gatekeeper reported the matter in a letter.

古文：后数月，翟谊兵起，莽召问，对 受师高康鸀。
现代文：几个月后，翟谊起兵，王莽召问门人，回答说听说于老师高康。
English: A few months later, when the fraternity raised an army, Wang Meng summoned the gatekeeper and replied that he had heard of the teacher Gaokang.

古文：莽恶之，以为惑众，斩康。
现代文：王莽憎恶他，认为是迷惑众人，杀了高康。
English: Wang Mang hated him, thought he was deceiving everyone, and killed Gao Kang.

古文：由是《易》有高氏学。
现代文：从此《易》有高氏学。
English: Since then, "Yi" has had Gao's learning.

古文：高、费皆未尝立于学官。
现代文：高、费的学说都不曾立于学宫。
English: Neither Gao nor Fei's doctrines were ever established in the palace of learning.

古文：伏生，济南人也，故为秦博士。
现代文：伏生，济南人。以前是秦博士。
English: Fusei, a native of Jinan. Formerly Dr. Qin.

古文：孝文时，求能治《尚书》者，天下亡有，闻伏生治之，欲召。
现代文：孝文时，寻求能解说《尚书》的人，天下没有这样的人，听说伏生研读，想召他。
English: At the time of Xiaowen, he was looking for someone who could explain Shang Shu. There was no one like him in the world. When he heard that Fusheng was studying, he wanted to recruit him.

古文：时伏生年九十余，老不能行，于是诏太常，使掌故朝错往受之。
现代文：当时伏生已九十多岁，太老不能去，于是韶令太常，派掌故晁错去学习。
English: At that time, Fuseon was more than ninety years old, too old to go, so he was ordered to go to study.

古文：秦时禁《书》，伏生壁藏之，其后大兵起，流亡。
现代文：秦时禁《书》，伏生把它藏在墙裹，之后起了战争，到处流亡。
English: Qin banned the "Book" at the time, Fusheng hid it in the wall, and then the war broke out, and he was exiled everywhere.

古文：汉定，伏生求其《书》，亡数十篇，独得二十九篇，即以教于齐、鲁之间。
现代文：汉平定天下后，伏生找他的《书》，丢了几十篇，祇找到二十九篇，便用它在齐、鲁之间教授。
English: After Han was pacified, Fusheng searched for his "Book," lost dozens of articles, only found twenty-nine, and used it to teach between Qi and Lu.

古文：齐学者由此颇能言《尚书》，山东大师亡不涉《尚书》以教。
现代文：齐学者因此很能讲《尚书》，山东的大师教经没有不涉及《尚书》的。
English: Qi scholars are therefore very able to speak of "Shangshu," and there is no master teaching in Shandong that does not involve "Shangshu."

古文：伏生教济南张生及殴阳生。
现代文：伏生教授济南张生和欧阳生。
English: Fusei professors Jinan Zhang Sheng and Ouyang Sheng.

古文：张生为博士，而伏生孙以治《尚书》征，弗能明定。
现代文：张生做了博士，而伏生的孙子因研究《尚书》被征，却不能阐明论定。
English: Zhang Sheng became a doctor, while Fusheng's grandson was enlisted for his research on "Shang Shu," but he was unable to clarify the argument.

古文：是后鲁周霸、雒阳贾嘉颇能言《尚书》云。
现代文：此后鲁周霸、雒阳贾嘉都很能讲《尚书》。
English: After that, Lu Zhouba and Fenyang Jiajia were both able to speak "Shangshu."

古文：欧阳生字和伯，千乘人也。事伏生，授倪宽。
现代文：欧阳生字扭伯，王垂人。事奉丛生，传给饱宽。
English: Ouyang was born with the Chinese character "Tuibo" (扭伯) and was a member of the "Wang Tie" (王垂人).

古文：宽又受业孔安国，至御史大夫，自有传。
现代文：坦宽又向孔圭量学习，官至御史大夫，自己有传。
English: Tan Kuan also learned a great deal from Kong Gui, and rose through the ranks to become a doctor of history, which he passed on to his son.

古文：宽有俊材，初见武帝，语经学。
现代文：坦真有良才，初次见亘游，谈论经学。
English: Frank and talented, first time to see Wataru, talking about the study.

古文：上曰： 吾始以《尚书》为朴学，弗好，及闻宽说，可观。 
现代文：皇上说： 我开始认为《尚书》是朴学，不喜欢，等听了倪宽的话，觉得值得一看。 
English: The emperor said: I began to think that "Shang Shu" was Park Xue, I didn't like it, and after listening to Ni Kuan's words, I thought it was worth seeing.

古文：乃从宽问一篇。
现代文：于是向倪宽请教了一篇。
English: So I asked Ni Kuan for a piece of advice.

古文：欧阳、大小夏侯氏学皆出于宽。
现代文：欧阳、大小夏侯氏之学都源于倪宽。
English: The teachings of Ouyang and Xia Hou all originated from Ni Kuan.

古文：宽授欧阳生子，世世相传，至曾孙高子阳，为博士。
现代文：倪宽传给欧阳生的儿子，世世相传，到曾孙欧阳高子阳，做了博士。
English: Ni Kuan was passed down to Ou Yang Sheng's son, passed down from generation to generation, to Ou Yang Sheng's great-grandson, Gao Ziyang, who became a doctor.

古文：高孙地馀长宾以太子中庶子授太子，后为博士，论石渠。
现代文：欧阳高孙地余长宾以太子中庶子身份传授太子，后来做了博士，讲论于石渠。
English: Ouyang Gao's great-great-grandson, Yu Changbin, was given the title of crown prince as an illegitimate child, and later became a doctor, lecturing at Shiquan.

古文：元帝即位，地馀侍中，贵幸，至少府。
现代文：元帝即位，地余任侍中，位高受宠，官至少府。
English: Emperor Yuan ascended the throne, Ji Yu served as an attendant, was highly favored, and became an official at the imperial court.

古文：戒其子曰： 我死，官属即送汝财物，慎毋受。
现代文：告诫儿子说： 我死后，官属会送给你财物，千万不要接受。
English: He warned his son: "When I die, officials will give you property. Don't accept it."

古文：汝九卿儒者子孙，以廉洁著，可以自成。 
现代文：你是九卿儒者的子孙，以廉洁著称，可以自己取得成就。 
English: You are a descendant of the Jiuqing Confucians, known for your integrity, and you can achieve success on your own.

古文：及地馀死，少府官属共送数百万，其子不受。
现代文：等地余死后，少府官属共送礼数百万，他的儿子不接受。
English: After Yu's death, Shaofu officials sent gifts totaling millions, which his son did not accept.

古文：天子闻而嘉之，赐钱百万。
现代文：天产听说后很赞赏，赐钱百万。
English: After hearing about it, Tian Yuan was very appreciative and gave him millions of money.

古文：地馀少子政为王莽讲学大夫。
现代文：地余的小儿子欧阳政是王莽的讲学大夫。
English: Ouyang Zheng, Ji Yu's youngest son, is Wang Mang's lecturer.

古文：由是《尚书》世有欧阳氏学。
现代文：从此《尚书》有欧阳氏学传世。
English: Since then, "Shangshu" has been passed down to generations of Ouyang scholars.

古文：林尊字长宾，济南人也。
现代文：林尊字长宾，济南人。
English: Lin Zunzhi Changbin, a native of Jinan.

古文：事欧阳高，为博士，论石渠。
现代文：事奉欧阳高，做了博士，讲论于石渠。
English: He served Ouyang High School, earned a doctorate, and lectured at Shiquan.

古文：后至少府、太子太傅，授平陵平当、梁陈翁生。
现代文：后官至少府、太子太傅，传给平陵平当、梁陈翁生。
English: At least the post of prefectural governor and the post of crown prince were passed down to Pingling Pingdong and Liang Chen Wengsheng.

古文：当至丞相，自有传。
现代文：平当官至丞相，自己有传。
English: He was a high-ranking government official and even the prime minister, and he has his own legend.

古文：翁生信都太傅，家世传业。
现代文：翁生为信都太傅，家中世代传授。
English: He was born with a strong belief in the capital city, which has been passed down in his family for generations.

古文：由是欧阳有平、陈之学。
现代文：从此欧阳有平、陈之学。
English: Since then, Ouyang has learned from Ping and Chen.

古文：翁生授琅邪殷崇、楚国龚胜。
现代文：翁生传给琅邪殷崇、楚国龚胜。
English: Weng Sheng passed it on to Zou Yanzhong and Chu Guo Sheng.

古文：崇为博士，胜右扶风，自有传。
现代文：殷崇做了博士，龚胜为右扶风，自己有传。
English: Yin Chong became a doctor, and Yan Sheng was a right-wing fan, and he had his own legend.

古文：而平当授九江朱普公文、上党鲍宣。
现代文：平当传给九江朱普公文、上党鲍宣。
English: Ping Dang passed on to Jiujiang Zhu Pu Gongwen and Shang Party Bao Xuan.

古文：普为博士，宣司隶校尉，自有传。
现代文：朱普做了博士，鲍宣为司隶校尉，自己有传。
English: Zhu Pu became a doctor, Bao Xuan was a captain of the Sili, and he had his own legend.

古文：徒众尤盛，知名者也。
现代文：徒弟特别多，大多是知名的人。
English: There are a lot of apprentices, mostly well-known people.

古文：夏侯胜，其先夏侯都尉，从济南张生受《尚书》以传族子始昌。
现代文：夏侯胜，他的祖先夏侯都尉，向济南张生学习《尚书》，传给族子始昌。
English: Xia Hou Sheng, his ancestor Xia Hou Duifeng, learned "Shang Shu" from Jinan Zhang Sheng and passed it on to his son Shi Chang.

古文：始昌传胜，胜又事同郡蕳卿。
现代文：始昌传给夏侯胜，夏侯胜又事奉同郡蔺卿。
English: Shichang was passed down to Xia Hou Sheng, and Xia Hou Sheng also served as the county magistrate.

古文：蕳卿者，倪宽门人。
现代文：蔺卿，是倪宽的门人。
English: Lord Zou is a disciple of Ni Kuan.

古文：胜传从兄子建，建又事欧阳高。
现代文：夏侯胜传给从兄之子夏侯建，夏侯建又事奉欧阳高。
English: Xia Hou Sheng was passed down to Xia Hou Jian, the son of his elder brother. Xia Hou Jian also served Ouyang Gao.

古文：胜至长信少府，建太子太傅，自有传。
现代文：夏侯胜官至长信少府，夏侯建为太子太傅，自己有传。
English: Xia Hou Sheng Guan to Changxin Shao Fu, Xia Hou Jian as Prince Taifu, he has a legend.

古文：由是《尚书》有大小夏侯之学。
现代文：从此《尚书》有大小夏侯之学。
English: Since then, "Shangshu" has been studied by princes big and small.

古文：周堪字少卿，齐人也。
现代文：周堪字少卿，齐国人。
English: Zhou Kanzhi Shaoqing, a native of Qi.

古文：与孔霸俱事大夏侯胜。
现代文：和孔灵都事他们。壬通是博士。
English: With Kong Ling, it's all about them. Rintong is a doctor.

古文：霸为博士。堪译官令，论于石渠，经为最高，后为太子少傅，而孔霸以太中大夫授太子。
现代文：区蛮为译官令，讲论于互堡，经的造诣最高，后来做了太子少傅，王递以太中大夫身份教授太子。
English: Guzman was a translator, lectured in both cities, and was the most accomplished scholar. Later, he became the prince's junior tutor, and Wang Xian became the prince's junior doctor and professor.

古文：及元帝即位，堪为光禄大夫，与萧望之并领尚书事，为石显等所谮，皆免官。
现代文：到五童即位，旦銮是光禄大夫，和芦望之一起领尚书事，被亘题等诬陷。都免了官。
English: By the time of the enthronement of the Five Children, Danzhao was the doctor of Guanglu, and he and Lu Wang were in charge of Shang Shuji, and they were framed by Wuji and others. They were both relieved of their duties.

古文：望之自杀，上愍之，乃擢堪为光禄勋，语在《刘向传》。
现代文：望之自杀，皇上哀悯他，便提升周堪为光禄勋，事在《刘向传》。
English: When Wang Zhi committed suicide, the emperor took pity on him and promoted Zhou Kan to the Order of the Star. The story is told in "Liu Xiang Rong."

古文：堪授牟卿及长安许商长伯。
现代文：周堪传给牟卿和长安许商长伯。
English: Zhou Kan was passed down to Mou Qing and Chang'an Xu Shang Changbai.

古文：牟卿为博士。
现代文：牟卿是博士。
English: Mou is a doctor.

古文：霸以帝师赐爵号褒成君，传子光，亦事牟卿，至丞相，自有传。
现代文：孔霸以帝师身份赐爵号为褒成君，传授儿子孔光，也事奉牟卿，官至丞相，自己有传。
English: Confucius, in his capacity as emperor, bestowed the title of Baochengjun on his son, Confucius Guang, and also served as Muqing, the highest-ranking official of the Joseon Dynasty, which was also passed down to him.

古文：由是大夏侯有孔、许之学。
现代文：从此大夏侯有孔、许之学。
English: Since then, there has been a hole in the summer prince and a learning of Xu.

古文：商善为算，著《五行论历》，四至九卿，号其门人沛唐林子高为德行，平陵吴章伟君为言语，重泉王吉少音为政事，齐炔钦幼卿为文学。
现代文：许商善于计算，着《五行论历》，四次官至九卿，令他的门人沛唐林子高从事德行，平陵吴章伟君从事言语，重泉王吉少音从事政事，齐炔钦幼卿从事文学。
English: Xu Shang was good at calculation. He wrote the "Five Elements Calendar" and rose from the fourth rank to the ninth rank. He ordered his disciple Pei Tang Lin Zigao to engage in virtue, Pingling Wu Zhang Weijun to engage in speech, Chongquan Wang Ji Shaoyin to engage in politics, and Qi Yuqin to engage in literature.

古文：王莽时，林、吉为九卿，自表上师冢，大夫、博士，郎吏为许氏学者，各从门人，会车数百辆，儒者荣之。
现代文：王莽时，唐林、王吉做了九卿，自己上表上老师坟冢，大夫博士郎吏研究许氏学的，各自带领门人，车会集数百辆，儒者以此为荣。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, Tanglin and Wang Ji became the nine nobles, with themselves on the top table, the teacher Grabao, the doctor and the doctor's assistant studying the study of Xu, each leading the gate, the car will gather hundreds of cars, Confucians are proud of this.

古文：钦、章皆为博士，徒众尤盛。
现代文：炔钦、吴章都是博士，徒弟很多。
English: Yu Qin and Wu Zhang are both doctors, and they have many apprentices.

古文：章为王莽所诛。
现代文：吴章被王莽杀害。
English: Wu Zhang was killed by Wang Mang.

古文：张山拊字长宾，平陵人也。
现代文：张山拊字长宾，平陵人。
English: Zhang Shanzhong's character is Changbin, who is from Pingling.

古文：事小夏侯建，为博士，论石渠，至少府。
现代文：事奉小夏侯建，做了博士，讲论于石渠，官至少府。
English: He served Xiao Xiao Jian, made a doctorate, lectured in Shiqu, and became a government official.

古文：授同县李寻、郑宽中少君、山阳张无故子儒，信都秦恭延君、陈留假仓子骄。
现代文：传授同县李寻、郑宽中少君、山阳张无故子儒、信都秦恭延君、陈留假仓子骄。
English: Taught by Li Huan, Zheng Kuan Junior High School Junior, Sanyang Zhang Mucai Ju, Xindu Qin Qian Yanjun, Chen Liu Hui Cang Zi Gao.

古文：无故善修章句，为广陵太傅，守小夏侯说文。
现代文：无故善于修习章句，做了广陵太傅，遵守小夏侯解说文义。
English: Without any reason, he was good at studying chapters and sentences, made Guangling Taifu, and obeyed Xiaohu's interpretation of the meaning of the text.

古文：恭增师法至百万言，为城阳内史。
现代文：秦恭增加师法到百万字，做了城阳内史。
English: Qin Gong increased the teaching method to a million words and made the history of the city.

古文：仓以谒者论石渠，至胶东相。
现代文：假仓以谒者身份讲论于石渠，官至胶束相。
English: The fake storehouse talks about the stone channel as a deaf person, and the official to the micellar phase.

古文：寻善说灾异，为骑都尉，自有传。
现代文：李寻善于解说灾异，做了骑都尉，自己有传。
English: Li Xuan was good at explaining natural disasters. He became a cavalry captain, and his story is well known.

古文：宽中有俊材，以博士授太子，成帝即位，赐爵关内侯，食邑八百户，迁光禄大夫，领尚书事，甚尊重。
现代文：宽中有良才，以博士身份教授太子，成帝即位后，赐爵关内侯，食邑八百户，升光禄大夫，领尚书事，很受尊重。
English: He was widely respected as a man of great talent, teaching the crown prince as a doctor, and after the enthronement of Emperor Cheng, he was given the title of Lord of Guanai, 800 households in the county, the title of Shoko-roku doctor, and the title of Shang Shuji.

古文：会疾卒，谷永上疏曰： 臣闻圣王尊师傅，褒贤俊，显有功，生则致其爵禄，死则异其礼谥。
现代文：适逢病死，谷永上疏说： 臣听说圣王尊敬师傅，褒赏才俊，显扬有功，活着就给他爵禄，死后就给予他特殊的礼谧。
English: At the time of his death from illness, Gu Yong Jinso said: "The minister heard that the holy king respected teachers, rewarded talent, and promoted meritorious deeds. He gave him a peerage while he was alive, and gave him a special eulogy after his death.

古文：昔周公薨，成王葬以变礼，而当天心。
现代文：从前周公薨，成王以变礼葬他，合于天意。
English: From the previous week's public funeral, Cheng Wang buried him with a change of etiquette, which was in accordance with Heaven's will.

古文：公叔文子卒，卫侯加以美谥，著为后法。
现代文：公叔文子死，卫侯赐予美好的谧号，成为后世成法。
English: After the death of his father-in-law Fumiko, Wei Hou bestowed him with a beautiful nickname, which became a law for future generations.

古文：近事，大司空朱邑、右扶风翁归德茂夭年，孝宣皇帝愍册厚赐，赞命之臣靡不激扬。
现代文：近代的事，大司空朱邑、右扶风翁归品德优秀而早早去世，孝宣皇帝哀愍册命丰厚赏赐，赞命臣子没有不受感动的。
English: In modern times, Daishi Ku Zhuyi and Zu Fu Feng Weng, both of whom had excellent moral character, passed away early. Emperor Xiaoxuan mourned for them and rewarded them generously, and the courtiers were not unmoved.

古文：关内侯郑宽中有颜子之美质，包商、偃之文学，严然总《五经》之眇论，立师傅之显位，入则乡唐、虞之闳道，王法纳乎圣听，出则参冢宰之重职，功列施乎政事，退食自公，私门不开，散赐九族，田亩不益，德配周、召，忠合《羔羊》，未得登司徒，有家臣，卒然早终，尤可悼痛！
现代文：关内侯郑宽中有颜子的美好品质，包容商、偃的文学，总括《五经》的妙论，立于师傅的显赫位置，在内则追随唐虞大道，向天子陈述圣王之法，在外则参与冢宰要职，功劳扩大到处理政事上，减退所食之禄，从至公之道，不自开私门，分散赐给九族。田亩不增加，德行与周召相配，忠心与《羔羊》相合，没能升任司徒，拥有家臣，猝然早逝，更可哀痛！
English: Guan's vassal, Zheng Kuan, had the beautiful quality of a good-looking person, the literature of accommodating merchants and merchants, the ingenious theory of summarizing the "Five Classics," and stood in the prominent position of a master. Among them, he followed the Tang Yu Road and stated the law of the holy king to the heavenly son. Outside, he participated in the important position of the eunuch. His merit extended to the handling of government affairs, reduced the amount of money he earned, and from the path of justice, he did not open his own door, and distributed it to the nine tribes. The fields did not increase, the virtue matched the call of Zhou, the

古文：臣愚以为宜加其葬礼，赐之令谥，以章尊师褒贤显功之德。 
现代文：臣愚认为应增加他的葬礼品级，赐予美谧，来表明尊师奖贤赏功的大德。 
English: The vassal believed that his funeral grade should be increased and he should be given a beautiful gong to show the great virtue of honoring teachers and rewarding merit.

古文：上吊赠宽中甚厚。
现代文：皇上悼赠宽中很丰厚。
English: The Emperor's condolence gift was very generous.

古文：由是小夏侯有郑、张、秦、假、李氏之学。
现代文：从此小夏侯有郑、张、秦、假、李氏之学。
English: Since then, Xiao Xiao has learned from the Zheng, Zhang, Qin, Fake and Li clans.

古文：宽中授东郡赵玄，无故授沛唐尊，恭授鲁冯宾。
现代文：宽中传授束郡赵玄，无故传授沛唐尊，秦恭传授鲁冯宾。
English: Zhao Xuan of Sok County, Pei Tang Zun of No Reason, and Lu Fengbin of Qin Qiong taught at the middle school.

古文：宾为博士，尊王莽太傅，玄哀帝御史大夫，至大官，知名者也。
现代文：冯宾是博士，唐尊是王莽太傅，赵玄是哀帝的御史大夫，位至大官，是知名的人。
English: Feng Bin is a doctor, Tang Zun is Wang Mang Taifu, Zhao Xuan is the imperial historian of the emperor, a high-ranking official, and a well-known person.

古文：孔氏有古文《尚书》，孔安国以今文字读之，因以起其家逸《书》，得十余篇，盖《尚书》兹多于是矣。
现代文：孔氏有古文《尚书》，孔安国用当今文字解读它，于是发掘他家的逸《书》，找到十多篇，大概《尚书》比这更多吧。
English: Kong had an ancient text, "The Book of Songs," and Kong Anguko began to interpret it with today's words, so he unearthed his family's lost "books" and found more than ten, probably "The Book of Songs" is more than this.

古文：遭巫蛊，未立于学官。
现代文：遭巫蛊之案牵连，没有立于学官。
English: He was implicated in a witchcraft and sorcery case, but did not become a scholar.

古文：安国为谏大夫，授都尉朝，而司马迁亦从安国问故。
现代文：安国是谏大夫，传授都尉朝，而司马迁也向安国问过旧事。
English: An Guo was a medical doctor of the Qin Dynasty and taught the captains of the Qin Dynasty, and Sima Qian also asked An Guo about the past.

古文：迁书载《尧典》、《禹贡》、《洪范》、《微子》、《金滕》诸篇，多古文说。
现代文：司马迁的书中载有《尧典》、《禹贡》、《洪范》、《微子》、《金滕》等篇，大多是古文学说。
English: Sima Qian's book contains "Shu Dian," "Yugong," "Hong Fan," "Weizi," "Jinteng" and other articles, most of which are about ancient literature.

古文：都尉朝授胶东庸生。
现代文：都尉朝传给胶束庸生。
English: The captaincy was passed on to Yosho Mikutsu.

古文：庸生授清河胡常少子，以明《穀梁春秋》为博士、部刺史，又传《左氏》。
现代文：庸生传给清河胡常少子，因通晓《谷梁春秋》做了博士、部刺史，又传授《左氏》。
English: Yong Sheng passed it on to the younger son of Qinghe Hu Chang, and because of his knowledge of "Guliang Spring and Autumn" he made a doctorate, a history of the department, and also taught "Zao Shi."

古文：常授虢徐敖。
现代文：胡常传给虢徐敖。
English: Hu Chang passed it on to Zou Xuqi.

古文：敖为右扶风掾，又传《毛诗》，授王璜、平陵涂惲子真。
现代文：徐敖是右扶风掾，又传授《毛诗》，传给王璜、平陵涂惮子真。
English: Xu Yao was the right hand of Fu Feng Yao, and also taught "Mao Poetry," which was passed on to Wang Yao and Pingling Tu Shao Zizhen.

古文：子真授河南桑钦君长。
现代文：子真传给河南桑钦君长。
English: Zizhen was passed on to Henan Sanqin Junlong.

古文：王莽时，诸学皆立。
现代文：王莽时，各学说都立于学官。
English: In Wang Mang's time, all doctrines were based on scholarly officials.

古文：刘歆为国师，璜、惲等皆贵显。
现代文：刘歆是国师，王璜、涂惮等都很显贵。
English: Liu Xuan is the national teacher, Wang Xuan, Tu Shu and so on are very distinguished.

古文：世所传《百两篇》者，出东莱张霸，分析合二十九篇以为数十，又采《左氏传》、《书叙》为作首尾，凡百二篇。
现代文：世上流传的《百两篇》，出自束莱张霸，把二十九篇分为数十篇，又采用《左氏传》、《书叙》作为首尾，共一百零二篇。
English: The world-famous "Hundred and Two Stories" was written by Zucai Zhangba. He divided the 29 stories into dozens, and used "The Biography of Zuo" and "The Story of Books" as the beginning and end, for a total of 102 stories.

古文：篇或数简，文意浅陋。
现代文：有的篇多次简省，文意浅陋。
English: Some articles have been simplified many times, and the literary meaning is shallow.

古文：成帝时求其古文者，霸以能为《百两》征，以中书校之，非是。
现代文：成帝时寻求古文，张霸因能作《百两》被征，用秘府藏书校对，两者不一致。
English: When he became emperor, he sought out ancient texts. Zhang Ba was conscripted for his ability to write "The Hundred and Two" and used the secret library to proofread. The two are inconsistent.

古文：霸辞受父，父有弟子尉氏樊并。
现代文：张霸的文辞受教于父，其父有弟子尉氏樊并。
English: Zhang Ba's words were taught to him by his father, who had a disciple, Li Jizhi.

古文：时，太中大夫平当、侍御史周敞劝上存之。
现代文：当时太中大夫子当、侍御史周敞劝皇上立此学。
English: At that time, Taichung Daifu Zi Dang and chamberlain Zhou Rong advised the emperor to establish this school.

古文：后樊并谋反，乃黜其书。
现代文：后来樊并谋反，便罢黜其书。
English: Later, he plotted a rebellion, and his book was banned.

古文：申公，鲁人也。
现代文：申公，鲁人。
English: Shen Gong, Lu Ren.

古文：少与楚元王交俱事齐人浮丘伯受《诗》。汉兴，高祖过鲁，申公以弟子从师入见于鲁南宫。
现代文：年轻时和楚五王变都事奉查学《诗》。坠兴起，直担经过鲁，吏公以弟子身份随老师在鲁南宫进见。
English: When he was young, he studied "Poetry" with Chu Wu Wang Zhen. After the fall and rise, he passed through Lu, and the officials followed the teacher as disciples in the Lunang Palace.

古文：吕太后时，浮丘伯在长安，楚元王遣子郢与申公俱卒学。
现代文：吕太后时，迳丘伯在垦室，楚五王派儿子型郢和吏公一起完成学业。
English: When Empress Dowager Lv was in the imperial palace, King Chu V sent his son, Emperor Qianlong, to complete his studies together with the officials.

古文：元王薨，郢嗣立为楚王，令申公傅太子戊。
现代文：五王薨，塑坠继立为茎王，令史公作太子刘戊的师傅。
English: The five kings of wrenches, the plastic pendant successively became the king of stems, and Shigong was the master of the prince Liu Wu.

古文：戊不好学，病申公。
现代文：刘戊不好学，憎恨申公。
English: Liu Wu is not good at studying and hates Shen Gong.

古文：及戊立为王，胥靡申公。
现代文：等刘戊立为王，让申公服胥靡之役。
English: Wait for Liu Er to be crowned king and let Shen Gong take the lead.

古文：申公愧之，归鲁退居家教，终身不出门。
现代文：申公羞愧，回鲁隐居家中教书，终身不出门。
English: Ashamed, Shen Gong returned to Lu to teach in seclusion at home, never leaving the house.

古文：复谢宾客，独王命召之乃往。
现代文：又谢绝宾客，衹有王命召他才去。
English: He also declined the invitation, saying that he would only go if the king asked him to.

古文：弟子自远方至受业者千余人，申公独以《诗经》为训故以教，亡传，疑者则阙弗传。
现代文：弟子们从远方来学习的有一千多人，申公衹用《诗经》训诂教授，不作传解，有疑问处便缺疑不传授。
English: There are more than a thousand disciples who come from far away to study. Shen Gongjun uses the "Song of Songs" to teach, not to interpret, and if there is any doubt, it will not be taught.

古文：兰陵王臧既从受《诗》，已通，事景帝为太子少傅，免去。
现代文：兰陵王臧跟他学《诗》，已精通，事奉景帝做了太子少傅，免职。
English: Lanling Wang Yao studied "Poetry" with him and became proficient. He served the Emperor Jing as the young prince and was relieved of his duties.

古文：武帝初即位，臧乃上书宿卫，累迁，一岁至郎中令。
现代文：武帝刚即位，王臧便上书宿卫，多次升迁，一年官至郎中令。
English: As soon as Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, Wang Xi was promoted to Shushouwei, promoted several times, and was promoted to the position of vice-commander within a year.

古文：及代赵绾亦尝受《诗》申公，为御史大夫。
现代文：另外代赵绾也曾向申公学《诗》，官为御史大夫。
English: In addition, Zhao Wei also studied "Poetry" from Shen Gong and was appointed as a goshi daifu.

古文：绾、臧请立明堂以朝诸侯，不能就其事，乃言师申公。
现代文：赵绾、王臧请求建立明堂朝见诸侯，事不能成，便向皇上推荐申公。
English: Zhao Zhen and Wang Zhen requested the establishment of the Ming Hall to meet the princes, but it could not be done, so they recommended the petition to the emperor.

古文：于是上使使束帛加璧，安车以蒲裹轮，驾驷迎申公，弟子二人乘轺传从。
现代文：于是皇上派使者带着束帛加以玉璧，用蒲裹安车之轮，驾着四匹马迎接申公，两个弟子乘朝传随从。
English: Therefore, the emperor sent an envoy with a satchel and a jade brooch, riding a four-horse chariot pulled by a horse-drawn carriage, and accompanied by two disciples.

古文：至，见上，上问治乱之事。
现代文：到朝廷后，拜见皇上，皇上询问国家兴衰的事。
English: After arriving at the Imperial Court, he met with the Emperor, who asked him about the rise and fall of the country.

古文：申公时已八十余，老，对曰： 为治者不在多言，顾力行何如耳。 
现代文：申公当时已八十多岁，年老，答道： 国家安定不在于多说，要看怎样勉力行事。 
English: Shen Gong, who was already in his eighties at the time, replied: National stability does not depend on how much we talk, but on how hard we work.

古文：是时，上方好文辞，见申公对，默然。
现代文：当时皇上正喜好文辞，听了申公的回答，默然不语。
English: At that time, the emperor was fond of literature, and listened to the reply of the petitioner, silently.

古文：然已招致，即以为太中大夫，舍鲁邸，议明堂事。
现代文：然而已经招来了，便任命为太中大夫，住在鲁邸，商议明堂的事。
English: However, he had already been summoned, and was appointed to the post of Grand Vice-Minister of Health, living in the Lu residence and discussing the matter of the Ming-tang.

古文：窦太后喜《老子》言，不说儒术，得绾、臧之过，以让上曰： 此欲复为新垣平也！ 
现代文：太皇窦太后喜欢《老子》的言论，不喜欢儒术，找出赵绾、王臧的过失，来责备皇上说： 这是想再做新垣平！ 
English: The Empress Dowager Dou liked the speech of "Lao Zi" and did not like Confucianism. She found out the faults of Zhao Zi and Wang Zi to reproach the emperor and said, "This is trying to be a new Qiping!"

古文：上因废明堂事，下绾、臧吏，皆自杀。
现代文：皇上于是废止明堂之事，把赵绾、王臧交给司吏审讯，都自杀了。
English: The emperor then abolished the Myeongdong and handed Zhao Ye and Wang Ye over to the magistrates for interrogation, and they both committed suicide.

古文：申公亦病免归，数年卒。
现代文：申公也以病免官回家，几年后死去。
English: Shen Gong was also sent home due to illness, and died a few years later.

古文：弟子为博士十余人，孔安国至临淮太守，周霸胶西内史，夏宽城阳内史，砀鲁赐东海太守，兰陵缪生长沙内史，徐偃胶西中尉，邹人阙门庆忌胶东内史，其治官民皆有廉节称。
现代文：弟子做博士的十几人，孔安国官至临淮太守，周霸做胶西内史，夏宽做城阳内史，碣鲁赐做束海太守，兰陵缪生做长沙内史，徐偃做胶西中尉，邹人阙门庆忌做胶东内史，他们治理官民都被称颂为廉洁有节操。
English: More than a dozen of his disciples became doctors, including Kong An, a state official, and Lin Huai, the Empress Dowager; Zhou Ba, the Inner History of Jiaoxi; Xia Guang, the Inner History of Chengyang; Jialu Zhi, the Inner History of Sokhai; Lanling Muxian, the Inner History of Changsha; Xu Wei, the Inner History of Jiaoxi; and Xuanren Yimen Qingyi, the Inner History of Jiaodong. Their governance of officials and the people was praised as being clean and disciplined.

古文：其学官弟子行虽不备，而至于大夫、郎、掌故以百数。
现代文：其弟子虽未立于学官，但官至大夫、郎、掌故的数以百计。
English: Although his disciples did not become academic officials, there are hundreds of officials ranging from doctors, brothers, and brothers-in-law.

古文：申公卒以《诗》、《春秋》授，而瑕丘江公尽能传之，徒众最盛。
现代文：申公最终传授《诗》、《春秋》，而瑕丘江公能全部传解，弟子最多。
English: Shen Gong eventually taught "Poetry" and "Spring and Autumn," while Ke Qiu Jiang Gong was able to interpret all of them, and had the most disciples.

古文：及鲁许生、免中徐公，皆守学教授。
现代文：到鲁许生、免中徐公，都谨守所学教授。
English: Even Lu Xi Sheng and Zhenzhong Xu Gong are professors of the institute.

古文：韦贤治《诗》，事大江公及许生，又治《礼》，至丞相。
现代文：韦贤研究《诗》，事奉大江公和许生，又研究《礼》，官至丞相。
English: Wei Xian studied "Poetry" and served Dajiang and Xu Sheng. He also studied "Rite" and rose to the position of chancellor.

古文：传子玄成，以淮阳中尉论石渠，后亦至丞相。
现代文：传给儿子玄成，以淮阳中尉身份讲论于石渠，后来也官至丞相。
English: Passed down to his son, Xuanzheng, he lectured at Shiqu as a lieutenant of Huaiyang and later rose to the rank of chancellor.

古文：玄成及兄子赏以《诗》授哀帝，至大司马车骑将军，自有传。
现代文：玄成和哥哥的儿子韦赏用《诗》教授哀帝，官至大司马车骑将军，自己有传。
English: Hyunseong and his brother's son Wei used the "Poetry" professor, Paedei, the official to the grand secretary, the carriage riding general, and had their own legend.

古文：由是《鲁诗》有韦氏学。
现代文：从此《鲁诗》有韦氏学。
English: From then on, "Lu Shi" had Wei's learning.

古文：王式字翁思，东平新桃人也。
现代文：王式字翁思，束平新桃人。
English: The royal-style characters are Weng Si and Sok Ping Xin Taojin.

古文：事免中徐公及许生。
现代文：事奉免中徐公和许生。
English: Xu Gong and Xu Sheng were exempted from service.

古文：式为昌邑王师。
现代文：王式做了吕邑王的老师。
English: Wang Xi became the teacher of King Lyu.

古文：昭帝崩，昌邑王嗣立，以行淫乱废，昌邑群臣皆下狱诛，唯中尉王吉、郎中令龚遂以数谏减死论。
现代文：昭帝崩，昌邑王继立，因行为淫乱被废，昌邑的群臣都下狱被杀，衹有中尉王吉、郎中令龚遂因多次劝谏而论罪减死。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhao, Wang Jili of Changyi was dethroned for adultery, and all of Changyi's vassals were sent to prison and killed. As a result, some of them, including Lieutenant Wang Ji and his second-in-command, Linyi, had their sentences commuted due to repeated persuasion.

古文：式系狱当死，治事使者责问曰： 师何以无谏书？ 
现代文：王式被拘系在狱应当处死，处理此事的使者责问道： 老师为什么没有写谏书呢？ 
English: Wang Xi was detained in prison and should be put to death, and the envoy in charge of the matter asked: Why didn't the teacher write a book?

古文：式对曰： 臣以《诗》三百五篇朝夕授王，至于忠臣孝子之篇，未尝不为王反复诵之也；至于危亡失道之君，未尝不流涕为王深陈之也。
现代文：王式回答说： 臣用《诗》三百零五篇早晚教王，讲到忠臣孝子的篇章，没有不为王反复诵读的；讲到危亡无道的君主，没有不流泪为王痛陈的。
English: The king replied, "The 3005 poems of the "Poetry" are used by the vassals to teach the king in the morning and evening. There is no chapter about loyal subjects and filial sons that is not recited for the king. There is no painful chapter about a dying monarch that is not shed tears for the king.

古文：臣以三百五篇谏，是以亡谏书。 
现代文：臣用三百零五篇来劝谏，所以没有谏书。 
English: The minister used three hundred and five articles to persuade him, so there was no book.

古文：使者以闻，亦得减死论，归家不教授。
现代文：使者告诉了皇上，也得以减死论罪，回家不再教授。
English: The emissary told the emperor and was able to commute his death sentence, returning home and no longer teaching.

古文：山阳张长安幼君先事式，后东平唐长宾、沛褚少孙亦来事式，问经数篇，式谢曰： 闻之于师具是矣，自润色之。 
现代文：山东张长安幼君先事奉王式，以后束平唐长宾、沛褚少孙也来事奉王式，请教几篇经，王式辞谢道： 我从老师那裹听来的就是这些，自己润色吧。 
English: Shandong Zhang Chang'an's young prince first served the royal style, and later Sokping Tang Changbin and Pei Yao's young grandson also came to serve the royal style. They asked for a few scriptures, and the royal thank-you speech said: This is what I heard from the teacher, do your own polishing.

古文：不肯复授。
现代文：不肯再教。
English: He doesn't want to teach again.

古文：唐生、褚生应博士弟子选，诣博士，抠衣登堂，颂礼甚严，试诵说，有法，疑者丘盖不言。
现代文：唐生、褚生应选博士弟子，到了博士那裹，提衣登堂，容仪严整，考试诵释，很得法，有疑问的地方就缺疑。
English: Tang Sheng and Hao Sheng should be chosen as doctoral disciples. When they become doctoral students, they should wear formal attire, have a neat appearance, recite the sutras in examinations, and be very proficient in the Fa. If they have any doubts, they should not doubt.

古文：诸博士惊问： 何师？ 对曰： 事式。 
现代文：各位博士惊奇地问他们的老师，回答说事奉王式。
English: The doctors asked their teacher in amazement, and he replied that they should serve the king.

古文：皆素闻其贤，共荐式。
现代文：博士们平时都听说他是贤才，一起推荐王式。
English: Doctors have always heard that he is a genius, and they all recommend him.

古文：诏除下为博士。
现代文：韶令拜为博士。
English: Zou Lingbai became a doctor.

古文：式征来，衣博士衣而不冠，曰： 刑余之人，何宜复充礼官？ 
现代文：王式被征来，穿着博士衣服却不戴帽子，说： 受过刑的人，怎适于再充当礼官？ 
English: "How can someone who has been punished be fit to serve as a ceremonial officer again?" asked Wang Shih, who was conscripted and wore a doctor's robe but no hat.

古文：既至，止舍中，会诸大夫、博士，共持酒肉劳式，皆注意高仰之，博士江公世为《鲁诗》宗，至江公著《孝经说》，心嫉式，谓歌吹诸生曰： 歌《骊驹》。 
现代文：到京后，停在旅舍裹，碰上各位大夫博士，一起带着酒肉慰问王式，都倾心仰慕他。博士江公世代为研究《鲁诗》的宗师，到江公作《孝经说》，心裹嫉妒王式，对歌吹的几个人说： 唱《骊驹》。 
English: After arriving in Beijing, he stopped at a hostel and met with doctors and doctors, and together they brought wine and meat to console Wang Xi, and they all admired him. Dr. Jiang Gong, the master of the "Lu Shi" generation, came to Jiang Gong to write "Xiao Jing Said," and he was jealous of Wang Xi, and said to several people who were singing: Sing "Xiao."

古文：式曰： 闻之于师：客歌《骊驹》，主人歌《客毋庸归》。
现代文：王式说： 我听老师说：客人唱《骊驹》，主人唱《客毋庸归》。
English: Wang Shi said, "I heard the teacher say, 'The guests will sing "Dragonfly," and the host will sing "The Guest Must Return."

古文：今日诸君为主人，日尚早，未可也。 
现代文：今天各位是主人，天还早，不可以。 
English: Today you are the owners, it's still early, it's not allowed.

古文：江翁曰： 经何以言之？ 
现代文：江翁说： 经哪裹这么说？ 
English: Jiang Weng said, "How can you say that?

古文：式曰： 在《曲礼》。 
现代文：王式说： 在《曲礼》。 
English: Wang Shi said, "Singing in "Song of Songs."

古文：江翁曰： 何狗曲也！ 
现代文：江翁说： 这是什么狗曲！ 
English: Jiang Weng said, "What kind of dog song is this!

古文：式耻之，阳醉逷地。
现代文：王式感到羞耻，装醉跌倒。
English: The royal family is ashamed, pretending to be drunk and falling down.

古文：式客罢，让诸生曰： 我本不欲来，诸生强劝我，竟为竖子所辱！ 
现代文：王式等客人散了，责备学生说： 我本不想来，你们强劝我来，竟然被那小子侮辱！ 
English: Wang Shi and the other guests dispersed, and he scolded the students, saying, "I didn't want to come, you urged me to come, and I was insulted by that boy!

古文：遂谢病免归，终于家。
现代文：于是称病辞职回家，死在家裹。
English: So he called in sick, quit his job and went home, where he died.

古文：张生、唐生、褚生皆为博士。
现代文：张生、唐生、褚生都是博士。
English: Zhang Sheng, Tang Sheng and Xing Sheng are all doctors.

古文：张生论石渠，至淮阳中尉。
现代文：张生讲论于石渠，官至淮阳中尉。
English: Zhang Sheng lectured at Shiqu, and was promoted to lieutenant of Huaiyang.

古文：唐生楚太傅。
现代文：唐生是楚太傅。
English: Tang Sheng is Chu Taifu.

古文：由是《鲁诗》有张、唐、褚氏之学。
现代文：从此《鲁诗》有张、唐、褚氏之学。
English: Since then, "Lu Shi" has been studied by Zhang, Tang and Zou.

古文：张生兄子游卿为谏大夫，以《诗》授元帝。
现代文：张生哥哥的儿子游卿是谏大夫，用《诗》教授元帝。
English: Zhang Sheng's brother's son, Youqing, was a doctor of medicine, and he used "Poetry" to teach Emperor Yuan.

古文：其门人琅邪王扶为泗水中尉，授陈留许晏为博士。
现代文：他的门人琅邪王扶是泅水中尉，陈留许晏是博士。
English: His protégé, Zou Yanzhongfu, is a lieutenant in the Navy, and Chen Ruoxu is a doctor.

古文：由是张家有许氏学。
现代文：从此张家有许氏的学说。
English: Since then, the Zhang family has followed the teachings of Xu.

古文：初，薛广德亦事王式，以博士论石渠，授龚舍。
现代文：起初，薛广德也事奉王式，以博士身份讲论于石渠，传授龚舍。
English: At first, Xue Guangde also served the royal style, lecturing on the stone channel as a doctor and teaching the outhouse.

古文：广德至御史大夫，舍泰山太守，皆有传。
现代文：广德官至御史大夫，龚舍为泰山太守，都有传。
English: It has been passed down that he was from a high-ranking official to a doctor of history, and that he was the governor of Mount Taishan.

古文：辕固，齐人也。
现代文：辕固，齐人。
English: Hao Gu, Qi Ren.

古文：以治《诗》孝景时为博士，与黄生争论于上前。
现代文：因研究《诗》在孝景时做了博士，和黄生在皇上面前争论。
English: Because of his research on "Poetry," he earned a doctorate in the time of Xiao Jing, and argued with Huang Sheng in front of the emperor.

古文：黄生曰： 汤、武非受命，乃杀也。 
现代文：黄生说： 汤武不是受命于天，而是杀害其君主而得天下。 
English: Huang Sheng said: Tangwu was not commanded by heaven, but gained the world by killing its monarch.

古文：固曰： 不然。
现代文：辕固说： 不对。
English: Hao Gu said, "That's not right."

古文：夫桀、纣荒乱，天下之心皆归汤、武，汤、武因天下之心而诛桀、纣，桀、纣之民弗为使而归汤、武，汤、武不得已而立。非受命为何？ 
现代文：桀纣淫乱，天下之心都归依汤武，汤武顺应天下之心而杀桀纣，桀纣的百姓不听他们指使而归顺汤武，汤武不得已才即王位，不是受命于天是什么？ 
English: 

古文：黄生曰：  冠虽敝必加于首，履虽新必贯于足。 
现代文：黄生说：  帽子虽破却一定要戴在头上，鞋子虽新却一定要穿在脚上，为什么呢？
English: Huang Sheng said: Although the hat is broken, it must be worn on the head. Although the shoes are new, they must be worn on the feet. Why?

古文：何者？上下之分也。
现代文：这是有上下的分别。
English: There is a difference between the top and the bottom.

古文：今桀、纣虽失道，然君上也；汤、武虽圣，臣下也。
现代文：现在桀纣虽然无道，然而是君上；汤武虽然圣明，却是臣下。
English: Now, although Xing has no way, he is a prince; although Tangwu is a saint, he is a vassal.

古文：夫主有失行，臣不正言匡过以尊天子，反因过而诛之，代立南面，非杀而何？ 
现代文：主上行为不当，臣不直言纠正来尊崇天子，反而因他有过错而杀了他，代替他面南而立，不是杀害君主是什么？ 
English: The lord behaved improperly, the vassal did not forthrightly correct him to honor the heavenly son, but instead killed him because he was at fault, and stood facing south instead of him. What is not killing the monarch?

古文：固曰： 必若云，是高皇帝代秦即天子之位，非邪？ 
现代文：辕固说： 真像你说的，那高皇帝代替秦即天子位，不对吗？ 
English: Hao Gu said, "It's just like you said, isn't it true that Emperor Gao replaced Qin as the Son of Heaven?

古文：于是上曰： 食肉毋食马肝，未为不知味也；言学者毋言汤、武受命，不为愚。 
现代文：于是皇上说： 吃肉不吃马肝，不是不知味道好坏，讲学问的不谈汤武受命，不是愚蠢。 
English: Then the emperor said, "To eat meat without eating horse liver is not to know whether the taste is good or bad, to speak of learning without speaking of Tangwu is not to be stupid.

古文：遂罢。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: So the argument died down.

古文：窦太后好《老子》书，召问固。
现代文：窦太后喜欢《老子》的书，召问辕固。
English: Empress Dowager Dou liked the book "Lao Zi" and called on Deng Guo.

古文：固曰： 此家人言矣。 
现代文：辕固说： 这是仆人的话。 
English: And he said, These are the words of my servant.

古文：太后怒曰： 安得司空城旦书乎！ 
现代文：太后发怒说： 怎么得到司空城旦书呢！ 
English: The empress dowager said angrily, "How did you get hold of Siku Chengdan's book?"

古文：乃使固人圈击彘。
现代文：于是让辕固进猪圈杀猪。
English: So he let Gong Gu into the pigsty to kill the pigs.

古文：上知太后怒，而固直言无罪，乃假固利兵。
现代文：皇上知道太后生气，而辕固直言无罪，便给了辕固锐利的武器。
English: The emperor knew that the empress dowager was angry and that Gong Guo was not guilty, so he gave Gong Guo a sharp weapon.

古文：下，固刺彘正中其心，彘应手而倒。
现代文：下去后，辕固正刺中猪心，猪随手倒下。
English: After going down, Zeng Gu was stabbing the pig's heart, and the pig fell down.

古文：太后默然，亡以复罪。
现代文：太后默然不语，没有再加罪的理由。
English: The empress dowager remained silent. There was no reason to add to her guilt.

古文：后上以固廉直，拜为清河太傅，疾免。
现代文：后来皇上因辕固廉洁耿直，拜为清河太傅，因病免职。
English: Later, the emperor was removed from his post due to illness, after he had been praised for his integrity and honesty, and had been appointed as the Qinghe Taifu.

古文：武帝初即位，复以贤良征。
现代文：武帝刚即位，又以贤良的名义被征。
English: Emperor Wu had just ascended to the throne when he was conscripted in the name of Emperor Xianliang.

古文：诸儒多嫉毁曰固老，罢归之。
现代文：儒士们都嫉妒毁谤说辕固年已老，便罢免让他回家了。
English: The Confucianists were jealous and slandered him as being too old, so they dismissed him and let him go home.

古文：时，固已九十余矣。
现代文：这时辕固已经九十多岁了。
English: At this time, Yan Guo was already more than ninety years old.

古文：公孙弘亦征，仄目而事固。
现代文：公孙弘也被征用，事奉辕固不敢正视。
English: Gongsunhong was also requisitioned, but he did not dare to face it.

古文：固曰： 公孙子，务正学以言，无曲学以阿世！ 
现代文：辕固说： 公孙子，一定要按照儒家学说来说话，不要曲意学说来逢迎世人！ 
English: Hao Gu said to him: Mr. Gongsun, be sure to discuss things with honest knowledge, and do not use evil words to cater to the world.

古文：诸齐以《诗》显贵，皆固之弟子也。
现代文：齐诸生因《诗》显贵，都是辕固的弟子。
English: All of them were eminent because of "Poetry" and all of them were steadfast disciples.

古文：昌邑太傅夏候始昌最明，自有传。
现代文：昌邑太傅夏侯始昌最精通，自己有传。
English: Changyi Taifu Xia Hou Shichang is the most proficient, and he has his own tradition.

古文：后苍字近君，东海郯人也。事夏侯始昌。
现代文：后苍字近君，东海郯人。事奉夏侯始昌。
English: The Empress Dowager Aza Chikankun, a native of Tokaido, served the summer lord Shisho.

古文：始昌通《五经》，苍亦通《诗》、《礼》，为博士，至少府，授翼奉、萧望之、匡衡。
现代文：登旦通晓《五经》，丘苇也通晓《诗》《礼》，做了博士，官至少府，传授翼奎、芦望之、匡堑。
English: Dengdan was familiar with the "Five Classics," Qiu Zhuang was also familiar with "Poetry" and "Ritual," and he became a doctor, a government official at least, and taught Wing Kui, Lu Wangzhi, and Kuang Qi.

古文：奉为谏大夫，望之前将军，衡丞相，皆有传。
现代文：寡奉是谏大夫，望之是前将军，匡衡为丞相，都有传。
English: It has been said that Dr. Ogihon was a doctor, Nozomu was a former general, and Kuangheng was a prime minister.

古文：衡授琅邪师丹、伏理斿君、颍川满昌君都。
现代文：匡衡传授琅邪师丹、伏理拧君、颖川满昌君都。
English: Kuang Heng teaches the evil sorcerer Dan, the evil sorcerer Fuli, and the evil sorcerer Yingchuan.

古文：君都为詹事，理高密太傅，家世传业。
现代文：君都是詹事，伏理为高密太傅，家中世代传承学业。
English: You are all Zhanji, Fuli is Gaomi Taifu, and your family has passed down your studies for generations.

古文：丹大司空，自有传。
现代文：师丹为大司空，自己有传。
English: Shidan is the grand master of the sky, and he has his own legend.

古文：由是《齐诗》有翼、匡、师、伏之学。
现代文：从此《齐诗》有翼、匡、师、伏之学。
English: Since then, "Qi Shi" has wings, supporters, teachers, and followers.

古文：满昌授九江张邯、琅邪皮容、皆至大官，徒众尤盛。
现代文：满昌传给九江张邯、琅邪皮容，都做了大官，门徒很多。
English: Manchang was passed down to Jiujiang Zhang Xuan and Zou Yapirong, both of whom became high-ranking officials and had many disciples.

古文：韩婴，燕人也。
现代文：韩婴，燕人。
English: Korean baby, swallows.

古文：孝文时为博士，景帝时至常山太傅。
现代文：孝文时做博士，景帝时官至常山太傅。
English: He was a doctor at the time of Emperor Xiaowen, and an official at the time of Emperor Jing.

古文：婴推诗人之意，而作内、外《传》数万言，其语颇与齐、鲁间殊，然归一也。
现代文：韩婴推察诗人的意思，而作《内传》《外传》数万字，辞语和齐、鲁之地的稍有不同，但旨义一致。
English: Han Jiao deduced the poet's meaning, and wrote tens of thousands of words of "Introduction" and "Extracts." The words are slightly different from those of Qi and Lu, but the meaning is the same.

古文：淮南贲生受之。
现代文：淮南贲生向他学习。
English: Huainan Xinsheng was apprenticed to him.

古文：燕、赵间言《诗》者由韩生。
现代文：燕赵之间讲《诗》的出自韩生。
English: The line about "poetry" between Yan and Zhao comes from Hansheng.

古文：韩生亦以《易》授人，推《易》意而为之传。
现代文：韩生也教人《易》，推察《易》的意思而作传解。
English: Han Sheng also teaches "Yi" and interprets the meaning of "Yi."

古文：燕、赵间好《诗》，故其《易》微，唯韩氏自传之。
现代文：燕赵之间喜欢《诗》，所以《易》不受重视，衹有韩氏自己传授。
English: Yan and Zhao like "Poetry," so "Easy" is not valued, but is taught by Han himself.

古文：武帝时，婴尝与董仲舒论于上前，其人精悍，处事分明，仲舒不能难也。
现代文：武帝时，韩婴曾和董仲舒在皇上面前争论，他为人精明强悍，处事分明，仲舒不能难倒他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, Han Zi had an argument with Dong Zhongshu in front of the emperor. He was a shrewd and strong man, and he was very clear in his actions. Zhongshu could not stump him.

古文：后其孙商为博士。
现代文：后来他的孙子韩商做了博士。
English: Later, his grandson, Han Shang, became a doctor.

古文：孝宣时，涿郡韩生其后也，以《易》征，待诏殿中，曰： 所受《易》即先太傅所传也。
现代文：孝宣时，涿郡韩生是他的后代，因《易》被征，在殿中等待诏令，说： 所学的《易》就是已故太傅传授的。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaoxuan, Han Sheng, a descendant of Emperor Xiaoxuan, who was conscripted because of Yi, waited for the imperial edict in the palace and said, "The Yi that I learned was taught by the late Taifu.

古文：尝受《韩诗》，不如韩氏《易》深，太傅故专传之。 
现代文：曾学《韩诗》，不如韩氏《易》精深，所以太傅专门传授它。 
English: He had studied "Han Poetry," but it was not as profound as Han's "Yi," so Taifu specially taught it.

古文：司隶校尉盖宽饶本受《易》于孟喜，见涿韩生说《易》而好之，即更从受焉嘒
现代文：司隶校尉盖宽饶本来向孟喜学《易》，见涿韩生讲《易》而很喜欢，便改向他学习。
English: Colonel Gaikangrao originally learned "Yi" from Meng Xi, but he liked "Yi" from Han Sheng, so he decided to learn from him instead.

古文：赵子，河内人也。
现代文：赵子，河内人。
English: Zhao Zi, from Hanoi.

古文：事燕韩生，授同郡蔡谊。
现代文：事奉燕韩生，传授同郡蔡谊。
English: Serving Yan Han Sheng, teaching fellow county Cai Rui.

古文：谊至丞相，自有传。
现代文：蔡谊官至丞相，自己有传。
English: Cai Jia was a high-ranking official up to the post of chancellor.

古文：谊授同郡食子公与王吉。
现代文：蔡谊传给同郡食子公和王吉。
English: Cai's friendship was passed on to the county's Shishi Gong and Wang Ji.

古文：吉为昌邑王中尉，自有传。
现代文：王吉是昌邑王的中尉，自己有传。
English: Wang Ji is the lieutenant of Changyi Wang, and has a legend of his own.

古文：食生为博士，授泰山栗丰。
现代文：食生是博士，传授泰山栗丰。
English: The food student is a doctor, taught by Taishan Kuritoyo.

古文：吉授淄川长孙顺。
现代文：王吉传给淄川王长孙顺。
English: Wang Ji was passed down to the eldest grandson of the King of Li River, Shun.

古文：顺为博士，丰部刺史。
现代文：长孙顺是博士，栗丰为部刺史。
English: The eldest grandson, Shun, is a doctor, while Kuritoyo is a historian.

古文：由是《韩诗》有王、食、长孙之学。
现代文：从此《韩诗》有王、食、长孙的学说。
English: Since then, "Hangul Poetry" has had the doctrine of the king, food, and the eldest grandson.

古文：丰授山阳张就，顺授东海发福，皆至大官，徒众尤盛。
现代文：栗丰传给山阳张就，长孙顺传给东海发福，都做了大官，门徒很多。
English: Li Feng was passed down to Shanyang Zhang Rong, and his eldest grandson Shun was passed down to Donghai Fafu, both of whom became high-ranking officials and had many disciples.

古文：毛公，赵人也。
现代文：毛公，赵人。
English: Mao Gong, Zhao Ren.

古文：治《濰》，为河间献王博士，授同国贯长卿。
现代文：研究《诗》，是河间献王的博士，传授同国的贯旦卿。
English: He studied "Poetry" and was awarded the title of "Doctor of Poetry" by the king of Kawama, and taught it to his compatriot, Tsuchidan Kyo.

古文：长卿授解延年。
现代文：垦趔传给解延年。
English: passed on to the extended year.

古文：延年为阿武令，授徐敖。
现代文：廷生是匝宝令，传授涂遨。
English: Ting Sheng is a disciple of Bao Ling, and teaches painting techniques.

古文：敖授九江陈侠，为王莽讲学大夫。
现代文：途茎传授九红速堡，是王莽的讲学大夫。
English: He is the lecturer of Wang Mang, who teaches Jiuhong Speed Castle.

古文：由是言《毛诗》者，本之徐敖。
现代文：从此讲《毛诗》的，都出白徐敖之说。
English: From now on, when "Mao Shi" is recited, everything comes out white, said Xu Yanzhong.

古文：汉兴，鲁高堂生传《士礼》十七篇，而鲁徐生善为颂。
现代文：汉兴起后，鲁高堂生传授《士礼》十七篇，而鲁徐生善于演习礼仪。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, Lu Gaodangsheng taught seventeen chapters of "Ji Li," and Lu Xusheng was good at practicing etiquette.

古文：孝文时，徐生以颂为礼官大夫，传子至孙延、襄。
现代文：孝文帝的时候，徐生因此做了礼官大夫，传授儿子到孙子徐延、徐襄。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Xu Sheng therefore became a ceremonial doctor, teaching his son to his grandsons Xu Yan and Xu Xiang.

古文：襄，其资性善为颂，不能通经；延颇能，未善也。
现代文：徐襄天生资质善于演习礼仪，却不能通晓经；徐延稍能通经，但不擅长。
English: Xu Xiang is naturally good at practicing etiquette, but he can't read the sutra; Xu Yan can read the sutra a little, but he's not good at acting.

古文：襄亦以颂为大夫，至广陵内史。
现代文：徐襄也因此而做了大夫，官至广陵内史。
English: As a result, Xu Xiang also became a doctor, rising to the rank of Guangling Inner Historian.

古文：延及徐氏弟子公户满意、桓生、单资皆为礼官大夫。
现代文：徐延和徐氏弟子公户满意、桓生、单次都是礼官大夫。
English: Xu Yan and the disciples of the Xu family have been satisfied with the public households, and have been the doctors of etiquette for a single time.

古文：而瑕丘萧奋以《礼》至淮阳太守。
现代文：而瑕丘萧奋因通晓《礼》官至淮阳太守。
English: However, because of his knowledge of the "Rite of Spring," Guekiu Xiaofeng rose to the position of Huaiyang's governor-general.

古文：诸言《礼》为颂者由徐氏。
现代文：各家讲《礼》演习礼仪的都出自徐氏。
English: All the schools that teach the "Rite" exercise etiquette are from the Xu family.

古文：孟卿，东海人也。
现代文：孟卿，东海人。
English: Meng Qing, from the East China Sea.

古文：事萧奋，以授后仓、鲁闾丘卿。
现代文：事奉萧奋，然后传授后仓、鲁间丘卿。
English: He served Xiao Fen, and then taught Houcang and Luma Qiuqing.

古文：仓说《礼》数万言，号曰《后氏曲台记》，授沛闻人通汉子方、梁戴德延君、戴圣次君、沛庆普孝公。
现代文：后仓解释《礼》数万字，号为《后氏曲台记》，传给沛闻人通汉子方、梁戴德延君、戴圣次君、沛庆普孝公。
English: Houcang interpreted tens of thousands of words of "Li," and the title was "Hou's Music Table," which was passed down to the famous scholars Han Zifang, Liang Dai De Yanjun, Dai Sheng Jijun, and Pei Qing Pu Xiaogong.

古文：孝公为东平太傅。
现代文：孝公是东乎太。
English: Filial piety is the most important virtue.

古文：德号大戴，为信都太傅；圣号小戴，以博士论石渠，至九江太守。
现代文：戴德号为大戴，是信都太傅；戴圣号为小戴，以博士身份讲论于石渠，官至九江太守。
English: Dadego was Dai Dai, and Shintou Taifu; Dai Shenggo was Xiao Dai, and lectured in Shiqu as a doctor, and was appointed as the Governor of Jiujiang.

古文：由是《礼》有大戴、小戴、庆氏之学。
现代文：从此《礼》有大戴、小戴、庆氏的学说。
English: Since then, "Rite" has had the doctrines of Dai Dai, Xia Dai, and Kei.

古文：通汉以太子舍人论石渠，至中山中尉。
现代文：通漠以太子舍人身份讲论于石渠，官至中山中尉。
English: Tongmo Etsuko talks about her identity as a renunciant in the stone canal, from the officer to Lieutenant Zhongshan.

古文：普授鲁夏侯敬，又传族子咸，为豫章太守。
现代文：庆普传给鲁夏侯敬，又传给族子庆咸，做了豫章太守。
English: Qing Pu was passed down to Lu Xia Hou Jing, and then passed down to the son of Qing Xian, and became the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：大戴授琅邪徐良斿卿，为博士、州牧、郡守，家世传业。
现代文：大戴传给琅邪徐良拧卿，做博士、州牧、郡守，家中世代传授。
English: Dai Dai was passed down to Yuya Xu Liangren as a doctor, state herdsman and county magistrate, and was passed down from generation to generation in his family.

古文：小戴授梁人桥仁季卿、杨荣子孙。
现代文：小戴传给梁人桥仁季卿、杨荣子孙。
English: Xiao Dai was passed down to the descendants of Liang Renqiao and Yang Rong.

古文：仁为大鸿胪，家世传业，荣琅邪太守。
现代文：桥仁是大鸿胪，家中世代传授，杨荣为琅邪太守。
English: Qiao Ren was a great scholar, passed down from generation to generation in his family, while Yang Rong was the evil emperor.

古文：由是大戴有徐氏，小戴有桥、杨氏之学。
现代文：从此大戴有徐氏之学，小戴有桥氏、杨氏之学。
English: From then on, Dai had the learning of Xu, and Xiao had the learning of Qiao and Yang.

古文：胡母生字子都，齐人也。
现代文：胡母生字子都，齐人。
English: Hu Mousheng Zizi Du, Qi Ren.

古文：治《公羊春秋》，为景帝博士。
现代文：研究《公羊春秋》，是景帝博士。
English: It was Dr. Jing Di who researched "Ram Spring and Autumn."

古文：与董仲舒同业，仲舒著书称其德。
现代文：和董仲舒学业相同。仲舒写文章称扬他的德行。
English: He has the same academic background as Dong Zhongshu. Zhongshu wrote an article praising his virtue.

古文：年老，归教于齐，齐之言《春秋》者宗事之，公孙弘亦颇受焉。
现代文：年老，回家在齐教书，齐讲《春秋》的人把他作为宗师事奉，公孙弘也多向他学习。
English: In his old age, he went home to teach in Qi, and the people who taught "Spring and Autumn" in Qi served him as a guru. Gongsun Hong also learned a lot from him.

古文：而董生为江都相，自有传。
现代文：而董生是江都相，自己有传。
English: But Dong Sheng is Jiangdu Xiang, and he has his own legend.

古文：弟子遂之者，兰陵褚大、东平赢公、广川段仲、温吕步舒。
现代文：弟子名成位达的，有兰陵褚大，柬平羸公，广！段仲，温吕步舒。
English: Disciples who have reached the highest level of fame include Lanling 大, Kambod Ping 公, Guang! 段仲, and Wen Lvbu Shu.

古文：大至梁相，步舒丞相长史，唯赢公守学不失师法，为昭帝谏大夫，授东海孟卿、鲁眭孟。
现代文：褚大官至梁相，步舒为丞相长史，衹有嬴公谨守学业未失师法，做了昭帝的谏大夫，传授束海孟卿、鲁眭孟。
English: Zou Daikan became Liang Xiang, Bu Shu became the long history of the chancellor, Zou Youqong kept his studies and did not lose his teaching methods, and became the doctor of Zhao Di, teaching Zhuhai Mengqing and Lu Yimeng.

古文：孟为符节令，坐说灾异诛，自有传。
现代文：眭孟是符节令，因解说灾异被杀，自己有传。
English: Yao Meng was a herald of the festival. He was killed for explaining the calamity, and it is said that he himself was killed.

古文：严彭祖字公子，东海下邳人也。
现代文：严彭祖字公子，束海下邳人。
English: Yan Pengzu's character, Prince, is played by Sokkaishimo Shonin.

古文：与颜安乐俱事眭孟。
现代文：和颜安乐都事奉眭孟。
English: Peace, tranquility, and happiness are all served by the gongmen.

古文：孟弟子百余人，唯彭祖、安乐为明，质问疑谊，各持所见。
现代文：眭孟弟子一百多人，衹有彭祖、安乐最精通，提问题疑义，各有见解。
English: There are more than a hundred disciples of Zou Meng, including Peng Zu, the most proficient in Anle, who ask questions and doubts, and have their own opinions.

古文：孟曰： 《春秋》之意，在二子矣！ 
现代文：眭孟说： 《春秋》的意旨，在这两个人了！ 
English: Yao Meng said, "The meaning of "Spring and Autumn" begins with these two people!"

古文：孟死，彭祖、安乐各颛门教授。
现代文：眭孟死后，彭祖、安乐各自专为一家教授。
English: After Yao Meng's death, Peng Zu and An Le each became a professor.

古文：由是《公羊春秋》有颜、严之学。
现代文：从此《公羊春秋》有颜、严的学说。
English: From then on, "Ram Spring and Autumn" has a beautiful, strict doctrine.

古文：彭祖为宣帝博士，至河南郡太守。
现代文：彭祖是宣帝博士，官至河南、束郡太守。
English: Peng Zu was a scholar of Emperor Xuanzong, and served as the governor of Henan Province and the governor of Sokun County.

古文：以高第入为左冯翊，迁太子太傅，廉直不事权贵。
现代文：因高第入朝为左冯翊，升任太子太傅，廉直不事奉权贵。
English: Because Gao Dai entered the imperial court as Zuo Fengyu, he was promoted to Prince Taifu. He was honest and did not serve the powerful.

古文：或说曰： 天时不胜人事，君以不修小礼曲意，亡贵人左右之助，经谊虽高，不至宰相。
现代文：有人劝说道： 天命不能胜任人事，您因为不行小礼曲意，没有贵人左右帮助，经义虽高深，也做不到宰相。
English: Some people tried to persuade him, saying, "Mandate of Heaven cannot be competent in personnel affairs. You cannot be a prime minister without the help of nobles because you cannot be polite. Although you are a scholar, you cannot be a prime minister."

古文：愿少自勉强！ 
现代文：希望您稍为勉强一下自己！ 
English: I hope you can pull yourself together a bit!

古文：彭祖曰： 凡通经术，固当修行先王之道，何可委曲从俗，苟求富贵乎！ 
现代文：彭祖说： 大凡通晓经术，本应修行先王大道，怎么能委曲随俗，苟且求取富贵呢！ 
English: Peng Zu said, "If you are a great scholar of the sutras, you should have practiced the Way of the Ancestors. How can you follow the ways of the world and seek wealth?

古文：彭祖竟以太傅官终。
现代文：彭祖最终任太傅官一直到死。
English: Peng Zu eventually served as Taifu official until his death.

古文：援琅邪王中，为元帝少府，家世传业。
现代文：传授琅邪王中，做了元帝少府，家中世代传授。
English: Taught in the middle of the evil king, did the young emperor of the Yuan Dynasty, and taught in the family for generations.

古文：中授同郡公孙文、东门云。
现代文：王中传授同郡公孙文、柬门云。
English: Wang Zhong teaches Gongsunwen and Cammenyun from the same county.

古文：云为荆州刺史，文东平太傅，徒众尤盛。
现代文：束门云是荆州刺史，公孙文是东平太傅，门徒特别多。
English: Sokmenyun is Jingzhou's history, Gongsunwen is Dongping Taifu, and there are a lot of disciples.

古文：云坐为江贼拜辱命，下狱诛。
现代文：束门云因给江贼下拜辱失君命，下狱被杀。
English: Sokumen Yun lost his life because he bowed down to the traitors and was killed in prison.

古文：颜安乐字公孙，鲁国薛人，眭孟姊子也。
现代文：颜安乐字公孙，鲁国薛人，眭孟姐姐的儿子。
English: Yan Anle Zi Gongsun, the son of Lu Guo Xue Ren, the son of Yao Meng's sister.

古文：家贫，为学精力，官至齐郡太守丞，后为仇家所杀。
现代文：家中贫寒，治学专心致力，官至齐郡太守丞，后来被仇家杀害。
English: His family was poor, but he devoted himself to his studies and rose to the position of Qi County grand marshal. Later, he was killed by his enemies.

古文：安乐授淮阳泠丰次君、淄川任公。公为少府，丰淄川太守。
现代文：安乐传授淮阳泠丰次君、淄川任公，任公是少府，泠丰是淄川太守。
English: Huaiyang Jianfeng Zijun, Jianchuan Rengu, Rengu is a minor prefect, Jianfeng is the governor of Jianchuan.

古文：由是颜家有泠、任之学。
现代文：从此颜家有泠、任之学。
English: From then on, Yan's family had no choice but to let him study.

古文：始贡禹事嬴公，成于眭孟，至御史大夫，疏广事孟卿，至太子太傅，皆自有传。
现代文：开始贡禹事奉嬴公，后在眭孟处学成，官至御史大夫，疏广事奉孟卿，官至太子太傅，都自己有传。
English: At the beginning, Gong Yu served King Meng, and later he studied at King Meng's office. He was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, Sogang served King Meng, and he was promoted to the position of Prince Daifu.

古文：广授琅邪管路，路为御史中丞。
现代文：疏广传授琅邪筅路，筅路是御史中丞。
English: It is said that the path of those who learn from others is the path of those who learn from themselves, and the path of those who learn from others is the path of those who learn from others.

古文：禹授颍川堂溪惠，惠授泰山冥都，都为丞相史。
现代文：亘垂传授头皿堂昼缠，堂垩晅传授泰山冥都，冥都是丞相史。
English: Watanabe taught Tosa-do in the afternoon, Dojo-do in the morning, Taizan-do in the afternoon, and Josho-do in the afternoon.

古文：都与路又事颜安乐，故颜氏复有管、冥之学。
现代文：冥都和筅路又事奉趣室銮，所以垄压又有笺、墓之学。
English: Hideto and Kushiro also serve as fun rooms, so the pressure of the ridge has a ripple, the study of the tomb.

古文：路授孙宝，为大司农，自有传。
现代文：差路传授逐宝，做大司农，自己有传。
English: The poor way to teach is to follow the treasure, and to be a great farmer is to have one's own teaching.

古文：丰授马宫、琅邪左咸。
现代文：泠丰传授马宫、琅邪左咸。
English: Zou Feng taught Ma Gong, and Zou Yanzhong taught Zuo Xian.

古文：咸为郡守九卿，徒众尤盛。
现代文：左咸是郡守九卿，门徒特别多。
English: Zuo Xian is one of the nine county governors, and has a large number of disciples.

古文：宫至大司徒，自有传。
现代文：马宫官至大司徒，自己有传。
English: Ma Gongguan to Daisetsu, he has his own legend.

古文：瑕丘江公，受《穀梁春秋》及《诗》于鲁申公，传子至孙为博士。
现代文：瑕丘江公跟鲁申公学习《谷梁春秋》和《诗》，传给儿子到孙子做了博士。
English: Koichujiang studied "Guliang Spring and Autumn" and "Poetry" with Rushen, and passed it down to his son until his grandson became a doctor.

古文：武帝时，江公与董仲舒并。
现代文：选查时，逗公和董仲舒齐名。
English: At the time of the investigation, Zhaogong and Dong Zhongshu were equally famous.

古文：仲舒通《五经》，能持论，善属文。
现代文：处蟹通晓《五经》，能立论，善于写文章。
English: He is familiar with the "Five Classics," able to make arguments, and good at writing articles.

古文：江公呐于口，上使与仲舒议，不如仲舒。
现代文：辽公言语迟钝，皇上叫他和件：舒辩论，不如仲舒。
English: Liao Gong's speech was sluggish, and the emperor called him to a dispute: Shu debate, it is not as good as Zhongshu.

古文：而丞相公孙弘本为《公羊》学，比辑其议，卒用董生。
现代文：而丞相公孙弘本来研究《公羊》学，排列编辑其义，最终录用董生。
English: But the prime minister, Sun Hong, originally studied the "Ram" school, arranged and edited its meaning, and eventually hired the director.

古文：于是上因尊《公羊》家，诏太子受《公羊春秋》，由是《公羊》大兴。
现代文：于是皇上就尊崇《公羊》家，韶令太子学《公羊春秋》，从此《公羊》兴盛。
English: As a result, the emperor respected the "Ram" family, and ordered the prince to study "Ram Spring and Autumn," from which "Ram" flourished.

古文：太子既通，复私问《穀梁》而善之。
现代文：太子通晓后，又私自请求《谷梁》而喜欢它。
English: After the prince learned about it, he asked for "Guliang" and liked it.

古文：其后浸微，唯鲁荣广王孙、皓星公二人受焉。
现代文：以后逐渐衰微，衹有鲁荣广王孙、皓星公二入学习。
English: After that, it gradually declined, and only Lu Rong, Guang Wangsun, and Gong Xinggong entered the study.

古文：广尽能传其《诗》、《春秋》，高材捷敏，与《公羊》大师眭孟等论，数困之，故好学者颇复受《穀梁》。
现代文：荣广能全部传解《诗》、《春秋》，才思敏捷，和《公羊》大师眭孟等辩论，多次难住他，所以好学的人又多学《谷梁》。
English: Rong Guang can fully interpret "Poetry" and "Spring and Autumn," he is quick-witted, and he has debated with "Ram" master Hao Meng and so on. He has been stumped many times, so people who are eager to learn will learn more about "Guliang."

古文：沛蔡千秋少君、梁周庆幼君、丁姓子孙皆从广受。
现代文：沛蔡千秋少君、梁周庆幼君、丁姓子孙，都跟荣广学习。
English: Pei Cai Qianqiu Shao Jun, Liang Zhouqing Yujun, Ding Zizhong, all study with Rongguang.

古文：千秋又事皓星公，为学最笃。
现代文：千秋又事奉皓星公，治学最专心。
English: Qianqiu also served the Emperor and devoted himself to his studies.

古文：宣帝即位，闻卫太子好《穀梁春秋》，以问丞相韦贤、长信少府夏侯胜及侍中乐陵侯史高，皆鲁人也，言穀梁子本鲁学，公羊氏乃齐学也，宜兴《穀梁》。
现代文：宣帝即位，听说卫太子喜欢《谷梁春秋》，问丞相韦贤、长信少府夏侯胜和侍中乐陵侯史高，都是鲁人，说谷梁子本是鲁学，公羊氏是齐学，应当兴学《谷梁》。
English: When Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne, he heard that Crown Prince Wei liked "Guliang Spring and Autumn." He asked the prime minister Wei Xian, the vice-premier Changxin Shaofu Xia Hou Sheng, and the vice-premier Le Ling Hou Shigao, all of whom were Lu people, and they said that the son of Gu Liang was originally a Lu scholar, and the Ram clan was a Qi scholar, and that he should be interested in studying "Guliang."

古文：时千秋为郎，召见，与《公羊》家并说，上善《穀梁》说，擢千秋为谏大夫给事中，后有过，左迁平陵令。
现代文：当时千秋是郎，被召见，和《公羊》家一起讲论，皇上喜欢《谷梁》的解释，提升千秋为谏大夫给事中，后来有过失，降为平陵令。
English: At that time, Qianqiu was the younger brother, he was summoned to see him, and he gave a lecture together with the "Ram" family. The emperor liked the explanation of "Guliang" and promoted Qianqiu to the position of "Dr. Zou," but later he made a mistake and was demoted to the position of "Heiling."

古文：复求能为《穀梁》者，莫及千秋。
现代文：又寻求能研究《谷梁》的，没人比得上千秋。
English: And if you are looking for someone who can research "Guliang," there is no one like Qianqiu.

古文：上愍其学且绝，乃以千秋为郎中户将，选郎十人从受。
现代文：皇上怜惜他的学术将灭绝，便让千秋做郎中户将，选十个郎受业。
English: The emperor was sorry that his scholar would die out, so he asked Chiaki to be a housemaster, and selected ten housemasters.

古文：汝南尹更始翁君本自事千秋，能说矣，会千秋病死，征江公孙为博士。
现代文：汝南尹更始翁君本来事奉千秋，已能解释，赶上千秋病死，征召江公的孙子做博士。
English: Yunnan Yin Qian Shi Weng Jun, who originally served Qian Qiu, has been able to explain that he caught up with Qian Qiu's illness and death, and conscripted Jiang Gong's grandson to be a doctor.

古文：刘向以故谏大夫通达待诏，受《穀梁》，欲令助之。
现代文：刘向以故谏大夫通达待诏，学习《谷梁》，想让他帮助江博士。
English: Liu Xiang wanted the late Dr. Zou to study "Gu Liang" and help Dr. Jiang.

古文：江博士复死，乃征周庆、丁姓待诏保宫，使卒授十人。
现代文：江博士又死，便征周庆、丁姓待诏于保宫，让他们完成教授教十个人的任务。
English: After the death of Dr. Jiang, Zhou Qing and Ding Zhidao were summoned to Baoguang to complete the task of teaching ten people.

古文：自元康中始讲，至甘露元年，积十余岁，皆明习。
现代文：从元康中开始讲授，到甘露元年，共十几年，都精通了。
English: From the time I started teaching at Yuankang Middle School, to the first year of Ganlu, a total of more than ten years, I have become proficient.

古文：乃召《五经》名儒太子太傅萧望之等大议殿中，平《公羊》、《穀梁》同异，各以经处是非。
现代文：于是召《五经》名儒太子太傅萧望之等在殿中大辩论，平均《公羊》、《谷梁》异同，各自用经论处是非。
English: As a result, the famous Confucian prince Taifu Xiaowang and others were summoned to the "Five Classics" for a big debate in the hall. On average, "Ram" and "Guliang" are different and the same, and they use the scriptures to discuss the rights and wrongs.

古文：时，《公羊》博士严彭祖、侍郎申輓、伊推、宋显，《穀梁》议郎尹更始、待诏刘向、周庆、丁姓并论。
现代文：当时《公羊》博士严彭祖、侍郎申挽、伊推、宋显，《谷梁》议郎尹更始、待诏刘向、周庆、丁姓一起辩论。
English: At that time, "Ram," Dr. Yan Pengzu, and his attendants Shenbei, Yidu, and Song Xian, "Guliang," and his councillors Yin Gangshi, Bai Zhao, Liu Xiang, Zhou Qing, and Ding were debating together.

古文：《公羊》家多不见从，愿请内侍郎许广，使者亦并内《穀梁》家中郎王亥，各五人，议三十余事。
现代文：《公羊》家多不被赞同，他们希望请侍郎许广参议，使者也同时让《谷梁》家中郎王亥参议，各五个人，议论三十多件事。
English: Most of the "Ram" family did not agree, they hoped to invite the attendant Xu Guang to participate in the discussion, and the messenger also let the "Guliang" family member Wang Hai participate in the discussion, five people each, to discuss more than thirty things.

古文：望之等十一人各以经谊对，多从《穀梁》。
现代文：望之等十一人各自用经义核对，多赞同《谷梁》。
English: Eleven people, including Mochizuki, each checked the meaning of the passage and mostly agreed with "Guliang."

古文：由是《穀梁》之学大盛。
现代文：从此《谷梁》学大为兴盛。
English: Since then, the "Guliang" University has flourished.

古文：庆、姓皆为博士。
现代文：周庆、丁姓都做了博士。
English: Both Zhou Qing and Ding surnamed have earned a doctorate.

古文：姓至中山太傅，授楚申章昌曼君，为博士，至长沙太傅，徒众尤盛。
现代文：丁姓官至中山太傅，传授楚申章昌曼君，做了博士，官至长沙太傅，门徒特别多。
English: Ding surnamed official to Zhongshan Taifu, taught Chu Shen Zhang Changman Jun, did a doctorate, official to Changsha Taifu, many disciples.

古文：尹更始为谏大夫、长乐户将，又受《左氏传》，取其变理合者以为章句，传子咸及翟方进、琅邪房风。
现代文：尹更始是谏大夫、长乐户将，又学《左氏传》，选取变理相合的来做章句，传授儿子尹咸和翟方进、琅邪房凤。
English: At the beginning, Yin Qian was a doctor of Taoism and a general of the Changle household. He also studied "The Biography of Zuo," and selected the chapters that were consistent with each other to teach his son Yin Xian and his son Fangjin and his son Fangfeng.

古文：咸至大司农，方进丞相，自有传。
现代文：尹咸官至大司农，方进做了丞相，自己有传。
English: From Yin Xianguan to the Chief Secretary of Agriculture, Fang Jin became the Prime Minister, and he had a legend.

古文：房凤字子元，不其人也。
现代文：房凤字子元，是不其人。
English: Fang Feng's character, Zi Yuan, is no ordinary person.

古文：以射策乙科为太史掌故。
现代文：因射策乙科做了太史掌故。
English: As a result of the shooting, the Eighth Division did too much.

古文：太常举方正，为县令都尉，失官。
现代文：太常荐举方正，做县令都尉，后来失去官职。
English: He too often recommended the promotion of Fang Zheng, became a county lieutenant, and later lost his official position.

古文：大司马票骑将军王根奏除补长史，荐凤明经通达，擢为光禄大夫，迁五官中郎将。
现代文：大司马骠骑将军王根上奏补授长史，举荐房凤明经通达，提升为光禄大夫，迁官五宫中郎将。
English: General Wang Geng, the chief of the Horse Cavalry Division, was appointed to supplement the long history of the award, and recommended Fang Feng to be promoted to the position of doctor of Guanglu, and transferred to the position of general of the Fifth Palace.

古文：时，光禄勋王龚以外属内卿，与奉车都尉刘歆共校书，三人皆侍中。
现代文：当时光禄勋王龚以外家亲属做内卿，和奉车都尉刘歆一起校书，三人都是侍中。
English: At that time, Guanglu Honored Wang Qian, a relative from outside the family, was made the Inner Lord, and he was a student of the school together with Fengche Captain Liu Qian. All three were attendants.

古文：歆白《左氏春秋》可立，哀帝纳之，以问诸儒，皆不对。
现代文：刘歆禀告说《左氏春秋》应立于学官，哀帝采纳了，用此事去问诸儒，都不回答。
English: Liu Zhe said that "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo" should be established in the scholar, and the emperor adopted it. When he asked the Confucian scholars about this, they did not answer.

古文：歆于是数见丞相孔光，为言《左氏》以求助，光卒不肯。
现代文：刘歆于是多次拜见丞相孔光，向他说明《左氏》来寻求援助，刘光最终不答应。
English: Liu Ye then repeatedly visited the prime minister, Kong Guang, and explained to him that "Mr. Zuo" had come to seek assistance, but that Liu Guang ultimately did not agree.

古文：唯凤、龚许歆，遂共移书责让太常博士，语在《歆传》。
现代文：衹有房凤、王龚赞同刘歆，便一起致书责备太常博士，事在《歆传》。
English: Both Fang Feng and Wang Qian agreed with Liu Qian, and together they wrote a letter to rebuke Dr. Taizang, which was published in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：大司空师丹奏歆非毁先帝所立，上于是出龚等补吏：龚为弘农；歆河内；凤九江太守，至青州牧。
现代文：大司空师丹上奏刘歆毁谤先帝所立之学，皇上于是贬出王龚等补吏，王龚做弘农太守，刘歆为河内太守，房凤做九江太守，官至青州牧。
English: The Grand Master of the Ku Sheng, Tang Shangsoo, slandered the teachings established by the former emperor, and the emperor then dethroned Wang Qian and other supplementary officials. Wang Qian became the Grand Master of Hongnong, Liu Qian became the Grand Master of Hanoi, Fang Feng became the Grand Master of Jiujiang, and Wang Qian became the Grand Master of Qingzhou.

古文：始，江博士授胡常，常授梁萧秉君房，王莽时为讲学大夫。
现代文：开始江博士传授胡常，胡常传授梁萧秉君房，王莽时做讲学大夫。
English: At the beginning, Dr. Jiang taught Hu Chang, Hu Chang taught Liang Xiao Bing Junfang, and Wang Mang was a lecturer.

古文：由是《穀梁春秋》有尹、胡、申章、房氏之学。
现代文：从此《谷梁春秋》有尹、胡、申章、房氏之学。
English: Since then, "Guliang Spring and Autumn" has Yin, Hu, Shenzhang and Fang's learning.

古文：汉兴，北平侯张苍及梁大傅贾谊、京兆尹张敞、太中大夫刘公子皆修《春秋左氏传》。
现代文：汉兴起后，北平侯张苍和梁太傅贾谊、京兆尹张敞、太中大夫刘公子都研习《春秋左氏传》。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, Zhang Cang, the Marquis of Peiping, Liang Taifu, Jia Yi, Jing Zhaoyin, Zhang Zhan, and Liu Gongzi, the Taizhong Doctor, all studied "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi."

古文：谊为《左氏传》训故，授赵人贯公，为河间献王博士，子长卿为荡阴令，授清河张禹长子。
现代文：买谊给《左氏传》训诂，传授赵人贯公，做了河间献王博士，儿子长卿是荡阴令，传授清河张禹长子。
English: He bought friendship for "The Tale of Zuo"'s apprentice, taught Zhao Renzhanggong, and made Kawama Xianwang Ph.D. His son, Changqing, was a Yinling, and taught Qinghe Zhangyu's eldest son.

古文：禹与萧望之同时为御史，数为望之言《左氏》，望之善之，上书数以称说。
现代文：张禹和萧望之同时作御史，多次为望之讲《左氏》，望之认为很好，多次上书称赞他。
English: Zhang Yu and Xiaobang also wrote imperial histories at the same time. He read "The Master of the Left" to Nozomu many times. Nozomu thought it was very good and wrote to him many times to praise him.

古文：后望之为太子太傅，荐禹于宣帝，征禹待诏，未及问，会疾死。
现代文：后来望之做太子太傅，向宣帝推荐张禹，张禹被征待诏，没来得及向他请教，赶上生病死了。
English: Later, Wang Zhi made Zhang Yu the crown prince and recommended him to Emperor Xuan. Zhang Yu was summoned for an imperial edict, but he did not have time to consult with him, and died of illness.

古文：授尹更始，更始传子咸及翟方进、胡常。
现代文：传授尹更始，更始传给儿子尹咸和翟方进、胡常。
English: It was passed down to his son, Yin Xian, and to his sons, Yin Xian, Yin Fangjin, and Hu Chang.

古文：常授黎阳贾护季君，哀帝时待诏为郎，授苍梧陈钦子佚，以《左氏》授王莽，至将军。
现代文：胡常传给黎阳贾护季君，哀帝时待诏作郎，传给苍梧陈钦子佚，用《左氏》教授王莽，官至将军。
English: Hu Chang passed down to Liyang Jia Guo Ji Jun, who was the son of Emperor Xiaowu, passed down to Cangwu Chen Qin Zi Yao, used "The Left" to teach Wang Mang, and became a general.

古文：而刘歆从尹咸及翟方进受。
现代文：而刘歆向尹咸和翟方进学习。
English: Liu Ye, on the other hand, studied under Yin Xian and Yan Fang.

古文：由是言《左氏》者本之贾护、刘歆。
现代文：从此讲解《左氏》的都遵照买护、刘歆之说。
English: Since then, all the interpreters of "Mr. Zuo" have followed the advice of Maigou and Liu Yanzhi.

古文：赞曰：自武帝立《五经》博士，开弟子员，设科射策，劝以官禄，讫于元始，百有余年，传业者浸盛，支叶蕃滋，一经说至百余万言，大师众至千余人，盖禄利之路然也。
现代文：赞曰：从武帝设立《五经》博士，开创选送弟子员，设科射策，用宫禄勉励，至元始止，一百多年，传承学业的人渐多，分枝也增加了，一经解释到一百多万字，大师多达一千多人，大概这是获取利禄的途径吧。
English: Zang said: From Emperor Wu to the establishment of the "Five Classics" doctor, the creation of the selection of disciples, the establishment of the science strategy, and the use of the palace reward to encourage, from the beginning to the end, more than a hundred years, the number of people inheriting the study has gradually increased, and the branches have also increased. Once explained, there are more than one million words, and there are more than one thousand masters. Perhaps this is the way to obtain the reward.

古文：初，《书》唯有欧阳，《礼》后，《易》杨，《春秋》公羊而已。
现代文：起初，《书》衹有欧阳，《礼》有后，《易》有杨，《春秋》有公羊而已。
English: At first, "Book" had Ouyang, "Rite" had Hou, "Yi" had Yang, and "Spring and Autumn" had Ram.

古文：至孝宣世，复立《大小夏侯尚书》，《大小戴礼》，《施》、《孟》、《梁丘易》，《穀梁春秋》。
现代文：到孝宣之世，又立《大小夏侯尚书》，《大小戴礼》，《施》、《孟》、《梁丘易》，《谷梁春秋》。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaoxuan, "Big and Small Xia Hou Shang Shu," "Big and Small Dai Li," "Shi," "Meng," "Liang Qiu Yi" and "Gu Liang Chunqiu" were also established.

古文：至元帝世，复立《京氏易》，平帝时，又立《左氏春秋》、《毛诗》、逸《礼》、古文《尚书》，所以罔罗遗失，兼而存之，是在其中矣。
现代文：到元帝之世，又立《京氏易》。平帝时，又立《左氏春秋》、《毛诗》、逸《礼》、古文《尚书》，用来搜罗遗失，兼容并存，道理也就在其中了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuan, "Keiji Yi" was also established. During the reign of Emperor Ping, "Zuo Shi Chunqiu," "Mao Shi," "Yi" "Li" and the ancient text "Shang Shu" were also established. They were used to collect lost and compatible and coexist, and the reason is also in them.

