古文：○宁宗四十年春正月癸巳，雨土。乙未，大风。
现代文：嘉定十年春正月十五日，降土。十七日，刮大风。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the spring of the tenth year of Jiading, the earth fell. On the seventeenth day, a strong wind blew.

古文：庚子，遣钱抚贺金主生辰。
现代文：二十二日，派遣钱抚祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 22nd, the money was sent to congratulate the donor on his birthday.

古文：二月庚申，地震。
现代文：二月十三日，发生地震。
English: On February 13, an earthquake occurred.

古文：夏四月丁未朔，金人犯光州中渡镇，执榷场官盛允升杀之，遂分兵犯樊城。
现代文：夏四月初一，金军侵犯光州中渡镇，俘捉榷场官盛允升杀掉，于是分兵进犯樊城。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the Chinese army invaded the town of Zhongdu in Gwangju, captured and killed Shengchang official Sheng Yun Sheng, and then a detachment of soldiers invaded Shengcheng.

古文：戊申，鄂州、江陵府副都统王守中引兵拒之，金人遂分兵围枣阳、光化军。
现代文：初二，鄂州、江陵府副都统王守中率军抵抗，金军于是又分兵围攻枣阳军、光化军。
English: On the second day of the first month, Wang Shuzhong, vice-governor of Ezhou and deputy governor of Gangneung, led the army to resist, and the Jin army then besieged the Zaoyang army and the Guanghua army.

古文：丙辰，诏江淮制置使李珏、京湖制置使赵方措置调遣，仍听便宜行事。
现代文：初十，下诏江淮制置使李环、京湖制置使赵方措置调遣，并且允许他们不上奏自行处理有关事宜。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Li Huan and Zhao Fang of the Jianghuai and Jinghu Departments respectively were dispatched, and they were allowed to handle the relevant matters on their own without reporting.

古文：丁巳，命四川制置使董居谊酌量缓急，便宜行事。
现代文：十一日，命令四川制置使董居谊酌量缓急，自行处理有关事宜。
English: On the 11th, the Sichuan Provincial People's Government was ordered to give priority to the discretion of Dong Juyi and deal with relevant matters on its own.

古文：辛酉，庐州钤辖王辛败金人于光山县之安昌砦，杀其统军完颜掩。
现代文：十五日，庐州铃辖王辛在光山县安昌寨打败金军，杀其统军完颜掩。
English: On the 15th, Wang Xin of Luzhou Province defeated the Golden Army in Anchangzhai, Guangshan County, and killed the unified army.

古文：壬戌，金兵遁去，随州、光化皆以捷闻。
现代文：十六日，金军逃走，随州、光化都上报战胜金军。
English: On the 16th, the Chinese army fled, and Suizhou and Guanghua both reported victory over the Chinese army.

古文：丁卯，诏出戍官兵金给其家。
现代文：二十一日，下诏出戍官兵全给其家。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he issued an edict ordering all officers and soldiers to leave for his home.

古文：五月辛巳，以久雨，释大理、三衙、临安府杖以下囚，蠲茶盐赏钱。
现代文：五月初五，因久雨不晴，释放大理寺、三衙、临安府杖刑以下囚犯，免除茶盐赏钱。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the prisoners of Dali Temple, Sanlu and Lin'an were released, and the reward money for tea and salt was exempted.

古文：甲申，赐礼部进士吴潜以下五百二十有三人及第、出身。
现代文：初八，赐礼部进士吴潜以下五百二十三人及第、出身。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, five hundred and twenty-three people, including Wu Qian, a member of the Ceremonial Department, were born.

古文：癸卯，赵方请下诏伐金，遂传檄招谕中原官吏军民。
现代文：二十七日，赵方请求下诏伐金，于是发布文书诏谕中原官吏军民。
English: On the 27th, Zhao requested permission to mine gold, and issued a written order to officials, soldiers and civilians in Central Plains.

古文：六月庚戌，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初四，太白星白天显现。
English: On the fourth day of the sixth lunar month, the Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊午，诏厉将士，募京西忠义人进讨。
现代文：十二日，下诏鼓励将士，招募京西忠义人进攻讨伐。
English: On the 12th, the emperor issued an edict to encourage soldiers and recruit loyalists from the western part of Beijing to join the offensive.

古文：辛未，东川大水。
现代文：二十五日，东川发生大水。
English: On the 25th, there was a big flood in the East River.

古文：癸酉，太白经天。
现代文：二十七日，太白星显现一天。
English: On the 27th, the white star appeared for one day.

古文：秋七月丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：戊寅，以旱，释诸路杖以下囚。
现代文：初三，因早灾释放各路杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the third day of junior high school, due to an early disaster, all prisoners below the minimum sentence were released.

古文：甲申，雅州蛮寇边，焚碉门砦，遣兵讨之。
现代文：初九，雅州蛮攻打边境，焚烧碉门寨，派兵讨伐。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Yazhou brutally attacked the border, burned Yamen Village, and sent troops to fight.

古文：丁亥，嗣濮王不俦薨。
现代文：十二日，嗣攫王赵不侍去世。
English: On the 12th, King Zhao passed away.

古文：庚子，诏诸军将佐有罪者送屯驻州鞫之，罢军士淫刑。
现代文：二十五日，下诏诸军将佐有罪者送往屯驻州审讯，罢军士淫刑。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that the guilty persons would be sent to the garrison state for interrogation, and the soldiers would be punished.

古文：八月乙丑，诏监司、郡守各举威勇才略可将帅者二人。
现代文：八月二十日，下诏监司、郡守各举威勇才略可以担任将帅者二人。
English: On August 20th, the next day, the superintendent and the county governor each raised the courage to suggest two people who could serve as generals.

古文：冬十月乙巳朔，以久雨，释大理、三衙、临安府及两浙诸州杖以下囚。
现代文：冬十月初一，因久雨不晴，释放大理寺、三衙、临安府和两浙各州杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the first day of October in winter, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the prisoners of Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an and the two states of Zhejiang were released.

古文：癸酉，蠲三衙、江上诸军公私逋负钱。
现代文：二十九日，免除三衙、江上各军公私拖欠钱。
English: On the 29th, the public and private arrears of the troops in Sanqi and the river were exempted.

古文：十一月丁丑，大风。
现代文：十一月初三，刮大风。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, it was blowing a gale.

古文：庚辰，太白昼见。
现代文：初六，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 13th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：甲申，诏浙东提举司发米十万石振给贫民。
现代文：初十，下诏浙东提举司发米十万石贩给贫民。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the East Zhejiang Provincial People's Government issued an edict to distribute 100,000 koku of rice to the poor.

古文：戊戌，太白经天。
现代文：二十四日，太白星显现一天。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the planet Venus passes through the sky.

古文：十二月戊申，以军兴，募民纳粟补官。
现代文：十二月初五，因兴兵伐金招募百姓纳粟补官。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, because of the soldiers cutting gold, the people were recruited to pick poppies.

古文：乙卯，诏武举人毋复应文举。
现代文：初七，下诏武举人不得再参加文举考试。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, candidates are no longer allowed to take the written examination.

古文：癸亥，金凤翔副统军完颜赟以步骑万人犯四川。
现代文：十五日，金国凤翔副统军完颜贾率领步骑一万人侵犯四川。
English: On the 15th, Jin Guo Fengxiang's vice-unification army led by Guan Yanjia invaded Sichuan with 10,000 men on horseback.

古文：戊辰，迫湫池堡。
现代文：二十日，金军逼进揪池堡。
English: On the 20th, the Chinese army forced their way into the Dianchi Fort.

古文：己巳，破天水军，守臣黄炎孙遁。
现代文：二十一日，金军攻破天水军，守臣黄炎孙逃跑。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Chinese army defeated the Tianshui army, and the vassal Huang Yansun fled.

古文：金人攻白环堡，破之。
现代文：金军进攻白环堡，攻破白环堡。
English: The Chinese army attacked Baihuan Fort and broke through Baihuan Fort.

古文：庚午，迫黄牛堡，统制刘雄弃大散关遁，金人据之。
现代文：二十二日，金军进逼黄牛堡，统制刘雄放弃大散关逃跑，金军占据大散关。
English: On the 22nd, the Chinese army pushed into Huang Niu Fort, forcing Liu Xiong to abandon the Great Sankuan and flee, and the Chinese army occupied the Great Sankuan.

古文：十一年春正月壬午，京东路忠义李全率众来归，诏以全为京东路总管。
现代文：嘉定十一年春正月初十，京东路忠义李全率众来归附，下诏任命李全为京东路总管。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the eleventh year of Jiading, Zhongyi Li Quan of Jingdong Road led the crowd to attach, and Li Quan was appointed as the general manager of Jingdong Road.

古文：戊子，金人围皂郊堡。
现代文：十六日，金军围攻皂郊堡。
English: On the 16th, the Chinese army besieged the Sox suburb.

古文：壬辰，利州将麻仲率忠义人焚秦州永宁砦。
现代文：二十日，利州将领麻仲率领忠义人焚烧秦州永宁寨。
English: On the 20th, Lizhou General Ma Zhong led the loyal people to burn Qinzhou Yongningzhai.

古文：乙未，以度僧牒千给四川军费。
现代文：二十三日，把一千道度僧碟供给四川作为经费。
English: On the 23rd, it provided Sichuan with 1,000 Doduo monk dishes as funding.

古文：丁酉，诏四川忠义人立功，赏视官军。
现代文：二十五日，下诏四少忠义人立功者，按官军标淮赏赐。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that those who had made meritorious contributions would be rewarded according to the official military standard.

古文：金人犯隔芽关，兴元都统李贵遁，官军大溃。
现代文：金军侵犯隔芽关，兴元都统李贵逃跑，官军大败。
English: The Chinese army invaded Zhabei Pass, the Xingyuan general Li Gui fled, and the government army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：二月甲辰，金人焚大散关而去。
现代文：二月初二，金军焚大散关后离去。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the Chinese army left after setting fire to the Great Hall of the People.

古文：乙巳，沔州都统王大才马蹶，死于河池。
现代文：初三，洒州都统王大子骑马仆倒，死于河池。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the eldest son of the crown prince of Surabaya fell from his horse and died in a river.

古文：丙午，金人破皂郊，死者五万人。
现代文：初四，金军攻破皂郊，死者五万人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the Golden Army broke through the suburbs of Sapa, and fifty thousand people died.

古文：丁未，金人破湫池堡。
现代文：初五，金军攻破揪池堡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army broke through the Dianchi Fort.

古文：戊申，金人围随州、枣阳军，游骑至汉上，均州守臣应谦之弃城走。
现代文：初六，金军围攻随州和枣阳军，游骑到汉江上，均州守臣应谦之弃城逃走。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Jin army besieged the Suizhou and Zaoyang army, rode to the Han River, and the Junzhou governor Ying Qian abandoned the city and fled.

古文：丙辰，白虹贯日。
现代文：十四日，白虹遮蔽太阳。
English: On the 30th, a white rainbow covers the sun.

古文：楚州钤辖梁昭祖焚金人粮舟于大清河，京东忠义副都统沈铎遣兵助之。
现代文：楚州铃辖梁昭祖在大清河焚烧金军粮舟，京东忠义副都统沈铎派兵援助。
English: Liang Zhaozu, the governor of Chuzhou's Ling Prefecture, burned the Golden Army's grain boat in the Daqing River, and Jingdong Zhongyi Vice-governor Shen Qi sent troops to help.

古文：三月丁丑，金人焚湫池堡而去。
现代文：三月初六，金军焚掠揪池堡而去。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the Chinese army burned and plundered the Dianchi Fort and left.

古文：戊子，利州统制王逸等率忠义人复皂郊，金副统军完颜赟、包长寿遁去，沔州军士郭雄追斩赟首，长寿仅以身免。
现代文：十七日，利州统制王逸等率忠义人收复皂郊，金军副统军完颜贾、包长寿逃走，洒州军士郭雄追斩完颜贾的首级，包长寿仅以身免。
English: On the 17th, Li Zhou's regent Wang Yiyi and other loyal and righteous people regained the suburbs of soap, the vice-regent of the gold army finished Yan Jia and Bao Changshou fled, and the state sergeant Guo Xiong chased and cut off the head of Yan Jia, and Bao Changshou only escaped with his life.

古文：己丑，沔州都统刘昌祖至皂郊。
现代文：十八日，洒州都统刘昌祖到皂郊。
English: On the 18th, Liu Changzu, the governor of Zhangzhou, went to Soju.

古文：辛卯，忠义人十万余出攻秦州，官军继进，至赤谷口，王逸传昌祖之命退师，且放散忠义人，军大溃。
现代文：二十日，忠义人十多万人出兵进攻秦州，官军随后而到，至赤谷口，王逸传刘昌祖之命退军，而且解散忠义人，军队大败。
English: On the 20th, more than one hundred thousand loyalists attacked Qinzhou, followed by the government army. At the mouth of the Akaya River, Wang Yizhong ordered Liu Changzu to withdraw his army, disbanded the loyalists, and the army was defeated.

古文：癸巳，包长寿合长安、凤翔之众，复攻皂郊，遂趋西和州。
现代文：二十二日，包长寿会合长安、凤翔士众，又进攻皂郊，于是攻向西和州。
English: On the 22nd, the Chang'an and Fengxiang soldiers of the Bao Longevity Association attacked the outskirts of So, and then attacked West Hezhou.

古文：是日，镇江忠义统制彭惟诚等败于泗州。
现代文：这天，镇江忠义统制彭惟诚等在泅州失败。
English: On this day, Peng Weixing, the leader of the Zhenjiang Province, failed in Zhangzhou.

古文：丙申，刘昌祖焚西和州遁，守臣杨克家弃城去。
现代文：二十五日，刘昌祖焚掠西和州逃走，守臣杨克家弃城而去。
English: On the 25th, Liu Changzu set fire to and plundered Xihe County and fled, and the Yangke family abandoned the city.

古文：戊戌，金人破西和州。
现代文：二十七日，金人攻破西和州。
English: On the 27th, the Jin people defeated the Western Hezhou.

古文：夏四月甲辰，刘昌祖焚成州遁，守臣罗仲甲弃城去。
现代文：夏四月初三，刘昌祖焚掠成州逃走，守臣罗仲甲弃城而去。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Liu Changzu burned and pillaged Chengzhou and fled, and the guardian Luo Zhongjia abandoned the city.

古文：是日，金人去西和州。
现代文：这天，金军离开西和州。
English: On this day, the gold army left West Japan.

古文：戊申，命四川增印钱引五百万以给军费。
现代文：初七，命令四川增印钱引五百万供给军费开支。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered Sichuan to increase the printing of money to raise five million yuan to supply military expenses.

古文：阶州守臣侯颐弃城去。
现代文：阶州守臣侯颐弃城而去。
English: The lords and vassals of Zhouzhou abandoned the city.

古文：是日，金人去成州。
现代文：这天，金军离开成州。
English: On this day, the Chinese army left Chengdu.

古文：戊午，金人复犯大散关，守将王立遁。
现代文：十七日，金军又侵犯大散关，守将王立逃走。
English: On the 17th, the Chinese army invaded the Great Sankuan Pass again, and the commander Wang Li fled.

古文：己未，金人犯黄牛堡，兴元都统吴政拒退之。
现代文：十八日，金军侵犯黄牛堡，兴元都统吴政抵抗，打退金军。
English: On the 18th, the gold army invaded Huang Niu Fort, and the Xingyuan capital Wu Zheng resisted and repulsed the gold army.

古文：癸亥，政至大散关，执王立斩之。
现代文：二十二日，吴政到大散关，俘获王立斩杀。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Zheng went to Dasankuan, captured Wang Li and killed him.

古文：五月乙亥，命四川制置司招进忠义人。
现代文：五月初五，命令四川制置司招集忠义人。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, the Sichuan Provincial Party Committee was ordered to summon loyalists.

古文：癸未，蚩尤旗见，其长竟天。
现代文：十三日，蛋尤旗显现，其长竟天。
English: On the 13th, the egg yolk flag appeared, its length was as long as the sky.

古文：丁亥，诏侍从、台谏、两省官集议平戎、御戎、和戎三策。
现代文：十七日，下诏侍从、台谏、两省官一起商讨平戎、御戎、和戎三策。
English: On the seventeenth day of the following month, Zhao's attendants, the Taiwu, and the two provincial officials discussed the three policies of Ping Rong, G Rong, and He Rong.

古文：壬辰，申严试法官七等之制。
现代文：二十二日，申严试法官七等之制。
English: On the 22nd, the system of strict examination of judges of the seventh grade was introduced.

古文：六月辛酉，诏湖州振恤被水贫民。
现代文：六月二十一日，下诏湖州贩济抚恤遭水灾贫民。
English: On June 21st, the Huzhou government announced that it would provide subsidies to the poor people affected by the floods.

古文：秋七月癸酉，夺知天水军黄炎孙三官、辰州居住。
现代文：秋七月初四，削夺天水知军黄炎孙三官，辰州居住。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Huang Yansun, the third official of the Tianshui Zhijun army, lived in Chenzhou.

古文：乙酉，修《孝宗宝训》。
现代文：十六日，修撰孝宗宝切卜。
English: On the 16th, Cheb, a filial piety treasure, was compiled.

古文：辛卯，蠲四川关外诸州税役。
现代文：二十二日，免除四川关外各州税役。
English: On the 22nd, it exempted all the states outside Sichuan from paying taxes.

古文：甲午，蠲光州民兵战死之家税役。
现代文：二十五日，免除光州民兵战死者之家税役。
English: On the 25th, the Gwangju Militia War Dead Home was exempted from paying taxes.

古文：九月己卯，朝献于景灵宫。庚辰，朝乡于太庙。
现代文：九月初十，祭祀景灵宫。十一日，祭祀太庙。
English: At the beginning of September, on the 10th, there will be a religious service at the Jingling Palace, and on the 11th, there will be a religious service at the Grand Temple.

古文：辛己，合祭天地于明堂，大赦。
现代文：十二日，在明堂合祭天地，举行大赦。
English: On the 12th, an amnesty was held in Myeongdong.

古文：辛卯，安定郡王伯浑薨。
现代文：二十二日，安定郡王赵伯泽去世。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Boze, the king of the county of Anning, passed away.

古文：丙申，兴元都统吴政、利州副都统张威各进三官。
现代文：二十七日，兴元都统吴政、利州副都统张威各进三官。
English: On the 27th, the Xingyuan governor Wu Zheng and the Lizhou deputy governor Zhang Wei were promoted to the three posts.

古文：刘昌祖夺五官、韶州安置。
现代文：刘昌祖被削夺五官，韶州安置。
English: Liu Changzu was deprived of five officials and resettled in Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月丙午，罗仲甲、杨克家、侯颐并夺三官，仲甲常德府、克家道州、颐抚州居住。
现代文：冬十月初八，罗仲甲、杨克家、侯颐都被削夺三官，分别送往常德府、道州、抚州居住。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, Luo Zhongjia, Yang Kejia, and Hou Yi were stripped of their posts and sent to live in Changdefu, Doushou, and Fuzhou, respectively.

古文：戊午，大风。
现代文：二十日，刮大风。
English: On the 20th, it was blowing a gale.

古文：壬戌，修盱眙军城。
现代文：二十四日，修筑盯胎军城。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, build a military city with a flat tire.

古文：十一月壬申，金人攻安丰军之黄口滩。
现代文：十一月初四，金军进攻安丰军黄口滩。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the Golden Army attacked the Huangkou Beach of the Anfeng Army.

古文：是月，陕西人张羽来归。
现代文：这个月，陕西人张羽来归附。
English: This month, Zhang Yu from Shaanxi came to join.

古文：十二年春正月戊辰朔，召董居谊诣行在。
现代文：嘉定十二年春正月初一，召董居谊到行在。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 12th year of Jiading, Dong Juyi was summoned to the line.

古文：以新利州路安抚使聂子述为四川制置使。
现代文：任命新利州路安抚使聂子述为四少制置使。
English: The appointment of Xinlizhou Road to appease the envoys described as the four-less system.

古文：庚辰，金人犯湫池堡，守将石宣拒退之。
现代文：十三日，金军进犯揪池堡，守将石宣打退金军。
English: On the thirteenth day, the gold army invaded Dianchi Fort, and the commander, Shi Xuan, beat back the gold army.

古文：甲申，金人攻白环堡，守将董炤拒退之。
现代文：十七日，金军进攻白环堡，守将董招打退金军。
English: On the 17th, the gold army attacked Baihuan Fort, and the guard, Dong Zhao, beat back the gold army.

古文：戊子，金人犯成州，沔州都统张威自西和州退守仙人原。
现代文：二十一日，金军进犯成州，洒州都统张威从西和州退守仙人原。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Chinese army invaded Chengzhou, and the other prefectures all retreated to Xianrenyuan from West Hezhou.

古文：庚寅，金人犯随州、枣阳军，又破信阳军之二砦，京西诸将引兵拒之。
现代文：二十三日，金军侵犯随州、枣阳军，又攻破信阳军二个寨子，京西各将率兵抵抗。
English: On the 23rd, the Golden Army invaded Suizhou and Zaoyang Army, and broke through two stockades of Xinyang Army. The generals of Beijing and Xi'an each led their soldiers to resist.

古文：辛卯，金人犯西和州，守臣赵彦呐设伏以待之，歼其众乃还。
现代文：二十四日，金军进犯西和州，守臣赵彦呐设伏途中，歼灭其众退回。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Chinese army invaded West Hezhou, and the vassal Zhao Yannan was on his way to surrender, annihilated his people and retreated.

古文：金人犯安丰军，建康都统许俊遣将却之。
现代文：金军进犯安丰军，建康都统许俊派将打退金军。
English: The gold army will attack the Anfeng army, and the Jiankangdu Xu Jun faction will beat back the gold army.

古文：金人焚成州，犯河池，守将张斌遁去。
现代文：金军焚掠成州，侵犯河池，守将张斌逃走。
English: The Chinese army burned and pillaged Chengzhou, invaded Hechi, and the commander Zhang Bin fled.

古文：癸巳，金人围安丰军及光州，攻光化军，破郧山县，进副均州。
现代文：二十六日，金军围攻安丰军和光州，进攻光化军，攻破郧山县，进逼均州。
English: On the 26th, the Jin army besieged the Anfeng army and Gwangju, attacked the Gwanghwa army, broke through Lushan County, and advanced to Junzhou.

古文：甲午，破凤州，守臣雷云弃城去，金人夷其城。
现代文：二十七日，攻破凤州，守臣雷云弃城而去，金人平夷其城。
English: On the 27th, Fengzhou was defeated, the guardian Lei Yun abandoned the city, and the Jin people razed the city.

古文：乙未，兴元都统吴政及金人战于黄牛堡，死之。
现代文：二十八日，兴元都统吴政和金军在黄牛堡交战，战死。
English: On the 28th, the Xingyuan capital Wu Zheng and the Jin army fought in the Yellow Cow Fort and died in battle.

古文：金人乘胜攻武休关。
现代文：金军乘胜进攻武休关。
English: The Chinese army took advantage of the victory to attack Wuyue Pass.

古文：二月戊戌朔，金人破光山县。
现代文：二月初一，金军攻破光山县。
English: On the first day of February, the Chinese army broke through Guangshan County.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天出现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：壬寅，金人围枣阳军，京湖制置使赵方遣统制扈再兴救之，不克进而还。
现代文：初五，金军围攻枣阳军，京湖制置使赵方派遣统制启再兴救援，没有能够进军就退回了。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Jin army besieged the Zaoyang army, and the construction of the Beijing Lake made the Zhao side dispatch the control system to restart the rescue. If they could not advance, they retreated.

古文：癸卯，金人破武休关，兴元都统李贵遁还，利州路提刑、权兴元府事赵希昔弃城去。
现代文：初六，金军攻破武休关，兴元都统李贵逃回，利州路提刑、代理兴元府事赵希昔弃城逃走。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army broke through the Wuxu Pass, the leader of the Xingyuan capital Li Gui fled back, Lizhou Road was punished, and the deputy Xingyuan prefect Zhao Xixi abandoned the city and fled.

古文：丁未，金人破兴元府。
现代文：初十，金军攻破兴元府。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Chinese army broke through Xingyuanfu.

古文：戊申，金人攻枣阳军。
现代文：十一日，金军进攻枣阳军。
English: On the 11th day, the Jin Army attacked the Zaoyang Army.

古文：己酉，遣殿前司军八千人防捍江面。
现代文：十二日，派遣殿前司军八千人防卫江面。
English: On the 12th, eight thousand troops of the Imperial General Headquarters were dispatched to defend the river.

古文：庚戌，以曾从龙同知枢密院事兼江、淮宣抚使，权吏部尚书任希夷签书枢密院事。
现代文：十三日，任命曾从龙为同知枢密院事兼江、淮宣抚使，代理吏部尚书任希夷为签书枢密院事。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the Privy Councillors who had been appointed from Long to Tongzhi, namely, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councillor, the Privy Councill

古文：辛亥，金人破大安军，守臣李文子弃城去。
现代文：十四日，金军攻破大安军，守臣李文子弃城逃走。
English: On the 14th, the Jin army defeated the Da'an army, and the guardian Li Wenzi abandoned the city and fled.

古文：金人犯洋州，守臣蔡晋卿遣兵拒之，不克，洋州破。
现代文：金军进犯洋州，守臣蔡晋卿派兵抵抗，没能打败金军，洋州被攻陷。
English: The Chinese army invaded Yangzhou, and the guardian Cai Jianqing sent troops to resist, but failed to defeat the Chinese army, and Yangzhou was captured.

古文：壬子，四川制置使董居谊自利州遁。
现代文：十五日，四川制置使董居谊从利州逃跑。
English: On the 15th, the establishment of the Sichuan Special Administrative Region caused Dong Juyi to flee from Lizhou.

古文：沔州都统张威遣统制石宣等邀击金人于大安军，大破之，获其将巴土鲁安，金人遂去兴元府。
现代文：洒州都统张威派遣统制石宣等在大安军阻击金军，大破金军，俘获将领巴土鲁安，金军于是离开兴元府。
English: Zhang Wei, the governor of Zhangzhou, dispatched the governor Shi Xuan and others to block the Jin army in the Da'an army, defeated the Jin army, captured the general Batuluan, and the Jin army then left Xingyuanfu.

古文：丙辰，金人去洋州。丁巳，京湖制置使赵方遣统制扈再兴等引兵三万余人出攻唐、邓二州，随州忠义统领刘世兴等引兵攻唐州。
现代文：十九日，金军离开洋州，二十日，京湖制置使赵方派遣统制启再兴等率兵三万多人出击唐、邓二州，随州忠义统领刘世兴等率兵进攻唐州。
English: On the 19th, the Chinese army left Yangzhou, and on the 20th, the establishment of the Beijing-Hubei system made the Zhao side send more than 30,000 soldiers under the command of Qi Zaixing and others to attack Tang and Deng Erzhou, and Liu Shixing, the leader of Suizhou Zhongyi, led the soldiers to attack Tangzhou.

古文：甲子，金人去枣阳军。
现代文：二十七日，金军离开枣阳军。
English: On the 27th, the Jin army left the Zaoyang army.

古文：乙丑，夏人复以书来四川，议夹攻金人，利州路安抚丁焴许之。
现代文：二十八日，夏军又致书四川，商讨夹攻金军，利州路安抚使厂婚同意了。
English: On the 28th, Xia Jun also sent a letter to Sichuan, discussing the attack on the Jin Army, and Lizhou Road pacified the factory marriage and agreed.

古文：三月己巳，以郑昭先知枢密院事，曾从龙参知政事。
现代文：三月初三，任命邓昭先为知枢密院事，曾从龙为参知政事。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Deng Zhaoxian was appointed to be a member of the Privy Council, and he had previously been a member of the Council of State.

古文：癸酉，金人复入洋州，焚其城而去。乙亥，兴元军士权兴等作乱，犯巴州，守臣秦季弃城去。
现代文：初七，金军又进人洋州，焚其城而去，初九，兴元军士权兴等叛乱，进犯巴州，守臣秦季肤弃城逃走。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the gold army entered Yangzhou again and burned its city, and left. On the ninth day of the first month, Xingyuan's sergeant Quan Xing and other rebels invaded Bazhou, and the retainer Qin Ji abandoned the city and fled.

古文：鄂州统制刘世荣会兵攻唐州。
现代文：鄂州统制刘世荣联合军队进攻唐州。
English: The joint army of Liu Shirong, governor of Ezhou, attacked Tangzhou.

古文：丁亥，太白昼见。
现代文：二十一日，太白星白天出现。
English: Dinghai, Taibai Star appeared during the day.

古文：权兴等降。
现代文：权兴等投降。
English: Kwon Heung and others surrender.

古文：癸巳，雨土。
现代文：二十七日，降土。
English: On the 29th, it rained from the sky.

古文：甲午，金人自盱眙退师。
现代文：二十八日，金军从盯胎退兵。
English: On the 28th, the Chinese army retreated from the battlefield.

古文：闰月己未，追雷云三官、梅州安置。
现代文：闰三月二十四日，追夺雷云三官，梅州安置。
English: On the 24th day of the third month of the leap year, the three officials of Lei Yun were captured and resettled in Meizhou.

古文：辛酉，赠吴政为右武大夫、忠州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，赠吴政为右武大夫、忠州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Wu Zheng was bestowed with the titles of Doctor of the Right Division of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Historian of Zhongzhou.

古文：壬戌，诏抚谕四川官军、忠义人。
现代文：二十七日，下诏抚谕四川官军和忠义人。
English: On the 27th, the next edict ordered the Sichuan government army and loyalists to leave.

古文：癸亥，兴元军士张福、莫简等作乱，以红巾为号。
现代文：二十八日，兴元军士张福、莫简等叛乱，以红巾为标记。
English: On the 28th, Xingyuan sergeants Zhang Fu, Mo Jian and others rebelled, marked by red scarves.

古文：是春，金人围安丰军、滁、濠、光三州。
现代文：这年春，金军围攻安丰军、滁州、壕州、光州。
English: In the spring of this year, the Chinese army besieged the Anfeng army, Zhangzhou, Hezhou and Gwangju.

古文：江、淮制置使李珏命池州都统武师道、忠义军统制陈孝忠救之，皆不克进。
现代文：江、淮制置使李环命令池州都统武师道、忠义军统制陈孝忠救助，都没能打败金军。
English: Jiang, Huai and Li Huan ordered the Chizhou capital to unite with Wushido and the loyalist army to help Chen Xiaozhong, but both failed to defeat the Golden Army.

古文：金人遂分兵自光州犯黄州之麻城，自濠州犯和州之石碛，自盱眙军犯滁州之全椒、来安及扬州之天长、真州之六合。
现代文：金军于是分兵从光州进犯黄州的麻城，从壕州进犯和州的石啧，从盯胎进犯滁州的全椒、来安和扬州的天长、真州的六合。
English: As a result, detachments of the Golden Army attacked Ma Cheng in Huangzhou from Gwangju, Shizhu in Hezhou from Hozhou, Quanzhe in Quanzhou, Tianchang in Lai'an and Yangzhou, and Liuhe in Zhenzhou from Dengpu.

古文：淮南流民渡江避乱，诸城悉闭。
现代文：淮南流民渡江避乱，各城全部封闭。
English: The Huainan refugees fled across the river to escape the turmoil, and all the cities were closed.

古文：金人游骑数百至东采石、杨林渡，建康大震。
现代文：金军游骑数百人到东采石、杨林渡，建康府大为震惊。
English: Jiankang Prefecture was shocked when hundreds of roving soldiers of the Chinese People's Liberation Army came to Dongcaishi and Yanglindu.

古文：京东总管李全自楚州、忠义总辖季先自涟水军各引兵来援，金人乃解去。
现代文：京东总管李全从楚州、忠义总辖季先从涟水军各自率兵前往救援，金军才解围退走。
English: The general manager of JD.com, Li Quan, led soldiers from Chuzhou and the Liaoning Navy from Zhongyi Prefecture respectively to the rescue, and the Chinese army was able to break the siege and retreat.

古文：全追击，败之于曹家庄，获其贵将。
现代文：李全追击，在曹家庄打败金军，俘获金军大将。
English: Li Quan pursued, defeated the gold army in Cao Jiazhuang, and captured the general of the gold army.

古文：夏四月庚午，张福入利州，四川制置使聂子述遁，杀总领财赋杨九鼎。
现代文：夏四月初五，张福进人利州，四川制置使聂子述逃跑，杀死总领财赋杨九鼎。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhang Fu entered Lizhou, Sichuan Province, made Zizi Shu escape, and killed Yang Jiu Ding, the general leader of wealth.

古文：丁丑，张福掠阆州，丁亥，掠果州。
现代文：十二日，张福劫掠间州。二十二日，劫掠果州。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Fu plundered Mianzhou. On the 22nd, he plundered Guozhou.

古文：癸巳，曾从龙罢。
现代文：二十八日，曾从龙被罢免。
English: On the 28th, he was removed from the dragon.

古文：以郑昭先兼参知政事，崇信军节度使、开府仪同三司、万寿观使安丙为四川宣抚使。
现代文：任命郑昭先兼参知政事，崇信军节度使、开府仪同三司、万寿观使安丙为四川宣抚使。
English: He appointed Zheng Zhaoxian, who was also a member of the Council of State, as the Sichuan envoy, as well as Zong Xinjun, the military envoy to the Qing Dynasty, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Wan Shou Guan Envoy An He.

古文：董居谊落职，夺三官。
现代文：董居谊被免职，削夺三官。
English: Dong Juyi was removed from his post and stripped of his three posts.

古文：五月乙未朔，召聂子述诣行在。
现代文：五月初一，召聂子述到行在。
English: On the first day of May, Zhao Zizi recited the line.

古文：张福薄遂宁府，潼川府路转运判官、权府事程遇孙弃城遁。
现代文：张福进逼遂宁府，憧川府路转运判官、代理府事程遇孙弃城逃跑。
English: Zhang Fujin forced Suining prefecture, Tongchuan prefecture road transfer magistrate, agency prefecture, and Sun abandoned the city and fled.

古文：丁酉，减两淮、荆襄、湖北、利州路沿边诸州杂犯死罪囚，释流以下，仍蠲今年租税。
现代文：初三，减轻两淮、荆襄、湖北、利州路沿边各州杂犯死罪囚犯，释放流刑以下囚犯，并且免除今年租税。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the death penalty for minor offenders in various states along the Liuzhou Road, including Zhuhai, Zhuhai, Hubei and Hubei, will be eased, prisoners sentenced to transportation will be released, and this year's tax will be exempted.

古文：己亥，太学生何处恬等伏阙上书，以工部尚书胡榘欲和金人，请诛之以谢天下。
现代文：初五，太学生何处恬等到朝廷上书，因工部尚书胡渠想与金国议和，请求诛杀之以谢天下。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the students waited for the imperial court to issue a letter, because the Ministry of Industry still wanted to discuss peace with Kim Guo, and requested the world to thank them.

古文：张福入遂宁府，焚其城。
现代文：张福进人遂宁府，焚烧其城。
English: Zhang Fu marched into Suining and set fire to the city.

古文：甲寅，四川宣抚司命沔州都统张威引兵捕福。
现代文：二十日，四川宣抚司命令洒州都统张威率兵捕获张福。
English: On the 20th, the Sichuan Propaganda Department ordered Zhang Wei and his soldiers to capture Zhang Fu.

古文：戊午，福入普州，守臣张已之弃城遁。
现代文：二十四日，张福进人普州，守臣张已之弃城逃跑。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Fu entered Puzhou, and his retainer Zhang Ye abandoned the city and fled.

古文：癸亥，诏侍从、两省、台谏各举文武可用之才二三人。
现代文：二十九日，下诏侍从、两省、台谏官各自举荐文武可用之才二至三人。
English: On the 29th day of the following month, the attendants of the imperial edict, the two provinces, and the Taiwan eunuchs each recommended that only two to three people could be used.

古文：六月戊辰，张福屯普州之茗山。
现代文：六月初五，张福屯驻普州茗山。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Zhang Fortun was stationed in Lushan, Puzhou.

古文：庚午，张威引兵至。
现代文：初七，张威率军到达。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zhang Wei arrived with his army.

古文：丙子，太白昼见。
现代文：十三日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the new year, a white star appeared during the day.

古文：辛巳，西川地震。
现代文：十八日，西川发生地震。
English: On the 18th, an earthquake occurred in Saikawa.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天显现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：癸未，张福请降，乙酉，张威执之，归于宣抚司。
现代文：二十日，张福请求投降，二十二日，张威俘获他，把他带到宣抚司。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Fu requested to surrender. On the 22nd, Zhang Wei captured him and took him to the Propaganda Department.

古文：丁亥，嗣濮王不嫖薨。
现代文：二十四日，嗣攫王赵不缥去世。
English: On the 24th, King Zhao died.

古文：金国招谕李全等，不听。
现代文：金国招谕李全等，李全没有应命。
English: Jin Guo invited Li Quan and others, but Li Quan did not comply with the order.

古文：辛卯，太白经天。
现代文：二十八日，太白星显现一天。
English: On the fifth day, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：癸巳，丁焴复以书约夏国攻金人。
现代文：三十日，蜻致书夏国相约夹攻金军。
English: On the 30th, he sent a letter to Xia, and the two agreed to attack the Jin army.

古文：秋七月丙申，张福伏诛。
现代文：秋七月初三，张福被处以死刑。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, Zhang Fu was sentenced to death.

古文：复夺董居谊二官、永州居住。
现代文：又削夺董居谊二官，永州居住。
English: He also won the second position of Dong Juyi and lived in Yongzhou.

古文：庚子，张威捕贼众一千三百余人诛之，莫简自杀，红巾贼悉平。
现代文：初七，张威捕贼众一千三百多人全部杀掉，莫简自杀，红巾贼全部平定。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zhang Wei killed all of the more than 1,300 thieves, Mo Jian committed suicide, and the red scarf thieves were all subdued.

古文：癸亥，李全引兵至齐州，知州王赟以城降。
现代文：三十日，李全率兵到齐州，知州王贾以城投降。
English: On the 30th, Li Quan led his troops to Qizhou. Wang Jia Yicheng of Qizhou surrendered.

古文：八月戊辰，复合利州东、西路为一。
现代文：八月初五，重新合利州东、西路为一路。
English: On the 5th of August, the east and west roads of Hangzhou were reopened as a single road.

古文：九月丙午，罢江、淮制置司，置沿江、淮东西制置司。
现代文：九月十四日，废罢江、淮制置司，设置沿江、淮东西制置司。
English: On September 14th, the Departments of Jiangsu and Huaiyang were abolished, and the Departments of Riverside and East and West Huaiyang were established.

古文：以宝文阁待制李大东为沿江制置使，淮南转运判官赵善湘为主管淮西制置司公事，淮东提刑贾涉为主管淮东制置司公事兼节制京东、河北路军马。
现代文：任命宝文阁待制李大东为沿江制置使，淮南转运判官赵善湘为主管淮西制置司公事，淮东提刑贾涉为主管淮东制置司公事兼节制京东、河北路军马。
English: He appointed Li Dadong, who was in charge of the construction of the Baowen Pavilion, as the construction manager along the river, Zhao Shanxiang, who was the judge of Huainan transshipment, as the manager of the construction department in west Huaihai, and Jia Wu, who was the manager of the construction department in east Huaihai, as the manager of the construction department in east Huaihai, and the manager of the construction department in east Beijing and north Hebei.

古文：十一月辛亥，进封杨次山为会稽郡王。
现代文：十一月十九日，进封杨次山为会稽郡王。
English: On November 19th, Yang Jishan was crowned as the king of the county.

古文：十二月壬申，京东节制司言复京东、河北二府九州四十县。
现代文：十二月初十，京东节制司报告说收复京东、河北二府九州四十县。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, the Jingdong Division of the Bureau of Statistics reported that 40 counties in the two prefectures of Jingdong and Hebei in Kyushu had been recovered.

古文：乙亥，筑兴元府城。
现代文：十三日，修筑兴元府城。
English: On the 13th, the Xingyuan prefectural capital was built.

古文：丁丑，雅州蛮入卢山县。
现代文：十五日，雅州蛮进人卢山县。
English: On the 15th, people from Yazhou entered Lushan County.

古文：己卯，四川宣抚司遣兵取洮州，召诸将议出师，招谕中原豪杰。
现代文：十七日，四川宣抚司派兵攻取姚州，召诸将商讨出兵，招谕中原豪杰。
English: On the 17th, the Sichuan Procuratorate dispatched troops to capture Yaozhou, summoned the generals to discuss sending troops, and summoned the Central Plains heroes.

古文：辛巳，蛮焚碉门砦，边丁大败。
现代文：十九日，蛮人焚烧碉门寨，边丁大败。
English: On the 19th, the barbarians set fire to Qimen Village, causing a major defeat for Hengding.

古文：乙酉，金人犯凤州之长桥。
现代文：二十三日，金军进犯凤州长桥。
English: On the 23rd, the Chinese army attacked the Fengchuang Bridge.

古文：丁亥，四川宣抚司命罢洮州之师。
现代文：二十五日，四川宣抚司命令罢除姚州之师。
English: On the 25th, the Sichuan Propaganda Department ordered the dismissal of Yaozhou's division.

古文：己丑，京湖置司遣统制扈再兴等引兵六万人，分二道出境。
现代文：二十七日，京湖制置司派遣统制启再兴等率兵六万人，分三路出境。
English: On the 27th, the Beijing-Hubei Construction and Construction Division dispatched 60,000 soldiers led by the Central Construction and Reconstruction Division and others to leave the country in three ways.

古文：庚寅，赏茗山捕贼功。
现代文：二十八日，赏赐茗山捕获盗贼之功。
English: On the 28th, Lushan was awarded for the capture of the thief.

古文：十三年春正月丁酉，扈再兴引兵攻邓州，鄂州都统许国攻唐州，不克而还。
现代文：嘉定十三年春正月初六，启再兴率兵进攻邓州，鄂州都统许国进攻唐州，没有攻取而回。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the spring of the 13th year of Jiading, Qi Zaoxing led an army to attack Dangzhou, and the whole country of Ezhou attacked Tangzhou, but did not attack and returned.

古文：金人追之，遂攻樊城，赵方督诸将拒退之。
现代文：金军追击，于是进攻樊城，赵方督促诸将打退金军。
English: The gold army chased and then attacked Shicheng. Zhao Fang urged the generals to beat back the gold army.

古文：己亥，雅州蛮复掠卢山县，遣兵讨之。
现代文：初八，雅州蛮又劫掠卢山县，派兵攻讨。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Yazhou brutally plundered Lushan County and sent troops to attack.

古文：己酉，命不凌为嗣濮王。
现代文：十八日，命令赵不凌为嗣攫王。
English: On the 18th, he ordered Zhao Boling to become the heir to the throne.

古文：戊午，夏人复以书来四川，议夹攻金人。
现代文：二十七日，夏人又致书四川，商议夹攻金军。
English: On the 27th, Xia again wrote to Sichuan to discuss attacking the Jin army.

古文：三月辛卯朔，雨土。
现代文：三月初一，降土。
English: On the first day of March, the earth fell.

古文：丁巳，黎州土丁叛，遣兵讨之。
现代文：二十七日，黎州土丁叛乱，派兵攻讨。
English: On the 27th, Li Zhou rebelled against Touting and sent troops to attack.

古文：夏四月庚申朔，淮东制置贾涉招谕山东、两河豪杰。
现代文：夏四月初一，淮东制置贾涉招谕山东、两河豪杰。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the Huaidong system was set up, involving the invitation of Shandong and the two rivers.

古文：五月庚寅朔，雅州蛮降。
现代文：五月初一，雅州蛮投降。
English: On the first day of May, Yazhou capitulated.

古文：戊戌，史弥远等上《玉牒》及《三祖下第七世宗藩庆系录》。
现代文：二十一日，史弥远等呈上压牌和三祖下第七世宗藩庆系录。
English: On the 21st, Shi Yanyuan and others presented the upper plate and the record of the seventh generation of the three ancestors.

古文：六月癸酉，赐礼部进士刘渭以下四百七十有五人及第、出身。
现代文：六月十五日，赐礼部进士刘渭以下四百七十五人及第、出身。
English: On June 15th, the Ministry of Ceremonies bestowed the title of honorary member to 475 people of various ranks and backgrounds.

古文：加安丙少保。
现代文：加安丙为少保。
English: Gaanhong is a junior security guard.

古文：丙子，以李全为左武卫大将军。
现代文：十八日，任命李全为左武卫大将军。
English: On the 18th, Li Quan was appointed as General Zuo Wei.

古文：壬午，以季先为果州团练使、涟水军忠义副都统，命赴枢密院议事，未至，杀之。
现代文：二十四日，任命季先为果州团练使、涟水军忠义副都统，命令他到枢密院商议事情，没有到，被杀。
English: On the 24th, Ji Xian was appointed as the training envoy of the Gozhou Regiment and the vice-commander of the Surabaya Army, and he was ordered to go to the Privy Council to discuss the matter. However, he did not come and was killed.

古文：秋七月戊戌，以京东、河北诸州守臣空名官告付京东、河北节制司，以待豪杰之来归者。
现代文：秋七月十一日，将京东、河北各州守臣空名任命书给付京东、河北节制司，以待来归附的豪杰。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the letter of appointment of the Jingdong and Hebei states to the Jingdong and Hebei governor was given to the Jingdong and Hebei governor to wait for the hero to be attached.

古文：丙午，以任希夷兼参知政事。
现代文：十九日，任命任希夷为参知政事。
English: On the 19th, Ren Xi'er was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：丙辰，四川宣抚司招黎人土丁，降之。
现代文：二十九日，四川宣抚司招黎人土丁，降服他们。
English: On the 29th, the Sichuan Procuratorate summoned the Li people and subjugated them.

古文：八月癸亥，皇太子询薨，谥曰景献。
现代文：八月初六，皇太子赵询去世，溢号景献。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the Crown Prince Zhao Zhen passed away.

古文：壬申，安丙遗夏人书，定议夹攻金人。
现代文：十五日，安丙致书夏军，确定商讨夹攻金军方案。
English: On the 15th, An He sent a letter to the Xia Army and decided to discuss the plan to attack the Jin Army.

古文：癸未，四川宣抚司命利州统制王仕信引兵赴熙、巩州会夏人，遂传檄招谕陕西五路官吏军民。
现代文：二十六日，四川宣抚司命令利州统制王仕信率兵到熙州、巩州联合夏军，于是发布文书招谕陕西五路官吏军民。
English: On the 26th, the Sichuan Procuratorate ordered the governor of Lizhou, Wang Shixin, to lead his troops to Xizhou and Gongzhou to unite with the Xia army, and then issued a document inviting officials, soldiers and civilians from the five provinces of Shaanxi.

古文：甲申，复海州，以将作监丞徐晞稷知州事。
现代文：二十七日，收复海州，任命将作监承徐翟为知州事。
English: On the 27th, Haizhou was recovered, and the appointment of Xu Jun as the supervisor of Zhizhou affairs was made.

古文：盱眙将石珪叛入涟水军，诏以珪为涟水忠义军统辖。
现代文：盯胎将领石盖叛人涟水军，下诏以石圭为涟水忠义军统辖。
English: General Sekigai, the traitor of the Surabaya army, was put in charge, and the loyalist army of Surabaya was placed under the command of Sekigai.

古文：九月辛卯，夏人引兵围巩州，且来趣师。
现代文：九月初五，夏军将领率兵围攻巩州，并且来催促宋朝出兵。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, the generals of the Xia Army led the troops to besiege Gongzhou, and urged the Song Dynasty to send troops.

古文：甲午，太白昼见。
现代文：初八，太白星白天显现。
English: At 1:00 a.m., Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：王仕信引兵发宕昌。
现代文：王仕信率兵从宕昌出发。
English: Wang Shixin and his soldiers set out from Tangchang.

古文：乙未，四川宣抚司统制质俊、李寔引兵发下城。
现代文：初九，四川宣抚司统制质俊、李算率兵从下城出发。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the troops led by the governor of Sichuan Province, Qiu Jun and Li Shan, set out from downtown.

古文：戊戌，四川宣抚司命诸将分道进兵，沔州都统张威出天水，利州副都统程信出长道，兴元副都统陈立出大散关，兴元统制田胃为宣抚司帐前都统出子午谷，金州副都统陈昱出上津。
现代文：十二日，四川宣抚司命令各将领分道进军：洒州都统张威出天水，利州副都统程信出长道，兴元副都统陈立出大散关，兴元统制田胃为宣抚司帐前都统出子午谷，金州副都统陈星出上津。
English: On the 12th, the Sichuan Propaganda and Reunification Department ordered the generals to march in different directions: Zhang Wei from Tianshui, the vice-governor of Lishu from Xinzhu, the vice-governor of Xingyuan from Daxangguan, the vice-governor of Xingyuan from Tianchi, the vice-governor of Jinzhou from Ziugu, and the vice-governor of Jinzhou from Shangjin.

古文：己亥，张威下令所部诸将毋得擅进兵。
现代文：十三日，张威下令部下各将不得擅自进兵。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Wei ordered his subordinates not to enter the army without permission.

古文：庚子，质俊等克来远镇。
现代文：十四日，质俊等攻克来远镇。
English: On the 14th, Qiao Jun and others conquered Yuanzhen.

古文：辛丑，王仕信克盐川镇。
现代文：十五日，王仕信攻克盐川镇。
English: On the 15th, Wang Shixin conquered Yanchuan Town.

古文：壬寅，质俊等自来远镇进攻定边城，金人来救，俊等击破之。
现代文：十六日，质俊等从来远镇进攻定边城，金军来救援，质俊等打败金军。
English: On the 16th, Quan Jun and others attacked Dingbian Town from Zhenyuan Town, the gold army came to the rescue, and Quan Jun and others defeated the gold army.

古文：乙巳，程信、王仕信引兵与夏人会于巩州城下。
现代文：十九日，程信、王仕信等率兵与夏军在巩州城下会合。
English: On the 19th, Cheng Xin, Wang Shixin and other leading soldiers met with Xia Jun at the foot of Gongzhou Castle.

古文：丁未，攻城不克。
现代文：二十一日，攻城没能成功。
English: On the twenty-first day, the siege failed.

古文：庚戌，金人犯皂郊堡，沔州统制董炤等与战，大败。
现代文：二十四日，金军进犯皂郊堡，洒州统制董沼等与金军交战，大败。
English: On the 24th, the Chinese army attacked Soju Suburban Fort, and Dong Numa, the governor of Surabaya, fought with the Chinese army, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：壬子，程信及夏人攻巩州不克，信引兵趋秦州。
现代文：二十六日，程信与夏军一起进攻巩州，没有攻取，程信率兵至秦州。
English: On the 26th, Cheng Xin and Xia Jun attacked Gongzhou together, but failed to capture it. Cheng Xin led his troops to Qinzhou.

古文：丙辰，夏人自安远砦退师。
现代文：三十日，夏军从安远寨退兵。
English: On the 30th, the Xia army retreated from Anyuanzhai.

古文：冬十月丁巳朔，程信邀夏人共攻秦州，夏人不从，信遂自伏羌城引军还，诸将皆罢兵。
现代文：冬十月初一，程信邀请夏军共同进攻秦州，夏军没有答应，程信于是从伏羌城率军退回，各将都罢兵。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Cheng Xin invited the Xia army to jointly attack Qinzhou. The Xia army did not agree, so Cheng Xin led the army back from Fuxi City, and all generals went on strike.

古文：戊寅，程信以四川宣抚司之命，斩王仕信于西和州。
现代文：二十二日，程信以四川宣抚司的命令，在西和州斩杀王仕信。
English: On the 22nd, Cheng Xin ordered Wang Shixin to be beheaded in Xihe Prefecture by the order of the Sichuan Propaganda Department.

古文：四川宣抚司以张威不进兵，罢其军职。
现代文：四川宣抚司因张威没有进兵，罢其军职。
English: Because Zhang Wei did not enlist in the army, the Sichuan Procuratorate dismissed him from his military post.

古文：十一月庚戌，大风。
现代文：十一月二十四日，刮大风。
English: On November 24th, there was a strong wind.

古文：壬子，临安府火。
现代文：二十六日，临安府发生火灾。
English: On the 26th, a fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：十二月戊午，大风。
现代文：十二月初二，刮大风。
English: On the second day of December, a strong wind began to blow.

古文：壬申，涟水忠义军统辖石珪叛。
现代文：十六日，涟水忠义军统辖石盖叛乱。
English: On the 16th, loyalist troops from Surabaya led the rebellion in Shigai.

古文：癸未，镇江副都统翟朝宗以 皇帝恭膺天命之宝 来献。
现代文：二十七日，镇江副都统翟朝宗进献 皇帝恭膺天命之宝 。
English: On the 27th, Zhenjiang Vice-Governor Zhaozong presented the treasure of destiny to Emperor Gongjun.

古文：十四年春正月丙戌朔，以雪寒，释大理、三衙、临安、两浙诸州杖以下囚。
现代文：嘉定十四年春正月初一，因雪寒释放大理寺、三衙、临安、两浙各州杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 14th year of Jiading, due to the cold and snow, the prisoners of Dali Temple, Sanluo, Lin'an and the two states of Zhejiang were released.

古文：乙未，地震。以李全还自山东，赐缗钱六万。
现代文：初十，发生地震，因李全从山东回，赐给络钱六万。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, an earthquake occurred, and because Li Quan had returned from Shandong, he was given sixty thousand rupees.

古文：庚子，立四川运米赏格。
现代文：十五日，立四川运米奖赏标准。
English: On the 15th, the Sichuan rice transportation reward standard was established.

古文：二月戊辰，金人围光州。
现代文：二月十三日，金军围攻光州。
English: On February 13, the Chinese army besieged Gwangju.

古文：己巳，金人犯五关。
现代文：十四日，金军进犯五关。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army invaded Wugang.

古文：壬申，金人治舟于团风，弗克济，遂围黄州，分兵破诸县，又遣别将犯汉阳军。
现代文：十七日，金军在团风打制舟船，没等渡江，于是围攻黄州，分兵攻破各县，又派副将进犯汉阳军。
English: On the seventeenth day, the gold army made boats in the regiment style, and did not wait to cross the river, so they besieged Huangzhou, divided the troops to break through the counties, and sent the vice-general to attack the Hanyang army.

古文：丁丑，李全弃泗州遁，还。
现代文：二十二日，李全放弃泅州逃回。
English: On the 22nd, Li Quan abandoned Zhangzhou and fled back.

古文：甲申，诏淮东、京湖诸路应援淮西，沿江制置司防守江面，权殿前司职事冯榯将兵驻鄂州，京东忠义都统李全将兵救蕲、黄，榯不果行。
现代文：二十九日，下诏淮东、京湖各路应援淮西，沿江制置司防守江面，代理殿前司职事冯树率兵进驻鄂州，京东忠义都统李全率兵救援薪州和黄州，酬刘没能成行。
English: On the 29th, the following orders were issued: Huaidong and Jinghu should support Huaixi, the riverside departments should be set up to defend the river surface, Feng Shu, the acting director of the former department, led the soldiers to enter Ezhou, Li Quan, the leader of the Beijing-Dongguan Loyid Corps, led the soldiers to rescue Zhuizhou and Huangzhou, and Guoliu could not make the trip.

古文：三月丙戌朔，鄂州副都统扈再兴引兵攻唐州。
现代文：三月初一，鄂州副都统启再兴率兵进攻唐州。
English: On the first day of March, the vice-governor of Ezhou, Zai Xing, led an army to attack Tangzhou.

古文：丁亥，金人破黄州，淮西提刑、知州事何大节弃城遁死。
现代文：初二，金军攻破黄州，淮西提刑、知州事何大节弃城逃跑而死。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army broke through Huangzhou, and Huaxi and Zhizhou abandoned the city to escape and died.

古文：庚寅，长星见。
现代文：初五，长星显现。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the long star appears.

古文：李全自楚州引兵援淮西。
现代文：李全从楚州率兵救援淮西。
English: Li Quan led soldiers from Chuzhou to rescue Huaxi.

古文：癸巳，扈再兴引所部趋蕲州。
现代文：初八，启再兴率所部到薪州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the new year, the rejuvenation rate department went to Tsuishu.

古文：甲午，太白昼见。
现代文：初九，太白星白天出现。
English: At 1:00 a.m., Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：乙未，诏京湖制置司趣援蕲、黄。
现代文：初十，下诏京湖制置司尽快救援薪州、黄州。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Beijing Lake Protection Division was ordered to rescue the cities of Zhouzhou and Huangzhou as soon as possible.

古文：己亥，金人陷蕲州，知州事李诚之及其家人、官属皆死之。
现代文：十四日，金军攻陷薪州，知州事李诚之及其家人、官属都死了。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Zhouzhou. Li Chengzhi, the governor of Zhouzhou, his family members, and officials all died.

古文：癸丑，金人退师，扈再兴邀击，败之于天长镇，甲寅晦，又败之。
现代文：二十八日，金军退兵，启再兴阻击，在天长镇打败金军，二十九日，阴晦，又打败金军。
English: On the 28th, the Chinese army retreated and launched a counterattack, defeating the Chinese army in Tianchang Town. On the 29th, in the evening, they defeated the Chinese army again.

古文：夏四月乙卯，复置诸王宫大、小学教授。
现代文：夏四月初一，重新设置诸王宫大小学教授。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, Zhu Wangguang was re-installed as a professor of elementary and junior high school.

古文：乙丑，命任子帘试于御史台。
现代文：十一日，命令任子到御史台帘前应试。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he ordered his son to go to the stage curtain to take the exam.

古文：戊辰，金人渡淮而北，李全遣兵追击，败之。
现代文：十四日，金军渡淮北退，李全派兵追击，打败金军。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army crossed the Huai River and retreated to the north. Li Quan sent soldiers to chase and defeat the Chinese army.

古文：五月甲申朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：壬辰，史弥远等上《孝宗宝训》、《皇帝会要》。
现代文：初九，史弥远等呈上孝宗宝切卜、东皇帝会要。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Shi Miyan and others presented the filial piety treasure, Cheb, to the Eastern Emperor.

古文：丙申，西川地震。
现代文：十三日，西川发生地震。
English: On the 13th, an earthquake occurred in Saikawa.

古文：乙巳，颁《庆元宽恤诏令》。
现代文：二十二日，颁布扶元宽恤诏令。
English: On the 22nd, the decree to grant amnesty to Fuyuan was issued.

古文：六月甲寅朔，初置沿江制置副使司于鄂州。丙寅，诏以侄福州观察使贵和为皇子，更名竑，进封祁国公。
现代文：六月初一，在鄂州初置沿江制置副使司。十三日，下诏命令侄福州观察使赵贵和为皇子，改名，进封祁国公。
English: On the first day of June, deputy envoys along the river were initially set up in Ezhou. On the 13th, the nephew of Fuzhou was ordered to observe and make Zhao Guiwa the prince, change his name, and enter the state.

古文：丁卯，以立皇子告于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十四日，把立皇子的事报告给天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 14th, he reported the matter of the crown prince to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：乙亥，以太祖十世孙与莒补秉义郎。
现代文：二十二日，以宋太祖十世孙赵与营补为秉义郎。
English: On the 22nd, Sun Zhao, the 10th patriarch of the Song Dynasty, and Ying Zhi were appointed as Bing Yiro.

古文：丙子，减京畿囚罪一等，释杖以下。
现代文：二十三日，减轻京瓷囚犯罪刑一等，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 23rd, the first-class criminal sentence of the Kyocera prisoner was reduced, and the prisoners below the cane sentence were released.

古文：辛巳，大风。
现代文：二十八日，刮大风。
English: On the 28th, a strong wind blew.

古文：秋七月辛丑，以赵方为京湖制置大使，贾涉为淮东制置使兼京东、河北路节制使。
现代文：秋七月十九日，任命赵方为京湖制置大使，贾涉为淮东制置使兼京东、河北路节制使。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhao Fang was appointed as the ambassador for the construction of Beijing Lake, and Jia Wu was appointed as the ambassador for the construction of Huaidong and the ambassador for the construction of Jingdong and Hebei Road.

古文：丁未，修《光宗宝训》。
现代文：二十五日，修撰优宗宝切卜。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Shoshen You Zongbao Chebu started.

古文：八月乙卯，赐史弥远家庙。
现代文：八月初四，赐史弥远家庙。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the Shiyan Family Temple was founded.

古文：任希夷罢。
现代文：任希夷被罢免。
English: Ren Xi'i was removed from office.

古文：壬戌，以兵部尚书宣缯同知枢密院事，给事中俞应符签书枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命兵部尚书宣增为同知枢密院事，给事中俞应符为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed Shang Shu Xuan Zeng of the Military Department as the Tongzhi Privy Councillor, and Zou Yingfu as the Signing Privy Councillor.

古文：甲子，以秉义郎与莒为右监门卫大将军，赐名贵诚。
现代文：十三日，任命秉义郎赵与营为右监门卫大将军，赐名贵诚。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Bingyi Lang Zhao Ying as the Right Supervisor of the Gate Guard General, and gave him the name Guisei.

古文：乙丑，追封史浩为越王，改谥忠定，配享孝宗庙庭。
现代文：十四日，追封史浩为越王，改溢号为忠定，配享孝宗庙庭。
English: On the 14th, Shihao was given the posthumous title of Yue Wang, his posthumous name was changed to Zhongding, and he was awarded the Xiaozong Temple Garden.

古文：戊寅，以侄右监门卫大将军贵诚为果州团练使。
现代文：二十七日，以侄右监门卫大将军赵贵诚为果州团练使。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Guicheng, the nephew of the Right Supervisor and Gatekeeper General, was appointed as the training envoy of the Guozhou Regiment.

古文：九月癸未，立贵诚为沂靖惠王后。
现代文：九月初二，立赵贵诚为沂靖惠王后代。
English: On the second day of September, Zhao Guicheng was designated as a descendant of Prince Su Jinghui.

古文：己丑，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：初八，祭祀景灵宫。初九，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 11th day, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：庚寅，朝飨于太庙。辛卯，合祭天地于明堂，大赦。
现代文：初十，在明堂合祭天地，举行大赦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, a general amnesty was held in Myeongdong.

古文：冬十月癸丑，京东、河北节制司言复沧州，诏以赵泽为河北东路钤辖、知州事。
现代文：冬十月初三，京东、河北节制司报告说收复沧州，下诏以赵泽为河北东路铃辖、知州事。
English: On the third day of October in the early winter, the Jingdong and Hebei Bureau of Statistics reported the recovery of Cangzhou, and announced that Zhao Ze would be in charge of Hebei East Road Ring and Chizhou affairs.

古文：甲寅，复以齐州为济南府，兖州为袭庆府。
现代文：初四，又以齐州为济南府，充州为袭庆府。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the school year, the Jinan Prefecture and the Heqing Prefecture of the Chenzhou Prefecture were selected.

古文：丙寅，夏人复以书来四川趣会兵。
现代文：十六日，夏军又致书四川催促会合军队。
English: On the 16th, Xia Jun also sent a letter to the Sichuan Urgent Meeting Army.

古文：庚午，雷。
现代文：二十日，打雷。
English: On the 16th, there was thunder.

古文：十一月己亥，安丙薨。
现代文：十一月十九日，安丙去世。
English: On November 19, An Hsiang passed away.

古文：是月，京东安抚张林叛。
现代文：这个月，京东安抚张林叛乱。
English: This month, JD.com appeased Zhang Lin's rebellion.

古文：十二月庚申，郑昭先罢。
现代文：十二月初八，郑昭先被罢免。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of December, Zheng Zhaoxian was removed from office.

古文：闰月辛巳朔，以宣缯兼参知政事，俞应符兼权参知政事。
现代文：闰十二月初一，任命宣增兼参知政事，俞应符兼代理参知政事。
English: On the first day of the second month of December, the appointment of Xuan Zeng, also a member of the Council of State, and Zou Yingfu, also an acting member of the Council of State, took place.

古文：戊申，以殿前司同正将华岳等谋为变，杀之。
现代文：二十八日，以殿前司同正将华岳等阴谋叛乱，杀之。
English: On the 28th, the former secretary of the palace and the current one conspired and rebelled against Hua Yue, and killed him.

古文：是岁，浙东、江西、福建诸路旱，沔、成、阶、利四州水，振之。
现代文：这一年，浙东、江西、福建各路早灾，洒、成、阶、利四州水灾，贩济这些地区的灾民。
English: This year, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, and Fujian all suffered from early disasters, and floods in four provinces, namely, Liaoning, Chengdu, Zhuhai, and Lijiang, and the merchants helped the victims in these regions.

古文：十五年春正月庚戌朔，御大庆殿，受恭膺天命之宝。
现代文：嘉定十五年春正月初一，到大庆殿，接受 恭膺天命之宝 。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the 15th year of Jiading, he went to Daqing Palace to receive the "Treasure of Destiny."

古文：癸丑，立李诚之庙于蕲州。
现代文：初四，在薪州立李诚之庙。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, I went to the Li Cheng Temple in Qi State.

古文：甲寅，褒赠蕲州死事官吏，录其子孙有差。
现代文：初五，褒赠薪州战死官吏，录用他们的子孙。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, officials who died in the war in Zhouzhou were awarded, and their descendants were hired.

古文：丁巳，诏抚谕山东河北军民、将帅、官吏。
现代文：初八，下诏抚谕山东和河北军民、将帅和官吏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the military and civilians, generals and officials of Shandong and Hebei were ordered to leave.

古文：己未，以受宝，大赦，文武官各进秩一级，大犒诸军。
现代文：初十，因接受 天命之宝 举行大赦，文武官吏分别晋升一级，大搞诸军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, an amnesty was held for accepting the treasure of destiny, and the civil and military officials were promoted to the first level respectively, and the army was greatly involved.

古文：二月庚子，罢御史台帘试任子法。
现代文：二月二十一日，罢除御史台帘试任子法。
English: On February 21, the Imperial Household Agency's "trial appointment" law was abolished.

古文：三月丁巳，诏江西提举司振恤旱伤州县。
现代文：三月初八，下诏江西提举司贩济抚恤受灾州县。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, Jiangxi issued a decree to raise the subsistence allowance for merchants in the affected counties.

古文：夏四月壬午，诏蠲蕲州今年租赋。
现代文：夏四月初四，下诏免除薪州今年租赋。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict exempted this year's rent from the state.

古文：五月庚戌，太白昼见。
现代文：五月初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：甲寅，诏监司虑囚，察州县匿囚者劾之。
现代文：初七，下诏监司讯问记录囚犯罪状，考察州县匿隐囚犯不报者进行弹勃。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the lower-level supervisors interrogated and recorded the criminal status of the prisoners, and inspected the state and county prisoners who did not report.

古文：丁巳，进封子祁国公竑为济国公。
现代文：初十，进封儿子祁国公赵为济国公。
English: In the early 10th century, Jinfei's son, Zhao, the prince of Qin, became the prince of Qi.

古文：己未，以侄果州团练使贵诚为邵州防御使。
现代文：十二日，任命侄果州团练使赵贵诚为邵州防御史。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Guicheng's nephew, Guozhou Rehearsal Team, was appointed to make Zhao Guicheng the defense history of Shaozhou.

古文：壬戌，知济南府种斌等攻张林于青州，林遁去。
现代文：十五日，知济南府种贾等在青州进攻张林，张林逃走。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zengjia and others from Jinan attacked Zhanglin in Qingzhou, and Zhanglin fled.

古文：己巳，修《孝宗经武要略》。
现代文：二十二日，修撰孝宗经武要略。
English: On the 22nd, the outline of the Filial Piety Sutra was compiled.

古文：六月辛卯，俞应符薨。
现代文：六月十四日，俞应符去世。
English: On June 14, Zou Yingfu passed away.

古文：秋七月甲子，诏江淮、荆襄、四川制置监司条画营田来上。
现代文：秋七月十八日，下诏江淮、荆襄、四川制置监司规划营田上报。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, Jianghuai, Jingxiang and Sichuan Construction Supervision Department of the State Council issued a report on the planning of Yingtan.

古文：八月己卯，命户部详议义役。
现代文：八月初四，命令户部详细讨论义役。
English: On the 4th of August, the head of the household was ordered to discuss volunteer work in detail.

古文：辛卯，诏文武官毋得归宗，著为令。
现代文：十六日，下诏文武官不得归宗，著为令。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: "Civil and military officers are not allowed to return to their families."

古文：甲午，有彗星出于氐。
现代文：十九日，有彗星出现在氏宿。
English: On the 19th, a comet appeared in Ujiyado.

古文：九月辛亥，以宣缯参知政事，给事中程卓同知枢密院事，吏部尚书薛极赐出身，签书枢密院事。
现代文：九月初六，任命宣增为参知政事，给事中程卓为同知枢密院事，吏部尚书薛极赐给出身、签书枢密院事。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, Xuan Zeng was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, Zhuo Zhongcheng was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, and Xue Ji was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：癸丑，雷，大雨雹。
现代文：初八，打雷，降大冰雹。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, there will be thunder and large hail.

古文：丁巳，复以随州三关隶德安府，置关使。
现代文：十二日，又以随州三关隶属德安府，设置关使。
English: On the 12th, Suizhou Sankuan was subordinated to De'an Prefecture, and a customs officer was set up.

古文：壬戌，彗星没。
现代文：十七日，彗星消失。
English: On the 17th, the comet disappeared.

古文：辛未，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：冬十月丙子，以收复京东州军，犒赏忠义有差。
现代文：冬十月初二，因收复京东州军，搞赏忠义人不等。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the restoration of the East Jingzhou Army brought rewards to the loyal and righteous.

古文：十一月戊午，赦京东、河北路。
现代文：十一月十四日，赦免京东、河北路。
English: On November 14, Beijing East Road and Hebei Road were pardoned.

古文：十二月乙亥朔，发米振给临安府贫民。
现代文：十二月初一，发米贩济临安府贫民。
English: On the first day of December, a rice vendor helps the poor in Lin'an.

古文：丙子，以雪寒，释京畿及两浙诸州杖以下囚。
现代文：初二，因雪寒，释放京瓷和两浙各州杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the second day of junior high school, due to the cold and snow, Kyocera and two states in Zhejiang released prisoners who had been sentenced to caning or less.

古文：丁亥，以李全为保宁军节度使、右金吾卫上将军、京东路镇抚副使。
现代文：十三日，任命李全为保宁军节度使、右金吾卫上将军、京东路镇抚副使。
English: On the 13th, Li Quan was appointed as the Baoding Army's envoy to the festival, the right Kim Wuwei general, and the deputy envoy to the Jingdong Road township.

古文：十六年春正月戊申，诏命官犯赃毋免约法。
现代文：嘉定十六年春正月初五，下诏命官犯贪赃者不得免除约法处罚。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the spring of the 16th year of Jiading, the following edict ordered that officials who commit corruption shall not be exempted from legal punishment.

古文：己酉，子坻生，辛酉，命淮东制置司振给山东流民。
现代文：初六，子赵低出生。十八日，命令淮东制置司贩济山东流民。
English: On the 18th, he ordered Huaidong to set up a trading post to help the displaced people in eastern Shanshan.

古文：二月戊子，雨土。
现代文：二月二十五日，降土。
English: On February 25th, the landings began.

古文：己丑，嗣秀王师禹薨，追封和王。
现代文：十六日，嗣秀王赵师禹去世，追封为和王。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Shiyu, the successor of King Xiu, died and was posthumously crowned as the King of Peace.

古文：戊戌，子坻薨，追封邳王，谥冲美。
现代文：二十五日，子赵低去世，追封为邱王，溢号冲美。
English: On the 25th, Zhao's son Zhao Gao died and was posthumously crowned King of Qiu.

古文：三月戊申，张林所部邢德来归，诏进二官，复以为京东东路副总管。
现代文：三月初五，张林所部邢德来归附，下诏进二官，又任命为京东东路副总管。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the year, Zheng De, the head of the Zhang Lin Research Institute, came to attach, and was promoted to the second post, and was also appointed as the deputy general manager of the Beijing East East Road.

古文：丁卯，以道州民饥，诏发米振之。
现代文：二十四日，因道州百姓饥荒，下诏发米贩济。
English: On the 24th, due to the famine of the people in Daozhou, the next edict was issued to sell rice.

古文：夏五月甲辰，诏右选试注官如左选之制。
现代文：夏五月初二，下诏右选试注官如同左选之制。
English: On the second day of the fifth month of summer, the right-selection examiners will be the same as the left-selection system.

古文：戊申，赐礼部进士蒋重珍以下五百四十有九人及第、出身。
现代文：初六，赐礼部进士蒋重珍以下五百四十九人及第、出身。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the 549 members of the ceremonial club, including Jiang Shuzhen, were given their first and second birthdays.

古文：戊辰，诏复潭州税酒法。
现代文：二十六日，下诏免除潭州税酒法。
English: On the 26th, the lower edict exempted the Tanzhou Tax Liquor Law.

古文：六月丁酉，程卓薨。
现代文：六月二十六日，程卓去世。
English: On June 26, Cheng Zhuo passed away.

古文：秋八月辛巳，诏州县经界毋增绍兴税额。
现代文：秋八月十一日，下诏州县经界不得增加绍兴税额。
English: On the 11th day of the 8th month of autumn, the economic circle of Zhaozhou County shall not increase the amount of Shaoxing tax.

古文：癸未，申严舶船铜钱之禁。
现代文：十三日，申严舶船铜钱出境的禁令。
English: On the 13th, the ban on the departure of copper coins from ships was strictly enforced.

古文：九月庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：乙巳，诏江、淮诸司振恤被水贫民。
现代文：十八日，下诏江、淮各部门贩济抚恤遭水灾贫民。
English: On the 18th, the departments of the Lower Yangtze River and the Huaihe River will provide subsidies to the poor people affected by the floods.

古文：乙卯，雷。
现代文：二十八日，打雷。
English: On the 28th, there was thunder.

古文：冬十一月辛亥，以太平州大水，诏振恤之。
现代文：冬十一月十三日，因太平州大水，下诏贩济抚恤。
English: On the 13th day of November in winter, due to the heavy water in Taiping County, the merchants were given a pension.

古文：十二月辛巳，命淮东、西总领及沿江被水州募江西、湖南民入米补官。
现代文：十二月十三日，命令淮东、西总领和沿江遭水灾州招募江西、湖南百姓人米补官。
English: On December 13, he ordered the governors of Huaidong and Xi and the flood-stricken provinces along the Yangtze River to recruit people from Jiangxi and Hunan as replacement officials.

古文：癸未，嗣濮王不凌薨。
现代文：十五日，嗣攫王赵不凌去世。
English: On the fifteenth day, the heir to the throne, King Zhao Bingling passed away.

古文：壬辰，雷。
现代文：二十四日，打雷。
English: On the 24th, thunder.

古文：十七年春正月戊戌朔，诏补先圣裔孔元用为通直郎，录程颐后。
现代文：嘉定十七年春正月初一，下诏补先圣后代孔元用为通直郎，录用程颐后代。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 17th year of Jiading, the following edict was issued to supplement the descendants of the previous saint, Kong Yuan, as Tsun Nairo, and the descendants of Cheng Yao were hired.

古文：癸亥，命淮东西、湖北路转运司提督营屯田。
现代文：二十六日，命令淮东西、湖北路转运司提督营田屯田。
English: On the 26th, he ordered the Huai East-West and Hubei Road Transportation Division Admiral Yingtian Tunden.

古文：二月癸巳，蠲台州逋赋十万余缗。
现代文：二月二十六日，免除台州拖欠赋税十万多络。
English: On February 26, Taizhou was exempted from tax arrears of more than 100,000 yuan.

古文：甲午，命临安府振粜贫民。
现代文：二十七日，命令临安贩桌接济贫民。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Lin'an vendors to set up tables to help the poor.

古文：三月癸丑，雪。
现代文：三月十六日，降雪。
English: Snowfall on March 16.

古文：是月，金人迫西和州，寻引兵还。
现代文：这个月，金军进逼西和州，不久率兵退回。
English: This month, the gold army pushed into the west and the state, and soon led the soldiers back.

古文：夏四月辛卯，诏庐州振粜饥民。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，下诏庐州贩桌接济贫民。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Bozhou vendor's table came down to help the poor.

古文：乙未，赐李全、彭义斌钱三十万缗为犒赏战士费。
现代文：二十九日，赐李全、彭义斌钱三十万络为搞赏战士费用。
English: On the 29th, Li Quan and Peng Yibin were awarded 300,000 rupees to reward the soldiers.

古文：五月戊戌，诏核实两淮、京湖、四川、江上诸军之数。
现代文：五月初二，下诏核实两淮、京湖、四川、江上诸军之数。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the following edict was issued to verify the number of troops in the two Huai, Jinghu, Sichuan and Yangtze rivers.

古文：六月丁卯朔，太白经天，昼见。
现代文：六月初一，太白星白天显现。
English: On the first day of June, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸酉，知西和州尚震午坐金兵至谋遁，夺三官、岳州居住。
现代文：初七，西和知州尚震午因金军到达阴谋逃跑，被削夺三官，岳州居住。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Xihe Zhizhou was still shaken in the afternoon due to the arrival of the gold army to escape the plot, was deprived of the three officials, and lived in Yuezhou.

古文：壬辰，大名府苏椿等举城来归，诏悉补官，即以其州授之。
现代文：二十六日，大名府苏椿等举城来归，下诏补官，即以其州命他管理。
English: On the 26th, the daimyo, Su Tsubaki, and others came back to the city, and he was appointed as a supplementary official, that is, he was appointed by his state.

古文：秋七月丁酉朔，命福建路监司振恤被水贫民。
现代文：秋七月初一，命令福建路监司贩济抚恤遭水灾贫民。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the Fujian Road Supervisor ordered the vendors to give alms to the flood-stricken poor.

古文：辛亥，命师嵓嗣秀王。
现代文：十六日，命令赵师莆嗣秀王。
English: On the 16th, he ordered Zhao Shishi to kidnap Shiu Wang.

古文：八月乙亥，罢通州天赐盐场。
现代文：八月初十，罢除通州天赐盐场。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, Tongzhou Heaven-sent Salt Farm was abolished.

古文：丙戌，帝不豫。
现代文：二十一日，宁宗身体染病。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor fell ill.

古文：闰八月乙未朔，申严两浙诸州输苗过取之禁。
现代文：闰八月初一，申严两浙各州输纳苗税多取的禁令。
English: On the first day of August, the two states of Zhejiang imposed a ban on accepting more seedlings tax.

古文：丁酉，皇帝崩于福宁殿，年五十七。
现代文：初三，宁宗在福宁殿逝世，终年五十七岁。
English: On the third day of the third month of the year, Ningzong died at Fu Ning Palace, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：史弥远传遗诏，立侄贵诚为皇子，更名昀，即皇帝位。
现代文：史弥远传布遗诏，立侄赵贵诚为皇子，改名晌，即皇帝位。
English: Shiyiyuan promulgated his last will and testament, making his nephew Zhao Guicheng the prince and changing his name to Zhao, that is, the emperor.

古文：尊皇后为皇太后，垂帘听政。
现代文：尊皇后为皇太后，垂帘听政。
English: The queen is revered as the empress dowager, and she listens to the government.

古文：进封皇子竑为济阳郡王，出居湖州。
现代文：进封皇子赵为济阳郡王，出居湖州。
English: Zhao, the prince of Jinfeng, became the king of Jiyang County and left for Huzhou.

古文：宝庆元年正月己丑，谥曰仁文哲武恭孝皇帝，庙号宁宗。
现代文：宝庆元年正月二十八日，溢号为仁文哲武恭孝皇帝，庙号为宁宗。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the first year of Baoqing, the posthumous name was Emperor Renwenzhebuyongxiao, and the temple name was Ningzong.

古文：三月癸酉，葬于会稽之永茂陵。三年九月，加谥法天备道纯德茂功仁文哲武圣睿恭孝皇帝。
现代文：三月十三日，葬于会稽永茂陵，宝庆三年九月，加溢为法天备道纯德茂功仁文哲武圣睿恭孝皇帝。
English: On March 13th, he was buried in the Yongmao Mausoleum, and in September of the third year of Baoqing, he was crowned as the Emperor of Law, Heaven, Preparation, Morality, Merit, Literature, Military Might, Wisdom, and Filial Piety.

古文：赞曰：宋世内禅者四，宁宗之禅，独当事势之难，能不失礼节焉，斯可谓善处矣。
现代文：评论说：宋朝宫廷内自动让位的有高宗、孝宗、光宗、宁宗四位皇帝，唯独宁宗即位，面临国家形势艰难之时，却能在这件事上不失掉礼节操守，可以说是善于处事啊！
English: Comment: Four emperors of the Song Dynasty, including Gao Zong, Xiao Zong, Guang Zong, and Ning Zong, voluntarily abdicated in the court of the Song Dynasty. However, Ning Zong ascended the throne, and faced with the difficult situation of the country, he could not lose the etiquette and conduct in this matter, and could be said to be good at handling things!

古文：初年以旧学辅导之功，召用宿儒，引拔善类，一时守文继体之政，烨然可观。
现代文：宁宗当政初年，靠着旧学辅导的功效，招引重用老成博学之士，引用提拔贤能之人，一个时期遵守成法继承传统的政治局面，非常盛隆可观。
English: In the first year of Ningzong's administration, relying on the effect of old-school guidance, attracting and reusing old and learned people, citing and promoting capable people, and adhering to the law and inheriting the traditional political situation for a period of time, it was very prosperous and impressive.

古文：中更侂胄用事，内蓄群奸，至指正人为邪，正学为伪，外挑强邻，流毒淮甸。
现代文：中途换上韩青执掌大权，内部潜藏着许多奸臣，以至于把正派的人当作邪恶的人，把纯正的学问视为虚假的学问，对外挑起与强邻金国的战事，祸及淮河两岸。
English: Halfway through, Han Qing took over the reins of power, and many treacherous vassals lurked within, to the extent that they regarded decent people as evil, regarded pure learning as false learning, and provoked external wars with the strong neighboring country of Jin, bringing disaster to both sides of the Huai River.

古文：频岁兵败，乃函侂胄之首，行成于金，国体亏矣。
现代文：由于连年用兵失败，结果包上韩青的头，送到了金国，国家的根本受到了损失。
English: Due to the failure of consecutive years of using soldiers, as a result, Han Qing's head was wrapped and sent to Jin Guo, and the country suffered a loss.

古文：既而弥远擅权，幸帝耄荒，窃弄威福。
现代文：以后又是史弥远独揽朝政，他们庆幸皇上年老昏乱，暗中弄权作威作福。
English: Later, it was Shiyiyuan who monopolized the imperial politics. They congratulated the emperor on his old age and drowsiness, and secretly used their power to gain prestige and wealth.

古文：至于皇储国统，乘机伺间，亦得遂其废立之私，他可知也。
现代文：甚至在选立太子制订纲纪等大事上，也乘机寻找缝隙，达到或废或立太子的阴谋，这些事情别人都很明白。
English: Even in important matters such as the selection of the crown prince and the establishment of the curriculum, they also took the opportunity to look for loopholes, to achieve or scrap the plot to establish the crown prince, these things are well understood by others.

古文：虽然，宋东都至于仁宗，四传而享国百年，邵雍称为前代所无，南渡至宁宗，亦四传而享国九十有八年，是亦岂偶然哉。
现代文：虽然如此，宋朝自从建都开封到宋仁宗，已经四代皇帝相继在位近百年，邵雍声称这是以前各朝代所没有的。自从宋朝南渡到宋宁宗，也经四代皇帝传位九十八年，这也许是偶然如此吧。
English: Nevertheless, since the Song Dynasty built its capital Kaifeng to Song Renzong, four generations of emperors have successively reigned for nearly a hundred years. Shaoyong claims that this is unprecedented in previous dynasties. Since the Song Dynasty moved south to Song Ningzong, it has been ninety-eight years since the four generations of emperors passed the throne. Perhaps this is a coincidence.

古文：惜乎神器授受之际，宁、理之视仁、英，其迹虽同，其情相去远矣。
现代文：可惜的是皇位授受的时候，宁宗、理宗与仁宗、英宗相对照，他们的路子虽然相同，其情致却相离太远了。
English: Unfortunately, when the imperial throne was conferred, Ning Zong and Li Zong, as opposed to Ren Zong and Ying Zong, although their paths were the same, their feelings were too far apart.

