古文：侯张薛侯君集，豳州三水人。以材雄称。
现代文：侯君集是豳州三水县人。以才力雄豪见称。
English: Hou Junji is from Sanshui County, Ganzhou. He is famous for his talent.

古文：少事秦王幕府，从征讨有功，擢累左虞候、车骑将军，封全椒县子。
现代文：少时侍奉于秦王幕府，随从征讨立有功劳，历任左虞候、车骑将军，封为全椒县子。
English: At a young age, he served in the Qin Dynasty Shogunate, and was awarded the title of Quanzhe County Son for his meritorious service as a follower of the Conquest.

古文：预诛隐太子尤力。
现代文：参与诛除隐太子尤为得力。
English: It was particularly effective in removing the crown prince.

古文：王即位，拜左卫将军，进封潞国公，邑千户。
现代文：秦王即位后，迁任左卫将军，进封为潞国公，享受封邑一千户。
English: After the enthronement of King Qin, he was transferred to the position of General of the Left Division of the Guards, and was given the title of Prince of the State of Qi, enjoying the fief of a thousand households.

古文：贞观四年，迁兵部尚书，俄检校吏部尚书，参议朝政。
现代文：贞观四年，迁任兵部尚书，不久又任检校吏部尚书，参议朝政。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, he was transferred to the military department of Shangshu, and soon he was appointed to the inspection department of Shangshu, and participated in the imperial government.

古文：李靖讨吐谷浑，以君集为积石道行军总管。
现代文：李靖征讨吐谷浑时，以君集为积石道行军总管。
English: When Li Jingzheng was campaigning against Tugu Hun, he appointed Junji as the general manager of the march on the Stone Road.

古文：师次鄯州，议所向。
现代文：大军行至鄯州，商议出击方向。
English: The large army marched to Bozhou to discuss the direction of the attack.

古文：君集曰： 王师已至，而贼不走险，天赞我也。
现代文：君集说： 王师已至，而贼寇未走赴险阻，这是上天助我。
English: "Heaven help me," said the prince, "for the king has come, but the thief has not gone.

古文：若以精兵掩不备，彼不我虞，必有大利。
现代文：如率精兵袭其不备，出彼意料之外，必能大获全胜。
English: If he does not have the best soldiers to attack him, he will be able to win a complete victory unexpectedly.

古文：若遁岨山谷，克之实难。 
现代文：如让其逃脱，守险于山谷再行讨伐就很难取胜了。 
English: If it is allowed to escape, it will be difficult for the defenders to win in the valley.

古文：靖然其计，简锐士，约赍深入，追及其众于库山，大战，破之，进会大非川，平其国。
现代文：李靖赞同其议，便挑选锐卒，轻装深入，追及吐谷浑之众于库山，大战破敌，进军会师于大非川，平定其国。
English: Li Jing agreed with his suggestion, so he selected the best soldiers, went deep with light equipment, chased the hordes of Tuyun in Kushan, defeated the enemy in a great battle, and marched into the confederacy in Dafu River to pacify his country.

古文：会诏世封功臣，授陈州刺史，更封陈；群臣不愿封，进吏部尚书。
现代文：其后下诏世封功臣，授职陈州刺史，改封为陈国公；因群臣不愿世封作罢。后升任吏部尚书。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Chen Guogong after he was awarded the title of Chen Zhou Zi Shi. However, he declined the title of Chen Guogong because the ministers did not want to grant him the title. Later, he was promoted to the position of Li Bu Shang Shu.

古文：君集本以行伍奋，不知学；后贵，益自喜，好书。
现代文：君集起身行伍之中，平素不知学问为何物；及为贵臣之后，方才喜好读书。
English: When you were marching in the army, you didn't know what learning was. It was only after you became a high-ranking official that you began to enjoy reading.

古文：及典选，分明课最，有誉于时。
现代文：掌管选举考课时，殿最分明，颇有时誉。
English: When he was in charge of the election examination, he was very clear and had a good reputation.

古文：吐蕃围松州，授当弥道行军大总管以击之。
现代文：吐蕃围困松州，授任为当弥道行军大总管以出击。
English: When Songzhou was besieged by Tubo, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army marching to Tangya.

古文：高昌不臣，拜交河道行军大总管出讨。
现代文：高昌王不臣服，拜君集为交河道行军大总管出讨。
English: Gaochang Wang refused to submit, and Baijun set out to become the general manager of the cross-river march.

古文：王曲文泰笑曰： 唐去我七千里，碛卤二千里无水草，冬风裂肌，夏风如焚，行贾至者百之一，安能致大兵乎？
现代文：高昌王麴文泰大笑说： 唐国离我们有七千里远，沙漠盐碱地二千里而无水草，冬风刺骨，夏风似火，行商到此仅百分之一，怎能通行大军呢？
English: Gaochang Wang Qianwen Tai laughed loudly and said, "Tang is seven thousand miles away from us, the desert is two thousand miles of salt and alkaline land with no water plants, the winter wind is biting, the summer wind is like fire, and only one percent of merchants come here. How can a large army pass through?

古文：使能顿吾城下一再旬，食尽当溃，吾且系而虏之。 
现代文：如果屯兵于坚城之下，不过一二十天，食尽必溃，我就可以捆缚他们了。 
English: If the camp is encamped under a fortified city, and it is not more than ten or twenty days before it is completely destroyed, then I will bind them.

古文：君集次碛口，而文泰死，子智盛袭位。
现代文：君集率军进至碛口时，文泰死去，其子智盛承袭其位。
English: When Junji led the army to Hekou, Wentei died, and his son Tomomori succeeded him.

古文：进营柳谷，候骑言国方葬死君，诸将请袭之。
现代文：大军进驻谷，侦骑告知该国正在安葬已故国君，诸将请求出兵袭击。
English: A large army entered the valley, and the scouts informed the country that the deceased sovereign was being buried, and they would request the dispatch of troops to attack.

古文：君集曰： 不可，天子以高昌骄慢，使吾龚行天罚，今袭人于墟墓间，非问罪也。 
现代文：君集说： 不行，天子因高昌国骄慢无礼，派我恭行天罚往讨，如今袭击其人于坟墓之间，就不是问罪之师了。 
English: Kim Ji said, "No, the Son of Heaven, because of the arrogance and rudeness of Gaochang, sent me to respectfully carry out the punishment of heaven, and now attacking his people between the graves is not the teacher of sin.

古文：于是鼓而前。
现代文：于是大振旗鼓而行。
English: So they marched with great fanfare.

古文：贼婴城自守，遣谕之，不下。
现代文：贼众据城固守，遣使晓谕而不听从。
English: The band of raiders encamped against the city, and issued a proclamation, but they did not obey.

古文：乃刊木塞堑，引撞车毁其堞，飞石如雨，所向无敢当，因拔其城，俘男女七千，进围都城，初，文泰与西突厥欲谷设约，有急相援。
现代文：便斩树填堑，推出撞车毁其城堞，抛掷石块如雨，所向不可抵挡，因而攻拔其城，俘获男女七千人，进而围困都城。起初，文泰与西突厥欲谷设相约，如有急难则将救援。
English: He cut down trees and filled them with straw, pushed a crashed car to destroy his city wall, threw stones like rain, which were irresistible, and thus attacked his city, captured seven thousand men and women, and then besieged the capital city. At first, Ventai and West Turk set up a meeting, and if there was an emergency, they would rescue.

古文：及是，欲谷设益惧，西走，智盛失援，乃降。
现代文：此时，欲谷设却因恐惧而西奔，智盛失去援兵，只好开城出降。
English: At this time, Zhi Gu set off to the west out of fear. When Zhisheng lost reinforcements, he had no choice but to leave the city.

古文：高昌平，君集刻石纪功还。
现代文：高昌平定，君集刻石纪功而还。
English: Gaochang was pacified, and Junji carved a stone record and returned it.

古文：初，君集配没罪人不以闻，又私取珍宝、妇女，将士因亦盗入，不能制。
现代文：起初，君集配没罪人不奏闻朝廷，又私自收取珍宝、妇女，将士因此也盗取宝物，君集不能控制。
English: At the beginning, the king's collection was not able to control the king's collection because the king's collection was full of criminals who did not report to the court, and the king's collection was also full of treasures and women, so the king's collection also stole treasures.

古文：及还京师，有司劾之，诏君集诣狱簿对。
现代文：到返回京师后，有关官员弹劾其罪，下诏君集入狱接受审讯。
English: After returning to Beijing, officials impeached him and he was sent to prison for trial.

古文：中书侍郎岑文本谏曰： 高昌之罪，议者以其遐远，欲置度外，唯陛下奋独见之明，授决胜之略，君集得指期平殄。
现代文：中书侍郎岑文本劝谏说： 高昌有罪，朝议认为路途遥远，打算置之度外而不问，惟陛下运用独见之明，授予决胜之略，君集方才如期平定。
English: In the text of the Chinese book, the attendant advised that: Gaochang was guilty, the court considered that the road was far away, and intended to set aside the degree without asking. However, His Majesty used his unique insight to award the winning strategy, and the Junji side was defeated as scheduled.

古文：今推劳将帅，从征之人悉蒙重赏，未逾数日，更以属吏，天下闻之，谓陛下录过遗功，无以劝后。
现代文：现在推恩慰劳将帅，从征之人尽受重赏，不过几天，又交付法吏，天下臣民闻知此事，必说陛下只记其过而忘其功，无以勉励后人。
English: Now, thanks are given to the generals for their consolation and labor, and those who followed the enlistment are highly rewarded. However, a few days later, they were handed over to the legal officials. When the subjects of the world heard about this, it must be said that His Majesty only remembered it in passing and forgot its merits, and had no way to encourage future generations.

古文：且古之出师，克敌有重赏，不胜蒙显戮。
现代文：况且古时命将出征，胜敌有重赏，不胜受严刑。
English: Moreover, in ancient times, it was the general's duty to go to war, and those who defeated the enemy would receive a heavy reward, while those who failed to do so would be severely punished.

古文：当其有功也，虽贪财纵欲，尚蒙爵邑；其无功也，虽勤躬洁己，不免鈇钺。
现代文：当其有功之时，即使贪财好色，也蒙爵邑之赏；如其无功，虽勤俭清廉，也不免斩首之刑。
English: If he is meritorious, even if he is greedy and lascivious, he will be rewarded with a peerage; if he is not meritorious, even if he is diligent, frugal and honest, he will be beheaded.

古文：故曰： 记人之功，忘人之过，宜为君者也。 
现代文：所以《尚书》说： 记人之功，忘人之过，应当成为君主啊。 
English: Therefore, "Shangshu" said: "He who remembers people's merits and forgets people's faults should become a monarch."

古文：昔李广利贪不爱卒，陈汤盗所收康居财物，二主皆赦其罪，封侯赐金。
现代文：从前李广利贪婪而不爱士卒，陈汤盗取所收缴的康居之财，两位皇上全都赦免其罪，封侯赐金。
English: In the past, Li Guangli was greedy and did not love his subordinates, Chen Tang stole the confiscated wealth of Kangju, and the two emperors all pardoned his sins and granted him money.

古文：夫将帅之臣，廉慎少而贪没多。
现代文：大凡将帅之臣，廉洁谨慎者少而贪婪妄为者多。
English: Great generals have few honest and prudent subordinates, but many greedy and reckless ones.

古文：军法曰： 使智，使勇，使贪，使愚。
现代文：黄石公《军势》上说 ：使用智者，使用勇者，使用贪者，使用愚者。
English: Huangshi Gong said in "Military Power": use the wise, use the brave, use the greedy, use the foolish.

古文：故智者乐立其功，勇者好行其志，贪者邀趋其利，愚者不计其死。 
现代文：因为智者乐于立功，勇者喜于行志，贪者趋利敢战，愚者不虑其死。 
English: Because the wise are happy to make meritorious deeds, the brave are happy to act, the greedy seek profits and dare to fight, and the foolish do not care about their death.

古文：是以前圣使人，必收所长而弃所短。
现代文：所以前代圣人任用将才，莫不取其所长而弃其所短。
English: Therefore, the previous generation of sages appointed generals, taking advantage of their strengths and abandoning their shortcomings.

古文：陛下宜申宥君集，俾复朝列，以劝有功。 
现代文：陛下应当宽宥君集，使他重登朝列，以勉励有功之人。 
English: Your Majesty should pardon Junji and reinstate him in the imperial line to encourage those who have meritorious deeds.

古文：帝寤，释不问。
现代文：太宗明白过来，释放君集而不问其过。
English: Taizong came to understand and released Junji without questioning him.

古文：君集自恃有功，以它罪被系，居怏怏不平。
现代文：君集自恃有功，而以贪冒之罪被逮，心中怏怏不平。
English: Kim Ji, who prided himself on his achievements, was arrested for the crime of embezzlement, and his heart was not at ease.

古文：会张亮出洛州都督，君集谬激说曰： 何为见排？ 
现代文：恰逢张亮出任洛州都督，君集故意激怒张亮说： 为何事被排挤出京？ 
English: Coinciding with Zhang Liang's appointment as the governor of Loushou, Junji deliberately angered Zhang Liang and said: Why was he ousted from Beijing?

古文：亮曰： 公排我，尚谁咎？ 
现代文：张亮说： 是您排挤，还能怪谁呢？ 
English: Zhang Liang said, "You are the one who pushed them out. Who else can be blamed?

古文：君集曰： 我平一国还，触天子嗔，何能排君？ 
现代文：君集说： 我平定一国回来，触惹天子发怒，怎能排挤您呢？ 
English: Kim Ji-sik said, "If I return from pacifying a country and anger the Son of Heaven, how can I push you out?"

古文：因攘袂曰： 郁郁不可活，能反乎？
现代文：随即挽起衣袖，说 ：沉闷受压活得没意思，您能造反吗？
English: Then he rolled up his sleeves and said: Can you rebel against the dullness and pressure of an uninteresting life?

古文：当与公反。 
现代文：我可与您同反。 
English: I can't disagree with you.

古文：亮密以闻。
现代文：张亮暗地奏闻此事。
English: Zhang Liang secretly reported the matter.

古文：帝曰： 卿与君集皆功臣，今独相语而无左验，奈何？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：您与君集都是功臣，君集独自与您相语而无验证，怎么办呢？ 
English: Taizong said, "You and Junji are both heroes. How can Junji talk to you without verification?

古文：秘不发，待君集如初。
现代文：便不问其事，而对待君集如初。
English: He did not ask about it, but treated Junji as before.

古文：皇太子承乾数有过，虑废，知君集犯望，因其婿贺兰楚石为千牛，私引君集入，问自安计。
现代文：皇太子承乾屡犯过失，担心被废，闻知君集不满，因而通过君集女婿东宫千牛贺兰楚石，私引君集进宫，问以自安之计。
English: Crown Prince Jian Qian repeatedly committed mistakes, worried about being scrapped, and heard that Junji was dissatisfied. Therefore, through Junji's son-in-law, Donggu Qian Niu Heran Chu Shi, he brought Junji into the palace and asked for a plan for self-reliance.

古文：君集举手谓曰： 此手当为殿下用之。 
现代文：君集举起手对他说 ：此手当为陛下效劳。 
English: Kim Ji-sik raised his hand and said to him, "This hand should serve your majesty."

古文：又遣楚石语承乾曰： 魏王得爱，陛下若有诏召，愿毋轻入。 
现代文：又派楚石对承乾说 ：魏王得宠，陛下若有诏书征召，希望不要轻易入宫。 
English: He also sent Chu Shi to Cheng Qian, saying, "The Wei king is favored. If your majesty is summoned by imperial edict, I hope you will not enter the palace easily."

古文：承乾纳之。
现代文：承乾采纳其策。
English: Chengyan adopted his strategy.

古文：然君集常畏谋泄，忽忽不自安，或中夕惊吒，妻怪之，曰： 公，国大臣，何为尔？
现代文：但君集常常害怕阴谋泄漏，惶惶而不自安，有时夜半惊起，其妻觉得奇怪，对他说： 您是国家大臣，为何这样呢？
English: However, he was often afraid that the plot would be exposed. He was panicked and not at ease. Sometimes he would wake up in the middle of the night. His wife thought it was strange and said to him, "You are the minister of state, why is this happening?"

古文：若有所负，宜自归，首领尚可全。 
现代文：如有犯罪之事，应当自归其罪，性命还可保全。 
English: If there is a crime, they should incriminate themselves, and their lives can still be saved.

古文：不从。
现代文：君集不听其言。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：承乾事觉，捕君集下狱。
现代文：承乾事发后，收捕君集入狱。
English: After the incident in Chengxian, Junji was arrested and jailed.

古文：楚石告状，帝自临问，曰： 我不欲令刀笔吏辱公。
现代文：楚石又告发其事，太宗亲自临问，说 ：我不想让刀笔吏折辱您。 
English: Chu Shi also reported the matter, and Emperor Taizong personally interrogated him, saying, "I don't want you to be humiliated by the clerk."

古文：君集辞穷不能对。
现代文：君集辞穷而不能回答。
English: You are too tired to answer.

古文：帝语群臣曰： 君集于国有功，朕不忍置诸法，将丐其命，公卿其许我乎？ 
现代文：太宗对群臣说： 君集于国有功，我不忍心置之于法，想免其死罪，各位能答应我吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers, "You have all made great contributions to the country. I cannot bear to put it before the law, and I want to avoid the death penalty. Can you all agree with me?

古文：君臣皆曰： 君集罪大逆不道，请论如法。 
现代文：群臣都说： 君集之罪，大逆不道，请依照法令处决。 
English: The courtiers all said, "The crime of gathering together is high treason, please execute him according to the law."

古文：帝乃谓曰： 与公诀矣，今而后，徒见公遗像已！ 
现代文：太宗便对君集说： 与您永别，从今以后，只能观看您的遗像了！ 
English: Taizong then said to Junshu: "Farewell forever, from now on, I can only look at your remains!"

古文：因泣下，遂斩之，籍其家。
现代文：因而流下眼泪，随即将他斩首，并籍没其家。
English: So he shed tears, beheaded him, and left his family destitute.

古文：君集临刑色不变，谓监吏曰： 我岂反者乎？
现代文：君集临刑神色不变，对监斩官说 ：我哪是谋反之人？
English: With his face unchanged, he said to the executioner: "Who am I, a rebel?

古文：蹉跌至此。
现代文：竟落到如此地步！
English: It has come to this!

古文：然尝为将，破二国，若言之陛下，丐一子以守祭祀。 
现代文：但我曾任将领，破灭两国，望能告知陛下，免坐一子以守祭祀。 
English: But I was once a general, I destroyed two countries, and I hope to be able to inform Your Majesty that I will spare one son for the sake of sacrifice.

古文：帝闻，原其妻及一子，徙岭表。
现代文：太宗闻知，宽宥其妻及一子死罪，流放岭南。
English: Emperor Taizong Hunchi pardoned his wife and one son for the capital crime and exiled them to Lingnan.

古文：始，帝命李靖教君集兵法，既而奏： 靖且反，兵之隐微，不以示臣。 
现代文：起初，太宗命令李靖教给君集兵法，过后君集上奏说： 李靖将会谋反，兵事隐微之处，不肯告诉我。 
English: At first, Emperor Taizong ordered Li Jingjiao to give him the rules of war. Later, he made a report at the assembly, saying, "Li Jingjiao will rebel, and he will not tell me the details of the war."

古文：帝以让靖，靖曰： 方中原无事，臣之所教，足以制四夷，而求尽臣术，此君集欲反耳。
现代文：太宗为此责备李靖。李靖说： 如今中原无事，臣所教之法，足以制服四夷，而君集却想学尽臣之谋略，这是君集想要谋反。 
English: Emperor Taizong reproached Li Jing for this. Li Jing said: Nowadays, there is no trouble in Central Plains, the methods taught by the vassals are enough to subdue the four Emperors, but Junji wants to learn all the strategies of the vassals. This is Junji's attempt to rebel.

古文：靖为右仆射，君集为兵部尚书，同还省，君集马过门数步乃觉，靖语人曰： 君集其有异虑乎？ 
现代文：李靖为右仆射，君集为兵部尚书，一同回省，君集乘马过门好几步才发觉，李靖对人说： 君集大概有什么异谋吧？ 
English: Li Jing, as the right-hand man, and Jun Ji, as the head of the military department, returned to the province together. It took several steps for Jun Ji to cross the gate on horseback before he was discovered. Li Jing said to the man, "I wonder if Jun Ji is plotting something?"

古文：后果如言。
现代文：后来果如其言。
English: It was later fulfilled.

古文：张亮，郑州荥阳人。
现代文：张亮是郑州荥阳县人。
English: Zhang Liang is from Shenyang County, Zhengzhou.

古文：起畎亩，志趣奇谲，虽外敦厚而内不情。
现代文：起自农耕之家，志趣雄奇而诡诈，外表虽似敦厚而内心却不是如此。
English: Coming from a family of farmers, he is ambitious and cunning. On the outside, he seems to be a strong-willed person, but inside, he is not.

古文：隋大业末，李密略地荥、汴，亮从之，未甚甄识。
现代文：隋朝大业末年，李密略地至荥、汴，张亮投奔于他，起初未受赏识。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty's great career, Li Miliang went to Shao, Shao, and Zhang Liang went to him. At first, he was not appreciated.

古文：时军中有谋叛去者，亮辄以告，密爱其诚，乃署骠骑将军，隶李勣。
现代文：其时军中有人谋叛，张亮立即告发，李密爱其忠诚，便委任他为骠骑将军，隶属于李责力。
English: At that time, someone in the army was plotting a rebellion, Zhang Liang immediately reported it, Li Mi loved his loyalty, and appointed him as a cavalry general, subordinate to Li Ruili.

古文：勣以黎阳归，亮颇佐佑之，擢郑州刺史。
现代文：李责力举黎阳归朝，张亮赞成其事颇力，被擢升为郑州刺史。
English: Li Liang was responsible for bringing Liyang back to the imperial court, and Zhang Liang was in favor of it. He was promoted to Zhengzhou chief historian.

古文：会王世充取郑，亮提孤军不敢入，亡命共城山。
现代文：恰逢王世充夺得郑州，张亮率领孤军不敢进入其境，便逃奔共城山。
English: When Wang Shichong conquered Zhengzhou, Zhang Liang, leading a lone army, did not dare to enter the territory and fled to Gongcheng Mountain.

古文：俄检校定州别驾。
现代文：不久授职检校定州别驾。
English: It will soon be time for the post-placement inspection of the school in Dingzhou.

古文：勣讨刘黑闼，使亮守相州，贼方盛，弃城遁。
现代文：李责力讨伐刘黑闼，派张亮守卫相州，因见贼势盛大，便抛弃相州城逃走。
English: Li Li urged Liu Heibei to fight, and sent Zhang Liang to guard Xiangzhou. Seeing that the bandits were very powerful, he abandoned Xiangzhou and fled.

古文：房玄龄以亮沈果有谋，白秦王，引为车骑将军。
现代文：房玄龄认为张亮果敢而有智谋，告知秦王，委任为车骑将军。
English: Fang Xuanling thought that Zhang Liang was courageous and resourceful, and told the Qin King to appoint him as the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：隐太子将作难，命亮统左右千人之洛阳，阴结山东豪杰以备变。
现代文：隐太子将作难，秦王命张亮统率左右一千人前往洛阳，阴结山东豪杰以防事变。
English: Emperor Qin ordered Zhang Liang to lead about a thousand people to Luoyang to prevent an incident.

古文：齐王告亮反，高祖以属吏诘讯，终无所言，乃得释。
现代文：齐王告发张亮谋反，高祖将他交付法官讯问，张亮终无所言，最终得以释放。
English: Qi Wang accused Zhang Liang of plotting a rebellion, Gaozu handed him over to the judge for interrogation, Zhang Liang eventually said nothing and was eventually released.

古文：王即位，除右卫将军，封长平郡公。
现代文：秦王即位后，就任右卫将军，封为长平郡公。
English: After the enthronement of King Qin, he was appointed the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard and given the title of the Prince of Changping County.

古文：累迁御史大夫，进封鄅国公，食益州户五百。
现代文：升任御史大夫，进封为禹阝国公，享受益州封邑五百户。
English: He was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, and was given the title of Ufan Guogong. He enjoyed the fiefdom of Yizhou for 500 households.

古文：历豳夏汭鄜三州都督、相州长史，徙郧国。
现代文：历任、夏、三州都督，相州长史，徙封郧国公。
English: Successive governors of the three prefectures, governors of the provinces, governors of the provinces, governors of the provinces.

古文：召拜工部尚书。
现代文：召入为工部尚书。
English: He was called to the Ministry of Works.

古文：亮为政多伺察，发〗缥隐微，示神明，抑强恤弱，所至有绩。
现代文：张亮为政善于伺察下情，揭露奸隐之情，动如神明，抑强扶弱，所至之处皆有绩效。
English: Zhang Liang, as a politician, is good at investigating the situation, exposing the hidden feelings, moving like a god, suppressing the strong and supporting the weak, and there are achievements everywhere.

古文：拜太子詹事，出为洛州都督。
现代文：迁任太子詹事，出为洛州都督。
English: He was transferred to the position of Prince Zhan Zhi, and became the governor of Luozhou.

古文：侯君集已诛，以刑部尚书参预朝政。
现代文：侯君集被诛之后，迁任刑部尚书，参预朝政。
English: After Hou Junji was arrested, he was transferred to the Penal Department of Shangshu and participated in the pre-imperial government.

古文：时茂州俚童张仲文自称天子，有司论斥乘舆有罪当死，摄刑部尚书韦挺奏： 童乃妖言，无死坐。 
现代文：当时茂州俚童张仲文自称天子，有关官员论定他冒犯乘舆有罪当死，代理刑部尚书韦挺上奏说 ：俚童所说的话乃是妖言，不应坐以死罪。 
English: At that time, the Maozhou pedophile Zhang Zhongwen claimed to be the son of God, and the relevant officials concluded that he was guilty of offending public opinion and should be sentenced to death. The acting head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuwei, made a report saying that the words spoken by the pedophile were demonic words and should not be punished with the death penalty.

古文：帝怒曰： 尔作威福于下，而归虐朕耶！ 
现代文：太宗发怒说： 你敢作威作福于下民，而归暴虐之名于我吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong was furious and said, "Do you dare to use your power to bless the people, and call me a tyrant?

古文：挺失据趋出。
现代文：韦挺失态趋出。
English: Wei Ting's gaffe is looming.

古文：亮为挺直之，帝曰： 公欲取刚正名乎？ 
现代文：张亮为韦挺直言辩护。太宗说： 您想博取刚正的名声吗？ 
English: Zhang Liang defended Wei Ting bluntly. Taizong said: Do you want to gain a reputation for integrity?

古文：亮不谢，帝寤曰： 宁屈我，以申公之请。 
现代文：张亮不赔小心，太宗明白后才说： 宁可使我受屈，也要申明您的奏请。 
English: Zhang Liang did not lose his caution, and only after Taizong understood did he say: "I would rather make me suffer, but I also want to confirm your request."

古文：童免死。
现代文：最后俚童竟免死罪。
English: In the end, the child molester was spared the death penalty.

古文：帝将伐高丽，亮频谏，不纳，因自请行，诏为平壤道行军大总管。
现代文：太宗将伐高丽，张亮多次劝谏，太宗不予采纳，于是自请前行，下诏担任平壤道行军大总管。
English: Zhang Liang repeatedly urged Taizong to march to Korea, but Taizong did not accept, so he went ahead at his own request and became the commander-in-chief of the march to Pyongyang.

古文：引兵自东莱浮海，袭破沙卑城，进至建安，营壁未立，贼奄至，亮不知所为，踞胡床直视无所言，众谓其勇，得自安。
现代文：率兵从东莱浮海，袭破辽东沙卑城，进驻建安时，营垒未立，贼众已至，张亮不知所为，仅踞胡床之上，直视而无所言，众人反以为勇，得以自安。
English: He led his soldiers from Donglai to the sea, attacked and broke through the city of Liaodong Shabei, and when he entered Jianan, the camp was not erected, the thieves had already arrived, Zhang Liang did not know what to do, only on the bed of the beard, he looked straight and had nothing to say, but everyone thought he was brave and was able to be at ease.

古文：于是副将张金树鼓于军，士奋击，因破贼。
现代文：其副将张金树下令击鼓于军，士卒奋击，因而破贼。
English: His vice-commander Zhang Jinshu ordered the drum to be beaten in the army, and the soldiers fought hard, thus breaking the thieves.

古文：及从帝还，至并州，乃得罪。
现代文：到随从太宗返回，行至并州时，才得罪被逮。
English: It was only when he returned from Taizong and went to annex the state that he was arrested.

古文：初，亮弃故妻，更娶李氏。
现代文：起初，张亮抛弃故妻，另娶李氏。
English: At first, Zhang Liang abandoned his late wife and married Ms. Li.

古文：李妒悍，私通歌儿，养为子，名慎几。
现代文：李氏嫉妒凶悍，与歌儿私通，养作儿子，取名慎几。
English: Mr. Li was jealous of the fierce, fornicated with the singer, raised a son, and was careful about his name.

古文：亮子顗数谏止，亮不纳。
现代文：张亮之子张耾多次谏止，张亮都不接受。
English: Zhang Liang's son, Zhang Yao, has been detained several times, but Zhang Liang does not accept it.

古文：李好左道，交通巫觋，桡政事。
现代文：李氏爱好旁门左道，与巫觋交结往来，干涉政事。
English: The Li clan likes to meddle in political affairs, making deals with the Wusong and interfering in politics.

古文：亮为相州，假子公孙节以谶有 弓长之主当别都 ，亮自以相旧都， 弓长 其姓，阴有怪谋。
现代文：张亮治理相州时，养子公孙节以谶书有 弓长之主当别都 的话，张亮自以为相州本是旧都， 弓长 是其姓氏，暗有异谋。
English: When Zhang Liang governed Xiangzhou, his adopted son, Gongsun Si, wrote in his diary that the lord of Yuchang was the capital. Zhang Liang thought that Xiangzhou was the old capital, and that Yuchang was his surname. There was a hidden agenda.

古文：术家程公颖者，亮素与厚，阴谓曰： 君前言陛下真天下主，何其神邪！ 
现代文：术士程公颖，张亮平素与他相善，便私下对他说： 您从前说陛下是真正的天下之主，怎么说得这么神？ 
English: The sorcerer Cheng Gongying, with whom Zhang Liang was generally on good terms, said to him privately: You once said that Your Majesty is the true Lord of the world, how can you say such a thing?

古文：公颖内晓，即称亮卧若龙，当大贵。
现代文：公颖心知其意，便称张亮卧如龙形，必能大贵。
English: Knowing her own mind, Gong Ying said that Zhang Liang, lying like a dragon, must be very valuable.

古文：亮曰： 国家殆必乱，吾臂龙鳞奋矣，慎几且大贵。 
现代文：张亮说： 国家必将有乱，我臂上的龙鳞将奋起，慎几也将大贵。 
English: Zhang Liang said: The country is bound to be chaotic, the dragon scales on my arms will rise up, and prudence will be highly valued.

古文：公孙常者，节兄也，亮谓曰： 吾有妾，相者云必为诸王姬。 
现代文：公孙常是公孙节之兄，张亮对他说： 我有侍妾，相面者说必为诸王姬。 
English: Zhang Liang said to him, "I have a concubine. The person I see must be Zhuo Wangji.

古文：常曰： 我兄子大品言，有神告公名在谶书。 
现代文：公孙常说 ：我侄子大品说，有神明告知您的名字载在谶书。 
English: The grandson often said: My nephew Daiping said that the gods told him that your name was written in the imperial edict.

古文：亮悦。
现代文：张亮大喜。
English: Zhang Liang was overjoyed.

古文：会陕人常德发其谋，并言亮养假子五百。
现代文：恰遇陕州人常德告发其阴谋，并上言说张亮养义子五百人。
English: Changde, a resident of Shaanxi, happened to denounce his plot and said that Zhang Liang had 500 legitimate children.

古文：帝使马周案之，亮谰辞曰： 囚等畏死，见诬耳。 
现代文：太宗派遣马周审理此事，张亮辩解说： 囚徒畏死，诬陷我啊。 
English: Emperor Taizong sent Ma Zhou to investigate the matter, and Zhang Liang defended himself by saying: "The prisoners are scared to death, they are framing me."

古文：因自陈佐命旧臣。
现代文：随即自述是佐命旧臣。
English: He then described himself as Satome's former vassal.

古文：帝曰： 亮养子五百将何为？
现代文：太宗说 ：张亮养义子五百人要干什么？
English: Taizong said, "What does Zhang Liang have to do to raise five hundred sons and daughters?

古文：正欲反耳。 
现代文：正是想造反罢了。 
English: That's what it's like to rebel.

古文：诏百官议，皆言亮当诛。
现代文：下诏百官集议，都说张亮之罪应当诛死。
English: The next day, hundreds of officials gathered to discuss, all saying that Zhang Liang's crime should be put to death.

古文：帝遣长孙无忌、房玄龄就狱谓曰： 法者，天下平，与公共为之。
现代文：太宗便派长孙无忌、房玄龄前往监狱对他说： 法令，对天下之人都应公平，与您共守此法。
English: Emperor Taizong then sent his eldest grandson, Mujie, and his eldest son, Fang Xuanling, to the prison to tell him: According to the law, we should be fair to everyone in the world and abide by this law with you.

古文：公不自修，乃至此，将奈何？ 
现代文：您不注意自身修养，落到如此地步，有什么办法呢？ 
English: If you don't pay attention to self-cultivation and fall to such a level, what can you do?

古文：于是斩西市，籍其家。
现代文：于是斩首于西京，并籍没其家。
English: As a result, his head was chopped off in West Kyoto, and he lost his home.

古文：薛万均，本燉煌人，后徙京兆咸阳。
现代文：薛万均本是敦煌人，后来移居京兆府咸阳县。
English: Xue Wanjun was originally from Dunhuang and later moved to Xianyang County, Beijing.

古文：父世雄，大业末为涿郡太守，万均与弟万彻因客幽州，以材武为罗艺所厚善。
现代文：父亲薛世雄，大业末年任涿郡太守，万均与其弟万彻因此客居幽州，以其才力勇武为罗艺所厚善。
English: His father, Xue Shixiong, served as the governor of Shixian County at the end of his career. Therefore, Wanjun and his younger brother, Wancher, lived in Yuzhou. With their talent and bravery, they were favored by Luo Yishi.

古文：与艺归款，高祖授万均上柱国、永安郡公。
现代文：与罗艺一同归朝，高祖授予万均爵为上柱国、封为永安郡公。
English: He returned to the imperial court together with Luo Yi, and Gao Zu awarded him the title of Shangzhu Guo and the title of Yong'an Guo.

古文：窦建德帅众十万寇范阳，艺迎拒之。
现代文：窦建德曾率众十万人入寇范阳，罗艺出兵迎击。
English: Dou Jiande once led hundreds of thousands of people to invade Fanyang, and Luo Yi sent troops to meet the attack.

古文：万均曰： 众寡不敌，宜以计胜。 
现代文：万均说： 众寡悬殊，不能硬拼，应当用计谋取胜。 
English: Wanjun said: When there is a great disparity in the number of people, it is not possible to fight hard, and we should use strategies to win.

古文：即教艺羸兵阻水以诱之，万均自以精骑百匿城左。
现代文：随即教罗艺用羸弱兵卒阻水布阵以诱敌，万均自率精骑一百名藏匿城左。
English: He then instructed Luo Yiyi to entice the enemy by using weak soldiers to form a water-blocking formation, and Banzhong himself led a hundred of them on horseback to hide in the city.

古文：建德师度水，邀半度击之，大败其众。
现代文：建德军队渡河时，趁其半渡出击，大败其众。
English: When the Jiande army crossed the river, it took advantage of its half-passage to attack, and was defeated.

古文：明年，建德以二十万骑来攻，兵已缘堞，万均与万彻率死士百人出地道，掩击其背，众惊溃去。
现代文：第二年，建德率二十万骑兵前来进攻，贼兵已经攀上城墙，万均与万彻率领敢死勇士百人钻出地道，掩袭其背，贼众惊溃而去。
English: In the second year, Jian De led two hundred thousand cavalrymen to attack, and the robber soldiers had already climbed the city wall. Wanjun and Wan Che led a hundred daredevils to drill out of the tunnel, cover their backs, and the thieves fled in surprise.

古文：秦王平刘黑闼，引万均为右二护军，北门长上。
现代文：秦王平定刘黑闼时，任命万均为右二护军，北门长上。
English: When the Qin King subdued Liu Heyao, he appointed Wan to be the second guard on the right and the north gate commander on the top.

古文：柴绍之讨梁师都也，以万均为副，万彻亦从。
现代文：柴绍出讨梁师都时，命万均为副帅，万彻也随同出征。
English: When Chai Shao went out to fight Liang Shidu, Wancheng was the second-in-command, and Wancheng also went out with him.

古文：距朔方数十里，突厥兵骤至，王师却，万均兄弟横击之，斩其骁将，虏阵欢，乘之，俘杀相藉。
现代文：离朔方数十里地时，突厥兵马大至，王师退却，万均兄弟纵横击杀，斩其骁将，虏阵大乱，乘势大破其众，俘获及杀伤甚多。
English: When they were dozens of miles away from the Shuo side, the Turkish soldiers and horses reached a large number, Wang Shi retreated, and the Wanjun brothers killed them vertically and horizontally, decapitated their commander, and caused a great disturbance in the army, taking advantage of the situation to break through the crowd, capturing and killing a lot.

古文：突厥走，遂围师都。
现代文：突厥败走后，王师进军围困师都。
English: After the defeat of the Turks, Wang Shiru marched into and besieged Shiru.

古文：诸将以城险未可下，万均曰： 城中气死，鼓不能声，破亡兆也。 
现代文：诸将都认为城险难以攻下，万均说： 城中有死气，鼓音不能成声，这是破亡的征兆。 
English: The generals all thought that the city was too dangerous to capture, and they all said: The city is dying, the drums cannot make a sound, this is a sign of ruin.

古文：既而贼果斩师都降。
现代文：不久贼众果然斩师都之首归降。
English: Not long after, the bandits did indeed cut off Shidu's head and he surrendered.

古文：拜左屯卫将军。
现代文：后任左屯卫将军。
English: He later became the General of the Left Tunwei.

古文：俄为沃沮道行军副总管，从李靖讨吐谷浑。
现代文：不久担任沃沮道行军副总管，随同李靖征讨吐谷浑。
English: Soon, he served as the deputy head of the march on Wo De Road, and accompanied Li Jingzheng to discuss Tu Guhun.

古文：军次青海，万均、万彻各以百骑行前，卒与虏遇，万均单骑驰突，无敢当者。
现代文：大军抵达青海，万均、万彻各率百名骑兵行走在前，结果与虏寇相遇，万均单枪匹马冲锋陷阵，无人敢来阻挡。
English: When the large army arrived in Qinghai, Wanjun and Wanche each led a hundred cavalry and marched ahead. As a result, they encountered the Ruiko. Wanjun charged into the battle single-handed, and no one dared to stop him.

古文：还语诸将曰： 贼易与。 
现代文：还阵后对诸将说 ：贼寇容易对付。 
English: After returning to the front, he said to the generals, "Thieves and robbers are easy to deal with."

古文：复驰进击，斩数千级，勇盖三军。
现代文：再次驰马进击，斩首数千级，勇气为三军之冠。
English: Once again, the galloping horse attacked, decapitated thousands of levels, and courage was the crown of the three armies.

古文：追奔至积石山，大风折旗，万均曰： 虏且来！ 
现代文：追击虏寇抵达积石山时，大风吹折军旗，万均说： 虏寇就要来了！ 
English: When the pursuit of the robbers arrived at Jishi Mountain, the high wind blew the military flag, and everyone said: The robbers are coming!

古文：乃勒兵。
现代文：便整兵布阵，做好准备。
English: Then get your troops lined up and ready.

古文：俄而虏至，万均直前斩其将，众遂溃，追至图伦碛乃还，与靖会青海。
现代文：不久虏寇果到，万均直往向前斩其将领，其众便溃败而逃，追击至图伦碛才还军，而与李靖会师于青海。
English: Shortly after the arrival of the Mongolian invaders, Wanjun marched straight ahead and killed their generals. They were defeated and fled. They pursued them to Tulunyu before returning to the army, and joined Li Jing's division in Qinghai.

古文：玺书勉劳，迁本卫大将军。
现代文：下达玺书慰劳，并迁任本卫大将军。
English: Issued an imperial letter of consolation, and transferred to the post of General Benwei.

古文：又副侯君集击高昌，曲智盛坚守未下，万均麾军进，智盛惧，乃降。
现代文：后来又作为侯君集的副帅进击高昌，麴智盛坚守其城不下，万均指挥其军进击，智盛恐惧，才出城投降。
English: Later, as the second-in-command of Hou Junxi, he attacked Gaochang. Zou Zhimeng held fast to his city and commanded his army to attack. Zhimeng was afraid and only left the city to surrender.

古文：进潞国公。
现代文：因功进封为潞国公。
English: He was awarded the title of Duke of Shandong for his achievements.

古文：会有诉万均与高昌女子乱，太宗欲穷治。
现代文：其后有人控诉万均与高昌女子乱伦，太宗想追究其事。
English: Later, someone accused Banzhong of incest with a Gaochang woman, and Taizong wanted to investigate the matter.

古文：魏徵曰：君使臣以礼，若所诉实，罪且轻，虚则所失重矣。 
现代文：魏征说： 君主应以礼节对待大臣，如所诉合于实情，仍属轻罪，如不符实情，那么所失就大了。 
English: Wei Zheng said: The monarch should treat the minister with courtesy. If the complaint is true, it is still a misdemeanor. If it is not true, then the loss is great.

古文：诏勿治。
现代文：下诏不予追究。
English: The following will not be pursued.

古文：后帝幸芙蓉园，坐清宫不谨下狱，忧愤卒。
现代文：后来太宗临幸芙蓉园，万均坐清宫不谨慎之罪下狱，因忧愤而死。
English: Later, Taizong Rincheng Hibiscus Garden, Wanjun was imprisoned for the crime of imprudence in the Qing Palace, and died of grief and anger.

古文：帝惊悼，为举哀，诏陪葬昭陵。
现代文：太宗感到惊慌伤悼，为他举哀，下诏陪葬于昭陵。
English: Taizong felt panicked and grieved, mourned for him, and issued an edict to be buried with him in Zhaoling.

古文：后尝赐群臣膜皮，及万彻而误呼万均，怆然曰： 万均朕勋旧，忽口其名，岂死者有知，冀此赐乎？ 
现代文：后来曾经赏赐群臣以貘皮，到万彻时误呼为万均，顿时伤感地说： 万均是我的勋旧之臣，忽然口呼其名，难道是死者有知，期望赏赐此物吗？ 
English: Later, he once rewarded a group of courtiers with sable skins. At the last moment, he mistakenly called them all Wanjun. Suddenly, he said sadly, "Wanjun is my honored old vassal. I suddenly spoke his name. Is it possible that the deceased knew about this and was expecting to be rewarded with this?

古文：因命取焚之，举坐感叹。
现代文：因而命人取貘皮焚烧，在场的人都很伤感叹息。
English: Therefore, he ordered someone to take the mink fur and burn it. The people present were very sad and sighed.

