古文：道生法。法者，引得失以绳，而明曲直者也。
现代文：作为宇宙本原的道产生了各项法度，法就像绳墨辨明曲直一样决定着事物的成败得失。
English: The Tao, as the origin of the universe, has produced various laws, and the law determines the success or failure of things, just as the ink on the rope determines the crookedness of things.

古文：执道者，生法而弗敢犯也，法立而弗敢废。
现代文：因此既然制定了各项法度就不可违犯，法度一旦设立便不可废弛。
English: Therefore, since various laws have been formulated, they cannot be violated, and once laws are established, they cannot be abolished.

古文：能自引以绳，然后见知天下而不惑矣。
现代文：所以说如果能够以绳墨法度自正，然后就可以识天下万物之理而不会迷惑。
English: Therefore, if you can self-correct with the rope ink method, then you can know the truth of all things in the world without being confused.

古文：虚无形，其裻冥冥，万物之所从生。
现代文：道体虚空无形，寂静深远，万物赖之以生。
English: The moral body is empty and formless, the silence is profound, and everything depends on it for survival.

古文：生有害，曰欲，曰不知足。
现代文：人一降生便有患害随之，这是因为人的本性中存在着欲望且这种欲望永无止境。
English: As soon as a person is born, harm follows, because there is a desire in human nature and this desire is never-ending.

古文：生必动，动有害，曰不时，曰时而。
现代文：人生则好妄动，妄动必有患害。具体表现在不能相识而动，甚至还逆时而动。
English: In life, it is easy to act rashly, and there is always harm in acting rashly. It is specifically manifested in not being able to meet and move, and even moving against the clock.

古文：动有事，事有害，曰逆，曰不称，不知所为用。
现代文：妄动必然妄举事，举事则患害随之，具体表现在行事违逆事理或举事不量力而行，甚至行事不知功用何在。
English: To act rashly is to do things rashly, and to do things rashly is to do harm. This is specifically manifested in acting contrary to reason or doing things beyond one's ability, and even acting without knowing what one's function is.

古文：事必有言，言有害，曰不信，曰不知畏人，曰自诬，曰虚夸，以不足为有余。
现代文：凡人举事必有言说，有言说即有患害，具体表现在言无征而爽信或口出大言不知尊敬他人，或者明明做不到的事却称能做到，或言过其实浮夸，或力所不及却扬言力量大有余。
English: An ordinary person must have words to say, and there is harm in having words to say, which is specifically manifested in saying nothing but writing letters, or speaking out loudly without respecting others, or saying things that can't be done but saying they can do it, or exaggerating and boasting, or not being able to do it but having more than enough power to threaten.

古文：故同出冥冥，或以死，或以生；或以败，或以成。
现代文：宇宙万物万事都生于道，其死生成败都是由道决定的。
English: All things in the universe are born from the Tao, and their death, rebirth and destruction are all determined by the Tao.

古文：祸福同道，莫知其所从生。
现代文：祸福同出一门，人们却不知道它们产生的原因。
English: Misfortune and good fortune come from the same source, but people do not know why they occur.

古文：见知之道，唯虚无有；虚无有，秋毫成之，必有形名；形名立，则黑白之分已。
现代文：要想明白死生、成败、祸福的道理，只有依靠道了。依靠道，就能把握所出现的细微事物的形和名，形和名的观念一旦确立，那么是非黑白的分界也是随之确定了。
English: If you want to understand the truth of life and death, success and failure, and good and evil, you must rely on the Tao. By relying on the Tao, you can grasp the form and name of the subtle things that appear. Once the concept of form and name is established, then the boundary between black and white is also determined.

古文：故执道者之观于天下也，无执也，无处也，无为也，无私也。
现代文：所以懂得大道的人示范天下的便是变通而不固执，功成而不依赖它，顺时而动不妄为，处事公正不以私意。
English: Therefore, people who know the road demonstrate that the world is flexible and not stubborn, achievement and not dependent on it, move with the times and not act rashly, and handle things fairly and not selfishly.

古文：是故天下有事，无不自为形名声号矣。
现代文：因此天下之事便可以在形名确立、名实相符的情况下自然而然地得到治理。
English: Therefore, the affairs of the world can be governed naturally under the condition that the formal name is established and the name is consistent with reality.

古文：形名已立，声号已建，则无所逃迹匿正矣。
现代文：各项法令制度都已确立，官职都已建置，那么天下万物就都在正道中了。
English: All laws and regulations have been established, and all official positions have been created, so everything in the world is on the right track.

古文：公者明，至明者有功。
现代文：心胸广阔，能包容一切的人是精明的，最为精明的人总能建立功业。
English: A broad-minded, all-inclusive person is shrewd, and the shrewdest person can always build a career.

古文：至正者静，至静者圣。
现代文：遵循正道的人总能达到因时而静的最高境界，至静的人就是圣人。
English: A person who follows the right path can always achieve the highest level of tranquility. The most tranquil person is a saint.

古文：无私者知，至知者为天下稽。
现代文：大公无私的人总是睿智的，至智的人可以成为天下所取法的榜样。
English: A selfless person is always wise, and a wise person can become an example for the world to follow.

古文：称以权衡，参以天当，天下有事，必有巧验。
现代文：如果用法度来审定是非，并且参照自然、社会的必然规律，那么天下之事都可以得到有效的证验了。
English: If we use legal standards to determine right and wrong, and refer to the inevitable laws of nature and society, then everything in the world can be effectively verified.

古文：事如直木，多如仓粟。斗石已具，尺寸已陈，则无所逃其神。
现代文：事物繁多，多得如同仓中的粟米，然而法律制度一一设置具备了，那么再隐秘微妙的东西也无法逃脱。
English: There are as many things as there are grains of corn in a granary, but once the legal system is in place, even the most secret and delicate things cannot escape.

古文：故曰：度量已具，则治而制之矣。
现代文：所以说法度已经具备了，所有事都可以得到有效的监督和治理。
English: Therefore, the standard has already been established, and everything can be effectively supervised and governed.

古文：绝而复属，亡而复存，孰知其神。
现代文：断绝了的世祀会重新接续，灭亡了的国家会重新出现，谁能知道其中的奥秘呢？
English: Who can fathom the mysteries behind the resumption of long-dormant religions and the re-emergence of long-dead nations?

古文：死而复生，以祸为福，孰知其极。
现代文：衰败的国家又变得兴盛了，祸事又变成了福事，谁能知道其中的究竟呢？
English: Failed states have become prosperous again, disasters have turned into blessings, and who knows what's behind it all?

古文：反索之无形，故知祸福之所从生。
现代文：只要反求于道，便可以懂得上述祸福、死生、存亡等产生的原因了。
English: As long as we turn to the Tao, we can understand the causes of the above-mentioned misfortune, death, survival, and so on.

古文：应化之道，平衡而止。轻重不称，是谓失道。
现代文：应付事物变化的方法在于掌握平衡和适度，轻重不当，便是失道。
English: The way to deal with the change of things is to grasp the balance and moderation, and if the weight is not right, it is a mistake.

古文：天地有恒常，万民有恒事，贵贱有恒位，畜臣有恒道，使民有恒度。
现代文：天地之间存在着永恒的规律，天下百姓各自从事着自己的本职，贵贱高低也都有它们确定的位置，使用下臣有确定的方法，统治百姓有既定的守则。
English: There is an eternal law between heaven and earth. People all over the world are engaged in their own duties. The high and the low also have their definite positions. There are definite methods for the use of subordinates, and there are established rules for ruling the people.

古文：天地之恒常，四时、晦明、生杀、輮刚。
现代文：四季更迭、昼夜交替，荣枯变换、柔刚转化便是天地间所存在的固有规律。
English: The change of the four seasons, the alternation of day and night, the transformation of prosperity and poverty, and the transformation of softness and hardness are inherent laws that exist between heaven and earth.

古文：万民之恒事，男农、女工。
现代文：男耕女织便是老百姓所从事的固定工作。
English: Men farming and women weaving are the fixed jobs that the common people are engaged in.

古文：贵贱之恒位，贤不肖不相放。
现代文：有才德和无才德的人不能处于同等的地位，就是贵贱都有它们确立的位置。
English: Talented and untalented people can not be in the same position, that is, both noble and low have their established position.

古文：畜臣之恒道，任能母过其所长。
现代文：选任官吏时，职位的高低要与他们的能力相符，这便是使用下臣的确定方法。
English: When appointing officials, the level of the position should be consistent with their ability, which is the method of determining the use of subordinates.

古文：使民之恒度，去私而立公。
现代文：去私门而行公道，这是统治人民的既定守则。
English: It is the established code for ruling the people to go to the private door and do justice.

古文：变恒过度，以奇相御。正奇有位，而名弗去。凡事无大小，物自为舍。
现代文：如果一旦出现了不正常或超越了常规的事情，就要相应地采取非常规的手段加以控制。
English: If something abnormal or out of the ordinary occurs, it is necessary to take unconventional means to control it.

古文：逆顺死生，物自为名。名形已定，物自为正。
现代文：而治理国家所使用的常规和特殊方法是因事而施的，明白了这一点，那么判定事物时也就不会发生偏颇了。
English: On the other hand, the conventional and special methods used to govern the country are applied according to the circumstances. If this is understood, then there will be no bias in judging things.

古文：故唯执者能上明于天之反，而中达君臣之半，密察于万物之所终始，而弗为主。故能至素至精，悎弥无形，然后可以为天下正。
现代文：事物无论巨细大小都有它们各自存在的原因，而逆顺死生等一切情况的发生都是由事物本身的性质决定的；根据性质就可以准确界定事物的名称和概念了，因而也就可以对该事物做出正确处理。圣人不但能体悟自然运行的规律，还能了解君道和臣道所应存在的分界，又能详察万物发生及终结的内在原因，然而却从不以天地万物的主宰自居，所以他能深远广泛的体悟万事万物，并成为天下的楷模。
English: Things, no matter how big or small, have their own reasons for existence, and the occurrence of all situations, such as life and death, is determined by the nature of the thing itself. According to the nature, the name and concept of the thing can be accurately defined, so that the correct treatment of the thing can be made. The sage can not only understand the laws of natural operation, but also understand the boundary between the monarch and the subject, and can also examine the internal causes of the occurrence and end of all things. However, he never considers himself the master of heaven and earth, so he can have a far-reaching and broad understanding of all things, and become a model for the world.

