古文：太宗、仁宗尝猎于大名之郊，题诗数十篇，贾昌朝时刻于石。
现代文：原文宋太宗、仁宗都曾经在大名府郊外畋猎，并题过数十首诗。贾昌朝任大名知府时，把这些诗都刻在石碑上。
English: Both Song Taizong and Ren Zong once hunted on the outskirts of Daming Prefecture, and wrote dozens of poems. When Jia Chang was appointed governor of Daming Prefecture, these poems were engraved on the stone monument.

古文：韩琦留守日，以其诗藏于班瑞殿之壁。
现代文：韩琦到了大名后，则把这些石碑藏在了班瑞殿的衬壁内。
English: After Han Zheng became a daimyo, he hid these stone tablets in the lining wall of the Banrui Palace.

古文：客有劝琦摹本以进者。
现代文：有人劝韩琦拓片摹本呈献给皇帝。
English: Some people advised Han Xuan to present a copy of the rubbings to the emperor.

古文：琦曰： 修之得已，安用进为？ 
现代文：韩琦说： 保存起来就可以了，何必呈上去呢？ 
English: Han Zheng said, "It is enough to preserve it, why do you have to display it?"

古文：客亦莫谕琦意。
现代文：这个人不理解韩琦的用意何在。
English: This person doesn't understand what Han Yan is up to.

古文：韩绛来，遂进之。
现代文：韩绛来到大名以后，就把诗临摹下来上呈给皇帝了。
English: After Han Xuan came to the daimyo, he copied the poem down and presented it to the emperor.

古文：琦闻之，叹曰： 昔岂不知进耶？
现代文：韩琦知道此事后，叹息道： 我从前难道不知道把诗呈献给皇上可以讨好卖乖吗？
English: After knowing this, Han Zheng sighed and said, "Didn't I once know that presenting a poem to the emperor would be a good way to curry favor?

古文：顾上方锐意四夷事，不当更导之耳。 
现代文：只是顾虑到皇上正血气方刚而锐意平定四夷，不应该愈加引导他这样做了。 
English: However, he should not have been led to do so, considering that the Emperor was determined to subdue the Shii.

古文：石守道编《三朝圣政录》，将上。
现代文：石介编撰《三朝圣政录》，准备呈献给皇帝。
English: Shisuke compiled "The Records of the Three Dynasties" and prepared to present it to the emperor.

古文：一日求质于琦，琦指数事：其一，太祖惑一宫鬟，视朝晏。
现代文：有一天他来请教韩琦的意见，韩琦指出其中有几件事不可上，其中一件是，太祖沉迷于一个宫女的美色，以致经常延误上朝时间。
English: One day, he came to consult Han Zheng's opinion. Han Zheng pointed out that there were several things that could not be ascended, one of which was that the great-grandfather was obsessed with the beauty of a courtesan, so that he often delayed the time to ascend the throne.

古文：群臣有言，太祖悟，伺其酣寝，刺杀之。
现代文：群臣有些非议，后来太祖觉悟了，便乘宫女熟睡时把她杀了。
English: There was some criticism from the courtiers, but later the great-grandfather came to his senses and killed the princess while she was sound asleep.

古文：琦曰： 此岂可为万世法？
现代文：韩琦说： 这件事难道可以作为万世效法的典范吗？
English: Han Wei said: Can this matter be used as a model for imitation for all time?

古文：已溺之，乃恶其溺而杀。
现代文：已经沉迷于她，却又因为悔恨自己的沉迷而杀害无辜之人。
English: Already addicted to her, he killed an innocent man out of remorse for his addiction.

古文：彼何罪？
现代文：她有什么罪过？
English: What was her crime?

古文：使其复有嬖，将不胜其杀矣。 
现代文：假使以后又有宠幸的人，那就要杀不胜杀了。 
English: If there are any favorites in the future, they must be killed.

古文：遂去此等数事。守道服其精识。
现代文：于是石介便删去了几件类似这样的事，同时他也十分佩服韩琦精到的见识。
English: As a result, Sekisui deleted several things similar to this, and at the same time he was very impressed with Han's insight.

