古文：马，蹄可以践霜雪，毛可以御风寒。齕草饮水，翘足而陆，此马之真性也。
现代文：马的蹄可以用来踩踏霜雪，毛可以抵御风寒，饿了吃草，渴了喝水，性起时撒腿跳跃，这就是马的天性。
English: Horses' hooves can be used to trample frost and snow, hair can resist wind and cold, eat grass when they are hungry, drink water when they are thirsty, and jump when they are sexually aroused. This is the nature of horses.

古文：虽有义台路寝，无所用之。
现代文：即使有高台正殿，对它来说也没有什么用处。
English: Even if there is a high platform, it is of no use to it.

古文：及至伯乐，曰： 我善治马。 
现代文：等到世上出了伯乐，他说： 我善于驯服马。 
English: When Haku came into the world, he said, "I am good at taming horses."

古文：烧之，剔之，刻之，雒之。连之以羁絷，编之以皂栈，马之死者十二三矣！
现代文：于是就用烧红的铁器灼炙马毛，用剪刀修剔马鬃，凿削马蹄甲，烙制马印记，用络头和绊绳来拴连它们，用马槽和马床来围着它们，这样一来马便死掉十分之二三了。
English: So they burned the horse's hair with red-hot irons, trimmed the mane with scissors, chiseled the hooves, branded the horse, tied them with cords and ropes, and surrounded them with stables and horse beds, so that two or three-tenths of the horses died.

古文：饥之渴之，驰之骤之，整之齐之，前有橛饰之患，而后有鞭策之威，而马之死者已过半矣！
现代文：让它们饥饿口渴，让它们快速驱驰，让它们急骤奔跑，让它们步伐整齐，让它们行动整齐划一，前有马口横木和马络装饰的限制，后有皮鞭和竹条的威逼，这样一来死去的马就超过半数了。
English: Let them be hungry and thirsty, let them drive fast, let them gallop, let them pace, let them act in an orderly manner, with the front of the horse crossbeam and horse decoration restrictions, followed by the threat of whips and bamboo strips, so that more than half of the dead horses.

古文：陶者曰： 我善治埴。 圆者中规，方者中矩。
现代文：制陶工匠说： 我最善于整治粘土，我用粘土制成的器皿，圆的合乎圆规，方的应于角尺。 
English: The potter said, "I am the best at shaping clay. I make vessels from clay. The round ones are round, and the square ones are square."

古文：匠人曰： 我善治木。 曲者中钩，直者应绳。
现代文：木匠说： 我最善于整治木材，我用木材制成的器皿，能使弯曲的合于钩弧的要求，笔直的跟墨线吻合。 
English: The carpenter said, "I am the best at trimming wood. I can make a vessel made of wood so that the curved one can meet the requirements of the hook and the straight one can meet the ink line.

古文：夫埴木之性，岂欲中规矩钩绳哉！
现代文：粘土和木材的本性难道就是希望去迎合圆规、角尺、钩弧、墨线吗？
English: Is it the nature of clay and wood to want to accommodate the compass, the cubit, the crook, the stroke?

古文：然且世世称之曰： 伯乐善治马，而陶匠善治埴木。 此亦治天下者之过也。
现代文：然而还世世代代地称赞他们说， 伯乐善于驯养马 而 陶匠、木匠善于整治粘土和木材 ，这也就是治理天下的人的过错啊！
English: Yet they praised them from generation to generation, saying, "Bo Le is good at taming horses, and potters and carpenters are good at repairing clay and wood." This is the fault of those who govern the world!

古文：吾意善治天下者不然。
现代文：我认为善于治理天下的人并不是这样。
English: I don't think people who are good at governing the world are like that.

古文：彼民有常性，织而衣，耕而食，是谓同德。
现代文：老百姓有他们固有不变的本能和天性，织布穿衣，耕种吃饭，这就是人类共有的德行和本能。
English: Ordinary people have their inherent and unchanging instincts and nature, weaving cloth, dressing, farming and eating, which is the common virtue and instinct of mankind.

古文：一而不党，命曰天放。
现代文：人们的思想和行为浑然一体没有一点儿偏私，这就叫做任其自然。
English: People's thoughts and actions are completely free of any selfishness, which is called letting nature take its course.

古文：故至德之世，其行填填，其视颠颠。
现代文：所以上古时代人类天性保留的最完善，人们的行动总是那么持重自然，人们的目光又是那么专一质朴。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, human nature was the most perfectly preserved, people's actions were always so natural, and people's eyes were so specific and simple.

古文：当是时也，山无蹊隧，泽无舟梁；万物群生，连属其乡；禽兽成群，草木遂长。
现代文：正是在这个年代里，山野里没有路径和隧道，水面上没有船只和桥梁，各种物类共同生活，人类的居所相通相连而没有什么乡、县差别，禽兽成群结队，草木遂心地生长。
English: It was in this era that there were no paths and tunnels in the mountains and fields, no ships and bridges on the water, all kinds of species lived together, human dwellings were interconnected and there was no difference between townships and counties, animals flocked in groups, and plants and trees grew heartily.

古文：是故禽兽可系羁而游，鸟鹊之巢可攀援而窥。
现代文：因此禽兽可以用绳子牵引着游玩，鸟鹊的巢窠可以攀登上去探望。
English: Therefore, animals can be pulled by a rope to play, and the nest of birds can be climbed to visit.

古文：夫至德之世，同与禽兽居，族与万物并。恶乎知君子小人哉！
现代文：在那人类天性保留最完善的年代，人类跟禽兽同样居住，跟各种物类相互聚合并存，哪里知道什么君子、小人呢！
English: In that age, when human nature was most perfectly preserved, man lived in the same way as beasts and animals, coexisting with all kinds of species. Who knows what kind of gentleman and villain!

古文：同乎无知，其德不离；同乎无欲，是谓素朴。
现代文：人人都蠢笨而无智慧，人类的本能和天性也就不会丧失；人人都愚昧而无私欲，这就叫做 素 和 朴 。
English: Everyone is stupid but not wise, and human instincts and nature will not be lost; everyone is stupid but selfless, which is called plain and simple.

古文：素朴而民性得矣。及至圣人，蹩躠为仁，踶跂为义，而天下始疑矣。
现代文：能够像生绢和原木那样保持其自然的本色，人类的本能和天性就会完整地留传下来。等到世上出了圣人，勉为其难地去倡导所谓仁，竭心尽力地去追求所谓义，于是天下开始出现迷惑与猜疑。
English: If it is possible to preserve its natural essence like the gourd and the log, the human instinct and nature will be passed down in its entirety. When a saint came into the world, reluctantly advocating so-called benevolence and trying his best to pursue so-called righteousness, then confusion and suspicion began to appear in the world.

古文：澶漫为乐，摘僻为礼，而天下始分矣。
现代文：放纵无度地追求逸乐的曲章，繁杂琐碎地制定礼仪和法度，于是天下开始分离了。
English: The world began to drift apart as people indulged in the relentless pursuit of pleasure music, and made elaborate rules and regulations.

古文：故纯朴不残，孰为牺尊！
现代文：所以说，原木没被分割，谁还能用它雕刻为酒器！
English: So, the log has not been divided, who can use it to carve a drinking vessel!

古文：白玉不毁，孰为珪璋！
现代文：一块白玉没被破裂，谁还能用它雕刻出玉器！
English: A piece of white jade has not been broken, who can use it to carve jade!

古文：道德不废，安取仁义！
现代文：人类原始的自然本性不被废弃，哪里用得着仁义！
English: Humanity's original natural nature will not be abandoned, where is the need for benevolence!

古文：性情不离，安用礼乐！
现代文：人类固有的天性和真情不被背离，哪里用得着礼乐！
English: If the innate nature and true feelings of mankind are not to be deviated from, what need is there for liturgical music!

古文：五色不乱，孰为文采！
现代文：五色不被错乱，谁能够调出文彩！
English: The five colors should not be confused, who can bring out the colors!

古文：五声不乱，孰应六律！
现代文：五声不被搭配，谁能够应和六律！
English: Five voices are not matched, who can match six!

古文：夫残朴以为器，工匠之罪也；毁道德以为仁义，圣人之过也。
现代文：分解原木做成各种器皿，这是木工的罪过，毁弃人的自然本性以推行所谓仁义，这就是圣人的罪过！
English: It is the sin of carpenters to disassemble logs to make various vessels, and it is the sin of saints to destroy the natural nature of man in order to promote so-called righteousness!

古文：夫马陆居则食草饮水，喜则交颈相靡，怒则分背相踢。马知已此矣！
现代文：再说马，生活在陆地上，吃草喝水，高兴的时候就颈交颈相互摩擦，生气的时候就背对背相互踢撞，马的智巧就只是这样了。
English: As for horses, they live on land, eat grass and drink water. When they are happy, they rub their necks against each other, and when they are angry, they kick each other back to back. This is all the cleverness of horses.

古文：夫加之以衡扼，齐之以月题，而马知介倪闉扼鸷曼诡衔窃辔。
现代文：等到后来把车衡和颈轭加在它身上，把配着月牙形佩饰的辔头戴在它头上，那么马就会侧目怒视，僵着脖子抗拒轭木，暴戾不驯，或诡谲地吐出嘴里的勒口，或偷偷地脱掉头上的马辔。
English: Then, when the scales and bridle have been put on him, and the crescent-crowned ploughshare has been placed on his head, the horse glares, stiffens his neck against the ploughshare, is unruly, or slyly spits out the bit in his mouth, or surreptitiously slips off his bridle.

古文：故马之知而能至盗者，伯乐之罪也。
现代文：所以，马的智巧竟能做出与人对抗的态度，这完全是伯乐的罪过。
English: Therefore, it is entirely Bo Le's fault that the horse's cleverness can make it confrontational.

古文：夫赫胥氏之时，民居不知所为，行不知所之，含哺而熙，鼓腹而游。民能已此矣！
现代文：上古赫胥氏的时代，黎民百姓居处不知道做些什么，走动也不知道去哪里，口里含着食物嬉戏，鼓着吃饱的肚子游玩，人们所能做的就只是这样了。
English: In the era of the ancient Hebei Dynasty, the people of Lai did not know what to do in their homes, did not know where to go, played with food in their mouths, and played with their full stomachs. This is all that people could do.

古文：及至圣人，屈折礼乐以匡天下之形，县跂仁义以慰天下之心，而民乃始踶跂好知，争归于利，不可止也。
现代文：等到圣人出现，矫造礼乐来匡正天下百姓的形象，标榜不可企及的仁义来慰藉天下百姓的心，于是人们便开始千方百计地去寻求智巧，争先恐后地去竞逐私利，而不能终止。
English: Wait until a saint appears, forge liturgical music to rectify the image of the people around the world, and flaunt unattainable benevolence to comfort the hearts of the people around the world, so people began to do everything possible to seek cleverness, scramble to compete for self-interest, but can not stop.

古文：此亦圣人之过也。
现代文：这也是圣人的罪过啊！
English: This is also the sin of a saint!

