古文：戊寅四月二十五日晨起，自鼎站西南行。
现代文：戊寅年四月二十五日清晨起床，自鼎站往西南行。
English: On the morning of April 25th, Wu Yin got up and drove from Ding Station to the southwest.

古文：一里余，有崖在路右，上下各有洞，洞门俱东南向，而上洞尤空阔，以高不及登。
现代文：一里多路，有山崖在路右，上下各有一个洞，洞口都朝向东南，而上洞尤其空阔，因为太高来不及上登。
English: There is a cliff on the right side of the road for more than a mile. There is a cave on each side of the road. The entrance of the cave faces southeast, and the upper cave is especially wide, because it is too high to climb.

古文：路左壑已成涧，随之南半里，山回壑尽，脊当其前，路乃上跻，水则自其下入穴。
现代文：路左壑谷中的泉水已变成了山涧，顺着山涧往南走半里，山体回绕，壑谷到了尽头，山脊挡在前方，路便上升而去，涧水却从山下流入洞穴中。
English: The spring water in the ravine on the left of the road had turned into a mountain stream. I walked half a mile south along the ravine, the mountain body circled, the ravine came to an end, the ridge was in front, the road rose and went away, but the muddy water flowed into the cave from under the mountain.

古文：盘折二里，逾坳脊，是为梅子关。
现代文：盘旋曲折地走了二里，越过山坳上的山脊，这是梅子关。
English: I walked two miles, twisting and turning, over the ridge on the ridge, which is Umezigaseki.

古文：越关而西，路左有峡，复坠坑而下，东西径一里，而西复回环连脊。
现代文：过关往西行，路左有个山峡，又下坠成坑谷，东西直处有一里，而西面又回绕过来与山脊相连。
English: Passing the pass to the west, there is a mountain gorge on the left of the road, and it falls down into a valley, and there is a mile between the east and west, and the west side is connected to the ridge.

古文：路循其上平行而西，复逾脊，始下陟。
现代文：道路沿着峡上平缓地向西行，又越过山脊，这才向下跋涉。
English: The road climbs gently west along the gorge and crosses the ridge before descending.

古文：二里，又盘坞中山西南转，二里，复西北上，一里，是为黄土坝。
现代文：二里路，又绕着坞中之山往西南转，二里，再向西北上山，一里，这是黄土坝。
English: Two miles up the road, then around the dock in the mountains to the southwest, two miles, then northwest up the mountain, one mile, this is the loess dam.

古文：盖鼎站之岭，至此中降，又与西岭对峙成峡，有土山中突而连属之，其南北皆坠峡下，中踞若坝然，其云黄土坝者以此。
现代文：大致鼎站的山岭，到此处从中下降，又与西岭对峙成峡谷，有座土山在峡中突起并与它相连，土山南北都下坠到峡中，盘踞在中央宛如堤坝一样，它被称为黄土坝就是因为这个原因。
English: The mountain range of roughly Ding Station, from which it descends to this point, confronts the West Ridge to form a canyon. A mound of earth protrudes in the canyon and is connected to it. The earth mounds from north to south fall into the canyon and are entrenched in the center like a dam. It is called the Loess Dam for this reason.

古文：有数家倚西山而当其坳，设巡司以稽察焉。
现代文：有几户人家背靠西山挡在山坳之间，设了巡检司以便稽查。
English: There are several households with their backs to the West Mountain Block between the mountains, and a patrol division has been set up for inspection.

古文：又上逾岭脊，共五里为白云寺。
现代文：又往上越过岭脊，共走五里是白云寺。
English: Further up and over the ridge, it is a total of five miles to Baiyun Temple.

古文：于是遂西南下，迤逦四里，途中扛担络绎，车骑相望，则临安道毋忠，以钦取皇帝取用入京也。
现代文：从此便向西南下走，透逛四里，途中扛轿挑担的络绎不绝，车马相望，是临安道道员母忠，被皇帝启用进京去。
English: From then on, he went down to the southwest and walked for four miles. On the way, there was a never-ending stream of people carrying carts and horses, looking at each other. He was a Taoist from Lin'an Province and was commissioned by the emperor to go to Beijing.

古文：司道无钦取之例，其牌如此，当必有说。
现代文：司、道一级的官吏没有皇帝直接征用的成例，他的行道牌上如此写着，肯定有其他解释。
English: There is no precedent for the emperor to directly requisition officials at the department or province level. If it says so on his street sign, there must be another explanation.

古文：按毋，川人，本乡荐乡试中举人，岂果有卓异特达圣聪超乎寻常，独特高妙像圣人一样的聪敏耶？然闻阿迷之僭据僭越名位，分裂割据未复，而舆扛之纷纭实繁，其才与操，似俱可议也。
现代文：据查，母忠是四川人，本来是乡荐出身，难道果然是有卓越特异的政绩传到皇帝的耳朵里吗？但是听说阿迷州的非法割据还未收复，可挑担抬轿喧喧嚷嚷的实在太繁华，此人的才能与操守，似乎都可以议论。
English: According to the investigation, Mochitada was from Sichuan and was originally from the township of Jincheng. Did his extraordinary political achievements really reach the ears of the emperor? However, it is said that the illegal annexation of Amanzhou has not yet been recovered. It is too prosperous to pick up and carry a sedan. This person's talent and integrity seem to be open to discussion.

古文：又至坞底，西北上一里，为新铺。
现代文：又来到坞底，往西北上行一里，是新铺。
English: I came to the bottom of the dock again, one mile upstream to the northwest, and it was a new shop.

古文：由铺西稍逾岭头，遂直垂垂下。
现代文：由铺西稍走一些越过岭头，便垂直下山而去。
English: From the west of the lodge, walk a little bit over the ridge, then descend vertically down the mountain.

古文：五里，过白基观。
现代文：五里，路过白基观。
English: Wuli, passing by Bai Jiguang.

古文：观前奉真武，后奉西方圣人，中颇整洁。
现代文：观中前殿供奉着真武大帝，后殿供着佛祖，观中十分整洁。
English: The front hall is dedicated to Emperor Zhenwu, while the back hall is dedicated to Buddha. The middle hall is very tidy.

古文：时尚未午，驼骑方放牧在后，余乃入后殿，就净几，以所携纸墨，记连日所游；盖以店肆杂沓，不若此之净而幽也。
现代文：此时还未到中午，马帮正在后面放牧，我便进入后殿，就着洁净的几案，用携带着的纸墨，记下连日来游过的地方；这是因为旅店中太杂乱，不如这里清洁幽静。
English: At this time, it was not yet noon, and the horse gang was grazing in the back, so I entered the vestibule, and with a few clean cases, I used the paper and ink I was carrying to write down the places I had visited for days; this was because the inn was too cluttered, and it was better to be clean and quiet here.

古文：僧檀波，甚解人意，时时以茶蔬米粥供。
现代文：僧人檀波，十分了解别人的心意，时时供给一些茶水蔬菜米粥。
English: The monk, who is very understanding of other people's feelings, always provides some tea, vegetables and rice porridge.

古文：下午，有象过，二大二小，停寺前久之。
现代文：下午，有大象路过，两大两小，停在寺前很长时间。
English: In the afternoon, two large and two small elephants stopped in front of the temple for a long time.

古文：象奴下饮，濒去，象辄跪后二足，又跪前二足，伏而候升。
现代文：赶象的奴仆下来饮水，临去时，大象就先跪下后面的两条腿，又跪下前面的两条腿，伏着等候站起来。
English: When the elephant's servant came down to drink water, the elephant first knelt down on its two hind legs and then on its two front legs, waited and then stood up.

古文：既而驼骑亦过，余方草记甚酣，不暇同往。
现代文：不久马帮也过去了，我在草记游程兴头正浓，来不及一同走。
English: Soon after, the horse gang also passed by. I was in the middle of writing up the itinerary and was too excited to go with them.

古文：又久之，雷声殷殷震动声，天色以云幕而暗，辞檀波，以少礼酬之，固辞不受。
现代文：又过了很久，雷声隆隆，天色由于云层遮蔽而暗下来，辞别檀波，用少许礼金酬谢他，他坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: After a long time, with thunder rumbling and the sky darkened by clouds, he said goodbye to Danbo and thanked him with a small gift, which he firmly refused to accept.

古文：初，余以为去盘江止五里耳，至是而知驼骑所期旧城，尚在盘江上五里，亟为前趋。
现代文：起初，我以为离盘江只有五里路了，来到这里才知道与马帮约定的旧城，还在盘江之上五里处，急忙往前赶路。
English: At first, I thought I was only five miles away from the Pan River. It was only when I got here that I realized that the old city I had agreed on with the horse gang was still five miles above the Pan River, and I hurried forward.

古文：乃西向直下三里，有枯涧自东而西，新构小石梁跨之，曰利济桥。
现代文：于是向西一直下行三里，有条干枯的山涧自东延向西，新建的小石桥横跨在涧上，叫利济桥。
English: As a result, they traveled westward for three miles, with a dry ridge stretching from east to west, and a newly built small stone bridge spanning the ridge, called Liji Bridge.

古文：越桥，度涧南，又西下半里，则盘江沸然，自北南注。
现代文：过了桥，来到山涧南面，又往西下走半里，就见到波涛汹涌的盘江，自北往南流注。
English: After crossing the bridge, I came to the south side of the mountains, and after walking half a mile to the west, I saw the turbulent Pan River, flowing from north to south.

古文：其峡不阔而甚深，其流浑浊如黄河而甚急。
现代文：盘江峡谷不宽但却非常深，水流浑浊如黄河而且十分湍急。
English: The Panjiang River canyon is not wide but very deep, the water is turbid like the Yellow River and very rapid.

古文：想清乃涸时也。循江东岸南行，半里，抵盘江桥。
现代文：在万山之中，众多的河流都是清的，可唯独此江浑浊，不知是什么缘故？沿盘江东岸往南行，半里，到达盘江桥。
English: Among the thousands of mountains, many rivers are clear, but only this river is muddy, I don't know why? Go south along the east bank of the Pan River for half a mile to reach the Pan River Bridge.

古文：桥以铁索，东西属两崖上为经，以木板横铺之为纬。
现代文：桥身使用铁链，东西两头连接在两端的山崖上作为纵向的桥体，用木板横向铺在铁链上。
English: The bridge body uses iron chains. The east and west ends are connected on the cliffs at both ends as a longitudinal bridge body, with wooden planks laid horizontally on the iron chain.

古文：东西两崖，相距不十五丈，而高且三十丈，水奔腾于下，其深又不可测。
现代文：东西两边的山崖，相距不足十五丈，可高处将近三十丈，江水奔腾于桥下，水深不可测。
English: The mountain cliffs on both sides of the east and west are less than 15 meters apart, but the height is nearly 30 meters. The river is rushing under the bridge, and the water depth is unfathomable.

古文：初以舟渡，多漂溺之患；垒石为桥，亦多不能成。
现代文：当初用船摆渡，多有漂没溺水的灾难发生；用石块垒砌成桥，也多半不能建成。
English: At the beginning, boats were used for ferrying, and many drowning disasters occurred; bridges built with stone blocks were also mostly unable to be built.

古文：以大铁链维两崖，链数十条，铺板两重，其厚仅八寸，阔八尺余，望之飘渺，然践之则屹然不动，日过牛马千百群，皆负重而趋者。
现代文：崇祯四年，现在的朱布政使当时任提刑按察使，命令安普的游击将军李芳先用大铁链系在两边山崖上，铁链有几十条，铺木板两层，板厚仅八寸，宽八尺多。远望去，桥身飘荡深远，但踩在桥上却岿然不动，每日过往的牛马千百群，都是载着重物往前赶路的。
English: In the fourth year of Chongzhen, the current Zhu Bo, the political envoy, at that time appointed the inspector, ordered the guerrilla general of Anpu, Li Fang, to first tie the mountain cliff on both sides with a large iron chain. There are dozens of iron chains, two layers of wooden boards, the thickness of the board is only eight inches, and the width is more than eight feet. Looking far and wide, the bridge body drifts far and wide, but it does not move when stepping on the bridge. The thousands of cattle and horses passing by every day are carrying heavy loads and rushing forward.

古文：桥两旁，又高维铁链为栏，复以细链经纬为纹。
现代文：桥的两旁，又拴着高高的铁链作为栏杆，再用细链子纵横连成网络。
English: On both sides of the bridge, high iron chains are attached as railings, and then the thin chains are connected vertically and horizontally into a network.

古文：两崖之端，各有石狮二座，高三、四尺，栏链俱自狮口出。
现代文：两边山崖，各有两尊石狮子，高约三四尺，作栏杆用的链子全部从狮子口中出来。
English: On both sides of the cliff, there are two stone lions, each about three or four feet high. All the chains used for the railing come out of the lion's mouth.

古文：东西又各跨巨坊。
现代文：东西两头又各自横跨有巨大的牌坊。
English: There are huge archways across the east and west ends.

古文：其东者题曰 天堑云航 ，督部朱公所标也；其西者题曰  ，傅宗龙时为监军御史所标也。
现代文：那东面的牌坊题写着 天堑云航 ，是总督朱公题写的；那西边的一座题为 口口口口 ，是傅宗龙当时任监军御史时题写的。
English: The one on the east side is inscribed "天云航" and was inscribed by Governor Zhu Gong; the one on the west side is inscribed "口口口口" and was inscribed by Fu Zonglong when he was in charge of supervising the military.

古文：傅又坚穹碑，题曰 小葛桥 ，谓诸葛武侯以铁为澜沧桥，数千百载，乃复有此，故云。
现代文：傅宗龙又竖立了一块圆石碑，题为 小葛桥 ，意思是说武侯诸葛亮用铁链造了澜沧江桥，历数百千年，这才又有了此桥，所以这样题。
English: Fu Zonglong also erected a round stone monument, entitled Xiao Ge Bridge, which means that the Wuhou Zhuge Liang built the Lancang River Bridge with iron chains, after hundreds of thousands of years, this is why there is this bridge, so this is the title.

古文：余按，渡澜沧为他人，乃汉武故事，而澜沧亦无铁桥；铁桥故址在丽江，亦非诸葛所成者。
现代文：我考证， 渡澜沧为其他人 ，是汉武帝时的旧事，而且澜沧江上也没有铁索桥；铁索桥的旧址在丽江，也不是诸葛亮建成的。
English: According to my research, crossing the Lancang River for others is an old story from the time of Emperor Hanwu, and there is no cable-stayed bridge on the Lancang River; the old site of the cable-stayed bridge is in Lijiang, and it was not built by Zhuge Liang.

古文：桥两端碑刻祠字甚盛，时暮雨大至，不及细观。
现代文：桥两端的碑刻祠堂庙宇很多，此时暮雨骤降，来不及细看。
English: There are many inscribed shrines and temples at both ends of the bridge. At this time, the dusk rain suddenly fell, and it was too late to take a closer look.

古文：度桥西。已入新城门内矣。
现代文：过到桥西，已经进入新城门内了。
English: After crossing to the west of the bridge, we have already entered the new city gate.

古文：左转瞰桥为大愿寺。
现代文：转向左边俯瞰大桥，旁边是大愿寺。
English: Turn to the left to overlook the bridge, next to it is Daegwan-ji Temple.

古文：西北循崖上，则新城所环也。
现代文：往西北沿着山崖上登，就是新城环绕的地方了。
English: Climbing up the cliff to the northwest is where the New Town is encircled.

古文：自建桥后，增城置所，为锁钥之要云。
现代文：自从建桥以后，增建了城池设置了卫所，成为军事重镇所在的要地了。
English: Since the bridge was built, a castle was added and a watchtower was set up, making it an important location for a military stronghold.

古文：闻旧城尚在岭头五里，急冒雨竭撅跻级艰难地登台阶而登。
现代文：听说旧城还在五里以外的岭头，急忙冒雨竭力跌跌撞撞地沿着石阶上登。
English: I heard that the old city was still five miles away in Lingdu, and I hurried to climb up the stone steps in the rain.

古文：一里半，出北门。
现代文：一里半，出了北门。
English: It's a mile and a half from the north gate.

古文：又北行半里，转而西，逶迤而上者二里，雨乃渐霁。
现代文：又往北行半里，转向西、弯弯曲曲向上走了二里路，雨才停天渐渐晴开。
English: I walked another half mile north, turned west, and walked two miles up the winding road. The rain stopped and the sky gradually cleared.

古文：新城内所上者峻，城外所上者坦。西逾坳，循右峰北转，又半里，则旧城悬岭后冈头矣。
现代文：向西穿越山坳，沿右边的山峰转向北走，又是半里，就见旧城高悬在岭后的山冈头上了。
English: Walk west across the ridge, turn north along the peak on the right, and after another half-mile, you will see the old city high above the top of the hill behind the ridge.

古文：青崖总兵姓班，三汊总兵姓商，此间总兵姓胡。
现代文：进了东门，城内有总兵府镇守。总兵府衙与客店的房舍没有什么差别。
English: Entering the east gate, there is a general military town guard in the city. There is no difference between the general military town guard and the guest house.

古文：添设虽多，而势不尊矣。
现代文：早晚发号令用喇叭，声音也不宏亮，锣鼓之声是没有的。
English: In the morning and in the evening, trumpets are used to issue orders. The sound is not loud, and there is no sound of beating drums.

古文：是夜，宿张斋公家；军人也。
现代文：这天夜里，住宿在张斋公家；是军人。
English: On this night, he stayed at a public house in Zhangzai; he was a soldier.

古文：二十六日驼马前发，余饭而出旧城西门。
现代文：二十六日马帮在先出发，我吃过饭才走出旧城西门。
English: On the 26th, the horse gang left first, and I walked out of the West Gate of the Old City after eating.

古文：始俱西南行，从岭坞升降。
现代文：开始时全是向着西南方行，在山岭山坞之间上上下下。
English: At the beginning, it was all heading southwest, going up and down between the mountains and docks.

古文：五里，有一、二家在南陇下，为保定铺。
现代文：五里，有一二户人家在南面山垄下，是保定铺。
English: In Wuli, there are one or two households under the ridge of Nanmen Mountain, which are Baoding shops.

古文：从其侧西上岭，渐陟隆崇。
现代文：从铺侧向西上岭，逐渐步入崇山峻岭。
English: From the side of the pavement to the west of Shangling, gradually step into the lofty mountains.

古文：三里，忽有水自岭峡下。
现代文：三里，忽见有水流自山岭峡谷间流下来。
English: Three miles away, I suddenly saw a stream of water flowing down from the mountains and canyons.

古文：循峡而上，峡中始多田塍，盖就水而成者。
现代文：顺着峡谷往上走，峡中开始有许多农田，大概是就着水流开成的田地。
English: Going up along the canyon, there are many farmlands in the canyon, probably fields that have opened up with the current.

古文：时已插莳矣。又上二里，是为凉水营。
现代文：又上走二里，这是凉水营。
English: Another two-mile walk uphill, this is the cold water camp.

古文：由营西复从山坞逶迤而上，渐上渐峻。
现代文：由营西再从山坞中透巡而上，慢慢上去渐渐陡峻起来。
English: From the west of the camp and then from the dockyard, the trail climbs slowly and gradually steepens.

古文：又五里，遇驼马方牧，余先发。
现代文：又行五里，遇上马帮正在放牧，我先出发。
English: After another five miles, I came across a herd of horses grazing. I set off first.

古文：将逾坳，坐坳下石间少憩，望所谓海马嶂者，欲以形似求之。
现代文：将要越过山坳之前，坐在山坳下的岩石间稍许休息一下，望着所谓海马嶂的地方，想要根据它形状相似之处来寻求它得名的原因。
English: Before going over the pass, I sat down on the rocks under the pass and rested for a while, looking at the so-called seahorse, trying to find the reason for its name based on its similar shape.

古文：忽有人自坳出，负罂小口大腹的瓦容器汲水，由余前走南岐去。
现代文：忽然间有个人自山坳中走出来，背着瓦瓮去汲水，由我面前走上南边的岔道上去。
English: All of a sudden, a man came out of the mountains, carrying a shovel to fetch water, and walked in front of me to the path on the south side.

古文：余先是望南崖回削有异，而未见其岐，至是亟随之。
现代文：我在这之前望见南面山崖回绕陡削有奇异之处，却未见到那条岔道，到此时连忙跟着他走。
English: Before this, I had seen something strange in the south face of the mountain cliff around the steep cut, but I did not see the ramp, and at this time I hurriedly followed him.

古文：抵崖下，则穹然巨洞，其门北向，其内陷空而下，甚宏。
现代文：到了山崖下，就见一个巨洞弯隆，洞口向北，洞内从高空凹陷下去，非常大。
English: When I reached the foot of the cliff, I saw a huge cave with a steep slope. The mouth of the cave faced north, and the inside of the cave sagged down from a great height. It was very large.

古文：其人入汲于石隙间，随处而是，皆自洞顶淙淙散空下坠，土人少凿坯承之。
现代文：那人进洞后在石缝间汲水，随处都是水，都是从洞顶涂涂散在空中落下来的水，当地人在岩石上略凿成石坑来接水。
English: After entering the cave, the man drew water between the stone cracks. There was water everywhere. It was water falling from the top of the cave and scattered in the air. The locals had dug pits in the rock to catch the water.

古文：水从洞左悬顶下者最盛，下有石台承之；台之侧，凿以贮汲者。
现代文：从洞左顶上悬空下来的水最大，下方有石台接水；石台的侧边，凿坑贮水供人汲取。
English: The water that hangs down from the top left of the cave is the largest. Below, there is a stone platform for receiving water; on the side of the stone platform, there is a pit for storing water for people to draw.

古文：洞从右下者最深，内可容数百人，而光明不閟，然俱无旁隙别窍，若堵墙而成者也。
现代文：洞从右边下去的地方最深，里面可容纳数百人，明亮而不幽闭，但是四旁全然没有别的缝隙和石窍，好似墙壁构成的一样。
English: The hole is deepest where it descends from the right, it can hold hundreds of people, it is bright and not confined, but there are no other gaps and nooks around it, as if it were made of walls.

古文：出洞，仍由旧路出大道。
现代文：出了洞，仍然经原路出到大道上。
English: Out of the hole, still via the original road out onto the main road.

古文：登坳即海马嶂，有真武阁跨坳间。
现代文：登上山坳即是海马嶂，有个真武阁跨在山坳间。
English: Climbing up the mountain is the hippopotamus, there is a real castle straddling between the mountains.

古文：余入憩阁间，取笔楮记游，而驼马已前去。
现代文：我进入阁中休息，取出纸笔记游记，可马帮已往前走了。
English: I went into the pavilion to rest and take out my paper travel notes, but the horse gang had already moved on.

古文：久之乃行。
现代文：很久以后才动身。
English: It was a long time before we set off.

古文：其内即为海马铺，去城十里矣。
现代文：山坳内就是海马铺，离城有十里了。
English: In the foothills of the mountains is the Seahorse Shop, ten miles from the city.

古文：其处北两日半程为小米马场，有堡城下临盘江，隔江即水西地；南两日程为乖场河，水涨难渡，即出铅之所也。
现代文：从此处往北两天半的路程是小米马场，有城堡下临盘江，隔江就是水西的辖地；往南两天的路程是乖场河，水涨时难以渡河，就是出产铅矿的地方了。
English: From here, two and a half days' journey to the north is the millet horse farm, there is a castle at the head of the Lower Linpan River, and the estuary is the jurisdiction of the west of the water; two days' journey to the south is the Guifang River, it is difficult to cross the river when the water rises, it is the place where lead ore is produced.

古文：又西循南岭而行，见其坞皆北向坠，然多中洼而外横亘者。
现代文：又向西沿着南岭而行，见到这里的山坞都是向北下斜，然而大多是中部下洼而外面横亘着山岭。
English: I also walked westward along the South Ridge. I saw that the docks here all slope down to the north, but most of them are depressions in the middle and mountains outside.

古文：连西又稍上二平脊，共三里，则北度而矗者，其峰甚高，是为广山。
现代文：连续向西走又慢慢上了两道平缓的山脊，共有三里路，就往北越过矗立的山峰，此峰很高，这是广山。
English: Continuously walking westward, I slowly climbed two gentle ridges, a total of three miles, and then went north over a towering peak, this peak is very high, this is Guangshan.

古文：其上李芳先新结浮屠，为文曲星，盖安南城东最高之巅也。
现代文：峰上李芳先新建了座佛塔，名为文曲星，大概是安南卫城东面最高的山顶了。
English: On the peak, Li Fang first built a new pagoda, named Wenqu Xing, which is probably the highest peak on the east side of the Annan Acropolis.

古文：又西二里为茶庵卖茶的小屋，其北有山，欹突可畏，作负嵎之势者，旧名歪山，今改名威山。
现代文：又向西行二里是茶庵，庵北有山，倾斜突兀令人可畏，作出负隅顽抗的姿态，旧时名叫歪山，今天改名为威山。
English: Another two miles to the west is the tea hermitage, and to the north of the hermitage is a mountain, with a formidable oblique slope and a defiant posture. In the old days, it was called the Crooked Mountain, but today it is called the Weishan Mountain.

古文：余望之有异，而亟于趋城，遂遵大路而西。
现代文：我望此山有异常之处，可是急于赶去城中，只好顺着大路往西走。
English: I thought there was something unusual about this mountain, but in my haste to get to the city, I had to follow the main road to the west.

古文：又三里，复逾一阜。
现代文：又行三里，再越过一个山阜。
English: Another three miles and another mountain pass.

古文：又二里，税驾于安南城之东关外逆旅陈贡士家。
现代文：又走二里，住宿在安南卫城东城关外陈贡士家的旅店中。
English: I walked another two miles and stayed at the Chen Gongshi family's hotel outside the East Gate of Annan Acropolis.

古文：二十七日驼马已发，余乃饭。
现代文：二十七日马帮已经出发，我才吃饭。
English: On the 27th, the horse gang had already set off, so I didn't get to eat.

古文：问知城东五里，由茶庵而北，有威山，山间有洞，从东透西；又有水洞，其中积水甚深，其前正瞰卫城。
现代文：间知城东五里处，经茶庵往北走，有座威山，山中有洞，从东穿到西；又有个水洞，洞中积水很深，洞前方正俯瞰着卫城。
English: Five miles to the east of Zizhi City, passing through the tea house to the north, there is a Weishan. There is a cave in the mountain that runs from east to west. There is also a water cave, the water in the cave is very deep, and the front of the cave overlooks the Acropolis.

古文：遥指其处，虽在山巅，然甚近也。
现代文：远远指着那地方，虽然是在山顶，可是十分近。
English: Pointing to the place far away, although it is on the top of the mountain, it is very close.

古文：乃同顾仆循昨来道，五里，东抵茶庵，遂由岐北向入山。
现代文：于是同顾仆沿着昨天来的路走，五里，抵达东面的茶庵，就由岔道向北进山。
English: So he and his companion walked five miles along the road they had come from yesterday, and when they reached the teahouse on the east side, they went north into the mountains by the mountain road.

古文：一里，抵山左腋，则威山之脉，自北突而南，南耸而北伏，南削而北垂，东西皆亘崖斜骞而南上；从南麓复起一小峰，亦如之。
现代文：一里，到了山的左侧，就见威山的山脉自北突向南，南面高耸而北面低伏，南面陡削而北面下垂，东西都横亘着山崖，斜向高举往南上升；从南边山麓又突起一座小峰，也像这样。
English: One mile to the left of the mountain, you can see the mountains of Weishan from north to south, the south is high and the north is low, the south is steep and the north is sagging, everything is covered with cliffs, rising diagonally to the south; from the southern foot of the mountain another small peak protrudes, also like this.

古文：入东峡又一里，直抵山后，则与东峰过脊处也。
现代文：走入东面的峡谷又行一里，径直到达山后，就是与东峰相连延伸而过的山脊处了。
English: Walking into the canyon on the east side, it is another mile, and after reaching the mountain, it is the ridge that is connected to the east peak.

古文：由脊北下，甚深而路芜；由脊西转，循山北峰之半西行，路芜而磴在。
现代文：由山脊往北下山，极深，而道路荒芜；由山脊上往西转，沿威山北峰的半腰上西行，道路荒芜可石阶还在。
English: From the ridge to the north down the mountain, very deep, and the road is deserted; from the ridge to the west, along the northern peak of Mount Weishan, the road is deserted, but the stone steps are still there.

古文：循之行，则北坞霾雾从坞中起，弥漫北峰，咫尺不可见；而南面威山之北，惟行处犹朗，而巅亦渐为所笼。
现代文：顺着石阶走，便见北面山坞中浓雾从坞中升起，弥漫到北峰，咫尺之间无法看见；而南面威山的北面，唯有行走之处依然晴朗，可山顶也渐渐被浓雾笼罩起来。
English: Walking along the stone steps, you can see the thick fog rising from the dock in the dock on the north side, spreading to the north peak, and you can't see it within a few feet; and on the north side of Weishan on the south side, only the walking area is still clear, but the top of the mountain is gradually shrouded in thick fog.

古文：西行半里，磴乃南上。
现代文：往西行半里，石阶便向南延伸。
English: Half a mile to the west, the stone steps extend southwards.

古文：拾级而登者半里，则峰之北面，全为雾笼矣。
现代文：逐级而登了半里，就见山峰的北面全被浓雾笼罩住了。
English: After climbing half a mile step by step, we saw that the north face of the mountain was completely covered with thick fog.

古文：乃转东北上，则东崖斜骞之上也。
现代文：于是转向东北上登，就到了东面山崖倾斜高举之处的上面了。
English: So I turned to the northeast and climbed up to the top of the east-facing cliff slope.

古文：石脊甚狭，由东北上西南，如攀龙尾而升。
现代文：石脊很窄，由东北上延到西南方，如同攀着龙尾上升。
English: The ridge is very narrow, stretching from the northeast to the southwest, as if climbing the dragon's tail.

古文：复见东南峰外，澄霄丽日，遥山如靛；余所行之西北，则弥沦如海，峰上峰下，皆入混沌，若以此脊为界者。
现代文：又见东南方山峰之外，澄净的天空中红日艳丽，远山如蓝靛；我所走的西北方，却是浓雾弥漫深沉如像大海，峰上峰下，皆陷入一片混沌，好像是以此条山脊作为分界线。
English: I also saw that beyond the peaks in the southeast, the red sun shone brightly in the clear sky, and the distant mountains were like blue ripples. In the northwest, where I was walking, the fog was as thick and deep as the sea, and the peaks above and below were all in chaos, as if this ridge was the dividing line.

古文：盖脊之东南，风所从来，故夙霾净卷；脊之西北，风为脊障，毒雾遂得倚为窟穴。
现代文：大约是山脊的东南方，是风吹来的方向，所以晨雾被卷得干干净净；山脊的西北面，风被山脊挡住，毒雾便能够紧依着山坞作为巢穴。
English: It was roughly the southeast of the ridge, the direction from which the wind was blowing, so the morning mist was swept clean; on the northwest side of the ridge, the wind was blocked by the ridge, and the poisonous mist was able to cling to the dock as a nest.

古文：予夙愿一北眺盘江从来处，而每为峰掩，至是适登北岭，而又为雾掩，造化根株，其不容人窥测如此！
现代文：我一向的愿望是向北方眺望一次盘江流来的地方，可常常被山峰遮住，来到此地刚好登上了朝北的山岭，却又被雾遮住了，大自然的根由，它不容许人们窥测竟然如此！
English: I have always wanted to look north to the place where the Pan River once flowed, but it is often covered by mountains. When I came here, I just climbed the north-facing mountain range, but it was covered by fog. The root of nature, it does not allow people to spy on it!

古文：攀脊半里，有洞在顶崖之下，其门东向，上如合掌，稍洼而下，底宽四五丈，中有佛龛僧榻，遗饭犹存，而僧不知何往。
现代文：攀越岭脊半里，有个洞在顶上山崖之下，洞口向东，顶上如合起的手掌，略微往下洼去，洞底宽四五丈，洞中有佛完和僧人的卧床，两旁有很多缭绕着氮氯之气的佛完。
English: Half a mile after climbing over the ridge, there is a cave at the top of the cliff, the mouth of the cave is to the east, the top is like a closed palm, slightly downwards, the bottom of the cave is four or five meters wide, there is a Buddha's end and a monk's bed in the cave, and there are many Buddha's ends surrounded by nitrogen and chlorine gas on both sides.

古文：两旁颇有氤氲之龛。其后直透而西，门乃渐狭而低，亦尖如合掌。
现代文：它后面直穿向西，洞便慢慢变得又窄又低，也是尖尖的如像合起来的手掌。
English: Behind it, straight ahead to the west, the hole gradually became narrow and low, and also pointed, like the palm of a closed hand.

古文：其门西径山腹而出，约七丈余，前后通望而下不见者，以其高也。
现代文：这个洞口向西径直穿过山腹而出，约有七丈多长，前后两个洞口相通，互相望得见，可从下面看不见的原因，是因为洞在高处。
English: This hole goes straight through the mountainside to the west and is about seven stories long. The front and back of the two holes are connected and can be seen from each other. The reason why it can't be seen from below is because the hole is high up.

古文：出后门，上下俱削崖叠石。
现代文：出了后洞口，上下都是陡削的悬崖和重叠的山石。
English: Out of the back of the cave, there are steep cliffs and overlapping rocks.

古文：路缘崖西南去十余丈，复有洞西向，门高不及丈，而底甚平，深与阔各二丈。
现代文：路沿着悬崖往西南前去十多丈，又有个向西的洞，洞口高不到一丈，可洞底十分平整，深与宽各有二丈。
English: The road goes along the cliff to the southwest for more than ten meters, and there is a hole to the west, the hole is less than one meter high, but the bottom of the hole is very flat, and the depth and width are two meters each.

古文：而洞后石缕缤纷，不深而幻，置佛座其中，而前建虚堂，已圮不能存。
现代文：而洞后部的岩石一缕缕的缤纷争呈，不深却很奇幻，其中放置了佛像，而且前边建成空空的佛堂，已经倒塌无法保存。
English: But the rocks at the back of the cave are a riot of colour, not deep but very magical, with a Buddha statue placed in it, and an empty Buddhist temple built at the front, which has collapsed and cannot be preserved.

古文：其前直瞰卫城，若垂趾可及，偶雾气一吞，忽漫无所睹，不意海市蜃楼，又在山阿城郭也。
现代文：它前方一直下瞰卫城，好像伸脚就可到达，偶尔雾气一吞，忽然烟云弥漫，什么也看不见了，想不到海市屋楼之景，又出现在这山弯城郭之间。
English: It overlooks the Acropolis all the way down in front of it, as if it can be reached by stretching one's feet. Occasionally, the fog is swallowed up, and suddenly the clouds are full of smoke, and nothing can be seen. Unimaginable scenes of the buildings of the seaside market appear again between the mountains and the city walls.

古文：然此特洞外者也。
现代文：然而这只不过是洞外的景色。
English: However, this is just the view outside the cave.

古文：由洞左旁窍东向入，其门渐隘而黑。
现代文：从洞左侧的旁洞向东进去，洞壁渐渐变得又窄又黑。
English: From the side hole on the left side of the cave to the east, the cave wall gradually becomes narrow and dark.

古文：攀石阈上，其中坎砢欹嵌，洼窦不一，皆贮水满中而不外溢。
现代文：攀着石门槛上登，洞中坎坎坷坷，倾斜下嵌，坑坑洼洼不一而足，其中都贮满水却不外溢。
English: Climbing up the stone threshold, the cave is bumpy, the slope is embedded, the pits are uneven, and they are filled with water but do not overflow.

古文：洞顶滴沥，下注水池，如杂珮ｐèｉ佩带的玉器繁絃乐器上的弦，铿锵远近。
现代文：洞顶的水滴，下注到水池中，如杂乱的玉佩相击声和繁杂的琴弦声，铿铿锵锵远近有声。
English: The water droplets from the top of the cave are poured into the pool, like the sound of jade beads and the sound of strings. There is sound from far and near.

古文：洞内渐转东北，势似宏深渊坠，既水池高下，无可着足，而无火炬遥烛，惟从黑暗中听其遥响而已。
现代文：由洞内渐渐转向东北，洞似庞大的深渊陷下去，水池既高高低低的，没有踏脚的地方，又无火把远照，唯有在黑暗中听那远远的响声而已。
English: From the cave gradually turned to the northeast, the cave like a huge abyss sank, the pool is both high and low, there is no place to step on, and there is no torch to shine far away, only to listen to the distant sound in the dark.

古文：余所见水洞颇多，而独此高悬众峰之顶，又潴而不流，无一滴外泄，向所望以为独石凌空，而孰意其中乃函水之具耶。
现代文：我所见过的水洞很多，可唯独此洞高悬在群峰之顶，水又积而不流，无一点一滴外泄，先前望去以为是一块凌空的孤石，可谁又意想得到其中竟然是盛水的容器呢。
English: I have seen a lot of water caves, but this cave alone is high above the peaks. The water accumulates and does not flow, without a single drop of leakage. Previously, it was thought to be a hollow rock, but who would have thought that it was a container of water.

古文：出洞，仍循崖而北，入明洞后门，抵前洞。
现代文：出洞后，仍沿着悬崖往北走，进了两头透亮的山洞的后洞，走到前洞。
English: After getting out of the cave, I still walked north along the cliff, entered the back cave of the two bright caves, and walked to the front cave.

古文：从僧榻之左，有旁龛可登，攀而上之，则有隙西透，若窗而岐为两。
现代文：从僧人卧床的左侧，有个位于侧面的佛完可以登上去，攀上佛完，就有条裂缝通向西方，好像窗户一样分为两岔。
English: From the left side of the monk's bed, there is a Buddha statue on the side that can be climbed up, and after climbing the Buddha, there is a crack leading to the west, which is divided into two folds like a window.

古文：其后复有洞门西向，在崖路之上，其门颇敞，第透隙处，双棂逼仄，只对外窥，不能穿之以出耳。
现代文：它后面又有个向西的洞口，在悬崖上的道路上方，洞口很宽敞，只是透进亮光的缝隙处，两道窗口很狭窄，只可往外窥视，不能穿过它们出去罢了。
English: Behind it there is another cave opening to the west, above the road on the cliff, the cave opening is very spacious, only a crack of light penetrates, the two windows are very narrow, you can only peep out, you can't get out through them.

古文：先是余入前洞，见崖间有镌 三明洞 三字者，从洞中直眺，但见前后，而不知旁观更有此异也。
现代文：这之前我走入前洞，见崖壁上镌刻有 三明洞 三个字，从洞中直望过去，只见前后两洞，却不知往旁观看还有此等奇异之处。
English: Before that, I walked into the front cave and saw the words "Sanming Cave" engraved on the cliff wall. Looking straight ahead from the cave, I could only see the front and back holes, but I didn't know that there were other strange places to look at.

古文：下洞，由旧路三里，出茶庵，适按君冯，士俊以专巡至。
现代文：下洞后，从原路行三里，到茶庵，恰好遇上巡按冯大人专门巡察来到此地。
English: After getting out of the cave, he walked three miles from the original road to the tea house, and happened to meet the inspector. Mr. Feng came to this place for a special inspection.

古文：从来直指巡方，不逾关岭、盘江，冯以特命再任，故历关隘至此耳。
现代文：从来直指使者巡察地方，不越过关岭、盘江一线，冯士俊由于特别任命连任，所以经过关隘到此。
English: The envoys never went straight to inspect localities and did not cross the Guanling and Panjiang rivers. Feng Shijun was reappointed by special appointment, so he went through Guanxi to get here.

古文：时旌旗穿关逾坳，瞻眺之，空山生色，第随其后抵安南，不免徒骑杂沓，五里之程，久乃得至。
现代文：此时族旗穿过关隘越过山坳，远眺过去，空旷的山野增添出光辉，但跟随在他们后面来到安南卫城，免不了差役车骑杂乱，五里的路程，很久才得以走到。
English: At this time, the national flag crossed the pass through the mountain pass, looked far and wide, and the open mountains and fields added brilliance, but followed them to the Annan Acropolis, inevitably the police car ride was messy, a five-mile journey, and it took a long time to walk.

古文：乃饮于陈氏肆中。
现代文：于是在陈家客店中喝了点水。
English: So I drank some water in the Chen Family Inn.

古文：遂入东门，西抵卫前，转南而出南门。
现代文：随即进入东门，往西来到安南卫官衙前，转向南走出南门。
English: Then enter the East Gate, go west to Annan Guardsmen's Quarters, turn south and walk out of the South Gate.

古文：南向行岭峡间，共平上二里，有脊自西北度东南，度处东平为塍，西忽坠坑深下，有小水自坑中唧唧出。
现代文：向南行走在山岭峡谷之间，共平缓地上行二里，有条山脊自西北延伸到东南方，山脊延过之处东面地势平坦，垦为农田，西面忽然向下深坠成坑，有细小水流从坑中缓缓流出。
English: Walking southwards between the mountains, ridges and canyons, a total of two miles of gentle uphill walk. There is a ridge extending from the northwest to the southeast. Where the ridge extends, the terrain is flat in the east, bordered by farmland. In the west, it suddenly plunges into a deep pit, and small streams of water slowly flow out of the pit.

古文：路随之，西循北崖下坠，即所谓乌鸣关也，乌鸣关在安南卫。土人呼为老鸦关。
现代文：道路顺着水流走，往西沿着北边的山崖下坠，就是所谓的乌鸣关了，当地人称呼为老鸦关。
English: The road follows the current of the water and drops down the cliff to the west along the northern side. This is the so-called Wuming Pass. Locals call it Laowu Pass.

古文：西向直下一里，有茶庵跨路隅，飞泉夹洒道间，即前唧唧细流，至此而奔腾矣。
现代文：向西一直下山一里，有座茶庵横在路旁，飞泉夹道洒落在路中，这就是前边的缓缓细流，至此变为奔腾之流了。
English: One mile down the mountain to the west, there is a teahouse on the side of the road, and flying springs are scattered on the road. This is the slow trickle in front, and it has become a rushing stream.

古文：庵下崖环峡仄，极倾陷之势。
现代文：庵下山崖环绕峡谷狭窄，极尽倾斜深陷之势。
English: The cliff below the hermitage is surrounded by a narrow canyon, which has the potential to be extremely steep and deep.

古文：又曲折下半里，泉溢浃道，有穹牌，题曰： 甘泉胜迹 。
现代文：又曲曲折折下山半里，泉水溢出浸透了道路，有块圆形石碑，题写着 甘泉胜迹 。
English: Half a mile down the mountain, the spring water overflowed and soaked the road. There was a round stone monument inscribed with the words "Ganquan Scenic Spot."

古文：其旁旧亦有享，已废，而遗址丰碑尚在，言嘉靖间有僧施茶膳众，由岭下汲泉甚艰，一日疏地得之，是言泉从僧发者。
现代文：碑旁旧时也有个亭子，已倒塌，可遗址和高大的石碑还在，碑文说嘉靖年间有个和尚在此施舍众人茶饭，由岭下汲取泉水十分艰难，一天挖地找到这股泉水，这是说泉水是由这个和尚发现的。
English: There was also a pavilion next to the monument in the old days, which has collapsed, but the site and the tall stone monument are still there. The inscription says that during the Jiajing Dynasty, a monk gave tea and rice to the people here. It is very difficult to draw spring water from under the ridge. One day, they dug down and found this spring water. This means that the spring water was discovered by this monk.

古文：余忆甘泉之名，旧《志》有之，而唧唧细流，实溢于岭上，或僧疏引至此，不为无功，若神之如锡卓禅杖龙移，则不然也。
现代文：我回忆甘泉的名称，旧志书上有这名字，可缓缓流淌的细流，事实上是在岭上溢出来的，或者是和尚疏挖引流到此，不能说没有功劳，如果把它神化为禅杖一拄龙王就搬家的神话，却不是这样的了。
English: I recall the name of Ganquan, the name is in the old book, the trickle that can slowly flow, in fact, overflowed on the ridge, or the monk dredged and drained to here, can not be said to have no merit, if it is deified as a zen wand, the myth of the dragon king moving house, but this is not the case.

古文：又拾级西南下一里，下抵峡口，循西崖之足，转而西行，北则石崖排空，突兀上压；南则坠壑下盘，坵垤纵横，皆犁为田。
现代文：又沿石阶向西南下山一里，下达峡口，沿西面山崖的山脚，转向西行，北面是石崖排列在高空，突兀而起，从上往下压；南面却坠成壑谷，向下盘绕，土丘纵横，都垦犁为田地。
English: I also went down the mountain one mile southwest along the stone steps to reach the mouth of the gorge. I followed the foot of the cliff on the west side and turned westward. On the north side, the stone cliffs were lined up high in the sky, rising abruptly and pressing down from above; on the south side, however, they fell into a valley, winding down, and the hills were vertical and horizontal, all of which were fields.

古文：虽升降已多，犹平行山半也。
现代文：虽然升降已有多次，仍然平缓地行走在半山腰。
English: Although there have been several ascents and descents, I am still walking smoothly halfway up the mountain.

古文：又西半里，有泉自北崖裂隙间宛转下注，路经其前，为架桥横度，泉落于侨内，复从桥下泻峡去。
现代文：又往西半里，有山泉从北面山崖的裂缝间宛转下泄，路经过它前边，为此架了座桥横走过去，泉水落在桥内一侧，再从桥下泻入峡中去。
English: Halfway to the west, a mountain spring spilled from a crack in the cliff to the north. The road passed in front of it, so a bridge was built to cross it. The spring water fell on the inside of the bridge and then poured into the gorge from under the bridge.

古文：坐桥上仰观之，崖隙欹曲，泉如从云叶间堕出，或隐或现，又瀑布一变格也。
现代文：坐在桥上仰望这股山泉，崖壁石缝歪斜弯曲，泉水如像从叶片般的云彩中坠落出来，时隐时现，又是瀑布的一种变形了。
English: Sitting on the bridge, looking up at this mountain spring, the rock crevices of the cliff wall are crooked and curved, and the spring water seems to fall out of the cloud like a leaf. It is a deformation of the waterfall.

古文：循崖又西，迤逦平上，两过南度之脊，渐转西北，共五里，为乌鸣铺。
现代文：沿着山崖又往西，绕来绕去平缓地上行，两次越过往南延伸的山脊，慢慢转向西北行，共走五里，是乌鸣铺。
English: Along the cliff to the west, around and around, slowly going up, twice crossing the ridge extending to the south, slowly turning to the northwest, walking a total of five miles, is Wu Mingpu.

古文：复西北下峡间，一里余，有小水，一自东峡来，一自北峡来，各有石梁跨之，合于路左而东南去。
现代文：再又往西北下到峡中，一里有余，有小溪，一条自东边峡中流来，一条从北面峡中流来，各有石桥跨在溪上，在路左合流后往东南流去。
English: Further northwest down into the gorge, there is a stream, a creek, a stream from the middle of the eastern gorge, a stream from the middle of the northern gorge, each with a stone bridge across the stream, and after the road merges to the left, it flows to the southeast.

古文：度两石桥，又西南上岭，一里，从岭头过一哨，有数十家夹道。
现代文：越过两座石桥，又向西南上岭，一里，从岭头路过一处哨所，有数十户人家夹道而居。
English: After crossing two stone bridges, we drove southwest to Shangling, one mile. From Lingtou, we passed a guard post, where dozens of households lived side by side.

古文：又从岭上循北界大山西向行，其南复平坠成壑，下盘错为田甚深。
现代文：又从岭上顺着北面一列大山向西行，岭南面重又平缓地下坠成壑谷，下面直到很深之处都是环绕交错的农田。
English: From the ridge, it followed a line of large mountains in the north to the west, and in the south of the ridge, it was heavy and gently fell into a valley, and below it was surrounded by interlaced farmland until it was very deep.

古文：其南遥山与北界环列者，耸如展屏，而北角独尖竖而起。
现代文：那南面的远山与北面一列呈环形排列的山，高耸着如展开的屏风，而北边的山角唯独尖尖地竖起。
English: The distant mountains to the south and a ring of mountains to the north towered like an unfurling screen, while the northern corner of the mountain stood out sharply.

古文：环此壑而东度土脊一支，遥属于北界大山，所过岭头夹哨处，正其北属之脊也。
现代文：环绕过这个壑谷并往东延伸的一条土脊，远远地连接着北面一列大山，所经过的岭头哨所夹道之处，正是连接着北面的山脊。
English: A ridge of earth that encircles this valley and extends to the east connects a line of large mountains in the far north. The place where the Lingtou sentry post crosses the road is precisely the ridge that connects the north.

古文：余先是从海马嶂西，即遥从岭隙见西峰缭绕，而此峰独方顶，迥出如屏。
现代文：我在此之前从海马嶂西边，就远远地从山岭的缺口中见到西边山峰缭绕，可独有此峰是方形峰顶，迥然出现如同屏风。
English: Before this, from the western side of the seahorse, I saw the peaks of the western side of the mountains far away from the gap of the mountains, but only this peak is a square peak, suddenly appearing like a screen.

古文：问骑夫： 江西坡即此峰否？ 对曰： 尚在南。 
现代文：问马夫： 江西坡是否就是此峰？  回答道： 还在南边。 
English: Asked Mafu: Is the Jiangxi slope this peak? Answered: It is still in the south.

古文：余望其坳入处反在北，心惑之，至是始知其即东向分支之脊，路虽对之行，而西坡实在其北。
现代文：我远望山坳的入口处反而在北边，心里对此很疑惑，到了这里才知道江西坡就是向东分支的山脊，路虽然对着它走，可西坡实际上在山脊的北面。
English: I looked far and wide for the entrance to the ridge, but it was on the north side, and I was very puzzled about it. It was only when I got here that I knew that the west slope of the Jiangxi Province was the ridge branching off to the east. Although I walked towards it, the west slope was actually on the north side of the ridge.

古文：循北岭升降曲折，皆在峰半行。
现代文：沿着北岭上下曲折，都在山峰半腰上行走。
English: The twists and turns up and down the North Ridge are all halfway up the mountain.

古文：又西北二里，西南二里，直坠坡而下者二里，缘岭西转者一里，是为纳溪铺；盖在北崖南坠之下，虽所下已多，而犹然土山之脊也。
现代文：又往西北二里，向西南二里，顺山坡一直下坠二里路，沿山岭往西转了一里路，这是纳溪铺；从北边山崖往南坠山而下，虽然下走的路程已很多，可仍然在土山的山脊上。
English: Two miles to the northwest, two miles to the southwest, two miles down the mountain slope, and one mile along the mountain ridge to the west, this is Naxi Pu; from the northern cliff to the south down the mountain, although the distance has been a lot, it can still be on the ridge of the earthen mountain.

古文：由铺西望，则东西山又分两界，有水经其中，第此两界俱支盘陇错，不若关岭之截然屏夹也。
现代文：由铺西望去，就见东西两面的山又分为两列，有河流流经其中，但只是两列山都是支脉盘绕山垄交错，不似关岭那样截然如屏风相夹。
English: Looking from the west, you can see that the mountains on both sides of the east and west are divided into two columns, with rivers flowing through them. However, the two columns of mountains are intertwined with the mountain ridges, not like the Guanling Mountains, which are interlocked like a screen.

古文：复西南下一里半，有水从东崖坠坑而出，西悬细若马尾。
现代文：再向西南下走一里半，有水流从东边山崖上流出坠入坑中，向西悬挂着，细如马尾。
English: Another mile and a half to the southwest, a stream of water flows out of the eastern cliff and falls into the pit, hanging to the west, as thin as a horse's tail.

古文：从其北，路亦坠崖而下。
现代文：从它的北边，路也循山崖下坠。
English: From its northern side, the road also follows the mountain cliffs.

古文：又二里余，抵坞中，巨桥三门，跨两陇间，水从东一门涌而北出，其西二门，皆下平为田，岂水涸时耶？
现代文：又行二里多，到达坞中。一座三个桥洞的巨桥，横跨两岸土垄之间，水流从东边的一个桥洞朝北涌出，那西头的两个桥洞，下面皆是平整的农田，难道此时是河水干涸的时节吗？
English: A huge bridge with three bridge holes, spanning between the earthen ridges on both sides, water gushing northward from a bridge hole on the east, and the two bridge holes on the west, all of which are flat farmland below. Is this the season when the river dries up?

古文：其水自西南诸峡中，各趋于桥之南，坠峡而下，经桥下，北注而出于盘江上流，其 纳溪 之名以此耶？
现代文：这条河水从西南方的各处山峡中，各自奔流到桥的南边，坠入峡谷，流经桥下，往北流注而后流入盘江上游，它 纳溪 的名字是出于这个原因吗？
English: The water of this river flows from various mountain gorges in the southwest to the south side of the bridge, falls into the canyon, flows under the bridge, flows northward and then flows into the upper reaches of the Pan River. Is the name of Na Creek for this reason?

古文：度桥，复西北上岭，是为江西坡，以岭在溪之西也。
现代文：过了桥，又往西北上岭，这便是江西坡，是由于山岭在溪流的西面。
English: After crossing the bridge, we went to Northwest Shangling, which is the western slope of Jiangxi, because the mountains are on the west side of the stream.

古文：路从夹冈中透壁盘旋而上，一里，出夹，复拾级上。
现代文：路从两峰相夹的山冈上从中间穿过崖壁盘旋着上走，一里，出了夹谷，又沿石阶上行。
English: The road spirals up from the hill between the two peaks through the middle of the cliff wall, one mile, out of the valley, and up along the stone steps.

古文：一里，得茅庵，在坡之半。
现代文：一里，遇到一处茅屋建的小庵，在半坡之中。
English: One mile, I came across a small hut built by a thatcher, halfway up the slope.

古文：又北上拾级，半里，抵岭头，其北有峰夹坞，尚高；东望纳溪铺之缀东崖者，高下正与此等。
现代文：又沿石阶北上，半里，抵达岭头，岭北有山峰夹成山坞，还很高；东望纳溪铺连缀着东面山崖之处，高低正与此岭相等。
English: I also walked north along the stone steps for half a mile and arrived at the ridge head. To the north of the ridge, there are peaks sandwiched into a dock, which is still very high. To the east, Banna Creek is interspersed with cliffs to the east, and the height is equal to this ridge.

古文：于是又西向平陟岭间二里，挟南峰转循其西，又西向行半里，则岭上水多左石坠。
现代文：从此又向西平缓地在山岭之间跋涉了二里，紧傍着南峰转向沿着它的西面走，又向西行半里，则见岭上的水流大多往左右两侧下坠。
English: From then on, I slowly trekked two miles to the west between the mountains, walking close to the south peak and turning to the west along it, and walking half a mile to the west, I saw the water flow on the ridge mostly falling to the left and right sides.

古文：又东北下转，则一深堑甚逼，自西南坠东北，若划山为二者。
现代文：又向东北往下转，就有一道深堑极其狭窄，自西南往东北下坠，好似把山划为两半的样子。
English: Turning down to the northeast, there is a deep and extremely narrow valley, descending from the southwest to the northeast, as if dividing the mountain into two halves.

古文：度小石梁而西，又西北逾岭头，共一里而入西坡城之东南门，是为有嘉城。
现代文：越过小石桥往西走，又向西北越过岭头，共有一里便进了西坡城的东南门，这里是有嘉城。
English: After crossing the small stone bridge to the west and crossing the ridge to the northwest, a total of one mile into the southeast gate of Xipo City, here is Jiacheng.

