古文：六微：一曰权借在下，二曰利异外借，三曰托于似类，四曰利害有反，五曰参疑内争，六曰敌国废置。
现代文：有六种隐蔽微妙的情况：一是君主把权势借给臣下；二是君臣利益不同而臣下借用外力谋私；三是臣下假托类似的事蒙骗君主；四是君臣利害关系彼此相反；五是等级名分上下混乱而导致内部争权夺利；六是敌国设谋按他们的意图任免大臣。
English: There are six hidden subtle situations: one is that the monarch lends power to the vassal; the second is that the interests of the monarch and the vassal are different and the vassal borrows external forces to seek personal gain; the third is that the vassal pretends to do similar things to deceive the monarch; the fourth is that the interests of the monarch and the vassal are opposite to each other; the fifth is that the hierarchy is chaotic and leads to internal competition for power and profit; the sixth is that the enemy country schemes to appoint and remove ministers according to their intentions.

古文：此六者，主之所察也。
现代文：这六种现象是君主必须明察的。
English: These six phenomena must be observed by the monarch.

古文：△经一权借
现代文：权借一权力和威势不可以让给别人去用。
English: Power and authority should not be given to others to use.

古文：权势不可以借人，上失其一，臣以为百。
现代文：君主失去一分权势，臣下就会把它当作百分去争。
English: If the monarch loses one point of power, his subjects will fight for it as if it were a hundred points.

古文：故臣得借则力多，力多则内外为用，内外为用则人主壅。
现代文：所以臣下得到君主的权势，力量就会强大起来；臣下力量强大起来了，朝廷内外就会被利用；朝廷内外一旦被利用，君主就会受到蒙蔽。
English: Therefore, when a vassal obtains the power of the monarch, the power will become strong; when a vassal's power becomes strong, it will be used inside and outside the court; once it is used inside and outside the court, the monarch will be deceived.

古文：其说在老聃之言失鱼也。
现代文：有关的解说在： 说一 中老聃说的 鱼不可脱于渊 部分。
English: The relevant commentary is in: Saying 1 The fish cannot escape from the abyss part of the old saying.

古文：是以人主久语而左右鬻怀刷，其患在胥僮之谏厉公，与州侯之一言而燕人浴矢也。△经二利异
现代文：因此君主同臣下谈话的时间长，臣下就以此作为抬高身价的资本；近侍会卖弄主子赐给的一些小物品。其中的祸患表现在：胥僮劝谏晋厉公，州侯手下的人异口同声为他解脱，燕人受骗用屎浴身。利异二
English: Therefore, the conversation between the monarch and his vassals lasted a long time, and the vassals used it as a capital to raise their status; the attendants would show off some small items given by the master. The scourge of this was manifested in: the prince was persuaded, the vassals of the vassal freed him in unison, and the vassal was deceived and bathed in excrement.

古文：君臣之利异，故人臣莫忠，故臣利立而主利灭。
现代文：君和臣的利益不同，所以臣下没有一个是忠诚的。所以臣下的利益确立了，君主的利益就失去了。
English: The interests of the prince and the vassal are different, so none of the vassals is loyal. Therefore, the interests of the vassal are established, and the interests of the monarch are lost.

古文：是以奸臣者召敌兵以内除，举外事以眩主，苟成其私利，不顾国患。
现代文：因此那些奸臣贼子，招致敌国军队来除掉国内私敌，用涉外事情来迷惑君主，假如能取得他的私利，就会不顾国家的忧患。
English: Therefore, those treacherous vassals and traitors, who invite the enemy's army to eliminate the domestic private enemy, use foreign affairs to confuse the monarch, and if they can obtain his self-interest, they will ignore the country's sorrow.

古文：其说在卫人之夫妻祷祝也。
现代文：有关的解说，在 说二 中卫国某对夫妻祈祷求神赐福一段。
English: The relevant commentary is from the passage of a husband and wife in the Central Plains praying for God's blessing in Saying 2.

古文：故戴歇议子弟，而三桓攻昭公；公叔内齐军，而翟黄召韩兵；太宰嚭说大夫种，大成牛教申不害；司马喜告赵王，吕仓规秦、楚；宋石遗卫君书，白圭教暴谴。
现代文：所以戴歇要议论诸公子，鲁国的三桓要合力攻打鲁昭公；韩相公叔要引进齐国的军队，魏臣翟黄要招韩军攻魏；太宰要劝说大夫种，大成牛要开导申不害；中山国司马喜要私送情报给赵王，魏臣吕仓要劝秦、楚攻魏；魏将宋石要写信给楚将卫君，魏相白圭要开导韩相暴谴。
English: Therefore, Dai Xie wanted to discuss the princes, the three kings of Lu wanted to jointly attack Lu Zhaogong; the uncle of Han Xianggong wanted to introduce the army of Qi, the Wei minister Yu Huang wanted to recruit the Korean army to attack Wei; Dazai wanted to persuade Dafu Zong, Dacheng Niu wanted to enlighten and not harm Shen; Sima Xi of Zhongshan wanted to send information to King Zhao, the Wei minister Lu Cang wanted to persuade Qin and Chu to attack Wei; the Wei general Song Shi wanted to write to the Chu general Wei Jun, and the Wei general Bai Gui wanted to enlighten and punish Han Xiang.

古文：△经三似类
现代文：似类三
English: Similar category three

古文：似类之事，人主之所以失诛，而大臣之所以成私也。
现代文：那些似是而非的假象，是使君主处罚不当，而大臣能够谋取私利的原因。
English: Those seeming paradoxes are what allow the monarch to mete out punishment and ministers to seek personal gain.

古文：是以门人捐水而夷射诛，济阳自矫而二人罪，司马喜杀爰骞而季辛诛，郑袖言恶臭而新人劓，费无忌教郄宛而令尹诛，陈需杀张寿而犀首走。
现代文：因此守门人泼水而夷射被诛杀；济阳君伪造王命而二人获罪；司马喜杀掉爱赛而季辛被诛杀；郑袖说新来的美人厌恶楚王的气味，美人被割去了鼻子；费无忌引诱郄宛上当，令尹把郄宛杀了；陈需暗杀张寿，迫使犀首出逃。
English: Therefore, the gatekeeper splashed water and was shot and killed; Jiyangjun forged the king's life and the two were found guilty; Sima Xi killed Aisai and Jixin was killed; Zheng Sleeve said that the new beauty detested the smell of King Chu, and the beauty was cut off the nose; it was no trouble to lure Zou Wan to the trap and let Yin kill Zou Wan; Chen needed to assassinate Zhang Shou and forced the rhinoceros to flee.

古文：故烧刍广会郄而中山罪，杀老儒而济阳赏也。
现代文：所以近侍烧掉马草仓库，中山国君就加罪于公子；济阳君门客杀掉老儒，济阳君会奖赏他。
English: Therefore, if a close attendant burned down the horse grass warehouse, Zhongshan Guojun would punish the prince; if Jiyang Jun's protégé killed the old man, Jiyang Jun would reward him.

古文：△经四有反
现代文：有反四
English: There are four opposites.

古文：事起而有所利，其尸主之；有所害，必反察之。
现代文：事情发生了，如果有利可得，应当牢牢掌握它；如果有害，一定要从反面加以考察。
English: When something happens, if it is beneficial, it should be firmly grasped; if it is harmful, it must be examined from the opposite side.

古文：是以明主之论也，国害则省其利者，臣害则察其反者。
现代文：因此明君考虑问题时，国家受害，就要察看谁能从中得到好处；臣下受害，就要考察与他利害相反的人。
English: Therefore, when Ming Jun considers a problem, if the country suffers, he should see who can benefit from it; if his vassal suffers, he should investigate those who have the opposite interests to him.

古文：其说在楚兵至而陈需相，黍种贵而廪吏覆。
现代文：有关的解说在 说四 中楚军攻魏而陈需升任魏相，黍种价高而粮仓官吏受到检查。
English: The relevant commentary is as follows: It is said that four times the Chu army attacked Wei, and Chen Bo was promoted to Wei minister. The price of millet seeds was high, and the officials of the granary were inspected.

古文：是以昭奚恤执贩茅，而不僖侯谯其次；文公发绕炙，而穰侯请立帝。
现代文：因此昭奚恤逮捕贩茅草的人；韩昭侯怒责厨师的副手；晋文公追查把头发缠在烤肉上的人；穰侯请齐王称帝。
English: Therefore, Zhaohui arrested the seller of thatch; Han Zhaohu scolded the cook's assistant; Jin Wengong tracked down the person who wrapped his hair around the roast meat; Zhaohu asked King Qi to proclaim him emperor.

古文：△经五参疑
现代文：参疑五
English: Suspect Five

古文：参疑之势，乱之所由生也，故明主慎之。是以晋骊姬杀太子申生，而郑夫人用毒药，卫州吁杀其君完，公子根取东周，王子职甚有宠而商臣果作乱，严遂、韩廆争而哀侯果遇贼，田常、阚止、戴驩、皇喜敌而宋君、简公杀。
现代文：等级名分相互混杂的局面，是产生祸乱的根源，所以明君应该慎重地对待它，因此有骊姬唆使晋献公杀掉太子申生的事，有郑君夫人用毒药毒死郑君的事，有卫州吁杀掉他哥哥卫桓公的事，有周公子根占得东周的事，有王子职过分受宠而太子商臣果然兴兵作乱的事。严遂、韩庞争权，结果韩哀侯被杀；田常和阚止争斗、戴欢和皇喜争斗，结果宋君、齐简公被杀。
English: The situation of mixed ranks is the root cause of the disaster, so Ming Jun should treat it carefully. Therefore, there was the case of Yan Ji instigating Jin Xian Gong to kill Prince Shen Sheng, the case of Zheng Jun's wife poisoning Zheng Jun with poison, the case of Wei Zhou calling for the killing of his brother Wei Huan Gong, the case of Zhou Gong Zi Gen occupying East Zhou, the case of the prince's position being overly favored and the prince's merchants actually starting a riot. Finally, Han Pang fought for power, and as a result, Han Yimou was killed; Tian Chang and Yao Du fought, Dai Huan

古文：其说在狐突之称 二好 ，与郑昭之对 未生 也。
现代文：有关的解说在 说五 中狐突谈论君主宠爱姬妄和近臣，以及郑昭回答君主说太子还未出生。废置六
English: The relevant commentary is in "Saying Five," in which the narrator talks about the monarch's favorite son and close minister, and Zheng Zhao's answer to the monarch that the crown prince has not yet been born.

古文：△经六废置敌之所务，在淫察而就靡，人主不察，则敌废置矣。
现代文：敌国力求的做到的，是使对立国家的君主观察错乱而造成失误；君主如果不能明察，就会按敌国的意图来任免自己的大臣。
English: The enemy's object is to throw the observation of the sovereign of the opposite country into confusion and cause him to make a mistake; if the sovereign does not observe this, he will appoint and dismiss his ministers in accordance with the intentions of the enemy.

古文：故文王资费仲，而秦王患楚使；黎且去仲尼，而干象沮甘茂。
现代文：所以周文王资助商臣费仲，秦王担忧楚国使者能干，齐臣黎且设法让鲁君赶走孔子，楚臣干象阻止楚王扶持甘茂。
English: Therefore, King Zhou supported the merchant Feizhong, King Qin was worried about the ability of the emissary of the State of Chu, Qisheng tried to get Lu Jun to drive out Confucius, and the State of Chu tried to prevent King Chu from supporting Ganmao.

古文：是以子胥宣言而子常用，内美人而虞、虢亡，佯遗书而苌弘死，用鸡猳而郐桀尽。
现代文：因此伍子胥散布舆论而楚国子常得以任用，因为收纳晋君献来的美女而虞虢两国终于灭亡，叔向故意丢失书信而使苌弘被杀，郑桓公制造订立盟约的假象而使邻国残杀自己的豪杰。
English: Therefore, Wu Zixuan spread public opinion and Chu Guozi was often appointed, because the beautiful women presented by Jinjun were accepted and the two countries finally perished, Uncle Xiang deliberately lost the letter and killed Zeng Hong, Zheng Huan made the illusion of concluding a covenant and made the neighboring countries kill their heroes.

古文：△庙攻
现代文：庙攻七
English: Seven attacks on the temple

古文： 参疑  废置 之事，明主绝之于内而施之于外。
现代文： 参疑内争 、 敌国废置 的事情，明君要严格地禁止它在国内出现，而应该把它作为一种策略运用于国外。
English: Mingjun should strictly prohibit the emergence of internal disputes and the abolition of the enemy state in the country, and should apply it as a strategy abroad.

古文：资其轻者，辅其弱者，此谓 庙攻 。
现代文：资助那些权势轻的，支持那些地位弱的，这就叫做庙攻。
English: Subsidizing those who have little power and supporting those who are in a weak position is called attacking the temple.

古文：参伍既用于内，观听又行于外，则敌伪得。
现代文：君主既能在内检查、验证，又能对国外观察、探听，那么敌人的一切诈伪都可以识破。
English: The monarch can not only check and verify inside, but also observe and listen to the outside world, so all the enemy's frauds can be detected.

古文：其说在秦侏儒之告惠文君也。
现代文：有关的解说在秦国侏儒告诉秦惠文王自己偷听到的楚国计谋。
English: The relevant explanation is that the dwarf of Qin told the king of Qin Huiwen about the strategy of Chu, which he had overheard.

古文：故襄疵言袭鄴，而嗣公赐令席。
现代文：所以襄疵告诉魏王赵想偷袭邺，卫嗣公赐给县令席子。
English: Therefore, Xiang Gui told Wei Wang that Zhao wanted to attack secretly, and Weizhong gave the county magistrate a seat.

古文：△说一
现代文：说一
English: Say one thing.

古文：势重者，人主之渊也；臣者，势重之鱼也。鱼失于渊而不可复得也，人主失其势重于臣而不可复收也。
现代文：权势好比是君主的深渊，臣子好比是君主权势这一深渊里的鱼，鱼离开深渊，就不能再得到它了；君主把权势失落给臣子，就不能再收回来。
English: Power is like the abyss of the monarch, and the vassal is like the fish in the abyss of the monarch's power. If the fish leaves the abyss, it can no longer get it; if the monarch loses power to the vassal, it can no longer get it back.

古文：古之人难正言，故托之于鱼。
现代文：古人难于直陈事理，所以把事理假托成鱼来作比喻。
English: It was difficult for the ancients to set things straight, so they used a fish as a metaphor.

古文：赏罚者，利器也，君操之以制臣，臣得之以拥主。
现代文：赏罚是锐利的武器，君主掌握它来制服臣子，臣子盗用它来蒙蔽君主。
English: Reward and punishment is a sharp weapon. The sovereign wields it to subdue the vassal, and the vassal steals it to blind the sovereign.

古文：故君先见所赏，则臣鬻之以为德；君先见所罚，则臣鬻之以为威。
现代文：所以君主事先显露出行赏苗头，臣子就会予以兜售来作为自己的恩德；君主事先显露出行罚苗头，臣子就会予以兜售来作为自己的权威。
English: Therefore, if the monarch shows signs of rewarding in advance, the vassal will sell it as his grace; if the monarch shows signs of punishing in advance, the vassal will sell it as his authority.

古文：故曰： 国之利器，不可以示人。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 国家的锐利武器，是不能显露出来给别人看到的。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The sharp weapons of the state cannot be revealed for others to see.

古文：靖郭君相齐，与故人久语，则故人富，怀左右刷，则左右重。
现代文：靖郭君田婴任齐相，和老相识谈话的时间长，老相识就变得富有；赏赐近侍小物品，近侍地位就会抬高。
English: Jing Guo Jun Tian baby is the same, and the old acquaintance has a long time to talk, and the old acquaintance becomes rich; reward the close attendant with small items, and the status of the close attendant will be elevated.

古文：久语怀刷，小资也，犹以成富，况于吏势乎？
现代文：谈话时间长、赏赐小物品，都是微小的资助，尚且可以借此致富，何况把权势让给官吏呢？
English: A long conversation, the giving of trifles, are petty grants by which to grow rich, much less to yield power to the magistrate.

古文：晋厉公之时，六卿贵，胥僮、长鱼矫谏曰： 大臣贵重，敌主争事，外市树党，下乱国法，上以劫主，而国不危者，未尝有也。 
现代文：晋厉公时，六卿地位很高。胥僮和长鱼矫劝谏说： 大臣地位高，权势重，敌国君主争相给他们捧场，他们与外国勾结，树立私党，对下扰乱国法，对上挟持君主，出现了这样的局面而国家不危乱的，自来就不曾有过。 
English: When Jin Li Gong was in power, the Six Lords held a high position. Zou and Changyu Jiao advised Zou: The ministers held high positions and wielded great power, and the enemy monarchs vied with each other to court them. They colluded with foreign countries, established their own parties, disrupted the country's laws from below, and held the monarch hostage from above. Such a situation has arisen, and there has never been a time when the country was not in danger of chaos.

古文：公曰： 善。 乃诛三卿。
现代文：晋厉公说： 讲得好， 于是就杀了三卿。
English: Jin Li Gong said, "That was a good speech," and killed the three nobles.

古文：胥僮、长鱼矫又谏曰： 夫同罪之人偏诛而不尽，是怀怨而借之间也。 
现代文：胥僮、长鱼矫又劝谏说： 对于罪状相同的人，杀了一部分，却不予涤除净尽，是让留下的人怀恨在心，是让他们有机可乘啊。 
English: Zou and Changyu Jiao also advised Zou: For people with the same crime, killing a part of them, but not eliminating them completely, is to let the remaining people hold grudges in their hearts, and to let them have something to take advantage of.

古文：公曰： 吾一朝而夷三卿，予不忍尽也。 
现代文：晋厉公说： 我一下子就杀了三位大卿，我再也不忍心全部杀光了。 
English: Jin Likong said, "I killed three grand nobles at once. I can't bear to kill them all.

古文：长鱼矫对曰： 公不忍之，彼将忍公。 
现代文：长鱼矫接话说： 您不忍心动手，他们倒要狠下心来害您的。 
English: Changyu said, "You don't have the heart to do it, but they are determined to harm you."

古文：公不听。
现代文：晋厉公没有听从劝告。
English: Prince Xiang doesn't listen to anyone's opinion.

古文：居三月，诸卿作难，遂杀厉公而分其地。
现代文：过了三个月，诸卿作乱，结果杀了厉公，并瓜分了晋地。
English: After three months, the lords rioted, and as a result, they killed Liguo and divided the land of Jin.

古文：州侯相荆，贵而主断。
现代文：州侯担任楚相，地位显贵并专权独断。
English: The prefect of the state served as the prime minister of Chu, with a prominent position and absolute power.

古文：荆王疑之，因问左右，左右对曰： 无有。 如出一口也。
现代文：楚王怀疑他有二心，就问左右近侍，左右近侍回答说没那么回事，众人同声，如出一口。
English: King Chu suspected that he was of two minds, so he asked his right and left attendants. The right and left attendants replied that there was no such thing, and everyone spoke in unison, as if they were saying one thing.

古文：燕人无惑，故浴狗矢。
现代文：有个燕人并未中邪迷惑，别人却要借故用狗屎给他洗身。
English: There is a Swallow Man who is not bewitched by evil, but others want to use dog excrement to wash him.

古文：燕人其妻有私通于士，其夫早自外而来，士适出。
现代文：有个燕人，妻子和某士通奸，他早上从外面回来，正碰上某士出门。
English: There was a Swallow Man whose wife had committed adultery with someone, and he came back from outside in the morning and ran into someone leaving the house.

古文：夫曰： 何客也？ 其妻曰： 无客。 
现代文：丈夫说： 这是什么客人？ 他妻子说： 没有客人。 
English: The husband said, "What is this guest?" His wife said, "There is no guest."

古文：问左右，左右言 无有 ，如出一口。
现代文：问身边的人，大家都说没有客人，如出一口。
English: When I asked the people around me, they all said that there were no guests.

古文：其妻曰： 公惑易也。 
现代文：他妻子说： 您神志迷乱了。 
English: His wife said, "You're out of your mind."

古文：因浴之以狗矢。
现代文：于是就用狗屎给他洗身。
English: So they washed him with dog excrement.

古文：一曰：燕人李季好远出，其妻私有通于士，季突至，士在内中，妻患之。
现代文：又一种说法：燕人李季喜欢出远门，他妻子私下和某士通奸，李季突然回来了，某士还在屋内，做妻子的非常担忧。
English: Another way of saying this is that Li Ji, the Swallow Man, likes to travel far and wide. His wife secretly committed adultery with someone. Li Ji suddenly came back, but someone was still inside the house. The wife was very worried.

古文：其室妇曰： 令公子裸而解发，直出门，吾属佯不见也。 
现代文：她的女仆说： 让这位公子光着身子，解开发结，径直走出门外，我们这些人都假装没看见 。
English: Her maid said, "Let the young man get up naked, undo the knot, and go straight out of the door, and we will all pretend not to see."

古文：于是公子从其计，疾走出门。
现代文：于是这位公子听从她的计谋，快步跑出门外。
English: So the young man followed her advice and ran out the door at a fast pace.

古文：季曰： 是何人也？ 家室皆曰： 无有。 
现代文：李季说： 这是什么人？ 家里的人都说： 没有人啊。 
English: Li Ji said, "Who is this person?" Everyone at home said, "Nobody."

古文：季曰： 吾见鬼乎？ 妇人曰： 然。 
现代文：李季说： 我看见鬼了吗？ 他妻子说： 是的。 
English: Li Ji said: Did I see a ghost? His wife said: Yes.

古文： 为之奈何？ 曰： 取五牲之矢浴之。 季曰： 诺。 
现代文： 怎么办呢？ 妻子说： 拿各种牲畜的屎来洗身。 李季说： 好吧 。
English: What should I do? My wife said, "Take all kinds of animal feces to wash your body." Li Ji said, "Okay."

古文：乃浴以矢。
现代文：于是就用屎来洗身。
English: So he washed himself with excrement.

古文：一曰浴以兰汤。
现代文：一说是用兰草煮的水来洗身。
English: It is said that they use water boiled with orchids to wash themselves.

古文：△说二
现代文：说二
English: Say two.

古文：卫人有夫妻祷者而祝曰： 使我无故，得百束布。 
现代文：卫人有一对夫妻在祈祷，妻子祝愿说： 让我没有灾难，得到一百捆布币。 
English: One of the guards saw a married couple praying. The wife made a wish: "Let there be no calamity, and I will receive a hundred bundles of cloth money."

古文：其夫曰： 何少也？ 对曰： 益是，子将以买妾。 
现代文：她丈夫说： 为什么这么少 ？妻子回答说： 超过这个数目， 您将会用它去买小老婆。 
English: Her husband said: Why so little? The wife replied: Beyond this amount, you will use it to buy a little wife.

古文：荆王欲宦诸公子于四邻，戴歇曰： 不可。 
现代文：楚王想让几个儿子到四周邻国去做官，戴歇说： 不行。 
English: King Chu wanted several of his sons to go to neighboring countries to become officials, but Daeche said, "No."

古文： 宦公子于四邻，四邻必重之。 
现代文： 让儿子到四周邻国去做官，四周邻国一定器重他们。 
English: Let the son go to the surrounding neighbors to become an official, and the surrounding neighbors will certainly value them.

古文：曰： 子出者重，重则必为所重之国党，则是教子于外市也，不便。 
现代文：戴歇说： 公子出国做官受到器重，受到器重必然成为这些国家的党羽，也就是用与外国勾结的方式来教育儿子了。这样做不利。 
English: Dai Xie said: "Boys who go abroad to become officials are valued, and if they are valued, they will inevitably become partisans of these countries, that is, they will educate their sons by means of collusion with foreign countries. This is not good.

古文：鲁孟孙、叔孙、季孙相戮力劫昭公，遂夺其国而擅其制。
现代文：鲁国的三桓一一孟孙、叔孙、季孙通力合作挟制了鲁昭公，结果占有了他的国家，垄断了他的权势。
English: The three kings of Lu, Meng Sun, Meng Sun's great-uncle, and Meng Sun's great-grandson, all worked together to control Lu Zhaogong, and as a result, they took over his country and monopolized his power.

古文：鲁三桓逼公，昭公攻季孙氏，而孟孙氏、叔孙氏相与谋曰： 救之乎？ 叔孙氏之御者曰： 我家臣也，安知公家？  凡有季孙与无季孙于我孰利？ 皆曰： 无季孙必无叔孙。 
现代文：鲁国的三桓威逼昭公朝廷，昭公进攻季孙，孟孙、叔孙互相商量说： 去救援吗？ 叔孙的车夫说： 我是个家臣，哪里知道公室大事？大致看来，有季孙和无季孙哪一样对我们更有利？ 大家都说： 没市季孙就没有步孙了。 
English: The three kings of Lu forced Zhaogong's imperial court, Zhaogong attacked Ji Sun, Meng Sun and Uncle Sun discussed with each other and said, "Should we go to the rescue?" Uncle Sun's driver said, "I am a vassal, how do I know about the affairs of the imperial court? Generally speaking, it is more beneficial for us to have Ji Sun or no Ji Sun?" Everyone said, "Without Ji Sun, there will be no step-grandchildren."

古文： 然则救之。 
现代文： 既然这样，那么就去救他。 
English: If that's the case, then go and save him.

古文：于是撞西北隅而入。
现代文：于是他们就从西北角冲了进去。
English: So they rushed in from the northwest corner.

古文：孟孙见叔孙之旗入，亦救之。
现代文：孟孙见叔孙的旗帜已经进入战场，也去救援。
English: When Meng Sun saw that his nephew's flag had entered the battlefield, he also went to the rescue.

古文：三桓为一，昭公不胜。
现代文：三桓合兵一处，鲁昭公失败了。
English: On one of the three fronts, Lu Zhaogong failed.

古文：逐之，死于乾侯。
现代文：三桓驱逐了鲁昭公，结果鲁昭公死在晋国的乾侯。
English: Sankan expelled Lu Zhaogong, and as a result, Lu Zhaogong died in Qianhou, Jin Province.

古文：公叔相韩而有攻齐，公仲甚重于王，公叔恐王之相公仲也，使齐、韩约而攻魏。
现代文：公孙伯婴担任韩相，又要拼命和齐国交好。公仲朋很受韩王器重。公叔伯婴担心韩王让公仲朋担任韩相，就让齐、韩结约去攻打魏国。
English: His great-great-grandson served as the minister of Korea, and he desperately wanted to make friends with Qi. Gong Zhong Biao was very important to the king of Korea. Uncle Gong was worried that the king of Korea would let Gong Zhong Biao serve as the minister of Korea, so he let Qi and Han make an appointment to attack Wei.

古文：公叔因内齐军于郑以劫其君，以固其位而信两国之约。
现代文：公孙伯婴乘机把齐军引入韩国国都，用来威胁他的君主，巩固他的相位，并重申两国的协约。
English: Gongsun took the opportunity to bring the Qi army into the Korean capital to threaten his monarch, consolidate his position, and reaffirm the alliance between the two countries.

古文：翟璜，魏王之臣也，而善于韩。
现代文：翟璜是魏王的大臣，却又和韩国交好。
English: He was a minister of the Wei King, yet he was friendly with Korea.

古文：乃召韩兵令之攻魏，因请为魏王构之以自重也。
现代文：他竞要召来韩国军队，让他们攻打魏国，接着请求替魏王去讲和，以便提高自己的地位。
English: He vied to call in Korean troops and have them attack Wei, then asked to make peace for the Wei king in order to improve his own position.

古文：越王攻吴王，吴王谢而告服，越王欲许之。
现代文：越王攻打吴王，吴王谢罪并宣布臣服，越王准备答应。
English: Yue Wang attacked Wu King, Wu King repented and declared his submission, and Yue King was ready to agree.

古文：范蠡、大夫种曰： 不可。
现代文：范蠡和大夫文种说： 不行。
English: Fan Rong and Doctor Wenzhuang said, "No."

古文：昔天以越与吴，吴不受，今天反夫差，亦天祸也。
现代文：过去上天把越国给了吴国，吴国不接受，现在上天不帮助吴王夫差，这也是天灾啊。
English: In the past, heaven gave Yue to Wu, but Wu did not accept it. Now, heaven does not help Wu Wangfu, which is also a natural disaster.

古文：以吴予越，再拜受之，不可许也。 
现代文：上天把吴国给了越国，应当拜两拜接受下来，不能答应吴王的要求。 
English: Heaven gave the State of Wu to the State of Yue. They should have accepted it with two bows. They could not agree to the request of the King of Wu.

古文：太宰嚭遗大夫种书曰： 狡兔尽则良犬烹，敌国灭则谋臣亡。
现代文：越国的太宰送给大夫文种的信上说： 狡猾的兔子捕完了，好猎狗就会被煮来吃；敌国灭亡了，谋臣就会遭到杀害。
English: A letter sent by the grand vizier of Yue to Doctor Wenzhong said: When the cunning rabbit is caught, the good hunting dog will be cooked and eaten; when the enemy country is destroyed, the adviser will be killed.

古文：大夫何不释吴而患越乎？ 大夫种受书读之，太息而叹曰： 杀之，越与吴同命。 
现代文：大夫您为什么不放过吴国，让它成为越国的忧患呢？ 大夫文种接信读罢，长叹一声说； 杀掉谋臣，越和吴将会遭到同样的下场。 
English: Doctor, why don't you let go of the State of Wu and let it become the sorrow of the State of Yue? Doctor, after reading the letter, said with a sigh; If you kill the adviser, Yue and Wu will suffer the same fate.

古文：大成牛从赵谓申不害于韩曰： 以韩重我于赵，请以赵重子于韩，是子有两韩，我有两赵。 
现代文：大成牛从赵国对在韩国的申不富说： 您用韩国的力量使我得到赵国的重用，我再用赵国的力量使您得到韩国的重用，这样一来，就像您有两个韩国，我有两个赵国一样了 。
English: Dacheng Niu said from Zhao Guo to Shen Rongfu in South Korea: You use the power of South Korea to make me get the heavy use of Zhao Guo, and I will use the power of Zhao Guo to make you get the heavy use of South Korea. In this way, it is like you have two Koreas and I have two Zhao Guos.

古文：司马喜，中山君之臣也，而善于赵，尝以中山之谋微告赵王。
现代文：司马喜是中山国君的臣子，但和赵国交好，曾经把中山国的谋略密告给赵王。
English: Sima Xi was a vassal of Zhongshan Guojun, but he was on good terms with Zhao Guo. He once tipped off the king of Zhao about Zhongshan Guo's plans.

古文：吕仓，魏王之臣也，而善于秦、荆。
现代文：吕仓是魏王的臣子，但和秦、楚两国交好。
English: Lyu Cang was a vassal of the Wei king, but he was on good terms with the Qin and Chu.

古文：微讽秦、荆令之攻魏，因请行和以自重也。
现代文：他暗示秦、楚，让两国攻魏，以便借机请求前去讲和来提高自己的地位。
English: He hinted to Qin and Chu to let the two countries attack Wei, so as to take the opportunity to ask them to make peace and improve their status.

古文：宋石，魏将也；卫君，荆将也。
现代文：宋石是魏国的将领，卫君是楚国的将领。
English: Song Shi was a general of Wei, and Wei Jun was a general of Chu.

古文：两国构难，二子皆将。
现代文：两国交战，宋石，卫君分别担任两国将领。
English: The two countries were at war, and Song Shih and Wei Jun respectively served as generals of the two countries.

古文：宋石遗卫君书曰： 二军相当，两旗相望，唯毋一战，战必不两存。
现代文：宋石送信给卫君说： 双方兵力相当，双方军旗相望，希望不要交战，交战后一定不能两存。
English: Song Shi sent a message to Wei Jun saying: The two sides are of equal strength, the two sides are looking forward to each other, and hope not to fight. After the war, there must not be two.

古文：此乃两主之事也，与子无有私怨，善者相避也。 
现代文：这是两国君主的事，我和您没有私仇，最好的办法是相互避开。 
English: This is a matter for the sovereigns of the two countries. I have no personal grudge against you. The best way is to avoid each other.

古文：白圭相魏，暴谴相韩。
现代文：白圭担任魏相，暴谴担任韩相。
English: Bai Gui served as Wei minister, and Wu Han as Han minister.

古文：白圭谓暴谴曰： 子以韩辅我于魏，我以魏待子于韩，臣长用魏，子长用韩。 
现代文：白圭对暴谴说： 您用韩国的力量帮助我在魏国任职，我用魏国的力量扶助您在韩国任职，我长期在魏国掌权、您长期在韩国掌权。 
English: Bai Gui said to the tyrant: You used the power of Korea to help me serve in Wei, I used the power of Wei to help you serve in Korea, I have long been in power in Wei, you have long been in power in Korea.

古文：△说三
现代文：说三
English: Say three

古文：齐中大夫有夷射者，御饮于王，醉甚而出，倚于郎门。
现代文：齐国有个叫夷射的中大夫，在齐王那里侍酒，喝得酪酊大醉后出来，倚靠在廊门上。
English: In the state of Qi, there was a middle-ranking doctor named Yixia Rong, who served wine to the king of Qi. After drinking himself into a stupor, he came out and leaned against the porch door.

古文：门者刖跪请曰： 足下无意赐之余沥乎？ 夷射叱曰： 去！
现代文：守门人别跪请求说： 您无意于赏给我一点吃剩下的酒吗？ 夷射斥骂道： 滚！
English: The doorkeeper begged him not to kneel, saying, "Don't you mean to give me some of the wine that's left to eat?"

古文：刑余之人，何事乃敢乞饮长者！ 刖跪走退。
现代文：受过刑的人怎么竟敢向尊长要酒喝！ 别跪慌忙退下。
English: How dare those who have been punished ask their elders for a drink! Don't kneel down and retreat in a hurry.

古文：及夷射去，刖跪因捐水郎门霤下，类溺者之状。
现代文：等到夷射离开后，别跪就把水泼在廊门的檐沟下，像尿湿的样子。
English: After waiting for Yixing to leave, don't kneel down and splash water under the gutter of the corridor door, like wet with urine.

古文：明日，王出而呵之，曰： 谁溺于是？ 刖跪对曰： 臣不见也。
现代文：第二天，齐王出来看见了，怒责道： 谁在这儿撒尿？ 别跪回答说： 我没看见。
English: The next day, King Qi came out and saw it, and angrily rebuked: Who is peeing here? Don't kneel down and answer: I didn't see it.

古文：虽然，昨日中大夫夷射立于此。 
现代文：虽说如此，昨天中大夫夷射在这儿站过。 
English: Having said that, Dr. Yixing stood here yesterday.

古文：王因诛夷射而杀之。
现代文：齐王因而对夷射进行惩罚并杀了他。
English: As a result, King Qi punished Yi Sha and killed him.

古文：魏王臣二人不善济阳君，济阳君因伪令人矫王命而谋攻己。
现代文：魏王臣子中有两个人与济阳君不和，济阳君就作假让人伪造王命而谋划进攻自己。
English: Two of Wei Wang's vassals were at odds with Jiyangjun, and Jiyangjun pretended to have someone forge the king's order and planned to attack himself.

古文：王使人问济阳君曰： 谁与恨？ 对曰： 无敢与恨。
现代文：魏王派人间济阳君说： 你与谁有仇？ 济阳君回答说： 我不敢和谁有仇。
English: The king of Wei sent a messenger to Jiyang, saying, "With whom do you have enmity?" Jiyang replied, "I dare not have enmity with anyone."

古文：虽然，尝与二人不善，不足以至于此。 
现代文：虽说如此，也曾和两个人关系不好，但还不至于到这种地步。 
English: Having said that, I've been on bad terms with two people, but not to this extent.

古文：王问左右，左右曰： 固然。 
现代文：魏王问左右近侍，都说： 确实如此。 
English: When the Wei king asked the attendants on his right and left, they all said, "It's true."

古文：王因诛二人者。
现代文：魏王就杀了这两个人。
English: The Wei king killed the two men.

古文：季辛与爰骞相怨，司马喜新与季辛恶，因微令人杀爰骞，中山之君以为季辛也，因诛之。
现代文：季辛和爱骞相互怨恨。司马喜和季辛的关系刚刚恶化，就暗地派人杀了爱骞。中山国君以为是季辛干的，于是就杀了季辛。
English: Ji Xin and Ai Yao hated each other. As soon as the relationship between Sima Xi and Ji Xin deteriorated, he secretly sent someone to kill Ai Yao. Zhongshan Guojun thought Ji Xin did it, so he killed Ji Xin.

古文：荆王所爱妾有郑袖者。
现代文：楚王宠妄中有个叫郑袖的。
English: One of King Chu's favorites is called Zheng Sleeve.

古文：荆王新得美女，郑袖因教之曰： 王甚喜人之掩口也，为近王，必掩口。 
现代文：楚王刚弄来了一个美女，郑袖就开导她说： 楚王非常喜欢别人捂住嘴巴，你要是靠近大王，一定要捂住嘴巴。 
English: As soon as King Chu brought in a beautiful woman, Zheng Sleeve enlightened her by saying: King Chu is very fond of people covering their mouths. If you are close to the great king, you must cover your mouth.

古文：美女入见，近王，因掩口。
现代文：美女入见，走近楚王就捂住嘴巴。
English: Seeing this, the beautiful woman covered her mouth as she approached King Chu.

古文：王问其故，郑袖曰： 此固言恶王之臭。 
现代文：楚王询问其中的原因，郑袖说： 她本来就说过讨厌大王的气味。 
English: When King Chu asked the reason for this, Zheng Soe said: She had already said that she hated the smell of the great king.

古文：及王与郑袖、美女三人坐，袖因先诫御者曰： 王适有言，必亟听从王言。 
现代文：等到楚王和郑袖、美女三人坐在一起的时侯，郑袖就事先告诫侍从说： 大王如果发话，一定要立即听从大王的话！ 
English: When King Chu was sitting with Zheng Sood and the three beautiful women, Zheng Sood warned the attendants in advance: "If the great king speaks, you must immediately obey the great king's words!"

古文：美女前，近王甚，数掩口。王悖然怒曰： 劓之。 
现代文：美女上前来到靠楚王很近的地方，多次捂住嘴巴。楚王勃然大怒说： 割掉她的鼻子！ 
English: The beautiful woman came up very close to King Chu and covered her mouth several times. King Chu flew into a rage and said, "Cut off her nose!"

古文：御因揄刀而劓美人。
现代文：侍从于是拔出刀来割掉了美人的鼻子。
English: The valet then pulled out a knife and cut off the beauty's nose.

古文：一曰：魏王遗荆王美人，荆王甚悦之。
现代文：另一种说法：魏王送给楚王一个美女，楚王非常喜欢。
English: Another way of saying this is that the Wei king gave the Chu king a beautiful woman, which the Chu king liked very much.

古文：夫人郑袖知王悦爱之也，亦悦爱之，甚于王，衣服玩好择其所欲为之。
现代文：楚王夫人郑袖知道楚王喜欢、宠爱这位美女，她就也喜欢、宠爱这位美女，胜过了楚王。衣服珍宝，挑选美女想要的给她。
English: King Chu's wife Zheng Sode knew that King Chu liked and favored this beautiful woman, and she also liked and favored this beautiful woman, better than King Chu. The clothes were precious, and she could choose what the beautiful woman wanted.

古文：王曰： 夫人知我爱新人也，其悦爱之甚于寡人，此孝子所以养亲，忠臣之所以事君也。 
现代文：楚王说： 夫人知道我宠爱新来的美人，她喜欢、宠爱这位美人超过了我，这也就是孝子奉养父母、忠臣奉侍君主的方法。 
English: King Chu said, "My wife knows that I love the new beauty. She likes and loves this beauty more than I do. This is how a filial son should serve his parents and a loyal subject should serve the monarch."

古文：夫人知王之不以己为妒也，因为新人曰： 王甚悦爱子，然恶子之鼻，子见王，常掩鼻，则王长幸子矣。 
现代文：郑袖知道楚王已不认为自己嫉妒，就对新来的美人说： 大王非常喜欢、宠爱你，但讨厌你的鼻子。你见到大王，时常捂住鼻子，大王就会长久宠爱你了。 
English: Zheng Soe knew that King Chu no longer thought he was jealous, so he said to the newly arrived beauty: The great king likes and favors you very much, but hates your nose. If you see the great king and often cover your nose, the great king will love you for a long time.

古文：于是新人从之，每见王，常掩鼻。
现代文：于是美人听从了郑袖的话，每次见到楚王，常常捂住鼻子。
English: So the beauty listened to Zheng Sleeve's words, and every time she saw King Chu, she often covered her nose.

古文：王谓夫人曰： 新人见寡人常掩鼻，何也？ 对曰： 不知也。 
现代文：楚王对郑袖说： 新人见我时常捂住鼻子，为什么？ 郑袖回答说： 我不知道。 
English: Chu Wang said to Zheng Soe: Newcomers often cover their noses when they see me, why? Zheng Soe replied: I don't know.

古文：王强问之，对曰： 顷尝言恶闻王臭。 
现代文：楚王硬是追问她，她回答说： 不久前新人曾说讨厌闻到大王的气味。 
English: Chu Wang questioned her, and she replied: Not long ago, the newcomer said that he hated the smell of the great king.

古文：王怒曰： 劓之。 夫人先诫御者曰： 王适有言，必可从命。 
现代文：楚王发怒说： 割了她的鼻子： 郑袖预先告诫侍从说： 大王如果发了话，一定要听从命令。 
English: King Chu said angrily, "Cut off her nose." Zheng Sood warned his attendants in advance, "If the Great King speaks, you must obey his order."

古文：御者因揄刀而劓美人。
现代文：侍从于是就拔出刀来割掉了美人的鼻子。
English: The valet then pulled out a knife and cut off the beauty's nose.

古文：费无极，荆令尹之近者也。
现代文：费无极是楚国令尹亲近的人。
English: It is extremely difficult to find someone who is close to Chu Guoling Yin.

古文：郄宛新事令尹，令尹甚爱之。
现代文：郄宛新近侍奉令尹，令尹非常喜欢他。
English: Hao Wan was newly assigned to serve Ling Yin, and Ling Yin liked him very much.

古文：无极因谓令尹曰： 君爱宛甚，何不一为酒其家？ 令尹曰： 善。 
现代文：费无极就对令尹说： 您很喜欢郄宛，为什么不到他家喝一次酒？ 令尹说： 好吧。 
English: After a great deal of effort, he said to Ling Yin, "You like Yu Wan very much, why don't you go to his house for a drink?" Ling Yin said, "Okay."

古文：因令之为具于郄宛之家。
现代文：令尹就让费无极到郄宛家置办酒席。
English: Ling Yin went to Yu Wan's house to set up a bar at great expense.

古文：无极教宛曰： 令尹甚傲而好兵，子必谨敬，先亟陈兵堂下及门庭。 
现代文：费无极开导郄宛说： 令尹非常高傲而喜欢兵器，您一定要小心遵奉他，先快些把兵器陈列在厅堂下面和院子门口。 
English: It was extremely difficult to explain to the guide: "Yin is very proud and likes weapons. You must be careful to obey him. First, quickly display the weapons under the hall and at the entrance to the courtyard.

古文：宛因为之。
现代文：郄宛就照办了。
English: He did as he was told.

古文：令尹往而大惊，曰： 此何也？ 无极曰： 君殆，去之！
现代文：令尹前往，大吃一惊，说： 这是什么？ 费无极说： 您危险了，快离开这里!
English: Yin was taken aback and said, "What is this? It's too much trouble to say, "You're in danger, get out of here!"

古文：事未可知也。 
现代文：事情还不知会怎样呢。 
English: We don't know what's going to happen.

古文：令尹大怒，举兵而诛郄宛，遂杀之。
现代文：令尹非常愤怒，发兵讨伐部宛，接着就杀了他。
English: This made Yin very angry, so he sent troops to the crusader and then killed him.

古文：犀首与张寿为怨，陈需新入，不善犀首，因使人微杀张寿。
现代文：犀首和张寿结下怨仇，陈需刚到魏国，与犀首不和，就派人暗杀了张寿。
English: Rhino's head and Zhang Shouling formed a grudge. Chen Bo had just arrived in Wei and was not getting along with Rhino's head, so he sent someone to assassinate Zhang Shouling.

古文：魏王以为犀首也，乃诛之。
现代文：魏王以为是犀首干的，就处罚了他。
English: The Wei king thought that the rhinoceros did it, and punished him.

古文：中山有贱公子，马甚瘦，车甚弊。
现代文：中山国有个地位低下的公子，他的马很瘦，他的车很破。
English: There was a low-ranking nobleman in Zhongshan Province. His horse was very thin, and his car was very broken.

古文：左右有私不善者，乃为之请王曰： 公子甚贫，马甚瘦，王何不益之马食？ 王不许。
现代文：有个和他私下不和的国君近侍，就替他向国君请求说。 公子很贫困，他的马很瘦，大王为什么不增加他的马料？ 国君不答应。
English: A close attendant of the sovereign, with whom he was privately at odds, petitioned the sovereign on his behalf, saying, "The prince is very poor, his horse is very thin, why doesn't the great king increase his horse supply?

古文：左右因微令夜烧刍厩。
现代文：近侍就暗中派人在晚上烧了草库马棚。
English: His close attendant secretly sent someone to burn down the horse barn in the evening.

古文：王以为贱公子也，乃诛之。
现代文：国君认为是这个地位低下的公子干的，就处罚了他。
English: The sovereign thought that this low-ranking nobleman had done it, and punished him.

古文：魏有老儒而不善济阳君。
现代文：魏国有个老儒与济阳君不和。
English: There was an old man in Wei who was at odds with Jiyang.

古文：客有与老儒私怨者，因攻老儒杀之，以德于济阳君，曰： 臣为其不善君也，故为君杀之。 
现代文：济阳君的门客中有个和老儒有私仇的，乘机攻击老儒并杀了他，以图讨好济阳君，说： 我因他与您不和，所以替您杀了他。 
English: One of Jiyangjun's clients, who had a personal grudge against the old man, took the opportunity to attack the old man and kill him, in an attempt to please Jiyangjun, saying: "I killed him for you because he was at odds with you.

古文：济阳君因不察而赏之。
现代文：于是济阳君不加明察就奖赏了他。
English: As a result, Jiyang rewarded him without a second thought.

古文：一曰：济阳君有少庶子者，不见知，欲入爱于君者。
现代文：另一种说法：济阳君家的年轻侍从中，有一个未被济阳君赏识而想得到宠爱的。
English: Another way of saying this is that among the young attendants of the Jiyang family, there was one who was not appreciated by Jiyang and wanted to be favored.

古文：齐使老儒掘药于马梨之山。济阳少庶子欲以为功，入见于君曰： 齐使老儒掘药于马梨之山，名掘药也，实间君之国。
现代文：齐派老儒到马梨山挖草药，这个侍从想借这件事立功，进见济阳君说： 齐派老儒到马梨山挖草药，名义上是挖草药，实际上是刺探您的封地。
English: Qi sent an old man to dig up herbs on Mount Maris. This attendant wanted to take credit for the deed, and said to Jiyang, "Qi sent an old man to dig up herbs on Mount Maris. In name, he was digging up herbs, but in reality, he was spying on your fiefdom."

古文：君杀之，是将以济阳君抵罪于齐矣。
现代文：您若不杀他，他就要拿济阳君受到魏国惩处的事去齐国报功了。
English: If you don't kill him, he will take the matter of Jiyangjun being punished by Wei to Qi to return the favor.

古文：臣请刺之。 君曰： 可。 
现代文：请让我去刺杀他。 济阳君说： 行。 
English: Please let me assassinate him, Jiyang said.

古文：于是明日得之城阴而刺之，济阳君还，益亲之。
现代文：于是第二天侍仆在城北找到老儒并刺杀他，济阳君随即就加倍亲近这个侍仆了。
English: So the next day, the servant found the old man in the north of the city and assassinated him. Jiyang immediately became even closer to the servant.

古文：△说四
现代文：说四
English: Say four

古文：陈需，魏王之臣也，善于荆王，而令荆攻魏。
现代文：陈需是魏王的臣子，又和楚王友好，就叫楚国攻打魏国。
English: Chen Bo, a courtier of the Wei king and a friend of the Chu king, ordered the Chu kingdom to attack the Wei kingdom.

古文：荆攻魏。陈需因请为魏王行解之，因以荆势相魏。
现代文：楚国攻打魏国，陈需乘机请求替魏玉去解围，于是利用楚国攻魏的形势做了魏相。
English: Chu attacked Wei, Chen needed to take the opportunity to request Wei to relieve the siege, so he took advantage of the situation of Chu attacking Wei to do Wei.

古文：韩昭侯之时，黍种尝贵甚。
现代文：韩昭侯时期，黍种价格曾很高。
English: During the reign of Han Zhaohou, the price of ginger was very high.

古文：昭侯令人覆廪，吏果窃黍种而粜之甚多。
现代文：昭侯派人检查粮仓，官吏果然盗窃了黍种并且卖掉了很多。
English: Zhao Hou sent people to inspect the granary, and the officials stole the millet seeds and sold a lot of them.

古文：昭奚恤之用荆也，有烧仓广会者而不知其人。
现代文：昭奚恤在楚国执政时，有人纵火烧了用茅草盖的粮仓，但不知道纵火的是谁。
English: When Zhaohui was in power in the State of Chu, someone set fire to a grain silo covered with thatch, but it is not known who set the fire.

古文：昭奚恤令吏执贩茅者而问之，果烧也。
现代文：昭奚恤命令官吏逮捕贩卖茅草的人并加以审问，果然是他放的火。
English: Zhaohui ordered officials to arrest the man who sold the thatch and interrogate him. It turned out that he was the one who started the fire.

古文：昭僖侯之时，宰人上食，而羹中有生肝焉。
现代文：韩昭侯时期，厨师上饭，肉汁中却有生肝。
English: During the reign of Han Zhaohou, the chef served rice with raw liver in the gravy.

古文：昭侯召宰人之次而谯之曰： 若何为置生肝寡人羹中？ 宰人顿首服死罪，曰： 窃欲去尚宰人也。 
现代文：昭侯召来厨师的助手，责骂他说： 你为什么把生肝放到我的肉汁中？ 厨师助手叩头承认死罪，说： 我私下想除掉主管大王膳食的人。 
English: Zhao Hou summoned the chef's assistant and scolded him, "Why did you put raw liver in my gravy?" The chef's assistant meekly confessed to the capital crime, saying, "I secretly want to get rid of the person in charge of the great king's meal."

古文：一曰：僖侯浴，汤中有砾。
现代文：另一种说法：韩昭侯洗澡，热水中有小石子。
English: Another version: Han Zhaohou is taking a bath, and there are pebbles in the hot water.

古文：僖侯曰： 尚浴免，则有当代者乎？ 左右对曰： 有。 
现代文：昭侯说： 主管洗澡的如果免职，那么有应当继任的人吗？ 左右近侍回答说： 有。 
English: Zhao Hou said, "If the person in charge of the bath is dismissed, is there someone who should succeed him?" The attendants around replied, "Yes."

古文：僖侯曰： 召而来。 
现代文：昭侯说： 叫他来。 
English: Zhao Hou said: Tell him to come.

古文：谯之曰： 何为置砾汤中？ 对曰： 尚浴免，则臣得代之，是以置砾汤中。 
现代文：叫来后昭侯怒责他说： 为什么在热水里放小石子？ 他回答说： 王管洗澡的如果免职，我就能够代替他，因此在热水中放了小石子。 
English: After being summoned, Zhao Hou angrily scolded him, saying, "Why did you put the pebbles in the hot water?" He replied, "If the king's bath attendant is dismissed, I can take his place, so I put the pebbles in the hot water."

古文：文公之时，宰臣上炙而发绕之。
现代文：晋文公时期，厨师端上烤肉而有头发缠在肉上。
English: During the Jin and Weng dynasties, chefs served grilled meat with hair wrapped around it.

古文：文公召宰人而谯之曰： 女欲寡人之哽耶，奚以发绕炙？ 宰人顿首再拜，请曰： 臣有死罪三：援砺砥刀，利犹干将也，切肉肉断而发不断，臣之罪一也；援锥贯脔而不见发，臣之罪二也；奉炽炉炭，肉尽赤红，炙熟而发不焦，臣之罪三也。
现代文：文公召厨师而怒责他说： 你想让我硬死啊，为什么用头发缠肉？ 厨师叩头拜过两拜请罪说： 我有三条死罪；拿来磨刀石磨刀，磨得像宝剑干将一样锋利，用来切肉，肉给切断了，但头发却不断，这是我的第一条罪状；拿起木棒穿透肉片却没有看见头发，这是我的第二条罪状；捧着烧得很旺的炉子，炭火都烧得通红，肉都熟了，头发却没有烧掉，这是我的第三条罪状。
English: The cook prostrated himself, bowed twice, and asked for forgiveness, saying, "I have committed three deadly sins. I took a sharpening stone to sharpen a knife, sharpened like a sword, and used it to cut meat. The meat was cut off, but the hair remained. This was my first sin. I picked up a wooden stick and pierced the meat without seeing the hair. This was my second sin. I held a very hot stove. The coals were red-hot. The meat was cooked, but the hair did not burn. This was my third sin."

古文：臣有三罪，死而不自知乎！ 平公曰： 何谓也？ 对曰： 臣刀之利，风靡骨断，而发不断，是臣之一死也；桑炭炙之，肉红白而发不焦，是臣之二死也；炙熟，又重睫而视之，发绕炙而目不见，是臣之三死也。
现代文：次等侍从中该没有暗中嫉恨我的人吧？ 文公说： 说得对。 就召来次等侍从，果真这样，于是加以处罚。另一种说法：晋平公请客喝酒，年轻的侍从端来烤肉，却有头发缠在肉上，平公催促去杀掉厨师，不得赦免。厨师大声叫着者天说：啊呀！我有三条罪状，死了也不知是犯的哪一条啊！平公说： 这话怎么说？ 厨师回答说： 我的刀很锋利，锋利得能斩断骨头，头发却斩不断，这是我的第一条死罪；用桑树烧成的木炭烤肉，肉烤熟了，该红的红了，该白的白了，头发却没烧焦，这是我的第二条死罪；烤肉熟了，又眯着眼睛细看，头发缠在烤肉上，眼睛却看不见，这是我的第三条死罪。
English: Shouldn't the second-ranked waiter have someone who secretly envies me? Wengong said, "That's right." He summoned the second-ranked waiter, and if that was the case, he punished him. Another way to say it: Jinping invited guests to drink, the young waiter brought roast meat, but there was hair entangled in the meat, and Pinggong urged him to kill the cook, which cannot be pardoned. The cook shouted to the heavens, "Ah! I have three charges, and I don't know which one I committed when I died!" Pinggong said, "How can I say this?" The cook replied, "

古文：意者堂下其有翳憎臣者乎？
现代文：想来次等侍从中该有暗恨我的吧？
English: Do you think the second-class steward should have a secret hatred of me?

古文：杀臣不亦蚤乎！ 
现代文：杀我不也太早点了吗？ 
English: Is it too early to kill me?

古文：穰侯相秦，而齐强。
现代文：穰侯魏冉任秦相时，齐国强大。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qin, the state of Qi was strong.

古文：穰侯欲立秦为帝而齐不听，因请立齐为东帝，而不能成也。
现代文：穰侯想立秦王为帝，齐国不予承认，他就请求立齐王为东帝，但事情没有成功。
English: Yan Hou wanted to establish Qin Wang as the emperor, but Qi did not recognize it. He asked for the establishment of Qi Wang as the Eastern Emperor, but the matter did not succeed.

古文：△说五
现代文：说五
English: Say five.

古文：晋献公之时，骊姬贵，拟于后妻，而欲以其子奚齐代太子申生，因患申生于君而杀之，遂立奚齐为太子。
现代文：晋献公时期，骊姬地位高，可以和君主的正妻匹敌。她想用自己的儿子莫齐来取代太子申生，就在献公面前陷害申生并杀了他，于是献公立奚齐为太子。
English: During the period of the offering of the prince to the emperor, Kenki had a high status, comparable to that of the monarch's wife. She wanted to replace Prince Shosho with her own son Mochi, so she framed Shosho and killed him before the offering of the prince to the emperor, and then offered Prince Kenki as the prince.

古文：郑君已立太子矣，而有所爱美女欲以其子为后。夫人恐，因用毒药贼君杀之。
现代文：郑君已经确立太子了，而有个受宠的美女想让自己的儿子当继承人，郑君夫人害怕，就用毒药暗杀了郑君。
English: Zheng Jun had already established himself as the crown prince, but there was a favored beauty who wanted her son to be the heir. Mrs. Zheng Jun was afraid, so she assassinated Zheng Jun with poison.

古文：卫州吁重于卫，拟于君，群臣百姓尽畏其势重。州吁果杀其君而夺之政。
现代文：卫州吁在卫国地位很高，可以和卫君匹敌，群臣百姓都害怕他大权在握，州吁果真杀了他的君主并夺取了政权。
English: Weizhou Xu had a high status in the defense of the country and could compete with Wei Jun. The courtiers and people were afraid of his great power. Weizhou Xu really killed his monarch and seized power.

古文：公子朝，周太子也，弟公子根甚有宠于君。
现代文：公子朝是周君太子，他的弟弟公子根很受周君的宠爱。
English: He was Zhou Jun's prince, and his younger brother Gongzigen was very much loved by Zhou Jun.

古文：君死，遂以东周叛，分为两国。
现代文：周君死后，公子根就率领东周叛乱，周分裂为两个小国。
English: After Zhou Jun's death, Gongzigen led the Eastern Zhou Rebellion, and Zhou was split into two small states.

古文：楚成王以商臣为太子，既而又欲置公子职。
现代文：楚成王把商臣立为太子，随后又想立公子职为太子。
English: King Chu Cheng made the merchant minister the crown prince, and then he wanted to make the prince the crown prince.

古文：商臣作乱，遂攻杀成王。
现代文：商臣发动叛乱，于是起兵杀了成王。
English: The merchants started a rebellion, so the soldiers killed Cheng Wang.

古文：一曰：楚成王以商臣为太子，既欲置公子职。
现代文：另一种说法：楚成王把商臣立为太子，过后又想立公子职为太子。
English: Another way of saying this is that King Chu Cheng raised a merchant minister to the position of crown prince, and later he wanted to raise a nobleman to the position of crown prince.

古文：商臣闻之，未察也，乃为其傅潘崇曰： 奈何察之也？ 潘崇曰： 飨江羋而勿敬也。 
现代文：商臣听说了这件事，但没有弄清，于是就对他师傅潘祟说： 怎样查清这件事呢？ 潘崇说： 设宴招待成王妹妹江芋，但不要尊敬她。 
English: The minister of commerce heard about this matter, but did not find out, so he said to his master Pan Cang: How can I find out about this matter? Pan Chong said: Set up a banquet to invite Chengwang's sister Jiangimo, but do not respect her.

古文：太子听之，江羋曰： 呼，役夫！宜君王之欲废女而立职也。 
现代文：太子接受了潘祟的建议。江芋说： 呸，下贱的东西难怪君主想废掉你而立职呢。 
English: The prince accepted Pan Cai's suggestion. Jiang Imo said, "You low-born thing, it's no wonder that the sovereign wants to abolish you and install you."

古文：商臣曰： 信矣。 
现代文：商臣说： 事情得到了证实。 
English: The minister of commerce said: The matter has been confirmed.

古文：潘崇曰： 能事之乎？ 曰： 不能。 
现代文：潘崇说： 你能侍奉职吗？ 商臣说： 不能。 
English: Pan Chong said: Can you serve? The merchant said: No.

古文： 能为之诸侯乎？ 曰： 不能。 
现代文： 能做职的诸侯吗？ 商臣说： 不能。 
English: Can the lords of the manor do their jobs? The chamberlain said: No.

古文： 能举大事乎？ 曰： 能。 
现代文： 能发动大事吗？ 商臣说： 能。 
English: Can you start something big? The chamberlain said, "Yes."

古文：于是乃起宿营之甲而攻成王。
现代文：于是商臣就发动守卫宫殿的军队去攻打成王。
English: So the merchant minister sent the troops guarding the palace to attack Cheng Wang.

古文：成王请食熊膰而死，不许，遂自杀。
现代文：成王请求吃过烤熟的熊掌再死去，商臣不答应，于是成王只好自杀。
English: Cheng Wang asked to eat the roasted bear's paws before dying, but the merchant did not agree, so Cheng Wang had to commit suicide.

古文：韩傀相韩哀侯，严遂重于君，二人甚相害也。严遂乃令人刺韩傀于朝，韩傀走君而抱之，遂刺韩傀而兼哀侯。
现代文：韩廆担任韩哀侯的国相，而严遂受着韩君的器重，韩廆和严遂相互仇恨，情形已很严重，于是严遂就派人在朝廷上刺杀韩廆，韩庞跑到哀侯身边抱住哀侯，刺客就刺杀韩廆，连哀侯也一起刺死了。
English: Han Biao served as the minister of state of Han Weihou, and Yan Sui was under the weight of Han Jun. Han Biao and Yan Sui hated each other, and the situation was very serious. Therefore, Yan Sui sent someone to assassinate Han Biao in the imperial court. Han Pang ran to the side of Han Weihou and hugged him. The assassin then assassinated Han Biao, and even Yan Weihou was stabbed to death.

古文：田恆相齐，阚止重于简公，二人相憎而欲相贼也。
现代文：田常担任齐相，而阚止受着齐简公的器重，田常、阚止这两个人互相憎恨并相杀掉对方。
English: Tian Chang served as Qi Xiang, while Zou Zhe was under the influence of Qi Jian Gong. Tian Chang and Zou Zhe hated each other and killed each other.

古文：田恆因行私惠以取其国，遂杀简公而夺之政。
现代文：田常因此施行私人恩惠收买了人心，用来夺取国家政权，结果杀掉了简公，夺取了政权。
English: As a result, Tian Chang used personal favors to buy people's hearts and used them to seize state power. As a result, he killed Jian Gong and seized power.

古文：戴驩为宋太宰，皇喜重于君，二人争事而相害也。皇喜遂杀宋君而夺其政。
现代文：戴驩担任宋国的太宰，而皇喜受着宋桓侯的器重，戴驩、皇喜争权夺利而互相伤害，结果皇喜杀了宋君，夺取了政权。
English: Dai Qian served as the grand vizier of the Song Dynasty, while the Emperor Xi was under the influence of Song Huan Hou. Dai Qian and the Emperor Xi fought for power and profit and harmed each other. As a result, the Emperor Xi killed Song Jun and seized power.

古文：狐突曰： 国君好内则太子危，好外则相室危。 
现代文：狐突说： 君王宠爱姬妄，太子就会危险；宠信近臣，相室就会危险。 
English: Foxtrot said: If the king favors and loves Ji De, the prince will be in danger; if he favors and trusts his close vassal, the camera room will be in danger.

古文：郑君问郑昭曰： 太子亦何如？ 对曰： 太子未生也。 
现代文：郑国国君问郑昭说： 太子到底怎么样？ 郑昭回答说： 太子还没出生呢。 
English: Zheng Guo Guojun asked Zheng Zhao: "How is the prince?" Zheng Zhao replied: "The prince hasn't been born yet."

古文：君曰： 太子已置，而曰 未生 ，何也？ 对曰： 太子虽置，然而君之好色不已，所爱有子，君必爱之，爱之则必欲以为后，臣故曰 太子未生 也。 △说六
现代文：郑君说： 太子已经确立了，您却说没有出生，为什么？ 郑昭回答说： 太子虽然确立了，但是君王的好色之心不减；宠爱的姬妄如果有了儿子，君主必定喜爱他；喜爱他，就一定想把他立为继承人，所以我说太子还没有出生。 说六
English: Zheng Zhao replied: Although the crown prince has been established, the king's lustful heart has not diminished; if the beloved Ji Lai has a son, the king must love him; if you love him, you must want to make him the heir, so I say that the crown prince has not yet been born.

古文：文王资费仲而游于纣之旁，令之谏纣而乱其心。
现代文：周文王帮助费仲在商封身边活动，让他劝谏纣王，扰乱纣王的心思。
English: Zhou Wenwang helped Feizhong to be active around Shangfeng, and asked him to persuade Zhao Wang and disturb Zhao Wang's mind.

古文：荆王使人之秦，秦王甚礼之。
现代文：楚王派人到秦国去，秦王很尊敬这位使者。
English: King Chu sent someone to Qin, and Qin respected this messenger very much.

古文：王曰： 敌国有贤者，国之忧也。
现代文：秦王说： 敌国有贤人，就是我国的忧患。
English: King Qin said: The enemy country has many wise men, which is our country's sorrow.

古文：今荆王之使者甚贤，寡人患之。 
现代文：现在楚王的使者很能干，我很担心。 
English: Now that King Chu's emissary is very capable, I'm worried.

古文：群臣谏曰： 以王之贤圣与国之资厚，愿荆王之贤人，王何不深知之而阴有之。
现代文：群臣劝谏说： 凭大王的圣明和国家资财的丰富，而羡慕楚王手下的贤人，大王何不与他深深地结交，暗中加以笼络呢？
English: The group of courtiers persuaded him, saying, "With the wisdom of the great king and the wealth of the country's resources, why doesn't the great king make a deep friendship with the wise men under the command of King Chu and secretly entice them?

古文：荆以为外用也，则必诛之。 
现代文：楚国以为他被外国利用，一定会处罚他的。 
English: The State of Chu thought that he was being used by a foreign country and would definitely punish him.

古文：仲尼为政于鲁，道不拾遗，齐景公患之。
现代文：孔子在鲁国执政，路不拾遗，齐景公很忧虑。
English: When Confucius came to power in the State of Lu, there was nothing to be done. Lord Qi Jing was very worried.

古文：黎且谓景公曰： 去仲尼，犹吹毛耳。
现代文：黎且对齐景公说： 除去孔子，像吹毛一样省事。
English: Lai Chi said to Chia Ching, "If you get rid of Confucius, you will save yourself a lot of trouble.

古文：君何不迎之以重禄高位，遗哀公女乐以骄荣其意。
现代文：您何不用厚禄高宫招引孔子，送给鲁哀公女子歌舞乐队来助长哀公的骄傲和虚荣心。
English: Why don't you invite Confucius to the palace of a high-ranking scholar and give Lu Aiguo a girl's singing and dancing band to boost his pride and vanity?

古文：哀公新乐之，必怠于政，仲尼必谏，谏必轻绝于鲁。 景公曰： 善。 
现代文：哀公新得欢乐，对政事一定懈怠，孔子一定会加以劝谏；他一劝谏，必定会和鲁国轻易地断绝关系。 景公说： 很好。 
English: Lamenting that the emperor was too happy and slack in political affairs, Confucius would certainly advise him; if he did, he would easily break off relations with Lu.

古文：乃令黎且以女乐二八遗哀公，哀公乐之，果怠于政。
现代文：就让黎且把四十八人的女子歌舞乐队送给哀公，哀公非常高兴，果真懒于理事。
English: Let Leki give the forty-eight-member women's song and dance band to Aigong. Aigong is very happy, and is really lazy to the director.

古文：仲尼谏不听，去而之楚。
现代文：孔子劝谏，哀公不听，孔子就离开鲁国到楚国去了。
English: Confucius advised him, but he did not listen, so Confucius left Lu and went to Chu.

古文：楚王谓干象曰： 吾欲以楚扶甘茂而相之秦，可乎？ 干相对曰： 不可也。 
现代文：楚王对干象说： 我想用楚国的力量扶持甘茂，让他做秦相，可以吗？ 干象回答说： 不可以。 
English: King Chu said to Gan Zong: I want to use the power of the State of Chu to support Gan Mao and make him the Qin Emperor, is that okay? Gan Zong replied: No.

古文：王曰： 何也？ 曰： 甘茂少而事史举先生。
现代文：楚王说： 为什么？ 干象说： 甘茂年轻时师事史举先生。
English: Chu Wang said: Why? Gan Xiang said: When Gan Mao was young, he was a history teacher.

古文：史举，上蔡之监门也，大不事君，小不事家，以苛刻闻天下。
现代文：史举是上蔡的看门人，从大的方面说不侍奉君主，从小的方面说理不好家庭，以刻薄闻名天下。
English: Shih Ju is the gatekeeper of Shang Cai. In the big picture, he does not serve the monarch. In the small picture, he is not good at reasoning with his family. He is known all over the world for being mean.

古文：茂事之，顺焉。
现代文：甘茂侍奉史举，顺着他刻薄的作风办事。
English: Kammao served Shih Ju and followed his mean style of work.

古文：惠王之明，张仪之辨也，茂事之，取十官而免于罪，是茂贤也。 
现代文：即使有秦惠王那样的明智，张仪那样的明察，甘茂侍奉他们，还是得到了十种官职，又能够免于罪过，这些都说明甘茂很能干。 
English: Even if he had the wisdom of Qin Hui Wang and the foresight of Zhang Yi, if he served them, he would still be able to obtain ten kinds of official posts and be free from sin. All of this shows that Ganmao is very capable.

古文：王曰： 相人敌国而相贤，其不可何也？ 干象曰： 前时王使邵滑之越，五年而能亡越。
现代文：楚王说： 替与楚对等的国家设立能干的相，为什么不可以呢？ 干象说： 过去大王派邵滑去越国做官，五年就能灭掉越国。
English: King Chu said, "Why can't we set up a competent faction for a country that is equal to Chu?" Gan Zang said, "In the past, when the Great King sent Shao Niu to be an official in Yue, he could wipe out Yue in five years.

古文：所以然者，越乱而楚治也。
现代文：之所以能够这样，是因为越国危乱而楚国太平。
English: The reason for this is that Yue is in a state of crisis, while Chu is at peace.

古文：日者知用之越，今忘之秦，不亦太亟忘乎？ 王曰： 然则为之奈何？ 干象对曰： 不如相共立。 
现代文：过去大王懂得用不贤的人去灭掉越国，现在忘了把这个经验用到秦国去，不也忘得太快了吗！ 楚王说： 那么该怎么办？ 干象回答说： 不如让共立做相。 
English: In the past, the great king knew how to use evil men to destroy Yue, but now he has forgotten to apply this experience to Qin. Isn't it too soon to forget? King Chu said, "Then what should we do?" Gan Xiang replied, "It's better to let Kyoritsu make the appearance."

古文：王曰： 共立可相，何也？ 对曰： 共立少见爱幸，长为贵卿，被王衣，含杜若，握玉环，以听于朝，且利以乱秦矣。 
现代文：楚王说： 共立可以做相，为什么呢？ 干象回答说： 共立年轻时就受秦王喜爱和宠信，年长时又被封为贵卿，穿着秦王的衣服，嘴里含着香草，手里拿着玉环，就这样在朝廷上处理问题，将有利于扰乱秦国了。 
English: King Chu said, "Kyoritsu can make a portrait, why?" The elephant replied, "When he was young, Kyoritsu was loved and favored by King Qin, and when he was older, he was made a noble, wearing King Qin's clothes, with herbs in his mouth and a jade ring in his hand. In this way, handling problems in the imperial court will be conducive to disturbing the state of Qin."

古文：吴政荆，子胥使人宣言于荆曰： 子期用，将击之；子常用，将去之。 
现代文：吴国征伐楚国，伍子胥派人向楚国宣称： 子期用为将军；吴将进攻楚国；子常用为将军，吴将离开楚国。 
English: When Wu conquered Chu, Wu Ziqi sent a man to Chu to announce: "Your son will be used as a general; Wu will attack Chu; your son will be used as a general; Wu will leave Chu."

古文：荆人闻之，因用子常而退子期也，吴人击之，遂胜之。
现代文：楚人听说后，就用子常为将，罢免了子期，吴人进攻楚国，结果取得了胜利。
English: After the Chu people heard about this, they used their sons as generals and dismissed their sons. The Wu people attacked the State of Chu and won the victory.

古文：晋献公伐虞、虢，乃遗之屈产之乘，垂棘之璧，女乐二八，以荣其意而乱其政。
现代文：晋献公讨伐虞、虢两国之前，就曾送给他们屈产的良马，垂棘的宝玉，四十八人的女子歌舞乐队，以便助长他们的信任之心，扰乱他们的国家政事。
English: In order to encourage their trust and disrupt their national politics, he once gave them a good horse with a bent leg, a precious jewel with a thorn, and a forty-eight-member girl's song and dance band before he dedicated himself to the public service to fight against corruption and conquer the two countries.

古文：叔向之谗苌弘也，为书苌弘，谓叔向曰： 子为我谓晋君，所与君期者，时可矣。
现代文：晋人叔向陷害周人苌弘时，伪造书信说：苌弘对叔向说； 你代我告诉晋君，和他的约会时机已经到了，为什么还不快点带兵来攻打呢？ 
English: When Uncle Jin framed Zhou Ronghong, he forged a letter saying: "Uncle Jin said to Uncle Jin: Tell Uncle Jin on my behalf that the date with him has come, why don't you hurry up and bring troops to attack?

古文：何不亟以兵来？ 因佯遗其书周君之庭而急去行。周以苌弘为卖周也，乃诛苌弘而杀之。
现代文：随后假装把书信丢在周君朝廷上，接着就急忙离去了，周君认为苌弘出卖周朝，就处罚了茬弘，并加以杀戮。
English: Zhou then pretended to throw the letter at Zhou's court, and then left in a hurry. Zhou believed that Gong Hong betrayed the Zhou dynasty, so he punished Gong Hong and killed him.

古文：郑桓公将欲袭郐，先问郐之豪杰、良臣、辩智、果敢之士，尽与姓名，择郐之良田赂之，为官爵之名而书之，因为设坛场郭门之外而埋之，衅之以鸡豭，若盟状。
现代文：郑桓公准备袭击邻国时，先打听邻国的豪杰、良臣和明智果断的人士，全部记下他们的名字，选择邻国好的田地写在他们名下表示已通贿赂，又在他们名下写上官爵名称表示已被收买。然后假装在外城门外设了坛场，把有关记录掩埋在下面，洒上鸡和猪的血来加以祭祀，像结盟似的。
English: When Zheng Huan Gong was preparing to attack neighboring countries, he first inquired about the heroes, good ministers and wise and decisive people of the neighboring countries, recorded all their names, selected the good fields of the neighboring countries, wrote under their names to indicate that they had been bribed, and wrote the names of the officials and nobles under their names to indicate that they had been bribed. Then he pretended to set up an altar outside the outer city gate, buried the relevant records below, and sprinkled chicken and pig blood to sacrifice them, as if they were allied.

古文：郐君以为内难也而尽杀其良臣。
现代文：郐君认为内部将有大难，因而杀了全部良臣。
English: Xing Jun thought that there would be a big disaster inside, so he killed all the good ministers.

古文：桓公袭郐，遂取之。
现代文：郑桓公偷袭邻国，结果把它攻取了。
English: Zheng Huan's sneak attack on a neighboring country resulted in its capture.

古文：秦侏儒善于荆王，而阴有善荆王左右而内重于惠文君。
现代文：秦国的侏儒得到楚王的喜欢，暗中又结交了楚王的左右侍从，在国内被秦惠文王器重。
English: The dwarfs of Qin won the favor of King Chu, and secretly made friends with the right and left attendants of King Chu, and were favored by King Qin Huiwen in China.

古文：荆适有谋，侏儒常先闻之以告惠文君。
现代文：碰上楚国有什么打算时，侏儒常常预先知道，把它告诉给秦惠文王。
English: When it came to what Chu had planned, the dwarf often knew in advance and told it to Qin Huiwen Wang.

古文：鄴令襄疵阴善赵王左右。赵王谋袭鄴，襄疵常辄闻而先言之魏王。
现代文：魏邺县县令襄疵暗中结交赵王的左有侍从，赵王谋划偷袭邺县，襄疵每每能够马上得到情报，并事先告诉魏王。
English: Wang Zhao's left-handed attendant secretly befriended Xiangqi, the governor of Weizhou County, and Zhao Wang planned to secretly attack Weizhou County. Xiangqi was able to get information immediately and told Wei Wang in advance.

古文：魏王备之，赵乃辄还。
现代文：魏王加以防备，随后赵国每次都撤兵了。
English: Wei Wang took precautions, and then Zhao Guo withdrew each time.

古文：卫嗣君之时，有人于县令之左右。
现代文：卫嗣君的时侯，有人受命在县令身边窥探。
English: During the reign of Emperor Weizong, someone was ordered to spy around the county magistrate.

古文：县令发蓐而席弊甚，嗣公还令人遗之席，曰： 吾闻汝今者发蓐而席弊甚，赐汝席。 
现代文：县令掀起褥子时，露出了很破旧的席子，嗣公马上派人赠送他席子，说： 我听说你今天掀起褥子时，席子很破旧，赏赐给你席子。 
English: When the county magistrate raised the curtain, a very worn-out seat was revealed. The lord of the manor immediately sent someone to present him with a seat, saying: I heard that when you raised the curtain today, the seat was very worn-out. I am awarding you a seat.

古文：县令大惊，以君为神也。
现代文：县令非常吃惊，认为卫嗣君神明。
English: The county magistrate was very surprised and thought that Weizhi was a god.

