古文：王莽字巨君，孝元皇后之弟子也。
现代文：王莽字巨君，是孝元皇后的侄子。
English: Wang Mang, nicknamed the Giant, was the nephew of Empress Xiaoyuan.

古文：元后父及兄弟皆以元、成世封侯，居位辅政，家凡九侯、五大司马，语在《元后传》。
现代文：元后的父亲和兄弟们都在汉元帝、汉成帝时封侯，担任要职，辅佐朝政。全家共有九人封侯、五位大司马，这些话记载在《元后传》裹。
English: Empress Yuan's father and brothers were all vassals during the reigns of Emperor Han Yuan and Emperor Han Cheng, holding important positions and assisting the government. The entire family consisted of nine vassals and five grand viziers, as recorded in "The Biography of Empress Yuan."

古文：唯莽父曼蚤死，不侯。
现代文：祇有王莽的父亲王曼去世较早，没有封侯。
English: Only Wang Mang's father, Wang Man, died earlier and was not given a title.

古文：莽群兄弟皆将军五侯子，乘时侈靡，以舆马声色佚游相高，莽独孤贫，因折节为恭俭。
现代文：王莽的叔伯兄弟们都是将军、侯爷的儿子，他们趁着父辈有权势的时候，生活奢侈糜烂，相互以车马高大，歌妓多才，姬妾漂亮，游戏新颖夸耀攀比。衹有王莽一个人孤独贫穷，也因而待人谦恭，生活俭朴。
English: Wang Mang's uncles and brothers were all the sons of generals and landlords. They took advantage of their parents' power to live a luxurious life, competing with each other in terms of the size of their chariots and horses, the talent of their singers and prostitutes, the beauty of their concubines, and the novelty of their games. Even though Wang Mang was alone and poor, he treated others with courtesy and lived a frugal life.

古文：受《礼经》，师事沛郡陈参，勤身博学，被服如儒生。
现代文：他拜沛郡人陈参为老师，学习《仪礼》、《周礼》，勤奋不懈，广泛学习，衣着像普通的书生一样。
English: He worshipped the county's Chen Sanwu as a teacher, studied "Rites" and "Weekly Rites," was diligent and tireless, studied extensively, and dressed like an ordinary student.

古文：事母及寡嫂，养孤兄子，行甚敕备。
现代文：他侍奉母亲和守寡的嫂子，抚养失去父亲的侄儿，行为十分谨慎检点。
English: He served his mother and his widowed sister-in-law, raised his nephew who had lost his father, and behaved very carefully.

古文：又外交英俊，内事诸父，曲有礼意。
现代文：另外，他在外面交结才智杰出的朋友，在家族中侍奉各位伯父叔父，都委婉周详，彬彬有礼。
English: In addition, he made brilliant friends outside, and served the uncles and uncles in the family, all of whom were tactful and courteous.

古文：阳朔中，世父大将军凤病，莽侍疾，亲尝药，乱首垢面，不解衣带连月。
现代文：阳朔年间，他伯父大将军王凤病了，王莽侍候他，亲自尝药，不梳头，不洗脸，以致蓬头垢面，接连几个月不脱衣服睡觉。
English: During the Yangshuo era, his uncle, the great general Wang Feng, fell ill. Wang Mang waited on him, personally tried the medicine, did not comb his hair, did not wash his face, so that his head was unkempt and dirty, and did not take off his clothes to sleep for several months.

古文：凤且死，以托太后及帝，拜为黄门郎，迁射声校尉。
现代文：王凤在弥留之际，把王莽托付给太后和成帝，被任命为黄门郎，后来提升为射声校尉。
English: At the time of his death, Wang Feng entrusted Wang Mang to the Empress Dowager and Emperor Cheng. He was appointed Huangmen Lang, and later promoted to Lieutenant of Yixing.

古文：久之，叔父成都侯商上书，愿分户邑以封莽，及长乐少府戴崇、侍中金涉、胡骑校尉箕闳、上谷都尉阳并、中郎陈汤，皆当世名士，咸为莽言，上由是贤莽。
现代文：过了很久，他的叔父成都侯王商上书皇帝，表示愿意分出自己的封户来分封给王莽，其他如长乐少府戴崇、侍中金涉、胡骑校尉箕闳、上谷都尉阳并和中郎陈汤，都是当时很有名望的人，他们都替王莽说话，皇上从此认为王莽是贤人。
English: After a long time, his uncle, Chengdu lord Wang Shang, wrote to the emperor and expressed his willingness to allocate his fief to Wang Mang. Others, such as Changle major Daizong, chamberlain Jin Zang, Hu Jia lieutenant Zou, Shangguan governor Yang Jian and middle brother Chen Tang, were all very famous people at that time. They all spoke for Wang Mang. The emperor believed that Wang Mang was a wise man.

古文：永始元年，封莽为新都侯，国南阳新野之都乡，千五百户。
现代文：永始元年，成帝封王莽新都侯，侯国建在南阳郡新野县的都乡，领有一千五百封户。
English: In the first year of the Yongshi era, Emperor Cheng placed Wang Mang as the new capital. The capital was built in Nanyang County's Nino County, with 1,500 households.

古文：迁骑都尉、光禄大夫、侍中。宿卫谨敕，爵位益尊，节操愈谦。
现代文：后来升为骑都尉兼光禄大夫加侍中，在皇宫内值宿警卫，谨慎周到，他官职越来越高，态度却越来越谦恭。
English: Later, he was promoted to cavalry captain, doctor of Guanglu and chamberlain, and was on duty as a guard in the imperial palace. He was cautious and thoughtful, and his official position became higher and higher, but his attitude became more and more humble.

古文：散舆马衣裘，振施宾客，家无所余。
现代文：他分出车马和轻暖的衣物，施舍救济宾客，以致家裹没有多余的衣物。
English: He gave away chariots and horses, and warm clothing, and gave alms for the relief of his guests, so that there was no surplus clothing in the house.

古文：收赡名士，交结将相、卿、大夫甚众。
现代文：他接纳供养知名人士，结交很多将军、丞相、卿大夫。
English: He received and provided for famous people, and made friends with many generals, prime ministers, and eminent doctors.

古文：故在位更推荐之，游者为之谈说，虚誉隆洽，倾其诸父矣。
现代文：所以身居要职的人更加推荐他，社会上的知名人士替他宣扬鼓吹，他的名声传遍朝野，超过了他的伯父、叔父们。
English: Therefore, people in important positions recommended him more, famous people in society preached and preached for him, and his reputation spread throughout the country, surpassing his uncles and uncles.

古文：敢为激发之行，处之不惭恧。
现代文：他敢于做出矫揉造作的行为，却不觉得惭愧。
English: He dares to be pretentious, but he's not ashamed.

古文：莽兄永为诸曹，蚤死，有子光，莽使学博士门下。
现代文：王莽的哥哥王永曾任职诸曹，早已去世，有个儿子叫王光，王莽让他到博士门下求学。
English: Wang Mang's elder brother, Wang Yong, who once held the post of Zhu Cao, has long since passed away. He had a son named Wang Guang, and Wang Mang sent him to study under a doctor.

古文：莽休沐出，振车骑，奉羊酒，劳遗其师，恩施下竟同学。
现代文：王莽在休假时，驾起车马，带着羊和酒，去慰劳他的老师，连他的同学们也一周嫔赠。
English: When Wang Mang was on vacation, he drove a horse and cart, and took sheep and wine to console his teacher. Even his classmates were given gifts for a week.

古文：诸生纵观，长老叹息。
现代文：引得许多书生竞相围观，老人们为之赞叹。
English: It attracted a lot of students to watch it, and the old people admired it.

古文：光年小于莽子宇，莽使同日内妇，宾客满堂。
现代文：王光比王莽的儿子王宇年纪小，王莽让他俩同一天结婚，来贺喜的宾客坐满了堂屋。
English: Wang Guang is younger than Wang Mang's son Wang Yu. Wang Mang had the two of them get married on the same day, and the hall was filled with guests who came to congratulate them.

古文：须臾，一人言太夫人苦某痛，当饮某药，比客罢者数起焉。
现代文：过了一会儿，有一个人说他母亲犯了某种病痛，应当服什么药，等到客人散去时，他已经起身了好几次。
English: After a while, one man said that his mother had some kind of illness, what medicine should be taken, and by the time the guests left, he had gotten up several times.

古文：尝私买侍婢，昆弟或颇闻知，莽因曰： 后将军朱子元无子，莽闻此儿种宜子，为买之。 
现代文：他曾经暗中买了一个婢女，兄弟们中间逐渐传开了，王莽便说： 后将军朱子元没有儿子，我听说这个女子能多生儿子，因而替他买了她。 
English: He once secretly bought a maid, and word gradually spread among his brothers. Wang Mang said, "The late General Zhu Ziyuan did not have a son. I heard that this woman could have more sons, so I bought her for him."

古文：即日以婢奉子元。
现代文：当天就把女婢送给了朱子元。
English: On the same day, she gave the maidservant to Zhu Zi Yuan.

古文：其匿情求名如此。
现代文：王莽隐藏自己的真实感情追求名誉到了这种地步。
English: Wang Mang hides his true feelings and pursues honor to such an extent.

古文：是时，太后姊子淳于长以材能为九卿，先进在莽右。
现代文：这时候，太后姐姐之子淳于长因为有才干身列九卿，做官在王莽之前，名誉地位在王莽之上。
English: At this time, the son of the empress dowager's sister, Jun Yuchang, was listed as one of the nine nobles because of his talent. He was an official before Wang Mang, and his honorary status was above Wang Mang.

古文：莽阴求其罪过，因大司马曲阳侯根白之，长伏诛，莽以获忠直，语在《长传》。
现代文：王莽暗中搜集了他的罪过，通过大司马曲阳侯王根向成帝奏明了他的情况，淳于长伏法被杀，王莽因而获得了忠诚正直的名声，这些话记载在《淳于长传》里。
English: Wang Mang surreptitiously collected his sins, and through the great master Ma Quyang, the lord Wang Gen, informed Emperor Cheng of his situation. Chun Yu was killed by the Chang Fu Fa, and Wang Mang thus gained a reputation for loyalty and honesty. These words are recorded in "Chun Yu Chang Chuan."

古文：根因乞骸骨，荐莽自代，上遂擢为大司马。
现代文：王根因而请求退休，推荐王莽代替自己，皇上于是提拔王莽任大司马。
English: Wang Gen therefore asked to retire and recommended Wang Mang to replace him. The emperor then promoted Wang Mang to the post of grand steward.

古文：是岁，绥和元年也，年三十八矣。
现代文：这一年是绥和元年，王莽年纪三十八岁。
English: This year is the first year of the Sino-Japanese War. Wang Meng is 38 years old.

古文：莽既拔出同列，继四父而辅政，欲令名誉过前人，遂克已不倦，聘诸贤良以为掾史，赏赐邑钱悉以享士，愈为俭约。
现代文：王莽既已超出自己的同辈，继四位伯父、叔父之后辅佐皇帝，打算使自己的名誉超过前人，于是严格要求自己，不知疲倦地工作。他聘请许多贤良的人充当属官办事，皇帝的赏赐和封邑的收入全都用来招待士人，他自己更加俭朴节约。
English: Wang Mang, who had already surpassed his peers and assisted the emperor after his four uncles and uncles, intended to make his reputation surpass his predecessors, so he strictly demanded himself and worked tirelessly. He hired many virtuous people to serve as officials. The emperor's reward and the income of the fief were all used to invite scholars. He himself was more frugal and economical.

古文：母病，公卿列侯遣夫人问疾，莽妻迎之，衣不曳地，布蔽膝。
现代文：他母亲生了病，王公大臣和列侯派遣夫人前来探问病情，王莽的妻子出去迎接，竟没有及地的长衣，布裙也仅到膝盖。
English: When his mother fell ill, the prince-minister and the vassal sent his wife to inquire about her condition. Wang Mang's wife went to meet her, but she did not have a long dress that reached the ground, and her cloth skirt only reached her knees.

古文：见之者以为僮使，问知其夫人，皆惊。
现代文：见到她的人以为她是奴仆，一问才知道她是王莽的夫人，都很吃惊。
English: People who saw her thought she was a servant, and were surprised to learn that she was Wang Mang's wife.

古文：辅政岁余，成帝崩，哀帝即位，尊皇太后为太皇太后。
现代文：王莽辅政一年多，漠成帝去世，汉哀帝继位，尊称皇太后为太皇太后。
English: Wang Mang assisted the government for more than a year, Emperor Mo Chengdi died, Emperor Han Ai succeeded to the throne, and the empress dowager was called the great empress dowager.

古文：太后诏莽就第，避帝外家。
现代文：王太后命令王莽辞官回家，让权给哀帝的外家。
English: The empress dowager ordered Wang Mang to return home, but he refused because he was a relative of the emperor.

古文：莽上疏乞骸骨，哀帝遣尚书令诏莽曰： 先帝委政于君而弃群臣，朕得奉宗庙，诚嘉与君同心合意。
现代文：王莽遂呈上奏章请求辞官，哀帝就派尚书令韶命王莽说： 先帝把朝政托付给您而抛弃了臣属们，朕能够接掌江山，实在盼望跟您同心同德。
English: Wang Mang then presented a petition to request a dicastery, and the emperor sent a letter to Wang Mang, saying: The former emperor entrusted the imperial government to you and abandoned his subjects. I can take over the country, and I really hope to be of the same mind as you.

古文：今君移病求退，以著朕之不能奉顺先帝之意，朕甚悲伤焉。
现代文：现在您上书说有病要求辞官，从而显得朕不能顺从先帝的意旨，朕对此十分悲伤。
English: Now that you have written to say that you are ill and require a courtier, it appears that I cannot obey the will of the former emperor. I am very sad about this.

古文：已诏尚书待君奏事。 
现代文：已经命令尚书等待您入朝奏事。 
English: Shang Shu has been ordered to wait for you to report in the morning.

古文：又遣丞相孔光、大司空何武、左将军师丹、卫尉傅喜白太后曰： 皇帝闻太后诏，甚悲。
现代文：又派遣丞相孔光、大司空何武、左将军师丹、卫尉傅喜禀告太后说： 皇帝听到太后的诏命，非常难过。
English: He also dispatched the chancellor Kong Guang, the grand secretary Ku He Wu, the left general Shidan, and the guard lieutenant Fu Xizhao to tell the empress dowager: The emperor was very sad to hear the empress dowager's imperial command.

古文：大司马即不起，皇帝即不敢听政。 
现代文：大司马如果不出来做官，皇帝就不敢处理朝政。 
English: If Daisima does not come out to be an official, the emperor will not dare to deal with the imperial government.

古文：太后复令莽视事。
现代文：王太后又命王莽任职理事。
English: The Queen Mother also appointed Wang Mang as a director.

古文：时哀帝祖母定陶傅太后、母丁姬在，高昌侯董宏上书言： 《春秋》之义，母以子贵，丁姬宜上尊号。 
现代文：这时哀帝的祖母定陶国傅太后、母亲了姬在世，高昌侯董宏上书说： 根据《春秋》之义，母以子贵而贵，丁姬应该加上尊号。 
English: At this time, Ding Tao Guofu's grandmother, Ding Tao Guofu's grandmother and Ding Ji's mother were still alive, and Gaochang Hou Donghong wrote: According to the meaning of "Spring and Autumn," mother and child are precious, and Ding Ji should be given a honorary title.

古文：莽与师丹共劾宏误朝不道，语在《丹传》。
现代文：王莽和师丹共同弹劾揭发董宏迷误朝廷，违反原则，这些话记载在《师丹传》中。
English: Wang Mang and Shidan jointly impeached and denounced Dong Hong for misleading the imperial court and violating principles. These words are recorded in the "Biography of Shidan."

古文：后日，未央宫置酒，内者令为傅太后张幄坐于太皇太后坐旁。
现代文：后来，未央宫举行宴会，内者令给傅太后设置了帷帐，坐在太皇太后的座位旁边。
English: Later, a banquet was held at the Weiyang Palace, and the host ordered the curtain to be set up for the Empress Dowager Fu, who sat next to the Empress Dowager's seat.

古文：莽案行，责内者令曰： 定陶太后藩妾，何以得与至尊并！ 
现代文：王莽巡视时见了就责备内者令说： 定陶国傅太后是藩王的太后、元帝的姬妾，怎么能跟最尊贵的人并列！ 
English: When Wang Mang inspected, he saw and rebuked the order of the insider and said: Ding Tao Guofu's empress dowager is the empress dowager of the king of the domain, the concubine of the former emperor, how can she be ranked with the most honorable people!

古文：彻去，更设坐，傅太后闻之，大怒，不肯会，重怨恚莽。
现代文：撤去帷帐，改设座位。傅太后听说这件事后，非常生气，不肯出席宴会，极其怨恨王莽。
English: After hearing about this, Empress Dowager Fu was very angry, refused to attend the banquet, and was extremely resentful of Wang Mang.

古文：莽复乞骸骨，哀帝赐莽黄金五百斤，安车驷马，罢就第。
现代文：王莽又请求辞官，哀帝就赏赐王莽黄金五百斤，安车一辆和骏马四匹，免职回到府第。
English: Wang Mang also asked the magistrate, and the emperor rewarded Wang Mang with five hundred catties of gold, a horse-drawn carriage and four horses. He was relieved of his duties and returned to the capital.

古文：公卿大夫多称之者，上乃加恩宠，置使家，中黄门十日一赐餐。
现代文：王公大臣和大夫们多有称赞他的，皇帝对他给予优待和爱护，在他家中安排专使侍候，让宫内太监每十天赏赐一次饮食。
English: Many princes, ministers and doctors praised him. The emperor gave him preferential treatment and love, arranged special envoys to wait in his home, and had the eunuch of the palace reward him with a meal every ten days.

古文：下诏曰： 新都侯莽忧劳国家，执义坚固，朕庶几与为治。
现代文：下韶书说： 新都侯王莽为国家忧虑操劳，一向按章行事，朕差不多能同他实现太平。
English: The next imperial edict said: The new capital lord Wang Mang has been working hard for the country's concerns and has always acted in accordance with regulations. I can almost achieve peace with him.

古文：太皇太后诏莽就第，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：太皇太后韶命王莽回到府第，朕对此十分惋惜。
English: I am very sorry to hear that the Empress Dowager was so desperate to return to the Imperial Palace.

古文：其以黄邮聚户三百五十益封莽，位特进，给事中，朝朔望见礼如三公。车驾乘绿车从。 
现代文：应当把黄邮聚的民户三百五十家加封给王莽，授予他特进加给事中的官衔，每逢初一、十五参加朝会，皇上接见他的礼仪如同接见三公那样，皇上出行时他乘坐绿车跟随。 
English: Wang Mang should be given the additional seal of the 350 households of the Yellow Post Office, and he should be awarded the special promotion and the official title in the matter. He should attend the imperial meeting on the first day and the fifteenth day of every month. The emperor should receive him with the etiquette as if he were receiving the three princes. When the emperor travels, he should follow in a green car.

古文：后二岁，傅太后、丁姬皆称尊号，丞相朱博奏： 莽前不广尊尊之义，抑贬尊号，亏损孝道，当伏显戮，幸蒙赦令，不宜有爵土，请免为庶人。 
现代文：两年以后，傅太后、丁姬都有了尊贵的称号，丞相朱博上奏书说： 王莽从前不肯推广尊敬尊长的原则，压制降低太后的尊贵封号，有损孝道，应当明典正刑，幸亏遇到赦免的命令，不应当拥有爵位和土地。请予罢免，降为平民。 
English: Two years later, both Empress Dowager Fu and Empress Dowager Ding Ji were given noble titles. Premier Zhu Bo issued a report saying: Wang Mang once refused to promote the principle of respect for one's elders, suppressing the lowering of the empress dowager's noble title was detrimental to filial piety, and should be punished according to the law. Fortunately, when he was pardoned, he should not have a peerage and land. Please remove him and reduce him to a commoner.

古文：上曰： 以莽与太皇太后有属，勿免，遣就国。 
现代文：皇上说： 因为王莽与太皇太后有亲属关系，不免除爵位和封地，命令他回封国去 。
English: The emperor said: Because Wang Mang is related to the great empress dowager, he is not exempted from the title and fief, and he is ordered to return to the country.

古文：莽杜门自守，其中子获杀奴，莽切责获，令自杀。
现代文：王莽闭门谢客，安分守己，他的次子王获杀死了奴婢，王莽严厉责备王获，要他自杀。
English: Wang Mang closed the door to thank the guests, kept his peace, his second son Wang Guo killed his slaves, Wang Mang severely reproached Wang Guo and asked him to commit suicide.

古文：在国三岁，吏上书冤讼莽者以百数。
现代文：留在封国三年，官吏上书替王莽伸冤的数以百计。
English: During the three years he stayed in the fief, hundreds of officials wrote to Wang Mang to seek redress for him.

古文：元寿元年，日食，贤良周护、宋崇等对策深颂莽功德，上于是征莽。
现代文：元寿元年，出现了日食，贤良周护、宋崇等在回答皇帝的策问时极力颂扬王莽的功勋德行，皇上于是召回王莽。
English: In the first year of Yuan Shou, there was a solar eclipse. When responding to the emperor's inquiry, Zhou You, Song Chong, and others extolled Wang Mang's merits and virtues. The emperor then recalled Wang Mang.

古文：始莽就国，南阳太守以莽贵重，选门下掾宛孔休守新都相。
现代文：当初王莽回到封国，南阳太守因为王莽地位高且重，选调太守衙门的属官宛县人孔休临时担任新都国相。
English: At the beginning, Wang Mang returned to the feudal state. Because of Wang Mang's high and important status, the Nanyang Daju selected Wan County's Kong Hui, a subordinate official of the Daju Shimen, to temporarily serve as the Minister of the New Capital.

古文：休谒见莽，莽尽礼自纳，休亦闻其名，与相答。
现代文：孔休进见王莽，王莽用尽礼节主动结交，孔休也知道他的名声，和他互相来往。
English: Confucius went to see Wang Mang. Wang Mang took the initiative to make friends, and Confucius also knew his reputation and interacted with him.

古文：后莽疾，休侯之，莽缘恩意，进其玉具宝剑，欲以为好。
现代文：后来王莽病了，孔休问候他，王莽藉此报答孔休的深厚情谊，送上自己镶嵌有美玉的宝剑，打算和他建立友好关系。
English: Later, when Wang Mang fell ill, Kong Xiu greeted him, and Wang Mang took this opportunity to repay Kong Xiu's deep friendship by giving him his own sword inlaid with gems, intending to establish a friendly relationship with him.

古文：休不肯受，莽因曰： 诚见君面有瘢，美玉可以灭瘢，欲献其瑑耳。 
现代文：孔休不肯接受，王莽便说： 我确实是看到您脸上有伤痕，美玉可以用来消除伤痕，想送给您这个剑鼻罢了。 
English: Kongxiu refused to accept it, Wang Mang then said: I really saw that you have scars on your face, the gem can be used to remove scars, I just want to give you this sword nose.

古文：即解其瑑，休复辞让。莽曰： 君嫌其贾邪？ 
现代文：就取下剑鼻，孔休再次推辞。王莽说： 您是嫌它的价钱太高吗？ 
English: He took off the nose of the sword, but Kongxiu refused again. Wang Mang said, "Don't you think its price is too high?"

古文：遂椎碎之，自裹以进休，休乃受。
现代文：于是用椎打碎了剑鼻，自己包起来送给孔休，孔休才接受了。
English: So he broke the nose of the sword with the vertebrae, wrapped it up and gave it to Kongxu, who accepted it.

古文：及莽征去，欲见休，休称疾不见。
现代文：等到王莽被召入朝要离去时，想见孔休，孔休推托有病没有相见。
English: When Wang Mang was called into the court to leave, he wanted to see Kong Xiu, but Kong Xiu was ill and did not see him.

古文：莽还京师岁余，哀帝崩，无子，而傅太后、丁太后皆先薨，太皇太后即日驾之未央宫收取玺绶，遣使者驰召莽。
现代文：王莽回到京城长安一年多，哀帝去世，没有儿子，而傅太后和丁太后都在哀帝之前去世了，太皇太后当天驾临未央宫收取玺绶，派遣使者飞马去召唤王莽。
English: Wang Mang returned to the Beijing city of Chang'an for more than a year. Emperor Ming died without a son, while Empress Dowager Fu and Empress Dowager Ding both died before Emperor Ming. On the same day, the Empress Dowager came to the Weiyang Palace to collect the imperial scepter and sent an envoy, Pegasus, to summon Wang Mang.

古文：诏尚书，诸发兵符节，百官奏事，中黄门、期门兵皆属莽。
现代文：命令尚书，朝廷所有派遣军队的符节凭证，文武百官向皇上陈述朝事，内宫太监和皇帝的亲兵都归王莽指挥。
English: The order was written, the imperial court issued certificates of all dispatched troops, and hundreds of civil and military officials reported to the emperor on the affairs of the dynasty. The inner palace eunuchs and the emperor's personal soldiers were under Wang Mang's command.

古文：莽白： 大司马高安侯董贤年少，不合众心，收印绶。 
现代文：王莽禀告说： 大司马高安侯董贤年纪太轻，不符合大家的心意，收缴他的印信。 
English: Wang Mang's obituary said: Daishi Ma Gao'an Hou Dong Xian is too young and does not meet everyone's wishes, and his seal letter was confiscated.

古文：贤即日自杀。
现代文：董贤当天就自杀了。
English: Dong Xian committed suicide the same day.

古文：太后诏公卿举可大司马者，大司徒孔光、大司空彭宣举莽，前将军何武、后将军公孙禄互相举。
现代文：王太后韶命王公大臣推荐适合接任大司马的人，大司徒孔光和大司空彭宣推荐王莽，前将军何武、后将军公孙禄互相推荐。
English: The empress dowager ordered the grand minister Wang Gong to recommend a suitable person to succeed the grand secretary Ma, the grand secretary Kong Guang and the grand secretary Kuang Peng Xuan recommended Wang Mang, the former general He Wu and the later general Gong Sun Lu recommended each other.

古文：太后拜莽为大司马，与议立嗣。
现代文：王太后任命王莽为大司马，和他商议选立皇位继承人。
English: The empress dowager appointed Wang Mang as the grand steward, and discussed with him the selection of the heir to the throne.

古文：安阳侯王舜，莽之从弟，其人修饬，太后所信爱也，莽白以舜为车骑将军，使迎中山王奉成帝后，是为孝平皇帝。
现代文：安阳侯王舜是王莽的堂弟，他为人谨慎，是王太后所信赖的人，王莽提出让王舜担任车骑将军，叫他去迎接中山王来继承成帝，造就是孝平皇帝。
English: Wang Mang, the Prince of Anyang, was the cousin of Wang Mang. He was prudent and trusted by the empress dowager. Wang Mang proposed that Wang Mang be appointed as the general of the cavalry and told him to meet the King of Zhongshan to inherit the throne. The result was Emperor Xiaoping.

古文：帝年九岁，太后临朝称制，委政于莽。
现代文：平帝刚刚九岁，王太后临朝代理朝政，把政务委托给王莽。
English: Emperor Ping was just nine years old, and Empress Dowager Wang, acting as regent, entrusted the affairs of state to Wang Mang.

古文：莽白赵氏前害皇子，傅氏骄僣，遂废孝成赵皇后、孝哀傅皇后，皆令自杀，语在《外戚传》。
现代文：土莽提出以前趟氏害死了皇子，傅氏骄傲僭越，于是废掉孝成趟皇后、孝哀傅皇后，命令她们俩自杀，这些话记载在《外戚传》中。
English: Durmstrang suggested that the previous Watan clan had killed the prince, and the Fu clan was proud and arrogant, so he abolished the queen of the Watan clan and the queen of the Fu clan, and ordered them both to commit suicide. These words are recorded in "The Tale of the Relatives."

古文：莽以大司徒孔光名儒，相三主，太后所敬，天下信之，于是盛尊事光，引光女婿甄邯为侍中奉车都尉。
现代文：王莽因为大司徒孔光是著名的儒士，辅佐过成帝、哀帝和平帝三位皇帝，是太后所尊敬的人，为全国人所信任，于是非常恭敬地对待孔光，推荐孔光的女婿甄邯担任侍中兼奉车都尉。
English: Wang Mang treated Kong Guang very respectfully, recommending Kong Guang's son-in-law Zhen Yi to serve as an aide-de-camp and second-in-command of the carriage. This was because Kong Guang was a famous Confucian and had assisted three emperors, namely, Emperor Chengdu, Emperor Puyi and Emperor Ping. He was respected by the empress dowager and trusted by the whole nation.

古文：诸哀帝外戚及大臣居位素所不说者，莽皆傅致其罪，为请奏，令邯持与光。
现代文：对哀帝的各位外戚和平素不喜欢的身居要位的大臣，王莽都罗织他们的罪名，写成请示奏章，叫甄邯带给孑光。
English: Wang Mang fabricated charges against all the relatives of the deceased emperor and high-ranking ministers whom he did not like, and wrote a petition for Zhen Yi to bring them to Xuan Guang.

古文：光素畏慎，不敢不上之，莽白太后，辄可其奏。
现代文：孔光一向怕事和谨慎，不敢不上报。王莽又禀告王太后，太后就同意这些奏章。
English: Kong Guang has always been afraid of things and cautious, daring not to report. Wang Mang also reported to the Queen Mother, and the Queen Mother agreed to these transcripts.

古文：于是前将军何武、后将军公孙禄坐互相举免，丁、傅及董贤亲属皆免官爵，徙远方。
现代文：于是前将军何武、后将军公孙禄因互相推荐任大司马而被免职，丁氏、傅氏和董贤的亲属都被免去官职和爵位，流放到遥远的地方。
English: As a result, the former general He Wu and the later general Gong Sun Lu were dismissed from their posts for recommending each other to be appointed grand steward, and the relatives of the Ding, Fu and Dong Xian were all dismissed from their official posts and titles and exiled to distant places.

古文：红阳侯立，太后亲弟，虽不居位，莽以诸父内敬惮之，畏立从容言太后，令已不得肆意，乃复令光奏立旧恶： 前知定陵侯淳于长犯大逆罪，多受其赂，为言误朝；后白以官婢杨寄私子为皇子，众言曰吕氏、少帝复出，纷纷为天下所疑，难以示来世，成襁褓之功。
现代文：红阳侯王立是王太后的亲弟弟，虽然没有当官，但是王莽因为他是叔父而内心敬畏他，害怕王立得闲就开导太后，使自己不能为所欲为，就又叫孔光向太后禀报王立往日的罪遇：王立以前知道定陵侯淳于长犯了大逆不道之罪，还大量接受他的贿赂，替他说情，迷误朝廷；后来禀告用官奴杨寄的私生子作为皇子，大家说是吕后、少帝复活了，众说纷纭，让天下人怀疑，这样就难于昭示后世，完成维护幼主的功业。
English: Hongyang Lord Wang Li was the younger brother of the Empress Dowager Wang. Although he was not an official, Wang Mang feared him because he was his uncle. He was afraid that Wang Li would be too idle to enlighten the Empress Dowager, so that he could not do whatever he wanted. He also asked Kong Guang to inform the Empress Dowager about Wang Li's past crimes: Wang Li had previously known that Ding Ling Hou Chun Yu Chang had committed the crime of high treason and immorality. He also accepted a large amount of bribes from him, interceded for him, and misled the court. Later, the obituary used the bastard son of the official slave

古文：请遣立就国。 
现代文：请让王立回他的封国去。 
English: Please let Wang Li go back to his fiefdom.

古文：太后不听。
现代文：王太后没有听从他的建议。
English: The Queen Mother did not follow his advice.

古文：莽曰： 今汉家衰，比世无嗣，太后独代幼主统政，诚可畏惧，力用公正先天下，尚恐不从，今以私恩逆大臣议如此，群下倾邪，乱从此起！
现代文：王莽说： 现在汉室衰落，接连几代没有继承人，太后您一个人代替幼主执掌朝政，实在可怕，努力用公正的态度作天下的表率，还恐怕不服从呢，如果您现在出于个人恩爱而不听我的意见，那么群臣就会滋生奸邪之念，祸乱将要由此发生了！
English: Wang Mang said, "Nowadays, the Han dynasty is in decline, and successive generations have no heirs. It is really terrible for you, the empress dowager, to take the reins of the imperial government in place of your young master. You should strive to set an example for the world with a fair attitude, but I am afraid you will not obey. If you do not listen to my opinion now out of personal favor, then the courtiers will breed the idea of treachery, and disaster will occur as a result!

古文：宜可且遣就国，安后复征召之。 
现代文：应该暂时打发他回封国去，待国事稍为安定之后再把他调回来。 
English: He should be sent back to China for a while, and then brought back when the country is a little more stable.

古文：太后不得已，遣立就国。
现代文：王太后迫不得已，让王立回封国去了。
English: The empress dowager had no choice but to let Wang Li return to his fiefdom.

古文：莽之所以胁持上下，皆此类也。
现代文：王莽用来逼迫、挟制太后和下臣们的手段，都是如此。
English: This is also true of the means Wang Mang used to persecute and blackmail the empress dowager and her vassals.

古文：于是附顺者拔擢，忤恨者诛灭。
现代文：就这样，依附顺从他的人得到提拔，反对怨恨他的人遭到杀戮。
English: In this way, those who clung to him and obeyed him were promoted, and those who opposed and resented him were killed.

古文：王舜、王邑为腹心，甄丰、甄邯主击断，平晏领机事，刘歆典文章，孙建为爪牙。
现代文：王舜、王邑成为他的心腹，甄丰、甄邯掌管纠察、弹劾、审判，平晏掌管机密的军政大事，刘歆主管礼乐和典章制度，孙建成为他的得力助手。
English: Wang Hui and Wang Yu became his confidants, Zhen Feng and Zhen Hui were in charge of picketing, impeachment, and trial, Ping Hui was in charge of confidential military and political events, Liu Hui was in charge of ceremonial music and the award system, and Sun Jian became his right-hand man.

古文：丰子寻、歆子棻、涿郡崔发、南阳陈崇皆以材能幸于莽。
现代文：甄丰的儿子甄寻、刘歆的儿子刘菜和涿郡的崔发、南阳的陈崇都由于有才能而得到王莽的宠幸。
English: Zhenfeng's son Zhenxing, Liu Yao's son Liu Cai, and Cui Fa from Yao County and Chen Chong from Nanyang were all favored by Wang Mang because of their talents.

古文：莽色厉而言方，欲有所为，微见风采，党与承其指意而显奏之，莽稽首涕泣，固推让焉，上以惑太后，下用示信于众庶。
现代文：王莽外表严厉而说话一本正经，想要做什么事情，他衹须略微通过表情和脸色示意一下，党羽就会秉承他的意思明白地向上禀奏，王莽就叩头至地哭泣着坚决推辞谦让，对上用来迷惑王太后，对下用来向广大平民百姓显示诚信。
English: Wang Mang was stern-looking and spoke with a straight face. When he wanted to do something, he had to make a slight gesture with his expression and face, and the followers would adhere to his intention and play up clearly. Wang Mang then bowed his head to the ground and wept, resolutely refusing to make concessions, which was used to confuse the Queen Mother, and to show sincerity to the general public.

古文：始，风益州令塞处蛮夷献白雉，元始元年正月，莽白太后下诏，以白雉荐宗庙。
现代文：当初，王莽婉言示意益州令让塞外的蛮夷进献白毛的雉鸡，元始元年正月，王莽禀告太后下诏书，用白毛雉鸡进献宗庙。
English: At first, Wang Mang made a gentle suggestion that the Yizhou Order should allow barbarians from abroad to donate white-haired pheasants. In the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year, Wang Mang told the Empress Dowager to use white-haired pheasants to donate to the temple.

古文：群臣因奏言太后： 委任大司马莽定策定宗庙。
现代文：大臣们便向太后奏报说： 太后委任大司马王莽决策拥立新帝，从而使朝廷安定。
English: The ministers then reported to the empress dowager: The empress dowager appointed the grand secretary Ma Wang Mang to make the decision to support the new emperor, thereby stabilizing the imperial court.

古文：故大司马霍光有安宗庙之功，益封三万户，畴其爵邑，比萧相国。
现代文：先前的大司马霍光有安邦定国的功劳，增加封邑三万户，并且规定他死后子孙继承爵位，封邑数同他相等，如同萧相国。
English: The previous Daishi, Maho Kōkō, was credited with stabilizing the country, increasing the number of fiefs by 30,000, and stipulating that his descendants would inherit the title of nobility after his death. The number of fiefs was equal to his, just like Shō Sangoku.

古文：莽宜如光故事。 
现代文：王莽应当按照霍光的成例授封。 
English: Wang Mang should be awarded the title in accordance with Huo Guang's precedent.

古文：太后问公卿曰： 诚以大司马有大功当著之邪？
现代文：王太后询问王公大臣门说： 真是因为大司马有大功劳应当明扬他呢？
English: The empress dowager inquired at the door of Wang Gong's palace and said, "Is it really because Da Sima has made great contributions that he should be made known?

古文：将以骨肉故欲异之也？ 
现代文：还是由于他是我的至亲缘故而使他与众不同呢？ 
English: Or does he stand out because he's my first cousin?

古文：于是群臣乃盛陈： 莽功德致周成白雉之瑞，千载同符。
现代文：于是大臣们便大力陈奏： 王莽的功德招来了像周公辅佐周成王获得白雉鸡一样的祥瑞征兆，相隔千年，符命却相同。
English: Therefore, the ministers vigorously recited: Wang Mang's merits have brought about the same auspicious signs as Zhou Gong's assistant, Zhou Cheng Wang, obtained the white pheasant chicken, separated by a thousand years, but with the same fate.

古文：圣王之法，臣有大功则生有美号，故周公及身在而托号于周。
现代文：圣明的帝王的法度是，臣下有了大的功勋，那么他生前就能获得美好的称号，所以周公在世时就得以用周的国号作为他的称号。
English: The sacred emperor's law is that if a subject has great merits, then he can obtain a beautiful title during his lifetime, so Zhou Gong was able to use Zhou's country name as his title when he was alive.

古文：莽有定国安汉家之大功，宜赐号曰安汉公，益户，畴爵邑，上应古制，下准行事，以顺天心。 
现代文：王莽有稳定国家、安定汉朝的莫大功勋，应当赐封称作安漠公，增加封户，规定他死后子孙继承爵位时封邑户和他一样，远的符合周公在周成王时的成例，近的如同霍光的先例，给王莽同等的封赏，以求顺上天的旨意。 
English: Wang Mang has made great contributions to the stability of the country and the stability of the Han Dynasty. He should be given the title of Anmangong, increase the number of households, and stipulate that when his descendants inherit the title of nobility after his death, they should be the same as him. This is far in line with the precedent of Zhou Gong during the reign of King Zhoucheng, and close to the precedent of Huo Guang. Give Wang Mang the same reward in order to comply with the will of heaven.

古文：太后诏尚书具其事。
现代文：王太后就诏令尚书备办这件事。
English: The empress dowager ordered Shang Shu to prepare the matter.

古文：莽上书言： 臣与孔光、王舜、甄丰、甄邯共定策，今愿独条光等功赏，寝置臣莽，勿随辈列。 
现代文：王莽上书说： 臣和孔光、王舜、甄丰、甄邯共同商定拥立新帝的大计，现在希望衹列出孔光等人的功劳和应得的赏赐，撇开臣王莽，不要和他们相提并论。 
English: Wang Mang wrote in his letter: "My ministers and Kong Guang, Wang Xi, Zhen Feng, and Zhen Yi jointly agreed on the plan to support the new emperor. Now I hope you will list the merits and rewards of Kong Guang and others. Leave aside my minister Wang Mang and do not compare them.

古文：甄邯白太后下诏曰：  无偏无党，王道荡荡。 
现代文：甄邯禀奏太后下韶书说：  不偏不袒，先王所行的正道宽阔广平。 
English: The Empress Dowager Zhenxuan said in her eulogy: "No partiality, no favoritism, the righteous path taken by the former king is broad and level.

古文：属有亲者，义不得阿。
现代文：对于有亲属关系的人，按理不能有所偏私。
English: For people who are related to each other, it is not reasonable to show favoritism.

古文：君有安宗庙之功，不可以骨肉故蔽隐不扬。
现代文：您有安邦定国的功劳，不能因为是至亲的缘故就隐讳不予褒扬。
English: You have contributed to the stability of the country. You cannot hide from praise just because you are a close relative.

古文：君其勿辞。 
现代文：希望您不要推辞。 
English: I hope you will not refuse.

古文：莽复上书让。
现代文：王莽又上书辞让。
English: Wang Mang also resigned in writing.

古文：太后诏谒者引莽待殿东箱，莽称疾不肯入。
现代文：王太后命谒者引导王莽到正殿的束厢房等待，王莽托病不肯上殿。
English: The person instructed by the empress dowager to guide Wang Mang to a box room in the main hall to wait. Wang Mang feigned illness and refused to go to the hall.

古文：太后使尚书令恂诏之曰： 君以选故而辞以疾，君任重，不可阙，以时亟起。 
现代文：王太后让尚书令姚恂命令他道： 您因为朝廷要给您褒功行赏而托病推辞，您的责任重大，不能不去，应该尽快上朝受封。 
English: The empress dowager had Shang Shuling order Yao Jun to order him to say: You are resigning because the imperial court wants to give you a commendation, your responsibility is great, you cannot leave, and you should receive the imperial seal as soon as possible.

古文：莽遂固辞。
现代文：王莽竟坚决推辞。
English: Wang Mang resolutely refused.

古文：太后复使长信太仆闳承制召莽，莽固称疾。
现代文：太后又让长信太仆王闳捧着诏书去召王莽，王莽仍坚持托病不出。
English: The empress dowager also asked Wang Xuan, a servant of Changxin Taifu, to summon Wang Mang with an imperial edict. Wang Mang still insisted that he would not come out due to illness.

古文：左右白太后，宜勿夺莽意，但条孔光等，莽乃肯起。
现代文：左右侍臣们禀报王太后，不要违背王莽的意愿，就衹列举孔光等人的功劳和赏赐，王莽才肯上朝理政。
English: When the courtiers around the court reported to the queen mother, not to go against Wang Mang's wishes, they listed the merits and rewards of people such as Kong Guang. Wang Mang was willing to go to the court to manage the government.

古文：太后下诏曰： 太傅博山侯光宿卫四世，世为傅相，忠考仁笃，行义显著，建议定策，益封万户，以光为太师，与四辅之政。
现代文：王太后下诏书说： 太傅博山侯孔光侍宿护卫四朝天子，几代都担任太傅、丞相，忠孝双全，仁义笃厚，行为合乎准则，天下闻名，提议决策拥立新皇帝，增加封邑一万户，任命孔光为太师，参加四辅的决策。
English: The empress dowager issued an imperial decree, saying: Emperor Bozan's vassal, Kong Guang, has served and escorted the emperor for four dynasties. For several generations, he has served as Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor Bozan's vassal, Emperor

古文：车骑将军安阳侯舜积累仁孝，使迎中山王，折冲万里，功德茂著，益封万户，以舜为太保。
现代文：车骑将军安阳侯王舜长期仁义忠孝，派他迎接中山王，击退敌兵，辗转万里，功勋道德卓著，增加封邑一万户，任命王舜为太保。
English: The chariot and cavalry general Anyang Hou Wang Qi has been benevolent, loyal and filial for a long time. He was sent to meet the King of Zhongshan, repelled the enemy soldiers, traveled thousands of miles, distinguished himself with outstanding merits and morals, increased the number of fiefs by 10,000, and appointed Wang Qi as Taibo.

古文：左将军光禄勋丰宿卫三世，忠信仁笃，使迎中山王，辅导共养，以安宗庙，封丰为广阳侯，食邑五千户，以丰为少傅。
现代文：左将军光禄勋甄丰侍宿护卫三朝天子，忠义诚信，仁爱笃厚，派他迎接中山王，辅助劝导奉养，从而安定了国家，赐封甄丰为广阳侯，食邑五千户，任命甄丰为少傅。
English: General Zuo Guanglu awarded Zhenfeng with the honor of serving and guarding the heavenly son of the three dynasties. He was loyal, honest, and full of benevolence. He sent him to meet the king of Zhongshan, assisted in persuading and supporting him, thus stabilizing the country. Zhenfeng was given the title of Guangyang marquis, with 5,000 households, and Zhenfeng was appointed as a young chef.

古文：皆授四辅之职，畴其爵邑，各赐第一区。
现代文：三人都授予四辅的职位，其子孙可以照样继承他们的爵位和封邑，每人赏赐一座府第。
English: All three were granted the position of Shifu, and their descendants could still inherit their titles and fiefs, and each was awarded a fudai.

古文：侍中奉车都尉邯宿卫勤劳，建议定策，封邯为承阳侯，食邑二千四百户。 
现代文：侍中奉车都尉甄邯值宿护卫辛勤劳累，提议决策拥新皇帝，赐封甄邯为承阳侯，食邑二干四百户。 
English: The chamberlain, Lieutenant Zhen Rong, who was on duty to escort the car, worked hard and proposed a decision to support the new emperor, awarding Zhen Rong the title of Prince of Chengyang, and providing food for two hundred and four hundred households.

古文：四人既受赏，莽尚未起，群臣复上言： 莽虽克让，朝所宜章，以时加赏，明重元功，无使百僚元元失望。 
现代文：四个人已经受到封赏，王莽还没有上朝理政，朝臣们又上奏说： 王莽虽然克己谦让，朝廷还是应该表彰，及时增加封赏，以表明朝廷重视首功之臣，不要令文武百官和老百姓失望。 
English: Four people have already received the award. Wang Mang has not yet been appointed to the post of prime minister. The courtiers also made a report, saying: Although Wang Mang is humble, the court should still commend him and increase the award in a timely manner, so as to show that the court attaches importance to the most meritorious vassals, and not to disappoint the civil and military officials and the common people.

古文：太后乃下诏曰： 大司马新都侯莽三世为三公，典周公之职，建万世策，功德为忠臣宗，化流海内，远人慕义，越裳氏重译献白雉。
现代文：王太后就下诏书说： 大司马新都侯王莽历任三朝的三公，承继周公的职责，制定了使后世长治久安的策略，功劳德行是忠臣们所景仰的，教化流传遍及全国，远方异域的人们也仰慕他的大义，所以越裳氏辗转而来进献白雉鸡。
English: The empress dowager issued an imperial decree, saying, "The three great princes of the three dynasties, including the grand prince Ma Xindu and the prince Wang Mang, have succeeded the duties of Zhou Guo, and have formulated a strategy to make future generations enjoy long-term peace and stability. His meritorious and virtuous deeds are admired by loyal subjects, his enlightenment is spread throughout the country, and people in faraway foreign lands also admire his great righteousness. Therefore, the Yue Xiang clan came to present Bai Xuan chicken.

古文：其以召陵，新息二县户二万八千益封莽，复其后嗣，畴其爵邑，封功如萧相国。
现代文：应当把召陵、新息两县民户二万八千家加封给王莽，免除他后代的赋税徭役，规定子孙可以继承他的爵位和封邑不变，封赏按照萧相国的成例。
English: Wang Mang should be given additional fiefs of twenty-eight thousand households in the two counties of Zhaoling and Xinxi, his descendants should be exempted from tax and service, his descendants should be allowed to inherit his peerage and fief, and the reward should be in accordance with the precedent of Xiao Xianguo.

古文：以莽为太傅，干四辅之事，号曰安汉公。
现代文：任命王莽为太傅，主管四辅的事务，称号叫作安汉公。
English: Wang Mang was appointed as Taifu, in charge of the four auxiliary affairs, and his title was Anhan Gong.

古文：以故萧相国甲第为安汉公第，定著于令，传之无穷。 
现代文：把从前萧相国的豪华宅邸作为安汉公的府第，将这些见诸文字，以传之于无穷。 
English: The luxurious mansion of the former Xiao Xianguo as the capital of Anhan, these are put into words and passed on to infinity.

古文：于是莽为惶恐，不得已而起受策。
现代文：于是王莽做出诚惶诚恐的样子，不得已才上朝接受了策命。
English: As a result, Wang Mang made a panic-stricken appearance, and had no choice but to go to the court to accept the mission.

古文：策曰： 汉危无嗣，而公定之；四辅之职，三公之任，而公干之；群僚众位，而公宰之；功德茂著，宗庙以安，盖白雉之瑞，周成象焉。
现代文：策书上写着： 汉室危急，皇位无人继承，是您安定了朝纲；四辅之职，三公之责，而由您承担了；文武百官臣僚们，而由您主宰：您功德行卓著，国家因为您得以安定，看来您招来的白雉鸡的祥瑞征兆，有周公辅佐周成王的景象。
English: It was written in the policy book: The Han Dynasty was in crisis, and there was no one to succeed to the throne. It was you who stabilized the imperial system; you assumed the duties of the four ancillaries and the responsibilities of the three princes; hundreds of civil and military officials and ministers were ruled by you. Your merits were outstanding, and the country was stable because of you. It seems that the white pheasant you invited was a sign of auspiciousness, and there was a scene of Zhou Guo's assistant Zhou Chengwang.

古文：故赐嘉号曰安汉公，辅翼于帝，期于致平，毋违朕意。 
现代文：所以赐封您美好的称号叫作安漠公，辅佐皇帝，希望能使天下太平，不要违背朕的旨意。 
English: That is why I have bestowed upon you the wonderful title of "Prince of Peace" and "Assistant Emperor" in the hope that you will bring peace to the world and not go against my will.

古文：莽受太傅安汉公号，让还益封畴爵邑事，云愿须百姓家给，然后加赏。
现代文：王莽接受了太傅和安漠公的封号，辞去了增加的封地和规定子孙世袭爵位、封邑的赏赐，说是愿意等到老百姓家家都丰衣足食了，然后再接受这样的赏赐。
English: Wang Mang accepted the titles of Taifu and Anmaogong, resigned from the increased fiefs and the reward of hereditary titles and fiefs, and said that he was willing to wait until the people's families were well-fed, and then accept such a reward.

古文：群公复争，太后诏曰： 公自期百姓家给，是以听之。
现代文：大臣们又争论起来，太后下韶说： 安汉公自己提出要以老姓家家都自给自足为期，所以听从了他的意见。
English: The ministers argued again, and the empress dowager said: An Han Gong himself proposed that all families should be self-sufficient for a period of time, so I listened to his opinion.

古文：其令公奉、舍人赏赐皆倍故。
现代文：应该使他的俸禄、私府吏员和赏赐都比原来增加一倍。
English: He should have his salary, staff and rewards doubled.

古文：百姓家给人足，大司徒、大司空以闻。 
现代文：等到老百姓家家丰衣足食了，大司徒、大司空就报告上来。 
English: Wait until the common people are well-fed and well-clothed, and the chief priests and the chief magistrates will report to you.

古文：莽复让不受，而建言宜立诸侯王后及高祖以来功臣子孙，大者封侯，或赐爵关内侯食邑，然后及诸在位，各有第序。
现代文：王莽又辞让没有接受，却建议应该立各位列侯、王爷们的后代和从高祖以来的功臣的子孙，有大功的封为列侯，或者赐封关内侯的爵位和收取赋税的封邑，所有在职的王公大臣，各按等级封赏。
English: Wang Mang did not accept the resignation, but suggested that the princes, the descendants of the princes and the descendants of the meritorious soldiers from the time of Gaozu should be appointed, and those who have made great contributions should be made princes, or the nobility of the Marquis of Guanzhong and the tax-collecting fiefs should be given, and all the princes and ministers in office should be rewarded according to their ranks.

古文：上尊宗庙，增加礼乐；下惠士民鳏寡，恩泽之政无所不施。
现代文：对上尊敬祖宗，增加祭祖时的礼仪和乐队规模；对下施恩惠给士人、平民以及鳏寡者等无依靠的老人，凡是施恩布德的政策没有不实行的。
English: On the one hand, respect for the ancestors, increase the etiquette and the size of the band when the ancestors are sacrificed; on the other hand, grant favors to the helpless old people such as scholars, commoners and widows. All the policies of the benevolent buddha have been implemented.

古文：语在《平纪》。
现代文：这些话记载在《乎帝本纪》裹。
English: These words are recorded in the "Kudihonshoki."

古文：莽既说众庶，又欲专断，知太后厌政，乃风公卿奏言： 往者，吏以功次迁至二千石，及州部所举茂材异等吏，率多不称，宜皆见安汉公。
现代文：王莽在取得了大众的好感之后，又想要专权独断，知道王太后厌弃政务，就暗示王公大臣们上奏章说： 以往的官吏凭着功劳升迁到二千石，以及州部所荐举的优异秀才出身的官吏，多不称职，应该让他们都来拜见安汉公，接受考核。
English: After Wang Mang won the favor of the public, he wanted to have absolute power. Knowing that the empress dowager abhorred government affairs, he hinted that Wang Gong's ministers should write a report saying: The previous officials who were promoted to two thousand koku with merit, as well as the officials recommended by the state department who were born with outstanding talents, are incompetent. They should all come to visit An Han Gong and be evaluated.

古文：又太后不宜亲省小事。 
现代文：再者太后不宜亲自过问细微琐事。 
English: Furthermore, it is not appropriate for the Empress Dowager to personally inquire about minor trifles.

古文：令太后下诏曰： 皇帝幼年，朕且统政，比加元服。
现代文：让王太后下诏书说： 皇帝还年幼，朕暂且执掌朝政，等到皇帝成年加冠为止。
English: Let the empress dowager issue a decree saying: The emperor is still young, I will temporarily take charge of the imperial government until the emperor comes of age and is crowned.

古文：今众事烦碎，朕春秋高，精气不堪，殆非所以安躬体而育养皇帝者也。
现代文：现在许多政务繁杂琐碎，朕年岁已高，精神体力不能胜任，这恐怕不是保养自己的身体从而教育培养皇帝的办法。
English: Now many government affairs are complicated and trivial. I am old and my mental and physical strength are not up to it. I am afraid that this is not the way to maintain my body and educate and train the emperor.

古文：故选忠贤，立四辅，群下劝职，永以康宁。
现代文：所以要选择忠诚贤能的人，设立四辅，使百官都忠于职守，永保国家的安定和平。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to select loyal and capable people, establish four auxiliary departments, make all officials be loyal to their duties, and maintain the stability and peace of the country forever.

古文：孔子曰： 巍巍乎，舜、禹之有天下而不与焉！ 
现代文：孔子说： 多么伟大啊，虞舜、夏禹治理天下，都是委任贤臣以成其功，而不亲身参与其事！
English: Confucius said, "How great it is that both Yu Xi and Xia Yu govern the world by appointing wise men to accomplish their tasks, without personally participating in their work!"

古文：自今以来，惟封爵乃以闻。他事，安汉公、四辅平决。
现代文：从今往后，惟有封爵位的事可以上报，其他事务由安汉公和四辅评定决断。
English: From now on, only the matter of knighthood can be reported, and other matters will be decided by Anhan and the four assistants.

古文：州牧、二千石及茂材吏初除奏事者，辄引入至近署对安汉公，考故官，问新职，以知其称否。 
现代文：州牧、二千石级以及秀才出身的官吏初次授官任职需要禀奏事务的，就引他们到宫殿附近的公署报告安汉公，考察原来的公务，询问新任的职务，以了解他们是否称职。 
English: When officials from the provincial governors, the 2,000-koku class, and those with outstanding talents need to report for their first appointment, they will be taken to the public office near the palace to report to Anhan, inspect the original official duties, and inquire about the newly appointed positions to see if they are qualified.

古文：于是莽人人延问，致密恩意，厚加赠送，其不合指，显奏免之，权与人主侔矣。
现代文：于是王莽一个个地接见询问这些官吏，尽量地表示关心和爱护，多多地赠送礼物，要是不合心意的，就明白地上奏请求免除他的官职，他的权力快和皇帝等同了。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang met and questioned these officials one by one, tried his best to show concern and love, and gave many gifts. If it was not to his liking, he would clearly request to be relieved of his official duties. His power was soon equal to that of the emperor.

古文：莽欲以虚名说太后，白言： 新承前孝哀丁、傅奢侈之后，百姓未赡者多，太后宜且衣缯练，颇损膳，以视天下。 
现代文：王莽打算用虚名取悦太后，启奏说 新承孝哀帝时丁家、傅家奢侈浪费之后，老百姓不得暖饱的很多，太后应该暂时穿着没有花纹的丝织品，稍微减少些山珍海味，以昭示天下。 
English: Wang Mang planned to use a false name to please the empress dowager. The prelude said that after the extravagant waste of the Ding family and the Fu family during the reign of Emperor Xincheng, the common people would not have enough to eat. The empress dowager should temporarily wear silk fabrics without patterns and slightly reduce some mountain and sea delicacies to show the world.

古文：莽因上书，愿出钱百万，献田三十顷，付大司农助给贫民。
现代文：紧接着王莽又上书，愿意拿出银钱一百万，献出田地三十顷，交给大司农救济贫民百姓。
English: Immediately after that, Wang Mang wrote again, saying that he was willing to take out one million silver coins, donate thirty hectares of fields, and hand them over to the chief secretary of farmers for the relief of poor people.

古文：于是公卿皆慕效焉。
现代文：于是王公大臣们都仿效他行事。
English: As a result, the princes' ministers followed his example.

古文：莽师群臣奏言： 陛下春秋尊，久衣重练，减御膳，诚非所以辅精气，育皇帝，安宗庙也。
现代文：王莽带领大臣们上奏说： 陛下您年事已高，长期身穿粗糙的丝绸，减少菜肴，确实不是保养身心健康，教养皇帝，安定国家的办法。
English: Wang Mang led the ministers in a report, saying: Your Majesty, you are very old, you have been wearing coarse silk for a long time, and reducing the number of dishes is really not the way to maintain physical and mental health, educate the emperor, and stabilize the country.

古文：臣莽数叩头省户下，白争未见许。
现代文：臣王莽多次到宫中省部门下磕头，禀奏力求，未蒙允准。
English: The vassal Wang Mang repeatedly went to the provincial department of the imperial court to ask for permission to play the flute, but he was not allowed.

古文：今幸赖陛下德泽，间者风雨时，甘露降，神芝生，蓂荚、朱草、嘉禾、休征同时并至。
现代文：现在依赖陛下的恩德，近来风调雨顺，天降甘露，灵芝出现，黄荚、朱草、嘉禾和祥瑞之兆一起到来。
English: Now relying on His Majesty's benevolence, the weather has recently been good, the sky has fallen, the nectar has sprouted, the reishi has appeared, the astragalus, the cinnamon, the jiahe and the auspicious signs have come together.

古文：臣莽等不胜大愿，愿陛下爱精休神，阔略思虑，遵帝王之常服，复太官之法膳，使臣子各得尽欢心，备共养。
现代文：臣王莽等人最大的愿望，就是希望陛下爱惜精力，休养心神，开阔心胸，减少思虑，穿着帝王常的服饰，恢复太官规定的帝王通常的膳食，让臣子们都能尽到对您的爱戴之心，奉上奉养的物品。
English: The greatest wish of Wang Mang's vassals and others is to hope that His Majesty will spare his energy, rest his mind, open his heart, reduce his worries, wear the emperor's usual clothes, and resume the emperor's usual meal prescribed by the eunuch, so that his vassals can do their best to love you, and offer you the items of support.

古文：惟哀省察！ 
现代文：希望您怜悯体谅！ 
English: I hope you will have mercy and understanding!

古文：莽又令太后下诏曰： 盖闻母后之义，思不出乎门阈。
现代文：王莽又让王太后下韶书说： 听说皇太后的准则，思想活动不超出宫门的界限。
English: Wang Mang also asked the empress dowager to sign a document saying: I heard that the empress dowager's principle is that ideological activities do not exceed the boundaries of the palace gates.

古文：国不蒙佑，皇帝年在襁褓，未任亲政，战战兢兢，惧于宗庙之不安。
现代文：国家没得到上天的保佑，皇帝年纪还小，不能亲自执政，我担惊受怕，小心谨慎，生怕国家不得安宁。
English: The country has not been blessed by heaven, the emperor is still young and cannot govern himself, I am afraid and cautious, afraid that the country will not be peaceful.

古文：国家之大纲，微朕孰当统之？
现代文：国家的最高权力，没有朕谁来执掌呢？
English: Without me, who will hold the supreme power of the country?

古文：是以孔子见南子，周公居摄，盖权时也。
现代文：因此孔子晋见南子，周公代掌朝政，是根据当时形势的需要。
English: Therefore, Confucius's appointment of Nanzi and Zhou Gongde's assumption of the leadership of the dynasty was based on the needs of the situation at the time.

古文：勤身极思，忧劳未绥，故国奢则视之以俭，矫枉者过其正，而朕不身帅，将谓天下何！
现代文：朕劳累身体，费尽心思，忧虑辛苦，不得安心，所以当天下崇尚奢侈时就用俭朴的作风来昭示全国，纠正偏差常需超过应有的限度，如果朕不亲自带头，天下臣民们该怎么办呢！
English: I am tired, exhausted, worried, and anxious, so when the world advocates luxury, I will use a frugal style to show the whole country that correcting deviations often requires more than the proper limit. If I do not personally take the lead, what should the world's subjects do?

古文：夙夜梦想，五谷丰熟，百姓家给，比皇帝加元服，委政而授焉。
现代文：朕朝夕都梦想着粮食丰收，老百姓家家能丰衣足食，等到皇帝成年以后，把朝政交给他。
English: Every morning and evening, I dream of a bumper grain harvest, the people can have enough food and clothing, and when the emperor comes of age, I will hand over the imperial government to him.

古文：今诚未皇于轻靡而备味，庶几与百僚有成，其勖之哉！ 
现代文：现在确实无暇享用轻柔的衣物和美味的食品，希望和百官们有所成就，应当勉励啊！ 
English: Now, indeed, there is no time to enjoy soft clothing and delicious food, and it is hoped that there will be some achievements with the dignitaries, and they should be encouraged!

古文：每有水旱，莽辄素食，左右以白。
现代文：每逢发生了水旱灾害，王莽总是衹吃蔬菜，左右侍从把情况报告给王太后。
English: Whenever there was a drought, Wang Mang always ate vegetables, and his attendants reported the situation to the empress dowager.

古文：太后遣使者诏莽曰： 闻公菜食，忧民深矣。
现代文：王太后派遣使者下诏给王莽说： 听说您饭食衹吃蔬菜，担忧人民的疾苦太切啦。
English: The empress dowager sent an envoy to Wang Mang to say: I heard that you don't eat vegetables at meals, and you are too worried about the people's suffering.

古文：今秋幸熟，公勤于职，以时食肉，爱身为国。 
现代文：今年庄稼的收成幸而较丰足，您这么勤奋尽职，应当按时吃些肉食，为了国家大计请您爱护身体。 
English: The harvest of this year's crops is fortunate and plentiful. You are so diligent and conscientious, you should eat some meat on time. For the sake of the national plan, please take care of your body.

古文：莽念中国已平，唯四夷未有异，乃遣使者赍黄金、币、帛，重赂匈奴单于，使上书言： 闻中国讥二名，故名囊知牙斯今更名知，慕从圣制。 
现代文：王莽考虑到中原已经安定，衹有四方夷族没有多大变化，就派遣使者携带黄金和财物，丰厚地赠送匈奴单于，让他上书说： 听说中原讥笑双名，我原名囊知牙斯，现在改名知，以表示仰慕遵从中原的制度。 
English: Wang Mang took into account that the Central Plains had already stabilized and that there was not much change among the barbarians in the four directions, so he sent an envoy to bring gold and wealth, generously presented the Xiongnu to Shanyu, and asked him to write: I heard that the Central Plains mocked the double name. My original name was Cang Zhi Ya Si, and now I changed my name to Zhi, to express my admiration for the system of the Central Plains.

古文：又遣王昭君女须卜居次入待。
现代文：又派遣王昭君的女儿须居次来侍奉王太后。
English: He also sent Wang Zhaojun's daughter Su Lian to serve the empress dowager.

古文：所以诳耀媚事太后，下至旁侧长御，方故万端。
现代文：为了欺骗、迷惑和向王太后献媚，直到她身边的随从宦官、侍女，王莽的手段竟是如此的变化多端。
English: In order to deceive, confuse and flatter the Queen Mother, right down to her entourage of eunuchs and ladies-in-waiting, Wang Mang's methods were so versatile.

古文：莽既尊重，欲以女配帝为皇后，以固其权，奏言： 皇帝即位三年，长秋宫未建，液廷媵未充。
现代文：王莽在位高权重之后，想把女儿给平帝作皇后，以便巩固他的权力，就上奏说： 皇上登基三年了，尚没有立皇后，妃妾没纳足。
English: After Wang Mang, who held a high position during his reign, wanted to make his daughter the empress of the Ping Emperor in order to consolidate his power, he wrote: The emperor has been on the throne for three years, but he has not yet appointed a queen, and he has not been able to find a concubine.

古文：乃者，国家之难，本从亡嗣，配取不正。
现代文：以往国家的危难，本起因于没有继承人，婚娶不当。
English: In the past, the country's peril was caused by the lack of an heir and improper marriage.

古文：请考论《五经》，定取礼，正十二女之义，以广继嗣。
现代文：请察考运用《五经》的理论，制定嫁娶礼仪、端正十二女的原则，以期较多生育继承人。
English: Please study and apply the theory of the "Five Classics" to formulate the principles of marriage etiquette and proper twelve daughters, with a view to having more heirs.

古文：博采二王后及周公、孔子世列侯在长安者適子女。 
现代文：广泛选取商、周王族的后代和周公、孔子时代在长安的列侯的正妻所生的后人许配给子女。 
English: An extensive selection of merchants, descendants of the Zhou royal family and descendants born to the legitimate wife of Zhou Gong, a feudal lord in Chang'an during the Confucius era, were allowed to have children.

古文：事下有司，上众女名，王氏女多在选中者。
现代文：这件事下交主管官吏，上报众多女子的名单，王氏家族的女儿有许多在候选名单中。
English: The matter was handed over to the competent officials, and a list of many women was reported. Many daughters of the Wang family were on the candidate list.

古文：莽恐其与已女争，即上言： 身亡德，子材下，不宜与众女并采。 
现代文：王莽恐怕她们和自己的女儿竞争，就上奏书说： 臣自身没有德行，女儿相貌下等，不宜与众女子同时被选。 
English: Wang Mang was afraid that they would compete with his own daughters, so he wrote a report saying: "The minister himself has no virtue, his daughters are inferior in appearance, and it is not appropriate to be selected at the same time as all the women."

古文：太后以为至诚，乃下诏曰： 王氏女，朕之外家，其勿采。 
现代文：王太后认为他是出于至诚之意，就下韶书说： 王氏家族的女儿，是朕的娘家人，不要选她们。 
English: The empress dowager thought he was acting out of sincerity, so she wrote a letter saying: The daughters of the Wang family are my daughters, do not choose them.

古文：庶民、诸生、郎吏以上守阙上书者日千余人，公卿大夫或诣廷中，或伏省户下，咸言： 明诏圣德巍巍如彼，安汉公盛勋堂堂若此，今当立后，独奈何废公女？
现代文：平民、众儒生、郎官以上守候在宫门前上书的每天有一千多人，王公大臣和大夫们有的到朝堂上，有的跪在省部门前，都说： 诏令所表现出来的圣明德行是那样崇高，安汉公的伟大功勋是这样昭明，而今在要选立皇后的时候，怎么偏偏要排除安汉公的女儿呢？
English: Every day, more than a thousand people, including commoners, Confucianists, and officials above the rank of vassal, waited in front of the palace gate to submit their letters. Some ministers and doctors came to the imperial court, while others knelt in front of the provincial departments. They all said, "The moral conduct of Emperor Ming shown by the edict is so sublime, and the great merits of Emperor Anhan are so obvious. But now, when it is time to elect a queen, why should Emperor Anhan's daughter be excluded?

古文：天下安所归命！愿得公女为天下母。 
现代文：全国人民向何处去呢！我们希望安汉公的女儿做国母。 
English: Where are the people of the whole country going? We want Prince Anhan's daughter to be the mother of the nation.

古文：莽遣长安以下分部晓止公卿及诸生，而上书者愈甚。
现代文：王莽派遣长史以下的属官分批晓谕劝阻王公大臣和儒生们，可是上书要求的人更多。
English: Wang Mang dispatched subordinate officials below Long Shi to issue orders in batches to dissuade Wang Gongjin and Confucian scholars, but more people submitted requests.

古文：太后不得已，听公卿采莽女。
现代文：太后迫不得已，衹得听凭王公大臣们选取王莽的女儿。
English: The empress dowager had no choice but to let the prince's ministers choose Wang Mang's daughter.

古文：莽复自白： 宜博选众女。 
现代文：王莽又自己表白： 应当广泛地在众多的女子中挑选。 
English: Wang Mang also confessed: It should be widely selected among the many women.

古文：公卿争曰： 不宜采诸女以贰正统。 莽白： 愿见女。 
现代文：王公大臣们争辩说： 不宜在众女子中选取皇后乱了正统，皇后之位是属于安漠公的女儿的。 王莽表示： 愿意让女儿出来相见。 
English: Wang Mugu's ministers argued: It is not appropriate to choose a queen from among all the women, it is against orthodoxy, and the position of queen belongs to the daughter of Prince Anam. Wang Mugu said: I am willing to let my daughter come out to meet.

古文：太后遣长乐少府、宗正、尚书令纳采见女，还奏言： 公女渐渍德化，有窈窕之容，宜承天序，奉祭祀。 
现代文：王太后派遣长乐宫少府、宗正、尚书令去送彩礼相亲，回来禀奏道： 安漠公的女儿长期受到道德和品行的教育，有美丽的容貌，能够延续皇族，接掌祭祀。 
English: The empress dowager sent Changle Palace's Shofu, Zongzheng, and Shang Shuling to attend the betrothal ceremony. When they returned, they sang: Prince An's daughter has long been educated in morality and ethics, has a beautiful face, can continue the royal family, and will receive the palm offering.

古文：有诏遣大司徒、大司空策告宗庙，杂加卜筮，皆曰： 兆遇金水王相，封遇父母得位，所谓 康强 之占， 逢吉 之符也。 
现代文：另外下韶派遣大司徒、大司空到宗庙裹祷告，用多种方法来占卜、预测吉凶，都说： 征兆遇着金旺水相，因为金生水，卦的意思是泰卦，预示着父母得位，这就是所谓 康乐强健 的预兆， 子孙大吉，的象征。 
English: In addition, the Lower Yangtze dispatched the Grand Scholar and the Grand Scholar Empty to the ancestral temple to wrap themselves in prayer, using a variety of methods to divine and predict good and bad fortune, saying: The omen meets the golden water phase, because the golden water, the gou means the Thai gou, indicates that the parents are in the right place, which is the so-called omen of healthy and strong, the symbol of the descendants of Dagi.

古文：信乡侯佟上言： 《春秋》，天子将娶于纪，则褒纪子称侯，安汉公国未称古制。
现代文：信丝岖型佟上奏： 《春秋》上记载，天子将要从钮国娶王后，就把纬国国君从子爵升为侯爵，安逸公的封国不符合古代的制度。 
English: It is recorded in "Spring and Autumn" that when the Son of Heaven was about to marry a queen from the country of Niu, he elevated the prince of the country of Wei from a viscount to a marquis. The fief of the prince of Anyi did not conform to the ancient system.

古文：事下有司，皆曰： 古者天子封后父百里，尊而不臣，以重宗庙，孝之至也。
现代文：把这件事交主管官吏讨论，他们都说： 古时候天子封赏王后的父亲纵横各一百里的土地，尊敬他而不把他作为臣子看待，藉此表示重视宗庙，这是至孝。
English: When the matter was brought to the officials in charge for discussion, they all said: In ancient times, the heavenly son rewarded the queen's father with a hundred-mile-long and hundred-mile-wide land, respected him, and did not regard him as a vassal, thereby expressing the importance of the ancestral temple. This is filial piety.

古文：佟言应礼，可许。
现代文：刘佟的话合乎礼制，可以批准。
English: Liu Ye's words are in line with etiquette and can be approved.

古文：请以新野田二万五千六百顷益封莽，满百里。 
现代文：请把新野县的田地二万五千六百顷加封给王莽，补足纵横各一百里。 
English: Please give Wang Mang the additional 25,600 hectares of farmland in Shinno County, adding 100 li in length and width.

古文：莽谢曰： 臣莽子女诚不足以配至尊，复听众议，益封臣莽。
现代文：王菱推辞说： 臣王菱的女儿实在配不上最尊贵的君主，现在又听从大家的意见，加封土地给臣。
English: Wang Ling said, "The daughter of the vassal Wang Ling is really not worthy of the most honorable monarch, and now she is listening to everyone's opinion and adding land to the vassal.

古文：伏自惟念，得托肺腑，获爵士，如使子女诚能奉称圣德，臣莽国邑足以共朝贡，不须复加益地之宠。愿归所益。 
现代文：臣自己想，能够列为皇上的近亲，获得爵位和土地，假如说女儿真能配上圣上的品德，臣封地的赋税足够供给朝见时进献贡品，不必再给予增加封地。臣愿意归还所增加的封地。 
English: The vassal himself thought that he could be classified as a close relative of the emperor and receive a title and land. If the daughter could really match the sacred character, the taxation of the vassal fief would be sufficient to supply the tribute when visiting the court, and there would be no need to increase the fief. The vassal was willing to return the increased fief.

古文：太后许之。
现代文：王太后答应了他。
English: The Queen Mother agreed.

古文：有司奏： 故事，聘皇后黄金二万斤，为钱二万万。 
现代文：主管官吏上奏说 按照惯例，聘皇后的彩礼是黄金二万斤，合银钱二万万。 
English: The official in charge reported that, in accordance with the usual practice, the empress's bride price was 20,000 kilos of gold and up to 20,000,000 silver coins.

古文：莽深辞让，受四千万，而以其三千三百万予十一媵家。
现代文：王莽一再推辞，接受了四千万，却把其中的三千三百万给了十一户陪女儿出嫁的人家。
English: Wang Mang repeatedly declined, accepted forty million, but gave thirty-three million of it to the eleven families who accompanied his daughter to the wedding.

古文：群臣复言： 今皇后受骋，逾群妾亡几。 
现代文：臣僚们又说： 而今皇后接受的聘礼，不比各位姬妾多多少。 
English: The courtiers added: "Nowadays, the empress receives no more than your concubines.

古文：有诏，复益二千三百万，合为三千万。
现代文：王太后又下韶令，再增加聘礼二千三百万，合成三千万。
English: The empress dowager issued another imperial edict, increasing the bride price by 23 million yuan to 30 million yuan.

古文：莽复以其千万分予九族贫者。
现代文：王菱又把其中的一千万分给了九族中的贫苦人家。
English: Wang Ling also gave ten million of it to the poor people of the nine tribes.

古文：陈崇时为大司徒司直，与张敞孙竦相善。
现代文：陈崇这时任大司徒司直，和张敞的孙子张竦关系友好。
English: At that time, Chen Chong was the head of the Grand Master, and he had a friendly relationship with Zhang Zhang, the grandson of Zhang Zhang.

古文：竦者博通士，为崇草奏，称莽功德，崇奏之，曰：
现代文：张竦是博学多才的读书人，他替陈崇起草了一份奏章，称颂王莽的功德，陈崇呈上奏章，上写道：
English: Zhang Qian was an erudite and multi-talented reader. He drafted a musical composition for Chen Chong, praising Wang Mang's merits. Chen Chong presented the musical composition, writing:

古文：窃见安汉公自初束脩，值世俗隆奢丽之时，蒙两宫厚骨肉之宠，被诸父赫赫之光，财饶势足，亡所牾意，然而折节行仁，克心履礼，拂世矫俗，确然特立；恶衣恶食，陋车驽马，妃匹无二，闺门之内，孝友之德，众莫不闻；清静乐道，温良下士，惠于故旧，笃于师友。
现代文：臣看到安汉公自从开始做官起值社会风气崇尚奢华的时候，他承蒙成帝和太后厚待至亲的恩宠，蒙受伯父、叔父们显赫的荣光，家财丰饶，权势很大，没有人能违背他的心意，然而他却能降低身份，推行仁爱，约束私欲，遵行礼制，违背世风，矫正习俗，刚毅地特立独行；他穿的是粗制的衣服，吃的是粗劣的饭莱，坐的是简陋的车子，驾车用的是劣马，配偶没有第二人，在家门之内，孝敬长辈、友爱同辈的美德。大家没有不知道的；他淡泊名利，以守道为乐，温和善良，谦恭地对待士人，给老朋友以恩惠照顾，对老师、朋友非常忠厚。
English: The courtier saw that from the time Prince Anhan began to be an official, the social ethos began to advocate luxury. He was favored by Emperor Cheng and the empress dowager to treat his relatives well. He was honored by his uncles and uncles. His family was rich and powerful. No one could go against his wishes. However, he was able to lower his status, promote benevolence, restrain selfish desires, follow etiquette, go against the world, correct customs, and stand out boldly. He wore coarse clothes, ate poor meals, rode a simple car, drove a bad horse, and had no second spouse. Within the family, he was filial

古文：孔子曰： 未若贫而乐，富而好礼 ，公之谓矣。
现代文：孔子说过 不如贫穷而快乐，富有而爱好礼仪 ，这称赞的就是安漠公啊。
English: Confucius said that it is better to be poor and happy than to be rich and polite. This is the praise of Anpu Gong.

古文：及为侍中，故定陵侯淳于长有大逆罪，公不敢私，建白诛讨。
现代文：到他做了侍中，原定陵侯淳于长犯了大逆不道之罪，安汉公不敢偏爱私亲，禀奏建议给予诛讨。
English: When he became an attendant, it was originally decided that Ling Hou Chun Yu Chang had committed the crime of high treason. An Han Gong did not dare to favor a close relative, so he proposed to give him a reprimand.

古文：周公诛管、蔡，季子鸩叔牙，公之谓矣。
现代文：周公诛杀管叔、流放蔡叔，季子用鸩酒毒死叔牙，安漠公就是这样的人啊。
English: Zhou Gong killed Uncle Guan, exiled Uncle Cai, Ji Zi poisoned his uncle's tooth with wine, An Bao Gong is such a person.

古文：是以孝成皇帝命公大司马，委以国统。
现代文：因此孝成皇帝任命安汉公为大司马，把国家的大权委托给他。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaocheng appointed Anhan as the grand steward and entrusted him with the power of the state.

古文：孝哀即位，高昌侯董宏希指求美，造作二统，公手劾之，以定大纲。
现代文：孝哀帝登基，高昌侯董宏迎合皇上的意旨，追求名位，想让丁姬做皇太后，弄成了两个皇位系统，安汉公亲自弹劾他，从而确定了朝纲。
English: Emperor Xiao Yan ascended to the throne, Gaochang Hou Donghong pandered to the emperor's will, pursued a prestigious position, and wanted to make Ding Ji the empress dowager, resulting in two imperial systems. An Han Gong personally impeached him, thus determining the imperial system.

古文：建白定陶太后不宜在乘舆幄坐，以明国体。
现代文：提议定陶国太后不宜在皇太后的帷幕裹就座，从而确定了朝廷的尊卑大体。
English: It was proposed that the Dowager Empress of the State of Tao should not be seated behind the curtain of the Empress Dowager, thus determining the overall hierarchy of the Imperial Court.

古文：《诗》曰 柔亦不茹，刚亦不吐，不侮鳏寡，不畏强圉 ，公之谓矣。
现代文：《诗经》上说 不吃软，也不怕硬，不欺侮鳏寡，不怕强硬的对手 ，称赞的就是安汉公啊。
English: In the "Song of Songs," it is said that he does not eat soft, nor is he afraid of hard, does not bully widows and widowers, and is not afraid of tough opponents. It is Anhan who is praised.

古文：深执谦退，推诚让位。
现代文：他深怀着谦让的态度，诚心诚意地推让大司马的职位。
English: With a deep sense of humility, he wholeheartedly conceded the position of chief secretary.

古文：定陶太后欲立僣号，惮彼面剌幄坐之义，佞惑之雄，朱博之畴，惩此长、宏手劾之事，上下一心，谗贼交乱，诡辟制度，遂成篡号，斥逐仁贤，诛残戚属，而公被胥、原之诉，远去就国，朝政崩坏，纲纪废驰，危亡之祸，不隧如发。
现代文：定陶国太后想要建立超出名分的称号，害怕他当面指责她不该在皇太后的帷幕裹坐，于是用花言巧语迷惑欺骗的朱博之流，对淳于长、董宏遭他亲手弹劾的往事引以为戒，他们上下一心，又是诬陷别人，又是玩弄阴谋诡计，违逆、破坏制度，于是成就了窃取的名号；排斥驱逐仁人贤士，杀戮伤害皇室外戚，安汉公因而蒙受像伍子胥、屈原那样的诽谤，远离朝廷回到封国，朝廷政治混乱，法制败坏，危亡的灾祸，有如千钩一发。
English: The Dowager Empress Dingtao wanted to establish a title beyond her official title. She was afraid that he would accuse her in person that she should not sit behind the curtain of the empress dowager. Therefore, he used rhetoric to deceive the deceitful Zhu Bo and others, and warned against the past events of Chun Yu Chang and Dong Hong being impeached by his own hand. They set out with one heart, framed others, played with intrigues and tricks, violated the system, and destroyed the system, thus achieving the stolen name; ostracized and expelled benevolent sages, killed and harmed relatives outside the imperial court. Therefore, An Han Gong suffered slander like Wu Z

古文：《诗》云 人之云亡，邦国殄顇， 公之谓矣。
现代文：《诗经》上说 贤人奔亡而留不住，国家都要受害 ，称赞的就是安汉公啊。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that the wise men run away and cannot stay, and the country will suffer. It is Anhan who is praised.

古文：当此之时，官亡储主，董贤据重，加以傅氏有女之援，皆自知得罪天下，结仇中山，则必同忧，断金相翼，借假遗诏，频用赏诛，先除所惮，急引所附，遂诬往冤，更惩远属，事势张见，其不难矣！
现代文：正当这个时候，宫中没有皇位继承人，董贤窃据重要权位，加上傅氏家族有女儿的支持，他们都自知得罪了天下人，跟中山王结下了仇恨，就一定会共同忧患，从而同心合力，互相帮助，凭藉假托遣韶，频繁运用赏罚大权，首先铲除所害怕的人，迅速启用依附他们的人，于是诬陷往日的仇家，再征召皇室中疏远的亲属，事情发展的态势很明白，这是不难做到的。
English: Just at this time, there was no heir to the throne in the palace, and Dong Xian and others had stolen important positions of power, and the Fu family had the support of their daughter. They all knew that they had offended the people of the world and had formed a hatred with Zhongshan Wang. They would certainly share the same sorrows, so they would work together and help each other. With the help of false recruitment and dismissal, they frequently used the power of reward and punishment. First of all, they eliminated the people they feared, and quickly used the people who depended on them. Then they framed the enemies of the past, and then conscripted the estranged relatives in the royal family. The situation of

古文：赖公方入，即时退贤，及其党亲。
现代文：多亏安汉公立刻入朝，及时驱退董贤，以及他的党羽和亲信。
English: Thanks to An Han's immediate entry into the imperial court, he was able to expel Dong Xian and his followers and cronies in time.

古文：当此之时，公远独见之明，奋亡前之威，盱衡厉色，振扬武怒，乘其未坚，厌其未发，震起机动，敌人摧折，虽有贲、育不及持剌，虽有樗里不及回知，虽有鬼谷不及造次，是故董贤丧其魂魄，遂自绞杀。
现代文：正是这个时候，安汉公运用他独到的智慧，奋起无人敢挡的神威，扬眉举目，露出严厉的神色，振奋发扬刚猛的气势，趁着他们立足未稳，在他们尚未发动之前就将他们压制住了，如霹雷响起，似弩机扳动，敌人被打垮了，就是有孟贲、夏育这些勇士也来不及持戈而刺，就是有号称 智囊 的樗里子也未能料，就是有鬼谷子也来不及对付，因此董贤丧魂落魄，就自己上吊死了。
English: It was at this time that An Han, using his unique wisdom, rose up with an unstoppable majesty, raised his eyebrows, revealed a stern look, roused himself to carry out a fierce momentum, took advantage of their unstable footing, and suppressed them before they had even started. Like thunder and lightning, like the trigger of a hammer, the enemy was defeated. Even if there are Meng Wei and Xia Yu, these warriors can not hold the sword and stab, even if there is a so-called "brain," they can not expect, even if there is a ghost, they can not deal with it. Therefore, Dong Xian lost his soul and hanged himself.

古文：人不还踵，日不移晷，霍然四除，更为宁朝。
现代文：人们还没有来得及转动脚跟，身影还没有移动，天下就已经清平，朝廷已经安定。
English: People have not yet had time to turn their heels, figures have not yet moved, the world has been peaceful, and the imperial court has been stable.

古文：非陛下莫引立公，非公莫克此祸。
现代文：若不是陛下就无人能启用安汉公，若不是安汉公就没人能制止这场灾祸。
English: If it were not for Your Majesty, no one would have been able to activate Anhan, and if it were not for Anhan, no one would have been able to stop this disaster.

古文：《诗》云 惟师尚父，时惟鹰扬，亮彼武王， 孔子曰 敏则有功， 公之谓矣。
现代文：《诗经》上说 衹有太师堂父太公吕望，当时武毅像雄鹰那样飞扬，辅助武王灭商 ，孔子说 应事迅疾，才能成功 ，这称赞的就是安汉公啊。
English: "The Book of Poetry" said that there was a great master's cousin, the great emperor Lvang. At that time, Wu Yi flew like an eagle and assisted King Wu to exterminate merchants. Confucius said that things should be done quickly in order to succeed. This praise is An Han Gong.

古文：于是公乃白内故泗水相丰、斄令邯，与大司徒光、车骑将军舜建定社稷，奉节东迎，皆以功德受封益土，为国名臣。
现代文：于是安汉公就建议由原泗水国丞相甄丰、牦县县令甄邯，和大司徒孔光、车骑将军王舜共商社稷大计，捧着朝廷的符节去东方迎接新皇帝，他们都凭着功勋和德能而接受封爵，增加封地，成为国家的著名臣子。
English: Therefore, Prince Anhan suggested that Zhenfeng, the former prime minister of Yishui Province, Zhenya, the governor of Yixian County, and Kongguang, the great scholar, and Wang Yao, the cavalry general, should make a grand plan to go to the East to meet the new emperor, holding the imperial symbols. They all received knighthoods based on their merits and abilities, increased their fiefs, and became famous courtiers of the country.

古文：《书》曰 知人则哲 ，公之谓也。
现代文：《书经》上说 能识别人才就是智慧 ，这称赞的就是安汉公啊。
English: "The Book" says that to be able to recognize others is wisdom, and this is praised by Anhan.

古文：公卿咸叹公德，同盛公勋，皆以周公为比，宜赐号安汉公，益封二县，公皆不受。
现代文：王公大臣们都赞叹安汉公的德行，共同盛誉宣汉公的功勋，都把他和周公相媲美，应当赏赐封号安汉公，增加两个县的封地，安汉公都不接受。
English: Wang Gong's ministers all praised An Han Gong's moral conduct, and jointly extolled the merits of An Han Gong. They all compared him to Zhou Gong. They should award him the title of An Han Gong and increase the fiefs of two counties, but An Han Gong did not accept it.

古文：传曰申包胥不受存楚之报，晏平仲不受辅齐之封，孔子曰 能以礼让为国乎何有 ，公之谓也。
现代文：古书上说申包胥不接受保存楚厘的报酬，垒芒健不接受辅佐齐基公的封赏，孔子说 能够用识礼谦让的态度治理国家，还会有什么困难的呢 ，称赞的就是安漠公啊。
English: The ancient books say that Shen Baojun did not accept the reward for preserving Chuli, that He Mangjian did not accept the reward for assisting Qiqi, and that Confucius said that if you can govern the country with an attitude of courtesy and modesty, what other difficulties will there be?

古文：将为皇帝定立妃后，有司上名，公女为首，公深辞让，迫不得已然后受诏。
现代文：将要给皇帝选定后妃，主管部门送上名册，安漠公的女儿列在首位，安漠公一再推辞，迫不得已才接受了诏令。
English: The empress dowager was to be selected for the emperor, and the competent authorities sent a list of names. Prince Anam's daughter was listed first. Prince Anam repeatedly declined, and was forced to accept the imperial edict.

古文：父子之亲天性自然，欲其荣贵甚于为身，皇后之尊侔于天子，当时之会千载希有，然而公惟国家之统，揖大福之恩，事事谦退，动而固辞。
现代文：父亲和子女的亲情，是人先天具备的秉性，是自然产生的，想要子女享受荣华富贵的心情比对自己还迫切，皇后地位之尊贵和天子等同，当时的机会千载难逢，可是安汉公想到的是国家的大统，辞谢不接受大福的恩宠，他事事谦恭退让，动不动就坚决推辞。
English: The affection between a father and his children is an innate disposition that people have, and it is naturally generated. The desire for children to enjoy glory and wealth is more urgent than for oneself. The dignity of the queen's position is equal to that of the son of heaven. At that time, the opportunity was rare. However, An Han Gong thought of the country's great unity. He refused to accept the grace of the Great Blessing. He humbly conceded everything and resolutely refused at every turn.

古文：《书》曰 舜让于德不嗣， 公之谓矣。
现代文：《书经》上说 舜帝让位给大禹，认为自己德行浅薄，不足以继承尧帝的事业， 称赞的就是安汉公啊。
English: "The Book" said that Emperor Xuan gave way to Dayu, and thought that his virtue was shallow and not enough to inherit the cause of Emperor Xuan. It was Anhan who praised him.

古文：自公受策，以至于今，亹亹翼翼，日新其德，增修雅素以命下国，逡俭隆约以矫世俗，割财损家以帅群下，弥躬执乎以逮公卿，教子尊学以隆国化。
现代文：自从安漠公接受策命一直到现在，勤勤勉勉，恭恭敬敬，德行天天进步；他进一步改善自己平素的操行，用来命令各王侯封国；保持俭朴、崇尚节约，用来矫正社会风气；施舍钱财、减少家产，作群臣的表率；主持公道，遍及王公大臣；教育子女重视学习，用以振兴国家的教化。
English: From the time he received his mission to the present, he has been diligent and diligent, respectful and respectful, and his virtue has been improving day by day. He further improved his ordinary behavior, used to order the princes to seize the country; maintained frugality and advocated economy, used to correct the social ethos; gave away money and reduced family property, and set an example for the ministers; presided over justice, throughout the princes and ministers; educated his children to value learning, and used to revitalize the country's enlightenment.

古文：僮奴衣布，马不秣谷，食饮之用，不过凡庶。
现代文：他的童仆穿麻布衣服，喂马不用谷物，饮食的费用，不超过平民百姓。
English: His boy servants wear sackcloth, his horses are fed without grain, and the cost of food does not exceed that of the common people.

古文：《诗》云 温温恭人，如集于木 ，孔子曰：食无求饱，居无求安， 公之谓矣。
现代文：《诗经》上说 温和恭谨的人，就像鸟儿栖息在树上 ，孔子说 吃饭不求过饱，居住不求安逸 ，称赞的就是安汉公啊。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that a gentle and respectful person is like a bird perched on a tree, and Confucius said, "Don't eat too much and don't live in comfort." It is Anhan who is praised.

古文：克身自约，籴食逮给，物物卬市，日阕亡储。
现代文：克制、约束自己，零星购买食物，仅够食用，各种物品都靠市场供应，当天用完，从不蓄积。
English: Self-restraint and restraint, buying food sporadically, only enough to eat, all kinds of goods are supplied by the market, used up on the same day, never accumulate.

古文：又上书归孝哀皇帝所益封邑，入钱献田，殚尽旧业，为众倡始。
现代文：又上奏书归还孝哀皇帝所增加的封邑，交纳金钱、捐献田地，耗尽原来的家业，充当首倡者。
English: He also submitted a report to return the fiefdoms added by Emperor Xiao Ai, paid money, donated fields, exhausted the original family business, and acted as the initiator.

古文：于是小大乡和，承风从化，外则王公列侯，内则帷幄侍御，翕然同时，各竭所有，或入金钱，或献田亩，以振贫穷，收赡不足者。
现代文：于是各阶层纷纷响应，接受影响，跟着效法，外面的王公列侯，裹面的宫禁侍从，协调一致，各人竭尽所有，有的交纳金钱，有的捐献田地，赈济穷人，收养缺衣少食的人。
English: As a result, people from all walks of life responded, accepted the influence, and followed the example. Princes and lords outside the palace, and courtiers who were forbidden to attend the palace, coordinated with each other. Everyone did their best, some paid money, some donated fields, helped the poor, and adopted people who lacked food and clothing.

古文：昔令尹子文朝不及夕，鲁公仪子不菇园葵，公之谓矣。
现代文：从前楚国的令尹子文因为白毁其家以解楚国的危难，以致顾得上早餐顾不上晚饭，鲁国丞相公仪子不吃自己园裹的葵菜，为的是不夺园工之利，安漠公就是这样的人啊。
English: Once upon a time, the ruler of Chu, Yin Ziwen, destroyed his home for nothing in order to solve the crisis in Chu, so much so that he couldn't afford breakfast or dinner. The prime minister of the state of Lu, Gong Yi Zi, wouldn't eat the sunflower greens from his own garden, so as not to take advantage of the gardeners. This is the kind of person that Anmo Gong is.

古文：开门延士，下及白屋，娄省朝政，综管众治，亲见牧守以下，考迹雅素，审知白黑。
现代文：敞开大门接待有学问的人，直到住在茅屋裹的普通寒士，不断精兵简政，综合管理许多政务，亲自接见州牧、郡守以下的官员，考核查实他们平素的操守德行，周密查明善恶功过。
English: Open the door to receive learned people, until ordinary cold people living in thatched huts, constantly streamline the army and simplify the government, comprehensively manage many government affairs, personally receive officials below the state pastor and county governor, examine and verify their ordinary moral conduct, and carefully identify good and evil deeds.

古文：《诗》云 夙夜匪解，以事一人 ，《易》曰 终日乾乾，夕惕若厉 ，公之谓矣。
现代文：《诗经》上说 朝夕不懈，服事天子 ，《易经》上说 整天自强不息，夜晚仍然担惊受怕，以防发生灾祸 ，安汉公就是这样的人啊。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that he works tirelessly in the morning and evening to serve the Son of Heaven, and "The Book of Changes" says that he is self-reliant all day long, but at night he is still afraid in case of disaster. An Han Gong is such a person.

古文：比三世为三公，再奉送大行，秉冢宰职，填安国家，四海辐凑，靡不得所。
现代文：连续三代都做三公，两次安葬大行皂帝，总揽朝政，安定国家，朝野上下聚集一起，像辐条集中到车轴上一样，各得其所。
English: Three generations in a row have made three kings, two times buried the great emperor of soap, the overall policy of the dynasty, the stability of the country, the up and down gathered together, like the spokes concentrated on the axle, each in its place.

古文：《书》曰： 纳于大麓，列风雷雨不迷 ，公之谓矣。
现代文：《书经》上说 把他安排在万机之政的职位上，即使遇上政治上的风雨雷电也不会迷惑 ，这称赞的就是安汉公啊。
English: "The Book" said that placing him in the position of the government of all machines, even in the event of political storms and lightning will not be confused, this is praised by Anhan.

古文：此皆上世之所鲜，禹、稷之所难，而公包其终始，一以贯之，可谓备矣！
现代文：上述这些都是先代所少有，夏禹、后稷所难能的，可是安汉公善始善终，此精神贯穿始终，可以称得上完美啦！
English: All of the above are rare for the previous generation, and difficult for Xia Yu and Hou Yi, but Anhan Gongsun is good from beginning to end, and this spirit runs through and through, and can be called perfect!

古文：是以三年之间，化行如神，嘉瑞叠累，岂非陛下知人之效，得贤之致哉！
现代文：因此，三年的时间，教化流行如有神灵，吉祥的征兆层层累累，难道这不是陛下能够识别人才的功效，得到贤能辅佐的结果吗？
English: Therefore, after three years of time, the enlightenment and popularization is like a god, and the auspicious signs are piled up. Isn't this the result of His Majesty's ability to recognize the effect of others' talents and get the assistance of talents?

古文：故非独君之受命也，臣之生亦不虚矣。
现代文：所以追不仅表明君主承受天命，也表明贤臣的一生也没有虚度。
English: Therefore, the pursuit not only shows that the monarch bears the fate of heaven, but also shows that the life of a wise man is not wasted.

古文：是以伯禹锡玄圭，周公受郊祀，盖以达天之使，不敢擅天之功也。
现代文：因此大禹被赏赐了行大典用的礼器黑玉，周公享受丫郊祀的礼遇，这是上天降赐贤才佐助君王，君王当申达其才能，不敢贪天之功。
English: Therefore, Dayu was awarded the ceremonial black jade for the grand ceremony, and Zhou Gong enjoyed the courtesy of the suburb worship. This is a heaven-sent gift of wisdom to Sasuke the king. The king should declare his talent and dare not covet the merits of heaven.

古文：揆公德行，为天下纪；观公功勋，为万世基。
现代文：考察安汉公的道德和品行，可以做天下的典范；观察安汉公的功勋，奠定了子孙万代的基业。
English: Examining the morality and conduct of An Han Gong can serve as a model for the world; observing the exploits of An Han Gong has laid the foundation for generations to come.

古文：基成而赏不配，纪立而褒不副，诚非所以厚国家，顺天心也。
现代文：成就了基业而赏赐不相当，典范树立了而褒扬不相符，这确实不是重视国家顺应天意的做法啊。
English: It is indeed not a practice of attaching importance to the state's compliance with the will of heaven.

古文：高皇帝褒赏元功，相国萧何邑户既倍，又蒙殊礼，奏事不名，入殿不趋，封其亲属十有余人。
现代文：高皇帝褒扬赏赐首功之臣，相国萧何封邑的民户已经增加了一倍，又受到特殊的礼遇，他奏事不必报名，进殿见驾不用小步快走，封赏他的亲属共十多人。
English: Emperor Gao praised and rewarded the most meritorious vassals, and the number of households in Xiaohefenwu, a neighboring country, has doubled. He also received special courtesy. He did not have to sign up for the ceremony, and he did not have to walk a short distance to enter the hall. A total of more than a dozen of his relatives were rewarded.

古文：乐善无厌，班赏亡遴，苟有一策，即必爵之，是故公孙戎位在充郎，选繇旄头，一明樊哙，封二千户。
现代文：喜欢与人为善，从不满足，颁发奖赏从不吝啬。如果献上一个良策，就一定赏赐爵位，因此公孙戎身处郎官的地位，是从冲锋的骑士中挑选出来的，一旦使樊啥弃暗投明，就赏赐他二：千户的封邑。
English: He likes to be kind to people, is never satisfied, and is never stingy with awards. If he presents a good plan, he will definitely award a knighthood. Therefore, Gongsun Rong is in the position of a vassal, selected from the knights of the charge, and once he makes it clear, he will reward him with two: the fief of a thousand households.

古文：孝文皇帝褒赏绛侯，益封万户，赐黄金五千斤。
现代文：孝文皇帝褒赏绛侯周勃，加封一万户封邑，赏赐黄金五千斤。
English: Emperor Xiaowen rewarded Zhou Bo with ten thousand additional fiefs and five thousand catties of gold.

古文：孝武皇帝恤录军功，裂三万户以封卫青，青子三人，或在襁褓，皆为通侯。
现代文：孝武皇帝抚恤立功的将士，分出三万户来赏赐卫青，卫青的三个儿子，有的还在襁褓之中，都被封为侯。
English: Emperor Xiaowu pardoned the meritorious soldiers and allocated 30,000 households to reward Wei Qing. Wei Qing's three sons, some of whom were still in infancy, were all given the title of marquess.

古文：孝宣皇帝显著霍光，增户命畴，封者三人，延及兄孙。
现代文：孝宣皇帝突出表彰霍光，增加封户，规定子孙原样承袭他的爵邑，受封赏的有三个人，延伸到侄孙。
English: Emperor Xiaoxuan gave prominent recognition to Huo Guang, increased the number of fiefs, and stipulated that his descendants should inherit his peerage as it was. There were three people who received the award, extending to his nephews.

古文：夫绛侯即因汉藩之固，杖朱虚之鲠，依诸将之递，据相扶之势，其事虽丑，要不能遂。
现代文：绛侯是凭着汉朝外有各藩国的坚固屏障，在内依仗朱虚侯刘章的刚直，依靠将领们的团结，凭藉互相扶持的形势，所以吕氏党徒虽然打算犯上作乱，其用心险恶，却总是不能成事。
English: The Han princes relied on the solid barrier of the Han Dynasty and the various feudal states outside the Han Dynasty, and internally relied on the firmness of Zhu Xiu and Liu Zhang, relied on the unity of the generals, and relied on the situation of mutual support. Therefore, although the Lü party members intended to commit disorder, their intentions were sinister, but they always failed to accomplish anything.

古文：霍光即席常任之重，乘大胜之威，未尝遭时不行，陷假离朝，朝之执事，亡非同类，割断历久，统政旷世，虽曰有功，所因亦易，然犹有计策不审过征之累。
现代文：霍光依仗长期担任要职，趁着屡获大胜的威势，不曾遇到不利的时机，被陷害而免官离朝，朝廷各部门的负责官吏，没有不是他的同党的，长期掌握大权，把持朝政几代没中断，虽说有功劳，但也是顺利得来的，可是仍然有谋略不周，错立昌邑王的祸患。
English: Huo Guang held important positions for a long time, took advantage of the power of repeated victories, never encountered an unfavorable opportunity, was framed and dismissed from the court, the officials in charge of the various departments of the imperial court were not his party, long-term power, and control of the court government for several generations without interruption, although there was merit, but it was also successfully obtained, but there was still a bad strategy, the disaster of the wrong establishment of Changyi Wang.

古文：及至青、戎，摽末之功，一言之劳，然犹皆蒙丘山之赏。
现代文：至于卫青和公孙戎，不过是刀枪之功，一句话之劳，可是仍然都受到了很高的奖赏。
English: As for Wei Qing and Gong Sun Rong, it was no more than the merit of the sword and the gun, the labor of one sentence, but they still received a high reward.

古文：课功绛、霍，造之与因也；比于青、戎，地之与天也。
现代文：考察安漠公和绛侯、霍光的功劳，是创造时势和利用时势的差别，把安汉公和卫青、公孙戎相比较，那是天地之别。
English: It is the difference between creating the current situation and taking advantage of the current situation to examine the merits of Prince Anmu and Gonghou and Huo Guang. It is the difference between heaven and earth to compare Prince Anhan with Wei Qing and Gongsun Rong.

古文：而公又有宰治之效，乃当上与伯禹、周公等盛齐隆，兼其褒赏，岂特与若云者同日而论哉？
现代文：而安漠公又有治国理政之能，就应当上与大禹、周公同样受尊崇，并获得和他们一样的褒扬赏赐，怎么衹是和绛侯、霍光、卫青、公孙戎等相提并论呢？
English: However, since Anmo Gong also has the ability to govern the country, he should be equally respected with Dayu and Zhou Gong, and receive the same praise and reward as them. How can he be compared with Gonghou, Huo Guang, Wei Qing, Gongsun Rong, etc.?

古文：然曾不得蒙青等之厚，臣诚惑之！
现代文：然而他竟未能得到卫青等人所受到的厚赏，臣确实感到迷惑不解！
English: However, he actually failed to receive the rich reward that Wei Qing and others received, and the minister really felt puzzled!

古文：臣闻功亡原者赏不限，德亡首者褒不检。
现代文：臣听说对于空前的大功赏赐不受限制，对最高的德行褒扬不受局限。
English: The minister heard that there is no limit to awarding unprecedented great achievements, and there is no limit to praising the highest virtues.

古文：是故成王之于周公也，度百里之限，越九锡之检，开七百里之宇，兼商、奄之民，赐以附庸殷民六族，大路大旂，封父之繁弱，夏后之璜，祝宗卜史，备物典策，官司彝器，白牡之牲，郊望之礼。
现代文：因此周成王对于周公，超越了纵横各百里的界限，超过了九锡的范围，开拓方圆七百里的封国疆界，合并商、奄两国的百姓，把殷朝的遣民条氏、徐氏、萧氏、索氏、长勺氏、尾勺氏赐给他作为附属小国，赏赐大车和大旗，封父的大弓，夏后的玉璜，为他设置太祝、太宗、太卜、太史等四官，赏赐完好的器物和记载典章制度的文书，设置百官和祭器，祭祀可以用白色的雄兽，可以举行郊祀、望祭等仪式。
English: Therefore, for Zhou Gong, Zhou Cheng Wang overstepped the boundaries of hundreds of miles in length and width, exceeded the scope of Jiuxi, opened up the seven-hundred-mile-square sealed national borders, merged merchants, and elected the people of the two countries, gave him the Yin Dynasty's Jiao clan, Xu clan, Xiao clan, Suo clan, Long Spoon clan, and Tail Spoon clan as affiliated small countries, awarded the cart and flag, the father's bow, and the summer queen's jade arrow, set up four officials for him, such as Tai Zhu, Tai Zong, Tai Bo, and Tai Shi, awarded perfect utensils

古文：王曰： 叔父，建尔元子。 
现代文：周成王说： 叔父，给您的长子建国封土。 
English: Zhou Chengwang said, "Uncle, give your eldest son a fief.

古文：子父俱延拜而受之。
现代文：于是周公父子都下拜接受了封赏。
English: As a result, Zhou Gong and his son both bowed down and accepted the award.

古文：可谓不检亡原者矣。
现代文：这可以说是不局限对空前功勋的赏赐了。
English: This can be said to be an unlimited reward for unprecedented merits.

古文：非特止此，六子皆封。
现代文：不仅止于这些，其他六个儿子都受到封赏。
English: Not only that, but the other six sons were also rewarded.

古文：《诗》曰： 亡言不雠，亡德不报。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 没有善言不被接纳，没有美德不受报偿。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "There is no kind word that will not be accepted, no virtue that will not be rewarded."

古文：报当知之，不如非报也。
现代文：报偿应与功德相称，不相称的就不是报偿。
English: The reward should be commensurate with the merits. If it is not commensurate, it is not a reward.

古文：近观行事，高祖之约非刘氏不王，然而番君得王长沙，下诏称忠，定著于令，明有大信不拘于制也。
现代文：观察近代所做的事情，高祖和诸将约定不是刘姓的不得封王，然而番君吴芮却被封为长沙王，并下韶称赞他的忠诚，明确记载到律令上，这是为了昭示天下对于有信用的人可以不囿于制度的限制。
English: Observing what has been done in modern times, Gao Zu and the generals agreed that no one with the surname of Liu could be crowned king. However, the guardian Wu Gan was crowned as the king of Changsha, and his loyalty was praised and clearly recorded in the ritsuryo. This was to show the world that trustworthy people could not be restricted by the system.

古文：春秋晋悼公用魏绛之策，诸夏服从。
现代文：春秋时期晋悼公采用了魏绛的策略，华夏各诸侯国都臣服于他。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, Emperor Jinmu adopted the strategy of Emperor Wei, and all the principalities in China submitted to him.

古文：郑伯献乐，悼公于是以半赐之。
现代文：郑伯献上乐器，晋悼公于是拿一半赏赐魏绛。
English: Zheng Bo presented a musical instrument, and Jin Weigong took half of it and gave it to Wei Xuan.

古文：绛深辞让，晋侯曰： 微子，寡人不能济河。
现代文：魏绛多次推辞，晋悼公说： 没有您，寡人的势力不能跨过黄河。
English: Wei Wei repeatedly declined, and Jin Weikong said: Without you, no one's power can cross the Yellow River.

古文：夫赏，国之典，不可废也。
现代文：赏赐是国家的制度，不能废弃。
English: Reward is a national system and cannot be abandoned.

古文：子其受之。 
现代文：您应该接受。 
English: You should accept it.

古文：魏绛于是有金石之乐，《春秋》善之，取其臣竭忠以辞功，君知臣以遂赏也。
现代文：魏绛于是就有了钟、磬之类的乐器，《春秋》赞扬了这件事，认为臣子能竭尽忠心而又辞谢赏赐，国君能够识别贤臣坚持封赏，都是可取的。
English: Wei Wei then had musical instruments such as bells and cymbals. "Spring and Autumn" praised this event, believing that it is desirable for a courtier to be loyal and refuse to reward, and for the sovereign to be able to recognize a wise minister and insist on awarding a reward.

古文：今陛下既知公有周公功德，不行成王之褒赏，遂听公之固辞，不顾《春秋》之明义，则民臣何称，万世何述？
现代文：现在陛下既然深知安汉公有周公那样的功德，却没有像周成王对待周公那样的褒扬和封赏，竟听从了安汉公的坚决推辞，不考虑《春秋》的原则，那么人民和臣子将称说什么，子孙后代将记述什么？
English: Now that His Majesty is well aware that An Han Gong has the same merits as Zhou Gong, but has not praised and rewarded him as Zhou Cheng Wang treated Zhou Gong, and has actually listened to An Han Gong's resolute refusal, without considering the principle of "Spring and Autumn," then what will the people and courtiers say, and what will future generations write about?

古文：诚非所以为国也。
现代文：遣确实不是治国的办法。
English: Expulsion is certainly no way to run a country.

古文：臣愚以为宜恢公国，令如周公，建立公子，令如伯禽，所赐之品，亦皆如之。
现代文：愚臣认为应当扩大安汉公的封国，让他和周公一样，给安汉公的长子封国建王，让他和伯禽一样。赏赐他的物品，也都像周公那样。
English: The foolish vassal thought that he should expand the fief of Anhan Gong, let him be like Zhou Gong, and give the eldest son of Anhan Gong the fief and establish the king, let him be like the bird. The goods that were rewarded to him were also like Zhou Gong.

古文：诸子之封，皆如六子。
现代文：安汉公其他儿子的封赏，都应像周公的六个儿子一样。
English: The rewards of Anhan's other sons should be the same as Zhou's six sons.

古文：即群下较然输忠，黎庶昭然感德。
现代文：那么群臣就会明显地受到鼓励，献出忠诚，老百姓就会明显地受到教化，感恩戴德。
English: Then the ministers will be clearly encouraged to be loyal, and the people will be clearly enlightened and grateful.

古文：臣诚输忠，民诚感德，则于王事何有？
现代文：如果群臣真的效忠朝廷，老百姓真的感恩戴德，那么对朝政来说还有什么难办的呢？
English: If the courtiers are really loyal to the imperial court, and the people are really grateful, then what else is difficult for the imperial government?

古文：唯陛下深惟祖宗之重，敬畏上天之戒，仪形虞、周之盛，敕尽伯禽之赐，无遴周公之报，令天法有设，后世有祖，天下幸甚！
现代文：望陛下深刻感念祖宗的厚托，恭敬地服从上天的告诫，效法舜帝和周成王的盛举，完备地给予像伯禽所得一样的赏赐，不吝惜像对待周公那样的赏赐，使国家的法制得以健全，后代的人有所依从，这是天下的大幸！
English: It is the great fortune of the world that His Majesty deeply remembers the generous trust of his ancestors, respectfully obeys the admonition of heaven, emulates the grand gesture of Emperor Qian and King Zhoucheng, completely gives the reward like the bird's income, and does not begrudge the reward like the treatment of Zhou Gong, so that the country's legal system can be sound and future generations can follow it.

古文：太后以视群公，群公方议其事，会吕宽事起。
现代文：王太后把奏章给大臣们看，大臣们正在议论逭件事，恰巧吕宽事件发生了。
English: The Empress Dowager showed the report to the ministers. The ministers were discussing something, and the Lyu Kuan Incident happened.

古文：初，莽欲擅权，白太后： 前哀帝立，背恩义，自贵外家丁、傅，挠乱国家，几危社稷。
现代文：当初，王莽想要独揽大权，禀告太后说： 从前哀帝登基后，违背恩情和道义，擅自使外戚丁家、傅家尊贵，扰乱了国家，几乎危及江山社稷。
English: At first, Wang Mang wanted to monopolize power, and wrote an obituary for the empress dowager, saying: "Once upon a time, after the late emperor ascended to the throne, he violated kindness and morality, arbitrarily made his relatives, the Ding family and the Fu family, noble, disturbed the country, and almost endangered the country and society.

古文：今帝以幼年复奉大宗，为成帝后，宜明一统之义，以戒前事，为后代法。 
现代文：现在平帝尚在幼年就继承了嫡长大宗，成为成帝的后嗣，应该明确一统江山的意义，以前代的事作为鉴戒，给后世作出典范。 
English: Now that Emperor Ping inherited the eldest son at a young age and became the heir of Emperor Cheng, it is necessary to clarify the meaning of unifying the country, using the previous generation as a warning and setting an example for future generations.

古文：于是遣甄丰奉玺绶，即拜帝母卫姬为中山孝王后，赐帝舅卫宝、宝弟玄爵关内侯，皆留中山，不得至京师。
现代文：于是派遣甄丰捧着玺印，就地赐封平帝的母亲卫姬为中山孝王后，赐给平帝的舅父卫实、卫宝的弟弟卫玄关内侯的爵位，让他都留在中山国，不允许到长安来。
English: Therefore, Zhenfeng was dispatched with the imperial seal to confer the title of Queen of Zhongshan to Wei Ji, the mother of Emperor Ping, and the title of Marquis of Wei Xuan Guan to Emperor Ping's uncle Wei Si and Wei Bao's brother Wei Xuan Guan. He was allowed to stay in Zhongshan and was not allowed to come to Chang'an.

古文：莽子宇，非莽隔绝卫氏，恐帝长大后见怨。
现代文：王莽的儿子王宇，责怪王莽把卫家和皇室分隔开，恐怕平帝长大后会怨恨。
English: Wang Mang's son, Wang Yu, blames Wang Mang for separating the guards from the royal family. I'm afraid Emperor Ping will grow up to resent this.

古文：宇即私遣人与宝等通书，教令帝母上书求入。
现代文：王宇就暗中派人和卫宝等人通信，让平帝的母亲上书请求到京师来。
English: Wang Yu secretly sent correspondence to Wei Bao and others, asking Ping Di's mother to send a letter requesting him to come to Beijing.

古文：语在《卫后传》。
现代文：这些话记载在《卫后传裹。
English: These words are recorded in "The Legend of Wei Hou."

古文：莽不听。
现代文：王莽不答应。
English: Wang Mang did not obey.

古文：宇与师吴章及妇兄吕宽议其故，章以为莽不可谏，而好鬼神，可为变怪以惊惧之，章因推类说令归政于卫氏。
现代文：王宇和他的老师吴章以及内兄吕宽议论这件事情，吴章认为王莽不会听从劝说，但是他相信鬼神，可以制造灾异使他感到恐惧，再由吴章趁机推演劝说他把大权交给卫家。
English: Wang Yu discussed the matter with his teacher Wu Zhang and his brother-in-law Lü Guang. Wu Zhang thought that Wang Mang would not listen to persuasion, but he believed in ghosts and gods, which could create disasters and make him feel fear. Wu Zhang then took the opportunity to persuade him to hand over power to Wei Jia.

古文：宇即使宽夜持血酒莽第门，吏发觉之，莽执宇送狱，饮药死。
现代文：王宇便让吕夜晚拿血涂洒王莽的府第，守门的吏卒发觉了这件事，王莽拘捕了王宇把他投进监狱，让他服毒药死了。
English: Wang Yu then asked Lu to smear Wang Mang's house with blood at night. The gatekeeper discovered this, Wang Mang arrested Wang Yu, threw him in jail, and had him poisoned to death.

古文：宇妻焉怀子，系狱，须产子已，杀之。
现代文：王宇的妻子吕焉怀有身孕，被关在牢里，等到生下孩子以后，再杀死她。
English: Wang Yu's wife, Lü Yanlong, was pregnant and was kept in prison. He waited until she gave birth before killing her.

古文：莽奏言： 宇为吕宽等所诖误，流言惑众，与管、蔡同罪，臣不敢隐，其诛。 
现代文：王莽上奏说： 王宇被吕宽等人所牵累，误入歧途，散布流言迷惑众人，犯下与管叔、蔡叔同等的罪行，臣不敢隐瞒，他应当论处。 
English: Wang Mang said in his report: Wang Yu was entangled by Lyu Kuan and others, went astray, spread rumors to confuse everyone, and committed the same crime as Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai. The minister did not dare to hide it, and he should be dealt with.

古文：甄邯等白太后下诏曰： 夫唐尧有丹朱，周文王有管、蔡，此皆上圣亡奈下愚子何，以其性不可移也。
现代文：甄邯等禀告王太后下诏说： 唐尧有个儿子丹朱，周文王有儿子管叔、蔡叔，这都是德才智慧高超的人对最笨的儿子无可奈何的例子，因为他们本性难移。
English: Zhen Qi and others wrote obituaries for the empress dowager, saying in their obituaries: Tang Xi had a son, Dan Zhu, and Zhou Wen Wang had a son, Guan Xiu and Cai Xiu. These are all examples of how a man of great virtue and wisdom had no choice but to have the stupidest son, because their natures were hard to change.

古文：公居周公之位，辅成王之主，而行管、蔡之诛，不以亲亲害尊尊，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：您居于周公的地位，辅佐像成王那样的幼主，实行像周公对管叔、蔡叔那样的处罚，不因为爱儿子而妨害尊重朝廷，朕很赞赏您的做法。
English: You are in the position of Zhou Gong, assisting a young lord like Cheng Wang, implementing punishments like Zhou Gong to Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, and not hindering respect for the imperial court because you love your son. I very much appreciate your approach.

古文：昔周公诛四国之后，大化乃成，至于刑错。
现代文：以往周公诛减三监及淮夷四国的后代，完成了深远的教化，达到了无人犯法刑罚搁置不用的程度。
English: In the past, the descendants of Zhou Gongjun and Huaiyi Shiguo have completed far-reaching indoctrination and reached a level where no one has violated the law and the punishment has been put on hold.

古文：公其专意翼国，期于致平。 
现代文：您应当专心辅佐朝政，希望实现太平。 
English: You should concentrate on assisting the government and hope to achieve peace.

古文：莽因是诛灭卫氏，穷治吕宽之狱，连引郡国豪桀素非议已者，内及敬武公主、梁王立、红阳侯立、平阿侯仁，使者迫守，皆自杀。
现代文：王莽趁此时机诛减了卫家，彻底查处吕宽案件，牵连到各郡、各封国平素抨击自己才能出众的人，朝中牵涉到敬武公主、梁王刘立、红阳侯王立和平阿侯王仁，派使者予以逼迫，他们都自杀了。
English: Wang Mang took advantage of this opportunity to reduce the number of guards, thoroughly investigate and deal with the case of Lyu Kuan, and implicate people in counties and fiefdoms who criticized their outstanding talents. The central government implicated Princess Jingwu, Liang Wang Liu Li, Hongyang Hou Wang Li and Heping Hou Wang Ren, and sent envoys to persecute them. They all committed suicide.

古文：死者以百数，海内震焉。
现代文：死的人数以百计，天下震动。
English: The death toll was in the hundreds, and the whole world was shaken.

古文：大司马护军褒奏言： 安汉公遭子宇陷于管、蔡之辜，子受至重，为帝室故不敢顾私。
现代文：大司马护军名叫裹的陈奏说： 安汉公遇上儿子王宇犯下像管叔、蔡叔那样的罪过，爱子之情虽深，但他为了皇室的利益，不敢顾及私情。
English: Chen Suo, the chief of Ma's bodyguard named Wrapped, said: When An Han Gong met his son Wang Yu, he committed the same sins as Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai. Although he loved his son deeply, he did not dare to consider his private feelings for the sake of the interests of the royal family.

古文：惟宇遭罪，喟然愤发作书八篇，以戒子孙。
现代文：他虑到王宇犯罪，感慨奋发写了八篇文章，用以告诫子孙。
English: Considering Wang Yu's crime, he wrote eight articles to warn his children and grandchildren.

古文：宜班郡国，令学官以教授。 
现代文：应该把这些文章下发全国各地，命令学官用来教授给学生。 
English: These articles should be distributed all over the country, and academic officials should be ordered to use them to teach students.

古文：事下群公，请令天下吏能诵公戒者，以著官簿，比《孝经》。
现代文：造件事下达给各大臣，他们请求命令全国凡能背诵安漠公诫子孙书的官员，把他们记录在官府档案中，把安汉公之文当《孝经》一样来看待。
English: The matter was sent to the ministers, and they requested an order to all officials in the country who could recite the Anmo Book of Public Precepts and Descendants, to record them in the government archives, and to treat Anhan's text as if it were the Filial Piety Sutra.

古文：四年春，郊祀高祖以配天，宗祀孝文皇帝以配上帝。
现代文：元始四年春季，在郊外祭天，同时配祭高祖，在宗庙中祭祀上天，同时配祭孝文皇帝。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, they held a festival of heaven in the suburbs, with the accompanying festival of Emperor Gaozu, and a festival of heaven in the ancestral temple, with the accompanying festival of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：四月丁未，莽女立为皇后，大赦天下。
现代文：四月丁未日，王莽的女儿被立为皇后，宣布大赦天下。
English: On the last day of April, Wang Mang's daughter was crowned empress and declared a general amnesty.

古文：遣大司徒司直陈崇等八人分行天下，览观风俗。
现代文：派遣大司徒司直陈崇等八个人分别赴全国各地，考察社会风俗。
English: He sent eight people, including the head monk, Chen Chong, to all parts of the country to investigate social customs.

古文：太保舜等奏言： 《春秋》列功德之义，太上有立德，其次有立功，其次有立言，唯至德大贤然后能之。
现代文：太保王舜等人上奏说： 《春秋》列举功德的大义，最高的是树立德行，其次是建立功业，再次是著书立说，衹有德行最高尚的大贤人才能做到这些。
English: "Spring and Autumn" enumerates the great virtues of merit, the highest being the establishment of virtue, followed by the establishment of merit, and again by writing that only a great sage with the most noble virtue can do these things.

古文：其在人臣，则生有大赏，终为宗臣，殷之伊尹，周之周公是也。 
现代文：对于作臣子的，就是生前得到最大的赏赐，死后成为人们景仰的大臣，殷商的伊尹，周朝的周公就是这样的人。 
English: For a courtier, it is the person who received the greatest reward during his lifetime and became a revered minister after his death, such as Yi Yin, a wealthy merchant, and Zhou Gong of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：及民上书者八千余人，咸曰： 伊尹为阿衡，周公为太宰，周公享七子之封，有过上公之赏。
现代文：一时之间百姓上书的有八干多人，都说： 伊尹做阿衡，周公做太宰，周公享有七个儿子的封爵，得到了超过上公的赏赐。
English: At one time, there were more than eight dozen people who submitted letters, all saying: Yi Yin as Aheng, Zhou Gong as Dazai, Zhou Gong enjoyed the knighthood of seven sons, and received more rewards than Shangguo.

古文：宜如陈崇言。 
现代文：应该按陈崇所说的办。 
English: It should be done as Chen Chong said.

古文：章下有司，有司请 还前所益二县及黄邮聚、新野田，采伊尹、周公称号，加公为宰衡，位上公。
现代文：奏章下发主管官员，主管官员请求 归还以前加封的二县以及黄邮聚、新野县的田地，用伊尹和周公的称号，给安汉公加封宰衡的称号，位居三公之上。
English: The competent official issued a report, the competent official requested the return of the two counties previously sealed, as well as the fields of Huangpu County and Nino County, using the titles of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, and giving Anhan Gong the title of Zhai Heng, ranking above the three kings.

古文：掾史秩六百石。
现代文：属吏的俸禄是六百石。
English: The salary of a subordinate official is 600 koku.

古文：三公言事，称 敢言之 。
现代文：三公上书衡奏事，开头要说 冒昧地说 。
English: On the third day of the imperial examination, you should say "I dare to say" at the beginning.

古文：群吏毋得与公同名。
现代文：官员们不得与安漠公同名。
English: Officials are not allowed to have the same name as Anmo.

古文：出众期门二十人，羽林三十人，前后大车十乘。
现代文：外出时随从期门亲兵二十人，羽林骑兵三十人，前后各十辆大车。
English: When they go out, they are accompanied by twenty soldiers from the gate, thirty horsemen from the forest, and ten carts in front and behind.

古文：赐公太夫人号曰功显君，食邑二千户，黄金印赤韨。
现代文：他的母亲封为功显君，赏赐封地二千户，佩戴黄金印章系着红色丝带。
English: His mother was named a meritorious person, awarded 2,000 fiefs, and wore a gold seal tied with a red ribbon.

古文：封公子男二人，安为褒新侯，临为赏都侯。
现代文：赐他的儿子二人，王安做襄新侯，王临做赏都侯。
English: He gave his two sons, Wang An to be the new lord of Xiang, and Wang Lin to be the lord of Baotou.

古文：加后聘三千七百万，合为一万万，以明大礼 。
现代文：增加皇后的聘礼三千七百万，合成一亿，以表明礼仪的隆重。 
English: The queen's dowry was increased by 37 million yuan to 100 million yuan to show the grandeur of the ceremony.

古文：太后临前殿，亲封拜。
现代文：王太后来到前殿，亲自赐封。
English: The Queen Mother then came to the front hall and personally conferred the title.

古文：安汉公拜前，二子拜后，如周公故事。
现代文：安汉公在前拜谢，两个儿子在后拜谢，如同周公的旧例。
English: Anhan Gong bowed in front, and his two sons bowed behind, just like Zhou Gong's old example.

古文：莽稽首辞让，出奏封事，愿独受母号，还安、临印韨及号位户邑。
现代文：王莽叩头推让，出宫后呈奏赐封的事，表示衹接受给母亲的封号，而要退还王安、王临的印信以及爵位封地。
English: Wang Mang kowtowed and made concessions, and after leaving the palace, he presented a report on the granting of the title, indicating that he accepted the title given to his mother, but wanted to return Wang An, Wang Lin's seal letter and the title fief.

古文：事下太师光等，皆曰： 赏未足以直功，谦约退让，公之常节，终不可听。 
现代文：事情下交太师孔光等人，都说： 赏赐不足以当功绩，谦虚节俭，退避礼让，是安汉公一贯的品德，一定不能相依。 
English: His close friend, the Grand Master Kong Guang Zhu, and others said, "A reward is not enough for merit, modesty and frugality, avoiding courtesy, are the consistent virtues of An Han, and they must not be intertwined.

古文：莽求见固让。
现代文：王莽要求进见太后，坚决辞让赏赐。
English: Wang Mang demanded to see the empress dowager, and resolutely refused to give up the reward.

古文：太后下诏曰： 公每见，叩头流涕固辞，今移病，固当听其让，令视事邪？
现代文：王太后下诏书说： 安汉公每次朝见，都磕头流泪坚决推辞，现在上书称病，是应该接受他的推让，让他处理政事呢？
English: The empress dowager issued an edict saying: Every time Prince An Han Rong visits the imperial court, he shakes his head, sheds tears and resolutely refuses. Now he has submitted a letter saying that he is ill. Should we accept his concession and let him handle political affairs?

古文：将当遂行其赏，遣归就第也？ 
现代文：还是应该执行对他的封赏，让他退归自己的府第呢？ 
English: Or should he be rewarded and allowed to return to his home province?

古文：光等曰： 安、临亲受印韨，策号通天，其义昭昭。
现代文：孔光等人说： 王安、王临亲自接受了印信，策封的爵位、称号已经通告上天，这个事实明明白白。
English: Kong Guang and others said: Wang An and Wang Lin personally received the sealed letter, and the titles and titles of the seal have been announced to the heavens, this fact is clear and obvious.

古文：黄邮、召陵、新野之田为入尤多，皆止于公，公欲自损以成国化，宜可听许。
现代文：黄邮聚、召陵县、新野县田地的收入更多，都衹和安汉公有关，他打算自我克制来促成国家的风化，应该可以同意。
English: The fields of Huangpu County, Zhaoling County and Xinye County have more income, and Tudor is related to Anhan. He intends to exercise self-restraint to promote the country's moralization, and should be able to agree.

古文：治平之化当以时成，宰衡之官不可世及。
现代文：天下安定政治清明应该实现，宰衡的官爵不能世袭。
English: A stable world and a clear-cut politics should be realized, and the official title of Zaiheng cannot be inherited.

古文：纳征钱，乃以尊皇后，非为公也。
现代文：增加的彩礼钱是为表示尊重皇后，不是为了安漠公。
English: The increased bride price was to show respect to the queen, not to appease the king.

古文：功显君户，止身不传。
现代文：功显君的食邑，止于自身不能继承。
English: The food of the meritorious is limited to himself and cannot be inherited.

古文：褒新、赏都两国合三千户，甚少矣。
现代文：褒新、赏都两国共有三千户，为数很少。
English: There are a total of 3,000 households in the two countries, which is a very small number.

古文：忠臣之节，亦宜自屈，而信主上之义。
现代文：忠臣的操守，也应该自我克制，以此申明君主赏罚有信的道理。
English: The conduct of a loyal subject should also be self-restrained, so as to affirm the principle that the monarch's reward and punishment are credible.

古文：宜遣大司徙、大司空持节承制，诏公亟入视事。
现代文：应该派遣大司徒、大司空拿着符节、捧着制书，韶令安漠公尽快入朝理政。
English: It is necessary to dispatch the grand steward and the grand steward Ku to take the symbols, hold the books, and order Anmu Gong to enter the government as soon as possible.

古文：诏尚书勿复受公之让奏。 
现代文：命令尚书不要再接受他的辞让奏章。 
English: He ordered Shang Shu not to accept his resignation any more.

古文：奏可。
现代文：孔光等的奏章得到了认可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：莽乃起视事，上书言： 臣以元寿二年六月戊午仓卒之夜，以新都侯引入未央宫；瘐申拜为大司马，充三公位；元始元年正月丙辰拜为太傅，赐号安汉公，备四辅官；今年四月甲子复拜为宰衡，位上公。
现代文：王莽于是出来处理政事，上书说： 臣在元寿二年六月戊午曰发生事变的夜裹，凭新都侯的身份被引进未央宫；庚申被任命为大司马，凑数担任三公的职位；元始元年正月丙辰曰被任命为太傅，赏赐臣安漠公的称号，空占了四辅的官位；今年四月甲子曰又被任命为宰衡，身居上公之位。
English: Wang Mang then came out to deal with political affairs, and wrote: On the night of the incident that occurred on the afternoon of June 30, Yuan Shou's second year of life, he was introduced to Weiyang Palace with the status of the new capital; He Xian was appointed as the chief secretary and held the position of the three princes; On the first day of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：臣莽伏自惟，爵为新都侯，号为安汉公，官为宰衡、太傅、大司马，爵贵、号尊、官重，一身蒙大宠者五，诚非鄙臣所能堪。
现代文：臣自己考虑，爵位是新都侯，称号是安漠公，官衔是宰衡、太傅和大司马，爵位尊贵、称号尊显、官职重要，一个人身受五项大的荣誉，实在不是臣下我所能胜任的。
English: The minister himself considered, the title is Xinduhou, the title is Anmo, the official title is Zaiheng, Taifu and Dasima, the title is distinguished, the title is distinguished, the official position is important, and a person is honored with five major honors. It is not something that I can do as a minister.

古文：据元始三年，天下岁已复，官属宜皆置。
现代文：根据元始三年的调查，全国的收成已经恢复正常，职官应当都恢复设置。
English: According to the survey of the first three years, the national harvest has returned to normal, and officials should all resume their posts.

古文：《穀梁传》曰： 天子之宰，通于四海。 臣愚以为，宰衡官以正百僚平海内为职，而无印信，名实不副。
现代文：《谷梁传》上说： 天子的大臣，权力通达全国，臣认为宰衡应该把匡正百官治理天下作为自己的责任，而却没有印信，名不符实。
English: "Guliangzhuan" said: The minister of the son of heaven, the power reaches all over the country. The minister believes that Zaiheng should take the responsibility of governing the world as his own responsibility, but there is no seal, the name is not true.

古文：臣莽无兼官之材，今圣朝既过误而用之，臣请御史刻宰衡印章曰 宰衡太傅大司马印 ，成，授臣莽，上太傅与大司马之印。 
现代文：臣没有兼任数职的才能，现在朝廷既然失误地任用了臣，臣请求御史刻宰衡的印章叫作 宰衡太傅大司马印，刻好后，授给臣，臣就上交太傅和大司马的印信。 
English: The vassal did not have the ability to hold several positions at the same time. Now that the court has mistakenly appointed the vassal, the vassal requested the historian to engrave the seal of Zai Heng to be called the Zai Heng Taifu Daisima Seal. After engraving, the vassal gave the vassal the seal letter of the Taifu and Daisima.

古文：太后诏曰： 可。
现代文：王太后下诏说： 可以。
English: The Queen Mother gave the order: "Yes."

古文：韨如相国，朕亲临授焉。 
现代文：所刻印章的系带可仿照相国的印纽，朕亲自临朝授予安漠公。 
English: The lacing of the engraved seal can be imitated by the photo of the country's seal, which I personally awarded to Prince Anmu.

古文：莽乃复以所益纳征钱千万，遗与长乐长御奉共养者。
现代文：王莽于是又把所增加的彩礼钱一千万，赠给长乐宫服侍王太后的随从太监和宫女。
English: Wang Mang then gave the additional reward money of ten million yuan to the eunuchs and maids of honor who served the empress dowager at Changle Palace.

古文：太保舜奏言： 天下闻公不受干乘之土，辞万金之币，散财施予千万数，莫不乡化。
现代文：太保王舜上奏说： 百姓听说安汉公不接受千乘侯国的封土，拒绝了一万斤黄金的聘银，散发财产施舍他人数以千万计，没有不表示景仰的。
English: Tai Bao Wang Xuan said: "When the people heard that An Han Gong refused to accept the fief of Qianren Hokoku, refused to accept 10,000 catties of gold and silver, and distributed property and gave alms, there were tens of millions of people who did not fail to express their admiration.

古文：蜀郡男子路建等辍讼惭怍而退，虽文王却虞、芮何以加！
现代文：蜀郡男子路建等听了这事就不再打官司，惭愧地退让而去，即使是周文王感化虞、芮两国国君，使他们自行终止田地分争而退让，也不过如此。
English: After hearing this, Lu Jian, a man from Shu County, no longer sued and shamefully conceded. Even if Zhou Wen Wang caused a crisis and persuaded the sovereigns of the two countries to voluntarily terminate the field dispute and concede, it was no more than that.

古文：宜报告天下。 
现代文：应该将逭件事情颁布天下。 
English: This matter should be announced to the world.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章得到了认可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：宰衡出，从大车前后各十乘，直事尚书郎、待御史、谒者、中黄门、期门羽林。
现代文：宰衡外出，前后各有十辆大车跟随，随从有当值理事的尚书郎、侍御史、谒者、中黄门、期门护卫亲兵和羽林军。
English: When Zai Heng went out, he was followed by ten large cars in front and behind, and was accompanied by the current director Shang Shuro, the attendant, the eunuch, the guards of the middle yellow gate, the period gate, and the Ulin army.

古文：宰衡常持节，所止，谒者代持之。
现代文：宰衡常常手中拿着符节，在停留的地方，由谒者代拿。
English: Zaiheng often holds the talisman in his hand, and in the place where he stays, it is picked up by the eunuch.

古文：宰衡掾史秩六百石，三公称 敢言之 。
现代文：宰衡的属员俸禄六百石，三公向宰衡奏报时自称 冒昧地说 。
English: The salary of a subordinate of Zaiheng was 600 koku, and when reporting to Zaiheng, San Gong said that he had the temerity to say so.

古文：是岁，莽奏起明堂、辟雍、灵台，为学者筑舍万区，作市、常满仓，制度甚盛。
现代文：这年，王莽提议兴建明堂、国立太学、御用天文台，给学生修建宿舍一万余间，修建市场、常满仓，规模很壮观。
English: In that year, Wang Mang proposed to build the Ming Hall, the National Taigaku, and the Imperial Observatory, to build more than 10,000 dormitories for students, and to build a market and a warehouse. The scale was very spectacular.

古文：立《乐经》，益博士员，经各五人。
现代文：在太学开设《乐经》课，增加博士名额，每一种经书各有五人讲授。
English: The "Music and Scripture" course will be opened at Taixu, the number of doctoral candidates will be increased, and each kind of scripture will be taught by five people.

古文：征天下通一艺教授十一人以上，及有逸《礼》、古《书》、《毛诗》、《周官》、《尔雅》、天文、图谶、钟律、月令、兵法、《史篇》文字，通知其意者，皆诣公车。
现代文：征召全国精通一门经学的教授十一人，以及收藏有散佚的《澧经》、古文《尚书》、《毛诗》、《周官》、《尔雅》、天文、图谶、音乐、月令历法、兵法、《史籀篇》文字，通晓它们意义的人，都前往公车衙门。
English: Eleven professors across the country who are proficient in a subject of study are called up, as well as people who have a collection of scattered sutras, ancient texts, "Shang Shu," "Mao Shi," "Zhou Guan," "Er Ya," astronomy, maps, music, lunar calendar, military tactics, and "History" text, and are familiar with their meaning, all go to the bus gate.

古文：网罗天下异能之士，至者前后千数，皆令记说廷中，将令正乖廖，一异说云。
现代文：收罗天下有特殊才能的学生，来的人前后数以千计，都让他们在朝廷上记录下自己的见解，打算用他们来纠正荒谬，统一各种不同的说法。
English: He gathered thousands of students with special talents from all over the world and had them record their opinions at the court, intending to use them to correct absurdities and unify various different statements.

古文：群臣奏言： 昔周公奉继体之嗣，据上公之尊，然犹七年制度乃定。
现代文：大臣们上奏说： 当年周公辅佐继位的幼主成王，据有上公的尊贵地位，可是仍然用了七年时间才使法令礼制得以确定。
English: The ministers reported as follows: In that year, Zhou Gongfu assisted the young Prince Cheng Wang to succeed to the throne, and although he had the honorable status of Shangguo, it still took seven years for the legal and ceremonial system to be established.

古文：夫明堂、辟雍，堕废千载莫能兴，今安汉公起于第家，辅翼陛下，四年于兹，功德烂然。
现代文：明堂和国立太学已毁坏废弃上千年，没人能兴修重建，而今安汉公出身于一般贵族家庭，辅佐陛下执政，至今才四年，功德就已十分显著。
English: Myeongdong and the National University of Korea have been destroyed and abandoned for thousands of years, and no one has been able to rebuild them. However, it has only been four years since Prince Anhan was born into an ordinary aristocratic family and assisted His Majesty in his reign, and his merits are already quite remarkable.

古文：公以八月载生魄庚子奉使，朝用书临赋营筑，越若翊辛丑，诸生、庶民大和会，十万众并集，平作二旬，大功毕成。
现代文：他在八月十六庚子接受朝廷的使命，拿着分派功役的书簿亲自部署修建工程，第二天辛丑曰，儒生和老百姓们聚会，十万人集合在一起，正常施工二十天，就大功告成了。
English: On the 16th day of August, he accepted the imperial court's mission and personally deployed the construction project with the book of assigned tasks. On the next day, the Confucians and ordinary people gathered, 100,000 people gathered together, and after 20 days of normal construction, the great work was completed.

古文：唐、虞发举，成周造业，诚亡以加。
现代文：就是唐尧、虞舜举行建设，周公营造成周城，也不过如此。
English: Even if Tang Dynasty and Yu Dynasty carried out construction and Zhou Dynasty caused Zhou City, it is nothing more than that.

古文：宰衡位宜在诸侯王上，赐以束帛加璧，大国乘车、安车各一，骊马二驷。 
现代文：宰衡的地位应该在那些诸侯王之上，应当赏赐他五匹丝帛和玉璧，以及像大国君王的乘车和安车各一辆，纯色的黑马八匹。 
English: Zai Heng's status should be above those of the princes and kings. He should be rewarded with five horses of silk and jade, as well as one carriage and one carriage each of the great kings, and eight pure-colored black horses.

古文：诏曰： 可。
现代文：王太后下韶说： 可以。
English: Emperor Wu said: Yes.

古文：其议九锡之法。 
现代文：应该议论赐给九种器物的方案。 
English: There should be a discussion on the plan to bestow nine kinds of utensils.

古文：冬，大风吹长安城东门屋瓦且尽。
现代文：当年冬季，大风把长安城东门上的屋瓦几乎全部揭掉。
English: In winter, a strong wind hit Chang'an City, and the roof tiles of the East Gate were blown away.

古文：五年正月，袷祭明堂，诸侯王二十八人，列侯百二十人，宗室子九百余人，征助祭。
现代文：元始五年正月，在明堂裹合祭远近祖先的神主，有诸侯王二十八人，列侯一百二十人，皇族子弟九百多人应征陪同皇上祭祀。
English: In the first month of the first year of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, there were twenty-eight princes and princes, one hundred and twenty vassals, and more than nine hundred members of the imperial family who were conscripted to accompany the emperor to the sacrifice of the god of the ancestors in the Ming Hall.

古文：礼毕，封孝宣曾孙信第三十六人为列侯，余皆益户赐爵，金、帛之赏各有数。
现代文：祭礼结束，赐封孝宣帝的曾孙刘信等三十六人为列侯，其他人都增加封地民户，赐封爵位，金钱和丝帛的赏赐各有差别。
English: At the end of the ceremony, thirty-six people, including Liu Xin, the great-grandson of Emperor Xiao Xuan, who was given the title of vassal, were made vassals. The others were all given additional fiefs, knighthoods, and different amounts of money and silk brocade.

古文：是时，吏民以莽不受新野田而上书者前后四十八万七千五百七十二人，及诸侯、王公、列侯、宗室见者皆叩头言，宜亟加赏于安汉公。
现代文：这时，官吏和百姓因为王莽不接受新野县的田地而上书的，前后达四十八万七千五百七十二人，以及诸侯王、公爵、列侯和皇族被召见的，都叩头说，应该从速给安汉公增加封赏。
English: At this time, the officials and the people, because Wang Mang did not accept the fields of Nino County, submitted a letter, amounting to 487,572, and the princes, dukes, vassals and imperial family were summoned to see, and they all bowed down and said that it was necessary to increase the reward to An Han Gong immediately.

古文：于是莽上书曰： 臣以外属，越次备位，未能奉称。
现代文：是王莽上书说：臣以外戚的身份，超越等级空占官位，未能称职。
English: It was Wang Mang who wrote: the status of a relative other than a vassal, exceeding the rank and occupying the official position, failed to perform his duties.

古文：伏念圣德纯茂。承天当古，制礼以治民，作乐以移风，四海奔走，百蛮并臻，辞去之日，莫不陨涕，非有款诚，岂可虚致？
现代文：俯伏思念陛下的圣德纯朴，顺应天意，符合古训，制定礼法去治理百姓，创作乐教去改变风俗，天下来朝，所有蛮夷都来归附朝廷，告别离去的那天，没有人不落泪。
English: He prostrated himself, thinking of His Majesty's holiness and simplicity, obeying the will of heaven, conforming to the ancient teachings, formulating etiquette to govern the people, creating music to change customs. As the heavens fall, all barbarians will come to join the imperial court. On the day of farewell, no one will not shed tears.

古文：自诸侯王已下至于吏民，咸知臣莽上与陛下有葭莩之故，又得典职，每归功列德者，辄以臣莽为余言。
现代文：如果不是出自内心，难道可以用空话招致？从诸侯王以下直到官吏、黎民百姓，都知道臣王莽上面跟陛下有亲属关系，又身居要职，每次歌功颂德，总要顺带说到臣王莽。
English: If it is not from the heart, can it be invited with empty words? From the princes and kings down to the officials and the people, they all know that the vassal Wang Mang has a family relationship with His Majesty, and he is in an important position. Every time they sing the praises of merit, they must always mention the vassal Wang Mang.

古文：臣见诸侯面言事于前者，未尝不流汗而渐愧也。
现代文：我看到诸侯在您面前提到这些事时，总是感到惭愧。
English: I always feel ashamed when I see princes mention these things in front of you.

古文：虽性愚鄙，至诚自知，德薄位尊，力少任大，夙夜悼栗，常恐污辱圣朝。
现代文：我虽然生性愚钝鄙陋，却有自知之明，德行薄而官位高，能力小而责任大，朝夕恐惧颤栗，常常担心玷污朝廷。
English: Although I am stupid and despicable by nature, I am self-aware. I have little virtue but a high official rank, little ability but great responsibility. I tremble with fear in the morning and evening, and often worry about tarnishing the imperial court.

古文：今天下治平，风俗齐风，百蛮率服，毕陛下圣德所自躬亲，太师光、太保舜等辅政佐治，群卿大夫莫不忠良，故能以五年之间至致此焉。
现代文：现在天下太平，风气整齐划一，所以外族归服，都是由于陛下的圣明德行所致，太师孔光、太保王舜等人辅佐朝政，协助治理的结果，各位卿大夫没有人不是忠臣良吏，所以能在五年的时间裹获得这样的政绩。
English: At present, the world is peaceful and the culture is uniform. Therefore, the submission of foreigners is all due to His Majesty's saintly and virtuous conduct. Grand Master Kong Guang, Grand Master Bao Wangtao and others have assisted the government of the dynasty and assisted the governance. There is no one among you who is not a loyal subject and a good official, so you can achieve such a political achievement in five years.

古文：臣莽实无奇策异谋。
现代文：臣王莽确实没有奇妙的计策和特殊的谋略。
English: Subordinate Wang Mang really does not have any strange stratagems or special strategies.

古文：奉承太后圣诏，宣之于下，不能得什一；受群贤之筹画，而上以闻，不得能什伍。
现代文：衹是秉承太后的圣旨，向下传达，还不能领会十分之一；接受众贤臣的筹措谋划，向上汇报，还不能归纳十分之五。
English: It is adhering to the sacred will of the empress dowager, communicating downwards, but cannot yet understand one-tenth; accepting the mobilization and planning of all the wise men and reporting to the top, but cannot yet summarize five-tenths.

古文：当被无益之辜，所以敢且保首领须臾者，诚上休陛下余光，而下依群公之故也。
现代文：本当承担办事不力的罪责，之所以得能暂时保全性命，实在是上面多受陛下的庇荫，下面依靠大臣们支持的缘故。
English: In fact, the reason why he was able to temporarily save his life by taking the blame for his poor performance was because he was protected by His Majesty above and supported by his ministers below.

古文：陛下不忍众言，辄下其章于议者。
现代文：陛下不耐烦众多的奏议，总是把那些奏章下交议事的官吏。
English: His Majesty was impatient with the large number of petitions, and always referred those petitions to the officials.

古文：臣莽前欲立奏止，恐其遂不肯止。
现代文：臣王莽先前打算立即上书请求您予以制止，又担心他们总是不肯停止。
English: Minister Wang Mang had planned to write to you immediately to ask you to stop it, but he was worried that they would not stop.

古文：今大礼已行，助祭者毕辞，不胜至愿，愿诸章下议者皆寝勿上，使臣莽得尽力毕制礼作乐事。
现代文：现在祭礼已经举行，参加祭礼的人都已告辞，我最大的愿望，就是希望下交臣下讨论的奏章都停止议论不要上报，让臣王莽得以尽全力完成制礼作乐的事业。
English: Now that the festival has been held and everyone who participated in the festival has left, my greatest wish is that the subordinate vassals should stop discussing and not report on the music, so that the vassal Wang Mang can do his best to complete the cause of making music.

古文：事成，以传示天下，与海内平之。
现代文：遣件事办成后，将其昭示全国，让天下人来品评。
English: After the dispatch is completed, it will be announced to the whole country for people from all over the world to evaluate.

古文：即有所间非，则臣莽当被诖上误朝之罪。如无他谴，得全命赐骸骨归家，避贤者路，是臣之私愿也。
现代文：如果有受到非议的地方，那么臣王莽就当承担牵累皇上贻误朝廷的大罪；如果没有其他责备，得以保全性命，赐准臣退休回家，给贤德的人让路，这是我的个人愿望。
English: If there is a reproach, then the vassal Wang Mang should bear the great sin of dragging the emperor to mislead the court; if there is no other reproach, it is my personal wish to be able to save my life, give the vassal to retire home, and make way for the virtuous.

古文：惟陛下哀怜财幸！ 
现代文：希望陛下同情怜悯才好！
English: I hope His Majesty will have pity!

古文：甄邯等白太后，诏曰： 可。
现代文：甄邯等人禀告玉立后，下诏书说： 可以。
English: After Zhen Rong and others made a false accusation against Yuling, the next edict said: "Yes."

古文：惟公功德光于天下，是以诸侯、王公、列侯、宗室、诸生、吏民翕然同辞，连守阙庭，故下其章。
现代文：衹是安漠公的功德光照全国，因此诸侯王、三公九卿、列侯、皇族、儒生、官吏和平民意见一致，连续守候在宫庭前，所以交下了他们的奏章。
English: It is the merit of Prince Anmu that shines throughout the country. Therefore, the princes, the three princes, the nine nobles, the vassals, the imperial family, the Confucians, the officials and the common people agreed to wait continuously in front of the palace, so they handed in their medals.

古文：诸侯、宗室辞去之日，复见前重陈，虽晓喻罢遣，犹不肯去。
现代文：诸侯、皇族离去的那天，再次到宫门、宫殿前郑重上奏，虽然已经明确告知解散，还是不肯离去。
English: On the day when the lords and the imperial family left, they once again went to the palace gate and the palace to solemnly play. Although they had been clearly informed of the dissolution, they still refused to leave.

古文：告以孟夏将行厥赏，莫不欢悦，称万岁而退。
现代文：后来告诉他们初夏将实行这项赏赐，没有人不欢欣，高呼万岁退去。
English: Later, they were told that this reward would be implemented in the early summer, and no one was not happy, shouting "long live the retreat."

古文：今公每见，辄流涕叩头言愿不受赏，赏即加不敢当位。
现代文：现在安汉公每次进见，总是流泪磕头说希望不要给予赏赐，如果实行赏赐就不敢担任现在的职位。
English: Now, whenever Anhan visits, he always tears up and says that he hopes no reward will be given. If a reward is given, he would not dare to hold his current position.

古文：方制作未定，事须公而决，故且听公。
现代文：正当制礼作乐的工作还没有结束，事事须要安汉公作决定，所以暂且听从他的意见。
English: The work of making music with proper etiquette has not yet ended, and everything needs to be decided by Anhan, so I will listen to his opinion for the time being.

古文：制作毕成，群公以闻。
现代文：等到制礼作乐完成了，大臣们把情况报上来。
English: After the ceremony and music were over, the ministers reported the situation to the emperor.

古文：究于前议，其九锡礼仪亟奏。 
现代文：对以前的议论加以深入研究。把赏赐九锡礼仪尽快报告上来。 
English: Make a thorough study of the previous discussions. Report the awarding of the Jiuxi etiquette as soon as possible.

古文：于是公卿大夫、博士、议郎、列侯张纯等九百二人皆曰： 圣帝明王招贤劝能，德盛者位高，功大者赏厚。
现代文：于是公卿大夫、博士、议郎、富平侯张纯等九百零二人都说： 圣明的帝王招纳贤士，奖励有才能的人，德高者权位高，功大者赏赐多。
English: As a result, nine hundred and two people, including court nobles, doctors, doctors of science, councilors, and Fuping marquis Zhang Chun, said: The holy emperor recruits sages, rewards talented people, those with high morality have high power, and those with great merits are rewarded more.

古文：故宗臣有九命上公之尊，则有九锡登等之宠。
现代文：所以德高望重的大臣可以获得九级上公的崇高地位，享受九种赏赐超过常等的荣誉。
English: Therefore, a highly respected minister can obtain the lofty status of a nine-level Shangguo and enjoy nine kinds of honors beyond ordinary honors.

古文：今九族亲睦，百姓既章，万国和协，黎民时雍，圣瑞毕溱，太平已洽。
现代文：现在皇族外戚亲爱和睦，百官公卿也已明确设立，四周各国友好和睦，百姓们善良和睦，祥瑞的吉兆到处都是，太平景象已广泛出现。
English: Now, the imperial family's relatives are loving and harmonious, the ranks of the hundred officials and nobles have also been clearly established, the surrounding countries are friendly and harmonious, the people are kind and harmonious, the auspicious signs of auspiciousness are everywhere, and the peaceful scene has appeared widely.

古文：帝者之盛莫隆于唐、虞，而陛下任之；忠臣茂功莫著于伊、周，而宰衡配之。
现代文：帝王的伟业没有比唐尧、虞爱更突出的，而陛下胜任得了；忠臣的丰功没有比伊尹、周公更显著的，而宰衡配得上。
English: The great deeds of emperors are no more outstanding than those of Tang Xuan and Yu Ai, but His Majesty is qualified; the great achievements of loyal subjects are no more conspicuous than those of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, but Zai Heng is worthy.

古文：所谓异时而兴，如合符者也。
现代文：造就是所谓人虽然不能同时，而功业却若合符节。
English: Creation is the so-called people, although not at the same time, but if the work is in line with the signs.

古文：谨以《六艺》通义，经文所见，《周官》、《礼记》宜于今者，为九命之锡。臣请命锡。 
现代文：谨用《六艺》适用于一般的原则，经文中所记载，《周官》、《礼记》还适用于今天情况的，拟定赏赐九锡的方案，我们请求陛下下令实行这一赏赐。 
English: We would like to use the general principles of the Six Arts, as recorded in the scriptures, and the principles of the Zhou Guan and the Book of Rites as applicable to today's situation, to draw up a plan to reward Jiuxi, and we ask His Majesty to order the implementation of this reward.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：策曰：
现代文：策书说：
English: The policy paper said:

古文：惟元始五年五月庚寅，太皇太后临于前殿，延登，亲诏之曰：公进，虚听朕言。
现代文：元始五年五月庚寅曰，太皇太后亲临前殿，请安汉公上殿，亲自命令他道： 您过来，耐心地听取我的话。
English: In May of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Geng Yin said that the great empress dowager personally came to the front hall, invited Anhan to come to the hall, and personally ordered him to say: You come here, patiently listen to my words.

古文：前公宿卫孝成皇帝十有六年，纳策尽忠，白诛故定陵侯淳于长，以弥乱发奸，登大司马，职在内辅。
现代文：以前您侍奉保卫孝成皇帝十六年，进计献策，竭尽忠心，建议严惩原定陵侯淳于长，从而制止了祸乱，揭露了奸邪，升作大司马，职责是在朝中辅佐皇上。
English: Previously, you served the Emperor Bao Wei and Xiao Cheng for 16 years. You provided advice and tried your best to be loyal. You proposed to severely punish the former imperial vassal Jun Yuchang, thus stopping the calamity and exposing the treachery. You were promoted to the position of grand steward, and your duties were to assist the emperor in the middle of the court.

古文：孝哀皇帝即位，骄妾窥欲，奸臣萌动，公手劾高昌侯董宏，改正故定陶共王母之僣坐。
现代文：孝哀皇帝登上皇位，骄横的妃妾想窃取太皇太后的尊号，奸佞的臣子企图制造混乱，是您亲自弹劾高昌侯董宏的罪行，改正原定陶共王母亲超越名分的座次。
English: The Emperor Xiao Yan ascended the throne, the arrogant concubine wanted to steal the honorary title of the Grand Empress Dowager, and the treacherous vassal attempted to create chaos. It was your crime to personally impeach Gaochang Hou Donghong and correct the original order of the mother of the Taoist King exceeding the rank.

古文：自是之后，朝臣论议，靡不据经。
现代文：从此后，朝廷大臣讨论商议政事，没有不根据经典的。
English: From then on, the ministers of the Imperial Court discussed and deliberated on political affairs, which was nothing new according to the classics.

古文：以病辞位，归于第家，为贼臣所陷。
现代文：后来您因病辞去大司马的职位，回到府第家宅，被奸贼所陷害。
English: Later, due to illness, you resigned from your position as chief steward and returned to your home in the prefecture, where you were set up by a thief.

古文：就国之后，孝哀皇帝觉寤，复还公长安，临病加剧，犹不忘公，复特进位。
现代文：回到封国之后，孝哀皇帝醒悟过来，又把您召回长安，到他病情加剧的时候，还没有忘记您，给您恢复了特进的职位。
English: After returning to the fiefdom, Emperor Xiao Ai came to his senses and called you back to Chang'an. When his illness worsened, he did not forget you and restored your position as a special envoy.

古文：是夜仓卒，国无储主，奸臣充朝，危殆甚矣。
现代文：这天晚上发生突然变故，国家没有皇位继承人，奸邪的臣子充斥朝廷，情况非常危急。
English: That evening, a sudden change of fortune occurred. The country had no heir to the throne, and treacherous courtiers filled the imperial court. The situation was very critical.

古文：朕惟定国之计莫宜于公，引纳于朝，即日罢退高安侯董贤，转漏之间，忠策辄建，纲纪咸张。
现代文：我想安定朝邦的大计没有人比您更合适了，就把您召进朝中，当天就罢免斥退了高安侯董贤，片刻之间，忠于朝廷的政策就制定好了，国家的法纪得以实施。
English: I think there is no one more suitable than you for the grand plan of stabilizing the dynasty and the country, so I summoned you to the court and dismissed Gaoan Hou Dongxian on the same day. In an instant, the policy of loyalty to the court was formulated, and the country's laws and regulations were implemented.

古文：绶和、元寿，再遭大行，万事皆举，祸乱不作。
现代文：绥和、元寿年间，两次遭遇皇帝辞世，很多事情都得到妥善处理，祸乱没有发生。
English: During the years of the Sino-Japanese War and the Yuan Shou, the emperor died twice. Many things were handled properly, and the disaster did not happen.

古文：辅朕五年，人伦之本正，天地之位定。
现代文：辅佐我五年以来，人伦关系的根本得以纠正，天地的位置得以确定。
English: Since assisting me for five years, the foundation of interpersonal relationships has been corrected, and the position of heaven and earth has been determined.

古文：钦承神祇，经纬四时，复千载之废，矫百世之失，天下和会，大众方辑。
现代文：恭敬地祭祀天地，按天时进行政务和农务，治理得井井有条；恢复了废弃千年的体制，矫正了百代的失误，全国祥和，大众和睦。
English: He reverently sacrificed heaven and earth, conducted government affairs and agricultural affairs according to the celestial time, and governed in an orderly manner. He restored the system that had been abandoned for a thousand years, corrected the mistakes of a hundred generations, and brought peace to the whole country and harmony to the public.

古文：《诗》之灵台，《书》之作雒，镐京之制，商邑之度，于今复兴。
现代文：《诗经》记载的周文王在丰京建灵台的事，《书经》记载周公营造雒邑的事，镐京的体制，商邑的法度，到现在又复兴了。
English: Zhou Wenwang's construction of a spiritual platform in Fengjing, recorded in the "Book of Poetry," and Zhou Gongjun's construction of Shunyi, the system of Shunyi, and the laws of the merchants, recorded in the "Book of Books," have been revived to this day.

古文：昭章先帝之元功，明著祖宗之令德，推显严父配天之义，修立郊禘宗祀之礼，以光大孝。
现代文：宣扬先帝的伟大功勋，宣传祖宗的美德，推行宣扬尊奉祖先配享上天的原则，好好设立郊祀、椅祀和宗祀的礼法，以发扬孝道。
English: To propagate the great merits of the former emperor, to propagate the virtues of the ancestors, to promote the principle of respecting and honoring the ancestors to enjoy heaven, and to establish the etiquette of suburban worship, chair worship and ancestral worship in order to promote filial piety.

古文：是以四海雍雍，万国慕义，蛮夷殊俗，不召自至，渐化端冕，奉珍助祭。
现代文：因此天下和谐，许多国家向往，那些蛮夷民族，不用召唤就自己前来，接受教化改变服饰，进献珍宝，参加祭祀大礼。
English: Therefore, there is harmony in the world, and many countries yearn for it. Those barbarian nations do not need to be summoned to come on their own, accept enlightenment, change clothes, donate treasures, and participate in sacrificial rites.

古文：寻旧本道，遵术重古，动而有成，事得厥中。
现代文：寻求古代的典章制度，依据圣人正道，遵循儒术、重视古代的传统，凡事必见成效，凡事则恰到好处。
English: Seeking the ancient ceremonial system, following the righteous path of sages, following Confucianism, and attaching importance to ancient traditions, everything must be effective, and everything is just right.

古文：至德要道，通于神明，祖考嘉享。
现代文：具备了忠君孝亲的正道高德，能和神灵相沟通，祖先得到好的供奉。
English: They possess the high moral standards of loyalty and filial piety, are able to communicate with the gods, and their ancestors receive good offerings.

古文：光耀显章，天符仍臻，元气大同。
现代文：光辉照耀、灿烂辉煌，上天的符命多次降临，全国人民精神振奋，共享太平。
English: The glory shines, the splendor shines, the heavenly signs and decrees have come down many times, the spirit of the people throughout the country is uplifted, and peace is shared.

古文：麟凤龟龙，众祥之瑞，七百有余。
现代文：麒麟、凤凰、神龟、黄龙，众多吉祥的征兆，出现了七百多次。
English: The unicorn, the phoenix, the tortoise, the yellow dragon, many auspicious signs, appeared more than seven hundred times.

古文：遂制礼作乐，有绥靖宗庙社稷之大勋。
现代文：于是制定礼制，创作乐教，有安邦定国的重大功勋。
English: As a result, he established the etiquette system, created music and education, and made great contributions to the peace and stability of the country.

古文：普天之下，惟公是赖，官在宰衡，位为上公。
现代文：普天之下，把希望都寄托在您身上，您官居宰衡，爵位列于上公。
English: The whole world is pinning its hopes on you. Your official residence is Zaiheng, and your rank is listed as Shangguo.

古文：今加九命之锡，其以助祭，共文武之职，乃遂及厥祖。於戏，岂不休哉！
现代文：现在给予九锡的赏赐，应当用来参加祭祀，设置文武百官，您所得到的殊荣终于光宗耀祖。呜呼，岂不美哉？
English: The reward of Jiuxi given now should be used to participate in the sacrificial rites, set up a hundred civil and military officials, and the honor you have received will finally be given to Guangzong Yaozu. Wow, isn't it beautiful?

古文：于是莽稽首再拜，受绿韨衮冕衣赏，玚琫玚珌，句履，鸾路乘马，龙旂九旒，皮弁素积，戎路乘马，彤弓矢，卢弓矢，左建朱钺，右建金戚，甲胄一具，秬鬯二卣，圭瓒二，九命青玉珪二，朱户纳陛。
现代文：因而王莽再次磕头拜谢，接受了绿色的围裙、礼服、礼帽和日常穿的衣裳，镶着玉的佩刀，歧头靴子，带响铃的辂车和四匹马，悬垂九束绦子作装饰的大龙旗，皮革做的武冠和白色战袍，戎车和四匹战马，红色弓箭，黑色弓箭，府门左边竖着红色的斧铁，右边竖着金色斧铁，盔甲各一领，香酒两卣，玉勺两只，象征最高级官爵的九命青玉圭两枚，允许安装红漆大门和营造檐内台阶。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang once again bowed his head in thanks and accepted green aprons, ceremonial dresses, ceremonial caps and everyday clothes, jade-encrusted sabers, boots with turned toes, a carriage with a bell and four horses, a large dragon flag with nine bundles of braids for decoration, a leather war crown and a white battle robe, a military vehicle and four war horses, red bows and arrows, black bows and arrows, a red axe on the left side of the government gate, a golden axe on the right side, a collar of armor, two jars of spiced wine, two jade spoons, two nine-life jade balls

古文：署宗官、祝官、卜官、史官，虎贲三百人，家令丞各一人，宗、祝、卜、史官皆置啬夫，佐官汉公。
现代文：设置宗官、祝、卜官、史官，虎贲三百人，家令、家丞各一人，宗、祝、卜、史等官都设啬夫，辅佐安汉公。
English: Set up the officials of the patriarch, the celebrant, the diviner, and the historian, with a total of three hundred people, one each of the family leader and the family secretary, and the officials of the patriarch, the celebrant, the diviner, and the historian were all set up to assist Anhan.

古文：在中府外第，虎贲为门卫，当出入者傅籍。
现代文：在官署和私宅，虎贲勇士作门卫，要出入的人必须登记在册。
English: In government offices and private homes, vise warriors act as gatekeepers, and people who want to enter and leave must be registered.

古文：自四辅、三公有事府第，皆用传。
现代文：从四辅、三公起，有事要进入官署和宅，都要使用令符。
English: From Shifu and Sanko onwards, if you need to enter a government office or residence, you must use a warrant.

古文：以楚王邸为安汉公第，大缮治，通周卫。
现代文：把楚王驻京官邸作为安汉公的府第，大加修缮整治，使之和周围的警卫相通。
English: King Chu's official residence in Beijing was designated as the Anhan's official residence, and it was extensively renovated so that it could communicate with the surrounding guards.

古文：祖祢庙及寝皆为朱户纳陛。
现代文：祖宗的祭庙和寝庙都可以安装红漆大门并营造檐内台阶。
English: Both the ancestral temple and the sleeping temple can install the red lacquer door and create the inner steps.

古文：陈崇又奏： 安汉公祠祖祢，出城门，城门校尉宜将骑士从。
现代文：速崇又上奏说： 安汉公祭祀祖先，从城门出，城门校尉应该派骑士跟从。
English: Hayataka also made a report, saying: Anhan Gong is out of the city gate to worship his ancestors, and the captain of the city gate should send a knight to follow him.

古文：入有门卫，出有骑士，所以重国也。 
现代文：入城有卫保护，出城有骑士跟随，这是为了尊重国家。 
English: Entering the city is protected by guards, and leaving the city is followed by knights. This is to respect the country.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章得到了批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：其秋，莽以皇后有子孙瑞，通子午道。
现代文：这年秋天，王莽因为他女儿王皇后有了生育的祥瑞征兆，就开凿子午道。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wang Mang, because his daughter Wang Quen had the auspicious sign of giving birth, started the Zi Mei Dao.

古文：子午道从杜陵直绝南山，径汉中。
现代文：子午道从杜陵开始，横穿终南山，直达汉中。
English: The Meridian Road starts from Duling, crosses Nanshan and ends in Hanzhong.

古文：风俗使者八人还，言天下风俗齐同，诈为郡国造歌谣，颂功德，凡三万言。
现代文：八个风俗使者回来了，说天下风俗整齐划一，他们伪造各郡、各封国民歌、民谣，歌功颂德，共有三万字。
English: Eight emissaries of customs returned, saying that the customs of the world are uniform. They forged national songs, folk songs, and songs praising merits in every county and province, totaling 30,000 words.

古文：莽奏定著令。
现代文：王莽把它上奏，明确记载到文献上。
English: Wang Mang played it and recorded it clearly in the literature.

古文：又奏为市无二贾，官无狱讼，邑无盗贼，野无饥民，道不拾遗，男女异路之制，犯者象刑。
现代文：又上奏说市上物无二价，官府没有诉讼案件，城裹没有盗贼，郊外没有饥民，人们路不拾遣，实行男女不一同走路的制度，违反者祇受到象征性的处罚。
English: It was also reported that there was no second price on the market, there were no lawsuits from the government, there were no thieves in the city, there were no hungry people in the suburbs, people did not pick up the road, the system of men and women not walking together was implemented, and violators were only subject to symbolic punishment.

古文：刘歆、陈崇等十二人皆以治明堂，宣教化，封为列侯。
现代文：刘歆、陈崇等十二人都因为修建明堂，宣扬教化，被封为列侯。
English: Liu Xuan, Chen Chong and twelve others were made lords of the manor for building the Ming Hall and preaching enlightenment.

古文：莽既致太平，北化匈奴，东致海外，南怀黄支，唯西方未有加。
现代文：王莽既已实现了太平，北方感化了匈奴，东方招来了海外国家，南方怀柔了黄支，衹有西方还没有受到影响。
English: Wang Mang has already achieved peace, the north has influenced the Xiongnu, the east has invited overseas countries, the south has softened the yellow branch, and the west has not yet been affected.

古文：乃遣中郎将平宪等多持金币诱塞外羌，使献地，愿内属。
现代文：便派遣中郎将乎宪等多带金银财宝去招引塞外的羌人，让他们献出土地，表示愿意归属汉朝。
English: He then dispatched his middle-ranking vassals, such as Gu Xian, with much gold, silver, and treasure to lure the Xiong people from outside of Tibet, so that they would offer land and express their willingness to belong to the Han Dynasty.

古文：宪等奏言： 羌豪良愿等种，人口可万二千人，愿为内臣，献鲜水海、允谷盐池，平地美草皆予汉民，自居险阻处为藩蔽。
现代文：平宪等奏报说： 羌人首领良愿等部落，人口约一万二千人，愿意作我国的臣民，献上鲜水海和允谷盐池，平坦的土地和美丽的草原都交给汉朝人民，自己住到险要阻塞的地方，作为我国的屏障。
English: Ping Xian and other tribals, with a population of about twelve thousand, are willing to be subjects of our country, offering the fresh water sea and the salt ponds of Yung Valley, the flat land and the beautiful grasslands to the people of the Han Dynasty, and living in places that are in danger of being blocked, as a barrier to our country.

古文：问良愿降意，对曰： 太皇太后圣明，安汉公至仁，天下太平，五谷成熟，或禾长丈余，或一粟三米，或不种自生，或茧不蚕自成，甘露从天下，醴泉自地出，凤皇来仪，神爵降集。
现代文：询问良愿归降的用意，他回答说： 太皇太后圣明，安汉公大仁大义，天下太平，五谷丰登，有的禾苗长到一丈多长，有的一个谷秆上结出三个谷穗，有的甚至并未播种，却自己长出庄稼，有的茧必蚕吐丝就能自己织成，甘露从天而降，甜美的泉水从地下涌出，凤凰因向往而飞来，神雀降落栖息。
English: When asked about his intention to abdicate, he replied: The empress dowager is a saint, the Han Dynasty is peaceful and benevolent, the world is at peace, and there is plenty of grain. Some grass seedlings grow to a height of more than one meter, some have three ears of grain on a stalk, some have not even been sown, but grow their own crops, and some cocoons can be woven by silkworms spinning silk. Nectar falls from the sky, sweet spring water gushes from the ground, phoenixes fly because of yearning, and sacred sparrows land to roost.

古文：从四岁以来，羌人无所疾苦，故思乐内属。 宜以时处业，置属国领护。 
现代文：自从四年以来，羌人没有痛苦，所以希望并乐意归属汉朝，应当及时安排他们的生产，设置附属统领保护他们。 
English: Since four years ago, the Qiang people have not suffered, so they hope and are willing to belong to the Han Dynasty. It is necessary to arrange their production in a timely manner and set up subordinate leaders to protect them.

古文：事下莽，莽复奏曰： 太后秉统数年，恩泽洋溢，和气四塞，绝域殊俗，靡不慕义。
现代文：事情交给王莽处理，王莽回奏说： 太后主持国务几年来，恩惠广泛传播，祥和之气充满四方，很远的地方和不同风俗的民族，无不向往德义。
English: The matter was handed over to Wang Mang to deal with, and Wang Mang echoed: Over the past few years that the empress dowager has presided over the state, the grace has been widely spread, and the atmosphere of peace has filled the four directions. Far away places and peoples with different customs all yearn for virtue and righteousness.

古文：越裳氏重译献白雉，黄支自三万里贡生犀，东夷王度大海奉国珍，匈奴单于顺制作，去二名，今西域良愿等复举地为臣妾，昔唐尧横被四表，亦亡以加之。
现代文：越裳氏经过辗转翻译进献上白色的雉鸡，黄支从三万里外进贡来活犀牛，束夷王横渡大海奉送国宝，匈奴单于顺从我国的制度，去掉双名，而今西域良愿等又献上上地甘作我国的臣属，过去唐尧的声威远播四方，也不过如此。
English: After being translated and translated, the Yuexiang clan presented a white pheasant chicken, the Huangzhi clan paid tribute from 30,000 miles away to bring a live rhinoceros, the King of Shuai crossed the sea to send a national treasure, the Xiongnu simply obeyed our country's system and removed the double name, and now the Western Regions Goodwill and others also presented the land to be our country's vassals. In the past, Tang Xuan's reputation spread far and wide, and it is no more than that.

古文：今谨案已有东海、南海、北海郡，未有西海郡，请受良愿等所献地为西海郡。
现代文：现在经谨慎查考我国已有丁东海、南海和北海郡，没有西海郡，请接受良愿等所进献的土地为西海郡。
English: Now, after careful examination, there are Ding Donghai, Nanhai and Beihai counties in our country, but there is no Xihai county. Please accept the land donated by well-wishers as Xihai county.

古文：臣又闻圣王序天文，定地理，因山川民俗以制州界。
现代文：臣又听说圣明的君王序列天文，规划地理，根据山 。形势和民风来划定州界。
English: The minister also heard that the kings of the Ming Dynasty followed the astronomical sequence, planned the geography, and delineated the state boundaries according to the mountains, the situation, and the people's customs.

古文：汉家地广二帝、三王，凡十三州，州名及界多不应经。
现代文：汉朝的版图比唐尧、虞舜二帝和夏、商、周三王还要广阔，共有十二州，州名和州界多不符合经书的记载。
English: The territory of the Han Dynasty was even more extensive than that of Tang Xuan, Emperor Yujing II, Emperor Xia, Emperor Shang, and Emperor Wuzhong. There were a total of 12 states, and most of the state names and state boundaries did not conform to the records in the scriptures.

古文：《尧典》十有二州，后定为九州。
现代文：《尧典》说有十二州，后来定为九州。
English: "Shosetsu" says that there are twelve states, later it was determined to be Kyushu.

古文：汉家廓地辽远，州牧行部，远者三万余里，不可为九。
现代文：汉朝开拓疆土达到极远的地方，州牧定期巡察辖区，最远的有三万多里，不可以衹分为九州。
English: The Han Dynasty's exploration of the territory reached extremely distant places, the state pastoral regular inspection jurisdiction area, the farthest is more than thirty thousand miles, can not be divided into Kyushu.

古文：谨以经义正十二州名分界，以应正始。 
现代文：谨请用经书规定的原则订正十二州的名分和州界，以求合乎礼法。 
English: I respectfully request you to revise the names and boundaries of the 12 states in accordance with the principles laid down in the Holy Book in order to conform to the rules of propriety.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被认可了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：又增法五十条，犯者徙之西海。
现代文：又增设法规五十条，违犯的人就把他们流放到西海郡去。
English: Another 50 regulations were added, and those who violated them were exiled to Sihai County.

古文：徙者以千万数，民始怨矣。
现代文：被流放的人以千万计，人民开始怨恨了。
English: The exiles numbered in the tens of thousands, and the people began to resent them.

古文：泉陵侯刘庆上书言： 周成王幼少，称孺子，周公居摄。
现代文：泉陵侯刘庆上书说： 周成王少年时，称作孺子，周公代理朝政。
English: Quanling Hou Liu Qing wrote: When Zhou Cheng Wang was a boy, he was called Zizi, and Zhou Gong was an agent of the imperial government.

古文：今帝富于春秋，宜令安汉公行天子事，如周公。 
现代文：当今皇帝年纪还小，应该让安汉公代行天子之事，像周公当年一样。 
English: Today's emperor is still young, and Anhan Gong should be allowed to act on behalf of the emperor, just like Zhou Gong did back then.

古文：郡臣皆曰： 宜如庆言。 
现代文：众位大臣都说： 应该按刘庆说的做。 
English: All the ministers said: We should do what Liu Qing said.

古文：冬，荧惑入月中。
现代文：冬季，火星经过月球背面。
English: In winter, Mars passes behind the Moon.

古文：平帝疾，莽作策，请命于泰畤，戴璧秉圭，愿以身代。
现代文：平帝生病，王莽写了策书，到泰时，替平帝祈祷平安，保住性命，他佩戴玉璧，捧着玉圭，愿意用自己的性命代替平帝。
English: When Emperor Ping fell ill, Wang Mang wrote a strategy book. When he arrived in Thailand, he prayed for Emperor Ping's safety and saved his life. He wore a jade brooch and held a jade key, and was willing to use his own life to replace Emperor Ping.

古文：藏策金滕，置于前殿，敕诸公勿敢言。
现代文：他把策书收藏在保险柜裹，放在前殿，告诫大臣们不要说出去。
English: He kept the policy book in a safe and put it in the vestibule, warning the ministers not to speak out.

古文：十二月，平帝崩，大赦天下。
现代文：十二月间，平帝去世，宣布大赦天下。
English: In December, Emperor Ping died, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：莽征明礼者宗伯凤等与定天下吏六百石以上皆服丧三年。
现代文：王莽征召通晓礼仪的宗伯凤等人参与决定让全国六百石以上的官吏一律服丧三年。
English: Wang Mang called on Zong Bofeng and others who were familiar with the etiquette to participate in the decision to make all officials with more than six hundred koku in the country serve three years of mourning.

古文：奏尊孝成庙曰统宗，孝平庙曰元宗。
现代文：奏报太后，尊称孝成帝庙为统宗，平帝庙叫作元宗。
English: According to the report of the empress dowager, the honorific name of the Xiaocheng Imperial Temple is the unified sect, and the Ping Imperial Temple is called the Yuan sect.

古文：时元帝世绝，而宣帝曾孙有见王五人，列侯广戚侯显等四十八人，莽恶其长大，曰： 兄弟不得相为后。
现代文：这时元帝的后裔已全部死去，而宣帝的曾孙，活着的有现在当王的五人，作列侯的广戚侯刘显等四十八人，王莽嫌他们都已长大成人不易控制，便说： 兄弟平辈之间，不能继承帝位。 
English: At this time, the descendants of Emperor Yuan had all died, but the great-grandchildren of Emperor Xuan, including the five who are now kings, and the great-grandson of Liu Xian, who was a vassal, and forty-eight others, were still alive. Wang Mang suspected that they had all grown up and were not easy to control, so he said: "Among brothers and peers, you cannot inherit the throne."

古文：乃选玄孙中最幼广戚侯子婴，年二岁，托以为卜相最吉。
现代文：于是就选择了玄孙中年龄最小的广戚侯的儿子刘婴，年仅二岁，藉口说他占卜、看相最吉利。
English: So he chose the youngest of his great-great-grandchildren, the two-year-old Liu Jiao, the son of his great-uncle, on the pretext that he could tell fortunes and had the most auspicious appearance.

古文：是月，前辉光谢嚣奏武功长孟通浚井得白石，上圆下方，有丹书著石，文曰： 告安汉公莽为皇帝。 
现代文：这个月，前辉光谢嚣奏报武功县长孟通疏浚水井，挖出一块白石头，上部是圆形，下部是方形，上面有朱红色文字，写着 通告安汉公王莽为皇帝 。
English: This month, Meng Tong, the governor of Wugong County, dredged a well and dug out a white stone. The upper part is round, the lower part is square, and there is a scarlet letter on it. It says, "Announce that Prince Anhan is the emperor."

古文：符命之起，自此始矣。
现代文：神秘的符命兆告从此开始了。
English: This is where the mysterious omens begin.

古文：莽命群公以白太后，太后曰： 此诬罔天下，不可施行！ 
现代文：王莽让王公们把这件事禀告太后，太后说： 这是欺骗天下人的，不能照办。 
English: Wang Mang asked the princes to report the matter to the empress dowager. The empress dowager said, "This is deceiving the people of the world, and we cannot comply."

古文：太保舜谓太后： 事已如此，无可奈何，沮之力不能止。
现代文：太保王舜对太后说： 事情已经到了这个地步，没有别的办法，如果要阻止他我们已经无能为力。
English: "Things have come to this point, there is no other way, there is nothing we can do to stop him," Wang Yao, the royal bodyguard, told the empress.

古文：又莽非敢有它，但欲称摄以重其权，填服天下耳。 
现代文：再者，王莽并不敢有什么野心，祇是想要一个代行皇帝职权的名义，加强权力，镇服天下罢了。 
English: Moreover, Wang Mang did not dare to have any ambition, but only wanted to strengthen power and subdue the world in the name of an acting emperor's authority.

古文：太后听许。
现代文：太后听后答应了。
English: The empress dowager accepted Wang Mang's suggestion.

古文：舜等即共令太后下诏曰： 盖闻天生众民，不能相治，为之立君以统理之。
现代文：王舜等人就共请太后下诏说： 听说上天生下百姓众生，不可能互相治理，给他们设立君主去统治管理他们。
English: Wang Qian and others jointly asked the empress dowager to issue an edict, saying, "I have heard that it is impossible for all people to govern each other. Let's set up a monarch to rule and administer them."

古文：君年幼稚，必有寄托而居摄焉，然后能奉天施而成地化，群生茂育。
现代文：要是君主年龄小，一定要有人受委托去摄政，然后才能承受上天的布施从而完成人世的教化，让众生健康成长。
English: If the monarch is young, someone must be entrusted with the regency, and only then can they receive the blessings of heaven to complete the enlightenment of the human world and let all beings grow up healthily.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 天工，人其代之。 
现代文：《书经》上不是说过吗？ 上天的职能，人们应该去代理。 
English: Isn't it said in the "Book of Songs" that people should act as agents of God's functions?

古文：朕以孝平皇帝幼年，且统国政，几加元服，委政而属之。
现代文：朕在孝平皇帝幼年的时候，暂且统摄朝政，望他长大成人，把政权交付给他。
English: When Emperor Xiaoping was a child, I temporarily reigned over the imperial government, hoping that he would grow up and hand over the power to him.

古文：今短命而崩，呜呼哀哉！
现代文：如今他短命而逝，呜呼哀哉！
English: Now his life is cut short, alas!

古文：已使有司征孝宣皇帝玄孙二十三人，差度宜者，以嗣孝平皇帝之后。
现代文：已命主管官吏征召孝宣皇帝玄孙二十三人，挑选合适的人继承孝平皇帝的皇位。
English: The officials in charge have been ordered to conscript twenty-three great-great-grandsons of Emperor Xiaoxuan to select a suitable person to succeed Emperor Xiaoping.

古文：玄孙年在襁褓，不得至德君子，孰能安之？
现代文：玄孙还在襁褓之中，如果没有品德最高尚的君子，谁能保护他？
English: The great-grandson is still in the cradle. If there is no gentleman with the highest moral character, who can protect him?

古文：安汉公莽辅政三世，比遭际会，安光汉室，遂同殊风，至于制作，与周公异世同符。
现代文：安漠公辅佐朝政已经三代，多次受到皇上的赏识，安定朝邦、光大了汉室帝王基业，统一了全国，发展到了制礼作乐的大好形势，和周公所处的时代虽然不同，但接受的符命是相同的。
English: There have been three generations of Anmukongosuke supporting the imperial government. They have been appreciated by the emperor many times. They have stabilized the court and the country, expanded the Han Dynasty, unified the whole country, and developed into a great situation of ceremonial music. Although they are different from the era in which Zhou Gong was, they accept the same fate.

古文：今前辉光嚣、武功长通上言丹石之符，朕深思厥意，云 为皇帝 者，乃摄行皇帝之事也。
现代文：如今前辉光谢、武功县长孟通上报丹书白石的符命，朕仔细地思索其意，说 做皇帝，的意思，就是代行皇帝的职权。
English: Now that Meng Tong, the former Huiguangxie and the governor of Wugong County, has announced the fate of Dan Shuxi Baishi, I have carefully pondered its meaning and said that the meaning of being an emperor is to act as an emperor.

古文：夫有法成易，非圣人者亡法。
现代文：有了法制成功就容易，不是圣人就不能建立和完善法制。
English: With the legal system, success is easy. It is not a saint who can establish and improve the legal system.

古文：其令安汉公居摄践祚，如周公故事，以武功县为安汉公采地，名曰汉光邑。
现代文：应当让安汉公登上皇位，代行皇权，仿周公的成例，把武功县作为安汉公的采邑，起名叫汉光邑。
English: An Han Gong should be allowed to ascend to the throne and exercise imperial power on behalf of the emperor. Following the example of Zhou Gong, Wugong County should be named Han Guangyun as the capital of An Han Gong.

古文：具礼仪奏。 
现代文：至于需要什么典礼仪式，有关官吏要上报。 
English: As for what kind of ceremony is needed, the relevant officials should report it.

古文：于是群臣奏言： 太后圣德昭然，深见天意，诏令安汉公居摄。
现代文：于是大臣们上奏说： 太后的圣德昭示于全国，深刻领会到上天的旨意，下令安汉公居位摄政，代行皇权。
English: Then the ministers reported: "The holy virtue of the empress dowager has been manifested throughout the country. Having deeply comprehended the will of Heaven, she has ordered Anhan Gong to take the regency and act as regent.

古文：臣闻周成王幼少，周道未成，成王不能共事天地，修文、武之烈。
现代文：臣等听说周成王年龄幼小，周朝的治国之道未行，周成王不能恭敬地侍奉天地，继承和发展周文王和周武王的事业。
English: The courtiers heard that Zhou Cheng Wang was too young and the Zhou Dynasty's way of governing the country had not yet been carried out. Zhou Cheng Wang could not respectfully serve heaven and earth, inherit and develop the cause of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu.

古文：周公权而居摄，则周道成，王室安；不居摄，则恐周队失天命。
现代文：周公权衡当时的形势，居位摄政，于是周朝的治国之道得以确立，王族得到了安全；如果不居位摄政，就恐怕周朝会违背上天的旨意。
English: Zhou Gong weighed up the situation at that time and installed a regent. As a result, the Zhou Dynasty's way of governing the country was established and the royal family was safe. If the regent was not installed, I am afraid that the Zhou Dynasty would violate God's will.

古文：《书》曰： 我嗣事子孙，大不克共上下，遏失前人光，在家不知命不易。
现代文：《书经》说： 我们的继承事业的子孙，很不能恭敬地服事天地，断绝失去先王的光大之道，卿大夫的家臣不知承受天命的不容易。
English: "Scripture" said: Our descendants who inherit the cause are very unable to respectfully serve heaven and earth, to break the path of losing the glory of the former king, and the vassals of the noble doctor do not know that it is not easy to bear the fate of heaven.

古文：天应棐谌，乃亡队命。 说曰：周公服天子之冕，南面而朝群臣，发号施令，常称王命。
现代文：天应辅助诚信的人，才不会失去天命，解说经义的文章说：周公戴着天子的龙冠，坐北向南接受臣子们的见，发号施令，常把自己的意图称作周王的命令。
English: Heaven should support those who are honest, so that they will not lose their destiny. An article explaining the sutras says: Zhou Gong wore the dragon crown of the son of heaven, sat north to south to accept the opinions of his courtiers, issued orders, and often called his intentions the orders of King Zhou.

古文：召公贤人，不知圣人之意，故不说也。
现代文：召公是贤人，不了解圣人的意图，所以不高兴。
English: The summoner is a wise man, but he does not understand the saint's intention, so he is not happy.

古文：《礼·明堂记》曰 周公朝诸侯于明堂，天子负斧依南面而立。 
现代文：《礼记。明堂记》说： 周公在明堂接见诸侯，像天子一样，背靠着画有斧形的屏风面向南站着。 
English: "Li Ji. Ming Tang Ji" said: Zhou Gong received the princes in the Ming Hall, and stood facing south with his back against the axe-shaped screen, like a heavenly son.

古文：谓 周公践天子位，六年朝诸侯，制礼作乐，而天下大服 也。
现代文：说是 周公站在天子的地位，经过六年的时间，接见诸侯，制定礼制，创作乐教，从而使天下人心悦诚服 。
English: It is said that Zhou Gong stood in the position of the son of heaven, and after six years of time, he received the princes, formulated the etiquette, and created music and teaching, thus pleasing the people of the world.

古文：召公不说。
现代文：召公不高兴。
English: I'm not happy about being called up.

古文：时武王崩，■粗未除。
现代文：当时武王刚去世，作为丧服的斩续没有解除。
English: At that time, King Wu had just passed away, and the mourning dress was not removed.

古文：由是言之，周公始摄则居天了之位，非乃六年而践阼也。
现代文：从逭一点来说，周公开始摄政就居天子之位，并不是六年之后才登上束阶就位行事的。
English: From a practical point of view, Zhou Gong lived in the position of the son of heaven from the beginning of the regency, and it was not six years later that he ascended to the position and acted in place.

古文：《书》逸《嘉禾篇》曰： 周公奉鬯立于阼阶，延登，赞曰：假王莅政，勤和天下。 此周公摄政，赞者所称。
现代文：《书经》失散的《嘉禾篇》说： 周公捧着香酒站在堂前束阶上，迎接大臣升阶登殿，赞辞说： 代理国王总理朝政，尽力使全国各方面的关系和谐， ，这是周公代理朝政时，司仪的人所称道的。
English: The lost "Jiahe Chapter" of the "Shu Jing" said: Zhou Gong stood on the front steps of the hall holding a fragrant wine to welcome the minister's promotion to the palace. The praise said: "Acting king prime minister of the dynasty, he tried his best to make the relations of all aspects of the country harmonious," which was praised by the master of ceremonies when Zhou Gong was acting as the ruler of the dynasty.

古文：成王加元服，周公则致政。
现代文：周成王成年后，周公就交还了政权。
English: After Zhou Cheng Wang came of age, Zhou Gong handed back power.

古文：《书》曰： 朕复子明辟 ，周公常称王命，专行不报，故言我复子明君也。
现代文：《书经》上说 朕把明君的权力归还给您，周公常把自己的意图称为周王的圣命，独立自主地处理政务，不请示汇报，所以说我把明君的权力归还给您。
English: "Shu Jing" said, "I am returning the power of Ming Jun to you. Zhou Gongzang often called his intention the sacred life of King Zhou, independently handled government affairs, and did not ask for reports. Therefore, I am returning the power of Ming Jun to you.

古文：臣请安汉公居摄践祚，服天子韨冕，背斧依于户牖之间，南面朝群臣，听政事。
现代文：我们请求安汉公坐上皇位，代行职权，身着皇帝的服装，头戴龙冠，背靠摆设在门窗之间的斧形图案屏风，面向南方接受群臣的朝拜，处理政务。
English: We ask An Han Gong to sit on the throne, act in his place, dressed in the emperor's clothes, wearing a dragon crown, with his back against the axe-shaped pattern screen placed between the doors and windows, facing south to receive the worship of the courtiers, and deal with government affairs.

古文：车服出入警跸，民臣称臣妾，皆如天子之制。
现代文：他出入经过的方要戒备清道，禁止通行，平民和大臣对他自称奴仆，全都照天子的礼制办。
English: Those who enter or leave his presence must be on the alert for impassable roads. Civilians and ministers, who claim to be his servants, must all act according to the etiquette of the Son of Heaven.

古文：郊祀天地，宗祀明堂，共祀宗庙，享祭群神，赞曰 假皇帝 ，民臣谓之 摄皇帝 ，自称曰 予 。
现代文：在京郊祭祀天地，在皇家大堂祭祀祖宗，在宗庙祭祀祖宗，祭祀各种神灵，赞辞称安汉公 假皇帝，平民和臣子则称他 皇帝 ，而他自称 予 。
English: In the suburbs of Beijing, they offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, to their ancestors in the royal hall, to their ancestors in the ancestral temple, and to various deities. In their eulogies, they call Prince Anhan the "false emperor," while commoners and courtiers call him the "emperor," and he calls himself the "god."

古文：平决朝事，常以皇帝之诏称 制 、以奉顺皇天之心，辅翼汉室，保安孝平皇帝之幼嗣，遂寄托之义，隆治平之化。
现代文：公平处置朝廷事务，常用皇帝诏书的形式，称为 制书 ，以秉承和顺应上天的苦心，辅佐协助汉朝皇室，维护孝平皇帝幼小后嗣的安全，成就了受委托居位摄政的大义，使治国安邦的教化得到兴盛。
English: Fair handling of the imperial court affairs, commonly used in the form of the emperor's edict, known as "making a book," adhering to and conforming to God's painstaking efforts, assisted and assisted the Han Dynasty royal family, safeguarded the safety of Emperor Xiaoping's young heirs, achieved the great righteousness of being entrusted with the position of regent, and made the enlightenment of governing the country prosperous.

古文：其朝见太皇太后、帝皇后，皆复臣节。
现代文：但他朝见太皇太后、孝子皇后时，都要恢复臣子的礼节。
English: However, when he met the Grand Empress Dowager and Empress Takako, he had to restore the etiquette of a courtier.

古文：自施政教于其宫家国采，如诸侯礼仪故事。臣昧死请。 太后诏曰： 可。 
现代文：他可以在自己的官署、宅第、封国、采地独立自主地施行政治教化，按照诸侯礼制的成例办理。我们冒死罪请求。 太后下诏说： 可以。 
English: He can independently and autonomously carry out political indoctrination in his government office, residence, fiefdom, and mining area, and handle it in accordance with the established example of the vassalage system. We dare to ask for the death penalty. The Empress Dowager said: Yes.

古文：明年，改元曰 居摄 。
现代文：第二年，改年号叫居摄。
English: The following year, the year-on-year change was called "Coming."

古文：居摄元年正月，莽祀上帝于南郊，迎春于东郊，行大射礼于明堂，养三老五更，成礼而去。
现代文：居摄元年正月，王莽到长安南郊祭祀天神，到东郊迎接春季的来临，在明堂举行大射礼，招待三老、五更，典礼结束后就回去了。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, Wang Mang went to the southern suburb of Chang'an to worship Tenjin, to the eastern suburb to welcome the coming of spring, held a grand shooting ceremony in the Ming Hall, invited the Three Elders and the Five Immortals, and went back after the ceremony.

古文：置柱下五史，秩如御史，听政事，侍旁记疏言行。
现代文：设置柱下史五人，俸禄同御史一样，让他们旁听工莽处理朝政，侍立两旁分别记录他的言行。
English: Set up five under-the-pillar historians, with the same salary as the imperial historian, and let them listen to the reckless handling of imperial politics, and record his words and deeds separately on both sides of the table.

古文：三月己丑，立宣帝玄孙婴为皇太子，号曰孺子。
现代文：三月己丑曰，立宣帝玄孙刘婴作皇太子，号称孺子。
English: In March, it was said that the great-great-grandson of Emperor Xuan, Liu Ying, became the crown prince and was known as Xunzi.

古文：以王舜为太傅左辅，甄丰为太阿右拂，甄邯为太保后承。
现代文：任命王舜作太傅左辅，甄丰作太阿右拂，甄邯作太保后承。
English: He appointed Wang Qian as the left assistant of Tai Fu, Zhen Feng as the right assistant of Tai Ah, and Zhen Qian as the right successor of Tai Bao.

古文：又置四少，秩皆二千石。
现代文：又设置四少官位，俸禄都是二千石。
English: In addition, four minor official ranks were established, with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：四月，安众侯刘崇与相张绍谋曰： 安汉公莽专制朝政，必危刘氏。
现代文：四月，安众侯刘崇与他的丞相张绍商量说： 安汉公王莽独裁朝廷政事，必定要危害刘姓皇族。
English: In April, Prince of Anhan Liu Chong and his prime minister Zhang Shao discussed and said: Prince of Anhan's reckless dictatorship of the imperial court must endanger the royal family with the surname of Liu.

古文：天下非之者，乃莫敢先举，此宗室耻也。
现代文：天下反对他的人，竟没人敢于先行动，这是皇族的耻辱。
English: It is a disgrace to the imperial family that no one in the world who opposes him dares to act first.

古文：吾帅宗族为先，海内必和。 
现代文：我率领同族的人先动手，全国一定都会响应。 
English: I will lead the people of the same ethnic group to take the first step, and the whole country will certainly respond.

古文：绍等从者百余人，遂进攻宛，不得入而败。
现代文：张绍等跟随他的有一百多人，于是进攻宛城，没有攻进去就失败了。
English: Zhang Shao and more than a hundred others followed him, so they attacked Wancheng, but failed without entering.

古文：绍者，张竦之从兄也。
现代文：张绍是张竦的堂兄。
English: Zhang Shao is Zhang Yao's cousin.

古文：竦与崇族父刘嘉诣阙自归，莽赦弗罪。
现代文：张竦和刘崇的远房伯父刘嘉到皇宫自首待罪，王菱赦免他们，没有加罪。
English: Zhang Ye and Liu Chong's distant uncle Liu Jia went to the imperial palace to turn himself in. Wang Ling pardoned them and did not add to their sentences.

古文：竦因为嘉作奏曰：
现代文：强速就替望嘘写奏章说：
English: He hurriedly wrote the music for the orchestra and said:

古文：建平、元寿之间，大统几绝，宗室几弃。
现代文：建平、元寿年间，皇统几乎中断，皇族几乎遭到废弃。
English: During the Jianping and Yuan Shou years, the imperial line was almost broken, and the imperial family was almost abandoned.

古文：赖蒙陛下圣德，扶服振救，遮扞匡卫，国命复延，宗室明目。
现代文：幸赖陛下的圣明德行，艰辛救助和维护扶持，国家的命运得以重新延续，皇族看到了新希望。
English: Thanks to His Majesty's wisdom and virtue, hardship relief and maintenance support, the country's fate has been renewed, and the royal family has seen new hope.

古文：临明统政，发号施令，动以宗室为始，登用九族为先。
现代文：到朝廷总理政务，发号施令，从皇室开始，用人首先考虑九族。
English: From the imperial court to the prime minister's government affairs, he issues orders. Starting from the royal family, the nine ethnic groups are considered first.

古文：并录支亲，建立王侯，南面之孤，计以百数。
现代文：也录用封赏旁支亲属，设立王国、侯国，面向南方称王称侯的人，要用百数计算。
English: They also hired and rewarded collateral relatives, set up kingdoms and vassal states, and those who called themselves kings and vassals facing south should be counted in hundreds.

古文：收复绝属，存亡续废，得比肩首，复为人者，嫔然成行，所以藩汉国，辅汉宗也。
现代文：挽回了绝灭的封国，使灭亡的得以存在、废弃的得以延续，因而得以获得同等地位，重新成为达官贵人的，多得排列成行，这都是为了维护汉朝，辅佐汉室皇族。
English: They saved the extinct fiefdoms, allowed the extinct ones to exist and the abandoned ones to continue, and thus they were able to obtain the same status and become dignitaries again. They were all in order to maintain the Han Dynasty and assist the Han royal family.

古文：建辟雍，立明堂，班天法，流圣化，朝群后，昭文德，宗室诸侯，咸益土地。
现代文：修建太学，设立举行会典的明堂，颁布上天的法则，流传圣人的教化，让全国的王侯来朝拜，显扬文治圣德，对皇族诸侯，都增加封地。
English: He built Taigaku, established Myoden for holding ceremonies, promulgated the heavenly law, spread the enlightenment of saints, let the princes of the whole country come to worship, and showed the virtue of literature. He increased the fiefs of the princes of the imperial family.

古文：天下喁喁，引领而叹，颂声洋洋，满耳而入。
现代文：天下景仰，伸颈遥望赞叹，颂者塞途颂声充耳。
English: The whole world is in awe, craning their necks to admire the distant view, and the eulogist's eulogy is deafening.

古文：国家所以服此美，膺此名，飨此福，受此荣者，岂非太皇太后日昃之思，陛下夕惕之念哉！
现代文：国家之所以能获得这样的佳誉，得到这样的美名，享受这样的洪福，赢得这样光荣的原因，难道不是太皇太后夜的思虑，陛下朝夕的思虑吗！
English: Isn't it the Empress Dowager Dowager's nightly thoughts, His Majesty's morning and evening thoughts, that are the reason why the country has been able to gain such a good reputation, get such a good name, enjoy such a bountiful blessing, and win such glory!

古文：何谓？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：乱则统其理，危则致其安，祸则引其福，绝则继其统，幼则代其任，晨夜屑屑，寒暑勤勤，无时休息，孳孳不已者，凡以为天，厚刘氏也。
现代文：遇到纷乱就整顿朝纲使它太平，遇到危险就让它得以平安，遇到灾祸就使它引来幸福，遇到皇统中断就拥立新皇帝来继承，遇到幼主就替他承担责任，从早到晚忙忙碌碌，从冬到夏勤勤恳恳，没时间休息，孜孜不倦，都是为了天下人，为看重刘氏江山。
English: In the event of chaos, the rectification of the imperial program will make it peaceful; in the event of danger, it will make it peaceful; in the event of disaster, it will bring happiness; in the event of the interruption of the imperial succession, it will support the new emperor to succeed; in the event of a young master, it will assume responsibility for him; from morning to night, it is busy and busy; from winter to summer, it is diligent and earnest, there is no time to rest, and it is tireless, all for the sake of the people of the world, and for valuing the Liu clan.

古文：臣无愚智，民无男女，皆谕至意。
现代文：我们臣下不论聪明的和愚钝的，老百姓不论男女，全晓得您的良苦用心。
English: Our subjects, whether clever or stupid, and the common people, whether men or women, all know of your good intentions.

古文：而安众侯崇乃独怀悖惑之心，操畔逆之虑，兴兵动众，欲危宗庙，恶不忍闻，罪不容诛，诚臣子之仇，宗室之雠，国家之贼，天下之害也。
现代文：然而安众侯刘崇却独自怀着谬乱的心思，从事叛逆的谋划，兴师动众，打算危害帝室和国家，他的恶行令人耳不忍闻，罪过大到杀了他都不能抵其罪，确实是臣子的仇人，皇族的敌人，国家的蟊贼，天下的祸害。
English: However, Liu Chong, the Prince of Anzhu, was alone with a delusional mind, engaged in rebellious planning, aroused the masses, and intended to endanger the imperial family and the country. His evil deeds were deafening, and his crime was so great that he could not be killed. He was indeed the enemy of the courtiers, the enemy of the imperial family, the thief of the country, and the scourge of the world.

古文：是故亲属震落而告其罪，民人溃畔而弃其兵，进不跬步，退伏其殃。
现代文：因此亲属震惊而控告他的罪行，百姓溃败背叛而抛弃他的兵器，他前进不到半步，便败退而遭到祸殃。
English: Therefore, his relatives were shocked and accused him of crimes, the people were defeated and betrayed and abandoned his weapons, and he could not advance more than half a step before he was defeated and defeated.

古文：百岁之母，孩提之子，同时断斩，悬头竿杪，珠珥在耳，首饰犹存，为计若此，岂不悖哉！
现代文：百岁的母亲，刚会笑的婴儿，同时斩杀断头，头被悬挂在竹竿末端，珠玉耳环还吊在耳朵上，金银、珠宝首饰还在身上，打这样的主意，难道不荒谬吗？
English: A hundred-year-old mother, a baby who can barely smile, decapitated and beheaded at the same time, her head hung on the end of a bamboo pole, with jeweled earrings still hanging from her ears, and gold, silver, and jewelry still on her body, isn't it absurd to come up with such an idea?

古文：臣闻古者畔逆之国，既以诛讨，则猪其宫室以为污池，纳垢浊焉，名曰凶虚，虽生菜茹，而人不食。
现代文：我听说古时候对叛逆的封国，在已经讨伐和严惩之后，就掘毁其宫殿成为池沼，让它蓄积污水，叫做凶墟，即使长出蔬菜，人们也不吃它。
English: I have heard that in ancient times, when a rebellious person was banned from the country, after he had been persecuted and severely punished, his palace was dug up to become a pond, and it was allowed to accumulate sewage, which was called a heinous ruin. Even if vegetables were grown, people would not eat them.

古文：四墙其社，覆上栈下，示不得通。
现代文：在它的祭土神社四周砌墙壁，用竹席覆盖住上面，遮蔽住下面，以便隔塞不通阴阳之气。
English: Build a wall around its sacred soil shrine, cover the top with a bamboo mat, and cover the bottom, so as to block the flow of yin and yang.

古文：辨社诸侯，出门见之，著以为戒。
现代文：把对安众侯封国神社的处治方式通报各王侯，让他们在各自封国内各自仿造一个，出门可见，以为借鉴。
English: Inform the princes of the way of handling the shrines of Anzhuo Fuguo Shrine, and let them imitate one in their respective fiefdoms, so that it can be seen when they go out, as a reference.

古文：方今天下闻崇之反也，咸欲骞衣手剑而叱之。
现代文：当今天下臣民听到刘崇叛乱的消息，全打算撩衣执剑去叱责他。
English: When today's subjects heard the news of Liu Chong's rebellion, they all planned to scold him.

古文：其先至者，则拂其颈，冲其匈，刃其躯，切其肌；后至者，欲拔其门，仆其墙，夷其屋，焚其器，应声涤地，则时成创。
现代文：那些先到的人，就会砍断他的脖子，捅破他的胸膛，劈开他的躯体，切割他的肌肉；后到的人，就想砸碎他的屋门，推倒他的墙壁，铲平他的房屋，烧毁他的器具，应声涂地，即时成为创伤。
English: Those who come first will cut his neck, tear his chest, split his body, cut his muscles; those who come later will want to smash his door, tear down his walls, bulldoze his house, burn his utensils, and immediately become a wound.

古文：而宗室尤甚，言必切齿焉。
现代文：而皇族尤其痛恨他，说到他必定咬牙切齿。
English: The imperial family hated him in particular, and they must have gritted their teeth when he was mentioned.

古文：何则？
现代文：什么道理呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：以其背畔恩义，而不知重德之所在也。
现代文：是认为他背叛恩情道义，而不了解深厚的德泽是怎么来的。
English: They think that he has betrayed the principles of benevolence and morality, but they do not understand how the deep-rooted virtue came about.

古文：宗室所居或远，嘉幸得先闻，不胜愤愤之愿，愿为宗室倡始，父子兄弟负笼荷锸，驰之南阳，猪崇宫室，令如古制。
现代文：皇族住的地方有的相距很远，刘嘉幸好得以首先听到，说不尽满腔愤怒之情，愿意作为皇族的表率，父子兄弟背着竹筐、扛着铁锹，奔赴南阳，掘毁刘崇的宫殿，使它成为污水池，以符合古时对叛逆者的处罚。
English: Some of the places where the imperial family lived were very far apart, and Liu Jia was fortunate to be the first to hear that they were not full of anger and were willing to serve as a model for the imperial family. With bamboo baskets on their backs and shovels on their shoulders, father and son brothers rushed to Nanyang to excavate Liu Chong's palace and make it a cesspool, in accordance with the ancient punishment for rebels.

古文：及崇社宜如毫社，以赐诸侯，用永监戒。
现代文：并拆毁刘崇祭祀土地的神社，让它像亡国的亳社一样，把他神社中的祭器赏赐给各王诸侯，用来永远作为借鉴。
English: He also tore down the shrines in the lands where Liu Chong had made sacrifices, so that they would be like the shrines in the ruined countries, and gave the sacrificial vessels from his shrine to the kings and princes, to be used as a reference forever.

古文：愿下四辅公卿大夫议，以明好恶，视四方。
现代文：希望把我的意见交给四辅和公卿大夫们讨论，以表明我朝的好恶，昭示天下。
English: I hope to submit my opinions to the four auxiliary and noble doctors for discussion, in order to show my likes and dislikes, and to show the world.

古文：于是莽大说。
现代文：因此王莽十分高兴。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang is very happy.

古文：公卿曰： 皆宜如嘉言。 
现代文：三公九卿说： 都应该照刘嘉说的办。 
English: The three princes and nine nobles said: Everything should be done as Liu Jia said.

古文：莽白太后下诏曰： 惟嘉父子兄弟，虽与崇有属，不敢阿私，或见萌牙，相率告之，及其祸成，同共雠之，应合古制，忠孝著焉。
现代文：王莽禀明太后下诏书说： 刘嘉父子兄弟，虽然与刘崇有亲属关系，可是不敢偏私，有的看见叛乱即将发生，就相继告发他，到叛乱形成，都一致把他当作仇敌看待，这符合古时的制度，忠孝的思想非常鲜明地表现出来。
English: Wang Mangjun, the empress dowager, issued an imperial edict saying: Liu Jia and his brothers, although they are related to Liu Chong, do not dare to be selfish. Some of them saw that the rebellion was about to happen and reported him one after another. When the rebellion was formed, they all regarded him as an enemy. This is in line with the ancient system, and the idea of loyalty and filial piety is very clearly manifested.

古文：其以杜衍户千封嘉为师礼侯，嘉子七人皆赐爵关内侯。 
现代文：应该把杜衍县的一千户赐封刘嘉作帅礼侯，刘嘉的七个儿子都赏赐关内侯的爵位。 
English: One thousand households in Duyan County should be given to Liu Jia as a handsome prince, and Liu Jia's seven sons should all be awarded the title of Guanai Prince.

古文：后又封竦为淑德侯。
现代文：后来又赐封张竦为淑德侯。
English: Later, Zhang Ye was given the title of Shu De Hou.

古文：长安为之语曰： 欲求封，过张伯松；力战斗，不如巧为奏。 
现代文：长安人把这件事编成俗语说： 要想得封，找张伯松；拼命战斗，不如巧妙上奏。 
English: The people of Chang'an made this matter into a proverb saying: If you want to get a seal, look for Zhang Bo Song; if you want to fight hard, it is better to play skillfully.

古文：莽又封南阳吏民有功者百余人，污池刘崇室宅。后谋反者，皆污池云。
现代文：王莽又封赏南阳郡有功劳的官吏和百姓一百多人，把刘崇宫殿住宅掘毁使其成为污水池。
English: Wang Mang also rewarded more than a hundred meritorious officials and citizens of Nanyang County, and excavated Liu Chong's palace residence to make it a cesspool.

古文：群臣复白： 刘崇等谋逆者，以莽权轻也。
现代文：以后凡是图谋造的人，都掘毁他的宫室使之成为污水池。众位大臣又禀告说： 刘崇等人之所以谋反，是因为王莽的权力仍然太轻。
English: In the future, anyone who tried to do so would have to dig up his palace and turn it into a cesspool. The ministers also obituary said: Liu Chong and others plotted the rebellion because Wang Mang's power was still too weak.

古文：宜尊重以填海内。 
现代文：应该加重他的权位使他能镇服天下。 
English: His position of power should be strengthened so that he can subdue the world.

古文：五月甲辰，太后诏莽朝见太后称 假皇帝。 
现代文：五月甲辰曰，太后下令王莽朝见她时可自称 假皇帝 。
English: According to May Jia Chen, the empress dowager ordered Wang Mang to call himself the "false emperor" when meeting her.

古文：冬十月丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月丙辰朔日，发生了日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of October in winter.

古文：十二月，群臣奏请： 益安汉公宫及家吏，置率更令，庙、厩、厨长丞，中庶子，虎贲以下百余人，又置卫士三百人。
现代文：十二月，群臣上奏请求道： 增加安汉公的官署和家吏，设置率更令，庙长、庙丞、厩长、厩丞、厨长、厨丞，中庶子，和虎贲勇士以下一百多人，又设置卫士三百人。
English: In December, a group of ministers made a request: to increase the number of officials and household staff of Anhan Public, the establishment rate was increased, and more than 100 people including the temple chief, temple secretary, stable master, stable secretary, chief cook, kitchen secretary, junior illegitimate child, and tigress warrior, and 300 guards were set up.

古文：安汉公庐为摄省，府为摄殿，第为摄宫。 
现代文：称安汉公的官署为摄省，官衙为摄殿，宅第为摄宫。 
English: He called the Anhan Public Security Bureau the "Photography Department," the Government Office the "Photography Palace," and the residence the "Photography Palace."

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被认可了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：莽白太后下诏曰： 故太师光虽前薨，功效已列。
现代文：王莽禀明太后下诏书说： 原太师孔光虽然已经薨逝，他的功绩已得到排列。
English: Wang Mangjun, the empress dowager of the Ming Dynasty, said in her imperial decree: Although the former grandmaster Kong Guang has passed away, his achievements have been ranked.

古文：太保舜、大司空丰、轻车将军邯、步兵将军建皆为诱进单于筹策，又典灵台、明堂、辟雍、四郊，定制度，开子午道，与宰衡同心说德，合意并力，功德茂著。
现代文：太保王舜、大司空甄丰、轻车将军甄邯、步兵将军孙建都为招进单于出谋划策，又主持修建观天象的灵台、行大典的明堂、中央太学和四郊祭坛，定立制度，开通子午道，与宰衡同心，同德，齐心合力，功德卓著。
English: Tai Bao Wang Yao, Daishi Ku Zhen Feng, Light Vehicle General Zhen Yao, and Infantry General Sun Jian all made suggestions for the recruitment of soldiers, and presided over the construction of the celestial observation platform, the Ming Hall for the grand ceremony, the Central University and the four suburban altars, established the system, and opened the meridian road. They were of the same mind, the same morality, and the same effort as Zai Heng, and their merits were outstanding.

古文：封舜了匡为同心侯，林为说德侯，光孙寿为合意侯，丰孙匡为并力侯。
现代文：赐封王舜的儿子王匡作同心侯，王林作说德侯，封孔光的孙子孑寿作合意侯，甄丰的孙子甄匡作并力侯。
English: He gave Wang Kuang, the son of Wang Hui, the title of Tong Xin Hou, Wang Lin the title of Shu De Hou, Feng Kongguang's grandson Yu Shou the title of Concord Hou, and Zhen Feng's grandson Zhen Kuang the title of Bai Li Hou.

古文：益邯、建各三千户。 
现代文：加赐甄邯、孙建封邑各三千户。 
English: In addition, 3,000 households in each of Zhenyao and Sun Jianfu villages will be upgraded.

古文：是岁，西羌庞恬、傅幡等怨莽夺其地作西海郡，反攻西海太守程永，永奔走。
现代文：这一年，西羌庞恬、傅幡等人怨恨王莽夺走他们的土地作为西海郡，就反攻西海郡太守程永，程永逃跑了。
English: In that year, Xidi Pangyao, Fuhuan and others resented Wang Mang for taking away their land as Xidi County, so they counterattacked Xidi County Governor Cheng Yong, and Cheng Yong fled.

古文：莽诛永，遣护羌校尉窦况击之。
现代文：王莽杀了程永，派遣护羌校尉实况进击西羌。
English: Wang Mang killed Cheng Yong and dispatched the captain of the garrison to attack Xidi.

古文：二年春，窦况等击破西羌。
现代文：二年春季，窦况等人打败了西羌。
English: In the spring of the second year, Dou Jiao and others defeated Xidi.

古文：五月，更造货：错刀，一直五千；契刀，一直五百；大钱，一直五十，与五铢钱并行。
现代文：五月，铸造新货币：错刀，一枚值五千钱；契刀，一枚值五百钱；大钱，一枚值五十钱，与五铢钱同时流通。
English: In May, the new currency was minted: the wrong knife, a five-thousand-dollar knife; the right knife, a five-hundred-dollar knife; the big knife, a fifty-dollar knife, circulated at the same time as the fifty-dollar knife.

古文：民多盗铸者。
现代文：民间有很多人私铸货币。
English: There are many people in the private sector who mint money.

古文：禁列侯以下不得挟黄金，输御府受直，然卒不与直。
现代文：于是下禁令从列侯以下的人不准私自携带黄金，送交御府的可以得到相等的代价，可是交出黄金的人却始终没有得到同等代价的钱币。
English: Therefore, it was forbidden for anyone below the rank of vassal to smuggle gold. Those who sent it to the imperial court could get the same price, but those who handed over the gold never received coins of the same price.

古文：九月，东郡太守翟义都试，勒车骑，因发奔命，立严乡侯刘信为天子，移檄郡国，言 莽毒杀平帝，摄天子位，欲绝汉室，今共行天罚诛莽 。
现代文：九月，东郡太守翟义趁着总试骑士的那天，集结战车、骑兵，调动应急部队，拥立严乡侯刘信当皇帝，发送檄文到各郡、各封国，指责王莽 毒死平帝，代理皇帝职位，想要断绝汉朝江山，现在我奉天命，讨伐王莽。 
English: In September, on the day of the general trial of the knights, the East County Governor Shouyi took advantage of the opportunity to assemble chariots and cavalry, mobilize emergency forces, support Yanxiang Hou Liu Xin as the emperor, send letters to all counties and fiefdoms, accuse Wang Mang of poisoning Emperor Ping, acting as the emperor, and want to break the Han Dynasty. Now I am following the mandate of heaven to fight Wang Mang.

古文：郡国疑惑，众十余万。
现代文：各郡各封国动摇起来，翟义的军队有十多万之众。
English: Counties and fiefdoms were shaken, and Shingyi's army numbered more than a hundred thousand.

古文：莽惶惧不能食，昼夜抱孺子告祷郊庙，放《大诰》作策，遣谏大夫桓谭等班于天下，谕以摄位当反政孺子之意。
现代文：王莽惊慌恐惧得吃不下饭，昼夜抱着孺子到郊祀祭坛和宗庙祷告，仿照《周书。大诰》写了篇策书，派遣谏大夫桓谭等人颁布天下，晓谕自己代理皇位将来会把政权归还给孺子的意图。
English: Wang Meng was so panicked and afraid that he could not eat. He went to the suburb altar and the ancestral temple to pray day and night, holding his son in his arms. He wrote a strategy book modeled on the "Weekly Book. Da Zi," and dispatched Dr. Xuan Tan and others to announce to the world his intention to return power to his son in the future as acting emperor.

古文：遣王邑、孙建等八将军击义，分屯诸关，守厄塞。
现代文：派遣王邑、孙建等八位将军攻击翟义，分别驻扎在各处关，守护险要地方。
English: Eight generals, including Wang Yu and Sun Jian, were dispatched to attack Shiyi, and stationed at various checkpoints to guard critical areas.

古文：槐里男子赵明、霍鸿等起兵，以和翟义，相与谋曰： 诸将精兵悉东，京师空，可攻长安。 
现代文：槐里县男子趟明、霍鸿等人起兵响应翟义，互相密谋说： 将领们和精锐部队都束征去了，京城空虚，我们可以进攻长安。 
English: The men of Bili County, including Wiming and Hohong, raised an army in response to Xingyi and plotted with each other, saying: The generals and elite troops have all been conscripted, the capital is empty, we can attack Chang'an.

古文：众稍多，至且十万人，莽恐，遣将军王奇、王级将兵拒之。
现代文：军队渐渐多起来，发展到将近十万人，王莽害怕了，派遣将军王奇、王级率军抵挡他们。
English: The army gradually increased and grew to nearly one hundred thousand. Wang Mang was afraid and sent the general Wang Qi and the king's troops to resist them.

古文：以太保甄邯为大将军，受钺高庙，领天下兵，左杖节，右把钺，屯城外。
现代文：任命太保甄邯为大将军，在高帝庙授予他斧铁，率领全国的军队，左手持节，右手握着斧钹，驻扎在长安城外。
English: Appointed Taibao Zhenyu as the general, awarded him the axe and iron at the Gao Di Temple, led the army across the country, holding the festival in his left hand, holding the axe in his right hand, and stationed outside Chang'an City.

古文：王舜、甄丰昼夜循行殿中。
现代文：王舜、甄丰昼夜在宫中巡视。
English: Wang Yao and Zhenfeng patrolled the palace day and night.

古文：十二月，王邑等破翟义于圉。
现代文：十二月，王邑等将领在圉县击败了翟义。
English: In December, Wang Yip and other generals defeated Jinyi in Jixian.

古文：司威陈崇使监军上书言： 陛下奉天洪范，心合宝龟，膺受元命，豫知成败，咸应兆占，是谓配天。
现代文：司威陈崇被派去做监军，上奏书说： 陛下承奉上天大法，心与宝龟相合，接受天命，预知成败，神妙莫测的计策都成功了，造就叫高明堪与天公相配。
English: Si Wei Chen Chong was sent to supervise the army, and the report said: His Majesty follows the great law of heaven, his heart is compatible with the turtle, accepts the fate of heaven, predicts success and failure, and the mysterious and unpredictable strategies are all successful, creating a match between Gao Ming and Tian Gong.

古文：配天之主，虑则移气，言则动物，施则成化。
现代文：高明堪与天公相配的君主，就能改变人的精神状态，说话就能使万物运动，做事就能改变社会风气。
English: A monarch who is highly intelligent and compatible with God can change people's mental state, can set all things in motion by speaking, and can change the social atmosphere by doing things.

古文：臣崇伏读诏书下日，窃计其时，圣思始发，而反虏仍破；诏文始书，反虏大败；制书始下，反虏毕斩，众将未及齐其锋芒，臣崇未及尽共愚虑，而事已决矣。 
现代文：臣陈崇俯伏拜读韶书下达的日期，暗中计算事态发展的过程，陛下的思虑刚一萌发，反贼就不断受挫；刚开始写韶书，反贼就完全失败；制书刚刚下达，反贼就统统被斩杀。将领们来不及一致露出他们的锋芒锐气，臣陈崇来不及献出自己的全部愚见，而事件的结局就已见分晓。 
English: Minister Chen Chong prostrated himself before the date of reading the imperial edict, secretly calculating the development of the situation. As soon as His Majesty's thoughts began, the anti-thieves were constantly frustrated; as soon as the imperial edict was written, the anti-thieves were completely defeated; as soon as the edict was issued, the anti-thieves were all killed. The generals were too late to show their sharpness, and Minister Chen Chong was too late to give up all his stupidity, and the outcome of the incident was already clear.

古文：莽大说。
现代文：王莽十分高兴。
English: Wang Mang is very happy.

古文：三年春，地震。
现代文：三年春季，发生了地震。
English: In the spring of the third year, an earthquake occurred.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：王莽宣布大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：王邑等还京师，西与王级等合击明、鸿，皆破灭，语在《翟义传》。
现代文：王邑等人回到京师长安，向西与王级等人合兵攻打趟明、霍鸿，把他们全都打败消灭了，这些话记载在《翟义传》裹。
English: Wang Yu and others returned to the Beijing division Chang'an, and went west with Wang Quan and others to fight against Wuchiming and Hohong, defeating and destroying them all. These words are recorded in the "Biography of Zou Yi."

古文：莽大置酒未央宫白虎殿，劳赐将帅，诏陈崇治校军功，第其高下。
现代文：王莽在未央宫白虎殿大摆酒宴，犒赏众将军。韶令陈崇审核军功，区分他们的高低等级。
English: Wang Mang held a grand wine banquet at the White Tiger Hall of the Weiyang Palace to reward the generals. He ordered Chen Chong to examine their military merits and distinguish their high and low grades.

古文：莽乃上奏曰： 明圣之世，国多贤人，故唐、虞之时，可比屋而封，至功成事就，则加赏焉。
现代文：王莽便上奏章说： 圣明的时代，国家贤人辈出，所以唐尧、虞舜的时候，可以挨家挨户封赏，等到功业和大事完成，就要按功劳加以封赏。
English: Wang Mang then recited the chapter and said: In the era of the Ming Dynasty, the country's wise men and women came forth in droves. Therefore, when it was the time of the Tang Dynasty and the Yuezhi Dynasty, rewards could be given from house to house. When achievements and major events were completed, rewards should be given according to merit.

古文：至于夏后涂山之会，执玉帛者万国，诸侯执玉，附庸执帛。
现代文：至于传说夏禹在涂山大会诸侯，携带玉帛等礼物参加的就有万国，诸侯拿着玉，附属国拿着帛。
English: As for the legend that Xia Yu brought gifts such as jade ingots to the princes at the Tuishan Conference, all countries took part, with the princes holding the jade and the vassal states holding the ingots.

古文：周武王孟津之上，尚有八百诸侯。
现代文：周武王大会诸侯于孟津之上，还有八百诸侯参加。
English: Zhouwu's grand assembly of lords was held in Mengjin, and eight hundred lords attended.

古文：周公居摄，郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝，是以四海之内各以其职来祭，盖诸侯千八百矣。
现代文：周公摄政，举行郊祀让后稷配享上天，在明堂举行宗祀让文王配享上帝，因此地方官员各自拿着他们的贡品前来参加祭典，大概有一千八百诸侯。《礼记。
English: Zhou Gong, the regent, held a suburb worship to let Hou Yi enjoy heaven, and held a religious service in the Ming Hall to let King Wen enjoy God, so local officials came to participate in the festival with their tributes, about eighteen hundred princes.

古文：《礼记·王制》千七百余国，是以孔子著《孝经》曰： 不敢遗小国之臣，而况于公、侯、伯、子、男乎？
现代文：王制》记载有一千七百多个国家，因此孔子在《孝经》裹说： 不敢遗漏一个小国的臣子，更何况对于公侯伯子男呢？
English: There are more than 1,700 countries recorded in the "Kingdom System," so Confucius said in the "Filial Piety": Don't you dare to leave out a vassal of a small country, let alone a prince?

古文：故得万国之欢心以事其先王。 
现代文：所以能赢得万国的欢心来祭祀他的先王。 
English: Therefore, he was able to win the hearts of all nations to worship his predecessor.

古文：此天子之孝也。
现代文：这是天子的孝道。
English: This is the filial piety of the Son of Heaven.

古文：秦为亡道，残灭诸侯以为郡县，欲擅天下之利，故二世而亡。
现代文：秦朝暴虐无道，消灭诸侯建立郡县，想要独享天下的利益，所以祇有两代就亡国了。
English: The Qin Dynasty was ruthless and tyrannical. It eliminated lords to establish counties, and wanted to exclusively enjoy the benefits of the world. Therefore, it took only two generations to ruin the country.

古文：高皇帝受命除残，考功施赏，建国数百，后稍衰微，其余仅存。
现代文：高祖皇帝承受天命，消灭残贼，考核功绩，实行封赏，建立诸侯国几百个，后来渐渐衰落，剩下来的寥寥无几。
English: Emperor Gaozhu received the mandate of heaven, eliminated the remnants of thieves, assessed the merits, implemented rewards, established hundreds of vassal states, and then gradually declined, with only a few remaining.

古文：太皇太后躬统大纲，广封功德以劝善，兴灭继绝以永世，是以大化流通，旦暮且成。
现代文：太皇太后亲自主持大政方针，广泛地封赏有功勋和德行的人，鼓励人们积德行善，使灭亡的诸侯国复兴，使断绝了后代的族属得以延续，永远保持下去，因此广泛深入的教化到处传播，早晚间就要完成。
English: The great empress dowager personally upholds the great political principles, extensively rewards those with merits and virtues, encourages people to accumulate virtues and do good deeds, revives the ruined vassal states, and enables the families that have been cut off from their descendants to continue and remain forever. Therefore, the extensive and in-depth enlightenment is spread everywhere, and it will be completed sooner or later.

古文：遭羌寇害西海郡，反虏流言东郡，逆贼惑众西土，忠臣孝子莫不奋怒，所征殄灭，尽备厥辜，天下咸宁。
现代文：遇上羌寇危害西海郡，叛贼在束郡造谣惑众，反贼在西部国土惑乱民众，忠臣孝子没有不愤怒的，大军所到之处，全部灭绝，都完全服罪，天下都安宁了。
English: In the event of raiders endangering Sihai County, traitors creating rumors and misleading the public in Shu County, and counter-traitors confusing the people in the western land, there is no loyal subject or filial son who is not angry. Wherever the great army went, they were all exterminated, they all fully confessed their sins, and the world was at peace.

古文：今制礼作乐，实考周爵五等，地四等，有明文；殷爵三等，有其说，无其文。
现代文：现在制定礼制、创作乐教，客观地考察周朝的爵位分五等，封地分四等，有明确文字记载；殷朝的爵位有三等，传有其解说，经无其正文。
English: Now, we have formulated the etiquette system, created music and education, and objectively examined the peerage of the Zhou Dynasty, which is divided into five grades, and the fief is divided into four grades, with clear written records; the peerage of the Yin Dynasty has three grades, which has its explanation, and the text has no text.

古文：孔子曰： 周监于二代，郁郁乎文哉！
现代文：孔子说： 周朝的制度是借鉴夏、商二代的制度而建立的，它是多么丰富美啊！
English: Confucius said: The system of the Zhou Dynasty was established by drawing on the system of Xia and Shang for the second generation. How rich and beautiful it is!

古文：吾从周。 臣请诸将帅当受爵邑者爵五等，地四等。 
现代文：我拥护周制，我请求众将领应当获得爵位和封邑的，爵位分五等，封地分四等。 
English: I support the Zhou system, and I request that generals should receive peerages and fiefs, with peerages divided into five grades and fiefs divided into four grades.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被认可了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：于是封者高为侯、伯，次为子、男，当赐爵关内侯者更名曰附城，凡数百人。
现代文：于是受封的人高的是侯爵和伯爵，其次是子爵和男爵，应当赐封关内侯的改爵位名叫附城，共有几百人。
English: As a result, the highest-ranking recipients were marquesses and counts, followed by viscounts and barons, and the title of vassal lord should be given to the vassal lord, a total of several hundred people.

古文：击西海者以 羌 为号，槐里以 武 为号，翟义以 虏 为号。
现代文：攻打西海郡的用 羌 字作为称号，攻打槐里县的用 武 字作称号，攻打翟义的用 虏 字作称号。
English: For the attack on Saikai County, the  character was used as the title, for the attack on Bali County, the 武 character was used as the title, and for the attack on Shiyi, the 虏 character was used as the title.

古文：群臣复奏言： 太后修功录德，远者千载，近者当世，或以文封，或以武爵，深浅大小，靡不毕举。
现代文：大臣们又上奏道： 太后称许有功的人，记录有德的人，远的上溯千年，近的就在当朝，有的人因为有文德受封赏，有的人因为有武功而得封爵，不论资历深浅和功德大小，没有不受封赏的。
English: The ministers also reported: The empress dowager praises those who have meritorious deeds, records those who have virtues, going back thousands of years, and the most recent one was just that morning. Some people have been awarded for their literary virtues, and some people have been knighted for their martial skills. Regardless of the depth of seniority and the size of merit, there is no one who is not rewarded.

古文：今摄皇帝背依践祚，宜异于宰国之时，制作虽未毕已，宜进二子爵皆为公。
现代文：而今安汉公代理皇帝背靠斧形图案屏风，登上皇位摄政，应该不同于担任宰衡总理朝政的时候，制礼作乐虽然尚未完全完成，应该晋升他两个儿子的爵位为公。
English: But now, An Han Gong, the acting emperor with his back leaning on the axe-shaped pattern screen, ascending to the throne of the regent, should be different from when he served as the prime minister of the dynasty, although the ceremonial music has not yet been fully completed, his two sons' titles should be promoted to the public.

古文：《春秋》 善善及子孙 ， 贤者之后，宜有土地 。
现代文：《春秋》上讲 喜爱好人及于他的子孙， 贤人的后代，应该享有土地 。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," it is said that the descendants of the wise men, who love the people and their children, should enjoy the land.

古文：成王广封周公庶子六人，皆有茅土。
现代文：周成王赐封周公的六个庶子，使其都有封地。
English: King Zhou Cheng gave fiefs to Zhou Gong's six illegitimate sons, so that they all had fiefs.

古文：及汉家名相大将萧、霍之属，咸及支庶。
现代文：还有汉朝著名丞相萧何、知名大将军霍光等人，都恩及旁支亲属。
English: There are also famous Han Dynasty prime minister Xiao He, well-known general Huo Guang and others, Du En and his collateral relatives.

古文：兄子光，可先封为列侯；诸孙，制度毕已，大司徒、大司空上名，如前诏书。 
现代文：对于他侄子王光，可以先封作列侯；他的孙子们，待到制礼作乐全部完成，大司徒、大司空报上名单，照从前的诏书办理。 
English: For his nephew Wang Guang, he can be made a vassal first; his grandchildren, wait until all the rites and music are completed, and the grand steward and grand steward of the sky will be listed, according to the previous edict.

古文：太后诏曰： 进摄皇帝子褒新侯安为新举公，赏都侯临为褒新公，封光为衍功侯。 
现代文：太后下韶说： 进升代皇帝的儿子裹新侯王安当新举公，赏都侯王临当裹新公，赐封王光为衍功侯。 
English: The empress dowager said in her eulogy, "The emperor's son, Wai Xin Hou Wang An, should be promoted to the imperial court, and the imperial prince, Wai Xin Hou Wang Lin, should be awarded the title of imperial prince, and Wang Guang should be awarded the title of imperial prince.

古文：是时，莽还归新都国，群臣复白以封莽孙宗为新都侯。
现代文：这时候，王莽交还了新都国，大臣们就又禀告要求赐封王莽的孙子王宗为新都侯。
English: At this time, Wang Mang returned the new capital to the state, and the ministers then demanded that Wang Mang's grandson Wang Zong be given the title of the new capital.

古文：莽既灭翟义，自谓威德日盛，获天人助，遂谋即真之事矣。
现代文：王莽已经消灭了翟义，自认为威望德行一天比一天兴盛，得到天意人心的帮助，于是谋划起登上真皇位的事来了。
English: Wang Mang had already eradicated Shanyi, and he thought that his prestige and virtue were becoming more and more prosperous day by day. With the help of Heaven's will and people's hearts, he planned to ascend the true imperial throne.

古文：九月，莽母功显君死，意不在哀，令太后诏议其服。
现代文：九月，王莽的母亲功显君去世，他的心思不在于表示哀痛，让太后诏令有关部门讨论他的丧服问题。
English: In September, Wang Mang's mother, Gong Xianjun, passed away. His intention was not to express his grief and let the empress dowager order the relevant departments to discuss the issue of his funeral clothes.

古文：少阿、羲和刘歆与博士诸儒七十八人皆曰： 居摄之义，所以统立天功，兴崇帝道，成就法度，安辑海内也。
现代文：少阿、羲和刘歆和博士、众儒生七十八人都说： 居位摄政应当统率天下臣民完成上天的使命，发扬光大帝业王道，建立健全法纪和制度，安定全国的局面。
English: Xiao Ah, Zou He, Liu Xuanhe, and Dr. Liu Xuanhe, as well as all the 78 Confucian students, said: the regent should lead the subjects of the world to complete the mission of heaven, carry forward the glory of the great emperor, establish a sound legal discipline and system, and stabilize the situation across the country.

古文：昔殷成汤既没，而太子蚤夭，其子太甲幼少不明，伊尹放诸桐宫而居摄，以兴殷道。
现代文：从前殷商的成汤去世后，而太子又早已天亡，他儿子太甲年少幼稚，不明事理，伊尹把他流放到桐宫而居位摄政，来振兴殷商的国道。
English: After the death of Cheng Tang, a former Yin merchant, and the death of the prince, his son Taijia was too young and naive to understand the matter, and Yi Yin exiled him to Tongu and placed him as a regent to revitalize the national road of Yin merchants.

古文：周武王既没，周道未成，成王幼少，周公屏成王而居摄，以成周道。
现代文：周武王去世后，周朝的道统还没确立，周成王年纪幼小，周公维护成王而居位摄政，来完成周朝的道统。
English: After the death of King Zhouwu, the Zhou Dynasty's Taoism was not yet established. King Zhoucheng was very young, and Zhou Gong insisted that he should become king and stay as regent to complete the Taoism of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：是以殷有翼翼之化，周有刑错之功。
现代文：因此殷商有整齐肃穆的教化，周朝有刑罚不用，囹圄空虚的功业。
English: Therefore, the Yin merchants had a tidy and solemn education, the Zhou Dynasty did not use punishment, and the work of emptiness.

古文：今太皇太后比遭家之不造，委任安汉公宰尹群僚，衡平天下。
现代文：现在太皇太后接连遭遇皇室处于逆境，委任安汉公主管监督百官，公平治理天下。
English: Now the empress dowager successively encountered the royal family in adversity, appointed the Anhan public official to supervise the hundred officials, and fairly govern the world.

古文：遭孺子幼少，未能共上下，皇天降瑞，出丹石之符，是以太皇太后则天明命，诏安汉公居摄践祚，将以成圣汉之业，与唐、虞三代比隆也。
现代文：遇上孺子年少，不能恭敬地事奉天地，苍天降下祥兆，出现了丹书白石的符命，因此太皇太后奉天法、明天意，诏令安漠公居位摄政、代行皇权，将要靠他来完成大汉朝的伟业，和唐尧、虞舜、夏、商、周媲美。
English: When the Empress Dowager was young, she could not respectfully serve heaven and earth, and heaven sent down auspicious signs, and the fate of Dan Shubaishi appeared. Therefore, the Empress Dowager, in accordance with the law of heaven and the will of tomorrow, decreed that Anmo Gong would serve as regent and exercise imperial power, and would rely on him to complete the great cause of the Han Dynasty, comparable to Tang Xuan, Yu Xuan, Xia, Shang and Zhou.

古文：摄皇帝遂开秘府，会群儒，制礼作乐，卒定庶官，茂成天功。
现代文：代皇帝于是开放秘府，召集众儒士，制礼作乐，终于制定了百官公卿的制度，很好地完成了上天的使命。
English: On behalf of the emperor, he opened the secret palace, gathered all the Confucianists, set up a system of etiquette and music, and finally established a system of one hundred officials and nobles, and successfully completed the mission of heaven.

古文：圣心周悉，卓尔独见，发得周礼，以明因监，则天稽古，而损益焉，犹仲尼之闻《韶》，日月之不可阶，非圣哲之至，孰能若兹！
现代文：他高明慧心观察周详，卓越独到的见解，发掘出了周朝的礼制，从而明确了继承和借鉴的根本，奉天法查古制，加以删减和增补，犹如仲尼欣赏《韶乐》，犹如太阳月亮的高不可攀，要不是圣达明哲之至的人，谁能如此？
English: With his keen observation and unique insight, he unearthed the ceremonial system of the Zhou Dynasty, thus clarifying the basis for inheritance and reference. He studied the ancient system according to the heavenly law, and edited and supplemented it. It was as if Zhong Ni was enjoying "The Sound of Music," and as if the sun and the moon were unattainable. Who could do so if he was not a saint and a philosopher?

古文：纲幻咸张，成在一匮，此其所以保佑圣汉，安靖元元之效也。
现代文：总纲要领都已设立，成功在即，这就是用来扶助大汉朝，安定百姓的功效。
English: The general outline has been established, and success is imminent. This is the effect of supporting the Han Dynasty and stabilizing the people.

古文：今功显君薨，《礼》： 庶子为后，为其母緦。 
现代文：现在功显君辞世而去，《仪礼》上说 庶子做了继承人，为他的生母守总麻服。 
English: Now that Gong Xianjun has passed away, the "Rite" says that the son-in-law has become the heir, and has kept the total hemp clothing for his birth mother.

古文：传曰： 与尊者为体，不敢服其私亲也。摄皇帝以圣德承皇天之命，受太后之诏居摄践祚，奉汉大宗之后，上有天地社稷之重，下有元元万机之忧，不得顾其私亲。
现代文：传文说 跟父亲和嫡母成了一个整体，就不敢为自己的生母守了，代皇帝靠圣明的德行，秉承皇天的旨意，接受太后的韶令居位摄政、代行皇权，继承汉朝的嫡传，对上承担事奉天地、治理国家的重任，对下要为全国人民操劳担忧、日理万机，不能够顾及他的生母。
English: According to the legend, when he became one with his father and legitimate mother, he did not dare to protect his birth mother. He relied on the virtue of Shenming to act as the emperor, adhered to the will of the emperor, accepted the order of the empress dowager to take the position of regent and act as the emperor, inherited the inheritance of the Han Dynasty, and assumed the important task of serving heaven and earth and governing the country. On the other hand, he had to work hard for the people of the whole country and worry about everything. He could not take care of his birth mother.

古文：故太皇太后建厥元孙，俾侯新都，为哀侯后。
现代文：所以太皇太后立他的长孙，使他当新都侯，作为哀侯的后嗣。
English: Therefore, the great empress dowager appointed his eldest grandson to be the new prince of the capital, as the heir of the mourner.

古文：明摄皇帝与尊者为体，承宗庙之祭，奉共养太皇太后，不得服其私亲也。
现代文：这表明代皇帝与尊贵的汉室宗亲成为一体，要恭敬地主持宗庙的祭礼，供奉赡养太皇太后，不能够为他的生母穿丧服了。
English: This indicates that the current emperor has become one with his esteemed Han imperial family, and must respectfully preside over the rituals of the ancestral temple, and offer support to the great empress dowager, and cannot wear mourning clothes for his birth mother.

古文：《周礼》曰 王为诸侯緦縗 ， 弁而加环绖 ，同姓则麻，异姓则葛。
现代文：《周礼》上说： 君王为诸侯穿鳃辕服 ， 龙冠上加上环绕而成的孝带 ，同姓诸侯用麻带，异姓诸侯用葛带。
English: "Weekly Rituals" said: The monarchs wear the imperial robes for the princes, the dragon crown with the filial band around it, the princes with the same surname with the hemp band, and the princes with different surnames with the kudzu band.

古文：摄皇帝当为功显君緦縗，弁而加麻环绖，如天子吊诸侯服，以应圣制。 
现代文：代皇帝应当替功显君穿鳃缀服，冠帽上面加上用麻环绕而成的孝带，如同天子吊唁诸侯的丧服，以顺应圣王的制度。 
English: The acting emperor should wear embroidered clothes for the meritorious prince, and the crown and cap should be topped with a filial band encircled with hemp, just as the Son of Heaven would wear the mourning clothes of the princes, in order to conform to the holy king's system.

古文：莽遂行焉，凡一吊再会，而令新都侯宗为主，服丧三年云。
现代文：于是王莽实行了上述办法，总共一吊两会的丧礼过程，让新都侯王宗作主丧人，服守三年的丧服。
English: As a result, Wang Mang implemented the above-mentioned method, a total of one hanging and two meetings of the funeral process, let the new capital lord Wang Zong be the main mourner, and served three years of mourning.

古文：司威陈崇奏，衍功侯光私报执金吾窦况，令杀人，况为收系，致其法。
现代文：司威陈崇奏称，衍功侯王光私下告诉执金吾实况，教实况替他杀人，实况把那个人逮捕，判处死刑斩首。
English: Chen Chongso said that Wang Guangru privately told the executioner Jinwu the facts, taught him to kill for him, arrested the man and sentenced him to death by beheading.

古文：莽大怒，切责光。
现代文：王莽大怒，严厉责备王光。
English: Wang Meng flew into a rage and severely rebuked Wang Guang.

古文：光母曰： 女自视孰与长孙、中孙？ 
现代文：王光的母亲说： 你看自己的身份和王宇、王获中哪一个亲近？ 
English: Wang Guang's mother said: Do you see your status as being close to Wang Yu or Wang Guo?

古文：遂母子自杀，及况皆死。
现代文：母子俩因而自杀，连实况也都死了。
English: Both mother and son committed suicide as a result, and both died in real life.

古文：初，莽以事母、养嫂、抚兄子为名，及后悖虐，复以示公义焉。
现代文：起初，王莽用侍奉母亲、奉养寡嫂、抚育侄儿得到了好名声，等到后来狂妄暴虐，又用这来显示公正无私。
English: At first, Wang Mang gained a good reputation by serving his mother, supporting his widowed sister-in-law, and raising his nephew. Later, he became arrogant and tyrannical, and used this to show his fairness and selflessness.

古文：令光子嘉嗣爵为侯。
现代文：让王光的儿子王嘉继承爵位当丁衍功侯。
English: Let Wang Guang's son Wang Jia succeed to the title of Ding Yan Gong Hou.

古文：莽下书曰： 遏密之义，讫于季冬，正月郊祀，八音当奏。
现代文：王莽下书说： 禁止奏乐的规定，到今年腊月岁尾终止，明年正月祭祀天地，所有的乐器都可以演奏。
English: Wang Mang wrote: "The ban on playing musical instruments will end at the end of this year's Lunar New Year. Next year's New Year's Day will be dedicated to heaven and earth, and all musical instruments can be played.

古文：王公卿士，乐凡几等？
现代文：诸侯王、三公九卿、士大夫，所采用的音乐分几等？
English: How many grades of music were used by the princes and kings, the three princes and nine nobles, and the magistrates?

古文：五声八音，条各云何？
现代文：五声八音，每一条各是什么？
English: Five voices and eight notes, what is each one of them?

古文：其与所部儒生各尽精思，悉陈其义。 
现代文：应该和所属儒生各自尽力思考，详尽陈述它们的意义。 
English: They should do their best to think about them individually with the Confucian students they belong to, and explain their meaning in detail.

古文：是岁，广饶侯刘京，车骑将军千人扈云、太保属臧鸿奏符命。
现代文：这一年广饶侯刘京、车骑将军千人扈云、太保属官臧鸿等奏报符命。
English: In this year, Guangrao marquess Liu Jing, chariot and cavalry general Qianqian Qianyun, and Taibo subordinate official Qianhong were reported to be dead.

古文：京言齐郡新井，云言巴郡石牛，鸿言扶风雍石，莽皆迎受。
现代文：刘京说齐郡忽然冒出一眼新井，扈云说巴郡发现了一头石牛，臧鸿说扶风雍县发现仙石，王莽都欣然接受了。
English: Liu Jing said that a new well suddenly appeared in Qi County, Gongyun said that a stone cow was found in Ba County, and Gonghong said that fairy stones were found in Fufeng and Yong County. Wang Mang gladly accepted all of them.

古文：十一月甲子，莽上奏太后曰：
现代文：十一月甲子日，王莽上奏章给太后说：
English: On November 1, Wang Mang said to the empress dowager:

古文：陛下至圣，遭家不造，遇汉十二世三七之厄，承天威命，诏臣莽居摄，受孺子之托，任天下之寄。
现代文： 陛下最圣明了，遇到皇家处于逆境之时，碰上汉朝传位十二代二百一十年的危险命运，承受上天威严的命令，诏令臣王莽居位摄政，代行皇权，接受辅弼孺子的委托，肩负天下的重望。
English: His Majesty the Most Holy and All-Wise, when encountering the royal family in adversity, encountered the dangerous fate of the Han Dynasty's succession of twelve generations for 210 years, received the command of heaven's majesty, ordered the vassal Wang Meng to take the position of regent, acted as the imperial power, accepted the commission of the auxiliary eunuch, and shouldered the weighty expectations of the world.

古文：臣莽兢兢业业，惧于不称。
现代文：臣王莽兢兢业业，惟恐不称职。
English: The vassal king is so dedicated to his work that he is afraid of being incompetent.

古文：宗室广饶侯刘京上书言： 七月中，齐郡临淄县昌兴亭长辛当一暮数梦，曰： 吾，天公使也。
现代文：皇族广饶侯刘京上书说： 七月中旬，齐郡临淄县昌兴亭亭长辛当一夜作了几个梦，梦见有人对他说： 我是天帝的使者。
English: Liu Jing, a member of the Guangrao imperial family, wrote: In mid-July, Xin Dang, the chief of the Changxing Pavilion in Linyi County, Qi County, had several dreams one night. He dreamed that someone said to him: I am the messenger of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：天公使我告亭长曰： 摄皇帝当为真。
现代文：天帝派我来告诉亭长： 代皇帝应当成为真正皇帝。 
English: The Heavenly Emperor sent me to tell the Pavilion Master: The acting emperor should become the real emperor.

古文：即不信我，此亭中当有新井。 
现代文：你如果不相信我，这个亭驿裹会出现一眼新井。 
English: If you don't believe me, there's a new well under this pavilion.

古文：亭长晨起视亭中，诚有新井，入地且百尺。 十一月壬子，直建冬至，巴郡石牛，戊午，雍石文，皆到于未央宫之前殿。
现代文：亭长早晨起来看亭中，确实有一眼新井，深入地下将近一百尺，十一月壬子日，正当建辰交冬至，巴郡的石牛，戊午日，雍的石文，都送到了未央宫前殿。
English: The chief of the pavilion got up in the morning to look at the pavilion. There was indeed a new well, nearly a hundred feet deep underground. On November Mizi Day, just before the winter solstice, Ba County's stone ox, Wu Wu Day, and Yong's stone text were all sent to the front hall of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：臣与太保安阳侯舜等视，天风起，尘冥，风止，得铜符帛图于右前，文曰：天告帝符，献者封侯。
现代文：我与太保安阳侯王舜等人前去观看，忽然间天空刮起大风，尘土飞扬，天昏地暗，等到风停了，在两石之前看到铜制的符信和用缣帛书写的图画文字，内容是： 上天通告皇帝的符命，进献的人可以封侯。
English: I went to watch with the Tai Po Yang Hou Wang Ye and others. Suddenly, a strong wind blew in the sky, dust flew, and the sky was dark. When the wind stopped, I saw a copper letter and a picture written in ink in front of the two stones. The content was: Heaven announces the fate of the emperor, and those who present it can be knighted.

古文：承天命，用神令。 
现代文：承受天命，执行神令。 
English: Accept the destiny and carry out the divine order.

古文：骑都尉崔发等视说。
现代文：骑都尉崔发等人看了全文并解说它的含义。
English: Cavalry Captain Cui Fa and others read the full text and explained its meaning.

古文：及前孝哀皇帝建平二年六月甲子下诏书，更为太初元将元年，案其本事，甘忠可、夏贺良谶书臧兰台。
现代文：以及从前孝哀皇帝建平二年六月甲子曰下诏书，改为太初元将元年，考察孝哀帝改元的经过情形，甘忠可、夏贺良的神秘预言预兆书藏在兰台。
English: as well as the imperial decree issued by Emperor Xiao'ai in June of the second year of Jianping, which was changed to the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：臣莽以为元将元年者，大将居摄改元之文也。于今信矣。
现代文：臣王莽认为元将元年的意思，就是大将居位摄政改元的预兆，到今天应验了。
English: The vassal Wang Mang believes that the general's intention of the first year of the year, that is, the omen of the general's regency in the first year, has come true today.

古文：《尚书·康诰》 王若曰： 孟侯，朕其弟，小子封。  
现代文：《尚书。康诰》记载 王周公这样说道： 诸侯之长，朕的弟弟，小子姬封。  
English: "Shangshu. Kangxi" records that Wang Zhou Gong said: "The head of the princes, my brother, the boy Kifeng.

古文：此周公居摄称王之文也。
现代文：这是周公居位摄政时被称为王的记录。
English: This is the record of Zhou Gong who was called Wang when he was a regent.

古文：《春秋》隐公不言即位，摄也。
现代文：《春秋》描述鲁隐公不说即国君位，因为他是代理鲁君。
English: "Spring and Autumn" describes Lu Yingguo as the king of the country, because he is acting as Lu Jun.

古文：此二经周公、孔子所定，盖为后法。
现代文：这两部经书是周公、了子所编定，都被后人效法。
English: These two scriptures were compiled by Zhou Gong and Liao Zi, and have been imitated by later generations.

古文：孔子曰： 畏天命，畏大人，畏圣人之言。 
现代文：孔子说： 怕天命，怕地位尊贵的人，怕圣人之言。 
English: Confucius said, "Fear the decrees of heaven, fear the persons of high rank, fear the sayings of the sages.

古文：臣莽敢不承用！
现代文：臣王莽怎敢不秉承执行呢！
English: How dare vassal Wang Mang not adhere to the implementation!

古文：臣请共事神祇宗庙，奏言太皇太后、孝平皇后，皆称假皇帝。
现代文：我请求在恭敬地事奉神祇和祖宗神庙，奏报太皇太后、孝平皇后时，都自称假皇帝。
English: I request you to respectfully serve the gods and the ancestral temple, and when reporting to the Grand Empress Dowager and Empress Xiaoping, all of them will call themselves fake emperors.

古文：其号令天下，天下奏言事，毋言 摄 。
现代文：而在向全国发号施令，天下臣民陈奏或议政时，都不说是 代理 。
English: However, when issuing orders to the whole country, and when the subjects of the world are playing or discussing politics, they do not say that they are agents.

古文：以居摄三年为初始元年，漏刻以百二十为度，用应天命。
现代文：把居摄三年作为初始元年，计时的漏刻改为一百二十度，用以顺应天命。
English: The three years of residence were taken as the initial first year, and the time delay was changed to one hundred and twenty degrees, in order to comply with the destiny.

古文：臣莽夙夜养育隆就孺子，令与周之成王比德，宣明太皇太后威德于万方，期于富而教之。
现代文：臣王莽一定日夜培养教育孺子，使他能和周成王相媲美，把太皇太后的声威德行传播到四面八方，希望他们富足并有教化。
English: Wang Mang, a vassal of the empress dowager, was determined to train and educate young scholars day and night, so that they could be comparable to Zhou Chengwang, and spread the sound virtue of the empress dowager to all corners of the world, hoping that they would be rich and educated.

古文：孺子加元服，复子明辟，如周公故事。
现代文：等到孺子成年加冠之后，就把皇帝的权力归还给他，像周公当年那样。 
English: Wait until the mule is an adult and crowned, then return the power of the emperor to him, as Zhou Gong did.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章得到了认可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：众庶知其奉符命，指意群臣博议别奏，以视即真之渐矣。
现代文：广大平民得知他信奉符命的事，示意众大臣广为议论，分别奏报太后，这显示了登上真皇位的发展趋势。
English: The broad masses of the common people learned that he believed in the things that were in accordance with his destiny, and suggested that the ministers widely discuss and separately report to the empress dowager, which showed the development trend of ascending to the true imperial throne.

古文：期门郎张充等六人谋共劫莽，立楚王。
现代文：期门郎张充等六人计划一同劫持王莽，拥立楚王做皇帝。
English: The six men, including Zhang Zhen, planned to kidnap Wang Mang and install King Chu as emperor.

古文：发觉，诛死。
现代文：被发觉，处死。
English: Found out, executed.

古文：梓潼人哀章，学问长安，素无行，好为大言。
现代文：梓潼县人哀章在长安求学，一向品行不端，喜欢吹牛皮说大话。
English: Aizhang, a resident of Zizhou County, studied in Chang'an. He always behaved badly and liked to brag.

古文：见莽居摄，即作铜匮，为两检，置其一曰 天帝行玺金匮图 ，其一署曰 赤帝行玺某传予黄帝金策书 。
现代文：他看到王莽已经代行皇帝大权，就做了一只铜柜，写了两道封书题笺，其中一张写着 天帝行玺金匮图 ，另一张写着 赤帝行玺某传予黄帝金策书 。
English: When he saw that Wang Mang had already acted on behalf of the emperor's authority, he made a copper cabinet and wrote two inscriptions, one of which was written by the Heavenly Emperor, and the other was written by the Red Emperor, which was passed on to the Yellow Emperor.

古文：某者，高皇帝名也。
现代文：所谓某，就是汉高祖刘邦的名称。
English: So-and-so is the name of Liu Bang, the founder of Henkel.

古文：书言王莽为真天子，皇太后如天命。
现代文：文书说王莽是真天子，皇太后应按上天旨意行事。
English: The document said that Wang Mang is the true son of heaven, and the empress dowager should act according to the will of heaven.

古文：图书皆书莽大臣八兴，又取令名王兴、王盛，章因自窜姓名，凡为十一人，皆署官爵，为辅佐。
现代文：图和书都写着王莽的八个大臣，又取好了名字王兴、王盛，哀章便自己从旁改编捏造姓名，共是十一人，都署上官衔和爵位，作为辅国佐政的大臣。
English: The eight ministers of Wang Mang are written in the picture and the book, and the names Wang Xing and Wang Sheng are taken, and the mourning chapter adapts and fabricates names from the side. There are a total of eleven people, all of whom have official titles and peerages, as ministers of the auxiliary state Saisei.

古文：章闻齐井、石牛事下，即日皆时，衣黄衣，持匮至高庙，以付仆射。
现代文：哀章听到齐郡新井和巴郡石牛的事下达了，就在当天黄昏的时候，身穿黄色衣服，提着铜柜子到高帝庙，把它交给仆射。
English: When Lai Zhang heard that the matter of Arai in Qi County and Shi Niu in Ba County had been handed down, he went to Gao Di Temple in the evening of the same day, wearing yellow clothes and carrying a copper cabinet, and handed it over to Puhe.

古文：仆射以闻。
现代文：仆射把这件事报上去了。
English: He reported the matter to the police.

古文：戊辰，莽至高庙拜受金匮神嬗。
现代文：戊辰日，王莽到高帝庙接受天命惮位的铜柜子。
English: On the day of Pentecost, Wang Mang went to the Emperor Gao Temple to receive the bronze cabinet of the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：御王冠，谒太后，还坐未央宫前殿，下书曰： 予以不德，托于皇初祖考黄帝之后，皇始祖考虞帝之苗裔，而太皇太后之末属。
现代文：他头戴王冠，拜见太后，回来坐在未央宫前殿，下韶书说： 我德行浅薄，有幸是皇初祖考黄帝的子孙，皇始祖考虞帝的后裔，以及太皇太后的微末亲属。
English: Wearing a crown on his head, he paid a visit to the empress dowager, returned and sat in the front hall of the Weiyang Palace, and said in his farewell letter: I am a shallow virtue, and I am fortunate to be a descendant of the first ancestor of the emperor, the Yellow Emperor, and a descendant of the first ancestor of the emperor, the Yu Emperor, as well as a distant relative of the great empress dowager.

古文：皇天上帝隆显大佑，成命统序，符契图文，金匮策书，神明诏告，属予以天下兆民。
现代文：皇天上帝赐厚恩保佑，既定的天命让我继承大统，符命、图书和文字，以及铜柜里的策书，都是神灵的指示，把天下千百万百姓的命运托付给我。
English: Emperor Heaven, God has bestowed great grace and blessing, and the established destiny has allowed me to inherit the supreme leadership. According to the destiny, books and characters, as well as the strategy book in the copper cabinet, are all the instructions of the gods, entrusting the fate of millions of people in the world to me.

古文：赤帝汉氏高皇帝之灵，承天命，传国金策之书，予甚祇畏，敢不钦受！
现代文：托赤帝汉朝高皇帝的神灵，秉承上天之命，惮让皇位的金策书，我十分敬畏，敢不恭敬接受！
English: To the deities of the Red Emperor, the Han Dynasty, and the Gao Emperor, upholding the mandate of heaven, I am very much in awe, and dare not respectfully accept!

古文：以戊辰直定，御王冠，即真天子位，定有天下之号曰 新 。
现代文：在戊辰日，当定辰，我戴上皇冠，登上真龙天子的宝座，定国号叫新。
English: On the day of Pentecost, when the fixed time, I put on a crown and ascended the throne of the true dragon god, the fixed country code is called new.

古文：其改正朔，易服色，变牺牲，殊徽帜，异器制。
现代文：应该改定正月朔日，改变车马、服饰的颜色，更改祭祀用的牲畜的毛色，更换旗帜之类的标志，重定器具的形制。
English: It is necessary to revise the New Year's Day, change the colors of the chariots, horses, and clothing, change the color of the livestock used for sacrifices, replace flags and other signs, and re-determine the shape of the equipment.

古文：以十二月朔癸酉为建国元年正月之朔，以鸡鸣为时。
现代文：把今年十二月初一癸酉日作为建国元年正月初一，以鸡呜之时作为一天的开始。
English: Take the first day of the first month of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China as the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, and take the time of the rooster as the beginning of the day.

古文：服色配德上黄，牺牲应正用白，使节之旄幡皆纯黄，其署曰 新使王威节 ，以承皇天上帝威命也。 
现代文：车马、服饰的颜色崇尚黄色，祭祀用的牲畜和正月建丑宜用白色，使节上用作装饰的牦牛尾都采用纯黄色，上写着 新使五威节，以显示秉承皇天上帝的威严。 
English: The colors of the chariots, horses, and clothing are yellow, and the sacrificial animals and the New Year's horse are white. The yakitori used as decoration on the envoys are all pure yellow, with the words "Xinzhi Wuwei Festival" written on them, to show the majesty of upholding the Emperor God.

