古文：起阏逢困敦，尽强圉单阏，凡四年。
现代文：起阏逢困敦，尽强圉单阏，一共四年。
English: For a total of four years, he worked hard and single-mindedly in the face of difficulties.

古文：高祖文皇帝下仁寿四年
现代文：隋文帝仁寿四年
English: Sui Emperor Wen Zhou dies at the age of four

古文：春，正月，丙午，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，丙午，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, and the afternoon of the third lunar month are all auspicious.

古文：帝将避暑于仁寿宫，术士章仇太翼固谏；不听，太翼曰： 是行恐銮舆不返！ 
现代文：文帝要去仁寿宫避暑，术士章仇太翼竭力劝说，文帝不听。章仇太翼说： 这次出行恐怕主上回不来了！ 
English: Emperor Wen is going to spend the summer at the Renshou Palace. The sorcerer Zhang Qiu Taiyi tries his best to persuade Emperor Wen, but Emperor Wen does not listen. Zhang Qiu Taiyi says, "I'm afraid the Lord won't come back from this trip!"

古文：帝大怒，系之长安狱，期还而斩之。
现代文：文帝勃然大怒，将章仇太翼投入长安的监狱，准备回来杀掉他。
English: Emperor Wen flew into a rage and threw Zhang Qiu Taiyi into a prison in Chang'an, preparing to come back and kill him.

古文：甲子，幸仁寿宫。
现代文：甲子，文帝驾临仁寿宫。
English: On the 27th, he went to Renshou Palace.

古文：乙丑，诏赏赐支度，事无巨细，并付皇太子。
现代文：乙丑，文帝下诏凡赏赐、财政支出，事无巨细一并交付皇太子杨广处理。
English: Second, Emperor Wen decreed that all rewards and financial expenditures, no matter how small, should be handed over to Crown Prince Yang Guang.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，帝不豫。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙卯，文帝感到身体不适。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wen began to feel unwell.

古文：六月，庚申，赦天下。
现代文：六月庚申，大赦天下。
English: In June, Koshin was granted amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，甲辰，上疾甚，卧与百僚辞诀，并握手歔欷，命太子赦章仇太翼。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲辰，文帝病重，他躺在床上和文武百官诀别，并握住大臣们的手欷不止。文帝命太子杨广赦免章仇太翼。
English: In the autumn, July, Jia Chen, Emperor Wen was seriously ill, he was lying in bed and bade farewell to hundreds of civil and military officials, and held the handcuffs of ministers more than once. Emperor Wen's life prince Yang Guang pardoned Zhang Qiu Taiyi.

古文：丁未，崩于大宝殿。
现代文：丁未，文帝在大宝殿驾崩。
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Wen passed away in the Great Treasure Hall.

古文：高祖性严重，令行禁止，勤于政事。每旦听朝，日昃忘倦。
现代文：隋文帝性格谨严持重，办事令行禁止，每日清晨听理朝政，到日偏西时还不知疲倦。
English: Sui Emperor Wen's character was prudent and strict, he forbade the execution of orders, he listened to reason and government every morning, and he was tireless when the sun set.

古文：虽啬于财，至于赏赐有功，即无所爱；将士战没，必加优赏，仍遣使者劳问其家。
现代文：虽然吝啬钱财，但赏赐有功之臣则不吝惜；将士战死，文帝必定从优抚恤，并派使者慰问死者家属。
English: Although he is stingy with money, he does not begrudge rewarding meritorious vassals. When a soldier dies in battle, Emperor Wen will certainly give him a generous pension and send an envoy to console the family of the deceased.

古文：爱养百姓，劝课农桑，轻徭薄赋。
现代文：他爱护百姓，劝课农桑，轻徭薄赋。
English: He loves and protects the people, exhorts farmers and farmers, and is frivolous.

古文：其自奉养，务为俭素，乘舆御物，故弊者随令补用；自非享宴，所食不过一肉；后宫皆服浣濯之衣。
现代文：自己生活务求节俭朴素，所乘车驾及所用之物，旧了坏了都随时修理使用；如果不是享宴，吃饭不过一个肉菜；后宫都身着洗旧了的衣服。
English: They live a frugal and simple life. The cars they drive and the things they use are repaired and used at any time when they are old and broken. If they do not enjoy the banquet, the meal is just a meat dish. The harem is dressed in old clothes.

古文：天下化之，开皇、仁寿之间，丈夫率衣绢布，不服绫绮，装带不过铜铁骨角，无金玉之饰。
现代文：天下人都为文帝的行为所感化。开皇、仁寿年间，男子都身穿绢布衣服，不穿绫绮；衣带饰品用的不过是铜铁骨角所制，没有金玉的装饰。
English: People around the world were inspired by the behavior of Emperor Wen. During the reign of Emperor Gaozong and the reign of Emperor Renshou, men wore clothes made of embroidered cloth, but did not wear hakama; the clothing and belt accessories were made of copper and iron, and were not decorated with gold and jewels.

古文：故衣食滋殖，仓库盈溢。
现代文：因此国家的财富日益增长，仓库丰盈。
English: Therefore, the wealth of the country is increasing day by day, and warehouses are abundant.

古文：受禅之初，民户不满四百万，末年，逾八百九十万，独冀州已一百万户。
现代文：文帝受禅之初，隋朝的民户不满四百万户；到了隋文帝仁寿末年，超过了八百九十万户，仅冀州就已有一百万户。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Wen's reign, there were less than four million households in the Sui Dynasty; by the end of Emperor Wen's reign, there were more than 8.9 million households, with one million households in Jizhou alone.

古文：然猜忌苛察，信受谗言，功臣故旧，无始终保全者；乃至子弟，皆如仇敌，此其所短也。
现代文：但是文帝好猜忌苛察，容易听信谗言，他的功臣故旧，没有能始终保全的；至于他的子弟辈，都象仇敌一样，这是他的短处。
English: However, Emperor Wen was suspicious, harsh, and easy to listen to, and his old heroes could not always be preserved. As for his children, they were all like enemies, which was his shortcoming.

古文：初，文献皇后既崩，宣华夫人陈氏、容华夫人察氏皆有宠。
现代文：当初，独孤皇后去世，宣华夫人陈氏、容华夫人蔡氏都受到文帝的宠爱。
English: At first, the lonely empress died, and Emperor Wen loved both Mrs. Chen of Xuanhua and Mrs. Cai of Yonghua.

古文：陈氏，陈高宗之女；蔡氏，丹杨人也。
现代文：陈氏是陈宣帝的女儿，蔡氏是丹杨人。
English: The Chen clan is the daughter of Chen Xuandi, and the Cai clan is from Danyang.

古文：上寝疾于仁寿宫，尚书左仆射杨素、兵部尚书柳述、黄门侍郎元岩皆入阁侍疾，召皇太子入居大宝殿。
现代文：文帝患病住在仁寿宫，尚书左仆射杨素、兵部尚书柳述、黄门侍郎元岩都进入仁寿宫侍病。文帝召皇太子杨广入内居崐住在大宝殿。
English: Emperor Wen was ill and stayed at Renshou Palace. Shangshu's left-hand servant Yang Su, Hyobu's left-hand servant Shangshu Liu Su, and Huangmen's right-hand man Yuan Yan all entered Renshou Palace to attend the illness. Emperor Wen called Crown Prince Yang Guang to live in the inner palace and stay at the Great Treasure Hall.

古文：太子虑上有不讳，须预防拟，手自为书，封出问素；素条录事状以报太子。
现代文：杨广考虑到如果文帝去世，必须预先作好防备措施，他亲手写了一封信封好，派人送出来询问杨素。杨素把情况一条条写下来回复太子。
English: Yang Guang considered that if Emperor Wen passed away, it was necessary to take precautionary measures in advance. He hand-wrote a sealed letter and sent someone to inquire about Yang Su. Yang Su wrote down the situation and replied to the prince.

古文：宫人误送上所，上览而大恚。
现代文：宫人误把回信送到了文帝的寝宫，文帝看后极为愤怒。
English: The courtiers mistakenly sent the reply to Emperor Wen's bedchamber, and Emperor Wen was extremely angry after reading it.

古文：陈夫人平旦出更衣，为太子所逼，拒之，得免，归于上所；上怪其神色有异，问其故。
现代文：天刚亮，陈夫人出去更衣，被太子杨广所逼迫。
English: At first light, Mrs. Chen went out to change clothes and was forced to do so by Prince Yang Guang.

古文：夫人泫然曰： 太子无礼！ 
现代文：陈夫人拒绝了他才得以脱身。
English: Mrs. Chen was able to escape only after she refused him.

古文：上恚，抵床曰： 畜生何足付大事！
现代文：她回到文帝的寝宫，文帝奇怪她神色不对，问什么原因，陈夫人流着泪说： 太子无礼！ 文帝愤怒，捶着床说： 这个畜生！
English: She returned to Emperor Wen's bedchamber. Emperor Wen was surprised that she didn't look right, and asked why. Lady Chen said with tears streaming down her face, "The prince is disrespectful!" Emperor Wen was furious, stomped on the bed and said, "This brute!"

古文：独孤误我！ 
现代文：怎么可以将国家大事交付给他！独孤误了我！ 
English: How can he be entrusted with the nation's affairs! I alone am to blame!

古文：乃呼柳述、元岩曰： 召我儿！ 
现代文：于是他叫来柳述、元岩说： 召见我的儿子！ 
English: So he called Liushul, and Yuan Yan said, "Call my son!"

古文：述等将呼太子，上曰： 勇也。 
现代文：柳述等人要叫杨广来。文帝说： 是杨勇。 
English: Liu Shu and others wanted to call Yang Guang. Emperor Wen said: It is Yang Yong.

古文：述、岩出阁为敕书。
现代文：柳述、元岩出了文帝的寝宫，起草敕书。
English: According to the legend, Yuan Iwao went to Emperor Wen's bedchamber to draft the edict.

古文：杨素闻之，以白太子，矫诏执述、岩，系大理狱；追东宫兵士帖上台宿卫，门禁出入，并取宇文述、郭衍节度；令右庶子张衡入寝殿侍疾，尽遣后宫出就别室；俄而上崩。
现代文：杨素闻知此事，告诉了太子杨广。杨广假传文帝的旨意将柳述、元岩逮捕，关进大理狱。他们迅速调来东宫的裨将兵士来宿卫仁寿宫，宫门禁止出入，并派宇文述、郭衍进入调度指挥；命令右庶子张衡进入文帝的寝宫侍侯文帝。后宫的人员全被赶到别的房间去。
English: Yang Su heard about this and told Prince Yang Guang. Yang Guang falsely reported that Emperor Wen had ordered the arrest of Liu Shu and Yuan Yan and put them in Dali Prison. They quickly transferred the guards of the East Palace to guard Renshou Palace, the palace gate was closed, and sent Yu Wenshu and Guo Yan to the dispatching command; ordered the right bastard Zhang Heng to enter Emperor Wen's sleeping palace to serve Emperor Wen. The personnel of the harem were all driven to other rooms.

古文：故中外颇有异论。
现代文：一会儿，文帝死了。
English: Moments later, Wendi was dead.

古文：陈夫人与后宫闻变，相顾战栗失色。
现代文：因此朝廷内外有很多不同的说法。陈夫人与后宫们闻知发生变故，面面相觑，战栗失色。
English: Therefore, there are many different opinions inside and outside the imperial court. When Mrs. Chen and the harem heard that there had been a change, they looked at each other, trembling and losing their color.

古文：晡后，太子遣使者赍小金合，帖纸于际，亲署封字，以赐夫人。
现代文：黄昏时，太子杨广派使者送来小金盒，盒边上贴封纸，杨广亲笔写上封字，赐给陈夫人。
English: At dusk, Prince Yang Guang sent an emissary to bring a small gold box. A paper seal was affixed to the edge of the box, and Yang Guang wrote a seal with his own pen and gave it to Mrs. Chen.

古文：夫人见之，惶惧，以为鸩毒，不敢发。
现代文：陈夫人看见小金盒，惊惶恐惧，以为是鸩毒，不敢打开。
English: Mrs. Chen saw the small gold box, panicked, thought it was poison, and did not dare to open it.

古文：使者促之，乃发，合中有同心结数枚，宫人咸悦，相谓曰： 得免死矣！ 
现代文：使者催促陈夫人，于是她打开小金盒，盒内有几枚同心结。宫人们都高兴了，互相说： 可以免死了！ 
English: The messenger urged Mrs. Chen, so she opened the small gold box, which contained several concentric knots. The palace people were happy and said to each other: You can avoid death!

古文：陈氏恚而却坐，不肯致谢；诸宫人共逼之，乃拜使者。
现代文：陈夫人愤怒得想坐下，不肯致谢。宫人们一起逼迫陈夫人，她才拜谢使者接受了小金盒。
English: Mrs. Chen was so angry that she wanted to sit down and refused to give thanks. The palace people persecuted Mrs. Chen together, and only after she thanked the messenger did she accept the small gold box.

古文：其夜，太子蒸焉。
现代文：当天夜里，太子杨广将陈夫人奸淫。
English: That night, the crown prince spent the night with her.

古文：乙卯，发丧，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：乙卯，为文帝发丧。太子杨广即皇帝位。
English: Emperor Wen died suddenly, and Prince Yang Guang became emperor.

古文：会伊州刺史杨约来朝，太子遣约入长安，易留守者，矫称高祖之诏，赐故太子勇死，缢杀之；然后陈兵集众，发高祖凶问。
现代文：正好伊州刺史杨约来朝见，杨广派杨约进入长安，调换了留守者。诈称文帝的诏命，将前太子杨勇赐死，杨勇被勒死。然后陈兵集众，发布文帝去世的凶信。
English: It just so happened that Yang Guanzhong, the governor of Yizhou, sent Yang Guanzhong to Chang'an to meet with the emperor. Yang Guanzhong sent Yang Guanzhong to Chang'an to replace those who were left behind. He falsely claimed that it was Emperor Wen's edict to put the former crown prince Yang Yong to death. Yang Yong was strangled to death. Then Chen gathered soldiers and released a sinister letter announcing the death of Emperor Wen.

古文：炀帝闻之，曰： 令兄之弟，果堪大任。 
现代文：炀帝听到杨约的行动后对杨素说： 您的弟弟果然能够担当重任。 
English: After hearing Yang Yao's actions, Emperor Yao said to Yang Su: Your younger brother is indeed capable of taking on important responsibilities.

古文：追封勇为房陵王，不为置嗣。
现代文：他追封杨勇为房陵王，不给杨勇立继承人。
English: He posthumously crowned Yang Yong as the tomb king and refused to give Yang Yong an heir.

古文：八月，丁卯，梓宫至自仁寿宫；丙子，殡于大兴前殿。
现代文：八月，丁卯，文帝的灵柩从仁寿宫至京师；丙子，在大兴前殿为文帝出殡。
English: In August, Dingwu, Emperor Wen's coffin was carried from Renshou Palace to Beijing, and Bizi, Emperor Wen's funeral was held in Daxing's front hall.

古文：柳述、元岩并除名，述徙龙川，岩徙南海。
现代文：柳述、元岩被一起除名。柳述被流放到龙川，元岩被流放到南海。
English: Liu Shu and Yuan Yan were both expelled. Liu Shu was exiled to Longchuan, and Yuan Yan was exiled to Nanhai.

古文：帝令兰陵公主与述离绝，欲改嫁之；公主以死自誓，不复朝谒，上表请与述同徙，帝大怒。
现代文：炀帝命令兰陵公主和柳述断绝关系，打算把她改嫁别人。兰陵公主以死来发誓，不再朝见炀帝。她上表炀帝要求和柳述一起流放，炀帝大怒，兰陵公主忧愤而死。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered Princess Lanling to break off relations with Liu Shu, intending to remarry her to someone else. Princess Lanling swore by death not to see Emperor Xuan again. She presented Emperor Xuan's request to be exiled together with Liu Shu. Emperor Xuan was furious, and Princess Lanling died of grief.

古文：公主忧愤而卒，临终，上表请葬于柳氏。
现代文：她临终时上表给炀帝请求归葬柳氏墓地。
English: On her deathbed, she petitioned Emperor Xizong to be buried in the Liu family cemetery.

古文：帝愈怒，竟不哭，葬送甚薄。
现代文：炀帝更加发怒，竟然没哭。兰陵公主的葬礼葬物极为简单菲薄。
English: Emperor Xuan became even angrier, to the point that he didn't cry. Princess Lanling's funeral was extremely simple.

古文：太史令袁充奏言： 皇帝即位，与尧受命年合。 
现代文：太史令袁充奏道： 皇帝即位，与尧受天命的时间吻合。 
English: Yuan Zhengsong, the Taishi, said: The emperor's enthronement coincides with the time when he received the mandate of heaven.

古文：讽百官表贺。
现代文：他示意百官上表庆贺。
English: He gestured to the hundreds of officials lining up to congratulate him.

古文：礼部侍郎许善心议，以为 国哀甫尔，不宜称贺。 左卫大将军宇文述素恶善心，讽御史劾之；左迁给事郎，降品二等。
现代文：礼部侍郎许善心提出，由于 国丧刚完，不适宜称贺 ，左卫大将军宇文述向来讨厌许善心，他示意御史弹劾许善心，许善心被降职为给事郎，降了两级。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Xu Zenshin, proposed that since the national funeral had just ended, it was not appropriate to congratulate, the left guard general, Yu Wenshu, had always hated Xu Zenshin. He signaled to the historian to impeach Xu Zenshin. Xu Zenshin was demoted to the position of the attendant, down two levels.

古文：汉王谅有宠于高祖，为并州总管，自山以东，至于沧海，南距黄河，五十二州皆隶焉；特许以便宜从事，不拘律令。
现代文：汉王杨谅受到文帝的宠爱，他是并州总管，崤山以东到沧海，南至黄河，五十二州都隶属于并州。杨谅得到特许可以便宜行事，可以不拘泥于法律条文。
English: Emperor Wen loved the Han king Yang Chong, who was the chief administrator of the unified states. The fifty-two states from the east of Mount Lushan to the Canghai and south to the Yellow River were all subordinate to the unified states. Yang Chong received special permission to act cheaply and not to adhere to the provisions of the law.

古文：谅自以所居天下精兵处，见太子勇以谗废，居常怏怏，及蜀王秀得罪，尤不自安，阴蓄异图。
现代文：杨谅自认为他所在的地方是天下精兵的聚集地，他看到太子杨勇因谗言被废黜，常常怏怏不乐；到蜀王杨秀获罪，杨谅极为不安，暗中怀有异图。
English: Yang Yuanzhong thought that the place he was in was the gathering place of the world's elite soldiers. He saw Prince Yang Yong was deposed for slander and was often unhappy; when Shu King Yang Xiu was convicted, Yang Yuanzhong was extremely uneasy and secretly harbored a different view.

古文：言于高祖，以 突厥方强，宜修武备。 
现代文：他对文帝说，由于 突厥正处于强盛时期，应该修整军备。 
English: He told Emperor Wen that since the Turks were at the height of their power, they should improve their armaments.

古文：于是大发工役，缮治器械，招集亡命，左右私人殆将数万。
现代文：于是他大规模地征崐发工匠夫役，修造武器，招集亡命之徒，身边的私人门客将近数万。
English: As a result, he enlisted craftsmen on a large scale to build weapons and recruit outlaws. He had close to tens of thousands of private clients.

古文：突厥尝寇边，高祖使谅御之，为突厥所败；其所领将帅坐除解者八十馀人，皆配防岭表。
现代文：突厥人曾进犯边塞，文帝派杨谅抵御突厥人，他被突厥人打败，他属下的将帅因罪被解职除名的有八十余人，都被发配流放到岭表。
English: The Turks had invaded the border fortress, Emperor Wen sent Yang Peng to defend against the Turks, he was defeated by the Turks, and more than eighty of his subordinate generals were dismissed for their crimes, and all of them were exiled to Ling table.

古文：谅以其宿旧，奏请留之，高祖怒曰： 尔为籓王，惟当敬依朝命，何得私论宿旧，废国家宪法邪！
现代文：杨谅因为这些人是他过去的老部下，奏请文帝留下这些人。文帝发怒说： 你作为藩王，只应恭敬地遵从朝廷的命令，怎么可以因私而谈论宿旧，废弃国家的法令呢！
English: Yang pardoned these people because they were his old subordinates in the past, and asked Emperor Wen to let them stay. Emperor Wen angrily said, "As the lord of the domain, you should only respectfully follow the orders of the imperial court. How can you talk about the old ways and abandon the laws of the country because of me!"

古文：嗟乎小子，尔一旦无我，或欲妄动，彼取尔如笼内鸡雏耳，何用腹心为！ 
现代文：你这小子，一旦没了我，要想轻举妄动，人家抓你就象抓笼子里的鸡雏一样，心腹又有什么用呢？ 
English: You, boy, once I'm gone, if you want to act rashly, you'll be caught like a chicken in a cage. What use is a confidant?

古文：王頍者，僧辩之子，倜傥好奇略，为谅咨议参军，萧摩诃，陈氏旧将，二人俱不得志，每郁郁思乱，皆为谅所亲善，赞成其阴谋。
现代文：王是王僧辩的儿子，为人洒脱，善于谋略，他是杨谅的谘议参军。
English: Wang is the son of Wang Sangye, a free-spirited man who is good at strategizing. He was Yang Peng's advisor to join the army.

古文：会荧惑守东井，仪曹鄴人傅奕晓星历，谅问之曰： 是何祥也？ 
现代文：萧摩诃是陈国的旧将。两个人都不得志，常常郁闷，胡思乱想，他们都得到杨谅的信任优待，都赞同杨谅谋反的阴谋。当时正好火星处在井宿的位置，仪曹邺人傅奕通晓天文星历，杨谅问他： 这是什么征兆？ 
English: Xiao Maqian was an old general of Chen Guo. Both of them were discouraged, often depressed, and cranky. They both received Yang Peng's trust and preferential treatment, and both agreed with Yang Peng's conspiracy to rebel. At that time, Mars was exactly in the location of the well, and Yi Cao and Ren Fu Yi were familiar with the astronomical calendar. Yang Peng asked him: What is this sign?

古文：对曰： 天上东井，黄道所经，荧惑过之，乃其常理，若入地上井，则可怪耳。 
现代文：傅奕回答： 天上的井宿，在黄道带上，是火星必经之路，这是正常的规律，倘若进入地上井的位置，那就怪异了。 
English: Fu Yi replied: "The well in the sky, on the zodiac, is the inevitable path of Mars. This is a normal rule, but if it enters the position of the above-ground well, it will be strange.

古文：谅不悦。
现代文：杨谅听了很不高兴。
English: Chen Youzhen was very unhappy.

古文：及高祖崩，炀帝遣车骑将军屈突通以高祖玺书征之。
现代文：到文帝去世时，炀帝派车骑将军屈突通持印有文帝玉玺的诏书召杨谅进京。
English: At the time of Emperor Wen's death, Emperor Zhou sent the chariot-riding General Qu Jutong with an imperial edict bearing Emperor Wen's jade scepter to summon Yang Piao to Beijing.

古文：先是，高祖与谅密约： 若玺书召汝，敕字傍别加一点，又与玉麟符合者，当就征。 
现代文：原来，文帝与杨谅秘密约定： 要是玺书召你，敕字旁另加一点，还要与玉麟符相契合，才可以应召。 
English: Originally, Emperor Wen and Yang Peng made a secret agreement: If you are summoned by a calligraphy, add another point next to the calligraphy, and match it with the unicorn, then you can be summoned.

古文：及发书无验，谅知有变。诘通，通占对不屈，乃遣归长安。谅遂发兵反。
现代文：杨谅看到发来的玺书与原约不能验证，就知道出了事，他盘问屈突通，屈突通闪烁其词而不回答，于是，屈突通被打发回长安，杨谅起兵造反。
English: When Yang Peng saw that the signed document and the original agreement could not be verified, he knew that something had happened. He interrogated Qu Xutong, who was evasive and did not answer. As a result, Qu Xutong was sent back to Chang'an, and Yang Peng started a mutiny.

古文：总管司马安定皇甫诞切谏，谅不纳。
现代文：总管司马安定人皇甫诞恳切规劝杨谅，杨谅不听。
English: The general manager of the Sima stable, the emperor's father-in-law, earnestly advised Yang Peng, but Yang Peng did not listen.

古文：诞流涕曰： 窃料大王兵资非京师之敌；加以君臣位定，逆顺势殊，士马虽精，难以取胜。
现代文：皇甫诞流着泪说： 我预料大王的兵力不是京师军队的对手；加上君臣的地位已经确定，双方势力悬殊，军队虽然精锐但难以取胜。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi said with tears streaming down her face, "I expected that the great king's army would not be a rival to the army of the Beijing division. In addition, the status of the monarchs and ministers has already been determined, and the two sides have a great disparity in power. Although the army is elite, it is difficult to win.

古文：一旦陷身叛逆，絓于刑书，虽欲为布衣，不可得也。 
现代文：一旦身处叛逆的地位，被追究刑法，就是想作一个平民也不可能了。 
English: Once you find yourself in a position of rebellion and are being investigated under criminal law, it is impossible to remain a civilian.

古文：谅怒，囚之。
现代文：杨谅听了发怒，把皇甫诞关进监狱。
English: Hearing this, Yang Yuanzhong became angry and put Emperor Fuxing in prison.

古文：岚州刺史乔钟葵将赴谅，其司马京兆陶模拒之曰： 汉王所图不轨，公荷国厚恩，当竭诚效命，岂得身为厉阶乎！ 
现代文：岚州刺史乔钟葵要去投奔杨谅，岚州司马京兆人陶模反对，说： 汉王杨谅图谋不轨，您身受国家的厚恩，应当竭诚为国效命，怎么能身陷祸端呢？ 
English: Zhangzhou Sima Jingzhao people objected, saying: Han Wang Yangzhao is scheming, you are favored by the country, you should wholeheartedly serve the country, how can you be trapped in the disaster?

古文：钟葵失色曰： 司马反邪！ 
现代文：乔钟葵变了脸色，说： 司马造反吗？ 
English: Qiao Zhong Kwai turned pale and said: Is Sima rebelling?

古文：临之以兵，辞气不挠，钟葵义而释之。
现代文：用兵器对着他，但陶模言辞气度都不屈服，乔钟葵感于陶模的义气就放了他。
English: He used weapons against him, but Tao Mow did not give in to his rhetoric. Qiao Zhong Kwai was impressed by Tao Mow's loyalty and let him go.

古文：军吏曰： 若不斩模，无以压众心。 
现代文：军吏说： 要是不杀陶模，无法让大家心服。 
English: The military official said, "If we don't kill Tao Meng, we won't be able to win everyone's heart."

古文：乃囚之。
现代文：乔钟葵就把陶模关起来。
English: So they put him in prison.

古文：于是从谅反者凡十九州。
现代文：此时跟从杨谅造反的共有十九个州。
English: At this time, a total of nineteen states rebelled against Yang.

古文：王頍说谅曰： 王所部将吏，家属尽在关西，若用此等，则宜长驱深入，直据京都，所谓疾雷不及掩耳；若但欲割据旧齐之地，宜任东人。 
现代文：王劝说杨谅： 大王属下的将领官吏，家属都在关西，要是用这些人，就应该长驱直入，直捣京都，也就是所谓的迅雷不及掩耳；要是只打算割据过去北齐的地盘，就应该任用关东人。 
English: Wang persuaded Yang Peng: The generals, officials, and family members under the Great King are all in Kansai, if you use these people, you should drive straight into Kyoto, that is, the so-called thunderbolt can not be hidden; if you only plan to divide the territory of the former Northern Qi, you should appoint Kanto people.

古文：谅不能决，乃兼用二策，唱言杨素反，将诛之。
现代文：杨谅不能决断，就两条计策并用。他声称杨素谋反，要诛杀杨素。
English: Unable to make up his mind, Yang Piao combined two strategies. He claimed that Yang Su was plotting a rebellion and that he wanted to kill Yang Su.

古文：总管府兵曹闻喜裴文安说谅曰： 井陉以西，在王掌握之内，山东士马，亦为我有，宜悉发之；分遣羸兵屯守要害，仍命随方略地，帅其精锐，直入蒲津。
现代文：总管府兵曹闻喜人裴文安劝说杨谅： 井陉以西的地方在大王手中，崤山以东的军队也是我们的，应该全部征发。分派弱兵屯守要害，仍命令将领随时攻城略地；率领精锐部队直入蒲津关。
English: Pei Wen'an, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial General Headquarters, persuaded Yang Rong: "The area west of Jingye is in the hands of the Great King, and the army east of Lushan is also ours, and should all be conscripted. Assign weak soldiers to guard the key, but still order the generals to attack the city at any time; lead the elite troops straight into Putsenguan.

古文：文安请为前锋，王以大军继后，风行雷击，顿于霸上。咸阳以东，可指麾而定。
现代文：我请求担任前锋，大王率领大军随后，以迅雷不及掩耳之势屯兵霸上，咸阳以东的地方便可以挥手而定。
English: I asked to serve as a forward, the great king led the army, and then, with thunder and lightning, the troops took over, and the place east of Xianyang could be waved away.

古文：京师震扰，兵不暇集，上下相疑，群情离骇；我陈兵号令，谁敢不从！
现代文：这样京师被震动惊扰，没有时间调集军队，上下相互猜疑，大家离心惊骇，我们陈兵以待，发号施令，谁敢不服从！
English: In this way, the Beijing division was disturbed by the shock, there was no time to mobilize the army, the upper and lower levels suspected each other, everyone was shocked, we waited, issued orders, who dared to disobey!

古文：旬日之间，事可定矣。 
现代文：十天之内，大事可定。 
English: Within ten days, everything can be decided.

古文：谅大悦，于是遣所署大将军余公理出太谷，趣河阳，大将军綦良出滏口，趣黎阳，大将军刘建出井陉，略燕、赵，柱国乔钟葵出雁门，署文安为柱国，与柱国纥单贵、王聃等直指京师。
现代文：杨谅听了大为高兴，就派遣他任命的大将军余公理率兵出太谷，奔河阳；大将军綦良率兵出滏口，奔黎阳；大将军刘建率兵出井陉，攻取燕、赵之地；柱国乔钟葵率军出雁门；任命裴文安为柱国，与柱国纥单贵、王聃等率军直指京师。
English: Yang Yuanzhong was very pleased to hear this, so he dispatched his appointed general Yu Gongli to lead the troops out of Tai Valley and run to Heyang; general Gong Liang to lead the troops out of Hukou and run to Liyang; general Liu Jian to lead the troops out of Jingyi and capture Yan and Zhao; pillar country Qiao Zhong Kwai to lead the troops out of Ganmen; appointed Pei Wen'an as pillar country, and with pillar countries such as Zou Shan Gui and Wang Qi to lead the troops straight to Beijing.

古文：帝以右武卫将军洛阳丘和为蒲州刺史，镇蒲津。
现代文：炀帝任命右武卫将军洛阳人丘和为蒲州刺史，镇守蒲津关。
English: Emperor Qian appointed the Right Wuwei general Luo Yang Renqiu and the governor of the town of Puzhou, Pu Jinguan.

古文：谅简精锐数百骑戴羃，诈称谅宫人还长安，门司弗觉，径入蒲州，城中豪杰亦有应之者；丘和觉其变，逾城，逃归长安。
现代文：杨谅挑选精锐骑兵几百名，戴妇人蔽身用的面罩，诈称是杨谅的宫人返回长安，守城的门卫没有觉察出来，杨谅军队直入蒲州，城中也有豪杰响应，丘和发觉出事，越过城墙逃回长安。
English: Yang Chong selected several hundred elite cavalrymen, wearing a mask used by women to cover themselves. The palace attendant, who was falsely claimed to be Yang Chong, returned to Chang'an. The gatekeeper who was guarding the city did not notice it. Yang Chong's army went straight to Puzhou. There was also a hero in the city who responded. Yau He discovered that something had happened and fled back to Chang'an across the city wall.

古文：蒲州长史勃海高义明、司马北平荣毘皆为反者所执。
现代文：蒲州长史勃海人高义明、司马北平人荣毗都被叛军抓住。
English: The governor of Pu, Sibei, Gao Yiming, and Sima, Beiping, Rongbi, were all captured by the rebels.

古文：裴文安等未至蒲津百馀里，谅忽改图，令纥单贵断河桥，守蒲州，而召文安还。
现代文：裴文安等人距百余里到蒲津关时，杨谅忽然改变计划，他命令纥单贵拆断河桥，据守蒲州，将裴文安召回。
English: When Pei Wen'an and others were more than a hundred miles away from Puzin Pass, Yang Peng suddenly changed his plan. He ordered Zou Shan Gui to tear down the river bridge and recall Pei Wen'an to Puzhou.

古文：文安至，谓谅曰： 兵机诡速，本欲出其不意。王既不行，文安又返，使彼计成，大事去矣。 
现代文：裴文安对杨谅说： 兵机在于神速诡秘，本来打算出其不意，大王却不这样做，又把我召回，使对方计谋成功，现在大势已去。 
English: Pei Wen'an said to Yang Yuanzhong, "The secret of military strategy lies in its swiftness and cunning. Originally, it was planned to take the enemy by surprise, but the great king did not do so, and called me back to make the other side's strategy successful. Now, the momentum has gone.

古文：谅不对。
现代文：杨谅无言以对。
English: Yang Peng was speechless.

古文：以王聃为蒲州刺史，裴文安为晋州刺史，薛粹为绛州刺史，梁菩萨为潞州刺史，韦道正为韩州刺史，张伯英为泽州刺史。
现代文：他任命王聃为蒲州刺史，裴文安为晋州刺史，薛粹为绛州刺史，梁菩萨为潞州刺史，韦道正为韩州刺史，张伯英为泽州刺史。
English: He appointed Wang Qian as the governor of Puzhou, Pei Wen'an as the governor of Jinzhou, Xue Qi as the governor of Zhangzhou, Liang Bosa as the governor of Zhangzhou, Wei Daozheng as the governor of Hanzhou, and Zhang Boying as the governor of Zhejiang.

古文：代州总管天水李景发兵拒谅，谅遣其将刘暠袭景；景击斩之。
现代文：代州总管天水人李景发兵抵抗杨谅的军队。杨谅派将领刘袭击李景，被李景击杀。
English: Li Jing, the person in charge of Tianshui at the time, sent troops to resist Yang Piao's army. Yang Piao sent General Liu to attack Li Jing, who was killed by Li Jing.

古文：谅复遣乔钟葵帅劲勇三万攻之，景战士不过数千，加以城池不固，为钟葵所攻，崩毁相继，景且战且筑，士卒皆殊死斗；钟葵屡败。
现代文：杨谅又派乔钟葵率领三万精兵进攻代州，李景手下士兵只有几千人，加上城墙不很牢固，受到乔钟葵的进攻，城墙相继崩塌毁坏，李景一边打仗一边筑城，士卒们都殊死战斗，乔钟葵多次被击败。
English: Yang Peng also sent Qiao Zhong Kwai to lead thirty thousand elite soldiers to attack Daizhou, Li Jing's soldiers were only a few thousand, plus the city wall was not very strong, it was attacked by Qiao Zhong Kwai, the city wall collapsed and destroyed one after another, Li Jing was fighting and building the city at the same time, the soldiers were fighting to the death, Qiao Zhong Kwai was defeated many times.

古文：司马冯孝慈、司法吕玉并骁勇善战，仪同三司侯莫陈乂多谋画，工拒守之术，景知三人可用，推诚任之，己无所关预，唯在閤持重，时抚循而已。
现代文：代州司马冯孝慈、司法吕玉都骁勇善战，仪同三司侯莫陈富于谋略策划，擅长防御坚守的战斗。李景知道这三人可以任用，对他们充分信任，自己不干预具体事务，只是在衙署内坐镇，不时地抚慰巡视而已。
English: Li Jing knew that these three could be appointed, and he fully trusted them. He did not interfere in the specific affairs, but just sat in the State Security Bureau, and from time to time comforted the patrols.

古文：杨素将轻骑五千袭王聃、纥单贵于蒲州，夜，至河际，收商贾船，得数百艘，船内多置草，践之无声，遂衔枚而济；迟明，击之；纥单贵败走，聃惧，以城降。
现代文：杨素率领轻骑五千在蒲州袭击王聃、纥单贵。
English: Yang Su led the Light Cavalry Five Thousand to attack Wang Qian and Zou Shan Gui in Puzhou.

古文：有诏征素还。
现代文：夜里，杨素率军到了河边，收集了几百只商船，船内铺上许多草，踩上去没有声音。
English: In the evening, Yang Su led the army to the river and collected several hundred merchant ships. The inside of the ships were covered with a lot of grass, and there was no sound when stepping on them.

古文：初，素将行，计日破贼，皆如所量，于是以素为并州道行军总管、河北道安抚大使，帅众数万以讨谅。
现代文：于是炀帝任命杨素为并州道行军总管、河北道安抚大使，率领几万军队讨伐杨谅。杨谅当初起兵时，他妃子的哥哥豆卢毓是汉王府主簿。
English: As a result, Emperor Qian appointed Yang Su as the general manager of the march of the state road and the pacification ambassador of Hebei Province, and led tens of thousands of troops to fight against Yang Chong. When Yang Chong initially raised an army, his concubine's brother Dou Luchen was the main bookkeeper of the Han royal palace.

古文：谅之初起兵也，妃兄豆卢毓为府主簿，苦谏，不从，私谓其弟懿曰： 吾匹马归朝，自得免祸，此乃身计，非为国也。
现代文：豆卢毓苦苦劝谏杨谅不要造反，杨谅不听。豆卢毓私下对他弟弟豆卢懿说： 我一个人回归朝廷，自然可以免祸，这是为我自身考虑，不是为国家。
English: Duluoch painstakingly advised Gong Yangpeng not to rebel, but Yangpeng did not listen. Duluoch said to his brother Duluoch in private: If I return to the imperial court alone, I can naturally avoid disaster. This is for my own consideration, not for the country.

古文：不若且伪从之，徐伺其使。 
现代文：不如暂且装作跟从杨谅，慢慢地再见机行事。 
English: It would be better to pretend to be a follower of Yang Peng for the time being, and slowly act according to the opportunity.

古文：毓，勣之子也。
现代文：豆卢毓是豆卢的儿子。
English: Dulu is the son of Dulu.

古文：毓兄显州刺史贤言于帝曰： 臣弟毓素怀志节，必不从乱，但逼凶威，不能自遂。
现代文：豆卢毓的哥哥是显州刺史豆卢贤，他对炀帝说： 我弟弟豆卢毓平素就有抱负有气节，一定不会跟着造反，但是迫于叛逆的凶威，不能自主。
English: Duluon's older brother was the Hsiengzhou statesman Duluoxian, who said to Emperor Gong: My younger brother Duluon always had ambition and spirit, and he would not have followed the rebellion, but he was compelled by the ferocity of the rebellion and could not act independently.

古文：臣请从军，与毓为表里，谅不足图也。 
现代文：我请求从军，和豆卢毓一里一外，杨谅就无法图谋作乱了。 
English: I begged him to join the army, and one mile away from the bean loaf, Yang Peng would not be able to plot to create turmoil.

古文：帝许之。贤密遣家人赍敕书至毓所，与之计议。
现代文：炀帝答应了，豆卢贤秘密派家人把皇帝的诏书送到豆卢毓的住处，和他商议大事。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed, and Duluxian secretly sent his family members to deliver the emperor's edict to Duluxian's residence to discuss important matters with him.

古文：谅出城，将往介州，令毓与总管属硃涛留守。
现代文：杨谅出了城要去介州，他命令豆卢毓和总管属朱涛留守。
English: Yang Peng left the city to go to Jingzhou. He ordered Zhu Lu and Zhu Tao to stay behind.

古文：毓谓涛曰： 汉王构逆，败不旋踵，吾属岂可坐受夷灭，孤负国家邪！
现代文：豆卢毓对朱涛说： 汉王杨谅已构成了叛逆罪，很快就会失败。我们怎么可以受牵连获灭族之罪，同时又辜负国家呢？
English: Dou Lujuan said to Zhu Tao: The Han King Yang Penghu has already constituted the crime of treason, and will soon fail. How can we be implicated in the crime of extermination, and at the same time fail the country?

古文：当与卿出兵拒之。 
现代文：我应当和您出兵抗拒杨谅。 
English: I should join you in sending troops to resist Yang Peng.

古文：涛惊曰： 王以大事相付，何得有是语！ 
现代文：朱涛吃惊地说： 汉王把大事托付给我们，怎么说这样的话？ 
English: Zhu Tao said in surprise, "The Han King has entrusted us with a great task. How can you say such a thing?"

古文：因拂衣而去，毓追斩之。出皇甫诞于狱，与之协计，及开府仪同三司宿勤武等闭城拒谅。
现代文：于是就拂袖而去，豆卢毓追上去杀死朱涛，把皇甫诞从监狱里放出来，与他协商，并和开府仪同三司宿勤武等人关闭城门以抗拒杨谅。
English: So he went away with a swipe of his sleeve. Dou Lujun chased and killed Zhu Tao, released the emperor's father-in-law from prison, negotiated with him, and closed the city gate with Kaifu Yi and Sanji Shuku Qinwu and others to resist Yang Yue.

古文：部分未定，有人告谅，谅袭击之。
现代文：豆卢毓尚未完全部置好，有人把这事报告了杨谅，他就率军袭击豆卢毓。
English: The construction of Douluye was not yet complete. Someone reported this to Yang Peng, and he led his army to attack Douluye.

古文：毓见谅至，绐其众曰： 此贼军也！ 
现代文：豆卢毓见杨谅率军来到，便哄骗大家说： 这是贼军！ 
English: Seeing Yang Peng leading an army, Duluochun tricked everyone by saying, "This is a bandit army!"

古文：谅攻城南门，稽胡守南城，不识谅，射之；矢下如雨；谅移攻西门，守兵识谅，即开门纳之，毓、诞皆死。
现代文：杨谅进攻南城门，稽胡人守卫南城门，他们不认识杨谅，用弓箭射击，箭如雨下。杨谅就转攻西城门，守兵认识杨谅，就开城门让杨谅进城，豆卢毓、皇甫诞都被杀死。
English: Yang Piao attacked the south gate, the Qin Hu people guarded the south gate, they did not know Yang Piao, they shot with bows and arrows, the arrows rained down. Yang Piao turned to attack the west gate, the guards knew Yang Piao, they opened the gate to let Yang Piao enter the city, Duluo and Wangfuxi were killed.

古文：綦良攻慈州刺史上官政，不克，引兵攻行相州事薛胄，又不克，遂自滏口攻黎州，塞白马津。
现代文：綦良率军进攻慈州刺史上官政，未能攻克，就率兵进攻兼任相州的行政长官薛胄，又未攻克，于是就从滏口进攻黎州，堵塞白马津。
English: Qian Liang led an army to attack Cizhou to overthrow the government, but failed to conquer it, so he led an army to attack Xue Yao, who was also the chief executive of Xiangzhou, but failed to conquer it, so he attacked Lizhou from Hekou and blocked Baima Jin.

古文：余公理自太行下河内，帝以右卫将军史祥为行军总管，军于河阴。
现代文：余公理从太行山到河内。炀帝任命右卫将军史祥为行军总管，在河阴驻军。
English: Yu Gong Li marched from Taihang Mountain to Hanoi. Emperor Gao appointed the right guard general Shi Xiang as the commander-in-chief of the march, and stationed troops in Ho Yin.

古文：祥谓军吏曰： 余公理轻而无谋，恃众而骄，不足破也。 
现代文：史祥对军吏说： 余公理轻率无计谋，依恃人多而骄横，很容易打败。 
English: Shi Xiang said to the officers, "Yu Gong Li is reckless and unscrupulous. He is arrogant and has many followers. He is easy to defeat.

古文：公理屯河阳，祥具舟南岸，公理聚兵当之。
现代文：余公理驻扎在河阳。史祥在河的南岸准备好船只，余公理集中兵力以抵挡史祥的进攻。
English: Yu Gongli was stationed in Heyang. Shi Xiang was preparing ships on the south bank of the river. Yu Gongli concentrated his forces to fend off Shi Xiang's attack.

古文：祥简精锐于下流潜济，公理闻之，引兵拒之，战于须水。
现代文：史祥挑选精兵从河下游暗地渡河，余公理听到这个消息就率兵抵抗，两军在须水交战。
English: Shi Xiang selected elite soldiers to cross the river secretly from the lower reaches of the river. When Yu Gongli heard this news, he led the soldiers to resist. The two armies fought in the water.

古文：公理未成列，祥击之，公理大败。
现代文：余公理的军队尚未布置好阵容，史祥已率军进攻，大败余公理。
English: Yu Gongri's army has not yet arranged a good lineup, Shi Xiang has led the army to attack, and Yu Gongri has been defeated.

古文：祥东趣黎阳，綦良军不战而溃。
现代文：史祥率军向东进逼黎阳，綦良的军队不战而溃。
English: Shi Xiang led the army to the east to push Liyang, and Hailiang's army collapsed without a fight.

古文：祥，宁之子也。
现代文：史祥是史宁的儿子。
English: Shi Xiang is the son of Shi Ning.

古文：帝将发幽州兵，疑幽州总管窦抗有贰心，问可使取抗者于杨素，素荐前江州刺史勃海李子雄，授上大将军，拜广州刺史。
现代文：炀帝要征发幽州的军队。他怀疑幽州总管窦抗有二心，就问杨素谁能把窦抗抓来。杨素推荐了前江州刺史勃海人李子雄。
English: Emperor Gao wanted to conscript Yuzhou's army. He suspected that the Yuzhou chief Dou Yan had a double heart, so he asked Yang Su who could capture Dou Yan. Yang Su recommended Li Zixiong, the former governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：又以左领军将军长孙晟为相州刺史，发山东兵，与李子雄共经略之。
现代文：炀帝任命李子雄为上大将军、广州刺史；又任命左领军将军长孙晟为相州刺史，征发崤山以东的军队，和李子雄一起筹划处理此事。
English: Emperor Xuan appointed Li Zixiong as the commander-in-chief and the governor of Guangzhou; he also appointed the commander-in-chief of the left-wing army, Sun Yat-sen, as the governor of Guangzhou, conscripted the army east of Shaoshan, and planned and dealt with the matter together with Li Zixiong.

古文：晟辞以男行布在谅所部，帝曰： 公体国之深，终不以儿害义，朕今相委，公其勿辞。 
现代文：长孙晟因为他儿子长孙行布在杨谅的军队里，就推辞任命。炀帝说： 您能够体谅国家的困难，终归不会因为儿子而损害国家大义，我委您以重任，您不要推辞。 
English: Because his son, the eldest grandson, Xing Bu, was in Yang Peng's army, he declined the appointment. Emperor Xing said: You can understand the difficulties of the country, and ultimately you will not harm the national cause because of your son. I entrust you with an important task, you should not decline.

古文：李子雄驰至幽州，止传舍，召募得千馀人。
现代文：李子雄驰马到达幽州，就在驿站停住。他招募到一千人。
English: Li Zixiong rode his horse to Yuzhou and stopped at the post station. He recruited a thousand people.

古文：抗来诣子雄，子雄伏甲擒之。
现代文：窦抗来见李子雄，李子雄埋伏好甲士将窦抗逮捕。
English: Dou Qi came to see Li Zixiong, and Li Zixiong ambushed a good soldier to arrest Dou Qi.

古文：抗，荣定之子也。
现代文：窦抗是窦荣定的儿子。
English: Dou Qi is the son of Dou Rongding.

古文：子雄遂发幽州兵步骑三万，自井陉西击谅。
现代文：李子雄征发幽州的军队，步、骑兵共三万人，从井陉向西进攻杨谅。
English: Li Zixiong conscripted and dispatched Yuzhou's army, with a total of 30,000 infantry and cavalry, to attack Yang Peng from Jingyao to the west.

古文：时刘建围戍将京兆张祥于井陉，子雄破建于抱犊山下，建遁去。
现代文：当时刘建将守将京兆人张祥包围在井陉，李子雄在抱犊山下击败刘建，刘建逃走。
English: At that time, Liu Jian encircled Zhang Xiang, the governor of Beijing, in Jingyao, Li Zixiong defeated Liu Jian at the foot of Mount Baodi, and Liu Jian fled.

古文：李景被围月馀，诏朔州刺史代人杨义臣救之。
现代文：李景被杨谅的军队包围了一个来月，炀帝下诏命令朔州刺史代人杨义臣救援李景。
English: Li Jing was encircled by Yang Peng's army for a month. Emperor Qian gave the order to Yang Yichen, the representative of Shuozhou Jishi, to rescue Li Jing.

古文：义臣帅马步二万，夜出西陉，乔钟葵悉众拒之。
现代文：杨义臣率领骑、步兵共两万人，夜间出了西陉关。乔钟葵集中全部兵力抵抗杨义臣。
English: Yang Yichen led a total of 20,000 cavalry and infantry and left Xishuanguan at night. Qiao Zhongkui concentrated all the troops to resist Yang Yichen.

古文：义臣自以兵少，悉取军中牛驴，得数千头，复令兵数百人，人持一鼓潜驱之，匿于涧谷间。
现代文：杨义臣知道自己兵少，就集中军中所有的牛、驴，共有几千头，又命令几百名士兵，每人持鼓一面，暗地驱赶牛驴隐蔽在山谷间。
English: Yang Yichen knew that he had few soldiers, so he concentrated all the cattle and donkeys in the army, a total of several thousand, and ordered several hundred soldiers, each holding a drum, to secretly drive away the cattle and donkeys and hide in the valley.

古文：晡后，义臣复与钟葵战，兵初合，命驱牛驴者疾进，一时鸣鼓，尘埃张天，钟葵军不知，以为伏兵发，因而奔溃；义臣纵击，大破之。
现代文：黄昏后，杨义臣又与乔钟葵交战。刚一交兵，杨义臣就命令驱赶牛、驴的士兵迅速前进，一时间战鼓敲响，尘埃满天，乔钟葵的军队不知怎么回事，以为对方的伏兵出击了，因而奔逃溃散。杨义臣纵兵进攻，大败乔钟葵。
English: After dusk, Yang Yichen fought with Qiao Zhong Kwai again. Just after the battle, Yang Yichen ordered the soldiers who drove the cattle and donkeys to advance quickly. For a while, the war drums were beating and the sky was full of dust. Qiao Zhong Kwai's army did not know what was going on, thinking that the other side's ambush had struck, so they ran away and scattered. Yang Yichen attacked the soldiers and defeated Qiao Zhong Kwai.

古文：晋、绛、吕三州皆为谅城守，杨素各以二千人縻之而去。谅遣其将赵子开拥众十馀万，栅绝径路，屯据高壁，布陈五十里。
现代文：晋、绛、吕三州城池都是杨谅军防守，杨素向每座城池各派两千人去牵制，杨谅派遣将领赵子开率领十余万人，用栅栏堵塞山径小路，在高壁岭上屯兵据守，军队摆开的阵势达五十里。
English: The cities and towns of Jin, Min and Lv three states were all defended by Yang Xuejun's army. Yang Su sent two thousand soldiers to each city and town to contain them. Yang Xuejun sent general Zhao Zikai with more than one hundred thousand people to block the mountain paths with fences, and stationed soldiers on the high cliff ridge. The army's position was up to fifty miles.

古文：素令诸将以兵临之，自引奇兵潜入霍山，缘崖谷而进。
现代文：杨素命令手下的将领们率兵对阵，自己率领奇兵潜入霍山，沿着悬崖山谷前进。
English: Yang Su ordered the generals under his command to lead the soldiers to fight against each other, and he himself led the soldiers to sneak into Huoshan and advance along the cliff valley.

古文：素营于谷口，自坐营外，使军司入营简留三百人守营，军士惮北兵之强，不欲出战，多愿守营，因尔致迟。
现代文：杨素在山谷口扎营，自己坐在营帐外，派军司进军营挑选三百人守营，军士们恐惧杨谅军队的强盛，不想出战，多数人愿意守营，因此行动迟缓。
English: Yang Su set up camp at the mouth of the valley. He sat outside the camp tent and sent the military secretary into the camp to select three hundred men to defend the camp. The sergeants were afraid of the strength of Yang Yue's army and did not want to go to war. Most people were willing to defend the camp, so the action was slow.

古文：素责所由，军司具对，素即召所留三百人出营，悉斩之；更令简留，人皆无愿留者。
现代文：杨素责问迟缓的原因，军司以实回答了，杨素马上把留下守营的三百人召出军营，全部斩首。他再次命令挑选留守人员，人们都不愿意留下。
English: Yang Su scolded and asked the reason for the delay, the military secretary answered truthfully, Yang Su immediately called out the three hundred people who remained behind to defend the camp, and beheaded them all. He again ordered the selection of the remaining personnel, and people were not willing to stay.

古文：素乃引军驰进，出北军之北，直指其营，鸣鼓纵火；北军不知所为，自相蹂践，杀伤数万。
现代文：于是杨素率军驰马行进，出现在杨谅军队的北面，直接对方的营地，呜鼓纵火；杨谅的军队不知所措，自相践踏，死伤了几万人。
English: As a result, Yang Su led his army on horseback, appeared to the north of Yang Peng's army, and directly set fire to the other side's camp; Yang Peng's army was at a loss, trampled on each other, and killed and injured tens of thousands of people.

古文：谅所署介州刺史梁修罗屯介休，闻素至，弃城走。
现代文：杨谅所任命的介州刺史梁罗屯兵在介休，听到杨素将至就弃城逃跑。
English: Yang Xuanzong's appointed garrison in Jingzhou, Shiliang Luo, was on leave, and when they heard that Yang Su was coming, they abandoned the city and fled.

古文：谅闻赵子开败，大惧，自将众且十万，拒素于蒿泽。
现代文：杨谅知道赵子开被打败，大为恐惧，亲自率领近十万人在蒿泽抵抗杨素。
English: Yang Jun knew that Zhao Zikai had been defeated and was very afraid. He personally led nearly one hundred thousand people to resist Yang Su in Heze.

古文：会大雨，谅欲引军还，王頍谏曰： 杨素悬军深入，士马疲弊，王以锐卒自将击之，其势必克。
现代文：正逢天降大雨，杨谅打算率军退回，王劝道： 杨素孤军深入，人马疲惫，大王亲自率领精兵进攻杨素，必能将他打败。
English: It was raining heavily, and Yang Peng was planning to lead his army back. Wang advised: Yang Su's lone army was deeply entrenched, and his men and horses were exhausted. The great king personally led his elite soldiers to attack Yang Su, and would surely defeat him.

古文：今望敌而退，示人以怯，沮战士之心，益西军之气，愿王勿还。 
现代文：现在望敌而退，让人以为我们怯懦，败坏我军将士的士气，长敌军之气势。希望大王不要撤退。 
English: If we retreat now in the face of the enemy, people will think we are cowardly, which will ruin the morale of our soldiers and weaken the enemy's momentum. I hope the emperor will not retreat.

古文：谅不从，退守清源。
现代文：杨谅不听，率军退守清源。
English: Yang Yu didn't listen and led his army to retreat to Qingyuan.

古文：王頍谓其子曰： 气候殊不佳，兵必败，汝可随我。 
现代文：王对他儿子说： 情况很不妙，我军必败，你可要跟着我。 
English: The king said to his son: "The situation is very bad, our army will be defeated, but you must follow me.

古文：杨素进击谅，大破之，擒萧摩诃。
现代文：杨素率军进攻，大败杨谅，捉住了萧摩诃。
English: Yang Su led the army to attack, defeated Yang Peng, and captured Xiao Ma Rong.

古文：谅退保晋阳，素进兵围之，谅穷蹙，请降，馀党悉平。
现代文：杨谅退守晋阳。杨素进军包围晋阳，杨谅束手无策，只得乞降，其余党都被平灭。
English: Yang Su marched in and encircled Jinyang, Yang Chong had no choice but to surrender, and the rest of the party was wiped out.

古文：帝遣杨约赍手诏劳素。
现代文：炀帝派杨约送他的手诏慰劳杨素。
English: Emperor Qian sent Yang about to send his hand to comfort Yang Su.

古文：王頍将奔突厥，至山中，径路断绝，知必不免，谓其子曰： 吾之计数不减杨素，但坐言不见从，遂至于此，不能坐受擒获，以成竖子名。
现代文：王要投奔突厥，走到山中，道路断绝，他知道自己无法幸免，对他儿子说： 我的计谋韬略不亚于杨素，但是因为我的建议不被采纳，以至到了这步田地。我不能坐受擒获，以成全那小子的名声。
English: The king was about to set out for Turkey, and he went into the mountains, and the road was cut off, and he knew that he could not escape, and he said to his son, "My counsel is as good as Yang Su's, but because my counsel was not accepted, I have come to this field.

古文：吾死之后，汝慎勿过亲故。 
现代文：我死后，你千万不要去亲朋故友家。 
English: After my death, you must not go to the homes of friends and relatives.

古文：于是自杀，瘗之石窟中。
现代文：他说完自杀，尸体被埋葬在石洞里。
English: He committed suicide and his body was buried in a cave.

古文：其子数日不得食，遂过其故人，竟为所擒；并获頍尸，枭于晋阳。
现代文：他儿子几天没有吃的，就到王熟人家，最后被人抓住。王的尸体也被找到，在晋阳受枭首之刑。
English: After his son had not eaten for several days, he went to the home of an acquaintance of Wang's and was eventually caught. Wang's body was also found and he was executed with a dagger in Jinyang.

古文：群臣奏汉王谅当死，帝不许，除名为民，绝其属籍，竟以幽死。
现代文：群臣奏议汉王杨谅应被处死，炀帝不许，将杨谅除名为民，将他从宗室中除名，杨谅最后被幽禁而死。
English: A group of ministers proposed that the Han king Yang Peng should be put to death, but Emperor Qian did not allow it. Yang Peng was removed from the name of the people, he was removed from the family, and Yang Peng was finally imprisoned and died.

古文：谅所部吏民坐谅死徙者二十馀万家。
现代文：他部下的官吏臣民受牵连而获罪，被处死和流放的有二十余万家。
English: Officials and subjects of his subordinates were implicated and convicted, and more than 200,000 families were executed and exiled.

古文：初，高祖与独孤后甚相爱重，誓无异生之子，尝谓群臣曰： 前世天子，溺于嬖幸，嫡庶分争，遂有废立，或至亡国；朕旁无姬侍，五子同母，可谓真兄弟也，岂有此忧邪！ 
现代文：当初，文帝和独孤皇后相互之间非常敬爱尊重，他发誓不要有别的姬妾生的儿子，曾对群臣说： 前代的皇帝对所宠幸的姬妾极为溺爱，出现了嫡子、庶子之争，也就有了废立之举，有的因此而亡国。我没有别的姬妾，五个儿子是同一个母亲，可以说是真正的兄弟，难道会有这种忧虑吗？ 
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wen and the lonely empress had great love and respect for each other. He swore not to have any other sons born of concubines. He once said to his courtiers: The previous emperor was extremely fond of his favorite concubine. There was a dispute between the legitimate son and the illegitimate son, and there was a move to abolish the throne, and some died as a result. I have no other concubine. Five sons are of the same mother, and can be said to be true brothers. Will there be such worries?

古文：帝又惩周室诸王微弱，故使诸子分据大镇，专制方面，权侔帝室。
现代文：文帝又鉴于北周皇室诸王势力微弱，就让几个儿子分别据守重镇，专门独挡一面，诸王的权力与皇帝相等。
English: In view of the weak power of the kings of the Northern Zhou royal family, Emperor Wen allowed several of his sons to separately defend important towns, especially to stand alone. The power of the kings was equal to that of the emperor.

古文：及其晚节，父子兄弟迭相猜忌，五子皆不以寿终。
现代文：到了文帝晚年，父子兄弟纷纷互相猜疑防备，五个儿子都未能寿终正寝。
English: In the later years of Emperor Wen, father and son brothers were suspicious of each other, and all five sons did not live to see the end of their lives.

古文：臣光曰：昔辛伯谂周桓公曰： 内宠并后，外宠贰政，嬖子配嫡，大都偶国，乱之本也。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：从前辛伯劝告周桓公说： 内宠姬妾地位与皇后相等；外宠重臣与皇帝一样也可发号施令；庶子与嫡子相匹敌；大的都城与国家的势力相匹敌。
English: The courtier Sima Guang said: In the past, Xinbo advised Zhou Huan Gong to say: The status of the inner favorite concubine is equal to that of the empress; the foreign favorite senior minister can also issue orders like the emperor; the illegitimate son is equal to the legitimate son; the big capital city is equal to the power of the country.

古文：人主诚能慎此四者，乱何自生哉！
现代文：这都是动乱的根本原因。 作为人主如果真能在这四方面慎重从事，动乱怎么能自动发生呢？
English: These are the root causes of turmoil. If, as a human being, you can really carefully engage in these four aspects, how can turmoil automatically occur?

古文：隋高祖徒知嫡庶之多争，孤弱之易摇，曾不知势钧位逼，虽同产至亲，不能无相倾夺。
现代文：隋文帝只知嫡、庶之分容易出现纷争，皇室的地位孤立微弱容易动摇，却不懂得诸王的势力与皇帝势均力敌就会危逼皇位。虽然一母至亲骨肉，也不能免于相互倾轧夺权。
English: The Sui Emperor only knew that the father-in-law and son-in-law were prone to disputes, and the position of the imperial family was isolated, weak and easily shaken. However, he did not understand that the power of the kings and the equal power of the emperor would endanger the imperial throne. Although a mother is a close relative, she is not immune to mutual competition for power.

古文：考诸辛伯之言，得其一而失其三乎！
现代文：考察辛伯的这些话，文帝只吸取了一点而丢掉了另外三点啊！
English: Examining these words of Simba, Wendi only absorbed one point and lost the other three points!

古文：冬，十月，己卯，葬文皇帝于太陵，庙号高祖，与文献皇后同坟异穴。
现代文：冬季，十月，己卯，文帝葬于太陵，庙号高祖，与独孤皇后同坟异穴。
English: In winter, October, Jiwu, Emperor Wen was buried in the tomb of Tai Ling, the temple of Gao Zu, and the lonely queen were buried in the same grave.

古文：诏除妇人及奴婢、部曲之课，男子二十二成丁。
现代文：炀帝下诏免除妇女及奴婢、部曲的赋税，规定男子二十二岁成丁。
English: Emperor Qian issued an edict exempting women, slaves, and peasants from paying taxes, and stipulated that men must be at least 22 years old.

古文：章仇太翼言于帝曰： 陛下木命，雍州为破木之冲，不可久居。又谶云： 修治洛阳还晋家。  
现代文：章仇太翼对炀帝说： 陛下属木命，雍州是克木之冲，不可长久居住，谶语也说： 修治洛阳还晋家。  
English: Zhang Qiu Taiyi said to Emperor Qian: Your majesty belongs to the tree of life, and Yongzhou is the top of the tree. You can't live there for a long time. The slang also says: "If you cultivate Luoyang, you will still belong to Jin."

古文：帝深以为然。
现代文：炀帝听后深以为然。
English: Later, Emperor Tang deeply felt that he was right.

古文：十一月，乙未，幸洛阳，留晋王昭守长安。
现代文：十一月，乙未，驾临洛阳，留下晋王杨昭守卫长安。
English: In November, Emperor Wei arrived in Luoyang, leaving the Jin king Yang Zhao to guard Chang'an.

古文：杨素以功拜其子万石、仁行、侄玄挺为仪同三司，赉物五万段，绮罗千匹，谅妓妾二十人。
现代文：杨素因功授其子杨万石、杨仁行、侄子杨玄挺为仪同三司，赏赐财物五万段，绮罗一千匹，杨谅的歌妓侍妾二十人。
English: Yang Su awarded his sons, Yang Wanseki, Yang Renxing, and nephew, Yang Xuan Ting, the same three titles for their meritorious service, and rewarded them with fifty thousand pieces of property, one thousand yakitori, and twenty of Yang Peng's concubines.

古文：丙申，发丁男数十万掘堑，自龙门东接长平、汲郡，抵临清关，渡河至浚仪、襄城，达于上洛，以置关防。
现代文：丙申，炀帝征发男丁几十万人挖掘沟，从龙门东接长平、汲郡，到临清关，越过黄河至浚仪、襄城，到达上洛，用来布置关防。
English: According to legend, Emperor Qianlong conscripted and sent hundreds of thousands of men to dig ditches, from Longmen East to Changping and Ku County, to Linqing Pass, across the Yellow River to Dongyi and Xiangcheng, and reached Shangluo, which was used to set up checkpoints.

古文：壬子，陈叔宝卒；赠大将军、长城县公，谥曰炀。
现代文：壬子，南陈国后主陈叔宝去世，被追赠为大将军、长城县公，谥号为炀。
English: Ren Zi, after the death of Chen Shubao, the ruler of the Southern Chen Kingdom, was posthumously awarded the title of General and the title of Great County Governor, with the posthumous name of Ren Zi.

古文：癸丑，下诏于伊洛建东京，仍曰： 宫室之制，本以便生，今所营构，务从俭约。 
现代文：癸丑，炀帝下诏在伊、洛营建东京，诏书说： 宫室的规制，本应从方便使用出发，现在营建的宫室，务必要节俭。 
English: After all, Emperor Go-Shirakawa issued an edict to build Tokyo in Ibaraki and Kyoto. The edict said: The regulation of the imperial palace should have been based on ease of use. The imperial palace that is currently being built must be thrifty.

古文：蜀王秀之得罪也，右卫大将军元胄坐与交通除名，久不得调。
现代文：蜀王杨秀获罪的时候，右卫大将军元胄因犯有与杨秀结交往来的罪而被除名，长期不得起用。
English: When Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, was found guilty, the right guard general, Yuan Xuan, was removed from his post for the crime of associating with Yang Xiu, and was not allowed to serve for a long time.

古文：时慈州刺史上官政坐事徙岭南，将军丘和以蒲州失守除名，胄与和有旧，酒酣，谓和曰： 上官政，壮士也，今徙岭表，得无大事乎！ 
现代文：当时慈州刺史上官政因犯罪被流放到岭南，将军丘和因为蒲州失守被除名，元胄与丘和有旧谊，两人饮酒酣，元胄对丘和说： 上官政是壮士，现在被流放到岭表，不会出大事吧？ 
English: At that time in the history of Cizhou, Guan Zheng was exiled to Lingnan for a crime. General Qiu He was expelled for losing the defense of Puzhou. Yuan Zheng had an old friendship with Qiu, and the two drank alcohol. Yuan Zheng said to Qiu He: Shang Guan Zheng is a strong man, and now he is exiled to Lingbo, won't anything happen?

古文：因自拊腹曰： 若是公者，不徒然矣。 
现代文：他抚摩着肚子说： 像此崐公这样的人，就不会不出事了。 
English: He rubbed his stomach and said, "People like this Shao Gong will not be able to get away with anything.

古文：和奏之，胄竟坐死。
现代文：丘和将此话报告炀帝，元胄竟然因此获罪而死。
English: Youka reported this to Emperor Shun, and Yuan Shun was convicted and died as a result.

古文：于是征政为骁卫将军，以和为代州刺史。
现代文：于是炀帝召回上官政任命为骁骑将军，任命丘和为代州刺史。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuan recalled Shangguan Zheng and appointed him as the general of the cavalry. He also appointed Qiuhe to write the history of Daizhou.

古文：炀皇帝上之上
现代文：隋炀帝大业元年
English: Sui and Qin Dynasties in the first year of the Great Leap Forward

古文：高祖文皇帝下大业元年
现代文：春季，正月，壬辰朔，大赦天下，改年号。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the new moon, the general amnesty, and the new year.

古文：春，正月，壬辰朔，赦天下，改元。立妃萧氏为皇后。
现代文：炀帝册立王妃萧氏为皇后。
English: The imperial edict made Princess Xiao the empress.

古文：废诸州总管府。
现代文：炀帝下诏撤销各州的总管府。
English: Abolition of the State Governments.

古文：丙辰，立晋王昭为皇太子。
现代文：丙辰，炀帝立晋王杨昭为皇太子。
English: Emperor Xian of Qin made Yang Zhao, King of Jin, the crown prince.

古文：高祖之末，群臣有言林邑多奇宝者。时天下无事，刘方新平交州，乃授方驩州道行军总管，经略林邑。
现代文：文帝末年，群臣中有人说林邑有许多奇珍异宝，当时天下无事，刘方刚刚平息了交州的叛乱，文帝就任命刘方为州道行军总管，筹划处理林邑方向的事务。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wen, some of the courtiers said that Linyi had many treasures. At that time, there was no trouble in the world. Liu Fang had just quelled the rebellion in Jiaozhou. Emperor Wen appointed Liu Fang as the general manager of the march of the state highway to plan and deal with the affairs of Linyi.

古文：方遣钦州刺史宁长真等以步骑万馀出越裳，方亲帅大将军张愻等以舟师出比景，是月，军至海口。
现代文：刘方派钦州刺史宁长真等人率领步骑兵一万余人出越裳；刘方亲自率领大将军张等人统帅水师出比景，当月，刘方军队到达林邑出海口。
English: Liu Fang sent more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry led by Qin Zhou's subordinate Shi Ning Changzhen and others to Yue Mo; Liu Fang personally led the general Zhang and others to command the sailors to compare the situation. That month, Liu Fang's army arrived at the sea port of Linyi.

古文：二月，戊辰，敕有司大陈金宝、器物、锦彩、车马，引杨素及诸将讨汉王谅有功者立于前，使奇章公牛弘宣诏，称扬功伐，赐赉各有差。
现代文：二月，戊辰，炀帝命令有关部门官员大规模地陈列金宝、器物、锦彩、车马，让人领着杨素和各位讨伐汉王杨谅有功的将领站在前面，命令奇章公牛弘宣读诏书，称赞讨伐杨谅的功劳，炀帝对他们分别进行赏赐。
English: In February, Emperor Wu ordered the officials of the relevant departments to display gold and treasure, utensils, decorations, chariots and horses on a large scale. They had Yang Su and the generals who fought against the Han King Yang Qiao to stand in front of them. They ordered Qizhang Xiu Hong to read out the edict and praise the merits of fighting against Yang Qiao. Emperor Wu rewarded them separately.

古文：素等再拜舞蹈而出。
现代文：杨素等人再三拜谢舞蹈而去。
English: Yang Su and others repeatedly bowed to the dance and left.

古文：己卯，以素为尚书令。
现代文：乙卯，任命杨素为尚书令。
English: Second, Yang Su was appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：诏天下公除，惟帝服浅色黄衫、铁装带。
现代文：炀帝颁诏于天下，除去丧服，只有炀帝身穿浅色黄衫，束着铁饰的衣带。
English: Emperor Gong issued an edict to the world, removing the mourning clothes, only Emperor Gong wore a light yellow shirt, tied with an iron-decorated belt.

古文：三月，丁未，诏杨素与纳言杨达、将作大匠宇文恺营建东京，每月役丁二百万人，徙洛州郭内居民及诸州富商大贾数万户以实之。
现代文：三月，丁未，炀帝下诏派杨素和纳言杨达、将作大匠宇文恺营建东京，每个月役使壮丁二百万人，迁徙洛州城内的居民和各州的富商大贾几万户充实东京。
English: In March, Emperor Zhou sent Yang Su and Nagan Yang Da to build Tokyo, and every month, two million young men were sent to work, and tens of thousands of residents in the city of Lozhou and rich merchants in various states migrated to enrich Tokyo.

古文：废二崤道，开菱册道。
现代文：废弃二崤道，开辟册道。
English: Abandon the two-lane road and open a toll road.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 听采舆颂，谋及庶民，故能审刑政之得失；今将巡历淮、海，观省风俗。 
现代文：戊申，炀帝下诏说： 听取采集百姓的意见，向百姓咨询治国的建议，这样才能够考查到治理国家的得失。我将要巡视淮海一带，考察民情风俗。 
English: Wushin, Emperor Qian issued an edict saying: Listen to and collect the opinions of the people, and consult the people on suggestions for governing the country. Only in this way can we examine the gains and losses of governing the country. I will inspect the area around Huaihai and examine the people's customs.

古文：敕宇文恺与内史舍人封德彝等营显仁宫。南接皁涧，北跨洛滨。发大江之南、五岭以北奇材异石，输之洛阳；又求海内嘉木异草，珍禽奇兽，以实园苑。
现代文：炀帝命令宇文恺和内史舍人封德彝等人营建显仁宫，显仁宫南边连接阜涧，北边跨越洛水，征调大江以南五岭以北的奇材异石，输送到洛阳；又搜求海内的嘉木异草，珍禽奇兽，用以充实皇家园苑。
English: Emperor Qian ordered Uwen Zang and Fong De Zang, who disdained history, to build the Xianren Palace. The southern side of the Xianren Palace was connected to Fuxi, and the northern side spanned Luoshui. Strange materials and stones from the south of the Yangtze River and the north of the Wuling Mountains were conscripted and transported to Luoyang. They also searched for rare trees and grasses and rare birds and beasts in the sea to enrich the royal gardens.

古文：辛亥，命尚书右丞皇甫议发河南、淮北诸郡民，前后百馀万，开通济渠。
现代文：辛亥，命令尚书右丞皇甫议征发河南、淮北各郡的百姓前后一百余万人，开辟通济渠。
English: Xinhai ordered Shang Shujing, the emperor's right-hand man, to collect and send more than one million people from Henan and Huaibei counties to open up the canal.

古文：自西苑引谷、洛水达于河；复自板渚引河历荥泽入汴；又自大梁之东引汴水入泗，达于淮；又发淮南民十馀万开邗沟，自山阳至杨子入江。
现代文：从西苑引谷水、洛水到黄河，又从板渚引黄河水经过荥泽进入汴水，从大梁以东引汴水进入泗水到淮河。又征发淮南的百姓十余万人开凿邗沟从山阳到杨子进崐入长江。
English: From Xiyuan, the valley water and Luoshui were led to the Yellow River, and from Pangzhu, the Yellow River water was led through Heze into Shunshui, and from the east of the beam, the Shunshui water was led into Shunshui to the Huai River. In addition, more than 100,000 people from Huainan were recruited to dig a ditch from Shanyang to Yangzi into the Yangtze River.

古文：渠广四十步，渠旁皆筑御道，树以柳；自长安至江都，置离宫四十馀所。
现代文：通济渠宽四十步，渠两旁都筑有御道，栽种柳树。从长安到江都设置离宫四十余所。
English: The Tongji Canal is forty paces wide, with a causeway built on both sides of the canal and willow trees planted. From Chang'an to Jiangdu, there are more than forty places to leave the palace.

古文：庚申，遣黄门侍郎王弘等往江南造龙舟及杂船数万艘。
现代文：庚申，派遣黄门侍郎王弘等人到江南建造龙舟和各种船只几万艘。
English: Goshun sent Huangmen's servant Wang Hong and others to the south of the Yangtze River to build tens of thousands of dragon boats and various vessels.

古文：东京官吏督役严急，役丁死者什四五，所司以车载死丁，东至城皋，北至河阳，相望于道。
现代文：东京的官吏监督工程严酷急迫，服役的壮丁死去十之四、五。有关部门用车装着死去的役丁，东到城皋，北至河阳，载尸之车连绵不断。
English: The officials in Tokyo supervised the project in a severe and urgent manner, and the young men who served died four times out of ten. The relevant departments used cars to carry the dead young men to the east of the city and to the north of Kawayo, and the cars carrying the corpses were incessant.

古文：又作天经宫于东京，四时祭高祖。
现代文：炀帝又在东京建造天经宫，每年四季祭祀文帝。
English: Emperor Xizong also built the Palace of Heaven's Literature in Tokyo, where the Emperor Wen is worshipped four times a year.

古文：林邑王梵志遣兵守险，刘方击走之。
现代文：林邑国王梵志，派兵把守险要之地，刘方率军进攻并赶走了他们。
English: Lin's king, Fan Zhi, sent troops to defend the critical area, and Liu Fang led the army to attack and drive them away.

古文：师渡阇黎江，林邑兵乘巨象，四面而至。
现代文：隋军渡过黎江，林邑的士兵乘坐巨象，从四面八方攻来。
English: The Sui army crossed the Li River, and Lin's soldiers rode on huge elephants and attacked from all directions.

古文：方战不利，乃多掘小坑，草覆其上，以兵挑之，既战，伪北；林邑逐之，象多陷地颠踬，转相惊骇，军遂乱。方以弩射象，象却走，蹂其阵，因以锐师继之。
现代文：隋军与林邑军交战不利，就挖了许多小坑，用草盖上，刘方让士兵向林邑军队挑战，两军交战，隋军佯作战败；林邑士兵追击隋军，他们乘坐的大象很多陷入小坑被绊倒，于是林邑士兵非常惊恐，军队大乱，刘方命士兵用弩射击大象，大象即逃跑，将林邑军的阵势践踏扰乱。
English: The Sui army and the Linyi army did not fight well, so they dug many small pits and covered them with grass. Liu Fang challenged the soldiers to challenge the Linyi army. The two armies fought, and the Sui army was defeated in battle. Linyi soldiers chased the Sui army. Many of the elephants they were riding fell into small pits and tripped over. So the Linyi soldiers were very frightened and the army was in chaos. Liu Fang ordered soldiers to shoot elephants with crossbows. The elephants fled, trampling and disturbing the Linyi army's formation.

古文：林邑大败，俘馘万计。
现代文：刘方趁机用精兵继续进攻，林邑军大败，被俘杀者万余人。
English: Liu Fang took advantage of the opportunity to continue the attack with elite soldiers. Lin's army was defeated, and more than 10,000 people were captured and killed.

古文：方引兵追之，屡战皆捷，过马援铜柱南，八日至其国都。
现代文：刘方率军追击，屡战屡胜，追过了马援铜柱以南，用了八天就打到林邑的国都。
English: Liu Fang led the army to pursue, repeatedly fought and repeatedly won, chased the south of Ma'an bronze pillar, and took eight days to reach the capital of Lin'ur.

古文：夏，四月，梵志弃城走入海。
现代文：夏季，四月，梵志放弃城池逃到海上。
English: In the summer, in April, Fanzhi abandoned the city and fled to the sea.

古文：方入城，获其庙主十八，皆铸金为之；刻石纪功而还。
现代文：刘方率军入城，缴获庙主牌位十八枚，都是用金子铸成的。刘方刻石立碑记录了这次征伐的功绩，尔后返回。
English: Liu Fang led the army into the city and captured eighteen main temple plaques, all of which were made of gold. Liu Fang carved a stone monument to record the achievements of this conquest, and then returned.

古文：士卒肿足，死者什四五。
现代文：隋军士卒患脚肿病，死去十之四、五。
English: Sui's sergeant-at-arms suffered from swollen feet and died four to five times a year.

古文：方亦得疾，卒于道。
现代文：刘方也患病，死于途中。
English: Liu Fang also fell ill and died on the way.

古文：初，尚书右丞李纲数以异议忤杨素及苏威，素荐纲于高祖，以为方行军司马。
现代文：当初，尚书右丞李纲因为几次有不同意见违逆了杨素和苏威，杨素就向文帝推荐李纲，让他作刘方的行军司马。
English: At first, Shang Shuyuan Li Gang disobeyed Yang Su and Su Wei several times because they had different opinions. Yang Su recommended Li Gang to Emperor Wen and made him Liu Fang's marching steed.

古文：方承素意，屈辱之，几死。
现代文：刘方懂得杨素的用意，他侮辱兔屈李纲几乎致死。
English: Liu Fang understood Yang Su's intention. He insulted Tuxie Qu and Li Gang almost to death.

古文：军还，久不得调，威复遣纲诣南海应接林邑，久而不召。
现代文：刘方军队返回，李纲很久得不到调动。苏威又派李纲到南海应酬处理林邑方面的事务，很久不召回他。
English: Liu Fang's army returned, and Li Gang could not be mobilized for a long time. Su Wei also sent Li Gang to the South China Sea to entertain and deal with Lin's affairs, and did not recall him for a long time.

古文：纲自归奏事，威劾奏纲擅离所职，下吏案问；会赦，免官，屏居于鄠。
现代文：李纲自己返回汇报情况，苏威就弹劾李纲擅离职守，将他交给司法官员审问治罪。正逢大赦天下，李纲被免去官职，隐居在县。
English: Li Gang himself returned to report the situation, Su Wei impeached Li Gang for leaving office without permission and handed him over to judicial officials for interrogation and punishment. At the time of the general amnesty, Li Gang was removed from office and lived in seclusion in the county.

古文：五月，筑西苑，周二百里；其内为海，周十馀里；为方丈、蓬莱、瀛洲诸山，高出水百馀尺，台观宫殿，罗络山上，向背如神。
现代文：五月，营建西苑，方圆二百里，苑内有海，周长十余里。海内建造蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲诸座神山，山高出水面百余尺，台观殿阁，星罗棋布地分布在山上，无论从那方面看都如若仙境。
English: In May, the West Garden was built, with a circumference of 200 miles, a sea in the garden, and a circumference of more than 10 miles. Penglai, Hojo, and Luzhou mountains were built in the sea, with mountains more than 100 feet above the water surface, Taiguan Pavilion, and Star Road are distributed on the mountain, both from that aspect are like a fairyland.

古文：北有龙鳞渠，萦纡注海内。
现代文：苑北面有龙鳞渠，曲折蜿蜒地流入海内。
English: On the north side of the garden there is a dragon scale canal, which meanders into the sea.

古文：缘渠作十六院，门皆临渠，每院以四品夫人主之，堂殿楼观，穷极华丽。
现代文：沿着龙鳞渠建造了十六院，院门临渠，每院以一名四品夫人主持，院内的堂殿楼观，极端华丽。
English: Sixteen wards were built along the Lung Chau Canal. The gates of the wards are adjacent to the canal. Each ward is presided over by a four-ranked lady. The view of the halls inside the wards is extremely gorgeous.

古文：宫树秋冬凋落，则剪彩为华叶，缀于枝条，色渝则易以新者，常如阳春。
现代文：宫内树木秋冬季枝叶凋落后，就剪彩绸为花和叶缀在枝条上，颜色旧了就换上新的，使景色常如阳春。
English: After the autumn and winter branches and leaves of the trees in the palace have withered, the flowers and leaves are decorated with colored silk on the branches. The old colors are replaced with new ones, so that the scenery is often like Yangchun.

古文：沼内亦剪彩为荷芰菱芡，乘舆游幸，则去冰而布之。
现代文：池内也剪彩绸做成荷、芰、菱、芡。炀帝来游玩，就去掉池冰布置上彩绸做成阳春美景。
English: In the pond, colored silk is also cut to make lotus, dragonfly, rhinoceros and dragonfly. When Emperor Gong came to visit, he removed the pond ice and placed colored silk to create a beautiful spring scene.

古文：十六院竞以淆羞精丽相高，求市恩宠。
现代文：十六院竞相用珍羞百精美食品一比高低，以求得到炀帝的恩宠。
English: Sixteen hospitals competed to outdo each other with hundreds of exquisite foods in order to gain the favor of the emperor.

古文：上好以月夜从宫女数千骑游西苑，作《清夜游曲》，于马上奏之。
现代文：炀帝喜欢在月夜带领几千名宫女骑马在西苑游玩，他作《清夜游曲》，在马上演奏。
English: Emperor Qian liked to lead several thousand court ladies on horseback to the West Courtyard on moonlit nights. He composed "Clear Night" and performed it on horseback.

古文：帝待诸王恩薄，多所猜忌。
现代文：炀帝对待诸王的恩宠很薄，却多有猜疑防范。
English: Emperor Yao treated the kings with little grace, but with a lot of suspicion and precaution.

古文：滕王纶、卫王集内自忧惧，呼术者问吉凶及章醮求福。
现代文：滕王杨纶、卫王杨集心中感到忧虑恐惧，就叫术士卜问吉凶并打醮求福。
English: Teng Wang Yang Qian and Wei Wang Yang Ji felt anxious and fearful in their hearts, so they asked the sorcerer to ask the fortune-teller about the auspicious and the evil, and to pray for good luck.

古文：或告其怨望咒诅，有司奏请诛之；秋，七月，丙午，诏除名为民，徙边郡。
现代文：有人告发他们怨恨诅咒皇帝，有关部门奏请炀帝杀掉他们。秋季，七月，丙午，炀帝下诏将杨纶、杨集除名为民，流放边郡。
English: Some people denounced that they resented and cursed the emperor, and the relevant departments appealed to Emperor Gong to kill them. In the autumn, in July, on the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Gong issued an edict to expel Yang Hui and Yang Ji as people and banish them to Bian County.

古文：纶，瓚之子；集，爽之子也。
现代文：杨纶是杨瓒的儿子；杨集是杨爽的儿子。
English: Yang Kun is the son of Yang Kun; Yang Ji is the son of Yang Shuang.

古文：八月，壬寅，上行幸江都，发显仁宫，王弘遣龙舟奉迎。
现代文：八月，壬寅，炀帝到江都游玩。他从显仁宫出发，王弘派龙舟来迎接。
English: In August, Emperor Renzhin went to the Yangtze River for a tour. He set off from the Xianren Palace, and Wang Hong sent a dragon boat to meet him.

古文：乙巳，上御小硃航，自漕渠出洛口，御龙舟。
现代文：乙巳，炀帝乘坐小朱航，从漕渠出洛口，乘坐龙舟。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuan took Xiao Zhuhang to go out of Luokou from the canal and took a dragon boat.

古文：龙舟四重，高四十五十尺，长二百丈。
现代文：龙舟上有四重建筑，高四十五尺，长二百尺。
English: On the dragon boat there is a four-story building, forty-five feet high and two hundred feet long.

古文：上重有正殿、内殿、东西朝堂，中二重有百二十房，皆饰以金玉，下重内侍处之。
现代文：龙舟最上层是正殿、内殿、东西朝堂；中间两层有一百二十个房间，都用金玉装饰；下层是宫内侍臣住的地方。
English: The uppermost floor of the dragon boat is the main hall, the inner hall, and the east and west chapels; there are one hundred and twenty rooms on the middle two floors, all decorated with gold beads; the lower floor is where the palace attendants live.

古文：皇后乘翔离舟，制度差小，而装饰无异。
现代文：皇后萧氏乘坐的翔螭舟规制比炀帝乘坐的龙舟要小一些，但装饰没什么不同。
English: The dragon boat used by Empress Xiao is smaller than the dragon boat used by Emperor Gao, but the decoration is the same.

古文：别有浮景九艘，三重，皆水殿也，又有漾彩、硃鸟、苍离、白虎、玄武、飞羽、青凫、陵波、五楼、道场、玄坛、板翕、黄篾等数千艘，后宫、诸王、公主、百官、僧、尼、道士、蕃客乘之，及载内外百司供奉之物，共用挽船士八万馀人，其挽漾彩以上者九千馀人，谓之殿脚，皆以锦彩为袍。
现代文：另有浮景船九艘，船上建筑有三重，都是水上宫殿。还有漾彩、朱鸟、苍螭、白虎、玄武、飞羽、青凫、陵波、五楼、道场、玄坛、板、黄蔑等几千艘船，供后宫、诸王、公主、百官、僧尼、道士、蕃客乘坐，并装载朝廷内外各机构部门进献的物品。这些船共用挽船的民夫八万余人，其中挽漾彩级以上的有九千余人，称为殿脚，都身穿锦彩制作的袍服。
English: In addition, there are nine floating scenic boats, with three-tiered buildings on board, all of which are floating palaces. There are also thousands of boats, such as the 彩, the Zhu Bird, the Heron, the White Tiger, the Xuanwu, the Flying Feather, the Blue Heron, the Lingbo, the Fifth Floor, the Dojo, the Basement, the Board, and the Yellow Scorn, for the harem, the kings, the princesses, the officials, the monks and nuns, the Taoists, and the eunuchs to ride, and to load the items donated by various institutional departments inside and outside the imperial court. These boats are shared by

古文：又有平乘、青龙、艨艟、艚艟、八棹、艇舸等数千艘，并十二卫兵乘之，并载兵器帐幕，兵士自引，不给夫。
现代文：又有平乘、青龙、艨艟、艚、八棹、艇舸等几千艘船供十二卫士兵乘坐，并装载兵器帐幕，由士兵自挽，不给民夫。
English: There were also thousands of boats, such as the flat ride, the blue dragon, the dragon, the dragon, the octopus, the octopus, and the boat, for the soldiers of the 12 Guards to ride on, and to load the weapons tent, and the soldiers had to take care of it themselves, and not give it to the civilians.

古文：舳舻相接二百馀里，照耀川陆，骑兵翊两岸而行，旌旗蔽野。
现代文：舟船首尾相接二百余里，灯火照耀江河陆地，骑兵在两岸护卫行进，旌旗蔽野。
English: Boats and ships lined up for more than two hundred miles, lights shone on the rivers and land, and cavalry marched on both sides of the river, waving flags and covering the fields.

古文：所过州县，五百里内皆令献食，多者一州至百轝，极水陆珍奇；后宫厌饫，将发之际，多弃埋之。
现代文：队伍所经过的州县，五百里内都命令进献食物。多的一州要献食百车，极尽水陆珍奇；后宫都吃腻了，将出发时，就把食物扔掉埋起来。
English: All the states and counties that the procession passed through were ordered to donate food within 500 miles. More than one state had to donate 100 carts of food, which was extremely rare; the harem was tired of eating, and when they set out, they threw the food away and buried it.

古文：契丹寇营州，诏通事谒者韦云起护突厥兵讨之，启民可汗发骑二万，受其处分。
现代文：契丹人侵犯营州。炀帝下诏命令通事谒者韦云起监领突厥军队去讨伐契丹人。启民可汗发骑兵两万人，受韦云起指挥。
English: The Khitans invaded Yingzhou. Emperor Zhao issued an imperial decree ordering Wei Yunqi, the mediator, to supervise the Turkish army to fight the Khitans. The Qimin Khan sent twenty thousand cavalry, under the command of Wei Yunqi.

古文：云起分为二十营，四道俱引，营相去一里，不得交杂，闻鼓声而行，闻角声而止，自非公使，勿得走马，三令五申，击鼓而发。
现代文：韦云起将士兵分为二十营，分四路出发，每营相隔一里，不得混杂，听到鼓声行动，听到号角声就停止。无公事派遣不得驰马，三令五申之后，军队擂鼓进发。
English: Wei Yun divided the soldiers into twenty battalions and set off in four directions. Each battalion was separated by one mile, and they were not allowed to mingle. When they heard the sound of the drum, they stopped moving, and when they heard the sound of the horn, they stopped moving. They were not allowed to ride horses unless they were on official business. After three orders and five shouts, the army marched out to the sound of drums.

古文：有纥干犯约，斩之，持首以徇。
现代文：突厥军的一个纥干违犯了军令，被斩首示众。
English: A member of the Turkish army violated military orders and was beheaded in public.

古文：于是突厥将帅入谒，皆膝行股栗，莫敢仰视。
现代文：于是突厥军的将帅进见韦云起，都跪着行走，战栗不己，不敢仰视。
English: As a result, the generals of the Turkic army entered Wei Yun and walked on their knees, shuddering and not daring to look up.

古文：契丹本事突厥，情无猜忌。
现代文：契丹本来是依附突厥的，所以对突厥人并无猜忌防范之心。
English: The Khitans were originally dependent on the Turks, so they had no suspicions about the Turks.

古文：云起既入其境，使突厥诈云向柳城与高丽交易，敢漏泄事实者斩。
现代文：韦云起率军进入契丹境内，他让突厥人诈称到柳城与高丽人做买卖，并严令有敢泄露实情的人就杀。
English: Wei Yun led an army into the territory of Khitan. He had the Turks falsely claim that they had come to Liucheng to do business with the Goryeo people, and gave strict orders to kill anyone who dared to reveal the truth.

古文：契丹不为备，去其营五十里，驰进袭之，尽获其男女四万口，杀其男子，以女子及畜产之半赐突厥，馀皆收之以归。
现代文：契丹人不加防备，韦云起率领突厥军队前进到距契丹人营地五十里的地方，突然驰进营帐袭击契丹人。契丹男女四万人全被俘获，杀掉男子，把俘获的契丹女人和畜产的一半赏赐给突厥人，其余的都收起来带回去。
English: The Khitans were unprepared, and Wei Yunqi led the Turkish army to advance to a place fifty miles from the Khitan camp, suddenly rushing into the camp to attack the Khitans. Forty thousand Khitan men and women were all captured, the men were killed, the captured Khitan women and half of the livestock were given to the Turks, and the rest were collected and taken back.

古文：帝大喜，集百官曰： 云起用突厥平契丹，才兼文武，朕今自举之。 
现代文：炀帝非常高兴，集合百官说： 韦云起用突厥人平定契丹，文武双全，我今天要亲自举荐他。 
English: Emperor Qian was very pleased and gathered hundreds of officials to say: Wei Yun used the Turks to subdue Khitan. He was both a man of letters and a man of arms. I want to personally recommend him today.

古文：擢为治书侍御史。
现代文：提升韦云起为治书侍御史。
English: Wei Yunqi was promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：初，西突厥阿波可汗为叶护可汗所虏，国人立鞅素特勒之子，是为泥利可汗。
现代文：当初，西突厥阿波可汗被叶护可汗俘获，突厥人立鞅素特勒的儿子为可汗即泥利可汗。
English: At first, the West Turk Abokhan was captured by Yegor Khan, and the Turks made the son of  Sutler the khan, i.e. Meli Khan.

古文：泥利卒，子达漫立，号处罗可汗。
现代文：泥利去世，他儿子达漫继位，号称处罗可汗。
English: Meli died and was succeeded by his son Daman, known as Shurokhan.

古文：其母向氏，本中国人，更嫁泥利之弟婆实特勒。
现代文：达漫的母亲向氏本是中国人，改嫁泥利的弟弟婆实特勒。
English: Daman's mother, Ms. Xiang, who is originally Chinese, remarried Mr. Meli's brother, Ms. Shitler.

古文：开皇末，婆实与向氏入朝，遇达头之乱，遂留长安，舍于鸿胪寺。
现代文：开皇末年，婆实和向氏入朝，正逢崐达头可汗叛乱，就留在长安，住在鸿胪寺。
English: In the last years of the Emperor's reign, when the Shihwa and Xiang dynasties came into the imperial court, just as the rebellion of the Khans of the Han Dynasty broke out, she stayed in Chang'an and lived in Hongye Temple.

古文：处罗多居乌孙故地，抚御失道，国人多叛，复为铁勒所困。
现代文：处罗所部大多居住在乌孙国的旧地，处罗统治失当，很多部众都背叛了他，后来又被铁勒人困扰。
English: Most of Shiloh's followers lived in the old land of the Ussun Kingdom. Shiloh's rule was improper, and many of his followers betrayed him. Later, they were plagued by the Tyrians.

古文：铁勒者，匈奴之遗种，族类最多，有仆骨、同罗、契苾、薛延陀等部，其酋长皆号俟斤。
现代文：铁勒人是匈奴人的后裔，分为许多部族，有仆骨、同罗、契、薛延陀等部，这些部族的酋长都号称俟斤。
English: The Tiele people are the descendants of the Huns and are divided into many tribes, including the Servants, Tongluo, Chi, Xueyantuo, and other groups. The chiefs of these tribes are known as Xujin.

古文：族姓虽殊，通谓之铁勒，大抵与突厥同俗，以寇抄为生，无大君长，分属东、西两突厥。
现代文：各部族的姓氏虽然不同，但都通称为铁勒，与突厥人的习俗大致相同，以侵略掠夺为生，没有大的君长，分属东、西突厥。
English: Although the surnames of each tribe are different, they are all commonly known as Tille, which is roughly the same as the customs of the Turks. They live by aggression and plunder, have no great monarchs, and belong to East and West Turk.

古文：是岁，处罗引兵击铁勒诸部，厚税其物，又猜忌薛延陀，恐其为变，集其酋长数百人，尽杀之。
现代文：这一年，处罗可汗率兵攻击铁勒各部，对铁勒人的财物征以重税，又猜忌薛延陀部，怕它生变，将其部族酋长几百人集中到一起全部杀死。
English: In that year, Shurokhan led his troops to attack the various Tiele clans, levying heavy taxes on the Tiele people's property. He was also suspicious of the Xueyantuo clan, fearing that it would mutate, and gathered several hundred of its tribal chiefs together to kill them all.

古文：于是铁勒皆叛，立俟利发俟斤契苾歌楞为莫何可汗，又立薛延陀俟斤字也咥为小可汗，与处罗战，屡破之。
现代文：于是，铁勒各部族都造反了，立俟利发俟斤契歌楞为莫何可汗，又立薛延陀部俟斤字也为小可汗。与处罗部交战，屡次击败处罗。
English: As a result, all the tribes of Tiel rebelled, establishing the Tieli clan as the Mohe Khan, and the Xueyantuo clan as the Xiao Khan. They fought against the Zhenluo clan and repeatedly defeated the Zhenluo clan.

古文：莫何勇毅绝伦，甚得众心，为邻国所惮，伊吾、高昌、焉耆皆附之。
现代文：莫何可汗为人勇毅绝伦，很得铁勒部众的民心，邻国都怕他，伊吾、高昌、焉耆等国都依附莫何可汗。
English: Mo He Khan is a man of great courage and determination. He has won the hearts and minds of the people. Neighbouring countries are afraid of him. Igu, Gaochang, Yancheng and other countries are all dependent on Mo He Khan.

古文：高祖文皇帝下大业二年春，正月，辛酉，东京成，进将作大匠宇文恺位开府仪同三司。丁卯，遣十使并省州省。
现代文：二年春季，正月，辛酉，东京建成，炀帝提升将作大匠宇文恺为开府仪同三司。丁卯，炀帝派十名使者合并简省州县。
English: In the spring of the second year, in the first month of the new year, in the middle of the year, Tokyo was completed, and Emperor Xizong promoted the great craftsman Wu Wenyi to be the keeper of the imperial edict and the three departments.

古文：二月，丙戌，诏吏部尚书牛弘等议定舆服、仪卫制度。
现代文：二月，丙戌，炀帝下诏命吏部尚书牛弘等人议定皇帝的车驾服饰、仪仗制度。
English: In February, Emperor Xizong and Emperor Gao issued an edict ordering officials such as Shangshu Niuhong and others to agree on the emperor's driving attire and honor system.

古文：以开府仪同三司何稠为太府少卿，使之营造，送江都。
现代文：任命开府仪同三司何稠为太府少卿，让他负责督办，送往江都。
English: He appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary He Chouzo as Taifu Shaoqing, put him in charge of supervision, and sent him to Jiangdu.

古文：稠智思精巧，博览图籍，参会古今，多所损益；衮冕画日、月、星、辰，皮弁用漆纱为之。
现代文：何稠聪慧精巧，博览群书，参酌古今制度，作了不少增减。他在天子礼服上画日、月、星、辰，用漆纱制成皮帽。
English: He was very clever, well-read, and made a lot of additions and subtractions, taking into account the ancient and modern systems. He painted the sun, moon, stars, and hours on the heavenly son's dress, and made a leather cap with lacquer yarn.

古文：又作黄麾三万六千人仗，及辂辇车舆，皇后卤簿，百官仪服，务为华盛，以称上意。
现代文：何稠又制做三万六千人的黄麾仪仗，以及辂辇、车舆和皇后的仪仗，文武百官的礼服，都务求华丽壮观以使炀帝满意。
English: He also made the 36,000-person Huangpi ceremonial robes, as well as the imperial robes, chariots and horses, and the ceremonial robes of the empress, and the ceremonial robes of the civil and military officials, all of which were made to be gorgeous and spectacular in order to satisfy the emperor.

古文：课州县送羽毛，民求捕之，网罗被水陆，禽兽有堪氅毦之用者，殆无遗类。
现代文：又向各州县征收羽毛，百姓为了搜捕鸟兽，水上陆地都置满了捕鸟兽的罗网，可用作羽毛装饰的鸟兽几乎被捕尽杀绝。
English: Feathers were also collected from all states and counties. In order to search for birds and beasts, the people filled the water and land with traps for birds and beasts. Birds and beasts that could be used as feather decorations were almost hunted to extinction.

古文：乌程有高树，逾百尺，旁无附枝，上有鹤巢，民欲取之，不可上，乃伐其根；鹤恐杀其子，自拔氅毛投于地，时人或称以为瑞，曰： 天子造羽仪，鸟兽自献羽毛。 
现代文：乌程有棵很高的树超过百尺，树周没有可以攀附的枝条，树上有鹤巢，有人要捉鹤，但爬不上树，就砍伐树根。鹤怕它的后代被杀，就自己把羽毛拔下来扔在地上。当时有人称之为吉祥的征兆，说： 天子制羽仪，鸟兽自动献羽毛。 
English: There was a tall tree more than a hundred feet high in Wucheng. There were no branches around the tree for cranes to cling to. There was a crane's nest in the tree. Someone wanted to catch a crane, but couldn't climb the tree, so they cut down the roots. The crane was afraid that its offspring would be killed, so it plucked off its own feathers and threw them on the ground. At the time, some people called it an auspicious sign, saying, "Heaven's son makes feathers, and birds and beasts automatically donate their feathers."

古文：所役工十万馀人，用金银钱帛巨亿计。
现代文：服役的工匠有十万余人，用的金银钱帛不计其数。
English: There are more than 100,000 artisans serving in the military, and countless gold and silver coins have been used.

古文：帝每出游幸，羽仪填街溢路，亘二十馀里。
现代文：炀帝每次出行，羽仪仪仗队伍把街巷都填满了，连绵二十余里。
English: Every time Emperor Xuan traveled, the feather ceremony ceremony team filled the streets and lanes, stretching for more than 20 miles.

古文：三月，庚戌，上发江都，夏，四月，庚戌，自伊阙陈法驾，备千乘万骑入东京。
现代文：三月，庚午，炀帝从江都出发。夏季，四月，庚戌，从伊阙排列千乘万骑的车驾仪仗进入东京。
English: In March, at noon, Emperor Shun set out from the Yangtze River, and in the summer, in April, at dusk, he entered Tokyo in a ceremonial chauffeur-driven carriage with thousands of riders from Ili.

古文：辛亥，御端门，大赦，免天下今年租赋。
现代文：辛亥，炀帝驾临端门，下诏大赦天下，免除今年的租赋。
English: At the turn of the year, Emperor Xizong arrived at the front gate and issued an edict to grant amnesty to the whole world, exempting this year's rent.

古文：制五品以上文官乘车，在朝弁服，佩玉；武官马加珂，戴帻，服袴褶。
现代文：制定五品以上文官的车、上朝时的礼服、佩玉等品级规制；武官的马要用珍贵的贝类来装饰，人须戴头巾，穿骑服。
English: A classification system for civilian officials' cars with five or more products, ceremonial dress during the Shang Dynasty, and jade beads will be established; military officers' horses must be decorated with precious shellfish, and they must wear headscarves and riding clothes.

古文：文物之盛，近世莫及也。
现代文：礼乐典章的盛况，近世无法相比。
English: The pomp and circumstance of ceremonial music cannot be compared with that of modern times.

古文：六月，壬子，以杨素为司徒，进封豫章王暕为齐王。
现代文：六月，壬子，炀帝任命杨素为司徒；进封豫章王杨为齐王。
English: In June, Emperor Jinsi appointed Yang Su as the tutor; and Yang, the king of Yuzhang, was appointed as the king of Qi.

古文：秋，七月，庚申，制百官不得计考增级，必有德行、功能灼然显著者进擢之。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚申，规定百官不能按正常的考核制度升级，必须有德行，并有显著功劳、能力的人才得以提升。
English: In the autumn, July, and Goshun, it was stipulated that officials could not be promoted according to the normal assessment system, and only those with virtue, significant merit, and ability could be promoted.

古文：帝颇惜名位，群臣当进职者，多令兼假而已；虽有阙员，留而不补。
现代文：炀帝很吝惜名位，群臣中崐有应当升官进爵的，多让其兼职暂代而已。虽然有的职务有空缺，却空着不补上。
English: Emperor Xuan was very parsimonious about titles. Among his ministers, there were only a few who deserved to be promoted to the peerage, and most of them were only allowed to work part-time temporarily. Although some positions were vacant, they were not filled.

古文：时牛弘为吏部尚书，不得专行其职，别敕纳言苏威、左翊卫大将军宇文述、左骁卫大将军张瑾、内史侍郎虞世基、御史大夫裴蕴、黄门侍郎裴矩参掌选事，时人谓之 选曹七贵 。
现代文：当时牛弘任吏部尚书，都不能专行其职，炀帝另外又命令纳言苏威、左翊卫大将军宇文述、左骁卫大将军张瑾、内史侍郎虞世基、御史大夫裴蕴、黄门侍郎裴矩参予掌握选择官吏之事，当时人们称之为 选曹七贵 。
English: At that time, Niu Hong was appointed as an official of Shang Shu, but could not exclusively perform his duties. Emperor Qian also ordered Nagan Su Wei, Zuo Wei General Yu Wenshu, Zuo Wei General Zhang Qi, Inner History Attendant Yu Shiji, Imperial History Officer Pei Ying, and Huangmen Attendant Pei Keng to participate in the selection of officials. At that time, people called him "Selector Seven."

古文：虽七人同在坐，然与夺之笔，虞世基独专之，受纳贿赂，多者超越等伦，无者注色而已。
现代文：虽然这七个人同时在坐，但是官吏升迁任免的实权，由虞世基独霸，他收受贿赂，行贿多的人就超越等级和不按一般常理去提拔，不行贿的人就仅只登记而已。
English: Although these seven people were in office at the same time, the real power of promotion and appointment of officials was dominated by Yu Shiji, who accepted bribes. Those who paid more bribes were promoted beyond their grade and not promoted according to common sense. Those who did not pay bribes were only registered.

古文：蕴，邃之从曾孙也。
现代文：裴蕴是裴邃的堂房曾孙。
English: Pei Yun is the great-great-grandson of Pei Yao.

古文：元德太子昭自长安来朝，数月，将还，欲乞少留；帝不许。
现代文：元德太子杨昭从长安来朝见炀帝，几个月后要返回长安。
English: Yang Zhao, the former German crown prince, came from Chang'an to the imperial court to meet Emperor Xizong. He would return to Chang'an a few months later.

古文：拜请无数，体素肥，因致劳疾，甲戌，薨。
现代文：他想乞求允许再留住一些时候，炀帝不许，杨昭跪拜请求了无数次，他身体本来就很胖，因此得病，甲戌，太子杨昭去世。
English: He wanted to beg for permission to stay a little longer, but Emperor Gong did not allow it. Yang Zhao knelt down and begged countless times. His body was originally very fat, so he got sick, his armor was torn, and Prince Yang Zhao died.

古文：帝哭之，数声而止，寻奏声伎，无异平日。
现代文：炀帝哭了几声就罢了，寻欢作乐，声色歌妓，与平常没什么两样。
English: Emperor Zou only cried a few times. He was looking for fun and making music, and his voice was like that of a singer. It was no different from usual.

古文：楚景武公杨素，虽有大功，特为帝所猜忌，外示殊礼，内情甚薄。
现代文：楚景武公杨素，虽然有大功，却特别被炀帝所猜忌，表面上对杨素以特殊的礼遇，实际上对待杨素很苛薄。
English: Chu Jingwu Yang Su, although he had great merits, was especially suspected by Emperor Gong. On the surface, Yang Su was treated with special courtesy, but in fact, Yang Su was treated very harshly.

古文：太史言隋分野有大丧，乃徙素为楚公，意言楚与隋同分，欲以厌之。
现代文：太史说隋的分野应有大丧，于是炀帝改封杨素为楚公，意思是说楚与隋同在一分野内，想以此来镇压妖邪。
English: Tai Shi said that there should be a great loss in the field of Sui, so Emperor Xuan changed the title of Yang Su to Chu Gong, meaning that Chu and Sui were in the same field, and wanted to use this to suppress the evil spirits.

古文：素寝疾，帝每令名医诊候，赐以上药，然密问医者，恒恐不死。
现代文：杨素卧病，炀帝常常命名医给杨素治病，赐给杨素上好的药，但暗地里问医生，总怕杨素不死。
English: Yang Su was bedridden. Emperor Qian often named a doctor to cure Yang Su and gave Yang Su the best medicine, but secretly asked the doctor, always afraid that Yang Su would not die.

古文：素亦自知名位已极，不肯饵药，亦不将慎，谓弟约曰： 我岂须更活邪！ 
现代文：杨素也知道自己的名分和地位已经达到了顶点，不肯吃药，也不再仔细调养，杨素对他弟弟杨约说： 我还再活着干吗？ 
English: Yang Su also knew that his fame and status had reached its peak. He refused to take medicine and no longer carefully nurtured. Yang Su said to his brother Yang You: Why am I still alive?

古文：乙亥，素薨，赠太尉公、弘农等十郡太守，葬送甚盛。
现代文：乙亥，杨素去世。炀帝赠杨素为太尉公、弘农等十郡太守的官衔，对他的葬礼葬送极为隆重丰厚。
English: Emperor Qianlong bestowed upon Yang Su the titles of Taijun Gong and Hongnong, as well as the title of the governor of ten counties, and his funeral was extremely grand and lavish.

古文：八月，辛卯，封皇孙倓为燕王，侗为越王，侑为代王，皆昭之子也。
现代文：八月，辛卯，炀帝封皇孙杨为燕王，杨侗为越王，杨侑为代王，他们都是杨昭的儿子。
English: In August, Emperor Xinwu appointed Emperor Sun Yang as the King of Yan, Yang Hui as the King of Yue, and Yang Hui as the acting king. They were all sons of Yang Zhao.

古文：九月，乙丑，立秦孝王子浩为秦王。
现代文：九月，乙丑，炀帝立秦孝王的儿子杨浩为秦王。
English: In September, Emperor Wu established Yang Hao, the son of Qin Xiao Wang, as Qin King.

古文：帝以高祖末年，法令峻刻，冬，十月，诏改修律令。
现代文：炀帝认为文帝晚年法令严峻苛细，冬季，十月，下诏修改法律条文。
English: Emperor Xuan considered Emperor Wen's decrees in his later years to be severe and harsh. In the winter, in October, he issued an edict to amend the legal provisions.

古文：置洛口仓于巩东南原上，筑仓城，周回二十馀里，穿三千窖，窖容八千石以还，置监官并镇兵千人。
现代文：在巩县东南原上设置洛口仓，修筑仓城，周围二十余里，开凿三千个粮窖，每个窖可装粮食八千多石。洛口仓设置监官和镇守的士兵一千人。
English: In the southeastern plain of Gong County, the Lokou Warehouse was set up, and the warehouse city was built, with a circumference of more than 20 miles. Three thousand granaries were excavated, each of which could hold more than eight thousand stones of grain. The inspector and one thousand soldiers of the town guard were set up in the Lokou Warehouse.

古文：十二月，置回洛仓于洛阳北七里，仓城周回十里，穿三百窖。
现代文：十二月，在洛阳北七里处设置回洛仓，仓城周围十里，开凿了三百个粮窖。
English: In December, at seven miles north of Luoyang, it was set back to Luocang, and ten miles around Cangcheng, three hundred granaries were excavated.

古文：初，齐温公之世，有鱼龙、山车等戏，谓之散乐，周宣帝时，郑译奏征之。
现代文：当初，在北齐后主高纬的时候，有鱼龙、山车等杂戏，称之为散乐。北周宣帝时，郑译奏请征召这些杂戏乐人。
English: At first, when the Northern Qi empress was at a high altitude, there were fish and dragon, roller coaster and other miscellaneous plays, which were called "sang music." When the Northern Zhou proclaimed the emperor, Zheng Yansong asked to recruit these miscellaneous musicians.

古文：高祖受禅，命牛弘定乐，非正声清商及九部四舞之色，悉放遣之。
现代文：文帝受周禅让后，命令牛弘制定礼乐，凡不是正声清商和九部四舞的乐曲舞蹈，全部摒弃不用。
English: After Emperor Wen yielded to Zhou Zhen, he ordered Niu Hong to draw up a ritual music, and all music and dances that were not the Zhengxing Qingshang and the nine four dances were abandoned.

古文：帝以启民可汗将入朝，欲以富乐夸之。太常少卿裴蕴希旨，奏括天下周、齐、梁、陈乐家子弟皆为乐户；其六品以下至庶人，有善音乐者，皆直太常。
现代文：炀帝因为启民可汗将要入朝，想以隋朝富丽的声乐向启民可汗炫耀，太常少卿裴蕴迎合炀帝的旨意，奏请将天下原来的周、齐、梁、陈等国的乐家子弟都编为乐户；六品以崐下官员至庶民百姓，有擅长音乐的，都到太常寺当差。
English: Emperor Qian wanted to show off the rich vocal music of the Sui Dynasty to the Qian people because the Qian people's khan was about to enter the imperial court. To meet Emperor Qian's wishes, Taizang Shaoqing Peiyun invited the original musicians from Zhou, Qi, Liang, Chen and other countries to be recruited as musicians; officials from the six provinces and municipalities to the common people, and those who were good at music were sent to Taizang Temple.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：炀帝采纳了这个建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：于是四方散乐，大集东京，阅之于芳华苑积翠池侧。
现代文：于是散在各地的乐人都集中到东京，炀帝在芳华苑积翠池旁检阅散乐。
English: As a result, musicians from all over the country converged on Tokyo, and Emperor Kaji reviewed the sanshaku next to the jicchui pond in Hongwha Garden.

古文：有舍利兽先来跳跃，激水满衢，鼋鼍、龟鳖、水人、虫鱼，遍覆于地。又有鲸鱼喷雾翳日，倏忽化成黄龙，长七八丈。
现代文：有舍利兽先来跳跃，忽然激水注满街道，遍地都是鼋鼍、龟鳖、水人、虫鱼；又有鲸鱼喷雾掩蔽日光，转眼间化作黄龙，长七八丈。
English: The Shaoli beast jumped first, and suddenly the rushing water filled the streets, and there were earthworms, turtles, water people, and worms everywhere; there was also whale spray to cover the sunlight, and it turned into a yellow dragon with a height of seven or eight meters.

古文：又二人戴竿，上有舞者，焱然腾过，左右易处。
现代文：又有二人头顶条长竿，竿上有人舞蹈，忽然两竿上的人飞腾而过，跳到对方的竿上。
English: There were also two people with a long pole above their heads. Someone was dancing on the pole. Suddenly, the people on both poles flew past and jumped onto the other pole.

古文：又有神鰲负山，幻人吐火，千变万化。
现代文：还有神鳌背负大山，魔术艺人吐火等技艺，千变万化。
English: There are also gods carrying mountains on their backs, magic artists spitting fire and other skills, which are ever-changing.

古文：伎人皆衣锦绣缯彩，舞者鸣环佩，缀花毦；课京兆、河南制其衣，两京锦彩为之空竭。
现代文：艺人们都穿着锦绣缯彩的衣服，舞蹈者身上环佩叮，还点缀着花色的羽毛。炀帝命令京兆、河南两地制做艺人所穿的彩服，以至于两京的锦缎彩绸为此空竭。
English: The artists were all dressed in brocade and satin clothes, the dancers wore corsets and were also adorned with flower-coloured feathers. Emperor Qian ordered the two places, Beijing and Henan, to make the costumes worn by the artists, so that the brocade and satin of the two capitals was exhausted.

古文：帝多制艳篇，令乐正白明达造新声播之，音极哀怨。
现代文：炀帝自制艳多篇，命令乐正白明达谱新曲教人演奏，乐曲极为哀婉愁怨。
English: Emperor Qian composed many pieces of music himself, and ordered to teach people how to play the new music of the Baimingda score. The music was extremely sad and melancholy.

古文：帝甚悦，谓明达曰： 齐氏偏隅，乐工曹妙达犹封王；我今天下大同，方且贵汝，宜自修谨！ 
现代文：炀帝非常高兴，对白明达说： 齐朝偏在一隅，乐工曹妙达还被齐后主封为王，如今我使天下大同，正要让你显贵，你要好好干呀！ 
English: Emperor Qian was very happy and said to Bai Mingda: "Qi Dynasty is in a corner. Musician Cao Miada was also made the king after Qi Dynasty. Now I have unified the world. I just want to make you prominent. You should do a good job!"

古文：高祖文皇帝下大业三年
现代文：三年春季，正月，朔旦，大规模地陈列、表演礼仪和技艺。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month, the new moon, large-scale display, performance etiquette and skills.

古文：春，正月，朔旦，大陈文物。时突厥启民可汗入朝，见而慕之，请袭冠带，帝不许。
现代文：当时突厥启民可汗入朝，看到这一场面非常倾慕，请求袭用隋朝服饰，炀帝没有允许。
English: At that time, the Turkic Qimin Khan entered the dynasty. Seeing this scene, he was very admiring and requested to use the Sui Dynasty costumes. Emperor Zhou did not allow it.

古文：明日，又帅其属上表固请，帝大悦，谓牛弘等曰： 今衣冠大备，致单于解辫，卿等功也。 
现代文：第二天，启民可汗又率领他的部属向炀帝上表恳切请求，炀帝非常高兴，对牛弘等人说： 如今公卿服饰制度完备，致使单于改易朝服，这是你们的功劳！ 
English: On the second day, Qimin Khan and his subordinates made a sincere request to Emperor Gong. Emperor Gong was very pleased and said to Niu Hong and others, "Nowadays, the noblemen's dress system is complete, which has led to the change of the imperial robe, which is your merit!

古文：各赐帛甚厚。
现代文：各自赏赐他们很丰厚的财物。
English: Each of them rewarded them with great wealth.

古文：三月，辛亥，帝还长安。
现代文：三月，辛亥，炀帝返回长安。
English: In March, Xinhai, Emperor Gong returned to Chang'an.

古文：癸丑，帝使羽骑尉硃宽入海求访异俗，至流求国而还。
现代文：癸丑，炀帝派遣羽骑尉朱宽出海求访异国风俗，朱宽到达流求国后返回。
English: At the same time, Emperor Qian sent Fei cavalry officer Zhu Guang out to sea to visit foreign customs. Zhu Guang arrived at the current to visit the country and then returned.

古文：初，云定兴、阎毘坐媚事太子勇，与妻子皆没官为奴婢。
现代文：当初，云定兴、阎毗因为取媚太子杨勇而获罪，他们及其妻子儿女都被官府没收为官奴婢。
English: At first, Yun Dingxing and Yan Fei were found guilty of seducing Prince Yang Yong, and they and their wives and children were confiscated by the government as official slaves.

古文：上即位，多所营造，闻其有巧思，召之，使典其事，以毘为朝请郎。
现代文：炀帝即位，进行许多营建工作，听说他们构思奇巧，就召来让他们掌管营建之事，任命阎毗为朝请郎。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he carried out a lot of construction work. When he heard that they had come up with a wonderful idea, he summoned them to take charge of the construction and appointed Yan Pi as the courtier.

古文：时宇文述用事，定兴以明珠络帐赂述，并以奇服新声求媚于求；述大喜，兄事之。
现代文：当时宇文述当权，云定兴用缀有明珠的帐幕贿赂宇文述，并用奇装异服和新颖别致的音乐向宇文述献媚。
English: At that time, Uwenshu was in power, and Yun Dingxing bribed Uwenshu with a tent decorated with pearls, and flattered Uwenshu with fancy clothes and novel and unique music.

古文：上将有事四夷，大造兵器，述荐定兴可使监造，上从之。
现代文：宇文述非常高兴，对云定兴象兄长一样看待。炀帝将要征讨四夷，大造兵器，宇文述推荐云定兴来监造，炀帝同意了。
English: Yu Wenshu was very pleased and treated Yun Dingxing like an elder brother. Emperor Wu was going to recruit the Si Yi and build a great weapon, and Yu Wenshu recommended that Yun Dingxing supervise the construction. Emperor Wu agreed.

古文：述谓定兴曰： 兄所作器仗，并合上心，而不得官者，为长宁兄弟犹未死耳。 
现代文：宇文述对云定兴说： 你所造的器仗都合乎皇帝的心意，但得不到官做的原因是因为长宁王兄弟都还没有死啊！ 
English: Yu Wenshu said to Yun Dingxing: The weapons you have created are in line with the emperor's will, but the reason you can't be made an official is because Changning Wang's brothers aren't dead yet!

古文：定兴曰： 此无用物，何不劝上杀之。 
现代文：云定兴说： 这些没用的东西，为什么不劝皇帝杀掉他们？ 
English: Yun Dingxing said: These useless things, why not persuade the emperor to kill them?

古文：述因奏： 房陵诸子年并成立，今欲兴兵征讨，若使之从驾，则守掌为难；若留于一处，又恐不可。
现代文：宇文述就奏报炀帝： 房陵王杨勇的几个儿子都已成年了，现在您正要出兵征讨四夷，倘若让他们跟着您出征，就很难掌管，倘若把他们留在一个地方，又恐怕不妥。
English: Yu Wenshu reported to Emperor Xuan: Several sons of Fangling King Yang Yong have come of age, and now you are about to send troops to subjugate Shiyi. If you let them go with you, it will be difficult to control them, and if you leave them in one place, I am afraid it will be wrong.

古文：进退无用，请早处分。 
现代文：进、退都不好办，请您早些处理。 
English: It's not easy to get in and out, so please do it early.

古文：帝然之，乃鸩杀长宁王俨，分徙其七弟于岭表，仍遣间使于路尽杀之。
现代文：炀帝认为宇文述的话很对，就毒死了长宁王杨俨，将杨俨的七个弟弟分别流放到岭表，派人在路上把他们全部杀死。
English: Emperor Yao thought that what Yuwen said was right, so he poisoned the Changning King Yang Hui, exiled Yang Hui's seven brothers to Ling table, and sent people to kill them all on the road.

古文：襄城王恪之妃柳氏自杀以从恪。
现代文：襄城王杨恪的妃子柳氏自杀以殉杨恪。
English: The concubine of Yang Ke, the king of Xiangcheng, committed suicide with the martyrdom of Yang Ke.

古文：夏，四月，庚辰，下诏欲安辑河北，巡省赵、魏。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚辰，炀帝下诏要安抚管理河北，巡视检查赵、魏之地。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Gaotian issued an edict to pacify and administer Hebei, and inspect the lands of Zhao and Wei.

古文：牛弘等造新律成，凡十八篇，谓之《大业律》；甲申，始颁行之。
现代文：牛弘等人制定新法律，共十八篇，称之为《大业律》；甲申，开始颁布施行。
English: Niu Hong and others formulated a new law, a total of eighteen articles, called the "Law of Cause and Effect"; Jiaxun began to promulgate and implement it.

古文：民久厌严刻，喜于宽政。
现代文：百姓久已厌恶法律严酷苛繁，对宽政十分高兴。
English: The people have long been disgusted with the severity and rigidity of the law, and are very happy with the lenient policy.

古文：其后征役繁兴，民不堪命。有司临时迫胁以求济事，不复用律令矣。
现代文：但后来频繁的劳役征发，使百姓无法忍受，官吏们常常临时胁迫百姓服役以应付差使，也就不再按律令执行了。
English: Later, however, the frequent conscription of labor made it unbearable for the common people, and the officials often forced the common people to serve temporarily in order to deal with the envoys. Therefore, it was no longer enforced according to the law.

古文：旅骑尉刘炫预修律令，弘尝从容问炫曰： 《周礼》士多而府史少，今令史百倍于前，减则不济，其故何也？ 
现代文：旅骑尉刘炫参与修订律令，牛弘曾从容地问刘炫： 《周礼》记载是士多而吏员少，现在吏员比从前多出百倍，减少则无法应付事务，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Brigadier Liu Xuan participated in the revision of the Ritsuryo. Niu Hong once calmly asked Liu Xuan: "Zhou Li" records that there are more officials and fewer clerks. Nowadays, there are a hundred times more clerks than before, and if there is a decrease, they cannot cope with affairs. What is the reason for this?

古文：炫曰： 古人委任责成，岁终考其殿最，案不重校，文不繁悉，府史之任，掌要目而已。
现代文：刘炫说： 古人委任吏员须要有责任有成绩，年终考核成绩，案卷不用重新审理，文牍不求繁多琐碎，吏员的责任，只是掌握工作的要点而已。
English: Liu Xuan said: In the old days, people were appointed to positions and were responsible for success. At the end of the year, their political performance was examined. The copy was not re-proofread, there were not so many official documents, and the responsibility of the history of the government was just to control the important points.

古文：今之文簿，恒虑覆治，若锻炼不密，则万里追证百年旧案。
现代文：现在的吏员总是担心文簿要重新审理考核，假若文辞考虑不周密，就会不远万里去追查印证百年的旧案。
English: Today's clerks are always worried that the books need to be re-examined. If the wording is not carefully considered, they will go far and wide to track down old cases that have been sealed for a hundred years.

古文：故谚云： 老吏抱案死。 
现代文：所以有谚语说： 老吏伏抱文案而死。 
English: That is why the proverb says: "Old officials die with their cases open."

古文：事繁政弊，职此之由也。 
现代文：事物繁杂这是为政的弊端，这就是吏员多而效率低的原因。
English: Things are complicated, which is a drawback for politics, and this is the reason why there are many officials and low efficiency.

古文：弘曰： 魏、齐之时，令史从容而已，今则不遑宁处，何故？ 
现代文：牛弘说： 北魏、北齐之时，吏员们办事很从容，现在则忽忽忙忙不得安宁，这是什么缘故？ 
English: Niu Hong said: When the Northern Wei Dynasty and the Northern Qi Dynasty were in power, officials were very easy-going, but now they are constantly busy and restless. What is the reason for this?

古文：炫曰： 往者州唯置纲纪，郡置守、丞，县置令而已。
现代文：刘炫说： 过去州只设置长吏、司马，郡只设置郡守、郡丞，县仅设县令而已。
English: Liu Xuan said: In the past, the state only set up the chief official and the secretary, the county only set up the county governor and the county magistrate, and the county only set up the county magistrate.

古文：其馀具僚则长官自辟，受诏赴任，每州不过数十。
现代文：其余应配备的僚属，则由长官自己挑选任命，得到诏命后就赴任，每州吏员不过几十人。
English: The rest of the subordinates, who should be equipped, are selected and appointed by the governor himself, and take office after receiving the imperial edict. There are only a few dozen clerks in each state.

古文：今则不然，大小之官，悉由吏部，纤介之迹，皆属考功。
现代文：如今则不然，大大小小的官吏，全部由吏部掌管，零零碎碎的事务都属于考绩范围。
English: Today, however, this is no longer the case. All officials, large and small, are under the control of the Personnel Department, and all matters, no matter how small or insignificant, fall within the scope of performance evaluation.

古文：省官不如省事，官事不省而望从容，其可得乎！ 
现代文：减少官吏不如减少事务，官员们的事务不减，却希望他们办事从容，那可能吗？ 
English: Is it possible that reducing the number of officials is not as good as reducing the number of affairs, and officials' affairs are not reduced, but they are expected to take things easy?

古文：弘善其言而不能用。
现代文：牛弘很同意刘炫的话，但却不能采纳。
English: Niu Hong agreed with Liu Xuan's words, but could not accept them.

古文：壬辰，改州为郡；改度量权衡，并依古式。
现代文：壬辰，炀帝改州为郡；改度、量、衡，全部依照古式。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Qian changed the prefecture into a county; the change of degree, quantity, and weight were all in accordance with the ancient style.

古文：改上柱国以下官为大夫；置殿内省，与尚书、门下、内史、秘书为五省；增谒者、司隶台，与御史为三台；分太府寺置少府监，与长秋、国子、将作、都水为五监；又增改左、右翊卫等为十六府；废伯、子、男爵，唯留王、公、侯三等。
现代文：改上柱国以下的官为大夫；设置殿内省与尚书、门下、内史、秘书省共为五省；增设谒者台、司隶台与御史台并为三台；分太府寺设置少府监，与长秋、国子、将作、都水为五监；又增改左、右翊卫等为十六府；废除伯、子、男的爵位，只留王、公、侯三等爵位。
English: The officials below Shoshikoku were changed to Dafu; the provinces of the palace and the provinces of Shoshu, Monzoku, Naishi, and Shisho were set up as a total of five provinces; the provinces of Shosha, Shishitai, and Mishitai were added as three provinces; the provinces of Dafu-ji were set up as Shofu-ken, and Choshu, Kokushi, Shosaku, and Dousui were set up as five provinces; the provinces of Shoshu, Monzoku, Naishi, and Shisho were set up as a total of five provinces; the provinces of Shoshu, Sh

古文：丙寅，车驾北巡；己亥，顿赤岸泽。
现代文：丙寅，炀帝到北方巡视。己亥，在赤岸泽停留。
English: Hsin-Yin, Emperor Gong went to the north to inspect. Ji-Hai, stopped at the Red River.

古文：五月，丁巳，突厥启民可汗遣其子拓特勒来朝。
现代文：五月，丁巳，突厥启民可汗派他的儿子拓特勒来朝见炀帝。
English: In May, the Turkic Qimin Khan sent his son Tuutler to the court to meet the emperor.

古文：戊午，发河北十馀郡丁男凿太行山，达于并州，以通驰道。
现代文：戊午，征发河北十几郡的男丁开凿太行山，到达并州，以开通驰道。
English: In the afternoon, men from more than a dozen counties in Hebei Province were conscripted to excavate the Taihang Mountains, and arrived in Anhui Province to open the road.

古文：丙寅，启民遣其兄子毘黎伽特勒来朝。
现代文：丙寅，启民可汁派侄子毗黎伽特勒来朝见。
English: Hsin-Yin, Kai-Min can send his nephew Vili-Gatler to see the emperor.

古文：辛未，启民遣使请自入塞奉迎舆驾，上不许。
现代文：辛未，启民可汗派使者请求亲自入塞迎接炀帝，炀帝没有应允。
English: Xinwei, Qimin Khan sent an envoy to request that he personally enter Tibet to meet Emperor Zhao, but Emperor Zhao did not agree.

古文：初，高祖受禅，唯立四亲庙，同殿异室而已。
现代文：当初，文帝受周禅，只立了四亲庙，而且是同殿异室而已。
English: At first, Emperor Wen, influenced by Zhou Zen, only built the Temple of the Four Ancestors, and it was just a different room in the same palace.

古文：帝即位，命有司议七庙之制。礼部侍郎摄太常少卿许善心等奏请为太祖、高祖各立一殿，准周文、武二祧，与始祖而三，馀并分室而祭，从迭毁之法。
现代文：炀帝即位，命令有关部门讨论建七庙的定制，礼部侍郎代行太常少卿许善心等奏请为太祖、高祖各建一座殿，依据周文王、周武王宗庙的标准，与始祖共建立三座殿，其余的人都分室祭祀，按照亲尽庙毁之法祭祀。
English: Emperor Shun ascended the throne, ordered the relevant departments to discuss the customization of building seven temples, and the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, acting on behalf of the Taizhang Shaoqing Xu Zenshin, requested that a hall be built for each great-grandfather and great-grandfather. According to the standards of the ancestral temple of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu, a total of three halls were built with the ancestors. The rest of the people were sacrificed in a separate room and sacrificed according to the method of destroying the temple.

古文：至是，有司请如前议，于东京建宗庙。
现代文：于是，有关部门奏请炀帝按上述议定的那样，在东京建立宗庙。
English: As a result, the relevant departments requested Emperor Shō to establish a family temple in Tokyo as agreed above.

古文：帝谓秘书监柳辩曰： 今始祖及二祧已具，后世子孙处朕何所？ 
现代文：炀帝对秘书监柳说： 如今始祖与文、武王的宗庙都已具备，后世子孙把我又放到什么位置上呢？ 
English: Emperor Zhao said to his secretary, Jian Liu, "Nowadays, the ancestral temples of our forefathers, King Wen and King Wu are all in place. What position will future generations place me in?

古文：六月，丁亥，诏为高祖建别庙，仍修月祭礼。
现代文：六月，丁亥，炀帝下诏为文帝另建宗庙，太阴在丙之月祭祀。
English: In June, Dinghai, Emperor Gao issued an edict to build a separate ancestral temple for Emperor Wen, and Taiyin held a sacrifice in the month of C.

古文：既而方事巡幸，竟不果立。
现代文：不久之后炀帝就忙于巡游之事，竟终于没有建立。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gong was busy with the parade, but it was never built.

古文：帝过雁门，雁门太守丘和献食甚精；至马邑，马邑太守杨廓独无所献，帝不悦。
现代文：炀帝巡游经过雁门，雁门太守丘和进献的食物非常精美；他到了马邑崐，唯独马邑太守杨廓无所献，炀帝很不高兴。
English: Emperor Qian cruised through the Wild Goose Gate, and the food offered by Yang Kuo, the Tai Shou of the Wild Goose Gate, was very exquisite. When he arrived at Ma'iyu, only Yang Kuo, the Tai Shou of Ma'iyu, had nothing to offer, and Emperor Qian was very unhappy.

古文：以和为博陵太守，仍使廓至博陵观和为式。
现代文：他任命丘和为博陵太守，让杨廓到博陵去向丘和学习。
English: He appointed Qiu He as the governor of Boling and asked Yang Kuo to go to Boling to learn from Qiu He.

古文：由是所至献食，竞为丰侈。
现代文：由此炀帝所到之处所进献的食物，竞相丰富奢侈。
English: As a result, the food offered to the emperor everywhere he went competed with each other in richness and luxury.

古文：戊子，车驾顿榆林郡。
现代文：戊子，炀帝的车驾停留在榆林郡。
English: At the same time, Emperor Gong's car stopped in Yulin County.

古文：帝欲出塞耀兵，径突厥中，指于涿郡，恐启民惊惧，先遣武卫将军长孙晟谕旨。
现代文：炀帝想要出塞去炫耀兵力，径直进入突厥境内，想去涿郡。他怕启民可汗惊恐，先派遣武卫将军长孙晟传达他的旨意。
English: Emperor Gao wanted to go out of the citadel to show off his military strength, go straight into the Turkish territory, and wanted to go to Gao County. He was afraid that the Qimin Khan would be alarmed, so he first sent the General of the Imperial Guard, Sun Qian, to convey his will.

古文：启民奉诏，因召所部诸国奚、、室韦等酋长数十人咸集。
现代文：启民可汗接到炀帝的诏书，就把他所属的奚？室韦等国的酋长几十人都召集起来。
English: After receiving Emperor Qian's edict, Qimin Khan called together dozens of chiefs from the states he belonged to, including Zhang, Shumwei, and others.

古文：晟见牙帐中草秽，欲令启民亲除之，示诸部落，以明威重，乃指帐前草曰： 此根大香。 
现代文：长孙晟看见启民可汗牙帐中杂草肮脏，打算让启民可汗亲自除掉，示范给各部落，以表示对朝廷的敬重。就指着帐前的草说： 这根草很香。 
English: Seeing that the weeds in the Qimin Khan's dental tray were dirty, the eldest grandson Yao planned to have the Qimin Khan personally remove them and show them to the tribes to show respect for the imperial court. He pointed to the grass in front of the tray and said: This grass is very fragrant.

古文：启民遽嗅之，曰： 殊不香也。 
现代文：启民可汗就急忙闻道，说： 一点也不香。 
English: Qimin Khan hurriedly listened to the explanation and said, "It's not fragrant at all.

古文：晟曰： 天子行幸所在，诸侯躬自洒扫，耕除御路，以表至敬之心；今牙内芜秽，谓是留香草耳！ 
现代文：长孙晟说： 天子巡幸所到之地，诸侯都要亲自洒扫，修整御道，以表示对天子的至诚崇敬之心。现在牙帐内杂草丛生，我只说是留着香草罢了！ 
English: The eldest grandson, Zou, said, "In the places visited by the heavenly son on his inspection tour, the lords should personally sweep and tidy up the roads to show their sincere reverence for the heavenly son. Now there are weeds growing in the dentition, I only say that there is vanilla left!

古文：启民乃悟曰： 奴之罪也！
现代文：启民可汗才醒悟过来，说： 我的罪过！
English: It was only then that Kai Min Khan came to his senses and said, "My sin is gone!"

古文：奴之骨肉皆天子所赐，得效筋力，岂敢有辞。
现代文：我的骨肉都是天子赐给的，得到为天子效力的机会，怎么敢推辞呢？
English: My flesh and blood are all given to me by the Son of Heaven. How dare I turn down the opportunity to serve the Son of Heaven?

古文：特以边人不知法耳，赖将军教之；此将军之惠，奴之幸也。 
现代文：只是因为边远地区的人不知道法度，全靠将军教诲我们了，将军的恩惠，是我的幸运。 
English: Just because people in remote areas do not know the law, it is entirely up to the general to teach us. The general's favor is my good fortune.

古文：遂拔所佩刀，自芟庭草。
现代文：于是拔出佩刀，亲自删除牙帐中的草。
English: So he pulled out his saber and personally removed the grass from the braces.

古文：其贵人及诸部争效之。
现代文：启民部族的显贵和其他部族的人都争相仿效启民可汗。
English: Prominent members of the Qimin tribe and people from other tribes are all vying to emulate the Qimin khan.

古文：于是发榆林北境，至其牙，东达于蓟，长三千里，广百步，举国就役，开为御道。
现代文：于是从榆林北境，到启民可汗的牙帐，向东到蓟，全体突厥人出动，开辟了一条长三千里、宽一百步的御道。
English: Therefore, from the northern border of Yulin, to the cusp of the Qimin Khan, and eastward to Kunlun, all the Turks set out and opened a three-thousand-mile-long, one-hundred-step-wide imperial road.

古文：帝闻晟策，益嘉之。
现代文：炀帝知道了长孙晟的策略，更加赞许他。
English: Emperor Yao learned of the eldest grandson Yao's strategy and praised him even more.

古文：丁酉，启民及义成公主来朝行宫。
现代文：丁酉，启民可汗和义成公主到炀帝的行宫来朝见。
English: Ding Xi, Qimin Khan and Princess Yicheng went to the imperial palace of Emperor Zhao to meet the emperor.

古文：己亥，吐谷浑、高昌并遣使入贡。
现代文：己亥，吐谷浑、高昌都派遣使者朝见、进贡。
English: Ji Hai, Tu Guhun and Gaochang all sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：甲辰，上御北楼观渔于河，以宴百僚。
现代文：甲辰，炀帝上北楼观看渔人在黄河中捕鱼，宴请百官。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Gao went to the North Tower to watch fishermen catch fish in the Yellow River and invited hundreds of officials to a banquet.

古文：定襄太守周法尚朝于行宫，太府卿元寿言于帝曰： 汉武出关，旌旗千里。今御营之外，请分为二十四军，日别遣一军发，相去三十里，旗帜相望，钲鼓相闻，首尾相属，千里不绝，此亦出师之盛者也。 
现代文：定襄太守周法尚到行宫觐见炀帝。太府卿元寿对炀帝说： 汉武帝出关，旌旗连绵千里，现在在御营外面，请把军队分为二十四军，每天派遣一军出发，相距三十里，旗帜相望，钲鼓相闻，首尾相连，千里不绝。这也是出师的盛况。 
English: Dafuqing Yuan Shou said to Emperor Xian: Emperor Hanwu has left the imperial palace, and the flags are flying for thousands of miles. Now they are outside the imperial camp. Please divide the army into 24 armies, and send one army out every day. They are 30 miles apart. The flags are facing each other, the drums are beating, and they are connected end-to-end, thousands of miles apart. This is also the grand occasion of the departure of the division.

古文：法尚曰： 不然，兵亘千里，动间山川，猝有不虞，四分五裂；腹心有事，首尾未知，道路阻长，难以相救，虽有故事，乃取败之道也。 帝不怿，曰： 卿意如何？ 
现代文：周法尚说： 这样不行。军队连绵千里，常有山川的隔阻，突然遇到不测，队伍就会四分五裂。若中央有事，则首尾不知道，况且道路险阻漫长，难以相救。虽然有汉武帝出关兵连千里的故事，但这是招致失败的办法。 炀帝听了不高兴，说： 你的意思如何？ 
English: Zhou Fashang said: "This is not possible. The army stretches for thousands of miles, often with mountain and river obstacles, and if something unexpected happens, the team will be torn apart. If there is something in the center, it is not known from beginning to end, and the road is long and difficult to rescue. Although there is a story of Emperor Hanwu sending a thousand miles of soldiers, this is a way to cause failure. Emperor Xuan was not happy to hear this and said: What do you mean?

古文：法尚曰： 结为方陈，四面外拒，六宫及百官家属并在其内；若有变起，所当之面，即令抗拒，内引奇兵，出外奋击，车为壁垒，重设钩陈，此与据城，理亦何异！
现代文：周法尚说： 将军队列成方阵，四面向外防御，六宫及百官家属都在方阵内，倘若发生变故，就命令受敌的方面抵抗，并从阵内派奇兵，仲出阵外奋力攻击，以车子作壁垒，再设曲形钩阵，这与据守城池的战术原理没有什么不同。
English: Zhou Fashang said: Put the army into a square formation, with four sides facing outward for defense, and the six palaces and the families of the hundred officials are all in the square formation. If there is a change of fortune, order the enemy side to resist, and send special soldiers from within the formation, fight outside the formation, use cars as barriers, and then set up a curved hook formation. This is no different from the tactical principle of defending the castle.

古文：若战而捷，抽骑追奔，万一不捷，屯营自守，臣谓此万全之策也。 帝曰： 善！ 
现代文：假若交战得胜，就调派骑兵追击，万一不胜，可以屯营自守，我认为这是万全之策。 炀帝说： 好！ 
English: If the battle is won, then the cavalry will be dispatched to pursue the enemy. If the battle is not won, they can camp and defend themselves. I think this is a perfect solution. Emperor Xuan said: Good!

古文：因拜法尚左武卫将军。
现代文：于是就任命周法尚为左武卫将军。
English: Therefore, he appointed Zhou Fashang as General Zuo Wuwei.

古文：启民可汗复上表，以为 先帝可汗怜臣，赐臣安义公主，种种无乏。
现代文：启民可汗又上表，以为 先帝可汗可怜我，将安义公主嫁给我，所应用的东西都不匮乏。
English: Qimin Khan is on the watch again, thinking that the previous emperor Khan took pity on me and married Princess Anyi to me. There is no shortage of things to use.

古文：臣兄弟嫉妒，共欲杀臣。
现代文：我的兄弟们嫉妒，都要杀我。
English: My brothers are jealous and want to kill me.

古文：臣当是时，走无所适，仰视唯天，俯视唯地，奉身委命，依归先帝。
现代文：我当时是走投无路，抬头只有天，低头只有地，将身家性命都托附给先帝。
English: At that time, I was at the end of my rope, with only the sky to look up and only the ground to look down, entrusting my family and life to the former emperor.

古文：先帝怜臣且死，养而生之，以臣为大可汗，还抚突厥之民。
现代文：先帝怜惜我将死，养护我使我又活下来，让我作了大可汗，还安抚了突厥的百姓。
English: The former emperor took pity on me and allowed me to die. He kept me alive, made me the Great Khan, and pacified the Turkic people.

古文：至尊今御天下，还如先帝养生臣及突厥之民，种种无乏。
现代文：如今陛下治理天下，仍和先帝一样养护我和突厥的百姓，使我们什么也不缺乏。
English: Today, His Majesty governs the world, and still protects me and the Turkish people, just like the former emperor, so that we lack nothing.

古文：臣荷戴圣恩，言不能尽。
现代文：我身受圣恩，感恩的话说不尽。
English: I am blessed beyond words.

古文：臣今非昔日突厥可汗，乃是至尊臣民，愿帅部落变改衣服，一如华夏。 
现代文：我现在已不是过去的突厥可汗，而是陛下的臣民，我愿意率领部落百姓改装易服，同华夏一样。 
English: I am now no longer the Turkic khan of the past, but a subject of His Majesty. I am willing to lead the tribal people to modify their clothing, just like Huaxia.

古文：帝以为不可。
现代文：炀帝认为不可以。
English: Emperor Xian did not think it was appropriate.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥，赐启民玺书，谕以 碛北未静，犹须征战，但存心恭顺，何必变服？ 
现代文：秋季，七月，辛亥，炀帝赐给启民可汗玺书，说由于 漠北并未平静，还须要征战，只要你们存心恭顺朝廷，何必变易服装呢？ 
English: In the autumn, July, Xinhai, Emperor Qian gave the Khanshan letter to the Qin people, saying that because the north of the desert was not calm, it was still necessary to go to war. As long as you are willing to obey the court, why do you have to change clothes?

古文：帝欲夸示突厥，令宇文恺为大帐，其下可坐数千人；甲寅，帝于城东御大帐，备仪卫，宴启民及其部落，作散乐。
现代文：炀帝想要向突厥人炫耀，他命令宇文恺制作大帐，帐内可坐几千人。甲寅，炀帝来到设于城东的大帐，备好仪仗侍卫，宴请启民可汗及其部属，宴间演出散乐。
English: Emperor Gao wanted to show off to the Turks, so he ordered Uwenqiu to make a grand table, which could seat several thousand people. Emperor Gao came to the grand table, which was located in the east of the city, prepared a ceremonial guard, invited the Qimin Khan and his subordinates to the banquet, and performed folk music during the banquet.

古文：诸胡骇悦，争献牛羊驼马数千万头。
现代文：各方部落的胡人都惊异欢悦，争着进献牛羊驼马几千万头。
English: The Hu people of all tribes were surprised and delighted, competing for tens of millions of cattle, sheep, camels and horses.

古文：帝赐启民帛二千万段，其下各有差。
现代文：炀帝赐给启民可汗帛二千万段，启民的部属按等级都有不同的赏赐。
English: Emperor Qian gave 20 million dan to the Qimin Khan, and the subordinates of the Qimin had different rewards according to their ranks.

古文：又赐启民路车乘马，鼓欢幡旗，赞拜不名，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：炀帝又赐给启民可汗辂车与坐骑，鼓乐幡旗等仪仗，特许他朝拜时不必唱名，其地位在诸侯王以上。
English: Emperor Qian also gave the Qimin Khan a chariot and a horse, a drum, a banner and other ceremonial objects, and specially allowed him not to have to chant his name when he worshiped. His status was higher than that of the princes.

古文：又诏发丁男百馀万筑长城，西拒榆林，东至紫河。
现代文：炀帝又下诏征发男丁一百余万人修筑长城，西起榆林，东至紫河。
English: Emperor Qian also issued an edict to conscript more than one million men to build the Great Wall, stretching from Yulin in the west to Zihe in the east.

古文：尚书左仆射苏威谏，帝不听，筑之二旬而毕。
现代文：尚书左仆射苏威劝阻，炀帝不听，修筑了二十天完工。
English: Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Jie Suwei, tried to dissuade him, but Emperor Qian did not listen, and the construction took twenty days to complete.

古文：帝之征散乐也，太常卿高颎谏，不听。
现代文：炀帝征召全国的散乐艺人，太常卿高劝阻，炀帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan summoned all the country's Hanzhong artists, but Emperor Xuan did not listen, as he was dissuaded by Emperor Taizong.

古文：颎退，谓太常丞李懿曰： 周天元以好乐而亡，殷鉴不远，安可复尔！ 
现代文：高退下来对太常丞李懿说： 北周天元帝因为好乐而亡国，殷鉴并不远，怎么可以再重复呢？ 
English: Gao stepped back and said to Taizhongzheng Lijun: Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan lost his country because of pleasure, Yin Jian is not far away, how can it be repeated?

古文：颎又以帝遇启民过厚，谓太府卿何稠曰： 此虏颇知中国虚实，山川险易，恐为后患。 
现代文：高又认为炀帝对启民可汗的待遇过厚，对太府卿何稠说： 这个胡虏很清楚中国的虚实，山川的险易，恐怕会成为后患。 
English: Gao also thought that Emperor Gong's treatment of the Qimin Khan was too generous, and said to the Grand Mufti He Chuxu: This Khurki is well aware of the truth and falsity of China, and the dangers of mountains and rivers, and I am afraid that he will become a hindrance.

古文：又谓观王雄曰： 近来朝廷殊无纲纪。 
现代文：他又对观王杨雄说： 近来朝廷太无纲纪了。 
English: He also said to Guan Wang Yangxiong: Recently, the imperial court is too undisciplined.

古文：礼部尚书宇文弼私谓颎曰： 天元之侈，以今方之，不亦甚乎？ 
现代文：礼部尚书宇文私下对高说： 周天元的奢侈，以今天的情况与之比较，也不算太过分吧？ 
English: Shangshu Yuwen, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, privately said to Gao: Zhou Tianyuan's extravagance, compared to today's situation, is not too excessive, is it?

古文：又言： 长城之役，幸非急务。 
现代文：又说： 修长城的工程，幸而不是急迫的任务。 
English: He also said: The project of repairing the Great Wall is not an urgent task, fortunately.

古文：光禄大夫贺若弼亦私议宴可汗太侈。
现代文：光禄大夫贺若弼也私下议论宴请启民可汗的规模太奢侈。
English: He Ruoqian, the doctor of Guanglu, also privately discussed the extravagant scale of the banquet for the Qimin Khan.

古文：并为人所奏。
现代文：这些话都被人报告了炀帝。
English: All of this was reported to Emperor Xizong.

古文：帝以为诽谤朝政，丙子，高颎、宇文弼、贺若弼皆坐诛，颎诸子徙边，弼妻子没官为奴婢。
现代文：炀帝认为他们诽谤朝政。丙子，高、宇文、贺若弼都获罪被杀。高的几个儿子流放到边地；贺若弼的妻子儿女被没收为官奴婢。
English: Emperor Qian believed that they were slandering the imperial government. Cunzi, Gao, Uwen, and He Ruoqi were all convicted and killed. Several of Gao's sons were exiled to outlying areas; He Ruoqi's wife and children were confiscated as official slaves.

古文：事连苏威，亦坐免官。
现代文：事情还牵连到苏威，也获罪而被免官。
English: The matter also implicated Su Wei, who was also convicted and removed from office.

古文：颎有文武大略，明达世务，自蒙寄任，竭诚尽节，进引贞良，以天下为己任；苏威、杨素、贺若弼、韩擒虎皆颎所推荐，自馀立功立事者不可胜数；当朝执政将二十年，朝野推服，物无异议，海内富庶，颎之力也。
现代文：高有文韬武略，对世务贤明，通达事理，自从蒙受重任以来，竭诚尽力，推荐引进忠诚贤良之士，以天下为已任。苏威、杨素、贺若弼、韩擒虎都是高推荐的，其他建有功劳做成大事的人更不可胜数。他当朝执政将近二十年，朝野上下都非常敬重他，对他无异议。国家富庶，是高的努力。
English: Gao was well-educated and well-versed in military affairs, he was wise in worldly affairs, and he was well-versed in matters of reason. Since he was given the important task, he made every effort to recommend the introduction of loyal and virtuous people, and he was appointed to the world. Su Wei, Yang Su, He Ruoqi, and Han Xinghu are all highly recommended, and other people who have made great achievements are even more numerous. He was in power for nearly 20 years, and the court and the country respected him very much, and there was no objection to him. The country's prosperity is a great effort.

古文：及死，天下莫不伤之。
现代文：他被杀，天下人没有不伤感的。
English: When he was killed, the whole world was saddened.

古文：先是，萧琮以皇后故，甚见亲重，为内史令，改封梁公，宗族缌麻以上，皆随才擢用，诸萧昆弟，布列朝廷。
现代文：原先，萧琮因为皇后萧氏的缘故，很为炀帝亲近推重，任命为内史令，后改封为梁公。萧琮宗族中的涉及服丧缌麻三月的人，都按才能提拔任用了，萧琮的几个兄弟，都在朝廷作官。
English: Originally, because of the Queen Xiao, Xiao Yao was very close to Emperor Gong and was appointed as the Inner Historian, and later changed his title to Liang Gong. People in Xiao Yao's family who were involved in the funeral of Nettle March were promoted and appointed according to their talents. Several of Xiao Yao's brothers worked as officials in the imperial court.

古文：琮性澹雅，不以职务为意，身虽羁旅，见北间豪贵，无所降下。
现代文：萧琮性情恬淡儒雅，不把职务放在心上，虽然客居他乡，但对北方的豪强贵族，都没有看得崐上的。
English: Xiao Yao's temperament is light and elegant, and he does not care about his duties. Although he lives in a foreign country, he does not think highly of the powerful aristocrats in the north.

古文：与贺若弼善，弼既诛，又有童谣曰： 萧萧亦复起。 
现代文：他与贺若弼有交情，贺若弼被杀，又有童谣说： 萧萧亦复起。 
English: He had a friendship with He Ruoqian, He Ruoqian was killed, and there is a nursery rhyme that says: Xiao Xiao also revived.

古文：帝由是忌之，遂废于家，未几而卒。
现代文：炀帝因此对他猜忌，就将他罢官回家，不久他就去世了。
English: Emperor Xuan was suspicious of him, so he dismissed him and sent him home, where he died soon after.

古文：八月，壬午，车驾发榆林，历云中，溯金河。
现代文：八月，壬午，炀帝的车驾从榆林出发，经过云中，溯金河而上。
English: In August, at noon, Emperor Gong's chariot set out from Yulin, passed through the clouds, and ascended the Jinhe River.

古文：时天下承平，百物丰实，甲士五十馀万，马十万匹，旌旗辎重，千里不绝。
现代文：当时天下承平，百物丰实，随驾的士兵有五十余万，马匹十万，旌旗辎重，千里不绝。
English: At that time, the world was at peace, all things were plentiful, there were more than half a million soldiers, one hundred thousand horses, and a lot of flags.

古文：令宇文恺等造观风行殿，上容侍卫者数百人，离合为之，下施轮轴，倏忽推移。
现代文：炀帝命令宇文恺等人制造观风行殿，殿上可容纳侍卫几百人，行殿可以离合，下设轮轴，可以很快地推移。
English: Emperor Qian ordered Uwen Zang and others to build a hall for observing the customs. The hall can accommodate hundreds of attendants and guards. The hall can be closed, and a wheel and axle can be set underneath so that it can move quickly.

古文：又作行城，周二千步，以板为干，衣之以布，饰以丹青，楼橹悉备。
现代文：又命宇文恺制作行城，行城周长二千步，以木板为主体，用布蒙上，再画上彩画，行城上观台、望敌楼全都齐备。
English: He also ordered Uwen Yao to make the parade route. The parade route has a circumference of two thousand paces, with wooden boards as the main body, covered with cloth, and then painted with color paintings. The parade route on the observation deck and the observation tower are all ready.

古文：胡人惊以为神，每望御营，十里之外，屈膝稽颡，无敢乘马。
现代文：胡人惊叹，以为神功，每望见御营，十里之外就跪伏叩头，没人敢骑马。
English: The Hu people were amazed, thinking it was a miracle. Whenever they saw the imperial camp, they would kneel and bow down ten miles away. No one dared to ride a horse.

古文：启民奉庐帐以俟车驾。
现代文：启民可汗奉献庐帐以等待炀帝的到来。
English: The Khans of the Qin Dynasty dedicated a bank account to await the arrival of the emperor.

古文：乙酉，帝幸其帐，启民奉觞上寿，跪伏恭甚，王侯以下袒割于帐前，莫敢仰视。
现代文：乙酉，炀帝驾临启民可汗的营帐，启民捧着酒杯为炀帝祝寿，跪伏在地上极为恭顺。突厥王侯以下的人都袒衣割肉立于帐前，不敢仰视。
English: At dusk, Emperor Zhao arrived at the tent of the Qimin Khan. The Qimin Khan held a wine cup to celebrate the birthday of Emperor Zhao, and knelt on the ground very obediently. People from the Turkic princes down stood in front of the tent, not daring to look up.

古文：帝大悦，赋诗曰： 呼韩顿颡至，屠耆接踵来；何如汉天子，空上单于台。 
现代文：炀帝非常高兴，赋诗道： 呼韩叩头至，屠耆接踵来，怎比汉天子，空上单于台！ 
English: Emperor Gao was very pleased, and wrote a poem: "Call Han to prostrate before you, and Tu Youyou will follow, how can Han Tianzi be alone on the stage in the sky!"

古文：皇后亦幸义成公主帐。
现代文：皇后萧氏也临幸义成公主的牙帐。
English: Empress Xiao is also the dental accountant of Princess Yicheng.

古文：帝赐启民及公主金甕各一，并衣服被褥锦彩，特勒以下，受赐各有差。
现代文：炀帝赐启民可汗和义成公主金瓮各一只，以及衣服、被褥、锦彩。特勒以下的人也受到不同等级的赏赐。
English: Emperor Qian gave each of Qimin Khan and Yicheng Princess a golden scepter, as well as clothes, bedding and ornaments. People below Teller were also rewarded at different levels.

古文：帝还，启民从入塞，己丑，遣归国。
现代文：炀帝回返，启民可汗随从炀帝入塞。乙丑，炀帝让启民可汗回国。
English: Emperor Xuan returned, and Qimin Khan followed Emperor Xuan into Tibet. Second, Emperor Xuan let Qimin Khan return to China.

古文：癸巳，入楼烦关；壬寅，至太原，诏营晋阳宫。
现代文：癸巳，炀帝进入楼烦关；壬寅，到达太原，下诏营建晋阳宫。
English: At this time, Emperor Xizong entered the building troubles; Emperor Ren, arrived in Taiyuan, issued an edict to build the Jinyang Palace.

古文：帝谓御史大夫张衡曰： 朕欲过公宅，可为朕作主人。 
现代文：炀帝对御史大夫张衡说： 我打算经过你的家，你可以为我作主人。 
English: "I'm going to pass by your house, you can be my host," Emperor Zou said to the chief historian Zhang Heng.

古文：衡乃先驰至河内，具牛酒。
现代文：张衡就先驰马到河内，准备牛和酒等物品。
English: Zhang Heng first rode to Hanoi to prepare cattle, wine and other goods.

古文：帝上太行，开直道九十里，九月，己未，至济源，幸衡宅。
现代文：炀帝上太行山，命开辟直达张衡家的道路九十里。九月，己未，炀帝到达济源，驾临张衡宅邸。
English: Emperor Gao ascended Mount Taihang and set out on a ninety-mile journey to Zhang Heng's home. In September, Emperor Gao arrived in Jiyuan and visited Zhang Heng's residence.

古文：帝悦其山泉，留宴三日，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：炀帝喜欢这里的山泉，留下来欢宴三天，赏赐的财物非常丰厚。
English: Emperor Qian loved the mountain spring here. He stayed to feast for three days and was rewarded with very rich possessions.

古文：衡复献食，帝令颁赐公卿，下至卫士，无不沾洽。
现代文：张衡又进献食物，炀帝让赏赐给公卿大臣以至于卫士，人人都得到了赏赐。
English: Zhang Heng also donated food, and Emperor Xizang gave rewards to nobles and ministers as well as guards, and everyone received rewards.

古文：己巳，至东都。
现代文：己巳，炀帝到达东都。
English: Suddenly, Emperor Xizong arrived in Dongdu.

古文：壬申，以齐王暕为河南尹；癸酉，以民部尚书杨文思为纳言。
现代文：壬申，炀帝任命齐王杨为河南尹；癸酉，任命民部尚书杨文思为纳言。
English: In Jinshin, Emperor Qin appointed Qi Wang Yang as Henan Yin; in Qi, appointed the Ministry of Civil Affairs Shangshu Yang Wensi as Nagan.

古文：冬，十月，敕河北诸郡送一艺户陪东都三千馀家，置十二坊于洛水南以处之。
现代文：冬季，十月，敕命河南各郡送一艺户到东京来辅助原有的三千余家艺户，在洛水以南设置十二坊来安置他们。
English: In the winter, in October, the counties of Henan sent one artist to Tokyo to supplement the original more than three thousand artists, and set up twelve villages south of Luoshui to accommodate them.

古文：西域诸胡多至张掖交市，帝使吏部侍郎裴矩掌之。
现代文：西域诸多胡人都到张掖做买卖。炀帝派吏部侍郎裴矩掌管这件事。
English: Many Hu people from the western region came to Zhangye to do business, and Emperor Gao sent the steward of the general staff, Pei Neng, to take charge of the matter.

古文：矩知帝好远略，诸商胡至者，矩诱访诸国山川风俗，王及庶人仪形服饰，撰《西域图记》三卷，合四十四国，入朝奏之。
现代文：裴崐矩知道炀帝喜好远征，做买卖的胡人来了，裴矩就探询各国的山川地理和风俗，国王以及百姓的风土人情，服饰仪表，撰写了《西域图记》三卷，共四十四国，入朝奏报给炀帝。
English: Knowing that Emperor Xizong liked to go on expeditions and that the Hu people, who did business, were coming, Pei Xizong inquired about the mountain and river geography and customs of various countries, the customs and manners of kings and people, and clothing and utensils. He wrote three volumes of "Westland Atlas," a total of forty-four countries, and reported to Emperor Xizong.

古文：仍别造地图，穷其要害，从西倾以去，纵横所亘，将二万里，发自敦煌，至于西海，凡为三道，北道从伊吾，中道从高昌，南道从鄯善，总凑敦煌。
现代文：另外还制作了西域地图，上面包括了西域所有重要的地点，从西倾山开始，纵横连亘将近二万里。从敦煌出发，到达西海，共分为三条路：北路从伊吾起，中路从高昌起，南路从鄯善起，总汇到敦煌。
English: In addition, a map of the western region was made, which included all important locations in the western region, starting from Xiling Mountain and stretching for nearly twenty thousand miles in length and width. Starting from Dunhuang and reaching the West Sea, it is divided into three roads: the north road from Igu, the middle road from Gaochang, and the south road from Shanshan, and finally to Dunhuang.

古文：且云： 以国家威德，将士骁雄，泛濛汜而越昆仑，易如反掌。
现代文：裴矩还说： 凭借着国家的威德，将士的骁勇，渡过汜水，翻越昆仑山，易如反掌。
English: Pei also said, "By virtue of the country's virtue and the bravery of the soldiers, it is easy to cross Surabaya and Kunlun Mountains.

古文：但突厥、吐浑分领羌、胡之国，为其壅遏，故朝贡不通。
现代文：但是突厥、吐谷浑分别统辖着羌人、胡人的国家，因为他们的阻挡和抑制，所以西域之国不能来朝贡。
English: However, Turku and Tugu Hun ruled the states of the Huns and Hu respectively, and because of their obstruction and suppression, the countries of the western region could not pay tribute.

古文：今并因商人密送诚款，引领翘首，愿为臣妾。
现代文：如今由商人秘密送来很多诚恳的书信，翘道盼望，愿成为大隋的臣属。
English: Nowadays, many sincere letters have been secretly sent by merchants, hoping to become subjects of the Great Sui Dynasty.

古文：若服而抚之，务存安辑，皇华遣使，弗动兵车，诸蕃既从，浑、厥可灭，混壹戎、夏，其在兹乎！ 
现代文：倘若降服并占有他们，务必要认真安抚管理。只须由朝廷派出使者，不必动用干戈，诸蕃国从属于我们以后，吐谷浑、突厥就可以灭掉了。使戎狄、华夏融合为一体，就在此一举了！ 
English: If we surrender and occupy them, we must seriously pacify and administer them. It is only necessary for the imperial court to send an envoy, and there is no need to use armed force. After all the Han states have been subordinated to us, the Tujugun and Turks can be eliminated. Let the military and the Chinese be integrated into one, and that's it!

古文：帝大悦，赐帛五百段，日引矩至御坐，亲问西域事。
现代文：炀帝大为高兴，赐帛五百段，每日让裴矩到御坐旁，亲自询问西域的情况。
English: Emperor Qian was very pleased and gave him five hundred dan. He asked Pei Jian to sit next to him every day and personally inquire about the situation in the western region.

古文：矩盛言 胡中多诸珍宝，吐谷浑易可并吞。 
现代文：裴矩夸张地说： 西域有很多珍宝，吐谷浑容易被吞并。 
English: Pei Jian exaggeratedly said: There are many treasures in the western region, and Tuyugun is easy to be annexed.

古文：帝于是慨然慕秦皇、汉武之功，甘心将通西域；四夷经略，咸以委之。
现代文：炀帝于是感慨地仰慕秦皇、汉武的功绩，诚心要开通西域。将筹划处理四夷的事务都委托给了裴矩。
English: Emperor Yao then admired the achievements of the Qin and Han emperors with emotion, and sincerely wanted to open up the western region. He entrusted the planning and handling of the affairs of Shiyi to Pei Mom.

古文：以矩为黄门侍郎，复使至张掖，引致诸胡，啗之以利，劝令入朝。
现代文：任命裴矩为黄门侍郎，又派裴矩到张掖，招引西域各国的胡人，给他们利益，劝告他们入朝。
English: He appointed Pei Jian as Huangmen waiter, and sent Pei Jian to Zhangye to attract Hu people from various countries in the western region, give them benefits, and advise them to enter the imperial court.

古文：自是西域诸胡往来相继，所经郡县，疲于送迎，糜费以万万计，卒令中国疲弊以至于亡，皆矩之唱导也。
现代文：从此西域的胡人往来不断，他们所经过的郡县，疲于招待迎送，耗费以万万计，终于使隋王朝疲乏凋敝至于灭亡，这都是裴矩所倡导的。
English: From then on, the Hu people in the western region kept coming and going. The counties and counties they passed through were tired of inviting and welcoming, and spent tens of thousands of dollars. Finally, the Sui Dynasty was exhausted and withered to death. This was all advocated by Pei Mom.

古文：铁勒寇边，帝遣将军冯孝慈出敦煌击之，不利。
现代文：铁勒入侵边界，炀帝派将军冯孝慈率军出敦煌阻击铁勒，出师不利。
English: When Tiele invaded the border, Emperor Qian sent General Feng Xiao Ci and his army to Dunhuang to block Tiele. The dispatch of the army was unfavorable.

古文：铁勒寻遣使谢罪，请降；帝使裴矩慰抚之。
现代文：不久铁勒人派遣使者来谢罪，请求归降，炀帝派裴矩安抚慰籍他们。
English: Not long after, the Tiele people sent an envoy to thank them for their sins and ask them to surrender, and Emperor Zhao sent Pei Jiao to appease and comfort them.

