古文：○太祖二三年春正月癸酉朔，以出师，不御殿。
现代文：乾德三年春正月初一，因为军队出征太祖不上殿听政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Qiande Spring, because the army was sent out, the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to listen to politics.

古文：甲戌，王全斌克剑门，斩首万余级，禽蜀枢密使王昭远、泽州节度赵崇韬。
现代文：初二，王全斌攻克剑门，杀死后蜀军一万多人，擒获后蜀枢密使王昭远、泽州节度使赵崇韬。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Wang Quanbin conquered Jianmen, killed more than ten thousand of the post-Shu army, captured the post-Shu confidential envoy Wang Zhaoyuan, and the Zhezhou Festival envoy Zhao Chongyi.

古文：乙亥，诏瘗征蜀战死士卒，被伤者给缯帛。
现代文：初三，太祖下诏埋葬出征后蜀战死的士兵，受伤的士兵赐给丝帛。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizong buried the soldiers who died in the battle of Shu after the expedition, and the wounded soldiers were given to the Silk Road.

古文：壬午，全斌取利州。
现代文：初十，王全斌攻取利州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Quanbin conquered Lishu.

古文：乙酉，蜀主孟昶降。得州四十五、县一百九十八、户五十三万四千三十有九。
现代文：十三日，后蜀皇帝孟昶投降，得到四十五个州、一百九十八个县、百姓五十三万四千零三十九户。
English: On the 13th day, Emperor Meng Rong of Later Shu surrendered and gained 45 prefectures, 198 counties, and 534,039 households.

古文：高丽国王遣使来朝献。
现代文：高丽国王派遣使臣来朝奉献礼品。
English: The King of Goryeo sent envoys to the DPRK to offer gifts.

古文：戊子，吏部郎中邓守中坐试吏不当，责本曹员外郎。
现代文：十六日，吏部郎中邓守中因考试吏员不当而获罪，贬为吏部员外郎。
English: On the 16th, Deng Shuzhong, a junior member of the administrative department, was found guilty of being an improper examination official and was demoted to a junior member of the administrative department.

古文：癸巳，刘光义取万、施、开、忠四州，遂州守臣陈愈降。
现代文：二十一日，刘光义攻取万、施、开、忠四个州，遂州守臣陈愈投降。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Guangyi captured the four provinces of Wan, Shi, Kai, and Zhong, and Suizhou's governor Chen Yu surrendered.

古文：乙未，诏抚西川将吏百姓。
现代文：二十三日，太祖下诏抚恤西川将士官吏百姓。
English: On the 23rd, the great-grandfather issued an edict to give a pension to Nishikawa's officers and people.

古文：丙申，赦蜀，归俘获，除管内逋赋，免夏税及沿征物色之半。
现代文：二十四日，赦免后蜀全境，虏获的牲口归还原来主人，免除原后蜀管辖地区内拖欠的赋税，免征一半夏税和沿纳征收物品。
English: On the 24th, the entire territory of Houxu was pardoned, the captured animals were returned to the original owners, the tax arrears in the original area under the jurisdiction of Houxu were exempted, and half of the summer tax was exempted.

古文：二月癸卯，南唐、吴越进长春节御衣、金银器、锦绮以千计。
现代文：二月初二，南唐、吴越进贡长春节御衣、金银器皿、锦绮一千多件。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, more than a thousand pieces of imperial robes, gold and silverware, and brocades were donated by Southern Tang and Wu Yue for the Spring Festival.

古文：甲辰，遣皇城使窦思俨迎劳孟昶。
现代文：初三，派遣皇城使窦思俨迎接慰问孟昶。
English: On the third day of the first month, the imperial city dispatched Dou Siyu to meet Meng Yu for condolences.

古文：丁未，全州大水。
现代文：初六，全州发大水。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the whole state was flooded.

古文：庚申，王全斌杀蜀降兵二万七千人于成都。
现代文：十九日，王全斌在成都杀死后蜀投降的士兵二万七千人。
English: On the 19th, Wang Quanbin in Chengdu killed 27,000 soldiers who surrendered after Shu.

古文：三月癸酉，诏置义仓。
现代文：三月初二，太祖下诏设置义仓。
English: On the second day of the third month, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to establish yakura.

古文：是月，两川贼群起，先锋都指挥使高彦晖死之，诏所在攻讨。
现代文：这个月，西川地区盗贼群起，先锋都指挥使高彦晖被盗贼杀死，太祖下诏所在地区攻击讨伐盗贼。
English: This month, thieves swarmed in the Nishikawa area, and the vanguard commanded that Takahikoma be killed by the thieves, and attacked and fought the thieves in the area where Taizu was located.

古文：夏四月乙巳，回鹘遣使献方物。
现代文：夏四月初五，回鹊派遣使臣进献当地土产。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of summer, Huizhou sent envoys to present local products.

古文：癸丑，职方员外郎李岳坐赃弃市。
现代文：十三日，职方员外郎李岳因贪赃罪在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 13th, Li Yue, the son-in-law of a staff member, was beheaded in public for the crime of corruption.

古文：南唐进贺收蜀银绢以万计。
现代文：南唐进献祝贺收复蜀地的银绢以万计。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty's offering of congratulations on the recovery of the silver ingots from Shu is the best in the world.

古文：戊午，遣中使给蜀臣鞍马、车乘于江陵。
现代文：十八日，太祖派遣中使在江陵赐给后蜀官员鞍马、车辆。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to present post-Shu officials with horses and vehicles in Gangneung.

古文：癸亥，募诸军子弟导五丈河，通皇城为池。
现代文：癸亥日，招募各军子弟疏导五丈河，河水贯通皇城流人内庭池塘。
English: On April Fool's Day, he recruited soldiers from all over the country to divert the waters of the Gojo River, which flowed through the inner courtyard pond of the Imperial Palace.

古文：五月辛未朔，诏还诸道幕职、令录经引对者，以涉途远近，差减其选。
现代文：五月初一，太祖诏令放还各道幕职、令录已经引人问对过的官员，根据离京路程的远近，差等减少选限。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Taizu issued an order to return all provincial officials to their posts, and officials who had been interrogated according to the order were released. According to the distance from Beijing, the selection limit was reduced.

古文：壬申，幸迎春苑宴射。
现代文：初二，太祖到迎春苑设宴射箭。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Taizu held an archery banquet at Yingchun Yuan.

古文：乙亥，遣开封尹光义劳孟昶于玉津园。
现代文：初五，派遣开封尹赵光义在玉津园慰劳孟昶。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yin Zhao Guangyi was dispatched from Kaifeng to comfort Meng Rong at the Jade Garden.

古文：丙戌，见孟昶于崇元殿，宴昶等于大明殿。
现代文：十六日，太祖在崇元殿接见孟昶昶，在大明殿宴请孟昶等人。
English: On the 16th, Taizu received Meng Xi in the Chongyuan Hall, and invited Meng Xi and others to a banquet in the Daming Hall.

古文：丁亥，赐将士衣服钱帛。
现代文：十七日，太祖赐给将士衣服钱帛。
English: On the seventeenth day, the great-grandfather gave the soldiers clothes and money.

古文：戊子，大赦，减死罪一等。
现代文：十八日，大赦天下，死罪囚犯减刑一等。
English: On the 18th, the world was amnestied, and death-row prisoners had their sentences reduced by one class.

古文：壬辰，宴孟昶及其子弟于大明殿。
现代文：二十三日，在大明殿宴请孟昶以及他的子弟。
English: On the 23rd, Meng Xi and his son were invited to a banquet at the Great Ming Palace.

古文：六月甲辰，以孟昶为中书令、秦国公，昶子弟诸臣锡爵有差。
现代文：六月初五，任命孟昶为中书令、秦国公，赐给孟昶的子弟及臣僚不等的官爵。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Meng Xi was appointed the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee and the Grand Duke of Qin, and various titles and ranks were given to Meng Xi's sons and ministers.

古文：庚戌，孟昶薨。
现代文：十一日，孟昶逝世。
English: On the 11th day, Meng Yao passed away.

古文：秋七月，珍州刺史田景迁内附。
现代文：秋七月，珍州刺史田景迁归附宋朝。
English: In the autumn and July, Zhenzhou Jishi Tianjing Qianqian was annexed by the Song Dynasty.

古文：壬辰，追封孟昶为楚王。
现代文：二十四日，追封孟昶为楚王。
English: On the 24th, Meng Jian was posthumously crowned King of Chu.

古文：丁酉，幸教船池，遂幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：二十九日，太祖到教船池，于是又到玉津园设宴。
English: On the 29th, the great-grandfather went to the teaching boat pond, and then went to the Yuzu Garden to hold a banquet.

古文：八月戊戌朔，诏籍郡国骁勇兵送阙下。
现代文：八月初一，太祖下诏登记州郡中晓勇的士兵并把他们送到京师。
English: On the first day of August, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to register Xiaoyong's soldiers in Shuzhong County and send them to the Beijing Division.

古文：癸卯，河决阳武县。
现代文：初六，黄河在阳武县决口。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Yellow River bursts its banks in Yangwu County.

古文：庚戌，诏王全斌等廪蜀亡命兵士家。
现代文：十三日，太祖诏令王全斌等人发粮食给后蜀逃亡士兵家庭。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Taizu ordered Wang Quanbin and others to distribute grain to the families of the soldiers who had fled to Honshu.

古文：乙卯，河溢河阳，坏民居。
现代文：十八日，黄河在河阳溢出河道，毁坏百姓房屋。
English: On the 18th, the Yellow River overflowed its course in Heyang, destroying people's houses.

古文：戊午，殿直成德钧坐赃弃市。
现代文：二十一日，殿直成德钧因贪赃受贿在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the twenty-first day, Tenshinari Decheng was beheaded in the city for corruption and bribery.

古文：己未，郓州河水溢，没田。
现代文：二十二日，黄河在邪州溢出河道，淹没田地。
English: On the 22nd, the Yellow River overflowed its course in Yazhou and flooded the fields.

古文：辛酉，寿星见。
现代文：二十四日，寿星出现。
English: On the 24th, the birthday star appeared.

古文：九月己巳，阅诸道兵，以骑军为骁雄，步军为雄武，并隶亲军。
现代文：九月初二，太祖检阅各个道的军队，把骑兵编为晓雄军，步兵编为雄武军，全部隶属侍卫亲军。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Emperor Taizu inspected the troops of various provinces, and organized the cavalry into the Xiao Xiong Army and the infantry into the Xiong Wu Army, all of which were subordinate to the personal guards.

古文：壬申，诏蜀诸郡各置克宁军五百人。
现代文：初五，诏令蜀地各州郡各自建立五百人的克宁军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor ordered the states and counties of Shu to each establish a 500-man kenin army.

古文：辛巳，河决澶州。
现代文：十四日，黄河在擅州决口。
English: On the 14th, the Yellow River broke through the Gongzhou Pass.

古文：戊子，幸西水硙。
现代文：二十一日，太祖到西水视察。
English: On the twenty-first day, the great-grandfather went to Xishui to inspect.

古文：十月丁酉朔，大雾。
现代文：十月初一，大雾。
English: On the first day of October, there was heavy fog.

古文：己未，太子中舍王治坐受赃杀人，弃市。
现代文：二十三日，太子中舍王治因接受贿赂杀人，在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Chuseok Wangzhi was publicly beheaded in the city for accepting bribes to commit murder.

古文：丙寅，济水溢邹平。
现代文：三十日，济水在邹平溢出河道。
English: On the 30th, water overflowed the river in Suiping.

古文：十一月丙子，甘州回鹘可汗遣僧献佛牙、宝器。
现代文：十一月初十，甘州回鹊可汗派遣和尚进献佛牙、宝器。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, the Khan of Gansu Province sent a monk to offer Buddha's tooth and treasure.

古文：乙未，剑州刺史张仁谦坐杀降，贬宋州教练。
现代文：二十九日，剑州刺史张仁谦因杀死投降的人而获罪，贬为宋州教练。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Renqian, an assassin from Jianzhou, was found guilty of killing a person who had surrendered, and was demoted to the rank of Songzhou coach.

古文：十二月丁酉朔，诏妇为舅姑丧者齐、斩。
现代文：十二月初一，太祖下诏已嫁女子在舅父、姑母去世时穿用粗麻布做成的缉边缝齐的丧服、粗麻布做成的左右和下边不缝的丧服。
English: On the first day of December, the great-grandfather decreed that the married woman should wear a mourning dress made of coarse linen with the edges sewn together, and a mourning dress made of coarse linen with no seams on the left and right sides and the bottom when her uncle and aunt died.

古文：己亥，诏西川管内监军、巡检毋预州县事。
现代文：初三，太祖下诏西川管辖区内的监军、巡检不得干预州县事务。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizu decreed that the supervising troops and patrols within the jurisdiction of Xichuan should not interfere in state and county affairs.

古文：戊午，甘州回鹘可汗、于阗国王等遣使来朝，进马千匹、橐驼五百头、玉五百围、琥珀五百斤。
现代文：二十二日，甘州回鹊可汗、于闻国王等派遣使臣来朝拜，进贡一千匹马、五百头骆驼、五百团玉、五百斤琉泊。
English: On the 22nd, the Uighur Khan of Gansu, King Yuwen, and others sent envoys to pay homage, bringing a tribute of one thousand horses, five hundred camels, five hundred trinkets, and five hundred jin of Ryukyuan silver.

古文：四年春正月丙子，遣使分诣江陵、凤翔，赐蜀群臣家钱帛。
现代文：乾德四年春正月初十，太祖派遣使臣分赴江陵、凤翔，赐给后蜀官员家庭钱帛。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the fourth year of the Qiande Spring, the great-grandfather sent envoys to Jiangling and Fengxiang, and gave money to the families of the officials of the later Shu.

古文：丁亥，命丁德裕等率兵巡抚西川。
现代文：二十一日，命令丁德裕等人率领军队巡行安抚西川。
English: On the 21st, he ordered Ding Deyu and others to lead an army patrol to pacify Saikawa.

古文：己丑，幸迎春苑宴射。
现代文：二十三日，太祖到迎春苑设宴射箭。
English: On the 23rd, Taizu held an archery banquet at Yingchun Yuan.

古文：二月癸卯，视皇城役。
现代文：二月初八，太祖视察皇城工程。
English: On the eighth day of the second month, Taizu inspected the construction of the Imperial City.

古文：丙辰，于阗国王遣其子德从来献。
现代文：二十一日，于闻国王派遣他的儿子李德从来进贡。
English: On the 21st, King Yuwen sent his son, Li De, to collect the tribute.

古文：安国军节度使罗彦瑰等败北汉于静阳，擒其将鹿英。
现代文：安国军节度使罗彦等部在静阳打败北汉军队，擒获北汉将领鹿英。
English: The festival of the An Guo Army enabled Luo Yan and other units to defeat the Northern Han Army in Jingyang and capture the Northern Han general Lu Ying.

古文：辛酉，试下第举人。
现代文：二十六日，考试落榜的举人。
English: On the 26th, the names of those who failed the exam were announced.

古文：甲子，免西川今年夏税及诸征之半，田不得耕者尽除之。
现代文：二十九日，免征西川今年的夏税以及各种应征物品的一半，田地未能得到耕种的全部免征。
English: On the 29th, half of this year's summer tax and various items subject to levy were exempted from Saikawa. Fields were not fully exempted from cultivation.

古文：岳州火。
现代文：岳州发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Yuezhou.

古文：三月癸酉，罢义仓。
现代文：三月初八，废除义仓。
English: On March 8th, the yakura was abolished.

古文：甲戌，占城国遣使来献。
现代文：初九，占城国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the state of Zhancheng sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：癸未，僧行勤等一百五十七人各赐钱三万，游西域。
现代文：十八日，僧行勤等一百五十七人，太祖赐给每人三万贯钱，去西域游历。
English: On the 18th day, one hundred and fifty-seven people, including the monk Xingqin, were given 30,000 yuan each by the great-grandfather to travel to the western region.

古文：夏四月丁酉，占城遣使来献。
现代文：夏四月初二，占城国派遣使臣来朝进贡。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the state of Zhancheng sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：丙午，潭州火。
现代文：十一日，潭州发生火灾。
English: On the 11th, a fire broke out in Tanzhou.

古文：壬子，罢光州贡鹰鹞。
现代文：十七日，停止光州进贡老鹰鹤子。
English: On the 17th, Gwangju stopped paying tribute to the eagle and crane.

古文：丁巳，契丹天德军节度使于延超与其子来降。
现代文：二十二日，契丹天德军节度使于延超和他的儿子来投降。
English: On the 22nd, the German army of Khitan Tian Jie Du forced Yu Yanchao and his son to surrender.

古文：进士李蔼坐毁释氏，辞不逊，黥杖，配沙门岛。
现代文：进士李蔼因低毁佛教获罪，说话又不谦虚恭敬，被刺面服杖刑，流放沙门岛。
English: Jin Shi Li Yan was found guilty of undermining Buddhism and speaking immodestly and respectfully. He was caned and exiled to Shamen Island.

古文：庚申，幸燕国长公主第视疾。
现代文：二十五日，太祖到燕国长公主府第看望她的病情。
English: On the 25th, the great-grandfather went to Princess Yan's residence to see how she was doing.

古文：五月，南唐贺文明殿成，进银万两。
现代文：五月，南唐祝贺文明殿建成，进贡一万两银子。
English: In May, the Southern Tang congratulated the Civilization Hall on its completion, and the tribute of ten thousand taels of silver was raised.

古文：甲戌，光禄少卿郭巳坐赃弃市。
现代文：初十，光禄少卿郭已因贪赃罪在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Guo, Guanglu Shaoqing, was beheaded in the city for corruption.

古文：乙亥，阅蜀法物、图书。
现代文：十一日，太祖观看后蜀皇帝仪仗队所用的器物、图书。
English: On the 11th day, the great-grandfather watched the objects and books used by the post-Shu Emperor's honor guard.

古文：丁丑，诏蜀郡敢有不省父母疾者罪之。
现代文：十三日，太祖下诏蜀郡敢有不探视父母疾病的人以犯罪论处。
English: On the 13th, people who did not visit their sick parents in Zhashu County were punished as criminals.

古文：辛巳，潭州火。
现代文：十七日，潭州发生火灾。
English: On the 17th, a fire broke out in Tanzhou.

古文：壬午，澶州进麦两歧至六歧者百六十五本。
现代文：十八日，擅州进贡有两处分粟至六处分粟的小麦一百六十五株。
English: On the 18th, 165 wheat plants with two to six parts of millet were donated to the state.

古文：辛卯，荧惑犯轩辕。
现代文：二十七日，火星侵犯轩辕星。
English: On the 27th, Mars encroached on Xuanwu Star.

古文：六月甲午，东阿河溢。
现代文：六月初一，黄河水在东阿溢出河道。
English: On the first day of June, the Yellow River overflowed its course in Dong'a.

古文：甲辰，河决观城。
现代文：十一日，黄河在观城决口。
English: On the 11th day, the Yellow River began to rise at the mouth of Guancheng.

古文：月犯心前星。
现代文：月亮侵犯心前星。
English: A monthly crime is a harbinger of the future.

古文：丙午，澧州刺史白全绍坐纵纪纲规财部内免官。
现代文：十三日，遭州刺史白全绍因破坏法纪在管辖区内聚敛财物，被免去官职。
English: On the 13th, Bai Quanshao was removed from his official position by the state for violating the law and accumulating wealth in the jurisdiction.

古文：诏人臣家不得私养宦者，内侍年三十以上方许养一子，士庶敢有阉童男者不赦。
现代文：太祖下诏：大臣们家中不得私自养阉人，年龄在三十岁以上的内侍允许收养一个儿子，官吏和百姓敢有阉割童男的人决不赦免罪行。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict: ministers were not allowed to privately raise eunuchs in their homes, servants over the age of thirty were allowed to adopt a son, and officials and commoners who dared to have a castrated male child would never be pardoned.

古文：己酉，果州贡禾，一茎十三穗。
现代文：十六日，果州进贡水稻，一株稻上有十三棵穗。
English: On the 16th, a tribute rice crop was planted in Gouzhou. There were 13 ears on one rice plant.

古文：秋七月丙寅，诏蜀官将吏及姻属疾者，所在给医药、钱帛。
现代文：秋七月初三，诏令：后蜀文武官吏以及他们的亲属有生病的人，所在地区的官府给他们医药钱帛。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the imperial edict was issued: After the civil and military officials of Shu and their relatives have people who are sick, the government office in their area will give them medicine money.

古文：戊辰，西南夷首领董暠等内附。
现代文：初五，西南夷首领董胡等人归附。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Dong Hu, the leader of the Southwest Yi, and others were annexed.

古文：己巳，幸造船务，又幸开封尹北园宴射。
现代文：初六，太祖到造船务，又到开封尹赵光义的北园设宴射箭。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the great-grandfather went to shipbuilding, and then went to the north garden of Kaifeng Yin Zhao Guangyi to set up a banquet for archery.

古文：癸酉，赐西川行营将士钱帛有差。
现代文：初十，赐给西川行营将士数量不等的钱帛。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month, the number of soldiers in the Nishikawa encampment was given varying amounts of money.

古文：庚辰，罢剑南蜀米麦征。
现代文：十七日，免去后蜀在剑南地区的米麦征敛。
English: On the 17th, after the removal of Shu, the collection of rice and wheat in the southern region of Jian was exempted.

古文：华州旱，免今年租。
现代文：华州早灾，免去华州今年的田租。
English: Due to the early disaster in Huazhou, this year's field rent in Huazhou is exempt.

古文：给州县官奉户。
现代文：给州县官员棒户。
English: To state and county officials, good luck.

古文：八月丁酉，诏除蜀倍息。
现代文：八月初五，太祖下诏免除蜀地加倍的利息。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Emperor Taizu issued an edict exempting Shu from the doubling of interest.

古文：庚子，水坏高苑县城。
现代文：初八，大水冲坏高苑县城。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, high water washed away the county seat of Gaoyuan.

古文：壬寅，诏宪臣及吏、刑部官三周岁满日，即转授加恩。
现代文：初十，太祖下诏御史以及吏部、刑部官员任满三周年时，就可以根据原任官职转官或加恩。
English: On the thirtieth day of the first month of the year, when the third anniversary of the appointment of officials of the Imperial Household Agency, the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Justice is over, they can be transferred or retired according to their original official position.

古文：庚戌，枢密直学士冯瓒、绫锦副使李美、殿中侍御史李檝为宰相赵普陷，以赃论死，会赦，流沙门岛，逢恩不还。
现代文：十八日，枢密直学士冯攒、绩锦副使李美、殿中侍御史李揖被宰相赵普陷害，以贪赃定为死罪，恰好大赦，被流放到沙门岛，逢到朝廷施恩时也不得回来。
English: On the 18th, the Privy Councilor Feng Ran, the Vice-Minister of Merit Li Mei, and the Palace Attendant Li Yao were framed by the Prime Minister Zhao Pu and sentenced to death for embezzlement. They were amnestied and exiled to Shamen Island. They were not allowed to return when they came to the imperial court for favors.

古文：辛亥，幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：十九日，太祖到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 19th, Taizu held a banquet and archery competition in the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：京兆府贡野蚕茧。
现代文：京兆府进贡野蚕茧。
English: The wild silkworm cocoons brought in from Keicho Prefecture.

古文：壬子，衡州火。
现代文：二十日，衡州火灾。
English: On the 20th, there was a fire in Hengzhou.

古文：乙卯，录囚。
现代文：二十三日，讯问记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On the 12th, the inspectors found the criminal's confession.

古文：丙辰，河决滑州，坏灵河大堤。
现代文：二十四日，黄河在滑州决口，冲坏灵河大堤。
English: On the 24th, the Yellow River burst its banks in the city of Leshou, breaching the Linghe Dam.

古文：普州兔食稼。
现代文：普州野兔吃庄稼。
English: Puzhou hares eat crops.

古文：闰月乙丑，河溢入南华县。
现代文：闰八月初四，黄河水溢出河道流人南华县。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th lunar month, the Yellow River overflowed and flooded Nanhua County.

古文：己巳，衡州火。
现代文：初八，衡州火灾。
English: In the eighth month of the year, there was a fire in Hengzhou.

古文：乙亥，诏：民能树艺、开垦者不加征，令、佐能劝来者受赏。
现代文：十四日，太祖下诏：百姓能广栽桑枣树，开垦荒田者不加租税，令佐官员能招复逃亡农户和劝勉农户栽桑植枣树的受赏。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandfather issued a decree: the people could widely plant mulberry jujube trees, those who reclaimed wasteland would not be taxed, and officials could invite fleeing farmers and encourage farmers to plant mulberry jujube trees.

古文：九月壬辰朔，水。
现代文：九月初一，发大水。
English: On the first day of September, there was a lot of rain.

古文：虎捷指挥使孙进、龙卫指挥使吴瑰等二十七人，坐党吕翰乱伏诛，夷进族。
现代文：虎捷指挥使孙进、龙卫指挥使吴等二十七个人因参与吕翰叛乱犯罪被处以死刑，孙进被灭族。
English: Twenty-seven people, including Sun Jin, who was ordered by Commander Tiger Jie, and Wu, who was ordered by Commander Long Wei, were sentenced to death for participating in the rebellion in Luhansk, and Sun Jin was exterminated.

古文：庚子，占城献驯象。
现代文：初九，占城国进贡受过驯养的大象。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, a tribute of domesticated elephants was brought to Chengdu.

古文：乙巳，幸教船池，遂幸玉津园观卫士骑射。
现代文：十四日，太祖亲临教船池，于是又到玉津园观看卫士骑马射箭。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandfather personally visited the teaching boat pond, and then went to the Tamatsuen Garden to watch the guards riding horses and shooting arrows.

古文：丙午，诏吴越立禹庙于会稽。
现代文：十五日，太祖下诏吴越国在会稽建立大禹庙。
English: On the 15th, the great ancestor Wu Yue State issued an edict to establish the Dayu Temple.

古文：冬十月辛酉朔，命太常复二舞。
现代文：冬十月初一，命令太常恢复文德、武功二舞。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the order was issued to resume the two dances of literature and arts and martial arts.

古文：癸亥，诏诸郡立古帝王陵庙，置户有差。
现代文：初二，诏令各个州郡修建古代帝王的陵墓和宗庙，安排不同数量的民户护陵。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered all prefectures and counties to build the mausoleums and ancestral temples of ancient emperors, and arrange for a different number of private households to protect the mausoleums.

古文：己巳，禁吏卒以巡察扰民。
现代文：初九，禁止吏员士兵借口巡察骚扰百姓。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, officials and soldiers were prohibited from harassing the people under the pretext of inspection.

古文：十二月庚辰，妖人张龙儿等二十四人伏诛，夷龙儿、李土、杨密、聂赟族
现代文：十二月二十日，妖人张龙儿等二十四人被处死刑，张龙儿、李玉、杨密、聂贾被灭族。
English: On December 20, twenty-four people, including the demon Zhang Long'er, were sentenced to death, and Zhang Long'er, Li Yu, Yang Mi, and Gong Jia were exterminated.

古文：五年春正月戊戌，治河堤。
现代文：乾德五年春正月初九，修治黄河堤。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the first month of the fifth year of the Qiande Spring, the Yellow River dike was repaired.

古文：丁未，合州汉初县上青樛木中有文曰 大连宋 。
现代文：十八日，合州汉初县上贡青服木，木头中有文字写着 大连宋 。
English: On the 18th, Shanggong Qingfu Wood in Hechu County of Hebei Province was found with the words "Dalian Song" written on it.

古文：甲寅，王全斌等坐伐蜀黩货杀降，全斌责崇义军节度使，崔彦进责昭化军节度使，王仁赡责右卫大将军。
现代文：二十五日，王全斌等人因征伐后蜀时贪污受贿杀死投降的士兵而获罪，王全斌被贬为崇义军节度使，崔彦进被贬为昭化军节度使，王仁赡被贬为右卫大将军。
English: On the 25th, Wang Quanbin and others were found guilty of corruption, bribery and killing soldiers who surrendered after the conquest of Shu. Wang Quanbin was demoted to the commander of the Chongyi Army, Cui Yanjin was demoted to the commander of the Zhaohua Army, and Wang Renyi was demoted to the right guard general.

古文：丙辰，诏伐蜀将校有受蜀人钱物者，并即还主。
现代文：丙辰日，诏令征伐后蜀的将校军官中有接受后蜀钱财物品的，都要立即归还原主。
English: On the tenth day of the ninth month, the imperial edict ordered the officers and officers who had received money and goods from Shu after the conquest to return them to their original owners immediately.

古文：丁巳，赏伐蜀功，曹彬、刘光义等进爵有差。
现代文：二十八日，赏赐征伐后蜀有功的将士，曹彬、刘光义等人不同程度地提升了官爵。
English: On the 28th, the meritorious soldiers of Shu were rewarded after the conquest, and Cao Bin, Liu Guangyi and others were promoted to the rank of nobility to varying degrees.

古文：二月庚申朔，幸造船务，遂幸城西观卫士骑射。
现代文：二月初一，太祖亲临造船务，于是到城西观看卫士骑马射箭。
English: On the first day of February, the great-grandfather was present at the shipbuilding, so he went to the west of the city to watch the guards riding horses and shooting arrows.

古文：甲子，薛居正、吕余庆并为吏部侍郎、依前参知政事。
现代文：初五，薛居正、吕余庆一起任吏部侍郎，仍担任参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Xue Jizheng and Lü Yuqing were both appointed as attendants of the cadre department, and still served as co-chairs of the government.

古文：己丑，幸教船池。
现代文：三十日，太祖亲临教船池。
English: On the 30th, the great-grandfather personally visited the teaching pond.

古文：三月甲辰，诏翰林学士、常参官于幕职、州县及京官内各举堪任常参官者一人，不当者连坐。
现代文：三月十五日，太祖下诏翰林学士、常参官在幕职、州县官员以及京官内各自推荐一名能够担任常参官的人员，被推荐人不称职，推荐人将连同获罪。
English: On March 15th, the great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-

古文：乙巳，诏诸道举部内官吏才德优异者。
现代文：十六日，太祖下诏让各个道推举所属官吏中才能德行优异的人。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Taizu issued an edict that each province should nominate officials with outstanding moral qualities.

古文：丙午，以普为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，崇矩检校太傅。
现代文：十七日，任命赵普为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，李崇矩为检校太傅。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Pu was appointed as Shang Shu's left-hand servant, Sho and his attendant, Shang Shu's right-hand man, He Ping, and Li Chong Rui as the school inspector.

古文：是日，幸教船池，又幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：这一天，太祖到教船池，又到玉津园举行宴会射箭。
English: On this day, the great-grandfather went to the teaching boat pond and held a banquet for archery in the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：丙辰，北汉石盆砦招收指挥使阎章以砦来降。
现代文：二十七日，北汉石盆寨招收指挥使阎章在本寨投降。
English: On the 27th, Yan Zhang, the commanding officer of Northern Han's Shibenzhai Recruiting Station, surrendered in the village.

古文：五星聚奎。夏五月乙巳，赐京城贫民衣。
现代文：金、木、水、火、土五颗行星在奎宿星处相聚。夏五月十七日，太祖赐给京城里的贫苦百姓衣服。
English: Five planets - gold, wood, water, fire, and earth - are gathered at the Kuiper Belt.On the 17th day of the 5th month of the summer, the great-grandfather gave clothes to the poor people in the capital.

古文：北汉鸿唐砦招收指挥使樊晖以砦来降。
现代文：北汉鸿唐寨招收指挥使樊晖在本寨投降。
English: Northern Han's Hong Tangzhai recruited commanding officers to force Yao to surrender in this village.

古文：甲寅，王溥为太子太傅。
现代文：二十六日，任命王溥为太子太傅。
English: On the 26th, Wang Xi was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：六月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：辛巳，幸建隆观，遂幸飞龙院。
现代文：二十四日，太祖到建隆观，于是又到飞龙院。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the great-grandfather went to Jianlongguan, and then to Feilongyuan.

古文：丁亥，牂牁顺化王子等来献方物。
现代文：三十日，粳顺化王子等人来进献当地土产。
English: On the 30th, Prince Gong of Hue and others came to offer local products.

古文：七月丁酉，禁毁铜佛像。
现代文：七月初十，禁止毁坏铜佛像。
English: On the tenth day of the seventh month, it is forbidden to destroy bronze Buddha statues.

古文：己酉，免水旱灾户今年租。
现代文：二十二日，免征遭受水早灾害的农户今年的租税。
English: On the 22nd, farmers who suffered from water-related disasters were exempted from this year's tax.

古文：八月甲申，河溢入卫州城，民溺死者数百。
现代文：八月二十八日，黄河水溢出河道流人卫州城，溺死百姓数百人。
English: On August 28th, the Yellow River overflowed and flooded the city of Weizhou, drowning hundreds of people.

古文：九月壬辰，仓部员外郎陈郾坐赃弃市。
现代文：九月初七，仓部员外郎陈哪因贪赃犯法在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, warehouse clerk Chen Ne was beheaded in public for corruption.

古文：甲午，西南蕃顺化王子部才等遣使献方物。
现代文：初九，西南蕃顺化王子部才等人派遣使臣进献当地土产。
English: In the early 9th century, the Prince's Department of Southwest Yunnan Province and the Prince's Department of Hue Province sent envoys to present local products.

古文：己酉，畋近郊。
现代文：二十四日，太祖在近郊打猎。
English: On the 24th, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：十一月乙酉朔，工部侍郎毋守素坐居丧娶妾免。
现代文：十一月初一，工部侍郎毋守素因在父丧期中娶妾被免官。
English: On the first day of November, the chamberlain of the Ministry of Works was dismissed for marrying a concubine during the period of his father's death.

古文：供奉武仁海坐枉杀人弃市。
现代文：供奉武仁海因滥杀无辜在闹市被斩首示众。
English: For the indiscriminate killing of innocents, worshiper Wu Renhai was beheaded in the city.

古文：十二月丙辰，禁新小铁镴等钱、疏恶布帛入粉药者。
现代文：十二月初二，禁止使用新铸的小铁等钱、涂粉加药质地稀疏低劣的布帛。
English: On the second day of December, it is forbidden to use newly minted small iron and other money, powder-coated and medicated fabric with sparse and inferior texture.

古文：癸酉，升麟州为建宁军节度。
现代文：十九日，升麟州为建宁军节度。
English: On the 19th, the Jianning Army Day was celebrated in Shenglinzhou.

古文：赵普以母忧去位，丙子，起复。
现代文：宰相赵普因母亲去世而离任。二十二日，赵普服丧期未满重新被用为宰相。
English: Prime Minister Zhao Pu left office due to the death of his mother. On the 22nd, Zhao Pu was reappointed as prime minister before the period of mourning was over.

古文：开宝元年春正月甲午，增治京城。
现代文：开宝元年春正月初十，扩大修治京城。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：陕之集津、绛之垣曲、怀之武陟饥，振之。
现代文：陕州的集津、绛州的垣曲、怀州的武陆发生饥荒，下诏救济这些地区的灾民。
English: Famine occurred in Jijin of Shaanxi Province, Kakiku of Bozhou Province, and Wulu of Huai Province, and the following decree was issued to provide relief to the victims in these regions.

古文：己亥，北汉偏城砦招收指挥使任恩等来降。
现代文：十五日，北汉偏城寨招收指挥使任恩等人来投降。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the commanding officer of the Northern Han Province recruited Ren En and others to surrender.

古文：三月庚寅，班县令、尉捕盗令。
现代文：三月初七，颁布县令、尉捕盗令。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, the county ordinance and the thief-catching order were promulgated.

古文：癸巳，幸玉津园。
现代文：初十，太祖亲临玉津园。
English: On the twelfth day, Taizu went to Tamatsuen.

古文：乙巳，有驯象自至京师。
现代文：二十二日，有驯养的大象自行来到京城。
English: On the 22nd, some domesticated elephants came to the capital on their own.

古文：夏四月乙卯，幸节度使赵彦徽第视疾。
现代文：夏四月初三，太祖到节度使赵彦徽的府第探视他的病情。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the great-grandfather went to the festival to make Zhao Yanhui's capital visit his illness.

古文：五月丁未，赐南唐米麦十万斛。
现代文：五月二十五日，赐给南唐大米小麦十万解。
English: On the 25th of May, he bestowed 100,000 grains of rice and wheat to Southern Tang.

古文：六月癸丑朔，诏民田为霖雨、河水坏者，免今年夏税及沿征物。
现代文：六月初一，太祖下诏百姓田地被连绵大雨、河水淹坏的，免征今年的夏税和因袭征收的杂税。
English: On the first day of June, farmers whose fields have been flooded by continuous heavy rain and river water will be exempt from this year's summer tax and incidental taxes.

古文：癸亥，诏荆蜀民祖父母、父母在者，子孙不得别财异居。
现代文：十一日，太祖下诏：荆蜀地区百姓有祖父母、父母在世的人，他们的子孙不准分开财产另外居住。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great-grandfather issued an edict: the people in the Jingshu area who have grandparents and parents alive, their children and grandchildren are not allowed to separate their property and live separately.

古文：丁丑，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 30th, the too-white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：戊寅，复见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星再次出现。
English: On the 26th, Tai Baoxing reappeared.

古文：辛巳，龙出单父民家井中，大风雨，漂民舍四百区，死者数十人。
现代文：二十九日，在单父县百姓家中的水井里有龙出来，伴随着大风大雨，漂没百姓房屋四百间，死亡几十人。
English: On the 29th, a dragon emerged from a well in the homes of people in Shanfa County. Accompanied by heavy wind and rain, it swept away 400 houses, killing dozens of people.

古文：秋七月丙申，幸铁骑营，赐军钱羊酒有差。
现代文：秋七月十五日，太祖到铁骑营，赐给将士钱、羊、酒多少不等。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, the great-grandfather went to the cavalry camp and gave the soldiers money, sheep and wine.

古文：北汉颖州砦主胡遇等来降。
现代文：北汉颖州寨主胡遇等人来投降。
English: North Han Yingzhou village chief Hu Yu and others came to surrender.

古文：丙午，幸铁骑营，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：二十五日，太祖到铁骑营，于是到玉津园。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the great-grandfather went to the iron riding camp, and then to the Jade Garden.

古文：戊申，坊州刺史李怀节坐强市部民物，责左卫率府率。
现代文：二十七日，坊州刺史李怀节因强行购买辖区百姓的物品，贬为左卫率府率。
English: On the 27th, Li Huai Jie, the governor of Fangzhou, was demoted to the rank of the left guard because he forcibly purchased the goods of the people in his jurisdiction.

古文：北汉主刘钧卒，养子继恩立。
现代文：北汉主刘钧去世，养子刘继恩即位当皇帝。
English: The ruler of Northern Han, Liu Bei, died, and his adopted son, Liu Jian, became emperor.

古文：八月乙卯，按鹘于近郊，还，幸相国寺。
现代文：八月初四，太祖在近郊打鹊鸟，回宫时到相国寺。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, Taizu was out in the suburbs hunting ostriches. When he returned to the palace, he went to Shokoku-ji Temple.

古文：戊午，又按鹘于北郊，还，幸飞龙院。
现代文：初七，太祖又在北郊打鹊鸟，回宫时到飞龙院。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great-grandfather again played ostrich in the northern suburbs, and when he returned to the palace, he went to Fei Long Yuan.

古文：丙寅，遣客省使卢怀忠等二十二人率禁军会潞州。
现代文：十五日，派遣客省使卢怀忠等二十二人率领禁军在潞州会合。
English: On the 15th, the guest province sent Lu Huaizhong and other 22 people to lead the forbidden army to meet in Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，命昭义军节度使李继勋等征北汉。
现代文：十七日，太祖命令昭义军节度使李继勋等人征伐北汉。
English: On the 17th, the great-grandfather ordered the Shao Yi Army to send Li Jixun and others to conquer Northern Han.

古文：九月辛巳朔，禁钱出塞。
现代文：九月初一，禁止钱币运出边境。
English: On the first day of September, it was forbidden to transport money across the border.

古文：癸未，监察御史杨士达坐鞠狱滥杀弃市。
现代文：初三，监察御史杨士达因审案滥杀无辜在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Yang Shida, a supervising magistrate, was beheaded in the middle of the city for the indiscriminate killing of innocent people.

古文：庚子，李继勋败北汉於铜温河。
现代文：二十日，李继勋在铜温河打败北汉军队。
English: On the 20th, Li Jixun defeated the Northern Han Army at Tongwenhe.

古文：己酉，北汉供奉官侯霸荣弑其主继恩，继元立。
现代文：二十九日，北汉供奉官侯霸荣杀死北汉皇帝刘继恩，刘继元即位当皇帝。
English: On the 29th, the Northern Han Dynasty sacrificial official Hou Ba Rong killed the Northern Han Dynasty Emperor Liu Jian, and Liu Jian became the emperor.

古文：冬十月己未，畋近郊，还，幸飞龙院。
现代文：冬十月初九，太祖在近郊打猎，回宫时到飞龙院。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs, and when he returned to the palace, he went to Fei Long Yuan.

古文：丙子，吴越王遣其子惟浚来朝贡。
现代文：二十六日，吴越王派遣儿子钱惟浚来朝贡。
English: On the 26th, King Wu Yue sent his son Qian Wei Jun to pay tribute.

古文：十一月癸卯，日南至，有事南郊，改元开宝。大赦，十恶、杀人、官吏受赃者不原。
现代文：十一月二十四日，冬至日，太祖在南郊举行祭祀，改年号为开宝，大赦天下，犯有十罪、杀人、贪污受贿的官吏不赦罪。
English: On November 24th, the winter solstice, Taizu held a ritual in the southern suburbs, changed the year name to Kaibao, and pardoned the whole world. Officials who committed ten crimes, murder, corruption and bribery were not pardoned.

古文：宰相普等奉玉册宝，上尊号曰应天广运大圣神武明道至德仁孝皇帝。
现代文：宰相赵普等人进奉玉册、玉宝，进上太祖尊号为应天广运大圣神武明道至德仁孝皇帝。
English: Prime Minister Zhao Pu and others were given the title of jade book and jade treasure, and the title of great ancestor was given to Emperor Naruhito as a tribute to Emperor Naruhito.

古文：十二月甲子，行庆，自开封兴元尹、宰相、枢密使及诸道蕃侯，并加勋爵有差。
现代文：十二月十六日，进行庆祝活动，从开封尹、兴元尹、宰相、枢密使到各个道的藩侯，都不同程度地加勋进爵。
English: On December 16th, the celebration was carried out, and from Kaifeng Yin, Xingyuan Yin, Prime Minister, Privy Envoy to the lords of various provinces, they were all knighted to varying degrees.

古文：乙丑，大食国遣使献方物。
现代文：十七日，大食国派遣使臣进贡当地土产。
English: On the 17th, the big-eating country sent envoys to collect tribute from the local produce.

古文：二年春正月己卯朔，以出师，不御殿。
现代文：开宝二年春正月初一，太祖因军队出征，不上殿听政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring in Kepo, the great-grandfather went on a military expedition and did not go to the palace to listen to the government.

古文：二月乙卯，命昭义军节度使李继勋为河东行营前军都部署，侍卫步军指挥使党进副之，宣徽南院使曹彬为都监，棣州防御使何继筠为石岭关部署，建雄军节度使赵赞为汾州路部署，以伐北汉。
现代文：二月初八，任命昭义军节度使李继勋为河东行营前军都部署，侍卫步军指挥使党进担任他的副手，宣徽南院使曹彬为都监，棣州防御使何继箔为石岭关部署，建雄军节度使赵赞为汾州路部署，以征伐北汉。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, the appointment of the Shouyi Army Festival led to the deployment of Li Jixun as the commander of the front army for the campaign to the east of the river, the command of the bodyguard infantry army led to the party to serve as his deputy, the Southern Xuanhui Academy led to Cao Bin as the supervisor of the capital, the defense of Zhangzhou led to the deployment of He Jifao to Shilingguan, and the Jianxiong Army Festival led to the deployment of Zhao Zan to Zhangzhou Road to conquer the North Han Dynasty.

古文：宴长春殿。
现代文：太祖在长春殿设宴款待。
English: The great-grandfather hosted a banquet at the Chosun-den.

古文：命彰德军节度使韩仲赟为北面都部署，彰义军节度使郭延义副之，以防契丹。
现代文：任命彰德军节度使韩仲贾为北面都部署，彰义军节度使郭延义担任副职，以防备契丹。
English: Han Zhongjia was deployed to the north after the appointment of the commander of the Changde Army, and Guo Yanyi was appointed deputy commander of the commander of the Changyi Army to prevent the preparation of the Khitan.

古文：戊午，诏亲征。
现代文：十一日，太祖下诏亲征。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great-great-grandfather issued an edict to personally enlist.

古文：己酉，以开封尹光义为上都留守，枢密副使沈义伦为大内部署、判留司三司事。
现代文：己酉日，任命开封尹赵光义为上都留守，枢密副使沈义伦为大内部署、判留司三司事。
English: On the same day, Kaifeng Yin Zhao Guangyi was appointed as the first to stay in Shangdu, and the vice-secretary Shen Yilun was assigned to the three departments of the university.

古文：甲子，发京师。
现代文：十七日，太祖率领大军从京城出发。
English: On the seventeenth day, Taizu led a large army out of the capital.

古文：乙亥，雨，驻潞州。
现代文：二十八日，下雨，大军驻扎在潞州。
English: On the 28th, it rained, and the large army was stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：三月壬辰，发潞州。
现代文：三月十五日，太祖在潞州出发。
English: On March 15th, Taizu set off from Zhangzhou.

古文：乙未，李继勋败北汉军于太原城下。
现代文：十八日，李继勋在太原城下打败北汉军队。二十一日，太祖来到靠近太原城下的地方。
English: On the 18th, Li Jixun defeated the Northern Han army at the foot of Taiyuan Castle. On the 21st, Taizu came to a place near the foot of Taiyuan Castle.

古文：戊戌，驾傅城下。庚子，观兵城南，筑长连城。
现代文：二十三日，在太原城南检阅军队显示军威，修筑长连城。
English: On the 23rd, in the south of Taiyuan City, the inspection of the army showed military prestige, and the construction of Changlian City began.

古文：辛丑，幸汾河，作新桥。
现代文：二十四日，太祖到汾河，修建一座新桥。
English: On the 24th, Taizu went to Luohe to build a new bridge.

古文：发太原诸县丁数万集城下。
现代文：征发太原附近各县的几万名男丁集中在太原城下。
English: Tens of thousands of men from counties around Taiyuan who were conscripted were concentrated under Taiyuan Castle.

古文：癸卯，北汉史昭文以宪州来降，乙巳，临城南，谓汾水可以灌其城，命筑长堤壅之，决晋祠水注之。
现代文：二十六日，北汉史昭文在宪州投降，二十八日，太祖到太原城南，说汾河水可以淹灌太原城，命令筑起长堤阻塞汾河水，决引晋祠水淹灌太原城。
English: On the 26th, Northern Han Dynasty historian Zhaowen surrendered in Ganzhou. On the 28th, Taizu went to the south of Taiyuan City and said that the water of the Min River could flood the city of Taiyuan. He ordered the construction of a long dike to block the water of the Min River, and finally led the water of the Jin Temple to flood the city of Taiyuan.

古文：遂砦城四面，继勋军于南，赞军于西，彬军于北，进军于东，乃北引汾水灌城。
现代文：于是又在太原城四周建立营寨，李继勋军队在太原城南，赵赞军队在太原城西，曹彬军队在太原城北，党进军队在太原城东，再从北面引汾河水淹灌太原城。
English: As a result, encampments were built around Taiyuan City. Li Jixun's army was in the south of Taiyuan City, Zhao Zhan's army was in the west of Taiyuan City, Cao Bin's army was in the north of Taiyuan City, the Party's marching army was in the east of Taiyuan City, and then the waters of the Min River flooded Taiyuan City from the north.

古文：辛亥，遣海州刺史孙方进率兵围汾州。
现代文：辛亥日，派遣海州刺史孙方进率领军队包围汾州。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Sun Fangjin, the governor of Haizhou, led an army to surround Zhangzhou.

古文：四月戊申，幸城东观筑堤。
现代文：四月初一，太祖到太原城东观看修建堤坝。
English: On the first day of April, Taizu went to the east of Taiyuan to watch the construction of the dam.

古文：壬子，复幸城东。
现代文：初五，太祖又来到太原城东。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Taizu came to the east of Taiyuan City again.

古文：己未，何继筠败契丹于阳曲，斩首数千级，俘武州刺史王彦符以献，命陈示所获首级、铠甲于城下。
现代文：十二日，何继箔在阳曲打败契丹，斩杀几千人，把俘虏的武州刺史王彦符献给太祖，太祖命令把所缴获的首级、恺甲在太原城下陈列出来。
English: On the twelfth day, He Jifa defeated Khitan in Yangqu, slaughtered several thousand people, and presented the captive Wuzhou Sishi Wangyan Fu to the Grandfather. The Grandfather ordered to display the captured heads and armor under the Taiyuan Castle.

古文：壬戌，幸汾河观造船。
现代文：十五日，太祖亲临汾河边视察造船。
English: On the 15th, the great-grandfather personally inspected the shipbuilding on the banks of the Yunnan River.

古文：戊辰，幸城西上生院。
现代文：二十一日，太祖到太原城西上生院。
English: On the twenty-first day, the great-grandfather went to Taiyuan City West Shang Sheng Yuan.

古文：丙子，复幸城西。
现代文：二十九日，又来到城西。
English: On the 29th, I came to the west of the city again.

古文：五月癸未，韩仲赟败契丹于定州北。
现代文：五月初七，韩仲贾在定州北面打败契丹。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, Han Zhongjia defeated Khitan in the north of Dingzhou.

古文：自戊子至庚寅，命水军载弩环攻，横州团练使王廷义、殿前都虞候石汉卿死之。
现代文：自十二日到十四日，太祖命令水军驾船载着强弩四面围攻太原城，横州团练使王廷义、殿前都虞候石汉卿战死。
English: From the 12th to the 14th, the great-grandfather ordered the navy to besiege Taiyuan City on all sides by driving boats and carrying strong rafts, and the Hengzhou Regiment trained Wang Tingyi and Densen Dugu to wait for Shi Hanqing to die in battle.

古文：甲午，北汉赵文度以岚州来降。
现代文：十八日，北汉赵文度在岚州投降。
English: On the 18th, Northern Han Zhao Wentu surrendered in Zhangzhou.

古文：甲辰，都虞候赵廷翰奏，诸军欲登城以死攻，上愍之，不允。
现代文：二十八日，都虞候赵廷翰奏，各军要求冒死攻击登上太原城，太祖怜惜将士，不允许进攻。
English: On the 28th, Dugong waited for Zhao Tinghan to play. Each army requested to risk their lives to attack Taiyuan City. Grandfather took pity on the soldiers and did not allow the attack.

古文：闰月戊申，雉圮，水注城中，上遽登堤观。
现代文：闰五月初二，太原城墙坍塌，河水灌注进城内，太祖马上登上长堤观察。
English: On the second day of the leap month of May, the city wall of Taiyuan collapsed, and the river water poured into the city. Taizu immediately climbed up the long embankment to observe.

古文：己酉，右仆射魏仁浦薨。
现代文：初三，右仆射魏仁浦去世。
English: In the third year of junior high school, his right-hand man Wei Renpu passed away.

古文：壬子，以太常博士李光赞言，议班师。
现代文：初六，因太常博士李光赞提议，讨论大军班师回朝。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, due to the proposal of Dr. Li Guangzan, the discussion of the large military class teacher returned to the North.

古文：己未，命兵士迁河东民万户于山东。
现代文：十三日，命令士兵把河东万户百姓迁徙到山东。
English: On the 13th, soldiers were ordered to relocate tens of thousands of people from Hedong to Shandong.

古文：庚申，分命使臣率兵赴镇、潞。
现代文：十四日，太祖分别命令使臣率领军队去镇州、潞州。
English: On the 14th, Taizu ordered the envoy to lead the army to Zhenzhou and Zhangzhou respectively.

古文：壬戌，驾还。
现代文：十六日，太祖起驾回京。
English: On the 16th, Taizu drove back to Kyoto.

古文：戊辰，驻跸于镇州。
现代文：二十二日，太祖在镇州停留。
English: On the 22nd, Taizu stopped in Zhenzhou.

古文：六月丙子朔，发镇州。
现代文：六月初一，太祖车驾从镇州出发。
English: On the first day of June, Taizu drove from Zhenzhou.

古文：癸巳，至自太原。曲赦京城囚。
现代文：十八日，太祖从太原回到京城，赦免京城里的囚犯。
English: On the 18th, Taizu returned to Kyoto from Taiyuan and pardoned the prisoners in Kyoto.

古文：秋七月丁巳，幸封禅寺。
现代文：秋七月十二日，太祖亲临封禅寺。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the great-grandfather himself came to Feng Zen Temple.

古文：诏镇、深、赵、邢、洺五州管内镇、砦、县悉城之。
现代文：下诏镇、深、赵、邢、洛五个州管辖内的镇、寨、县都要修建城墙。
English: Towns, townships and counties under the jurisdiction of the five prefectures of Zaozhuang, Shen, Zhao, Handan and Luo should build city walls.

古文：甲子，大宴，赐宰相、枢密使、翰林学士、节度、观察使袭衣金带。
现代文：十九日，举行盛大宴会。赐给宰相、枢密使、翰林学士、节度使、观察使成套衣裳和金带。
English: On the 19th, a grand banquet was held. Sets of clothes and gold belts were given to the Prime Minister, Privy Counsellor, Hanlin Scholar, Festival Delegate, and Observation Delegate.

古文：戊辰，西南夷顺化王子武才等来献方物。
现代文：二十三日，西南夷顺化王子武才等人来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Wu Cai and others from Southwest Yiwu and Hunhua came to pay tribute to local local products.

古文：癸酉，幸新水硙。
现代文：二十八日，太祖来到新建的水视察。
English: On the 28th, Taizu came to inspect the newly built water tower.

古文：汴决下邑。
现代文：汁河在下邑决口。
English: The Juhe River flows out of the mouth of Shimoyura.

古文：乙亥，寿星见。
现代文：三十日，寿星出现。
English: On the 30th, the birthday star appears.

古文：八月丁亥，诏川峡诸州察民有父母在而别籍异财者，论死。
现代文：八月十二日，太祖下诏川峡各州检察百姓中有父母在世而本人分家另住的，以死罪论处。
English: On August 12, the people's procuratorates of all prefectures in Zhaozhuang River Gorge announced that if a person's parents were still alive, but he or she was separated from the family and lived elsewhere, he or she would be sentenced to death.

古文：九月乙巳朔，幸武成王庙。
现代文：九月初一，太祖亲临武成王庙。
English: On the first day of September, the great-grandfather personally visited the temple of King Mucheng.

古文：壬戌，幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：十八日，太祖到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 18th, Taizu held a banquet in the Tamatsuen Garden and played archery.

古文：冬十月戊子，畋近郊。
现代文：冬十月十四日，太祖在近郊打猎。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：庚寅，散指挥都知杜延进等谋反伏诛，夷其族。
现代文：十六日，散指挥都知杜延进等人谋划作乱被处死，杜延进被灭族。
English: On the 16th, Du Yanjin, the leader of Du Zhi, was executed for plotting a riot, and Du Yanjin was exterminated.

古文：诏相、深、赵三州丁夫死太原城下者，复其家。
现代文：太祖下诏：相、深、赵三州丁夫死于太原城下的人，免除各家的赋税和摇役。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict: Those who died under the Taiyuan Castle in the three states of Sang, Shen and Zhao were exempt from taxes and taxes.

古文：庚子，以王溥为太子太师，武衡德为太子太傅。
现代文：二十六日，任命王溥为太子太师，武衡德为太子太傅。
English: On the 26th, Wang Xi was appointed as the prince's daishi, and Wu Hengde as the prince's daifu.

古文：癸卯，西川兵马都监张延通、内臣张屿、引进副使王珏为丁德裕所谮，延通坐不逊诛，屿、珏并杖配。
现代文：二十九日，西川兵马都监张延通、内臣张屿、引进副使王环被丁德裕在太祖面前进谗言，张延通以大不敬获罪被杀，张屿、王环都服杖刑并被流放。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Yantong, the governor of the West River Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Zhang Yu, a vassal, and Wang Huan, a vice-envoy of the introduction, were reprimanded by Ding Deyu in front of the great-grandfather. Zhang Yantong was killed for the crime of great disrespect, Zhang Yu and Wang Huan both served a cane sentence and were exiled.

古文：十一月丙午，幸镇宁军节度使张令铎第视疾。
现代文：十一月初三，太祖到镇宁军节度使张令铎府第，探视张令铎的病情。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Emperor Taizu went to Zhang Lingyao's residence during the Zhenning Army Festival to visit Zhang Lingyao.

古文：甲寅，畋近郊，还，幸金凤园。
现代文：十一日，太祖在近郊打猎，回宫时到金凤园。
English: On the 11th day, the great-grandfather went hunting in the suburbs, and when he returned to the palace, he went to the Golden Phoenix Garden.

古文：庚申，回鹘、于阗遣使来献方物。
现代文：十七日，回鹊、于闻派遣使臣来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 17th, Hui and Wen sent envoys to pay tribute to local products.

古文：十二月癸未，幸中书视宰相赵普疾。
现代文：十二月初十，太祖亲临中书省探视宰相赵普病情。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, the great-great-grandfather personally visited Zhongshu to visit the Prime Minister Zhao Pu's illness.

古文：己亥，右赞善大夫王昭坐监大盈仓，其子与仓吏为奸赃，夺两任、配隶汝州。
现代文：二十六日，右赞善大夫王昭因监大盈仓，儿子和仓吏勾结贪污，被剥夺两任官职，流放到汝州服役。
English: On the 26th, Dr. Wang Zhao, a doctor of the Right Admiralty, was stripped of his two official posts and exiled to serve in Ruzhou for supervising a large-profit warehouse, and his son colluded with the warehouse clerk to commit corruption.

古文：丁德裕诬奏西川转运使李铉指斥，事既直，犹坐酒失，责授右赞善大夫。
现代文：丁德裕上奏诬陷西川转运使李铰直呼皇上姓名，冤枉已经得伸，李铰仍然因为酒醉的过失，被贬为右赞善大夫。
English: Tingdeyu Shangso framed Saikawa Transshipment to make Li Xuan call the emperor's name directly, the injustice has been extended, Li Xuan is still because of the fault of drunkenness, was relegated to the right to be a good doctor.

古文：三年春正月癸卯朔，雨雪，不御殿。
现代文：开宝三年春正月初一，降雨雪，太祖不上殿处理政务。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Kepo, it rained and snowed, and the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to deal with government affairs.

古文：癸丑，增河堤。
现代文：十一日，增筑黄河堤。
English: On the 11th, the construction of the Yellow River embankment was completed.

古文：辛酉，诏民五千户举孝弟彰闻、德行纯茂者一人，奇才异行不拘此限，里闾郡国递审连署以闻，仍为治装诣阙。
现代文：十九日，太祖下诏：百姓每五千户推举一名孝顺父母敬爱兄长名声显著的人，德行善美优秀的人，有才能卓越、行为与众不同的人不受这条限制，里巷州郡逐级审查联名签署后呈报朝廷，还要为被荐人赴朝廷准备行装。
English: On the 19th, the great-grandfather issued an edict: the people should nominate one person from every 5,000 households who is filial, obedient to their parents, respects and loves their elder brothers and sisters, has a distinguished reputation, is virtuous, good-looking and excellent, and has outstanding talent and unique behavior. This restriction does not apply to Li Xiangzhou County, which will be examined step by step and jointly signed and reported to the imperial court. It is also necessary to prepare for the recommended person to go to the imperial court.

古文：二月庚寅，幸西茶库，遂幸建隆观。
现代文：二月十九日，太祖到西茶库，于是又到建隆观。
English: On February 19th, Taizu went to the West Tea Warehouse, and then went to the Jianlong Temple.

古文：三月庚戌，诏阅进士十五举以上司马浦等百六人，并赐本科出身。
现代文：三月初九，太祖下诏选取参加进士考试十五次以上的司马浦等一百零六人，都赐给本科出身。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, Emperor Taizu issued a decree to select 106 people, including Sima Pu, who had participated in the entrance examination more than 15 times, and all of them were awarded to undergraduates.

古文：辛亥，赐处士王昭素国子博士致仕。
现代文：初十，赐给处士王昭素国子博士后让他退休。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Wang Zhaoxu Kuniko, a clerk, was granted the right to retire after receiving his doctorate.

古文：丙辰，殿中丞张颙坐先知颍州政不平，免官。
现代文：十五日，殿中承张氰因为在以前担任颖州知州时处理政务不平允，被免去官职。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Tenzhongcheng Zhangyan was removed from his official position because he was not able to handle the government affairs when he was in charge of Yingzhou Chizhou.

古文：己未，幸宰相赵普第视疾。
现代文：十八日，太祖亲临赵普府第看望他的病情。
English: On the 18th, the great-grandfather personally visited Zhao Pufu to see his condition.

古文：夏四月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。
English: Summer The first day of April, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，幸寺观祷雨。
现代文：十七日，太祖亲临寺观祈祷下雨。
English: On the 17th, the great-grandfather visited the temple to pray for rain.

古文：辛卯，雨。
现代文：二十一日，下雨。
English: On the 21st, it rained.

古文：甲午，幸教船池。
现代文：二十四日，太祖亲临教船池。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the great-grandfather personally visited the teaching pond.

古文：己亥，罢河北诸州盐禁。
现代文：二十九日，废除河北各个州的盐禁。
English: On the 29th, the salt ban in all provinces of Hebei was abolished.

古文：诏郡国非其土产者勿贡。
现代文：太祖下诏州郡不是当地的土产不要进贡朝廷。
English: Don't pay tribute to the imperial court if your ancestor's Zhaozhou County is not a local product.

古文：五月丁未，禁京城民畜兵器。
现代文：五月初七，禁止京城百姓积贮兵器。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, the citizens of Beijing were prohibited from stockpiling weapons.

古文：癸丑，幸城北观水硙。
现代文：十三日，太祖到城北观看水。
English: On the 13th, Taizu went to the north of the city to look at the water.

古文：癸亥，赐诸班营舍为雨坏者钱有差。
现代文：二十三日，赐给营房被雨水淋坏的各班钱多少不等。
English: On the 23rd, varying amounts of money were given to each group whose barracks had been damaged by the rain.

古文：六月乙未，禁诸州长吏亲随人掌厢镇局务。
现代文：六月二十六日，禁止各州长吏的亲随人员执掌厢镇局务。
English: On June 26th, the personal attendants of prefectural governors were prohibited from taking charge of town affairs.

古文：秋七月乙巳，立报水旱期式。
现代文：秋七月初六，订立报告水早灾害期限的法令。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, a decree was issued to set a deadline for reporting water-related disasters.

古文：壬子，诏蜀州县官以户口差第省员加禄，寻诏诸路亦如之。
现代文：十三日，太祖下诏蜀地州县官员根据管辖户口数多少不等减少官吏和增加棒禄，不久又下诏各路也按照蜀地办法减员增棒。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an edict to the officials of Shu County to reduce the number of officials and increase the bonus according to the number of households under their jurisdiction. Soon after, the emperor issued an edict to all counties to reduce the number of officials and increase the bonus in accordance with the Shu measures.

古文：戊辰，幸教船池，又幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：二十九日，太祖到教船池，又亲临玉津园举行宴会射箭。
English: On the 29th, the great-grandfather went to the teaching boat pond, and also personally attended the banquet held in the Yujin Garden to shoot arrows.

古文：八月戊子，幸教船池，又幸玉津园。
现代文：八月十九日，太祖到教船池，又到了玉津园。
English: On August 19th, Taizu went to the teaching boat pond, and then to the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：九月己亥朔，命潭州防御使潘美为贵州道兵马行营都部署，朗州团练使尹崇珂副之。
现代文：九月初一，任命潭州防御使潘美为贺州道兵马行营都部署，朗州团练使尹崇坷担任他的副手。
English: On the first day of September, the defense of Tanzhou was appointed to deploy Pan Mei as the camp commander of Hezhou Dao, and the group training of Lanzhou was assigned to Yin Chongbei as his deputy.

古文：遣使发十州兵会贺州，以伐南汉。
现代文：派遣使者征发十个州的军队到贺州会合，以讨伐南汉。
English: He sent an envoy to summon the armies of ten states to meet in Hezhou to fight the Southern Han Dynasty.

古文：甲辰，诏：西京、凤翔、雄、耀等州，周文、成、康三王，秦始皇，汉高、文、景、武、元、成、哀七帝，后魏孝文，西魏文帝，后周太祖，唐高祖、太宗、中宗、肃宗、代宗、德、顺、文、武、宣、懿、僖、昭诸帝凡二十七陵尝被盗发者，有司备法服、常服各一袭，具棺椁阝重葬，所在长吏致祭。
现代文：初六，太祖下诏：西京、凤翔、雄州、耀州等州，周文王、成王、康王三位周王，秦始皇、汉高祖、文帝、景帝、武帝、元帝、成帝、哀帝七位汉朝皇帝，后魏孝文帝，西魏文帝，后周太祖，唐高祖、太宗、中宗、肃宗、代宗、德、顺、文、武、宣、爵、嘻、昭各位唐代帝王，一共二十七座陵墓，其中曾经被盗挖过的陵墓，有关机构准备礼法规定的衣服、平常的衣服各一套，备好棺停重新安葬，所在地区的长吏致祭词。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1

古文：己酉，幸开宝寺观新钟。
现代文：十一日，太祖亲临开宝寺观看新钟。
English: On the 11th day, the great-grandfather visited Kaiboji Temple to see the new bell.

古文：丙辰，女直国遣使赍定安国王烈万华表，献方物。
现代文：十八日，女直国派遣使臣带着安定国王烈万华的表章，贡献当地土产。
English: On the 18th, Women's Naokuni dispatched envoys with the seal of the stable king, Lei Wanhua, to contribute to local production.

古文：丁卯，潘美等败南汉军万众于富州，下之。
现代文：二十九日，潘美等人在富州打败一万多名南汉军队，攻克富州。
English: On the 29th, Pan Mei and others defeated more than 10,000 South Han troops in Fuzhou and conquered Fuzhou.

古文：十月庚辰，克贺州。
现代文：十月十二日，攻克贺州。
English: On October 12, Hezhou was conquered.

古文：十一月壬寅，下昭、桂二州。
现代文：十一月初四，攻克昭、桂二州。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the two states of Zhao and Gui were conquered.

古文：乙巳，减桂阳岁贡白金额。
现代文：初七，减少桂阳每年进贡的白金数额。
English: On the seventh day of the month, reduce the amount of platinum paid as tribute in Guiyang each year.

古文：癸丑，右领军卫将军石延祚坐监仓与吏为奸赃，弃市。
现代文：十五日，右领军卫将军石延柞因为利用监仓身份和管库的吏员勾结贪污在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the fifteenth day, the right leader of the military guards, General Shi Yanjun, was beheaded in the city because he used his position as supervisor to collude with the officials of the warehouse to commit corruption.

古文：癸亥，定州驻泊都监田钦祚败契丹于遂城。
现代文：二十五日，定州驻泊都监田钦柞在遂城打败契丹。
English: On the 25th, Jingtian Qinqian, the governor of Dingzhou, defeated Khitan in Suicheng.

古文：丙寅，以曹州举德行孔蟾为章丘主簿。
现代文：二十八日，任命曹州所荐德行善美的孔蟾为章丘主簿。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Confucius, who was recommended by Cao Zhou, to be the main book of Zhangqiu.

古文：十二月壬申，潘美等下连州。
现代文：十二月初五，潘美等人攻克连州。
English: On the fifth day of December, Pan Mei and others conquered Lianzhou.

古文：辛卯，大败南汉军万余于韶州，下之。癸巳，增河堤。
现代文：二十四日，在韶州把一万多名南汉军队打得大败，攻克韶州。二十六日，加筑黄河堤坝。
English: On the 24th, he defeated more than 10,000 Southern Han troops in Zhangzhou and conquered Zhangzhou. On the 26th, he built a dam on the Yellow River.

古文：四年春正月戊戌朔，以出师，不视朝。
现代文：开宝四年春正月初一，因军队出征，太祖不上朝处理政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth spring of Kepo, due to the army's departure, the great-grandfather did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：丙午，罢诸道州县摄官。
现代文：初九，罢免各道州县原有的代理官员。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the original acting officials of each prefecture and county will be removed.

古文：丁未，右千牛卫大将军桑进兴坐赃弃市。
现代文：初十，右千牛卫大将军桑进兴因贪赃在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, General Sang Jin Xing of the Right Qian Niu Guards was beheaded in the city for corruption.

古文：癸丑，潘美等取英州、雄州。
现代文：十六日，潘美等人攻克英州、雄州。
English: On the 16th, Pan Mei and others conquered Yingzhou and Xiongzhou.

古文：二月丁亥，南汉刘钅长遣其左仆射萧漼等以表来上。
现代文：二月二十一日，南汉刘米派遣他的左仆射萧崔等人带着表章来上朝。
English: On February 21st, Liu Mi of the Southern Han Dynasty sent his left-hand man, Sha Xiao Cui, and others to go to the Joseon Dynasty with medals.

古文：己丑，潘美克广州，俘刘鋹，广南平。
现代文：二十三日，潘美攻克广州，俘虏刘银，平定广南。
English: On the 23rd, Pan Mei conquered Guangzhou, captured Liu Yin, and pacified Guangnan.

古文：得州六十、县二百十四、户十七万二百六十三。
现代文：得到六十个州、二百十四个县、百姓十七万零二百六十三户。
English: Sixty prefectures, 214 counties, and 170,263 households were covered.

古文：辛卯，大赦广南，免二税，伪署官仍旧。
现代文：二十五日，大赦广南，免征夏秋二税，原来广南政权的官吏留任。
English: On the 25th, Guangnan was amnestied, exempted from summer and autumn taxes, and the officials of the original Guangnan regime remained in office.

古文：三月乙未，幸飞龙院，赐从臣马。
现代文：三月乙未日，太祖亲监飞龙院，赐给随从官员马匹。
English: On the second day of March, the great-grandfather personally supervised Fei Long Yuan and gave horses to the officials.

古文：丙申，诏广南有卖人男女为奴婢转佣利者，并放免。伪政有害于民者具以闻，除之。
现代文：初一，太祖下诏：广南地区有买人家子女做奴婶而转雇给他人以获利的人，一律释放；原来广南政权有损害百姓的政策措施都要汇报朝廷，加以废除。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the great-grandfather issued an edict: all those in the Guangnan region who had bought other people's children to work as maids and transferred them to others for profit should be released; all policies and measures of the Guangnan regime that harmed the people should be reported to the imperial court and abolished.

古文：增前代帝王守陵户二。
现代文：增加前代帝王各个陵墓的守陵户二户。
English: The number of families guarding the mausoleums of previous emperors has increased by two.

古文：夏四月丙寅朔，前左监门卫将军赵玭诉宰相赵普，坐诬毁大臣，汝州安置。
现代文：夏四月初一，前任左监门卫将军赵业控告宰相赵普，因诬蔑低毁大臣而获罪，被安置到汝州。
English: On the first day of April in summer, Zhao Ye, the former left-wing gatekeeper general, sued the prime minister Zhao Pu, was convicted of slandering and demeaning the minister, and was relocated to Ruzhou.

古文：丁卯，三佛齐国遣使献方物。
现代文：初二，三佛齐国派遣使者进贡当地土产。
English: On the second day of the first month, the three Buddhas of Qi sent an envoy to pay tribute to local local products.

古文：己巳，诏禁岭南商税、盐、曲，如荆湖法。
现代文：初四，太祖下诏禁止岭南地区商税、盐、茹，按荆湖地区法令执行。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizu issued an edict prohibiting trade tax, salt, and cooking in the Lingnan region, which was implemented in accordance with the laws of the Jinghu region.

古文：辛未，幸永兴军节度使吴廷祚第视疾。
现代文：初六，太祖亲临永兴军节度使吴廷柞府第探视他的病情。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the great-grandfather personally visited the Yongxing Army Festival and sent Wu Tingyao to visit his illness.

古文：癸未，幸开宝寺。
现代文：十八日，太祖到开宝寺。
English: On the 18th, Taizu went to Kaiboji Temple.

古文：辛卯，南唐遣其弟从谏来朝贡。
现代文：二十六日，南唐派遣皇弟李从谏来朝贡。
English: On the 26th, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent the younger brother of the emperor, Li Zongyu, to bring tribute.

古文：发厢军千人修前代陵寝之在秦者。
现代文：征发一千名厢军修缮在陕西地区的前代帝王陵墓。
English: One thousand soldiers were conscripted to repair the mausoleum of the former emperor in the Shaanxi region.

古文：壬辰，监察御史闾丘舜卿坐前任盗用官钱，弃市。
现代文：二十七日，监察御史间丘舜卿因为以前当官时盗用官钱，在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 27th, the Inspector-General of History, Qiu Junqing, was beheaded in the city because he had embezzled public money when he was in office.

古文：五月乙未朔，御明德门受刘鋹俘，释之；斩其柄臣龚澄枢、李托、薛崇誉。
现代文：五月初一，太祖亲临明德门行受刘长俘礼，赦免刘长罪；把他的权臣龚澄枢、李托、薛崇誉斩首。
English: On the first day of May, the great-grandfather personally went to the Mingde Gate to receive Liu Chang's prisoner-of-war ceremony, pardoned Liu Chang's crime, and beheaded his powerful vassals Gong Cheng Zu, Li Tuo, and Xue Chong Rong.

古文：大宴于大明殿，鋹预焉。
现代文：太祖在大明殿举行盛大宴会，刘米也参加了。
English: The great-grandfather held a grand banquet at Daming Hall, and Liu Mi also attended.

古文：丁酉，赏伐广南功，潘美、尹崇珂等进爵有差。
现代文：初三，太祖奖赏征伐广南的有功人员，潘美、尹崇坷等人进升爵位不等。
English: On the third day of the new year, the great ancestor rewarded the meritorious personnel of the conquest of Guangnan, and Pan Mei, Yin Chongbei and others were promoted to knighthoods.

古文：六月癸酉，遣使祀南海。
现代文：六月初九，派遣使者祭祀南海。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, an envoy was sent to offer sacrifices to Nanhai.

古文：丁丑，命翰林试南汉官，取书判稍优者，授令、录、簿、尉。
现代文：十三日，命令翰林院考试南汉官员，选取书判稍优的人，授予令、录、簿、尉的官职。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the officials of the Southern Han Dynasty to take the examination of the Hanlin Academy, select the person with a slightly better book judgment, and award the official position of the order, record, book, and lieutenant.

古文：壬午，以孝子罗居通为延州主簿。
现代文：十八日，任命孝子罗居通为延州主簿。
English: On the 18th, he appointed his son Luo Jutong as the chief accountant of Yanzhou.

古文：封刘鋹为恩赦侯。
现代文：封刘银为恩赦侯。
English: Liu Yin was pardoned.

古文：乙酉，罢贺州银场。
现代文：二十一日，撤消贺州银场。
English: On the 21st, the Hezhou Silver Mine was closed.

古文：赐刘鋹月奉外钱五万、米麦五千斛。
现代文：在刘长每月棒禄之外另赐给五万贯钱、米麦五十解。
English: In addition to Liu Chang's monthly stipend, he was also given 50,000 yuan and 50 yuan worth of rice and barley.

古文：河决原武，汴决谷熟。
现代文：黄河在原武决口，汁河在谷熟决口。
English: The Yellow River is at the mouth of the Genbu River, and the Ju River is at the mouth of the Guju River.

古文：秋七月戊戌，赐开封尹光义门戟十四。
现代文：秋七月初五，太祖赐给开封尹赵光义十四把门戟。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the great-grandfather gave the 14th door handle to the Kaifeng Yin Zhao Guangyi.

古文：庚子，幸新修水硙，赐役人钱帛有差。
现代文：初七，太祖亲临新修建的水，赐给工匠役人钱财布帛多少不等。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great-grandfather personally visited the newly built waterworks and gave the craftsmen and officials money, cloth, and various other things.

古文：戊午，复著内侍养子令。
现代文：二十五日，重新签署内侍养子令。
English: On the 25th, the Imperial Household Agency's child-rearing order was re-signed.

古文：癸亥，幸建武军节度使何继筠第视疾。
现代文：三十日，太祖亲临建武军节度使何继箔府第探视他的病情。
English: On the 30th, the great-grandfather personally came to the Jianwu Army Festival to have He Jiaofu visit his illness.

古文：汴决宋城。
现代文：汁水在宋城决口。
English: The juice is brewed in Songcheng.

古文：八月壬申，文武百官上尊号，不允。
现代文：八月初九，文武百官给太祖上尊号，太祖不允许。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, hundreds of civil and military officials gave the great-grandfather the honorific title, but the great-grandfather did not allow it.

古文：辛卯，景星见。
现代文：二十八日，景星出现。
English: On the 28th, Jing Xing appeared.

古文：冬十月癸亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日食。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：己巳，诏伪作黄金者弃市。
现代文：初七，太祖下诏凡伪造黄金者都将在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Taizu decreed that anyone who forged gold would be beheaded in the downtown area.

古文：庚午，太子洗马王元吉坐赃弃市。
现代文：初八，太子洗马王元吉因贪赃在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Prince Saima Wang Yuanji was beheaded in public for corruption.

古文：辛巳，除广南旧无名配敛。
现代文：十九日，免除广南地区原有的无名摊派苛敛。
English: On the 19th, the original nameless apportionment in the Guangnan region was exempted.

古文：甲申，诏十月后犯强窃盗者，郊赦不原。
现代文：二十二日，太祖下诏十月后犯有强行盗窃抢劫罪行的人在南郊大赦时也不能得到赦免。
English: On the 22nd, those who committed crimes of forced theft and robbery after the Emperor's edict in October could not be pardoned in the Southern Suburbs amnesty.

古文：丙戌，放广南民驱充军者。
现代文：二十四日，释放被强行驱赶充军的广南百姓。
English: On the 24th, the people of Guangnan who were forcibly driven to join the army were released.

古文：十一月癸巳朔，南唐遣其弟从善，吴越国王遣其子惟浚，以郊祀来朝贡。
现代文：十一月初一，南唐皇帝派遣弟弟李从善，吴越国主派遣儿子钱惟浚，因太祖在郊外祭祀天地而来朝贡。
English: On the first day of November, the Emperor of Southern Tang dispatched his younger brother, Li Congshan, and the Lord of Wuyue dispatched his son, Qian Weizhong, to pay tribute to the emperor because the great ancestor had come to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth in the suburbs.

古文：南唐主煜表乞去国号呼名，从之。
现代文：南唐主李煌上表要求去掉国号和直呼其名，太祖同意了他的请求。
English: Southern Tang Lord Li Huang requested to remove the country name and call it by its name on the table, and the great-grandfather agreed to his request.

古文：庚戌，诏诸道所罢摄官三任无遗阙者以闻。
现代文：十八日，太祖下诏各道把罢免的代理官员中三任没有什么过失的人报告上来。
English: On the 18th, the Taizoh issued an edict to all provinces to report three of the acting officials who had been dismissed, who had committed no wrongdoing.

古文：河决澶州，通判姚恕坐不即上闻，弃市。
现代文：黄河在擅州决口，通判姚恕因没有立即上报朝廷在闹市被斩首示众。
English: At the junction of the Yellow River and the Xizhou River, the court sentenced Yaoshu to be beheaded in the middle of the city for not immediately reporting to the imperial court.

古文：己未，日南至，有事南郊，大赦，十恶、故劫杀、官吏受赃者不原。
现代文：二十七日，冬至日，在南郊举行祭祀典礼，大赦天下，犯有刑律规定的十恶罪犯、故意抢劫杀人犯、贪污受贿的官吏不赦。
English: On the 27th, the day of the winter solstice, a sacrificial ceremony was held in the southern suburbs to grant amnesty to the whole world, and not to pardon criminals who committed the ten evils stipulated in the criminal law, intentional robbers and murderers, and corrupt and bribe-taking officials.

古文：诏置诸州幕职官奉户。
现代文：太祖下诏设置各州幕职官棒户。
English: Emperor Taizu decreed that the shogunate officials in each prefecture should be given bonshu.

古文：壬戌，蜀班内殿直四十人，援御马直例乞赏，遂挝登闻鼓，命各杖二十，翌日，悉斩于营，都指挥单斌等皆杖、降。
现代文：三十日，四十名蜀班内殿直，援引御马直的例子要求赏赐，竟敲登闻鼓请愿，太祖下令各杖二十。第二天，全部在营中斩首，都指挥单斌等人都被处以杖刑、降官。
English: On the thirtieth day, forty donshi in the Shu band, citing the example of Mima Zhi, demanded a reward, and even beat the drums to petition, and the ancestor ordered twenty sticks each. The next day, all were beheaded in the camp, and all commanders, including Shanbin, were punished with canes and demotion.

古文：十二月癸亥朔，赐南郊执事官器币有差。
现代文：十二月初一，赐给南郊祭祀时的执事官器皿钱财多少不等。
English: On the first day of December, the amount of money given to the deacon during the Southern Suburbs Festival varies.

古文：丁卯，行庆，开封尹光义、兴元尹光美、贵州防御使德昭、宰相赵普并益食邑。
现代文：初五，举行庆祝活动，开封尹赵光义、兴元尹赵光美、贵州防御使赵德昭、宰相赵普都增加了食邑。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, celebrations were held, and the opening of Yin Zhao Guangyi, Hingyuan Yin Zhao Guangmei, and the defense of Guizhou made Zhao Dezhao and Prime Minister Zhao Pu all increase their food.

古文：己巳，内外文武官递进勋爵。
现代文：初七，朝廷内外的文武官员分别递升了勋爵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court were promoted to lords.

古文：辛未，赐九经李符本科出身。
现代文：初九，赐给考试九经的李进本科出身。
English: Li Jin, who was given nine sutras for the junior high school exam, is a graduate of an undergraduate school.

古文：壬午，畋近郊。
现代文：二十日，太祖到近郊打猎。
English: On the 20th, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

