古文：孝平皇帝，元帝庶孙，中山孝王子也。
现代文：汉平帝，是汉元帝的孙子，中山孝王的儿子。
English: Emperor Hanping was the grandson of Emperor Han Yuan and the son of Emperor Zhongshan.

古文：母曰卫姬。
现代文：母亲是卫姬。
English: His mother was Wei Ji.

古文：年三岁嗣立为王。
现代文：三岁的时候继位为王。
English: He succeeded to the throne at the age of three.

古文：元寿二年六月，哀帝崩，太皇太后诏曰： 大司马贤年少，不合众心。其上印、绶，罢。 
现代文：元寿二年六月，哀帝驾崩，太皇太后下诏说： 大司马董贤年少，不受大家欢迎，应交还印绶，撤销其官职。 
English: In June of the second year of Yuan Shou, after the death of Emperor Ai, the Empress Dowager issued an edict saying: Grand Secretary Ma Dongxian is young and unwelcome by everyone, he should return the seal money and revoke his official position.

古文：贤即日自杀。
现代文：董贤当日自杀。
English: Dong Xian committed suicide the same day.

古文：新都侯王莽为大司马，领尚书事。秋七月，遣车骑将军王舜、大鸿胪左咸使持节迎中山王。
现代文：新都侯王莽为大司马，掌丞相事秋七月，派车骑将军王舜、大鸿胪左贤咸持太皇太后诏迎中山王。
English: Wang Mang, the prince of the new capital, was the chief steward, and in the autumn and July, he sent a car to ride on the general Wang Qian and the great giant Zou Xian to hold the great empress dowager to welcome the king of Zhongshan.

古文：辛卯，贬皇太后赵氏为孝成皇后，退居北宫，哀帝皇后傅氏退居桂宫。
现代文：七月三十日，贬皇太后赵飞燕为孝成皇后，退居于北宫，哀帝皇后傅氏退居桂宫。
English: On July 30, Zhao Feiyan, the deposed empress dowager, became the empress of Xiaocheng and retired to the North Palace, while Fu Shi, the empress dowager, retired to the Gui Palace.

古文：孔乡侯傅晏、少府董恭等皆免官爵，徙合浦。
现代文：孔乡侯傅晏、少府董恭等都予免职，迁徙到合浦。
English: Kongxiang Hou Fuyao, Shaofu Donggyong and others were dismissed and moved to Hapu.

古文：九月辛卯，中山王即皇帝位，谒高庙，大赦天下。
现代文：九月初一日，中山王登皇帝位，晋谒高祖庙，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of September, Zhongshan Wang ascended to the throne of the emperor, promoted to Gaozhu Temple, and pardoned the world.

古文：帝年九岁，太皇太后临朝，大司马莽秉政，百官总己以听于莽。
现代文：平帝时年九岁，太皇太后垂帘听政，大司马王莽操持国政，百官聚于朝廷东厅以听取王莽的指示。
English: When Emperor Ping was nine years old, the empress dowager was listening to politics, the grand secretary Ma Wang Mang was conducting state affairs, and hundreds of officials gathered in the East Hall of the Imperial Court to listen to Wang Mang's instructions.

古文：诏曰： 夫赦令者，将与天下更始，诚欲令百姓改行洁己，全其性命也。
现代文：下诏说： 朝廷每发布赦免令，是打算与天下重新开始，真心地希望百姓能洗心革面，以保全其品格与性命的。
English: The next edict said: Every time the imperial court issues an amnesty order, it intends to make a new start with the world, and sincerely hopes that the people can wash their hearts and change their faces in order to preserve their character and lives.

古文：往者有司多举奏赦前事，累增罪过，诛陷亡辜，殆非重信慎刑，洒心自新之意也。
现代文：以往有关官员在量刑时多把赦令前所犯的过失重提，累增犯法者的罪过，甚至株陷无辜之人。违背了朝廷发布赦令是为了重信慎刑与希望有罪过的人涤心自新的原意。
English: In the past, when sentencing, the relevant officials often referred to the faults committed before the pardon order, and the sins of the lawbreakers increased, and even innocent people were imprisoned. It violated the original intention of the Imperial Court to issue a pardon order in order to emphasize the prudence of punishment and hope that the guilty would cleanse their hearts.

古文：及选举者，其历职更事有名之士，则以为难保，废而弗举，甚谬于赦小过举贤材之义。
现代文：对于举荐的人才，也因为他在历史上曾犯过某种过错，以为不可信任，就废置而不举荐。这就完全背离了孔子说的 赦小过，举贤才 的原则。
English: For the recommended talent, also because he has committed some kind of mistake in history and is considered untrustworthy, he is discarded and not recommended. This is completely contrary to the principle of "forgive minor faults and promote talents" said by Confucius.

古文：诸有臧及内恶未发而荐举者，勿案验。
现代文：对于虽有经济及品行方面的错误但无人告发而被举荐的人，一律不必查究。
English: There is no need to investigate anyone who has been recommended without being reported, even if they have made financial or moral mistakes.

古文：令士厉精乡进，不以小疵妨大材。
现代文：以便鼓励人才集中精力去追求进步，不因小的疵点而妨碍一个难得的人才。
English: In order to encourage talents to concentrate on the pursuit of progress, and not to hinder a rare talent due to minor defects.

古文：自今以来，有司无得陈赦前事置奏上。
现代文：从现在起，有关机构的官员不必陈奏赦前所犯的过失。
English: From now on, officials of the relevant agencies do not have to explain the mistakes committed before the pardon.

古文：有不如诏书为亏恩，以不道论。
现代文：有不遵此诏书的为有亏皇恩，以违背帝诏论处。
English: Any failure to comply with this edict would be considered a breach of the emperor's grace and punished as a violation of the imperial edict.

古文：定著令，布告天下，使明知之。 
现代文：特明著此令，布告天下，使明知其事。 
English: He specifically issued this order and announced it to the world so that everyone would know about it.

古文：元始元年春正月，越裳氏重译献白雉一，黑雉二，诏使三公以荐宗庙。
现代文：元始元年春正月，南方远国越裳氏献白雉一只，黑雉二只，诏令三公以此物献于宗庙。
English: At the beginning of the first month of spring in the first year of the first century, the Yuexiao clan from a faraway country in the south offered one white pheasant and two black pheasants, and ordered the three princes to offer them to the ancestral temple.

古文：群臣奏言大司马莽功德比周公，赐号安汉公，及太师孔光等皆益封。语在《莽传》。
现代文：群臣奏言大司马王莽功德像周公辅成王一样崇高，特赐号为安汉公，对太师孔光等都加封，其事记在《王莽传》。
English: The dignitaries reported that the great master Ma Wang Mang's merits were as lofty as those of Zhou Gongfu Cheng Wang. He was given the special title of Anhan Gong, and the great master Kong Guang was also given a seal. His story is recorded in "Wang Mang Biography."

古文：赐天下民爵一级，吏在位二百石以上，一切满秩如真。
现代文：赏赐天下臣民爵一级。官吏在位二百石以上，试用期未满的都按已满看待。
English: Government officials with more than 200 koku in their ranks, and those who have not completed their probationary period, will be regarded as having completed it.

古文：立故东平王云太子开明为王，故桃乡顷侯子成都为中山王。
现代文：发全俸。立已故东平王刘云的太子开明为王，立已故桃乡顷侯之子刘成都为中山王。
English: He appointed Prince Kaiming, the son of the late Dongping King Liu Yun, as the king, and appointed Liu Chengdu, the son of the late Prince Taoxiang, as the king of Zhongshan.

古文：封宣帝耳孙信等三十六人皆为列侯。
现代文：封宣帝耳孙刘信等三十六人都为列侯。
English: Thirty-six people, including Liu Xin, the son of Emperor Xuanzong, were vassals.

古文：太仆王恽等二十五人前议定陶傅太后尊号，守经法，不阿指从邪；右将军孙建爪牙大臣，大鸿胪咸前正议不阿，后奉节使迎中山王；及宗正刘不恶、执金吾任岑、中郎将孔永、尚书令姚恂、沛郡太守石诩，皆以前与建策，东迎即位，奉事周密勤劳，赐爵关内侯，食邑各有差。
现代文：太仆王恽等二十五人以前在议定陶傅太后尊号时，严守经法，不阿附从邪，右将军孙健辅弼大臣，大鸿胪左贤正义不阿，后来奉太皇太后诏迎中山王，还有宗正刘不恶、执金吾任岑、中郎将孔永、尚书令姚恂、沛郡太守石诩都曾参与继承人大事的讨论，东迎中山王继承帝位，办事周密勤劳，都赐爵为关内侯，封邑有所差别。
English: Twenty-five people, including the eunuch Wang Qian, strictly adhered to the sutras and did not follow the evil, the right general Sun Jianfu, the minister of justice, the great general Zuoxian, and later, the king of Zhongshan, according to the edict of the empress dowager, the general Zong Zheng Liu, the general Zheng Gu, the general Zong Yong, the general Zang Shuling Yao, and the general Zheng Shi, the governor of Pei County, all participated in the discussion of the succession, and the king of Zhongshan inherited the throne, and worked diligently. They were all given the title of Gu

古文：赐帝征即位所过县邑吏二千石以下至佐史爵，各有差。
现代文：赏赐平帝在继位前来京师时所经过的县邑的官员从二千石以下到佐史的爵级。各有差等。
English: He rewarded the officials of the counties and townships that he passed through when he came to Beijing to succeed the throne, from less than 2,000 koku to the peerage of Sashi. There are differences.

古文：又令诸侯王、公、列侯、关内侯亡子而有孙若子同产子者，皆得以为嗣。
现代文：又诏令各侯王、公、列侯、关内侯等无子而有孙或养兄弟之子为嗣的，都可以为爵位继承人。
English: It was also decreed that princes, dukes, vassals, and vassals who had no sons, but had grandsons or adopted brothers as heirs, could inherit the title of nobility.

古文：公、列侯嗣子有罪，耐以上先请。
现代文：公、列侯嗣子有罪，犯剃光头以上罪的先要请示朝廷。
English: If a prince or a prince's heir is guilty of a crime of shaving his head or more, he must first petition the imperial court.

古文：宗室属未尽而以罪绝者，复其属。其为吏举廉佐史，补四百石。
现代文：名列刘氏皇谱而因犯罪被开除族籍的，恢复其族籍，宗室中为吏的因依廉史升为佐史的，补禄为四百石。
English: Those who were expelled from the nationality due to a crime and were listed in the Liu Emperor's genealogy were reinstated their nationality. Those who were officials in the family were promoted to assistant historians due to their incorruptible history, and the supplementary stipend was four hundred koku.

古文：天下吏比二千石以上年老致仕者，参分故禄，以一与之，终其身。
现代文：天下官吏俸同二千石以上年老退休的，三分其原禄，用三分之一与其本人，以养天年。
English: If a lower-ranking government official with a salary of more than 2,000 koku retires at an old age, he or she will receive one-third of his or her former salary and one-third of his or her own salary to support the old age.

古文：遣谏大夫行三辅，举籍吏民，以元寿二年仓卒时横赋敛者，偿其直。
现代文：派谏大夫循行三辅，考查吏民交纳赋敛的册籍，凡因在元寿二年仓促时加收的赋敛，偿还其增加部分。
English: Dr. Pai followed the three-pronged approach, examined the register of officials and the people who received tax rebates, and reimbursed the increased part of the tax rebates due to the hasty increase in the second year of the first year of life.

古文：义陵民冢不妨殿中者勿发。
现代文：义陵民冢不妨碍皇陵塘中正殿的不必迁走。
English: There is no need to move away from the main hall of the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：天下吏民亡得置什器储偫。
现代文：天下吏民不得拥有军队的器物及行军厨灶等。
English: Under heaven, officials and citizens are not allowed to own military utensils and marching kitchens.

古文：二月，置羲和官，秩二千石；外史、闾师，秩六百石。
现代文：二月，设置主管阴阳时序的羲和官，禄为二千石；设外史、闾师，禄为六百石。
English: In February, a magistrate in charge of yin and yang chronology was set up, with a stipend of 2,000 koku; an outside historian and a magistrate were set up, with a stipend of 600 koku.

古文：班教化，禁淫祀，放郑声。
现代文：以颁布朝廷教化之令，禁止不合礼制规定的祭祀，摒除靡靡之声。
English: With the promulgation of the imperial edict of edification, prohibiting sacrificial rites that do not meet the requirements of the etiquette system, the voices of defeat were eliminated.

古文：乙未，义陵寝神衣在柙中，丙申旦，衣在外床上，寝令以急变闻。
现代文：二月七日，哀帝陵神衣在柜中，八日的早晨，却出现在外床上，墓令以非常之变奏明朝廷。
English: On February 7th, the coffin was in the cabinet, but on the morning of the 8th, it appeared on the outer bed, and the tombstone order was sent to the Ming court with a very unusual change.

古文：用太牢祠。
现代文：平帝用大牢进行祭祷。
English: Emperor Ping used the dungeon as a place of worship.

古文：夏五月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏季五月初一，出现日偏食。
English: In summer, a partial solar eclipse occurs on the first day of May.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：公卿、将军、中二千石举敦厚能直言者各一人。
现代文：公卿、将军、中二千石举荐敦厚能直言的各一人。
English: Court nobles, generals, and 2,000-koku junior high school students each recommended a person who could speak frankly.

古文：六月，使少府左将军丰赐帝母中山孝王姬玺书，拜为中山孝王后。
现代文：六月，派少傅左将军甄丰赐平帝母中山孝王姬以玺书，晋封为中山孝王后。
English: In June, he sent Zhen Feng, a minor Fu Zu general, to give the imperial letter to Emperor Ping's mother, Zhongshan Xiaowang Ji, and promoted her to the position of Zhongshan Xiaowang Queen.

古文：赐帝舅卫宝、宝弟玄爵关内侯。
现代文：赐帝舅卫宝及宝弟卫玄爵关内侯。
English: Uncle Wei Bao and brother Wei Xuan Jie were given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：赐帝女弟四人号皆曰君，食邑各二千户。
现代文：赐平帝妹妹四人都称为君，食汤沐邑二千户。
English: Emperor Ping's four younger sisters are all called Jun, and there are two thousand households in the soup kitchen.

古文：封周公后公孙相如为褒鲁侯，孔子后孔均为褒成侯，奉其祀。
现代文：封周公后公孙相如为褒鲁侯，孔子后孔均为褒成侯。奉周公与孔子的祭祀。
English: After the death of Zhou Gong, Gong's grandsons were all awarded the title of Prince of Lu, and after the death of Confucius, Gong was awarded the title of Prince of Chengdu.

古文：追谥孔子曰褒成宣尼公。
现代文：追谥孔子为褒成宣尼公。
English: Chasing after Confucius is a way of praising Confucius.

古文：罢明光宫及三辅驰道。
现代文：罢去明光宫及三辅驰道。
English: Let's go to the Mingguang Palace and the three subsidiary roads.

古文：天下女徒已论，归家，顾山钱月三百。
现代文：天下女犯已定罪的，令其归家，每月出钱三百以雇人取薪。
English: If a female offender has been convicted, she is ordered to return home and pay 300 yuan a month to hire someone to collect her salary.

古文：复贞妇，乡一人。
现代文：免除贞妇赋役，每乡一人。
English: exempt chaste women from military service, one from each township.

古文：置少府海丞、果丞各一人；大司农部丞十三人，人部一州，劝农桑。
现代文：设置少府海丞、果丞各一人；大司农郡丞十三人，每人负责一个州，劝勉发展农桑。
English: There will be one minor prefectural governor and one major prefectural governor; thirteen major prefectural governors, each responsible for a prefecture, to encourage the development of agricultural mulberry.

古文：太皇太后省所食汤沐邑十县，属大司农，常别计其租入，以赡贫民。
现代文：太皇太后减去所食汤沐邑十县，归属于大司农，经常另外计算其税收所得，用以救济平民。
English: The empress dowager subtracted ten counties of Muyi from the soup she ate, which belonged to the farmers. She often calculated their tax income separately to help the common people.

古文：秋九月，赦天下徒。
现代文：秋季九月，赦天下囚徒。
English: In September of the autumn, he pardoned all the prisoners.

古文：以中山苦陉县为中山孝王后汤沐邑。
现代文：以中山苦陉县为中山孝王后汤沐邑。
English: Take Zhongshan Bitou County as Zhongshan Xiaowangyu Tang Mui.

古文：二年春，黄支国献犀牛。
现代文：二年春季，黄支国贡献犀牛。
English: In the spring of the second year, Huangshi Province contributed the first rhinoceros.

古文：诏曰： 皇帝二名，通于器物，今更名，合于古制。使太师光奉太牢告祠高庙。 
现代文：下诏书说：皇帝原名箕子，与用器名相同，今改名为絗，以合于古制，派太师光奉太牢告事于高祖祠庙。
English: The next edict said: The emperor's original name was Zizi, which is the same as the name of the utensil. Now it has been renamed Zou, so as to conform to the ancient system. He sent the Grand Master Guang Bong too firmly to the ancestral temple of Gao Zu.

古文：夏四月，立代孝王玄孙之子如意为广宗王，江都易王孙盱台侯宫为广川王，广川惠王曾孙伦为广德王。
现代文：夏季四月，立代孝王玄孙之子刘如意为广宗王，江都易王孙盱台侯刘宫为广川王，广川德王曾孙刘伦为广德王。
English: In the summer of April, Liu Ruyi, the son of the great-great-grandson of the founding king Xiao Wang, became the king of Guangzong, the son of the king of Jiangdu Yi, the son of the prince of Xingtai, Liu Gong, became the king of Guangchuan, and the great-grandson of the king of Guangchuan, Liu Ren, became the king of Guangde.

古文：封故大司马博陆侯霍光从父昆弟曾孙阳、宣平侯张敖玄孙庆忌、绛侯周勃玄孙共、舞阳侯樊哙玄孙之子章皆为列侯，复爵。
现代文：封已故大司马博陆侯霍光从昆弟曾孙霍阳，宣平侯张敖玄孙张庆忌、绛侯周勃玄孙周共、舞阳侯樊哙玄孙之子樊章都为列侯，恢复其官爵。
English: The great-grandson of Kun Di, Hoyang, who was a vassal of the late Grand Master Mabo Lu, Hokwang, the great-grandson of Hoyang, the great-grandson of Xuanping, Zhang Xuan, the great-grandson of Zhang Qingyi, the great-grandson of Zhou Bo, the great-grandson of Zhou Gong, and the son of Wuyang, the great-grandson of Zhou Xuan, were all vassals, and their titles were restored.

古文：赐故曲周侯郦商等后玄孙郦明友等百一十三人爵关内侯，食邑各有差。
现代文：赐已故曲周侯郦商等后代玄孙郦明友等一百一十三人爵为关内侯，食邑各有差等。
English: The descendants of the late Qu Zhou Hou and other merchants, such as the great-great-grandson of Zhou Mingyou, were given 113 peerages as Guanai Hou, and the food in each village was different.

古文：郡国大旱，蝗，青州尤甚，民流亡。
现代文：郡国发生大的旱灾、蝗灾，青州最严重，百姓到处逃荒。
English: Major droughts and locust plagues occurred in the county and state, with the most serious in Qingzhou. People fled from the famine everywhere.

古文：安汉公、四辅、三公、卿大夫、吏民为百姓困乏献其田宅者二百三十人，以口赋贫民。
现代文：安汉公、四辅、三公、卿大夫、吏民为帮助百姓解决困难而捐献房屋与土地的有二百三十人，按照人口分配给贫民。
English: In order to help the people solve their difficulties, 230 people, including Anhan, Shifu, Sankong, noble doctors and officials, donated houses and land, which were distributed to the poor according to the population.

古文：遣使者捕蝗，民捕蝗诣吏，以石、斗受钱。天下民赀不满二万及被灾之郡不满十万，勿租税。
现代文：派遣使者负责灭蝗，百姓将捕杀的蝗虫送交官府，用石斗量蝗后按数付钱，天下的百姓的家资不满二万，以及受灾的郡县家资不满十万的，都免交租税。
English: Envoys will be dispatched to exterminate the locusts, and the people will send the locusts they have killed to the government offices. Locusts will be measured with stone buckets, and then payment will be made according to the number of locusts. People around the world whose household assets are less than 20,000, as well as counties and counties affected by the disaster whose household assets are less than 100,000, are exempt from paying taxes.

古文：民疾疫者，舍空邸第，为置医药。
现代文：灾民中的病人，安置在捐献的邸舍房屋中，进行医治。
English: The sick among the victims of the disaster were placed in donated mansions and houses for treatment.

古文：赐死者一家六尸以上葬钱五千，四尸以上三千，二尸以上二千。
现代文：给死者一家死六人以上的葬钱五千，死四人以上的三千，死二人以上的二千。
English: For a family of six or more deceased, the funeral fee is 5,000, for four or more deceased, it is 3,000, and for two or more deceased, it is 2,000.

古文：罢安定呼池苑，以为安民县，起官寺市里，募徙贫民，县次给食。
现代文：撤销安定的呼池苑，改为安民县，起官署与住房，招募贫民迁居于此，由县官发给口粮。
English: Revoke the stable Huchien, change it to Anmin County, set up a government office and housing, recruit poor people to move here, and distribute rations by the county official.

古文：至徙所，赐田宅什器，假与犁、牛、种、食。
现代文：到迁移处以后，由公家分配给房屋土地与用具，并借给犁、牛、种、口粮。
English: After arriving at the relocation site, the official allocated houses, land and equipment, and lent them ploughs, cattle, seeds and rations.

古文：又起五里于长安城中，宅二百区，以居贫民。
现代文：又起五个居民里于长安城中，修住宅二百区，以供贫民居住。
English: In Chang'an City, another five residential districts were built in 200 districts for the poor to live in.

古文：秋，举勇武有节明兵法，郡一人，诣公车。
现代文：秋，下诏各郡举荐勇武而又懂兵法的，每郡一人，到公车署报到。
English: In autumn, one person from each county who is brave and knows military tactics will be recommended by each county to report to the bus station.

古文：九月戊申晦，日有蚀之。赦天下徒。
现代文：九月三十日，出现日偏食，赦免天下囚徒。
English: On September 30th, a partial solar eclipse occurred, and prisoners around the world were pardoned.

古文：使谒者大司马掾四十四人持节行边兵。
现代文：派谒者大司马掾四十四人持朝廷符节巡视边防部队。
English: Chief Magistrate Ma Jun, who dispatched the troops, led a patrol of 44 men holding imperial regalia to inspect the border troops.

古文：遣执金吾侯陈茂假以钲鼓，募汝南、南阳勇敢吏士三百人，谕说江湖贼成重等二百余人皆自出，送家在所收事。重徙云阳，赐公田宅。
现代文：派执金吾侯陈茂并临时使用铙鼓以重其威仪，募集汝南、南阳勇敢吏士三百人，晓谕并劝说江湖盗首成重等二百余人自首投诚，送回原籍为民并按章从事赋役，将贼首成重迁于云阳，并赏赐公田公宅。
English: He dispatched Jinwuhou Chenmao and temporarily used gongs and drums to emphasize his authority, recruited three hundred brave officials from Runan and Nanyang, exhorted and persuaded more than two hundred people such as Jianghu thief Shoucheng to surrender, sent them back to their place of origin as citizens and engaged in forced labor according to regulations, relocated the thief Shoucheng to Yunyang, and rewarded them with public lands and houses.

古文：冬，中二千石举治狱平，岁一人。
现代文：冬季，中二千石举荐治狱公平的吏员，每年一人。
English: In winter, one official per year from each of the 2,000-koku junior high schools will be recommended to administer justice in the prison.

古文：三年春，诏有司为皇帝纳采安汉公莽女。
现代文：三年春季，诏有关机构为平帝与安汉公王莽之女行订婚礼。
English: In the spring of the 3rd year of the Heian period, the relevant agencies arranged a wedding between Emperor Ping and the daughter of Prince Mang of Anhan.

古文：语在《莽传》。
现代文：记在《王莽传》中。
English: It is recorded in "Wang Mang Chuan."

古文：又诏光禄大夫刘歆等杂定婚礼。四辅、公卿、大夫、博士、郎、吏家属皆以礼娶，亲迎立轺并马。
现代文：又诏光禄大夫刘歆等制定婚礼仪节，四辅、公卿、大夫、博士、郎、吏家属都要按婚礼举行结婚仪式。
English: In addition, the Guanglu doctor Liu Wei and others formulated the wedding ceremony festival, and the four auxiliary, noblemen, doctors, doctors, brothers-in-law, and officials' families should hold the wedding ceremony according to the wedding ceremony.

古文：夏，安汉公奏车服制度，吏民养生、送终、嫁娶、奴婢、田宅、器械之品。
现代文：迎娶时用立车双马。夏季，安汉公上奏请建立有关车马与衣服等制度，对于吏民的养生、送终、嫁娶、奴婢、田宅、用品等都有明确的等级规定。
English: When marrying, use a horse-drawn carriage. In the summer, the Anghan Emperor requested the establishment of a system related to horses and clothes. There are clear class regulations for officials and people's health, death, marriage, slaves, farmhouses, supplies and so on.

古文：立官稷及学官：郡国曰学，县、道、邑、侯国曰校，校、学置经师一人；乡曰庠，聚曰序，序、痒置《孝经》师一人。
现代文：建立官稷及学宫。郡国的称为学，县、道、邑、侯国称为校。校与学都设专职经师一人。乡称为庠，村落称为序，序、庠设专职《孝经》师一人。
English: Establish a government office and a school palace. The county is called the school, and the county, province, county and province is called the school. The school and the school both have one full-time teacher. The township is called the township, the village is called the village, and there is one full-time "Filial Piety" teacher for the township and village.

古文：阳陵任横等自称将军，盗库兵，攻官寺，出囚徒。
现代文：阳陵任横等自称为将军，盗出武库兵器，攻打官署，释放囚徒。
English: Yangling Ren and others called themselves generals, stole weapons from arsenals, attacked government offices, and released prisoners.

古文：大司徒掾督逐，皆伏辜。
现代文：大司掾奉命督捕，全都伏罪。
English: Daishi was ordered to supervise the arrest, and all of them committed a crime.

古文：安汉公世子宇与帝外家卫氏有谋。宇下狱死，诛卫氏。
现代文：安汉公王莽之子王宇与平帝外戚家卫氏有谋反之罪，王宇下狱处死，卫氏被诛。
English: Wang Yu, the son of Prince Mang of Anhan, and the maternal relative of Emperor Ping, Jia Wei, were guilty of plotting rebellion. Wang Yu was sent to prison and executed, while Wei was imprisoned.

古文：四年春正月，郊祀高祖以配天，宗祀孝文以配上帝。
现代文：四年春季正月，郊祭高祖以配享于天，宗祀文帝以配享于上天。
English: In the spring of the first month of the fourth year, the suburb festival Gaozu was held to enjoy heaven, and the religious service Emperor Wen was held to enjoy heaven.

古文：改殷绍嘉公曰宋公，周承休公曰郑公。
现代文：改殷绍嘉公名宋公，周承休侯名郑公。
English: He changed Yin Shao Jia's name to Song Gong and Zhou Chengyu's name to Zheng Gong.

古文：诏曰： 盖夫妇正则父子亲，人伦定矣。
现代文：下诏说： 大凡夫妇正则父子亲，人伦定。
English: The next edict said: The great couple are father and son, and their character is the same.

古文：前诏有司复贞妇，归女徒，诚欲以防邪辟，全贞信。
现代文：以前曾诏令有关机构免除贞节之妇的赋役，遣犯罪的女囚回家，本意是想防止邪僻，褒全贞信。
English: Previously, relevant agencies had been ordered to exempt women of chastity from military service and to send female prisoners who had committed crimes back home. The intention was to prevent perversion and to reward chastity.

古文：及眊掉之人刑罚所不加，圣王之所以制也。
现代文：对于年八十及七岁以下的人，不加以刑罚，这是古代圣王所规定的。
English: For those who are eighty years old and under the age of seven, there is no punishment, which is stipulated by the ancient sages.

古文：惟苛暴吏多拘系犯法者亲属，妇女老弱，构怨伤化，百姓苦之。
现代文：但现在有些苛暴吏员多拘系犯法者的亲属，妇女老弱不免，结仇怨而伤王化，百姓深为痛苦。
English: But now some of the harsh officials are often relatives of the criminal offenders, the women are old and weak, and the people are deeply pained.

古文：其明敕百僚，妇女非身犯法，及男子年八十以上七岁以下，家非坐不道，诏所名捕，它皆无得系。
现代文：现明谕百官，妇女不是本身犯法，男子在八十以上七岁以下家里不是犯了大逆不道，皇帝下诏按名逮捕的，都不得拘捕。
English: It is hereby expressly ordered to all officials that no woman shall be arrested unless she herself has broken the law, and no man shall be arrested unless he has committed high treason or misdemeanors in his family and is over eighty years of age and under seven years of age, and has been arrested in his own name by imperial edict.

古文：其当验者，即验问。
现代文：应当验问的，就地验问。
English: If there is to be an interrogation, it should be conducted on the spot.

古文：定著令。 
现代文：特定此令。 
English: This order is specific.

古文：二月丁未，立皇后王氏，大赦天下。
现代文：二月初七日，立皇后王氏，大赦天下。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, the Queen Wang clan was established, and the country was amnestied.

古文：遣太仆王恽等八人置副，假节，分行天下，览观风俗。
现代文：派太仆王恽等八人并置副使，持朝廷命令，分别循行天下，览观风俗。
English: He sent eight people, including the imperial servant Wang Qian, as concurrent vice-envoys, with orders from the imperial court to travel around the world and observe customs.

古文：赐九卿已下至六百石、宗室有属籍者爵，自五大夫以上各有差。
现代文：赏赐九卿以下至六百石，刘氏宗谱上有名者以爵级，从五大夫以上各有差等。
English: Nine lords and below were awarded up to 600 koku, and those famous in the Liu family tree were given peerage, with different amounts for the five great lords and above.

古文：赐天下民爵一级，鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。
现代文：赏赐天下臣民爵一级，赏鳏寡孤独高年帛若干。
English: Reward the world's subjects with a first-class title, and reward the widows, the lonely, and the elderly with several stars.

古文：夏，皇后见于高庙。加安汉公号曰 宰衡 。赐公太夫人号曰功显君。
现代文：夏季，皇后拜谒高祖庙，加安汉公号为 宰衡 ，赐安汉公太夫人名功显君。
English: In summer, the empress paid homage to the Gaozhu Temple, and bestowed upon the wife of Prince Anhan the title of Zaiheng.

古文：封公子安、临皆为列侯。
现代文：封其子王安、王临皆为列侯。
English: His sons, Wang An and Wang Lin, were appointed as vassals.

古文：安汉公奏立明堂、辟雍。
现代文：安汉公王莽奏建立明堂、辟雍。
English: Prince Anhan boldly established the Ming Dynasty and the Yong Dynasty.

古文：尊孝宣庙为中宗，孝元庙为高宗，天子世世献祭。
现代文：尊称宣帝庙为中宗，元帝庙为高宗，天子世世献祭。
English: The honorifics of Xuan Di Temple are Zhong Zong, Yuan Di Temple is Gao Zong, and Tian Zi Zi Zi Zi Zi Zong.

古文：置西海郡，徙天下犯禁者处之。
现代文：设置西海郡，迁移天下犯禁的犯人到此居住。
English: Set up Xihai County, relocate prisoners who have violated the national ban to live here.

古文：梁王立有罪，自杀。
现代文：梁王立有罪，自杀了。
English: Liang Wangli was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：分京师置前辉光、后丞烈二郡。
现代文：分出京师一部分建立前恽光、后丕烈二郡。
English: A part of the Beijing Division was separated to establish two counties, the former Jiguang and the latter Jialing.

古文：更公卿、大夫、八十一元士官名、位次及十二州名。
现代文：更改公卿、大夫、八十一元士官名与位次及十二州的名称。
English: Change the names and ranks of court nobles, doctors, and eighty-one yuan officers, as well as the names of twelve states.

古文：分界郡国所属，罢、置、改易，天下多事，吏不能纪。
现代文：划分郡国所属的界限，撤销、设置、更改，天下多事，吏员无法纪录清楚。
English: Dividing the boundaries of county and state affiliation, revoking, setting, changing, there are many things in the world, and the clerk cannot record clearly.

古文：冬，大风吹长安城东门屋瓦且尽。
现代文：冬季，大风袭长安城，东门屋瓦被吹尽。
English: In winter, a strong wind hit Chang'an City, and the roof tiles of the East Gate were blown away.

古文：五年春正月，祫祭明堂。诸侯王二十八人、列侯百二十人、宗室子九百余人征助祭。
现代文：五年春正月，礻合祭明堂，各侯王二十八人，列侯一百二十人，宗室子九百余人参加助祭。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, there were twenty-eight princes, one hundred and twenty vassals, and more than nine hundred vassals who participated in the festival.

古文：礼毕，皆益户，赐爵及金、帛，增秩、补吏，各有差。
现代文：礼毕，都增加封地户口，赏赐爵级及金帛，增加俸禄与升职，各有差等。
English: As a courtesy, they all increased their fiefdom accounts, awarded knighthoods and gold medals, increased salaries and promotions, and so on.

古文：诏曰： 盖闻帝王以德抚民，其次亲亲以相及也。
现代文：太皇太后下诏说： 听说帝王首先以德抚民，其次是亲其所亲以互相帮助。
English: The empress dowager issued an edict saying, "I have heard that emperors should first help the people with virtue, and secondly, help their loved ones to help each other.

古文：昔尧睦九族，舜惇叙之。
现代文：以往尧命名九族敦睦，舜又厚叙这亲亲之意。
English: In the past, Jiuzhong Dunmu was named Jiuzhong Dunmu, and the meaning of this kinship was strongly emphasized.

古文：朕以皇帝幼年，且统国政，惟宗室子皆太祖高皇帝子孙及兄弟吴顷、楚元之后，汉元至今，十有余万人，虽有王侯这属，莫能相纠，或陷入刑罪，教训不至之咎也。
现代文：朕因皇帝值于幼年，暂统国政，念及宗室子孙都是太祖高皇帝子孙及其兄弟吴顷王、楚元王的后代，从汉朝初建时起刘氏子孙已发展到十余万人。虽有王侯的属籍，也不能互相保证不触犯刑律。有的陷入刑罪，这是教训不周的过失。
English: Because the emperor was in his infancy, he temporarily ruled the country, bearing in mind that his descendants are the descendants of Emperor Taizu Gao and his brothers, King Wu He and King Chu Yuan. Since the founding of the Han Dynasty, the descendants of the Liu clan have grown to more than 100,000 people. Although they have the nationality of princes, they cannot guarantee each other not to violate the criminal law. Some have fallen into criminal offenses, which is an ill-learned mistake.

古文：传不云乎？ 君子笃于亲，则民兴于仁。 
现代文：《论语》不是指出过吗？ 在上者关心其亲属，则百姓行仁成风。 
English: Didn't the Analects of Confucius point out that when people care about their relatives, benevolence becomes popular?

古文：其为宗室，自太上皇以来族亲，各以世氏，郡国置宗师以纠之，致教训焉。
现代文：现在作出规定：从太上皇以来的族亲，各以其世代为氏，郡国派专人进行管理，对其进行教育与约束。
English: It is now stipulated that the relatives from the time of the Emperor, each according to his generation, shall be the clan, and the county and state shall send special personnel to manage, educate and restrict them.

古文：二千石选有德义者以为宗师。
现代文：二千石选派有德义之士为其宗师。
English: A man of virtue and righteousness was selected from 2,000 koku of rice to be his mentor.

古文：考察不从教令有冤失职者，宗师得因邮亭书言宗信，请以闻。
现代文：考察其中有不从教令或者蒙冤失其常业的，宗师将情况报告宗伯，再报告朝廷。
English: If, during the inspection, any of them did not follow the edict or were unjustly deprived of their regular occupation, the guru would report the situation to the patriarch, and then to the imperial court.

古文：常以岁正月赐宗师帛各十匹。 
现代文：每年正月赏赐宗正帛各十匹。 
English: Every year in the first month of the year, ten Dzongzheng horses are awarded.

古文：羲和刘歆等四人使治明堂、辟雍，令汉与文王灵台、周公作洛同符。
现代文：羲和官刘歆等四人负责主管明堂、辟雍，使汉与周文王作灵台、周公作洛邑相符合。
English: Four people, including the eunuch and official Liu Ye, were in charge of the Ming and Yong dynasties, so that Han was consistent with Zhou Wenwang as the spiritual platform and Zhou Gong as Luoyang.

古文：太仆王恽等八人使行风俗，宣明德化，万国齐同。皆封为列侯。
现代文：太仆王恽等八人到各地循行了解风俗，宣传朝廷德政，万国齐同，都封为列侯。
English: Eight people, including the eunuch Wang Yao, traveled to various regions to learn about customs and propagandize the German policy of the imperial court. All countries were united, and all were crowned as princes.

古文：征天下通知逸经、古记、天文、历算、钟律、小学、《史篇》、方术、《本草》及以《五经》、《论语》、《孝经》、《尔雅》教授者，在所为驾一封轺传，遣诣京师。至者数千人。
现代文：征天下能精通逸经、古纪、天文、历算、钟律、小学、史篇、方术、本草以及《五经》、《论语》、《孝经》、《尔雅》教授的，从所在地乘传车，派到京师。到京师数千人。
English: Those who are able to be proficient in the classics, ancient history, astronomy, calendars, horology, elementary school, history, Chinese medicine, herbalism, and the "Five Classics," "Analects," "Book of Filial Piety," and "Eloquence" will be sent to Beijing by train. Thousands of people will be sent to Beijing.

古文：闰月，立梁孝王玄孙之耳孙音为王。
现代文：闰五月，立梁孝王玄孙之耳孙音为王。
English: In leap May, Liang Xiaowang's great-great-grandson, Liang Xiaowang's great-great-grandson and Liang Xiaowang's great-great-grandson were crowned.

古文：冬十二月丙午，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：冬季十二月十六日，平帝驾崩于未央宫。
English: On December 16th in winter, Emperor Ping died in the Summer Palace.

古文：大赦天下。有司议曰： 礼，臣不殇君。
现代文：大赦天下，有司奏道： 按礼制臣无短寿之君。
English: There was a general amnesty throughout the country, and a scribe sang: According to the etiquette system, there is no short-lived prince.

古文：皇帝年十有四岁，宜以礼敛，加元服。 
现代文：皇帝年十四岁，应按礼制入殓，戴王冠。 
English: When an emperor is fourteen years old, he should be enthroned according to the etiquette and wear a crown.

古文：奏可。
现代文：太皇太后同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：葬康陵。
现代文：葬于康陵。
English: He was buried in Kangling.

古文：诏曰： 皇帝仁惠，无不顾哀，每疾一发，气辄上逆，害于言语，故不及有遗诏。
现代文：太皇太后下诏说： 皇帝仁惠，顾念哀怜。每次发病，气往上涌，不能言语，故来不及有遗诏。
English: The empress dowager issued an imperial edict saying, "The emperor is benevolent, considerate and compassionate. Every time I get sick, my spirits rise and I can't speak, so it's too late to issue an imperial edict."

古文：其出媵妾，皆归家得嫁，如孝文明故事。 
现代文：现遣返其陪嫁婢妾，回家可以另嫁，和文帝时一样。 
English: Now, his concubine has been repatriated, and she can return home to marry another man, just as Emperor Wen did.

古文：赞曰：孝平之世，政自莽出，褒善显功，以自尊盛。
现代文：班固评论：平帝之世，政从王莽所出。褒善显功，以显示其尊盛。
English: Ban Gu's comment: In the era of Emperor Ping, politics came from Wang Mang. He rewarded good deeds to show his dignity.

古文：观其文辞，方外百蛮，亡思不服；休征嘉应，颂声并作。
现代文：观其文辞，方外蛮夷，都思归服。美征嘉兆，颂声并作。
English: Looking at his words, outsiders are barbarians, and they all want to submit to him. He also wrote poems of beauty, auspiciousness, and praise.

古文：至乎变异见于上，民怨于下，莽亦不能文也。
现代文：至于变异见于上，民怨起于下，王莽也不能进行文饰了。
English: As for the variation seen above, the people's resentment arose below, Wang Mang could not carry out the decoration.

