古文：四战之国贵守战，负海之国贵攻战。
现代文：四面受敌的国家要重视防御，背靠大海的国家要重视打进攻战。
English: A country surrounded by enemies on all sides should attach importance to defense, and a country with its back to the sea should attach importance to fighting an offensive war.

古文：四战之国，好举兴兵以距四邻者，国危。
现代文：假如四面受敌的国家喜欢发兵进入自己邻国，那国家就危险了。
English: If an embattled country likes to send troops into its own neighborhood, that country is in danger.

古文：四邻之国一兴事，而己四兴军，故曰国危。
现代文：因为四面的邻国每兴兵一次，而自己就要四处派兵迎战，所以说国家就危险了。
English: Because every time its neighbors on all sides raise an army, it has to send troops everywhere to fight, so the country is in danger.

古文：四战之国，不能以万室之邑舍钜万之军者，其国危。
现代文：四面与他国接壤的国家，如果不能有上万户的城邑驻守数以万计的军队，这个国家就危险了。
English: A country that borders other countries on all sides would be in danger if it did not have tens of thousands of cities and towns garrisoning tens of thousands of troops.

古文：故曰：四战之国务在守战。
现代文：所以说四面与他国接壤的国家主要防御。
English: Therefore, it is said that the main defense of a country that borders other countries on all sides.

古文：守有城之邑，不如以死人之力与客生力战。
现代文：防守带城墙的城镇，不懂得用民众决一死战的力量与敌人求生的力量作战，城池一定会被攻下。
English: Towns and cities with defensive walls, which do not know how to use the power of the people to fight to the death and the power of the enemy to survive, will certainly be captured.

古文：其城拔者，死人之力也，客不尽夷城，客无从入，此谓以死人之力与客生力战。
现代文：如果守军拼死抵抗，入侵者也不能将城墙全部攻破，入侵者就无法进入城内，这就叫用拼死抵抗的力量与敌人求生的力量作战。
English: If the defenders desperately resist, the invaders cannot break through all the city walls, and the invaders cannot enter the city. This is called using the power of desperate resistance to fight the enemy's power to survive.

古文：城尽夷，客若有从入，则客必罢，中人必佚矣。
现代文：城墙上的守军如被全部杀死，入侵者假如打开进城的通道，但是他们一定极为疲劳，而城内的军队以逸待劳。
English: If the defenders on the wall are all killed, the invaders will escape if they open a passage into the city, but they must be extremely tired, and the troops inside the city are exhausted.

古文：以佚力与罢力战，此谓以生人力与客死力战。
现代文：用以逸待劳的兵力同疲惫的敌军作战，这就叫用精力充实的有生力量同疲惫的敌人作战。
English: To fight a tired enemy with exhausted troops is to fight a tired enemy with energized living forces.

古文：皆曰： 围城之患，患无不尽死而邑。 
现代文：因此都说： 围攻城镇的担忧是因为担心守军没有不为守卫自己的城镇拼死打仗的。 
English: Therefore, they all said: The fear of besieging towns is due to the fear that the defenders have not fought to the death to defend their towns.

古文：此三者，非患不足，将之过也。
现代文：这三种情况，如果入侵者考虑不够，这是将领战术上的错误。
English: In these three cases, if the invaders do not consider enough, it is a tactical mistake of the generals.

古文：守城之道，盛力也。
现代文：守卫城镇的基本原则是壮大自己的力量。
English: The basic principle of guarding towns is to increase one's strength.

古文：故曰客，治簿檄，三军之多，分以客之候车之数。
现代文：因此说，要仔细整理簿册，把三军的兵士按照入侵者侦察战车的数量编队。
English: Therefore, he said, it is necessary to carefully sort out the books and arrange the soldiers of the three armies according to the number of the invaders' reconnaissance chariots.

古文：三军：壮男为一军，壮女为一军，男女之老弱者为一军，此之谓三军也。
现代文：这三军是：壮年男子组成一支军队，壮年女子组成一支军队，男女老弱之人组成一支军队。
English: These three armies are: men of prime age form an army, women of prime age form an army, and men and women, old and weak, form an army.

古文：壮男之军，使盛食、厉兵，陈而待敌。壮女之军，使盛食、负垒，陈而待令；客至而作土以为险阻及耕格阱；发梁撤屋，给从从之，不洽而熯之，使客无得以助攻备。
现代文：壮年男子组成的军队，让他们吃饱饭，磨好武器，排开来等待敌人的到来；壮年女子组成的军队，让她们吃饱饭，背上装土用的笼子，排列开来等待上级的命令。敌军到了，就让她们用土堆成难以通过的障碍，挖好陷井，毁坏桥梁，拆除房屋，如果来得及，就把剩下的东西运走；如果来不及，就将这些东西烧掉，使敌人无法得到用来帮助攻城的东西。
English: An army of able-bodied men, let them eat their fill, sharpen their weapons, and line up to await the arrival of the enemy; an army of able-bodied women, let them eat their fill, carry earthen cages on their backs, and line up to await the orders of their superiors; when the enemy army arrives, let them use mounds of earth to make impassable obstacles, dig traps, destroy bridges, demolish houses, and if it is time, carry away the rest; if it is too late, burn these things, so that the enemy can not get the things used to help the siege.

古文：老弱之军，使牧牛马羊彘，草木之可食者，收而食之，以获其壮男女之食。
现代文：年老体弱的组成的军队，让他们去放牧牛、马、羊、猪，将草木中它们能吃的收集到一起喂养它们，以便获得壮年男女军队的食物。
English: An army composed of old and infirm, let them go to graze cattle, horses, sheep, pigs, collect what they can eat from the plants and feed them together, in order to obtain food for the army of men and women.

古文：而慎使三军无相过。
现代文：要谨慎地让三支军队不要互相往来。
English: Carefully keep the three armies away from each other.

古文：壮男过壮女之军，则男贵女，而奸民有从谋，而国亡；喜与，其恐有蚤闻，勇民不战。
现代文：壮年男子到壮年女子的军队中，那男子就会爱上女子，那些坏人就会想出放纵淫荡的坏主意，而国家就会灭亡；壮年男子喜欢住在一起，他们害怕早晚听到战争的消息，到这时就是勇敢的民众也不愿意作战了。
English: When a young man is in the army of a young woman, the young man falls in love with the young woman, the bad men get wicked, licentious ideas, and the country is ruined; the young men like to live together, they are afraid that sooner or later they will hear of war, and then even the brave people will not want to fight.

古文：壮男壮女过老弱之军，则老使壮悲，弱使强怜；悲怜在心，则使勇民更虑，而怯民不战。
现代文：壮年男子到年老体弱的军中去，老人会让他们感到悲伤，体弱的人会让强壮的怜悯；有悲伤、怜悯之情埋在心里，就会让勇敢的民众改变主意，而胆小的民众就不敢作战了。
English: When strong men go into an old and feeble army, the old men make them sad, and the feeble men make the strong ones sorry; when sorrow and pity are in the heart, the brave people change their minds, and the cowardly people do not dare to fight.

古文：故曰：慎使三军无相过。此盛力之道。
现代文：所以说，谨慎地让三支军队不要互相往来，这是增强防守力量的方法。
English: So, prudently keeping the three armies away from each other is a way to strengthen the defensive power.

