古文：厥挟脊而痛至顶，头沉沉然，目吭硫然，腰脊强。取足太阳腘中血络。
现代文：厥病，上逆之气导致脊柱两侧疼痛直达巅顶，头部昏昏沉沉，双目视物不清，腰背强直，这是足太阳经的病变，治疗时应取足太阳经的委中穴处的血络，点刺出血以泻邪气。
English: Convulsions, inverse qi causes pain on both sides of the spine to reach the top, the head is dizzy, the binocular vision is unclear, and the lumbar spine is strong. This is a lesion of the solar plexus. When treating, the blood circulation at the middle hole of the solar plexus should be taken, and the evil qi should be eased by pinprick bleeding.

古文：厥胸满面肿，唇漯漯然，暴言难，甚则不能言，取足阳明。
现代文：厥病胸中满闷面部肿胀，嘴唇肿胀涎液不能收，突然出现言语困难，甚至不能言语的，这是足阳明胃经的病变，应取足阳明经的穴位。
English: The face is swollen, the lips are swollen, and the pus cannot be collected. Suddenly, speech difficulties appear, and even speech is not possible. This is a lesion of the gastric meridian. The acupoint of the gastric meridian should be taken.

古文：厥气走喉而不能言，手足清，大便不利，取足少阴。
现代文：气向上逆充塞咽喉，致使不能言语，手足清冷，大便不通，是足少阴肾经的病变，治疗时应取肾经的穴位。
English: qi upward reverse charging throat, resulting in speechlessness, cold hands and feet, stool does not pass, is a lesion of the foot-and-shin-kidney meridian, and the acupoint of the kidney meridian should be taken during treatment.

古文：厥而腹向向然，多寒气，腹中榖榖，便溲难，取足太阴。
现代文：厥气上逆而腹中胀满，叩之有声，内多寒气，腹鸣如呼呼响声，大小便困难，病变在足太阴脾经，治疗应取足太阴经的穴位。
English: On the contrary, the abdomen is full of gas, there is a knocking sound, there is a lot of cold air inside, the abdomen sounds like a whirring sound, it is difficult to urinate and defecate, the lesion is in the metaphyseal, and the treatment should be taken at the metaphyseal acupoint.

古文：嗌干，口中热如胶，取足少阴。
现代文：咽中干，口中燥热，口中津液稠粘似胶，是足少阴肾经的病变，应取足少阴肾经的穴位针刺治疗。
English: Dry throat, dry heat in the mouth, thick viscous mucus in the mouth, is a lesion of the tarsal meridian. It should be treated with acupuncture at the tarsal meridian.

古文：膝中痛，取犊鼻，以员利针，发而间之。
现代文：腿的膝盖中疼痛，应用员利针刺足阳明胃经的犊鼻穴，出针之后，间隔一段时间可以再次治疗。
English: Pain in the middle of the knee of the leg, the applicator needles the foot, the stomach through the nostril, after the needle is released, it can be treated again after a period of time.

古文：针大如牦，刺膝无疑。
现代文：员利针是长似牛尾长毛的大针，十分适合针刺膝部。
English: The jianli needle is a large needle that resembles the long hair of a cow's tail. It is very suitable for needling the knee.

古文：喉痹不能言，取足阳明；能言，取手阳明。
现代文：喉痹，若是不能说话，就针刺足阳明胃经的腧穴；若是还能说话，就针刺手阳明大肠经。
English: If you have a sore throat and can't speak, you need to prick the anus of the foot and stomach meridian; if you can still speak, you need to prick the hand and large intestine meridian.

古文：疟不渴，间日而作，取足阳明；渴而日作，取手阳明。
现代文：疟疾病，没有口渴的症状，隔一日发作，应针刺足阳明胃经的穴位；若是口渴，而且每天发作，就取手阳明大肠经。
English: Malaria disease, no symptoms of thirst, attacks every other day, should be pricked with a needle at the point of the foot Yang Ming stomach meridian; if it is thirsty, and it occurs every day, take the hand Yang Ming large intestine meridian.

古文：齿痛不恶清饮，取足阳明；恶清饮，取手阳明。
现代文：牙齿疼痛，不怕喝冷水，治疗应针刺足阳明胃经穴位；若是怕喝冷水，就取手阳明大肠经的穴位治疗。
English: Tooth pain, not afraid to drink cold water, treatment should be acupuncture foot Yang Ming stomach meridian points; if you are afraid to drink cold water, take the hand Yang Ming large intestine meridian points treatment.

古文：聋而不痛者，取足少阳；聋而痛者，取手阳明。
现代文：耳聋但不疼痛的，应取足少阳经的穴位；耳聋而疼痛的，应取手阳明大肠经的穴位。
English: Deaf but not painful, should take the foot less Yang Zhen; deaf and painful, should take the hand Yang Ming large intestine Zhen.

古文：衄而不止，衄血流，取足太阳。衄血取手太阳，不已，刺宛骨下，不已刺，腘中出血。
现代文：鼻出血不止，如有黑色瘀血流出的，治疗应取足太阳膀胱经的穴位；若出血不多有瘀血，应针刺手太阳小肠经的穴位；如果没有治愈的，就针刺手太阳小肠经的腕骨穴；若还是不愈，就针刺足太阳膀胱经的委中穴，采用针刺出血的方法。
English: If the nosebleed does not stop, if there is black blood coming from the umbilicus, the treatment should be performed at the point of the solar bladder; if there is not much blood, the point of the solar small intestine should be pricked with a needle; if it is not cured, the wrist bone hole of the solar small intestine should be pricked with a needle; if it is still not healed, the middle hole of the solar bladder should be pricked with a needle, and the method of pricking the blood should be used.

古文：腰痛，痛上寒，取足太阳；阳痛上热，取足厥阴，不可以俛仰，取足少阳。
现代文：腰痛，若疼痛的部位发凉，就针刺足太阳膀胱经和足阳明胃经；若是疼痛的部位发热，就针刺足厥阴肝经；如腰痛得不能前俯后仰，就取足少阳胆经针刺。
English: For low back pain, if the painful area is cool, then prick the foot with the solar bladder meridian and the foot with the solar gastric meridian; if the painful area is hot, then prick the foot with the solar hepatic meridian; if the low back pain cannot bend forward or backward, then prick the foot with the solar urinary bladder meridian and the foot with the solar gastric meridian.

古文：中热而喘，取足少阴，腘中血络。
现代文：内热而气喘，治疗当取足少阴肾经的腧穴，并在足太阳膀胱经的委中穴附近的血络处放血。
English: Asthmatic due to internal heat, the treatment is to take blood from the perineum of the foot-solar-kidney meridian and the blood circulation near the middle hole of the foot-solar-bladder meridian.

古文：喜怒而不欲食，言益小，刺足太阴，怒而多言，刺足少阳。
现代文：易怒而不欲饮食，言语很少的，应针刺足太阴脾经；常发怒且说话甚多的，治疗时应针刺足少阳胆经。
English: Irritable and unwilling to eat, with few words, should be acupuncture feet too yin spleen; often angry and talk a lot, treatment should be acupuncture feet less yang and gallbladder.

古文：顑痛，刺手阳明与顑之盛脉，出血。
现代文：下巴疼痛，应针刺手阳明大肠经和下巴处跳动明显的动脉刺之出血。
English: Jaw pain, should needle prick hand yangming large intestine meridian and jaw beating obvious arterial prick bleeding.

古文：项痛不可俯仰，刺足太阳，不可以顾，刺手太阳也。
现代文：项部疼痛，头不能俯仰的，应针刺足太阳经；头不能回转的，应针刺手太阳经的穴位。
English: If the neck is painful and the head cannot be tilted, the foot meridian should be pricked with a needle; if the head cannot be rotated, the meridian should be pricked with a needle.

古文：小腹满大，上走胃至心，淅淅身时寒热，小便不利，取足厥阴，腹满，大便不利，腹大亦上走胸嗌，喘息喝喝然，取足少阴，腹满食不化，腹向向然，不能大便，取足太阴。
现代文：小腹胀满，气逆向上连及胃胃脘和心胸的，恶寒瑟瑟打冷颤，全身忽而寒冷忽而发热，小便不利，治疗时应取足厥阴经的穴位。腹中胀满，大便不通，腹部胀大，中气上逆冲胸甚至咽喉，张口喘息并发出喝喝的声音，治疗时应该取足少阴肾经穴位进行针刺治疗。腹中胀满，食谷不化，腹中有响声，大便不通利，治疗应当针刺足太阴脾经的腧穴。
English: The lower abdomen is swollen and full, the gas is connected to the stomach and stomach cramps and the heart and chest, the cold is shivering, the whole body is suddenly cold and hot, the urine is unfavorable, and the treatment should be performed at the foot and anus. The abdomen is swollen, the stool does not pass, the abdomen is swollen, the gas is against the chest and even the throat, the mouth is wheezing and emits the sound of drinking, and the treatment should be performed by acupuncture at the foot and anus. The abdomen is swollen, the oesophagus does not dissolve, there is a sound in the

古文：心痛引腰脊，欲呕，取足少阴。
现代文：心痛牵引腰脊作痛，恶心欲呕吐的，取足少阴经的穴位针刺治疗。
English: For heartache, traction lumbar spine pain, nausea and vomiting, acupressure treatment of acupoints with low menstrual flow.

古文：心痛，腹胀，啬啬然，大便不利，取足太阴。
现代文：心痛，腹中胀满，大便涩而不通，取足太阴脾经的穴位针刺治疗。
English: Heartache, the abdomen is swollen, the stool is astringent and does not pass, and acupuncture is used to treat the points of the feet that are too far from the spleen.

古文：心痛，引背不得息，刺足少阴，不已，取手少阳。
现代文：心痛牵引至后背，致使喘息不利，应针刺足少阴肾经的穴位；若不愈，可以针刺手少阳三焦经的穴位。
English: If the heartache drags to the back, causing bad breath, it is necessary to prick the points of the Shao-Yang kidney meridian at the feet; if it does not go away, it is possible to prick the points of the Shao-Yang three-focal meridian at the hands.

古文：心痛引小腹满，上下无常处，便溲难，刺足厥阴心痛，但短气不足以息，刺手太阴。
现代文：心痛，小腹胀满，上下疼痛无定处，大小便困难，治疗可刺足厥阴经的穴位。心痛，仅有气短而呼吸困难的，应针刺手太阴肺经。
English: Heartache, fullness in the lower abdomen, pain everywhere, difficulty in urinating and defecating, treatment can be performed at the point where the legs are pricked. Heartache, only shortness of breath and difficulty in breathing, should be pricked with a needle.

古文：心痛，当九节刺之，按已刺，按之立已，不已，上下求之，得之立已。
现代文：心痛，应当针刺第九椎之下的筋缩穴，如果疼痛不能止，就在针刺之后用手按压，一般就可以马上止痛；如果这样还没有效果，就在筋缩穴的附近上下寻找，只要找到了相应的穴位刺治，就会立即止痛。
English: For heart pain, the muscle contraction hole under the ninth vertebra should be needled. If the pain cannot be stopped, press it with your hand after the needling, and the pain can generally be stopped immediately. If this does not work, look up and down near the muscle contraction hole. As long as the corresponding puncture point is found, the pain will be stopped immediately.

古文：颌痛，刺足阳明曲周动脉，见血，立已，按人迎于经，立已。
现代文：下颌腮疼痛，应针刺足阳明胃经颊车穴周围的动脉，针刺出血之后就会马上见效；若是不能止痛，用手按人迎穴旁边的动脉，很快就可止痛。
English: Pain in the lower jaw should be treated with a pinprick of the artery around the carotid sinus through the foot, and the effect will be immediate after the pinprick bleeds. If the pain cannot be relieved, press the artery next to the carotid sinus with your hand to quickly relieve the pain.

古文：气逆上，刺膺中陷者，与下胸动脉。
现代文：气逆上冲，针刺胸前足阳明胃经的膺窗穴或者屋翳穴，以及胸下的动脉。
English: The qi is pushed up, and needles are pricked at the anus or roof of the anus in front of the chest, and the arteries under the chest.

古文：腹痛，刺脐左右动脉，已刺按之，立已，刺气街，已刺按之，立已。
现代文：腹中疼痛，针刺肚脐两侧动脉处的天枢穴，刺过之后用手按压，可以立即止痛；如果还不没止痛，就针刺足阳明胃经的气冲穴，针刺过后用手按压，马上见效。
English: Pain in the abdomen, needle prick navel on both sides of the artery at the center of the day hole, prick with the hand after pressing, you can immediately stop the pain; if not stop the pain, needle prick foot Yang Ming stomach through the air hole, needle prick with the hand after pressing, immediately effective.

