古文：七年春，卫侯使孙良夫来盟。
现代文：七年春季，卫侯派遣孙桓子来鲁国结盟。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Wei Hou sent Sun Huan Zi to make an alliance with Lu.

古文：夏，公会齐侯伐莱。
现代文：夏季，宣公会合齐惠公联兵进攻莱国。
English: In the summer, the joint forces of Qi Huigong and the Propaganda Association attacked Lai Guo.

古文：秋，公至自伐莱。
现代文：秋季，宣公从攻打莱国的地方回国。
English: In the autumn, Emperor Xuanzong returned to China from the place where he had attacked Lai.

古文：大旱。冬，公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯于黑壤。
现代文：冬季，宣公与晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯在黑壤会见。
English: In winter, Xuan Gong met with Jin Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo and Cao Bo in Heihe.

古文：七年春，卫孙桓子来盟，始通，且谋会晋也。
现代文：七年春季，卫国的孙桓子来鲁国缔结盟约，两国开始修好，同时商量和晋国会见。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the defender of the country, Sun Huan Zi, came to Russia to sign an alliance treaty, and the two countries began to mend fences, and at the same time, they discussed and met with the Jin Dynasty.

古文：夏，公会齐侯伐莱，不与谋也。
现代文：夏季，鲁宣公会合齐惠公联兵进攻莱国，这是由于事先并没有让我国参与策划。
English: In the summer, the Lu Xuan Gong Association Qi Huigong joint forces attacked Laos, which was because our country did not participate in the planning in advance.

古文：凡师出，与谋曰及，不与谋曰会。
现代文：凡是出兵，事先参与策划叫做 及 ，没有参与策划叫做 会 。
English: Whenever troops are dispatched, those who participated in the planning in advance are called "and," and those who did not participate in the planning are called "council."

古文：赤狄侵晋，取向阴之禾。
现代文：赤狄入侵晋国，割取了向阴的谷子。
English: Red Di invaded Jin Province and cut off Xiangyin's corn.

古文：郑及晋平，公子宋之谋也，故相郑伯以会。
现代文：郑国和晋国讲和，这是出于公子宋的谋划，所以公子宋作为郑君的赞助行礼者来参加盟会。
English: Zheng and Jin declared peace, which was planned by Prince Song, so Prince Song came to participate in the alliance as a patron of Zheng Jun.

古文：冬，盟于黑壤，王叔桓公临之，以谋不睦。
现代文：冬季，在黑壤结盟。周卿士王叔桓公到会监临，以促成不和睦的诸侯重建邦交。
English: In the winter, they made an alliance in Heihe. Zhou Jing and Shih Wang Shu Huan Gong came to supervise the meeting in order to facilitate the reestablishment of diplomatic relations between the feuding lords.

古文：晋侯之立也，公不朝焉，又不使大夫聘，晋人止公于会，盟于黄父。
现代文：晋成公即位的时候，鲁宣公没有去朝见，又不派大夫访问，晋国人因此在会上拘留了他。
English: When Emperor Jincheng ascended to the throne, Emperor Lu Xuankuo did not go to the imperial court and did not send a doctor to visit, so the Jin people detained him at the meeting.

古文：公不与盟，以赂免。
现代文：在黄父结盟，宣公没有参加，由于向晋国送了一些财物才得以被释放回国。
English: After the alliance with the Yellow Father, Xuan Gong did not participate, and was only able to be released to return to the country because he sent some property to Jin.

古文：故黑壤之盟不书，讳之也。
现代文：所以《春秋》不记载黑壤的结盟，这是由于隐讳国君受辱。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" does not record the alliance of Black Earth, which is due to the hidden humiliation of the sovereign.

