古文：◎外国一
现代文：外国一
English: The first foreign

古文：○朝鲜
现代文：朝鲜
English: North Korea

古文：朝鲜，箕子所封国也。
现代文：朝鲜，是古代箕子所封得的国家。
English: Korea is a country that was conquered by the Jurchens in ancient times.

古文：汉以前曰朝鲜。
现代文：汉代以前叫朝鲜。
English: Before the Han Dynasty, it was called North Korea.

古文：始为燕人卫满所据，汉武帝平之，置真番、临屯、乐浪、玄菟四郡。
现代文：开始的时候，朝鲜为燕人卫满所占据，汉武帝平定该地后，设置了真番、临屯、乐浪和立菟四个郡。
English: At the beginning, Korea was occupied by Yanren Weimans. After Emperor Han Wu conquered the area, he set up four counties: Zhenban, Lintun, Lelang and Lixuan.

古文：汉末，有扶余人高氏据其地，改国号曰高丽，又曰高句丽，居平壤，即乐浪也。
现代文：汉朝末年，有个扶余人高氏占据了该地，把国号改为高丽，又称高句丽。高氏居住在平壤，就是乐浪郡的所在地。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, a Fuyu, Gao, occupied the area and changed the country's name to Goryeo, also known as Goguryeo. Gao lived in Pyongyang, which is the location of Le Lang County.

古文：已，为唐所破，东徙。
现代文：后来，唐朝派兵攻破了高句丽，他们便往东迁徙。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty sent troops to conquer Goguryeo, and they migrated eastward.

古文：后唐时，王建代高氏，兼并新罗、百济地，徙居松岳，曰东京，而以平壤为西京。
现代文：后唐时代，王建代替了高氏，兼并了新罗、百济等地，迁居到松岳，称为东京，而把平壤称为西京。
English: In the post-Tang era, Wang Jian replaced Gao Shi, annexed Silla, Baekje and other places, and moved to Songyue, known as Tokyo, and Pyongyang as Xijing.

古文：其国北邻契丹，西则女直，南曰日本，元至元中，西京内属，置东宁路总管府，尽慈岭为界。
现代文：该国北部与契丹为邻，西部靠近女真，其南部是日本。元朝至元中年，西京归附元朝，朝廷在该地设置东宁路总管府，以慈岭的尽头与朝鲜为界。
English: The northern part of the country is adjacent to Khitan, the western part is close to Yeojin, and the southern part is Japan. From the Yuan Dynasty to the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, West Beijing was annexed to the Yuan Dynasty, and the imperial court set up the Dongning Road General Administration in this place, with the end of Ciling as the border with North Korea.

古文：明兴，王高丽者王颛。
现代文：明朝兴起后，在高丽为王的是王颛。
English: After the rise of the Ming Dynasty, the king of Goryeo was Wang Ye.

古文：太祖即位之元年遣使赐玺书。
现代文：明太祖即位的元年曾派使者给王颛赐印有皇帝玺印的诏书。
English: In the first year of the enthronement of the Ming Taizu, an envoy was sent to present Wang Qi with an imperial edict bearing the emperor's seal.

古文：二年送还其国流人。
现代文：二年朝廷将从高丽流亡过来的人送了回去。
English: Two years later, the imperial court sent back the exiles from Goryeo.

古文：颛表贺，贡方物，且请封。
现代文：王颛奉表向明太祖祝贺登基，并贡献土产，请求朝廷给以封号。
English: Wang Xi sent a letter to the Ming Emperor to congratulate him on his accession to the throne, and asked the imperial court to give him a seal.

古文：帝遣符玺郎偰斯赍诏及金印诰文封颛为高丽国王，赐历及锦绮。
现代文：皇帝派符玺郎亻契斯持皇帝的诏书到高丽，给王颛颁赐封他为高丽国王的金印诰文，赏赐历法和锦绮给他。
English: The emperor sent the herald of the Emperor's edict to Goryeo, and gave Wang Xuan the golden seal of the King of Goryeo, the calendar, and the brocade.

古文：其秋，颛遣总部尚书成惟得、千牛卫大将军金甲两上表谢，并贺天寿节，因请祭服制度，帝命工部制赐之。
现代文：该年秋天，王颛派遣自己的总部尚书成惟得和千牛卫大将军金甲两上表谢恩，并祝贺天寿节。同时，他们还请教明朝的祭服制度。皇帝命令工部专门为他们制好后赐与他们。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wang Hui sent his headquarters to Shangshu to express his gratitude to General Qian Niu Wei and congratulate him on the Tianju Festival. At the same time, they also asked for advice on the sacrificial clothing system of the Ming Dynasty. The emperor ordered the Ministry of Industry to specially make it for them and then give it to them.

古文：惟得等辞归，帝从容问： 王居国何为？
现代文：成惟得等人前来向皇帝辞行回去时，皇帝不紧不慢地问道： 你们的国王平时做些什么呢？
English: When Cheng Rongde and the others came to tender their resignations to the emperor, the emperor asked unhurriedly: What does your king usually do?

古文：城郭修乎？
现代文：修建城郭吗？
English: Build a castle?

古文：兵甲利乎？
现代文：兵甲锐利吗？
English: Is your armor sharp?

古文：宫室壮乎？ 
现代文：宫室壮观吗？ 
English: Is the palace spectacular?

古文：顿首言： 东海波臣，惟知崇信释氏，他未遑也。 
现代文：成惟得等叩头而释说： 我们东海波涛中的人，只知道崇信释迦牟尼，至于其他事情还没时间去考虑。 
English: Cheng Rongde waited for the kowtowing and explained: We, the people in the waves of the East China Sea, only know about revering Shakyamuni, and we don't have time to think about other things.

古文：遂以书谕之曰： 古者王公设险，未尝去兵。
现代文：皇帝于是用文书谕告高丽国王说： 古代的王公设置了险障，也还是不废军队。
English: The emperor then sent a written order to the king of Goryeo, saying: The ancient prince set up a dangerous obstacle, but still did not abandon the army.

古文：民以食为天，而国必有出政令之所。
现代文：百姓以食为天，国家必有发出政令的场所。
English: The people live for food, and the state must have a place to issue decrees.

古文：今有人民而无城郭，人将何依？
现代文：现今你那儿有人民而无城郭，人民将依靠什么？
English: Now that you have the people there and no walls, what will the people rely on?

古文：武备不修，则威弛；地不耕，则民艰于食；且有居室，无厅事，无以示尊严。
现代文：朝廷不修军备，则威严会松弛；土地不耕种，则百姓的粮食会发生困难；如果有居室而无官厅办事，则显示不出尊严与卑下。
English: If the imperial court does not improve its armament, its dignity will be weakened; if the land is not cultivated, the people's food will be difficult; if there is a living room but no government office, it will not show dignity and humiliation.

古文：此数者朕甚不取。
现代文：这几样都是我所不取的。
English: These are all things I don't take for granted.

古文：夫国之大事，在祀与戎。
现代文：国之大事，在于祭祀和军事。
English: The most important things for the country are the rituals and the military.

古文：苟阙斯二者，而徒事佛求福，梁武之事，可为明鉴。
现代文：如果缺了这两项，只事佛求福，梁武帝之事，则可作为明鉴。
English: If these two items are missing, only the matter of seeking blessings from Buddha and the matter of Emperor Liangwu can be used as a clear example.

古文：王国北接契丹、女直，而南接倭，备御之道，王其念之。 
现代文：你的国家北接契丹和女真，南连倭国，军备防卫之事，你可顾念着。 
English: Your country is bordered to the north by Khitan and Jurchen, and to the south by Wakoku. You may be concerned about the matter of armament and defense.

古文：因赐之《六经》、《四书》、《通监》。
现代文：并因此赐给高丽国王《六经》、《四书》、《通鉴》等书。
English: As a result, King Goryeo was given books such as the "Six Classics," "Four Books" and "Comprehensive Commentary."

古文：自是贡献数至，元旦及圣节皆遣使朝贺，岁以为常。
现代文：从此，高丽国经常给朝廷献贡，元旦和朝廷有圣节时他们也都派使者前来朝觐祝贺。有时一年来几次也是常事。
English: Since then, Goryeo has often paid tribute to the imperial court. On New Year's Day and when the imperial court has a holy day, they also send envoys to congratulate the imperial court. Sometimes it is a regular occurrence several times a year.

古文：三年正月命使往祀其国之山川。
现代文：三年正月皇帝派使者到高丽祭祀该国的山川。
English: In the first month of the third year, the emperor sent an envoy to Korea to worship the country's mountains and rivers.

古文：是岁颁科举诏于高丽，颛表谢，贡方物，并纳元所授金印。
现代文：该年皇帝给高丽颁发了科举的诏令，王颛上表以示谢恩，并贡献土产，上交了元朝皇帝授予他的金印。
English: In the same year, the emperor issued a decree on the imperial examination to Goryeo. Wang Xuan presented a certificate to show his gratitude, and contributed to the local production, and handed over the gold seal awarded to him by the emperor of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：中书省言： 高丽贡使多赍私物入货，宜征税；又多携中国物出境，禁之便。 
现代文：中书省上奏说 ：高丽来朝贡的使者大多在公货中夹带私物，对此应该征税；而他们回去时，又大多携带中国货出境，应禁止他们才好。 
English: "Most of the envoys of the Korean tributes brought their personal belongings in the public goods, which should be taxed; and when they returned, most of them carried Chinese goods out of the country, so they should be banned," said the report of the Ministry of Culture and Literature.

古文：俱不许。
现代文：皇帝不允许这样做。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：五年表请遣子弟入太学，帝曰： 入学固美事，但涉海远，不欲者勿强。 
现代文：五年高丽国王上表请求允许他们派遣子弟来中国入太学学习，皇帝说： 入学固然是件美好的事，但又要过海路途又远，不愿来的不要勉强。 
English: Five years ago, the King of Goryeo requested permission to send his son to study in China. The Emperor said, "It is a wonderful thing to go to school, but it is a long way across the sea. If you don't want to come, don't be reluctant."

古文：贡使洪师范、郑梦周等一百五十余人来京，失风溺死者三十九人，师范与焉。
现代文：高丽派来献贡的使者洪师范、郑梦周等一百五十多人在来京城的路上，因刮大风被吹下海溺死的就有三十九人，洪师范也在其中。
English: On the way to Beijing, more than 150 people, including the envoys Hong Shifan and Zheng Mengzhou sent by Goryeo to pay tribute, were blown into the sea by a strong wind, drowning 39 people, including Hong Shifan.

古文：帝悯之，遣元枢密使延安答里往谕入贡毋数。
现代文：皇帝怜悯他们，派遣元朝时的枢密使延安答里前去谕告高丽国王献贡不须太多。
English: The emperor took pity on them and sent Yan'an Taeli, a confidential envoy of the Yuan Dynasty, to tell the King of Goryeo that it was not too much to pay tribute.

古文：而颛复遣其门下赞成事姜仁裕来贡马，其贺正旦使金湑等已先至，帝悉遣还。
现代文：而王颛又派遣他门下的赞成事姜仁裕前来京城贡献马匹，而此前他派来祝贺元旦的使者金氵胥等人已先期到达京城。
English: Wang Qian also sent his subordinate, Jiang Renyu, to Beijing to contribute horses, and earlier he had sent to congratulate the New Year's Day envoy, Jin Qian and others, who had arrived in Beijing ahead of schedule.

古文：谓中书省臣曰： 高丽贡献繁数，既困敝其民，而涉海复虞覆溺。
现代文：皇帝都把他们遣送回去了。皇帝对中书省的大臣们说 ：高丽给朝廷的献贡太频繁，既增加了他们百姓的负担，又有过海时翻船溺水的危险。
English: The emperor sent them all back. The emperor said to the ministers of the Chinese Literature Department: Goryeo's tribute to the imperial court is too frequent, which not only increases the burden on their people, but also has the risk of shipwreck and drowning at sea.

古文：宜遵古诸侯之礼，三年一聘。
现代文：还是应该遵循古时候诸侯的礼节，三年一聘。
English: They should still follow the etiquette of the feudal lords in ancient times, and only hire someone every three years.

古文：贡物惟所产，毋过侈。
现代文：所贡献的东西只限土产，不须过于奢侈。
English: The things we contribute are limited to local products and do not have to be too extravagant.

古文：其明谕朕意。 
现代文：你们要向他们明白地谕告我的意思。 
English: Tell them plainly what I want you to do.

古文：六年，颛遣甲两等贡马五十匹，道亡其二，甲两以闻。
现代文：六年，王颛派甲两等人向明朝廷进献贡马五十匹，结果路途上逃亡了两匹，甲两将此事上报了朝廷。
English: In the sixth year, Wang Xi sent A and two others to present fifty tribute horses to the Ming court. As a result, two horses escaped on the way, and A and two reported the matter to the court.

古文：及进，以私马足之。
现代文：等到在朝廷上献马时，他以私下里买的马凑足了五十匹的数字献了上来。
English: When it came time to present the horses at court, he presented them with the figure of fifty horses bought privately.

古文：帝恶其不诚，却之。
现代文：皇帝讨厌他的不诚实，没有收下贡马。
English: The emperor hated his dishonesty and did not accept the tribute.

古文：七年遣监门护军周谊、郑庇等来贡，表请每岁一贡，贡道从陆，由定辽，毋涉海，其贡物称 送太府监 。
现代文：七年，王颛又派监门护军周谊和郑庇等人前来献贡，上表请求明太祖允许他们每年献一次贡，进贡使由定辽出发走陆路，毋须过海，其贡品声称 送太府监 。
English: In the seventh year, Wang Hui also sent the gate guards Zhou Yi and Zheng Bi and others to pay tribute. The above table asked the Ming Emperor to allow them to pay tribute once a year. The tribute envoys departed from Dingliao by land, without crossing the sea, and claimed that their tribute would be sent to the grand procurator.

古文：中书省言： 元时有太府监，本朝未尝有，言涉不诚。 
现代文：中书省上奏说 ：元朝时有太府监，本朝没设该机构，其言辞似乎不诚。 
English: China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said: There was a prefectural overseer in the Yuan Dynasty, but there is no such institution in the current dynasty. His words seem to be insincere.

古文：帝命却其贡。
现代文：皇帝命令不收他们的贡物。
English: The emperor ordered that no tribute be taken from them.

古文：是岁颛为权相李仁人所弑。
现代文：该年，王颛被当权的宰相李仁人所杀。
English: In the same year, Wang Qi was killed by the prime minister in power, Li Renzhong.

古文：颛无子，以宠臣辛肫之子禑为子，于是仁人立禑。
现代文：王颛没有儿子，他收养宠臣辛肫的儿子辛礻禺为自己的儿子，于是李仁人便扶立辛礻禺为王。
English: Wang Yao did not have a son, so he adopted the son of his favorite, Xin Yao, as his own son. Li Renren then made Xin Yao king.

古文：八年，禑遣判宗簿事崔原来告哀，且言前有贡使金义杀朝使蔡斌，今嗣王禑已诛义，籍其家。
现代文：八年，王礻禺派遣判宗簿事崔原来京城向明太祖告哀，并说以前有高丽的进贡使者金义杀死了明朝的使者蔡斌，现今继嗣王位的辛礻禺已经将金义诛杀，籍没了金义的家产。
English: In the eighth year, Wang Qian sent the record of the verdict to Cui Yuan of the capital city to mourn Ming Taizu, and said that in the past, there was a tribute envoy of Goryeo, Jin Yi, who killed the envoy of the Ming Dynasty, Cai Bin. Now the heir to the throne, Xin Yi, has killed Jin Yi and lost the family property of Jin Yi.

古文：帝疑其诈，拘原而遣使往祭吊。
现代文：皇帝怀疑其中有诈，将崔原拘捕起来并派遣使者到高丽去祭吊王颛。
English: The emperor suspected that there was fraud, arrested Choe Won and sent an envoy to Goryeo to sacrifice and hang Wang Ye.

古文：十年，使来请故王颛谥号，帝曰： 颛被杀已久，今始请谥，将假吾朝命，镇抚其民，且掩其弑逆之迹，不可许。
现代文：十年，高丽使者来京城请求明朝廷给已故的高丽王王颛封一个谥号，皇帝说： 王颛被杀时间已久，到今天才来请求封谥号，想借我朝廷的命令，镇抚当地的百姓，以掩盖他们弑君叛逆的恶迹，不能答应他们。
English: Ten years ago, a Koryo envoy came to Beijing to request the Ming court to give a posthumous name to the late King of Koryo, Wang Yong. The emperor said: Wang Yong was killed a long time ago, and today I have come to request a posthumous name. I want to use my order from the court to pacify the local people in order to cover up the evil deeds of their rebellion against the king. I can't agree to them.

古文：前所留使者，其遣之。 
现代文：将以前所拘留的使者遣送回去。 
English: Send back the previously detained envoys.

古文：于是释原归。
现代文：这样便把崔原释放回去。
English: In this way, Cui Yuan was released.

古文：其夏，复遣周谊贡马及方物，却不受。
现代文：该年夏天，辛礻禺又派周谊来献贡马和土产，皇帝没有接受。
English: In the summer of the same year, Xinlu sent Zhou Rui to offer tribute horses and local products, but the emperor did not accept.

古文：冬，又遣使贺明年正旦。
现代文：冬天，又派使者来京城向皇帝祝贺明年元旦。
English: In winter, an envoy was sent to the capital to congratulate the emperor on New Year's Day.

古文：帝曰： 高丽王颛被弑，奸臣窃命，《春秋》之义，乱臣必诛，夫又何言。
现代文：皇帝说： 高丽王王颛被臣属所杀，奸臣窃据了大权，按《春秋》的大义，叛乱之臣必须诛杀，这有什么说的呢？
English: The emperor said, "Koryo King Wang Ye was killed by his vassals, and treacherous vassals usurped great power. According to the great justice of "Spring and Autumn," rebellious vassals must be killed. What does this say?

古文：第前后使者皆称嗣王所遣，中书宜遣人往问嗣王如何，政令安在。
现代文：你们前后来的使者都称自己是嗣王辛礻禺所派，中书省应派人前往高丽问明嗣王的情况，看其政令是怎么出的。
English: Your envoys before and after you all claim to have been sent by King Myongseong. The Ministry of Culture and Literature should send someone to Korea to inquire about King Myongseong and see how his decree was issued.

古文：若政令如前，嗣王不为羁囚，则当依前王言，岁贡马千匹，明年贡金百斤、银万两、良马百、细布万，仍悉送还所拘辽东民，方见王位真而政令行，朕无惑已。
现代文：如果他们的政令还是像王颛在位时那样由高丽王所发，且嗣王没受别人的羁囚，则应当依照前高丽王的诺言，每年给朝廷献贡马一千匹，明年则贡献金子一百斤、银子一万两、良马一百匹、细布一万匹，全部遣送回所拘留的辽东百姓，这才见得嗣王辛礻禺真的继承了王位，政令真的是由他发出的，我就没有疑惑了。
English: If their decree is still issued by the King of Goryeo, as it was when Wang Hui was on the throne, and the heir-king is not under the custody of others, then, according to the promise of the former King of Goryeo, they should donate one thousand horses to the court every year, and next year they should contribute one hundred kilos of gold, ten thousand silver, one hundred fine horses, and ten thousand fine cloth, all of which should be sent back to the people of Liaodong who were detained. Only then will I see that the heir-king Xin Hui really inherited the throne, and the decree was really issued by him, and I will have no doubts.

古文：否则弑君之贼，必讨无赦。 
现代文：否则，对待弑杀君王的乱臣贼子，必然讨伐，无所赦免。 
English: Otherwise, there will inevitably be a crusade against the unruly vassals and thieves who fight and kill the king, and there will be no pardon.

古文：十一年四月，禑复命谊来贡。
现代文：十一年四月，辛礻禺又让周谊前来朝廷进献贡物。
English: In April of the eleventh year of the Heian period, Emperor Xinzheng again asked Zhou Yi to come to the imperial court to offer tribute.

古文：十二年敕辽东守将潘敬、叶旺等谨饬边备。
现代文：十二年皇帝敕令辽东守将潘敬、叶旺等人整肃军队小心守卫。
English: In the 12th year of the emperor's reign, the governor of Liaodong, Pan Jing, Ye Wang and others were sent to guard the troops carefully.

古文：其冬，禑遣李茂芳等来贡，以不如约却之。
现代文：该年冬天，辛礻禺又派李茂芳等人前来献贡，朝廷以他们不按约行事为由拒绝了他们的贡品。
English: In the winter of the same year, Xinlu sent Li Maofang and others to offer tribute, but the imperial court refused their tribute on the grounds that they had not acted in accordance with the agreement.

古文：十三年，辽东送高丽使谊至京师，帝敕敬等曰： 高丽弑君，又杀朝使，前坚请入贡又不如期，今遣谊来，以虚文饰诈，他日必为边患。
现代文：十三年，辽东把高丽使者周谊送到京师，皇帝敕谕辽东守将潘敬等人说： 高丽国内奸臣弑杀君王，又杀死我朝廷使者，以前坚持请求入贡却又不按期进行，现今把周谊派来以虚文掩饰其不诚之心，他日必定会成为边境祸患。
English: In the thirteenth year, Liaodong sent the Koryo envoy Zhou Yi to Beijing. The emperor ordered the governor of Liaodong, Pan Jing, and others to say: The Koryo domestic treacherous vassal killed the king and killed my imperial envoy. Previously, he insisted on requesting tribute but did not carry it out on schedule. Now he sent Zhou Yi to cover up his dishonest heart with false documents. He will surely become a border disaster one day.

古文：自今来者，其绝勿通。 
现代文：从今日起，与他们断绝往来交通。 
English: From today, we will cut off communication with them.

古文：因留谊于京师。
现代文：这样就把周谊留在了京城。
English: In this way, Zhou Rui stayed in Beijing.

古文：十六年来贡，却之，命礼部责其朝贡过期、陪臣侮慢之罪；诚欲听约者，当以前五岁违约不贡之物并至。
现代文：十六年高丽又派人来献贡品，皇帝拒绝了，命令礼部责问其朝贡过期、陪臣侮辱怠慢朝廷之罪；责成他们如果真想按约定行事，应将前五年违约没有贡献的东西全部带来上贡。
English: Sixteen years later, Goryeo again sent someone to offer tribute, but the emperor refused, and ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to reprimand them for overdue tribute and the sin of insulting and neglecting the imperial court; they were instructed that if they really wanted to act according to the agreement, they should bring all the things that had not been contributed in the first five years of breach of contract.

古文：十七年六月，禑遣司仆正崔涓、礼仪判书金进宜贡马二千匹。且言金非地所产，愿以马代输，余皆如约。
现代文：十七年六月，辛礻禺派遣司仆正崔涓、礼义判书金进宜来京城向朝廷进献贡马二千匹，并说金子不是高丽的土产，希望能以马代替金子向朝廷献贡，其余的贡物都按约定进行。
English: In June of the seventeenth year, Xin Zheng sent his servants Zheng Cui Zheng and Li Yi to send a letter to Jin Jin Yi to come to Beijing to offer two thousand tribute horses to the imperial court, and said that the gold was not a local product of Goryeo, hoping to use horses instead of gold to pay tribute to the imperial court. The rest of the tribute was carried out according to the agreement.

古文：辽东守将唐胜宗为之请，帝许之。
现代文：辽东守将唐胜宗为他们向皇帝请示此事，皇帝答应了。
English: The governor of Liaodong Province, Tang Shengzong, petitioned the emperor for their release, and the emperor agreed.

古文：然请颛谥号，袭王爵，未允也。
现代文：但当高丽贡使又请求皇帝给王颛封个谥号，下诏让辛礻禺承袭高丽王的爵位时，皇帝没有答应。
English: However, when the Goryeo envoy also asked the emperor to give Wang Quan a posthumous name and issue an edict to let Xin Quan inherit the title of the king of Goryeo, the emperor did not agree.

古文：十八年正月，贡使至。
现代文：十八年正月，高丽献贡的使者到达京城。
English: In the first month of the 18th year, the envoy of the Korean tribute arrived in Beijing.

古文：帝谕礼臣曰： 高丽屡请约束，朕数不允，而其请不已，故索岁贡以试其诚伪，非以此为富也。
现代文：皇帝谕告礼部大臣说 ：高丽屡次请求接受我们的约束，我都没有答允，而他们还是不停地请求，所以我要求他们每年献贡以试他们的心是真还是伪，并不是以此手段来积聚财富。
English: The Emperor told the Minister of Ceremonies: "Goryeo has repeatedly asked to be bound by us, but I have not agreed, and they still keep asking, so I ask them to pay a tribute every year to test whether their hearts are true or false, not as a means to accumulate wealth.

古文：今既听命，宜损其贡数，令三年一朝，贡马五十匹。
现代文：现今他们既然已经听从了朝廷的成命，应减少他们进贡的次数，让他们三年进贡一次，每次献贡马五十匹就够了。
English: Now that they have obeyed the order of the imperial court, they should reduce the number of times they pay tribute. Let them pay tribute once every three years. Fifty horses are enough for each tribute.

古文：至二十一年正旦乃贡。 
现代文：到二十一年元旦再来献贡就行。 
English: Come back on the 21st New Year's Day to pay tribute.

古文：七月，禑上表请袭爵，并请故王谥。
现代文：同年七月，辛礻禺上表请求朝廷允许他继承高丽王的爵位，并请求给已故高丽王封谥号。
English: In July of the same year, Xin Xuan requested the Imperial Court to allow him to inherit the title of the King of Goryeo, and requested that the deceased King of Goryeo be given a posthumous name.

古文：命封禑为高丽国王，赐故王颛谥恭愍。
现代文：皇帝下诏令封辛礻禺为高丽国王，给已故高丽国王王颛赐谥号为恭愍。
English: The emperor issued a decree to crown Hsin Kyong as the king of Korea, and to give the late king of Korea, Wang Kyong, the posthumous title of Kyong Kyong.

古文：十九年二月遣使贡布万匹、马千匹。
现代文：十九年二月，高丽派使者向明朝廷贡献布一万匹、马一千匹。
English: In February 1919, Koryo sent an envoy to the Ming court to offer 10,000 pieces of cloth and 1,000 horses.

古文：九月，表贺，贡方物。
现代文：九月，又奉表来向朝廷祝贺，并进献土产。
English: In September, he was invited again to congratulate the imperial court and present local products.

古文：其后贡献辄逾常额，且未尝至三年也。
现代文：此后他们向朝廷进贡所献的物品，其数量总是超过常额，而且不到三年就来京城上贡。
English: After that, the number of items they offered as tribute to the imperial court always exceeded the regular amount, and they came to the capital to pay tribute in less than three years.

古文：冬，诏遣指挥佥事高家奴以绮布市马于高丽。
现代文：该年冬天，皇帝下诏派指挥佥事高家奴到高丽以绮布交换马匹。
English: In the winter of that year, the emperor sent the commander An Ji Gao Jia Nu to Goryeo to exchange horses for cocoons.

古文：二十年三月，高家奴还，陈高丽表辞马直，帝敕如数偿之。
现代文：二十年三月，高家奴回来后，陈说高丽上表表示马不要钱，皇帝下敕令还是按马的价值如数偿还给他们。
English: In March 20th, after Gao Jia Nong returned, Chen said that Goryeo said on the table that the horse did not need money, and the emperor issued an order to reimburse them according to the value of the horse.

古文：先是，元末辽、沈兵起，民避乱，转徙高丽。
现代文：此前，元朝末年因在辽、沈两地兴兵，百姓因避战乱而转迁到高丽。
English: Previously, at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, soldiers were raised in Liao and Shen, and the people moved to Goryeo to escape the war.

古文：至是因市马，帝令就索之，遂以辽、沈流民三百余口来归。
现代文：到此时因开马市，皇帝就让使者向高丽索还这些迁徙过去的百姓。于是辽、沈两地迁过去的流民有三百多口回到了故地。
English: At this time, because of Kaima City, the emperor asked the emissary to return these people who had migrated in the past to Coliseum. As a result, more than three hundred displaced people who had moved to Liao and Shen returned to their hometowns.

古文：十二月命户部咨高丽王： 铁岭北，东西之地，旧属开元者，辽东统之。
现代文：同年十二月，皇帝让户部给高丽王送咨文，说： 铁岭的北部，东西之地，以前属于开元的地方，由辽东统领。
English: In December of the same year, the emperor asked the household department to send a message to King Goryeo, saying: The northern part of the Tieling Mountains, the land of east and west, formerly belonged to Kaiyuan, and was led by Liaodong.

古文：铁岭之南，旧属高丽者，本国统之。
现代文：铁岭的南部，以前属于高丽的地方，由你们本国统领。
English: The southern part of the Tieling, which used to belong to Korea, is ruled by your country.

古文：各正疆境，毋侵越。 
现代文：双方都确定自己的疆境，不得有侵越行为。 
English: Both sides have determined their own borders, and there must be no acts of encroachment.

古文：二十一年四月，禑表言，铁岭之地实其世守，乞仍旧便。
现代文：二十一年四月，辛礻禺上表给朝廷，说铁岭之地是他们世代相守的领地，请求朝廷仍按以前方式划归高丽管辖为好。
English: In April of the twenty-first year, Hsin-soo presented a petition to the imperial court, saying that the Tieling region had been their territory for generations, and requesting the imperial court to transfer it to the jurisdiction of Korea in the same manner as before.

古文：帝曰： 高丽旧以鸭绿江为界，今饰辞铁岭，诈伪昭然。
现代文：皇帝说 ：高丽以前是以鸭绿江为界，现今矫辞说铁岭是他们的世袭之地，其欺诈虚伪之心已经昭然若揭。
English: The emperor said, "Koryo used to be bounded by the Yalu River, but now they say that the Tieling is their hereditary land. Their deceit and hypocrisy have been exposed.

古文：其以朕言谕之，俾安分，毋生衅端。 
现代文：你们将我的话转告给他们，让他们各安本分，不要滋生事端。 
English: You shall speak my words to them, that they may be quiet, and that there be no tumult among them.

古文：八月，高丽千户陈景来降，言： 是年四月，禑欲寇辽东，使都军相崔莹、李成桂缮兵西京。
现代文：该年八月，高丽的千户陈景前来投降明朝廷，进言说： 今年四月，辛礻禺想入侵辽东，派都军相崔莹和李成桂在西京整治军队。
English: In August of the same year, Chen Jing of Qoryo's Qianhu came to surrender to the Ming court, and said: In April of this year, Xin Yi wanted to invade Liaodong, and sent the capital's military cousins, Cui Ying and Li Chenggui, to rectify the army in Xijing.

古文：成桂使陈景屯艾州，以粮不继退师。
现代文：李成桂派陈景屯驻艾州，因粮食不继而退兵。
English: Li Chenggui sent Chen Jingtun to Aizhou, but he left the army because of food shortages.

古文：王怒，杀成桂之子。
现代文：辛礻禺发怒，为此杀死了李成桂的儿子。
English: Xin Yao became angry and killed Li Chenggui's son for this.

古文：成桂还兵攻破王城，囚王及莹。 
现代文：李成桂便回兵攻破王城，将高丽王辛礻禺和崔莹囚禁起来了。 
English: Ri Seong-gyu then returned with his army and broke through the royal city, imprisoning Goryeo's Wang Hsin-tao and Choi Ying-tung.

古文：景惧及，故降。
现代文：陈景因此感到害怕，故前来投降明朝。
English: As a result, Chen Jing felt scared, so he came to surrender in the morning.

古文：帝敕辽东严守备，仍遣人侦之。
现代文：皇帝下敕令给辽东守将，让他们严密守备，并派人侦察高丽的情况。
English: The emperor issued an imperial order to the Liaodong generals to keep them closely guarded, and sent someone to investigate the situation in Goryeo.

古文：十月，禑请逊位于其子昌。
现代文：十月，辛礻禺派人来朝廷请求将高丽国王的王位让给他的儿子辛昌。
English: In October, Hsin Kyong sent someone to the imperial court to request that the throne of the King of Goryeo be given to his son Hsin Chang.

古文：帝曰： 前闻其王被囚，此必成桂之谋，姑俟之以观变。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：此前听说高丽国王已被其属下囚禁，这次请求让位之事必是李成桂的计谋，暂且等着以观事态的变化再说。 
English: The emperor said, "I had heard that King Goryeo had been imprisoned by his subordinates. This request to abdicate must be a trick of Syngman Rhee. Let's wait and see how things change."

古文：二十二年，权国事昌奏乞入朝，帝不许。
现代文：二十二年，权国事辛昌请求入京城前来朝觐，皇帝没答应。
English: In the 22nd year of the Emperor's reign, Quan Guo Ji Xinchang requested to come to Beijing for the imperial court, but the Emperor did not agree.

古文：是岁，成桂废昌，而立定昌国院君瑶。
现代文：该年，李成桂废除了辛昌，扶立定昌国院君王瑶为高丽国王。
English: In the same year, Syngman Rhee abolished Sinchang and installed Dingchang as the king of Goryeo.

古文：二十三年正月遣使来告。
现代文：二十三年正月王瑶派使者来朝廷告知此事。
English: In the first month of the 23rd year, Wang Yao sent an envoy to the imperial court to inform the matter.

古文：二十四年三月诏市马高丽。
现代文：二十四年三月皇帝下诏在高丽买马。
English: In March 1924, the emperor issued an edict to buy horses in Korea.

古文：八月，权国事瑶进所市马千五百匹。
现代文：八月，权国事王瑶将朝廷在高丽买的马一千五百匹全送了过来。
English: In August, the powerful minister of state, Wang Qi, sent the entire 1,500 horses that the imperial court had bought in Goryeo.

古文：帝曰； 三韩君臣悖乱，二纪于兹。
现代文：皇帝说： 三韩之地君臣相悖而作乱，三代都是如此。
English: The emperor said: In the land of the three Koreas, princes and ministers have been at odds with each other and caused turmoil, and this has been the case for three generations.

古文：今王瑶嗣立，乃王氏苗裔，宜遣使劳之。 
现代文：现今王瑶继立，总是王氏的后裔，应派使者慰劳他。 
English: Now that Wang Xizhi is still standing, he is still a descendant of the Wang clan. An envoy should be sent to comfort him.

古文：十二月，瑶遣其子奭朝贺明年正旦。
现代文：十二月，王瑶派遣他的儿子王来朝廷祝贺明年元旦。
English: In December, Wang Hui sent his son Wang to the imperial court to offer New Year's greetings.

古文：奭未归而成桂自立，遂有其国，瑶出居原州。
现代文：王还未回去而李成桂已自立为高丽国王，占有了高丽国，王瑶出居在原州。
English: The king has not yet returned, but Ri Song Gwee has already established himself as the king of Goryeo and taken possession of Goryeo. Wang Ye is living in Wonju.

古文：王氏自五代传国数百年，至是绝。
现代文：王氏从五代十国时期起占有了高丽国，子孙相传了数百年，到此时灭绝了。
English: The Wang clan has occupied Korea since the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, and their descendants have been passed down for hundreds of years. By this time, they had become extinct.

古文：二十五年九月，高丽知密直司事赵胖等持国都评议司奏言： 本国自恭愍王薨，无嗣，权臣李仁人以辛肫子禑主国事，昏暴好杀，至欲兴师犯边，大将李成桂以为不可而回军。
现代文：二十五年九月，高丽知密直司事赵胖等人持国都评议司上奏说 ：本国自从恭愍王死后，没有后嗣，权臣李仁人扶辛肫的儿子辛礻禺来主持国事。他昏暴好杀，还想兴兵侵犯明朝的边境，大将李成桂认为不能这样做而回军。
English: In September 25th, Zhao Fatty, the Secretary of the Korean Intellectual Property Office, and others, said: "Since the death of King Gongye, our country has had no heir. The powerful minister Li Renren helped Xin Ye, the son of Xin Ye, to preside over state affairs. He was violent and wanted to invade the borders of the Ming Dynasty. General Li Cheng Gui thought that this could not be done and returned to the army.

古文：禑负罪惶惧，逊位于子昌。
现代文：辛礻禺负罪后惶恐害怕，便让位给他的儿子辛昌。
English: Horrified and scared after he was found guilty, Xin Zheng gave up his seat to his son, Xin Chang.

古文：国人弗顺，启请恭愍王妃安氏择宗亲瑶权国事。
现代文：国内百姓不愿意，于是启请恭愍王的王妃安氏挑选王氏宗亲中的王瑶暂理国事。
English: The people of the country did not want to do so, so they asked the princess of King Gongjun, An, to choose Wang Qian, one of the patriarchs of the Wang clan, to temporarily take charge of state affairs.

古文：已及四年，昏戾信谗，戕害勋旧，子奭痴騃不慧，国人谓瑶不足主社稷。
现代文：王瑶主持国事已有四年，昏戾无道，听信谗言，残害有功劳的旧臣，其儿子王颠痴不慧，国内百姓都认为王瑶才能不足以主持国家大事。
English: Wang Hui has been presiding over state affairs for four years. He is reckless, listens to gossip, and destroys meritorious old ministers. His son, Wang Buxi, is foolish and incompetent. The domestic people all think that Wang Hui's talent is not enough to preside over national affairs.

古文：今以安氏命，退瑶于私第。王氏子姓无可当舆望者，中外人心咸系成桂。
现代文：现今按照安氏的命令，已将王瑶退回到私第，而王氏子孙中没有人有威望能担当主持国政的重担，国内外百姓全推崇李成桂。
English: Now, according to An's order, Wang Xi has been returned to private ownership, and none of Wang's descendants have the prestige to take on the heavy burden of presiding over national affairs. People at home and abroad all respect Li Chenggui.

古文：臣等与国人耆老共推主国事，惟圣主俞允。 
现代文：我们与国内百姓中的乡老共同推举李成桂主持国事，愿朝廷圣主允可此事。 
English: We, together with the villagers among the domestic people, have jointly nominated Li Chenggui to preside over state affairs. I hope the Imperial Court will allow this.

古文：帝以高丽僻处东隅，非中国所治，令礼部移谕： 果能顺天道，合人心，不启边衅，使命往来，实尔国之福，我又何诛。 
现代文：皇帝认为高丽偏处于东隅，不是中国治理的版图之内，让礼部转达他的敕谕： 若李氏果然能顺应天道，符合人心，不在边境挑起争端，与本朝廷有使节往来，实在是你们国家的福气，我又有什么不允可的呢！ 
English: The emperor thought that Korea was located in the eastern corner, not within the territory of China's governance, and asked the Ministry of Ceremonies to convey his edict: If the Lee clan can indeed conform to the heavenly way, conform to the hearts of the people, not provoke disputes at the border, and have envoys with this court, it is really a blessing for your country, and what should I not allow?

古文：冬，成桂闻皇太子薨，遣使表慰，并请更国号。
现代文：该年冬天，李成桂听说明朝皇太子亡故，便派使者奉表前来慰问，并请求皇帝给他的国家更改国号。
English: In the winter of that year, after Li Chenggui heard about the death of the crown prince, he sent an envoy to offer condolences and ask the emperor to change the country's name.

古文：帝命仍古号曰朝鲜。
现代文：皇帝让他的国家仍按古代的称号叫朝鲜。
English: The emperor let his country still be called Korea according to the ancient title.

古文：二十六年二月遣使进马九千八百余匹，命运纻丝绵布一万九千七百余匹酬之。
现代文：二十六年二月，朝鲜派遣使者向明朝皇帝进献贡马九千八百多匹，皇帝命令运送丝棉布一万九千七百多匹给他们以示酬谢。
English: In February of the twenty-sixth year, North Korea sent an envoy to the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty to present more than 9,800 horses as a tribute. The Emperor ordered the delivery of more than 19,700 silk and cotton cloths as a token of gratitude.

古文：六月表谢，贡马及方物，并上前恭愍王金印，请更己名曰旦。
现代文：六月，朝鲜国王派人奉表谢恩，并向皇帝贡献马和土产，还交上前恭愍王的金印，请求将自己的名字改为旦。
English: In June, the king of Korea sent someone to express his gratitude, and presented the emperor with a horse and local products. He also handed over the gold seal of the former King Gongjun and asked to change his name to Dan.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是月，辽东都指挥使司奏，朝鲜国招引女直五百余人，潜渡鸭绿江，欲入寇。
现代文：该月，辽东都指挥使司上奏，说朝鲜国招引了五百多名女真人，偷偷地渡过鸭绿江，想入寇辽东。
English: That month, the commander of Liaodongdu told the envoy that North Korea had lured more than five hundred Jurchens to secretly cross the Yalu River to enter Liaodong.

古文：乃遣使敕谕，示以祸福。
现代文：皇帝便派使者带着敕谕去见朝鲜国王，向他晓以祸福。
English: The emperor then sent an envoy with an encyclical to the Korean king to inform him of the good and bad.

古文：旦得敕，惶惧陈谢，上贡，并械送逋逃军民三百八十余人至辽东。
现代文：李旦得到敕谕后，惶惶恐恐地向皇帝陈表谢恩，并献上贡物，还把从辽东逃亡过去的军民三百八十多人戴上桎梏送回辽东。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Li Dan, in panic and fear, presented a thank-you gift to Emperor Chen and paid tribute. He also escorted more than 380 soldiers and civilians who had fled from Liaodong back to Liaodong in shackles.

古文：二十七年，旦遣子入贡。
现代文：二十七年，李旦派儿子前来中国向皇帝献贡。
English: In the 27th year, Li Dan sent his son to China to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：二十八年遣使柳珣贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十八年又派遣使者柳王旬前来祝贺第二年的元旦。
English: In the 28th year, they sent an envoy, Liu Wangjun, to congratulate the second year's New Year's Day.

古文：帝以表文语慢，诘责之。
现代文：皇帝因其上表中的文字语言有轻视怠慢朝廷之处，便诘责柳王旬。
English: The emperor reprimanded Liu Wang Shun because the words and language in the above table showed contempt for and neglect of the imperial court.

古文：珣言表文乃门下评理郑道传所撰，遂命逮道传，释珣归。
现代文：柳王旬说该表的文字是本国门下评理郑道传所撰，皇帝便命令逮捕郑道传，将柳王旬释放回去。
English: Liu Wangjun said that the text of the table was written by Zheng Daochuan, a critic from his country. The emperor then ordered the arrest of Zheng Daochuan and the release of Liu Wangjun.

古文：二十九年送撰表人郑总等三人至，云表实总等所撰，道传病不能行。
现代文：二十九年朝鲜把撰写表文的郑总等三人送到京城，上表说前表实际上是郑总等人所撰，郑道传有病不能前来京城。
English: In the 29th year, North Korea sent three people including General Zheng, who wrote the form, to Beijing. The above form said that the previous form was actually written by General Zheng and others, and Zheng Daochuan was ill and could not come to Beijing.

古文：帝以总等乱邦构衅，留不遣。
现代文：皇帝认为郑总等人扰乱邦交，挑起事端，强行留下不准遣送回去。
English: The emperor believed that General Zheng and others had disturbed diplomatic relations, provoked trouble, and were not allowed to be forcibly sent back.

古文：三十年冬，复以表涉讥讪，拘其使。
现代文：三十年冬天，朝廷又因朝鲜的表文中有讥讪之词，将其来使拘留起来。
English: In the winter of the 30th year, the imperial court detained him again because there were mocking words in North Korea's petition.

古文：建文初，旦表陈年老，以子芳远袭位。
现代文：建文初年，李旦上表陈说自己年纪已老，将王位传给儿子李芳远。皇帝同意。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwen, Li Dan publicly announced that he was too old and would pass the throne to his son Li Fangyuan. The emperor agreed.

古文：许之。成祖立，遣官颁即位诏。
现代文：明成祖登基后，派遣官员到各地颁发即位诏书。
English: After Emperor Mingchengzhu ascended to the throne, officials were dispatched to various regions to issue imperial edicts of enthronement.

古文：永乐元年正月，芳远遣使朝贡。
现代文：永乐元年正月，李芳远派使者到京城向明成祖献贡。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yongle, Li Fangyuan sent an envoy to the capital to pay tribute to Ming Chengzu.

古文：四月复遣陪臣李贵龄入贡，奏芳远父有疾，需龙脑、沈香、苏合、香油诸物，赍布求市。
现代文：四月李芳远派遣陪臣李贵龄又来入贡，并上奏说我李芳远的父亲身体有病，需要龙脑、沉香、苏合、香油等物，现带着棉布来请求买一些回去。
English: In April, Li Fangyuan sent his attendant Li Guiling to pay tribute again, and reported that Li Fangyuan's father was ill and needed dragon's brain, agarwood, acacia, fragrant oil, etc. He brought cotton cloth to request to buy some back.

古文：帝命太医院赐之，还其布。
现代文：皇帝让太医院挑好这些药物，赏赐给李芳远，将带来的布送还回去。
English: The emperor asked the Tai Hospital to select these drugs, award them to Li Fangyuan, and send the cloth back.

古文：芳远表谢，因请冕服书藉。
现代文：李芳远上表谢恩，并请求皇帝赐给他冕服和书籍。
English: Li Fangyuan expressed his gratitude and asked the emperor to give him a crown robe and books.

古文：帝嘉其能慕中国礼，赐金印、诰命、冕服、九章、圭玉、珮玉，妃珠翠七翟冠、霞帔、金坠，及经籍彩币表里。
现代文：皇帝嘉赏他能够仰慕中国的礼仪，于是赐给他金印、诰命、冕服、九章、圭玉、玉、妃珠翠七翟冠、霞帔、金坠以及经典书籍彩帛表里等等。
English: The emperor appreciated his ability to admire Chinese etiquette, so he gave him the golden seal, the imperial seal, the coronation robe, the nine chapters, the gems, the jade, the seven-crowned crown, the honeysuckle, the gold pendant, and the classic books, and so on.

古文：自后贡献，岁辄四五至焉。
现代文：从此朝鲜国前来献贡，一年总有四五次。
English: Since then, North Korea has come to pay tribute four or five times a year.

古文：二年十二月诏立芳远子禔为世子，从其请也。
现代文：二年十二月皇帝听从朝鲜国王的请求，下诏立李芳远的儿子李礻是为世子。
English: In December of the second year, the emperor obeyed the request of the king of Korea and decreed that Li Fangru, the son of Li Fangru, was the heir.

古文：五年十二月，贡马三千匹至辽东，命户部运绢布万五千匹偿之。
现代文：五年十二月，朝鲜将贡马三千匹送到辽东，皇帝命令户部运送绢布一万五千匹予以酬偿。
English: In December of the fifth year, North Korea sent three thousand horses to Liaodong, and the emperor ordered the household department to transport fifteen thousand yakitori to be reimbursed.

古文：六年，世子禔来朝，赐织金文绮。
现代文：六年，朝鲜世子李礻是前来朝觐皇帝，皇帝命令给他赏赐织金文绮。
English: In the sixth year, the Korean heir, Ri Yong, came to the court of the emperor, and the emperor ordered him to reward him with a woven gold bracelet.

古文：及归，帝亲制诗赐之。
现代文：等李礻是归去时，皇帝又亲自做诗赐与他。
English: When Li Qiye returned, the emperor personally wrote a poem and gave it to him.

古文：时朝鲜纳女后宫，立为妃嫔者四人。
现代文：此时，朝鲜国王后宫纳女，将其中四人立为妃嫔。
English: At this time, the Korean king's harem accepted women, and four of them were appointed as concubines.

古文：其秋，遣陪臣郑擢来告其父旦之丧。
现代文：该年秋天，朝鲜国的陪臣郑擢受李芳远派遣来京城，告诉明朝廷其父李旦已经死亡。
English: In the autumn of that year, the North Korean vassal Zheng Yang was sent by Li Fangyuan to Beijing to tell the Ming court that his father Li Dan had died.

古文：命官吊祭，赐谥康献。
现代文：皇帝命令官员前去吊祭，并给李旦赐谥号为康献。
English: The emperor ordered the officials to go to the hanging ceremony, and gave Li Dan the honorary title of Kangxian.

古文：十六年奏世子禔不肖，第三子祹孝弟力学，国人所属，请立为嗣，诏听王所择。
现代文：十六年朝鲜国王上奏说世子李礻是不肖，而第三个儿子李衶倒是孝悌有礼努力学习，受国人的推崇，请求将其立为嗣子。皇帝下诏书说听凭国王的选择。
English: Sixteen years ago, the king of North Korea reported that his heir, Ri Yong, was not handsome, but his third son, Ri Yong, was filial and courteous, studied hard, was respected by the countrymen, and asked to be made the heir. The emperor issued a decree saying that he would defer to the king's choice.

古文：因上表谢，并陈己年老，请以祹理国事。
现代文：于是李芳远上表谢恩，并陈述自己年事已老，请求让李衶掌理国事。
English: As a result, Li Fangyuan expressed his gratitude, and stated that he was old, and requested that Li Jie be put in charge of state affairs.

古文：命光禄少卿韩确、鸿胪丞刘泉封祹为朝鲜国王。
现代文：皇帝命令光禄少卿韩确、鸿胪丞刘泉封李衶为朝鲜国王。
English: The emperor ordered Han Ji, Guanglu Shaoqing, and Liu Quanfeng to become the kings of Korea.

古文：时帝已迁北都，朝鲜益近，而事大之礼益恭，朝廷亦待以加礼，他国不敢望也。
现代文：此时明成祖已将京城迁到北都，离朝鲜更近了，而朝鲜以大国之礼伏侍明朝更为恭敬，明朝廷亦对朝鲜优礼有加，这是其他国家不敢奢望的。
English: At this time, Ming Chengzu had moved the capital to the northern capital, which was closer to North Korea, and North Korea was more respectful to the Ming Dynasty with the courtesy of a great power, and the Ming Dynasty also showed courtesy to North Korea, which other countries did not dare to expect.

古文：二十年，芳远卒，赐谥恭定。
现代文：二十年，李芳远死，皇帝给他赐封谥号为恭定。
English: Twenty years later, when Li Fang died, the emperor gave him the title of Gongding.

古文：二十一年七月，祹请立嫡子珦为世子，从之。
现代文：二十一年七月，李衶请求立嫡子李王向为世子，皇帝同意。
English: In July of the twenty-first year, Li Xi requested that his legitimate son, Li Wangxiang, be made the heir, and the emperor agreed.

古文：先是，敕祹贡马万匹，至是如数至，赐白金绮绢。
现代文：此前，皇帝曾敕谕李衶，让他向朝廷献贡马一万匹。至此李衶派人将贡马全部送到，皇帝给他赏赐白金和绮绢。
English: Previously, the emperor had ordered Li Qiye to offer 10,000 horses as tribute to the imperial court. So Li Qiye sent someone to bring all the horses as tribute, and the emperor rewarded him with platinum and a scepter.

古文：宣德二年三月遣中官赐白金纻纱，别敕进马五千匹，资边用。
现代文：宣德二年三月，皇帝派宦官给朝鲜国王赏赐白金和纱，让他再进献马五千匹给边境军队使用。
English: In March of the second year of Xuande, the emperor sent eunuchs to reward the Korean king with platinum and yarn, and asked him to donate another five thousand horses for use by the border troops.

古文：九月如数至。
现代文：九月五千匹马如数送到。
English: In September, the full five thousand horses arrived.

古文：四年祹赐书： 珍禽异兽，非朕所贵，其勿献。 
现代文：四年皇帝给李衶敕书说 ：珍禽异兽，我不以为贵，你可不必献。 
English: In the fourth year, the emperor said to Li Yanshu: Rare birds and animals, I don't think they are expensive, you don't have to offer.

古文：后又敕祹： 金玉之器，非尔国所产，宜止之，土物效诚而已。 
现代文：其后又给李衶敕谕说： 金玉之器，不是你们国家所产，应该不献，以本国的土产表示诚心就够了。 
English: After that, he said to Li Shizhu: The golden vessel is not produced in your country, so you should not offer it. It is enough to show sincerity with your own domestic products.

古文：八年，祹奏遣子弟诣太学或辽东学，帝不许，赐《五经》、《四书》、《性理》、《通鉴纲目》诸书。
现代文：八年，李衶上奏说想派子弟到太学或到辽东学习，皇帝没有答应，只赏赐给他们《五经》、《四书》、《性理》、《通鉴纲目》等书。
English: In the eighth year, Li Qiye said that he wanted to send his sons to study in Taiyue or Liaodong. The emperor did not agree, but only rewarded them with books such as "Five Classics," "Four Books," "Character" and "Comprehensive Course."

古文：正统元年三月放朝鲜妇女金黑等五十三人还其国。
现代文：正统元年三月，明朝廷将朝鲜妇女金黑等五十三人放还回国。
English: In March of the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, the Ming court released 53 North Korean women, including Kim Hye, back to their country.

古文：金黑等自宣德初至京师，至是遣中官送回。
现代文：金黑等人从宣德初年到京城，至此派宦官将她们送回国去。
English: Jinhei and others went to Beijing from Xuande in the first year, and the eunuch sent them back to the country.

古文：三年八月赐祹远游冠、绛纱袍、玉佩、赤舄。
现代文：三年八月，皇帝给李衶赏赐远游冠、绛纱袍、玉佩和赤乌。
English: In August of the third year, the emperor gave Li Qian the Faraway Crown, the Gossamer Robe, the Jade Scarf and the Red Ribbon.

古文：先是，建州长童仓避居朝鲜界，已复还建州。
现代文：此前，建州的长官童仓避难居住到朝鲜境内，不久又回到建州。
English: Previously, Tongcang, the governor of Gyeongju, took refuge in North Korea and returned to Gyeongju soon after.

古文：朝鲜言： 昔以穷归臣，臣遇之善。
现代文：朝鲜上奏说： 建州长官童仓以前因为穷窘而归附于我们，我们待他很好。
English: The North Korean ambassador said: "Before the establishment of the Republic of Korea, Governor Tongcang became our vassal because of poverty, and we treated him well.

古文：今负恩还建州李满住所，虑其同谋扰边。 
现代文：现今他忘恩回到建州李满住那里，怕他们合谋扰我边境。 
English: Now he has returned ungratefully to Jianzhou, where Li Manchu lives, for fear that they will conspire to disturb our border.

古文：建州长言，所部为朝鲜追杀，阻留一百七十余家。
现代文：而建州长官则上奏说他的部属遭朝鲜人追杀，至今还阻留在朝鲜有一百七十多家。
English: Governor Jian, on the other hand, reported that his subordinates had been chased and killed by the North Koreans, and that more than 170 of them remained in North Korea to this day.

古文：五年诏祹还之。
现代文：五年，皇帝下诏给李衶，让他把这一百七十多家人还回来。
English: Five years later, the emperor issued an edict to Li Qiye, ordering him to return the more than 170 family members.

古文：七年五月谕祹曰： 鸭绿江一带东宁等卫，密迩王境，中多细人逃至王国，或被国人诱胁去者，无问汉人、女直，至即解京。 
现代文：七年五月，皇帝谕告李衶说： 鸭绿江一带的东宁等卫所，接近贵国边境，其中会有许多小人逃到贵国，或被贵国的人引诱胁迫过去。今后不问是汉人还是女真人，凡到贵国去的全解送到京城来。 
English: In May of the seventh year, the emperor issued an edict to Li Xuan, saying, "Dongning and other sanitariums along the Yalu River are close to your country's border, and many villains will flee to your country, or be lured and coerced by people from your country. In the future, no matter whether they are Han or Jurchen, all those who go to your country will be sent to Beijing.

古文：初，瓦剌密令女直诸部诱朝鲜，使背中国。
现代文：原先，瓦剌曾暗地里让女真各部落引诱朝鲜背叛中国。
English: Originally, Waju had secretly asked the Jurchen tribes to lure Korea into betraying China.

古文：祹拒之，白其事于朝。
现代文：李衶都拒绝了他们，并将此事向明朝廷说明。
English: Li Hongdu rejected them all and explained the matter to the Ming court.

古文：帝嘉其忠，敕奖之，并赐彩币。
现代文：皇帝嘉赏他的忠心，敕令给予奖励，并给他赐予彩币。
English: The emperor commended his loyalty, gave him a reward, and gave him a lot of money.

古文：九年春，倭寇犯边，祹命将擒获五十余人，械送京师。
现代文：九年春天，倭寇侵犯边境地区，李衶命令将领活捉了五十多名倭寇，将他们戴上桎梏押送到京城。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, when the wokou invaded the border area, Li Lan ordered his generals to capture more than fifty wokou alive and escort them to the capital in shackles.

古文：十年又获余党来献。
现代文：十年朝鲜又抓获了倭寇的余党并献到京城。
English: Ten years later, North Korea captured another group of wako and brought them to the capital.

古文：帝连敕奖谕，赐赉加等。
现代文：皇帝连连敕谕嘉奖，并优加赏赐。
English: Emperor Lianlianzhu awarded the prize, and gave him a bonus.

古文：十三年冬，命使调发朝鲜及野人女直兵会辽东，征北寇。
现代文：十三年冬天，皇帝派使者前去调遣朝鲜和野人女真的军队到辽东会合，去征讨北部的敌寇。
English: In the winter of the thirteenth year, the emperor sent an envoy to dispatch the armies of Korea and the Wild Woman to Liaodong to meet and fight the enemy pirates in the north.

古文：时英宗北狩，郕王即位，遣官颁诏于其国。
现代文：不久，英宗皇帝巡狩北部边疆，成阝王即皇帝位，派官员到朝鲜颁发即位诏书。
English: Soon after, Emperor Yeongjong made a tour of the northern border, and sent an official to North Korea to issue an imperial edict of enthronement.

古文：景泰元年贡马五百匹。奏称奉敕办马二三万匹，比因邻寇构衅，马畜踣毙，一时未能。
现代文：景泰元年朝鲜向朝廷献贡马五百匹，并上奏声称奉皇帝的敕谕筹办贡马两三万匹，只是近来因邻境入侵，挑起争端，马畜都死亡了，因此一时未能按数上贡。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, Korea offered five hundred horses as tribute to the imperial court, and reported that it had prepared twenty to thirty thousand horses as tribute according to the emperor's edict. However, recently, due to the invasion of neighboring countries, disputes were provoked, and the horses and cattle all died, so it was not possible to pay tribute according to the number for a while.

古文：诏曰： 寇今少息。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：现今外敌入侵已稍有停息。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "Nowadays, the foreign enemy's invasion has somewhat stopped."

古文：马已至者，偿其直。未至者，止勿贡。 
现代文：已到的贡马按其价钱给予酬偿，还未到的就让他们不要贡献了。 
English: When the tribute arrived, they were paid according to their price, but before it arrived, they were not allowed to contribute.

古文：是年夏，祹卒，赐吊祭，谥庄宪，封子珦为国王。
现代文：该年夏天，李衶死，皇帝派官前去吊祭，赐谥号为庄宪，册封李衶的儿子李王向为朝鲜国王。
English: In the summer of the same year, Ri Su Yong died, and the emperor sent an official to the hanging ceremony to bestow the title of "King of Korea" on Ri Su Yong's son, Ri Wang Xiang.

古文：会辽东奏报开原、沈阳有寇入境，掠人畜，系建州、海西、野人女直头目李满住等为向导，因谕珦相为掎角截杀之。
现代文：此时辽东上奏朝廷，说在开原、沈阳有敌寇入侵，掠夺人畜，是由建州、海西、野人女真的头目李满住等为向导引进来的。
English: At this time, Liaodong appealed to the imperial court, saying that in Kaiyuan and Shenyang, there were enemy invaders invading and plundering people and animals, which were introduced by Jianzhou, Haixi, and Li Manju, the leader of the Wild Woman Genuine, as guides.

古文：其秋，续贡马千五百余匹。
现代文：该年秋天，李王向又向明朝续献贡马一千五百多匹。
English: In the autumn of that year, Li Wangxiang continued to offer more than 1,500 horses as tribute to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：赐冕服，并偿其直。
现代文：皇帝给他赐予冕服，并酬偿其马的价值。
English: The emperor gave him a coronation robe and reimbursed the value of his horse.

古文：冬又赐珦及妃权氏诰命，封其子弘暐为世子。
现代文：冬天，皇帝又给李王向和他的王妃权氏颁发诰命，封其儿子李弘日韦为世子。
English: In the winter, the emperor also gave the imperial command to Li Wangxiang and his empress Guan, and designated his son Li Hongzhiwei as the heir.

古文：二年冬，以建州头目潜与朝鲜通，戒珦绝其使。
现代文：二年冬天，因建州的头目与朝鲜暗中往来，皇帝告诫李王向不要派使者去建州。
English: In the winter of the second year, the emperor warned Li Wangxuan not to send an envoy to Jiangzhou because the leader of Jiangzhou had secret dealings with North Korea.

古文：三年秋，珦卒，来告哀。
现代文：三年秋天，李王向死，朝鲜派人来向明朝告哀。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Ri Wangxiang died, and North Korea sent people to pay their respects to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：遣中官往吊祭，赐谥恭顺，命子弘暐嗣立。
现代文：朝廷派宦官前去吊祭，给李王向赐谥号为恭顺，命李王向的儿子李弘日韦即位为朝鲜国国王。
English: The imperial court sent eunuchs to the hanging ceremony to give King Ri Jong Un the posthumous title of Junshun, and ordered King Ri Jong Un's son, Ri Hong Rong, to ascend to the throne as the king of Korea.

古文：弘暐立三年，以年幼且婴夙疾，请以叔瑈权国事。
现代文：李弘日韦当了三年国王，因年纪幼小且长期患病，便请求其叔李王柔权理国事。
English: When Li Hongzhi Wei had been king for three years, due to his young age and long-term illness, he asked his uncle Li Wang Rong to take charge of state affairs.

古文：七年上表逊位，乃封瑈为国王。
现代文：七年李弘日韦向明朝廷上表让位，朝廷便封李王柔为朝鲜国王。
English: In the seventh year, Li Hongzhi and Wei abdicated to the Ming court, and the court then crowned Li Wangru as the king of Korea.

古文：瑈请立子暲为世子，从之。
现代文：李王柔请求明朝廷立他的儿子李日章为世子，皇帝同意了。
English: Li Wangru asked the Ming court to make his son Li Rizhang the heir, and the emperor agreed.

古文：天顺三年，边将奏，有建州三卫都督私与朝鲜结，恐为中国患。
现代文：天顺三年，边境将领上奏朝廷，说建州等三个卫所的都督私下与朝鲜勾结，恐怕会为害于中国边境。
English: In the third year of Tianshun, the border generals appealed to the imperial court, saying that the governors of Jianzhou and other three garrisons were secretly colluding with North Korea, which would be detrimental to the Chinese border.

古文：因敕瑈毋作不靖，贻后悔。
现代文：皇帝便敕令李王柔不要做此不靖之事，否则以后会后悔的。
English: The emperor then ordered Li Wangru not to do such a reckless thing, otherwise she would regret it later.

古文：瑈疏辨，复谕曰： 宣德、正统年间，以王国与彼互相侵掠，敕解怨息兵，初不令交通给赏授官也。
现代文：李王柔向明朝廷上疏替自己辩解，皇帝又敕谕他说： 宣德、正统年间，因你们王国与他们之间互相侵略和掠夺，朝廷敕谕你们解怨息兵，当初就让你们王国不要与他们有往来，不要给他们奖赏和授予他们任何官职。
English: Li Wangrou defended himself to the court of the Ming Dynasty, and the emperor also ordered him: "During the years of Xuande and Zhengde, because your kingdoms and theirs invaded and plundered each other, the court ordered you to resolve the grievances of the soldiers, and initially told your kingdom not to have any dealings with them, not to reward them and not to grant them any official positions.

古文：彼既受朝廷官职，王又加之，是与朝廷抗也。
现代文：他们已经接受了本朝廷所授的官职，而你朝鲜国王又给他们加官，这是与本朝廷相对抗嘛。
English: They have already accepted the official positions given by this court, and you, the king of Korea, have promoted them, which is against this court.

古文：王素秉礼义，何尔文过饰非？
现代文：你素来秉持礼义，为何会这样文过饰非呢？
English: You have always upheld propriety, why would you embellish the truth in such a way?

古文：后宜绝私交，以全令誉。 
现代文：以后应断绝与他们的私下交往，以保全你的名誉。 
English: In the future, you should cut off private communication with them in order to preserve your reputation.

古文：四年复谕瑈曰： 王奏毛怜卫都督郎卜儿哈通谋煽乱，已置之法。
现代文：四年，皇帝又谕告李王柔说： 你上奏说毛怜卫都督郎卜儿哈与外国通谋煽动叛乱，已将他绳之以法。
English: In the fourth year, the emperor also told Li Wangru, "You reported that Mao Rongwei's governor, Lang Bu Ha, conspired with foreign countries to incite rebellion, and he has been brought to justice.

古文：夫法止可行于国中，岂得加于邻境。
现代文：可是法律只能在自己国中行使，岂能强加到邻国境内？
English: But the law can only be enforced within one's own country. Can it be imposed on the territory of a neighboring country?

古文：郎卜儿哈有罪，宜奏朝廷区处。
现代文：郎卜儿哈有罪，应上奏本朝廷，由本朝廷酌情处置。
English: If Rongbuerha is guilty, it should be reported to the Imperial Court, which will handle the case at its own discretion.

古文：今辄行杀害，何怪其子阿比车之思复仇也。
现代文：而现今你却把他杀害了，难怪他的儿子阿比车想找你们报仇。
English: And now you have killed him, and it is no wonder that his son Abishai seeks your vengeance.

古文：闻阿比车之母尚在，宜急送辽东都司，令阿比车领回，以解仇怨。 
现代文：听说阿比车的母亲还在你们手中，应尽快将她送到辽东都司那里，让阿比车领回去，以便解怨释仇。 
English: I heard that the mother of Abike is still in your hands. You should send her to the Liaodong governor's office as soon as possible, and let Abike take her back, in order to relieve the grievance and take revenge.

古文：五年，建州卫野人至义州杀掠，瑈奏乞朝命还所掠。
现代文：五年，建州卫的野人到义州杀戮抢劫，李王柔上奏朝廷请求皇帝命建州卫野人归还所抢劫的东西。
English: In the fifth year, Jianzhou Wei's savages went to Yizhou to kill and rob. Li Wangrou appealed to the imperial court to request the emperor to order Jianzhou Wei's savages to return what they had robbed.

古文：兵部议： 朝鲜先尝诱杀郎卜儿哈，继又诱致都指挥兀克，纵兵掠其家属。
现代文：兵部讨论后认为 ：朝鲜先前曾诱杀了郎卜儿哈，后来又利诱都指挥兀克，纵兵抢劫了他们的家属。
English: After discussion, the military department held that: North Korea had previously induced the death of Lang Bu'er Ha, and later, it had also induced the death of the commander of the capital, Hun Ke, and the soldiers had robbed their families.

古文：今野人实系复仇，宜谕朝鲜，寇盗之来皆自取，惟守分安法，庶弭边衅。 
现代文：现今野人对朝鲜的屠杀和抢劫，实系复仇行为。应谕告朝鲜，这次野人对他们的寇盗，实是咎由自取，只有安分守法，才能平息边境争端。 
English: The present massacre and robbery of the North Koreans by the barbarians is actually an act of revenge. North Korea should be told that this time the barbarians are to blame for their robbery, and only if they are peaceful and abide by the law can the border dispute be calmed down.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：成化元年冬，陪臣李门炯来朝，卒于道。
现代文：成化元年冬天，朝鲜的陪臣李门炯前来京城朝觐明朝皇帝，结果死在路途上。
English: In the winter of the first year of Chenghua, the North Korean vassal Li Mengyao came to Beijing to visit the Ming Dynasty emperor, but died on the way.

古文：命给棺赐祭，并赐彩币慰其家。
现代文：皇帝命令给他赐予棺木并致祭，给他的家属赐予彩币以示慰问。
English: The emperor ordered to give him a coffin and make an offering, and to give his family coins as a token of condolence.

古文：时朝鲜频贡异物，三年春，敕谕瑈修常贡，勿事珍奇。
现代文：这时朝鲜频频向明朝廷进献异物，三年春天，皇帝敕谕李王柔上贡还是像以前那样以常物为好，不要专事珍奇异物。
English: At this time, North Korea frequently presented foreign objects to the Ming court. In the spring of the third year, the emperor ordered Li Wangru to pay tribute with ordinary objects as before, and not to specialize in rare and strange foreign objects.

古文：是时朝廷用兵征建州，敕瑈助兵进剿。
现代文：此时，明朝廷派兵征讨建州，皇帝敕谕李王柔也出兵相助。
English: At this time, the Ming court sent soldiers to negotiate the establishment of the state, and the emperor ordered Li Wangru to send troops to help.

古文：瑈遣中枢府知事康纯统众万余渡鸭绿、泼猪二江，攻破九狝府诸寨，斩获多。
现代文：李王柔派遣中枢府知事康纯统率一万多人渡过鸭绿江和泼猪江，攻破了九犭尔府等寨子，斩杀和俘虏了不少敌人。
English: Li Wangru dispatched more than ten thousand people, including the governor of the Central Prefecture, Kang Chun-tung, to cross the Yalu River and the Warthog River, broke through the stockade of Jiuzhaigou and other fortresses, and killed and captured many enemies.

古文：四年正月遣官来献俘。诏从厚赉，敕奖谕之。
现代文：四年正月，朝鲜派遣官员将俘虏献给明朝，明朝皇帝下诏给予厚赏并敕谕嘉奖他们。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, North Korea dispatched officials to dedicate the prisoners to the Ming Dynasty, and the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty issued a decree to give them a heavy reward and commend them.

古文：是年，瑈卒，赐谥惠庄。
现代文：该年，李王柔死，皇帝给他赐封谥号为惠庄。
English: In the same year, Li Wangru died, and the emperor gave him the title of Huizhuang.

古文：遣太监郑同、崔安封世子晄为王，给妃韩氏诰命。
现代文：朝廷派遣太监郑同、崔安前去朝鲜册封世子李日光为朝鲜国王，给王妃韩氏颁发诰命。
English: The imperial court sent eunuchs Zheng Tong and Cui An to North Korea to crown the heir, Li Nikko, as the king of North Korea, and to issue the death warrant to Princess Han.

古文：既行，巡按辽东御史侯英奏曰： 辽东连年被寇，疮痍未起，今复禾稼不登，军民乏食。
现代文：郑同他们出发以后，辽东的巡按御史侯英上奏朝廷说 ：辽东连年遭受寇乱，疮痍未平，现今又是庄稼未收军民乏食之时。
English: After Zheng and they set out, the inspector of Liaodong, Hou Ying, reported to the imperial court, saying: Liaodong has been subjected to invasions year after year, and the devastation is still not over. Now is the time when the crops have not been harvested and the soldiers and people are short of food.

古文：太监郑同等随从人员所过驿骚。
现代文：太监郑同等随从人员所过之处，驿所受骚。
English: The eunuch Zheng and his attendants were harassed wherever they went.

古文：臣考先年曾于翰林院中，选有学行文望者出使。
现代文：我考证了一下，前几代皇帝时曾有在翰林院中挑选有学问有名望者出使的先例。
English: I did some research and found that there was a precedent for emperors in previous generations to select scholars and celebrities from the Hanlin Court to send on missions.

古文：今同、安俱朝鲜人，坟墓宗族皆在，见其国王，不免屈节，殊亵中国体。
现代文：现今郑同和崔安都是朝鲜人，其祖先的坟墓和宗族都在朝鲜，见到朝鲜国王，不免会有所屈节，这样特别会有损国体。
English: Today, Zheng Tong and Choe An are both Koreans. Their ancestors' graves and clans are in North Korea. Seeing the king of North Korea, it is inevitable that there will be a curtsey, which will especially damage the national body.

古文：乞寝成命，或翰林，或给事中及行人内推选一员，往使为便。 
现代文：请求朝廷收回这个成命，或在翰林院，或在给事中及行人中推举出一位官员，作为使者出使朝鲜，这样更好。 
English: It would be better to ask the imperial court to revoke this order, or to nominate an official from the Hanlin Academy, or from among the courtiers and commoners, to be sent to North Korea as an envoy.

古文：帝曰： 英所言良是。
现代文：皇帝说： 侯英所言是对的。
English: The emperor said, "What Hou Ying said is right.

古文：自后赏赉遣内臣，其册封正副使，选廷臣有学行者。 
现代文：此后给朝鲜赏赐物品时可派宦官前往，而册封正副使节时，则在朝廷大臣中选择有学问德行者充当。 
English: After that, when giving gifts to Korea, eunuchs could be sent to the country, and when envoys and vice-envoys were appointed, learned and virtuous people were chosen from among the ministers of the imperial court to act as envoys.

古文：六年，晄病笃，以所生子幼，命其兄故世子暲女子娎子权国事，遣陪臣以闻。
现代文：六年，李日光病重，因自己的儿子年纪幼小，便命他的兄长前世子李日章的儿子李折女暂理国事。李日光派陪臣将此情况告诉了明朝廷。
English: In the sixth year, Li Nikko was seriously ill, and because his son was too young, he ordered his brother's eldest son, Li Rizhang's son, Li Er's daughter, to temporarily manage state affairs. Li Nikko sent a vassal to inform the Ming court of this situation.

古文：及卒，赐谥襄悼，命娎嗣位，娎妻韩氏封王妃。
现代文：等李日光死时，明朝廷给他封谥号为襄悼，命令李折女继承朝鲜国王位，李折女的妻子韩氏被封为王妃。
English: When Ri Nikko died, the Ming court gave him the posthumous name of Jo, and ordered Ri Er's daughter to succeed to the throne of Korea. Ri Er's wife, Han, was crowned queen.

古文：十年追赠娎父世子暲为国王，谥怀简，母韩氏为王妃，从所请也。
现代文：十年，明朝廷追赠李折女的父亲世子李日章为朝鲜国王，赐谥号为怀简，封李折女的母亲韩氏为王妃，这是顺从李折女的请求所做的举措。
English: Ten years later, the Ming court posthumously bestowed the title of King of Korea on Ri Ri-jang, the son of Ri Ri-jeong's father, Ruan, bestowed the title of King of Korea on Huai-jang, and crowned Ri Ri-jeong's mother, Han, as Empress. This was a measure taken in compliance with Ri Ri-jeong's request.

古文：十一年四月，娎奏建州野人纠聚毛怜等卫侵扰边境不已，乞朝命戒饬。
现代文：十一年四月，李折女上奏说建州野人纠集毛怜等卫所不停地侵扰我国边境地区，请求明朝廷下令制止整戒这种行为。
English: In April of the eleventh year, Li Er's wife made a report that the Jianzhou savages and the Mao Er and other guards were constantly invading the border areas of our country, and requested the Ming court to order the rectification of this behavior.

古文：十二年十月，娎为继妻尹氏请封，赐诰命冠服。
现代文：十二年十月，李折女向明朝廷请求为他的继妻尹氏赐封，皇帝便给她颁赐诰命和冠服。
English: In October of the 12th year, Li Orizhe asked the Ming court to grant a title of nobility to his step-wife Yin, and the emperor gave her the imperial sash and crown.

古文：时禁外国互市兵器，娎奏： 小邦北连野人，南邻倭岛，五兵之用，不可缺一。
现代文：此时，明朝禁止与外国开市买卖兵器，李折女上奏说： 我们小国北部与野人相连，南部与倭国岛屿相接，五种兵器不能缺一。
English: At this time, the Ming Dynasty prohibited the opening of markets for the sale and purchase of weapons with foreign countries. Li Orime, the envoy, said: The northern part of our small country is connected to the barbarians, and the southern part is connected to the islands of Wakoku. One of the five weapons cannot be missing.

古文：而弓材所需牛角，仰于上国。
现代文：而制作弓箭所需的牛角，全仰仗你们国家提供。
English: And the horns needed to make bows and arrows are entirely dependent on your country to provide them.

古文：高皇帝时尝赐火药、火炮，今望特许收买弓角，不与外番同禁。 
现代文：高皇帝时期曾赐给我们火药和火炮，现今还望皇帝特许我们收买弓角，不与一般外族人那样受禁止。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao, we were given gunpowder and artillery. Today, we are still waiting for the emperor to grant us special permission to buy bows and arrows, so that we are not banned like ordinary foreigners.

古文：兵部议岁市弓角五十，后以不足于用，请无限额，诏许倍市。
现代文：兵部讨论后决定每年卖给他们弓角五十。后来因不够用，朝鲜请求不要有限额，皇帝下诏答应提供多一倍的弓角给他们。
English: After discussion with the military, it was decided to sell them 50 bow horns each year. Later, due to insufficient use, North Korea requested that there be no limit, and the emperor issued an edict promising to provide them with double the amount of bow horns.

古文：十五年十月命娎出兵夹击建州女直。
现代文：十五年十月，皇帝下令让李折女出兵夹击建州女真。
English: In October of the fifteenth year, the emperor ordered Li Ori to send troops to attack Jianzhou Jianzhen.

古文：娎遂遣右赞成鱼有沼率兵至满浦江，以水泮后期。
现代文：李折女便派右赞成鱼有诏率兵到满浦江，因涨水拖延了日期。
English: Li Orimiao then sent troops to the Manpu River in support of the right to fish, but the date was delayed due to high water.

古文：复遣左议政尹弼商、节度使金峤等渡江进剿。
现代文：李折女便又派左议政尹弼商和节度使金峤等人渡过江去，进剿女真人。
English: Li Orimiao then sent the left-wing councilor Yin Shanzhong and Jieduo to make Jin Yao and others cross the river and enter the city.

古文：十六年春遣陪臣来献捷，帝命内官赍敕奖其能继先烈，赐金币，领兵官赏赉如例。
现代文：十六年春天，李折女派陪臣来向明朝廷献捷报，皇帝命宦官持敕令嘉奖朝鲜能继承祖先的功业，特赏赐金币；对朝鲜的领兵官也按例给予赏赐。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of the Heian period, Li Er sent a female attendant to present the report of the victory to the Ming court. The emperor ordered the eunuch to hold a scepter to reward North Korea for being able to inherit the achievements of its ancestors, with a special reward of gold coins; the North Korean military leader was also rewarded as usual.

古文：后使还，遣其臣许熙伴送。
现代文：后来朝鲜使者回去时，朝鲜派遣其大臣许熙前来伴送。
English: Later, when the North Korean envoy returned, North Korea sent its minister, Xu Xi, to accompany him.

古文：熙归至开州，建州骑二千邀之，掠其从卒三十余人，马二百三十余匹，他所亡物称是。
现代文：许熙回到开州时，建州女真人出两千骑兵邀击了他们，掳走了许熙手下的士卒三十多人，马二百三十多匹。朝鲜将此事上奏明朝廷。
English: When Xu Xi returned to Kaizhou, the Jianzhou Jurchen sent out two thousand cavalry to attack them and took away more than thirty of Xu Xi's soldiers and more than two hundred and thirty horses. North Korea reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：奏闻，英国公张懋、吏部尚书尹旻等以辽东连年用兵，未可轻动，宜以此意谕娎。
现代文：英国公张懋、吏部尚书尹等人认为对辽东已连年用兵，现在未可轻易动武，应将此意思谕告给李折女。
English: The British official Zhang Xuan, the bureaucrat Shang Shu Yin and others believed that they had been using soldiers in Liaodong for many years, and now they could not easily use force, and they should convey this intention to Li Orime.

古文：敕辽东守臣整饬边备，更令译者穷究所掠，期在必得，仍赐熙白金彩币慰安之。
现代文：皇帝便敕令辽东的守卫大臣整肃军队小心守卫，又让泽官前去建州穷究他们所掠的人和物，务必将他们所掠掳去的人和物要过来，给许熙则赏赐白金和彩币以示慰劳和安抚。
English: The emperor then ordered the minister of defense in Liaodong to clean up the army and carefully guard it, and ordered the officials to go to Jianzhou to investigate the people and things they had plundered. They must bring the people and things they had plundered. He rewarded Xu Xi with platinum and colored coins as a token of comfort and appeasement.

古文：十七年，娎奏继妃尹氏失德，废置，乞更封副室尹氏。
现代文：十七年，李折女上奏说继妃尹氏无德，已经被废置，请求明朝廷册封副室尹氏为王妃，皇帝同意了。
English: In the seventeenth year, Li Er's maid-in-waiting reported that Yin's step-sister-in-law had no virtue and had been abolished, and requested the Ming court to crown Yin's second-in-law as the princess. The emperor agreed.

古文：从之。十九年四月封娎长子忄隆为世子。
现代文：十九年四月，明朝廷封李折女的长子李忄隆为世子。
English: In April of the 19th year of the Ming Dynasty, Li Yulong, the eldest son of the Ming Dynasty's court-appointed Li Erni, became the heir.

古文：弘治七年十二月，娎卒，赐谥康靖。
现代文：弘治七年十二月，李折女死，皇帝赐封谥号为康靖。
English: In December of the seventh year of the Hongzhi era, Li Er's daughter died, and the emperor gave her the posthumous name Kangjing.

古文：明年四月，封忄隆为国，妻慎氏为王妃。
现代文：第二年四月，明朝廷册封李忄隆为朝鲜国王，其妻慎氏被封为王妃。
English: In April of the following year, the Ming court crowned Ri Su Yong as the king of Korea, and his wife, Shin, was crowned queen.

古文：十二年，忄隆奏： 本国人屡有违禁匿海岛，诱引军民，渐至滋蔓。
现代文：十二年，李隆上奏明朝廷： 本国有人屡次违禁藏匿到海岛上，引诱军民前往海岛，以致有滋蔓发展的趋势。
English: In the 12th year, Li Longzheng reported to the Ming court: Some people in our country have repeatedly violated the ban to hide on the island, luring soldiers and civilians to the island, resulting in a growing trend.

古文：乞许本国自行搜刷。
现代文：请求朝廷允许本国自行搜捕这些人。
English: Request the court to allow the country to search for these people on its own.

古文：其系上国地方，请敕官追捕。 
现代文：其中牵涉到贵国的地方，请求你们敕令官员追捕。 
English: One of them involves a place in your country, and I'm asking you to order your officials to pursue it.

古文：时辽东守臣亦奏如忄隆言，报可。
现代文：这时辽东的守卫大臣也有内容如李忄隆所言的奏章上报朝廷，皇帝同意了他们的提议。
English: At this time, the Minister of Defense of Liaodong also reported the contents of the report to the imperial court, as Li Yulong said, and the emperor agreed to their proposal.

古文：十五年冬，封忄隆长子〈皇页〉为世子。
现代文：十五年冬天，皇帝封李忄隆的长子李皇页为朝鲜国王的世子。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year, the emperor named Li Hongzhi, the eldest son of Li Yulong, as the heir of the Korean king.

古文：正德二年，忄隆以世子〈皇页〉夭亡，哀恸成疾，奏请以国事付其弟怿，其国人复奏请封怿。
现代文：正德二年，李忄隆因世子李皇页夭折，哀恸成疾，上奏明朝廷请将国事托付给他的弟弟李怿，其国中的人又上奏请求明朝廷册封李怿。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, Li Yulong, because of the premature death of his son Li Hongzhi and his illness, petitioned the Ming court to entrust the state affairs to his brother Li Hongzhi, and the people in his country also petitioned the Ming court to seal Li Hongzhi.

古文：礼部议命怿权理国事，俟忄隆卒乃封。
现代文：礼部商量后任命李怿权理朝鲜国事，等李忄隆死后再册封他。
English: After deliberation by the Ministry of Ceremonies, Ri Su Yong was appointed as the person in charge of North Korea's state affairs. He would be appointed again after Ri Su Yong's death.

古文：既，陪臣卢公弼等以朝贡至京，复请封怿，廷议不允。
现代文：不久，朝鲜的陪臣卢公弼等人因入朝献贡到京城，又请求皇帝册封李怿，朝廷大臣讨论后认为不可。
English: Soon after, the North Korean vassal Lu Gongye and others came to the capital to pay tribute to the emperor for his accession to the throne, and also requested the emperor to confer the title of prince on Ri Yong. After discussion, the ministers of the imperial court deemed this to be impossible.

古文：十二月，忄隆母妃奏怿长且贤，堪付重寄。
现代文：十二月，李忄隆的母亲上奏明朝廷，说李怿有长者之风且有贤德，可托付重任。
English: In December, Li Yulong's mother appealed to the Ming court, saying that Li Yulong had the demeanor of an elder and was virtuous, and could be entrusted with important tasks.

古文：于是礼部奏： 忄隆以痼疾辞位，怿以亲弟承托，接受既明，友爱不失。
现代文：这样，礼部便上奏说： 李忄隆因久病辞去王位，李怿以亲弟弟的身份承接王位，其接受关系既是明了的，兄弟之间又不失友爱。
English: Thus, the Ministry of Ceremonies made the following announcement: Li Yulong abdicated the throne due to a long-term illness, and Li Xi took over the throne as his own brother. The acceptance relationship is clear, and the brothers do not lose their friendship.

古文：通国臣民举无异词，宜顺其请。 
现代文：朝鲜全国的臣民对此都无异议，应当顺从他们的请求。 
English: All the subjects of the DPRK have no objection to this and should comply with their request.

古文：上乃允怿嗣位，遣中官敕封，并赐其妃尹氏诰命。
现代文：皇帝便允许李怿继嗣王位，派宦官前去敕封，并给李怿的妃尹氏颁赐诰命。
English: The emperor then allowed Li Xi to succeed to the throne, sent eunuchs to seal the seal, and gave the imperial command to Li Xi's wife Yin.

古文：初，成桂之自立也，与宰相李仁人本异族。
现代文：当初，李成桂自立为朝鲜王时，与宰相李仁人本不是同一宗族的人。
English: At first, when Lee Seung-Gui established himself as the king of Korea, he was not originally from the same clan as Prime Minister Ri In-Rin.

古文：永乐间，降祭海岳祝文，称成桂为仁人子，而《祖训》亦载仁人子成桂更名旦。
现代文：永乐年间，皇帝所降的祭海河和山岳的祝文中，称李成桂为李仁人的儿子，而《祖训》亦记载说李仁人的儿子李成桂更名为李旦。
English: During the Yongle era, in the congratulatory letter to the emperor on the festival of rivers, seas and mountains, Li Chenggui was said to be the son of Li Ren, and "Ancestral Teachings" also recorded that Li Ren's son Li Chenggui changed his name to Li Dan.

古文：后成桂子芳远奏辨，太宗许令改正。
现代文：后来李成桂的儿子李芳远上奏专为此事做辨，明太宗允许将此改正过来。
English: Later, Li Chenggui's son, Li Fangyuan Shangso, made a special distinction for this matter, and Ming Taizong allowed this to be corrected.

古文：至是修《大明会典》，仍列《祖训》于朝鲜国。
现代文：到此时修《大明会典》时，仍将《祖训》列于朝鲜国中。
English: At this time, when the Daiming Canon was revised, the Ancestor's Teaching was still listed as part of the Korean nation.

古文：贡使市以归，怿上疏备陈世系，辨先世无弑逆事，乞改正。
现代文：朝鲜前来献贡的使节将此书买回国去后，李怿上疏备陈自己的世系，说自己的先世祖先中没有弑杀君王的叛逆行为，请求明朝廷予以更正。
English: After the envoys from North Korea who came to pay tribute bought the book back to their country, Li Qian prepared Chen's own lineage, saying that his ancestors did not commit the traitorous act of killing the king, and asked the Ming court to correct it.

古文：礼部议： 《会典》详载本朝制度，事涉外国，疑似之际，在所略。
现代文：礼部认为 ：《大明会典》详细记载本朝代的制度，其事涉及到外国的，无法确定的地方应从略。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies believes: "The Daimyo Codex" is a detailed record of the system of this dynasty, which involves foreign countries, and places that cannot be determined should be omitted.

古文：况成桂得国出皇祖命，其不系仁人后，太宗诏可征，宜从其请。 
现代文：况且李成桂得朝鲜国王位是出于皇祖的任命，他不是李仁人的后代，这由太祖皇帝的诏书可以证明，因此应该顺从他们的请求，将此更正过来。 
English: Moreover, Lee Sung-kyu was appointed to the throne of Korea by the emperor's ancestor. He is not a descendant of Lee In-man, which can be proved by the imperial decree of the great-grandfather emperor. Therefore, it is necessary to comply with their request and correct this.

古文：诏曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：可以。 
English: Emperor Wu said: Yes.

古文：十五年冬，命内官封怿子峼为世子，赐怿金帛珠玉，令括取异物及童男女以进。
现代文：十五年冬季，皇帝派宦官册封李怿的儿子李山告为世子，赐给李怿金帛珠玉，让李怿从朝鲜括取珍奇异物和童男童女献给明朝廷。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year, the emperor sent an eunuch to proclaim the son of Li Xuan, Li Shan, as the son of the world, and gave Li Xuan gold and jewels, and asked Li Xuan to take rare and exotic objects and boys and girls from North Korea to the Ming court.

古文：十六年，世宗即位，礼官言： 天子初践祚，宜正中国之体，绝外裔狎侮之端。
现代文：十六年，世宗即皇帝位，礼官上奏说： 天子初登皇位，应把中国的国体搞得光明正大，以杜绝外国人对我们的狎侮之言。
English: In the 16th year of Shizong's reign as emperor, the etiquette officer gave the following speech: The first time that the Son of Heaven ascended the throne, he should make China's national character bright and upright, in order to prevent foreigners from insulting us.

古文：请谕怿非朝廷意，召内臣还，毋有所索取。 
现代文：请求皇上谕告李怿，说括取珍奇异物和童男童女不是朝廷的本意，将派去的宦官招回来，不要有所索取。 
English: He asked the emperor to tell Li Qiye that it was not the intention of the imperial court to collect rare and exotic objects and children, and that the eunuchs sent to collect them should be brought back.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了这个建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：嘉靖二年八月，以俘获倭夷来献，并送还中国被掠八人。
现代文：嘉靖二年八月，朝鲜将俘获的倭国人献给明朝廷，并把八个被掳掠的中国人送了回来。
English: In August of the second year of Jiajing, North Korea presented the captured Wakoku people to the Ming court, and sent back eight abducted Chinese people.

古文：赐白金锦纻。
现代文：皇帝给朝鲜赐予白金和锦。
English: The emperor bestowed platinum and brocade on Korea.

古文：八年八月，陪臣柳溥上言：国祖李旦系本国全州人。
现代文：八年八月，朝鲜的陪臣柳溥上奏说： 本国的国祖李旦系本国全州人。
English: In August of the eighth year, North Korea's vassal Liu Ye said: The country's ancestor, Li Dan, was a native of Jeonju.

古文：二十八世祖瀚仕新罗为司空。
现代文：其二十八代祖先李瀚在新罗为官，任司空。
English: His 28th-generation ancestor, Li Han, served as an official in Silla, and was appointed by Siku.

古文：新罗亡，六世孙兢休入高丽。
现代文：新罗灭亡后，李瀚的六世孙李兢休进入高丽。
English: After the fall of Silla, Li Han's sixth-generation grandson, Li Jinghui, entered Goryeo.

古文：十三世孙安社仕元为南京千户所达鲁花赤。
现代文：李兢休的第十三代孙子李安社在元朝为官，任南京千户所的达鲁花赤。
English: Li Jinyu's thirteenth-generation grandson, Li Ansha, was an official in the Yuan Dynasty and served as the Daruhana of the Nanjing Thousand Households.

古文：元季兵兴，安曾孙子春与男成桂避地东迁。
现代文：元朝末年兵乱兴起，李安社的曾孙李子春及其儿子李成桂避乱东迁。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, a war broke out, and the great-grandson of the Li An Society, Li Zichun, and his son, Li Chenggui, moved east to escape the turmoil.

古文：至正辛丑，当恭愍王之十年，有红巾贼入境，成桂击贼有功，授武班职事，时尚未知名。
现代文：元朝至正辛丑年，大约是高丽恭愍王十年，有红巾贼人进入高丽境内，李成桂因击贼有功，被授予武班职事，不过此时还未出名。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the Zhengxingwu Year, about ten years after the ascension of King Gongye of Goryeo, there was a red scarf thief who entered the territory of Goryeo. Li Chenggui was awarded a military post for his achievements in defeating the thief, but he was not famous at that time.

古文：恭愍无嗣，阴蓄宠臣辛肫之子禑为子，晚为嬖臣洪伦、内竖崔万生所弑。
现代文：恭愍王无子，暗地里将宠臣辛肫的儿子辛礻禺收养为自己的儿子，结果晚年被宠臣洪伦和内竖崔万生所弑杀。
English: King Gongye, who had no son, secretly adopted the son of his favorite vassal, Hsin Yong, as his own son. As a result, he was killed by his favorite vassal, Hong Lun, and the vassal, Cui Wansheng, in his later years.

古文：权臣李仁人诛伦、万生而立禑，擢成桂为门下侍中。
现代文：当时权臣李仁人诛杀了洪伦和崔万生，扶立辛礻禺为王，将李成桂提拔为门下侍中。
English: At that time, the powerful vassal Li Renren killed Hong Lun and Cui Wansheng, made Xin Zheng king, and promoted Li Chenggui to be his junior attendant.

古文：禑遣成桂侵辽东，成桂不从，返兵。
现代文：辛礻禺派李成桂入侵辽东，李成桂不服从，回兵国内。
English: Xinlu sent Li Chenggui to invade Liaodong. Li Chenggui disobeyed and returned to China.

古文：禑惧，逊位于子昌。
现代文：辛礻禺害怕，让位给他的儿子辛昌。
English: Xin Zheng was afraid and gave way to his son Xin Chang.

古文：昌以伪姓见黜，复立王氏裔定昌君瑶，窜仁人于外。
现代文：辛昌因不是王氏的后裔被废黜，于是又立王氏后裔定昌君王瑶为高丽王，将李仁人放逐在外。
English: Sinchang was dethroned because he was not a descendant of the Wang clan, so King Dingchang, a descendant of the Wang clan, was appointed King of Goryeo, and Li Renren was exiled.

古文：瑶复不道，国人戴成桂，请于高皇帝，立为王，更名旦，赡瑶别邸，终其身，实未尝为弑。
现代文：王瑶又行无道，高丽国人全部拥戴李成桂，于是向高皇帝请求立为高丽王，改名为李旦。同时将王瑶在别处赡养起来，直到其终，实际上并没有杀他。
English: Wang Xuan had no choice, the people of Goryeo all supported Li Chenggui, so he asked Emperor Gao to make him King of Goryeo and changed his name to Li Dan. At the same time, he supported Wang Xuan in other places until his death, but did not actually kill him.

古文：前永乐、正德间屡经奏请，俱蒙俞允，而迄未改正。
现代文：以前在永乐、正德年间屡次上奏朝廷请求将此错讹改正过来，都得到皇帝的答允，但最终都没有改正。
English: In the past, during the Yongle and Zhengde dynasties, he repeatedly petitioned the imperial court to correct this mistake, and received the emperor's consent, but in the end there was no correction.

古文：今遇重修《会典》，乞赐昭雪。 
现代文：现今正好重修《大明会典》，请求皇帝将此冤枉之事洗刷清楚。 
English: Now is the right time to revise the "Great Ming Code" and ask the emperor to clear up this injustice.

古文：诏送史馆编纂。
现代文：皇帝下诏将此奏章送到史馆编纂。
English: The emperor issued an edict to have this musical composition sent to a historical museum for compilation.

古文：十八年二月，睿宗祔太庙，配享明堂礼成，怿表贺。
现代文：十八年二月，朝廷将睿宗合葬在太庙，给睿宗举行配享明堂的典礼，李怿为此奉表向皇帝祝贺。
English: In February 18th, the imperial court buried Ruizong together in the Great Temple, and held a ceremony for Ruizong to enjoy the Ming Hall. Li Xi sent a congratulatory letter to the emperor for this.

古文：帝特御奉天门引见，赐宴礼部。
现代文：皇帝特地到奉天门接见李怿，并在礼部赐宴招待。
English: The emperor specially went to Fengtianmen to meet Li Yao, and gave a banquet invitation in the ceremonial department.

古文：二十三年冬，怿卒。
现代文：二十三年冬天，李怿死。
English: In the winter of 233, Li Xuan died.

古文：二十四年正月来讣，赐谥恭僖。诏立其子峼。
现代文：二十四年正月前来告哀，皇帝给李怿赐谥号为恭僖，并下诏立李怿的儿子李山告为朝鲜国王。
English: In the first month of the twenty-fourth year, he came to mourn, and the emperor gave the title of "Gongun" to Ri Son, and decreed that Ri Son's son, Ri Son, would be the king of Korea.

古文：峼未逾年卒，赐谥荣靖。
现代文：李山告不到一年也死了，皇帝赐谥号为荣靖。
English: Li Shanwei died less than a year later, and the emperor gave him the title of Rongjing.

古文：九月，峼弟权国事峘遣使谢祭谥，并请袭封，诏许之。
现代文：九月，李山告的弟弟权国事李山亘派使者到京城向皇帝感谢朝廷的吊祭和赐谥号，并请求继承王位，皇帝下诏同意了。
English: In September, Li Shanwei, the younger brother of Li Shanwei, sent an envoy to Beijing to thank the emperor for the imperial hanging offering and the imperial banner, and requested to inherit the throne. The emperor agreed.

古文：二十五年，峘遣使送下海番人六百余至边，赐金币。
现代文：二十五年，李山亘派使者将下海的六百多名番族人送到中国边境，皇帝给他赏赐金币。
English: In the 25th year, Li Shanwu sent an envoy to send more than 600 Qiang people who had gone to sea to the Chinese border. The emperor rewarded him with gold coins.

古文：二十六年正月，峘咨称： 福建人从无泛海至本国者，因往日本市易，为风所漂，前后共获千人以上，皆挟军器货物，致中国火炮亦为倭有，恐起兵端。 
现代文：二十六年正月，李山亘写来咨文，声称： 福建从来没有人飘洋过海到我们朝鲜来的，他们到日本去做买卖，结果被风漂到本国，前后共有一千人以上。他们都挟带着军器等货物，致使中国的火炮也被倭人拥有了，这样恐怕会引起战祸。 
English: In the first month of the twenty-sixth year, Li Shanwu wrote a message, claiming: No one from Fujian has ever sailed across the ocean to our Korea. They went to Japan to do business, and as a result, they were carried by the wind to their home country. A total of more than a thousand people. They all carried military equipment and other goods. As a result, the Chinese artillery was also owned by the Japanese, which would probably cause a war disaster.

古文：诏： 顷年沿海奸民犯禁，福建尤甚，往往为外国所获，有伤国体。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：近年来沿海地区的奸民违犯禁令，以福建尤甚，结果往往被外国抓获，有伤于中国的国体。
English: The emperor issued an edict, saying: In recent years, villains in coastal areas have violated the ban, especially in Fujian. As a result, they are often caught by foreign countries, which is harmful to China's national identity.

古文：海道官员令巡按御史察参。
现代文：负责海道的官员应让当地的巡按御史察参此事。
English: The official in charge of the seaway should let the local patrol inspector investigate the matter.

古文：仍赐王银币，以旌其忠。 
现代文：此外仍赏赐银币给朝鲜国王，以表彰他对朝廷的忠心。 
English: In addition, silver coins were still awarded to the Korean king in recognition of his loyalty to the court.

古文：三十一年冬，以洪武、永乐间所赐乐器敝坏，奏求律管，更乞遣乐官赴京校习，许之。
现代文：三十一年冬，朝鲜因洪武、永乐年间赏赐给他们的乐器已损坏，请求再给他们一些律管，另外还请求派遣乐官到京城来校对和学习乐律。
English: In the winter of 31st, North Korea, because the musical instruments given to them during the years of Hongwu and Yongle had been damaged, requested that they be given some more tuning forks. In addition, they also requested that a music official be sent to Beijing to proofread and study the music.

古文：三十五年五月有倭船四自浙、直败还，漂入朝鲜境。
现代文：皇帝答应了。三十五年五月，有四艘倭人的船从浙江、直隶败退回去，结果漂入朝鲜境内。
English: The emperor agreed, and in May of the year thirty-five, four Wajin ships sailed back from Zhejiang and Zhili, but ended up drifting into Korean territory.

古文：峘遣兵击歼之，得中国被俘及助逆者三十余人来献，因贺冬至节，帝赐玺书褒谕。
现代文：李山亘派兵袭击并歼灭了他们，将倭寇所俘虏的中国人及帮助倭寇做叛逆之事的三十多名中国人一起献给明朝廷，并向皇帝祝贺冬至节。皇帝用玺书赏赐李山亘，给以褒奖。
English: Li Shanwu sent soldiers to attack and annihilate them, and presented the Chinese captured by the wokou and more than thirty Chinese who helped the wokou to rebel to the Ming court, and congratulated the emperor on the winter solstice. The emperor rewarded Li Shanwu with a letter of commendation.

古文：三十八年十一月奏： 今年五月，有倭寇驾船二十五只来抵海岸，臣命将李铎等剿杀殆尽，获中国民陈春等三百余人，内招通倭向导陈得等十六人，俱献阙下。 
现代文：三十八年十一月，李山亘上奏说： 今年五月，有倭寇驾驶二十五艘船抵达我国海岸，我命令李铎等将他们全部剿灭，缴获了被他们俘虏的中国百姓陈春等三百多人，还有给倭人充当向导的陈得等十六名中国内奸，现全部献到朝廷。 
English: In November of 38th year, Li Shanshan wrote: In May of this year, there were wokou (Japanese pirates) who arrived on the coast of our country in 25 ships. I ordered Li Qian and others to destroy them all. I captured more than 300 Chinese people including Chen Chun, who was captured by them, as well as 16 Chinese spies including Chen De, who acted as a guide for the Japanese. All of them are now presented to the imperial court.

古文：复降敕奖励，厚赉银币，并赐铎等有差。
现代文：皇帝又降敕令给予奖励，以银币厚赏李山亘，并给李铎等人按等级给予赏赐。
English: The emperor also decreed to give rewards by lowering the imperial standard, rewarded Li Shanwu with a thick silver coin, and gave rewards to Li Xuan and others according to their rank.

古文：四十二年九月，峘复上书辨先世非李仁人后，今修《会典》虽蒙厘正，乞著始祖旦、父子春之名，帝令附录《会典》。
现代文：四十二年九月，李山亘又上书为其先祖不是李仁人的后代作辨，说今日修订的《大明会典》虽蒙厘正，但没有写上始祖李旦和李旦的父亲李子春的名字。皇帝下令将此附录在《大明会典》内。
English: In September of the year 42, Li Shanwu wrote again to argue that his ancestors were not descendants of the Li Ren people, saying that although the "Daming Canon" revised today was correct, it did not include the names of Li Dan, the founder, and Li Zichun, Li Dan's father. The emperor ordered this to be appended to the "Daming Canon."

古文：隆庆元年六月遣官颁即位诏。
现代文：隆庆元年六月，朝廷派官员到朝鲜颁皇帝即位的诏书。
English: In June of the first year of the Longqing era, the imperial court sent officials to North Korea to issue the imperial edict of the emperor's enthronement.

古文：时帝将幸太学，来使乞留观礼，许之。
现代文：此时皇帝将幸临太学，朝鲜的使者请求容许他观看典礼，皇帝答应了。
English: At this time, the emperor will be fortunate enough to visit Taegu. The North Korean envoy asked to be allowed to watch the ceremony, and the emperor agreed.

古文：是年冬，峘卒，赐谥恭宪，命其侄昖袭封。
现代文：该年冬天，李山亘死，皇帝给他赐封谥号为恭宪，让李山亘的侄子李日公承袭朝鲜王位。
English: In the winter of that year, when Ri Son Gwon died, the emperor gave him the posthumous title of Gong Sin, and allowed Ri Son Gwon's nephew Ri Il Gwon to succeed to the throne of Korea.

古文：万历元年正月上穆宗尊谥、两宫徽号礼成，昖表贺，献方物马匹。
现代文：万历元年正月，万历皇帝给隆庆皇帝穆宗封谥号，两宫举行徽号典礼。李日公为此向明朝廷上表祝贺，并贡献土产和马匹。
English: In the first month of the 1st year of the Wanli era, Emperor Wanli gave the Longqing Emperor Mu Zong the imperial seal and the two palaces held the emblem ceremony. For this, Emperor Li congratulated the Ming court on the table and contributed local products and horses.

古文：时昖屡请赐《皇明会典》，为其先康献王旦雪冤。
现代文：这时，李日公屡次请求朝廷赐与他《皇明会典》，为他的祖先康献王李旦雪冤。
English: At this time, Li Rikong repeatedly asked the imperial court to give him the "Imperial Ming Dynasty Code" and to present it to King Li Danxue for his ancestor Kang.

古文：十六年正月，《会典》成，适贡使愈泓在京，请给前书，以终前命。
现代文：十六年正月，《大明会典》修订完成，正好朝鲜贡使愈泓也在京城，请求皇帝赐一部《大明会典》给他带回去，以了结前番的使命。
English: In the first month of the 16th year, the revision of the "Daming Code" was completed, just as the North Korean tributary, Yushan, was also in Beijing, asking the emperor to give him a copy of the "Daming Code" to take back with him, to complete the mission.

古文：许之。
现代文：皇帝答应了他。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：十七年十一月，陪臣奇芩等入贺冬至，奏称本年六月，大琉球国船遭风至海岸，所有男妇合解京，给文放归。
现代文：十七年十一月，朝鲜陪臣奇芩等人前来朝廷向皇帝祝贺冬至，并上奏称本年六月有大琉球国的船被风吹到朝鲜海岸，船上所有男女都被解送到京城，请求给他们关文放他们回去。
English: In November of the seventeenth year, the North Korean vassal Qichen and others came to the imperial court to congratulate the emperor on the winter solstice, and reported that in June of this year, a ship of the Great Ryukyu Kingdom was blown to the coast of North Korea, and all the men and women on board were sent to Beijing, requesting that they be given customs documents to let them go back.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十九年十一月奏，倭酋关白平秀吉声言明年三月来犯，诏兵部申饬海防。
现代文：十九年十一月，朝鲜上奏说倭人酋长关白平秀吉声称明年三月将来进犯。皇帝给兵部下诏让他们整肃海防。
English: In November 1919, North Korea reported that the Japanese chieftain, Guan Baiping Hideyoshi, had announced that he would attack in March of the following year. The emperor ordered his soldiers to clean up the coastal defenses.

古文：平秀吉者，萨摩州人，初随倭关白信长。
现代文：平秀吉，是萨摩州人，原先跟随倭人的关白信长。
English: Taira Hideyoshi, a native of Satsuma, was originally a follower of the Wajin, Guan Bai Nobunaga.

古文：会信长为其下所弑，秀吉遂统信长兵，自号关白，劫降六十余州。
现代文：碰上信长被其部下所杀后，平秀吉便统领信长的军队，自称关白，劫掠并降服了六十多个州。
English: When Nobunaga was killed by his subordinates, Taira no Hideyoshi took command of Nobunaga's army, called himself Guan Bai, and plundered and conquered more than sixty provinces.

古文：朝鲜与日本对马岛相望，时有倭夷往来互市。
现代文：朝鲜与日本的对马岛隔海相望，时常有倭人到朝鲜做买卖。
English: North Korea and Japan's Tsushima Island face each other across the sea, and there are often Japanese people who come to North Korea to do business.

古文：二十年夏五月，秀吉遂分渠帅行长、清正等率舟师逼釜山镇，潜渡临津。
现代文：二十年五月，平秀吉派遣手下的渠帅行长、清正等人率领海军逼近釜山镇，偷偷地渡过了临津。
English: In May of the 20th year, TAIRA no Hideyoshi dispatched his subordinates, such as the governor of the canal, and Qing Zheng, to lead the navy to approach Busan Town and secretly pass through Imjin.

古文：时朝鲜承平久，兵不习战，昖又湎酒，弛备，猝岛夷作难，望风皆溃。
现代文：此时的朝鲜已享受了很久的太平时光，军队已不会打战，而李日公又整日酗酒，军备松弛。等岛夷之人突然作难时，朝鲜人皆望风而逃。
English: At this time, North Korea had enjoyed a long period of peace. The army was no longer able to fight, and Ri Il Gong was drinking all day, and the armament was slack. When the islanders were suddenly in trouble, the North Koreans all fled to the wind.

古文：昖弃王城，令次子珲摄国事，奔平壤。
现代文：李日公抛弃了王城，让其次子李珲主持国事，自己逃到平壤。
English: Ri Il Gung abandoned Wangcheng and let his second son Ri Son Rong preside over state affairs. He himself fled to Pyongyang.

古文：已，复走义州，愿内属。
现代文：不久，又逃到义州，想内属明朝。
English: Not long after, he fled to Yishu again, thinking that he belonged to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：七月，兵部议令驻札险要，以待天兵；号召通国勤王，以图恢复。
现代文：七月，兵部商量后让他驻扎在险要之地，等待明朝的天兵到来；另外再让他号召朝鲜全国起来救护王朝，以图恢复朝鲜国的江山。
English: In July, after consultation with the military department, he had him stationed in a critical place to wait for the heavenly soldiers to arrive in the morning; in addition, he had him call on all of Korea to rise up to save the dynasty in an attempt to restore the Korean nation.

古文：而是时倭已入王京，毁坟墓，劫王子、陪臣，剽府库，八道几尽没，旦暮且渡鸭绿江，请援之使络绎于道。
现代文：此时倭寇已经进入王京，毁坏了李氏王室的坟墓，劫持了王子和陪臣，剽掠了朝鲜国王府的金库，朝鲜的八道几乎都被他们占领了，且旦暮之间将渡过鸭绿江来。朝鲜请求明朝军队络绎不绝地援救他们。
English: At this time, the wokou had already entered Wangjing, destroyed the tomb of the Li royal family, kidnapped the prince and his attendants, plundered the treasury of the Korean royal palace, occupied almost all eight provinces of North Korea, and would cross the Yalu River between dusk and dawn. North Korea asked the Ming Dynasty army to rescue them incessantly.

古文：廷议以朝鲜为国藩篱，在所必争。遣行人薛潘谕昖以兴复大义，扬言大兵十万且至。
现代文：明朝廷大臣认为朝鲜是中国的藩篱之国，在所必争，于是皇帝派行人薛潘谕告李日公，要他负起兴复国家大义的重负，并扬言派十万大军到朝鲜为他助战。
English: The minister of the Ming court thought that Korea was a country surrounded by China, and it was necessary to fight, so the emperor sent a messenger, Xue Pan, to Li Riguo, asking him to shoulder the heavy burden of restoring the national cause, and threatening to send 100,000 troops to Korea to help him fight.

古文：而倭业抵平壤，朝鲜君臣益急，出避爱州。
现代文：而倭寇此时已经抵达平壤，朝鲜的君臣更加焦急，躲避到爱州。
English: At this time, the wako had already arrived in Pyongyang, and the North Korean monarchs and ministers were even more anxious and fled to Aizhou.

古文：游击史儒等率师至平壤，战死。
现代文：明朝的游击史儒率军到达平壤，结果阵亡。
English: The guerrilla Shi Ru of the Ming Dynasty led an army to Pyongyang, but was killed in the battle.

古文：副总兵祖承训统兵渡鸭绿江援之，仅以身免。
现代文：副总兵祖承训带兵渡过鸭绿江援救史儒，结果败退，只身而还。
English: The vice-chief soldier Zu Chengxun led the soldiers across the Yalu River to rescue Shi Ru. As a result, he was defeated and had to save himself.

古文：中朝震动，以宋应昌为经略。
现代文：这样，中朝两国都受震动，朝廷便派宋应昌经略朝鲜事务。
English: As a result, both China and North Korea were shaken, and the imperial court sent Song Yingchang to handle North Korean affairs.

古文：八月，倭入丰德等郡，兵部尚书石星计无所出，议遣人侦探之，于是嘉兴人沈惟敬应募。
现代文：八月，倭寇进入丰德等郡，兵部尚书石星无计可施，便商议派人侦察倭寇的情况，于是嘉兴人沈惟敬应募前去侦察。
English: In August, when the wokou entered Fondu and other counties, Shang Shuxuxi of the military department had no choice but to discuss sending someone to investigate the situation of the wokou, so Jiaxing man Shen Weijing volunteered to go and investigate.

古文：惟敬者，市中无赖也。
现代文：沈惟敬，是市中的无赖之徒。
English: Shen Weijing is a rogue in the city.

古文：是时秀吉次对马岛，分其将行长等守要害为声援。
现代文：此时平秀吉驻军在对马岛，派其将领行长等守住要害之地作为声援。
English: At this time, TAIRA no Hideyoshi stationed troops on Tsushima Island and sent his generals, including the governor, to hold the key location as a show of solidarity.

古文：惟敬至平壤，执礼其卑。
现代文：沈惟敬到平壤后，对倭人执礼时甚为卑谄。
English: After Shen Weijing went to Pyongyang, he was very humble when he bowed to the Japanese.

古文：行长绐曰： 天朝幸按兵不动，我不久当还。
现代文：行长欺骗他说 ：天朝幸亏按兵不动，我们不久就会回去了。
English: The governor deceived him, saying, "Fortunately, the emperor is not moving, and we will soon return."

古文：以大同江为界，平壤以西尽属朝鲜耳。 
现代文：现以大同江为界，平壤以西的地方全部归属朝鲜吧。 
English: With the Taedong River as the boundary, the entire area west of Pyongyang now belongs to North Korea.

古文：惟敬以闻。
现代文：沈惟敬将此信讯上报朝廷。
English: Shen Weijing reported this letter to the imperial court.

古文：廷议倭诈未可信，乃趣应昌等进兵。
现代文：朝廷大臣商议后认为倭人奸诈不可相信，便让宋应昌等人进兵。
English: After deliberation, the ministers of the imperial court thought that the treachery of the Japanese could not be trusted, so they let Song Yingchang and others enter the army.

古文：而星颇惑于惟敬，乃题署游击，赴军前，且请金行间。
现代文：而石星颇被沈惟敬的言词迷惑，题书给游击，让他赶赴在大军之前进入朝鲜，并请求带上金钺去行离间计。
English: But Shi Xing was quite puzzled by Shen Wei Jian's words and wrote a letter to the guerrilla, asking him to rush into North Korea before the main army, and requesting him to take the gold ingot with him.

古文：十二月，以李如松为东征提督。
现代文：当年十二月，朝廷派李如松为东征提督。
English: In December of that year, the imperial court sent Li Rousong as the Eastern Expedition admiral.

古文：明年正月，如松督诸将进战，大捷于平壤。
现代文：第二年正月，李如松监督诸将进兵战斗，在平壤取得大捷。
English: In the first month of the second year, Ri Rusong supervised the generals entering the battle and achieved great success in Pyongyang.

古文：行长渡大同江，遁还龙山。
现代文：行长渡过大同江，逃回龙山。
English: The governor crossed the Datong River and fled back to Longshan.

古文：所失黄海、平安、京畿、江原四道并复，清正亦遁还王京。
现代文：此前被倭寇占领的黄海、平安、京畿、江原四个道也一并收复，清正也逃回到王京。
English: The four provinces of the Yellow Sea, Pingan, Gyeonggi and Gangwon, which had previously been occupied by the wokou, were also recovered together, and Kiyomasa also fled back to Wangjing.

古文：如松既胜，轻骑趋碧蹄馆，败，退驻开城。
现代文：李如松既已取胜，便派轻骑向碧蹄馆进攻，失败后，退驻在开城。
English: After Li Rusong had won, he sent light cavalry to attack Bijie Pavilion. After the defeat, he retreated to Kaesong.

古文：事具《如松传》。
现代文：其事详见《李如松传》。
English: For details, please refer to the "Biography of Li Ru Song."

古文：初，如松誓师，欲斩惟敬，以参军李应试言而止。
现代文：当初，李如松誓师进兵时，想斩杀沈惟敬，因参军李应试的劝说而作罢。
English: At first, when Li Ruzong's vowing division marched into the army, he wanted to kill Shen Weijing, but was dissuaded by Li Yingtui's persuasion to join the army.

古文：至是败，气缩，而应昌急图成功，倭亦乏食有归志，因而封贡之议起。
现代文：这次碧蹄馆之战失败后，其气势也缩了回去，而宋应昌则急于想获得成功，倭寇也因缺粮有回军的意思，因而朝廷上出现了封贡的议论。
English: After the failure of the Battle of Bijie Pavilion, its momentum also shrank back, while Song Yingchang was anxious to succeed, and the wokou also had the intention of returning to the army due to lack of grain, so there was a discussion of tribute in the imperial court.

古文：应昌得倭报惟敬书，乃令游击周弘谟同惟敬往谕倭，献王京，返王子，如约纵归。
现代文：宋应昌获得倭寇上报沈惟敬的文书后，便让游击周弘谟和沈惟敬一起前去谕告倭寇，让他们献出王京之地，送回王子，这样便按约让他们平安回去。
English: After Song Yingchang obtained the document reported by the wokou to Shen Weijing, he ordered the guerrillas Zhou Hongmu and Shen Weijing to go to the wokou and tell them to give up the land of Wangjing and send it back to the prince, so that they could return safely according to the agreement.

古文：倭果于四月弃王城遁。
现代文：倭寇果然在四月份放弃王城逃跑了。
English: The Wokou abandoned the capital and fled in April.

古文：时汉江以南千有余里朝鲜故土复定，兵部言宜令王还国居守，我各镇兵久疲海外，以次撤归为便。
现代文：此时，汉江以南一千多里的朝鲜故土已经收复平定，兵部建议应让朝鲜国王回国居住和守卫，而我们明朝各镇的大军在海外长期作战也很疲劳，应按次序撤退回国为好。
English: At this time, the Korean homeland, more than a thousand miles south of the Han River, had been restored and pacified. The military department suggested that the Korean king should be allowed to return home to live and guard, and our large army of the Ming and Qing dynasties was also very tired from fighting overseas for a long time. It would be better to retreat back to the country in order.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：应昌疏称： 釜山虽濒海南，犹朝鲜境，有如倭觇我罢兵，突入再犯，朝鲜不支，前功尽弃。
现代文：宋应昌上疏给皇帝说 ：釜山虽然濒临大海的南部，毕竟还是朝鲜的边境，假如倭人侦知我明朝廷撤军，突然再入侵进犯，朝鲜又支撑不住，岂不是前功尽弃？
English: Song Yingchang wrote to the emperor, "Although Busan is in the southern part of the country near the sea, it is, after all, the border of Korea. If the Japanese discover that I have withdrawn my troops from the imperial court tomorrow, suddenly invade and attack, and Korea is unable to hold out, won't I have lost all my previous achievements?"

古文：今拨兵协守为第一策，即议撤，宜少需，俟倭尽归，量留防戍。 
现代文：为今之计，第一要策是派兵协助朝鲜一起守卫，即使讨论撤军，也只能撤回一小部分，等倭寇军队全部撤回本国了，再适量留下一部分军队驻防守卫该地。 
English: For now, the first important measure is to send troops to assist North Korea to guard together. Even if the withdrawal of troops is discussed, only a small part can be withdrawn. When all the wokou troops have withdrawn to their home country, an appropriate amount of troops will be stationed to guard the place.

古文：部议留江浙兵五千，分屯要害，仍谕昖搜练军实，毋恃外援。
现代文：兵部讨论后留下江浙兵五千，分别屯驻在要害之地，仍谕告李日公要自己充实武备，操练军队，不要依赖外援。
English: After the discussion of the military department, he left five thousand soldiers from Jiangsu and Zhejiang, stationed separately in the critical place, and still ordered Li Riguo to enrich his own military equipment, train the army, and do not rely on foreign aid.

古文：已而沈惟敬归自釜山，同倭使来请款，而倭随犯咸安、晋州，逼全罗，声复汉江以南，以王京、汉江为界。
现代文：不久沈惟敬从釜山归来，和倭人所派的使者一起前来献诚，而倭寇此时又进犯咸安、晋州，逼近全罗，声称要收复汉江以南的地方，以王京、汉江为界。
English: Soon after, Shen Weijing returned from Busan and came to offer his devotion together with the envoys sent by the Japanese. At this time, the Japanese invaders attacked Haman and Jinzhou, approaching Jeolla, claiming to recover the land south of the Han River, with Wangjing and the Han River as the boundary.

古文：如松计全罗饶沃，南原府尤其咽喉，乃命诸将分守要害。
现代文：李如松考虑到全罗这个地方较富饶肥沃，南原府尤其是其咽喉要害，于是命令诸将领分别守住要害之地。
English: Considering that this part of Jeolla is relatively rich and fertile, and Nanyuanfu, in particular, is the key to its throat, Li Rusong ordered the generals to separately guard the key places.

古文：已，倭果分犯，我师并有斩获。
现代文：不久，倭寇果然分兵进犯该地，我军斩获不少敌人。
English: Not long after, the wokou (Japanese invaders) invaded the area with a detachment of soldiers, and our army captured quite a few enemies.

古文：兵科给事中张辅之、辽东都御史赵耀皆言款贡不可轻受。
现代文：兵科给事中张辅之和辽东都御史赵耀都说倭人输运的贡物不能轻易接受。
English: Zhang Yuanzhi and Zhao Yao, the governor of Liaodong, both said that the tribute transported by the Japanese could not be easily accepted.

古文：七月，倭从釜山移西生浦，送回王子、陪臣。
现代文：七月，倭军从釜山转移到西生浦，送回了朝鲜的王子和陪臣。
English: In July, the Wa army moved from Busan to Xishengpu and sent back the Korean prince and his attendants.

古文：时师久暴露，闻撤，势难久羁。
现代文：此时，明朝军队已长期在外，听说要撤军之后，其回国之势已很难加以压制。
English: At this time, the Ming Dynasty troops had been away for a long time, and after hearing that they were going to withdraw, it was difficult to suppress their return.

古文：应昌请留刘綎川兵，吴惟忠、骆尚志等南兵，合蓟、辽兵共万六千，听綎分布尚之大丘，月饷五万两，资之户兵二部。
现代文：于是宋应昌请求留下刘纟廷的川军和吴惟忠、骆尚志等人的南方军，会合蓟州、辽东的军队共一万六千人，听任刘纟廷的指挥，分布在庆尚的大丘等地，每月给军饷五万两，钱由户部和兵部共出。
English: As a result, Song Yingchang, at the request of Liu Yingting, left Liu Yingting's Sichuan Army and the Southern Army led by Wu Weizhong, Luo Shangzhi and others. A total of 16,000 troops from Bozhou and Liaodong were assembled, under the command of Liu Yingting and distributed in Daqiu and other places in Qingshan. They were paid 50,000 taels of military pay per month. The money was jointly paid by the household department and the military department.

古文：先是，发帑给军费，已累百万。
现代文：在此之前，朝廷已经发放国库中的金帛充当军费，累计已达百万。
English: Prior to this, the imperial court had already distributed gold ingots from the national treasury to serve as military expenses, and the total has reached millions.

古文：廷臣言虚内实外非长策，请以所留川兵命綎训练，兵饷令本国自办。
现代文：朝廷大臣上奏说像这样使国内空虚而去充实国外的做法不是长久之策，请求朝廷将留在朝鲜的川军交给刘纟廷训练，其军饷由朝鲜自己筹办。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court reported that it was not a long-term strategy to make the country empty and go abroad to enrich the country. He asked the Imperial Court to give the Sichuan army that remained in Korea to Liu Bingting for training, and the military pay would be organized by North Korea itself.

古文：于是诏撤惟忠等兵，止留綎兵防守。
现代文：这样，皇帝便下诏令撤回了吴惟忠等人的军队，只留下刘纟廷的军队防守朝鲜。
English: In this way, the emperor issued a decree to withdraw the army of Wu Weizhong and others, leaving only Liu Bingting's army to defend Korea.

古文：谕朝鲜世子临海君珒居全庆，以顾养谦为经略。
现代文：皇帝还谕告朝鲜国的世子临海君李王聿居住到全庆，让顾养谦经略朝鲜事务。
English: The emperor also ordered the heir to the throne of Korea, the prince of Linhai, Li Wangtao, to live in Quanqing and let Gu Yaoqian manage Korean affairs.

古文：九月，昖以三都既复，疆域再造，上表谢恩。
现代文：九月，李日公认为朝鲜的三都既已收复，国家的疆域已是再造，便向明朝廷上表谢恩。
English: In September, Ri Il Gong recognized that the three capitals of Korea had been recovered and the country's territory had been rebuilt, and he expressed his gratitude to the Ming court.

古文：然时倭犹据釜山也，星益一意主款。
现代文：不过此时倭寇还占据着釜山，石星更加一意主张与倭人输诚。
English: However, at this time, the wako were still occupying Busan, and Sekisei was even more adamant that he wanted to be honest with the Japanese.

古文：九月，兵部主事曾伟芳言： 关白大众已还，行长留待。
现代文：同月，兵部主事曾伟芳说 ：关白的大军已经回日本，行长留在釜山等待。
English: In the same month, the head of the military department, Zeng Weifang, said: Guan Bai's large army has returned to Japan, and the governor has remained in Busan to wait.

古文：知我兵未撤，不敢以一矢加遗。
现代文：他们知道我军未撤，不敢向我们发一矢。
English: They know that our army has not withdrawn, and they dare not fire a single shot at us.

古文：欲归报关白卷土重来，则风不利，正苦冬寒。
现代文：他们想报告关白，让他带兵卷土重来，则风向不利，正是冬寒季节。
English: They wanted to report to Guan Bai and let him bring his troops back, but the wind was unfavorable, it was the winter cold season.

古文：故款亦去，不款亦去。
现代文：所以对他们输诚他们也是要离去，不输诚他们也是要离去。
English: Therefore, if they lose their sincerity, they also want to leave, and if they do not lose their sincerity, they also want to leave.

古文：沈惟敬前于倭营讲购，咸安、晋州随陷，而俗恃款冀来年不攻，则速之款者，正速之来耳。
现代文：沈惟敬前番在倭寇营地里讲和，咸安、晋州随即陷落，而想依靠输诚讲和的手段希望明年倭人不来攻击，则会是输诚愈速，来犯更快。
English: Shen Wei Jing was the first to declare peace in the wokou camp, and Xi'an and Jinzhou immediately fell. If you want to rely on the means of declaring peace and hope that the Japanese will not attack next year, then the faster you declare peace, the faster they will attack.

古文：故款亦来，不款亦来。
现代文：所以他们是我们输诚也要来犯，不输诚也要来犯。
English: Therefore, they are the ones who will commit crimes even if we lose sincerity, and the ones who will commit crimes even if we don't lose sincerity.

古文：宜令朝鲜自为守，吊死问孤，练兵积粟，以图自强。 
现代文：因此应让朝鲜自己守卫国土，向百姓吊祭死者慰问孤寡，训练军队，积聚粮粟，以图自强。 
English: Therefore, North Korea should be allowed to defend its own territory, offer sacrifices to the people, mourn the dead, comfort the widows and orphans, train the army, and accumulate grain crops in order to strengthen itself.

古文：帝以为然，因敕谕昖者甚至。
现代文：皇帝认为这个意见提得对，因而更加敕谕李日公，要他率领朝鲜军民自守自强。
English: The emperor thought that this opinion was right, so he further ordered Ri Il Gong to lead the Korean army and people to defend and strengthen themselves.

古文：二十二年正月，昖遣金晬等进方物谢恩。
现代文：二十二年正月，李日公派遣金日卒等人向朝廷进献土产，向皇帝谢恩。
English: In the first month of the 22nd year, Emperor Li sent Kim Il Sung and others to present local products to the imperial court and express gratitude to the emperor.

古文：礼部郎中何乔远奏： 晬涕泣言倭寇猖獗，朝鲜束手受刃者六万余人。
现代文：礼部郎中何乔远上奏说 ：金日卒涕泣着说倭寇在朝鲜很猖獗，朝鲜人束手被杀的达六万多人。
English: He Qiaoyuan, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: Kim Il-sung cried and said that wako were rampant in North Korea, and that more than sixty thousand North Koreans had been killed.

古文：倭语悖慢无礼，沈惟敬与倭交通，不云和亲，辄曰乞降。
现代文：倭人语言悖逆傲慢，十分无礼，沈惟敬与倭人交通时，不讲是双方和亲，而总是说请求投降。
English: The Japanese language is rebellious, arrogant, and very rude. When Shen Wei Jing communicated with the Japanese, he did not say that the two sides were friendly, but always said that he asked for surrender.

古文：臣谨将万历十九年中国被掠人许仪所寄内地书、倭夷答刘綎书及历年入寇处置之宜，乞特敕急止封贡。 
现代文：我现在小心地将万历十九年被倭寇掳掠去的中国人许仪所寄往内地来的书信和倭夷之人回答刘纟廷的文书，以及倭人历年入寇的处置情况等全部请皇上过目，请皇上下特敕令，赶快制止与倭人的封贡之事。 
English: I am now carefully going through the letters sent to the mainland by the Chinese Xu Yi, who was captured and plundered by the Japanese invaders in the 19th year of the Wanli era, and the documents sent by the Japanese to reply to Liu Bingting, as well as the disposition of the Japanese invaders over the years. I would like to ask the emperor to review all of them, and ask the emperor to issue a special edict to quickly stop the tribute payment to the Japanese.

古文：诏兵部议。
现代文：皇帝下诏将此意见交兵部讨论。
English: The emperor decreed that this opinion be submitted to the military for discussion.

古文：时廷臣交章，皆以罢封贡、议战守为言。
现代文：此时朝廷大臣都交相上奏章，都认为应该停止与倭人的封贡之事，商量如何出战与守卫。
English: At this time, the ministers of the imperial court all sent messages to each other, and they all believed that they should stop paying tribute to the Japanese, and discuss how to go to war and guard.

古文：八月，养谦奏讲贡之说，贡道宜从宁波，关白宜封为日本王，谕行长部倭尽归，与封贡如约。
现代文：八月，顾养谦上奏主张讲贡，说日本的贡道应从宁波进入，关白应封为日本王，谕告行长部下的倭人全部回归日本，按相互约定进行册封和上贡。
English: In August, Gu Yaoqian advocated a tribute, saying that the Japanese tribute road should enter from Ningbo, and Guan Bai should be crowned as the king of Japan. He ordered all the Japanese under the command of the governor to return to Japan and carry out the registration and tribute according to mutual agreement.

古文：九月，昖请许保国。
现代文：九月，李日公请求明朝廷答应保全他的国家。
English: In September, Li Rikong asked the Ming court to agree to the preservation of his country.

古文：帝乃切责群臣阻挠，追褫御史郭实等。
现代文：皇帝便切切责怪群臣阻挠他施行封贡之事，追夺了御史郭实等人的官职。
English: The emperor then sharply reproached the courtiers for obstructing him from enforcing the tribute, and pursued the official posts of Guo Si and others.

古文：诏小西飞入朝，集多官面议，要以三事：一，勒倭尽归巢；一，既封不与贡；一，誓无犯朝鲜。
现代文：接着又下诏让小西飞入朝，招集众多官员面议此事。皇帝要以三个条件：其一，勒令倭人全部回到自己的老巢去；其二，只行册封不与上贡；其三，发誓不侵犯朝鲜。
English: Next, he issued an edict to let Xiao Xi fly into the imperial court and summon a large number of officials to discuss the matter. The emperor wanted three conditions: First, order all the Japanese to return to their hometowns; second, only carry out the official seal and not pay tribute; third, swear not to invade Korea.

古文：倭俱听从，以闻。
现代文：倭人答应了这三个条件。
English: The Japanese agreed to all three conditions.

古文：帝复谕于左阙，语加周复。
现代文：皇帝便又在左阙赐谕，要大臣们对册封之事详加周细反复地斟酌。
English: The emperor then issued a decree in Zuoying, asking the ministers to consider the matter of canonization in detail and repeatedly.

古文：十二月，封议定，命临淮侯李宗城充正使，以都指挥杨方亨副之，同沈惟敬往日本，王给金印，行长授都督佥事。
现代文：十二月，册封之事确定，皇帝派临淮侯李宗城为出使日本的正使，以都指挥杨方亨为副使，同沈惟敬一起前往日本，给日本王颁赐金印，给行长等授予都督佥事职位。
English: In December, the matter of the investiture was confirmed. The emperor sent Lin Huai Hou Li Zongcheng as the chief envoy to Japan, Yang Fangheng as the deputy envoy to command the capital, and went to Japan together with Shen Weijing to present the gold seal to the king of Japan and to confer the post of governor to the governor.

古文：二十三年九月，昖奏立次子珲为嗣。
现代文：二十三年九月，李日公上奏明朝廷，请求立次子李珲为继承人。
English: In September 23rd, Li Rikong petitioned the Ming court to make his second son, Li Xi, the heir.

古文：先是，昖庶长子临海君珒陷贼中，惊忧成疾，次子光海君珲收集流散，颇著功绩，奏请立之。
现代文：此前，李日公的庶长子临海君李王聿落到倭贼手中后，受惊积忧成疾，而次子光海君李珲收集流散的军民，颇有功绩，曾经上奏请求立李珲为继承人。
English: Previously, after the eldest illegitimate son of Li Rongguo, Linhai King Li Wangtao, fell into the hands of the Japanese invaders, he was shocked and became ill, while the second son, Guanghai King Li Tao, collected scattered soldiers and civilians, quite a feat. He once petitioned to establish Li Tao as the heir.

古文：礼部尚书范谦言继统大义，长幼定分，不宜僣差，遂不许。
现代文：礼部尚书范谦说有关继统大义，长幼已有定分，不应僭越，于是不答应立李珲为继承人。
English: Shang Shuxu of the Ministry of Ceremonies told Fan Qian that regarding the succession to the throne, the eldest son and the youngest son had already been determined and should not overstep, so he did not agree to appoint Li Qian as the successor.

古文：至是复奏，引永乐间恭定王例上请，礼臣执奏，不从。
现代文：这次是第二次上奏请求立李珲，并援引了永乐年间恭定王的例子，而礼部大臣坚持上奏不可。
English: This time, it was the second time that the Minister of Ceremonies requested the installation of Li Xi, and cited the example of King Gongding during the Yongle era, but the Minister of Ceremonies insisted that it was impossible.

古文：二十四年五月，昖复疏请立珲，礼部仍执不可，诏如议。
现代文：二十四年五月，李日公又上疏请求立李珲，礼部仍坚持不松口，皇帝也只好下诏同意礼部的意见。
English: In May of the 24th year, Li Riguang once again made a formal request for the establishment of Li Xuan, the Ministry of Ceremonies still insisted on not relenting, and the emperor had no choice but to issue an edict to agree with the opinion of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：时国储未建，中外恫疑，故尚书范谦于朝鲜易封事三疏力持云。
现代文：这时朝鲜王国的王储未立，中外都有疑惑，所以有尚书范谦在朝鲜更封王储的事情上三次上疏坚持道义的说法。
English: At this time, the crown prince of the Kingdom of Korea had not yet been appointed, and there were doubts in China and abroad, so there was a saying that Shang Shu Fan Qian insisted on the morality of three times on the matter of the crown prince of North Korea.

古文：九月，封使至日本。
现代文：该年九月，册封的使者到达日本。
English: In September of that year, the envoys arrived in Japan.

古文：先是，沈惟敬抵釜山，私奉秀吉蟒玉、翼善冠、地图、武经、良马。
现代文：在此之前，沈惟敬先抵釜山，私下奉送蟒玉、翼善冠、地图、武经和良马等给平秀吉。
English: Prior to this, Shen Wei Jing arrived in Busan first, and privately sent jade, winged crowns, maps, martial arts and good horses to Ping Hideyoshi.

古文：而李宗城以贪淫为倭守臣所逐，弃玺书夜遁。
现代文：而李宗城则因贪淫被倭国的守卫大臣驱逐出来后，丢弃玺书连夜逃走。
English: On the other hand, Li Zongcheng, after being expelled by the Minister of Defense of the State of Wa for adultery, threw away the imperial edict and fled overnight.

古文：事闻，逮问。
现代文：此事传到朝廷，朝廷将李宗城逮捕问罪。
English: The matter was reported to the imperial court, which arrested Li Zongcheng for questioning.

古文：乃以方亨充正使，加惟敬神机营衔副之。
现代文：于是便任命杨方亨为正使，给沈惟敬加封神机营的官衔，让他做杨方亨的副使。
English: As a result, Yang Fangheng was appointed as the official envoy, and Shen Weijing was given the official title of the deputy envoy of Yang Fangheng.

古文：及是奉册至，关白怒朝鲜王子不来谢，止遣二使奉白土绸为贺，拒其使不见，语惟敬曰： 若不思二子、三大臣、三都、八道悉遵天朝约付还，今以卑官微物来贺，辱小邦邪？辱天朝邪？
现代文：等到他们奉朝廷的封册到达日本关白所居之处时，关白对朝鲜王子不来日本谢恩，只派两名使者奉白土绸为贺感到很愤怒，将朝鲜王子的使者挡在外面不接见，并对沈惟敬说： 我们是考虑到与你们天朝有约才将两个王子、三名大臣和三都、八道等地付还给朝鲜，现在他们以如此卑官微物来向我们祝贺，到底是侮辱我们小邦呀，还是侮辱你们天朝呀？
English: When they arrived at the place of residence of Guan Bai in Japan with the seal of the imperial court, Guan Bai was very angry that the North Korean prince did not come to Japan and sent only two envoys to congratulate him. He blocked the North Korean prince's envoys from meeting him, and said to Shen Wei Ke: "We took into account that we have an agreement with you Heavenly Court to return the two princes, three ministers and the three capitals, eight provinces and other places to North Korea. Now they are congratulating us with such a lowly thing. Is it an insult to our small country, or is it an insult to you Heavenly Court?

古文：且留石曼子兵于彼，候天朝处分，然后撤还。 
现代文：暂且把石曼子的军队留在朝鲜，等天朝处分朝鲜之后再撤回来。 
English: For the time being, leave Ishimanzo's army in Korea and wait for the Heavenly Court to punish Korea before withdrawing.

古文：翌日奉贡，遣使赍表文二道，随册使渡海至朝鲜。
现代文：第二天，关白便向明朝廷奉贡，派使者带两道表文，跟随明朝的册封使者一起渡海到达朝鲜。
English: The next day, Guan Bai paid tribute to the Ming court, sent an envoy with two letters of commendation, and followed the Ming envoy to cross the sea to North Korea.

古文：廷议遣使于朝鲜，取表文进验，其一谢恩，其一乞天子处分朝鲜。
现代文：朝廷大臣讨论后让皇帝派使者到朝鲜将日本关白的表文取来检验，其中一份是向明朝廷谢恩的，另一份则是请求天子处分朝鲜的。
English: After the discussion, the ministers of the Imperial Court asked the emperor to send an envoy to North Korea to examine the letters from Japan, one of which was to thank the Ming Dynasty, and the other was to ask God to punish North Korea.

古文：初，方亨诡报去年从釜山渡海，倭于大版受封，即回和泉州。
现代文：早先，杨方亨向朝廷诡报他是去年从釜山渡海到日本，在日本大阪给倭人授予册封，之后他即回到和泉州。
English: Earlier, Yang Fangheng had told the imperial court that he had crossed the sea from Busan to Japan last year and conferred the title of nobility on a Japanese in Osaka, Japan, after which he immediately returned to Izumi.

古文：然倭方责备朝鲜，仍留兵釜山如故，谢表后时不发，方亨徒手归。
现代文：但是倭人正在责备朝鲜，仍一如既往地在釜山驻扎军队，向明朝廷进奉的谢表延时不发，杨方亨徒手而归。
English: However, the Japanese were blaming North Korea, still stationed troops in Busan as usual, and delayed sending a letter of thanks to the Ming court. Yang Fangheng returned empty-handed.

古文：至是，惟敬始投表文，案验潦草，前折用丰臣图书，不奉正朔，无人臣礼。
现代文：到现在，沈惟敬才将表文投过来，表文上的案验潦草不清，前折上用的是丰臣的私章，表文末没有具体日期，完全没有做人臣应有的礼貌。
English: Up until now, Shen Wei Jing has only submitted the form. The verification of the application on the form is scrawled unclearly, the preface uses Toyotomi's private seal, there is no specific date at the end of the form, and there is no courtesy due to a minister.

古文：而宽奠副总兵马楝报清正拥二百艘屯机张营。
现代文：宽奠副总兵马栋此时上报说清正率二百艘战船屯驻在机张营。
English: At this time, Kuan Dian's deputy commander-in-chief, Terracotta Warriors and Horses Dong, reported that Qing Zheng had stationed 200 warships in Zhangye.

古文：方亨始直吐本末，委罪惟敬，并呈石星前后手书。
现代文：杨方亨见此情状，才将事情的原委直吐出来，并将罪行推托到沈惟敬头上，还将石星前后写来的手书呈给皇帝看。
English: When Yang Fangheng saw this situation, he spit out the original commission of the matter and blamed the crime on Shen Wei Jing. He also showed the Emperor the handwriting written by Shi Xing before and after.

古文：帝大怒，命逮石星、沈惟敬案问。
现代文：皇帝大怒，命令将石星、沈惟敬逮捕问罪。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered that Shi Xing and Shen Wei Jie be arrested and questioned.

古文：以兵部尚书邢玠总督蓟、辽；改麻贵为备倭大将军，经理朝鲜；佥都御史杨镐驻天津，申警备；杨汝南、丁应泰赞画军前。
现代文：之后，皇帝任命兵部尚书邢总督蓟州、辽东事务；将麻贵改为备倭大将军，让他经理朝鲜事务；命令都御史杨镐驻守天津，加强警备；任命杨汝南、丁应泰于军中赞画。
English: After that, the emperor appointed the military commander Shang Shuxuan as the governor of Bozhou and Liaodong affairs; changed Magui to the general of Baowei and made him the manager of Korean affairs; ordered the governor of the capital, Shi Yangtao, to be stationed in Tianjin to strengthen the guard; appointed Yang Runan and Ding Yingtao to be commended in the army.

古文：五月，玠至辽。
现代文：五月，玠到辽东。
English: In May, it reached Liaodong.

古文：行长建楼，清正布种，岛倭窖水，索朝鲜地图，玠遂决意用兵。
现代文：听说行长正在建楼，清正正在播种，岛上的倭人正在储淡水，索讨朝鲜地图，显然是做长期占领的打算，邢于是决心用兵。
English: Hearing that the governor was building a building, that Qing Zheng was sowing seeds, and that the Japanese on the island were storing fresh water and looking for a map of Korea, it was clear that they intended to occupy the country for a long time, so they decided to use troops.

古文：麻贵望鸭绿江东发，所统兵仅万七千人，请济师。
现代文：麻贵沿鸭绿江往东进发，所统领的军队仅一万七千人，请求朝廷给他增派兵力。
English: Magui marched eastward along the Yalu River, commanding an army of only 17,000 men. He asked the imperial court to send him more troops.

古文：玠以朝鲜兵惟娴水战，乃疏请募兵川、浙，并调蓟、辽、宣、大、山、陕兵及福建、吴淞水师，刘綎督川、汉兵听剿。
现代文：邢认为朝鲜的军队只习水战，便上疏朝廷请求招募四川、浙江的军队，并调遣蓟、辽、宣、大、山、陕五地的军队和福建、吴淞的水军，让刘纟廷总督川、汉两地的军队听候进剿的命令。
English: He thought that the North Korean army was only familiar with naval warfare, so he went to the imperial court to request the recruitment of troops from Sichuan and Zhejiang, and dispatched the troops from the five provinces of Yunnan, Liao, Xuan, Daxing, Shan and Shaanxi, as well as the naval forces from Fujian and Wuxi, so that the troops from the two provinces of Sichuan and Han would obey the orders of Liu Bingding, the Governor-General.

古文：贵密报候宣、大兵至，乘倭未备，掩釜山，则行长擒，清正走。
现代文：麻贵悄悄地报告说等宣、大两地的军队到朝鲜时，乘倭军不备，突然掩杀釜山的倭军，则行长必被擒，清正必逃跑。
English: Magui quietly reported that when the armies of the two countries arrived in Korea, if the Japanese army was not prepared and suddenly covered up the Japanese army in Busan, then the governor would be arrested and Qing Zheng would flee.

古文：玠以为奇计，乃檄杨元屯南原，吴惟忠屯忠州。
现代文：邢以为这是奇计，便传令杨元屯驻南原，吴惟忠屯扎忠州。
English: Yu thought it was a trick and ordered Yang Yuan to stay in Nanyuan and Wu Weizhong to stay in Zhongzhou.

古文：六月，倭数千艘泊釜山，戮朝鲜郡守安弘国，渐逼梁山、熊川。
现代文：六月，倭军数千艘战船停泊在釜山，戮杀了朝鲜的郡守安弘国，逐渐逼近梁山和熊川。
English: In June, thousands of warships of the Wa army anchored in Busan, killed the Korean county governor Anhonguk, and gradually approached Mt. Liang and the Kumagawa River.

古文：惟敬率营兵二百，出入釜山。
现代文：沈惟敬率领两百营兵，在釜山出入。
English: Shen Weijing led two hundred battalions to enter and leave Busan.

古文：玠阳为慰藉，檄杨元袭执之，缚至贵营，惟敬执而向导始绝。
现代文：邢表面上是慰藉沈惟敬等人，暗地里传檄给杨元，让他袭击并收执沈惟敬，将他缚捆到麻贵的军营中。沈惟敬被执则倭军的向导便开始断绝了。
English: On the surface, it was to comfort Shen Weijing and others, but it was secretly passed on to Yang Yuan, who attacked and captured Shen Weijing and tied him up in a military camp in Meguo. Shen Weijing was then executed by the Wa army's guides, and the persecution began.

古文：七月，倭夺梁山、三浪，遂入庆州，侵闲山。
现代文：七月，倭军夺取梁山和三浪，于是入侵庆州和闲州。
English: In July, the Wa army captured Liangshan and Sanlang, and then invaded Gyeongju and Yeongju.

古文：统制元均兵溃，遂失闲山。
现代文：统制元均的军队溃散，闲山于是失守。
English: The army under the command of Yuan Quan broke up, and Zhishan fell into disarray.

古文：闲山岛在朝鲜西海口，右障南原，为全罗外藩，一失守则沿海无备，天津、登、莱皆可扬帆而至。
现代文：闲山岛是朝鲜西海口，它是南原的右屏障，是全罗的外藩之地。闲山岛一旦失守则朝鲜沿海就无守备可言，天津、登州、莱州的船皆可扬帆直达。
English: Zhishan Island is the west coast of Korea, it is the right barrier of the Southern Plains, and it is the place of the foreign domain of the whole country. Once Zhishan Island is lost, there is no defense on the coast of Korea, and ships from Tianjin, Dengzhou, and Laizhou can sail directly.

古文：而我水兵三千甫抵旅顺，闲山破，经略檄守王京西之汉江、大同江，扼倭西下，兼防运道。
现代文：明朝的水军三千人刚抵达旅顺，闲山岛遭陷落后，经略传檄文给朝鲜的明军，要他们守卫王京西面的汉江和大同江，扼住倭军西下的要道，兼防运输道路。
English: Three thousand sailors of the Ming Dynasty had just arrived in Lushun, and after the fall of Zhishan Island, they sent a brief message to the Ming Army of Korea, asking them to guard the Han River and Datong River west of Wangjing, choke the important road of the Wa Army to the west, and prevent the transportation road.

古文：八月，清正围南原，乘夜猝攻，守将杨元遁。
现代文：八月，清正包围了南原，乘夜突然发动攻击，守将杨元逃走。
English: In August, Qingzheng besieged Nanyuan and launched a surprise attack at night, forcing Yang Yuan to flee.

古文：时全州有陈愚衷，去南原仅百里，南原告急，愚衷不敢救，闻已破，弃城走。
现代文：此时守卫全州的陈愚衷离南原仅一百里路。南原向他告急时，陈愚衷却不敢救，听到南原已被攻破的消息后，陈愚衷也弃城逃跑。
English: At this time, Chen Yuxin, who guarded the whole state, was only a hundred miles away from Nanyuan. When Nanyuan called him in a hurry, Chen Yuxin did not dare to save him. After hearing the news that Nanyuan had been breached, Chen Yuxin also abandoned the city and fled.

古文：麻贵遣游击牛伯英赴援，与愚衷合兵，屯公州。
现代文：麻贵派遣游击牛伯英赶来援救，与陈愚衷的军队会合后，屯驻公州。
English: Magui dispatched the guerrilla Niu Boying to come to the rescue, and after meeting with Chen Yucheng's army, he settled in Gongzhou.

古文：倭遂犯全庆，逼王京。
现代文：倭军于是进犯全州，逼近王京。
English: The Wa army then attacked Jeonju and approached Wangjing.

古文：王京为朝鲜八道之中，东阻乌岭、忠州，西则南原、全州，道相通。
现代文：王京是朝鲜八道的中心，其东是乌岭和忠州，其西是南原和全州，彼此道路相通。
English: Wangjing is the center of North Korea's eight provinces, with Wuling and Chungju to the east, and Nanwon and Jeonju to the west. All roads are connected to each other.

古文：自二城失，东西皆倭，我兵单弱，因退守王京，依险汉江。
现代文：自从南原、全州失守后，东西两面全是倭军，我守军兵力单薄，就退守王京，依汉江天险阻止倭军。
English: After losing Nanyuan and Quanzhou, the whole of the east and west were occupied by the Japanese army. Our defending army was weak, so we retreated to defend Wangjing and used the natural danger of the Han River to stop the Japanese army.

古文：麻贵请于玠欲弃王京退守鸭绿江。
现代文：麻贵向邢请示，想放弃王京退守鸭绿江。
English: Magui asked Zou for permission to abandon Wangjing and retreat to the Yalu River.

古文：海防使萧应宫以为不可，自平壤兼程趋王京止之。
现代文：海防使萧应宫以为不能这样，从平壤星夜兼程赶往王京制止。
English: The coast guard made Xiao Ying Palace think that this was not possible, and rushed from Pyongyang to Wangjing to stop it.

古文：麻贵发兵守稷山，朝鲜亦调都体察使李元翼由乌岭出忠清道遮贼锋。
现代文：麻贵发兵守住稷山，朝鲜也调遣都体察使李元翼从乌岭出忠清道，拦击倭贼的前锋。
English: Ma Gui sent troops to defend Lushan, and North Korea also dispatched troops to investigate and make Li Yuanyi leave Zhongqing Road from Wuling to stop the advance of the Japanese invaders.

古文：玠既身赴王京，人心始定。
现代文：邢也亲自赶赴王京，这样人心才安定下来。
English: Zou also personally rushed to Wangjing, so that people's hearts could settle down.

古文：玠召参军李应试问计，应试请问庙廷主画云何。
现代文：邢招参军李应试问该怎么办，李应试问皇帝和朝廷大臣有什么打算。
English: Li Ying should try to find out what to do, Li Ying should try to find out what the emperor and the minister of the court have in mind.

古文：玠曰： 阳战阴和，阳剿阴抚，政府八字密画，无泄也。
现代文：邢说 ：阳战阴和，阳剿阴抚。政府的八字密划，你可不要泄露啊！ 
English: Zou said, "The yang is war, the yin is peace, and the yang is caress. The government's eight-character secret plan, you should not leak it!"

古文：应试曰： 然则易耳。
现代文：李应试说： 这样就容易了。
English: Li Ying said tentatively, "It's easier this way."

古文：倭叛以处分绝望，其不敢杀杨元，犹望处分也。
现代文：倭人反叛是因为对处分朝鲜感到绝望，他们不敢杀死杨元，就是还希望朝廷处分朝鲜。
English: The Wa rebelled because they were desperate to punish Korea. They did not dare to kill Yang Yuan, even though they hoped that the imperial court would punish Korea.

古文：直使人谕之曰沈惟敬不死，则退矣。 
现代文：直接派人告诉他们说沈惟敬没死，他们定会退兵。 
English: Directly send someone to tell them that Shen Weiqing is not dead, and they will definitely withdraw.

古文：因请使李大谏于行长，冯仲缨于清正，玠从之。
现代文：李应试便请求让李大谏出使到行长那里，冯仲缨出使到清正那里，邢同意了。
English: Li tentatively asked Li Daxuan to send an envoy to the governor, and Feng Zhongyuan to send an envoy to Qingzheng. Zhuang agreed.

古文：九月，倭至汉江，杨镐遣张贞明持惟敬手书往，责其动兵，有乖静候处分之实。
现代文：九月，倭寇到达汉江，杨镐派张贞明持沈惟敬的手书前去倭寇军营，责怪他们动兵，违犯了静候处分的约定。
English: In September, when the wokou arrived at the Han River, Yang Pi sent Zhang Zhenming to go to the wokou camp with Shen Yuebing's handwritten letter, accusing them of mobilizing troops and violating the agreement of waiting for punishment.

古文：行长、正成亦尤清正轻举，乃退屯井邑。
现代文：此时行长和正成两人也担心清正轻举妄动，便退军驻扎到井邑。
English: At this time, the governor and Zhengcheng were also worried that Qing Zheng would act rashly, so they withdrew and stationed in Jingyun.

古文：麻贵遂报青山、稷山大捷。
现代文：麻贵于是向朝廷上报说在青山、稷山取得大捷。
English: Magui then reported to the imperial court that he had won a great victory in Aoyama and Shaoshan.

古文：萧应宫揭言： 倭以惟敬手书而退，青山、稷山并未接战，何得言功？ 
现代文：萧应宫揭发道： 倭寇是看了沈惟敬的手书而退的兵，青山、稷山并未打仗，怎么能谈功劳呢？ 
English: Xiao Yinggu revealed: The wokou were soldiers who retreated after reading Shen Weijing's handwriting. Aoyama and Shaoshan did not fight, so how can we talk about their merits?

古文：玠、镐怒，遂劾应宫恇怯，不亲解惟敬，并逮。
现代文：邢、杨镐为此很恼怒，于是弹劾萧应宫对敌恐惧畏缩，不敢亲自押送沈惟敬，将萧应宫逮捕问罪。
English: Zhai and Yang were very angry about this, so they impeached Xiao Yingguo for fear of the enemy and did not dare to personally escort Shen Weijing and arrest Xiao Yingguo for questioning.

古文：十一月，玠征兵大集，帝发帑金犒军，赐玠尚方剑，而以御史陈效监其军。
现代文：十一月，邢玠所征调的军队已经集结，皇帝将国库中的金帛拿出来犒劳军队，给邢赐予尚方宝剑，派御史陈效做邢的监军。
English: In November, the troops conscripted by the emperor had been assembled. The emperor took out the gold ingots from the treasury to reward the troops, gave them Shangfang's sword, and sent Gu Shi Chen to supervise the troops.

古文：玠大会诸将，分三协。
现代文：邢大会诸将之后，将军队分为三个协。
English: After the meeting of generals, the army was divided into three groups.

古文：镐同贵率左右协，自忠州、乌岭向东安，趋庆州，专攻清正。
现代文：杨镐和麻贵率领左右两协军队从忠州、乌岭向东安出兵，直奔庆州，专门攻打清正。
English: Yang Hui and Magui led the armies of the left and right two consortia from Zhongzhou and Wuling to Dong'an, and went straight to Qingzhou to specifically attack Qingzheng.

古文：使李大谏通行长，约勿往援。
现代文：派李大谏出使到行长那里，让他不要去救援清正。
English: Li Dazhao sent an envoy to the governor to ask him not to rescue Qingsheng.

古文：复遣中协屯宜城，东援庆州，西扼全罗。
现代文：邢又派中协的军队屯驻在宜城，往东可支援庆州，往西则扼守全罗。
English: He also sent troops of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference to be stationed in Yicheng. They could support Gyeongju in the east and defend Jeolla in the west.

古文：以余兵会朝鲜合营，诈攻顺天等处，以牵制行长东援。
现代文：再派剩下的军队与朝鲜的军队一起汇合，佯攻顺天等地，以牵制行长，不让他去支援清正。
English: He then sent the rest of the army to join forces with the North Korean army and pretend to attack Suncheon and other places in order to restrain the governor and prevent him from supporting Ching Jeong.

古文：十二月，会庆州。
现代文：十二月，明军在庆州会合。
English: In December, the Ming army gathered in Gyeongju.

古文：麻贵遣黄庆赐贿清正约和，而率大兵奄至其营。
现代文：麻贵派黄应赐去贿赂清正，与他讲和，而自己率大军掩杀到他的军营里去。
English: Magui sent Huang to bribe Qingzheng and make peace with him, while he led a large army to hide in his camp.

古文：时倭屯蔚山，城依山险，中一江通釜寨，其陆路由彦阳通釜山。
现代文：此时倭寇屯驻在蔚山，蔚山城背靠山险，中间只有一条江与釜寨相通，其陆路由彦阳通釜山。
English: At this time, the wokotun was stationed in Ulsan. Ulsan City was backed by mountainous terrain, with only one river connecting it to Busan in the middle. The river's land route ran through Hanyang to Busan.

古文：贵欲专攻蔚山，恐釜倭由彦阳来援，乃多张疑兵，又遣将遏其水路，遂进逼倭垒。
现代文：麻贵想专门攻打蔚山，又怕釜山的倭军从彦阳赶来救援，便多布置疑兵，又派遣将领遏住水路，于是进逼倭寇的堡垒。
English: Magui wanted to specifically attack Ulsan, but was afraid of Busan's Wa army coming from Yanyang to rescue, so he arranged more suspicious soldiers, and sent generals to block the waterway, and then entered the fortress of the wokou.

古文：游击摆寨以轻骑诱倭入伏，斩级四百余，获其勇将，乘胜拔两栅。
现代文：游击摆寨以轻骑将倭军诱入伏击圈内，斩杀敌人四百多名，俘虏了敌军勇将，于是乘胜攻下了两个栅寨，倭军被焚烧而死的不知其数。
English: The guerrillas lured the Wa army into the ambush circle with light cavalry, killed more than four hundred of the enemy, captured the enemy's brave general, and then took advantage of the victory to capture two stockades. An unknown number of Wa troops were burned to death.

古文：倭焚死者无算，遂奔岛山，连筑三寨。
现代文：之后，倭军逃奔到岛山，连筑三个栅寨。
English: After that, the Wa army fled to Shima-yama and built three stockades.

古文：翌日，游击茅国器统浙兵先登，连破之，斩获甚多，倭坚壁不出。
现代文：第二天，游击茅国器统领浙江的军队率先登上栅寨，接连攻破了这三个栅寨，斩杀和俘虏敌人甚多。倭军于是坚壁不出战。
English: On the second day, the guerrilla forces led by Mao Guoqui of Zhejiang took the lead in climbing the stockade, and successively broke through the three stockades, killing and capturing a large number of enemies. As a result, the Wa army did not fight.

古文：岛山视蔚山高，石城坚甚，我师仰攻多损伤。
现代文：蔚山比岛山高，石城很坚固，我军仰攻多有损伤。
English: Ulsan is higher than the island mountain, Shicheng is very strong, and our army has more damage when attacking from behind.

古文：诸将乃议曰： 倭艰水道，饷难继，第坐困之，清正可不战缚也。 
现代文：诸将便商量说 ：倭寇水道受阻，粮饷难继，只要将他们围困起来，清正则可不战而俘。 
English: The generals discussed and said: the wako waterway is blocked, the grain supply is unsustainable, as long as they are besieged, Qing Zheng can be captured without a fight.

古文：镐等以为然，分兵围十日夜，倭饥甚，伪约降缓攻。
现代文：杨镐认为此计不错，于是分兵将他们包围了十天十夜。倭军甚饿，假装准备投降以缓和明军的攻击。
English: Yang Pi thought this was a good plan, so his detachment surrounded them for ten days and ten nights. The Wa army was very hungry and pretended to be ready to surrender in order to soften the Ming army's attack.

古文：俄行长援兵大至，将绕出军后。
现代文：不久，行长的援兵大批而来，将绕到明军的背后袭击明军。
English: Soon, the governor's reinforcements arrived in large numbers and attacked the Ming army from behind.

古文：镐不及下令，策马西奔，诸军皆溃。遂撤兵还王京，士卒物故者二万。
现代文：杨镐还来不及下命令，就自己策马往西逃奔，结果各军全部溃散，只好撤军回王京，士兵损失了二万多人。
English: Before Yang Hui could give the order, he bolted westward on his horse. As a result, all the armies were scattered and had to withdraw back to Wangjing. More than twenty thousand soldiers were lost.

古文：上闻之，震怒。乃罢镐听勘，以天津巡抚万世德代。
现代文：皇帝听说此事后，深受震怒，便罢了杨镐的官，让他听候审核处理，派天津巡抚万世德代理他的职务。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he was so furious that he dismissed Yang Xuan's officials, put him on trial, and sent Tianjin's governor Wan Shide to take his place.

古文：事详《镐传》。
现代文：此事详见《杨镐传》。
English: For details, please refer to "The Biography of Yang Xuan."

古文：二十六年正月，邢玠以前役乏水兵无功，乃益募江南水兵，议海运，为持久计。
现代文：二十六年正月，邢认为前次战役是因缺乏水军才导致无功，便更加招募江南的水兵，想从海上运送过来，作为在朝鲜持久作战的考虑。
English: In the first month of the twenty-sixth year, Yu believed that the previous battle was unsuccessful due to the lack of naval forces, so he recruited more sailors from the south of the Yangtze River and wanted to transport them from the sea as a consideration for long-term combat in Korea.

古文：二月，都督陈璘以广兵，刘綎以川兵，邓子龙以浙、直兵先后至。
现代文：二月，都督陈王率领湖广的军队，刘纟廷率领四川的军队，邓子龙率领浙江、直隶的军队先后到达朝鲜。
English: In February, the governor Chen Wang led the troops from Guangxi, Liu Bingding led the troops from Sichuan, and Deng Zilong led the troops from Zhejiang and Zhili to Korea.

古文：玠分兵三协，为水陆四路，路置大将。
现代文：邢将军队分成三协，下又设置水陆四路，每路派一员大将统领。
English: He divided the army into three associations, and set up four water and land routes, each of which was led by a general.

古文：中路如梅，东路贵，西路綎，水路璘，各守汛地，相机行剿。
现代文：中路由如梅统领，东路由麻贵统领，西路由刘纟廷统领，水路由陈王统领，各自守卫汛地，相机进剿。
English: The middle route is led by Rumei, the east route is led by Magui, the west route is led by Liu Bingding, and the water route is led by Chen Wang, each guarding their own territory, and the camera enters their territory.

古文：时倭亦分三窟。东路则清正，据蔚山。西路则行长，据粟林、曳桥，建砦数重。中路则石曼子，据泗州。
现代文：此时倭军也分为三窟，东路由清正率领，占据着蔚山；西路由行长统领，占据着粟林和曳桥，建造了数重栅寨，严密防守；中路由石曼子统领，占据站泗州。
English: At this time, the Wa army was also divided into three caves. The east route, led by Qing Zheng, occupied Ulsan; the west route, led by the governor, occupied the maize forest and the drawbridge, built several fences, and closely defended; the middle route, led by Shi Manzi, occupied the station of Zhangzhou.

古文：而行长水师番休济饷，往来如驶。
现代文：行长的水军轮番给各倭军运送粮饷，在海上往来如梭。
English: The governor's navy took it in turns to transport grain sacks to the various Wa armies, and the traffic at sea was like a shuttle.

古文：我师约日并进，寻报辽阳警，李如松败没，诏如梅还赴之，中路以董一元代。
现代文：我军确定日期准备一齐进攻，不久国内来报说辽阳遭受敌寇入侵，李如松战败阵亡，皇帝下诏让如梅回国赴任，于是中路便由董一元统领。
English: Our army set a date to prepare for an all-out attack, and soon reports came from home that Liaoyang had been invaded by enemy pirates, Li Rousong was defeated and killed, and the emperor ordered Rumei to return to China to take office, so the middle road was led by Dong Yiyuan.

古文：当应泰之劾镐也，昖请回乾断，崇励镇抚，以毕征讨。
现代文：当应泰审决杨镐的罪行时，李日公请求皇帝收回他对杨镐的决定，以勉励各镇抚官员完成征讨倭寇的重任。
English: When Yang Hui was tried and sentenced in Thailand, Li Rikong asked the emperor to revoke his decision on Yang Hui in order to encourage the officials of the townships to complete the important task of recruiting wokou.

古文：上不许。
现代文：皇帝没答应。
English: The Emperor did not give his permission.

古文：又应泰曾以筑城之议为镐罪案，谓坚城得志，启朝鲜异日之患，于是昖奏辨。
现代文：又因为应泰曾将杨镐在朝鲜筑城作为杨镐的一条罪状，说城坚意得之后，将会使朝鲜日后成为中国的祸患，于是李日公又上奏皇帝为此辩解。
English: Also, because Ying Tai had accused Yang Pi of building a city in Korea as one of Yang Pi's crimes, saying that after the city was fortified, it would make Korea become a scourge to China in the future, so Li Rikong again appealed to the emperor to justify this.

古文：帝曰： 连年用兵发饷，以尔国素效忠顺故也，毋以人言自疑。 
现代文：皇帝对李日公的回答是： 我们连年在朝鲜用兵，分发军饷，是因为你们国家对我们素来效忠顺从的缘故，不要因为个别人的话而自己起疑心。 
English: The emperor's answer to Ri Nichong was: We have been using soldiers in Korea for years and distributing military pay because your country has always been loyal and obedient to us. Don't doubt yourself because of the words of individuals.

古文：九月，将士分道进兵，刘綎进逼行长营，约行长为好会。
现代文：九月，在朝鲜的明军将士分道进兵，刘纟廷进逼行长的营地，与行长相约好好地会一会他。
English: In September, when the Ming soldiers in North Korea marched into the camp separately, Liu Bingding marched into the commander's camp and made an appointment with the commander to have a good meeting with him.

古文：翌日，攻城，斩首九十二。
现代文：第二天，刘纟廷率军攻城，杀死敌人九十二人。
English: The next day, Liu Bingting led an army to attack the city, killing ninety-two of the enemy.

古文：陈璘舟师协堵击，毁倭船百余。
现代文：陈王的水军也协助刘纟廷堵击倭军，毁坏倭军船只一百多艘。
English: Chen Wang's navy also assisted Liu Bingding to block the Japanese army, destroying more than a hundred Japanese ships.

古文：行长潜出千余骑扼之，綎不利，退，璘亦弃舟走。
现代文：行长悄悄地派一千多骑兵扼击刘纟廷，刘纟廷感觉形势不利而退兵，陈王也弃船而逃。
English: The governor quietly sent more than a thousand cavalry to strangle Liu Bingting. Liu Bingting felt that the situation was unfavorable and withdrew. Chen Wang also abandoned the ship and fled.

古文：麻贵至蔚山，颇有斩获，倭伪退诱之。
现代文：麻贵带兵到蔚山，斩杀了不少敌人，倭军佯装退兵引诱麻贵。
English: Magee led an army to Ulsan and killed many enemies. The Wa army lured Magee by pretending to retreat.

古文：贵入空垒，伏兵起，遂败。
现代文：麻贵进入空空的堡垒后，伏兵四起，于是被倭军打败。
English: After Magee entered the empty fortress, four ambushes arose, and he was defeated by the Wa army.

古文：董一元进取晋州，乘胜渡江，连毁二寨。
现代文：董一元进兵夺取了晋州，乘胜渡江，接连攻毁了两座敌寨。
English: Dong Yi Yuan marched into Jinzhou, took advantage of the victory to cross the Yangtze River, and successively attacked and destroyed two enemy camps.

古文：倭退保泗州老营，鏖战下之，前逼新寨。
现代文：倭寇退保泗州的老营，经过激烈的鏖战，攻下了泗州老营，往前进逼到新寨。
English: The wokou retreated to the old camp of Bozhou, and after a fierce battle, they captured the old camp of Bozhou and advanced to Xinzhai.

古文：寨三面临江，一面通陆，引海为濠，海艘泊寨下千计，筑金海、固城为左右翼。
现代文：新寨三面环江，一面靠大陆。江中引入海水作为护濠，在寨前停泊有海船数以千计。新寨的两边筑有金海和固城两个城，做自己的左右两翼。
English: Xinzhai is surrounded by the Yangtze River on three sides, with one side on the mainland. Seawater is introduced into the river as a protective barrier, and thousands of ships are moored in front of the village. On both sides of Xinzhai, there are two cities, Jinhai and Gucheng, which are its left and right wings.

古文：十月，董一元遣将四面攻城，用火器击碎寨门，兵竞前拔栅。
现代文：十月，董一元派遣将领从四面攻打城池，用火器击碎了寨门，士兵竞相前去拔除栏栅。
English: In October, Dong Yiyuan dispatched generals to attack the city from four sides, smashed the city gate with firearms, and soldiers raced to remove the railing.

古文：忽营中火药崩，烟焰涨天。倭乘势冲击，固城倭亦至，兵遂大溃，奔还晋州。
现代文：忽然军营中火药发生爆炸，火焰冲天，倭军乘势冲击明军，固城的倭军也已赶来，于是明军大溃，逃回到晋州。
English: Suddenly, gunpowder exploded in the military camp, the flames soared into the sky, the Wa army took advantage of the situation to attack the Ming army, and the Wa army from Gucheng had also arrived, so the Ming army was routed and fled back to Jinzhou.

古文：帝闻，命斩二游击以徇，一元等各带罪立功。
现代文：皇帝听说此事后，命令斩两个游击以示惩戒，让董一元等人各带罪立功。
English: After the emperor heard about this, he ordered that two guerrillas be beheaded as a disciplinary measure, and that Dong Yiyuan and the others each be punished for their crimes.

古文：是月，福建都御史金学曾报七月九日平秀吉死，各倭俱有归志。
现代文：该月，福建都御史金学曾上报说在七月九日日本的平秀吉死亡，朝鲜的倭军都有回国的意图。
English: In the same month, the Fujian governor, Jin Xue, reported that the Japanese general, Taira Hideyoshi, had died on July 9th, and that the Korean Wa Army intended to return home.

古文：十一月，清正发舟先走，麻贵遂入岛山、酉浦，刘綎攻夺曳桥。
现代文：十一月，清正率军乘船先回，麻贵于是进入岛山和酉浦，刘纟廷攻夺了曳桥。
English: In November, Qing Zheng led the army back by boat, and Mage Gui then entered Shima Shan and Lopu, and Liu Bingding captured the drawbridge.

古文：石曼子引舟师救行长，陈璘邀击败之。
现代文：石曼子率水军援救行长，陈王率军邀击，打败了石曼子。
English: Shi Manzi led the navy to rescue the governor, Chen Wang led the army to attack, and defeated Shi Manzi.

古文：诸倭扬帆尽归。
现代文：不久，各地倭军全部扬帆回国。
English: Soon, all the Wa troops in various regions set sail for home.

古文：自倭乱朝鲜七载，丧师数十万，糜饷数百万，中朝与属国迄无胜算，至关白死而祸始息。
现代文：自从倭寇在朝鲜作乱的七年间，中朝两国还有其他属国丧失了军队数十万人，花费军饷数百万，至今都还算不过来。到关白死，这个祸乱才开始平息。
English: In the seven years since the Wokou rebellion in Korea, China, North Korea, and other vassal states have lost hundreds of thousands of troops and spent millions of military funds, and it is still difficult to calculate. It was not until the death of Guan Bai that this calamity began to subside.

古文：二十七年闰四月，以平倭诏告天下，又敕谕昖曰： 倭奴平秀吉肆为不道，蹂躏尔邦。
现代文：二十七年闰四月，皇帝将平定倭寇的消息诏告天下，又给李日公敕谕说 ：倭奴平秀吉行为放肆无道，蹂躏你的国家。
English: In leap April of the 27th year, the emperor announced to the world the news of the pacification of the wokou, and also sent a message to Li Rikong, saying: "Wano Ping Hideyoshi behaved recklessly and ravaged your country.

古文：朕念王世笃忠贞，深用悯恻。
现代文：我顾念你王室对朝廷世代忠贞，深为怜悯你们。
English: I think of your royal family's loyalty to the imperial court for generations, and I feel deep pity for you.

古文：七年之中，日以此贼为事。
现代文：这七年来，每天都在考虑对付倭贼的事。
English: For the past seven years, I have been thinking about how to deal with the Japanese invaders every day.

古文：始行薄伐，继示包容，终加严讨。
现代文：刚开始时是对他们薄施讨伐，继而又包容和亲他们，最终对他们严加征讨。
English: At the beginning, they were lightly cracked down on, then they were tolerated and loved, and finally they were severely cracked down on.

古文：盖不杀乃天之心，而用兵非予得已。
现代文：不杀人乃是上天的善心，用兵动武乃是不得已而已。
English: Heaven's benevolence is not to kill people, and it is only out of necessity that military force is used.

古文：安疆靖乱，宜取荡平。
现代文：安疆靖乱，应以扫荡平定为好。
English: The Anjiang Uprising should be defined as a sweeping victory.

古文：神恶凶盈，阴歼魁首，大师乘之，追奔逐北，鲸鲵尽戮，海隅载清，捷书来闻，忧劳始释。
现代文：可幸的是天神也讨厌倭人作恶太多，暗里帮我们歼灭了倭人魁首，于是大军乘此机会，追击败退的倭寇，连海隅都已扫清。捷报传来，我的忧劳之心才稍有放松。
English: Fortunately, Tenjin also disliked the fact that the Japanese were doing too much evil, and secretly helped us to annihilate the leader of the Japanese, so the army took this opportunity to chase the retreating Japanese, and even the corners of the sea have been cleared.

古文：惟王虽还旧物，实同新造，振凋起敝，为力倍艰。
现代文：对于你来说，虽然归还给你的是旧的河山，但实际上同新造的是一样的，要振兴凋敝之业，费力更为艰辛。
English: For you, although the old rivers and mountains are returned to you, they are actually the same as the newly created ones. It is more arduous to revitalize the withering industry.

古文：倭虽遁归，族类尚在。
现代文：倭寇虽然逃归本国，但其种族还在。
English: Although the wako fled back to their home country, their race is still around.

古文：兹命邢玠振旅归京，量留万世德等分布戍守。
现代文：我现在命令邢带兵回京城，适量留下万世德等人替你分别戍守国土。
English: I now order you to take your soldiers back to the capital, leaving Wan Shide and others to defend the country for you.

古文：王宜卧薪尝胆，无忘前耻，惟忠惟孝，缵绍前休。 
现代文：你应该卧薪尝胆，不忘前耻，尽忠尽孝，将前辈的功业发扬光大。 
English: You should lie down and try your guts, not forget the shame of the past, be loyal and filial, and carry forward the achievements of your predecessors.

古文：一，留戍兵，马步水陆共计三万四千有奇，马三千匹。一，定月饷，每年计银九十一万八千有奇。一，定本色，合用米豆，分派辽东、天津、山东等处，每年十三万石。一，留中路海防道。一，裁饷司。一，重将领。一，添巡捕。一，分汛地。一，议操练。一，责成本国。
现代文：五月，邢玠向朝廷逐条陈述东征之后的十件善后事宜：其一，留下骑兵、步兵、水兵共三万四千多人，战马三千匹帮助朝鲜戍守疆土；其二，确定每月的军饷，每年给驻守朝鲜的明军发饷银共九十一万八千多两；其三，确定缴纳的田税，可用米豆代替米麦，将此分派给辽东、天津、山东等地，每年十三万石；其四，留兵守卫中路的海防通道；其五，裁减运饷司；其六，尊重将领；其七，增添巡捕；其八，将各军镇巡逻的讯地分开；其九，操练军队；其十，责成朝鲜本国按以上意见去办。
English: In May, Emperor Gong reported to the imperial court, item by item, ten matters concerning the aftermath of the Eastern Expedition: First, he left behind a total of more than 34,000 cavalry, infantry and sailors, and 3,000 horses to help Korea defend its territory; Second, he determined the monthly military pay, and issued a total of more than 9,118,000 taels of silver to the Ming troops stationed in Korea each year; Third, he determined the field tax paid, which could be used to replace rice and wheat with rice and beans, and distributed it to Liaodong, Tianjin, Shandong and other places, amounting to 130,000 koku each year; Fourth, he left soldiers to guard the coastal defense

古文：廷臣议： 数年疲耗，今始息肩，自宜内固根本，不当更为繁费。
现代文：朝廷大臣讨论后认为 ：几年来疲惫消耗，到现在可以休息一下，自然应当在国内加固根本，不应当更多地花费消耗。
English: After the discussion, the Minister of the Imperial Court believed that: after several years of exhaustion and consumption, it is now possible to take a break. Naturally, it is necessary to strengthen the foundation in China, and it is not necessary to spend more on consumption.

古文：况彼国兵荒之后，不独苦倭之扰，兼苦我兵。
现代文：况且朝鲜国遭受兵荒之后，不仅仅是以倭人的侵扰为苦，还苦于要负担我们在朝鲜的军队。
English: Moreover, after the Korean nation suffered a military famine, not only did it suffer from the Japanese invasion, but it also suffered from having to bear the burden of our troops in Korea.

古文：故今日善后事宜，仍当商之彼国，先量彼饷之赢绌，始可酌我兵之去留。
现代文：所以今天所议的善后事宜，仍应与朝鲜国商量，先看他们的粮饷出入情况，再来斟酌我军的去留。
English: Therefore, we should still consult with North Korea on the aftermath matters discussed today. First, we should look at the situation of their grain imports and exports, and then consider the departure and stay of our troops.

古文：至于增买马匹，添补标兵，创立巡捕，及至管饷府佐，悉宜停止。 
现代文：至于增购马匹、添补标兵、创立巡捕，以及管理粮饷的府佐等等，全应停止。 
English: As for the purchase of additional horses, the addition of additional pacesetters, the creation of patrols, and the management of grain stores, etc., all should be stopped.

古文：帝命督抚会同国王酌奏。
现代文：皇帝命令督抚会同朝鲜国王一起商量酌定后再上奏此事。
English: The emperor ordered the governor to discuss the matter with the king of Korea and then report it.

古文：八月，昖献方物，助大工，褒赏如例。
现代文：八月，李日公向朝廷进献土产，皇帝按例给予褒赏。
English: In August, Emperor Li gave a gift of local produce to the imperial court, and the emperor rewarded him as usual.

古文：十月，请留水兵八千，以资戍守。
现代文：十月，朝鲜请求留下八千水兵帮他们戍守疆土。
English: In October, North Korea asked for 8,000 sailors to remain behind to help defend its territory.

古文：其撤回官兵，驻札辽阳备警。
现代文：从朝鲜撤回来的官兵，就全部驻扎在辽阳以防北方外族入侵。
English: All the officers and soldiers who were withdrawn from Korea were stationed in Liaoyang to prevent the invasion of foreigners from the north.

古文：二十八年四月请将义州等仓遗下米豆运回辽阳。
现代文：二十八年四月，朝鲜请求将义州等地仓库中遗留下来的明军食用的米豆运回辽阳。
English: In April of the 28th year, North Korea requested that the rice beans left in warehouses in Yizhou and other places be transported back to Liaoyang for the Ming army to eat.

古文：户部议： 输运维艰，莫若径与彼国，振其雕敝，以昭皇仁。 诏曰： 可。 
现代文：户部上奏说： 运输很困难，不如直接送给朝鲜、让他们用于振兴凋敝的家业，以便昭示皇帝的仁德之心。 皇帝下诏说 ：同意。 
English: The head of the Imperial Household Agency said, "Transportation is very difficult, so it would be better to send the money directly to North Korea, and let them use it to revive the fading family business, in order to show the Emperor's benevolent heart." The Emperor said, "I agree."

古文：二十九年二月，兵部覆奏经督条陈七事： 一，练兵士。
现代文：二十九年二月，兵部答复经督朝鲜事务的七条意见： 其一，训练士兵。
English: In February 1929, the Ministry of Military Affairs replied to the Governor of Korean Affairs with seven opinions: First, train soldiers.

古文：丽人鸷悍耐寒苦，而长衫大袖，训练无方，宜以束伍之法教之。
现代文：高丽人骠悍，能耐寒受苦，但其衣是长衫大袖，无法训练，应以管束行伍的方法教育他们。
English: The Goryeo people are tough and can endure the cold, but their clothes are long-sleeved shirts. They cannot be trained, and they should be taught to march in a disciplined manner.

古文：一，守冲要。
现代文：其二，守卫要冲之地。
English: Second, guard the place where you want to rush.

古文：朝鲜三面距海，釜山与对马相望，巨济次之，宜各守以重兵，并蔚山、开山等处皆宜戍守。
现代文：朝鲜三面环海，釜山与对马岛隔海相望，巨济也就在旁边，应以重兵防守该地，并在蔚山、开山等地也派兵戍守。
English: North Korea is surrounded by the sea on three sides, Busan and the island of Tsushima are across the sea, and Gwangju is also nearby. It is necessary to defend this place with heavy troops, and also send soldiers to guard in Ulsan, Kaesang and other places.

古文：一，修险隘。
现代文：其三，修筑险隘之处的营垒。
English: Third, build a camp at the narrowest point.

古文：王京北倚丛山，南环沧海。
现代文：王京北靠丛山，南临沧海。
English: Wangjing is surrounded by mountains in the north and the Canghai Sea in the south.

古文：忠州左右乌、竹二岭，羊肠绕曲，有一夫当关之险。
现代文：忠州左右又有乌岭和竹岭，其道像羊肠一样狭小绕曲，有一夫当关万夫莫开之险。
English: On the left and right of Chungju, there are Wuling and Zhuling. The road is as narrow and winding as a sheep's intestine, so there is a risk of getting lost.

古文：今营垒遗址尚存，亟宜修葺。
现代文：现今这些地方的营垒遗址尚存，应给予修葺。
English: The remains of the barracks in these places still exist today and should be restored.

古文：一，建城池。
现代文：其四，修建城池。
English: Fourth, the construction of the castle.

古文：朝鲜八道，十九无城。
现代文：朝鲜八道之地，十之八九没有城池。
English: Of the eight provinces in North Korea, nine out of ten do not have a castle.

古文：平壤西北鸭、浿二江，俱南通海。
现代文：平壤西北部的鸭绿江和坝江，都在南部通海。
English: The Yalu River and the Dam River in the northwest of Pyongyang both flow into the sea in the south.

古文：倘倭别遣一旅占据平壤，则王京声援断绝，皆应修筑屯聚。
现代文：倘若倭寇另外派一支军队占领平壤，则王京的声援就会被断绝，这些地方都应修筑屯寨聚众守卫。
English: If the Japanese invaders sent another army to occupy Pyongyang, then Wang Jing's solidarity would be cut off, and these places should build camps and gather guards.

古文：一，造器械。
现代文：其五，造器械。
English: Fifth, make tools.

古文：倭战便陆不便海，以船制重大，不利攻击。
现代文：倭军便于陆战而不便于海战，是因为他们的船太重太大，不利于攻击。
English: The reason why the Wa army was better suited to land warfare than to naval warfare was that their ships were too heavy and too large, which was not conducive to attack.

古文：今准福唬造百十艘为奇兵，并添造神机百子火箭。
现代文：现今准许他们添造一百一十艘战船作为奇兵，船上添造有神机百子火箭。
English: Now they are allowed to build an additional one hundred and ten warships as a miracle soldier, and to build a hundred rockets with a miracle machine on the ship.

古文：一，访异材。
现代文：其六，寻访奇异人材。
English: Sixth, the search for extraordinary talent.

古文：朝鲜贵世官，贼世役，一切禁锢，往往走倭走敌，为本国患，宜破格搜采。
现代文：朝鲜国以世代为官为贵，以世代服役为贱，对百姓为官之途全都禁锢，因此许多人材往往逃到倭人那里或投奔敌方，成为本国的祸患。因此应让他们破格搜寻采用人材。
English: North Korea values generational officials, values generational service above all else, and forbids ordinary citizens from becoming officials. As a result, many talented people often flee to the Japanese or join the enemy, becoming a scourge to the country. Therefore, they should be allowed to search for talented people in an unconventional way.

古文：一，修内治。
现代文：其七，整治我国内的军备。
English: The seventh is to rectify our domestic armaments.

古文：国家东南临海，以登、旅为门户，镇江为咽喉，应援之兵，不宜尽撤。
现代文：我们中国东南临海，以登州、旅顺为通海的门户，镇江是通海的咽喉，应援之兵，不应全部撤离。
English: We, in southeastern China, are bordered by the sea, with Danzhou and Lushun as the gateways to the sea, and Zhenjiang as the throat to the sea. The soldiers who came to help should not all be evacuated.

古文：我自固，亦所以固朝鲜也。 
现代文：我们自己稳固了也就能使朝鲜也稳固。 
English: If we can stabilize ourselves, we can stabilize North Korea.

古文：诏朝鲜刻励以行。
现代文：皇帝下诏让朝鲜按上述几条刻苦执行。
English: The emperor decreed that the DPRK should diligently implement the above-mentioned articles.

古文：九月，奏所颁诰命冕服遭变沦失，祈补给，从之。
现代文：九月，朝鲜上奏说朝廷以前颁发给他们的诰命和冕服都因遭变乱沦失了，祈求皇帝再补发颁给，皇帝同意了。
English: In September, the Koreans reported to the emperor that the imperial court had previously awarded them the imperial crown and imperial robe, which had been lost due to the turmoil, and asked the emperor to reissue them. The emperor agreed.

古文：时倭国内乱，对马岛主平义智悉遣降人还朝鲜，遗书乞和，且扬言秀吉将家康将输粮数十万石为军兴资，以胁朝鲜。
现代文：此时倭人国内动乱，对马岛的岛主平义智将投降他们的朝鲜人全部遣送朝鲜，并传书过来与朝鲜讲和，还声称平秀吉手下的将领家康将输送粮食数十万作为军用物资，以威胁朝鲜。
English: At this time, the Japanese were in turmoil at home, and the island owner of Tsushima, Taira no Yoshitomo, was about to surrender and send all of his Koreans to Korea, and send a letter to make peace with North Korea. He also claimed that Ieyasu, the general under the command of Taira Hideyoshi, would send hundreds of thousands of grain as military supplies to threaten North Korea.

古文：朝鲜与对马岛一水相望，岛地不产五谷，资米于朝鲜。
现代文：朝鲜与对马岛一水相隔，岛内不产五谷，靠朝鲜给他们提供大米。
English: North Korea is separated from the island of Tsushima by a body of water, and the island does not produce grain, relying on North Korea to provide them with rice.

古文：兵兴后，绝开市，因百计胁款。
现代文：自倭军入侵朝鲜后，停止与对马岛开市供粮，对马岛便千方百计胁迫朝鲜与他们通好。
English: After the Japanese invaded Korea, they stopped trading grain with Tsushima, and Tsushima did everything possible to coerce Korea into becoming friendly with them.

古文：秀吉死，我军尽撤，朝鲜畏倭滋甚。
现代文：平秀吉死后，明朝的军队全部撤回国内，朝鲜对倭人十分畏惧。
English: After the death of TAIRA no Hideyoshi, all the troops of the Ming Dynasty were withdrawn into the country. North Korea was very afraid of the Japanese.

古文：欲与倭通款，又惧开罪中国。
现代文：他们想与倭人通好，又怕得罪中国。
English: They want to get along with the Japanese, but they are afraid of offending China.

古文：十二月，昖以岛倭求款来请命。
现代文：十二月，李日公以对马岛倭人向朝鲜求好一事请示明朝廷。
English: In December, Li Rikong asked the Ming court for permission to appeal to the Japanese people of the Malay Archipelago to seek goodwill from North Korea.

古文：兵部以事难遥度，令总督世德酌议，诏可。
现代文：兵部认为此事难以遥相估计，让总督万世德酌情上报处理，皇帝同意。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs thought that the matter was difficult to estimate from afar, and asked Governor Wan Shide to report it to the emperor for handling at his discretion. The emperor agreed.

古文：三十年十一月，昖言倭使频来要挟和款，兵端渐露，乞选将率兵，督同本国训练修防。
现代文：三十年十一月，李日公上奏称倭国使者频频来要挟我们朝鲜与他们通好，还为此准备动兵，请求朝廷选派将领率军到朝鲜监督协助我们的防卫。
English: In November of the thirtieth year, Li Rihong made a report saying that the emissaries of the Japanese Empire frequently came to threaten us, Korea, to be on good terms with them, and also prepared to mobilize troops for this purpose, requesting the imperial court to send generals to lead the army to Korea to supervise and assist our defense.

古文：帝曰： 曾留将士教习，成法具在，无容再遣。
现代文：皇帝说 ：曾经留下将士教习过你们怎么防卫，现成的方法都在那儿，不用再派人了。 
English: The emperor said, "I have left my generals to teach you how to defend yourselves. All the methods are there, there is no need to send more men."

古文：因命其使臣赍敕诫励。
现代文：让朝鲜的使者将敕谕带回去劝诫勉励他们。
English: Let the North Korean envoys take the message back to exhort and encourage them.

古文：三十三年九月，昖复请封珲为世子，礼部仍执立长之议。
现代文：三十三年九月，李日公又请求明朝廷封李珲为世子，礼部仍坚持立长之说。
English: In September, 33rd year, Li Rikong again requested the Ming court to anoint Li Xi as his heir, but the Ministry of Ceremonies still insisted that he should be the eldest son.

古文：三十五年四月，昖以家康求和来告，兵部议听王自计而已。
现代文：三十五年四月，李日公以家康前来向朝鲜求和之事上报明朝廷，兵部讨论后认为听任朝鲜国王自己处理算了。
English: In April of the year thirty-five, Ri Il Gong reported to the imperial court that Ieyasu had come to Korea to sue for peace. After discussion, the military department decided to let the king of Korea handle the matter himself.

古文：由是和款不绝，后三年始画开市之事。
现代文：从此，朝鲜和日本通好，过了三年便计划互相开市贸易。
English: Since then, North Korea and Japan have been on good terms, and after three years, they plan to open markets and trade with each other.

古文：三十六年，昖卒。光海君珲自称署国事，追陪臣来讣，且请谥。
现代文：三十六年，李日公死，光海君李珲自称为署国事，派陪臣前来向明朝廷讣告丧讯，并请求朝廷给李日公封谥号。
English: Thirty-six years ago, after the death of Li Rikong, the Guanghai Emperor, Li Xi, declared himself to be in charge of state affairs and sent a vassal to the Ming court to announce his death and ask the court to give Li Rikong a posthumous name.

古文：帝恶其擅，不允，令该国臣民公义以闻。
现代文：皇帝厌恶他擅自接掌国政，没答应他的请求，让朝鲜国的臣民公议谁该当政之后，将结果上报明朝廷。
English: The emperor was disgusted by his taking control of state affairs without authorization, and did not agree to his request to let the subjects of Korea publicly discuss who should be in power, and then report the results to the Ming court.

古文：时我大清兵征服各部，渐近朝鲜。
现代文：这时我大清的军队已征服了各部落，渐渐逼近朝鲜。
English: At this time, the Qing Dynasty's army had conquered all the tribes and was gradually approaching Korea.

古文：兵部议令该王大修武备，整饬边防，并请敕辽左督抚镇臣，遣官宣达毋相侵犯之意。
现代文：兵部讨论后，让李珲大修武备，整肃边防，并请求皇帝给辽东左督抚和其他镇守大臣下敕令，让他们派官到大清宣达不相侵犯之意。
English: After the discussion of the military department, he asked Li Qian to overhaul the military and clean up the border defense, and requested the emperor to issue an imperial decree to the Liaodong Zuo Fu and other town guard ministers, so that they could send officials to the Qing Dynasty to proclaim the intention of non-aggression.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十月，封珲为国王，从其臣民请也。
现代文：十月，明朝廷封李珲为朝鲜国王，顺从了朝鲜臣民的请求。
English: In October, the Ming court crowned Ri Yong as the king of Korea, complying with the request of the Korean subjects.

古文：三十七年二月，谥昖曰昭敬，遣官赐珲及妃柳氏诰命。
现代文：三十七年二月，皇帝给李日公封谥号为昭敬，派遣官员到朝鲜给李珲和他的妃柳氏颁赐诰命。
English: In February 1937, the emperor gave the imperial title of Zhao Jing to Li Rikong and dispatched officials to North Korea to bestow the posthumous names of Li Xi and his concubine Liu Shi.

古文：初，朝鲜失守，赖中国力得复，倭弃釜山遁。
现代文：当初，朝鲜失守，依靠中国的力量才得以收复，倭寇放弃釜山而逃。
English: At first, Korea was defeated, and it was only by relying on China's strength that it was able to recover, and the wokou abandoned Busan and fled.

古文：然阴谋启疆，为患不已。
现代文：但是倭寇阴谋重新侵犯朝鲜疆界，为患一直不断。
English: However, the wokou plot to re-invade the Korean border has been ongoing.

古文：于是海上流言倭图釜山，朝鲜与之通。
现代文：于是海上有流言说倭寇图谋釜山，朝鲜与倭人通好。
English: As a result, there were rumors at sea that the Japanese were plotting to attack Busan, and that North Korea and the Japanese were on good terms.

古文：四十一年九月，总兵官杨宗业以闻。
现代文：四十一年九月，总兵官杨宗业将此上报朝廷。
English: In September 1941, General Yang Zongye reported this to the imperial court.

古文：珲疏辨，诏慰解之。
现代文：李珲为此上疏辩伪，皇帝下诏对李珲安慰劝解了一番。
English: For this reason, Li Qiye hesitated to argue, and the emperor issued an edict to comfort and persuade Li Qiye.

古文：四十二年四月，奏请追封生母金氏。
现代文：四十二年四月，李珲上奏明朝廷，请求皇帝追封他的生母金氏。
English: In April of 42, Li Hongzhang appealed to the Ming court, asking the emperor to restore his birth mother Kim Il Sung to the throne.

古文：礼部按《会典》，嫡母受封而生母先亡者得追赠，乃命封为国王次妃。
现代文：礼部按《大明会典》中嫡母受封而生母先亡者可以得到追赠的条例，便册封金氏为朝鲜国王的次妃。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies, in accordance with the regulations of the "Great Ming Dynasty" in which the legitimate mother was appointed and the first-born mother could receive a posthumous gift, annotated the Kim clan as the second wife of the Korean king.

古文：四十三年十一月，表贺冬至，因奏买回《吾学编》、《弇山堂别集》等书，载本国事与《会典》乖错，乞改正。
现代文：四十三年十一月，李珲上表向皇帝祝贺冬至，并上奏买回的《吾学编》、《合廾山堂别集》等书中所记载的朝鲜之事与《大明会典》有出入，请求朝廷予以改正。
English: In November 43rd, Li Hongzhi wrote to the emperor to congratulate him on the winter solstice. He also reported that there were discrepancies between the Korean affairs recorded in the books "Wu Xue Hen" and "Hao Shandong Bei Shu" that he had bought back, and the "Daming Canon," and requested the imperial court to correct them.

古文：礼部言： 野史不足凭。
现代文：礼部上奏说 ：野史不足为凭。
English: The head of the ceremonial department said, "The lack of field history is proof enough."

古文：今所请耻与逆党同讥，宜悯其诚，宣付史馆。 
现代文：现今他所请求更改的是耻于与叛党一起遭到讥讽，应怜悯他的诚心，交付史馆更改。 
English: What he is asking to change now is the shame of being ridiculed along with the rebels, and his sincerity should be pitied and handed over to the history museum to be changed.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：初，珲为生母已得封，至是复祈给冠服。
现代文：当初，李珲为他生母取得了册封，至此又祈求皇帝给他生母颁赐冠服。
English: At first, Li Qian obtained a seal for his birth mother, and then asked the emperor to give his birth mother a crown.

古文：礼臣以金氏侧室，礼有隆杀，执不可。
现代文：礼部大臣认为金氏是侧室，按礼不能享受这个隆遇，因此坚持不可。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies believes that the Kim clan is a concubine, and according to the etiquette cannot enjoy this grand occasion, so it is impossible to insist.

古文：四十五年正月，珲请至再，帝以珲屡次恳陈，勉从之。
现代文：四十五年正月，李珲又来为他生母请求冠服，皇帝因李珲屡次恳切陈请，勉强顺从了他的要求。
English: In the first month of the 45th year of the Emperor's reign, the Emperor reluctantly complied with Li Yu's request to wear a crown for his birth mother, as he had repeatedly begged him to do so.

古文：四十七年，杨镐督马林、杜松、刘綎等出师，为我大清兵所败。
现代文：四十七年，杨镐监督马林、杜松、刘纟廷等人出兵，被我大清军队击败。
English: In 1947, Yang Xuan oversaw the dispatch of troops by Marin, Juniper, Liu Qingting and others, and was defeated by the Qing army.

古文：朝鲜助战兵将，或降或战死。
现代文：朝鲜派来帮助明朝作战的兵将，要么投降要么战死。
English: The soldiers sent by North Korea to help fight the Ming Dynasty will either surrender or die in battle.

古文：珲告急，诏加优恤。
现代文：李珲向明朝廷告急，皇帝下诏优加抚恤。
English: Li Hong complained urgently to the Ming court, and the emperor issued an edict to increase the pension.

古文：十一月，兵部覆：朝鲜入贡之道，宜添兵防守。
现代文：十一月，兵部向朝廷奏复：朝鲜向朝廷入贡的道路，应添兵防守。
English: In November, the military department reported back to the imperial court: North Korea's road to paying tribute to the imperial court should be guarded by more soldiers.

古文：诏镇江等处设兵将，令经略熊廷弼调委。
现代文：皇帝下诏给镇江等地添设军将，让经略熊廷弼负责此事。
English: The emperor issued an edict to add military commanders to Zhenjiang and other places, and let the strategist Xiong Tingyao take charge of the matter.

古文：四十八年正月，珲奏： 敌兵八月中攻破北关，金台吉自焚，白羊出降。
现代文：四十八年正月，李珲上奏朝廷： 敌军于八月中攻破了北关，金台吉自焚而死，白羊向敌人投降。
English: In the first month of the 48th year, Li Qian reported to the imperial court: The enemy army broke through the North Gate in mid-August, Jintaiji self-immolated and died, and Baiyang surrendered to the enemy.

古文：铁岭之役，蒙古宰赛亦为所灭。
现代文：铁岭一战，蒙古的宰赛也被敌军所灭。
English: In the first battle of Tieling, Mongolia's Zaisei was also destroyed by the enemy.

古文：闻其国谋议以朝鲜、北关、宰赛皆助兵南朝，今北关、宰赛皆灭，不可使朝鲜独存。
现代文：听说敌国正在谋划，认为朝鲜、北关和宰赛都出兵帮助明朝，现今北关、宰赛都已灭亡，不能让朝鲜独自还生存下去。
English: I heard that the enemy country was plotting, and thought that Korea, Pekan and Zaisei had all sent troops to help the Ming Dynasty. Now, Pekan and Zaisei have all perished, and it is impossible for Korea to survive on its own.

古文：又闻设兵牛毛寨、万遮岭，欲略宽奠、镇江等处。
现代文：又听说敌军已陈兵在牛毛寨和万遮岭，想侵略宽奠、镇江等地。
English: It was also heard that the enemy troops had exhausted their troops in Niu Mao Zhai and Wanzhialing, and wanted to invade Kuan Dian, Zhenjiang and other places.

古文：宽奠、镇江与昌城、义州诸堡隔水相望，孤危非常。
现代文：宽奠、镇江与我们朝鲜的昌城、义州等堡垒隔水相望，孤处一隅非常危险。
English: Kuan Dian and Zhenjiang are across the water from our North Korean fortresses such as Changcheng and Yizhou, and it is very dangerous to be alone.

古文：敌若从叆阳境上鸦鹘关取路绕出凤凰城里，一日长驱，宽镇、昌城俱莫自保。
现代文：敌军若从云爰阳境内取道雅鹘关绕出凤凰城，长驱一天，则宽镇、昌城都无法自保了。
English: If the enemy army takes the road of Yaxu Pass from the territory of Yunnan and Yangzhou to bypass Phoenix City and drives for a long time, then Guangzhen and Changcheng will not be able to protect themselves.

古文：内而辽左八站，外而东江一城，彼此隔断，声援阻绝，可为寒心。
现代文：这样，里面的辽左佟站和外面的东江城就彼此隔断，声援断绝，这就寒心了。
English: In this way, Liaozao Railway Station inside and Dongjiang City outside are cut off from each other, solidarity is cut off, and this is chilling.

古文：望速调大兵，共为掎角，以固边防。 
现代文：希望朝廷快速调遣大军防守，与我们共同倚为犄角之势，以巩固边防。 
English: We hope that the imperial court will quickly dispatch a large army for defense and work with us to consolidate the border defense.

古文：时辽镇塘报称朝鲜与大清讲和，朝议遂谓珲阳衡阴顺，宜遣官宣谕，或命将监护，其说纷拿。
现代文：此时，辽东的镇塘上报朝廷，声称朝鲜与大清讲和，朝廷大臣认为这是李珲表面制衡大清暗地降顺大清的计谋，应派官前去宣谕，或派将领前去监护，其说纷纭，莫衷一是。
English: At this time, Zhengtang of Liaodong reported to the imperial court, claiming that North Korea had made peace with the Great Qing Dynasty. The minister of the imperial court thought that this was a scheme of Li Qian to control the Great Qing Dynasty on the surface, but secretly to subordinate to the Great Qing Dynasty. He should send an official to announce it, or send a general to supervise it. There were various opinions, and there was no middle ground.

古文：珲疏辨： 二百年忠诚事大，死生一节。 
现代文：李珲上疏辩解说 ：二百年对明朝的忠诚是天下最大的事，是死是生关系到名节。 
English: Li Xuan explained defensively: "Two hundred years of loyalty to the Ming Dynasty is the greatest thing in the world. Whether you die or live is related to the name day.

古文：词极剀挚。
现代文：其言辞极为切实诚挚。
English: His words are very practical and sincere.

古文：礼、兵二部请降敕令晓谕，以安其心。
现代文：礼部、兵部都为此请求皇帝降敕令晓谕李珲，让他安心。
English: Both the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Ministry of Military Affairs requested the emperor to issue the imperial edict of abdication to Li Xi, to reassure him.

古文：帝是其议，然敕令陪臣往，不遣官也。
现代文：皇帝认为礼部、兵部的意见是对的，但不派官专门前去送敕令，而是让朝鲜的陪臣带回去。
English: The emperor thought that the opinions of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Ministry of Military Affairs were right, but he did not send an officer specifically to deliver the imperial edict, but let the North Korean vassal take it back.

古文：天启元年八月，改朝鲜贡道，自海至登州，直达京师。
现代文：天启元年八月，明朝廷改变了朝鲜上贡的线路，让他们从海路到登州，再直达京城。
English: In August of the first year of Tianqi, the Ming court changed the route of the North Korean tribute, allowing them to travel by sea to Dengzhou and then directly to Beijing.

古文：时毛文龙以总兵镇皮岛，招集逃民为兵，而仰给于朝鲜。
现代文：此时毛文龙以总兵的身份镇守皮岛，招集逃亡的百姓为兵，依靠朝鲜供给粮饷。
English: At this time, Mao Wenlong guarded Pi Dao as the commander-in-chief, called up fugitive civilians as soldiers, and relied on North Korea to supply grain.

古文：十一月，珲奏力难馈饷，乞循万历东征例，发运山东粟，从之。
现代文：十一月，李珲上奏说朝鲜国力难以负担这笔军饷，请求明朝廷遵循万历年间东征的事例，运送山东的粟米作为毛文龙军的军饷，皇帝同意。
English: In November, Premier Li Keqiang said that the national strength of the DPRK could not afford to pay the war bounty, and requested the Ming court to follow the example of the Eastern Expedition in the Wanli period and transport the millet from Shandong as the war bounty of the Mao Wenlong Army. The emperor agreed.

古文：三年四月，国人废珲而立其侄绫阳君倧，以昭敬王妃之命权国事，令议政府移文督抚转奏，文龙为之揭报。
现代文：三年四月，朝鲜国的国人废除了李珲的王位，拥立他的侄子绫阳君李亻宗，以昭敬王的王妃之命，让李亻宗权理朝鲜国事，让朝鲜政府移文给督抚，让督抚转奏明朝廷。
English: In April of the third year, the citizens of Korea abolished the throne of Ri Son Gwon, and supported his nephew, the prince of Suyang, Ri Son Gwon. By the order of the empress of the king, Ri Son Gwon was given the authority to manage the affairs of the Korean state, and the Korean government was transferred to the governor, and the governor was transferred to the Ming court.

古文：登州巡抚袁可立上言： 珲果不道，宜听太妃具奏，以待中国更立。 
现代文：毛文龙将此事揭发上报给了明朝廷。登州巡抚袁可立上奏说： 李珲果然有行不道之事，应听听朝鲜太妃的具体奏折后，等待中国来更立朝鲜国王。 
English: Mao Wenlong exposed the affair and reported it to the Ming court. Yuan Keli, the governor of Dengzhou, made a report saying, "Li Gan has indeed done something immoral. After listening to the specific report of the Korean princess, we should wait for China to reinstate the Korean king."

古文：疏留中。
现代文：袁可立的疏章被留在了中书省。
English: Yuan Keli's posthumous medal was left behind in Zhongshu.

古文：八月，王妃金氏疏请封倧，礼部尚书林尧俞言： 朝鲜废立之事，内外诸臣抒忠发愤，有谓宜声罪致讨者，有谓勿遽讨且受方贡核颠末者，或谓当责以大义，察舆情之向背者，或谓当令倧讨敌自洗者，众论咸有可采。
现代文：八月，朝鲜王妃金氏上疏，请求明朝廷封李亻宗为朝鲜国王，礼部尚书林尧俞上奏说 ：朝鲜废立国王之事，朝廷内外各位大臣都抒忠发愤，有的提议应声张他们的罪行而讨伐他们；有的提议不要急于讨伐而应接受他们的贡献，宽恕他们的末枝小错；有的说应当责令他们遵守大义，再察看国人的向背情况而定王位的；还有的提议应让李亻宗带兵去讨伐敌人替自己洗刷罪过的。这么多议论中都有可采用之处。
English: In August, the eldest daughter of the Korean princess Kim Il Sung petitioned the Ming court to crown Ri Son Jong as the king of Korea. The Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies wrote a report saying: "All the ministers inside and outside the court were outraged by the abdication of the king of Korea. Some suggested that they should denounce their crimes and fight them; some suggested that they should not rush to fight and should accept their contribution and forgive their minor mistakes; some said that they should be ordered to observe the great righteousness, and then look at the situation of the countrymen to determine the throne; there was also a proposal that Ri Son Jong should lead soldiers to fight the enemy and wash away his sins

古文：其谓珲实悖德，倧讨叛臣以赤心奉朝廷者，惟文龙一人耳。
现代文：而说李珲对明朝廷有逆悖之心，李亻宗是以赤心讨伐叛臣，忠心侍奉明朝廷的，只有毛文龙一人。
English: However, only Mao Wenlong is said to have had a rebellious heart towards the Ming Dynasty, while Li Shizong fought against traitors with a pure heart and served the Ming Dynasty loyally.

古文：皇上奉天讨逆，扶植纲常，此正法也。
现代文：皇上奉天意讨伐逆贼，扶植纲纪常规，是正法。
English: It is the Emperor's will to crack down on the traitors and establish the normal discipline, which is the true law.

古文：毋亦念彼素称恭顺，迥异诸裔，则更遣贞士信臣，会同文龙，公集臣民，再四询访。
现代文：姑且不念李珲对明朝廷素来恭顺，与各裔迥然不同，为今之道也应该另派忠贞于朝廷的有信誉的大臣，会同毛文龙一起，公开征集朝鲜臣民的意见，再三再四地询问访察为好。
English: Apart from the fact that Ri Su Yong has always been obedient to the Ming Dynasty and is very different from all other descendants, it would be a good idea to appoint a trustworthy minister who is loyal to the Imperial Court. Together with Mao Wenlong, they should openly solicit the opinions of the Korean subjects and repeatedly inquire and inspect.

古文：勘辨既明，再请圣断。 
现代文：等到情况审核辨别清楚后，再请示皇上做出圣断。 
English: Wait until the situation has been examined and discerned, and then ask the emperor to make a sacred decision.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十二月，礼部复上言： 臣前同兵部移咨登抚，并札毛师，遣官往勘。
现代文：十二月，礼部回复朝廷说： 此前我们和兵部一起移咨文到登州巡抚那里，并给毛文龙去信，让他们派遣官员前去朝鲜调查。
English: In December, the Ministry of Ceremonies replied to the Imperial Court, saying, "Previously, we, together with the Ministry of Military Affairs, sent a message to the governor of Dangzhou, and sent a letter to Mao Wenlong, asking them to send officials to North Korea to investigate.

古文：今据申送彼国公结十二道，自宗室至八道臣民共称倧为恭顺。
现代文：现今根据朝鲜国十二道公结之后申报上来的材料看，从王室宗族到八道的臣民都说李亻宗十分恭顺。
English: Nowadays, according to the materials declared after the public contract of the 12th province of Korea, the subjects from the royal family to the eight provinces all said that Ri Yong Zong was very obedient.

古文：且彼之陪臣相率哀吁，谓当此危急之秋，必须君国之主。
现代文：况且朝鲜国的陪臣也相率前来哀求呼吁，说当此危急之秋，必须有君临国政的主人。
English: Moreover, North Korea's vassals also came forward to appeal for help, saying that in this critical autumn, there must be a sovereign master of state affairs.

古文：乞先颁敕谕，令倧统理国事，仍令发兵索赋，同文龙设伏出奇，俟渐有次第，始遣重臣往正封典。
现代文：因此请求皇上先给他们颁发敕谕，让李亻宗统理国事，仍让他们出兵索讨赋税，与毛文龙一起设下埋伏出奇制胜。等到朝鲜的局势渐渐正常以后，再派重要大臣前去朝鲜正式举行册封典礼。
English: Therefore, he asked the emperor to issue an imperial edict to them first, let Ri Son Gwon take charge of state affairs, still let them send troops to collect taxes, and set up an ambush with Mao Wenlong to achieve a surprise victory. After the situation in North Korea gradually normalized, he would send important ministers to North Korea to officially hold the enthronement ceremony.

古文：庶几字小之中，不失固圉之道。 
现代文：这样做，也不失为巩固边疆之道。 
English: Doing so is also a way to consolidate the border.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四年四月，封倧为国王。
现代文：四年四月，明朝廷封李亻宗为朝鲜国王。
English: In April of the same year, the Ming court crowned Yi Sunjong as the king of Korea.

古文：五年十二月，文龙报： 朝鲜逆党李适、韩明琏等起兵昌城，直趋王京，被臣擒获。
现代文：五年十二月，毛文龙上报说： 朝鲜的叛逆之人李适和韩明琏等人在昌城起兵，直扑王京，被我擒获。
English: In December of the fifth year, Mao Wenlong reported: North Korea's traitors, Li Shih and Han Mingyao, raised an army in Changcheng, attacked Wangjing, and were captured by me.

古文：余孽韩润、郑梅等窜入建州，有左议府尹义立约为内应，期今冬大举犯朝鲜。
现代文：他们的余党韩润和郑梅等人逃入建州。他们与左议府尹义立约为内应，约定在今年冬天大举侵犯朝鲜。
English: Hanrun, Zhengmei and others of their remnant party fled to Gyeongju, and they made a secret agreement with the left-wing parliament, Yoon Il, to aggressively invade North Korea this winter.

古文：臣已咨国王防守，暂移铁山之众就云从岛柴薪。 
现代文：我已送咨文给朝鲜国王，让他加强防守，把铁山的百姓暂时移到云从岛来生活。 
English: I have sent a message to the king of North Korea, asking him to strengthen the defense and temporarily move the people of Iron Mountain to Yundao Island to live.

古文：登莱巡抚武之望奏： 毛帅自五月以来，营室于须弥，所谓云从岛是也。
现代文：登州、莱州的巡抚武之望上奏说： 毛文龙元帅从五月份以来，在须弥建造宫室，也就是所谓的云从岛。
English: Marshal Mao Wenlong has been building a palace in Shuya, also known as Yuncong Island, since May.

古文：今十月又徙兵民商贾以实之，而铁山之地空矣。
现代文：现今是十月他又在云从岛充实从外地迁来的军队、百姓和商贾，而铁山之地空虚了。
English: Now it's October, and he's filling Yunzongdao with troops, civilians, and merchants who have moved there from other places, while the Iron Mountain area is empty.

古文：故朝鲜各道疑其有逼处之嫌，甚至布兵以防御之。
现代文：所以朝鲜各道怀疑他有逼处之嫌，甚至还布好军队防备他。
English: As a result, all sides in North Korea suspect him of being under duress, and have even deployed troops to guard against him.

古文：今镇臣所称李适等之叛，尹义立之内应，臣等微闻之，而未敢遽信焉。
现代文：现今镇抚大臣所称的李适等人的叛乱，以及尹义立为内应之事，我们只稍有听说，而不敢太相信。
English: We have only heard a little about the rebellion of Li Shih and others, and about Yin Yili's role in it, which the Minister of Public Security is now claiming, but we can't quite believe it.

古文：信之则益重鲜人之疑，不信则恐贻后来之患。 
现代文：我们相信毛文龙之说，则更加重朝鲜人的怀疑，而不相信他的报告，又怕给将来贻下后患。 
English: If we believe what Mao Wenzhong said, the North Koreans will be more suspicious, but if we don't believe his report, we will be afraid of causing trouble for future leaders.

古文：兵部言： 牵制敌国者，朝鲜也；联属朝鲜者，毛镇也；驾驭毛镇者，登抚也。
现代文：兵部上奏说 ：牵制敌国的，是朝鲜；与朝鲜相联属的，是毛文龙；驾驭毛文龙的，是登州巡抚。
English: The report to the Ministry of Military Affairs said: It is the DPRK that holds back the enemy country; it is the Mao Wenlong that is affiliated with the DPRK; it is the Dengzhou governor that drives the Mao Wenlong.

古文：今抚臣与镇臣不和，以至镇臣与属国不和，大不利。 
现代文：现今巡抚大臣与镇守大臣不和，导致镇守大臣与属国不和，这样十分不利。 
English: At present, there is discord between the governor-general and the town guard minister, which has led to discord between the town guard minister and the vassal state, which is very unfavorable.

古文：帝乃饬勉镇抚同心，而韩润、尹义立等令朝鲜自处。
现代文：皇帝便敕令镇守大臣和巡抚大臣之间要同心同德，而韩润、尹义立的事听任朝鲜自己处理。
English: The emperor then ordered that the minister of the garrison and the minister of the governor should be of the same mind, and the matter of Hanrun and Yin Yili was left to North Korea to deal with.

古文：倧又请撤辽民安插中土，兵部言： 辽人去留，文龙是视。
现代文：李亻宗又请求朝廷将辽东的百姓撤回安插到中国境内，兵部上奏说： 辽东人的去留问题，由毛文龙决定。
English: Li Yingzong also requested the imperial court to withdraw the people from Liaodong and resettle them in China. The head of the Ministry of Military Affairs said: The question of whether the people from Liaodong should stay or leave was decided by Mao Wenlong.

古文：文龙一日不去，则辽人一日不离。
现代文：毛文龙一天不离开，则辽东人也一天不会离开。
English: If Mao Wenlong does not leave for a day, then the Liaodong people will not leave for a day.

古文：鲜人驱之入岛可也，驱之离岛不可也。
现代文：朝鲜人把他们赶入岛内可以，但要把他们从岛上赶出去则不行了。
English: The North Koreans can drive them into the island, but they can't drive them out.

古文：宜令镇臣将辽民尽刷过岛，登抚刻期运粮朝鲜，量行救振，以资屯牧。 
现代文：应让镇守大臣把辽东的百姓从岛上清理出来，让登州巡按官限期运粮食到朝鲜，给当地辽东人施行救赈，以帮助他们发展生产。 
English: The town guard minister should be asked to clear the people of Liaodong from the island, and the state inspector should be allowed to transport grain to North Korea within the time limit, and rescue the local Liaodong people to help them develop production.

古文：帝是之。
现代文：皇帝以此为是。
English: The emperor thought it was right.

古文：六年十月，倧上疏曰：
现代文：六年十月，李亻宗向明朝廷上疏说：
English: In October of the sixth year, Li Yanzong said to the court of the Ming Dynasty:

古文：皇朝之于小邦，覆帱之恩，视同服内。
现代文： 皇朝对于小邦有复国之恩，将我们小邦视同国内。
English: The imperial dynasty had the grace of restoration for small countries, and regarded our small countries as domestic countries.

古文：顷遭昏乱，潜通敌国，皇天震怒，降黜厥命。
现代文：不久前小邦国王昏乱，暗通敌国，致使皇朝天子震怒，降旨废黜了小邦国王。
English: Not long ago, the king of a small state was confused and colluded with an enemy country, which made the emperor angry and deposed the king of a small state.

古文：臣自权署之初，不敢遑宁，即命陪臣张晚为帅，李适副之，付以国中精锐，进屯宁边，一听毛镇节制，以候协剿之期。
现代文：我自从权理小邦国事之初，就不敢安宁，马上派陪臣张晚为元帅，李适为副元帅，将我们小国中的精锐之师交付给他们，让他们进驻到宁州边境，一切听从毛文龙镇守大臣的节制，以等候与皇朝军队一起进剿敌人。
English: Since the beginning of the small country's rise to power, I have not dared to be at peace. I immediately sent my vassals Zhang Huan as a marshal and Li Si as a deputy marshal, and handed over to them the elite division of our small country, allowing them to enter the Ningzhou border, all subject to the restraint of Mao Wenlong, Minister of Town Guard, to wait with the imperial army to invade the enemy.

古文：而适重兵在握，潜蓄觊觎，遂与龟城府使明琏举兵内叛，直犯京城。
现代文：而李适重兵在握之后，暗中蓄有觊觎之心，于是便与龟城的府使韩明琏一起起兵叛乱，直接进犯京城。
English: However, after Li Shihong's capture, he secretly harbored a grudge, so he and Han Mingyao, the governor of Guicheng, started a mutiny and directly attacked the capital.

古文：晚收余兵蹑其后，与京辅官兵表里夹攻，贼皆授首，而西边军实及列镇储偫罄于是役矣。
现代文：张晚收集残余军队跟踪其后，与京辅官兵一起对李适的叛军内外夹攻，叛贼全部抓获。但是我们国家西部边疆的军力以及各镇的储备物资在这次战役中也全部消耗殆尽了。
English: Zhang Ye collected the remnants of the army, followed them, and together with the Kiev auxiliary officers and soldiers, launched a pincer attack on Li Si's rebels inside and outside, and the traitors were all captured. However, the military strength of the western border of our country and the reserve materials of each town were all exhausted in this battle.

古文：毛镇当全辽沦没之后，孤军东渡，寄寓海上，招集辽民前后数十万，亦小邦所仰藉也。
现代文： 镇守大臣毛文龙在辽东全部沦陷后，孤军东渡，寄寓于海上，先后招集了数十万辽东的逃亡百姓为兵，这也是我们小邦所仰藉的力量。
English: After the fall of all of Liaodong, Mao Wenlong, the minister of the town guard, led a lone army to the east and stayed at sea. He successively called up hundreds of thousands of fleeing people from Liaodong as soldiers. This is also the strength that our small country relies on.

古文：顾以封疆多故，土瘠民贫，内供本国之军需，外济镇兵之待哺，生谷有限，支给实难。
现代文：但是考虑到我们国家变故太多，土地贫瘠百姓穷困，内要供应本国的军需，对外又要负担镇守大臣的军队，生产的粮食有限，实在是难以支给了。
English: However, considering that our country has changed too much, the land is poor and the people are poor, we have to supply our own military supplies internally, and we have to bear the burden of the town guard minister's army to the outside world, the production of grain is limited, it is really difficult to pay.

古文：辽民迫于饥馁，散布村落，强者攫夺，弱者丐乞。
现代文：辽东的百姓为饥饿所迫，散布在各村落之中，强者攫夺当地百姓的粮食，弱者则行乞讨生活。
English: Forced by hunger, the people of Liaodong are scattered among various villages. The strong rob the local people of food, while the weak go begging.

古文：小邦兵民被挠不堪，抛弃乡邑，转徙内地。
现代文：我们小国的军民不堪忍受他们的骚扰，背井离乡，往内地转展迁徙。辽东的百姓也随着进入了内地。
English: The soldiers and civilians of our small country could not bear their harassment, so they left their hometowns and moved inland. The people of Liaodong also moved inland.

古文：辽民逐食，亦随而入。自昌、义以南，安、肃以北，客居六七，主居三四。
现代文：从昌城、义州以南到安州、肃州以北，迁徙过来的客人占了六七成，而当地的主人只占了三四成。
English: From the south of Changcheng and Yizhou to the north of Anzhou and Suzhou, the guests who migrated accounted for 67%, while the local owners only accounted for 30-40%.

古文：向者将此情形具奏，见兵部题覆处分已定，何敢再干。
现代文：以往曾将此情形具体上奏给朝廷，看见兵部给此事的处理已经决定，所以不敢再行干预。
English: In the past, he had reported this situation to the imperial court, and seeing that the military department had already decided how to handle the matter, he did not dare to intervene again.

古文：至韩润及弟潭系逆贼明琏子侄，亡命潜逃，因而勾引来寇。
现代文： 至于韩润和他的弟弟韩潭，都是叛逆贼人韩明琏的儿子和侄子，亡命潜逃在外，因而将敌寇勾引而来。
English: As for Han Run and his brother Han Tan, they were the sons and nephews of the traitorous thief Han Mingyu, who had fled into exile and thus lured the enemy bandits here.

古文：贼既叛国而去，制命已不在臣。
现代文：贼人既然已背叛国家而逃，对他们的制命已不掌握在我手里了。
English: Since the thieves have betrayed the country and fled, I no longer have control over their lives.

古文：尹义立曾任判书，本非议政。
现代文：尹义立曾任判书职位，本来就不是议政之官。
English: Yin Yili once held the post of adjudicator, and was not originally a deliberation officer.

古文：顷年差为毛镇接伴官，不称任使，褫职归家，并无怨叛之事。
现代文：他近年当差充任镇守大臣毛文龙的接伴官，因不称职，被褫夺官职回家，并无怨恨反叛之事。
English: In recent years, he served as the escort officer of the town guard minister, Mao Wenlong. Due to his incompetence, he was deprived of his official position and sent home. There was no resentment or rebellion.

古文：毛镇据王仲保等所诉，都无实事。
现代文：毛文龙镇守大臣根据王仲保等人的诉说，其实都不是事实。
English: According to Wang Zhongbao and others, the claims made by Mao Wenlong, Minister of Town Defense, are not true.

古文：意必有谗邪之臣，欺妄督抚，以售其交构之计者。
现代文：我想肯定是有谗邪之臣，欺骗督抚大臣，以兜售其交构离间之计。
English: I think it is certain that there is a scheming minister, deceiving the supervising minister, in order to peddle his divisive strategy.

古文：毛帅久镇海外，臣与周旋已近十稔。
现代文： 毛文龙元帅长期镇守海外，我与他打交道已有十年。
English: Marshal Mao Wenlong has been overseas for a long time. I have been dealing with him for ten years.

古文：虽饩牵将竭，彼此俱困，而情谊之殷，实无少损。
现代文：虽然生活中的肉食将绝，我们都被此所困，但彼此间的情谊之深，没受丝毫损失。
English: Although the carnivorous life will be extinct, we are all trapped by this, but the depth of the friendship between each other has not suffered the slightest loss.

古文：且其须弥之迁，直为保护累重，将以就便刍薪。
现代文：况且他迁驻到须弥，是为了保护手下的军民，让他们可就近取食而已。
English: Moreover, he moved to Suya in order to protect the soldiers and civilians under his command, so that they could get food nearby.

古文：一进一退，兵家常事。
现代文：此一进一退，本是兵家常事。
English: This back and forth is a common occurrence in the military.

古文：讹言噂沓，本不介意。
现代文：讹言很多，我本不介意。
English: There was a lot of abuse, which I didn't mind.

古文：窃见部抚移咨曰 虞其逼处 ，曰 驱其民，驱其帅 ，甚至有 布兵以防，属国携贰 之语，似海外情事，未尽谅悉。
现代文：后来看到兵部督抚移交过来的咨文中有 虞其逼处 ， 驱其民，驱其帅 ，甚至还有 布兵以防，属国怀有二心 等语，似乎是讲海外的情况，料想朝廷可能还不了解全部情况。
English: Later, I saw that in the message handed over by the superintendent of the military department, there were words such as "fear of being forced to do something," "driving away its people," "driving away its commander," and even "setting up troops to prevent," "belonging to the country" and "having second thoughts," which seemed to be talking about the situation overseas, suggesting that the imperial court might not yet understand the full situation.

古文：臣之请刷辽民，因力不足济，初非虑及逼处也。
现代文：我之所以请求朝廷清理辽东的百姓，是因为无力供养他们，原先并没有考虑逼处之事。
English: The reason why I asked the imperial court to clean up the people in Liaodong Province was because I couldn't afford to feed them, and I hadn't originally considered forcing them to do so.

古文：臣方与毛镇同心一力，建功报主，岂敢有一毫猜防意乎。
现代文：我正与毛文龙元帅一起同心协力，建功报答君主，岂敢有一丝一毫的猜防之意？ 
English: I am making a concerted effort with Marshal Mao Wenlong to repay the monarch for his services. How dare I have the slightest suspicion?

古文：帝报曰： 王和协东镇，爱戴中朝，忠贞之忱，溢乎言表。
现代文：皇帝看了疏章以后说 ：朝鲜国王与辽东镇守大臣和睦协力，爱戴中朝两国，其对朝廷的忠贞之情，溢于言表。
English: After reading the epitaph, the emperor said, "The King of Korea and the Minister of Liaodong Province have worked in harmony and cooperation. He loves China and North Korea, and his loyalty to the imperial court is beyond words."

古文：镇军久悬，鲜、辽杂处。
现代文：镇守之军久悬海外，朝鲜人和辽东人杂处一起。
English: The garrison troops have been overseas for a long time, and Koreans and Liaodong people are everywhere together.

古文：久客累主，生寡食多。
现代文：久客累主，生产少而食客多。
English: Long-term customers are tiring, production is low and diners are many.

古文：微王言，朕有不坐照万里之外者。
现代文：如果不是你朝鲜国王说，我还无法坐照万里之外的情况。
English: If it wasn't for you, the king of North Korea said, I wouldn't be able to see the situation from a million miles away.

古文：然毛帅在中朝为牵制之师，在王国则唇齿之形也。
现代文：但是毛文龙元帅对中朝两国来说，是牵制敌国的军旅；对你们朝鲜国来说则是形同唇齿。
English: But for China and North Korea, Marshal Mao Wenlong is a military brigade to contain the enemy country; for you, North Korea, it is the same as lips and teeth.

古文：海上刍輓，已令该部区画，刻期运济。
现代文：海上守军所需的粮草，我已命令兵部和户部筹划，限期运到。
English: I have ordered the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior to plan for the grain and grass needed by the naval garrison, and to deliver it by the deadline.

古文：逃难边民，亦令毛帅悉心计处，俾无重为王累。
现代文：逃难出来流入你们国家的边境百姓，也让毛文龙元帅悉心计划安排，使他们不成为你的累赘。
English: Let Marshal Mao Wenlong carefully plan and arrange for the people who have fled and flowed into your country's border, so that they do not become a burden to you.

古文：传讹之言，未足介怀，并力一心，王其勉之。 
现代文：讹传之言，不必挂心，你们应合力同心，好自为之。 
English: As the saying goes, you don't have to worry about it. You should work together as a team to do it yourself.

古文：七年三月，兵部上文龙揭言： 丽官、丽人招敌攻铁山，伤我兵千人，杀丽兵六万，焚粮百余万，敌遂移兵攻丽矣。 
现代文：七年三月，兵部将毛文龙的揭报上奏皇帝 ：高丽的官员中有些人招引敌人攻打铁山，打伤了我军一千人，杀死了六万高丽士兵，焚毁粮食百余万石，现敌人正移兵攻打高丽。 
English: In March of the seventh year, the military department reported the revelation of Mao Wenlong to the emperor: Some of the Goryeo officials invited the enemy to attack the Iron Mountain, injured a thousand of our army, killed sixty thousand Goryeo soldiers, and burned more than one million stones of grain. Now the enemy is moving troops to attack Goryeo.

古文：帝敕文龙速相机应援。
现代文：皇帝敕令毛文龙尽快相机救援他们。
English: The emperor ordered Mao Wenlong to rescue them as soon as possible.

古文：登抚李嵩奏： 朝鲜叛臣韩润等引敌入安州，节度使南以兴自焚死，中国援兵都司王三桂等俱阵亡。 
现代文：登州巡抚李嵩上奏说 ：朝鲜的叛臣韩润等，招引敌人攻打安州，节度使南以兴自焚而死，中国援兵的都司王三桂等人也都阵亡。 
English: The governor of Danzhou, Li Song, said in his report: North Korea's traitor Han Run and others lured the enemy to attack Anzhou, and the festival caused Nan Yixing to self-immolate and die, and the Chinese reinforcement officer Wang Sangui and others were also killed.

古文：既复奏： 义州及郭山、凌汉、山城俱破，平壤、黄州不战自溃，敌兵直抵中和，游骑出入黄、凤之间，又分向云从，攻掠毛帅，国王及士民迁于江华以避难。 
现代文：不久又上奏说： 义州和郭山、凌汉、山城都已被敌攻破，平壤、黄州也不战自溃，敌兵已直抵中和，其游击骑兵已在黄州、凤凰城之间出入，并派兵向云从岛进发，攻打毛文龙元帅，朝鲜的国王和士民都迁徙到江华避难。 
English: It was soon reported that: Yizhou and Guoshan, Linghan and Shancheng had all been broken by the enemy, Pyongyang and Huangzhou had also been defeated, the enemy soldiers had arrived directly in Zhonghe, and their guerrilla cavalry had entered and exited between Huangzhou and Phoenix City, and sent troops to the island of Yunnan to attack Marshal Mao Wenlong. The king and people of Korea had migrated to Jianghua for refuge.

古文：时大清兵所至辄下，朝鲜列城望风奔溃，乃遣使谕倧。
现代文：这时大清的军队所到之处，朝鲜的各城都望风奔溃，于是大清便派使者谕告李亻宗，李亻宗向大清投诚，大清才退兵。
English: At this time, wherever the Qing army went, all the cities in Korea were on the verge of collapse, so the Qing sent an envoy to Li Yanzong. Li Yanzong surrendered to the Qing, and the Qing only withdrew.

古文：倧输款，遂班师。九月，倧奏被兵情形。
现代文：九月，李亻宗向明朝廷上奏讲述了遭大清军队侵略的情况。
English: In September, Li Yanzong made a report to the Ming court, describing the situation of being invaded by the Qing army.

古文：时熹宗崩，庄烈帝嗣位，优诏励勉焉。
现代文：这时熹宗皇帝死，庄烈帝即皇帝位，下诏对李亻宗勉励一番。
English: At this time Emperor Yongzong died, Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, and the following edict was issued to encourage Li Yongzong.

古文：崇祯二年，改每岁两贡为一贡。
现代文：崇祯二年，朝廷将朝鲜的每年进贡两次改为每年一次。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, the imperial court changed the annual tribute of North Korea from twice a year to once a year.

古文：先是，辽路阻绝，贡使取道登、莱，已十余年矣。
现代文：此前，辽东的道路阻绝，朝鲜的贡使只能取道于登州和莱州，这样已持续了十多年了。
English: Previously, Liaodong's roads were blocked, and North Korea's envoys could only travel through Dengzhou and Laizhou. This has been going on for more than a decade.

古文：自袁崇焕督师，题改觉华，迂途冒险，其国屡请复故。
现代文：从袁崇焕督军之后，让他们改走觉华。由于该路迂回曲折且多危险，朝鲜国屡次请求恢复从登州和莱州道路上贡。
English: After Yuan Chonghwan's army was defeated, they were forced to march to Jecheonhwa. Due to the circuitous and dangerous route, North Korea has repeatedly requested the resumption of the tribute from the roads of Dongju and Laizhou.

古文：至是遣户曹判书郑斗源从登海来，移书登抚孙元化，属其陈请。
现代文：至此朝鲜便派户曹判书郑斗源从登州海路过来，移书给登州巡抚孙元化，嘱咐他向明朝廷陈请此事。
English: At this point, the DPRK sent the judgment of the House of Cao to Zheng Douyuan, who came from the sea route of Danzhou, transferred the document to the governor of Danzhou, Sun Yuanhua, and ordered him to report the matter to the Ming court.

古文：元化委官伴送，仍疏闻。
现代文：孙元化就派遣官员伴送郑斗源进京城，向皇帝上疏奏闻此事。
English: Sun Yuanhua sent officials to escort Zheng Douyuan to Beijing and reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：帝以水路既有成命，改途嫌于自便，不许。
现代文：皇帝认为在水路方面已有成命，改途不好，便没有答应。
English: The emperor did not agree to change the route, believing that he had already succeeded in the waterway.

古文：是年六月，督师袁崇焕杀平辽将军左都督毛文龙于双岛。
现代文：该年六月，督师袁崇焕在双岛杀死了平辽将军、左都督毛文龙。
English: In June of that year, the inspector Yuan Chonghuan killed the general Ping Liao and the left governor Mao Wenlong in Shuangdao.

古文：六年六月，倧遗书总兵黄龙言： 文龙旧将孔有德、耿仲明率士卒二万投顺大清，向朝鲜征粮。
现代文：六年六月，李亻宗传书给总兵黄龙说 ：毛文龙的部将孔有德、耿仲明率领士卒二万投顺了大清，现向朝鲜征粮。
English: In June of the sixth year, Li Yanzong sent a letter to General Huang Long saying: "Mao Wenlong's generals, Kong Youde and Geng Zhongming, led 20,000 soldiers to surrender to the Qing Dynasty, and are now collecting grain from Korea.

古文：本国以有德等曩在皮岛为本国患，故未之应。 
现代文：本国认为孔有德等人以往在皮岛时就已是本国的祸患，所以没答应他。 
English: The country believed that Kong Youde and others had already been a scourge to the country when they were on Pi Dao, so they did not allow him to leave.

古文：龙以闻。
现代文：黄龙将此上报给了朝廷。
English: Huanglong reported this to the imperial court.

古文：十年正月，太宗文皇帝亲征朝鲜，责其渝盟助明之罪，列城悉溃。
现代文：十年正月，清太宗文皇帝亲自率兵征讨朝鲜，责备他们违反盟约帮助明朝的罪行。朝鲜各城军民全部溃逃。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, Emperor Taizongwen of the Qing Dynasty personally led an army to invade North Korea, accusing them of violating the treaty and helping the Ming Dynasty. All the soldiers and civilians in all the cities of North Korea fled.

古文：朝鲜告急，命总兵陈洪范调各镇舟师赴援。
现代文：朝鲜向明朝廷告急，明朝廷命令总兵陈洪范调遣各镇的水军前去援救。
English: North Korea sent an urgent appeal to the Ming court, which ordered General Chen Hongfan to dispatch naval forces from various towns to come to the rescue.

古文：三月，洪范奏官兵出海。
现代文：三月，陈洪范上奏说官军已经出海。
English: In March, Chen Hongfan reported that the government troops had gone to sea.

古文：越数日，山东巡抚颜继祖奏属国失守，江华已破，世子被擒，国王出降。
现代文：又过了几天，山东巡抚颜继祖上奏说朝鲜国已经失守，江华已被攻破，朝鲜的世子被大清擒获，国王出降。
English: A few days later, Yan Jizzu, the governor of Shandong Province, reported that the Korean kingdom had been lost, the Yangtze River had been breached, the heir of Korea had been captured by the Qing Dynasty, and the king had surrendered.

古文：今大治舟舰，来攻皮岛、铁山，其锋甚锐。
现代文：现今大清正大造船舰，进攻皮岛和铁山，其锋甚锐。
English: At present, the Qing Dynasty is building a large number of warships, attacking Pi Dao and Tie Shan, and its front is very sharp.

古文：宜急敕沈世魁、陈洪范二镇臣，以坚守皮岛为第一义。
现代文：应急忙敕令沈世魁、陈洪范二位镇守大臣，要他们以坚守皮岛为第一要义。
English: In an emergency, Shen Shikui and Chen Hongfan, the two town guard ministers, were hastily ordered to hold on to Pi Dao as their first priority.

古文：帝以继祖不能协图匡救，切责之。
现代文：皇帝则认为颜继祖不能协助他匡扶国家救护百姓，深切地责备了他。
English: The emperor thought that Yan Jizhu could not help him save the country and the people, and reproached him deeply.

古文：亡何，皮岛并为大清兵所破，朝鲜遂绝，不数载而明亦亡矣。
现代文：不久，皮岛也被大清的军队所攻破，朝鲜便灭绝了，没过几年明朝也灭亡了。
English: Soon, Pi Dao was also invaded by the Qing army, and Korea became extinct. A few years later, the Ming Dynasty also perished.

古文：朝鲜在明虽称属国，而无异域内。故朝贡络绎，锡赉便蕃，殆不胜书，止著其有关治乱者于篇。
现代文：朝鲜之于明朝，虽然是属国，但与国内没什么区别，所以朝鲜对朝廷的上贡络绎不绝，而朝廷对他们的赏赉也是不胜其书。这里只著有关朝鲜的治乱情况。
English: Although North Korea was a vassal state of the Ming Dynasty, it was treated no differently from the rest of the country, so the North Korean tribute to the imperial court was incessant, and the imperial court's appreciation of them was unparalleled.

古文：至国之风土物产，则具载前史，兹不复录。
现代文：至于该国的风土物产都在以前篇章中已有所述，在此不赘。
English: As for the country's customs and products, all of which have been described in previous chapters, there is nothing new here.

