古文：王浑，字玄冲，太原晋阳人也。
现代文：王浑，字玄冲，太原晋阳人。
English: Wang Hun, Zha Xuan Chong, Taiyuan Jinyang people.

古文：父昶，魏司空。
现代文：父亲王昶，是魏司空。
English: His father, Wang Yao, was Wei Sikuo.

古文：浑沈雅有器量。
现代文：王浑深沉儒雅有器量。
English: Wang Hunshen is a refined and elegant person.

古文：袭父爵京陵侯，辟大将军曹爽掾。
现代文：承袭了父亲京陵候的爵位，被征为大将军曹爽的属官。
English: He inherited his father's peerage of the Imperial mausoleum, and was enlisted as a subordinate officer of the great general Cao Shuang.

古文：爽诛，随例免。
现代文：曹爽被诛，依惯例被免官。
English: Cao Shuang was arrested and removed from office according to the usual procedure.

古文：起为怀令，参文帝安东军事，累迁散骑黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：起用为怀令，参文帝安束军事，逐渐升迁任散骑黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as a courtier, a military retainer of Emperor Anzong, and was gradually promoted to the posts of horseback riding attendant of the Yellow Gate and horseback riding regular attendant.

古文：咸熙中为越骑校尉。
现代文：咸熙年间任越骑校尉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianxi, he served as a captain of the Yue cavalry.

古文：武帝受禅，加扬烈将军，迁徐州刺史。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，加封王浑为扬烈将军，迁任徐州刺史。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation, and promoted Wang Hun to the rank of general and moved him to Xuzhou.

古文：时年荒岁饥，浑开仓振赡，百姓赖之。
现代文：当时遇上灾荒饥馑，王浑开仓赈济，百姓依赖他。
English: At that time, in the face of disaster, famine and famine, Wang Hun opened a warehouse to provide aid, and the people relied on him.

古文：泰始初，增封邑千八百户。
现代文：泰始初年，增加封邑一千八百户。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, the number of fiefs increased by 1,800.

古文：久之，迁东中郎将，监淮北诸军事，镇许昌。
现代文：一段时间后，迁任东中郎将，监淮北诸军事，镇守注昌。
English: After a period of time, he was transferred to the post of Dongzhongro General, Supervisor of Huaibei Military, and Town Guard of Chuchang.

古文：数陈损益，多见纳用。
现代文：屡次陈述治国方略，多被采纳。
English: The strategy for governing the country has been repeatedly stated, and most of it has been adopted.

古文：转征虏将军、监豫州诸军事、假节，领豫州刺史。
现代文：转任征虏将军、监豫州诸军事、假节，兼豫蛆刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of conscript general, supervising the military affairs of Yuzhou, the false festival, and the history of Yuzhou.

古文：浑与吴接境，宣布威信，前后降附甚多。
现代文：型更的管辖地与县边境相连，他宣布威信，前后来投降依附的人很多。
English: The jurisdiction of the type is more connected with the county border, he announced prestige, and there are many people who have surrendered and attached themselves.

古文：吴将薛莹、鲁淑众号十万，淑向弋阳，莹向新息。
现代文：吴将薛莹、鲁淑的军队号称十万，鲁淑军向弋阳，薛莹军向新皇。
English: Wu led the armies of Xue Ying and Lu Shuxu to a reputed 100,000 men, Lu Shuxu's army marched to Shenyang, and Xue Ying's army marched to the new emperor.

古文：时州兵并放休息，众裁一旅，浮淮潜济，出其不意，莹等不虞晋师之至。
现代文：当时州兵都放假休息，军队衹有一旅人，王浑用船悄悄渡过进回，出其不意，莹等人没料到置军的到来。
English: At that time, the National Guard was on vacation, and the army had only one traveler. Wang Hun used a boat to quietly cross back and forth. Unexpectedly, Ying and others did not expect the arrival of the army.

古文：浑击破之，以功封次子尚为关内侯。
现代文：王浑打败他们，因有功封王浑的次子王尚为关内侯。
English: Wang Hun defeated them, and Wang Shang, the second son of Wang Hun, was made the governor of Guanai.

古文：迁安东将军、都督扬州诸军事，镇寿春。
现代文：迁任安东将军、都督扬州诸军事，镇守寿春。
English: He was transferred to General Anton, the military governor of Yangzhou, and the town guardian of Shuchun.

古文：吴人大佃皖城，图为边害。
现代文：吴人大规模在皖城屯田，图谋在边境制造祸害。
English: The Wu people massed in Tongcheng Tunden and plotted to create havoc at the border.

古文：浑遣扬州刺史应绰督淮南诸军攻破之，并破诸别屯，焚其积谷百八十余万斛、稻苗四千余顷、船六百余艘。
现代文：王浑派遣扬州刺史应绰督统进南各军攻破他们，并且攻破了另外的一些军屯，焚烧了吴人积储的谷物一百八十多万斛、稻苗四千多顷、船六百多艘。
English: Wang Hun dispatched Yangzhou Zhishi Yingzhuo to lead the armies into the south to defeat them, and also defeated some other military camps, and burned more than 1.8 million mu of grain, more than 4,000 hectares of rice seedlings and more than 600 ships accumulated by the Wu people.

古文：浑遂陈兵东疆，视其地形险易，历观敌城，察攻取之势。
现代文：王运于是在东部边境陈兵，了解地形的险易，逐个地观看敌城，考察攻取的形势。
English: Wang Yun then sent troops to the eastern border, learned about the dangers of the terrain, watched the enemy cities one by one, and examined the situation of the attack.

古文：及大举伐吴，浑率师出横江，遣参军陈慎、都尉张乔攻寻阳濑乡，又击吴牙门将孔忠，皆破之，获吴将周兴等五人。
现代文：等到大规模讨伐吴国，王浑率军队从横江出兵，派遣参军陈慎、都尉张乔攻打寻阳濑乡，又攻击吴牙门将孔忠，都打败了他们，俘获吴将周兴等五人。
English: Waiting for the large-scale crusade against the State of Wu, Wang Hun led the army to send troops from the Yangtze River, dispatched Chen Shen and Lieutenant Zhang Qiao, who joined the army, to attack the village of Xuanyang, and also attacked the gatekeeper of the State of Wu, Kong Zhong. They all defeated them, and captured Wu general Zhou Xing and five others.

古文：又遣殄吴护军李纯据高望城，讨吴将俞恭，破之，多所斩获。
现代文：又派遣殄吴护军李纯占据高望城，讨伐吴将俞恭，打败了他，斩杀俘获很多。
English: He also dispatched Li Chun, the guardian of Wu, to occupy Gaowang City. He fought against Wu Zheng, defeated him, and killed and captured many people.

古文：吴历武将军陈代、平虏将军硃明惧而来降。
现代文：吴厉武将军陈代、平虏将军朱明因恐惧而来投降。
English: Wu Liwu's general Chen Dai and Pingrui's general Zhu Ming surrendered out of fear.

古文：吴丞相张悌、大将军孙震等率众数万指城阳，浑遣司马孙畴、扬州刺史周浚击破之，临阵斩二将，及首虏七千八百级，吴人大震。
现代文：吴丞相张悌、大将军孙震等人率兵数万向城阳进发，王浑派遣司马孙畴、扬州刺史周浚打败他们，在阵前杀死两员将领，并斩首七千八百人，吴人十分恐惧。
English: Wuzhen's minister of war Zhang Ye and general Sun Zhen led tens of thousands of soldiers to march towards Chengyang. Wang Hun dispatched Sima Sun Zhen and Yangzhou's general Zhou Jun to defeat them, killing two generals before the battle and beheading 7,800 people. The people of Wuzhen were very afraid.

古文：孙皓司徒何植、建威将军孙晏送印节诣浑降。
现代文：孙皓的司徒何植、建威将军孙晏送官印符节到王浑那裹投降。
English: Sun Yat-sen's disciple He Zhi and Jian Wei's general Sun Yat-sen sent official seals to Wang Hun-na and surrendered.

古文：既而王濬破石头，降孙皓，威名益振。
现代文：后来王浚攻破石头，使孙皓投降，威望名声更大。
English: Later, Wang Jun broke through the stone and made Sun Yat-sen surrender, and his prestige and reputation became even greater.

古文：明日，浑始济江，登建鄴宫，酾酒高会。
现代文：第二天，王浑才渡江，登上建邺宫，摆酒宴聚会。
English: The next day, Wang Hunjie crossed the river, boarded the Jianye Palace, and held a wine banquet.

古文：自以先据江上，破皓中军，案甲不进，致在王濬之后。
现代文：自认为先占据江上，攻破孙皓的中军，按兵不动，招致落在王浚之后。
English: They thought that they would occupy the river first and defeat Sun Yat-sen's Chinese army, but they did not move their troops, causing them to fall behind Wang Jun.

古文：意甚愧恨，有不平之色，频奏濬罪状，时人讥之。
现代文：心中很是惭愧忌恨，有不服气的样子，屡次奏报王浚的罪状，当时的人讥讽他。
English: In his heart, he was ashamed, disgusted, and unconvinced. He repeatedly reported Wang Jun's crime, and people at the time mocked him.

古文：帝下诏曰： 使持节、都督扬州诸军事、安东将军、京陵侯王浑，督率所统，遂逼秣陵，令贼孙皓救死自卫，不得分兵上赴，以成西军之功，又摧大敌，获张悌，使皓途穷势尽，面缚乞降。
现代文：皇帝下诏书说： 使持节、都督扬州诸军事、安东将军、京陵侯王浑，督率他的军队，进逼秣陵，使得敌人孙皓救死自卫，无法分兵奔赴上游，从而成就了西军的功业。又摧毁大敌，俘获张悌，使得孙皓穷途末路，自缚乞求投降。
English: The emperor's edict said: "Enable Jichijie, the military governor of Yangzhou, General Anton, and Wang Hun, the marquis of Jingling, to lead his army and advance into Fuling, make the enemy Sun Yat-sen save his life in self-defense, unable to send troops upstream, thus achieving the cause of the Western Army. And destroy the great enemy, capture Zhang Yat-sen, make Sun Yat-sen have no choice but to beg for surrender."

古文：遂平定秣陵，功勋茂著。
现代文：于是平定秣陵，功勋显赫。
English: As a result, Baling was pacified, which was a great achievement.

古文：其增封八千户，进爵为公，封子澄为亭侯、弟湛为关内侯，赐绢八千匹。 
现代文：增加封邑八干户，进升爵位为公，封他的儿子王澄为亭侯、弟弟王湛为关内侯，赐绢八千匹。 
English: He increased the fiefs of eight khan households, promoted the title of nobility to the prince, appointed his son Wang Cheng as the prince of Ting, and his brother Wang Zhan as the prince of Guan, and bestowed eight thousand horses.

古文：转征东大将军，复镇寿阳。
现代文：转任征束大将军，又镇守寿阳。
English: He was transferred to the post of Conscript Major General, and also became the town guard of Shouyang.

古文：浑不尚刑名，处断明允。
现代文：王浑不崇尚刑法名分，处事决断公正。
English: Wang Hun does not advocate criminal law, and his decisions are impartial.

古文：时吴人新附，颇怀畏惧。
现代文：当时吴人刚刚归附，很是有畏惧之心。
English: At that time, the people of Wu had just been annexed and were very fearful.

古文：浑抚循羁旅，虚怀绥纳，座无空席，门不停宾。
现代文：王浑安抚外乡人，诚心安慰接纳，座上没有空着的席位，门前没有滞留的宾客。
English: Wang Hun pacified the foreigners and sincerely consoled and accepted them. There were no vacant seats on the table and no guests lingering in front of the door.

古文：于是江东之士莫不悦附。
现代文：于是江束的人士没有不喜悦依附的。
English: As a result, the people of Jiangsu did not reluctantly follow suit.

古文：征拜尚书左仆射，加散骑常侍。
现代文：征召授官为尚书左仆射，加任散骑常侍。
English: The conscript awarding officer was Shangshu Zuofu, and the roving equestrian attendant was Rong.

古文：会朝臣立议齐王攸当之籓，浑上书谏曰： 伏承圣诏，宪章古典，进齐王攸为上公，崇其礼仪，遣攸之国。
现代文：适逢朝臣议论齐王司马攸当去藩国，王浑上书劝谏说：恭敬地接受诏书，效法古代典章，进升齐王司马攸为上公，崇盛对他的礼仪，派司马攸赴藩国。
English: At a time when the courtiers were discussing whether Qi Wang Sima You should go to the domain, Wang Hun sent a letter to persuade them to: respectfully accept the imperial decree, follow the ancient ceremony, promote Qi Wang Sima You to the position of Shangguo, respect his etiquette, and send Sima You to the domain.

古文：昔周氏建国，大封诸姬，以籓帝室，永世作宪。
现代文：过去周氏建国，大封姬姓，用以屏蔽王室，世世代代效法。
English: In the past, when the Zhou Dynasty founded the country, the surname of Dafeng Ji was used to shield the royal family, and it has been imitated for generations.

古文：至于公旦，武王之弟，左右王事，辅济大业，不使归籓。
现代文：至于公旦，是远王的弟弟，掌管王事，辅佐大业，不让他去藩国。
English: As for Gongdan, he was Yuan Wang's younger brother, in charge of royal affairs, and an assistant to Daye, and he was not allowed to go to the domain.

古文：明至亲义著，不可远朝故也。
现代文：说明至亲道义显著，不能远离朝廷的缘故。
English: This shows that he has a strong sense of family ethics and cannot stay away from the imperial court.

古文：是故周公得以圣德光弼幼主，忠诚著于《金縢》，光述文武仁圣之德。
现代文：因此周公得以用圣德光耀佐助幼君，忠诚记载在《金滕》中，光大遵循文王、武仁义圣明的美德。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gong was able to use the holy virtues to shine on Sasuke, and his loyalty was recorded in the "Golden Ten," and he followed the virtues of King Wen, Wu Ren Yi and Shen Ming.

古文：攸于大晋，姬旦之亲也。
现代文：司马攸对于大晋，如同姬旦那种亲近关系。
English: Sima You is as close to Dajin as Hidan is.

古文：宜赞皇朝，与闻政事，实为陛下腹心不贰之臣。
现代文：应该赞助皇朝，参与政事，实在是陛下的心腹忠诚的臣下。
English: They should support the imperial dynasty and participate in political affairs. They are truly His Majesty's loyal vassals.

古文：且攸为人，修洁义信，加以懿亲，志存忠贞。
现代文：况且司马攸的为人，高洁诚信，加上是皇室亲族，心存忠贞。
English: Moreover, Sima You is a person of high integrity, coupled with the fact that he is a relative of the royal family, he is loyal.

古文：今陛下出攸之国，假以都督虚号，而无典戎干方之实，去离天朝，不预王政。
现代文：如今陛下派司马攸去藩国，给他都督的虚号，而没有调兵执政的实际权力，远离朝廷。不参预朝政。
English: Today, His Majesty sent Sima You to the domain, giving him the false title of governor, but without the actual power to mobilize troops to govern, far away from the imperial court. He did not participate in pre-imperial politics.

古文：伤母弟至亲之体，亏友于款笃之义，惧非陛下追述先帝、文明太后待攸之宿意也。
现代文：伤害了一母同胞兄弟至亲的体统，损害了兄弟友爱忠诚的道义，恐怕造不是陛下遵循先帝、文明太后对待司马攸平宿的意愿。
English: I am afraid that it was not His Majesty's intention to follow the wishes of the former Emperor and Empress Dowager Cunwen in his treatment of Sima Youping, which harmed the dignity of a mother, compatriots, brothers and relatives, and damaged the morality of brotherly love and loyalty.

古文：若以攸望重，于事宜出者，今以汝南王亮代攸。
现代文：如果因为司马攸名望大，从国事考虑应当派出的话，如今可用汝南王司马亮代替司马攸。
English: If Sima You were to be sent because of his high reputation and for reasons of state, then King Sima Liang of the South can be used to replace Sima You.

古文：亮，宣皇帝子，文皇帝弟，伷、骏各处方任，有内外之资，论以后虑，亦不为轻。
现代文：司马亮是宣皇帝的儿子，文皇帝的弟弟，司马佃、司马骏各处一方重任，在朝廷内外都有资望，说到曰后的忧虑，也不算轻。
English: Sima Liang was the son of Emperor Xuan, the younger brother of Emperor Wen, and both Sima Ye and Sima Ye had important responsibilities. They were both respected inside and outside the imperial court. When it came to worries about the future, they were not insignificant.

古文：攸今之国，适足长异同之论，以损仁慈之美耳。
现代文：假如让司马攸去了封国，恰好助长了亲疏不一的言论，而损害了君主仁慈的美名。
English: If Sima You went to seal the country, it would just encourage the rhetoric of estrangement, and damage the reputation of the benevolent monarch.

古文：而令天下窥陛下有不崇亲亲之情，臣窃为陛下不取也。
现代文：让天下人看到陛下有不崇尚对亲人友善的情操，我私下裹认为陛下那样做不可取。
English: To let the world see that Your Majesty does not respect the sentiments of being kind to relatives, I secretly think that it is not advisable for Your Majesty to do so.

古文：若以妃后外亲，任以朝政，则有王氏倾汉之权，吕产专朝之祸。
现代文：如果认为把朝政交给后妃外戚，则会有王氏权倾汉室的危险，有吕产专权的祸患。
English: If it is thought that the imperial government should be handed over to the empress dowager's maternal relative, there will be a danger that the power of the royal family will be transferred to the Han family, and there will be the scourge of the absolute power of the Lü dynasty.

古文：若以同姓至亲，则有吴楚七国逆乱之殃。
现代文：如果任用同姓至亲，则有吴、楚等七国叛逆的祸殃。
English: If a close relative with the same surname is appointed, there will be the calamity of Wu, Chu and other seven countries' rebellion.

古文：历观古今，苟事轻重，所在无不为害也。
现代文：纵观历代，衹要是事关重大，都有可能造成祸害。
English: Throughout the ages, if it is a matter of great importance, it is likely to cause harm.

古文：不可事事曲设疑防，虑方来之患者也。唯当任正道而求忠良。
现代文：不能事事怀疑设防，担心将要发生的祸患，衹应当任用正道搜求忠良。
English: One should not be suspicious of fortifications and worry about impending disasters, but should take the right path to seek loyalty.

古文：若以智计猜物，虽亲见疑，至于疏远者亦何能自保乎！
现代文：如果凭心计猜疑别人，就是亲人也受怀疑，那么没有亲属关系的人又怎么能自保呢!
English: If you suspect others with your heart, even your relatives will be suspected, so how can people who are not related protect themselves?

古文：人怀危惧，非为安之理。此最有国有家者之深忌也。
现代文：人心怀有恐惧感，不是求得安定的方法，这最是统治国家的人要深深禁忌的。
English: Instilling fear in people is not the way to achieve stability, and it is the most deeply taboo for those who rule the country.

古文：愚以为太子太保缺，宜留攸居之，与太尉汝南王亮、卫将军杨珧共为保傅，干理朝事。
现代文：我认为太子太保缺员，应留下司马攸任此职，和太尉汝南王司马亮、卫将军杨珧一同担任保傅，料理朝政。
English: In my opinion, the prince's vacancy for the position of the imperial bodyguard should be left to Sima You, and he should serve as the imperial bodyguard and cook for the imperial court together with the prince's lieutenant, Runan Wang Sima Liang, and the general of the imperial guard, Yang Hui.

古文：三人齐位，足相持正，进有辅纳广义之益，退无偏重相倾之势。
现代文：三人官位同等，足以相互扶持纠正，进一步说有辅佐纳言推广道义的好处，退一步说没有偏重一方相互倾轧的权势。
English: The three officials are of equal rank, which is enough to support and correct each other. It is further said that there is the benefit of supporting and promoting morality, and it is said that there is no power to favor one side over the other.

古文：令陛下有笃亲亲之恩，使攸蒙仁覆之惠。
现代文：使陛下有厚待亲人的恩典，让司马攸蒙受仁义的恩惠。
English: so that your majesty will have the grace to treat your relatives well, and so that Sima You will receive the grace of benevolence.

古文：臣同国休戚，义在尽言，心之所见，不能默已。
现代文：我与国家命运休戚相关，从道义上要求我有话必说，心中所想到的，不能沉默不言。
English: I am closely related to the fate of the country, and it is morally required that I have something to say. What I think in my heart cannot remain silent.

古文：私慕鲁女存国之志，敢陈愚见，触犯天威。
现代文：私下敬慕鲁女爱国的志气，冒昧地陈述自己的看法，触犯了天威。
English: Privately, she respected Muru's patriotic spirit and dared to state her own opinion, which violated the will of heaven.

古文：欲陛下事每尽善，冀万分之助。
现代文：想让陛下每件事都办得完美，希望自己能尽微薄之力。
English: I want everything to be perfect for His Majesty, and I hope I can do my best.

古文：臣而不言，谁当言者。 帝不纳。
现代文：我不说，该谁来说呢。皇帝不采纳。
English: I won't say who should speak. The emperor won't accept it.

古文：太熙初，迁司徒。
现代文：太熙初年，迁任司徒。
English: In the first year of the Tahei era, he was transferred to the post of magistrate.

古文：惠帝即位，加侍中，又京陵置士官，如睢陵比。
现代文：惠帝即位，加授侍中，又在京陵设置士官，如同睢陵那样。
English: Emperor Hui ascended the throne, conferred the title of chamberlain, and set up officers in the imperial mausoleum, just like the imperial mausoleum.

古文：及诛杨骏，崇重旧臣，乃加浑兵。
现代文：等到诛杀杨骏，尊崇旧臣，于是加授王浑军职。
English: He waited until he had killed Yang Xuan and respected his former vassal, and then he gave Wang Hun the military post.

古文：浑以司徒文官，主史不持兵，持兵乃吏属绛衣。
现代文：王浑因为司徒是文官，主掌国史不统领军队，统率军队则官吏穿红色服装。
English: Wang Hun, because Sito is a civil servant, is in charge of the country's history and does not lead the army, while the officials who lead the army wear red clothing.

古文：自以偶因时宠，权得持兵，非是旧典，皆令皁服。
现代文：自认为偶然受到一时的宠幸，权且掌管军队，不符旧典章，于是命令都穿黑衣。
English: Believing himself to be the accidental favorite of the moment, in power and in charge of the army, and not conforming to the old regulations, he ordered everyone to wear black.

古文：论者美其谦而识体。
现代文：议论的人赞美他谦虚而识大体。
English: Commentators praise him for his modesty and common sense.

古文：楚王玮将害汝南王亮等也。公孙宏说玮曰： 昔宣帝废曹爽，引太尉蒋济参乘，以增威重。
现代文：楚王司马璋将要害汝南王司马亮等，公孙宏劝司马璋说： 过去宣帝废曹爽，召来太尉蒋济陪乘，用以增加威严气势。
English: King Sima Qian of Chu was going to kill King Sima Liang of the south of the Ryukyus, and Gongsun Hong advised Sima Qian to say: In the past, Cao Shuang was dethroned and Emperor Xuan was dethroned, so he summoned the captain Jiang Jie to accompany him in order to increase his authority.

古文：大王今举非常事，宜得宿望，镇厌众心。
现代文：大王如今做不寻常的事，应该有老成有名望的人，镇压众人的心。
English: The Great King is now doing unusual things. He should have an old and famous person to suppress the hearts of the people.

古文：司徒王浑宿有威名，为三军所信服，可请同乘，使物情有凭也。 
现代文：司徒王浑平素有威名，被三军信服，可以请他同乘，使人情有所依赖。 
English: Sutou Wang Hunping had a reputation and was trusted by the three armies. He could be invited to ride with them, which made people feel dependent on him.

古文：玮从之。
现代文：司马璋依从了他。
English: Sima Yi obeyed him.

古文：浑辞疾归第，以家兵千余人闭门距玮。
现代文：王浑声称有病回到宅第，用千余名家兵闭门抗拒司马璋。
English: Wang Hun claimed to be ill and returned to his residence, where he used more than a thousand soldiers to resist Sima Qian behind closed doors.

古文：玮不敢逼。
现代文：司马璋不敢逼迫他。
English: Sima Yi did not dare to persecute him.

古文：俄而玮以矫诏伏诛，浑乃率兵赴官。
现代文：不久司马璋因为假传圣旨被杀，王浑于是率兵上任。
English: Soon after, Sima Yi was killed for falsely transmitting the sacred edict, and Wang Hun took office at the head of an army.

古文：帝尝访浑元会问郡国计吏方俗之宜，浑奏曰： 陛下钦明圣哲，光于远近，明诏冲虚，询及刍荛，斯乃周文畴咨之求，仲尼不耻下问也。
现代文：皇帝曾就元旦朝会时如何向郡国计吏问询方俗一事向王浑咨询，王浑奏报说： 陛下圣明，光照远近，开明的诏令冲淡虚静，咨询下及平民，这如同周文王的访求四方，孑乙子的不耻下问。
English: The emperor once consulted Wang Hun on how to inquire about the customs of the county and state accountants at the New Year's Day meeting. Wang Hun said: Your Majesty is holy, the light is far and near, the enlightened edict is diluted and empty, and the commoners are consulted. This is like King Zhou Wen's visit to the four directions, and the shameless questioning of the emperor.

古文：旧三朝元会前计吏诣轩下，侍中读诏，计吏跪受。
现代文：过去三朝元旦朝会前计吏到殿前，侍中读韶书，计吏下跪受韶。
English: For the past three New Year's Days, the treasurer has come to the front of the hall before the morning meeting, the chamberlains read the imperial edict, and the treasurer kneels down to receive the imperial edict.

古文：臣以诏文相承已久，无他新声，非陛下留心方国之意也。
现代文：我认为诏文相承已久，没有新意，不符合陛下留心四方藩国的本意。
English: I think that the Imperial Rescript has been handed down for a long time, has no new meaning, and does not conform to His Majesty's intention of paying attention to the four provinces.

古文：可令中书指宣明诏，问方土异同，贤才秀异，风俗好尚，农桑本务，刑狱得无冤滥，守长得无侵虐。
现代文：可以令中书指名宣读韶书，问四方的异同，人才的状况，风俗的崇尚，农桑的情形，刑狱有无冤屈滥用，地方宫有无侵夺暴虐。
English: It is possible to have the Chinese writer nominate the reading of the imperial edict, ask the differences and similarities of the four sides, the status of talents, the worship of customs, the situation of farmers and peasants, whether there is any abuse of the prison, and whether there is any abuse of the local palace.

古文：其勤心政化兴利除害者，授以纸笔，尽意陈闻。
现代文：那些用心于政治教化兴利除害的人，给他们纸笔，把知道的都写出来。
English: Those who are intent on political indoctrination and eliminating the harmful people, give them a pen and paper and write down everything they know.

古文：以明圣指垂心四远，不复因循常辞。
现代文：以此表明圣上关心四方，不再因循以往的言辞。
English: This shows that the Holy Father is concerned about the Quartet and is no longer following the previous rhetoric.

古文：且察其答对文义，以观计吏人才之实。
现代文：而且考察他们作答的文义，来观察计吏的实际才能。
English: They also looked at the semantics of their answers to see the numerator's actual ability.

古文：又先帝时，正会后东堂见征镇长史司马、诸王国卿、诸州别驾。
现代文：此外在先帝时，元旦朝会后在束堂见征镇长史司马、各王国卿、各州的别驾。
English: In addition, during the reign of the former emperor, after the New Year's Day meeting, he met with the mayor of the town of Shishima, the lords of the kingdoms, and the governors of the states in Sokudo.

古文：今若不能别见，可前诣轩下，使侍中宣问，以审察方国，于事为便。 
现代文：如今要是不能见，可召至殿前，派侍中慰问，以此审察四方藩国，在形式上也方便。 
English: If you can't see him now, you can call him to the front of the hall and send condolences to the attendants. This is a convenient way to inspect the four provinces.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇帝同意了王浑的奏章。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：又诏浑录尚书事。
现代文：又下诏命王浑录尚书事。
English: He also issued an imperial edict ordering Wang Hun to record and keep records.

古文：浑所历之职，前后著称，及居台辅，声望日减。
现代文：王浑在所担任的职务上，一直有名望，等到宫居宰相，声望逐日降低。
English: Wang Hun has always been well-known in his position, but when he became the prime minister of the palace, his reputation decreased day by day.

古文：元康七年薨，时年七十五，谥曰元。
现代文：元康七年去世，时年七十五岁，谧号元。
English: Yuan Kang died seven years later, at the age of seventy-five, and his posthumous name was Yuan.

古文：长子尚早亡，次子济嗣。
现代文：长子王尚死得早，次子王济继嗣。
English: The eldest son, Wang Jizhe, died early, and the second son, Wang Jizhe, became the successor.

古文：济字武子。
现代文：王济，字武子。
English: Wang Zhi, the character "Wu Zi."

古文：少有逸才，风姿英爽，气盖一时，好弓马，勇力绝人，善《易》及《庄》、《老》，文词俊茂，伎艺过人，有名当世，与姊夫和峤及裴楷齐名。
现代文：年少时有超人的才能，风姿英俊豪爽，气概超越一时。喜好弓箭骑马，勇力无人能比，善于《易》及《庄》、《老》，文词美好，技艺超人，在当世有名望，与姐夫和崤及裴楷名望相同。
English: When he was young, he had superhuman talent. He was handsome and dashing, and his courage was beyond compare. He liked to ride a horse with a bow and arrow, his courage was unmatched, he was good at "Yi" and "Zhuang" and "Lao," his writing was beautiful, and his skills were superhuman. He was famous in the contemporary world, the same as his brothers-in-law, Wanyan and Pei Kai.

古文：尚常山公主。
现代文：娶了常山公主。
English: He married Princess Tsuneyama.

古文：年二十，起家拜中书郎，以母忧去官。
现代文：二十岁，应召离家出任中书郎，为母亲守丧辞官。
English: At the age of twenty, he was called to leave home to work as a junior high school teacher, and he kept his mother's funeral notice.

古文：起为骁骑将军，累迁侍中，与侍中孔恂、王恂、杨济同列，为一时秀彦。
现代文：起用为骁骑将军，逐渐升迁任侍中，与侍中孔恂、王恂、杨济在同一官列，成为当时俊杰。
English: He was appointed as the cavalry general, and was gradually promoted to the position of chamberlain. He was in the same rank as the chamberlains Kong Qian, Wang Qian, and Yang Ji, and became the best at that time.

古文：武帝尝会公卿籓牧于式乾殿，顾济、恂而谓诸公曰： 朕左右可谓恂恂济济矣！ 
现代文：武帝曾在式干殿会见公卿及地方长官，看着二济、二恂对诸位公卿说： 我的左右可以说温顺恭谨的恂恂济济一堂! 
English: Emperor Wu once met with nobles and local governors in the Shikgan-den. He looked at the two courtiers and two eunuchs and said to the nobles: My right and left can be said to be a meek and respectful pair of courtiers!

古文：每侍见，未尝不谘论人物及万机得失。
现代文：每次侍君参见，没有不议论人物及各类事情得失的。
English: Every time you see the waiter, there is no getting away from talking about people and all kinds of things.

古文：济善于清言，修饰辞令，讽议将顺，朝臣莫能尚焉。帝益亲贵之。
现代文：王迺善于清谈，修饰辞令，讽议顺随，朝臣没有能超过他的，皇帝更加亲近看重他。
English: Wang Yao was good at plain talk, embellishing words, and following through with sarcastic comments. No courtier could surpass him, and the emperor valued him even more.

古文：仕进虽速，论者不以主婿之故，咸谓才能致之。
现代文：官升得虽快，议论的人不认为是因为翁婿的缘故，都说是靠才能达到的。
English: Although the promotion is fast, the commentators do not think that it is because of the son-in-law, they all say that it is achieved by talent.

古文：然外虽弘雅，而内多忌刻，好以言伤物，侪类以此少之。
现代文：然而外表虽然宽宏儒雅，而内心很是嫉妒苛刻，喜欢用言语伤人，周围人因此轻视他。
English: However, although he has a generous and elegant appearance, his heart is very jealous and harsh, and he likes to hurt people with words, so people around him despise him.

古文：以其父之故，每排王濬，时议讥焉。
现代文：因为他父亲的缘故，经常排挤王浚，当时的议论讥讽他。
English: Because of his father, Wang Jun was often excluded, and the discussion at that time ridiculed him.

古文：齐王攸当之籓，济既陈请，又累使公主与甄德妻长广公主俱入，稽颡泣请帝留攸。
现代文：齐王司马攸将去藩国，王济在陈述请求之后，又屡次让公主与甄德的妻子长广公主一同入宫，磕头流泪请求皇帝留下司马攸。
English: Qi King Sima You will go to the country of the domain. After Wang Ji's request, he repeatedly let the princess and Zende's wife, Changguang Princess, enter the palace together. Shantou asked the emperor to keep Sima You in tears.

古文：帝怒谓侍中王戎曰： 兄弟至亲，今出齐王，自是朕家事，而甄德、王济连遣妇来生哭人！ 
现代文：皇帝生气地对侍中王戎说： 兄弟间关系最亲，如今派出齐王，自然是我家裹的事。而甄德、王济接连打发妇人来活活哭死人! 
English: The emperor angrily said to the attendant Wang Rong: The relationship between the brothers is the closest, and now I have sent Qi Wang, which is naturally a matter for my family. And Zhen De and Wang Jie successively sent women to cry for the dead!

古文：以忤旨，左迁国子祭酒，常侍如故。
现代文：由于抵忤圣旨，降职任国子祭酒，常侍的职位依旧。
English: Due to the arrival of the imperial edict, he was demoted to the position of Kuniko Matsuri sake, but his position as a regular attendant remained the same.

古文：数年，入为侍中。
现代文：几年后，入宫任侍中。
English: A few years later, he entered the Imperial Palace as a chamberlain.

古文：时浑为仆射，主者处事或不当，济性峻厉，明法绳之。
现代文：当时王浑任仆射，主事人处理事情有时不恰当，王济生性严厉，依法惩处他。
English: At that time, Wang Hunren was a subordinate, and the person in charge sometimes handled things inappropriately. Wang Jisheng was strict and punished him according to the law.

古文：素与从兄佑不平，佑党颇谓济不能顾其父，由是长同异之言。
现代文：王济平素与堂兄王佑不和，王佑的党羽很是认为王辽太不顾念自己的父亲，于是助长了不同的意见。
English: Wang Jiping was not on good terms with his cousin Wang You, and Wang You's followers believed that Wang Liaota did not care about his father, thus fostering different opinions.

古文：出为河南尹，未拜，坐鞭王官吏免官。而王佑始见委任。
现代文：出任河南尹，还没上任，因鞭打王府辅吏官而获罪被免官，而王佑正受到委任。
English: Yin of Henan Province, who had not yet taken office, was found guilty of whipping an assistant official of the royal court and was removed from office, while Wang Youjun was appointed.

古文：而济遂被斥外，于是乃移第北芒山下。
现代文：擅于是被贬斥出朝，王济就把家搬到北芒山下。
English: Good at being expelled from the imperial court, Wang Ji moved his family to the foot of the Beimang Mountain.

古文：性豪侈，丽服玉食。
现代文：王济生性奢侈，衣食讲究。
English: Wang Jizhe is extravagant in nature, and is particular about food and clothing.

古文：时洛京地甚贵，济买地为马埒，编钱满之，时人谓为 金沟 。
现代文：当时洛京地价很高，王济买地用作骑射的跑道，把钱编在一起铺满跑道，当时的人称之为 金沟 。
English: At that time, the price of land in Luojing was very high. Wang Jie bought land to use as a track for horse shooting, and the money was woven together to cover the track. At that time, people called it Jingou.

古文：王恺以帝舅奢豪，有牛名 八百里驳 ，常莹其蹄角。
现代文：王恺因为是皇帝之舅奢侈豪华，有一头牛叫做 八百里驳 ，常装饰牛的蹄角。
English: Because Wang Qian was the emperor's uncle, he was extravagant and luxurious. He had a cow called Ba Bao Li Jie (八百里驳), which often decorated the horns of the cow's hooves.

古文：济请以钱千万与牛对射而赌之。
现代文：王济提出用钱一千万和牛做赌注比试射箭。
English: Wang Jie proposed to use ten million Japanese cattle as a bet to try archery.

古文：恺亦自恃其能，令济先射。
现代文：王恺自认为有本事，让王济先射。
English: Wang Yao thought he had the ability, so he let Wang Jizhe shoot first.

古文：一发破的，因据胡床，叱左右速探牛心来，须臾而至，一割便去。
现代文：王济一发射中，于是坐在交椅上，喝叱左右赶快把牛心取来，转眼间来到，一刀割下就走。
English: Wang Ji was in the middle of firing, so he sat on a chair, drank wine and quickly fetched the bull's heart, came in the blink of an eye, cut it with a knife and left.

古文：和峤性至俭，家有好李，帝求之，不过数十。
现代文：和崤生性极俭朴，家中有棵好李子树，皇帝索要，也不过给他几十个。
English: He and his twin were extremely frugal. They had a good plum tree at home, and the emperor asked for dozens of plums.

古文：济候其上直，率少年诣园，共啖毕，伐树而去。
现代文：王济趁着和崤去值班，带领年轻人到果园，一起吃完，砍了李子树才走。
English: Wang Ji took the opportunity to go on duty with Zou, led the young people to the orchard, finished eating together, and cut down the plum tree before leaving.

古文：帝尝幸其宅，供馔甚丰，悉贮琉璃器中。
现代文：皇帝曾到王济的住宅，奉上的饭食很丰盛，都装在琉璃器皿中。
English: The emperor once went to Wang Ji's residence. The meal he was served was very sumptuous, and it was all in glassware.

古文：蒸肫甚美，帝问其故，答曰： 以人乳蒸之。 
现代文：蒸肫子味道很好，皇帝问原因，回答说： 用人奶蒸的。 
English: The steamed hazelnuts tasted very good. When the emperor asked why, he replied, "They were steamed with human milk."

古文：帝色甚不平，食未毕而去。
现代文：皇帝脸色很不好看，没吃完就走了。
English: The emperor did not look well and left without finishing his meal.

古文：济善解马性，尝乘一马，著连乾鄣泥，前有水，终不肯渡。
现代文：王济很懂马的性情，曾骑着一匹马，马身上披有连干鄣泥，前方有水，马始终不肯渡过去。
English: Wang Ji is very familiar with the temperament of horses. He once rode a horse. The horse's body was covered with dried mud, and there was water in front of it. The horse still refused to cross.

古文：济云： 此必是惜鄣泥。 
现代文：王渣说： 这一定是舍不得鄣泥。 
English: Wang Jia said, "It must be the reluctance to shovel mud."

古文：使人解去，便渡。
现代文：让人解下去，马于是渡水。
English: Let someone untie it, and the horse will cross the water.

古文：故杜预谓济有马癖。
现代文：因而杜预说王济有爱马的嗜好。
English: As a result, Du predicted that Wang Jie had a penchant for horses.

古文：帝尝谓和峤曰： 我将骂济而后官爵之，何如？ 
现代文：皇帝曾经对翅岖说： 我想骂王辽然后给他封官进爵，怎么样? 
English: The emperor once said to the winged rug: I want to curse Wang Liao and then give him a knighthood, how about it?

古文：峤曰： 济俊爽，恐不可屈。 
现代文：和崤说： 王济豪爽，恐怕不能委屈他。 
English: He said: Wang Jigao is cool, I'm afraid I can't offend him.

古文：帝因召济，切让之，既而曰： 知愧不？ 
现代文：皇帝于是召来王济，深深地责备他，然后说： 知道惭愧吗? 
English: The emperor then summoned Wang Zhi, deeply reproached him, and then said: "Do you know shame?

古文：济答曰： 尺布斗粟之谣，常为陛下耻之。
现代文：王济回答说： 兄弟间不能相容，我常为陛下感到羞耻。
English: Wang Zi replied: Brothers are not compatible. I often feel ashamed of Your Majesty.

古文：他人能令亲疏，臣不能使亲亲，以此愧陛下耳。 
现代文：别人能让亲人疏远，我不能让亲人亲近，为此我愧对陛下。 
English: Others can alienate their relatives, but I cannot bring my relatives closer, and for this I am sorry to Your Majesty.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：皇帝默然不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：帝尝与济弈棋，而孙皓在侧，谓皓曰： 何以好剥人面皮？ 
现代文：皇帝曾与王济下棋，而孙皓在旁边，皇帝对逐壁说： 为什么喜欢剥人的脸皮? 
English: The emperor once played chess with Wang Ji, while Sun Yat-sen was nearby. The emperor said to Wang Ji: "Why do you like to skin people's faces?

古文：皓曰： 见无礼于君者则剥之。 
现代文：孙皓说： 见到对国君无礼的人就剥了他。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "When I saw a person who was disrespectful to the sovereign, I stripped him.

古文：济时伸脚局下，而皓讥焉。
现代文：王济当时把脚伸到了棋盘下，因而孙皓讥讽王济。
English: At that time, Wang Jie put his foot under the chessboard, so Sun Yat-sen mocked Wang Jie.

古文：寻使白衣领太仆。
现代文：不久让他由平民身份兼任太仆。
English: Soon after, he was promoted from a commoner to a servant.

古文：年四十六，先浑卒，追赠骠骑将军。
现代文：四十六岁，死在王运之前，追赠为骠骑将军。
English: He was forty-six years old and died before the king's birthday. He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Horse.

古文：及其将葬，时贤无不毕至。
现代文：等到将要安葬，当时的贤人都来了。
English: When the burial was about to take place, the sages of the time came.

古文：孙楚雅敬济，而后来，哭之甚悲，宾客莫不垂涕。
现代文：孙楚很敬重王济，而来得晚，哭得很悲伤，宾客没有不落泪的。
English: Sun Chu respected Wang Jie very much. He came late and cried very sadly. There was no guest who did not shed tears.

古文：哭毕，向灵床曰： 卿常好我作驴鸣，我为卿作之。 
现代文：哭完了，对着灵床说： 卿常常喜好我学驴叫，我为卿叫一遍。 
English: When he had finished crying, he said to the hearse: "My lord often likes me to learn to bray like a donkey. I will bray once more for my lord."

古文：体似声真，宾客皆笑。
现代文：学得形体相似声音逼真，宾客都笑了。
English: The guests all laughed when they learned that the shapes were similar and the sounds were realistic.

古文：楚顾曰： 诸君不死，而令王济死乎！ 
现代文：遥楚回头看着他们说： 你们不死，却让王渣死了! 
English: Looking back at them from afar, he said, "You don't die, but you let the scum die!"

古文：初，济尚主，主两目失明，而妒忌尤甚，然终无子，有庶子二人。
现代文：当初，王济娶了公主，公主双目失明，而妒忌心很重，然而始终没生孩子，有妾生的儿子两人。
English: At first, Wang Jie married a princess. The princess was blind in both eyes, and her jealousy was very strong. However, she never gave birth to a child, but had two sons by a concubine.

古文：卓字文宣，嗣浑爵，拜给事中。
现代文：王皇字塞宣，继承了玉运的爵位，官拜给事中。
English: Wanghuangzha Xiexuan, who inherited the title of Yuyun, was in the middle of his official duties.

古文：次聿，字茂宣，袭公主封敏阳侯。
现代文：次子王娄，字茎宣，继承公主封为堑旦吆。
English: The second son, Wang Qian, Zhi Zhu Xuan, inherited the princess title and became the crown prince.

古文：济二弟，澄字道深，汶字茂深，皆辩慧有才藻，并历清显。
现代文：王渣有两个弟弟，王迢字塑，王这字茎遝，都善言谈聪明有文采，都历任清高显贵之职。
English: Wang Jia has two younger brothers, Wang Jia Zi Shao and Wang Jia Zi Zhuang, both of whom are well-spoken, clever and literate, and both of whom have held high-ranking and prestigious positions.

古文：王濬，字士治，弘农湖人也。
现代文：王浚字士治，弘农湖地人。
English: Wang Junzhi, a native of Hongnong Lake.

古文：家世二千石。
现代文：家世中有人做过太守。
English: There are people in my family who have served as Taishu.

古文：濬博坟典，美姿貌，不修名行，不为乡曲所称。
现代文：王浚博览古籍，姿容相貌俊美，不注重名声品行，不被乡里人称道。
English: Wang Jun is well-versed in ancient books, handsome in appearance, does not pay attention to reputation and conduct, and is not praised by the villagers.

古文：晚乃变节，疏通亮达，恢廓有大志。
现代文：后来改变了节操，开通豁达，很有大志向。
English: Later, he changed his temper, became more open-minded, and was very ambitious.

古文：尝起宅，开门前路广数十步。
现代文：曾盖房，大门前留有几十步宽。
English: Once built, there are dozens of steps in front of the gate.

古文：人或谓之何太过，濬曰： 吾欲使容长戟幡旗。 
现代文：有人问他为什么留下太多地方，王浚说： 我想使门前容下长戟幡旗。 
English: When asked why he left so much space, Wang Jun said, "I wanted to make room for the long banner in front of the door."

古文：众咸笑之，濬曰： 陈胜有言，燕雀安知鸿鹄之志。 
现代文：众人都笑他，王浚说： 陈胜说过，燕雀哪知道鸿鹄的志向。 
English: Everyone laughed at him. Wang Jun said, "Chen Sheng once said, "How can a sparrow know the ambition of a great egret?"

古文：州郡辟河东从事。
现代文：州郡征他为河东从事。
English: He was recruited by the state and county to work in Hedong.

古文：守令有不廉洁者，皆望风自引而去。
现代文：官吏中不廉洁的人，都听到消息自行离去。
English: All the dishonest officials left of their own accord when they heard the news.

古文：刺史燕国徐邈有女才淑，择夫未嫁。
现代文：刺史燕国人徐邈有个女儿淑贤有才，挑选丈夫尚未出嫁。
English: Xu Yao, a native of the Yan nationality, has a talented daughter, Shu Xian, who has not yet married her husband.

古文：邈乃大会佐吏，令女于内观之。
现代文：徐邈盛大地会集下属官吏，让女儿在裹面观看他们。
English: Xu Rong grandly gathered subordinate officials and let his daughter watch them in a mask.

古文：女指濬告母，邈遂妻之。
现代文：女儿指着王浚告诉母亲，徐邈于是把女儿嫁给他。
English: The daughter pointed to Wang Jun and told her mother, and Xu Xi then married her daughter to him.

古文：后参征南军事，羊祜深知待之。
现代文：后来参征南军事，羊祜深深理解厚待他。
English: Later, he joined the South Korean military, and was treated with deep understanding and kindness.

古文：祜兄子暨白祜： 濬为人志太，奢侈不节，不可专任，宜有以裁之。 
现代文：羊祜兄长的儿子羊暨对羊祜说： 王浚做人的志向太过分，奢侈不节制，不能过于信任，应该对他有所限制。 
English: Yang Jie, the son of Yang Jue's elder brother, said to Yang Jue: Wang Jue's ambition to be a man is too excessive, extravagant and unrestrained, and he should not be trusted too much. He should be restricted.

古文：祜曰： 濬有大才，将欲济其所欲，必可用也。 
现代文：羊祜说： 王浚有大才，我将要帮他实现愿望，必定可以任用。 
English: The shepherd said, "Wang Jun has great talent. I will help him to realize his wish. He can certainly be appointed."

古文：转车骑从事中郎，识者谓祜可谓能举善焉。
现代文：转任车骑从事中郎，有见识的人说羊祜能推举有良才的人。
English: Some people with insight say that the Sheep and Goats can promote talented people.

古文：除巴郡太守。
现代文：拜任巴郡太守。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Bashir Province.

古文：郡边吴境，兵士苦役，生男多不养。
现代文：巴郡与吴国边境相邻，兵士们以劳役为苦，生男孩大多不养活。
English: Ba County is adjacent to the border with the State of Wu. The soldiers suffer from hard labor, and most of the boys are not fed.

古文：濬乃严其科条，宽其徭课，其产育者皆与休复，所全活者数千人。
现代文：王浚于是使条令严厉，使徭役宽松，那些生育的人，都让他们休整并免除徭役，这样活下来的有几千人。
English: Wang Jun then made the regulations strict and the labor service lax. Those who gave birth were allowed to rest and were exempted from labor service. Several thousand people survived in this way.

古文：转广汉太守，垂惠布政，百姓赖之。
现代文：转任广汉太守，实施恩惠仁政，百姓依赖他。
English: He was transferred to the post of Guanghan governor-general and implemented the policy of benevolence and benevolence. The people relied on him.

古文：濬夜梦悬三刀于卧屋梁上，须臾又益一刀，濬警觉，意甚恶之。
现代文：王浚夜间梦到卧室梁上悬着三把刀，一会儿又添了一把刀，王浚惊醒，心中厌恶这个梦。
English: Wang Jun dreamt at night that there were three swords hanging from the beam in his bedroom. A moment later, another sword was added. Wang Jun woke up, disgusted by the dream.

古文：主簿李毅再拜贺曰： 三刀为州字，又益一者，明府其临益州乎？ 
现代文：主簿李毅拜了两拜祝贺说： 三把刀是州字，又添一把，您恐怕要去益州了吧? 
English: The chief clerk, Li Yi, bowed twice and congratulated him, saying: "Three swords are the word "Zhou" and one more. I'm afraid you're going to Yizhou, aren't you?

古文：及贼张弘杀益州刺史皇甫晏，果迁濬为益州刺史。
现代文：等到贼人张弘杀了益州刺史皇甫晏，果然调王浚任益州刺史。
English: Wait until the thief Zhang Hong killed the Yizhou stabber Wang Fuxi, and then transfer Wang Jun to be the Yizhou stabber.

古文：濬设方略，悉诛弘等，以勋封关内侯。
现代文：王浚设计谋划，全部诛杀了张弘等人，因为有功被封为关内侯。
English: Wang Jun designed and planned, killed all Zhang Hong and others, because he was awarded the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：怀辑殊俗，待以威信，蛮夷徼外，多来归降。
现代文：安抚不同的风俗，用威严信用待人，异族境外，大多前来归顺投降。
English: To appease different customs, to treat people with dignity and trust, most foreigners came to surrender.

古文：征拜右卫将军，除大司农。
现代文：征召授职为右卫将军，授官大司农。
English: He was conscripted and appointed to the post of General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and promoted to the post of Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：车骑将军羊祜雅知濬有奇略，乃密表留濬，于是重拜益州刺史。
现代文：车骑将军羊祜很知道王浚有奇谋，于是暗中上表留王浚，于是又任益州刺史。
English: The chariot and cavalry general Yang Zhen knew very well that Wang Jun had a plot, so he secretly left Wang Jun on the table, and then he was appointed to stab history in Yizhou.

古文：武帝谋伐吴，诏濬修舟舰。
现代文：武帝谋划伐吴，下诏令王浚修造舟船。
English: Emperor Wu planned to conquer Wu, and issued an edict ordering the king to build a boat.

古文：濬乃作大船连舫，方百二十步，受二千余人。
现代文：王浚于是建造大船相连的船，一百二十步见方，载两千多人。
English: Wang Jun then built a large ship connected ships, one hundred and twenty paces square, carrying more than two thousand people.

古文：以木为城，起楼橹，开四出门，其上皆得驰马来往。
现代文：用木材建城，树起高台，开通向四方的大门，城上都可以骑马往来。
English: The city was built with wood, trees raised the hill, opened the gate to the four directions, and people could ride horses to and from the city.

古文：又画鹢首怪兽于船首，以惧江神。
现代文：又在船头上画上鹚鸟的头及怪兽，用来恫吓江神。
English: They also painted ostrich heads and monsters on the bow to intimidate the river gods.

古文：舟楫之盛，自古未有。
现代文：舟船的规模之大，自古没有过。
English: The size of the boat has never been so large since ancient times.

古文：濬造船于蜀，其木柿蔽江而下。
现代文：王浚在蜀造船，砍削下的木片遮盖了江面向下游漂流。
English: Wang Jun in Shu shipbuilding, the wood chips under the chopping covered the river drifting downstream.

古文：吴建平太守吾彦取流柿以呈孙皓曰： 晋必有攻吴之计，宜增建平兵。
现代文：吴建平太守吾彦取来木片呈给孙皓说： 晋一定有攻打吴的谋划，应该增加建平的兵力。
English: Wu Jianping's governor Azahiko took a piece of wood and presented it to Sun Yat-sen, saying, "Jin must have a plan to attack Wu, and Jianping's forces should be increased."

古文：建平不下，终不敢渡。 
现代文：建平不被攻下，晋军最终不敢渡江。 
English: Jianping was not conquered, and the Jin army ultimately did not dare to cross the river.

古文：皓不从。
现代文：孙皓不听从。
English: Sun Yat-sen did not listen.

古文：寻以谣言拜濬为龙骧将军、监梁益诸军事。
现代文：不久因谣言授王浚为龙骧将军、监梁益诸军事。
English: Soon, due to rumours, Wang Jun was promoted to the rank of General Long Yu, and Jian Liang Yi was transferred to the military.

古文：语在《羊祜传》。
现代文：事情记载在《羊枯传》。
English: The event is recorded in the "Sheep Herder's Tale."

古文：时朝议咸谏伐吴，濬乃上疏曰： 臣数参访吴楚同异，孙皓荒淫凶逆，荆扬贤愚无不嗟怨。
现代文：当时朝廷的议论都劝阻伐吴，王浚就上书说： 我多次查访吴楚的异同，孙皓荒淫凶暴，荆扬的人不论贤愚没有不抱怨的。
English: At that time, the discussions of the imperial court were all to discourage the cutting of Wu, and Wang Juntao wrote: I have repeatedly visited the differences and similarities of Wuchu, Sun Yat-sen was wild and violent, and there was no one who did not complain, whether they were wise or foolish.

古文：且观时运，宜速征伐。
现代文：况且观察时机运数，应该迅速征伐。
English: Moreover, observing the timing and number of operations, it should be quickly conquered.

古文：若今不伐，天变难预。
现代文：如果现在不讨伐，天意的变化难以预料。
English: If there is no crusade now, it is difficult to predict the change of God's will.

古文：令皓卒死，更立贤主，文武各得其所，则强敌也。
现代文：假如孙皓突然死了，更换了贤明的国君，文官武将各自有了合适的位置，那么吴就是强敌了。
English: If Sun Yat-sen suddenly died, the wise sovereign was replaced, and the civil officials and military commanders each had a suitable position, then Wu would be a strong enemy.

古文：臣作船七年，日有朽败，又臣年已七十，死亡无日。
现代文：我造船七年，逐渐会有腐朽败坏的，再说我已七十岁，离死已不远。
English: I've been building ships for seven years, and gradually there will be decay, and besides, I'm seventy years old and I'm not far from death.

古文：三者一乖，则难图也，诚愿陛下无失事机。 
现代文：这三条有一项不顺，就难于圆谋了，诚恳地希望陛下不失时机。 
English: If one of these three points is not satisfactory, it will be difficult to make a plan. I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will not lose the opportunity.

古文：帝深纳焉。
现代文：皇帝深深接受他的看法。
English: The emperor deeply accepted his opinion.

古文：贾充、荀勖陈谏以为不可，唯张华固劝。
现代文：贾充、荀勖陈述劝谏认为不可伐吴，衹有张华坚持劝战。
English: Jia Chong and Zou made a statement to persuade Wu not to attack Wu, and Zhang Hua insisted on persuasion.

古文：又杜预表请，帝乃发诏，分命诸方节度。
现代文：加上杜预上表请求，皇帝于是下韶书，分派命令各方节度。
English: In addition to Du's request for an advance table, the emperor then issued an imperial edict, assigning orders to all parties.

古文：濬于是统兵。
现代文：王浚于是统领军队。
English: Wang Jun then took command of the army.

古文：先在巴郡之所全育者，皆堪徭役供军，其父母戒之曰： 王府君生尔，尔必勉之，无爱死也！ 
现代文：先前在巴郡那些保全了生育的人，都能够服徭役供给军队，他们的父母告诫他们说： 王太守生养了你们，你们一定要努力，不要舍不得死! 
English: Previously, in Bashir, those who preserved their fertility were able to serve in the army. Their parents warned them: "Mother Wang preserved your fertility, you must work hard, don't be reluctant to die!"

古文：太康元年正月，濬发自成都，率巴东监军、广武将军唐彬攻吴丹杨，克之，擒其丹杨监盛纪。
现代文：太康元年正月，王浚从成都发兵，率领巴东监军、广武将军唐彬攻打吴国的丹杨，攻克了那裹，擒获了丹杨监盛纪。
English: In the first month of the first year of Taikang, Wang Jun sent an army from Chengdu, led the Patong Supervision Army and the Guangwu General Tang Bin to attack the Danyang of Wu, conquered the Nawabula, and captured the Danyang Supervision Sheng Ji.

古文：吴人于江险碛要害之处，并以铁锁横截之，又作铁锥长丈余，暗置江中，以逆距船。
现代文：吴人在长江险阻要害的地方，都用铁锁横向截断，又做一丈多长的铁锥，暗中设置在江中，用以迎头阻挡船只。
English: The Wu people used iron locks to cut off the Yangtze River at critical points. They also made iron cones several meters long and secretly placed them in the middle of the river to block ships head-on.

古文：先是，羊祜获吴间谍，具知情状。
现代文：在攻吴以前，羊祜抓获吴间谍，完全了解了情况。
English: Before attacking Wu, Yang Hui captured a Wu spy and fully understood the situation.

古文：濬乃作大筏数十，亦方百余步，缚草为人，被甲持杖，令善水者以筏先行，筏遇铁锥，锥辄著筏去。
现代文：王浚于是做了几十个大筏子，也百余步见方，用草扎成人形，披盔甲拿兵器，命令水性好的人乘筏子走在前面，筏子遇上铁锥，铁锥就刺到筏子上漂走了。
English: Wang Jun then made dozens of large rafts, also more than a hundred paces square, using grass to make human figures, wearing armor to carry weapons, ordering people with good water resistance to walk in front of the rafts. The rafts met iron cones, and the iron cones stuck to the rafts and floated away.

古文：又作火炬，长十余丈，大数十围，灌以麻油，在船前，遇锁，然炬烧之，须臾，融液断绝，于是船无所碍。
现代文：又做火炬，十余丈长，圆周有几十围大，灌上麻油，置于船前，遇到铁锁，点燃火炬烧它，一会儿功夫，融成液体断绝，于是船没有障碍。
English: He also made a torch, more than ten cubits long, with a circumference of several tens of cubits, filled it with hemp oil, placed it in front of the ship, encountered an iron lock, lit the torch, burned it, and after a while, melted into a liquid and broke off, so the ship had no obstacle.

古文：二月庚申，克吴西陵，获其镇南将军留宪、征南将军成据、宜都太守虞忠。
现代文：二月庚申日，攻克吴西陵，俘获吴镇南将军留宪、征南将军成据、宜都太守虞忠。
English: In February, on Goshun's Day, they conquered Wu Xiling, and captured Wu Zhenan's general, Liu Xian, the general of the Southern Expedition, Cheng Jian, and the governor of Yidu, Yu Zhong.

古文：壬戌，克荆门、夷道二城，获监军陆晏。
现代文：壬戌曰，攻克荆门、夷道两城，俘获监军陆晏。
English: According to Ren Yu, the two cities of Jingmen and Yidu were conquered, and the Guan army of Lu Yu was captured.

古文：乙丑，克乐乡，获水军督陆景。
现代文：乙丑，攻克乐乡，俘获水军督陆景。
English: Second Ugly, conquered Le Township, captured the naval commander Lu Jing.

古文：平西将军施洪等来降。
现代文：平西将军施送等人来投降。
English: General Pingxi Shifeng and others came to surrender.

古文：乙亥，诏进濬为平东将军、假节、都督益梁诸军事。
现代文：乙亥日，韶书进升王浚为平东将军、假节、都督益梁诸军事。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the Chinese lunar calendar, Wang Jun was promoted to the general of Pingdong, Fuxi, and the military governor of Yiliang.

古文：濬自发蜀，兵不血刃，攻无坚城，夏口、武昌，无相支抗。
现代文：王浚自从在蜀地发兵，兵器不见血，攻城无顽敌，夏口、武昌，都不相互支持抵抗。
English: Since Wang Jun sent troops to Shu, there has been no bloodshed of weapons, and there is no invincible enemy to attack the city. Both Xiakou and Wuchang do not support each other's resistance.

古文：于是顺流鼓棹，径造三山。
现代文：于是顺流摇桨，直奔三山。
English: So I paddled downstream and headed straight for the three mountains.

古文：皓遣游击将军张象率舟军万人御濬，象军望旗而降。
现代文：孙皓派遣游击将军张象率水兵万人抵御王浚，张象的军队看到晋军战旗就投降。
English: Sun Yat-sen dispatched the guerrilla general Zhang Xiang and ten thousand sailors to resist Wang Jun. Zhang Xiang's army surrendered when they saw the battle flag of the Jin army.

古文：皓闻濬军旌旗器甲，属天满江，威势甚盛，莫不破胆。
现代文：孙皓听说王浚军旌旗兵器盔甲与天际相连，满江都是，威势很盛，没有不吓破胆的。
English: Sun Yat-sen heard that Wang Jianjun's banner, weapons and armor were connected to the sky, and the whole river was full of them. They were very powerful, and there was nothing that did not frighten him.

古文：用光禄薛莹、中书令胡冲计，送降文于濬曰： 吴郡孙皓叩头死罪。
现代文：采用光禄勋薛莹、中书令胡冲的策略，送投降文书给王浚说： 吴郡孙皓叩头死罪。
English: Adopting the strategy of Guangluxun Xue Ying and Hu Chong of the Chinese book, he sent a surrender document to Wang Jun and said: It is a capital crime for Wu County to kowtow to Sun Yat-sen.

古文：昔汉室失御，九州幅裂，先人因时略有江南，遂阻山河，与魏乖隔。
现代文：过去汉朝皇室失去统治，九州分裂，先人凭藉天时占据了江南，于是山河被阻，与魏隔离。
English: In the past, the imperial family of the Han Dynasty lost its rule, Kyushu was divided, and the ancestors occupied the south of the Yangtze River by virtue of time. As a result, the mountains and rivers were blocked and separated from Wei.

古文：大晋龙兴，德覆四海，暗劣偷安，未喻天命。
现代文：大晋兴盛，美德布满四海，吴昏昧偷安，不知天命。
English: Dajin thrives, virtue is spread all over the world, Wu dimly steals peace, and does not know the fate of heaven.

古文：至于今者，猥烦六军，衡盖露次，还临江渚。
现代文：至于今天，多多烦扰六军，露宿野外，远道来到江中小洲。
English: As for today, many of them have disturbed the six armies, camped out in the open, and come all the way to the small islands in the Yangtze River.

古文：举国震惶，假息漏刻，敢缘天朝，含弘光大。
现代文：全国震惊惶恐，苟且偷生片刻，冒昧攀援天朝，宽宏大量。
English: The whole country was shocked and panicked. They risked their lives for a moment, ventured to support the imperial court, and were magnanimous.

古文：谨遣私署太常张夔等奉所佩玺绶，委质请命。 
现代文：恭谨地派遣私署太常张夔等人奉上我所佩的玉玺绶带，把性命交您发落。 
English: I respectfully dispatch my private secretary, Zhang Ye, and others to present the jade sash I am wearing, and to entrust my life to you.

古文：壬寅，濬入于石头。
现代文：壬寅，王浚进入石头。
English: Ren Yin, Wang Jun into the stone.

古文：皓乃备亡国之礼，素车白马，肉袒面缚，衔璧牵羊，大夫衰服，士舆榇，率其伪太子瑾、瑾弟鲁王虔等二十一人，造于垒门。
现代文：孙皓于是备下亡国的礼节，白色的车马，袒露肢体，双手反绑，口衔璧玉手牵羊，大夫穿丧服，官吏用车拉着棺材，率领伪太子孙瑾、孙瑾的弟弟鲁王孙虔等二十一人，来到军垒门前。
English: Sun Yat-sen then prepared the etiquette of the dead country, a white chariot and horse, bare limbs, hands tied behind his back, mouth tied with a rope, doctors wearing mourning clothes, officials pulling the coffin with a car, and led the pseudo-princeling Sun Yat-sen, Sun Yat-sen's brother Lu Wang Sun Qian and twenty-one others to come to the gate of the military base.

古文：濬躬解其缚，受璧焚榇，送于京师。
现代文：王浚躬身为他松绑，接受璧玉焚烧棺材，送孙皓等人去京师。
English: Wang Jun prostrated himself to untie him, accepted the jade incinerated coffin, and sent Sun Yat-sen and others to Beijing.

古文：收其图籍，封其府库，军无私焉。
现代文：接收吴国的地图书籍，封闭了他们的府库，军队没有入侵占。
English: Received the map books of Wuxi, closed their treasury, and the army did not invade and occupy.

古文：帝遣使者犒濬军。
现代文：皇帝派使者犒劳王浚的军队。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to reward Wang Jun's army.

古文：初，诏书使濬下建平，受杜预节度，至秣陵，受王浑节度。
现代文：起初，韶书令王浚攻下建平，受杜预节制调度，到了秣陵，受王浑节制调度。
English: At first, he ordered Wang Jun to attack Jianping, which was dispatched by Du Du, and then to Fuling, which was dispatched by Wang Hun.

古文：预至江陵，谓诸将帅曰： 若濬得下建平，则顺流长驱，威名已著，不宜令受制于我。
现代文：杜预到了江陵，对众将帅说： 如果王浚能攻下建平，就顺流长驱而下，威名已经显著，不宜令他受我节制。
English: Du arrived in Gangneung ahead of time and said to the generals: "If Wang Jun can conquer Jianping, he will drive down the river. His prestige is already significant, and it is not appropriate to make him submit to my restraint."

古文：若不能克，则无缘得施节度。 
现代文：如果不能攻克建平，也就没办法施行节度。 
English: If Jianping cannot be conquered, there will be no way to enforce discipline.

古文：濬至西陵，预与之书曰： 足下既摧其西籓，便当径取秣陵，讨累世之逋寇，释吴人于涂炭。
现代文：浚到了西陵，杜预给他书信说： 你已经摧毁了吴国西部屏障，就该直接去攻取秣陵，讨伐逃亡了几代的敌寇，把吴人从灾难中解救出来。
English: When he arrived at Xiling, Du Yuan sent him a letter saying: You have destroyed the western barrier of Wu, you should go directly to capture Fuling, fight the enemy invaders who have fled for several generations, and rescue the Wu people from the disaster.

古文：自江入淮，逾于泗汴，溯河而上，振旅还都，亦旷世一事也。 
现代文：从长江进入淮河，越过泅水汴水，逆黄河而上，凯旋回都城，这也是前所未有的事业啊。 
English: From the Yangtze River into the Huai River, across the Surabaya River, up the Yellow River and back to the capital, this is also an unprecedented undertaking.

古文：濬大悦，表呈预书。
现代文：王浚十分欣喜，上表呈上杜预的书信。
English: Wang Jun was very pleased and presented the letter to Du Yuan on the table.

古文：及濬将至秣陵，王浑遣信要令暂过论事，濬举帆直指，报曰： 风利，不得泊也。 
现代文：等到王浚将要到达秣陵，王浑送信邀请命令王浚去暂且商议军事，王浚扬帆直下，报告说： 顺风，无法停船。 
English: When Wang Jun was about to arrive at Fuling, Wang Hun sent an invitation to Wang Jun and ordered him to leave temporarily to discuss military affairs. Wang Jun set sail immediately and reported: Fair winds, can't stop.

古文：王浑久破皓中军，斩张悌等，顿兵不敢进。
现代文：王浑早巳攻破孙皓的中军，斩杀张悌等人，按兵不敢前进。
English: Wang Hun had already defeated Sun Yat-sen's Chinese army, killed Zhang Ye and others, and the soldiers did not dare to advance.

古文：而濬乘胜纳降，浑耻而且忿，乃表濬违诏不受节度，诬罪状之。
现代文：而王浚乘胜受降，王浑感到羞耻而且忿恨，于是上表说王浚违抗诏书不受节制调度，编织罪名上告他。
English: However, Wang Jun was humiliated and angry when he was defeated. Therefore, the above table said that Wang Jun's defiance of the edict was not subject to restraint, and he was accused of weaving.

古文：有司遂按濬槛车征，帝弗许，诏让濬曰： 伐国事重，宜令有一。
现代文：有关官吏于是要依法用槛车征王浚，皇帝不许，下诏责备王浚说： 讨伐敌国事关重大，命令应该统一。
English: The relevant officials then wanted to use the threshold car to recruit Wang Jun in accordance with the law, but the emperor did not allow it, and the next edict rebuked Wang Jun, saying: The crusade against the enemy country is of great importance, and the order should be unified.

古文：前诏使将军受安车将军浑节度，浑思谋深重，案甲以待将军。
现代文：先前下韶书让将军受安东将军王浑节度，王浑谋略深远，按兵不动等待将军。
English: Previously, the imperial edict had made the general subject to the dictates of General Anton Wanghun. Wanghun made far-reaching plans and waited for the general without moving.

古文：云何径前，不从浑命，违制昧利，甚失大义。
现代文：为什么自行前进，不服从王浑的命令，违背制度昧于利益，很是有失大义。
English: Why go ahead on their own, disobey Wang Hun's orders, violate the system is not in the interest, it is very unjust.

古文：将军功勋，简在朕心，当率由诏书，崇成王法，而于事终恃功肆意，朕将何以令天下？ 
现代文：将军的功勋，全记在我心中，应当一切依照诏书，崇大成就王法，如果都仗着有功而任意行事，我将靠什么号令天下? 
English: The merits of the general are all recorded in my heart. Everything should be done in accordance with the edict, and the king's law should be sublimely achieved. If everyone acts arbitrarily on the basis of merit, what will I rely on to command the world?

古文：濬上书自理曰：
现代文：王浚上书自行陈述道理说：
English: Wang Jun said in his self-declared reason for submitting the letter:

古文：臣前被庚戌诏书曰： 军人乘胜，猛气盆壮，便当顺流长骛，直造秣陵。 
现代文：我先前接受《庚戌诏书》说： 军人乘胜，勇猛的精神更盛，就该顺流推进，直奔拯堕。 
English: I had previously accepted the "Kung Fu Imperial Rescript" as saying: "When a soldier is victorious and his courageous spirit is stronger, he should advance along the stream and go straight to salvation.

古文：臣被诏之日，即便东下。
现代文：我接受诏书那天，就开始束进。
English: On the day I received the imperial edict, I began to bundle up.

古文：又前被诏书云 太尉贾充总统诸方，自镇东大将军伷及浑、濬、彬等皆受充节度 ，无令臣别受浑节度之文。
现代文：此外先前韶书又说 太尉贾充总管各方，自镇束大将军司马佃及王浑、王浚、唐彬等人都受贾充节制调度 ，没有命令我另外接受王浑节度的文字。
English: In addition, the previous imperial edict also said that Second Lieutenant Jia Chong was in charge of all parties, and that General Sima Ye and Wang Hun, Wang Jun, Tang Bin and others were all subject to Jia Chong's control. I was not ordered to accept Wang Hun's control.

古文：臣自连巴丘，所向风靡，知孙皓穷踧，势无所至。
现代文：我自从到达巴丘，所向披靡，知道孙皓窘迫，已经没有威势。
English: Since I arrived in Bachu, I have been invincible. Knowing Sun Yat-sen's predicament, I no longer have any power.

古文：十四日至牛渚，去秣陵二百里，宿设部分，为攻取节度。
现代文：十四日到达牛渚，离秣陵二百里，驻扎安排，为攻取部署。
English: On the 14th, they arrived at Ushizuchi, 200 miles from Fuling, and were stationed there in preparation for the invasion.

古文：前至三山，见浑军在北岸，遣书与臣，可暂来过，共有所议，亦不语臣当受节度之意。
现代文：前进到三山，看到王浑的军队在北岸，他送书信给我，说我可以到他那裹短暂停留，有事共同商议，也没说我该受他节制调度的话。
English: When I advanced to Sanshan and saw Wang Hun's army on the north bank, he sent me a letter saying that I could stay with him for a short time and discuss something together. He did not say that I should be subject to his restrained scheduling.

古文：臣水军风发，乘势造贼城，加宿设部分行有次第，无缘得于长流之中回船过浑，令首尾断绝。
现代文：我的水军迅猛奋发，乘势奔赴敌城，加上部署行进有次第，无法在浩荡的江水中调转船头到王浑那裹，使得船队首尾断绝。
English: My navy made a rapid and vigorous start, taking advantage of the situation to rush to the enemy city, and with the deployment of marching in order, it was impossible to turn the bow of the ship to Wanghunna in the turbulent river water, making the fleet cut off from end to end.

古文：须臾之间，皓遣使归命。
现代文：转眼之间，孙皓派遣使者来投降。
English: In the blink of an eye, Sun Yat-sen sent an envoy to surrender.

古文：臣即报浑书，并写皓笺，具以示浑，使速来，当于石头相待。
现代文：我当即给王浑覆信，并抄写了孙皓的书信，都交给王浑遇目，让他快来，我将在石头等他。
English: I immediately replied to Wang Hun's letter and copied Sun Yat-sen's letter. I gave them to Wang Hun when I met him. I told him to come quickly and I would wait for him at the stone.

古文：军以日中至秣陵，暮乃被浑所下当受节度之符，欲令臣明十六日悉将所领，还围石头，备皓越逸。
现代文：军队在中午到达秣陵，黄昏时就接到王浑下达的该受他节度的符命，想命令我在第二天即十六统领我全部军队回师包围石头，防备孙皓逃逸。
English: The army arrived at Fuling at noon. At dusk, I received an order from Wang Hun that I should be subject to his discipline. He wanted to order me to lead all my troops back to the division the next day, the 16th, to surround the stone and prevent Sun Yat-sen from escaping.

古文：又索蜀兵及镇南诸军人名定见。
现代文：又索取蜀军及镇南各军人名约定见面。
English: He also asked for the names of soldiers from the Shu army and the south of the town to meet.

古文：臣以为皓已来首都亭，无缘共合空围。
现代文：我认为孙皓已来都亭伏罪，没必要一同徒劳地包围。
English: I think that Sun Yat-sen has come to the capital to commit a crime, and there is no need to encircle it together in vain.

古文：又兵人定见，不可仓卒，皆非当今之急，不可承用。
现代文：再说军人约定见面，不能仓猝，又都不是眼下的急事，无法接受命令。
English: Moreover, when soldiers agree to meet, they should not be in a hurry, nor should it be a matter of immediate urgency, and they should not accept orders.

古文：中诏谓臣忽弃明制，专擅自由。
现代文：韶书说我忽视抛弃制度，独断专行。
English: Zou Shu said that I ignored the abandonment of the system and acted arbitrarily.

古文：伏读严诏，惊怖悚忄栗，不知躯命当所投厝。
现代文：拜读严厉的诏书，惊恐战栗，不知命运将会如何。
English: They read the stern edict, trembling with fear, not knowing what their fate would be.

古文：岂惟老臣独怀战灼，三军上下咸尽丧气。
现代文：岂衹我一人心怀恐惧，三军上下都丧失了锐气。
English: Am I the only one with fear in my heart? All three armies have lost their spirit.

古文：臣受国恩，任重事大，常恐托付不效，孤负圣朝，故投身死地，转战万里，被蒙宽恕之恩，得从临履之宜。是以凭赖威灵，幸而能济，皆是陛下神策庙算。
现代文：我享受国家恩典，责任重大，常怕辜负皇上托付，对不起朝廷。因而投身于凶险的战场，转战万里，蒙受宽恕的恩典，得以有见机行事的方便，因而凭藉威灵，侥幸成功，都是陛下神机妙算。
English: I enjoy the grace of the state, I have great responsibilities, I am always afraid of failing to live up to the emperor's trust, and I am sorry to the court. Therefore, I threw myself into the perilous battlefield, traveled thousands of miles to fight, received the grace of forgiveness, and was able to act opportunistically. Therefore, by virtue of will and luck, success is His Majesty's divine strategy.

古文：臣承指授，效鹰犬之用耳，有何勋劳而恃功肆意，宁敢昧利而违圣诏。
现代文：我按照指点，效鹰犬之劳罢了，有什么功勋能让我仗着有功而放任自己呢，难道敢昧于利益而违背圣诏吗。
English: According to the instructions, I am only following the work of the eagle and the dog. What merit can let me rely on merit and let myself go? Do I dare to violate the holy edict for the sake of profit?

古文：臣以十五日至秣陵，而诏书以十六日起洛阳，其间悬阔，不相赴接，则臣之罪责宜蒙察恕。
现代文：我十五日到达秣陵，而诏书十六日从洛阳发出，这期间间隔很长，不相连接，那么我的罪责应受到考虑宽恕。
English: I arrived in Fuling on the 15th, and the edict was issued from Luoyang on the 16th. This period is long and not connected, so my guilt should be considered and forgiven.

古文：假令孙皓犹有螳螂举斧之势，而臣轻军单入，有所亏丧，罪之可也。
现代文：假如孙皓仍有螳螂举斧的势头，而我率轻军自行攻入，造成亏损丧亡，责罚我是可以的。
English: If Sun Yat-sen still has the momentum of a cockroach lifting an axe, and I lead a light army to attack on my own, causing losses and deaths, I can be punished.

古文：臣所统八万余人，乘胜席卷。
现代文：我所统领的八万多人，乘胜追击。
English: The more than 80,000 people under my command took advantage of the victory and pursued the enemy.

古文：皓以众叛亲离，无复羽翼，匹夫独立，不能庇其妻子，雀鼠贪生，苟乞一活耳。
现代文：孙皓已经众叛亲离，不再有帮凶，孤身一人，不能庇护妻儿，雀鼠贪生，苟且求得活命罢了。
English: Sun Yat-sen has been abandoned by all his relatives, he no longer has any accomplices, he is all alone, he cannot shelter his wife and children, and the mice are greedy for life and are just begging for their lives.

古文：而江北诸军不知其虚实，不早缚取，自为小误。
现代文：而江北诸军不知吴国虚实，不早俘获，自是小的失误。
English: However, the armies in the north of the Yangtze River did not know the reality of Wuzhong and did not capture it early, which was a small mistake.

古文：臣至便得，更见怨恚，并云守贼百日，而令他人得之，言语噂沓，不可听闻。
现代文：我马到成功，更遭人怨恨，并说守候敌人一百天，而让别人得了功劳，议论纷杂，无法入耳。
English: I was immediately successful, and even more hated by people, and said that I would wait for the enemy for a hundred days, and let others get the credit.

古文：案《春秋》之义，大夫出疆，由有专辄。
现代文：按《春秋》的大义，大夫出外，尚且有自主权。
English: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," doctors have the right to go out and have autonomy.

古文：臣虽愚蠢，以为事君之道，唯当竭节尽忠，奋不顾身，量力受任，临事制宜，苟利社稷，死生以之。
现代文：我虽然愚蠢，但认为侍奉国君的道义，衹应竭尽节操忠心，奋不顾身，根据能力接受任务，临事制定对策，衹要对国家有利，任凭生死。
English: Although I am stupid, I think that the morality of serving the sovereign is that one should be loyal and devoted to the best of one's ability, accept tasks according to one's ability, formulate countermeasures according to one's ability, be beneficial to the country, and not care about life and death.

古文：若其顾护嫌疑，以避咎责，此是人臣不忠之利，实非明主社稷之福也。
现代文：如果担心招致嫌疑，而躲避罪责，这是作臣的不忠的利益所在，实在不是圣明君主与朝廷的福分。
English: If, for fear of arousing suspicion, one avoids culpability, this is where the disloyal interests of a vassal lie, and is certainly not a blessing shared by a saintly monarch and the imperial court.

古文：臣不自料，忘其鄙劣，披布丹心，输写肝脑，欲竭股肱之力，加之以忠贞，庶必扫除凶逆，清一宇宙，愿令圣世与唐虞比隆。
现代文：我不自量力，不顾自己的地位低下，披露赤胆忠心，倾吐忠心竭力不惜生命的实情，希望竭尽辅佐大臣的力量，加上忠贞，但愿定能扫除凶敌叛逆，统一安定天下，愿圣世与唐尧虞舜同样昌盛。
English: I will do my best, regardless of my lowly status, to reveal my red-blooded loyalty, to pour out my loyalty, to spare no effort to spare the truth of life, to hope to exhaust the power of the Vice-Minister, and to be loyal. I hope to be able to sweep away the fierce enemy and rebellion, to unify and stabilize the world, and I hope that the Holy World and the Tang Dynasty will be equally prosperous.

古文：陛下粗察臣之愚款，而识其欲自效之诚，是以授臣以方牧之任，委臣以征讨之事。
现代文：陛下大致清楚我的老实忠诚，而且知道我本人愿意效力的诚心，因而授予我治理一方的重任，把征讨的大事交付给我。
English: His Majesty, being well aware of my honesty and fidelity, and knowing my sincerity in wanting to be of service, has entrusted me with the important task of governing the country, and has entrusted me with the important matter of collecting taxes.

古文：虽燕主之信乐毅，汉祖之任萧何，无以加焉。
现代文：即便是燕主信任乐毅，汉祖信任萧何，也无法超过您对我的信任。
English: Even if the Lord of the Swallows trusts Le Yi, and the Han Zu trusts Xiao He, they cannot exceed your trust in me.

古文：受恩深重，死且不报，而以顽疏，举错失宜。
现代文：受恩深重，用死都难以报答，而我因顽钝疏忽，举措不当。
English: I am deeply indebted to you, and it would be difficult for me to repay you with my life. However, due to my obtuse negligence, my actions were inappropriate.

古文：陛下弘恩，财加切让，惶怖怔营，无地自厝，愿陛下明臣赤心而已。
现代文：陛下弘恩，仅对我加以责备，惶恐不安，无地自容，但愿陛下明白我的赤胆忠心而已。
English: Your Majesty Hong En, only reproaches me, panics, and has no self-respect, but I hope that Your Majesty understands my red-blooded loyalty.

古文：浑又腾周浚书，云濬军得吴宝物。
现代文：王浑致书周浚，说王濬的军队得到了吴的宝物。
English: Wang Hun wrote to Zhou Jun, saying that Wang Qian's army had obtained Wu's treasure.

古文：濬复表曰：
现代文：王浚又上表说：
English: Wang Jun went on to say:

古文：被壬戌诏书，下安东将所上扬州刺史周浚书，谓臣诸军得孙皓宝物，又谓牙门将李高放火烧皓伪宫。
现代文：接《壬戌诏书》，下达安东将军所上呈彊业刺史且逡的书信，说我所统领的军队得到了逐蹬的实物，又说牙门将李高放火烧孙壁的伪宫。
English: In response to the "Imperial Edict of Nanking," I sent a letter to General Andong's office, in which there was a bitter history and a bitter letter, saying that the army I commanded had received the real thing, and that the gatekeeper Li Gao had set fire to the pseudo-palace of Sunbi.

古文：辄公文上尚书，具列本末。
现代文：就写公文上报尚书，把事情的情形都罗列出来。
English: Write an official document and submit it to the government, listing all the circumstances of the case.

古文：又闻浑案陷上臣。
现代文：又听说王浑写文书诬陷上告我。
English: I also heard that Wang Hun falsely accused me of writing a document and sued me.

古文：臣受性愚忠，行事举动，信心而前，期于不负神明而已。
现代文：我生性愚钝忠厚，一举一动，问心无愧就去做，衹希望不辜负神明就行了。
English: I'm stupid and loyal by nature, and I'll do whatever it takes with a clear conscience, as long as I hope to live up to the gods.

古文：秣陵之事，皆如前所表，而恶直丑正，实繁有徒，欲构南箕，成此贝锦，公于圣世，反白为黑。
现代文：秣陵的事，都如同我先前上表说的那样，然而嫉害正直，大有人在，故意编造，罗织罪名，公然行于圣世，颠倒黑白。
English: The case of Fuling is the same as I said above. However, there are many people who are jealous of honesty, deliberately fabricate and fabricate crimes, openly act in the holy world, and reverse black and white.

古文：夫佞邪害国，自古而然。
现代文：佞臣奸邪害国，自古就是那样。
English: It has been that way since ancient times, when vassals betrayed and harmed the country.

古文：故无极破楚，宰嚭灭吴，及至石显，倾乱汉朝，皆载在典籍，为世所戒。
现代文：因而无捶攻破楚，空颤消灭呈，至于亘题，搞选朝，这些都记载在典籍中，被世人引以为戒。
English: Therefore, there is no way to break through the Chu, the air tremors are eliminated, and as for the eternal question, to engage in the election of the dynasty, these are recorded in the classics, and are cautioned by the world.

古文：昔乐毅伐齐，下城七十，而卒被谗间，脱身出奔。
现代文：过去銮毅讨伐齐，攻下七十个城池，然而最终被谗言离间，脱身出奔。
English: In the past, he fought tirelessly and captured seventy castles. However, he was eventually outmaneuvered and ran away.

古文：乐羊既反，谤书盈箧。
现代文：乐羊得胜回朝后，诽谤他的书信装满了书箱。
English: After Le Yang's triumphant return to the imperial court, boxes were filled with letters slandering him.

古文：况臣顽疏，能免谗慝之口！
现代文：何况我顽钝疏漏，怎能堵得上说坏话人的嘴!
English: Besides, how can I, with my obtuse negligence, shut the mouths of those who speak ill of me!

古文：然所望全其首领者，实赖陛下圣哲钦明，使浸润之谮不得行焉。
现代文：然而我能保全身首的希望所在，全仗着陛下圣明，使渐进的谗言行不通。
English: But there is hope that I can save my head, all thanks to His Holiness, so that the gradual criticism does not work.

古文：然臣孤根独立，朝无党援，久弃遐外，人道断绝，而结恨强宗，取怨豪族。
现代文：然而我势孤力单，朝中没有同党声援，长久地被抛在荒远的地方，人事关系断绝，而又舆势力强大的宗派豪门结下了仇怨。
English: However, I was all alone, there was no solidarity with the party in the DPRK, I was left in a remote place for a long time, personal relationships were severed, and the sectarian giants with strong public opinion created a grudge.

古文：以累卵之身，处雷霆之冲；茧栗之质，当豺狼之路，其见吞噬，岂抗脣齿！
现代文：以危如累卵的自身，处于雷霆的冲击中；以初生牛犊弱小的身躯，挡在豺狼的道路上，将被吞噬，怎么抵御得了唇齿!
English: He that exposes himself to danger is in the lash of the thunderbolt; he that with the body of a new-born calf, weak and small, stands in the way of the wolf, will be devoured; how can he resist the teeth and lips!

古文：夫犯上干主，其罪可救，乖忤贵臣，则祸在不测。
现代文：冒犯了国君，这个罪是可以挽救的，得罪了权贵大臣，那灾祸就难以测度。
English: If you offend the sovereign, the sin can be redeemed; if you offend a high-ranking minister, the calamity is difficult to measure.

古文：故硃云折槛，婴逆鳞之怒，庆忌救之，成帝不问。
现代文：因此朱云折断囚笼，大大惹怒了成帝，庆忌救他，盛童不再问罪。
English: Therefore, Zhu Yun broke the prison cage, greatly angered Emperor Cheng, celebrated and saved him, and Sheng Tong no longer asked for punishment.

古文：望之、周堪违忤石显，虽阖朝嗟叹，而死不旋踵。
现代文：望之、且垡得罪了互题，虽然满朝叹息，而死亡仍无可避免。
English: Although the imperial court was filled with grief, death was still inevitable.

古文：此臣之所大怖也。
现代文：这是我深感恐怖的。
English: That's what I'm really scared about.

古文：今浑之支党姻族内外，皆根据磐，并处世位。
现代文：如今王浑的党羽姻亲内外，都相互勾结，都处于世代相承的官位。
English: Today, Wang Hun's in-laws, both inside and outside the party, are in collusion with each other, and they are all in official positions inherited from generation to generation.

古文：闻遣人在洛中，专共交构，盗言孔甘，疑惑观听。
现代文：听说在洛中派遣了人，专门在一起勾结，谗言很是动听，疑惑人们的视听。
English: I heard that someone was sent to Lozhong specifically to collude with each other. The slander was very persuasive, casting doubt on people's eyes and ears.

古文：夫曾参之不杀人，亦以明矣，然三人传之，其母投杼。
现代文：曾参不杀人，也是明明白白的了，然而三人传说他杀人，他母亲就吓得扔下了织布梭子而走。
English: It was clear that he did not want to kill anyone, but the three of them were rumored to have killed him, and his mother was so frightened that she threw down her loom and ran away.

古文：今臣之信行，未若曾参之著；而谗构沸腾，非徒三夫之对，外内扇助，为二五之应。
现代文：如今我的信用品行，不如曾参那么显著；而谗言沸腾，不仅仅是三个人在说，内外煽动，众人响应。
English: Today, my creditworthiness is not as obvious as it once was; and the criticism is boiling, not just three people are talking, inciting inside and outside, and everyone is responding.

古文：夫猛兽当途，麒麟恐惧，况臣脆弱，敢不悚忄栗。
现代文：猛兽挡路，麒麟恐惧，何况我脆弱，怎能不战栗!
English: A ferocious beast blocks my path, a unicorn frightens me, and I'm so fragile, how can I not tremble!

古文：伪吴君臣，今皆生在，便可验问，以明虚实。
现代文：伪吴的君臣，如今都活着，造就可以验证审问，从而辨明真假。
English: The princes and ministers of the pseudo-Wu are all alive today, so we can verify the interrogation and thus distinguish the true from the false.

古文：前伪中郎将孔摅说，去二月武昌失守，水军行至。
现代文：先前伪中郎将孔摅说，去年二月武昌失守，水军将到。
English: Former pseudo-middle-ranking officer Kong Hao said that when Wuchang was lost in February last year, the navy would arrive.

古文：皓案行石头还，左右人皆跳刀大呼云： 要当为陛下一死战决之。 
现代文：孙皓巡视石头回朝，左右人都舞刀大呼说： 总该为陛下决一死战。 
English: When Sun Yat-sen inspected the stone and returned to the imperial court, people on both sides of him raised their swords and shouted, "We must fight to the death for His Majesty."

古文：皓意大喜，谓必能然，便尽出金宝，以赐与之。
现代文：孙皓心中大喜，认为必定能那样，于是就悉数拿出金银实物，去赐给他们。
English: Sun Yat-sen was overjoyed in his heart, thinking that he would definitely be able to do that, so he took out all the gold and silver in kind and gave it to them.

古文：小人无状，得便持走，皓惧，乃图降首。
现代文：小人无礼，得到就拿着跑了，孙皓恐惧，就打算投降。
English: The villain was rude and took what he got and ran away. Sun Yat-sen was afraid and planned to surrender.

古文：降使适去，左右劫夺财物，略取妻妾，放火烧宫。
现代文：投降的使者刚离去，左右劫夺财物，掠夺妻妾，放火烧宫。
English: The surrendering envoys had just left, looting property left and right, plundering wives and concubines, and setting fire to the palace.

古文：皓逃身窜首，恐不脱死，臣至，遣参军主者救断其火耳。
现代文：孙皓拼命逃窜，惟恐不能活命，我到了那裹，派参军主事的人去扑灭大火。
English: Sun Yat-sen desperately fled, fearing that he would not survive. When I got there, I sent the person in charge of the army to extinguish the fire.

古文：周浚以十六日前入皓宫，臣时遣记室吏往视书籍，浚使收缚。
现代文：周浚于十六日前进入孙皓的宫室，我当时派遣记室吏去视察书籍，周浚派人把记室吏拘禁。
English: Sixteen days ago, Zhou Jun entered Sun Yat-sen's palace room. At that time, I sent a recorder to inspect the books, and Zhou Jun sent a person to detain the recorder.

古文：若有遗宝，则浚前得，不应移踪后人，欲求苟免也。
现代文：如果有遣留下的财宝，那么周浚已在先得到，不该留下踪迹给后人，以期苟且免罪。
English: If there is any treasure left behind, then Zhou Jun should have obtained it first, and should not leave a trace for future generations, in the hope of being exonerated.

古文：臣前在三山得浚书云： 皓散宝货以赐将士，府库略虚。 
现代文：我先前在三山收到周浚的书信说： 孙皓分发财宝赏赐将士，库房中被掠夺空虚。 
English: I had previously received a letter from Zhou Jun in Sanzhan, saying: Sun Yat-sen distributed treasure to reward soldiers, and the storehouses were looted and emptied.

古文：而今复言 金银箧笥，动有万计 ，疑臣军得之。
现代文：而如今又说 金银竹箱，数以万计 ，怀疑我的军队拿去了。
English: And now they are saying that the army has taken away tens of thousands of gold and silver bamboo boxes, and they suspect me.

古文：言语反覆，无复本末。
现代文：言语反复，不再有事情的原委。
English: Words are repeated, and there is no longer an original committee.

古文：臣复与军司张牧、汝南相冯紞等共入观皓宫，乃无席可坐。
现代文：我又与军司张牧、汝南相冯鱿等人一同进孙皓的宫室观看，竟然没有地方可坐。
English: I also went into Sun Yat-sen's palace room with the military governor Zhang Mu and the minister of the south, Feng Ye, to watch, but there was no place to sit.

古文：后日又与牧等共视皓舟船，浑又先臣一日上其船，船上之物，皆浑所知见。
现代文：日后又与张牧等人一同去看孙皓的舟船，王浑又比我早一天上了孙皓的船。船上的东西，都是王浑所知道看见的。
English: Later, together with Zhang Mu and others, I went to see Sun Yat-sen's boat. Wang Hun boarded Sun Yat-sen's boat one day before me. Everything on the boat was known and seen by Wang Hun.

古文：臣之案行，皆出其后，若有宝货，浑应得之。
现代文：我的巡行，都在他之后，如果有宝物，王浑应该得到了。
English: My parade is after him. If there is a treasure, Wang Hun should get it.

古文：又臣将军素严，兵人不得妄离部阵间。
现代文：再说我治军一向严明，军人不许擅自离开部队战阵。
English: Moreover, I have always been strict in governing the army, and soldiers are not allowed to leave the army battlefront without permission.

古文：在秣陵诸军。凡二十万众。
现代文：在秣陵的几路军队，总计二十万人。
English: Several armies in Fuling, totaling two hundred thousand people.

古文：臣军先至，为土地之主。
现代文：我的军队先到，成了一地之主。
English: My army arrived first and became the master of the land.

古文：百姓之心，皆归仰臣，臣切敕所领，秋毫不犯。
现代文：百姓的心，都归附仰仗我，我深切告诫我所统领的部队，秋毫不犯。
English: The hearts of the people are turned to me, and I have charged the troops under my command not to commit this outrage.

古文：诸有市易，皆有伍任证左，明从券契，有违犯者，凡斩十三人，皆吴人所知也。
现代文：凡有市场交易，都有数人担任见证，明确地依从契约，有违犯的人，共斩杀了十三个，这都是吴人所知道的。
English: Whenever there was a market transaction, there were several people who served as witnesses and clearly complied with the contract. If there was a violation, a total of thirteen people were killed. This was all known to the people of Wu.

古文：余军纵横，诈称臣军，而臣军类皆蜀人，幸以此自别耳，岂独浚之将士皆是夷齐，而臣诸军悉聚盗跖耶！
现代文：其他的军队乱窜于各处，诈称是我的部下，而我军都是蜀人，幸亏靠逭一点自我区别。难道周浚的将士都是伯夷、叔齐，而我的各军全部聚集了盗跖吗!
English: Other armies are rampaging everywhere, falsely claiming to be my subordinates, while our army leaders are all Shu people, fortunately with a little self-distinction. Could it be that Zhou Jun's soldiers are all Bo Yi and Xiu Qi, while all my armies have gathered stolen plunder?

古文：时有八百余人，缘石头城劫取布帛。
现代文：当时有八百余人，顺着石头城劫取布帛。
English: At that time, there were more than eight hundred people along the stone city to rob cloth bags.

古文：臣牙门将军马潜即收得二十余人，并疏其督将姓名，移以付浚，使得自科结，而寂无反报，疑皆纵遣，绝其端绪也。
现代文：我的牙门将军马荡当即捕获二十多人，都分别记下了他们督将的姓名，移交给周浚，使他能自行依法了结，然而没有了音信返报，我怀疑都被放纵走了，断绝了此事的头绪。
English: My dentist, General Ma Rong, immediately captured more than twenty people, and they all separately recorded the names of their superiors and handed them over to Zhou Jun, so that he could settle the matter according to law on his own. However, there was no reply to the message, and I suspect that they were all allowed to leave, breaking off the clue of the matter.

古文：又闻吴人言，前张悌战时，所杀财有二千人，而浑、浚露布言以万计。
现代文：又听吴人说，先前张悌作战时，仅被杀了两千人，而王浑、周浚散布说敷以万计。
English: They also heard from the Wu people that only two thousand people were killed in the previous battle of Zhangye, while Wang Hun and Zhou Jun spread the rumor that tens of thousands were killed.

古文：以吴刚子为主簿，而遣刚至洛，欲令刚增斩级之数。
现代文：以昱剧的儿子为主簿，而派呈剧去盗，想让昱剑增报杀敌的数目。
English: With the son of Fen opera as the main book, he sent Fen opera to steal, hoping to increase the number of enemies killed by Fen sword.

古文：可具问孙皓及其诸臣，则知其定审。
现代文：可以全都向孙皓及他的大臣们问询，就可以详细确定地知道。
English: You can all ask Sun Yat-sen and his ministers, and you can know for sure in detail.

古文：若信如所闻，浚等虚诈，尚欺陛下，岂惜于臣！
现代文：如果真如同我听到的那样，周浚等人虚报欺诈，尚且欺骗陛下，难道会怜惜我吗!
English: If it is true, as I have heard, that Zhou Jun and others falsely reported the fraud, and even deceived His Majesty, will he pity me?

古文：云臣屯聚蜀人，不时送皓，欲有反状。
现代文：说我屯聚蜀人，不按时交送珏壁，有想造反的样子。
English: He said that I gathered people from Shu and did not deliver the walls on time, and seemed to want to rebel.

古文：又恐动吴人，言臣皆当诛杀，取其妻子，冀其作乱，得骋私忿。
现代文：又恐吓吴人，说我将会把他们都杀掉，掠取他们的妻儿，希望他们作乱，得以发泄私忿。
English: I also threatened the Wu people, saying that I would kill them all and take their wives and children, hoping that they would revolt and vent their private anger.

古文：谋反大逆，尚以见加，其余谤沓，故其宜耳。
现代文：谋反大逆不道，尚且还要被再加罪名，其余诽谤言论，也就是很自然的了。
English: In addition to being charged with conspiring to commit treason, the rest of the slanderous remarks are also quite natural.

古文：浑案臣 瓶磬小器，蒙国厚恩，频繁擢叙，遂过其任 。
现代文：到更奏报我 小小才能，蒙受国家厚恩，频繁提拔任用，于是就超过了他的能力 。
English: To make matters worse, my small talent, favored by the state, frequent promotion and appointment, exceeded his ability.

古文：浑此言最信，内省惭惧。
现代文：王运这话最真实，心中反省惭愧恐惧。
English: Wang Yun's words are the most real, and his heart is full of remorse, shame and fear.

古文：今年平吴，诚为大庆，于臣之身，更受咎累。
现代文：今年平定了吴，实在是大的喜事，而对于我来说，反而受灾患连累。
English: The fact that Wu has been pacified this year is really a great joy, but for me, it has been a series of disasters.

古文：既无孟侧策马之好，而令济济之朝有谗邪之人，亏穆穆之风，损皇代之美。
现代文：既没有孟之厘鞭打马匹以示不矜功的好品德，又让兴盛的朝廷中有进谗言行奸邪的人，损害肃穆的风气，损害皇代的美名。
English: Neither did Meng Zhili whip horses to show the virtue of hard work, nor did he allow the prosperous imperial court to have people who were corrupt, damaging the solemn atmosphere and the reputation of the imperial dynasty.

古文：由臣顽疏，使致于此，拜表流汗，言不识次。
现代文：因为我的顽钝疏漏，造成这种情况，拜送表章汗流满面，语无伦次。
English: Because of my obtuse omission, resulting in this situation, Bai Xing chapter sweaty face, incoherent.

古文：濬至京都，有司奏，濬表既不列前后所被七诏月日，又赦后违诏不受浑节度，大不敬，付廷尉科罪。
现代文：玉璇到了京城，有关官吏奏报，王浚上表既不列前后所受七个诏书的月，又赦免后来违背诏书不受到车节制调度，大不敬，交廷尉治罪。
English: When Yuxuan arrived in Beijing, the relevant officials made a report, and Wang Jun did not list the seven months of the imperial edict he had received before and after, and he was pardoned. Later, if he violated the imperial edict, he would not be subject to car control and dispatch, which was very disrespectful, and he would be punished by a court official.

古文：诏曰： 濬前受诏径造秣陵，后乃下受浑节度。
现代文：诏书说： 王浚先受诏书直奔秣陵，后来才下诏让他受王浑节度。
English: The imperial edict said: Wang Jun first received the imperial edict and went straight to Fuling, and only later did he receive the imperial edict from Wang Hun.

古文：诏书稽留，所下不至，便令与不受诏同责，未为经通。
现代文：诏书滞留，没有达到，如果把这与不接受诏书说成有同等罪责，不能说是合乎情理。
English: If this is said to have the same guilt as not accepting the edict, it cannot be said to be reasonable.

古文：濬不即表上被浑宣诏，此可责也。
现代文：王浚不当即上表报告被王浑宣诏，这是可以责罚的。
English: It is punishable for Wang Jun to improperly announce that the above report was promulgated by Wang Hun.

古文：濬有征伐之劳，不足以一眚掩之。 
现代文：王浚有征战讨伐的功劳，不足以被一点过失掩盖。 
English: Wang Jun's contribution to the crusade is not enough to be covered up by a bit of negligence.

古文：有司又奏，濬赦后烧贼船百三十五艘，辄敕付廷尉禁推。
现代文：有关官吏又奏报，说王浚在诏书赦免吴国后烧敌船一百三十五艘，就该下令交廷尉下狱推究。
English: Relevant officials also reported that Wang Jun should have ordered the courtier to be sent to prison for investigation for burning 135 enemy ships after he pardoned Wu Guo in the edict.

古文：诏曰 勿推 。
现代文：诏书说 不要推究 。
English: The edict said not to speculate.

古文：拜濬辅国大将军，领步兵校尉。
现代文：拜王浚为辅国大将军，兼步兵校尉。
English: Bai Wangjun is an assistant general and an infantry lieutenant.

古文：旧校唯五，置此营自濬始也。
现代文：过去校的编制衹设五个，设置这个营是从王浚开始的。
English: In the past, the establishment of the school consisted of five, and the establishment of this camp began with Wang Jun.

古文：有司又奏，辅国依比，未为达官，不置司马，不给官骑。
现代文：有关官吏又奏报，辅国一职依照条例，不算是高官，不置司马，不给官骑。
English: Relevant officials also reported that, according to the regulations, the post of assistant to the state is not a high-ranking official, does not have a secretary, and does not give the official a horse.

古文：诏依征镇给五百大车，增兵五百人为辅国营，给亲骑百人、官骑十人，置司马。
现代文：诏书令依照征镇的职位给五百大车，增兵五百人为辅国营，给亲骑一百人、官骑十人，设置司马。
English: In accordance with the position of recruiting towns, the imperial rescript ordered the raising of five hundred wagons, the addition of five hundred soldiers to supplement the state camp, one hundred horsemen for relatives, ten horsemen for officials, and the setting up of horses.

古文：封为襄阳县侯，邑万户。
现代文：封为襄阳县侯，封邑一万户。
English: He was given the title of county magistrate of Yangyang County, with 10,000 households in his fief.

古文：封子彝杨乡亭侯，邑千五百户，赐绢万匹，又赐衣一袭、钱三十万及食物。
现代文：封儿子王彝为杨乡亭侯，封邑一千五百户，赐绢一万匹，又赐衣一套、钱三十万及食物。
English: He gave his son Wang Yao the title of Yangxiangtingrumo, and granted him 1,500 households, 10,000 yakitori, a set of clothes, 300,000 yuan and food.

古文：濬自以功大，而为浑父子及豪强所抑，屡为有司所奏，每进见，陈其攻伐之劳，及见枉之状，或不胜忿愤，径出不辞。
现代文：王浚自认为功劳大，而被王浑父子及豪强所压抑，屡次被官吏们弹劾，每逢进见，都陈述自己攻战讨伐的功劳，以及被冤枉的情况，有时忿恨至极，不告辞就径直离去了。
English: Wang Jun considered himself to be of great merit, but he was suppressed by Wang Hun, father and son, and Gaoqiang. He was repeatedly impeached by officials. Whenever he had the opportunity, he stated his merits in the war and crusade, as well as the situation of being wronged. Sometimes he was extremely angry and left without a word.

古文：帝每容恕之。
现代文：皇帝常常宽容原谅他。
English: The emperor often forgave him.

古文：益州护军范通，濬之外亲也。谓濬曰： 卿功则美矣，然恨所以居美者，未尽善也。 
现代文：益州护军范通，是王浚的姻亲，对王浚说： 你的功劳可以说是很大了，然而遣憾的是在能使你享有美名的方面，你没能做到尽善尽美。 
English: Fan Tong, an in-law of Wang Jun, a military escort in Yizhou, said to Wang Jun, "Your achievements can be said to be great, however, it is regrettable that you have not been able to achieve perfection in the aspects that can make you enjoy a good reputation.

古文：濬曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：王浚问： 这是什么意思? 
English: Wang Jun asked: What does this mean?

古文：通曰： 卿旋旆之日，角巾私第，口不言平吴之事。
现代文：范通说： 您凯旋那天，就该头戴角巾回到家中，口中不提平定吴国的事。
English: Fan Tong said: On the day of your triumphant return, you should return home with a kerchief on your head and not mention the matter of pacifying Wu.

古文：若有问者，辄曰： 圣主之德，群帅之力，老夫何力之有焉！ 
现代文：如果有人间，就说： 靠的是圣明国君的美德，众将帅的力量，我在此事上哪有什么功劳呢!
English: If there is anyone among you, let him say: I rely on the virtue of the Holy Emperor Ming and the strength of the generals, so what merit do I have in this matter?

古文：如斯，颜老之不伐，龚遂之雅对，将何以过之。
现代文：，像这样，颜老的不矜功，龚遂的谦虚对答，又怎能超过你呢。
English: , like this, Yan Lao's hard work, and Sui Sui's modest response, how can it surpass you?

古文：蔺生所以屈廉颇，王浑能无愧乎！ 
现代文：蔺相如所以在廉颇面前委屈自己，王浑能不惭愧吗! 
English: Wang Hun couldn't help but feel ashamed for having wronged himself in front of such a shameless person!

古文：濬曰： 吾始惧邓艾之事，畏祸及，不得无言，亦不能遣诸胸中，是吾偏也。 
现代文：王浚说： 我开始时怕邓艾那种事，惧怕灾祸殃及，不能不说，也不能放在心中，这是我气量狭小。 
English: Wang Jun said: At the beginning, I was afraid of Deng Ai's kind of thing, afraid of disaster, I can't help but say it, I can't put it in my heart, this is my narrow scope.

古文：时人咸以濬功重报轻，博士秦秀、太子洗马孟康、前温令李密等并表讼濬之屈。
现代文：当时的人都认为王浚功劳大而报答轻，博士秦秀、太子洗马孟康、前温令李密等人一同上表申述王浚的委屈。
English: At that time, people thought that Wang Jun's merit was great but his reward was light. Doctor Qin Xiu, Prince Zima Mengkang, former Wenling Li Mi and others went to the table to complain about Wang Jun's grievances.

古文：帝乃迁濬镇军大将军，加散骑常侍，领后军将军。
现代文：皇帝于是升王浚为镇军大将军，加任散骑常侍，兼后军将军。
English: The emperor then promoted Wang Jun to be the general of the town army, and he was also appointed as a straggler and general of the rear army.

古文：王浑诣濬，濬严设备卫，然后见之，其相猜防如此。
现代文：王浑拜访王浚，王浚严设防卫，然后才见他，他们之间的相互猜疑防范就是这样。
English: Wang Hun visited Wang Jun, Wang Jun set up a strict defense, and then saw him, the mutual suspicion between them is like this.

古文：濬平吴之后，以勋高位重，不复素业自居，乃玉食锦服，纵奢侈以自逸。
现代文：王浚平定吴国以后，因为功高位重，不再以朴素自居，而玉食锦服。放纵奢侈来自享安逸。
English: After Wang Jun subdued the State of Wu, because of his high rank and great achievements, he no longer considered himself to be simple, but indulged in luxury. Indulgence comes from enjoying comfort.

古文：其有辟引，多是蜀人，示不遗故旧也。
现代文：如有征召引荐，多是蜀人，表示不遗忘故旧。
English: If there is a conscription recommendation, most are Shu people, indicating that they will not forget the past.

古文：后又转濬抚军大将军、开府仪同三司，加特进，散骑常侍、后军将军如故。
现代文：后来又转任王浚为抚军大将军、开府仪同三司，加授特进，散骑常侍、后军将军的职位依旧。
English: Later, Wang Jun was transferred to the position of General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and the positions of the General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, the General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, the General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, the General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, the General of the General Staff of the General Staff of

古文：太康六年卒，时年八十，谥曰武。
现代文：太康六年去世，时年八十岁，谧号武。
English: Taikang died six years later, at the age of eighty, with the posthumous name Wu.

古文：葬柏谷山，大营茔域，葬垣周四十五里，面别开一门，松柏茂盛。
现代文：葬在柏谷山，大规模建造墓地，墓地围墙周长四十五里，四面各开一门，松柏茂盛。
English: He was buried in Mount Kakuya, and a large-scale cemetery was built. The perimeter of the cemetery wall is forty-five miles, with one gate on each side, and the pine and cypress trees are luxuriant.

古文：子矩嗣。
现代文：儿子王矩继嗣。
English: His son, Wang Rui, became his successor.

古文：矩弟暢，散骑郎。
现代文：王矩的弟弟王畅，任散骑郎。
English: Wang Chang, Wang Guo's younger brother, is Ren Sanzhiro.

古文：暢子粹，太康十年，武帝诏粹尚颍川公主，仕至魏郡太守。
现代文：王畅的儿子王粹，太康十年，武帝下诏令王粹娶颖川公主，官至魏郡太守。
English: Wang Chang's son Wang Zi, Taikang for ten years, Emperor Wu ordered Wang Zi to marry Yingchuan Princess, and became the governor of Wei County.

古文：濬有二孙，过江不见齿录。
现代文：王浚有两个孙子，过江南迁后没有被录用。
English: Wang Jun, who has two grandchildren, was not hired after moving south of the Yangtze River.

古文：安西将军恆温镇江陵，表言之曰： 臣闻崇德赏功，为政之所先；兴灭继绝，百王之所务。
现代文：安西将军桓温镇守江陵，上表议论此事说： 我听说崇尚美德赏赐功臣，是从政的首要事情；使泯灭的振兴，使断绝的继续，是各代帝王所从事的。
English: The general of Anxi, Kuan Wen Zhen, who was in charge of the defense of Gangneung, commented on this matter in a speech: I have heard that advocating virtue and rewarding meritorious soldiers are the most important things in politics; the revival of annihilation and the continuation of severance are what emperors have been engaged in for generations.

古文：故德参时雍，则奕世承祀；功烈一代，则永锡祚胤。
现代文：因而德行参与了时世安定，那么世代祭祀不断；功绩显赫于一代，那么永远赐福于后代。
English: Therefore, if virtue participates in the stability of the times, then the sacrifices of the generations will continue; if the merits are outstanding in one generation, then the blessings will always be bestowed on future generations.

古文：案故抚军王濬历职内外，任兼文武，料敌制胜，明勇独断，义存社稷之利，不顾专辄之罪。
现代文：已故抚军大将军王浚历任朝廷内外官职，能文能武，料敌制胜，明智勇敢善决断，胸怀国家利益，不顾专擅的罪名。
English: Wang Jun, the late general of the Fuzhou army, served in various positions inside and outside the imperial court. He was skilled in literature and martial arts, knew how to defeat the enemy, was wise and brave, good at making decisions, had the national interest at heart, and did not care about his criminal record.

古文：荷戈长鹜，席卷万里，僭号之吴，面缚象魏，今皇泽被于九州，玄风洽于区外，襄阳之封，废而莫续；恩宠之号，坠于近嗣。
现代文：持枪长驱直入，席卷万里，僭越名号的吴君，反绑自己在宫门外投降。如今皇帝的恩泽布满九州，谈玄之风融洽于区域以外。襄阳侯的封爵，废置而没人继承；恩宠的名号，在近代后人就坠落了。
English: Wu Jun, the gun-wielding warlord, drove straight in, swept across thousands of miles, and stole the title of Wu Jun, then tied himself up and surrendered outside the palace gate. Nowadays, the emperor's favor is all over Kyushu, and the style of talking about the occult is harmonious outside the region. The title of Xiangyang Marquis was abolished and no one succeeded; the name of grace fell in modern times.

古文：遐迩酸怀，臣窃悼之。
现代文：远近心酸，我暗中悲伤。
English: Near and far, my heart is sad, and I am secretly sad.

古文：濬今有二孙，年出六十，室如悬磬，糊口江滨，四节蒸尝，菜羹不给。
现代文：王浚如今有两个孙子，年过六十，家中一无所有，在江边糊口，四时的节候祭祀，拿不出菜羹。
English: Wang Jun now has two grandchildren, over sixty years old, nothing at home, living by the river, four o'clock festival sacrifice, can't take out the vegetable soup.

古文：昔汉高定业，求乐毅之嗣；世祖旌贤，建葛亮之胤。
现代文：过去漠高祖建立帝业，寻求乐毅的后人；晋世祖表彰贤能，授官于诸葛亮的子孙。
English: In the past, the Mogao ancestor established the imperial family and sought the descendants of Le Yi; the Jin ancestor commended the virtuous and awarded positions to the descendants of Zhuge Liang.

古文：夫效忠异代，立功异国，尚通天下之善，使不泯弃，况濬建元勋于当年，著喜庆于身后，灵基托根于南垂，皇祚中兴于江左，旧物克彰，神器重耀，岂不由伊人之功力也哉！
现代文：在别的朝代效忠，在其他国家立功，尚且可以施行天下的善举，使他们的功业不被遗弃。何况王浚在当年建立了头功，在身后留下了吉祥，祖先把后代托付在南疆，皇室朝廷的帝业在江东复兴重建，旧物能显赫，神器重新光耀，难道不是因为那个人的功劳吗!
English: They have been loyal to other dynasties and made contributions in other countries, and they can still perform the world's good deeds, so that their achievements will not be abandoned. What's more, Wang Jun established the first achievement in that year, leaving auspicious behind, the ancestors entrusted the descendants to Southern Xinjiang, the imperial cause of the royal court was revived and rebuilt in the East of the Yangtze River, the old things can be prominent, the artifact shines again, isn't it because of that person's merit?

古文：诚宜加恩，少垂矜悯，追录旧勋，纂锡茅土。
现代文：实在应该施加恩典，稍加怜悯，追记往日功勋，继承封爵。
English: There really ought to be grace, a bit of mercy, a nod to the past, a knighthood.

古文：则圣朝之恩，宣暢于上，忠臣之志，不坠于地矣。 
现代文：那么圣朝的恩典，在上天畅达，忠臣的志向，不会坠落于地下。 
English: Then the grace of the Holy Dynasty will reach the heavens, and the aspirations of the loyal subjects will not fall to the ground.

古文：卒不见省。
现代文：上表始终不被考虑。
English: The table above is never taken into account.

古文：唐彬，字儒宗，鲁国邹人也。父台，太山太守。
现代文：唐彬字儒宗，是垒厘邹人。父亲唐台，是太山太守。
English: Tang Bin Zi, a Confucian, was a native of Yoli. His father, Tang Tai, was the governor of Taishan.

古文：彬有经国大度，而不拘行检。
现代文：唐彬有治国的大度量，而不拘品行检点。
English: Tang Bin had a great capacity for governing the country, but he was not a good judge of character.

古文：少便弓马，好游猎，身长八尺，走及奔鹿，强力兼人。
现代文：年少时熟悉骑马射箭，喜好游猎，身高八尺，跑起来能追上奔跑的鹿，力气有几个人那么大。
English: When he was young, he was familiar with horseback archery, liked hunting, was eight feet tall, could run up and catch a running deer, and had the strength of several people.

古文：晚乃敦悦经史，尤明《易经》，随师受业，还家教授，恆数百人。
现代文：后来才看重喜好经书史籍，尤其懂《易经》，跟老师学习，回家教授，常有几百人。
English: Only later did they attach importance to their liking for scriptures and historical books, especially understanding the I Ching, studying with teachers, and going home to teach. There are often several hundred of them.

古文：初为郡门下掾，转主簿。
现代文：起初任郡门下掾，转任主簿。
English: At first, he served as a deputy sheriff of the county gate, and then became the chief clerk.

古文：刺史王沈集诸参佐，盛论距吴之策，以问九郡吏。
现代文：刺史王沈召集诸多手下人，热烈讨论抵御吴的对策，向九郡官吏发问。
English: Wang Sheng called together many of his subordinates to discuss the countermeasures to resist Wu, and asked questions to officials from nine counties.

古文：彬与谯郡主张恽俱陈吴有可兼之势，沈善其对。
现代文：唐彬与谯郡主簿张惮都陈述吴国可以被兼并的形势，王沈赞赏他们的回答。
English: Both Tang Bin and Zhang Shuo, the chief of the county of Yao, stated the situation that Wu could be annexed, and Wang Shen appreciated their answer.

古文：又使彬难言吴未可伐者，而辞理皆屈。
现代文：又让唐彬反驳那些认为不能伐吴的人，那些人都理屈辞穷。
English: He also let Tang Bin refute those who believed that it was impossible to conquer Wu. Those people were all poor in reason.

古文：还迁功曹，举孝廉，州辟主簿，累迁别驾。
现代文：回去后升任功曹，推举孝廉，州裹召他为主簿，逐渐升迁任别驾。
English: After returning, he was promoted to gong cao, promoted to xiaolian, the state called him to be the main book, and he was gradually promoted to be the second driver.

古文：彬忠肃公亮，尽规匡救，不显谏以自彰，又奉使诣相府计事，于时僚佐皆当世英彦，见彬莫不钦悦，称之于文帝，荐为掾属。
现代文：唐彬忠诚恭敬公正开明，尽心规劝匡正，不为表现自己而显示劝谏。又奉命去相府商议事情，当时幕僚们都是当世的名人才子，见到唐彬没有不钦佩高兴的，到文帝那裹称赞他，要推荐他为属官。
English: Tang Bin was loyal, respectful, fair and open-minded. He tried his best to persuade Kuang Zheng, and did not show persuasion in order to show himself. He was also ordered to go to the Imperial Palace to discuss matters. At that time, the staff members were all famous people in the world. Seeing Tang Bin was not without admiration and joy. He went to Emperor Wen to praise him and recommend him as a subordinate officer.

古文：帝以问其参军孔颢，颢忌其能，良久不答。
现代文：文帝向参军孔颢问询此事，孔颢忌妒唐彬的才能，半天不回话。
English: Emperor Wen inquired about the matter with the military officer Kong Qian. Kong Qian was jealous of Tang Bin's talent and did not reply for half a day.

古文：陈骞在坐，敛板而称曰： 彬之为人，胜骞甚远。 
现代文：陈骞在座，收敛笏板说： 唐彬的为人，超过我很多。 
English: Chen Yao, who was present, said, "Tang Bin is a much better person than I am.

古文：帝笑曰： 但能如卿，固未易得，何论于胜。 
现代文：文帝笑着说： 衹要能如同你，就已经难得了，还说什么超过。 
English: Wen Di said with a smile: "If you want to be like you, it's already difficult, but it's more than that.

古文：因辟彬为铠曹属。
现代文：于是征召唐彬任钟曹属。
English: Therefore, Tang Bin Ren Zhong Cao Zhen was conscripted.

古文：帝问曰： 卿何以致辟？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 你凭什么被征用? 
English: The emperor asked: On what basis were you requisitioned?

古文：对曰： 修业陋巷，观古人之遗迹，言满天下无口过，行满天下无怨恶。 
现代文：回答说： 在简陋的街巷裹修治学业，考察古人的遗迹，言论充满天下而没有过失，行为遍及天下而没有怨恶。 
English: He replied, "Studying in the rough streets and alleys, examining the relics of the ancients, speaking freely without fault, and acting freely without resentment.

古文：帝顾四坐曰： 名不虚行。 
现代文：皇帝看着四周说： 名不虚传。 
English: The emperor looked around and said, "The legend is true.

古文：他日，谓孔颢曰： 近见唐彬，卿受蔽贤之责矣。 
现代文：事后，文帝对孔颢说： 近日见到唐彬，你有遮掩贤人的过责啊。 
English: Afterwards, Emperor Wen said to Confucius: "Recently, I saw Tang Bin. You are guilty of covering up for a sage.

古文：初，邓艾之诛也，文帝以艾久在陇右，素得士心，一旦夷灭，恐边情搔动，使彬密察之。
现代文：当初，在邓艾被诛时，文帝因为邓艾长期在胧西，平素很得人心，一旦被灭，恐怕边关形势动荡，派唐彬去暗中察访。
English: At the beginning, when Deng Ai was arrested, Emperor Wen, because Deng Ai had been in Xiamen for a long time and was very popular, once he was killed, I am afraid that the border situation would be turbulent, and sent Tang Bin to secretly inspect.

古文：彬还，白帝曰： 邓艾忌克诡狭，矜能负才，顺从者谓为见事，直言者谓之触迕。
现代文：唐彬回来，对文帝说： 邓艾生性忌妒苛刻诡诈狭隘，夸耀自负，顺从的人被认为会办事，直言的人被认为是冒犯。
English: When Tang Bin returned, he said to Emperor Wen: Deng Aisheng is jealous, harsh, deceitful, narrow-minded, boastful and conceited. Those who are obedient are considered to be able to do things, and those who are outspoken are considered to be offensive.

古文：虽长史司马，参佐牙门，答对失指，辄见骂辱。
现代文：即使是长史司马，参佐牙门，答对不合心意，就被他辱骂。
English: Even Chief Secretary Sima, Senator Sasagamon, was abused by him when he gave an answer that did not suit him.

古文：处身无礼，大失人心。
现代文：做人不讲究礼，大失人心。
English: If you do not pay attention to etiquette, you will lose your heart.

古文：又好施行事役，数劳众力。
现代文：又喜好施行杂事工役，屡次劳师动众。
English: He also likes to carry out miscellaneous work, and has repeatedly mobilized laborers.

古文：陇右甚患苦之，喜闻其祸，不肯为用。
现代文：陇西很是觉得忧虑辛苦，听到他遇上了祸事很高兴，不肯再为他卖力。
English: Shaanxi was very worried and worried. He was very happy to hear that he had met with a disaster, and refused to work hard for him.

古文：今诸军已至，足以镇压内外，愿无以为虑。 
现代文：如今各军已到，足以镇压内外，希望不要为此事担心。 
English: Now that the troops have arrived, they are strong enough to suppress both at home and abroad. I hope you will not worry about this.

古文：俄除尚书水部郎。
现代文：不久拜任尚书水部郎。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Shosho Suiburo.

古文：泰始初，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：泰始初年，赐他关内侯的爵位。
English: In the first year of Taishi, he was given the title of Lord of Kwanai.

古文：出补鄴令，彬道德齐礼，期月化成。
现代文：外放任邺令，唐彬道德符合礼，一年就完成了教化。
English: Tang Bin's morals were in line with etiquette, and he completed his education in just one year.

古文：迁弋阳太守，明设禁防，百姓安之。
现代文：迁任弋阳太守，公开地设立禁令防范，百姓安定。
English: He was transferred to the position of the governor of Shenyang, a ban was publicly established to prevent this, and the people were stabilized.

古文：以母丧去官。
现代文：因为母亲的丧事辞宫。
English: He resigned because of his mother's death.

古文：益州东接吴寇，监军位缺，朝议用武陵太守杨宗及彬。
现代文：益州与呈厘敌寇相邻，监军的位置缺员，朝廷议论任用武陵太守杨宗及唐彬。
English: Yizhou was adjacent to the invaders of Chengli, there was a shortage of supervisors, and the imperial court was debating the appointment of Yang Zong and Tang Bin, the governors of Wuling.

古文：武帝以问散骑常侍文立，立曰： 宗、彬俱不可失。
现代文：武帝以此事间询散骑常侍文立，文立说： 杨宗、唐彬都不可失去。
English: Emperor Wu inquired about this matter with the imperial equerry Wen Li, who said: Yang Zong and Tang Bin should not be lost.

古文：然彬多财欲，而宗好酒，惟陛下裁之。 
现代文：然而唐彬财欲重，而杨宗贪酒，请陛下裁定。 
English: However, Tang Bin is greedy for money, while Yang Zong is greedy for alcohol. Please let His Majesty decide.

古文：帝曰： 财欲可足，酒者难改。 
现代文：武帝说： 财欲可以满足，而贪杯的人难于改变。 
English: Emperor Wu said: The greed for money can be satisfied, but the greedy person is difficult to change.

古文：遂用彬。
现代文：于是任用了唐彬。
English: As a result, Tang Bin was appointed.

古文：寻又诏彬监巴东诸军事，加广武将军。
现代文：不久又下韶命令唐彬监巴东诸军事，加授广武将军。
English: Soon after, he issued an order to Tang Bin to supervise the military in the east of the country, and promoted Guangwu to the rank of general.

古文：上征吴之策，甚合帝意。
现代文：上疏论征吴的策略，很合皇帝心意。
English: Shangzhu's strategy of conquering Wu was very much in line with the emperor's wishes.

古文：后与王濬共伐吴，彬屯据冲要，为众军前驱。
现代文：后来和王遗一同伐星，卢堑占据交通要道，作为众军的先头部队。
English: Later, together with Wang Yue, Lu Yao occupied the main road as the vanguard of the army.

古文：每设疑兵，应机制胜，陷西陵、乐乡，多所擒获。
现代文：常设置疑兵，把握时机取得胜利。攻陷西陵、乐乡，俘获的敌人很多。
English: He often set up suspicious soldiers and seized the opportunity to achieve victory. He conquered Xiling and Le Town, and captured many enemies.

古文：自巴陵、沔口以东，诸贼所聚，莫不震惧，倒戈肉袒。
现代文：自旦医、蛆以东，敌军各部所聚集之处，没有不震惊恐惧的，纷纷倒戈投降。
English: In the areas where the enemy forces were concentrated, such as Zidan and the east of Handan, there was no one who was not shocked and frightened, and they surrendered one after another.

古文：彬知贼寇已殄，孙皓将降，未至建鄴二百里，称疾迟留，以示不竞。
现代文：唐彬知道敌人已经步入绝境，孙皓即将投降，离建邺二百里，声称有病而滞留，以示不争功。
English: Tang Bin knew that the enemy was in a desperate situation and that Sun Yat-sen was about to surrender. He stayed 200 miles away from Jian Ye, claiming that he was ill, to show that he did not want to compete for merits.

古文：果有先到者争物，后到者争功，于时有识莫不高彬此举。
现代文：果然有先到的人争物，后到的人争功，当时有见识的人没有不称赞卢堑这一举动的。
English: As expected, those who came first competed for the goods, and those who came later competed for the merits. At that time, people with insight did not fail to praise Lu Yao's actions.

古文：吴平，诏曰： 广武将军唐彬受任方隅，东御吴寇，南监蛮越，抚宁疆埸，有绥御之绩。
现代文：昱厘平定，韶书说； 广武将军卢丝在边境任职，向东抵御呈寇，向南面临蛮越，抚慰安定疆场，有安邦御敌的功绩。
English: Bali was pacified, the imperial edict said; Guangwu General Lu Si served at the border, resisted the invasion to the east, faced the invasion to the south, soothed and stabilized the battlefield, and had the merit of keeping the country safe from the enemy.

古文：又每慷慨，志在立功。
现代文：又常慷慨陈辞，志在立功。
English: He often made generous speeches, aspiring to do great things.

古文：顷者征讨，扶疾奉命，首启戎行，献俘授馘，勋效显著。
现代文：不久前征讨，带病接受命令，为众军前锋献上俘虏和杀敌之敷，功勋显着。
English: Not long ago, he took part in a military expedition. He was ill when he received the order, and he presented the prisoners and the bedding for killing the enemy to the vanguard of the army. His achievements are remarkable.

古文：其以彬为右将军、都督巴东诸军事。 
现代文：任命卢堑为右将军、都督旦塞诸军事。 
English: Lu Wei was appointed as the right general, and the governor was assigned to the military.

古文：征拜翊军校尉，改封上庸县侯，食邑六千户，赐绢六千匹。
现代文：征拜翊军校尉，改封上庸县侯，食邑六千户，赐绢六千匹。
English: He was enlisted as a lieutenant of the Shanshan Army, and was given the title of the lord of Shangyong County, with 6,000 households and 6,000 yakitori.

古文：朝有疑议，每参预焉。
现代文：朝廷如有疑难，经常参预其中。
English: If there is a problem, the imperial court will often intervene.

古文：北虏侵掠北平，以彬为使持节、监幽州诸军事、领护乌丸校尉、右将军。
现代文：北方敌寇侵扰掠夺北平，任命唐彬为使持节、监幽业诸军事、兼护乌丸校尉、右将军。
English: The northern invaders invaded and plundered Beiping, and Tang Bin was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the overseer of the military, the captain of Wu Maru, and the general of the right.

古文：彬既至镇，训卒利兵，广农重稼，震威耀武，宣喻国命，示以恩信。
现代文：唐毖到达边镇后，训练士卒修治兵器，拓广农田重视农业，振奋军威显示武力，宣传国家法令，显示恩典信用。
English: After Tang Xuan arrived at the border town, the training officers began to repair weapons, expand farmland and attach importance to agriculture, encourage military power to show force, publicize national laws and regulations, and show grace and trust.

古文：于是鲜卑二部大莫廆、擿何等并遣侍子入贡。
现代文：于是鲜卑二部大莫魔、挝何等人都派遣儿子入侍皇帝做人质。
English: As a result, Emperor Xianbei, Empress Dowager Mo, Emperor Lao and others all sent their sons to serve the emperor as hostages.

古文：兼修学校，诲诱无倦，仁惠广被。
现代文：唐彬兼修学校，教诲诱导不知疲倦，仁慈恩惠广泛散布。
English: Tang Bin also attended school, tirelessly taught and guided, and widely spread benevolence and grace.

古文：遂开拓旧境，却地千里。
现代文：于是开拓旧日的边境，推进千里。
English: As a result, they opened up the old borders and advanced thousands of miles.

古文：复秦长城塞，自温城洎于碣石，绵亘山谷且三千里，分军屯守，烽堠相望。
现代文：修复秦长城要塞，从温城至碣石，绵亘山谷中绵延近三千里，分军屯守，烽火台相望。
English: Restoration of the Qin Great Wall fortress, stretching nearly three thousand miles from Wencheng to Shanshi, in the middle of a long valley, with detachments stationed there, looking out over the campfire.

古文：由是边境获安，无犬吠之警，自汉魏征镇莫之比焉。
现代文：从此边境获得安宁，没有犬吠报警，自逻魏以来的大将军没有能比遇他的。
English: Since then, the border has been peaceful, there are no dogs barking to alert the police, and no general since Luo Wei has been able to match him.

古文：鲜卑诸种畏惧，遂杀大莫廆。
现代文：鲜卑各部族畏惧，于是杀了大莫魔。
English: He was feared by all the tribes, so he killed Da Momo.

古文：彬欲讨之，恐列上俟报，虏必逃散，乃发幽冀车牛。
现代文：唐彬想讨伐他们，恐怕按程序等候上报，敌人必定逃散，于是就调动幽冀车牛。
English: Tang Bin wanted to fight them, but he was afraid that if he waited for the report to be submitted according to the procedure, the enemy would surely flee, so he mobilized the Yuji cart and oxen.

古文：参军许祗密奏之。诏遣御史槛车征彬付廷尉，以事直见释。
现代文：参军许祗暗中奏报，下诏派御史槛车征唐彬交付廷尉，因为事出有因被释放。
English: Xu Xiamen, who joined the army, sent a report in the middle of the night, and the imperial edict was issued to dispatch the imperial army to recruit Tang Bin as a court lieutenant, because he was released for some reason.

古文：百姓追慕彬功德，生为立碑作颂。
现代文：百姓追慕唐彬的功德，在唐彬活着的时候为他立碑赞颂。
English: The people admire Tang Bin's merits, and set up a monument to praise him when Tang Bin was alive.

古文：彬初受学于东海阎德，门徒甚多，独目彬有廊庙才。
现代文：唐彬起初在东海阎德那裹求学，阎德学生很多，惟独看中唐彬有在朝中做官的才能。
English: At first, Tang Bin studied in the East Sea at Yan De, and there were many students of Yan De. However, it was believed that Tang Bin had the talent to be an official in the court.

古文：及彬官成，而德已卒，乃为之立碑。
现代文：等到唐彬做了官，而阎德已经死了，于是为阎德立碑。
English: When Tang Bin became an official, and Yan De had already died, a monument was erected for Yan De.

古文：元康初，拜使持节、前将军、领西戎校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：元康初年，授任为使持节、前将军、兼西戎校尉、雍州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Kang era, he was awarded the title of "foreign envoy," "former general," "Xi Rong lieutenant" and "Yongzhou statesman."

古文：下教曰： 此州名都，士人林薮。
现代文：发布教令说： 这个州是有名的大城，士人聚集。
English: Issuing a fatwa, he said: "This state is famous for its big cities, where scholars congregate.

古文：处士皇甫申叔、严舒龙、姜茂时、梁子远等，并志节清妙，履行高洁。
现代文：隐居不做官的人皇甫申叔、题锤匡、姜茂时、梁子远等人，都足志向节操清高美好，品行高洁。
English: People who live in seclusion and do not work as officials, such as Emperor Fushun, Tie Hammer Kuang, Jiang Maoshi, and Liang Ziyuan, all aspire to be virtuous and clean, and have high moral standards.

古文：践境望风，虚心饥渴，思加延致，待以不臣之典。
现代文：一踏上这块土地就听到他们的名声，我虚心如饥似渴，想请他们到来，不按官方的礼节接待他们。
English: As soon as I set foot on this land, I heard about their fame, and I was so hungry and thirsty that I wanted to invite them to come and not receive them according to official etiquette.

古文：幅巾相见，论道而已，岂以吏职，屈染高规。
现代文：以平民打扮相见，谈经论道而已，怎能因为官职，委屈污染他们高洁的准则。
English: Dressed as ordinary people, they only talk about the Bible and the Tao. How can they pollute their high and clean standards with grievances because of their official duties?

古文：郡国备礼发遣，以副于邑之望。 
现代文：郡国备礼发送，来满足城邑的心愿。 
English: The prefectural government sent the gift to fulfill the wishes of the city.

古文：于是四人皆到，彬敬而待之。
现代文：于是四个人都到了，唐彬恭敬地对待他们。
English: So all four of them arrived, and Tang Bin treated them respectfully.

古文：元康四年卒官，时年六十，谥曰襄，赐绢二百匹，钱二十万。
现代文：元康四年死在官任上，时年六十岁，镒号襄，赐绢二百匹，钱二十万。
English: Yuan Kang died in office four years later, at the age of sixty, with the posthumous name of Xiang, and was given two hundred donkeys and two hundred thousand yuan.

古文：长子嗣，官至广陵太守。
现代文：长子继嗣，官做到广陵太守。
English: The eldest son, the successor, became the governor of Guangling.

古文：少子岐，征虏司马。
现代文：小儿子唐岐，任征虏司马。
English: The youngest son, Tangqi, was conscripted as Sima.

古文：史臣曰：孙氏负江山之阻隔，恃牛斗之妖氛，奄有水乡，抗衡上国。
现代文：史臣曰：孙氏凭藉江山的阻隔，仗着牛斗星宿的妖气，占有水乡，与晋国抗衡。
English: The historian said: The Sun clan, by virtue of the barrier of the country and the mountains, took advantage of the evil spirit of the bullfight star, occupied the water town, and competed with the Jin country.

古文：二王属当戎旅，受律遄征，浑既献捷横江，濬亦克清建鄴。
现代文：王浑、王浚在军旅之中，受命迅速出征，王浑在横江告捷后，王遗也攻克了建塑。
English: Wang Hun and Wang Jun were on a military trip and were ordered to go to war quickly. After Wang Hun was successful in the cross-river, Wang Yi also conquered Jianshu.

古文：于时讨吴之役，将帅虽多，定吴之功，此焉为最。
现代文：当时讨伐：主国的战役，将帅虽多，平定吴的功劳，这算是最大。
English: At that time, the crusade: the battle of the host country, although there were many generals, Wu's contribution to the pacification was the greatest.

古文：向使弘范父之不伐，慕阳夏之推功，上禀庙堂，下凭将士。
现代文：假如推崇莲父的不矜功，敬慕压疆的推让功劳。说在上受命于朝廷，在下靠的是将士。
English: If we praise the selfless service of Rinpoche, and admire the selfless service of Zhu Jiang, we should say that the superior was ordered by the imperial court, and the subordinate was a soldier.

古文：岂非茂勋茂德，善始善终者欤！
现代文：难道不是大功大德，善始善终的人了吗!
English: Wasn't he a man of great merit, with a good beginning and a good end?

古文：此而不存，彼焉是务。
现代文：没有这种精神，却在另一方面追求。
English: They don't have this spirit, but on the other hand, they pursue it.

古文：或矜功负气，或恃势骄陵，竞构南箕，成兹贝锦。
现代文：或者矜功枢气，或者仗势盛气凌人，构陷他人，编织罪名。
English: Or they will exploit their strengths, or they will use their power to bully others, frame others, and fabricate charges.

古文：遂乃喧黩宸扆，斁乱彝伦，既为戒于功臣，亦致讥于清论，岂不惜哉！
现代文：于是污染了宫室的空气，败坏搞乱了法度规矩，既使得功臣们引以为戒，又招致舆论的讥讽，难道不可惜吗!
English: As a result, the air of the imperial palace was polluted, the laws and regulations were corrupted and disrupted, and the heroes were admonished and the public opinion was ridiculed. Isn't it a pity!

古文：王济遂骄父之褊心，乖争子之明义，俊材虽多，亦奚以为也。
现代文：王济顺遂了骄横的父亲的狭小心胸，违背了儿子在父亲面前规谏的道义，超人的才能虽多，又有什么用啊。
English: Wang Jishun fulfilled the narrow mindedness of his arrogant father and violated the morality of his son's discipline in front of his father. Although there are many superhuman talents, what is the use?

古文：唐彬畏避交争，属疾迟留，退让之风，贤于浑濬远矣。
现代文：卢堑害怕且避免互相争夺，托病滞留，退让的风范，比王运王擅贤明多了。
English: Lu Yao is afraid of and avoids competing with each other, and he is much wiser than Wang Yunwang in the manners of feigning illness and conceding.

古文：传云 不拘行检 ，安得长者之行哉！
现代文：传记中说他 不拘于品行检点 ，从哪得来长者的品行呢!
English: In his biography, he said, "Regardless of the conduct checkpoints, where did the elders' conduct come from?"

古文：赞曰：二王总戎，淮海攸同。
现代文：赞曰：二王统领军队，进海就统一了。
English: Zang said: The two kings lead the army, and when they enter the sea, they are unified.

古文：浑既害善，濬亦矜功。
现代文：王运伤害好人，而王渣夸耀功劳。
English: The king of fortune harms good people, while the king of scum boasts of his achievements.

古文：武子豪桀，夙参朝列。
现代文：王济豪杰，身居朝臣之列。
English: Wang Ji Haojie, ranked as a courtier.

古文：逞欲牛心，纡情马埒。
现代文：挖牛心以显示豪奢，修骑射围墙来寄托心境。
English: Digging a cow's heart to show luxury, riding a horse to shoot a fence to keep the mood.

古文：儒宗知退，避名全节。
现代文：庐堑知道退让，躲避功名，保全节操。
English: He knows how to concede, avoid taking credit, and preserve discipline.

