古文：起玄黓涒滩，尽昭阳作噩，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋怀帝永嘉六年
English: two years in total. Six years since the enthronement of Emperor Huai Yongjia

古文：孝怀皇帝下永嘉六年
现代文：春季，正月，汉呼延皇后去世，谥号为武元。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, the Empress of Hanyu died, and her nickname was Wuyuan.

古文：春，正月，汉呼延后卒，谥曰武元。汉镇北将军靳冲、平北将军卜珝寇并州；辛未，围晋阳。
现代文：汉镇北将军勒冲、平北将军卜进犯并州。辛未，包围晋阳。
English: Han Zhenbei's general Le Chong and Pingbei's general Bu Jin invaded and annexed the prefecture. Xin Wei encircled Jinyang.

古文：甲戌，汉主聪以司空王育、尚书令任顗女为左、右昭仪，中军大将军王彰、中书监范隆、左仆射马景女皆为夫人，右仆射硃纪女为贵妃，皆金印紫绶。
现代文：甲戌，汉主刘聪封司空王育和尚书令任的女儿为左、右昭仪，中军大将军王彰、中书监范隆、左仆射马景三人的女儿都为夫人，右仆射朱纪的女儿为贵妃，都授予金印章和紫色绶带。
English: The daughters of the Han emperor Liu Congfu, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu Jia, the Han emperor Liu J

古文：聪将纳太保刘殷女，太弟乂固谏。
现代文：刘聪打算纳娶太保刘殷的女儿，太弟刘苦苦劝谏。
English: Liu Cong planned to marry the daughter of the eunuch Liu Yin, and the eunuch Liu painstakingly advised him.

古文：聪以问太宰延年、太傅景，皆曰： 太保自云刘康公之后，与隆下殊源，纳之何害！ 
现代文：刘聪就此事询问太宰刘延年、太傅刘景，他们都说： 太保刘殷自称是周代刘康公的后代，与陛下不是一个族源，娶她有什么妨害？ 
English: Liu Cong asked Dazai Liu Yan Nian and Taifu Liu Jing about this matter, and they both said: Taipo Liu Yin claims to be a descendant of Zhou Dynasty Liu Kang Gong, and is not a family source with His Majesty. What is the obstacle to marrying her?

古文：聪悦，拜殷二女英、娥为左、右贵嫔，位在昭仪上；又纳殷女孙四人皆为贵人，位次贵妃。
现代文：刘聪很高兴，封刘殷的两个女儿刘英、刘娥为左、右贵嫔，地位在昭仪之上。又纳娶刘殷的四个孙女都当作贵人，地位低于贵妃。
English: Liu Cong was very pleased that Liu Yin's two daughters, Liu Ying and Liu E, were the left and right noblewomen, and their status was higher than that of Zhaoyi. In addition, Liu Yin's four granddaughters were all considered noblewomen, and their status was lower than that of noblewomen.

古文：于是六刘之宠倾后宫，聪希复出外，事皆中黄门奏决。
现代文：这样六刘所受的宠爱占满后宫，刘聪很少再出门到外面，政事都由宦宫中黄门传达。
English: In this way, Liu Liu's favors filled the harem, Liu Cong rarely went out again, and political affairs were all conveyed by the Yellow Gate in the Palace.

古文：故新野王歆牙门将胡亢聚众于竟陵，自号楚公，寇掠荆土，以歆南蛮司马新野杜曾为竟陵太守。
现代文：已故新野王司马歆的牙门将胡亢在竟陵聚众，自称楚公，在荆州的土地上抢掠，任司马歆的南蛮司马新野人杜曾为竟陵太守。
English: The late Shinshino king Sima Qian's tooth keeper Hu Qian gathered a crowd at the Mausoleum. He called himself Chu Gong and plundered the land in Jingzhou. The Southern barbarian Sima Xinshi Du, who served as Sima Qian, was the Grand Keeper of the Mausoleum.

古文：曾勇冠三军，能被甲游于水中。
现代文：杜曾骁勇为三军第一，能身穿铠甲在水中游泳。
English: Du Zeng Rongyong was the first in the three armies to be able to swim in the water while wearing armor.

古文：二月，壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，壬子朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs at the end of February.

古文：石勒筑垒于葛陂，课农造舟，将攻建业。
现代文：石勒在葛陂修筑营垒，向农民征税修造舟船，打算进攻建业。
English: Shi Le built a fortress in Gejun, levied taxes on farmers to build boats, and planned to attack Jianye.

古文：琅邪王睿大集江南之众于寿春，以镇东长史纪瞻为扬威将军，都督诸军以讨之。
现代文：琅邪王司马睿大规模调集江南的部队到寿春，任镇东长史纪瞻为扬威将军，统领各军队来征讨石勒。
English: The evil king Sima Rui massively mobilized troops from the south of the Yangtze River to Shuchun, and appointed the town's mayor Shizhuan as Yangwei general, leading all the armies to conquer Shile.

古文：会大雨，三月不止，勒军中饥疫，死者太半，闻晋军将至，集将佐议之。
现代文：遇到大雨，三个月不停，石勒军队饥乏并流行疾病，死的人超过大半，又听到晋朝军队将要开来，就召集武将及参佐商议。
English: In the face of heavy rain for three months in a row, famine and epidemic disease in the Shile army, more than half of whom died, and hearing that the Jin dynasty army was about to arrive, he called together military commanders and advisers for discussion.

古文：右长史刁膺请先送款于睿，求扫平河朔以自赎，俟其军退，徐更图之，勒愀然长啸。
现代文：右长史刁膺请石勒先向司马睿求和，请求扫平河朔来赎自己的罪，等到司马睿的军队退还江南，再慢慢谋取他。
English: The right-hand man, Shi Yan, asked Shi Le to first sue for peace from Sima Rui, and ask for a sweep of the river to atone for his sins. Wait until Sima Rui's army returns to the south of the Yangtze River, and then slowly seek him out.

古文：中坚将军夔安请就高避水，勒曰： 将军何怯邪！ 
现代文：石勒听后忧伤地大声发出长叹。中坚将军夔安请石勒到地势高的地方避水，石勒说： 将军你为什么胆怯呢？ 
English: After listening to this, Shi Le sighed loudly and mournfully. The middle-ranking general Yan An asked Shi Le to go to higher ground to avoid the water. Shi Le said, "General, why are you so timid?"

古文：孔苌等三十馀将请各将兵，分道夜攻寿春，斩吴将头，据其城，食其粟。要以今年破丹杨，定江南。
现代文：孔苌等三十多个武将请求各自带兵分路夜袭寿春，斩掉吴地武将的头颅，占据他们的城邑，吃他们的粮食，想就在今年攻下丹阳、平定江南。
English: More than 30 generals, including Confucius, requested that they each lead a detachment to attack Shouchun at night, cut off the heads of Wu generals, occupy their towns, eat their grain, and want to capture Danyang and pacify the south of the Yangtze River this year.

古文：勒笑曰： 是勇将之计也！ 
现代文：石勒笑着说： 这真是勇将的计策啊！ 
English: Shearer smiled and said: "This is really a brave man's strategy!

古文：各赐铠马一匹。
现代文：各赐他们铠甲一副、马一匹。
English: Give them each a pair of coats of mail and a horse.

古文：顾谓张宾曰： 于君意何如？ 
现代文：石勒对张宾说： 依您看怎么办呢？ 
English: Shi Ler said to Zhang Bin: In your opinion, what should be done?

古文：宾曰： 将军攻陷京师，囚执天子，杀害王公，妻略妃主。
现代文：张宾说： 将军您攻陷京城，囚禁了晋朝天子，杀害亲王公卿大臣，侵占凌辱晋朝的嫔妃公主，拔下您的头发，也不够来数将军您的罪过。
English: Zhang Bin said: General, you captured the capital city, imprisoned the prince of the Jin Dynasty, killed princes and ministers, occupied and humiliated the princess of the Jin Dynasty, and pulled out your hair. It is not enough to count your sins.

古文：擢将军之发，不足以数将军之罪，奈何复相臣奉乎！去年既杀王弥，不当来此；今天降霖雨于数百里中，示将军不应留此也。
现代文：怎么能再以臣下的身分尊奉晋朝呢？去年杀了王弥，就不应该到这里来。现在，几百里内上天不断地降雨，这是告诉将军您不应该在这里逗留了。
English: How can you continue to serve the Jin Dynasty as a subject? If you killed Wang Ya last year, you shouldn't have come here. Now that it's been raining for hundreds of miles, it's telling the general that you shouldn't stay here.

古文：鄴有三台之固，西接平阳，山河四塞，宜北徙据之，以经营河北，河北既定，天下无处将军之右者矣。
现代文：邺城有三个高台防守坚固，西临汉都城平阳，隔山阻河四面都有要塞，应当向北迁徙占据那里，经营黄河以北地区。河北地区稳定后，全国就没有处在将军您上面的人。
English: There are three high towers in Handan that are well-defended. Pingyang, the capital of Hanzhong, is to the west, and there are fortresses on all sides of the mountains and rivers. You should migrate to the north to occupy there and manage the areas north of the Yellow River. After Hebei region is stable, there will be no one in the country above you as a general.

古文：晋之保寿春，畏将军往攻之耳。
现代文：晋朝保卫寿春，只是害怕您去攻打寿春罢了。
English: Jin Dynasty to defend Shuchun, just afraid of you to attack Shuchun.

古文：彼闻吾去，喜于自全，何暇追袭吾后，为吾不利邪！
现代文：他们听说我们离去了，对能够自己保全而感到高兴满足，还有什么功夫追击我军的后部，施行不利于我军的行动呢？
English: When they heard that we had left, they were happy and satisfied that they could protect themselves. How else could they chase the rear of our army and carry out actions that were detrimental to our army?

古文：将军宜使辎重从北道先发，将军引大兵向寿春。
现代文：您应当派辎重队伍从北面的道路先行出发，您带领大部军队开往寿春。
English: You should send a large number of troops to start from the road in the north, and you should lead a large part of the army to Shuchun.

古文：辎重既远，大兵徐还，何忧进退无地乎？ 
现代文：辎重队伍走远后，大部军队再缓慢回撤，还忧虑什么进退无路的呢？ 
English: After the heavy cavalcade has gone far away, the majority of the army will slowly retreat again. Are you still worried that there is no way out?

古文：勒攘袂鼓髯曰： 张君计是也！ 
现代文：石勒捋起衣袖抚动髯须说： 张君的计策好啊！ 
English: Shi Lerong rolled up his sleeves, stroked his mustache and said: Zhang Jun's strategy is good!

古文：责刁膺曰： 君既相辅佐，当共成大功，奈何遽劝孤降！
现代文：又责备刁膺说： 您既然作我的辅佐，就应当共同成就大功业，怎么能催促劝说我投降呢？
English: He also reproached Yu, saying, "Since you are my assistant, you should jointly accomplish great feats. How can you urge and persuade me to surrender?

古文：此策应斩！
现代文：出这个计策的应当杀头！
English: Whoever came up with this scheme should be fired!

古文：然素知君怯，特相宥耳。 
现代文：但我平素了解您胆怯怕事，特地原谅您罢了。 
English: But I understand that you are afraid, and I forgive you.

古文：于是黜膺为将军，擢宾为右长史，号曰 右侯 。
现代文：于是把刁膺贬黜为将军，提拔张宾为右长史。号称 右侯 。
English: Therefore, he demoted Yao to general and promoted Zhang Bin to the Right Long History. He was known as the Right Marquis.

古文：勒引兵发葛陂，遣石虎帅骑二千向寿春，遇晋运船，虎将士争取之，为纪瞻所败。
现代文：石勒带兵从葛陂出发，派石虎带领二千骑兵开往寿春，遇到晋朝的运输船，石虎的部将兵士争先攻取，结果被纪瞻打败。
English: Shi Le led an army from Gejun and sent Shi Hu to lead two thousand cavalrymen to Shuchun. When they encountered a transport ship of the Jin Dynasty, Shi Hu's troops fought to capture it first. As a result, they were defeated by Ji Zhan.

古文：瞻追奔百里，前及勒军，勒结陈待之；瞻不敢击，退还寿春。
现代文：纪瞻追击了一百多里，追上石勒的军队，石勒排好兵阵等待，而纪瞻不敢攻打，退还到寿春。
English: Ji Zhan chased more than a hundred miles and caught up with Shiller's army. Shiller lined up and waited, but Ji Zhan did not dare to attack and returned to Shuchun.

古文：汉主聪封帝为会稽郡公，加仪同三司。
现代文：汉主刘聪封晋怀帝为会稽郡公，开府仪同三司。
English: The Han emperor Liu Congfeng Jin Huai Di was the county magistrate of the association, and the opening ceremony was the same as the three divisions.

古文：聪从容谓帝曰： 卿昔为豫章王，朕与王武子造卿，武子称朕于卿，卿言闻其名久矣，赠朕柘弓银研，卿颇记否？ 
现代文：刘聪和颜悦色地对怀帝说： 你过去当豫章王，我与王武子拜访你，王武子向你称赞我，你说久闻大名，送给我柘木良弓和银砚台，你还记得吗？ 
English: Liu Cong said to Emperor Huai in a friendly manner: You used to be the King of Yuanzhang, I visited you with Wang Wuzi, Wang Wuzi praised me to you, you said you had heard of me for a long time, and gave me the Qinmu Liangyu and the Silver Forge, do you remember?

古文：帝曰： 臣安敢忘之？
现代文：怀帝说： 臣下我怎么敢忘掉呢？
English: Emperor Huai said: How dare I forget my vassal?

古文：但恨尔日不早识龙颜！ 
现代文：只遗憾当时没有及早地认识龙颜！ 
English: It's just a pity that I didn't get to know Longyan sooner!

古文：聪曰： 卿家骨肉何相残如此？ 
现代文：刘聪说： 你家的亲骨肉为什么这样互相残杀？ 
English: Liu Cong said, "Why are your family members killing each other like this?

古文：帝曰： 大汉将应天受命，故为陛下自相驱除，此殆天意，非人事也！
现代文：怀帝说： 大汉将要承接天意，所以自相驱赶杀戮替陛下扫清道路，这是天意，不是人所能决定的！
English: Emperor Huai said, "Great Han is about to take over the will of Heaven, so it is Heaven's will, not man's, to drive out and kill each other to clear the way for His Majesty!

古文：且臣家若能奉武皇帝之业，九族敦睦，陛下何由得之！ 
现代文：再说我家如果能尊奉武皇帝的大业，九族和睦相处，陛下从哪里得到天下呢？ 
English: Besides, if my family can honor the great cause of Emperor Wu, and the nine ethnic groups can live in harmony, where will His Majesty get the world from?

古文：聪喜，以小刘贵人妻帝，曰： 此名公子孙也，卿善遇之。 
现代文：刘聪听得高兴，把小刘贵人给了怀帝作妻子，说： 这是名公爵的孙女，你好好对待她。 
English: Liu Cong was pleased to hear this and gave little Liu Guiren to Emperor Huai as his wife, saying, "This is the granddaughter of a famous duke, you should treat her well."

古文：代公猗卢遣兵救晋阳，三月，乙未，汉兵败走。
现代文：代公拓跋猗卢派兵救援晋阳，三月，乙未，汉军队败退而逃。
English: On behalf of Emperor Tuoba, Lu sent soldiers to rescue Jinyang. In March, the Han army was defeated and fled.

古文：卜珝之卒先奔，靳冲擅收珝，斩之；聪大怒，遣使持节斩冲。
现代文：卜带领部众先逃跑，勒冲擅自拘捕了卜，把他杀了。刘聪勃然大怒，派使者拿着符节杀了勒冲。
English: Bu led the group to flee first, and Le Chong arrested Bu without authorization and killed him. Liu Cong flew into a rage and sent an envoy to kill Le Chong with a rune.

古文：聪纳其舅子辅汉将军张实二女徽光、丽光为贵人，太后张氏之意也。
现代文：刘聪纳娶他舅舅的儿子辅汉将军张的两个女儿张徽光、张丽光为贵人，这是太后张氏的主意。
English: It was the idea of Empress Dowager Zhang that Liu Congna marry Zhang Huiguang and Zhang Liguang, the two daughters of his uncle's son, Fu Han General Zhang.

古文：凉州主簿马鲂说张轨： 宜命将出师，翼戴帝室。 
现代文：凉州主簿马鲂对张轨说： 应当让武将出征，以辅助拥戴朝廷。 
English: The main bookkeeper of Liangzhou, Ma Jun, said to Zhang Rail: It is necessary to let the military commander go to war to support the imperial court.

古文：轨从之，驰檄关中，共尊辅秦王，且言： 今遣前锋督护宋配帅步骑二万，径趋长安；西中郎将实帅中军三万，武威太守张琠帅胡骑二万，络绎继发。 
现代文：张轨接受了这个建议，急速将檄文传布关中地区，号召共同尊奉辅佐秦王司马业。并且说： 现在派遣前锋督护宋配率领二万步兵和骑兵，直接奔赴长安，西中郎将张带领中军三万军队，武威太守张率领二万胡人骑兵，陆续出发。 
English: Zhang Railing accepted this suggestion, quickly spread the message to Guanzhong area, and called for mutual respect for the assistant of the Qin King Sima Ye. And said: Now send the forward overseer Song Bi to lead 20,000 infantry and cavalry directly to Chang'an, Xi Zhong Lang will lead the Chinese army of 30,000 troops, and Wu Wei Taizhou Zhang will lead 20,000 Hu cavalry, and set off one after another.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，征南将军山简卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙寅，征南将军山简去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Cui Yin, the general of the Southern Expedition, Shan Jian, passed away.

古文：汉主聪封其子敷为渤海王，骥为济南王，鸾为燕王，鸿为楚王，劢为齐王，权为秦王，操为魏王，持为赵王。
现代文：汉主刘聪封他的儿子刘敷为渤海王，刘骥为济南王，刘鸾为燕王，刘鸿为楚王，刘劢为齐王，刘权为秦王，刘操为魏王，刘持为赵王。
English: The Han ruler Liu Cong sealed his son Liu Shiki as the King of Bohai, Liu Shun as the King of Jinan, Liu Shun as the King of Yan, Liu Hong as the King of Chu, Liu Shun as the King of Qi, Liu Quan as the King of Qin, Liu Cao as the King of Wei, and Liu Jie as the King of Zhao.

古文：聪以鱼蟹不供，斩左都水使者襄陵王摅；作温明、徽光二殿未成，斩将作大匠望都公靳陵。
现代文：刘聪因为鱼蟹供应不上，杀死左都水使者襄陵王刘摅。温明、徽光二座宫殿没有建成，杀死将作大匠望都公靳陵。
English: Liu Cong, unable to supply fish and crabs, killed the Left Capital Water Emissary, the King of Xiangling, Liu Ye. The two palaces of Wenming and Huiguang were not built, and the Mausoleum of the Great Master, Wangdu Gong, was killed.

古文：观渔于汾水，昏夜不归。
现代文：他到汾水观看捕鱼，黄昏黑夜都不返回。
English: He went to Surabaya to watch the fishing and did not return at dusk.

古文：中军大将军王彰谏曰： 比观陛下所为，臣实痛心疾首。
现代文：中军大将军王彰劝谏说： 近来看到陛下的行动，我实在是痛心疾首。
English: The Chinese general Wang Changxuan said: "Recently, seeing Your Majesty's actions, I am truly heartbroken.

古文：今愚民归汉之志未专，思晋之心犹甚；刘琨咫尺，刺客纵横。
现代文：现在愚民们归附汉的心意并不确定，而思念晋朝的心情还非常浓厚，刘琨虎视眈眈近在咫尺，刺客到处都有。
English: Now, the intention of the fools to join the Han Dynasty is not certain, but the feeling of missing the Jin Dynasty is still very strong. Liu Bei is close at hand, and assassins are everywhere.

古文：帝王轻出，一夫敌耳。
现代文：帝王轻率地出行，一个人就能把您刺杀。
English: If the emperor travels carelessly, one man can assassinate him.

古文：愿陛下改往修来，则亿兆幸甚！ 
现代文：希望陛下改变过去的作法养成新的习惯，那么百性感到非常幸运！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will change the past practice and develop new habits, then everyone will feel very lucky!

古文：聪大怒，命斩之。王夫人叩头乞哀，乃囚之。
现代文：刘聪勃然大怒，命令杀他，王彰的女儿王夫人在一旁叩头乞求宽恕，于是把王彰囚禁起来。
English: Liu Cong flew into a rage and ordered him to be killed. Wang Chang's daughter, Mrs. Wang, bowed down and begged for forgiveness, so Wang Chang was imprisoned.

古文：太后张氏以聪刑罚过差，三日不食；太弟乂、单于粲舆榇切谏。
现代文：太后张氏因为刘聪的刑罚过于严苛，三天不吃饭。太弟刘义，单于刘粲带着棺材冒死恳切地劝谏。
English: Empress Dowager Zhang did not eat for three days because Liu Cong's punishment was too harsh. Liu Yi, Liu Yao's younger brother, risked his life to earnestly persuade Liu Yao with a coffin.

古文：聪怒曰： 吾岂桀、纣，而汝辈生来哭人！ 
现代文：刘聪怒冲冲地说： 我难道是暴君桀、纣吗？你们却来哭活人！ 
English: Liu Cong said angrily, "Am I a tyrant? Yet you come to cry for the living!"

古文：太宰延年、太保殷等公卿、列侯百馀人，皆免冠涕泣曰： 陛下功高德厚，旷世少比，往也唐、虞，今则陛下。
现代文：太宰刘延年、太保刘殷等公卿大臣列侯一百多人，都摘去头冠哭着说： 陛下功高德厚，从古到今很少有人能与您相比，古代有唐尧、虞舜，今天则是陛下。
English: Dazaifu Liu Yan Nian, Taibao Liu Yin, and more than a hundred other nobles, ministers, and princes all took off their crowns and wept, saying, "Your majesty, you are a man of great virtue. From ancient times to the present, there are few people who can compare with you. In ancient times, there was Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan, but today it is your majesty.

古文：而顷来以小小不供，亟斩王公；直言忤旨，遽囚大将。
现代文：但近来因为物资稍微供应不上。就杀王公，直言冒犯您的旨意，就马上囚禁大将。
English: But recently, because supplies are a little short, they killed the prince, openly defied your will, and immediately imprisoned the general.

古文：此臣等窃所未解，故相与忧之，忘寝与食。 
现代文：这是我们心里所不理解的，所以大家都对此感到忧虑，乃至废寝忘食。 
English: This is what we do not understand in our hearts, so we are all worried about it, and even forget to eat.

古文：聪慨然曰： 朕昨大醉，非其本心，微公等言之，朕不闻过。 
现代文：刘聪慨叹说： 朕昨天大醉，这些事不是我的本意，不是你们说起，朕就听不到自己的过失了。 
English: Liu Cong sighed and said, "I was very drunk yesterday. These things were not my intention. If you hadn't mentioned it, I wouldn't have heard about my mistake.

古文：各赐帛百匹，使侍中持节赦彰曰： 先帝赖君如左右手，君著勋再世，朕敢忘之！
现代文：每人赐百匹布帛，派侍中拿着符节赦免王彰说： 先帝刘渊依靠您如同左右手一样，您立下的再世之功，朕怎敢记掉？
English: Each of them was given a hundred pieces of cloth, and the attendants were given a rune to pardon Wang Chang, saying, "The late Emperor Liu Yuan relied on you as his right and left hand. How dare I forget the merit of reincarnation that you established?

古文：此段之过，希君荡然。
现代文：这次的过失，希望您不要放在心上。
English: I hope you won't take this mistake to heart.

古文：君能尽怀忧国，朕所望也。
现代文：您能够尽心忧国，正是朕所希望的。
English: It is my hope that you will be able to devote yourself to the care of the nation.

古文：今进君骠骑将军、定襄郡公，后有不逮，幸数匡之！ 
现代文：现在提升您为骠骑将军，封定襄郡公。朕将来再有做得不尽如人意的地方，还希望您多多指正。 
English: Now, I promote you to the general of the cavalry, and seal you as the county magistrate of Xiang County. In the future, there will be more things that I have not done as well as I would like, and I hope you will correct them.

古文：王弥既死，汉安北将军赵固、平北将军王桑恐为石勒所并，欲引兵归平阳。
现代文：王弥死后，汉安北将军赵固、平北将军王桑担心自己的军队被石勒吞并，想带兵返回平阳。
English: After Wang Mi's death, Han'an's Northern General Zhao Gu and Pingbei's Northern General Wang Sang feared that their armies would be absorbed by Shile and wanted to take their soldiers back to Pingyang.

古文：军中乏粮，士卒相食，乃自䂭硗津西渡，攻掠河北郡县。
现代文：军中缺少粮食，士卒竟互相宰食。于是从硗津西渡黄河，进攻抢掠黄河以北的郡县。
English: There was a shortage of grain in the army, and soldiers were actually killing each other for food. Therefore, they crossed the Yellow River from west of Shaojin and attacked and plundered counties north of the Yellow River.

古文：刘琨以其兄子演为魏郡太守，镇鄴，固、桑恐演邀之，遣长史临深为质于琨。
现代文：刘琨任哥哥的儿子刘演为魏郡太守，镇守邺城，王桑害怕刘演阻击，就派长史临深到刘琨处作为人质。
English: Liu Xuan, the son of Liu Xuan's brother, was the governor of Wei County and the town guard of Shicheng. Wang San was afraid of Liu Xuan's resistance, so he sent Changshi Linxin to Liu Xuan's place as a hostage.

古文：琨以固为雍州刺史，桑为豫州刺史。
现代文：刘琨就任赵固为雍州刺史，王桑为豫州刺史。
English: Liu Wei appointed Zhao Gu as the Yongzhou chief historian, and Wang Sang as the Henan chief historian.

古文：贾疋等围长安数月，汉中山王曜连战皆败，驱掠士女八万馀口，奔于平阳。
现代文：贾疋等人包围长安几个月，汉中山王刘曜接连出战都失败了，强行驱赶八万多成年男女逃奔平阳。
English: Jia Wei and others besieged Chang'an for several months, and the Hanzhong Mountain King Liu You failed in his successive campaigns, forcibly driving more than eighty thousand adult men and women to flee to Pingyang.

古文：秦王业自雍入于长安。
现代文：秦王司马业从雍州进入长安。
English: Qin Wang Sima entered Chang'an from Yongzhou.

古文：五月，汉主聪贬曜为龙骧大将军，行大司马。
现代文：五月，汉主刘聪把刘曜贬为龙骧大将军，行大司马。
English: In May, the Han ruler Liu Cong demoted Liu You to the rank of general and promoted him to the rank of major general.

古文：聪使河内王粲攻傅祗于三渚，右将军刘参攻郭默于怀；会祗病薨，城陷，粲迁祗子孙并其士民二万馀户于平阳。
现代文：刘聪派河内王刘粲在三渚攻打傅祗，派右将军刘参到怀县攻打郭默。正遇上傅祗因病去世，三渚城陷落，刘粲把傅祗的子孙以及士人百姓二万余户都迁往平阳。
English: Liu Cong sent the king of Hanoi, Liu Ye, to attack Fu Ye in Samji, and sent the right-wing general, Liu San, to attack Guo Mo in Huai County. When Fu Ye died of illness and Samji fell, Liu Ye moved Fu Ye's descendants and more than 20,000 households of officials and commoners to Pingyang.

古文：六月，汉主聪欲立贵嫔刘英为皇后。张太后欲立贵人张徽光，聪不得已，许之。
现代文：六月，汉主刘聪打算立贵嫔刘英为皇后，而张太后要立贵人张徽光，刘聪没办法，只好同意。
English: In June, Emperor Liu Cong planned to make the noblewoman Liu Ying the empress, while Empress Zhang wanted to make the noblewoman Zhang Huiguang the empress. Liu Cong had no choice but to agree.

古文：英寻卒。
现代文：刘英不久就去世了。
English: Liu Ying died soon after.

古文：汉大昌文献公刘殷卒。
现代文：汉大昌文献公刘殷去世。
English: Liu Yin, the Han Dynasty Grand Master of Literature, passed away.

古文：殷为相，不犯颜忤旨，然因事进规，补益甚多。
现代文：刘殷当丞相，从不冒犯皇帝违反圣旨，但经常就具体的事情进宫规劝，对刘聪补益很多。
English: When Liu Yin was the prime minister, he never offended the emperor in violation of the imperial edict, but he often went to the palace to advise on specific matters, which was of great benefit to Liu Cong.

古文：汉主聪每与群臣议政事，殷无所是非；群臣出，殷独留，为聪敷畅条理，商榷事宜，聪未尝不从之。
现代文：汉主刘聪每次与大臣们商议政事，刘殷都不表示什么态度，等大臣们离开，刘殷单独留下，为刘聪对所议铺陈发挥再理出头绪，商讨事宜，刘聪从没有不采纳他的建议的。
English: Every time the Han master Liu Cong discussed political affairs with the ministers, Liu Yin did not show any attitude. When the ministers left, Liu Yin was left alone, for Liu Cong to play out and re-arrange the situation and discuss the matters. Liu Cong never did not accept his suggestion.

古文：殷常戒子孙曰： 事君当务几谏。
现代文：刘殷常常告诫子孙说： 为君主作事应当务求对君主委婉地劝谏。
English: Liu Yin often admonished his children and grandchildren, saying, "When working for the monarch, you should strive to be tactful in your advice to the monarch.

古文：凡人尚不可面斥其过，况万乘乎！
现代文：凡人尚且不能当面斥责他的过错，更何况皇帝呢？
English: How could an ordinary person, let alone the emperor, reprimand him for his wrongdoing in person?

古文：夫几谏之功，无异犯颜，但不彰君之过，所以为优耳。 
现代文：委婉劝谏的功效，其实与冒犯君主没有什么区别，只是不明说君主的过失，所以是比较好的方法。 
English: The effect of euphemistic persuasion is actually no different from offending the monarch, but it is not clear that it is the monarch's fault, so it is a better method.

古文：官至侍中、太保、录尚书，赐剑履上殿、入朝不趋、乘舆入殿。
现代文：刘殷历任侍中、太保、录尚书等职，并被赐予可以佩剑穿鞋上宫殿、朝见天子不用快步行走、乘车进入宫殿等特权。
English: Liu Yin successively held the positions of chamberlain, eunuch, and recorder, and was given privileges such as being able to wear shoes and a sword in the palace, not having to walk quickly to see the emperor in the morning, and entering the palace by car.

古文：然殷在公卿间，常恂恂有卑让之色，故能处骄暴之国，保其富贵，不失令名，以寿考自终。
现代文：但是刘殷在公卿大臣中，常常恭顺地带有卑谦礼让的神色，所以处在骄纵横暴的国家，能够保全自己的富贵，不损伤自己的美好声名，以长寿善终。
English: However, among the nobles and ministers, Liu Yin often obediently wore a humble and courteous look, so he was in a country of arrogance and violence, able to preserve his wealth, not damage his good reputation, and end with a long life.

古文：汉主聪以河间王易为车骑将军，彭城王翼为卫将军，并典兵宿卫。
现代文：汉主刘聪任河间王刘易为车骑将军，彭城王刘翼为卫将军，共同统领皇宫禁卫军。
English: Liu Cong, the ruler of Han, appointed Liu Yi, the king of Hebei, as the general of chariots and cavalry, and Liu Ying, the king of Pengcheng, as the general of guards, jointly leading the imperial palace guards.

古文：高平王悝为征南将军，镇离石；济南王骥为征西将军，筑西平城以居之；魏王操为征东将军，镇蒲子。
现代文：任高平王刘悝为征南将军，镇守离石；济南王刘骥为征西将军，建筑西平城居住；魏王刘操为征东将军，镇守蒲子。
English: Gaoping King Liu Bei was appointed as the general to conquer the south and held the town of Liushi; Jinan King Liu Bei was appointed as the general to conquer the west and built and lived in Xiping City; Wei King Liu Cao was appointed as the general to conquer the east and held the town of Puzi.

古文：赵固、王桑自怀求迎于汉，汉主聪遣镇远将军梁伏疵将兵迎之。
现代文：赵固、王桑从怀县向汉请求接应，汉主刘聪派镇远将军梁伏疵带兵迎接他们。
English: Zhao Gu and Wang Sang from Huai County asked the Han Dynasty to accept the request, and the Han Emperor Liu Cong sent Zhenyuan General Liang Fucai to lead the troops to meet them.

古文：未至，长史临深、将军牟穆帅众一万叛归刘演。
现代文：迎接的军队还没有到达时，长史临深、将军牟穆带领一万军队反叛投归刘演。
English: When the welcoming army had not yet arrived, Chang Shi Lin Sheng and General Mou Mu led ten thousand troops to rebel and return to Liu Yuan.

古文：固随疵而西，桑引其众东奔青州，固遣兵追杀之于曲梁，桑将张凤帅其馀众归演。
现代文：赵固随梁伏疵向西边进发，王桑却又带领所属军队向东奔赴青州，赵固就派兵追击，在曲梁杀了王桑。王桑的部将张凤带领残余部众投归刘演。
English: Zhao Gu followed Liang Fuqi to the west, but Wang San led his army to the east to Qingzhou. Zhao Gu sent troops to pursue and killed Wang San in Qu Liang. Wang San's troops led Zhang Feng and the rest of the troops to return to Liu Yuan.

古文：聪以固为荆州刺史、领河南太守，镇洛阳。
现代文：刘聪让赵固担任荆州刺史，兼河南太守，镇守洛阳。
English: Liu Cong allowed Zhao Gu to serve as the governor of Jingzhou, the governor of Henan Province, and the governor of Luoyang.

古文：石勒自葛陂北行，所过皆坚壁清野，虏掠无所获，军中饥甚，士卒相食。
现代文：石勒从葛陂向北行进。所经过的地方百姓都坚壁清野，因而没有抢掠到什么东西，军中非常饥饿，出现士卒吃士卒充饥的现象。
English: Shi Le marched north from Gezi. The people of the places he passed through were all hard-walled and clear, so he did not loot anything. The army was very hungry, and there was a phenomenon of soldiers eating each other to satisfy their hunger.

古文：至东燕，闻汲郡向冰聚众数千壁枋头，勒将济河，恐冰邀之。
现代文：到达东燕，听说汲郡人向冰聚集了几千人在枋头修筑了营垒，石勒将要渡黄河，又担心遭到向冰的阻击。
English: When they arrived in Dongyan, they heard that several thousand people from Xiang Bing County had gathered in Shantou to build a camp. Shi Le was going to cross the Yellow River, but he was worried that he would be blocked by Xiang Bing.

古文：张宾曰： 闻冰船尽在渎中未上，宜遣轻兵间道袭取，以济大军，大军既济，冰必可擒也。 
现代文：张宾说： 听说向冰的船只全都放在水中没有抬上岸，应当派遣轻装兵士抄小道去偷袭夺取这些船，用来渡大部军队过黄河，大部军队渡河后，一定能擒获向冰。 
English: Zhang Bin said: It is said that the ships of Xiang Bing were all placed in the water and were not brought ashore. Light-armed soldiers should be dispatched to follow the trail to make a sneak attack to seize these ships and use them to ferry the majority of the army across the Yellow River. After the majority of the army crosses the river, they will certainly be able to capture Xiang Bing.

古文：秋，七月，勒使支雄、孔苌自文石津缚筏潜渡，取其船。
现代文：秋季，七月，石勒派遣支雄、孔苌从文石津绑扎木筏偷渡，夺取了向冰的船只。
English: In the autumn, in July, Shiller sent Zhi Xiong and Kong Yao to smuggle a raft from Wenshizu, and they captured Xiang Bing's ship.

古文：勒引兵自棘津济河，击冰，大破之，尽得其资储，军势复振，遂长驱至鄴。
现代文：石勒率兵从棘津渡黄河，攻打向冰，把向冰打得惨败，得到了向冰的全部物资储备，军队士气重新振作起来，于是长驱直入到达邺城。
English: Shi Le led the troops from Xizhu to cross the Yellow River, attacked Xiang Bing, defeated Xiang Bing, obtained all the material reserves of Xiang Bing, and the morale of the army was rejuvenated, so they drove straight into Dafangcheng.

古文：刘演保三台以自固，临深、牟穆等复帅其众降于勒。
现代文：刘演防守三台以求自己稳固，临深、牟穆等人又率领自己的部众向石勒投降。
English: Liu En defended three stations in order to stabilize himself, while Lin Sheng, Mou Mu and others led their subordinates to surrender to Shi Le.

古文：诸将欲攻三台，张宾曰： 演虽弱，众犹数千，三台险固，攻之未易猝拔。舍而去之，彼将自溃。
现代文：部将们想攻打三台，张宾对石勒说： 刘演虽然兵力微弱，但还有几千军队，三台险峻坚固，攻打不容易很快把它拿下，放弃它而离开，那里将会自己崩溃。
English: The generals wanted to attack the three fortresses, Zhang Bin said to Shi Lu: Although Liu En is weak, he still has thousands of troops. The three fortresses are steep and solid, and it is not easy to attack them. Take it down quickly, abandon it and leave, and it will collapse on its own.

古文：方今王彭祖、刘越石，公之大敌也，宜先取之，演不足顾也。
现代文：现在王浚、刘琨是您的主要敌人，应当先打他们，刘演不值得注意。
English: Now Wang Jun and Liu Ye are your main enemies. You should fight them first. Liu Xuan is not worthy of attention.

古文：且天下饥乱，明公虽拥大兵，游行羁旅，人无定志，非所以保万全，制四方也。
现代文：再说天下饥饿动乱，您虽然拥有强大的军队，但来回行军长期在旅途中，人心不定，这不是控制四方的万全之计。
English: Besides, there are famines and upheavals all over the world. Although you have a powerful army, you have been marching back and forth for a long time, and people's minds are uncertain. This is not a panacea for controlling the four directions.

古文：不若择便地而据之，广聚粮储，西禀平阳以图幽、并，此霸王之业也。
现代文：不如选择一个便利的地方占据它，多多聚集储备粮食，尊奉平阳以谋取幽州、并州，这是霸王的功业。
English: It is better to choose a convenient place to occupy it, gather a lot of reserve grain, and honor Pingyang to seek Yuzhou and Yuzhou, which is the work of the overlord.

古文：邯郸、襄国，形胜之地，请择一而都之。 
现代文：邯郸、襄国，都是好地方，请选一个作为都城。 
English: Handan and Xiangguo are both good places, please choose one as the capital.

古文：勒曰： 右侯之计是也。 
现代文：石勒说： 您的计策是对的！ 
English: Shiller said: Your strategy is right!

古文：遂进据襄国。
现代文：于是进发占据了襄国。
English: As a result, Jinfa took over Xiangguo.

古文：宾复言于勒曰： 今吾居此，彭祖、越石所深忌也，恐城堑未固，资储未广，二寇交至。
现代文：张宾又对石勒说： 现在我们驻扎在这里，是王浚、刘琨深深忌惮的。我担心城墙堑壕还不坚固，物资储备还不充分时，他们二人交相率兵来了。
English: Zhang Bin also said to Shi Le: Now that we are stationed here, Wang Jun and Liu Ye are deeply afraid. I am worried that the city wall trenches are not yet solid, and the material reserves are not sufficient, when the two of them came to lead the soldiers.

古文：宜亟收野谷，且遣使至平阳，具陈镇此之意。 
现代文：应当迅速收取野外的粮食，并且派使者到平阳，一一说明我们镇守此地的意图。 
English: We should quickly collect food from the field and send emissaries to Pingyang to explain our intention to defend this place.

古文：勒从之，分命诸将攻冀州，郡县壁垒多降，运其谷以输襄国；且表于汉主聪，聪以勒为都督冀、幽、并、营四州诸军事、冀州牧，进封上党公。
现代文：石勒听取了这个建议，分别命令诸将攻打冀州，那里的郡、县、营垒大多投降，就把这些地方的粮谷运往襄国。并且表奏汉主刘聪，刘聪让石勒担任都督冀、幽、并、营四州诸军事，冀州牧，进封为上党公。
English: Shiller listened to this suggestion and ordered the generals to attack Jizhou, where most of the counties, counties, and camps surrendered, and shipped the grain from these places to Xiangguo. And played the Han master Liu Cong, Liu Cong let Shiller serve as the governor of Hebei, Yu, and Hebei, the military of the four states, and the Jizhou herdsmen, and Jinfeng was the upper party official.

古文：刘琨移檄州郡，期以十月会平阳，击汉。
现代文：刘琨向各州郡发布檄文，约定十月在平阳会合，攻打汉。
English: Liu Bei issued an imperial edict to all prefectures and counties, and agreed to meet in Pingyang in October to attack Han.

古文：琨素奢豪，喜声色。
现代文：刘琨平素奢侈豪华，喜欢音乐女色。
English: Liu Wei is usually extravagant and luxurious, and likes music and women.

古文：河南徐润以音律得幸于琨，琨以为晋阳令。
现代文：河南人徐润因为擅长音律而受到刘琨的宠信，刘琨让他担任晋阳令。
English: Xu Run, a native of Henan Province, was favored by Liu Bei because he was good at musical rhythms. Liu Bei made him the leader of Jinyangling.

古文：润骄恣，干预政事。
现代文：徐润骄纵放肆，经常干预政事。
English: Xu Run was arrogant, indulgent and often interfered in political affairs.

古文：护军令狐盛数以为言，且劝琨杀之，琨不从。
现代文：护军令狐盛多次对此向刘琨发表看法，并且劝刘琨把他杀了。刘琨不听。
English: Fox Sheng, the commander of the garrison, repeatedly expressed his opinion to Liu Bei about this, and persuaded Liu Bei to kill him. Liu Bei did not listen.

古文：润谮盛于琨，琨收盛，杀之。
现代文：结果徐润向刘琨说令狐盛的坏话，刘琨就拘捕了令狐盛，把他杀了。
English: As a result, Xu Run spoke ill of Ling Fuxsheng to Liu Bei, who arrested Ling Fuxsheng and killed him.

古文：琨母曰： 汝不能驾御豪杰以恢远略，而专除胜己，祸必及我。 
现代文：刘琨的母亲说： 你不能组织驾驭英雄豪杰来完成宏大的谋略，而只知一心清除超过自己的人，这带来的灾祸一定会殃及我。 
English: Liu Yao's mother said, "You can't organize and control heroes and heroines to accomplish a grand strategy, but only know how to eliminate people who are better than you. The disaster brought about by this will surely affect me."

古文：盛子泥奔汉，具言虚实。
现代文：令狐盛的儿子令狐泥投奔到汉，全部陈说刘琨的虚实情况。
English: The son of Lingsheng Fox, Lingshui Fox, fled to Han, and all the facts about Liu Ye were untrue.

古文：汉主聪大喜，遣河内王粲、中山王曜将兵寇并州，以令狐泥为乡导。
现代文：汉主刘聪大喜过望，派遣河内王刘粲、中山王刘曜率兵进犯并州，让令狐泥担任向导。
English: The Han ruler Liu Cong was overjoyed and sent the king of Hanoi, Liu Ye, and the king of Zhongshan, Liu You, to invade and annex the state, and let Ling Xudei serve as a guide.

古文：琨闻之，东出，收兵于常山及中山，使其将郝诜、张乔将兵拒粲，且遣使求救于代公猗卢。
现代文：刘琨听说后，向东在常山及中山聚集军队，派部将郝诜、张乔带兵阻击刘粲，并且派使者向代公拓跋猗卢请求救援。
English: After hearing this, Liu Bei gathered troops to the east in Changshan and Zhongshan. He sent General Zou and Zhang Qiao with soldiers to block Liu Bei, and sent an envoy to the deputy general Tuoba Lu to request rescue.

古文：诜乔俱败死。
现代文：郝诜、张乔都兵败而死。
English: Zhai and Zhang Qiao were both killed in the battle.

古文：粲、曜乘虚袭晋阳，太原太守高乔、并州别驾郝聿以晋阳降汉。
现代文：刘粲、刘曜乘虚袭击晋阳，太原太守高乔、并州别驾郝聿献出晋阳向汉投降。
English: Liu Bei and Liu You attacked Jinyang by taking advantage of the situation, and the Taiyuan governor Gao Qiao and the prefectural governor presented Jinyang to Han for surrender.

古文：八月，庚戌，琨还救晋阳，不及，帅左右数十骑奔常山。
现代文：八月，庚戌，刘琨返回来救晋阳，没来得及，只好带领左右随从几十人骑马逃奔常山。
English: In August, Geng Hui and Liu Bei returned to save Jinyang, but before they could, they had to lead dozens of followers on horseback to flee to Changshan.

古文：辛亥，粲、曜入晋阳。
现代文：辛亥，刘粲、刘曜进入晋阳。
English: Xinhai, Liu Bei and Liu You entered Jinyang.

古文：壬子，令狐泥杀琨父母。
现代文：壬子，令狐泥把刘琨的父母都杀了。
English: Jinzi, let the mud kill Liu Ye's parents.

古文：粲、曜送尚书卢志、侍中许遐、太子右卫率崔玮于平阳。
现代文：刘粲、刘曜把晋朝尚书卢志、侍中许遐、太子右卫率崔玮送到平阳。
English: Liu Wei and Liu You sent the Jin Dynasty Shang Shul Lu Zhi, the chamberlain Xu Wei, and the prince's right guard, Cui Wei, to Pingyang.

古文：聪复以曜为车骑大将军，以前将军刘丰为并州刺史，镇晋阳。
现代文：刘聪又以刘曜担任车骑大将军，以前将军刘丰任并州刺史，镇守晋阳。
English: Liu Cong also appointed Liu You as the general of chariot and cavalry. Former general Liu Feng was appointed as the governor of Jinyang.

古文：九月，聪以卢志为太弟太师，崔玮为太傅，许遐为太保，高乔、令狐泥皆为武卫将军。
现代文：九月，刘聪任卢志为太弟太师，任崔玮为太傅，许遐为太保，高乔、令狐泥都担任武卫将军。
English: In September, Liu Cong appointed Lu Zhi as the grand brother and grand master, appointed Cui Jun as the grand master, Xu Jun as the grand tutor, Gao Qiao and Ling Xudei as the grand guards.

古文：己卯，汉卫尉梁芬奔长安。
现代文：己卯，汉的卫尉梁芬逃奔长安。
English: Han's bodyguard Liang Fen fled to Chang'an.

古文：辛巳，贾疋等奉秦王业为皇太子，建行台于长安，登坛告类，建宗庙、社稷，大赦。
现代文：辛巳，贾疋等尊奉秦王司马业为皇太子，在长安建立行台，登祭坛祭天。设置宗庙、社稷，实行大赦。
English: Xin Si, Jia Hui and others venerated Qin King Sima Ye as the crown prince, set up a procession in Chang'an, ascended the altar to worship the heavens, set up ancestral temples and shrines, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：以阎鼎为太子詹事，总摄百揆；加贾疋征西大将军，以秦州刺史南阳王保为大司马。
现代文：任阎鼎为太子詹事，代理统领文武百官。任命贾疋为征西大将军，秦州刺史、南阳王司马保为大司马。
English: Yan Ding was appointed as the prince of Zhanji, acting as the commander-in-chief of the army and navy. Jia Xi was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, Qin Zhou and Nanyang Wang Sima Bao were appointed as the major generals.

古文：命司空荀籓督摄远近，光禄大夫荀组领司隶校尉、行豫州刺史，与籓共保开封。
现代文：让司空荀藩督领远近的事务，光禄大夫荀组兼任司隶校尉、豫州刺史，与荀藩共同守卫开封。
English: He had the governor of the Jiu Clan, Siku, take charge of the near and far-off affairs, and the commander of the Jiu Clan, Guanglu, also served as the captain of the Jiu Clan, and the governor of the Jiu Clan, Yuzhou, jointly guarded Kaifeng with the Jiu Clan.

古文：秦州刺史裴苞据险以拒凉州兵，张实、宋配等击破之，苞奔柔凶坞。
现代文：秦州刺史裴苞占据险要之地来抵御凉州的军队。张、宋配等人打败了他，裴苞逃奔柔凶坞。
English: Qin Zhou's general Pei Jun occupied a critical position to fend off Liang Zhou's army. Zhang, Song Pi and others defeated him, and Pei Jun fled to Zhuohui.

古文：冬，十月，汉主聪封其子恒为代王，逞为吴王，朗为颍川王，皋为零陵王，旭为丹杨王，京为蜀王，坦为九江王，晃为临川王；以王育为太保，王彰为太尉，任顗为司徒，马景为司空，硃纪为尚书令，范隆为左仆射，呼延晏为右仆射。
现代文：冬季，十月，汉主刘聪封自己的儿子刘恒为代王，刘逞为吴王，刘朗为颍川王，刘皋为零陵王，刘旭为丹阳王，刘京为蜀王，刘坦为九江王，刘晃为临川王。任王育为太保、王彰为太尉，任为司徒，马景为司空，朱纪为尚书令，范隆为左仆射，呼延晏为右仆射。
English: In the winter of October, the Han ruler Liu Cong appointed his son Liu Heng as the acting king, Liu Gan as the king of Wu, Liu Lang as the king of Luochuan, Liu Zi as the king of Luling, Liu Xu as the king of Danyang, Liu Jing as the king of Shu, Liu Tan as the king of Jiujiang, and Liu Huan as the king of Linchuan. Ren Wang Yu as the Taibo, Wang Zhang as the Taifu, Ren as the Szeto, Ma Jing as the Sikuo, Zhu Ji as the Shang Shuling, Fan Long as the Zuo Zhuo, and Hu Yan Zi as the Zuo Zhu

古文：代公猗卢遣其子六修及兄子普根、将军卫雄、范班、箕澹帅众数万为前锋以攻晋阳，猗卢自帅众二十万继之，刘琨收散卒数千为之乡导。
现代文：代公拓跋猗卢派他的儿子拓跋六修以及哥哥的儿子拓跋普根、将军卫雄、范班、箕澹带领几万军队作为前锋攻打晋阳，拓跋猗卢自己带领二十万军队跟在后面，刘琨召集了几千逃散的兵士作为拓跋六的向导。
English: His son Tuoba Liuxiu and his brother's sons Tuoba Pugen, Generals Wei Xiong, Fanban, and Zou, led tens of thousands of troops as the vanguard to attack Jinyang. Tuoba Liuxiu himself led two hundred thousand troops to follow behind. Liu Bei gathered several thousand soldiers who had fled as Tuoba Liuxiu's guide.

古文：六修与汉中山王曜战于汾东，曜兵败，坠马，中匕创。
现代文：拓跋六与汉中山王刘曜在汾东交战，刘曜的军队失败，他自己也负伤七处，掉下马。
English: Tuoba Lu and Liu You, the king of the mountains of the Han Dynasty, fought in the east of Shandong. Liu You's army was defeated, and he himself was injured in seven places and fell off his horse.

古文：讨虏将军傅虎以马授曜，曜不受，曰： 卿光乘以自免，吾创已重，自分死此。 
现代文：讨虏将军傅虎把自己的马交给刘曜，刘曜不接受，说： 你应该骑上它突围，我伤得已很重，命该丧此。 
English: The warlord Fu Hu gave his horse to Liu Ye, but Liu Ye did not accept it, saying, "You should ride it to break out of the encirclement. I have been seriously injured, and my life is worthless."

古文：虎泣曰： 虎蒙大王识拔至此，常思效命，今其时矣。
现代文：傅虎哭着说： 我蒙受您的赏识而被提拔到现在的地位，常常想着以自己的生命报效您，现在正是这样的时候了。
English: Fu Hu wept and said, "I have received your appreciation and been promoted to my current position. I have often thought about repaying you with my life, and now is the right time.

古文：且汉室初基，天下可无虎，不可无大王也！ 
现代文：再说汉的朝廷刚刚建立，天下可以没有傅虎，而不能没有您啊！ 
English: Besides, the Han imperial court has just been established. The world can do without Fuhu, but not without you!

古文：乃扶曜上马，驱令渡汾，自还战死。
现代文：于是把刘曜扶上马，赶着马渡过汾水，自己又回去冲杀最后战死。
English: So he put Liu You on a horse, drove the horse across Surabaya, and went back to kill himself, and finally died in battle.

古文：曜入晋阳，夜，与大将军粲、镇北大将军丰掠晋阳之民，逾蒙山而归。
现代文：刘曜进入晋阳，夜里与大将军刘粲、镇北大将军刘丰抢劫晋阳的百姓，然后翻过蒙山而撤回。
English: Liu You entered Jinyang, robbed the people of Jinyang at night with the general Liu Wei and the general Liu Feng, and then withdrew across Mengshan.

古文：十一月，猗卢追之，战于蓝谷，汉兵大败，擒刘丰，斩邢延等三千馀级，伏尸数百里。
现代文：十一月，拓跋猗卢追击他们的军队，在蓝谷交战，又大败汉军，擒获刘丰，杀了邢延等三千多人，尸横几百里。
English: In November, Tuoba and Lu chased their army, fought in the Blue Valley, and defeated the Han army, captured Liu Feng, killed more than three thousand people such as Yu Yan, and the corpses were scattered hundreds of miles.

古文：猗卢因大猎寿阳山，陈阅皮肉，山为之赤。
现代文：拓跋猗卢因胜利而到寿阳山大规模打猎，将猎物的皮，肉摆放在山上观看，山因此而变为红色。
English: Because of his victory, Tuoba Qilu went to Shouyang Mountain to hunt on a large scale, and placed the skin and meat of the prey on the mountain to watch. As a result, the mountain turned red.

古文：刘琨自营门步入拜谢，固请进军。
现代文：刘琨从军营门走进去拜谢拓跋猗卢，坚持请求拓跋猗卢继续进军。
English: Liu Wei walked in from the gate of the military camp to pay his respects to Tuobao Lu and insisted that Tuobao Lu continue to march forward.

古文：猗卢曰： 吾不早来，致卿父母见害，诚以相愧。
现代文：拓跋猗卢说： 我没能早来，致使你父母被杀害，心里确实感到惭愧，现在你已收复了并州的辖境。
English: Tuoba Lu said, "I feel really ashamed that I didn't come earlier and your parents were killed, and now you have regained control of Xingzhou."

古文：今卿已复州境，吾远来，士马疲弊，且待后举，刘聪未可灭也。 
现代文：而我远道来此，兵士马匹都已疲惫，暂且等待以后再举事，刘聪不是一下子就能消灭的。 
English: But I have come all the way here, the soldiers and horses are all tired, let's wait and do something later, Liu Cong can't be eliminated all at once.

古文：遣琨马、牛、羊各千馀匹，车百乘而还，留其将箕澹、段繁等戍晋阳。
现代文：送给刘琨一千多匹马，牛羊各一千多头和一百辆车后回师，把部将箕澹、段繁等留下来戍守晋阳。
English: He gave Liu Bei more than a thousand horses, more than a thousand heads of cattle and sheep each, and a hundred cars to return to the division later. He left the general Zou and Duan Xiang to defend Jinyang.

古文：琨徙居阳曲，招集亡散。
现代文：刘琨迁徙到阳曲居住，召集流散的人员。
English: Liu Ye migrated to Yangqu to live and gather the dispersed personnel.

古文：卢谌为刘粲参军，亡归琨，汉人杀其父志及弟谧、诜。
现代文：卢谌是刘粲的参军，逃跑投奔了刘琨。汉杀了他的父亲卢志以及弟弟卢谧、卢诜。
English: Lu Yao was Liu Yao's son who joined the army. He ran away and joined Liu Yao. Han killed his father Lu Zhi and his brothers Lu Yao and Lu Yao.

古文：赠傅虎幽州刺史。
现代文：追赠傅虎为幽州刺史。
English: The posthumous gift of Fuhu is the history of Yuzhou.

古文：十二月，汉主聪立皇后张氏，以其父实为左光禄大夫。
现代文：十二月，汉君主刘聪把张氏立为皇后，任她父亲张为左光禄大夫。
English: In December, the Han Emperor Liu Cong made Zhang the empress and appointed her father Zhang as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu.

古文：彭仲荡之子天护帅群胡攻贾疋，天护阳不胜而走，疋追之，夜坠涧中，天护执而杀之。
现代文：彭仲荡的儿子彭天护带领胡人们攻打贾疋，彭天护表面上假装失败而退走，贾疋追击，夜里掉到山涧中，彭天护把他抓住杀了。
English: Peng Zhongran's son, Peng Tianyou, led the Hu people to attack Jia Yu. On the surface, Peng Tianyou pretended to be defeated and retreated. Jia Yu chased him and fell into the mountains at night. Peng Tianyou caught him and killed him.

古文：汉以天护为凉州刺史。
现代文：汉让彭天护任凉州刺史。
English: Han let Peng Tianguo be appointed as the guardian of Liangzhou.

古文：众推始平太守麹允领雍州刺史。
现代文：大家推举始平太守麴允兼雍州刺史。
English: All of them nominated Shi Ping, the Grand Empress Dowager, and Yongzhou, the Prince of Song.

古文：阎鼎与京兆太守梁综争权，鼎遂杀综。
现代文：阎鼎与京兆太守梁综争夺权力，阎鼎于是杀了梁综。
English: Yan Ding competed for power with the Beijing Zhaotai guard, Liang Siming. Yan Ding then killed Liang Siming.

古文：麹允与抚夷护军索纟林、冯翊太守梁肃合兵攻鼎，鼎出奔雍，为氐窦首所杀。
现代文：麴允与扶夷护军索，冯太守梁肃联合兵力攻打阎鼎，阎鼎出奔雍州，被氐人窦首杀死。
English: Yan Yun and Fuyi escort troops, Feng Taishu and Liang Sui jointly attacked Yan Ding, Yan Ding went out of Yongzhou, and was killed by Xingren Dou Shou.

古文：广平游纶、张豺拥众数万，据苑乡，受王浚假署；石勒遣夔安、支雄等七将攻之，破其外垒。
现代文：广平人游纶、张豺拥有几万人，占据苑乡，王浚让他们在那儿暂时代理原官行使职权，石勒派遣夔安、支雄等七个将领攻打他们，攻破了外围的营垒。
English: The Guangping people, including Youyi and Zhangye, owned tens of thousands of people and occupied Yuanxiang. Wang Jun allowed them to temporarily exercise their powers as acting officials there. Shiller sent seven generals, including Yan'an and Zhixiong, to attack them and break through the outer camp.

古文：浚遣督护王昌帅诸军及辽西公段疾陆眷、疾陆眷弟匹磾、文鸯、从弟末柸部众五万攻勒于襄国。
现代文：王浚派遣都护王昌率领各军，以及辽西公段疾陆眷，段疾陆眷的弟弟段匹、段文鸯、堂弟段末等人的部众五万人到襄国攻打石勒。
English: Wang Jun dispatched the capital protector Wang Chang to lead all the armies, as well as Liaoxi's general Duan Zhiliu, Duan Zhiliu's younger brother Duan Pi, Duan Wenzhong, and cousin Duan Madu, and other members of the 50,000-strong army to Xiang Province to attack Shilai.

古文：疾陆眷屯于渚阳，勒遣诸将出战，皆为疾陆眷所败。
现代文：段疾陆眷在渚阳驻扎，石勒派多名将领去攻打，都被段疾陆眷打败。
English: Duan Shiliu was stationed in Jinyang. Shiller sent a number of generals to attack, but they were all defeated by Duan Shiliu.

古文：疾陆眷大造攻具，将攻城，勒众甚惧。
现代文：段疾陆眷大量制造攻城的器具，打算攻城，石勒的部众都非常惧怕。
English: Duan Zhi Lu and his retainers made a large number of siege tools and planned to attack the city. Shi Le's subordinates were very afraid.

古文：勒召将佐谋之曰： 今城堑未固，粮储不多，彼众我寡，外无救授，吾欲悉众与之决战，何如？ 
现代文：石勒召集部将参佐等官员商议说： 现在城墙堑壕还不坚固，粮食储备也不多，敌众我寡，外面没有救援，因此我想用全力与他决战，怎么样？ 
English: Shi Le, the convener of the department, consulted with the officials such as the counselor and said: Now the city wall and trenches are not strong, the grain reserves are not much, the enemies are few and far between, and there is no rescue outside, so I want to fight him with all my strength, how about it?

古文：诸将皆曰： 不如坚守以疲敌，待其退而击之。 
现代文：武将们都说： 还不如坚守使敌人疲惫，等待他们退还时再打击他们。 
English: The generals all said: It is better to hold out and wear down the enemy, and wait for them to retreat before striking them.

古文：张宾、孔苌曰： 鲜卑之种，段氏最为勇悍，而末柸尤甚，其锐卒皆在末柸所。
现代文：张宾、孔苌说： 鲜卑部落当中，段氏最为骁勇骠悍，而段末更加突出，他们的精锐部队都在段末那里。
English: Zhang Bin and Kong Wei said: Among the Xianbei tribes, the Duan clan is the most courageous and powerful, and the Duanbei is more prominent. Their elite troops are all at the end of the Duanbei.

古文：今闻疾陆眷刻日攻北城，其大众远来，战斗连日，谓我孤弱，不敢出战，意必懈惰；宜且勿出，示之以怯，凿北城为突门二十馀道，俟其来至，列守未定，出其不意，直冲末柸帐，彼必震骇，不暇为计，破之必矣。
现代文：今天听说段疾陆眷几天之内就要攻打北城，他的军队从远方来，又连日战斗，认为我们孤独无援兵力微弱，不敢出去交战，斗志一定松懈懒惰。我们最好暂且不出去，让他们觉得我们胆怯，在北城墙凿出二十几条暗道，等待他们来到时，兵阵还没有排列稳定，出其不意，直冲段末的军帐，他们一定震惊惧怕而来不及安排对策，打败他们是必定无疑的。
English: Today, I heard that Duan Zhi Lu's retainers would attack the North City within a few days. His army came from far away and fought for days. They thought that we were alone, without reinforcements, weak, and did not dare to go out to fight. Our fighting spirit must be slack and lazy. We had better not go out for the time being, so that they would think that we were timid. They had dug out more than two dozen secret passages in the north city wall. When they arrived, the soldiers were not yet lined up and stable. To their surprise, they directly attacked the military account at the end of the section. They must have been shocked and afraid and did not have

古文：末柸败，则其馀不攻而溃矣。 
现代文：段末失败了，其他军队就不攻自溃了。 
English: If they failed at the end of the passage, the other armies would not attack and would be routed.

古文：勒从之，密为突门。
现代文：石勒听从了这个计策，秘密设置暗道暗门。
English: Shi Le listened to this scheme and secretly set up a back door.

古文：既而疾陆眷攻北城，勒登城望之，见其将士或释仗而寝，乃命孔苌督锐卒自突门出击之，城上鼓以助其势。苌攻末柸帳，不能克而退。末柸逐之，入其垒门，为勒众所获，疾陆眷等军皆退走。
现代文：不久段疾陆眷攻打北城，石勒登上城墙观望他们的情况，发现他们的武将士卒有的甚至放下兵器躺着，就命令孔苌带领精锐兵士从暗门中突袭，城上擂鼓呐喊助威，孔苌进攻段末的军帐，不能攻破便撤退，段末追击，进入孔苌的军垒门，被石勒的军队所擒获。段疾陆眷等人的军队都退走。
English: Not long after, Duan Zhirong attacked Beicheng. Shi Le ascended the city wall to observe their situation, and found that some of their warriors had even laid down their weapons. He ordered Kong Hui to lead the elite soldiers to raid from the secret gate. Drums and shouts of encouragement were heard on the city. Kong Hui attacked the military headquarters at the end of the section, and if he could not break through, he retreated. At the end of the section, he pursued and entered the military gate of Kong Hui, and was captured by Shi Le's army. The troops of Duan Zhirong and others all retreated.

古文：苌乘胜追击，枕尸三十馀里，获铠马五千匹。
现代文：这时孔苌乘胜追击，杀得尸横三十多里，缴获铠甲马匹五千多。
English: At this time, Kong Xuan successfully pursued, killed more than 30 corpses, and captured more than 5,000 armored horses.

古文：疾陆眷收其馀众，还屯渚阳。
现代文：段疾陆眷召集剩余部众，退到渚阳驻扎。
English: Duan Zhilu immediately called up the remaining members and withdrew to Nagisiyang.

古文：勒质末柸，遣使求和于疾陆眷，疾陆眷许之。
现代文：石勒以段末为人质，派使者去向段疾陆眷求和，段疾陆眷同意了。
English: Shi Le took Duan Duan as a hostage and sent an envoy to Duan Dui to sue for peace. Duan Dui agreed.

古文：文鸯谏曰： 今以末柸一人之故而纵垂亡之虏，得无为王彭祖所怨，招后患乎！ 
现代文：段文鸯劝谏说： 现在因为段末一人的缘故而把面临灭亡的敌人放跑，该不会被王浚所怨恨，而招来后患吧？ 
English: Duanwen advised Duanwen, saying, "Now, because of Duanwen, you have let go of an enemy who is about to perish. Won't this be resented by Wang Jun and cause trouble later?

古文：疾陆眷不从，复以铠马金银赂勒，且以末柸三弟为质而请末柸。
现代文：段疾陆眷不听，又用铠甲马匹金银去贿赂石勒，并且用段末的三弟作人质而请求换回段末。
English: Duan Zhi Lu did not listen, and used armored horses, gold and silver to bribe Shiller, and used Duan's third brother as a hostage to request the return of Duan.

古文：诸将皆劝勒杀末柸，勒曰： 辽西鲜卑健国也，与我素无仇雠，为王浚所使耳。
现代文：各将领都劝石勒杀了段末，石勒说： 辽西鲜卑是强健的国家，与我们向来没有仇，这次是受王浚的指使罢了。
English: All the generals advised Shi Le to kill Duan Feng. Shi Le said, "Liaoxi Xianbei is a strong country, and we have never had any enmity with them. This time, it was just at the behest of Wang Jun."

古文：今杀一人而结一国之怨，非计也。
现代文：现在杀一个人而去与一个国家结怨仇，不是办法。
English: It is not a good idea to kill a person and start a feud with a country.

古文：归之，必深德我，不复为浚用矣。 
现代文：放他回去，他们一定会深深地感念我，不再被王浚所用。 
English: Let him go back, they will surely miss me deeply and will no longer be used by Wang Jun.

古文：乃厚以金帛报之，遣石虎与疾陆眷盟于渚阳，结为兄弟。
现代文：于是用丰厚的金子、布、帛回报他，派石虎去与段疾陆眷在渚阳结盟、拜为兄弟。
English: Therefore, he rewarded him with plentiful gold, cloth, and straw, and sent Shihhu to ally with Duan Zhi Lu in Nagiyang and worship him as a brother.

古文：疾陆眷引归，王昌等不能独留，亦引兵还蓟。
现代文：段疾陆眷带兵回归辽西，王昌没有力量单独留下，也率兵还归蓟州。
English: Due to illness, Duan Lu and his retinue led the soldiers back to western Liaoning. Wang Chang did not have the strength to stay alone, and he also led the soldiers back to Zhangzhou.

古文：勒召末柸，与之燕饮，誓为父子，遣还辽西。
现代文：石勒召来段末，与他宴饮，并宣誓结为父子，便让他回辽西。
English: Shi Le summoned him at the end of the passage, had a banquet with him, and swore to be father and son, then let him return to West Liao.

古文：末柸在涂，日南向而拜者三。
现代文：段末在路上。每天都朝南三拜。
English: At the end of the section, I was on the road. I walked south three times a day.

古文：由是段氏专心附勒，王浚之势遂衰。
现代文：从此段氏一心附从石勒，王浚的势力于是衰败。
English: From then on, the Duan clan followed Shiller wholeheartedly, and Wang Jun's power declined.

古文：游纶、张豺请降于勒。
现代文：游纶、张豺向石勒请求投降。
English: You Zou and Zhang Zou appealed to Shi Le to surrender.

古文：勒攻信都，杀冀州刺史王象。
现代文：石勒攻打信都，杀冀州刺史王象。
English: Shi Le attacked the capital of Xinzhuang and killed the king elephant of Jizhou.

古文：浚复以邵举行冀州刺史，保信都。
现代文：王浚又让邵举任冀州刺史，防守信都。
English: Wang Jun also allowed Shao He to be appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province, and to defend the capital.

古文：是岁大疫。
现代文：这一年，全国大肆流行传染病。
English: There was a major outbreak of plague the following year.

古文：王澄少与兄衍名冠海内。刘琨谓澄曰： 卿形虽散朗，而内实动侠，以此处世，难得其死。 
现代文：王澄年轻时，名声就与哥哥王衍一起名扬海内，刘琨对王澄说： 你外表虽然洒脱清朗，而内心实际易动而侠义，这样来处世，难得好死。 
English: When Wang Cheng was young, he and his brother Wang Yan became famous at sea. Liu Ye said to Wang Cheng: Although your appearance is bright and clear, your heart is actually flexible and chivalrous. If you live like this, it's hard to die well.

古文：及在荆州，悦成都内史王机，谓为己亚，使之内综心膂，外为爪牙。
现代文：等王澄到荆州，喜欢成都内史王机，认为他仅次于自己，让他对内成为综理事务的心腹臂膀，对外成为得力帮手。
English: When Wang Cheng came to Jingzhou, he liked Chengdu's internal history, and thought that he was second only to himself, so that he became the heart and soul of the overall affairs internally, and became a powerful helper to the outside world.

古文：澄屡为杜苾所败，望实俱损，犹傲然自得，无忧惧之意，但与机日夜纵酒博弈，由是上下离心；南平太守应詹屡谏，不听。
现代文：王澄多次被杜打败，声望与实际都有所减损，但仍是傲然自得，心里没有一点忧虑惧怯，只是与王机日夜纵情喝酒对弈，因此上下都与他不一条心，南平太守应詹多次劝谏，而王澄不听。
English: Wang Cheng was defeated many times by Du, and his reputation and reality were both damaged, but he was still proud of himself. He did not have a single worry or fear in his heart. He just played the game of drinking with Wang Cai day and night. As a result, his superiors and subordinates did not have the same heart as him. Nanping Taishu Yingzhan repeatedly persuaded him, but Wang Cheng did not listen.

古文：澄自出军击杜苾，军于作塘。
现代文：王澄自己出兵攻打杜，在作塘驻扎。
English: Wang Cheng himself sent troops to attack Du and stationed them in Zuotang.

古文：故山简参军王冲拥众迎应詹为刺史，詹以冲无赖，弃之，还南平，冲乃自称刺史。
现代文：以前在山简处任参军的王冲聚集部众迎接应詹当刺史，应詹因为王冲不可靠，离开他返回南平，王冲于是自称刺史。
English: Wang Chong, who had previously served in the army in Shanjan, gathered his followers to welcome Ying Zhan when he arrived in Nanping. Ying Zhan left Wang Chong because he was unreliable and returned to Nanping. Wang Chong then called himself Ying Zhan.

古文：澄惧，使其将杜蕤守江陵，徙治孱陵，寻又奔沓中。
现代文：王澄惧怯，派自己的部将杜蕤防守江陵，自己把治所迁徙到孱陵，不久又逃奔沓中。
English: Wang Cheng was afraid and sent his subordinate Du Xi to defend Jiangling. He moved the government office to Fuling, and soon fled to Yunnan.

古文：别驾郭舒谏曰： 使君临州虽无异政，然一州人心所系，今西收华容之兵，足以擒此小丑，奈何自弃，遽为奔亡乎！ 
现代文：别驾郭舒劝谏王澄说： 您到荆州虽然没有特殊的政绩，但仍是一州的人心所寄托的，现在您把华容县的军队从西边调回，完全能够擒获这个小丑，怎么能够自己放弃，仓惶地逃走呢？ 
English: Don't drive Guo Shu to persuade Gong Wangcheng to say: Although you did not have any special political achievements when you came to Jingzhou, you still have the trust of the people of Jingzhou. Now that you have transferred the Huarong County army back from the west, you are fully capable of capturing this clown. How can you give up and run away in a hurry?

古文：澄不从，欲将舒东下。
现代文：王澄不接受，想带着郭舒往东走。
English: Wang Cheng did not accept and wanted to go east with Guo Shu.

古文：舒曰： 舒为万里纪纲，不能匡正，令使君奔亡，诚不忍渡江。 
现代文：郭舒说： 我担任着处理一州纪纲法度的职务，不能够扶正州务，现在您外出逃亡，实在不忍心渡江。 
English: Guo Shu said: I hold the position of dealing with a state's legal system, and I can't help the state affairs. Now that you are on the run, I really can't bear to cross the river.

古文：乃留屯沌口。
现代文：于是就留守在沌口。
English: So he stayed in Chaoskou.

古文：琅邪王睿闻之，召澄为军谘祭酒，以军谘祭酒周顗代之，澄乃赴召。
现代文：琅邪王司马睿听说后，就征召王澄担任军咨祭酒，以军咨酒祭周代替他原来的职务，王澄于是应召而来。
English: After hearing about the evil king Sima Rui, Wang Cheng was conscripted to serve as the military ceremony wine, replacing his original position with the military ceremony wine festival week. Wang Cheng then came in response to the call.

古文：顗始至州，建平流民傅密等叛迎杜苾，苾别将王真袭沔阳，顗狼狈失据。
现代文：周刚到荆州时，建平的流民傅密等人叛离，去迎接杜，杜的别将王真袭击沔阳，周于是狼狈地失去所守。
English: When Zhou had just arrived in Jingzhou, Jianping's exiles Fu Mi and others defected and went to meet Du. Du did not want Wang Zhen to attack Poyang, so Zhou lost his position in dismay.

古文：征讨都督王敦遣武昌太守陶侃、寻阳太守周访、历阳内史甘卓共击苾，敦进屯豫章，为诸军继援。
现代文：征讨都督王敦派武昌太守陶侃、寻阳太守周访、历阳内史甘卓一起攻打杜，王敦进军到豫章驻扎，作为各支军队的后援。
English: In the campaign, the viceroy Wang Dun sent Wuchang's eunuch Tao Kan, Hanyang's eunuch Zhou Qi, and Liyang's eunuch Gan Zhuo to attack Du together. Wang Dun marched into Yuzhang and stationed there as a backup for each army.

古文：王澄过诣敦，自以名声素出敦右，犹以旧意侮敦。
现代文：王澄前去拜访王敦，自认为名声一直在王敦之上，还想按照以往的想法轻侮王敦。
English: Wang Cheng went to visit Wang Dun. He thought that his reputation had always been higher than Wang Dun's, and he still wanted to despise Wang Dun in accordance with his previous thoughts.

古文：敦怒，诬其与杜苾通信，遣壮士扼杀之。
现代文：这次王敦大怒，诬陷他与杜有信使来往，派壮士把王澄掐死。
English: This time Wang Dun flew into a rage, falsely accused him of having dealings with Du You's messenger, and sent a strong man to strangle Wang Cheng.

古文：王机闻澄死，惧祸，以其父毅、兄矩皆尝为广州刺史，就敦求广州，敦不许。
现代文：王机听说王澄死了，害怕受牵连，因为自己的父亲王毅、哥哥王矩都曾经当过广州刺史，就到王敦那里请求到广州任职，王敦不允许。
English: When Wang Ji heard that Wang Cheng had died, he was afraid of being implicated, because his father Wang Yi and his brother Wang Rui had both served as the mayor of Guangzhou. He went to Wang Dun to request a post in Guangzhou, but Wang Dun did not allow it.

古文：会广州将温邵等叛刺史郭讷，迎机为刺史，机遂将奴客门生千馀人入广州。
现代文：正遇到广州的武将温邵等人叛离刺史郭讷，迎接王机去当刺史，王机于是带着家奴、门客一千多人到了广州。
English: He had just met the Cantonese warlord Wen Shao and others who had defected from Zhishu Guo Ne and welcomed Wang Ji to become Zhishu. Wang Ji then took more than a thousand of his servants and guests to Guangzhou.

古文：讷遣兵拒之，将士皆机父兄时部曲，不战迎降，讷乃避位，以州授之。
现代文：郭讷派兵阻击王机，但部将兵士都是王机父亲、哥哥任职时的人马，因而不战却迎上去投降，郭讷于是辞职，把职务交给王机。
English: Guo Ne sent troops to block Wang Chieh, but the soldiers were the same as when Wang Chieh's father and brother were in office, so they did not fight but surrendered. Guo Ne then resigned and handed over his duties to Wang Chieh.

古文：王如军中饥乏，官军讨之，其党多降；如计穷，遂降于王敦。
现代文：王如的军中饥饿困乏，官军征讨他们，王如的属下大多投降。王如没有办法，于是向王敦投降。
English: Wang Ru's army was starving and exhausted, and the government army was conscripting them. Most of Wang Ru's subordinates surrendered. Wang Ru had no choice, so he surrendered to Wang Dun.

古文：镇东军司顾荣、前太子洗马卫玠皆卒。
现代文：镇东军司顾荣、前太子洗马卫都去世了。
English: Gu Rong, the commander of the East Zhenjiang Military Region, and the former crown prince Saima Wei both passed away.

古文：玠，瓘之孙也，美风神，善清谈；常以为人有不及，可以情恕，非意相干，可以理遣，故终身不见喜愠之色。
现代文：卫是卫的孙子，风韵神气很优美，善于清谈。常常认为别人没有做到的，能够在情理上宽恕，遭人意外的冒犯，也能够用道理来排遣，所以终身都没有表露出高兴或生气的神色。
English: Wei is Wei's grandson. He has a graceful demeanor and is good at plain talk. He often thinks that others have not done it, can forgive on the basis of reason, be offended by people by accident, and can also use reason to disperse, so he has never shown a happy or angry look throughout his life.

古文：江阳太守张启，杀行益州刺史王异而代之。
现代文：江阳太守张启杀了益州刺史王异，自己取代了王异的职务。
English: Zhang Qi, the governor of Jiangyang, killed Wang Yi, the governor of Yizhou, and took his place.

古文：启，翼之孙也，寻病卒。
现代文：张启是张翼的孙子。但不久就病死了。
English: Zhang Qi was the grandson of Zhang Ying, but he died of illness soon after.

古文：三府文武共表涪陵太守向沈行西夷校尉，南保涪陵。
现代文：益州三个官府的官员一起表奏涪陵太守向沈担任西夷校尉，到南面守卫涪陵。
English: Officials from three government offices in Yizhou jointly proposed that Xiang Shen, the eunuch of the imperial mausoleum, serve as the captain of Xiyi and go to the south to guard the imperial mausoleum.

古文：南安赤亭羌姚弋仲东徙榆眉，戎、夏襁负随之者数万；自称护羌校尉、雍州刺史、扶风公。
现代文：南安赤亭羌人姚弋仲向东迁徙到榆眉，戎人、汉人携带妻儿老小跟随他的人有几万，姚弋仲自称护羌护尉、雍州刺史、扶风公。
English: Yao Yuzhong, a native of Nan'an's Chiting County, migrated eastward to Meimei. There were tens of thousands of people who followed him, including the Eunuchs and Han people who brought their wives and children. Yao Yuzhong called himself the Protector of Meimei, the Historian of Yongzhou, and the Lord of the Winds.

古文：孝愍皇帝上
现代文：晋愍帝建兴元年
English: Emperor Jianxing in the first year of the Jin Dynasty

古文：孝怀皇帝下建兴元年春，正月，丁丑朔，汉主聪宴群臣于光极殿，使怀帝著青衣行酒。
现代文：春季，正月，丁丑朔，汉主刘聪在光极殿宴请群臣，派晋怀帝身穿青衣巡行酌酒劝饮。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Han Emperor Liu Cong invited a group of ministers to a banquet in the Hall of Light, and sent Emperor Jinhuai, dressed in a blue robe, on a tour to drink wine and persuade them to drink.

古文：庾珉、王俊等不胜悲愤，因号哭；聪恶之。
现代文：庾珉、王隽等人不胜悲愤，因此而放声大哭。
English: Yao, Wang Yao and others were so sad and angry that they burst into tears.

古文：有告珉等谋以平阳应刘琨者，二月，丁未，聪杀珉、俊等故晋臣十馀人，怀帝亦遇害。
现代文：刘聪讨厌他们。
English: Liu Cong hates them.

古文：大赦，复以会稽刘夫人为贵人。
现代文：正好有人告发庾珉等人商谋在平阳接应刘琨。
English: It just so happened that someone reported that Zou and others were plotting to pick up Liu Zou in Pingyang.

古文：荀崧曰：怀帝天姿清劭，少著英猷，若遇承平，足为守文佳主。
现代文：二月，丁未，刘聪杀庾珉、王隽等原晋朝的大臣十多人，晋怀帝也遇害。刘聪宣布大赦，重新让会稽刘夫人当贵人。
English: In February, Ding Wei and Liu Cong killed more than ten ministers of the former Jin Dynasty, including Zou and Wang Hui, and Emperor Jinhuai was also killed. Liu Cong announced an amnesty and re-designated the auditor Mrs. Liu as a dignitary.

古文：而继惠帝扰乱之后，东海专政，故无幽、厉之衅而有流亡之祸矣！
现代文：荀崧说：怀帝天资清高，年轻时就以英俊志向远大而著名，如果遇到天下太平，完全能够成为保持礼乐制度的很好的君主。但继惠帝时局势纷乱之后，东海王司马越独揽朝政，所以没有周幽王、周厉王的罪孽而却有流亡的灾祸。
English: Zou said: Emperor Huai was a man of great talent. When he was young, he was famous for being handsome and ambitious. If the world was peaceful, he would be able to become a good monarch who maintained the ritual system. However, after the chaotic situation during the reign of Emperor Hui, the East Sea King Sima Yue took over the government, so there was no sin of King Zhou Yu or King Zhou Li, but there was a disaster of exile.

古文：乙亥，汉太后张氏卒，谥曰光献。
现代文：乙亥，汉太后张氏去世，谥号为光献。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the Han Empress Dowager Zhang died, and her posthumous name was Guangxian.

古文：张后不胜哀，丁丑，亦卒，谥曰武孝。
现代文：张皇后非常悲哀，丁丑，也去世了，谥号为武孝。
English: Empress Zhang was very sad, Ding Yuxi also passed away, his nickname was Wu Xiao.

古文：己卯，汉定襄忠穆公王彰卒。
现代文：己卯，汉定襄忠穆公王彰去世。
English: Prince Yang Zhongmu of Han Dynasty passed away.

古文：三月，汉主聪立贵嫔刘娥为皇后，为之起皇仪殿。
现代文：三月，汉主刘聪把贵嫔刘娥立为皇后，为她建造仪殿。
English: In March, Emperor Liu Cong made the noblewoman Liu E the empress and built a ceremonial hall for her.

古文：廷殿陈元达切谏，以为： 天生民而树之君，使司牧之，非以兆民之命，穷一人之欲也。
现代文：廷尉陈元达恳切地劝谏，认为： 天生百姓而为他们树立君主，是让君主管理他们，并不是用千万百姓的生命满足一个人穷奢极欲。
English: The courtier Chen Yuanda earnestly advised him, saying, "To establish a monarch for the natural people is to let the monarch manage them, not to use the lives of tens of thousands of people to satisfy one person's extravagant desires.

古文：晋氏失德，大汉受之，苍生引领，庶几息肩。
现代文：晋朝廷无道，大汉受命于天，百姓翘首以待，差不多可以稍加养息。
English: The Jin court had no way out, the great man was ordered by heaven, and the people waited expectantly, almost able to raise their spirits a little.

古文：是以光文皇帝身衣大布，居无重茵，后妃不衣锦绮，乘舆马不食粟，爱民故也。
现代文：所以光文皇帝刘渊身穿粗布，居住的地方也没有双层的坐垫，皇后妃嫔也不穿绫罗绸缎，拉车的马匹不喂粟谷，这是爱惜百姓的缘故。
English: Therefore, the Guangwen Emperor Liu Yuan wore coarse cloth, and there was no double cushion in the place where he lived. The empress consort also did not wear silk brocade, and the horses pulling the cart did not feed poppy seeds. This was for the sake of caring for the people.

古文：陛下践阼以来，已作殿观四十馀所，加之军旅数兴，餽运不息，饥馑、疾疫，死亡相继，而益思营缮，岂为民父母之意乎！
现代文：陛下即位以来，已经建造了四十多处宫殿，加上一再兴兵作战，军粮运输不停，饥馑、疾病流行，造成人们死的死、逃的逃，但您还想大兴土木，这难道是作百姓的父母的想法吗？
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, more than forty palaces have been built, in addition to the repeated mobilization of troops for war, the non-stop transportation of military food, famine, disease epidemics, causing people to die and escape, but you still want to do extensive civil engineering, is this the idea of being the parents of the people?

古文：今有晋遗类，西据关中，南擅江表；李雄奄有巴、蜀；王浚、刘琨窥窬肘腋；石勒、曹嶷贡禀渐疏。陛下释此不忧，乃更为中宫作殿，岂目前之所急乎！
现代文：现在晋朝的残余还在西边占据着关中地区，南边把持着江东地区；李雄占据着巴蜀地区；王浚、刘琨窥伺着我们的肘腋之处；石勒、曹嶷贡奉与禀告越来越少，陛下不为这一切担忧，却又在宫廷中建造殿堂，这难道是目前所急需的吗？
English: At present, the remnants of the Jin Dynasty still occupy the Guanzhong region in the west and the East Jiangsu region in the south; Li Xiong occupies the Bashu region; Wang Jun and Liu Bei are watching our elbows; Shi Le, Cao Bingong and obituaries are becoming fewer and fewer. Your Majesty is not worried about all this, but is building a hall of fame in the court. Is this what is urgently needed at present?

古文：昔太宗居治安之世，粟帛流衍，犹爱百金之费，息露台之役。
现代文：过去汉文帝处于安定的社会，稻谷布帛十分丰盛，仍然珍惜百金的费用，停止修建露台的劳役。
English: In the past, Han Emperor Wen was in a stable society, rice cloth was very abundant, still cherished the cost of one hundred gold, and stopped the labor of building terraces.

古文：陛下承荒乱之馀，所有之地，不过太宗之二郡，战守之备，非特匈奴、南越而已。
现代文：陛下接受的是兵荒马乱的时代，所占有的地方，不过汉文帝时的两个郡，需要征战和防御的，也并不仅仅是匈奴、南越。
English: His Majesty accepted the place occupied by Cm during the Warring States Period, but the two counties under Emperor Hanwen needed to be conquered and defended, and not just by the Xiongnu and South Vietnam.

古文：而宫室之侈乃至于此，臣所以不敢不冒死而言也。 
现代文：而皇宫的奢侈却到了这个地步，所以我不敢不冒死来说这几句话。 
English: But the luxury of the Imperial Palace has reached this point, so I dare not say these few words without risking death.

古文：聪大怒曰： 朕为天子，营一殿，何问汝鼠子乎，乃敢妄言沮众！
现代文：刘聪勃然大怒说： 朕身为天子，建造一个殿堂，为什么要问你这样的鼠辈呢？
English: Liu Cong flew into a rage and said, "I, as the Son of Heaven, am building a hall of fame. Why would I ask a rat like you?

古文：不杀此鼠子，朕殿不成！ 
现代文：你竟敢胡说八道扰乱大家的情绪，不杀掉这个鼠辈，朕的殿堂就建不成！ 
English: How dare you talk nonsense and disturb everyone's mood. If you don't kill these rats, my temple can't be built!

古文：命左右： 曳出斩之！
现代文：向左右随从发出命令： 拖出去杀了！
English: He issued orders to his followers on both sides: Drag them out and kill them!

古文：并其妻子同枭首东市，使群鼠共穴！ 
现代文：连他的妻、子一起在东市悬首示众，让这群老鼠进到一个墓穴里去！ 
English: Together with his wife and son, he hung his head in public in Higashi City. Let this group of rats go into a grave!

古文：时聪在逍遥园李中堂，元达先锁腰而入，即以锁锁堂下树，呼曰： 臣所言者，社稷之计，而陛下杀臣。
现代文：当时刘聪在逍遥园的李中堂里，陈元达事先拿锁锁住腰进去，进去后便用锁把自己锁在堂下的树下，大声呼喊： 我所说的，是为社稷大业考虑，而陛下却要杀掉我。
English: At that time, Liu Cong was in the Li Zhong Hall of the Happy Garden. Chen Yuanda took a lock and locked his waist in advance. After entering, he locked himself under the tree under the hall and shouted loudly: What I said was for the great cause of the society, but Your Majesty wants to kill me.

古文：硃云有言： 臣得与龙逢、比干游，足矣！  
现代文：汉朝朱云说： 我能够与龙逢、比干同游，这就满足了！  
English: Han Dynasty Zhu Yun said: I can travel with Long Feng and Bi Gan, which is enough!

古文：左右曳之不能动。
现代文：随从们拉不动他。
English: His followers couldn't drag him away.

古文：大司徒任顗、光禄大夫硃纪、范隆、骠骑大将军河间王易等叩头出血曰： 元达为先帝所知，受命之初，即引置门下，尽忠竭虑，知无不言。
现代文：大司徒任，光禄大夫朱纪、范隆，骠骑大将军河间王刘易等人一起叩头叩得出血，说： 陈元达为先帝刘渊所赏识器重，受命立汉之初，就把他安排在门下，他也一直尽忠竭虑，知无不言。
English: Grand Master Tu Ren, Guanglu doctors Zhu Ji and Fan Long, and grand cavalry general Kawama Wang Liu Yi all bowed their heads and clapped their hands together to draw blood, saying: Chen Yuanta was a great admirer of the former emperor Liu Yuan, and when he was ordered to establish the Han Dynasty, he was placed under his command. He has always been loyal and thoughtful, and he knows everything.

古文：臣等窃禄偷安，每见之未尝不发愧。
现代文：我们这些人都是在职位上苟且偷安，每次见到他时没有不感到惭愧的。
English: Those of us who have worked our way up through the ranks are ashamed every time we see him.

古文：今所言虽狂直，愿陛下容之。
现代文：今天他所说的话虽然有些狂妄直率，但希望陛下能够宽容他。
English: I hope that His Majesty will be able to tolerate what he said today, even though it was somewhat arrogant and forthright.

古文：因谏诤而斩列卿，其如后世何！ 
现代文：因为直言劝谏而杀列卿，这让后世怎么办？ 
English: What will future generations make of the killing of a peer for his outspoken advice?

古文：聪默然。
现代文：刘聪沉默不语。
English: Liu Cong was silent.

古文：刘后闻之，密敕左右停刑，手疏上言： 今宫室已备，无烦更营，四海未壹，宜爱民力。
现代文：刘皇后听说后，暗中命令随从们停止对陈元达的刑罚，亲笔写了奏疏给刘聪，说： 现在宫室已经齐备，用不着再营建新的，四海还未统一，应当珍惜百姓的财力。
English: After hearing this, Empress Liu secretly ordered her attendants to stop the punishment of Chen Yuanda, and wrote a personal letter to Liu Cong, saying: Now the palace is ready, there is no need to build a new one, the four seas are not yet unified, and the financial resources of the people should be cherished.

古文：廷尉之言，社稷之福也，陛下宜加封赏；而更诛之，四海谓陛下何如哉！
现代文：廷尉陈元达的直言是社稷的福气，陛下应该加以赏赐。现在反而要杀他，天下会怎样来评说陛下呢？
English: The outspokenness of the courtier Chen Yuanda is a blessing for society, and His Majesty should reward it. Now, on the other hand, they want to kill him. How will the world judge His Majesty?

古文：夫忠臣进谏者固不顾其身也，而人主拒谏者亦不顾其身也。
现代文：直言进谏的忠臣固然不顾自己的性命，而拒绝进谏的君主也是不考虑自身的性命。
English: The loyal vassal who is outspoken about entering the priesthood certainly does not care about his own life, and the monarch who refuses to enter the priesthood does not consider his own life.

古文：陛下为妾营殿而杀谏臣，使忠良结舌者由妾，远近怨怒者由妾，公私困弊者由妾，社稷阽危者由妾，天下之罪皆萃于妾，妾何以当之！
现代文：陛下为了给我营建宫殿而杀劝谏的大臣，这样，使忠良之臣缄口不言是因为我，远近都产生怨恨愤怒是因为我，公私两方面的困窘弊害也是因为我，使国家社稷面临危险还是因为我，天下的大罪都集中到我的身上，我怎么能承担得起呢？
English: Your majesty, in order to build a palace for me, you killed the minister who advised you, so that the loyal and good ministers were silent because of me, the resentment and anger were caused because of me, the embarrassment and disadvantages in both public and private were also because of me, the national society was in danger or because of me, the world's great sins were concentrated on me, how could I afford it?

古文：妾观自古败国丧家，未始不由妇人，心常疾之。
现代文：我观察发现，自古以来造成国破家亡的，没有不从妇人开始。
English: I have observed and found that since ancient times, there has never been anything that caused the destruction of a country and the death of a family without starting with a woman.

古文：不意今日身自为之，使后世视妾由妾之视昔人也！
现代文：我心里常常为之痛心，想不到今天自己也会这样，使得后世的人看我，就像我看古人一样！
English: My heart often aches for it, and I can't imagine that I would do the same today, so that future generations would look at me as I look at the ancients!

古文：妾诚无面目复奉巾栉，愿赐死此堂，以塞陛下之过！ 
现代文：我实在没有脸面再伺侯您，希望您允许我就死在这个殿堂里，来弥补陛下的过错！ 
English: I really don't have the face to wait for you any longer. I hope you will allow me to die in this hall of fame to make up for your majesty's mistake!

古文：聪览之变色。
现代文：刘聪看完后脸色都变了。
English: Liu Cong's face changed after watching it.

古文：任顗等叩头流涕不已。
现代文：任等人仍然流着泪不停地叩头。
English: Ren and the others continued to bow their heads in tears.

古文：聪徐曰： 朕比年已来，微得风疾，喜怒过差，不复自制。
现代文：刘聪才慢慢地说溃岛 朕近年以来，因为中了点风，喜怒超过限度，不能自己控制。
English: Liu Congcai said slowly, "In recent years, I have not been able to control myself since I got a bit of wind and my emotions exceeded the limit.

古文：元达，忠臣也。
现代文：陈元达是忠臣，朕却没有看出来。
English: Chen Yuanda was a loyal subject, but I didn't see it.

古文：朕未之察。诸公乃能破首明之，诚得辅弼之义也。
现代文：各位能够磕破头让我了解他，确实是深明辅佐之臣的职责。
English: It is indeed the duty of the Vice-Minister of Defense to break through and let me get to know him.

古文：朕愧戢于心，何敢忘之！ 
现代文：我的惭愧藏在心中，怎么敢忘掉呢？ 
English: My shame is hidden in my heart, how dare I forget it?

古文：命顗等冠履就坐，引元达上，以刘氏表示之，曰： 外辅如公，内辅如后，朕复何忧！ 
现代文：说着让任等人整理好冠带鞋履坐下，又叫陈元达上来，把刘皇后的奏疏给他看，说： 在外有像您这样的人辅佐，在内有像皇后这样人辅佐，我还有什么可忧虑的呢？ 
English: He told Ren and the others to sit down and tidy up their crowns and shoes, and called Chen Yuanda to come up and show him the play of Empress Liu. He said, "With people like you helping outside, and people like the Empress helping inside, what else do I have to worry about?

古文：赐顗等谷帛各有差，更命逍遥园曰纳贤园，李中堂曰愧贤堂。
现代文：赏赐给任等人不同数量的稻谷与布帛，把逍遥园改称为纳贤园，李中堂改称为愧贤堂。
English: Ren and others were rewarded with different amounts of rice and cloth bags, the Happy Garden was renamed the Garden of Virtue, and the Li Zhongtang Hall was renamed the Hall of Shame.

古文：聪谓元达曰： 卿当畏朕，而反使朕畏卿邪！ 
现代文：刘聪对陈元达说： 你本该怕朕，现在反倒使朕怕你了！ 
English: Liu Cong said to Chen Yuanda: You should have been afraid of me, but now you have made me afraid of you!

古文：西夷校尉向沈卒，众推汶山太守兰维为西夷校尉。
现代文：西夷校尉向沈去世。大家推举汶山太守兰维为西夷校尉。
English: Xiyi Captain Xiang Shen passed away. Everyone nominated the governor of Wenshan, Lan Wei, as Xiyi Captain.

古文：维帅吏民北出，欲向巴东。
现代文：兰维带领官吏百姓向北进发，想到巴东去。
English: Ranveer led the officials and common people to head north and thought of going to Padang.

古文：成将李恭、费黑邀击，获之。
现代文：成汉部将李恭、费黑共同攻打，擒获兰维。
English: The Chenghan Division attacked Li Qiong and Fei Hei together and captured Lan Wei.

古文：夏，四月，丙午，怀帝凶问至长安，皇太子举哀，因加元服。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙午，晋怀帝被害的凶信传到长安，皇太子举行哀悼，加戴冠冕。
English: In the summer, on the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the news of the murder of Emperor Jinhuai spread to Chang'an. The crown prince held a mourning ceremony and was crowned.

古文：壬申，即皇帝位，大赦，改元。
现代文：壬申，即皇帝位，宣布大赦，改年号为建兴。
English: Jinshin, enthroned as emperor, pardoned the world, changed the year name.

古文：以卫将军梁芬为司徒，雍州刺史麹允为尚书左仆射、录尚书事，京兆太守索纟林为尚书右仆射、领吏部、京兆尹。
现代文：任卫将军梁芬为司徒，雍州刺史麴允为尚书左仆射、录尚书事，京兆太守索为尚书右仆射，兼领吏部、京兆尹。
English: Liang Fen, who was appointed as the general of the imperial guard, was the tutor, Yangzhou Zhi Shiyun was the left-hand servant of Shangshu and recorded Shangshu affairs, and Jingzhao Taishuo was the right-hand servant of Shangshu and concurrently the leader of the cadre department and Jingzhao Yin.

古文：是时长安城中，户不盈百，蒿棘成林；公私有车四乘，百官无章服、印绶，唯桑版署号而已。
现代文：当时长安城中，户不满百家，蒿草荆棘丛生，公室私家的车乘只有四辆，文武百官没有官服、印章绶带，只有授官桑木板和官署名号而已。
English: At that time, in Chang'an City, there were less than a hundred households, thorns and thistles grew thickly, there were only four cars used by the public offices and private cars, and there were no official uniforms, seals and ribbons for the hundreds of civil and military officials, only mulberry boards for awarding officials and official signature numbers.

古文：寻以索纟林为卫将军、领太尉，军国之事，悉以委之。
现代文：不久任索为卫将军、兼太尉，军政大事，全部委交给索。
English: Soon, So was appointed as Wei general and captain, and all military and political affairs were entrusted to So.

古文：汉中山王曜、司隶校尉乔智明寇长安，平西将军赵染帅众赴之；诏麹允屯黄白城以拒之。
现代文：汉中山王刘曜、司隶校尉乔智明进犯长安，平西将军赵染带领军队也赶去参战，晋朝诏令麴允到黄白城去抵御。
English: Hanzhong Mountain King Liu You and Sili Lieutenant Qiao Zhiming invaded Chang'an, and the army led by Pingxi General Zhao Zhen also rushed to participate in the war. The Jin Dynasty issued an edict to Yu Yun to go to Huangbai City to resist.

古文：石勒使石虎攻鄴，鄴溃，刘演奔廪丘，三台流民皆降于勒。
现代文：石勒派石虎攻打邺城，邺城溃败，刘演逃奔廪丘，三台的流民全部向石勒投降。
English: Shi Le sent Shi Hu to attack Shicheng, Shicheng was defeated, Liu Yuen fled to Shaoshan Hill, and all the displaced people in the three counties surrendered to Shi Le.

古文：勒以桃豹为魏郡太守以抚之；久之，以石虎代豹镇鄴。
现代文：石勒让桃豹担任魏郡太守进行管理。过了一段时间，又让石虎代替桃豹镇守邺城。
English: Shi Le let Taobao serve as the governor of Wei County to manage. After a period of time, he also let Shi Hu replace Taobao Town to guard Lushan City.

古文：初，刘琨用陈留太守焦求为兗州刺史，荀籓又用李述为兗州刺史；述欲攻求，琨召求还。
现代文：当初，刘琨任用陈留太守焦求为兖州刺史，荀藩又任用李述为兖州刺史。李述想攻打焦求，刘琨就把焦求召回来。
English: At first, Liu Bei appointed Chen Liu Taifu Jiaocui as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the Zhang clan appointed Li Shu as the governor of Zhangzhou. When Li Shu wanted to attack Jiaocui, Liu Bei called Jiaocui back.

古文：及鄴城失守，琨复以刘演为兗州刺史，镇廪丘。
现代文：邺城失守后，刘琨又让刘演任兖州刺史，镇守廪丘。
English: After the loss of the defense of Lucheng, Liu Bei also allowed Liu to play the role of the governor of Luzhou and the town guard of Shaoqiu.

古文：前中书侍郎郗鉴，少以清节著名，帅高平千馀家避乱保峄山，琅邪王睿就用鉴为兗州刺史，镇邹山。
现代文：前中书侍郎郗鉴，年轻时就以清高的节操著名，带领高平的一千多户人家到峄山避乱防卫。琅邪王司马睿任用郗鉴为兖州刺史，镇守邹山。
English: Former junior high school secretary Gong Jian, who was famous for his high integrity when he was young, led more than a thousand families in Gaoping to Lushan to escape and defend. The evil king Sima Rui appointed Gong Jian to be the governor of Lushan and guard Lushan.

古文：三人各屯一郡，兗州吏民莫知所从。
现代文：这样，李述、刘演、郗鉴三人在一郡之内各守一处，兖州的官吏百姓不知听从谁好。
English: In this way, Li Shu, Liu Yuan, and Zou Jian are three people who each guard one place within a county, and the officials and people of Zhangzhou do not know who to obey.

古文：琅邪王睿以前庐江内史华谭为军咨祭酒。
现代文：琅邪王司马睿任用前庐江内史华谭为军咨祭酒。
English: Sima Rui, the king of evil, appointed the former Lijiang Inner Shihuatang as the military congratulatory drink.

古文：谭尝在寿春依周馥。
现代文：华谭曾经在寿春依附于周馥。
English: Hua Tan once clung to Zhou Qi in Shuchun.

古文：睿谓谭曰： 周祖宣何故反？ 
现代文：司马睿对华谭说： 周馥为什么反叛？ 
English: Sima Rui said to Hua Tan: Why did Zhou Yu rebel?

古文：谭曰： 周馥虽死，天下尚有直言之士。
现代文：华谭说： 周馥虽然死了，天下仍还有直言之士。
English: Hua Tan said: Although Zhou Yong is dead, there are still straight talkers in the world.

古文：馥见寇贼滋蔓，欲移都以纾国难，执政不悦，兴兵讨之，馥死未逾时而洛都沦没。
现代文：周馥看到强盗窃贼越来越多，想迁都来解除困难，当局不高兴，派兵征讨他，结果周馥死了还没有一个时辰，都城洛阳就沦陷了。
English: Zhou Yu saw more and more robbers and thieves. He wanted to move the capital to relieve the difficulties. The authorities were not happy and sent soldiers to recruit him. As a result, Zhou Yu died before an hour had passed, and the capital Luoyang fell.

古文：若谓之反，不亦诬乎！ 
现代文：如果说周馥反叛，不是冤枉吗？ 
English: If Zhou Qi rebelled, wasn't he wronged?

古文：睿曰： 馥位为征镇，握强兵，召之不入，危而不持，亦天下之罪人也。 
现代文：司马睿说： 周馥身居征镇戍守地方的军事要职，掌握强大的兵力，朝廷召他而他不入朝，朝廷危险的时候而不能扶助，也算是天下的罪人。 
English: Sima Rui said: Zhou Ye was in a military position of commanding a town and garrisoning a region. He had a strong military force at his disposal. The imperial court summoned him, but he did not go to the imperial court. When the imperial court was in danger, he could not help. He was also a sinner in the world.

古文：谭曰： 然，危而不持，当与天下共受其责，非但馥也。 
现代文：华谭说： 是这样，朝廷危险而不能扶助，他应该与全国的将领一起受到责难，不仅仅是周馥一个人。 
English: Hua Tan said: In this way, the court is in danger and cannot help, he should be blamed together with the generals of the whole country, not just Zhou Jun alone.

古文：睿参佐多避事自逸，录事参军陈頵言于睿曰： 洛中承平之时，朝士以小心恭恪为凡俗，以偃蹇倨肆为优雅，流风相染，以至败国。
现代文：司马睿的参佐幕僚大多逃避事务求得自己安逸，录事参军陈对司马睿说： 洛阳太平安定的时候，朝臣们认为小心谨慎属守职责的是平庸，认为傲慢放纵是优雅，这种风气流行感染，以致国家败亡。
English: Most of Sima Rui's advisors and staff members evade affairs to seek their own comfort. Chen, who joined the army, said to Sima Rui: When Luoyang was peaceful and stable, courtiers thought that being careful and prudent was mediocre, and that arrogance and indulgence were elegant. This culture was contagious, resulting in the country's downfall.

古文：今僚属皆承西台馀弊，养望自高，是前车已覆而后车又将寻之也。
现代文：现在您的幕僚属下也都效法继承了洛阳时的弊病，修养名望自以为高，这是前面的车子已经翻了而后面的车子又将重蹈覆辙。
English: Now your staff members have also inherited the ills of Luoyang. They think that cultivation and reputation are high. This is because the car in front has turned over and the car behind will repeat the same mistake.

古文：请自今临使称疾者，皆免官。 
现代文：请求从今以后，接受职任却又称病不行使职责的，全部免去他们的官职。 
English: Requesting that henceforth, all those who accept posts but claim to be sick and do not perform their duties should be removed from their posts.

古文：睿不从。
现代文：司马睿不听。
English: Sima Rui did not listen.

古文：三王之诛赵王伦也，制《己亥格》以赏功，自是循而用之。
现代文：齐王司马、成都王司马颖、河间王司马三王诛杀赵王司马伦时，制定《己亥格》来奖赏功勋，从此沿习使用。
English: When the three kings of Qi Wang Sima, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying, and Kawama Wang Sima killed Zhao Wang Sima Lun, they formulated "Self-Esteem" to reward merit, and have been using it ever since.

古文：頵上言： 昔赵王篡逆，惠皇失位，三王起兵讨之，故厚赏以怀向义之心。
现代文：陈上书说： 过去赵王司马伦篡权叛逆、惠皇帝失去地位，三王举兵征讨他，因此用丰厚的奖赏来感念响应举义的人心。
English: Chen Shangshu said: In the past, Zhao Wang Simaren usurped power and rebelled, Emperor Hui lost his status, the three kings raised an army to recruit him, so they used the rich reward to impress the human heart to respond to the righteousness.

古文：今功无大小，皆以格断，乃至金紫佩士卒之身，符策委仆隶之门，非所以重名器，正纪纲也，请一切停之！ 
现代文：现在功劳不论大小，都按照《己亥格》来确定奖赏，结果造成本来是丞相等高级官员佩带的金印紫绶挂到了一般士卒的身上，用来调兵遣将的凭信符节，命官授爵的策书送给了仆从隶卒的家门之中，这不是重视国家礼仪制度、匡正法律纲纪的作法，请求把这一切都停下来！ 
English: Now, regardless of the size of the merit, the reward is determined in accordance with "Ji Heger." As a result, the gold seal purple ribbon, which was originally worn by high-ranking officials such as the prime minister, was hung on the body of ordinary soldiers, the letters used to dispatch soldiers were sent by letter, and the strategy of appointing officers to knighthoods was sent to the families of servants. This is not a way to value the national etiquette system and rectify the legal framework, and we request that all of this be stopped!

古文：頵出于寒微，数为正论，府中多恶之，出頵为谯郡太守。
现代文：陈出身贫寒低贱，多次进行这样义正辞严的议论，王府中大多都厌恶他，于是派陈去担任谯郡太守。
English: Chen, who was born poor and lowly, repeatedly carried out such righteous and rigorous discussions. Most of the royal court detested him, so they sent Chen to serve as the governor of Jixian County.

古文：吴兴太守周玘，宗族强盛，琅邪王睿颇疑惮之。
现代文：吴兴太守周，宗族很强盛，琅邪王司马睿对他很猜疑忌惮。
English: Wu Xingta Shou Zhou, the clan is very strong, and the evil king Sima Rui is very suspicious of him.

古文：睿左右用事者，多中州亡官失守之士，驾御吴人，吴人颇怨。
现代文：而司马睿身边任职的，大多是中州地区丢弃官职逃离职守的士人，他们来管理吴地的人，吴人都很怨愤。
English: However, most of the officials around Sima Rui are officials from the Zhongzhou region who have abandoned their official posts and fled their duties. They are the ones who have come to administer Wu, and the people of Wu are very resentful.

古文：玘自以失职，又为刁协所轻，耻恚愈甚，乃阴与其党谋诛执政，以诸南士代之。
现代文：周自己因为失去职位，又被刁协所轻蔑，羞耻愤怒更加强烈，于是就和他的属下密谋杀掉执政的大臣，而以南方人士取代他们。
English: Zhou himself was despised by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference for losing his post, and his shame and anger were even stronger, so he and his subordinates plotted to murder the ruling ministers and replace them with southerners.

古文：事泄，玘忧愤而卒；将死，谓其子勰曰： 杀我者，诸伧子也；能复之，乃吾子也。 
现代文：事情泄露，周忧愤交加而死。临死时，对他儿子周勰说： 杀死我的是那些中州侉子，能够实现我的设想的，就是我的儿子。 
English: When he was dying, he said to his son Zhou Qi: "It was those Zhongzhou scoundrels who killed me. It is my son who can realize my vision."

古文：石勒攻李恽于上白，斩之。
现代文：石勒在上白攻打李恽，把他杀了。
English: Shi Le attacked Li Yao in Shangbai and killed him.

古文：王浚复以薄盛为青州刺史。
现代文：王浚又任命薄盛为青州刺史。
English: Wang Jun also appointed Bo Sheng as the Qingzhou chief historian.

古文：王浚使枣嵩督诸军屯易水，召段疾陆眷，欲与之共击石勒。
现代文：王浚派枣嵩督领各军在易水驻扎，召段疾陆眷，想与他一起攻打石勒，段疾陆眷不来。
English: Wang Jun sent Zaozhuang Song to lead the troops stationed in Yishui, and summoned Duan Zi Lu, who wanted to attack Shiloh with him, but Duan Zi Lu did not come.

古文：疾陆眷不至，浚怒，以重币赂拓跋猗卢，并檄慕容廆等共讨疾陆眷。
现代文：王浚发怒，用重金贿赂拓跋猗卢，并向慕容等人传发檄文，要共同讨伐段疾陆眷。
English: Wang Jun was furious and bribed Tuoba Lu with a large sum of money. He also sent a message to Murong and others to jointly fight against the disease.

古文：猗卢遣右贤王六修将兵会之，为疾陆眷所败。
现代文：拓跋猗卢派右贤王拓跋六带领军队去与王浚会合，结果被段疾陆眷打败。
English: Tuoba and Lu sent the Right Sage Wang Tuoba Six to lead the army to meet with Wang Jun. As a result, he was defeated by Duan Zhi and Lu Jing.

古文：廆遣慕容翰攻段氏，取徒河、新城，至阳乐，闻六修败而还，翰因留镇徒河，壁青山。
现代文：慕容派慕容翰去攻打段氏，攻取了徒河、新城，到达阳乐，听说拓跋六失败，慕容翰因此留在徒河镇守，在青山建立营垒。
English: Murong sent Murong Han to attack the Duan clan, captured Tuhe and Xincheng, and arrived at Yangle. When he heard that Tuoba Six had failed, Murong Han stayed in Tuhe to defend the town and set up a camp in Aoyama.

古文：初，中国士民避乱者，多北依王浚，浚不能存抚，又政法不立，士民往往复去之。
现代文：当初，躲避战乱的中原士人百姓，大多向北依附王浚，王浚却不能体恤安抚，又加上行政法律都没有建立，所以士人、百姓又都离开了他。
English: At first, most of the Central Plains nobles and commoners, who had fled the turmoil of war, clung to Wang Jun in the north. However, Wang Jun could not be appeased, and administrative laws were not established, so the nobles and commoners left him.

古文：裕，抽之子也。
现代文：而段氏兄弟只知武夫之勇，不能用礼仪对待士大夫。
English: But the Duan brothers only know the bravery of a warrior, and cannot treat a scholar-doctor with etiquette.

古文：裴嶷清方有干略，为昌黎太守，兄武为玄菟太守。
现代文：只有慕容政事整饬清明，爱惜重视裴嶷清廉公正，有办事的才能和谋略，曾任晋昌黎太守，兄裴武任玄菟太守。
English: Only Mu Rong kept the government affairs clean and tidy, cherished the importance of Pei Yu as a clean and fair person, and had the ability and strategy to do things. He once served as the governor of Jinchang Lili, and his brother Pei Wu served as the governor of Xuanzang.

古文：武卒，嶷与武子开以其丧归，过廆，廆敬礼之，及去，厚加资送。
现代文：裴武去世，裴嶷与裴武的儿子裴开送丧回故乡，在经过慕容那里时，慕容恭敬而待之以礼，离开时，送给他们丰厚的资财。
English: After Pei Wu's death, Pei Yao and Pei Wu's son Pei Kai were sent back to their hometown in mourning. When they passed by Murong, Murong was respectful and bowed to them. When they left, he gave them a lot of money.

古文：行及辽西，道不通，嶷欲还就廆。
现代文：走到辽西，道路不通，裴嶷想回去投奔慕容。
English: When he got to the west of Liaoning Province, the road was impassable. Pei Rong wanted to go back to Murong.

古文：开曰： 乡里在南，奈何北行！
现代文：裴开说： 故乡在南方，怎么能向北走呢？
English: Pei Kai said, "My hometown is in the south, how can I go north?

古文：且等为流寓，段氏强，慕容氏弱，何必去此而就彼也！ 
现代文：再说同样是流离失所寄人篱下，段氏强大，慕容氏微弱，何必离开这里而到慕容那里去呢？ 
English: Besides, it is the same as being displaced and living under a hedge. Mr. Duan is strong, and Mr. Murong is weak. Why leave here and go to Murong?

古文：嶷曰： 中国丧乱，今往就之，是相帅而入虎口也。
现代文：裴嶷说： 中原处于死丧战乱中，现在去中原，是一起投入虎口。
English: Pei Hao said, "Central Plains is in the midst of a deadly war. If you go to Central Plains now, you will be thrown into the jaws of a tiger.

古文：且道远，何由可达！
现代文：再说道路遥远，怎么才能到达呢？
English: Besides, the road is far away, how can I get there?

古文：若俟其清通，又非岁月可冀。
现代文：如果等待中原清明畅通，又不是可以按年月期待的。
English: If you wait for the Central Plains to be clear and unobstructed, you can't expect it every year.

古文：今欲求托足之地，岂可不慎择其人。
现代文：现在想找一个寄托立足的地方，怎么能不谨慎地选择这样的人。
English: If you want to find a foothold now, how can you not carefully choose such a person?

古文：汝观诸段，岂有远略，且能待国士乎！
现代文：你看段氏几兄弟，难道有远大的谋略吗，能够很好地对待士人吗？
English: Look at the Duan brothers, do they have a grand strategy, and can they treat the scholars well?

古文：慕容公修仁行义，有霸王之志，加以国丰民安，今往从之，高可以立功名，下可以庇宗族，汝何疑焉！ 
现代文：慕容公修养德行，有仁义，有实现霸王之业的志向，加上他国富民安，现在去跟随他，向高处可以建立功名，对下可以庇护宗族，你还有什么可怀疑的吗？ 
English: Murong Gong cultivates virtue, has benevolence and righteousness, and has the ambition to realize the overlord's cause, plus the prosperity and peace of other countries. Now, if you follow him, you can build a reputation for achievement in high places, and you can protect the clan from below. Do you have anything to doubt?

古文：开乃从之。
现代文：裴开于是听从了叔父裴嶷的安排。
English: Pei Kai then followed the arrangement of his uncle Pei Yao.

古文：既至，廆大喜。
现代文：到了以后，慕容非常高兴。
English: After arriving, Murong was very happy.

古文：阳耽清直沈敏，为辽西太守。慕容翰破段氏于阳乐，获之，廆礼而用之。
现代文：阳清廉耿直沉毅机敏，任辽西太守，慕容翰在阳乐打败段氏时，抓获阳，慕容待之以礼而任用他。
English: Yang Qinglian, Geng Zhizhong, Sheng Yi and Qianxin were astute and were appointed as the governors of western Liaoning. Murong Han captured Yang when he defeated Duan in Yangle. Murong treated him with courtesy and appointed him.

古文：游邃、逄羡、宋奭，皆尝为昌黎太守，与黄泓俱避地于蓟，后归廆。
现代文：游邃、逄羡、宋，都曾经担任昌黎太守，与黄泓一起都在蓟地避乱，后来才投奔慕容。
English: You Zou, Zou En, Song, all once served as the governor of Changli, and together with Huang Zi, they all fled the turmoil in Zou, and later joined Murong.

古文：王浚屡以手书召邃兄畅，畅欲赴之，邃曰： 彭祖刑政不修，华、戎离叛。以邃度之，必不能久，兄且盘桓以俟之。 
现代文：王浚多次用亲笔信征召游邃的哥哥游畅，游畅想应召前往，游邃说： 王浚不整饬刑法政务，华人、戎人都叛离了他，依我推测，他一定不能长久，哥哥你暂且逗留一段时间等等看。 
English: Wang Jun repeatedly used his own handwritten letter to conscript Wang Jun's brother, Yu Chang. Yu Chang wanted to go when summoned. Yu Chang said, "Wang Jun did not properly handle the criminal law and government affairs. The Chinese and the soldiers all rebelled against him. According to my guess, he will not last long. Brother, you should stay for a while and wait and see."

古文：畅曰： 彭祖忍而多疑，顷者流民北来，命所在追杀之。
现代文：裴畅说： 王浚残忍而多疑，近来流民往北而来，他命令部下追杀他们。
English: Pei Chang said: "Wang Jun was cruel and suspicious. Recently, refugees came north, and he ordered his subordinates to hunt them down.

古文：今手书殷勤，我稽留不往，将累及卿。
现代文：现在亲笔写信态度殷勤，我停留在这儿不去，将要牵累你。
English: Now I am writing to you in person with the attitude of a courteous, I am not going to stay here, I am going to bother you.

古文：且乱世宗族宜分，以冀遗种。 
现代文：再说乱世当中，宗族应当分开，以期望留下宗族的后代。 
English: Moreover, in the midst of a turbulent world, clans should separate in the hope of leaving behind descendants of the clan.

古文：遂从之，卒与浚俱没。
现代文：裴邃这才同意了，但不久裴畅与王浚一起都死了。
English: It was only then that Pei Jun agreed, but soon after, both Pei Chang and Wang Jun were dead.

古文：宋该与平原杜群、刘翔先依王浚，又依段氏，皆以为不足托，帅诸流寓同归于廆。
现代文：宋该与平原人杜群、刘翔都是先依靠王浚，转而又依靠段氏，认为他们都不值得寄托，而带领各流亡的家族一起归附了慕容。
English: Song Gao, together with the plainsmen Du Qun and Liu Xiang, first relied on Wang Jun, and then on the Duan clan. They believed that they were not worthy of trust, and led the exiled families to join Murong.

古文：东夷校尉崔毖请皇甫岌为长史，卑辞说谕，终莫能致；廆招之，岌与弟真即时俱至。
现代文：东夷校尉崔毖请皇甫岌担任长史，用谦恭的态度劝说，终究没有能把皇甫岌召来。
English: Dongyi's captain, Cui Wei, invited the emperor to serve as the long history, and persuaded him with a humble attitude. In the end, the emperor could not be summoned.

古文：辽东张统据乐浪、带方二郡，与高句丽王乙弗利相攻，连年不解。
现代文：而慕容招呼他们，皇甫岌与弟弟皇甫真当时就一起到了。辽东张统占据乐浪、带方二郡，与高句丽王乙弗利交战，连年不断。
English: But Murong greeted them, and Emperor Fuxi and his brother Emperor Fuzhen arrived together at that time. Liaodong Zhang Tong occupied Lelang, took two counties, and fought with King Yifuli of Goguryeo, for years on end.

古文：乐浪王遵说统帅其民千馀家归廆，廆为之置乐浪郡，以统为太守，遵参军事。
现代文：乐浪人王遵劝说张统带领所辖百姓一千多家投奔慕容，慕容为他设置乐浪郡，让张统任太守，王遵任参军。
English: Le Lang people Wang Zun persuaded Zhang Tong to lead more than a thousand people under his jurisdiction to join Murong. Murong set up Le Lang County for him, let Zhang Tong serve as the governor, and Wang Zun joined the army.

古文：王如馀党涪陵李运、巴西王建等自襄阳将三千馀家入汉中，梁州刺史张光遣参军晋邈将兵拒之。
现代文：王如的残余部众涪陵人李运、巴西人王建等人从襄阳带领三千多户人家进入汉中地区，梁州刺史张光派参军晋邈带兵阻止。
English: Wang Ru's remnants, such as Li Yun, a Burmese, and Wang Jianru, a Brazilian, led more than three thousand households from Xiangyang into the Hanzhong region. Zhang Guang, a statesman from Liangzhou, sent troops to Jinbei with soldiers to stop them.

古文：邈受运、建赂，劝光纳其降，光从之，使居成固。
现代文：晋邈接受了李运、王建的贿赂，劝张光接纳他们的投降。张光同意了，让他们居住在成固。
English: Jin Ye accepted bribes from Li Yun and Wang Jian to persuade Zhang Guang to accept their surrender. Zhang Guang agreed and let them live in Chenggu.

古文：既而邈见运、建及其徒多珍宝，欲尽取之，复说光曰： 运、建之徒，不修农事，专治器仗，其意难测，不如悉掩杀之。不然，必为乱。 
现代文：不久晋邈发现李运、王建及其部众有很多珍宝，想全部拿过来，就又对张光说： 李运、王建的部众们，不进行农业生产，而专门制造兵器，他们的意图很难预料，不如趁其不备把他们全部杀了，不然他们一定会作乱。 
English: Soon after, Jin Ye found that Li Yun, Wang Jian and their followers had a lot of precious treasures and wanted to take them all, so he said to Zhang Guang: Li Yun and Wang Jian's followers do not engage in agricultural production, but specialize in manufacturing weapons. Their intentions are difficult to predict. It is better to take advantage of the situation and kill them all. Otherwise, they will surely cause trouble.

古文：光又从之。
现代文：张光又听从了他。
English: Zhang Guang obeyed him again.

古文：五月，邈将兵攻运、建，杀之。
现代文：五月，晋邈带兵攻打李运、王建，把他们杀了。
English: In May, Jin Yong led his soldiers to attack Li Yun and Wang Jian and killed them.

古文：建婿杨虎收馀众击光，屯于厄水；光遣其子孟苌讨之，不克。
现代文：王建的女婿杨虎收拾起剩余的部众攻打张光，驻扎在厄水，张光派他儿子张孟苌讨伐他们。
English: Wang Jian's son-in-law, Yang Hu, gathered up the remaining followers to attack Zhang Guang and stationed them in Yishui. Zhang Guang sent his son, Zhang Mengyao, to fight them.

古文：壬辰，以琅邪王睿为左丞相、大都督，督陕东诸军事；南阳王保为右丞相、大都督，督陕西诸军事。
现代文：但不能取胜。壬辰，朝廷以琅邪王司马睿担任左丞相、大都督，都督陕东诸军事；以南阳王司马保任右丞相、大都督，都督陕西诸军事。
English: However, they could not win. In the Ming Dynasty, the imperial court appointed the evil king Sima Rui as the left prime minister, the great governor, and the military governor of Shaanxi East; the south Yang king Sima Bao as the right prime minister, the great governor, and the military governor of Shaanxi.

古文：诏曰： 今当扫除鲸鲵，奉迎梓宫。
现代文：诏书说： 现在应当扫除像刘聪那样的大鱼，奉迎怀帝的灵柩。
English: The edict said: Now is the time to sweep away the big fish like Liu Cong and pay homage to the coffin of Emperor Huai.

古文：令幽、并两州勒卒三十万直造平阳，右丞相宜帅秦、凉、梁、雍之师三十万径诣长安，左丞相帅所领精兵二十万径造洛阳，同赴大期，克成元勋。 
现代文：命令幽、并两州带领三十万兵率直接进兵平阳，右丞相应当率领秦州、凉州、梁州、雍州的军队三十万人直接到长安，左丞相率领所属的二十万精锐兵士直接到洛阳，共同奔赴约定的大业，完成伟大的功勋。 
English: He ordered Yu and the two prefectures to lead 300,000 soldiers directly to Pingyang. The minister of justice should lead 300,000 troops from Qin, Liangzhou, Liangzhou and Yongzhou directly to Chang'an, and the minister of justice should lead 200,000 elite soldiers directly to Luoyang. They should work together to achieve the agreed great cause and accomplish great feats.

古文：汉中山王曜屯蒲坂。
现代文：汉中山王刘曜在蒲坂屯兵。
English: Liu You, the King of the Mountains in the Han Dynasty, stationed troops in Busan.

古文：石勒使孔苌击定陵，杀田徽；薄盛帅所部降勒，山东郡县，相继为勒所取。
现代文：石勒派孔苌攻打定陵，杀了田徽。薄盛带领所属军队向石勒投降，崤山以东的各个郡县，相继被石勒占取。
English: Shi Le sent Kong Ye to attack Ding Ling and killed Tian Hui. Bo Sheng led his army to surrender to Shi Le, and all counties east of Lushan were successively occupied by Shi Le.

古文：汉主聪以勒为侍中、征东大将军。
现代文：汉主刘聪任石勒为侍中、征东大将军。
English: The lord of the Han Dynasty, Liu Cong, appointed Shi Le as an aide-de-camp and grand marshal of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：乌桓亦叛王浚，潜附于勒。
现代文：乌桓人也叛离了王浚，暗中归附于石勒。
English: Wu Huan also defected from Wang Jun and secretly joined Shi Le.

古文：六月，刘琨与代公猗卢会于陉北，谋击汉。
现代文：六月，刘琨与代公拓跋猗卢在泾北会合，商议攻汉。
English: In June, Liu Bei and the regent Tuoba Lu met in Beibei to discuss attacking Han.

古文：秋，七月，琨进据蓝谷，猗卢遣拓跋普根屯于北屈。
现代文：秋季，七月，刘琨进发占据蓝谷，拓跋猗卢派遣拓跋普根驻扎在北屈。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Qinfa occupied the Blue Valley, and Tuoba Qilu dispatched Tuoba Pugen to be stationed in North Qu.

古文：琨遣监军韩据自西河而南，将攻西平。
现代文：刘琨派遣监军韩据从西河往南，打算攻打西平。
English: Liu Bei dispatched the monitoring force Han Bei from the West River to the south, intending to attack Xiping.

古文：汉主聪遣大将军粲等拒琨，骠骑将军易等拒普根，荡晋将军兰阳等助守西平。
现代文：汉主刘聪派遗大将军刘粲等人阻击刘琨，骠骑将军刘易等人阻击拓跋普根，荡晋将军兰阳等人协助守卫西平。
English: The Han ruler Liu Cong dispatched General Liu Ye and others to block Liu Ye, General Liu Yi and others to block Tuoba Pugen, and General Lanyang and others to help guard Xiping.

古文：琨等闻之，引兵还。
现代文：刘琨等人听说后，带兵回师。
English: After hearing this, Liu Ye and others took the soldiers back to the division.

古文：聪使诸军仍屯所在，为进取之计。
现代文：刘聪让各支军队仍驻扎在原地，作为进取的安排。
English: Liu Cong let the troops remain stationed in the same place as an enterprising arrangement.

古文：帝遣殿中都尉刘蜀诏左丞相睿以时进军，与乘舆会於中原。
现代文：愍帝派遣殿中都尉刘蜀诏令左丞相司马睿按时进军，与皇帝的乘舆在中原相会。
English: Emperor Xizong dispatched the palace lieutenant Liu Shuzhao to order the left chancellor, Sima Rui, to march on time and meet the emperor's cavalry in the Central Plains.

古文：八月，癸亥，蜀至建康，睿辞以方平定江东，未暇北伐。
现代文：八月，癸亥，刘蜀到达建康，司马睿推辞说，刚刚平定江东地区，没有余暇北伐。
English: In August, Yan Hai and Liu Shu arrived in Jiankang. Sima Rui said that he had just pacified the eastern Jiangsu region and had no time for the Northern Expedition.

古文：以镇东长史刁协为丞相左长史，从事中郎彭城刘隗为司直，邵陵内史广陵戴邈为军咨祭酒，参军丹杨张闿为从事中郎，尚书郎颍川钟雅为记室参军，谯国桓宣为舍人，豫章熊运为主簿，会稽孔愉为扌彖。
现代文：司马睿让镇东长史刁协任丞相左长史，从事中郎彭城人刘隗任司直，邵陵内史广陵人戴邈任军咨祭酒，参军丹阳人张任从事中郎，尚书郎颍川人钟雅任记室参军，谯国人桓宣任舍人，豫章人熊远任主簿，会稽人孔愉任掾。
English: Sima Rui made the town's Dongdong chief, Shi Yan, co-chairman of the vice-minister, Zuo Changshi, engaged in the vice-lord, the Pengcheng people, Liu Yan, engaged in the vice-lord, the Guangling people, Dai Yan, engaged in the military ceremony, the Danyang people, Zhang Yan, engaged in the vice-lord, the Dangchuan people, Zhong Ya, engaged in the record room, the Qin people, Huan Xuan, engaged in the housekeeper, the Yuzhang people, Xiong Yuan, engaged in the master book, and the auditor, Kong Yu, engaged in the audit.

古文：刘隗雅习文史，善伺候睿意，故睿特亲爱之。
现代文：刘隗平素熟习文史，善于体察司马睿的心意，所以司马睿特别亲近宠爱他。
English: Liu Bingping is familiar with literary history and is good at perceiving Sima Rui's mind, so Sima Rui is particularly close to him.

古文：熊远上书，以为： 军兴以来，处事不用律令，竞作新意，临事立制，朝作夕改，至于主者不敢任法，每辄关谘，非为政之体也。
现代文：熊远上书，认为： 兴兵以来，处理事务不依照法令，各官署都竞相自作主张，遇事临时建立制度，但朝令夕改，又导致主事的人不敢承担责任，每当决断时都要报告请示，这不是执政的法度。
English: Xiong Yuan submitted a letter, saying: Since the rise of the People's Liberation Army, the handling of affairs is not in accordance with the law. All government departments are competing to make their own proposals and establish a temporary system in the event of an incident. However, orders are changed from morning to evening, which leads to the person in charge not daring to take responsibility. Whenever a decision is made, they must report and ask for instructions. This is not the rule of law.

古文：愚谓凡为驳议者，皆当引律令、经传，不得直以情言，无所依准，以亏旧典。
现代文：我认为凡是对决策提出异议的，都应该引用法令和经传典籍，不得简单地用情理来论说，没有一定的标准作依据从而损害原有的典制。
English: In my opinion, anyone who challenges a decision should cite laws and regulations as well as traditional texts, and should not simply use reason to argue that there is no certain standard to use as a basis, thereby damaging the original legal system.

古文：若开塞随宜，权道制物，此是人君之所得行，非臣子所宜专用也。 
现代文：如果放任让大家都按照自认为合适的措施行事，都用权宜变通的方法处理事务，这是君主所能够作的，而不是臣下所应当独自使用的。 
English: If all were left to do as they saw fit, all would deal with matters by expedient means, which the sovereign can, but which his subjects ought not to use alone.

古文：睿以时方多事，不能从。
现代文：司马睿因为当时事情很多，没有能够同意。
English: Sima Rui couldn't agree because there were many things going on at the time.

古文：初，范阳祖逖，少有大志，与刘琨俱为司州主簿。同寝，中夜闻鸡鸣，蹴琨觉曰： 此非恶声也！ 
现代文：当初，范阳人祖逖，年轻时就有大志向，曾与刘琨一起担任司州的主簿，与刘琨同寝，夜半时听到鸡鸣，他踢醒刘琨，说： 这不是令人厌恶的声音。 
English: At the beginning, Fan Yang's ancestor Zhu Xi, who had great aspirations when he was young, had served as the main bookkeeper of Sizhou together with Liu Xi, and slept with Liu Xi. At midnight, he heard a rooster crowing. He kicked Liu Xi awake and said: This is not a disgusting sound.

古文：因起舞。
现代文：就起床舞剑。
English: I just got up and did the sword dance.

古文：及渡江，左丞相睿以为军咨祭酒。
现代文：渡江以后，左丞相司马睿让他担任军咨祭酒。
English: After crossing the river, the Minister of the Left, Sima Rui, asked him to serve as the military congratulatory drink.

古文：逖居京口，纠合骁健，言于睿曰： 晋室之乱，非上无道而下怨叛也，由宗室争权，自相鱼肉，遂使戎狄乘隙，毒流中土。
现代文：祖逖住在京口，聚集起骁勇强健的壮士，对司马睿说： 晋朝的变乱，不是因为君主无道而使臣下怨恨叛乱，而是皇亲宗室之间争夺权力，自相残杀，这样就使戎狄之人钻了空子，祸害遍及中原。
English: Zhu Xi lived in Beijing and gathered a group of brave and strong men and said to Sima Rui: The turmoil of the Jin Dynasty was not because the monarch was mad and sent his vassals to rebel against him, but because the imperial parents and families fought for power and killed each other. In this way, the soldiers took advantage of the situation, and the scourge spread throughout the Central Plains.

古文：今遗民既遭残贼，人思自奋，大王诚能命将出师，使如逖者统之以复中原，郡国豪杰，必有望风响应者矣！ 
现代文：现在晋朝的遗民遭到摧残伤害后，大家都想着自强奋发，大王您确实能够派遣将领率兵出师，使像我一样的人统领军队来光复中原，各地的英雄豪杰，一定会有闻风响应的人！ 
English: Now, after the remnants of the Jin Dynasty have been devastated and injured, everyone is thinking of self-improvement. Great King, you can indeed send generals to lead soldiers out of the division, so that people like me can lead the army to recover the Central Plains. Heroes and heroes from all over the country, there will definitely be people who respond to the wind!

古文：睿素无北伐之志，以逖为奋威将军、豫州刺史，给千人廪，布三千匹，不给铠仗，使自召募。
现代文：司马睿一直没有北伐的志向，他听了祖逖的话以后，就任命祖逖为奋威将军、豫州刺史，仅仅拨给他千人的口粮，三千匹布，不供给兵器，让祖逖自己想办法募集。
English: Sima Rui never had any ambition to lead the Northern Expedition. After listening to Zu Xi's words, he appointed Zu Xi as the General of Fenwei and the Historian of Yuzhou. He only allocated him the rations for a thousand people, three thousand pieces of cloth, and did not supply weapons, leaving Zu Xi to find his own way to recruit.

古文：逖将其部曲百馀家渡江，中流，击楫而誓曰： 祖逖不能清中原而复济者，有如大江！ 
现代文：祖逖带领自己私家的军队共一百多户人家渡过长江，在江中敲打着船桨说： 祖逖如果不能使中原清明而光复成功，就像大江一样有去无回！ 
English: Zhu Xi led his private army of a total of more than a hundred families across the Yangtze River, beating the oars in the river and saying: "If Zhu Xi cannot make the Central Plains clear and successful, just like the big river, there is no going back!"

古文：遂屯淮阴，起冶铸兵，募得二千馀人而后进。
现代文：于是到淮阴驻扎，建造熔炉冶炼浇铸兵器，又招募了二千多人然后继续前进。
English: So he stationed in Huaiyin, built a furnace for smelting and casting weapons, recruited more than two thousand people and then moved on.

古文：胡亢性猜忌，杀其骁将数人。
现代文：胡亢性格猜忌多疑，因此杀了自己的骁勇部将多人。
English: Hu Yao's character was suspicious and suspicious, so he killed many of his generals.

古文：杜曾惧，潜引王冲之兵使攻亢。
现代文：杜曾感到恐惧，暗自勾结王冲的军队让他们攻打胡亢。
English: Du was afraid and secretly colluded with Wang Chong's army to let them attack Hulun.

古文：亢悉精兵出拒之，城中空虚，曾因杀亢而并其众。
现代文：胡亢出动全部精锐部队阻击王冲，而城中空虚，杜曾趁机杀了胡亢，接管了他的部众。
English: Hu Yao dispatched all his elite troops to block Wang Chong, but the city was empty. Du Zeng took the opportunity to kill Hu Yao and take over his subordinates.

古文：周顗屯浔水城，为杜苾所困；陶侃使明威将军硃伺救之，苾退保泠口。
现代文：周屯兵浔水城，被杜围困，陶侃派明威将军朱伺前去救援，杜就退到泠口防卫。
English: Zhou's garrison, Surabaya City, was besieged by Du. Tao Kan sent Mingwei's general Zhu Wei to the rescue, and Du retreated to defend Hekou.

古文：侃曰： 苾必步向武昌。 
现代文：陶侃说： 杜一定会移兵武昌。 
English: Tao Kan said: Du will definitely move troops to Wuchang.

古文：乃自径道还郡以待之，苾果来攻。
现代文：就从近路回到郡中等待杜，杜果然来进攻了。
English: He took a shortcut back to Guozhong to wait for Du, who then attacked.

古文：侃使硃伺逆击，大破之，苾遁归长沙。
现代文：陶侃派朱伺迎头痛击，大败杜，杜自己逃回长沙。
English: Tao Kan sent Zhu Wei to meet him head-on, defeating Du, and Du himself fled back to Changsha.

古文：周顗出浔水投王敦于豫章，敦留之。
现代文：周离开浔水到豫章投奔王敦，王敦留下了他。
English: Zhou left Surabaya to join Wang Dun in Yuzhang, but Wang Dun left him behind.

古文：陶侃使参军王贡告捷于敦，敦曰： 若无陶侯，便失荆州矣！ 
现代文：陶侃派参军王贡向王敦报捷，王敦说： 如果没有陶候，就要失去荆州了！ 
English: Tao Kan sent Wang Gong to report the victory to Wang Dun. Wang Dun said, "If we don't wait for Tao, we will lose Jingzhou!"

古文：乃表侃为荆州刺史，屯沔江。
现代文：于是表奏陶侃任荆州刺史，驻扎在沔江。
English: As a result, Tao Kan, who played the role of Jingzhou, was stationed in the Li River.

古文：左丞相睿召周顗，复以为军谘祭酒。
现代文：左丞相司马睿征召周，又让他担任军咨祭酒。
English: Sajo Minister Sima Rui conscripted Zhou, and made him serve as the military congratulatory drink.

古文：初，氐王杨茂搜之子难敌，遣养子贩易于梁州，私卖良人子一人，张光鞭杀之。
现代文：当初，氐人的大王杨茂搜的儿子杨难敌，派养子到梁州贩卖交易，私自买了良人的一个孩子，张光用鞭刑把这养子杀了。
English: At the beginning, Yang Nanyi, the son of Yang Maoshuo, the great king of the Qiang people, sent his adopted son to Liangzhou to sell and trade. He bought a child of his lover, and Zhang Guang killed the adopted son with a whipping.

古文：难敌怨曰： 使君初来，大荒之后，兵民之命仰我氐活，氐有小罪，不能贳也？ 
现代文：杨难敌怨恨地说： 您刚刚来此，经过大荒年以后，军队百姓的性命都需要仰仗氐人才能生存，氐人有小罪过，难道不能宽恕吗？ 
English: Yang Nanwu said resentfully: You have just come here, after the years of great famine, the lives of the army and the people all need to rely on you to survive. You have small sins, can't you forgive?

古文：及光与杨虎相攻，各求救于茂搜，茂搜遣难敌救光。难敌求货于光，光不与。
现代文：等到张光与杨虎交战时，双方都向杨茂搜求救，杨茂搜派杨难敌去救张光，杨难敌向张光索求货物，但张光不给。
English: When Zhang Guang was at war with Yang Hu, both sides appealed to Yang Maoshu for help. Yang Maoshu sent Yang Nanyuan to rescue Zhang Guang. Yang Nanyuan asked Zhang Guang for goods, but Zhang Guang refused to give them.

古文：杨虎厚赂难敌，且曰： 流民珍货，悉在光所，今伐我，不如伐光。 
现代文：而杨虎却丰厚地贿赂杨难敌，并且说： 流民的的珍贵货物，都在张光处，现在征伐我，不如征伐张光。 
English: Yang Hu, on the other hand, generously bribed Yang Rongfei and said, "The precious goods of the refugees are all in Zhang Guang's place. It is better to invade Zhang Guang than to invade me."

古文：难敌大喜。
现代文：杨难敌非常高兴。
English: Yang Nanju was very happy.

古文：光与虎战，使张孟苌居前，难敌继后。
现代文：张光与杨虎交战，派张孟苌打前阵，杨难敌作后援。
English: Zhang Guang fought with Yang Hu, and sent Zhang Mengyao to fight in the front line, while Yang Nandu supported the enemy.

古文：难敌与虎夹击孟苌，大破之，孟苌及其弟援皆死。
现代文：结果杨难敌与杨虎夹攻张孟苌，大败张孟苌，张孟苌与弟弟张援都死了。
English: As a result, Yang Rongfei and Yang Hu pinched Zhang Mengyao, defeated Zhang Mengyao, and Zhang Mengyao and his brother Zhang Yuan both died.

古文：光婴城自守。
现代文：张光只好环城防守。
English: Zhang Guang had to defend the ring.

古文：九月，光愤激成疾，僚属劝光退据魏兴。光按剑曰： 吾受国重任，不能讨贼，今得死如登仙，何谓退也！ 
现代文：九月，张光因愤怒激动而得病，僚属劝张光退到魏兴据守，张光按着剑说： 我接受了国家的重任，不能讨伐贼寇，今天死了如同登仙，为什么说撤退呢？ 
English: In September, Zhang Guang fell ill due to anger. Colleagues and relatives urged Zhang Guang to retreat to Wei Xing. Zhang Guang pressed his sword and said: I accepted the important task of the country, I can't fight the bandits, today I died like a saint, why say retreat?

古文：声绝而卒。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：州人推其少子迈领州事，又与氐战没，众推始平太守胡子序领梁州。
现代文：州里的人们推举他的小儿子张迈代行州刺史的职务，结果又与氐人交战而死。大家又推举始平太守胡子序兼行梁州刺史的职务。
English: The people of the prefecture elected his youngest son, Zhang Mai, as acting prefect of the prefecture, but he was killed in a battle with the Xiongnu. The people also elected Shi Ping Taishu as acting prefect of Liang Prefecture.

古文：荀籓薨于开封。
现代文：荀藩在开封去世。
English: He died in Kaifeng.

古文：汉中山王曜、赵染攻麹允于黄白城，允累战皆败，诏以索纟林为征东大将军，将兵助允。
现代文：汉中山王刘曜、赵染在黄白城攻打允，允多次出战都失败了。朝廷诏令任索为征东大将军，带兵去援助允。
English: Liu You and Zhao Zhen, the kings of the mountains in the Han Dynasty, attacked and defeated Yun in Huangbai City, and Yun was defeated in many battles. The Imperial Court issued a decree to appoint So as the general to conquer the East and lead soldiers to aid Yun.

古文：王贡自王敦所还，至竟陵，矫陶侃之命，以杜曾为前锋大都督，击王冲，斩之，悉降其众。
现代文：王贡从王敦处回来，到竟陵，假称陶侃的命令，任杜曾为前锋大都督，攻打王冲，把王冲杀了。
English: Wang Gong came back from Wang Dun and went to Jingling. He pretended to have been ordered by Tao Kan to attack Wang Chong, who was once a vanguard grand viceroy, and killed him.

古文：侃召曾，曾不至。
现代文：使王冲的部众全部归降。陶侃征召杜曾，杜曾不来。
English: He made all of Wang Chong's subordinates surrender. Tao Kan summoned Du Zeng, but Du Zeng did not come.

古文：贡恐以矫命获罪，遂与曾反击侃。
现代文：王贡害怕因为假称陶侃的命令而获罪，就与杜曾反叛攻打陶侃。
English: Wang Gong was afraid that he would be found guilty for pretending to give orders to Tao Kan, so he and Du Zeng rebelled and attacked Tao Kan.

古文：冬，十月，侃兵大败，仅以身免。
现代文：冬季，十月，陶侃的军队大败，陶侃仅仅逃脱了性命。
English: In the winter, in October, Tao Kan's army was defeated, and Tao Kan only escaped with his life.

古文：敦表侃以白衣领职。
现代文：王敦表奏陶侃以布衣百姓的身分兼任现在职务，将功赎罪。
English: Wang Dun watch Tao Kan, as a commoner in civilian clothes, concurrently held his current position, redeeming his sin.

古文：侃复帅周访等进攻杜苾，大破之，敦乃奏复侃官。
现代文：陶侃又带领周访等人进攻杜，杜大败。王敦于是表奏恢复陶侃的职务。
English: Tao Kan also led Zhou Wei and others to attack Du, and Du suffered a major defeat. Wang Dun then played the role of restoring Tao Kan's position.

古文：汉赵染谓中山王曜曰： 麹允帅大众在外，长安空虚，可袭也。 
现代文：汉赵染对中山王刘曜说： 麴允率领大军在外面，长安空虚，可以袭击。 
English: Han Zhao Zhen said to Liu You, the king of Zhongshan: Yu Yun is leading a large army outside, Chang'an is empty and can be attacked.

古文：曜使染帅精骑五千袭长安，庚寅夜，入外城。
现代文：刘曜让赵染率领五千精锐骑兵袭击长安，庚寅夜，攻入外城。
English: Liu You asked Zhao Zeng to lead five thousand elite cavalry to attack Chang'an, and he entered the outer city at night.

古文：帝奔射雁楼。染焚龙尾及诸营，杀掠千馀人；辛卯旦，退屯逍遥园。
现代文：愍帝奔往射雁楼，赵染焚烧了龙尾以及各营帐，杀死抢掠一千多人。辛卯早晨，赵染退到逍遥园驻扎。
English: Emperor Qian rushed to the Shooting Wild Goose Tower, Zhao Sen set fire to the Dragon's Tail Tower and all the barracks, killed and robbed more than a thousand people. In the morning of the second day, Zhao Sen retreated to the Happy Garden to stay.

古文：壬辰，将军麹鉴自阿城帅众五千救长安。癸巳，染引还，鉴追之，与曜遇于零武，鉴兵大败。
现代文：壬辰，将军麴鉴从阿城率领五千人救长安，癸巳，赵染带兵回师，麴鉴追击赵染，与刘曜在零武相遇，麴鉴的军队大败。
English: In Imjin, general Zhaojian led five thousand people from Acheng to save Chang'an, in Jinshi, Zhao Zeng led the troops back to the division, Zhaojian pursued Zhaojian, and met Liu You at Zhibu, and Zhaojian's army was defeated.

古文：杨虎、杨难敌急攻梁州，胡子序弃城走，难敌自称刺史。
现代文：杨虎、杨难敌紧急攻打梁州，胡子序弃城逃走，杨难敌自称刺史。
English: Yang Hu and Yang Nanyi urgently attacked Liangzhou, abandoned the city and fled. Yang Nanyi claimed to be a historian.

古文：汉中山王曜恃胜而不设备。十一月，麹允引兵袭之，汉兵大败，杀其冠军将军乔智明；曜引归平阳。
现代文：汉中山王刘曜倚仗胜利而不设防备，十一月，麴允带兵袭击刘曜，汉兵大败，麴允杀了汉冠军将军乔智明。刘曜带兵返回平阳。
English: Liu You, the king of the mountains in the Han Dynasty, relied on victory without setting up defenses. In November, Zou Yun led troops to attack Liu You. The Han soldiers were defeated, and Zou Yun killed Han champion General Qiao Zhiming. Liu You led troops back to Pingyang.

古文：王浚以其父字处道，自谓应 当涂高 之谶，谋称尊号。
现代文：王浚根据他父亲的字处道，自认为应验了 当途高 的谶语，图谋称帝。
English: According to his father's words and deeds, Wang Jun thought that he had fulfilled the slang of the time, and tried to become an emperor.

古文：前勃海太守刘亮、北海太守王抟、司空扌彖高柔切谏，浚皆杀之。
现代文：前勃海太守刘亮、北海太守王抟，司空掾高柔恳切地劝谏，王浚把他们都杀了。
English: The former Bohai governor Liu Liang, the North Sea governor Wang Yao, and the governor Gao Rong earnestly advised him, and Wang Jun killed them all.

古文：燕国霍原，志节清高，屡辞征辟。
现代文：燕国人霍原，志气节操清明高洁，多次辞去王浚的任命。
English: Huo Yuan, a native of Yan Guo, has a clear and noble spirit of self-restraint, and has repeatedly resigned from the appointment of Wang Jun.

古文：浚以尊号事问之，原不答。
现代文：王浚又以称帝的事问他，霍原不回答。
English: Wang Jun also asked him about praising the emperor, but Huo Yuan did not answer.

古文：浚诬原与群盗通，杀而枭其首。
现代文：王浚就诬陷霍原与强盗们勾结，杀了霍原并悬首示众。
English: Wang Jun falsely accused Houyuan of colluding with the robbers, killed Houyuan and hung his head for the public to see.

古文：于是士民骇怨，而浚矜豪日甚，不亲政事，所任皆苛刻小人，枣嵩、硃硕，贪横尤甚。
现代文：这样士人、百姓都很震骇怨恨，而王浚骄纵狂妄越来越厉害，不闻政事，所任用的人都是苛刻的小人、枣嵩、朱硕贪婪骄横更为突出。
English: In this way, both the scholars and the people were shocked and resentful, and Wang Jun's arrogance and arrogance became more and more severe. He did not listen to politics, and the people he appointed were all harsh villains, and his greed and arrogance were more prominent.

古文：北州谣曰： 府中赫赫，硃丘伯；十囊、五囊，入枣郎。 
现代文：北州有民谣说： 府中赫赫，是朱丘伯；十囊五囊，尽入枣郎。 
English: There is a folk song in Beizhou that says: Fuzhonghehe, is Zhu Chubo; ten bags and five bags, all into Zaozaburo.

古文：调发殷烦，下不堪命，多叛入鲜卑。
现代文：朱硕字丘伯。调遣征发非常频繁，下面不堪忍受，大多叛离投奔鲜卑。
English: Zhu Shuo, also known as Chubo. He was transferred and conscripted very frequently, which was unbearable, and most of his subordinates defected to Xianbei.

古文：从事韩咸监护柳城，盛称慕容廆能接纳士民，欲以讽浚。浚怒，杀之。
现代文：从事韩咸守护柳城，盛赞慕容能够接纳士人、百姓，想来讽喻王浚，王浚发怒，把他杀了。
English: Engaged in Han Xian's protection of Liucheng, Mu Rong was highly praised for being able to accept scholars and common people. To paraphrase Wang Jun, Wang Jun got angry and killed him.

古文：浚始者唯恃鲜卑、乌桓以为强，既而皆叛之。
现代文：王浚开始只是因为倚仗着鲜卑人、乌桓人而强大，但不久鲜卑、乌桓都叛离了他。
English: At first, Wang Jun was only strong because he relied on Xianbei and Wuhuan, but soon Xianbei and Wuhuan all betrayed him.

古文：加以蝗旱连年，兵势益弱。
现代文：加上连年蝗灾、旱灾，军队势力更加衰弱。
English: Coupled with successive years of locust plagues and droughts, the military's strength has become even weaker.

古文：石勒欲袭之，未知虚实，将遣使觇之，参佐请用羊祜、陆抗故事，致书于浚。
现代文：石勒想袭击王浚，但不知他的虚实，打算派使者去侦察，参佐请石勒效法羊祜、陆抗以交邻之礼对待敌方的前例给王浚去信。
English: Shiller wanted to attack Wang Jun, but he didn't know if it was true or not. He planned to send an emissary to investigate. The counselor asked Shiller to send a letter to Wang Jun, following the example of Yang Xuan and Lu Zui, who treated their enemies with neighborly courtesy.

古文：勒以问张宾，宾曰： 浚名为晋臣，实欲废晋自立，但患四海英雄莫之从耳；其欲得将军，犹项羽之欲得韩信也。
现代文：石勒因此问张宾，张宾说： 王浚名义上是晋朝的大臣，实际上想废掉晋朝自立为帝，只是怕四海的英雄无人相从罢了，他想得到将军您，就像项羽想得到韩信一样。
English: Shi Ler therefore asked Zhang Bin, Zhang Bin said: Wang Jun Rong is nominally a minister of the Jin Dynasty, in fact, he wants to abolish the Jin Dynasty and establish himself as an emperor, but he is afraid that the heroes of the four seas will not be followed. He wants to get the general you, just like Xiang Yu wants to get Han Xin.

古文：将军威振天下，今卑辞厚礼，折节事之，犹惧不言，况为羊、陆之亢敌乎！
现代文：将军威震天下，现在用谦恭的言辞丰厚的礼物，降低身分去对待他，还怕他不信，何况是羊、陆那样势均力敌呢？
English: The general is so powerful that he shakes the world. Now, he uses humble words and rich gifts to treat him with a lower status, fearing that he will not believe him. What is more, are the sheep and the land so evenly matched?

古文：夫谋人而使人觉其情，难以得志矣。 勒曰： 善！ 
现代文：图谋他人却又使其能够察觉真情，就难以达到目的。 石勒说： 好！ 
English: It is difficult to achieve the goal of scheming others but enabling them to detect the true feelings.Shiller said: Good!

古文：十二月，勒遣舍人王子春、董肇多赍珍宝，奉表于浚曰： 勒本小胡，遭世饥乱，流离屯厄，窜命冀州，窃相保聚以救性命。
现代文：十二月，石勒派遣舍人王子春、董肇带上很多珍宝，给王浚奉表说： 我本来是小小的胡人，遭到饥饿变乱的时局，四处流浪屯守在困厄之地，流窜到冀州，想互相聚集保卫来挽救自己的性命。
English: In December, Shi Le sent his courtiers, Prince Chun and Dong Zhaotong, with many precious treasures to present to Wang Jun. He said, "I was originally a small Hu person, who suffered from hunger and turbulent times, wandered around in a troubled land, and drifted to Jizhou, and wanted to gather protection to save my life.

古文：今晋祚沦夷，中原无主；殿下州乡贵望，四海所宗，为帝王者，非公复谁！
现代文：现在晋朝皇室沦灭，中原无主，殿下是州乡尊贵的名门望族，四海都尊崇，作帝王的人，不是您还有谁？
English: Now that the imperial family of the Jin Dynasty has fallen, the Central Plains have no master, and His Imperial Highness is a distinguished member of a prestigious family in Zhouzhou Township, revered by people from all over the world, who is the emperor, if not you?

古文：勒所以捐躯起兵，诛讨暴乱者，正为殿下驱除尔。
现代文：石勒所以冒死起兵，诛讨凶暴作乱的人，正是为殿下驱除这些强寇妄贼罢了。
English: It was for the sake of His Royal Highness that Shiller risked his life and raised an army to fight against the violent rioters and drive out these invaders and thieves.

古文：伏愿殿下应天顺人，早登皇祚。
现代文：希望殿下能够应天顺从民意，尽快登上皇位。
English: I hope that His Imperial Highness will follow the will of the people and ascend the throne as soon as possible.

古文：勒奉戴殿下如天地父母，殿下察勒微心，亦当视之如子也。 
现代文：石勒我尊奉拥戴殿下就像尊奉天地父母一样，殿下体察我的心意，也应该把我当作儿子一样看待呀！ 
English: Shi Le, I respect Your Highness as much as I respect the parents of heaven and earth. Your Highness is aware of my heart and should treat me as a son!

古文：又遗枣嵩书，厚赂之。
现代文：又给枣嵩去信，并用厚重的礼物贿赂他。
English: He also sent a letter to Zaosong and bribed him with a heavy gift.

古文：浚以段疾陆眷新叛，士民多弃己去，闻勒欲附之，甚喜，谓子春曰： 石公一时英杰，据有赵、魏，乃欲称籓于孤，其可信乎？ 
现代文：王浚因为段疾陆眷刚刚叛离，士人、百姓又大多离开了自己，听到石勒想来归附自己，大喜过望，对王子春说： 石公是当世豪杰，占据有赵、魏地区，却想做我的藩属，这能是真的吗？ 
English: Wang Jun was overjoyed to hear that Shi Le wanted to attach himself, saying to Prince Chun, "Shi Gong is a contemporary hero, occupying the Zhao and Wei regions, but he wants to be a member of my clan. Can this be true?

古文：子春曰： 石将军才力强盛，诚如圣旨。
现代文：王子春说： 石将军才能力量都很强盛，确实如您所说。
English: Prince Chun said: The talents and abilities of the stone generals are very strong, indeed, as you said.

古文：但以殿下中州贵望，威行夷、夏，自古胡人为辅佐名臣则有矣，未有为帝王者也。
现代文：只是因为殿下是中州的尊贵的名门望族，威势达于夷人、华人地区，自古以来有胡人作为辅佐君主的名臣的情况，而没有作帝王的人。
English: It is only because His Imperial Highness is a distinguished member of a prestigious family in Chuzhou, who has been influential in the Yi and Chinese regions, and since ancient times, there have been Hu people who have served as eminent vassals to assist the monarch, but there is no person who has served as emperor.

古文：石将军非恶帝王不为而让于殿下，顾以帝王自有历数，非智力之所取，虽强取之，必不为天人之所与故也。
现代文：石将军不是厌恶帝王的地位而辞让给殿下，只是顾虑因为帝王自有天道气数，不是仅靠才智力量所能取得的，即使强行取得帝位，也一定不被上天与人们所承认的缘故。
English: General Ishi did not dislike the emperor's position and resigned to give it to His Highness, but he was only concerned because the emperor had his own heavenly virtue, which could not be obtained by intellectual power alone, and even if he forcibly obtained the imperial throne, it would not be recognized by heaven and people.

古文：项羽虽强，终为汉有。
现代文：项羽虽然强大，但天下终究为汉朝所有。
English: Although powerful, the Han Dynasty ultimately ruled the world.

古文：石将军之比殿下，犹阴精之与太阳，是以远鉴前事，归身殿下，此乃石将军之明识所以远过于人也，殿下又何怪乎！ 
现代文：石将军与殿下相比，就像月亮之于太阳，所以鉴于历史情况，才投身于殿下，这是石将军远见卓识所以远远超过他人的地方，殿下有什么可奇怪的呢？ 
English: Compared to His Imperial Highness, General Shi is like the moon to the sun, so in view of the historical situation, he devoted himself to His Imperial Highness. This is where General Shi's foresight is far superior to others. What is strange about His Imperial Highness?

古文：浚大悦，封子春、肇皆为列侯，遣使报聘，以厚币酬之。
现代文：王浚听后非常高兴，把王子春、董肇都封为侯，派使者报告这个聘任，并且重金酬谢他们。
English: After hearing this, Wang Jun was very happy. He made Princes Chun and Dong Zhao princes, sent an envoy to report the appointment, and rewarded them with a large sum of money.

古文：游纶兄统，为浚司马，镇范阳，遣使私附于勒；勒斩其使以送浚。
现代文：游纶的哥哥游统，担任王浚的司马，镇守范阳，派使者暗自依附于石勒，石勒杀了他的使者并送给王浚。
English: You Tong's brother You Tong, who served as Wang Jun's steward, sent an envoy to secretly attach himself to Shi Le. Shi Le killed his envoy and sent him to Wang Jun.

古文：浚虽不罪统，益信勒为忠诚，无复疑矣。
现代文：王浚虽然没有以罪罚游统，却更加相信石勒的忠诚，不再怀疑。
English: Although Wang Jun did not punish Yu Tong, he still believed in Shi Le's loyalty and no longer doubted.

古文：是岁，左丞相睿遣世子绍镇广陵，以丞相扌彖蔡谟为参军。
现代文：这一年，左丞相司马睿派长子司马绍镇守广陵，让丞相掾蔡谟担任参军。
English: In the same year, the Left Chancellery Minister Sima Rui sent his eldest son Sima Shao to guard Guangling, and let the Prime Minister Zou Zaimu join the army.

古文：谟，克之子也。
现代文：蔡谟是蔡克的儿子。
English: Zymu is the son of Zek.

古文：汉中山王曜围河南尹魏浚于石梁，兗州刺史刘演、河内太守郭默遣兵救之，曜分兵逆战于河北，败之；浚夜走，获而杀之。
现代文：汉中山王刘曜在石梁包围了河南尹魏浚，兖州刺史刘演、河内太守郭默派兵救援魏浚，刘曜分兵在河北迎战，打败了他们。魏浚连夜逃走，刘曜抓获后把他杀了。
English: In Shiliang, Liu You, the mountain king of the Han Dynasty, encircled Yin Weizhong of Henan Province. Liu En, the governor of Bozhou, and Guo Mei, the governor of Hanoi, sent troops to rescue Wei You. Liu You's detachment met and defeated them in Hebei Province. Wei You fled overnight, and Liu You captured and killed him.

古文：代公猗卢城盛乐以为北都，治故平城为南都；又作新平城于灅水之阳，使右贤王六修镇之，统领南部。
现代文：代公拓跋猗卢在盛乐县筑城作为北都，把旧平城作为南都，又在水的北面建新平城，派右贤王拓跋六镇守，总管南部地区事务。
English: On behalf of King Tuoba, Lu set up the northern capital in Tsukushi, Shenle County, and the southern capital in the old Pingcheng. He also built the new Pingcheng on the north side of the water, and sent the Right Sage King Tuoba to guard six towns and be in charge of the affairs of the southern region.

