古文：瞽蒙掌播鼗、柷、敔、埙、箫、管、弦、歌。讽诵诗，世奠系，鼓琴瑟。
现代文：瞽蒙负责演奏鼗、祝、敌、埙、箫、管、弦等乐器和歌唱，讽诵诗以及小史撰定的帝系和世本等，弹奏琴瑟。
English: Yimeng is responsible for playing musical instruments such as gongs, congratulations, enemies, cymbals, gongs, pipes, strings and singing, reciting poems and imperial and world history written by Xiao Shi, and playing the harpsichord.

古文：掌九德六诗之歌，以役大师。
现代文：掌管《九德》和六诗的歌唱，以听从大师的指挥。
English: In charge of the singing of "Nine Virtues" and six poems, to listen to the master's command.

古文：视瞭掌凡乐事播鼗，击颂磬、笙磬，掌大师之县。
现代文：视瞭掌管凡演奏音乐时就敲击鼗，敲击颂磬、笙磬。负责为大师悬挂乐器。
English: He is in charge of striking the cymbals, hammering the cymbals and cymbals when playing music. He is responsible for hanging musical instruments for the masters.

古文：凡乐事，相瞽。
现代文：凡演奏音乐就搀扶瞽蒙。
English: Wherever there is music, there is singing.

古文：大丧，廞乐器。大旅，亦如之。宾射，皆奏其钟鼓，鼜、恺献，亦如之。典同掌六律、六同之和，以辨天地、四方、阴阳之声，以为乐器。凡声，高声昆，正声缓，下声肆，陂声散，险声敛，达声赢，微声，回声衍，侈声笮，弇声郁，薄声甄，厚声石。
现代文：凡钟所发出的声音：钟体上部过大，发出的声音就盘旋在钟内难扩散；钟体上下过直，发出的声音就迟重缓慢；钟体下部过大，发出的声音就会放肆而去不稍容留；钟体一边偏大，发出的声音就离散而不稍内敛；钟体一边偏窄，发出的声音就内敛而不外扬；钟体过大，发出的声音就过于宏大；钟体过小，发出的声音就过小；钟体过圆，发出的声音就过于宛转回旋；钟体中央过小，发出的声音就过于迫促；钟体中央过宽，发出的声音就抑郁回旋而难出；钟体过薄，发出的声音就像震掉出来的一样；钟体过厚，就难以叩击发声。
English: The sound emitted by any bell: if the upper part of the bell is too large, the sound emitted will hover in the bell and be difficult to diffuse; if the bell is too straight, the sound emitted will be slow and heavy; if the lower part of the bell is too large, the sound emitted will be impudent and will not be tolerated; if the bell is too large, the sound emitted will be discrete and will not be restrained; if the bell is too narrow, the sound emitted will be restrained and will not be emitted; if the bell is too large, the sound emitted will be too grand; if the bell is too small, the sound em

古文：凡为乐器，以十有二律为之数度，以十有二声为之齐量。
现代文：凡制造乐器，都以发出的声音能够符合十二律来确定它们的度数，对照十二种病钟的声音来纠正大小容量。
English: All makers of musical instruments determine the power of their instruments by the sound they emit, which is in accordance with the twelve laws, and correct the size and capacity by comparing it to the sound of twelve kinds of sick bells.

古文：凡和乐，亦如之。
现代文：凡调整旧乐器也依照上述标准。
English: All adjustments to old musical instruments are also carried out in accordance with the above standards.

古文：磬师掌教击磬，击编钟，教缦乐、燕乐之钟磬。
现代文：磬师掌管教授敲击编磬、编钟，教授配合缦乐、燕乐演奏的钟磬。
English: The gong master is in charge of teaching the striking of gongs and chimes, as well as teaching the chimes to be played in combination with gong music and yang music.

古文：凡祭祀，奏缦乐。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，演奏缦乐。
English: Whenever a religious service is held, music is played.

古文：钟师，掌金奏。
现代文：钟师掌管敲击钟镩。
English: The carillonneur is in charge of striking the gong.

古文：凡乐事，以钟鼓奏九夏：《王夏》、《肆夏》、《昭夏》、《纳夏》、《章夏》、《齐夏》、《族夏》、《祴夏》、《骜夏》。
现代文：凡演奏音乐，击钟鼓演奏九《夏》：《王夏》、《肆夏》、《昭夏》、《纳夏》、《章夏》、《齐夏》、《族夏》、《诫夏》、《骜夏》。
English: Everyone played music, and nine "summers" were played with bells and drums: "Wang Xia," "Wang Xia," "Zhaoxia," "Zhao Xia," "Naxia," "Zhang Xia," "Qi Xia," "Zong Xia," "Zhang Xia" and "Feng Xia."

古文：凡祭祀、飨食，奏燕乐。
现代文：凡举行祭祀、飨礼或食礼，就演奏燕乐。
English: Whenever there is a religious service, a feast or a meal, Yanren is played.

古文：凡射，王奏《驺虞》，诸侯奏《狸首》，卿大夫奏《采蘋，士奏《采蘩》。
现代文：凡举行射礼，王射时奏《驺虞》，诸侯射时奏《狸首》，卿大夫射时奏《采蓣》，士射时奏《采蘩》。
English: Whenever a shooting ceremony is held, the king will play "Shuyu" (虞) when shooting, the princes will play "Tuxiu" (狸首) when shooting, the noblemen will play "Zheyu" (采) when shooting, and the scholars will play "Zheyu" (采) when shooting.

古文：掌鼙鼓、缦乐。
现代文：掌管敲击应鼙，磬师演奏缦乐时就敲击应鼙以相和。
English: He is in charge of striking the eulogy, and when the eulogist plays the eulogy, he strikes the eulogy with harmony.

古文：笙师，掌教龠竽、笙、埙、籥、箫、篪、笛、管，舂、牍、应、雅，以教祴乐。
现代文：笙师掌管教授吹奏竽、笙、埙、籥、箫、篪、篷、管，撞击牍、应、雅，以教授配合演奏《陔夏》之乐的节奏。
English: The gong master led the professor to play the gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong,

古文：凡祭祀、飨射，共其钟、笙之乐。
现代文：凡举行祭祀、飨礼或食礼，供给所需的与钟声相应和的笙乐。
English: Whenever there is a religious service, a feast or a meal, the appropriate music to accompany the chimes is provided.

古文：燕乐，亦如之。
现代文：演奏燕乐时也这样做。
English: Do the same when playing the Yan music.

古文：大丧，廞其乐器。及丧，奉而藏之。
现代文：有大丧时，陈设所掌管而用以随葬的乐器，到下葬的时候奉送这些乐器到墓穴而藏入椁中。
English: When there is a great mourning, the musical instruments that are in charge of the museum and are used to accompany the funeral, are sent to the grave and hidden in the coffin at the time of burial.

古文：大旅，则陈之。
现代文：举行大旅祭时，就陈设所掌管的乐器。
English: When the Great Pilgrimage Festival is held, the musical instruments in his charge are displayed.

古文：鏄师掌金奏之鼓。
现代文：鏄师掌管演奏钟铸时敲击晋鼓。
English: The gong master is in charge of playing the bell and beating the drum while casting the bell.

古文：凡祭祀，鼓其金奏之乐。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，击晋鼓配合钟铸演奏。
English: Whenever a religious service is held, drums are beaten and chimes are played.

古文：飨食、宾射，亦如之。
现代文：举行飨礼、食礼和宾射礼也这样做。
English: This is also done during the welcome ceremony, the meal ceremony and the guest shooting ceremony.

古文：军大献，则鼓其恺乐。
现代文：出征凯旋而大献战功时，击鼓配合演奏凯旋之乐。
English: When returning from a victorious campaign and making a great contribution to the war effort, drumming is combined with the performance of the music of the triumphant return.

古文：凡军之夜三鼜，皆鼓之。守鼜，亦如之。
现代文：凡军营中巡夜，三次譬鼓都由铸师负责敲击，王宫日常守备的譬鼓也负责敲击。
English: Whenever there was a night patrol in a military camp, a foundryman was responsible for striking the tambourine three times, and the tambourine that guarded the royal palace on a daily basis was also responsible for striking.

古文：大丧。廞其乐器，奉而藏之。
现代文：有大丧时，陈设所掌管而用以随葬的乐器，并奉送到墓地而藏入椁中。
English: In times of great mourning, the musical instruments used for funerals, which are under the control of the museum, are sent to cemeteries and hidden in urns.

古文：韎师掌教韎乐。祭祀，则帅其属而舞之。
现代文：韎师掌管教授东夷舞乐，祭祀时就率领属下跳东夷舞。
English: Zou Shi was in charge of teaching the Eastern Barbarian Dance, and led his subordinates to dance the Eastern Barbarian Dance during the ritual.

古文：大飨，亦如之。
现代文：举行大飨礼时也这样。
English: This is also done when the Imperial Banquet is held to invite all the princes to come to the Imperial Court.

古文：旄人掌教舞散乐，舞夷乐，凡四方之以舞仕者属焉。
现代文：旄人掌管教授从民间选拔出来的善于舞乐的人，教授四夷舞乐。凡从四方选出从事舞乐的人都隶属于旄人。
English: The Xiongren are in charge of teaching the dance music to those who are good at dance music, who are selected from the general public. They teach the dance music to the Si Yi. All the people who are engaged in dance music, who are selected from the Si Fang, belong to the Xiongren.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客，舞其燕乐。籥师掌教国子舞羽、龠籥。
现代文：凡举行祭祀或招待宾客，在演奏燕乐时使所统领的四方从事舞蹈者表演四夷舞乐。籥师掌管教国子持羽吹籥而舞。
English: Whenever a religious service is held or guests are invited, the leader of the four parties will lead the dancers to perform the dance of the Four Emperors while the music of the birds is being played.

古文：祭祀则鼓羽龠之舞。
现代文：举行祭祀时就击鼓作为舞羽籥之舞的节奏。
English: Drumming is used as the rhythm of the dance of the feathered reed when a ritual is held.

古文：宾客飨食，则亦如之。
现代文：招待宾客举行飨礼或食礼时也这样做。
English: This is also done when inviting guests to hold a banquet or meal.

古文：大丧，廞其乐器，奉而藏之。
现代文：有大丧时，陈设所掌管而用以随葬的乐器，并奉送到墓地而藏入椁中。
English: In times of great mourning, the musical instruments used for funerals, which are under the control of the museum, are sent to cemeteries and hidden in urns.

古文：籥章掌土鼓、豳籥。
现代文：籥章掌管击土鼓和吹豳籥。
English: Gong Zhang is in charge of beating the drum and blowing the gong.

古文：中春昼，击土鼓，龠豳诗，以逆暑。
现代文：春二月，白天敲击土鼓，吹奏豳诗，以迎接暑气的到来。
English: In the spring and February, during the day, they beat earthen drums and played poems to welcome the arrival of the heat.

古文：中秋夜迎寒，亦如之。
现代文：秋八月，夜间迎接寒气的到来也这样做。
English: In autumn and August, do the same at night to welcome the arrival of cold weather.

古文：凡国祈年于田祖，龠豳雅，击土鼓，以乐田畯。
现代文：凡国中向田祖祈求丰年，就吹奏豳雅，敲击土鼓，以使田畯快乐。
English: In every country, people pray to Tian Zu for a prosperous year, and then they play gongs and drums to make Tian Zu happy.

古文：国祭蜡，则龠豳颂，击土鼓，以息老物。
现代文：国中举行蜡祭，就吹奏豳颂，敲击土鼓，以祈使老而疲劳的万物得到休息。
English: When the wax festival is held in the middle of the country, they blow gongs and beat earthen drums to pray for the rest of the old and tired things.

古文：鞮鞻氏掌四夷之乐与其声歌。祭祀，则龠而歌之。燕，亦如之。
现代文：鞮鞻氏掌管四夷的舞乐及其歌唱，举行祭祀时就吹管、籥伴奏歌唱，举行燕礼时也这样做。
English: The Yi clan presided over the dance music and singing of the Si'i people. They blew pipes and sang to the accompaniment of gongs when holding religious services, and did the same when holding the Yan ceremony.

古文：典庸器掌藏乐器庸器。
现代文：典庸器掌管收藏乐器和庸器。
English: The philharmonic presides over a collection of musical instruments and philharmonics.

古文：及祭祀，帅其属而设荀虡，陈庸器。
现代文：到祭祀的时候，率领属吏陈设笱虞，陈列庸器。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, the subordinate officials led the procession to display the yakitori and the utensils.

古文：飨食、宾射，亦如之。
现代文：举行飨礼、食礼和宾射礼时也这样做。
English: This is also done during the welcome ceremony, the meal ceremony and the guest shooting ceremony.

古文：大丧，廞荀虡。
现代文：有大丧时，陈设用以随葬的笋虞。
English: When there is a large funeral, there is a risk that the display will be used to accompany the funeral.

古文：司干掌舞器。
现代文：司干掌管授予和收藏舞蹈器具。
English: Sikan is in charge of awarding and collecting dance equipment.

古文：祭祀，舞者既陈，则授舞器。既舞，则受之。
现代文：举行祭祀时，舞蹈者排列好之后，就授予他们舞器，舞蹈完毕后再接受舞器而收藏。
English: When a ritual is held, after the dancers are lined up, they are given dancing instruments. After the dance is over, the dancers receive the dancing instruments and collect them.

古文：宾飨，亦如之。
现代文：招待宾客举行大飨礼时也这样做。
English: This is also done when inviting guests to hold a grand banquet.

古文：大丧，廞舞器。及葬，奉而藏之。
现代文：有大丧时，陈列用以随葬的舞器，到下葬时奉送到墓地并藏入椁中。
English: When there is a great funeral, the dancing utensils used for the funeral are displayed, and when the funeral is over, they are sent to the cemetery and hidden in the coffin.

