古文：谢彦章见之，知其儒者，待之以礼，谓其乡人刘去非曰： 为君得一宗人。 
现代文：刘皞，字克明，后晋丞相谯国公刘日句的弟弟。刘皞小时离开家乡，后唐天年间，被梁将刘寻阝的军士抓获。谢彦章看见他，就知道他是读书人，以礼节接待他，对刘皞的同乡人刘去非说： 我为您找到了一个同姓的人。 
English: Liu Xuan, also known as Kemin, was the younger brother of the late Emperor Jin's minister, Liu Zhiguo. Liu Xuan left his hometown at an early age, and in the late Tang Dynasty, he was captured by Liang general Liu Xuan's sergeant. When Xie Yanzhang saw him, he knew that he was a reader, and received him with courtesy. He said to Liu Xuan's fellow villager, Liu Defei, "I have found a person with the same surname for you."

古文：即令皞见之，去非询其爵里，乃亲族也，对泣久之，自是随去非客于彦章门下。
现代文：便令刘皞去见刘去非，刘去非询问他的家乡籍贯，原来是有近亲关系的宗族，相对流泪很长时间，从此随刘去非在谢彦章手下做门客。
English: He then ordered Liu Yao to meet Liu Defei, and Liu Defei inquired about his hometown of origin. It turned out to be a clan with a close relationship, and the relative shed tears for a long time. Since then, Liu Defei has been a doorkeeper under Xie Yanzhang.

古文：彦章得罪，去非为郢州刺史，皞随之郡。
现代文：谢彦章获罪后，刘去非任郢州刺史，刘皞跟随他到了郢州。
English: After Xie Yanzhang was found guilty, Liu went to Fizhou to become a historian, and Liu Yao followed him to Fuzhou.

古文：庄宗平河洛，去非以尝从刘守奇归梁，深惧获罪，乃弃郡投高季兴于荆南，皞累为荆州摄官。
现代文：唐庄宗平定黄河、洛阳一带后，刘去非因为自己曾经跟随刘守奇归顺梁朝，深怕获罪，于是丢下郢州投靠荆南高季兴，刘皞多次在荆州代理官职。
English: After Tang Zhuangzong had pacified the Yellow River and Luoyang area, Liu Dafu, because he had once followed Liu Shouqi to the Shunliang Dynasty, was deeply afraid of being punished, so he left Bozhou to rely on Jingnan Gao Jixing. Liu Bozhou has been acting as an official in Jingzhou for many times.

古文：既而兄昫明宗朝为学士，遣人召归。
现代文：不久哥哥刘日句任唐明宗朝学士，派人召回刘皞。
English: Soon after, his brother Liu Rixuan was appointed as a Tang Ming Dynasty scholar, and sent someone to recall Liu Xuan.

古文：梁汉颙镇邓州，辟为从事，入为监察御史，历水部员外郎、史馆修撰。
现代文：梁汉镇守邓州时，任刘皞为从事，后入朝任监察御史，又历任水部员外郎、史馆修撰。
English: When Liang Han was in charge of the town of Dengzhou, he was engaged in the work of Liu Xuan, and later he was appointed to the imperial court to supervise the history, and successive members of the Ministry of Water Affairs and the History Museum compiled it.

古文：长兴末，宰臣赵凤镇邢台，表为节度判官。
现代文：长兴末年，宰臣赵凤镇守邢台，表荐刘皞为节度判官。
English: In the last years of Changxing, Zhao Fengzhen, the vice-minister, guarded the ceremonial table and recommended Liu Ye as the judge of the festival.

古文：清泰初，入为起居郎，改驾部员外郎，兼侍御史知杂事，移河南少尹、兵部郎中，转太府卿。
现代文：清泰初年，入朝任起居郎，改任驾部员外郎，兼侍御史管理杂务，调任河南少尹、兵部郎中，转任太府卿。
English: In the first year of the Qing dynasty, he entered the imperial court as kijiro, and was reassigned as the driver's assistant, and concurrently as the attendant's assistant, and was reassigned as Henan Shao Yin, Hyobu Rongzhong, and was reassigned as Dafuqing.

古文：汉祖受命，用为宗正卿。
现代文：后汉高祖登上帝位后，任刘皞为宗正卿。
English: After Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty ascended to the throne, Liu Ye was appointed as Zong Zhengqing.

古文：周初，改卫尉卿。
现代文：后周初年，改任卫尉卿。
English: At the beginning of the following year, he was reappointed to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：广顺元年冬十月，税居于东京，夜梦鬼诧之曰： 公于我冢上安床，深不奉益。 
现代文：广顺元年冬十月，刘皞住在东京，夜晚梦见有鬼惊讶地对他说： 您在我的坟上架床，对我很不利。 
English: In the winter and October of the first year of Guangshun, Liu Yao lived in Tokyo. At night, he dreamed of a ghost and was surprised to say to him: You are making a bed on my grave, which is not good for me.

古文：皞问鬼姓氏，曰李丕文。
现代文：刘皞问鬼的姓名，说叫李丕文。
English: Liu Ye asked the name of the ghost and was told it was Li Yowen.

古文：皞曰： 君言殊误，都城内岂可冢耶？ 
现代文：刘皞说： 你说的太不对了，都城内哪能埋人呢？ 
English: Liu Wei said, "What you said is so wrong. How can you bury someone in the capital?

古文：曰： 冢本在野，张十八郎展城时围入。 
现代文：回答说： 坟本来是在野外，张十八郎扩大都城时就把它围进来了。 
English: He replied, "The grave was originally in the open, but Zhang Shichiro encircled it when he expanded the capital.

古文：忽寤。
现代文：忽然梦醒。
English: Suddenly waking up from a dream.

古文：又半月，复梦前鬼曰： 公不相信，屈观吾舍可乎？ 
现代文：又过了半个月，再次梦见上次的那个鬼说： 你如不相信，可屈驾看看我的家好吗？ 
English: Half a month later, I had another dream about the ghost from last time, saying: If you don't believe me, can you bend down and take a look at my house?

古文：即以手掊地，豁然见华第，花木丛萃，房廊雕焕，立皞于西庑。
现代文：于是用手挖地，豁然看见有华丽的住宅，花草树木茂密丛生，房屋廊庑雕凿闪光，刘皞站立在西边廊庑下。
English: So he dug the ground with his hands and suddenly saw a gorgeous house, flowers and trees thickly clustering, the hallway carved and chiseled, and Liu Ye standing under the west porch.

古文：久之，见一团火如电，前来渐近，即前鬼也。
现代文：很久后，看见一团状如闪电的火，向前渐渐走来，原来就是那鬼。
English: After a long time, he saw a ball of fire like lightning, gradually moving forward. It turned out to be the ghost.

古文：引皞深入，出其孥，泣拜如有所托。
现代文：鬼将刘皞带到房舍深处，叫出自己的妻子儿女，哭着拜请刘皞像有所托。
English: The ghost took Liu Yao to the depths of the house, called out his wife and children, and begged Liu Yao with tears.

古文：皞问丕文鬼事，曰： 冥司各有部属，外不知也。 
现代文：刘皞问李丕文有关鬼的事，回答说： 阴间各有分部相属，外界不能知道。 
English: When Liu Ye asked Li Yewen about ghosts, he replied, "There are different parts of the underworld, and the outside world can't know about them.

古文：皞曰： 余官何至？ 
现代文：刘皞说 ：我能做到什么官？ 
English: Liu Wei said: What can I do, officer?

古文：再三不对，苦讯之，曰： 齐王判官。 
现代文：询问再三鬼不回答，苦苦追问他，才说 ：可做到齐王的判官。 
English: After repeated inquiries, the ghost did not answer, and after struggling to question him, he finally said, "I can be the judge of King Qi."

古文：皞曰： 张令公为齐王，去世久矣。
现代文：刘皞说： 张令公做齐王，已去世很久了。
English: Liu Wei said: Zhang Ling Gong, the king of Qi, has been dead for a long time.

古文：今郓州高令公为齐王，余方为列卿，岂复为宾佐乎？ 
现代文：现在郓州高令公做齐王，我已是一位列卿，怎么能再做判官呢？ 
English: Now that Zhangzhou Gaoling Gong is the king of Qi, I am already a noble, how can I be a judge again?

古文：鬼曰： 不知也。 
现代文：鬼说： 不知道。 
English: The ghost said, "I don't know."

古文：皞既寤，欲掘而视之。既而又告同僚曰： 鬼虽见诉，其如吾税舍何？ 
现代文：刘皞醒来后，想挖地看看，后又告诉别人说： 鬼虽然向我诉告，又怎能不让我住在这里呢？ 
English: After waking up, Liu Yao wanted to dig around and have a look, and then he told others, "Even though the ghosts are complaining to me, how can they not let me live here?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：广顺二年春，朝廷以皞为高丽册使。
现代文：广顺二年春，朝廷任刘皞为高丽国册使。
English: In the spring of the second year of Guangshun, the imperial court appointed Liu Ye as the envoy of the Korean National Anthem.

古文：三月，至郓，节度使高行周以皞嗜酒，留连累日，旦夕沉醉。
现代文：三月，到达郓州，节度使高行周因为刘皞嗜酒，留下他几天，每天日夜沉醉不醒。
English: In March, when he arrived in Zhangzhou, the festival made Gao Xing Zhou leave him for a few days because of Liu Yao's alcoholism, and he was drunk every day and night.

古文：《太平广记》云：衔命使吴越，路由郓州，卒于邮亭。时年六十一。
现代文：二十三日，早晨起来梳头，形状就如酒醉未醒，儿子刘泳仔细一看，已经去世了，时年六十一岁。
English: On the 23rd, when he got up in the morning to comb his hair, he looked like he was still drunk. When his son Liu Yong took a closer look, he had already passed away at the age of 61.

古文：其年八月，郓帅齐王高行周亦梦请齐王判官，得无是乎！
现代文：那年八月，郓州主帅齐王高行周也梦见有鬼请求当齐王判官，大概就是刘皞吧！
English: In August of that year, Zhangzhou coach Qi Wang Gao Xing Zhou also dreamed of a ghost asking to be the judge of Qi Wang, probably Liu Ye!

古文：满座皆笑。孙晟，本名凤。《南唐书》云：孙忌，高密人，一名凤，又名晟，少举进士。性阴贼，好奸谋。
现代文：刘皞从事儒学，喜欢藏书，嗜酒而无仪态检点，然而内心无其他私念，急于行义，文友们都因此而称扬他。孙晟，本名孙凤。性情阴险狠毒，爱行奸计。
English: Liu Yao is a Confucian scholar, loves to collect books, is fond of alcohol, and has no etiquette. However, he has no other selfish thoughts in his heart, and is eager to do righteousness. His literary friends praise him for this. Sun Yao, whose real name is Sun Feng, has an insidious, dangerous, and vicious disposition, and likes to play tricks.

古文：少为道士，工诗，于庐山简寂观画唐诗人贾岛像，悬于屋壁，以礼事之。
现代文：小时当道士，工于诗歌，在庐山简寂道观时，画唐朝诗人贾岛的像，挂在屋内墙上，以礼节侍奉他。
English: He was a Taoist for an hour, working on poetry, and when he was in Shaoshan, he painted a portrait of the Tang Dynasty poet Jia Dao, hung it on the wall of the house, and served him with etiquette.

古文：观主以为妖妄，执杖驱出之，大为时辈所嗤。
现代文：观主以为孙晟荒谬反常，用棍子将他赶走，大为当时人嗤笑。
English: The onlookers thought that Sun Yat-sen was absurd and abnormal, and chased him away with a stick, which made people laugh at the time.

古文：改儒服，谒唐庄宗于镇州，授秘书省著作郎。
现代文：后穿上儒士服饰，到镇州拜见唐庄宗，被授任秘书省著作郎。
English: After putting on Confucian clothing, he went to Zhenzhou to meet Tang Zhuangzong, and was appointed secretary of the provincial secretary.

古文：《南唐书》云：豆卢革为相，雅知忌，辟为判官。
现代文：天成初年，朱守殷占据夷门反叛，当时孙晟是他的幕僚，帮助他反叛。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, Zhu Shouyin occupied Yimen and rebelled. At that time, Sun Yat-sen was his staff and helped him to rebel.

古文：适忌闲行在东门，闻乱，得民家马乘之，奔桐城。叛卒不得忌，乃杀都押衙李建崇而逸。
现代文：孙晟也略有文采，李景尊杨溥为让皇的册文，就是孙晟所做，所以南唐特别看重他。二十年间，历任伪职，财物和房屋，都很使他称心如意。孙晟因为家中侍女很多，当吃饭时不设饭桌，令侍女们每人端着一个菜盘，围在他身旁，叫作 肉台盘 。
English: Sun Yat-sen was also a bit of a writer. Li Jingzong Yang Yat-sen was the one who wrote the book of the emperor, so the Southern Tang Dynasty especially valued him. During the past twenty years, the successive pseudo-positions, property and houses were very pleasing to him. Sun Yat-sen, because there were many maids in the family, did not set a dining table when eating, so the maids each carried a dish and surrounded him, called the meat plate.

古文：忌坐贬光禄卿。显德三年春，王师下广陵，江左惊窘，李景伪署晟为司空，令奉贡于行在，世宗遣右常侍刘悦伴之，赐与甚厚。
现代文：显德三年，后周军队攻下广陵，江东惊惧危急，李景任孙晟为司空，令他到世宗所在地奉上贡物，世宗派右常侍刘悦陪同他，赐给优厚的财物。
English: In the third year of Xiande, after the Zhou army captured Guangling, and the East River was alarmed and in danger, Li Jing appointed Sun Yat-sen as the second-in-command, and ordered him to go to the location of the Shizong to pay tribute. Liu Yue, the right-hand attendant of the Shizong faction, accompanied him and gave him a generous property.

古文：洎随驾到阙，舍于都亭驿，礼遇殊优。
现代文：及随世宗到京城，住在都亭驿，礼遇特别优厚。
English: and followed Shizong to Beijing, living in the Du Ting Courtyard, where they were treated with special courtesy.

古文：每召见，饮之醇醴，问以江南事，晟但言： 吴畏陛下之神武，唯以北面为求，保无二也。 
现代文：每次召见他，用美酒招待，问他有关南唐的情况，孙晟仅说： 南唐害怕陛下的英武，只想割让江北求和。 
English: Every time he summoned him, invited him with fine wine, and asked him about the situation in Southern Tang Dynasty, Sun Yat-sen only said: Southern Tang Dynasty was afraid of His Majesty's valiant warriors, and only wanted to cede the north of the Yangtze River to sue for peace.

古文：先是，张永德守下蔡，素与李重进不协，每宴将校，多暴其短。
现代文：此前，张永德驻守下蔡，一向与李重进不和，每次宴请将校，总是揭露他的短处。
English: Previously, Zhang Yongde was stationed under Cai, and had always been at odds with Li Chongjin. Every time he invited the officer to a banquet, he would always expose his shortcomings.

古文：一日，永德乘醉，乃大言重进潜蓄奸谋，当时将校无不惊骇，繇是人情大扰。
现代文：一天，张永德乘着醉酒，大讲李重进暗藏奸计，当时将校无不惊骇，因而人心大乱。
English: One day, Zhang Yongde took advantage of drunkenness to talk about Li Chongjin's hidden treachery. At that time, the officer was shocked and his heart was in turmoil.

古文：后密遣亲信乘驿上言，世宗不听，亦不介意。
现代文：后来暗中派亲信乘驿马报告世宗，世宗不听，也不介意。
English: Later, he secretly sent a close confidant to report to Sejong on horseback. Sejong didn't listen and didn't mind.

古文：一日，重进自寿阳去其部从，直指永德帐下，宴饮终日而去，自此人情稍安。
现代文：一天，李重进从寿阳离开他的部将随从，直往张永德军营帐中，摆宴喝酒一整天才离去，从此人心稍为安定。
English: One day, Li Shougin left Shouyang with his subordinates and went straight to Zhang Yongde's barracks, where he held a banquet and drank for a whole day before leaving. From then on, people's minds were somewhat stable.

古文：时李景觇而知之，因密令人赍蜡书遗重进，劝为不轨，重进以其蜡书进呈，世宗览之，皆斥讟反间之言。
现代文：这时李景侦知这回事，于是暗中派人用蜡丸包着密信送给李重进，劝他造反。李重进把蜡丸包着的密信交给世宗，世宗看信，都是挑拨反间的言语。
English: At this time, Li Jing found out about this, so he secretly sent someone to send a secret letter wrapped in a wax ball to Li Shougin to persuade him to rebel. Li Shougin handed the secret letter wrapped in a wax ball to Shizong, and Shizong read the letter, all of which were words to incite discord.

古文：世宗怒晟前言失实，因急召侍卫都虞候韩通令收晟下狱，与其从者百余人皆诛之。
现代文：世宗愤怒孙晟以前的话不真实，于是急召侍卫都虞候韩通，令收捕孙晟下狱，随从他的一百多人都被诛杀。
English: Shizong was angry that Sun Yat-sen's previous words were not true, so he urgently summoned the palace guards to wait for Han Tong, ordered Sun Yat-sen to be arrested and imprisoned, and more than a hundred of his followers were killed.

古文：及将下狱，世宗令近臣问以江南可取之状，晟默然不对。
现代文：孙晟性情慷慨，总是感念李景的厚遇，誓死要报答他。当他将要下狱时，世宗令亲近的臣子询问他图取南唐的有关情况，孙晟默然不答。
English: Sun Yat-sen was generous by nature, always thinking of Li Jing's generous treatment and vowing to repay him. When he was about to be released from prison, a courtier close to King Sejong asked him about the circumstances of his attempt to take Nantang. Sun Yat-sen silently did not answer.

古文：临刑之际，整其衣冠，南望金陵再拜而言曰： 臣惟以死谢。 
现代文：临刑之时，端正自己的衣冠，向南遥望金陵再拜而言： 臣仅能以死告罪于君王。 
English: When he was about to be executed, he straightened his robe and looked southward to the Jinling Mausoleum and said: "A vassal can only accuse the king of death.

古文：遂伏诛。
现代文：于是被诛。
English: As a result, he was arrested.

