古文：子墨子言曰：今天下之所誉善者，其说将何哉？
现代文：墨子说道：当今天下所赞美的人，该是怎样一种说法呢？
English: Mozi said, "What kind of statement is it to say that the person you are praising today has passed away?"

古文：为其上中天之利，而中中鬼之利，而下中人之利，故誉之与？
现代文：是他在上能符合上天的利益，于中能符合鬼神的利益，在下能符合人民的利益，所以大家才赞誉他呢？
English: Is it because he can meet the interests of heaven above, the interests of ghosts and gods in the middle, and the interests of the people below, that everyone praises him?

古文：意亡非为其上中天之利，而中中鬼之利，而下中人之利，故誉之与？
现代文：还是他在上不能符合上天的利益，于中不能符合鬼神的利益，在下不能符合人民的利益，所以大家才赞誉他呢？
English: Or is it because he cannot meet the interests of heaven above, the interests of ghosts and gods in the middle, and the interests of the people below, that everyone praises him?

古文：虽使下愚之人，必曰： 将为其上中天之利，而中中鬼之利，而下中人之利，故誉之。 
现代文：即使是最愚蠢的人，也必定会说： 是他在上能符合上天的利益，于中能符合鬼神的利益，在下能符合人民的利益，所以人们才赞誉他。 
English: Even the most stupid person will surely say: It is because he can meet the interests of heaven above, the interests of ghosts and gods in the middle, and the interests of the people below, that people praise him.

古文：今天下之同意者，圣王之法也，今天下之诸侯，将犹多皆免攻伐并兼，则是有誉义之名，而不察其实也。
现代文：现在天下所共同认为是义的，是圣王的法则。但现在天下的诸侯大概还有许多在尽力于攻战兼并，那就只是仅有誉义的虚名，而不考察其实际。
English: What the whole world now considers to be righteousness is the law of the holy king. However, there are probably still many of the world's lords who are trying their best to fight against annexation, which is only a false name of righteousness, without examining its reality.

古文：此譬犹盲者之与人，同命白黑之名，而不能分其物也，则岂谓有别哉！
现代文：这就象瞎子与常人一同能叫出白黑的名称，却不能辨别那个物体一样，这难道能说会辨别吗？
English: Just as a blind person can call out the names of black and white together with an ordinary person, but cannot distinguish that object, can this be said to be discerning?

古文：是故古之知者之为天下度也，必顺虑其义而后为之行。
现代文：所以古时的智者为天下谋划，必先考虑此事是否合乎义，然后去做它。
English: Therefore, the ancient sages who planned for the world must first consider whether the matter is justified, and then do it.

古文：是以动，则不疑速通。
现代文：行为依义而动，则号令不疑而速通于天下。
English: When actions are motivated by meaning, then the order is unquestionable and quickly spread throughout the world.

古文：成得其所欲，而顺天、鬼、百姓之利，则知者之道也。
现代文：确乎得到了自己的愿望而又顺乎上天、鬼神、百姓的利益，这就是智者之道。
English: The way of a wise man is to get what he really wants, and then follow the interests of heaven, ghosts, and gods, and the people.

古文：是故古之仁人有天下者，必反大国之说，一天下之和，总四海之内。焉率天下之百姓，以农、臣事上帝、山川、鬼神。
现代文：所以古时享有天下的仁人，必然反对大国攻伐的说法，使天下的人和睦一致，总领四海之内，于是率领天下百姓务农，以臣礼事奉上鬼、山川、鬼神。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, the benevolent people who enjoyed the world would inevitably oppose the attack of the great powers, so that the people of the world would be harmonious and united, and the general would lead the four seas. Therefore, he led the people of the world in agriculture, and served the ghosts, mountains, rivers, and ghosts with the courtier's etiquette.

古文：利人多，功故又大，是以天赏之，鬼富之，人誉之，使贵为天子，富有天下，名参乎天地，至今不废，此则知者之道也，先王之所以有天下者也。
现代文：利人之处多，功劳又大，所以上天赏赐他们，鬼神富裕他们，人们赞誉他们，使他们贵为天子，富有天下，名声与天地并列，至今不废。这就是智者之道，先王所获得天下的缘故。
English: There are many ways to benefit people, and their merits are great. Therefore, heaven rewards them, ghosts and gods enrich them, people praise them, make them noble sons of heaven, rich in the world, and their reputation is on a par with that of heaven and earth. This is the way of the wise, the reason why the first king gained the world.

古文：今王公大人、天下之诸侯则不然。
现代文：现在的王公大人、天下的诸侯则不是这样。
English: This is not the case with the current kings and princes of the world.

古文：将必皆差论其爪牙之士，皆列其舟车之卒伍，于此为坚甲利兵，以往攻伐无罪之国。入其国家边境，芟刈其禾稼，斩其树木，堕其城郭，以湮其沟池，攘杀其牲口，燔溃其祖庙，劲杀其万民，覆其老弱，迁其重器，卒进而柱乎斗，曰： 死命为上，多杀次之，身伤者为下；又况失列北桡乎哉？
现代文：他们必定要指使他们的谋臣战将，都排列其兵船战车的队伍，在这个时候准备用坚固的铠甲和锐利的兵器，去攻打无罪的国家，侵入那些国家的边境，割掉其庄稼，斩伐其树木，摧毁其城郭，填塞其沟池，夺杀其牲畜，烧毁其祖庙，屠杀其人民，灭杀其老弱，搬走其宝器，终至进而支持战斗，说： 死于君命的为上，多杀敌人的次之，身体受伤的为下。至于落伍败退的呢？
English: They must have ordered their generals to line up their ships and chariots, ready at this time with strong armor and sharp weapons, to attack innocent countries, invade the borders of those countries, cut down their crops, cut down their trees, destroy their fortifications, fill their ditches, kill their livestock, burn their ancestral temples, slaughter their people, kill their old and weak, remove their treasures, and finally support the battle, saying: Those who die for the sake of the king's life are the highest, those who kill the enemy are the second, and those who are injured are the lowest. As for the stragglers?

古文：罪死无赦！ 
现代文：罪乃杀无赦！ 
English: There is no forgiveness for the crime of murder!

古文：以惮其众。
现代文：用这些话使他的士卒畏惧。
English: With these words he struck fear into his soldiers.

古文：夫无兼国覆军，贼虐万民，以乱圣人之绪。
现代文：兼并他国覆灭敌军；残杀虐待民众，以破坏圣人的功业。
English: Annexing other countries to crush the enemy army; killing and abusing the people in order to destroy the saint's work.

古文：意将以为利天乎？
现代文：还将认为这是利于上天吗？
English: Will it still be considered to be beneficial to Heaven?

古文：夫取天之人，以攻天之邑，此刺杀天民，剥振神之位，倾覆社稷，攘杀其牲□，则此上不中天之利矣。
现代文：取用上天的人民，去攻占上天的城邑，这乃是刺杀上天的人民，毁坏神的神位，倾覆宗庙社稷，夺杀其牲口，那么这就对上下符合上天的利益了。
English: To use the people of heaven to conquer the cities of heaven is to assassinate the people of heaven, destroy the god's throne, overthrow the patriarchal temple, and kill their livestock. Then this is in line with the interests of heaven.

古文：意将以为利鬼乎？
现代文：还将认为这样利于鬼神吗？
English: Will it still be considered beneficial to ghosts and gods?

古文：夫杀之人，灭鬼神之主，废灭先王，贼虐万民，百姓离散，则此中不中鬼之利矣。
现代文：屠杀了这些人民，就灭掉了鬼神的祭主，废灭了先王，残害虐待万民，使百姓分散，那么这就于中不符合鬼神的利益了。
English: If these people were slaughtered, the priest of ghosts and gods was eliminated, the former king was abolished, all the people were brutalized and abused, and the people were scattered, then this would not be in the interests of ghosts and gods.

古文：意将以为利人乎？
现代文：还将认为这样利于人民吗？
English: Will it still be considered beneficial to the people?

古文：夫杀之人为利人也博矣！
现代文：认为杀他们的人民是利人，这就也微薄了。
English: It's a small price to pay for thinking that killing their people is a good thing.

古文：又计其费此－－为周生之本，竭天下百姓之财用，不可胜数也，则此下不中人之利矣。
现代文：又计算那些费用，原都是人民的衣食之本，所竭尽天下百姓的财用，就不可胜数了，那么，这就对下不符合人民的利益了。
English: If we also calculate those expenses, which are the source of the people's food and clothing, and exhaust the financial resources of the people all over the world, they will be innumerable. In that case, it would not be in the interests of the people.

古文：今夫师者之相为不利者也，曰： 将不勇，士不分，兵不利，教不习，师不众，率不利和，威不圉，害之不久，争之不疾，孙之不强。植心不坚，与国诸侯疑。
现代文：现在率领军队的人相互认为不利的事情，即是： 将领不勇敢，兵士不奋厉，武器不锐利，训练不习战，军队不多，士卒不和，受到威胁而不能抵御，遏止敌人而不能久长，争斗而不能迅疾，转拢来又不强大，树立的决心不坚定，结交的诸侯内心生疑。
English: Those who are now leading the army consider the following things to be unfavorable to each other: the generals are not brave, the soldiers do not work hard, the weapons are not sharp, the training is not warlike, the army is not large, the soldiers do not fight, they are threatened and cannot resist, they cannot hold back the enemy for a long time, they cannot fight quickly, they are not strong when they are surrounded, their determination is not firm, and the hearts of the princes they have made friends with are suspicious.

古文：与国诸侯疑，则敌生虑而意羸矣。
现代文：结交的诸侯内心生疑，那么敌对之心就会产生而共同对敌的意志就减弱了。 
English: If doubts arise in the hearts of princes who are friends, then hostility will arise and the will to fight the enemy together will weaken.

古文：偏具此物，而致从事焉，则是国家失卒，而百姓易务也。
现代文：假若完全具备了这些不利条件而竭力从事战争，那么国家就会失去法度，百姓也就要改业了。
English: If all these unfavorable conditions were fully present and the country were to engage in war, the country would lose its legitimacy and the people would have to change their profession.

古文：今不尝观其说好攻伐之国，若使中兴师，君子，庶人也，必且数千，徒倍十万，然后足以师而动矣。
现代文：现在何不试着看看那些喜欢攻伐的国家？假使国中出兵发动战争，君子身分的人，普通人士数以千计，负担劳役的人数十万，然后才足以成军而出动。
English: Now why not try to look at those countries that like to attack? If a country sends troops to start a war, there are thousands of people with the status of a gentleman, ordinary people, and hundreds of thousands of people who bear the burden of labor, and then they are enough to form an army and set out.

古文：久者数岁，速者数月。是上不暇听治，士不暇治其官府，农夫不暇稼穑，妇人不暇纺绩织纴，则是国家失卒，而百姓易务也。
现代文：久的数年，快的数月，这使在上位的人无暇听政，官员无暇治理他的官府之事，农夫无暇耕种，妇女无暇纺织，那么国家就会失去法度，而百姓则要改业了。
English: Long years, short months, so that the ruler has no time to listen to the government, the official has no time to manage the affairs of his government, the farmer has no time to cultivate, and the woman has no time to weave, then the country will lose legitimacy, and the people will have to change their occupation.

古文：然而又与其车马之罢毙也，幔幕帷盖，三军之用，甲兵之备，五分而得其一，则犹为序疏矣。
现代文：然而如那种兵车战马的损失，帐幕帷盖，三军的用度，兵甲的设备，如果能够收回五分之一，这还只是一个粗略的估计。
English: But the loss of the chariots, the horsemen, the curtains, the provisions of the three armies, and the equipment of the armor, if one-fifth can be recovered, is only a rough estimate.

古文：然而又与其散亡道路，道路辽远，粮食不继，傺食饮之时，厕役以此饥寒冻馁疾病而转死沟壑中者，不可胜计也。
现代文：然而又如那种士卒在道路上散亡，由于道路遥远，粮食不继，饮食不时，厮役们因之辗转死于沟壑中的，又多得不可胜数。
English: However, like those soldiers who died on the road, because the road was far away, the food did not continue, the food did not come from time to time, and the guards died in the gully because of it, and there were too many.

古文：此其为不利于人也，天下之害厚矣。
现代文：像这样不利于人、为害天下之处就够严重了。
English: It is serious enough to do something like this that is detrimental to people and harmful to the world.

古文：而王公大人，乐而行之。则此乐贼灭天下之万民也，岂不悖哉？
现代文：但王公大人却乐于实行，那么这实即是乐于残害天下的百姓，难道不是荒唐吗？
English: But if the princes are happy to carry it out, then they are actually happy to destroy the people of the world. Isn't that absurd?

古文：今天下好战之国，齐、晋、楚、越，若使此四国者得意于天下，此皆十倍其国之众，而未能食其地也，是人不足而地有余也。
现代文：现在天下好战的国家为齐、晋、楚、越，如果让这四国得意于天下，那么，使他们的人口增加十倍，也不能全部耕种土地。这是人口不足而土地有余呀！
English: At present, all the belligerent countries in the world are Jin, Chu, and Yue. If these four countries are allowed to dominate the world, their population will increase tenfold, and they will not be able to cultivate all the land. This is because the population is insufficient and the land is more than enough!

古文：今又以争地之故，而反相贼也，然则是亏不足，而重有余也。
现代文：现在又因争夺土地的缘故而互相残杀，既然这样，那么这就是亏损不足而增加有余了。
English: Now they are killing each other over land, so it's more of a loss than a gain.

古文：今逮夫好攻伐之君，又饰其说，以非子墨子曰： 以攻伐之为不义，非利物与？
现代文：现在一般喜好攻伐的国君，又辩饰其说，用以非难墨子说： 认为攻战为不义，难道不是有利的事情吗？
English: The sovereign, who now generally favored the offensive, also embellished his argument, using it to reproach Nebuchadnezzar, saying: Isn't it advantageous to consider the offensive to be unjust?

古文：昔者禹征有苗，汤伐桀，武王伐纣，此皆立为圣王，是何故也？ 
现代文：从前大禹征讨有苗氏，汤讨伐桀，周武王讨伐纣，这些人都立为圣王，这是什么缘故呢？ 
English: In the past, there were the Miao clan, the Tang clan, and the Zhouwu clan, all of whom were set up as holy kings. What was the reason for this?

古文：子墨子曰： 子未察吾言之类，未明其故者也。彼非所谓 攻 ，谓 诛 也。
现代文：墨子说： 您没有搞清我说法的类别，不明白其中的缘故。他们的讨伐不叫作 攻 ，而叫作 诛 。
English: Mozi said, "You don't understand the category of what I'm saying, and you don't understand the reason for it. Their crusade is not called an attack, but a siege.

古文：昔者三苗大乱，天命殛之，日妖宵出，雨血三朝，龙生于庙，犬哭乎市，夏冰，地坼及泉，五谷变化，民乃大振。
现代文：从前三苗大乱，上天下命诛杀他。太阳为妖在晚上出来，下了三天血雨，龙在祖庙出现，狗在市上哭叫，夏天水结冰，土地开裂而下及泉水，五谷不能成熟，百姓于是大为震惊。
English: The sun came out at night as a demon, it rained blood for three days, a dragon appeared in the ancestral temple, a dog cried in the market, water froze in the summer, the land cracked down and springs, the grain could not mature, and the people were shocked.

古文：高阳乃命玄宫，禹亲把天之瑞令，以征有苗。
现代文：古帝高阳于是在玄宫向禹授命，大禹亲自拿着天赐的玉符，去征讨有苗。
English: The ancient emperor Goyang then gave Yu the order in the Imperial Palace, and Yu personally took the heavenly jade talisman and went to solicit seedlings.

古文：四电诱祗，有神人面鸟身，若瑾以侍，搤矢有苗之祥。苗师大乱，后乃遂几。
现代文：这时雷电大震，有一位人面鸟身的神，恭谨地侍立，用箭射死有苗的将领，苗军大乱，后来就衰微了。
English: At this time, there was a great thunder and lightning earthquake, and a god with a human face and a bird's body rose up, stood respectfully, and shot the general who had seedlings with an arrow. The seedlings army was in chaos, and later it waned.

古文：禹既巳克有三苗，焉磨为山川，别物上下，卿制大极，而神民不违，天下乃静，则此禹之所以征有苗也。
现代文：大禹既已战胜三苗，于是就划分山川，区分了事物的上下，节制四方，神民和顺，天下安定。这就是大禹征讨有苗。
English: Since Dayu had already defeated the three seedlings, he divided the mountains and rivers, distinguished the upper and lower things, controlled the four directions, the gods and the people, and the world was stable. This is Dayu's conquest of the seedlings.

古文：逮至乎夏王桀，天有命，日月不时，寒暑杂至，五谷焦死，鬼呼国，鹤鸣十夕余。
现代文：等到夏王桀的时候，上天降下严命，日月失时，寒暑无节，五谷枯死，国都有鬼叫，鹤鸣十余个晚上。
English: By the time of the summer solstice, the heavens had decreed a severe fate. When the sun and moon disappeared, there was no summer or winter, the crops withered, the country was haunted, and the cranes chirped for more than ten nights.

古文：天乃命汤于镳宫： 用受夏之大命。夏德大乱，予既卒其命于天矣，往而诛之，必使汝堪之。 
现代文：天就在镳宫命令汤： 去接替夏朝的天命，夏德大乱，我已在天上把他的命运终断，你前去诛灭他，一定使你戡定他。 
English: Heaven commanded Tang at the Summer Palace: "Go and take over the destiny of the Summer Palace. The Summer Palace is in turmoil. I have already decided his fate in heaven. Go ahead and destroy him. You will surely be able to hold him down."

古文：汤焉敢奉率其众，是以乡有夏之境，帝乃使阴暴毁有夏之城，少少有神来告曰： 夏德大乱，往攻之，予必使汝大堪之。
现代文：汤于是敢奉命率领他的部队，向夏边境进军。天帝派神暗中毁掉夏的城池。少顷，有神来通告说： 夏德大乱，去攻打他，我一定让你彻底戡定他。
English: Tang then dared to lead his troops to march to Xia's border. The Heavenly Emperor sent a god to secretly destroy Xia's city. Suddenly, a god came to announce: Xia De is in turmoil, go attack him, I will definitely let you completely subdue him.

古文：予既受命于天，天命融隆火，于夏之城闲西北之隅。 
现代文：我既已受命于上天，上天命令火神祝融降火在夏都西北角。 
English: Since I have been ordered by the heavens, the heavens ordered the fire god to wish the fire to fall in the northwest corner of the summer capital.

古文：汤奉桀众以克有，属诸侯于薄，荐章天命，通于四方，而天下诸侯莫敢不宾服，则此汤之所以诛桀也。
现代文：汤接受夏的民众而战胜了夏，在薄地会合诸侯，表明天命，并向四面八方通告，而天下诸侯没有敢不归附的。这就是汤诛灭夏。
English: Tang accepted Xia's people and defeated Xia, and gathered the princes in the plain to show the fate of heaven, and announced it to all directions, and the princes in the world did not dare not to adhere to it. This is Tang's destruction of Xia.

古文：逮至乎商王纣，天不序其德，祀用失时，兼夜中十日，雨土于薄，九鼎迁止，妇妖宵出，有鬼宵吟，有女为男，天雨肉，棘生乎国道，王兄自纵也。
现代文：等到商王纣，上天不愿享用其德，祭祀失时。夜中出了十个太阳，在薄地下了泥土雨，九鼎迁移位置，女妖夜晚出现，有鬼晚上叹喟，有女子变为男人，天下了一场肉雨，国都大道上生了荆棘，而纣王更加放纵自己了。
English: When the merchant king died, the heavens did not want to enjoy his virtue, and the sacrifice was a waste of time. In the middle of the night, ten suns came out, there was a muddy rain in the thin ground, Jiuding migrated position, the female demon appeared at night, there was a ghost sighing at night, there was a woman turned into a man, there was a rain of flesh under the sky, thorns grew on the capital avenue, and the dragon king indulged himself more.

古文：赤鸟衔珪，降周之岐社，曰： 天命周文王，伐殷有国。 
现代文：有只赤鸟口中衔圭，降落在周的岐山社庙上，圭上写道： 上天授命周文王，讨伐殷邦。 
English: A red bird landed on the temple of Qishan Shrine in Zhou and wrote: "God has ordered King Zhou Wen to invade Yin Province."

古文：泰颠来宾，河出绿图，地出乘黄。
现代文：贤臣泰颠来投奔帮助，黄河中浮出图箓地下冒出乘黄神马。
English: The wise minister Tai Biao rushed to help, the Yellow River surfaced, and the Yellow God Horse emerged from the underground.

古文：王既巳克殷，成帝之来，分主诸神，祀纣先王，通维四夷，而天下莫不宾。
现代文：周武王即位，梦见三位神人说： 我已经使殷纣沉湎在酒乐之中，去攻打他，我一定使你彻底戡定他。 武王于是去进攻纣这个疯子，灭商兴周。上天赐给武王黄鸟之旗。
English: When King Zhou Wu ascended to the throne, he dreamed of three gods saying, "I have caused Yin Zhuo to sink into drunkenness. Go and attack him, and I will make you completely subdue him." King Wu then went to attack this madman, the merchant Xing Zhou. Heaven gave King Wu the banner of the yellow bird.

古文：焉袭汤之绪，此即武王之所以诛纣也。
现代文：武王既已战胜殷商，承受上天的赏赐，命令诸侯分祭诸神，并祭祀纣的祖先，政教通达四方，而天下没有不归附的，于是继承了汤的功业。
English: Since King Wu had already defeated the Yin merchants and received the reward from heaven, he ordered the vassals to offer sacrifices to the gods, and to offer sacrifices to the ancestors of the Yao. Politics and religion reached all four directions, and there was no one in the world who did not adhere to it, so he inherited the work of Tang.

古文：若以此三圣王者观之，则非所谓 攻 也，所谓 诛 也 
现代文：这即是武王诛纣。如果从这三位圣王来看，则并非 攻 ，而叫作 诛 。 
English: If you look at it from the perspective of these three holy kings, it is not called "attack" but "attack."

古文：则夫好攻伐之君又饰其说，以非子墨子曰： 子以攻伐为不义，非利物与？
现代文：但是那些喜好攻伐的国君又辨饰其说，用来非难墨子道： 您以攻战为不义，它难道不是很有利吗？
English: But those princes who liked to attack also embellished it, using it to reproach Mozi: You are unjust to attack, isn't it very advantageous?

古文：昔者楚熊丽，始讨此睢山之间，越王繄亏，出自有遽，始邦于越；唐叔与吕尚邦齐、晋。
现代文：从前楚世子熊丽，最初封于睢山之间；越王繄亏出自有遽，始在越地建国；唐叔和吕尚分别建邦于晋国、齐国。
English: Once upon a time, Chu Zizhi Xiongli was originally sealed between the Lushan Mountains; Yue Wang Xiongli was born out of haste and began to establish a state in Yue; Uncle Tang and Lushan established a state in Jin and Qi respectively.

古文：此皆地方数百里，今以并国之故，四分天下而有之，是故何也？
现代文：这时的地方都不过方圆数百里，现在因为兼并别国的缘故，四分天下而占有之，这是什么缘故呢？ 
English: At that time, places were no more than a few hundred miles in circumference. Now, because of the annexation of other countries, they occupy four-fifths of the world. What is the reason for this?

古文：子墨子曰： 子未察吾言之类，未明其故者也。
现代文：墨子说： 您没有搞清我说法的类别，不明白其中的缘故。
English: Mozi said: You didn't understand the category of what I said, you didn't understand the reason for it.

古文：古者天子之始封诸侯也，万有余；今以并国之故，万国有余皆灭，而四国独立。
现代文：从前天下最初分封的诸侯，万有余国；现在因为并国的缘故，万多国家都已覆灭，惟有这四个国家独自存在。
English: From the time of the first division of the kingdoms of the world the day before yesterday, there were thousands of countries; now, because of the annexation of countries, thousands of countries have been destroyed, but these four countries exist alone.

古文：此譬犹医之药万有余人，而四人愈也，则不可谓良医矣。 
现代文：这譬如医生给万余人开药方，而其中仅四个人治好了，那么就不能说是良医了。 
English: For example, if a doctor prescribes medicine to more than ten thousand people, but only four of them are cured, then he cannot be said to be a good doctor.

古文：则夫好攻伐之君又饰其说，曰： 我非以金玉、子女、壤地为不足也，我欲以义名立于天下，以德求诸侯也。 
现代文：但是喜好攻伐的国君又辩饰其说，说道： 我并不是以为金玉、子女、土地不够，我要在天下以义立名，以德行收服诸侯。 
English: But the prince, who liked to attack, also embellished his argument, saying: "I do not think that gold, children, and land are not enough. I want to make a name for myself in the world with righteousness, and win over princes with virtue."

古文：子墨子曰： 今若有能以义名立于天下，以德求诸侯者，天下之服，可立而待也。
现代文：墨子说： 现在如果真有以义在天下立名，以德收服诸侯的，那么天下的归附就可以立等了。 
English: Mozi said, "Nowadays, if there really are people who have made a name for themselves in the world by being righteous, and who have subdued princes with virtue, then the world's annexation can wait.

古文：夫天下处攻伐久矣，譬若傅子之为马然。
现代文：天下处于攻伐时代已很久了，就像把童子当作马骑一样。
English: It has been a long time since the world has been in the era of aggression, just like taking a boy as a horse.

古文：今若有能信效先利天下诸侯者，大国之不义也，则同忧之；大国之攻小国也，则同救之，小国城郭之不全也，必使修之，布粟之绝则委之，币帛不足则共之。
现代文：今天如果有能先以信义相交而利于天下诸侯的，对大国的不义，就一道考虑对付它；对大国攻打小国，就一道前去解救；小国的城郭不完整，必定使他修理好；布匹粮食乏绝，就输送给他；货币不足，就供给他。
English: Today, if there is someone who can first communicate with sincerity and benefit the princes of the world, for the injustice of the big country, they will consider dealing with it together; for the big country to attack the small country, they will go together to rescue; the small country's castle is not complete, it must be repaired by him; if the cloth and food are exhausted, it will be sent to him; if the currency is insufficient, it will be provided to him.

古文：以此效大国，则小国之君说。
现代文：以此与大量较量，小国之君就会高兴。
English: The ruler of a small country will be pleased to compete with a large number of countries.

古文：人劳我逸，则我甲兵强。
现代文：别人劳顿而我安逸，则我的兵力就会加强。
English: When others are weary and I am at ease, then my strength will increase.

古文：宽以惠，缓易急，民必移。
现代文：宽厚而恩惠，以从容取代急迫，民心必定归附。
English: Generous and gracious, replacing haste with leisure, the people's hearts will surely be won over.

古文：易攻伐以治我国，攻必倍。
现代文：改变攻伐政策来治理我们的国家，功效必定加倍。
English: If we change the offensive policy to govern our country, the effect will be doubled.

古文：量我师举之费，以争诸侯之毙，则必可得而序利焉。
现代文：计算我们兴师的费用，以安抚诸侯的疲敝，那么一定能获得厚利了。
English: If we calculate the cost of reinstating the division, in order to appease the fatigue of the princes, then we will surely be able to obtain a hefty profit.

古文：督以正，义其名，必务宽吾众，信吾师，以此授诸侯之师，则天下无敌矣，其为下不可胜数也。
现代文：以公正督察别人，以义为名，务必宽待我们的民众，取信于我们的军队，以此援助诸侯的军队，那么就可以无敌于天下了。这样做对天下产生的好处也就数不清了。
English: To supervise others with fairness, to act in the name of righteousness, to be sure to treat our people with leniency, to gain the trust of our army, and to assist the armies of the lords in this way, then you can be invincible to the world. The benefits of doing so to the world are countless.

古文：此天下之利，而王公大人不知而用，则此可谓不知利天下之臣务矣。
现代文：这是天下之利，但王公大人不懂得去应用，则这可以说是不懂得有利于天下的最大要务了。
English: This is a benefit to the world, but if Wang Gong adults do not know how to apply it, then this can be said to be the biggest priority for the world.

古文：是故子墨子曰： 今且天下之王公大人士君子，中情将欲求兴天下之利，除天下之害，当若繁为攻伐，此实天下之巨害也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 现在天下的王公大人士君子，如果内心确实想求得兴起天下的利益，除去天下的祸害，那么，假若频繁地进行攻伐，这实际就是天下巨大的祸害。
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "Nowadays, princes and great people of the world, gentlemen, if your heart really wants to seek the interests of the world and eliminate the scourge of the world, then if you frequently attack, this is actually a huge scourge of the world.

古文：今欲为仁义，求为上士，尚欲中圣王之道，下欲中国家百姓之利，故当若 非攻 之为说，而将不可不察者此也！ 
现代文：现在若想行仁义，求做上等的士人，上要符合圣王之道，下要符合国家百姓之利，因而对于象 非攻 这样的主张，将不可不审察的原因，即在于此。 
English: Now, if you want to do what is benevolent and just, if you want to be a first-class scholar, you must conform to the way of the holy king on the one hand, and the interests of the people of the country on the other. Therefore, the reason why you cannot but examine such an assertion as "attack or no attack" lies in this.

