古文：房陟王超段何韦鲍生妓梁璟崔御史曹唐
现代文：房陟王超段何韦鲍生妓梁璟崔御史曹唐
English: Fang Zhen Wang Chaodan He Wei Bao Sheng Geisha Liang Zhen Cui Mi Shi Cao Tang

古文：房陟
现代文：房陟
English: Chestnut

古文：房陟任清河县尉，妻荥阳郑氏，有容色。
现代文：房陟任清河县尉。妻子是荥阳人，姓郑，很有姿色。
English: He was a lieutenant of Qinghe County. His wife, surnamed Zheng, was from Shenyang. She was very beautiful.

古文：时村中有一老妪，将诣谒禅师，未至，而中路荒野间。
现代文：当时，有个村子中一个老妇人，要去拜见一个禅师。
English: At that time, there was an old woman in a village who wanted to visit a Zen master.

古文：见一白衣妇人，于榛棘中行，哭极哀。绕一丘阜，数十步间，若见经营之状者。
现代文：还没到，中途路过一片荒野，看见一个穿白衣服的妇人，在荆棘、草丛间行走，哭得非常悲哀，又见她围绕着一个小土丘，在距离自己几十步远的地方，好象在干什么。
English: Before I arrived, I passed through a wilderness and saw a woman in a white dress, walking among thorns and grass, crying very sadly. I also saw her around a small mound, dozens of steps away from me, as if she was doing something.

古文：妪怪而往问，及渐逼，妇人即远，妪适回，而妇人复故处。
现代文：老妇人感到很奇怪，走过去想问她。等稍稍靠近了她，那妇人就远离了她；老妇人走回来，那妇人就又在原来的地方。
English: The old woman felt very strange and went over to ask her about it. When she got a little closer, the woman moved away from her; when the old woman came back, the woman was back where she had been.

古文：如是数四。
现代文：象这样有很多次。
English: It's happened many times.

古文：妪度非人，天昏黑，遂舍之。
现代文：老妇人估计她不是人间人。天黑下来，就丢开她自去赶路了。
English: The old woman didn't think she was human. When it got dark, she left her and went on her way.

古文：及至禅师处，说所见，兼述妇人形状、衣服。禅师异之，因书记屋壁。
现代文：等到了禅师那里，叙述路上所见，又说了那妇人的样子及装束，禅师认为很奇怪，于是就把这事写在墙壁上。
English: When he got to the Zen master's place, he described what he had seen on the way, and described the woman's appearance and dress. The Zen master thought it was very strange, so he wrote about it on the wall.

古文：后月余日，房陟妻暴亡，果葬于前所哭绕丘阜间，而容貌衣服，一如老妪前见者。
现代文：以后一个多月后的一天，房陟妻突然死了，果然埋葬在那妇人哭和徘徊的小土丘一带，而容貌，衣服，全象老妇人先前见到的一样。
English: One day, more than a month later, Fong Yao's wife suddenly died and was indeed buried near the small mound where the woman had been crying and wandering. Her appearance and clothes were exactly the same as those the old woman had seen before.

古文：王超
现代文：王超
English: Wang Chao

古文：太和五年，复州医人王超，善用针，病无不差。
现代文：太和五年时，复州有个医生叫王超，很善于用针给人治病。
English: When she was five years old, there was a doctor in Fuzhou named Wang Chao, who was very good at treating people with needles.

古文：死经宿而苏，言如梦：至一处，城壁台阁，如王者居。
现代文：经过他医治的病人，没有治不好的。王超曾经死了，经过一夜又苏醒过来。醒后说象作了一场梦一样。梦中他到了一个地方，高墙楼阁，象王侯居住的地方。
English: Wang Chao once died, but he woke up after a night and said it was like a dream. In the dream, he arrived at a place, a high-walled castle, where a prince lived.

古文：见一人卧，召前脉视，右膊有肿，大如杯，令超治之。即为针出浓升余。
现代文：看见一个人躺在那里，那人招呼王超上前给他诊脉，病人的左臂长了一个肿瘤，象酒杯一样大，王超用针给他排出一升多浓水。
English: Seeing a man lying there, the man called Wang Chao forward to give him a pulse diagnosis. The patient's left arm had a tumor as big as a wine glass. Wang Chao used a needle to drain a liter of thick water.

古文：顾黄衣吏曰：可领视毕也。
现代文：那个病人回头对身穿黄衣的小吏说：可以带他去看看毕院。
English: The patient turned to the clerk in yellow and said, "You can take him to see the hospital."

古文：超随入一门，门署曰毕院。庭中有人眼数千，聚成山，视内迭瞬明灭。
现代文：王超跟随黄衣人走进一个门，门上标有毕院二字，庭中有数千只眼睛，眼睛聚在一起，象山一样，瞬间明灭、闪亮。
English: Wang Chao followed the man in yellow and walked into a door. The word "Bi Yuan" was marked on the door. There were thousands of eyes in the garden. The eyes were clustered together like a mountain, flashing and shining in an instant.

古文：黄衣曰：此即毕也。
现代文：黄衣人说：这就是 毕 呀。
English: The man in yellow said, "That's right.

古文：俄有二人，形甚奇伟，分处左右。鼓巨箑，吹激聚眼，扇而起，或飞，或走为人者，顷刻而尽。
现代文：不一会儿，有二人，身材高大，分别站在两边，搧动着巨大的扇子，吹动着那些聚在一起的眼睛。扇子一动，那些眼睛就有的飞，有的跑，就象人一样，顷刻间那些眼睛就消失了。
English: A moment later, two tall men, standing on either side of him, waved a huge fan and blew on the eyes that had come together. When the fan moved, some of the eyes flew, some ran, just like people, and in an instant the eyes disappeared.

古文：超访其故，黄衣曰：有生之类，先死为毕。
现代文：王超问是什么缘故，黄衣人说：有生命的东西，先死叫 毕 。
English: When Wang Chao asked why, the man in yellow said, "If something is alive, it has to die first."

古文：言次忽活。
现代文：黄衣人说完王超就复活了。
English: After the man in yellow finished speaking, Wang Chao came back to life.

古文：段何
现代文：段何
English: Duan He

古文：进士段何赁居客户里。
现代文：进士段何租房子住在客户里。
English: How many employees live in the client's rented house?

古文：太和八年夏，卧疾逾月，小愈。
现代文：太和八年夏天，得了一场病，病了一个多月，稍稍有好转。
English: In the summer of 2000, I got sick. I was sick for more than a month, but I got better.

古文：昼日因力栉沐，凭几而坐。
现代文：天亮后用力梳洗后，靠几案坐着休息。
English: After combing hard after dawn, sit and rest with a few cases.

古文：忽有一丈夫，自所居壁缝中出，裳而不衣，啸傲立于何前，熟顾何曰：疾病若此，何不娶一妻，俾侍疾。
现代文：忽然有一个男子，从所住地方的墙壁中的夹缝中走出来，只穿下衣，光着上身，大声地呼喝着站在段何面前，仔细地看着段何说：你病成这样，为什么不娶一妻，让她伺候你的病？
English: Suddenly, a man came out of a crack in the wall of the place where he lived, wearing only his underwear, bare-chested, shouting loudly and standing in front of Duan He. He looked at Duan He carefully and said, "You are so sick, why not marry a wife and let her take care of your illness?"

古文：忽尔病卒，则如之何？
现代文：如果你突然死了，那可怎么办？
English: What happens if you die suddenly?

古文：何知其鬼物矣。曰：某举子贫寒，无意婚娶。
现代文：段何知道他是鬼，就说，我是个举子，家境贫寒，没有心思娶妻。
English: When Duan learned that he was a ghost, he said, "I am an only child, from a poor family, and I have no intention of marrying a wife.

古文：其人曰：请与君作媒氏。
现代文：那人说：让我给你作个媒人。
English: The man said, "Let me be your matchmaker."

古文：今有人家女子，容德可观，中外清显，姻属甚广。自有资从，不烦君财聘。
现代文：现在有个人家的女儿，容貌、品德都值得一看，无论内心、外表都很纯洁、高贵、亲朋故友也很多，自有资财来源，又不麻烦你花费财礼。
English: Now there is a daughter of a private family. Her appearance and character are worth seeing. Both inside and outside, she is very pure and noble. She has many relatives, friends and old friends. She has her own source of wealth and does not bother you to spend money.

古文：何曰：未成名，终无此意。
现代文：段何说：没成名，始终不会有这个意思。
English: Duan He said: Without fame, there will never be this meaning.

古文：其人又曰：不以礼，亦可矣。
现代文：那人说：不举行成婚的仪式也行啊！
English: The man said: "It's okay not to hold a marriage ceremony!

古文：今便与君迎来。
现代文：现在我马上为你迎来。
English: Now I'm coming for you.

古文：其人遂出门，须臾复来，曰：至矣。
现代文：说完，那人就出了门，不一会儿，又回来了，说：到了。
English: And when he had thus spoken, he went out, and came in again a little while after, and said, Here I am.

古文：俄有四人，负金璧舆。从二青衣，一云髻，一半髻，皆绝色。
现代文：一会儿，就见四个人抬着用金玉装饰的轿子，后面跟着两个婢女，一个梳着高高的发髻，另一个发鬟低垂，都是绝色美女。
English: In a moment, I saw four people carrying a palanquin decorated with jewels, followed by two maids, one with a high hair bun, the other with a low hair bun, all of them stunning beauties.

古文：二苍头，持装奁衣箧，直置舆于阶前。
现代文：两个男仆拿了妆奁、衣箱。径直把轿子抬到阶前才放下。
English: Two manservants took the dresser and the wardrobe. They carried the palanquin straight to the front of the steps before setting it down.

古文：媒者又引入阁中，垂帏掩户，复至何前曰：迎她良家子来，都不为礼，无乃不可乎？
现代文：媒人又把轿中的女子引入闺房中，放下帘子，关上门。然后又到段何面前说：迎取她这样良家女子，连礼仪都不举行，还有什么不满足的呢？
English: The matchmaker also led the woman in the sedan into the boudoir, put down the curtain, and closed the door. Then he went to Duan He and said, "To welcome a woman from a good family like her, you don't even hold a ceremony. What's not to be satisfied with?"

古文：何恶之，兼以困惫，就枕不顾。
现代文：段何听后非常厌恶，加上困乏疲惫，就躺下不理他。
English: Duan He was very disgusted after listening to him, and with fatigue, he lay down and ignored him.

古文：媒又曰：纵无意收采，第试一观。
现代文：媒人又说：即使你无意娶她，但是也可以试着看一看。
English: The matchmaker added: "Even if you have no intention of marrying her, you can still try.

古文：如是说谕再三，何终不应。
现代文：类似的话，那人反复说了许多遍。段何始终不答应。
English: The man repeated similar words many times, but Duan He still did not agree.

古文：食顷，媒者复引出门，舆中者乃以红笺题诗一篇，置何案上而去。
现代文：一顿饭的工夫，那自称媒人的人又带这一行人出了门。轿中那女人用红色信笺写了一首诗，放在段何面前的几案上走了。
English: Within an hour of the meal, the self-proclaimed matchmaker led the group out the door. The woman in the car wrote a poem on a red letterhead and left with several cases in front of her.

古文：其诗云：乐广清赢经几年，姹娘相托不论钱。
现代文：诗中写道：乐广清赢经几年，姹娘相托不论钱。
English: He wrote in the poem: After several years, Le Guangqing won the victory, and his daughter won the victory, regardless of money.

古文：轻盈妙质归何处，惆怅碧楼红玉田。
现代文：轻盈妙质归何处，惆怅碧楼红玉田。
English: Where does the lightness and beauty go? It's all about the red jade field.

古文：其书迹柔媚，亦无姓名，纸末唯书一我字。
现代文：那字迹轻柔漂亮，也没写姓名。唯独在纸末写了个我字。
English: The handwriting was soft and beautiful, and he didn't write his name. He just wrote "I" at the end of the paper.

古文：何自此疾病日退。
现代文：从此以后，段何的病也一天天好转了。
English: Since then, Duan He's illness has been getting better day by day.

古文：韦鲍生妓
现代文：韦鲍生妓
English: Wei Bao raw prostitute

古文：酒徒鲍生，家富畜妓。
现代文：嗜酒成性的鲍生，家里很富有、养活很多艺妓。
English: The family of the alcoholic Bao Sheng is very rich and supports many geishas.

古文：开成初，行历阳道中，止定山寺，遇外弟韦生下第东归，同憩水阁。
现代文：开成初年，走到历阳途中，住在定山寺。他的表弟韦生落榜东归，二人相遇，同在水阁休息。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, on the way to Liyang, he lived in Jingshan Temple. His cousin Wei Sheng fell to the East, and the two met and rested together in the water pavilion.

古文：鲍置酒，酒酣，韦谓鲍曰：乐妓数辈焉在？
现代文：鲍生备办了酒宴。喝到尽兴的时候，韦生对鲍生说：那些艺妓在哪？
English: When they had drunk their fill, Wei Sheng said to Bao Sheng: "Where are those geishas?

古文：得不有携者乎？
现代文：能不带来吗？
English: Can I bring some wine?

古文：鲍生曰：幸各无恙，然滞维阳日，连毙数驷，后乘既缺，不果悉从。唯与梦兰、小倩俱，今亦可以佐欢矣。
现代文：鲍生说：幸好都没出什么事，然而滞留在淮阳的那些日子，接连死了许多马，后来车就少了，无法把他们全带来，只跟梦兰、小倩他们一起来了。也足可以供我们娱乐了。
English: Bawson said: "Fortunately, nothing happened. However, in those days when we were stranded in Huaiyang, many horses died one after another. Later, there were fewer cars, so we couldn't bring them all. They only came with Meng Lan and Xiao Yao. It was enough to entertain us.

古文：顷之，二双鬟抱胡琴方响而至，遂坐韦生、鲍生之右，摐丝击金，响亮溪谷。
现代文：一会儿，两个头上梳着双髻的艺妓抱着胡琴，边走边拉地走过来了，就坐在韦生、鲍生的石边。那二人抚试琴弦，拉开琴弓，响亮的乐曲声回荡在溪谷。
English: In a moment, two geishas with double-bobbed hair on their heads, holding a huqin in their arms, came walking and pulling, and sat down on the edge of the stone of Wei Sheng and Bao Sheng. The two of them touched the strings and pulled the bow, and the loud music echoed in the valley.

古文：酒阑，鲍谓韦曰：出城得良马乎？
现代文：酒快喝完的时候，鲍生对韦生说：出城买到良马了吗？
English: When the wine was almost finished, Bao Sheng said to Wei Sheng: Did you go out of town to buy a good horse?

古文：对曰：予春初塞游，自鄜坊历乌延，抵平夏。止灵武而回。
现代文：韦生回答说：我春初去塞外游览，从鄜坊经过乌延，到达平复，最后到灵武，然后返回来，买到了几匹部落的骏马。
English: Wesson replied, "I went on a trip outside of Tibet at the beginning of spring. I went from Weifang, through Wuyan, to Pingfu, and finally to Lingwu, and then back. I bought a few horses from the tribe.

古文：部落驵骏获数疋，龙形凤颈，鹿颈凫膺，眼大足轻，脊平肋密者，皆有之。
现代文：龙形凤颈、鹿颈凫膺、眼大足轻、脊平肋密的样样都有。
English: There are specimens of dragon-shaped phoenix neck, deer neck, large eyes and light feet, and dense ridges and ribs.

古文：鲍抚掌大悦，乃停杯命烛，阅马于轻槛前数匹，与向来夸诞，十未尽其八九。
现代文：鲍生听了后，拍着手非常高兴，就放下酒杯，让人拿着蜡烛，到栓马桩去看了几匹马。这些马与方才韦生所夸耀吹嘘的相比，还不足十分之八九。
English: After listening to this, Bao Sheng clapped his hands and was very happy, so he put down his wine glass and asked people to take a candle and go to the horse stables to see a few horses. These horses are less than one-tenth of what Fang Zai Wei Sheng boasted.

古文：韦戏鲍曰：能以人换，任选殊尤。
现代文：韦生对鲍生开玩笑说：可以用人来换，随便你挑选最好的马。
English: Wesson joked to Bowson, "You can trade people for horses, just pick the best horse."

古文：鲍欲马之意颇切，密遣四弦，更衣盛妆，顷之乃至。
现代文：鲍生想要马的心情非常迫切，就暗自派人把四弦找来，更换浓妆，一会儿就到了。
English: Bowson was so eager to have a horse that he secretly sent someone to find the four strings, change the heavy make-up, and soon arrived.

古文：命棒酒劝韦生，歌一曲以送之云：白露湿庭砌，皓月临前轩。此时颇留恨，含思独无言。
现代文：鲍生让这人拿着酒杯为韦生劝酒。这人唱一支曲子赠韦生。歌词是：白露湿庭砌，皓月临前轩，此时颇留恨，含思独无言。
English: Bao Sheng asked this person to hold a wine glass to persuade Wei Sheng to drink. This person sang a song as a gift to Wei Sheng. The lyrics are: Bai dew wet garden building, the moon is at the front of the house, at this time there is a lot of resentment, and he is speechless.

古文：又歌《送鲍生酒》云：风飐荷珠难暂圆，多生信有短姻缘。
现代文：又唱一首歌为鲍生助兴，歌词是：风飐荷珠难暂园圆，多生信有短姻缘。
English: They also sang a song for Bao Sheng, the lyrics of which were: "It is difficult for the wind to blow the lotus bead around the garden for a while, and many people believe that there is a short marriage."

古文：西楼今夜三更月，还照离人泣断弦。
现代文：西楼今夜三更月，还照离人泣断弦。
English: The west tower is three months old tonight, and it still shines with people crying and breaking strings.

古文：韦乃召御者，牵紫叱拨以酬之。
现代文：韦生召来看管马匹的人，牵一匹紫色的马吆喝着送给鲍生以表示酬谢。
English: Wei Sheng called the person in charge of the horses to come and lead a purple foal and gave it to Bao Sheng as a reward.

古文：鲍意未满，往复之说，紊然无章。
现代文：鲍生的欲望仍未满足、反反复复地叨念着，语言杂乱而无次序。
English: Baosheng's desire is still unsatisfied, and he repeats and repeats, and the language is chaotic and out of order.

古文：有紫衣冠者二人，导从甚众，自水阁之西，升阶而来。
现代文：这时有穿紫衣戴紫帽子的二个人，前呼后拥地带着一大群人从水阁西边登上台阶向这边走过来。
English: At this time, there were two people wearing purple clothes and purple hats, who came forward and back with a large group of people from the west side of the water pavilion up the steps to this side.

古文：鲍韦以寺当星使交驰之路，疑大寮夜至，乃恐悚入室，阖门以窥之。
现代文：鲍生韦生二人认为定山寺正当使者频繁往来的路口，怀疑是权臣到此，就慌慌张张进了屋子，关上门偷着向外看。
English: Bao Sheng and Wei Sheng both thought that Jingshan Temple was a legitimate intersection frequented by emissaries. Suspecting that a dignitary had come here, they panicked into the house, closed the door and peeked out.

古文：而杯盘狼籍，不假收拾。
现代文：而外面酒杯盘碟弄得乱七八糟，还未及收拾，穿紫衣服的人已到座位上了。
English: But outside, the glasses, plates and glasses were in a mess, and before they could be put away, the man in purple was already in his seat.

古文：时紫衣即席，相顾笑曰：此即向来闻妾换马之筵。
现代文：两个人相对笑了笑说：这就是方才听到的以妾换马的宴席。
English: Two people smiled at each other and said, "This is the horse-for-concubine banquet we just heard about."

古文：因命酒对饮，一人须髯甚长，质貌甚伟，持杯望月，沉吟久之，曰：足下《盛赋》云： 斜汉左界，北路南躔。
现代文：于是让人拿酒、二人对饮。其中一人长着长长的络腮胡须，身材高大魁伟，举起酒杯，遥望月亮，迟疑了好一会儿，说：先生的大作有 斜汉左界，北路南躔。
English: One of them, a tall, powerful man with a long bushy beard, raised his glass, looked at the moon in the distance, hesitated for a long moment, and said, "My master's masterpiece is "Tang Han Zuo Jie" and "North Road, South Road."

古文：白露暖空，素月流天 可得光前绝后矣。
现代文：白露暖空。素月流天。可以算作空前绝后的佳句了。
English: White dew and warm sky. The moon and the stars. This can be counted as the best sentence ever.

古文：对月殊不见赏 风霁地表，云敛天末。洞庭始波，木叶微脱 。
现代文：面对明月何不欣赏 风霁地表，云敛天末，洞庭始波，木叶微脱 呢？
English: Faced with the bright moon, why not appreciate the wind rippling the surface of the earth, the clouds gathering at the end of the day, the beginning of the cave garden, and the leaves slightly peeling off?

古文：长须云：数年来在长安，蒙乐游王引至南宫，入都堂，与刘公干、鲍明远看试秀才，予窃入司文之室，于烛下窥能者制作。
现代文：另一个长胡须的人说：多年来在长安，承蒙乐游王把我推荐给南宫，进入了大的殿堂，与刘公干、鲍明远主管科举取仕，我偷闲去观看了文章诗赋中最宝贵的东西，在烛光下观看能人写作。
English: Another man with a long beard said, "For many years in Chang'an, I was recommended to the Southern Palace by the King of Song, Song and Pilgrimage, and entered the Great Hall of the People. I served with Liu Gonggan and Bao Mingyuan in charge of the imperial examination. I took the time to watch the most precious things in the essay and poetry, and watched talented people write under the candlelight.

古文：见属对颇切，而赋有蜂腰鹤膝之病，诗有重头重尾之犯。
现代文：见他们连缀文章、吟诗和赋非常流畅。然而赋有蜂腰鹤膝的弊病，诗有重头重尾的缺点。
English: You can see that they are very fluent in linking articles, chanting poems and fu. However, the fu has the drawbacks of bee waist, crane knee, and the poem has the drawbacks of heavy head and tail.

古文：若如足下洞庭木叶之对，为纰谬矣。
现代文：象先生的 洞庭  木叶 这类对句一样，那就错了。
English: Like Mr. Zong's "Cave Garden, Leaves" and similar couplets, that is wrong.

古文：小子拙赋云： 紫台稍远，燕山无极。
现代文：我有拙劣诗句 紫台稍远，燕山无极。
English: I have a bad poem: The Purple Mountain is a little far away, but the Yanshan Mountain is boundless.

古文：凉风忽起，白日西匿。
现代文：凉风忽起，白日西匿。
English: A cool breeze suddenly arose, and the day faded away.

古文：则 稍远  忽起 之声，俱遭黜退矣。
现代文：则是时间比较久远的即兴而作，都应该废弃了，难道它们没有区别吗？
English: Is there a difference between improvisation and improvisation that has been around for a long time and should be abandoned?

古文：不亦异哉！谓长须曰：吾闻古之诸侯，贡士于天子，尊贤劝善者也。
现代文：落腮胡须对长胡须的人说：我听说古代的诸侯举荐人才给天子，就是尊重贤才，勉励从善的人。
English: The bearded man said to the bearded man: I have heard that in ancient times, the princes recommended talents to the Son of Heaven, that is, they respected the wise and encouraged the good.

古文：故一适谓之好德，再适为之遵贤，三适谓之有功。
现代文：所以第一次举荐就认为他的德行好。第二次去推荐，就认为他尊重贤才，第三次去推荐，就认为他有功，于是给以赏赐。
English: Therefore, the first recommendation is that his virtue is good. The second recommendation is that he respects the sage, and the third recommendation is that he is meritorious, so he is rewarded.

古文：乃加九锡；不贡士，一黜爵，再黜地。三黜爵地。
现代文：不举荐人才的，根据情况，轻者免除爵位，再者没收封地，最重的就既免除爵位又没收封地。
English: For those who do not recommend talents, according to the circumstances, the lighter ones will be exempted from knighthoods, the others will be confiscated fiefs, and the heaviest will be both exempted from knighthoods and confiscated fiefs.

古文：夫古之求士也如此，犹恐搜山之不高，索林也不深。
现代文：古代天子这样选拔接纳人才，还忧心冲冲，象怕搜山唯恐到不了高处，又象搜索森林，深怕到不了林子尽头。
English: In this way, the ancient heavenly sons selected and accepted talents, but they were also worried, as if they were afraid of searching the mountains, but they were afraid of not being able to reach the heights, and like searching the forest, they were deeply afraid of not being able to reach the end of the forest.

古文：尚有遗漏者，乃每岁春季开府库，出币帛，周天下而礼聘之。
现代文：当着这个时候，儒墨等各家的贤才，难道都选拔出来了吗？
English: In the face of this time, have all the sages of various families, such as Confucius and Mao Zedong, been selected?

古文：当是时，儒墨之徒，岂尽出矣；智谋之士，岂尽举矣；山林深泽，岂无遗矣；日月照临，岂得尽其所矣。
现代文：聪慧善谋的人难道都被举荐出来了吗？山林深泽没有一处遗漏吗？日月高照，难道普遍地照到所有的地方吗？
English: Have all the clever and resourceful people been recommended? Is there not a single omission in the mountains, forests, and marshes? Does the sun and moon shine high, and does it shine universally everywhere?

古文：天子求之既如此，诸侯贡之又如此，聘礼复如此，当有栖栖于岩谷，郁郁不得志者。吾闻今之求聘之礼缺，是贡举之道隳矣。
现代文：天子这样选拔人才，诸侯这样举荐人才，选聘人才的制度又这样完奋，还有隐居深山巨谷郁郁不得志的人，我看到现在求贤纳士的法规如此欠缺，这就是推荐选拔人才的道路被毁坏了。
English: The Son of Heaven selects talents in this way, the princes recommend talents in this way, the system of selecting and hiring talents is so perfect, and there are also people who live in seclusion in the deep mountains and valleys who are depressed. I see that the laws and regulations for seeking talents are so lacking now. This means that the road of recommending and selecting talents has been destroyed.

古文：贤不肖同途焉，才不才汩汩焉。
现代文：贤的和不贤的不分，有才的和无才的不辨。
English: There is no distinction between the virtuous and the wicked, or between the talented and the untalented.

古文：隐岩冗者，自童髦穷经。
现代文：隐居在岩谷等闲散的地方的人，从孩童时候起，就竭力追索取仕效国之路，一直到白头。
English: People who live in seclusion in idle places such as Iwatani, since childhood, have been trying to pursue the road to success, all the way to Paektu.

古文：至于白首焉；怀方策者，自壮岁力学，讫于没齿。
现代文：胸怀良策的人，从身强力壮的时候开始努力学习，一直到衰老掉牙为止。
English: Those who have a good strategy in mind will study hard from the time when they are physically strong, until they are old and lose their teeth.

古文：虽每岁乡里荐之于州府，州府贡之于有司，有司考之诗赋。
现代文：即使每年乡里把人才推荐给州府，州府又把他们举荐给有司，有司再考察他们诗文。
English: Even if every year the villages recommend talented people to the prefectural government, the prefectural government recommends them to the department, and the department then examines their poems.

古文：蜂腰鹤膝，谓不中度；弹声韵之清浊，谓不中律。
现代文：诗赋有蜂腰鹤膝的毛病，认为不合乎要求，读起来声音有清有浊，认为不合乎韵律。
English: The poem has the problem of bee waist, crane knee, and is considered not to meet the requirements. When read, the sound is clear and muffled, and is considered not to meet the prosody.

古文：虽有周孔之贤圣，班马之文章，不由此制作，靡得而达矣。
现代文：即使有周公、孔子那样的圣贤，班固、司马迁那样的著作也从此不再问世了。
English: Even if there are sages like Zhou Gong and Confucius, works like Banggu and Sima Qian will never be published again.

古文：然皇王帝霸之道，兴亡理乱之体，其可闻乎？
现代文：那样的人才也无法获得并使之显贵了。这样古代先王的思想、学说，兴衰治乱的根本道理，难道还能听到吗？
English: That kind of talent cannot be obtained and made prominent. Can the thoughts and doctrines of the ancient kings, the fundamental principles of rising and falling and managing chaos, still be heard?

古文：今足下何乃赞扬今之小巧，而隳张古之大体？
现代文：现在你却赞扬如今诗赋的小小的技巧，而损害了发扬古代圣贤的传统思想、美德的大的根本的谋划。
English: Now you are praising the small technicalities of today's poetry, to the detriment of the great fundamental project of promoting the traditional ideas and virtues of the ancient sages.

古文：况予乃诉皓月长歌之手，岂能拘于雕文刻句者哉。
现代文：况且我是个喜欢面对明月、高声吟咏、抒发感情的人，怎能受得了雕文刻句的束缚呢？
English: Moreover, I am a person who likes to face the bright moon, sing aloud, and express emotions. How can I be bound by carved sentences?

古文：今珠露既清，桂月如昼，吟咏时发，杯觞间行，能援笔联句，赋今之体调一章，以乐长夜否？
现代文：现在露珠已散尽，桂月朗照，如同白昼吟诗作赋的兴致即时而发，能频频举杯、提笔联句，吟咏现在的诗体一首，以便在长夜中相娱乐吗？
English: Now that the dewdrops have dispersed and the waxing gibbous moon shines brightly, can you raise your glass frequently, take up your pen to write a couplet, and recite a poem in the current verse, so as to be entertained during the long night?

古文：曰：何以为题？
现代文：长胡子说：以什么为题？
English: The long-bearded man said, "What is it about?"

古文：长须云：便以妾换马为题，仍以舍彼倾城，求其骏足为韵。
现代文：络腮胡子说：就以以妾换马为题。仍以舍其倾城之色，求其骏足为韵。
English: Luo Yao's mustache said, "It's about changing horses for concubines. It's still a rhyme about abandoning one's beloved and seeking one's footing."

古文：命左右折庭前芭蕉一片，启书囊，抽毫以操之，各占一韵。
现代文：命令左右的人折下庭前一片芭蕉叶，打开书囊，取出毛笔握在手中、各占一韵。
English: The person on the right or left is ordered to fold down a plantain leaf in front of the court, open the book bag, take out the brush and hold it in their hands, and each account for one rhyme.

古文：长须者唱云：彼佳人兮，如琼之瑛；此良马兮，负骏之名。
现代文：络腮胡子吟道：彼佳人兮，如琼之瑛；此良马兮，负骏之名。
English: "He is a good person, just like Qiong Ziying; this good horse is named Guo Zi Rong.

古文：将有求于逐日，故何惜于倾城？
现代文：将有求于逐日，故何惜于倾城。
English: There will be a demand for day-by-day, so why not go for it.

古文：香暖深闺，永厌桃花之色；风清广陌，曾怜喷玉之声。
现代文：香暖深闺，永厌桃花之色；风清广陌，曾怜喷玉之声。
English: Fragrant and warm, she is the color of peach blossoms; windy and clear, she is the voice of jade.

古文：希逸曰：原夫人之矜其容，马乃称其德。
现代文：希逸曰：原夫人之矜其容，马乃称其德。
English: Xiyi said, "The former first lady's beauty is in her face, but her virtue is in her heart."

古文：既各从其所好，谅何求而不克。
现代文：既各从其所好，谅何求而不克。
English: Let each one do what he likes, and do not refuse what you ask for.

古文：长跪而别，姿容休耀其金钿；右牵而来，光彩顿生于玉勒。
现代文：长跪而别，姿容休耀其金钿；右牵而来，光彩顿生于玉勒。
English: Long kneeled and parted, his countenance still shines with its golden beak; drawn to the right, brilliance is suddenly born in the emerald.

古文：文通曰：步及庭砌，效当轩墀。
现代文：文通曰：步及庭砌，效当轩墀。
English: The correspondent said, "Step by step, the garden is built, and the effect is spectacular."

古文：望新恩，惧非吾偶也；恋旧主，疑借人乘之。
现代文：望新恩，惧非吾偶也；恋旧主，疑借人乘之。
English: Hope for new blessings, fear of not being able to obtain them; love for the old master, and distrust of others.

古文：香散绿骏，意已忘于鬓发；汗流红颔，爱无异于凝脂。
现代文：香散绿尽，意已忘于鬓发；汗流红颔，爱无异于凝脂。
English: The fragrance has faded, the meaning has been forgotten; the sweat is red, and the love is tantamount to curd.

古文：希逸曰：是知事有兴废，用有取舍。
现代文：希逸曰：是知事有兴废，用有取舍。
English: Xi Yiyi said: It is the governor who has the power of choice.

古文：彼以绝代之容为鲜矣，此以轶群之足为贵者。
现代文：彼以绝代之容为鲜矣，此以轶群之足为贵者。
English: It is rare for him to have a peerless appearance, so he takes the foot of the egret as the noble one.

古文：买笑之恩既尽，有类卜之；据鞍之力尚存，犹希进也。
现代文：买笑之恩既尽。有类卜之；据鞍之力尚存，犹希进也。
English: The grace of buying laughter has been exhausted. There is a similarity; as far as the power of the saddle is concerned, it is still possible.

古文：文通赋四韵讫，芭蕉尽。韦生发箧取红笺，跪献于庑下。
现代文：文通赋四韵写完，芭蕉叶已经用完，韦生打开箱子、拿出红格的纸，跪在厢房前献给他。
English: After he finished writing the four rhymes of Wen Tong Fu, and the plantain leaves had been used up, Wei Sheng opened the box, took out the red-checked paper, and knelt in front of the room to dedicate it to him.

古文：二人大惊曰：幽显路殊，何见逼之若是？然吾子非后有爵录，不可与鄙夫相遇。
现代文：二人非常吃惊的说：我们与他阴阳隔世，道路不同，怎么能这样强求我们，然而你我都不是不要封爵受禄的人，不能再与世间的庸俗鄙陋的人相见。
English: The two were very surprised and said, "We have been separated from him for a long time, and our paths are different. How can you force us like this? However, neither you nor I are people who do not want to be knighted, and we can no longer meet with the vulgar and despicable people of the world."

古文：谓生曰：异日主文柄，较量俊秀轻重，无以小巧为意也。
现代文：又对韦生说：他日你如果掌握以文章取士的权柄，衡量优劣高下，不要把小小的技巧放在心上。
English: He also said to Wesson: "If one day you have the power to recruit students with essays, and measure their merits and demerits, don't worry about small skills.

古文：言讫，二公行十余步间，忽不知其所在矣。梁璟
现代文：说完，二个人走了十几步，忽然不知去向了。梁璟
English: After saying this, the two of them walked more than a dozen steps, and suddenly they didn't know where to go.

古文：有梁璟者，开成中，自长沙将举孝廉，途次商山，舍于馆亭中。
现代文：有个叫梁璟的，开成年中，从长沙出发去参加选拔孝廉的考试。途中停留在商山。住宿在馆亭中。
English: There was a middle-aged man named Liang Qian, who set out from Changsha to take part in the examination for selecting filial piety. On the way, he stayed in Shangshan. He stayed in a pavilion.

古文：时八月十五夕，天雨新霁，风月高朗，璟偃而不寐。
现代文：当时正好是八月十五晚上，雨过天晴，空气清新、明月高悬。梁璟躺下而没有睡着。
English: At that time, it was the evening of August 15th, the rain had passed and the sky was clear, the air was fresh, and the bright moon was high overhead. Liang Yao lay down but did not fall asleep.

古文：至夜半，忽见三丈夫，衣冠甚古，皆被珠绿，徐步而来。
现代文：到半夜，忽然看见三个男子，衣帽装束都很古老，全都穿着绿色衣服，珠光宝气的，漫步向这边走来。
English: In the middle of the night, I suddenly saw three men, dressed in very old clothes and hats, all wearing green clothes, pearly and precious, strolling towards me.

古文：至庭中，且吟且赏，从者数人。
现代文：到了庭院里，一边吟诵，一边观赏，后面跟着许多人。
English: When they arrived at the courtyard, they chanted and watched while being followed by many people.

古文：璟心知其鬼也，然素有胆气，因降阶揖之。
现代文：梁璟虽然知道他们是鬼，但是他历来有胆量，于是走下台阶向那三个人拱手见礼。
English: Although he knew that they were ghosts, Liang Jun, who always had courage, walked down the steps and bowed to the three people.

古文：三人亦无惧色，自称萧中郎、王步兵、诸葛长史。
现代文：那三个人也没有一点畏惧的神色，他们自称是萧三郎，王步兵、诸葛长史。
English: The three men didn't look scared at all. They claimed to be Xiaosaburo, Wang Fusiliers, and Zhuge Changshi.

古文：即命席坐于庭中，曰：不意良夜遇君于此！因呼其童曰：玉山取酒。
现代文：随即就命设筵在院子里，各自坐下。那三个人对梁璟说：没料到今晚良霄佳节能跟您在这里相见，于是召呼童仆说：玉山拿酒来！
English: The three men said to Liang Yao, "I didn't expect to see you here tonight, Liang Yao, Liang Yao, so I called my boy servant and said, "Yushan, bring me some wine!"

古文：酒至，环席递酌。
现代文：酒拿来后，就环绕座席依次斟酒。
English: After the wine is brought, the wine is poured around the seats in turn.

古文：已而王步兵曰：值此好风月，况佳宾在席，不可无诗也。
现代文：一会儿，王步兵说：当着这样大好的风光岁月，又有佳宾在座，不能没有诗啊，应该命题联句来歌咏中秋之月。
English: After a while, Wang Fuxing said, "In the face of such a beautiful scenery and good guests, we can't do without a poem. We should write a couplet to sing the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：因举题联句，以咏秋月，步兵即首为之曰：秋月圆如镜萧中郎曰：秋风利似刀。
现代文：王步兵首先诵道：秋月圆如镜。萧三郎吟道：秋风利似刀。梁璟吟诵道：秋云轻比絮。
English: Wang Fuxing first chanted: The autumn moon is round like a mirror. Xiaosaburo chanted: The autumn wind is like a sword. Liang Kun chanted: The autumn clouds are lighter than the snow.

古文：璟曰：秋云轻比絮。次至诸葛长史，嘿然久之，二人促曰：幸以拙速为事。
现代文：最后轮到诸葛长史，诸葛沉默了许久，另外二人催促他说：不要以笨拙和速度快慢为借口。
English: Finally, it was Zhuge Changshi's turn. Zhuge was silent for a long time. The other two urged him: Don't use clumsiness and speed as an excuse.

古文：长史沉吟，又食顷，乃曰：秋草细同毛。
现代文：长史沉吟不语，又过了一顿饭时间，才吟出秋草细同毛。
English: Changshi chanted silently, and it took another meal time before he chanted "autumn grass is fine with hair."

古文：二人皆大笑曰：拙则拙矣，何乃迟乎？
现代文：萧三郎和王部兵听了都大笑说：拙是拙了些，为什么这样慢呢？
English: When Xiao Saburo and the royal soldiers heard this, they all laughed loudly and said, "I'm a bit clumsy, why are you so slow?"

古文：长史曰：此中郎过耳，为僻韵而滞捷才。
现代文：长史说：这是萧中郎的过错，我是为了避开生僻的音韵，才限制了我的速度。
English: "It's Xiao Zhonglang's fault," said Changshi. "I limited my speed in order to avoid unfamiliar rhymes."

古文：既而中郎又曰：良会不可无酒佐，命玉山召惠娘来。
现代文：不一会儿，中郎又说：良辰聚会不能没有酒来助兴。就让玉山召惠娘来。
English: After a while, Nakahiro said again, "A good time party can't be without wine to add to the fun. Let Yushan call Hui Niang."

古文：玉山去，顷之，有一美人，鲜衣自门步来，笑而拜坐客。诸葛长史戏谓女郎曰：自赴中郎召耳。与吾何事？
现代文：玉山去了，一会儿，有一个美人，穿着很鲜艳的衣服，从门里出来，笑吟吟地与席间各位拜会，诸葛长史开玩笑地对女郎说：我自去接受中郎征召罢了，与你有什么关系？
English: Yushan went, and a moment later, a beautiful woman, dressed in very bright clothes, came out of the door, laughing and chanting with everyone at the table. Zhuge Changshi jokingly said to the girl: I just went to accept the Zhonglang conscription, what does it have to do with you?

古文：美人曰：安知不为众人来？
现代文：美人说：你怎么知道我不是为了别人而来？
English: The beauty said: "How do you know I'm not here for someone else?

古文：步兵曰：欲自明，无如歌以送长史酒。
现代文：王步兵说：最聪明的办法莫过于唱一支曲子，劝长史进酒了。
English: Wang Fuxing said: The smartest way is to sing a song to persuade Changshi to drink.

古文：惠娘起曰：愿歌凤楼之曲。
现代文：惠娘起身说：愿唱凤楼一曲。
English: Hui Niang stood up and said, "I would like to sing a phoenix tower song."

古文：即歌之，清吟怨慕，璟听之忘倦。
现代文：于是就开始唱。淡淡地倾吐哀怨，慕艳之情。梁璟听了之后顿时忘了疲倦。
English: So she began to sing. She gently poured out her sorrow and yearning for Yan. After listening to her, Liang Wei suddenly forgot her tiredness.

古文：久而歌阕，中郎又歌。曲既终曰：山光渐明，愿更缀一篇，以尽欢也。
现代文：很久，唱完了。中郎又唱，唱完之后说：山色天光渐亮，愿再联缀一篇，以便尽享欢乐啊！
English: After a long time, the song was over. The middle-aged man sang again, and after he had finished he said: "The mountain sky is getting brighter, I would like to add one more song so that I can fully enjoy the joy!"

古文：即曰：山树高高影。
现代文：训吟诵道：山树高高影。
English: The chanting of the precepts: Mountains and trees cast high shadows.

古文：步兵曰：山花寂寂香。
现代文：王步兵接着吟道：山花寂寂香。
English: Wang Fuxing then chanted, "The mountain flowers are sad and fragrant."

古文：因指长史曰：向者僻韵，信中郎过，分愿续此，以观捷才耳。
现代文：吟完指着长史说：方才是为了回避冷僻的音韵，确实是中郎错怪了你。现在该接续往下联句。以便让大家见识你敏捷的才能。
English: After chanting, he pointed to Nagashi and said, "Fang is the one who avoided the eccentric melody. It's true that Zhongro misjudged you. Now it's time to continue with the next couplet, so that everyone can see your agile talent."

古文：长史应曰：山天遥历历。
现代文：长史应和吟道：山天遥历历。
English: The long history should be in harmony with the chanting: the mountain is far away.

古文：一坐大笑：迟不如速，而且拙，捷才如是耶？
现代文：满座的人都大笑。说：吟得慢的，不如吟得快的，而且又拙笨。原来是这样的敏捷之才啊！
English: Everyone in the auditorium burst out laughing. They said, "If you sing slowly, it's better to sing fast, and you're clumsy. You're such a quick talent!"

古文：长史色不能平。
现代文：长史显出不平的神色。
English: Nagashi's expression turned sullen.

古文：次至璟曰：山水急汤汤。
现代文：其次轮到梁璟，梁璟吟道：山水急汤汤。
English: Next, it was Liang Hui's turn. Liang Hui chanted, "Landscape, rush, rush."

古文：中郎泛言赏之，乃问璟曰：君非举进士者乎。
现代文：中郎用空洞言辞假意赞美，又问梁璟说：你不是中了进士吗？
English: Zhongro pretended to praise him with empty words, and then asked Liang Qi, "Aren't you the winner?

古文：璟曰：将举孝廉科。
现代文：梁璟说：将去考取孝廉。
English: Liang Jun said: I will go to take the entrance examination for Xiaolian.

古文：中郎笑曰：孝廉安知为诗哉？
现代文：中郎叽笑说：孝廉怎么明白写诗联句呢？
English: Zhong Lang said with a smile, "How does Xiaolian know how to write a couplet?

古文：璟因怒叱之，长史亦奋袂而起，坐客惊散，遂失所在，而杯盘亦无见矣。
现代文：梁璟因此大声呵叱他。长史也挽起袖子愤怒的站起来，满席的坐客都惊散了，不知去向，就连杯盘也不见了。
English: As a result, Liang Qi loudly scolded him. Chang Shi also rolled up his sleeves and stood up angrily. The full-seated guests were shocked and dispersed. I don't know where they went, even the cups and plates were gone.

古文：璟自是被疾恍惚，往往梦中郎步兵来，心甚恶之。
现代文：梁璟从此患病，精神恍惚，常常梦见中郎和步兵来。心里很厌恶。
English: From then on, Liang Jun fell ill and was in a daze. He often dreamed of middlemen and foot soldiers. He was disgusted.

古文：后至长安，遇术士李生辟鬼符佩之，遂绝也。
现代文：以后到了长安，遇见一个掌握法术的李生给他写了驱鬼符带上，于是以上的情况就消失了。
English: Later, when he arrived in Chang'an, he met a man named Li Sheng who had mastered magic and wrote an exorcism charm on his belt, so the above situation disappeared.

古文：崔御史
现代文：崔御史
English: Choi Mi-shi

古文：广陵有官舍，地步数百，制置宠丽。
现代文：广陵有官舍，方圆几百步。建造宏伟、华丽。
English: Guangling has an official residence, a few hundred paces in radius. The building is magnificent and gorgeous.

古文：里中传其中为鬼所宅，故居之者，一夕则暴死。
现代文：乡里传说那里是鬼住的屋子。所以住在那里面的人，一个晚上就突然死了。
English: According to the village legend, it was a haunted house, so the people who lived there died suddenly one night.

古文：锁闭累年矣。
现代文：到现在已经封锁关闭多年了。
English: By now, the blockade has been closed for years.

古文：有御史崔某，职于广陵。
现代文：有一个姓崔的御史，在广陵任职。
English: There was an imperial historian surnamed Cui who served in Guangling.

古文：至，开门曰：沃不自作，我新居之，岂能为灾耶？
现代文：到了这官舍，打开门说：妖怪，不要再闹事了。我刚刚住在这儿，怎能害我呢？
English: When he arrived at the official residence, he opened the door and said, "Yokai, don't cause any more trouble. I've only just moved here, how could they harm me?"

古文：即白廉使而居焉。
现代文：于是就住在白廉使住过的那个地方。
English: So he lived in the same place where Bai Liangzhu used to live.

古文：是夕微雨，崔君命仆者尽居他室，而独寝于堂中，惕然而寝。衣尽沾湿，即起。
现代文：这天晚上下小雨，崔御史让奴仆都住在其它房间。自己住在厅堂中。很担心地睡下了，衣服全浸湿了。
English: It was drizzling that evening, so Choe Gosei asked his servants to stay in other rooms while he stayed in the hall. He was worried and fell asleep, his clothes soaking wet.

古文：见己之卧榻在庭中，却寝。
现代文：起身以后，才知道自己睡的床席是在院子里。
English: After getting up, I realized that the bed I was sleeping on was in the yard.

古文：未食顷，其榻又适于庭中。如是者三。
现代文：他搬回床席又在原处睡下了，没到一顿饭工夫，他的床席又迁到院子里，象这样反复搬了三次。
English: He moved back to his bed and fell asleep again in the same place, and before he had time for a meal, his bed was moved again to the courtyard, and this was repeated three times.

古文：崔曰：我谓天下无鬼，今则果有矣。
现代文：崔御史说：我认为天下无鬼，现在果然有鬼呀。
English: "I thought there were no ghosts in the world, but now there are ghosts," Cui said.

古文：即具簪笏，命酒沃而祝曰：吾闻居此者多暴死，且人神殊道，当自安其居，岂害生人耶？
现代文：就让人准备簪笔和笏板等祭祀的穿戴的礼服，命人洒酒亲自祷告说：我听说住在这儿的很多人都突然死了，况神和人不同世而居，应该各自安于自己的生活，怎么能危害活人呢？
English: So he had people prepare the ceremonial robes to be worn for the sacrifice, such as quill pens and cutting boards, and ordered people to sprinkle wine. He prayed in person and said, "I have heard that many people who live here have died suddenly. Moreover, gods and people do not live in the same world. They should each be content with their own lives. How can they harm the living?

古文：虽苟以形见，以声闻者，是其负冤郁而将有诉者，或将求一饭以祭者，则见于人。而人自惊悸而死，固非神灵害之也。
现代文：即使苟且让人看到鬼的形态，听见鬼的声音，这也是他们有冤郁想告诉世人，或求得世人用饭食祭祀啊。那么让人看见鬼，人惊吓而死，本来不是神灵害他们啊。
English: Even if they let people see the shape of the ghost and hear the voice of the ghost, this is because they have a grievance and want to tell the world, or ask the world to use food as a sacrifice. So if people see the ghost and die of fright, it is not the gods who have harmed them.

古文：沃而祝者三，俄闻空中有言曰：君人也，我鬼也。
现代文：我虽然愚笨，但我毫不畏惧，如果真有什么冤屈要说，就直截了当地对我讲，我可以帮助实现你的托付。即使赴汤蹈火也不推辞。
English: Although I am stupid, I am not afraid. If you really have something to complain about, you can tell me directly that I can help you achieve your mission. Even if you go through hell, you will not refuse.

古文：诚不当以鬼干人，直将以深诚奉告。
现代文：象这样洒酒祷告三次。一会儿听到空中说道：你是人，我是鬼，确实不该让人见鬼啊。只是我有冤情，想真诚的告诉你。
English: Like this, he sprinkled wine and prayed three times. A moment later, he was heard in the air saying: "You are a human being, I am a ghost, I really shouldn't give a damn. But I have a grievance, and I want to tell you sincerely."

古文：崔曰：但言之。
现代文：崔御史说：你只管说吧。
English: Choi Mi-shi said, "Just say it."

古文：鬼曰：我女子也，女弟兄三人，俱未笄而殁，父母葬我于郡城之北久矣。
现代文：鬼说：我是女子，我有姊妹三人。都未成年就死了，父母把我们埋在县城北已经很久了。
English: The ghost said, "I am a girl, and I have three sisters. They all died when they were minors, and my parents have been burying us in the northern part of the county for a long time.

古文：其后府公于此峻城池，构城屋。
现代文：那以后，府公在这建城池、造新房。
English: After that, the prefectural governor built a castle and new houses here.

古文：工人伐我封内树且尽，又徙我于此堂之东北隅。羁魂不宁，无所栖托。
现代文：作工的人把我们墓地里的树几乎砍光了，又把我们迁到这座房子的东北角，使得我们的灵魂不得安宁，无处栖身。
English: The workmen have cut down almost all the trees in our graveyard and moved us to the north-east corner of this house, leaving us with no peace of mind and nowhere to live.

古文：不期今夕，幸遇明君子，故我得以语其冤。
现代文：不料今晚有幸见到你这聪慧公子，我才能诉说冤情。
English: Unexpectedly, I had the good fortune to meet you tonight, you clever young man, so that I could air my grievances.

古文：倘君以仁心，为我棺而葬于野，真恩之大者矣。
现代文：假如能靠你的仁慈为我们棺木移葬到旷野，对我们真是最大的恩惠了。
English: It would be a great favour to us if, through your kindness, we could have our coffin removed and buried in the wilderness.

古文：已而涕泣呜咽，又曰：我在此十年矣。前后所居者，皆欲诉其事，自是居人惊悸而死。
现代文：说完就哭起来。一会儿又说，我在这十年了，对于前后住在这里的人，我都想说这件事，只是那些人都惊吓而死。
English: After saying this, she began to cry. A moment later, she added, "I've been here for ten years, and I want to tell this to everyone who lived here before and after, but they all died of fright."

古文：某儿女子，非有害于人也。
现代文：我是女子，并不是有意想害别人。
English: I'm a woman and I didn't mean to hurt anyone.

古文：崔曰：吾前言固如是矣。虽然，如何不见我耶？
现代文：崔御史说：我先前说的话就是这个意思，既然这样，为什么不让我见见你？
English: Cui said, "That's what I meant when I said earlier. In that case, why don't you let me see you?"

古文：鬼曰：某鬼也，岂敢以幽晦之质而见君乎？
现代文：鬼说：我是鬼，怎敢凭阴司的形骸去见你呢？
English: The ghost said: I am a ghost, how dare I go to see you with the remains of my vagina?

古文：既诺我之请，虽然冥昧中，亦当感君子恩。
现代文：既然你答应了我的请求，我即使在幽府中，也一定感谢你的大恩，怎能白白地就此了却。
English: Since you have agreed to my request, I am sure to thank you for your great favor, even in a remote place. How could I have done this for nothing?

古文：岂可徒然而已？
现代文：说完，就告辞而去。
English: With that, he bade farewell and left.

古文：言讫，遂告去。明日，召工人，于堂东北隅发之，果得枯骸，葬于禅智寺隙地。
现代文：第二天，崔御使召作工的人，在官舍东北角挖掘，果然挖出骨骸，把它埋葬到禅智寺的空地里。
English: On the next day, Cui Guanzhong called for workers to dig in the northeast corner of the official residence, and they dug out the skeleton and buried it in the open space of the Zenchi Temple.

古文：里人皆祭之，谓之三女坟。
现代文：乡里人都去祭奠她们，把这坟叫作三女坟。
English: The villagers all went to pay tribute to them, calling this grave the Three Women's Grave.

古文：自是其宅遂安。
现代文：从此那座宅子就平安无事了。
English: The house has been safe ever since.

古文：曹唐
现代文：曹唐
English: Cao Tang

古文：进士曹唐，以能诗，名闻当世，久举不第，常寓居江陵佛寺中亭沼。
现代文：进士曹唐因为能写诗，闻名于世，但长期科考，屡次不中。常来江陵佛寺中亭沼这个地方。
English: Conscript Cao Tang is famous in the world for being able to write poetry, but he has repeatedly failed to pass the long-term scientific research. He often comes to this place in the middle of the Gangneung Buddhist Temple.

古文：境甚幽胜，每自临玩赋诗，得两句曰：水底有天云漠漠，人间无路月茫茫。
现代文：这地方因为环境幽静而有名。
English: The area is renowned for its tranquil setting.

古文：吟之未久，自以为常制者不及此作。
现代文：曹唐每天都到这里游玩、赋诗。写出水底有天云漠漠，人间无路月茫茫的诗句。吟了不长时间，自认为以前写的都不如这两句。
English: Cao Tang visited here every day to play and compose poems. He wrote a poem about the sky being cloudy and desolate under the water, and the world being without a path. After chanting for a short time, he felt that he was not as good as the two poems he had written before.

古文：一日还坐亭沼上，方用怡咏，忽见二妇人，衣素衣，貌甚闲冶，徐步而吟，则是唐前所做之二句也。
现代文：一天，还是坐在亭沼上，刚要尽情朗诵，忽然看见两个妇人，穿着白衣裳，样子很闲适，姿色艳丽、慢步而来，口中吟诵的正是曹唐前日写的两句诗。
English: One day, still sitting on the pavilion, just about to recite to his heart's content, he suddenly saw two women, dressed in white, looking very relaxed, with a beautiful appearance, walking slowly, and reciting exactly the two lines of poetry that Cao Tang had written the day before.

古文：唐自以制未翌日，人固未有知者，何遽而得之。
现代文：唐心想：自写这两句诗，没过两天，别人固然不知，怎么立刻让她二人知道？
English: Tang thought to himself, "If I write these two lines of poetry by myself in two days, and others don't know about it, how can I let them know about it immediately?"

古文：因迫而迅之，不应而去。
现代文：于是赶忙去问那二位妇人，那二人不应而去。
English: So he went quickly to the two women and asked them if they wanted to leave.

古文：未十步间，不见矣。
现代文：未到十几步远，就不见了。
English: It didn't get more than a dozen paces away before it disappeared.

古文：唐方甚疑怪，唐素与寺僧法舟善，因言于舟。
现代文：唐正为此感到疑惑奇怪。曹唐平素与寺僧法舟很要好，于是把这情况告诉法舟。
English: Tang Zheng was puzzled and puzzled by this. Cao Tang Pingxu was very friendly with the temple monk Fazhou, so he told Fazhou about this situation.

古文：舟惊曰：两日前，有一少年见访，怀一碧笺，示我此诗。
现代文：法舟吃惊地说：两天前，有一青年来访，怀中揣着蓝色纸笺，让我看这两句诗，我正要跟他搭话，他又让我看 唐 字。
English: "Two days ago, a young man came to visit me, carrying a blue paper bag in his arms. He asked me to read these two poems. I was about to strike up a conversation with him, but he asked me to read the Chinese characters.

古文：乃出示唐，颇惘然。数日后，唐卒于佛舍中。
现代文：此后，曹唐精神恍惚，几天后死在佛寺中。
English: After that, Cao Tang fell into a trance and died in a Buddhist temple a few days later.

