古文：山师掌山林之名，辨其物与其利害，而颁之于邦国，使致其珍异之物。
现代文：山师掌管山林的名号，辨别山中的物产，以及有利或有害于人的动、植物，而划分给诸侯国，使他们进贡珍异的物产。
English: The mountain master controlled the names of the mountains and forests, distinguishing the goods in the mountains, as well as the animals and plants that were beneficial or harmful to humans, and dividing them into vassal states, making them pay tribute to rare goods.

古文：川师掌川泽之名，辨其物与其利害而颁之于邦国，使致其珍异之物。
现代文：川师掌管河流和湖泊的名号，辨别其中的物产，以及有利或有害于人的动、植物，而划分给诸侯国，使他们进贡珍异的物产。
English: The river masters controlled the names of rivers and lakes, distinguishing the goods in them, as well as animals and plants that were beneficial or harmful to humans, and dividing them into vassal states, making them pay tribute to rare goods.

古文：师掌四方之地名，辨其丘陵、坟衍、显之名物之可以封邑者。
现代文：原师掌管四方的地形之名，辨别丘、陵、坟、衍、原、隰的名称和物产、辨别其中可以划分出来建造居邑的地方。
English: The original division is in charge of the names of the four-square terrain, distinguishing the names and properties of hills, tombs, graves, yans, yans, and ridges, and distinguishing the places that can be divided out to build villages.

古文：匡人掌达法则，匡邦国，而观其慝，使无敢反侧，以听王命。
现代文：匡人负责宣达八法、八则，用以匡正诸侯国，而观察是否有为奸作恶的，使他们不敢违背法度，而听从王的命令。
English: Constituents are responsible for promulgating the eight laws and eight principles, which are used to rectify the provinces, and observe whether there are traitors and evildoers, so that they do not dare to violate the laws and obey the king's orders.

古文：撢人掌诵王志道国之政事，以巡天下邦国国而语之，使万民和说而正王面。
现代文：撢人掌管诵说王的心志，讲述王国的政事，通过巡行天下的诸侯国而告诉他们，使万民和睦高兴而心向王。
English: The eunuchs were in charge of reciting the king's will, telling the political affairs of the kingdom, and telling them by touring the principalities of the world, so that all the people would be happy and have a heart for the king.

古文：都司马，掌都之士、庶子及其众庶车马、兵甲之戒令，以国法掌其政学，以听国司马。
现代文：都司马掌管有关都中士、庶子和兵众、车马、兵甲的戒令，依照国法掌管有关他们的政教，而听命于大司马的属官。
English: In accordance with the national law, the Grand Steward of the Capital shall be in charge of the political and religious affairs of the sergeants, illegitimate children, soldiers, chariots, horses, and armor of the Capital, and shall obey the subordinate officers of the Grand Steward of the Capital.

古文：家司马，亦如之。
现代文：家司马的职掌也是这样。
English: This is also the case with the duties of the house steward.

