古文：王继勋，陕州平陆人。
现代文：王继勋，陕州平陆人。
English: Wang Jixun, from Pinglu, Shaanxi Province.

古文：隶河中府为牙校。李守贞之叛，令继勋据潼关，为郭从义所破，走还河中。
现代文：隶属河中府任中下级军官，李守贞反叛，命王继勋据守潼关，但被郭从义所击败，逃回河中。
English: Li Shouzhen, a mid-to-low-ranking officer under the Central Government of Hebei Province, rebelled and ordered Wang Jixun to guard Shaoguan, but he was defeated by Guo Congyi and fled back to Hebei Province.

古文：俄白文珂、刘词领兵至城下，守贞又遣继勋与其爱将聂知遇夜出攻河西砦，复为汉兵所败，被创而遁。
现代文：不久白文珂、刘词领军兵临城下，李守贞又派王继勋与其心腹将领聂知遇在晚上出兵攻打河西砦，再次被汉兵所击败，受挫而逃。
English: Soon after, Bai Wenke and Liu Zhi led the soldiers to the outskirts of the city, and Li Shouzhen also sent Wang Jixun and his henchman general Yu Zhidi to attack the Hexi Fort in the evening. They were once again defeated by the Chinese soldiers and fled in frustration.

古文：继勋度守贞必败，遂逾城出降，周祖奏补供奉官。
现代文：王继勋估计李守贞必败，于是越城出来投降，后周太祖奏补他为供奉官。
English: Wang Jixun estimated that Li Shouzhen would be defeated, so Yuecheng came out to surrender, and later Zhou Taizu made him a tributary officer.

古文：广顺初，领汾州刺史，充晋、磁、隰等州缘边巡检，历宪、麟、石、磁四州刺史。
现代文：后周广顺初，王继勋任汾州刺史，兼晋、磁、隰等州缘边巡检，历任宪、麟、石、磁四州刺史。
English: Later, at the beginning of Zhou Guangshun, Wang Jixun was appointed as the chief historian of Shanzhou, and he also inspected the periphery of Shanzhou such as Jin, Magnetism, and Zou, and successively served as the chief historian of Shanzhou, Lin, Shi, and Magnetism.

古文：宋初，迁磁州团练使，坐境上用兵失律、荆罕儒陷阵，责授右监门卫率。
现代文：宋初，王继勋迁任磁州团练使，因边境用兵不当、荆罕儒失陷战场之罪，受责降职授右监门卫率。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Wang Jixun was transferred to the position of the training envoy of the Chenzhou Regiment. Due to the crime of improper use of troops on the border and the loss of Jinghan Ru on the battlefield, he was ordered to reduce his position to the rank of right guard.

古文：初平荆襄，命权知道州，未几，授本州刺史。
现代文：开始平定荆襄之地，命王继勋权知道州，没多久，授任道州刺史。
English: He began to pacify the land of Jingxiang, and was appointed as the prefect of Guizhou Province, and soon he was appointed as the prefect of Doushou Province.

古文：州境与广南接，刘鋹屡引兵入寇，继勋因上言岭表可图之状。
现代文：道州境与广南相接，刘钅长屡次领兵入侵，王继勋于是上书说岭南可图的情形。
English: The border between Doushou and Guangnan adjoined, Liu Yuchang repeatedly led troops to invade, and Wang Jixun then wrote a letter saying that Lingnan could be the situation.

古文：出为高阳关兵马钤辖，淳化二年，卒于官。
现代文：等到宋朝军队南伐，以王继勋任贺州道行营马步军都监。王继勋威武勇敢，在战场，常用铁鞭、铁槊、铁木过，军中称之为 王三铁 。
English: When the Song Dynasty army went to the south, Wang Jixun was appointed as the inspector of the horse-marching army in the Hezhou Road. Wang Jixun was brave and brave. In the battlefield, he often used iron whips, iron hoes, and iron ladders. In the army, he was called Wang San Tie.

古文：翟守素，济州任城人。
现代文：翟守素，济州任城人。
English: Zou Shousu, a resident of Jeju.

古文：父溥，晋左司御率府率。
现代文：父亲翟溥，为后晋左司御率府率。
English: His father,, was later promoted to the position of Sasaji (Minister of the Left) and became the prefectural governor.

古文：守素以父任为殿直，历汉、周，迁供奉官，领承天军使。
现代文：翟守素因父亲官职之故任殿直，历后汉、后周，升为供奉官，管领承天军使。
English: Because of his father's official position, he was appointed to be a courtier, and after Han and Zhou dynasties, he was promoted to be an official in charge of the imperial envoys.

古文：乾德中，为引进副使，从王全斌伐蜀，以往来驰告军事为职。
现代文：宋乾德年间，他为引进副使，跟随王全斌伐蜀，以来回奔跑报告军事情况为职。
English: During the Song Qiande era, he was responsible for the introduction of deputy envoys, followed Wang Quanbin to attack Shu, and since then has been running back and forth to report the military situation.

古文：蜀平，擢判四方馆事。
现代文：蜀平定后，升为判四方馆事。
English: After Shu was pacified, it was elevated to the status of a four-party liaison office.

古文：以两川余寇未殄，虑致骚动，再令守素入蜀经略诸郡，分兵以防遏之。
现代文：宋廷以两川反叛余党未灭，担心招致骚乱，再令翟守素入蜀经略诸郡，分兵用以防守阻遏敌人。
English: Song Ting, with the remnants of the rebel parties in the two rivers not yet extinguished, was worried about inciting riots. He then ordered his retainers to enter the counties of Shu Jingliu, and divided his troops to defend and deter the enemy.

古文：开宝中，会麟、府内属戎人争地不决，因致扰乱，命守素驰往抚喻。
现代文：开宝年间，恰逢麟、府州内附的戎人争地纠纷没能解决，因而导致扰乱，朝廷命翟守素迅速前往安抚晓谕。
English: During the Kibo era, the dispute over land between the people of Rin and the people of Ebisu, both of which were annexed to Fuzhou, could not be resolved, which led to disturbances. The imperial court ordered the emperor to quickly go to pacify the situation.

古文：守素辨其曲直，戎人悦服。
现代文：他辨明是非曲直，戎人心悦诚服。
English: He discerns right and wrong, and wins the hearts of the people.

古文：从征太原，命海州刺史孙方进围汾州，守素监其军，转引进使。
现代文：他跟随皇帝征太原，皇帝命海州刺史孙方进围汾州，命翟守素监军，转任引进使。
English: He followed the emperor to conquer Taiyuan, the emperor ordered Haizhou to besiege Shishifang to encircle Luzhou, and he was appointed as the envoy of introduction.

古文：开宝三年，命为剑南十州都巡检使，东上阁门使郭崇信副之。
现代文：开宝三年，翟守素受命任剑南十州都巡检使，东上门使郭崇信为其副职。
English: In the third year of Kaibao, Zou Shousu was appointed as the inspector of the ten states in southern Jian, and Guo Chongxin, the envoy to the east, became his deputy.

古文：赐守素钱五百万，入谢日，复遣为岐帅符彦卿官告使。
现代文：赏赐翟守素钱五百万，他入朝答谢皇帝的那天，皇帝又派他为岐州帅臣符彦卿官告使。
English: On the day when he entered the court to thank the emperor for awarding him five million rupees, the emperor also sent him as the official messenger of the Qizhou courtier Fu Yanqing.

古文：守素辞以锡赍优厚，不敢更当奉使之诏，上不许。
现代文：他以赏赐甚优厚不敢再当奉使之诏相辞，皇帝不答应。
English: The emperor did not agree to his offer of a very generous reward, as he no longer dared to make it a condition of the imperial edict.

古文：九年，吴越国王钱俶来朝，命守素护诸司供帐，迎劳郊外。
现代文：开宝九年，吴越国王钱亻叔来宋朝见，皇帝命翟守素护卫诸司供帐，在郊外迎接慰劳。
English: In the ninth year of Kaibao, the king of Wuyue, Qian Rongshu, came to the Song Dynasty to meet with the emperor. The emperor ordered the guards to provide the account and welcome the consolation in the suburbs.

古文：并垒未下，诏与洺州防御使郭进率兵深入其境，蹈藉禾稼，守素多所虏获。
现代文：当时并州堡垒没攻克，皇帝诏令翟守素与氵名州防御使郭进率军深入其境，践踏其地的庄稼，翟守素所俘获颇多。
English: At that time, the fortress of Bianzhou had not been conquered, and the emperor's edict ordered Guo Shousu and the defense of Yanmingzhou to make the Guo expeditionary force penetrate into its territory, trample on the crops of its land, and Guo Shousu captured quite a lot.

古文：太宗即位，迁客省使，领宪州刺史。
现代文：宋太宗登上皇位，升翟守素为客省使，兼任宪州刺史。
English: When Song Taizong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of guest provincial envoy and concurrently served as the chief historian of Gyeongju.

古文：太平兴国三年夏，河决荥阳，诏守素发郑之丁夫千五百人，与卒千人领护塞之。
现代文：太平兴国三年夏天，黄河在荥阳决口，皇帝诏令翟守素发郑州的成年男子一千五百人与士兵一千人护塞黄河。
English: In the summer of the third year of Taiping Xingguo, the Yellow River was at the mouth of Poyang. The emperor ordered 1,500 adult men and 1,000 soldiers from Zhengzhou to block the Yellow River.

古文：是秋，梅山洞蛮恃险叛命，诏遣守素率诸州屯兵往击之。
现代文：这年秋天，梅山洞蛮依险反叛宋廷，皇帝诏派翟守素领诸州屯兵前去进击梅山蛮。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Meishan Cave Barbarians rebelled against the Song Dynasty, and the Emperor Zhao sent Guo Shou Su to lead the troops from Zhuzhou to attack the Meishan Cave Barbarians.

古文：值霖雨弥旬，弓弩解弛，不堪用，明日，将接战，守素一夕令削木为弩。
现代文：正值霖雨不停地下了十多天，士兵的弓弩都松弛了，不能使用，第二天，将要与梅山蛮交战，翟守素一个晚上命令削木为弩。
English: It had been raining for more than ten days. The soldiers' bows and arrows were all loose and could not be used. The next day, they were going to fight with Meishan. One night, Xing Shousu ordered to cut wood for the crossbows.

古文：及旦，贼奄至，交射之，贼遂败。
现代文：等到天亮，蛮兵蜂拥而至，交叉射击，蛮兵败退。
English: Wait until dawn, the barbarians swarm, cross-fire, the barbarians retreat.

古文：乘胜逐北，尽平其巢穴。
现代文：翟守素率兵乘胜追击逃兵，全部平定了蛮兵造反据点。
English: The soldiers led by Xing Guosi took advantage of the victory and chased the deserters, and all the barbaric rebel strongholds were pacified.

古文：先是，数郡大吏、富人多与贼帅包汉阳交通，既而得其书讯数百封，守素并焚之，反侧以定。
现代文：先前，许多郡的长吏、富人多与蛮族首领包汉阳交往联系，不久翟守素获得了他们交敌的书信几百封，他一并烧掉，反叛者得以安定。
English: Previously, many county officials and rich people had contacts with the barbarian leader Bao Hanyang. Soon, Gong Shou Su obtained hundreds of letters from their enemies. He burned them together, and the rebels were able to stabilize.

古文：俄而钱俶献浙右之地，诏守素为两浙诸州兵马都监，安抚诸郡，人心甚悦，即以知杭州。
现代文：不久钱亻叔向宋进献浙右之地，皇帝诏令翟守素为两浙诸州兵马都监，安抚各郡，当地民心很悦服，朝廷随即让他知杭州。
English: Soon after, Uncle Qian Rong offered Song Jin a place on the right side of Zhejiang. The emperor issued an imperial edict to make Xing Shou Su the military governor of the two states of Zhejiang to pacify the counties. The local people were very pleased, and the imperial court immediately let him know about Hangzhou.

古文：岁满，为西京巡检使。
现代文：满一年后，翟守素任西京巡检使。
English: A year later, he was appointed the inspector of Saikyo.

古文：秦王廷美以事勒归私第，以守素权知河南府兼留守司事，属洛阳岁旱艰食，多盗，上忧之。守素既至，渐以宁息。
现代文：秦王赵廷美因事被勒令归其住宅，朝廷令翟守素权知河南府兼留守司事，所属之地洛阳年旱缺食，多盗贼，皇帝很担忧，翟守素来上任后，逐渐地加以平息。
English: Qin King Zhao Tingmei was ordered to return to his residence as a result of the incident. The imperial court ordered Guo Shou Su Quanzhi to leave Henan Prefecture and stay as a secretary. Luoyang, the place he belonged to, suffered from drought and food shortages. There were many thieves. The emperor was very worried. After Guo Shou Su took office, he gradually calmed them down.

古文：未几，迁商州团练使。
现代文：没多久，他迁任商州团练使。
English: Not long after, he was transferred to the post of Shangzhou group training envoy.

古文：雍熙二年，改知延州。
现代文：雍熙二年，翟守素改任知延州。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, Gong Shousu was transferred to Chiyan Prefecture.

古文：自刘廷让败于君子馆，河朔诸州城垒多圮。
现代文：自从刘廷让在君子馆战败，河朔各州城墙堡垒大多毁坏了。
English: Since Liu Tingzang's defeat at the Gentleman's Pavilion, most of the city walls and fortresses in all the states of Hebei Province have been destroyed.

古文：四年，诏守素与田仁朗、王继恩、郭延濬分路按行，发诸州镇兵增筑，护其役。
现代文：雍熙四年，皇帝诏令翟守素与田仁朗、王继恩、郭延浚分路检查，征发各州镇兵增筑损坏的城墙，他们督护工程。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Zou Shousu, along with Tian Renlang, Wang Jian and Guo Yanjun, to inspect the branch roads, and to conscript soldiers from towns in all provinces to build up the damaged city walls, and they supervised the project.

古文：赐白金三十两，留充天雄军兵马钤辖、知大名府，改知潞州。
现代文：赐翟守素白金三十两，留他任天雄军兵马钤辖、知大名府，又改任知潞州。
English: He gave him 30 taels of platinum and left him in charge of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses of Tianxiong's army, the prestigious capital of Zhida, and changed his post to Zhisheng.

古文：会建方田，命为代北方田都部署、并州兵马钤辖，从屯夏州，改知凤翔府。
现代文：恰逢建造方田，朝廷命他任代北方田都部署、并州兵马钤辖，屯驻夏州，改任知凤翔府。
English: Coinciding with the construction of Fangda, the imperial court ordered him to be deployed to the northern Tiandu on behalf of the emperor, and to be under the jurisdiction of the State Terracotta Warriors and Horses, stationed in Xiazhou, and reassigned to Chifeng Xiangfu.

古文：淳化中，夏帅赵保忠上言，其弟继迁诱戎人为寇，且求援师。
现代文：淳化年间，夏州首领赵保忠上书朝廷说，他的弟弟赵继迁引诱戎人进犯，请求朝廷派援军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Junhua, the leader of Xia Prefecture, Zhao Baozhong, sent a letter to the imperial court saying that his younger brother, Zhao Jiji, had lured the imperial army into attacking and requested the imperial court to send reinforcements.

古文：诏守素率兵复屯夏州，未几，又徙石州，以老病上疏求归本郡，从之。
现代文：皇帝诏令翟守素率领军队再屯驻夏州，没多久，又移兵石州，翟守素以年老有病上书请求回原籍，皇帝答应了他的请求。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Xing Shousuo to lead the army to re-settle in Xiazhou. Not long after, he moved his army to Shizhou. Xing Shousuo requested to return to his hometown with a letter saying that he was old and sick. The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：三年，卒，年七十一。
现代文：淳化三年，翟守素去世，终年七十一岁。
English: He died at the age of seventy-one.

古文：守素逮事四朝，绵历内职五十余年。
现代文：翟守素历事四个朝代，连续任内职五十多年。
English: He has served four dynasties consecutively and has been in office for more than 50 years.

古文：性谨慎，宽仁容众，所至有治绩。
现代文：他性格谨慎，宽厚仁义，能容纳众人，所到任之处有政绩。
English: He has a prudent personality, is generous and benevolent, can accommodate everyone, and has political achievements wherever he has been.

古文：凡断大辟狱，虽罪状明白，仍遍询僚寀，佥同而后决；属吏有过不面折，必因公宴援往事之相类者言其获咎，以微警之。
现代文：凡是决断死刑案件，即使犯人罪状已明白清楚，他仍要遍询同僚，大家都同意后才作出判决；他对下属有过失不当面驳斥，必定趁着公宴时援引与此相类的往事说明他做错了，用以稍稍警诫属下。
English: When deciding on a death penalty case, even if the prisoner's guilt is clear, he will still have to consult his colleagues and make a judgment only after everyone agrees; he will make a face-to-face refutation of his subordinates' negligence, and will certainly take advantage of the public banquet to cite similar past events to show that he has done wrong, and to slightly caution his subordinates.

古文：新进后生多至节帅，而守素久次不迁，殊无陨获意，时论以此多之。
现代文：新提拔的晚辈多官至节度使、元帅，而翟守素很长时间停留在原职不得升迁，他一点也没有觉得困迫失意，时论因此称赞他。
English: The newly promoted younger generation of officials ranged from vice-premiers to marshals, while Xu Shouwen had stayed in his original post for a long time without being promoted. He did not feel distressed at all, and the Times praised him for it.

