古文：戊寅八月初七日余作书投署府何别驾，求《广西府志》。
现代文：戊寅年八月初七日我写了信送给广西府代理知府何别驾，向他求要《广酋府志》。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month in the year of Wu Yin, I wrote a letter to the acting governor of Guangxi Province, asking him for the "Guangxi Provincial Gazetteer."

古文：是日其诞辰，不出堂，书不得达。
现代文：这一天是他的生日，他不上大堂办公，信没有送到。
English: It was his birthday, he didn't go to the lobby, and the letter wasn't delivered.

古文：入堂阅其四境图，见盘江自其南界西半入境，东北从东界之北而去，不标地名，无从知其何界也。
现代文：我进府署大堂上观览广西府全境图，看到盘江从广西府南部边界的西部流入境内，往东北从东部边界的北面流出去，地图上没有标出地名，无法知道盘江流经哪些地界。
English: I entered the lobby of the prefectural government office to view a map of the entire territory of Guangxi Province. I saw that the Panjiang River flows into the territory from the west of the southern border of Guangxi Province and flows out to the northeast from the north of the eastern border. There are no place names marked on the map, so it is impossible to know which geographical boundaries the Panjiang River flows through.

古文：初八日何收书欲相见，以雨不往。
现代文：初八日何别驾收到我的信后想和我见面，因为下雨没能前往。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, after receiving my letter, he wanted to meet me, but he couldn't go because of the rain.

古文：初九日余令顾仆辞何，不见；促其《志》，彼言即送至，而终不来。
现代文：初九日我让顾仆去向何别驾告辞，何别驾没有接见顾仆；顾仆催促要《广西府志》，他传话说立即送来，但始终没送来。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, I asked Gu Min to go to bid farewell to He Bie Jie, but He Bie Jie did not receive Gu Min. Gu Min urged him to get the "Guangxi Provincial History," he sent a message saying that he would send it immediately, but it was never sent.

古文：菊惟黄色，不大。
现代文：这一天，又是大雨不停。
English: On this day, it was raining heavily again.

古文：又有西番菊。广西府西界大山，高列如屏，直亘南去，曰草子山。
现代文：初十日何别驾说找不到印好的《广西府志》，他已经命令重新印刷了。这一天中午天晴后，才看见黄菊盛开。广西府西部的大山，高高耸列、如同屏障，直往南延伸下去，名叫草子山。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he said that he couldn't find the printed "Guangxi Prefecture Diary," and he had ordered to reprint it. It was only after the sky cleared at noon that day that he saw the yellow chrysanthemum in full bloom. The mountains in the west of Guangxi Province, towering high, like a barrier, extend southward, and are called Caozi Mountain.

古文：西界即大麻子岭，从大龟来者。
现代文：西部是大麻子岭，是从大龟山延伸过来的山脉。
English: In the west, there is the Jiaozi Ridge, a mountain range extending from the Great Turtle Mountain.

古文：东界峻逼，而西界层叠，北有一石山，森罗于中，连络两界，曰发果山。
现代文：东部陡峭狭窄，而西部层山重叠，北面有一座石山，森严可畏地罗列在中间，连接东西两部，这是发果山。
English: The eastern part is steep and narrow, while the western mountains overlap. In the north, there is a stone mountain, with a formidable forest in the middle, connecting the two parts of the east and west. This is the Fruit Mountain.

古文：泸江在南，而此水亦窃其名，不知何故。矣邦池之南，复有远山东西横属，则此中亦一南北中洼之坑，而水则去来皆透于穴矣。
现代文：发果山东面的支脉往南延伸，结聚为广西府治所在的小山；其西面和西部山横连的支脉中，有股水从洞穴涌出，水很大，这股水就是沪江的源头，流经西门大桥后成为矣邦池的水源。矣邦池的南面，远远的又有山脉横贯东西，这样看来，矣邦池也是一个南北走向的中洼之坑，而池水则是进出都从山洞中穿过。
English: The eastern branch of Mount Phago extends to the south and gathers into a small mountain where Guangxi Province is located. In the west and west of the mountain, there is water gushing out of the cave. The water is very large. This water is the source of the Hujiang River. After flowing through the West Gate Bridge, it becomes the water source of the Yibang Pool. On the south side of the Yibang Pool, there are mountains across the east and west. In this way, the Yibang Pool is also a south-to-north depression pit, and the water of the pool passes through the cave.

古文：此郡山之最远者也。
现代文：这是广西府境最边远的山脉。
English: This is the most remote mountain range in Guangxi.

古文：发果山圆若贯珠，横列郡后。
现代文：发果山圆得像连贯的珠子，横着排列在广西府城背后。
English: The hair fruit mountains are round like coherent beads, and they are lined up horizontally behind the city of Guangxi.

古文：东下一支曰奇鹤峰，则学宫所托，西下一支曰铁龙峰，则万寿寺所倚；而郡城当其中环处。
现代文：其往东边延伸的一支叫奇鹤峰，是学宫背靠的山峰；往西边延伸的一支叫铁龙峰，是万寿寺背靠的山峰；而广西府城正位于这两座山峰中的回环处。
English: The one that extends to the east is called Qizhefeng, which is the mountain behind the Palace of Learning; the one that extends to the west is called Tie Longfeng, which is the mountain behind the Wanzhou Temple; and Guangxi Fucheng is located in the loop of these two mountains.

古文：城之东北，亦有一小石峰在其中，曰秀山，上多突石，前可瞰湖，后可揽翠。
现代文：府城的东北边，还有一座立在其间的小石峰，名叫秀山，秀山上有很多突起的石头，往前可以俯瞰湖水，向后可以饱览翠色。
English: On the northeast side of the capital, there is also a small stone peak in between, called Xiushan. There are many protruding stones on Xiushan. You can overlook the lake from the front and enjoy the emerald color from the back.

古文：城南濒湖，复突三峰：东即广福，曰灵龟山；中峰最小，曰文笔峰，建塔于上；而西峰横若翠焉。
现代文：府城南边濒临湖水。还有三座山峰突立：东边是广福寺所在的山，叫灵龟山；中间的山峰最小，叫文笔峰，峰顶建有塔；而西边的山峰像翠屏一样横列在那里。
English: The southern side of the prefectural capital is close to the lake. There are also three peaks protruding: the eastern side is the mountain where Guangfu Temple is located, called Lingku Mountain; the middle peak is the smallest, called Wenpen Peak, with a tower at the top; and the western peaks are lined up there like green screens.

古文：即名翠屏。
现代文：这是广西府城附近的山峰。
English: This is a mountain peak near the city of Guangxi.

古文：此郡山之近者也。秀山前有伏波将军庙，后殿为伏波像，前殿为郡守张继孟祠。
现代文：秀山前面有伏波将军庙，庙中后殿供奉伏波将军塑像，前殿是广西府知府张继孟的祠堂。
English: In front of Xiushan, there is the Fubo General's Temple. In the middle of the temple, the back hall is dedicated to the statue of Fubo General. The front hall is the ancestral hall of Zhang Jimeng, the governor of Guangxi.

古文：张，扶风人，以甲科守此。
现代文：张继孟是扶风县人，以进士身份来担任广西府知府。
English: Zhang Jimeng is a native of Fufeng County, and served as the governor of Guangxi Province as a conscript.

古文：壬申为普酋困，城岌岌矣。
现代文：壬申年，广西府被普名胜围困，府城面临巨大的危险。
English: In the year of Jinshin, Guangxi Prefecture was besieged by the Pu Nian Sheng, and the prefectural capital faced great danger.

古文：张奋不顾身，固保城隍，普莫能破，城得仅存。
现代文：张继孟奋不顾身，坚定不移地守卫府城，普名胜无法攻破，府城才得以保存。
English: Zhang Jie Meng fought tirelessly and unswervingly to defend the prefectural capital, and it was only after the victory of Pu Nian Sheng that the prefectural capital was saved.

古文：先是张梦马伏波示以方略，后遂退贼。
现代文：在作战之前，张继孟梦见伏波将军马援为自己指示作战方略，后来就打退叛军。
English: Before the battle, Zhang Jiemeng dreamed that General Ma Yuan of Fubo instructed him on the battle strategy, and later defeated the rebels.

古文：二月终，亲莅息宰河招抚焉。
现代文：二月底，张继孟亲自到息宰河招抚。
English: At the end of February, Zhang Jimeng personally came to Qi Zaihe to visit.

古文：州人服其胆略，贼称为 舍命王 云。
现代文：当地人佩服张继孟的胆略，而叛军称他为 舍命王 。
English: Locals admire Zhang Jimeng's audacity, while the rebels call him the "king of sacrifice."

古文：新寺即万寿寺当发果西垂之南，其后山石嶙峋，为滇中所无。
现代文：新寺位于发果山西边的南部，寺背后的嶙峋山石，是云南其它地方所没有的。
English: The new temple is located in the southern part of the western side of Mt. Fangguo. The rock behind the temple is not found anywhere else in Yunnan.

古文：其寺南向，后倚峭峰，前临遥海，亦此中胜处。
现代文：新寺向南，背靠陡峭的山峰，前方面对远远的矣邦池，也是广西府的名胜风景处。
English: The new temple faces south, backed by steep peaks, with the distant Yibang Pond in front. It is also a famous scenic spot in Guangxi Province.

古文：前有玉皇阁，东为城隍庙，但在城外。
现代文：新寺前面有玉皇阁，东面是城陛庙，都在城外。
English: In front of the new temple is the Jade Emperor's Palace, and to the east is the City Emperor's Temple, both outside the city.

古文：泸源洞在城西北四里。
现代文：沪源洞在府城西北四里。
English: Hugen-dong is located four miles northwest of the prefectural capital.

古文：新寺后山西尽，环坞而北，其中乱峰杂沓，缀以小石岫，皆削瓣骈枝，标青点翠。
现代文：新寺后山往西的尽头，环形山坞的北面，其中众多的山峰杂乱分布，还连缀着小石峰，完全像花瓣分开、枝条并列，点缀出青色、翠色。
English: At the western end of the hill behind the new temple, to the north of the circular dockyard, many of the peaks are randomly distributed, and are also interspersed with small stone peaks, completely separated like petals, branches side by side, and dotted with blue and emerald.

古文：北环西转，而泸源之水，涌于下穴，泸源之洞，辟于层崖，有三洞焉。
现代文：往北绕、再往西转，沪源洞的水，从下洞涌出，沪源洞敞开在层叠的山崖上，有三个洞。
English: Winding around to the north and then west, the water of Huanyuan Cave gushes out from the lower cave. Huanyuan Cave is open on the cascading cliff, with three caves.

古文：上洞东南向，前有亭；下洞南向，在上洞西五十步，皆在前山之南崖。
现代文：上洞口朝东南，洞前有亭子；下洞口朝南，在上洞西边五十步的地方，两个洞都在前山的南面山崖。
English: The entrance to the upper cave faces southeast, with a pavilion in front of the cave; the entrance to the lower cave faces south, and both caves are on the southern cliff of Qianshan, fifty paces to the west of the upper cave.

古文：后洞在后山之北冈，其上如眢ｙｕāｎ干枯井。
现代文：后洞在后山的北面山冈，洞上部像晋井一样。
English: The back cave is in the north of the back mountain, and the upper part of the cave is like a well.

古文：从井北坠穴而下二十步，底界而成脊，一穴东北下而小，一穴东南下而廓。
现代文：顺着井北坠入洞中后下去二十步，洞底形成分界的脊，一个洞往东北深下去而狭小，一个洞往东南深下去而空阔。
English: After falling into the hole along the north of the well, it goes down for twenty steps, and the bottom of the hole forms a dividing ridge. A hole deep to the northeast is narrow, and a hole deep to the southeast is wide.

古文：此三洞之分向也。
现代文：以上是三个洞分别不同的走向。
English: The above are three holes with different courses.

古文：其中所入皆甚深，秉炬穿隘，屡起屡伏，乳柱纷错，不可穷诘焉。
现代文：每个洞进去都很深，手持火把穿行在狭窄的洞中，洞中的地势时起时伏，钟乳石柱纷杂交错，无法穷究。
English: Each hole is very deep, and torches are used to walk through the narrow holes. The terrain in the cave is constantly changing, and the stalactite columns are intertwined, which is inexhaustible.

古文：十一日大霁。
现代文：十一日天气十分晴朗。
English: On the 11th, the weather was very fine.

古文：上午出西门，过城隍庙、玉皇阁前。
现代文：上午从西门出城，经过城陛庙、玉皇阁前。
English: In the morning, go out of the city from the west gate, pass the city's imperial temple and the Jade Emperor Pavilion.

古文：西一里，转新寺西峰之嘴而北。
现代文：往西走一里，绕着新寺西边的峰嘴往北走。
English: Walk west for one mile, then walk north around the peak of the mountain to the west of the new temple.

古文：又北一里，见西壑涨水盈盈，而上洞在其西北矣。
现代文：又往北走一里，看见西边沟壑中水涨得满满的，而上洞就在沟壑的西北边了。
English: I walked another mile north and saw that the water in the gully on the west side had risen to its full height, and the upper cave was on the northwest side of the gully.

古文：由岐路一里抵山下，历级游上洞。
现代文：顺着岔路走一里来到山下，踏着一级级石阶游览上洞。
English: Walk one mile along the winding road to the bottom of the mountain, and climb the first-level stone steps to visit the upper cave.

古文：望洞西有寺，殿两重，入憩而瀹水为餐。
现代文：远远看到上洞西边有座寺庙，有两重大殿，进寺庙休息并烧水吃饭。
English: In the distance, you can see a temple on the west side of the cave. There are two large halls. You can enter the temple to rest and boil water for meals.

古文：余因由寺西观水洞。
现代文：我于是顺着寺庙往西观览水洞。
English: So I followed the temple to the west to see the water cave.

古文：还寺中索炬，始知为洞有三，洞皆须火深入。
现代文：返回寺中寻找火把，才知道水洞有三个，每个洞都必须点着火把才能深入。
English: Returning to the temple to look for torches, I learned that there are three water caves, and you have to light a torch in each cave to go deeper.

古文：下午，强索得炬，而火为顾仆所灭，遍觅不可得。
现代文：下午，勉强找到火把，但火被顾仆弄熄了，到处找火源而找不到。
English: In the afternoon, I managed to find a torch, but the fire was put out by the servants. I looked everywhere for the source of the fire, but couldn't find it.

古文：遥望一村，在隔水之南，涨莫能达，遂不得为深入计。聊一趋后洞之内，披其外扃，还入下洞之底，探其中门而已。
现代文：看到远处有一个村庄，隔在沟壑南岸，因水涨而无法去至，于是想不出深入洞里的办法了，姑且去到后洞里，观览外层，再进入下洞底，探到它的中门。
English: Seeing a village in the distance, separated by the south bank of the ravine, and unable to reach it because of the rising water, I couldn't think of a way to go deeper into the cave, let alone go to the back of the cave, observe the outer layer, and then enter the bottom of the lower cave and explore its middle door.

古文：仍从旧路归，北入新寺，抵暮而返。
现代文：仍然从原路回去，往北进入新寺，傍晚才回到城中。
English: He still went back from the original road, went north into the new temple, and only returned to the city in the evening.

古文：十二日早促何君《志》，犹曰即送至；坐寓待之，拟一至即行；已而竟日复不可得。
现代文：十二日一早就去催促何别驾的《广西府志》，还是说立即就送来，我坐在寓所中等待，准备书一送到就出发；过后又是一整天都没有等到。
English: On the twelfth day, I went early in the morning to urge the "Guangxi Prefecture Chronicle," which was not driven by anyone, or to say that it would be sent immediately. I sat in my apartment and waited. As soon as the preparation document was delivered, I set off; after that, I did not wait for the whole day.

古文：晚谓顾仆曰： 《志》现装钉，俟钉成帙，即来候也。 
现代文：晚上何别架对顾仆说： 《广西府志》正在装钉，等装钉成册，立即前来问候。 
English: In the evening, He Beijia said to his servant: "Guangxi Provincial History" is being stapled, wait for it to be stapled into a book, come and greet me immediately.

古文：余初以为广西郡人必悉盘江所出，遍征之，终无谙者。
现代文：我当初认为广西府的人一定都知道盘江源头的出处，问遍当地人，始终没有熟悉的人。
English: At first, I thought that people in Guangxi Province must know the source of the headwaters of the Pan River. I asked all the locals, but I never found anyone familiar with it.

古文：其不知者，反谓西转弥勒，既属颠倒。
现代文：那些不知道的人，反而还说盘江往西流，转到弥勒州，完全颠倒了流向。
English: Those who do not know, on the contrary, say that the Panjiang River flows westward and turns to Maile Prefecture, completely reversing the flow direction.

古文：其知者，第谓东北注罗平，经黄草坝下，即莫解所从矣。
现代文：那些知道一点的人，只是说出往东北流到罗平州，经过黄草坝流下去，就没有人知道流到什么地方了。
English: Those who know a little, just say that it flows to the northeast to Lopingzhou, flows through the Yellow Grass Dam, and no one knows where it goes.

古文：间有谓东南下广南，出田州，亦似揣摩之言，靡有确据也。
现代文：偶而有人说从东南流到广南府，再从田州流出去，也只像揣摩着说，没有确凿的证据。
English: Occasionally, some people say that it flows from Southeastern China to Guangnan Prefecture, and then flows out of Tianzhou. It's just like guessing, there is no conclusive evidence.

古文：此地至黄草坝，又东北四五日程。
现代文：从广西府到黄草坝，往东北走，还有四五天的路程。
English: From Guangxi to Huangcao Dam, going northeast, there are still four or five days to go.

古文：余欲从之，以此中淹留日久，迤西之行不可迟，姑留为归途之便。
现代文：我想沿着盘江去黄草坝，因为在广西府停留的日子长了，去滇西的旅行不能推迟，暂且把这打算留作从滇西返回途中顺便的事。
English: I want to go along the Pan River to the Yellow Grass Dam, because the days of staying in Guangxi Province are long, and the trip to Shaanxi cannot be postponed. For the time being, I will leave this plan as a by-product on the way back from Shaanxi.

古文：广西府鹦鹉最多，皆三乡县所出，然止翠毛丹喙，无五色之异。
现代文：广西府鹦鹉最多，都出自三乡县，然而只是翠毛红嘴一个品种，没有其它颜色。
English: Guangxi parrots were the most numerous, all coming from Sanxiang County. However, it was only a species of red-billed parrot, with no other colors.

古文：三乡县，乃甲寅萧守所城。
现代文：三乡县城是甲寅年广西府萧知府修建的。
English: Sanxiang County Town was built by Xiaochifu of Guangxi Province in the year of Jia Yin.

古文：维摩州，州有流官，只居郡城，不往州治。
现代文：维摩州设有流官，但流官只住在广西府城，不到州治居住。
English: Vima Prefecture has magistrates, but magistrates only live in Guangxi Prefecture, not in the prefecture.

古文：二处皆藉何天衢守之，以与普拒。
现代文：三乡县、维摩州都靠何天衙守卫，以便抵御普名胜。
English: Sanxiang County and Wimao County both rely on how many sky lanterns they have to guard in order to defend themselves from the famous scenic spots.

古文：广福寺在郡城东二里，吉双乡在矣邦池之东南，与之对。
现代文：广福寺位于府城东边二里的地方，吉双乡位于矣邦池的东南，和广福寺相对。
English: Guangfu Temple is located two miles east of the prefectural capital, and Jishuang Township is located southeast of Yibangchi, opposite Guangfu Temple.

古文：而弥勒州在郡西九十里。
现代文：而弥勒州在广西府西边九十里。
English: And Maile Prefecture is ninety miles west of Guangxi Province.

古文：《一统志》乃注寺在弥勒东九十里，乡为弥勒属，何耶？
现代文：《一统志》却注释广福寺在弥勒州东边几十里，吉双乡隶属于弥勒州。
English: However, "Isshongzhi" notes that Guangfu Temple is located several dozen miles east of Maile Prefecture, while Jishuang Township belongs to Maile Prefecture.

古文：岂当时郡无附郭，三州各抵其前为界，故以属之弥勒耶？
现代文：为什么会是这样呢？难道当时广西府没有附郭县，三州分别抵到府治跟前分界，所以把吉双乡隶属于弥勒州？
English: Why is this? Was it not the case that Guangxi did not annex Guo County at that time, and the three prefectures arrived at the prefectural boundary separately, so that Jishuangxiang was subordinated to Miele Prefecture?

古文：然今大麻子哨西，何以又有分界之址也？
现代文：但是今天大麻子哨西边，为什么又有分界的遗址呢？
English: But why is there a demarcation site on the west side of the hemp sub-post office today?

古文：十三日中夜闻雷声，达旦而雨。
现代文：十三日半夜听到雷声，到天亮时下起雨来。
English: At midnight on the 13th, thunder was heard, and by dawn it was raining.

古文：初余欲行屡矣，而日复一日，待之若河清焉！
现代文：当初我多次想出发，却日复一日地等在这里，像等黄河水清一样遥遥无期！
English: At the beginning, I wanted to leave many times, but I waited here day after day, like waiting for the Yellow River to be clear!

古文：自省至临安，皆南行。
现代文：从省城昆明到临安府，都是往南走。
English: From Kunming, the provincial capital, to Lin'an, all roads lead south.

古文：自临安抵石屏州，皆西北。
现代文：从临安府到石屏州，都是往西北走。
English: From Lin'an to Shiping, go northwest.

古文：自临安抵阿迷，皆东北。
现代文：从临安府到阿迷州，都是往东北走。
English: From Lin'an to Amanzhou, go northeast.

古文：自阿迷抵弥勒，皆北行。
现代文：从阿迷州到弥勒州，都是往北走。
English: From Amanzhou to Maitreya, go north.

古文：自弥勒抵广西府，皆东北。
现代文：从弥勒州到广西府，都是往东北走。
English: From Miele Prefecture to Guangxi Prefecture, they all go to the northeast.

古文：十四日再令顾仆往促《志》，余束装寓中以待。
现代文：十四日再次让顾仆去催《广西府志》，我整理好行装在寓所中等待。
English: On the 14th, I once again asked Gu's servant to rush the "Guangxi Prefectural History" to me. I packed it up and waited in my apartment.

古文：乍雨乍霁。
现代文：天气忽雨忽晴。
English: The weather is changing from rainy to sunny.

古文：上午得回音，仍欲留至明晨云。
现代文：上午得到回话，说仍要留在这里等到明天早晨。
English: In the morning I received a reply saying that I still had to stay here until tomorrow morning.

古文：乃携行李出西门，入玉皇阁。
现代文：我于是带上行李从西门出城，去玉皇阁。
English: So I took my luggage and left the city through the West Gate to the Jade Emperor's Palace.

古文：阁颇宏丽，中乃铜像，而两庑塑群仙像，极有生气，正殿四壁，画亦精工。
现代文：玉皇阁很宏伟、壮丽，正殿有铜像，而两边厢房立有众神仙的塑像，塑得极有生气。正殿四周的壁画也都画得精美。
English: The Jade Emperor's Palace is very grand and magnificent. The main hall has a bronze statue, and on both sides of the pavilion there are statues of the gods, which are very lively. The murals around the main hall are also beautifully painted.

古文：征普时，游率兵屯郡南海梢，以防寇之冲突。
现代文：随后到万寿寺，把行李放在寺的右厢房。饭后攀登寺左边的铁龙锋山梁，山上石头层层叠叠、棱角分明，完全好似龙鳞象角一样。
English: Then, I went to Wanshou Temple and put my luggage in the right wing of the temple. After lunch, I climbed the dragon-shaped mountain on the left side of the temple. The stones on the mountain were stacked on top of each other and had sharp edges and corners, just like dragon scales and elephant horns.

古文：四年四月，普兵忽乘之，游竟没于阵。
现代文：四月，普名胜的军队突然乘机进攻官军，游公最后战死在阵地上。
English: In April, the army of Pu Nanshan suddenly took the opportunity to attack the official army, and You Gong finally died on the battlefield.

古文：今其子现居其地，不得归，故停柩寺中。
现代文：如今他的儿子住在这里，不能回故乡，所以将灵枢停放在寺中。
English: Now that his son lives here, he can't go back to his hometown, so he keeps his spiritual center in the temple.

古文：余为慨然。
现代文：我为游公叹息。
English: I weep for you.

古文：是晚，遇李如玉、杨善居诸君作醮寺中，屡承斋饷。
现代文：这一天晚上，遇上李如玉、杨善居等人到寺里作道场，我多次承蒙他们招待斋饭。
English: On this evening, I met Li Ruyu, Yang Shanju and others who came to the temple to do the dojo, and I have repeatedly accepted their invitation to the meal.

古文：僧千松亦少解人意。
现代文：僧人千松也很善解人意。
English: Monk Chimatsu is also very empathetic.

古文：是晚月颇朗。
现代文：晚上月亮很明。
English: The moon is very bright in the evening.

古文：十五日余入城探游君之子，令顾仆往促何君。
现代文：十五日我进城探望游大勋的儿子，让顾仆去催何别驾送书。
English: On the fifteenth day, I went to the city to visit Yu Daxun's son, and asked Gu's servant to urge him not to send the book.

古文：上午，出西门，游城隍庙。
现代文：上午，从西门出城，游览城陛庙。
English: In the morning, go out of the city from the West Gate to visit the Imperial Temple.

古文：既返寺，寺中男妇进香者接踵。
现代文：返回万寿寺后，看到来寺中进香的男男女女接连不断。
English: After returning to Wanzhou Temple, I saw a succession of men and women coming to the temple to offer incense.

古文：有吴锡尔者，亦以进香至，同杨善居索余文，各携之去，约抵暮驰还。
现代文：有个叫吴锡尔的人，也因为进香来到万寿寺，他和杨善居一起求借我的文章，后各自带着文章离去，约定当天晚上赶来归还。
English: There was a man named Wu Xier, who also came to Wanshou Temple because of the incense. He and Yang Shanju together asked to borrow my article, and then they each left with the article, agreeing to return it that evening.

古文：抵午，顾仆回言： 何君以吏钉《志》久迟，扑数板，限下午即备，料不过期矣。 
现代文：到了中午，顾仆回来说： 何别驾因为属吏装钉《广西府志》时间长、速度慢，打了他好几板，限他今天下午就装钉完，想来不会超过这个期限了。 
English: At noon, Gu's servant came back and said, "Why don't you drive your subordinate official to finish stapling "Guangxi Provincial History" because it takes a long time and is slow. You have hit him with several boards. As long as he finishes stapling this afternoon, I don't think he will exceed this deadline."

古文：下午，何命堂书送《志》及程仪至，余作书谢之。
现代文：下午，何别驾命府中的书吏送来《广西府志》以及所赠送的礼物，我写信向他道谢。
English: In the afternoon, why don't you order the librarian of the prefecture to send the "Guangxi Prefectural History" and the gift, I will write to him to thank him.

古文：是晚为中秋，而晚云密布，既暮而大风怒吼。
现代文：这天晚上是中秋节，但傍晚时层云密布，天黑以后就大风怒吼。
English: It was the Mid-Autumn Festival that evening, but the clouds were thick in the late afternoon, and the wind roared after dark.

古文：僧设茶于正殿，遂餔餟而卧。
现代文：僧人在正殿上摆设了茶点，于是吃喝之后就睡觉了。
English: The monk set up a teapot on the main hall, and after eating and drinking, he went to sleep.

古文：十六日雨意霏霏，不能阻余行色。
现代文：十六日天可能继续下雨，却不能阻止我启程的心愿。
English: It may continue to rain on the 16th, but it can't stop my desire to leave.

古文：而吴、杨文未至，令顾仆往索之。
现代文：但吴锡尔、杨善居借走的文章没有送还，我让顾仆前往索取。
English: However, the articles borrowed by Wu Xil and Yang Shanju were not returned, so I asked my valet to go and retrieve them.

古文：既饭，杨君携酒一樽，侑吃以油饼熏凫，乃酌酒而携凫饼以行。
现代文：吃过饭后，扬善居带来一蹲酒以及下酒的油饼、烤野鸭，于是饮完酒，然后带着烤鸭、油饼就出发了。
English: After the meal, Yang Shanju brought a bottle of wine as well as oatcakes and roasted wild duck with wine, so after drinking the wine, he set off with the roasted duck and oatcakes.

古文：从玉皇阁后循铁龙东麓而北，一里，登北山而上。
现代文：从玉皇阁背后顺着铁龙峰东麓往北走，一里，攀登北面的山而上。
English: From the back of the Jade Emperor Pavilion, walk north along the eastern foot of the Iron Dragon Peak for one mile and climb up the mountain to the north.

古文：一里逾其坳，即发果山之脊也，《志》又谓之九华山。
现代文：一里越过山坳，就到了发果山脊，《广西府志》又称发果山为九华山。
English: One mile over the ridge, you will reach the Fangguo ridge. "Guangxi Provincial History" also called Fangguoshan as Jiuhua Mountain.

古文：盖东峰之南下者为奇鹤，为学宫所倚；西峰之南下者为铁龙，为万寿寺之脉；中环而南突于城中者，为钟秀山；其实一山也。
现代文：原来发果山东峰往南延伸为奇鹤峰，是学宫所背靠的山峰；西峰往南延伸为铁龙峰，是万寿寺所在的山峰；回环中往南突立在城中的，是钟秀山；基实都源于一座山。
English: Originally, the east peak of Mount Haguo extended southward as Qihefeng, the mountain behind the palace of learning; the west peak extended southward as Tie Longfeng, the mountain where Wanzhou Temple is located; the southward protrusion in the city in the middle of the loop is Zhongxiu Mountain; the foundation all originated from a mountain.

古文：从岭上平行，又北三里，始见泸源洞在西，而山脊则自东界大山横度而西，属于西界，为郡城后倚。然泸源之水，穿其西穴而出，亦不得为过脉也。
现代文：顺岭上平走，又往北三里，才看见沪源洞在西面，而发果山脊则从广西府东部大山往西横穿过去，和西部山相连，成为广西府城背靠的山脉，而沪源洞的水，从山脉西边的洞穴穿出，其脊也没能成为过脉。
English: After walking on the flat of Shunling and going north for another three miles, I saw the Huyuan Cave in the west, while the Fago Ridge crossed from the eastern mountains of Guangxi Province to the west and connected with the western mountains, becoming the mountains behind the city of Guangxi Province. The water of the Huyuan Cave penetrated from the caves on the west side of the mountains, and its ridge could not become a vein.

古文：从岭北行，又五里而稍下，有哨在坞之南冈，曰平沙哨，郡城北之锁钥也。
现代文：顺着山岭往北走，又走了五里，然后逐渐下山，有哨所位于山坞南边的山冈上，这是平沙哨，是广西府城北面的军事要地。
English: Walking north along the mountains, walking another five miles, and then gradually descending the mountain, there is a sentry post on the hill south of the dock. This is the Pingsha sentry post, a military important place north of the city of Guangxi.

古文：其东即紫微之后脉，犹屏列未尽；其西则连峰蜿蜒，北自师宗南下为阿卢山；界坞中之水，而中透泸源者也。
现代文：平沙哨东边是紫微山背后的山脉，仍然像屏障一样地耸列下去，没有尽头；西边则是连绵不断、蜿蜒曲折的山峰，从北边师宗州往南延伸为阿卢山，山阻挡了坞中水流，使水从沪源洞中穿过。
English: On the east side of Ping Sha Sentinel is the mountain range behind Zi Wei Shan, which still towers like a barrier and has no end; on the west side is the continuous, meandering mountain peaks, extending from Shizongzhou in the north to Alu Mountain in the south. The mountain blocks the water flow in the dock and causes the water to pass through the Huan Duong.

古文：由哨前北行坞中，六里，有溪自北而南，小石梁跨之，是为矣各桥。
现代文：顺着平沙哨前的山坞往北行，六里，有股溪水从北往南流，一座小石桥横跨在溪水上面，名叫矣各桥。
English: Walking north along the dock in front of the Ping Sha sentry post, for six miles, there are streams flowing from north to south, and a small stone bridge across the stream, called Yigai Bridge.

古文：溪水发源于东西界分支处，由梁下西注南转，坞穷而南入穴，出于泸源之上流也。
现代文：溪水发源于东西部山脉分界的地方，从桥下流向西边后再转南流，流出山坞就往南注入山洞，出洞后就是沪源洞水流的上游。
English: The stream originates from the place where the eastern and western mountains are separated. It flows from under the bridge to the west and then turns south. After flowing out of the dock, it flows south into the cave. After leaving the cave, it is the upstream of the water flow of Hugen-dong.

古文：又北六里，有村在西山之半，溪峡自东北来，路由西北上山。
现代文：又往北走六里，有村庄在西边的山腰上，溪水流经的峡谷从东北边伸过来，路往西北边上山。
English: Six miles further north, there is a village on the western side of the mountainside, the canyon through which the stream flows stretches from the northeast, and the road climbs up the mountain to the northwest.

古文：一里，蹑岭而上，二里，遂逾西界之脊，于是瞰西坞行。
现代文：一里，顺着山岭往上走，二里，就越过西部的山梁，于是俯视着西坞而行。
English: One mile up the mountain, two miles over the western ridge, looking down on the West Docks.

古文：坞中水浸成壑，有村在其下；其西复有连山自北而南，与此界又相持成峡焉。
现代文：坞中水冲刷出沟壑，有村庄在下面；山坞西面又有连绵不断的山从北往南延伸，和西部山相对峙，又形成峡谷。
English: In the dock, water washes out gullies, with villages below; on the west side of the dock, there are continuous mountains stretching from north to south, confronting the western mountains and forming a canyon.

古文：从岭上又北四里，乃西北下西峡中，一里抵麓。
现代文：顺着岭上又往北走四里，才往西北下到西峡谷中，一里抵达山脚。
English: Along the ridge, we walked another four miles north, before descending northwest into the West Canyon, reaching the foot of the mountain after one mile.

古文：复循东麓北行十五里，复有连冈属两界之间，有数家倚其上，是为中火铺，有公馆焉，按《志》，师宗南四十里有额勒哨，当即此矣。
现代文：再沿着峡谷东麓往北走十五里，又有连绵不断的山冈连接在峡谷东西之间，有数家人背靠山冈居住，这是中火铺，有公馆设在这里。吃过饭，仍然顺着峡谷往北走。
English: Another fifteen miles north along the eastern foot of the canyon, and there are continuous hills connecting the east and west of the canyon. Several families live on the hills behind them. This is a mid-temperature camp, and there is a public house here. After eating, I still walked north along the canyon.

古文：饭，仍北行峡中。其内石峰四五，离立峥峥。
现代文：峡谷中有四五座石峰，各自分开耸立、气势高峻。
English: There are four or five stone peaks in the canyon, each of them towering and imposing.

古文：峡西似有溪北下，路从峡东行，两界山复相持而北。
现代文：峡谷西边似乎有条溪流往北淌走，道路顺着峡谷东边走，东、西两边的山又互相对峙着往北走向。
English: On the west side of the canyon, there seems to be a stream flowing to the north, the road runs along the east side of the canyon, and the mountains on the east and west sides face each other to the north.

古文：坞中皆荒茅沮洳沼沼，直抵师宗，寂无片椽矣。
现代文：坞中全是野草、地势低湿，一直到师宗州，空旷得片瓦无存。
English: In the docks, it is all wild grass, the terrain is low-humidity, all the way to Shizongzhou, and it is so empty that not a single tile remains.

古文：闻昔亦有村落，自普与诸彝出没莫禁，民皆避去，遂成荒径。
现代文：听说过去坞中也有村落，自从普名胜等人出没此地，骚挠百姓，百姓都逃离了，山坞于是成了荒无人烟的通道。
English: It is said that there used to be a village in the dockyard, but since Pu Nansheng and others haunted the area and disturbed the people, they all fled, and the dockyard became a deserted passage.

古文：广西李翁为余言： 师宗南四十里，寂无一人，皆因普乱，民不安居。
现代文：广西府的李翁曾对我说： 师宗州以南四十里，空无一人，都是因为普名胜叛乱，百姓不能安居乐业。
English: Li Weng from Guangxi once said to me: "Forty miles south of Shizongzhou, there is no one. It's all because of the Pu Nansheng Rebellion. People can't live and work in peace.

古文：龟山督府今亦有普兵出没。路南之道亦梗不通。
现代文：龟山督府内现在也有普名胜的军队出没，路南州的路也受阻不通。
English: In Guishan prefecture, there are now also troops of the People's Liberation Army, and the road to Nanzhou is also blocked.

古文：一城之外，皆危境云。 
现代文：师宗州城以外，恐怕都是危险的境地。
English: I'm afraid that everything outside of Shizongzhou is in a dangerous situation.

古文：龟山为秦土官寨。
现代文：龟山是秦土官的山寨。
English: Kameyama is a replica of a Qin governor's residence.

古文：其山最高，为弥勒东西山分脉处。
现代文：这座山最高，是弥勒州东西部山分支的地方。
English: This mountain is the highest, and it is the place where the eastern and western mountains of Maile Prefecture branch off.

古文：其西即北属陆凉，西属路南，为两州间道。
现代文：龟山西面则北连陆凉州，西连路南州，有去两州的小路。
English: On the west side of Kameyama, there is Beilian Lu, Liangzhou, Xili Road, Nanzhou, and there are small roads to the two states.

古文：向设督捕城，中渐废弛。
现代文：龟山从前设有督捕城，现今逐渐失掉作用。
English: Kameyama used to have a governor to capture the city, but now it is gradually losing its role.

古文：秦土官为吊土官所杀，昂复为普所掳。
现代文：秦土官被昂土官杀死，昂土官又被普名胜俘掳。
English: The Qin magistrate was killed by the Aung magistrate, and the Aung magistrate was captured by Funaesho.

古文：今普兵不时出没其地，人不敢行，往路南澂者，反南迂弥勒，从北而向革泥关焉。
现代文：现在普名胜的军队不时地出没这一带，人们不敢从龟山走，去路南州、微江府的人，反而往南绕道弥勒州，再往北朝革泥关走。
English: Now the army of the general scenic spot haunts this area from time to time. People do not dare to go from Kameyama, and those who go to Lunan Prefecture and Weijiang Prefecture instead go south by way of Miele Prefecture, and then go north to Gele County.

古文：益自广西郡城外，皆普氏所慑服。
现代文：大概除了广西府城以外，都被普名胜慑服了。
English: With the possible exception of the city of Guangxi, they have all been won over by the popularity of the name.

古文：即城北诸村，小民稍温饱，辄坐派其赀以供，如违，即全家掳掠而去。
现代文：即便是府城以北的各村庄，只要百姓稍有温饱，普名胜就坐地摊派钱财，如果敢违抗，全家立即被掳掠而去。
English: Even in the villages north of the capital, as long as the people have a little food and clothing, the famous places will sit down and distribute money. If they dare to resist, the whole family will be immediately abducted and plundered.

古文：故小民宁流离四方，不敢一鸣之有司，以有司不能保其命，而普之生杀立见也。
现代文：所以百姓宁愿流离四方，也不敢对官府诉说一个字，因为官府不能保护百姓的生命安全，而普名胜的生杀予夺立即能够实施。
English: Therefore, the people would rather be displaced in all directions, and dare not say a word to the government, because the government cannot protect the safety of the people's lives, and the killing and taking of life of the famous resort can be implemented immediately.

古文：北行二十里，经坞而西，从坞中度一桥，有小水自南而北，涉之，转而西北行。
现代文：往北走二十里，穿过山坞往西走，在坞中过一座桥，有条小河从南往北流，渡过小河，转向西北走。
English: Walk north for twenty miles, walk west through the dock, cross a bridge in the dock, there is a stream flowing from south to north, cross the stream, turn northwest.

古文：瞑色已合，顾仆后，余从一老人、一童子前行，踯躅昏黑中。
现代文：夜色已经降临，顾仆走在后面，我跟随一位老人、一个孩子走在前面，在昏暗中跌跌撞撞地行进。
English: Night had fallen, Gu Min walked behind, I followed an old man, a child walked in front, stumbling in the dark.

古文：余高声呼顾仆，老人辄摇手禁止，盖恐匪人闻声而出也。
现代文：我高声呼叫顾仆，老人立即摇手禁止，是因为怕土匪听见喊声出来抢劫。
English: I called out loudly to my servant, and the old man immediately waved his hand to forbid it, for fear that bandits would hear the shouts and come out to loot.

古文：循坡陟坳十里，有一尖峰当坳中，穿其腋，复西北行。
现代文：顺着坡攀登了十里山坳，有一座尖峰耸立在山坳当中，从尖峰侧面穿过，仍然朝西北走。
English: I climbed the ten-mile ridge along the slope. There was a spike standing in the middle of the ridge. I passed through the side of the spike and still went northwest.

古文：其处路甚泞，蹊水交流，路几不辨。
现代文：这段路十分泥泞，水流交错，几乎辨不清路在哪里。
English: This section of the road is very muddy, the water flows are interlaced, and it is almost impossible to tell where the road is.

古文：后不知顾仆趋何所，前不知师宗在何处，莽然随老人行，而老人究不识师宗之远近也。
现代文：后面不知道顾仆走向什么地方，朝前不知道师宗州在哪里，莽撞地跟着老人走，而老人竟然不了解师宗州的远近。
English: Behind him, Gu Min didn't know where he was going. In front of him, he didn't know where Shizongzhou was. He recklessly followed the old man, who didn't even know how far Shizongzhou was.

古文：老人初言不能抵城，随路有村可止。
现代文：老人开初说到不了师宗州城，顺路有村庄能够住宿。
English: At the beginning, the old man couldn't get to Shizongzhou City, but there were villages along the way where he could stay.

古文：余不信。
现代文：我不相信。
English: I don't believe it.

古文：至是不得村，并不得师宗，余还叩之。
现代文：到这时既找不到村庄，并且看不到师宗州，我又询问老人。
English: By this time, I couldn't find the village and couldn't see Shizongzhou, so I asked the old man again.

古文：老人曰： 余昔过此，已经十四年。
现代文：老人说： 我从前走过这段路，已经十四年了。
English: The old man said, "I have walked this path before, fourteen years ago.

古文：前此随处有村，不意竞沧桑莫辩！ 
现代文：从前路上到处有村庄，想不到现在竟然沧海桑田，无法辨认！ 
English: Once upon a time there were villages everywhere on the road ahead, but now it's a sea of mulberry fields, unrecognisable!

古文：久之，渐闻犬吠声隐隐，真如空谷之音，知去人境不远。
现代文：过了一段时间，渐渐听到隐隐约约的狗叫声，真像空谷之音那样难得，知道距离有人烟的地方不远了。
English: After a while, I began to hear the faint barking of dogs, as rare as the sound of an empty valley, and I knew that I was not far from a populated area.

古文：过尖山，共五里，下涉一小溪，登坡，遂得师宗城焉。
现代文：过了尖山，一共走五里，往下越过一条小溪，上坡，终于到了师宗州城。
English: After passing the cusp of the mountain, we walked a total of five miles, down over a stream, uphill, and finally arrived at Shizongzhou.

古文：抵东门，门已闭，而外无人家。
现代文：抵达城东门，城门已经关闭，但城外没有人家。
English: Arriving at the east gate of the city, the gate has been closed, but there is no one outside the city.

古文：循城东北隅，有草茅数家，俱已熟寝。
现代文：顺着城墙走到城东北角，有几家人住在茅草屋里，都早已熟睡。
English: Walking along the city wall to the northeast corner of the city, there are several families living in thatched huts, all already fast asleep.

古文：老人仍同童子去。
现代文：老人便和孩子离去。
English: The old man left with the child.

古文：余止而谋宿，莫启户者。
现代文：我停下来寻找住处，没有哪一家开门。
English: I stopped to look for a place to stay, but no one answered the door.

古文：心惶惶念顾仆负囊，山荒路寂，泥泞天黑，不知何以行？
现代文：我心中惶惶不安，挂念顾仆背负着行李，山路荒凉，空无一人，再加上泥泞、天黑，不知道他怎么走？
English: My heart is full of trepidation, worried about Gu Min with his luggage on his back, the mountain road is desolate, there is no one, plus it is muddy and dark, I don't know how he is going?

古文：且不知从何行？
现代文：而且不知道他从哪里走？
English: And he doesn't know where he's going?

古文：久之，见暗中一影，亟呼而得之，而后喜可知也！
现代文：过了很久，看见黑暗中过来一个人影，我急忙呼叫并得到回答，这种喜悦，可想而知！
English: After a long time, when I saw a figure in the darkness, I hurriedly called out and received an answer. You can imagine my joy!

古文：既而见前一家有火，趋叩其门。
现代文：不久看见前面有灯光，赶忙过去敲门求宿。
English: Soon he saw a light ahead and hurried over to knock on the door to ask for a place to stay.

古文：即此地外五里尖山之下，时有贼出没。
现代文：这家人开始坚决推辞，我等了很久，才开门让我们进去。
English: The family started pushing back hard, and I waited a long time for them to open the door and let us in.

古文：土人未晚即不敢行，何幸而昏夜过之！ 师宗在两山峡间，东北与西南俱有山环夹。
现代文：烧水煮杨君赠送的粉糕吃，像怡糖般地甘甜。洗脚后垫着草就睡了，半夜又听到雨声。师宗州位于两山之间的峡谷里，东北和西南都有山夹绕。
English: He boiled water to eat the confectionery presented by Yang Jun, which was as sweet as yakitori. After washing his feet, he slept on a bed of grass. In the middle of the night, he heard the sound of rain again. Shizongzhou is located in a canyon between two mountains, with mountains surrounding it in the northeast and southwest.

古文：其坞纵横而开洋，不整亦不大。
现代文：州城所在的山坞纵横开阔，不整齐，也不大。
English: The dock where the state capital is located is wide, not neat, and not large.

古文：水从东南环其北而西去，亦不大也。
现代文：河水从东南边绕到州城北边，然后往西边流去，也不大。
English: The river flows from the southeast to the north of the state capital, and then to the west. It is not large.

古文：城虽砖甃而甚卑。
现代文：城墙虽然是砖墙却很低。
English: The city walls, although made of brick, are very low.

古文：城外民居寥寥，皆草庐而不见一瓦。
现代文：城外民房稀少，全是草房而看不见一片瓦。
English: There are few houses outside the city. They are all grass houses and not a single tile can be seen.

古文：其地哨守之兵，亦俱何天衢所辖。
现代文：这一地区哨所的守军，也都属于何天衙管辖。
English: The garrison of the guard post in this area is also under the jurisdiction of He Tianjun.

古文：城西有通玄洞，去城二里，又有透石灵泉，俱不及游。
现代文：州城西边有通玄洞，距离城二里，还有透石灵泉，都来不及游览。
English: On the west side of the state capital, there is Tongyuan Cave, two miles away from the city, as well as a rock-cut spiritual spring, all of which are too late to visit.

