古文：◎英宗一英宗睿圣文孝皇帝，讳硕德八剌，仁宗嫡子也。
现代文：英宗睿圣文孝皇帝，名叫硕德八剌，是仁宗的嫡亲儿子。
English: Emperor Yingzong Rui Shengwenhiao, named Shu De Baqi, was the legitimate son of Emperor Renzong.

古文：母庄懿慈圣皇后，弘吉剌氏，以大德七年二月甲子生。
现代文：母亲庄懿慈圣皇后，出自弘吉剌氏，于大德二年二月初六生英宗。
English: His mother, Empress Zhuangzhu Cisheng, was from the Hongjitai clan and gave birth to the sixth child, Yingzong, in early February of the second year of the Emperor's reign.

古文：仁宗欲立为太子，帝入谒太后，固辞，曰： 臣幼无能，且有兄在，宜立兄，以臣辅之。 
现代文：仁宗想立他为太子，他却进见太后，极力推辞说： 我年幼无才，况且还有兄在，应立兄长，我愿辅佐他。 
English: Rinzong wanted to appoint him as crown prince, but he went to see the empress dowager and strongly objected, saying, "I am too young and have no talent, and besides, I have an older brother. I should appoint my elder brother, and I would like to support him."

古文：太后不许。
现代文：但太后不答应。
English: The Queen Mother wouldn't allow it.

古文：延祐三年十二月丁亥，立为皇太子，授金宝，开府置官属。
现代文：延三年十二月十九日，册立英宗为皇太子，授予金宝，开建府署设立官属。
English: On December 19th, the third year of the extension, Emperor Yeongjong was enthroned as crown prince, awarded the golden treasure, and the government office was established.

古文：监察御史段辅、太子詹事郭贯等，首请近贤人，择师傅，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：监察御史段辅、太子詹事郭贯等人，首先建议太子亲近贤人，选择师傅，受到太子的赞许。
English: First of all, the inspector of the Imperial Historian's Office, Prince Zhan Zhiguo, and others suggested that the prince be close to the wise man and choose a master, which was praised by the prince.

古文：六年十月戊午，受玉册，诏命百司庶务必先启太子，然后奏闻。
现代文：延六年十月初七，接受玉册。皇上下令各部门事务都要先请示太子，然后上报朝廷。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the 6th year, the Jade Album was accepted. The emperor ordered that all departmental affairs should first be requested from the prince, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：帝谓中书省臣曰： 至尊委我以天下事，日夜寅畏，惟恐弗堪。
现代文：太子对中书省官员说 ：皇上把天下事托付给我，我日夜小心谨慎，唯恐承担不起重任。
English: The crown prince said to the officials of the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture: The emperor entrusted me with the affairs of state. I am careful day and night, lest I cannot bear the heavy responsibility.

古文：卿等亦当洗心涤虑，恪勤乃职，勿有隳坏，以贻君父忧。 
现代文：各位也应除去私心，恭敬勤敏地对待工作，不要办坏事情，给君父带来忧虑。 
English: You should also remove selfishness, treat work respectfully and diligently, and do not do bad things and bring worries to your father.

古文：七年春正月戊戌，仁宗不豫，帝忧形于色，夜则焚香，泣曰： 至尊以仁慈御天下，庶绩顺成，四海清晏。
现代文：延七年春正月十八日，仁宗生病，英宗忧形于色，夜里焚香祈祷，哭着说 ：皇上以仁慈治理天下，百事俱兴，四海清平。
English: On the 18th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 7th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3

古文：今天降大厉，不如罚殛我身，使至尊永为民主。 
现代文：如今天降大灾，不如把惩罚降到我身上，使皇上成为民众的主人。 
English: If a great disaster were to befall today, it would be better to bring the punishment down on me, so that the emperor could become the master of the people.

古文：辛丑，仁宗崩，帝哀毁过礼，素服寝于地，日歠一粥。
现代文：二十一日，仁宗逝世。英宗哀伤尽孝超出了礼制的规定，他穿白色丧服睡在地上，每天只喝一碗粥。
English: On the twenty-first day, Rinzong passed away. Yingzong's mourning and filial piety exceeded the requirements of the etiquette. He wore white mourning clothes and slept on the ground. He only drank a bowl of porridge every day.

古文：癸卯，太阴犯斗。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the 23rd, Ta Yin Xing Ling committed a fight.

古文：甲辰，太子太师铁木迭儿以太后命为右丞相。
现代文：二十四日，太子太师铁木迭儿根据太后的命令出任右丞相。
English: On the 24th, the prince's father-in-law, Tie Mu Di'er, assumed the post of Minister of the Right by order of the empress dowager.

古文：丙午，遣使分谳内外刑狱。
现代文：二十六日，派遣使者分别判定京城内外刑事案件。
English: On the 26th, envoys were dispatched to adjudicate criminal cases in and out of Beijing.

古文：戊申，赈通、漷二州蒙古贫民，汰知枢密院事四员。
现代文：二十八日，救济通州、氵郭州蒙古族贫民。裁减知枢密院事官员四名。
English: On the 28th, relief was provided to the Mongolian poor in Tongzhou and Zhangguozhou, and four officials of the Privy Council were reduced.

古文：禁巫、祝、日者交通宗戚、大官。
现代文：禁止巫祝卜筮之人交接宗戚大官。
English: It is forbidden for those who practice witchcraft, pray to Buddha, or practice divination to succeed to the position of grand chancellor.

古文：二月壬子，罢造永福寺。
现代文：二月初二，停建永福寺。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the construction of Yongfu Temple was suspended.

古文：赈大同、丰州诸驿饥。
现代文：救济大同、丰州各驿站饥荒。
English: Relief for the famine in Datong and Toyosu.

古文：以江浙行省左丞相黑驴为中书平章政事。
现代文：任命江浙行省左丞相黑驴为中书平章政事。
English: Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Vice-Minister of the Left, Black Donkey, was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of the Central Government.

古文：丁巳，修佛事。
现代文：初七，修作佛事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the school year, they began to practice Buddhism.

古文：戊午，祭社稷。
现代文：初八，祭祀土神谷神。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the shrine is dedicated to the god of the valley, Tsuchigami.

古文：建御容殿于永福寺。
现代文：在永福寺里建造御容殿。
English: Goryo-den Hall was built in Eifuku-ji Temple.

古文：汰富民窜名宿卫者，给役蒙古诸驿。
现代文：裁除挂名宿卫人员中的富家子弟，派往蒙古族居住区各驿站。
English: The children of rich families among the registered guards were dismissed and sent to various stations in the Mongolian residential areas.

古文：己未，命储粮于宣德、开平、和林诸仓，以备赈贷供亿。
现代文：初九，下令储粮于宣德、开平、和宁等地仓库，以备赈贷供应之需。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, he ordered the storage of grain in warehouses in Xuande, Kaiping, and Haining to prepare for the need for loan supply.

古文：复以都水监隶中书。
现代文：再次将都水监隶属于中书省。
English: Once again, the Metropolitan Waterworks Supervisor will be subordinated to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：辛丑，太阴犯轩辕御女。
现代文：十一日，太阴星凌犯轩辕御女。
English: On the 11th day, Tai Yin Xing raped Xuan Ye's daughter.

古文：平章政事赤斤铁木儿、御史大夫脱欢罢为集贤大学士。
现代文：平章政事赤斤铁木儿、御史大夫脱欢降职为集贤大学士。
English: Heizhang, the political secretary, Akakjin, the cabinet secretary, and Goshi, the doctor of history, left the party and were demoted to the position of Jixian University scholars.

古文：壬戌，太阴犯灵台。
现代文：十二日，太阴星凌犯灵台。
English: On the twelfth day, the great Yin star crossed the grave.

古文：甲子，铁木迭儿、阿散请捕逮四川行省平章政事赵世延赴京。
现代文：十四日，铁木迭儿、阿散奏请将四川行省平章政事赵世延抓到京城。
English: On the 14th, Tie Mu Di'er and Ah Sang requested that Zhao Shiyan, the political secretary of Pingzhang Province in Sichuan Province, be arrested and brought to Beijing.

古文：参议中书省事乞失监坐鬻官，刑部以法当杖，太后命笞之，帝曰： 不可。
现代文：参议中书省事乞失监犯卖官之罪，刑部依法判决打板子，太后下令用鞭打。英宗说： 不行。
English: In the counselor's report, the crime of begging and losing custody of the offender and selling official came from the Ministry of Justice. The criminal justice department decided to beat the board according to the law, and the empress dowager ordered to use whipping. Yingzong said: No.

古文：法者天下之公，徇私而轻重之，非示天下以公也。 
现代文：法令是公之于天下的，徇私情而轻重不当，就不能以公心示天下。 
English: Laws and ordinances are made public to the world. If they are made public out of selfishness, they cannot be made public out of sincerity.

古文：卒正其罪。
现代文：结果依法处置。
English: As a result, it was disposed of in accordance with the law.

古文：丙寅，以陕西行省平章政事赵世荣为中书平章政事，江西行省右丞木八剌为中书右丞，参知政事张思明为中书左丞，中书左丞换住罢为岭北行省右丞。
现代文：十六日，任命陕西行省平章政事赵世荣为中书平章政事，江西行省右丞木八剌为中书右丞，参知政事张思明为中书左丞，中书左丞换住降职为岭北行省右丞。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Shirong, the political secretary of Pingzhang Province in Shaanxi Province, was appointed as the political secretary of Zhongshu Pingzhang Province, Mibatang, the political secretary of Jiangxi Province, was appointed as the political secretary of Zhongshu Pingzhang Province, Zhang Siming, the political secretary of Sanzhi Province, was appointed as the political secretary of Zhongshu Pingzhang Province, and Zhang Siming, the political secretary of Zhongshu Pingzhang Province, was appointed as the political secretary of Zhongshu Pingzhang Province, Mibatang, the political secretary of Jiangxi Province, was appointed as the political secretary of

古文：丁卯，太阴犯日星。
现代文：十七日，太阴星凌犯日星。
English: On the seventeenth day, the great yin star overtook the sun star.

古文：白云宗总摄沈明仁为不法坐罪，诏籍江南冒为白云僧者为民。
现代文：白云宗总摄沈明仁犯法坐罪，下诏将江南冒名为白云宗的僧徒登记核实为民。
English: Shen Mingren, the head of the Baiyun sect, committed the crime of law-breaking and issued an edict to register and verify the monks of the Baiyun sect in the south of the Yangtze River as citizens.

古文：己巳，修镇雷佛事于京城四门，罢上都乾元寺规运总管府。
现代文：十九日，在京城四门修作镇雷佛事活动。撤销上都乾元寺规运总管府。
English: On the 19th, in the four gates of the capital city, there will be activities to repair the town's levees and Buddha statues. The head office of regulation and operation of Shangdu Qianyuan Temple will be revoked.

古文：庚午，太阴犯斗。
现代文：二十日，太阴星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the 20th, Ta Yin Xing Ling committed a fight.

古文：辛未，括民间系官山场、河泊、窑冶、庐舍。
现代文：二十一日，登记民间属于官府的山场、河泊、窑冶、房舍。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the government's mountain sites, river ports, kilns, and houses belonging to the people were registered.

古文：壬申，召陕西行台御史大夫答失铁木儿赴阙。
现代文：二十二日，调陕西行台御史大夫答失铁木儿回朝。
English: On the 22nd, Dr. Mishi, who had been to Shaanxi and Taiwan, returned to China.

古文：以辽阳、大同、上都、甘肃官牧羊马牛驼给朔方民户，仍给旷地屯种。
现代文：将辽阳、大同、上都、甘肃等地官有的羊马牛驼分给北方民户，照旧例给予空地屯田耕种。
English: The government-owned sheep, horses, cattle and camels in Liaoyang, Datong, Shangdu, Gansu and other places will be distributed to the northern households, and the vacant land will be cultivated as usual.

古文：癸酉，括勘崇祥院地，其冒以官地献者追其直，以民地献者归其主。
现代文：二十三日，登记崇祥院的田产。其中冒名将官地献纳者追回原值，将民地献纳者归还原主。
English: On the 23rd, the farmland of Chongxiangin was registered. Among them, the impostor recovered the original value of the official land donor and returned the private land donor to the original owner.

古文：决开平重囚。
现代文：判决开平要犯。
English: The sentence was handed down to an important offender.

古文：丙子，定京城环卫更番法，准五卫汉军岁例。
现代文：二十六日，审定京城环卫更番法，参照五卫汉军年例。
English: On the 26th, the method of changing the guard of the Beijing city sanitation was approved, with reference to the annual case of the five guards of the Chinese army.

古文：丁丑，夺前中书平章政事李孟所受秦国公制命，仍仆其先墓碑。
现代文：二十七日，剥夺前中书平章政事李孟所受秦国公制命，照旧例仆倒其祖先墓碑。
English: On the 27th, Li Meng, who had been deprived of the former title of General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, was ordered by the Qin government to demolish the tombstones of his ancestors as usual.

古文：戊寅，中书平章政事兀伯都剌罢为甘肃行省平章政事，阿礼海牙罢为湖广行省平章政事。
现代文：二十八日，中书平章政事兀伯都剌降职为甘肃行省平章政事，阿礼海牙降职为湖广行省平章政事。
English: On the 28th, the government official of Pingzhang Province, Bo Tuo, was demoted to the government official of Pingzhang Province, Gansu Province, and the government official of Pingzhang Province, Are Hague, was demoted to the government official of Pingzhang Province, Hubei Province.

古文：铁木迭儿以前御史中丞杨朵儿只、中书平章政事萧拜住违太后旨，矫命杀之，并籍其家。
现代文：铁木迭儿借口前御史中丞杨朵儿只、中书平章政事萧拜住违背太后意旨，假托命令杀了他们，并且抄其家产。
English: Tie Mu Di'er, under the pretext that Yang Duo'er, the former Imperial Historian of the Middle Kingdom, and Ping Zhang, the Chinese historian of the Middle Kingdom, had violated the empress dowager's will, killed them on the pretext of an order, and stole their family property.

古文：徽政院使失列门，以太后命请更朝官，帝曰： 此岂除官时耶？
现代文：徽政院使失列门，根据太后命令奏请更换朝廷官员。英宗说 ：这难道是封官的时候吗？
English: The Empress Dowager's order called for the replacement of the imperial officials. Yingzong said, "Isn't it time to lock up the officials?"

古文：且先帝旧臣，岂宜轻动。
现代文：况且是先帝旧臣，怎能轻易更动？
English: Moreover, he is a former emperor and a former minister, how can he be changed so easily?

古文：俟予即位，议于宗亲、元老，贤者任之，邪者黜之可也。 
现代文：等我即位后，与宗亲及元老大臣商议，贤良者任用，奸邪者罢黜，不就得了。 
English: After I ascend the throne, I will consult with my father-in-law and the minister of veterans to appoint the virtuous and dismiss the evil.

古文：司农卿完者不花言： 先帝以土田颁赐诸臣者，宜悉归之官。 
现代文：司农卿完者不花上言 ：先帝赏赐给各大臣的田地，都应当归还官府。 
English: It is not too much to say that the fields given to the ministers by the former emperor should be returned to the government.

古文：帝问曰： 所赐为谁？ 
现代文：英宗问道 ：赐给谁了？ 
English: Yingzong asked: Who was it given to?

古文：对曰： 左丞相阿散所得为多。 
现代文：回答说 ：左丞相阿散得到的最多。 
English: He replied: Azan, the Left Minister, got the most.

古文：帝曰： 予常谕卿等，当以公心辅弼。
现代文：英宗说： 我经常传谕各位，应出以公心辅佐朝政。
English: He said, "I have often preached to you that you should support the government of the Imperial Court with a righteous heart.

古文：卿于先朝尝请海泊之税，以阿散奏而止。
现代文：你在先朝曾经请求海舶税款，由于阿散上奏而制止。
English: You had asked for seagoing tax in the previous dynasty, but it was stopped due to the ascension of Asan.

古文：今卿所言，乃复私憾耳，非公议也，岂辅弼之道耶？ 
现代文：你现在说的话，仍是个人成见，不是出于公心，这哪是辅佐之道？ 
English: What you are saying now is still based on personal prejudice, not out of the public interest. What is the way to help?

古文：遂出完者不花为湖南宣慰使。
现代文：于是逐出完者不花，任为湖南宣慰使。
English: As a result, those who finished the expulsion did not spend any money and were appointed as Hunan Xuan Yue Envoys.

古文：夺僧辇真吃剌思等所受司徒、国公制，仍销其印。
现代文：剥夺僧侣辇真吃剌思等人所接受的司徒、国公的制命，照旧例销毁其印信。
English: Deprive the monks of the precepts of sutra and kokugo accepted by the monks such as Jianzhen and Jisi, and destroy their seal letters as usual.

古文：三月辛巳，以中书礼部领教坊司。
现代文：三月初二，命由中书省礼部领属教坊司。
English: On the second day of March, it was ordered by the Ministry of Religious Affairs of the People's Republic of China.

古文：壬午，赈陈州、嘉定州饥。
现代文：初三，救济陈州、嘉定州饥荒。
English: On the third day of the first month, relief for the famine in Chenzhou and Jiading.

古文：瓜哇遣使入贡。
现代文：爪哇国派遣使者进贡。
English: Java sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：戊子，太阴犯酒旗上星，荧惑犯进贤。
现代文：初九，太阴星凌犯酒旗上星，火星凌犯进贤。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the yin star is the star of the wine flag, and the Mars is the star of the criminal.

古文：征诸王、驸马流窜者，给侍从，遣就分邑。
现代文：征召流亡在外的诸王驸马，给予侍从，派往所分的城邑。
English: He summoned the horses of the kings who were in exile, gave them attendants, and sent them to the cities he had divided.

古文：庚寅，帝即位，诏曰：
现代文：十一日，英宗即皇帝位。下诏说：
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Yeongjong ascended to the throne. The following edict was issued:

古文：洪惟太祖皇帝膺期抚运，肇开帝业；世祖皇帝神机睿略，统一四海。
现代文： 伟大的太祖皇帝顺应天意，始开帝业；世祖皇帝神机妙算，统一天下，以圣继圣。
English: The great great-grandfather emperor complied with the will of heaven and began the imperial career; the great-grandfather emperor used divine cunning to unify the country and follow the saint with the saint.

古文：以圣继圣，迨我先皇帝，至仁厚德，涵濡群生，君临万国，十年于兹。以社稷之远图，定天下之大本，叶谋宗亲，授予册宝。
现代文：到我先皇帝以至仁厚德，涵养民众，治理天下，于今已十年。凭他对国家安危的远虑，奠定了天下的根本，与宗室亲属商议，授我玉册金宝。
English: It has now been ten years since my predecessor, the emperor, governed the world with the utmost benevolence and virtue, nurturing the people. With his foresight of the country's safety and security, he laid the foundation of the world, negotiated with the relatives of the family, and awarded me the golden book.

古文：方春宫之与政，遽昭考之宾天。
现代文：正当太子我参政之时，不想父皇却匆匆归天。
English: When I, the crown prince, entered politics, I didn't want my father, the emperor, to be overthrown, but he hastily ascended to heaven.

古文：诸王贵戚，元勋硕辅，咸谓朕宜体先帝付托之重，皇太后拥护之慈，既深系于人心，讵可虚于神器，合辞劝进，诚意交孚。
现代文：诸王贵戚，元老重臣，都说应体会先帝的重大托付，皇太后的慈祥护持，这件事既已深系人心，怎能让神器虚旷呢？于是共同劝进，诚意可嘉。
English: The noble relatives of kings and emperors, the elders and chief ministers, all said that they should experience the great trust of the former emperor and the kind protection of the empress dowager. Since this matter has been deeply rooted in the hearts of the people, how can the artifact be empty? Therefore, it is commendable to persuade them together.

古文：乃于三月十一日，即皇帝位于大明殿。
现代文：故于十一日即皇帝位于大明殿。
English: Therefore, on the eleventh day, the emperor was located in the Daming Hall.

古文：可赦天下。
现代文：可赦免天下罪人。 
English: He can pardon all the sinners in the world.

古文：尊太后为太皇太后。
现代文：尊奉太后为太皇太后。
English: The revered empress dowager is the great empress dowager.

古文：是夜，太阴犯明堂。
现代文：这天夜里，太阴星凌犯明堂。
English: On this night, a very dark star was the culprit.

古文：壬辰，太皇太后受百官朝贺于兴圣宫。
现代文：十三日，太皇太后在兴圣宫接受百官朝贺。
English: On the 13th, the empress dowager received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials at the Xingsheng Palace.

古文：铁木迭儿进开府仪同三司、上柱国、太师。
现代文：铁木迭儿进爵为开府仪同三司、上柱国、太师。
English: Tiemu Dier was knighted as Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Shangzhu Guo, and Taishi.

古文：敕群臣超授散官者，朝会毋越班次。
现代文：敕令群臣超授散官者，朝会时不得越出班次。
English: Those who have ordered their retainers to super-distribute officials are not allowed to exceed their shifts when meeting with the emperor.

古文：赐诸王也孙铁木儿、脱脱那颜等金银、币帛有差。
现代文：赏赐诸侯王也孙铁木儿、脱脱那颜等人金银钱帛不等。
English: The reward of the princes and kings, the descendants of Tiemu Er, the people who got rid of that face, and so on ranged from gold and silver coins.

古文：赈宁夏路军民饥。
现代文：赈济宁夏路军民饥荒。
English: The soldiers and people of Ningxia Road, Fujian Province, suffered from famine.

古文：甲午，作佛事于宝慈殿，赈木怜、浑都儿等十一驿饥。
现代文：十五日，在宝慈殿做佛事活动。赈济木怜、浑都儿等十一处驿站饥荒。
English: On the fifteenth day, Buddhist activities were held at Baozi Hall. Eleven stations, including Qizhi Murei and Hundu'er, suffered from famine.

古文：乙未，日明晕若连环。
现代文：十六日，日晕出现，像环形。
English: On the 16th, a halo appeared, like a ring.

古文：丙申，斡罗思等内附，赐钞万四千贯，遣还其部。
现代文：十七日，斡罗思等部族内附，赏赐钱钞一万四千贯，遣还其部属。
English: On the 17th, Zhuo Luo Si and other tribals were rewarded with 14,000 yuan in cash and returned to their subordinates.

古文：遣知枢密事也儿吉尼检核巩昌等路屯戍，选甘州戍卒。
现代文：派遣知枢密院事也儿吉尼检查核实巩昌等路屯田戍防情况，挑选甘州戍卒。
English: He dispatched the secretary of the Privy Council to inspect and verify the defense situation of Gongchang and other roads, and select the best soldiers in Ganzhou.

古文：戊戌，汰上都留守司留守五员，定吏员秩止从七品如前制。
现代文：十九日，裁减上都留守司留守官员五名。规定官员品秩止于从七品，仍同前制。
English: On the 19th, the number of officials remaining in the Civil Affairs Department was reduced by five, and the rank of officials was limited to seven, which was the same as before.

古文：庚子，降太常礼仪院、通政院、都护府、崇福司，并从二品；蒙古国子监、都水监、尚乘寺、光禄寺，并从三品；给事中、阑遗监、尚舍寺、司天监，并正四品；其官递降一等有差，七品以下不降。
现代文：二十一日，降太常礼仪院、通政院、都护府、崇福司品秩，皆为从二品；蒙古国子监、都水监、尚乘寺、光禄寺，皆为从三品；给事中、阑遗监、尚舍寺、司天监，皆为正四品；其官员依次降级不一，但七品以下官员不降级。
English: On the twenty-first day, the officials of Taizhong Rite Academy, Tongzheng Academy, Dugofu, and Sofu were all downgraded to the second grade; the Mongolian State Children's Supervisor, Doushui Supervisor, Shangzheng Temple, and Guanglu Temple were all downgraded to the third grade; and the officials of Genshizhong, Zouyi Supervisor, Shangshe Temple, and Sityen Supervisor were all downgraded to the fourth grade; their officials were downgraded in different order, but officials below the seventh grade were not downgraded.

古文：赐边戍诸王、驸马及将校士卒金银、币帛有差。
现代文：赏赐边地戍守的诸王、驸马及将校士兵金银钱帛不等。
English: The kings, horses, officers and soldiers who guarded the border were rewarded with gold, silver and money.

古文：市羊五十万、马十万，赡北边贫乏者。
现代文：买羊五十万只、马十万匹，供给北方边地贫乏者。
English: He bought five hundred thousand sheep and a hundred thousand horses, and gave them to the poor in the land of the north.

古文：辛丑，禁擅奏玺书。
现代文：二十二日，禁止擅自宣奏玺书。
English: On the 22nd, it was forbidden to play the imperial rescript without permission.

古文：以枢密院兼领左、右卫率府。
现代文：命由枢密院兼领左、右卫率府。
English: He was appointed by the Privy Council to head both the Left and Right Guards.

古文：壬寅，降前中书平章政事李孟为集贤侍讲学士，悉夺前所受制命。
现代文：二十三日，将前中书平章政事李孟降职为集贤侍讲学士，悉数剥夺从前所接受的制命。
English: On the 23rd, Li Meng, the former political secretary of the Shuhei chapter of the CPC Central Committee, was demoted to the position of a scholar, and deprived of all the orders he had previously received.

古文：御史台臣请降诏谕百司以肃台纲，帝曰： 卿等但守职尽言，善则朕当服行，否亦不汝罪也。 
现代文：御史台官员请下诏宣谕各衙门整肃台纲，英宗说： 各位只管守职尽言，善的话，我自会遵行，不善也不会怪罪你们。 
English: The officials of the Imperial Historian's Office were asked to issue the following edict to each gate to rectify the platform, and Emperor Yingzong said: "All of you should just do your duty and do your best. If you say something good, I will follow it, and if you do something bad, I will not blame you.

古文：甲辰，诏中外毋沮议铁木迭儿。
现代文：二十五日，下诏朝廷内外不得指责铁木迭儿。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that no one inside or outside the imperial court was allowed to criticize Tie Mu Di'er.

古文：敕罢医、卜、工匠任子，其艺精绝者择用之。
现代文：敕令罢免医卜工匠子弟顶职，对其中技艺精巧者加以选择使用。
English: The imperial edict removed the top positions from the children of medical artisans, and those with exquisite skills were selected for use.

古文：丙午，有事于南郊，告即位。
现代文：二十七日，祭天于南郊，告以即皇帝位。
English: On the 27th day, he held a festival in the southern suburbs and was proclaimed emperor.

古文：丁未，罢崇祥院，以民匠都总管府隶将作院。
现代文：二十八日，撤销崇祥院，将民匠都总管府隶属于将作院。
English: On the 28th, Chongxiang Institute was revoked, and the General Administration of the People's Handicrafts Capital was subordinated to Chongxiao Institute.

古文：夏四月庚戌，有事于太庙，告即位。
现代文：夏四月初一，在太庙祭祖，告以即皇帝位。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, at the ancestral temple festival, he was proclaimed emperor.

古文：追夺佛速司徒官。
现代文：追夺佛速的司徒官职。
English: The pursuit of Buddha's speed leads to the post of magistrate.

古文：罢少府监，复仪凤、教坊、广惠诸司品秩。
现代文：撤销少府监。恢复仪凤司、教坊司、广惠司等部门品秩。
English: The junior prefectural inspector was revoked, and the ranks of departments such as the Department of Ceremonies, the Department of Education, and the Department of Welfare were restored.

古文：罢行中书省丞相，河南行省丞相也先铁木儿、湖广行省丞相朵儿只的斤、辽阳行省丞相，并降为本省平章政事，惟征东行省丞相高丽王不降。
现代文：撤销行中书省丞相官职。河南行省丞相也先铁木儿、湖广行省丞相朵儿只的斤、辽阳行省丞相，皆降级为本省平章政事，仅征东行省丞相高丽国王不降级。
English: The posts of the provincial chancellor of Zhoushi Province were revoked. The provincial chancellor of Henan Province was also downgraded to Tiemu Er, the provincial chancellor of Hukang Province was downgraded to Duodecang, and the provincial chancellor of Liaoyang Province was downgraded to Pingzhang of this province. Only the provincial chancellor of the Eastern Expedition, King Goryeo, was not downgraded.

古文：赐诸王铁木儿不花钞万五千贯。
现代文：赏赐诸王铁木儿不花钱钞一万五千贯。
English: King Tiemu'er was rewarded with fifteen thousand crowns in free money.

古文：甲寅，太白犯填星。
现代文：初五，金星凌犯土星。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Venus transits Saturn.

古文：乙卯，复国子监、都水监，秩正三品。
现代文：初六，恢复国子监、都水监品秩为正三品。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the National Children's Supervisor and the Capital Water Supervisor were restored to the rank of Senior Third Rank.

古文：罢回回国子监、行通政院。
现代文：撤销回回国子监、行通政院。
English: Revocation of the return of the provincial overseer and the establishment of the Gyotsu government office.

古文：封诸王彻彻秃为宁远王。
现代文：册封诸王彻彻秃为宁远王。
English: He was crowned the king of Ningyuan.

古文：申诏京师势家与民均役。
现代文：下诏申命京师大族与民众一体服役。
English: The following edict ordered the great people of Beijing to serve as one with the people.

古文：那怀、浑都儿驿户饥，赈之。
现代文：赈济那怀、浑都儿驿户饥荒。
English: There is a famine in the land of Goshen, a famine in the land of Hindustan, and a famine in the land of Seti.

古文：戊午，祀社稷，告即位。
现代文：初九，祭社稷之神，告以即位。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the god of the festival, Shishaku, announced his enthronement.

古文：己未，绍庆路洞蛮为寇，命四川行省捕之。
现代文：初十，绍庆路洞蛮寇掠，下令四川行省加以捕获。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Sichuan Provincial Government to capture the robber bandits in the Shaoqing Road Cave.

古文：祭遁甲神于香山。
现代文：在香山祭祀遁甲神。
English: Sacrifices are made to the armored deity at Mt. Xiangshan.

古文：命平章政事王毅等征理在京诸仓库粮帛亏额，申严和林酒禁。
现代文：下令平章政事王毅等人核实清理京师各仓库粮帛亏空的数额。申命严守和林酒禁。
English: He ordered the Pingzhang government official Wang Yi and others to verify the amount of the deficit of grain in the warehouses of the Beijing division.

古文：庚申，降百官越阶者，并依所受之职。
现代文：十一日，命百官越出阶次者，皆降为实任官职相应的品位。
English: On the 11th day of the month, all officials who were promoted to higher ranks were demoted to the rank corresponding to their actual posts.

古文：以太常礼仪院使拜住为中书平章政事；以西僧牙八的里为元永延教三藏法师，授金印。
现代文：任命太常礼仪院使拜住为中书平章政事。任命西僧牙八的里为元永延教三藏法师，授予金印。
English: Taizhong Rite Academy appointed Baiju as the Censer of Pingzhang, and appointed the Western Monk Gaba as the Former Yongen Teacher of the Three Tibetan Rites, and awarded him a gold seal.

古文：壬戌，太阴犯房。
现代文：十三日，太阴星凌犯房宿。
English: On the 13th, Ta Yin Xing Ling stayed at a criminal's house.

古文：以即位，赏宿卫军。
现代文：因即位，赏赐宿卫军人。
English: As a result of the enthronement, a reward was given to the soldiers of the Imperial Guard.

古文：括马三万匹，给蒙古流民，遣还其部。
现代文：收集三万匹马，给予蒙古族流民，遣还原部属。
English: He collected thirty thousand horses, gave them to Mongolian refugees, and repatriated his former subordinates.

古文：给通、漷二州蒙古户夏布。
现代文：给予通州、氵郭州蒙古族民户夏布。
English: Mongolian households in Tongzhou and Zhangguozhou will be given "Xiabo."

古文：铁木迭儿请参决政务，禁诸臣毋隔越擅奏，从之。
现代文：铁木迭儿请参与决定政务，禁止诸臣不得越级擅自上奏。
English: Tiemu Di'er, please participate in the decision-making of government affairs, and prohibit all ministers from acting above their rank without permission.

古文：乙丑，仁宗丧卒哭，作佛事七日。
现代文：接受这项建议。十六日，仁宗丧满百日，做佛事七天。
English: On the 16th, the 100th day of the funeral of the Rinzong and seven days of Buddhist services were completed.

古文：戊辰，车驾幸上都。
现代文：十三日，皇帝车驾临幸上都。
English: On the 13th, the emperor drove to Shangdu.

古文：海运至直沽，调兵千人防戍。
现代文：海运到直沽，调兵千人防守。
English: It was transported by sea to Naosuke, and a thousand soldiers were sent to defend the city.

古文：封王煦为鸡林郡公。
现代文：封王煦为鸡林郡公。
English: He was named the Duke of Jilin County.

古文：议祔仁宗，以阴阳拘忌，权结彩殿于太室东南，以奉神主。
现代文：集议以仁宗神主礻付庙，因阴阳家忌讳，暂且编结彩殿于太室东南方，以供奉神主。
English: It was decided to build a temple dedicated to the god of the Rinzong sect, but due to the taboo of yin and yang, it was decided to temporarily build the Saiden hall in the southeastern part of the Taimuro to worship the god.

古文：己巳，河间、真定、济南等处蒙古军饥，赈之。
现代文：二十日，河间、真定、济南等处蒙古军饥荒，赈济了他们。
English: On the 20th, the Mongol army was starving in places such as Kawama, Jinding, and Jinan, and they were given food.

古文：罢市舶司，禁贾人下番。
现代文：撤销市舶司，禁止商人前往外国。
English: The city's shipping department was abolished, and merchants were prohibited from traveling abroad.

古文：课回回散居郡县者，户岁输包银二两。
现代文：对散居郡县的回回族人课税，每年输纳包银二两。
English: The Hui people who live in scattered counties and counties are taxed and lose up to two bags of silver a year.

古文：增两淮、荆湖、江南东西道田赋，斗加二升。
现代文：增加两淮、荆湖、江南东西道田赋，每斗添加二升。
English: The Tianfu of the two Huai, Jinghu and East and West Jiangnan provinces will be increased by two liters per dou.

古文：赈大都、净州等处流民，给粮马，遣还北边。
现代文：赈济大都、净州等处流民，给予粮食马匹，遣还北方边地。
English: He gave money to the displaced people in Dadu, Jingzhou and other places, gave them grain horses, and repatriated them to the northern border areas.

古文：戊寅，以蒙古、汉人驿传复隶通政院。
现代文：二十九日，将蒙古、汉人驿传再次隶属通政院。
English: On the 29th, the Mongolian and Chinese embassies were once again subordinated to the State Council.

古文：有献七宝带者，因近臣以进，帝曰： 朕登大位，不闻卿等荐贤而为人进带，是以利诱朕也，其还之。 
现代文：有人托近臣献纳七宝带，英宗说： 我登临大位，不见各位推荐贤才而替人献纳宝带，这是以利诱我。把宝带还给献纳者。 
English: When someone asked a close vassal to donate a seven-treasure belt, Emperor Yingzong said, "Since I ascended to the throne, I have not seen any of you recommending a sage to donate a treasure belt on behalf of someone else. This is to entice me with interest. Return the treasure belt to the donor."

古文：是月，左卫屯田旱、蝗，左翊屯田虫食麦苗，亳州水。
现代文：这个月，左卫屯田发生旱灾、蝗灾，左翊屯田发生虫灾，麦苗被吃。亳州发生水灾。
English: This month, droughts and locust plagues occurred in Zuoyutunten, insect plagues occurred in Zuoyutunten, and wheat seedlings were eaten. Floods occurred in Luzhou.

古文：五月己卯，禁僧驰驿，仍收元给玺书。
现代文：五月初一，禁止僧徒驰驿，照旧例收回原给玺书。
English: On the first day of May, it was forbidden for monks to gallop, and the original edict was withdrawn as usual.

古文：庚辰，上都留守贺伯颜坐便服迎诏弃市，籍其家。
现代文：初二，上都留守官贺伯颜坐便服迎诏罪名被杀，家产被抄。
English: On the second day of junior high school, He Boyan, a left-behind official in Shangdu, was killed for the crime of wearing a casual dress to welcome the emperor, and his family property was confiscated.

古文：辛巳，汝宁府霖雨伤麦禾，发粟五千石赈粜之。
现代文：初三，汝宁府久雨伤害麦谷，调发粮食五千石加以赈济平卖。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the long rain in Runnin hurt the wheat valley, and 5,000 koku of grain was allocated and sold at a reduced price.

古文：丁亥，罢沅陵县浦口千户所。
现代文：初九，撤销沅陵县浦口千户所。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the 1,000-household post in Pukou, Fuling County, was abolished.

古文：己丑，中书省臣请禁擅奏除拜，帝曰： 然恐朕遗忘，或乘间奏请，滥赐名爵，汝等当复以闻。 
现代文：十一日，中书省臣奏请禁止擅自申奏任官，英宗说： 但我怕一时忘记，如有人趁机奏请，以致滥赐名号，你们应当再次奏闻。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Minister of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy forbade anyone to apply for an appointment without permission, and Yingzong said: But I am afraid to forget for a moment, if someone takes the opportunity to apply for an appointment, so that the name is given out indiscriminately, you should apply again.

古文：复置称海、五条河屯田。
现代文：再次设置称海、五条河等处屯田。
English: Once again, military garrisons were set up in places such as Shakaima and Gojo-gawa.

古文：命僧祷雨。
现代文：命僧侣祈祷降雨。
English: The monks prayed for rain.

古文：大同云内、丰、胜诸郡县饥，发粟万三千石贷之。
现代文：大同路云内、丰、胜等州县饥荒，调发粮食一万三千石加以赈济。
English: Datong Road, Yunnai, Feng, Sheng and other counties suffered from famine, and 13,000 kilos of grain were allocated to alleviate the situation.

古文：左丞相阿散罢为岭北行省平章政事，以拜住为中书左丞相，乃剌忽、塔失海牙并为中书平章政事，只儿哈郎为中书参知政事。
现代文：左丞相阿散降职为岭北行省平章政事。任命拜柱为中书左丞相，乃剌忽、塔失海牙皆为中书平章政事，只儿哈郎为中书参知政事。
English: Sajo Minister Ahsan was demoted to the position of Pingzhang Political Affairs of Lingbei Province, Baizhu was appointed to the position of Sajo Sajo Political Affairs of Zhongshu, Naozhuang and Taozhuang were both appointed to the position of Sajo Pingzhang Political Affairs of Zhongshu, and only Haro was appointed to the position of Sajo Sanzhang Political Affairs of Zhongshu.

古文：庚寅，太阴犯心。
现代文：十二日，太阴星凌犯心宿。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, the great Yin star overtook the criminal's heart.

古文：辛卯，参知政事钦察罢为集贤学士。
现代文：十三日，参知政事钦察降职为集贤学士。
English: On the 13th, the councillor and politician, Kincha, was demoted to the rank of scholar.

古文：赈上都城门及驻冬卫士。
现代文：赈济上都城门及冬季驻防卫士。
English: The gate of the Shangdu city and the guards stationed there in winter are provided by the government.

古文：遣使榷广东番货，弛陕西酒禁。
现代文：遣使对广东番货征税。放松陕西酒禁。
English: The envoy levied taxes on goods from Guangdong and relaxed the ban on alcohol in Shaanxi.

古文：壬辰，和林民阎海瘗殍死者三千余人，旌其门。
现代文：十四日，和林百姓阎海收葬死者遗骸三千多具，旌表其门户。
English: On the 14th, more than three thousand remains of the dead were collected and buried by the people of Yanhai, and the portal was opened.

古文：癸巳，太阴犯天狗。
现代文：十五日，太阴星凌犯天狗。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Yin star overtook the Tengu star.

古文：甲午，沈阳军民饥，给钞万二千五百贯赈之。
现代文：十六日，沈阳军民饥荒，给予钱钞一万二千五百贯加以赈济。
English: On the 16th, Shenyang's soldiers and people were starving, and 12,500 kang in money and banknotes were given to relieve the situation.

古文：乙未，请大行皇帝谥于南郊。
现代文：十七日，请已故皇帝谥号于南郊。
English: On the 17th, the late emperor's funeral procession left from the southern suburb.

古文：丙申，太白犯毕。
现代文：十八日，金星凌犯毕宿。
English: On the 18th, Jin Xing Ling committed suicide.

古文：禁宗戚权贵避徭役及作奸犯科。
现代文：禁止宗戚权贵之家逃避徭役及为非作歹。
English: It is forbidden for the families of influential relatives to evade their duties and commit misdeeds.

古文：戊戌，有告岭北行省平章政事阿散、中书平章政事黑驴及御史大夫脱忒哈、徽政使失列门等与故要束谋妻亦列失八谋废立，拜住请鞫状，帝曰： 彼若借太皇太后为词，奈何？ 
现代文：二十日，有人告发岭北行省平章政事阿散、中书平章政事黑驴以及御史大夫脱忒哈、徽政使失列门等人与已故要束谋之妻亦列失八阴谋废立，拜住奏请加以审讯核实，英宗说 ：他们如以太皇太后为托词，怎么办？ 
English: On the 20th, it was reported that Ling Beihang Province Pingzhang Political Affairs Asan, Zhongshu Pingzhang Political Affairs Black Donkey, as well as the Imperial Historian Decheng Ha, the Empress's political envoy Shou Limen and the wife of the deceased wanted to conspire also listed the lost eight conspiracies to be abolished. Please go to the trial to verify. Yingzong said: What if they use the Empress Dowager as a pretext?

古文：命悉诛之，籍其家。
现代文：下令全数诛杀，抄其家产。
English: The order was given to kill all of them and confiscate their property.

古文：追封陇西公汪世显为陇右王。
现代文：追封陇西公汪世显为陇右王。
English: Wang Shixian, the Duke of Western Gansu, was crowned the rightful king of Gansu.

古文：辛丑，以知枢密院事铁木儿脱为中书平章政事。
现代文：二十三日，任命知枢密院事铁木儿脱为中书平章政事。
English: On the 23rd, Tiemu Ertu, Secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, was appointed to the post of the Secretary of the State Council.

古文：壬寅，监察御史请罢僧、道、工、伶滥爵及建寺、豢兽之费。
现代文：二十四日，监察御史奏请罢免僧道工匠伶人滥用的名号以及建寺庙，养禽兽的费用。
English: On the 24th, the inspector of the historical record requested that the abuse of the name and the construction of the temple and the cost of raising animals and animals by the monks and craftsmen be removed.

古文：甲辰，以诛阿散、黑驴、贺伯颜等诏天下。
现代文：二十六日，将诛杀阿散、黑驴、贺伯颜等人之事诏告天下。
English: On the 26th, they announced to the world that they had beaten and killed Asan, Black Donkey, He Boyan and others.

古文：敕百司日勤政务，怠者罪之。
现代文：敕令各衙门勤于政务，懈怠者治罪。
English: The emperor ordered all officials to be diligent in government affairs, and those who slacked off were punished.

古文：丙午，御史刘恒请兴义仓及夺僧、道官。
现代文：二十八日，御史刘恒奏请兴办义仓及剥夺僧道官职。
English: On the 28th, Grand Historian Liu Hengso requested the establishment of a benevolent warehouse and the deprivation of the monk's official post.

古文：敕捕亦列失八子江浙行省平章政事买驴，仍籍其家。
现代文：敕令逮捕亦列失八之子江浙行省平章政事买驴，照例抄其家产。
English: The arrest order also listed the lost eighth son of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Pingzhang, to buy a donkey, and his family property was copied as usual.

古文：丁未，封王禅为云南王，往镇其地。
现代文：二十九日，封王禅为云南王，前去镇守该地。
English: On the 29th, King Zen was proclaimed the king of Yunnan and went to the town to defend the area.

古文：饶州番阳县进嘉禾，一茎六穗。
现代文：饶州番阳县进献嘉禾，一茎结出六穗。
English: Raozhou Panyang County donated Jiahe, and one stem produced six ears.

古文：以贺伯颜、失列门、阿散家赀、田宅赐铁木迭儿等。
现代文：将贺伯颜、失列门、阿散家资田宅赐给铁木迭儿等人。
English: He gave He Boyan, Zhulimen, and the Asan family's Zidan residence to Tie Mu Di'er and others.

古文：六月己酉，流徽政院使米薛迷于金刚山。
现代文：六月初一，流放徽政院使米薛迷到金刚山。
English: On the first day of June, the banishment of Hui Seongin made Mi Xue fan to Mount Kumgang.

古文：以脱忒哈、失列门故夺人畜产归其主。
现代文：把脱忒哈、失列门从前掠夺他人的牲畜产业归还原主。
English: Return to the original owners the livestock properties that were previously plundered from others.

古文：甲寅，前太子詹事床兀儿伏诛。
现代文：初六，前太子詹事床兀儿因罪被杀。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, the former crown prince Zhan Zhizhi was killed for his crime.

古文：京师疫，修佛事于万寿山。
现代文：京师发生瘟疫，修作佛事于万寿山。
English: There was a plague in Beijing, so he practiced Buddhism on Mount Manshou.

古文：乙卯，昌王阿失部饥，赐钞千万贯赈之。
现代文：初七，昌王阿失部饥荒，赏赐钱钞千万贯加以赈济。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Chang Wang Ah lost part of his wealth due to famine. He was rewarded with tens of millions of money and banknotes to help him out.

古文：赏诛阿散等功，赐拜住以下金银、钞有差。
现代文：奖赏诛除阿散等人之功，赐给拜住以下金银钱钞不等。
English: The rewards for removing Asan and others from their positions ranged from gold and silver banknotes to the following.

古文：丙辰，召河南行省平章政事也仙帖木儿至京师，收脱忒哈广平王印。
现代文：初八，调河南行省平章政事野仙帖穆儿到京师。收缴脱忒哈广平王大印。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he transferred the Henan-bound province of Pingzhang to the Beijing division.

古文：丁巳，以江西行省左丞相脱脱为御史大夫，宗正紥鲁火赤铁木儿不花知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命江西行省左丞相脱脱为御史大夫，宗正扎鲁火赤铁木儿不花知枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the Minister of the Left of Jiangxi Province, Decheng Decheng, as the Imperial Historian, and Zongzheng Zaruhu, the Red Iron Wood and the Flower of Wisdom as the Privy Councillor.

古文：戊午，罢徽政院。
现代文：初十，撤销徽政院。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Imperial Household Agency was abolished.

古文：广东采珠提举司罢，以有司领其事。
现代文：广东采珠提举司撤销，令有关部门代领其事务。
English: The Guangdong Pearl Harvesting Promotion Division was abolished, and the relevant departments were ordered to take charge of its affairs.

古文：封知枢密院事塔失铁木儿为蓟国公。
现代文：封知枢密院事塔失铁木儿为蓟国公。
English: Funchi Privy Council Tower lost its iron wood and became the lord of the country.

古文：己未，定边地盗孳畜罪犯者，令给各部力役，如不悛，断罪如内地法。
现代文：十一日，规定边地盗窃牲畜犯罪的人要为各部服力役，如不悔改，就按内地法令判罪。
English: On the 11th, it was stipulated that people who commit the crime of stealing livestock in the outlying areas should serve as forced laborers for various ministries. If they do not repent, they will be convicted according to the mainland laws and regulations.

古文：庚申，太阴犯斗。
现代文：十二日，太阴星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the seventeenth day, Ta Yin Xing Ling committed a fight.

古文：赐角百二十人钞各千贯。
现代文：赐予角牛氐斗士一百二十人钱钞各一千贯。
English: One hundred and twenty fighters of the Horned Calf Fighting Team were given one thousand Korean won each.

古文：辛酉，诏免僧人杂役。
现代文：十三日，下诏免除僧人杂役。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an edict exempting monks from chores.

古文：壬戌，敕诸使至京者，大事五日、小事三日遣还。
现代文：十四日，敕令各路使者到京师的，大事五天、小事三天返回原地。
English: On the 14th, the emperor ordered all envoys to Beijing to return to their original places within five days for major matters and three days for minor matters.

古文：是夜，月食既。
现代文：这一夜，发生月全食。
English: That night, a total lunar eclipse occurred.

古文：癸亥，太阴犯垒壁阵。
现代文：十五日，太阴星凌犯垒壁阵。
English: On the fifteenth day, Taiyin Xingling broke through the wall.

古文：乙丑，赈北边饥民，有妻子者钞千五百贯，孤独者七百五十贯。
现代文：十七日，救济北方边地饥民，有家小者一千五百贯，单身七百五十贯。
English: On the 17th, relief was provided to the starving people in the northern outlying areas. Those with small families received 1,500 kroner and singles received 750 kroner.

古文：新作太祖幄殿。
现代文：新建太祖幄殿。
English: The newly built Taizokushinden is completed.

古文：西番盗洛各目降。
现代文：西番盗贼洛各目投降。
English: The West Band of Thieves surrenders.

古文：丁卯，太白犯井。
现代文：十九日，金星凌犯井宿。
English: On the 19th, Jin Xing Ling Xuanjing stayed at the inn.

古文：赐诸王阿木里台宴服、珠帽。
现代文：赐予诸王阿木里台宴服与珠帽。
English: All the kings were given Amuridai banquet clothes and beaded hats.

古文：戊辰，赈雷家驿户钞万五千贯。
现代文：二十日，赈济雷家驿户钱钞一万五千贯。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the amount of money given to the Lei family was 15,000 Korean Won.

古文：辛未，太阴犯昴。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星凌犯昴宿。
English: On the 23rd, Taiyin Xingxing committed the crime of squatting.

古文：甲戌，赐北边诸王伯要台等十人钞各二万五千贯。
现代文：二十六日，赐予北方边地诸王伯要台等十人钱钞各二万五千贯。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the northern borderlands were given to ten people such as kings, bishops, and dignitaries, and each was given twenty-five thousand kun.

古文：边民赈米三月。
现代文：赈济边民三个月的粮食。
English: Give three months' worth of grain to the people in the border areas.

古文：修宁夏钦察鲁佛事，给钞二百一十二万贯。
现代文：修作宁夏饮察鲁佛事活动，给予钱钞一百一十二万贯。
English: Ningxia Puncaloo Buddhist activities were carried out, with a total of 1.12 million yuan in cash and banknotes.

古文：丁丑，改红城中都威卫为忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司，隶枢密院。
现代文：二十九日，将红城中都威卫改为忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司，隶属枢密院。
English: On the 29th, Wei Wei, the commander of the Central Capital of Hongcheng, was changed to Zhongyi, the commander of the Imperial Guards and the commander of the Imperial Envoys, who was subordinate to the Privy Council.

古文：罢章庆司、延福司、群牧监、宫正司、辽阳万户府，复徽仪司为缮珍司，善政司为都总管府，内宰司、延庆司、甄用监复为正三品。
现代文：撤销章庆司、延福司、群牧监、宫正司、辽阳万户府。恢复徽仪司名为缮珍司，善政司名为都总管府。内宰司、延庆司、甄用监恢复为正三品。
English: Revoke the titles of Qing Di, Yan Fu Di, Qun Mu Jian, Gong Zheng Di, and Liaoyang Wanyu Fu. Reinstate the titles of Hui Yi Di as Shuo Zhen Di, and Zheng Zheng Di as the General Administration of the Capital. Reinstate the titles of Nai Zai Di, Yan Qing Di, and Zhen Ying Di as the three official titles.

古文：益都蝗，荆门州旱，棣州、高邮、江陵水。
现代文：益都蝗灾。荆门州旱灾。棣州、高邮、江陵等地水灾。
English: Locust plagues in Yidu. Drought in Jingmen Prefecture. Floods in Zhangzhou, Gaoyou, Jiangling and other places.

古文：秋七月戊寅，赐诸王曲鲁不花钞万五千贯。
现代文：秋七月初一，赐予诸侯王曲鲁不花钱钞一万五千贯。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, he gave the vassals of King Chulu a sum of money of fifteen thousand kroner.

古文：命玄教宗师张留孙修醮事于崇真宫。
现代文：命玄教宗师张留孙在崇真宫做醮事活动。
English: Zhang Liusun, the guru of Emperor Xuanzang, is doing an anecdote activity at the Chongzheng Palace.

古文：壬午，立普定路屯田，分乌撒、乌蒙屯田卒二千赴之。
现代文：初五，设置普定路屯田，分出乌撒、乌蒙屯田士卒前往。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Puting Road tunden was set up, and the Usa and Umon tunden soldiers were sent out.

古文：运和林粮于紥昆仓，以便边军，市马三万、羊四万给边军贫乏者。
现代文：从和林运粮到扎昆仓，以方便边防军。买马三万匹、羊四万只，给予边防军士中的贫乏者。
English: He transported grain from Warim to Zakunchang to make it easier for the border guards. He bought thirty thousand horses and forty thousand sheep to give to the poor among the border guards.

古文：癸未，括马于大同、兴和、冀宁三路，以颁卫士。
现代文：初六，征集马匹于大同、兴和、冀宁三路，以分给卫士。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, horses were collected from Datong, Xinghe and Jining and distributed to the guards.

古文：甲申，车驾将北幸，调左右翊军赴北边浚井。
现代文：初七，车驾将临幸北方边地，调拨左右翊军士前往北边浚井。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the driver will drive to the northern edge of Linxing and transfer the left and right sergeants to the northern dredge.

古文：以知枢院事买驴、哈丹并为辽阳行省平章政事。
现代文：任命知枢密院事买驴、哈丹并为辽阳行省平章政事。
English: Appointed Zhizhuang Privy Councillor to buy donkeys, Hardan and Pingzhang political affairs for Liaoyang Province.

古文：丙戌，赐诸王买奴等钞二十五万贯。
现代文：初九，赐予诸王买奴等人钱钞二十五万贯。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the king gave 250,000 kroner in banknotes to those who bought slaves.

古文：丁亥，太阴犯斗。
现代文：初十，太阴星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Ta Yin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：诸王告住等部火，赈粮三月、钞万五千贯。
现代文：诸王告住等部火灾，赈济三个月粮食及钱钞一万五千贯。
English: The kings complained about the fire in Etobe, and were given three months' worth of grain and 15,000 kan bills.

古文：晋王也孙铁木儿部饥，赈钞五千万贯。
现代文：晋王也孙铁木儿部饥荒，赈济钱钞五千万贯。
English: Jin Wang and Sun Tiemu suffered from famine and had to save 50 million yuan in banknotes.

古文：壬辰，罢女直万户府及狗站脱脱禾孙，散辽阳红花万户府兵。
现代文：十五日，撤销女直万户府以及狗站脱脱禾孙。遣散辽阳红花万户府兵丁。
English: On the 15th, Mianzhong Wanjufu and the dog station were revoked. The soldiers of Liaoyang Honghua Wanjufu were dismissed.

古文：遣扈从诸营还大都，禁践民禾。
现代文：派遣扈从各营返回大都，禁止践踏民田禾谷。
English: It is forbidden to trample on people's fields and valleys.

古文：安南内附人陈岩言其国贡使多为觇伺，敕湖广行省汰遣之。
现代文：安南内附人员陈严上言，该国贡使多为刺探情报而来，敕令湖广行省予以减省遣还。
English: Chen Yan, a member of Annan's inner circle, said that most of the country's tributary envoys came to spy for information, and ordered the province of Hunan to reduce and repatriate them.

古文：乙未，赐西僧沙加钞万五千贯，以甘肃行省平章钦察台知枢密院事。
现代文：十八日，赐予西僧沙加钱钞一万五千贯。任命甘肃行省平章钦察台为知枢密院事。
English: On the 18th, Western Monk Sasaka was given 15,000 Korean won in banknotes and coins, and Pingzhang Qinzatai, the governor of Gansu Province, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：回回太医进药曰打里牙，给钞十五万贯。
现代文：回回族太医进献名为打里牙的药品，给予钱钞十五万贯。
English: Hui Taiji donated a medicine called "Dai Li Fang" and was given 150,000 Korean Won in money.

古文：丙申，以昌平、滦阳十二驿供亿繁重，给钞三十万贯赈之。
现代文：十九日，因昌平、滦阳十二处驿站供役繁重，给予钱钞三十万贯赈济他们。
English: On the 19th, due to the heavy workload of the twelve stations in Changping and Shenyang, 300,000 yuan of banknotes were given to help them.

古文：中书平章政事乃剌忽罢。
现代文：中书平章政事乃剌忽罢免。
English: Zhongshu Pingzhang's political career ended abruptly with his dismissal.

古文：降封安王兀都不花为顺阳王。
现代文：降封安王兀都不花为顺阳王。
English: Even if he were to lose his title, he would still be the Sun King.

古文：禁献珍宝制衮冕。
现代文：禁止进献珍宝制作的礼服礼帽。
English: It is forbidden to donate ceremonial dress and hats made of precious stones.

古文：戊戌，荧惑犯房。
现代文：二十一日，火星凌犯房宿。
English: On the twenty-first day, Mars invaded the house.

古文：枢密院臣言： 塔海万户部不剌兀赤与北兵战，拔军士三百人以还，弃其子于野，杀所乘马以啖士卒，请赏之。 
现代文：枢密院官员上言 ：塔海万户部不剌兀赤与北兵作战，率领军士三百人还朝，弃其子女于野外，杀所乘战马给士卒吃，请予奖赏。 
English: An official of the Privy Council said, "Tahai Wanhu Department fought against the Northern soldiers, led 300 soldiers to fight against the Northern soldiers, abandoned their children in the field, killed them, and gave them to the soldiers to eat, please give a reward."

古文：赐钞五千贯。
现代文：赐给钱钞五千贯。
English: Give me five thousand rupees in cash.

古文：斡鲁思辰告诸王月儿鲁铁木儿谋变，赏钞万五千贯，敕中外希赏自请者勿予。
现代文：斡鲁思辰告发诸王月儿鲁铁木儿谋反，赏给钱钞一万五千贯，敕内外官员希图奖赏亲自请求者不得赐予。
English: Lu Sichen denounced Zhu Wang Yue'er and Lu Tiemu'er for plotting a rebellion, and rewarded them with 15,000 kroner in money and banknotes. Officials at home and abroad who want to reward those who request it in person are not allowed to do so.

古文：己亥，太阴犯昴。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星凌犯昴宿。
English: On the 26th day of the lunar month, the planet Taiyin committed the crime of entering and leaving the celestial region.

古文：赐女巫伯牙台钞万五千贯。
现代文：赐予女巫伯牙台钱钞一万五千贯。
English: He gave the witch, Baoga Tai, fifteen thousand crowns in banknotes.

古文：庚子，以江南行御史台中丞廉恂为中书平章政事。
现代文：二十三日，任命江南行御史台丞廉恂为中书平章政事。
English: On the 23rd, the governor of the Southern Yangtze River, Grand Historian Lian Ye, was appointed to the post of Censer Pingzhang.

古文：辛丑，赐公主紥牙八剌等钞七万五千贯。
现代文：二十四日，赐予公主扎牙八剌等人钱钞七万五千贯。
English: On the 24th, Princess Zaga was given 75,000 Korean won in banknotes and coins.

古文：晋王也孙铁木儿遣使以地七千。顷归朝廷，请有司征其租，岁给粮钞，从之。
现代文：晋王也孙铁木儿遣使将七千顷土地归还朝廷，请有关衙门征其租税，每年给予粮食钱钞，接受这项请求。
English: The King of Jin and Sun Temur sent an envoy to return seven thousand hectares of land to the imperial court, and asked the relevant government to collect its taxes and give grain money every year, and accept this request.

古文：以辽阳金银铁冶归中政院。
现代文：将辽阳行省金银铁冶归属中政院管辖。
English: Liaoyang Province's gold, silver and ferrous metallurgy will be under the jurisdiction of the Central Government.

古文：癸卯，赐伶人钞二万五千贯，酒人十五万贯。
现代文：二十六日，赐给伶人钱钞二万五千贯，酿酒工匠十五万贯。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he gave twenty-five thousand kroner in banknotes to the people of Xiang, and one hundred and fifty thousand kroner to the brewing craftsmen.

古文：己巳，以知枢密院事也儿吉尼为江西行省平章政事。
现代文：二十八日，任命知枢密院事也儿吉尼为江西行省平章政事。
English: On the 28th, the Secretary of the Privy Council, Yaerjini, was appointed as the political secretary of Pingzhang, Jiangxi Province.

古文：是月，后卫屯田及颍、息、汝阳、上蔡等县水，霸州及堂邑县蝻。
现代文：本月份，后卫屯田以及颍、息、汝阳、上蔡等州县水灾，霸州及堂邑县蝗蝻成灾。
English: This month, floods hit Tongdian and counties including Handan, Xixi, Ruyang and Shangcai, while locusts infested Bozhou and Dongyi counties.

古文：八月丁未朔，岭北省臣忻都坐以官钱犒军免官，诏复其职。
现代文：八月初一，岭北行省官员忻都坐以官钱犒军之罪免除官职，下诏恢复其职务。
English: On the first day of August, all the officials of Lingbei Xingguo Province were relieved of their official duties for the crime of embezzling public funds, and were ordered to resume their duties.

古文：戊申，祭社稷。
现代文：初二，祭社稷之神。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the god of the shrine is worshipped.

古文：罢曲靖路人匠提举司。
现代文：撤销曲靖路人匠提举司。
English: Revoke the nomination of Qu Jing Road craftsmen.

古文：赈晋王部军民钞二百五十万贯。
现代文：赈济晋王部属军民钱钞二百五十万贯。
English: The military and civilian money belonging to the Royal Department of Fujian and Jin amounted to 2.5 million yuan.

古文：翙星于司天监。
现代文：在司天监祭星。
English: In the priest's celestial overseer.

古文：辛亥，赈龙居河诸军。
现代文：初五，赈济龙居河各军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the armies of Longji River in Fujian Province were formed.

古文：乙卯，赐上都驻冬卫士钞四百万贯。
现代文：初九，赐给上都冬天留守卫士钱钞四百万贯。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the remaining winter guards of Shangdu were given 4 million yuan in banknotes.

古文：诸王木南即部饥，兴圣宫牧驼户贫乏，并赈之。
现代文：诸王木南即部饥荒，兴圣宫牧驼户贫乏，皆予以赈济。
English: There was a famine in the southern part of Zhuwangmu, and the camel herders in Xingshugu were poor. They were all given relief.

古文：丙辰，祔仁宗圣文钦孝皇帝、庄懿慈圣皇后于太庙，铁木迭儿摄太尉，奉玉册行事。
现代文：初十，将仁宗圣文钦孝皇帝、庄懿慈圣皇后神主附祭于太庙。铁木迭儿代行太尉职事，奉玉册办事。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wencheng Xiao and Empress Zhuangzici of the Ren School were enshrined in the Great Temple. Tiemu Di'er acted as the first lieutenant and served as the Jade Book.

古文：太白犯灵台。
现代文：金星凌犯灵台。
English: Venus over the grave.

古文：戊午，铁木迭儿以赵世延尝劾其奸，诬以不敬下狱，请杀之，并究省、台诸臣，不允。
现代文：十二日，铁木迭儿因赵世延曾弹劾其奸谋，加上不敬之罪逮下监狱，奏请杀掉他，并追究省、台诸官员，未得到批准。
English: On the 12th, because Zhao Shiyan had impeached his treacherous plot, plus the crime of disrespect, Tiemu Di'er was arrested and sent to prison. He was asked to kill him, and to investigate provincial and Taiwanese officials, but he did not get approval.

古文：帝幸凉亭，从容谓近侍曰： 顷铁木迭儿必欲置赵世延于死地，朕素闻其忠良，故每奏不纳。 
现代文：英宗临幸凉亭，从容对近侍说： 前不久铁木迭儿想方设法要处死赵世延，我早就闻知赵是忠良之士，所以每次奏请皆不采纳。 
English: Yingzong Rincheng Pavilion, calmly said to the attendants: Not long ago, Tiemu Dier tried every means to execute Zhao Shiyan. I have long known that Zhao is a loyal person, so every request is not accepted.

古文：左右咸称万岁。
现代文：左右之人皆呼万岁。
English: Everyone on the right and left shouted "Long live!"

古文：乙丑，荧惑犯天江。
现代文：十九日，火星凌犯天江。
English: On the 19th, Mars invaded the Tianjiang River.

古文：丁卯，太白犯太微垣右执法。宫人官奴，坐用日者请太皇太后翙星，杖之，籍其资。
现代文：二十一日，金星凌犯太微垣右执法，宫人官奴因用术士请皇太后祭星之罪，受杖责，没收其资金。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Jin Xing Ling was found guilty of being too weak to enforce the law, and the palace officials were punished for the crime of using sorcerers to ask the empress dowager to sacrifice the star, and their funds were confiscated.

古文：脱思马部宣慰使亦怜真坐违制不发兵，杖流奴儿干之地。
现代文：脱思马部宣慰史亦怜真因违制不发兵之罪，杖责流放于奴儿干地方。
English: Dismissing the horse department's condolence history and pitying the real crime of violating the rule of not sending troops, the stick was banished to a dry place.

古文：庚午，发米十万石赈粜京师贫民。
现代文：二十四日，调发十万石米赈济平卖给京师贫民。
English: On the 24th, Jiping sold 100,000 koku of rice to the poor people of Beijing.

古文：壬申，太阴犯轩辕御女。
现代文：二十六日，太阴星凌犯轩辕御女。
English: On the 26th, Taiyin Xingxing raped Xuanzang's daughter.

古文：甲戌，广东新州饥，赈之，河间路水。
现代文：二十八日，广东新州饥荒，予以赈济。河间路水灾。
English: On the 28th, the famine in Xinzhou, Guangdong, was alleviated, and the floods in Hema Road ended.

古文：九月甲申，建寿安山寺，给钞千万贯。
现代文：九月初八，修建寿安山寺庙，给予钱钞一千万贯。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the construction of the Shouan Mountain Temple was given 10 million yuan.

古文：括兴和马以赡北部贫民，禁五台山樵采。
现代文：征收兴和路马匹以供给北部贫民。禁止五台山樵采。
English: Collecting Xinghe Road horses to supply the poor in the north. Prohibiting the mining of Wutaishan rhino horn.

古文：罢上都、岭北、甘肃、河南诸郡酒禁。
现代文：取消上都、岭北、甘肃、河南等地酒禁。
English: The prohibition of alcohol in Shangdu, Lingbei, Gansu, Henan and other places will be cancelled.

古文：乙酉，太阴犯垒壁阵。
现代文：初九，太阴星凌犯垒壁阵。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the great yin and the great yang crossed the wall.

古文：丙戌，荧惑犯斗。
现代文：初十，火星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Mars is a place of violent crime.

古文：壬辰，敕议玉华宫岁享睿宗登歌大乐。
现代文：十六日，敕令商议玉华宫岁享睿宗登歌大乐事。
English: On the 16th, the imperial command deliberated on the Yuhua Palace to enjoy the great music of Ruizong's ascension to the throne.

古文：土番利族、阿俄等五种寇成谷，遣巩昌总帅以兵讨之。
现代文：土番利族、阿俄等五族寇掠成谷，派遣巩昌路总帅领兵讨伐。
English: Five ethnic groups, including the Tubanli and the Ao, raided Chenggu and sent the commander-in-chief of Gongchang Road to lead the troops in the campaign.

古文：循州溪蛮秦元吉为寇，遣守将捕之。
现代文：循州溪洞蛮夷秦元吉为寇，派守将前去捕捉。
English: Qin Yuanji, a barbarian from Xuzhou Creek Cave, was a thief, and the guards were sent to catch him.

古文：癸巳，太阴犯昴。
现代文：十七日，太阴星凌犯昴宿。
English: On the 22nd, Taiyin Xingxing broke into the inn.

古文：沈阳水旱害稼，弛其山场河泊之禁。
现代文：沈阳水旱灾害影响收成，放宽当地山场河泊处的禁令。
English: The floods and droughts in Shenyang have affected the harvest, and the ban on camping in the local mountains and rivers has been relaxed.

古文：戊戌，太阴犯鬼。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星凌犯鬼宿。
English: On the 22nd, Ta Yin Xing overran the haunted house.

古文：己亥，太白犯亢。
现代文：二十三日，金星凌犯亢宿。
English: On the 23rd, Jin Xing Ling committed suicide.

古文：庚子，常澧州洞蛮贞公合诸洞为寇，命土官追捕之。
现代文：二十四日，常澧州洞蛮贞公会合诸洞蛮夷为寇，命令土官追捕他们。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the Changchun-dong Barbarian Immorality Public Meeting ordered the local officials to hunt them down.

古文：癸卯，亲王脱不花、搠思班遣使来贺登极。
现代文：二十七日，亲王脱不花、搠思班派遣使者来恭贺登极。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, Prince Defuhua and Gong Sipan sent an envoy to congratulate the enthronement.

古文：甲辰，云南木邦路土官绐邦子忙兀等入贡，赐币有差。
现代文：二十八日，云南木邦路土官绐邦之子忙兀等人入京进贡，赐予币帛不等。
English: On the 28th, local officials from Mubang Road, Yunnan Province, including He Xuan, the son of Zang Bang, came to Beijing to pay tribute, and were given coins and money.

古文：遣马紥蛮等使占城、占腊、龙牙门，索驯象。
现代文：派遣马扎蛮等人出使占城、占腊、龙牙门，索取驯象。
English: He sent Mazaman and others to Zhancheng, Zhanla and Longya Men to solicit tamed elephants.

古文：以廪藏不充，停诸王所部岁给。
现代文：因库藏不足，停发诸王所部岁赐。
English: Due to insufficient reserves, the distribution of gifts to the royal households was suspended.

古文：冬十月丁未，时享太庙。
现代文：冬十月初二，按时享祭于太庙。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, the festival will be held on time at Taimiao.

古文：庚戌，太阴犯荧惑于斗。
现代文：初五，太阴星凌犯火星于斗宿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the sun is too far from the earth and the moon is too far from the earth.

古文：将作院使也速坐董制珠衣怠工，杖之，籍其家。
现代文：将作院使也速因负责制作珠衣不力之罪，受杖责，被抄家产。
English: The official in charge of the construction of the hospital was also punished with the cane and his family's property was confiscated for the crime of being responsible for the poor production of beaded clothing.

古文：壬子，作佛事于文德殿四十日。
现代文：初七，在文德殿做佛事四十天。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he spent forty days doing Buddhist rituals at the Temple of Literature.

古文：申严两淮盐禁。
现代文：申令严守两淮盐禁。
English: The order is to strictly abide by the salt ban.

古文：丁巳，酉阳耸侬洞蛮田谋远为寇，命守臣招捕之。
现代文：十二日，酉阳耸侬洞蛮田谋远为寇乱，命守土官予以招捕。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Shenyang Shennongdong Barbarian Field was far away from the disturbance, and the local officials were summoned to arrest.

古文：戊午，车驾至自上都。
现代文：十三日，车驾从上都到来。
English: On the 13th, the cars started arriving from all over.

古文：诏太常院臣曰： 朕将以四时躬祀太室，宜与群臣集议其礼。
现代文：下诏给太常院官员说 ：我将按四季亲自祭祀太室，应与群臣会集商议其礼仪。
English: He issued the following edict to the officials of the Imperial Household Agency: "I will personally offer sacrifices to the Empress according to the four seasons, and should discuss the etiquette with the council of retainers."

古文：此追远报本之道，毋以朕劳于对越而有所损，其悉遵典礼。 
现代文：这是追怀远祖报答本亲之道，不得因我劳于对答称扬而有所减损。应完全遵守通常的礼节。 
English: This is the way to pay homage to our ancestors, and it should not be compromised by the fact that I work hard to praise them. The usual etiquette should be fully observed.

古文：安南国遣其臣邓恭俭来贡方物。
现代文：安南国派其臣子邓恭俭进贡当地物品。
English: The State of Annan sent its vassal Deng Gongren to pay tribute with local goods.

古文：庚申，敕译佛书。
现代文：十五日，敕令翻译佛书。
English: On the 15th, the imperial order to translate Buddhist scriptures was issued.

古文：辛酉，赐劳探马赤宿卫者，遣还所部。
现代文：十六日，赏赐慰劳探马赤宿卫人员，遣还原先部属。
English: On the 16th, the personnel of the Akasukabe patrol were given a consolation prize and sent back to their former subordinates.

古文：癸亥，太阴犯井。
现代文：十八日，太阴星凌犯井宿。
English: On the 18th, Taiyin Xing Bingjing stayed at the inn.

古文：乙丑，幸大护国仁王寺，帝师请以醮八儿监藏为土番宣慰司都元帅，从之。
现代文：二十日，驾临大护国仁王寺。帝师奏请任命醮八儿监藏为土蕃宣慰使都元帅，皇帝答应了这个要求。
English: On the 20th, he arrived at the Grand Protector of the country, the Nio-ji Temple. The emperor agreed to his request to appoint Juhachi Jozo as the Marshal of the Imperial Consulate.

古文：酉阳土官冉世昌遣其子冉朝率大、小石堤洞蛮入贡。
现代文：酉阳土官冉世昌派其子冉朝带领大小石堤洞蛮入京进贡。
English: Ran Shichang, the magistrate of Shenyang, sent his son Ran Cho to lead the large and small stone dykes into the capital to pay tribute.

古文：丙寅，定恭谢太庙仪式。
现代文：二十一日，议定恭谢太庙仪式。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was agreed to hold a ceremony to congratulate the temple.

古文：丁卯，为皇后作鹿顶殿于上都。
现代文：二十二日，为皇后在上都建造鹿顶殿。
English: On the 22nd, a deer-roofed hall was built for the empress in Shangdu.

古文：己巳，罢玉华宫祀睿宗登歌乐。
现代文：二十四日，罢免玉华宫祭祀睿宗用的登歌乐曲。
English: On the 24th, the performance of the Song of Ascension used for the Yuhua Palace ritual of Ruizong was cancelled.

古文：敕翰林院译诏，关白中书。
现代文：敕令翰林院翻译诏书须通知中书省。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture shall be notified of the cancellation of the translation of the Imperial Rescript by the Academy of Ling Hanlin.

古文：庚午，命拜住督造寿安山寺。
现代文：二十五日，命拜住监督建造寿安山寺庙。
English: On the 25th, he was appointed to supervise the construction of the Shouan Mountain Temple.

古文：癸酉，流诸王阿刾铁木儿于云南。
现代文：二十八日，流放诸王阿剌铁木儿于云南。
English: On the 28th, the emperors were exiled to Yunnan.

古文：十一月丙子朔，帝斋齐宫。
现代文：十一月初一，英宗驾临斋宫。
English: On the first day of the month of November, Emperor Yingzong arrived at the Palace.

古文：丁丑，恭谢太庙，至仁宗太室，即流涕，左右感动。
现代文：初二，恭谢太庙，一到仁宗太室就泪流满面，左右之人都很感奋激动。
English: On the second day of junior high school, I went to pay my respects at the Imperial Shrine. As soon as I arrived at the Imperial Palace, I was in tears. Everyone around me was very excited.

古文：戊寅，以海运不给，命江浙行省以财赋府租益之，还其直，归宣徽、中政二院。
现代文：初三，因海运不足，下令江浙行省用财赋府租来增添，归还其原价，归属宣徽、中政二院。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, due to the shortage of maritime transport, the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Government ordered the province to increase the rent with funds from the government, return the original price, and belong to Xuanhui and the Second Central Government.

古文：检勘沙、净二州流民，勒还本部。
现代文：检核沙州、净州流民，勒令返回本部。
English: The displaced people in Shazhou and Jingshou were inspected and ordered to return to the headquarters.

古文：以登极，大赉诸王、百官，中书会其数，计金五千两、银七十八万两、钞百二十一万一千贯、币五万七千三百六十四匹、帛四万九千三百二十二匹、木绵九万二千六百七十二匹、布二万三千三百九十八匹、衣八百五十九袭，鞍勒、弓矢有差。
现代文：因登极而大赐诸王百官，中书省会总其数，共计黄金五千两、白银七十八万两、钱钞一百二十一万一千贯、丝币五万七千三百六十四匹、丝帛四万九千三百二十二匹、木绵九万二千六百七十二匹、布二万三千三百九十八匹、衣服八百五十九套，鞍勒弓箭不等。
English: Because he ascended to the throne, he greatly bestowed on all the kings and officials, including the provincial capital of the People's Republic of China, a total of 5,002 tons of gold, 780,000 tons of silver, 1,211,000 tons of banknotes, 57,364 tons of silk coins, 49,322 tons of silk cocoons, 92,672 tons of cotton, 23,398 tons of cloth, 859 sets of clothes, saddles, bows and arrows, and so on.

古文：给岭北驿牛马。
现代文：给予岭北驿站牛马。
English: Giving the cattle and horses of Lingbei Feeding Station.

古文：造今年钞本，至元钞五千万贯、中统钞二百五十万贯。
现代文：造作本年钞本，至元钞五千万贯、中统钞二百五十万贯。
English: The production of this year's banknotes is up to 50 million yuan banknotes and 2.5 million yuan banknotes.

古文：汰卫士冒受岁赐者。
现代文：清理卫士中冒名领受岁赐的人。
English: Purge the guards of the impostors who have received the gift of life.

古文：庚辰，并永平路滦邑县于石城。
现代文：初五，将永平路滦邑县并于石城县。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yongping Road will be extended to Minyi County and Shicheng County.

古文：遣定住等括顺阳王兀都思不花邸财物，入章佩监、中政院。
现代文：派遣定住等人检括顺阳王兀都思不花府邸财物，缴入章佩监和中政院。
English: Dispatching residents and others to inspect the property of the Shunyang Wang Xizhufu Mansion, and submit it to the Zhangpei Supervisor and the Central Government.

古文：禁京城诸寺邸舍匿商税。
现代文：禁止京城各寺庙邸舍隐匿商税。
English: All temples and residences in the capital are prohibited from concealing commercial tax.

古文：辛巳，以亲祀太庙礼成，御大明殿受朝贺。
现代文：初六，因亲祀太庙礼完成，驾临大明殿受群臣朝贺。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the school year, he arrived at the Daming Hall to receive morning greetings from his retainers.

古文：甲申，敕翰林国史院纂修《仁宗实录》。
现代文：初九，敕储存翰林国史院纂修《仁宗实录》。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the "Ninsong Record" was compiled and edited by the Hanlin Institute of National History.

古文：丁亥，作佛事于光天殿。戊子，幸隆福宫。
现代文：十二日，在光天殿做佛事活动。十三日，临幸隆福宫。
English: On the 12th, Buddhist activities will be held at the Kōten-den Hall, and on the 13th, at the Rinzai Longfuku Palace.

古文：己丑，宣德蒙古驿饥，命通政院赈之。
现代文：十四日，宣德府蒙古驿站饥荒，命通政院予以赈济。
English: On the 14th, the Mongolian post of Xuande Prefecture suffered from famine, and it was ordered by the State Council to provide relief.

古文：丁酉，诏各郡建帝师八思巴殿，其制视孔子庙有加。
现代文：二十二日，诏各州府修建帝师八思巴殿堂，其制度超过了孔庙的规模。
English: On the 22nd, all prefectures ordered the construction of the Temple of the Eight Sages, whose system exceeded the scale of the Temple of Confucius.

古文：戊戌，交趾蛮侬志德寇脱零那乞等六洞，命守将讨之。
现代文：二十三日，交趾蛮夷侬志德进犯脱零那乞等六洞，命守将加以讨伐。
English: On the 23rd, the barbaric barbarian Nong Zhide attacked six holes, including the begging hole, and the lifeguards will fight against it.

古文：遣使阅实各行省戍兵。
现代文：遣使检阅核实各行省戍防兵丁。
English: The envoys were sent to inspect and verify each line of provincial defense troops.

古文：己亥，计京官俸钞，给米三分。
现代文：二十四日，计算京官俸禄钱钞，给米占十分之三。
English: On the 24th, the calculation of the Beijing official's salary money increased, accounting for three-tenths of the rice.

古文：癸卯，荧惑犯垒壁阵。
现代文：二十八日，火星凌犯垒壁阵。
English: On the 28th, Mars breached the barrier.

古文：甲辰，铁木迭儿言： 和市织币薄恶，由董事者不谨，请免右丞高昉等官，仍令郡县更造，征其元直。 
现代文：二十九日，铁木迭儿上言： 和市所得织币质劣，由管事官不负责造成，请免除右丞高日方等人官职，照例令州县重制，征缴其原价。 
English: On the 29th, Tiemu Di'er made the following speech: the quality of the money woven with the city's income is inferior, and the steward is not responsible for causing it. Please exempt Ujo Gao, Nippo and others from their official duties, and order the state and county to remake it as usual, and collect its original price.

古文：不允。
现代文：英宗不答应。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：太常礼仪院拟进时享太庙仪式。
现代文：太常礼仪院拟定并呈进时享太庙仪式。
English: The ceremony was planned and presented by the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：十二月乙巳朔，诏曰： 朕祗遹眙谋，获承丕绪，念付托之惟重，顾继述之敢忘。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏说： 我恭循遗谋，得继大统，思虑所托付的重任，顾念继述之志不能忘却。
English: On the first day of December, he issued the following edict: I have faithfully followed the last advice and succeeded to the supreme leadership. I have thought about the important task entrusted to me, and I cannot forget the will to succeed.

古文：爰以延祐七年十一月丙子，被服衮冕，恭谢于太庙。
现代文：于是在延七年十一月初一日，身着礼服礼帽，恭谢于太庙。
English: So on the first day of November in the extended seventh year, wearing a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat, I paid my respects at Taimiao.

古文：既大礼之告成，宜普天之均庆。
现代文：既然大礼已告成，应普天之下，同来庆贺。
English: Now that the grand ceremony has come to an end, the whole world should come together to celebrate.

古文：属兹逾岁，用易纪元，于以导天地之至和，于以法春秋之谨始，可以明年为至治元年。
现代文：而今即将逾岁，故而改换纪元，以宣导天地至和之气，以效法《春秋》谨始的精神，可将明年称为至治元年。
English: Now that I am about to pass the age limit, I have changed the era to promote the spirit of harmony between heaven and earth, and to follow the spirit of the beginning of "Spring and Autumn," I can call next year the first year of governance.

古文：减天下租赋二分，包银五分。
现代文：减免天下租赋二成，包银五分。
English: The reduction and exemption of the world rent is 20%, and the silver is 5%.

古文：免大都、上都、兴和三路差税三年。
现代文：免除大都、上都、兴和三路差税三年。
English: The three-way differential tax of Datu, Shangdu and Xinghe will be exempted for three years.

古文：优复煮盐、炼铁等户二年。
现代文：优免煮盐、炼铁等民户二年。
English: Private households such as boiled salt and iron making will be exempted for two years.

古文：开燕南、山东河泊之禁，听民采取。
现代文：开放燕南、山东河泊的禁令，任凭民人采樵猎取。
English: The ban on hunting in Yan'nan and Shandong's Hebei Province will be lifted, and people will be allowed to harvest and hunt.

古文：命官家属流落边远者，有司资给遣之；其子女典鬻于人者，听还其家。
现代文：命官家属流落边远地方的，有司出资遣还回籍；如有子女典卖给人的，任其返家。
English: If the family members of the appointed officials live in remote areas, they shall be repatriated at the expense of the department; if there are children who have been sold to others, they shall be allowed to return home.

古文：监察御史、廉访司岁举可任守令者二人。
现代文：监察御史、廉访司每年推举可任守令者两名。
English: The Inspector-General of History and the Independent Investigation Department shall annually nominate two persons who may be appointed as guardians.

古文：七品以上官，有伟画长策可以济世安民者，实封上之。
现代文：七品以上官员中，有宏伟规划长远策略可以济世安民的，据实封书上奏。
English: Among officials with seven or more awards, those with grand plans and long-term strategies that can benefit the world and the people shall be recorded in writing.

古文：士有隐居行义，明治体，不求闻达者，有司具状以闻。 
现代文：士人有隐居行义，明于治体，不求闻达者，有关主管衙门应行文奏明。 
English: If a scholar lives in seclusion and practices righteousness, knows how to govern, and does not seek to be well-known, the relevant authorities should be informed.

古文：丁未，播州蜒蛮的羊笼等来降。
现代文：初三，播州譙蛮的羊笼等人来降。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the wild sheep cages of Banshu came down.

古文：庚戌，铸铜为佛像，置玉德殿。
现代文：初六，铸铜做佛像，安置于玉德殿。
English: At the age of six, a bronze Buddha statue was cast and placed in the Jade Hall.

古文：壬子，赐寿宁公主钞七万五千贯。
现代文：初八，赐予寿宁公主钱钞七万五千贯。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he gave Princess Suning seventy-five thousand kan in banknotes.

古文：癸丑，以天寿节，预遣使修醮于龙虎山。
现代文：初九，因天寿节，预先遣使修醮事于龙虎山。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, due to the Tianshou Festival, it was sent in advance to the Longhu Mountain.

古文：乙卯，率百官奉玉册、玉宝，加上太皇太后尊号曰仪天兴圣慈仁昭懿寿元全德泰宁福庆徽文崇祐太皇太后。
现代文：十二日，率领百官奉上玉册、玉宝，加封太皇太后尊号为仪天兴圣慈仁昭懿寿元全德泰宁福庆徽文崇太皇太后。
English: On the 12th, the leading 100 officials presented the jade book and the jade treasure, and the honorary title of the Grand Empress Dowager was given to the Grand Empress Dowager Yi Tianxing, the Grand Empress Dowager Zhaoren, the Grand Empress Dowager Quan De, the Grand Empress Dowager Taining, the Grand Empress Dowager Fuqing, the Grand Empress Dowager Huiwen and the Grand Empress Dowager Chong.

古文：翰林学士忽都鲁都儿迷失译进宋儒真德秀《大学衍义》，帝曰： 修身治国，无逾此书。 
现代文：翰林学士忽都鲁都儿迷失翻译并进呈宋儒真德秀《大学衍义》，英宗说： 修身治国，没有超过这本书的。 
English: Translated and presented by Song Ju Zhendexiu, "The Meaning of University" by Hanlin Baccalaureate, "Hundo Rudor Lost," Yingzong said: "There is no better book for cultivating oneself and governing the country.

古文：赐钞五万贯。
现代文：赐予钱钞五万贯。
English: The amount of money given was fifty thousand crowns.

古文：河南饥，帝问其故，群臣莫能对，帝曰： 良由朕治道未洽，卿等又不尽心乃职，委任失人，致阴阳失和，灾害荐至。
现代文：河南饥荒。英宗询问缘故，群臣不能回答，英宗说： 这是因我治国之道不善，各位又不全心尽职，用人不当，造成阴阳失和，以致灾害接踵而至。
English: Henan famine. When Yingzong inquired about the cause, the ministers could not answer. Yingzong said, "This is because my way of governing the country is not good, and you are not doing your duty wholeheartedly, employing people improperly, causing yin and yang to lose harmony, resulting in disasters one after another.

古文：自今各务勤恪，以应天心，毋使吾民重困。 
现代文：从今以后各位务必勤勉谨慎，以顺应天意，不要使人民陷入重重困苦之中。 
English: From now on, you must be diligent and prudent to comply with the will of heaven, and not let the people fall into many hardships.

古文：太阴掩昴。
现代文：太阴星遮掩昴宿。
English: A cloudy star obscures the inn.

古文：丙辰，以太皇太后加号礼成，御大明殿受朝贺。
现代文：十二日，因太皇太后加尊号礼完成，临御大明殿接受百官朝贺。
English: On the twelfth day, because of the completion of the Great Empress Dowager's coronation ceremony, the Imperial Palace accepted the morning greetings of hundreds of officials.

古文：丁巳，诏谕中外。
现代文：十三日，下诏宣谕朝廷内外官员。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict was issued to officials inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：戊午，太阴犯井。
现代文：十四日，太阴星凌犯井宿。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the star of the sun is too gloomy to commit a crime.

古文：庚申，太阴犯鬼。
现代文：十六日，太阴星凌犯鬼宿。
English: On the 16th, Ta Yin Xing overran the haunted house.

古文：辛酉，作延春阁后殿。
现代文：十七日，修建延春阁后殿。
English: On the 17th, the rear hall of Enshunkaku was built.

古文：壬戌，召西僧辇真哈剌思赴京师，敕所过郡县肃迎。
现代文：十八日，征招西僧辇真哈剌思前来京城，敕令所过州县认真迎接。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the Western Monk Zou Zhenharuxi came to Beijing for recruitment, and the commanding officer went to Zhoushu County to welcome him.

古文：乙丑，翙星于回回司天监四十昼夜。
现代文：二十一日，在回回司天监祭星四十昼夜。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the festival of the return of the priest-overseer is celebrated for forty days and nights.

古文：丙寅，以典瑞院使阔彻伯知枢密院事。
现代文：二十二日，任命典瑞院使阔彻伯知枢密院事。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the envoy of the Emperor and Empress of Sweden was appointed as the Privy Councillor of Bochi.

古文：修秘密佛事于延春阁。
现代文：在延春阁修作秘密佛事活动。
English: Engaged in secret Buddhist activities at Enshunkaku.

古文：丁卯，铁木迭儿、拜住言： 比者诏内外言得失，今上封事者，或直进御前。
现代文：二十三日，铁木迭儿、拜住上言： 先前下诏内外臣工上书论朝政得失。现在上书论事者，有的直接进呈御前。
English: On the twenty-third day, Tie Mu Di'er bowed to the emperor and said, "Previously, it was decreed that ministers at home and abroad should write books on the merits and demerits of the imperial government. Now, some of those who write books on the subject are directly submitted to the emperor.

古文：乞令臣等开视，乃入奏闻。 
现代文：今后请让我等开拆检视，然后入奏皇上。 
English: In the future, please let me wait for the opening and inspection, and then play the Emperor.

古文：帝曰： 言事者直至朕前可也，如细民辄诉讼者则禁之。 
现代文：英宗说： 议论政事的可以直接进呈到我这儿，如是小民告状打官司的就不用送来了。 
English: Yingzong said, "If you want to discuss politics, you can send it to me directly. If you want to file a lawsuit, you don't have to send it to me.

古文：给武宗皇后钞七十五万贯。
现代文：给予武宗皇后钱钞七十五万贯。
English: He gave the Empress Takemune 750,000 kan in banknotes.

古文：以《大学衍义》印本颁赐群臣。
现代文：将《大学衍义》印本分赐给群臣。
English: He gave a printed copy of "The Meaning of University" to his ministers.

古文：戊辰，以太皇太后加号礼成，告太庙。
现代文：二十四日，因太皇太后加尊号礼完成，祭告太庙。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, due to the completion of the ceremony of adding honor to the empress dowager, the temple was announced.

古文：己巳，敕罢明年二月八日迎佛。
现代文：二十五日，敕令撤销明年二月八日迎佛活动。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict revoked the activities to welcome the Buddha on February 8 next year.

古文：中书右丞木八剌罢为江西行省右丞，以中书参知政事只儿哈郎为右丞，江南浙西道廉访使薛处敬为中书参知政事。
现代文：中书右丞木八剌降职为江西行省右丞。任命中书省参知政事只儿哈郎为右丞，江南浙西道廉访使薛处敬为中书参知政事。
English: The Vice-governor of Central Shuxi Province, Mibatang, was demoted to Vice-governor of Jiangxi Province, and the Vice-governor of Central Shuxi Province, Ha Long, was appointed Vice-governor of Central Shuxi Province, and the Vice-governor of Central Shuxi Province, Xue Duxiang, was appointed Vice-governor of Central Shuxi Province.

古文：遣使阅奉元路军需库。
现代文：派遣使者检核奉元路军需库。
English: Send an envoy to inspect the munitions depot in Fengyuan Road.

古文：辛未，拜住进卤簿图，帝以唐制用万二千三百人耗财，乃定大驾为三千二百人，法驾二千五百人。
现代文：二十七日，拜住进呈卤簿图，英宗认为唐朝制度使用一万二千三百人耗费钱财，于是大驾用三千二百人，法驾二千五百人。
English: On the 27th, after a visit to present a book of records, Yingzong thought that the Tang Dynasty system used 12,300 people and spent a lot of money, so he used 3,200 people and 2,500 people.

古文：上思州徭结交趾寇忠州。
现代文：上思州瑶人交结交趾入寇忠州。
English: Upper Shizhou people mingle with each other and move into Qozhongzhou.

古文：癸酉，帝闻贺伯颜母老，悯之，以所籍京兆田硙还其家。
现代文：二十七日，英宗听说贺伯颜之母年老，怜悯她，把所没收的京兆田产归还她家。
English: On the 27th, Yingzong heard that He Boyan's mother was old, took pity on her, and returned the confiscated land to her family.

古文：江浙行省平章政事伯颜察儿、江西行省平章政事白撒都并坐贪墨免官。
现代文：江浙行省平章政事伯颜察儿、江西行省平章政事白撒都皆坐贪污罪罢官。
English: Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province Pingzhang Governor Bo Yanchaer and Jiangxi Province Pingzhang Governor Bai Sadu were both removed from office for corruption.

古文：是岁，决狱轻重七千六百三十事。
现代文：这一年，审核判定案件七千六百三十例。
English: This year, 7,630 cases were reviewed and decided.

古文：河决汴梁原武，浸灌诸县；滹沱决文安、大城等县；浑河溢，坏民田庐。
现代文：汴梁路原武县黄河决口，淹没许多州县。滹沱河决口于文安、大城等县境。浑河水溢，毁坏民户田产房舍。
English: Qiliang Road, formerly the mouth of the Yellow River in Wuxian County, flooded many counties and prefectures. The mouth of the Qiliang River is located in Wen'an, Dacheng and other counties. The Hunhe River overflowed, destroying the maternity houses of private households.

古文：秦州成纪县暴雨，山崩，朽坏坟起，覆没畜产。
现代文：秦州成纪县暴雨引起山崩，冲下的土石堆起，埋压牲畜田产。
English: Torrential rain in Qinzhou Chengji County caused landslides, washed-down debris piled up, burying livestock fields.

古文：汴梁延津县大风昼晦，桑多损。
现代文：汴梁路延津县刮大风，白日如同黑夜，桑树多受折损。
English: Yanjin County, Huliang Road, Yanjin County, the wind is blowing, the day is like night, and the mulberry trees are mostly damaged.

古文：大同雨雹，大者如鸡卵。
现代文：大同路下冰雹，大的像鸡蛋。
English: Hailstones, as big as eggs, fell on Datong Road.

古文：诸卫屯田陨霜害稼，益津县雨黑霜。
现代文：各卫所屯田降霜损害庄稼。益津县天降黑霜。
English: Frost damage to crops in the fields of the sanatoriums. Black frost fell in Izu County.

古文：至治元年春正月丁丑，修佛事于文德殿。
现代文：至治元年春正月初三，在文德殿做佛事活动。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：壬午，增置漷州都漕运司同知、运判各一员。
现代文：初八，增设氵郭州都漕运司同知、运判各一名。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Shengguozhou Metropolitan Rowing Transport Division was added, and one person was awarded for each transport.

古文：甲申，召高丽王王章赴上都。
现代文：初十，征召高丽国王王璋前往上都。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the king of Goryeo, Wang Ye, was summoned to Shangdu.

古文：丙戌，帝服衮冕，享太庙，以左丞相拜住亚献，知枢密院事阔彻伯终献。
现代文：十二日，英宗穿戴礼服礼帽，祭享于太庙，命左丞相拜住为亚献，知枢密院阔彻伯终献。
English: On the twelfth day, Yingzong wore a ceremonial dress and cap, and the ceremony was held in the Great Temple. He ordered the left minister to worship for the second offering, and the final offering was made by Kuo Che Bo of the Privy Council.

古文：诏群臣曰： 一岁惟四祀，使人代之，不能致如在之诚，实所未安。
现代文：宣诏群臣说 ：一年只有四次祭享，派人代行，不能表现祭神如神在的诚意，这使我心不安。
English: The emissaries said, "There are only four times a year when the deities are worshipped, so we have to send someone to act on our behalf. We can't show the sincerity of worshipping the deities as if they are real. This makes me uneasy."

古文：岁必亲祀，以终朕身。 
现代文：每年我必定亲自祭祀，并终身如此。 
English: Every year I have to personally perform the sacrifice, and I will continue to do so for the rest of my life.

古文：廷臣或言祀事毕宜赦天下，帝谕之曰： 恩可常施，赦不可屡下。
现代文：朝廷大臣中，有人说，祭祀完毕应赦免天下罪徒。英宗晓谕他们说 ：恩赏可以经常施予，赦免不能多次下达。
English: Among the ministers of the imperial court, there were some who said that the criminals of the world should be pardoned after the sacrificial rites were completed. Emperor Yingzong told them that rewards could be given frequently, but pardons could not be given repeatedly.

古文：使杀人获免，则死者何辜？ 
现代文：让杀人犯免于惩处，那么死者有何罪呢？ 
English: Let the murderer go unpunished, then what is the dead man guilty of?

古文：遂命中书陈便宜事，行之。
现代文：于是下令中书省条陈于国有利之事以行之。
English: Therefore, he ordered the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs to do what was good for the country.

古文：丁亥，帝欲以元夕张灯宫中，参议中书省事张养浩上书谏止，帝遽命罢之，曰： 有臣若此，朕复何忧？
现代文：十三日，英宗想在元宵节晚上张灯于宫中，参议中书省事张养浩上书劝谏制止，英宗赶忙撤销此议，并说： 有这好的臣子，我还忧虑什么呢？
English: On the thirteenth day, Yingzong wanted to hang lanterns in the palace on the evening of the Lantern Festival. In the middle of the deliberation, Zhang Yanghao, the Minister of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry

古文：自今朕凡有过，岂独台臣当谏，人皆得言。 
现代文：今后我凡有过失，岂只台臣应谏，人人都可上言。 
English: From now on, if I make a mistake, only Taiwanese ministers will be held accountable, and everyone can speak up.

古文：赐养浩帛二匹。
现代文：赐予张养浩丝帛两匹。
English: Zhang Yanghao was given two silkworms.

古文：诸王忽都答儿来朝。
现代文：诸王忽都答儿来朝。
English: Kings and queens came to the imperial court.

古文：癸巳，诸王斡罗思部饥，发净州、平地仓粮赈之。
现代文：十九日，诸王斡罗思部饥荒，调发净州、平地仓库粮食加以赈济。
English: On the 19th, all the kings arranged for the famine in Mindanao and sent grain from the warehouses in Chenzhou and Pingdi to relieve the famine.

古文：蕲州蕲水县饥，赈粮三月。
现代文：蕲州蕲水县饥荒，赈济三个月的粮食。
English: There is a famine in Luzhou's Lishui County, and three months' worth of grain has been donated.

古文：奉元路饥，禁酒。
现代文：奉元路饥荒，下禁酒令。
English: Bongyuan Road famine, under the prohibition of alcohol.

古文：乙未，太阴掩房。
现代文：二十一日，太阴星遮掩房宿。
English: On the twenty-first day, a cloudy star covered the house.

古文：己亥，降延福监为延福提举司，广福监为广福提举司，秩从五品。
现代文：二十五日，将延福监降格为延福提举司，广福监降格为广福提举司，品秩为从五品。
English: On the 25th, Yanfu Supervisor was downgraded to Yanfu Promotion Officer, Guangfu Supervisor was downgraded to Guangfu Promotion Officer, and the rank was reduced to Junior Fifth Rank.

古文：以寿安山造佛寺，置库掌财帛，秩从七品。
现代文：因寿安山建造佛寺，设置仓库安排官员掌管财帛，品秩为从七品。
English: Due to the construction of a Buddhist temple on Shouan Mountain, the establishment of a warehouse and the arrangement of officials in charge of financial affairs, the rank was reduced from seven.

古文：甲辰，辰星犯外屏。
现代文：三十日，水星凌犯外屏。
English: On the 30th, Mercury transits the outer screen.

古文：水、金、火、土四星聚奎。
现代文：水星、金星、火星、土星相聚于奎宿。
English: Mercury, Venus, Mars and Saturn come together in Cancer.

古文：二月，汴梁、归德饥，发粟十万石赈粜。
现代文：二月，汴梁路及归德府饥荒，调发粮食十万石赈济平卖。
English: In February, due to the famine in Qilian Road and Guidefu, grain was allocated and sold at 100,000 koku.

古文：河南、安丰饥，以钞二万五千贯、粟五万石赈之。
现代文：河南安丰路饥荒，用钱钞二万五千贯、粮食五万石赈济。
English: Henan's Anfeng Road suffered from famine. Twenty-five thousand yuan in banknotes and fifty thousand kilos of grain were used to relieve the famine.

古文：戊申，祭社稷。
现代文：初四，祭祀社稷之神。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the god of the shrine is worshipped.

古文：改中都威卫为忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司。
现代文：将中都威卫改为忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使司。
English: The name of Zhongdu Weiwei was changed to Zhongyu Beiwei, and the pro-army troops all commanded envoys.

古文：己酉，作仁宗神御殿于普庆寺。辛亥，调军三千五百人修上都华严寺。
现代文：初五，在普庆寺内建造仁宗神御殿。初七，征调军士三千五百名修建上都华严寺。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the Ninshu Shinto Shrine was built in the premises of the Puqing Temple. On the 7th day of the first month, 3,500 soldiers were drafted to build the Shangdu Huayan Temple.

古文：壬子夜，金、火、土三星聚于奎。
现代文：初八夜晚，金星、火星、土星相聚于奎宿。
English: On the evening of the first day of the eighth month, Venus, Mars, and Saturn converge on Kuijuku.

古文：大永福寺成，赐金五百两、银二千五百两、钞五十万贯、币帛万匹。
现代文：大永福寺建成，赐予黄金五百两、白银二千五百两、钱钞五十万贯、币帛万匹。
English: The Great Yeongbokgung Temple was completed, and he was given gold five hundred taels, silver two thousand five hundred taels, banknotes five hundred thousand taels, and coins ten thousand taels.

古文：丁巳，畋于柳林，敕更造行宫。
现代文：十三日，在柳林行猎，敕令重建行宫。
English: On the 13th, he went hunting in the willow forest, and the imperial edict ordered the reconstruction of the palace.

古文：监察御史观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失、成珪、李谦亨谏造寿安山佛寺，杀观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失，杖珪、谦亨，窜于奴儿干地。
现代文：监察御史观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失、成王圭、李谦亨劝阻建造寿安山佛寺，下令杀戮观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失，杖责成王圭、李谦亨，流放于奴儿干地区。
English: Supervised Guan Yin Bao, Guan Yueha, Cheng Wang Gui and Li Qianheng to dissuade the construction of Shou'an Mountain Buddhist Temple, ordered the killing of Guan Yin Bao and Guan Yueha, and ordered Wang Gui and Li Qianheng to be exiled to Nuergan area.

古文：己未，枢密院臣请授副使吴元珪荣禄大夫，以阶高不允，授正奉大夫。
现代文：十五日，枢密院官员奏请授副使吴元王圭官阶为荣禄大夫，因阶高而不批准，只授予正奉大夫官阶。
English: On the 15th, officials of the Privy Council requested that Wu Yuanwang Gui, the deputy envoy, be awarded the rank of honorary doctor. However, because of the high rank, they did not approve, and only awarded the official rank of official doctor.

古文：赈木怜道三十一驿贫户。
现代文：赈济木怜道三十一所驿站贫困民户。
English: Thirty-one post stations of poverty-stricken households are located on Jimei Road.

古文：辛酉，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：十七日，金星凌犯火星。
English: On the 17th, Venus transits Mars.

古文：癸亥，太阴犯心。
现代文：十九日，太阴星凌犯心宿。
English: On the 19th, it was too gloomy to sleep.

古文：甲子，置承徽寺，秩正三品，割常州、宜兴民四万户隶之。
现代文：二十日，设置承徽寺，品秩为正三品，划割常州路宜兴州民户四百家隶属于它。
English: On the 20th, the Chenghui Temple was set up, with a grade ranking of positive three, and 400 households in Yixing County on Changzhou Road were assigned to it.

古文：丁卯，以僧法洪为释源宗主，授荣禄大夫、司徒。
现代文：二十三日，命僧人法洪为释源宗主，授予荣禄大夫、司徒官阶职衔。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed the monk Fahong as the patriarch of Shiyuan and awarded him the titles of Ronglu doctor and scholar.

古文：禁越台、省诉事，罢先朝传旨滥选者。
现代文：禁止超越御史台、中书省直接诉事。罢免先朝传内旨滥选用者。
English: It is forbidden to appeal directly beyond the Imperial History Channel and the Ministry of Chinese Literature, and those who abuse the secret message transmitted by the previous government will be dismissed.

古文：戊辰，赐公主紥牙八剌从者钞七十五万贯。
现代文：二十四日，赐予公主扎牙八剌随从钱钞七十五万贯。
English: On the 24th, the princess was given 750,000 kroner in money and 750,000 kroner in gold.

古文：三月甲戌，营王也先帖木儿部畜牧死损，赐钞五十万贯。
现代文：三月初一，营王也先帖木儿部所牧牲畜死亡伤损，赐予钱钞五十万贯。
English: On the first day of March, the king of the battalion also awarded the Timu Children's Research Institute 500,000 kroner for the death and injury of livestock.

古文：丙子，建帝师八思巴寺于京师。
现代文：初三，在京师建造帝师八思巴寺庙。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he built the Teishi Hasiba Temple in Kyoto.

古文：丁丑，御大明殿，受缅国使者朝贡。
现代文：初四，临御大明殿接受缅国使者朝贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Imperial Palace receives the tribute from the envoys of Burma.

古文：太阴掩昴。
现代文：太阴星遮掩昴宿。
English: A cloudy star obscures the inn.

古文：赐公主买的钞五万贯，驸马灭怜钞二万五千贯。
现代文：赐予公主买的钱钞五万贯，驸马灭怜钱钞二万五千贯。
English: He gave the princess 50,000 Korean won in banknotes and 25,000 Korean won in banknotes.

古文：召诸王太平于汴。
现代文：征召诸王太平于汴梁。
English: Summon the kings of Taiping to Qilian.

古文：发民丁疏小直沽白河。
现代文：发民户壮丁疏通小直沽白河。
English: From the middle-class to the upper-middle-class, dredge the White River.

古文：庚辰，廷试进士泰普化、宋本等六十四人，赐及第、出身有差。
现代文：初七，廷试进士泰普化、宋本等六十四人，赐予进士及第、出身不等。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, 64 people, including Taipu Hua and Song Ben, were admitted to the imperial court, and were given the titles and ranks.

古文：辛巳，车驾幸上都。
现代文：初八，车驾临幸上都。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I drove to the capital of happiness.

古文：遣使赐西番撒思加地僧金二百五十两、银二千二百两、袈裟二万，币、帛、幡、茶各有差。
现代文：派遣使者赐予西番撒思加地方僧人黄金二百五十两、白银二千二百两、袈裟二万件、币帛幡茶各不等。
English: He sent an envoy to give the local monks of Sisika, Westphalia, 2502 pieces of gold, 222 pieces of silver, 320,000 pieces of money, and various amounts of tea.

古文：壬午，遣咒师朵儿只往牙济、班卜二国取佛经。
现代文：初九，派遣咒师朵儿只前往牙济、班卜二国求取佛经。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, she sent her exorcist daughter to the two countries of Jaji and Bamboo to obtain Buddhist scriptures.

古文：癸未，制御服珠袈裟。
现代文：初十，缝制珠宝袈裟御服。
English: In her early teens, she sewed jewelry and dresses for the imperial court.

古文：甲申，敕纂修《仁宗实录》，《后妃》、《功臣传》。
现代文：十一日，敕令纂修《仁宗实录》、《后妃传》、《功臣传》。
English: On the 11th day of the month, an imperial order was issued to compile and revise the "Ninsong Record," the "Queen's Biography" and the "Legendary Biography."

古文：乙酉，宝集寺金书西番《波若经》成，置大内香殿，益寿安山造寺役军。
现代文：十二日，宝集寺用黄金书写制成西番波若经，置于皇宫香殿中。增添寿安山建造寺庙的服役军士。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Baoji Temple made the Western Pan-Hora Sutra with gold writing and placed it in the Imperial Palace Incense Hall. The military servicemen who built the temple on Shouan Mountain were added.

古文：己丑，大同路麒麟生。
现代文：十三日，大同路麒麟降生。
English: On the 13th, Datong Road Kirin was born.

古文：甲午，置云南王府。
现代文：二十一日，建置云南王府署。
English: On the 21st, the Yunnan King's Office was built.

古文：己亥，宦者孛罗铁木儿坐罪，流奴儿干地。
现代文：二十六日，宦官孛罗铁木儿坐罪过，流放奴儿干地区。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the eunuch Luo Tiemu'er pleaded guilty and was exiled to a dry area.

古文：庚子，赈宁国路饥。
现代文：二十七日，赈济宁国路饥荒。
English: On the 27th, famine broke out in Ningguo Road, Fujian Province.

古文：辛丑，以铁失为御史大夫，佩金符，领忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：二十八日，任命铁失为御史大夫，佩戴金符，担任忠翊侍卫亲军都指挥使。
English: On the 28th, Tetsuko was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, wearing a gold badge, and serving as a loyal bodyguard and commander of the imperial army.

古文：癸卯，益都、般阳饥，以粟赈之。
现代文：三十日，益都路、般阳路饥荒，用粮食加以赈济。
English: On the 30th, there was a famine in Yidu Road and Banyang Road, and grain was used to relieve the famine.

古文：夏四月丙午，给喃答失王府银印，秩正三品；宽彻、忽塔迷失王府铜印，秩从三品。
现代文：夏四月初三，给予喃答失王府银印，品秩为从三品。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Mootai was awarded the Silver Seal of the Imperial Palace, and its rank was raised to the third grade.

古文：庚戌，享太庙。
现代文：初七，祭享太庙。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the temple fair is held.

古文：江州、赣州、临江霖雨，袁州、建昌旱，民皆告饥，发米四万八千石赈之。
现代文：江州、赣州、临江三路久雨，袁州路与建昌州干旱，民众都告饥荒，调发大米四万八千石予以赈济。
English: Jiangzhou, Zhangzhou and Linjiang 3rd Road have been rainy for a long time, Yuanzhou Road and Jianchang County have been dry, and the people have suffered from famine, and 48,000 kilos of rice have been allocated to help.

古文：丁巳，广德路旱，发米九千石减直赈粜。
现代文：十四日，广德路干旱，调发大米九千石减价出售予以赈济。
English: On the 14th, Guangde Road was dry, and 9,000 kilos of rice were sold at a reduced price to help out.

古文：戊午，太阴犯心。
现代文：十五日，太阴星凌犯心宿。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Taiyin Xingxing committed a crime.

古文：己未，造象驾金脊殿。
现代文：十六日，建造像驾金脊殿。
English: On the 16th, the Golden Spine Hall was built.

古文：吉阳黎蛮寇宁远县。
现代文：吉阳军黎族蛮夷入寇宁远县。
English: The Jiyang army of the Li people brutally invaded Koningyuan County.

古文：庚申，太阴犯斗。
现代文：十七日，太阴星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the seventeenth day, Ta Yin Xing Ling committed a fight.

古文：戊辰，敕赐铁木迭儿父祖碑。
现代文：二十五日，敕令赐予铁木迭儿父祖墓碑。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict gave Tiemu Dier the tombstone of his father's ancestor.

古文：命宦者孛罗台为太常署令，太常官言刑人难与大祭，遂罢之。
现代文：任命宦者孛罗台为太常署令，太常官员上言： 刑人怎能参与大祭呢！ 
English: Appointing the eunuch, Luo Tai, as the deputy of the Taichang, the Taichang officials said, "How can a criminal participate in the grand festival?"

古文：五月丙子，毁上都回回寺，以其地营帝师殿。
现代文：于是撤销这项任命。五月初三，拆毁上都回回清真寺，用其地营建帝师殿。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the temple was demolished and the land returned to the mosque, which was used to build the Emperor's Palace.

古文：赈益都、胶州饥。
现代文：赈济益都、胶州饥荒。
English: Famine in Jiaozhou, the capital of Shanxi Province.

古文：丁丑，霸州蝗。
现代文：初四，霸州蝗灾。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the locust plague in Bazhou began.

古文：戊寅，太白犯鬼积尸气，太阴犯轩辕。
现代文：初五，太白凌犯鬼宿积尸气。太阴星凌犯轩辕。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Taibai Ling committed the crime of ghostly accumulation of corpse gas.

古文：庚辰，太阴犯明堂。
现代文：初七，太阴星凌犯明堂。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the first year of the school year, Tai Yin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：濮州大饥，命有司赈之。
现代文：濮州发生大饥荒，下令有关部门予以赈济。
English: A great famine occurred in Zhangzhou, and the relevant departments were ordered to provide relief.

古文：壬午，迁亲王图帖穆尔于海南。
现代文：初九，谪迁亲王图帖穆尔于海南岛。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Prince Tut Timur was exiled to the island of Hainan.

古文：禁日者毋交通诸王、驸马，掌阴阳五科者毋泄占候。
现代文：禁止卜筮之人不得交结诸王、驸马，掌管阴阳五科者不得泄漏测算情况。
English: The person who forbids divination must not intermarry with kings and horses, and the person in charge of the five disciplines of yin and yang must not leak the measurement situation.

古文：以兴国路去岁旱，免其田租。
现代文：因兴国路去年干旱，免除该地田租。
English: Due to last year's drought on Xingguo Road, the site was exempted from paying land rent.

古文：女直蛮赤兴等十九驿饥，赈之。
现代文：十四日，在大阁做佛事活动。十七日，赈济诸王哈宾铁木尔部。
English: On the 14th, they did Buddhist activities at the Great Pavilion. On the 17th, they donated to the King Habintiemul Department.

古文：辛卯，海漕粮至直沽，遣使祀海神天妃。
现代文：沂州民人张昱犯妖言惑众、济南路道士李天祥犯教人用兵作战之罪，皆受杖责。
English: Zhang Ye, a citizen of Zhangzhou, was punished with the cane for the crime of using evil words to deceive the public, and Li Tianxiang, a Taoist priest of Jinan Road, was punished with the cane for the crime of teaching people to fight with soldiers.

古文：作行殿于缙山流杯池。
现代文：在缙山流杯池建造行宫。
English: Construct a traveling palace at the Lushan Stream Cup Pool.

古文：高邮府旱。
现代文：高邮府干旱。
English: The high post office is dry.

古文：癸巳，宝定路飞虫食桑。
现代文：二十日，保定路飞虫吃桑叶。
English: On the 20th, the Baoding flying insects eat mulberry leaves.

古文：乙未，命世家子弟成童者入国学。
现代文：二十二日，下令世家子弟到达一定年龄的进入太学。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered all children of a certain age to enter Taigaku.

古文：辛丑，太常礼仪院进太庙制图。
现代文：二十八日，太常礼仪院进呈太庙制图。
English: On the 28th, the Taichang Rite Academy submitted a plan for the construction of the temple.

古文：壬寅，开元路霖雨。
现代文：二十九日，开元路久雨不停。
English: On the 29th, it rained for a long time on Kaigen Road.

古文：六月癸卯朔，日有食之。作金浮屠于上都，藏佛舍利。
现代文：六月初一，发生日食。在上都制作金浮屠，收藏佛舍利子。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse occurred. In Shangdu, people made gold Buddha statues and collected Buddhist relics.

古文：乙卯，以铁木迭儿领宣政院事。
现代文：十三日，任命铁木迭儿承领宣政院事。
English: On the 13th, Tie Mu Di'er was appointed to take charge of the Xuan Zheng Academy.

古文：丁巳，参知政事敬俨罢为陕西行御史台中丞。
现代文：十五日，参知政事敬俨降职为陕西行御史台中丞。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, Jing Yi, was demoted to the position of the middle-ranking official of the Shaanxi Provincial History Bureau.

古文：戊午，泾州雨雹。
现代文：十六日，泾州降冰雹。
English: On the 16th, hail fell in Zhangzhou.

古文：己未，太阴犯虚梁。
现代文：十七日，太阴星凌犯虚梁。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Great Yin Star broke through the false beam.

古文：滁州霖雨伤稼，蠲其租。
现代文：滁州久雨损伤庄稼，免除其田租。
English: The crops damaged by the long rain in Zhangzhou were exempted from field rent.

古文：辛酉，太白经天。
现代文：十九日，金星经天。
English: On the 19th, Venus moves across the sky.

古文：赵弘祚等言事，勒归乡里，仍禁妄言时政。
现代文：赵弘祚等上言议事，勒令返归乡里，照旧禁止妄言时政得失。
English: Zhao Hongyao and others spoke at the meeting, ordered to return to their hometowns, and prohibited false speech as usual.

古文：壬戌，龙虎山张嗣成来朝，授太玄辅化体仁应道大真人。
现代文：二十日，龙虎山张嗣成来朝，授予太玄辅化体仁应道大真人尊号。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Shicheng of Longhu Mountain came to the DPRK and conferred the title of "Honorable Person" on Tai Xuan.

古文：乙丑，遣使往铨江浙、江西、湖广、四川、云南五省边郡官选。
现代文：二十三日，派遣使者前往江浙、江西、湖广、四川、云南五行省挑选边郡官员。
English: On the 23rd, envoys were sent to the five provinces of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hunan, Sichuan and Yunnan to select border county officials.

古文：丁卯，翙星于司天台。
现代文：二十五日，在司天台祭星。
English: On the 25th, the Star Festival will be held in Shidendai.

古文：大同路雨雹。
现代文：大同路降冰雹。
English: Hailstones fall on Datong Road.

古文：戊辰，卫辉、汴梁等处蝗。
现代文：二十六日，卫辉路、汴梁路等处蝗灾。
English: On the 26th, locusts infested Weihui Road, Qilian Road and other places.

古文：己巳，以上都留守只儿哈郎为中书平章政事。
现代文：二十七日，任命上都留守只儿哈郎为中书平章政事。
English: On the 27th, Haro, the only one to stay behind, was appointed to the post of Chusho Heisho Seiji.

古文：临江路旱，免其租。
现代文：临江路干旱，免除其租税。
English: Linjiang Road arid, exempt from tax.

古文：通济屯霖雨伤稼，霸州大水，浑河溢，被灾者二万三千三百户。
现代文：通济屯久雨伤害庄稼。霸州发大水，浑河漫溢，受灾民众达二万三千三百户。
English: Long-lasting rain in Tongji-tun damages crops. Heavy rain falls in Bozhou, the Hun River overflows, and 23,300 households are affected.

古文：秋七月壬申，赐晋王也孙铁木儿钞百万贯。
现代文：秋七月初一，赐予晋王也孙铁木儿钱钞百万贯。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Jin Wang Yao Sun Tiemu'er was given one million yuan in banknotes.

古文：辽阳、开元等路及顺州、邢台等县大水。
现代文：辽阳、开元等路及顺州、邢台等县发大水。
English: Liaoyang, Kaiyuan and other roads, as well as Shunzhou, Xingtai and other counties, experienced heavy water.

古文：癸酉，卫辉路胙城县蝗。
现代文：初二，卫辉路胙城县蝗灾。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the locust plague in Lucheng County on Weihui Road.

古文：乙亥，赈南恩、新州饥。
现代文：初四，赈济南恩州、新州饥荒。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, famine struck Enzhou and Xinzhou in southern Fujian Province.

古文：丙子，淮安路属县水。
现代文：初五，淮安路属县水灾。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Huai'an Road was flooded.

古文：丁丑，享太庙。
现代文：初六，祭享太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, the temple is dedicated.

古文：戊寅，通州潞县榆棣水决。
现代文：初七，通州潞县榆棣大水决堤。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the flood broke through the dike in Tongzhou Min County.

古文：庚辰，卤簿成。
现代文：初九，扈从仪仗队完成。
English: On the morning of the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Hao completed the honor guard.

古文：滹沱河及范阳县巨马河溢。
现代文：滹沱河及范阳县巨马河水溢。
English: The Minhe River and the Juma River in Fanyang County are overflowing.

古文：辛巳，盩厔县僧圆明作乱，遣枢密院判官章台督兵捕之。
现代文：初十，周至县僧人圆明造反，派遣枢密院判官章台率兵马搜捕。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the monks of Zhouzhi County rebelled against Yuanming and dispatched the judge of the Privy Council Zhang Tai to lead the soldiers and horses to search and arrest them.

古文：壬午，通许、临淮、盱眙等县蝗。
现代文：十一日，通许、临淮、盱眙等县蝗灾。
English: On the 11th day of the month, locust plagues occurred in Tongxu, Linhuai, Handan and other counties.

古文：癸未，对太尉孛兰奚为和国公。
现代文：十二日，封太尉孛兰奚为和国公。
English: On the 12th day of the month, he was appointed as the Prince of Wakoku.

古文：乙酉，大雨，浑河防决。
现代文：十四日，天降大雨，浑河堤决口。
English: On the 14th, heavy rain fell, and the Hunhe dike burst.

古文：庚寅，清池县蝗。
现代文：十九日，清池县蝗灾。
English: On the 19th, the locust plague in Kiyochikun began.

古文：癸巳，太阴犯昴。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星凌犯昴宿。
English: On the 22nd, Taiyin Xingxing broke into the inn.

古文：黄平府蛮卢砰为寇，削万户何之祺等官一级。
现代文：黄平府蛮夷卢砰作乱，降万户何之琪等人官品一级。
English: Huangping prefecture barbarian Lu Xun caused a disturbance, and reduced 10,000 households of He Zhiqi and others to the first level of official goods.

古文：遣吏部尚书教化、礼部郎中文矩使安南，颁登极诏。
现代文：派遣吏部尚书教化、礼部郎中文矩出使安南，颁布登极诏书。
English: He dispatched officials such as Shang Shuxu (尚書教化) and Luo Zhongxin (礼部郎中文矩) to Annan and issued the Imperial Rescript.

古文：诸王阔别薨，赙钞万五千贯。
现代文：诸侯王阔别逝世，赐予钱钞一万五千贯。
English: After the death of the vassal king Kuo Bei, he bestowed fifteen thousand kroner in banknotes.

古文：丙申，禁服色逾制。
现代文：二十五日，禁止服装颜色越制。
English: On the 25th, it is forbidden to exceed the standard of clothing color.

古文：己亥，奉仁宗及帝御容于大圣寿万安寺。蒲阴县大水。
现代文：二十八日，在大圣寿万安寺供奉仁宗及英宗御容。蒲阴县发大水。
English: On the 28th, offerings were made to the Ninshu and Yingzong deities at the Daishoju Wan'an Temple.

古文：庚子，修上都城。
现代文：二十九日，修建上都城墙。
English: On the 29th, the construction of the capital city wall began.

古文：诏河南、江浙流民复业。
现代文：下诏令河南、江浙行省流民恢复本业。
English: issued a decree ordering the displaced people in Henan and Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces to resume their work.

古文：淮西蒙城等县饥，郃阳道士刘志先以妖术谋乱，复命章台捕之。
现代文：淮西蒙城等县饥荒。合阝阳道士用妖术图谋叛乱，再次下令由章台搜捕。
English: There was famine in the counties of Huai Simong and other counties. The Taoist of Hapuyang used magic to plot a rebellion, and once again ordered a search and arrest by Zhang Tai.

古文：蓟州平谷、渔阳等县大水，大都、保定、真定、大名、济宁、东平、东昌、永平等路，高唐、曹、濮等州水，顺德、大同等路雨雹，乞儿吉思部水。
现代文：蓟州平谷、渔阳等县发大水。大都、保定、真定、大名、济宁、东平、东昌、永平等路，高唐、曹、濮等州水灾。顺德、大同等路降冰雹。乞儿吉思部水灾。
English: Huge floods occurred in Pinggu, Yuyang and other counties in Luzhou. Floods occurred in Datu, Baoding, Zhending, Daimyo, Jining, Dongping, Dongchang, Yongping Road, Gaotang, Cao, Handan and other counties. Hailstones fell on Shunde and Datong Road. There was a flood in Jishibu.

古文：八月壬寅，修都城。
现代文：八月初一，修建京师城墙。
English: On the first day of August, the construction of the Keishi city wall began.

古文：安陆府水，坏民庐舍。
现代文：安陆府水灾，毁坏民户房舍。
English: Floods in Anlu Prefecture, destroying homes.

古文：癸卯，赈胶州饥。
现代文：初二，赈济胶州饥荒。
English: On the second day of the new year, famine struck Jiaozhou in Fujian Province.

古文：甲辰，高邮兴化县水，免其租。
现代文：初三，高邮府兴化县水灾，免除其租税。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Gao Post Office was exempted from tax due to the floods in Xinghua County.

古文：丙午，泰兴、江都等县蝗。
现代文：初五，泰兴、江都等县蝗灾。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, locusts infested Taixing, Jiangdu and other counties.

古文：丁未，太阴犯心。
现代文：初六，太阴星凌犯心宿。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Ta Yin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：戊申，祭社稷。
现代文：初七，祭祀社稷之神。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the god of the shrine is worshipped.

古文：上都鹿顶殿成。
现代文：上都鹿顶殿建成。
English: The Shangdu Deer-Top Hall was completed.

古文：己酉，太阴犯斗。
现代文：初八，太阴星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Ta Yin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：庚戌，以军士贫乏，遣知枢密院事铁木儿不花整治，仍诏谕中外，有敢扰害者罪之。
现代文：初九，因军士贫乏，派遣知枢密院事铁木儿不花予以整治，照旧例下诏谕令内外臣民，有敢妨碍扰乱者治罪。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, due to the shortage of military officers, it was dispatched to the Privy Council to rectify the situation without spending money. As usual, the imperial edict ordered the subjects at home and abroad to punish those who dared to interfere with the disturbance.

古文：赈北部孤寡粮、钞。
现代文：赈济北部地区孤寡者粮食钱钞。
English: In the northern region of Shaanxi Province, there is a shortage of grain banknotes for widows and orphans.

古文：赐公主速哥八剌钞五十万贯。
现代文：赐予公主速哥八剌钱钞五十万贯。
English: He gave the princess a five-hundred-thousand-kan (one-hundred-thousand rupees) note.

古文：兀儿速、憨哈纳思等部贫乏，户给牝马二匹。
现代文：兀儿速、憨哈纳思等部贫乏，每户予以母马两匹。
English: There is a dearth of stallions such as Zou Er-hai and Zou Hanas, with two mares born in each household.

古文：壬子，荧惑犯轩辕。
现代文：十一日，火星凌犯轩辕。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Mars invasion broke out.

古文：乙卯，中书平章政事铁木儿脱罢为上都留守。
现代文：十四日，中书平章政事铁木儿脱降职为上都留守。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Pingzhang, the political secretary of Zhongshu, and Tiemu'er, who had been demoted from their posts, were both absent.

古文：壬戌，淮安路盐城、山阳县水，免其租。
现代文：二十一日，淮安路盐城、山阳两县水灾，免除其租税。
English: On the 21st, Huai'an Road, Yancheng and Shanyang counties were exempted from taxes due to floods.

古文：车驾驻跸兴和，左右以寒甚，请还京师，帝曰： 兵以牛马为重，民以稼穑为本。
现代文：车驾驻留兴和路，左右近臣因天气寒冷，奏请早还京师。英宗说： 行兵以牛马为重要，人民以耕种收获为根本。
English: The chariot stayed at Xinghe Road, and because of the cold weather, the ministers on the left and right were asked to return to Beijing early. Yingzong said: Troops marching with oxen and horses are important, and the people are fundamental to farming and harvesting.

古文：朕迟留，盖欲马得刍牧，民得刈获，一举两得，何计乎寒？ 
现代文：我驻留此地，是想让马匹得以放牧，人民可以搞好秋收，这是一举两得的好事，何必计较严寒呢？ 
English: I am staying here because I want the horses to be able to graze and the people to have a good autumn harvest. This is a win-win situation, so why worry about the cold?

古文：雷州路海康、遂溪二县海水溢，坏民田四千余顷，免其租。
现代文：雷州路海康、遂溪两县海水涨溢，毁坏民人田地四千多顷，免除该地租税。
English: Hai Kang and Suixi counties of Leizhou Road were exempted from the tax because the seawater overflowed and destroyed more than 4,000 hectares of people's fields.

古文：秦州成纪县山崩。
现代文：秦州成纪县山崩。
English: A landslide occurred in Chengji County, Qinzhou.

古文：九月乙亥，荧惑犯灵台。
现代文：九月初五，火星凌犯灵台。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the lunar month, Mars will invade the spirit world.

古文：京师饥，发粟十万石减价粜之。
现代文：京师饥荒，调发粮食十万石减价出售。
English: Due to the famine in Beijing, 100,000 koku of grain was allocated and sold at a reduced price.

古文：丙子，驻跸昂兀岭。
现代文：初六，驻扎于昂兀岭。
English: In the sixth grade of junior high school, he was stationed in Ngong Pingling.

古文：壬午，荧惑犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：十二日，火星凌犯太微垣西垣上将。
English: On the 12th, Mars assaulted Admiral Nishigaki.

古文：赐诸王撒儿蛮钞五万贯。
现代文：赐予诸王措撒儿蛮钱钞五万贯。
English: He gave all the kings and queens fifty thousand crowns in cash and banknotes.

古文：壬辰，中书平章政事塔失海牙坐受赃杖免。
现代文：二十二日，中书平章政事塔失海牙坐受贿罪被杖责免职。
English: On the 22nd, the political tower of the Chinese scholar Pingzhang lost The Hague and was removed from office for the crime of accepting bribes.

古文：丁酉，荧惑犯太微垣右执法。
现代文：二十七日，火星凌犯太微垣右执法。
English: On the 27th, the law enforcement came to the scene of the Martian encroachment.

古文：车驾还大都。
现代文：车驾返还大都。
English: Most of them were returned by car.

古文：庚子，安陆府汉水溢，坏民田，赈之。
现代文：三十日，安陆府汉水漫溢，毁坏民田，予以赈济。
English: On the 30th, Chinese water overflowed in Anlu Prefecture, destroying people's fields, and relief was provided.

古文：冬十月辛丑朔，修佛事于大内。妖僧圆明等伏诛。
现代文：冬十月初一，在皇宫内修作佛事。妖僧圆通等被逮处决。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a Buddhist service was held in the Imperial Palace. The demon priest, Yuntong, and others were arrested and executed.

古文：甲辰，太白经天。
现代文：初四，金星经天。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, Venus passes through the sky.

古文：戊申，荧惑犯太微垣左执法。
现代文：初八，火星凌犯太微垣左执法。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the law enforcement of the Mars invasion crime was too weak.

古文：庚戌，亲享太庙。
现代文：初十，亲临祭享太庙。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, you can visit the temple and enjoy the festival.

古文：壬子，拜住献嘉禾，两茎同穗。
现代文：十二日，拜住进献嘉禾，两茎同一穗。
English: On the twelfth day, the two stems of the same spike were presented to the emperor.

古文：癸丑，敕翰林、集贤官年七十者毋致仕。
现代文：十三日，敕令翰林与集贤院官员年满七十者不得退休。
English: On the 13th, officials of the Qiling Hanlin and Jixian Academy who have reached the age of 70 are not allowed to retire.

古文：以内郡水，罢不急工役。
现代文：因内地水灾，罢免不急迫的工役。
English: Due to flooding in the mainland, non-urgent laborers were dismissed.

古文：敕蒙古子女鬻为回回、汉人奴者，官收养之。
现代文：敕令被卖给回回及汉人为奴仆的蒙古族子女，由官府收养。
English: The imperial edict was sold to the Mongolian children of Hui Hui and Han slaves, who were adopted by the government.

古文：禁中书掾曹毋泄机事，命枢密遣官整视各郡兵马。
现代文：禁止中书掾曹官员泄漏机密事情。下令枢密院派遣官员整顿巡视各路兵马。
English: The Central Committee prohibited the officials of Cao Cao from leaking confidential information, and ordered the Privy Council to send officials to rectify and inspect the soldiers and horses.

古文：戊午，置赵王马札罕部钱粮总管府，秩正三品。
现代文：十八日，设置赵王马札罕部钱粮总管府，秩禄为正三品。
English: On the 18th, the Zhao Wang Mazakhan Department of the General Administration of Money and Grain was set up, and the rank was raised to Senior Third Rank.

古文：己未，肇庆路水，赈之。
现代文：十九日，肇庆路水灾，予以赈济。
English: On the 19th, Zhaoqing Road was flooded, and relief was provided.

古文：丙寅，河南行省参知政事你咱马丁坐残忍免官。
现代文：二十六日，河南行省参知政事你咱马丁因残暴罪罢官。
English: On the 26th, the Henan Provincial Party Secretary of the Communist Party of China, Martin, was dismissed for the crime of brutality.

古文：丁卯，增置侍仪司通事舍人六员，侍仪舍人四员。
现代文：二十七日，增设侍仪司通事舍人六名、侍仪舍人四名。
English: On the 27th, an additional six attendants and four attendants were added to the Office of the Master of Ceremonies.

古文：己巳，遣燕铁木儿巡边。
现代文：二十九日，派遣燕铁木儿巡视边地。
English: On the 29th, the Yan Tie Mu'er patrol was dispatched to patrol the border areas.

古文：十一月辛未，荧惑犯进贤。
现代文：十一月初二，火星凌犯进贤。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the Mars invasion criminal Jinxian appeared.

古文：己亥，幸大护国仁王寺。
现代文：初六，临幸大护国仁王寺。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche went to Nio-ji Temple.

古文：丙子，太阴犯虚梁。
现代文：初七，太阴星凌犯虚梁。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the great Yin star transgressed the false beam.

古文：戊寅，御大明殿，群臣上尊号曰继天体道敬文仁武大昭孝皇帝。
现代文：初九，临御大明殿，群臣为英宗加上尊号为继天体道敬文仁武大昭孝皇帝。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, at the Imperial Palace, a group of courtiers called Yingzong, followed by the honorific title of Emperor Jingwen Renwu Dazhao Xiao, followed the celestial path.

古文：是夜，辰星犯房。
现代文：这天夜里，水星凌犯房宿。
English: On this night, Mercury transits the house.

古文：己卯，以受尊号诏天下，拜住请释囚，不允。
现代文：初十，以接受尊号下诏天下，拜住奏请释放囚徒，未得到批准。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he issued an edict to the whole country to accept the honorific title, and made a public appeal for the release of prisoners, but it was not approved.

古文：庚辰，益寿安山寺役卒三千人。
现代文：十一日，增添寿安山寺服役士卒三千人。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the number of Shouanshan Temple servicemen increased by three thousand.

古文：辛巳，命御史大夫铁失领左、右阿速卫。
现代文：十二日，任命御史大夫铁失统领左、右阿速卫。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Mishi no Daifu (Minister of History) Tetsu Fusatsuru to be the leader of the left and Asobe to the right.

古文：丙戌，太阴犯井。
现代文：十七日，太阴星凌犯井宿。
English: On the seventeenth day, Taiyin Xingranjing stayed at the inn.

古文：丁亥，以教官待选者借注广海巡检。
现代文：十八日，以教官等待候选的人员借广海巡检阙诠注。
English: On the 18th, the personnel waiting for the candidate with the instructor took advantage of the Guanghai inspection and interpretation.

古文：己丑，太阴犯酒旗，又犯轩辕。
现代文：二十日，太阴星凌犯酒旗，又犯轩辕。
English: On the 20th, Taiyin Xingling committed drunkenness, and also committed sedition.

古文：庚寅，拜住等言： 受尊号，宜谢太庙，行一献礼。
现代文：二十一日，拜住等人上言 ：接受尊号，应答谢太庙，恭行一献礼。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, worshipers and others made the following appeal: accept the honorary title, respond with thanks to the temple, and make a donation.

古文：世祖亦尝议行，武宗则躬行谢礼。 
现代文：世祖也曾提议实行，武宗则亲行谢礼。 
English: The founder had also proposed to implement it, and the Emperor himself performed the thanksgiving.

古文：诏曰： 朕当亲谢。 
现代文：下诏说 ：我当亲去答谢太庙。 
English: The next edict said: I should personally go and thank the Imperial Temple.

古文：己亥，太白犯西咸。
现代文：下令太史卜筮吉日，枢密院拣选仪仗队兵卒。二十二日，太阴星凌犯明堂。
English: On the auspicious day, Taishi ordered the Privy Council to select the guard of honor. On the 22nd, Taishin Xingran entered the hall.

古文：十二月庚子，给蒙古子女冬衣。
现代文：二十四日，因营田提举司征收酒税扰民，命有关部门兼管该税。十二月初一，给予蒙古族子女冬季服装。
English: On the 24th, because the Yingtian Higher Education Bureau imposed a liquor tax to disturb the people, the relevant departments were ordered to also manage the tax. On the first day of December, Mongolian children were given winter clothing.

古文：辛丑，立亦启烈氏为皇后，遣摄太尉、中书右丞相铁木迭儿持节授玉册、玉宝。
现代文：初二，册立亦启烈氏为皇后，派遣代理太尉、中书右丞相铁木迭儿授予玉册、玉宝。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Ms. Kai Ryo was registered as the empress, and the acting captain and the vice-chairman of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Tie Mu Di'er, were dispatched to award the jade book and the jade treasure.

古文：癸卯，以立后诏天下。
现代文：初四，因立皇后下诏天下。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the Empress was enthroned.

古文：庆远路饥，真定路疫，并赈之。
现代文：庆远路饥荒，真定路瘟疫，皆加赈济。
English: Famine in Qingyuan Road, plague in Zhending Road, all of them are in need of help.

古文：甲辰，荧惑犯亢。
现代文：初五，火星凌犯亢宿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Mars will invade your house.

古文：戊申，躬谢太庙。
现代文：初九，亲行拜谢太庙。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, they went to pay their respects at the Imperial Shrine.

古文：庚戌，太阴犯昴。
现代文：十一日，太阴星凌犯昴宿。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great Yin star overtook the pagoda.

古文：作太庙正殿。
现代文：建造太庙正殿。
English: The construction of the main hall of the grand temple was completed.

古文：甲寅，疏玉泉河。
现代文：十五日，疏浚玉泉河。
English: On the 15th, the Yuquan River was dredged.

古文：车驾幸西僧灌项寺。
现代文：车驾临幸西僧灌顶寺。
English: The car drives to the Guanzhong Temple of the Western Monk Guanzhong.

古文：己未，封唆南藏卜为白兰王，赐金印。
现代文：二十日，封唆南藏卜为白兰王，赐以金印。
English: On the 20th, Nan Zangbo was crowned as the King of Bran and given a golden seal.

古文：真定、保定、大名、顺德等路水，民饥，禁酿酒。
现代文：真定、保定、大名、顺德等路水灾，民人挨饿，禁止酿酒。
English: Floods occurred in the cities of Jinding, Baoding, Daimyo, and Shunde, and the people were starving. Brewing of alcohol was prohibited.

古文：以金虎符颁各行省平章政事。
现代文：把金虎符分发各行省平章政事。
English: Distribute the golden tiger charms to each line of the provincial civil service.

古文：辛酉，荧惑入氐。
现代文：二十二日，火星进入氐宿。
English: On the 22nd, Mars entered Aries.

古文：甲子，置田粮提举司，掌蓟、景二州田赋，以给卫士贫乏者，秩从五品。
现代文：二十五日，设置田粮提举司，掌管蓟州、景州田赋。以供给卫士贫乏者，秩禄为从五品。
English: On the 25th, he set up the Field Grain Raising Division, which was in charge of the Bozhou and Jingzhou rice fields. Those who were poor in supplying guards were given the rank of five products.

古文：命帝师公哥罗古罗思监藏班藏卜诣西番受具足戒，赐金千三百五十两、银四千五十两、币帛万匹、钞五十万贯。
现代文：下令帝师公哥罗古罗思监藏班藏卜前往西番接受具足戒，赐予黄金一千三百五十两、白银四千零五十两、币帛万匹、钱钞五十万贯。
English: He ordered the emperor's tutor, Emperor Koroguros, to send the jailer, Banzangzangpo, to Xifan to receive sufficient discipline, awarding him 1,350 taels of gold, 4,052 taels of silver, 10,000 taels of coins, and 500,000 taels of banknotes.

古文：以诸王怯伯使者数入朝，发兵守北口及卢沟桥。
现代文：因诸王怯伯使者多次入朝，发兵防宁北口及卢沟桥。
English: Because emissaries of kings and emperors repeatedly entered the imperial court, troops were sent to defend the North Gate of Ning and Lugou Bridge.

古文：冶铜五十万斤作寿安山寺佛像。
现代文：赈济河间路饥荒。再次任命马家奴为司徒。二十六日，设置寿安山寺佛象。
English: Famine on the road between the rivers in Ganzi. Ma Jia Nu was once again appointed as a disciple. On the 26th, the Buddhist elephant of Shou'an Mountain Temple was set up.

古文：宁海州蝗，归德、辽阳、通州等处水。
现代文：守海州蝗灾。归德路、辽阳路、通州等地水灾。
English: Locust plague in Shouhaizhou. Floods in Guide Road, Liaoyang Road, Tongzhou and other places.

