古文：礼书所载黄彝，乃画人目为饰，谓之 黄目 。
现代文：《三礼图》所载录的黄彝这种器物，是画人的眼睛为装饰的，称之为 黄目 。
English: This kind of ware, which is recorded in the "Three Rites of Painting," is decorated with the painter's eyes, and is called the "yellow eye."

古文：余游关中，得古铜黄彝，殊不然。
现代文：我游历关中时，曾得到一件黄彝古铜器，根本不是这个样子。
English: When I visited Guanzhong, I was given a yellow enamel bronze, which is not like this at all.

古文：其刻画甚繁，大体似缪篆，又如阑盾间所画回波曲水之文。
现代文：这件古铜器所刻画的纹饰甚为繁缛，大体上类似屈曲缠绕的缪篆文字，而又如同宫殿前栏杆之间的石陛上所刻画的回旋水波纹。
English: The ornamentation of this bronze is very elaborate, resembling, in general, the sinuous and winding characters of the Muses, and resembling the swirling water ripples on the stone between the railings in front of the palace.

古文：中间有二目，如大弹丸，突起。煌煌，所谓黄目也。
现代文：其纹饰中间有两只眼睛，像两个大的弹丸，突起于铜器表面，煌煌然发亮，这大概就是所谓 黄目 。
English: There are two eyes in the middle of its decoration, like two large projectiles, protruding from the surface of the copperware, shining brilliantly, which is probably the so-called yellow eye.

古文：视其文，仿佛有牙角口吻之象。或说黄目乃自是一物。
现代文：看它的纹饰，仿佛还有牙齿、角、口和嘴唇的形象，所以有人说 黄目 可能源自于一种动物。
English: Looking at its decoration, it seems to have the image of teeth, horns, mouth and lips, so some people say that the yellow eye may have originated from an animal.

古文：又余昔年在姑熟王敦城下土中得一铜钲，刻其底日 诸葛士全茖茖鸣钲。 茖即古落字也，此部落之落。士全，部将名耳。
现代文：我当年又曾在姑熟王敦所建城下的土中得到一件铜钲，其底部刻有 诸葛士全茖鸣钲 的文字。 茖 就是古 落 字，在这里是部落的 落 ， 士全 应该就是王敦部将的名字。
English: That year, I also found a bronze plaque in the soil under the city built by Wang Dun, which was engraved with the words "Zhuge Shi Quan" at the bottom. "Zhuge Shi Quan" is an ancient Chinese character, and here it is a tribal word. "Shiquan" should be the name of General Wang Dun.

古文：钲中间铸一物，有角，羊头；其身亦如篆文，如今时术土所画符。
现代文：钲的中间铸有一个动物，有角，头像羊头，身子的线条如同缪篆，就像现今术士所画的符箓。
English: In the middle of the cocoon was cast an animal with horns, its head resembling a sheep's head, and the lines of its body resembling a cocoon, just like the cocoons drawn by sorcerers today.

古文：傍有两字，乃大篆 飞廉 字，篆文亦古怪；则钲间所图，盖飞廉也。
现代文：旁边有两个字，是大篆的 飞廉 二字，篆文也很是古怪，那么这件钲的中间所铸的图形大约就是飞廉的形象。
English: Next to it, there are two words, the Chinese character "飞廉" (fei lian) for big clam, and the Chinese character "文" (zhuan) is also very strange, so the figure cast in the middle of this clam is roughly the image of fei lian.

古文：飞廉，神兽之名。
现代文：飞廉是古代相传的一种神兽的名称。
English: Fei Liang is the name of a divine beast passed down from ancient times.

古文：淮南转运使韩持正也有一钲。所图飞廉及篆字，与此亦同。
现代文：淮南转运使韩持正也有一件钲，那上面所铸的飞廉图形和篆字，与我的这一件也相同。
English: Huainan transshipment company Han Mochizheng also has a cocoon, and the flying figures and cocoons cast on it are the same as mine.

古文：以此验之，则黄目疑亦是一物。
现代文：据此推论，那么 黄目 也有可能就是一种动物。
English: According to this inference, then, the yellow-eyed cucumber may also be an animal.

古文：飞廉之类，其形状如字非字，如画非画，恐古人别有深理。
现代文：此等飞廉之类，其形状似字非字，似画非画，恐怕是古人别有深意。
English: This kind of flying stick, whose shape resembles a word or not a word, a painting or not a painting, is probably a deep meaning of the ancients.

古文：大底先王之器，皆不苟为。昔夏后铸鼎以知神奸，殆亦此类。
现代文：大抵古代先王的礼器都不是随便制作的，从前夏后氏铸鼎以使民知神奸，大概也是这类器物。
English: For the most part, the ceremonial objects of the ancient emperors were not made arbitrarily. It is likely that this type of utensil was also made by the Qian Xiao clan in order to deceive the people.

古文：恨未能深究其理，必有所谓。
现代文：遗憾的是现在还未能深入研究揭示其中的道路，然而古人这样做一定有寓意的。
English: Unfortunately, it has not yet been possible to conduct in-depth research to reveal the path, but the ancients must have had a meaning in doing so.

古文：或日： 《礼图》樽彝，皆以木为之，未闻用铜者。 
现代文：有人说，《三礼图》所画的樽彝都是木制的，没有听说有铜制的。
English: Some people say that the cymbals depicted in the "Three Rites" are all made of wood, and they have not heard of any made of copper.

古文：此亦未可质，如今人得古铜樽者极多，安得言无？
现代文：这点也经不起质证，如现在人们获得的古铜樽已经极多，怎么能说古代没有铜制的礼器呢？
English: This, too, does not stand up to cross-examination. If there are so many bronze barrels now, how can it be said that there were no ceremonial objects made of copper in ancient times?

古文：如《礼图》 瓮以瓦为之 ，《左传》却有谣瓮；律以竹为之，晋时舜祠下乃发得玉律。
现代文：如《三礼图》中的瓮是陶制的，而《左传》中却有 瑶瓮 ；律管是竹制的，而晋代在舜祠下便发掘出了玉制的律管。
English: For example, the gong in the "Three Rites" is made of pottery, but the gong in the "Left Hand" is made of ; the compass is made of bamboo, but the Jin Dynasty unearthed a jade compass under the gong hall.

古文：此亦无常法。
现代文：这些也是没有常规的。
English: These, too, are unconventional.

古文：如蒲穀壁，《礼图》悉作草稼之象，今世人发古冢得蒲璧，乃刻文蓬蓬如蒲花敷时；彀壁如粟粒耳。则《礼图》亦未可为据。
现代文：又如蒲璧和谷璧，《三礼图》都在璧的表面上画几棵草或庄稼的图案作为它们的装饰，而现在世人发掘古墓所得到的蒲璧，却是刻纹茂密像蒲席的编织花纹铺开时的样子，谷璧则不过是璧的表面密排的圆形突起有如米粒而已，可见《三礼图》也未可作为依据。
English: For example, both Pu Bi and Gu Bi, the "Three Rites" all depict several grasses or crops on the surface of the Bi as their decoration. However, the Pu Bi obtained by the world's excavation of ancient tombs is the appearance when the woven pattern of the carved pattern is spread out, while the Gu Bi is just the surface of the Bi with a dense row of round protrusions like rice grains. It can be seen that the "Three Rites" can not be used as a basis.

古文：唐人诗多有言吴钩者。
现代文：唐人诗作中也有很多提及吴钩的。
English: There are also many references to wu huang in Chinese poetry.

古文：吴钩，刀名也，刃弯。今南蛮用之，谓之葛党刀。
现代文：吴钩是刀的名称。刀是弯的，现在南方一些土著部族还在用，称之为 葛党刀 。
English: Wu hook is the name of the knife. The knife is curved, and now some indigenous tribes in the south are still using it, calling it the Ge Party knife.

古文：古法以牛革为矢服，卧则以为枕。
现代文：古人用牛皮做箭筒，行军的时候睡觉就用它做枕头。
English: The ancients used cowhide to make quivers, and used it to make pillows when they went to sleep.

古文：取其中虚，附地枕之，数里内有人马声，则皆闻之。
现代文：利用箭筒中空的特点，贴紧地面枕在头下，几里以内的地方如果有人马走动的声音，都能听到。
English: Using the hollow nature of the quiver, close to the ground pillow under the head, within a few miles of the place, if there are people around, the sound of horses can be heard.

古文：盖虚能纳声也。
现代文：这大概是由于中空的东西能够接收声音吧！
English: This is probably due to the fact that hollow things can receive sound!

古文：熙宁中，李定献偏架弩，似弓而施榦镫。
现代文：熙宁年间，李定向官府进献偏架弩，像一般的弩弓而安装了一种铁镫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, Li Decheng donated a gantry crossbow to the government, and installed an iron crossbow like an ordinary crossbow.

古文：以镫距地而张之，射三百步，能洞重扎，谓之 神臂弓 ，最为利器，李定本党项羌酋，自投归朝廷，官至防团而死，诸子皆以骁勇雄于西边。
现代文：用脚踏铁镫抵于地面开弓，箭射出三百步远，还能洞穿多层铠甲，当时称之为 神臂弓 ，是最厉害的武器。李定本是党项羌族人的酋长，自从投归朝廷，历官至团练使、防御使而去世，他的几个儿子都以骁勇善战称雄于西部边陲。
English: Using a footed spade to hit the ground to open the bow, the arrow shot out three hundred paces, and it could also pierce through multiple layers of armor. At that time, it was called the divine arm bow, the most powerful weapon. Li Dingben was the chief of the Qiang ethnic group. Since he returned to the court, he has passed away after serving as an official, a regimental training envoy, and a defense envoy. Several of his sons are known for their bravery and good fighting in the western borderlands.

古文：古剑有沈卢、鱼肠之名，沈音湛。沈卢谓其湛湛然黑色也。
现代文：古代的名剑有叫 沈卢 、 鱼肠 的。 沈卢 的意思，是说它的色泽湛湛然又黑又亮。
English: In ancient times, famous swords were called "Shenlu" or "fish gut" swords. "Shenlu" means that its color is deep, dark and bright.

古文：古人以剂钢为刃，柔铁不茎榦；不尔则多断折。
现代文：古人以含有杂质的钢为剑刃，以熟铁为剑身，不这样剑就容易折断。
English: The ancients used steel containing impurities as the blade and wrought iron as the body of the sword. Otherwise, the sword would break easily.

古文：剑之钢者，刃多毁缺，巨阙是也。故不可纯用剂钢。
现代文：用钢铸的剑，剑刃会多有毁缺，古时相传的 巨阙 就是这种剑，所以铸剑不可纯用含有杂质的钢。
English: Swords made of steel often have defects on the blade. The giant eel, which has been passed down from ancient times, is such a sword. Therefore, steel containing impurities should not be used to cast swords.

古文：鱼肠即今蟠钢剑也，又谓之松文。取诸鱼燔熟，褫去胁，视见其肠，正如今之蟠钢剑文也。
现代文：以 鱼肠 为名的剑，就是现在的蟠钢剑，其名又叫 松文 ；这 鱼肠 的名字是这样来的：把鱼煮熟，剥去它两边的肉，露出它的肠子看一看，就知道其肠正像现在蟠钢剑的花纹。
English: The sword named "fish gut" is the present-day Yancheng steel sword, also known as Songwen; the name of this fish gut comes from this: cook the fish, peel off the flesh on both sides of it, expose its gut, and take a look. You will know that its gut is just like the pattern of the present-day Yancheng steel sword.

古文：济州金乡县发一古冢，乃汉大司徒朱鲔墓，石壁刻人物、祭器、乐架之类。
现代文：济州金乡县发掘出一座古墓，是东汉初大司徒朱鲔的墓，墓室的石壁上都刻有人物、祭器、乐架之类的图像。
English: An ancient tomb has been unearthed in Jinxiang County, Jeju. It is the tomb of Zhu Xi, a scholar of the Eastern Han Dynasty. The stone walls of the tomb are engraved with images of human figures, sacrificial vessels, and music stands.

古文：人之衣冠多品，有如今之幞头者，巾额皆方，悉如今制，但无脚耳。
现代文：人物的衣冠服饰多种多样，有一种头巾像今天的幞头，头巾的前面都是方形的，完全和今天的式样相同，只是没有垂带。
English: The costumes of the figures are diverse. There is a headscarf like today's skullcap. The front of the headscarf is square, exactly the same as today's style, but without hanging bands.

古文：妇人亦有如今之垂肩冠者，如近年所服角冠，两翼抱面，下垂及肩，略无小异。
现代文：妇人所戴也有像今人所称的 垂肩冠 的，类似近年所服的角冠，两侧的巾布抱着脸面，下垂到肩部，几乎连小小的差异都没有。
English: Women also wore what is now known as a draped shoulder crown, similar to the horned crown worn in recent years, with a kerchief around the face that hung down to the shoulders. There was hardly any difference.

古文：人情不相远，千余年前冠服已尝如此。
现代文：是知人情相近而不相远，千余年前的冠服已曾是这个样子。
English: It is acquaintances who are close to each other, not far away. The ceremonial robes of more than a thousand years ago already looked like this.

古文：其祭器亦有类今之食器者。
现代文：墓室图像中的祭器也有类似今天的食器的。
English: The sacrificial vessels in the images of the burial chamber are also similar to today's tableware.

古文：古人铸鉴，鉴大则平，鉴小则凸。
现代文：古人制作铜镜，镜子大，镜面就平；镜子小，镜面就要凸起。
English: The ancients made bronze mirrors. If the mirror was large, the mirror surface would be flat; if the mirror was small, the mirror surface would be raised.

古文：凡鉴洼则照人而大，凸则照人面小。
现代文：凡是镜子镜面凹陷的，照出的人脸就大；镜面凸起的，照出来的人脸就小。
English: When the mirror is concave, the face that shines out is large; when the mirror is convex, the face that shines out is small.

古文：小鉴不能全视人面，故令微凸，收人面令小，则鉴虽小而能全纳人面，仍復量鉴之小大，增损高下，常令人面与鉴大小相若。
现代文：小镜子不能把人的脸部照全，所以让镜面微微凸起，就可把人脸缩小一点全部照出来，那么即使镜子很小也能把人脸全都照出来。反反复复多次测量，试验镜面的大小，调整镜面的凹凸程度，经常做到人脸的大小与镜子照出的形象的大小相配。
English: A small mirror cannot fully illuminate a person's face, so if the mirror is slightly raised, the face can be narrowed down a little to fully illuminate the face, so even if the mirror is very small, the face can be fully illuminated. Repeatedly repeated multiple measurements, test the size of the mirror, adjust the degree of concavity of the mirror, and often make the size of the face match the size of the image reflected by the mirror.

古文：此工之巧智，后人不能造。
现代文：这是古代工匠的精巧与智慧之处，后代人做不出来。
English: This is the ingenuity and wisdom of ancient craftsmen, and future generations can't do it.

古文：比得古鉴，皆刮磨令平，此师旷所以伤知音也。
现代文：接连有人得到古人所铸的铜镜，结果都刮削打磨把镜面弄平了，这也正是师旷之所以伤感于知音难觅的缘故。
English: One after another, someone obtains a bronze mirror cast by the ancients, but ends up scraping and polishing it to flatten the mirror surface. This is precisely the reason why Shi Kuo is saddened by the difficulty of finding Zhiyin.

古文：熙宁中，尝发地得大钱三十余千文，皆 顺天  得一 。
现代文：熙宁年间，曾因掘地采集到大钱三十多贯，都是 顺天元宝 和 得一元宝 。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, more than 30 large sums of money were collected due to excavation, all of which were Shuntian yuan treasure and one yuan treasure.

古文：当时在庭皆疑古无 得一 年号，莫知何代物。
现代文：当时朝廷诸臣都怀疑古代没有 得一 年号，不知这些钱是哪个朝代的。
English: At that time, all the courtiers of the imperial court suspected that there was no year number in ancient times, and they did not know which dynasty the money belonged to.

古文：余按《唐书》，史思明僭号铸 顺天  得一 钱。 顺天 其伪年号， 得一 特以名铸钱耳，非年号也。
现代文：我检查《唐书》记载：史思明僭越称帝号，铸 顺天 、 得一 钱。 顺天 是史思明伪政权的年号； 得一 只是他所铸钱的称谓，不是年号。
English: I checked the records of the "Tang Shu": Shi Siming called himself emperor more and more, minted Shuntian, and got one money. Shuntian is the year of Shi Siming's pseudo-regime; get one is only the title of the money he minted, not the year.

古文：世有透光鉴，鉴背有铭文，凡二十字，字极古，莫能读。
现代文：民间流传一件透光的铜镜，镜的背面有铭文，共二十个字，字体极古老，不能识读。
English: Folklore tells of a translucent bronze mirror. On the back of the mirror there is an inscription with a total of twenty characters. The font is very old and cannot be read.

古文：以鉴承日光，则背文及二十字，皆透在屋壁上，了了分明。
现代文：用镜面接太阳光，铜镜背面的花纹及二十个字就都透射在屋壁上，十分清楚分明。
English: Using a mirror to catch the sunlight, the pattern on the back of the bronze mirror and the twenty characters are transmitted on the roof wall, very clear and distinct.

古文：人有原其理，以谓铸时薄处先冷，唯背文上差厚，后冷而铜缩多。文虽在背，而鉴面隐然有迹，所以于光中现。
现代文：有人推究这一现象的道理，以为铸铜镜时，薄的地方先冷，而背面有花纹及文字的地方要厚一些，这些地方冷得慢，铜就收缩得多一些；花纹虽在背面，而在镜面上仍然隐约存留着它们的痕迹，所以在日光照射下就显示出来了。
English: Some people have speculated on the reason for this phenomenon, believing that when casting a copper mirror, the thinner areas are cooled first, while the areas with patterns and words on the back are thicker. These areas cool slowly, and the copper shrinks more; although the patterns are on the back, they still have faint traces on the mirror surface, so they show up under sunlight.

古文：余观之，理诚如是。
现代文：依我所观察，这一现象的原理确实如此。
English: As far as I can see, this is indeed the principle of the phenomenon.

古文：然余家有三鉴，又见他家所藏，皆是一样，文画铭字无纤异者，形制甚古。
现代文：然而我家里有三面铜镜，又曾见到他人家里所藏的一面，都是一个样式，纹饰图画和铭文字体几乎没有丝毫的差异，形制都很古老。
English: However, there are three bronze mirrors in my home, and I have seen the one hidden in someone else's home. They are all of the same style, and there is almost no difference between the decorative pictures and the inscription fonts. The shapes are all very old.

古文：唯此一样光透，其他鉴虽至薄者皆莫能透。
现代文：而只有这一面能够透光，其他镜子即使最薄的，也都不能透光。
English: But only this side can transmit light, other mirrors, even the thinnest, cannot transmit light.

古文：意古人别自有术。
现代文：我猜想古人可能自有一套特别的制作技术。
English: I suspect that the ancients may have had their own special production techniques.

古文：余顷年在海州，人家穿地得一弩机，其望山甚长，望山之侧为小矩，如尺之有分寸。
现代文：我近年在海州，见有户人家挖地得到一件弩机。这弩机的瞄准部件相当长，瞄准部件旁边有一小矩尺，如同普通的有分寸刻度的矩尺。
English: In recent years in Haizhou, I have seen a family digging in the ground to get a boring machine. The aiming part of this boring machine is quite long, and there is a small torque meter next to the aiming part, just like an ordinary minute-scale torque meter.

古文：原其意，以目注镞端，以望山之度拟之，準其高下，正用算家勾股法也。《太甲》曰： 往省括于度则释。 
现代文：推究其意，是在发射时以眼目注视箭头的端点，用瞄准部件的度数测算发射的角度，以调整箭头的高下，用的正是算术家的勾股法。《尚书·太甲》篇说： 往省括于度则释。 
English: The meaning of this is to look at the end point of the arrow at the time of launch, use the power of the aiming component to measure the launch angle, and adjust the height of the arrow. It is the arithmetic method of the arithmetician. "Shangshu · Taijia" said: To the degree is to the degree.

古文：疑此乃度也。
现代文：我怀疑这件弩机的小矩尺就是《太甲》篇所说的 度 。
English: I doubt that the small scale of this milling machine is what the "Taijia" article said.

古文：汉陈王宠善弩射，十发十中，中皆同处，其法以 天覆地载，参连为奇，三微三小。三微为经，三小为纬，要在机牙。 
现代文：汉末陈王刘宠善于弩弓发箭，号称十发十中，并且每次射中的都是同一个靶心。史书记载他的办法是 天覆地载，参连为奇，三微三小，三微为经，三小为纬，要在机牙 。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Chen Wang Liu Diao was good at shooting a bow and arrow. He was famous for shooting ten times and ten times, and each time he shot the same bull's-eye. Historians recorded that his method was to cover the sky and the earth, to be surprised, to be surprised, to be surprised, to be surprised, to be surprised.

古文：其言隐晦难晓。大意天覆地载，前后手势耳；参连为奇，谓以度视镞，以镞视的，参连如衡，此正是勾股度高深之术也；三经、三纬，则设之于堋，以志其高下左右耳。
现代文：这些话隐晦难以明白，揣测其大意： 天覆地载 ，大约不过是指发射时用以指示调整前后高下的手势； 参连为奇 ，说的是按瞄准部件的度数注视箭头，通过箭头注视靶的，使瞄准部件、箭头、靶的三者连在同一条水平线上，这正是利用勾股定理测量高下浅深的方法； 三经三纬 ，则是设在靶墙上的三条经线和三条纬线，用来标志箭靶的高低左右。
English: It is difficult to understand these obscure words, and to speculate on their meaning: 天覆地载, roughly means nothing more than a gesture used to indicate the adjustment of the height before and after the launch; 参连为奇, means looking at the arrow according to the degree of the aiming component, and looking at the target through the arrow, so that the aiming component, the arrow and the target are connected on the same horizontal line, which is exactly the method of measuring the height and depth using the hook theorem; 三经三纬, is the three lines of longitude and three lines of latitude located on the target wall, used to mark the height and latitude of the target.

古文：余尝设三经、三纬，以镞注之发矢，亦十得七八。设度于机，定加密矣。
现代文：我曾按这办法设置三经三纬，以箭头瞄准，发箭也十中七八；若设刻度于弩机上，那么命中的精密度一定会更高。
English: I used to set the three longitudes and three latitudes in this way, aiming with the arrow, and the arrow shot was seventy-eight out of ten; if the scale was set on the hammer, then the precision of the hit would certainly be higher.

古文：青堂羌善锻甲，铁色青黑，莹彻可鉴笔发，以麝皮为絤旅之，柔薄而韧。
现代文：青堂羌人善于锻造铠甲，所造铠甲的铁片颜色青黑，晶莹透亮，可以照出毛发。用麝皮做成的背心缀以甲片，柔软轻薄而坚韧。
English: The people of Qingdao are good at forging armor, and the iron sheets of the armor they make are blue-black in color, crystal clear and translucent, and can shine hair. The vest made of mink is decorated with armor, soft, thin and tough.

古文：镇戎军有一铁甲，匵藏之，相传以为宝器。
现代文：镇戎军有一副铁甲，用木匣收藏着，官员届届相传当做宝器。
English: The town's army has a pair of iron armor, which is kept in a wooden box. It has been handed down from generation to generation of officials as a treasure.

古文：韩魏公帅泾、原，曾取试之。去之五十步，强弩射之，不能入。
现代文：韩魏公泾原帅时，曾取出做过试验，在五十步开外，用强弩来射它，不能射穿。
English: When Han Wei was the commander of the imperial eunuchs, he took it out and tested it. When it was fifty paces away, he shot it with a strong crossbow, but it could not penetrate.

古文：尝有一矢贯扎，乃是中其钻空；为钻空所刮，铁皆反卷，其坚如此。
现代文：也曾有一箭穿透了甲片，竟是因为正好射在了甲片的小钻孔上，结果箭头为钻空所刮，铁都反卷起来了，其甲片竟坚硬到如此程度。
English: There was also an arrow that penetrated the armor plate, actually because it was shot right on the small drill hole of the armor plate. As a result, the arrow was scraped by the drill hole, the iron was rolled back, and the armor plate was hard to such an extent.

古文：凡锻甲之法，其始甚厚，不用火，冷锻之，比元厚三分减二乃成。
现代文：凡是锻造铠甲，其方法是开始铁片甚厚，不用炉火加高温锻打，而只进行冷锻，直到铁片的厚度比原来减少了三分之二，就算锻成了。
English: The usual method of forging armor is to start with a very thick piece of iron, not to forge it at high temperature and high temperature, but only to carry out cold forging, until the thickness of the iron sheet is reduced by two-thirds compared to the original, even if it is forged.

古文：其未留头许不锻，隐然如瘊子。欲以验未锻时厚薄。如浚河留土筍也。谓之 瘊子甲 。
现代文：甲片的末端留着像筷子头那么大小的一小片不锻打，隐约像个瘊子，这是为了检查铁片未锻打时的厚薄，有如疏浚河道时留些笋状的立土，所以这种铠甲被叫做 瘊子甲 。
English: At the end of the plate, there is a small piece of unwrought iron as big as the head of a chopstick, vaguely resembling a pair of pliers. This is to check the thickness of the iron plate when it is unwrought, just like when a river is dredged, leaving some ripples in the ground, so this kind of armor is called a pair of pliers.

古文：今人多于甲札之背隐起，伪为瘊子，虽置瘊子，但无非精钢，或以火锻为之，皆无补于用，徒为外饰而已。
现代文：今人锻甲，多在甲片的背面暗留一个伪做的瘊子；虽留瘊子，但所用质料原非精钢，或由火锻做成，都无补于实用，不过徒为外表的装饰罢了。
English: Nowadays, when people forge armor, they mostly leave a fake dowel on the back of the armor plate; although the dowel is left, the raw material used is not stainless steel, or it is made of fire forging, which does not add to the practicality, but it is just an external decoration.

古文：朝士黄秉少居长安，游骊山，值道士理故宫石渠，石下得折玉钗，刻为凤首，已皆破缺，然制作精巧，后人不能为也。
现代文：朝廷命官黄秉年轻时居住在长安，有一次游骊山，正碰上一个道士在修治旧时宫殿的石渠，在石头下发现一支折断的玉钗，钗头刻成风首的形状，都已残缺，然而制作的精巧，是后人不能做到的。
English: When he was young, Huang Bing, an official of the imperial court, lived in Chang'an. On one occasion, he was on a tour of Lushan Mountain when he met a Taoist monk who was repairing the stone channel of the old palace. Under the stone, he found a broken jade gong, and a hoe carved into the shape of the head of the wind, all of which were incomplete. However, the exquisite workmanship was beyond the reach of future generations.

古文：郑嵎《津阳门》诗云： 破簪碎细不足拾，金沟浅溜和缨緌。 
现代文：郑愚的《津阳门诗》说： 破簪碎钿不足拾，金沟浅溜和缨绥。 
English: Zheng Yu's "Tsunyang Gate Poem" says: "Broken reeds and broken reeds are not enough to pick up, and the golden ditch is shallow and narrow.

古文：非虚语也。
现代文：这话不是虚传的。
English: This is not a myth.

古文：余又尝过金陵，人有发六朝陵寝，得古物甚多。
现代文：我又曾路过金陵，见有人发掘六朝君主的陵墓，得到很多古物。
English: I also passed by the Jinling Mausoleum and saw people excavating the mausoleums of the monarchs of the Six Dynasties and obtaining many antiquities.

古文：余曾见一玉臂钗，两头施转关，可以屈伸，合之令圆，仅于无缝，为九龙绕之，功侔鬼神。
现代文：我曾看到一支玉臂钗，两头都设置转动机关，可以弯曲、伸直或使之变成圆形的，几乎看不出有缝，而为九条龙所环绕，制作功夫可比鬼斧神工。
English: I once saw a jade arm bracelet, both ends are equipped with a rotary switch, can be bent, straightened or made into a circle, almost no visible seams, but surrounded by nine dragons, making the effort comparable to the devil's work.

古文：世多谓前古民醇，工作率多卤拙，是大不然。
现代文：世人多称往古民风淳朴，手工制作大都粗糙笨拙，其实大不是这么一回事。
English: The world mostly refers to the ancient folk style as simple, and the hand-made products are mostly rough and clumsy. However, this is not the case.

古文：古物至巧，正由民醇故也。民醇，工不苟。
现代文：古器物制造非常精巧，正由于民风淳朴的缘故，民风淳朴则各种手工制作都一丝不苟。
English: The manufacture of ancient utensils is very delicate, precisely because of the simplicity of the folk style, and all kinds of hand-made products are meticulous.

古文：后世风俗虽侈，而工之致力不及古人，故物多不精。
现代文：后世风俗虽浮华奢侈，而在工艺上的用力不及古人，所以造出来的器物多不精致。
English: Although the customs of later generations were flashy and extravagant, they did not use as much technology as the ancients, so the objects they made were not as delicate.

古文：今人地中得古印章，多是军中官。
现代文：今人所得地下出土的古印章，多是军中武官的印章。
English: Most of the ancient seals that have been unearthed underground are the seals of military attachés.

古文：古之佩章，罢免迁死皆上印绶；得以印绶葬者极稀。
现代文：古人佩戴印章，罢免、升迁和死去都要上交印章和系印章的绶带，能以印章和绶带随葬的极少。
English: The ancients wore seals, and when they were dismissed, promoted or died, they had to hand over the seal and the umbilical cord with the seal. Very few could be buried with the seal and the umbilical cord.

古文：土中所得，多是没于行阵者。
现代文：现在见于地下出土的，多是死于行伍战阵的人所留下的。
English: Most of what is now found underground was left behind by those who died on the battlefield.

古文：大驾玉辂，唐高宗时造，至今进御。
现代文：宫中大驾玉辂，是唐高宗时制造的，至今还供皇上使用。
English: The Imperial Standard Jade Urn was made in the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, and is still used by the emperor.

古文：自唐至今，凡三至泰山登封。其他巡幸，莫记其数。至今完壮，乘之安若山岳，以措杯水其上而不摇。
现代文：从唐朝到现在，共三次用它东至泰山举行封禅典礼，其他巡视出行，不计其数，而玉辂至今完好结实，乘坐起来安如山岳，放杯水在上面也不会摇动。
English: From the Tang Dynasty to the present, it has been used for a total of three times to hold a sealing ceremony east of Mount Tai, and there are countless other inspection trips. However, the jade gong is still intact and strong, and it is as stable as a mountain. Putting a glass of water on it will not shake.

古文：庆历中，尝别造玉辂，极天下良工为之，乘之动摇不安，竟废不用。
现代文：庆历年间，曾另造一辆玉辂，极尽天下最优秀的工匠手艺制作，乘上去还是摇动不稳定，最后被废弃不用。
English: During the celebration of the calendar, another jade gong was made, made by the best craftsmen in the world, but it was unstable and eventually abandoned.

古文：元丰中，復造一辂，尤极工巧，未经进御，方陈于大庭，车屋适坏，遂压而碎，只用唐辂。
现代文：元丰年间，又造了一辆玉辂，尤其极尽天下工巧之能事，而还没有进献皇上，正陈放在大庭中，恰好车屋倒坏，竟压碎了，只好仍用唐玉辂。
English: During the Yuan and Feng dynasties, another jade chariot was made, which was particularly ingenious, but it had not yet been presented to the emperor. It was being displayed in the courtyard when the carriage house fell into disrepair and was crushed, so the Tang jade chariot had to be used.

古文：其稳利坚久，历世不能窥其法。
现代文：唐玉辂的稳定、便利、坚固、耐用，历来都不能搞清楚它所以如此的制造方法。
English: The stability, convenience, strength, and durability of Tang Yushan have never been able to figure out how it is made.

古文：世传有神物护之，若行诸辂之后，则隐然有声。
现代文：世传有神物保护它，如果让它行在其他车辂之后，就会隐隐约约听到一种奇怪的声响。
English: Legend has it that a deity protects it, and if it is allowed to travel behind other carriages, a strange sound can be faintly heard.

