古文：齐人有冯谖者，贫乏不能自存，使人属孟尝君，愿寄食门下。
现代文：齐国有个名叫冯谖的人，家境贫困难以养活自己，托人请求孟尝君，愿意在他的门下当门客。
English: There was a man in the state of Qi named Feng Yu, whose family was too poor to feed themselves, and he asked Meng Yuqun to be his concierge.

古文：孟尝君曰： 客何好？ 
现代文：孟尝君问： 先生有什么爱好吗？ 
English: Meng Yuqun asked: Does the teacher have any hobbies?

古文：曰： 客无好也。 
现代文：冯谖说： 没有。 
English: Feng Yu said: No.

古文：曰： 客何能？ 曰： 客无能也。 
现代文：孟尝君又问： 先生有什么才能吗？ 他回答说： 也没有。 
English: Meng Qiqun also asked: Does the teacher have any talent? He answered: Neither.

古文：孟尝君笑而受之曰： 诺。 
现代文：孟尝君笑了笑，接纳了他： 好的。 
English: Meng Yuqun smiled and accepted him: Okay.

古文：左右以君贱之也，食以草具。
现代文：孟尝君身边的人因为主人不太在意冯谖，就让他吃粗茶淡饭。
English: The people around Meng Yuqun let him eat coarse tea and light rice because the owner didn't care much about Feng Yuqun.

古文：居有顷，倚柱弹其剑，歌曰： 长铗归来乎！食无鱼。 
现代文：住了不久，冯谖就背靠柱子，弹剑而歌： 长剑呀，咱们回去吧，吃饭没有鱼。 
English: Not long after moving in, Feng Yao leaned his back against a pillar, swung his sword and sang: Long sword, let's go back, there's no fish for dinner.

古文：左右以告。
现代文：左右的人把这件事告诉孟尝君。
English: People around told Meng Yaojun about this.

古文：孟尝君曰： 为之驾，比门下之车客。 
现代文：孟尝君吩咐说： 给他其他门客的待遇，让他吃鱼。 
English: Meng Yijun ordered, "Give him the same treatment as the other guests and let him eat fish."

古文：于是乘其车，揭其剑，过其友曰： 孟尝君客我。 
现代文：又过了不久，冯谖又弹着他的剑，唱道： 长剑呀，我们还是回去吧，出门没有车坐。 孟尝君说： 替他配上车，待遇和其他门客一样。 
English: After a short while, Feng Yao rattled his sword again and sang: Long sword, let's go back, there is no car to go out. Meng Yaojun said: Put him in the car, the treatment is the same as other guests.

古文：后有顷，复弹其剑铗，歌曰： 长铗归来乎！无以为家。 
现代文：于是冯谖驾车带剑，向他们的朋友夸耀： 孟尝君奉我为上客。 这样过了一段日子，冯谖复弹其剑，唱道： 长剑呀，咱们回去吧，没有什么可以用来养家。 
English: So Feng Yu drove with a sword, boasting to their friends: Meng Yuqun treated me as a guest.After a while, Feng Yu rebounded his sword and sang: Long sword, let's go back, there is nothing to support the family.

古文：左右皆恶之，以为贪而不知足。
现代文：左右的人都厌恶他，认为他贪得无厌。
English: People on both sides loathe him and think he is insatiably greedy.

古文：孟尝君问： 冯公有亲乎？ 
现代文：孟尝君问道： 冯先生有父母吗？ 
English: Meng Yuqun asked: Does Mr. Feng have parents?

古文：对曰： 有老母。 
现代文：左右答道： 老母健在。 
English: Left and right answer: My mother is still alive.

古文：孟尝君使人给其食用，无使乏。于是冯谖不复歌。
现代文：孟尝君资其家用，不使他母亲穷困，于是冯谖从此就不再唱歌了。
English: Meng Yijun funded his family so that his mother would not be impoverished. As a result, Feng Yu never sang again.

古文：后孟尝君出记，问门下诸客： 谁习计会，能为文收责于薛者乎？ 
现代文：后来，孟尝君出了一通告示，问门下食客： 请问哪一位通晓账务会计，能替我到薛地收债呢？ 
English: Later, Meng Yakun issued a notice, asking local diners: Which one is familiar with accounting and can collect debts for me in Xuedi?

古文：冯谖署曰： 能。 
现代文：冯谖署上名字说： 我能。 
English: Feng Yu said, "I can do it."

古文：孟尝君怪之，曰： 此谁也？ 
现代文：孟尝君看了很诧异，向左右随从： 这是谁呀？ 
English: Meng Yuqun was very surprised to see this, and asked his followers: Who is this?

古文：左右曰： 乃歌夫长铗归来者也。 
现代文：人们回答道： 就是那个唱 长剑呀，我们回去吧 的人。 
English: The people answered, "He is the one who sang, 'Let's go back to the swords.'

古文：孟尝笑曰： 客果有能也，吾负之，未尝见也。 
现代文：孟尝君笑道： 他果然有才能，我真对不起他，还没有见过他的面呢。 
English: Meng Qijun smiled, "He really does have talent. I'm really sorry for him, I haven't met him yet."

古文：请而见之，谢曰： 文倦于事，愦于忧，而性懦愚，沉于国家之事，开罪于先生。
现代文：于是请他来相见，并道歉说： 田文每日为琐事所烦，心身俱累，被忧愁弄得神昏意乱，而且生来懦弱笨拙，只因政务缠身，而怠慢了先生。
English: So he invited him to meet him, and apologized, saying: Tian Wenguang is daily bothered by trifles, his mind and body are tired, he is dizzy with sorrow, and he was born weak and clumsy, and he only neglected because he was involved in government affairs, sir.

古文：先生不羞，乃有意欲为收责于薛乎？ 冯谖曰： 愿之。 
现代文：好在先生不怪我，先生愿意替我到薛地收债吗？ 冯谖说： 愿效微劳。 
English: Fortunately, my teacher did not blame me. Would my teacher be willing to go to Xuedi to collect debts for me? Feng Yao said: I am willing to do a little work.

古文：于是约车治装，载券契而行，辞曰： 责毕收，以何市而反？ 
现代文：于是孟尝君替他备好车马行装，让他载着债券契约出发。辞别时，冯谖问： 收完债后，买些什么回来？ 
English: So Meng Yijun prepared a carriage and horses for him, and let him set off with the bond contract. When saying goodbye, Feng Yijun asked: After collecting the debt, what will you buy back?

古文：孟尝君曰： 视吾家所寡有者。 
现代文：孟尝君回答： 先生看着办，买点我家缺少的东西吧。 
English: Mr. Meng replied, "The teacher will take care of it. Let's buy something that my family lacks."

古文：驱而之薛，使吏召诸民当偿者，悉来合券。券遍合，起矫命以责赐诸民，因烧其券，民称万岁。
现代文：冯谖赶着马车到薛地，派官吏把该还债的百姓都叫来核对债券，全部核对之后，冯谖站了起来，假托孟尝君的名义将债款赏给这些百姓，并烧掉了那些券契文书，百姓感激得一直欢呼。
English: Feng Hui drove the carriage to Xuedi, and sent officials to call all the people who should pay their debts to check the bonds. After all the checks, Feng Hui stood up, awarded the debts to these people in the name of Meng Yuqun, and burned those bond documents. The people were grateful and cheered all the time.

古文：长驱到齐，晨而求见。孟尝君怪其疾也，衣冠而见之，曰： 责毕收乎？
现代文：冯谖又马不停蹄地返回齐国都城临淄，一大早就求见孟尝君，孟尝君很奇怪他回来得这么快，穿好衣服就接见他说： 收完债了吗？
English: Feng Yao kept returning to Linyi, the capital of Qi, and asked to see Meng Yaojun early in the morning. Meng Yaojun was surprised that he came back so quickly. After getting dressed, he met him and said, "Have you finished collecting the debt?"

古文：来何疾也! 
现代文：怎么回来的这般快捷？ 
English: How did you get back so fast?

古文：曰： 收毕矣。 
现代文：冯谖答道： 都收完了。 
English: Feng Li replied: Everything has been collected.

古文： 以何市而反？ 
现代文： 先生替我买了些什么回来？ 
English: What did the teacher buy for me and bring back?

古文：冯谖曰： 君云 视吾家所寡有者 。臣窃计，君宫中积珍宝，狗马实外厩，美人充下陈。
现代文：冯谖说： 殿下曾言 买些家中缺乏的东西 ，臣暗想，殿下宫中珠宝堆积，犬马满厩，美女成群。
English: Feng Yu said, "Your highness once said to buy some things that are lacking at home," the retainer thought to himself, "The jewels in your highness' palace are piled up, the stables are full of dogs and horses, and there are hordes of beautiful women.

古文：君家所寡有者以义耳!窃以为君市义。 孟尝君曰： 市义奈何？ 
现代文：殿下家中所缺少的，惟有仁义了，因此臣自作主张为殿下买了仁义回来。 孟尝君说： 你是怎么买仁义的？ 
English: All that was missing in His Highness's household was benevolence and righteousness, so the vassal took it upon himself to buy benevolence and righteousness for His Highness. Meng Qiqun said: How did you buy benevolence and righteousness?

古文：曰： 今君有区区之薛，不拊爱子其民，因而贾利之。
现代文：冯谖答道： 殿下封地只有小小的薛地，不但不体恤薛地百姓，反而像商人一样在他们身上榨取利益。
English: Feng Li replied: His Imperial Highness's fief only extends to a small area of Xue, and instead of showing compassion for the people of Xue, he is squeezing profits out of them like a merchant.

古文：臣窃矫君命，以责赐诸民，因烧其券，民称万岁。乃臣所以为君市义也。 孟尝君不说，曰： 诺，先生休矣! 
现代文：臣为君计，私下假传殿下的命令，将他们所有的债务都免去了，并将所有债权焚毁，百姓都高呼万岁，这就是臣替殿下买的仁义呀！ 孟尝君很不高兴，说： 我知道了，先生退下休息吧。 
English: The vassal was scheming for the prince, secretly and falsely relaying his highness's orders, forgiving all their debts, and burning all their debts. The people were shouting, "Long live the king!" This was the benevolence and righteousness that the vassal had bought for his highness! Meng Yuqun was very unhappy and said, "I know, sir, step back and rest."

古文：后期年，齐王谓孟尝君曰： 寡人不敢以先王之臣为臣。 
现代文：一年以后，齐闵王对孟尝君说： 寡人不敢用先王的旧臣来做我的臣子。 
English: A year later, King Qizhen said to Meng Yaojun: "No one dares to use the former king's old vassal as my vassal.

古文：孟尝君就国于薛，未至百里，民扶老携幼，迎君道中。
现代文：孟尝君回到封地薛，还差百里未到，当地百姓就扶老携幼，在路旁迎接孟尝君。
English: Meng Yaojun returned to the fiefdom of Xue, but he was still a hundred miles away. Local people helped the old man and his children to meet Meng Yaojun on the roadside.

古文：孟尝君顾谓冯谖： 先生所为文市义者，乃今日见之。 
现代文：孟尝君回头对冯谖说： 先生为我买的仁义 ，今天才看到。 
English: Meng Yijun looked back at Feng Yu and said, "I only saw the benevolence you bought for me today."

古文：冯谖曰： 狡兔有三窟，仅得免其死耳。
现代文：冯谖对孟尝君接着进言说： 狡兔三窟，才可得以免死。
English: Feng Yao then said to Meng Yaojun, "Only by avoiding the three caves can you avoid death."

古文：今君有一窟，未得高枕而卧也。请为君复凿二窟。 
现代文：如今殿下只有一个洞穴，还不能做到高枕无忧，臣愿替殿下再凿两个洞穴。 
English: His Royal Highness only has one cave at the moment, so he can't rest easy yet. The vassal would like to dig two more caves for His Royal Highness.

古文：孟尝君予车五十乘，金五百斤，西游于梁，谓惠王曰： 齐放其大臣孟尝君于诸侯，诸侯先迎之者，富而兵强。 
现代文：孟尝君便给他五十辆车，五百斤金去游说魏国。冯谖来到魏国，对惠王说： 齐国放逐了大臣孟尝君，诸侯谁先得到他，谁就能富国强兵。 
English: Meng Yuqun then gave him fifty cars and five hundred catties of gold to lobby Wei. Feng Yu came to Wei and said to Hui Wang: Qi has banished Minister Meng Yuqun, and whoever gets him first will be able to enrich the country and strengthen the army.

古文：于是梁王虚上位，以故相为上将军，遣使者，黄金千斤，车百乘，往聘孟尝君。
现代文：于是魏王空出相位，让原来的相国做上将军，派出使节，以千斤黄金、百乘马车去聘孟尝君。
English: As a result, the Wei king took the initiative to make his former partner a general and sent an envoy to hire Meng Yuqun with a thousand pounds of gold and a hundred horse-drawn carriages.

古文：冯谖先驱诫孟尝君曰： 千金，重币也；百乘，显使也。齐其闻之矣。 
现代文：冯谖先赶回薛地对孟尝君说： 千斤黄金是极贵重的聘礼，百乘马车是极隆重的使节，齐国应该已经知道这件事情了。 
English: Feng Yu rushed back to Xue first and said to Meng Yu: A thousand pounds of gold is a very valuable betrothal gift, and a hundred horse-drawn carriages are very grand envoys. Qi should have already known about this.

古文：梁使三反，孟尝君固辞不往也。
现代文：魏国使者接连来了三次，可孟尝君坚决推辞不就。
English: The Wei envoy came three times in a row, but Meng Yatong firmly refused.

古文：齐王闻之，君臣恐惧，遣太傅赍黄金千斤，文车二驷，服剑一，封书谢孟尝君曰： 寡人不祥，被于宗庙之祟，沉于谄谀之臣，开罪于君，寡人不足为也。愿君顾先王之宗庙，姑反国统万人乎？ 
现代文：齐王听到这个消息，君臣震恐，连忙派遣太傅带着一千斤黄金，两乘四马花车及宝剑一把，外附书信一封向孟尝君道歉说： 都是寡人行为的兆头不吉祥，遭受祖宗降下的神祸，听信谗言，得罪了先生。寡人无德，虽不足以辅佐，但请先生顾念先王宗庙，暂且回国执掌政务。 
English: Upon hearing this news, King Qi and his ministers were horrified, and quickly dispatched Taifu with a thousand kilos of gold, two four-horse floats and a sword, with an attached letter of apology to Meng Yaojun, saying: "All of these are ominous signs of the actions of certain people. You have suffered the divine disaster of your ancestors, you have listened to bad advice, and you have sinned, sir. You are a man without virtue, although you are not enough to help, but please consider the ancestral temple of the previous king, and temporarily return to the country to take charge of government affairs.

古文：冯谖诫孟尝君曰： 愿请先王之祭器，立宗庙于薛。 
现代文：冯谖劝孟尝君说： 希望殿下索取先王的祭器，立宗庙于薛。 
English: Feng Yu advised Meng Yuqun saying, "I hope that your highness will request the sacrificial vessels of the former king and establish a family temple in Xue.

古文：庙成，还报孟尝君曰： 三窟已就，君始高枕为乐矣。 
现代文：宗庙落成，冯谖回报说： 三窟已就，殿下可安心享乐了。 
English: After the completion of the ancestral temple, Feng Li replied: The three caves have been completed, and Your Highness can enjoy them with peace of mind.

古文：孟尝君为相数十年，无纤介之祸者，冯谖之计也。
现代文：孟尝君为相几十年，没有纤介之微的祸患，倚靠的正是冯谖的谋划啊！
English: Meng Yaojun has been in power for decades, there is no minor disaster, it is Feng Yao's plan that relies on it!

