古文：二十年春，王二月，夫人姜氏如莒。
现代文：二十年春季，周历二月，夫人姜氏去莒国。
English: In the spring of the 20th year, in February of the lunar calendar, Mrs. Jiang went to Shan State.

古文：夏，齐大灾。
现代文：夏季，齐国发生大灾。
English: In the summer, a great disaster occurred in Qi Province.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，齐人伐戎。
现代文：冬季，齐国攻打戎人。
English: In winter, the Qi attacked the Yongren.

古文：二十年春，郑伯和王室，不克。
现代文：二十年春季，郑厉公调解周惠王和子穨之间的纠纷，没有成功。
English: In the spring of the 20th year, Zheng Liguo mediated the dispute between Zhou Hui Wang and Zixuan without success.

古文：执燕仲父。
现代文：逮捕了燕仲父。
English: Yan Zhongfu was arrested.

古文：夏，郑伯遂以王归，王处于栎。
现代文：夏季，郑厉公就带了周惠王回国。惠王住在栎地。
English: In the summer, Zheng Li Gong took Zhou Hui Wang back to China. Hui Wang lived in Handan.

古文：秋，王及郑伯入于邬。遂入成周，取其宝器而还。
现代文：秋季，惠王和郑厉公到了邬地，于是就进入成周，取得了成周的宝器而回。
English: In the autumn, Hui Wang and Zheng Liguang arrived in Handan, so they entered Cheng Zhou and returned with Cheng Zhou's treasure.

古文：冬，王子颓享五大夫，乐及徧舞。
现代文：冬季，王子穨设享礼招待五位大夫，奏乐及于各个时代所有的舞蹈。
English: In winter, the prince held a banquet to invite five doctors, music and all the dances of all ages.

古文：郑伯闻之，见虢叔，曰： 寡人闻之，哀乐失时，殃咎必至。
现代文：郑厉公听到这件事，见到虢叔说： 我听说，悲哀或者高兴，若不是时候，灾祸一定会到来。
English: When Zheng Liguo heard about this and saw Uncle Zou, he said, "I've heard that, sad or happy, if it's not the right time, disaster will surely come.

古文：今王子颓歌舞不倦，乐祸也。
现代文：现在王子穨观赏歌舞而不知疲倦，这是以祸患为高兴。
English: Now the prince watches the song and dance tirelessly, rejoicing in the calamity.

古文：夫司寇行戮，君为之不举，而况敢乐祸乎！
现代文：司寇杀人，国君为此而减膳撤乐，何况敢以祸患而高兴呢？
English: When a scoundrel kills a man, the ruler of the country cuts down on his diet and withdraws from entertainment. How dare he rejoice at the calamity?

古文：奸王之位，祸孰大焉？
现代文：篡夺天子的职位，祸患还有比这更大的吗？
English: Is there a greater evil than usurping the position of the Son of God?

古文：临祸忘忧，忧必及之。
现代文：面临祸患而忘记忧愁，忧愁一定到来。
English: In the face of adversity, forget sorrow, for sorrow is sure to come.

古文：盍纳王乎？ 虢公曰： 寡人之愿也。 
现代文：何不让天子复位呢？ 虢公说： 这是我的愿望。 
English: Why not let the Son of Heaven be reinstated? Zang Gong said: This is my wish.

