古文：世指挥佥事，举武会试，授南安守备。
现代文：崔文荣，浙江海宁卫人，其家世代为指挥佥事。文荣以武举参加会试，授南安守备。
English: Cui Wen Rong, Zhejiang Haining guardsman, his family generation as a conductor. Wen Rong participated in the audition with martial arts and was awarded the Nan'an Guard.

古文：崇祯中，临、蓝盗起，逼桂阳，桂王告急。
现代文：崇祯年间，临、蓝地方百姓反明，进逼桂阳，桂王告急。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the people of Lin and Lan provinces rebelled against the Ming Dynasty and forced their way into Guiyang. The King of Guiyang was in a hurry.

古文：文荣督所部会剿，却贼四万人。以功，擢武昌参将。
现代文：文荣督所部会剿，打退义军四万人，因功劳升武昌参将。
English: Wen Rongguo, head of the headquarters, defeated 40,000 rebels and was promoted to the rank of general for his service.

古文：十六年四月，张献忠犯汉阳，文荣渡江袭斩六百级。
现代文：崇祯十六年四月，张献忠进攻汉阳，文荣渡江袭击义军，斩六百人。
English: In April of the 16th year of Chongzhen, Zhang Xianzhong attacked Hanyang, and Wen Rong crossed the river to attack the rebels, killing six hundred people.

古文：已而城陷，武昌震惧。
现代文：其后汉阳城陷落，武昌人心不安。
English: After that, Hanyang City fell, and people in Wuchang were worried.

古文：巡抚宋一鹤既死，承天新任巡抚王聚奎未至，武昌素不宿重兵，城空虚。
现代文：巡抚宋一鹤已死，而承天新任巡抚王聚奎未到任，武昌素来不屯驻重兵，城内空虚。
English: The governor Song Yihe has died, and the new governor Wang Jukui has not yet taken office. Wuchang has never stationed heavy troops, and the city is empty.

古文：或议撤江上兵以守，文荣曰： 守城不如守江，团风、煤炭、鸭蛋诸洲，浅不及马腹，纵之飞渡，而坐守孤城，非策也。 
现代文：有人提出撤江上兵来守武昌，文荣则认为 ：守城不如守江，团风、煤炭、鸭蛋诸洲，水浅不及马腹，放弃这些地方，让敌人飞渡，而我们坐守孤城，这不是用兵方略。 
English: Some people suggested withdrawing soldiers to the river to guard Wuchang, but Wen Rong believed that: guarding the city is not as good as guarding the river, the group wind, coal, duck eggs and other continents, the water is not as shallow as a horse's belly, abandoning these places, letting the enemy fly over, and we guard the lonely city, this is not a military strategy.

古文：县无人，贼出营樊口，文荣军洪山寺扼之。
现代文：但当权者没有听取他的意见，结果是让义军从团风渡江，攻陷武昌县，屯兵于樊口。文荣屯军于洪山寺以扼守武昌城。
English: However, those in power did not listen to his opinion, and as a result, they let the rebel army cross the river from the wind of the regiment to attack Wuchang County, and stationed troops at the mouth of the river. Wen Rong stationed troops at Hongshan Temple to defend Wuchang City.

古文：既，敛兵入城，以他将代守。
现代文：其后，收兵入城，由他将代守。
English: After that, he will gather the troops and enter the city, and he will stand guard on his behalf.

古文：贼全军由鸭蛋洲毕渡，抵洪山，守将亦退入城。
现代文：义军由鸭蛋洲渡江，进抵洪山。明军守将退入武昌城内。
English: The rebel army crossed the river from Duck Egg Island and entered Hongshan. The Ming army will retreat into Wuchang City.

古文：文荣以武胜门当贼冲，偕故相贺逢圣协守，贼攻之不能下。
现代文：文荣认为武胜门是御敌要冲，与故相贺逢圣共同防守，义军难以攻下。
English: Wen Rong believed that the Wusheng Gate was the enemy's strategic point of attack, and defended it together with the former enemy. It was difficult for the rebels to capture it.

古文：监军参政王扬基时已擢右佥都御史，巡抚承天、德安二郡，未闻命，尚驻武昌。见势急，与推官傅上瑞诡言有事汉阳，开门遁去，人情益汹汹。
现代文：监军参政王杨基，这时已升为右佥都御史，巡抚承天、德安二郡，但尚未接到调令，仍驻武昌，他见形势危急，与推官傅上瑞借口有事去汉阳，开城门逃走，武昌城内人心更加不安。
English: At that time, Wang Yangji, the supervisor of the army and a member of the Politburo, had been promoted to the position of the governor of Hanyang, the governor of Chengdu and De'an counties, but had not yet received the transfer order and was still stationed in Wuchang. He saw the situation as critical and went to Hanyang on the pretext of having something to do with Fu Shangrui, opened the city gate and fled. The people in Wuchang were even more uneasy.

古文：贼悯其老不杀，俾养马，叱曰： 我为士数十年，肯役于贼耶！ 
现代文：先前，楚王曾出资募兵，应募者都是蕲州和黄州的残兵溃卒，其中还有义军的间谍。这时，他们开文昌、保安门放义军入城。文荣方出战回来，来不及关闭城门，跃马大呼，斩杀三人。自己被义军用长矛刺死。
English: Previously, King Chu had funded the recruitment of soldiers, and the applicants were the remnants of the defeated soldiers in Luzhou and Huangzhou, including the spies of the rebel army. At this time, they opened Wenchang and the security gate to let the rebel army enter the city. The Wen Rong side went to war and came back, but did not have time to close the city gate, shouted loudly, and killed three people. He was stabbed to death with a spear by the rebel army.

古文：延颈就刃，贼杀之。蔡道宪，字元白，晋江人。
现代文：蔡道宪，字元白，福建晋江人。
English: Cai Daoxian, surnamed Bai, from Jinjiang, Fujian.

古文：崇祯十年进士。为长沙推官。
现代文：崇祯十年进士，任长沙推官。
English: After ten years of service, he was promoted to the post of Changsha magistrate.

古文：地多盗，察豪民通盗者，把其罪而任之。
现代文：长沙这地方多盗，而且与豪民私通。道宪查出通盗豪民，令他们戴罪立功。
English: There are many thieves in this area of Changsha, and they have private dealings with high-ranking people. The provincial constitution has detected high-ranking people who are thieves, and made them pay for their crimes.

古文：盗方劫富家分财，收者已至。
现代文：强盗刚劫掠富人的财物分赃，后面就来人收走了这些财物。
English: The robbers had just plundered the rich man's belongings and divided the loot, when they were followed by people who took the belongings.

古文：召富家还所失物，皆愕不知所自。
现代文：道宪把被劫的富贵人家召来认领，大家都感到诧异，不知这些财物是如何获得的。
English: Dogen summoned the robbed rich people to claim them, and everyone was surprised, not knowing how these belongings were obtained.

古文：恶少年闭户谋为盗，启户，捕卒已坐其门，惊逸去。
现代文：有恶少年闭户偷盗，一开门便见捕卒已在门口等候，惊慌而逃。
English: A bad boy closed his house to steal. As soon as he opened the door, he saw that the arresting officer was already waiting at the door. He panicked and fled.

古文：吉王府宗人恣为奸，道宪先治而后启王。
现代文：吉王府的同族人恃势恣意为奸，道宪先治其罪，而后告诉吉王。
English: Ji Wangfu's compatriots plotted to seize power and commit treason. Dao Xian punished them first and then told Ji Wang what had happened.

古文：王召责之，抗声曰： 今四海鼎沸，寇盗日滋。王不爱民，一旦铤而走险，能独与此曹保富贵乎？ 
现代文：吉王把道宪召来斥责一顿，道宪厉声道： 今四海不安，寇盗日多，王若不爱民，一旦他们铤而走险，王能与你同族人保其富贵吗？ 
English: King Ji summoned Dao Xian to reprimand him. Dao Xian snapped, "Nowadays, the four seas are in turmoil, and there are more robberies every day. If the king does not love the people, if they falter and run into danger, will the king and his people be able to protect their wealth?

古文：王悟，谢遣之。
现代文：吉王这才明白，向道宪道歉，把他送走。
English: Ji Wang understood this, apologized to Daoxian, and sent him away.

古文：十六年五月，张献忠陷武昌，长沙大震。
现代文：崇祯十六年五月，张献忠攻克武昌，长沙大为震惊。
English: In May of the 16th year of Chongzheng, Zhang Xianzhong attacked Wuchang, and Changsha was greatly shocked.

古文：承天巡抚王扬基率所部千人，自岳州奔长沙。
现代文：承天巡抚王扬基率所部千人，从岳州逃往长沙。
English: Wang Yangji, the governor of Chengdu, fled from Yuezhou to Changsha with a thousand people.

古文：道宪请还驻岳州，曰： 岳与长沙唇齿也，并力守岳则长沙可保，而衡、永亦无虞。 
现代文：道宪请他回去屯驻岳州，对他说： 岳与长沙唇齿相依，全力守住岳州则长沙可保，衡阳、永兴也无虞。 
English: The Provincial Constitution asked him to go back and stay in Yuezhou, and said to him: Yue and Changsha are closely related. If you stay in Yuezhou with all your strength, Changsha will be safe, and Hengyang and Yongxing will also be safe.

古文：扬基曰： 岳，非我属也。 
现代文：扬基说： 岳州不是我管辖范围。 
English: Yankee said: Yuezhou is not within my jurisdiction.

古文：道宪曰： 弃北守南，犹不失为楚地。若南北俱弃，所属地安在？ 
现代文：道宪道： 弃北而守南，还不失为楚地；若南北都失，你的属地又在哪里？ 
English: Dao Xian Dao: If you abandon the north and keep the south, you will not lose Chu. If you lose both the north and the south, where will your territory be?

古文：扬基语塞，乃赴岳州。
现代文：扬基无话可说，只得去岳州。
English: Yankee had nothing to say, so he had to go to Yuezhou.

古文：及贼入蒲圻，即遁去。
现代文：但义军一到蒲圻，他便立即逃跑了。
English: But as soon as the rebels arrived in Buda, he immediately fled.

古文：湖广巡抚王聚奎远驻袁州，惮贼不敢进。
现代文：湖广巡抚王聚奎远驻江西袁州，怕农民起义军而不敢到湖广来。
English: The inspector of Hougang, Wang Jiuyuan, who was stationed in Yuanzhou, Jiangxi, was afraid of the peasant uprising and did not dare to come to Hougang.

古文：道宪亦请移岳，聚奎不得已至岳，数日即徙长沙。
现代文：道宪也请他移驻岳州。聚奎不得已到了岳州，但只几天就迁到长沙。
English: The provincial government also asked him to move to Yuezhou. Zhu Kui was forced to go to Yuezhou, but he moved to Changsha in just a few days.

古文：道宪曰： 贼去岳远，可缮城以守。
现代文：道宪对他说： 贼离岳还远，可加固城墙以备防守。
English: Dao Xian said to him: The thief is still far away from the mountain, and the city wall can be strengthened to prepare for defense.

古文：彼犯岳，犹惮长沙援。
现代文：敌若攻岳，会怕长沙的援兵。
English: If the enemy attacks Yue, they will be afraid of Changsha's reinforcements.

古文：若弃岳，长沙安能独全。 
现代文：如果放弃岳州，长沙怎能保住。 
English: If we give up Yuezhou, how can Changsha be saved?

古文：聚奎不从。
现代文：聚奎不听。
English: Jukui didn't listen.

古文：贼果以八月陷岳州，直犯长沙。
现代文：义军果于八月攻陷岳州，直指长沙。
English: The rebel army succeeded in capturing Yuezhou in August, pointing straight at Changsha.

古文：先是，巡按御史刘熙祚令道宪募兵，得壮丁五千训练之，皆可用。
现代文：在此以前，巡按御史刘熙祚令道宪募兵，得壮丁五千，训练后皆可用。
English: Prior to this, Liu Xizhe, the inspector-general of history, ordered the gendarmerie to recruit five thousand soldiers, all of whom could be used after training.

古文：至是亲将之，与总兵官尹先民等扼罗塘河。
现代文：这时，聚奎亲自统领，与总兵尹先民等扼守瑭河。
English: At this time, Zhu Kui personally took the lead, and together with the general soldier Yin Xianmin and others, they closely guarded the Minhe River.

古文：聚奎闻贼逼，大惧，撤兵还城。
现代文：闻农民义军逼进，十分恐惧，撤兵回城。
English: Hearing that the peasant rebels had forced their way in, they were very frightened and withdrew back to the city.

古文：道宪曰： 去长沙六十里有险，可栅以守，毋使贼逾此。 
现代文：道宪建议： 离长沙六十里有险，可立栅扼守，毋使贼越过此地。 
English: Suggestions from the Provincial Constitution: There is danger sixty kilometers away from Changsha. A fence can be erected to prevent thieves from crossing the area.

古文：又不从。
现代文：聚奎又不采纳。
English: Wang Yao again did not listen.

古文：时知府堵胤锡入觐未返，通判周二南摄攸县事，城中文武无几。
现代文：知府堵胤锡入朝拜见皇帝未还，通判周二南代行攸县政务，城中文武人员不多。
English: The prefectural governor, Toutian Xixi, did not return from his visit to the emperor, and it was decided that on Tuesday, Nan would take over the administration of You County. There were not many armed personnel in the city.

古文：贼薄城，士民尽窜。
现代文：义军逼近长沙城，士民都逃走了。
English: The rebels approached Changsha City, and all the nobles and commoners fled.

古文：聚奎诡出战，遽率所部遁。
现代文：聚奎借口出战，率所部逃跑，道宪独自拒守。
English: On the pretext of going to war, Jukui led his troops to flee, while Dao Xian refused to defend himself.

古文：道宪独拒守，贼绕城呼曰： 军中久知蔡推官名，速降，毋自苦。 
现代文：义军绕城大呼 ：军中久知蔡推官大名，快投降吧，毋自讨苦吃！ 
English: The rebels circled the city shouting: "The army has long known the name of Cai Xuan, let's surrender now, there's no need to suffer!"

古文：已而恶展，构韬杀之，据嘉定，蜀人咸不直乾德。
现代文：道宪命守军以箭来回答。过了三天，尹先民出战，失败而还。义军夺门而入，先民降，道宪被执，义军要给他官做，道宪大骂。
English: After three days, Yin Xianmin went out to fight, failed and returned. The rebels stormed in, Xianmin surrendered, Daxian was executed, the rebels wanted to make him an official, and Daxian cursed.

古文：会刘文秀自云南至，擒韬，陷嘉定，乾德乃驱家人及其弟御史升德，俱赴水死。
现代文：义军为他解缚，请他上坐，他还是大骂。义军知他终不肯降，将他处斩，年仅二十九岁。
English: The rebels untied him and invited him to sit down, but he still cursed loudly. The rebels knew that he would not surrender and beheaded him, aged only twenty-nine.

古文：刘熙祚，字仲缉，武进人。
现代文：朝廷赠太仆寺少卿，谥忠烈。刘熙祚，字仲缉，常州府武进人。
English: The imperial court gave him the title of Taipu-ji Shaoqing, Zou Zhongli, Liu Xiqi, Zi Zhongzhi, and Changzhou Fuwu Jinren.

古文：父纯仁，泉州推官。
现代文：父刘纯仁，曾任泉州推官。
English: His father, Liu Chunren, was once a Quanzhou magistrate.

古文：十五年冬巡按湖南。
现代文：崇祯十五年冬，巡按湖南。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year of the Chongzhen Emperor, he went on a inspection tour of Hunan.

古文：李自成陷荆、襄诸郡，张献忠又破蕲、黄，临江欲渡。
现代文：李自成攻陷荆州、襄阳诸郡，张献忠攻破蕲州、黄州，准备渡江。
English: Li Zicheng conquered Jingzhou and Yangyang counties, Zhang Xianzhong conquered Zhangzhou and Huangzhou, and prepared to cross the river.

古文：熙祚以明年二月抵岳州，檄诸将分防江浒，偏沅、郧阳二抚联络形势。
现代文：熙祚估计张献忠会在第二年二月抵岳州，令诸将分别防御江边，联络偏沅、郧阳二抚以为声援。
English: Xi Xi estimated that Zhang Xianzhong would arrive in Yuezhou in February of the following year, and ordered the generals to separately defend the riverside, contact Zhaoyuan and Shenyang for solidarity.

古文：会贼马守应据澧州，窥常德，土寇甘明扬等助之。
现代文：当时义军马守应占据澧州，欲进取常德，当地农民军甘明杨等接应。
English: At that time, the rebel army Ma Shou should occupy Zhangzhou, want to enter Changde, the local peasant army Gan Ming Yang and so on.

古文：熙祚驰至常德，击斩明扬。五月还长沙。
现代文：熙祚赶到常德斩明杨，五月还长沙。
English: Xi Jinping arrived in Changde, Chongming, Yang, and Changsha in May.

古文：及武昌、岳州相继陷，急令总兵尹先民、副将何一德督万人守罗塘河，扼要害。
现代文：武昌、岳州相继陷落，熙祚急令总兵尹先民，副将何一德率军万人守罗塘河，扼住要害。
English: Wuchang and Yuezhou fell one after another, and Xi Jinping hastily ordered the general soldier Yin Xianmin and the vice-general He Yide to lead the army of ten thousand people to guard the Luotang River and hold the key.

古文：而巡抚王聚奎乃撤守长沙，贼遂长驱至。
现代文：而巡抚王聚奎却撤守长沙，义军长驱南进。
English: However, the governor Wang Jukui withdrew from Changsha, and the rebels drove south.

古文：聚奎率溃将孔全彬、黄朝宣、张先璧等走湘潭，长沙不能守。
现代文：聚奎率败将孔全彬、黄朝宣、张先壁等退往湘潭，长沙不能守。
English: Ju Kui defeated Kong Quan Bin, Huang Chaoxuan, Zhang Xianbi and others to retreat to Xiangtan, and Changsha could not be defended.

古文：惠王避地至长沙，与吉王谋出奔，熙祚奉以奔衡州。
现代文：这时避居于长沙的惠王与吉王计划逃走，熙祚把他送到衡州。
English: At this time, Hui Wang and Ji Wang, who were living in Changsha, planned to escape, and Xi Xi sent him to Hengzhou.

古文：衡州，桂王封地也，聚奎兵至，大焚劫，王及吉、惠二王皆登舟避乱。
现代文：衡州本桂王的封地，聚奎的军队也到了这里，大肆焚劫，桂王、吉王、惠王都乘船避难。
English: Gui Wang, Ji Wang, and Hui Wang all took refuge on a boat.

古文：熙祚单骑赴永州为城守计。
现代文：熙祚单骑赴永州布置防务。
English: Xi Jinping rode alone to Yongzhou to arrange the defense.

古文：未几，聚奎复走祁阳，衡州遂陷。
现代文：不久，聚奎又退往祁阳，衡州失守。
English: Soon after, Zhu Kui retreated to Fenyang and lost Hengzhou.

古文：永士民闻之，空城逃。
现代文：永州士民闻聚奎将至，纷纷逃亡，永州成为空城。
English: When the Yongzhou scholar and citizen Wenzhu Kui was about to arrive, they fled one after another. Yongzhou became an empty city.

古文：三王至永州，聚奎继至，越日全彬等亦至，劫库金去。
现代文：桂、吉、惠三王至永州，聚奎随即而至，第二天孔全彬等也到了永州，抢劫府库金银而去。
English: Gui, Ji and Hui Sanwang went to Yongzhou, followed by Zhu Kui, and the next day, Kong Quanbin and others also went to Yongzhou to rob the government treasury of gold and silver.

古文：积劳得疾，请告归卒。兄弟三人并死王事。
现代文：熙祚派兵护送桂、吉、惠三王逃往广西，随即回永州拒守。义军追捕到熙祚，献忠在桂王宫中令熙祚跪下，熙不跪。
English: Xizang sent soldiers to escort the three kings of Gui, Ji, and Hui to flee to Guangxi, and then returned to Yongzhou to refuse to defend. The rebels chased them to Xizang, and Xian Zhong ordered Xizang to kneel in the palace of King Gui, but Xizang did not kneel.

古文：王聚奎既失永州，后伺贼退，潜还武昌，为代者何腾蛟所劾，夤缘免。王孙兰，字畹仲，无锡人。
现代文：又派降将尹先民去劝说，熙祚仍不屈，被杀。朝廷闻知，赠太常寺少卿，谥忠毅。王孙兰，字畹仲，常州府无锡人。
English: He also sent his subordinate general, Yin Xianmin, to persuade them, but Xi Xi still refused to give in and was killed. The imperial court heard of this and bestowed the title of Junior Secretary of the Taizhong Temple on Zhai Zhongyi, and Wang Sunlan, also known as Zhaozhong, was from Wuxi, Changzhou.

古文：崇祯四年进士。累迁成都知府。
现代文：崇祯四年进士，曾任成都知府。
English: He entered the priesthood four years ago and was once the prefect of Chengdu.

古文：蜀宗人虐民，民相聚，将焚内江王第。孙兰抚谕之，乃解。
现代文：蜀王同族人虐待百姓，百姓聚众焚毁内江蜀王府，孙兰进行安抚，这场风波才平息下来。
English: Shu Wang's compatriots mistreated the people, the people gathered to burn down the Shu Wang's palace in the Inner River, Sun Lan tried to appease them, and the storm only calmed down.

古文：父扰，服阕，起官绍兴，修荒政。
现代文：父亲去世后孙兰服丧。期满，启任绍兴官员。
English: After the death of his father, Sun Lan went into mourning. At the end of his term, he was appointed as an official of Shaoxing.

古文：迁广东副使，分巡南雄、韶州二府。
现代文：在绍兴有政绩，升为广东副使，分巡南雄、韶州二府。
English: He had political achievements in Shaoxing, and was promoted to vice-envoy of Guangdong Province, and was assigned to inspect two provinces, Nanxiong and Zhangzhou.

古文：连州瑶贼为乱，驰剿，三战皆捷。
现代文：连州瑶民反对朝廷，孙兰领兵镇压，三战三捷。
English: The people of Lianzhou rebelled against the imperial court, and Sun Lan led the troops to suppress them, leading to three wars and three victories.

古文：十六年，张献忠大乱湖南，湖南之郴州宜章与韶接壤。孙兰乞援督府，不应，最后以七百人至，一宿复调去。
现代文：十六年，张献忠进军湖南。湖南郴州之宜章与韶州接壤，孙兰向督府求救援，不应，最后虽派出七百人来援，但只一晚又调走了。
English: Sixteen years later, Zhang Xianzhong marched into Hunan. Yizhang, one of the counties of Hunan Bozhou, bordered Bozhou. Sun Lan appealed to the governor's office for help, but to no avail. In the end, although seven hundred people were sent to help, they were transferred away after only one night.

古文：及贼陷衡州，肆屠戮。韶所辖乐昌、乳源、仁化，逋窜一空。
现代文：张献忠攻克衡州，韶州所辖之乐昌、乳渠、仁化的守军逃跑一空。
English: Zhang Xianzhong defeated Hengzhou, and the defenders of Lechang, Liaocheng and Renhua under the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou fled.

古文：连州守将先据城叛，韶士民闻之，空城逃，而贼所设伪官传檄将至。孙兰仰天叹曰： 失封疆当死，贼陷城又当死，吾盍先死乎！ 
现代文：连州守将首先举起反明的旗帜，韶州士民闻知，纷纷逃走。献忠派的官员即将到来，孙兰仰天叹息说： 失守边境当死，贼攻陷城也当死，我何不先死！ 
English: The governor of Lianzhou will be the first to raise the anti-Ming flag, and the officials and people of Zhangzhou will hear about it and flee in droves. The loyalist officials are about to arrive, and Sun Lan sighed and said, "If you lose the border, you will die, if a thief captures the city, you will die, why don't I die first!"

古文：遂自缢。
现代文：遂自缢。
English: and hanged himself.

古文：既死，贼竟不至，朝廷悯其忠，予赠恤。
现代文：孙兰死后，农民义军并没有来到韶州，朝廷念孙兰的忠义，予以赠恤。
English: After Sun Lan's death, the peasant rebels did not come to Zhangzhou. The imperial court remembered Sun Lan's loyalty and gave him a pension.

古文：程良筹，字持卿，孝感人，工部尚书注子也。
现代文：程良筹，字持卿，湖广孝感人，二部尚书程注之子。
English: Cheng Liangqiao, the son of Zhaozhongqing, the son of Hu Guangxiao, the son of the son of the son of the son of Zhaozhongqing.

古文：天启五年进士。
现代文：天启五年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the fifth year of the Apocalypse.

古文：时注为太常少卿，不附魏忠贤。御史王士英劾其为赵南星、李三才私党，忠贤遂矫旨并良筹除名，永不叙录。
现代文：此时，注为太常少卿，不依附于魏忠贤，御史王士英弹劾他是赵南星、李三才的私党，忠贤便假传圣旨将良筹除名，永不录用。
English: At this time, Wang Shiying, the chief historian, accused him of being a private party of Zhao Nansing and Li Sancai, noting that he was too often a minor lord and did not adhere to Wei Zhongxian. Zhongxian then removed Liangzhe from the list for falsely transmitting the holy will and would never be hired.

古文：未出仕而除名，前此未有也。
现代文：进士未授官而除名，这是从未有之事。
English: It has never happened before that an officer has been removed from his post without being promoted.

古文：崇祯元年起官，历文选员外郎，掌选事。
现代文：至崇祯元年才启用，授文选员外郎之职，掌管选事。
English: It was not opened until the first year of the Chongzhen era, and the post of the secretary of the selection committee was transferred to the secretary, who was in charge of the selection.

古文：麻城李长庚为尚书，以同乡故，甚倚之。
现代文：麻城人李长庚为尚书，因为与良筹是同乡而甚倚重于他。
English: Li Chang Geng, a resident of Ma City, is a scholar, because he is a fellow villager with Liang Qiao and relies heavily on him.

古文：正郎久缺不推补，同列多忌，朝论亦少之。
现代文：正郎官久缺未补，长庚任用良筹，同僚多忌妒，朝廷许多人也轻视他。
English: The post of chief retainer had not been filled for a long time, Chang Geng appointed a good leader, his colleagues were jealous, and many people in the imperial court despised him.

古文：长庚用推举失当削籍，良筹亦下吏遣戍，久乃释归。
现代文：长庚被弹劾用人失当而被削职，良筹也因而被革职发往边疆戍守，很久后才释归。
English: Chang Geng was impeached for employing people improperly and was dismissed, and Liang Qi was also dismissed and sent to the frontier to guard, and was released after a long time.

古文：十六年，李自成犯承天，孝感亦陷。
现代文：崇祯十六年，李自成进攻承天府，孝感也被攻陷。
English: In the 16th year of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng attacked Chengtianfu, and Xiaogan was also captured.

古文：良筹以白云山险峻，与同邑参政夏时亨筑垒聚守。
现代文：良筹因知白云山险峻，与同县参政夏时亨筑垒防守。
English: Because he knew that Mount Baiyun was steep, Liangzhe joined the county government in the summer to build defensive fortifications.

古文：贼使说降，良筹毁其书。
现代文：自成派人去劝降，良筹撕毁自成的信。
English: Zicheng sent someone to persuade him to surrender, but Liangqiao tore up Zicheng's letter.

古文：贼怒，设长围攻之，相持四十余日，解去。
现代文：义军展开围攻，相持四十余天未下，解围退去。
English: The rebels launched a siege, holding out for more than forty days before surrendering, lifting the siege and retreating.

古文：时汉阳、武昌亦为张献忠所陷，四面皆贼，独白云孤处其间，贼颇患之。
现代文：这时汉阳、武昌也为张献忠攻陷，白云山处于四面包围之中。其后，武昌为官军收复。
English: At this time, Hanyang and Wuchang also fell to Zhang Xianzhong, and Baiyun Mountain was surrounded on all sides. Later, Wuchang was recaptured by the government army.

古文：已，武昌为官军所复，良筹号召远近诸寨，掎角进兵。其冬，遂复孝感、云梦。
现代文：良筹号召远近诸寨进军，相互支援。
English: Liang Ge called on people from far and near to march to Zhuzhai and support each other.

古文：十二月，进薄德安，兵败，退保白莲寨。寨中人素通贼，为内应，良筹遂被执。
现代文：这年冬季相继收复孝感、云梦。十二月，官军进逼德安府，被击败，退保白莲寨，寨中人与义军暗中有联系，为内应，良筹被执。
English: In the winter of that year, the feeling of returning to filial piety and the dream of returning to the motherland came one after another. In December, the government army forced its way into De'anfu, was defeated, and withdrew from Bai Lian Zhai. The people in Bai Lian Zhai had a secret connection with the rebel army, which was an inside job, and a good plan was carried out.

古文：说降，不屈，羁之密室。
现代文：劝他降，不肯，把他囚禁于密室。
English: Persuaded him to surrender, refused, and imprisoned him in a secret room.

古文：明年正月，左良玉遣将攻德安。
现代文：十七年正月，左良玉遣将进攻德安。
English: In the first month of the seventeenth year, Sadayoshi Tamaki attacked De'an.

古文：世清登崇祯七年进士，除户部主事，榷浒墅关，有清操。历员外郎，屡迁右参议，分守商、雒，驻商州。
现代文：崇祯七年进士，授户部主事，历任员外郎、右参议，分守商、雒，驻商州。
English: He entered the priesthood in the seventh year of his reign, and was in charge of the household registration department. He held the positions of wairo, right councillor, branch manager of merchants, and chief of merchants, and resided in Shangzhou.

古文：城屡遭兵，四野萧然，民皆入保城中。
现代文：商州城屡遭兵乱，四野萧条，百姓都迁入城中避难。
English: The city of Shangzhou was repeatedly besieged by soldiers, the four provinces were in a state of depression, and the people moved into the city to take refuge.

古文：而客兵所过淫掠，民苦兵甚于贼。
现代文：客兵所过地方奸淫抢掠，民苦于兵。
English: The guest soldiers raped, pillaged and plundered wherever they went, and the people suffered from the soldiers.

古文：世清下令兵不得阑入城。
现代文：世清下令：兵不得擅自入城。
English: The Qing Dynasty decreed that soldiers were not allowed to enter the city without permission.

古文：未几，关中兵经其地，有二卒挝门，榜以徇。督抚发兵，诫毋犯黄参议令。
现代文：不久，关中兵经过商州，督抚下令，诫军士不要违犯黄参议不准擅自入城的命令。
English: Soon, Guan Zhong soldiers passed through Shangzhou, and the governor ordered and admonished the sergeants not to violate Huang Sangui's order not to enter the city without permission.

古文：李自成躏荆、襄，远近震动。
现代文：李自成进军荆、襄，远近受到震动。
English: Li Zicheng marched into Jing and Xiang, and was shaken from far and near.

古文：世清一子方幼，属友人养人，誓身殉。
现代文：世清一子年幼，托友人抚养，他自己誓以身殉职。
English: Shixing had a young son, whom he raised with the help of a friend, and he vowed to die in the line of duty.

古文：十六年十月，自成败孙传庭军，长驱入关，遣右营十万人从南阳犯商州。
现代文：崇祯十六年十月，自成打败明朝孙传庭军，长驱入关，遣右营十万人由南阳进攻商州。
English: In October of the 16th year of Chongzhen, he successfully defeated the Ming Dynasty Sun Chuan Ting's army, drove Chang into Guan, and sent 100,000 people from the right battalion to attack Shangzhou from Nanyang.

古文：世清凭城守，有奸民投贼，至城下说降，世清佯与语，发炮毙之，悬其首城上曰： 怀二心者视此！ 
现代文：世清坚守。有人投降义军，到城下来劝降，世清假装与他答话，发炮击毙此人，悬其头于城上，城中士民不得不为他效力守城。
English: Someone surrendered to the rebels, came down to the city to persuade them to surrender, the Qing Dynasty pretended to talk to him, fired a cannon to kill this person, hung his head on the city, and the city sergeants and citizens had to defend the city for him.

古文：叹曰： 城小无兵，空令士民受祸，计惟自靖耳。 
现代文：炮弹、箭矢用尽，则用石头，石头用尽，妇人掘砖继之。
English: When the cannonballs and arrows are exhausted, stones are used. When the stones are exhausted, women dig bricks.

古文：令妻妾子女尽缢，乃投缳死。简仁瑞，字季麟，荣县人。由举人历安西官同知，迁平凉知府。十六年冬，贼入关，诸王及监司以下官谋遁走。
现代文：朝廷赠光禄寺卿。简仁瑞，字季麟，四川荣县人。由举人任西安同知，后调平凉知府。崇祯十六年冬，农民起义军入关，诸王及监司以下的官吏准备逃走。
English: The imperial court presented him with the title of Guanglu Temple Lord. Jian Ren Rui, also known as Ji Lin, was from Rong County, Sichuan. He was appointed as Xi'an Tongzhi by the emperor, and later transferred to Liangzhi Prefecture. In the winter of the 16th year of the Chongzhen Emperor, the peasants' uprising army entered the customs, and the kings and officials below the supervisors were preparing to flee.

古文：仁瑞谒韩王曰： 长安有重兵，讹言不足信。
现代文：仁瑞去拜谒韩王时说： 长安有重兵，讹言不足信。
English: When Yan Rui went to pay homage to the King of Han, he said, "Chang'an has a large number of soldiers.

古文：殿下轻弃三百年宗社，欲何之？
现代文：殿下轻易抛弃三百年的宗社，准备到哪里去？
English: Your highness easily abandoned the three-hundred-year-old ancestral shrine. Where are you preparing to go?

古文：纵贼压境，延、宁、甘、凉诸军足相援，必不能支，同死社稷，亦不辱二祖列宗。 
现代文：纵然贼军压境，而延、宁、甘、凉地方的军队足可相援。若实在不能支持，与社稷共存亡，也不辱太祖、成祖及列宗。 
English: Even if the bandit army oppresses the border, the armies of Yan, Ning, Gan and Liang can support each other. If they can't support, they will coexist with the society and die, and they won't disgrace the ancestors, ancestors and descendants.

古文：王不从。
现代文：韩王不听从。
English: Han Wang did not obey.

古文：是夕，其护卫卒噪，挟王及诸郡王、宗室斩关出奔，胁仁瑞行。
现代文：当晚，韩王的护卫军士兵挟王及诸郡王、宗室斩关出逃，还胁迫仁瑞同行。
English: That night, soldiers of Han Wang's escort army forced Zeng Wang, Zhu Guan Wang and his family to flee, and also coerced Ren Rui to go with them.

古文：仁瑞曰： 吾平凉守也，吾去，谁与守？ 
现代文：仁瑞拒不随行，对他们说： 我的责任是守平凉，我走了，谁来防守？ 
English: Yan Rui refused to go with them and said, "My responsibility is to protect Pingliang. If I leave, who will defend it?"

古文：众遂去。仁瑞乃撤四关居民入城，以土石塞门为死守计。
现代文：他把四关居民迁入城内，以土石塞堵城门，准备死守。
English: He moved the residents of Shiguan into the city, blocked the city gate with earth and stone, and prepared to defend it.

古文：出按云南，还朝，言： 陛下议均输再征一年，民力已竭，讨贼诸臣泄泄沓沓，徒糜数百万金钱。 
现代文：不久，农民义军传令他们投降。仁瑞把未处决的死囚召来对他们说 ：我过去曾不杀你们，你们也报答我吗？ 
English: Not long after, the peasant rebels sent word to them to surrender. Yan Rui summoned the remaining death row prisoners and said to them, "I did not kill you in the past, will you repay me?"

古文：帝纳其言，敕兵部飞骑勒熊文灿进兵，而张献忠已叛矣。十五年迁浙江右参政，未任而罢。
现代文：都说愿意听命。第二天，义军进抵城下，城中士民草拟了降书，要求仁瑞签名盖官印。
English: They all said that they were willing to obey orders. The next day, the rebels entered the city, and the sergeants drafted a letter of surrender, requesting Ren Rui's signature and official seal.

古文：贼陷城，胁之仕，不屈死。
现代文：仁瑞怒斥他们，整顿衣冠，自缢于堂上。
English: Yan Rui angrily rebuked them, straightened his clothes, and hanged himself in the hall.

古文：都任，字弘若，祥符人。
现代文：义军攻克平凉，全城士民都投降义军。都任，字弘若，河南祥符人。
English: The rebels conquered Pingliang, and all the city's soldiers and citizens surrendered to the rebels. Du Ren, also known as Hong Rua, was a native of Xiangfu, Henan Province.

古文：万历四十一年进士。授南京兵部主事，进郎中，屡迁四川右参政。
现代文：万历四十一年进士，授南京兵部主事，进升郎中，又调任四川右参政。
English: In the 41st year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to officer, given the title of chief of the Nanjing Military Department, promoted to junior officer, and transferred to the Sichuan Right to participate in politics.

古文：天启五年大计，左迁江西佥事，复屡迁陕西左布政使。
现代文：天启五年考核地方官吏，升江西佥事，再升陕西左布政使。
English: In the five-year appraisal of local officials, Jiangxi Anji was promoted, and then Shaanxi Zuo Bu political envoy was promoted.

古文：崇祯五年又谪山东右参政。再迁山西按察使。
现代文：崇祯五年，贬为山东右参政，后再升山西按察使。
English: In the fifth year of Chongzhen, he was demoted to Shandong right-wing political participant, and then promoted to Shanxi inspector.

古文：任性刚严，多忤物，数谪徙，终不变。
现代文：任禀性刚毅，常得罪人，虽多次遭到贬谪，但始终不改。
English: Self-willed and strong-willed, he often offends people. Although he has been belittled many times, he has never changed.

古文：月朔，同僚朝晋王，任据《会典》争，不赴。
现代文：每月初一日，同僚去拜谒晋王，任依据《会典》而不去。
English: On the first day of the first month of the month, colleagues go to pay homage to King Gongjin, but they do not go according to the "Code of the Association."

古文：巡按御史张孙振诬劾提学佥事袁继咸，任数慰问继咸，赆其行。
现代文：巡按御史张孙振诬劾提学佥事袁继咸，任多次慰问继咸，离开时还送他路费。
English: Zhang Sun Zhen, the inspector-general of history, made many condolences to Yuan Jixian, and also sent him travel expenses when he left.

古文：孙振怒，复中以大计，贬秩归。
现代文：孙振闻知大怒，再乘考核官吏之机，降都任的官阶，让他辞职回家。
English: Sun Zhenwen was furious, and took advantage of the opportunity to assess officials, reduce the official rank of the capital, and let him resign and go home.

古文：后复起，历右布政使兼副使，饬榆林兵备。
现代文：后再启任右布政使兼副使，令他负责榆林兵备。
English: Later, he was reappointed as the political envoy and deputy envoy of the Right Division of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, and was put in charge of the military preparedness of Yulin.

古文：十六年九月，巡抚崔源之罢去，代者张凤翼未至，总兵官王定从孙传庭出关，大败奔还，远近震恐。
现代文：崇祯十六年九月，巡抚崔源之罢官，而接任的张凤翼还未到任，总兵官王定随孙传庭出关御敌，大败而回，远近震动。
English: In September of the 16th year of Chongzhen, the governor Cui Yuan was dismissed, and Zhang Fengyi, who took over the post, had not yet arrived. The commander-in-chief, Wang Ding, went out with Sun Chuanting to fight against the enemy, but he was defeated and returned, causing shock in the near and far.

古文：李自成遂据西安，遣其将李过以精卒数万徇三边，延安、绥德相继陷。
现代文：李自成占据西安，遣其将李过以精兵数万攻取三边，延安、绥德相继被占领。
English: Li Zicheng occupied Xi'an and sent tens of thousands of elite soldiers to conquer the three sides. Yan'an and Shunde were successively occupied.

古文：定惧，诡言讨河套寇，率所部遁去，榆林益空虚。
现代文：王定害怕了，诡称讨河套寇而率所部逃跑，榆林更加空虚。
English: Wang Ding was scared. He called himself a trickster and ran away with his subordinates. Yulin was even emptier.

古文：任急集军民，慷慨流涕，谕以大义，与督饷员外郎王家录、副将惠显等议城守。
现代文：都任忙召集军民誓死守城，与督饷员外郎王家录、副将惠显等商议守城事宜。
English: The capital was in a hurry to call up soldiers and civilians to defend the city with all their might, and to discuss the matter of defending the city with the governor, Wai Lang Wang Jia Lu, the vice-commander Hui Xian, and others.

古文：乃慕义殉忠，志不少挫，无一屈身贼庭，其忠烈又为天下最。事闻，天子嗟悼，将大行褒恤，国亡不果。
现代文：城中被罢职的武将，任因为尤世威会用兵，推为主帅，率诸将王世钦等数十人誓死守御。十一月十五日，义军围攻榆林，二十七日攻克，都任在巷战中被俘。要他投降，不肯。被处死。
English: On November 15, the rebel army besieged Yulin, and on the 27th, they conquered it. Ren was captured in a street battle. He was asked to surrender, but refused. He was executed.

古文：祝万龄，咸宁人。
现代文：世威等都死。祝万龄，湖广咸宁人。
English: All the greats are dead. Long live the people of Hukang and Xianning.

古文：父世乔。
现代文：父亲祝世乔，远游不归。
English: My father wishes Joe all the best. He's never coming back.

古文：有至行，以父远游不归，年十五即独身访求，濒死，历数千里，卒得之。后由选贡通判南康，以清慎著。万龄师乡人冯从吾，举万历四十四年进士。累官保定知府。
现代文：万龄十五岁单身去寻找，行程数千里，终于找到父亲。后由选贡授南康通判，为官清廉谨慎。万龄拜同乡人冯从吾为师，万历四十四年中进士，授保定知府。
English: Wanling was 15 years old and single when he went to look for his father. After traveling thousands of miles, he finally found his father. Later, he was awarded the South Kangtong Prize by the election of tributes, and was judged to be a clean and prudent official. Wanling followed his countryman Feng Zongwu as his teacher, and after forty-four years of hard work, he became a scholar and was awarded the post of governor of Baoding.

古文：天启六年，魏忠贤尽毁天下书院，万龄愤。
现代文：天启六年，魏忠贤尽毁天下书院，万龄非常愤怒。
English: In the sixth year of the Apocalypse, Wei Zhongxian did his best to destroy the World Academy, and Wanling was very angry.

古文：逆党李鲁生遂劾万龄倡讹言，谓天变、地震、物怪、人妖，悉由毁书院所致，非圣诬天实甚。
现代文：魏忠贤党人李鲁生弹劾万龄，散布讹言，说天变、地震、物怪、人妖等，都是由于书院所造成的。万龄因而被撤职。
English: Li Lousheng, a member of the Wei Zhongxian Party, impeached Wanling and spread slander, saying that natural disasters, earthquakes, monsters, ogres, etc. were all caused by the academy. Wanling was removed from his post.

古文：万龄遂落职。崇祯初，用荐起黄州知府，集诸生定惠书院，迪以正学。
现代文：崇祯初年，起任万龄为黄州知府，他在黄州把本府生员召集于定惠书院，以儒家正学来开导他们。
English: In the first year of the reign of Chongzhen, when Wanling became the governor of Huangzhou, he called the students of the capital to Dinghui College in Huangzhou to enlighten them with Confucian formal education.

古文：居三年，迁河南副使，监军磁州。
现代文：在黄州任职三年后，调为河南副使，监军磁州。
English: After serving in Huangzhou for three years, he was transferred to Henan as deputy envoy, supervising the troops in the magnetic state.

古文：辉县之北与山西陵川之南，有村曰水峪，回贼窃据数十年，大为民患。
现代文：辉县之北与山西陵川之南，有个水峪村，是农民起义军老回回部的根据地，在此已数十年。
English: Between the north of Huixian County and the south of Lingchuan in Shanxi Province, there is a village of Shuiyan, which has been the base of the Peasants' Revolt Army for decades.

古文：万龄与山西监司王肇生合兵击，六战焚其巢三百余，贼遂平。
现代文：万龄与山西监司王肇生合兵进剿，大战六次，焚烧三百余里，攻克此村。
English: Wanling and Shanxi Supervisor Wang Zhaosheng marched together, fought six times, burned more than three hundred miles, and conquered this village.

古文：录功，加右参政。
现代文：万龄因功加右参政之职。
English: Wanling was promoted to the post of right-wing politician for his merits.

古文：流贼自山西入河北，掠新乡。
现代文：义军由山西入河北，进攻新乡。
English: The rebels entered Hebei from Shanxi and attacked Xinxiang.

古文：万龄邀击之，贼走陵川。
现代文：万龄截击，义军转战陵川，其后又攻新乡。
English: Wanling intercepted, the rebels turned to Lingchuan, and then attacked Xinxiang.

古文：已，复大至，坐失事，削籍归。
现代文：万龄战败，削职归家。汤开远为他伸冤，无效。
English: Wanling was defeated and returned home with a demotion. Tang Kaiyuan tried to get justice for him, but to no avail.

古文：汤开远讼其冤，不纳。久之，廷臣交荐，未及用，而西安陷。
现代文：许久以后，廷臣交相举荐，正准备任用，西安为义军所陷。
English: After a long time, Xi'an fell to the rebel army after the courtier recommended him and was preparing to appoint him.

古文：万龄深衣大带，趣至关中书院，哭拜先圣，投缳死。
现代文：万龄赴关中书院，哭拜先圣，上吊自尽。
English: Wanling went to Guanzhong College, wept and worshiped the Ancestor, and hanged himself.

古文：佥事泾阳王徵、太常寺卿耀州宋师襄、怀庆通判咸宁窦光仪、仪封知县长安徐方敬、芮城知县咸宁徐芳声、举人宗室朱谊巉及席增光皆里居，城破，并抗节死。
现代文：泾阳人佥事王征、太常寺卿耀州宋师襄、咸宁人怀庆通判窦光仪、长安人仪封知县徐方敬、咸宁人芮城知县徐芳声、明王朝宗族举人米谊及举人席增光都在西安，城破被杀。
English: Wang Zheng (阳人事), Yaozhou Song Shi Xiang (太常寺卿耀州宋师襄), Huai Qing Tong (咸宁人怀庆通判 Dou Guang Yi), Xu Fang Jing (長安人儀封知县徐方敬), Xu Fang Sheng (咸宁人城知县徐芳声), and the Ming Dynasty clansmen Zhanren (举人米谊) and Zhanren (举人席增光) were all in Xi'an, and Chengba was killed.

