古文：夫作为书论者，所以纪纲道德，经纬人事，上考之天，下揆之地，中通诸理，虽未能抽引玄妙之中才，繁然足以观终始矣。
现代文：著书立说的目的，是用来整治道德，规划人世之事。向上考察天道的变化规律，向下研究大地的万事万物，在中间能够把许多道理贯通起来。即使这部书不能把深奥玄妙的道理提炼出来，但涉猎广泛，也完全能够观察事物的终始了。
English: The purpose of writing a book is to rectify morality and plan human affairs. Looking up at the laws of change of the heavenly way and looking down at all things of the earth, many truths can be penetrated in the middle. Even if this book cannot refine the profound and mysterious truth, but it is widely involved, it is also completely able to observe the beginning and end of things.

古文：总要举凡，而语不剖判纯朴，靡■大宗，惧为人之惽惽然弗能知也；故多为之辞，博为之说，又恐人之离本就末也。故言道而不言事，则无以与世浮沉；言事而不言道，则无以与化游息。故著二十篇，有《原道》、有《俶真》、有《天文》、有《坠形》、有《时则》、有《览冥》、有《精神》、有《本经》、有《主术》、有《缪称》、有《齐俗》、有《道应》、有《氾论》、有《诠言》、有《兵略》、有《说山》、有《说林》、有《人间》、有《修务》、有《泰族》也。
现代文：如果只是提纲挈领地说明大概的意思，而文章中不去剖析最基本的材料，分清事物的本来面貌，担心别人会对基本理论糊里糊涂地搞不清楚，因此较多地增加了一些文字，广泛地加以阐述说明，又害怕别人脱离根本而迢求未接，所以光谈大道而不谈人事，那么便没有办法和社会一起共处：谈论人事而不谈大道，那么便不能和自然变化一起行止。因此著作二十篇，有《原道》，有《俶真》，有《天文》，有《地形》，有《时则》，有《览冥》，有《精神》，有《本经》，有《主术》，有《缪称》，有《齐俗》，有《道应》，有《氾论》，有《诠言》，有《兵略》，有《说山》，有《说林》，有《人间》，有《修务》，有《泰族》。
English: If you just outline and explain the general meaning of the territory, but do not analyze the most basic materials in the article, distinguish the original appearance of things, worry that others will be confused about the basic theory, so you add more words and explain it extensively, and are afraid that others are detached from the fundamentals and do not understand, so you only talk about the road and do not talk about personnel, then there is no way to coexist with society: talking about personnel without talking about the road, then you can not do it with natural changes. Therefore, there are twenty works, including "Original Road," "True Truth," "Astronomy," "Topography," "Time," "Meditation," "Spirit,"

古文：《原道》者，卢牟六合，混沌万物，象太一之容，测窈冥之深，以翔虚无之轸，托小以苞大，守约以治广，使人知先后之祸富，动静之利害。
现代文：《原道》的内容，规划了天地四方，探索万物的形成规律，拟象元气的形状，探测大道的深远，而翱翔在无所不包的领域之内。虽然寄托在小处但包容探广，持守简约但治理广大，使人们懂得祸福发生的先后次序，也可以了解行、止的利害关系。
English: The contents of the "Original Way" plan the four directions of heaven and earth, explore the formation laws of all things, simulate the shape of vitality, probe the profoundness of the avenue, and soar in the all-encompassing field. Although it is placed in a small place, it is inclusive and wide-ranging, and it is kept simple but managed widely, so that people can understand the order of occurrence of misfortune and good fortune, and can also understand the interests of action and cessation.

古文：诚通其志，浩然可以大观矣。
现代文：果真能够通达它的旨意，对广博纷烦的事物便可以得到透彻的了解了。
English: If it can really achieve its purpose, it will be possible to get a thorough understanding of a wide range of things.

古文：欲一言而寤，则尊天而保真；欲再言而通，则贱物而贵身；欲参言而究，则外物而反情。
现代文：要想用一句话来明白其中的道理，那么就是尊重天道而保持本性；想见第二句话来通晓其中的道理，就是轻视外物而重视自身；要想用第三句话来探究其中的奥秘，就是抛去外物而返回真情。
English: If you want to use one sentence to understand the truth, then it is to respect the heavenly way and maintain the nature; if you want to see the second sentence to understand the truth, it is to despise the external things and value yourself; if you want to use the third sentence to explore the mysteries, it is to throw away the external things and return to the true feelings.

古文：执其大指，以内治五藏，瀸濇肌肤，被服法则，而与之终身，所以应待万方，鉴耦百变也。
现代文：掌握了其中的要领，可以对内润泽五脏六腑，对外浸渍肌肉皮肤。亲身体验到这个自然的法则，可以和它伴随终身。可以用来应对万方，揽合百变。
English: Having mastered the essentials, you can moisturize your internal organs and externally impregnate your muscles and skin. Experience this natural law firsthand, and you can accompany it for life. It can be used to deal with all directions and embrace all changes.

古文：若转丸掌中，足以自乐也。
现代文：对待万方百变，就象弄丸掌中，自己也完全可以得到其中的乐趣。
English: Treating the ever-changing world as if it were in the palm of your hand, you can also fully enjoy it.

古文：《俶真》者，穷逐终始之化，嬴垀有无之精，离别万物之变，合同死生之形。使人遗物反己，审仁义之间，通同异之理，观至德之统，知变化之纪，说符玄妙之中，通回造化之母也。
现代文：《俶真》的内容，探求自然界起始终结的变化规律，包含了微妙的有、无相生的精髓，辨别万物的变化规律，等齐合同生相死的形体关系，使人明白超然物外而返回真性的道理，审察清楚仁义的得失，沟通相同与差别之间的联系，观察最高的道德的领属关系，寻求千变万化的头绪，解说清楚深奥玄妙的符验，通达自然变化的根源。
English: The content of "Truthfulness-Compassion-Forbearance," exploring the ever-changing laws of nature, contains the subtle essence of coexistence and non-coexistence, distinguishing the laws of change of all things, equating the physical relationship between life and death, making people understand the principle of transcendence and return to authenticity, examining the gains and losses of benevolence and righteousness, communicating the connection between the same and difference, observing the highest moral belonging relationship, seeking ever-changing clues, explaining the profound and mysterious symbols, and getting to the root of natural changes.

古文：《天文》者，所以和阴阳之气，理日月之光，节开塞之时，列星辰之行，知逆顺之变，避忌讳之殃，顺时运之应，法五神之常，使人有以仰天承顺，而不乱其常者也。
现代文：《天文》的内容，是用来协调阴阳二气的关系，理顺日月运行的规律，掌握发生、禁止的季节变化，排列星辰运行的顺序；知道逆行、顺行的变化，避开忌讳和祸殃的发生；顺从天时规律的对应变化，确定五星之神活动的规则。使人能够尊奉天道、顺应变化，而不会扰乱它的正常规律。
English: The contents of "Astronomy" are used to coordinate the relationship between yin and yang, rationalize the laws of the movement of the sun and moon, grasp the seasonal changes that occur and are prohibited, and arrange the order of the movement of the stars; know the changes of retrograde and prograde, avoid the occurrence of taboos and disasters; obey the corresponding changes in the laws of heaven and time, and determine the rules of the activities of the gods of the five stars. Make people able to worship the heavenly way and conform to changes without disturbing its normal laws.

古文：《地形》者，所以穷南北之修，极东西之广，经山陵之形，区川谷之居，明万物之主，知生类之众，列山渊之数，规远近之路。
现代文：《地形》的内容，是用来穷究南北的长度，测清东西的宽度，划分山陵的形势，区别大川深谷的流向，明确万物的根本，知道生物繁多的种类，罗列山川的数量，规划远近的道路。
English: The content of "Topography" is used to exhaustively investigate the length of the north and south, measure the width of the east and west, divide the situation of the mountains, distinguish the flow direction of the large rivers and deep valleys, clarify the fundamentals of all things, know the many species of organisms, list the number of mountains and rivers, and plan the roads near and far.

古文：使人通回周备，不可动以物，不可惊以怪者也。
现代文：使人通达通达周详，不可以因外物而妄动，不能够因怪物而惊恐。
English: It is necessary to be thorough and thorough, and it is not allowed to move because of foreign objects, and it is not possible to be frightened by monsters.

古文：《时则》者，所以上因天时，下尽地力，据度行当，合诸人则，形十二节，以为法式，终而复始，转于无极，因循仿依，以知祸福，操舍开塞，各有龙忌，发号施令，以时教期。
现代文：《时则》的内容，是说上面安依循自然运行的时序，下面要尽力发挥土地的潜力；据守六度的法则，实行适宜的节令，符合人类生活的规律，形成十二个月的月令，作为共同遵循的准则，一月一年，终而复始，在没有穷尽地运行着，按照自然法则，依样效法。便知道祸福产生的规律，持守和舍弃，开发和禁止，各自都有鬼神的忌日。国君发布政令，按时教化百姓。
English: The contents of the "Rules of Time" are as follows: the upper part follows the natural order of time, and the lower part should make every effort to give full play to the potential of the land; according to the rule of six degrees, implement appropriate festivals, conform to the laws of human life, form a twelve-month lunar calendar, as a common guideline, January one year, from beginning to end, running without exhaustion, in accordance with the laws of nature, according to the example. then know the laws of evil and good, keep and abandon, develop and prohibit, each has the day of the death of ghosts and gods. The king issued a decree to educate the people on time.

古文：使君人者知所以从事。
现代文：这样可以使统治天下的国君，知道所从事的政事。
English: In this way, the sovereigns who rule the world will know what they are doing.

古文：《览冥》者，所以言至精之通九天也，至微之沦无形也，纯粹之入至清也，昭昭之通冥冥也。
现代文：《览冥》的内容，是用来说明最精微之气可以上通九天，最微小的事物可以沦没在无形之中，纯清精粹之屋可以进入最洁净的境地，光明的东西可以通向黑暗之中。
English: The content of "Looking into the Underworld" is used to illustrate that the subtlest air can travel for nine days, the smallest things can become invisible, the house of pure essence can enter the purest state, and bright things can lead to darkness.

古文：乃始揽物引类，览取挢掇，浸想宵类，物之可以喻意象形者，乃以穿通窘滞，决渎壅塞，引人之意，系之无极，乃以明物类之感，同气之应，阴阳之合，形埒之朕，所以令人远观博见者也。
现代文：于是便可以挹取万物，招引同类。撮持积聚，渐渐形成相类似的事物。万物中能够表明意旨，而用形象摹画出来的事物，于是便同自然界的贯通凝塞，疏决川渎，堵塞险要相关联，引导人们的意志，同无穷无尽的事物联系起来，用以表明万物种类之间的互相感应关系，说明相同之气可以互相应和，阴阳二气的互相融合，而能使天地之间的征兆显露出来，以便使人用来观察遥远而广博的事物。
English: As a result, it is possible to grasp all things, attract the same kind, grasp and accumulate, and gradually form similar things. Among all things, it is possible to express the intention, and the things drawn with the image are then related to the natural world's penetration, condensation, drainage, and blockage, guide people's will, and connect with endless things, to show the mutual induction relationship between all species, show that the same air can correspond to each other, and the mutual fusion of yin and yang, and can reveal the signs between heaven and earth, so that people can use it to observe distant and extensive things.

古文：《精神》者，所以原本人之所由生，而晓寤其形骸九窍，取象与天，合同其血气，与雷霆风雨比类其喜怒，与昼宵寒暑并明，审死生之分，别同异之迹，节动静之机，以反其性命之宗，所以使人爱养其精神，抚静其魂魄，不以物易己，紧守虚无之宅者也。
现代文：《精神》的内容，用来探讨人类产生的本源，而明白人的形骸、九窍，得到形象是与上天同一的；人体的血液、精气，是和自然界的雷霆风雨相比照的；人体的喜怒哀乐，是和白天黑夜、严寒酷暑相变化的。审查死生的分别，区别相同、不问的迹象。调节动静的机关、而返回到性命的根本之处。所用来使人爱护保养他的精神，抚慰宁静他的魂魄，不因为外物而改变自己的天性，而坚守大道的根本。
English: The content of "Spirit" is used to explore the origin of human beings, and understand that the human skeleton, the nine acupoints, and the resulting image are the same as heaven; the blood and essence of the human body are compared with the thunderstorms and rainstorms of nature; the emotions of the human body are different from the day and night, the cold and heat. Review the difference between life and death, the same difference, and the signs of not asking. The organ that regulates movement and movement, and return to the fundamental place of life. Used to make people cherish and maintain his spirit, soothe the tranquility of his soul, and not change his nature because of foreign objects

古文：《本经》者，所以明大圣之德，通维初之道，埒略衰世古今之变，以褒先世之隆盛，而贬末世之曲政也。
现代文：《本经》的内容，是用来彰明圣人的美好德行，通达古代圣贤开创的道德规范，略列哀世道德的颓败和古今道德的变化，用来褒扬先世的隆盛，而贬斥末世的弊政。
English: The contents of "this sutra" are used to highlight the virtuous deeds of the saints, to reach the moral standards created by the ancient sages, to list the failures of secular morality and the changes in ancient and modern morality, to praise the prosperity of the past, and to denounce the maladministration of the last days.

古文：所以使人黜耳目之聪明，精神之感动，樽流遁之观，节养性之和，分帝王之操，列小大之差者也。
现代文：用来使人废黜耳目的聪明，宁静精神上引起的激动，抑制由于情欲而产生的五种淫逸，调节用来养性的天和，分散帝王所操持的权柄，罗列大小之间的差别。
English: Wisdom to dethrone the evil eye, calm the agitation of the mind, restrain the five kinds of lusts, regulate the balance of nature, disperse the power wielded by emperors, and enumerate the differences between great and small.

古文：《主术》者，君人之事也。
现代文：《主术》的内容，是讲国君统治天下之事。
English: The content of "Main Art" is about the ruler ruling the world.

古文：所以因作任督责，使群臣各尽其能也。明摄权操柄，以制群下，提名责实，考之参伍，所以使人主秉数持要，不妄喜怒也。
现代文：国君按照百官任职，督察责罚，使群臣各自尽到自己的才能，高明地执掌权柄，用来控制臣下，举出名目，按照实际督责检查，并且互相参照。以便使国君学握权术，抓住要害，不致妄生喜怒之情。
English: In order to make the sovereign learn the art of holding power, grasp the crux of the matter, and not give rise to irrational feelings of joy and anger, the sovereign should appoint a hundred officials, supervise and punish them, and let the ministers each do his best to hold power skillfully, so that they can control their subordinates, name them, supervise and inspect them according to the actual situation, and refer to each other.

古文：其数直施而正邪，外私而立公，使百官条通而辐辏，各务其业，人致其功。此主术之明也。
现代文：他的统治术使邪曲正直，排除私欲而能树立公道。可以使百官象枝条通往树干，如车辐辏聚车轴，各自力求干好本业，人人便可以建立他们的功业，这就是国君统治的聪明之处。
English: His ruling skill makes the wickedness honest, eliminates the selfishness and can establish justice. It can make the officials like branches leading to the tree trunk, like the spokes of a car gathering the axles, each striving to do a good job, and everyone can build their career. This is the wisdom of the ruler's rule.

古文：《缪称》者，破碎道德之论，差次仁义之分，略杂人间之事，总同乎神明之德，假象取耦，以相譬喻，断短为节，以应小具。
现代文：《缪称》的内容，解析道德的理论，排列仁义的区别，稍微间杂人世间的事情，全部汇集在变化莫测的大道之中；假借外物的形象来取得耦合的例证，以便用来相互比方，就象截断小的竹子作为符节，用来适应小的需求一洋。
English: The contents of "Miu Zhao," the analysis of moral theory, the arrangement of the differences between benevolence and righteousness, and the slightly messy things in the world are all gathered in the unpredictable avenue; using the image of foreign objects to obtain examples of coupling in order to be used for mutual comparison, just like cutting off small bamboo as a symbol, used to adapt to small needs.

古文：所以曲说攻论，应感而不匮者也。
现代文：对于解决人们所用的片面之说和巧辩之论，那么就可以感通应对而不致缺乏理论了。
English: As for the one-sided arguments and clever arguments used by people to solve problems, then it is possible to respond sensitively without a lack of theory.

古文：《齐俗》者，所以一群生之短修，同九夷之风气，通古今之论，贯万物之理，财制礼义之宜，擘画人事之终始者也。
现代文：《齐俗》的内容，是用来统一万物的长短优劣，齐同九夷的风气，沟通古今不同的论说，贯通万物生存的道理，裁定礼义的适宜内容，规划人世间事情的终始。
English: The contents of "Qi Zhuang" are used to unify the merits and demerits of all things, align with the customs of the Nine Emperors, communicate different theories from ancient to modern times, penetrate the truth of the existence of all things, determine the appropriate content of etiquette, and plan the beginning and end of things in the world.

古文：《道应》者，揽掇遂事之踪，追观往古之迹，察祸福利害之反，考验乎老庄之术，而以合得失之势者也。
现代文：《道应》的内容，选取成功之事的事迹，追寻观察往古之时的印迹，考察祸福利害之间的正反关系；同老子、庄子的学说相验证，以便符合得失的趋势。
English: The content of "Dao Ying" is to select the stories of successful events, trace the traces of observation in ancient times, examine the positive and negative relationship between evil, welfare and harm, and verify with the teachings of Lao Zi and Zhuo Zi, so as to conform to the trend of gain and loss.

古文：《氾论》者，所以箴缕縩繺之间，扌韱揳啮之郄也。
现代文：《氾论》的内容，是象用针线穿插在衣缝之间，如同木楔补缀在齿缝之隙。
English: The content of "Flood" is like a needle and thread interspersed between the seams of clothing, like a wooden wedge patching the gap between the teeth.

古文：接径直施，以推本朴，而兆见得失之变，利病之反，所以使人不妄没于势利，不诱惑于事态，有符严晲，兼稽时势之变，而与化推移者也。
现代文：通过捷径使曲道变成正直，以便推论事物的本来面目，而预见得失的变比和利害的正反关系。以便用来使人不盲目沉沦在势利之中，不被事态的变化所迷惑；符合天道运行规律，并且考察时势的变化，而能够与自然一起转移变迁。
English: By taking shortcuts, the curved path is made straight, so as to deduce the true nature of things, and foresee the change ratio of gains and losses and the positive and negative relationship of interests; so as to make people not blindly sink into snobbery and not be confused by changes in the state of affairs; conform to the laws of the heavens, and examine the changes in the current situation, and be able to transfer changes with nature.

古文：《诠言》者，所以譬类人事之指，解喻治乱之体也。差择微言之眇，诠以至理之文，而补缝过失之阙者也。
现代文：《诠言》的内容，是用来比类人世之事的意旨，解释辨明国家治乱的根本，比较深微之旨的奥妙，用最根本的道理加以解释，而用来补救治政的过失。
English: The contents of the "Interpretation" are used to compare the meaning of human-like things, to explain and identify the fundamentals of the country's governance, to explain the mysteries of the more profound meaning, to explain with the most fundamental principles, and to remedy the mistakes of governance.

古文：《兵略》者，所以明战胜攻取之数，形机之势，诈谲之变，体因循之道，操持后之论也。
现代文：《兵略》的内容，是用来说明战胜敌人、攻取敌阵的方法，军事形势的机变，欺诈多变的战术；体察军事斗争的规律，采取后发制人的策略。
English: The content of the "Military Strategy" is used to illustrate the methods of defeating the enemy and capturing the enemy's position, the volatility of the military situation, and the deceptive and changeable tactics; to observe the laws of military struggle and adopt the strategy of delaying the attack.

古文：所以知战阵分争之非道不行也，知攻取坚守之非德不强也。
现代文：而用来表明战争的胜负，没有大道是行不通的；知道夺取破阵、坚夺城池，没有德性是不能强大的。
English: But to show the victory or defeat of the war, there is no avenue is impractical; know that the capture of the broken line, the capture of the city, without virtue is not powerful.

古文：诚明其意，进退左右无所失击危，乘势以为资，清静以为常，避实就虚，若驱群羊，此所以言兵者也。
现代文：如果真正明了这个意旨，前进后退，左冲左突都没有什么失去的；打击危险之敌，乘着有利的形势，来作为凭借，而把清解作为准则。避开实力，攻击虚弱之敌，就象驱赶牛羊一样。这就是所说的用兵问题。
English: If one truly understands this meaning, one has nothing to lose in advancing and retreating, in rushing and dashing; in striking a dangerous enemy, one should take advantage of the favorable situation as a basis, and take a clear solution as a guideline; avoid strength and attack a weak enemy, just like driving away cattle and sheep. This is the so-called problem of using troops.

古文：《说山》、《说林》者，所以窍窕穿凿百事之壅遏，而通行贯扃万物之窒塞者也。
现代文：《说山》《说林》的内容，是用来开通百事的堵塞，而使万物的障碍畅通无阻。
English: The content of "Talking Mountain" and "Talking Forest" is used to open up the blockage of all things, and make the obstacles of all things unimpeded.

古文：假譬取象，异类殊形，以领理人之意，解除结细，说捍抟囷而以明事埒事者也。
现代文：借用比喻来选取对象，联系不同的种类和殊别的形体，用来领会人世间事物的要义，解开纽结，解释疑团，而用来阐明百事变化的征兆。
English: Metaphors are used to select objects, to connect different kinds and types of shapes, to grasp the essence of things in the world, to untie knots, to explain doubts, and to clarify the signs of change.

古文：《人间》者，所以观祸福之变，察利害之反，钻脉得失之迹，标举终始之坛也。
现代文：《人间》的内容，是用来观察祸福的变化，考察利害的正反演变；按照脉络研究得失的踪迹，揭示事物终终的更替关系。
English: The content of "Human World" is used to observe the changes in misfortune and fortune, to examine the positive and negative evolution of interests; to study the traces of gains and losses according to the context, and to reveal the ultimate replacement relationship of things.

古文：分别百事之微，敷陈存亡之机，使人知祸之为福，亡之为得，成之为败，利之为害也。
现代文：分清各种事物的微小区别，陈述存也、灭亡的机变，使人们知道坏事可以变为好事，失去可以变为得到，成功可以变为失败，有利可以变为有害。
English: Distinguish the subtle differences of all kinds of things, explain the mechanism of existence and extinction, and let people know that bad things can be turned into good things, loss can be turned into gain, success can be turned into failure, and beneficial can be turned into harmful.

古文：诚喻至意，则有以倾侧偃仰世俗之间，而无伤乎谗贼螫毒者也。
现代文：果真理解了它的深远意义，那么就可以在世俗之间俯仰曲伸了，而不会被谗佞和坏人所伤害。
English: If you truly understand its far-reaching significance, then you can rise above the mundane and not be harmed by evil and bad people.

古文：《修务》者，所以为人之于道未淹，味论未深，见其文辞，反之以清静为常，恬淡为本，则懈堕分学，纵欲适情，欲以偷自佚，而塞于大道也。
现代文：《修务》别的内容，是用来针对有人对 道 没有精深的理解，对旨意观点没有深入探索，只重视那此文辞，反而误把清静作为法则，把淡漠作为根本，就会松懈堕落而放弃学业，放纵情欲，满足安逸，想用马马虎虎、自我放荡，就把大道堵塞。
English: The other contents of "Renovation" are used to deal with people who do not have a profound understanding of the Tao, do not have a deep exploration of the view of the will, and only attach importance to this text. Instead, they mistakenly regard tranquility as the rule and indifference as the fundamental. They will slacken and fall and give up their studies, indulge their passions, and satisfy their ease. If they want to use carelessness and self-indulgence, they will block the road.

古文：今夫狂者无忧，圣人亦无忧。
现代文：现在疯子是没有忧虑的，圣人也是没有忧虑的。
English: Now the madman has no worries, the sage has no worries.

古文：圣人无忧，和以德也；狂者无忧，不知祸福也。
现代文：圣人没有忧虑，是用德性来协调；疯子没有忧虑，不知道祸、福的发生。
English: A saint does not worry, but uses virtue to coordinate; a madman does not worry, and does not know the occurrence of misfortune and blessing.

古文：故通而无为也，与塞而无为也同；其无为则同，其所以无为则异。
现代文：用来观览五帝三皇的业迹，含怀着上天的意旨，怀抱着大地之气；执掌公正，饱含和气；大德在内心形成，而凝结在天地之中，引发阴、阳二气；规定了四季的时序，正气传布四方。
English: It is used to view the deeds of the Five Emperors and the Three Emperors. It contains the will of heaven and the spirit of the earth; it upholds justice and is full of harmony; great virtue is formed in the heart, and condenses in heaven and earth, causing yin and yang; it stipulates the time sequence of the four seasons, and the positive spirit spreads in all directions.

古文：故为之浮称流说其所以能听，所以使学者孳孳以自几也。
现代文：用它来安抚天下就会安宁，推广它就能得到施行。于是便用来化育万物，流动感化一切生物。
English: If it is used to pacify the world, there will be peace, and if it is promoted, it can be implemented. Therefore, it is used to transform all things, and the flow affects all living things.

古文：《泰族》者，横八极，致高乘，上明三光，下和水土，经古今之道，治伦理之序，总万方之指，而归之一本，以经纬治道，纪纲王事，乃原心术，理性情，以馆清平之灵，澄彻神明之精，以与天和相婴薄，所以览五帝三王，怀天气，抱天心，执中含和，德形于内，以莙凝天地，发起阴阳，序四时，正流方，绥之斯宁，推之斯行，乃以陶冶万物，游化群生，唱而和，动而随，四海之内，一心同归。
现代文：就象唱歌就有和声，活动就有跟随一样，天下之内，一个意念而归向一起。
English: Just as a song has a harmony, and an activity has a following, all over the world, an idea comes together.

古文：故景星见，祥风至，黄龙下，凤巢列树，麟止郊野。
现代文：因此瑞星山现，吉祥之风来临，黄龙随之降下，凤凰在树上筑巢，麒麟在郊野停息。
English: Therefore, Ruixing Mountain is now, the auspicious wind is coming, the yellow dragon is descending, the phoenix is nesting in the trees, and the unicorn is resting in the countryside.

古文：德不内形，而行其法藉，专用制度，神祇弗应，福祥不归，四海不宾，兆民弗化。
现代文：大德没有在内心形成，而推行他的法令，专门使用法制，天地之神不会响应，幸福吉祥不会来临；四海之内不能宾服，兆亿人不能归顺。
English: Great virtue is not formed in the heart, but the implementation of his decrees, the exclusive use of the legal system, the gods of heaven and earth will not respond, happiness and auspicious will not come; within the four seas can not be accommodated, trillions of people can not be surrendered.

古文：故德形于内，治之大本。
现代文：因此，道德在内心形成，这是治国的最大根本。
English: Therefore, morality is formed in the heart, which is the greatest foundation for governing the country.

古文：此《鸿烈》之《泰族》也。
现代文：这就是《鸿烈》中的《泰族》所要表达的内容。
English: This is what the "Thai Tribe" in "Pride and Prejudice" wants to express.

古文：凡属书者，所以窥道开塞，庶后世使知举错取舍之宜适，外与物接而不眩，内有以处神养气，宴炀至和，而己自乐所受乎天地者也。
现代文：概括著书的目的，是用来观察大道的开启和阻塞，希望后代能够值得举止措施、取舍的适当办法，在外部和万物交接而不致迷惑，在内部能够用来静处精神颐养元气，温煦最高的和气，而自己也能够从中得到快乐，这些都是从天地之中得到的。
English: The purpose of summarizing the book is to observe the opening and obstruction of the avenue, and hope that future generations can be worthy of manners, the appropriate way to choose, and the external and all things will not be confused, and the internal can be used to calm the spirit, nourish vitality, warm the highest harmony, and they can also get happiness from it, all of which are obtained from heaven and earth.

古文：故言道而不明终始，则不知所仿依；言终始而不明天地四时，则不知所避讳；言天地四时而不引譬援类，则不知精微；言至精而不原人之神气，则不知养生之机；原人情而不言大圣之德，则不知五行之差；言帝道而不言君事，则不知小大之衰；言君事而不为称喻，则不知动静之宜；言称喻而不言俗变，则不知合同大指；已言俗变而不言往事，则不知道德之应；知道德而不知世曲，则无以耦万方；知氾论而不知诠言，则无以从容；通书文而不知兵指，则无以应卒已；知大略而不知譬喻，则无以推明事；知公道而不知人间，则无以应祸福；知人间而不知修务，则无以使学者劝力。
现代文：因此谈论人道而不明白事物的始终变化，便不知道学习仿效的对象；谈论事物的始终变化，而不明了天地四时的变化，便不知道回避灾祸和忌讳的事情；谈说天地四时之间的变化，而不去引用譬喻援引类似的例证，便不如道精妙微小的事物；谈论人的最微妙的精气不探索人的神气发生原因，便不知道养生的机变；探索人之常情而不谈论最高的道德，便不知道五种行为之间的差别，谈论天子之道而不说诸侯国君之事，便不知道大小的等次；淡论国君之事而不去陈说譬喻，便不知道掌握动静的适度；谈论陈说譬喻，而不论及习俗的变化，便不知道会合大要；谈论习俗变化而不谈往古之事，就不了解道德的对应变化；了解道德的对应变化而不知道世事的曲折，便不能配合各种变故；知道广博地论说而不知道阐明精微之言，便不能从容不迫；通晓书籍文章而不知道用兵的要旨，便没有办法应付突然变故；知道大要而不知道使用譬喻，就没有办法推论明白事理；了解公正之道而不知道人间曲直，便不能应对祸福；知道人间之事而不了解努力进取，便不能来使学习的人勤奋学业。
English: Therefore, to talk about humanity without understanding the constant change of things is not to know the object of learning and imitation; to talk about the constant change of things without understanding the change of the four seasons is not to know the avoidance of disasters and taboos; to talk about the change between the four seasons without using similes and similar examples is not as good as the way of fine and small things; to talk about the most subtle essence of man without exploring the cause of the appearance of man is not to know the mechanism of health care; to explore the common sense of man without talking about the highest morality is not to know the difference between the five kinds of behavior; to talk about the way of heaven and earth without talking about

古文：欲强省其辞，览总其要，弗曲行区入，则不足以穷道德之意。
现代文：想尽力减少它的文字，总括的它的要点，但是不经过委婉曲折地引入境地，便不能够穷尽道德的旨意。
English: One tries to reduce it to words, to summarize its main points, but one cannot exhaust the moral purpose without introducing it in a tortuous and euphemistic manner.

古文：故著书二十篇，则天地之理究矣，人间之事接矣，帝王之道备矣！
现代文：因此著书二十篇，这样天地之间的道理便探究清楚了。人世间的事情便全部接触了，帝王统治天下的方法已经全备了。
English: Therefore, he wrote twenty books, and in this way, the reason between heaven and earth became clear. All the things in the world came into contact, and the method for the emperor to rule the world was complete.

古文：其言有小有巨，有微有粗，指奏卷异，各有为语。
现代文：书中的论说有的谈论小事，有的涉及大事，有细微之说，也有粗疏之言，每卷旨趣都是不同的，各自都有论述的文字。
English: Some of the book's discussions are about small things, some are about big things, some are about small things, and some are about coarse things. Each volume has a different theme, and each has its own text.

古文：今专言道，则无不在焉，然而能得本知末者，其唯圣人也。
现代文：现在专门谈论道，那么是没有地方不存在的；但是能够得到根本而能知道未节的，恐怕只有圣人了。
English: Now that we are talking specifically about Tao, then there is no place that does not exist; but I am afraid that only sages can obtain the fundamental and know the unspoken.

古文：今学者无圣人之才，而不为详说，则终身颠顿乎混溟之中，而不知觉寤乎昭明之术矣。
现代文：现在的学习的人没有圣人之才，如果不替他们详细解说，那么就会终身困顿于杂乱昏暗之中，而不知道在光明的道路上醒悟。
English: Today's students don't have the talent of a saint. If you don't explain things to them in detail, they will be stuck in the chaos and darkness for the rest of their lives, not knowing how to wake up on the bright road.

古文：今《易》之《乾》、《坤》，足以穷道通义也，八卦可以识吉凶、知祸福矣，然而伏羲为之六十四变，周室增以六爻，所以原测淑清之道，而扌麏逐万物之祖也。
现代文：现在《周易》中的乾和坤，完全能够穷尽道术通达旨意了，八卦可以识别吉凶知道祸福了；但是伏羲还为它演变而成了六十四个卦象，周文上又增加了六爻，所用来探究测度明朗之道，而远溯万物的本源。
English: Now, the Qian and Kun in "Zhou Yi" are fully capable of exhausting the Taoism and achieving the will, and the Ba Gua can identify the auspicious and the evil, and know the misfortune and the good; but the Fuxi has also evolved into sixty-four Gua images, and the Zhou text has added six folds, which are used to explore the clear way of measurement, and trace the origin of all things.

古文：夫五音之数不过宫商角徵羽，然而五弦之琴不可鼓也。必有细大驾和，而后可以成曲。
现代文：五音的数量，不过宫商角微羽，但是五弦的琴不能够弹奏，必须有高音、低音的更互相和，然后才能成为曲子。
English: The number of pentatones is small, but the five-stringed lute cannot be played, there must be more harmony between the treble and bass, and then it can become a tune.

古文：今画龙首，观者不知其何兽也，具其形，则不疑矣。
现代文：现在画一个龙头，观看的人不知道是什么野兽，全部画完它的形状，那么就不会怀疑了。
English: Now draw a dragon's head, the viewer does not know what kind of beast it is, once its shape is fully drawn, then there will be no doubt.

古文：今谓之道则多，谓之物则少，谓之术则博，谓之事则浅，推之以论，则无可言者，所以为学者，固欲致之不言而已也。
现代文：现在说到 道 的，就会谈的很多；说到万物的，就会谈的很少，谈到统治之术的，就会议论很广泛；而谈到事情的，就很浅薄。如果用理论来推求，那么便觉得无话可说了。所用来从事教学的人，本来想指引他们，也只好不说罢了。
English: Now, when it comes to doctrine, there is much to say; when it comes to things, there is little to say; when it comes to government, there is much to say; when it comes to things, there is little to say; when it comes to theories, there is nothing to say; when it comes to teachers, there is nothing to say.

古文：夫道论至深，故多为之辞，以抒其情；万物至众，故博为之说，以通其意。
现代文：大道的学问是最深的，所以要多多的替它说明，以便表达它的实际情况，万物是纷坛复杂的，所以广博他为它论说，以便通达它的意旨。
English: The learning of Tao is the deepest, so it is necessary to explain more and more for it in order to express its actual situation. All things are complex, so it is necessary to discuss it widely in order to achieve its intention.

古文：辞虽坛卷连漫，绞纷远缓，所以洮汰涤荡至意，使之无凝竭底滞，卷握而不散也。
现代文：辞语虽然曲折而又很散乱，纷纭交错而又遥远松缓，所用来淘汰清除个人的旧有的牢固观念，使他们没有凝结闭塞，那么掌握大道而不会松散。
English: Although the words are tortuous and very scattered, interlaced and far from loose, they are used to eliminate and clear the old fixed ideas of individuals, so that they are not congealed and blocked, so that they can grasp the avenue and will not be loose.

古文：夫江河之腐胔，不可胜数，然祭者汲焉，大也。一杯酒白，蝇渍其中，匹夫弗尝者，小也。
现代文：在长江黄河中的腐烂尸骨是数不清的，但是祭祀的人要从中汲水，因为它广大；一杯白酒，苍蝇淹没在其中，一个人都不去品尝，因为它狭小。
English: There are countless rotting corpses in the Yellow River of the Yangtze River, but the sacrificial people have to draw water from it because it is vast; a glass of white wine, flies drown in it, and no one wants to taste it because it is narrow.

古文：诚通乎二十篇之论，睹凡得要，以通九野，径十门，外天地，捭山川，其于逍遥一世之间，宰匠万物之形，亦优游矣。
现代文：果真能够通达二十篇的论述，看到大概得到要领，可以用来通达九野，取道十门，把天地排除在外，开合山川，对于自由往返于人世之间，执宰万物之形，也可以说能悠闲自得了。
English: If you can really get through the twenty-part discussion and see that you have roughly obtained the essentials, you can use it to reach the nine fields, take the ten gates, exclude the heavens and the earth, open and close the mountains and rivers, and for the freedom to travel back and forth between the human world and control the shape of all things, you can also say that you can leisurely do it yourself.

古文：若然者，挟日月而不烑，润万物而不秏。曼兮洮兮，足以览矣，藐兮浩兮，旷旷兮，可以游矣。
现代文：如果能象这样，到达日月而不会有光亮，润泽万物而不会消耗；漫布大地啊，而润滑万物啊，完全可以用来观览一切了。
English: If it were possible in this way to reach the sun and the moon without illumination, to lubricate all things without consumption, to spread the earth and lubricate all things, it would be possible to observe everything.

古文：文王之时，纣为天子，赋敛无度，杀戮无止，康梁沉湎，宫中成市，作为炮烙之刑，刳谏者，剔孕妇，天下同心而苦之。
现代文：深远无边啊，可以遨游在广阔无垠之源啊！周文王的时候，商纣王是天子，搜刮民赋没有限度，杀戮无辜不能停止，沉溺于淫乐美酒之中，宫廷之中竟象市场一样；制造了炮烙之刑，挖掉劝谏的贤人之心，剖开孕妇的肚子，天下一心而痛恨他，周文王四代积累善事，修治德行，推行大义。
English: Far and wide, you can travel in the vast and boundless source! In the time of King Zhouwen, the merchant king was the son of heaven. There was no limit to the collection of people's wealth, the killing of innocents could not be stopped, indulging in sexual pleasure and fine wine. The court was like a market. He created the punishment of cannon fire, dug out the hearts of the wise men who advised him, opened the stomach of a pregnant woman, and hated him with all his heart. King Zhouwen accumulated good deeds, cultivated virtue, and promoted the great righteousness for four generations.

古文：文王四世累善，修德行义，处岐周之间，地方不过百里，天下二垂归之。文王欲以卑弱制强暴，以为天下去残除贼而成王道，故太公之谋生焉。
现代文：处在岐周之地。土地方圆不过百里，但是天下三分之二的诸侯归向了他，周文王要以卑下弱小的地位战胜强暴的纣王，而为天下人民除去凶残之君，以便成就王道，因此姜太公的兵谋便产生了。
English: The land is only a hundred miles in circumference, but two-thirds of the kingdoms of the world have turned to him. King Zhouwen wants to defeat the violent King Zhao with a lowly and weak position, and remove the cruel prince for the people of the world in order to achieve the royal way. Therefore, Jiang Taigong's military strategy came into being.

古文：文王业之而不卒，武王继文王之业，用太公之谋，悉索薄赋，躬擐甲胄，以伐无道而讨不义，誓师牧野，以践天子之位。
现代文：周文王从事伐纣的事业，刚开始便去世了，周武王继承周文王的大业，采用太公的谋略，倾注全国的兵力，亲自穿上甲胄，来讨伐无道不义之君。在牧野会合天下诸侯，誓师伐纣，终于踏上了天于之位。
English: King Zhou Wen was engaged in the logging business, but he died just after starting it. King Zhou Wu inherited the great cause of King Zhou Wen, adopted the strategy of the grand duke, poured in troops from all over the country, and personally put on armor to fight the ruthless and unjust king. In Makino, the princes of the world met, swore to teach logging, and finally stepped on the throne of heaven.

古文：天下未定，海内未辑，武王欲昭文王之令德，使夷狄各以其贿来贡，辽远未能至，故治三年之丧，殡文王于两楹之间，以俟远方。
现代文：天下没有平定，海内没有安宁，武王打算使文王的美德昭明天下，使夷狄各自带着他们的财物前来进献；道路遥远的地方不能按时到达，于是便治理三年之丧，把文王尸体大殓在两个楹柱之间，用来等待远方之人。
English: There was no peace in the world, and no peace in the sea. King Wu planned to make the virtue of King Wen known to the world, and to make the Yidi each bring their belongings to offer; the distant places could not be reached on time, so he administered a three-year funeral, and placed the body of King Wen between two pillars to wait for people from far away.

古文：武王立三年而崩，成王在褓襁之中，未能用事，蔡叔、管叔，辅公子禄父而欲为乱，周公继文王之业，持天子之政，以股肱周室，辅翼成王，惧争道之不塞，臣下之危上也，故纵马华山，放牛桃林，败鼓折枹，搢笏而朝，以宁静王室，镇抚诸侯。
现代文：周武于立国三年而驾崩，周成王还在襁褓之中，不能执政。蔡叔、管叔辅助约王公子禄父，想要举行叛乱。周公旦继承父兄文王、武王的事业，掌握了天子的权力，用来安定周王室，而辅佐成王，平定天下大叛乱。周公担心争斗不停止，臣下危及天子，因此便把军马释放到华山，把牛散放到桃林；把战鼓打破，鼓槌折断，身插笏板而朝见，以便安定周王室，镇压安抚天下诸侯。
English: Zhou Wu died three years after the founding of the country, and Zhou Cheng Wang was still in his infancy and unable to govern. Cai Shu and Guan Shu assisted the father of Prince Yue, who wanted to hold a rebellion. Zhou Gongdan inherited the cause of his father and brother, King Wen and King Wu, and seized the power of Tianzi to stabilize the Zhou royal family, and assisted King Cheng to quell the great rebellion in the world. Zhou Gong was worried that the struggle would not stop and his subjects would endanger Tianzi, so he released the horses to Huashan and scattered the cattle to the peach forest; he broke the war drums, broke the drumsticks

古文：墨子学儒者之业，受孔子之术，以为其礼烦扰而不说，厚葬靡财而贫民，服伤生而害事，故背周道而行夏政。
现代文：成王已经长大，能够处理政事，周公便到鲁国受封，用这个办法转移风气改变习俗。孔子修治成、康的主张，祖述周公的教训，用来教导七十个学生，使他们穿戴起周王朝的衣冠，研究遗留下来的典籍，于是儒学便产生了。墨子学习儒家的学说，接受孔子的思想，认为他的礼节烦琐而不简易；丰厚的葬礼，耗费了资财，而使百姓贫困；长久服丧，伤害生命而妨碍政事。
English: King Cheng had grown up and was able to handle political affairs. Zhou Gong then went to the State of Lu to receive the title, using this method to transfer the culture and change the customs. Confucius's idea of cultivating a healthy and harmonious society, and his ancestor's teachings, were used to teach seventy students, so that they could wear the crown of the Zhou Dynasty and study the remaining classics. Thus, Confucianism was born. Mozi studied Confucianism and accepted Confucius's ideas, believing that his etiquette was cumbersome and not easy; rich funerals consumed resources and impoverished the people; long funerals hurt lives and

古文：禹之时，天下大水，禹身执蔂垂，以为民先，剔河而道九岐，凿江而通九路，辟五湖而定东海，当此之时，烧不暇撌，濡不给扢，死陵者葬陵，死泽者葬泽，故节财、薄葬、闲服生焉。
现代文：因此背离周朝的法规而使用夏朝的法令。夏禹的时候，天下发了大水，禹亲自拿着畚箕和木锹，而给百姓作出表率。疏通黄河而分成九个支流，凿通江而沟沟众多的河流，开通五湖而注入东海。在这个时候，烧火的余烬来不及排除，衣服沾湿了来不及擦拭，死在山陵葬在山陵，死在湖泽葬在湖泽，因此节省财物而简易的葬礼，简单的服饰便产生了。
English: Therefore, they deviated from the regulations of the Zhou Dynasty and used the decrees of the Xia Dynasty. At the time of Xia Yu, the world was flooded, and Yu personally took the plow and the wooden plow and set an example for the people. He dredged the Yellow River and divided it into nine tributaries, chiseled the river and ditched numerous rivers, opened the Five Lakes and poured into the East Sea. At this time, it was too late to remove the embers of the fire, and it was too late to wipe the clothes when they were wet. The dead were buried in the mountains and the dead were buried in the lakes. Therefore, simple funerals

古文：齐桓公之时，天子卑弱，诸侯力征，南夷北狄，交伐中国，中国之不绝如线。
现代文：齐桓公的时候，天子的地位卑下，势力弱小，诸侯用武力互相征伐。南夷北狄，交互侵伐中国，中国没有断绝，但仅象细丝一样，十分危急。
English: At the time of King Qianlong, the status of Tianzi was low and the power was weak, and the princes used force to invade each other. The South and the North invaded and invaded China, and China was not cut off, but only like a thin thread, it was very critical.

古文：齐国之地，东负海而北障河，地狭田少，而民多智巧，桓公忧中国之患，苦夷狄之乱，欲以存亡继绝，崇天子之位，广文、武之业，故《管子》之书生焉。
现代文：齐国之地，东边背靠大海，北面有黄河作阻塞，地盘狭小，田地很少，而百姓多有智术和巧诈，桓公忧虑中国的隅祸患，苦于夷狄的战乱，想来保存灭亡的国家，继续绝嗣的宗族，使大于的地位尊崇起来，增广文、武的事业，因此管子的著作便产生了。
English: In the land of Qi, facing the sea to the east and blocked by the Yellow River to the north, the land is small and the fields are few, but the people are clever and cunning. King Huan was worried about the misfortunes of China and suffered from the wars of the Yidi. He wanted to preserve the ruined country, continue the lineage of the dead, make the status of the greater respected, and expand the cause of literature and martial arts. Therefore, the works of Guanzi came into being.

古文：齐景公内好声色，外好狗马，猎射亡归，好色无辨。
现代文：齐景公在宫廷内贪恋音乐美色，在外爱好走狗、骏马，射箭打猎便忘掉归来，喜欢贤人但是常常不能辨别。
English: In the court, Prince Qi Jing fell in love with music and beauty. When he was away, he loved to walk dogs and ride horses. When he went archery hunting, he forgot to come back. He liked wise men, but he often couldn't tell them apart.

古文：作为路寝之台，族铸大钟，撞之庭下，郊雉皆呴，一朝用三千钟赣，梁丘据、子家哙导于左右，故晏子之谏生焉。
现代文：建起豪华的路寝之台，聚集铜铁铸起了大钟，在庭下值击之后，引起远郊的野鸡呜叫。一个朝上便赐给群臣三万斛粮食。梁邱据、子家哙在左右引诱景公。因此晏子的讽谏便产生了。
English: He built a luxurious roadbed, gathered copper and iron to cast a large bell, and after striking the bell in the courtyard, caused the pheasants in the suburbs to cry. One morning, he gave the courtiers thirty thousand baht of grain. Liang Qiu Jian and Zi Jia Yao lured Jing Gong to the right and left. Therefore, the irony of the dice came into being.

古文：晚世之时，六国诸侯，溪异谷别，水绝山隔，各自治其境内，守其分地，握其权柄，擅其政令。
现代文：战国的时候，六国诸侯地域各不相同，大水阻碍，高山隔绝，各自治理自己的境内，守卫着分割的土地，掌握着他们的大权，擅自发布政令，下面没有诸侯之长，上面没有天子统治。
English: At the time of the Warring States, the territories of the princes of the six states were all different. They were hindered by great water and isolated by high mountains. Each autonomous government governed its own territory, guarded the divided land, controlled their great power, and issued decrees without authorization. There were no princes below, and there was no heavenly son ruling above.

古文：下无方伯，上无天子，力征争权，胜者为右，恃连与国，约重致，剖信符，结远援，以守其国家，持其社稷，故纵横修短生焉。
现代文：用武力争夺权力，胜利的为尊。他们依仗联合之国，约定能够招致的重兵，剖开符契，连结远方的援兵，用来防守他们的国家，护卫他们的社稷。因此纵横、长短之术产生了。
English: They used force to fight for power, with victory at stake. They relied on a united country, agreed to be able to bring in heavy troops, opened the contract, linked distant reinforcements, used to defend their country, protect their society. Therefore, the vertical and horizontal, long and short techniques have emerged.

古文：申子者，朝昭厘之佐，韩、晋别国也。
现代文：申不害，是韩昭王的辅佐。韩国原是由晋分割而建立的。
English: Shen Fuhong was an aide to King Han Zhao. Korea was originally established by the division of Jin.

古文：地墽民险，而介于大国之间，晋国之故礼未灭，韩国之新法重出，先君之令未收，后君之令又下，新故相反，前后相缪，百官背乱，不知所用。
现代文：土地贫瘠，而百姓险恶，又介于大国之间。晋国原来的礼仪没有废止，韩国的新法又重新出现；先君的命令没有收回，后君的命令又接着而下。新、旧相反，前后相抵触，百官相背而混乱，不知如何使用。
English: The land is barren, and the people are treacherous, and it is between great powers. The original etiquette of Jin has not been abolished, and the new law of Korea has reappeared; the order of the former emperor has not been withdrawn, and the order of the latter emperor has followed. New and old, on the contrary, contradict each other, and the officials are confused and do not know how to use them.

古文：故刑名之书生焉。
现代文：因此刑名之学便产生了。
English: Therefore, the study of surnames came into being.

古文：秦国之俗，贪狼强力，寡义而趋利。
现代文：秦国的习俗，贪狠如狼，竭尽武力，缺少大义，而趋向利益。
English: The customs of the Qin State are as greedy as a wolf, exhausting force, lacking great righteousness, and tending to benefit.

古文：可威以刑，而不可化以善；可劝以赏，而不可厉以名。
现代文：可以用刑法来施行威严，而不可以用教化让他们行善；可以用奖励来勉励他们，而不能用名声来使他们严肃。
English: Penal laws may be used to enforce severity, but not education to make them do good; rewards may be used to encourage them, but not fame to make them serious.

古文：被险而带河，四塞以为固，地利形便，畜积殷富。
现代文：覆盖险阻而以黄河为带，四周有险关堵塞，地理形势对它极为有利方便，积蓄充足。
English: Covering the Yellow River as the belt of dangerous obstacles, there are dangerous blockages all around, the geographical situation is extremely favorable and convenient for it, and the savings are sufficient.

古文：孝公欲以虎狼之势而吞诸侯，故商鞅之法生焉。
现代文：秦孝公想以处于虎、狼之优势，而吞并天下诸侯。因此商鞅的法家思想便产生了。
English: Qin Xiaogong wanted to take the advantage of being a tiger and a wolf, and annex the world's principalities.

