古文：五月初一日余束装寄逆旅主人符心华寓，兰溪人。乃南抵普安北门外，东向循城行。
现代文：五月初一日我捆好行装寄放在旅店主人符心华的寓所中，于是往南来到普安城北门外，向东沿着城墙走。
English: On the first day of May, I bundled up my luggage and left it in the apartment of the innkeeper, Fu Xinhua, so I went south to the north gate of Pu'an City and walked east along the city wall.

古文：先是驼骑议定自关岭至交水，至是余欲往丹霞，彼不能待，计程退价。
现代文：在此之前，与马帮商定从关岭到交水，到这里后我想前往丹霞山去，他们不能等，计算了旅程退了余款。
English: Prior to this, I agreed with the horse gang to go from Guanling to Jiuquan. After I got here, I wanted to go to Danxia Mountain. They couldn't wait, calculated the journey and refunded the remaining money.

古文：余仓卒收行李，其物仍为夫盗去。
现代文：我仓粹之间收拾行李，其中的物品仍然被马夫偷去了。
English: I hurriedly packed my bags, but the items were still stolen by the coachman.

古文：穷途之中，屡遭拐窃，其何堪乎！复随溪南转过东门，又循而抵南门，有石梁跨溪上。
现代文：走投无路之间，屡次遭到拐骗偷窃，那怎么经受得起啊门再顺着溪流向南转过东门，又沿溪流抵达南门，有石桥跨在溪上。
English: Caught between a rock and a hard place, repeatedly abducted, cheated and stolen from, how can they bear it? The gate then follows the stream to the south, passes through the east gate, and then follows the stream to the south gate. There is a stone bridge across the stream.

古文：越其南，水从西崖向南谷，路从东坡上南岭，西眺水抵南谷，崖环壑绝，遂注洞南入。
现代文：过到桥南，溪水从西边山崖流向南面的山谷中，路从东面的山坡上到南边的山岭，往西远眺，溪水流到南面的山谷后，山崖环抱，壑谷断绝，水流便往南注入洞中。
English: Passing to the south of the bridge, the stream water flows from the western cliff to the southern valley. The road goes from the eastern hillside to the southern mountain range. Looking far to the west, after the stream water flows to the southern valley, it is surrounded by the cliff, the valley is cut off, and the water flows south into the cave.

古文：时急于丹霞，不及西下，二里，竟南上岭，从岭上行。
现代文：此时急于去丹霞山，来不及向西下去。二里，竟自往南上岭，在岭上前行。
English: At this time, I was in a hurry to go to Danxia Mountain, but I didn't have time to go west. Two miles later, I actually went south to Shangling and drove on the ridge.

古文：又二里，逾岭转而西，其两旁山腋，多下坠之穴，盖其地当水洞东南，其下中空旁透，下坠处，皆透穴之通明者也。
现代文：又行二里，越过岭转向西走，岭两旁的山侧，有很多下陷的洞穴，大概此地正当水洞的东南方，山腹之下中间是空的，四通八达，下陷之处，都是通有洞穴透进光亮的地方了。
English: I walked another two miles, crossed the ridge and turned west. On both sides of the ridge, there are many sunken caves on the mountain side. This is probably the southeast of the water cave. The middle under the hillside is empty, and it is accessible from all directions. The sunken places are all places where the cave penetrates the light.

古文：又西南一里，路右一峡下迸，有岩西南向，其上甚穹，乃下探之。
现代文：又往西南行一里，路右向下迸裂开一条峡谷，有个岩洞朝向西南方，洞口上部隆起很高，于是下峡去探察此洞。
English: Another mile to the southwest, the road splits a canyon to the right downhill. There is a cave facing the southwest, the upper part of the cave opening is very high, so the lower gorge went to explore this cave.

古文：东门有侧窦如结龛，门内洼下而中平，无甚奇幻。
现代文：东边的洞口有个侧洞，好像建造的佛完，洞口以内下洼但洞中平坦，没有什么奇特变幻之处。
English: At the east end of the cave, there is a side cave. It looks like a Buddha statue. The inside of the cave is sunken, but the inside of the cave is flat. There are no strange changes.

古文：遂复上南行，又一里，逾岭脊，遂西南渐下，行坡峡间。
现代文：于是再上山往南行，又是一里，越过岭脊，就向西南逐渐下坡，行走在山坡与峡谷之间。
English: So I went up the mountain to the south, another mile, over the ridge, and gradually downhill to the southwest, walking between the hillside and the canyon.

古文：一里，过石亭垒址，其南路分两岐：由东南者，为新、安二所、黄草坝之径；由西南者，则向丹霞而南通乐民所道也。
现代文：一里，路过一处石块垒砌的石亭的废址，在它南边路分为两条岔道：由东南方向去的，是去新、安二所和黄草坝的小径；由西南去的，就是通向丹霞山而后向南通往乐民所的道路了。
English: One mile, passing a waste site of a stone pavilion made of stone walls, the south side road is divided into two side roads: from the southeast, it is the path to Xin, An 2 and Huang Cao Dam; from the southwest, it is the road leading to Danxia Mountain and then south to Le Min.

古文：遂从西南下。
现代文：于是从西南方下走。
English: So I walked down from the southwest.

古文：从岭峡中平下者二里，东顾峡坑坠处，有水透崖南出，余疑为水洞所泄之水，而其势颇小，上流似不雄壮。
现代文：在山岭峡谷中平缓下走了二里路，向东回头看峡坑下坠之处，有股水流穿透山崖往南流出，我怀疑是水洞中外泄的水，可水势很小，上游似乎不怎么雄壮。
English: I walked two miles down the mountain canyon, looked back to the east to see where the canyon fell, and there was a stream of water penetrating the cliff and flowing south. I suspected it was water leaking out of the cave, but the water potential was very small, and the upstream did not seem very majestic.

古文：从其西，遂西南坠坑而下。
现代文：从水流的西侧，就往西南向坑谷中下走。
English: From the west side of the stream, go southwest to the middle of the valley.

古文：一里，抵壑中，则有溪汪然自西而东注，小石梁跨其上。曰南板桥。
现代文：一里，来到壑谷中，就有条溪水浩浩荡荡自西往东流注，小石桥跨在溪上，叫做南板桥。
English: One mile into the valley, there is a stream flowing from west to east. A small stone bridge spans the stream and is called Nanbanqiao.

古文：以别于北大道之三板桥也。其下水西自石洞出，即承水洞之下流，至是而复透山腹也。
现代文：桥下的流水自西边的石洞中流出，立即连接水洞的下游，到这里便又穿透山腹流出来。
English: The water under the bridge flows out of the stone cave on the west side, immediately connecting the lower reaches of the water cave, where it then flows out through the mountainside.

古文：水从桥东，又合南峡一溪，东向而去，东北合软桥下流，出北板桥而东与盘江合。
现代文：溪水从桥东流去，又会合南面山峡中的溪流，向东而去，在东北方汇入软桥下游之水，流出北板桥后往东与盘江合流。
English: The stream water flows from the bridge to the east, meets the stream in the mountain gorge to the south, flows eastward, flows into the water downstream of the soft bridge in the northeast, flows out of the north board bridge, and flows eastward to join the Pan River.

古文：其南峡之溪，则自大水塘南山岚洞来。
现代文：那条南面峡中流来的溪流，就是自大水塘南边山岚洞流来的。
English: The stream that flows in the gorge to the south comes from the hawthorn cave on the south side of the large pond.

古文：二溪一北一南，皆透石洞而出，亦奇矣。
现代文：两条溪流一北一南，都是透过石洞流出来的，也算奇特了。
English: Two streams, one to the north and one to the south, flow through the cave, which is also quite unusual.

古文：越南板桥南一里，溯南来溪入南峡，转而西行峡中。
现代文：越过南板桥往南行一里，溯南来的溪流走入南面的山峡，转向西行走在峡中。
English: Cross the South Board Bridge and walk south for one mile. The stream coming from the south enters the mountain gorge to the south, and turns west to walk in the gorge.

古文：又二里，则有坝南北横截溪上，其流涌坝下注，阔七、八丈，深丈余，绝似白水河上流之瀑，但彼出天然，而此则人堰者也。
现代文：又行二里，就有座水坝呈南北向横截在溪上，水流涌过堤坝下泻，宽七八丈，深一丈多，极似白水河上游的瀑布，但那一处是天然形成的，而此处却是人工建水坝形成的了。
English: After another two miles, there was a dam cutting across the stream in a north-south direction. The water gushed over the dike and cascaded down, seventy-eight feet wide and more than a foot deep, very similar to the waterfalls in the upper reaches of the White Water River, but that one was naturally formed, while here it was artificially dammed.

古文：坝北崖有石飞架路旁，若鷁水鸟首掉虚，而其石分窍连枝，玲珑上透，嵌空凑合，亦突崖之一奇也。
现代文：水坝北边的山崖上有块岩石飞架在路旁，好像凌空的船头，而且这块岩石分出许多孔洞，如树枝相连，玲珑剔透，上部露出亮光，凑聚在一起镶嵌在空中，也是突出的悬崖中的奇观了。
English: On the cliff north of the dam there is a rock flying on the roadside, like the prow of a flying ship, and this rock has many holes, such as branches connected, exquisite and clear, the upper part is bright, gathered together and embedded in the air, it is also a miracle in the protruding cliff.

古文：又西三里，路缘北崖而上，西越之而下，共半里，山回水转，其水又自南向北而来者，其先东西之峡甚束，至是峡之成南北者渐宽。
现代文：又向西三里，路沿着北面的山崖往上走，向西越过山崖下行，共有半里，山回水转，那条溪水又自南向北而来，流来此之前东西向的峡谷十分狭窄，流到这里呈南北向的峡谷渐渐宽了起来。
English: Another three miles to the west, the road went up along the cliff to the north, and went down over the cliff to the west, a total of half a mile, the mountains turned back and forth, and the stream came from the south to the north. The east-west canyon before this was very narrow, and the north-south canyon gradually widened.

古文：又循溪西崖南向行，一里，南逾一突嘴，则其南峡开而盘成大坞，南望有石梁横跨溪上。
现代文：又顺着溪流西面的山崖向南行，一里，往南越过一个突出来的山嘴，就见它南面的山峡开阔起来回绕成大山坞，往南望去有座石桥横跨在溪上。
English: He also followed the cliff on the west side of the stream to the south. One mile to the south, he passed over a protruding promontory, and saw the canyon on the south side of it open up and turn into a large dock. Looking south, there was a stone bridge across the stream.

古文：半里，度石梁而东，遂东南上坡，始与南来之溪别。
现代文：半里，过了石桥往东走，于是向东南上坡，这才与南来的溪流分开。
English: After half a mile, cross the stone bridge to the east, then walk uphill to the southeast until you are separated from the stream coming from the south.

古文：东上半里，过一村，又东半里，转而南稍下，共半里，逾小溪而上，过赵官屯，遂由屯村北畔东南入坞。
现代文：往东上坡半里，路过一个村庄，又向东半里，转向南略略下行，共半里路，越过小溪往上走，经过越官屯，便由赵官屯村北侧旁往东南进入坞中。
English: Half a mile uphill to the east, passing through a village, then half a mile to the east, turning slightly south and slightly down, a total of half a mile, crossing the creek, going up, passing through Yueguantun, then from the north side of Zhaoguantun village to the southeast into the dock.

古文：二里，复七岭，一里，转峡处有水飞坠山腰。
现代文：二里，再上岭，一里，山峡转折处有水流飞坠到山腰。
English: Two miles, then up the ridge, one mile, at the turn of the canyon, there is a stream of water flying down to the mountainside.

古文：循山嘴又西转而南半里，随峡东入又半里，峡中有水自东峡出，即飞瀑之上流也。
现代文：沿着山嘴又由西转向南行半里，顺着峡谷往东进去又走半里，峡中有水流自东方峡谷中流出，这就是飞流瀑布的上游了。
English: Along the ridge, it turns from west to south for half a mile, following the canyon to the east for another half a mile, and there is water flowing out of the east canyon, which is the upper reaches of the flying waterfall.

古文：小石梁跨峡而南，石碑剥落，即丹霞山《建桥记》文也。
现代文：小石桥跨过峡谷往南去，有块已剥落的石碑，就是丹霞山《建桥记》的碑文了。
English: A small stone bridge crosses the canyon to the south, and there is a stone tablet that has been peeled off, which is the inscription of the "Bridge Construction Record" of Danxia Mountain.

古文：由桥南西向盘岭，为大水塘之道，遂由桥东向溯水而入。
现代文：从桥南向西盘绕于山岭之上，是到大水塘的路，于是由桥头向东溯溪水入山。
English: From the south to the west of the bridge, winding around the mountains, is the road to the large pond, so from the bridge head to the east to follow the stream into the mountains.

古文：其下峡中箐树蒙密，水伏流于下，惟见深绿一道，迤逦谷底。
现代文：路下方峡中警深树密，溪水伏流于下，唯见一道深绿色，道巡于谷底。
English: Under the road, Fangxia Zhongguan is densely covered with trees, streams flow underneath, only a dark green can be seen, and the road is at the bottom of the valley.

古文：又东半里，内坞复开，中环为田，而水流其间。
现代文：又往东半里，山内山坞重又开阔起来，环绕着坞中垦为农田，而水流在田间流淌。
English: Another half-mile to the east, the mountain dock is heavy and open, surrounded by farmland in the middle of the dock, and the water flows in the fields.

古文：路循山南转，半里，入竹树间，有一家倚山隈ｗēｉ弯曲处结庐，下瞰壑中平畴而栖，余以为非登山道矣。
现代文：路顺着山势往南转，半里，步入竹丛树林之间，有一家人靠着山弯建了房屋，下瞰着壑谷中平坦的田野居住，我以为这不是登山的路了。
English: The road turned south along the mountain range. Half a mile into the bamboo thicket, a family built a house against the mountainside and lived overlooking the flat fields in the valley. I thought this was no longer a mountaineering road.

古文：忽一人出，呼余由其前，稍转而东，且导余东南登岭，乃下耕坞中去。
现代文：忽然间有一人出门来，呼唤我到他屋前，稍稍转向东，并且引导我往东南登岭，这才下到坞中耕地去了。
English: Suddenly a man came out of the house, called me to his house, turned slightly to the east, and led me to the southeast of Dengling, and then went down to the dock in the middle of the farmland.

古文：及余跻半里，复西入樵径，其人自坞中更高呼 稍东 ，遂得正道。
现代文：待我上登了半里时，又向西走上了打柴的小径，那个人从坞中又高声呼叫 稍偏东一点 ，终于找到了正道。
English: When I had climbed half a mile, I walked west on the firewood path, and the man shouted from the dock, "A little to the east," and finally found the right path.

古文：其处四山回合，东北皆石山突兀，而余所登西南土山，则松阴寂历，松无挺拔之势，而偃仆盘曲，虽小亦然。
现代文：此处四面群山合拢围绕着，东北面都是突兀的石山，则我所登的西南面的土山，却松荫寂静。松树没有挺拔的气势，却树干堰仆，盘绕屈曲，虽小树也这样。
English: Here the mountains close in on all sides and surround me. To the northeast are rugged rocky mountains, while the earthen hills to the southwest, which I climbed, are shaded by pine trees. The pine trees do not have the strength to stand up, but their trunks are bent and twisted, even though they are small.

古文：遂藉松阴，以手掬所携饭抟而食，觉食淡之味更长也。
现代文：于是借着松树树荫，用手捧着随身带来的饭，团成饭团子吃，觉得吃淡饭更有滋味。
English: So I used the shade of the pine trees to hold the rice I had brought with me in my hands and eat it in a ball, feeling that it was more delicious to eat light rice.

古文：既而循坡南上者半里，又入峡西上者一里，又南逾坳脊间半里。
现代文：随即顺着山坡往南上走半里，又进峡向西上走一里，又往南翻越在山坳山脊间半里。
English: He then walked half a mile southwards along the mountain slope, another mile westwards into the gorge, and another half a mile southwards between the ridges of the hawthorn.

古文：其坳两旁石峰，东西涌起，而坳中则下陷成井，灌木丛翳其间，杳不可窥。
现代文：这个山坳两旁的石峰，在东西两面耸起，但山坳中却下陷成深井，灌木成丛密蔽其间，杳然不可窥测。
English: The stone peaks on both sides of this ridge rise up on the east and west sides, but in the ridge they sink into deep wells, densely covered with bushes, seemingly impenetrable.

古文：已循东峰之南，又转而东南，盘岭半里，其两旁石峰，又南北涌起，而峡中又下陷成洼。
现代文：不久沿着东峰的南侧，又转向东南，盘绕在岭上半里，山岭两旁的石峰，又在南北两面耸起，而峡中又下陷成洼地。
English: Soon, along the south side of the east peak, it turned to the southeast, winding around the upper half of the ridge. The stone peaks on both sides of the ridge rose up on the north and south sides, while the middle of the gorge sank into a depression.

古文：又稍转东北，路成两岐，一由北逾峡，一由东上峰。
现代文：又稍稍转向东北，路分成两条岔道，一条由北边穿过山峡，一条由东面上登山峰。
English: After a slight turn to the northeast, the road splits into two side roads, one going through a canyon from the north, and one going through a mountain peak from the east.

古文：余不知所从，乃从东向而上者，其两旁石峰，复南北涌起。
现代文：我不知从哪里走，只好从向东而上的那条路走，路两旁的石峰，又一次在南北两面耸起。
English: I didn't know where to go, so I had to take the road that went up to the east. The stone peaks on both sides of the road rose up again on the north and south sides.

古文：半里陟其间，渐南转，又半里，南向跻其坳，则两旁石峰，又东西涌起。
现代文：半里路都跋涉在山峰之间，渐渐向南转，又走半里，向南登上山坳，就见两旁的石峰，又在东西两面耸起。
English: I trudged half a mile between the peaks, gradually turned south, walked another half mile, climbed the ridge to the south, and saw the stone peaks on both sides, and rose on both sides of the east and west.

古文：越脊南，始见西南一峰特耸，形如天柱，而有殿宇冠其上。
现代文：越到山脊南面，这才见到西南方一座山峰独自耸立，形状如同擎天柱，可峰顶上有殿宇。
English: Further south on the ridge, I saw a solitary peak in the south-west, shaped like a crescent, but with a temple on top.

古文：乃西南下洼间，半里，复南上冈脊。
现代文：于是向西南下到洼地间，半里，再往南登上冈脊。
English: So I went southwest to the depression, half a mile, and then south to the ridge.

古文：回望所越之脊，有小洞一规，其门南向；其西有石峰如展旗，其东冈之上，复起乱峰如涌髻，而南冈则环脊而西，遂矗然起丹霞之柱焉；其中回洼下陷，底平如镜，已展土为田，第无滴水，不堪插莳。
现代文：回头望翻越过的山脊，有个圆圆的小洞，洞口向南；脊西有石峰如迎风招展的族旗，它东边的山冈之上，又耸起乱峰，如高盘的发髻，而南面的山冈则山脊环绕着往西而去，于是巍然耸起柱子般的丹霞山；其中下陷成环形的洼地，底部平展如镜，已经翻土成田，但只是没有一滴水，木能插秧。
English: Looking back over the ridge, there is a round small hole, the mouth of the hole to the south; west of the ridge, there are stone peaks like the national flag waving in the wind. On top of the mountains on the east, there are turbulent peaks, such as the hairpin of the high plate, while the mountains on the south are surrounded by the ridge to the west, so the pillar-like Danxia Mountain suddenly rises; in which there is a ring-shaped depression, the bottom is flat like a mirror, it has been overturned into Narita, but there is not a drop of water, wood can be inserted.

古文：由冈西向跻级登峰，级缘峰西石崖，其上甚峻；已而崖间悬树密荫，无复西日之烁。
现代文：由冈头向西沿石阶登峰，石阶沿着峰西侧的石崖走，上去的路非常陡峻；不久崖壁间悬垂着的密树荫蔽，不再有西下烈日照射的灼热了。
English: From the top of the hill to the west along the stone steps to climb the peak, the stone steps go along the cliff on the west side of the peak, the way up is very steep; soon the dense trees hanging between the cliff walls are shaded, and there is no longer the scorching heat of the setting sun.

古文：直跻半里，始及山门。
现代文：一直上登半里，这才来到山门。
English: I had been climbing for half a mile when I came to the mountain gate.

古文：其门西北向，而四周笼罩山顶。
现代文：寺门朝向西北方，而四周笼罩在山顶之上。
English: The temple gate faces northwest and is surrounded by the top of the mountain.

古文：时僧方种豆垄坂间，门闭莫入。
现代文：此时僧人正在山坡上的土垄间种豆，大门关着无法进去。
English: At this time, the monks were planting beans between the ridges on the hillside. The gate was closed and they couldn't get in.

古文：久之，一徒自下至，号照尘。启门入余，遂以香积供。
现代文：很久之后，一个徒弟自下面到来，开门让我进去，便拿出寺中的饭食供作晚餐。
English: After a long time, a disciple came from below, opened the door for me to enter, and took out the food from the temple to make dinner.

古文：既而其师影修至，遂憩余阁中，而饮以茶蔬。
现代文：不久他的师傅影修到来了，就让我在阁中歇息，并拿来茶水蔬果给我饮用。
English: Soon his master, Ying Xiu, arrived. He let me rest in the pavilion and brought me tea, water, fruits and vegetables to drink.

古文：影修又不昧之徒也，时不昧募缘安南，影修留余久驻，且言其师在，必不容余去，以余乃其师之同乡也。
现代文：影修又是不昧的徒弟了，当时不昧到安南卫去化缘，影修挽留我多住些时间，并且说，如果他师傅在，必定不会容许我离开，因为我是他师傅的同乡。
English: At that time, I had no choice but to go to Annanwei to make up for lost time. The cameraman asked me to stay a little longer, and said that if his master was there, he would not allow me to leave, because I was his master's fellow countryman.

古文：余谢其意，许为暂留一日。
现代文：我谢过他的好意，答应为此暂留一天。
English: I thanked him for his kindness and agreed to stay for a day.

古文：初二日甚晴霁。
现代文：初二日十分晴朗。
English: The first two days will be very sunny.

古文：余徙倚四面，凭窗远眺，与影修相指点。
现代文：我不时徘徊在楼阁的四面，凭窗远眺，与影修互相指点景色。
English: From time to time, I wandered around the four sides of the mansion, looking out the window, and pointing out the scenery to the cinematographer.

古文：其北近山稍伏，其下为赵官屯，渐远为普安城，极远而一峰危突者，八纳也。
现代文：山北边近处的山微微起伏，山下是赵官屯，渐渐远去是普安城，极远处有一座山峰高高突起的地方，是八纳山。
English: The mountains near the northern edge of the mountain are slightly undulating. At the bottom of the mountain is Zhaoguantun, gradually moving away is Pu'an City, and in the far distance there is a mountain peak, Mount Bayana.

古文：相去已百里。其南稍下，而横脊拥其后，为山岚洞；极远而遥峰隐隔者，乐民所之南，与亦佐县为界者也。
现代文：山南面稍下去，有一道横向的山脊围在它后边，那是山岚洞；极远处有山峰隐约出现，是乐民所的南边，是与亦佐县交界之处。
English: Slightly down the southern face of the mountain, there is a transverse ridge behind it, which is the hawthorn cave; in the far distance, there are peaks looming, which is the southern edge of the music center, and is the junction with Isasa County.

古文：其西坠峡而下，为大水塘，坞中自南而北，山岚洞之水，北出南板桥者也，隔溪则巨峰排列，亦自南而北，所谓睡寺山矣；山西即亦资孔大道，而岭障不可见。
现代文：山西面深坠入峡中去的，是大水塘，坞中自南往北的，是山岚洞之水，往北流到南板桥的溪流；隔着溪流就有巨大的山峰排列，也是自南往北，就是所谓的睡寺山了；山西边就是通往亦资孔的大道，可被山岭拦住了不能看见。
English: The western side of the mountain plunged into the gorge is the large reservoir. The water in the dock from the south to the north is the water of the hawthorn cave, and flows north to the stream of Nanbanqiao. Across the stream there are huge peaks, also from the south to the north, which are the so-called sleeping temple mountains. The western side of the mountain is the road to Yizhikong, which can be stopped by the mountains and cannot be seen.

古文：其东仅为度脊，上堆盘髻之峰；稍远则骈岫丛沓，迤逦东北去，为免场营方顶山之脉者也。
现代文：山东面仅是延伸而过的山脊，脊上堆着一座似盘状发髻的山峰；稍远处就是并列的山峦重重叠叠，透邀向东而去，是兔场营方顶山的山脉了。
English: The eastern side of the mountain is just a ridge that stretches past, with a mountain peak that looks like a disk-shaped bun piled on the ridge; a little further away are the mountains of the parallel mountain ridges that overlap and invite you to go east, which are the mountains at the top of the rabbit camp.

古文：山东南为归顺土司。
现代文：山东南方是归顺土司。
English: To the south of Shandong is the land of Guishun.

古文：初三日饭后辞影修。
现代文：越过它的东南，是新、安二所和黄草坝各地，与洒城奸交界。
English: To the south-east, across it, is Xin, An Er and Huang Cao Ba, all over the country, at the junction with Spry City.

古文：影修送余以茶酱，粤西无酱。
现代文：这一天我在楼阁中起草笔记。
English: On this day, I was drafting notes in the pavilion.

古文：贵州间有之而甚贵，以盐少故。而是山始有酱食。
现代文：影修多次摆设了茶点等候着，拿来鸡萝菌、蔚浆花和黄莲头供餐，都是山菜中有风味的。
English: Ying Xiu has set up refreshments several times and is waiting for them. He serves them with dill mushroom, yakitori and yellow lotus root, all of which have a mountain vegetable flavor.

古文：遂下山。十里，北过赵官屯，十里，东北过南板桥，七里，抵普安演武场。
现代文：初三日饭后辞别了影修，影修拿茶酱送给我。于是下山，十里，往北路过赵官屯，十里，向东北过了南板桥，七里，到达普安卫的演武场。
English: On the third day of the first month, after dinner, I said goodbye to Ying Xiu, and Ying Xiu gave me some tea sauce. So I went down the mountain, ten miles, north to Zhaoguantun, ten miles, northeast to Nanbanqiao, seven miles, and arrived at Pu'anwei's martial arts arena.

古文：由其西横岭西度，一里，望三一溪北来，有崖当其南，知洞在是矣。
现代文：由演武场西边往西横越山岭，一里，望见三一溪由北流来，有山崖位于溪南，心知洞在这里了。
English: From the west side of the martial arts arena to the west across the mountains, one mile, we can see the Trinity Creek flowing from the north, there is a cliff in the south of Xi'an, and we know that the cave is here.

古文：遂下，则洞门北向迎溪，前有巨石坊，题 碧云洞天 ，始知是洞之名碧云也。
现代文：于是走下去，就见洞口向北迎着溪流，洞前有座巨大的石牌坊，题着 碧云洞天 ，这才知道此洞的名字叫碧云了。
English: So I walked down and saw the mouth of the cave facing the stream to the north. In front of the cave, there was a huge stone archway with the inscription "Biyun Cave Heaven." That's when I knew the name of this cave was "Biyun."

古文：土人以此为水洞，以其上有佛者为干洞。
现代文：有一块巨石立在洞口中央，把洞口一分为二，路由东面一侧下去，水由西边一侧流进去。
English: There is a boulder in the middle of the mouth of the cave. It divides the mouth of the cave in two, with water flowing down the eastern side and water flowing in from the western side.

古文：洞前一巨石界立门中，门分为二，路由东下，水由西入。
现代文：进到洞中，却空荡荡没有阻隔，水顺洞的西侧流，路沿洞的东侧走，分道趋向同一方向，向南走十多丈，渐渐昏黑下来。
English: When I entered the cave, it was empty and there was no barrier. The water flowed along the west side of the cave, the road went along the east side of the cave, and the separate roads tended to go in the same direction. I walked more than ten meters to the south, and it gradually became dark.

古文：入洞之中，则扩然无间，水循洞西，路循洞东，分道同趋，南向十余丈，渐昏黑矣。
现代文：忽然转向东，水顺着洞的北侧流，路沿着洞的南侧走，洞的东面竟然弯隆而起十分宽阔，遥望洞内，光影陆离，波涛之声沸腾，但行走之处仍然是暗暗的。
English: Suddenly, he turned to the east. The water flowed along the north side of the cave, and the road ran along the south side of the cave. The east side of the cave was very wide. Looking into the cave from a distance, the light and shadow were different, and the sound of the waves was boiling, but the place where he walked was still dark.

古文：忽转而东，水循洞北，路循洞南，其东遂穹然大辟，遥望其内，光影陆离，波响腾沸，而行处犹暗暗也。盖其洞可入处已分三层，其外入之门为一层，则明而较低；其内辟之奥为一层，则明而弥峻；当内外转接处为一层，则暗而中坼，稍束如门，高穹如桥，耸豁不如内层，低垂不如外层，而独界其中，内外回眺，双明炯然。
现代文：大体上此洞从可以进入之处已分为三层：那由外面进来的洞口为一层，明亮却较低矮；洞内空阔的深处为一层，明亮而且愈加高大；在内外转接之处为一层，黑暗而且中间裂开，略略束紧如像门洞，高高隆起好似桥洞，高耸开阔之处不如内层，低矮下垂不如外层，但独自隔在其中，从内外两层回头眺望，两头望去都光辉明亮。
English: In general, the cave has been divided into three layers from the point of entry: the entrance to the cave from the outside is one layer, bright but low; the hollow depth inside the cave is one layer, bright and getting higher; the inside and outside junction is one layer, dark and cracked in the middle, slightly tight like a door hole, high and high like a bridge hole, high and open is not as good as the inner layer, low and sagging is not as good as the outer layer, but it is separated by itself, looking back from the inside and outside two layers, both ends are bright and bright.

古文：然从暗中仰瞩其顶，又有一圆穴上透，其上亦光明开辟，若楼阁中函，恨无由腾空而上也。
现代文：然而从黑暗中抬头注视洞顶，又有一个圆圆的洞穴通往上面，那上边也很光明开阔，如像是楼阁包藏在其中，恨不能腾空而上了。
English: However, looking up from the darkness to the top of the cave, there is another round cave leading to the top, which is also very bright and open, as if it were a castle hidden in it, eager to be able to take off.

古文：东行暗中者五六丈而出，则堂户宏崇，若阿房、未央，四围既拓，而峻发弥甚；水从东南隅下捣奥穴而去，光从西北隅上透空明而入；其内突水之石，皆如踞狮泛凫，附壁之崖，俱作垂旂ｑí旗矗柱。
现代文：向东在黑暗中行走了五六丈便出来，就见厅堂门户宏伟高大，好像阿房宫、未央宫，四周既已开阔，而高峻之处愈甚；水流从东南隅往下冲捣深穴而去，亮光从西北隅顶上透过明亮的虚空射入；洞内突出水面的岩石，都好像是盘踞着的雄狮、浮水的野鸭，附着在洞壁上的石崖，全如下垂的旗子、矗立的柱子的模样。
English: He walked eastward in the dark for five or six meters and came out to see the grand and tall entrance of the hall, like the Afang Palace and the Weiyang Palace. The surroundings were already open, and the higher the place, the deeper the hole. The water flowed down from the southeast corner, and the light came from the top of the northwest corner through the bright void. The rocks protruding from the water surface in the cave all looked like a male lion, a floating duck, and a cliff attached to the cave wall. They were all in the form of hanging flags and standing pillars.

古文：盖内奥之四隅，西南为转入之桥门，西北为上透之明穴，东南为入水之深窍；而独东北回环迥邃，深处亦有穴高悬，其前有眢窟下坠，黑暗莫窥其底，其上有侧石环之，若井栏然，岂造物者恐人暗中失足耶？
现代文：大略洞内深处的四个角落，西南方是转进来的桥洞，西北面是上透亮光的洞穴，东南边是水流进去的深穴；而唯独东北方回环深邃，深处也有洞穴高悬着，它前边有个干枯的窟窿深陷下去，黑暗得不能窥见洞底，窟窿上面有侧立的岩石环绕着它，好像井栏一样，难道是造物主担心人在黑暗中失足跌下去吗？
English: In the four corners of the depth of the large cave, the southwest is the bridge cave into which the crane turned, the northwest is the upper translucent light cave, and the southeast is the deep hole into which the water flows; but only the northeast loop is deep, and there are also caves hanging high in the depths. In front of it, there is a dry cave that sinks deep. It is too dark to see the bottom of the cave. There are sideways rocks above the cave surrounding it, like a well fence. Is it the Creator who is afraid that people will lose their footing and fall down in the dark?

古文：由窟左循崖而南，有一石脊，自洞顶附壁直垂而下，痕隆起壁间者仅五六寸，而鳞甲宛然，或巨或细，是为悬龙脊，俨有神物浮动之势。
现代文：由窟窿左边沿着石崖往南走，有一条石脊，自洞顶顺着洞壁一直垂下来，那条石痕在壁上隆起之处仅有五六寸，可鳞甲宛然，有的巨大有的细小，这就是悬龙脊，俨然有神龙浮动的气势。
English: Walking south from the left side of the grotto along the cliff, there is a stone ridge that hangs down from the top of the cave along the cave wall. The stone scar on the wall is only five or six inches high, but it looks like a scale, some are huge and some are small. This is the hanging dragon ridge, which seems to have the momentum of a divine dragon floating.

古文：其下西临流侧，石畦每每，是为十八龙田。
现代文：它的下方西面临水处的侧边，农田状的岩石一片片，这是十八龙田。
English: Below it, on the west side facing the water, there is a farmland-like rock patch, which is the Eighteen Dragon Fields.

古文：由窟右循崖而东，有一石痕，亦自洞顶附壁直垂而下，细纹薄影，是为蛇退皮，果若遗蜕粘附之形。
现代文：由窟窿右边沿着石崖往东走，有一条石痕，也是自洞顺着洞壁一直垂下来，鳞纹细小，身影薄薄的，这是蛇蜕皮，果然好似蟒蛇蜕皮后粘附着的形态。
English: Walking from the right side of the cave along the cliff to the east, there is a stone trace, which also hangs down from the cave along the wall of the cave. The scales are small and the figure is thin. This is snake skin, and it is indeed similar to the shape of the python's skin.

古文：其西攀隙而上，则明窗所悬也。
现代文：从它西边攀着裂缝上登，就到了明亮的天窗高悬之处。
English: Climbing up through a crack on its western side, you reach a place where a bright skylight hangs high.

古文：其窗高悬二十丈，峻壁峭立，而多侧痕错锷。
现代文：那天窗高悬在二十丈高的地方，高峻的洞壁峭立，但侧面有很多锋刃状的石痕错落其间。
English: On that day, the window hung high in a place twenty feet high, the steep cave wall stood high, but there were many sharp-edged stone marks on the side.

古文：缘之上跻，则其门扩然，亦北向而出，纵横各三丈余，外临危坡，上倚峭壁，即在水洞之东，但上下悬绝耳。
现代文：沿着这些石痕上登，就见那洞口宽阔，也是向北出去，纵横各有三丈多，外面下临险坡，上面紧依峭壁，就在水洞的东边，只是上下高悬路绝罢了。
English: Climbing up along these stone marks, you can see the wide mouth of the cave, which also goes to the north, with more than three vertical and horizontal sides, with a dangerous slope outside and a cliff above, just to the east of the water cave, but only a high overhanging road.

古文：门内正对矗立之柱，柱之西南，即桥门中透之上层也。
现代文：洞口内正对着矗立的石柱，石柱的西南，就是桥洞中通的上层了。
English: The mouth of the cave is directly opposite the standing stone pillar, and the southwest of the stone pillar is the upper level of the middle passage of the bridge cave.

古文：余既跻明窗，旋下观悬龙、蛇蜕，仍由蛩下出，饭于洞门石上。
现代文：我登上明亮的天窗后，随即下去观览了悬龙脊和蛇蜕皮，仍由拱桥下出来，在洞口的石板上吃饭。
English: After climbing up to the bright skylight, I went down to see the hanging dragon's ridge and snakeskin, and still came out from under the arched bridge to eat on the stone plate at the mouth of the cave.

古文：石乃所镌诗碑，游人取以为台，以供饮馔。
现代文：石板是镌刻着诗文的石碑，游人用来作桌子，以便陈放酒食。
English: The stone slab is a stone monument engraved with poetry, and is used by visitors as a table to serve food and drink.

古文：其诗乃张涣、沈思充者，诗不甚佳，而涣字极遒ｑｉú强劲活可爱。
现代文：碑上的诗是张涣、沈思充所题，诗不怎么好，不过张涣的字写得极为遒劲活泼可爱。
English: The poem on the monument is the subject of Zhang Xi, Shen Si Cheng, the poem is not very good, but Zhang Xi's writing is extremely lively and lovely.

古文：镌碑欲垂久远，而为供饮之具，将磨漶不保矣，亟出纸笔录之。
现代文：刻碑是想要流传久远，却用来作为供饮酒的器具，将要磨损漫愿保不住了，急忙拿出纸笔抄录了诗文。
English: The engraved monument was intended to be passed down for a long time, but it was used as a drinking utensil. It was about to wear out and I couldn't keep it, so I hurriedly took out a pen and paper and copied the poem.

古文：仍入内洞，欲一登蛩桥上层，而崖壁悬峭，三上三却。
现代文：仍旧进入内洞，想要登到上层的拱桥上去一次，可崖壁悬峻陡峭，三度上登三次退下来。
English: Still entering the inner cave, I tried to climb up to the upper arch bridge once, but the cliff wall was steep and steep. I climbed up three times and retreated three times.

古文：再后，仍登明窗东南，援矗柱之腋，透出柱南，平视蛩桥之背，甚坦而近，但悬壁无痕，上下俱绝攀践，咫尺难度。
现代文：再后来，仍登到明亮天窗的东南方，攀援到矗立石柱的侧面，钻到石柱南边，在水平方向上看见拱桥的背部，十分平坦而且很近，但高悬的石壁上没有石痕，上上下下都绝无攀附践踏之处，咫尺之间难以飞度。
English: Later, I still climbed to the southeast of the bright skylight, climbed to the side of the standing stone pillar, drilled to the south of the stone pillar, and saw the back of the arch bridge in the horizontal direction. It was very flat and very close, but there were no stone marks on the high-hanging stone wall. There was no climbing and trampling on the top and bottom, and it was difficult to fly between the feet.

古文：于是复下而出洞。
现代文：于是又下来出洞。
English: So he went down again and came out of the hole.

古文：日已下舂，因解衣浴洞口溪石间。
现代文：已是日落之时，于是脱了衣服在洞口的溪石之间沐浴。
English: It was already sunset, so he took off his clothes and bathed between the rocks at the mouth of the cave.

古文：半截夙垢，以胜流浣濯之，甚快也！
现代文：半年来的积垢，用清澈的溪流来洗涤净，十分痛快呀！
English: The accumulated dirt from the past half year is washed clean with a clear stream. It's very pleasant!

古文：既而拂拭登途，忽闻崖上歌笑声，疑洞中何忽有人，回瞩之，乃明窗外东崖峭绝处，似有人影冉冉。
现代文：不久擦拭干净上路，忽然听到山崖上有欢歌笑语之声，疑惑洞中怎么突然有了人，回头注视洞中，原来是那明亮天窗外东面山崖上的悬崖绝壁处，似乎有人影影绰绰。
English: After a while, I wiped the road clean, suddenly heard the sound of singing and laughing on the cliff, wondered how there was suddenly a person in the cave, and looked back at the cave, which turned out to be the cliff cliff on the eastern cliff outside the bright skylight. It seemed that someone was there.

古文：余曰： 此山灵招我，不可失也。 
现代文：我说： 这是山中神灵在招唤我，不可失去机会。 
English: I said: This is the spirit of the mountain calling me, I must not lose the opportunity.

古文：先是，余闻水洞之上有梵龛，及至，索之无有。
现代文：这以前，我听说水洞之上有佛完，到来之时，四处搜寻佛完又没有。
English: Earlier, I had heard that there was a Buddha statue on top of the cave, but when I arrived, there was no Buddha statue to be found.

古文：从明窗外东眺，层崖危耸，心异之，亦不见有攀缘之迹。
现代文：从明亮天窗外向东眺望，层层山崖高耸，对此心里面很奇怪，也不见有可攀缘的痕迹。
English: Looking from the bright skylight to the east, the mountains and cliffs are towering, which is very strange in my heart, and there is no trace of climbing.

古文：及出水洞觅路，旁有小径，隐现伏草间，又似上跻明窗者，以为此间乃断崖绝磴耳，不意闻声发閟，亟回杖上跻。
现代文：到出了水洞找路时，旁边有小径，隐约出现在倒伏的草丛间，又似乎是上登明亮天窗的路，以为这里是悬崖石瞪断绝了，意想不到能听见人声。
English: When looking for a way out of the water hole, there are paths next to it, looming among the fallen grass, and it seems to be the way to climb the bright skylight. I thought it was a cliff stone, and unexpectedly I could hear human voices.

古文：始向明窗之下，旋转而东，拾级数十层，复跻危崖之根，则裂窍成门。
现代文：发现了这个隐秘的去处，连忙掉转手杖上登。开始时向着明亮天窗之下走，随即转向东，沿台阶上了数十层，再次登到危崖的根部，就见洞穴裂成门。
English: Having discovered this secret place, I hurriedly turned my cane and climbed up. At the beginning, I walked under the bright skylight, then turned to the east, climbed dozens of steps, climbed to the base of the cliff again, and saw the cave split into a door.

古文：其门亦北向，内高二丈余，深亦如之；左有旁穴前透，多裂隙垂棂，僧以石窒之为室；右有峭峡后坼，上颇氤氲盘结，而峻不可登。
现代文：洞口也是向北，里面高二丈多，深处也如此；左边有旁洞通到前方，有很多裂缝和下垂的窗棍状的石片，僧人用石块把它堵塞起来作为屋子；右边有陡峭的峡谷在后面裂开，顶上盘绕着氮氯的烟气，可太陡峻不能登上去。
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the north, inside it is much higher and deeper; on the left there is a side cave leading to the front, there are many cracks and sagging window stick-shaped pieces of stone, the monks use stones to block it as a house; on the right there is a steep canyon cracking in the back, the top is coiled with nitrogen and chlorine fumes, but it is too steep to climb.

古文：洞中有金仙三像，一僧栖其间，故游者携樽酹就酌于此。
现代文：洞中有如来佛的三尊塑像，一个和尚住在洞中，先前见到的那些游人带着酒蹲在此处饮酒。
English: There are three statues of Buddha in the cave, a monk lives in the cave, and the previously seen tourists squat here with wine to drink.

古文：非其声，余将芒芒返城，不复知水洞之外，复有此洞矣。
现代文：不是他们的声音，我将茫茫然返回城里，不再会知道水洞之外，还有此洞了。
English: If it wasn't for their voices, I would have returned to the city in a daze, no longer aware of this cave beyond the water.

古文：酌者仆从甚都漂亮，想必王翰林子弟，余远眺而过之。
现代文：饮酒人的随从仆人都十分漂亮，想必是王翰林的子弟，我远远望到他们便走过去了。
English: The attendant servants of the drinker were all very beautiful, presumably the sons of Wang Hanlin, and I walked past them when I saw them from a distance.

古文：下山，循溪溯流二里，有大道，即南门桥。
现代文：下山后，沿着溪水逆流走二里，有大道，就是南门桥。
English: After descending the mountain, walk two miles along the stream against the current. There is an avenue, which is the South Gate Bridge.

古文：遂从南门入，蹑山坡北行。
现代文：于是从南门入城，踏着山坡往北行。
English: So I entered the city from the south gate and walked up the hill to the north.

古文：城中荒敝甚，茅舍离离散乱，不复成行；东下为州署，门廨无一完者。
现代文：城中十分荒凉破旧，茅屋散乱，不再成行；往东下去是州衙门，门庭官衙无一完好之处。
English: The city is very desolate and dilapidated, the huts are scattered, and no one goes there anymore; to the east is the state gate, and there is no perfect place for the gatekeeper.

古文：皆安酋叛时，城破鞠为丘莽，至今未复也。
现代文：这都是安邦彦贼首叛乱时，城被攻破，长成荒丘丛莽，至今未能恢复的缘故。
English: This is all due to the fact that the city was breached and grew into a heap of barren hills when An Bangyan led the rebellion, and has not been restored to this day.

古文：出北门，还抵逆旅。
现代文：出了北门，回到旅店。
English: I left the north gate and returned to the hotel.

古文：是晚觅夫不得，遂卧。
现代文：这天晚上未能找到脚夫，便睡了。
English: That night, unable to find a porter, he fell asleep.

古文：按君是早返辕矣。
现代文：初四日找不到脚夫，在旅店中等候。
English: I couldn't find a porter on the first four days, so I waited at the hotel.

古文：初四日觅夫不得，候于逆旅。稍散步北寺，惟有空楼层阁，而寂无人焉，乃构而未就者。还，闷闷而卧。
现代文：到北寺中去稍微散散步，唯有空楼层阁，寂静无人，这是尚未建成的寺院。回来，心情闷闷地躺下。
English: I went for a short walk to the North Temple, only to find it empty, silent and deserted. It was a temple that had not yet been built. I came back and lay down in a depressed mood.

古文：初五日仍不得夫。
现代文：初五日仍然找不到脚夫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I still couldn't find a porter.

古文：平明微雨，既止，而云油然四布。
现代文：天明时下起小雨，雨停之后，浓云四布。
English: At first light, light rain fell. After the rain stopped, thick clouds formed.

古文：是日为端午，市多鬻蒲艾者。
现代文：这天是端午节，市场上卖营蒲艾叶的人很多。
English: This day is the Dragon Boat Festival, and there are many people selling camphor leaves in the market.

古文：雄黄为此中所出，然亦不见巨块。
现代文：雄黄是这一带出产的东西，然而也不见有大块的。
English: This is the stuff of which this area is made, but there are no big ones here.

古文：市有肉而无鱼。
现代文：集市中有肉却无鱼。
English: There is meat in the market but no fish.

古文：余兀坐逆旅，囊中钱尽，不能沽浊醪愁，回想昔年雉山之乐，已分霄壤。
现代文：我端坐在旅店中，口袋中的钱完了，不能买浊酒解愁，回想起去年在雏山时的欢乐，已是天地之别。
English: I am sitting in the hotel, the money in my pocket has run out, I can't buy gin to relieve my sorrows, I recall the joy of last year in the foothills, it is a world apart.

古文：初六日夜雨达旦。
现代文：初六日夜间下雨通宵达旦。
English: On the night of the sixth day of the first month, it rained all night long.

古文：夫仍不得。
现代文：脚夫仍然找不到。
English: I still can't find a porter.

古文：既午，遇金重甫者，麻城人也，贾而儒，索观余诸公手卷。为余遍觅夫，竟无至者。
现代文：中午之后，遇上了金重甫，他是麻城人，既是商人又是读书人，索取我带着的诸公的书画手卷观赏，替我四处寻找脚夫，竟然没有愿来的人。
English: After noon, I met Jin Shoufu, a resident of Macheng, who is both a businessman and a reader. He asked to see the scroll of Zhu Gong's calligraphy and painting that I was carrying, and searched for porters for me, but no one was willing to come.

古文：初七日囊钱日罄，而夫不可得，日复一日，不免闷闷，是早，金重甫言将往荆州，余作书寄式围叔。
现代文：初七日袋中钱一天天告罄，可脚夫找不到，日复一日，不免闷闷不乐。这天早上，金重甫讲到将要前往荆州，我写了封信寄给式围叔。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, the money in my bag ran out day after day, but I couldn't find a porter. Day after day, I couldn't help but feel depressed. That morning, when Jin Chongfu said that he was going to Jingzhou, I wrote a letter to Uncle Shihai.

古文：下午，彼以酒资奉，虽甚鲜而意自可歆欣喜。
现代文：下午，他拿了些酒钱来奉送，虽然很少，但心里自然感到很欣喜。
English: In the afternoon, he gave me some money for alcohol. Although it was very little, I was naturally very happy.

古文：初八日候夫虽有至者，而恶主代为掯ｋèｎ索价刁难价，力阻以去。
现代文：初八日坐等脚夫。虽然有来的人，但是可恶的店主代为抬价刁难，竭力阻挠以致离开了。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I sat and waited for the porter. Although there were people who came, the odious shop owner tried his best to obstruct them in order to raise the price, so I left.

古文：下午得骑，亦重价定之，无可奈何也。
现代文：下午找到了坐骑，也是重金议定的，无可奈何呀！
English: In the afternoon, I found a mount, which was also agreed for a large sum of money. I couldn't help it!

古文：余所遇恶人，如衡阳劫盗，狗场拐徒，并此寓窃钱去者，共三番矣。
现代文：我所遇到的坏人，如衡阳抢劫的强盗，狗场堡拐骗的歹徒，加上此处寓所中把钱偷去的人，一共是三次了。
English: The bad guys I have encountered, such as the robber who robbed Hengyang, the gangster who abducted and swindled the kennel castle, and the person who stole money from this apartment, are a total of three times.

古文：此寓所窃，初疑为骑夫，后乃知为符主也。
现代文：在此寓所偷窃的人，起初怀疑是马夫，后来才知道是符店主。
English: The person who stole from the apartment was initially suspected to be a groom, but was later revealed to be the owner of a shop.

古文：人之无良如此！
现代文：人没有天良竟然如此！
English: People have no idea how lucky they are!

古文：夫劫盗、拐徒无论，如南宁梁冲宇、宝檀僧，并此人，俱有害人之心。
现代文：抢劫的强盗、拐骗的歹徒暂且不论，如像南宁的梁仲宇、宝檀和尚，加上此人，全都有害人之心。
English: For the time being, regardless of the robbers who rob and the gangsters who kidnap and swindle, such as Nanning's Liang Zhongyu, Baodan Monk, and this person, all have a harmful heart.

古文：余以万里一身，脱其虎口，亦幸矣！
现代文：我以在万里之外的孑然一身，能逃脱他的虎口，也是万幸了！
English: I thought I was all alone, thousands of miles away, and was lucky to escape his clutches!

古文：初九日平明，以行李付骑，别金重甫乃行。
现代文：初九日黎明，把行李交付给马夫，告别金重甫便动身了。
English: At dawn on the 9th day of the first month, the luggage was handed over to the stableman, and Jin Shoufu departed.

古文：是早，云气浓郁。
现代文：这天早上，云气浓郁。
English: On this morning, the clouds were thick.

古文：从普安北门外第一溪桥北，循西峡入，过税司前，渐转西南，皆溯小溪西岸行。
现代文：从普安城北门外溪流上第一座桥的北面，沿着西面的山峡进去，路过税司门前，渐渐转向西南，都是在小溪西岸逆水行走。
English: From the north side of the first bridge over the stream outside the north gate of Pu'an City, along the mountain gorge in the west, passing in front of the taxation gate, and gradually turning to the southwest, they are all walking against the water on the west bank of the creek.

古文：西山崇隆，小瀑屡屡从山巅悬注。
现代文：西边的山高峻弯隆，小瀑布屡屡从山顶悬空下注。
English: The mountain on the west side is high and steep, with small waterfalls repeatedly hanging from the top of the mountain.

古文：南五里，始西南登坡，是为云南坡。
现代文：往南行五里，开始向西南登坡，这是云南坡。
English: Go south for five miles and start climbing the slope to the southwest. This is the Yunnan slope.

古文：初二里稍夷，又一里半甚峻，过一脊而西，复上坳，共一里，为马鞍岭。
现代文：起初的二里路稍微平缓些，又一里半＋分陡峻，越过一条山脊往西行，再登上山坳，共一里，是马鞍岭。
English: At first, the two-mile route was a little smoother, but after a mile and a half, it became steeper and steeper, crossing a ridge to the west, and then climbing up the ridge, a total of one mile, which is Ma'anling.

古文：越而西，遂循岭西向西南行，于是升降在岭头，盘折皆西南，俱不甚高深。
现代文：越到岭西，就沿着岭西向西南行，于是在岭头上上下下，曲曲折折都是向西南行，都不怎么高不怎么深。
English: When you get to the west of Lingxi, you go southwest along the west of Lingxi, so you go up and down on the ridge, and the twists and turns are all southwest, neither too high nor too deep.

古文：今才奉宪禁，并于一处，过无问者。又南越一坳，大雨淋漓。
现代文：五里，渐次降到坞中，是坳子哨。又向南越过一个山坳，忽然大雨傍沱，仍旧前行。
English: Five miles, gradually descending to the dock, is a pigeon post. I crossed a mountain ridge to the south, and suddenly it was raining heavily. I still went ahead.

古文：仍前，升降大峰之西，冒雨又十五里而至海子铺。
现代文：在一座大山峰的西面上上下下，冒雨又走了十五里才来到海子铺。
English: On the west face of a large mountain, I went up and down, braved the rain and walked another fifteen miles to get to Haizopu.

古文：山坞稍开，颇大，中有水塘，即所谓海子也。
现代文：山坞渐渐开阔起来，很大，坞中有水塘，就是所谓的海子了。
English: The dock gradually widened and became very large. There was a pond in the dock, the so-called "Haizi."

古文：有小城在其南，是为中火铺。
现代文：有座小城在水塘南边，这是中火铺。
English: There is a small town on the south side of the pond, this is the middle fire shop.

古文：普安二十二哨，俱于此并取哨钱，过者苦焉。
现代文：普安卫的二十二个哨所，都在此一并收取过哨所税费，过路的人痛苦不堪。
English: The 22 checkpoints of the Public Security Bureau have all collected the checkpoint taxes and fees at the same time, and the passers-by are in agony.

古文：先各哨分取，今并取于此。哨目止勒索驼马担夫，见余辈亦不甚阻挠，余乃入城，饭于肆。
现代文：哨所的头目只勒索马帮挑夫，见到我们这帮人也不怎么阻挠，我便进了城，在饭馆中吃了饭。
English: The head of the guard post only extorted horses to help the porters, and when he saw our group of people, he didn't do much to stop them, so I went into the city and ate in a restaurant.

古文：复出南门，南向登山。
现代文：再走出南门，向南登山。
English: Then go out of the south gate and climb southward.

古文：五里，遇驼马方牧于山坡，雨复大至，余乃先行。
现代文：五里，遇上马帮正在山坡上放牧，大雨再次来临，我便先走了。
English: After five miles, I came across a herd of horses grazing on the hillside. Heavy rain was coming again, so I left first.

古文：升降高下，俱依东大山而南，两旁多眢ｙｕāｎ干枯的井井坠坑，不辨水从何出。
现代文：上上下下，高高低低，都是靠着东面的大山往南行，两旁有许多枯井陷坑，分辨不出水从哪里流出去。
English: Up and down, high and low, everything is moving southward against the big mountain in the east. There are many dead wells and sinkholes on both sides, and it is impossible to tell where the water is flowing from.

古文：又五里为大河铺，有水自铺东平泻坡陀下，漫流峡中，路随之而南。
现代文：又走五里是大河铺，有水流自铺东平缓地泻到山坡下，四处漫溢流到峡中，路随着水流往南走。
English: Another five-mile walk is the big river shop, there is water flow from the shop east gently down the hillside, everywhere overflowing into the gorge, the road follows the water flow to the south.

古文：天乃大霁，忽云破峰露，见西南有山甚高，土人称为黑山。
现代文：这时天空大晴，忽然云破峰露，见到西南方有座山十分高，
English: At this time, the sky was very clear, suddenly the clouds broke the dew on the peaks, and I saw a very high mountain in the southwest.

古文：云气笼罩，时露一班，直上与天齐。
现代文：被云气笼罩着，此时露出一些，笔直上耸与天一般高。
English: Shrouded by clouds, this time revealing some, straight up and sky-high.

古文：望而趋五里，大河之水，已渐坠深堑，似从西北坼峡去。
现代文：望着此山赶了五里地，大河之水，已渐渐坠入深堑中去，似乎是从西北方裂开峡谷流去。
English: Looking at this mountain, the water of the river has gradually fallen into the depths, and it seems to be flowing from the northwest to split the canyon.

古文：路东南缘岭透峡东下，则山环坞合间，中洼为塘，水满其中，而四面皆高，不知出处。
现代文：路往东南沿着山岭穿过山峡向东下走，就见在群山环绕山坞合拢之间，中央下洼成水塘，水贮满塘中，但四面地势都高，不知水从何处流出去。
English: The road to the southeast along the mountains through the canyon to the east, you can see in the mountains surrounding the dock close, the central depression into a pond, water storage full of ponds, but the terrain is high on all sides, I do not know where the water flows out.

古文：又东透坳下，坞间又复洼而成塘，与前虽有高下，而潴水莫泄同之。
现代文：又往东穿过山坳下行，山坞间又再次下洼成水塘，与前边那个水塘虽有高低的区别，可积水无处外泄与前者相同。
English: It went eastward through the hawthorns, and between the docks, it sank again to form a pond. Although there is a difference in height from the previous pond, the water can leak out of the same place as the previous one.

古文：又东缘南峰而转，越其东，则东坞大开，深盘远错，千塍环壑于下。
现代文：又向东绕着南面的山峰转，绕到它的东边，就见东面的山坞十分开阔，盘绕到深处，在远方错落有致，千百块田滕环绕于下方的壑谷。
English: Then turn around the southern peak to the east, and go around it to the east, you will see the dock on the east is very open, winding to the depths, staggered in the distance, and thousands of rice paddies surround the valley below.

古文：度其地在丹霞山南、山岚洞西南，余谓壑底水即北透山岚者。
现代文：估计此地在丹霞山南边、山岚洞的西南，我认为壑底的水流就是往北穿流过山岚洞的河水。
English: I estimate that this place is on the south side of Mount Danxia, southwest of the hawthorn cave. I think that the water flow at the bottom of the ridge is the river water flowing north through the hawthorn cave.

古文：征之土人，云： 西峰下有入水洞，水坠穴去，不知所出。 
现代文：向当地人验证这个看法，回答说： 西峰下有个进水的洞，水坠入洞穴中流去，不知从何处流出。 
English: Verifying this opinion with the local people, he replied: There is a watering hole under the west peak. Water falls into the cave and flows away, and I don't know where it goes.

古文：从西峰稍下，共五里，是为何郎铺。
现代文：从西峰渐渐下走，共五里，这是何郎铺。
English: It's a five-mile walk down from the west peak. This is He Langpu.

古文：越铺南，又上岭，仍依东岭行，回望云笼高峰，已在西北，时出时没，兴云酿雨，皆其所为。虽山中雨候不齐，而众山若惟瞻其马首者。
现代文：越过铺南，又上岭，仍然靠着东岭走。回头望云雾笼罩的高峰，已在西北方，时出时没，兴云作雨，都是此峰酿成的，虽然山中降雨的气象条件不一致，可是群山就像对它唯命是从的样子。
English: Looking back, the mist-shrouded peak is already in the northwest, and the clouds come and go, and the clouds make rain, all of which are caused by this peak. Although the meteorological conditions of rainfall in the mountains are inconsistent, the mountains seem to be obedient to it.

古文：循东岭南下峡中，有溪自南而来，溯之行其东岸。
现代文：沿着东岭往南下到峡中，有溪水自南流来，溯流在溪水东岸行走。
English: Along the Dongling to the south to the middle of the gorge, there is a stream flowing from the south, tracing the east bank of the stream.

古文：共五里，路忽由水渡西岸，而暴雨涨流，深涌莫能越。
现代文：共行五里，路忽然由水中渡到西岸，可暴雨后水流高涨，水深浪涌不能越过去。
English: Five miles together, the road suddenly crosses from the water to the west coast, but after the rainstorm, the water flow is high, and the water surge cannot pass.

古文：方欲解衣赴之，忽东山之上有呼者，戒莫渡，招余东上岭行。
现代文：正打算脱衣赴水，忽然东山之上有人呼叫，告诉不要渡水，招唤我向东上岭走。
English: I was about to take off my clothes and go to the water, when suddenly someone shouted from the top of Dongshan, telling me not to cross the water and inviting me to walk to Dongjiaoling.

古文：余从之，遂从莽棘中上东岭。
现代文：我听从他的话，就从草莽荆棘中登上东岭。
English: I obeyed his words and climbed Dongling from the grass and thorns.

古文：已得微道，随之南二里，得北来大道，果从东岭上降者。
现代文：不久找到小道，顺着小道往南行二里，遇到北边来的大道，果然是从东岭上下降的路。
English: Soon I found a trail, followed the trail south for two miles, encountered a road coming from the north, and sure enough, it was the road descending from Dongling.

古文：盖涉溪者乃西道，从岭者乃东道，水涸则从西，水涨则从东也。
现代文：原来涉溪过去的路是西道，从岭上走的路是东道，溪水干涸时就从西道走，水涨时便从东道走。
English: Originally, the road that went through the stream was the west road, and the road that went from the ridge was the host. When the stream dried up, it went from the west road, and when the water rose, it went from the host.

古文：西流之中，有一线深坑，涸时横板以渡，兹涨没无影，非其人遥呼，几不免冯之险矣。
现代文：西道溪流之中，有一条深坑，干涸时横放木板走过去，此时水涨木板漂没得无影无踪了，不是那个人远远呼叫，几乎免不了徒步涉水过河的危险了。
English: In the middle of the West Road stream, there is a deep pit. When it was dry, a horse walked across it with a wooden plank. At this time, the water rose and the wooden plank drifted away without a trace. It was not the man who called from far away, and the danger of wading across the river on foot was almost inevitable.

古文：从东岭下一里，则大道西濒溪，道中水漫数寸，仍揭而溯之。
现代文：从东岭下行一里，就有条大道，西侧濒临溪流，道上的水淹了几寸深，仍需提衣逆流而行。
English: One mile downstream from Dongling, there is a highway. The west side is close to the stream. The water on the road is a few inches deep, and it is still necessary to pick up clothes and walk against the current.

古文：盖其源发于西南火烧铺西分水岭，按《志》，分水岭在普安西南百二十里，即此。北流经此，又北抵黑山、何郎之南，不知所泄，即土人亦莫能悉也。
现代文：一里，有座石桥跨在溪上。这条溪水从西南方流抵东山山麓，流到这里横着折向西，从桥下流到西山山麓，于是转向北流去。大概它发源于西南方火烧铺西面的分水岭，往北流经此地，又向北流抵黑山、何郎的南面，不知泄往何处，就是本地人也不能详知了。
English: A mile away, there is a stone bridge over the stream. This stream water flows from the southwest to the foot of Dongshan Mountain, flows here sideways to the west, flows from under the bridge to the foot of Xishan Mountain, and then turns to the north stream. It probably originates from the watershed west of the southwest campfire, flows north through this place, and flows north to the south of Black Mountain and He Lang. I don't know where it goes, even the locals don't know.

古文：石梁西麓，有穴纷骈纵横如 亦 字，故名其地曰亦字孔，今讹为亦资孔，乃土音之溷也。
现代文：石桥西边的山麓上，有些孔洞纷杂并列，纵横排列，如个 亦 字，故而把此地起名叫亦字孔，今天错读成亦资孔，是土话的方音混淆了。
English: At the foot of the mountain on the west side of the stone bridge, some holes are jumbled and juxtaposed, arranged vertically and horizontally, like a word. Therefore, this place is called Yizha Kong. Today, it is mispronounced as Yizha Kong, which is a confusion of the tones of the local dialect.

古文：梁南半里，即为亦字孔驿，有城倚西山下，而水绕其东焉。
现代文：桥南半里处，就是亦字孔骚，有城紧靠在西山下，而溪水绕到城东。
English: Half a mile south of the bridge is Kongxu, also known as Kongso. The city is close to the west mountain, and the stream flows around to the east of the city.

古文：比至，雷雨大作。
现代文：及到城下时，雷雨大作。
English: When we reached the outskirts of the city, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：宿于西门内周铺。
现代文：住宿在西门内的周家店铺中。
English: Accommodation is in the Zhou family store in the West Gate.

