古文：操存要有真宰，无真宰则遇事便倒，何以植顶天立地之砥柱！
现代文：个人操守志向要有真正的主宰，没有主宰，遇到事情就会倾倒，如何能成得了顶天立地的中流砥柱！
English: The ambition of personal integrity must have a true master, without a master, it will collapse when things happen, how can it become the mainstay of the sky-high position!

古文：应用要有圆机，无圆机则触物有碍，何以成旋乾转坤之经纶！
现代文：具体办事要会圆通机变，没有圆通机变，做事就会障碍重重，这样怎么能使自己成为扭转乾坤、治理国家的人才呢！
English: If you want to do specific things, you have to be flexible, and if you are not flexible, you will have many obstacles. How can you make yourself a talent to turn things around and govern the country?

古文：士君子之涉世，于人不可轻为喜怒，喜怒轻，则心腹肝胆皆为人所窥；于物不可重为爱憎，爱憎重，则意气精神悉为物所制。
现代文：品德高尚的文人学士接触社会，对于他人不可轻易表露喜怒情绪，喜怒情绪一旦泄露，内心情感就全被他人窥见；对于事物不可过分喜爱或憎恨，过分喜爱或憎恨，则精、气、神就会为物所控制。
English: A literati with high moral character who comes into contact with society should not easily show emotions of joy and anger to others. Once the emotions of joy and anger are leaked, the inner feelings will all be seen by others. He should not love or hate things too much. If he loves or hates things too much, the spirit, qi, and god will be controlled by the things.

古文：倚高才而玩世，背后须防射影之虫；饰厚貌以欺人，面前恐有照胆之镜。
现代文：倚仗自己的高超才能玩世不恭，背地里必须防备含沙射影的毒虫；文饰厚道外貌来欺骗他人，则要考虑肝胆之镜会让你原形毕露。
English: If you rely on your superior ability to be cynical, you must guard against the poisonous insects of insinuation behind the scenes; if you deceive others with a well-groomed appearance, you should consider that the mirror of the liver and gallbladder will reveal your true form.

古文：心体澄彻，常在明镜止水之中，则天下自无可厌之事；意气和平，常在丽日光风之内，则天下自无可恶之人。
现代文：内心世界澄净清澈，如映照在明亮镜子或平静水面上，自然这天下就没有可以厌恶的事物；意志神态平和安静，如沐浴着灿烂阳光和煦春风，天下自然就没有可以憎恶的人。
English: If the inner world is clear and limpid, such as reflected in a bright mirror or on a calm water surface, naturally there will be nothing to detest in this world; if the will is peaceful and quiet, such as bathed in brilliant sunshine and spring breeze, naturally there will be no one to detest in the world.

古文：当是非邪正之交，不可少迁就，少迁就则失从违之正；值利害得失之会，不可太分明，太分明则起趋避之私。
现代文：当是非正邪混杂一起时，不可丧失原则地迁就他人，一点点迁就就会失去扶正祛邪的机会；当利害得失纠葛在一起时，个人利益他人利益不可分得太清楚，分得太清楚就容易贪图一己之私。
English: When right and wrong are mixed together, the principle of accommodating others should not be lost, and a little bit of accommodation will lose the opportunity to rectify the wrongs; when interests and losses are entangled, personal interests and others' interests cannot be separated too clearly, and if they are separated too clearly, it is easy to covet one's own selfishness.

古文：苍蝇附骥，捷则捷矣，难辞处后之羞；萝茑依松，高则高矣，未免仰攀之耻。
现代文：苍蝇叮附在马的尾巴上，虽然跑得很快捷，但钟难以推辞处在后面的羞耻；茑萝依附松树而攀援，虽然爬得很高，但终归难以避免它是攀附它物的事实。
English: The fly clings to the horse's tail, although it runs very fast, but the clock can hardly deny the shame of being behind; the dill clings to the pine tree and climbs, although it climbs very high, it is difficult to avoid the fact that it is clinging to something else.

古文：所以君子宁以风霜自挟，毋为鱼鸟亲人。
现代文：所以，品德高尚又有见识的人宁可在风霜雨雪中自我扶持，也绝不变成供别人赏玩的鱼鸟来亲近他人。
English: Therefore, people with high moral character and insight would rather support themselves in the wind, rain and snow, and never become fish and birds for others to enjoy and get close to others.

古文：好丑心太明，则物不契；贤愚心太明，则人不亲。
现代文：心中对于美好与丑陋的界限过于分明，就会与外界格格不入；心中对于贤智与愚拙的界限过于分明，他人就不会亲近你。
English: If the boundary between beauty and ugliness is too clear in your heart, you will be incompatible with the outside world; if the boundary between wisdom and foolishness is too clear in your heart, others will not be close to you.

古文：士君子须是内精明而外浑厚，使好丑两得其平，贤愚共受其益，才是生成的德量。
现代文：品德高尚的文人学士必须是内心精明而外表浑厚，对美好与丑陋的事平衡接纳，对贤智与愚拙的人共享益处，这才是应有的道德气量。
English: A literati with high moral character must be shrewd at heart and thick-skinned on the outside, accept a balance of good and ugly things, and share benefits with wise and foolish people. This is the proper moral temperament.

古文：伺察以为明者，常因明而生暗，故君子以恬养智；奋迅以为速者，多因速度而致迟，故君子以重持轻。
现代文：自认为看透万事万物的人，常常因为自觉精明而自陷愚昧，所以真正品德高尚又有见识的人用恬淡培养智慧；做事决断雷厉风行的人，常常是欲速则不达，所以，品德高尚又有见识的人举轻若重，谨慎行事。
English: People who think they understand everything are often self-deceived because they are self-consciously shrewd. Therefore, people who are truly virtuous and knowledgeable cultivate wisdom with modesty. People who are decisive in doing things are often too hasty. Therefore, people who are virtuous and knowledgeable are of great importance and act cautiously.

古文：士君子济人利物，宜居其实，不宜居其名，居其名则德损；士大夫忧国为民，当有其心，不当有其语，有其语则毁来。
现代文：品德高尚的文人学士接济帮助别人，应着眼于实际行动，而不应追求声名，追求声名易使品德受损；有所作为的官员忧国忧民，应当是真心实意，而不应空喊口号，空喊口号就会招致非议诽谤。
English: A literati with high moral character who helps others should focus on practical actions, rather than pursuing fame, which can easily damage their moral character; an official who makes a difference should be sincere, rather than shouting slogans, which will lead to criticism and slander.

古文：遇大事矜持者，小事必纵弛；处明庭检饰者，暗室必放逸。
现代文：遇到重大事情才郑重其事的人，在遇到小事的时候必然会松弛懈怠；在大庭广众之下才检点约束自己的人，在别人看不到的地方就会放纵行乐。
English: Those who are serious only when encountering important matters will inevitably relax and slack off when encountering trifles; those who restrain themselves only in the presence of the general public will indulge in places where others cannot see.

古文：君子只是一个念头持到底，自然临小事如临大敌，坐密室若坐通衢。
现代文：真正的君子则是坚守一个信念，这样小事也会当做大事对待，身处在他人的私宅中也如在大街上，始终表里如一。
English: A true gentleman, on the other hand, adheres to a belief that small things are treated as big things, and when he is in someone else's private home, he is like on the street, always true to form.

古文：使人有面前之誉，不若使其无背后之毁；使人有乍交之欢，不若使其无久处之厌。
现代文：使他人当面赞美你，不如使他人不在背后诋毁诽谤你；使他人感到结交之初的快乐，不如使他们没有长久相处的厌烦。
English: Let others praise you to your face, rather than slander you behind your back; let others feel the joy of friendship, rather than the boredom of a long-term relationship.

古文：善启迪人心者，当因其所明而渐通之，毋强开其所闭；善移风化者，当因其所易而渐及之，毋轻矫其所难。
现代文：善于启迪人们心灵的人，应当根据对方已有所悟的循循善诱开导他们，不要强行灌输他们所不懂的；善于改变风俗教化的人，应当根据对方容易接受的逐渐推行，不要给予矫正他们难以改变难以接受的东西。
English: Those who are good at enlightening people's minds should lead and enlighten them according to the principles that the other side has already understood, and should not forcefully instill what they do not understand; those who are good at changing customs and educating people should gradually implement according to the other side's easy acceptance, and should not correct what is difficult for them to change and difficult to accept.

古文：彩笔描空，笔不落色，而空亦不受染；利刀割水，刀不损锷，而水亦不留痕。
现代文：用彩笔在空中描画，彩笔不会在空中留下色彩，天空也不会受到污染；用锋利的刀切割流水，不会损坏刀刃，流水也不会留下痕迹。
English: Drawing in the air with a crayon, the crayon will not leave color in the air, and the sky will not be polluted; cutting running water with a sharp knife will not damage the blade, and the running water will not leave traces.

古文：得此意以持身涉世，感与应俱适，心与境两忘矣。
现代文：领悟此种意境，并把它用到修身处世中，则你的感触与应验相互适合，达到物我两忘的境界。
English: If you can understand this state of mind and use it to cultivate yourself in the world, then your feeling and fulfillment will be compatible, and you will reach the realm of forgetting both things and yourself.

古文：己之情欲不可纵，当用逆之之法以制之，其道只在一忍字；人之情欲不可拂，当用顺之之法以调之，其道只在一恕字。
现代文：自己的情感欲望不可以放纵，应当用克制的方法来控制自己的欲望，关键在于一个 忍 字；他人的情感欲望不可以拂逆，应当用顺从之法来疏导它，其方法只在于一个 恕 字。
English: One's own emotional desires should not be indulged, and one's own desires should be controlled by means of restraint. The key lies in the word "tolerance." The emotional desires of others should not be suppressed, but should be channeled by means of obedience. The key lies in the word "forgiveness."

古文：今人皆恕以适己而忍以制人，毋乃不可乎！
现代文：现在的人全都将 恕 字用在自己身上，而将 忍 字用于约束他人，这实在是不可以的！
English: People nowadays all use the word "forgive" for themselves, but use the word "tolerate" to restrict others, which is really unacceptable!

古文：好察非明，能察能不察之谓明；必胜非勇，能胜能不胜之谓勇。
现代文：喜欢查清是非并不明智，能够查清而又不去查清才算高明；一定要取胜并非勇敢，能够取胜而又不去取胜才可称为勇敢。
English: It is not wise to love to find out what is right and what is wrong, but it is wise to be able to find out and not to find out; it is not brave to win, but it is brave to win and not to win.

古文：随时之内善救时，若和风之消酷暑；混俗之中能脱俗，似淡月之映轻云。
现代文：随时随地可以出手匡救时弊，其功德宛若和缓清风消除酷热暑气；混同世俗又能够超脱世俗，其节操就像淡淡月光映照轻薄浮云一样。
English: At any time and at any place, it can be used to solve the problems of the times. Its merits are like that of easing the wind and eliminating the heat and heat. It can be mixed with the mundane and transcend the mundane. Its discipline is like the pale moonlight shining on the thin floating clouds.

古文：思入世而有为者，须先领得世外风光，否则无以脱垢浊之尘缘；思出世而无染者，须先谙尽世中滋味。否则无以持空寂之后苦趣。
现代文：想要进入世俗有所作为的人，必须先领略到世俗以外的风光，否则不可能摆脱垢秽浑浊的尘世因缘；想超出世俗而没有沾染的人，必须先谙熟详尽世俗之中的滋味，否则不可能把持空虚寂寞的苦恼意趣。
English: Those who want to enter the world and make a difference must first enjoy the scenery outside the world, otherwise it is impossible to get rid of the dirty and turbid earthly causes; those who want to go beyond the world and are not contaminated must first master the taste of the world, otherwise it is impossible to keep the empty and lonely suffering.

古文：与人者，与其易疏于终，不若难亲于始；御事者，与其巧持于后，不若拙守于前。
现代文：与他人交往，与其最后轻易地疏远分手，不如在最开始亲近时慎重一些；承担某项工作，与其最后凭借机巧收拾残局，不如起初大智若愚，做好点点滴滴。
English: In dealing with others, it is better to be cautious when getting close at the beginning than to alienate and break up easily at the end; to take on a certain job, it is better to be smart and do a little bit at the beginning than to clean up the mess with skill at the end.

古文：酷烈之祸，多起于玩忽之人；盛满之功，常败于细微之事。
现代文：惨烈沉痛的灾祸，大多起源于玩忽职守的人；盛极圆满的功绩，时常败落在细小轻微小事。
English: The most grievous calamities have their origin in the neglect of duty; the grandest and most complete achievements are often defeated by small and trifling matters.

古文：故语云﹕ 人人道好，须防一人着脑；事事有功，须防一事不终。 
现代文：所以有句话这样说： 每个人都说好，还要防备有一个人懊恼闹事；每件事都有功，须要防备有一件事不能善始善终。 
English: Therefore, there is a saying that goes like this: Everyone says yes, but we must also be prepared for one person to be annoyed and cause trouble; everything has merit, and we must be prepared for one thing that cannot start well and end well.

古文：功名富贵，直从灭处观究竟，则贪恋自轻；横逆困穷，直从起处究由来，则怨尤自息。
现代文：功绩名声富足尊贵，直接从它的灭失处观看结局，贪图依恋之心就会减轻；横祸困穷，直接从它的缘起处追究原因，就不会再怨天尤人。
English: If you look at the result directly from the place of its loss, the craving and attachment will be lessened; if you look at the cause directly from the place of its origin, you will no longer blame others.

古文：宇宙内事要力担当，又要善摆脱。
现代文：人世间大小事情既要勇于承担，又要善于摆脱。
English: We should not only be brave enough to take on the big and small things in the world, but also be good at getting rid of them.

古文：不担当，则无经世之事业；不摆脱，则无出世之襟期。
现代文：不承担，就没有经历世事的功业才能；不摆脱，就没有超脱世俗的胸襟期待。
English: If you do not undertake, you will not have the ability to experience worldly affairs; if you do not get rid of it, you will not have the expectation of transcending the world.

古文：待人而留有余，不尽之恩礼，则可以维系无厌之人心；御事而留有余，不尽之才智，则可以提防不测之事变。
现代文：对待他人留有余地，不穷尽恩惠礼遇，就可以维系难以满足的人心；处理事务留有余地，不用尽才能智慧，就可以防备不可预测的突变。
English: Treating others with room to spare, without exhausting favors and courtesy, can maintain the insatiable human heart; handling affairs with room to spare, without exhausting talent and wisdom, can prevent unpredictable mutations.

古文：了心自了事，犹根拔而草不生；逃世不逃名，似膻存而蚋仍集。
现代文：了却心念自然能了结事情，犹如根茎拔除而花草不能生长；逃避世俗不能逃避名利，就好似腥膻存在而蚊蚋仍然聚集。
English: But the mind can naturally conclude things, just as flowers and plants cannot grow if the root is pulled out; fame and fortune cannot escape from the world, just as mosquitoes still gather if the mosquito cocoon exists.

古文：仇边之弩易避，而恩里之戈难防；苦时之坎易逃，而乐处之阱难脱。
现代文：戍边仇敌射来的弩箭容易躲避，有恩邻里的戈矛难以防备；苦难时遇到沟坎容易跳过，快乐时却常因失去警惕难以逃脱。
English: It is easy to dodge the crossbow arrows shot by the enemy on the other side of the river, and it is difficult to guard against the spears of gossip in a benevolent neighborhood; it is easy to jump over the ditch when suffering, but it is often difficult to escape when happy because of losing vigilance.

古文：膻秽则蝇蚋丛嘬，芳馨则蜂蝶交侵。
现代文：膻臭污秽就会引来苍蝇蚊子的聚集，芳香甘馨则会招引蜜蜂蝴蝶的侵扰。
English: Foul odours attract swarms of flies and mosquitoes, while sweet fragrances attract swarms of bees and butterflies.

古文：故君子不作垢业，亦不立芳名。
现代文：所以真正的君子不做耻辱之事，也不树立美好名声。
English: Therefore, a true gentleman does not do disgraceful things, nor does he establish a good reputation.

古文：只是元气浑然，圭角不露，便是持身涉世一安乐窝也。
现代文：只要让自己的元气始终充沛，不露锋芒，就可以修身养性，处世如处安乐窝了。
English: As long as you keep your vitality always full and do not show your sharpness, you can cultivate your body and cultivate your character, and your life will be like a peaceful nest.

古文：从静中观物动，向闲处看人忙，才得超尘脱俗的趣味；遇忙处会偷闲，处闹中能取静，便是安身立命的工夫。
现代文：从静止中观看物体的运动，向闲暇处观看人们的忙碌，这才有超脱尘俗的趣味；遇到忙碌时会忙中偷闲，处在热闹中能闹中取静，这就是安身立命的最大功夫。
English: To watch the movement of objects from a place of stillness, to watch people's busyness from a place of leisure, this is what makes it a super-deserted hobby; when you are busy, you will sneak around when you are busy, and when you are in the middle of the hustle and bustle, you can take a break from the hustle and bustle. This is the greatest effort to settle down.

古文：邀千百人之欢，不如释一人之怨；希千百事之荣，不如免一事之丑。
现代文：与其让千百人获得欢乐，不如消解一个人的怨恨；与其希望做成千百件好事获得荣耀，不如小心谨慎莫因做错一件事而出丑。
English: Instead of giving joy to thousands of people, it is better to dissolve the resentment of one person; instead of hoping to achieve glory by doing thousands of good things, it is better to be careful not to make a mistake by doing one thing.

古文：落落者，难合亦难分；欣欣者，易亲亦易散。
现代文：性格孤傲的人，难以迎合也难以分离；性格开朗的人，容易亲近也容易离散。
English: People with a lonely and arrogant personality are difficult to cater to and difficult to separate; people with a cheerful personality are easy to get close to and easy to disperse.

古文：是以君子宁以刚方见惮，毋以媚悦取容。
现代文：因此有才德的人，宁可用刚直方正显现惮色，不要用献媚取悦获取笑容。
English: Therefore, people with talent would rather use the straight and square to show their courage, rather than using flattery to get a smile.

古文：意气与天下相期，如春风之鼓畅庶类，不宜存半点隔阂之形；肝胆与天下相照，似秋月之洞彻群品，不可作一毫暧昧之状。
现代文：情谊恩义与天下人相互期待，犹如春天和风的鼓动畅达庶有物类，不适宜存在半点阻隔障阂的形态；真心诚意与天下人相互照应，好似秋天月光的洞悉透彻群众品格，不可以做作一毫暗暧愚昧的状态。
English: The mutual expectations of friendship, benevolence, and the people of the world are like those of spring and wind, which can easily reach all kinds of things. It is not appropriate to have a form that is half-blocked and obstructed. The sincerity and sincerity of the people of the world correspond to each other. It is like the insight of the autumn moonlight into the character of the masses, and cannot be made into a state of ignorance.

古文：仕途虽赫奕，常思林下的风味，则权且之念自轻；世途虽纷华，常思泉下的光景，则利欲之心自淡。
现代文：做官之路虽然显赫光彩，经常想一想山林的风景趣味，那么，贪图权势的念头就会减轻；尘世虽然纷繁华丽，经常想一想黄泉之下的凄惨景象，那么，私利欲望的心思就自然淡薄。
English: Although the road to becoming an official is brilliant, if you often think about the scenery and taste of the mountains and forests, then the thought of coveting power will be lessened; although the earthly world is colorful and gorgeous, if you often think about the tragic scene under the yellows, then the desire for self-interest will naturally be weak.

古文：鸿未至先援弓，兔已亡再呼矢，总非当机作用；风息时休起浪，岸到处便离船，才是了手工夫。
现代文：大雁还没到就已张弓搭箭，兔子已经逃跑了才找弓箭，这都不是合乎时机的作为；风波平息时不要再鼓起波浪，渡船已到岸边就应离船上岸，这才是识时务之俊杰。
English: The geese have not yet arrived, but have already drawn their bows and arrows, and the rabbits have already fled and are looking for their bows and arrows. These are not opportune actions; when the storm subsides, do not make waves again, and when the ferry has reached the shore, it should leave the ship. This is a good understanding of the current affairs.

古文：从热闹场中出几句清冷言语，便扫除无限杀机；向寒微路上用一点赤热心肠，自培植许多生意。
现代文：在争名夺利的热闹场合说几句泼冷水的话，可扫除许多狂妄拼杀之心；对贫寒失势之人表达一点赤热心肠，就会焕发他们的生命活力。
English: A few cold words in the heat of the moment can sweep away a lot of hubris; a warm word to the poor and downtrodden can bring them back to life.

古文：随缘便是遣缘，似舞蝶与飞花共适；顺事自然无事，若满月偕盂水同圆。
现代文：顺势而为，随缘是福，这便是把握生命机缘之道，就如同飞舞的蝴蝶与飘落的花朵和谐共处；事事顺其自然，也就不会自寻烦恼，就如同天上满月与水盆中映照的满月一样圆。
English: Go with the flow, go with the flow is a blessing, this is the way to grasp the opportunities of life, just like the flying butterflies and floating flowers coexist harmoniously; everything goes with the flow, and there will be no trouble, just like the full moon in the sky and the full moon reflected in the basin are round.

古文：淡泊之守，须从浓艳场中试来；镇定之操，还向纷纭境上勘过。不然操持未定，应用未圆，恐一临机登坛，而上品禅师又成一下品俗士矣。
现代文：恬淡寂泊的操守，必须从浓烈艳丽场合中试炼出来；镇静安定的操持，还要向纷繁杂乱情境上难堪过来，不然操守秉持尚未坚定，应对运用尚未圆通，恐怕一旦面临机遇登上坛场，上等品位的禅师就又变成一个下等品味的世俗人士了。
English: The discipline of calmness and tranquility must be tested in the midst of intense and glamorous occasions; the discipline of calmness and stability must also be embarrassed in the face of complex and chaotic situations. Otherwise, the upholding of discipline is not yet firm, and the use of response is not yet perfect. I am afraid that once faced with the opportunity to ascend to the altar, a Zen master with superior taste will become a worldly person with inferior taste.

古文：廉所以戒贪。
现代文：清廉是用来警戒勿生贪婪之心。
English: Chastity is used to guard against the greed of the heart.

古文：我果不贪，又何必标一廉名，以来贪夫之侧目。
现代文：我如果真的不贪婪，又何必标榜一个清廉名声，去引来贪婪人士的冷眼斜视。
English: If I am really not greedy, why do I have to flaunt a clean reputation to attract the cold eyes of greedy people.

古文：让所以戒争。
现代文：谦让是用来警戒勿生争抢之念。
English: Modesty is used to guard against the idea of competition.

古文：我果不争，又何必立一让的，以致暴客之弯弓。
现代文：我如果真的不争抢，又何必树立一个谦让的标靶，去招致强横凶暴人士的攻击。
English: If I really do not compete, why do I have to set up a modest target to attract the attacks of strong and violent people.

古文：无事常如有事时，提防才可以弥意外之变；有事常如无事时，镇定方可以消局中之危。
现代文：没有事情的时候也要像有事时那样谨慎防范，才可以弥补意料之外的变故；有事时也要像无事时那样镇静自若，以消解困局之中的危机。
English: When there is nothing going on, you should also be as cautious and preventative as when there is something going on, so that you can make up for unexpected changes; when there is something going on, you should also be as calm and self-assured as when there is nothing going on, so as to resolve the crisis in the predicament.

古文：处世而欲人感恩，便为敛怨之道；遇事而为人除害，即是导利之机。
现代文：为人处世总是想要他人感恩戴德，这实际是在为自己招惹怨恨；处理事情总想着为他人消除祸害，这才是使自己始终处于有利之地的做法。
English: If you always want others to be grateful, you are actually creating resentment for yourself; if you always want to eliminate harm for others, this is the way to keep yourself in a favorable position.

古文：持身如泰山九鼎凝然不动，则愆尤自少；应事若流水落花悠然而逝，则趣味常多。
现代文：修持身心犹如泰山九鼎安然不动摇，过失罪咎自然就会减少；应付人事宛若流水落花悠闲地流逝，意趣韵味常常就会增多。
English: Practicing the mind and body is like the nine peaks of Mount Tai, safe and unshakable, and the guilt of negligence will naturally decrease; dealing with personnel is like the leisurely flow of water and flowers, and the meaning and charm will often increase.

古文：君子严如介石而畏其难亲，鲜不以明珠为怪物而起按剑之心；小人滑如脂膏而喜其易合，鲜不以毒螫为甘饴而纵染指之欲。
现代文：君子威严如碑石，如果因此对君子敬而远之，就很难不把明珠当作怪物，只想拔剑清除它；小人狡猾如油脂，如果因此喜欢与小人交往，就很难不将毒螫当作甘饴，只想食之以纵欲。
English: A gentleman's majesty is like a stone monument, if you respect and stay away from a gentleman because of this, it is difficult not to regard a pearl as a monster and just want to pull out a sword to clear it; a villain's cunning is like grease, if you like to associate with villains because of this, it is difficult not to regard a drug lord as a candy and just want to indulge in lust.

古文：遇事只一味镇定从容，纵纷若乱丝，终当就绪；待人无半毫矫伪欺隐，虽狡如山鬼，亦自献诚。
现代文：遇到事情只要一直沉着镇静从容应对，纵然事情纷繁宛若乱丝，终究应当有了条理；对待他人没有半点矫饰虚伪欺骗隐瞒，虽然狡捷犹如山鬼，也是自然奉献诚意。
English: When encountering things, as long as you have been calmly and calmly dealing with things, even if things are chaotic, they should eventually be organized; treat others without any pretense, hypocrisy, deception, and concealment, although cunning is like a mountain ghost, it is also a natural dedication sincerity.

古文：肝肠煦若春风，虽囊乏一文，还怜茕独；气骨清如秋水，纵家徒四壁，终傲王公。
现代文：对人赤诚热心，就有如春风一样温暖，即使口袋里只有一文钱，也会用来怜爱孤独可怜的人。气骨清朗犹如秋水，纵然家中只有四面墙壁，终究傲视王公贵族。
English: If you are sincere and warm-hearted to others, you will be as warm as the spring breeze. Even if you only have a penny in your pocket, you will use it to pity the lonely and poor. Your bones are as clear as autumn water. Even if there are only four walls in your home, you will still be proud of the princes and nobles.

古文：讨了人事的便宜，必受天道的亏；贪了世味的滋益，必招性分的损。
现代文：讨取了人情事理的便宜，必然要承受上天道意的亏损；贪图了人世百般滋润，必然招致天性缘分的损害。
English: Obtain the advantage of human reason, must bear the loss of God's will; covet the moisture of the world, will inevitably lead to the damage of natural predisposition.

古文：涉世者宜蕃择之，慎毋贪黄雀而坠深井，舍隋珠而弹飞禽也。
现代文：涉足世事的人应当慎重选择，千万不要因贪心捕捉黄雀而坠入深井，也不要用宝贵的隋珠作弹子击打飞鸟！
English: People who get involved in worldly affairs should choose carefully. Do not fall into a deep well out of greed to catch a yellow finch, and do not use precious Sui beads as marbles to hit flying birds!

古文：费千金而结纳贤豪，孰若倾半瓢之粟，以济饥饿之人；构千楹而招来宾客，孰若葺数椽之茅，以庇孤寒之士。
现代文：花费千两黄金结交贤士豪杰，怎么比得上倒出半瓢小米救济那些饥饿的人有意义；构筑豪宅广厦招引宾朋来客，怎么比得上修葺小小的茅屋庇护那些孤寒的人有意义。
English: Spending a thousand taels of gold to make friends with sages and heroes is as meaningful as pouring out half a bushel of millet to help those who are hungry; building a mansion to attract guests is as meaningful as repairing a small hut to shelter those who are lonely.

古文：解斗者助之以威，则怒气自平；惩贪者济之以欲，则利心反淡。
现代文：劝解争斗的人，先助其威，他的愤怒情绪会自然平息；惩罚贪婪的人，先满足其贪欲，他的利欲之心反而淡漠。
English: If you advise a quarrelsome person, you will help him first, and his anger will naturally subside; if you punish a greedy person, you will satisfy his greed first, but his desire for profit will be indifferent.

古文：所谓因其势而利导之，亦救时应变一权宜法也。
现代文：这就是所谓的因势利导之法，也是匡救时局应付突变的一种权宜之法。
English: This is the so-called cause-and-effect method, and it is also an expedient method to deal with sudden changes in the situation.

古文：市恩不如报德之为厚。雪忿不若忍耻之为高。要誉不如逃名之为适。矫情不若直节之为真。
现代文：布施恩惠不如报答恩德更为厚道，洗雪忿恨不如忍受耻辱更为高明，沽名钓誉不如逃避声名更为闲适，矫揉造作不如坦诚直白更为真实。
English: It is more virtuous to bestow favors than to repay kindness, more noble to wash away resentment than to endure disgrace, more leisurely to fish for fame than to escape fame, and more truthful than frankness.

古文：救既败之事者，如驭临崖之马，休轻策一鞭；图垂成之功者，如挽上滩之舟，莫少停一棹。
现代文：挽救近乎失败的事情，犹如驾驭面临悬崖的马，不要慌乱，不要轻易扬鞭策马，以免摔落悬崖；希图唾手可得的成功，犹如牵挽上了滩头的船，不要松劲，不要稍停一棹，以免前功尽弃。
English: Salvaging a near-failure is like steering a horse facing a cliff, don't panic, don't easily whip the horse, so as not to fall off the cliff; hoping for a quick success is like pulling a boat on the beach, don't let up, don't stop for a moment, so as not to give up.

古文：先达笑弹冠，休向侯门轻曳裾；相知犹按剑，莫从世路暗投珠。
现代文：已经显贵做了高官的人，总是要嘲笑那些借助自己的势力取得官职的人，所以不要经常奔走于权贵之门。朋友之间还会拔剑相争，所以在与人交往时不要明珠暗投，轻易地信任别人。
English: Those who have already become dignitaries and high-ranking officials should always laugh at those who use their own power to obtain official positions, so don't always rush to the door of the powerful. Friends will also fight with swords, so when dealing with people, don't throw pearls and trust others easily.

古文：杨修之躯见杀于曹操，以露己之长也；韦诞之墓见伐于钟繇，以秘己之美也。
现代文：杨修遭曹操杀害，因为他在曹操面前显摆自己的聪明；韦诞的坟墓被钟繇盗伐，因为他在坟墓里秘藏了自己的爱物。
English: Yang Xiu was killed by Cao Cao because he showed off his cleverness in front of Cao Cao; the tomb of Weixue was robbed by bell-ringers because he hid his favorite things in the tomb.

古文：故哲士多匿采以韬光，至人常逊美而公善。
现代文：所以，贤哲人士大多隐匿才华以韬光养晦，至德人士常常将美好的东西逊让给别人以共享。
English: Therefore, most sages and philosophers hide their talents in order to maintain obscurity, while virtuous people often give up beautiful things to others in order to share.

古文：少年的人，不患其不奋迅，常患奋迅而成卤莽，故当抑其躁心；老成的人，不患其不持重，常患以持重而成退缩，故当振其惰气。
现代文：对于年纪轻轻的人，不担心他不行动迅速，却常担心他因为过于迅速而导致粗疏鲁莽，故而应当抑制他的浮躁之心；对于上了年纪的人，不担心他不稳重谨慎，却常担心他因为过于稳重而导致畏缩不前，故而应当振奋他的衰惰之气。
English: For a young man, one should not worry that he does not act quickly, but one should restrain his impetuous heart, because he is often worried that he is too quick and leads to rudeness; for an elderly man, one should not worry that he is not steady and prudent, but one should often worry that he is too steady and leads to flinching, so one should cheer up his languid spirit.

古文：望重缙绅，怎似寒微之颂德。朋来海宇，何如骨肉之孚心。
现代文：名望超过高官，怎么还像寒微卑贱之人忙于歌颂功德；朋友来自四方，如何能像骨肉至亲那样贴合心意。
English: Fame surpasses high-ranking officials, how can they still be busy praising merits like cold and lowly people; friends come from all over the world, how can they fit into the heart like flesh and blood relatives.

古文：舌存常见齿亡，刚强终不胜柔弱；户朽未闻枢蠹，偏执岂能及圆融。
现代文：常常会看到舌头还好好的，牙齿却没有了，可见刚强终究胜不过柔弱；户门朽烂却没听说门轴也被虫子蛀蚀了，可见偏执岂能比得上圆融。
English: We often see that the tongue is still good, but the teeth are gone, and we can see that the strong ultimately prevail over the weak; the door is rotten, but we don't hear that the door shaft has also been eroded by insects, and we can see that bigotry can't be compared to roundness.

