古文：成王既黜殷命，杀武庚，命微子启代殷后，作《微子之命》。
现代文：周成王已废黜殷商的国运，诛杀武庚，诰命天下由微子启代替武庚为殷侯，史叙其事，作《微子之命》。
English: Zhou Chengwang has dethroned the national fortune of Yin merchants, killed Wu Geng, and ordered the world to replace Wu Geng with Weizi Kai as Yin Hou. The history of this matter is "The Life of Weizi."

古文：王若曰： 猷！
现代文：成王这样说： 啊！
English: Cheng Wang said: Ah!

古文：殷王元子。
现代文：殷王的长子微子。
English: King Yin's eldest son, Micron.

古文：惟稽古，崇德象贤。统承先王，修其礼物，作宾于王家，与国咸休，永世无穷。
现代文：你一定要稽考古代，有尊崇盛德、效法先贤的制度，就是说，效法贤王，整治典礼文物，作王家的贵宾，和友邦一起共享政德之美，世代绵长，无穷无尽。啊！
English: You must review the ancient times, have the system of respecting and revering the virtuous and emulating the sages, that is to say, emulate the virtuous king, rectify the ceremony and cultural relics, be a distinguished guest of the royal family, and share the beauty of politics and morality with friends. Generations are long and endless. Ah!

古文：呜呼！乃祖成汤克齐圣广渊，皇天眷佑，诞受厥命。
现代文：你的祖先成汤，能够肃敬、圣明、广大、深远，被皇天顾念佑助，承受了天命。
English: Your ancestors have become a soup, can be revered, sacred, vast and far-reaching, have been cherished and helped by the emperor, and have borne the fate of heaven.

古文：抚民以宽，除其邪虐，功加于时，德垂后裔。
现代文：他用宽和的办法安治臣民，除掉邪恶暴虐之徒。功绩施展于当时，德泽流传于后裔。
English: He governed his subjects peacefully and got rid of evil tyrants. His achievements were made at that time, and his virtues were passed down to his descendants.

古文：尔惟践修厥猷，旧有令闻，恪慎克孝，肃恭神人。
现代文：你履行成汤的治道，老早有美名。谨慎能孝，恭敬神和人。
English: You have long had a good reputation for carrying out your judicial duties. You are prudent, capable of filial piety, and respectful of God and man.

古文：予嘉乃德，曰笃不忘。
现代文：我赞美你的美德，以为纯厚而不可忘。
English: I praise your virtues as pure and unforgettable.

古文：上帝时歆，下民祗协，庸建尔于上公，尹兹东夏。
现代文：上天依时享受你的祭祀，下民对你敬爱和睦，因此立你为上公，治理这块东夏地区。
English: Heaven has always enjoyed your sacrificial rites, and the people have loved and been at peace with you. Therefore, I have appointed you as the supreme ruler to govern this Dongxia region.

古文：钦哉，往敷乃训，慎乃服命，率由典常，以蕃王室。
现代文：要敬重呀！
English: Show some respect!

古文：弘乃烈祖，律乃有民，永绥厥位，毗予一人。
现代文：前去发布你的政令。谨慎对待你的上公职位与使命，遵循常法以保卫周王室。宏扬你烈祖的治道，规范你的人民，长久安居上公之位，辅助我一人。
English: Go ahead and issue your decree. Treat your public position and mission with caution, follow the common law to protect the Zhou royal family. Magnify the governance of your martyrs, standardize your people, stay in the public position for a long time, and assist me alone.

古文：世世享德，万邦作式，俾我有周无斁。
现代文：这样，你的世世子孙会享受你的功德，万邦诸侯会以你为榜样，服从我周王室而不厌倦。 啊！
English: In this way, your descendants throughout the ages will enjoy your merits, and the princes of all nations will follow your example and obey me, the Zhou royal family, without getting tired.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：前去吧，要好好地干！
English: Alas!

古文：往哉惟休，无替朕命。 
现代文：不要废弃我的诰命。 
English: Don't throw away my hard work.

