古文：赵汝谈，字履常，生而颖悟，年十五，以大父恩补将仕郎。
现代文：赵汝谈，字履常，生来就很聪明，十五岁时，因祖父的恩荫被补官为将士郎。
English: Zhao Ru said that he was born very clever, and at the age of fifteen, he was promoted to shoshiro because of his grandfather's favor.

古文：登淳熙十一年进士第。
现代文：他考中淳熙十一年进士。
English: He was admitted to the junior high school in the eleventh year of Atsuhiro's junior high school examination.

古文：丞相周必大得其文异之，语参知政事施师点曰： 是子他日有大名于世。 调汀州教授，改广德军，添差江西安抚司干办公事。
现代文：丞相周必大得到他的文章认为他与众不同，对参知政事施师点说 ：此人他日将在世上有名声。 赵汝谈调任汀州教授，改为广德军教授，添差江西安抚司干办公事。
English: Zhou Bida, the chancellor, got his article and thought he was different, and said to the political advisor: This person will be famous in the world one day. Zhao Ru talked about being transferred to the professor of Tingzhou, changed to the professor of Guangde Army, and sent to Jiangxi to do office work.

古文：尝从朱熹订疑义十数条，熹嗟异之。
现代文：他曾跟从朱熹考订有疑问的义理十几条，朱熹赞叹他的学识。
English: He had studied more than a dozen doubtful doctrines from Zhu Xi, and Zhu Xi praised his knowledge.

古文：佐丞相赵汝愚定大策，汝愚欲骤以词掖处之，力辞去。
现代文：赵汝谈辅佐丞相赵汝愚制定重大的国策。赵汝愚想立即提升他为文学侍从一类的官职，他极力推辞掉。
English: Zhao Ru talked about Assistant Vice-Minister Zhao Ruwu formulating major national policies. Zhao Ruwu wanted to immediately promote him to an official position such as literary attendant, but he strongly declined.

古文：持祖母服。
现代文：赵汝谈为祖母守孝。
English: Zhao Ru talks about being a grandmother.

古文：汝愚去国，其弟汝谠力上疏乞留汝愚、斩侂胄，闻者吐舌。
现代文：赵汝愚被罢官，他的弟弟赵汝谠极力上疏请求留下赵汝愚，杀韩胄，听说的人都很惊叹。
English: Zhao Rugu was dismissed from his post, and his younger brother, Zhao Rugao, tried his best to solicit Zhao Rugu to stay and kill Han Zhao. Everyone who heard about it was amazed.

古文：兄弟罹党祸斥去。
现代文：赵汝谈兄弟二人都遭党祸被斥去。
English: Zhao Ru said that both brothers were expelled by the Party.

古文：寻调安庆府教授，添差浙东安抚司干办公事。
现代文：不久赵汝谈为安庆府教授，添差浙东安抚司干办公事。
English: Soon after, Zhao Rutan became a professor in Anqing Prefecture, and was assigned to the East Zhejiang Pacification Department to do office work.

古文：丁母忧，免丧，召为太社令。
现代文：他遭母丧，服丧期满后，被任命为太社令。
English: He was bereaved by his mother, and after the period of mourning was over, he was appointed to the Tai Sha Order.

古文：时侂胄用事炽甚，汝谈痛愤，登坛读祝，大呼侂胄及陈自强名。
现代文：当时韩胄权倾一时，赵汝谈很痛愤，在登坛读祭文时，他大叫韩胄和陈自强的名字。
English: At that time, when Han Xuan lost power, Zhao Rutan was very angry. When he ascended the altar to read the sacrificial text, he shouted the names of Han Xuan and Chen Ziqiang.

古文：自强不能堪，它日指汝谈曰： 末坐白皙者何人？ 汝谈不为动。
现代文：陈自强不能忍受，另一天指着赵汝谈说 ：末位面色白皙的是什么人？ 赵汝谈没为此动摇。
English: Unable to bear it, Chen Ziqiang pointed to Zhao Ru the next day and said, "Who is the last person with a white face?" Zhao Ru did not waver.

古文：以参知政事李壁荐，召试馆职，擢正字。
现代文：因为参知政事李壁的荐举，赵汝谈被召试馆职，提拔为正字。
English: Because of the recommendation of the senator and politician Li Bi, Zhao Ruan was called to the examination hall and promoted to the official position.

古文：是时吴曦叛，上下束手，或请就以曦为王，其人造汝谈，汝谈诘之曰： 孰欲王曦者，可斩！ 其人面发赤不能对，遂以言去，主管崇道观。
现代文：这时吴曦反叛，朝廷上下束手无策，有人请求就封吴曦为王，这个人到赵汝谈这来，赵汝谈责问他说： 谁想以吴曦为王，该杀！ 这个人脸红了不能答对，就因为言语的错误被罢官，为主管崇道观。
English: At this time, Wu Xi rebelled, and the imperial court was helpless to do anything. Someone requested that Wu Xi be made king. This person came to Zhao Ru to talk about it, and Zhao Ru asked him: "Whoever wants to make Wu Xi king should be killed! This person blushed and could not answer correctly, and because of the error of speech, he was dismissed from his post, and he was appointed as the head of the worship of Taoism.

古文：添差通判嘉兴府，与郡守王介志合。
现代文：赵汝谈为添差嘉兴府通判，他和郡守王介志同道合。
English: Zhao Ruan is the Jiaxing prefectural magistrate, and he and the county governor Wang Jie are like-minded.

古文：改知无为军，与光州守柴中行、安丰守陆峻俱称循吏。
现代文：赵汝谈改任无为军知军，和光州守臣柴中行、安丰守臣陆峻并称为奉职守法的官吏。
English: Zhao Ru talked about his reappointment as a non-commissioned officer of the army, and was called a duty-bound and law-abiding official, along with the Gwangju governor Chai Zhongxing and the Anfeng governor Lu Jun.

古文：时金人内变，有旨令献料敌、备边二策。
现代文：当时金人内部发生变乱，皇上下诏令百官献料敌、备边二策。
English: At that time, there was a mutiny within the goldsmiths, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering all officials to donate materials to the enemy and prepare for a two-pronged strategy.

古文：其料敌之策曰： 祸乱犹在河北，未遽至河南，盖豪雄择形势，大盗窥货宝，金帛重器俱聚河北，河南无大川为之险，欲起安所凭？
现代文：赵汝谈的料敌策略说 ：祸乱仍在河北，还没到河南，英雄豪杰就选占地形，大盗贼就窥伺财物，金帛和重要的物品都集中在河北，河南没有大川作为险要，想起事有什么凭靠？
English: Zhao Ru's strategy of spotting the enemy said: the calamity is still in Hebei, it has not yet reached Henan, the hero hero selects the terrain, the big thief spies on the property, the gold ingots and important items are concentrated in Hebei, Henan does not have the big river as the key, what is the basis for remembering things?

古文：且金素以河南近我，置守多完颜氏亲党，其下亦令蕃汉错居，所以防虑备尽。
现代文：况且金人一向认为河南离我们近，设置的守将大多是完颜氏亲党，他们的下属也是蕃汉杂居，防备的很严密。
English: Moreover, the Jin people have always believed that Henan is close to us. Most of the garrisons were set up by relatives of the Yan clan, and their subordinates were also mixed Han Chinese, so they were very closely guarded.

古文：纵彼丧乱，守将欲畔则自畔，何至相率尽反。
现代文：即使金国发生变乱，守将想反叛也是单独反叛，不会都反叛。
English: Even if there is a revolution in China, the generals who want to rebel will rebel alone, they will not all rebel.

古文：然有天下者，自不容易一日废备，岂以金人存亡之候为吾缓急哉！ 其备边之策曰： 今边州大抵无城，缺兵少粮，铠仗不足。
现代文：但是统治天下的人，自然不会一天废去守备，怎能以金人存亡的时间为我们的缓急呢！ 他的备边策略说 ：现在沿边州郡一般都没建城，缺兵少粮，铠甲、武器不足。
English: But the people who rule the world, naturally, will not waste a single day on defense, how can we prioritize the time for the survival of the Jin people! His preparation strategy said: Now, there is generally no city built along the border counties, soldiers are short of food, armor and weapons are insufficient.

古文：若使自办，何所取资？
现代文：如果让各州自己筹办，到哪儿去取？
English: If the states are left to do it on their own, where are they going to get it?

古文：丐诸朝廷，安得力给？
现代文：向朝廷请求，朝廷怎能全力供给？
English: Ask the imperial court, how can the imperial court supply the best?

古文：若仿古藩封，拔用英杰守郡，则并租税市榷之利尽与之，免其共贡，上不置监临，下悉听选辟，民得自赋，兵得自募，凡百悉听所为。
现代文：如果仿照古时候封藩的做法，选拔英杰去守卫边郡，把租税、贸易的收入都给他们，免去他们向朝廷的贡奉，在他们的上面不设监督官，他们的僚属一律听任他们自己选用，他们可以自行征收赋税，自行招募士兵，一切都由他们自行决定。
English: If, following the example of the practice of feudal fiefdoms in ancient times, they selected heroes to guard the border counties, gave them all the income from taxes and trade, exempted them from paying tribute to the imperial court, and did not set up supervisors above them, their subordinates would be left to their own choice. They could collect taxes on their own, recruit soldiers on their own, and decide everything on their own.

古文：其有功者亦不遽徙，就峻爵秩，增异车服，给美田宅，官其子孙，凡可优宠，无不极至，使内为公卿，虽贵曾不如守边之乐。
现代文：他们中有功的人也不立即调走，给他们封官拜爵，增置车马、服装等仪仗，给他们好的土地、住宅，让他们的子孙做官，凡是可以对他们表示优待宠爱的，没有不达到顶点的，使在朝内任公卿的人，虽然地位显贵也不如守卫边郡的快乐。
English: Those of them who had meritorious deeds were not immediately transferred away, they were given titles of officials and knights, they were given additional cars, horses, clothing and other honors, they were given good land, houses, and their children and grandchildren were made officials. Anyone who could show them preferential treatment and favor did not fail to reach the top, so that the people who served as court nobles in the imperial court, although their status was prominent, were not as happy as the guards of the border counties.

古文：如此则有才者争自奋励，缓急必能出死力报上。 于后河南二十余年犹为金守，宋沿边诸郡权大削，兵事无肯任责者，汝谈之言若蓍龟然。
现代文：这样有才能的人就会争相尽力，国家危难的时候他们一定能出死力报答皇上。 以后河南二十多年仍是金国的辖境，宋沿边各郡的权力被大大削夺，没有肯承担兵事的人，赵汝谈的话就像耆龟一样可以作为借鉴。
English: Such talented people will strive to do their best, and when the country is in danger, they will surely be able to repay the emperor with their utmost efforts. In the next twenty years, Henan will still be under the jurisdiction of Jin, and the power of counties along the Song Dynasty will be greatly reduced. For those who are not willing to undertake military affairs, Zhao Ru's words can be used as a reference like a tortoise.

古文：改湖北提举常平，振饥尽力。
现代文：赵汝谈改任湖北提举常平，他尽力赈济饥民。
English: Zhao Ru talked about being transferred to Changping, Hubei Province, and he did his best to feed the hungry.

古文：知温州，改知外宗正，作诗勉其族属，皆望风而化。
现代文：他任温州知州，改为知外宗正，他写诗劝勉自己的族人，族人都按他说的去做。
English: He changed the name of Wenzhou from Chizhou to Chigaizongzheng. He wrote poems to exhort his people, and they all did as he said.

古文：迁江西提举常平。
现代文：赵汝谈任江西提举常平。
English: Zhao Ru talks about the appointment of Jiangxi to promote Changping.

古文：宁宗崩，以哀痛得疾。
现代文：宁宗去世，赵汝谈因哀痛而得病。
English: Ningzong passed away, and Zhao Rutan fell ill from grief.

古文：贺理宗表，力寓劝戒。
现代文：他的贺理宗即位表，极力把劝戒的意思寓在其中。
English: His Hori Sect enthronement chart, he tried his best to convey the meaning of exhortation in it.

古文：陈硕曰： 此谏书也。 数丐祠，授江西转运判官，辞不获命，之官一月，以言者罢。
现代文：陈硕说 ：这是劝谏书。 赵汝谈多次请求担任管理宫观一类的闲职，他被授予江西转运判官，他推辞没被允许，在职一个月，因受弹劾而被罢免。
English: Chen Shuo said: "This is a letter of advice. Zhao Rong repeatedly requested to serve as an idle post such as the management of Gongguan, he was awarded the Jiangxi Transportation Judge, his resignation was not allowed, he was in office for one month, and he was removed from office due to impeachment.

古文：先是，汝谈因疾去官，言者谓其傲睨轩冕，不乐为世用。
现代文：先前，赵汝谈因病罢官，台谏官认为他轻视官禄爵位，不乐意为世所用。
English: Previously, when Zhao Ru talked about resigning from his post due to illness, Taiwanese eunuchs thought that he despised his official salary and title and was not willing to be used by the world.

古文：至是弥远不与祠，乃杜门著述。
现代文：这时史弥远不给他管理宫观的闲职，他就闭门著述。
English: At this time, Shimi refused to give him the sinecure of managing the palace, and he began to write behind closed doors.

古文：端平初，以礼部郎官召，入对言： 倚用老成，广集忠智，访求众敝之原，辟取可行之策，以饬积蠹之蛊，而成终泰之功者，愿加圣心焉。 又言： 大佞似忠，大奸似圣，未免信向而擢任之。
现代文：端平初年，赵汝谈以礼部郎官的身份被召用，他奏对说： 依靠和任用老成的人，广泛搜集忠心和有才智的人，访求各种弊端产生的根源，征求和采取可行的策略，来整顿所有的弊政，最终成就天下安泰的功业，希望陛下能留心这些。 又说： 特别能说会道的人好像很忠心，特别奸邪的人好像很圣明，人君免不了信任并提拔他们。
English: In the first year of Duanping, Zhao Ruan was summoned as the official of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and he said: Relying on and appointing experienced people, extensively collecting loyal and talented people, investigating the root causes of various malpractices, soliciting and adopting feasible strategies to rectify all maladministration, and ultimately achieving the cause of peace and security in the world, I hope Your Majesty can pay attention to these. He also said: People who can speak in particular seem to be very loyal, and those who are particularly wicked seem to be very holy. People cannot help but trust and promote them.

古文：始未见甚失，久乃浸至差讹，则纲维之臣将不能不执，议论之士将不得不言。
现代文：开始看不见什么大过失，时间长了渐渐地就会出现差错，那么辅佐朝政的大臣不能不管，议论的士大夫将不能不说。
English: At first, no big mistakes can be seen, but as time goes on, mistakes will gradually appear, so the minister assisting the government can't ignore it, and the debating scholar will have to say it.

古文：执之坚，宁不疑其侵权？
现代文：管的紧，能不怀疑他们侵权？
English: Can we not suspect them of infringement?

古文：言之数，宁不意其卖直？
现代文：说的多，能不认为他们谋求恩宠？
English: If they talk a lot, can we not conclude that they are looking for favours?

古文：至是则不特是非邪正易位，而黜陟予夺失中多矣。 又曰： 外之得以窒吾听、杂吾目、扰吾天君者，以吾未得虚一而静之理也。
现代文：如果这样的话就不仅是是非邪正的位置颠倒了，而且进退人才的原则也违背了。 他又说： 外人能堵住我们的耳朵、弄花我们的眼睛、扰乱我们的心，是我们没能做到虚一而静。
English: If this is the case, not only will the position of right and wrong be reversed, but the principle of advancing and retreating talents will also be violated.He also said: Outsiders can block our ears, dazzle our eyes, and disturb our hearts.

古文：苟得之，导我声色而不能入，投我宝货而不能中，扇我以功名而不能动，凝然湛然，孰得干之哉。 改秘书少监兼权直学士院。
现代文：如果做到了这一点，用声色引诱我们也不能陷进去，用财物贿赂我们也不能去符合他们，用功名煽动我们也不能动摇，我们既坚强又清廉，谁能干扰我们呢。 赵汝谈改任秘书少监兼权直学士院。
English: If we do this, we can't be enticed by the tone of voice, we can't fall into the trap, we can't be bribed with money and goods to conform to them, and we can't be swayed by the name of the work, we are both strong and clean, who can interfere with us.Zhao Ru talks about being appointed secretary of the juvenile detention center and the right to direct the academy.

古文：时集议出师，汝谈反覆言不可轻战，而和尤非计。
现代文：当时朝廷决定出兵，赵汝谈反复讲不可轻易开战，但讲和也不是好的计策。
English: At that time, the imperial court decided to send troops. Zhao Ru repeatedly said that it was not easy to go to war, but it was not a good strategy to talk about peace.

古文：既而三京收复，虽前言用兵不便者亦喜，汝谈独有忧色。
现代文：不久宋兵收复了三京，即使先前说用兵不利的人也高兴，只有赵汝谈面带忧虑。
English: Soon, the Song soldiers recaptured Sanjing. Even those who had previously said that the use of soldiers was unfavorable were happy. Only Zhao Ru was worried.

古文：未几，洛师败，朝论始服其先见。
现代文：不久，洛阳兵败，朝中的议论才佩服他有先见之明。
English: Not long after, Luoyang was defeated, and the discussion in the imperial court was impressed by his foresight.

古文：迁宗正少卿，兼权直，兼编修国史、检讨实录，兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：赵汝谈升为宗正少卿，兼任权直，兼编修国史、检讨实录，兼崇政殿说书。
English: Zhao Ru was promoted to Zong Zheng Shaoqing, and concurrently served as Quan Zhi, the editor of the national history, the review of the actual record, and the commentary of the Chongzheng Palace.

古文：因讲《论语》而言汉元帝恭俭无过，惟以刚不克改，明不能绎，优柔不断，而汉业遂衰。
现代文：他趁讲解《论语》时说汉元帝端正、严肃、俭朴，没有过错，只是因为他不能改变自己的固执，虽清明却不能推究，优柔寡断，汉朝的基业才衰落。
English: He took advantage of the explanation of "The Analects" to say that Emperor Han Yuan was upright, serious and frugal, and there was no fault, but because he could not change his stubbornness, although he was clear, he could not investigate, and he was indecisive, the foundation of the Han Dynasty declined.

古文：权吏部侍郎，升侍读，兼直学士院，兼同修国史院同修撰，以所注《易》进讲。
现代文：赵汝谈为权吏部侍郎，升为侍读，兼直学士院，兼同修国史院同修撰，以自己注释的《易》向皇上讲解。
English: Zhao Ruan was the attendant of the Department of Government Officials, and was promoted to attendant reader. He was also a member of the Academy of Direct Education and a fellow student of the Academy of National History, and he explained to the emperor with his own commentary of Yi.

古文：时朝议履亩称楮，汝谈言非便，迕时宰意。
现代文：当时朝廷决定按亩核算钱，赵汝谈认为不利，违背了当时宰相的意思。
English: At that time, the imperial court decided to calculate money according to mu, which Zhao Ruan thought was unfavorable and violated the intention of the prime minister at that time.

古文：京师军变，宰相乞贬秩，上已允，汝谈奏恐失体，持不可。
现代文：京城发生军队变乱，宰相请求贬官，皇上已答应，赵汝谈上奏认为这样恐怕有失大体，不可行。
English: An army mutiny occurred in the capital, the prime minister requested to be demoted, the emperor has agreed, and Zhao Ru said that he thought that this was probably a bad idea and not feasible.

古文：草答诏，以为贬秩易，审举措难，宰相滋不悦。
现代文：他起草答诏，认为贬官容易，制定好措施难，宰相更不高兴。
English: He drafted a reply, arguing that it was easy to demote officials, but difficult to formulate good measures. The prime minister was even more displeased.

古文：以言去国，提举崇禧观。
现代文：赵汝谈因论事离开朝廷，担任提举崇禧观的官职。
English: Zhao Ruan left the imperial court because of the controversy and assumed the official position of promoting Chong Xizong.

古文：起知婺州，四辞不允。
现代文：他被重新任用为婺州知州，四次推辞都没允许。
English: He was reappointed as Zhangzhou chizhou, and the four times of rejection were not allowed.

古文：至郡，力丐祠。
现代文：到婺州后，又极力请求担任管理宫观的闲职。
English: After arriving in Zhangzhou, he also strongly requested to take on the sinecure of managing Gonggu.

古文：召赴行在，四辞。
现代文：朝廷召他入京，他四次推辞。
English: The imperial court invited him to enter the capital, but he declined four times.

古文：权礼部侍郎兼学士院，力辞兼直。
现代文：赵汝谈为权礼部侍郎兼直学士院，他极力推辞兼直。
English: Zhao Ru talks about being the attendant of the ceremonial department of power and the academy of directness, and he strongly refuses to be direct.

古文：时金兵新破，三阃增秩，称提官楮，四郡获赏。
现代文：当时刚打败金兵，三帅增加官俸，按功劳提高官钱，四郡获得奖赏。
English: At that time, just after defeating the gold soldiers, the three commanders-in-chief increased the official salary, increased the official money according to their merits, and the four counties received the highest reward.

古文：汝谈独蹙頞，登对，首疏言： 边面无可倚仗，乞超越拘挛，简拔俊杰，如吴用周瑜、鲁肃，晋任祖逖、陶侃故事，使之各分方面，连数十城，推毂授权，尽归赐履。
现代文：只有赵汝谈感到忧愁，他登廷奏对，首先上疏说： 边境没什么可以倚仗的，请朝廷不拘一格，选拔俊杰，像东吴重用周瑜、鲁肃，晋任用祖逖、陶侃那样，让他们分别负责各方面，连接几十座城，推荐人才和授权给他们，都由京官负责。
English: Zhao Rutan was the only one who felt sad. He went to the court to make a speech. First, Shang Zuo said, "There is nothing to rely on at the border. Please ask the court to be eclectic and select outstanding people. Like Eastern Wu used Zhou Yu and Rusu, and Jin used Zu Xi and Tao Kan, let them be responsible for various aspects, connect dozens of cities, and recommend talents and authorize them. Beijing officials are responsible for all of this."

古文：巴蜀一人，荆襄一人，两淮各一人，一切便宜行事，不复更从中御，庶几伸缩由己，机用出心。 盖推广乡者备边之策。
现代文：巴蜀安排一人，荆襄安排一人，两淮各安排一人，一切事情都不须请示而灵活处理，不再由朝廷从中干预，这样是伸缩由他们自己，各种策略出于他们的意图。 这是在推广他从前提出的备边策略。
English: Bashu arranges one person, Jingxiang arranges one person, the two Huai each arrange one person, all things are handled flexibly without having to ask for instructions, and the court no longer intervenes, so the expansion and contraction is done by themselves, and various strategies are based on their intentions.

古文：且曰： 臣之此策，行于开禧未用兵之前，决不至罹今日之患。 其论楮法，尤中时敝，上称叹久之，且谓： 卿文学高世，宜代予言，力辞何为？ 卒以老祈免，章四上，免兼直，改侍讲。数日，仍兼直学士院，五辞。
现代文：他还说 ：我的这个策略，在开禧用兵之前施行，决不至于遭受今天的祸患。 他议论钱币法，非常切中当时的弊病，皇上称赞了很久，并说： 你文章博学超出了世俗，应该代替我讲话，为什么极力推辞呢？ 赵汝谈最终因年老请求罢官，四次上章，被免去兼直，改任侍讲，数日后，他仍兼直学士院，推辞了五次。
English: He also said, "This strategy of mine, carried out before the beginning of the jubilee, will never suffer today's disaster." He talked about the monetary law, which was very relevant to the ills of the time, and the emperor praised it for a long time, and said, "Your article is more learned than worldly, you should speak in my place, why do you strongly refuse?" Zhao Rong finally asked to resign because of old age, four times the chapter, was removed from concurrently, and was reappointed as an assistant lecturer. A few days later, he was still concurrently at the Academy, and resigned five times.

古文：权给事中，权刑部尚书，及卒，转两官。遣表上，又转四官。
现代文：赵汝谈为权给事中，权刑部尚书，他去世后，转升两官，遗表献上后，又转升四官。
English: Zhao Ru said that he was promoted to the second rank after his death, and to the fourth rank after his will was presented.

古文：汝谈天资绝人，沈思高识，自少至老，无一日去书册。
现代文：赵汝谈天资超人，思想深邃具有远见卓识，从小到老，没有一天离开书籍的。
English: Zhao Ru talks about superhuman talent, profound thinking, visionary, and never leaving books from childhood to old age.

古文：其论《易》，以为为占者作；书《尧》、《舜》二典宜合为一，禹功只施于河洛，《洪范》非箕子之作；《诗》不以《小序》为信；《礼记》杂出诸生之手；《周礼》宜傅会女主之书。
现代文：他论述《易》，认为是为占卜的人而写的；《尚书》的《尧典》、《舜典》应该合二为一，大禹的功劳只表现在河洛，《洪范》不是箕子写的；《诗》不以《小序》为真实；《礼记》是很多人共同完成的；《周礼》是适合附会临朝执政的王后或太后的书。
English: He discussed "Yi" and believed that it was written for diviners; "Shang Shu"'s "Shan Duan" and "Shan Duan" should be combined into one, Dayu's merit is only manifested in Helo, "Hong Fan" is not written by Shanzi; "Poetry" does not take "Small Prelude" as true; "Li Ji" is jointly completed by many people; "Zhou Li" is a book suitable for the queen or queen mother of the ruling dynasty.

古文：要亦卓绝特立之见。
现代文：总结得十分卓绝，并有独到见解。
English: An excellent summary with a unique perspective.

古文：为文章有天巧。
现代文：赵汝谈写文章自然巧妙。
English: Zhao Ru is naturally skillful in writing articles.

古文：笃于伦谊而忘仇怨，御史王益祥尝劾之，后汝谈官其乡，益祥愧不敢见，汝谈乃数过之，相得欢甚。
现代文：他坚持伦理道德并不记仇怨，御史王益祥曾弹劾过他，后来赵汝谈在他的家乡做官，王益祥羞愧不敢见他，于是赵汝谈多次去拜访王益祥，他们二人相处得十分融洽。
English: He insisted on ethics and morality and did not hold grudges. Wang Yixiang, the governor, once impeached him. Later, Zhao Rucheng became an official in his hometown. Wang Yixiang was ashamed and did not dare to see him. So Zhao Rucheng visited Wang Yixiang many times. The two of them got along very well.

古文：尝论议韩非、李斯皆有荀卿之才，惟其富贵利欲之心重，故世得而贱之，惟卿独能守其身，不苟希合，士何可不自重哉。
现代文：赵汝谈曾议论韩非、李斯都有荀卿的才能，只是他们贪图富贵利欲的心思重，所以被世人轻视，只有荀卿保持自己的清白，不苟合，士大夫有什么可以不自重呢。
English: Zhao Rudan once said that Han Fei and Li Si both had the talent of Lord Zou, but they were despised by the world because of their greed for wealth and profit. Only Lord Zou kept his innocence and did not commit adultery. What can a scholar do without self-respect?

古文：所著有《易》、《书》、《诗》、《论语》、《孟子》、《周礼》、《礼记》、《荀子》、《庄子》、《通鉴》、《杜诗注》。
现代文：他著有《易注》、《书注》、《诗注》、《论语注》、《孟子注》、《周礼注》、《礼记注》、《荀子注》、《庄子注》、《通鉴注》、《杜诗注》。
English: He is the author of "Easy Note," "Book Note," "Poetry Note," "Essay Note," "Mencius Note," "Chou Li Note," "Rite Note," "Hangul Note," "Zhuangzi Note," "Tongjian Note" and "Du Shi Note."

古文：赵汝谠，字蹈中，少俶傥有轶材，智略出人上。
现代文：赵必愿，字立夫，是广西经略安抚赵崇宪的儿子。
English: Zhao Bingyan, also known as Zhe Lifu, is the son of Zhao Chongxian, who was pacified in Guangxi Province.

古文：龙泉叶适尝过其家，汝谠年少，衣短后衣，不得避。
现代文：他不到二十岁时，遭祖母丧，因悲哀他骨瘦如柴。
English: He was less than twenty years old when his grandmother died, and his grief left him skeletal.

古文：未弱冠，丁大母忧，哀毁骨立。服阕，以大父汝愚遗表，补承务郎。开禧元年，铨监平江府粮料院，调常熟丞。
现代文：服丧期满后，因祖父赵汝愚的遗表，他被补官为承务郎。开禧元年，他铨试后为监平江府粮料院，调为常熟丞。
English: After his period of mourning was over, he was promoted to the position of assistant steward due to his grandfather Zhao Ruwu's will. In the first year of the millennium, he was appointed as supervisor of the Pingjiang Grain Refinery and transferred to the position of journeyman.

古文：嘉定七年举进士，知崇安县，剖判如流，吏不能困。
现代文：嘉定七年，他被推举参知进士考试，任崇安县知县，辨别各种事情都很清楚，官吏不能阻挠他。
English: In the seventh year of Jiading, he was promoted to the highest rank in the examination for the promotion of scholars, and was appointed as the leading scholar of Chong'an County. He was very clear in distinguishing all kinds of things, and the officials could not obstruct him.

古文：修学政，立催科法，列户名为三等，以三期为约，足者旌之，未足者宽以趣之，逾期不纳者里胥程督之，民皆感怿愿输。
现代文：他整顿学政，定征收租税的法令条目，把户名列为三等，以三期为限，交足的给以表彰，没交足的给以宽限，过期不交的里胥负责监督，百姓都很高兴愿意交纳。
English: He rectified the school administration, set the items of the decree for tax collection, listed the household name as the third grade, with a three-period limit, commended those who paid in full, gave a grace period for those who did not pay in full, and supervised those who did not pay in time, and the people were very happy to pay.

古文：革胥吏鬻盐之敝。
现代文：赵必愿革除了胥吏卖盐的弊政。
English: Zhao would like to get rid of the bad policy of selling salt in addition to cadres.

古文：擅发光化社仓活饥民，帅怒，逮吏欲惩之，必愿曰： 刍牧职也，吏何罪。 束檐俟谴，帅无以诘而止。
现代文：赵必愿擅自发放光化社仓的粮食救活饥民，统帅大怒，抓起小吏想惩治他，赵必愿说： 这是守臣的职责，小吏有什么罪？ 
English: Zhao Biyi would like to distribute the grain from the Gwanghwa warehouse without authorization to save the starving people. The commander was furious and grabbed the minor official to punish him. Zhao Biyi would like to say: This is the duty of a vassal, what is the crime of the minor official?

古文：旧有均惠仓，无所储，必愿捐缗钱增籴，至二千石。
现代文：他就收拾行装等着受责备，统帅没有什么理由能责问他就结束了这件事。原来有个均惠仓，仓中没什么储备，赵必愿捐钱增买了粮食，使仓储达二千石。
English: He packed up and waited to be blamed, and the commander had no reason to blame him and ended the matter. Originally, there was an average warehouse, and there was little reserve in the warehouse. Zhao was willing to donate money to buy more grain, so that the storage reached two thousand koku.

古文：力主义役之法，乡选善士，任以推排，入资买田助役，则勉有产之家，有感化者，出己田以倡，遂遍行一邑，上下便之。
现代文：他极力主张实行义役法，在乡里间选择善良的人，让他们负责推排，他拿出钱财买田助役，劝勉有资产的人家，有受到感化的人，拿出自己的土地进行倡导，这个风气在这个地区流行起来，上下都很方便。
English: He strongly advocated the implementation of the volunteer law, selecting good-hearted people in the countryside and letting them be responsible for pushing the platoon, he took out money and resources to buy fields to help, and encouraged people with assets and people who had been influenced to take out their own land to advocate. This culture became popular in this area, and it was very convenient to go up and down.

古文：台府以闻，下其式八郡四十八县。
现代文：台府听说后，在八郡四十八县颁布了这个办法。
English: After hearing about this, the Taiwanese government issued this measure in eight counties and forty-eight counties.

古文：秩满，民共立祠刻石。
现代文：赵必愿任职年满，当地百姓共同建立祠堂，刻上碑文纪念他。
English: At the end of his term of office, Zhao would like the local people to jointly build an ancestral hall and engrave an inscription to commemorate him.

古文：授湖、广总所干办公事。
现代文：赵必愿被授予湖、广总所干办公事。
English: Zhao would like to be assigned to the General Office of Hubei and Guangxi for work.

古文：丁父忧，居丧尽礼，贻书问学于黄干。
现代文：遭父丧，他为父亲守丧完全符合礼节，他给黄干写信请教学术问题。
English: When his father passed away, it was perfectly proper for him to attend his father's funeral. He wrote to Huang Gan to ask for advice on academic issues.

古文：服除，差充两浙运司主管文字。再考，特差充提领安边所主管文字。
现代文：守丧期满后，赵必愿被差派为两浙运司主管文字，再次考核他为官的政绩后，他被特差派为提领安边所主管文字。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, Zhao Bingyan was sent to be the chief of the two Zhejiang Transportation Departments. After re-evaluating his performance as an official, he was specially sent to be the chief of the Anbian District.

古文：差知全州，陛辞，奏乞下道、江二州访周惇颐之后。
现代文：赵必愿被差遣为全州知州，他向皇上辞别时，上奏请求去道州、江州寻访周敦颐的后代。
English: Zhao Bin would like to be sent to Jeonju Chizhou. When he bade farewell to the emperor, he requested to go to Daozhou and Jiangzhou to visit the descendants of Zhou Dunyi.

古文：知常州，改知处州，陈折帛纳银之害，皆得请。
现代文：赵必愿任常州知州，改为处州知州，他向朝廷陈述折帛交纳银子的弊病，他的建议都被采纳。
English: Zhao would like to change the name of Changzhou Zhizhou to Zhenzhou Zhizhou. He made a statement to the imperial court about the evils of accepting bribes, and his suggestions were all accepted.

古文：移泉州，罢白土课及免差吏榷铁，讽诸邑行义役。
现代文：赵必愿调到泉州任职，罢去白土课税并免除了差吏榷铁，劝各县实行义役。
English: Zhao Bin would like to be transferred to Quanzhou to take office, remove the white soil tax and exempt the police officers from the iron, and persuade the counties to implement the voluntary service.

古文：秋旱，力讲行荒政，乞拨永储、广储二仓米振救。
现代文：秋季天旱，他极力讲求救灾的事，请求调拨永储、广储两处粮仓的米赈济灾民。
English: In the autumn drought, he tried his best to talk about the need for disaster relief, and requested the allocation of permanent storage and wide storage of two grain silos to help the victims of the disaster.

古文：差主管官告院。
现代文：赵必愿被差派为主管官告院。
English: Zhao would like to be sent to the People's Procuratorate.

古文：越五日，诏依旧主管官告院兼知台州，一循大父之政，察民疾苦，抚摩凋瘵，修养济院，建陈瓘祠，政教兼举。
现代文：过了五天，皇上下诏让他仍旧主管官告院并兼任台州知州，他完全继承祖父的为政作风，访察百姓的疾苦，抚恤贫困的人，修养济院，建陈馞祠，政事和教化都取得了成绩。
English: Five days later, the emperor issued an imperial edict to let him still be the official in charge of suing the court and concurrently serve as Taizhou Zhizhou. He completely inherited his grandfather's style of politics, visited the people's sufferings, supported the poor, cultivated the hospital, built the Chenluo Shrine, and achieved achievements in politics and enlightenment.

古文：端平元年，以直秘阁知婺州。
现代文：端平元年，赵必愿以直秘阁的身份任婺州知州。
English: In the first year of Dengping, Zhao Bixin was willing to be appointed as the direct secretary of Zhangzhou Chizhou.

古文：至郡，免催绍定六年分小户绫罗钱三万缗有奇。
现代文：他到婺州后，免去了绍定六年小户人家承担的三万多缗绫罗钱。
English: After he arrived in Zhangzhou, he was relieved of the more than 30,000 rupees that small households in Shaoding had to bear for six years.

古文：立淳良、顽慢二籍，劝惩人户。
现代文：设立善良、刁顽两种户籍，以便劝戒人们。
English: To set up two kinds of household registration, "good-natured" and "stubborn," so as to admonish people.

古文：措置广惠仓及诸仓积谷。
现代文：赵必愿筹措广惠仓和其他粮仓的存粮。
English: Zhao would like to collect the grain stored in Guanghui and other granaries.

古文：奏乞宽减内帑绫罗，申省免用旧例，预解诸色窠名钱，罢开化税场。
现代文：他上奏请求减少皇宫仓库的绫罗，向户部申请免用旧例，先废除各种窠名钱，罢去开化税场。
English: He made a petition to reduce the waste of the palace warehouse, and applied to the Household Department for exemption from the old practice, first abolishing all kinds of so-called money, and then opening a chemical tax office.

古文：迁太府寺丞，寻迁度支郎中。
现代文：赵必愿升为太府寺丞，不久升为度支郎中。
English: Zhao would like to be promoted to Dafu-ji-jo, and soon to Doushiro-chung.

古文：诏以汝愚配享宁宗，从必愿请也。
现代文：皇上下诏赵汝愚和宁宗一起享受祭祀，这是赵必愿请求的。
English: Emperor Zhao Ruwu and Emperor Ningzong enjoyed the sacrificial rites together, which was Zhao's request.

古文：兼右司郎中，引见，疏言：
现代文：赵必愿兼任右司郎中，皇上召见他，他上疏说：
English: The emperor summoned Zhao Bibo, who also served as his right-hand man, and said to him:

古文：陛下英明密运，断出于独，固欲一切转移之。
现代文： 陛下英明有运气，独自决断，本想扭转一切。
English: His Majesty had the wisdom and the luck to make his own decision, and he wanted to turn everything around.

古文：然而大权若在我，或者犹有下移之疑；众正若已开，或者犹有旁径之疑。
现代文：然而大权如果掌握在自己手里，或许还有权力转移下面的疑虑；各条正路如果都已打开，或许还怀疑有其他的门路。
English: However, if the power is in your own hands, you may still have doubts about the power transfer; if all the right roads have been opened, you may still suspect that there are other doors.

古文：策免二相，销天变也，去者固难以复留，留者恐终于引去。
现代文：策封和罢免二个宰相，可以消除天灾，被罢免的本来就难再留下来，留下来的恐怕最终也要辞官。
English: The appointment and dismissal of two prime ministers can eliminate natural disasters. It is difficult for those who have been dismissed to remain, and those who remain may eventually have to resign.

古文：虚鼎席以待故老，疑者或意其未必来，而况在数千里之外；责次补以任大政，疑者或意其不敢专，而况于不安其位。
现代文：留着三公、宰相的高位等待元老旧臣，怀疑的人或许还是不来，何况在数千里之外；按位次任命官员掌握大政，怀疑的人或许还是不敢专心工作，何况他们的官位也不安稳。
English: Retaining the high positions of the three princes and the prime minister, waiting for the veterans and old ministers, the doubters may still not come, let alone thousands of miles away; the officials appointed by order of precedence control the government, the doubters may still not dare to concentrate on work, let alone their official position is not stable.

古文：中书，政之本也。今果何时，尚可含糊意向以启天下之疑乎？
现代文：中书，是政事的根本，现在是什么时候，还能含糊意图而使天下人产生疑虑吗？
English: Zhongshu, is the foundation of politics. When is it now, can you still have vague intentions and cause people around the world to have doubts?

古文：亲擢台谏，开言路也，用之未久者，何为轻于易去？
现代文：亲自选拔台谏，是广开言路，任用不长时间，为什么就轻易罢去？
English: Personally selecting the chairman is a wide-open way, the appointment is not long, why is it easy to leave?

古文：去之未几，何为使之复来？
现代文：罢去不久，为什么让他再来？
English: He'll be gone soon, why let him come back?

古文：召于外服者，不知果能用之而必坚；除目周行者，不知果能听之而无讳乎？
现代文：从地方召用的人，不知究竟能不能被重用而必定安心吗？派遣到外地巡察的官员，不知能不能听从建议而没有避讳呢？
English: People who are called from local areas, I do not know whether they can be reused and must be at ease? Officials sent to inspect in the field, I do not know whether they can listen to suggestions without shying away?

古文：朝廷除授，军国赏罚，本至公也，今有姓名未达于庙堂，而迁擢忽由于中出，斥逐三衙，竟不指名罪状，而人始得以疑陛下矣。
现代文： 朝廷任官，国家赏罚，本来是最公正的，现在有姓名没有在朝廷出现过，而提升他的命令忽然从内廷传出，斥逐三衙，竟不说明是因为什么罪名，于是人们开始对陛下产生疑虑了。
English: The appointment of officials by the Imperial Court and the rewards and punishments by the state were originally the most just. Now, there is a person whose name has not appeared in the Imperial Court, but the order to promote him suddenly came from the Inner Court, expelling the three emperors without even explaining the reason for the crime, so people began to have doubts about His Majesty.

古文：一除目之颁，一号令之出，虽未必由于阉宦，而人或疑于阉宦；虽未必由于私谒，而人或疑于私谒；虽未必由于戚畹宗邸，而人或疑于戚畹宗邸。
现代文：颁布一个任免官吏的名单，发布一项命令，即使不一定是出自宦官的意图，而人们或许就怀疑宦官；即使不一定是出于宠臣的意图，而人们或许就怀疑宠臣；即使不一定是出于皇亲国戚的意图，而人们或许就怀疑皇亲国戚。
English: To promulgate a list of officials to be appointed and dismissed, to issue an order, even if it is not necessarily from the intention of eunuchs, and people may suspect eunuchs; even if it is not necessarily from the intention of favorites, and people may suspect favorites; even if it is not necessarily from the intention of imperial relatives, and people may suspect imperial relatives.

古文：夫天下者，祖宗之天下也，非陛下所私有也，陛下虽有去敝之心，而动涉可疑之迹，陛下亦何乐于此。
现代文：天下，是祖宗的天下，不是陛下所私有的，陛下虽然有革除弊病的心思，然而却做出让人产生怀疑的事，陛下在这方面还有什么快乐呢？ 
English: The world, the world of the ancestors, is not His Majesty's private property. Although His Majesty has the heart to eradicate the ills, he has done something that makes people doubt. What joy does His Majesty have in this regard?

古文：时论伟之。
现代文：赵必愿的上疏受到当时人的赞扬。
English: Zhao Bingyan's asceticism was praised by people at the time.

古文：三京兵败，边事甚亟，诏条上守御计，必愿言十事：下哀痛之诏，合江淮之兵，救江陵之急，节财用之宜，縻议和之使，抚无归之民，处北来之众，置镇抚之使，择帅阃之代，拔未用之将，皆切于边要。
现代文：宋朝攻打三京的军队失败，边事十分紧急，皇上诏命大臣上奏防守的计策，赵必愿讲十件事：颁布哀悼的诏书，汇合江淮地区的军队，解救江陵的危急，节省财物，不要派使臣议和，抚恤无家可归的百姓，安置从北方来的人民，设置安抚使，选择更替的将帅，提拔没被重用的将领，这些都切中边事的要害。
English: The Song Dynasty's attack on the troops of the Three Kingdoms failed, the border affairs were very urgent, the emperor's edict ordered the minister to play a defensive strategy, Zhao would like to talk about ten things: to issue a condolence edict, to unite the troops in the Jianghuai region, to relieve the crisis in the Yangtze River, to save money, not to send envoys to discuss peace, to support the homeless people, to resettle the people from the north, to set up a pacifying envoy, to choose a replacement general, to promote generals who have not been reused, these are the key issues of the border affairs.

古文：政府议楮币日轻，欲令诸州再用印及他为称提之法，必愿力争不可。
现代文：政府议论纸币日益贬值，想命令各州再印制并采用其他称提法，赵必愿力争这样不可行。
English: The government talks about the depreciation of paper money and wants to order the states to reprint and adopt other denominations, but Zhao is determined to make this impossible.

古文：嘉熙元年，贻书政府，论边防事宜，授右司郎中。
现代文：嘉熙元年，赵必愿给政府写信，论述边防的事，他被任命为右司郎中。
English: In the first year of the Jiaxi Dynasty, Zhao Bing would like to write a letter to the government to discuss the border defense, and he was appointed as the junior secretary of the Right Division.

古文：火灾，必愿应诏上封事，曰： 开边稔祸之刑，牵制而未行；激变弃城之戮，姑息而未举。
现代文：发生火灾，赵必愿应皇帝诏命上封事，他说： 对扩充疆土而酿成祸患的人的处罚，受到制约而没施行；对激起事变、放弃城堡的人的诛杀，因姑息而没执行。
English: In the event of a fire, Zhao Bin would like to make a report in accordance with the Emperor's edict. He said: The punishment of those who caused the disaster by expanding the territory was restricted and not implemented; the killing of those who provoked the incident and abandoned the castle was not carried out due to leniency.

古文：京、襄沦没，祖宗之基业莫能保；淮、蜀蹂躏，赤子之冤魂无所依。
现代文：京、襄沦陷，祖宗的基业没能保住；淮、蜀地区遭受蹂躏，赤子的冤魂失去依托。
English: After the fall of Beijing and Xiangyang, the ancestral inheritance could not be preserved; the Huai and Shu regions were ravaged, and the baby's ghost lost its support.

古文：履亩之令下而加以抑配，称提之法严而重以告讦。
现代文：核实土地的命令下达后却增加了抑配，称提法很严却对告发的人施以重赏。
English: After the order to verify the land was issued, they increased the withholding, saying that the wording was very strict, but they put a heavy reward on the informant.

古文：民无盖藏，每有转壑之忧；士不宿饱，常有思乱之志。 又曰： 台谏、给舍骨鲠之论莫容；左右便嬖浸润之言易入。
现代文：老百姓无屋可住、无物可储，常有转死沟壑的忧患；士大夫吃不饱饭，常有想作乱的志向。 又说： 台谏、给舍忠直的议论不能被容忍，而身边那些靠阿谀奉迎得到宠信的近臣的谗言却很容易被听信。
English: The common people have no house to live in, nothing to store, and are often in the throes of despair; the magistrates do not have enough to eat, and often have the ambition to make trouble. He also said: Taibei, the talk of giving loyalty and honesty can not be tolerated, but the criticisms of those around him who have been favored by the flatterers are easily heard.

古文：春夏常享，阔略于原庙之尊；节钺隆恩，殷勤于邸第之贵。 又曰： 必也正故相专国之罪，严贪夫徇国之诛，思室鬼高明之瞰。
现代文：春季、夏季的常规祭祀，是请求祖宗宽恕；授予高官厚禄是对王侯贵戚的厚待。 又说 ：一定要处治原任宰相专权的罪过，对贪生怕死的人要斩杀，怀念死者高明的建议。
English: The regular sacrifices in spring and summer are to ask for the forgiveness of the ancestors; to grant high-ranking officials a generous reward is to treat princes and noble relatives well; it is also said: it is necessary to punish the sins of the former prime minister's dictatorship, to kill those who are greedy for life and afraid of death, and to remember the advice of the deceased Gao Ming.

古文：先编氓，后亲贵，去木妖竞治之衅；尚坚固，革奢华，戒宴殿无度之宴酣，节内庭不急之营缮。 又论济王及国本事。
现代文：先百姓，后亲贵，除去树木之妖争相统治的祸患；崇尚坚固，革除奢华，劝戒挥霍无度的宴饮，节省宫内不紧迫的营建。 他又论奏济王和立太子的事。
English: First the common people, then the nobility, removed the evil of the tree-demons vying for dominance; advocated solidity, eliminated luxury, discouraged extravagant banquets, and economized on unnecessary construction in the palace.

古文：迁左司郎中，又迁司农少卿兼左司。
现代文：赵必愿升为左司郎中，又升为司农少卿兼左司。
English: Zhao would like to be promoted to the middle of the left sergeant, and then to the Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture and the left sergeant.

古文：转对，言： 正气日消月沮，驯至今日，非惟搢绅不肯论事，下至草茅之士，皆结舌矣。
现代文：他在百官轮次转对时说： 正气被日月消阻遏，以致今日，不只是士大夫不肯议论政事，下至平民百姓，都闭口不谈了。
English: He said at the turn of the hundred officials: "The righteous spirit has been suppressed by the sun and the moon, so that today, not only the officials are unwilling to discuss politics, but also the common people have shut their mouths.

古文：端平初年，沉疴方去，新病未作，陛下犹勤于咨访，如恐不及。
现代文：端平初年，旧病才好，新病还没发作，陛下还勤于询访，恐怕不及时。
English: In the first year of Duanping, the old disease is only good, the new disease has not yet occurred, and His Majesty is still busy with inquiries, I am afraid it is not timely.

古文：今疾攻心腹，决裂将溃，乃不求瞑眩之剂以起其殆，甚可惑也。 又曰： 毋使人臣以指斥怀疑，毋致陛下以厌言得谤。 时直士相继去，故必愿及之。
现代文：现在病势攻入心腹，将要使身体分裂，还不寻求治病的药方来拯救危急，太令人疑惑了。 又说 ：不要让大臣们因受到指责而心怀疑虑，不要使陛下因压制人言而受到非议。 当时忠直的人相继离去，所以赵必愿谈了这些。
English: Now that the disease has entered the heart, it will split the body, and it is too suspicious not to seek a cure to save the critical situation. He also said: Don't let the ministers be suspicious of being accused, and don't let His Majesty be accused of suppressing people's speech. At that time, the loyal people left one after another, so Zhao would like to talk about these.

古文：兼敕令所删修官，拜司农卿，兼职如故。
现代文：赵必愿兼任敕令所删修官，被任命为司农卿，仍兼旧职。
English: Zhao Bingyi concurrently served as the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict of the imperial edict

古文：翼日，改宗正少卿，仍兼删修敕令兼国史编修实录检讨，寻兼左司，迁太府卿，仍兼编修、检讨，迁宗正少卿。
现代文：第二天，他改任宗正少卿，仍兼删修敕令兼国史编修实录检讨，不久兼左司，升为太府卿，仍兼编修、检讨，升为宗正少卿。
English: The next day, he was reappointed as Munezheng Shosho-kyo (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs), and he was still in charge of editing and revising the imperial edict and compiling and revising the historical record. Soon, he was also in charge of the left division, and was promoted to Dafu-kyo (Major Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs), and he was still in charge of editing and revising, and was promoted to Munezheng Shosho-kyo.

古文：诏依旧太府卿，仍兼职，且兼中书门下检正诸房公事。
现代文：皇上诏命他仍任太府卿，仍兼职，并兼中书门下检正诸房公事。
English: The Emperor's edict ordered him to remain as Dafu-kyo, to continue working part-time, and to carry out official duties under the supervision of Zhongshumen.

古文：转对，言： 中才庸主，惟其无所知觉，故言不可入，而败亡随之。
现代文：百官轮次转对时，他说： 一般的人和昏庸的君主，只是他们自己什么也不知道，所以听不进去别人的话，于是失败和灭亡就随之而来。
English: When the dignitaries turned round, he said: Ordinary people and dull monarchs, but they don't know anything themselves, so they can't listen to others, so failure and destruction follow.

古文：陛下作敬天之图，朝夕对越，谓宜天意可回，而荧惑失度，郁攸煽灾，迫近禁门，几毁左藏。
现代文：陛下有顺应天意的抱负，早晨和晚上都做以德配天的事，认为这应该能挽回天意，然而迷惑失去常度，火气形成灾害，逼近宫门，几乎烧毁左藏库。
English: His Majesty had the ambition to comply with the will of heaven, and in the morning and in the evening he did everything to be worthy of heaven, thinking that this should be able to save the will of heaven. However, the delusion lost its constancy, the fire caused disasters, approached the palace gate, and almost burned down the left storehouse.

古文：烟埃方息，白昼陨星，贯日之虹，胁阳之雹，叠见层出。
现代文：烟尘才熄灭，白天掉下星星，遮蔽日光的虹，威胁太阳的冰雹，层出不穷。
English: Smoke and dust only go out, stars fall during the day, rainbows that block sunlight, hailstorms that threaten the sun, and so on.

古文：陛下观时察变，何由致此？
现代文：陛下观察这些变化，为什么会这样？
English: Your Majesty, observing these changes, why is this?

古文：今日之事，动无良策，惟在侧身修行，祈天永命而已。 迁起居舍人，兼职仍旧。
现代文：如今的事，没有好的办法改变，只有修身实践，向天请求统治长久而已。 赵必愿升为起居舍人，仍旧兼职。
English: Nowadays, there is no good way to change things, only to practice self-cultivation and ask the heavens to rule for a long time. Zhao would like to be promoted to a layman and still work part-time.

古文：大水，上封事曰： 海潮毁隘，侵迫禁城，灾异之来，理不虚发，必上畏天戒，下修人事，易沴召和，转移于陛下方寸间耳。 又曰： 《周官》国有大事，则举大询之理。
现代文：发生水灾，赵必愿上封事说： 海潮毁坏堤坝，逼近京城，灾害降临，是有道理的，必须要上畏惧天的惩戒，下整治各种事情，改变灾害不祥之气，召来和气，这些全在陛下是否用心。 又说 ：《周官》认为国家有大事，就要广泛征求意见和建议。
English: In the event of a flood, Zhao Bingyi said in a letter: The sea tides have destroyed the dikes, the capital is approaching, and the disasters are justified. It is necessary to fear the punishment of heaven, rectify all kinds of things, change the ominous atmosphere of disasters, and bring harmony, all of which are in His Majesty's intentions. He also said: "Zhou Guan" believes that the country has major events, and it is necessary to widely solicit opinions and suggestions.

古文：今日之事迫矣，谓宜合众谋，屈君策，上而搢绅，下而刍荛，各陈所见，择其可用之策，以授任事之臣，庶几千虑一得，以成天下人不因之意。 暂兼权右郎官。
现代文：现在事情很急迫了，应该集中大家的谋略，采纳众人好的计策，上至士大夫，下至一般百姓，都可以各抒己见，选择其中可以采用的对策，把这些对策交给管事的大臣，也许能从一千个计谋中得到一个有用的，以成就天下人不因袭的想法。 赵必愿暂时兼任权右郎官。
English: Now that things are very urgent, we should concentrate everyone's strategies and adopt everyone's good strategies. From the highest officials to the ordinary people, everyone can express their own opinions, choose the countermeasures that can be used, and submit these countermeasures to the minister in charge. Perhaps we can get a useful one out of a thousand strategies to achieve the idea that the world does not attack. Zhao will be willing to temporarily concurrently serve as the right-hand man.

古文：言： 财非天雨鬼输，岂可轻施妄用。
现代文：他说 ：财富不是从天上掉下来的，怎能轻率地滥用。
English: He said: "Wealth does not fall from the sky, how can it be abused carelessly.

古文：长此不已，必至颠覆，异时或得罪。
现代文：总这样下去，一定会导致颠覆，到时候或许要犯罪。
English: If it continues like this, it will definitely lead to subversion, and at that time, perhaps, to crime.

古文：今之大夫不能为国生财，程异、皇甫鏄之徒乘间捷出，推敲克剥，以术相胜，凿空取办，以计巧取，事掊敛，献羡余，间架缗钱之令下，而唐祚愈促矣。
现代文：现在的士大夫不能为国家创造财富，程异、皇甫之类的人还乘机搞歪门邪道，想办法剥削百姓，用各种手段争胜，对百姓大肆搜刮，用各种计谋巧取豪夺，从事聚敛，进奉搜刮来的财富，调拨大兴土木所需钱财的命令下达，那么就会像唐朝一样越来越危机了。
English: Today's bureaucrats and magistrates cannot create wealth for the country, and people like Cheng Yi and Wang Fu still take advantage of the opportunity to engage in crooked practices, find ways to exploit the people, use various means to win, scrounge the people, use various tricks to take advantage of the people, engage in accumulation, use the scrounged wealth, and issue orders to allocate the money needed for large-scale civil engineering. Then it will be more and more in crisis like the Tang Dynasty.

古文：愿陛下精思熟虑，约已爱民，必如勾践之卧薪尝胆，必如卫文公之帛衣布冠，可也。 权吏部右侍郎，乞免兼检正，从之。
现代文：希望陛下深思熟虑，约束自己，爱护百姓，一定要像勾践那样卧薪尝胆，一定要像卫文公那样艰苦朴素，这才行。 赵必愿为权吏部右侍郎，他请求免去检正的兼职，被允许。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will think deeply, restrain himself, and love the people, and must be as prudent as Gou Jian, and must be as hard and simple as Wei Wen Gong. Zhao Bing is willing to be the right hand man of the authority department, and he asked to be exempted from the part-time job of the procuratorate, and was allowed.

古文：兼国史修撰。
现代文：赵必愿兼国史修撰。
English: Zhao would also like to write a national history.

古文：时边事急，必愿应诏言： 宜敕彭大雅自重庆领王青之兵东下以复夔，责李安民及归、峡二守以自效，调一将督中流之师，以伐其顺流之谋，调一将自间道出鼎、澧之后，以折其捣虚之锋，调一将助芮兴之势，以备江陵之急。
现代文：当时边事危急，赵必愿应皇帝的命令上疏说 ：应该命令彭大雅从重庆率领王青的军队东下收复夔州，让李安民及归、峡二州的守臣要坚守城池，调派一名将领统率长江中游的军队，以粉碎敌人顺流而下的计划，调派一名将领从小路到鼎、澧二州的后面，以挫敌人攻打我方力量薄弱地区的锋芒，调派一名将领去壮大芮兴的声势，以防备江陵的危急。
English: At that time, the border situation was critical, and Zhao Biyi said in response to the emperor's order: Peng Daya should be ordered to lead Wang Qing's army from Chongqing to the east to recover Luzhou, so that Li Anmin and the returnees and the vassals of the two provinces should stick to the city, dispatch a general to lead the army in the middle of the Yangtze River to crush the enemy's plan down the river, dispatch a general from the path to the back of Ding and Luzhou to frustrate the enemy's attack on our weak areas, and dispatch a general to strengthen the momentum of rejuvenation to prevent the crisis in

古文：又宜下湖南遣飞军及团结民兵之类守沅江、益阳江，以防冲突长沙，尽收江上民船，毋资敌用。 区画皆中事机。
现代文：还应该命令湖南派快兵和团结民兵等武装力量守卫沅江、益阳江，以防止敌人冲入长沙，把长江上的百姓船只全部收走，不要让它们被敌人所用。 
English: Hunan should also be ordered to send armed forces such as the express soldiers and the unity militia to guard the Minjiang River and the Yiyang River to prevent the enemy from rushing into Changsha, and to take away all the people's boats on the Yangtze River and not let them be used by the enemy.

古文：暂兼权侍左侍郎。
现代文：他的谋划都切合事情的关键。赵必愿暂时兼代左侍郎。
English: His plans are all in line with the crux of the matter. Zhao is willing to temporarily serve as the left-hand man.

古文：李宗勉每称其平允。
现代文：李宗勉常称赞他公平。
English: Li Zongwen often praised him for his fairness.

古文：暂兼权户部侍郎，兼同详定敕令。
现代文：他暂时兼代户部侍郎，兼同详定敕令。
English: For the time being, he also acted as the steward of the household and issued detailed imperial edicts.

古文：请立国本，请亲祷雨。
现代文：赵必愿请求立皇太子，请求皇上亲自去祈祷下雨。
English: Zhao would like to ask for the crown prince to be appointed and for the emperor to personally pray for rain.

古文：迁户部侍郎，暂兼给事中。
现代文：赵必愿升为户部侍郎，暂时兼给事中。
English: Zhao would like to be promoted to the position of the head of the household, and is temporarily in the middle of things.

古文：先是，钱相尝缴陈洵益赠节使不行，必愿复缴奏曰： 李韶向为殿中侍御史，疏论洵益，乞予外祠，以绝窥伺，陛下不行其言，复夺其职，韶不能自安，径求外补。
现代文：先前，钱相曾封驳陈洵益赠授节使，没有得到施行，赵必愿又上奏说： 李韶从前为殿中侍御史，上疏议论陈洵益，请求给他管理宫观的闲职，以断绝他对陛下的窥伺。陛下不采纳李韶的话，又罢了李韶的官职，李韶心中不安，就请求到地方任职。
English: Previously, the Minister of Finance had blocked the nomination of Chen Bingyi as the bestowal of the festival envoy, but it was not implemented, and Zhao Bingyi also reported that: Li Qian, who was formerly a palace attendant, discussed Chen Bingyi, and requested that he be given the idle position of managing the palace, in order to cut off his prying into His Majesty. His Majesty did not accept Li Qian's words, and dismissed Li Qian's official position. Li Qian was uneasy in his heart, and asked to serve in a local position.

古文：今召之不至，正以此故。
现代文：现在召李韶，他不回来，就是这个原因。
English: This is the reason why Li Xuan is being summoned now and will not return.

古文：若超赠洵益，又缴驳不行，韶愈无来期矣。
现代文：如果对陈洵益超赠官职，又不采用大臣的封驳，李韶更是没有来的时候了。
English: If Chen Shanyu is given an official post, and the minister's denial is not used, it is not the time for Li Jun to come.

古文：陛下忍于去一贤从官，而不忍于沮一已死之内侍，则何以兴起治功，振扬国势？
现代文：陛下忍心去掉一位贤能的从官，而不忍心停止对一个已死去内侍的封赠，那么靠什么能建立天下大治的局面，使国势振兴呢？
English: His Majesty could bear to get rid of a capable aide, but he could not bear to stop conferring the imperial title on a deceased retainer. So what can be relied on to establish a situation of universal governance and revitalize the national situation?

古文：欲望寝洵益节钺，趣韶供职。 于是必愿三以疾乞祠，不许。
现代文：希望停止对陈洵益封赠节钺，使李韶早来任职。 于是赵必愿三次因病请求去担任闲职，没被允许。
English: It was hoped that Chen Yiyifeng would stop being given bonuses, so that Li Yao would come to work early. Therefore, Zhao Yiyifeng requested to work part-time due to illness three times, but was not allowed.

古文：权户部尚书，疏言： 端平元年，洛师轻出。
现代文：赵必愿代理户部尚书，他上疏说： 端平元年，攻打洛阳的军队轻率出发。
English: Zhao Bingyi, acting as the representative of the household department of Shangshu, said: In the first year of Duanping, the army attacked Luoyang rashly.

古文：明年，德安失，襄阳失。
现代文：第二年，德安失陷，襄阳失陷。
English: In the second year, De'an fell and Xiangyang fell.

古文：又明年，固始失，定远失，六安失，郢、复、荆门失，蜀道蹂，成都破。
现代文：又过一年，固始失陷，定远失陷，六安失陷，郢、复二州及荆门失陷，蜀地遭受蹂躏，成都被攻破。
English: A year later, Guzhi fell, Dingyuan fell, Lu'an fell, Handan, Fuzhou, and Jingmen fell, Shu was ravaged, and Chengdu was broken.

古文：又明年，夔、峡徙，浮光降。
现代文：又过了一年，夔、峡二州落入敌手，浮光投降。
English: A year later, Shantou and Nanzhou fell to the enemy, and Fuguang surrendered.

古文：又明年，滁阳歼。
现代文：又过了一年，滁阳灭亡。
English: Another year passed, and Shenyang perished.

古文：越二年，寿春弃。
现代文：过了两年，寿春被丢弃。
English: Two years later, Shuchun was abandoned.

古文：明年，真阳扰，安丰危，成都遗烬，靡有孑遗。 又曰： 去冬安丰危而复安，特天幸尔。
现代文：第二年，真阳受到骚扰，安丰出现危机，成都是一片瓦砾，没有什么留下来。 又说： 去年冬天安丰转危为安，实在是天助。
English: In the second year, Zhengyang was harassed, Anfeng was in crisis, Chengdu was a pile of rubble, and there was nothing left. He also said: Last winter, Anfeng turned the corner and became safe. It was truly God's help.

古文：君臣动色，太平自贺。
现代文：君臣庆贺太平。
English: The Emperor and Empress congratulated Taihei.

古文：雷作于雪宴之先期，蜀警于大宴之朌命，戒心一弛，赫鉴已随之矣。 又乞 谕太府丞，核户部收支数目，庶见多寡盈虚之实，有余则储之以待朝廷之取拨，阙则助之以示宫府之一体。 二疏迕丞相史嵩之，乞免官、乞祠，皆不许。
现代文：在雪宴之前天上打雷，在求天保佑时蜀地报警，一放松警惕，被分裂的借鉴就随之而来了。 又请求 命令太府丞，核实户部的收支数目，了解多少盈亏的实情，有剩余的就储存起来，等国家需要时拿出来调拨，有缺额就补上，以表示宫中和官署是一体 。这两个上疏都触犯了丞相史嵩之，赵必愿请求罢官，请求去管理宫观，都没允许。
English: The sky thundered before the snow banquet, and the police were alerted in Shu at the time of asking for God's blessing. As soon as the vigilance was relaxed, the use of division came with it. He also requested an order to Taifu Zhao, to verify the number of income and expenditure of the household department, to understand the true situation of how much profit and loss, to store the surplus, and to take it out and allocate it when the country needed it, and to make up the shortfall when there was a shortfall, so as to show that the palace and the government office were one and the same. Both of these oversights violated the prime minister Shi Song, and Zhao

古文：以司谏郑起潜论列，以宝谟阁直学士奉祠；辞职名，不许。
现代文：因为司谏郑起潜的弹劾，赵必愿以宝谟阁直学士的身份担任管理宫观的职务；他辞职名，没被允许。
English: Because of the impeachment of the priest Zheng Qixian, Zhao Bing would like to take the position of managing the palace as a direct bachelor of the Baomu Pavilion; he resigned and was not allowed.

古文：淳祐五年，以华文阁直学士知福州、福建安抚使，三辞，不许。
现代文：淳五年，赵必愿以华文阁直学士的身份为福州知州、福建安抚使，他三次推辞，没被允许。
English: In June of the fifth year, Zhao Bing would like to serve as Fuzhou, Chizhou and Fujian's pacifying envoy with the status of a direct bachelor of Huaweng Pavilion. He declined three times, but was not allowed.

古文：闽人闻必愿至，欣然叹羡。
现代文：福建人听说赵必愿来，非常高兴。
English: Fujian people are very happy to hear that Zhao will come.

古文：必愿平易以近民，忠信以厚俗，恻怛以勤政，行乡饮酒，旌退士，奖高年，裁僧寺实封之数。
现代文：赵必愿平易近人，讲求忠信以有补于风俗，忧伤而勤于政事，在举行乡饮酒礼时，他表彰隐士，勉励老人，裁减对僧寺实封的数目。
English: Zhao would like to be approachable, emphasize loyalty to supplement customs, and be sad but diligent in politics. When holding the township drinking ceremony, he commended hermits, encouraged the elderly, and reduced the number of monks and temples.

古文：尤留意武事，甫入境，即以军礼见戎帅，申明左翼军节制事宜，措置海道修水，教士卒知劝。 居官四年，累乞归，及命召，又三辞，皆不许。
现代文：特别留心军事，他刚到福建，就以军礼会见统帅，申明管理左翼军的有关事项，筹措修理海道，鼓励士卒。他任官四年，多次请求辞官，等朝廷召回他时，他又三次推辞，都没被允许。
English: He paid special attention to the military. As soon as he arrived in Fujian, he met with the commander with military etiquette, affirmed the management of the left-wing army, raised funds to repair the highway, and encouraged the soldiers. He served for four years, repeatedly requested to resign, and when the court recalled him, he resigned three times, but was not allowed.

古文：卒，遗表上，赠银青光禄大夫。
现代文：赵必愿去世，献上遗表，他被赠为银青光禄大夫。
English: When Zhao Bingxian passed away, he presented his last will and testament, and he was given the title of "Silver Qingguanglu Doctor."

古文：必愿才周器博，心平量广，而又蚤闻家庭忠孝之训、师友正大之言，故所立卓然可称云。
现代文：赵必愿博学多才，心地善良，度量阔达，又很早受到家庭忠孝的训导、听到老师和朋友光明正大的话，因此他的为人处世深受赞扬。
English: Zhao would like to be well-educated, versatile, kind-hearted, and broad-minded. He received the training of family loyalty and filial piety at a very early age, and heard the words of teachers and friends, so his conduct was highly praised.

