古文：孔子曰： 夫圣人之德，何以加于孝乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 圣人之德，有什么能超过孝呢! 
English: Confucius said: What can surpass filial piety, the virtue of a sage?

古文：孝者百行之本，人伦之至极也。
现代文：孝是百种行为的根本，人伦的极至。
English: Filial piety is the foundation of a hundred kinds of behavior, the ultimate of human relations.

古文：凡在性灵，孰不由此。
现代文：凡在性灵，无不由此。
English: All that is in the soul arises from it.

古文：若乃奉生尽养，送终尽哀，或泣血三年，绝浆七日，思《蓼莪》之慕切，追顾复之恩深，或德感乾坤，诚贯幽显，在于历代，盖有人矣。
现代文：像那奉生尽养，送终尽哀，或者泣血三年，绝浆七，思《蓼莪》诗所写的慕切，追父母养育的恩深，或者德感乾坤，诚贯幽显，在历代，都有这种人。
English: In all ages, there have been people like those who devoted themselves to nurturing their children to the best of their ability, who mourned for their parents until the end of their lives, or who cried blood for three years and died at the age of seven, who thought about the yearning written in the poem "Cherry Blossoms," who pursued the deep grace of their parents' upbringing, or who were imbued with a deep sense of morality, and whose sincerity shone through.

古文：陈承梁室丧乱，风漓化薄，及迹隐阎闾，无闻视听，今之采缀，以备阙云。
现代文：陈朝承接梁室的丧乱，风俗浇薄，到迹隐里中门，都无闻视听，今予采缀，聊以备缺。
English: The Chen dynasty inherited the disaster of the beam room, the customs were thinly spread, and there was no audio-visual at the middle gate of the hiding place. Now it is decorated and talked about to prepare for shortages.

古文：殷不害，字长卿，陈郡长平人也。
现代文：殷不害，字长卿，陈郡长平人。祖父殷任。
English: Yin Nongxiao, Zhaochangqing, Chen County Governor Pingren. Grandfather Yin Ren.

古文：祖任，齐豫章王行参军。
现代文：齐豫章王行参军。
English: Qiyu Zhangwang marched into the army.

古文：父高明，梁尚书中兵郎。
现代文：父亲殷高明，梁朝尚书中兵郎。
English: His father, Yin Gaoming, was a soldier in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：不害性至孝，居父忧过礼，由是少知名。
现代文：殷不害生性极孝，居父丧超过礼节，由此少年即知名。
English: The boy is known for his filial piety and exceeding etiquette at his father's funeral.

古文：家世俭约，居甚贫窭，有弟五人，皆幼弱，不害事老母，养小弟，勤剧无所不至，士大夫以笃行称之。
现代文：家中世代俭仆节约，居住很贫陋。有弟五个，都年幼弱小，殷不害侍奉老母，养育小弟，勤勉无所不至，士大夫以他的诚实厚道行为称道他。
English: His family had been frugal and thrifty for generations, living in very poor conditions. He had five younger brothers, all of whom were young and weak. They served their old mother diligently, raised their younger brothers, and were diligent in everything they did. The scholar praised him for his honest and virtuous behavior.

古文：年十七，仕梁廷尉平。
现代文：十七岁，任梁朝廷尉平。
English: At the age of seventeen, he was appointed as Liang's court lieutenant.

古文：不害长于政事，兼饰以儒术，名法有轻重不便者，辄上书言之，多见纳用。
现代文：殷不害长于政事。兼饰以儒术，名法中有轻重不便的，他就上书言之，多被纳用。
English: Confucianism is also used as a decoration, and when there is something inconvenient in the name of the law, it is said in writing, and is mostly used.

古文：大同五年，迁镇西府记室参军，寻以本官兼东宫通事舍人。
现代文：大同五年，改为镇西府记室参军，继而以本官兼东宫通事舍人。
English: In the fifth year of the same year, he joined the army as a member of the Zhenxi Prefecture Recorder's Office, and then served as his own official and the courier of the East Palace.

古文：是时朝廷政事多委东宫，不害与舍人庾肩吾直日奏事，梁武帝尝谓肩吾曰： 卿是文学之士，吏事非卿所长，何不使殷不害来邪？ 
现代文：此时朝廷政事多委任于东宫，殷不害舆舍人庾肩吾逐日奏事。梁武帝曾对殷不害说： 你是文学之士，官吏之事不是你的所长，何不派殷不害来呢? 
English: At this time, most of the political affairs of the imperial court were delegated to the East Palace, and Emperor Liang said to Emperor Yin, "You are a man of letters, and you are not in charge of the affairs of officials. Why don't you send Yin to me?"

古文：其见知如此。
现代文：殷不害被梁武帝所知到如此地步。
English: This is the level of understanding and appreciation of Jie Jue by Gao Zu.

古文：简文又以不害善事亲，赐其母蔡氏锦裙襦、氈席被褥，单复毕备。
现代文：简文又以殷不害善于事亲，赐他的母亲蔡氏锦裙襦、毡席、被褥，单复全备。
English: Jianwen also gave his mother Cai's brocade dress, table, and bedding, which were all perfect.

古文：七年，除东宫步兵校尉。
现代文：左回七年，封束宫步兵校尉。
English: Seven years later, he became an infantry captain at the Imperial Palace.

古文：太清初，迁平北府谘议参军，舍人如故。
现代文：左遣初年，改任平北府谘议参军，舍人照旧。
English: In the first year of Zuoying, he was reassigned to consult and join the army in Pingbei Prefecture, but he still refused to join the army.

古文：侯景之乱，不害从简文入台。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，殷不害跟从简文入台。
English: During the rebellion of Hou Jing, Yin followed Jianwen into Taiwan.

古文：及台城陷，简文在中书省，景带甲将兵入朝陛见，过谒简文。
现代文：到台城陷落，简文在中书省，侯景披戴盔甲率兵入朝晋见，遇门顺道见简文。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, the Jianwen was at the center of the Chinese book province. Hou Jing, wearing armor, led an army to meet the Jin Dynasty, and when he met the door, he saw the Jianwen.

古文：景兵士皆羌、胡杂种，冲突左右，甚不逊，侍卫者莫不惊恐辟易，唯不害与中庶子徐摛侍侧不动。
现代文：侯景的士兵都是羌胡杂种族人，他们与简文左右手下人冲突，很不礼貌，侍卫们无不惊恐躲避，惟有殷不害与中庶子徐摘侍立一旁不动。
English: Hou Jing's soldiers were all of mixed ethnicity. They clashed with Jianwen's subordinates left and right, which was very impolite. The guards all fled in fright, except for Yin, who stood side by side with the middle child, Xu Zhan.

古文：及简文为景所幽，遣人请不害与居处，景许之，不害供侍益谨。
现代文：到简文被侯景幽禁，简文派人请殷不害与他居于一处，侯景答应了他，殷不害供奉侍候简文更为恭谨。
English: When Jianwen was imprisoned by Houjing, Jianwen sent someone to invite Yin Nuxin to live with him, and Houjing agreed. It was more respectful for Yin Nuxin to serve and wait for Jianwen.

古文：简文夜梦吞一塊土，意甚不悦，以告不害，不害曰： 昔晋文公出奔，野人遗之塊，卒反晋国，陛下此梦，事符是乎？ 
现代文：简文夜间梦见自己吞下一块土，心中很不乐，以此告诉殷不害，殷不害说： 昔日晋文公出奔，野人赠他一块土，他最终返回了晋国，陛下您这梦，不是正符合此事吗? 
English: Jianwen dreamed at night that he had swallowed a piece of soil, and he was very unhappy, so he told Yin Nongxiao, and Yin Nongxiao said, "Once upon a time, the Duke of Jin fled, and a wild man gave him a piece of soil, and he eventually returned to Jin. Your majesty, this dream of yours, isn't it exactly in line with this?

古文：简文曰： 若天有徵，冀斯言不妄。 
现代文：简文说： 假如上天有征验，但愿此言不假。 
English: Jianwen said: If there is a test in heaven, I hope this is true.

古文：梁元帝立，以不害为中书郎，兼廷尉卿，因将家属西上。
现代文：梁元帝立，以殷不害为中书郎，兼廷尉卿，便带家属西上。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan established Yin Fuxin as the chief scribe and courtier, he went west with his family.

古文：江陵之陷也，不害先于别所督战，失母所在。
现代文：江陵陷落，殷不害先在别处督战，不见了母亲在哪裹。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Yin first went to fight elsewhere. Where is her missing mother?

古文：于时甚寒，冰雪交下，老弱冻死者填满沟堑。
现代文：其时很冷，冰雪交加，老弱冻死的填满了沟壑。
English: It was very cold, with snow and ice, and the ravines were filled with old and weak people who had frozen to death.

古文：不害行哭道路，远近寻求，无所不至，遇见死人沟水中，即投身而下，扶捧阅视，举体冻湿，水浆不入口，号泣不辍声，如是者七日，始得母尸。
现代文：殷不害一路上边行边哭，远近寻找，无所不到，遇见死人在沟水中，就投身而下，扶起来仔细辨看，整个身体冻湿了，汤水不入口，哭泣不停声，这样共七日，才找到母亲的尸体。
English: Along the way, Yin Nongxiao cried as she walked, searching far and wide, reaching everywhere. When she found the dead in the ditch, she threw herself down, stood up and carefully identified it. Her whole body was wet with cold, she couldn't swallow the soup, and she couldn't stop crying. It took her seven days to find her mother's body.

古文：不害凭尸而哭，每举音辄气绝，行路无不为之流涕。
现代文：殷不害对着尸体痛哭，每发音便气绝，行路人无不为之流涕。
English: Yin innocently wept bitterly over the corpse, losing her breath with every utterance, and passers-by were moved to tears.

古文：即于江陵权殡，与王裒、庾信俱入长安，自是蔬食布衣，枯槁骨立，见者莫不哀之。
现代文：于是便在江陵暂且殡殓，舆王哀、庾信同入长安，自此蔬食布衣，枯槁瘦骨，见者无不为他悲哀。
English: As a result, he was temporarily buried in Gangneung, and both the king's mourning and the letter of condolence went to Chang'an. Since then, the vegetable and cloth clothes, the withered and thin bones, and all who saw him were sad for him.

古文：太建七年，自周还朝，其年诏除司农卿，寻迁光禄大夫。
现代文：太建七年，从北周还朝，这年韶令封司农卿，继而改任光禄大夫。
English: In the seventh year of Tai Jian, from the Northern Zhou Dynasty to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, this year, he was appointed as the Secretary of Agriculture, and then he was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：八年，加明威将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：太建八年，加明威将军、晋陵太守。
English: In the eighth year of the Jian period, General Ga Mingwei and the Governor of Jinling were crowned.

古文：在郡感疾，诏以光禄大夫征还养疾。
现代文：在郡时感染疾患，帝韶以光禄大夫征还养病。
English: While in the county, he contracted an illness, but recovered with the help of Dr. Guanglu.

古文：后主即位，加给事中。
现代文：后主登位，加给事中。
English: After the Lord ascended to the throne, he was added to the middle of things.

古文：初，不害之还也，周留其长子僧首，因居关中。
现代文：当初，殷不害回还时，北周留下他的长子殷僧首，便居于关中。
English: At first, when Yin did not return harmfully, Bei Zhou left his eldest son, Yin, to live in Guanzhong.

古文：祯明三年，京城陷，僧首来迎，不害道病卒，时年八十五。
现代文：祯明三年，京城陷落，殷僧首来迎接，殷不害病死于路上，死时八十五岁。
English: Three years after the Ming Dynasty, when the capital fell, Yin Zeng first came to greet him, but he died of illness on the way, at the age of eighty-five.

古文：不佞字季卿，不害弟也。
现代文：殷不佞，字季卿，殷不害的弟弟。
English: Yin Bu Rong, Zi Jie Qing, Yin Bu Rong's younger brother.

古文：少立名节，居父丧以至孝称。
现代文：少年时即树立名节，居父丧而以极孝为人称道。
English: When he was a boy, he set up a famous festival, celebrated his father's death and was praised for his extreme filial piety.

古文：好读书，尤长吏术，仕梁，起家为尚书中兵郎，甚有能称。
现代文：喜好读书，尤其长于吏术，初任梁朝尚书中兵郎，很有能力。
English: He likes to read, and is especially good at bureaucracy. He is a soldier in the first Liang Dynasty, and is very capable.

古文：梁元帝承制，授戎昭将军、武陵王谘议参军。
现代文：梁元帝承制，授予戎昭将军、武陵王谘议参军。
English: Emperor Liangyuan inherited the system, and awarded General Rong Zhao and King Wuling the right to consult and join the army.

古文：承圣初，迁武康令。
现代文：承圣初年，改任武康令。
English: In the first year after his consecration, he was transferred to the Order of Mukang.

古文：时兵荒饥馑，百姓流移，不佞巡抚招集，繈负而至者以千数。
现代文：其时兵荒马乱饥荒遍行，百姓流离失所，殷不佞巡抚招集，以布包小儿负之于背而来的人数以千计。
English: At that time, soldiers, horses, famine and famine were rampant, the people were displaced, and thousands of people were summoned by the governors, who came with cloth bags and children on their backs.

古文：会江陵陷，而母卒，道路隔绝，久不得奔赴，四载之中，昼夜号泣，居处饮食，常为居丧之礼。
现代文：值江陵陷落，而母亲死，道路隔绝，殷不佞很久不能奔赴，四年之中，日夜号哭，居处饮食，常守居丧的礼节。
English: When Jiangling fell, and his mother died, the road was cut off, and he could not go for a long time. In four years, he cried day and night, lived and ate, and always observed the etiquette of living and mourning.

古文：高祖受禅，起为戎昭将军，除娄令。
现代文：高祖受禅，起用为戎昭将军，封娄令。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen and was appointed as the general of Rong Zhao, and the imperial decree was issued.

古文：至是，第四兄不齐始之江陵，迎母丧柩归葬。
现代文：到此时，第四兄殷不齐方到江陵，迎母亲丧棺归葬。
English: At this time, the fourth brother, Yin Qi Fang, went to Gangneung to welcome his mother's coffin for burial.

古文：不佞居处之节，如始闻问，若此者又三年。
现代文：殷不佞居处的礼节，仍如开始听闻丧讯时一样，这样又过了三年。
English: Three years later, the etiquette of Yin's home is still the same as it was when he first heard of the death.

古文：身自负土，手植松柏，每岁时伏腊，必三日不食。
现代文：殷不佞亲身负土，亲手植种松柏，每年夏天伏日、冬天腊日，必定三天不吃东西。
English: Yin Bu Rong personally sows the soil and plants conifers with his own hands. Every summer, he fasts for three days, and in winter, he fasts for three days.

古文：世祖即位，除尚书左民郎，不就。后为始兴王谘议参军，兼尚书右丞，迁东宫通事舍人。
现代文：世祖登位，封尚书左民郎，殷不佞不就位，后为始兴王谘议参军，兼尚书右丞，改为东宫通事舍人。
English: Shizu ascended to the throne, and was given the titles of Shangshu Zuo Minro (尚書左民郎) and Yin Buyeo (殷不不) before taking the throne. Later, Shixing Wang was advised to join the army, and Shangshu Yu Rong (尚書右丞) was also appointed as the secretary of the Eastern Court.

古文：及世祖崩，废帝嗣立，高宗为太傅，录尚书辅政，甚为朝望所归。
现代文：到世祖崩，废帝继立，高宗为太傅，录尚书辅政，很为朝廷众望所归。
English: After the death of the world's ancestors, the deposed emperor succeeded to the throne, and Gaozong became the grand tutor of the emperor and the vice-regent. He was highly regarded by the imperial court.

古文：不佞素以名节自立，又受委东宫，乃与仆射到仲举、中书舍人刘师知、尚书右丞王暹等，谋矫诏出高宗。
现代文：殷不佞一向以名节自立，又受委任于束宫，便与仆射到仲举、中书舍人刘魉知、尚书右丞王堡等，策谋假造诏书让高宗出朝。
English: Yin Buyeo had always been self-reliant on the basis of fame, and after being appointed to Sokgong, he plotted with his vassals to Zhongji, Liu Xizhi, who was in charge of Chinese books, and Wangbao, who was in charge of Western books, to forge an imperial edict to allow Gaozong to enter the imperial court.

古文：众人犹豫，未敢先发，不佞乃驰诣相府，面宣敕，令相王还第。
现代文：众人犹豫不决，没人敢先发，殷不堡便驰马到相府，当面宣读诏令，命令相王还府第。
English: Everyone hesitated, no one dared to go first, so Ingeborg rode to the prime minister's residence, read out the edict in person, and ordered the prime minister to return to the residence.

古文：及事发，仲举等皆伏诛，高宗雅重不佞，特赦之，免其官而已。
现代文：到事情被揭发，到仲举等都被杀，高宗雅重殷不佞，特赦他，衹是罢免了他的官职而已。
English: By the time the affair was exposed and the intermediary was killed, Gao Zongya did not hesitate to pardon him, but only removed him from his official post.

古文：高宗即位，以为军师始兴王谘议参军，加招远将军。
现代文：高宗登位，封殷不佞为军师始兴王谘议参军，加招远将军。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and Fong Yin Bu Rong, as the military instructor, advised Shi Xing Wang to join the army and recruit General Yuan.

古文：寻除大匠卿，未拜，加员外散骑常侍，又兼尚书右丞。
现代文：不久封大匠卿，未就官，加员外散骑常侍，又兼尚书右丞。
English: He was soon given the title of Daisho-kyo (Master Craftsman), but did not take up his post. He was also given the additional post of non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and was also appointed Shojo-jo.

古文：俄迁通直散骑常侍，右丞如故。
现代文：继而又改任通直散骑常侍，右丞照旧。
English: Subsequently, he was reappointed to the post of Tsuchida Sanzhiki no Tsuneishi, while Ujo remained as before.

古文：太建五年卒，时年五十六。
现代文：越叁五年壁丕堡死，年纪五十六岁。
English: Yue Xuan died in the bunker at the age of fifty-six.

古文：诏赠秘书监。
现代文：诏赠秘书监。
English: He was awarded the title of secretary superintendent.

古文：第三兄不疑，次不占，次不齐，并早亡。
现代文：殷不佞的第三个兄长凿丕壁，第四个兄长壁丕占，第五个兄长殷不齐，都早死。
English: The third elder brother of Yin Bozhong chiseled the wall, the fourth elder brother chiseled the wall, and the fifth elder brother Yin Bozhong died early.

古文：不佞最小，事第二寡嫂张氏甚谨，所得禄俸，不入私室。
现代文：殷不佞最小，侍奉第二寡嫂退氐十分恭谨，所得俸禄，不入自己私室。
English: Yin is not the youngest, serving the second widowed sister-in-law is very respectful, earning a salary, not entering his private room.

古文：长子梵童，官至尚书金部郎。
现代文：他的长子殷梵童，官至尚书金部郎。
English: His eldest son, Yin Banzhong, became the official Shang Shujin Bro.

古文：谢贞，字元正，陈郡阳夏人，晋太傅安九世孙也。
现代文：谢贞，字元正，陈郡阳夏人，晋朝太傅安九世孙。
English: Xie Zhen, Zi Yuan Zheng, Chen County Yang Xia Ren, the ninth generation of the Jin Dynasty Taifu An.

古文：祖绥，梁著作佐郎、太子舍人。
现代文：祖父谢绥，梁朝著作佐郎、太子舍人。
English: Grandfather Xie Yao, Liang Dynasty, author of "Saro" and "Prince Xie Ren Ren."

古文：父蔺，正员外郎，兼散骑常侍。
现代文：父亲谢蔺，正员外郎，兼散骑常侍。
English: His father, Xie Yao, was a full-fledged member of the imperial family and also a samurai.

古文：贞幼聪敏，有至性。
现代文：谢贞幼年聪敏，有纯厚的性情。
English: Xie Zhen is intelligent and has a pure temperament.

古文：祖母阮氏先苦风眩，每发便一二日不能饮食，贞时年七岁，祖母不食，贞亦不食，往往如是，亲族莫不奇之。
现代文：祖母阮氏先前苦于中风眩晕，每次发病便一二天不能吃东西，谢贞其时七岁，祖母不吃，他也不吃，往往这样，亲戚无不为此惊奇。
English: Nguyen's grandmother had previously suffered from a stroke and vertigo, and each time she fell ill, she could not eat for a day or two. Xie Zhen was seven years old at the time, and his grandmother did not eat, and he did not eat either. This was often the case, and relatives were all surprised by this.

古文：母王氏，授贞《论语》、《孝经》，读讫便诵。
现代文：母亲王氏，教授谢贞《论语》、《孝经》，他读完便能背诵。
English: Wang's mother, professor Xie Zhen, read "The Analects" and "The Book of Filial Piety" to him, and he was able to recite them after reading them.

古文：八岁，尝为《春日闲居》五言诗，从舅尚书王筠奇其有佳致，谓所亲曰： 此儿方可大成，至如 风定花犹落 ，乃追步惠连矣。 
现代文：八岁，曾作《春日闲居》五言诗，从舅尚书王筠惊奇他有特别才能，对亲戚说： 此儿将来可成大器，至于 风定花犹落，一句，可追步谢惠连了。 
English: At the age of eight, he had composed the five-character poem "Spring Idleness." His uncle, Shang Shuxuan, was surprised that he had a special talent, and said to his relatives: "Here you can become a great instrument in the future. As for the wind and flowers, in a word, you can follow in the footsteps of Xie Huilian."

古文：由是名辈知之。
现代文：由此名家辈都知道了谢贞。
English: As a result, all the famous family members knew about Xie Zhen.

古文：年十三，略通《五经》大旨。尤善《左氏传》，工草隶虫篆。
现代文：十三岁，略通《五经》大旨，尤其擅长《左氏传》，工于草书、隶书、虫篆书。
English: At the age of thirteen, he was able to understand the gist of the Five Classics, and was particularly good at "The Biography of Zuo," working in cursive, cursive, and cursive.

古文：十四，丁父艰，号顿于地，绝而复苏者数矣。
现代文：十四岁，父丧，号哭于地，气绝而复苏有数次。
English: Fourteen years old, father's death, crying on the ground, breathless and resuscitated several times.

古文：初，父蔺居母阮氏忧，不食泣血而卒，家人宾客惧贞复然，从父洽、族兄皓乃共往华严寺，请长爪禅师为贞说法，仍谓贞曰： 孝子既无兄弟，极须自爱，若忧毁灭性，谁养母邪？ 
现代文：当初，父亲谢蔺居母阮氏丧，不吃东西哭泣出血而死，家人宾客怕谢贞也会如此，叔父谢洽、族兄谢嵩于是同往华严寺，请长爪掸师为谢贞说法，禅师对谢贞说： 孝子既无兄弟，极须自爱，如忧虑而自毁，谁来赡养母亲呢? 
English: At the beginning, Xie Zhen's father, Xie Zhen, was mourning the death of his mother, Ruan, and died without eating, crying and bleeding. Family guests were afraid that Xie Zhen would do the same. Uncle Xie Ciao and elder brother Xie Song then went to Huayan Temple together, and asked the long-clawed acupuncturist to speak for Xie Zhen. The Zen master said to Xie Zhen: A filial son has no brother, so he must have self-love. If he is worried and self-destructs, who will support his mother?

古文：自后少进饘粥。
现代文：此后谢贞才稍微吃一些稠粥。
English: Only after that did Xie Zhen slightly eat some thick porridge.

古文：太清之乱，亲属散亡，贞于江陵陷没，皓逃难番禺，贞母出家于宣明寺。
现代文：太清之乱，亲属散亡，谢贞在江陵陷没，谢万逃难到番禺，谢贞母亲出家到宣明寺。
English: During the Taiching Rebellion, relatives were scattered, Xie Zhen was trapped in Gangneung, Xie Wan fled to Panyu, and Xie Zhen's mother became a nun at Xuanming Temple.

古文：及高祖受禅，皓还乡里，供养贞母，将二十年。
现代文：到高祖受禅，谢万回还乡里，供养谢贞母亲，将近二十年。
English: When Gaozhu received Zen, Xie Wan returned to the countryside and provided for Xie Zhen's mother for nearly twenty years.

古文：太建五年，贞乃还朝，除智武府外兵参军事。
现代文：太建五年，谢贞才还朝，被封智武府外兵参军事。
English: After five years of construction, Xie Zhencai returned to the imperial court and was appointed as a foreign soldier of Zhimu Prefecture to participate in the military.

古文：俄迁尚书驾部郎中，寻迁侍郎。
现代文：不久改任尚书驾部郎中，继而改为侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Shosho chauffeur junior, and then to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：及始兴王叔陵为扬州刺史，引祠部侍郎阮卓为记室，辟贞为主簿，贞不得已乃行。
现代文：到始兴王叔陵任扬州刺史，引祠部侍郎阮卓为记室，征召谢贞为主簿，谢贞不得已才行。
English: To the tomb of Prince Xingwang's uncle, Yangzhou's chief historian, he summoned the steward of the ancestral hall, Ruan Zhuo, to serve as a recorder, and recruited Xie Zhen as the chief recorder. Xie Zhen had no choice but to do so.

古文：寻迁府录事参军，领丹阳丞。
现代文：不久改任府录事参军，领丹阳丞。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of prefectural record keeper and joined the army, leading Danyang.

古文：贞度叔陵将有异志，因与卓自疏于王，每有宴游，辄辞以疾，未尝参预，叔陵雅钦重之，弗之罪也。
现代文：谢贞猜度叔陵将会有异志，便与阮卓自动疏远王，每次宴游，便以患疾推辞，不曾参预，叔陵对他们一向钦敬，不以此为罪。
English: Xie Zhenchaidou Shuling will have a different ambition, so he will automatically alienate the king from Ruan Zhuo. Every banquet, he will use illness as an excuse not to attend. Shuling has always admired them and will not take this as a crime.

古文：俄而高宗崩，叔陵肆逆，府僚多相连逮，唯贞与卓独不坐。
现代文：不久高宗崩，叔陵叛逆，官府中许多人都被牵连，惟独谢贞与阮卓不受牵连。
English: Soon Gao Zong passed away, Shuling rebelled, and many people in the government were implicated, but only Xie Zhen and Ruan Zhuo were not implicated.

古文：后主仍诏贞入掌中宫管记，迁南平王友，加招远将军，掌记室事。
现代文：后主乃下诏令谢贞入宫掌中宫管记，改任南平王友，加招远将军，掌记室事。
English: Later, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Xie Zhen to enter the palace to be in charge of the palace record, and he was reassigned as the friend of the king of Nanping, the general of Zhaoyuan, and in charge of the record office.

古文：府长史汝南周确新除都官尚书，请贞为让表，后主览而奇之。
现代文：府长史泣堕且汝南封都官尚书，请谢贞撰让表，篷圭览表很为惊奇。
English: The prefectural governor Shih Wei and the governor of Yunnan Province, Shang Shu, asked Xie Zhen to draw up a concession list. The list was very surprising.

古文：尝因宴席问确曰： 卿表自制邪？ 
现代文：堕王曾于宴席时间旦堕道： 你的让表是你自撰的吗? 
English: The fallen king once said during a banquet: Did you write your resignation letter yourself?

古文：确对曰： 臣表谢贞所作。 
现代文：且堕回答说： 我的表是证贞所作。 
English: And the fallen replied: My watch was made by Zhenzhen.

古文：后主因敕舍人施文庆曰： 谢贞在王处，未有禄秩，可赐米百石。 
现代文：后主便命舍人施文庆说： 谢贞在王处，没有禄秩，可赐米百石。 
English: Afterward, the master ordered his subordinate, Shi Wenqing, to say, "Xie Zhen is in the king's place, and has no rank, but can be given a hundred kilos of rice.

古文：至德三年，以母忧去职。
现代文：至德三年，谢贞以母丧离职。
English: Three years later, Xie Zhen left the company after the death of her mother.

古文：顷之，敕起还府，仍加招远将军，掌记室。
现代文：不久，诏令还府，仍加招远将军，掌记室。
English: Soon, the imperial edict returned to the government, still adding the recruitment of General Yuan, in charge of the records office.

古文：贞累启固辞，敕报曰： 省启具怀，虽知哀茕在疚，而官俟得才，礼有权夺，可便力疾还府也。 
现代文：谢贞多次启奏坚决辞去，韶令说： 你的启奏已览，详情俱悉，虽知你哀痛在心，但官府需得才，礼节有权夺，可便勉力还府。 
English: Xie Zhen resolutely resigned several times, and the imperial edict said: Your resignation has been reviewed, the details are well known, although I know you are sad, but the government needs talent, and etiquette has the power to seize, so you can try to return to the government.

古文：贞哀毁羸瘠，终不能之官舍。
现代文：谢贞哀痛彻骨，体弱带病，终于不能到官府。
English: Grief-stricken, weak and ill, Xie Zhen was finally unable to go to the government office.

古文：时尚书右丞徐祚、尚书左丞沈客卿俱来候贞，见其形体骨立，祚等怆然叹息，徐喻之曰： 弟年事已衰，礼有恒制，小宜引割自全。 
现代文：其时尚书右丞徐祚、尚书左丞沈客卿都来问候谢贞，见他身体瘦骨伶仃，徐祚等人怆然叹息，慢慢劝谕说： 你年事已衰，礼有恒制，你还是适当引割自全吧。 
English: His fashion book right-hand man, Xu Qi, and his fashion book left-hand man, Shen Keqing, all came to greet Xie Zhen. Seeing his skinny body, Xu Qi and others sighed and slowly advised him: You are old, and you have a constant system of etiquette. You should still properly dress yourself.

古文：贞因更感恸，气绝良久，二人涕泣，不能自胜，悯默而出。
现代文：谢贞于是更为感慨，气绝很久，二人在一旁抽泣，不能自抑，默默地同情而出。
English: Xie Zhen was even more moved. She held her breath for a long time. The two of them sobbed on the sidelines, unable to control themselves, and silently sympathized with each other.

古文：祚谓客卿曰： 信哉，孝门有孝子。 
现代文：徐祚对沈客卿说： 可信啊，孝门有孝子。 
English: Xu Yao said to Shen Jiaqing: It's believable, a filial son has a filial son.

古文：客卿曰： 谢公家传至孝，士大夫谁不仰止，此恐不能起，如何？ 
现代文：沈客卿说： 谢公家传孝道，士大夫谁不敬仰，此次他恐怕不能再起，怎么办? 
English: Shen Keqing said, "Thanks to the publicans' propagation of filial piety, who does not admire the scholar and scholar, this time he may not be able to rise again, what should we do?

古文：吏部尚书吴兴姚察与贞友善，及贞病笃，察往省之，问以后事，贞曰： 孤子飐祸所集，将随灰壤。
现代文：吏部尚书吴兴姚察与谢贞友好，到谢贞病重，姚察去看望他，问他后事，谢贞说： 我孤子争祸所集，将要随灰入壤了。
English: Wu Xingyao, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was friendly with Xie Zhen. When Xie Zhen was seriously ill, Yao Zhan went to visit him and asked him about the aftermath. Xie Zhen said, "The ashes of my sons' quarrels will fall to the ground."

古文：族子凯等粗自成立，已有疏付之，此固不足仰尘厚德。
现代文：族子谢凯等基本上已自立，已有书付之，此可以不必仰承厚德。
English: Tribal members such as Xie Kai have basically become independent and have been documented, so there is no need to rely on merit.

古文：即日迷喘，时不可移，便为永诀。
现代文：即日迷喘，时间不可移，便可能成为永别。
English: If you lose track of time on the same day, time cannot be moved, it may become a farewell.

古文：弱儿年甫六岁，名靖，字依仁，情累所不能忘，敢以为托耳。 
现代文：小儿年刚六岁，名靖，字依仁，情寄不能忘，敢请为托。 
English: The child is just six years old, the name is Jing, the character is Yiren, the love letter can not be forgotten, dare to ask for help.

古文：是夜卒，敕赙米一百斛，布三十匹。
现代文：当夜死，诏令赐给丧事所用米一百斛，布三十匹。
English: On the night of his death, the imperial edict gave him 100 bushels of rice and 30 pieces of cloth for his funeral.

古文：后主问察曰： 谢贞有何亲属？ 
现代文：后主问姚察道： 谢贞有什么亲属? 
English: Afterwards, the host asked Yao Zhao: What relatives does Xie Zhen have?

古文：察因启曰： 贞有一子年六岁。 
现代文：姚察便启奏道： 谢贞有一儿子六岁。 
English: Yao Zha then began to sing: Xie Zhen has a six-year-old son.

古文：即有敕长给衣粮。
现代文：于是韶令长期给予衣服粮食。
English: As a result, the imperial edict gave clothes and grain for a long time.

古文：初，贞之病亟也，遗疏告族子凯曰： 吾少罹酷罚，十四倾外廕，十六钟太清之祸，流离绝国，二十馀载。
现代文：当初，谢贞病重，留书告族子谢凯说： 我少年时遭酷罚，十四岁死了父亲，十六岁正遇上太清之祸，流离去国，二十多年。
English: At the beginning, Xie Zhen was seriously ill and left a letter to her son, Xie Kai, saying: When I was a teenager, I was severely punished. My father died when I was fourteen. At the age of sixteen, I was in the throes of the Taiching disaster and was forced to leave the country for more than twenty years.

古文：号天蹐地，遂同有感，得还侍奉，守先人坟墓，于吾之分足矣。
现代文：戒慎小心。于是有同感，得以回还侍奉，守先人的坟墓，于我之分已足了。
English: So I felt the same way, and was able to return to serving and guarding the graves of my ancestors. That was enough for me.

古文：不悟朝廷采拾空薄，累致清阶，纵其殒绝，无所酬报。
现代文：想不到朝廷采拾我这空薄者，多次致我清阶之处，此使我纵然身死，也不能酬报。
English: I could not have imagined that the imperial court would pick me up, an empty person, and repeatedly send me to a place of purification, for which I could not be rewarded even if I died.

古文：今在忧棘，晷漏将尽，敛手而归，何所多念。
现代文：今我处忧棘之中，如晷漏将到尽头，将撒手归天，没什么可多念的。
English: Now I'm in the throes of grief, such as mistakes will come to an end, will give up and go to heaven, there is nothing more to learn.

古文：气绝之后，若直弃之草野，依僧家尸陀林法，是吾所愿，正恐过为独异耳。
现代文：我气绝之后，如直接弃之于草野，依僧家尸陁林法，这是我的愿望，我衹是恐怕做得过分不同罢了。
English: After I die, if I were to be abandoned directly to the grassland, according to the monk's corpse and forest method, this is my wish. I am afraid that I have done too much differently.

古文：可用薄板周身，载以灵车，覆以苇席，坎山而埋之。
现代文：可用薄板做棺材周身，置以灵车，盖以苇席，在山坎裹埋之。
English: You can use a thin plate to make a coffin around the body, place it in a hearse, cover it with a coffin seat, and bury it in the mountains.

古文：又吾终鲜兄弟，无他子孙，靖年幼少，未闲人事，但可三月施小床，设香水，尽卿兄弟相厚之情，即除之，无益之事，勿为也。 
现代文：又我终少兄弟，没有其他子孙，谢靖年纪幼小，还不懂人事，但可以三月施以小床，设香水，尽你们兄弟相厚的情谊，然后就除去，没有益的事，不要做。 
English: In the end, I have few brothers and no other children or grandchildren. Xie Jing is still young and doesn't know much about human affairs, but you can make a small bed in March, set up a perfume, and make the best of your brotherly friendship, and then remove it. Don't do anything that is not beneficial.

古文：初，贞在周尝侍赵王读，王即周武帝之爱弟也，厚相礼遇。
现代文：当初，谢贞在北周曾侍奉趟王读书，赵王就是周武帝的爱弟，对他待以厚遇。
English: At the beginning, Xie Zhen had served Zhao Wang as a student in Northern Zhou. Zhao Wang was the beloved younger brother of Emperor Zhou, and he was treated well.

古文：王尝闻左右说贞每独处必昼夜涕泣，因私使访问，知贞母年老，远在江南，乃谓贞曰： 寡人若出居籓，当遣侍读还家供养。 
现代文：赵王曾听左右人说谢贞每当独自一人时必定日夜哭泣，便私下派人访问，知道谢贞母亲已年老，远在江南，便对谢贞说： 我如出宫居之藩国，一定派侍读回家供养老母。 
English: Zhao Wang had heard some people say that Xie Zhen would cry day and night whenever she was alone, so he secretly sent someone to visit her. Knowing that Xie Zhen's mother was old and far away in the south of the Yangtze River, he said to Xie Zhen: "If I were to leave the palace and live in a feudal country, I would definitely send a maid to come home to care for my elderly mother."

古文：后数年，王果出，因辞见，面奏曰： 谢贞至孝而母老，臣愿放还。 
现代文：数年以后，赵王果然出宫，便来辞见，当面上奏道： 谢贞极孝而母亲已老，臣愿放还他。 
English: A few years later, Zhao Wang did indeed leave the palace, and he came to resign, saying in person: Xie Zhen is very filial and his mother is old, and his vassal is willing to release him.

古文：帝奇王仁爱而遣之，因随聘使杜子晖还国。
现代文：周武帝惊奇赵王的仁爱，便派遣谢贞回还，于是谢贞随聘使杜子晖回国。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu was surprised by the benevolence of King Zhao, so he sent Xie Zhen back, and Xie Zhen then sent Du Zixuan back to China.

古文：所有文集，值兵乱多不存。
现代文：所有文集，正值兵乱多已不存。
English: Most of the anthologies published at the time of the war no longer exist.

古文：司马皓，字文升，河内温人也。
现代文：司马皓，字文升，河内温人人。
English: Sima Qian, Zi Wen Sheng, Hanoi Wen Ren.

古文：高祖晋侍中、光禄勋柔之，以南顿王孙绍齐文献王攸之后。
现代文：高祖是晋朝侍中、光禄勋司马柔之，以卢塑王孙绍蛮塞麸王司马攸之后。
English: Gao Zu was a courtier of the Jin Dynasty, a member of the Guanglu Order of Sima Rong, and a descendant of the Lu Sculpture King Sun Shao, who was the successor of King Sima You.

古文：父子产，梁尚书水部侍郎、后阳太守，即梁武帝之外兄也。
现代文：父亲司马子产，梁朝尚书水部侍郎、后阳太守，即梁武帝的表兄。
English: His father, Sima Zizang, was Liang Zhaozhong's attendant at the Ministry of Books and Water, and Goyang Dazhong, that is, Liang Wudi's cousin.

古文：皓幼聪警，有至性。
现代文：司马皓幼时聪敏机警，有纯厚的性情。
English: When Sima Yan was young, he was smart and alert, with a pure temperament.

古文：年十二，丁内艰，孺慕过礼，水浆不入口，殆经一旬。
现代文：十二岁，母丧，孺子敬慕遇礼，汤水不入口，整整过了十天。
English: At the age of twelve, his mother passed away, his son revered and saluted her, he refused to drink soup, and it took him ten whole days to recover.

古文：每至号恸，必致闷绝，内外亲戚，皆惧其不胜丧。
现代文：每当号啕痛哭，必然致使气绝，内外亲戚都怕他不胜丧事。
English: Whenever there is a cry of distress, it will inevitably lead to exhaustion, and relatives at home and abroad are afraid that he will not win the funeral.

古文：父子产每晓喻之，逼进饘粥，然毁瘠骨立。
现代文：父亲司马子产每每晓之以理，喻之以事，逼他进食稠粥，然而他仍身瘦如骨。
English: His father, Sima Zi Rong, forced him to eat thick porridge, but he was still thin.

古文：服阕，以姻戚子弟，预入问讯，梁武帝见皓羸瘦，叹息良久，谓其父子产曰： 昨见罗儿面颜憔悴，使人恻然，便是不坠家风，为有子矣。 
现代文：服丧毕，以姻戚子弟关系，预入问讯，梁武帝见司马焉瘦弱，叹息很久，对他的父亲司马子产说： 昨日见罗儿面色憔悴，使人看丁心疼。这是不坠家风，是你有这样的儿子。 
English: After the funeral, with the relationship between son and son-in-law as the starting point for the interrogation, Emperor Liangwu saw Sima Yan's emaciation and sighed for a long time, saying to his father Sima Zizang: "Yesterday, I saw Luo Er with a gaunt face, which made people feel sad to see Ding. This is not a family tradition, you have such a son.

古文：罗儿，即皓小字也。
现代文：罗儿，是司马隽的小字。
English: "Roll" is Sima Ye's diminutive.

古文：释褐太学博士，累迁正员郎。
现代文：司马焉初任太学博士，又改任正员郎。
English: Sima Yan was first appointed as a Doctor of Theology, and then he was reappointed as an official member.

古文：丁父艰，哀毁逾甚，庐于墓侧，一日之内，唯进薄麦粥一升。
现代文：父丧，哀痛更厉害，建庐在墓侧，一天之内，衹吃薄麦粥一升。
English: In mourning for his father, the grief was even more intense. Jian Chen was at the side of the grave. Within one day, he ate one liter of thin wheat porridge.

古文：墓在新林，连接山阜，旧多猛兽，皓结庐数载，豺狼绝迹。
现代文：墓在新林，连接山陵，旧日多猛兽，司马焉结庐数年，豺狼绝迹。
English: The grave is in the new forest, connected to the mountains. There were many ferocious beasts in the old days. Sima Yan has been dead for several years, and the jackals are extinct.

古文：常有两鸠栖宿庐所，驯狎异常，新林至今犹传之。
现代文：常有两鸠栖宿于庐所，赏玩抚弄不同寻常，新林至今还在传言此事。
English: There are often two storks roosting in the nesting place, enjoying the unusual play, and Xinlin is still rumored about this.

古文：承圣中，除太子庶子。
现代文：承圣年中，封司马焉为太子庶子。
English: In the year of his consecration, Fushi Ma Yan became the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：江陵陷，随例入关，而梁室屠戮，太子瘗殡失所，皓以宫臣，乃抗表周朝，求还江陵改葬，辞甚酸切。
现代文：江陵陷落，随例入关，而梁皇室遭屠杀，太子的殡葬处也失所，司马焉以宫中之臣身份，乃向北周朝廷上表，请求还江陵改葬，言辞十分悲切。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, the imperial family of Liang was massacred, and the prince's burial place was also lost. Sima Yan, as a courtier in the palace, petitioned the Northern Zhou court to return Gangneung for reburial, and his words were very sad.

古文：周朝优诏答曰： 昔主父从戮，孔车有长者之风，彭越就诛，栾布得陪臣之礼。
现代文：北周朝廷优韶答道： 昔日主父被杀，孔车有长者之风，彭越遭杀，乐布具陪臣之礼。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty court eunuch replied: In the past, the master was killed, the drill had the style of an elder, Peng Yue was killed, and the cloth was given as a gift to the vassal.

古文：庶子乡国已改，犹怀送往之情，始验忠贞，方知臣道，即敕荆州，以礼安厝。 
现代文：庶子你乡国已改，还怀有送往之情，始验忠贞，方知臣道，即韶告荆州，以礼安置。 
English: If your son-in-law has changed his country of origin, and still harbors the desire to send him back, he should first check his loyalty, and if he knows the way of a vassal, he should report to Jingzhou and be resettled with courtesy.

古文：太建八年，自周还朝，高宗特降殊礼，赏锡有加。
现代文：太建八年，司马焉自北周还朝，高宗特降殊礼，赏赐有加。
English: After eight years of construction, Sima Yan returned from the Northern Zhou Dynasty to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and Gao Zong was given a special honor and a reward.

古文：除宜都王谘议参军事，徙安德宫长秋卿、通直散骑常侍、太中大夫、司州大中正，卒于官。
现代文：封宜都王谘议参军事，改任安德宫长秋卿、通直散骑常侍、太中大夫、司州大中正，死于官任上。
English: Feng Yidu advised the king to join the military, and was reappointed as the palace chief of the Andes, Qiuqing, Tsunzhi Sanzhixi, Taizhong Dafu, and Sizhou Daizhong Zheng. He died in office.

古文：有集十卷。
现代文：有文集十卷。
English: There are ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：子延义，字希忠，少沈敏好学。
现代文：司马焉儿子司马延义，字希忠，少年时聪敏好学。
English: Sima Yan's son Sima Yan Yi, nicknamed Xizhong, was bright and eager to learn as a young boy.

古文：江陵之陷，随父入关。
现代文：江陵陷落，随父亲入关。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, he entered the customs with his father.

古文：丁母忧，丧过于礼。
现代文：母丧，服丧超过礼节。
English: Mother's mourning, mourning is beyond etiquette.

古文：及皓还都，延义乃躬负灵榇，昼伏宵行，冒履冰霜，手足皆皲瘃。
现代文：到司马嵩还京城，司马延义便亲负灵棺，日伏夜行，冒严寒履冰霜，手脚都冻伤了。
English: When Sima Song returned to Beijing, Sima Yan Yi personally carried the coffin, walked day and night, braved the severe cold and walked on ice, and his hands and feet were frostbitten.

古文：及至都，以中风冷，遂致挛废，数年方愈。
现代文：到京城时，由于中了风寒，以致造成痉挛残废，数年以后才愈。
English: When he arrived in the capital, he was crippled due to a stroke, and it took several years for him to recover.

古文：稍迁鄱阳王录事参军、沅陵王友、司徒从事中郎。
现代文：不久改任鄱阳王录事参军、沅陵王友、司徒从事中郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the middle-ranking official of the Shanyang Wang Luo Ji Joined the army, and the Shuling Wang You and the Sito.

古文：张昭，字德明，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：张昭，字德明，吴郡吴人。幼年有孝性。
English: Zhang Zhao, surnamed Deming, a native of Wu County, Wuzhen. He was a filial child.

古文：幼有孝性，色养甚谨，礼无违者。
现代文：侍奉父母很谨慎，没有违背礼的地方。
English: It is prudent to serve one's parents, and there is no place for violating etiquette.

古文：父，常患消渴，嗜鲜鱼，昭乃身自结网捕鱼，以供朝夕。
现代文：父亲张堡，常患消渴病，嗜好吃鲜鱼，昙昭便亲自结纲捕鱼，以供奉父亲早晚吃。
English: His father, Zhang Burg, often suffered from thirst-quenching disease and had a penchant for eating fresh fish, so Zou Zhao personally caught fish to offer to his father to eat in the morning and evening.

古文：弟乾，字玄明，聪敏博学，亦有至性。
现代文：弟张干，字玄明，聪敏博学，亦有纯厚性情。
English: His younger brother, Zhang Gan, is a brilliant, intelligent and erudite person, and also has a pure temperament.

古文：及父卒，兄弟并不衣绵帛，不食盐醋，日唯食一升麦屑粥而已。
现代文：到父亲死，兄弟俩都不穿丝绸，不食盐醋，每天衹吃一升麦屑粥。
English: Until their father's death, the two brothers did not wear silk, did not eat salt and vinegar, and ate a liter of oatmeal porridge every day.

古文：每一感恸，必致呕血，邻里闻其哭声，皆为之涕泣。
现代文：每次一有感触便痛哭，必定哭到呕血，邻里人听到他们的哭声，都为之伤心流泪。
English: Every time there is a touch, they cry bitterly, they must cry until they vomit blood. Neighbors hear their cries and are saddened and shed tears.

古文：父服未终，母陆氏又亡，兄弟遂六年哀毁，形容骨立，亲友见者莫识焉。
现代文：为父亲服丧没完，母亲堕氐又死，兄弟俩便六年伤心悲哀，形容枯槁、骨瘦如柴，亲友们见了都不认识他们了。
English: After grieving for their father, and their mother's illness and death, the two brothers spent the next six years in sorrow. Described as withered and scrawny, their relatives and friends no longer recognized them.

古文：家贫，未得大葬，遂布衣蔬食，十有馀年，杜门不出，屏绝人事。
现代文：家中贫苦，没法大葬，于是便穿布衣、吃蔬食，十多年中，闭门不出，摒绝人事。
English: His family was poor and couldn't afford a large funeral, so he wore cloth clothes and ate vegetarian food. For more than ten years, he never left the house and avoided people.

古文：时衡阳王伯信临郡，举乾孝廉，固辞不就。
现代文：其时衡阳王伯值到郡，推举强茧孝廉，他坚决辞谢不肯就位。
English: At that time, Hengyang Wang Bozheng came to the county to nominate Qiang Yu Xiaolian, but he resolutely declined to take the position.

古文：兄弟并因毁成疾，昭失一眼，乾亦中冷苦癖，年并未五十终于家，子胤俱绝。
现代文：兄弟俩都因伤悲而患疾，张昭瞎了一只眼，张干也中了冷苦癖病，年纪都不到五十岁就死于家中，都没有子孙后代。
English: Both brothers suffered from illness as a result of their grief. Zhang Zhaohong was blind in one eye, and Zhang Gan also suffered from a cold-bittering disease. Both died at home before the age of fifty, and neither had any descendants.

古文：高宗世有太原王知玄者，侨居于会稽剡县，居家以孝闻。
现代文：高宗时有友愿的王知玄，侨居于盒翅型鉴，居家以孝而闻名。
English: Wang Zhixuan, who had friends when he was in high school, lived in Box Wing, where he was known for his filial piety.

古文：及丁父忧，哀毁而卒，高宗嘉之，诏改其所居清苦里为孝家里云。
现代文：到父丧，哀痛毁身而死，直塞嘉奖他，诏令将他所居住的清苦里改名为孝家里。
English: After his father's death, his grief destroyed his body and he died. He was commended by the emperor, who ordered that the village where he lived be renamed Xiaojie.

古文：史臣曰：人伦之德，莫大于孝，是以报本反始，尽性穷神，孝乎惟孝，不可不勖矣。
现代文：史臣曰：人伦之德，莫大于孝，所以报本反始，尽性穷神，惟有孝，不可不勉励。
English: Shichen said, "There is nothing greater than filial piety in the virtue of human relations. Therefore, it is necessary to encourage filial piety.

古文：故《记》云 塞乎天地 ，盛哉！
现代文：因此《记》说 塞之于天地 ，盛啊!
English: Therefore, the "Record" says that it is stuck in heaven and earth, it is prosperous!

