古文：袁充，字德符，本陈郡阳夏人也。其后寓居丹阳。
现代文：袁充字德符，原是陈郡阳夏人。后来寓居丹阳。
English: Yuan Chong Zi De Fu was originally from Yangxia, Chen County. Later, he lived in Danyang.

古文：祖昂，父君正，俱为梁侍中。
现代文：祖父袁昂、父亲袁居正，都是梁朝的侍中。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Ang, and his father, Yuan Junzheng, both served as Liang's aides-de-camp.

古文：充少敬悟，年十余岁，其父党至门，时冬初，充尚衣葛衫。
现代文：袁充年少时机敏聪慧，十多岁的时候，父亲的朋友来家中做客，当时正值初冬天气，袁充还穿着葛衫。
English: When he was in his teens, a friend of his father's came to visit the family home. It was early winter, and Yuan was still wearing his winter coat.

古文：客戏充曰： 袁郎子絺兮霡兮，凄其以风。 
现代文：来客引《诗经》打趣他说： 葛布粗啊葛布细，冷风起啊好凄凉。 
English: A visitor quoted the "Book of Songs" to make fun of him, saying: Ge cloth is coarse, Ge cloth is fine, the cold wind is blowing, it's so bleak.

古文：充应声答曰： 唯絺与霡，服之无数。 
现代文：袁充也引《诗经》作答： 葛布细啊葛布粗，穿起来啊不厌恶。 
English: Yuan Cheng also quoted the "Song of Songs" to answer: Ge cloth is thin, Ge cloth is thick, it is not disgusting to wear.

古文：以是大见嗟赏。
现代文：因此袁充倍受称赞。
English: For this reason, it is greatly appreciated.

古文：仕陈，年十七，为秘书郎。
现代文：十七岁时，袁充当上了陈国的秘书郎。
English: He served the Chen Dynasty and became a secretary at the age of seventeen.

古文：历太子舍人、晋安王文学、吏部侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：历任太子舍人、晋安王文学、吏部侍郎、散骑常侍等职务。
English: He held the posts of prince's concubine, Jinan king's literature, secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, horseback riding attendant and so on.

古文：及陈灭，归国，历蒙、鄜二州司马。
现代文：陈国灭亡后，袁充归投隋朝，历任蒙州、州司马。
English: After the death of Chen Guo, Yuan Chong returned to the Sui Dynasty, and successively held the posts of Mengzhou and State Secretary Ma.

古文：充性好道术，颇解占候，由是领太史令。
现代文：袁充生性喜爱道术，擅长通过天象占断吉凶，因此兼任太史令。
English: Yuan Cheng was born with a liking for Taoism. He was quite good at divining the future, which is why he was appointed Grand Historian.

古文：时上将废皇太子，正穷治东宫官属，充见上雅信符应，因希旨进曰： 比观玄象，皇太子当废。 
现代文：当时隋文帝准备废除皇太子杨勇，正致力于罗织罪名惩治东宫所属官员。袁充心知文帝很相信符应，就顺着文帝的心意进言说： 我近来观测天象，看来皇太子应当废除。 
English: At that time, Sui Emperor Wen was preparing to abolish Crown Prince Yang Yong and was working on fabricating charges to punish officials belonging to the East Palace. Yuan Zheng knew in his heart that Emperor Wen believed very much in correspondence, so he said in accordance with Emperor Wen's heart: I have recently observed celestial objects, it seems that the crown prince should be abolished.

古文：上然之。
现代文：文帝认为他说得对。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：充复表奏，隋兴已后，日影渐长，曰： 开皇元年，冬至日影一丈二尺七寸二分，自尔渐短。
现代文：袁充又给文帝上奏，说隋朝建国以来，日影逐渐变长，他说： 开皇元年，冬至日影一丈二尺七寸二分。自此一天天变短。
English: Yuan Chong also reported to Emperor Wen that since the founding of the Sui Dynasty, the shadow of the sun has gradually become longer. He said: In the year of the founding of the emperor, the winter solstice shadow was one meter, two feet, seven and two minutes. Since then, it has become shorter day by day.

古文：至十七年，冬至影一丈二尺六寸三分。
现代文：到开皇十七年，冬至日影一丈二尺六寸三分。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Emperor's reign, on the day of the winter solstice, the sun's shadow was one joule, two shaku, six suns and three minutes.

古文：四年冬至，在洛阳测影，一丈二尺八寸八分。
现代文：开皇四年冬至，在洛阳测得日影长一丈二尺八寸八分。
English: On the winter solstice in the fourth year of the emperor, he observed the sun's shadow in Luoyang. It was 2 feet, 8 inches and 7 minutes long.

古文：二年，夏至影一尺四寸八分，自尔渐短。
现代文：开皇二年，夏至日影长一尺四寸八分，自此一天天变短。
English: In the second year of the Emperor, on the day of the summer solstice, the length of the shadow was 1 shaku 4 sun 8 bu. Since then, it has gradually shortened.

古文：至十六年，夏至影一尺四寸五分。
现代文：到开皇十六年，夏至日影长一尺四寸五分。
English: By the 16th year of the Emperor's reign, the length of the summer solstice shadow was 1 shaku 4 sun 5 bu.

古文：《周官》以土圭之法正日影，日至之影尺有五寸。
现代文：《周官》上记载用土圭之法测日影之长，夏至日影长一尺五寸。
English: "Zhou Guan" uses the method of Tu Gui to determine the sun shadow, and the summer solstice sun shadow is one foot and five inches long.

古文：郑玄云： 冬至之影一丈三尺。 
现代文：郑玄说： 冬至日影长一丈三尺。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: The winter solstice sun shadow is three feet long.

古文：今十六年夏至之影，短于旧影五分，十七年冬至之影，短于旧影三寸七分。
现代文：现在开皇十六年夏至日影的长度比以前短了五分，开皇十七年冬至日影的长度比以前短了三寸七分。
English: Today, the shadow of the sun on the summer solstice of the 16th year of the Emperor is five inches shorter than the shadow of the past; the shadow of the sun on the winter solstice of the 17th year of the Emperor is three inches and seven minutes shorter than the shadow of the past.

古文：日去极近则影短而日长，去极远则影长而日短，行内道则去极近，外道则去极远。
现代文：太阳离极点近影子就短，白天的时间就长；太阳离极点远影子就长，白天时间就短。太阳在内道上运行，离极点就近，在外道上运行，离极点就远。
English: When the sun is close to the pole, the shadow is short and the day is long; when the sun is far from the pole, the shadow is long and the day is short. The sun moves on the inner path, close to the pole, and on the outer path, far from the pole.

古文：《尧典》云： 日短星昴，以正仲冬。 
现代文：《尧典》上说： 日子在昴星边变短，就是这一年的十一月。 
English: "The Book of Zohar" says: The days grow short around the Zohar, that is, in November of this year.

古文：据昴星昏中，则知尧时仲冬，日在须女十度。以历数推之，开皇已来冬至，日在斗十一度，与唐尧之代去极并近。
现代文：根据昴星黄昏时的位置，就可以知道尧帝时的十一月，太阳在须女星十度的地方，根据历法推算，开皇以来的冬至日，太阳在斗星十一度，和尧时一样，太阳都与极点很接近。
English: According to the position of the Pleiades at dusk, it can be known that in November of the Pleiades, the sun is at the tenth degree of the Pleiades. According to the calendar, the winter solstice since the founding of the emperor, the sun is at the eleventh degree of the Pleiades, and like the Pleiades, the sun is very close to the pole.

古文：谨案《春秋元命包》云： 日月出内道，璇玑得常，天帝崇灵，圣王祖功。 
现代文：查阅《春秋元命苞》，上面写着： 日月在内道运行，璇玑星得处恒常位置，这是天帝大显灵圣，人间圣帝贤王将有开创之功。 
English: Read the "Spring, Autumn and New Year's Rescript," which reads: The sun and moon run in the inner path, and the fixed star is in a constant position. This is the heavenly emperor's great manifestation of the holy spirit, and the earthly holy emperor, the wise king, will have a pioneering role.

古文：京房《别对》曰： 太平日行上道，升平行次道，霸世行下道。 
现代文：京房《别对》上说： 太平年代太阳在上道运行，升平年代太阳在中道运行，乱世太阳在下道运行。 
English: "Don't get it wrong," said Kyofusa: In a peaceful world, the sun moves up, in a leveling world, the sun moves down, and in a world of competition, the sun moves down.

古文：伏惟大隋启运，上感乾元，影短日长，振古未之有也。 
现代文：现在大隋朝建立，感动上天，日影变短白昼变长，这是从古到今还没有过的事。 
English: I think that the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty.

古文：上大悦，告天下。
现代文：文帝看了非常高兴，将这件事公布于天下。
English: Emperor Wen was very happy and announced it to the world.

古文：将作役功，因加程课，丁匠苦之。
现代文：后来国家大兴土木，因为白昼变长就增加每天的工作任务，役夫工匠受尽劳苦。
English: Preparations were made to greatly encourage labor and service, and as a result, taxes were increased, and craftsmen suffered greatly as a result.

古文：仁寿初，充言上本命与阴阳律吕合者六十余条而奏之，因上表曰： 皇帝载诞之初，非止神光瑞气，嘉祥应感，至于本命行年，生月生日，并与天地日月、阴阳律吕运转相符，表里合会。
现代文：隋文帝仁寿初年，袁充将文帝本命与阴阳律吕相符合的六十余条理由写成条款奏上，接着上表说： 皇上诞生的时候，不光有神光瑞气、吉祥感应，而且皇上的出生年月日时都和天地日月、阴阳律吕的运转相符、表里一致。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty's benevolent life, Yuan Chun wrote down more than sixty reasons why Emperor Wen's original destiny was in accordance with the laws of yin and yang, and then the above table said: When the emperor was born, not only was there divine light and auspiciousness, but also the date and time of the emperor's birth were consistent with the operation of heaven and earth, the sun and the moon, and the laws of yin and yang.

古文：此诞圣之异，宝历之元。
现代文：这是圣主出现的异兆，是圣世的发端。
English: This is a sign of the birth of the Holy Emperor Ming and the beginning of a precious calendar.

古文：今与物更新，改年仁寿。岁月日子，还共诞圣之时并同，明合天地之心，得仁寿之理。
现代文：现在大隋朝同万物一起更新，改年号为仁寿，使年月日时回归到与圣帝诞生相一致的时间上去，以证明它合乎天地之心，得于仁寿之理。
English: Now, the Great Sui Dynasty, together with all things, has been renewed, the year has been changed to benevolence, and the year, date and time have been returned to the time consistent with the birth of the Holy Emperor, to prove that it is in line with the heart of heaven and earth and derived from the principle of benevolence.

古文：故知洪基长算，永永无穷。 
现代文：所以知道大隋江山将会基业长久，永无穷尽。 
English: Therefore, we know that the grand cause is eternal and has no end.

古文：上大悦，赏赐优崇，侪辈莫之比。
现代文：文帝看了非常高兴，对袁充赏赐特别优厚，同辈中没有人能与他相比。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased. The reward given to Yuan Chong was very generous. No one of his kind could be compared to him.

古文：仁寿四年甲子岁，炀帝初即位，充及太史丞高智宝奏言： 去岁冬至，日影逾长，今岁皇帝即位，与尧受命年合。
现代文：仁寿四年，岁在甲子，炀帝刚登上皇位，袁充和太史丞高智宝上奏说： 去年冬至日影特别长，今年皇上即位，这正与唐尧登基的情况相同。
English: Ren Shou was four years old and lived in Jiazi. Emperor Qian had just ascended to the throne. Yuan Chong and Grand Historian Gao Zhibao reported: Last winter solstice, the sun's shadow was particularly long. This year, the emperor ascended to the throne. This is exactly the same situation as Tang Jun's ascension to the throne.

古文：昔唐尧受命四十九年，到上元第一纪甲子，天正十一月庚戌冬至，陛下即位，其年即当上元第一纪甲子，天正十一月庚戌冬至，正与唐尧同。
现代文：从前尧帝在位四十九年，到上元第一个甲子年，正是十一月庚戌冬至日，皇上您即位，其年正当上元第一甲子，而且也是十一月庚戌日的冬至日，与尧帝正好相同。
English: From the forty-ninth year of the reign of the former Emperor Shun, to the first year of the Jiazi in the Shangyuan, it was precisely the winter solstice day of November Geng Zi, the year of your accession to the throne, the year of the first year of the Jiazi in the Shangyuan, and it was also the winter solstice day of November Geng Zi, exactly the same as the Emperor Shun.

古文：自放勋以来，凡经八上元，其间绵代，未有仁寿甲子之合。
现代文：从唐尧到现在共经历了八个上元，这中间历朝历代都没有像仁寿四年这样正好与尧帝甲子相符合的。
English: Since he was awarded the decoration, he has experienced a total of eight Shangyuan, during which several generations have been extended. There is no one who fits like Renju Jiazi.

古文：谨案：第一纪甲子，太一在一宫，天目居武德，阴阳历数并得符同。
现代文：根据查考：第一纪甲子年，太一星在一宫，天目星居武德之位，阴阳历法都很符合。
English: According to the investigation: In the first year of Jiazi, Taichi Star was in one palace, Tianme Star was in the position of Wu De, and the yin and yang calendars were all consistent.

古文：唐尧丙辰生，丙子年受命，止合三五，未若己丑甲子，支干并当六合。
现代文：尧帝是丙辰年出生的，丙子年登基，只合于三五之数，不如己丑甲子年登基，干支都与六合相应。
English: Emperor Qian was born in the year of Yin Chen, and ascended to the throne in the year of Yin Zi, which only corresponds to the number of three and five. It is not as good as that he ascended to the throne in the year of Yin Qiao Zi, and the zodiac signs all correspond to the number six.

古文：允一元三统之期，合五纪九章之会，共帝尧同其数，与皇唐比其踪。
现代文：皇上您的登基，正合于一元三统五纪九章的期会，与尧帝一样同合天命，正可以追踪于尧帝之后。
English: It coincides with the period of the unification of the Yuan and the Three Kingdoms, coincides with the meeting of the Five Dynasties and Nine Dynasties, coincides with the number of emperors and empresses, and coincides with the foundation of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：信所谓皇哉唐哉，唐哉皇哉者矣。 
现代文：这确实是皇而唐之、唐而皇之的事啊！ 
English: What is said, "Tangya, Tangya, Tangya" is indeed so.

古文：仍讽齐王暕率百官拜表奉贺。
现代文：袁充又劝谕齐王杨日柬率领百官上表朝贺。
English: Next, he satirized King Qi, Yang, Japanese, and Cambodians, and led hundreds of civil and military officials to offer their congratulations.

古文：其后荧惑守太微者数旬，于时缮治宫室，征役繁重，充上表称 陛下修德，荧惑退舍 。
现代文：这之后，火星居于太微之位达几十天，当时正修造宫室，捐税劳役都十分繁重，袁充却上表说： 皇上您道德仁慈，火星退归本位。 
English: After this, Mars remained in a position of insignificance for dozens of days. At that time, the palace construction room was under construction, and the tax and labor service were very heavy. However, Yuan Cheng said on the table: Your Majesty, you are moral and benevolent, Mars has returned to its original position.

古文：百僚毕贺。
现代文：百官都上朝称贺。
English: Hundreds of military and civilian officials came to congratulate him.

古文：帝大喜，前后赏赐将万计。
现代文：炀帝非常高兴，前前后后对袁充的赏赐不下万数。
English: Emperor Yao was very pleased and rewarded Yuan Zong with tens of thousands of dollars in wealth.

古文：时军国多务，充候帝意欲有所为，便奏称天文见象，须有改作，以是取媚于上。
现代文：当时国家多事，袁充窥知炀帝想做什么事，就上表说天象如何如何，应当怎样怎样，用这种方法来讨炀帝欢心。
English: At that time, the country was in the middle of many things. When Yuan Chong was waiting for Emperor Gong to do something, he said that it was a sign from heaven that he should make some changes and use these to please Emperor Gong.

古文：大业六年，迁内史舍人。
现代文：大业六年，袁充升做内史舍人。
English: After six years of hard work, Yuan Zheng was promoted to the post of secretary of history.

古文：从征辽东，拜朝请大夫、秘书少监。
现代文：跟着炀帝出征辽东，又拜为朝请大夫、秘书少监。
English: He followed Emperor Qian in conquering the eastern part of Liaodong, and he invited a doctor, a secretary, and a junior superintendent.

古文：其后天下乱，帝初罹雁门之厄，又盗贼益起，帝心不自安。
现代文：此后国家发生动乱，炀帝先遭遇了雁门的危难，接着又有各地盗贼不断，他心中害怕，不能安定。
English: After that, the country was in turmoil. Emperor Zou first encountered the peril of the Wild Goose Gate, followed by thieves from all over the country. He was afraid and could not be stable.

古文：充复假托天文，上表陈嘉瑞，以媚于上曰：臣闻皇天辅德，皇天福谦，七政斯齐，三辰告应。
现代文：袁充又假托天象，上表陈述吉祥之兆来向文帝讨好，他说：臣下我听说上天辅佑有德的人，上天降福于谦逊之君，七政齐备，日月星辰都会显现异兆。
English: Yuan Chong also pretended to be a celestial being and used the above table to present auspicious signs to ingratiate himself with Emperor Wen. He said, "I have heard from my vassals that Heaven helps those who are virtuous, Heaven blesses those who are humble, the seven political systems are all in place, and the sun, moon and stars will all display miraculous signs.

古文：伏惟陛下握录图而驭黔首，提万善而化八纮，以百姓为心，匪以一人受庆，先天罔违所欲，后天必奉其时。
现代文：皇上您手握河图洛书统治天下百姓，心怀万种善念教化八方之民，心中常装百姓苦乐，而不以一人一姓为爱憎，这样的人先天不会违拗他的意志，后天也一定遭逢时运。
English: Emperor, you hold in your hand the Book of the River Tulou to rule the people of the world. You cherish all kinds of good thoughts to enlighten the people in all directions. Your heart is always filled with the people's bitterness and joy, instead of loving and hating each person by name. Such a person will not defy his will a priori, and will certainly meet with misfortune the day after tomorrow.

古文：是以初膺宝历，正当上元之纪，乾之初九，又与天命符会。
现代文：因此，皇上您登上大位就碰上上元甲子，呈现乾卦初九的卦象，正与天意相符合。
English: Therefore, Emperor, when you ascended to the throne, you encountered Shangyuan Jiazi, presenting the image of the first nine years of the Qian Gua, which is in line with the will of Heaven.

古文：斯则圣人冥契，故能动合天经。
现代文：这是由于圣人所做的一切都在冥冥中与天意相契合，所以他们的一举一动都能符合天意。
English: These coincide with the sages, so the movement and movement coincide with the movement of heaven.

古文：谨按去年已来，玄象星瑞，毫厘无爽，谨录尤异，上天降祥、破突厥等状七事：
现代文：去年以来，天象祥瑞的征兆都丝毫不差，现记下其中的特异之处，奏上天降祥瑞预示将攻灭突厥等七件事。
English: Since last year, the signs of the celestial auspice have been in no way inferior. I will now write down the peculiarities among them, and play seven things such as the celestial auspice foreshadowing the destruction of the Turks.

古文：其一，去八月二十八日夜，大流星如斗，出王良北，正落突厥营，声如崩墙。
现代文：第一，去年八月二十二日夜晚，大流星如斗，从王良星之北窜出，正落在突厥人的军营之中，就像城墙崩塌一样发生巨大声响。
English: First, on the night of August 22 last year, a large meteor streaked out of the north of Wang Liangxing and landed in the middle of the Turkish military camp, causing a huge noise like a city wall collapsing.

古文：其二，八月二十九日夜，复有大流星如斗，出羽林，向北流，正当北方。
现代文：第二，八月二十九日夜晚，又有大流星如斗，从羽林宫窜出，向北流动，堕于正北方向。
English: Second, on the night of August 29th, another large meteor streaked out of the Hualin Palace, flowing northward and falling in the due north direction.

古文：依占，频二夜流星坠贼所，贼必败散。
现代文：根据占断，连续两颗大流星坠向贼营，敌人必然被消灭。
English: According to the prediction, two large meteors in a row will fall on the thief's camp, and the enemy will inevitably be eliminated.

古文：其三，九月四日夜，频有两星大如斗，出北斗魁，向东北流。
现代文：第三，九月四日夜晚，连续两颗大流星从北斗星的斗魁窜出，流向东北。
English: Third, on the evening of September 4, two large meteors in succession streaked out from the head of the Big Dipper and flowed to the northeast.

古文：依占，北斗主杀伐，贼必败。
现代文：根据占断，北斗星主征伐，贼人一定会被打败。
English: According to the prediction, the Big Dipper will be the main conquest, and the thieves will definitely be defeated.

古文：其四，岁星主福德，频行京、都二处分野。
现代文：第四，岁星是福德星，不断出现在京、都的分野处。
English: Fourth, the lucky star is the star of good fortune, which constantly appears in Beijing and the capital.

古文：依占，国家之福。
现代文：根据占断，这是国家有福的征兆。
English: According to the horoscope, this is a sign of good fortune for the country.

古文：其五，七月内，荧惑守羽林，九月七日已退舍。
现代文：第五，七月间，火星居于羽林之位，九月七日已退归本位。
English: Fifth, in July, Mars is in the position of feather forest, and on September 7 it has returned to its original position.

古文：依占，不出三日，贼必败散。
现代文：根据占断，贼兵不出三天就会被扫平。
English: According to the plan, the bandits would be wiped out in three days.

古文：其六，去年十一月二十日夜，有流星赤如火，从东北向西南，落贼帅卢明月营，破其童车。
现代文：第六，去年十一月二十日夜晚，有流星红得像火一样，从东北流向西南，落向贼帅卢明月营寨，砸碎了他的木童车。
English: Sixth, on the evening of November 20 last year, a meteor, red as fire, streamed from the northeast to the southwest and fell on the camp of the thief Lu Mingyue, smashing his wooden stroller.

古文：其七，十二月十五日夜，通汉镇北有赤气亘北方，突厥将亡之应也。
现代文：第七，十二月二十五日夜晚，通汉镇的北边有红光横亘于天空，这是突厥将要灭亡的征兆。
English: On the night of December 25th, the 7th, there was a red light in the sky to the north of the town of Tonghan, which was a sign that the Turks were about to perish.

古文：依勘《城录》，河南洛阳并当甲子，与乾元初九爻及上元甲子符合。此是福地，永无所虑。
现代文：查《城录》一书，河南洛阳合乎甲子，正与乾卦初九辞及上元甲子相符合，那里是福地，永远也用不着担心。
English: According to the "City Records" book, Luoyang, Henan, is in line with the first nine verses of the "Kenga" and the first nine verses of the "Shangyuan." It is a blessed place, and you never have to worry.

古文：旋观往政，侧闻前古，彼则异时间出，今则一朝总萃。
现代文：遍查往事，闻说往古之事，都是偶尔才出现祥瑞的征兆，现在却一时之间全出现了。
English: Looking back on the politics of yesteryear, listening to the things of the past, those are all from different time intervals, and now it is a morning summary of strange things.

古文：岂非天赞有道，助歼凶孽，方清九夷于东獩，沉五狄于北溟，告成岱岳，无为汾水。
现代文：这正是上天奖励有道之君，帮助歼灭凶顽孽障，预示将要扫清九夷于东犭岁，将五狄都沉入北溟之中，到泰山封禅以示大功告成，请不必以汾水之贼为念。
English: This is exactly the heaven's reward for the virtuous ruler, help to annihilate the evil, foreshadowing that the Nine Emperors will be swept away in the East, the Five Emperors will be sunk into the North, and the great work will be completed by the sealing of the Great Wall of China on Mount Tai. Please do not think of the thief of the flood.

古文：书奏，帝大悦，超拜秘书令，亲待逾昵。
现代文：炀帝看了奏章非常高兴，擢升袁充为秘书令，对他更加宠幸。
English: Emperor Qian was very happy to see the record, and Yuan Shong was promoted to secretary, which was even more fortunate for him.

古文：帝每欲征讨，充皆预知之，乃假托星象，奖成帝意，在位者皆切患之。
现代文：炀帝每次要征伐，袁充都预先探知，就假托天象，进言鼓励炀帝去做，朝臣们都把他当做一大祸患。
English: Every time Emperor Zhao wanted to go on a campaign, Yuancheng would detect it in advance, pretend to be a celestial being, and encourage Emperor Zhao to do it. The courtiers regarded him as a great disaster.

古文：宇文化及杀逆之际，并诛充，时年七十五。
现代文：宇文化及作乱杀死炀帝之时，袁充一同被杀，死时七十五岁。
English: When Emperor Wu was killed by Yu Wenhua and his followers, Yuan Zheng was also killed. He was 75 years old at the time of his death.

