古文：韩王信者，故韩襄王孽孙也，长八尺五寸。
现代文：韩王韩信是原来韩襄王的庶出孙子，身高八尺五寸。
English: Han Wang Han Xin is the great-great-grandson of the original Han Xiang Wang. He is eight feet five inches tall.

古文：及项梁之立楚後怀王也，燕、齐、赵、魏皆已前王，唯韩无有後，故立韩诸公子横阳君成为韩王，欲以抚定韩故地。
现代文：到了项梁拥立楚王的后代楚怀王的时候，燕国、齐国、赵国、魏国都早已自己立下了国王，只有韩国后继无人，所以才立了韩国诸公子中的横阳君韩城为韩王，想以此来安抚原韩国的土地。
English: By the time that Xiang Liang supported the establishment of King Chu Huai, a descendant of King Chu, the states of Yan, Qi, Zhao, and Wei had already established their own kings. Only Korea had no successor, so they established the Yangyang Emperor Hancheng, one of the nobles of Korea, as the king of Korea, hoping to appease the land of the original Korea.

古文：项梁败死定陶，成饹怀王。
现代文：项梁在定陶战败而死，韩成投奔楚怀王。
English: Cao Liang was defeated and died in the Battle of Dingtao, and Han Cheng fled to King Chu Huai.

古文：沛公引兵击阳城，使张良以韩司徒降下韩故地，得信，以为韩将，将其兵从沛公入武关。
现代文：沛公带军队进攻阳城时，命张良以韩国司徒的身份降服了韩国原有地盘，得到韩信，任命他为韩国将军，带领他的军队随从沛公进入武关。
English: When Pei Gong led his army to attack Yangcheng, he ordered Zhang Liang to subdue the original territory of South Korea as a South Korean soldier, get Han Xin, appoint him as a South Korean general, and lead his army to follow Pei Gong into Wuguan.

古文：沛公立为汉王，韩信从入汉中，乃说汉王曰： 项王王诸将近地，而王独远居此，此左迁也。
现代文：沛公被立为汉王，韩信跟随着沛公进入汉中，就说服汉王道： 项羽把自己的部下都封在中原附近地区，唯独大王您处在这遥远的地方，这等于降职！
English: Pei Gong was established as the king of Han, Han Xin followed Pei Gong into Han, and persuaded the king of Han to say: Xiang Yu has sealed his subordinates in the area near the Central Plains, but you, the great king, are in this distant place, which is tantamount to demotion!

古文：士卒皆山东人，跂而望归，及其锋东乡，可以争天下。 
现代文：您部下士兵都是崤山以东的人，他们都踮起脚尖，急切地盼望返回故乡，趁着他们锐气强盛向东进发，就可以争夺天下。 
English: The soldiers under your command are all from the east of Mount Lushan. They are all on their tiptoes, eagerly looking forward to returning to their hometowns, and taking advantage of their strong spirit to go east, so that they can compete for the world.

古文：汉王还定三秦，乃许信为韩王，先拜信为韩太尉，将兵略韩地。
现代文：汉王回军平定三秦时，就答应让韩信为韩王，先任命他为韩太尉，带兵去攻取韩国旧地。
English: When Han Wang returned to the army to pacify Sanqin, he promised to make Han Xin the king of Han, and first appointed him as Han Taifu, leading troops to conquer the old land of Korea.

古文：项籍之封诸王皆就国，韩王成以不从无功，不遣就国，更以为列侯。
现代文：项羽所封的诸侯王都到各自的封地去，韩王韩成因没跟随项羽征战，没有战功，不派他到封地去，改封他为列侯。
English: The feudal lords and princes appointed by Xiang Yu all went to their respective fiefdoms. Han King Han Cheng, because he did not follow Xiang Yu to the war, did not have any war exploits, so he was not sent to his fiefdom and was appointed as a feudal lord.

古文：及闻汉遣韩信略韩地，乃令故项籍游吴时吴令郑昌为韩王以距汉。
现代文：等到听说汉王派韩信攻取韩地，就命令自己游历吴地时的吴县县令郑昌做韩王以抗拒汉军。
English: When he heard that the King of Han had sent Han Xin to invade Han, he ordered Zheng Chang, the governor of Wuxian County, to be the King of Han to resist the Chinese army.

古文：汉二年，韩信略定韩十馀城。
现代文：汉高祖二年，韩信平定了韩国的十几座城池。
English: In the second year of Henkel's founding, Han Xin leveled more than a dozen cities in South Korea.

古文：汉王至河南，韩信急击韩王昌阳城。
现代文：汉王到达河南，韩信在阳城猛攻韩王郑昌。
English: Han Wang arrived in Henan, Han Xin attacked Han Wang Zheng Chang in Yangcheng.

古文：昌降，汉王乃立韩信为韩王，常将韩兵从。
现代文：郑昌投降，汉王就立韩信为韩王，常带领韩地军队跟随汉王。
English: When Zheng Chang surrendered, Han Xin was appointed king of Han by the Han king, and he often led the Korean army to follow the Han king.

古文：三年，汉王出荥阳，韩王信、周苛等守荥阳。
现代文：汉高祖三年，汉王撤出荥阳，韩王韩信和周苛等人守卫荥阳。
English: Three years after the founding of the Han Dynasty, the Han King withdrew from Fenyang. Han Wang, Han Xin and Zhou Cao guarded Fenyang.

古文：及楚败荥阳，信降楚，已而得亡，复归汉，汉复立以为韩王，竟从击破项籍，天下定。
现代文：等到楚军攻破荥阳，韩信投降了楚军，不久得以逃出，又投归汉王，汉王再次立他为韩王，最终跟从汉王击败项羽，平定了天下。
English: When the Chu army broke through Poyang, Han Xin surrendered to the Chu army, and was soon able to escape, and returned to the Han king. The Han king once again made him the king of Han, and finally followed the Han king to defeat Xiang Yu and leveled the world.

古文：五年春，遂与剖符为韩王，王颍川。
现代文：汉高祖五年春天，汉高祖就和韩信剖符为信，正式封他为韩王，封地在颍川。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, Emperor Gaozu wrote a letter to Han Xin, officially crowning him as the King of Han, with his fief located in the Xingchuan River.

古文：明年春，上以韩信材武，所王北近巩、洛，南迫宛、叶，东有淮阳，皆天下劲兵处，乃诏徙韩王信王太原以北，备御胡，都晋阳。
现代文：第二年春天，高祖认为韩信雄壮勇武，封地颍川北靠近巩县、洛阳，南逼近宛县、叶县，东边则是重镇淮阳，这些都是天下的战略要地，就下诏命韩王韩信迁移到太原以北地区，以防备抵抗匈奴，建都晋阳。
English: In the spring of the second year, Gaozu thought that Han Xinxiong was strong and brave, and that the fiefs in the north of Luochuan near Gongxian and Luoyang, in the south near Wanxian and Yexian, and in the east the important town of Huaiyang, were all strategic places in the world. He ordered Han Wang Hanxin to move to the north of Taiyuan to prevent resistance to the Xiongnu and build the capital of Jinyang.

古文：信上书曰： 国被边，匈奴数入，晋阳去塞远，请治马邑。 
现代文：韩信上书说： 我的封国紧靠边界，匈奴多次入侵，晋阳距离边境较远，请允许我建都马邑。 
English: In the letter, Han wrote: My fiefdom is close to the border, the Huns have invaded many times, and Jinyang is far from the border. Please allow me to build the capital, Ma'eup.

古文：上许之，信乃徙治马邑。
现代文：皇帝答应了，韩信就把都城迁到马邑。
English: The emperor agreed, and Han Xin moved the capital to Ma'e.

古文：秋，匈奴冒顿大围信，信数使使胡求和解。
现代文：在这年秋天，匈奴冒顿单于重重包围了韩信，韩信多次派使者到匈奴处求和。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Xiongnu single-handedly besieged Han Xin. Han Xin repeatedly sent envoys to the Xiongnu to sue for peace.

古文：汉发兵救之，疑信数间使，有二心，使人责让信。
现代文：汉朝派人带兵前往援救，但怀疑韩信多次私派使者，有背叛汉朝之心，派人责备韩信。
English: The Han Dynasty sent soldiers to rescue him, but suspected that Han Xin had repeatedly sent emissaries to betray the heart of the Han Dynasty, and sent someone to rebuke Han Xin.

古文：信恐诛，因与匈奴约共攻汉，反，以马邑降胡，击太原。
现代文：韩信害怕被杀，于是就和匈奴约定好共同攻打汉朝，起兵造反，把国都马邑拿出投降匈奴，并率军攻打太原。
English: Han Xin was afraid of being killed, so he agreed with the Xiongnu to jointly attack the Han Dynasty, set up an army to rebel, took out the capital Ma'iu to surrender to the Xiongnu, and led the army to attack Taiyuan.

古文：七年冬，上自往击，破信军铜鞮，斩其将王喜。
现代文：高祖七年冬天，皇帝亲自率军攻打韩信，在铜鞮击败韩信的军队，并将其部将王喜斩杀。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of Emperor Gaozu, the emperor personally led the army to attack Han Xin, defeated Han Xin's army in Tonglu, and killed his subordinate Wang Xi.

古文：信亡走匈奴。其与白土人曼丘臣、王黄等立赵苗裔赵利为王，复收信败散兵，而与信及冒顿谋攻汉。
现代文：韩信逃跑投奔匈奴，他的部将白土人曼丘臣、王黄等人拥立赵王的后代赵利为王，又收编韩信被击败逃散的军队，并和韩信及匈奴冒顿单于商议一齐攻打汉朝。
English: Han Xin ran away and joined the Huns. His subordinates, such as the White Earthmen Manchu Chen and Wang Huang, supported Zhao Li, the descendant of King Zhao, as king. They also assembled Han Xin's defeated and dispersed army, and attacked the Han Dynasty together with Han Xin and the Huns.

古文：匈奴仗左右贤王将万馀骑与王黄等屯广武以南，至晋阳，与汉兵战，汉大破之，追至于离石，破之。
现代文：匈奴派遣左右贤王带领一万多骑兵和王黄等人驻扎在广武以南地区，到达晋阳时，和汉军交战，汉军打败了他们，乘胜追到离石，又将他们打败。
English: The Xiongnu dispatched the left and right wise kings to lead more than ten thousand cavalrymen and Wang Huang and others stationed in the area south of Guangwu. When they arrived in Jinyang, they fought with the Chinese army. The Chinese army defeated them, chased them to the stone and defeated them.

古文：匈奴复聚兵楼烦西北，汉令车骑击破匈奴。
现代文：匈奴再次在楼烦西将地区聚集军队，汉高祖命令战车部队和骑兵把他们打败。
English: The Xiongnu once again gathered troops in the western part of the region, and Emperor Gaozhu ordered the chariot troops and cavalry to defeat them.

古文：匈奴常败走，汉乘胜追北，闻冒顿居代谷，高皇帝居晋阳，使人视冒顿，还报曰 可击 。
现代文：匈奴总是败逃，汉军乘胜追击败兵，听说冒顿单于驻扎在代谷，汉高祖当时在晋阳，派人去侦察冒顿，侦察人员回来报告说 可以出击 。
English: The Xiongnu always lost and fled, the Chinese army took advantage of the victory to chase and defeat the soldiers. It is said that the Hentong soldiers were stationed in Daigou, and the Han Gaozu was in Jinyang at that time. He sent someone to spy on the Hentong soldiers, and the spies came back and reported that they could attack.

古文：上遂至平城。
现代文：皇帝也就到达平城。
English: The emperor also arrived in Pingcheng.

古文：上出白登，匈奴骑围上，上乃使人厚遗阏氏。
现代文：皇帝出城登上白登山，被匈奴骑兵团团围住，皇帝就派人送给匈奴王后阏氏许多礼物。
English: The emperor went out of the city and climbed Mount Paektu, where he was surrounded by Hun cavalry regiments. The emperor then sent someone to give the Hun queen, Lady Zhou, many gifts.

古文：阏氏乃说冒顿曰： 今得汉地，犹不能居；且两主不相戹。 
现代文：阏氏便劝冒顿单于说： 现在已经攻取了汉朝的土地，但还是不能居住下来；更何况两国君主不互相围困。 
English: Mr. Zou then advised the adventurous Dondan to say: Now the land of the Han Dynasty has been conquered, but it still cannot be inhabited; moreover, the two monarchs do not besiege each other.

古文：居七日，胡骑稍引去。
现代文：过了七天，匈奴骑兵逐渐撒去。
English: After seven days, the Hun cavalry gradually dispersed.

古文：时天大雾，汉使人往来，胡不觉。
现代文：当时天降大雾，汉朝派人在白登山和平城之间往来，匈奴一点也没有察觉。
English: At that time, a heavy fog descended from the sky, and the Han Dynasty sent people to travel between Mount Paektu and Heping City. The Xiongnu did not notice it at all.

古文：护军中尉陈平言上曰： 胡者全兵，请令彊弩傅两矢外乡，徐行出围。 
现代文：护军中尉陈平对皇帝说： 匈奴人都用长枪弓箭，请命令士兵每张强弩朝外搭两支利箭，慢慢地撤出包围。 
English: The lieutenant of the escort, Chen Ping, said to the emperor: The Huns are all armed with long guns and bows and arrows. Please order the soldiers to put two sharp arrows on each strong shield and slowly withdraw from the encirclement.

古文：入平城，汉救兵亦到，胡骑遂解去。
现代文：撤进平城之后，汉朝的救兵也赶到了，匈奴的骑兵这才解围离去。
English: After withdrawing into Pingcheng, the Han Dynasty's relief troops also arrived, and the Huns' cavalry only left after the siege was lifted.

古文：汉亦罢兵归。
现代文：汉朝也收兵而归。
English: The Han Dynasty also withdrew its troops.

古文：韩信为匈奴将兵往来击边。
现代文：韩信为匈奴人带兵往来在边境一带攻击汉军。
English: Han Xin led troops for the Huns to attack the Han army along the border.

古文：汉十年，信令王黄等说误陈豨。
现代文：汉高祖十年，韩信命王黄等人劝说陈豨，使其误信而反。
English: Ten years after the founding of Henkel, Han Xinmei, Wang Huang, and others tried to persuade Chen Yao to change his mind.

古文：十一年春，故韩王信复与胡骑入居参合，距汉。
现代文：十一年春天，前韩王韩信又和匈奴骑兵一起侵入参合，对抗汉朝。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the former king of Korea, Han Xin, and the Hun cavalry invaded Senghe to fight against the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉使柴将军击之，遗信书曰： 陛下宽仁，诸侯虽有畔亡，而复归，辄复故位号，不诛也。
现代文：汉朝派遣柴将军带兵前去迎击，柴将军先写给韩信说： 皇帝陛下宽厚仁爱，尽管有些诸侯背叛逃亡，但当他们再度归顺的时候，总是恢复其原有的爵位名号，并不加诛杀。
English: The Han Dynasty dispatched General Chai to lead troops to meet the attack. General Chai first wrote to Han Xin, saying: His Majesty the Emperor is generous and kind. Although some lords betrayed and fled, when they surrendered again, they always restored their original title and name, and did not fight.

古文：大王所知。
现代文：这些都是大王您所知道的。
English: You know all this.

古文：今王以败亡走胡，非有大罪，急自归！ 
现代文：现在您是因为战败才逃归匈奴的，并没有大罪，您应该赶快来归顺！ 
English: Now that you have fled to the Huns because of defeat, there is no great sin, you should quickly come to submit!

古文：韩王信报曰： 陛下擢仆起闾巷，南面称孤，此仆之幸也。
现代文：韩王韩信回信道： 皇帝把我从里巷平民中提拔上来，使我南面称王，这对我来说是万分荣幸的。
English: Han Wang and Han Xin replied, "It is a great honor for me that the emperor promoted me from a commoner and made me a king.

古文：荥阳之事，仆不能死，囚於项籍，此一罪也。
现代文：在荥阳保卫战中，我不能以死效忠，而被项羽关押。这是我的第一条罪状。
English: In the defense of Shenyang, I could not be loyal to death, and I was imprisoned by Xiang Yu. This is my first charge.

古文：及寇攻马邑，仆不能坚守，以城降之，此二罪也。
现代文：等到匈奴进犯马邑，我不能坚守城池，献城投降。这是我的第二条罪状。
English: Wait until the Xiongnu invade Ma'eup, I can't hold on to the city and surrender the city. This is my second crime.

古文：今反为寇将兵，与将军争一旦之命，此三罪也。
现代文：现在反而为敌人带兵，和将军争战，争这旦夕之间的活头。
English: Now, on the contrary, he is leading the troops for the enemy, fighting with the general, and fighting for survival in this desperate situation.

古文：夫种、蠡无一罪，身死亡；今仆有三罪於陛下，而欲求活於世，此伍子胥所以偾於吴也。
现代文：这是我的第三条罪状。文种、范蠡没有一条罪状，但在成功之后，一个被杀一个逃亡；现在我对皇帝犯下了三条罪状，还想在世上求取活命，这是伍子胥在吴国之所以被杀的原因。
English: This is my third crime. Wenzhong and Fan Qi did not have a single crime, but after success, one was killed and one fled; now I have committed three crimes against the emperor, and I still want to live in the world. This is the reason why Wu Ziqi was killed in Wu.

古文：今仆亡匿山谷间，旦暮乞贷蛮夷，仆之思归，如痿人不忘起，盲者不忘视也，势不可耳。 
现代文：现在我逃命隐藏在山谷之中，每天都靠向蛮夷乞讨过活，我思归之心，就同瘫痪的人不忘记直立行走，盲人不忘记睁眼看一看一样，只不过情势不允许罢了。 
English: Now I'm hiding in the valley, running for my life, living day by day by begging from the barbarians. My desire to return is the same as that of a paralyzed man who doesn't forget to walk upright, or a blind man who doesn't forget to open his eyes to see, but the situation doesn't allow it.

古文：遂战。柴将军屠参合，斩韩王信。
现代文：于是两军交战，柴将军屠平参合城，并将韩王韩信斩杀。
English: As a result, the two armies clashed, and General Chai Tu Ping entered the city and killed King Han Hanxin.

古文：信之入匈奴，与太子俱；及至穨当城，生子，因名曰穨当。
现代文：韩信投靠匈奴的时候，和自己的太子同行，等到了颓当城，又生了一个儿子，因而取名叫颓当。
English: When Han Xin sided with the Xiongnu, he went with his own prince and waited until the city of Shantang, where he had another son, who was named Shantang.

古文：韩太子亦生子，命曰婴。
现代文：韩太子也生下一个儿子，取名为婴。
English: Crown Prince Han also gave birth to a son, named Jung.

古文：至孝文十四年，穨当及婴率其众降汉。
现代文：到孝文帝十四年，韩颓当和韩婴率领部下投归汉朝。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Han Xudang and Han Jiao led their subordinates to return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉封穨当为弓高侯，婴为襄城侯。
现代文：汉朝封韩颓当为弓高侯，韩婴为襄城侯。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Han Zheng was the governor of Qian Gao, and Han Jiao was the governor of Xiangcheng.

古文：吴楚军时，弓高侯功冠诸将。
现代文：在平定吴楚七国之乱时，弓高侯的军功超过其它将领。
English: During the suppression of the Seven Kingdoms War of Wu-Chu, the military exploits of Bow Gao Hou surpassed those of other generals.

古文：传子至孙，孙无子，失侯。
现代文：爵位儿子传到孙子，他的孙子没有儿子，侯爵被取消。
English: The title of marquis passed from son to grandson, his grandson had no son, and the marquisate was abolished.

古文：婴孙以不敬失侯。
现代文：韩婴的孙子因犯有不敬之罪，侯爵被取消。
English: Han's grandson was stripped of his marquis title for committing the crime of disrespect.

古文：穨当孽孙韩嫣，贵幸，名富显於当世。
现代文：韩颓当庶出的孙子韩嫣，地位尊贵，很受皇帝宠爱，名声和富贵都荣显于当世。
English: Han Xuan's grandchild, Han Xuan, who was born out of wedlock, had a noble status and was very much favored by the emperor. His fame and wealth were reflected in the present world.

古文：其弟说，再封，数称将军，卒为案道侯。
现代文：他的弟弟韩说，再度被封侯，并多次受命为将军，最后封为案道侯。
English: His younger brother, Han, said he was once again given the title of marquess, and was ordered to be a general several times, before finally being given the title of judge marquess.

古文：子代，岁馀坐法死。
现代文：儿子继承侯爵，一年多之后因犯法被处死。
English: His son succeeded him as marquis and was executed more than a year later for breaking the law.

古文：後岁馀，说孙曾拜为龙嵒侯，续说後。
现代文：又过一年多，韩说的孙子韩曾被封为龙额侯，继承了韩说的爵位。
English: More than a year later, Han's grandson, Han, was named Long Yuan, inheriting Han's title.

古文：卢绾者，丰人也，与高祖同里。
现代文：卢绾是丰邑人，和汉高祖是同乡。
English: Lu Wei is from Fengyi, and is a fellow villager of Han Gao Zu.

古文：卢绾亲与高祖太上皇相爱，及生男，高祖、卢绾同日生，里中持羊酒贺两家。及高祖、卢绾壮，俱学书，又相爱也。
现代文：卢绾的父亲和高祖的父亲非常要好，等到生儿子时，汉高祖和卢绾又是同日而生。乡亲们抬着羊酒去两家祝贺，等到高祖、卢绾长大了，在一块读书，又非常要好。
English: Lu Yao's father and Gao Zu's father were very close. When Gao Zu's son was born, Han Gao Zu and Lu Yao were born on the same day. The villagers went to congratulate the two families with sheep wine. When Gao Zu and Lu Yao grew up and studied together, it was very good.

古文：里中嘉两家亲相爱，生子同日，壮又相爱，复贺两家羊酒。
现代文：乡亲们见这两家父辈非常要好，儿子同日出生，长大后又很要好，再次抬着羊酒前去祝贺。
English: The villagers saw that the two fathers were very good friends. The son was born on the same day, and he was very good when he grew up. They once again carried the sheep wine to congratulate him.

古文：高祖为布衣时，有吏事辟匿，卢绾常随出入上下。及高祖初起沛，卢绾以客从，入汉中为将军，常侍中。
现代文：高祖还是平民百姓的时候，被官吏追拿需要躲藏，卢绾总是随同左右，东奔西走，到高祖从沛县起兵时，卢绾以宾客的身份相随，到汉中后，担任将军，总是陪伴在高祖身边。
English: When Gaozu was still a commoner, he was chased by officials and needed to hide. Lu Yao always followed Gaozu around and went everywhere with him. When Gaozu raised an army from Pae County, Lu Yao accompanied him as a guest. After he entered Han Middle School, he served as a general and always accompanied Gaozu.

古文：从东击项籍，以太尉常从，出入卧内，衣被饮食赏赐，群臣莫敢望，虽萧曹等，特以事见礼，至其亲幸，莫及卢绾。
现代文：跟从高祖东击项羽时，以太尉的身份不离左右，可以在高祖的卧室内进进出出，衣被饮食方面的赏赐丰厚无比，其他大臣没人能企及，就是萧何、曹参等人，也只是因事功而受到礼遇，至于说到亲近宠幸，没人能赶得上卢绾。
English: When following Gao Zu to the East, the identity of the ether lieutenant is not far away, you can enter and exit Gao Zu's bedroom, and the clothing and food rewards are incomparably rich. No other ministers can match, that is, Xiao He, Cao San and others are only treated with courtesy because of their merits. As far as being close and favored, no one can catch up with Lu Yao.

古文：绾封为长安侯。
现代文：卢绾被封为长安侯。
English: Lu Wei was given the title of Lord of Chang'an.

古文：长安，故咸阳也。
现代文：长安，就是原来的咸阳啊。
English: Chang'an is the original Xianyang.

古文：汉五年冬，以破项籍，乃使卢绾别将，与刘贾击临江王共尉，破之。
现代文：汉高祖五年的冬天，已经击败了项羽，就派卢绾另带一支军队，和刘贾一起攻打临江王共尉，将他击败。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of Emperor Gaozu, he had already defeated Xiang Yu, so he sent Lu Yao with another army to attack Lin Jiang Wang and defeat him.

古文：七月还，从击燕王臧荼，臧荼降。
现代文：七月凯旋而归，跟随皇帝攻打燕王臧荼，臧荼投降。
English: In July, he made a triumphant return, followed the emperor to attack Yan Wang, and Yan surrendered.

古文：高祖已定天下，诸侯非刘氏而王者七人。
现代文：高祖平定天下后，诸侯中不姓刘而封王的一共有七个人。
English: After Gaozhu conquered the world, there were a total of seven princes who were not surnamed Liu but were crowned kings.

古文：欲王卢绾，为群臣觖望。
现代文：高祖本想封卢绾为王，但又害怕群臣怨恨不满。
English: Gao Zu originally wanted to make Lu Xun king, but he was afraid of the resentment of his vassals.

古文：及虏臧荼，乃下诏诸将相列侯，择群臣有功者以为燕王。
现代文：等到俘虏臧荼之后，就下诏封将相们为列侯，在群臣中挑选有功的人封为燕王。
English: After the captives were killed, the emperor issued an edict to make the princes into vassals, and selected the most meritorious person among the vassals to be crowned as the king of swallows.

古文：群臣知上欲王卢绾，皆言曰： 太尉长安侯卢绾常从平定天下，功最多，可王燕。 
现代文：文武群臣都知道皇帝想封卢绾为王，就一齐上言道： 太尉长安侯卢绾经常跟随皇帝平定天下，功劳最多，可以封为燕王。 
English: The ministers of literature and military affairs all knew that the emperor wanted to make Lu Xun king, so they all said together: "Captain Chang'an Hou Lu Xun often followed the emperor to pacify the world, with the most merit, he can be named the King of Swans."

古文：诏许之。
现代文：皇帝下诏批准了。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：汉五年八月，乃立虏绾为燕王。诸侯王得幸莫如燕王。
现代文：汉高祖五年八月，就立卢绾为燕王，诸侯王受到的宠幸没有谁比得上燕王。
English: In August of the fifth year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong appointed Lu Xun as the King of Swans. No one was more favored by the princes than the King of Swans.

古文：汉十一年秋，陈豨反代地，高祖如邯郸击豨兵，燕王绾亦击其东北。
现代文：汉高祖十一年秋天，陈豨在代地造反，高祖到邯郸去攻打陈豨的军队，燕王卢绾也率军攻打陈豨的东北部。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, Chen Xi rebelled on his behalf. Gaozu went to Xi'an to attack Chen Xi's army, and Yan Wang Lu Xi also led an army to attack the northeastern part of Chen Xi.

古文：当是时，陈豨使王黄求救匈奴。
现代文：在这时，陈豨派王黄去向匈奴求救。
English: At this time, Chen Xi sent Wang Huang to the Xiongnu for help.

古文：燕王绾亦使其臣张胜於匈奴，言豨等军破。
现代文：燕王卢绾也派部下张胜出使匈奴，声称陈豨等人的部队已被击败。
English: Yan's king, Lu Xun, also sent his subordinate Zhang Sheng to dispatch the Xiongnu, claiming that the troops of Chen Xuan and others had been defeated.

古文：张胜至胡，故燕王臧茶子衍出亡在胡，见张胜曰： 公所以重於燕者，以习胡事也。
现代文：张胜到匈奴以后，前燕王臧荼的儿子臧衍逃亡在匈奴，见到张胜说： 您之所以在燕国受重用，是因为您熟悉匈奴事务。
English: After Zhang Sheng came to the Xiongnu, the son of the former King Yan of Yan fled to the Xiongnu. When Zhang Sheng saw Zhang Sheng, he said, "The reason why you are valued in Yan's country is because you are familiar with Xiongnu affairs."

古文：燕所以久存者，以诸侯数反，兵连不决也。
现代文：燕国之所以能长期存在，是因为诸侯多次反叛，战争连年不断。
English: The reason why Yan's state has been able to exist for so long is because the princes rebelled many times and the war continued year after year.

古文：今公为燕欲急灭豨等，豨等已尽，次亦至燕，公等亦且为虏矣。
现代文：现在您想为燕国尽快消灭陈豨等人，但陈豨等人被消灭之后，接着就要轮到燕国，您这班人也要成为俘虏了。
English: Now you want to eliminate Chen Qi and others as soon as possible for Yan Guo, but after Chen Qi and others are eliminated, then it will be the turn of Yan Guo, and your group of people will also become prisoners.

古文：公何不令燕且缓陈豨而与胡和？
现代文：您为什么不让燕国延缓攻打陈豨而与匈奴修好呢？
English: Why didn't you let Yan delay the attack on Chen and make peace with the Xiongnu?

古文：事宽，得长王燕；即有汉急，可以安国。 
现代文：战争延缓了，能使卢绾长期为燕王，如果汉朝有紧急事变，也可以借此安定国家。 
English: The war was delayed, which could keep Lu Wei as the king of Yan for a long time. If there were an emergency in the Han Dynasty, it could also be used to stabilize the country.

古文：张胜以为然，乃私令匈奴助豨等击燕。
现代文：张胜认为他的话是对的，就暗中让匈奴帮助陈豨攻打燕国。
English: Zhang Sheng thought his words were right, so he secretly asked the Xiongnu to help Chen Qi attack Yan's country.

古文：燕王绾疑张胜与胡反，上书请族张胜。
现代文：燕王卢绾怀疑张胜和匈奴勾结谋反，就上书皇帝请求把张胜满门抄斩。
English: Yan Wang Lu Yao suspected that Zhang Sheng and the Xiongnu were conspiring to rebel, so he sent a letter to the emperor requesting that Zhang Sheng be beheaded.

古文：胜还，具道所以为者。
现代文：张胜返回，把之所以这样干的原因全部告诉了卢绾。
English: Zhang Sheng returned and told Lu Yao all the reasons why he did it.

古文：燕王寤，乃诈论它人，脱胜家属，使得为匈奴间，而阴使范齐之陈豨所，欲令久亡，连兵勿决。
现代文：卢绾醒悟了，就找了一些替身治罪处死了，把张胜的家属解脱出来，使张胜成为匈奴的间谍，又暗中派遣范齐到陈豨的处所，想让他长期叛逃在外，使战争连年不断。
English: When Lu Xun came to his senses, he found some bodyguards and executed them. He freed Zhang Sheng's family and made Zhang Sheng a spy for the Xiongnu. He also secretly sent Fan Qi to Chen Zhen's place, hoping that he would defect for a long time, so that the war would continue year after year.

古文：汉十二年，东击黥布，豨常将兵居代，汉使樊哙击斩豨。
现代文：汉高祖十二年，东征黥布，陈豨经常率军在代地驻扎，汉派遣樊哙攻打陈豨并将其斩杀。
English: In the twelfth year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, when the Eastern Expedition set out for Zibo, Chen Zhe often led the army to stay in place. Han dispatched troops to attack Chen Zhe and killed him.

古文：其裨将降，言燕王绾使范齐通计谋於豨所。
现代文：他的一员副将投降，说燕王卢绾派范齐到陈豨处互相交通情报，商议策划。
English: One of his lieutenants surrendered, saying that Yan Wang Lu sent Fan Qi to Chen Qi's place to exchange traffic information and discuss the plan.

古文：高祖使使召卢绾，绾称病。
现代文：高祖派使臣召卢绾进京，卢绾称病推托不往。
English: Gao Zu sent an envoy to summon Lu Wei to Beijing, but Lu Wei said that he would not go because of his illness.

古文：上又使辟阳侯审食其、御史大夫赵尧往迎燕王，因验问左右。
现代文：皇帝又派辟阳侯审食其，御史大夫赵尧前去迎接燕王，并顺便查问燕王部下臣子。
English: The emperor also sent Biyang Marquis to examine him, and the Imperial Historian Zhao Jun went to meet Yan Wang, and in passing questioned Yan Wang's subordinates.

古文：绾愈恐，闭匿，谓其幸臣曰： 非刘氏而王，独我与长沙耳。
现代文：卢绾更加害怕，闭门躲藏不出，对自己宠信的臣子说： 不是刘姓而被封为王的，只有我卢绾和长沙王吴芮了。
English: Lu Yao was even more afraid and could not hide behind closed doors. He said to his trusted vassal, "It is not Liu who has been made king, but only I, Lu Yao, and the king of Changsha, Wu Yao.

古文：往年春，汉族淮阴，夏，诛彭越，皆吕后计。
现代文：去年春天，汉朝把淮阴侯韩信满门抄斩，夏天，又杀掉了彭越，这都是吕后的计谋。
English: Last spring, the Han Dynasty beheaded Huaiyin Hou Han Xin Manmen, and in the summer, it killed Peng Yue. All of these were Lv Guo's schemes.

古文：今上病，属任吕后。
现代文：现在皇帝重病在身，把国事全部交给了吕后。
English: Now that the emperor is seriously ill, he has handed over all state affairs to Empress Lyu.

古文：吕后妇人，专欲以事诛异姓王者及大功臣。 
现代文：而吕后是个妇女，总想找个借口杀掉异姓诸侯王和功高的大臣。 
English: But Luguo was a woman, and she always wanted to find an excuse to kill princes and high-ranking ministers with different surnames.

古文：乃遂称病不行。
现代文：于是卢绾还是推托有病，拒绝进京。
English: As a result, Lu Wei still refused to go to Beijing, claiming that he was ill.

古文：其左右皆亡匿。
现代文：卢绾的部下臣子都逃跑躲藏。
English: Lu Yao's subordinates and retainers all ran away and hid.

古文：语颇泄，辟阳侯闻之，归具报上，上益怒。
现代文：但卢绾的话泄露出一些，辟阳侯听到了，便把这一切都报告了皇帝，皇帝更加生气。
English: But some of Lu Yao's words leaked out, and when Biyang Hou heard this, he reported all of this to the emperor, who became even more angry.

古文：又得匈奴降者，降者言张胜亡在匈奴，为燕使。
现代文：后来，汉朝又得到一些投降的匈奴人，说张胜逃到匈奴中，是燕王的使者。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty obtained some Huns who surrendered, saying that Zhang Sheng fled to the Huns and was the envoy of King Yan.

古文：於是上曰： 卢绾果反矣！ 
现代文：于是皇帝说： 卢绾真的反了！ 
English: Then the emperor said, "Lu Yao has really gone against the grain!"

古文：使樊哙击燕。
现代文：就派樊哙攻打燕国。
English: So he sent his eunuchs to invade Yan.

古文：燕王绾悉将其宫人家属骑数千居长城下，侯伺，幸上病愈，自入谢。
现代文：燕王卢绾把自己所有的宫人家属以及几千名骑兵安顿在长城下，等待机会，希望皇帝病好之后，亲自进京谢罪。
English: Emperor Yan's son, Emperor Lu Xun, placed all of his imperial family members and several thousand cavalry under the Great Wall, waiting for an opportunity to personally visit Beijing to express his gratitude after the emperor recovered from his illness.

古文：四月，高祖崩，卢绾遂将其众亡入匈奴，匈奴以为东胡卢王。
现代文：四月，高祖逝世，卢绾也就带领部下逃入匈奴，匈奴封他为东胡卢王。
English: In April, Gaozu died, and Lu Xun led his men to flee to the Xiongnu, who made him the king of Eastern Hulu.

古文：绾为蛮夷所侵夺，常思复归。
现代文：卢绾受到匈奴的侵凌掠夺，总是想着重返汉朝。
English: Lu Wei was invaded and plundered by the Xiongnu, and always wanted to return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：居岁馀，死胡中。
现代文：过了一年多，卢绾在匈奴逝世。
English: More than a year later, Lu Xun died in Xiongnu.

古文：高后时，卢绾妻子亡降汉，会高后病，不能见，舍燕邸，为欲置酒见之。
现代文：在高后时，卢绾的妻子儿女逃出匈奴重投汉朝，正赶上高后病重，不能相见，住在了燕王在京的府邸，准备在病好之后再设宴相见。
English: After high school, Lu Wei's wife and children escaped from the Huns and returned to the Han Dynasty. Just in time, Lu Wei fell seriously ill and was unable to meet his wife. He stayed at Yan Wang's residence in Beijing and prepared to hold a banquet to meet his wife after he recovered from his illness.

古文：高祖竟崩，不得见。
现代文：但高后竟去世了，未能见面。
English: However, Gao Po passed away and they were unable to meet.

古文：卢绾妻亦病死。
现代文：卢绾的妻子也因病去世。
English: Lu Yao's wife also died of illness.

古文：孝景中六年，卢绾孙他之，以东胡王降，封为亚谷侯。
现代文：汉景帝中元六年，卢绾的孙子卢他之以东胡王的身份向汉投降，被封为亚谷侯。
English: In the sixth year of the Han Dynasty, Lu Taqi, the grandson of Lu Yao, surrendered to the Han Dynasty as the King of Donghu and was named the Marquis of Yagu.

古文：陈豨者，宛朐人也，不知始所以得从。
现代文：陈豨是宛朐人，不知道当初是什么原因得以跟从高祖。
English: Chen Xuan is a Wan Xuan person, and he doesn't know why he was able to follow Gao Zu in the first place.

古文：及高祖七年冬，韩王信反，入匈奴，上至平城还，乃封豨为列侯，以赵相国将监赵、代边兵，边兵皆属焉。
现代文：到高祖七年冬天，韩王韩信反叛，逃入匈奴，皇帝到平城而回，封陈豨为列侯，以赵国相国的身份率领督统赵国、代国的边防部队，这一带戍卫边疆的军队统归他管辖。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, King Han Xin rebelled and fled to the Huns. The emperor returned to Pingcheng and made Chen Qi a vassal lord. As the vassal lord of the State of Zhao, he led the frontier troops of the State of Zhao and represented the State. The troops defending the frontier in this area were under his jurisdiction.

古文：豨常告归过赵，赵相周昌见豨宾客随之者千馀乘，邯郸官舍皆满。
现代文：陈豨曾经告假回家，经过赵国时，赵国相国周昌看到陈豨的随行宾客有一千多辆车子，把邯郸所有的官舍全部住满。
English: Chen Wei once went home on leave. When passing through Zhao Guo, Zhao Guo's minister of state, Zhou Chang, saw that Chen Wei's accompanying guests had more than a thousand cars, filling all of Wei's official residences.

古文：豨所以待宾客布衣交，皆出客下。
现代文：而陈豨对待宾客用的平民百姓之间的交往礼节，而且总是谦卑恭敬，屈已待人。
English: Chen Xi treated his guests with the etiquette of ordinary people, and was always humble and respectful.

古文：豨还之代，周昌乃求入见。
现代文：陈豨回到代国，周昌就请求进京朝见。
English: When Chen Xi returned to the representing country, Zhou Chang requested to see the emperor in Beijing.

古文：见上，具言豨宾客盛甚，擅兵於外数岁，恐有变。
现代文：见到皇帝之后，把陈豨宾客众多，在外独掌兵权好几年，恐怕会有变故等事全盘说出。
English: After seeing the emperor, he said that Chen Xi had many guests and had held military power abroad for several years, and he was afraid that there would be a change of circumstances.

古文：上乃令人覆案豨客居代者财物诸不法事，多连引豨。
现代文：皇帝就命人追查陈豨的宾客在财物等方面违法乱纪的事，其中不少事情牵连到陈豨。
English: The emperor ordered someone to investigate Chen Yao's guests for violations of laws and disciplines in terms of property and other matters, many of which implicated Chen Yao.

古文：豨恐，阴令客通使王黄、曼丘臣所。
现代文：陈豨非常害怕，暗中派宾客到王黄、曼丘臣处通消息。
English: Chen Yao was very afraid and secretly sent guests to Wang Huang and Manchu Chen to pass on the news.

古文：及高祖十年七月，太上皇崩，使人召豨，豨称病甚。
现代文：到高祖十年七月，太上皇去世，皇帝派人召陈豨进京，但陈豨称自己病情严重。
English: In July of the 10th year of Gaozu's reign, when the emperor died, the emperor sent someone to summon Chen Qi to Beijing, but Chen Qi said that he was seriously ill.

古文：九月，遂与王黄等反，自立为代王，劫略赵、代。
现代文：九月，便与王黄等人一同反叛，自立为代王，劫掠了赵，代两地。
English: In September, he rebelled together with Wang Huang and others, established himself as the acting king, and plundered Zhao and the two provinces.

古文：上闻，乃赦赵、代吏人为豨所诖误劫略者，皆赦之。上自往，至邯郸，喜曰： 豨不南据漳水，北守邯郸，知其无能为也。 
现代文：皇帝听说之后，就一律赦免了被陈豨所牵累而进行劫掠的赵、代官吏。皇帝亲自前往，到达邯郸后高兴地说： 陈豨不在南面占据漳水，北面守住邯郸，由此可知他不会有所作为。 
English: After the emperor heard about it, he pardoned all the Zhao and deputy officials who were involved in the looting by Chen Xuan. The emperor went there in person and said happily after arriving in Xuan: Chen Xuan does not occupy Surabaya in the south, but keeps Xuan in the north, which shows that he will not make any difference.

古文：赵相奏斩常山守、尉，曰： 常山二十五城，豨反，亡其二十城。 
现代文：赵相国上奏请求把常山的郡守、郡尉斩首，说： 常山共有二十五座城池，陈豨反叛，失去了其中二十座城。 
English: Zhao Xianguo petitioned the court to behead the county governor and lieutenant of Changshan, saying: Changshan has a total of twenty-five cities. Chen Xi rebelled and lost twenty of them.

古文：上问曰： 守、尉反乎？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 郡守、郡尉反叛了吗？ 
English: The emperor asked: Did the county governor and the county lieutenant rebel?

古文：对曰： 不反。 
现代文：赵相国回答说： 没反叛。 
English: Zhao Xianguo replied: There is no rebellion.

古文：上曰： 是力不足也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这是兵力不足的缘故。 
English: The emperor said: This is due to the shortage of troops.

古文：赦之，复以为常山守、尉。
现代文：赦免了他们，同时还恢复了他们的守尉职务。
English: He pardoned them and reinstated them as guards.

古文：上问周昌曰： 赵亦有壮士可令将者乎？ 
现代文：皇帝问周昌说： 赵国还有能带兵打仗的将领吗？ 
English: The emperor asked Zhou Chang: Does Zhao still have generals who can lead soldiers into battle?

古文：对曰： 有四人。 
现代文：周昌回答说： 有四个人。 
English: Zhou Chang replied: There are four people.

古文：四人谒，上谩骂曰： 竖子能为将乎？ 
现代文：然后让这四个人拜见皇帝，皇帝一见便破口大骂道： 你们这些小子们也能带兵打仗吗？ 
English: Then these four men were brought before the emperor, who, at the sight of them, burst into a tirade of abuse: "Can you boys also lead soldiers into battle?

古文：四人惭伏。
现代文：四个人惭愧地伏在地上。
English: The four of them prostrated themselves on the ground in shame.

古文：上封之各千户，以为将。
现代文：但皇帝还是各封给他们一千户的食邑，任命为将。
English: However, the emperor still gave each of them a thousand households of food villages and appointed them as generals.

古文：左右谏曰： 从入蜀、汉，伐楚，功未遍行，今此何功而封？ 
现代文：左右近臣谏劝道： 有不少人跟随您进入蜀郡、汉中，其后又征伐西楚，有功却未得到普遍封赏，现在这几个人有什么功劳而予以封赏？ 
English: His close advisers on both sides advised him, "There are many people who followed you into Shu County and Hanzhong, and then went on to conquer Western Chu. They have made contributions, but they have not been generally rewarded. Now, what are the contributions of these few people to be rewarded?

古文：上曰： 非若所知！
现代文：皇帝说： 这就不是你们所能了解的了！
English: The emperor said, "That's not for you to understand!

古文：陈豨反，邯郸以北皆豨有，吾以羽檄徵天下兵，未有至者，今唯独邯郸中兵耳。
现代文：陈豨反叛，邯郸以北都被他所占领，我用紧急文告来征集各地军队，但至今仍未有人到达，现在可用的就只有邯郸一处的军队而已。
English: Chen Qi rebelled and occupied all of the north of Qi. I used an urgent message to recruit troops from all over the country, but so far no one has arrived, and now only one army is available.

古文：吾胡爱四千户封四人，不以慰赵子弟！ 
现代文：我何必要吝惜封给四个人的四千户，不用它来抚慰赵地的年轻人呢！ 左右近臣都说： 好。 
English: Why should I begrudge the four thousand households given to four people, and not use it to soothe the young people of Zhao! My close advisers on both sides said, "Good."

古文：皆曰： 善。 
现代文：于是皇帝又问： 陈豨的将领都有谁？ 
English: So the emperor asked again: Who are Chen Tuo's generals?

古文：於是上曰： 陈豨将谁？ 曰： 王黄、曼丘臣，皆故贾人。 
现代文：左右回答说： 有王黄，曼丘臣，以前都是商人。 皇帝说： 我知道了。 
English: They replied, "Wang Huang and Manchu Chen used to be merchants," and the emperor said, "I know.

古文：上曰： 吾知之矣。 乃各以千金购黄、臣等。
现代文：于是各悬赏千金来求购王黄、曼丘臣等的人头。
English: As a result, they each offered a bounty of a thousand gold to buy the heads of Wang Huang, Manchu Chen and others.

古文：十一年冬，汉兵击斩陈豨将侯敞、王黄於曲逆下，破豨将张春於聊城，斩首万馀。
现代文：高祖十一年冬天，汉军在曲逆城下攻击并斩杀了陈豨的大将侯敞、王黄，又在聊城把陈豨的大将张春打得大败，斩杀了一万多人。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year of Gaozu's reign, the Han army attacked and killed Chen Xi's generals Hou Cang and Wang Huang at the foot of Quqicheng, and defeated Chen Xi's general Zhang Chun in Liaocheng, killing more than 10,000 people.

古文：太尉勃入定太原、代地。
现代文：太尉周勃进军平定了太原和代郡。
English: Captain Zhou Bo marched in and pacified Taiyuan and Dayi County.

古文：十二月，上自击东垣，东垣不下，卒骂上；东垣降，卒骂者斩之，不骂者黥之。
现代文：十二月，皇帝亲自率军攻打东垣，但未能攻克，叛军士卒辱骂皇帝；不久东垣投降，凡是骂皇帝的士卒一律斩首，其他没骂的士卒则处以黥刑，在额头上刺字。
English: In December, the emperor personally led an army to attack Donggaki, but failed to conquer it. Rebel soldiers insulted the emperor. Soon, Donggaki surrendered. All soldiers who cursed the emperor were beheaded, and other soldiers who did not curse were beaten and had a tattoo on their forehead.

古文：更命东垣为真定。
现代文：把东垣改名真定。
English: It was decided to rename Higashigaki.

古文：王黄、曼丘臣其麾下受购赏之，皆生得，以故陈豨军遂败。
现代文：王黄、曼丘臣的部下所有被悬赏征求的，一律都被活捉，因此陈豨的军队也就彻底溃败了。
English: All of Wang Huang's and Manchurian's subordinates who were offered rewards were captured alive, so Chen Xi's army was completely defeated.

古文：上还至洛阳。
现代文：皇帝回到洛阳。
English: The emperor returned to Luoyang.

古文：上曰： 代居常山北，赵乃从山南有之，远。 
现代文：皇帝说： 代郡地处常山的北面，赵国却从山南来控制它，太遥远了。 
English: The emperor said, "Dai County is located in the north of Changshan Mountain, but Zhao Province controls it from Shannan Mountain, which is too far away.

古文：乃立子恆为代王，都中都，代、雁门皆属代。
现代文：于是就封儿子刘垣为代王，以中都为国都，代郡、雁门都隶属代国。
English: As a result, he made his son Liu Qi the acting king, with Zhongdu as the national capital, and Dai County and Yanmen all belonging to the acting country.

古文：高祖十二年冬，樊哙军卒追斩豨於灵丘。
现代文：高祖十二年冬天，樊哙的士卒追到灵丘把陈豨斩首。
English: In the winter of the twelfth year of Gaozu's reign, Shao's soldiers chased Chen Yao to the spirit mound and beheaded him.

古文：太史公曰：韩信、卢绾非素积德累善之世，徼一时权变，以诈力成功，遭汉初定，故得列地，南面称孤。
现代文：太史公说：韩信、卢绾并不是一向积德累善的世家，而是侥幸于一时随机应变，以欺诈和暴力获得成功，正赶上汉朝刚刚建立，所以才能够分封领土，南面为王。
English: Taishigong said: Han Xin and Lu Wei were not always a virtuous family, but they were lucky in a moment of random contingency, and succeeded with fraud and violence. They were just catching up with the Han Dynasty, which had just been established, so they were able to partition the territory, and the south was king.

古文：内见疑彊大，外倚蛮貊以为援，是以日疏自危，事穷智困，卒赴匈奴，岂不哀哉！
现代文：在内由于势力强大而被怀疑，在外倚仗着外族作援助。因此日益被皇帝疏远，自陷危境，走投无路，无计可施，最终迫不得已投奔匈奴，难道不可悲吗！
English: Suspicious at home because of his great power, he relied on foreign nations for assistance abroad. As a result, he was increasingly alienated by the emperor, and he found himself in a dangerous situation, with no way out and nothing to do, until he was finally forced to go over to the Huns. Isn't that sad?

古文：陈豨，梁人，其少时数称慕魏公子；及将军守边，招致宾客而下士，名声过实。
现代文：陈豨是梁地人，在他年轻的时候，每每称赞，倾慕魏公子信陵君；等到后来他率领军队守卫边疆，招集宾客，礼贤下士，名声超过了实际。
English: Chen Xi is from Liangdi. When he was young, he praised and admired Wei Gongzixin Lingjun. Later, he led the army to guard the border, invited guests, and became a corporal. His reputation exceeded reality.

古文：周昌疑之，疵瑕颇起，惧祸及身，邪人进说，遂陷无道。
现代文：周昌怀疑他，许多过失也就从这里产生了，由于害怕灾祸临头，奸邪小人又乘机进说，于是终于使自己陷于大逆不道的境地。
English: Zhou Chang doubted him, and many mistakes were made from here. Due to the fear of impending disaster, the evil villain took advantage of the opportunity to advance, and finally got himself into a situation of high treason.

古文：於戏悲夫！
现代文：唉呀，太可悲了！
English: Alas, how sad!

古文：夫计之生孰成败於人也深矣！
现代文：由此可见，谋虑的成熟与否和成败如何，这对一个人的影响太深远了！
English: From this, it can be seen that the maturity of the deliberation and the success or failure, the impact on a person is too far-reaching!

