古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：寒热瘰疬在于颈腋者，皆何气使生？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯道：发寒、发热的瘰疬症，多发生在颈部和腋下，这是为什么呢？
English: Huang Di asked Qibo Dao: cold sores and hot sores mostly occur on the neck and under the armpits. Why is that?

古文：岐伯曰：此皆鼠瘘寒热之毒气也，留于脉而不去者也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这些都属于鼠瘘病的寒热毒气稽留在经脉，不能消除的结果。
English: Qi Bo replied, "These are all the results of rat-bite disease, where cold, heat and poisonous gases remain in the veins and cannot be eliminated.

古文：黄帝曰：去之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：如何进行治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to carry out the treatment?

古文：岐伯曰：鼠瘘之本，皆在于脏，其末上出于颈腋之间，其浮于脉中，而未内着于肌肉，而外为脓血者，易去也。
现代文：岐伯答道：鼠瘘病的本部在内脏，其标部循经脉上出于颈项和腋下。如果毒气浮于经脉之中而尚未内入附着于肌肉，只是外部化为脓血的瘰疬症，容易除去。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The headquarters of rat hookworm disease is in the internal organs, and its standard part starts from the neck and armpit along the meridians. If the poisonous gas floats in the meridians and has not yet been internally attached to the muscles, it is only externalized as blood poisoning, and it is easy to remove.

古文：岐伯曰：请从其本引其末，可使衰去而绝其寒热。
现代文：岐伯答道：可以通过调治其本部，从而引导滞留于标部的病邪散出，这样可使鼠瘘病的寒热邪气逐渐衰退以至根除。
English: Qibo replied: It is possible to adjust its headquarters, thereby guiding the diseases that remain in the standard part to disperse. In this way, the cold fever evil spirit of rat-bite disease can gradually decline and even be eradicated.

古文：审按其道以予之，徐往徐来以去之，其小如麦者，一刺知，三刺而已。
现代文：治疗时要仔细诊察相关脏腑经脉的通道，而后取穴刺治，用徐往徐来的针法以祛除鼠瘘病邪。瘰疬症结块小如麦粒的，针刺一次见效，针刺三次即可痊愈。
English: During treatment, it is necessary to carefully examine the channels of the relevant organs and meridians, and then puncture and cure, and use the needle method to gradually remove the disease. If the pus disease is small as a grain of wheat, acupuncture is effective once, and acupuncture can be cured three times.

古文：黄帝曰：决其生死奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：如何推断瘰疬症的预后呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to deduce the prognosis of porphyria?

古文：岐伯曰：反其目视之，其中有赤脉，上下贯瞳子，见一脉，一岁死；见一脉半，一岁半死；见二脉，二岁死；见二脉半，二岁半死；见三脉，三岁而死。
现代文：岐伯答道：推断瘰疬症预后的方法是，翻开患者的眼睑进行观察，若眼中有红色的脉络，上下贯通瞳子，便是病情恶化的征兆。若出现一条红色的脉络，死期当在一年之内；出现一条半，死期为一年半之内；出现两条，死期为两年之内；出现两条半，死期为两年半；出现三条，死期为三年。
English: Qibo replied: The way to deduce the prognosis of porphyria is to first open the patient's eyelids for observation. If there is a red vein in the eye, the pupil runs up and down, it is a sign of worsening of the disease. If a red vein appears, the death period should be within one year; if one and a half appears, the death period is within one and a half years; if two appear, the death period is within two years; if two and a half appear, the death period is two and a half years; if three appear, the death period is three years.

古文：见赤脉不下贯瞳子，可治也。
现代文：若只有红色的脉络而没有贯通瞳子，尚能够治疗。
English: If only the red vein does not pass through the pupil, it can still be treated.

