古文：清净恬愉，人之性也；仪表规矩，事之制也。
现代文：清静恬愉是人的本性；仪表规矩是处事的原则。
English: It is human nature to be calm and pleasant; the rules of etiquette are the principles of conduct.

古文：知人之性，其自养不勃，知事之制，其举错不惑。
现代文：知道人的本性，那么人自身的修养就不会悖谬；懂得处事的原则，那么人自身的行为就不会乱套。
English: If one knows the nature of man, then one's self-cultivation will not be perverted; if one knows the principle of doing things, then one's own behavior will not be disorderly.

古文：发一端，散无竟，周八极，总一管，谓之心。
现代文：从一端出发，能散逸得无穷无尽，周游八极后又回归到它的中枢，这就叫 心 。
English: Starting from one end, it can dissipate to infinity, travel around the eight poles, and then return to its center, which is called the heart.

古文：见本而知末，观指而睹归，执一而应万，握要而治详，谓之术。
现代文：看到事物的本原就能推知事物的未来，看到事物的指向就能预见事物的归宿，掌握要点能应对繁多，把握纲要能治理详繁，这种本领叫 术 。
English: Seeing the origin of things can predict the future of things, seeing the direction of things can predict the destination of things, grasping the main points can deal with a variety of things, and grasping the outline can manage the details. This ability is called skill.

古文：居知所为，行智所之，事智所秉，动智所由，谓之道。道者，置之前而不挚，错之后而不轩，内之寻常而不塞，布之天下而不窕。
现代文：静居时知道在做什么、行动时知道该去哪里、办事时知道所依原则、举动时知道来历缘由，达到这种境界的叫 道 。 道 ，置搁前头它不会低伏，放在后面它不会翘起，纳入窄处它不显壅塞，散布天下它不留空隙。
English: When you are at rest, you know what to do; when you are on the move, you know where to go; when you are doing business, you know the principles you should follow; and when you are in action, you know the reasons for your actions.

古文：是故使人高贤称誉己者，心之力也；使人卑下诽谤己者，心之罪也。
现代文：所以使别人推崇赞誉自己，这是 心 的功力；使人家轻视诽谤自己，这是 心 的罪过。
English: Therefore, it is the power of the heart to make others admire and praise oneself; it is the sin of the heart to make others despise and slander oneself.

古文：夫言出于口者，不可止于人；行发于迩者，不可禁于远。
现代文：话是从你口中说出的，别人无法阻止你；行为发生在你身上，远处的人无法禁止你。
English: Words come out of your mouth, and no one can stop you; actions come to you, and no one can stop you.

古文：事者，难成而易败也；名者，难立而易废也。
现代文：事情难以成功却容易失败，名声难以树立却容易毁坏。
English: Things are difficult to succeed but easy to fail, reputation is difficult to establish but easy to destroy.

古文：千里之堤，以蝼蚁之穴漏；百寻之屋，以突隙之烟焚。
现代文：千里长堤，因为蝼蚁的洞穴渗水而决溃，百丈高楼，因为烟囱的裂缝冒出烟火而焚毁。
English: Thousands of miles of embankments have been breached due to water seeping from ants' burrows, and tall buildings have been burnt down due to fireworks emerging from chimney cracks.

古文：《尧戒》曰： 战战栗栗，日慎一日。 
现代文：《尧戒》上说： 战战栗栗，一天比一天谨慎。
English: "The Precepts" says: tremble, and be more cautious day by day.

古文：人莫蹪于山，而蹪于垤。 
现代文：人不会被大山绊倒，而往往被小土堆绊倒。 
English: One does not stumble over large mountains, but often over small mounds.

古文：是故人皆轻小害，易微事，以多悔。
现代文：所以，人们都往往轻视小事忽略小害，以致酿成大祸后才为之后悔。
English: Therefore, people often despise small things and ignore small harms, so that they only regret it after causing a big disaster.

古文：患至而多后忧之，是犹病者已惓而索良医也。虽有扁鹊、俞跗之巧，犹不能生也。
现代文：灾祸降临后再犯愁，这就好比到了病危后才去求良医，这时即使有扁鹊、俞跗这样的名医也难以治好病人的病。
English: Worrying again after a disaster is like seeking a good doctor only after the disease is in danger. At this time, even a famous doctor with tonsils and adenoids would find it difficult to cure the patient's illness.

古文：夫祸之来也，人自生之；福之来也，人自成之。
现代文：灾祸的降临是自己招引的；幸福的到来是自己促成的。
English: The advent of disaster is self-induced; the arrival of happiness is self-induced.

古文：祸与福同门，利与害为邻，非神圣人，莫之能分。
现代文：这祸福同出一门，利害相近为邻，不是圣明的人是难以区分这其中的奥妙的。
English: This misfortune and good fortune come from the same source, the interests are close to each other, and it is difficult for people who are not saints to distinguish the secret of this.

古文：凡人之举事，莫不先以其知规虑揣度，而后敢以定谋，其或利或害，此愚智之所以异也。
现代文：大凡人们要做某件事，都要先用他的智慧思考揣度一番，然后才根据思考的结论定下计划谋略，实践下来的结果，有人得利有人受害，这就是智者和蠢人的差别所在。
English: When ordinary people want to do something, they must first use their wisdom to think and calculate, and then, according to the conclusion of the thinking, set a plan and strategy. The result of the practice, some people will benefit and others will suffer. This is the difference between the wise and the stupid.

古文：晓自然以为智，知存亡之枢机，祸福之门户，举而用之，陷溺于难者，不可胜计也。
现代文：但是那些自以为明白存亡之关键、祸福之由来的聪明人，在办事处事中还是陷入危难境地，这样的事例还真的数不胜数。
English: But those clever people who think they know the key to survival, the cause of misfortune and good fortune, still fall into a dangerous situation in the office, and such cases are really countless.

古文：使知所为是者，事必可行，则天下无不达之途矣。
现代文：假若大家能预先知道自己的主张正确，且行得通，那么天下也就没有什么不通的道路了。
English: If everyone could know in advance that their ideas are correct and workable, then there would be no impassable roads in the world.

古文：是故知虑者，祸福之门户也；动静者，利害之枢机也。
现代文：但事实上并非如此。由此可见，智虑思考是祸福的根由，行动举措是利害的关键。
English: But in fact, this is not the case. Thus, it can be seen that intelligent thinking is the root of misfortune and good fortune, and action measures are the key to interests.

古文：百事之变化，国家之治乱，待而后成。
现代文：百事的变化、国家的治乱，都有待正确的思想和行动来完成。
English: The change of Pepsi and the governance of the country all need correct thoughts and actions to be accomplished.

古文：是故不溺于难者成，是故不可不慎也。
现代文：所以对此不可不审慎。
English: So we have to be careful about this.

古文：天下有三危：少德而多宠，一危也；才下而位高，二危也；身无大功而受厚禄，三危也。
现代文：天下有三种危险：缺少德行而尊宠却多，这是第一种危险；才能低下而地位尊贵，这是第二种危险；没有大的功劳却有丰厚的俸禄，这是第三种危险。
English: There are three kinds of danger in the world: the first kind of danger is to lack virtue but to be favored by many people; the second kind of danger is to have low ability but to be held in high esteem; and the third kind of danger is to have a large salary but to have no great merits.

古文：故物或损之而益，或益之而损。
现代文：所以事物有时候是损减它，结果却是补益它，有时候是补益它，结果却是损减它。
English: Wherefore the things of the world, if they be diminished, are sometimes increased; and if they be increased, are sometimes diminished.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：昔者，楚庄王既胜晋于河、雍之间，归而封孙叔敖，辞而不受。
现代文：以前楚庄王在河雍之间的邲地战胜了晋国，凯旋归来后庄王要封赏孙叔敖，孙叔敖辞谢而不接受。
English: Previously, the king of Chu Zhuang had defeated Jin in the fertile land between the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River. After his triumphant return, the king of Zhuang wanted to reward Sun Shuxuan, but Sun Shuxuan refused to accept his thanks.

古文：病疽将死，谓其子曰： 吾则死矣，王必封女。女必让肥铙之地，而受沙石之间有宀侵丘者。
现代文：后来当孙叔敖患痈疽快要死时，他对儿子说： 我如果死了，楚王一定会封赏你的，一定要推辞肥沃富饶的地方，只接受沙石之地。在楚、荆之间有个叫寑丘的地方，那儿土地贫瘠，所以地名也难听。
English: Later, when Sun Shuxuan was dying of gangrene, he said to his son: "If I die, King Chu will surely reward you. You must reject the fertile and rich land, and only accept the sandy land. Between Chu and Jing, there is a place called Mengqiu, where the land is barren, so the place name is also unpleasant.

古文：其地确石而名丑，荆人鬼，越人禨，人莫之利也。 
现代文：当地的荆人和越人都信奉鬼神、讲究迷信，所以没人喜欢那里。 
English: The local Jing people and Yue people all believe in ghosts and gods and are superstitious, so no one likes it there.

古文：孙叔敖死，王果封其子以肥铙之地。
现代文：不久，孙叔敖去世了，楚庄王果然将肥沃富饶的领地封赏给孙叔敖的儿子，孙叔敖儿子谢绝了，而要求赏封寑丘之地。
English: Soon after, Sun Shuxuan passed away. The king of Chu Zhuang did indeed award the fertile and rich territory to Sun Shuxuan's son. However, Sun Shuxuan's son declined the offer and asked for the land of Shaoqiu to be awarded.

古文：其子辞而不受，请有宀侵之丘。楚国之俗，功臣二世而爵禄，惟孙叔敖独存。此所谓损之而益也。
现代文：按楚国的法规，功臣的封禄传到第二代就要收回封禄，唯独孙叔敖一家保存了下来，这就是我们说的损减它，结果却是补益它。
English: According to the laws of the State of Chu, the second generation of a meritorious subject is entitled to the return of the fief, but only the Sun Shuxuan family has retained it. This is what we call a loss, but in the end it is a gain.

古文：何谓益之而损？
现代文：那么，什么叫补益它，结果却是损减它？
English: So what is it that benefits it, but in the end harms it?

古文：昔晋厉公南伐楚，东伐齐，西伐秦，北伐燕，兵横行天下而无所绻，威服四方而无所诎，遂合诸侯于嘉陵。
现代文：从前晋厉公南伐楚国、东伐齐国、西伐秦国、北伐燕国，部队纵横天下，威震四方，没有阻碍也没有挫折。
English: In the past, Jin Li Gong's troops went to the south to conquer Chu, the east to conquer Qi, the west to conquer Qin, and the north to conquer Yan. There were no obstacles and no setbacks.

古文：气充志骄，淫侈无度，暴虐万民。
现代文：于是厉公在嘉陵会合诸侯，气横志骄、淫侈无度、残害百姓。
English: As a result, Liguo met with the lords in Jialing, was arrogant, extravagant, and brutalized the people.

古文：内无辅拂之臣，外无诸侯之助，戮杀大臣，亲近导谀。
现代文：国内无辅佐规谏的大臣，国外没有诸侯的援助。同时又杀戮忠臣，亲近小人。
English: A minister with no aides and advisers at home and no support from lords abroad. At the same time, he killed loyal retainers and befriended villains.

古文：明年出游匠骊氏，栾书、中行偃劫而幽之。诸侯莫之救，百姓莫之哀，三月而死。
现代文：在会合诸侯的第二年，厉公出游宠臣匠骊氏的领地时，被栾书、中行偃劫持，囚禁起来；这时诸侯中没有一个来搭救他，百姓中也没有一个同情他，囚禁三个月后就一命呜呼了。
English: In the second year of the gathering of the lords, when Liguo went to visit the territory of his favorite vassal, the master craftsman Shun, he was kidnapped by Shishi and Zhongxing and imprisoned. At that time, none of the lords came to rescue him, and none of the people sympathized with him. After three months of imprisonment, he died.

古文：夫战胜攻取，地广而名尊，此天下所愿也，然而终于身死国亡，此所谓益之而损者也。
现代文：每战必胜，每攻必克，然后扩展土地，提高威望，这是每个天下人都希望得到的利益。但晋厉公却因为这些而落得个身死国亡。这就是我们说的补益它，结果却是损减它。
English: Every battle must be won, every attack must be defeated, and then expand the land and increase the prestige, which is the benefit that everyone in the world hopes to get. However, Jin Li Gong was killed because of these. This is what we call supplementing it, but the result is to reduce it.

古文：夫孙叔敖之请有宀侵之丘，沙石之地，所以累世不夺也；晋厉公之合诸侯于嘉陵，所以身死于匠骊氏也。
现代文：孙叔敖叮嘱儿子要求封赏寑丘之地，因为寑丘之地贫瘠，所以能代代相传；晋厉公在嘉陵会合诸侯以想称霸天下，结果死在匠骊氏的领地。
English: Sun Xiuquan told his son to ask for the land of Shaoqiu to be awarded, because the land of Shaoqiu is barren, so it can be passed down from generation to generation; Jin Liguo wanted to dominate the world at the Jialing Association of Princes, but died in the territory of the Shaoqiu clan.

古文：众人皆知利利而病病也，唯圣人知病之为利，知利之为病也。
现代文：一般性的人都只知道利就是利，弊就是弊，而只有圣人懂得弊可以转化为利，利可以转化为弊。
English: Ordinary people only know that good is good and evil is evil, but only sages know that evil can be transformed into good and good can be transformed into evil.

古文：夫再实之木根必伤，掘藏之家必有殃。以言大利而反为害也。
现代文：两次结果实的树木，它的根必定受损伤；盗人家墓的人也必定有祸殃，这说的就是贪大利反而造成大害的事。
English: If a tree bears fruit twice, its roots will be damaged. If a man steals a grave, he will be cursed. This is a case of greed causing great harm.

古文：张武教智伯夺韩、魏之地而禽于晋阳，申叔时教庄王封陈氏之后而霸天下。
现代文：张武唆使智伯夺取韩、魏两家的土地，结果反而使智伯在晋阳城被擒获；申叔时劝告楚庄王封立陈国的后代，结果使楚庄王称霸天下。
English: Zhang Wuying ordered Zhibo to seize the land of the Han and Wei dynasties, but the result was that Zhibo was captured in Jinyang City; Shen Shuji advised the King of Chuzhuang to appoint the descendants of Chen Guo, and the result was that the King of Chuzhuang ruled the world.

古文：孔子读《易》，至《损》、《益》，未尝不愤然而叹，曰： 益损者，其王者之事与！
现代文：孔子读《易经》，读到《损》卦和《益》卦时，未尝不喟然叹息道： 懂得益和损之间的关系的，应该是行王道的君王的事吧？ 
English: When Confucius read the "I Ching" and came across the "Loss" and "Gain" chapters, he couldn't help but sigh: "If one understands the relationship between gain and loss, it should be a matter for a king who practices the royal way, right?

古文：事或欲与利之，适足以害之；或欲害之，乃反以利之。
现代文：事情有时候想对它有利但却恰恰足以害了它，有时候想害它但却又恰恰对它有利。
English: Things sometimes want to be good for it but are just enough to harm it, and sometimes want to harm it but are just right for it.

古文：利害之反，祸福之门户，不可不察也。 
现代文：利和害向相反方面的转化，祸与福的缘由是不能不明察的呀！
English: The transformation of benefit and harm to the opposite side, the cause of misfortune and good fortune cannot be overlooked!

古文：阳虎为乱于鲁，鲁君令人闭城门而捕之，得者有重赏，失者有重罪。
现代文：阳虎在鲁国作乱，鲁国君命令手下人关闭城门搜捕阳虎，宣布凡抓获阳虎者有重赏，放走阳虎者要处罚。
English: Yang Hu made a disturbance in the State of Lu. The Prince of Lu ordered his subordinates to close the city gate to search for and capture Yang Hu, and announced that anyone who captured Yang Hu would be rewarded, and anyone who released Yang Hu would be punished.

古文：圉三匝，而阳虎将举剑而伯颐，门者止之曰： 天下探之不穷，我将出子。 
现代文：追捕者将阳虎层层包围起来，阳虎只得举剑准备自刎，这时有位守门人劝阻他说： 天下大得很，可以逃生，何以自杀？我将放你出城去。 
English: The pursuers surrounded Yang Hu layer by layer. Yang Hu had to raise his sword and prepare to kill himself. At this time, a gatekeeper dissuaded him saying: The world is very big, you can escape, why commit suicide? I will let you go out of the city.

古文：阳虎因赴围而逐，扬剑提戈而走。
现代文：于是阳虎得以冲出重围，在后面的追兵紧追不舍的情况下，阳虎挥舞宝剑提着戈奔跑冲杀。
English: As a result, Yang Hu was able to break out of the encirclement. With the pursuing soldiers in hot pursuit, Yang Hu waved his sword and ran to kill them.

古文：门者出之，顾反取其出之者，以戈推之，攘祛薄腋。
现代文：那位守门人乘混乱之机放阳虎出了城门。阳虎出了城以后又折返回来，抓住那位守门人，举戈刺他，戈刺破袖子伤及腋部。
English: The gatekeeper took advantage of the chaos to let Yang Hu out of the gate. After Yang Hu left the city, he came back, grabbed the gatekeeper, raised his sword and stabbed him. The sword pierced the sleeve wound and the crotch.

古文：出之者怨之曰： 我非故与子反也，为之蒙死被罪，而乃反伤我，宜矣其有此难也。 
现代文：这时守门人抱怨说： 我本来就和你非亲非友，为了救你我冒着被处死罪的风险，可你反而刺伤我。真是活该啊，会碰上这样的灾难。 
English: At this time, the doorkeeper complained: "I am neither a relative nor a friend to you. In order to save you, I risked being put to death, but you stabbed me instead. I really deserve it, to encounter such a disaster."

古文：鲁君闻阳虎失，大怒，问所出之门，使有司拘之，以为伤者受大赏，而不伤者被重罪。
现代文：鲁国国君听说阳虎逃出城，大怒，查问阳虎是从哪座城门逃脱的，并派主管官员拘捕有嫌疑的守门人。
English: When Lu Guo Guojun heard that Yang Hu had escaped from the city, he was furious. He asked Yang Hu which gate he had escaped from, and sent officials to arrest the suspected gatekeeper.

古文：此所谓害之而反利者也。何谓欲利之而反害之？
现代文：鲁国国君认定凡受伤的守门人是阻拦阳虎的，要重赏；而没有受伤的守门人可能是故意放走阳虎的，要重罚。
English: Lu Guo Guojun determined that any injured gatekeeper who stopped the male tiger should be rewarded, while an uninjured gatekeeper who may have deliberately let the male tiger go should be severely punished.

古文：楚恭王与晋人战于鄢陵，恭王伤而未休。
现代文：楚恭王和晋国军队在鄢陵会战。战斗正紧张激烈之间，恭王受伤使战斗不得不停止。
English: King Chu Gong and the Jin army fought in Fuling. The battle was tense and intense. King Gong was injured and the battle had to be stopped.

古文：司马子反渴而求饮，竖阳谷奉酒而进之。
现代文：楚军中的司马子反口渴难忍而寻找饮料。这时侍从阳谷捧着酒献给子反。
English: Sima Zi, a soldier in the Chu army, was thirsty and looking for something to drink. At this time, the attendant Yang Gu took the wine and offered it to Zi Fang.

古文：子反之为人也，嗜酒而甘之，不能绝于口，遂醉而卧。
现代文：子反这人喜欢饮酒，见酒就乐不可支。子反接过阳谷递上的酒就喝个不停，没多久就喝得酩酊大醉，躺在帐篷里。
English: The son, on the other hand, liked to drink, and when he saw the wine, he was overjoyed. The son, on the other hand, took the wine that was handed to him by Yang Gu and drank it incessantly. Not long after, he got very drunk and lay down in the tent.

古文：恭王欲复战，使人召司马子反。辞以心痛。
现代文：恭王打算再与晋军开战，便派人去叫子反，子反谎称心痛病发作不受召令。
English: King Gong planned to go to war with the Jin army again, so he sent someone to summon Zi Fang. Zi Fang falsely claimed to have a heart attack and was not summoned.

古文：王驾而往视之，入幄中而闻酒臭。
现代文：恭王于是驾车亲往探望，一进军中帐篷便闻到一股酒气。
English: King Gong then drove to visit in person, and as soon as he entered the tent, he smelled a whiff of alcohol.

古文：恭王大怒，曰： 今日之战，不谷亲伤。所恃者，司马也。
现代文：这下恭王大怒，说： 今天这场恶战，我为了取胜而亲临战场，受了重伤，现在指望能派上司马子反的用场，可他却成了这副样子。
English: At this, King Gong flew into a rage and said, "Today, this terrible battle began. I went to the battlefield in order to win, and I was seriously injured. Now I hope to be able to use my boss as a counterforce, but he has become like this.

古文：而司马又若此，是亡楚国之社稷，而不率吾众也。
现代文：他实在是心中没有国家社稷的地位，又不体恤我军士兵。
English: He really does not have the status of a national hero in his heart, nor does he sympathize with the soldiers of our army.

古文：不谷无与复战矣。 
现代文：我没法再与晋军打下去了。 
English: I can't fight the Jin army anymore.

古文：于是罢师而去之，斩司马子反为僇。
现代文：于是下令收兵撤退，并以耽误战事的罪名杀子反示众。
English: He then ordered the withdrawal of troops and protested by accusing them of delaying the war.

古文：故竖阳谷之进酒也，非欲祸子反也，诚爱而欲快之也，而适足以杀之。
现代文：这侍从阳谷献上酒，并不是想要害子反，实在是爱护子反，想让子反快乐，但想不到恰恰是害了子反。
English: This waiter from Yanggu offered wine, not because he wanted to harm the son, but because he really loved the son and wanted to make the son happy, but unexpectedly it was precisely the son who was harmed.

古文：此所谓欲利之而反害之者也。
现代文：这就是想对人有利结果却反而害了他。
English: It's when you want to do something good for someone and it ends up hurting them.

古文：夫病湿而而强之食，病曷而饮之寒，此众人之所以为养也，而良医之所以为病也。
现代文：一定要患温热病的人进食，让中暑者喝冷水，这是一般人用来调治病人的方法，但良医却认为这样是加重病情。
English: It is necessary for people suffering from hyperthermia to eat, and for people with heat stroke to drink cold water. This is a method used by the general public to treat patients, but good doctors believe that this aggravates the condition.

古文：悦于目，悦于心，愚者之所利也，然而有道者之所辟也。
现代文：追求赏心悦目，这是蠢货、笨蛋所热衷于的事，但有 道 的聪明人却对此躲得远远的。
English: The pursuit of pleasing the eye is a passion of the foolish and stupid, but the wise and virtuous keep well away from it.

古文：故圣人先忤而后合，众人先合而后忤。
现代文：所以圣明的人是先遭逆境而后顺遂；而一般性的人是先称心如意而后陷入困境。
English: Therefore, a saintly person is first overcome by adversity and then succeeds; while a common person is first satisfied and then gets into trouble.

古文：有功者，人臣之所务也；有罪者，人臣之所辟也。
现代文：建功立业是每个做臣子的人所追求的目标；犯罪受罚又是每个做臣子的人所要避免的后果。
English: Making achievements is the goal pursued by every person who is a vassal; being punished for crimes is the consequence that every person who is a vassal must avoid.

古文：或有功而见疑，或有罪而益信，何也？
现代文：但有时会出现这样的现象，即有了功劳却引起别人的猜疑，有了罪过却反而受人信任。这是为什么呢？
English: But sometimes there is such a phenomenon, that is, when there is merit, it arouses the suspicion of others, and when there is sin, it is trusted by others. Why is this?

古文：则有功者离恩义，有罪者不敢失仁心也。
现代文：这是因为为了追逐功名，有时人就不顾情义了；而犯了罪过的人却不敢再失去仁慈之心了。
English: This is because in the pursuit of fame, people sometimes disregard the truth; and those who have sinned dare not lose their kindness.

古文：魏将乐羊攻中山，其子执在城中。
现代文：所以会出现上述的现象。魏国将领乐羊率部队攻打中山国。他的儿子被中山人抓起来扣押在城内。
English: Therefore, the above-mentioned phenomenon will occur. Wei general led the troops to attack Zhongshan. His son was arrested by Zhongshan people and detained in the city.

古文：城中县其子以示乐羊。
现代文：中山人将他的儿子绑着吊在城头上给乐羊看。
English: The man from Zhongshan tied his son to the top of the castle and hung him up for the sheep to see.

古文：乐羊曰： 君臣之义，不得以子为私。 
现代文：乐羊看了后说： 为了君臣的情义，效忠君王，尽我做臣的职责，我不能为了儿子而有私情。 
English: After reading it, Le Yang said, "For the sake of the feelings of the sovereign and the vassal, I must be loyal to the sovereign and fulfill my duties as a vassal. I cannot have personal feelings for the sake of my son."

古文：攻之愈急。
现代文：于是他所指挥的部队攻城越发猛烈。
English: As a result, the troops under his command attacked the city with increasing ferocity.

古文：中山因烹其子，而遗之鼎羹与其首。乐羊循而泣之曰： 是吾子！ 
现代文：中山城里的人就将他的儿子烹煮了，还派人送给乐羊一鼎肉羹和他儿子的头颅。乐羊抚摸着头颅，哭泣着说： 这是我的儿啊！ 
English: The people of Zhongshan City cooked up his son and sent someone to give Le Yang a bowl of meat soup and his son's head. Le Yang stroked his head and cried, "This is my son!"

古文：已，为使者跪而啜三杯。
现代文：说完向使者跪下，喝下一杯肉羹。
English: After saying this, kneel before the messenger and drink a cup of broth.

古文：使者归报，中山曰： 是伏约死节者也，不可忍也。 
现代文：使者回去报告： 乐羊是个不惜为节义献身的人，对他真的没有办法。 
English: The messenger went back to report: Le Yang is a person who is willing to sacrifice his life for the festival, and there is really nothing that can be done for him.

古文：遂降之。
现代文：于是中山国只得向魏国投降。
English: As a result, Zhongshan had to surrender to Wei.

古文：为魏文侯大开地，有功。
现代文：乐羊在这次战争中为魏文侯开拓了大片的土地，并因此立了大功。
English: In this war, Le Yang opened up a large area of land for Wei Wen Hou, and thus made a great contribution.

古文：自此之后，日以不信。
现代文：但谁知道，从此以后，魏文侯一天天地不信任乐羊。
English: But who knows, from then on, Wei Wenhou did not trust Le Yang day by day.

古文：此所谓有功而见疑者也。
现代文：这就是有了功劳却反而引起别人的猜疑。
English: It's the kind of thing that gets you credit, but makes others suspicious.

古文：何谓有罪而益信？
现代文：那么，什么叫有了罪过却反而受人信任呢？
English: So what does it mean to have sinned and yet be trusted?

古文：孟孙猎而得鹿，使秦西巴持归烹之。
现代文：孟孙打猎，得到了一头小鹿，于是让手下人秦西巴拿回家去烹煮。
English: Meng Sun went hunting and got a fawn, so he asked his subordinate Qin Xiba to take it home and cook it.

古文：鹿母随之而啼，秦西巴弗忍，纵而予之。
现代文：母鹿紧随着秦西巴哀啼不止，秦西巴不忍心伤害幼鹿，于是就放掉幼鹿还给母鹿。
English: The doe followed Qin Xiba's mournful cries. Qin Xiba could not bear to hurt the young deer, so he released the young deer and gave it back to the doe.

古文：孟孙归，求鹿安在，秦西巴对曰： 其母随而啼，臣诚弗忍，窃纵而予之。 
现代文：孟孙回到家后追问幼鹿的去向，秦西巴只得回答： 这幼鹿的母亲在我身后不停地哀啼，我实在不忍心，于是自作主张放掉了幼鹿还给母鹿。 
English: After Meng Sun returned home and asked where the young deer had gone, Qin Xiba had to answer: The mother of this young deer kept wailing behind me. I really couldn't bear it, so I let go of the young deer and gave it back to the doe.

古文：孟孙怒，逐秦西巴。
现代文：孟孙听后大怒，一气之下就赶走了秦西巴。
English: After hearing this, Meng Sun flew into a rage and drove away Qin Xiba.

古文：居一年，取以为子傅。
现代文：过了一年，孟孙又将秦西巴召回来担任他儿子的老师。
English: A year later, Meng Sun called Qin Xiba back to serve as his son's teacher.

古文：左右曰： 秦西巴有罪于君，今以为子傅，何也？ 
现代文：孟孙身边的人就问： 秦西巴得罪过你，为什么现在又用他来做你儿子的老师？ 
English: The people around Meng Sun asked, "Qin Xiba has sinned against you, why are you using him as your son's teacher?

古文：孟孙曰： 夫一鹿而不忍，又何况于人乎！ 
现代文：孟孙回答说： 连一头幼鹿都不忍心加以伤害，更何况对人呢？ 
English: Monsun replied, "I can't bear to harm even a young deer, let alone a human being.

古文：此谓有罪而益信者也。
现代文：这就是有了罪过却反而受人信任。
English: This is what it means to have sinned and yet to be trusted.

古文：故趋舍不可不审也。此公孙鞅之所以抵罪于秦，而不得入魏也。
现代文：所以人的取舍进退不可不谨慎，取舍不谨慎，正是公孙鞅在秦国获罪而又不能进入魏国避难的原因。
English: Therefore, one should not be careless in choosing one's way forward or backward. It is carelessness in choosing one's way forward or backward that is the reason why Gongsun Rong was convicted in Qin but could not take refuge in Wei.

古文：功非不大也，然而累足无所践者，不义之故也。
现代文：公孙鞅的功劳不能算不大，可他就是无立足之地，寸步难行，这是由于他不义的缘故。
English: The merit of Gongsun Yao cannot be considered insignificant, but he is without a foothold, and it is difficult to advance step by step. This is due to his injustice.

古文：事或夺之而反与之，或与之而反取之。
现代文：有些事情还表现为：要夺取人家的反而被人家夺走，先给予别人反过来又夺取别人的。
English: Some things are also manifested as: to take someone's home, but to be taken away by others, to give to others first, and in turn to take from others.

古文：智伯求地于魏宣子。
现代文：智伯向魏宣子索取土地，魏宣子不想给。
English: Zhibo requested land from Wei Xuanzi, but Wei Xuanzi did not want to give it.

古文：宣子弗欲与之。任登曰： 智伯之强，威行于天下，求地而弗与，是为诸侯先祸也。不若与之。 
现代文：这时任登说话了： 智伯现在正强盛着，他的威势遍及天下，他开口要土地，如果不给，这无异是替其他诸侯先承担灾难，不如给他算了。 
English: At this time, Ren Deng spoke: Zhibo is now in a strong position, his power is all over the world, he opened his mouth to ask for land, if he did not give it, it would be tantamount to taking on the disaster for other princes, it is better to give it to him.

古文：宣子曰： 求地不已，为之奈何？ 
现代文：魏宣子接着说： 如果智伯没完没了地向我们索取土地，那又该如何是好？ 
English: Wei Xuan Zi went on to say, "If Zhibo endlessly demands land from us, then what should we do?

古文：任登曰： 与之，使喜，必将复求地于诸侯，诸侯必植耳。
现代文：任登说： 咱们魏家先给他一点土地，让智伯尝到一点甜头后，他会如法炮制继续向别的诸侯要土地的，诸侯们也只得竖起耳朵听从，但内心一定会产生怨恨的。
English: Ren Deng said: We, the Wei family, will give him a little land first, and let Zhibo taste a little sweetness, and then he will continue to ask other lords for land. The lords only have to prick up their ears and obey, but there will definitely be resentment in their hearts.

古文：与天下同心而图之，一心所得者，非直吾所亡也。 
现代文：到时我们就可和各诸侯同心协力来对付智伯了。这样一来，我们从中可获得的好处就不仅仅是我们丧失的那点东西了。 
English: Then we will be able to make a concerted effort with all the princes to deal with Zhibo, so that the benefits we can gain from it are not just what we have lost.

古文：魏宣子裂地而授之。
现代文：魏宣子听从了任登的话，割让了一些土地给智伯。
English: Wei Xuan Zi listened to Ren Deng and ceded some land to Zhibo.

古文：又求地于韩康子，韩康子不敢不予。诸侯皆恐。
现代文：智伯尝到甜头后果然向韩康子索要土地，韩康子不敢不给，诸侯们此时是一片恐慌。
English: After tasting the sweetness, Zhibo demanded land from Han Kangzi. Han Kangzi did not dare not to give it, and the princes were in a panic.

古文：又求地于赵襄子。襄子弗与。
现代文：随后，智伯又向赵襄子索要土地，赵襄子回绝了他。
English: Subsequently, Zhibo asked Zhao Xiangzi for more land, but Zhao Xiangzi turned him down.

古文：于是智伯乃从韩、魏，围襄子于晋阳。
现代文：于是智伯就胁迫韩、魏两家攻打赵襄子，并将赵襄子围困在晋阳城中。
English: As a result, Zhibo coerced Han and Wei to attack Zhao Xiangzi and besieged him in the city of Jinyang.

古文：三国通谋，禽智伯而三分其国。此所谓夺人而反为人所夺者也。
现代文：但此时的赵、韩、魏三家已暗中联络、合谋，共同行动，在晋阳打败了智伯的军队，还擒获智伯，并将智伯把持的晋国一分为三。这就是本想夺取人家的反而被人家夺走。
English: However, at this time, the three families of Zhao, Han, and Wei had already secretly contacted, conspired, and acted together to defeat Zhibo's army in Jinyang, capture Zhibo, and divide Jinyang, which was controlled by Zhibo, into three parts. This meant that what was originally intended to be taken was instead taken away.

古文：何谓与之而反取之？
现代文：那么，什么叫先给予别人反过来又夺取别人的呢？
English: So, what does it mean to first give to others and then take from others?

古文：晋献公欲假道于虞以伐虢，遗虞垂棘之璧与屈产之乘。
现代文：晋献公想向虞国借道去征伐虢国，于是就赠送给虞国君垂棘宝璧和屈产良马。
English: Jin Xiangguo wanted to take the road to the State of Yu to conquer the State of Yao, so he presented the State of Yu with a thorny treasure and a good horse.

古文：虞公惑于璧与马，而欲与之道。
现代文：虞国君看到这些宝璧和良马，心里有点动，想借道给晋献公。
English: Seeing these treasures and fine horses, Yu Guojun felt a little moved and wanted to make a donation.

古文：宫之奇谏曰： 不可！
现代文：这时宫之奇就劝谏了： 这可使不得！
English: At this time, the miracle of the palace advised: This can't be done!

古文：夫虞之与虢，若车之有轮，轮依于车，车亦依轮。
现代文：我们虞国和虢国的关系就像车轮和辅木的关系一样，辅木紧挨在车轮外侧，而车轮就依赖着辅木的保护。
English: The relationship between our states is like the relationship between the wheel and the supporting tree. The supporting tree is close to the outside of the wheel, and the wheel relies on the protection of the supporting tree.

古文：虞之与虢，相恃而势也。
现代文：虞国和虢国现在正形成一种互相依赖的态势。
English: The two countries are now forming an interdependent situation.

古文：若假之道，虢朝亡而虞夕从之矣。 
现代文：假若借道给晋国，那么虢国早上亡国，当天晚上我们的虞国也随之灭亡。 
English: If we were to give Jin Province, then Min Province would be destroyed in the morning, and the same evening, our State of Yu would also be destroyed.

古文：虞公弗听，遂假之道。
现代文：这虞国君不听宫之奇的规劝，还是将道路借给了晋军。
English: This Yu Guojun did not listen to the persuasion of the palace miracle, but still lent the road to the Jin army.

古文：荀息伐虢，遂克之。
现代文：荀息率军灭了虢国。
English: The army of interest destroyed the country of interest.

古文：还反伐虞，又拔之。
现代文：部队随即在回师的途中，又拿下了虞国。
English: On the way back to the division, the troops took Yugoku again.

古文：此所谓与之而反取者也。
现代文：这就是先给予别人反过来又夺取别人的。
English: This is giving to others and taking from others.

古文：圣王布德施惠，非求其报于百姓也；郊望褅尝，非求福于鬼神也。
现代文：圣王布施恩德给天下民众，并不是企望从民众那里得到报答；举行祭天地、日月山川和祖宗的仪式，并不是谋求鬼神能赐福。
English: The benevolence of the holy king to the people of the world is not an attempt to receive rewards from the people; holding the ceremony of sacrificing heaven and earth, the sun, the moon, the mountains and rivers, and the ancestors is not seeking the blessing of ghosts and gods.

古文：山致其高，而云起焉；水致其深，而蛟龙生焉；君子致其道，而福禄归焉。
现代文：山达到一定高度，就自然会兴起云雨；河水深到一定程度，也自然会有蛟龙出现；君子修行达到一定道德境界，也必然会有福禄归属他们。
English: When a mountain reaches a certain height, clouds and rain will naturally appear; when a river reaches a certain depth, dragons will naturally appear; when a gentleman's practice reaches a certain moral level, there will inevitably be a blessing for them.

古文：夫有阴德者，必有阳报；有阴行者，必有昭名。
现代文：那些暗中积德的人，必定会得到公开的好报；那些暗中施惠者，也必定会得到显耀的声望。
English: Those who are secretly virtuous are sure to get a public reward; those who are secretly benevolent are sure to get a shining reputation.

古文：古者，沟防不修，水为民害。禹凿龙门，辟伊阙，平治水土，使民得陆处。
现代文：古时候沟渠堤防失修，洪水成了人民的灾害，于是夏禹凿通龙门，开辟伊阙，平息洪水，整治土地，使百姓能在陆地上生活安居。
English: In ancient times, the ditch embankment was in disrepair, and floods became a disaster for the people. Therefore, Xia Yu chiseled the gantry, opened up the Yili River, calmed the flood, and rectified the land so that the people could live safely on land.

古文：百姓不亲，五品不慎，契教以君臣之义，父子之亲，夫妻之辨，长幼之序。
现代文：百姓间不亲近、五种人伦关系不清顺，于是契就教育百姓知道君臣、父子、夫妇、兄弟之间的尊卑等次和相关礼节。
English: The people were not close to each other, and the five kinds of human relations were not smooth. Therefore, the Jie educated the people to know the hierarchy and related etiquette between monarchs and ministers, fathers and sons, couples, and brothers.

古文：田野不修，民食不足，后稷乃教之辟地垦草，粪土种谷，令百姓家给人足。
现代文：田地荒芜，民众缺衣少粮，于是后稷就指导百姓民众开垦荒地，改良土壤，播种粮食，让百姓民众家家丰衣足食。
English: The fields were barren and the people were short of clothing and food, so Hou Yi guided the people to reclaim the wasteland, improve the soil, sow grain, and let the people have enough food and clothing.

古文：故三后之后，无不王者，有阴德也。
现代文：所以这三位君王的后代无不成为帝王，这就是因为他们平时积阴德的缘故。
English: Therefore, the descendants of these three emperors all became emperors, and this was because of their usual sexual immorality.

古文：周室衰，礼义废，孔子以三代之道教导于世。其后嗣至今不绝者，有隐行也。
现代文：周王室衰微，礼义废弃，孔子就用三代的道德教育世人，孔氏家族继嗣至今不绝，这就是孔子平时德行高的缘故。
English: When the Zhou royal family declined and abandoned propriety and righteousness, Confucius used three generations of moral education to educate the world. The successors of the Confucius family have not ceased to this day. This is the reason why Confucius was highly virtuous in peacetime.

古文：秦王赵政兼吞天下而亡，智伯侵地而灭，商鞅支解，李斯车裂。
现代文：秦始皇赵政用暴力兼并天下并很快灭亡，智伯侵占韩、魏、赵三家土地但最终反被消灭，商鞅实行苛政而遭肢解，李斯谋害忠良而遭车裂。
English: Zhao Zheng, the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty, used violence to annex the whole world and soon died, Zhi Bo occupied the three lands of Han, Wei and Zhao but was eventually eliminated, Shang Kui implemented a harsh policy and was dismembered, Li Si plotted to kill Zhong Liang and was chariot-wrecked.

古文：三代种德而王，齐桓继绝而霸。
现代文：夏、商、周三代君王施行道德而称王天下，齐桓公帮助弱国生存下去而成为霸主。
English: Xia, Shang, and the third generation of emperors practiced morality and became kings of the world. Qi Huan helped the weak countries to survive and became the overlord.

古文：故树黍者不获稷，树怨者无报德。
现代文：种黍的不会收获稷，埋下怨恨的不会得到恩德的报答。
English: He who sows thorns will not reap thistles, and he who sows the seed of bitterness will not reap the harvest.

古文：昔者，宋人好善者，三世不解。
现代文：从前宋国有一户好行善的人家，世代坚持不懈行善做好事。
English: Once upon a time in the Song Dynasty, there was a family of people who were good at doing good deeds. Generations of them persevered in doing good deeds.

古文：家无故而黑牛生白犊。以问先生。
现代文：有一年，家里养的一头黑母牛产下一只纯白的牛犊，于是家里人就将这件怪事去请教术数先生。
English: One year, a black cow raised at home gave birth to a pure white calf, so the family went to ask Mr. Zhuxu about this strange thing.

古文：先生曰： 此吉祥，以飨鬼神。 
现代文：术数先生说： 这是吉祥的征兆，用这纯白牛犊去祭祀鬼神吧。 
English: The numerologist said, "This is an auspicious sign. Let's use this pure white calf to sacrifice to ghosts and gods."

古文：居一年，其父无故而盲。
现代文：又过了一年，这家的父亲无缘无故眼睛失明了。
English: A year later, the father of the family lost his sight for no reason.

古文：牛又复生白犊。其父又复使其子以问先生。
现代文：以后这母牛又产下一头纯白牛犊，于是父亲又让儿子去请教术数先生。
English: Later, the cow gave birth to a pure white calf, so the father asked his son to ask Mr. Count.

古文：其子曰： 前听先生言而失明，今又复问之，奈何？ 
现代文：儿子问道： 先前听了术数先生的话，父亲您的眼睛失明了，现在还去问他为什么？ 
English: The son asked: Father, your eyes have gone blind after listening to the words of Mr. Numerology. Now you still want to ask him why?

古文：其父曰： 圣人之言，先忤而后合。其事未究，固试往，复问之。 
现代文：父亲说了： 圣人的话常常是先好像不对，但以后会应验吻合的，而且这件事还没完，你就去试着问问吧！ 
English: The father said: The words of the saints often seem to be wrong at first, but later they will be fulfilled, and the matter is not over, just go and try to ask!

古文：其子又复问先生。
现代文：儿子又去问术数先生这怪事。
English: My son went to ask the math teacher about this strange thing.

古文：先生曰： 此喜祥也，复以飨鬼神。 
现代文：术数先生回答说： 这也同样是吉祥的征兆，还是用这纯白牛犊去祭祀鬼神吧！ 
English: The numerologist replied, "This is also an auspicious sign. Why don't you use this pure white calf to sacrifice to ghosts and gods?"

古文：归致命其父。其父曰： 行先生之言也。 
现代文：儿子回家后将术数先生的话如实报告了父亲，父亲说： 那就按照先生的话去做吧！ 
English: After his son returned home, he truthfully reported the words of the numerologist to his father, who said, "Then do what your teacher says!"

古文：居一年，其子又无故而盲。
现代文：又过一年，儿子的眼睛也无缘无故地失明了。
English: A year later, his son's eyes also went blind for no reason.

古文：其后楚攻宋，围其城。
现代文：后来楚国攻打宋国，包围了这户人家所居住的城邑。
English: Later, Chu attacked Song and besieged the city where the family lived.

古文：当此之时，易子而食，析骸而炊。
现代文：这时候，城里能充饥的东西都吃光了，人们只能交换孩子吃，并将枯骨劈开当柴烧。
English: At this time, everything in the city that could satisfy hunger was eaten up. People could only exchange children for food and split the dead bones for firewood.

古文：丁壮者死，老病童儿皆上城，牢守而不下。
现代文：壮年人也全都战死，这样老人、病人、儿童上城楼防守，顽强抵御，使楚军迟迟攻克不下。
English: All the adults also died in the battle, so the elderly, the sick, and the children went up to the city tower to defend and resist tenaciously, so that the Chu army could not overcome the delay.

古文：楚王大怒。城已破，诸城守者皆屠之。
现代文：这时楚王大怒，在城被攻破之后，将凡上城楼防守的人全部杀死。
English: At this time, King Chu was furious. After the city was breached, he killed all those who defended the city tower.

古文：此独以父子盲之故，得无乘城。
现代文：唯独这户人家因父子均失明而没上城楼防守，得以保全性命。
English: However, because both father and son were blind, this family did not go up to the castle to defend themselves, and were able to save their lives.

古文：军罢围解，则父子俱视。
现代文：当楚军撤走以后，父子两人的眼睛又复明了。
English: When the Chu troops withdrew, both father and son regained their eyesight.

古文：夫祸福之转而相生，其变难见也。
现代文：这正是祸福互相转化互相促成，其中的变化难以明了。
English: This is precisely the transformation of misfortune and blessing into each other and the mutual promotion of each other, the changes in which are difficult to understand.

古文：近塞上之人有善术者，马无故亡而入胡。人皆吊之。
现代文：在靠近边塞的居民中，有一位精通术数的人，一次他家养的马无缘无故跑到胡人那里，邻居家的人都为此事来安慰他。
English: Among the residents near the border fortress, there was a man who was good at mathematics. Once, his horse ran to the Hu people for no reason, and the neighbors came to comfort him.

古文：其父曰： 此何遽不为福乎？ 
现代文：他说： 这事难道就不能变成好事吗？ 
English: He added: "How do you know it's not going to be a good thing?

古文：居数月，其马将胡骏马而归。
现代文：过了一段时间，跑走的马领着一群马回来了。
English: After some time, the runaway horse led a group of horses back.

古文：人皆贺之。
现代文：邻居家的人又都来贺庆。
English: All the neighbors came to celebrate the new year.

古文：其父曰： 此何遽不能为祸乎？ 
现代文：他说： 这事难道就不可能变为坏事吗？ 
English: "Isn't it possible that this could turn bad?" he said.

古文：家富良马，其子好骑，堕而折其髀。
现代文：果然，因家有不少胡人养的好马，他儿子骑马玩时将大腿骨给摔断了。
English: Sure enough, because there are many good horses raised by the Hu family, his son broke his thigh bone while riding a horse.

古文：人皆吊之。
现代文：这样邻居又来安慰他。
English: So the neighbor came to comfort him.

古文：其父曰： 此何遽不为福乎？ 
现代文：他又说： 怎么知道这事不会变成好事呢？ 
English: He added: "How do you know it's not going to be a good thing?

古文：居一年，胡人大入塞，丁壮者引弦而战，近塞之人，死者十九，此独以跛之故，父子相保。
现代文：过了一年，胡人大举进攻边塞，青壮年男子都拿起武器参战，结果边塞附近的居民死去十分之九，唯独这户人家因儿子跛脚，父子性命都保住了。
English: A year later, the Hu people launched a large-scale attack on the border fortress. Young and strong men took up arms to fight. As a result, nine out of ten residents near the border fortress died. However, this family was spared because their son was lame.

古文：故福之为祸，祸之为福，化不可极，深不可测也。
现代文：所以说福可变为祸，祸可变为福，这其中的变化难以捉摸，深不可测。
English: Therefore, it is said that blessing can turn into disaster, disaster can turn into blessing, and the changes in this are elusive and unfathomable.

古文：或直于辞而不害于事者，或亏于耳以忤于心，而合于实者。
现代文：有时辞语顺当却不切合实事，有时言辞难听不合心意但却切合实际。
English: Sometimes the words are appropriate but do not correspond to reality, sometimes the words are unpleasant but do correspond to reality.

古文：高阳魋将为室，问匠人。
现代文：宋国人高阳魋准备建造房子，他采伐了木材等建房材料后去征求匠人的意见。
English: Gao Yangxuan, a Song Dynasty native, was preparing to build a house. After he had harvested timber and other building materials, he went to solicit the opinions of craftsmen.

古文：匠人对曰： 未可也。木尚生，加涂其上，必将挠。
现代文：匠人对他说： 现在还不能开工，因为木料还没干透；在湿木头上涂上泥浆，时间一长，这木头会变形。
English: The craftsman said to him, "It is not yet time to begin the work, for the wood is not yet dry. If you put mud on wet wood, it will become misshapen over time."

古文：以生材任重涂，今虽成，后必败。 高阳魋曰： 不然。
现代文：用湿木料承受重泥，即使现在造好房子，往后房子一定会倒塌。 高阳魋听了后说： 不对。
English: Using wet wood to bear heavy mud, even if a house is built now, it will surely collapse later. After listening, Gao Yangjun said, "That's not right.

古文：夫木枯则益劲，涂干则益轻，以劲材任轻涂，今虽恶，后必善。 
现代文：木料干了就更坚硬，泥浆干了就变轻。用坚硬的木料承受变轻了的泥浆，眼前虽然不好，往后就一定坚固。 
English: When the wood dries, it becomes harder, and when the mud dries, it becomes lighter. If you use hard wood to bear the lighter mud, although it is not good at first, it will be strong in the future.

古文：匠人穷于辞，无以对。
现代文：匠人听了后一时也没有话说，便只好按照吩咐造房子。
English: After hearing this, the craftsman was speechless for a moment, and had no choice but to build the house as ordered.

古文：受令而为室。
现代文：没多久，房子落成，显得非常高大结实，十分壮观。
English: Not long after, the house was completed, appearing very tall and solid, very spectacular.

古文：其始成，竘然善也，而后果败。此所谓直于辞而不可用者也。
现代文：但不久这房子果然倒塌。这就是所谓的辞语顺当但却不切合实事。
English: But before long, the house did indeed collapse. This is what is known as a convenient phrase, but it does not correspond to reality.

古文：何谓亏于耳、忤于心而合于实？
现代文：那么，什么叫辞语难听不合心意却切合实际呢？
English: So, what do you call words that are unpleasant and disagreeable but realistic?

古文：靖郭君将城薛，宾客多止之，弗听。
现代文：靖郭君打算在他的封地薛修筑城墙，他手下的宾客、门人都纷纷劝阻，靖郭君不听。
English: Yasuko planned to build a city wall in his fief of Xue, but his guests and retainers all tried to dissuade him, but Yasuko would not listen.

古文：靖郭君谓谒者曰： 无为宾通言。 
现代文：靖郭君对传达官说： 不要替来访的客人传话通报了。 
English: Jing Guo said to the communication officer: Don't send a message to inform the visiting guests.

古文：齐人有请见者，曰： 臣请道三言而已。过三言，请烹。 
现代文：这时有位齐国人要求会见靖郭君，说： 我只说三个字，多说一个字，我情愿受烹刑。 
English: At this time, a person from Qi asked to meet with Jing Guo Jun, saying: I only say three words, say one more word, I would rather be cooked.

古文：靖郭君闻而见之。
现代文：靖郭君听到后表示愿意接见这位齐国人。
English: After hearing this, Jing Guo expressed his willingness to meet with the man from Qi.

古文：宾趋而进，再拜而兴。因称曰： 海大鱼。 
现代文：那齐国人快步走到靖郭君跟前，拜了二次，然后起身说： 海大鱼。 
English: The Naxi people walked briskly up to Jing Guo, bowed twice, then stood up and said, "Big fish in the sea."

古文：则反走。
现代文：说完就转身往外走。
English: After saying this, he turned around and walked out.

古文：靖郭君止之曰： 愿闻其说。 
现代文：靖郭君连忙喊着那齐人： 我想听听你的高见。 
English: Jing Guo hurriedly shouted to the Naxi people: I want to hear your high opinion.

古文：宾曰： 臣不敢以死为熙。 
现代文：那齐国人煞有介事地说道： 我可不敢拿自己的性命开玩笑。 
English: "I wouldn't dare to joke with my own life," said the Naxi man.

古文：靖郭君曰： 先生不远道而至此，为寡人称之。 
现代文：靖郭君说： 先生你不顾路途遥远来到我这里，有意见但说无妨，我很想听听。 
English: Jing Guo Jun said: Sir, you have come to me despite the long journey. If you have an opinion, you are welcome to say it. I would like to hear it.

古文：宾曰： 海大鱼，网弗能止也，钓弗能牵也。
现代文：那齐国人就说： 大海里的大鱼，渔网都捕捉不到它，钓钩更钓不到它。
English: The people of Naxi said, "There is a big fish in the ocean, and the fishing net cannot catch it, and the fishing hook cannot catch it.

古文：荡而失水，则蝼蚁皆得志焉。
现代文：但是它一旦跃出水面落在岸边，那蝼蛄和蚂蚁都可以随心所欲地咬食它。
English: But as soon as it jumps out of the water and lands on the shore, the toads and ants can bite it as much as they want.

古文：今夫齐，君之渊也。君失齐，则薛能自存乎？ 
现代文：如今，齐国就是你的大海，若是失去了齐国，这薛地还能独自存在吗？ 
English: Today, Qi is your sea. If you lose Qi, can Xue still exist on its own?

古文：靖郭君曰： 善！ 
现代文：靖郭君听了后一下子醒悟，说： 先生你讲的真好。 
English: After listening, Jing Guo Jun suddenly woke up and said: Sir, what you said was really good.

古文：乃止不城薛。
现代文：于是靖郭君马上取消了在薛地筑城的计划。
English: As a result, Yasukuni immediately cancelled the plan to build a castle in Xue Di.

古文：此所谓亏于耳、忤于心而得事实者也。
现代文：这就是辞语难听且不合人心的却切合实际。
English: That is the ugly and unpalatable reality of the situation.

古文：以 无城薛 止城薛，其于以行说，乃不若 海大鱼 。
现代文：用硬邦邦 不要在薛地筑城 的话来劝止靖郭君薛地筑城的计划，对于劝说的实际效果来说，还不如用 海大鱼 三个字来得管用。
English: Using the words "don't build in Xue Di" to dissuade Jing Guo Jun's plan to build a city in Xue Di, for the actual effect of persuasion, it is better to use the three characters of "sea big fish" to be effective.

古文：故物或远之而近，或近之而远。或说听计当而身疏，或言不用、计不行而益亲。
现代文：所以事情有时候是，疏远它反而亲近它，接近它反而疏远它；还有些事情是，说的话被采纳，而且计谋恰当，但自身却反而被疏远；说的话不被接受，而且计谋行不通，但自身却反而被亲近。
English: So sometimes it is a matter of being estranged from it, but being close to it, and being close to it, but being estranged from it; and sometimes it is a matter of being accepted, and the plan is right, but being estranged from it; and sometimes it is a matter of not being accepted, and the plan is not working, but being close to it.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么说明这点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：三国伐齐，围平陆，括子以报于牛子曰： 三国之地，不接于我，逾邻国而围平陆，利不足贪也。
现代文：魏、韩、赵三国攻打齐国，包围了齐国的平陆这地方。括子向牛子报告： 魏、韩、赵三国和我们齐国不接壤，他们越过邻国包围平陆，没有什么实际可以贪图的利益。
English: The three countries of Wei, Han, and Zhao attacked Qi and encircled the flat land of Qi. Parenthesis reported to Niu Zi: The three countries of Wei, Han, and Zhao do not share a border with our country of Qi. They encircled the flat land through neighboring countries. There is no practical benefit to be gained.

古文：然则求名于我也。请以齐侯住。 
现代文：他们这样做只是想从我们齐国获取某种名声而已，既然这样，就叫齐侯前去和他们讲和算了。 
English: What they are doing is just trying to gain some kind of reputation from our country of Qi. In that case, let Qi Hou go and make peace with them.

古文：牛子以为善。
现代文：牛子听了后认为这是好主意。
English: After listening to it, Niu Zi thought it was a good idea.

古文：括子出，无害子入。
现代文：括子走后，无害子随即进来。
English: After the braces are gone, the innocuous seeds come in.

古文：牛子以括子言告无害子。
现代文：牛子就将括子的话告诉给无害子听。
English: Cowherd told the parenthesis to Harmless.

古文：无害子曰： 异乎臣之所闻。 
现代文：无害子只是说： 这跟我所听说的不一样。 
English: "It's different from what I've heard," Mr. Harmless said.

古文：牛子曰： 国危而不安，患结而不解。
现代文：牛子见无害子不说出具体的意见，就用话来刺激无害子： 国家危害却又无能耐安定它，祸患缠身又无办法解脱，还尊重谋士干什么？ 
English: Niu Zi sees a harmless child but does not express a specific opinion, so he uses words to stimulate the harmless child: the country is harmful but unable to stabilize it, it is plagued by disasters and there is no way to get rid of it, and what is the use of respecting the counselor?

古文：何谓贵智？ 无害子曰： 臣闻之，有裂壤土以安社稷者，闻杀身破家以存其国者，不闻出其君以为封疆者。 
现代文：这下无害子才说出自己的看法： 我听说过有以割让土地来使国家安定的，我也听说过以牺牲生命、毁掉家园来保存国家的，但我就是没有听说过让自己的君主去求和受辱来保住疆土的。 
English: It was only then that the harmless child voiced his opinion: I have heard of ceding land to make the country stable, and I have also heard of sacrificing lives and destroying homes to preserve the country, but I just haven't heard of letting my monarch beg for peace and suffer humiliation to preserve the territory.

古文：牛子不听无害子之言，而用括子之计，三国之兵罢，而平陆之地存。
现代文：牛子当然不会听从无害子这种议论的，而采用了括子的计谋，使三国军队顺利撤走，平陆也就安全保住了。
English: Of course, Niu Zi would not listen to such a harmless argument, but he used the bracket's strategy to make the three countries' armies withdraw smoothly, and Ping Lu was safe.

古文：自此之后，括子日以疏，无害子日以进。
现代文：可是，从那天起，括子一天天被齐侯疏远，而无害子却日益被齐侯看重得以晋升。
English: However, from that day on, Bracket was alienated by Qi Hou day by day, while Harmless was increasingly valued by Qi Hou and promoted.

古文：故谋患而患解，图国而国存，括子之智得矣。无害子之虑无中于策，谋无益于国，然而心调于君，有义行也。
现代文：所以，用谋虑来解除祸患，祸患也就被解除，用谋略来挽救国家，国家也就得以保存，这括子的智谋就是这样管用而实际，但却受到疏远；而无害子的想法根本不合乎策略，对国家也无实际好处，可是他就是掌握君主的心意，顺着君主的心意，从行为上看有忠义的表现，所以日益受到齐侯的看重。
English: Therefore, the use of strategy to solve the disaster, the disaster will also be solved, the use of strategy to save the country, the country will also be preserved, the wisdom of the bracket is so effective and practical, but it is alienated; and the idea of harmlessness is not strategic at all, and there is no real benefit to the country, but he is to grasp the monarch's mind, follow the monarch's mind, and have the performance of loyalty in terms of behavior, so he is increasingly valued by peers.

古文：今人待冠而饰首，待履而行地。冠履之于人也，寒不能暖，风不能障，暴不能蔽也。
现代文：这就好像人用帽冠做头饰、穿鞋子便于行一样，这帽冠和鞋子对人来说，天寒不能保温、刮风不能挡风、烈日下不能遮阳，但人们还是戴帽穿鞋，这是因为人的头脚需要帽鞋作依托。
English: It is as if people use the cap to make a headdress and wear shoes to make it easier to walk. For people, this cap and shoes cannot keep warm in the cold weather, cannot block the wind when the wind blows, and cannot shade the sun under the hot sun, but people still wear hats and shoes. This is because people's heads and feet need cap shoes for support.

古文：然而冠冠履履者，其所自托者然也。夫咎犯战胜城濮，而雍季无尺寸之功，然而雍季先赏而咎犯后存者，其言有贵者也。故义者，天下之所赏也。百言百当，不如择趋而审行也。
现代文：咎犯在城濮打了胜仗，而雍季却无半点功劳，但到论功行赏时，雍季首先得到赏赐，而咎犯只得到安抚，为什么呢？这是因为雍季说的话中有它可贵之处。 义 ，正是天下所赏识、珍贵的东西，所以说句句话管用，不如瞅准势头，摸透人的心意然后谨慎行事。
English: The culprit won the battle at the city gate, but Yong Ji didn't do anything, but when it came to the reward of merit and performance, Yong Ji was rewarded first, while the culprit was only appeased, why? This is because there is something valuable in what Yong Ji said. Righteousness is something that is appreciated and precious in the world, so if you want to say something that works, it's better to identify the momentum, understand people's minds and then act cautiously.

古文：或无功而先举，或有功而后赏。
现代文：有时候没有功劳却先得到荐举，有时候有功劳却后得到赏赐。
English: Sometimes there is no merit, but a recommendation is given first, and sometimes there is merit, but it is given later.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么说明这点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：昔晋文公将与楚战城濮，问于咎犯曰： 为奈何？ 
现代文：以前晋文公要在城濮和楚军交战，文公征询咎犯的意见，问咎犯： 这仗该怎样打？ 
English: In the past, Prince Jinwen wanted to fight the Chu army in Chenghuang. He asked the culprits for their opinions. He asked the culprits: How should this battle be fought?

古文：咎犯曰： 仁义之事，君子不厌忠信；战陈之事，不厌诈伪。
现代文：咎犯说： 如果是做仁义的事，那就不该讨厌忠诚守信用；如果是和敌军开战，那最好是兵不厌诈。
English: The culprit said: If it is a matter of doing what is benevolent and just, then one should not be averse to loyalty and keeping one's word; if it is a matter of going to war with the enemy army, then it is best to be a soldier who is not averse to deception.

古文：君其诈之而已矣。 
现代文：现在既然是和楚军交战，君王你就只管使用欺诈就可。 
English: All you have to do is deceive the enemy.

古文：辞咎犯，问雍季。雍季对曰： 焚林而猎，愈多得兽，后必无兽。以诈伪遇人，虽愈利，后无复。
现代文：文王辞别咎犯后，又去请教雍季，雍季回答说： 放火来焚烧山林，尽管暂时能打获到很多野兽，但是最终会到无兽可猎的地步；用欺诈手段对付人，虽然一时能获得很多利益，但到最后一定会无利可图。
English: After King Wen said goodbye to the culprit, he went to consult Yong Ji again. Yong Ji replied: Setting fire to burn the mountains and forests, although it can temporarily catch a lot of beasts, it will eventually reach the point where there are no beasts to hunt; using fraudulent means to deal with people, although it can gain a lot of benefits for a while, it will definitely be unprofitable in the end.

古文：君其正之而已矣。 
现代文：所以君王还是正大光明行事为好。 
English: Therefore, it is better for the monarch to act in a straightforward manner.

古文：于是不听雍季之计，而用咎犯之谋。与楚人战，大破之。
现代文：文王没有听从雍季的话，而是采纳了咎犯的计策，和楚军开战时用计大败楚军。
English: King Wen did not listen to the words of Yongji, but adopted the culprit's strategy, and when the Chu army went to war, he used the strategy to defeat the Chu army.

古文：还归赏有功者，先雍季而后咎犯。
现代文：回国以后，嘉奖有功人员，首先是奖赏雍季，然后才奖赏咎犯。
English: After returning to China, the first step in rewarding meritorious personnel is to reward Yong Ji, and only then to reward the guilty.

古文：左右曰： 城濮之战，咎犯之谋也，君行赏先雍季何也？ 
现代文：这时晋文公身边的人就说了： 我们之所以能在城濮之战中获胜，靠的是咎犯的计策。君王论功行赏为何将雍季放在最前面，这是为什么？ 
English: At this time, the people around Prince Jinwen said: The reason why we were able to win the battle of Chenghuang is because of the criminal's strategy. Why did the king put Yongji at the forefront of the reward for meritorious deeds?

古文：文公曰： 咎犯之言，一时之权也；雍季之言，万世之利也。吾岂可以先一时之权，而后万世之利哉？ 
现代文：文公回答说： 咎犯的诈术，只是权宜之计，适用于一时战争需要；而雍季的忠信观点，则是符合长远的利益，我怎么能只看重权宜之计而轻视长远利益呢？ 
English: Wenguang replied: The deception of the culprit is only a temporary measure, suitable for temporary war needs; while Yongji's loyal view is in line with long-term interests. How can I only value the temporary measure and despise the long-term interests?

古文：智伯率韩、魏二国伐赵。围晋阳，决晋水而灌之。城下缘木而处，县釜而炊。
现代文：还有一事例，智伯率领韩、魏两家攻打赵家，包围了晋阳城，并挖开晋水灌淹晋阳城，导致城中的军民爬上树来避水，悬挂着锅来烧饭。
English: In another case, Zhi Bo led the Han and Wei dynasties to attack the Zhao family, encircled the Jinyang city, and dug up the Jinyang water to flood the Jinyang city, causing the soldiers and civilians in the city to climb trees to avoid water and hang pots to cook rice.

古文：襄子谓张孟谈曰： 城中力已尽，粮食匮乏，大夫病，为之奈何？ 
现代文：这时赵襄子找张孟谈商量： 晋阳城里人力已经耗尽，粮食也十分缺乏，官兵们也缺医少药，你看如何是好？ 
English: At this time, Zhao Xiangzi found Zhang Meng to discuss: Jinyang city's manpower has been exhausted, food is also very scarce, officers and soldiers are also short of medicine, what do you think?

古文：张孟谈曰： 亡不能存，危不能安，无为贵智士。
现代文：张孟谈说： 国家面临危亡而不能保全它，那真的是算白养了我们这批谋士了。
English: Zhang Meng said: The country is facing peril and cannot preserve it. It is really a waste to raise our group of advisers.

古文：臣请试潜行，见韩、魏之君而约之。 
现代文：现在让我偷偷试着涉水出城，去会会魏、韩二家君王，是否有可能搞个协议共同对付智伯。 
English: Now let me secretly try to wade out of the city to meet the kings of Wei and Han, and see if it is possible to make an agreement to jointly deal with Zhibo.

古文：乃见韩、魏之君，说之曰： 臣闻之，唇亡而齿寒。
现代文：于是张孟谈暗中出城会见魏、韩两君王，劝说道： 人们常说：唇亡齿寒。
English: So Zhang Meng talked about secretly going out of the city to meet the kings of Wei and Han, and persuaded them, saying: People often say: cold lips and cold teeth.

古文：今智伯率二君而伐赵，赵将亡矣。
现代文：今天智伯胁迫你们两家来攻伐我们赵家，眼看赵家保不住。
English: Today, Zhi Bo has coerced both of your families to attack our Zhao family. I can't stand the sight of the Zhao family.

古文：赵亡则君之次矣。
现代文：可是按智伯的个性，赵家一灭亡，他就非得挨个地来收拾你们两家。
English: However, according to Zhi Bo's personality, as soon as the Zhao family perished, he had to clean up your two families one by one.

古文：及今而不图之，祸将及二君！ 
现代文：所以现在假若我们不共同想法对付智伯的话，灾难也就很快要落到你们两家头上了。 
English: So now, if we don't come up with a joint plan to deal with Zhibo, disaster will soon befall both of you.

古文：二君曰： 智伯之为人也，粗中而少亲，我谋而泄，事必败，为之奈何？ 
现代文：韩、魏两家君王说： 智伯这个人，暴戾骄横而少恩寡情。我们的计谋如果泄露，事情就坏了，这如何是好？ 
English: The kings of the Han and Wei dynasties said, "This man Zhi Bo is violent, arrogant, and lacking in mercy. If our plan is leaked, things will be ruined. How is this good?

古文：张孟谈曰： 言出君之口，入臣之耳，人孰知之者乎？
现代文：张孟谈马上说： 话从二位君王口中出，进是进入到我的耳中，谁还会知道？
English: Zhang Meng immediately said: The words came out of the mouths of the two kings and entered my ears. Who else would know?

古文：且同情相成，同利相死。
现代文：再说，处境一样、情况相同、利益一致的人应该互相成全、生死与共。
English: Moreover, people who are in the same situation, the same situation, and the same interests should complement each other and share life and death.

古文：君其图之。 
现代文：请二君王仔细考虑吧！ 
English: Think about it carefully!

古文：二君乃与张孟谈阴谋，与之期。
现代文：于是韩、魏二君王与张孟谈谋划商定举事日期，并约定其他事项。
English: As a result, Han, Emperor Wei II and Zhang Meng discussed and agreed on the date of the event and agreed on other matters.

古文：张孟谈乃报襄子。
现代文：张孟谈随即潜回城里向赵襄子回报。
English: Zhang Meng immediately dived back into the city to return the favor to Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：至其日之夜，赵氏将杀其守堤之吏，决水灌智伯。智伯军救水而乱。
现代文：到了约定的日期，趁着黑暗，赵襄子派人杀了看守堤防的官兵，挖开大堤使水倒灌进智伯的军营，智伯军队一片慌乱，连忙堵水。
English: On the agreed date, taking advantage of the darkness, Zhao Xiangzi sent someone to kill the officers and soldiers guarding the embankment, dug up the embankment and poured water into Zhi Bo's military camp. Zhi Bo's army was in a panic and quickly blocked the water.

古文：朝、魏翼而击之，襄子将卒犯其前，大败智伯军，杀其身而三分其国。
现代文：这时韩军和魏军从两翼攻打过来，赵襄子又率军队从正面出击，将智伯的军队打得落花流水，智伯也被杀死，又将智伯的封地一分为三，从此晋国也就分为韩、魏、赵三国。
English: At this time, the Korean army and the Wei army attacked from two sides, and Zhao Xiangzi led the army to attack from the front, beating Zhi Bo's army to a standstill. Zhi Bo was also killed, and Zhi Bo's fief was divided into three, and since then Jin Province has been divided into Korea, Wei and Zhao.

古文：襄子乃赏有功者，而高赫为赏首。
现代文：等到胜利凯旋归来，赵襄子奖赏有功人员时，最先受奖赏的是高赫。
English: When Zhao Xiangzi rewarded meritorious personnel after the triumphant return, Gao He was the first to be rewarded.

古文：群臣请曰： 晋阳之存，张孟谈之功也。
现代文：大臣们提出问题： 晋阳之所以能保住，全仗张孟谈的功劳。
English: The ministers raised a question: It was all thanks to Zhang Mengtan that Jinyang could be preserved.

古文：而赫为赏首，何也？ 
现代文：可现在却是高赫获首赏，这是什么缘故？ 
English: But now it is Gao He who won the first prize. What is the reason for this?

古文：襄子曰： 晋阳之围也，寡人国家危，社稷殆。群臣无不有骄侮之心者，唯赫不失君臣之礼，吾是以先之。 
现代文：赵襄子回答： 当晋阳被围困的时候，我的国家危难的时候，众多大臣很少不对我流露出轻侮骄傲的神情，唯有高赫仍然不失君臣礼节，所以我首先奖赏他。 
English: Zhao Xiangzi replied: When Jinyang was under siege, and my country was in danger, many ministers rarely did not show me contempt and pride. Only Gao He still did not lose the courtesy of a prince and a minister, so I first rewarded him.

古文：由此观之，义者，人之大本也，虽有战胜存亡之功，不如行义之隆。
现代文：由此看来， 义 才是做人的根本。即使战胜敌人，挽救国家，也比不上施行忠义来得高贵。
English: From this perspective, righteousness is the foundation of being human. Even if you defeat the enemy and save the country, it is not as noble as practicing loyalty.

古文：故君子曰： 美言可以市尊，美行可以加人。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 美好的言辞可以博得尊重，美好的德行可以超越众人。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Beautiful words can win respect, and beautiful virtues can surpass everyone.

古文：或有罪而可赏也，或有功而可罪也。
现代文：有时候有罪过却得到嘉奖，有时候有功绩却引来责罚。
English: Sometimes guilt is rewarded, sometimes merit is punished.

古文：西门豹治邺，廪无积粟，府无储钱，库无甲兵，官无计会，人数言其过于文侯。
现代文：西门豹治理邺县时，粮仓里没有积蓄的粮食，钱库里没有储备的钱币，兵库里没有兵械存放，官府里没有总计收入的账簿。
English: When Ximenleopard was in charge of Min County, there was no stored grain in the granary, no stored money in the bank, no stored weapons in the arsenal, and no ledger of total income in the government office.

古文：文侯身行其县，果若人言。
现代文：这样就有人多次在文侯面前议论过西门豹的这些过失。
English: In this way, some people have repeatedly discussed these mistakes of Ximenpao in front of Wenhong.

古文：文侯曰： 翟璜任子治邺，而大乱。
现代文：于是魏文侯就亲临邺县检查工作，看到的现象果然和人们议论的相一致。
English: So Wei Wenhou personally inspected the work of Lixian County, and the phenomenon he saw was indeed consistent with what people were talking about.

古文：子能道则可，不能，将加诛于子！ 
现代文：魏文侯于是召见西门豹说： 翟璜推荐你来治理邺县，你却将这里治理得如此混乱。
English: Wei Wenhou then summoned Xi Mengbao and said: "I recommended you to govern Handan County, but you have made such a mess of governing here.

古文：西门豹曰： 臣闻王主富民，霸主富武，亡国富库。
现代文：你能说清这些事的原由也就算了，否则就要严加追究。 西门豹解释说： 我听说实行王道的君王使人民富足；实施霸道的君王使士富足；只有亡国之君才使各种府库充足。
English: If you can clearly explain the reasons for these things, you can forget about it, otherwise you will have to be strictly investigated.Simon Leopard explained: I heard that the king who practiced the royal way made the people rich; the king who practiced the tyrannical way made the envoys rich; only the ruler of the ruined country made the various treasuries sufficient.

古文：今王欲为霸王者也，臣故稸积于民。
现代文：如今你魏文侯是要实施王霸之道，所以为臣就将粮食、兵器、钱财都积贮在民间。
English: Now Wei Wenhong wants to implement the way of the tyrant, so he stores grain, weapons, and money in the people.

古文：君以为不然，臣请升城鼓之，甲兵粟米，可立具也。 
现代文：你如果不信的话，让我登上城楼击鼓，这时铠甲兵器和粮食就会马上齐备。 
English: If you don't believe me, let me go up to the tower and play the drums, then armor and food will be ready immediately.

古文：于是乃升城而鼓之。一鼓，民被甲括矢，操兵弩而出；再鼓，负辇粟而至。文侯曰： 罢之。 
现代文：于是西门豹登上城楼开始击鼓，第一阵鼓声结束，只见百姓纷纷披挂铠甲，带着弓箭，手持兵器从家里出来；第二阵鼓声结束，只见又有许多百姓背着或用车装着粮食纷纷来到。看到这些后，魏文侯说： 行了，行了。 
English: So Ximen Leopard climbed onto the city tower and began to beat the drum. After the first round of drumming ended, the people were seen coming out of their homes wearing armor, carrying bows and arrows, and armed with weapons. After the second round of drumming ended, many people were seen coming with grain on their backs or in their cars. After seeing this, Wei Wenhou said, "That's it, that's it."

古文：西门豹曰： 与民约信，非一日之积也。
现代文：西门豹说： 我和百姓守约讲信用，这可不是一天就能形成的。
English: Simeon the Leopard said: I keep my promises to the people and speak of trust, which is not something that can be formed in a day.

古文：一举而欺之，后不可复用也。
现代文：有一次欺骗他们，以后就别再想调动他们。
English: Fool them once, don't try to fool them again.

古文：燕常侵魏入城，臣请北击之，以复侵地。 
现代文：燕国曾经侵犯我国，占据我国八座城市；现在让我指挥军民向北攻打燕国，收复失地。 
English: Yan's country once invaded our country and occupied eight cities in our country; now let me command the military and civilians to attack Yan's country to the north and recover the lost land.

古文：遂举兵击燕，复地而后反。
现代文：于是西门豹率兵攻打燕国，收复了失地后返回邺城。
English: As a result, Ximen Leopard led the troops to attack Yan Province, regained the lost territory and returned to Lucheng.

古文：此有罪而可赏者也。
现代文：这就是有罪过反而得到嘉奖的事例。
English: This is a case of the guilty being rewarded.

古文：解扁为东封，上计而入三倍。有司请赏之。
现代文：还有，解扁担任魏东部边境官员，有一次年终上报账目，地方财政收入增加了三倍，主管财政的官员提请上级嘉奖解扁。
English: Moreover, as a border official in the eastern Wei Dynasty, there was a time when the accounts were reported at the end of the year, the local fiscal revenue increased threefold, and the official in charge of finance asked his superiors to commend him.

古文：文侯曰： 吾土地非益广也，人民非益众也，入何以三倍？ 
现代文：而魏文侯却质疑说： 我的国土没有增扩，人口也没增多，为何解扁的地方财政却增加三倍？ 
English: Wei Wenhou, however, questioned: My country has not expanded and the population has not increased, so why has the local finance of the government increased threefold?

古文：对曰： 以冬伐木而积之，于春浮之河而鬻之。 
现代文：主管官员解释说： 解扁在当地下令百姓冬天砍伐树木积存起来，到来年春天再从河道运出去卖掉，所以这样积聚了不少钱财。 
English: The official in charge explained: Xie Bian ordered the local people to cut down trees in winter and store them, and then transport them from the river to sell them in the spring of the next year, so they accumulated a lot of money.

古文：文侯曰： 民春以力耕，暑以强耘，秋以收敛，冬间无事，以伐林而积之，负轭而浮之河。
现代文：魏文侯听了说： 百姓春天努力耕种，夏天勉力耘耕锄草，秋天又忙着收割敛藏，只有冬天才有空闲，现在要他们冬天伐木积贮树木，又驾车运到河边，这样一来，百姓哪有时间休生养息。
English: Wei Wenhou listened and said: The people worked hard to cultivate in the spring, worked hard to plow and weed in the summer, and were busy harvesting and storing in the fall. They only had free time in the winter. Now they are asked to cut down trees in the winter to store them, and drive them to the river. In this way, the people have no time to rest and recuperate.

古文：是用民不得休息也，民以敝矣。虽有三倍之入，将焉用之！ 
现代文：他们已经疲惫不堪，就是收入增加三倍，这又有什么用呢？ 
English: They are exhausted, and what good is a threefold increase in income?

古文：此有功而可罪者也。
现代文：这就是有功绩却反而引招责备的事例。
English: This is an example of a meritorious deed attracting blame.

古文：贤主不苟得，忠臣不苟利。
现代文：贤明的君主不苟且获得，忠诚的臣子不苟且得利。
English: Wise monarchs are exacting and gain, loyal subjects are exacting and gain.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么说明这点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：中行穆伯攻鼓，弗能下。
现代文：中行穆伯进攻鼓地，一时攻不下。
English: In the middle of the game, Mubo attacked Drum, but couldn't attack for a while.

古文：餽闻伦曰： 鼓之啬夫，闻伦知之。
现代文：这时?闻伦说： 鼓地方上的啬夫，我认识他。
English: At this time, Wen Lun said, "I know the stingy man in the drumming area.

古文：请无罢武大夫，而鼓可得也。 
现代文：我有办法不劳顿我们的军队就能把鼓这个地方弄到手。 
English: There's a way I can get this place without exhausting our military.

古文：穆伯弗应。
现代文：穆伯没有理会?
English: Mube ignored it?

古文：左右曰： 不折一戟，不伤一卒，而鼓可得也。君奚为弗使？ 穆伯曰： 闻伦为人，佞而不仁。
现代文：闻伦说的话。穆伯身边的人就说了： 按?闻伦说来我们可以不断一戟、不伤一卒就可以将鼓地拿到手，你为什么不派?闻伦去做这件事呢？ 穆伯说： ?闻伦是个奸邪不仁的小人。
English: The people around Mu Bo said, "According to Mu Bo, we can get hold of the drumsticks with just one beat and without hurting a single person. Why don't you send Mu Bo to do this?" Mu Bo said, "Mu Bo is a malicious and unkind person.

古文：若使闻伦下之，吾可以勿赏乎？
现代文：如果派他去完全这件任务，夺得鼓地，到时我能不奖赏他吗？
English: If I send him out to complete the task, to win the land, should I not reward him?

古文：若赏之，是赏佞人。佞人得志，是使晋国之武，舍仁而从佞。
现代文：如果奖赏他，也就等于是奖赏奸邪不仁小人，让这种奸邪小人得志，也就会使整个晋国的人都会舍弃仁义而追求奸佞。
English: If he were to be rewarded, it would be tantamount to rewarding a traitorous and uncharitable villain. If such a traitorous and uncharitable villain were allowed to succeed, it would cause the entire people of Jin to abandon benevolence and pursue treachery.

古文：虽得鼓，将何所用之！ 
现代文：这样即使得了鼓地，又有什么用呢？ 
English: So what's the use of dancing, even if you get a drumstick?

古文：攻城者，欲以广地也，得地不取者，见其本而知其末也。
现代文：攻夺城池，本想是扩展领土，但有时本可轻易获得的土地却不去获得，这是因为这样的人已看清了事物的本源而推知它发展的后果了。
English: The capture of a castle is intended to expand the territory, but sometimes the land that can be easily obtained is not obtained, because such a person has seen the source of things and deduced the consequences of its development.

古文：秦穆公使孟盟举兵袭郑。
现代文：秦穆公派遣孟盟率军去偷袭郑国。
English: Qin Mu Gong sent Meng Lian and his army to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：过周以东。
现代文：孟盟率领部队通过东周国境后向东进发。
English: Meng Meng led the troops to march eastward after passing through the Eastern Zhou border.

古文：郑之贾人弦高、蹇他相与谋曰： 师行数千里，数绝诸侯之地，其势必袭郑。
现代文：郑国的商人弦高和蹇他商议： 秦国军队行军数千里，疾速穿过其他诸侯国境，看他们那副架势，一定是来袭击我们郑国的。
English: Zheng merchants Zheng Gao and Zang He discussed: Qin's army marched thousands of miles and quickly crossed the borders of other states. Judging by their posture, they must have come to attack us in Zheng.

古文：凡袭国者，以为无备也。
现代文：凡是偷袭别国的，都是以为对方没有防备的。
English: Anyone who makes a surprise attack on another country thinks that the other side is unprepared.

古文：今示以知其情，必不敢进。 
现代文：现在如果我们有个办法让秦军知道郑国已有防备，他们就一定不敢前来袭击我国了。 
English: Now if we have a way to let the Qin army know that Zheng has prepared, they will not dare to attack our country.

古文：乃矫郑伯之命，以十二牛劳之。
现代文：于是弦高就假托郑穆公的命令拿出十二头牛犒劳秦军。
English: As a result, Zheng Gao, on the orders of Zheng Mu Gong, brought out twelve oxen to work for the Qin army.

古文：三率相与谋曰： 凡袭人者，以为弗知。
现代文：秦军三位将领商量说： 凡是偷袭别国的，总以为别人是不知道自己的军事行动的。
English: The three generals of the Qin Army discussed and said: Anyone who makes a surprise attack on another country always thinks that others do not know about his military actions.

古文：今已知之矣。守备必固，进必无功。 
现代文：现在郑国派人来慰劳我军，这说明对方已经知道我军的意图，他们的防备一定很严密，我们继续执行原军事行动，看来难以成功。 
English: Now Zheng Guo has sent people to comfort our army, which shows that the other side has already known the intention of our army, their defense must be very strict, we continue to carry out the original military operation, it seems difficult to succeed.

古文：乃还师而反。
现代文：于是秦军就只好往回撤。
English: As a result, the Qin army had to retreat.

古文：晋先轸举兵击之，大破之殽。
现代文：而晋国的先轸又率军在途中伏击他们，在崤山大败秦军。
English: But the forerunner of Jin and his army ambushed them on the way and defeated the Qin army in Shaoshan.

古文：郑伯乃以存国之功赏弦高，弦高辞之曰： 诞而得赏，则郑国之信废矣。
现代文：郑国的国君郑伯认为弦高保全国家有功，就要奖赏弦高。弦高却推辞说： 我欺诈了别人而得到奖赏，那么郑国原本的信义原则就要受到败坏。
English: Zheng Bo, the sovereign of Zheng, thought that Zheng Gao should be rewarded for his contribution to the preservation of the country. However, Zheng Gao refused, saying, "If I cheat others and get a reward, then the original principle of loyalty of Zheng will be corrupted."

古文：为国而无信，是俗败也，赏一人而败国俗，仁者弗为也。
现代文：一个国家的治理无信义原则，就会败坏整个风气习俗。
English: If a country is governed without the principle of trustworthiness, it will corrupt the entire culture and customs.

古文：以不信得厚赏，义者弗为也。 遂以其属徙东夷，终身不反。
现代文：弦高在推辞了奖赏后就带着他的宗族迁徙到东夷地区安家，以后终身都没有回到过郑国。
English: After Zheng Gao declined the reward, he migrated with his clan to the Dongyi region to settle down. He never returned to Zhengguo after that.

古文：故仁者不以欲伤生，知者不以利害义。
现代文：所以，讲仁德的人是不会为满足私欲而去伤害天性的，聪明的人是不会因贪利而去损害道义的。
English: Therefore, people with benevolence will not harm nature in order to satisfy their selfish desires, and smart people will not harm morality due to greed.

古文：圣人之思修，愚人之思叕。
现代文：圣人深谋远虑，蠢货目光短浅。
English: The sage is far-sighted; the fool is shortsighted.

古文：忠臣者务崇君之德，谄臣者务广君之地。
现代文：忠诚的臣子是竭力促成君王品行高尚，而谄佞的臣子是致力于拓展君王的领土。
English: A loyal vassal strives to promote the king's virtue, while a disloyal vassal strives to expand the king's territory.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么说明这点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：陈夏徵舒弑其君，楚庄王伐之，陈人听令。
现代文：陈国的夏征舒杀害了他的国君陈灵公，犯下了弑君之罪，楚庄王于是发兵讨伐，陈国人也听从楚军的命令，协助楚庄王讨贼。
English: Xia Zhenshu of the State of Chen killed his sovereign, Chen Linggong, and committed the crime of kidnapping. The King of Chu Zhuang then sent an army to fight. The people of Chen also obeyed the orders of the Chu army and assisted the King of Chu Zhuang to catch the thief.

古文：庄王以讨有罪，遣卒戍陈，大夫毕贺。
现代文：庄王讨伐有罪之人以后，留下一支部队驻扎在陈国，楚国的大夫们都纷纷来向庄王庆贺，并称赞这一措施。
English: After Zhuang Wang cracked down on the guilty, he left a troop stationed in Chen Province. The doctors of Chu Province all came to congratulate Zhuang Wang and praised this measure.

古文：申叔时使于齐，反还而不贺。庄王曰： 陈为无道，寡人起九军以讨之。
现代文：当时申叔时正出使到齐国去，等他回国以后却没有向庄王庆贺和表示赞同在陈国驻军的做法。
English: At that time, Uncle Shin was on a mission to Qi, and when he returned to China, he did not congratulate Zhuang Wang and express his approval of the practice of stationing troops in Chen.

古文：征暴乱，诛罪人，君臣皆贺，而子独不贺，何也？ 
现代文：这时楚庄王就问申叔时： 陈国叛臣大逆不道，我发动大军讨伐他们，平息了暴乱，惩处了罪人，群臣都来庆贺和表示赞许，唯独你不庆贺也不赞许，什么道理？ 
English: At this time, the king of Chu Zhuang asked Uncle Shin: Chen Guo's traitors committed great treason, I launched a large army to fight them, quelled the riots, punished the sinners, and the ministers all came to celebrate and express their approval, but you do not celebrate or approve, what is the reason?

古文：申叔时曰： 牵牛蹊人之田，田主杀其人而夺之牛，罪则有之，罚亦重矣。
现代文：申叔时说： 有人牵牛踩踏了别人家的田，那田的主人杀了牛主又抢走了他的牛。
English: Uncle Shin said, "Someone led a cow to trample on someone else's field. The owner of that field killed the owner of the cow and stole his cow.

古文：今君王以陈为无道，兴兵而攻，因以诛罪人，遣人戍陈。
现代文：牵牛人的罪过是明显的，但是既杀牛主又抢走他的牛，这样的惩处也显得太过分了。
English: The cowherd's crime is obvious, but to kill the owner and take his cow is a punishment too far.

古文：诸侯闻之，以王为非诛罪人也，贪陈国也。盖闻君子不弃义以取利。 
现代文：今天君王你认为陈国弑君者大逆不道，发兵征讨，诛杀了罪臣，但却还派兵驻扎在陈国不走，这样使其他诸侯们认为你君王发兵征讨的目的不在诛杀罪臣，而是在贪图人家的国家，我听说君子是不抛弃道义来谋取利益的。 
English: Today, your majesty, you think that Chen Guoqin is a traitor. He sent troops to investigate and kill the traitors, but he also sent troops to stay in Chen Guoqin. This made other lords think that your majesty's purpose of sending troops to investigate was not to kill the traitors, but to make profit in a country that is greedy for others. I have heard that a gentleman does not abandon morality to seek profit.

古文：王曰： 善 。
现代文：楚庄王一听，感到有道理，说： 你讲得好。 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang listened and felt justified, saying: You spoke well.

古文：乃罢陈之戍，立陈之后。
现代文：于是便从陈国撤走部队，并立了陈国国君的后代为新的国君。
English: As a result, the troops were withdrawn from Chen Guo, and the descendants of Chen Guo Guo were established as the new sovereign.

古文：诸侯闻之，皆朝于楚。
现代文：诸侯们知道这件事后，都来朝拜楚国楚庄王。
English: After the lords knew about this, they all came to pay homage to the king of Chu.

古文：此务崇君之德者也。
现代文：这就是忠诚的臣子是竭力促成君王品行高尚。
English: This is how a loyal vassal strives to make the monarch behave nobly.

古文：张武为智伯谋曰： 晋六将军，中行文子最弱，而上下离心，可伐以广地。 
现代文：张武替智伯出主意，说： 晋国的六大将军中，中行文子最弱小，而且他们内部又离心离德、上下一团结，现在正好可以讨伐他们来扩展我们的领地。 
English: Zhang Wu came up with an idea for Zhibo, saying, "Among the six great generals of Jin, Zhongxing Wenzi is the weakest, and they are internally divided and united. Now is the right time to fight them to expand our territory."

古文：于是伐范、中行；灭之矣，又教智伯求地于韩、魏、赵。
现代文：智伯于是听从张武的计谋发兵攻打了范氏、中行氏，并将他们消灭。之后，张武又唆使智伯向魏、韩、赵三家索要土地。
English: Zhibo then listened to Zhang Wu's plan and sent troops to attack the Fan and Zhongxing clans and exterminate them. After that, Zhang Wu also instigated Zhibo to demand land from Wei, Han and Zhao.

古文：朝、魏裂地而授之，赵氏不与，乃率韩、魏而伐赵，围晋阳三年，三国阴谋同计，以击智氏，遂灭之。
现代文：韩家和魏家息事宁人就割让了土地，而赵家不肯割让。智伯于是胁迫韩、魏两家一起攻打赵家，并包围晋阳达三年之久。后来赵、魏、韩三家暗中联合，秘密商议，一同用计进攻智伯，最终消灭智伯家族。
English: When the Han and Wei families settled their dispute, the Ning people ceded the land, but the Zhao family refused to cede. Zhibo then coerced the Han and Wei families to attack the Zhao family together and besieged Jinyang for three years. Later, the three families of Zhao, Wei, and Han secretly united, secretly negotiated, and attacked Zhibo together, eventually eliminating the Zhibo family.

古文：此务为君广地者也。
现代文：这就是那些臣子致力于扩展君王的领土。
English: These are the courtiers dedicated to expanding the monarch's territory.

古文：夫为君崇德者霸，为君广地者灭。
现代文：竭力促成君王的品德高尚，君王终于称霸天下；致力于扩展君王的领土，最终使君王被人家消灭。
English: Strive to make the king's character noble, and the king will finally dominate the world; work to expand the king's territory, and eventually the king will be eliminated by others.

古文：故千乘之国，行文德者王，汤、武是也；万乘之国，好广地者亡，智伯是也。
现代文：所以，就是是千辆兵车的诸侯小国，但只要实行德政就能称王天下，像商汤和周武王就是这样；但反过来，即使是万辆兵车的大国，如果喜欢扩展领地，最终还是导致灭亡，像智伯就是一个典型的事例。
English: Therefore, even if it is a small country with a thousand chariots, as long as it practices German politics, it can be called the king of the world, like Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu; but on the other hand, even if it is a large country with ten thousand chariots, if it likes to expand its territory, it will eventually lead to its demise, like Zhibo is a typical example.

古文：非其事者勿仞也，非其名者勿就也。
现代文：不是自己分内的事不要去主动认揽，不该自己获得的名声就不要去接受。
English: Do not solicit things that are not your own, and do not accept fame that you should not have obtained.

古文：无故有显名者勿处也，无功而富贵者勿居也。
现代文：无故而获得名声，这种名声还是不要的好；无功而获得富贵，这种富贵不占有为好。
English: Fame without reason is a good thing not to have; riches without merit are a good thing not to have.

古文：夫就人之名者废，仞人之事者败，无功而大利者后将为害。
现代文：追求人之虚名，虚名难留；揽搭他人的事，这事难成功；没有功劳却得大利，终将会被大利所累成祸害。
English: If you pursue a false name, it is difficult to keep the false name; if you try to pick up other people's business, it is difficult to succeed; if you do not have merit, but have gained merit, you will eventually be harmed by merit.

古文：譬犹缘高木而望四方也，虽愉乐哉，然而疾风至，未尝不恐也。
现代文：这就好比攀上树的高处眺望四方，虽然一时心旷神怡，可是大风骤起，就不能不惊慌害怕。
English: It's like climbing a tree and looking out in all directions. Although you're momentarily exhilarated, when the wind suddenly picks up, you can't help but panic and get scared.

古文：患及身，然后忧之，六骥追之，弗能及也。
现代文：一旦到了祸患殃及自身后再后悔，那么即使驾上六匹骏马也难以追回。
English: Once the calamity befalls oneself and then regrets it, it is difficult to recover even if you ride six horses.

古文：是故忠臣事君也，计功而受赏，不为苟得；积力而受官，不贪爵禄。
现代文：所以忠臣事奉君王，要算准自己有多少功劳后才接受相应的奖赏，不能苟且贪得多占；衡量自己有多少才能再接受官职，不能贪图爵位利禄。
English: Therefore, loyal subjects who serve the monarch should calculate how much merit they have before accepting the corresponding reward, and should not be greedy for more; they should measure how much ability they have before accepting an official post, and should not covet a knighthood.

古文：其所能者，受之勿辞也；其所不能者，与之勿喜也。
现代文：自己能胜任的事，接受下来就不必推辞；自己不能胜任的事，给了你你也不必沾沾自喜。
English: If you accept what you can do well, you don't have to reject it; if you are given what you can't do well, you don't have to be complacent.

古文：辞所能则匿，欲所不能则惑。辞所不能而受所能，则得无损堕之势，而无不胜之任矣。
现代文：推辞自己能胜任的事就有些假客气，不能算坦诚正直；勉强做自己做不了的事就会把事情搞乱；推辞自己不能胜任的事、接受自己能胜任的事就很得体，也就不会出现损毁坏事的可能，也就没有什么不能胜任的事。
English: To refuse to do what one is capable of doing is a bit of false politeness, and cannot be regarded as frank and honest; to reluctantly do what one cannot do will mess things up; to refuse to do what one is not capable of doing, and to accept what one is capable of doing is very proper, and there will be no possibility of damage and destruction, and there will be nothing that one is not capable of doing.

古文：昔者智伯骄，伐范、中行而克之，又劫韩、魏之君而割其地，尚以为未足，遂兴兵伐赵。
现代文：以前智伯骄横，攻打范氏、中行氏；得手以后又要韩、魏两家的土地。还认为不够，又发动攻打赵家。
English: In the past, Zhi Bo was arrogant and attacked the Fan and Zhong Xing clans; after he succeeded, he wanted the land of the Han and Wei dynasties. He also thought it was not enough and launched an attack on the Zhao family.

古文：韩、魏反之，军败晋阳之下，身死高梁之东，头为饮器，国分为三，为天下笑。
现代文：而一旦魏、韩反戈一击，三家联手，智伯的军队就打不过韩、魏、赵三家，最终兵败晋阳，智伯自己死在高梁东面，他的头颅也被做成尿壶，他所把持的晋国也被瓜分，这样的下场一直被天下人耻笑。
English: However, once Wei and Han fought back against Go and the three countries joined forces, Zhi Bo's army could not beat Han, Wei and Zhao, and eventually defeated Jinyang. Zhi Bo himself died in the east of Gaoliang, his head was made into a urinal, and Jin Province, which he controlled, was divided up. This outcome has always been ridiculed by the world.

古文：此不知足之祸也。
现代文：这所有一切都是在于贪心不足造成的祸害！
English: All of this is due to the scourge of insufficient greed!

古文：老子曰： 知足不辱，知止不殆，可以修久。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 知道满足就不会遭到困辱，知道适可而止就不会遭到危险，这样就可以保持长久。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "If you know how to be satisfied, you will not be humiliated, and if you know how to be moderate, you will not be in danger, so you can keep it for a long time."

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：或誉人而适足以败之，或毁人而乃反以成之。
现代文：有时候赞誉人家却恰恰足以败坏他，有时候诋毁人家却反而成全了他。
English: Sometimes praising people is just enough to corrupt him, sometimes slandering people is enough to make him perfect.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：这话怎么说呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：费无忌复于荆平王曰： 晋之所以霸者，近诸夏也；而荆之所以不能与之争者，以其僻远也。
现代文：费无忌对楚平王说： 晋国之所以能够称霸，是因为它靠近诸夏各国；楚国之所以不能与晋国争霸，是因为我们楚国处在稍偏远的南方。
English: He did not hesitate to say to King Chuping: The reason why Jin can dominate is because it is close to the countries of Zhuxia; the reason why Chu cannot compete with Jin is because we, Chu, are located in the slightly remote south.

古文：楚王若欲从诸侯，不若大城城父，而令太子建守焉，以来北方，王自收其南，是得天下也。 
现代文：君王如果想要诸侯服从归顺自己，不如扩建城父城，派太子建驻守在那里，以便使北方诸侯能归服楚国。君王自己则亲自收服治理南方。这样就可以称霸天下。 
English: If the king wants the lords to obey and submit to him, it is better to expand the city of Chengdu and send the prince to reside there, so that the northern lords can submit to the state of Chu. The king himself will personally submit and govern the south. In this way, he can dominate the world.

古文：楚王悦之，因命太子建守城父，命伍子奢傅之。
现代文：平王听了很高兴，于是派太子建驻守城父城，并命令伍子奢担任太子建的师傅。
English: King Heian was very pleased to hear this, so he sent Prince Jian to garrison his father's city and ordered Wu Zixu to serve as Prince Jian's master.

古文：居一年，伍子奢游人于王侧，言太子建甚仁且勇，能得民心。
现代文：过了一年，伍子奢派人到平王游说，说太子建非常仁慈，又非常勇武，深得民心。
English: A year later, Wu Zixu sent people to lobby Ping Wang, saying that Prince Jian was very kind, very brave, and won the hearts of the people.

古文：王以告费无忌，无忌曰： 臣固闻之，太子内抚百姓，外约诸侯。齐、晋又辅之，将以害楚，其事已构矣。 
现代文：平王听了这些话后就将这些赞誉太子建的话告诉了费无忌。费无忌说： 臣对此早有所闻。太子建在城父，对内安抚百姓，对外结交诸侯，齐、晋两国又辅助他，这将会危害到楚国，而且这事已经酝酿很久了。 
English: After listening to these words, King Ping told these words of praise for Prince Jian to Fei Wubi. Fei Wubi said: "I have heard about this for a long time. Prince Jian in the city father, to appease the people inside, to make friends with the princes outside, Qi and Jin countries and assist him, this will harm Chu, and this matter has been brewing for a long time.

古文：王曰： 为我太子，又尚何求？ 
现代文：平王听了说： 太子建是我们的太子，他还要求什么呢？ 
English: Upon hearing this, King Hei said, "Prince Jian is our prince, what more could he ask for?

古文：曰： 以秦女之事怨王。 
现代文：费无忌说： 他一定是为秦女的事怨恨君王呢！ 
English: One can't help but say: He must have resented the king for the Qin woman!

古文：王因杀太子建而诛伍子奢，此所谓见誉而为祸者也。
现代文：于是，楚平王一怒之下就将太子建杀了，还杀了伍子奢。这就是赞誉人家却反而祸害了他。
English: As a result, King Chuping killed Prince Jian in a fit of rage, and also killed Wu Zixia. This was praised by others, but it actually harmed him.

古文：何谓毁人而反利之？
现代文：那么，什么是诋毁人家却反而成全了他？
English: So, what is it that tarnishes a man but makes him whole?

古文：唐子短陈骈子于齐威王，威王欲杀之，陈骈子与其属出亡奔薛。
现代文：唐子在齐威王面前说陈骈子的坏话，齐威王要杀陈骈子。陈骈子就带着他的亲属逃往薛地。
English: Tang Zi spoke ill of Chen Zizi in front of King Qi Wei, and King Qi Wei wanted to kill Chen Zizi. Chen Zizi fled to Xue Di with his relatives.

古文：孟尝君闻之，使人以车迎之，至而养以刍豢黍粱五味之膳，日三至，冬日被裘罽，夏日服絺纻，出则乘牢车，驾良马。
现代文：孟尝君听说此事，就派人用车子迎接陈骈子一行人。陈骈子到后，孟尝君用肉食米饭奉养他，一天三顿美味佳肴。冬天给陈骈子穿皮衣，夏天给陈骈子穿葛麻。出门不是乘牛车就是骑良马。
English: When Meng Yuqun heard about this, he sent someone to meet Chen Zizi and his entourage in a car. After Chen Zizi arrived, Meng Yuqun fed him with meat and rice, three delicious meals a day. In winter, Chen Zizi was dressed in a fur coat, and in summer, Chen Zizi was dressed in sesame seeds. He went out either by ox cart or on a good horse.

古文：孟尝君问之曰： 夫子生于齐，长于齐，夫子亦何思于齐？ 
现代文：有一回孟尝君问陈骈子： 你生在齐国，长在齐国，你对齐国还思念吗？ 
English: Once, Meng Yuqun asked Chen Zhezi: You were born in Qi and grew up in Qi, do you still miss Qi?

古文：对曰： 臣思夫唐子者。 
现代文：陈骈子回答说： 我思念那位叫唐子的人。 
English: Chen Zhenzi replied: I miss that person called Tang Zi.

古文：孟尝君曰： 唐子者，非短子者邪？ 
现代文：孟尝君说： 那位唐子不就是讲你坏话的那个人？ 陈骈子说： 是的。 
English: Meng Yijun said: Isn't that Tang Zi the one who spoke ill of you? Chen Yizi said: Yes.

古文：曰： 是也。 孟尝君曰： 子何为思之？ 
现代文：孟尝君问道： 你为什么要思念这种人呢？ 
English: Meng Qiqun asked: Why do you miss such a person?

古文：对曰： 臣之处于齐也，粝粢之饭，藜藿之羹，冬日则寒冻，夏日则暑伤。
现代文：陈骈子回答道： 我在齐国的那阵子，吃的是糙米饭，喝的是野菜羹。冬天挨饿，夏天受热。
English: Chen Zizi replied: When I was in Qi Province, I ate brown rice and drank vegetable soup. I was starving in winter and suffering from heat in summer.

古文：自唐子之短臣也，以身归君，食刍豢，饭黍粱，服轻暖，乘牢良，臣故思之。 
现代文：自从唐子说我坏话以后，我投奔到你门下，吃的是细粮肉食，穿的是轻暖衣服，乘的是牛车良马。
English: Ever since Tang Zi said bad words about me, I rushed to your door. I ate refined grains and meat, wore light and warm clothes, and rode a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：此谓毁人而反利之者也。
现代文：就凭这些，我就忘不掉这个唐子。 
English: Based on these, I can't forget this Tang Zi.

古文：是故毁誉之言，不可不审也。
现代文：这就是诋毁别人却反而给别人带来好处。
English: This is to discredit others but to bring benefits to others.

古文：或贪生而反死，或轻死而得生，或徐行而反疾。
现代文：所以说诋毁和赞誉的话，千万得慎重，不能随便说的。有时候人贪生怕死反而丧命，有时候人视死如归反而得生；有时候人慢行反而是速达。
English: Therefore, when it comes to slander and praise, you must be careful not to say it casually. Sometimes people are greedy for life and afraid of death but lose their lives, sometimes people see death as a homecoming but live; sometimes people are slow but fast.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：鲁人有为父报仇于齐者，刳其腹而见其心，坐而正冠，起而更衣，徐行而出门，上车而步马，颜色不变。
现代文：鲁国有个人到齐国去为他父亲报仇，他将仇人杀死以后，剖腹挖心，然后坐下端正帽子，又站起更换了血衣，缓步走出仇家大门，登上马车以后让马夫慢慢驱赶马走，脸上的神色一点不变。
English: A man from the State of Lu went to Qi to avenge his father. After killing his enemy, he cut open his abdomen, then sat down, straightened his hat, stood up again, changed his bloody clothes, walked slowly out of the gate of the enemy's house, and after boarding the carriage, let the groom slowly drive the horse away. The look on his face did not change at all.

古文：其御欲驱，抚而止之曰： 今日为父报雠，以出死，非为生也。
现代文：马夫这时倒想将马赶得快些，他却按住马夫说： 我今日来为父亲报仇，早已将生死置之度外，并不打算活着回去。
English: The groom now wanted to drive the horse faster, but he held the groom back and said, "I have come today to avenge my father. I have already put life and death on hold, and I do not intend to return alive."

古文：今事已成矣，又何去之！ 
现代文：现在父亲的仇已报了，哪用得着快走逃命？ 
English: Now that my father's revenge has been avenged, why should I run for my life?

古文：追者曰： 此有节行之人，不可杀也。 
现代文：而来追赶的人看到这种情景后说： 这是位有节操的士人，不能追杀。 
English: But the person who came to chase him saw this scene and said, "This is a disciplined scholar, he can't chase and kill."

古文：解围而去之。
现代文：于是散开包围，放那人离开。
English: So they broke up the encirclement and let the man go.

古文：使被衣不暇带，冠不及正，蒲伏而走，上车而驰，必不能自免于千步之中矣。
现代文：假使这报仇者换血衣时慌得顾不上束腰带，又来不及端正帽冠，跌跌撞撞，连滚带爬地逃跑，一上车后又催马急驰，那么他恐怕走不了十步就被人抓住杀死了。
English: If the avenger, in his haste to change his blood-stained coat, had not been able to fasten his belt, had not had time to adjust the crown of his cap, had stumbled, crawled and fled, and had ridden his horse at full gallop, he would probably have been caught and killed within ten paces.

古文：今坐而正冠，起而更衣，徐行而出门，上车而步马，颜色不变，此众人所以为必死也，而乃反以得活。
现代文：现在他又是坐下端正帽子，站起身更换血衣，缓步走出仇家大门，上车后又让马慢行，脸上神色不变，诸如此类都被人家以为是一种自寻死路的行为，但这报仇者就是靠这些行为反而生存了下来。
English: Now he sits down again, straightens his hat, stands up, changes his bloody clothes, slowly walks out of the gate of the enemy's house, gets on the car and lets the horse slow down, his face unchanged, and the like are all thought to be a self-destructive behavior, but this avenger has survived by these actions.

古文：此所谓徐而驰，迟于步也。
现代文：这就说明有时候缓慢徐行反而比快奔急驰还要快。
English: This shows that sometimes moving slowly is actually faster than speeding.

古文：夫走者，人之所以为疾也；步者，人之所以为迟也。
现代文：奔跑，人们总以为是快的；步行，人们总以为是慢的。
English: People always think that running is fast, and walking is slow.

古文：今反乃以人之所为迟者反为疾，明于分也。
现代文：今天这报仇者却反而将人们认为迟慢的变成了快速的，这是因为他明白了自己的生与死。
English: Today, instead, the avenger has turned what was considered slow into fast, because he has understood his own life and death.

古文：有知徐之为疾，迟之为速者，则几于道矣。
现代文：而懂得慢能变快、徐缓可以转化为疾速这个道理的人，也就离道不远了。
English: And those who understand the principle that slow can become fast and slow can be transformed into rapidity are not far from the path.

古文：故黄帝亡其玄珠，使离朱、捷剟索之，而弗能得之也。于是使忽怳，而后能得之。
现代文：所以黄帝丢失了玄珠，叫离朱、捷剟两人去寻找，他们没能找到，于是让善忘的忽恍去寻找，忽恍居然寻找到了。
English: Therefore, the Yellow Emperor lost the Black Pearl and asked the two people to search for it. They couldn't find it, so they let the forgetful ones search for it, and they actually found it.

古文：圣人敬小慎微，动不失时。
现代文：圣人谨小慎微，行为举动适合时宜。
English: The sage is prudent, and acts in accordance with the times.

古文：百射重戒，祸乃不滋。
现代文：对于社会纷繁复杂的现象百般豫备，重重戒防，这样灾祸就不会产生。
English: For the complex and complicated phenomena of society, we should make all kinds of preparations and take all kinds of precautions, so that the disaster will not occur.

古文：计福勿及，虑祸过之。同日被霜，蔽者不伤。愚者有备，与知者同功。
现代文：对 福 不必想得过多，对祸要多加防备；同时受到霜打，有遮蔽的就不易受伤；愚钝的人有了防备，就和聪明人一样有同等功效。
English: It is not necessary to think too much about good fortune, but to be more prepared for misfortune; if you are hit by frost at the same time, you will not be easily injured if you are covered; if a dull person is prepared, it will have the same effect as a smart person.

古文：夫爝火在缥烟之中也，一指所能息也；唐漏若鼷穴，一抔之所能塞也。
现代文：那小火把在刚刚点燃时的缥惚火星，只须用一根手指就能按熄；池塘堤坝的漏洞只有像老鼠洞那么大时，只须一块土块就可堵塞。
English: That small torch, when it has just been lit, can be extinguished with just one finger; when the hole in the pond dike is only as big as a mouse hole, it only takes one clod to plug it.

古文：及至火之燔孟诸而炎云台，水决九江而渐荆州，虽起三军之众，弗能救也。
现代文：但等到火势烧及孟诸泽、蔓延的范围有云梦泽那么大一片，洪水从九江决口、泛滥淹没整个荆州，那时即使调动全国所有军队也都无法扑灭堵塞。
English: However, when the fire reached Meng Zhuze and spread to an area as large as Yun Mengze, and the flood from the Jiujiang estuary flooded the entire Jingzhou, then even mobilizing all the troops in the country could not extinguish the blockage.

古文：夫积爱成福，积怨成祸。若痈疽之必溃也，所浼者必多矣。
现代文：积累仁爱则带来福祉，积聚怨恨则酿成祸患，这就如同痈疽必然要溃烂，并污染很多地方一样。
English: The accumulation of benevolence brings well-being, the accumulation of resentment brings disaster, just as gangrene must fester and contaminate many places.

古文：诸御鞅复于简公曰： 陈成常、宰予二子者，甚相憎也。臣恐其构难而危国也。
现代文：诸御鞅向齐简公报告： 陈成常和宰予，他们两人互相憎恨，积怨很深，我怕他们两人会作乱而殃及国家。
English: Zhuoyuan reported to Qi Jianguo: Chen Chengchang and Zhaiyou are at loggerheads. The two of them hate each other and have deep-rooted grudges. I'm afraid the two of them will cause turmoil and bring disaster to the country.

古文：君不如去一人。 
现代文：君王你不如除掉他们其中一个。 
English: Your Majesty, you might as well get rid of one of them.

古文：简公不听。
现代文：简公不听。
English: Jian Gong did not listen.

古文：居无几何，陈成常果攻宰予于庭中，而弑简公于朝。
现代文：没过多久，陈成常果然在庭院里杀死宰予，并在朝廷上杀死齐简公。
English: Before long, Chen Chengchang killed Zhaiyou in the courtyard and Qi Jiangong in the court.

古文：此不知敬小之所生也。
现代文：这就是不懂得谨慎处理小事而造成的祸害。
English: This is the calamity of not being prudent in small matters.

古文：鲁季氏郈氏斗鸡，郈氏介其鸡，而季氏为之金距。
现代文：鲁国的季氏和郈氏两家斗鸡，郈氏给鸡披上铠甲，而季氏则给鸡装上金属尖爪。
English: Two families, Ji's and Ji's, fight for a rooster in the country of Lu. The Ji's put armor on the rooster, while the Ji's put metal claws on the rooster.

古文：季氏之鸡不胜。季平子怒，因侵郈氏之宫而筑之。
现代文：季氏的鸡斗输了，季平子非常恼火，便乘机侵占了郈家的宅院，还修建了房屋、围墙。
English: Ji's cockfight lost, Ji Ping Zi was very angry, and he took the opportunity to occupy the house of the Yi family, and also built houses and fences.

古文：郈昭伯怒，伤之鲁昭公曰： 祷于襄公之庙，舞者二人而已，其余尽舞于季氏。
现代文：郈昭伯也怒气冲天，在鲁昭公面前攻击季平子： 祭祀襄公庙堂时，季氏只用两人舞，其余的都去为季氏祖庙起舞了。
English: Zhai Zhao Bo also flew into a rage and attacked Ji Ping Zi in front of Lu Zhao Gong: During the sacrifice of the Xiang Gong Temple, Ji only used two people to dance, and the rest went to dance for Ji's ancestral temple.

古文：季氏之无道无上，久矣。弗诛，必危社稷！ 公以告子家驹。
现代文：季氏大逆不道、目无君王的时间已很长了，如不杀季平子，以后一定会危及国家利益。 鲁昭公将郈昭伯的话告诉了子家驹。
English: It had been a long time since the Ji clan had been so rebellious and ruthless, and if they did not kill Ji Ping Zi, they would surely endanger the interests of the country in the future. Lu Zhaogong told Zi Jiaqi the words of Zi Zhaobing.

古文：子家驹曰： 季氏之得众，三家为一。其德厚，其威强，君胡得之！ 
现代文：子家驹说： 季氏家族深得民众支持，而且季氏三兄弟又联合成一体，他们德高望重，实力强大，你君王又怎么对付得了？ 
English: Zi Jiayu said, "The Ji family is deeply supported by the people, and the three Ji brothers are united as one. They are highly respected and powerful. How can you, the king, deal with them?"

古文：昭公弗听，使郈昭伯将卒以攻之。
现代文：鲁昭公不听，硬派郈昭伯率军去攻打季氏。
English: Lu Zhaogong did not listen, and sent Zhai Zhaobing and his army to attack the Ji clan.

古文：仲孙氏、叔孙氏相与谋曰： 无季氏，死亡无日矣。 
现代文：仲孙氏和叔孙氏一起商量： 如果无季平子，我们两家不用多久就会灭亡。 
English: Mr. Nakasone and his great-uncle discussed together: "If there is no season for heishi, our two families will perish in a short time."

古文：遂兴兵以救之。
现代文：于是兴兵去救助季平子。
English: So Xingbing went to rescue Ji Pingzi.

古文：郈昭伯不胜而死，鲁昭公出奔齐。
现代文：战争的结果是，郈昭公战败被杀死，鲁昭公也为之出逃到齐国去避难。
English: As a result of the war, Zhai Zhaogong was defeated and killed, and Lu Zhaogong also fled to Qi to take refuge.

古文：故祸之所从生者，始于鸡定；及其大也，至于亡社稷。
现代文：这场灾难的起因开始于斗鸡之类的小事，祸事闹大以后，竟然会导致国家灭亡。
English: The cause of this disaster began with small things like cockfights, and after the calamity, it would lead to the country's demise.

古文：故蔡女荡舟，齐师大侵楚。
现代文：蔡姬在船上摇晃嬉闹，使齐桓公受了惊吓，由此引起齐国侵攻楚国。
English: Cai Ji rocked and frolicked on the boat, which frightened Qi Huan Gong and caused Qi to invade Chu.

古文：两人构怨，廷杀宰予，简公遇杀，身死无后，陈氏代之，齐乃无吕。
现代文：陈成常和宰予结下怨仇，造成宰予被杀于朝廷中，齐简公也为此遭了殃。齐简公死后无继承者，陈氏取而代之，齐国从此不再为吕家所有了。
English: Chen Chengzang and Zhaiyou formed a grudge, which resulted in Zhaiyou being killed in the imperial court, and Qi Jiang also suffered for this. After the death of Qi Jiang, there was no successor, and the Chen clan took his place. From then on, Qi Province was no longer owned by the Lu family.

古文：两家斗鸡，季氏金距，郈公作难，鲁昭公出走。
现代文：季氏和郈氏斗鸡，季氏为鸡装上金属尖爪，引起郈昭伯发难，鲁昭公出逃。
English: Mr. Ji and Mr. Zou had a cockfight. Mr. Ji put metal claws on the chicken, which caused Zou Zhaobo to get into trouble and Lu Zhaogong to flee.

古文：故师之所处，生以棘楚，祸生而不蚤灭，若火之得燥，水之得湿，浸而益大。
现代文：所以战争一旦发生，军队所到之处，到处是荆棘杂草、人烟稀少、田地荒芜。祸患的苗子不及时扑灭，就会像火碰上干燥物、水遇上低湿处一样，蔓延扩散开来，以至不可收拾。
English: Therefore, once a war breaks out, everywhere the troops go, there will be thorns and weeds, few people, and barren fields. If the seeds of the disaster are not extinguished in time, they will spread and spread like fire to dry matter and water to low humidity, and become unmanageable.

古文：痈疽发于指，其痛遍于体。故蠹啄剖梁柱，蚊虻走牛羊，此之谓也。
现代文：痈疽虽然长在手指上，但它引起的疼痛却会遍及全身；蛀虫咬啮，会裂损毁坏房梁柱子；蚊虫牛虻的叮咬，会引起牛羊痛得乱蹦乱跑。
English: Although the gangrene grows on the fingers, the pain caused by it will spread throughout the whole body; the tick bites the beak, it will crack and destroy the house beam column; the bite of the mosquito cattle tick will cause the cattle and sheep to run around in pain.

古文：人皆务于救患之备，而莫能知使患无生。
现代文：所有这些都是说的这种道理：小害引起大害。人都竭力做到对祸患的防备和阻止，但却没有人懂得怎样使祸患从根本上不发生。
English: All of this is to say that small harms cause great harms. People are trying their best to prevent and stop disasters, but no one knows how to prevent disasters from happening in the first place.

古文：夫使患无生，易于救患而莫能加务焉，则未可与言术也。
现代文：使祸患从根本上不发生，要比制止祸患容易，可是没有人在这上面花工夫下力气，对这样的人就无法与他们谈论道术。
English: It is easier to prevent a calamity from happening than to stop it from happening, but if no one is working hard on this, it is impossible to talk about the Dao with such people.

古文：晋公子重耳过曹，曹君欲见其骿肋，使之袒而捕鱼。
现代文：晋公子重耳流亡途中经过曹国，曹国君想看看重耳生的骈生肋骨，就有意让重耳裸露着上身下河去捉鱼。
English: Prince Jin passed by Cao on his way to exile. Cao Guojun wanted to see the twin ribs of Jie Er, so he purposely let Jie Er go down to the river to catch fish, bare-chested.

古文：厘负羁止之曰： 公子非常也。从者三人，皆霸王之佐也。
现代文：这时釐负羁劝说道： 公子重耳是位非常人物，跟随他的三位随从也都是有辅佐霸王的才能。
English: At this time, he said, "Prince Chung-ear is a great man, and the three attendants who follow him also have the ability to assist the overlord.

古文：遇之无礼，必为国忧。 
现代文：如果今天对他们无礼，将来必定会给咱们曹国带来后患的。 
English: If you are rude to them today, you will surely bring misfortune to our Cao Guo in the future.

古文：君弗听。
现代文：曹国君不听劝告。
English: Jian Gong did not listen.

古文：重耳反国，起师而伐曹，遂灭之。
现代文：后来重耳返回晋国取得了君位，果然对曹国发起了攻击，还灭亡了曹国。
English: Later, Chong Er returned to Jin Province and gained the throne. He launched an attack on Cao Province, and Cao Province was destroyed.

古文：身死人手，社稷为墟。祸生于袒而捕鱼，齐、楚欲救曹，不能存也。
现代文：曹国君也身死于他人之手，曹国变为一片虚墟，而这灾祸正是由让重耳袒露骈生肋骨下水捉鱼引起。齐、楚两大国想救曹国，也救不了它。
English: Cao Guojun also died at the hands of others, Cao Guojun turned into a ruin, and this calamity was caused by letting heavy ears, dewdrops and ribs catch fish under water. Qi and Chu two countries wanted to save Cao Guojun, but could not save it.

古文：听厘负羁之言，则无亡患矣。
现代文：但反过来说，当初如果听了釐负羁的劝告，这曹国也许就不会有这样的灾祸发生。
English: But, on the other hand, if they had listened to the advice of Yan Guo Gui, this country might not have had such a disaster.

古文：今不务使患无生，患生而救之，虽有圣知，弗能为谋耳。
现代文：现在是不致力于使祸患不发生，而是等到祸患发生了再去挽救，这样你再有圣明的智慧，也是无计可施的。
English: Now is not the time to try to prevent the disaster from happening, but to wait until the disaster happens and then save it, so that you have the wisdom of the saints, and there is nothing you can do.

古文：患祸之所由来者，万端无方。
现代文：这祸患的由来，遍及四面八方，防不胜防。
English: The origin of this scourge is ubiquitous and cannot be prevented.

古文：是故圣人深居以避辱，静安以待时。
现代文：所以圣明的人常常是以深居简出来避免一些不必要的麻烦事，以免取辱，静心安适以等待时机。
English: Therefore, the saintly person often avoids unnecessary troubles by living in a secluded place, so as to avoid humiliation, and meditates and adapts to wait for the right time.

古文：小人不知祸福之门户，妄动而絓罗网，虽曲为之备，何足以全其身！
现代文：而小人不知道祸福产生的由来，常常是轻举妄动自投罗网，有时尽管千方百计加以防范，但又怎能保全得了自身？
English: And the villain does not know the origin of misfortune and good fortune, often recklessly throwing himself into the net, sometimes despite every effort to prevent it, but how can he protect himself?

古文：譬犹失火而凿池，被裘而用箑也。
现代文：这就好像失了火再去开凿池塘取水，穿着皮衣摇扇取凉一样。
English: It's like losing a fire and then digging a pond to get water, or wearing a fur coat and shaking a fan to cool off.

古文：且唐有万穴，塞其一，鱼何遽无由出？
现代文：况且，池塘堤坝有一万只洞，你塞着其中一个，鱼还有其他洞好逃生。
English: Besides, the pond dam has ten thousand holes. You plug one of them, and the fish have other holes to escape.

古文：室有百户，闭其一，盗何遽无从入。
现代文：房屋有一百处门，你关闭其中一扇，盗贼还是有其他门洞好进来。
English: A house has a hundred doors. If you close one of them, the burglar can still get in through the other openings.

古文：夫墙之坏也于隙，剑之折必有齿。
现代文：大墙的倒塌往往起因于一条小小的裂缝；剑的折断常常是因为它本身已有缺损处了。
English: The fall of a great wall is often due to a small crack; the breaking of a sword is often due to a defect in itself.

古文：圣人见之密，故万物莫能伤也。
现代文：所以圣人能及早预见预防祸患的由来，这样也就没有什么东西可以伤害他。
English: Therefore, the sage can foresee and prevent the origin of the calamity in advance, so that nothing can harm him.

古文：太宰子朱待饭于令尹子国。令尹子国啜羹而热，投卮浆而沃之。
现代文：楚国的太宰子朱侍候令尹子国用餐，令尹子国尝了一口羹汤后感到汤太烫，就拿杯子里的汤水往子朱浇去。
English: Dazaizi Zhu of Chu served Yin Ziguo at dinner. After Yin Ziguo tasted a mouthful of soup, he felt that the soup was too hot, so he took a cup of soup water and poured it over Yin Ziguo.

古文：明日，太宰子朱辞官而归。
现代文：第二天，太宰子朱便辞去了太宰的职务，回家去了。
English: The next day, Dazai's son Zhu resigned from his position as Dazai and went home.

古文：其仆曰： 楚太宰未易得也，辞官去之，何也？ 
现代文：他的仆人就问： 楚国太宰的职务不易谋得，你为何辞官离去？ 
English: His servant then asked: The position of Dazai of the State of Chu is not easy to obtain. Why did you resign and leave?

古文：子朱曰： 令尹轻行而简礼，其辱人不难。 
现代文：子朱解释说： 令尹子国的行为轻浮，傲慢无礼，他要想侮辱人是非常容易的。 
English: Zi Zhu explained: Yin Ziguo's behavior is frivolous, arrogant and rude. It is very easy for him to insult people.

古文：明年，伏郎尹而笞之三百。
现代文：第二年，子国果然找岔制服了郎尹，还打了郎尹三百大板。
English: In the second year, Zikoku did indeed find a way to subdue Lang Yin, and also beat Lang Yin three hundred large boards.

古文：夫仕者先避之，见终始微矣。
现代文：所以说，明察事理的人总是预先避免着，并善于从事情的细微不好的苗子中预料到事物发展的结果。
English: Therefore, a prudent person always avoids things in advance, and is good at anticipating the outcome of the development of things from the subtle bad seeds of things.

古文：夫鸿鹄之未孚于卵也，一指蔑之，则靡而无形矣；及至其筋骨之已就，而羽翮之既成也，则奋翼挥羽慧，凌乎浮云，背负青天，膺摩赤霄，翱翔乎忽荒之上，析惕乎虹霓之间。虽有劲弩利矰微缴，蒲且子之巧，亦弗能加也。
现代文：那鸿鹄还没从卵中孵化出来的时候，只须用一根手指头一戳，它就溃破而变得无影无踪了。但等到它筋骨生成，羽毛翅膀丰满，它就会振动翅翼，挥动羽毛，飞上浮云，背负青天，胸贴着红霞，翱翔在无边无际的天空，徜徉在彩虹之间，这时虽有强弩利箭，细缴长丝，再加上有蒲且子这样的神射手，也对付不了它。
English: When the great dragonfly has not yet hatched from the egg, it only needs to be poked with a finger to burst and become invisible. But when it is sinewy and full of feathers and wings, it will vibrate its wings, wave its feathers, fly up to the clouds, carry the blue sky, have the red haze on its chest, soar in the boundless sky, and fly between the rainbows. At this time, although there are strong and sharp arrows, fine filaments, and a sharpshooter such as the pheasant, it cannot cope with it.

古文：江水之始出于岷山也，可扌搴衣而越也，及至乎下洞庭，骛石城，经丹徒，起波涛，舟杭一日不能济也。
现代文：长江发源于岷山时，人可以提着衣裳涉水淌过。但等到它奔流到洞庭湖、流向石头城、经过丹徒镇时，就形成了波涛汹涌之势，这时你乘船航行一天也不能渡过。
English: When the Yangtze River originated in Lushan, people could wade through the water with their clothes. But when it rushed to Dongting Lake, flowed to Stone Town, and passed through Dantou Town, it formed a turbulent wave, and you could not cross it by boat for a day.

古文：是故圣人者，常从事于无形之外，而不留思尽虑于成事之内。是故患祸弗能伤也。
现代文：所以圣人总是在事物尚未形成之时便关注留意它，而不是等到事物已形成危害之势时才去留心注意它，所以这祸患往往难以伤及他。
English: Therefore, the sage always pays attention to things when they are not yet formed, and does not wait until they have become harmful before paying attention to them, so the disaster is often difficult to hurt him.

古文：人或问孔子曰： 颜回何如人也？ 
现代文：有人问孔子： 颜回是个怎样的人？ 
English: Someone asked Confucius: What kind of person is Yan Huai?

古文：曰： 仁人也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 是个仁慈的人。我不如他。 
English: Confucius replied, "He is a kind man. I am not as good as him.

古文：丘弗如也。  子贡何如人也？ 
现代文：有人又问： 子贡是个怎样的人？ 
English: Someone else asked: What kind of person is Zigong?

古文：曰： 辩人也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 是个善于辞令的人。我不如他。 
English: Confucius replied, "He is a good speaker. I am not as good as him."

古文：丘弗如也。 
现代文：又问： 子路是个怎样的人？ 
English: He also asked: What kind of person is Zi Lu?

古文： 子路何如人也？ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 是个勇敢的人。我不如他。 
English: Confucius replied, "He is a brave man. I am not as good as him.

古文：曰： 勇人也。丘弗如也。 宾曰： 三人皆贤夫子，而为夫子役。
现代文：那位客人就说了： 他们三个人都比你行，可是都成为你的学生，听你教诲，这又是为什么呢？ 
English: The guest said, "All three of them are better than you, but they have all become your students and listen to your teachings. Why is that?"

古文：何也？ 孔子曰： 丘能仁且忍，辩且讷，勇且怯。
现代文：孔子说： 但我孔丘是既能仁慈又能下决断的，既善于辩说又有时显得嘴笨，既勇敢又胆怯的。
English: Confucius said: But I, Confucius, can be both kind and decisive, both good at arguing and sometimes clumsy, both brave and timid.

古文：以三子之能，易丘一道，丘弗为也。 
现代文：拿他们三个人的长处换我这种处世之道，我还不情愿呢。 
English: I don't want to exchange the strengths of the three of them for my way of dealing with the world.

古文：孔子知所施之也。
现代文：孔子懂得该怎样来运用他自己的长处和短处的。
English: Confucius knew how to make use of his own strengths and weaknesses.

古文：秦牛缺径于山中，而遇盗。夺之车马，解其橐笥，拖其衣被，盗还反顾之，无惧色忧志，驩然有以处得也。
现代文：秦牛缺路过一座山，遇到了一群强盗，强盗抢走了他的车马，解开他的口袋和竹箱，还夺走了他的衣被。强盗们离去的时候回过头来看秦牛缺，只看见秦牛缺非但没有恐惧、忧伤的神情，反而还显得很高兴的样子，有点悠然自得。
English: Qin Niu Que passed through a mountain and encountered a group of robbers. The robbers took his horse and cart, unzipped his pockets and bamboo box, and also took away his quilt. When the robbers left, they turned around to look at Qin Niu Que. All they saw was that Qin Niu Que did not have a fearful or sad look, but rather appeared to be happy, a bit at ease with himself.

古文：盗遂问之曰： 吾夺子财货，劫子以刀，而志不动，何也？ 
现代文：强盗们于是问秦牛缺： 我们抢了你的财物，用刀胁迫你，但你却面不改色心不跳，这是为什么呢？ 
English: The robbers then asked Qin Niu Que: We robbed your property and threatened you with a knife, but you didn't change your face or your heartbeat. Why is that?

古文：秦牛缺曰： 车马所以载身也，衣服所以掩形也，圣人不以所养害其养。 
现代文：秦牛缺回答说： 车马是用来供人装载和乘骑的，衣裳是用来掩遮体形的，圣人是不会因为顾惜这些养身护身的财物而去伤害自己的身心的。 
English: Qin Niu Que replied: Chariots and horses are used for people to load and ride, clothes are used to cover the shape of the body, saints will not harm their body and mind because they care about these self-care and self-protection belongings.

古文：盗相视而笑曰： 夫不以欲伤生，不以利累形者，世之圣人也。
现代文：强盗们听了这番高见后相视而笑，说： 这人知道不以物欲伤害身心，不为利益拖累身体，是当今的圣人。
English: The robbers looked at each other with a smile after listening to this high opinion, saying: This man knows not to hurt his body and mind with material desires, not to drag his body for profit, and is today's saint.

古文：以此而见王者，必且以我为事也。 
现代文：如果这样的人以这样的高论去见君王而被重用后，他必定会对我们作认真处理解决的。 
English: If such a person goes to the king with such a lofty opinion and is reused, he will certainly deal with us seriously.

古文：还反杀之。
现代文：于是这群强盗又折回来杀死了秦牛缺。
English: So the bandits returned and killed Qin Niu Que.

古文：此能以知知矣，而未能以知不知也。能勇于敢，而未能勇于不敢也。
现代文：这位秦牛缺能够凭他的智慧来显示自己什么都懂，但却不能以聪明而掩其聪明、装糊涂以避杀身之祸；这位秦牛缺敢于表现自己勇敢，却不敢于表现自己 柔弱 。
English: This Qin Niu Que can use his wisdom to show that he knows everything, but he can't hide his cleverness with cleverness, and he can't play dumb to avoid the disaster of killing himself; this Qin Niu Que dares to show that he is brave, but he doesn't dare to show that he is weak.

古文：凡有道者，应卒而不乏，遭难而能免，故天下贵之。
现代文：凡是有道之人，都能应付仓猝事变而不会显得束手无策，遇到祸患总能化解，所以天下人都看重他。
English: All virtuous people can cope with sudden events without being helpless, and can always resolve disasters, so people all over the world value him.

古文：今知所以自行也，而未知所以为人行也。
现代文：如果现在只知道自己做某事的原由，而不知道别人做某事的原由，知己不知彼，那么这样的人对纷繁复杂的事还远远没有研究透。
English: If you only know why you do something, but don't know why others do something, and your friends don't know him, then such a person is still far from having studied the intricacies of things.

古文：其所论未之究者也。人能由昭昭于冥冥，则几于道矣。《诗》曰： 人亦有言，无哲不愚。 
现代文：人如果能由原本的明白精明进入到混沌高明的境界，那么他就离道不远了。《诗经》上说： 人们说过这样的话，哲人无不愚。 
English: If a person can go from the original clear and shrewd to the realm of chaos and sophistication, then he is not far from the path. "The Book of Songs" says: People have said such things, philosophers are all stupid.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：事或为之，适足以败之；或备之，适足以致之。
现代文：事情有时候人为地去做了，却恰恰是败坏了它；有时候有意去防范它，却恰恰是招致它。
English: Sometimes things are done artificially, but it is precisely to corrupt it; sometimes deliberately to prevent it, but it is precisely to cause it.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：秦皇挟录图，见其传曰： 亡秦者，胡也。 
现代文：秦始皇得到一册录图，发现上面的解说文字写着： 亡秦者，胡也。 
English: Qin Shihuang got a copy of the record, and found that the explanatory text above read: The deceased Qin, Hu Ya.

古文：因发卒五十万，使蒙公、杨翁子将，筑修城。
现代文：于是秦始皇便征调五十万军队，命令蒙恬、杨翁子率领去修筑长城，以防 胡人 。
English: As a result, Qin Shi Huang mobilized half a million troops and ordered Meng Ye and Yang Weng Zi to lead the construction of the Great Wall to prevent the Hu from advancing.

古文：西属流沙，北击辽水，东结朝鲜，中国内郡挽车而饷之。
现代文：这修筑的长城西起流沙、北接辽水、东连朝鲜。从中原内地派人拉车输送军饷粮食以供修筑长城。
English: The Great Wall was built from the west to the sand dunes, from the north to Liaoshui, and from the east to Korea. From the Central Plains, people were sent to transport military supplies for the construction of the Great Wall.

古文：又利越之犀角、象齿、翡翠、珠玑，乃使尉屠睢发卒五十万，为五军，一军塞镡城之岭，一军守九疑之塞，一军处番禺之都，一军守南野之界，一军结余干之水。
现代文：除此之外，秦始皇还贪图越地的犀牛角、象牙、翡翠和珍珠。于是又派尉屠睢率兵五十万，分成五路大军：一路大军扼守镡城山岭，一路大军守卫九嶷要塞，一路驻守番禺城邑，一路大军防守南野边界，一路大军集结在余干河畔。
English: In addition, Emperor Qin also coveted rhinoceros horns, ivory, jade and pearls that crossed the country. Therefore, he also sent Lieutenant Tu Youjun to lead five hundred thousand soldiers and divided them into five armies: one army to guard the mountains of Lucheng, one army to guard the fortress of Jiuzhaigou, one army to guard the cities and towns of Panyu, one army to defend the border of Nan'an, and one army to gather on the banks of the Yugang River.

古文：三年不解甲驰弩，使临禄无以转饷。
现代文：各路大军三年之内不解铠甲，不松弓弩。
English: The armies of all directions will not loosen their armor or let go of their bows and arrows for three years.

古文：又以卒凿渠而通粮道，以与越人战，杀西呕君译吁宋。
现代文：监禄无法输运军粮，于是令士兵凿挖河道以运军粮，靠这来和越人作战，杀了越族西呕人的君主译吁宋。
English: Unable to transport the grain, he ordered his soldiers to dig a canal to transport the grain, which they used to fight against the Viets, killing the king of the Viets, King Ho Song.

古文：而越人皆入丛薄中，与禽兽处，莫肯为秦虏。
现代文：越人全部逃进莽莽丛林中，和禽兽共处，不肯做秦军的俘虏。
English: All the Viets fled into the dense jungle, living with animals and refusing to be taken prisoner by the Qin army.

古文：相置桀骏以为将，而夜攻秦人，大破之。
现代文：西呕人推选出勇猛强悍的人做将领，深夜攻打秦军，把秦军打败，并杀了尉屠睢，其时尸横遍野，血流成河。
English: The Western Wei people elected a brave and strong man as a general, attacked the Qin army in the middle of the night, defeated the Qin army, and killed the lieutenant Tu You, at which time the corpses were all over the field, and the blood flowed into rivers.

古文：杀尉屠睢，伏尸流血数十万，乃发谪戍以备之。当此之时，男子不得修农亩，妇人不得剡麻考缕，羸弱服格于道，大夫箕会于衢，病者不得养，死者不得葬。
现代文：秦始皇此时只得派囚徒来防守南疆边界。在这段时间内，战争使得全国各地男子不能安心在田里耕种，妇女无法静心在家削麻纺织；老弱病残者都出外拉车运送军粮给养，官吏们则拿着箕畚公开在路口收刮钱财；病者得不到治疗，死者得不到掩埋。
English: At this time, Emperor Qin Shi Huang only had to send prisoners to defend the southern Xinjiang border. During this time, the war made it impossible for men across the country to safely cultivate in the fields, and women could not meditate at home cutting hemp textiles; the old, the weak, and the sick all went out to pull carts to transport military supplies, and officials openly collected money at road junctions with shovels; the sick could not be treated, and the dead could not be buried.

古文：于是陈胜起于大泽，奋臂大呼，天下席卷，而至于戏。
现代文：于是陈胜在大泽乡举事起义，他振臂一呼，各地反秦人马纷纷响应，顿时席卷天下，义军一下子打到戏城。
English: As a result, Chen Sheng started an uprising in Dashe Township. He waved his arms and shouted, and anti-Qin people and horses responded from all over the country, sweeping the world at once, and the rebels suddenly hit the theater.

古文：刘、项兴义兵随，而定若折槁振落，遂失天下。
现代文：这时刘邦和项羽也兴义兵跟随在陈胜之后，他们夺取城池，消灭秦军，其势如折断枯枝，振落枯叶，锐不可挡。
English: At this time, Liu Bang and Xiang Yu also rallied volunteers to follow Chen Sheng. They captured the city and destroyed the Qin army. Their momentum was like breaking a dead branch and shaking a dead leaf. It was unstoppable.

古文：祸在备胡而利越也。欲知筑修城以备亡，不知筑修城之所以亡也。发谪戍以备越，而不知难之从中发也。
现代文：秦始皇就这样丢失了天下，而祸根在于秦始皇为防 胡 人和贪图越人的地财。秦始皇原本修筑长城是为了防止灭亡，谁知恰恰是修筑长城导致了秦王朝的灭亡；秦始皇调动囚徒防守边疆，谁知恰恰是从这中间爆发了灾难。
English: In this way, Qin Shihuang lost the world, and the root of the evil lies in the fact that Qin Shihuang wanted to prevent the Hu people and coveted the land and wealth of the Yue people. Qin Shihuang originally built the Great Wall to prevent his downfall, but it was precisely the construction of the Great Wall that led to the downfall of the Qin Dynasty; Qin Shihuang mobilized prisoners to defend the frontier, and it was precisely from this middle that the disaster broke out.

古文：夫鹊先识岁之多风也，去高木而巢扶枝，大人过之则控■，婴儿过之则挑其卵；知备远难而忘近患。
现代文：那乌鸦、喜鹊知道一年中哪个季节多风暴，于是将原本在高大树端上的巢迁到低矮路旁的树枝上安巢，但谁知这样一来，路人就可随手掏到雏鸟，小孩顺路就可挑破鸟蛋。乌鸦和喜鹊只知道预防遥远的祸患，却不知这样一来，又造成了眼前的灾难。
English: The crows and magpies know which season of the year is more stormy, so they move their original nests on the ends of tall trees to nest on the branches by the low road, but who knows, in this way, passers-by can pick out chicks with their hands, and children can pick out bird eggs along the way. Crows and magpies only know how to prevent distant disasters, but they do not know that this has caused the current disaster.

古文：故秦之设备也，鸟鹊之智也。
现代文：以此来看秦始皇的所谓防备，只是像乌鸦、喜鹊之类的小智慧。
English: In this way, the so-called precaution of Qin Shihuang is just a small wisdom like crows and magpies.

古文：或争而反强之，或听从而反止之。
现代文：事情有时候是这样的，拿利害关系去劝阻人家，被劝的人反而硬要坚持下去；有时表面上听从，但反倒可以制止他。
English: Sometimes things are like this: the one who is persuaded insists on continuing, while the one who is dissuaded takes advantage of the situation to dissuade others; sometimes he ostensibly obeys, but on the other hand, he can be stopped.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：鲁哀公欲西益宅，史争之，以为西益宅不祥。哀公作色而怒。左右数谏不听。
现代文：鲁哀公想往西边扩建住宅，史官极力劝谏他，认为向西扩建宅院不吉利，鲁哀公沉下脸来发脾气，不听身边的人多次规劝。
English: Lu Aigong wanted to expand his residence to the west, and the historian tried his best to dissuade him, saying that it was unlucky to expand the mansion to the west. Lu Aigong lost his temper and did not listen to the people around him.

古文：乃以问其傅宰折睢，曰： 吾欲益宅，而史以为不祥。子以为何如？ 
现代文：后来鲁哀公将这件事拿去询问太傅宰折睢： 我想往西扩展住宅，史官说不吉利，你认为怎样？ 
English: Later, Lu Aigong took this matter to Taifu Zai Rong: I want to expand my residence to the west, the historian said it was unlucky, what do you think?

古文：宰折睢曰： 天下有三不祥，西益宅不与焉。 
现代文：宰折睢说： 天下有三件不吉利的事，但向西扩展修建宅院不在其中。 
English: Zhairezi said: There are three unlucky things in the world, but expanding to the west and building homes is not one of them.

古文：哀公大悦而喜。
现代文：鲁哀公听了很高兴，喜形于色。
English: Lu Aigong was very happy to hear this, his face lit up with joy.

古文：顷，复问曰： 何谓三不祥？ 
现代文：过了片刻，鲁哀公又追问： 那么，什么叫三件不吉利的事呢？ 
English: After a while, Lu Aigong asked again: So, what are the three unlucky things?

古文：对曰： 不行礼义，一不祥也；嗜欲无止，二不祥也；不听强谏，三不祥也。 
现代文：宰折睢说： 不行礼义是一不吉利的事，嗜欲无止境是二不吉利的事，不听忠谏是三不吉利的事。 
English: Zai Erqi said: "Not to be polite is the first unlucky thing, to have endless desires is the second unlucky thing, and not to be loyal is the third unlucky thing."

古文：哀公默然深念，愤然自反，遂不西益宅。
现代文：哀公听了后默默沉思，感慨地反省自我，终于停止向西扩建宅院的事。
English: After listening, Aigong silently pondered, emotionally reflected on himself, and finally stopped the expansion of the mansion to the west.

古文：夫史以争为可以止之，而不知不争而反取之也。
现代文：史官以为只要力争强谏就可以阻止哀公向西扩建宅院事，却不懂得不力争强谏反而会被采纳接受。
English: Historians thought that as long as they strived for strong support, they could prevent Aiko from expanding the house to the west, but they did not understand that if they did not strive for strong support, they would be accepted.

古文：智者离路而得道，愚者守道而失路。
现代文：聪明人离开了大路却得到了便道，愚蠢者死守大道却失去了捷径。那?
English: The wise man leaves the highway and takes the byway, but the fool clings to the main road and misses the byway.

古文：夫说之巧，于闭结无不解。非能闭结而尽解之也，不解不可解也。至乎以弗解解之者，可与及言论矣。
现代文：说灵巧，人们都说他没什么结不能解开的，其实他并不是任何死结都能解开，他只是不去解那些解不开的死结罢了，以至于人们误认为他什么死结都能解开。只有那些能够以 不解 来 解 结的人，才可以和他谈论 道 。
English: When people talk about dexterity, they say that there is no knot that cannot be untied. In fact, he is not able to untie any dead knots. He just does not untie those dead knots that cannot be untied, so that people mistakenly think that he can untie any dead knots. Only those who can untie knots can talk to him.

古文：或明礼义、推体而不行，或解构妄言而反当。
现代文：有时候对人阐明礼义、讲述大道理反而不行，但用些荒诞胡乱的话来解决纠纷反而效果好。
English: Sometimes it is not possible to explain the etiquette and tell the truth to people, but it is effective to use some absurd words to resolve disputes.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：何以见得呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：孔子行游，马失，食农夫之稼，野人怒，取马而系之。
现代文：孔子一次出游，马跑失了，走进一块田里吃了人家的庄稼，那户田的主人看了大发脾气，捉住马就将它拴了起来。
English: Once when Confucius was on a trip, his horse ran away and wandered into a field and ate someone else's crops. The owner of the field lost his temper, caught the horse and tied it up.

古文：子贡往说之，卑辞而不能得也。
现代文：子贡就前去请求田主放马，说了很多谦恭的话都没使田主放马。
English: Zigong went forward to ask the farmer to release the horse, and said a lot of courteous words, but did not make the farmer release the horse.

古文：孔子曰： 夫以人之所不能听说人，譬以大牢享野兽，以《九韶》乐飞鸟也。
现代文：回去后孔子对子贡说： 你用人家不喜欢听的话去请求人家放马，这就好像用太牢祭享野兽，以《九韶》古乐去取悦飞鸟。
English: After returning, Confucius said to Zigong, "If you use words that others don't like to hear to ask them to release a horse, it's like using a prison rite to enjoy wild beasts, and using the ancient music of the Nine Bells to please flying birds.

古文：予之罪也，非彼人之过也。 
现代文：马没被放回来，是你的过失，不是田主的责任。 
English: If the horse is not returned, it is your fault, not the landlord's.

古文：乃使马圉往说之。至，见野人曰： 予耕于东海，至于西海，吾马之失，安得不食子之苗？ 
现代文：于是孔子就派马夫去讨马，马夫到了那田主那里说： 你田主耕种的田是从东头一直耕到老远的西头，我的马跑失后没人照料，怎么能不吃没人看管的禾苗呢？ 
English: So Confucius sent a groom to look for the horse. When the groom arrived at the owner of the field, he said, "The field that your landlord cultivates is cultivated from the east end to the far west end. After my horse ran away, there was no one to take care of it. How could I not eat the unattended seedlings?"

古文：野人大喜，解而与之。
现代文：田主一听，十分高兴，就解开系着的马还给了马夫。
English: When the farmer heard this, he was very happy and untied the horse and gave it back to the groom.

古文：说若此其无方也，而反行。事有所至，而巧不若拙。
现代文：这位马夫劝说田主的话看起来不成体统，但反而一说就行，事情也真有它的极致处，灵巧的语言还不如拙笨的话语管用。
English: The groom's words of persuasion to the landlord seem unseemly, but on the contrary, it's all right to say it, things really do have their extremes, and clever language is not as effective as clumsy words.

古文：故圣人量凿而正枘。
现代文：所以圣人是量度好榫眼的大小、形状来校正榫头的。
English: Therefore, the sage is to measure the size and shape of the beak to correct the beak.

古文：夫歌《采菱》，发《阳阿》，鄙人听之，不若此《延路》、《阳局》。非歌者拙也，听者异也。故交画不畅，连环不解，物之不通者，圣人不争也。
现代文：你唱《采菱》《阳阿》这样的歌曲，粗俗的人听了感到还不如《延路》这样通俗的歌曲来得顺耳好听，这并不是唱歌的人唱的不好，而是听歌的人的欣赏能力不同。所以交错画的线条不流畅，连着的玉环不易解；对于那些隐微不通的事物，圣人是不去争辩的。
English: When you sing songs such as "Cherry Picking" and "Yang Ah," vulgar people feel that they are not as pleasing to the ear as popular songs such as "Long Road." This is not because the singer is not good at singing, but because the listener's appreciation ability is different. Therefore, the interlaced lines are not smooth, and the connected jade rings are not easy to solve; for those obscure things, the saints do not argue.

古文：仁者，百姓之所慕也；义者，众庶之所高也。为人之所慕，行人之所高，此严父之所以教子，而忠臣之所以事君也。
现代文：仁是百姓所仰慕的，义是民众所推崇的；做百姓所仰慕的事，行民众所推崇的事，这正是严父用来教育子女、忠臣用来事奉君王的内容。
English: Benevolence is admired by the people, righteousness is respected by the people; doing what the people admire, doing what the people respect, this is exactly the content that strict fathers use to educate their children and loyal subjects use to serve the king.

古文：然世或用之而身死国亡者，不同于时也。
现代文：然而，世上却有施行仁义而身死国亡的，这是因为仁义实行不合时宜。
English: However, there are people in the world who have died while practicing benevolence and righteousness. This is because the practice of benevolence is not timely.

古文：昔徐偃王好行仁义，陆地之朝者三十二国。
现代文：从前徐偃王喜欢施行仁义，这样使天下三十二个国家朝拜他。
English: Once upon a time, King Xu Xi liked to practice benevolence and righteousness, so that thirty-two countries around the world worshiped him.

古文：王孙厉谓楚庄王曰： 王不伐徐，必反朝徐。 
现代文：这时王孙厉就对楚文王说： 君王如果不讨伐徐国，那过不了多久，我们反过来就要去朝拜他了。 
English: At this time, Wang Sun Li said to Chu Wen Wang: If the king does not fight against Xu, it will not be long before we, in turn, will go to worship him.

古文：王曰： 偃王，有道之君也，好行仁义，不可伐。 
现代文：文王就说： 徐偃王是位有道之君，他喜欢施行仁义，我们不好讨伐他。 
English: King Wen said, "King Xu Rong is a principled ruler. He likes to practice benevolence and righteousness. It is not easy for us to fight against him.

古文：王孙厉曰： 臣闻之，大之与小，强之与弱也，犹石之投卵，虎之啖豚，又何疑焉？
现代文：王孙厉就接着说： 强国对付弱国，大国对付小国，这就如同用石击卵、虎吃猪一样，大王有什么好犹豫的。
English: Wang Sun-li went on to say: "A strong country confronts a weak country, a big country confronts a small country. This is just like hitting an egg with a rock, or a tiger eating a pig. A great king has no reason to hesitate."

古文：且夫为文而不能达其德，为武而不能任其力，乱莫大焉。 
现代文：再说实施文治却不能实现德政，奉行武道又不能显示出实力，那么祸乱没有比这更大的了。 
English: Moreover, there is no greater calamity than to implement the rule of law but fail to realize the rule of virtue, and to practice martial arts but fail to show strength.

古文：楚王曰： 善 。
现代文：听了这席话，文王说： 好！ 
English: Upon hearing this, King Wen said, "Good!

古文：乃举兵而伐徐，遂灭之。
现代文：于是就发兵攻打徐国，并很快将徐国消灭了。
English: As a result, he sent troops to attack Xu Province, and soon eliminated Xu Province.

古文：知仁义而不知世变者也。
现代文：这样，徐偃王就成为一个只知实施仁义却不知世道已变的人了。
English: In this way, King Xu Bei became a man who only knew how to practice benevolence and righteousness, but did not know that the world had changed.

古文：申菽、杜茝，美人之所怀服也；及渐之于滫，则不能保其芳矣。
现代文：申菽、杜矨，是美人所喜欢佩戴的香草，但这香草一旦被臭水所沾污，就再也无法保持它的芳香了。
English: Cuckoo, cuckoo, is a herb that beauties like to wear, but once this herb is stained with foul water, it can no longer retain its fragrance.

古文：古者，五帝贵德，三王用义，五霸任力。
现代文：古时候五帝崇尚仁德，三王施行道义，五霸依靠武力。
English: In ancient times, the Five Emperors advocated benevolence, the Three Kings enforced morality, and the Five Overlords relied on force.

古文：今取帝王之道，而施之五霸之世，是由乘骥逐人于榛薄，而蓑笠盘旋也。
现代文：现在如果拿五帝、三王的道德仁义用到五霸这时代，这就好像骑着千里马在莽莽丛林中追逐，只会像斗笠打转盘旋。
English: Now, if we take the morality, benevolence and righteousness of the Five Emperors and Three Kings and apply it to the era of the Five Overlords, it would be like riding a thousand-mile horse and chasing it through a wild jungle. It would only spin around like a top hat.

古文：今霜降而树谷，冰泮而求获，欲其食则难矣。
现代文：如果在霜降以后再种谷子，到来年冰化时就想收获，这样来求粮食就难了。所以《易经》上说： 潜龙勿用。 
English: If you plant corn again after the frost, you will want to harvest it when the ice melts next year, so it will be difficult to ask for grain. Therefore, "I Ching" said: Do not use the dragon.

古文：故《易》曰： 潜龙勿用 者，言时之不可以行也。
现代文：这句话说的就是时势不可妄动。
English: What this sentence says is that the situation should not be rushed.

古文：故 君子终日乾乾，夕惕若厉，无咎 。
现代文：因此， 君子白天兢兢业业，夜里仍然谨慎警惕，这样即使身临险境，灾祸也不会降临。 
English: Therefore, a gentleman works diligently during the day and remains cautious and vigilant at night, so that even if he is in danger, the disaster will not come.

古文：终日乾乾，以阳动也；夕惕若厉，以阴息也。
现代文： 白天兢兢业业 是顺阳气而动； 夜里谨慎警惕 是随阴气安息。
English: During the day, diligence is to move with the yang; at night, cautious vigilance is to rest with the yin.

古文：因日以动，因夜以息，唯有道者能行之。
现代文：昼动而夜息这种规律，只有得道之人才能做得到。
English: Only those who have mastered the Tao can achieve this law of day and night.

古文：夫徐偃王为义而灭，燕子哙行仁而亡，哀公好儒而削，代君为墨而残。
现代文：徐偃王因为施仁义而亡，燕王哙因为行仁义而灭，鲁哀公因为好儒子而弱残，代国君因为奉行墨学而遭害。
English: King Xu Rong died because he practiced benevolence and righteousness, King Yan Rong died because he practiced benevolence and righteousness, King Lu Aikong died because he was a good Confucian and weak, and the reigning sovereign was persecuted because he practiced ink painting.

古文：灭亡削残，暴乱之所致也，而四君独以仁义儒墨而亡者，遭时之务异也。
现代文：这灭、亡、削、残一般说来都是由于暴虐才会招致，而这四位君主却因施行仁义儒墨而招致灭亡，原因就在于他们遭逢的时势不同。
English: The reason why these four emperors were killed, died, were cut down, or were left in ruins, is that they were killed because of their benevolence and righteousness, rather than because of their tyranny.

古文：非仁义儒墨不行，非其世而用之，则为之禽矣。
现代文：这当然并不是讲仁义儒墨不好，只是说世道已经变化，再去实施推行，就会因此受害。
English: Of course, this is not to say that benevolence, righteousness and Confucianism are not good. It is just to say that the world has changed, and if we try to implement it, we will suffer as a result.

古文：夫戟者，所以攻城也；镜者，所以照形也。
现代文：戟是用来攻城的，镜是用来照人的。
English: The plough is used to attack the city, the mirror is used to shine on people.

古文：宫人得戟，则以刈葵；盲者得镜，则以盖卮。
现代文：但宫中太监拿到戟，就只会用它来割葵菜；瞎子拿到镜，就只会用它当杯盖。
English: However, when the eunuch in the palace gets the pickaxe, he will only use it to cut sunflower greens; when the blind man gets the mirror, he will only use it as a cup lid.

古文：不知所施之也。
现代文：这是因为他们不知道怎样来用戟和镜。
English: This is because they don't know how to use tweezers and mirrors.

古文：故善鄙不同，诽誉在俗；趋舍不同，逆顺在君。
现代文：所以好坏相同的人和事，是受到赞誉还是被诽谤，不取决于这人和事的本身，而取决于人们的习俗。
English: Therefore, whether a person or a thing that is good or bad is praised or slandered depends not on the person or thing itself, but on people's customs.

古文：狂谲不受禄而诛，段干木辞相而显，所行同也，而利害异者，时使然也。
现代文：人取舍志向相同，是走运还是倒霉，不取决于人取舍志向本身，而取决于遇上怎样的时势。狂谲不接受俸禄，以清高隐居而被杀害；段干木辞去相位，不图利禄名声而出了名。这两人的品性、德行相同，一个得益一个得害，这是时势造成的。
English: If two people have the same aspiration, whether they are lucky or unlucky does not depend on the aspiration itself, but on the situation they encounter. The wild boar did not accept the salary and was killed in seclusion; the piece of dry wood resigned from the phase and became famous without seeking fame. The two people have the same character and virtue, one benefit and one harm, which is caused by the current situation.

古文：故圣人虽有其志，不遇其世，仅足以容身，何功名之可致也！
现代文：所以圣人即使有好的志向情操，但如果没有碰上好世道，那么他充其量只能保全性命，哪还谈得上实现什么功名！
English: Therefore, even if a saint has good aspirations and sentiments, if he does not encounter a good world, then at best he can only save his life, and there is no question of what merits he can achieve!

古文：知天之所为，知人之所行，则有以任于世矣。
现代文：既了解天意如何，又了解人间时尚怎样，就能够在这世界上实行你的志向。
English: If you understand both the will of heaven and the fashions of men, you will be able to realize your aspirations in this world.

古文：知天而不知人，则无以与俗交；知人而不知天，则无以与道游。
现代文：如果只了解天意而不了解人间风俗时尚，就无法与世俗交往；如果只知道人间时尚风俗而不知天意，就无法与道周游。
English: If you only know God's will but do not know human customs and fashions, you will not be able to interact with the world. If you only know human fashions and customs but do not know God's will, you will not be able to travel with the Tao.

古文：单豹倍世离俗，岩居谷饮，不衣丝麻，不食五谷，行年七十，犹有童子之颜色。
现代文：单豹远离尘世，隐居山岩之中，以饮谷水为生，不穿丝帛衣服和不食五谷，年过七十还保持着童颜。
English: Solitary leopards stay away from the world, live in seclusion among the mountain rocks, drink grain water for a living, do not wear silk clothes and do not eat grain, and maintain a childlike appearance after the age of seventy.

古文：卒而遇饥虎，杀而食之。
现代文：可是，有一次遇到饿虎，被活活咬死吞食。
English: However, once he met a hungry tiger and was eaten alive by a crocodile.

古文：张毅好恭，过宫室廊庙必趋，见门闾聚众必下，厮徒马圉，皆与伉礼。
现代文：张毅好恭敬，每次经过宫室庙堂，必定以碎步疾行；看到里巷门口聚集人群，必定下车步行；他对杂役马伕，也以礼相待。
English: Zhang Yi is very respectful. Every time he passes the palace temple, he must walk with a broken stride; when he sees a crowd gathered at the entrance of the alley, he must get off the bus and walk; he also treats the groom with courtesy.

古文：然不终其寿，内热而死。
现代文：但就是这样的好人，却没有享尽天年，得内热病死了。
English: But just such a good man did not live to a ripe old age and died of a fever.

古文：豹养其内而虎食其外，毅修其外而疾攻其内。
现代文：单豹修养心性，心性修养的不错，不料被老虎吃了他的身子；张毅注重修饰行为礼仪，外表修饰得讲究礼仪，但疾病侵入他的体内。
English: The lone leopard cultivated his mind, his mind was cultivated well, but the tiger ate his body; Zhang Yi paid attention to the modification of behavior and etiquette, and paid attention to the appearance of etiquette, but the disease invaded his body.

古文：故直意适情，则坚强贼之；以身役物，则阴阳食之。
现代文：所以内心世界调节得十分和谐，随顺本性，但外界的坚强物就伤害了他；而自身受外物所累的人，就更容易被失调的阴阳二气所吞食。
English: Therefore, the inner world is very harmoniously regulated and follows the nature, but the external strong things hurt him; and the person who is burdened by the external things is more likely to be devoured by the unbalanced yin and yang.

古文：此皆载务而戏乎其调者也。
现代文：这些都在于有负累而不能将外形与心性协调。得 道 的人是外形变化而内心不变的。
English: These are all due to the fact that they are burdened and cannot harmonize their outward appearance with their inner nature. Those who attain the Way change outwardly but do not change inwardly.

古文：得道之士，外化而内不化，外化，所以入人也，内不化，所以全其身也。故内有一定之操，而外能诎伸、赢缩、卷舒，与物推移，故万举而不陷。
现代文：变化外形是为了适应世俗，内心不变是为了保全自身。所以一个人如果内心有固定操守，外表又能屈能伸、能盈能缩、能卷能舒，与物推移周旋，那么干什么都不会陷入困境。
English: The change of appearance is to adapt to the world, and the change of heart is to preserve oneself. Therefore, if a person has a fixed discipline in his heart, and the appearance can flex and stretch, can increase and decrease, can wind and relax, and can keep pace with things, then he will not get into trouble no matter what he does.

古文：所以贵圣人者，以其能龙变也。
现代文：世人之所以推崇圣人，是因为圣人能像龙那样变幻无穷。
English: The reason why the world reveres sages is because sages can change endlessly like dragons.

古文：今扌卷扌卷然守一节，推一行，虽以毁碎灭沉，犹且弗易者，此察于小好，而塞于大道也。
现代文：反过来看，有些人只勉力于细微末节，死守于一种行为，虽然已经因此碰得头破血流，被证明行不通，但还是不知道改弦易辙。这些人就只盯着眼前的一些小的好处，而对大道是一窍不通。
English: On the other hand, there are those who are obsessed with the minutiae, who cling to a course of action which, though it has been tried and proved to be unworkable, they do not know how to change; who look only at the small advantages in front of them, and know nothing of the road.

古文：赵宣孟活饥人于委桑之下，而天下称仁焉。荆亻次非犯河中之难，不失其守，而天下称勇焉。
现代文：赵宣孟在桑树的树荫下救下了一个饥饿万分的人，天下人就此知道他的仁慈；楚佽非江中遇难，以剑保持自己的操守，天下人就此称赞他的勇敢。
English: Zhao Xuanmeng saved a starving man under the shade of a mulberry tree, and the whole world knew his kindness; Chu Xuanfei was killed in the river and kept his integrity with a sword, and the world praised his bravery.

古文：是故见小行则可以论大体矣。
现代文：因此，看人的一个细小的表现行为就可以断定他为人的大概。
English: Therefore, looking at a small manifestation of a person's behavior can determine that he is a human being.

古文：田子方见老马于道，喟然有志焉。
现代文：田子方在路上遇到一匹老马，由此产生感触，便问赶马人说： 这是谁家的马？ 
English: On the way, Tashigata met an old horse, which made her feel something, so she asked the driver: "Whose horse is this?"

古文：以问其御曰： 此何马也？ 
现代文：赶马人说： 这原是公家王室的牲口，因为老病不中用了，便被牵出来卖了。 
English: The horse driver said, "This used to be an animal belonging to the royal family, but because it was too old and sick to be used, it was taken out and sold.

古文：其御曰： 此故公家畜也。老疲而不为用，出而鬻之。 田子方曰： 少而贪其力，老而弃其身，仁者弗为也。 
现代文：听了此话后，田子方感慨地说： 这马壮年的时候，人们拼命地使用它的力气，老了病了就抛弃了它。仁慈的人是不应该这样做的。 
English: After listening to this, Tian Zifang said with emotion: When this horse was in its prime, people desperately used its strength, and abandoned it when it was old and sick. A kind person should not do this.

古文：束帛以赎之。
现代文：于是便用一束帛赎回这匹老马。
English: So he ransomed the old horse with a bundle of straw.

古文：疲武闻之，知所以归心矣。
现代文：魏国的老弱武士听说此事后，由此产生联想，从此也就从内心拥戴了田子方。
English: After hearing about this, the old and weak samurai of Wei heard about this, and the association arose from this, and from then on they also supported the Tianzi side from the bottom of their hearts.

古文：齐庄公出猎，有一虫举足将搏其轮，问其御曰： 此何虫也？ 
现代文：齐庄王外出打猎，路上有一只小虫，伸出前肢要挡齐庄王的车轮滚动，齐庄王见了后问赶车人： 这是什么虫呀？ 
English: Qizhuang Wang was out hunting. There was a small insect on the road. It stretched out its forelimbs to block the rolling of Qizhuang Wang's wheel. Upon seeing it, Qizhuang Wang asked the driver: What kind of insect is this?

古文：对曰： 此所谓螳螂者也。
现代文：赶车人说： 这就是人们常说的螳螂。
English: The driver said: This is what people often call a cockroach.

古文：其为虫也，知进而不知却，不量力而轻敌。 
现代文：这种昆虫只知前进不知退却，从不计量自己的力量，且轻视对方敌手。 
English: This insect only knows how to advance and not retreat, never measures its own strength, and despises the other opponent.

古文：庄公曰： 此为人而必为天下勇武矣。 
现代文：庄公听了后说： 如果它是人的话，肯定是一位天下勇士。 
English: Zhuang Gong said after listening: If it is human, it must be a world-class warrior.

古文：回车而避之。
现代文：说完便让车子绕道避开了螳螂。
English: After saying that, he made the car take a detour to avoid the cockroaches.

古文：勇武闻之，知所尽死矣。
现代文：齐国的勇士听说此事后，由此联系自身，都感到应归附齐庄公。
English: When the warriors of Qi heard about this, they all felt that they should return to Qi Zhuang.

古文：故田子方隐一老马而魏国载之，齐庄公避一螳螂而勇武归之。
现代文：田子方怜惜一匹老马使得魏国人都拥戴他，齐庄公避开一螳螂使勇士们都归附他。
English: Tian Zifang took pity on an old horse so that the Wei people all embraced him, and Qizhuanggong avoided a cockroach so that the warriors all adhered to him.

古文：汤教祝网者，而四十国朝；文王葬死人之骸，而九夷归之；武王荫曷人于樾下，左拥而右扇之，而天下怀其德；越王勾践一决狱不辜，援龙渊而切其股，血流至足，以自罚也，而战武士必其死。
现代文：商汤叫人网开三面，祈祝猎物 无入吾网 ，使天下四十个诸侯来朝拜他；周文王礼葬死者的骨骸而使九夷归服了他；周武王将一位中暑者安置在树荫之下，左手拥抱着他，右手用扇给他扇凉，使天下人都归顺了他。越王勾践偶然一次错判了案子，冤枉了无辜，就拿出宝剑刺割自己的大腿，血流满地，以示自责，听到这些消息，战士们在战斗中不惜生命拼死作战。
English: Shang Tang ordered the net to be opened on three sides, praying that the prey would not enter his net, so that forty princes from all over the world came to worship him; King Zhou Wen buried the bones of the dead and made Jiuji to submit to him; King Zhou Wu placed a heatstroke victim under the shade of a tree, hugged him with his left hand, and cooled him with a fan with his right hand, so that all the people of the world submitted to him. King Yue Guo Jian accidentally misjudged the case and wronged the innocent, so he took out his sword and stabbed his thigh, and blood flowed all over the ground to show his remorse

古文：故圣人行之于小，则可以覆大矣；审之于近，则可以怀远矣。
现代文：所以说圣人从小处入手做事，就能产生大的影响；谨慎处理身边小事，就能感化安抚远方的人们。
English: Therefore, it is said that sages can have a great impact if they start from a small place; if they carefully handle small things around them, they can influence and pacify people far away.

古文：孙叔敖决期思之水，而灌雩娄之野，庄王知其可以为令尹也。子发辩击剧而劳佚齐，楚国知其可以为兵主也。
现代文：孙叔敖用期思之水浇灌雩娄良田，楚庄王以此看出孙叔敖治理国家的才能，便任命孙叔敖为楚国令尹；子发训练军队赏罚分明，使劳逸齐同，楚国人便知道他是个帅才。
English: Sun Shuxuan used the water of his thoughts to irrigate the fertile fields of Chu, and the king of Chu Province saw Sun Shuxuan's ability to govern the country, and appointed Sun Shuxuan as the commander-in-chief of Chu. Sun Shuxuan trained the army with clear rewards and punishments, so that work and rest were the same, and the people of Chu knew that he was a handsome talent.

古文：此皆形于小微而通于大理者也。
现代文：这些都是从细微之处显露出大道理的例证。
English: These are all examples of revealing the truth from the subtleties.

古文：圣人之举事，不加忧焉，察其所以而已矣。
现代文：圣人办事，不自寻烦忧，只弄清事情的所以然就是了。
English: The sage does his work without troubling himself, but only clarifies things, and that's it.

古文：今万人调钟，不能比之律；诚得知者，一人而足矣。
现代文：如果上万个人来调整乐钟，就不可能合音律，假若有懂行的专家，只需一个人调整就够了。
English: If tens of thousands of people to adjust the musical clock, it is impossible to chime, if there are experts, just one adjustment is enough.

古文：说者之论，亦犹此也。
现代文：游说也是这样的道理，如果说在理上，用不着话多。
English: This is also the case with lobbying. If we are talking about logic, we don't need to say much.

古文：夫车之所以能转千里者，以其要在三寸之辖。
现代文：车子之所以能运行千里，关键在于那三寸长的车辖。
English: The key to the car being able to run for thousands of miles lies in the three-inch-long wheelbase.

古文：夫劝人而弗能使也，禁人而弗能止也，其所由者非理也。
现代文：劝说人家，人家不按你说的去做，禁止人家又禁止不住，原因在于你讲的理由不在理上。
English: Persuade others, they don't do what you say, forbid others and can't be forbidden, the reason is that the reason you say is not reasonable.

古文：昔者，卫君朝于吴，吴王囚之，欲流之于海。
现代文：过去卫国国君到吴国去朝拜，吴王夫差将卫君拘囚起来，还打算将他流放到海岛上去。
English: In the past, Emperor Wei went to worship in the State of Wu, and King Wu sent guards to arrest Emperor Wei and planned to exile him to an island.

古文：说者冠盖相望，而弗能止。
现代文：劝阻吴王的人车子络绎不断，车盖都能互相看得见，但就是改变不了吴王的主意。
English: The people who tried to dissuade Wu Wang kept coming and going, and the car covers were all visible to each other, but they couldn't change Wu Wang's mind.

古文：鲁君闻之，撤钟鼓之县，缟素而朝。
现代文：鲁哀公知道这件事以后，撤去了悬挂着的钟鼓，穿着素服上朝。
English: After Lu Aigong learned of this, he removed the hanging bell and drum and went to the palace in his plain clothes.

古文：仲尼入见，曰： 君胡为有忧色？ 
现代文：孔子上朝拜见哀公，问道： 君王为什么面有忧虑的神色？ 
English: Confucius bowed down to see the king and asked, "Why does the king look worried?"

古文：鲁君曰： 诸侯无亲，以诸侯为亲；大夫无党，以大夫为党。
现代文：鲁哀公说： 诸侯们互相不亲爱，卫君主动去亲近诸侯；大夫们互相不团结，卫君主动去团结他们。
English: Lu Aikong said: Princes do not love each other, the prince of Wei took the initiative to get close to the princes; doctors do not unite with each other, the prince of Wei took the initiative to unite them.

古文：今卫君朝于吴王，吴王囚之，而欲流之于海，孰意卫君之仁义而遭此难也！
现代文：现在卫君去吴国朝见国王，被吴王囚禁了起来，还打算将他流放到海岛上去。卫君如此仁义，竟然遭到这样厄运。
English: Now Wei Jun went to the King of Wu to see him, and was imprisoned by the King of Wu, who also planned to exile him to an island. Wei Jun was so benevolent that he suffered such bad luck.

古文：吾欲免之而不能，为奈何？ 
现代文：我想解救他，可又做不到，真不知怎么办好？ 
English: I want to save him, but I can't. I don't know what to do.

古文：仲尼曰： 若欲免之，则请子贡行。 
现代文：孔子听了后说： 要想解救卫君，那就请子贡去一趟吧。 
English: After listening, Confucius said, "If you want to save Wei Jun, then invite Zigong to visit."

古文：鲁君召子贡，授之将军之印。
现代文：于是哀公叫来子贡，授给他将军印。
English: Therefore, Aiko called for tribute and gave him the seal of a general.

古文：子贡辞曰： 贵无益于解患，在所由之道。 
现代文：子贡推辞不受，解释说： 尊贵的地位无益于消除卫君的灾难，要靠正确的方法才行。 
English: Unfazed by Zigong's rebuff, he explained, "An honorable position is not conducive to eliminating the calamity of the prince's defense, but the right method is necessary.

古文：敛躬而行，至于吴，见太宰嚭。
现代文：子贡于是悄悄地上路，前往吴国去了。到了吴国，他先去见太宰伯嚭。
English: Zigong then quietly set out on the road and went to the State of Wu. When he arrived in the State of Wu, he first went to see Dazai Bogong.

古文：太宰嚭甚悦之，欲荐之于王。
现代文：太宰伯嚭对子贡的到来感到十分高兴，将准备推荐给吴王。
English: Dazai Bogong was very pleased with the arrival of Zigong and was ready to recommend him to King Wu.

古文：子贡曰： 子不能行说于王，奈何吾因子也！ 
现代文：子贡说： 你在吴王面前讲话不起作用，我又怎么能靠你引见呢？ 
English: Zigong said, "Your speech in front of King Wu is useless. How can I rely on you to guide me?

古文：太宰嚭曰： 子焉知嚭之不能也？ 
现代文：太宰伯嚭说： 你怎么知道我讲话不起作用呢？ 
English: Dazai said, "How do you know that my speech doesn't work?

古文：子贡曰： 卫君之来也，卫国之半曰： 不若朝于晋。 
现代文：子贡说： 卫君来朝拜吴王的时候，卫国有一半的人说：不如去朝拜晋国。
English: Zigong said, "When Emperor Wei came to pay homage to King Wu, half of the people in Emperor Wei's country said, "It would be better to pay homage to Jin."

古文：其半曰： 不若朝于吴。 
现代文：卫国的另一半人则说：不如去朝拜吴国。
English: The other half of the defenders of the country said: It is better to go and worship the State of Wu.

古文：然卫君以为吴可以归骸骨也。
现代文：但是卫君认定要来吴国，并认为来了后可以得到善终，所以就绑着自己来吴国听吴王发落。
English: However, Wei Jun decided that he wanted to come to Wuxi, and thought that he could have a good end after coming, so he tied himself to come to Wuxi to listen to the birth and death of King Wu.

古文：故束身以受命。今子受卫君而囚之，又欲流之于海，是赏言朝于晋者，而罚言朝于吴也。
现代文：现在你们不但将卫君囚禁了起来，还打算将他流放到海岛上去，这等于有意奖励卫国中主张朝拜晋国的人，而有意打击卫国中主张朝拜吴国的那部分人。
English: Now you have not only imprisoned Wei Jun, but also plan to exile him to an island. This is tantamount to intentionally rewarding those who advocate the worship of Jin in Wei, while intentionally cracking down on those who advocate the worship of Wu in Wei.

古文：且卫君之来也，诸侯皆以为蓍龟兆，今朝于吴而不利，则皆移心于晋矣。
现代文：再说，卫君来吴国的时候，诸侯都为卫君占卜过凶吉，现在卫君朝拜吴国非但没有得到好处，反而受难，这样就使诸侯们的心要向着晋国了。
English: Furthermore, when Emperor Wei came to Wu, the princes all divined bad luck for Emperor Wei. Now Emperor Wei is worshipped in Wu, but instead of benefiting, he is suffering. This makes the princes' hearts yearn for Jin.

古文：子之欲成霸王之业，不亦难乎！ 
现代文：你想帮助吴王完成霸主的事业不就很难了吗？ 
English: If you want to help King Wu complete the cause of hegemony, won't it be difficult?

古文：太宰嚭入，复之于王。王报出令于百官曰： 比十日，而卫君之礼不具者，死！ 
现代文：太宰伯嚭进宫就将这番话原原本本地报告给吴王听，吴王听后马上下令： 十天之内如果对卫国君的礼仪还没完备的话，就处死。 
English: When Dazai Hakuin entered the palace, he reported these words to King Wu, who immediately ordered: If the etiquette for the Emperor is not completed within ten days, he will be executed.

古文：子贡可谓知所以说矣。
现代文：子贡可真叫懂得如何游说劝谏的。
English: Zigong really knows how to lobby and persuade.

古文：鲁哀公为室而大，公宣子谏曰： 室大，众与人处则哗，少与人处则悲。
现代文：鲁哀公修建宫殿，规模很大，公宣子劝谏说： 宫殿造了太大，很多人聚在一起就会很喧闹，而人少时又会显得很凄清。
English: Prince Rouye built a palace on a very large scale, and was advised by his son-in-law that the palace was too large, and when many people gathered together, it would be noisy, and when there were few people, it would be gloomy.

古文：愿公之适。 
现代文：所以我希望君王你造宫殿最好是恰如其分。 
English: Therefore, I hope that the palace you build for the king will be just right.

古文：公曰： 寡人闻命矣。 
现代文：哀公说： 我听你的指教。 
English: Aiko said, "I will listen to your advice."

古文：筑室不辍。公宣子复见曰： 国小而室大。
现代文：但说管说、做管做，修造大宫殿的工程并没停下来。
English: But all talk and no action has stopped the construction of the grand palace.

古文：百姓闻之，必怨吾君；诸侯闻之，必轻吾国。 
现代文：这样，公宣子又去拜见哀公，说： 咱们国家是个小国家，如果宫殿造了大了，老百姓知道了会埋怨君王的，诸侯知道了会看不起我们的。 
English: In this way, the courtier went to see the king again and said: Our country is a small country, if the palace is built big, the common people will complain about the king, and the lords will look down on us.

古文：鲁君曰： 闻命矣。 
现代文：鲁哀公说： 已经听到过这样的指教了。 
English: Lu Aigong said, "I've heard this kind of advice before.

古文：筑室不辍。
现代文：但是工程仍然在继续。
English: But work is still going on.

古文：公宣子复见曰： 左昭而右穆，为大室以临二先君之庙，得无害于子乎？ 
现代文：公宣子只得第三次去见哀公，说： 新宫殿的左边是昭庙，右边是穆庙，修造这样大的宫殿正好靠近两位先君的庙堂，这样不有损你作为孝子的形象吗？ 
English: For the third time, Kuan Xuan Zi had to go to see Aiko, and said: On the left side of the new palace is the Zhao Temple, and on the right side is the Mu Temple. The construction of such a large palace is right next to the temple of the two forefathers. Won't this damage your image as a filial son?

古文：公乃令罢役，除版而去之。
现代文：听到这席话，鲁哀公才下令停止施工，拆除板筑。
English: Hearing these words, Ruai Gongcai ordered to stop the construction and dismantle the board building.

古文：鲁君之欲为室，诚矣；公宣子止之，必矣。
现代文：鲁哀公要修建宫殿的想法是十分坚决的，公宣子要阻止这件事的决心也是十分坚定的。
English: Lord Rui's idea of building a palace was very firm, and the determination of the prince to stop it was also very firm.

古文：然三说而一听者，其二者非其道也。
现代文：但是公宣子劝了三次，第三次才使鲁哀公接受意见，停止施工。
English: However, Gong Xuan Zi advised him three times, and it was only after the third time that Rui Gong accepted the advice and stopped the construction.

古文：夫临河而钓，日入而不能得一鲦鱼者，非江河鱼不食也，所以饵之者非其欲也。
现代文：这三次中，前二次讲得不得要领，没有击中要害，所以鲁哀公根本听不进去。有人面对河水垂钓，一整天还钓不到一条小白鱼，这不能怪河中的鱼不上钩，而是在于钩上的鱼饵鱼不喜欢吃。
English: Of these three times, the first two times were not to the point and did not hit the key, so Lu Aigong could not listen at all. Some people faced the river fishing and could not catch a small white fish for a whole day. This is not to blame the fish in the river for not being hooked, but because the fish on the hook do not like to eat.

古文：及至良工执竿，投而擐唇吻者，能以其所欲而钓者也。夫物无不可奈何，有人无奈何。铅之与丹，异类殊色，而可以为丹者，得其数也。
现代文：而那些钓鱼的高手就不是这样了，他们所拿的鱼竿线绳钩儿一下子就能钩着鱼儿的嘴，是因为这钩上的鱼饵是鱼喜欢吃的东西。事情没办法对付，是在于人对这事情不了解，所以无法对付。铅和丹种类不同、颜色各异，但铅可以炼成丹，因为人们掌握了其中的关键技术。
English: However, this is not the case for those who are good at fishing. The rod and line hook they hold can hook the fish's mouth at once, because the bait on this hook is what the fish likes to eat. The reason why things cannot be dealt with is that people do not understand this matter, so they cannot deal with it. Lead and tin are different types and different colors, but lead can be refined into tin, because people have mastered the key technology.

古文：故繁称文辞，无益于说，审其所由而已矣。
现代文：所以繁琐的话语、漂亮的辞藻，无助于劝说别人，只要抓住其中问题的原由就可以。
English: Therefore, tedious words, beautiful words, do not help to persuade others, as long as you grasp the cause of the problem.

古文：物类之相摩，近而异门户者，众而难识也。
现代文：纷繁复杂的事物紧密联系着，可是又不同门类，这种现象随处可见，又难以识别。
English: The phenomenon of numerous and complex things that are closely related, but different categories, can be seen everywhere, but it is difficult to identify.

古文：故或类之而非，或不类之而是；或若然而不然者，或不若然而然者。
现代文：所以有些事物的现象看来相似，但却又不一样；有时有些事物的现象看似不一样，但却又是一样。
English: So the phenomena of some things look similar, but they are different; sometimes the phenomena of some things look different, but they are the same.

古文：谚曰： 鸢堕腐鼠，而虞氏以亡。 
现代文：有时候好像是这回事却又不是这回事；有时候好像不是这回事却实际上正是这回事。
English: Sometimes it seems to be the case, but it is not; sometimes it seems not to be the case, but it is.

古文：何谓也？曰：虞氏，梁之大富人也。
现代文：谚语说： 老鹰嘴里掉下了死腐鼠，富户虞家要遭灭亡了。 
English: A proverb says: A dead rat has fallen from the eagle's mouth, and the wealthy family of the Yu family is about to be destroyed.

古文：家充盈殷富，金钱无量，财货无赀。
现代文：这话怎么讲呢？它说的是这样一个故事：那虞氏家族原是梁地的大富人家，家里富足殷实，钱财多得无法计算。
English: How to explain this? It tells the following story: Originally, the Nagu family was a very wealthy family. The family was rich and affluent, with an incalculable amount of money.

古文：升高楼，临大路，设乐陈酒，积博其上。
现代文：虞家在大道路口边修建了一座高楼，经常在楼上设置酒席，摆排乐舞，宴请宾客，玩弈棋游戏。
English: Yu Jia built a high-rise building at the mouth of the highway, and often set up a bar upstairs, arranged music and dance, invited guests, and played games.

古文：游侠相随而行楼下，博上者射朋张，中反两而笑，飞鸢适堕其腐鼠而中游侠。
现代文：有一次一群游侠结伴而行，经过楼下，楼上玩博棋游戏的人，下注赌博，有人获胜而大笑。
English: Once, a group of rangers were walking together, passing downstairs, and upstairs, people were playing a game of chess, placing bets and laughing when someone won.

古文：游侠相与言曰： 虞氏富乐之日久矣，而常有轻易人之志。吾不敢侵犯，而乃辱我以腐鼠。
现代文：今天虞家竟然用死鼠来侮辱我们。此仇不报，我们就无法在天下树立我们的英勇之名。
English: Today, Yu Jia insulted us with a dead rat. If we don't avenge this, we won't be able to establish our heroic reputation in the world.

古文：如此不报，无以立务于天下。
现代文：让我们齐心协力，率领众兄弟，一定要消灭虞家。 
English: Let's make concerted efforts and lead all the brothers, and we must eliminate the bourgeoisie.

古文：请与公僇力一志，悉率徒属，而必以灭其家。 
现代文：当晚，众游侠合力攻打虞家宅院，把虞家给消灭了。
English: That night, all the rangers joined forces to attack the house of Yu Jia, and wiped out Yu Jia.

古文：此所谓类之而非者也。
现代文：这就是看似相似，但实际上却并不一样。
English: That is, it looks similar, but it is not the same.

古文：何谓非类而是？
现代文：那么，什么是看似不一样，但实际却又是一样？
English: So, what looks different but is actually the same?

古文：屈建告石乞曰： 白公胜将为乱。 
现代文：屈建对石乞说： 白公胜将要闹事作乱。 
English: Qu Jian said to Shi Qian: Bai Gongsheng is going to make trouble.

古文：石乞曰： 不然。
现代文：石乞说： 不会。
English: The beggar said, "No."

古文：白公胜卑身下士，不敢骄贤，其家无管龠之信，关楗之固。
现代文：白公胜平时谦恭下士，从不敢在贤人面前骄慢，他家没有牢固门闩的防备，也没有可靠的锁钥。
English: Bai Gongsheng is usually a humble and courteous corporal, and never dares to be proud in front of the sages. His family does not have a solid door latch protection, nor a reliable key.

古文：大斗斛以出，轻斤两以内，而乃论之，以不宜也。 
现代文：他平时大斗斛卖出，以小秤买入。你怎么反而用这种言论非议他？ 
English: He usually sells aggressively and buys with a small balance. How can you criticize him with this kind of speech?

古文：屈建曰： 此乃所以反也。 
现代文：屈建说： 这正是他要谋反的迹象。 
English: Qu Jian said: This is just a sign that he wants to rebel.

古文：居三年，白公胜果为乱，杀令尹子椒、司马子期。
现代文：过了三年，白公胜果然发动叛乱，杀死了令尹子椒、司马子期。
English: After three years, Bai Gongsheng launched a rebellion and killed Ling Yin Zizhe and Sima Zihuan.

古文：此所谓弗类而是者也。
现代文：这就是看似不像，实际上就是这样子。
English: That's what it looks like, that's what it is.

古文：何谓若然而不然？
现代文：那么，什么是好像是这回事却又不是这回事呢？
English: So what is it that seems to be the case but isn't?

古文：子发为上蔡令，民有罪当刑，狱断论定，决于令尹前。
现代文：子发担任上蔡县令，有人犯了罪应依法判刑。案子审判定当，在子发面前执行，其时子发感叹着、流露出凄怆的神色。
English: Zifa served as the Shangcai County magistrate. Someone had committed a crime and should be sentenced according to the law. The case was adjudicated and executed in front of Zifa, at which time Zifa sighed and revealed a terrible look.

古文：子发喟然有凄怆之心，罪人已刑而不忘其恩。
现代文：犯人受了刑后忘不了子发怜悯他的恩情。在这以后，子发得罪了楚惠王而被迫出逃。
English: After the prisoner was sentenced, he could not forget Zifa's compassion for him. After this, Zifa offended King Chu Hui and was forced to flee.

古文：此其后，子发盘罪威王而出奔，刑者遂袭恩者，恩者逃之于城下之庐。
现代文：恰巧在出逃途中碰到那位受刑者，这人掩护了子发，让子发躲进城墙下的一间小屋内。
English: On his way out, he happened to run into the inmate, who protected Zi Fa and let him hide in a hut under the city wall.

古文：追者至，踹足而怒，曰： 子发视决吾罪而被吾刑，怨之憯于骨髓，使我得其肉而食之，其知厌乎！ 
现代文：追捕子发的公差赶到，那位受刑者故意跺脚发怒叫骂： 子发亲自判决审定我的罪又让我受了刑，我对他是恨之入骨，现在就是吃了他的肉，还难解我心头之恨。 
English: The official sent to hunt down Zi Fa arrived, and the prisoner deliberately stomped his feet and shouted angrily: "Zi Fa personally judged and convicted me of my crime and made me suffer the punishment. I hated him to the bone, and now that I have eaten his flesh, it is still difficult to understand the hatred in my heart."

古文：追者以为然而不索其内，果活子发。
现代文：追捕者看到这番情景也就信以为真，也就不再进小屋搜查了。
English: The pursuers saw this scene and believed it to be true, so they no longer entered the hut to search.

古文：此所谓若然而不然者。
现代文：这就是好像是这回事却又不是这回事。
English: It's like it's happening and it's not happening.

古文：何谓不然而若然者？
现代文：那么，什么是好像不是这回事却实际上正是这回事？
English: So what is it that seems not to be the case, but is actually the case?

古文：昔越王勾践卑下吴王夫差，请身为臣，妻为妾，奉四时之祭祀，而入春秋之贡职，委社稷，效民力，隐居为蔽，而战为锋行。礼甚卑，辞其服，其离叛之心远矣。
现代文：以前越王勾践对吴王夫差表现得卑躬屈膝、低三下四：既请求要做吴王的臣子，又愿意让妻子做吴王的小妾；还向吴王进奉四季的祭祀用品，承担春秋两季的贡品；将自身乃至国家都交给了吴王，还让全国百姓为吴王效劳；平时隐蔽不抛头露面，打起仗来则充当先锋；对吴王的礼节很恭敬，言辞用语很驯服，根本看不出有反叛之心。
English: In the past, King Gochang of Yue showed servility and humiliation to King Wufu of Wu: he asked to be a vassal of King Wufu, and was willing to let his wife be a concubine of King Wufu; he also presented to King Wufu the sacrificial articles for the four seasons, and bore the tribute for the two seasons of spring and autumn; he handed over himself and the country to King Wufu, and also let the people of the whole country serve King Wufu; he did not show his face in peacetime, but acted as a vanguard when war broke out; he was very respectful of King Wufu's

古文：然而甲卒三千人，以禽夫差于姑胥。
现代文：然而最后还是率领三千士兵在姑苏山上擒获了夫差，并消灭了吴国。
English: However, in the end, he still led three thousand soldiers on the Gusu Mountain to capture the enemy and destroy the State of Wu.

古文：是故不可不察也。
现代文：以上四种情况，是不能不审察的。
English: The above four situations must be examined.

