古文：傅縡字宜事，北地灵州人也。
现代文：傅縡，字宜事，北地灵州人。
English: Fu Hao, also known as Yi Ji, is from Lingshou, North China.

古文：父彜，梁临沂令。
现代文：父亲傅彝，任梁朝临沂县令。
English: His father, Fu Jun, was appointed by Liang Chao as the county magistrate of Linyi County.

古文：縡幼聪敏，七岁诵古诗赋至十余万言。
现代文：傅縡自幼聪明灵敏，七岁时能背诵古代的诗赋多达十几万言。
English: Fu Yao has been smart and sensitive since he was a child. At the age of seven, he could recite as many as 100,000 ancient poems.

古文：长好学，能属文。
现代文：长大以后勤奋好学，善于写文章。
English: When they are a little older, they are eager to learn and can write articles.

古文：太清末，丁母忧，在兵乱中，居丧尽礼，哀毁骨立，士友以此称之。
现代文：太清末年，纟宰因母亲去世而在家服丧。当时正是兵荒马乱的时候，他居丧期间尽礼而为，因伤心过度而消瘦得皮包骨，体瘦如柴，士人和他的朋友因此而十分称赞他。
English: At the end of the Qing Dynasty, Zhezai was at home mourning the death of his mother. At that time, it was the time of the Warring States period. During the mourning period, he did his best to be polite. Because of the excessive sadness, he was so thin that he was skin and bones, and his body was as thin as wood. The scholar and his friend highly praised him for this.

古文：后依湘州刺史萧循。
现代文：后来，他投靠湘州刺史萧循。
English: Later, he joined Shanshi Shaoshu.

古文：循颇好士，广集坟籍，縡肆志寻阅，因博通群书。
现代文：萧循很喜爱结交士人，广泛收集各种典籍，傅縡在这里可以任意寻找阅读到各种书籍，并因此而博通群书。
English: Xiao Xun is very fond of making friends with scholars and has an extensive collection of various classics. Fu Jun can find and read all kinds of books here, and thus has access to a wide range of books.

古文：王琳闻其名，引爲府记室。
现代文：王琳听到他的声名，便召他担任了府记室。
English: When Wang Lin heard of his fame, she called him to serve as the chief secretary.

古文：琳败，随琳将孙瑒还都。
现代文：王琳失败后，傅縡又随王琳的部将孙蠩到了京都。
English: After Wang Lin's defeat, Fu Xi followed Wang Lin and brought Sun Yat-sen back to Beijing.

古文：时陈文帝使顔晃赐瑒杂物，瑒托縡啓谢，词理周洽，文无加点。
现代文：当时，陈文帝派颜晃赐给孙蠩许多杂物，孙蠩让傅縡写了一份表启以示感谢。
English: At that time, Chen Wendi sent Yan Jiao to give a lot of sundries to Sun Qian, and Sun Qian asked Fu Qian to write a thank-you letter.

古文：晃还言之文帝，召爲撰史学士。
现代文：傅縡下笔成章写得语词文理周密。颜晃回来后告诉了陈文帝，于是召用傅縡担任了撰史学士。
English: After Yan Xing returned, he told Chen Wendi, so he called Fu Xing to serve as a historian.

古文：再迁骠骑安成王中记室，撰史如故。
现代文：再升迁任骠骑将军安成王的中记室，仍兼撰史学士。
English: He was promoted again to serve as the middle secretary of the cavalry general An Chengwang, and was still a bachelor of history.

古文：縡笃信佛教，从兴皇寺慧朗法师受三论，尽通其学。
现代文：傅縡真诚信奉佛教，跟从兴皇寺的慧朗法师学习《三论》，透彻地知晓其中的奥妙。
English: Fu Xi sincerely believes in Buddhism, and has studied the "Three Treatises" with Master Hui Lang of the Xinghuang Temple, and thoroughly understands the mysteries therein.

古文：寻以本官兼通直散骑侍郎使齐，还，累迁太子庶子、仆。
现代文：不久，以本官身份兼任通直散骑侍郎，出使齐国，累迁太子庶子、太子仆官。
English: Soon, he concurrently served as Tsuchina Sanzhijirō as his own official, dispatched envoys to Qi Province, and successively moved the prince's illegitimate son and the prince's servant.

古文：后主即位，迁秘书监、右卫将军，兼中书通事舍人，掌诏诰。
现代文：陈后主即位后，迁任秘书监、右卫将军，兼中书通事舍人，掌管撰写诏诰文书。
English: Tuo Wang ascended to the throne, and was promoted to Secretary Supervisor, General of the Right Division of the Guards, and also the person in charge of the General Affairs Department of the Central Military Commission, as well as the person in charge of the General Office of the Central Military Commission.

古文：縡爲文典丽，性又敏速，虽军国大事，下笔辄成，未尝起草，沈思者亦无以加，甚爲后主所重。
现代文：傅縡写文章文词典雅华丽，本性又敏捷迅速，即使是有关军国大事的文书，他也下笔立成，从不事先起草。写成以后再反复思考也没有什么地方需要加以增删的，因而很受陈后主所赏识。
English: Fu Jun's writing of the article dictionary is elegant and gorgeous, and his nature is agile and quick. Even if it is a document related to military and national events, he writes it down and never drafts it in advance. After writing it, there is nothing to be added or deleted, so it is highly appreciated by Chen Hou's master.

古文：然性木强，不持检操，负才使气，陵侮人物，朝士多衔之。
现代文：但他性情过于呆板又倔强，不注意检束自己的操行，自负有才而盛气凌人，朝臣们大多很恨他。
English: However, Fu Wei's character was simple and stubborn, he was undisciplined, boasted of his talent, often bullied and insulted others, and the imperial court hated him.

古文：会施文庆、沈客卿以佞见幸，专制衡轴，而縡益疏。
现代文：正值施文庆、沈客卿以奸佞而受到宠幸，专制朝政，因而傅縡更受到疏远。
English: At the same time, Shi Wenqing and Sheng Keqing were favored with the title of traitor, and the imperial government was autocratic, so Fu Xi was further alienated.

古文：文庆等因共谮之，后主收縡下狱。
现代文：施文庆等人便一起说他的坏话，陈后主将傅縡抓起来关入狱中。
English: Shi Wenqing and others began to speak ill of him, and Chen Houchen arrested Fu Lan and put him in prison.

古文：縡素刚，因愤恚，于狱中上书曰： 夫人君者，恭事上帝，子爱黔黎，省嗜欲，远谄佞，未明求衣，日旰忘食，是以泽被区宇，庆流子孙。
现代文：傅縡一向性格刚强，因而十分愤慨，便在狱中上书说： 作为国君，恭敬侍奉天帝，慈爱黎民百姓，节制嗜好欲望，远离谗佞之人，天未明披衣而起，日已晚还忘饮食，所以能德泽遍布海内，善美流传于子孙。
English: Fu Yao had always been a strong character, so he was very indignant and wrote a letter in prison saying: As a sovereign, respect and serve the emperor, love the people, restrain hobbies and desires, stay away from those who are lazy, get up early in the morning, and forget to eat late in the day, so Nengdeze is all over the sea, and good and beautiful are passed down to their children and grandchildren.

古文：陛下顷来酒色过度，不虔郊庙之神，专媚淫昏之鬼。
现代文：陛下近来酒色过度，不敬郊庙之神，专媚淫乱之鬼。
English: His Majesty has been drinking too much lately. He does not respect the gods of the suburban temples, and is obsessed with the ghosts of debauchery.

古文：小人在侧，宦竖弄权，恶忠直若仇雠，视百姓如草芥。
现代文：小人在侧，宦官弄权，厌恶忠直之士如见仇人，视百姓有如草芥。
English: The villain is on the side, the eunuch is playing for power, the loyal and upright person is loathed as if he were an enemy, and the people are regarded as straw and mustard.

古文：后宫曳绮绣，厩马馀菽粟，兆庶流离，转尸蔽野，货贿公行，帑藏损耗，神怒人怨，衆叛亲离。
现代文：后宫中人人身穿绮绣之服，马厩里广余豆粟之粮，万民流离失所，尸横遍野；贿赂公开进行，内库损耗，神怒人怨，众叛亲离。
English: In the harem, everyone is wearing embroidered clothes, in the stables, there is a large surplus of bean-poppy grain, all the people have been displaced, corpses are everywhere; bribery is openly carried out, internal reserves are depleted, anger and resentment are rampant, and people are estranged from their relatives.

古文：恐东南王气，自斯而尽。 
现代文：只恐东南王气，自此而尽。 
English: I'm afraid that Southeastern's kingliness will have to come to an end.

古文：书奏，后主大怒。
现代文：奏书送上后，后主大怒。
English: After the performance, the owner was furious.

古文：顷之稍解，使谓曰： 我欲赦卿，卿能改过不？ 
现代文：不久，后主怒气稍减，便派人对他说： 我要赦免你，你能改正过失吗？ 
English: After a while, his father-in-law's anger abated a little, so he sent someone to say to him, "I'm going to pardon you. Can you correct your mistake?"

古文：縡对曰： 臣心如面，臣面可改，则臣心可改。 
现代文：傅縡回答说： 臣心如面，臣面可以改变，则臣心可改。 
English: Fu Qiao replied: A minister's heart is like his face, a minister's face can be changed, so can a minister's heart.

古文：后主于是益怒，令宦者李善度穷其事，赐死狱中。
现代文：后主于是更加恼怒，便命令宦官李善度尽力追究他的过失，赐死于狱中。
English: The latter became even more angry, and ordered the eunuch Li Shandong to do his best to investigate his wrongdoing, and to let him die in prison.

古文：老臣宿将，弃之草莽，谄佞谗邪，升之朝廷。
现代文：传有文集十卷。傅縡虽然刚直有才，但为人狠毒傲慢，被当世人所痛恨。
English: It is said that there are ten volumes of the anthology. Although Fu Yao was upright and talented, he was a cruel and arrogant person and was hated by the contemporary world.

古文：今疆埸日蹙，隋军压境，陛下如不改弦易张，臣见麋鹿复游于姑苏矣。 
现代文：当他死时，有毒蛇蜷屈着爬上灵床，在灵床前接受祭奠，离开了又转回来，前后一百多天时间。
English: When he died, the venomous snake curled up and climbed onto the cot, received a memorial service in front of the cot, left and then returned, for more than a hundred days.

古文：书奏，后主大怒，即日斩之。顾野王字希冯，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：时时听到有愤怒的弹指声。顾野王，字希冯，吴郡吴人。
English: The sound of angry finger-pointing could be heard from time to time. Gu Ye Wang, Zi Xi Feng, Wu County Wu people.

古文：祖子乔，梁东中郎武陵王府参军事。
现代文：祖父顾子乔，曾任梁东中郎将武陵王府参军事。
English: Grandfather Gu Zi Qiao, the Eastern Middle Brother of the Liang Dynasty, Wuling Wangfu, took part in the military.

古文：父烜，信威临贺王记室，兼本郡五官掾，以儒术知名。
现代文：父亲顾火亘，是信威将军临贺王的记室，兼本郡五官掾，以通儒学而知名于世。
English: His father, Gu Huawu, was the secretary of General Xinwei Lin He Wang, and also the county's fifth-ranking official, known for his knowledge of Confucianism.

古文：野王幼好学，七岁读五经，略知大旨。
现代文：顾野王幼时便很好学，七岁读五经，便能读懂大致意思。
English: When Gu Niu Wang was a child, he was very good at learning. When he read the Five Classics at the age of seven, he could understand the general meaning.

古文：九岁能属文。
现代文：九岁能写文章。
English: A nine-year-old can write an article.

古文：尝制日赋，领军朱异见而奇之。
现代文：他曾写了一篇《日赋》，领军朱异见后认为他是奇才。
English: He once wrote an article entitled "The Sun Deity," and after leading the Zhu dissidents, they thought he was a genius.

古文：十二，随父之建安，撰建安地记二篇。
现代文：十二岁，野王随父亲到建安，撰写了《建安地记》两篇。
English: At the age of twelve, Ye Wang followed his father to Jian'an and wrote two articles of "Jian'an Diary."

古文：长而遍观经史，精记默识，天文地理，蓍龟占候，虫篆奇字，无所不通。
现代文：长大后，他遍读经史，精心记识，天文地理、卜筮、观天相、虫篆奇字，无所不通。
English: When he grew up, he read through the history of scripture, carefully memorized astronomy, geography, divination, celestial observation, and the Chinese characters for worms, and knew everything.

古文：爲临贺王府记室。
现代文：他曾任临贺王府记室。
English: He once served as the recorder of the Linhe royal palace.

古文：宣城王爲扬州刺史，野王及琅邪王褒并爲宾客，王甚爱其才。
现代文：后来宣城王任扬州刺史，顾野王与琅笽人王褒一起为宾客，宣城王很爱顾野王的才华。
English: Later, the king of Xuancheng was appointed Yangzhou chief historian, and the king of Guye was a guest together with the king of Yunnan. The king of Xuancheng was very fond of the talent of the king of Guye.

古文：野王又善丹青，王于东府起斋，令野王画古贤，命王褒书赞，时人称爲二绝。
现代文：顾野王还很擅长画画，宣城王在东府建书斋，让野王画古代贤人，让王褒写赞颂之辞，当时人称此为 二绝 。
English: King Gu was also very good at painting. King Xuancheng built a study hall in Dongfu, asked King Gu to paint ancient sages, and asked King Gu to write a eulogy. At that time, people called this the second death.

古文：及侯景之乱，野王丁父忧，归本郡，乃召募乡党，随义军援都。
现代文：侯景之乱时，顾野王因父丧回到家乡吴郡守丧。他在乡里招募民众，随义军救援都城。
English: During the Houjing Rebellion, Gu Ye Wang returned to his hometown of Wu County to mourn his father's death. He recruited people in the countryside to follow the rebels to rescue the capital.

古文：野王体素清羸，裁长六尺，又居丧过毁，殆不胜哀。及杖戈被甲，陈君臣之义，逆顺之理，抗辞作色，见者莫不壮之。
现代文：顾野王一向清瘦体弱，身高只有六尺，又因居丧过于悲痛，身体像是禁不住这样的哀伤；可是当他手持兵器，身披盔甲上阵，陈述君臣之义、逆与顺的道理时，慷慨陈词，正言厉色，见到的人都觉得他十分气壮。
English: King Guneo had always been thin and frail, only six feet tall, and he was so grief-stricken by his father's death that his body seemed to be unable to hold back the grief. However, when he went into battle with weapons in hand, wearing armor, and expounded the principles of kingship and submission, and the principles of vice and virtue, his words were generous and forthright, and everyone who saw him felt that he was very strong.

古文：城陷，逃归会稽。
现代文：后来京城被攻破，他逃回了会稽。
English: Later, when the capital was breached, he fled back to the auditorium.

古文：陈天嘉中，敕补撰史学士。
现代文：陈天嘉年间，皇帝下令补顾野王为撰史学士。
English: During the reign of Chen Tianjia, the emperor ordered Wang Guoxuan to be awarded a bachelor's degree in history.

古文：太建中，爲太子率更令，寻领大着作，掌国史，知梁史事。
现代文：太建年间，顾野王为太子率更令，不久任大著作，掌管国史，知梁史事。
English: During the Taiken era, King Guno was promoted to the rank of crown prince, and soon became a great writer, in charge of national history, and knowledgeable about historical affairs.

古文：后爲黄门侍郎，光禄卿，知五礼事。
现代文：后来他又任黄门侍郎，光禄卿，知五礼事。
English: Later, he also served as Huangmen waiter, Guangluqing, and Zhiwulei.

古文：卒，赠秘书监，右卫将军。
现代文：死后，追赠为秘书监，右卫将军。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the position of secretary supervisor, the right guard general.

古文：野王少以笃学至性知名，在物无过辞失色。
现代文：顾野王年轻时以勤奋好学、性情淳厚而闻名，对各种事物没有过分溢美之辞而失其本色。
English: When he was young, Gu Niu Wang was known for his diligence and eagerness to learn, as well as his honest nature. He did not overly praise various things and lost his true colors.

古文：观其容貌，似不能言，其厉精力行，皆人所莫及。
现代文：看他的模样，好像不善言辞，但他振奋精神，尽力去干事时，却是别人所比不上的。
English: By the look of him, he doesn't seem to be good with words, but when he tries to cheer himself up and go to work, he's second to none.

古文：所撰玉篇三十卷，舆地志三十卷，符瑞图十卷，顾氏谱传十卷，分野枢要一卷，续洞冥记一卷，玄象表一卷，并行于时。
现代文：他的著作有《玉篇》三十卷，《舆地志》三十卷，《符瑞图》十卷，《顾氏谱传》十卷，《分野枢要》一卷，《续洞冥记》一卷，《玄象表》一卷，在当时都很流行。
English: His works include "Jade Chapter" of 30 volumes, "History of Public Opinion" of 30 volumes, "Furitu" of 10 volumes, "Biography of Gu" of 10 volumes, "Field Essentials" of 1 volume, "Continuation of the Cave" of 1 volume, and "Hidden Image Table" of 1 volume, all of which were very popular at the time.

古文：及即位，授侍中。太建中，历位五兵、度支、祠部三尚书，卒。
现代文：他还撰写了《通史要略》一百卷，《国史纪传》二百卷，但未写完就去世了。
English: He also wrote a hundred volumes of "General History Summary" and two hundred volumes of "National History Biography," but he died before he finished.

古文：姚察字伯审，吴兴武康人，吴太常卿信之九世孙也。
现代文：他有文集二十卷。姚察字伯审，吴兴武康人，吴国太常卿姚信的九世孙。
English: He has 20 volumes of anthologies. Yao Zha Zi Ber Qian, Wu Xing Wu Kang Ren, the ninth generation grandson of Yao Xin, the First Secretary of the State of Wu.

古文：父僧垣，梁太医正。
现代文：父亲姚僧垣，是梁朝的太医正。
English: His father, Yao Sangak, was the chief physician of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：及元帝在荆州，爲晋安王谘议参军。
现代文：梁元帝在荆州时，僧垣作晋安王陈伯恭的谘议参军。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan was in Jingzhou, the monk acted as an advisor to Jinan King Chen Boxiong to join the army.

古文：后入周，位遇甚重。
现代文：后来入周，官位颇高，很受恩遇。
English: Later, he was promoted to Zhou, a high-ranking official, and was very well received.

古文：察幼有至性，六岁诵书万馀言。
现代文：姚察从小性情淳厚，六岁便能背诵文章万余言。
English: Yao Zha has had a good temperament since he was a child. At the age of six, he could recite more than ten thousand words.

古文：不好戏弄，励精学业，十二能属文。
现代文：不贪玩耍，读书勤奋，十二岁就能写文章。
English: Not greedy play, reading diligently, twelve years old will be able to write articles.

古文：僧垣精医术，知名梁代，二宫所得供赐，皆回给察兄弟，爲游学之资。
现代文：僧垣精于医术，梁代知名，在宫中得到的赏赐，都带回去给姚察兄弟，作为他们游学的费用。
English: Monk Waki was good at medicine, well-known in the Liang Dynasty, and the rewards he received in the palace were all brought back to the Yao brothers as the cost of their study tour.

古文：察并用聚蓄图书，由是闻见日博。
现代文：姚察用这些钱买了不少书籍，因此知识见闻日益广博。
English: Yao Cha used the money to buy a lot of books, so his knowledge became more and more extensive.

古文：年十三，梁简文帝时在东宫，盛修文义，即引于宣猷堂听讲论难，爲儒者所称。
现代文：十三岁时，梁简文帝萧纲为太子，积极提倡文学研究学问。把他召到宣猷堂听讲研讨，受到儒生们称赞。
English: At the age of thirteen, Emperor Xiaogang of Liang Jianwen became the crown prince and actively promoted the study of literature. He was invited to the Xuanwu Hall to listen to lectures and seminars, which was praised by Confucians.

古文：及简文嗣位，尤加礼接。
现代文：简文帝即位后，对他更加礼遇。
English: When Emperor Jianwen ascended the throne, they treated him with more courtesy.

古文：起家南海王国左常侍，兼司文侍郎。
现代文：初次作官任南海王国左常侍，兼司文侍郎。
English: He was appointed to the position of Zuo Changzhi of the South Sea Kingdom, as well as Sifan Zhilong.

古文：后兼尚书驾部郎。
现代文：后来又兼尚书驾部郎。
English: Later, he also held the post of Shuki-buro.

古文：遇梁室丧乱，随二亲还乡里。
现代文：遇上梁朝丧乱，随父母回家乡。
English: When the Liang Dynasty was in turmoil, he followed his parents back to his hometown.

古文：在乱离间，笃学不废。
现代文：在战乱期间，依旧努力读书，不废学业。
English: During the war, he continued to study hard and never gave up his studies.

古文：元帝于荆州即位，授察原乡令。
现代文：梁元帝在荆州即位，委任姚察为原乡县令。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan ascended the throne in Jingzhou and appointed Yao Zha as the original township and county magistrate.

古文：后爲佐着作，撰史。
现代文：后改任佐著作，负责修史。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of assistant editor, in charge of revising history.

古文：陈永定中，吏部尚书徐陵领大着作，复引爲史佐。
现代文：陈永定年间，吏部尚书徐陵兼任大著作，招引姚察为史佐。
English: During the years of Chen Yongding, the head of the cadre department, Shangshu Xu Ling, also served as a great writer, attracting Yao Zha as a historian.

古文：太建初，补宣明殿学士。
现代文：太建初年，增补为宣明殿学士。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, he was upgraded to a bachelor of Xuanming Temple.

古文：寻爲通直散骑常侍，报聘于周。
现代文：不久又为通直散骑常侍，作为使节回访周朝。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as an envoy to pay a return visit to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：江左耆旧先在关右者，咸相倾慕。
现代文：已在关西的江南士人，都对他表示倾慕。
English: Jiang Zuo's old friends in Guan Zuo all admire him.

古文：沛国刘臻窃于公馆访汉书疑事十馀条，并爲剖析，皆有经据。
现代文：沛国刘臻私下到他下榻的公馆请教《汉书》中的疑问十余条，姚察都作了分析解释，并且都有经典为据。
English: Peiguo Liu Zhen privately went to the residence where he was staying to consult more than ten questions in the "Chinese Book," Yao Cha made an analysis and explanation, and all of them were based on the classics.

古文：臻谓所亲曰： 名下定无虚士。 
现代文：刘臻对自己的亲近人称赞说： 姚察可真不是徒有虚名啊。 
English: Liu Zhen said to those close to him, "There must be no false sages under the name of fame.

古文：着西聘道里记。
现代文：姚察就此行著成《西聘道里记》。
English: Yao Zha thus wrote "Record of Xibei Road."

古文：使还，补东宫学士，迁尚书祠部侍郎。
现代文：出使回国，被补为东宫学士，升任尚书祠部侍郎。
English: He was sent back to China, was promoted to the Eastern Palace Bachelor, and was promoted to the chamberlain of the Shangshu ancestral hall.

古文：旧魏王肃奏祀天地，设宫悬之乐，八佾之舞，尔后因循不革。
现代文：三国时魏国王肃制定的祭祀天地仪式，设立四面悬磬之乐，用六十四人之舞，后来历代都因循不变。
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, the Wei King Su formulated the sacrificial heaven and earth ceremony, set up the music of the four sides of the curtain, and used the dance of sixty-four people. Later generations have followed the same path.

古文：至梁武帝以爲事人礼缛，事神礼简，古无宫悬之文。
现代文：到了梁武帝认为对人事礼节宜繁复，侍鬼神礼节应从简，因此废了那套规定。
English: When Emperor Liangwu arrived, he thought that the etiquette of personnel should be complicated, and the etiquette of serving ghosts and gods should be simple, so he abolished that set of rules.

古文：陈初承用，莫有损益。
现代文：陈朝初年也承袭下来，没有任何增减。
English: Chen inherited Liang's etiquette in the first year, and there was no increase or decrease.

古文：宣帝欲设备乐，付有司立议，以梁武爲非。
现代文：陈宣帝准备增设音乐，交给有关部门讨论。结果认为梁武帝不对。
English: Chen Xuandi prepared to add music and submitted it to the relevant departments for discussion. As a result, Liang Wudi was considered to be wrong.

古文：时硕学名儒，朝端在位，咸希旨注同。
现代文：当时的名流学者、高官显贵，无不顺应旨意随声附和。
English: Famous scholars, high-ranking officials and dignitaries of the time, all complied with the will and joined in.

古文：察乃博引经籍，独违群议，据梁乐爲是。
现代文：姚察却广引经籍，独违众议，认为梁代之乐是正确的。
English: Yao Zha, on the other hand, quoted widely from the scriptures and went against the popular opinion, believing that Liang's interpretation was correct.

古文：当时惊骇，莫不惭服。
现代文：当时引起众人惊骇，无不惭愧钦佩。
English: At that time, it caused everyone's consternation, and everyone was ashamed to admire it.

古文：仆射徐陵因改同察议。
现代文：仆射徐陵于是改用姚察的意见。
English: So, he changed his opinion to that of Yao Zhao.

古文：其不顺时随俗，皆此类也。
现代文：他不爱趋时随俗的行为，往往都是这样。
English: Yao's meticulous observation and common sense are similar to anecdotes.

古文：后历仁威淮南王、平南建安王二府谘议参军。
现代文：后来历任仁威淮南王、平南建安王二府谘议参军。
English: Later, the successors of King Ren Wei of Huainan and King Jianan of Binan consulted the two prefectures to join the army.

古文：丁内忧去职。
现代文：逢母丧辞去职务。
English: He resigned from his post after his mother's death.

古文：俄起爲戎昭将军，知撰梁史。
现代文：不久起用为戎昭将军，主持撰写梁史。
English: He was soon promoted to General Rong Zhao and presided over the writing of Liang Shi.

古文：后主立，兼东宫通事舍人，知撰史。
现代文：后主即位后，兼任东宫通事舍人，仍负责撰史。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he also served as the secretary of the East Palace, and was still responsible for writing history.

古文：至德元年，除中书侍郎，转太子仆，余并如故。
现代文：至德元年，任职中书侍郎，又转任太子仆，其余官职如故。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he served as a secretary, and then as a servant to the crown prince. The rest of his official positions remain the same.

古文：初，梁室沦没，察父僧垣入长安，察蔬食布衣，不听音乐，至是凶问因聘使到江南。
现代文：当初，梁朝灭亡，姚察父亲僧垣被掳入长安，姚察于是便素食布衣，不听音乐，直到后来他父亲的死讯传到江南。
English: At first, the Liang Dynasty was overthrown, and Yao Zha's father, a monk, was captured and taken to Chang'an. As a result, Yao Zha became a vegetarian and did not listen to music until news of his father's death spread to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：时察母韦氏丧制适除，后主以察羸瘠，虑加毁顿，乃密遣中书舍人司马申就宅发哀，仍敕申专加譬抑。
现代文：当时他刚为母亲韦氏服丧期满，后主看他病弱不堪，怕再毁伤他的身体，就不敢张扬，秘密派遣中书舍人司马申到姚察家去吊丧，并让司马申劝止他节哀。
English: At that time, he had just completed the period of mourning for his mother Wei, and his stepmother saw that he was weak and sickly. Afraid of damaging his body again, she did not dare to make a fuss, and secretly sent the Chinese scholar Sima Shen to Yao Zha's house to mourn, and let Sima Shen persuade him to stop mourning.

古文：寻以忠毅将军起兼东宫通事舍人，察频让不许。
现代文：不久以忠毅将军的名号起任他兼东宫通事舍人，姚察屡次辞让不肯就职。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as General Zhong Yi and the secretary of the East Palace, but Yao Zha repeatedly refused to take office.

古文：俄敕知着作郎事。
现代文：很快又下诏让他主管著作郎事务。
English: Soon after, he was put in charge of the publisher's affairs.

古文：服阕，除给事黄门侍郎，领着作。
现代文：丧服期满，任给事黄门侍郎之职，兼任著作郎。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed to the post of Huangmen waiter, and also served as a writer.

古文：察既累居忧戚，斋素日久，因加气疾。
现代文：姚察屡遭不幸之后，斋戒素食日久，因此染病。
English: After Yao Zha repeatedly suffered misfortune, he fasted and ate vegetarian food for a long time, and became ill as a result.

古文：后主尝别召见，爲之动容，命停长斋，令从晚食。
现代文：后主曾特别召见他，看到他那副样子也难过得变了脸色，命令他停了长斋，让他和自己一块儿吃晚饭。
English: The empress dowager had summoned him specially, and when she saw him, she was saddened and changed her face. She ordered him to break his long fast, and let him have dinner with her.

古文：又诏授秘书监，领着作，奏撰中书表集。
现代文：又下诏授予他秘书监一职，兼任著作郎，进呈所撰中书表集。
English: He was also awarded the post of secretary-supervisor, concurrently serving as a writer, and submitted to the collection of Chinese books.

古文：历度支、吏部二尚书。
现代文：历任度支、吏部二尚书。
English: Successive leaders of the provincial party branch and the cadre department are two Shangshu.

古文：察自居显要，一不交通。
现代文：姚察自从身居要职，便断绝一切私交。
English: Yao Zha has severed all personal relationships since he assumed high office.

古文：尝有私门生不敢厚饷，送南布一端，花綀一匹。
现代文：曾经有他的一个门生不敢给他送厚礼，只送他南布一端，花纟束一匹。
English: Once, one of his disciples did not dare to give him a gift, only giving him a piece of cloth and a bunch of flowers.

古文：察谓曰： 吾所衣着，止是麻布蒲綀，此物于吾无用。
现代文：姚察对他说： 我所穿的衣服，只是麻布蒲纟束。这些东西对我没有用处。
English: Yao Zha said to him, "The clothes I am wearing are just a bunch of linen cloths. These things are of no use to me.

古文：既欲相款接，幸不烦尔。 
现代文：既然想和我真诚交往，就不须送什么礼物。 
English: Since you want to have a sincere relationship with me, you don't have to give me a gift.

古文：此人逊请，察厉色驱出，自是莫敢馈遗。
现代文：那人一再客气礼让，姚察发怒，厉声把他赶出门去，从此再也没人敢给他送礼了。
English: After the man repeatedly made polite concessions, Yao Ca became angry and drove him out of the door with a sharp voice. From then on, no one dared to give him a gift.

古文：陈亡入隋，诏授秘书丞，别敕成梁、陈二史。又敕于朱华阁长参。
现代文：陈亡后入仕隋朝，文帝下诏任他为秘书丞，又令他完成梁、陈二朝史，还让他在朱华阁长期负责修史工作。
English: After Chen's death, he entered the Sui Dynasty, and Emperor Wen appointed him as secretary-general, and ordered him to complete the history of the Liang and Chen dynasties, and also let him be responsible for the revision of history in Zhu Huagou for a long time.

古文：文帝知察蔬菲，别日独召入内殿，赐果菜，指谓朝臣曰： 闻姚察学行当今无比，我平陈唯得此一人。 
现代文：文帝知道姚察生活简朴，粗茶淡饭，一天单独召他入内殿，赐食水果菜肴，并指着他对朝臣们说： 听说姚察学问人品当世无双，我灭陈仅得此一人而已。 
English: Emperor Wen knew that Yao Zha's life was simple, with plain food and coarse tea. One day, he called him into the inner hall alone and gave him fruit dishes to eat. Pointing to him, he said to the courtiers: I heard that Yao Zha's scholarly qualities are unparalleled in the world, and I was the only one to defeat Chen.

古文：开皇十三年，袭封北绛郡公。
现代文：开皇十三年，承袭父职作北绛郡公。
English: In the 13th year of the Emperor's reign, he succeeded his father as the governor of Beilun County.

古文：察在陈时聘周，因得与父僧垣相见，将别之际，绝而复苏。
现代文：姚察在陈朝时曾出使北周，因此得以与父亲僧垣相见，临别之时悲痛得死去活来。
English: During the Chen Dynasty, Yao Zha was sent to Northern Zhou, so he was able to meet his father, a monk. At the time of parting, he was overcome with grief.

古文：至是承袭，愈更悲感，见者莫不爲之歔欷。
现代文：这时承袭父职，更加悲哀伤感，见到他悲痛之状的人无不下泪。
English: At this time, inheriting his father's position, he was even more sad and sad, and those who saw his grief could not help but shed tears.

古文：丁后母杜氏丧，解职。在服制之中，有白鸠巢于户上。
现代文：逢后母杜氏去世，解去职务，在服丧期间，有白鸠在他门头上做窝。
English: After his mother passed away and he was relieved of his duties, egrets made a nest on his doorstep during the period of mourning.

古文：仁寿二年，诏除员外散骑常侍、晋王侍读。
现代文：仁寿二年，文帝下诏封他为员外散骑常侍、晋王侍读。
English: In the second year of his life, Emperor Wen decreed that he be appointed as a non-commissioned cavalry officer and attendant of Jin Wang.

古文：炀帝即位，授太子内舍人。
现代文：隋炀帝即位后，委以太子内舍人之职。
English: After Emperor Sui and Qian ascended the throne, the committee passed the post to another person.

古文：及改易衣冠，删定朝式，预参对问。
现代文：朝廷变更衣冠服饰，删改朝仪等事，姚察参与顾问。
English: Yao Zha was a consultant involved in the Imperial Court's changes in clothing and accessories, as well as the abrogation and alteration of imperial etiquette.

古文：大业二年，终于东都。
现代文：大业二年，死于东都洛阳。
English: He died in Luoyang, the eastern capital, two years later.

古文：遗命薄葬，以松板薄棺，才可容身，土周于棺而已。葬日，止麤车即送厝旧茔北。不须立灵，置一小床，每日设清水，六斋日设斋食菜果，任家有无，不须别经营也。
现代文：留下遗嘱要薄葬，用薄松木板作棺材，容下身体即可，周围用土一封就行了；下葬那天，只需用辆大车拉到旧墓地的北边；不必设灵位，放一张小床，每天摆上点清水，六斋日时设置斋食菜果，家里有什么用什么，不要另外操办。
English: If you leave a will, it should be buried in a thin coffin, made of thin pine planks. The body can be accommodated, and the surrounding soil can be used. On the day of burial, it is only necessary to use a truck to pull it to the north of the old cemetery. There is no need to set up a spiritual place, put a small bed, put some clean water every day, and set up fasting vegetables and fruits on the sixth day of Lent. Do not do anything else if you have anything to do at home.

古文：初，察欲读一藏经，并已究竟，将终，曾无痛恼，但西向坐正念，云 一切空寂 。
现代文：当初，姚察要读一部佛经，后来研读完毕，临死时，没有一点痛苦烦恼，只是面向西方打坐，排除杂念，只想 一切空寂 。
English: At first, Yao Zha wanted to read a Buddhist sutra. Later, after he finished reading, when he was about to die, he did not have any pain or trouble, but just meditated facing the west, eliminated distractions, and only thought of emptiness.

古文：其后身体柔软，顔色如恒。
现代文：后来就身体发软，面色如常而逝。
English: Later, the body softened and the face faded away as usual.

古文：两宫悼惜，赠賵甚厚。
现代文：朝廷深表哀痛，赠赐很多丧葬用品。
English: The Imperial Court expressed its deep sorrow and donated a lot of funeral supplies.

古文：察至孝，有人伦鉴识，冲虚谦逊，不以所长矜人。
现代文：姚察恪守孝道，是人伦楷模，能明辨是非，淡泊谦虚，不以自己的长处傲视别人。
English: Yao Zha adheres to filial piety, is a model of human ethics, can distinguish right from wrong, is modest, and does not use his own strengths to look down on others.

古文：专志着书，白首不倦。
现代文：专心著书，白首不倦。
English: Concentrate on writing, never get tired.

古文：所着汉书训纂三十卷，说林十卷，西聘、玉玺、建康三锺等记各一卷，文集二十卷。
现代文：共著有《汉书训纂》三十卷，《说林》十卷，《西聘》、《玉玺》、《建康三钟》等记各一卷，文集二十卷。
English: He has co-authored 30 volumes of "Hanshu Xuanquan," 10 volumes of "Shuilin," one volume each of "Xibai," "Yuhuan" and "Jiankang Sanjing," and 20 volumes of literary collections.

古文：所撰梁、陈史，虽未毕功，隋开皇中，文帝遣中书舍人虞世基索本，且进。
现代文：所撰梁、陈史，虽没能完稿，但隋开皇年间，文帝已派中书舍人虞世基索取稿本，上交朝廷。
English: Although the author, Chen Shi, was not able to complete the manuscript, during the reign of Emperor Sui, Emperor Wen sent the Chinese scholar Yu Shiji to request the manuscript and submit it to the imperial court.

古文：临亡，戒子思廉撰续。
现代文：他临终时，嘱咐儿子姚思廉继续撰写。
English: On his deathbed, he told his son Yao Siliang to continue writing.

古文：思廉在陈爲衡阳王府法曹参军、会稽王主簿。
现代文：思廉在陈朝为衡阳王府法曹参军、会稽王主簿。
English: Siliang joined the army in the Chen Dynasty as the legal officer of Hengyang Royal Palace, and was the chief accountant of the King's Auditing Office.

