古文：周穆王燕昭王彭祖魏伯阳
现代文：周穆王燕昭王彭祖魏伯阳
English: Zhou Mu Wang Yan Zhao Wang Peng Zu Wei Boyang

古文：周穆王
现代文：周穆王
English: Zhou Mu Wang

古文：周穆王名满，房后所生，昭王子也。
现代文：周穆王名叫姬满，是房太后生的，父亲是周昭王。
English: Zhou Mu Wang's name was Ji Man. He was born to the Empress Dowager Fang and his father was Zhou Zhao Wang.

古文：昭王南巡不还，穆王乃立，时年五十矣。
现代文：昭王南巡时死在途中，穆王于是继位成为周朝的国君。
English: When King Zhao was on a southern tour, he died on the way. King Mu then succeeded to the throne and became the ruler of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：立五十四年，一百四岁。
现代文：当时穆王已经五十岁了，一共在位五十四年，活了一百零四岁。
English: At that time, King Mu was already 50 years old. He reigned for a total of 54 years and lived to be 104 years old.

古文：王少好神仙之道，常欲使车辙马迹，遍于天下，以仿黄帝焉。
现代文：穆王年轻时就喜欢修炼成仙的道术，想学黄帝那样驾车马游遍天下的名山大川。
English: When he was young, King Mu liked to cultivate the Taoism of immortality and wanted to learn how to drive a horse across the world's famous mountains and rivers like the Yellow Emperor.

古文：乃乘八骏之马，奔戎，使造父为御。
现代文：于是他坐着八匹骏马拉的车奔赴西北戎族聚居的地方，为他驾车的是周朝最有名的驭手造父。
English: So he rushed to the place where the Northwest Eunuchs lived in a carriage drawn by eight pack horses, driven by the most famous charioteer of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：得白狐玄貉，以祭于河宗。
现代文：在路上，穆王得到一只白狐狸一只黑貉子，用它们祭祀了河神。
English: On the way, King Mu got a white fox and a black pheasant, and used them to sacrifice to the river god.

古文：导车涉弱水，鱼鳖鼋鼍以为梁。
现代文：他的车驶到据说连羽毛都浮不起来的弱水时，河里的鱼、龟、鳄鱼等自动为他搭起了桥让他的车通过。
English: When his car drove into weak water, where it is said that not even feathers can float, fish, turtles, crocodiles, etc. in the river automatically built a bridge for him to let his car pass.

古文：逐登于舂山，又觞西王母于瑶池之上。
现代文：接着穆王登上了舂山，在天界的瑶池上会见了西王母，并和她一起畅饮。
English: Then, King Mu ascended Lushan Mountain and met the West Queen Mother at the Lushan Pond in the Heaven Realm, and had a drink with her.

古文：王母谣曰： 白云在天，道里悠远。
现代文：筵席上，西王母唱道： 天上飘着悠悠白云，道路啊漫长得无穷无尽。
English: At the banquet, the Queen of the West sang: There are long white clouds floating in the sky, and the road is long and endless.

古文：山川间之，将子无死，尚能复来。 
现代文：无数的高山大河把我们阻隔，从此一别将难通音信。如果你能长生不老，我们以后还能重逢。 
English: Countless mountains and rivers separate us, and from now on it will be difficult to communicate. If you can live forever, we can meet again in the future.

古文：王答曰： 余归东土，和洽诸夏，万民平均，吾顾见汝。 
现代文：穆王说， 我回到中原故土以后，将使华夏各国都能和睦相处，使万民都过上平等富足的生活，到那时我会再来看望你。 
English: King Mu said, "When I return to my homeland in the Central Plains, I will make all the countries in China live in harmony, so that all people can live an equal and prosperous life. At that time, I will come to see you again."

古文：比及三年，将复而野。又至于雷首太行，遂入于宗周。
现代文：过了三年，穆王又出行于原野，到了山西的雷首山和太行山，然后又回到周朝的都城镐京。
English: Three years later, King Mu traveled in the wilderness again, to Mount Leshou and Mount Taihang in Shanxi Province, and then returned to the capital of the Zhou Dynasty, Beijing.

古文：时尹喜既通流沙草栖于终南之阴，王追其旧迹，招隐士尹辄、杜冲，居于草栖之所，因号楼观。
现代文：当时令尹喜已经跋涉过流沙和草地到了终南山之北，周穆王也追随着他的足迹，请来了隐士尹辄、杜冲，他俩都住在草地树上搭的屋子里，周穆王也来和他们同住，他们的住处被称为 楼观 。
English: At that time, Yin Xi had already trudged through the quicksand and grassland to the north of the last Nanshan Mountain. Zhou Mu Wang also followed his footsteps and invited the hermits Yin Qi and Du Chong. Both of them lived in a house built on a tree in the grassland. Zhou Mu Wang also came to live with them. Their residence was called Lou Guan.

古文：从诣焉。祭父自郑圃来谒，谏王以徐偃之乱。王乃返国，宗社复安。
现代文：后来祭父从郑圃赶来拜见穆王，报告说徐偃造反作乱，穆王才又回到国中平复了作乱，使社稷平安。
English: Later, the priest arrived from Zhengpu to pay homage to King Mu. He reported that King Mu had returned to the country to quell the rebellion and bring peace to the society.

古文：王造昆仑时，饮蜂山石髓，食玉树之实，又登群玉山，西王母所居，皆得飞灵冲天之道。
现代文：穆王登昆仑山时，喝的是蜂山石缝中的甘泉，吃的是玉树上的果实，又登上西王母居住的群玉山，得到腾云飞升的道术。
English: When King Mu ascended Mount Kunlun, he drank from the spring of nectar in the cleft of the rock of Mount Bee, ate the fruit of the jade tree, and ascended the jade mountains where the Queen of the West lived, and obtained the Taoism of soaring clouds.

古文：而示迹托形者，盖所以示民有终耳。
现代文：他之所以还以凡人的形象在世间出现，是想现身说道，告诉人们修炼的成果。
English: The reason why he still appears in the world as an ordinary person is that he wants to show himself and tell people the results of his cultivation.

古文：况其饮琬琰之膏，进甜雪之味，素莲黑枣，碧藕白橘，皆神仙之物，得不延期长生乎。
现代文：何况穆王喝的是玉石制成的膏浆，吃的昆仑山上的甜雪，还有素莲、黑枣、碧藕、白桔等仙果，怎能不延年益寿长生不老呢？
English: What's more, King Mu drinks a paste made of jade, eats the sweet snow on Mount Kunlun, and has lotus, black jujube, tourmaline, white orange and other fruits. How could he not prolong his life and live forever?

古文：又云，西王母降穆王之宫。相与升云而去。
现代文：传说西王母曾降临到周穆王的宫中，两个人一块驾云飞升，进入了天宫。
English: Legend has it that the West Queen Mother once descended to the palace of King Zhou Mu, and the two of them flew up together on a cloud and entered the Heavenly Palace.

古文：燕昭王
现代文：燕昭王
English: Yan Zhao Wang

古文：燕昭王者，哙王之子也。及即位，好神仙之道。
现代文：燕昭王是哙王的儿子，即位以后，非常爱好修炼成仙的道术。
English: Yan Zhao Wang is the son of King Zou. After he ascended the throne, he was very fond of cultivating the Taoism of immortality.

古文：仙人甘需臣事之，为王述昆台登真之事，去嗜欲，撤声色，无思无为，可以致道。
现代文：他朝中有个叫甘需的大臣就是个仙人，常给燕昭王讲述登昆仑山修道的事，告诉他只要去掉心中的私欲，不接触女色和游乐，什么也不想，什么也不作，清心寡欲，就可以得道。
English: In his court, there was a so-called greedy minister who was a hermit. He often told Yan Zhao Wang about ascending Mount Kunlun to become a monk. He told him that as long as he got rid of the selfish desires in his heart, did not come into contact with women and pleasure, did not think about anything, did not do anything, and had a pure heart and few desires, he would be able to attain the Way.

古文：王行之既久，谷将子乘虚而集，告于王曰： 西王母将降，观尔之所修，示尔以灵玄之要。 
现代文：燕昭王照甘需的要求实行了很久。有一次仙人谷将子驾云来到燕昭王宫中对他说， 西王母将要降临，她要看看你修道的情况，指点你修炼的诀窍。 
English: Yan Zhao Wang carried out the request for a long time. Once, the Valley of Immortals brought Zi Jiuyun to Yan Zhao Wang's palace and said to him, the Queen of the West is coming, she wants to see the situation of your cultivation and point out your cultivation skills.

古文：后一年，王母果至。与王游燧林之下，说炎皇钻火之术。
现代文：过了一年，西王母果然降临，和燕昭王一起在燧林游玩，告诉他炎帝钻木取火的方法。
English: A year later, the West King's Mother did indeed come to visit Yan Zhao Wang in Yulin. She told him how to drill firewood and make fire.

古文：然绿桂膏以照夜，忽有飞蛾衔火，集王之宫。得圆丘砂珠，结而为佩。
现代文：到了夜间，就点燃起桂树的膏脂照明，这时突然有很多飞蛾口衔着火聚集到燕昭王宫中，火球变成了圆丘形的砂珠，燕昭王就把它们串成了玉佩。
English: At night, they lit up the resin lighting of the cinnamon tree. Suddenly, many moths gathered in Yan Zhaowang's palace with their mouths on fire. The fireballs turned into round mound-shaped sand beads, and Yan Zhaowang strung them together to make jade beads.

古文：王登捱日之台，得神鸟所衔洞光之珠，以消烦暑。
现代文：燕昭王登上离太阳最近的一座高台上，得到了神鸟衔来的一颗宝珠，这宝珠能使人避开太阳的炎热。
English: Yan Zhao Wang climbed onto a high platform closest to the sun and received a jewel from the divine bird. This jewel can help people avoid the heat of the sun.

古文：自是王母三降于燕宫，而昭王狥于攻取，不能遵甘需澄静之旨，王母亦不复至。
现代文：后来西王母又三次降临燕昭王的宫中。而燕昭王忙于攻城略地，处理国事，没有遵照甘需当初说的话去静心修炼，王母就再也没来过。
English: Later, the Queen of the West came to the palace of King Yan Zhao three more times. However, King Yan Zhao was busy with the siege of the city and the country, dealing with state affairs, and did not follow the words of Gan Bo to meditate and cultivate, so the Queen Mother never came again.

古文：甘需白： 王母所设之馔，非人世所有，玉酒金醴，后期万祀，王既尝之，自当得道矣。但在虚疑纯白。保其遐龄耳。 
现代文：甘需说： 西王母所设的酒宴，不是人世间的东西，那些玉酒金液，都是需要万年的时间酿制用来供神仙享用的，燕昭王既然吃了，自然就得道了，只要虚心高洁的静修，自然会保持长生的。 
English: Gan Gou said, "The wine banquet set up by the Western Queen Mother is not something of this world. Those jade wine and gold liquid require ten thousand years to be brewed for the immortals to enjoy. Since Yan Zhao Wang has eaten it, he will naturally attain the Tao. As long as he is modest and pure in his meditation, he will naturally maintain his longevity."

古文：甘需亦升天而去。
现代文：后来甘需也升天而去，三十三年后，燕昭王无病而死。
English: Later, Gan Gan also ascended to heaven, and thirty-three years later, Yan Zhao Wang died without illness.

古文：三十三年，王无疾而殂，形骨柔软，香气盈庭。
现代文：他死后身体骨骼十分柔软，身上散发出的香气溢满于宫中。
English: After his death, his bones were very soft, and the fragrance from his body filled the palace.

古文：子惠王立矣。
现代文：燕昭王死后，他的儿子惠王作了国君。
English: After the death of Yan Zhao Wang, his son Hui Wang became the king.

古文：彭祖
现代文：彭祖
English: Peng Zu

古文：彭祖者，姓籛讳铿，帝颛顼之玄孙也。殷末已七百六十七岁，而不衰老。
现代文：彭祖姓籛名铿，是远古时代颛顼帝的玄孙，到殷代末年时，彭祖已经七百六十七岁了，但一点也不衰老。
English: Peng Zu, surnamed Renmei, was the great-great-grandson of Emperor Wu in ancient times. By the end of the Yin Dynasty, Peng Zu was seven hundred and sixty-seven years old, but he did not age at all.

古文：少好恬静，不恤世务，不营名誉，不饰车服，唯以养生治身为事。
现代文：彭祖少年时就喜欢清静，对世上的事物没有兴趣，不追名逐利，不喜爱豪华的车马服饰，把修身养性看成头等大事。
English: When Peng Zu was a young boy, he liked tranquility, had no interest in worldly things, did not chase fame and profit, did not like luxurious car and horse costumes, and regarded self-cultivation as a top priority.

古文：王闻之，以为大夫。
现代文：君王听说他的品德高洁，就请他出任大夫的官职。
English: When the king heard of his virtuous character, he invited him to take up the post of doctor.

古文：常称疾闲居，不与政事。
现代文：但彭祖常常以有病为借口，不参与公务。
English: But Peng Zu often used his illness as an excuse not to participate in official duties.

古文：善于补导之术，服水桂云母粉麋角散，常有少容。
现代文：他非常精通滋补身体的方术，常服用 水桂云母粉  麋角散 等丹方，所以面容总像少年人那样年轻。
English: He is very proficient in the art of nourishing the body. He often takes cucumber mica powder, ginger horn powder and other herbal medicines, so his face is always as young as a boy.

古文：然性沈重，终不自言有道，亦不作诡惑变化鬼怪之事，窈然无为。
现代文：然而彭祖的心性十分稳重，从来不说自己修炼得道的事，也不装神弄鬼的惑乱人心。
English: However, Peng Zu's mentality was very stable. He never talked about his own cultivation of the Tao, nor did he pretend to be a charlatan to mislead people.

古文：少周游，时还独行，人莫知其所诣，伺候竟不见也。
现代文：他清净无为，幽然独处，很少到处周游，就是出行，也是一个人独自走，人们不知道他到什么地方去，连他的仆从也不知道他哪儿去了。
English: He is pure and inactive, he lives alone, he rarely travels anywhere, even when he does, he travels alone, people do not know where he is going, even his servants do not know where he has gone.

古文：有车马而常不乘，或数百日，或数十日，不持资粮，还家则衣食与人无异。
现代文：彭祖有车有马但很少乘用，出门时常常不带路费和口粮，一走就是几十天甚至几百天，但回来时仍和平常一样非常健康。
English: Peng Zu has a car and a horse, but he rarely uses them. When he goes out, he often does not take travel expenses and rations with him. When he leaves, it is for dozens or even hundreds of days, but when he comes back, he is still very healthy as usual.

古文：常闭气内息，从旦至中，乃危坐拭目，摩搦身体，舐唇咽唾，服气数十，乃起行言笑。
现代文：平时他常常静坐屏气，心守丹田从早晨一直到中午都端端正正地坐着，用手轻轻揉双眼，轻轻按摩身体的各部位，用舌头舐嘴唇吞咽唾液，运上几十次气，然后才收功，赶来散步谈笑。
English: In ordinary times, he would often sit quietly and hold his breath. He would sit upright from morning until noon, gently rubbing his eyes with his hands, gently massaging various parts of his body, licking his lips with his tongue, swallowing saliva, and breathing in and out dozens of times. Only then would he regain his strength and come out for a walk to talk and laugh.

古文：其体中或瘦倦不安，便导引闭气，以攻所患。心存其体，面九窍，五脏四肢，至于毛发，皆令具至。
现代文：如果他偶尔感到身体疲倦或不舒服，就运用闭气的方法来治体内的病患，让胸中所运的气散布到身体的各部位，不论是脸上的九窍，肺腑五脏、手足四肢以至于身上的毛发，都让气逐一走到。
English: If he occasionally feels physically tired or uncomfortable, he will use the method of shutting off the breath to treat the patients in the body, and let the breath carried in the chest spread to all parts of the body, whether it is the face, the lungs, the limbs, and even the hair on the body, let the breath go one by one.

古文：觉其气云行体中，故于鼻口中达十指末，寻即体和。
现代文：这时就会觉得气像云一样在身体中运行，从鼻子、嘴一直通到十指的末端，不一会儿就觉得通体十分舒畅了。
English: At this time, you will feel the qi moving like a cloud in the body, from the nose and mouth all the way to the end of the ten fingers, and soon you will feel the whole body is very comfortable.

古文：王自往问讯，不告。
现代文：君王去看望彭祖时，也常常不通知他，偷偷留下些珍宝玩物赏给他就走了。
English: When the king visited Peng Zu, he often did not inform him, secretly left some precious toys to reward him, and then left.

古文：致遗珍玩，前后数万金，而皆受之，以恤贫贱，无所留。
现代文：君王给彭祖的赏赐前后有几万金，彭祖也都接受下来，但立刻就把它们救济了穷苦的人们，自己一点也不留。
English: The king gave Peng Zu tens of thousands of gold before and after the reward, Peng Zu also accepted it, but immediately gave it to the poor people, and did not keep any for himself.

古文：又采女者，亦少得道，知养性之方，年二百七十岁，视之如五六十岁。
现代文：还有位叫采女的人，也是从少年时就开始修道，已经二百七十岁了，看起来只有五六十岁，她也很精通修炼的方术。
English: There is also a person named Zeng Niu, who has been practicing since she was a teenager. She is 270 years old, but looks like she is only in her fifties or sixties. She is also very proficient in the art of cultivation.

古文：奉事之于掖庭，为立华屋紫阁，饰以金玉。
现代文：君王让采女住在嫔妃的掖庭宫中，为她建筑了华丽殿阁，赏赐她不少金玉。
English: The king let the princess live in the palace of the empress Dowager, built a magnificent palace for her, and rewarded her with a lot of gold.

古文：乃令采女乘辎軿，往问道于彭祖。
现代文：有一次，君王让采女乘上华贵的马车去看望彭祖，向彭祖求教修行的要点和延年益寿的方法。
English: On one occasion, the king asked his daughter-in-law to take a luxurious carriage to visit Peng Zu, to ask Peng Zu for the essentials of the practice and the method of prolonging life.

古文：既至再拜，请问延年益寿之法，彭祖曰： 欲举形登天，上补仙官，当用金丹，此九召太一，所以白日升天也。
现代文：彭祖说， 如果想要升入天堂去在仙界做仙官，就要常服金丹。九召、太一都是因为常服金丹才白日升天的。
English: Peng Zu said that if you want to ascend to heaven and become a celestial officer in the celestial world, you must always wear the cassock. Jiuzhaigou and Taichi both ascended to heaven during the day because they always wore the cassock.

古文：此道至大，非君王之所能为。
现代文：不过这是道术中最高的，人间的君王是作不到的。
English: However, this is the highest level of Daoism, and it is impossible to make a human king.

古文：其次当爱养精神，服药草，可以长生。
现代文：其次就是要养精蓄神，服用药草，可以长生。
English: Secondly, it is necessary to keep one's spirits up and take herbs so that one can live longer.

古文：但不能役使鬼神，乘虚飞行。
现代文：但是不能搞那些驱使鬼神、乘风飞行的邪术。
English: But you can't do those magic tricks that drive ghosts and gods and fly with the wind.

古文：身不知交接之道，纵服药无益也。
现代文：如果本身不懂得阴阳交合的道理，就是吃药也没有效果。
English: If you do not understand the principle of yin and yang intercourse, even taking medicine has no effect.

古文：能养阴阳之意，可推之而得，但不思言耳，何足怪问也。
现代文：关于阴阳交合的原理，只能靠自己去推断体会，怎么能说得出来呢？所以觉得你问得很奇怪。
English: Regarding the principle of yin and yang mating, you can only deduce and experience it on your own. How can you say it? So I think your question is very strange.

古文：吾遗腹而生，三岁而失母，遇犬戎之乱，流离西域，百有余年。
现代文：我是遗腹子，三岁就死了母亲，又赶上了犬戎之乱，颠沛流离逃难到了西域，在那里呆了一百多年。
English: I am a posthumous child. My mother died when I was three years old, and I was caught up in the Inujimura Rebellion. I was displaced and fled to the western region, where I stayed for more than a hundred years.

古文：加以少祜，丧四十九妻，失五十四子，数遭忧患，和气折伤。
现代文：我从少年就死了父母失去了依靠，以后又陆续死了四十九个妻子，失去了五十四个儿子，多次遭难，损伤了我的元气。
English: Since I was a boy, my parents died and I lost my dependence. Since then, forty-nine wives have died one after another, fifty-four sons have been lost, and I have suffered many hardships, which has damaged my vitality.

古文：冷热肌肤不泽，荣卫焦枯，恐不度世。所闻浅薄，不足宣传。
现代文：不管冷热，我的肌肤都没有光泽，营养护理得也很不好，形体瘦得像枯木，恐怕活不太长久，加上我的所见所闻也很浅薄，实在没有什么可向别人宣扬的。
English: Whether hot or cold, my skin has no luster, nutrition care is very poor, my body is thin like dead wood, I'm afraid I won't live very long, and what I've seen and heard is very shallow, there's really nothing to preach to others.

古文：大宛山有青精先生者，传言千岁，色如童子，步行日过五百里，能终岁不食，亦能一日九食，真可问也。 
现代文：大宛山里有一位青精先生，据说已经活了一千岁，仍然像个童子，一天能步行五百里，能够长年不吃东西，也可以一天吃九餐，你不妨去向他求教修炼之术吧。 
English: There is a young master in Dawang Mountain who is said to have lived for a thousand years and still looks like a boy. He can walk five hundred miles a day, can go for years without eating, and can eat nine meals a day. You might as well go to him to learn the art of cultivation.

古文：采女曰： 敢问青精先生是何仙人者也？ 
现代文：采女问道， 那么青精先生是位什么神仙呢？ 
English: The young lady asked, "So what kind of immortal is Mr. Qingjing?"

古文：彭祖曰： 得道者耳，非仙人也。
现代文：彭祖说他也不过是个得道的人，不是什么仙人。
English: Peng Zu said that he was just a person who had attained the Way, not some kind of immortal.

古文：仙人者，或竦身入云，无翅而飞；或驾龙乘云，上造天阶；或化为鸟兽，游浮青云；或潜行江海，翱翔名山；或食元气，或茹芝草，或出入人间而人不识，或隐其身而莫之见。
现代文：凡是仙人，或者能够纵身入云，没有翅膀而能飞翔，或者能乘着龙驾着云直达天庭；或者能变化成鸟兽翱翔在云中，畅游在江海，飞越穿行于名山大川。还有些神仙以天地之元气为食，或者吃仙药灵芝，或者出入于人世间而凡人看不出他们是神仙；或者隐藏起自己的身形使人看不见。
English: All immortals can either fly into the clouds, without wings, or ride a dragon to reach heaven; or transform into birds and beasts to soar in the clouds, swim in rivers and seas, and fly through famous mountains and rivers. Some immortals feed on the vitality of heaven and earth, or eat the elixir Ganoderma lucidum, or enter and leave the human world without being seen by mortals; or hide their bodies to be invisible.

古文：面生异骨，体有奇毛，率好深僻，不交俗流。
现代文：有的脸上长着非凡的骨相，身上有奇异的毛，孤独自处，不与凡人交往。
English: Some of them have extraordinary bone structure on their faces and strange hair on their bodies. They live alone and do not socialize with ordinary people.

古文：然此等虽有不死之寿，去人情，远荣乐，有若雀化为蛤，雉化为蜃，失其本真，更守异气。余之愚心，未愿此已。
现代文：然而这些仙人虽然有长生不死的寿命，但他们与人情相去太远，与人世完全隔绝了，就像鸟雀变成蛤蟆，山鸡变成海蜃，已经失去了本身的真实，成为一种怪异的东西，以我愚笨的想法，是不愿意变成那种仙人的。
English: However, although these immortals have an eternal life span, they are too far away from human feelings and are completely isolated from the human world. Just like a sparrow becomes a cocoon and a pheasant becomes a seagull, they have lost their own reality and become a strange thing. In my stupid mind, I don't want to become that kind of immortal.

古文：入道当食甘旨，服轻丽，通阴阳，处官秩耳。骨节坚强，颜色和泽，老而不衰，延年久视。
现代文：修炼道术，就应该吃甘美的食物，穿轻柔华丽的衣服，懂得阴阳相通相变的道理，也完全可以作官，修道的人应该骨骼健壮，面色和体肤十分有光泽，虽年老而不衰弱，年岁越大见到的事越多。
English: Practitioners of Taoism should eat sweet food, wear soft and gorgeous clothes, understand the principle of yin and yang phase change, and can fully serve as officials. Practitioners should have strong bones, and their complexion and skin should be very shiny. Although they are old, they are not weak. The older they get, the more things they see.

古文：长在世间，寒温风湿不能伤，鬼神众精莫敢犯，五兵百虫不可近，嗔喜毁誉不为累，乃可贵耳。
现代文：长年在人间，冷热风湿伤不着，鬼神精怪不敢犯，五种兵器和百种毒虫都不能靠近，别人的褒贬议论都毫不在乎，这些都是最可贵的。
English: For many years in the human world, cold and hot rheumatism can not hurt, ghosts and spirits dare not commit, five kinds of weapons and a hundred kinds of poisonous insects can not be close, others do not care about the praise and criticism, these are the most valuable.

古文：人之受气，虽不知方术，但养之得宜，常至百二十岁。
现代文：人生在世本来就接受着天地之荫之气，即使不懂得修道的方术，但只要有适当的修养，就可以活到一百二十岁。
English: When a person is alive, he inherently receives the shadow of heaven and earth. Even if he does not know how to cultivate, as long as he has the proper cultivation, he can live to be 120 years old.

古文：不及此者伤也。小复晓道，可得二百四十岁。
现代文：如果稍微懂点道术，就可活到二百四十岁。
English: If you know a little bit about Taoism, you can live to be 240 years old.

古文：加之可至四百八十岁。
现代文：再要多懂些道术，就可以活四百八十岁。
English: If you know more about Taoism, you can live for 480 years.

古文：尽其理者，可以不死，但不成仙人耳。
现代文：真正弄通了修炼的原理，就能长生不死了，只是不能成仙而已。
English: If you truly understand the principles of cultivation, you can live forever, but you cannot become immortal.

古文：养寿之道，但莫伤之而已：夫冬温夏凉，不失四时之和，所以适身也；美色淑资，幽闲娱乐，不致思欲之惑，所以通神也；车服威仪，知足无求，所以一志也；八音五色，以悦视听，所以导心也。
现代文：延年益寿最根本的一条就是不要使身心受到伤害：要适应冬寒夏热的四季气候变化，使身体永远舒适；对美人女色和悠闲娱乐都要适可而止，不要被贪欲所诱惑，这样你的内心就可以安然洁净；对于作官时的车马仪仗服饰，都知足而不贪求，这就能使你志趣专一；音乐绘画使人赏心悦目，使你的心情能够得到启迪。
English: The most fundamental rule for prolonging life is not to cause harm to the body and mind: to adapt to the four seasons of climate change in winter and summer, so that the body is always comfortable; to the beauty and leisure entertainment should be appropriate, do not be tempted by greed, so that your heart can be safe and clean; for the chariot and horse ceremonial dress when serving as an official, be content without greed, which can make you single-minded; music painting makes people pleasing to the eye, so that your mood can be enlightened.

古文：凡此皆以养寿，而不能斟酌之者，反以速患。
现代文：所有上面这些，都能养身益寿。而不能掌握这些分寸，反而会对自己有所伤害。
English: All of the above can improve your health and longevity, but if you can't master these measures, you will hurt yourself.

古文：古之至人，恐下才之子，不识事宜，流遁不还，故绝其源：故有上士别床，中士异被，服药百裹，不如独卧。
现代文：古代的圣人，担心愚钝的人们，不掌握事情的分寸，沉浸在欲河中流连忘返，因而要断绝人欲之源。所以有些非常高洁的雅士们不与妻子同床，其次的一些士人们则不和妻子同被。就是吃上一百副药，也不如一个人独自静卧修养。
English: The sages of ancient times, fearing the dull people, did not grasp the proportion of things, immersed themselves in the river of desire, lingering and forgetting, and thus wanted to cut off the source of human desire. Therefore, some very noble noblemen did not share a bed with their wives, and secondly, some nobles did not share a bed with their wives. Even if you take a hundred pairs of medicine, it is not as good as a person lying alone to cultivate.

古文：五音使人耳聋，五味使人口爽。
现代文：音乐听得过多会使人耳聋，美味吃得过了头反而败坏人的口味。
English: Listening to too much music will make people deaf, and eating too much delicious food will ruin people's taste.

古文：苟能节宣其宜适，抑扬其通塞者，不以减年，得其益也。
现代文：如果对一切都有所节制适可而止，正确地处理通畅和堵塞的关系，就不但不能减寿，还能够获得好处。
English: If everything is tempered with moderation, and the relationship between smoothness and blockage is correctly handled, not only can life expectancy not be reduced, but benefits can also be obtained.

古文：凡此之类，譬犹水火，用之过当，反为害也。
现代文：这一切种种都和水、火的使用一样道理，用得过了分，必然要受害。
English: All of these are just as reasonable as the use of water and fire. If you use too much, you are bound to suffer.

古文：不知其经脉损伤，血气不足，内理空疏，髓脑不实，体已先病。
现代文：人们常常不理解，如果经脉受到了损伤，血气不足，内脏虚弱，髓脑也不坚实，身体必然要生病。
English: People often do not understand that if the meridians are damaged, the blood is insufficient, the internal organs are weak, and the medulla is not solid, the body is bound to get sick.

古文：故为外物所犯，因气寒酒色，以发之耳，若本充实，岂有病也。
现代文：而这病恰恰是因为受了外界的伤害，比如受了天气变化或酒色过度引起了内损，而并不是人自身就会生出病来。
English: And this disease is precisely because of external damage, such as weather changes or excessive alcohol caused internal damage, and it is not the person himself who will get sick.

古文：夫远思强记伤人，优喜悲哀伤人，喜乐过差忿怒不解伤人，汲汲所愿伤人，阴阳不顺伤人。
现代文：思虑过多、用脑过度、过忧过喜、悲哀过度、愤怒气恼、过分企求、阴阳不能协调，这些都能伤人，但男女的房事过度则是最能伤人的。
English: Too much thinking, too much use of the brain, too much worry, too much joy, too much sorrow, too much anger, too much striving, and the yin and yang cannot be coordinated can all hurt people, but the excessive housework of men and women is the most harmful.

古文：有所伤者数种，而独戒于房中，岂不惑哉？
现代文：这乍看很奇怪，其实不然。男女相辅相成，像天地相生是同一个道理。
English: This may seem strange at first glance, but it's not. Men and women complement each other, like heaven and earth, for the same reason.

古文：男女相成，犹天地相生也，所以神气导养，使人不失其和。
现代文：所以男女之间的事更要讲究以气养神，不能过分而失去协调。
English: Therefore, it is even more important to pay attention to matters between men and women to raise spirits with qi, and not to lose coordination excessively.

古文：天地得交接之道，故无终竟之限；人失交接之道，故有伤残之期。
现代文：天和地按着阴阳交接的规律就可以永无终极，人如果失去交接的和谐就会受到伤害。
English: According to the law of yin and yang handover, heaven and earth can never have an end. If people lose the harmony of handover, they will be harmed.

古文：能避众伤之事，得阴阳之术，则不死之道也。
现代文：人如果避开伤害而得到阴阳和谐之术，就得到了长生之道。
English: If a person avoids harm and obtains the art of yin and yang harmony, he obtains the way of longevity.

古文：天地昼分而夜合，一岁三百六十交，而精气和合，故能生产万物而不穷。
现代文：天与地是白天分晚上合，一年有三百六十次交接，天的阳气和地的阴气融合在一起，才使得万物滋生无有穷尽。
English: Heaven and earth are daytime and night, and there are three hundred and sixty times of handover in a year. The yang of heaven and the yin of earth are fused together, which makes all things breed inexhaustibly.

古文：人能则之，可以长存。
现代文：人如果能符合天道，就能够长存。
English: If a person can conform to the heavenly way, he can survive for a long time.

古文：次有服气，得其道则邪气不得入，治身之本要。
现代文：其次就是吐纳运气的法术，得到这种法术的人，邪气就不能侵害他，这是修炼自身的根本所在。
English: The second is the spell of spitting luck. The person who obtains this spell cannot be harmed by evil spirits. This is the essence of cultivation itself.

古文：其余吐纳导引之术，及念体中万神、有舍影守形之事，一千七百余条，及四时首向、责己谢过、卧起早晏之法，皆非真道，可以教初学者，以正其身。
现代文：其它像吐纳导引、含影守形等等的方法有一千七百多条，以及四季睡觉时头应朝哪个方向、经常检讨自己的过错、睡眠和起床的早晚等等方法，都算不上修道的真谛，不过可以教那些初学修道的人入门而已。
English: There are more than 1,700 other methods such as tuning in guidance, shadowing, and so on, as well as the four seasons, which direction should the head be facing when sleeping, regularly reviewing one's own faults, sleeping and getting up in the morning and evening, and so on, are not the true essence of the practice, but can only teach those who are new to the practice to get started.

古文：人受精养体，服气炼形，则万神自守其真，不然者，则荣卫枯悴，万神自逝，悲思所留者也。
现代文：一个人如果能够修身养性，运气炼身，那么万神都会来到他的心中。如果不能很好的调养自身，把身体搞得十分衰弱，那万神也就自然离去，就是再悲伤也不会把神留住。
English: If a person is able to cultivate his body and nurture his character, then the gods will come to his heart. If he cannot cultivate himself well and makes his body very weak, then the gods will naturally leave, and even sadness will not keep the gods.

古文：人为道，不负其本而逐其末，告以至言而不能信，见约要之书，谓之轻浅，而不尽服诵，观夫太清北神中经之属，以此自疲，至死无益，不亦悲哉？
现代文：修道的人如果不能找到最根本的道理而去舍本逐末，有得道的人郑重指点还不相信，对那些讲解真正修炼道理的书籍不去认真阅读却说书上讲得太浅薄，一见到论述天界、北神的大部经典就嫌太难懂而不去攻读，这样的人到死也不会有什么收益的，不是很可悲的事吗？
English: If cultivators cannot find the most fundamental truth and go through the book step-by-step, and those who are worthy of the path still do not believe, and do not carefully read those books that explain the true cultivation principles, but say that the books are too shallow, and do not study when they see that most of the classics that discuss the heavenly world and the North God are too difficult to understand, such people will not have any benefit until death. Isn't it a very sad thing?

古文：又人苦多事，少能弃世独往。
现代文：还有的人尽管苦于世间俗事缠身，但又不甘心抛开尘世独自到山中去居住修行。
English: There are also people who, despite suffering from the mundane things of the world, are not willing to leave the world to live and practice in the mountains alone.

古文：山居穴处者，以道教之。终不能行，是非仁人之意也，但知房中闭气，节其思虑，适饮食则得道也。
现代文：这种人就是教给他修道的方法，他也不会去认真实行，因为他们没有仁人志士的那种真诚的心意，以为只要自己关上房门在屋里炼闭气的功夫，不想凡俗的事并节制饮食就可以得道了。
English: This kind of person will teach him the method of cultivation, but he will not seriously practice it, because they do not have the sincere heart of a benevolent person. They think that as long as they close the door of their house and do the work of shutting off their breath, do not want to do ordinary things and control their diet, they can obtain the way.

古文：吾先师初著九节都解指韬形隐遁尤为开明四极九室诸经，万三千首，为以示始涉门庭者。 
现代文：我的先师曾著过《九都》《节解》《指教》《韬形》、《隐守》、《无为》、《开明》、《四极》、《九灵》等论述道术的经典，共有一万三千条，用以教导那些刚入门学道的人，你可以拿去参照着使用吧。 
English: My predecessor once wrote the classics of Daoism, such as "Kundo," "Seijiro," "Shuido," "Shigata," "Hinzoku," "Hakushu," "Muwae," "Kaimei," "Shihoku" and "Nine Spirits," a total of 13,000 articles, which are used to teach those who are just beginning to learn Daoism. You can use them as a reference.

古文：采女具受诸要以教王，王试之有验。
现代文：采女从彭祖那里得到了这些学道的要点，回去后教给君王，君王试了一下很灵验。
English: The adopted daughter obtained the essentials of these teachings from Peng Zu, and after returning home she taught them to the king, who tried them out and found them very effective.

古文：殷王传彭祖之术，屡欲秘之。乃下令国中，有传祖之道者诛之，又欲害祖以绝之。
现代文：殷王得到了彭祖的道术后，一直想秘而不宣，并在国内下了命令说谁要敢传扬彭祖的道术就杀头，还想杀害彭祖以使他的道术失传。
English: After King Yin obtained Peng Zu's Taoism, he always wanted to keep it a secret, and gave an order in the country that anyone who dared to propagate Peng Zu's Taoism would be killed. He also wanted to kill Peng Zu to make his Taoism lost.

古文：祖知之乃去，不知所之。
现代文：彭祖知道以后就走掉了，也不知去了哪里。
English: After Peng Zu knew, he left, and I don't know where he went.

古文：其后七十余年，闻人于流沙之国西见之。
现代文：过了七十多年以后，听说有人在流沙国的西部见到了彭祖。
English: More than seventy years later, it is said that someone saw Peng Zu in the western part of Lushan.

古文：王不常行彭祖之术，得寿三百岁，气力丁壮，如五十时。
现代文：殷王并不坚持按彭祖的道术修炼，但也活了三百多岁，气力还像五十岁的人一样强壮。
English: King Yin did not insist on cultivating according to the Taoism of Peng Zu, but he also lived for more than three hundred years, and his strength was as strong as that of a fifty-year-old man.

古文：得郑女妖淫，王失道而殂。
现代文：后来由于他得了一个妖冶的女子郑氏，骄奢淫逸，终于失去了道行而死。
English: Later, because he married a magical woman named Zheng, he became arrogant and lascivious, and finally lost his virtue and died.

古文：俗间言传彭祖之道杀人者，由于王禁之故也。
现代文：民间流传说凡是传播彭祖道术就被杀，就是指的殷王禁传彭祖道术的事。
English: According to the folk legend, anyone who propagated Peng Zu Daoism would be killed. This refers to the story of King Yin forbidding the propagation of Peng Zu Daoism.

古文：后有黄山君者，修彭祖之术，数百岁犹有少容。
现代文：后来有一位黄山君按照彭祖的道术修炼，已经活了几百岁，面貌仍似少年。
English: Later, there was a Huangshan prince who cultivated according to the Taoism of Peng Zu. He had lived for several hundred years and still looked like a boy.

古文：彭祖既去，乃追论其言，以为彭祖经。
现代文：彭祖成仙后，人们把他的论述记录下来，就成为《彭祖经》。
English: After Peng Zu became an immortal, people recorded his exposition and it became "Peng Zu Jing."

古文：魏伯阳
现代文：魏伯阳
English: Wei Boyang

古文：魏伯阳者，吴人也，本高门之子，而性好道术。
现代文：魏伯阳是吴国人，出身门第很高，但非常喜欢道术。
English: Wei Boyang is a native of Wuxu, from a high-ranking family, but he is very fond of Taoism.

古文：后与弟子三人，入山作神丹。
现代文：后来，他带着三个弟子进山去炼丹。
English: Later, he took three disciples into the mountains to brew dan.

古文：丹成，知弟子心怀未尽，乃试之曰： 丹虽成，然先宜与犬试之，若犬飞，然后人可服耳；若犬死，即不可服。 
现代文：丹炼成以后，魏伯阳知道有的弟子心不诚，就故意试验他们说， 丹虽然炼成了，但最好还是先拿狗试一试。如果狗吃了丹以后飞升腾空，我们就能吃。如果狗吃了丹死了，那人就不能吃。 
English: After Dan was refined, Wei Boyang knew that some disciples were not sincere, so he deliberately tested them and said that although Dan was refined, it would be best to try it with a dog first. If the dog flew up after eating Dan, we could eat it. If the dog died after eating Dan, that person could not eat it.

古文：乃与犬食，犬即死，伯阳谓诸弟子曰： 作丹唯恐不成，既今成而犬食之死，恐是未合神明之意，服之恐复如犬，为之奈何？ 弟子曰： 先生当服之否？ 伯阳曰： 吾背违世路，委家入山，不得道亦耻复还，死之与生，吾当服之。 
现代文：于是就把丹给狗吃，狗当时就死了。伯阳就对弟子们说， 炼丹时唯恐炼不成功，现在炼成了，狗吃后却死了。
English: So he gave the dog some Dan to eat, and the dog died at that time. Boyang said to his disciples, "When you were making Dan, you were afraid that you would not succeed, but now you have made it, and the dog died after eating it."

古文：乃服丹，入口即死。弟子顾视相谓曰： 作丹以求长生，服之即死，当奈此何？ 独一弟子曰： 吾师非常人也，服此而死，得无意也。 
现代文：我想恐怕是我们炼丹违背了神灵的意旨，如果我们吃了也会像狗一样死去，这可怎么办呢？ 弟子说， 先生吃不吃这丹呢？ 伯阳说： 我违抗了世俗的偏见，离家进山，没有得道，实在没脸再回去，不管是死是活，我都得把丹吃掉。 
English: I think that we might have breached the will of the gods by making dan. If we eat it, we will die like dogs. What should we do? The disciple said, "Shouldn't the teacher eat this dan?" Boyang said, "I defied the prejudices of the world, left home and went into the mountains. I didn't attain enlightenment, and I really don't have the face to go back. Whether I live or die, I have to eat dan."

古文：因乃取丹服之，亦死。
现代文：说罢就把丹服下去了。
English: As soon as I said that, I took off my robe.

古文：余二弟子相谓曰： 所以得丹者，欲求长生者，今服之即死，焉用此为？
现代文：刚一吃完，伯阳就死了。弟子们互相大眼瞪小眼，说， 本来炼丹是为了长生不死，现在吃了丹却死了，这可怎么办？ 
English: As soon as he finished eating, Boyang died. The disciples stared at each other, saying, "Originally, making dan was for immortality, but now he died after eating dan. How can this be?"

古文：不服此药，自可更得数十岁在世间也。 
现代文：只有一个弟子说， 我看老师不是平常人，吃丹后死了，大概不是他的真心吧。 
English: Only one disciple said, "I think the teacher is not an ordinary person. He died after eating red bean paste. It's probably not his true heart."

古文：遂不服，乃共出山，欲为伯阳及死弟子求棺木。
现代文：说罢就拿丹吃下去，也立刻死了。剩下的两个弟子互相说， 咱们炼丹就是为求长生，现在吃了丹就死，要这丹有什么用呢？
English: The remaining two disciples said to each other, "We made the dan in order to live forever. If we eat the dan now, we will die. What is the use of this dan?"

古文：二子去后，伯阳即起，将所服丹内死弟子及白犬口中，皆起。
现代文：不吃它，仍可以在世上活它几十年。 于是他俩都没有服丹，一块出山，打算给伯阳和已死的弟子寻求棺材。两个弟子走后，伯阳就站起来了，把自己所服的丹放在那个死弟子和白狗的嘴里，弟子和狗都活了。
English: If they didn't eat it, they could still live for decades in the world. Therefore, both of them didn't take the dan and went out of the mountain together, intending to look for a coffin for Boyang and the dead disciple. After the two disciples left, Boyang stood up and put the dan he had taken into the mouth of the dead disciple and the white dog. The disciple and the dog were both alive.

古文：弟子姓虞，遂皆仙去。
现代文：这个弟子姓虞，和伯阳一同升仙而去。
English: This disciple, surnamed Yu, ascended to heaven together with Boyang.

古文：道逢入山伐木人，乃作手书与乡里人，寄谢二弟子，乃始懊恨。
现代文：在路上他们看见一个上山砍柴的人，伯阳就写了封信让砍柴人捎给那两个弟子，两个弟子十分懊悔。
English: On the way, they saw a man going up the mountain to cut wood. Boyang wrote a letter asking the woodcutter to give it to the two disciples. The two disciples were very remorseful.

古文：伯阳作《参同契五行相类》，凡三卷，其说是《周易》，其实假借爻象，以论作丹之意。
现代文：魏伯阳著了本书叫《参同契五行相类》，一共三卷，表面上是论述《周易》，其实是假借《易经》中的八卦图象来论述炼丹的要领。
English: Wei Boyang wrote a book called "The Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements of the Five Elements."

古文：而世之儒者，不知神丹之事，多作阴阳注之，殊失其旨矣。
现代文：后来的儒生们不懂得炼丹的事，把魏伯阳这部书当成论阳阴八卦的书来注解，这和书的原意相去甚远。
English: Later Confucians did not understand the matter of purging Dan, and interpreted Wei Bo Yang's book as a book on Yang and Yin gossip, which was far from the original meaning of the book.

