古文：有言诸葛丞相惜赦者。
现代文：蜀国有人批评诸葛亮在发布赦令上很吝啬，而法令又过严。
English: Some people in Shu criticized Zhuge Liang for being stingy in issuing the pardon order, while the decree was too strict.

古文：亮答曰： 治世以大德，不以小惠。
现代文：诸葛亮对此回应说： 治理天下应本着至公至德之心，而不该随意施舍不当的小恩小惠。
English: Zhuge Liang responded to this by saying: The governance of the world should be based on the principles of public interest and morality, and should not arbitrarily give undue small favors.

古文：故匡衡、吴汉不愿为赦。
现代文：所以汉朝的匡衡、吴汉治国理政就认为无故开赦罪犯不是件好事。
English: Therefore, the Han Dynasty's Kuang Heng and Wu Han ruled the country and thought that it was not a good thing to pardon criminals without reason.

古文：先帝亦言： 吾周旋陈元方、郑康成间，每见启告，治乱之道悉矣，曾不及赦也。 
现代文：先帝刘备也曾说道： 我曾与陈纪、郑玄交往，从与他们的交谈中，可以明了天下兴衰治乱的道理，但他们从没有说过大赦罪犯也是治国之道。 
English: The previous emperor Liu Bei also said: I once had dealings with Chen Ji and Zheng Xuan, and from my conversations with them, I can understand the principle of the rise and fall of the world and the rule of chaos, but they never said that amnesty for criminals is also the way to govern the country.

古文：若刘景升父子岁岁赦宥，何益于治乎？ 
现代文：又如刘表父子年年都有大赦之令，结果身死国灭，赦免罪犯对治理国家有什么好处呢？ 
English: Also, if Liu Biao and his son have been pardoned every year, and the result is the death of the country, what is the benefit of pardoning criminals to govern the country?

古文：及费祎为政，始事姑息，蜀遂以削。
现代文：后来费祎主政时，采用姑息宽赦的策略，蜀汉的国势也因此逐渐削弱不振。
English: Later, when Fei Yao was in power, he adopted a strategy of appeasement and clemency. As a result, the national strength of Shuhan gradually weakened.

古文：子产谓子太叔曰： 惟有德者，能以宽服民；其次莫如猛。
现代文：春秋时郑国的子产对后继者太叔说： 只有具有大德的人，才可以用宽容的方法来治理人民；次一等的就只能用严厉的律法来治理了了。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Zheng Guo's son-in-law said to his successor, Uncle Rong: Only a person with great virtue can govern the people in a tolerant manner; the second-class people can only be governed by strict laws.

古文：夫火烈，民望而畏之，故鲜死焉；水懦弱，民狎而玩之，则多死焉。
现代文：猛烈的大火，人看了就感到害怕，因此很少有人被烧死；平静的河水，人们喜欢接近嬉戏，却往往因此被淹死。
English: Fierce fires are seen and feared, so few are burned to death; placid rivers, which men love to approach and play in, are often drowned in.

古文：故宽难。 太叔为政，不忍猛而宽。
现代文：所以用宽容的方法治理国家是很困难的，不是常人所能做到的。 
English: Therefore, it is very difficult to govern the country in a tolerant way, and it is not something that ordinary people can do.

古文：于是郑国多盗，太叔悔之。仲尼曰： 政宽则民慢，慢则纠之以猛；猛则民残，残则施之以宽。宽以济猛，猛以济宽，政是以和。 
现代文：后来太叔治理国家，不忍心用严厉的方法，从而导致郑国盗匪猖獗，民怨沸腾，太叔非常后悔，但为时已晚。孔子说： 政令过于宽容，百姓就会轻慢无礼，这时就要用严厉的律法来约束他们；过于严厉，百姓又可能凋残不堪，这时则要用宽松的政令来缓和他们的处境。
English: Later, the great-uncle governed the country and could not bear to use harsh methods, which led to the rampant banditry in Zheng and the boiling resentment of the people. The great-uncle regretted very much, but it was too late. Confucius said: If the government decree is too lenient, the people will be disrespectful, and then they must be restrained by strict laws; if it is too harsh, the people may be devastated, and then they must use a loose government decree to ease their situation.

古文：商君刑及弃灰，过于猛者也；梁武见死刑辄涕泣而纵之，过于宽者也。
现代文：用宽容来约束残弊，用严厉来整顿轻慢，这样才能做到人事通达，政风和谐。 
English: Use tolerance to restrain corruption, use severity to rectify frivolity, so that personnel can be reached and the political style can be harmonious.

古文：《论语》赦小过，《春秋》讥肆大眚。
现代文：《论语》有 对小的过错予以宽容 的说法，而《春秋》曾讥斥 那些放纵有大过错的人 。
English: "Analects" has a saying about being tolerant of minor faults, while "Spring and Autumn" once scorned those who indulge in major faults.

古文：合之，得政之和矣。
现代文：二者只有调和得当，才能实现政事的和谐。
English: Only by properly reconciling the two can political harmony be achieved.

