古文：殷既错天命，微子作诰父师、小师。
现代文：殷商废弃了天命，微子作诰与父师、少师商议。
English: Yin Shang abandoned the Mandate of Heaven, and the microcosm began to negotiate with his father and younger teachers.

古文：微子若曰： 父师、少师！
现代文：微子这样说： 父师、少师！
English: Micron says this: Father, young teacher!

古文：殷其弗或乱正四方。
现代文：殷商真的没有办法继续治理国家了吗？
English: Is there really no way for Yin Shang to continue to govern the country?

古文：我祖厎遂陈于上，我用沈酗于酒，用乱败厥德于下。
现代文：我们的先祖成汤制定了常法在先，而纣王却沉溺于酒色中，因淫乱而败坏成汤的美德在后。
English: Our ancestor Cheng Tang established the common law first, while King Gong indulged in wine, and the virtue of Cheng Tang was corrupted by fornication later.

古文：殷罔不小大好草窃奸宄。卿士师师非度。
现代文：殷商的臣民无不抢夺偷盗、犯法作乱，官员们连法度都不遵守。
English: The subjects of wealthy merchants are always robbing, stealing, breaking the law and causing disturbances, and the officials do not even comply with the law.

古文：凡有辜罪，乃罔恒获，小民方兴，相为敌仇。
现代文：对于犯罪的人不逮捕加以惩罚，百姓们难以忍受都纷纷起来反抗。
English: If criminals are not arrested and punished, the people will rise up and resist.

古文：今殷其沦丧，若涉大水，其无津涯。
现代文：现在殷商恐怕要灭亡了，就好像要渡过大河，却找不到渡口和河岸。
English: Now, it is feared that Yin merchants are about to perish. It is like trying to cross a large river, but not being able to find the ferry and the riverbank.

古文：殷遂丧，越至于今！ 
现代文：殷商法度丧亡，竟到了这个地步！ 
English: The death of the Yin Commercial Code has come to this!

古文：曰： 父师、少师，我其发出狂？
现代文：微子说： 父师、少师，我将被废弃而出亡在外呢？
English: Microcosm said: Father, young teacher, will I be abandoned and exiled?

古文：吾家耄逊于荒？
现代文：还是住在家中安然避居荒野呢？
English: Or stay at home and avoid the wilderness?

古文：今尔无指告，予颠隮，若之何其？ 父师若曰： 王子！
现代文：现在你们不指点我，殷商就会灭亡，你们是否告诉我应该怎么办啊？ 父师这样说： 王子！
English: Now, if you don't point me in the right direction, the merchants will perish. Are you going to tell me what I should do?

古文：天毒降灾荒殷邦，方兴沈酗于酒，乃罔畏畏，咈其耇长旧有位人。
现代文：上天降下大灾要灭亡我们殷商，而君臣上下沉溺在酒色中，却不惧怕老天的威力，违背年高德劭的旧时大臣。
English: Heaven sent down a great calamity to destroy our merchants, while the princes and ministers indulged in wine, but they did not fear the power of God, and violated the high moral standards of the old ministers.

古文：今殷民乃攘窃神祗之牺牷牲用以容，将食无灾。
现代文：现在，臣民竟然偷盗祭祀天地神灵的贡物，把它们藏起来，或是饲养，或是吃掉，都没有罪。
English: Now, there is no crime for a subject to steal the offerings made to the gods of heaven and earth, hide them, or raise them, or eat them.

古文：降监殷民，用乂仇敛，召敌仇不怠。
现代文：再向下看看殷民，官军用杀戮和重刑横征暴敛，招致民怨也不放宽。
English: Further down, look at the Yin people. The government and military have been killing and imposing heavy sentences, which has aroused the people's resentment.

古文：罪合于一，多瘠罔诏。
现代文：这些罪行都在国君一人身上，痛苦不堪的国民无处申诉无处申诉。
English: All these crimes were committed by the sovereign alone, and the suffering citizens had nowhere to appeal to.

古文：商今其有灾，我兴受其败；商其沦丧，我罔为臣仆。
现代文：殷商现在或许会有灾祸呢，我们应该马上行动，铲除祸端；殷商或许会灭亡呢，我不做敌人的奴隶。
English: There may be a calamity for the merchants now, we should act immediately to eradicate the calamity; the merchants may perish, I will not be the enemy's slave.

古文：诏王子出，迪我旧云刻子。王子弗出，我乃颠隮。
现代文：我劝告王子出去，我早就说过，箕子和王子不出去，我们殷商就会灭亡。
English: I advised the prince to go out. I had already said that if the mule and the prince did not go out, our merchants would perish.

古文：自靖，人自献于先王，我不顾行遁。 
现代文：自己拿定主意吧！人人各自去对先王作出贡献，我不再顾虑了，将要出走。 
English: Make up your own mind! Everyone should contribute to the former king. I will no longer worry and will leave.

