古文：死者，人之常分，不可免也。
现代文：死亡这是人常有的事，不可避免。
English: Death is a fact of life. It is inevitable.

古文：吾年十九，值梁家丧乱，其间与白刃为伍者，亦常数辈，幸承馀福，得至於今。
现代文：我十九岁的时候，正好碰上梁朝动荡不安，在那期间有许多次都是在刀剑丛中过日子，幸亏承蒙祖上的福荫，我才能活到今天。
English: When I was nineteen years old, I happened to run into the turbulence of the Liang Dynasty. During that period, I often lived in a thicket of swords. Fortunately, thanks to the blessings of my ancestors, I can live to this day.

古文：古人云： 五十不为夭。 
现代文：古人说： 活到五十岁就不算短命了。 
English: The ancients said: "Living to the age of fifty is not a short life.

古文：吾已六十馀，故心坦然，不以残年为念。
现代文：我已经活到了六十岁，所以心里平静坦然，不因为所剩时日不多而焦虑了。
English: I have reached the age of sixty, so I am calm and at peace, not anxious because I have not much time left.

古文：先有风气之疾，常疑奄然，聊书素怀，以为汝诫。
现代文：以前我患有风湿病，常怀疑自己会突然死去，所以记下自己平时的想法，作为对你们的嘱咐训诫。
English: In the past, I suffered from rheumatism and often suspected that I would die suddenly, so write down my usual thoughts as an exhortation to you.

古文：先君先夫人皆未还建邺旧山，旅葬江陵东郭。
现代文：我去世的父母的灵枢都没能送回建邺祖坟处，暂时葬在江陵城的东郊。
English: The spirits of my deceased parents could not be sent back to the Jianye Ancestral Cemetery and were temporarily buried in the eastern suburbs of Jiangling City.

古文：承圣末，已启求扬都，欲营迁靥，蒙诏赐银百两，已於扬州小郊北地烧砖。便值本朝沦没，流离如此。数十年间，绝於还望。
现代文：承圣末年，我已经上奏请求回扬都，著手准备将父母的灵柩迁回老家，承蒙元帝下诏赐银百两，我已在扬州近郊北边烧制墓砖，没想到此时梁朝灭亡，我流离失所到了此地，几十年来对迁葬扬都已不抱什么希望了。
English: At the end of the year of consecration, I had already made a request to return to Yangdu, and began to prepare for the relocation of my parents' coffin back to my hometown. Thanks to the Emperor Yuan's edict, I was given 100 taels of silver. I had already fired the tomb bricks in the northern suburbs of Yangzhou. I did not expect that the Liang Dynasty would perish at this time, and I was displaced to this place. For decades, I had no hope of moving the funeral to Yangdu.

古文：今虽混一，家道馨穷，何由办此奉营资费？
现代文：现今天下虽然已经统一，但家道衰落，哪里有能力支付这奉还营葬造墓的费用？
English: Nowadays, although it has been unified, but the family way has declined, where is the ability to pay the cost of building and building a tomb?

古文：且扬都污毁，无复遗，还被下湿，未为得计。
现代文：更何况扬都已被破坏，老家没有一个亲人了。
English: What's more, Yangdu has been destroyed, and there is not a single relative left in his hometown.

古文：自咎自责，贯心刻髓。
现代文：加上坟地被淹，土地低洼潮湿，也没办法迁葬。
English: In addition to the cemetery being flooded, the land is low-lying and wet, and there is no way to relocate the graves.

古文：孔子之葬亲也，云： 古者墓而不坟，丘东西南北之人也，不可以弗识也。 
现代文：我非常责怪自己，这种感觉刻骨铭心。孔子安葬亲人的时候说道： 古代的墓是没有土堆的。我孔丘是四处奔走的人，不能不在墓地上留个标志。 
English: When Confucius was burying his relatives, he said, "Ancient tombs do not have mounds. I, Confucius, am a person who runs around, and I cannot help but leave a mark on the cemetery."

古文：於是封之崇四尺。
现代文：于是就在坟墓上堆了一个高度为四尺的坟头。
English: So they piled a four-foot-high headstone on top of the grave.

古文：然则君子应世行道，亦有不守坟墓之时，况为事际所逼也。
现代文：这样看来君子处世行道，也有无法亲自留守坟墓的时候；何况为事势所逼无法守墓呢！
English: In this way, it seems that when a gentleman is in the world, there are times when he cannot personally stay at the grave; what's more, he cannot stay at the grave because of the situation!

古文：吾今羁旅，身若浮云，竟未知何乡是吾葬地，唯当气绝便埋之耳。
现代文：现在的我漂泊在外，感觉就像漂浮不定的浮云，不知哪里才是我的葬身之处，等我死后随地埋葬就行了。
English: Now I'm drifting outside, feeling like a floating, unstable cloud. I don't know where I'll be buried. When I die, I'll be buried anywhere.

古文：汝曹宜以传业扬名为务，不可顾恋朽壤，以取湮没也。
现代文：你们应该以继承功业、弘扬美名为要事，不要对埋葬我的地方留有顾念，以免埋没了自己的未来。
English: You should take it as an important matter to inherit the merits and carry forward the good name. Don't worry about where to bury me, so as not to bury your own future.

