古文：起玄黓困敦，尽阏逢摄提格，凡三年。
现代文：起玄黓困敦，尽阏逢摄提格，一共三年。
English: A total of three years have passed since then.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝上之中景福元年春，正月，丙寅，赦天下，改元。
现代文：唐昭宗景福元年春季正月，丙寅，唐昭宗诏令赦免天下，改年号为景福。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Tang Zhaozong Jingfu, the Tang Zhaozong issued a decree to pardon the world and changed the year name to Jingfu.

古文：凤翔李茂贞、静难王行瑜、镇国韩建、同州王行约、秦州李茂庄五节度使上言：杨守亮容匿叛臣复恭，请出军讨之，乞加茂贞山南西道诏讨使。
现代文：凤翔节度使李茂贞、静难节度使王行瑜、镇国节度使韩建、同州节度使王行约、秦州节度使李茂庄五人一同向朝廷上疏进言：杨守亮容纳藏匿叛逆乱臣杨复恭，请发兵讨伐杨守亮，并请求加封李茂贞为山南西道招讨使。
English: The Fengxiang Festival sent Li Maozhen, the Jingan Festival sent Wang Xingyu, the Zhenguo Festival sent Han Jian, the Tongzhou Festival sent Wang Xingyao, and the Qinzhou Festival sent Li Maozhuang. Together, the five of them sent a message to the imperial court: Yang Shouliang should accommodate the hiding traitor Yang Fuqiong, please send troops to fight Yang Shouliang, and request that Li Maozhen be appointed as the envoy of the western Shannan Province.

古文：朝议以茂贞得山南，不可复制，下诏和解之，皆不听。
现代文：朝廷商议认为，李茂贞如果获得山南西道招讨使的官职，就不可能再控制住他了，于是颁下诏令劝李茂贞等五位节度使与杨守亮和解，结果都不听从。
English: The imperial court deliberated that if Li Maozhen obtained the official position of the envoy of the Western Shannan Province, it would be impossible to control him, so it issued a decree to persuade Li Maozhen and five other emissaries to reconcile with Yang Shouliang. As a result, they did not obey.

古文：王镕、李匡威合兵十余万攻尧山，李克用遣其将李嗣勋击之，大破幽、镇兵，斩获三万。
现代文：王熔、李匡威联合军队总共十余万人攻打尧山，李克用派遣属下将领李嗣勋进行抗击，大败幽州、镇州的军队，斩杀擒获三万人。
English: The combined armies of Wang Rong and Li Kuangwei attacked Shaoshan with a total of more than 100,000 men. Li Ke used the dispatch of his subordinate general Li Shixun to fight back, defeating the Yuzhou and Zhenzhou armies, killing and capturing 30,000 people.

古文：杨行密谓诸将曰： 孙儒之众十倍于我，吾战数不利，欲退保铜官，何如？ 
现代文：杨行密对各位将领说： 孙儒的军队人数是我们的十倍，我们作战多次失利，现在想退到铜官固守，怎么样？ 
English: Yang Xingmi said to the generals: Sun Ru's army is ten times as large as ours, we have suffered many defeats in battle, and now we want to retreat to the bronze officers, how about it?

古文：刘威、李神福曰： 儒扫地远来，利在速战。
现代文：刘威、李神福说： 孙儒调动全部军队从远处前来，速战速决对他有利。
English: Liu Wei and Li Shenfu said: Sun Ru mobilized the entire army to come from afar, and the quick battle and quick decision were beneficial to him.

古文：宜屯据险要，坚壁清野以老其师，时出轻骑抄其馈饷，夺其俘掠。
现代文：我们应当占险要的地方，坚守城堡，转移周围的人畜财粮，使孙儒的军队疲劳困苦，我方再不时派出轻便骑兵抄掠他们输送的军粮，夺取他们掳掠的东西。
English: We should occupy the critical places, hold fast to the castle, divert the surrounding people, animals, wealth and grain, and make Sun Ru's army tired and exhausted. From time to time, we will send light cavalry to plunder the military grain they transport and seize the things they have plundered.

古文：彼前不得战，退无资粮，可坐擒也。 
现代文：孙儒向前没有交战的机会，后退又没有资财粮食，我们擒获孙儒可以说是马到成功的事！ 
English: There was no fighting chance for Sun Ru to advance, and there was no wealth or food for him to retreat. Our capture of Sun Ru can be said to be a great success!

古文：戴友规曰： 儒与我相持数年，胜负略相当。
现代文：戴友规对杨行密说： 孙儒与我们争夺扬州相持了五个年头，彼此胜负大体相当。
English: Dai You Gui said to Yang Xingmi: Sun Ru and we have been competing for Yangzhou for five years, and our wins and losses are roughly equal.

古文：今悉众致死于我，我若望风弃城，正堕其计。
现代文：现在孙儒发动全部军队要把我们致于死地，我们若是望风而走放弃城池，那就正中了孙儒的计谋。
English: Now, Sun Ju has unleashed the entire army to kill us. If we give up the city hoping for the best, then we are right in the middle of Sun Ju's scheme.

古文：淮南士民从公渡江及自儒来降者甚，公宜遣将先护送归淮南，使复生业，儒军闻淮南安堵，皆有思归之心，人心既摇，安得不败！ 
现代文：淮南的士子人民跟随你渡过长江以及从孙儒的军营中前来投降的人相当多，你应当派遣将领护送这些人先回淮南，让他们象原来一样谋生立业；孙儒军队的士兵听说淮南一带人民安居，生活稳定，都会产生回归故里的念头，孙儒的军心既然动摇，怎么会不失败呢！ 
English: The scholarly people of Huainan have followed you across the Yangtze River, and there are quite a lot of people who have come to surrender from Sun Ru's military camp. You should send generals to escort these people back to Huainan first, and let them make a living as before; the soldiers of Sun Ru's army have heard that the people around Huainan live in peace and stability, and will have the idea of returning to their hometown. Since Sun Ru's military heart is shaken, how can it not fail?

古文：行密悦，从之。
现代文：杨行密听后很高兴，依从了属下将领的意见。
English: Yang Xingmin was very happy after listening, and followed the advice of his subordinate generals.

古文：友规，庐州人也。
现代文：戴友规是庐州人。
English: Dai Youqi is from Zhangzhou.

古文：威戎节度使杨晟与杨守亮等约攻王建，二月，丁丑，晟出兵掠新繁、汉州之境，使其将吕尧将兵二千会杨守厚攻梓州；建遣行营都指挥使李简击尧，斩之。
现代文：威戎节度使杨晟与李守亮等人相约共同攻打王建，二月，丁丑，杨晟派出军队到新繁、汉州境内抢掠，命令手下将领吕荛带领军队二千会同杨守厚攻打梓州。王建派遣行营都指挥使李简抗击吕荛，将吕荛斩杀。
English: During the Wei Rong Festival, Yang Jie and Li Shouliang and others agreed to jointly attack Wang Jian. In February, Ding Jiu, Yang Jie sent troops to Xinxiang and robbed the territory of Hanzhou, and ordered his subordinate general Lv Jie to lead an army of two thousand to attack Zizhou together with Yang Shouhou. Wang Jian dispatched the command to Li Jian to fight against Lv Jie and killed Lv Jie.

古文：戊寅，硃全忠出兵击硃瑄，遣其子友裕将兵前行，军于斗门。
现代文：戊寅，朱全忠派出军队攻打朱，派遣他的儿子朱友裕督率军队前行，在濮阳县的斗门城驻扎下来。
English: In Wuyin, Zhu Quanzhong sent an army to attack Zhu, and sent his son, Zhu Youyu, to lead the army forward, and stationed it in Doumen City, Suiyang County.

古文：李茂贞、王行瑜擅举兵击兴元。
现代文：李茂贞、王行瑜未奉朝廷命令擅发动军队攻打兴元。
English: Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu launched an army to attack Xingyuan without an order from the imperial court.

古文：茂贞表求招讨使不已，遗杜让能、西门君遂书，陵蔑朝廷。
现代文：李茂贞不断上表请求授给他山南西道招讨使，给宰相杜让能、神策中尉西门君遂送去书信，凌辱蔑视朝廷。
English: Li Maozhen constantly petitioned to be granted the post of the envoy to the western Shannan Province, and then sent letters to the Prime Minister Du Zhaneng and the Divine Policy Lieutenant Ximen Jun, insulting and defying the imperial court.

古文：上意不能容，御延英，召宰相、谏官议之。
现代文：昭宗认为不能容许李茂贞如此放肆，便御临延英殿，召令宰相、谏官进行商议。
English: Shoson thought that Li Maozhen could not be allowed to act so recklessly, so he went to Yan Ying's palace and summoned the prime minister and eunuchs for consultation.

古文：时宦官有阴与二镇相表里者，宰相相顾不敢言，上不悦。
现代文：当时宦官中有人暗中与李茂贞、王行瑜勾，因而宰相们相互观望不敢发言，昭宗很不高兴。
English: At that time, some of the eunuchs were secretly involved with Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu, so the prime ministers did not dare to speak while watching each other. Shozong was very unhappy.

古文：给事中牛徽曰： 先朝多难，茂贞诚有翼卫之功；诸杨阻兵，亟出攻讨，其志亦在疾恶，但不当不俟诏命耳。
现代文：给事中牛徽说： 先朝皇帝多灾多难，李茂贞当即派出军队攻伐征讨，他的意向就在于痛恨杨复恭一伙奸恶小人，但是不应当不等待朝廷的诏命就行动。
English: On the matter, Niu Hui said: The previous emperor had many disasters and difficulties, and Li Maozhen immediately sent an army to attack and conquer. His intention was to hate Yang Fookong and a group of villains, but he should not act without waiting for the imperial decree.

古文：比闻兵过山南，杀伤至多。
现代文：近来听说他的军队经过山南，斩杀伤害的人相当多。
English: Recently, I heard that his army passed through Shannan, killing and injuring quite a lot of people.

古文：陛下倘不以招讨使授之，使用国法约束，则山南之民尽矣。 
现代文：陛下倘若不以山南西道招讨使的官职授给李茂贞，使用国家法度来约束他，那么山南的人民就会被斩尽杀绝了！ 
English: If your majesty does not give Li Maozhen the official post of the envoy of the western Shannan province, and use the national laws to restrain him, then the people of Shannan will be exterminated!

古文：上曰： 此言是也。 
现代文：昭宗说： 这知说的话。 
English: Taizong said, "That makes sense.

古文：乃以茂贞为山南西道招讨使。
现代文：于是任命李茂贞为山南西道招讨使。
English: As a result, Li Maozhen was appointed as the envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：甲申，硃全忠至卫南，硃瑄将步骑万人袭斗门，硃友裕弃营走，瑄据其营。
现代文：甲申，朱全忠到达卫州南部，朱率领步，骑兵一万人攻打斗门城，朱友裕放弃营寨逃走，朱于是占据了斗门的营寨。
English: Jia Shen, Zhu Quanzhong arrived in the south of Weizhou, Zhu led the march, ten thousand cavalry attacked Doumen City, Zhu Youyu abandoned the camp and fled, Zhu then occupied the camp of Doumen.

古文：全忠不知，乙酉，引兵趣斗门，至者皆为郓人所杀。
现代文：朱全忠不知道斗门城已被朱夺取，乙酉，他带领军队赶往斗门，到达那里的人都被朱的郓州军队斩杀。
English: Zhu Quanzhong did not know that the Doumen City had been captured by Zhu, so he led the army to the Doumen, and all the people who arrived there were killed by Zhu's Zhangzhou army.

古文：全忠退军瓠河，丁亥，瑄击全忠，大破之，全忠走。
现代文：朱全忠退到濮州雷泽县的瓠河镇驻扎，丁亥，朱攻打朱全忠，朱全忠大败逃跑。
English: Zhu Quanzhong retreated to stationed in Luohe Town, Leize County, Ganzhou, Dinghai, Zhu attacked Zhu Quanzhong, Zhu Quanzhong was defeated and fled.

古文：张归厚于后力战，全忠仅免，副使李璠等皆死。
现代文：张归厚在后面竭力阻击掩护，朱全忠仅兔一死，副使李等人都在交战中阵亡。
English: Zhang Guihou tried his best to block the cover in the back, Zhu Quanzhong died only once, and the deputy envoy Li and others were killed in the battle.

古文：硃全忠奏贬河阳节度使赵克裕，以佑国节度使张全义兼河阳节度使。
现代文：朱全忠奏请将河阳节度使赵克裕贬职，让佑国节度使张全义兼任河阳节度使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong requested that Zhao Keyu be demoted from the post of Heyang Festival Envoy, and that Zhang Quanzhi be appointed as Heyang Festival Envoy from the post of Youguo Festival Envoy.

古文：孙儒围宣州。
现代文：孙儒围攻宣州。
English: Sun Ru besieged Xuanzhou.

古文：初，刘建锋为孙儒守常州，将兵从儒击杨行密，甘露镇使陈可言帅部兵千人据常州。
现代文：起初，刘建锋为孙据守常州，当他带领军队跟随孙儒攻打杨行密时，甘露镇使陈可言率领所部人马一千人据守常州。
English: At first, Liu Jianfeng defended Changzhou for Sun, and when he led the army to follow Sun Ru to attack Yang Xingmi, Ganlu Town sent Chen Keyan to defend Changzhou with 1,000 men and horses.

古文：行密将张训引兵奄至城下，可言仓猝出迎，训手刃杀之，遂取常州。
现代文：杨行密的将领张训带领军队忽然来到常州城下，陈可言仓猝出城迎战，张训亲手将陈可言斩杀，于是占取常州。
English: Yang Xingmi's general Zhang Xun led the army suddenly came to the outskirts of Changzhou City. Chen Keyan rushed out of the city to fight. Zhang Xun personally killed Chen Keyan and occupied Changzhou.

古文：行密别将又取润州。
现代文：杨行密的另一将领又攻取了涧州。
English: Another of Yang Xingmi's generals also conquered Ganzhou.

古文：硃全忠连年攻时溥，涂、泗、濠三州民不得耕获，衮、兗、河东兵救之，皆无功，复值水灾，人死者什六七。
现代文：朱全忠连年攻打时溥，徐州、泗州、濠州三州的人民都无法耕种收获，兖州、郓州、河东的军队救援时溥，都没有成功，又赶上闹水灾，人民死亡的占十分之六七。
English: Zhu Quanzhong attacked the three states of Ganzhou, Xuzhou, Ganzhou and Ganzhou for years on end, but the people were unable to cultivate and harvest. When the armies of Ganzhou, Ganzhou and Hedong tried to rescue Ganzhou, they were not successful. They also caught up with the floods, and people's deaths accounted for 67 out of 10.

古文：溥困甚，请和于全忠，全忠曰： 必移镇乃可。 
现代文：时溥极其困乏，向朱全忠请求和解，朱全忠回答说： 你必须迁移镇所离开徐州才可以。 
English: He was extremely tired and asked Zhu Quanzhong for reconciliation. Zhu Quanzhong replied, "You must move your town away from Xuzhou before you can leave."

古文：溥许之。
现代文：时溥表示同意。
English: Shi Hao agreed.

古文：全忠乃奏请移溥它镇，仍命大臣镇徐州。
现代文：朱全忠便奏请将时溥调往其他镇所，仍然任命朝中大臣镇守徐州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong then requested that Shi Hao be transferred to other townships, and still appointed the Minister of the Middle Kingdom as the town guard of Xuzhou.

古文：诏以门下侍郎、同平章事刘崇望同平章事，充感化节度使，以溥为太子太师。
现代文：于是，唐昭宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事刘崇望以同平章事衔，充任感化节度使，任命时溥为太子太师。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaozong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Liu Chongwang, a subordinate attendant and Tongping Zongji, to the title of Tongping Zongji, to serve as an agent to influence the festival, and appointed Shi Jie as the prince daishi.

古文：溥恐全忠诈而杀之，据城不奉诏，崇望及华阴而还。
现代文：时溥担心朱全忠欺骗谋杀他，依然占据徐州城而不奉行朝廷的诏令，刘崇望到达华阴便又返回长安。
English: At that time, he was worried that Zhu Quanzhong had deceived and murdered him, and still occupied Xuzhou City without following the imperial edict. Liu Chongwang arrived in Huayin and then returned to Chang'an.

古文：忠义节度使赵德諲薨，子匡凝代之。
现代文：忠义节度使赵德死去，他的儿子赵匡凝代任忠义节度使。
English: Zhao De was killed by the Loyalty Festival, and his son, Zhao Kuangge, became the Loyalty Festival's envoy.

古文：范晖骄侈失众心，王潮以从弟彦复为都统，弟审知为都监，将兵攻福州。民自请输米饷军，平湖洞及滨海蛮夷皆以兵船助之。
现代文：福建观察使范晖骄横奔侈造成属下离心离德，王潮任命堂弟王彦复为都统，胞弟王审知为都监，带领军队攻打福州，人民自动请求运送粮米给王潮的军队，平湖洞以及海边的蛮夷都用战船援助王潮。
English: Fujian observes that Fan Qi's arrogance and extravagance caused his subordinates to leave Germany. Wang Chao appoints his cousin Wang Yanfu as the leader of the General Headquarters of the Communist Party of China, and his brother Wang Xizhi as the General Supervisor of the General Headquarters of the Communist Party of China, and leads the army to attack Fuzhou. The people voluntarily request the delivery of grain and rice to Wang Chao's army. Pinghu Cave and the barbarians on the seashore use warships to assist Wang Chao.

古文：辛丑，王建遣族子嘉州刺史宗裕、雅州刺史王宗侃、威信都指挥使华洪、茂州刺史王宗瑶将兵五万攻彭州，杨晟逆战而败，宗裕等围之。
现代文：辛丑，王建派遣同族子弟嘉州刺史王宗裕、雅州刺史王宗侃、威信都指挥使华洪、茂州刺史王宗瑶带领军队五万攻打彭州，杨晟迎战失败，王宗裕等当即围攻杨晟。
English: In Xinwu, Wang Jian dispatched his compatriots Jiazhou Zishi Wang Zongyu, Yazhou Zishi Wang Zongkan, and Wixin to command Huahong, and Muzhou Zishi Wang Zongya led an army of 50,000 to attack Pengzhou. Yangshuo was defeated, and Wang Zongyu immediately besieged Yangshuo.

古文：杨守亮遣其将符昭救晟，径趋成都，营三学山。
现代文：杨守亮派遣属下将领符昭前去救助杨晟，符昭直接奔赴成都，在汉州金堂县的三学山安营扎寨。
English: Yang Shouliang sent his subordinate general Fu Zhao to rescue Yang Hui. Fu Zhao went directly to Chengdu and set up camp on Sanshueishan in Jintang County, Hanzhou.

古文：建亟召华洪还。
现代文：王建紧急召令华洪返回成都。
English: Wang Jian urgently summoned Hua Hong to return to Chengdu.

古文：洪疾驱而至，后军尚未集，以数百人夜去昭营数里，多击更鼓；昭以为蜀军大至，引兵宵遁。
现代文：华洪火速赶到，后面的军队还没有来得及集结，就带领几百人的夜间到离符昭营寨几里以外的地方，频繁地击打更鼓。符昭以为是王建的军队大规模来到，便带领军队连夜逃跑了。
English: Hua Hong arrived in a hurry, and the army behind him did not have time to assemble, so he led several hundred people at night to a place a few miles away from Fu Zhao's camp, and frequently beat more drums. Fu Zhao thought that Wang Jian's army had arrived on a large scale, so he led the army to escape overnight.

古文：三月，以户部尚书郑延昌为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：三月，朝廷任命户部尚书郑延昌为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In March, the imperial court appointed the head of the household, Zheng Yanchang, as the secretary of the middle secretary, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：延昌，从谠之从兄弟也。
现代文：郑延昌是郑从谠的堂兄弟。
English: Zheng Yanchang is the cousin of Zheng Conglu.

古文：左神策勇胜三都都指挥使杨子实、子迁、子钊，皆守亮之假子也，自渠州引兵救杨晟，知守亮必败，壬子，帅其众二万降于王建。
现代文：左神策勇胜三都都指挥使杨子实、杨子迁、杨子钊，都是杨守亮的养子，他们从渠州带领军队救援杨晟，知道杨守亮一定要失败，便于壬子，率领所部人马共计二万向王建投降。
English: Zuo Sheng's strategy of winning all three capitals was directed by Yang Zishu, Yang Zijun and Yang Zijuan, all of whom were the adopted sons of Yang Shouliang. They led the army from Quzhou to rescue Yang Shouliang. Knowing that Yang Shouliang must fail, it was convenient for Renzi to lead a total of twenty thousand people and horses from the headquarters to surrender to Wang Jian.

古文：李克用、王处存合兵攻王镕，癸丑，拔天长镇。
现代文：李克用、王处存联合军队攻打王熔，癸丑，攻克滹沱河东北的天长镇。
English: Li Ke used and Wang Shuzhen combined forces to attack Wang Liao and Zou Ugly, and conquered Tianchang Town in the northeast of the Fenhe River.

古文：戊午，镕与战于新市，大破之，杀获三万馀人；辛酉，克用退屯栾城。
现代文：戊午，王熔在镇州九门县的新市与李克用、王处存展开激战，结果大败李克用、王处存，斩杀擒获三万余人；辛酉，李克用率众退到城驻扎。
English: At noon, Wang Rong fought a fierce battle with Li Kegui and Wang Shuzhen in Xinshi, Jiumen County, Zhenzhou. As a result, Li Kegui and Wang Shuzhen were defeated, and more than 30,000 people were killed and captured; Xin Rong and Li Kegui led the crowd to retreat to the city and stationed.

古文：诏和解河东及镇、定、幽四镇。
现代文：唐昭宗颁发诏令劝河东及镇州、定州、幽州四镇和解。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang issued a decree to persuade Hedong and the four towns of Zhenzhou, Dingzhou and Yuzhou to reconcile.

古文：杨晟遗杨守贞、杨守忠、杨守厚书，使攻东川以解彭州之围，守贞等从之。
现代文：杨晟给杨守贞、杨守忠、杨守厚送去书信，让他们攻打东川以求解除彭州之围，杨守贞等遵命行动。
English: Yang Hui sent a letter to Yang Shouzhen, Yang Shouzhong and Yang Shouhou, asking them to attack Dongchuan in order to lift the siege of Pengzhou, and Yang Shouzhen complied with the order.

古文：神策督将窦行实戍梓州，守厚密诱之为内应；守厚至涪城，行实事泄，顾彦晖斩之。
现代文：神策督将窦行实驻守梓州，杨守厚暗中引诱他做内应；杨守厚到达涪城，窦行实要做内应的事情泄漏，顾彦晖将窦行实斩杀。
English: The divine governor stationed Dou Xizhi in Zizhou, and Yang Shouhou secretly lured him to do his bidding; Yang Shouhou arrived in Shicheng, and Dou Xizhi leaked what he was going to do, and Gu Yanqi killed Dou Xizhi.

古文：守厚遁去。
现代文：杨守厚于是逃走离去。
English: Yang Shouhou then ran away.

古文：守贞、守忠军至，无所归，盘桓绵、剑间，王建遣其将吉谏袭守厚，破之。
现代文：杨守贞、杨守忠的军队赶到，找不到去处，在绵州、剑州之间徘徊。王建派遣手下将领吉谏攻打杨守厚，将他打败。
English: Yang Shuzhen's and Yang Shuzhong's armies arrived, but couldn't find a place to go, wandering between Mianzhou and Jianzhou. Wang Jian dispatched his subordinate general Jizhong to attack Yang Shouhou and defeat him.

古文：癸亥，西川将李简邀击守忠于钟阳，斩获三千馀人。
现代文：癸亥，西川将领李简在绵州巴西县的钟阳镇拦击杨守忠，斩杀擒获三千余人。
English: At the same time, Li Jian, the general of the West River, stopped Yang Shouzhong in Zhongyang Town of Brazil County, Mianzhou, and killed and captured more than three thousand people.

古文：夏，四月，简又破守厚于铜鉾，斩获三千馀人，降万五千人；守忠、守厚皆走。
现代文：夏季，四月，李简又在铜打败杨守厚，斩杀擒获三千余人，前往投降的有一万五千人；杨守忠、杨守厚都逃跑了。
English: In the summer, in April, Li Jian again defeated Yang Shouhou in the Bronze War, killing and capturing more than three thousand people, and fifteen thousand people went to surrender; Yang Shouzhong and Yang Shouhou both fled.

古文：乙酉，置武胜军于杭州，以钱镠为防御使。
现代文：乙酉，朝廷在杭州武胜军，任命钱为防御使。
English: Acetylene, the imperial court in Hangzhou Wu Shengjun, appointed money as a defense force.

古文：天威军使贾德晟，以李顺节之死，颇怨愤，西门君遂恶之，奏而杀之。
现代文：天威军使贾德晟，因为李顺节之死，很是怨恨愤怒，西门君遂憎恨他，上奏唐昭宗将贾德晟杀死。
English: Because of the death of Li Shunjie, the Tianwei Army made Jia Dejun very resentful and angry, and Xi Menjun hated him, and sent Tang Zhaozong to kill Jia Dejun.

古文：德晟麾下千馀骑奔凤翔，李茂贞由是益强。
现代文：贾德晟属下一千余名骑兵投奔凤翔，李茂贞的势力从此更加大起来。
English: More than a thousand cavalrymen under Jia Dejun joined Fengxiang, and Li Maozhen's power became even greater.

古文：李匡威出兵侵云、代，壬寅，李克用始引兵还。
现代文：李匡威派出军队侵扰云州、代州，壬寅，李克用开始从镇州带领军队返回。
English: Li Kuangwei sent troops to invade Yunnan and Daizhou, while Ren Yin and Li Kegui began to lead the troops back from Zhenzhou.

古文：时溥遣兵南侵，至楚州，杨行密将张训、李德诚败之于寿河，遂取楚州，执其刺史刘瓚。
现代文：时溥派遣军队向南侵扰，到达楚州，杨行密的将领张训、李德诚在寿河将时溥的人马打败，乘胜攻占了楚州，抓获楚州刺史刘瓒。
English: Zhisheng sent troops to invade the south and reached Chuzhou. Yang Xingmi's generals Zhang Hun and Li Decheng defeated Zhisheng's troops in Shouhe, captured Chuzhou and captured the Chuzhou warlord Liu Bei.

古文：五月，加邠宁节度使王行瑜兼中书令。
现代文：五月，朝廷加封宁节度使王行瑜兼任中书令。
English: In May, the Imperial Court granted Wang Xingyu the additional title of "Chongshu Ling" (中書令).

古文：杨行密屡败孙儒兵，破其广德营，张训屯安吉，断其粮道。
现代文：杨行密多次击败孙儒的军队，攻破了孙儒在广德安设的营寨，张训则在安吉驻扎，截断了孙儒的运粮道路。
English: Yang Xingmi repeatedly defeated Sun Ru's army and broke through the camp set up by Sun Ru in Guangde, while Zhang Xun was stationed in Anji and cut off Sun Ru's grain transportation route.

古文：儒食尽，士卒大疫，遣其将刘建锋、马殷分兵掠诸县。
现代文：孙儒军中粮食吃尽，大闹瘟疫，孙儒派遣属下将领刘建锋、马殷分别带领军队到各县抢掠。
English: Sun Ju's army ran out of food and was plagued by a plague. Sun Ju sent his subordinate generals Liu Jianfeng and Ma Yin to lead the army to loot each county.

古文：六月，行密闻儒疾疟，戊寅，纵兵击之。
现代文：六月，杨行密听说孙儒军中正闹瘟疫，戊寅，便派出军队攻打孙儒。
English: In June, Yang Xingmi heard that there was a plague in Sun Ju's army, and Wu Yin sent troops to attack Sun Ju.

古文：会大雨、晦冥，儒军大败，安仁义破儒五十馀寨，田頵擒儒于陈，斩之，传首京师，儒众多降于行密。
现代文：当地正赶上大雨滂沱，天昏地暗，孙儒军队大败，安仁义攻破孙儒五十多个营寨，田在阵地上擒获孙儒，将他斩杀，把他的头传送到京师长安，孙儒的手下人马大多向杨行密投降。
English: The area was in the middle of a heavy rainstorm, the sky was dark, Sun Ru's army was defeated, An Renyi broke through more than fifty encampments of Sun Ru. Tian captured Sun Ru at the position, killed him, and sent his head to the Beijing division Chang'an. Most of Sun Ru's subordinates surrendered to Yang Xingmi.

古文：刘建锋、马殷收馀众七千，南走洪州，推建锋为帅，殷为先锋指挥使，以行军司马张佶为谋主，比至江西，众十馀万。
现代文：刘建锋、马殷收集剩余的人马七千人，向南奔往洪州，大家推举刘建锋为统帅，马殷为先锋指挥使，委任张佶为谋主，等到队伍到达江西，人数已达十余万。
English: Liu Jianfeng and Ma Yin gathered the remaining seven thousand people and rushed south to Hongzhou. Everyone nominated Liu Jianfeng as the commander, Ma Yin as the vanguard commander, and appointed Zhang Ye as the mastermind. By the time the team arrived in Jiangxi, the number had reached more than one hundred thousand.

古文：丁酉，杨行密帅众归扬州；秋，七月，丙辰，至广陵，表田頵守宣州，安仁义守润州。
现代文：丁酉，杨行密帅众归杨州；秋，七月，丙辰，杨行密回到广陵，向朝廷上表请令田守宣州，安仁义守润州。
English: Ding Jun and Yang Xingmi returned to Yangzhou; in the autumn and July, Bing Chen and Yang Xingmi returned to Guangling and petitioned the imperial court to make Tian Shou the governor of Xuanzhou and Anren Yi the governor of Runzhou.

古文：先是，扬州富庶甲天下，时人称扬一、益二，及经秦、毕、孙、杨兵火之馀，江、淮之间，东西千里扫地尽矣。
现代文：在此之前，扬州的富庶天下无比，当时人们称颂扬州第一，益州第二，等到经过秦彦、毕师铎、孙儒、杨行密各股军队的战火之后，江、淮之间，东西千里方圆一片败落景象。
English: Prior to this, Yangzhou's wealth was unrivaled in the world. At that time, people praised Yangzhou as the first and Yizhou as the second. However, after the wars of Qin Yan, Bi Shizhen, Sun Ru and Yang Xingmi's armies, between the Jiang and Huai Rivers, there was a decline in the east and west for thousands of miles.

古文：王建围彭州，久不下，民皆窜匿山谷；诸寨日出俘掠，谓之 淘虏 ，都将先择其善者，馀则士卒分之，以是为常。
现代文：王建围攻彭州，很久不能攻克，当地百姓都窜逃藏匿在高山深谷之中。王建各个营寨的士卒每天出去掳掠抢劫，把这叫做 淘虏 ，对搜抢来的人民财物，军中将领先挑选好的，剩余的让士兵们瓜分，以此为常事。
English: Wang Jian besieged Pengzhou and was unable to conquer it for a long time. The local people fled and hid in the high mountains and deep valleys. Wang Jian's soldiers from various camps went out every day to loot and rob, which is called "tao hui." For the people's property and belongings that were looted, the general of the army would take the lead in selecting the good ones, and let the soldiers divide up the rest, which was a common practice.

古文：有军士王先成者，新津人，本书生也，世乱，为兵，度诸将惟北寨王宗侃最贤，乃往说之曰： 彭州本西川之巡属也，陈、田召杨晟，割四州以授之，伪署观察使，与之共拒朝命。今陈、田已平而晟犹据之，州民皆知西川乃其大府而司徒乃其主也，故大军始至，民不入城而入同谷避之，以俟招安。
现代文：有一个军士王先成，是新律人，本来是个书生，适逢天下大乱，便参军从武，他揣测各位将领中只有北面营寨的王宗侃最为贤明，就前往劝王宗侃说： 彭州本来是西川的属地，陈敬、田令孜召来杨晟，割出四个州授给杨晟，任杨晟为观察使，与他们共同抗拒朝廷命令，现在陈敬、田令孜已经平灭，而杨晟仍然占据着彭州，彭州的人民都知道西川是他们的大府，而检校司徒王建是他们的官长，所以王建的大队人马到达彭城一带之初，当地百姓并不进入城内归附杨晟，而是逃往高山深谷躲避起来，等待着王建的招抚。
English: There was a sergeant Wang Xiancheng, who was a New Legalist, originally a scholar, who joined the army when the world was in turmoil. He guessed that among the generals, only Wang Zongkan, who was stationed in the north, was the wisest, so he went to persuade Wang Zongkan to say: Pengzhou was originally the territory of the West River, Chen Jing and Tian Lingzi summoned Yang Jia, carved out four states to grant to Yang Jia, appointed Yang Jia as an observer, and jointly resisted the imperial order with them. Now Chen Jing and Tian Lingzi have been wiped out, but Yang Jia still occupies Pengzhou

古文：今军至累月，未闻招安之命，军士复从而掠之，与盗贼无异，夺其资财，驱其畜产，分其老弱妇女以为奴婢，使父子兄弟流离愁怨；其在山中者暴露于暑雨，残伤于蛇虎，孤危饥渴，无所归诉。
现代文：现在王建军队到达已经几个月了，百姓没有听到招抚劝降的命令，相反纵容军中士卒一再大肆抢掠，与强盗贼寇没有什么两样，他们抢夺百姓的资财货物，追逐百姓的家畜财产，把年老体弱的人以及妇女分给士兵做奴婢，使这里的父子兄弟骨肉分离愁苦怨怒。那些在山谷中的人，酷暑暴雨之下无遮无盖，不时受到毒蛇猛虎的残害，孤苦危险，又饿又渴，没有诉苦的地方。
English: It has been several months since the arrival of Wang Jian's army. The people have not heard the order to entice and persuade. On the contrary, they have indulged the army sergeants and soldiers to repeatedly loot and pillage. They are no different from robbers and thieves. They robbed the people's wealth and goods, chased the people's livestock and property, and divided the old and infirm people and women into slaves and maids for the soldiers, causing the separation of the flesh and blood of fathers and sons. Those in the valley, under the intense heat and heavy rain, have no cover, and are occasionally attacked by poisonous snakes and tigers. They are in danger

古文：彼始以杨晟非其主而不从，今司徒不加存恤，彼更思杨氏矣。 
现代文：彭州百姓开始时认为杨晟不是他们的官长而不遵从他，现在检校司徒王建对他们不加爱抚救济，他们就会改变初衷想念杨晟了。 
English: At the beginning, the people of Pengzhou thought that Yang Hui was not their official and did not obey him. Now, if Wang Jian, the inspector of the school, does not give them caressing relief, they will change their original intention and miss Yang Hui.

古文：宗侃恻然，不觉屡移其床前问之，先成曰： 又有甚于是者，今诸寨每旦出六七百人，入山淘虏，薄暮乃返，曾无守备之意，赖城中无人耳，万一有智者为之画策，使乘虚奔突，先伏精兵千人于门内，登城望淘虏者稍远，出弓弩手、砲手各百人，攻寨之一面，随以役卒五百，负薪土填壕为道，然后出精兵奋击，且焚其寨；又于三面城下各出耀兵，诸寨咸自备御，无暇相救，城中得以益兵继出，如此，能无败乎！ 
现代文：王宗侃十分悲戚，不由得一再移动他坐着的床向前询问王先成，王先成说： 还有比这更为危险的事：现在各个营寨每天早晨出动六七百人，进入深山搜掠百姓财物，天黑时才返回来，竟然没有守寨防备的意思。这不过是赖于彭州城内没有能人罢了，万一有足智多谋的人为杨晟出谋划策，让他乘虚出击，事先在彭州城门的里面埋伏下精壮人马一千人，当登上城楼望到王建营寨的士兵外出去抢掠走远时，便派出弓弩手、炮手各一百人，攻打营寨的一面，紧随着派五百名役夫士兵，身背柴草土石填满堑壕垫好道路，然后出动精锐军队奋勇攻打，并且焚烧王建的营寨；又从彭州城的另三面突然派出军队，各个营寨都自己忙着防备抵御，没有功夫相互救援，彭州城内得以增派军队相继杀出，这样一来，王建怎么能不失败呢！ 
English: Wang Zongkan was very sad and couldn't help but repeatedly move the bed he was sitting on forward to ask Wang Xiancheng. Wang Xiancheng said, "There is something more dangerous than this: now, every morning, six or seven hundred people are dispatched from each camp to go into the mountains to plunder the people's property, and only return when it is dark. They have no intention of guarding the camp. This is simply due to the fact that there is no capable person in Pengzhou City. In the unlikely event that a resourceful person devises a plan for Yang Xuan to take advantage of the void and let him attack. In advance, he will ambush

古文：宗侃矍然曰： 此诚有之，将若之何？ 
现代文：王宗侃惊慌地说： 这种情况确定有司能发生，该怎么办好呢！ 
English: Wang Zongkan said in panic: This situation is sure to happen, what should I do?

古文：先成请条列为状以白王建，宗侃即命先成草之，大指言： 今所白之事，须四面通共，宗侃所司止于北面，或所白可从，乞以牙举施行。 
现代文：王先成请求分条开列写成状纸以便禀告王建，王宗侃当即命令王先成起草状文，大意是说： 今天所禀告的事，必须是围攻彭州城的王宗裕、王宗侃、华洪、王宗瑶四面相通共同行动，我王宗侃所统管的只是北面的营寨，或许所禀告的事可以依从，请求命令西川军队的使牙检举全都施行。 
English: Wang Xiancheng requested Wang Jian to write out a paper in order to report Wang Jian. Wang Zongkan immediately ordered Wang Xiancheng to draft a letter, to the effect that: The matter reported today must be the common action of Wang Zongyu, Wang Zongkan, Hua Hong and Wang Zongya, who besieged Pengzhou City. What I, Wang Zongkan, controlled was only the camp in the north. Perhaps the matter reported can be complied with. I request that the army of the West River be ordered to carry out the investigation.

古文：事凡七条： 其一，乞招安山中百姓。
现代文：事情共有七条： 其一，请求招抚山谷中的百姓。
English: There are seven items on the agenda: First, a request to appease the people in the valley.

古文：其二，乞禁诸寨军士及子弟无得一人辄出淘虏，仍表诸寨之旁七里内听樵牧，敢越表者斩。
现代文：其二，请求禁止各营寨的军中士兵和子弟，一个也不准出去搜掠百姓，在各营寨的旁边立石碑，七里方圆之内听凭打柴放牧，有敢超越石碑的斩杀。
English: Secondly, they requested that soldiers and their children in the army should be banned from each camp, and no one should be allowed to go out to plunder the people. Stone monuments should be erected next to each camp, and within a seven-mile radius, they should be allowed to collect firewood and graze, and anyone who dared to go beyond the stone monuments should be killed.

古文：其三，乞置招安寨，中容数千人，以处所招百姓，宗侃请选所部将校谨干者为招安将，使将三十人昼夜执兵巡卫。
现代文：其三，请求设置招安寨，寨中能容纳下几千人，以安置所招来的百姓，我王宗侃请求从所部将校中挑选谨慎干练的人为招安将领，令他带领三十人日夜手持武器巡逻护卫。
English: Thirdly, he asked for the establishment of the Zhaan Village, which could accommodate several thousand people, to resettle the invited people. I, Wang Zongkan, requested that a prudent and capable person be selected from the officers of the headquarters to be the Zhaan General, and that he lead thirty people day and night to patrol and guard with weapons.

古文：其四，招安之事须委一人总领，今榜帖既下，诸寨必各遣军士入山招安，百姓见之无不惊疑，如鼠见狸，谁肯来者！
现代文：其四，招抚百姓这件事，必须委派一个人总管，现在招安的榜帖既然发了下去，各个营寨一定是分头派遣军中士兵进入山谷招抚百姓，躲藏在那里的百姓看到这种情形，没有不惊慌疑惧的，就会象老鼠见了猫，有谁还肯前来投降！
English: Fourthly, a person must be appointed to be in charge of the matter of attracting the people. Now that the invitation to peace has been issued, each camp must have sent soldiers from the army to the valley to attract the people. When the people hiding there saw this situation, if they were not panicked and afraid, they would be like a mouse seeing a cat. Who would come and surrender?

古文：欲招之必有其术，愿降帖付宗侃专掌其事。
现代文：要想招抚山谷中的百姓，必须有恰当的方法，希望颁下文告委任我王宗侃专门掌管这桩事。
English: If you want to appease the people in the valley, you must have a proper method, and I hope to announce that I have appointed Wang Zongkan to be in charge of this matter.

古文：其五，乞严勒四寨指挥使，悉索前日所虏彭州男女老幼集于营场，有父子、兄弟、夫妇自相认者即使相从，牒其人数，部送招安寨，有敢私匿一人者斩；仍乞勒府中诸营，亦令严索，有自军前先寄归者，量给资粮，悉部送归招安寨。
现代文：其五，请求严格勒令四面营寨的指挥使，把从前掳掠来的彭州男女老幼全都集结在营寨的广场上，有父亲与儿子、哥哥与弟弟、丈夫与妻子自己相互认出的，就让他们相聚，在公文上注明人数，分部送往招安寨，有胆敢私自隐匿一个人的当即处斩；并请求勒令成都府中的各个营寨，也严格搜索，有先前从军队前沿送回来的百姓，酌量支给资财粮食，全都分部送回招安寨。
English: Fifthly, we request that the commanding officers of the camps on all four sides be strictly ordered to gather all the men, women and children of Pengzhou who were captured in the past on the square of the camp. If there are fathers and sons, brothers and brothers, husbands and wives who recognize each other, let them get together, indicate the number of people on the official document, and send the branch to Zha'an Village. If anyone dares to hide a person, he will be immediately executed. We also request that the various camps in Chengdu Prefecture be strictly searched. If there are people who were previously sent back from the front of the army, they will be given the appropriate amount of money and grain

古文：其六，乞置九陇行县于招安寨中，以前南郑令王丕摄县令，设置曹局，抚理百姓，择其子弟之壮者，给帖使自入山招其亲戚；彼知司徒严禁侵掠，前日为军士所虏者，皆获安堵，必欢呼踊跃，相帅下山，如子归母，不日尽出。
现代文：其六，请求在招安寨中设置九陇行县，委任从前的南郑县令王丕暂摄九陇行县县令，设置曹局，招抚安顿百姓，从这些百姓中挑选身强力壮的子弟，发给他们文告，让他们自己入山招请他们的亲戚，百姓知道王司徒严令禁止士兵侵扰抢掠，前些时候被军中士兵抢虏去的人，也都很平安，必定会欢呼跳跃，纷纷走下山来，如同儿子回到母亲的怀抱，用不了几天就会全部从山中出来。
English: Sixthly, they requested to set up Jiuzhaigou County in Zha'an Village, appoint the former South Zheng County Commander Wang Qian as the provisional leader of Jiuzhaigou County, set up the Cao Bureau, attract and settle the people, select the strong children from these people, send them a message, let them go into the mountains to invite their relatives, the people know that Wang Sitou strictly prohibits soldiers from intruding and looting, and the people who were captured by soldiers in the army earlier are also very safe, they will surely cheer and jump, and come down the mountain one after another, just like a son returning to his mother's arms, in a few days

古文：其七，彭州土地宜麻，百姓未入山时多沤藏者，宜令县令晓谕，各归田里，出所沤麻鬻之，以为资粮，必渐复业。 
现代文：其七，彭州的土地适于种麻，这里的百姓在没有进山时将大量的麻沤藏起来，应当命令县令明确告知百姓，分别回到田间故里，挖出沤藏的麻卖掉，换取资财粮食，这样必定会逐渐恢复旧业。 
English: Seventh, the land of Pengzhou is suitable for growing hemp. The people here hide a large amount of hemp when they do not go into the mountains. The county should order the county government to clearly inform the people, go back to the fields separately, dig out the hidden hemp and sell it in exchange for wealth and grain. This will inevitably gradually restore the old business.

古文：建得之大喜，即行之，悉如所申。
现代文：王建接到状文大为欢喜，当即施行，全部照办。
English: Wang Jian was very pleased to receive the notice, which was implemented immediately, and everything was done accordingly.

古文：明日，榜帖至，威令赫然，无敢犯者。
现代文：第二天，发布的告示传下，威严的军令赫然在目，没有人敢违。
English: The next day, the announcement was made, the majestic military order was in plain sight, and no one dared to disobey.

古文：三日，山中民竞出，赴招安寨如归市，寨不能容，斥而广之；浸有市井，又出麻鬻之。
现代文：第三天，躲藏在山谷中的百姓竞相出来，象赶集一样奔赴招安寨，招安寨容不下，就开辟地盘扩展寨子。逐渐地又有了集市，百姓又拿出收藏的麻贩卖。
English: On the third day, the villagers who had been hiding in the valley came out to compete with each other, rushing to Zha'an Village like a stampede. Unable to tolerate Zha'an Village, they opened up a site to expand the village. Gradually, there was a market again, and the people took out their collection of hemp to sell.

古文：民见村落无抄暴之患，稍稍辞县令，复故业。
现代文：招安寨的人民看到自己村落没有被残暴抢掠的苦难，逐渐告辞九陇行县县令，回到故里重操旧业。
English: When the people of Zha'an Village saw that their village had not suffered from the atrocities of looting, they gradually bid farewell to Jiuzhaigou County and returned to their hometown to resume their old business.

古文：月馀，招安寨皆空。
现代文：一个多月的时间，招安寨里都空了。
English: For more than a month, Zha'an Village has been empty.

古文：己巳，李茂贞克凤州，感义节度使满存奔兴元。茂贞又取兴、洋二州，皆表其子弟镇之。
现代文：己巳，李茂贞攻克凤州，感义节度使满存逃奔兴元，李茂贞又连续攻占了兴州、洋州，向朝廷上表请求委任他的子弟统管。
English: At this time, Li Maozhen conquered Fengzhou, and was so impressed by Yi Jiedu that he made Man Cun run away to Xingyuan. Li Maozhen conquered Xingzhou and Yangzhou successively, and petitioned the imperial court to appoint his son as governor.

古文：八月，以杨行密为淮南节度使、同平章事，以田頵知宣州留后，安仁义为润州刺史。
现代文：八月，朝廷任命杨行密为淮南节度使、同平章事，委任田为宣州留后，任命安仁义为润州刺史。
English: In August, the imperial court appointed Yang Xingmi as Huainan's ceremonial envoy, Tongping Zhangji, appointed Tian to stay in Xuanzhou, and appointed An Renyi to be the historian of Runzhou.

古文：孙儒降兵多蔡人，行密选其尤勇健者五千人，厚其禀赐，以皁衣蒙甲，号 黑云都 ，每战，使之先登陷陈，四邻畏之。
现代文：孙儒投降过来的军队大多是蔡州人，杨行密挑选他们当中特别勇猛强健的人五千名，予以丰厚的俸饷和赏赐，用黑色的外衣蒙盖上甲胄，号称 黑云都 ，每当作战时，就让这些人首先冲锋陷，四周邻近的军队都很惧怕他们。
English: Most of the troops that surrendered to Sun Ru were from Caizhou. Yang Xingmi selected five thousand of them who were particularly brave and strong, gave them rich salaries and rewards, and covered their armor with a black coat, known as Hei Yundu. Whenever there was a battle, these people were the first to charge into the battle, and the surrounding troops were very afraid of them.

古文：行密以用度不足，欲以茶盐易民布帛，掌书记舒城高勖曰： 兵火之馀，十室九空，又渔利以困之，将复离叛。
现代文：杨行密因为军中费用缺乏，想用茶叶和食盐换取百姓的布帛，掌书记舒城人高勖说： 战乱刚刚过去，老百姓十户有九家是空的，官府却又要以商谋利使他们艰难窘迫，这将会使百姓再次叛离我们。
English: Yang Xingmi wanted to exchange tea leaves and salt for the people's cloth cocoons because of the shortage of expenses in the army, and Gao Yao, the chief secretary of Shucheng, said: The war has just passed, and nine out of ten households of the people are empty, but the government is trying to make them suffer hardships with business profits, which will make the people betray us again.

古文：不若悉我所有易邻道所无，足以给军；进贤守令劝课农桑，数年之间，仓库自实。 
现代文：不如拿出我们拥有的东西去与缺少此物的邻道贸易，这样完全可以供给军队，再挑选贤明的地方长官劝勉人民耕作纺织，几年的时间，仓库自然就会充盈。 
English: It is better to take out what we have to trade with neighboring countries that lack this thing, so that we can fully supply the army, and then select wise local governors to encourage the people to cultivate textiles. In a few years, the warehouse will naturally be full.

古文：行密从之。
现代文：杨行密采纳了高勖的意见。
English: Yang Xingmi adopted Yuan Qi's opinion.

古文：田頵闻之曰： 贤者之言，其利远哉！ 
现代文：田听到这件事后说： 贤明人士的话，其利益深远呀！ 
English: When Tian heard about this, he said: Wise people say, the benefits are far-reaching!

古文：行密驰射武伎，皆非所长，而宽简有智略，善抚御将士，与同甘苦，推心待物，无所猜忌。
现代文：杨行密对于骑马射箭比武这些技艺，都没有什么专长，可是他对人宽厚，生活节俭又有智谋胆略，善于安抚驾御宫中将士，与他们同甘共苦，待人处事推心置腹，没有任何猜疑顾忌。
English: Yang Xingmi did not have any expertise in riding horses, archery or martial arts, but he was generous to others, lived a frugal life and was resourceful. He was good at placating the generals in the imperial court, sharing the joys and sorrows with them, treating others with sincerity, and had no suspicions.

古文：尝早出，从者断马鞦，取其金，行密知而不问，它日，复早出如故，人服其度量。
现代文：有一次早晨出去，跟随的人剪断驾辕马臀部的皮带，拿走那上面的金饰，杨行密知道了也不追问，后来，仍象以前一样在早晨外出，人们都佩服他的心胸度量。
English: Once, when he went out in the morning, the people following him cut the leather belt from the driver's horse's buttocks and took away the gold ornaments on it. Yang Xingmi knew this and did not question it. Later, he still went out in the morning as before, and people all admired his level-headedness.

古文：淮南被兵六年，士民转徙几尽；行密初至，赐与将吏，帛不过数尺，钱不过数百，而能以勤俭足用，非公宴，未尝举乐。
现代文：淮南一带遭受战乱接连六年，当地士人和百姓辗转迁移几乎走光了；杨行密刚到这里时，赏赐将领官吏，布帛不过几尺，银钱不到几百。可是杨行密能够靠勤奋节俭保证军中供给充足，除非因公摆设宴会，他自己从不举办歌舞声乐。
English: When Yang Xingmi first arrived here, he rewarded the generals and officials with only a few feet of cloth and less than a few hundred silver coins. However, Yang Xingmi was able to ensure sufficient supplies for the army by being diligent and frugal. Unless he held a banquet for official purposes, he never held singing and dancing.

古文：招抚流散，轻徭薄敛，未及数年，公私富庶，几复承平之旧。
现代文：杨行密招收安抚流离的人民，减轻徭役少征赋税，没有几年的功夫，官府和人民都富有起来，几乎恢复到太平盛世时的状态。
English: Yang Xingmi recruited and pacified the wandering people, reduced taxes and levied less taxes. Within a few years of hard work, the government and the people were rich and almost restored to the state of the Taiping era.

古文：李克用北巡至天宁军，闻李匡威、赫连鐸将兵八万寇云州，遣其将李君庆发兵于晋阳。
现代文：李克用往北巡视到达天宁军，听说李匡威、赫连铎率领军队八万侵扰云州，便派遣属下将领李君庆从晋率军出发。
English: Li Ke used his inspection tour to the north to reach the Tianning Army. When he heard that Li Kuangwei and He Lianyao led an army of 80,000 to invade Yunnan, he sent his subordinate general Li Junqing from Jin to lead the army.

古文：克用潜入新城，伏兵于神堆，擒吐谷浑逻骑三百；匡威等大惊。
现代文：李克用偷偷进入新城，而在云州城南的神堆设下伏兵，擒获吐谷浑的巡逻骑兵三百人；李匡威等大为震惊。
English: Li Ke used to sneak into Xincheng, and set up an ambush under the God's heap in the south of Yunnan City, and captured three hundred cavalry patrols of Tuyugun; Li Kuangwei and others were greatly shocked.

古文：丙申，君庆以大军至，克用迁入云州。
现代文：丙申，李君庆率领大军赶到，李克用便迁入云州。
English: Bishen, Li Junqing led a large army to arrive, and Li Ke used it to move into Yunnan.

古文：丁酉，出击匡威等，大破之。己亥，天威等烧营而遁；追至天成军，斩获不可胜计。
现代文：丁酉，李克用派出军队攻打李匡威等焚烧营寨逃跑；李克用的军队追到蔚州东北的天成军，斩杀擒获无法计算。
English: Ding Xuan, Li Ke sent troops to attack Li Kuangwei and other incinerated camps to escape; Li Ke's troops chased Tiancheng's army to the northeast of Ulshu, killing and capturing more than can be counted.

古文：辛丑，李茂贞攻拔兴元，杨复恭、杨守亮、杨守信、杨守贞、杨守忠、满存奔阆州。
现代文：辛丑，李茂贞攻克兴元，杨复恭、杨守亮、杨守信、杨守贞、杨守忠、满存一同逃奔阆州。
English: Xinxiu, Li Maozhen defeated Xingyuan, Yang Fuqong, Yang Shouliang, Yang Shouxin, Yang Shouzhen, Yang Shouzhong, and Manchu fled to Ganzhou together.

古文：茂贞表其子继密权知兴元府事。
现代文：李茂贞上表朝廷请求委任他的儿子李继密暂时主持兴元府事宜。
English: Li Maozhen petitioned the imperial court to appoint his son Li Jimi to temporarily preside over the affairs of Xingyuan.

古文：九月，加荆南节度使成汭同平章事。
现代文：九月，朝廷加封荆南节度使成为同平章事。
English: In September, the imperial court sealed the Jingnan Festival, making it a matter of equal importance.

古文：时溥迫监军奏称将士留己，冬，十月，复以溥为侍中、感化节度。
现代文：时溥逼迫监军向朝廷奏称军中将士一定要挽留他自己，而不应召到京师，冬季，十月，朝廷又任命时溥为侍中、感化节度使。
English: In the winter, in October, the imperial court appointed Shi Yan as an attendant and an envoy to influence the festival, after Shi Yan forced the supervisors of the army to report to the imperial court that the lieutenant generals must retain himself and not be called to the Beijing division.

古文：硃全忠奏请追溥新命；诏谕解之。
现代文：朱全忠上奏请求朝廷追回对时溥新的任命；唐昭宗颁发诏令劝朱全忠与时溥和解。
English: Zhu Quanzhong appealed to the imperial court to recover the new appointment to Shi Yan; Tang Zhaozong issued a decree to persuade Zhu Quanzhong and Shi Yan to reconcile.

古文：初，邢、洺、磁州留后李存孝，与李存信俱为李克用假子，不相睦。
现代文：当初，邢州、州、磁州的留后李存孝，与李存信都是李克用的养子，可是他们相互不和睦。
English: At first, Li Cunxiao and Li Cunxin, who stayed behind in Bozhou, Zhouzhou and Maganzhou, were the adopted sons of Li Ke, but they did not get along with each other.

古文：存信有宠于克用，存孝在邢州，欲立大功以胜之，乃建议取镇冀；存信从中沮之，不时听许。
现代文：李存信在李克用那里很受宠，李存孝在邢州，想要建立大功以求超过李存信，于是建议攻取镇冀，李存信从中作梗，李克用不时听从李存信的意见。
English: Li Cunxin was favored by Li Kegui, and Li Cunxiao was favored by Li Kexin in Zhangzhou. Li Cunxiao wanted to establish a great achievement in order to surpass Li Cunxin, so he suggested capturing Zhenji. Li Cunxin obstructed Li Cunxin, and Li Kexin had to listen to Li Cunxin's opinion from time to time.

古文：及王镕围尧山，存孝救之，不克。
现代文：等到王围攻尧山，李存孝前往救援，未能获胜。
English: When Wang Wai attacked Lushan, Li Cunxiao went to the rescue, but failed to win.

古文：克用以存信为蕃、马步都指挥使，与存孝共击之，二人互相猜忌，逗留不进；克用更遣李嗣勋等击破之。
现代文：李克用便任命李存信为蕃、汉马步都指挥使，与李存孝一同攻打王，李存孝、李存信二人互相猜疑忌恨，彼此逗留观望而不前进；李克用改派李嗣勋等将王打败。
English: Li Kegui then appointed Li Cunxin as the commander and Han Mapu as the commander, and together with Li Cunxiao attacked Wang. Li Cunxiao and Li Cunxin suspected and hated each other, and they stayed to watch each other without advancing; Li Kegui reassigned Li Shuxun and others to defeat Wang.

古文：存信还，谮存孝无心击贼，疑与之有私约。
现代文：李存信回到李克用那里，诬陷李存孝根本不想攻打贼寇，怀疑他与贼寇暗中有密约。
English: Li Cunxin returned to Li Kegui and accused Li Cunxiao of not wanting to fight the bandits at all, suspecting that he had a secret agreement with the bandits.

古文：存孝闻之，自以有功于克用，而信任顾不及存信，愤怨，且惧及祸，乃潜结王镕及硃全忠，上表以三州自归于朝廷，乞赐旌节及会诸道兵讨李克用；诏以存孝为邢、洺、磁节度使，不许会兵。
现代文：李存孝听到这事，自认为对李克用颇有功劳，可是李克用对他的信任反不如李存信，很是愤恨，又怕大祸降临，于是暗中与王和朱全忠交结，向朝廷上呈表章以邢州、州、磁州三州归顺朝廷，并请求赏赐给他节使度的旌旗节铽，以及会同各道军队讨伐李克用。唐昭宗颁发诏令，任命李存孝为邢州、州、磁州节度使，但不同意会合军队的举动。
English: When Li Cunxiao heard about this, he thought that he had done a great service to Li Kejun, but Li Kejun did not trust him as much as Li Cunxin. He was very angry and feared that a great disaster would come. Therefore, he secretly made friends with Wang and Zhu Quanzhong, and presented the imperial court with a badge with the three states of Quzhou, Zhoushou and Magizhou to submit to the imperial court. He also requested that he be awarded the banner of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of the festival of

古文：十一月，时溥濠州刺史张璲、泗州刺史张谏以州附于硃全忠。
现代文：十一月，时溥的濠州刺史张、泗州刺史张谏分别献出濠州、泗州，归附朱全忠。
English: In November, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhang Zizhou, Zhu Zenzhong.

古文：乙未，硃全忠遣其子友裕将兵十万攻濮州，拔之，执其刺史邵伦，遂令友裕移兵击时溥。
现代文：乙未，朱全忠派遣他的儿子朱友裕带领军队十万人攻打濮州，予以攻克，抓获濮州刺史部伦，于是，朱全忠又命令朱友裕调转军队攻打时溥。
English: Two years later, Zhu Quanzhong sent his son Zhu Youyu to lead an army of one hundred thousand to attack Zhangzhou, conquer it, and capture Zhangzhou's history department. Therefore, Zhu Quanzhong also ordered Zhu Youyu to transfer the army to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：孙儒将王坛陷婺州，刺史蒋环奔赵州。
现代文：孙儒的将领王坛攻陷婺州，婺州刺史蒋逃奔越州。
English: Sun Ju's general Wang Tan invaded and conquered Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou assassinated Chiang Kai-shek and fled to Yuezhou.

古文：庐州刺史蔡俦发杨行密祖父墓，与舒州刺史倪章连兵，遣使送印于硃全忠以求救。
现代文：庐州刺史蔡俦挖开杨行密祖父的坟墓，与舒州刺史倪章联合军队，派遣使者向朱全忠送去官印求救。
English: Cai Wei, the statesman of Zhangzhou, dug up the grave of Yang Xingmi's grandfather, and sent an envoy to Zhu Quanzhong to ask for help.

古文：全忠恶其反覆，纳其印，不救，且牒报行密；行密谢之。
现代文：朱全忠厌恶蔡俦反复无常，接收了他送来的官印，而不派兵救援，并且给杨行密送去书信通报消息；杨行密对朱全忠表示感谢。
English: Zhu Quanzhong detested Cai Qi's capriciousness, accepted the official seal he sent, instead of sending soldiers to rescue, and sent a letter to Yang Xingmi to inform him of the news; Yang Xingmi expressed his gratitude to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：行密遣行营都指挥使李神福将兵讨俦。
现代文：接着，杨行密派遣行营都指挥使李神福带领军队讨伐蔡俦。
English: Next, Yang Xingmi dispatched the commander of the camp to ask Li Shenfu to lead the army to fight against Cai Xuan.

古文：《宣明历》浸差，太子少詹事边冈造新历成，十二月，上之。
现代文：唐穆宗时建立的《宣明历》逐渐出现误差，太子少詹事边冈改造新历完工，十二月，进献朝廷。
English: The "Xuanming Calendar" established at the time of Tang Mu Zong gradually showed errors, and the new calendar was completed and presented to the imperial court in December.

古文：命曰《景福崇玄历》。
现代文：昭宗把新历命名为《景福崇玄历》。
English: Zhaozong named the new calendar "Gingfu Chongyuan Calendar."

古文：壬午，王建遣其将华洪击杨守亮于阆州，破之。
现代文：壬午，王建派遣属下将领华洪在阆州进攻杨守亮，将其打败。
English: At noon, Wang Jian dispatched his subordinate general Hua Hong to attack Yang Shouliang in Zhangzhou and defeated him.

古文：建遣节度押牙延陵郑顼使于硃全忠；全忠问剑阁，顼极言其险。
现代文：王建派遣节度押牙、延陵人郑顼出使到朱全忠那里，朱全忠询问剑阁的情况，郑顼极力述说剑阁的险峻。
English: Wang Jian sent an envoy to Zhu Quanzhong to inquire about the state of Jiange, and Zheng Jian tried his best to describe the steepness of Jiange.

古文：全忠不信，顼曰： 苟不以闻，恐误公军机。 
现代文：朱全忠不信，郑顼说： 假如不相信我说的话，恐怕要误了你的军机大事。 
English: If Zhu Quanzhong did not believe him, Zheng Yao said: "If you do not believe what I say, I am afraid you will miss the great event of your military aircraft.

古文：全忠大笑。
现代文：朱全忠听后哈哈大笑。
English: Zhu Quanzhong laughed out loud after listening.

古文：是岁，明州刺史钟文季卒，其将黄晟自称刺史。
现代文：这一年，明州刺史钟文季去世，他的手下将领黄晟自称明州刺史。
English: This year, Mingzhou chief historian Zhong Wenzhi passed away, and his subordinate Huang Qi claimed to be the chief historian.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝上之中景福二年春，正月，时溥遣兵攻宿州，刺史郭言战死。
现代文：景福二年春季正月，时溥派遣军队攻打宿州，宿州刺史郭言战死。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Gingfu, Shishu dispatched an army to attack Shuzhou, and Shuzhou assassinated Guo Geng.

古文：东川留后顾彦晖既与王建有隙，李茂贞欲抚之使从己，秦恢复更赐彦晖节；诏以彦晖为东川节度使，茂贞又奏遣知兴元府事李继密救梓州，未几，建遣兵败东川、凤翔之兵于利州，彦晖求和，请与茂贞绝。乃许之。
现代文：东川留后顾彦晖既然与王建有矛盾，李茂贞便想招抚顾彦晖使他随从自己，于是上奏请求再次赏赐给顾彦晖节度使旌旗节钺，唐昭宗颁诏任命顾彦晖为东川节度使。李茂贞又奏请派遣掌管兴元府事宜的李继密救援梓州，不久，王建派遣军队在利州打败了东川、凤翔的军队。顾彦晖向王建求和，表示要与李茂贞断绝往来，王建这才许可与他和解。
English: After Gu Yanqi stayed in Dongchuan, since there was a contradiction with Wang Jian, Li Maozhen wanted to entice Gu Yanqi to follow him, so he made a request to reward Gu Yanqi's festival again to make the flag festival. The Tang Zhaozong issued a decree to appoint Gu Yanqi as the Dongchuan festival envoy. Li Maozhen also asked Li Jimi, who was in charge of the affairs of Xingyuanfu, to rescue Zizhou. Soon, Wang Jian sent troops to defeat Dongchuan and Fengxiang's troops in Lizhou. Gu Yanqi sued Wang Jian for peace, saying that he wanted to break

古文：凤翔节度使李茂贞自请镇兴元，诏以茂贞为山南西道兼武定节度使，以中书侍郎、同平章事徐彦若同平章事，充凤翔节度使，又割果、阆二州隶武定军。
现代文：凤翔节度使李茂贞请求镇守兴元府，唐昭宗颁诏任命李茂贞为山南西道兼武定节度使。委任中书侍郎、同平章事徐彦若为同平章事，充任凤翔节度使，又割出果州、阆州隶属武定节度使管辖。
English: The Fengxiang festival made Li Maozhen request to be the town guard of Xingyuanfu, and the Tang Zhaozong issued an edict to appoint Li Maozhen as the Shannan West Road and Wuding festival envoy. If Xu Yan, the secretary of the Central Office and the Tongping chapter, was the Tongping chapter, he would serve as the Fengxiang festival envoy, and Gouzhou and Zhangzhou would be under the jurisdiction of the Wuding festival envoy.

古文：茂贞欲兼得凤翔，不奉诏。
现代文：李茂贞试图同时获得凤翔，因而拒不奉行诏令。
English: Li Maozhen tried to obtain Fengxiang at the same time, and thus refused to comply with the edict.

古文：二月，甲戌，加西川节度使王建同平章事。
现代文：二月，甲戌，朝廷加封西川节度使王建为同平章事。
English: In February, at Kuching, the imperial court added the fief of Xichuan Jiedu to make Wang Jian a peer.

古文：李克用引兵围邢州，王镕遣牙将王藏海致书解之，克用怒，斩藏海，进兵击镕，败镇兵于平山，辛巳，攻天长镇，旬日不下。
现代文：李克用带领军队围攻邢州，镇州的王派遣牙将王藏海给李克用送去书信劝解。李克用大怒，将王藏海斩杀，派军队攻打王，在平山县打败镇州的军队。辛巳，李克用攻打天长镇，十几天都没有攻克。
English: Li Ke used to lead the army to besiege Bozhou, and the king of Zhenzhou sent a tooth to Wang Zanghai to Li Ke to send a letter of persuasion. Li Ke, with great anger, killed Wang Zanghai, sent an army to attack the king, and defeated the army of Zhenzhou in Pingshan County. Soon, Li Ke used to attack Tianchang Town, and did not conquer it for ten days.

古文：镕出兵三万救之，克用逆战于叱日岭下，大破之，斩首万馀级，馀众溃去。
现代文：王派出军队三万前往救援，李克用在叱日岭下迎战，把王军队打得大败，斩杀一万余人，剩余的人马溃散逃去。
English: Wang sent an army of thirty thousand to the rescue, and Li Ke used it to meet the battle at the foot of the Zhaozhiling Mountains, defeating Wang's army, killing more than ten thousand people, and the remaining people scattered and fled.

古文：河东军无食。脯其尸而啖之。
现代文：李克用的河东军队没有粮食，就把被杀士卒的尸体切割而食。
English: Li Ke's Hedong army had no food, so they cut up the bodies of the murdered soldiers and ate them.

古文：时溥求救于硃瑾，硃全忠遣其将霍存将骑兵三千军曹州以备之。
现代文：徐州的时溥向兖州的朱瑾请求救援，朱全忠派遣属下将领霍存带领骑兵三千在曹州驻扎防备朱瑾军队的进攻。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent his subordinate general Huo Cun and 3,000 cavalry stationed in Caozhou to guard against the attack of Zhu Quanzhong's army.

古文：瑾将兵二万救徐州，存引兵赴之，与硃友裕合击徐、兗兵于石佛山下，大破之，瑾遁归兗州。
现代文：朱瑾率领军队二万人前去救援徐州，霍存带领人马前往迎战，他和朱友裕在彭城附近的石佛山下联合攻击徐州、兖州的军队，结果徐州、兖州军队大败，朱瑾逃回兖州。
English: Zhu Xi led an army of twenty thousand people to rescue Xuzhou, and Huo Cun led the troops to meet the battle. He and Zhu Youyu jointly attacked the armies of Xuzhou and Ganzhou under Shifo Mountain near Pengcheng. As a result, the armies of Xuzhou and Ganzhou were defeated, and Zhu Xi fled back to Ganzhou.

古文：辛卯，徐兵复出，存战死。
现代文：辛卯，徐州军队再次出击，霍存恃胜不备战死。
English: Xinwu, Xuzhou army attack again, Huo Cunxu defeated and killed.

古文：李克用进下井陉，李存孝将兵救王镕，遂入镇州，与镕计事，镕又乞师于硃全忠，全忠方与时溥相攻，不能救，但遗克用书，言 鄴下有十万精兵，抑而未进。 
现代文：李克用进军攻下井陉，李存孝带领军队前往救援王熔，于是进入镇州，与王熔商议攻防事宜。王熔又请朱全忠派出军队救援，朱全忠正忙于与时溥交战，不能派兵救援，不过却给李克用送去书信，说： 我在邺下驻有十万精兵，只因我的抑制才未让他们推进。 
English: Li Ke used his march to conquer Jingyao, Li Cunxiao led the army to rescue Wang Rong, and then entered Zhenzhou to discuss offensive and defensive matters with Wang Rong. Wang Rong also asked Zhu Quanzhong to send an army to rescue. Zhu Quanzhong was busy with the war with Shijiazhuang and could not send troops to rescue, but he sent a letter to Li Ke to say: I have stationed 100,000 elite soldiers under my command, and it was only because of my restraint that I did not let them advance.

古文：克用复书： 倘实屯军鄴下，颙望降临；必欲真决雌雄，愿角逐于常山之尾。 
现代文：李克用给朱全忠回信说： 倘若你在邺下确实驻有强兵，那么我恭候大军的到来；如果一定真要分出胜负，请到常山脚下决战。 
English: Li Ke replied to Zhu Quanzhong in a letter: "If you really have strong soldiers stationed under your command, then I am waiting for the arrival of the army; if you really want to determine the outcome, please go to the foot of Changshan Mountain for a decisive battle.

古文：甲午，李匡威引兵救镕，败河东兵于元氏，克用引还邢州。
现代文：甲午，李匡威带领军队救助王熔，在元氏打败李克用的河东军队，李克用率领人马返回郑州。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Li Kuangwei led the army to rescue Wang Rong. In the Yuan Dynasty, Li Ke used the army from the east of the river to defeat Wang Rong. Li Ke used the army from the east of the river to return to Zhengzhou.

古文：镕犒匡威于藁城，辇金帛二十万以酬之。
现代文：王熔的藁城犒劳李匡威，拿出金帛二十万来酬谢。
English: Li Kuangwei, who worked for Wang Rong's Lucheng, was rewarded with 200,000 gold ingots.

古文：硃友裕围彭城，时溥数出兵，友裕闭壁不战。
现代文：朱友裕围攻彭城，时溥几次派出军队挑战，朱友裕都关闭营垒拒不出战。
English: Zhu Youyu besieged Pengcheng, Shijiazhuang several times sent troops to challenge, Zhu Youyu closed the camp and refused to fight.

古文：硃瑾宵遁，友裕不追，都虞候硃友恭以书谮友裕于全忠。全忠怒，驿书下都指挥使庞师古，使代之将，且按其事。
现代文：朱瑾在石佛山下战败于夜间逃跑，朱友裕也不追击，都虞候朱友恭写信给朱全忠诬陷朱友裕，朱全忠看信后勃然大怒，当即通过驿站传信给都指挥使宠师古，命令他代替朱友裕统领军队，并且审查朱友裕的可疑事件。
English: Zhu Xi was defeated at the foot of Shifo Mountain and fled at night. Zhu Youyu did not pursue him. Zhu Youqun was framed by Zhu Quanzhong in a letter written by Zhu Youqun to Zhu Quanzhong. After reading the letter, Zhu Quanzhong flew into a rage. He immediately sent a letter to the commander of Zhu Quanzhong through the post, ordering him to lead the army in place of Zhu Youyu and to review the suspicious incident of Zhu Youyu.

古文：书误达于友裕，友裕大惧，以二千骑逃入山中，潜诣砀山，匿于伯父全昱之所。
现代文：不料，朱全忠的这封信误传到朱友裕的手里，朱友裕看到极其恐惧，当即带着二千骑兵逃进深山，秘密到达砀山，在伯父朱全昱那里藏匿起来。
English: Unexpectedly, this letter from Zhu Quanzhong was mistakenly passed on to Zhu Youyu. Seeing the extreme fear, Zhu Youyu immediately fled into the mountains with two thousand cavalry, secretly reached Shaoshan, and hid with his uncle Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠夫人张氏闻之，使友裕单骑诣汴州见全忠，泣涕拜伏于庭；全忠命左右捽抑，将斩之，夫人趋就抱之，泣曰 汝舍兵众，束身归罪，无异志明矣。 
现代文：朱全忠的夫人张氏听说这件事，让朱友裕单人骑马到济州拜见朱全忠，朱友裕在厅堂上痛哭流涕跪下求饶，朱全忠命令身边侍卫揪住他的头发，按住他的脖子，要把他拉出去处斩，张夫人急忙跑过去抱住朱友裕，流着泪说： 你离开手下马，只身回来认罪，没有其他图谋已经很明显了。 
English: Mr. Zhang, the wife of Zhu Quanzhong, heard about this incident and asked Zhu Youyu to ride alone to Jeju to meet Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Youyu cried bitterly in the hall and knelt down to beg for forgiveness. Zhu Quanzhong ordered the guards around him to cover his hair, hold his neck, and pull him out to be beheaded. Mrs. Zhang hurried over to hug Zhu Youyu and said with tears: You left your horse and came back alone to confess. It was already clear that there was no other plan.

古文：全忠悟而舍之，使权知许州。
现代文：朱全忠听后顿时醒悟而免除对朱友裕的刑罚，命他暂且主持许州事宜。
English: After listening, Zhu Quanzhong suddenly woke up and exempted Zhu Youyu from punishment, ordering him to temporarily preside over the affairs of Huzhou.

古文：友恭，寿春人李彦威也，幼为全忠家僮，全忠养以为子。
现代文：朱友恭，本来是寿春人李彦威，幼小时候便为朱全中家的童仆，被朱全忠收养为义子。
English: Zhu Yougong, originally named Li Yanwei, was a servant of Zhu Quanzhong Junior High School when he was a child. He was adopted by Zhu Quanzhong as his son-in-law.

古文：张夫人，砀山人，多智略，全忠敬惮之，虽军府事，时与之谋议；或将兵出，中途，夫人以为不可，遣一介召之，全忠立为之返。
现代文：张夫人是砀山人，足智多谋，朱全忠敬重而又惧怕她，即使是节度使司的要事，也时常与她谋划高议。有时朱全忠率领军队出征，已经行进到半路，而张夫人认为这次出征不可取，只派遣一个人去召请，朱全忠立即因此而返回。
English: Mrs. Zhang was from Shaoshan and was resourceful. Zhu Quanzhong respected and feared her. Even when it came to important matters, he often discussed and planned with her. Sometimes, Zhu Quanzhong led an army to go to war and was already halfway there, but Mrs. Zhang thought that it was not advisable for him to go to war. She only sent one person to summon him, so Zhu Quanzhong immediately returned.

古文：庞师古攻佛山寨，拨之，自是徐兵不敢出。
现代文：庞师古攻打石佛山营寨，予以占据。从此以后，时溥的徐州军队不敢再出来交战。
English: Pang Shigu attacked Shifoshan encampment and occupied it. Since then, the Xuzhou army dared not come out to fight again.

古文：李匡威之救王镕也，将发幽州，家人会别，弟匡筹之妻美，匡威醉而淫之。
现代文：李匡威救援王熔时，将要从幽州出发，家族里的人都会聚为他送别，李匡威胞弟李匡筹的妻子长得秀美，李匡威喝醉酒后将她奸淫。
English: When Li Kuangwei rescues Wang Luo, he will set out from Yuzhou. Everyone in the family will gather to see him off. The wife of Li Kuangwei's brother, Li Kuang Qi, is very beautiful. Li Kuang Wei got drunk and raped her.

古文：二月，匡威自镇州还，至博野，匡筹据军府自称留后，以符追行营兵。
现代文：三月份，李匡威从镇州返回，到达博野，李匡筹占据节度使司自称留后，用节度使司的符节追回李匡威行营的军队。
English: In March, when Li Kuangwei returned from Zhenzhou and arrived in Bono, Li Kuangqiao occupied the commander's post and claimed to stay, and used the commander's post to chase back the troops of Li Kuangwei's encampment.

古文：匡威众溃归，但与亲近留深州，进退无所之，遣判官李抱真入奏，请归京师。
现代文：李匡威的人马溃散投归幽州，他只得与一些亲近的士卒留在深州，进退无去处，便派遣判官李抱真向朝廷上奏，请求回到京师长安。
English: Li Kuangwei's men scattered and returned to Yuzhou. He had to stay in Shenzhou with some close soldiers. With nowhere to go, he sent the judge Li Bozhen to appeal to the imperial court, requesting to return to Beijing Division Chang'an.

古文：京师屡更大乱，闻匡威来，坊市大恐，曰： 金头王来图社稷。 
现代文：京师接连几次遭受大的战乱，听说李匡威要来，巷头巷尾的人们大为恐慌，都说： 金头王李匡威要来图谋大唐皇位了。 
English: The Beijing division suffered several major wars in a row. Hearing that Li Kuangwei was coming, the people in the streets panicked. They all said: Li Kuangwei, the King of Jin, is coming to plot the throne of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：士民或窜匿山谷。
现代文：长安的士人百姓有的竟逃窜到山谷中藏匿起来。
English: Some of the citizens of Chang'an fled and hid in the valley.

古文：王镕德其以己故致失地，迎归镇州，为筑第，父事之。
现代文：因为李匡威是为救援王熔而失去了幽州的，因此王熔对李匡威感恩戴德，迎接李匡威回到镇州，并为他建造了府第，当作父亲一样侍奉他。
English: Because Li Kuangwei lost Yuzhou to rescue Wang Rong, Wang Rong was grateful to Li Kuangwei, welcomed Li Kuangwei back to Zhenzhou, and built a mansion for him, serving him like a father.

古文：以渝州刺史柳玭为泸州刺史，柳氏自化绰以来，世以孝悌礼法为士大夫所宗。
现代文：朝廷任命渝州刺史柳为泸州刺史。柳氏家族自从元和年间和柳公绰以来，世代都因敬老尊长、重礼守法而被士大夫们所尊崇。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu, the prince of Yuzhou, as the prince of Zhangzhou. The Liu family has been revered by scholars and magistrates for their respect for elders and their strict adherence to the law since the Yuan and Qing dynasties.

古文：玼御史大夫，上欲以为相。宦官恶之，故久谪于外。
现代文：柳曾任御史大夫，皇帝想委任他做宰相，宦官们憎恶他，因而长期贬职在外。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint him as prime minister, but the eunuchs hated him, so he was demoted for a long time.

古文：玼戒其子弟曰： 凡门地高，可畏不可恃也。
现代文：柳曾经告诫他家中的子弟说： 门第地位高贵，是可怕而不是可以自恃的事。
English: Liu once admonished the children in his family, saying, "The noble status of a family is a terrible thing, not something to boast about.

古文：立身行己，一事有失，是得罪重于他人，死无以见先人于地下，此其所以可畏也。
现代文：这些人为人处事，如果一件事上出现失误，招来的罪过就会比别人严重得多，死后也没有脸面在地下祖先相见，这是所以说可怕的原因。
English: These people do things for other people. If there is a mistake in one thing, the guilt incurred will be much more serious than others. After death, there is no face to meet the ancestors in the underground, which is why it is so terrible.

古文：门高则骄心易生，族盛则为人所嫉；懿行实才，人未之信，小有玼，众皆指之。此其所以不可恃也。
现代文：门第高就容易产生骄傲心理，家族昌盛就要被人嫉妒；他们的美德善行、真才实学，人们未必相信，而稍微有一点美中不足，大家都会去指责他们，这是所以说不可自恃的原因。
English: It is easy to be proud when one's lineage is high, and to be envied when one's family is prosperous; people may not believe in one's virtues, good deeds, true talent, and hard work, but if there is a flaw in one's virtue, everyone will criticize them, which is why one should not be conceited.

古文：故膏梁子弟，学宜加勤，行宜加励，仅得比他人耳！ 
现代文：因此，高贵人家的子弟，学习应当更加勤奋，行为应当再接再励，这样也仅仅是能和其他普通人相比而已！ 
English: Therefore, the children of noble families should be more diligent in their studies, and their behavior should be encouraged, so that they can only be compared with other ordinary people!

古文：王建屡请杀陈敬瑄、田令孜、朝廷不许。
现代文：王建一再请求杀掉陈敬、田令孜，朝廷不准许。
English: Wang Jian repeatedly requested to kill Chen Jing and Tian Lingzi, but the imperial court did not allow it.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，建使人告敬瑄谋作乱，杀之新津。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙亥，王建指使人告发陈敬谋反作乱，在新津将他杀死。
English: In the summer, in April, Yihai, Wang Jian ordered people to denounce Chen Jingmo for rebellion and riot, and killed him in Xinjin.

古文：又告令孜通凤翔书，下狱死。
现代文：又指使人告发田令孜与凤翔节度使李茂贞暗中通信，把他囚禁狱中致死。
English: He also ordered people to denounce Tian Lingzi and Feng Xiang for secretly communicating with Li Maozhen, and he was imprisoned and sentenced to death.

古文：建使节度判官冯涓草表奏之曰： 开匣出虎，孔宣父不责他人；当路斩蛇，孙叔敖盖非利己。
现代文：王建命令节度判官冯涓起草表章奏报说： 打开木笼放出猛虎，孔子责备其弟子不责备别人；孙叔敖将两头蛇杀死，并不是为了他自己的利益。
English: Wang Jian ordered the judge of the festival, Feng Yu, to draft a report saying: Open the wooden cage to release the tiger, Confucius reproached his disciple for not reproaching others; Sun Shuxuan did not kill the two-headed snake for his own benefit.

古文：专杀不行于阃外，先机恐失于彀中。 
现代文：统兵在外的将帅如果没有专杀大权，重要的机会就要在奸臣的圈套中丧失。 
English: If the commander-in-chief does not have the exclusive right to kill, an important opportunity will be lost in the trap of a traitor.

古文：涓，宿之孙也。
现代文：冯涓是冯宿的孙子。
English: Feng Xuan is the grandson of Feng Shuang.

古文：汴军攻徐州，累月不克。
现代文：汴州军队攻打徐州，连续几个月未能攻克。
English: The Zhangzhou army attacked Xuzhou and failed to conquer it for several months.

古文：通事官张涛以书白硃全忠云： 进军时日非良，故无功。 
现代文：通事官张涛写信给朱全忠说： 进军的时机没有把握好，所以劳而无功。 
English: Zhang Tao, the communications officer, wrote to Zhu Quanzhong, saying, "We did not grasp the right time to advance, so all our efforts were in vain.

古文：全忠以为然，敬翔曰： 今攻城累月，所费甚多，徐人已困，旦夕且下，使将士闻此言，则懈于攻取矣。 
现代文：朱全忠同意他的看法。敬翔却说： 现在攻打徐州城已经几个月了，耗费人力财力相当大，时溥的徐州军队已经困乏不堪，攻下徐州是早晚的事了，如果让军中将士知道张涛的这些话，那么进攻的劲头就会松懈下来。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong agreed with him. However, Jing Xiang said: It has been several months since the attack on Xuzhou City. It has consumed a lot of manpower and financial resources. The exhausted Xuzhou army is exhausted. It is a matter of time before Xuzhou is captured. If the lieutenant generals know these words of Zhang Tao, then the momentum of the attack will slacken.

古文：全忠乃焚其书。
现代文：朱全忠于是将张涛的书信烧掉。
English: Zhu Quanzhong then burned Zhang Tao's letters.

古文：癸未，全忠自将如徐州；戊子，庞师古拨彭城，时溥举族登燕子楼自焚死。
现代文：癸未，朱全忠亲自率领人马到达徐州；戊子，庞师古攻克彭城，时溥全家族的登上燕子楼自焚而死。
English: Before long, Zhu Quanzhong personally led the troops and horses to Xuzhou; Wu Zi and the Pang division attacked Ke Peng City, when the whole family of Zhu Quanzhong boarded the Swallow Tower and died of self-immolation.

古文：己丑，全忠入彭城，以宋州刺史张廷范知感化留后，奏乞朝廷除文臣为节度使。
现代文：已丑，朱全忠进入彭城，委任宋州刺史张廷范主持感化留后事宜，奏请朝廷任命文臣做节度使。
English: Already ugly, Zhu Quanzhong entered Pengcheng, appointed Zhang Tingfan, the leading Songzhou scholar, to preside over the post-imperial affairs, and requested the court to appoint Wencheng as the regent.

古文：李匡威在镇州，为王镕完城堑，缮甲兵，训士卒，视之如子，匡威以镕年少，且乐真定土风，潜谋夺之。
现代文：李匡威留在镇州，为王熔整治护城堑壕，修理盔甲武器，把王熔当成儿子一样看等。李匡威因为王熔年纪小，又喜好镇州的水土气候，便秘密谋划夺取镇州。
English: Li Kuangwei stayed in Zhenzhou, tidied up the moat for Wang Rong, repaired armor weapons, and treated Wang Rong like a son. Li Kuangwei secretly planned to seize Zhenzhou because Wang Rong was young and liked the water and soil climate of Zhenzhou.

古文：李抱真自京师还，为之画策，阴以恩施悦其将士。
现代文：李抱真从京师长安返回镇州，为李匡威出谋划策，暗中给予王熔军中将士小恩小惠以换取他们的好感。
English: Li Bozhen returned to Zhenzhou from the Beijing division Chang'an, made a plan for Li Kuangwei, and secretly gave the lieutenant general Wang Rongjun a small favor in exchange for their goodwill.

古文：王氏在镇久，镇人爱之，不徇匡威。
现代文：王熔家族在镇州已经很长时间，镇州人爱戴王熔，而不曲从李匡威。
English: Wang Rong's family has been in Zhenzhou for a long time. People in Zhenzhou love Wang Rong, but they don't like Li Kuangwei.

古文：匡威忌日，镕就第吊之。匡威素服衷甲，伏兵劫之，镕趋抱匡威曰： 镕为晋人所困，几亡矣，赖公以有今日；公欲得四州，此固镕之愿也，不若与公共归府，以位让公，则将土莫之拒矣。 
现代文：在李匡威的父母去世的纪念日，王熔到李匡威的寓所吊唁，李匡威身套丧服里面却穿着盔甲，埋伏下士兵将王劫持，王奔到李匡威的面前抱着他说： 我王熔被河东李克用围困时，几乎要兵败身亡了，依靠你的救援才有今天；你想获得镇州、冀州、深州、赵州这四个州，这本来是我的愿望，不如我和你一同回到节度使司，把节度使的官位让给你，这样军中将士就不会抗拒你了。 
English: On the anniversary of the death of Li Kuangwei's parents, Wang Rong went to Li Kuangwei's home to offer condolences. Li Kuangwei was dressed in mourning clothes, but he was wearing armor. The soldiers ambushed and kidnapped Wang. Wang Ben went to Li Kuangwei and held him in front of him and said: When I, Wang Rong, was besieged by Li Ke of Hedong, I was almost defeated and died. It is only today that I can rely on your rescue. You want to obtain the four states of Zhenzhou, Jizhou, Shenzhou, and Zhaozhou. This was originally my wish. It would be better if I

古文：匡威不以为然，与镕骈马，陈兵入府，会大风雷雨，屋瓦皆振。
现代文：李匡威认为可以，与王熔并排骑着马，摆开军队进入节度使的司。恰逢狂风大作雷雨交加，房屋上的瓦都被震动。
English: Li Kuangwei thought it would be a good idea to ride side by side with Wang Rong on horseback and lead the troops into the governor's office. This coincided with strong winds and thunderstorms, which shook the tiles on the houses.

古文：匡威入东偏门，镇之亲军闭之，有屠者墨君和自缺垣跃出，拳殴匡威甲士，挟镕于马上，负之登屋。
现代文：李匡威进入镇州城的东偏门，王熔的镇州亲军当即把东偏门关闭，有个屠夫叫墨君和从残破的墙壁后面跳出来，用拳头猛打李匡威的披甲士兵，把王熔从马背上夹在腋下，背着他登上房层。
English: Li Kuangwei entered the east gate of Zhenzhou City. Wang Rong's Zhenzhou pro-army immediately closed the east gate. A butcher named Mo Junhe jumped out from behind the broken wall, punched Li Kuangwei's armored soldiers with his fist, clipped Wang Rong under the armpit from horseback, and carried him up to the floor.

古文：镇人既得镕，攻匡威，杀之，并其族党。
现代文：镇州军队既然已经夺回王熔，便攻打李匡威，将他杀死，李匡威的亲族党羽也一同被杀掉。
English: Since the Zhenzhou army had already recaptured Wang Liao, they attacked Li Kuangwei and killed him. Li Kuangwei's relatives and followers were also killed.

古文：镕时年十七，体疏瘦，为君和所挟，颈痛头偏者累日。
现代文：王熔当时年仅十七岁，身体瘦弱，这次被墨君和夹着走，竟好几天脖子疼痛脑袋偏斜。
English: Wang Rong was only seventeen years old at the time, and his body was thin and weak. This time, he was caught by Mok Jun and walked, and his neck hurt for several days and his head was tilted.

古文：李匡筹奏镕杀其兄，请举兵复冤；诏不许。
现代文：李匡筹向朝廷奏报王熔杀害了他的哥哥李匡威，请求发动军队报仇，昭宗颁诏不许他擅动。
English: Li Kuangchong reported to the imperial court that Wang Rong had killed his brother Li Kuangwei, and requested to launch an army to take revenge. Zhaozong issued an edict not to allow him to act without authorization.

古文：幽州将刘仁恭将兵戍蔚州，过期未代，士卒思归。
现代文：幽州将领刘仁恭带领军队守卫蔚州，过了期限还没有士兵来替代，军中士兵都想回归。
English: Yuzhou General Liu Rengong led the army to guard Ulshu. After the deadline, there were no soldiers to replace him. The soldiers in the army all wanted to return.

古文：会李匡筹立，戍卒奉仁恭为帅，还攻幽州，至居庸关，为府兵所败。
现代文：正逢李匡筹自称节度使，蔚州的士兵当即尊奉刘仁恭为统帅，返回攻打幽州，到达居庸关，被李匡筹的幽州节度使府军队打败。
English: At the very time when Li Kuang-ch'ing claimed to be the envoy of the festival, the soldiers of Ulshu immediately honored Liu Rengong as the commander, returned to attack Yuzhou, reached Juyongguan, and were defeated by Li Kuang-ch'ing's Yuzhou festival envoy army.

古文：仁恭奔河东，李克用厚待之。
现代文：刘仁恭逃奔河东，李克用对待他相当优厚。
English: Liu Rengong fled to the east of the river, and Li Ke used to treat him quite generously.

古文：李神福围庐州；甲午，杨行密自将诣庐州，田頵自宣州引兵会之。
现代文：李神福围攻庐州。甲午，杨行密亲自率领军队到达庐州，田宣州带领军队来与他会合。
English: Li Shenfu besieged Bozhou. In the afternoon of the 1st, Yang Xingmi personally led the army to Bozhou, and Tian Xuanzhou led the army to join him.

古文：初，蔡人张颢以骁勇事秦宗权，后从孙儒，儒败，归行密，行密厚待之，使将兵戍庐州。
现代文：当初，蔡州人张颢以其勇猛果敢侍奉秦宗权，后来又跟随孙儒，孙儒失败后，张颢归附杨行密，杨行密对待他很优厚，委任他带领军队驻扎庐州。
English: At first, Zhang Ye, a native of Caizhou, served Qin Zongquan with his bravery and courage, and later followed Sun Ru. After Sun Ru's defeat, Zhang Ye was attached to Yang Xingmi. Yang Xingmi treated him very generously and appointed him to lead the army stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：蔡俦叛，颢更为之用。
现代文：蔡俦反叛后，张颢又改旗易帜为他所用。
English: After Cai Xuan rebelled, Zhang Xuan changed the banner to the one he used.

古文：及围急，颢逾城来降，行密以隶银枪都使袁稹。
现代文：等到庐州被围紧急时，张颢越过城墙再投奔杨行密，杨行密把张颢派到银枪都使袁稹手下。
English: When Bozhou was under siege, Zhang Ye crossed the city wall and went to Yang Xingmi. Yang Xingmi sent Zhang Ye to the Silver Pistol to make Yuan Ye subordinate.

古文：稹以颢反复，白行密，请杀之，行密恐稹不能容，置之亲军。
现代文：袁稹认为张颢反复无常，向杨行密陈说，请求将张颢杀死，杨行密担心袁稹容不下张颢，便把张颢安置在亲军中。
English: Yuan Shun thought that Zhang Ye was capricious and asked Yang Xingmi to kill Zhang Ye. Yang Xingmi was worried that Yuan Shun would not tolerate Zhang Ye, so he placed Zhang Ye in the pro-army.

古文：稹，陈州人也。
现代文：袁稹是陈州人。
English: Yuan Qi is from Chenzhou.

古文：王彦复、王审知攻福州，久不下。
现代文：王潮派遣王彦复、王审知攻打福州，很久未能攻克。
English: Wang Chao dispatched Wang Yanfu and Wang Xizhi to attack Fuzhou, but failed to conquer it for a long time.

古文：范晖求救于威胜节度使董昌，昌与陈岩婚姻，发温、台、婺州兵五千救之。
现代文：范晖向威胜节度使董昌求救，董昌与陈岩是姻亲，便派遣温州、台州、婺州军队五千前往救援。
English: Fan Zheng sent five thousand troops from Wenzhou, Taizhou and Zhangzhou to rescue Dong Chang, who was a relative of Chen Yan.

古文：彦复、审知以城坚，援兵且至，士卒死伤多，白王潮，欲罢兵更图后举，潮不许。
现代文：王彦夏、王审知因为福州城坚固，救援军队即将赶到，军中士卒死亡受伤的已相当多，向王潮述说，想要撤回军队以后再作打算，王潮不准许。
English: Wang Yanxia and Wang Xianxi knew that because Fuzhou was a strong city, the rescue army was about to arrive, and there had already been a considerable number of deaths and injuries of army sergeants. They told Wang Chao that if they wanted to withdraw the army and then make plans, Wang Chao would not allow it.

古文：请潮自临行营，潮报曰： 兵尽添兵，将尽添将，兵将俱尽，吾当自来。 
现代文：王彦复、王审知请王潮亲自前来军营，王潮回答他们说： 士兵光了增加士兵，将领没了添派将领，等到士兵将领都没了，我自然要亲自来。 
English: Wang Yanfu and Wang Xizhi asked Wang Chao to come to the military camp in person. Wang Chao replied to them, "When there are no more soldiers, I will increase the number of soldiers. When there are no more generals, I will send more generals. When there are no more generals, I will naturally come in person."

古文：彦复、审知惧，亲犯矢石急攻之。
现代文：王彦复、王审知被王潮的话吓呆了，他们亲自昌着箭石猛烈进攻。
English: Wang Yanfu and Wang Xizhi were stunned by Wang Chaoyu's words, and they personally attacked Chang with arrow stones.

古文：五月，城中食尽，晖知不能守，夜，以印授监军，弃城走，援兵亦还。
现代文：五月份，福州城内粮食吃尽，范晖知道不能再固守，夜里，把官印交给监军，离开福州城逃跑，前来救援的军队也纷纷返回。
English: In May, the grain in Fuzhou was exhausted, and Fan Yu knew that he could no longer hold out. At night, he handed over the official seal to the supervising army and fled from Fuzhou. The army that came to the rescue also returned one after another.

古文：庚子，彦复等入城。
现代文：庚子，王彦复、王审知进入福州城。
English: Geng Zi, Wang Yan Fu, and Wang Xizhi enter Fuzhou City.

古文：辛丑，晖亡抵沿海都，为将士所杀。
现代文：辛丑，范晖逃亡到沿海城中，被军中将士斩杀。
English: Sin ugly, Fan Qi fled to the coastal city, and was killed by the lieutenant generals.

古文：潮入福州，自称留后，素服葬陈岩，以女妻其子延晦，厚抚其家。
现代文：王潮进入福州城。自称留后，身穿丧服安葬陈岩，把自己的女儿嫁给陈岩的儿子陈延晦，对陈岩家族的抚恤十分丰厚。
English: Wang Chao entered Fuzhou City. He said that he would stay behind, wear mourning clothes to bury Chen Yan, and marry his daughter to Chen Yan's son, Chen Yanwei. The pension for Chen Yan's family was very rich.

古文：汀、建二州降，岭海间群盗二十馀辈皆降溃。
现代文：汀州、建州两个州也向王潮投降，从岭南到沿海之间的二十多股成伙盗贼或者归顺王潮或者溃散。
English: The two states of Tingzhou and Jianzhou also surrendered to the king tide, and more than twenty groups of thieves from Lingnan to the coast either surrendered to the king tide or broke up.

古文：闰月，以武胜防御使钱镠为苏杭观察使。
现代文：闰五月，朝廷任命武胜防御使钱为苏杭观察使。
English: In leap May, the imperial court appointed Wu Sheng Defense Minister Qian Qian as the Su Hang observation envoy.

古文：又以扈跸都头曹诚为黔中节度使，耀德都头李鋋为镇海节度使，宣威都头孙惟晟为荆南节度使，六月，以捧日都头陈珮为岭南东道节度使，并同平章事。
现代文：又任命扈跸都头曹诚为黔中节度使，耀德都头李为镇海军节度使，宣威都头孙惟晟为荆南节度使。六月，朝延又任命捧日都头陈为岭南东道节度使，并同平章事。
English: In addition, Cao Cheng, the head of the Shandong capital, was appointed as the delegate of the Shandong Central Festival, Li, the head of the Yaode capital, was appointed as the delegate of the Zhen Navy Festival, and Sun Weizhen, the head of the Xuanwei capital, was appointed as the delegate of the Jingnan Festival. In June, Chen, the head of the Hunichi capital, was appointed as the delegate of the Lingnan host festival, and the same thing happened.

古文：时李茂贞跋扈，上以武臣难制，欲用诸王代之，占攵城等四人皆加恩，解兵柄，令赴镇。
现代文：当时李茂贞骄磺跋扈，昭宗感到武臣难以控制，想要用皇族各王取代他们，因此曹诚、李、孙惟晟、陈四人都接到皇帝的恩诏，解除在京师的兵权，命令他们前赴镇所。
English: At that time, Li Maozhen was very arrogant, and Zhaozong felt that it was difficult to control the warriors and wanted to replace them with the kings of the royal family. Therefore, Cao Cheng, Li, Sun Weizhen, and Chen all received the emperor's edict to lift the military power of the division in Beijing and ordered them to go to the town hall.

古文：李匡筹出兵攻王镕之乐寿、武强，以报杀匡威之耻。
现代文：李匡筹派出军队攻打王熔的乐寿、武强两地，以报王杀害其兄李匡威这一耻辱。
English: Li Kuangchong sent troops to attack Wang Rong's Le Shou and Wu Qiang provinces to report the disgrace of Wang killing his brother Li Kuangwei.

古文：秋，七月，王镕遣兵救邢州；李克用败之于平山，壬申，进击镇州。
现代文：秋季七月，王熔派遣军队救援邢州，被李克用在平山将他打败，壬申，李克用进击镇州。
English: In the autumn of July, Wang Rong sent an army to rescue Zhangzhou, and Li Ke used it to defeat him in Pingshan. In Jinshin, Li Ke used it to attack Zhenzhou.

古文：镕惧，请以兵粮二十万助攻邢州，克用许之。
现代文：王熔十分惧怕，请求拿出军粮二十万来帮助李克用攻打邢州，李克用许可了王熔的请求。
English: Wang Rong was very afraid and asked for 200,000 yuan of military food to help Li Kejun attack Zhangzhou. Li Kejun agreed to Wang Rong's request.

古文：克用治兵于栾城，合镕兵三万进屯任县，李存信屯琉璃陂。
现代文：李克用在栾城整训军队，会合王熔军队总共三万人在邢州东南的任县驻扎，李存信则在邢州龙冈县的琉璃陂驻扎。
English: Li Ke used the time to re-train the army in Zhangcheng, and a total of 30,000 people from Wang Rong's army were stationed in Ren County in the southeast of Zhangzhou, while Li Cunxin was stationed in Liulishu in Longgang County, Zhangzhou.

古文：丁亥，杨行密克庐州，斩蔡俦。
现代文：丁亥，杨行密攻克庐州，将庐州刺史蔡俦斩杀。
English: Dinghai and Yang Xing made a secret attack on Zhangzhou, and killed Zhangzhou's leader Cai Jun.

古文：左右请发俦父母冢，行密曰： 俦以此得罪，吾何为效之！ 
现代文：杨行密身边的人请求挖毁蔡俦父母的坟，杨行密说： 蔡俦因为挖掘了我的祖坟而获罪，我怎么能去效法他呢！ 
English: People around Yang Xingmi asked him to dig up the graves of Cai Xuan's parents. Yang Xingmi said, "Cai Xun is guilty of digging up my ancestral grave, how can I follow his example!

古文：加天雄节度使李茂庄同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封秦州的天雄节度使李茂庄为同平章事。
English: The Tianxiong Festival of the Qin State was awarded by the imperial court, making Li Maozhuang a peerage.

古文：钱镠发民夫二十万及十三都军士筑杭州罗城，周七十里。
现代文：钱征发民夫二十万连同十三都的士兵筑造杭州的外围城，围绕杭州城有七十里长。
English: The money was collected and distributed, and two hundred thousand people, together with soldiers from thirteen capitals, built the outlying city of Hangzhou, which is seventy miles long.

古文：升州刺史张雄卒，冯弘鐸代之为刺史。
现代文：州刺史张雄死去，冯弘铎接替为升州刺史。
English: Zhang Xiong, the State Historian, died, and Feng Hongyao succeeded him as the State Historian.

古文：李茂贞恃功骄横，上表及遗杜让能书，辞语不逊。
现代文：李茂贞倚仗有功骄傲强横，向昭宗进呈表章以及给杜让能写信，言语很不恭谦。
English: Li Maozhen was proud of her military achievements and was very strong-willed. She presented a medal to Zhaozong and wrote a letter to Du Jiang. Her words were very disrespectful.

古文：上怒，欲讨之，茂贞又上表，略曰： 陛下贵为万乘，不能庇元舅之一身；尊极九州，不能戮复恭之一竖。 
现代文：昭宗十分愤怒，想要讨伐李茂贞。李茂贞再次上表，大略说： 陛下身为一统天下的大唐皇帝，却不能庇护皇舅王瑰一人的性命；陛下在天下最受尊崇，却不能斩杀杨复恭这个家伙。 
English: Zhaozong was very angry and wanted to fight Li Maozhen. Li Maozhen once again went to the table and said roughly: Your Majesty, as the Great Tang Emperor who rules the world, cannot protect the life of one of the Emperor's uncles, Wang Gui; Your Majesty is the most respected in the world, but cannot kill this guy, Yang Fuzhong.

古文：又曰： 今朝廷但观强弱，不计是非。 
现代文：又说： 现在朝廷只看各节度使的强弱与否，而不计议是非曲直。 
English: He also said: Now the imperial court only looks at the strength or weakness of each festival, without considering the rights and wrongs.

古文：又曰： 约衰残而行法，随盛壮以加恩；体物锱铢，看人衡纩。 
现代文：还说： 朝廷约束势力弱者对他们行之以法，附合势力强盛者对他们施加恩赏；处事视其轻重而斤斤计较，看人权衡利害而仰人鼻息。 
English: He also said: The imperial court restrains the weak and brings them to justice, and rewards the strong and powerful; it handles matters according to their weight and importance, and looks down on people who weigh up their interests.

古文：又曰： 军情易变，戎马难羁，唯虑甸服生灵，因兹受祸，未审乘舆播越，自此何之！ 
现代文：他又说： 军中情形千变万化，战争胜负难以约束，我是担心京畿一带的百姓因此遭受祸害，不知道皇帝流离迁徙，今后还能到哪里去！ 
English: He also said: The situation in the army is ever-changing, and the outcome of the war is difficult to control. I am worried that the people in the Gyeonggi area will suffer from the scourge. I don't know where the emperor can go in the future!

古文：上益怒，决讨茂贞，命杜让能专掌其事，让能谏曰： 陛下初临大宝，国步末夷，茂贞近在国门，臣愚以为未宜与之构怨，万一不克，悔之无及。 
现代文：昭宗更加愤怒，决心讨伐李茂贞，命令杜让能专门掌管征讨事宜，杜让能劝昭宗说： 陛下刚刚即位不久，国家的命运还不平安，凤翔的李茂贞离京师长安这样近，我认为不应当与他结下怨仇，万一不能消灭他，那么后悔也来不及了。 
English: Zhaozong was even more angry and determined to fight Li Maozhen. He ordered Du Zhan to be in charge of collecting the money. Du Zhan was able to persuade Zhaozong to say, "Your Majesty has just ascended the throne, and the fate of the country is not yet secure. Li Maozhen, who is flying like a phoenix, is so close to Beijing's ruler, Chang'an. I don't think we should have a grudge against him. If we can't eliminate him, then it's too late to regret.

古文：上曰： 王室日卑，号令不出国门，此乃志士愤痛之秋。
现代文：昭宗说： 现在皇室的地位越来越低下，朝廷的号令在京师以外的地方就得不到推行，这正是仁人志士痛心疾首的时刻。
English: Shozong said, "Nowadays, the status of the imperial family is getting lower and lower, and the orders of the imperial court cannot be implemented in places other than Beijing. This is the time for people with benevolent intentions to work hard.

古文：药弗瞑眩，厥疾弗瘳。
现代文：服药不到使眼晴昏花程度，疾病就不会痊愈。
English: If you don't take the medicine to the point of dizziness, the disease will not be cured.

古文：朕不能甘心为孱懦之主，愔愔度日，坐视陵夷。
现代文：朕不能甘心做一个软弱可欺的君主，默默无闻地度过时日，坐在这里看着别人来欺侮。
English: I cannot be content to be a weak and deceitful monarch, to pass the time in obscurity, to sit here and watch others be bullied.

古文：卿但为朕调兵食，朕自委诸王用兵，成败不以责卿！ 
现代文：你只管为朕调动军队粮食，朕亲自委派各王统领军队，不论成功与失败都不会追究你的责任。 
English: Just mobilize the army's provisions for me, and I will personally appoint the kings to lead the army. Regardless of success or failure, I will not hold you responsible.

古文：让能曰： 陛下必欲行之，则中外大臣共宜协力以成圣志，不当独以任臣。 
现代文：杜让能回答说： 陛下一定要兴兵讨伐李茂贞，那么朝廷内外的大臣都应当齐心协力效助陛下实现宏图大志，而不应当唯独任用我一人。 
English: Dujan replied, "Your Majesty must raise an army to fight Li Maozhen, then all the ministers inside and outside the court should work together to help your Majesty achieve his ambitious goals, and should not appoint me alone.

古文：上曰： 卿位居元辅，与朕同休戚，无宜避事！ 
现代文：昭宗对杜让能说： 你身为宰相，与朕应当同甘共苦，不应遇事躲避！ 
English: Zhaozong said to Du Jiangneng: As the prime minister, you should share the joys and sorrows with me, and you should not run away in case of trouble!

古文：让能泣曰： 臣岂敢避事！
现代文：杜让能流着泪说： 我怎么敢遇事躲避呢！
English: Dujon can say with tears: How dare I dodge an accident!

古文：况陛下所欲行者，宪宗之志也；顾时有所未可，势有所不能耳。
现代文：况且陛下所要施行的事情，是当年宪宗皇帝的志愿；只是天时还有所不利，形势也不允许罢了。
English: Moreover, what His Majesty is about to do is the will of the Emperor Kenzong of that year; however, the weather is still unfavorable and the situation is not permissive.

古文：但恐他日臣徒受晁错之诛，不能弭七国之祸也。敢不奉诏，以死继之！ 
现代文：史恐怕将来有一天我会象汉景帝时的晁错一样白白遭受杀身大祸，而不能平息吴楚等七国叛乱的战祸。我怎敢不奉行诏令，以死相报！ 
English: I am afraid that one day in the future, I will suffer the great calamity of killing myself in vain, just like the mistake of Emperor Han Jing, and I will not be able to quell the war calamity of the rebellion of the seven countries such as Wu Chu. How dare I not follow the edict of the emperor and repay with death!

古文：上乃命让能留中书，计画调度，月馀不归。
现代文：昭宗于是任命杜让能留在中书省，筹划调度，一个多月没有回家。
English: So Shozong appointed Du Zhaneng to stay in Zhongshuo to plan the schedule, and he did not return home for more than a month.

古文：崔昭纬阴结邠、岐，为之耳目，让能朝发一言，二镇夕必知之。
现代文：崔昭纬暗中与州、岐州交结，探听消息，杜让能早晨说一句话，州、岐州傍晚就一定会知道。
English: Cui Zhaowei secretly met with Zhu and Qizhou to listen for news. Du Zhan could say a word in the morning, and Zhu and Qizhou would certainly know in the evening.

古文：李茂贞使其党纠合市人数百千人，拥观军容使西门君遂马诉曰： 岐帅无罪，不宜致讨，使百姓涂炭。 
现代文：李茂贞指使他的党羽纠集集市中成百上千的人，包围在观军容使西门君遂马前诉说： 李茂贞大帅没有罪，不应当对他进行征讨，而使百姓遭受战祸。 
English: Li Maozhen ordered his followers to gather hundreds of thousands of people in the bazaar and encircle Xiamenjun Suima, who was watching the military parade, and said, "General Li Maozhen is not guilty, and it is not right to conscript him and make the people suffer the scourge of war."

古文：君遂曰： 此宰相事，非吾所及。 
现代文：西门君遂说： 这是宰相的事，不是我力所能及的。 
English: Simon then said: This is a matter for the Prime Minister, it is not within my power.

古文：市人又邀崔昭纬、郑延昌肩舆诉之，二相曰： 兹事主上专委杜太尉，吾曹不预知。 
现代文：那些被收集的人又拦截崔昭纬、郑延昌乘坐的轿子进行诉说，两位宰相说： 这件事皇帝专门委任太尉杜让能料理，我们事先也不知道。 
English: Those who had been collected also intercepted the palanquins in which Cui Zhaowei and Zheng Yanchang were riding to make their appeal. The two prime ministers said, "The emperor specially appointed Lieutenant Du Jiangneng to handle this matter, and we didn't know about it in advance.

古文：市人因乱投瓦石，二相下舆走匿民家，仅自免，丧堂印及朝服。
现代文：市中百姓于四处乱投砖瓦石块，崔昭纬、郑延昌两位宰相慌忙下了轿子跑到民户家里躲藏起来，仅以自身得免，大堂官印和上朝服装都丢失了。
English: People in the city threw bricks and stones at random in all directions. The two prime ministers, Cui Zhaowei and Zheng Yanchang, hurriedly got off the palanquin and ran to the homes of private households to hide. They could only save themselves. The official seal of the lobby and the clothing of the Shang Dynasty were lost.

古文：上命捕其唱帅者诛之，用兵之意益坚。
现代文：唐昭宗命令捕拿这次闹事中倡导的人予以诛杀，出兵讨伐的念头更加坚定。
English: Tang Zhaozong ordered the arrest of those who advocated this riot to be killed, and the idea of sending troops to fight was even more determined.

古文：京师民或亡匿山谷，严刑所不能禁。
现代文：京师长安的人民有的逃到山谷中藏匿起来，虽然动用严酷的刑法也禁止不住。
English: Some of the people of Beijing Division Chang'an fled to hide in the valley, although the use of harsh criminal law could not be prohibited.

古文：八月，以嗣覃王嗣周为京西招讨使，神策大将军李钅岁副之。
现代文：八月，唐昭宗任命续任覃王李嗣周为京西招讨使，神策大将军李为副使。
English: In August, Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty appointed the King of Wei, Li Zhi Zhou, as the Western Capital Recruitment Envoy, and the Grand General of the Shen Zhe Li as the Deputy Envoy.

古文：丙辰，杨行密遣田頵将宣州兵二万攻歙州；歙州刺史裴枢城守，久不下。
现代文：丙辰，杨行密派遣田带领军队二万攻打歙州；歙州刺史裴枢据城固守，田很久不能攻克。
English: Hsin-Chen and Yang Xing-Ming dispatched Tian to lead an army of twenty thousand to attack Bozhou; Bozhou sent Shi-Pei to defend the city, but Tian could not be conquered for a long time.

古文：时诸将为刺史者多贪暴，独池州团练使陶雅宽厚得民，歙人曰： 得陶雅为刺史，请听命。 
现代文：当时各军中将领当了刺史以后大多贪婪粗暴，唯有池州团练使陶雅待人宽厚很得民心，歙州人说： 如果让陶雅来做刺史，我们愿意服从命令。 
English: At that time, most of the generals in the army were greedy and rude after they were appointed to the post of chief of staff. Only the Chizhou regimental drill made Tao Ya treat people generously and won the hearts of the people. Zhangzhou people said: If we let Tao Ya do the post of chief of staff, we are willing to obey orders.

古文：行密即以雅为歙州刺史，歙人纳之。
现代文：杨行密当即任命陶雅为歙州刺史，歙州人便接受了他。
English: Yang Xingmi immediately appointed Tao Ya as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the people of Zhangzhou accepted him.

古文：雅尽礼见枢，送之还朝。
现代文：陶雅用极高的礼节拜见裴枢，送裴枢返回朝廷。
English: Tao Ya used the highest etiquette to visit Peizhu and take him back to the imperial court.

古文：枢，遵庆之曾孙也。
现代文：裴枢是裴遵庆的第三代孙子。
English: Pei Zu is the third generation grandson of Pei Zunqing.

古文：硃全忠命庞师古移兵攻兗州，与硃瑾战，屡破之。
现代文：朱全忠命令庞师古调动军队攻打兖州，与朱瑾作战，多次打败朱瑾。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered Pang Shigu to mobilize the army to attack Zhangzhou, fight with Zhu Xi, and repeatedly defeat Zhu Xi.

古文：九月，丁卯，以钱镠为镇海节度使。
现代文：九月，丁卯，朝廷任命钱为镇海节度使。
English: In September, Dingwu, the imperial court appointed Qian as the Zhenhai Festival envoy.

古文：李存孝夜犯李存信营，虏奉诚军使孙考老。
现代文：李存孝在夜间进攻李存信的营寨，虏获了奉诚军使孙考老。
English: Li Cunxiao attacked Li Cunxin's encampment at night and captured the Fengcheng army's envoy, Sun Kao.

古文：李克用自引兵攻邢州，掘堑筑垒环之。
现代文：李克用亲自率领军队攻打邢州，环绕邢州挖掘堑壕修筑营垒。
English: Li Ke personally led the army to attack Bozhou, digging trenches around Bozhou and building barracks.

古文：存孝时出兵突击，堑垒不能成。
现代文：李存孝不时派出军队突然袭击，使他的堑壕营垒不能建成。
English: From time to time, Li Cunxiao sent troops to make surprise attacks, so that his trench camp could not be built.

古文：河东牙将袁奉韬密使人谓存孝曰： 大王惟俟堑成即归晋阳，尚书所惮者独大王耳，诸将非尚书敌也。
现代文：河东牙将袁奉韬秘密派人对李存孝说： 陇西郡王李克用只是等着堑壕营垒修成就返回晋阳，尚书你所惧怕的只有大王李克用罢了，他手下的各位将领都不是你的对手。
English: He Dongya commander Yuan Fengya secretly sent a message to Li Cunxiao, saying: "King Li Ke of Shaanxi County is just waiting for the trench fortifications to be completed before returning to Jinyang. Shangshu, what you fear is only the great king Li Ke, and all the generals under his command are not your rivals.

古文：大王若归，咫尺之堑，安能沮尚书之锋锐邪！ 
现代文：大王李克用如果返回晋阳，几尺宽的堑壕，怎么能阻止住尚书你的锋芒锐势呢！ 
English: If the great king Li Ke were to return to Jinyang, how could he stop Shang Shuxu from taking advantage of the situation with a trench several feet wide?

古文：存孝以为然，按兵不出。
现代文：李存孝认为很对，便止住军队不再出城袭击。
English: Li Cunxiao thought it was right and stopped the army from leaving the city to attack.

古文：旬日，堑垒成，飞走不能越，存孝由是遂穷。
现代文：十几天的时间，李克用的堑壕营垒修造完毕，即使插上翅膀飞也越不过去，李存孝因此处境艰难。
English: After a dozen days, Li Cunxiao was in a difficult situation, as the trench fortifications used by Li Ke had been completed and he could not fly even if he put his wings on.

古文：汴将邓季筠从克用攻邢州，轻骑逃归。
现代文：汴州军队的原来将领邓季筠这时也跟随李克用攻打邢州，他乘马轻装逃回汴州。
English: The original general of the Zhangzhou army, Deng Jizhe, also followed Li Ke to attack Zhangzhou at this time. He fled back to Zhangzhou with a light horse.

古文：硃全忠大喜，使将亲军。
现代文：朱全忠见了他大为高兴，命令他统领亲军。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was very pleased to see him and ordered him to lead his family's army.

古文：乙亥，覃王嗣周帅禁军三万送凤翔节度使徐彦若赴镇，军于兴平。
现代文：乙亥，覃王李嗣周率领禁军三万护送风翔节度使徐彦若前赴镇所，在兴平驻扎。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the king of Wei, Li Zhi Zhou, led 30,000 imperial troops to escort Xu Yanru to the town and stationed him in Xingping.

古文：李茂贞、王行瑜合兵近六万，军于盩厔以拒之。
现代文：李茂贞、王行瑜联合军队约近六万人，驻扎在进行抗击。
English: Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu led a joint army of nearly sixty thousand people, stationed in the city to resist.

古文：禁军皆新募市井少年，茂贞、行瑜所将皆边兵百战之馀，壬午，茂贞等进逼兴平，禁军皆望风逃溃，茂贞等乘胜进攻三桥，京城大震，士民奔散，市人复守阙请诛首议用兵者。
现代文：朝廷禁军都是刚刚从市街上召募来的少年，而李茂贞、王行瑜所带领的都是边防士兵，经历过大大小小上百次的战斗，壬午，李茂贞等进军逼近兴平，朝廷禁军都望风逃散，李茂贞等乘胜进攻三桥，京师长安大为震惊，士人百姓四处奔逃，市街的百姓又踞守在皇宫门前请求诛杀首先倡仪发兵进行征伐的人。
English: The Imperial Forbidden Army was made up of young boys who had just been recruited from the city streets, while Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu led the frontier soldiers, who had experienced hundreds of battles, large and small. At noon, Li Maozhen's army approached Xingping, and the Imperial Forbidden Army fled in the wind. Li Maozhen and others attacked the Three Bridges in triumph. The Beijing division commander An Da was shocked, and the common people fled everywhere. The common people in the city also stood in front of the imperial palace to request the killing of the person who had first proposed to send troops to fight.

古文：崔昭纬心害太尉、门下侍郎、同平章事杜让能，密遗茂贞书曰： 用兵非主上意，皆出于杜太尉耳。 
现代文：崔昭纬存心陷害太尉、门下侍郎、同平章事杜让能，秘密给李茂贞送去书信说： 朝延用兵征伐并不是皇帝的意图，都是太尉杜让能出的主意罢了。 
English: Cui Zhaowei was determined to frame Du Jiangneng, the captain, his manservant, and Tongping Zhang, and secretly sent a letter to Li Maozhen saying: It was not the emperor's intention to conscript Asanobu, it was just the idea of the captain Du Jiangneng.

古文：甲申，茂贞陈于临皋驿，表让能罪，请诛之。
现代文：甲申。李茂贞在长安城西的临皋驿陈列军队，向唐昭宗进呈表章历数杜让能的罪行，请求将他诛杀。
English: Jia Sheng. Li Maozhen displayed troops in Linyi, west of Chang'an City, and presented Tang Zhaozong with a list of Dujaneng's crimes, requesting that he be killed.

古文：让能言于上曰： 臣固先言之矣，请以臣为解。 
现代文：杜让能对唐昭宗说： 我本来就有言在先，现在就请通过惩处我来排解战事吧。 
English: Dujan Neng said to Tang Zhaozong: I have already spoken first, now let me settle the war by punishing me.

古文：上涕下不自禁，曰： 与卿诀矣！ 
现代文：唐昭宗痛器流涕不能控制，对杜让能说： 只能与你分别了！ 
English: Tang Zhaozong could not control the flow of pain, and said to Du Zhaneng: I can only separate from you!

古文：是日，贬让能梧州刺史，制辞略曰： 弃卿士之臧谋，构籓垣之深衅，咨询之际，证执弥坚。 
现代文：当天，就把杜让能贬职为梧州刺史，诏令大略说： 朕没有听取谋臣的深谋远虑，构成了藩镇的挑衅，最后商议之时，争执更加坚决。 
English: On the same day, Dujaneng was demoted to the status of Wuzhou history, and the imperial edict said roughly: I did not listen to the forethought of the strategist, which constituted a provocation of the domain and town. At the time of the final discussion, the dispute was more resolute.

古文：又流观军容使西门君遂于儋州，内枢密使李周潼于崖州，段诩于欢州。
现代文：接着，唐昭宗又把观军容使西门君遂流放到儋州，内枢密使李周潼流放到崖州，段诩流放到州。
English: Next, Tang Zhaozong sent Guan Junrong to exile Ximenjun to Ganzhou, Inner Privy Councilor Li Zhoujun to exile to Yalangzhou, and Duanjun to exile to Zhou.

古文：乙酉，上御安福门，斩君遂、周潼、诩，再贬让能雷州司户。遣使谓茂贞曰： 惑朕举兵者，三人也，非让能之罪。 
现代文：乙酉，唐昭宗亲临安福门，将西门君遂、李周潼、段诩处斩，将杜让能再次贬为雷州司户，派遣使臣对李茂贞说： 蛊惑朕出兵的，是西门君遂、李周潼和段诩这三个人，不是杜让能的罪过。 
English: On the other hand, Tang Zhaozong personally visited the Anfu Gate, beheaded Ximen Junzu, Li Zhouqi, and Duan Yu, relegated Dujan Neng to the position of Leizhou governor, and dispatched an envoy to Li Maozhen to say: It was Ximen Junzu, Li Zhouqi, and Duan Yu who incited me to send troops, and it was not Du Jian Neng's fault.

古文：以内侍骆全瓘、刘景宣为左右军中尉。
现代文：朝廷任命臣官骆全、刘景宣为左、右军中尉。
English: The imperial court appointed the vassals Luo Quan and Liu Jingxuan as the left and right army lieutenants.

古文：壬辰，以东都留守韦昭度为司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事，御史中丞崔胤为户部侍郎、同平章事，胤，慎由之子也，外宽弘而内巧险，与崔昭纬深相结，故得为相。
现代文：壬辰，朝廷任命东都留守韦昭度为司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事，任命御史中丞崔胤为户部侍郎、同平章事。崔胤是崔慎由的儿子，他表面上对人宽宏大量，内心里却奸巧阴险，与崔昭纬相互往来交情很深，因此得以做宰相。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed Dongdu's left-behind Wei Zhaodu as a tutor, a servant and a subordinate of Tongping Zhangji, and appointed Goshi Chujo Cui Yan as a servant of the household and a subordinate of Tongping Zhangji. Cui Yan was the son of Cui Shanyu, who was generous on the surface, but treacherous in his heart. He had a deep relationship with Cui Zhaowei, so he was able to become prime minister.

古文：季父安潜谓所亲曰： 吾父兄刻苦以立门户，终为缁郎所坏！ 
现代文：崔胤的叔父崔安潜对亲信说： 我的父亲哥哥兢兢业业为崔家创立了基业，最终要败在缁郎的手里了！ 
English: Cui Yan's uncle, Cui Anqian, said to his relatives: My father and brother have diligently created a foundation for the Cui family, and eventually they will be defeated by Yao Lang!

古文：缁郎，胤小字也。
现代文：缁郎是崔胤的小名。
English: Shiro is Choi In's nickname.

古文：李茂贞勒兵不解，请诛杜让能然后还镇，崔昭纬复从而挤之。
现代文：李茂贞控制军队而不解除对京师的威胁，表示只有朝廷杀掉杜让能才能返回凤翔，崔昭纬又在内怂恿施加压力。
English: Li Maozhen controlled the army without removing the threat to the Beijing division, saying that only if the court killed Dujaneng could he return to Fengxiang, and Cui Zhaowei put pressure on him internally.

古文：冬，十月，赐让能及其弟户部侍郎弘徽自尽。
现代文：冬季，十月，昭宗赐令杜让能和他的弟弟户部侍郎杜弘徽自杀。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Akimune ordered Du Zhaneng and his younger brother, Household Attendant Du Honghui, to commit suicide.

古文：复下诏布告中外，称 让能举枉错直，爱憎系于一时；鬻狱卖官，聚敛逾于巨万。 
现代文：还向朝廷内外人颁布诏书，说： 杜让能荐举邪恶的人而不用直朴的人，对人的喜好和憎恶都凭一时决定；他拿案狱官司做买卖，卖官卖爵，搜刮的钱财超过上万。 
English: He also issued an imperial edict to people inside and outside the court, saying: Dujan can recommend evil people rather than straightforward people, and his likes and dislikes are determined by the moment; he does business with judges and magistrates, sells officials, and collects more than tens of thousands of money and wealth.

古文：自是朝廷动息皆禀于邠、岐，南、北司往往依附二镇以邀恩泽。
现代文：从这以后，朝廷的一举一动都要禀告州、岐州，朝廷官员和宫内宦官也往往依附李茂贞、王行瑜以博得恩赏提拔。
English: From then on, every move of the imperial court had to be reported to the prefectures of Zhou and Qizhou, and imperial officials and eunuchs often followed Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu to be rewarded and promoted.

古文：有崔鋋、王超者，为二镇判官，凡天子有所可否，其不逞者，辄诉于鋋、超，二人则教茂贞、行瑜上章论之，朝廷少有依违，其辞语已不逊。
现代文：崔、王超二人，是州、岐州的判官，凡是昭宗对一些事情的决断，使某些人未能得逞，他们就向崔、王超申诉，崔、王超二人便教唆李茂贞、王行瑜上呈表章进行辩论，朝廷对他们的事稍微有些不同意见，李茂贞、王行瑜便出言不逊。
English: Cui and Wang Chao were the judges of the prefectures of Guizhou and Qizhou. Whenever Zhaozong's decision on some matter caused some people to fail, they would appeal to Cui and Wang Chao. Cui and Wang Chao then instigated Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu to present their signatures for debate. The imperial court had a slightly different opinion on their matter, and Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu spoke harshly.

古文：制复以茂贞为凤翔节度使兼山南西道节度使、守中书令，于是茂贞尽有凤翔、兴元、洋、陇秦等十五州之地。
现代文：昭宗颁发诏令重新任命李茂贞为凤翔节度使兼任山南西道节度使、守中书令，于是李茂贞占据了凤翔、兴元、洋州、陇秦等十五个州的全部地盘。
English: Zhaozong issued a decree to reappoint Li Maozhen as the Fengxiang festival envoy and concurrently as the Shannan West Road festival envoy and the Shuzhong Shuling, so Li Maozhen occupied all the territory of Fengxiang, Xingyuan, Yangzhou, Qinqin and other fifteen states.

古文：以徐彦若为御史大夫。
现代文：朝廷又任命徐彦若为御史大夫。
English: The imperial court also appointed Xu Yanruo as the imperial historian.

古文：戊戌，以泉州刺史王潮为福建观察使。
现代文：戊戌，朝廷任命泉州刺史王潮为福建观察使。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed Quanzhou's Sisi Wangchao as the Fujian Observer.

古文：舒州刺史倪章弃城走，杨行密以李神福为舒州刺史。
现代文：舒州刺史倪章放弃舒州城逃跑，杨行密委任李神福为舒州刺史。
English: Shuzhou assassin Ni Zhang abandons Shuzhou to escape, Yang Xingmi appoints Li Shenfu as Shuzhou assassin.

古文：邠宁节度使、守侍中兼中书令王行瑜求为尚书令；韦昭度密奏： 太宗以尚书令执政，遂登大位，自是不以授人臣。
现代文：宁节度使、守侍中兼中书令王行瑜谋求尚书令官职；韦昭度秘密上奏说： 太宗皇帝是以尚书令执掌政务大权，从而登基即位的，所以从此不再授职尚书令，但郭子仪一直到死都推辞。
English: Ning Jiedu sent Wang Xingyu, the Keeper of the Privy Seal and the Vice-Regent of the Privy Seal, to seek the post of the Vice-Regent of the Privy Seal; Wei Zhaodu secretly reported: Emperor Taizong used the Vice-Regent of the Privy Seal to hold the power of government affairs and thus ascended to the throne, so he would no longer confer the post of Vice-Regent of the Privy Seal, but Guo Ziyi refused until his death.

古文：惟郭子仪以大功拜尚书令，终身避让。行瑜安可轻议！ 十一月，以行瑜为太师，赐号尚父，仍赐铁券。
现代文：王行瑜怎么可以轻率地议求此职！ 十一月，朝廷任命王行瑜为太师，赐给尚父名号，尚袭旧制颁赐铁券。
English: In November, the imperial court appointed Wang Xingyu as Grand Master, gave him the title of Shang father, and followed the old system of awarding iron certificates.

古文：十二月，硃全忠请徙盐铁于汴州以便供军；崔昭纬为全忠新破徐、郓，兵力倍增，若更判盐铁，不可复制，乃赐诏开谕之。
现代文：十二月，朱全忠请求把盐铁转运使衙署迁到汴州，以便供给军需。崔昭纬认为朱全忠刚刚打败时溥的徐州军队和朱的郓州军队，兵力倍增，如果再让他兼任盐铁转运使，就不可能再控制他了，于是朝廷颁诏令劝导朱全忠。
English: In December, Zhu Quanzhong requested that the Salt and Iron Transportation Office be moved to Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, in order to supply military needs. Cui Zhaowei believed that Zhu Quanzhong had just defeated the Xuzhou army of Zhisheng and the Zhangzhou army of Zhu, and that the number of troops had doubled. If he was allowed to serve as the Salt and Iron Transportation Office, it would be impossible to control him, so the imperial court issued a decree to persuade Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：汴将葛从周攻齐州刺史硃威，硃瑄、硃瑾引兵救之。
现代文：汴州军队将领葛从周攻打齐州刺史朱威，朱、朱瑾带领军队救援朱威。
English: The general of the Zhangzhou army led Ge to attack Zhu Wei from Zhou, and Zhu and Zhu Xi led the army to rescue Zhu Wei.

古文：初，武安节度使周岳杀闵勖，据潭州，邵州刺史邓处讷闻而哭之，诸将入吊，处讷曰： 吾与公等咸受仆射大恩，今周岳无状杀之，吾欲与公等竭一州之力，为仆射报仇，可乎？ 
现代文：当初，武安节度使周岳杀死闵勖，占据潭州，邵州刺史邓处讷得知后悲伤痛哭，各位将领前来祭奠闵勖，邓处讷对他们说： 我和你们都蒙受闵仆射的大恩大德，现在周岳无端将他杀害，我要和你们竭尽邵州的全部军力，为闵仆射报仇，可以吗？ 
English: At first, the Wu'an Festival caused Zhou Yue to kill Zhai and occupy Tanzhou. After learning this, Deng Shuanna, the general of Shao Zhou, wept bitterly. All the generals came to pay tribute to Zhai. Deng Shuanna said to them, "I and all of you have suffered from Zhou Yue's great kindness. Now Zhou Yue has killed him for no reason. I want to exhaust all of Shao Zhou's military strength with you to avenge Zhou Yue's death. Is that okay?"

古文：皆曰： 善！ 
现代文：大家一起回答说： 好！ 
English: His subordinates all nodded and said, "That's a good idea."

古文：于是训卒厉兵，八年，乃结朗州刺史雷满共攻潭州，克之，斩岳，自称留后。
现代文：于是，邓处讷训练士卒，整顿装备，八年后，便联合朗州刺史雷满共同攻打潭州，攻克潭州城，将周岳斩杀，自称留后。
English: As a result, eight years later, Deng sent his trained soldiers to rectify the equipment, and then jointly attacked Tanzhou and the city of Tanzhou with Lanzhou's Zhang Shi and Lei Man, killing Zhou Yue and claiming to stay behind.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝上之中乾宁元年
现代文：乾宁元年春季正月，乙丑朔，朝廷下令天下大赦，改年号为乾宁。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Qianning, the imperial court ordered a general amnesty, and the year name was changed to Qianning.

古文：春，正月，乙丑朔，赦天下，改元。
现代文：李茂贞进入京师长安，布置大量军队自卫，几天后返回凤翔。
English: Li Maozhen entered the capital Chang'an, deployed a large number of troops for self-defense, and returned to Fengxiang a few days later.

古文：李茂贞入朝，大陈兵自卫，数日归镇。以李匡筹为卢龙节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命李匡筹为卢龙节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Kuangqiao as the Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：二月，硃全忠自将击硃瑄，军于鱼山。
现代文：二月，朱全忠亲自率领大军攻打郓州的朱，在鱼山安营扎寨。
English: In February, Zhu Quanzhong personally led a large army to attack Zhu of Ganzhou and set up camp in Yu Mountain.

古文：瑄与瑾合兵攻之，兗、郓兵大败，死者万馀人。
现代文：朱与朱瑾联合军队进攻朱全忠的营地，结果朱瑾的兖州军队和朱的郓州军队大败，死亡一万多人。
English: Zhu and Zhu Xi jointly attacked Zhu Quanzhong's camp. As a result, Zhu Xi's Zhangzhou army and Zhu's Zhangzhou army were defeated, and more than 10,000 people died.

古文：以右散骑常侍郑綮为礼部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：朝廷任命右散骑常侍郑綮为礼部侍郎、同平章事。
English: The imperial court appointed Zheng Qi, the right rider's equerry, as the attendant of the ceremonial department, and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：綮好诙谐，多为歇后诗，讥嘲时事；上以为有所蕴，手注班簿，命以为相，闻者大惊。
现代文：郑綮说话诙谐，经常写一些歇后诗，讥讽嘲笑时事。唐昭宗认为郑綮内蕴才干，亲手把他的姓名添入在朝大臣的登记册上，任命郑綮为宰相，听到这一消息的人很吃惊。
English: Zheng Yi spoke wittily, often wrote some poems after a break, and mocked current affairs. Tang Zhaozong thought that Zheng Yi had inherent talent, and personally added his name to the register of ministers of the court and appointed Zheng Yi as prime minister. People who heard this news were very surprised.

古文：堂吏往告之，綮笑曰： 诸君大误，使天下更无人，未至郑綮！ 
现代文：宫中官吏前往告诉郑綮这一任命，郑綮笑着说： 你们一定是大错了，即使天下再没有人，也轮不到我郑綮做宰相呀！ 
English: The palace officials went to tell Zheng Rong about this appointment. Zheng Rong smiled and said: You must have made a big mistake. Even if there were no one else in the world, it would not be my turn to be prime minister!

古文：史曰： 特出圣意。 
现代文：宫中官吏说： 这是特出自皇帝的旨意。 
English: A palace official said: "This is a special order from the emperor.

古文：綮曰： 果如是，奈人笑何！ 
现代文：郑綮说： 果真是这样，让人们怎么笑话啊！ 
English: Zheng Yao said: If this is really the case, how can people make fun of it!

古文：既而贺客至，綮搔首言曰： 歇后郑五作宰相，时事可知矣！ 
现代文：接着，前来恭贺的宾客来到，郑綮用手抓着头说： 歇后诗人郑五充任宰相，当朝的事情可以知道了！ 
English: Next, the congratulatory guests arrived. Zheng Yao held his head in his hands and said, "After the break, the poet Zheng Wuchong was appointed prime minister. You can find out what happened that morning!"

古文：累让不获，乃视事。
现代文：他一再推辞而没有获得准许，这才前赴宰相任。
English: He repeatedly declined and did not receive permission, and only then did he assume the post of prime minister.

古文：以邵州刺史邓处讷为武安节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命邵州刺史邓处讷为武安节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Deng Zhanna, the governor of Shaozhou, as the special envoy of the Wu'an Festival.

古文：彰义节度使张钧薨，表其兄鐇为留后。
现代文：泾州的彰义节度使张钧死去，有表章奏请任命张钧的哥哥张为留后。
English: The Zhangye Festival in Zhangzhou caused Zhang Ye's death, and there is a petition asking for Zhang Ye's brother Zhang Ye to be appointed as his successor.

古文：三月，黄州刺史吴讨举州降杨行密。
现代文：三月，黄州刺史吴讨献出黄州，向杨行密投降。
English: In March, Huang Zhou stabbed Shi Wu to offer up Huang Zhou and surrendered to Yang Xingmi.

古文：邢州城中食尽，甲申，李存孝登城谓李克用曰： 儿蒙王恩得富贵，苟非困于谗慝，安肯舍父子而从仇雠乎！
现代文：邢州城内粮食吃尽，甲申，李存孝登上城楼对围困他的李克用说： 儿子我承蒙大王您的恩德才得以富贵，若不是被奸邪小人逼迫，我怎么能舍弃父子之恩而去随从你的仇人呢！
English: Having eaten up all the grain in the city of Zhangzhou, Li Cunxiao went up to the city tower and said to Li Kegui, who was besieging him: "My son, I have become rich thanks to the great king's kindness. If I had not been persecuted by evil villains, how could I abandon the kindness of my father and son and follow your enemies?"

古文：愿一见王，死不恨！ 
现代文：我希望再见大王一面，便死无遗恨！ 
English: I hope to see the great king again, and then I will die with no regrets!

古文：克用使刘夫人视之。
现代文：李克用让刘夫人去看望李存孝。
English: Li Ke asked Mrs. Liu to visit Li Cunxiao.

古文：夫人引存孝出见克用，存孝泥首谢罪曰： 儿粗立微劳，存信逼儿，失图至此！ 
现代文：刘夫人带领李存孝出邢州城去拜见李克用。李存孝跪在地上向李克用磕头认罪说： 儿子我刚立了一点功劳，李存信便威逼我，以致于失去考虑到这种地步！ 
English: Mrs. Liu led Li Cunxiao out of Zhangzhou City to meet Li Kejun. Li Cunxiao knelt on the ground and confessed to Li Kejun with a hoe, saying: "My son, I have just made a little merit, Li Cunxin will force me, so that I lose this degree!

古文：克用叱之曰： 汝遗硃全忠、王镕书，毁我万端，亦存信教汝乎！ 
现代文：李克用怒喝他说： 你写给朱全忠、王熔的信，大肆毁谤我，这也是李存信逼你干的吗？ 
English: Li Ke shouted at him angrily, "You wrote letters to Zhu Quanzhong and Wang Liao, slandering me. Is this what Li Cunxin forced you to do?

古文：囚之，归于晋阳，车裂于牙门。
现代文：于是把李存孝囚禁起来，回到晋阳，在牙门将李存孝车裂处死。
English: Therefore, he imprisoned Li Cunxiao, returned to Jinyang, and executed Li Cunxiao by chariot in Zhamen.

古文：存孝骁勇，克用军中皆莫及；常将骑兵为先锋，所向无敌，身被重铠，腰弓髀槊，独舞铁楇陷陈，万人辟易。
现代文：李存孝勇猛果敢，李克用军营中的将领都比不过他；他经常带领骑兵做李克用的先锋，所向无敌，他身披沉重铁甲，腰挎弓箭长矛，独自挥舞铁冲锋陷阵，成千上万的人在他面前都丧胆逃退。
English: Li Cunxiao was so brave and courageous that Li Ke could not match him with the generals in the camp; he often led the cavalry to be the vanguard for Li Ke, and was invincible. He was wearing heavy iron armor, with a bow and arrow and spear at his waist, and waved the iron charge alone. Thousands of people were discouraged and fled in front of him.

古文：每以二马自随，马稍乏，就阵中易之，出入如飞。
现代文：李存孝常常带着两匹马跟随作战，骑着的马稍微疲乏，他就在阵地上改骑另一匹马，出入如飞。
English: Li Cunxiao often took two horses to fight with him. The horse he was riding was a little tired, so he changed to another horse at the position. He was in and out in no time.

古文：克用惜其才，意临刑诸将必为之请，因而释之。
现代文：李克用很爱惜李存孝的才能，他估计临到动刑前各位将领一定会为李存孝求情，他便可以趁机将李存孝释放。
English: Li Kegui was very fond of Li Cunxiao's talent. He estimated that the generals would certainly intercede for Li Cunxiao before the execution, and he could take the opportunity to release Li Cunxiao.

古文：既而诸将疾其能，竟无一人言者。
现代文：后来却是军中各位将领妒忌李存孝的才能，竟然没有一个人出来说话。
English: Later, however, the generals in the army were jealous of Li Cunxiao's talent, and no one came out to speak.

古文：既死，克用为之不视事者旬日，私恨诸将，而于李存信竟无所谴。
现代文：李存孝被处死后，李克用为此悲伤而不办理政务长达十几天，在心中憎恨手下将领，可是对李存信竟然没有什么责罚。
English: After the death of Li Cunxiao, Li Ke used his grief not to handle government affairs for more than ten days, hating his generals in his heart, but there was no punishment for Li Cunxin.

古文：又有薛阿檀者，其勇与存孝相侔，诸将疾之，常不得志，密与存孝通；存孝诛，恐事泄，遂自杀。
现代文：还有一个叫薛阿檀的将领，他的勇猛与李存孝不相上下，军中各将也嫉妒他，常常不得志，他暗中与李存孝相通；李存孝被处死后，薛阿檀担心事情泄漏，于是自杀了。
English: There was also a general named Xue Atan, whose bravery was on a par with that of Li Cunxiao. The generals in the army were also jealous of him and were often discouraged. He secretly had a relationship with Li Cunxiao. After Li Cunxiao was executed, Xue Atan was worried that things would leak out, so he committed suicide.

古文：自是克用兵势浸弱，而硃全忠独盛矣。
现代文：从此，李克用军队的势力逐渐衰弱下去，而朱全忠却独自强盛。
English: From then on, Li Ke gradually weakened the power of the army, while Zhu Quanzhong became strong on his own.

古文：克用表马师素为邢洺节度使。
现代文：李克用上表请求朝廷任命马师素为邢节度使。
English: Li Ke used the above table to request the imperial court to appoint Ma Shizuo as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：硃全忠遣军将张从晦慰抚寿州。
现代文：朱全忠派遣军中将领张从晦慰问安抚寿州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched Lieutenant General Zhang Conglu to offer condolences and appease Shoushou.

古文：从晦陵侮刺史江彦温而与诸将夜饮；彦温疑其谋己，明日，尽杀在席诸将，以书谢全忠而自杀。
现代文：张从晦凌辱欺侮寿州刺史江彦温，而和寿州各位将领整夜饮酒；江彦温怀疑张从晦要图谋自己，第二天，他把在席间饮酒的各位将领全都杀掉，留下遗书向朱全忠谢罪，也自杀了。
English: Zhang Conghuang insulted and bullied Jiang Yanwen, the governor of Shoushou, and drank all night with the generals of Shoushou; Jiang Yanwen suspected Zhang Conghuang of plotting against him. The next day, he killed all the generals who were drinking at the banquet, left a suicide note to Zhu Quanzhong, and also committed suicide.

古文：军中推其子从顼知军州事，全忠为之腰斩从晦。
现代文：军中将士推举江彦温的儿子江从顼主持军中和寿州事宜，朱全忠为此将张从晦腰斩处死。
English: Jiang Yanwen's son, Jiang Conglu, was elected by the lieutenant generals to preside over the military and Shoushou affairs. Zhu Quanzhong executed Zhang Conglu for this.

古文：五月，加镇海节度使钱镠同平章事。
现代文：五月，朝廷加封镇海节度使钱同平章事。
English: In May, the imperial court added the Zhenhai Festival to make the money equal.

古文：刘建锋、马殷引兵至澧陵，邓处讷遣邵州指挥使蒋勋、邓继崇将步骑三千守龙回关。
现代文：刘建锋、马殷带领军队到达澧陵县，邓处讷派遣邵州指挥使蒋勋、邓继崇率领步兵骑兵三千人驻守龙回关。
English: Liu Jianfeng and Ma Yin led the army to arrive in Fuling County, and Deng Banna dispatched Shao Zhou commander Jiang Xun and Deng Jizong to lead 3,000 infantry and cavalry to guard Longmuiguan.

古文：殷先至关下，遣使诣勋，勋等以牛酒犒师。
现代文：马殷首先来到龙回关下，派使者去拜望蒋勋。
English: Ma Yin first came to Longhuiguan and sent an envoy to visit Jiang Xun.

古文：殷使说勋曰： 刘骧智勇兼人，术家言当兴翼、轸间。
现代文：蒋勋等拿出牛肉美酒犒劳马殷的人马，马殷的使者劝蒋勋说： 刘骧既有智谋又有胆略，占卜算命的人说他会在荆州、长沙这一带兴起。
English: Jiang Xun and others took out beef and wine to lure Ma Yin's men and horses. Ma Yin's emissaries advised Jiang Xun that: Liu Bei has both wisdom and courage. Fortune tellers say that he will rise in Jingzhou and Changsha.

古文：今将十万众，精锐无敌，而君以乡兵数千拒之，难矣。
现代文：现在刘骧率领十万军队，装备精良，士兵强壮，所向无敌，而你带着几千名乡兵去抗击，实在太难了。
English: Now Liu Bei is leading a hundred thousand troops, well-equipped, strong soldiers, invincible, and you go to fight with a few thousand villagers, it's really too difficult.

古文：不如先下之，取富贵，还乡里，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：你不如抢先从龙回关撤下，谋取富贵荣华，返回乡里，不是也很好吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be better for you to withdraw from Long Huiguan ahead of time, seek wealth and glory, and return to the countryside?

古文：勋等然之，谓众曰： 东军许吾属还。 
现代文：蒋勋等认为这样不错，便对手下人马说： 从东面来的刘建锋、马殷的军队允许我们返回故里了。 
English: Jiang Xun and others thought this was a good thing, and said to his subordinates: Liu Jianfeng and Ma Yin's army coming from the east have allowed us to return to our hometown.

古文：士卒皆欢呼，弃旗帜铠仗遁去。
现代文：士兵们听后都欢呼跳跃，扔下旗帜盔甲和仪仗纷纷逃去。
English: After hearing this, the soldiers cheered and jumped up and down, threw down their flags, armor, and medals, and fled.

古文：建锋令前锋衣其甲，张其旗，趋潭州。
现代文：刘建锋命令前锋士兵穿戴上蒋勋队伍扔下盔甲，并打着蒋勋、邓继崇的旗帜，奔赴潭州。
English: Liu Jianfeng ordered the forward soldiers to put on the armor of Jiang Xun's team, throw down the armor, and carry the flags of Jiang Xun and Deng Jizong to go to Tanzhou.

古文：潭人以为邵州兵还，不为备。
现代文：潭州城内的人以为是邵州的军队回来了，不做任何防备。
English: People in the city of Tanzhou thought that the army of Shao Zhou had returned, and did not make any preparations.

古文：建锋入径入府，处讷方宴，擒斩之。
现代文：刘建锋的军队直接进入潭州官署，邓处讷这时正在举行宴会，于是被擒获斩杀。
English: Liu Jianfeng's troops directly entered the Tanzhou government office, and Deng Shunna was holding a banquet at the time, so he was captured and beheaded.

古文：戊辰，建锋潭州，自称留后。
现代文：戊辰，刘建锋进入潭州，自称留后。
English: Wu Chen, Liu Jianfeng entered Tanzhou, claiming to stay behind.

古文：王建攻彭州，城中人相食，彭州内外都指挥使赵章出降。
现代文：王建攻打彭州，城内缺乏粮食，吃人充饥，彭州内外都指挥使赵章出城向王建投降。
English: Wang Jian attacked Pengzhou. There was a shortage of grain in the city, and people were eating to satisfy their hunger. Both inside and outside of Pengzhou, commanders ordered Zhao Zhang to leave the city and surrender to Wang Jian.

古文：王先成请筑龙尾道，属于女墙。
现代文：王先成建议在彭州城外修筑象龙尾一样的登道，连接到城上的短墙，以便攻入城内。
English: Wang Xiancheng suggested building a causeway like a dragon's tail outside the city of Pengzhou, connected to a short wall on the city, in order to break into the city.

古文：丙子，西川兵登城，杨晟犹帅众力战，刀子都虞候王茂权斩之。
现代文：丙子，王建的西川军队登上彭州城墙，杨晟仍率领人马竭力奋战，刀子都虞候王茂权将杨晟斩杀。
English: Bongzi, Wang Jian's West River army boarded the Pengzhou city wall, Yang Hui still led the men and women to fight hard, and Wang Maoguang cut Yang Hui to death with his sword.

古文：获彭州马步使安师建，建欲使为将，师建泣谢曰： 师建誓与杨司徒同生死，不忍复戴日月，惟速死为惠。 
现代文：彭州马步使安师建被抓获，王建想任命他做手下将领，安师建流着泪谢绝说： 我安师建誓与司徒杨晟同生共死，不忍心仍留在世上，只求快把我处死就是恩惠了。 
English: Pengzhou Ma Bu caused An Shijian to be captured. Wang Jianjun wanted to appoint him as his subordinate general. An Shijian declined with tears, saying, "I, An Shijian, swear to live and die together with Stu Yang Hui. I can't bear to stay in this world. It would be a favor if you could just execute me quickly."

古文：再三谕之，不从，乃杀之，礼葬而祭之。
现代文：王建再三劝导，安师建还是不听从，王建只好将安师建杀死，按一定的礼仪埋葬并祭奠他。
English: Wang Jian repeatedly persuaded him, but An Shijian still did not listen. Wang Jian had no choice but to kill An Shijian, bury him according to a certain etiquette and pay tribute to him.

古文：更赵章姓名曰王宗勉，王茂权名曰宗训，又更王钊名曰宗谨，李绾姓曰王宗勉，王茂权名曰宗训，又更王钊名曰宗谨，李绾姓名曰王宗绾。
现代文：王建把赵章的姓名改为，收为养子。
English: Wang Jian changed Zhao Zhang's name and adopted him.

古文：辛卯，中书侍郎、同平章事郑延昌罢为右仆射。
现代文：辛卯，朝延将中书侍郎、同平章事郑延昌贬职为右仆射。
English: Soon after, Asanobu demoted Zheng Yanchang, Chusho's chamberlain and Tongping's aide-de-camp, to the role of right-hand man.

古文：硃瑄、硃瑾求救于河东，李克用遣骑将安福顺及弟福庆、福迁督精骑五百假道于魏，渡河应之。
现代文：朱、朱瑾向河东节度使李克用求救，李克用派遣骑兵将领安福顺和他的弟弟安福庆、安福迁督率精壮骑兵五百借道经魏州，渡过黄河前往应援。
English: Zhu and Zhu Xi asked Li Ke for help at the festival in Hedong. Li Ke dispatched cavalry general An Fushun and his brother An Fuqing, An Fu Qian Guo and five hundred strong cavalrymen via Weizhou to cross the Yellow River to help.

古文：武昌节度使杜洪攻黄州，杨行密遣行营都指挥使硃延寿等救之。
现代文：武昌节度使杜洪派军队攻打黄州，杨行密派遣行营都指挥使朱延寿等前往救援。
English: The Wuchang Festival made Du Hong send troops to attack Huangzhou, Yang Xingmi dispatched the camp commander Zhu Yanshou and others to go to the rescue.

古文：六月，甲午，以宋州刺史张廷范为武宁节度使，从硃全忠之请也。
现代文：六月，甲午，朝廷根据朱全忠的请求，任命宋州刺史张廷范为武宁节度使。
English: At the request of Zhu Quanzhong, the imperial court appointed Zhang Tingfan, a Song dynasty scholar, as the envoy to the Wu Ning Festival in the afternoon of June 1st.

古文：蕲州刺史冯敬章邀击淮南军，硃延寿攻蕲州，不克。
现代文：蕲州刺史冯敬章拦击朱延寿淮南军队，朱延寿攻打蕲州，未能攻克。
English: Feng Jingzhang, the governor of Zhangzhou, intercepted Zhu Yanshou's Huainan army. Zhu Yanshou attacked Zhangzhou, but failed to conquer it.

古文：戊午，以翰林学士承旨、礼部尚书李溪同平章事；方宣制，水部郎中知制诰刘崇鲁出班掠麻恸哭。
现代文：戊午，朝廷任命翰林学士承旨、礼部尚书李为同平章事，刚刚宣布这一诏令，水部郎中知制诰刘崇鲁从朝中大臣的班次里出来强行夺过诏书大声痛哭。
English: In the afternoon, the imperial court had just announced the imperial decree appointing the Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi and the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies Shangshu Li as co-equal officials. Liu Chonglu, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Water Resources, came out of the middle minister's shift to forcibly take the imperial decree and cried loudly.

古文：上召崇鲁，问其故，对言： 溪奸邪，依附杨复恭、西门君遂，得在翰林，无相业，恐危社稷。 
现代文：唐昭宗召来刘崇鲁，问他原因，刘崇鲁回答说： 李奸诈邪恶，依附杨复恭、西门君遂，才得到翰林学士官职，根本没有做宰相的品行，恐怕他会危害大唐天下的。 
English: Tang Zhaozong summoned Liu Chonglu and asked him the reason. Liu Chonglu replied: Li was deceitful and evil, and he only got the post of Hanlin Baccalaureate by relying on Yang Fuqong and Xiamen Jun. He did not have the moral conduct to be a prime minister at all. I am afraid that he will endanger the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：溪竟罢为太子少傅。
现代文：李终于被贬为太子为傅。
English: Li was finally demoted to the rank of crown prince.

古文：溪，鄜之孙也。
现代文：李是唐宪宗时李的孙子。
English: Li is the grandson of Li in the time of Tang Xianzong.

古文：上师溪为文，崔昭纬恐溪为相，分己权，故使崇鲁沮之。
现代文：唐昭宗向李学习写作文章，崔昭纬怕李做了宰相，会分去他的权力，因而指使刘崇鲁出来阻挠。
English: Tang Zhaozong learned to write articles from Li, and Cui Zhaowei was afraid that Li had become the prime minister and would take away his power, so he ordered Liu Chonglu to come out and obstruct.

古文：溪十表自讼，丑诋崇鲁父符 受赃枉法，事觉自杀；弟崇望与杨复恭深交，崇鲁庭拜田令孜，为硃玫作劝进表，乃云臣交结内臣，何异抱赃唱贼！
现代文：李十次进呈表章自行申诉，表内痛骂道： 刘崇鲁的父亲刘符贪污受贿践踏法度，事情被觉察后自杀；刘崇鲁的弟弟刘崇望与杨复恭交情很深，刘崇鲁本人则曾在庭堂上叩拜田令孜，为朱玫起草篡夺帝位的表文，可是他却说我交结宦官，这与怀里抱着赃物嘴里高喊捉贼有什么两样！
English: Ten times, Li submitted a self-complaint form, and the form scolded: Liu Chonglu's father, Liu Fu, abused the law by accepting bribes, and committed suicide after the matter was discovered; Liu Chonglu's brother, Liu Chongwang, had a deep friendship with Yang Fuqiong; Liu Chonglu himself once bowed to Tian Lingzi in the courtyard and drafted a petition to usurp the throne for Zhu Mei, but he said that I had a relationship with a eunuch. What is the difference between this and holding stolen goods in my arms and shouting "catch the thief!"

古文：且故事，絁巾惨带，不入禁庭。
现代文：况且按成例，身着粗绸巾和浅色衣带等不吉利的服饰都不能进入宫内殿堂。
English: Moreover, as a rule, people wearing unlucky clothing such as coarse silk scarves and light-coloured belts are not allowed to enter the Imperial Palace.

古文：臣果不才，崇鲁自应上章论列，岂于正殿恸哭！
现代文：我若是果真没有才识，刘崇鲁自然应当上呈表章论说陈述，怎么能在宫中正殿上嚎啕大哭呢！
English: If I really have no talent, Liu Chonglu should naturally submit a written statement, how can I cry loudly in the main hall of the palace!

古文：为国不祥，无人臣礼，乞正其罪。 
现代文：此事他不顾忌国家的吉祥，丧失了做臣子的礼节，请求治他的罪。 
English: He did not care about the auspiciousness of the country, lost the etiquette of being a courtier, and asked to be punished for his crime.

古文：诏停崇鲁见任。
现代文：为此，唐昭宗诏令中止刘崇鲁当时所任的官职。
English: For this reason, Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to suspend Liu Chongru from his official post.

古文：溪犹上表不已，乞行诛窜，表数千言，诟詈无所不至。
现代文：李仍然不停地上呈表章，请将刘崇鲁诛杀或流放，表文有几千字，痛骂严斥无所不至。
English: Li continued to hold up a sign asking that Liu Chonglu be killed or exiled. The sign was several thousand words long and was full of abuse.

古文：李克用大破吐谷浑，杀赫连鐸，擒白义诚。
现代文：李克用大破吐谷浑部，杀死赫连铎，擒获白义诚。
English: Li Ke used a large broken spit valley mud part to kill Hereng Yao and capture Bai Yicheng.

古文：秋，七月，李茂贞遣兵攻阆州，拨之，杨复恭、杨守亮、杨守信帅其族党犯围走。
现代文：秋季，七月，李茂贞派遣军队进攻阆州，予以攻克，杨复恭、杨守亮、杨守信率领家族党羽冲破包围逃走。
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Maozhen sent troops to attack and conquer Zhangzhou. Yang Fookong, Yang Shouliang, and Yang Shouxin led the family members to break through the encirclement and escape.

古文：礼部侍郎、同平章事郑綮自以不合众望，累表避位，诏以太子少保致仕；以御史大夫徐彦若为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：礼部侍郎、同平章事郑綮感到自己得不到群臣的拥护，多次上表请求退位，唐昭宗诏令郑綮以太子少保官衔退休；朝廷任命御史大夫徐彦若为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事。
English: Zheng He, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department and Tong Ping, felt that he could not get the support of the courtiers, and repeatedly requested the abdication of the throne. The Tang Zhaozong issued an edict ordering Zheng He to retire as a minor official; the imperial court appointed the doctor of history Xu Yan as the attendant of the Central Records and the official of the Department of Records and Tong Ping.

古文：绵州刺史杨守厚卒，其将常再荣举城降王建。
现代文：绵州刺史杨守厚死去，他的将领常再荣献出绵州城向王建投降。
English: Yang Shouhou, the ruler of Mengzhou, died, and his generals surrendered Mengzhou City to Wang Jianlu.

古文：杨复恭、守亮、守信将自商山奔河东，至乾元，遇华州兵，获之。
现代文：杨复恭、杨守亮、杨守信要从商山奔往河东，到达商州的乾元县时，遇到华州军队，将他们抓获。
English: Yang Fookong, Yang Shouliang, and Yang Shouxin wanted to run from Shangshan to Hedong. When they reached Qianyuan County in Shangzhou, they encountered the Huazhou army and were captured.

古文：八月，韩建献于阙下，斩于独柳。
现代文：八月，韩建把杨复恭父子三人送交朝廷，在独柳将他们斩杀。
English: In August, Han Jian sent Yang Fuqiong and his three sons to the imperial court, where they were beheaded.

古文：李茂贞献复恭遗守亮书，诉致仕之由云： 承天门乃隋家旧业，大侄但积粟训兵，勿贡献。
现代文：李茂贞献上杨复恭以前给杨守亮的信，信上陈诉他退职的情由说： 唐朝的江山本是隋朝的旧业，大侄你只管积存粮食训练士兵，不要向朝廷进贡。
English: Li Maozhen presented a letter from Yang Fookong to Yang Shouliang, in which he told him the reason for his resignation, saying: The Tang Dynasty's Jiangshan was originally the old business of the Sui Dynasty. Great-nephew, you should only accumulate grain to train soldiers, not pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：吾于荆榛中立寿王，才得尊位，废定策国老，有如此负心门生天子！ 
现代文：我当初在荆棘榛丛一样的因境中拥立寿王继承帝位，才使得他得到皇位，可是皇帝即位后却废掉了我这个制定大策的国家元老，哪里有象这样忘恩负义的学生天子呀！ 
English: I originally supported Shouwang's succession to the imperial throne in a situation similar to that of a thorn bush, which enabled him to obtain the throne, but after the emperor ascended the throne, he abolished me, the elder statesman who formulated the grand strategy. Where are such ungrateful students, heavenly son!

古文：昭义节度使康君立诣晋阳谒李克用。
现代文：昭义节度使康君立前赴晋阳拜见李克用。
English: The Akiyoshi festival made Kangjunli go to Jinyang to meet Li Ke for the first time.

古文：己未，克用会诸将饮博，酒酣，克用语及李存孝，流涕不已。
现代文：已未，李克用会聚属下各位将领尽情饮酒，喝到兴头上，李克用谈起李存孝，泪水不停地往下流。
English: Not long ago, Li Ke used the opportunity to gather his subordinate generals to drink to their heart's content. Li Ke used the opportunity to talk about Li Cunxiao, and his tears kept flowing down.

古文：君立素与李存信善，一言忤旨。克用拨剑斫之，囚于马步司。
现代文：康君立平时和李存信亲近友好，不慎一句话触怒了李克用，李克用拔出剑来就向康君立砍去，把他囚禁在马步司。
English: Kang Junli and Li Cunxin were close and friendly in peacetime. Li Ke used a careless word to anger Li Cunxin. Li Cunxin pulled out his sword and slashed at Kang Junli, imprisoning him in Ma Bu Si.

古文：九月，庚申朔，出之，君立已死。
现代文：九月，康申朔，李用克命令把康君立放出来，可是康君立已经死了。
English: In September, Kang Shenshuo and Li Ke ordered to release Kang Junli, but Kang Junli was already dead.

古文：克用表云州刺史薛志诚为昭义留后。
现代文：李克用于上表朝廷请求任命云州刺史薛志诚为昭义留后。
English: Li Ke used the above table to request the imperial court to appoint Yunnan acolyte Xue Zhicheng as the successor of Zhao Yi.

古文：冬，十月，丁酉，封皇子祤为棣王，禊为虔王，禋为沂王，祎为遂王。
现代文：冬季十月，唐昭宗封皇子李为棣王，李禊为虔王，李为沂王，李为遂王。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty named the prince Li as the king of Jie, Li Jie as the king of Kian, Li Jie as the king of Jie and Li Jie as the king of Sui.

古文：刘仁恭数因盖寓献策于李克用，愿得兵万人取幽州。
现代文：刘仁恭几次经由盖寓向李克用献计献策，希望给他一万军队攻取李匡筹的幽州。
English: Several times, Liu Renkong presented his plan to Li Keqiang through the guesthouse, hoping to give him ten thousand troops to capture Yuzhou, which was Li Keqiang's stronghold.

古文：克用方攻邢州，分兵数千，欲纳仁恭于幽州，不克。
现代文：李克用正在攻打刑州，便分派出几千人马，想让刘仁恭进入幽州，却未能攻克。
English: Li Ke used the fact that he was attacking Chizhou as an excuse to dispatch several thousand horses in an attempt to let Liu Renkong enter Yuzhou, but he failed to conquer Zhou.

古文：李匡筹益骄，数侵河东之境。克用怒，十一月，大举兵攻匡筹，拨武州，进围新州。
现代文：李匡筹更加骄傲起来，几次侵扰李克用的河东地盘，李克用大为震怒，十一月，发动军队大规模进攻李匡筹，攻克武州，进军围攻新州。
English: Li Kuangchong became even more proud. He invaded Li Ke's territory in the east of the river several times, and Li Ke was very angry. In November, he launched a large-scale attack on Li Kuangchong, conquered Wuzhou, and marched into and besieged Xinzhou.

古文：以泾原留后张鐇为彰义节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命泾原留后张为彰义节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhang to be the special envoy to the festival in Changyi after he had stayed in Yuyuan.

古文：硃全忠遣使至泗州，使者陵慢刺史张谏，谏举州降杨行密。
现代文：朱全忠派遣使者到泗州，使者凌辱轻慢泗州刺史张谏，张谏于是献出泗州城向杨行密投降。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent an envoy to Zhangzhou. The envoy insulted Zhang Quanzhong, and Zhang Quanzhong surrendered Zhangzhou City to Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密遣押牙唐令回持茶万馀斤如汴宋贸易，全忠执令回，尽取其茶。
现代文：杨行密派遣押牙将唐令回带着一万多斤茶叶到汴州、宋州一带贸易，朱全忠抓获唐令回，把茶叶全部夺去。
English: Yang Xingmi dispatched Oshiaga to bring back Tangling with more than ten thousand catties of tea to trade in the areas of Zhangzhou and Songzhou. Zhu Quanzhong captured Tangling and took away all the tea.

古文：扬、汴始有隙。
现代文：扬州的杨行密和汴州的朱全忠从此开始有了怨仇。
English: Yang Xingmi from Yangzhou and Zhu Quanzhong from Zhangzhou started to have a grudge.

古文：十二月，李匡筹遣大将将步骑数万救新州，李克用选精兵逆战于段庄，大破之，斩首万馀级，生擒将校三百人，以练纟斥之，徇于城下。
现代文：十二月，李匡筹派遣大将率领步兵、骑兵几万人前往救援新州，李克用挑选精壮士兵在新州东南的段庄迎战，把李匡筹的人马打得大败，斩杀一万余人，活捉将校三百人，用绳索捆绑起来，在新州城下示众。
English: In December, Li Kuang-ch'u sent a general to lead tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to rescue Xinzhou. Li Ke used selected strong soldiers to fight in Duanzhuang in the southeast of Xinzhou, defeated Li Kuang-ch'u's men, killed more than 10,000 people, captured 300 officers alive, tied them up with ropes, and paraded them under Xinzhou Castle.

古文：是夕，新州降。
现代文：当天傍晚，新州军队便向李克用投降。
English: In the evening of the same day, the Xinzhou army surrendered to Li Keji.

古文：辛亥，进攻妫州。
现代文：辛亥，李克用进攻妫州。
English: On the 23rd, the attack on Zhangzhou began.

古文：壬子，匡筹复发兵出居庸关，克用使精骑当其前以疲之，遣步将李存审自他道出其背夹击之，幽州兵大败，杀获万计。
现代文：壬子，李匡筹又派遣军队出居庸关，李克用派令精锐骑兵阻击其前锋以使李匡筹的人马疲惫，另外派遣步兵将领李存审从其他道路绕到背后进行夹击，李匡筹的幽州军队大败，被斩杀擒获数以万计。
English: On the other hand, Li Kuangchong also sent troops out of Yongguan. Li Ke sent elite cavalry to block his forwards to make Li Kuangchong's men tired, and sent infantry general Li Cunxin from other roads to the rear to make a pincer attack. Li Kuangchong's Yuzhou army was defeated, and tens of thousands were killed and captured.

古文：甲寅，李匡筹挈其族奔沧州，义昌节度使卢彦威利其辎重、妓妾，遣兵攻之于景城，杀之，尽俘其众。
现代文：甲寅，李匡筹携带家人逃奔沧州，义昌节度使卢彦威看上了李匡筹的行李资财、歌妓妻妾，派出军队在景城攻击，将李匡筹杀死，所有人马都被卢彦威俘获。
English: A Yin, Li Kuangchie fled to Cangzhou with his family, and the Yichang Festival made Lu Yanwei notice Li Kuangchie's luggage, wealth, and prostitute wife and concubine. He sent an army to attack in Jingcheng and killed Li Kuangchie. All the horses were captured by Lu Yanwei.

古文：存审本姓苻，宛丘人，克用养以为子。
现代文：李存审本来姓符，是宛丘人，李克用将他收养为义子。
English: Li Cunxuan was originally surnamed Fu and was from Wanchiu. Li Ke used to adopt him as his son-in-law.

古文：丙辰，克用进军幽州，其大将请降。
现代文：丙辰，李克用进军幽州，幽州大将请求投降。
English: Bing Chen and Li Ke used to march into Yuzhou, and the general of Yuzhou requested to surrender.

古文：匡筹素暗懦，初据军府，兄匡威闻之，谓诸将曰： 兄失弟得，不出吾家，亦复何恨！但惜匡筹才短，不能保守，得及二年，幸矣。 
现代文：李匡筹平是愚昧软弱，当他刚刚出任幽州节度使时，他的哥哥李匡威知道后，对各位将领说： 我做哥哥的失去，让弟弟获得，仍然没有出我们的家门，也没有什么可遗恨的，只可惜李匡筹缺乏才干，不能够保住，能占据两年时间，就值得庆幸了！ 
English: Li Kuangchongping was ignorant and weak. When he had just been appointed as the Yuzhou Festival envoy, his brother Li Kuangwei knew and said to the generals: I have lost a brother and gained a younger brother, but I still haven't left our home, and there is nothing to hate. It's just a pity that Li Kuangchong lacks talent and can't keep it up. If he can occupy two years, it's worth celebrating!

古文：加匡国节度使王行约检校待中。
现代文：朝廷加封匡国节度使王行约为检校侍中。
English: The Imperial Court's conferment of the title of Kuangguo Jiedu made Wang Xingyong a school inspector.

古文：吴讨畏杜洪之逼，纳印请代于杨行密，行密以先锋指挥使瞿章权知黄州。
现代文：黄州刺史吴讨畏惧杜洪的逼攻，便交纳官印请杨行委人代理，杨行密委任先锋指挥使瞿章暂管黄州刺史事宜。
English: In fear of Du Hong's attack, Wu, the governor of Huangzhou, asked Yang Xingmi, a member of the commission, to act as his deputy, and Yang Xingmi appointed the vanguard commander to temporarily manage the affairs of Huangzhou.

古文：是岁，黄连洞蛮二万围汀州，福建观察使王潮遣其将李承勋将万人击之；蛮解去，承勋追击之，至浆水口，破之。
现代文：这一年，汀州宁化县的黄连洞有蛮人二万围攻汀州，福建观察使王朝派遣手下将领李承勋带领一万人马前往攻击。蛮人解除围攻离去，李承勋追击，到达浆水口，将蛮人打败。
English: In this year, Huangliandong in Ninghua County, Tingzhou, was besieged by 20,000 savages. Fujian observation caused the dynasty to send its general, Li Chengxun, to lead 10,000 soldiers to attack. The savages lifted the siege and left, and Li Chengxun pursued them, reached the mouth of the muddy water, and defeated the savages.

古文：闽地略定。
现代文：福建一带大略定安下来。
English: The Fujian region is generally stable.

古文：潮遣僚佐巡州县，劝农桑，定租税，交好邻道，保境息民，闽人安之。
现代文：王潮派遣属下官员到各州县巡视，勉励人民耕种纺织，制定地租赋税限额，和邻近各道友好交往，保护境内让人民休养，福建人民都很安定。
English: Wang Chao dispatched his subordinate officials to inspect all prefectures and counties, encourage the people to cultivate textiles, set land rent tax quotas, have friendly exchanges with neighboring provinces, protect the territory and let the people rest and recuperate. The people of Fujian are very stable.

古文：封州刺史刘廉卒，子隐居丧于贺江，士民百馀人谋乱，隐一夕尽诛之。
现代文：封州刺史刘谦死去，刘谦的儿子刘隐在贺江守丧，当地土著居民一百多人谋举叛乱，刘隐在一晚将他们全部杀掉。
English: Liu Qian, the famous statesman of Fenzhou, died. Liu Qian's son, Liu Ying, held a funeral in Hejiang. More than a hundred local aborigines plotted a rebellion, and Liu Ying killed them all in one night.

古文：岭南节度使刘崇龟召补右都押牙兼贺水镇使；未几，表为封州刺史。
现代文：岭南节度使刘崇龟召来刘隐补授右都押牙兼任贺水镇使，不久，又上表朝廷请求任命刘隐为封州刺史。
English: During the Lingnan Festival, Liu Chongke summoned Liu Ying to supplement Liu Ying's position as the official representative of He Shui Town. Soon after, Liu Ying was requested by the imperial court to be appointed as the official representative of Fuzhou.

古文：义胜节度使董昌为政苛虐，于常赋之外，加敛数倍，以充贡献及中外馈遗，每旬发一纲，金万两，银五千鋋，越绫万五千匹，他物称是，用卒五百人，或遇雨雪风水违程，则皆死。
现代文：越州义胜节度使董昌政治苛刻为人暴虐，在正常的赋税之外，又增加几倍征收，拿来向朝廷进贡奉献和内外馈送，董昌每十天向京师长安发送贡品一纲，有黄金一万两，白银五千铤，浙东绫绢一万五千匹，其他物品也都大体相当，指派士兵五百人运送，有时因为遇到暴雨大雪狂风洪水而延误行程，运送贡品的士兵就会被全部处死。
English: The Yuezhou Yisheng Festival made Dongchang's politics harsh and tyrannical. In addition to the normal taxation, it also increased the collection several times, using it to pay tribute to the imperial court and feed it inside and outside. Dongchang sent a tribute every ten days to Beijing Shichang'an, with 10,000 taels of gold, 5,000 taels of silver, 15,000 taels of Zhejiang Dongtao, and other items are roughly equivalent. Five hundred soldiers were assigned to transport, and sometimes the trip was delayed due to heavy rain, heavy snow, strong winds and floods. The soldiers transporting the tribute would all be executed.

古文：责奉为天下最，由是朝廷以为忠，宠命相继，官至司徒、同平章事，爵陇西郡王。
现代文：他向朝廷进贡献的财物，为天下第一，因此朝廷认为董昌忠诚，奖赏诏令连接不断，他的官职高升到司徒、同平章事，并获得陇西郡王的爵位。
English: He was the first in the world to contribute to the wealth of the imperial court. Therefore, the imperial court believed that Dong Chang was loyal, and the reward and reward orders were continuously connected. His official position was elevated to the status of Sidu, Tongping Zhangji, and he was awarded the title of King of Shaanxi County.

古文：是建生祠于越州，制度悉如禹庙，命民间祷赛者，无得之禹庙，皆之生祠。
现代文：董昌在世就在越州为自己建造祠庙，规模形状完全和越州大禹庙一样，命令民间祈福求神的百姓，不准到大禹庙去，必须都到他的生祠。
English: When he was alive, Dong Chang built an ancestral temple for himself in Yuezhou. The scale and shape are exactly the same as that of the Yuezhou Dayu Temple. He ordered the people to pray for blessings and ask God. They were not allowed to go to the Dayu Temple, but had to go to his ancestral temple.

古文：昌求为越王，朝廷未之许，昌不悦曰： 朝廷欲负我矣，我累年贡献无算而惜一越王邪！ 
现代文：董昌向朝廷请求任命他为越王，朝廷没有准许，董昌便很不高兴地说： 朝廷要辜负我了，我多年来向朝廷进贡奉献无数，百朝廷竟舍不得一个越王的爵位！ 
English: Dong Chang asked the court to appoint him as King of Yue, but the court did not give permission, and Dong Chang said very unhappy: The court is going to fail me, I have made countless tributes to the court over the years, and the hundred court is reluctant to have a title of King of Yue!

古文：有谄之者曰： 王为越王，曷若为越帝。 
现代文：有谄媚阿谀的人对董昌说： 大王与其做越王，还不如称做越帝。 
English: A flatterer said to Dong Chang: "Instead of being the king of Vietnam, the Great King should be called the Emperor of Vietnam."

古文：于是民间讹言时世将变，竞相帅填门喧噪，请昌为帝。
现代文：于是民间谣传世道要有变更，人们争着挤满董昌的府门喧嚷喊叫，纷纷请求董昌称帝。
English: As a result, there was a need for a change in the way folk songs were passed down, and people crowded the gates of Dongchang's palace, shouting noisily and asking Dongchang to be proclaimed emperor.

古文：昌大喜，遣人谢之曰： 天时未至，时至我自为之。 
现代文：董昌欣喜若狂，派人出去答谢说： 时机还不成熟，时机一到我自然要称帝的。 
English: Overjoyed, Dong Chang sent someone out to thank him, saying, "The time is not yet ripe. When the time comes, I will naturally praise the emperor."

古文：其僚佐吴瑶、都虞候李畅之等皆劝成之，吏民献谣谶符瑞者不可胜纪，其始赏之以钱数百缗，既而献者日多，稍减至五百、三百而已，昌曰： 谶云 兔子上金床 ，此谓我也。
现代文：董昌的僚佐吴瑶、都虞候李畅之等人都劝说促成此事，于是官吏百姓纷纷进献预示大吉的隐语和祥瑞征兆，举不胜举，开始时对进献的人赏给几百缗钱，后来进献的人越来越多，赏钱逐渐减少到不过五百、三百文而已。董昌说： 有谶语说 兔子上金床 ，这指的就是我。
English: Dong Chang's colleagues, Zuo Wusong, Duyu Hou Li Changzhu, and others all persuaded to facilitate this matter, so officials and commoners rushed to offer omens of good luck and auspicious signs. At the beginning, several hundred baht were awarded to those who donated. Later, more and more people donated, and the reward money gradually decreased to only five hundred and three hundred mon. Dong Chang said: There is a slang saying "rabbit on the gold bed," which refers to me.

古文：我生太岁在卯，明年复在卯，二月卯日卯时，吾称帝之秋也。 
现代文：我的生辰在卯年，明年又恰是卯年，二月的卯日卯时，就是我称帝的时间。 
English: My birthday is in the year of the rooster, next year is also the year of the rooster, and February's rooster day, rooster time, is the time I celebrate the emperor.

