古文：温之会，晋人执卫成公归之于周，使医鸩之，不死，医亦不珠。
现代文：诸侯在温地盟会的时候，晋国逮捕了卫成公，把他押送到周，指使医生用毒酒暗害他，没有成功，医生也没有受到报复。
English: When the lords were meeting in Wen Di, Jin arrested Wei Cheng Gong, sent him to Zhou, and ordered the doctor to assassinate him with poisoned wine. It was not successful, and the doctor did not receive any retaliation.

古文：臧文仲言于僖公曰： 夫卫君殆无罪矣。
现代文：臧文仲对鲁僖公说： 卫君大概没有罪了。
English: Yu Wenzhong said to Lu Yaogong: Wei Jun is probably not guilty.

古文：刑五而已，无有隐者，隐乃讳也。
现代文：刑不过五种，没有用毒死的方法去暗害的。
English: There are only five kinds of punishments, and there is no method of poisoning to assassinate.

古文：大刑用甲兵，其次用斧钺，中刑用刀锯，其次用钻笮，薄刑用鞭扑，以威民也。
现代文：暗害就得避嫌疑。大刑是用甲兵讨伐，其次是用斧钺杀戮，中刑是用刀锯断肢，其次是用钻笮毁容，最轻的是鞭打，用来威吓百姓。
English: The most severe punishment was to be killed by cavalry, the next was to be killed with an axe, the middle punishment was to be dismembered with a knife and saw, the next was to be disfigured with a drill, and the lightest punishment was whipping, which was used to intimidate the people.

古文：故大者陈之原野，小者致之市朝，五刑三次，是无隐也。
现代文：所以用甲兵、斧钺杀死的在野外执行，用刀锯处死的在市、朝执行，五种刑法三个场所，这些都没有隐蔽地执行的。
English: Therefore, the execution of those who were killed by armored soldiers and axes was carried out in the open, and the execution of those who were killed by knives and saws was carried out in the city and in the capital, and the five criminal laws were carried out in three places, none of which were carried out covertly.

古文：今晋人鸩卫侯不死，亦不讨其使者，讳而恶杀之也。
现代文：现在晋人毒死卫侯不成功，也没有报复医生，是想避去暗害的嫌疑。
English: Now the Jin people poisoned Wei Hou to death without success, and did not retaliate against the doctor, in order to avoid suspicion of assassination.

古文：有诸侯之请，必免之。
现代文：倘若有诸侯出面替卫君求情，一定会得到赦免。
English: If any lords came forward to intercede on behalf of the prince, he would certainly be pardoned.

古文：臣闻之：班相恤也，故能有亲。
现代文：我听说：地位相同的人互相体恤，所以能够关系亲近。
English: I heard that people of the same status sympathize with each other, so they can have a close relationship.

古文：夫诸侯之患，诸侯恤之，所以训民也。
现代文：诸侯有了患难，其他诸侯去体恤他，这样才能教育百姓互相帮助。
English: When a vassal is in trouble, other vassals should sympathize with him, so that the people can be educated to help each other.

古文：君盍请卫君以示亲于诸侯，且以动晋？
现代文：你何不替卫君求情以在诸侯间显示你的爱心，并且以此感动晋侯呢？
English: Why don't you intercede on behalf of the prince to show your love among the princes, and thus move the princes?

古文：夫晋新得诸侯，使亦曰： 鲁不弃其亲，其亦不可以恶。  
现代文：晋侯刚刚成为诸侯间的盟主，让他也认为：鲁国不背弃它亲近的诸侯，我们不可以待他不好。 
English: Jin Hou had just become the leader among the princes, so he also thought: if Lu did not betray its close princes, we could not treat him badly.

古文：公说，行玉二十瑴，乃免卫侯。
现代文：僖公很高兴，用二十对白玉送给周王和晋侯，于是卫侯得到赦免。
English: Shao Gong was very pleased and gave twenty pairs of white jade to King Zhou and Prince Jin, so Prince Wei was pardoned.

古文：自是晋聘于鲁，加于诸侯一等，爵同，厚其好货。
现代文：从此以后晋国遣使到鲁国聘问，规格要比其他诸侯高一等，送的礼物也比和鲁国同等爵位的要好。
English: From then on, Jin emissaries were sent to Lu to ask questions, and their specifications were higher than those of other lords, and the gifts they sent were better than those of lords of the same rank in Lu.

古文：卫侯闻其臧文仲之为也，使纳赂焉。
现代文：卫侯听闻臧文仲对自己被释放的作用，派人送礼给他。
English: Wei Hou heard about the role of Gong Wenzhong in his release and sent someone to give him a gift.

古文：辞曰： 外臣之言不越境，不敢及君。 
现代文：臧文仲推辞说： 别国臣子的话不越境，不敢和你有交往。 
English: Zou Wenzhong said, "The words of other countries' courtiers do not cross the border, and they do not dare to associate with you.

