古文：廖永安，字彦敬。德庆侯永忠兄也。
现代文：廖永安，字彦敬，德庆侯廖永忠的兄长。
English: Liao Yongan, also known as Yan Jing, is the older brother of Liao Yongzhong, a member of the Deqing clan.

古文：太祖初起，永安兄弟偕俞通海等以舟师自巢湖来归。
现代文：太祖起兵不久，廖永安兄弟偕同俞通海等人率舟师从巢湖前来归附。
English: Not long after the great-grandfather raised an army, Liao Yong'an's brothers, together with Tonglu Tonghai and others, led a boat division from Chaohu Lake to annex it.

古文：太祖亲往收其军，遂以舟师攻元中丞蛮子海牙于马场河。
现代文：太祖亲自前往收编其军，并利用这支舟师攻打元中丞蛮子海牙于马场河。
English: Taizu himself went to assemble his army, and used this fleet to attack the former middle-ranking samurai, Hague, on the Horse Farm River.

古文：元人驾楼船，不利进退，而永安辈操舟若飞，再战，再破元兵，始定渡江策。
现代文：元军驾驶的楼船，进退不便，而廖永安等人驾的船快如飞，再战又打败了元兵，于是制定了渡长江的计划。
English: The building ship piloted by the Yuan Army was inconvenient to advance and retreat, while the ship piloted by Liao Yong'an and others was as fast as flying. They defeated the Yuan soldiers in the second battle, so they made a plan to cross the Yangtze River.

古文：顷之，发江口。
现代文：顷刻之间，发兵江口。
English: In an instant, troops were dispatched to the mouth of the river.

古文：永安举帆，请所向，命直指牛渚。西北风方骤，顷刻达岸。
现代文：廖永安驾驶着船只，直驶牛渚。突然刮起西北风，舟师迅速到达彼岸。
English: Liao Yong'an steered the boat, heading straight for Niuzhu. The northwest wind suddenly blew, and the boatman quickly reached the other side.

古文：太祖急挥甲士鼓勇以登，采石镇兵皆溃，遂乘胜取太平。
现代文：太祖指挥甲士鼓足勇气登岸攻击，采石镇的军队全部溃逃，太祖军又乘胜攻取太平。
English: Taizu's commanding officers mustered enough courage to attack ashore. The quarry town's entire army fled, and Taizu's army took advantage of the victory to capture Taiping.

古文：授管军总管。
现代文：廖永安被授予管军总管。
English: Liao Yongan was awarded the title of Chief of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：以舟师破海牙水栅，擒陈兆先，入集庆。擢建康翼统军元帅。
现代文：率舟师攻破海牙水栅，生擒陈兆先，进入集庆，提升为建康翼统军元帅。
English: He led the boat division to break through the Hague water gate, and Chen Zhaoxian was born. He entered the celebration and was promoted to the marshal of the Jiankang United Front Army.

古文：以舟师从取镇江，克常州，擢同佥江南行枢密院事。
现代文：率舟师从大军取镇江，攻克常州，提升为同佥江南行枢密院事。
English: He took Zhenjiang from the big army and conquered Changzhou with his boatmen, and was promoted to be the Privy Councillor of the Southern Branch of the Yangtze River.

古文：又以舟师同常遇春自铜陵趋池州。合攻，破其北门，执徐寿辉守将，遂克池州。
现代文：又率舟师同常遇春自铜陵进攻池州，联合作战，攻破城北门，捉拿了徐寿辉的守将，于是攻克了池州。
English: He also led the boat division to attack Chizhou from Tongling in the spring, fought jointly, broke through the north gate of the city, captured the guard of Xu Shouhui, and then conquered Chizhou.

古文：偕俞通海拔江阴之石牌戍，降张士诚守将栾瑞。擢同知枢密院事。
现代文：偕同俞通海攻占江阴的石牌戍，降服了张士诚的守将栾瑞，提升为同知枢密院事。
English: Tongzhi Tongzhi penetrated the sea to capture the stone plaque of Jiangyin, and defeated Zhang Shicheng's guard general, Gong Rui, and was promoted to Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：又以舟师破士诚兵于常熟之福山港。再破之通州之狼山，获其战舰以归。
现代文：又率舟师在常熟的福山港打败了张士诚的部队，又在通州的狼山再次败敌，缴获敌战舰而归。
English: He also led his boat division to defeat Zhang Shicheng's troops in the Fukuyama port of Changshu, and defeated the enemy again in the Wolf Mountain of Tongzhou, captured the enemy warship and returned.

古文：遂从徐达复宜兴，乘胜深入太湖。
现代文：跟从徐达收复宜兴，乘胜深入太湖。
English: Following the recovery of Yixing from Xu Da, take advantage of the victory and go deep into Taihu.

古文：遇吴将吕珍，与战。后军不继，舟胶浅，被执。
现代文：恰遇吴将吕珍，与之交战，因后援不能跟上，船只又搁浅，最后被俘。
English: He happened to meet Wu's general, Lü Zhen, and engaged him in battle. Because his reinforcements could not keep up, the ships ran aground again, and he was finally captured.

古文：永安长水战，所至辄有功。
现代文：廖永安擅长水战，所到之处都立下战功。
English: Liao Yong'an is good at water combat, and has made great achievements wherever he has gone.

古文：士诚爱其才勇，欲降之，不可，为所囚。
现代文：张士诚十分爱惜他的才勇，准备招降他。遭到拒绝，被投进囚牢。
English: Zhang Shicheng was very fond of his talent and prepared to recruit him. He was rejected and thrown into prison.

古文：太祖壮永安不屈，遥授行省平章政事，封楚国公。
现代文：太祖赞赏廖永安的忠勇，遥授行省平章政事，赐封为楚国公。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated Liao Yongan's loyalty and bravery, awarded him the provincial title of Pingzhang and granted him the title of Duke of Chu.

古文：永安被囚凡八年，竟死于吴。
现代文：廖永安被囚禁了八年，最后死于吴。
English: Liao Yongan was imprisoned for eight years and eventually died in Wu.

古文：吴平，丧还，太祖迎祭于郊。
现代文：平定吴地后，葬归故里，太祖在郊外迎祭。
English: After the pacification of Wudi, he was buried in his hometown, and his great-grandfather celebrated the festival in the suburbs.

古文：洪武六年，帝念天下大定，诸功臣如永安及俞通海、张德胜、耿再成、胡大海、赵德胜、桑世杰皆已前没，犹未有谥号，乃下礼部定议。
现代文：洪武六年，太祖认为天下大定，诸功臣如廖永安、俞通海、张德胜、耿再成、胡大海、赵德胜、桑世杰等人都去世，但还没有谥号，于是下令礼部议定。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, the great ancestor thought that the world was settled, and the meritorious vassals such as Liao Yongan, Zhai Tonghai, Zhang Desheng, Geng Zaicheng, Hu Haihai, Zhao Desheng, Sang Shijie and others had all passed away, but there was still no posthumous name, so he ordered the etiquette department to make an agreement.

古文：议曰： 有元失驭，四海糜沸。
现代文：议曰 ：有元失驭，四海糜沸。
English: He said: "There is a fundamental loss of control, and the four seas are boiling.

古文：英杰之士，或起义旅，或保一方，泯泯棼棼，莫知所属。
现代文：英杰之士，或起义旅，或保一方，泯泯棼棼，莫知所属。
English: Whether they belong to the Heroes of Yingjie, or the Uprising Brigade, or the Guo side, we do not know.

古文：真人奋兴，不期自至，龙行而云，虎啸而凤。
现代文：真人奋兴，不期而至，龙行而云，虎啸而风。
English: Genuine people are enthusiastic, come unexpectedly, the dragon walks while the cloud, the tiger roars while the wind blows.

古文：若楚国公臣永安等，皆熊罴之士、膂力之才，非陷坚没阵，即罹变捐躯，义与忠俱，名耀天壤。
现代文：若楚国公臣永安等，皆熊罴之士，膂力之才，非陷坚没阵，即罹变捐躯，义与忠俱，名耀天壤。
English: If the public ministers of Chu State, such as Yong'an, were great warriors, great talents, if they did not fight, they would die, if they were righteous and loyal, they would be famous all over the world.

古文：陛下混一天下，追维旧劳，爵禄及子孙，烝尝著祀典。易名定谥，于礼为宜。
现代文：陛下混一天下，追维旧劳，爵禄及子孙，尝著祀典，易名定谥，于礼为宜。
English: Your majesty, after a hard day's work, it is appropriate to reclaim the old labor, peerage and descendants, taste the ritual book, change the name, and make the ceremony.

古文：臣谨按谥法：以赴敌逢难，谥臣永安武闵；杀身克戎，谥臣通海忠烈；奉上致果，谥臣张德胜忠毅；胜敌致强，谥臣大海武庄；辟土斥境，武而不遂，谥臣再成武壮；折冲御侮，壮而有力，谥臣赵德胜武桓。
现代文：臣谨按谥法，以赴敌逢难，谥臣永安武闵；杀身克戎，谥臣通海忠烈；奉上致果，谥臣张德胜忠毅；胜敌致强，谥臣大海武庄；辟土斥境，武而不遂，谥臣再成武壮；折冲御侮，壮而有力，谥臣赵德胜武桓。
English: According to the Law of the Great Dragon, if a vassal sincerely follows the Law of the Great Dragon, he will be able to go to the enemy and encounter difficulties. If a vassal is always peaceful and brave, if a vassal is brave and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if a vassal is loyal and brave, if

古文：臣世杰，业封永义侯，与汉世祖封寇恂、景丹相类，当即以为谥。 
现代文：臣世杰，业封永义侯，与汉世祖封寇恂、景丹相类，当即以为谥。 
English: Viceroy Shijie, Ye Feng Yong Yi Hou, is similar to Han Dynasty ancestors Feng Qiao and Jing Dan, and is immediately thought to be the best.

古文：诏曰： 可。 
现代文：太祖诏令 ：可以。 
English: Emperor Wu said: Yes.

古文：九年皆加赠开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、光禄大夫、柱国。
现代文：九年都加赠开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、光禄大夫、柱国。
English: In the ninth year, the opening of the country and the auxiliary movement pushed the sincerity of the proclamation, the warrior, the doctor of the light, and the pillar country.

古文：已，又改封永安郧国公。
现代文：不久，又改封永安郧国公。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of Yongan Shogun.

古文：无子，授其从子升为指挥佥事。
现代文：廖永安无子，授予他的侄子廖升为指挥佥事。
English: Liao Yong'an had no son, so he appointed his nephew Liao Sheng as the conductor.

古文：俞通海，字碧泉。
现代文：俞通海，字碧泉，他的祖先是濠州人。
English: His ancestors were from Zhangzhou.

古文：其先濠人也，父廷玉徙巢。子三人，通海、通源、渊。
现代文：父亲俞廷玉迁徙到巢，有儿子三人，俞通海、俞通源、俞渊。
English: The father, Hao Tingyu, migrated to the nest and had three sons, Hao Tonghai, Hao Tongyuan and Hao Yuan.

古文：元末，盗起汝、颍。
现代文：元末，盗贼起事于汝、颍。
English: At the end of the first year of the year, the thieves attacked you and me.

古文：廷玉父子与赵普胜、廖永安等结寨巢湖，有水军千艘。数为庐州左君弼所窘，遣通海间道归太祖。
现代文：廷玉父子与赵普胜、廖永安等人在巢湖结寨，拥有水师舟船千艘，多次使庐州左君弼深感窘迫，后派俞通海绕道前往联系归附太祖事宜。
English: Ting Yu's father and son, together with Zhao Pusheng, Liao Yong'an and others, built a castle in Chaohu Lake and owned a thousand boats. They repeatedly made Zhangzhou Zuojunyi feel deeply embarrassed, and then sent him to take a detour through the Shantong Sea to contact the ancestor.

古文：太祖方驻师和阳，谋渡江，无舟楫。
现代文：太祖当时驻军和阳，正准备渡江，但没有舟楫。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was stationed in Heyang and was preparing to cross the river, but there was no boat.

古文：通海至，大喜曰： 天赞我也！ 
现代文：俞通海到来，太祖大喜说： 天助我啊。 
English: When Shantonghai arrived, the great-grandfather was overjoyed and said, "Heaven help me."

古文：亲往抚其军。而赵普胜叛去。
现代文：于是亲自前去抚慰其军，只有赵普胜叛去。
English: So he personally went to comfort his troops, and only Zhao Pusheng defected.

古文：元兵以楼船扼马场河等口。濒湖惟一港可通，亦久涸。
现代文：元兵用楼船扼守马场河等口，濒临巢湖只有一港可通，但已干涸很久了。
English: The Yuan soldiers guarded the mouths of the Horse Farm River and other rivers with ships, and there was only one port on the edge of the lake, but it has been dry for a long time.

古文：会天大雨，水深丈余，乃引舟出江，至和阳。
现代文：正遇上天下大雨，水深丈余，于是引舟出江，到达和阳。
English: It was raining heavily and the water was too deep, so the boat was led out of the river and arrived at Heyang.

古文：通海为人沉毅，治军严而有恩，士乐为用。
现代文：俞通海为人沉毅，治军严恩相济，士兵乐于效命。
English: Zhaotonghai was a man of great fortitude. He governed the army with strict benevolence, and the soldiers were happy to serve him.

古文：巢湖诸将皆长于水战，而通海为最。
现代文：巢湖诸将都擅长水战，其中又以俞通海为最。
English: Lake Chaohu generals are all good at water battles, among which the Shantong Sea is the best.

古文：从破海牙诸水寨，授万户。
现代文：从太祖军破海牙诸水寨，被授予万户。
English: From the time of the Great Ancestor's army breaking through the water fortifications of The Hague, it was awarded to ten thousand households.

古文：从渡江，克采石，取太平，徇下诸属县。
现代文：从太祖渡江，攻克采石，占领太平，并迅速攻克诸属县。
English: From Taizu to Wujiang, conquer the quarry, occupy Taiping, and quickly conquer the subordinate counties.

古文：海牙复以战舰截采石，而陈兆先合淮兵二十万屯方山，相犄角。
现代文：海牙再次派战舰截击采石，陈兆先联合淮兵二十万屯居方山，互为掎角。
English: The Hague again sent a warship to intercept the quarry, and Chen Zhaoxian and Huai soldiers jointly occupied Fangshan with a population of 200,000. They were at loggerheads with each other.

古文：通海与廖永安等击之，大败其众，海牙遁。
现代文：俞通海和廖永安等人出兵迎击敌人，大败敌军，海牙逃跑。
English: Zhai Tonghai and Liao Yongan and others sent troops to meet the enemy, defeated the enemy army, and Hague fled.

古文：进破兆先，取集庆路。
现代文：进而打败陈兆先，攻占集庆路。
English: He then defeated Chen Zhaoxian and captured Jixing Road.

古文：从汤和拔镇江，迁秦淮翼元帅。
现代文：跟从汤和攻占镇江，晋升为秦淮翼元帅。
English: He followed Tang He in conquering Zhenjiang and was promoted to Marshal Qin Huaiyi.

古文：偕诸将取丹阳、金坛、常州。迁行枢密院判官。
现代文：偕同诸将攻取丹阳、金坛、常州，晋升为行枢密院判官。
English: Yu Tongzhu captured Danyang, Jintan and Changzhou, and was promoted to judge of the Privy Council.

古文：从克宁国，下水阳，因以舟师略太湖，降张士诚守将于马迹山，舣舟胥口。
现代文：从大军克宁国，下水阳，派水师进攻太湖，在马迹山降服了张士诚的守将，在胥口停船上岸。
English: From the great army of Kening country, launched Shuiyang, sent sailors to attack Taihu Lake, subdued Zhang Shicheng's defenders in Ma Lushan, and docked the ship in Hekou.

古文：吕珍兵暴至，诸将欲退。
现代文：吕珍的部队突然到来，诸将准备撤退。
English: Lü Zhen's troops suddenly arrived, and the generals prepared to retreat.

古文：通海曰： 不可，彼众我寡，退则情见。不如击之。 
现代文：俞通海说： 不可，敌众我寡，撤退则真情暴露，不如和敌人交战。 
English: Zhai Tonghai said: No, the enemy is few and far between, and retreating would expose the true situation. It is better to engage the enemy.

古文：乃身先疾斗，矢下如雨，中右目，不能战。命帐下士被己甲督战。
现代文：于是身先士卒，敌箭如雨点般地射来，俞通海右眼中箭，不能继续战斗，命帐下军士穿上他的战甲督战。
English: As a result, the soldiers in the lead were hit by enemy arrows like raindrops. The arrows pierced the right eye of the sea, and they could not continue the battle. The sergeant was ordered to put on his battle armor and supervise the battle.

古文：敌以为通海也，不敢逼，徐解去。
现代文：敌人误认为就是俞通海，不敢逼进，慢慢地撤退了。
English: The enemy mistakenly thought that it was across the sea, did not dare to push in, and slowly retreated.

古文：由是一目遂眇。
现代文：于是俞通海瞎了一只眼睛。
English: As a result, Hao Tonghai was blinded in one eye.

古文：已，偕永安等克石牌戍，夺马驮沙而还。
现代文：不久，偕同廖永安等人攻克石牌并戍守在此，夺取马驮沙而归。
English: Soon after, Zou and Liao Yong'an and others conquered Shibei and stayed here, capturing Ma'ansha and returning.

古文：普胜既叛归友谅，陷池州，遣别将守，而自据枞阳水寨。
现代文：赵普胜已经叛归了陈友谅，他攻陷池州，派大将镇守，自己则据守枞阳水寨。
English: Zhao Pusheng had already rebelled against Chen Youzhen, he invaded Chizhou, sent a general to guard the town, and himself guarded the Poyang Water Town.

古文：太祖方征浙东，以枞阳为忧。
现代文：太祖正在征讨浙东，但以枞阳为忧患。
English: Taizu is in the process of conquering eastern Zhejiang, but is worried about Shenyang.

古文：通海往攻，大破之。
现代文：俞通海前往进攻，大破敌军。
English: Shantonghai went on the offensive and defeated the enemy army.

古文：普胜陆走，尽获其舟，遂复池州。
现代文：赵普胜从陆路逃走，缴获了他全部的舟船，于是收复池州。
English: Zhao Pusheng fled by land, captured all of his ships, and then recaptured Chizhou.

古文：迁佥枢密院事。
现代文：晋升为佥枢密院事。
English: Promoted to Senior Privy Councillor.

古文：陈友谅犯龙湾，偕诸将击走之，追焚其舟于慈湖，擒七帅，逐北至采石。
现代文：陈友谅进犯龙湾，俞通海偕同诸将赶走了敌人，并在慈湖焚烧敌船，活捉七帅，追敌北至采石。
English: Chen Youzhen invaded Longwan Bay, drove away the enemy with his generals, burned the enemy ships in Cihu Lake, captured seven soldiers alive, and chased the enemy north to the quarry.

古文：功最，进枢密院同知。
现代文：俞通海功劳最大，晋升为枢密院同知。
English: It was Tonghai who made the greatest contribution and was promoted to privy councillor.

古文：从攻友谅，下铜陵，克九江，掠蕲、黄。
现代文：从大军攻陈友谅，攻下铜陵，攻克九江，占领蕲州、黄州。
English: From the great army, they attacked Chen Youyong, captured Tongling, conquered Jiujiang, and occupied Zhangzhou and Huangzhou.

古文：从徐达击叛将祝宗、康泰，复南昌。
现代文：跟从徐达攻打叛将祝宗、康泰，收复南昌。
English: Zhu Zong and Kangtai, who fought against the rebels with Xu Da, recovered Nanchang.

古文：从援安丰，败士诚兵。还攻庐州。
现代文：从援安丰，打败了张士诚的部队，回攻庐州。
English: From Anfeng, he defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops and returned to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：友谅大举围南昌。从太祖击之。
现代文：陈友谅派兵大举围攻南昌，跟从太祖迎战。
English: Chen Youzhen sent a large number of troops to besiege Nanchang, and followed his great-grandfather into battle.

古文：遇于康郎山，舟小不能仰攻，力战几不支。
现代文：在康郎山和敌人遭遇，因船小不能仰攻，几次力战都未成功。
English: In the encounter with the enemy on Mount Kanglang, because the ship was too small to attack from the bow, several battles were not successful.

古文：通海乘风纵火焚其舟二十余，敌少挫。
现代文：俞通海乘风纵火焚烧了敌船二十余艘，敌人小败。
English: Zhaotong Hai took advantage of the wind to set fire to more than 20 enemy ships. The enemy suffered a small defeat.

古文：太祖舟胶，友谅骁将张定边直前，犯太祖舟。常遇春射中定边，通海飞舸来援，舟骤进水涌，太祖舟得脱。而通海舟复为敌巨舰所压，兵皆以头抵舰，兜鍪尽裂，仅免。
现代文：太祖的船搁浅，陈友谅的骁将张定边进犯太祖坐船，常遇春射中了张定边，俞通海飞舸前来增援，舟骤进，水位增高，太祖的船得以脱身，但俞通海的船被敌巨舰所压，士兵都用头抵着舰，头盔全部破裂了，但免于一死。
English: Grandfather's ship ran aground, Chen Youzhen's raft pushed Zhang Dingbian into Grandfather's boat. Often, Zhang Dingbian was hit by the spring shot, and Zhang Tonghai came to reinforce the raft. The boat suddenly advanced, the water level increased, and Grandfather's boat was able to escape, but the boat across the sea was pressed by the enemy's huge ship. The soldiers all hit the ship with their heads, and their helmets all broke, but they were spared from death.

古文：明日复战，偕廖永忠等以七舟置火药，焚敌舟数百。
现代文：第二天再战，偕同廖永忠等用七条船装置火药，焚烧敌舰数百艘。
English: On the second day of the battle, Zou, together with Liao Yongzhong and others, used seven ships to install gunpowder and burned hundreds of enemy ships.

古文：逾二日，复以六舟深入。
现代文：过了二天，又派六艘船深入。
English: Two days later, six more ships were sent in.

古文：敌连大舰力拒。
现代文：敌人连接大舰奋力抵抗。
English: The enemy joined the big ship to fight back.

古文：太祖登舵楼望，久之无所见，意已没。
现代文：太祖登舵楼观望，很久还没看到什么，心想派入的六船已经失败。
English: Taizu boarded the wheelhouse to wait and see. He hadn't seen anything for a long time, and the six ships he wanted to send in had already failed.

古文：有顷，六舟绕敌舰出，飘飖若游龙。
现代文：突然，六艘船绕敌舰出现了，像游龙一样飘然。
English: Suddenly, six ships appeared around the enemy ship, floating like a dragon.

古文：军士欢噪，勇气百倍，战益力。
现代文：军士欢呼，勇气百倍，越战越勇。
English: The sergeants cheered, their courage increased a hundredfold, and they fought more bravely in Vietnam.

古文：友谅兵大败。
现代文：陈友谅大败。
English: Chen Youxuan suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：师次左蠡，通海进曰： 湖有浅，舟难回旋。
现代文：部队驻于左蠡，俞通海建议 ：湖比较浅，船难以回旋。
English: Troops stationed at Zuoying, Tongtonghai Suggestions: The lake is relatively shallow, and it is difficult for ships to turn around.

古文：莫若入江，据敌上流。
现代文：还不如进入长江，扼住敌人的上流。
English: It would be better to enter the Yangtze River and choke the enemy's upstream.

古文：彼舟入，即成擒矣。 
现代文：敌船进入，就可顺利擒拿了。 
English: If the enemy ship enters, it can be captured smoothly.

古文：遂移师出湖，水陆结栅。
现代文：于是移师湖口，水陆结栅。
English: As a result, the division was moved to Hukou, and the water and land were separated.

古文：友谅不敢出。居湖中一月，食尽，引兵突走，竟败死。
现代文：陈友谅不敢出战，困守湖中达一个月，弹尽粮绝，派兵突围，最后战败而死。
English: Chen Youyuan did not dare to go to war. He was trapped in the lake for a month, ran out of food, sent troops to break out of the siege, and finally died in defeat.

古文：是役也，通海功最多。
现代文：在这次战役中，俞通海的功劳最大。
English: In this battle, Shantonghai's contribution was the greatest.

古文：师还，赐良田金帛。
现代文：班师回朝，赏赐良田金帛。
English: The team returned to the morning and rewarded Ryota with the gold medal.

古文：明年从平武昌。
现代文：第二年从大军平武昌。
English: The next year, he went to Pyeongwuchang from the army.

古文：拜中书省平章政事。
现代文：任命为中书省平章政事。
English: He was appointed as the vice-governor of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：总兵略刘家港，进逼通州，败士诚兵，擒其将朱琼、陈胜。
现代文：统兵进攻刘家港，进而逼近通州，打败张士诚的部队，活捉了战将朱琼、陈胜。
English: The unified army attacked Liujiagang, and then approached Tongzhou, defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops, and captured the generals Zhu Qiong and Chen Sheng alive.

古文：进摄江淮行中书省事，镇庐州。
现代文：晋升为江淮行中书省事，镇守庐州。
English: He was promoted to Jianghuaixingzhongshuo, and served as the town guard of Bozhou.

古文：从徐达平安丰。
现代文：跟从徐达平定安丰。
English: Followed by Xu Da Pingding Anfeng.

古文：又从克湖州，略太仓。秋毫不犯，民大悦。
现代文：又从克湖州，进攻太仓，秋毫无犯，老百姓十分高兴。
English: From Huzhou to Taicang, no crime was committed in the autumn, and the people were very happy.

古文：围平江，战灭渡桥。捣桃花坞，中流矢，创甚，归金陵。
现代文：围攻平江，激战灭渡桥，直捣桃花坞，身中流箭，伤势很重，回到金陵。
English: They besieged Pingjiang, fought fiercely to destroy the bridge, directly attacked the peach blossom dock, suffered heavy injuries, and returned to Jinling.

古文：太祖幸其第，问曰： 平章知予来问疾乎？ 
现代文：太祖亲临其舍，问道： 平章知道我来问候你的病情吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather came to his house in person and asked: Does Pingzhang know that I have come to greet you because of your illness?

古文：通海不能语。
现代文：俞通海不能回答。
English: Hao Tonghai couldn't answer.

古文：太祖挥涕而出。
现代文：太祖挥泪而出。
English: The great-grandfather burst into tears.

古文：翼日卒，年三十八。
现代文：次日去世，年仅三十八岁。
English: He died the next day, aged just 38.

古文：太祖临哭甚哀，从官卫士皆感涕。
现代文：太祖哭得十分伤心，从官卫士都感动得落泪。
English: The great-grandfather cried very sadly, and the guards were moved to tears.

古文：追封豫国公，侑享太庙，肖像功臣庙。
现代文：追封为豫国公，侑享太庙，肖像归入功臣庙。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Prince of the State of Henan, and his portrait was included in the portrait of a meritorious subject.

古文：洪武三年，改封虢国公，谥忠烈。
现代文：洪武三年，改封为虢国公，谥号忠烈。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, his title was changed to the Duke of Shandong, and his posthumous name was changed to Zhong Rong.

古文：通海父廷玉官佥枢密院事，先卒，追封河间郡公。
现代文：俞通海的父亲俞廷玉曾任枢密院事，在通海之前去世，追封为河间郡公。
English: Gong Tonghai's father Gong Tingyu was once a Privy Councillor. He died before Gong Tonghai and was posthumously made the Duke of Kawama County.

古文：通海无子，弟通源嗣其官。
现代文：俞通海没有儿子，他的弟弟俞通源继承官位。
English: Shantonghai did not have a son, and his younger brother Shantongyuan succeeded to the official post.

古文：通源，字百川。
现代文：俞通源，字百川。
English: 通源,字百川.

古文：从大将军征中原，偕副将军冯胜等会兵太原，定河中。渡河，克鹿台，取凤翔、巩昌、泾州，守开城。
现代文：跟从大将军征讨中原，偕同副将军冯胜等在太原会师，平定河中，渡黄河，攻克鹿台，攻取凤翔、巩昌、泾州，镇守开城。
English: He followed the general to conquer the Central Plains, and together with the vice-general Feng Sheng, he joined the division in Taiyuan, pacified Dinghe, crossed the Yellow River, conquered Lutetia, conquered Fengxiang, Gongchang, Zhangzhou, and guarded Kaesong.

古文：会张良臣据庆阳再叛，大将军命诸将分兵蹙之。
现代文：张良臣驻扎庆阳再次叛乱，大将军命令诸军分兵攻打。
English: Zhang Liangchen stationed in Qingyang rebelled again, and the general ordered the troops to attack.

古文：通源自临洮疾趋至泾，略其西，顾时略其北，傅友德略其东，陈德略其南。
现代文：通源自临洮迅速赶到泾州，进攻庆阳的西边，顾时进攻北面，傅友德进攻东面，陈德攻南面，大将军进逼城下。
English: From Linyi, Tong quickly rushed to Luzhou, attacked the west side of Qingyang, Gu Shi attacked the north side, Fu Youde attacked the east side, Chen De attacked the south side, and the general entered and forced the city.

古文：大将军逼城下，良臣援绝粮尽，败死。遂克庆阳。
现代文：张良臣粮尽援绝，被打败而死，于是攻克了庆阳。
English: Zhang Liangchen exhausted his grain supply, was defeated and died, so he conquered Qingyang.

古文：征定西，克兴元，皆先登。
现代文：征讨定西，攻克兴元，他都率先登城。
English: He was the first to go to the city for the conquest of Dingxi and the conquest of Xingyuan.

古文：洪武三年封南安侯，岁禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年封为南安侯，年食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: Hongwu was given the title of Nan'an Hou for three years, with an annual stipend of 1,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：四年从廖永忠伐蜀，又从徐达出塞，抚甘肃，有功。
现代文：四年，跟从廖永忠伐蜀，又从徐达出塞，安抚甘肃，立功。
English: In four years, he followed Liao Yongzhong in conquering Shuxu, and from Xu Da he went out to pacify Gansu, which was a great achievement.

古文：徙江南豪民十四万田凤阳。
现代文：把江南豪民十四万迁徙到凤阳屯田。
English: He moved 140,000 wealthy people from the south of the Yangtze River to Fengyang Tunden.

古文：又攻云南，征广南蛮，俘斩数万。
现代文：又攻打云南，征讨广南蛮，俘、斩敌数万。
English: He also attacked Yunnan and fought against the Guangnan barbarians, capturing and killing tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：建文元年召复爵。
现代文：二十二年诏令还乡，赏赐钞五万，在巢州建立官邸，未行去世。
English: In 1922, he returned to his hometown by imperial decree, was awarded 50,000 banknotes, and built an official residence in Chaozhou. He died before he was able to do so.

古文：随大军征燕，战没于白沟河。
现代文：儿子俞祖，因病不能即位。过了一年追论胡惟庸党案，因通源已死就不予追究了，但削去了爵位。
English: His son, Emperor Taizu, was unable to ascend the throne due to illness. After a year of pursuing Hu Wei Yong's party case, it was dropped because Tongyuan had already died, but the title of nobility was removed.

古文：次子靖嗣官。胡大海，字通甫，虹人。
现代文：胡大海，字通甫，虹人。
English: Hu Haihai, Zhi Tongfu, Hongren.

古文：长身、铁面，智力过人。
现代文：长身铁面，智力过人。
English: He's tall, has an iron face, and is extremely intelligent.

古文：太祖初起，大海走谒滁阳，命为前锋。
现代文：太祖刚刚起兵时，大海就到滁阳谒见太祖，任命为前锋。
English: When the great-grandfather had just raised an army, Hai Hai went to Poyang to see the great-grandfather and was appointed as a forward.

古文：从渡江，与诸将略地，以功授右翼统军元帅，宿卫帐下。
现代文：从太祖渡江，与诸将攻取地盘，因功授予右翼统军元帅，宿卫帐下。
English: From the time of Emperor Taizu's crossing of the Yangtze River, he fought with other generals to capture territory, and was awarded the title of Right Wing United Army Marshal for his service. He was assigned to the post of night watchman.

古文：从破宁国，副院判邓愈戍之。遂拔徽州，略定其境内。
现代文：从大军破宁国，协助院判邓愈戍守，于是占领徽州，平定境内。
English: From the great army to break through Ningguo, to help the court sentence Deng Yu to stay, so the occupation of Huizhou, to pacify the territory.

古文：元将杨完者，以十万众来攻，大海战城下，大破走之。
现代文：元将杨完者派十万兵前来进攻，大海在城下迎战，敌人大败而逃。
English: General Yang Guanzhong sent a hundred thousand soldiers to attack, the sea met the battle under the city, the enemy was defeated and fled.

古文：遂与邓愈、李文忠自昱岭关攻建德。
现代文：和邓愈、李文忠自昱岭关一直攻打到建德。
English: and Deng Yu and Li Wenzhong attacked from the Yuling Pass all the way to Jiande.

古文：败元师于淳安，遂克建德。
现代文：在淳安打败元兵，攻克建德。
English: Defeat the Yuan soldiers in Chun'an and conquer Jiande.

古文：再败杨完者，降溪洞兵三万人。
现代文：再次打败了杨完者，降服了溪洞兵三万人。
English: He defeated Yang Wan again and subdued 30,000 soldiers from Xidong.

古文：进枢密院判官。
现代文：晋升为枢密院判官。
English: Promoted to the Privy Council.

古文：克兰溪，从取婺州，迁佥枢密院事。
现代文：攻克兰溪，从取婺州，晋升为枢密院事。
English: He was promoted to Privy Councillor after conquering Crane Creek and capturing Luzhou.

古文：下诸暨，守将宵遁。
现代文：攻下诸暨，守将趁夜逃跑，万户沈胜投降后又叛乱。
English: After capturing Zhuji, the garrison took advantage of the night to escape, and after the surrender of Wanyu Shen Shen, they rebelled again.

古文：万户沈胜既降复叛，大海击败之，生擒四千余人。
现代文：胡大海将其击败，生擒四千余人。
English: Hu Haihai defeated it, leaving more than four thousand people stranded.

古文：改诸暨为诸全州。移兵攻绍兴，再破张士诚兵。
现代文：把诸暨改为诸全州，移兵攻打绍兴，再次打败张士诚的部队。
English: He changed "Zhuji" to "Zhuquanzhou," transferred troops to attack Shaoxing, and defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops again.

古文：太祖以宁、越重地，召大海使守之。
现代文：太祖认为宁、越是重地，召大海前去镇守。
English: The great-grandfather thought that the more the merrier, and summoned the sea to defend the town.

古文：士诚将吕珍围诸全，大海救之。珍堰水灌城，大海夺堰，反灌珍营。
现代文：张士诚的将领吕珍围攻诸全，大海带兵援救，吕珍堰水灌城，大海夺堰反灌吕珍的军营。
English: Zhang Shicheng's general Lü Zhen besieged Zhu Quan, the sea brought soldiers to the rescue, Lü Zhen's weir flooded the city, and the sea took the weir and flooded Lü Zhen's military camp.

古文：珍势蹙，于马上折矢誓。请各解兵，许之。
现代文：吕珍的势力被削弱，在马上折矢发誓，请求双方撤兵，胡大海答应了。
English: Lv Zhen's power was weakened, and he immediately vowed to fight back, asking both sides to withdraw their troops. Hu Haihai agreed.

古文：郎中王恺曰： 珍猾贼，不可信，不如因击之。 
现代文：郎中王恺说： 吕珍狡猾不可信，还不如乘机攻打他。 
English: Wang Yao, a retainer, said, "Luzhen's cunning cannot be trusted. It is better to take the opportunity to attack him."

古文：大海曰： 言出而背之，不信；既纵而击之，不武。 
现代文：大海说： 已经允诺而又违背，这是不守信用。已经放归而又攻打，这是不讲武德。 
English: The ocean said, "If a promise is made and then broken, it is not keeping a promise. If a promise is made and then broken, it is not keeping a promise. If a promise is made and then broken, it is not keeping a promise.

古文：师还，人皆服其威信。
现代文：于是下令撤军，人们十分钦佩他的威信。
English: He then ordered the withdrawal of the troops, and his authority was greatly admired.

古文：寻攻处州，走元将石抹宜孙，遂定处州七邑。
现代文：不久攻打处州，赶走了元将石抹宜孙，平定了处州七邑。
English: He soon attacked Zhouzhou, drove away the former general Shima Yisun, and leveled seven towns in Zhouzhou.

古文：陈友谅寇龙江，命分军捣信州，以牵制敌。
现代文：陈友谅进攻龙江，命令分兵进攻信州，以牵制敌人。
English: Chen Youzhen attacked Longjiang and ordered a detachment of soldiers to attack Shinshu in order to contain the enemy.

古文：大海用王恺言，亲引兵往，遂克信州，以为广信府。
现代文：大海采纳了王恺的建议，亲自带兵前往，于是攻克信州，设立广信府。
English: Tahei accepted Wang Xi's suggestion and personally led the troops to conquer Shinshu and set up the Guangxin Prefecture.

古文：信方绝粮，或劝还师。
现代文：信州弹尽粮绝，有人劝说撤离。
English: Shinshu ran out of food, and some people were persuaded to evacuate.

古文：大海曰： 此闽、楚襟喉地也，可弃之乎？ 
现代文：大海说 ：这是闽、楚的襟喉之地，怎么能放弃呢？ 
English: The sea said: This is the place of the collar of the dragonfly, Chu, how can I give it up?

古文：筑城浚隍以守之。
现代文：筑城浚隍固守。
English: The dredging of the city of Tsukushi is still going on.

古文：先是，军粮少，所得郡县，将士皆征粮于民，名曰寨粮。
现代文：当初，军粮较少，在所占领的郡县中，将士都向百姓征粮，名为寨粮，百姓十分不满。
English: At first, there was less military grain. In the occupied counties, the soldiers all collected grain from the people, called Zhai grain, and the people were very dissatisfied.

古文：民甚病之。
现代文：大海下令免去。
English: The sea ordered them to leave.

古文：大海以为言，始命罢去。进江南行省参知政事，镇金华。
现代文：晋升为江南行省参知政事，镇守金华。
English: Jinhua was promoted to the post of the governor of Jiangnan Province.

古文：初，严州既下，苗将蒋英、刘震、李福皆自桐庐来归。
现代文：最初，攻下严州，苗将蒋英、刘震、李福都自桐庐前来归附。
English: At first, Yanzhou was conquered, and Miao sent Jiang Ying, Liu Zhen, and Li Fudu from Tonglu to annex it.

古文：大海喜其骁勇，留置麾下。
现代文：大海十分喜爱他们骁勇，就留他们在自己的麾下。
English: The sea loved them so much for their courage that it kept them under its wing.

古文：至是，三人者谋作乱，晨入分省署，请大海观弩于八咏楼。
现代文：如今，三人谋划作乱，早晨进入分省署，请大海在八咏楼观弩。
English: Now, the three of them are plotting to create chaos. In the morning, they will enter the branch office and invite the sea to watch them in the eight-story building.

古文：大海出，英遣其党跪马前，诈诉英过。大海未及答，反顾英。
现代文：大海前去，蒋英派其党羽跪在马前，假装诉说蒋英的罪过，大海还没来得及回答，回过头来看蒋英。
English: The sea went forward, Jiang Ying sent his party members to kneel in front of the horse, pretending to tell Jiang Ying's sins. The sea did not have time to answer, and looked back at Jiang Ying.

古文：英出袖中槌击大海，中脑仆地。并其子关住、郎中王恺皆遇害。
现代文：蒋英拿出袖中的槌子猛击大海，直中脑部倒地，他的儿子关住、郎中王恺都遇害。
English: Jiang Ying took out the mallet in his sleeve and slammed it into the sea, causing his head to fall to the ground. His son Guanzhong and his son-in-law Wang Xi were both killed.

古文：英等大掠城中，奔于吴。
现代文：蒋英等人在城中大肆掠夺后，投奔了张士诚。
English: After Jiang Ying and others plundered the city, they went to Zhang Shicheng.

古文：其后，李文忠攻杭州，杭人执英以降。太祖命诛英，刺其血以祭大海。
现代文：这以后李文忠攻打杭州，杭州人抓住蒋英来降，太祖命令杀了他，用他的血来祭奠大海。
English: After this, Li Wenzhong attacked Hangzhou. The people of Hangzhou captured Jiang Ying and brought him down. The great-grandfather ordered to kill him and use his blood to pay tribute to the sea.

古文：大海善用兵，每自诵曰： 吾武人，不知书，惟知三事而已：不杀人，不掠妇女，不焚毁庐舍。 
现代文：大海善于用兵，常常朗诵： 我是武人，不知书本知识，仅仅懂得三件事而已：不杀人，不掠夺妇女，不焚烧房屋。 
English: The sea is good at using soldiers, often reciting: I am a warrior, I do not know book knowledge, I only know three things: do not kill, do not plunder women, do not burn houses.

古文：以是军行远近争附。
现代文：于是他所到之处，远近都争相归附。
English: Wherever he went, people from near and far flocked to him.

古文：及死，闻者无不流涕。
现代文：他死后，闻者无不流涕。
English: After his death, the rumours were rife.

古文：又好士，所至辄访求豪隽。
现代文：又喜爱文人，所到之处都访求豪杰。
English: He also loves writers and seeks out heroes wherever he goes.

古文：刘基、宋濂、叶琛、章溢之见聘也，大海实荐之。
现代文：刘基、宋濂、叶琛、章溢等人的聘用，实际上都是大海推荐的。
English: In fact, the recruitment of Liu Ji, Song Qi, Ye Qi, Zhang Yiyi and others were all recommended by the sea.

古文：追封越国公，谥武庄，肖像功臣庙，配享太庙。
现代文：追封为越国公，谥号武庄，肖像列入功臣庙，配享太庙。
English: His posthumous name was Yue Guoguang, his posthumous name was Wuzhuang, his portrait was included in the temple of meritorious soldiers, and he was given a share of the Great Temple.

古文：初，太祖克婺州，禁酿酒。大海子首犯之。
现代文：当初，太祖攻克婺州，禁止酿酒，大海的儿子首先违犯。
English: At the beginning, the great ancestor conquered Kezhu and prohibited the brewing of wine. The son of the sea was the first to violate the law.

古文：太祖怒，欲行法。
现代文：太祖大怒，准备绳之以法。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and prepared to take legal action.

古文：时大海方征越，都事王恺请勿诛，以安大海心。
现代文：当时大海正在征讨越地，都事王恺请求不要杀，以此来安定大海的心。
English: At that time, the sea was conquering more and more land, and Wang Yao begged everyone not to kill, in order to stabilize the heart of the sea.

古文：太祖以再兴数有功，叛非其志，故凤与梦庚皆不得恤云。
现代文：太祖说： 宁可使大海背叛我，也不可使我的法不能施行。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "I would rather have the sea turn against me than not be able to practice my religion."

古文：耿再成，字德甫，五河人。
现代文：最终还是杀了。到关住再被杀后，大海就没有后代了。耿再成，字德甫，五河人。
English: In the end, they still killed him. After he was locked up and killed again, the sea had no descendants. Gen Zhancheng, Zhi Defu, Wuhe people.

古文：从太祖于濠，克泗、滁州。
现代文：在濠州就跟随太祖，攻克泗州、滁州。
English: In Bozhou, he followed his great-grandfather and conquered Bozhou and Bozhou.

古文：元兵围六合，太祖救之，与再成军瓦梁垒。力战，度不敌，引还。
现代文：元兵围攻六合，太祖前去援救，与耿再成在瓦梁垒驻军，奋力激战，估计不能胜敌就撤走了。
English: The Yuan soldiers besieged Liuhe, Taizu went to the rescue, and stationed troops with Geng Zaicheng at Walyangye, fought hard, and withdrew when it was estimated that they could not defeat the enemy.

古文：元兵尾至，太祖设伏涧侧，令再成诱敌，大败之。
现代文：元兵追来，太祖在河涧侧面设下埋伏，命令耿再成诱敌，大败元军。
English: Chased by the Yuan soldiers, Taizu set up an ambush on the side of the river, ordered Geng to lure the enemy again, and defeated the Yuan army.

古文：以镇抚从渡江，下集庆。
现代文：任镇抚，从太祖渡江，攻下集庆。
English: He was appointed as the commander of the town, crossed the river from the great ancestor, and captured Jqing.

古文：以元帅守镇江，以行枢密院判官守长兴，再守扬州。
现代文：派元帅镇守镇江，行枢密院判官守卫长兴，又守卫扬州。
English: He sent the marshal Zhen to guard Zhenjiang, the judge of the Privy Council to guard Changxing, and Yangzhou.

古文：从取金华，为前锋，屯缙云之黄龙山以遏敌冲。
现代文：从大军取金华，担任前锋，驻扎在缙云的黄龙山以遏制敌人的入侵。
English: He took Jinhua from the main army and stationed him in Huanglong Mountain in Jinyun as a forward to deter the enemy's invasion.

古文：与胡大海破石抹宜孙于处州，克其城，守之。
现代文：在处州与胡大海打败了石抹宜孙，攻克敌城，并派兵守卫。
English: In Zhanzhou and Huhai, he defeated Shimagisun, conquered the enemy city, and sent soldiers to guard it.

古文：宜孙来攻，又败之庆元。
现代文：石抹宜孙进攻，又在庆元被打败。
English: Shi Maku attacked Yishun and was defeated again in Qingyuan.

古文：再成持军严，士卒出入民间，蔬果无所捐。
现代文：再成治军严厉，士卒在百姓间出入，连蔬菜水果都无人摘取。
English: Zengcheng governed the army strictly, the officers and men went in and out among the people, and no one even picked the vegetables and fruits.

古文：金华苗帅蒋英等叛，杀胡大海。
现代文：金华苗的首领蒋英等人作乱，杀了胡大海。
English: Jiang Ying, the leader of Jinhua Miao, and others rioted and killed Hu Haitong.

古文：处州苗帅李祐之等闻之，亦作乱。
现代文：处州苗的首领李之等人听此消息，也作乱。
English: On hearing this news, the leader of Wenzhou Miao, Li Zhuang, and others also caused a disturbance.

古文：再成方对客饭，闻变，上马，收战卒不满二十人，迎贼骂曰： 贼奴！
现代文：再成正在吃饭，听到叛乱的消息就立即上马，带领士兵不足二十人，对叛贼骂道： 贼奴！
English: Zengcheng was having dinner, when he heard the news of the rebellion, he immediately mounted his horse, led less than twenty soldiers, and scolded the traitors: Thieves!

古文：国家何负汝，乃反。 
现代文：国家有什么负于你们，你们谋反？ 
English: What does the state owe you, you rebels?

古文：贼攒槊刺再成。
现代文：叛贼拿起长矛刺向再成。
English: The renegade picked up a spear and stabbed toward the reunion.

古文：招谕河州、临洮，皆下。
现代文：再成挥剑连断几支长矛，但还是受伤落马，骂不绝口而死。
English: Zengcheng swung his sword and broke several spears in succession, but he was still injured and fell off his horse. He cursed endlessly and died.

古文：改杭州指挥同知。
现代文：胡深等人收殓他的尸体，用稻草埋葬了再成。
English: Hu Sheng and others collected his body and buried him with straw.

古文：七年出海捕倭，深入外洋，溺死。
现代文：后改葬在金陵的聚宝山，追封为高阳郡公，侑享太庙，肖像归于功臣庙。洪武十年，加封为泗国公，谥号武壮。
English: Later, he was reburied in Jubaoshan, Jinling. He was posthumously awarded the title of Goyang County Governor, granted the title of Grand Master of the Temple of Heaven, and his portrait was given to the Temple of Merit. In the tenth year of Hongwu, he was awarded the title of Grand Master of the State, and his posthumous title was Wuzhuang.

古文：张德胜，字仁辅，合肥人。
现代文：张德胜，字仁辅，合肥人。
English: Zhang Desheng, surnamed Renshu, from Hefei.

古文：才略雄迈。
现代文：才略雄迈。
English: It's just a little bit bigger.

古文：与俞通海等以舟师自巢来归。
现代文：和俞通海等人率舟师自巢湖来归附。
English: He and Zou Tonghai and others led the boatmen from Chaohu Lake to annex it.

古文：从渡江，克采石、太平。
现代文：从太祖渡江，攻克采石、太平。
English: From the time of Emperor Taizu's crossing of the Yangtze River, we have conquered quarrying and peace.

古文：陈埜先来攻，与汤和等破擒之。授太平兴国翼总管。
现代文：陈聎先前来进攻，和汤和等人打败来犯之敌，授予太平兴国翼总管。
English: Chen Yao had previously attacked, and Tang He and others defeated the invading enemy and awarded Taiping Xing as the head of the wing.

古文：破蛮子海牙水寨，擒陈兆先。
现代文：攻破蛮子海牙的水寨，生擒了陈兆先。
English: Chen Zhaoxian survived after breaking through the water fortifications of the barbarian Hague.

古文：下集庆，克镇江，授秦淮翼元帅。
现代文：攻下集庆，攻克镇江，授予秦淮翼元帅。
English: He conquered Jieqing and Zhenjiang, and was awarded the title of Marshal Qin Huaiyi.

古文：取常州，擢枢密院判。
现代文：攻取常州，提升为枢密院判。
English: The capture of Changzhou was elevated to a Privy Council decision.

古文：克宁国，收长枪兵。
现代文：攻克宁国，收编了长枪兵。
English: Conquered Ningguo Province and organized the Long Riflemen.

古文：下太湖，略马迹山。
现代文：攻下太湖，占领了马迹山。
English: They conquered Taihu Lake and occupied Mount Matuo.

古文：攻宜兴，取马驮沙及石牌寨。
现代文：攻打宜兴，占领了马驮沙和石牌寨。
English: They attacked Yixing and occupied Ma'ansha and Shibeizhai.

古文：进佥枢密院事。
现代文：晋升为枢密院事。
English: Promoted to Privy Councillor.

古文：赵普胜陷池州，德胜往援，弗及，还，从徐达拔宜兴。
现代文：赵普胜攻陷了池州，德胜前去增援，已经来不及了，回来就跟从徐达攻占了宜兴。
English: Zhao Pusheng conquered Chizhou, Desheng went to reinforce, it was too late, he came back and conquered Yixing from Xu Daru.

古文：普胜复掠青阳、石埭。
现代文：普胜占领了青阳、石埭。
English: Pu Sheng occupied Qingyang and Shifang.

古文：德胜与战栅江口，破走之。
现代文：德成在栅江口与敌交战，把敌人赶跑了。
English: He fought with the enemy at the mouth of the Zaojiang River and drove the enemy away.

古文：已，复同通海击败其众，遂复池州。
现代文：不久，又和通海打败了赵普胜的主力，于是收复池州。
English: Soon, he and Tonghai defeated the main force of Zhao Pusheng, and then recovered Chizhou.

古文：引兵自无为趋浮山，走普胜将胡总管，追，败之青山，逐北至潜山。
现代文：率兵自无为进攻浮山，赶走赵普胜的将领胡总管，奋起直追，在青山又打败了他们，把他们一直赶到北面的潜山。
English: He led his troops to attack Fushan on his own initiative, drove away Zhao Pusheng's general Hu Shanzhong, pursued them, defeated them again in Aoyama, and drove them all the way to Kuchiyama in the north.

古文：陈友谅将郭泰逆战沙河，破斩之，遂克潜山。
现代文：陈友谅的大将郭泰在沙河迎战，被打败斩首，于是攻克了潜山。
English: Chen Youzhen's general Guo Tai fought in the Sand River, was defeated and beheaded, and then conquered the Hidden Mountain.

古文：友谅犯龙江，德胜总舟师迎战，杀伤相当。
现代文：陈友谅进犯龙江，德胜率领舟师迎战，双方死伤相当。
English: Chen Youjun invaded the Longjiang River, and Desheng led the paddlers into battle. Both sides suffered a similar number of casualties.

古文：德胜大呼，麾诸将奋击。友谅军披靡，遂大败。
现代文：德胜大呼，他的部将奋起反击，友谅的军队节节败退，于是大败。
English: Desheng shouted loudly, his subordinates rose up to fight back, and the friendly army was defeated and retreated, resulting in a crushing defeat.

古文：与诸将追及之慈湖，纵火焚其舟。
现代文：和诸将追敌至慈湖，纵火焚烧了敌船。
English: He and his generals chased the enemy to Lake Cihu and set fire to the enemy ship.

古文：至采石，大战，没于阵。
现代文：到了采石，与敌大战，死于沙场。
English: Came to the quarry, fought with the enemy, died on the battlefield.

古文：赵德胜，濠人。
现代文：赵德胜，濠州人。
English: Zhao Desheng, from Zhangzhou.

古文：为元义兵长，善马槊，每战先登。
现代文：担任元义兵长，擅长马上使长矛，每次战斗必定在前。
English: As a former volunteer captain, he is good at making spears immediately, and every battle must be at the front.

古文：隶王忙哥麾下，察其必败。
现代文：归属王忙哥的麾下，已经观察到了他最终必败。
English: Under the command of Wang Shaoqiao, it has been observed that he will eventually be defeated.

古文：太祖取滁阳，德胜母在军中，乃弃其妻来从。
现代文：太祖占领了滁阳，德胜的母亲在军中，抛下妻子前来归附。
English: The great-grandfather occupied Fenyang, and Desheng's mother, who was in the army, left her wife and came to annex it.

古文：太祖喜，赐之名，为帐前先锋。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，赐给他名字，任命为帐前先锋。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased, gave him a name and appointed him as a pioneer.

古文：从取铁佛冈，攻三汊河，破张家寨，克全椒、后河诸寨。
现代文：从取铁佛冈，攻打三汊河，攻破张家寨，攻克全椒、后河诸寨。
English: From the Iron Buddha Hill, attack the Samcheon River, break through the Zhangjiazhai Village, and conquer the Zhenping and Houhe Villages.

古文：援六合，中流矢，几殆。
现代文：援助六合，身中流矢，几乎丧命。
English: He was hit by a stray arrow in the middle of his body and almost died.

古文：击鸡笼山，捣乌江，下和州、含山。
现代文：攻打鸡笼山，直捣乌江，攻下和州、含山。
English: Attack the Chicken Cage Mountain, directly attack the Wujiang River, and capture the Wazhou and Hanzhong Mountains.

古文：夜袭陈埜先营，拔板门、铁长官二寨，遂取仪真。
现代文：夜袭陈聎先军营，攻占板门、铁长官二寨，于是攻取仪真。
English: They attacked Chen Yuxian's military camp at night, captured Panmen, Tie Changgu Nizhai, and then captured Yizhen.

古文：授总管府先锋。
现代文：授予总管府先锋。
English: Awarded the Pioneer of the General Administration Office.

古文：从渡江，下太平，克芜湖、句容、溧水、溧阳，皆有功。
现代文：从太祖渡江，攻下太平，攻克芜湖、句容、溧水、溧阳，都有功。
English: From the time of Emperor Taizu to the crossing of the Yangtze River, the conquest of Taiping, the conquest of Wuhu, Jujong, Surabaya, and Shenyang, all have contributed.

古文：从常遇春败蛮子海牙于采石，破陈兆先营于方山，下集庆，功最。
现代文：跟从常遇春在采石打败了蛮子海牙，在方山攻破了陈兆先的营地，攻下集庆，功劳最大。
English: He defeated the barbarian Hague in the quarry, broke through Chen Zhaoxian's camp in Fangshan, and captured Jieqing, with the greatest credit.

古文：从徐达取镇江，破苗军水寨。
现代文：跟从徐达攻取镇江，攻破苗军水寨。
English: He followed Xu Da to capture Zhenjiang and break through the Miao Army's water fort.

古文：下丹阳、金坛，平宁国。
现代文：攻下丹阳、金坛，平定宁国。
English: They captured Danyang and Jintan and pacified Ningguo.

古文：转领军先锋。
现代文：改任领军先锋。
English: He was reappointed as the leading vanguard.

古文：取广德，破张士诚水寨。复从遇春攻常州，解牛塘围，复广德、宁国。
现代文：攻取广德，破张士诚水寨，又跟从常遇春攻打常州，解除了牛塘之围，收复了广德、宁国。
English: He conquered Guangde, broke through the Zhang Shicheng Water Village, and followed the attack on Changzhou from Changshu Spring, lifted the siege of Cattle Pond, and recovered Guangde and Ningguo.

古文：取江阴，攻常熟，擒张士德。
现代文：占领江阴，攻打常熟，活捉了张士德。
English: Occupied Jiangyin, attacked Changshu, and captured Zhang Shide alive.

古文：从攻湖州。
现代文：从攻湖州。
English: From attacking Huzhou.

古文：宜兴叛，还兵定之。
现代文：宜兴叛乱，回师平定。
English: The Yixing Rebellion was quelled by returning troops.

古文：擢中翼左副元帅。
现代文：提升为中翼左副元帅。
English: Promoted to the middle wing left deputy marshal.

古文：陈友谅犯龙江。
现代文：陈友谅进犯龙江。
English: Chen Youxian invaded Longjiang.

古文：龙江第一关曰虎口城，太祖以属德胜。
现代文：龙江第一关是虎口城，太祖交给德胜。
English: The first pass of the Longjiang River is Hukou City, which was handed over to Desheng by his great-grandfather.

古文：友谅至，力战。
现代文：友谅到来，展开激战。
English: Tomoyasu arrives and a fierce battle ensues.

古文：伏兵起，友谅大败。遂复太平。
现代文：伏兵四起，友谅大败，于是收复了太平。
English: There were four ambushes, and Tomozawa was soundly defeated, and peace was restored.

古文：下铜陵临山寨，略黄山桥及马驮沙，征高邮。
现代文：攻下了铜陵临山寨，进攻黄山桥和马驮沙，征讨高邮，都立下战功。
English: He captured the Tongling Lincangzhai, attacked Huangshan Bridge and Ma'ansha, and collected high postage, all of which were war feats.

古文：有功，进后翼统军元帅。
现代文：提升为后翼统军元帅。
English: Promoted to Rear Admiral of the United Front.

古文：从太祖西征，破安庆水寨，乘风溯小孤山。
现代文：跟从太祖西征，攻破安庆水寨，乘风逆流而上，抵达小孤山。
English: Following the western expedition of the great ancestor, breaking through the Anqing Water Village, riding the wind upstream, arriving at the small lonely mountain.

古文：距九江五里，友谅始知，仓皇遁去。
现代文：离九江只有五里路了，友谅才得知，仓惶逃跑。
English: It was only five miles away from Jiujiang. When he found out, he panicked and ran away.

古文：遂克九江，徇黄梅、广济，克瑞昌、临江、吉安，还下安庆。进克抚州，取新淦。
现代文：于是攻克了九江，攻战于黄梅、广济，攻克瑞昌、临江、吉安，回师安庆，进而攻克抚州，占领新淦。
English: As a result, they conquered Jiujiang, fought in Huangmei, Guangxi, conquered Ruichang, Linjiang, Ji'an, Anqing, and then conquered Fuzhou and occupied Xinjiang.

古文：讨南昌叛将，复其城，炮伤肩。
现代文：征讨南昌叛将，收复该城，被炮石伤了肩。
English: He was wounded in the shoulder by a cannonball when he went to fight the rebels in Nanchang and recapture the city.

古文：授佥江南行枢密院事。
现代文：授予江南行枢密院事。
English: He was awarded the post of Privy Councillor of Jiangnan District.

古文：与朱文正、邓愈共守南昌。
现代文：与朱文正、邓愈共同镇守南昌。
English: Together with Zhu Wenzheng and Deng Yu, he served as the town guard of Nanchang.

古文：平罗友贤于池州，破友谅将于西山。复临江、吉安、抚州。
现代文：在池州平定了罗友贤，在西山打败了友谅的将领，收复了临江、吉安、抚州。
English: He pacified Luo Youxian in Chizhou, defeated the general of Youxian in Xishan, and recovered Linjiang, Jian, and Fuzhou.

古文：未几，友谅大举兵围南昌。德胜帅所部数千，背城逆战，射杀其将，敌大沮。
现代文：没多久，友谅大举围攻南昌，德胜率部下数千人背城逆战，射杀敌将，敌人深感沮丧。
English: Not long after, Yuzhen launched a large-scale siege of Nanchang, defeating several thousand of his subordinates in a rearguard action, shooting the enemy general, and the enemy was deeply frustrated.

古文：明日复合，环城数匝。
现代文：第二天汇合，围城数圈。
English: The next day, they converged and encircled the city several times.

古文：友谅亲督战，昼夜攻，城且坏。
现代文：友谅亲自督战，昼夜不停地进攻，城墙被打坏了。
English: Tomoyasu personally supervised the battle, attacked day and night, and the city wall was destroyed.

古文：德胜帅诸将死战，且战且筑，城坏复完。
现代文：德胜率诸将死战，边战斗边筑城，坏城墙被修复。
English: Virtue wins the battle to the death, while fighting, the city is built, and the bad city wall is repaired.

古文：暮坐城门楼，指挥士卒。弩中腰膂，镞入六寸，拔出之，叹曰： 吾自壮岁从军，伤矢石屡矣，无重此者。
现代文：傍晚坐在城门楼，指挥战斗，腰部中箭，钅族射进六寸深，拔出钅族，叹息道： 我自壮年从军，箭伤已多次了，但没有比这次严重的。
English: In the evening, he was sitting in the gate tower of the city, directing the battle. He was hit by an arrow in the waist, and the Yao people shot six inches deep and pulled out the Yao people. He sighed and said, "I have been in the army since I was a young man. I have been injured by arrows many times, but nothing is more serious than this time.

古文：丈夫死不恨，恨不能扫清中原耳。 
现代文：大丈夫死是没有什么悔恨的，但恨不能扫平中原。 
English: There is nothing to regret about the death of a fine man, but I wish I could sweep the Central Plains.

古文：言毕而绝，年三十九。
现代文：说完话后就死了，年仅三十九岁。
English: He was only 39 when he died.

古文：追封梁国公，谥武桓，列祀功臣庙，配享太庙。
现代文：追封为梁国公，谥号武桓，列祀功臣庙，配享太庙。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Liang Guogong and the posthumous name of Wu Huan. He was enshrined in the Temple of the Meritorious Servants and given a share in the Imperial Temple.

古文：国胜等绕出敌舰后，援绝，力战死。
现代文：德胜刚直沉鸷，严肃驾驭部下。未曾读书，随机应变，他的行为符合古法。
English: Desheng is straight-forward and stern, and seriously controls his subordinates. He has never read books, and adapts at random. His behavior is in line with the ancient law.

古文：而南昌城中谓国胜已前死，故豫章、康山两庙俱得预祀云。桑世杰，无为人。亦自巢湖来归。
现代文：像修士一样真诚相待朋友。友谅围攻南昌达八十五天，先后战死的共有十四人。桑世杰，无为人，也是从巢湖前来归附太祖的。
English: He treated his friends as sincerely as a monk. He besieged Nanchang for eighty-five days, and a total of fourteen people died in the battle. Sang Shijie, a nobody, also came from Chaohu to join his great-grandfather.

古文：赵普胜有异志，世杰发其谋，普胜逸去。
现代文：赵普胜有异心，世杰发觉了他的阴谋，赵普胜逃走。
English: Zhao Pusheng had an ulterior motive, Shijie discovered his plot, Zhao Pusheng fled.

古文：从渡江，以舟师破元水军。
现代文：从太祖渡江，率舟师攻破元军水师。
English: From the time of Taizu's crossing of the Yangtze River, he led the boat division to defeat the former navy division.

古文：授秦淮翼元帅。
现代文：授予秦淮翼元帅。
English: Awarded to Marshal Qin Huaiyi.

古文：下镇江，徇金坛、丹阳，攻宁国长枪诸军，克水阳，平常州。
现代文：攻下镇江，随军征讨金坛、丹阳，攻打宁国长枪诸军，攻克水阳，平定常州。
English: He conquered Zhenjiang, followed the army to conquer Jintan and Danyang, attacked the armies of the Changgun in Ningguo, conquered Shuiyang, and pacified Changzhou.

古文：判行枢密院事。
现代文：担任枢密院事。
English: Served as a Privy Councillor.

古文：略地江阴、宜兴。
现代文：镇守江阴、宜兴。
English: The town guards Jiangyin and Yixing.

古文：初，石牌民朱定，贩盐无赖，与富民赵氏有隙，遂告变，灭赵氏，授江阴判官。
现代文：最初，石牌百姓朱定是贩盐无赖，和富民赵氏有矛盾，于是上告赵氏谋反，剿灭了赵氏，朱定被授予江阴判官。
English: At first, Zhu Ding, a commoner with a badge of honor, was a salt-peddling scoundrel. He had conflicts with the rich Zhao clan, so he sued the Zhao clan for plotting a rebellion and annihilated the Zhao clan. Zhu Ding was awarded the title of judge of Jiangyin.

古文：寻复为盗，元遣兵捕之。
现代文：不久，朱定又沦为盗贼，元派兵追捕。
English: Before long, Zhu Ding was reduced to being a thief, and Yuan sent soldiers to hunt him down.

古文：定闻张士诚据高邮，乃导士诚由通州渡江，遂陷平江。以定为参政，而遣元帅栾瑞戍石牌。
现代文：朱定听说张士诚占据高邮，于是为士诚引路，从通州渡江，攻陷了平江，任命朱定为参政，而派元帅栾瑞戍守石牌。
English: Zhu Ding heard that Zhang Shicheng occupied Gaoyou, so he led the way for Shicheng, crossed the river from Tongzhou, conquered Pingjiang, appointed Zhu to participate in politics, and sent Marshal Zou Rui to guard Shibei.

古文：及大兵既取江阴，瑞尚据石牌，导舟师往来。
现代文：到了大军攻取江阴后，栾瑞还占据着石牌，引导舟往来。
English: After the great army captured Jiangyin, Zhen Rui still occupied the stone plate to guide the boat traffic.

古文：太祖命永安及世杰击之，世杰力战死，瑞亦降。张氏窥江路绝。
现代文：太祖命令永安和世杰攻打石牌，世杰力战而死，栾瑞也投降了，张士诚窥伺大江之路遂绝。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Yongan and Shijie to attack the stone tablet, Shijie died in the battle, Zou Rui also surrendered, and Zhang Shicheng spied the road of the big river.

古文：太祖念其功，赠安远大将军、轻车都尉、永义侯，侑享太庙。
现代文：太祖念世杰的功绩，赐予安远大将军、轻车都尉、永义侯，侑享太庙。
English: The great-grandfather commemorated the exploits of the great-grandfather, and bestowed the titles of General Anyuan, Lieutenant of the Light Cavalry, and Yongyi Hou, as well as the right to enjoy the Great Temple.

古文：转至东门，敌悉兵围之，遂战死。
现代文：儿子桑敬因父亲死烈，累官至都督府佥事。洪武二十三年，封为徽先伯，年食禄为一千七百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: Due to his father's death, his son, Sang Kyong, rose through the ranks to the governor's office. In the 23rd year of Hongwu, he was given the title of Hui Xian Bo, with an annual stipend of 1,700 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：赠怀远将军，立庙长兴。
现代文：第二年和徐辉祖等人守卫边防，不久又受命在平阳屯军，受蓝玉党案株连而死。
English: The next year, he guarded the border with Xu Huizu and others, and soon he was ordered to garrison troops in Pingyang. He was sentenced to death by the Blue Jade Party.

古文：茅成，定远人。
现代文：茅成，定远人。
English: Mao Cheng, Ding Yuan Ren.

古文：自和州从军，隶常遇春麾下。克太平，始授万户。
现代文：自和州开始从军，隶属常遇春麾下，攻克太平，授予万户。
English: Zihezhou began to serve in the army, and was subordinated to Changyu Chunyu, conquered Taiping, and awarded 10,000 households.

古文：从定常州、宁国，进总管。
现代文：从定常州、宁国，晋升为总管。
English: From Dingchangzhou and Ningguo, he was promoted to general manager.

古文：克衢州，授副元帅。
现代文：攻克衢州，授予副元帅。
English: Conquered Zhangzhou and was awarded the rank of vice-marshal.

古文：守金华，改太平兴国翼元帅。
现代文：镇守金华，改任太平兴国翼元帅。
English: Jinhua, the town guard, was transferred to the post of Taiping Xingguoqi Marshal.

古文：从克安庆，援安丰，战鄱阳，克武昌，授武德卫千户。
现代文：从大军克安庆，援助安丰，激战鄱阳，攻克武昌，授予武德卫千户。
English: From the great army to defend Anqing, to aid Anfeng, to fiercely fight Poyang, to conquer Wuchang, to award Wudewei to thousands of households.

古文：寻进指挥副使。
现代文：不久晋升为指挥副使。
English: He was soon promoted to deputy commander.

古文：取赣州、安陆、襄阳、泰州，皆有功。
现代文：占领赣州、安陆、襄阳、泰州，都立下战功。
English: The occupation of Bozhou, Anlu, Yangyang and Taizhou have all made great achievements in the war.

古文：从徐达攻平江，焚张士诚战船，筑长围困之。
现代文：跟从徐达攻打平江，焚烧了张士诚的战船，修筑长围困住敌人。
English: He followed Xu Da to attack the Pingjiang River, burned Zhang Shicheng's warships, and built a long siege to trap the enemy.

古文：达攻娄门，士诚出兵战，成击败之。突至外郛，中叉死。
现代文：徐达攻打娄门，士诚出兵迎战，茅成把敌人打跑了，冲锋到外城，身中叉而死。
English: Xu Da attacked Qimen, Shicheng sent troops to meet the battle, Mao Cheng beat the enemy and ran away, stormed to the outer city, and died in the middle.

古文：赠东海郡公，祀功臣庙。
现代文：赠予东海郡公，祀于功臣庙。
English: It was given to Tokaigunko and is enshrined in the Kosen-ji Temple.

古文：同时死者，有杨国兴，亦定远人。以右翼元帅守宜兴。
现代文：同时战死的有杨国兴，也是定远人，任右翼元帅镇守宜兴。
English: At the same time, Yang Guoxing, also from Dingyuan, was killed in the battle. He was the right-wing marshal of the town of Yixing.

古文：初，常州人陈保二聚众，号 黄包军 。即降复叛，诱执詹、李二将。国兴执斩之。
现代文：最初，常州人陈保二聚众号称 黄包军 ，已经投降了又叛乱，诱捉了詹、李二将，国兴捉拿了陈保二后斩首。
English: At first, Chen Bao II of Changzhou gathered a crowd and called himself the Yellow Envelope Army. He had already surrendered and rebelled, captured Zhan and Li II, and Guoxing captured Chen Bao II and beheaded him.

古文：授神武卫指挥使。
现代文：授予神武卫指挥使。
English: He was awarded the post of Shenwuwei commander.

古文：至是攻阊门战死，以其子益袭指挥使。
现代文：至此攻打阊门战死。他的儿子杨益继承了指挥使。
English: At this point, he was killed in the attack on Shimen. His son Yang Yi inherited the post of commander.

古文：胡深，字仲渊，处州龙泉人。
现代文：胡深，字仲渊，处州龙泉人。
English: Hu Shen, Zha Zhongyuan, Zhengzhou Longquan people.

古文：颖异有智略，通经史百家之学。
现代文：聪颖而有智谋，精通经史百家之学。
English: Clever and resourceful, he is well-versed in the study of hundreds of schools of history.

古文：元末兵乱，叹曰： 浙东地气尽白，祸将及矣。 
现代文：元末战乱，他叹息道： 浙东地气尽白，大祸将来临。 
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a war, and he sighed, "Zhejiang and the east are exhausted, and a great disaster is coming."

古文：乃集里中子弟自保。
现代文：于是聚集里中弟子结寨自保。
English: As a result, the disciples in the gathering gathered to protect themselves.

古文：石抹宜孙以万户镇处州，辟参军事，募兵数千，收捕诸山寇。
现代文：石抹宜孙任万户镇守处州，辟参军事，招募士兵数千人，收捕诸山寇。
English: Shi Muxun appointed Wanyu Town to guard Zhouzhou, participated in the military, recruited thousands of soldiers, and arrested many mountain robbers.

古文：温州韩虎等杀主将叛。
现代文：温州韩虎等人杀了主将叛敌，胡深前去晓谕他们。
English: Wenzhou Hanhu and others killed the main rebel, Hu Sheng went to tell them.

古文：深往谕之，军民感泣，杀虎以城降。已，偕章溢讨龙泉之乱，搜旁县盗，以次平之。
现代文：军民感动得流涕，杀韩虎投降了。不久，偕同章溢讨伐龙泉之乱，收捕附近各县的盗贼，并依次平定。
English: The soldiers and civilians were so moved that they killed Han Hu and surrendered. Soon after, Gong Tongzhangyi fought against the Longquan Rebellion, arrested the thieves in the nearby counties, and subdued them one by one.

古文：宜孙时已进行省参政，承制命深为元帅。
现代文：此时石抹宜孙已晋升为行省参政，胡深被任命为元帅。
English: At this time, Shigu Yishun had been promoted to be a provincial politician, and Hu Sheng was appointed as a marshal.

古文：戊戌十二月，太祖亲征婺州。深帅兵车数百辆往援，至松溪不能救，败去，婺遂下。
现代文：戊戌年十二月，太祖亲征婺州，胡深带领兵车数百辆前去援救，行至松溪而不能救，大败而去，婺州于是被攻下。
English: In December of the year of the Goat, the Great Ancestor personally conquered Bozhou. Hu Sheng led hundreds of military vehicles to the rescue, went to Songxi and could not save it. He was defeated and went away. Bozhou was then conquered.

古文：明年，耿再成侵处州，宜孙分遣元帅叶琛、参谋林彬祖、镇抚陈中真及深帅兵拒战。
现代文：第二年，耿再成进攻处州，石抹宜孙分别派元帅叶琛、参谋林彬祖、镇抚陈中真和胡深率兵拒战。
English: The following year, Geng Zaicheng attacked Zhouzhou, and Shigu Yisun separately sent Marshal Ye Jun, Staff Officer Lin Binzu, and Commissars Chen Zhongzheng and Hu Sheng to lead the troops to refuse to fight.

古文：会胡大海兵至，与再成合，大破之，进抵城下。
现代文：遇上胡大海的部队来到，和再成会合，大破石军，抵达城下。
English: The troops of Hu Haiya arrived and met with the reunion of the Great Stone Army, arriving at the foot of the city.

古文：宜孙战败，与叶琛、章溢走建宁，处州遂下。
现代文：石抹宜孙战败，与叶琛、章溢逃到建宁，处州于是被攻下。
English: Shi Maku Yisun was defeated, and he fled to Jianning with Ye Xi and Zhang Yiyi. Therefore, Zhenshu was conquered.

古文：深以龙泉、庆元、松阳、遂昌四县降。
现代文：胡深以龙泉、庆元、松阳、遂昌四县投降。
English: Hu Sheng surrendered four counties including Longquan, Qingyuan, Songyang and Suichang.

古文：太祖素知深名，召见，授左司员外郎，遣还处州。
现代文：太祖平素就知道胡深的名字，此时召见他，授予左司员外郎，派他回到处州，召集部曲。
English: The great-grandfather had always known Hu Sheng's name. At this time, he summoned him, awarded him to Gairo, the left-hand steward, and sent him back to Zhenzhou to assemble the troops.

古文：招集部曲，从征江西。既定，命以亲军指挥守吉安。
现代文：从征江西，平定后，任命为亲军指挥，镇守吉安。
English: From the conquest of Jiangxi, after the pacification, he was appointed as the commander of the pro-army, the town guard of Ji'an.

古文：处州苗军叛，杀守将耿再成，深从平章邵荣讨诛之。
现代文：处州苗军叛乱，杀了守将耿再成，胡深跟从平章邵荣讨伐了他们。
English: Zhuozhou Miao Army rebelled, killed the guard Geng Rencheng, and Hu Sheng fought them with the help of Pingzhang Shao Rong.

古文：会改中书分省为浙东行中书省，遂以深为行省左右司郎中，总制处州军民事。
现代文：遇上改中书分省为浙东行中书省，于是任命胡深为行省左右司郎中，总制处州军民事务。
English: When the sub-provinces of the Central Military Region were changed to the Central Military Region of East Zhejiang Province, Hu Sheng was appointed as the General Secretary of the Central Military Region of East Zhejiang Province and the General Secretary of the State Military and Civil Affairs.

古文：时山寇窃发，人情未固，深募兵万余人，捕诛渠帅。
现代文：此时山寇暗中骚扰，百姓还不安定。胡深招兵万余人，捕捉诛杀了渠帅。
English: At this time, the mountain pirates were secretly harassing and the people were still unstable. Hu Sheng recruited more than ten thousand soldiers, captured and killed the canal commander.

古文：沿海军素骁，诛其尤横者数人，患遂息。
现代文：沿海军队素来骁勇，杀了他们中几个十分横行的，民患得以平息。
English: The coastal troops have always been brave and killed several of them very rampantly, and the people's troubles have subsided.

古文：癸卯九月，诸全叛将谢再兴以张士诚兵犯东阳。
现代文：九月，诸全叛将谢再兴带张士诚的部队进犯东阳。
English: In September, the rebels led by Xie Zaixing and Zhang Shicheng invaded Dongyang.

古文：左丞李文忠令深引兵为前锋，再兴败走。
现代文：左丞李文忠命令胡深率兵担任前锋，再兴大败而走。
English: Zu Rong Li Wenzhong ordered Hu Sheng to lead the troops to serve as a striker, and then went away in defeat.

古文：深建议以诸全为浙东藩屏，乃度地去诸全五十里并五指山筑新城，分兵戍守。
现代文：胡深建议把诸全作为浙东的藩屏，于是经过度量在离诸全五十里处连着五指山修筑新城，分兵戍守。
English: Hu Sheng suggested that Zhuquan be used as a screen for the Eastern Zhejiang Province, so a new city was built 50 miles away from Zhuquan, along with Wuzhishan Mountain, and a garrison was established.

古文：太祖初闻再兴叛，急驰使诣文忠，别为城守计。至则工已竣。
现代文：太祖刚一听说再兴叛敌，就急忙派使者告诉文忠，要他另筑新城守备，使者到达时工程已经完工。
English: As soon as the great-grandfather heard about the rebirth of the rebels, he hurriedly sent an envoy to tell Wenzhong to build another new city for defense. By the time the envoy arrived, the project had been completed.

古文：后士诚将李伯升大举来侵，顿新城下，不能拔，败去。
现代文：后来士诚将领李伯升大举来犯，到达新城下，但攻城不下，大败而去。
English: Later, the Shicheng general Li Bo-sheng made a large-scale attack and reached the new city, but he could not attack the city and was defeated.

古文：太祖嘉深功，赐以名马。
现代文：太祖嘉奖胡深的功劳，赐给他名马。
English: The great-grandfather praised Hu Sheng's merits and gave him a famous horse.

古文：太祖称吴王，以深为王府参军，仍守处州。
现代文：太祖称吴王，就任命胡深为王府参军，仍镇守处州。
English: The great-grandfather was called King Wu, and he appointed Hu Sheng to join the army for the royal court, and he was still in charge of the town and county.

古文：温州豪周宗道聚众据平阳。数为方国珍从子明善所逼，以城来归。
现代文：温州豪民周宗道聚众占据平阳，多次遭到方国珍侄子方明善的威逼，于是以城前来归附太祖。
English: Zhou Zongdao, a prominent citizen of Wenzhou, gathered a crowd to occupy Pingyang. He was repeatedly intimidated by Fang Guozhen's nephew, Fang Mingshan, so he came to the city to join his grandfather.

古文：明善怒，攻之。
现代文：明善大怒下令攻打平阳。
English: In a rage, Myoshin ordered an attack on Pyonyang.

古文：深遣兵击走明善，遂下瑞安，进兵温州。
现代文：胡深派兵赶跑了明善，于是攻下了瑞安，进兵温州。
English: Hu Sheng sent troops to chase away Ming Son, and then captured Ruian and marched into Wenzhou.

古文：方氏惧，请岁输银三万充军实。
现代文：方氏十分害怕，请求年输送白银三万充实军队。
English: Fang was very afraid and asked for an annual supply of thirty thousand silver to replenish the army.

古文：乃命深班师，复还镇。
现代文：于是命令胡深班师，重新回到处州镇守。
English: Therefore, he ordered Hu Sheng's squadron to return to the town of Wanzhou.

古文：陈友定兵至，破之，追至浦城，又败其守兵，城遂下。
现代文：陈友定的军队到来，被打败，追赶到浦城，又打败了敌守兵，城被攻下。
English: Chen Youding's army arrived, was defeated, chased to Pucheng, defeated the enemy guards, and the city was captured.

古文：进拔松溪，获其守将张子玉。
现代文：进而攻占了松溪，俘虏了敌守将张子玉。
English: They then captured Songxi and captured the enemy general Zhang Zidam.

古文：因请发广信、抚州、建昌三路兵，规取八闽。
现代文：因而请求发动广信、抚州、建昌三路的部队，攻取八闽。
English: Therefore, he requested that troops from Guangxin, Fuzhou, and Jianchang be sent to capture Yaqi.

古文：太祖喜曰： 子玉骁将，擒之则友定破胆。乘势攻之，理无不克。 
现代文：太祖高兴地说： 子玉是骁将，他被俘后友定已吓破了胆，趁势攻打，没有攻不破的道理。 
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "Zodama is a great general. After he was captured, his friends must have been scared out of their wits and took advantage of the situation to attack. There is no invincibility.

古文：因命广信指挥朱亮祖由铅山、建昌，左丞王溥由杉关，会深齐进。
现代文：因此命令广信指挥朱亮祖由铅山、建昌出发，左丞王溥由杉关出发，会合胡深一起进军。
English: Therefore, he ordered Zhu Liangzu, the commander of Guangxin, to set out from Zhushan and Jianchang, and Wang Yao, the left general, to set out from Sugiguan, and to join Hu Sheng and march together.

古文：已，亮祖等克崇安，进攻建宁。
现代文：不久，亮祖等人攻克崇安，进攻建宁。
English: Soon, Liang Zu and others conquered Chong'an and attacked Jianning.

古文：友定将阮德柔固守。
现代文：友定将领陈德柔固守。
English: General Chen De Rong, the commander of Tomosada, held firm.

古文：深视氛祲不利，欲缓之。
现代文：胡深感觉到不祥之气，想暂缓攻击。
English: Hu Sheng sensed the ominous atmosphere and wanted to postpone the attack.

古文：亮祖曰： 师已至此，庸可缓乎？
现代文：亮祖说： 军队已到达这里，怎么能暂缓呢？
English: Liang Zu said: The army has arrived here, how can it be delayed?

古文：且天道幽远，山泽之气变态无常，何足征也。 
现代文：况且天道幽远，山泽之气变化无常，哪里是什么不祥的征兆呢？ 
English: Moreover, the heavens are far away, and the atmosphere of the mountains and lakes is changeable. What is the ominous sign?

古文：时德柔兵屯锦江，逼深阵后。亮祖督战益急。
现代文：此时德柔屯兵在锦江，逼近胡深部队后方，亮祖督战越发急。
English: At this time, De Roux's troops were in Jinjiang, approaching the rear of Hu Sheng's troops, and the war between the two became more and more urgent.

古文：深引兵还击，破其二栅。
现代文：胡深率兵还击，击破敌二栅。
English: Hu Sheng led the troops to return fire and broke the enemy's second gate.

古文：德柔军力战，友定自以锐师夹击。
现代文：德柔军队力战，友定率精锐之师夹击。
English: The deju army fought hard, and the friend-fixing rate of the elite division was high.

古文：日已暮，深突围走，马蹶被执，遂遇害，年五十二。追封缙云郡伯。
现代文：天已黑，胡深突围，战马失蹄而被俘，遇害，终年五十二岁，追封为缙云郡伯。
English: It was already dark, Hu Sheng broke through the encirclement, his horse lost its hoof and he was captured and killed. He was fifty-two years old, and he was posthumously awarded the title of county magistrate of Jinyun County.

古文：太祖尝问宋濂曰： 胡深何如人？ 
现代文：太祖曾经问宋濂 ：胡深是什么样的人？ 
English: Grandfather once asked Song Tao: What kind of person is Hu Sheng?

古文：对曰： 文武才也。 
现代文：回答说： 文武之才。 
English: He replied, "Craftsmanship."

古文：太祖曰： 诚然。浙东一障，吾方赖之。 
现代文：太祖说： 诚然，浙东的屏障是我方的依靠。 
English: The great-grandfather said: It is true that the barrier in eastern Zhejiang is our reliance.

古文：而深以久任乡郡，志图平闽以报效，竟以死徇。
现代文：而胡深久任乡郡，志图平定闽地报效朝廷，最终以死殉国。
English: However, Hu Shengyu, who was in charge of the township for a long time, was determined to serve the imperial court, and eventually died as a martyr.

古文：深驭众宽厚，用兵十余年，未尝妄戮一人。
现代文：胡深领兵宽厚，用兵十余年，未曾妄杀一人。
English: Hu Sheng was a generous leader of soldiers. He had been leading soldiers for more than ten years and had never killed a single person.

古文：守处州，兴学造士。
现代文：镇守处州，兴学培养人才。
English: The town guard is in charge of the town, and is interested in educating talented people.

古文：缙云田税重，以新没入田租偿其数。
现代文：缙云田税繁重，胡深用新垦田地所收之田租补足不足部分。
English: Because of the heavy taxes on the Jinyun field, Hu Sheng used the land rent received from the new Jinyun field to make up for the shortfall.

古文：盐税什一，请半取之，以通商贾。
现代文：盐税十分抽其一，请求减半，以利商贾。
English: The salt tax is very much in the first place, with a request to halve it in order to benefit merchants.

古文：军民皆怀其惠云。
现代文：军民都怀念他的恩德。
English: The military and the people all miss his kindness.

古文：孙兴祖，濠人。
现代文：孙兴祖，濠州人。
English: Sun Xingzu, from Zhangzhou.

古文：从太祖渡江，积功为都先锋。
现代文：跟从太祖渡江，累积功劳担任都先锋。
English: Following his great-grandfather, Watarie, he served as a pioneer with accumulated merits.

古文：战龙江，迁统军元帅。
现代文：攻打龙江，晋升为统军元帅。
English: Attacked the Longjiang River and was promoted to Marshal of the United Army.

古文：破瑞昌八阵营，擢天策卫指挥使。
现代文：攻破瑞昌八阵营，提升为天策卫指挥使。
English: He broke through the eight camps of Ruichang and was promoted to the Commander of Tianzewei.

古文：兴祖沉毅有谋，大将军徐达雅重之。
现代文：兴祖沉毅而有谋略，大将军徐达十分欣赏他。
English: Xingzu is calm and strategic, and General Xu Darup fully appreciates him.

古文：克泰州，以达请，命守海陵。
现代文：攻克泰州，因徐达的请求，命他镇守海陵。
English: He conquered Taizhou and, at Xu Da's request, ordered him to guard Hailing.

古文：海陵，士诚兵入淮要地也。兴祖整军令，练士伍，防御甚严。
现代文：海陵是张士诚的部队入淮的要地，兴祖整治军队，操练士兵，防御十分严密。
English: Hailing is the important place for Zhang Shicheng's troops to enter Huai, Xingzu rectifies the army, drills soldiers, and the defense is very tight.

古文：吴兵自海口来侵，击败之，擒彭元帅。
现代文：吴兵从海口侵犯，被打败，活捉了彭元帅。
English: Wu Bing invaded from Haikou, was defeated, and captured Marshal Peng alive.

古文：平江既下，命兴祖取通州，士诚守将已诣徐达降。
现代文：平江攻下后，命兴祖攻取通州，士诚守将已向徐达请降。
English: After the capture of Pingjiang, it was the order of Xingzu to capture Tongzhou, and Shicheng Shoujun had already asked Xu Da to surrender.

古文：进大都督府副使，移镇彭城。
现代文：晋升为大都督府副使，移镇彭城。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of the great governor's office and moved to Pengcheng.

古文：达既定关陕，旋师北向，檄兴祖会东昌。
现代文：徐达已平定了关、陕，旋师北向，通知兴祖于东昌汇合。
English: Xu Da has leveled off Guan, Shaanxi, and turned northward, informing Xingzu to converge on Dongchang.

古文：从克元都。置燕山六卫，留兵三万人，命兴祖守之，领大都督分府事。
现代文：随从大军攻克元都，设置燕山六卫，留兵三万人，命兴祖镇守，统领大都督分府事。
English: He followed the great army to conquer the Yuan capital, set up the Yanshan Six Guards, kept 30,000 soldiers, ordered Xingzu to guard the town, and presided over the affairs of the great governor.

古文：大兵西征，扩廓由居庸窥北平。达谓诸将： 北平有孙都督，不足虑。 
现代文：大兵西征，扩廓由居庸窥视北平，徐达对诸将说： 北平有孙都督在，不足为忧虑。 
English: The soldiers were marching westward, and Ju Yong peered at Beiping from the extended silhouette. Xu Da said to the generals: Beiping has Sun Tudou, and it is not enough to worry.

古文：遂直捣太原。语详《达传》。
现代文：于是直捣太原，详情见《徐达传》。
English: As a result, he went straight to Taiyuan. For details, see "Xu Darwen."

古文：洪武三年，帅六卫卒从达出塞，次三不剌川，遇敌，力战死，年三十五。
现代文：洪武三年，率六卫的部队跟从徐达出塞，到达三不剌川，遇上敌人力战而死，年仅三十五岁。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, the troops led by Liu Wei followed Xu Da out of the fortress and arrived at Sanbuyuan River. He was only thirty-five years old when he met the enemy and died in battle.

古文：太祖悼惜之，追封燕山侯，谥忠愍，配享通州常遇春祠。
现代文：太祖哀悼痛惜，追封为燕山侯，谥号忠愍，配享于通州常遇春祠。
English: The great-grandfather mourned and regretted, and was posthumously awarded the title of Yanshan Hou (燕山侯), with the posthumous name of Zhongyao (忠), which he enjoyed at the Tongzhou Changyu Spring Shrine.

古文：未几，中书省以都督同知汪兴祖兼俸事入奏。
现代文：不久，中书行省都督同知汪兴祖兼俸事入奏。
English: Soon after, Wang Xingzu, the governor of Zhongshujing Province and a mutual acquaintance, was also appointed to the post.

古文：帝闻奏兴祖名，叹息，命以月俸给故燕山侯兴祖家。
现代文：太祖听到兴祖这个名字，就叹息，命以月俸给已故的燕山侯兴祖家。
English: When the great-grandfather heard the name Xingzu, he sighed and ordered to give a monthly salary to the late Yanshan Hou Xingzu's family.

古文：以其长子恪袭武德卫指挥使。
现代文：以他的长子孙恪继承武德卫指挥使。
English: He was succeeded by his eldest son and grandson, Wu Dewei.

古文：久之，历都督佥事。
现代文：很久后，历任都督佥事。
English: A long time later, the successive governors of the capital had a falling out.

古文：二十一年，以右参将从蓝玉北征，至捕鱼儿海。论功封全宁侯，岁禄二千石，予世券。
现代文：二十一年，任右参将跟从蓝玉北征，到了捕鱼儿海，论功封为全宁侯，年食禄二千石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the twenty-first year, Ren U-sang will follow the Blue Jade Northern Expedition and go to the Fishing Children's Sea. He will be awarded the title of Quan Ning Hou, with an annual stipend of 2,000 koku, and will be given a hereditary certificate.

古文：恪谨敏，有儒将风。
现代文：孙恪谨敏，有儒将风度。
English: Sun Jianmin has the demeanor of a Confucian general.

古文：从征楚、蜀，还驻沔阳，简阅各卫所军士备边。
现代文：从征楚、蜀，回师驻守沔阳，检查各卫所军士的边防。
English: From Zhengchu, Shu, back to the division stationed in Fenyang, to check the border defense of each guard station sergeant.

古文：二十五年，进兼太子太保。
现代文：二十五年，晋升为太子太保。
English: Twenty-five years later, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：未几，籍兵山西，从宋国公胜练兵。
现代文：不久，在山西征兵，跟从宋国公冯胜练兵。
English: Soon after, he was conscripted in Shanxi Province to train soldiers with Feng Sheng, the ruler of the Song Dynasty.

古文：旋召还，赐第中都。
现代文：不久被召回，赐给官邸于中都。
English: He was soon recalled and given an official residence in the capital.

古文：后坐蓝玉党死。
现代文：后受蓝玉党案株连而死。
English: He was later sentenced to death by the Blue and White Party.

古文：曹良臣，安丰人。
现代文：曹良臣，安丰人。
English: Cao Liangcheng, An Fengren.

古文：颍寇起，聚乡里筑堡自固。
现代文：颍州寇贼起事，聚集乡里筑城堡自卫。
English: The robbers in Zhangzhou rose up and gathered the villagers to build a castle to defend themselves.

古文：归太祖于应天，为江淮行省参政。
现代文：在应天归附太祖，担任江淮行省参政。
English: In response to the will of heaven, he was attached to the great ancestor and served as a political participant in Jianghuai Province.

古文：从取淮东，收浙西，进行省左丞。
现代文：从取淮东，收复浙西，晋升为行省左丞。
English: He took Huaidong and recovered West Zhejiang, and was promoted to the position of acting provincial commissar.

古文：从大军取元都，略地至泽、潞。
现代文：跟从大军攻取元都，经略的土地到达泽、潞。
English: He followed the great army to conquer the Yuan capital, and the land he ruled reached Dazhe and Handan.

古文：进山西行省平章，还守通州。
现代文：提升为山西省平章，回守通州。
English: He was promoted to Shanxi Province Pingzhang and returned to Tongzhou.

古文：时大兵出山西，通州守备单弱，所部不满千人。
现代文：当时大部队正出征山西，通州守备单弱，所属部队不足千人。
English: At that time, a large force was leaving for Shanxi, and the defense of Tongzhou was weak, with less than a thousand troops.

古文：元丞相也速将万骑营白河。
现代文：元丞相也速率万余骑兵在白河安营扎寨。
English: The former prime minister also ordered more than 10,000 cavalrymen to set up camp in Shirakawa.

古文：良臣曰： 吾兵少，不可与战。
现代文：良臣说： 我军人少不可与敌战。
English: The good minister said, "Our soldiers must fight the enemy in small numbers."

古文：彼众虽多，亡国之余，败气不振，当以计走之。 
现代文：敌人虽多，但亡国之余，士气不振，应用计谋赶跑他们。 
English: Although there are many enemies, they are demoralized after the fall of the country, and they use tricks to drive them away.

古文：乃密遣指挥仵勇等于濒河舟中多立赤帜，亘三十余里，钲鼓声相闻。
现代文：于是秘密地派指挥仵勇等人于濒河舟中树起了许多红旗，绵延三十余里，击鼓之声可以相闻。
English: Therefore, they secretly sent the conductor Gong Yong and others to plant many red flags in the boats along the river, stretching more than thirty miles, and the sound of drumming can be heard.

古文：也速大骇，遁去。
现代文：也速十分害怕，逃跑了。
English: He was also very scared and ran away.

古文：良臣出精骑逐交百余里，元兵自是不敢窥北平。
现代文：良臣派精骑追赶百余里，元兵从此不敢窥视北平。
English: The courtiers sent horsemen to chase them for more than a hundred miles, and the Yuan soldiers no longer dared to look at Beiping.

古文：复从大将军达击扩廓帖木儿于定西，败之。
现代文：又跟从大将军徐达在定西攻打扩廓帖木儿，打败了敌人。
English: He also followed the great general Xu Da in attacking and expanding Timur in Dingxi, defeating the enemy.

古文：洪武三年封宣宁侯，岁禄九百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，赐封为宣宁侯，年食禄九百石，给予世袭凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was given the title of Xuanning Hou, an annual stipend of 900 kilos, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：明年从伐蜀，克归州山寨，取容美诸土司。
现代文：第二年从伐蜀，攻克归州山寨，占领容美诸土司。
English: In the second year, they started from cutting down Shu, conquered Guizhou cottage, and occupied Yongmei villages.

古文：会周德兴拔茅冈覃垕寨，自白盐山伐木开道，出纸坊溪以趋夔州，进克重庆。
现代文：会合周德兴攻占了茅冈覃篨寨，自白盐山伐木开道，出纸坊溪进军夔州，进而攻克重庆。
English: At the same time, Zhou Dexing conquered Maogang Bozhai, opened the logging road of Zibo Yanshan, and marched into Bozhou from Shifang Creek, and then conquered Chongqing.

古文：明年从副将军文忠北征，至胪朐河，收其部藩。
现代文：第二年跟从副将军文忠北征，抵达胪朐河，收复其部落。
English: The following year, he followed the vice-general, Wenzhong, on the Northern Expedition, and arrived in Luohe to recover his tribe.

古文：文忠帅良臣持二十日粮，兼程进至土剌河。
现代文：文忠率良臣带上二十天的粮食，日夜兼程进军土剌河。
English: Wenzhong led his vassals with twenty days' worth of grain, marching day and night into the Tuyun River.

古文：哈剌章渡河拒战，少却。
现代文：哈剌章渡河抵抗，稍许退却。
English: The Harbin chapter crossed the river to resist, and retreated a little.

古文：追至阿鲁浑河，敌骑大集。
现代文：追击至阿鲁浑河，敌骑兵大会集。
English: Pursued to the Arughun River, a large number of enemy cavalry gathered.

古文：将士皆殊死战，敌大败走，而良臣与指挥周显、常荣、张耀皆战死。
现代文：将士都殊死而战，敌人大败而逃，但良臣和指挥周显、常荣、张耀都战死。
English: The soldiers fought to the death, the enemy was defeated and fled, but the good ministers and commanders Zhou Xian, Chang Rong and Zhang Yao all died in the battle.

古文：累功为守御福建指挥使，守兴化。
现代文：战情上报，赠予良臣为安国公，谥号忠壮，列祀功臣庙。
English: The situation of the war was reported, and it was presented to a good vassal as the An Guo Gong, with the posthumous name of Zhongzhuang, and enshrined in a temple for meritorious vassals.

古文：至是俱战没，帝厚恤诸臣家，命有司各表其墓。濮英，庐州人。
现代文：儿子曹泰继承侯位，后受蓝玉党案株连而死，削去爵位。濮英，庐州人。
English: His son, Cao Tai, succeeded to the marquessate, but later died as a direct result of the Blue and Yellow Party's actions, and his title was taken away.

古文：初以勇力为百夫长，积功至西安卫指挥。坐军政不修，召还诘责，遣叶升代之。
现代文：最初因勇敢担任百夫长，累积功劳官至西安卫指挥，因军政不修，被朝廷召回诘责，改派叶升取而代之。
English: At first, because of his bravery in serving as a centurion, he accumulated merit officers to the Xi'an Defense Command, but because of his lack of military and political discipline, he was recalled by the imperial court for reprimand, and he was promoted to replace him.

古文：升更言其贤，令还卫。
现代文：叶升呈说濮英贤良，朝廷令他回到西安卫。
English: Ye Sheng said that Xing Ying was virtuous, and the imperial court ordered him to return to Xi'an Wei.

古文：洪武十九年，太祖命耿炳文选陕西都司卫所卒备边，惟英所练称劲旅，加都督佥事。
现代文：洪武十九年，太祖命耿炳文选拔陕西都司卫的部队加强边防，唯独濮英操练的军士可谓劲旅，于是，加封他为都督佥事。
English: In the 19th year of Hongwu, Geng Xianwen, the great-grandfather, selected the troops of Shaanxi Tusi Wei to strengthen the border defense. However, the drill sergeant of Zou Ying could be described as a vigorous journey. Therefore, he was appointed as the governor.

古文：明年命师所部随大将军冯胜北征。
现代文：第二年，命他率部队随大将军冯胜北征。
English: The following year, he led his troops to accompany General Feng Sheng on the Northern Expedition.

古文：抵金山，降纳哈出，遂班师，而以英将奇兵三千人为殿。
现代文：抵达金山，降服纳哈出；班师回朝时，濮英带领奇兵三千殿后。
English: Arriving at Jinshan, Naha surrendered; when the team returned to the North, Zou Ying led the three thousand soldiers to the back of the hall.

古文：纳哈出余众窜匿者尚数十万，闻帅旋，设伏于途，谋俟大军过窜取之。
现代文：纳哈出的余部逃窜匿藏的还有数十万人，听说明军回朝，就在中途设下埋伏，图谋攻袭明军尾部。
English: There were also hundreds of thousands of people hiding in the rest of the escapees from Naha. When they heard that the Ming army was returning to the North, they set up an ambush in the middle of the way and tried to attack the tail of the Ming army.

古文：未发。英后至，猝为所乘，冲突不能出，马踣，遂见执。
现代文：濮英后到达，遭到敌人的突然袭击，突围不成，战马跌倒，濮英被俘。
English: Xing Ying arrived later and was suddenly attacked by the enemy. He was unable to break out of the encirclement, his horse fell, and Xing Ying was captured.

古文：敌既得英，思挟为质。
现代文：敌人得到濮英，妄图挟持他为人质。
English: The enemy got hold of Hao Ying and tried to take him hostage.

古文：英绝食不言，乘间引佩刀剖腹死。
现代文：濮英绝食不言，趁敌人不注意时用佩刀剖腹而死。
English: Xing Ying did not go on a hunger strike, but took advantage of the enemy's inattention to disembowel himself with a saber.

古文：事闻，赠金山侯，谥忠襄。
现代文：太祖听说此事，赐金山侯，谥号忠襄。
English: When his great-grandfather heard about this, he gave him the title of Prince of Jinshan and the posthumous name of Zhongxiang.

古文：明年进赠乐浪公。
现代文：第二年，进赠乐浪公。
English: In the second year, the gift was presented to Lelangong.

古文：封其子玙为西凉侯，禄二千五百石，予世券。
现代文：封他的儿子濮王与为西凉侯，食禄二千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: He made his son, Shao Wang, the prince of Xiliang, with a stipend of 2,500 koku and gave him a certificate of inheritance.

古文：二十三年，命练兵东昌，又令驻临清，训练士卒。
现代文：二十三年，命他在东昌练兵，又命他驻守临清，训练士卒。
English: In 233, he was ordered to train soldiers in Dongchang and stationed in Linqing to train soldiers.

古文：二十五年，召还，同宋国公胜等简阅山西士马。
现代文：二十五年，被召回，同宋国公冯胜等人检阅山西兵马。
English: Twenty-five years later, he was recalled to review the Shanxi soldiers and horses with Song Guogong Feng Sheng and others.

古文：玙能修父职，帝甚嘉之。
现代文：濮王与颇能胜任父亲之官职，太祖十分欣赏。
English: Shao Wangye was quite capable of fulfilling his father's official duties, which the great-grandfather greatly appreciated.

古文：复令籍山西民兵，所籍州县最多，事集而不扰。
现代文：又令他征集山西的民兵，他所征集的州县数量最多，事情办成了但又不扰民。
English: He also ordered him to recruit militia from Shanxi Province. He recruited the largest number of counties and prefectures. The task was accomplished without disturbing the people.

古文：明年坐蓝玉党，戍五开死。
现代文：第二年，受蓝玉党案株连，谪戍五开而死。
English: In the second year, he was arrested by the Blue Jade Party and died.

