古文：申徽字世仪，魏郡人也。
现代文：申徽字世仪，是魏郡人。
English: Shen Hui is a native of Wei County.

古文：六世祖钟，为后赵司徒。
现代文：六世祖申钟，任后趋司徒。
English: The sixth ancestor, Shen Zhong, later became a disciple.

古文：冉闵末，中原丧乱，钟子邃避地江左。
现代文：蛊围末年，中原局势动乱，皇钟的儿子史达到丝南避难。
English: In the last years of the siege, the situation in the Central Plains was turbulent, and Wang Zhong's son Shi Darong took refuge in Nan.

古文：曾祖爽仕宋，位雍州刺史。
现代文：曾祖吏垄在直塑塞做官，任雍蛆刺史。
English: Zeng Zuoli Reng served as an official in Zhishu, and was appointed as the Yongzheng scribe.

古文：祖隆道，宋北兖州刺史。
现代文：祖父隆道，任塞韭查业刺史。
English: His grandfather, Longdao, was appointed to the post of secretary to investigate the history of the profession.

古文：父明仁，郡功曹，早卒。
现代文：父亲明仁，任郡功曹，早年去世。
English: His father, Akihito, who was a county meritorious person, died at an early age.

古文：徽少与母居，尽心孝养。
现代文：申徽年少时与母亲住在一起，尽心孝敬供养。
English: When Shen Hui was young, he lived with his mother and devotedly provided for her.

古文：及长，好经史。
现代文：到长大后，喜好经书史籍。
English: When he grew up, he was fond of scriptures and historical books.

古文：性审慎，不妄交游。
现代文：性格谨慎，不随便与人结交来往。
English: He is cautious and does not socialize with people casually.

古文：遭母忧，丧毕，乃归于魏。
现代文：后来遇上母亲去世，守丧完毕，就回到魏。
English: Later, when his mother passed away, he returned to Wei after the funeral.

古文：元颢入洛，以元邃为东徐州刺史，邃引徽为主簿。
现代文：元颢进入洛，以元邃为束徐州刺史，豆邃推荐皇邀为主簿。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Luo, with Yuan Xuan as a bundle of Xuzhou stabbing history, and the bean paste recommended by the emperor as the main book.

古文：颢败，邃被槛车送洛阳，故吏宾客并委去，唯徽送之。
现代文：五题失败，五邃被槛车送往渔区，旧曰的官吏宾客都丢下他离去了，祇有车銮送行。
English: After failing five questions, Wu Yao was sent to the fishing area by a carriage. The old government officials and guests left him behind, and he was only escorted by a carriage.

古文：及邃得免，乃广集宾友，叹徽有古人风。
现代文：到了五邃得以免罪，就广泛地聚集宾客朋友，赞叹申徽有古人的风度。
English: When Wu Xi was exonerated, he gathered a wide range of guests and friends to praise Shen Hui's ancient demeanor.

古文：寻除太尉府行参军。
现代文：不久任太尉府行参军。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of captain and joined the army.

古文：孝武初，徽以洛阳兵难未已，遂间行入关见文帝。
现代文：孝武帝初年，史邀因为盗屋战事不停，就走小路进阗谒见塞童。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, because of the incessant warfare of robbing houses, Shi Ying took a side road to enter the palace to see the boy.

古文：文帝与语，奇之，荐之于贺拔岳。
现代文：文帝与他交谈，认为他很奇特，就向贺拔岳推荐。
English: Emperor Wen talked with him, thought he was very special, and recommended him to He Batur.

古文：岳亦雅相敬待，引为宾客。
现代文：贺垄遥也非常尊敬地接待他，招引为宾客。
English: He Rongyao also received him with great respect and invited him as a guest.

古文：文帝临夏州，以徽为记室参军，兼府主簿。
现代文：塞帝驾临夏州，以申徽为记室参军，兼任府主簿。
English: Seti drove to Linxia Prefecture, joined the army with Shen Hui as a recorder, and also served as the main book of the prefecture.

古文：文帝察徽沉密有度量，每事信委之。
现代文：文帝审察申徽为人深沉周密，很有风度器量，每件事情都信任委托他。
English: Wen Di inspected Shen Hui, who was a profound and meticulous person, very personable, and trusted and entrusted him with everything.

古文：乃为大行台郎中。
现代文：就任大行台郎中。
English: He assumed the post of Daigodairo junior high school.

古文：时军国草创，幕府务殷，四方书檄，皆徽之辞也。
现代文：当时军务与国政刚刚开始创立，幕府事务众多，四方的文书，都是出自申徽的言辞。
English: At that time, military affairs and national politics were just beginning to be created, there were many shogunate affairs, and the documents of the four parties were all from the words of Shen Hui.

古文：以迎孝武功，封博平县子，本州大中正。
现代文：因为迎立孝武帝有功，封为博平县子，本州大中正。
English: Because of his meritorious service in welcoming Emperor Xiaowu, he was awarded the title of Bo-Ping County's son and was promoted to Honshu University's junior high school.

古文：大统初，进爵为侯。
现代文：太铲初年，晋爵为侯。
English: In the first year of Taisho, he was given the title of Marquis.

古文：四年，拜中书舍人，修起居注。
现代文：四年，任中书舍人，修撰起居注。
English: For four years, he served as a middle school teacher, and began to write and live notes.

古文：河桥之役，大军不利，近侍之官，分散者众，徽独不离左右。
现代文：河桥之战，大军失利，皇帝身边侍卫的官员，很多都分散了，惟有申徽不离皇帝身边。
English: The battle of the river bridge, the defeat of the great army, the officials of the guards around the emperor, many are scattered, but the emblem does not leave the emperor's side.

古文：魏帝称叹之。
现代文：逸查称赞他。
English: The audit commended him.

古文：十年，迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：十年，升给事黄门侍郎。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：先是，东阳王元荣为瓜州刺史，其女婿刘彦随焉。
现代文：在此之前，柬阳王元荣任瓜州刺史，他的女婿刘彦跟随他。
English: Prior to this, the King of Khamyang Wang Yuan Rong served as the Guazhou scribe, and his son-in-law Liu Yan followed him.

古文：及荣死，瓜州首望表荣子康为刺史，彦遂杀康而取其位。
现代文：等到元荣去世，瓜州的头等望族上表授任元荣的儿子元康为刺史，刘童就杀死元康取代他的地位。
English: After Yuan Rong's death, Guazhou's first-class aristocrats conferred on Yuan Rong's son, Yuan Kang, the title of crown prince, and Liu Tong killed Yuan Kang to take his place.

古文：属四方多难，朝廷不遑问罪，因授彦刺史。
现代文：适逢四方多难，朝廷没有闲暇问罪，于是授刘彦任刺史。
English: Faced with many difficulties on all sides, the imperial court did not have time to investigate the crime, so it appointed Liu Yan as the chief prosecutor.

古文：频征不奉诏，又南通吐谷浑，将图叛逆。
现代文：朝廷多次征召，他都不接受诏令，又与南方的吐谷浑相勾结，将要策划叛变。
English: He was called up several times by the imperial court, but he did not accept the imperial edict, and he colluded with the southern Tuvalu to plan a mutiny.

古文：文帝难于动众，欲以权略致之。
现代文：文帝难于兴师动众，想用计谋招致他。
English: Emperor Wen found it difficult to arouse enthusiasm for his teacher and tried to use stratagems to attract him.

古文：乃以徽为河西大使，密令图彦。
现代文：就以申徽为河西大使，秘密地下令设法对付刘彦。
English: He secretly issued an order to try to deal with Liu Yan under the pretext that he was the ambassador of Hexi.

古文：徽轻以五十骑行，既至，止于宾馆。
现代文：申徽以五十名骑兵轻装出发，已经到了瓜州，在宾馆歇息。
English: Shen Hui set out with fifty light cavalry and has arrived in Guazhou, resting in a hotel.

古文：彦见徽单使，不以为疑。
现代文：刘彦见到申徽单身出使，不作怀疑。
English: Liu Yan did not doubt when he saw Shen Hui was a single envoy.

古文：徽乃遣一人微劝彦归朝，以揣其意。
现代文：申徽就派遣一个人暗中劝说刘彦归顺朝廷，用以揣度他的心意。
English: Shenhui sent a person to secretly persuade Liu Yan to submit to the imperial court, and used him to gauge Liu Yan's intentions.

古文：彦不从。
现代文：刘彦不听从。
English: Liu Yan did not listen.

古文：徽又使赞成其住计，彦便从之，遂来至馆。
现代文：申徽又派人赞成他长驻的计划，刘彦便听从了，来到宾馆。
English: Shenhui also sent someone to approve his long-term stay plan, and Liu Yan obeyed and came to the hotel.

古文：徽先与瓜州豪右密谋执彦，遂叱而缚之。
现代文：申徽预先与瓜州的豪门大族秘密商议逮捕刘彦，等刘彦一到宾馆，就大声呵叱并且捆绑了他。
English: Shenhui secretly discussed the arrest of Liu Yan with Guazhou's big families in advance, and when Liu Yan arrived at the hotel, they scolded him loudly and tied him up.

古文：彦辞无罪。
现代文：刘彦以没有罪过作为托辞。
English: Liu Yan used the excuse that he was not guilty.

古文：徽数之曰： 君无尺寸之功，滥居方岳之重。
现代文：申徽列举他的罪状说： 你没有半点功劳，名不副实地占据刺史的高位。
English: Shen Hui enumerated his crimes and said: You have no merit at all, and you are undeservedly occupying a high position in history.

古文：恃远背诞，不恭贡职，戮辱使人，轻忽诏命。
现代文：恃仗地处边远，违命放纵，不奉行进贡的职责，羞戮使者，轻视韶命。
English: It is far away from the battlefield, indulges in disobedience, does not carry out the duty of tribute, humiliates the messenger, and despises the death.

古文：计君之咎，实不容诛。
现代文：统计你的罪遇，确实应该杀头。
English: Counting your crimes, you really should be shot in the head.

古文：但授诏之日，本令相送归阙，所恨不得申明罚以谢边远耳。 于是宣诏慰劳吏人及彦所部，复云大军续至，城内无敢动者。
现代文：衹是皇帝下韶的那天，本来命令押送你回到朝廷，我感到遣憾的是不能申明罚罪来向边远地区道歉。 于是宣布诏令，慰问犒劳官吏以及刘彦的部下，又说大军将陆续来到，城内没有胆敢骚动的人。
English: On the day of the emperor's coronation, when I had originally ordered you to be escorted back to the imperial court, I regretted that I could not declare a punishment to apologize to the outlying areas, so I issued a decree to express my condolences to the hard-working officials and Liu Yan's subordinates, and said that a large army would come one after another, and there was no one in the city who dared to make a fuss.

古文：使还，迁都官尚书。
现代文：出使回到朝廷，升为都官尚书。
English: He was sent back to the imperial court and was promoted to the post of metropolitan.

古文：十二年，瓜州刺史成庆为城人张保所杀，都督令狐延等起义逐保，启请刺史。
现代文：十二：年，瓜州刺史成庆被城中人张保杀死，都督令狐延等人仗义起兵驱逐张保，启奏请派刺史。
English: On the 12th year of the 12th month of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12

古文：以徽信洽西土，拜假节、瓜州刺史。
现代文：皇帝因为申徽诚信广泛流布于西边的疆土，授他临时持节出巡，任瓜州刺史。
English: The emperor, because of Shen Hui's sincerity widely spread in the western territory, granted him a temporary leave of absence from the festival and appointed him as the governor of Guazhou.

古文：徽在州五稔，俭约率下，边人乐而安之。
现代文：申徽在瓜州五年，节俭约束部下，边地人民安居乐业。
English: Shenhui has been in Guazhou for five years. The frugality constrains his subordinates, and the people of the outlying areas live and work in peace.

古文：十六年，征兼尚书右仆射，加侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十六年，征入兼任尚书右仆射，加授侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Sixteen years later, he was conscripted and concurrently served as Shangshu's right-hand man, and was additionally awarded the titles of Chamberlain, Cavalry General, Keifu's Ceremonial Officer, and Third Secretary.

古文：废帝二年，进爵为公，正右仆射，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：废帝二年，晋为公爵，任正右仆射，赐姓宇文氏。
English: Two years after the dethronement of the emperor, he was promoted to the rank of duke and given the surname Uwen.

古文：徽性勤敏，凡所居官，案牍无大小，皆亲自省览。
现代文：申徽性格勤勉机敏，凡是所任的官职，官府的文书无论大小，都亲自阅览。
English: Shenhui's character is diligent and astute, and he personally reads all official positions and government documents, no matter how big or small.

古文：以是事无稽滞，吏不得为奸。
现代文：因此事情没有拖延滞留，官吏不能为非作歹。
English: Therefore, there was no delay in the matter, and the officials could not do anything wrong.

古文：后虽历公卿，此志不懈。
现代文：后来虽然登上公卿的高位，这种志向不曾懈怠。
English: Although he later ascended to the high position of a nobleman, he never lost this aspiration.

古文：出为襄州刺史。
现代文：出任为襄州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：时南方初附，旧俗，官人皆通饷遗。
现代文：当时南方刚刚归附，旧时习俗，官员都通行镇赠。
English: At that time, the southern part of the country had just been annexed, and the old custom of officials receiving gifts from towns was still in effect.

古文：徽性廉慎，乃画杨震像于寝室以自戒。
现代文：申徽性格清廉谨慎，就画了一幅杨震的像挂在寝室用以白戒。
English: Shen Hui, who is honest and prudent, drew a portrait of Yang Zhen and hung it in his bedroom to use as a white ring.

古文：及代还，人吏送者数十里不绝。
现代文：到征调回朝任职，百姓和官吏送行的人数十里不断。
English: They were conscripted and transferred back to the DPRK, and the people and officials who saw them off traveled dozens of miles.

古文：徽自以无德于人，慨然怀愧，因赋诗题于清水亭。
现代文：申徽自以为对人民没有德行，感慨有愧于怀，于是写诗题在清水亭上。
English: Shen Hui thought that he had no virtue towards the people and felt ashamed of his feelings, so he wrote a poem on the top of the Clear Water Pavilion.

古文：长幼闻之，竞来就读。
现代文：老少听到这个消息，争着前来阅读。
English: On hearing the news, young and old rushed to read it.

古文：递相谓曰： 此是申使君手迹。 
现代文：互相传告说： 这是申使君的手迹。 
English: They said to one another, "This is the handwriting of the envoy."

古文：并写诵之。
现代文：一起抄写朗诵。
English: Let's copy the recitation together.

古文：明帝以御正任总丝纶，更崇其秩为上大夫，员四人，号大御正，又以徽为之。
现代文：明帝以御正任总丝纶，又提高他的官位为上大夫，官员四人，号称大御正，任命申徽做这个官。
English: Emperor Ming appointed Shen Hui as the grand marshal and promoted him to the rank of senior doctor. Four officials, known as grand marshals, appointed Shen Hui as this official.

古文：历小司空、少保，出为荆州刺史，入为小司徒、小宗伯。
现代文：历任小司空、少保，出任为荆州刺史，召入为小司徒、小宗伯。
English: The successors of Xiao Si Ku, Xiao Bao, served as Jingzhou stabbing history, called in as Xiao Si Tuo, Xiao Zong Bo.

古文：天和六年，上疏乞骸骨，诏许之。
现代文：天和六年，上奏疏请求退休，下诏答应他。
English: At the age of six, he asked to retire, and was granted his request.

古文：薨，赠泗州刺史，谥曰章。
现代文：后来去世，追赠为泗州刺史，谧号为章。
English: He later died and was posthumously awarded the title of Zhangzhou Jishi, and his posthumous name was Chang.

古文：子康嗣。位泸州刺史，司织下大夫、上开府。
现代文：儿子申康继嗣官居泸州刺史，司织下大夫、上开府。
English: His son, Shenkang, succeeded to the post of official, and lived in Bozhou, Shishi, Shibei, and Shangkaifu.

古文：康弟敦，汝南郡守。敦弟静，齐安郡守。静弟处，上开府、同昌县侯。
现代文：申康的弟弟申敦，任汝南郡太守申敦的弟弟申静，任齐安郡太守申静的弟弟申虚，任上开府、同吕县侯。
English: Shenkang's younger brother, Shen Dun, the younger brother of Shen Tun, who served as the governor of Runan County, Shen Jing, the younger brother of Shen Qu, who served as the governor of Qian County, Shen Hu, served as the governor of Tonglu County.

古文：卒。
现代文：后来去世。
English: To die.

古文：陆通字仲明，吴郡人也。曾祖载，从宋武帝平关中，军还，留载随其子义真镇长安，遂没赫连氏。
现代文：陆通字仲明，是吴郡人，曾祖陆载，跟随宋亘游平定闱中，大军回朝，留下陆载跟随他的儿子刘义真镇守垦玄，就沦没在面巡手中。
English: Lu Tongzhe Zhongming, a native of Wuxi County, was the great-grandfather of Lu Zai, who followed Song Guanzhong to pacify Dingyuan, and the army returned to the North, leaving Lu Zai and his son Liu Yizhen to guard Jiaoxuan, and then he was lost in the face of inspectors.

古文：魏太武平赫连氏，载仕魏任中山郡守。
现代文：丝立逮壶平定赫连氏，迪茎在魏做官，任史丛圆太守。
English: Si Li and Fang Jiu subdued the Heren clan, Di Zi served as an official in the Wei Dynasty, and was appointed as the governor of Shizhu County.

古文：父政，性至孝。
现代文：父亲陆政，性格极其孝顺。
English: His father, Lu Zheng, was extremely filial.

古文：其母吴人，好食鱼，北土鱼少，政求之常苦难。后宅侧忽有泉出而有鱼，遂得以供膳。
现代文：他的母亲是吴地人，喜好吃鱼，北方鱼少，陆政找鱼经常很困难后来住宅旁边忽然有泉水涌出，并且有鱼，就得以供给膳食。
English: His mother is from Wu, and likes to eat fish. There are few fish in the north, and it is often difficult to find fish in the mainland. Later, a spring suddenly gushed out next to the house, and there were fish, so they were able to provide meals.

古文：时人以为孝感所致，因谓其泉为孝鱼泉。
现代文：当时的人们认为是孝顺感动天地所招致的，因此称这股泉水为孝鱼泉。
English: At that time, people believed that filial piety was inspired by heaven and earth, so they called this spring water the filial fish spring.

古文：初从尔朱天光讨伐，及天光败，归文帝。
现代文：起初跟随尔朱天光讨伐，等到玉光失败，归附文帝。
English: At first, he followed the crusade of Erzhu Tianguang, and when Yuguang failed, he was attached to Emperor Wen.

古文：文帝为行台，以政为行台左丞、原州长史，赐爵中都县伯。
现代文：文童任行台，任命睦苏为行台左丞、原州长史，赐爵中都县伯。
English: Wendao was appointed as Gyodae, and Mutsu Su was appointed as Gyodae's left-hand man, former prefectural governor, and given the title of Nakatsu-ken no haku.

古文：大统中，卒。
现代文：大统年问去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：通少敦敏好学，有志节。
现代文：陆逼年少时敦厚敏捷，爱好学习，富有志气节操。
English: When he was young, Lu Jian was strong and agile, fond of learning, and full of ambition and discipline.

古文：幼从在河西，遂逢寇难，与政相失。通乃自拔东归，从尔朱荣。
现代文：幼年时跟随父亲陆政在河西，因为碰上强寇作乱，与陆苏走失，陆通于是自己设法脱身向东归去，跟随尔塞茔。
English: When he was a child, he followed his father, Lu Zheng, to the west of Hexi. Because he ran into a strong bandit who caused a disturbance and lost contact with Lu Su, Lu Tong managed to escape and return to the east, following Ercei.

古文：荣死，又从尔朱兆。
现代文：玺塞茔死后，又跟随尔朱韭。
English: After the death of 塞, he followed 爾朱.

古文：及尔朱氏灭，乃入关。
现代文：等到尔朱氏败灭，就入关。
English: Wait until the defeat of the Lzhu clan, then enter the customs.

古文：文帝时在夏州，引为帐内督。
现代文：文帝当时在夏州，引举为帐内督。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen was in Xiazhou, and he was promoted to the post of accountant.

古文：顷之，贺拔岳为侯莫陈悦所害，时有传军府已亡散者，文帝忧之，通以为不然。
现代文：不久，贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，当时有传说贺辽鱼的军府已经逃散，文帝担忧这件事，挝认为不会如此。
English: Soon after, He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue. At that time, there was a legend that the military headquarters of He Liao Yu had already dispersed. Emperor Wen was worried about this, but Lao believed that this would not be the case.

古文：居数日，问至，果如所策。
现代文：过了数日，音信传来，果然如同陆通所料想的那样。
English: A few days later, the news came, just as Lu Tong had expected.

古文：自是愈见亲礼，遂昼夜陪侍，家人罕见其面。
现代文：从此更加被亲近礼待，就夜陪同侍候，家人很少见到他。
English: From then on, he was treated with even closer courtesy. He was accompanied by an attendant at night, and his family rarely saw him.

古文：通虽处机密，愈自恭谨，文帝以此重之。
现代文：陆通虽然位处机密，但是自己更加恭敬谨慎，文帝因此看重他。
English: Although Lu Tong was in a confidential position, he was more respectful and cautious, so Emperor Wen valued him.

古文：后以迎孝武功，封都昌县伯。
现代文：后来因为迎立孝武帝有功，封都昌县伯。
English: Later, because of his meritorious service in welcoming Emperor Xiaowu, he was given the title of Count of Chang County.

古文：大统元年，进爵为侯。
现代文：大统元年，晋为侯爵。
English: In the first year of unification, he was promoted to marquis.

古文：从禽窦泰，复弘农。
现代文：跟随活捉窦泰，收复弘农。
English: Follow the capture of Dou Tai and the recovery of Hong Nong.

古文：沙苑之役，力战有功。
现代文：沙苑的战役中，奋力作战，立有战功。
English: In the battle of Sha Yuan, he fought hard and distinguished himself.

古文：又从解洛阳围。
现代文：又跟随解除洛阳之围。
English: This was followed by the lifting of the siege of Luoyang.

古文：军还，属赵青雀反于长安，文帝将讨之，以人马疲弊，不可速行。
现代文：大军回朝，适逢趟青雀在长安谋反，文帝将要讨伐他，因为人马疲劳，不能迅速行动。
English: When the great army returned to China, it was time for the young sparrow to rebel in Chang'an. Emperor Wen was going to fight him, because the men and horses were tired and could not move quickly.

古文：又谓青雀等一时陆梁，不足为虑。
现代文：又认为赵青雀等人衹是一时跋扈，不值得忧虑。
English: He also believed that Zhao Qingzhao and others were just playing for time and were not worth worrying about.

古文：乃云： 我到长安，但轻骑临之，必当面缚。 通进曰： 青雀等既以大军不利，谓朝廷倾危，同恶相求，遂成反乱。
现代文：就说： 我到长安，衹须轻骑到达，必将反绑反寇。 陆通进奏说： 赵青雀等人已经因为大军不利，认为朝廷快要倾覆，共同的邪恶凑到一起，就构成叛乱。
English: He said, "When I arrive in Chang'an, I will ride lightly, and I will certainly rebel against the invaders." Lu Tongjinso said, "Zhao Qingzhao and others have already formed a rebellion because of the disadvantage of a large army, believing that the imperial court is about to be overthrown, and that the common evil will come together.

古文：然其逆谋久定，必无迁善之心。
现代文：然而他们叛逆的计谋早巳决定，必然没有改恶从善的心思。
English: However, their treacherous plot had already been decided, and they certainly did not have the heart to change evil for good.

古文：且其诈言大军败绩，东寇将至，若以轻骑往，百姓谓为信然，更沮兆庶之望。
现代文：况且他们造谣说大军打了败仗，东方的强寇即将来到，如果以轻骑前往，老百姓认为真的是这样，就更加使百姓沮丧。
English: Moreover, they spread rumours that the great army had lost the battle and that the Eastern invaders were about to arrive. If they travelled by light cavalry and the common people thought that this was really the case, it would make the common people even more depressed.

古文：大兵虽疲弊，精锐犹多。
现代文：我们大军虽然疲劳，但是精锐的兵士还有很多。
English: Although our army is fatigued, there are still many elite soldiers.

古文：以明公之威，率思归之众，以顺讨逆，何虑不平。 文帝深纳之，因从平青雀。
现代文：凭着您的威望，率领思归的部下，以遵循天道来讨伐叛逆，担心什么不能平定呢? 文帝深表赞同并采纳他的建议，于是跟随平定了赵青雀的叛乱。
English: Relying on your prestige, leading your subordinates who are thinking of returning, and following the heavenly way to fight the rebellion, what are you worried about that you can't quell it? Emperor Wen deeply agreed and adopted his suggestion, so he followed and quelled the rebellion of Zhao Qingzhao.

古文：录前后功，进爵为公，徐州刺史。
现代文：记绿他的前后功劳。晋为公爵，任徐州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of duke and was appointed as the chief historian of Xuzhou.

古文：以寇难未平，留不之部。
现代文：因为强寇的祸难没有平定，留下没到官署去。
English: Because the scourge of the bandits had not been quelled, he did not go to the government office.

古文：与于谨讨刘平伏，加大都督。
现代文：与于谨讨伐刘平伏，加授大都督。
English: Liu Pingfu was also awarded the title of Grand Governor.

古文：从文帝援玉壁，进仪同三司。
现代文：跟随文帝支援玉壁，升为仪同三司。
English: He followed Emperor Wen in supporting the Jade Wall and was promoted to the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：九年，高仲密以地来附，通从若干惠战于邙山，众军皆退，唯惠与通率所部力战。
现代文：九年，高仲密以土地来归附，陆通跟随若干惠在邙山作战，众多的军队都退却了，衹有若干惠与陆通率领所属的部下奋力作战。
English: In the ninth year, Gao Zhongmi used land to annex it, and Lu Tong followed several Hui to fight in Shaoshan. Many armies retreated, and some Hui fought hard with their subordinates led by Lu Tong.

古文：至夜中乃阴引还，敌亦不敢逼。
现代文：到了半夜就暗中退兵返回，敌人也不敢逼近。
English: In the middle of the night, they secretly withdrew and returned, and the enemy did not dare to approach.

古文：进授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、太仆卿，赐姓步六孤氏，进爵绥德郡公。
现代文：升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、太仆卿，赐姓步六孤氏，晋爵为绥德郡公。
English: He was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, and Third Division, and given the surname Bu Rikuo and the title of Duke of Shunde County.

古文：周孝闵践阼，拜小司空。
现代文：周孝闵帝登位，任小司空。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaohui ascended to the throne, and Xiaozikong was appointed.

古文：保定五年，累迁大司寇。
现代文：保定五年，屡经升迁为大司寇。
English: After five years in Baoding, he was repeatedly promoted to the position of Senior Secretary.

古文：通性柔谨，虽久处列位，常清慎自守。
现代文：陆通性格柔顺谨慎，虽然长期处于列侯之位，但经常清廉慎重以自守。
English: Lu Tong's character was gentle and prudent. Although he was a vassal for a long time, he was always honest and prudent to protect himself.

古文：所得禄赐，尽与亲故共之，家无余财。
现代文：所得到的俸禄赏赐，全部与亲属故旧共同享有，家中没有剩余的财物。
English: All the salaries and rewards received are shared with relatives, and there is no surplus property in the family.

古文：常曰： 凡人患贫而不贵，不患贵而贫也。 建德元年，转大司马。
现代文：经常说： 凡是人都以贫困而不尊贵作为忧患，不以尊贵而贫困作为忧患。 建德元年，改任大司马。
English: He often said, "All people regard poverty, not nobility, as their affliction, and poverty, not nobility, as their affliction."

古文：其年薨。
现代文：当年去世。
English: That year, Hou Mo Chen Shun passed away.

古文：通弟逞。
现代文：陆通的弟弟是陆逞。
English: Lu Tong's younger brother is Lu Gang.

古文：逞字季明。
现代文：龌字垩塱。
English: That's it.

古文：初名彦，字世雄。
现代文：起初名产，字世雄。
English: At first, it was a famous product, called Shiseo.

古文：魏文帝常从容谓之曰： 尔既温裕，何因乃字世雄？
现代文：魏塞童曾经舆他闲谈说： 你既然温和宽容，为何却以世雄为字?
English: Wei Sedong once chatted with him and said: Since you are gentle and tolerant, why do you use the word "world hero"?

古文：且为世之雄，非所宜也。
现代文：况且作为世间的英雄，不是适宜的。
English: Moreover, as a hero of the world, it is not appropriate.

古文：于尔兄弟，又复不类。 遂改焉。
现代文：对于你的兄弟，也不相似。 就改了。
English: For your brother, it's not the same.

古文：逞少谨密，早有名誉。
现代文：陆逞年少时谨慎周密，很早就有名望声誉。
English: When he was young, Lu Gan was cautious and meticulous, and he gained fame and reputation very early.

古文：兄通先以军功别受茅土，乃让父爵中都县伯，令逞袭之。
现代文：哥哥陆通早先因军功另受分封，就让出父亲的爵位中都县伯，使陆逞继承。
English: His older brother, Lu Tong, who had earlier received a separate award for his military service, gave up his father's title of Zhongdu County magistrate, leaving Lu Gan to succeed.

古文：起家羽林监、文帝内亲信。
现代文：由羽林监起家出任官职，成为文帝的亲信。
English: He rose through the ranks to become a close confidant of Emperor Wen.

古文：时辈皆以骁勇自达，唯逞独兼文雅。
现代文：当时一班人都以勇猛而显达，惟有陆逞兼有文雅。
English: At that time, a group of people were all distinguished by their bravery, but only Lu Gan had both courage and gentleness.

古文：文帝由此加礼遇焉。
现代文：文帝因此对他更加礼遇。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen treated him with more courtesy.

古文：大统十四年，参大丞相府军事，寻兼记室。
现代文：大统十四年，参预大丞相府军事，不久兼任记室。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Unification, he became a prefectural vice-premier and minister of war, and soon also held the post of secretary.

古文：保定初，累迁吏部中大夫，历部、御伯中大夫，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，徙授司宗中大夫，转军司马。
现代文：保定初年，屡经升迁为吏部中大夫，历任蕃部、御伯中大夫，晋为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，转授司宗中大夫，改任军司马。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was repeatedly promoted to the position of the middle doctor of the cadre department, successively held the post of the middle doctor of the eunuch department and the eunuch department, promoted to the general of the cavalry, the secretary of the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, transferred to the middle doctor of the Shizong department, and changed to the secretary of the army.

古文：逞干识详明，历任三府，所在着绩。
现代文：陆逞才干见识审慎明察，历任三府，所在之处都有功绩。
English: Lu Gan talent, insight, prudence and clear-sightedness, the successors of the three prefectures, where there are merits.

古文：朝廷嘉之，进爵为公。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖他，晋为公爵。
English: The court rewarded him by making him a duke.

古文：天和三年，齐遣侍中斛斯文略、中书侍郎刘逖来聘。
现代文：天和三年，齐派遣侍中斛斯文略、中书侍郎刘逖前来访问。
English: On the third day of the new year, they sent the chamberlains Su Wenliu and Liu Wei to pay a visit.

古文：初修邻好，盛选行人。
现代文：初次修复睦邻交好，盛大地挑选使者。
English: For the first time, good-neighborly relations were restored, and envoys were chosen in large numbers.

古文：诏逞为使主，尹公正为副以报之。
现代文：下韶陆逞为使主，尹公正为副以作回报。
English: Under the leadership of Lu Gang, Yin Zhengyi was the chief envoy, and vice-chief Yin Zhengyi was the deputy envoy.

古文：逞美容止，善辞令，敏而有礼,齐人称焉。
现代文：陆逞的仪容举止很美好，善于辞令，敏捷而有礼节，齐人称赞他。
English: Lu Gang's appearance and demeanor are very beautiful, he is good at rhetoric, agile and courteous, and he is praised by all.

古文：还届近畿，诏令路车服，郊迎而入。
现代文：返回接近京城管辖的地区，下韶以辂车仪服的礼遇，在郊外迎接进入。
English: Returning to areas close to the jurisdiction of the capital city, the lower jaws greet the entrance in the suburbs with the courtesy of a carriage.

古文：时人荣之。四年，除京兆尹。
现代文：当时人们都以此为荣。四年，任京兆尹。
English: At that time, people were proud of this. For four years, he held the post of Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：都界有豕生数子，经旬而死。
现代文：京都边界有母猪生下数只小猪，十多日后母猪死去。
English: On the border of Kyoto, a sow gave birth to several piglets, but died more than ten days later.

古文：其家又有豮，遂乳养之，诸豚赖之以活。
现代文：这户人家又有闱割过的猪，用来哺养小猪，小猪赖此而成活。
English: The family also has a castrated pig, which is used to feed the piglets, who depend on it for their survival.

古文：时论以逞仁政所致。
现代文：当时的议论认为是陆逞的仁政所招致的。
English: At the time, the discussion was that it was caused by the benevolent government of Lu Gang.

古文：俄迁司会中大夫，出为河州刺史。
现代文：不久升司会中大夫，调出任河州刺史。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of the secretary of the association, and was transferred to the post of the chief historian of Hezhou.

古文：晋公护雅重其才，表为中外府司马，赖委任之。
现代文：晋公宇文护非常看重他的才能，上表任为中外府司马，非常信任他。
English: Jin Gongyu Wengu valued his talent very much. He was appointed as the Sima of the Middle and Foreign Provinces, and he trusted him very much.

古文：寻复为司会，兼纳言，迁小司马。
现代文：不久又任司会，兼任纳言，升小司马。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the secretary, concurrently as the councilor, and then as the junior secretary.

古文：及护诛，坐免官。
现代文：到宇文护被杀，受牵连被免除官职。
English: Zuo Wenguo was killed and was removed from his post as a result of the implication.

古文：顷之，起为纳言。
现代文：不久，起用任纳言。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Naganobu.

古文：又以疾不堪剧任，乃除宜州刺史。
现代文：又因为有病不能支持繁重的事务，就授任宜州刺史。
English: In addition, because he was ill and unable to support the heavy workload, he was appointed as Yizhou chief historian.

古文：故事，刺史奉辞，例备卤簿。
现代文：按照旧例，刺史接受使命，照例备有出外时的仪仗队。
English: According to the old practice, when a member of the imperial court accepts a mission, he is usually accompanied by an honor guard.

古文：逞以时属农要，奏请停之。
现代文：陆逞认为当时适逢农忙时节，就上奏请求停用。
English: Lu Gang believed that it was a busy season for farmers at that time, and requested to stop using it.

古文：武帝深嘉焉，诏遂其所请，以彰雅操。
现代文：武帝对此深为嘉奖，下韶顺应他的请求，用来表彰他的美好的节操。
English: Emperor Wu was deeply appreciative of this, and the Lower Yangtze complied with his request and used it to commend his fine discipline.

古文：逞在州有惠政，吏人称之。
现代文：陆逞在宜州施行仁政，官吏人民都称赞他。
English: Lu Gang implemented benevolent politics in Yizhou, and the officials and people all praised him.

古文：东宫初建，授太子太保。
现代文：太子初立，任太子太保。
English: The crown prince will be enthroned at the beginning of the year, and the position of crown prince and deputy crown prince will be created.

古文：卒，赠大将军。
现代文：后来去世，追赠大将军。
English: He later died and was posthumously awarded the rank of general.

古文：子操嗣。
现代文：儿子陆操继嗣。
English: His son, Xiao Miao, became his successor.

古文：柳敏字白泽，河东解县人，晋太常纯之七世孙也。
现代文：扭堑字皇墨，是迥塞经毖人，置太常蛆纯的七世孙。
English: Twisting the ink of the Emperor, is the seventh generation of the seven generations of the seven generations of the seven generations of the seven generations of the seven generations of the seven generations.

古文：父懿，魏车骑大将军、仪同三司、汾州刺史。
现代文：父亲堑噬，任魏车骑大将军、仪同三司、险刺史。
English: His father devoured him, and he was appointed to the general of the Wei chariot and cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the history of danger.

古文：敏九岁而孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：堑噬九岁时父亲去世，侍奉母亲以孝顺闻名。
English: His father died when he was nine years old, and he was known for his filial piety in serving his mother.

古文：性好学，涉猎经史，阴阳卜筮之术，靡不习焉。
现代文：性格爱好学习，涉猎经书史籍，阴阳筮的道术，没有不学习的。
English: Character love to learn, dabble in scriptures and historical books, Yin and Yang Taoism, there is no not learning.

古文：年未弱冠，起家员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：年纪未到二十岁，由员外散骑侍郎起家出任官职。
English: At the age of less than twenty, he started his career as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：累迁河东郡丞。
现代文：屡经升迁为河东郡丞。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the post of Hedong County magistrate.

古文：朝议以敏之本邑，故有此授。
现代文：朝廷议论认为这是柳敏的家乡，所以有这样的任命。
English: The imperial court argued that this was Liu Min's hometown, so there was such an appointment.

古文：敏虽统御乡里，而处物平允，甚得时誉。
现代文：柳敏虽然治理家乡，但是他处理事情公平得当，非常被当时人称誉。
English: Although Liu Min governed his hometown, he handled things fairly and properly, and was highly praised by people at the time.

古文：及文帝克复河东，见而器异之，乃谓之曰： 今日不喜得河东，喜得卿也。 即拜丞相府参军事。
现代文：到文帝用武力收复河东时，见到柳敏后，很器重他，对他说： 今日不以得到河东作为喜事，而以得到您作为喜事。 立即授任丞相府参军事。
English: When Emperor Wen recovered Hedong by force, after seeing Liu Min, he held him in high esteem and said to him, "Today, I do not regard the acquisition of Hedong as a joyous event, but the acquisition of you as a joyous event.

古文：俄转户曹参军，记室。
现代文：不久调任户曹参军，兼任记室。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to join the army and also served as a secretary.

古文：每有四方宾客，恒令接之，爰及吉凶礼仪，亦令监综。
现代文：每逢有四方宾客来到，经常命令他负责接待，连及吉凶礼仪，也命令他督察治理。
English: Whenever guests from the four quarters came, he was often ordered to be in charge of the reception, and he was also ordered to supervise the management of the auspicious and inauspicious etiquette.

古文：又与苏绰等修撰新制，为朝廷政典。迁礼部郎中，封武城县子，加帅都督，领本乡兵。
现代文：又与苏绰等人修撰新制，作为朝廷政典升礼部郎中，封武城县子，加授帅都督，率领本乡士兵。
English: He also revised the new system with Su Qiao and others, and was promoted to the Vice-Minister of Ceremonies as part of the imperial ceremony. He was also awarded the title of the son of Wucheng County and the title of the commander of the capital, and led the soldiers of his hometown.

古文：俄进大都督。
现代文：不久升大都督。
English: He was soon promoted to grand governor.

古文：遭母忧，居丧旬日之间，鬓发半白。
现代文：碰上母亲去世，守丧十之间，鬓发一半变白。
English: When my mother passed away, I was in mourning for ten days, and half of my hair turned white.

古文：寻起为吏部郎中。
现代文：不久起用为吏部郎中。
English: He was soon promoted to junior secretary.

古文：毁瘠过礼，杖而后起。
现代文：因哀伤过度而消瘦超过了礼节，需要扶着拐杖方能起来。
English: Due to excessive grief and emaciation exceeded the etiquette, you need to hold on to crutches before you can get up.

古文：文帝见而叹异之，特加廪赐。
现代文：文帝见到后为之惊叹，特地加以官府粮米的赏赐。
English: Emperor Wen was astonished when he saw it, and the government rewarded him with grain and rice.

古文：及尉迟迥伐蜀，以敏为行军司马。
现代文：到尉迟迥讨伐蜀地，以柳敏为行军司马。
English: The lieutenant arrived late to fight against Shu, with Liu Min as the marching steed.

古文：军中筹略，并以委之。
现代文：军中策划谋略，都交给他处理。
English: He was put in charge of military planning and strategy.

古文：益州平，进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，迁尚书，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：益州平定，升骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中，升为尚书，赐姓宇文氏。
English: After Yishu was pacified, he was promoted to General of Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Divisions, was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain, was promoted to Senior Secretary, and was given the surname Uwen.

古文：六官建，拜礼部中大夫。
现代文：六官建立，任礼部中大夫。
English: Six offices were established, and he was appointed as the junior doctor of the ceremonial department.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵为公，又除河东郡守，寻复征拜礼部。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，晋为公爵，又任河东郡太守，不久又征用在礼部任职。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne, was promoted to Duke, and also served as the governor of Hedong County, and was soon requisitioned to serve in the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：出为郢州刺史，甚得物情。
现代文：出任为郢州刺史，甚得民心。
English: He was appointed as the historian of Zhangzhou and won the hearts of the people.

古文：及将还朝，夷夏士人感其惠政，并赍酒肴及土产候之于路。
现代文：到他将要回到朝廷，当地各族士人感激他的仁政，一起送上美酒佳肴及土产在路上等候。
English: When he was about to return to the imperial court, the local people of all ethnic groups were grateful to him for his benevolent government, and together they sent fine wine, delicacies and local products to wait on the road.

古文：敏乃从他道而还。
现代文：柳敏却从另外的道路回朝。
English: However, Liu Min took a different route back to the North.

古文：复拜礼部。
现代文：又授礼部官职。
English: He also resigned from his post at the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：后改礼部为司宗，仍以敏为之。
现代文：后来改礼部为司宗，仍以柳敏担任官职。
English: Later, he was appointed as the head of the etiquette department, with Liu Min still holding the official position.

古文：敏操履方正，性又恭勤，每日将朝，必夙兴待旦。
现代文：柳敏操行公正平直，性格又很恭顺勤谨，每日将要上朝，必然早起等待天亮。
English: Liu Min is fair and upright, and his character is very courteous and diligent. He will go to the morning every day, and he will inevitably get up early to wait for the dawn.

古文：又久处台阁，明练故事，近或乖先典者，皆按据旧章，刊正取中。
现代文：又久处尚书之位，明了熟悉旧例，新近礼仪有违背先朝典章的，都按照旧时规章，改正选取适中。
English: Moreover, having been a scholar for a long time, I understand that I am familiar with the old cases, and if there is a new etiquette that violates the previous dynasty's regulations, it will be in accordance with the old regulations, and the correction will be appropriate.

古文：迁小宗伯，监修国史。
现代文：升小宗伯，监督修撰国史。
English: Sheng Xiaozongbo supervised the compilation of the national history.

古文：转小司马，又监修律令。
现代文：调任小司马，又监督修撰律令。
English: He was transferred to the position of a petty steward and also supervised the revision of the ritsuryo.

古文：进位大将军，出为鄜州刺史，以疾不之部。
现代文：晋为大将军，出任鄘州刺史，因为有病不到所管辖的地区去。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general and served as the governor of Zhangzhou, because he could not go to the area under his jurisdiction due to illness.

古文：武帝平齐，进爵武德郡公。
现代文：武帝平定齐，晋爵为武德郡公。
English: Emperor Wu was subdued, and the prince of Wude County was promoted to the peerage.

古文：敏自建德以后，寝疾积年，武帝及宣帝并亲幸其第问疾焉。
现代文：柳敏从建德年间以后，患病多年，武帝及宣帝都亲自到他的府第慰问病情。
English: After Liu Min had been ill for many years since he was a young man, Emperor Wu and Emperor Xuan both came to his capital in person to offer their condolences.

古文：开皇元年，进位上大将军、太子太保。
现代文：开皇元年，晋为上大将军、太子太保。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was promoted to Shodai Shogun and Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：其年卒。
现代文：当年去世。
English: That year, Wang Liang passed away.

古文：赠五州诸军事、晋州刺史。
现代文：追赠五州诸军事、晋州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Military Commander of the Five Provinces and Military Historian of Jinzhou.

古文：临终诫其子等，丧事所须，务从简约。
现代文：临终告诫他的儿子等人，丧事所需，务必简单节约。
English: On his deathbed, he warned his son and others to be frugal with funeral expenses.

古文：其子等并涕泣奉行。
现代文：他的儿子等人都流泪遵照实行。
English: His son and others were in tears as they complied.

古文：少子昂。
现代文：小儿子叫柳昂。
English: The youngest son is called Liu Ang.

古文：昂字千里，幼聪颖有器识，干局过人。
现代文：柳昂字千里，年幼时聪明有器量见识，才干器局超过一般的人。
English: Liu Angzili, when he was young, was smart and resourceful, and his talent exceeded that of the average person.

古文：武帝时，为内史中大夫、开府仪同三司，赐爵文城郡公。
现代文：武帝时，任内史中大夫、开府仪同三司，赐爵文城郡公。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he held the posts of Inner History Middle Doctor, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and was given the title of Prince of Wencheng County.

古文：当途用事，百寮皆出其下。
现代文：当权执政，百官都出自他的任命之下。
English: When he was in power, hundreds of officials were appointed by him.

古文：昂竭诚献替，知无不为，谦虚自处，未尝骄物。
现代文：柳昂竭尽诚心，劝善规过，议兴议革，知道的事没有不做的，谦虚自处，未尝以骄傲待人接物。
English: Liu Ang tried his best to be sincere. He tried to persuade people to be good at following rules and regulations, to discuss and reform, to know what not to do, to be humble, and to treat people and things with pride.

古文：时论以此重之。
现代文：当时的议论因此看重他。
English: That's why he was so important in the discourse of the time.

古文：武帝崩，受遗辅政。
现代文：武帝驾崩，受遗诏辅佐政务。
English: Emperor Wu passed away and was succeeded by his heir, Emperor Zhao.

古文：稍被宣帝疏，然不离本职。
现代文：逐渐被宣帝疏远，但不离本职。
English: He was gradually alienated by Emperor Xuan, but he did not abandon his duties.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，深自结纳。
现代文：隋文帝任丞相，与他结交很深。
English: Sui Wen Di served as chancellor and had a deep friendship with him.

古文：文帝以为大宗伯。
现代文：文帝任他为大宗伯。
English: Emperor Wen made him the grand patriarch.

古文：拜日，遂得偏风，不能视事。
现代文：授任之日，就得了中风病，不能就职治事。
English: On the day he was appointed, he suffered a stroke and was unable to take up his duties.

古文：文帝受禅，疾愈，加上开府，拜潞州刺史。
现代文：文帝承受禅让的帝位，他的病痊愈了，加授上开府，官拜潞州刺史。
English: Emperor Wen inherited the imperial throne from Emperor Zenzang. His illness was cured, he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu, and he was given the title of Zizhou Shishi.

古文：昂见天下无事，上表请劝学行礼。
现代文：柳昂见到天下太平无事，上表章请求鼓励学习推行礼仪。
English: Seeing the world at peace, Liu Ang asked the emperor to encourage the study and implementation of etiquette.

古文：上览而善之，优诏答昂。
现代文：皇帝看了认为很好，以优诏回答他。
English: The emperor thought it was very good, and replied to him in the form of an imperial edict.

古文：自是天下州县皆置博士习礼焉。
现代文：从此天下州县都设置博士学习礼仪。
English: Since then, all prefectures and counties in China have set up doctoral programs to study etiquette.

古文：昂在州甚有惠政。
现代文：柳昂在潞州很有仁政。
English: Liu Ang is very benevolent in Zhangzhou.

古文：卒官。
现代文：在任上去世。
English: He later died in office.

古文：子调嗣。
现代文：儿子柳调继承。
English: His son, Ryuushin, succeeded him.

古文：卢柔字子刚。
现代文：卢柔字子刚。
English: Lu Zhuoji Zi Gang.

古文：少孤，为叔母所养，抚视甚于其子。
现代文：年少丧父，被叔母收养，叔母抚养看待他比亲生儿子还好。
English: He lost his father at a young age and was adopted by his aunt, who raised him as if he were better than her own son.

古文：柔尽心温凊，亦同己亲。
现代文：卢柔尽心孝顺叔母，也同自己的母亲一样。
English: Lu Rong is as filial to her aunt as she is to her own mother.

古文：宗族叹重之。
现代文：宗族的人都感叹看重他。
English: The people of his clan are very fond of him.

古文：性聪敏，好学，未弱冠，解属文，但口吃不能持论。
现代文：性格聪明机敏，喜爱学习，未到二十岁，懂得撰著文辞，衹是口吃不能发表议论。
English: Clever and quick-witted, likes to study, under the age of twenty, knows how to write a speech, but he stutters and can't make a speech.

古文：颇使酒诞节，为世所讥。
现代文：颇为因酒使性，放纵礼节，被世人所讥笑。
English: He was rather a drunkard, indulged in propriety, and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：司徒、临淮王彧见而器之，以女妻焉。
现代文：司徒、临淮王元或见到而器重他，把女儿嫁给他。
English: Stowe and Lin Huai Wangyuan may have respected him when they saw him and married their daughters to him.

古文：及魏孝武与齐神武有隙，诏贺拔胜出牧荆州，柔谓因此可着功绩，遂从胜之荆州。
现代文：到魏孝武帝与齐神武帝感情上有裂痕，下诏贺拔胜出任荆州刺史，卢柔认为因此可建立功绩，于是跟随贺拔胜到荆州去。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty and Emperor Wu of the Qi Dynasty had a rift in their feelings, and He Puxin was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou. Lu Rong believed that he could build a merit, so he followed He Puxin to Jingzhou.

古文：以柔为大行台郎中，掌书记。
现代文：以卢柔为大行台郎中，掌书记。
English: With Lu Rong as a member of the Taihang Taira clan, holding the position of secretary.

古文：军中机务，柔多预之。
现代文：军中机密事务，卢柔很多都参预了。
English: In military confidential affairs, Lu Ruo has been involved in many of them.

古文：及胜为太保，以柔为掾，加冠军将军。
现代文：等到贺拔胜任太保，以卢柔为属官，加授冠军将军。
English: Wait until He Bi is a competent Tai Po, with Lu Rong as a subordinate officer, and award the champion general.

古文：孝武后召胜引兵赴洛，胜以问柔。
现代文：孝武帝后来召贺拔胜领兵赴洛，贺拔胜询问卢柔的意见。
English: Emperor Xiaowu later summoned He Baxian to lead the troops to Luoyang, and He Baxian asked Lu Rong's opinion.

古文：曰： 高欢托晋阳之甲，意实难知。
现代文：卢柔说： 高欢依托晋阳的军队，心意实在难以知道。
English: Lu Rong said: Gao Huan relies on the army of Jinyang, and it is really difficult to know his intentions.

古文：公宜席卷赴都，与决胜负，存没以之，此忠之上策也。
现代文：你应该席卷军力，奔赴京都，与他决一胜负，不顾存亡，这是忠的上策。
English: You should sweep the military forces, rush to Kyoto, and fight him to a draw, regardless of survival, this is the best policy of loyalty.

古文：若北阻鲁阳，南并旧楚，东连兖、豫，西接关中，带甲十万，观衅而动，亦中策也。
现代文：如果北面阻挡鲁阳，向南并吞旧时楚地，东面连接兖、豫，西面连接关中，领兵十万，伺机而动，也是中策。
English: If the north side blocks Luyang, the south side annexes the old time Chu land, the east side connects Yunnan and Henan, and the west side connects Guanzhong, leading 100,000 soldiers, and waiting for the opportunity to move, it is also a central policy.

古文：举三荆之地，通款梁国，可以身免，功名去矣。
现代文：拿三荆的土地，与梁国通好，可以自身免于祸难，但是功名就不存在了。
English: If you take the land of the Three Thorns and are on good terms with Liang Guo, you can save yourself from disaster, but there will be no glory.

古文：策之下者。 胜轻柔年少，笑而不应。
现代文：这是下策。 贺拔胜轻视卢柔年轻，笑着不回答他。
English: This was the next step. He Baxing belittled Lu Zhuo's youth and laughed and did not answer him.

古文：及孝武西迁，东魏遣侯景袭穰，胜败，遂南奔梁。
现代文：到了孝武帝往西迁移，东魏派遣侯景袭击穣城，贺拔胜被打败了，就往南投奔梁。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu migrated to the west, the Eastern Wei Dynasty sent Hou Jing to attack Lucheng. He was defeated and fled to Nantou.

古文：柔亦从之。
现代文：卢柔也跟随他。
English: Lulu follows him.

古文：胜频表梁求归，武帝览表，嘉其辞彩。
现代文：贺拔胜多次上表请求回去，梁武帝看了奏表，嘉奖他的言辞文采。
English: He Baxing repeatedly asked to go back to the table. Emperor Liang Wu saw the report card and praised his words and prose.

古文：既知柔所制，因遣舍人劳问，并遗缣锦。
现代文：后来知道是卢柔所撰写，就派遣舍人慰劳存问，并送给丝绸锦缎。
English: Later, when it was known that it was written by Lu Rong, he sent his servant to solace Lu Rong and give him a silk brocade.

古文：后与胜俱还，行至襄阳，齐神武惧胜西入，遣侯景以轻骑邀之。
现代文：后来与贺拔胜一起返回，走到襄阳，齐神武帝惧怕贺拔胜从西进入，派遣侯景率领轻骑拦截他。
English: Later, he returned with He Baxing and went to Xiangyang. Emperor Qizhenwu was afraid that He Baxing would enter from the west, so he sent Hou Jing and his light cavalry to intercept him.

古文：胜及柔惧，乃弃船山行，赢粮冒险，经数百里。
现代文：贺拔胜及卢柔很恐惧，就舍弃船只，爬山而走，带着干粮，冒着危险，行经数百里。
English: Horrified, He Baxing and Lu Rong abandoned the boat and walked up the mountain, risking hundreds of miles with the dry grain.

古文：时属秋霖，徒侣冻馁，死者太半。
现代文：当时适逢秋雨连绵，同行之人又冻又饿，死了一大半。
English: At that time, it coincided with continuous autumn rain, and the people who accompanied him were cold and hungry, and most of them died.

古文：至丰阳界，柔迷失道，独宿僵木之下，寒雨衣湿，殆至于死。
现代文：到丰阳地界，卢柔迷失道路，独自在枯树之下过夜，寒雨打湿了衣服，几乎要冻死。
English: At the Fengyang Land Boundary, Lu Rong lost her way and spent the night alone under a dead tree. The cold rain made her clothes wet, and she almost froze to death.

古文：大统二年，至长安。
现代文：大统二年，到了长安。
English: Two years after reunification, he arrived in Chang'an.

古文：封容城县男，邑二百户。
现代文：封为容城县男，食邑二百户。
English: He was given the title of the man of Yeongseong County, with 200 households in Yeongseong.

古文：太祖重其才，引为行台郎中，加平东将军，除从事中郎，与苏绰对掌机密。
现代文：太祖重视他的才能，推举为行台郎中，加授平束将军，任从事中郎，与苏绰一起掌管机密事务。
English: The great-great-grandfather valued his talent, and he was elected as a member of the Gangtai Clan, awarded the title of General of the Pingzhu Clan, appointed as a middle-ranking official, and in charge of confidential affairs together with Su Qiao.

古文：时沙苑之后，大军屡捷，汝、颍之间，多举义来附。
现代文：当时沙苑之战后，大军屡传捷报，汝、题之间，很多人起义来归附。
English: At that time, after the Battle of Sha Yuan, the great army repeatedly spread the good news, and many people rose up to join.

古文：书翰往反，日百余牒。
现代文：文书往返，每一百余件。
English: There are more than 100 pieces of correspondence going back and forth.

古文：柔随机报答，皆合事宜。
现代文：卢柔根据情况回报答覆，都符合事宜。
English: Lu Ruo replied according to the situation, all of which were in line with the matter.

古文：进爵为子，增邑三百户，除中书舍人。
现代文：晋为子爵，增加食邑三百户，授任中书舍人。
English: He was promoted to the rank of viscount, increased the number of households to 300, and was awarded the title of "Chuangshushe Renren."

古文：迁司农少卿，转郎，兼著作，撰起居注。
现代文：升司农少卿，转为郎，兼任著作，修撰起居注。
English: He was promoted to Shoshi, Junior Secretary of Agriculture, and became a farmer. He also worked as a writer.

古文：后拜黄门侍郎。
现代文：后任黄门侍郎。
English: He later became a waiter at the Yellow Gate.

古文：文帝知其贫，解衣赐之。
现代文：文帝知道他很贫困，脱下外衣赏赐给他。
English: Emperor Wen knew that he was very poor, so he took off his coat and gave it to him.

古文：魏废帝元年，加军骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、中书监。
现代文：魏废帝元年，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍、中书监。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was awarded the title of General of Cavalry, the title of Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and the title of General of Cavalry.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜小内史，迁内史大夫，进位开府。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，任小内史，升内史大夫，晋位开府。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and was appointed to the position of Xiaonai Shi (小内史) and promoted to the position of Shennai Shi Daifu (升内史大夫) and was promoted to the position of Kaifu (開府).

古文：卒于位。
现代文：在官位上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：所作诗颂碑铭檄表启行于世者数十篇。
现代文：所作诗颂碑铭檄表启在世间流传的有数十篇。
English: There are dozens of poems and monuments inscribed with his name that have been circulated around the world.

古文：子恺嗣。
现代文：儿子卢恺继嗣。
English: His son, Lu Ye, succeeded him.

古文：恺字长仁。
现代文：卢恺字旦仁。
English: Lu Hao said, "Tan Ren."

古文：涉猎经史，有当世干能。
现代文：涉猎经籍史书，有治世之才。
English: He dabbles in books of history and literature, and has a talent for ruling the world.

古文：起家齐王记室。
现代文：由查王记室起家做官。
English: He started his career as a government official in the office of King Cha.

古文：历吏部、内史上士，礼部下大夫。
现代文：历任吏部、内史上士，礼部下大夫。
English: He was successively a member of the Ministry of Justice, a member of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and a doctor of etiquette.

古文：寻为聘陈副使。
现代文：不久任访问速迩的副使。
English: He soon became the deputy envoy to visit Saotome.

古文：大象初，拜东京吏部下大夫。
现代文：左塞初年，任塞哀吏部下大夫。
English: In the first year of Zuo Jie, he was appointed as the doctor of the subordinate of Jie Yili.

古文：唐瑾字附璘。
现代文：唐瑾，字附璘。
English: Tang Xuan, the characters with  in the end.

古文：父永。
现代文：父亲名丞。
English: My father's name is Nagase.

古文：性温恭，有器量，博涉经史，雅好属文。
现代文：唐瑾性格温和恭顺，很有度量，广泛地涉猎经籍史书，平素喜好撰写文章。
English: Tang Yao's personality is mild and obedient, he is very measured, he extensively dabbles in books of history and classics, and likes to write articles.

古文：身长八尺二寸，容貌甚伟。
现代文：身高八尺二寸，容貌非常壮美。
English: He is eight feet two inches tall and has a handsome face.

古文：年十七，周文闻其名，乃贻永书曰： 闻公有二子：曰陵，从横多武略；瑾，雍容富文雅。
现代文：十七岁时，旦塞听到他的名声，就赠送卢丞一封书信说： 听说你有两个儿子：一个叫唐陵，性格奔放富有军事才能；一个叫唐瑾，仪态大方通晓艺文礼乐。
English: At the age of seventeen, when Dansai heard of his fame, he presented Lu Zheng with a letter saying: I heard that you have two sons: one is called Tangling, with a vigorous personality and rich military talent; one is called Tang Yao, with a generous demeanor and a knowledge of arts, literature and music.

古文：可并遣入朝，孤欲委以文武之任。 因召拜尚书员外郎、相府记室参军事。
现代文：可以一起派遣进入朝廷，我想将文武的重任交给他们。 于是召入任尚书员外郎、相府记室参军事。
English: They could be sent to the imperial court together, and I wanted to give them the important tasks of literature and military affairs. Therefore, I called in Gairo, who was appointed as a court scribe, and Maru, who was a military officer in the cabinet secretary's office.

古文：军书羽檄，瑾多掌之。
现代文：军事文书，多由唐瑾掌管。
English: Military documents were mostly controlled by the Tang Dynasty.

古文：从破沙苑，战河桥，并有功，封姑臧县子。累迁尚书右丞、吏部郎中。
现代文：跟随攻破沙苑，在河桥作战，都有功劳，封为姑臧县子屡经升迁为尚书右丞、吏部郎中。
English: Following the conquest of Shayuan and the battle in Heqiao, he was awarded the title of the son of Guye County, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of Shangshu Rongzheng and the junior official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：于时魏室播迁，庶务草创，朝章国典，瑾并参之。
现代文：当时魏室流离迁徙，各种事务刚刚创立，朝廷章程，国家典则，唐瑾都参预制订。
English: At that time, the Wei family was displaced and migrated, all kinds of affairs had just been created, the imperial charter, the national code, and Tang Xuan were all involved in the pre-formulation.

古文：迁户部尚书，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：升户部尚书，晋为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐姓宇文氏。
English: As a result, Tang Xuan was given the title of Shang Shucan Wai Rong (尚書员外郎) and became a member of the military in the Office of the Chief of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (相府記室). Tang Xuan was responsible for issuing all kinds of official documents in the military.

古文：时燕公于谨勋高望重，朝野所属。
现代文：当时燕公于谨功高望重，为朝野所瞩目。
English: At that time, Yan Gong was held in high regard for his honorable service, and attracted the attention of the court.

古文：白文帝，言瑾学行兼修，愿与之同姓，结为兄弟，庶子孙承其余论，有益义方。
现代文：他禀告文帝，说唐瑾学问品行修养都好，愿意舆他同姓，结拜为兄弟，希望子孙继承他的宏论，有益于做人之道。
English: He reported to Emperor Wen, saying that Tang Xiu was a man of fine learning, fine conduct and fine upbringing, and that he was willing to have the same surname as Tang Xiu and worship him as a brother. He hoped that Tang Xiu's children and grandchildren would inherit his grand theory, which would be beneficial to their way of life.

古文：文帝叹异者久之，更赐瑾姓纽于氏。
现代文：文帝久久感叹认为奇异，又赐唐瑾姓万纽于氏。
English: Emperor Wen thought it was strange for a long time, and gave the Tang Dynasty the surname of Wanyu Yu.

古文：瑾乃深相结纳，敦长幼之序；谨亦庭罗子孙，行弟侄之敬。
现代文：唐瑾与他深深结交，注重长幼的次序；亍谨也在厅堂罗列子孙，行弟侄的礼仪。
English: Tang Xuan had a deep friendship with him, and paid attention to the order of the eldest son and the youngest son. Xuan Zi also listed his children and grandchildren in the hall, and the etiquette of his younger brothers and nephews.

古文：其为朝望所宗如此。
现代文：他被朝廷有威望的大臣如此尊崇。
English: He was held in such high esteem by the court's most prestigious ministers.

古文：进爵临淄县伯，转吏部尚书。
现代文：晋爵为临淄县伯，调任吏部尚书。
English: He was promoted to Linyi County magistrate and transferred to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：铨综衡流，雅有人伦之鉴。
现代文：量才授官，很有鉴别各类人的能力。
English: He is a good judge of character and has a great ability to distinguish between different types of people.

古文：以父忧去职，寻起令视事。
现代文：他因为父亲去世离职，不久起用命令他治理政事。
English: He left office because of his father's death, and soon afterwards he was ordered to run the government.

古文：时六尚书皆一时之秀，周文自谓得人，号为六俊。
现代文：当时六部尚书都是一时的俊秀，周文自称得到人才，号为 六俊 。
English: At that time, the six Shangshu books were all Junshu at the time. Zhou Wen claimed to be a talented person, and his name was Liujun.

古文：然瑾尤见器重。
现代文：然而唐瑾尤其被器重。
English: However, Tang Xuan is especially revered.

古文：于谨南伐江陵，以瑾为元帅府长史。
现代文：于谨向南讨伐江陵，以唐瑾为元帅府长史。
English: Yu Zheng marched south to attack Jiangling, with Tang Jun as marshal and prefectural governor.

古文：军中谋略，多出瑾焉。
现代文：军队中的谋划策略，很多都出自唐瑾。
English: Many of the planning strategies in the army come from Tang Xuan.

古文：江陵既平，衣冠仕伍，并没为仆隶。
现代文：江陵已经平定，世族、十人、兵士，一起沦没为仆人奴隶。
English: After Gangneung was subdued, all the officials of the Southern Dynasty were reduced to slaves.

古文：瑾察其才行，有片善者，辄议免之，赖瑾获济者甚众。
现代文：唐瑾细察他们的才能品行，有一点可取的，就商议赦免他们，依赖唐瑾获得救助的人很多。
English: Tang Xuan carefully examined their talents and conduct, and if there was anything to be desired, he would discuss pardoning them. Many people depended on Tang Xuan for help.

古文：时论多焉。
现代文：当时的议论都赞许他。
English: The talk at the time was all in his favour.

古文：及军还，诸将多因虏掠，大获财物。
现代文：到大军归还，诸位将领多乘机抢劫，得到大量财物。
English: When the large army returned, the generals took advantage of the opportunity to loot and obtained a large amount of property.

古文：瑾一无所取，唯得书两车，载之以归。
现代文：唐瑾对钱财一无所取，衹得到两车书，载着归还。
English: He didn't get anything, he just got two train books and brought them back.

古文：或白文帝曰： 唐瑾大有辎重，悉是梁朝珍玩。 文帝初不信之，然欲明其虚实，密遣使检阅之，唯见坟籍而已。
现代文：有入禀告文帝说： 唐瑾有很多包裹箱笼，全是梁朝珍宝和玩赏的物品。 文帝本不相信，但是想了解他的实际情况，秘密派出使者检查察看，衹见到古书罢了。
English: In his obituary, Emperor Wen said: Tang Xuan had a lot of boxes and cages, all of which were treasures and playthings of the Liang Dynasty. Emperor Wen did not believe him, but he wanted to know his actual situation and secretly sent an emissary to inspect them. All he saw were old books.

古文：乃叹曰： 孤知此人来二十许年，明其不以利干义。
现代文：就叹息道： 我知道这个人来到已有二十多年，明白他不会以私利于犯道义。
English: He sighed and said, "I know that this man has been here for more than twenty years, and I understand that he will not violate morality for personal gain.

古文：向若不令检视，恐常人有投杼之疑，所以益明之耳。
现代文：如果不派人查看，恐怕普通人受谣言蛊惑而猜疑，造就是使他更加清白的方法了。
English: If they don't send someone to investigate, I'm afraid that ordinary people will be misled by rumors and become suspicious, which is just a way to make him more innocent.

古文：凡受人委任，当如此也。 论平江陵功，进爵为公。
现代文：凡是被人任用的人，应当这样。 评论他平定江陵的功劳，晋为公爵。
English: This is how it should be for anyone who has been appointed by someone else, commenting on his achievements in pacifying Gangneung and being promoted to Duke.

古文：六官建，授礼部中大夫，出为蔡州刺史。
现代文：六官建立，授任礼部中大夫，出任为蔡州刺史。
English: Six officials were established, and he was awarded the title of Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and served as the secretary of the history of Caizhou.

古文：历州、硖州，所在皆有德化，人吏称之。
现代文：历任拓州、硖州，所在之处都有德政感化，百姓官吏都称赞他。
English: Successive governors of Takuzhou and Zhangzhou have been influenced by German politics wherever they have been, and the people and officials have praised him.

古文：转荆州总管府长史。
现代文：调任荆州总管府长史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Jingzhou Chief Administrator.

古文：入为吏部中大夫，历御正、纳言中大夫。
现代文：召入任吏部中大夫，历任御正、纳言中大夫。
English: He was called to the post of junior doctor of the cadre department, and successively held the posts of imperial vice-minister and junior doctor of Nagan.

古文：曾未十旬，遂迁四职，搢绅以为荣。
现代文：未到百，连升四职，士大夫以之为荣耀。
English: Before reaching one hundred, he was promoted to four posts in a row, and he took it as an honor to be promoted to Shidafu.

古文：久之，除司宗中大夫，兼内史。
现代文：过了很久，任司宗中大夫，兼任内史。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the junior doctor of the department and also served as the internal historian.

古文：寻卒于位。
现代文：不久在任上去世。
English: He died shortly after taking office.

古文：赠小宗伯，谥曰方。
现代文：追赠小宗伯，谧号为方。
English: He was posthumously awarded the posthumous title of Junior Master, and his posthumous name was Fang.

古文：瑾性方重，有风格。
现代文：唐瑾性格端方持重，很有风度品格。
English: Tang Xuan's character is very dignified and dignified.

古文：退朝休，恒着衣冠以对妻子。
现代文：退朝休假，经常穿朝服戴官帽来面对妻子儿女。
English: When he is on leave from the imperial court, he often wears imperial robes and an official cap to face his wife and children.

古文：遇迅雷风烈，虽闲夜宴寝，必起，冠带端笏危坐。
现代文：遇上急雷烈风，即使在寂静的夜晚安逸地睡觉之时，也必定起床，戴好官帽系上官带端正笏板正襟危坐。
English: In the event of a sudden thunderstorm, even when sleeping comfortably in a quiet night, you must get up, wear an official cap, wear an official belt, and sit on the board.

古文：又好施与，家无余财，所得禄赐，常散之宗族。
现代文：又喜好施舍给与，家中没有多余的财产，所得到的俸禄赏赐，经常散发给宗族之人。
English: They also like to give alms. There is no extra wealth in the family, and the salary and rewards they receive are often distributed to members of the clan.

古文：其尤贫者，又割膏腴田宇以赈之。
现代文：对那些特别贫困的人，又割让肥沃的田地来救济他们。
English: For those who are particularly poor, fertile fields are also allocated to help them.

古文：所留遗子孙者，并硗埆之地。
现代文：他遗留给子孙的，都是贫瘠的田地。
English: All he left to his descendants were barren fields.

古文：朝野以此称之。
现代文：朝野都因此而称许他。
English: Asano praised him for this.

古文：撰新仪十篇。
现代文：撰著《新仪》十篇。
English: He has written ten articles for Xin Yi.

古文：所着赋颂碑诔二十余万言。
现代文：所著赋颂碑谏共二十多万字。
English: He wrote more than 200,000 words in total.

古文：孙大智嗣。
现代文：孙子唐大智继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his grandson, Tang Dazhi.

古文：瑾次子令则，性好篇章，兼解音律，文多轻艳，为时人所传。
现代文：唐瑾次子庐全型，性格喜好文字著作，兼晓音乐，文章多有纤柔艳丽之辞，被当时的人传诵。
English: Tang Yao's second son was a full-fledged scholar, with a penchant for literary works and a knowledge of music. Many of his articles contained delicate and beautiful words, which were recited by the people of the time.

古文：天和中，以齐驭下大夫使于陈。
现代文：玉翅年间，以齐驭下大夫身份出使到速。
English: During the years of the Jade Wing, he was dispatched to Suwa as a doctor.

古文：大象中，官至乐部下大夫。
现代文：太塞年间，官职做到乐部下大夫。
English: During the Taisei era, the highest-ranking official position was that of a junior doctor.

古文：仕隋，位太子左庶子。
现代文：在瞳塑做官，任太子左庶子。
English: He worked as an official at Hitomiso, and was an illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：皇太子勇废，被诛。
现代文：皇太子圭蝗被废，他也被杀。
English: Crown Prince Gui Locust was deposed, and he was also killed.

