古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余闻刺有五禁，何谓五禁？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯道：我听说针刺治疗时有五禁，什么叫五禁呢？
English: Huang Di asked Qi Bo: I heard that there are five prohibitions in acupuncture treatment. What are the five prohibitions?

古文：岐伯曰：禁其不可刺也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：五禁就是指凡是到禁日，对某些部位应避免针刺。
English: Qi Bo replied: "Five prohibitions" means that when it comes to the forbidden day, acupuncture should be avoided for certain parts.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻刺有五夺。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说针刺的禁忌有五夺。
English: Huang Di said: I heard that there are five taboos for acupuncture.

古文：岐伯曰：无泻其不可夺者也。
现代文：岐伯说：五夺是指在气血衰弱，元气大伤时不能用泻法针刺，以免更伤元气。
English: Qi Bo said: "Five deprivations" means that when the qi and blood are weak and the vitality is greatly injured, it is not possible to use the laxative method of acupuncture, so as not to further injure the vitality.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻刺有五过。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说针刺的禁忌还有叫五过的。
English: Huang Di said: I have heard that the taboo of acupuncture is also called the five-pass.

古文：岐伯曰：补泻无过其度。
现代文：岐伯说：五过就是指针刺补泻不要超过其常度，超常则为过。
English: Qi Bo said: Five times over is the pointer prick to make up for diarrhea not to exceed its normal, abnormal is too much.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻刺有五逆。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说针刺应避免五逆。
English: Huang Di said: I heard that acupuncture should avoid the five evils.

古文：岐伯曰：病与脉相逆，命曰五逆。
现代文：岐伯说：病状与脉象相反的五种情况，叫做五逆。
English: Qi Bo said: the five cases in which the pathology is contrary to the pulse are called the five reversals.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻刺有九宜。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说针刺有九宜。
English: Huang Di said: I heard that acupuncture has nine benefits.

古文：岐伯曰：明知九针之论，是谓九宜。
现代文：岐伯说：清楚地了解九针的理论并能恰当运用，称为九宜。
English: Qi Bo said: A clear understanding of the nine-prong theory and its proper application is called Jiugi.

古文：黄帝曰：何谓五禁？
现代文：黄帝说：什么叫五禁？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What are the Five Prohibitions?

古文：愿闻其不可刺之时。
现代文：我想知道那些时日对那些部位不可针刺。
English: I'd like to know what time of day it is and what areas are off-limits.

古文：岐伯曰：甲乙日自乘，无刺头，无发矇于耳内。
现代文：岐伯说：天干应于人身，甲乙应头，所以适到甲日和乙日，不要刺头部，也不要用 发矇 的针法刺耳内。
English: Qibo said: Tiangan should be applied to the body, and A and B should be applied to the head. Therefore, on days A and B, do not pierce the head, and do not pierce the inner ear with a hairpin.

古文：丙丁日自乘，无振埃于肩、喉廉泉。
现代文：丙丁应肩、喉，逢到丙日和丁日，不要用 振埃 法刺肩、喉部的廉泉穴。
English: Shoulder and larynx should be stimulated. On the third day and the fourth day, do not use the vibration method to stimulate the shoulder and larynx.

古文：戊己日自乘四季，无刺腹，去爪泻水。
现代文：戊己应手足四肢，每逢戊日和己日，不能刺腹部，不要用 去爪 法泻水。
English: You should wash your hands, feet and limbs every Friday and Saturday. Do not prick your abdomen, and do not use the nail-removal method to drain the water.

古文：庚辛日自乘，无刺关节于股膝。
现代文：庚辛应于大腿和膝盖，每逢庚日和辛日，不能刺大腿和膝部的关节。
English: Gengxin should be applied to the thighs and knees. Every Geng day and spicy day, the joints of the thighs and knees should not be pricked.

古文：壬癸日自乘，无刺足胫，是谓五禁。
现代文：壬癸应脚和小腿，每逢壬日和癸日，不能刺脚和小腿的穴位。这就是所说的五禁。
English: Rincheng should be applied to the feet and lower legs, and it is not allowed to prick the feet and lower legs on the first day of the month and the second day of the month. This is the so-called "five prohibitions."

古文：黄帝曰：何谓五夺？
现代文：黄帝问：什么叫五夺？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What is "five conquests"?

古文：岐伯曰：形肉已夺，是一夺也。
现代文：岐伯说：形体肌肉瘦削，是一夺。
English: Qi Bo said: The lean muscular body shape is amazing.

古文：大夺血之后，是二夺也。
现代文：大失血之后，是二夺。
English: After the massive blood loss, it was a close call.

古文：大汗出之后，是三夺也。
现代文：大汗出之后，是三夺。
English: After sweating profusely, it's a three-way fight.

古文：大泄之后，是四夺也。
现代文：大泄之后，是为四夺。
English: After the blowout, it was a four-way tie.

古文：新产及大血之后，是五夺也。
现代文：分娩之后流血过多及大量出血之后，是五夺。
English: Excessive bleeding after childbirth and heavy bleeding after childbirth are five reasons.

古文：此皆不可泻。
现代文：这五种大虚的病症都是元气大伤，不可再用泻法。
English: These five major deficiency diseases are all serious injuries to vitality, and the laxative method can no longer be used.

古文：黄帝曰：何谓五逆？
现代文：黄帝问：什么叫五逆？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What are the Five Contrarieties?

古文：岐伯曰：热病脉静；汗已出，脉盛躁，是一逆也。
现代文：岐伯说：热性病，脉应洪大而反见沉静；在出汗之后，脉应安静，而反见躁动的，是逆证之一。
English: Qi Bo said: "In febrile diseases, the pulse should be large but calm; after sweating, the pulse should be quiet, but agitated, is one of the contraindications.

古文：病泄，脉洪大，是二逆也。
现代文：患泻下病，脉应沉静，而反见洪大之脉，是逆证之二。
English: Suffering from laxity, the pulse should be calm, but on the contrary, the pulse should be large, which is one of the two counterexamples.

古文：着痹不移，䐃肉破，身热，脉偏绝，是三逆也。
现代文：患痹病而长时不愈，肘、膝等处高起的肌肉破溃，身体发热，而脉搏出现偏绝，是逆证之三。
English: If the paralysis lasts for a long time, the elbows, knees, and other elevated muscles are ruptured, the body is feverish, and the pulse is deviated, it is one of the three counterexamples.

古文：淫而夺形、身热，色夭然白，乃后下血衃，血衃笃重，是谓四逆也。
现代文：房事不节，致使形体消瘦，发热，面色苍白而枯晦不泽，或见大便下紫血块更加重了病情的，是为逆证之四。
English: It is one of the four contraindications that the house is not in order, causing the body to be emaciated, feverish, pale and dull, or that the purple blood clot under the stool is more severe.

古文：寒热夺形，脉坚搏，是谓五逆也。
现代文：人有久发寒热，形体消瘦，脉见坚硬搏指的，是逆证之五。
English: People who have had a cold for a long time, are emaciated, and have a stiff pulse are five of the counterexamples.

