古文：秦昭王谓左右曰： 今日韩、魏，孰与始强? 
现代文：秦昭王问左右近臣： 你们看现在的韩、魏两国与以往相比如何？ 
English: Qin Zhao Wang asked his right and left courtiers: How do you see the present Korea and Wei compared to the past?

古文：对曰： 弗如也。 
现代文：左右侍臣答道： 已是今非昔比。 
English: The attendants around him said, "It's not as good as Tian Wen and Meng Wu Xian Neng."

古文：王曰： 今之如耳、魏齐，孰与孟尝、芒卯之贤? 
现代文：昭王又问： 现在的韩臣如耳、魏臣魏齐，与当年田文、芒卯相比谁更贤能呢？ 
English: King Zhao also asked, "Compared with Han Zhenru Er and Wei Zhen Wei Qi in the past, who is more capable now?"

古文：对曰： 弗如也。 
现代文：左右侍臣说： 不如田文、芒卯贤能。 
English: The attendants around him said, "It's not as good as Tian Wen and Meng Wu Xian Neng."

古文：王曰： 以孟尝、芒卯之贤，帅强韩、魏之兵以伐秦，犹无奈寡人何也!今以无能之如耳、魏齐，帅弱韩、魏以攻秦，其无奈寡人何，亦明矣! 
现代文：秦昭王说： 想当初，田文与芒卯率领强大的韩魏联军前来攻打秦国，寡人仍安然不动，视若无物，如今换了没什么才能的如耳、魏齐为统帅，率领疲弱之兵来攻打秦国，更不能奈何我了！ 
English: Qin Zhaowang said: At the beginning, Tianwen and Mengwu led the powerful Han and Wei allied forces to attack Qin, and few people were still calm and motionless, as if there was nothing. Now, the talentless Ru Er and Wei Qi have been replaced as commanders, leading the weak soldiers to attack Qin, and I can't help myself!

古文：左右皆曰： 甚然。 
现代文：神色之间颇为自负。左右都附和说： 大王说得很对！ 
English: The courtiers on both sides said, "That's right."

古文：中期推琴对曰： 三之料天下过矣。
现代文：这时候有个叫中期的大臣推开面前的琴说： 大王对诸侯的事情预料错了。
English: At this time, a mid-ranking minister pushed away the harp in front of him and said: The great king was wrong about the princes.

古文：昔者六晋之时，智氏最强，灭破范、中行，帅韩、魏以围赵襄子于晋阳。决晋水以灌晋阳，城不沉者三板耳。
现代文：古时晋国六个卿相时代，以智氏最强大，智氏灭亡了范、中行氏，并且率领韩、魏联军，把赵襄子围困在晋阳，决开晋水来淹晋阳，仅仅差尺就把全城淹没。
English: In ancient times, during the era of the six princes of Jin, the most powerful was the Zhi clan. The Zhi clan destroyed the Fan and Zhongxing clans, and led the Korean and Wei allied forces to besiege Zhao Xiangzi in Jinyang, cut off the Jin water to flood Jinyang, and drowned the whole city just a few feet away.

古文：智伯出行水，韩康子御，魏桓子骖乘。
现代文：当智伯坐战车出去巡视水势时，由韩康子给他拉马，由魏桓子陪他坐车。
English: When Zhibo went out to inspect the water level in a chariot, Han Yanzi gave him a horse and Wei Huanzi accompanied him in the chariot.

古文：智伯曰： 始吾不知水之可亡人之国也，乃今知之。
现代文：这时智伯说： 当初我不知道水可以灭亡人家的国家，现在我才知道。
English: At this time, Zhi Bo said: At first, I didn't know that water could destroy a country, but now I know.

古文：汾水利以灌安邑，绛水利以灌平阳。 
现代文：汾水便于淹魏都安邑，而绛水便于渑韩都平阳。
English: Surabaya is convenient for flooding the capital of Wei, Anyi, and Surabaya is convenient for flooding the capital of Han, Pingyang.

古文：魏恒子肘韩康子，康子履魏恒子，蹑其踵。
现代文：于是，魏桓子就用肘碰了碰韩康子，韩康子用脚踩了踩魏桓子，踢了踢他的脚跟。
English: As a result, Wei Huan Zi touched Han Kang Zi with his elbow, Han Kang Zi stepped on Wei Huan Zi with his foot, and kicked his heel.

古文：肘足接于车上，而智氏分矣。
现代文：他们就在车上碰碰肘、踢踢脚的工夫，就决定了智伯国家的分裂命运。
English: The time they spent bumping elbows and kicking and kicking in the car decided the fate of the split of the Zhibo country.

古文：身死国亡，为天下笑。
现代文：后来智伯身死国亡，被天下人所耻笑。 
English: Later, Zhi Bo died and the country was shamed by the whole world.

古文：今秦之强，不能过智伯；韩、魏虽弱，尚贤在晋阳之下也。
现代文：现在秦国的强盛还没有超过智伯，韩、魏虽然衰弱，仍然胜过赵襄子被围困在晋阳时。
English: At present, the prosperity of Qin has not surpassed that of Zhibo, and although Han and Wei are weak, they are still better than Zhao Xiangzi when he was besieged in Jinyang.

古文：此乃方其用肘足时也，愿王之勿易也。 
现代文：所以现在就是韩、魏碰手撞足的时候，但愿君王不要大意。 
English: So now is the time for Han and Wei to butt heads. I hope the king doesn't mind.

