古文：冠称元服，衣曰身章。
现代文：冠是戴在头上的服饰，称为 元服 ；衣是穿在身上的文采，称为 身章 。
English: The crown is the costume worn on the head, known as the original dress; the robe is the decoration worn on the body, known as the badge.

古文：曰弁曰冔曰冕，皆冠之号；日履日舄曰屣，悉鞋之名。
现代文：弁、冔、冕都是帽子的名称；履、舄、屣，都是鞋子的名称。
English: The name of the hat is the valve, the brim, and the crown; and the name of the shoe is the shoe, the brim, and the crown.

古文：上公命服有九锡，士人初冠有三加。
现代文：三公以上的命服有九等，皆君主所赐叫做 九锡 ；士人成年行冠礼，要换三次帽子，称为 三加 。
English: There are nine grades of life jackets for three or more dukes, all of which are given by the monarch and are called Jiuxi; for the coronation of a scholar as an adult, the hat must be changed three times, which is called three plus.

古文：簪缨缙绅，仕宦之称；章甫缝掖，儒者之服。
现代文：簪缨、缙绅皆是官员的代称，章甫、缝掖都是读书人所穿的衣服和戴的帽子。
English: "" and "绅" are the representative names of officials, and "章甫" and "缝" are the names of the clothes and hats worn by readers.

古文：布衣即白丁之谓，青衿乃生员之称。
现代文：布衣就是对平民百姓的称呼；青衿乃是生员、秀才的名称。
English: Buyi is the name for the common people; Qingtao is the name for the freshmen and talents.

古文：葛屦履霜，诮俭啬之过甚；绿衣黄里，讥贵贱之失伦。
现代文： 葛屦履霜 ，是讥讽人俭朴吝啬得太过分了； 绿衣黄里 ，是讽刺人贵贱伦常颠倒了顺序。
English: Kudzu is a satirist who takes frugality and parsimony too far; green-and-yellow is a satirist who reverses the order of nobility and vulgarity.

古文：上服曰衣，下服曰裳；衣前曰襟，衣后曰裾。
现代文：上身的服装叫做 衣 ，下身的服装叫做 裳 。衣的前幅称作 襟 ，后幅称作 裾 。
English: The upper garment is called the robe, and the lower garment is called the petticoat. The front of the robe is called the collar, and the back is called the hem.

古文：敝衣曰褴褛，美服曰华裾。
现代文：破烂的衣服称作 褴褛 ，华丽的衣服称作 华裾 
English: Tattered clothes are called, gorgeous clothes are called 华裾

古文：襁褓乃小儿之衣，弁髦亦小儿之饰。
现代文： 襁褓 是婴儿的服饰， 弁髦 是孩童的帽子。
English: is a baby's dress, 弁髦 is a child's hat.

古文：左衽是夷狄之服，短后是武夫之衣。
现代文：衣襟开在左边的是夷人的衣服，后幅短的上衣是武夫穿的。
English: On the left, with the lapels open, is the clothing of a barbarian, while the short-sleeved shirt behind is worn by a warrior.

古文：尊卑失序，如冠履倒置；富贵不归，如锦衣夜行。
现代文：凡是不讲尊卑次序的人，好比 冠履倒置 ；发财显贵的人不回到家乡去，好比 锦衣夜行 。
English: All those who do not speak of the order of superiority and inferiority are like crowns and shoes turned upside down; those who are rich and distinguished do not go back to their hometowns, like brocades and night walks.

古文：狐裘三十年，俭称晏子；锦幛四十里，富羡石崇。
现代文：一件狐皮袍穿了三十年，晏子的俭朴为人称道；王恺搭起四十里长的锦帐，石崇的豪富让人羡慕。
English: A fox-skin robe is worn for thirty years, and the thriftiness of the mule is praised; Wang Xi sets up a forty-mile-long brocade account, and the rich people of Shitong are envied.

古文：孟尝君珠履三千客，牛僧孺金钗十二行。
现代文：孟尝君有三千门客，个个都穿着珍珠装饰的鞋子；牛僧孺姬妾众多，头戴金钗的女子就有十二排。
English: Meng Yuqun has three thousand customers, all of whom are wearing shoes decorated with pearls; the cow monk and his concubine are numerous, and there are twelve rows of women wearing gold bracelets.

古文：千金之裘，非一狐之腋；绮罗之辈，非养蚕之人。
现代文：价值千金的皮袍，不是一只狐狸腋下之毛就能缝制而成的；身着绮罗绸缎的人，都不是养蚕人。
English: A valuable leather robe cannot be sewn from the hair of a fox's armpit; a man dressed in silk is not a silkworm breeder.

古文：贵者重裀叠褥，贫者裋褐不完。
现代文：富贵者的衣被铺盖，用的都是重重叠叠的毯子褥子。贫穷的人有的连裋褐粗布的衣衫都不完整。
English: The clothes of the rich and famous were covered with overlapping blankets and satin, while the clothes of the poor and destitute were not complete, even their coarse brown cloths.

古文：卜子夏甚贫，鹑衣百结；公孙弘甚俭，布被十年。
现代文：子夏家贫穿的衣服破破烂烂，打的补丁已经有百结了。公孙弘非常节俭，一床布被盖了十年。
English: The clothes worn by the poor Zixia family are tattered and worn out, and the patches they have made are already a hundred knots. Gongsun Hong is very frugal, and one bed has been covered with cloth for ten years.

古文：南州冠冕，德操称庞统之迈众；三河领袖，崔浩羡裴骏之超群。
现代文： 南州冠冕 ，这是司马徽称赞庞统才华出众； 三河领袖 ，这是崔浩羡慕裴骏智能超群。
English: Nanzhou crown, this is Sima Hui's praise for outstanding talent; Sanhe leader, this is Cui Hao's envy of Pei Jun's superior intelligence.

古文：虞舜制衣裳，所以命有德；昭侯藏敝裤，所以待有功。
现代文：虞舜制定衣裳的图案颜色等级，用它任命贤德的人；魏昭侯收藏破裤，用来赏赐给有功的人。
English: Gu Yao established the pattern color grade of clothing, and used it to appoint virtuous people; Wei Zhaohou collected torn trousers, which were used to reward meritorious people.

古文：唐文宗袖经三浣，晋文公衣不重裘。
现代文：唐文宗的衣服洗了三次仍在穿。晋文公提倡节俭，不同时穿两件皮衣。
English: Tang Wenzong's clothes have been washed three times and are still being worn. Jin Wengong advocates frugality and does not wear two furs at the same time.

古文：衣履不敝，不肯更为，世称尧帝；衣不经新，何由得故，妇劝桓冲。
现代文：衣服鞋子不穿到有破损，不肯换新的，所以世人称颂尧帝俭朴；新做的衣服不穿用，哪里有旧衣可穿呢！
English: People do not wear clothes and shoes until they are damaged and do not want to replace them with new ones, so the world praises Emperor Qian for his frugality; if you do not wear new clothes, where can you wear old clothes?

古文：王氏之眉贴花钿，被韦固之剑所刺；贵妃之乳服诃子，为禄山之爪所伤。
现代文：这是桓冲的妻子劝桓冲的话。韦固的妻子王氏眉心贴着花钿，是因为被丈夫刺伤；杨贵妃穿着胸衣，是因为她曾被安禄山抓伤了乳房。
English: This is what Huanchong's wife said to persuade Huanchong. Weigu's wife, Wang Shizhong, wore a wreath on her eyebrow because she was stabbed by her husband; Yang Guifei wore a bra because she had been scratched by Anlu Shan.

古文：姜氏翕和，兄弟每宵同大被；王章未遇，夫妻寒夜卧牛衣。
现代文：姜家兄弟和睦每天晚上都睡在一起，盖同一床被子。王章未得到君王的赏识之前十分贫困，夫妻两人在寒冬只能睡在草编的牛衣上。
English: The brothers of the Jiang family slept together in harmony every night, covering the same bed quilt. Wang Zhang was very poor before he was appreciated by the king, and the two couples could only sleep in the cold winter on straw-woven cow clothes.

古文：绶带轻裘，羊叔子乃斯文主将；葛巾野服，陶渊明真陆地神仙。
现代文：缓带轻裘，世人称羊祐为 斯文主将 ；葛巾野服，世人称陶渊明为 陆地神仙 。
English: With a light touch, the world calls Yosuke a gentle captain; Ge is a field uniform, and the world calls Tao Yuanming a land god.

古文：服之不衷，身之灾也；緼袍不耻，志独超欤。
现代文：衣服如果穿得不合自己的身份，会招来杀身之祸；身着破袍而不以为耻，其志向的确超越众人啊！
English: If you wear clothes that don't fit your identity, you will invite death; if you wear a ragged robe, you won't be ashamed, and your aspirations will truly surpass everyone else's!

