古文：天尊地卑，乾坤定矣。卑高以陈，贵贱位矣。
现代文：天尊贵在上，地卑微在下，《易经》中乾为天为高为阳，坤为地为低为阴的象征就定了。
English: Heaven is exalted above, and earth is humbled beneath. In the I Ching, dry symbolizes heaven, high symbolizes the sun, and coarse symbolizes earth, low symbolizes the shade.

古文：动静有常，刚柔断矣。方以类聚，物以群分，吉凶生矣。
现代文：天地间万事万物莫不由卑下以至高大，杂然并陈，《易经》中六爻贵贱的位置，亦依序而排定了。
English: Everything in heaven and earth cannot help but rise from the lowly to the highest, and they are all the same. In the I Ching, the six noble and lowly positions are also arranged in order.

古文：在天成象，在地成形，变化见矣。是故刚柔相摩，八卦相荡，鼓之以雷霆，润之以风雨；日月运行，一寒一暑。
现代文：所以宇宙间，阴阳二性不停地切摩变化，八卦所代表的八种天地间的八个基本物象，不停地相与鼓动变化，由是产生了宇宙万有。比如说，以雷霆之气，鼓动万物的生机，以风雨疏散润泽万物的气机，日月的运行就构成了人间的昼夜寒暑。
English: Therefore, in the universe, the yin and yang of the two sexes are constantly rubbing and changing, and the eight basic objects of the eight kinds of heaven and earth represented by the Eight Trigrams are constantly interacting and agitating changes, which produced the universe of all things. For example, with the breath of thunder, the vitality of all things is agitated, and the wind and rain are used to disperse the moisture of all things. The movement of the sun and moon constitutes the cold and heat of day and night in the human world.

古文：乾道成男，坤道成女。
现代文：乾为天为父为阳，是构成男性的象征，坤为地为母为阴，是构成女性的象征。
English: Dry for the sky for the father for the yang, is a symbol of the male, Kun for the earth for the mother for the yin, is a symbol of the female.

古文：乾知大始，坤作成物。
现代文：乾为天，代表时间，故知天地之大始；坤为地代表空间，故能作成万物。
English: Qian is heaven, representing time, so he knows the beginning of heaven and earth; Kun is earth, representing space, so he can create all things.

古文：乾以易知，坤以简能；易则易知，简则易从；易知则有亲，易从则有功；有亲则可久，有功则可大；可久则贤人之德，可大则贤人之业。
现代文：乾为天昭然运行于上而昼夜攸分，是容易让人了解的，坤为地浑然化为万物，是以简易为其功能的。容易则易于知解，简易则容易遵从。容易使人了解则有人亲附，容易遵从，则行之有功。有人亲附则可以长久，有能成功则可以创造伟大的事业。可以长久的，是贤人的德泽；可以成为伟大的，是贤人的事业。
English: It is easy for people to understand that the heavens and the earth move above and the day and night are important. It is easy for people to understand that the earth and the sky are transformed into all things, and it is easy for them to function. It is easy to understand that it is easy to understand, and it is easy to follow that it is easy to follow. It is easy for people to understand that it is easy to follow, and it is easy to follow that it is effective. It can be long for people to follow, and it can be successful that it can create a great cause. It can be long, it is the virtue of the wise; it can be great, it is the cause of the wise

古文：易简而天下之理得矣。天下之理得，而成位乎其中矣。
现代文：《易经》的道理即是如此简易，而能包含天下的道理，能了知天下的道理，则能与天地同参，而成就不朽的名位了。
English: The truth of "I Ching" is so simple, but if it can contain the truth of the world, if it can know the truth of the world, it can participate with heaven and earth, and achieve an immortal place.

