古文：四年春，王正月，公及齐侯平莒及郯。
现代文：四年春季，周历正月，宣公和齐惠公促成莒国和郯国讲和。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Xuan Gong and Qi Huigong led the two countries to declare peace.

古文：莒人不肯，公伐莒，取向。
现代文：莒人不肯宣公攻打莒国，占领了向地。
English: The Xiongnu people refused to proclaim the gospel, attacked the Xiongnu country and occupied Xiangdi.

古文：秦伯稻卒。
现代文：秦伯稻去世。
English: Qin Borao passed away.

古文：夏六月乙酉，郑公子归生弑其君夷。
现代文：夏季六月乙酉日，郑国公子归生杀掉了自己的君主。
English: In the summer of June, on Acetylene Day, Prince Zheng Guozhong killed his own monarch.

古文：赤狄侵齐。
现代文：赤狄入侵齐国。
English: Red Di invaded Qi.

古文：秋，公如齐。
现代文：秋季，宣公去齐国。
English: In autumn, Xuan Gong went to Qi Province.

古文：公至自齐。
现代文：宣公从齐国回来。
English: Zhuang Gong has returned from Qi Province.

古文：冬，楚子伐郑。
现代文：冬季，楚国攻打郑国。
English: In winter, Chu attacked Zheng.

古文：四年春，公及齐侯平莒及郯。
现代文：四年春季，鲁宣公和齐惠公使莒国和郯国讲和，莒人不肯。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Lu Xuan and Qi Hui, the envoys of the State Council and the State Council, made peace, but the people of the State Council refused.

古文：莒不肯，公伐莒，取向，非礼也。
现代文：宣公攻打莒国，占领了向地，这是不合于礼的。
English: It is unseemly to proclaim the gospel, attack and subdue the country, and occupy the country.

古文：平国以礼不以乱，伐而不治，乱也。
现代文：和别国讲和应该用礼，不应该用动乱。讨伐就不能安定，就是动乱。
English: To make peace with other countries, you should use courtesy, not turmoil. If the crusade is not stable, it is turmoil.

古文：以乱平乱，何治之有？
现代文：用动乱去平定动乱，还有什么安定？
English: Using turmoil to quell turmoil, what kind of stability is there?

古文：无治，何以行礼？
现代文：没有安定，用什么来实行礼？
English: Without stability, with what to perform the rite?

古文：楚人献鼋于郑灵公。
现代文：楚国人献给郑灵公一只大甲鱼。
English: The people of Chu dedicated a large turtle to Zheng Linggong.

古文：公子宋与子家将见。子公之食指动，以示子家，曰： 他日我如此，必尝异味。 
现代文：公子宋和子家将要进见，走在路上，公子宋的食指忽然自己动了起来，就把它给子家看，说： 以往我遇到这种情况，一定可以尝到美味。 
English: Mr. Song and his son's family were about to go to the market. As they were walking along the road, Mr. Song's index finger suddenly moved on its own. He showed it to his son's family and said, "I've encountered this situation before, I can definitely taste the deliciousness."

古文：及入，宰夫将解鼋，相视而笑。
现代文：等到进去以后，厨师正准备切甲鱼，两人互相看着而笑起来。
English: When they get inside, the chef is preparing to carve a turtle, and the two look at each other and laugh.

古文：公问之，子家以告。
现代文：郑灵公问他们为什么笑，子家就把刚才的情况告诉郑灵公。
English: Zheng Linggong asked why they were laughing, and his son told Zheng Linggong about the situation.

古文：及食大夫鼋，召子公而弗与也。
现代文：等到郑灵公把甲鱼赐给大夫们吃的时候，也把公子宋召来但偏不给他吃。
English: When Zheng Linggong gave the turtle fish to the doctors to eat, he also called his son Song, but did not give it to him to eat.

古文：子公怒，染指于鼎，尝之而出。
现代文：公子宋发怒，用手指头在鼎里蘸了蘸，尝到味道后才退出去。
English: Furious, Prince Song dipped his finger into the soup and tasted it before leaving.

古文：公怒，欲杀子公。
现代文：郑灵公发怒，要杀死公子宋。
English: Ling Gong was very angry and wanted to kill Zi Gong.

古文：子公与子家谋先。
现代文：公子宋和子家策划先下手。
English: Zi Gong and Zi Jia Shangyi attacked first.

古文：子家曰： 畜老，犹惮杀之，而况君乎？ 
现代文：子家说： 牲口老了，尚且不忍心杀掉，何况是国君呢？ 
English: His son said, "How can you kill an old animal, let alone a sovereign?"

古文：反谮子家，子家惧而从之。
现代文：公子宋就反过来诬陷子家。子家害怕，只好跟着他干。
English: Prince Song, in turn, framed his son's family. The son's family was afraid and had no choice but to follow him.

古文：夏，弑灵公。
现代文：夏季，杀死了郑灵公。
English: In the summer, they killed Reigo.

古文：书曰： 郑公子归生弑其君夷。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说： 郑公子归生弑其君夷。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that: Zheng Gongzi was born in Shijiazhuang.

古文：权不足也。
现代文：这是由于子家的勇气不足。
English: This was due to a lack of courage on the part of the child's family.

古文：君子曰： 仁而不武，无能达也。 
现代文：君子说： 仁爱而没有勇武，总是达不到目的。 
English: The gentleman said, "Charity without courage will always fall short of the goal."

古文：凡弑君：称君，君无道也；称臣，臣之罪也。
现代文：凡是杀死国君，如果只记载国君的名字，这是由于国君无道；记载臣下的名字，这就是臣下有罪过。
English: Whenever a sovereign is killed, if only the sovereign's name is recorded, it is because the sovereign is a scoundrel; if a subject's name is recorded, it is because the subject is guilty.

古文：郑人立子良，辞曰： 以贤则去疾不足，以顺则公子坚长。 
现代文：郑国人要立子良为国君，子良辞谢说： 以贤明而论，去疾是不够的，以顺序而论，公子坚年长。 
English: The people of Zheng wanted to make Ziliang the ruler of the country. Ziliang thanked them and said: On the basis of wisdom, it is not enough to cure diseases. On the basis of order, the prince is older.

古文：乃立襄公。
现代文：就立了郑襄公。
English: Zheng Xiang stood up.

古文：襄公将去穆氏，而舍子良。
现代文：襄公准备驱逐他的兄弟们，而赦免了子良。
English: Prince Xiang was about to expel his brothers, but he pardoned Ziliang.

古文：子良不可，曰： 穆氏宜存，则固愿也。
现代文：子良不同意，说： 穆公的儿子如果适合留下来，去疾本来就有这样的愿望。
English: Ziliang disagreed, saying, "If Mu Gong's son is fit to stay, he would have had such a desire to go to the hospital.

古文：若将亡之，则亦皆亡，去疾何为？ 
现代文：如果要离开郑国，那就都离开，为什么单独留下去疾？ 
English: If you want to leave Zhengzhou, then all leave, why stay alone?

古文：乃舍之，皆为大夫。
现代文：于是赦免了他们，让他们都做大夫。
English: So he pardoned them and let them all become doctors.

古文：初，楚司马子良生子越椒。
现代文：当初，楚国的司马子良生了子越椒。
English: At first, Sima Zilang of Chu gave birth to a son, Yue Zi.

古文：子文曰： 必杀之。
现代文：子文说： 一定要杀死他！
English: Ziwen said, "We must kill him!"

古文：是子也，熊虎之状，而豺狼之声，弗杀，必灭若敖氏矣。
现代文：这个孩子，有熊虎的形状、豺狼的声音，不杀，必然会灭亡若敖氏了。
English: This child, with the shape of a bear and tiger, and the voice of a wolf, if not killed, would certainly perish if he were a member of the Yao clan.

古文：谚曰： 狼子野心。 
现代文：俗话说： 狼子野心。 
English: As the saying goes: ambition is the wolf's food.

古文：是乃狼也，其可畜乎？ 
现代文：这孩子是一条狼，难道能够养着吗？ 
English: This child is a wolf, can it be raised?

古文：子良不可。子文以为大慼，及将死，聚其族曰： 椒也知政，乃速行矣，无及于难。 
现代文：子良不同意，子文把这件事当成一件很大的忧心事，到他临死的时候，聚集了他的族人，说： 如果越椒一旦执政，就快点走吧，不要遭到祸难。 
English: Ziliang disagreed. Ziwen regarded this as a matter of great concern. When he was about to die, he gathered his people and said, "If Yuefei comes to power, let's leave quickly, so as not to meet with disaster."

古文：且泣曰： 鬼犹求食，若敖氏之鬼，不其馁而？ 
现代文：同时哭着说： 鬼尚且要求吃东西，若敖氏的鬼不是要挨饿了吗！ 
English: At the same time, he cried and said, "The ghost is still demanding to eat, if the ghost of Mr. Yu is not going to starve!"

古文：及令尹子文卒，鬥般为令尹，子越为司马，蒍贾为工正。谮子扬而杀之，子越为令尹，己为司马。
现代文：等到令尹子文死去，鬬般担任令尹，子越担任司马。贾出任工正，诬陷子扬并且杀了他，子越就做了令尹，他自己做了司马。
English: When Ling Yin Ziwen died, Zi Yue became Ling Yin, Zi Yue became Sima, Jia became Gong Zheng, framed Zi Yang and killed him, Zi Yue became Ling Yin, and Zi Yue became Sima.

古文：子越又恶之，乃以若敖氏之族圄伯嬴于轑阳而杀之，遂处烝野，将攻王。
现代文：子越又讨厌他，就带领了若敖氏的族人把伯嬴囚禁在轑阳并且杀死了他，于是就住在烝野地方，准备进攻楚庄王。
English: The more his son disliked him, he led the members of the Wakasa clan to imprison Haku in Shinyang and kill him, so he lived in the wilderness and prepared to attack the king of Chuzhuang.

古文：王以三王之子为质焉，弗受，师于漳澨。
现代文：楚庄王用三代国王的子孙作为人质，子越不接受。楚庄王在漳澨用兵。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang used the descendants of three generations of kings as hostages, and the sons did not accept it. The king of Chu Zhuang used soldiers in Shao.

古文：秋七月戊戌，楚子与若敖氏战于皋浒。
现代文：秋季，七月初九日，楚庄王和若敖氏在皋浒作战。
English: In the autumn, on the 9th day of the 7th month, King Chu Zhuang and the Ruoqi clan fought in the city of Zhengzhou.

古文：伯棼射王，汏辀，及鼓跗，著于丁宁。
现代文：子越椒用箭射楚庄王，力量强而箭镞锋利，箭飞过车辕，穿过鼓架，射在铜钲上。
English: Zi Yue Pepper shot the king of Chu Zhuang with an arrow. The power was strong and the arrowhead was sharp. The arrow flew over the carriage, through the drum stand, and shot at the gong.

古文：又射汏辀，以贯笠毂。
现代文：又射一箭，飞过车辕，透过车盖。
English: Another arrow, flying over the wheel rim, through the hood.

古文：师惧，退。
现代文：士兵害怕，开始退却。
English: Frightened, the soldiers began to retreat.

古文：王使巡师曰： 吾先君文王克息，获三矢焉。
现代文：楚庄王派人在军队里到处喊着说： 我们的先君文王攻克息国，得到三枝箭，子越椒偷去两枝，已经全用完了。 
English: The king of Chu Zhuang sent people to shout everywhere in the army, saying: Our forefather King Wen conquered the country, got three arrows, and Zi Yue Zhe stole two, and they have all been used up.

古文：伯棼窃其二，尽于是矣。 鼓而进之，遂灭若敖氏。初，若敖娶于云阜，生鬥伯比。
现代文：于是楚王下令击鼓进军，就消灭了若敖氏。当初，若敖在云阜国娶妻，生了鬬伯比。
English: As a result, King Chu gave the order to march to the beat of drums, and the Ruo family was wiped out. Originally, Ruo Ruo married a woman in Yunnan Province and gave birth to Ruo Bo Bi.

古文：若敖卒，从其母畜于云阜，淫于云阜子之女，生子文焉。
现代文：若敖死后，跟着他的母亲养在云阜国，和云阜子的女儿私通，生了子文。
English: After Ruo Ruo's death, he was raised by his mother in Yufu Province. He had an affair with Yufu's daughter and gave birth to Ziwen.

古文：夫人使弃诸梦中，虎乳之。云阜子田，见之，惧而归，夫人以告，遂使收之。
现代文：夫人让人把子文丢在云梦泽里，有老虎给他喂奶，云阜子打猎，看到这场面，害怕而回来。夫人把女儿私生子的情况告诉子，子就让人收养了子文。
English: His wife asked someone to leave Ziwen in Yunmen Lake. A tiger fed him milk, and Yunfu Zi went hunting. Seeing this, he was afraid and came back. His wife told him about her daughter's illegitimate child, and the son asked someone to adopt Ziwen.

古文：楚人谓乳穀，谓虎於菟，故命之曰鬥穀於菟。
现代文：楚国人把奶叫做 穀 ，把老虎叫做 於菟 ，所以就把这个孩子叫做鬬穀於菟。
English: The people of Chu call milk koku (grain) and tigers yakitori, so they called this child yakitori yakitori.

古文：以其女妻伯比，实为令尹子文。
现代文：云阜子把他的女儿嫁给鬬伯比做妻子。鬬穀於菟就是令尹子文。
English: Yun Fu Zi married his daughter to Zibo Bi as his wife.

古文：其孙箴尹克黄使于齐，还，及宋，闻乱。
现代文：子文的孙子箴尹克黄出使齐国，回来时到达宋国，听到叛乱消息。
English: Ziwen's grandson Zhen Yin Ke Huang sent an envoy to Qi, and when he returned, he arrived in Song and heard the news of the rebellion.

古文：其人曰， 不可以入矣。 
现代文：有人说： 不能回去了。 
English: Some people say: I can't go back.

古文：箴尹曰： 弃君之命，独谁受之？
现代文：箴尹说 丢掉国君的命令，还有谁来接受我？
English: Zhen Yin said, "Throw away the order of the sovereign, who else will accept me?"

古文：君，天也，天可逃乎？ 
现代文：国君，就是上天，难道可以逃避上天吗？ 
English: Is it possible for the sovereign, that is, heaven, to escape from heaven?

古文：遂归，复命而自拘于司败。
现代文：就回到楚国复命，并且自动到法官那里请求囚禁。
English: He returned to Chu to have his life restored, and went to the judge of his own accord to request imprisonment.

古文：王思子文之治楚国也，曰： 子文无后，何以劝善？ 
现代文：楚庄王想起子文治理楚国的功绩，说： 子文如果没有后代，如何劝人为善？ 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang recalled Ziwen's achievements in governing the state of Chu and said: If Ziwen has no descendants, how can he persuade people to be good?

古文：使复其所，改命曰生。
现代文：就让克黄恢复原来的官职，把他的名字改为 生 。
English: He allowed Kehuang to resume his former official position and changed his name to Sheng.

古文：冬，楚子伐郑，郑未服也。
现代文：冬天，楚国军队讨伐郑国，郑国没有顺服。
English: In winter, the army of Chu attacked Zheng, but Zheng did not obey.

