古文：王祐温峤戴文谌黄石公袁双商康贾充王文度徐长陈绪白道猷高雅之罗根生沈纵戴氏女孙盛湛满竺县遂武曾晋孝武帝蔺启之王猛封驱之
现代文：王祐温峤戴文谌黄石公袁双商康贾充王文度徐长陈绪白道猷高雅之罗根生沈纵戴氏女孙盛湛满竺县遂武曾晋孝武帝蔺启之王猛封驱之
English: Wang YuwenDai WenHuangshi GongYuan ShuangShangKangJiaChongWangWenDuXuChangChenXubaiDaoHighlyElegantLuoGenshengShenGongDai's granddaughterShengTanManSuibuZengJinXiaoWu EmperorQi's WangMengFeng

古文：王祐
现代文：王祐
English: Wang Yu

古文：散骑侍郎王祐，疾困，与母辞诀。
现代文：任散骑侍郎一职的王祐，由于被疾病折磨得死去活来，便与母亲诀别。
English: Wang Yu, who held the position of horseback riding attendant, said goodbye to his mother because he was tortured to death by the disease.

古文：既而闻有通宾者曰： 某郡某里某人。 
现代文：随即，他就听见友人来报说： 曾经任过别驾的某郡某里某人，突然登门来访。 
English: Immediately, he heard a friend report: "Someone from such and such county, who used to be a taxi driver, suddenly came to visit.

古文：尝为别驾，祐亦雅闻其姓字。
现代文：其实，王祐也听说过词人的姓名。
English: In fact, Wang Yu also heard the name of the lyricist.

古文：有顷，奄然来至，曰： 与卿士类，有自然之分，又州里，情便款然。
现代文：来报信的人又说： 这个人与你是同一种人，你们二人有天然的缘分，又是同州同里人。 于是，王祐对客人相当热情，款然接待。
English: The person who came to report the letter also said: This person is the same kind of person as you, you two have a natural predestination, and you are from the same state and the same village. Therefore, Wang Yu was quite enthusiastic about the guests and received them warmly.

古文：今年国家有大事，出三将军，分布征发。
现代文：客人告诉他说： 今年国家有大事，把三将军派出来到各地向民间征调兵将。
English: The guest told him: This year, the country is facing major events, and the three generals will be sent to various regions to recruit and transfer soldiers from the civilian population.

古文：吾等十余人，为赵公明府参佐。至此仓卒，见卿有高门大屋，故来投。
现代文：我们这十来个人，都是赵公明府里的参佐，仓卒来到此地，见你这里有高门深院，于是就投奔来了。
English: These ten or so of us are all councilors in Zhao Gongming's government. We came here in a hurry, saw that there was Gaomen Shenyuan here, so we rushed here.

古文：与卿相得，大不可言。 
现代文：我与你相投又相称，此情深不可言。 
English: I'm your perfect match, I'm your perfect match, I can't say it enough.

古文：祐知其鬼神，曰： 不幸笃疾，死在旦夕，遭卿以性命相托。 
现代文：王祐知道他是鬼神，便说： 我不幸病情转重，死在旦夕，今天有幸遇到你，便想以性命相托。 
English: Wang Yu knew that he was a ghost and said, "I unfortunately fell seriously ill and died on the eve of death. Today, I had the good fortune to meet you, and I want to entrust my life to you."

古文：答曰： 人生有死，此必然之事。
现代文：客人回答说： 人生固有一死，这是必然的事情。
English: The guest replied, "Life has a death, it's inevitable.

古文：死者不系生时贵贱。
现代文：死去的人，与生前的贵贱毫无关系。
English: Those who have died have nothing to do with the nobility of their former lives.

古文：吾今见领兵千人，须卿，得度薄相付。
现代文：我今天举荐你领兵千人，必须等到官署下文书之后才能上任。
English: Today, I recommend you to lead a thousand soldiers. You must wait until you receive the official document from the government office before you can take office.

古文：如此地难得，不宜辞之。 
现代文：这件事情是非常难得的，你不应该推辞呵。 
English: This is a very rare thing, you shouldn't turn it down.

古文：祐曰： 老母年高，兄弟无有，一旦死亡，前无供养。 
现代文：王祐说： 老母亲年纪太大了，又没有一个兄弟，我一旦死了，老母亲谁来侍养？ 
English: Wang Yu said: My old mother is too old and has no brother. If I die, who will take care of my old mother?

古文：遂歔欷不能自胜。
现代文：随即便歔欷感叹，不能自已。
English: I can't help but sigh.

古文：其人怆然曰： 卿位为常伯，而家无余财。向闻与尊夫人辞诀，言辞哀苦，然则卿国士也，如何可令死。
现代文：那位客人也怆然说道： 你身为皇帝的近臣，而家中却没有什么财产；刚才，我又听你与老母亲诀别，言辞悲哀凄苦，令人心碎，但你的的确确称得上一个国士，怎么能让你死呢？
English: The guest also said: "You are a close retainer of the emperor, but your family has no property; just now, I heard you say goodbye to your old mother. The words are sad, bitter, and heartbreaking, but you are indeed a statesman. How can you let you die?

古文：吾当相为。 
现代文：我应当相助于你。 
English: I should be helping you.

古文：因起去： 明日更来。 
现代文：于是他起身而去。说： 第二天来。 
English: So he got up and left, saying, "Come back the next day."

古文：其明日又来。
现代文：第二天又来了。
English: The next day it happened again.

古文：祐曰： 卿许活吾，当卒恩不？ 
现代文：王祐说： 你如果让我活下去，当至死不忘这大恩大德。 
English: Wang Yu said, "If you let me live, I will never forget your great kindness."

古文：答曰： 大老子业已许卿，当复相欺耶！ 
现代文：回答说： 我们将军老爷子已经答应了你，我还能骗你吗？ 
English: He replied: "Grandfather General has already promised you, can I still lie to you?

古文：见其从者数百人，皆长二尺许，乌衣军服，赤油为誌。
现代文：这时，只见他的身后跟了好几百人，全都二尺多高，穿黑色的军装，身上涂着红油标誌。
English: At this time, he was followed by several hundred people, all more than two feet tall, wearing black military uniforms, with red oil marks painted on their bodies.

古文：祐家击鼓祷祀。诸鬼闻鼓声。皆应节起舞，振袖飒飒有声。
现代文：王祐家里人击鼓祈祷，众鬼听见鼓响，全都踏着那鼓点跳起舞来，袖子甩得飒飒作响。
English: Wang Yu's family members drummed and prayed, and when the ghosts heard the drumming, they all danced to the beat of the drum, their sleeves flapping loudly.

古文：祐将为设酒食，辞曰： 不须。 
现代文：王祐为他们设下酒筵，那人告辞说： 不用。 
English: Wang Yu set up a bar for them, and the man excused himself, saying, "No.

古文：因复起去，谓祐曰： 病在人体中如火，当以水解之。 
现代文：便又站起身对王祐说， 病在人体中如同一团火，就应当用水去解它。 
English: Then he stood up again and said to Wang Yu, "Disease is like a ball of fire in the human body, and it should be extinguished with water."

古文：因取一杯水，发被灌之。又曰： 为卿留赤笔十余枝，在荐下，可与人使著，出入辟恶灾。 
现代文：说完拿来一盆水，掀被就灌，又说， 我给你留下十余支红笔，放在垫子下面，可以让人举着它，出入辟恶灾。 
English: Having said this, he fetched a basin of water and, lifting the quilt, poured it in. He also said, "I'll leave you more than ten red pens, put them under the cushion, so that people can lift them up to ward off evil."

古文：因道曰： 王甲李乙，吾皆与之。 
现代文：于是就说出一串名字，有的已经发过了，其余的让王祐都给他们每人发一支。
English: He then read out a list of names, some of which had already been sent out, while the rest asked Wang Yu to send one to each of them.

古文：遂执祐手与辞。
现代文：那人随即握着王祐的手同他告别。
English: The man then shook Wang Yu's hand and bade him farewell.

古文：时祐得安眠，夜中忽觉，忽呼左右，令开被： 神以水灌我，将大沾濡。 
现代文：这天王祐得以安然入睡。半夜，他忽然醒来，急忙喊手下人，让他们打开被子，说神人用水灌他，就要弄得一塌糊涂了。
English: In the middle of the night, he suddenly woke up and hurriedly called his subordinates to open the quilt, saying that if the godman poured water on him, he would make a mess.

古文：开被而信有水，在上被之下，下被之上，不浸，如露之在荷。量之得三升七合。
现代文：打开被子一看，果然真的有水。那水在上下两床被子中间，不往被子里浸渗，如露珠在荷叶上滚动，收起来共有三升七合。
English: When I opened the quilt, I saw that there was indeed water. The water was in the middle of the two quilts, not seeping into the quilt, like dew rolling on a lotus leaf. I collected a total of three liters and seven cups.

古文：于是疾三分愈二，数日大除。
现代文：于是，王祐的病就去了三分之二。几天之后便彻底痊愈。
English: As a result, two-thirds of Wang Yu's illness went away. A few days later, he was completely cured.

古文：凡其所道当取者，皆死亡，唯王文英半年后乃亡。所道与赤笔人，皆经疾病及兵乱，皆亦无恙。
现代文：凡是那个人说要选取的人全都死了，只有三文英又活半年之后才死；凡是他说要送给红笔的人，虽然遇上了疾病和兵乱之灾，但却都安然安恙。
English: All the people the man said he wanted to choose from were dead, except for Samwen Ying, who lived for another six months before dying. All the people he said he wanted to give a red pen to were safe and sound, even though they were afflicted by disease and the ravages of war.

古文：初有妖书云： 上帝以三将军赵公明、钟士季，各督数万鬼下取人。 
现代文：当初，有本妖书说：上天派赵公明、钟士季等，各率领数万鬼兵到世间征召兵将，结果没找到他住的地方。
English: At the beginning, there was a book of goblins that said: Heaven sent Zhao Gongming, Zhong Shiji, and so on, each leading tens of thousands of ghost soldiers to the world to recruit soldiers. As a result, they did not find a place for him to live.

古文：莫知所在。祐病差，见此书，与所道赵公明合焉。温峤
现代文：王祐病好之后，看见了这本妖书，与那人所说的赵公明完全符合。温峤
English: After Wang Yu recovered from his illness, he saw this demonic book, which was completely consistent with what the man had said about Zhao Gongming.

古文：古今相传：夜以火照水底，悉见鬼神。
现代文：从古到今，人们都传说：当夜深人静的时候，用火照水底，便能够看见鬼神。
English: From ancient times to the present, people have a legend: when it's the dead of night, you can use fire to illuminate the bottom of the water and see ghosts and gods.

古文：温峤平苏峻之难，及于湓口，乃试照焉。
现代文：温峤等人击败了苏峻的叛乱，来到江西的湓口，他试着照了一把。
English: Wen Xuan and others defeated Su Jun's rebellion and came to Jiangxi's Hekou. He tried to take a picture of it.

古文：果见官寺赫奕，人徒甚盛；又见群小儿，两两为偶，乘轺车，驾以黄羊，睢盱可恶。
现代文：果然，他看见了官家的寺庙显耀盛大，大众甚多；又看见不少小孩子，两个两个为一伙，乘坐轻便小车，让黄羊拉着，睁大眼睛向上看，十分可恶的样子。
English: Sure enough, he saw the temple of the official family shining grandly, with a large number of people; he also saw many children, two by two, riding in a light cart, pulled by a yellow sheep, looking up with their eyes wide open, a very abominable look.

古文：温即梦见神怒曰： 当令君知之。 
现代文：温峤当夜就梦见神人发怒道： 应该让你知道知道厉害。 
English: That night, Wen Wei dreamed that the godman was angry and said, "I should let you know how terrible it is.

古文：乃得病也。
现代文：不久，温峤便得病了。
English: Soon after, Ong Yao fell ill.

古文：戴文谌
现代文：戴文谌
English: Dai Wenjun

古文：沛国戴文谌居阳城山，有神降，妻焉。
现代文：沛国人戴文谌住在阳城山，有神女来到此地，嫁给他作妻子。
English: Dai Wenzhong, a native of Pei Province, lived in Yangcheng Mountain. A goddess came to this place and married him.

古文：谌疑是妖魅，神已知之，便去。
现代文：戴文谌怀疑她是妖怪。神女知道他的心思之后，便走了。
English: Dai Wenju suspected that she was a ghost. After the goddess knew his thoughts, she left.

古文：遂见作一五色鸟，白鸠数十枚从，有云覆之，不遂见。
现代文：当即，只见她变成一只五色鸟朝远处飞去，后面跟随着几十只白鸠。有顷，云霞将它们盖住，再什么也看不见了。
English: Immediately, I saw her turn into a five-colored bird and fly away into the distance, followed by dozens of egrets. Suddenly, the clouds covered them, and I couldn't see anything else.

古文：黄石公
现代文：黄石公
English: Huangshi Gong

古文：益州之西，云南之东，有神祠。
现代文：在益州的西部、云南县的东边，有一座神庙。
English: In the west of Yizhou, on the eastern edge of Yunnan County, there is a temple dedicated to the cow.

古文：克山石为室，下有人奉祠之。
现代文：它是在岩石上凿出一个洞作为庙室的。
English: It was carved out of a hole in the rock as a temple.

古文：自称黄公。因言此神，张良所受黄石公之灵也。
现代文：刚刚凿洞的时候，只见里面有一个人正在祭祀，他自称黄公，因此人们把他看作这个庙里的神。汉留侯张良就是受黄石公的点化，并得到一部《太公兵法》才具有灵气的。
English: When he was just digging the hole, he saw a man inside who was making a sacrifice. He called himself Huang Gong, so people saw him as the god of this temple. Han Liu Hou Zhang Liang was enlightened by Huang Shi Gong and received a copy of "Tai Kung Hei Fa" to have a spiritual aura.

古文：清净不烹杀。
现代文：他一靠子不杀生，且清清净净。
English: He doesn't kill, and he's clean.

古文：诸祈祷者，持一百钱，一双笔，一丸墨，石室中前请乞。
现代文：所有来祈祷的人，都要拿一百钱，一双笔，一丸墨，到石室中向前跪下乞告。
English: Everyone who came to pray had to take a hundred rupees, a pair of pens and a ball of ink and go to the stone room, kneel down and beg.

古文：先闻石室中有声，须臾，问来人何欲。
现代文：这样，就可以先听石室里有说话声，一会儿，便问来人有什么要求。
English: In this way, you can first listen to the voice in the stone room, and then ask what the person wants.

古文：既言，便具语吉凶，不见其形。
现代文：当你把自己的要求说出来之后，那人就会告诉你吉凶福祸。然而，只闻其声不见其形。
English: After you have stated your request, that person will tell you the fortunes and misfortunes. However, you only hear the voice and do not see the form.

古文：至今如此。
现代文：直到今天，还是这样。
English: To this day, it's still like that.

古文：袁双
现代文：袁双
English: Yuan Shuang

古文：丹阳县有袁双庙。
现代文：丹阳县境内有座袁双庙。
English: There is a Yuan Shuang Temple in Danyang County.

古文：真弟四子也。真为桓宣武诛，便失所在。
现代文：袁双是道教所奉的真武帝君弟弟的四儿子，真武帝君被桓武杀死之后，他便失去了住处。
English: Yuan Shuang was the fourth son of the younger brother of Emperor Zhenwu, who was revered by Taoists. After Emperor Zhenwu was killed by Kuanwu, he lost his residence.

古文：灵在太元中，形见于丹阳，求立庙。
现代文：他的灵魂在晋太元年间，身子却出现在今天的丹阳县。他请求人们为自己修一座庙。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jintao, his spirit and body appeared in today's Danyang County, and he asked people to build a temple for him.

古文：未既就功，大有虎灾。
现代文：未等到修成，这里便闹起虎灾。
English: Before it was completed, a tiger plague broke out here.

古文：被害之家，辄梦双至，催功甚急。
现代文：被害者的家属就梦见袁双来到身边，催促他们赶快把庙修建起来。
English: The families of the victims dreamed that Yuan Shuang came to their side and urged them to quickly build the temple.

古文：百姓立祠堂，于是猛暴用息。
现代文：百姓们把祠庙建起之后，虎患于是就根除了。
English: After the people built the ancestral temple, the tiger epidemic was eradicated.

古文：今道俗常以二月晦，鼓舞祈祠。
现代文：如今，道家有个习俗，就是常常在二月的最后一天擂鼓起舞，到祠庙祈祷祭祀。
English: Nowadays, Taoists have a custom of playing drums and dancing on the last day of February, and going to ancestral temples to pray and offer sacrifices.

古文：尔日，常风雨忽至。
现代文：近些日子，常常有风雨忽然降临。
English: In recent days, wind and rain often come suddenly.

古文：元嘉五年，设奠讫，村人丘都，于庙后见一物，人面鼍身，葛巾，七孔端正，而有酒气。
现代文：汉桓帝元嘉五年，祭祀完毕，村里有个叫丘都的人，在庙后看见一个怪物，长着人的面孔扬子鳄的身子，扎着葛织成的衣巾，耳目口鼻等七窍长得挺端正，而且有酒气。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Han Dynasty, after the sacrifice was completed, a man in the village called Qudu saw a monster behind the temple. It had the body of a yangzi crocodile with a human face, wore a cloth made of kudzu, and had the ears, eyes, mouth, nose, and other seven orifices straight, and had the smell of alcohol.

古文：未知为双之神，为是物凭也。
现代文：不知道他是袁双化身的人应该明白，这就是凭证呵。
English: People who don't know that he is the incarnation of Yuan Shuang should understand that this is the proof.

古文：商康
现代文：商康
English: Commerce and Industry

古文：乌程卞山，本名土山。
现代文：乌程县有一座卞山，原名叫土山。
English: In Wucheng County, there is a Lushan Mountain, originally named Tsuchiyama.

古文：有项籍庙，自号卞王，因改为名。
现代文：山上有座项羽庙，因为他自己号称卞王，所以这座山改名为卞山。
English: There is a Xiangfe Temple on the mountain, and because he called himself the Dragon King, the mountain was renamed the Dragon Mountain.

古文：山足有一石柜，高数尺。陈郡殷康，尝往开之，风雨晦暝，乃止。
现代文：山脚下有一口石柜，好几尺高，陈郡有个姓康的富人曾经前往打开石柜，顿时风雨飘摇，天昏地暗，只好停止。
English: At the foot of the mountain, there is a mouth of a stone cabinet, several feet high. A rich man surnamed Kang in Chen County once went to open the stone cabinet, and suddenly the wind and rain swayed, the sky was dark, and he had to stop.

古文：贾充
现代文：贾充
English: Jia Chong

古文：贾充伐吴时，尝屯项城，军中忽失充所在。
现代文：西晋大臣贾充攻打讨伐孙吴时，曾经屯兵于项城，军营之中忽然就不见了他的影子。
English: When the West Jin minister Jia Chong attacked and fought against Sun Wu, he once stationed troops in Xiangcheng, and his shadow suddenly disappeared from the military camp.

古文：充帐下都督周勒，时昼寝，梦见百余人，录充，引入一迳。
现代文：贾充帐下有个都督叫周勒，当时正在白天睡觉，梦见一百多人在追捕贾充，抓住之后把他押入一条小道。
English: Jia Chong has a governor named Zhou Le under his account. At that time, he was sleeping during the day and dreamed that more than a hundred people were chasing Jia Chong, catching him and then pushing him into a path.

古文：勒惊觉，闻失充，乃出寻索之。
现代文：周勒惊醒了，就听说了贾充失踪这件事，便出去寻找线索。
English: When Zhou Le woke up, he heard about Jia Chong's disappearance and went out to look for clues.

古文：忽睹所梦之道，遂往求之。果见充行至一府舍，侍卫甚盛，府公南面坐，声色甚厉，谓充曰： 将乱吾家事，必尔与荀勖。
现代文：忽然，他发现了梦见的那条小道，随即就沿路去找，果然看见贾充走进一座官府，那里侍卫很多，壁垒森然。只见府中的长官坐在南面，声色俱厉地对贾充说： 你将坏了我们家的大事儿！
English: Suddenly, he found the path he had dreamed of, and then he went along the road to look for it. He saw Jia Chong enter a government office, where there were many guards and thick walls. He saw the head of the government office sitting on the south side, and he said to Jia Chong in a loud voice: You have ruined our family's big thing!

古文：既惑吾子，又乱吾孙。
现代文：你与尚书令荀勖勾结，既迷惑了我的儿子，又迷乱了我的孙子。
English: In collusion with Shang Shuling, you have both confused my son and bewildered my grandson.

古文：间使任恺黜尔而不去，又使庾纯詈汝而不改，今吴寇当平，汝方表斩张华，汝之憨，皆此类也。
现代文：这期间我派任恺罢免你，你却不离去；又派庾纯谴责你你也不改。今天，孙吴之寇应当扫平，你就上表斩了张华。你的愚昧和蠢笨的伎俩，不过如此。
English: During this period, I sent Ren Zheng to dismiss you, but you did not leave; I also sent Zheng Chun to condemn you, but you did not change. Today, Sun Wuzhikang should have wiped out, and you beheaded Zhang Hua on the table. Your ignorance and stupid tricks, but that is not the case.

古文：若不悛慎，当旦夕加罪。 
现代文：如果再不思悔改而谨慎起来，早晚还会给你加刑。 
English: If you don't repent and be prudent, sooner or later you will be given a longer sentence.

古文：充因叩头流血。
现代文：贾充便连连磕头，脑袋都磕出了血。
English: Jia Chong then repeatedly shakes his head, and blood gushes from his head.

古文：公曰： 汝所以廷日月而名器如此者，是卫府之勋耳。
现代文：那长官又说， 之所以为你延长了阳寿并使你有如此地位和名气，这都是因为你保卫朝廷有功呵。
English: The magistrate also said, "The reason why you have extended your longevity and have such status and fame is because you have contributed to the defense of the imperial court."

古文：终当使孙嗣死于钟簴之间，大子毙于金酒之中，小子困于枯木之下。
现代文：不过，你要记住，最后应当让孙太子死于钟簴的两侧之间，让你的大儿子死在药酒毒下，让你的小儿子被压于枯木之下。
English: However, you must remember that in the end you should let your grandson die between the two sides of the bell tower, let your eldest son die under the poison of medicine and wine, and let your youngest son be crushed under the dead tree.

古文：荀勖亦略同。
现代文：尚书令荀勖也与你大致相同。
English: Shang Shuling is also roughly the same as you.

古文：然其先德小浓，故在汝后。
现代文：但他有才华并积下阴德，死在你的后面。
English: But he's got talent and he's got a vice and he's dying behind you.

古文：数年之外，国嗣亦替。 
现代文：数年之后，就要改朝换代了。 
English: In a few years, there will be a change of dynasty.

古文：言毕命去。
现代文：说完，他就让贾充离去。
English: Having said that, he let Jia Chong leave.

古文：充忽然还营，颜色憔悴，性理昏丧，经日乃复。
现代文：贾充突然回到军营，脸色憔悴，神志不清，整天恍恍惚惚，过了好几天才恢复过来。
English: Jia Chong suddenly returned to the military camp, his face dazed, delirious, in a daze all day, and it took him several days to recover.

古文：其后孙谧死于钟下。贾后服鸩酒而死，贾午考竟。用大杖。
现代文：后来，孙太子死于钟山脚下，贾充的女儿齐王妃服鸩酒而亡，贾义，太子的死，是用大棒杖毙的。
English: Later, Sun Taizi died at the foot of the Bell Mountain, Jia Chong's daughter Qi Wangfei died of drunkenness, and Jia Yi, the death of the prince, was killed with a big stick.

古文：皆如所言。
现代文：全跟那人说的一样。
English: It later turned out to be just as Cui Yao had said.

古文：王文度
现代文：王文度
English: Wang Wendu

古文：晋王文度镇广陵，忽见二驺，持鹄头板来召之。王大惊，问驺： 我作何官？ 
现代文：晋代，王文度镇守广陵郡。一日，他忽然看见两个主驾车马的小吏，握着鹄头板来召见他，王文度大惊，急问那两个小吏： 我将要做什么官？ 
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Wang Wendu was in charge of Guangling County. One day, he suddenly saw two minor officials driving a horse and cart, holding a stepladder to summon him. Wang Wendu was shocked and asked the two minor officials: What kind of official will I be?

古文：驺云： 尊作平北将军徐兖二州刺史。 
现代文：回答说： 你将要做平北将军及徐州和兖州的刺史。 
English: He replied, "You will write the history of General Pingbei and the history of Xuzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：王曰： 吾已作此官，何故复召耶？ 
现代文：王文度说： 我已经当上了这样的官，为什么还要召见我呢？ 
English: Wang Wendu said, "I have already become such an official, why do you need to summon me?

古文：鬼云： 此人间耳，今所作是天上官也。 
现代文：那鬼吏说： 这是人间哪，今天让你做的则是天上的官呀。 
English: The ghost official said, "This is the human world, what you have been asked to do today is the official of heaven.

古文：王大惧之。
现代文：王文度更加惊恐万状。
English: Wang Wendao was even more terrified.

古文：寻见迎官玄衣人及鹄衣小吏甚多，王寻病薨。
现代文：俄顷，只见不少黑衣人鹄衣小吏来迎接他，他随即便病死了。
English: Suddenly, he saw many black-clad people and petty officials coming to meet him, and he then fell ill and died.

古文：徐长
现代文：徐长
English: Xu Chang

古文：吴兴徐长夙与鲍靓有神明之交，欲授以秘术。
现代文：吴兴县的徐长早就跟鲍靓有神祈之交往，想跟他学神仙法术。
English: Xu Chang, from Wuxing County, has been praying to the gods with Bao Tong for a long time, and wants to learn magic from him.

古文：先请徐宜有约，誓以不仕，于是授录。
现代文：鲍靓先让徐长立下誓约，今后不再做官，然后才把记载法术的的籍录传授给他。
English: Bao Yao first asked Xu Chang to swear an oath that he would no longer be an official in the future, and then gave him the book of spells.

古文：以常见八大神在侧，能知来见往。
现代文：不久，徐长就能把常见的八大神召到自己身边，而且使人们看见这八大神怎么来的和怎么走的。
English: Soon, Xu Chang will be able to call the common eight gods to his side, and make people see how these eight gods come and go.

古文：才识日异，州乡翕然美谈。
现代文：他的法术越来越高，日新月异，当地人传为美谈。
English: His spells are getting higher and higher, changing every day, and the locals are talking about it.

古文：欲用为州主簿。
现代文：官府还要任用他为州主簿。
English: The government also wants to appoint him as the state's chief accountant.

古文：徐心悦之。
现代文：听到这消息，徐长很高兴。
English: Upon hearing the news, Xu Chang was very happy.

古文：八神一朝不见七人，余一人倨傲不如常。
现代文：一天，八大神少了七个，只召来一个大神还傲慢无礼不如往常。
English: One day, seven of the eight great gods were missing, and only one great god was summoned, and he was not as arrogant and rude as usual.

古文：徐问其故，答云： 君违誓，不复相为。使身一人留卫录耳。 
现代文：徐长问其原因，他回答说： 你违背了誓约，大家不再奉陪，派我一个人留下来是保护这套籍录的呵。 
English: Xu Chang asked the reason, he replied: You violated the oath, everyone is no longer accompanied, I was sent to stay alone to protect this set of books.

古文：徐乃还录，遂退。
现代文：徐长把籍录还回后，这个大神也走了。
English: After Xu Chang returned the register, this great god also left.

古文：陈绪
现代文：陈绪
English: Chen Xu

古文：新城县民陈绪家，晋永和中，旦闻扣门，自通云： 陈都尉。 
现代文：晋代永和年间，新城县陈绪家里，天刚亮就听见敲门声，并且自报姓名和身份说： 我是陈都尉。 
English: During the Yonghe era of the Jin Dynasty, Chen Xu heard a knock on the door of his home in Xincheng County just after dawn. He gave his name and identity and said, "I am Lieutenant Chen.

古文：便有车马声，不见形。径进，呼主人共语曰： 我应来此，当权住君家，相为致福。 
现代文：接着就听见一阵车马声，但却看不见人影。 陈都尉 径直走进屋里，把主人喊出来说道： 我应该到这里来，暂且住在你们家，让我们相互致福吧！ 
English: Then he heard a rush of horses and carriages, but he could not see anyone. Lieutenant Chen went straight into the house, called out to his master and said: I should come here, stay at your house for a while, and let's bless each other!

古文：令绪施设床帐于斋中。
现代文：他让陈绪在书房里架设床帐。
English: He asked Chen Xu to set up a bed curtain in the study.

古文：或人诣之，斋持酒礼求愿，所言皆验。
现代文：有人来拜见他，拿着酒和礼品求他算命，所说的都很灵验。
English: People come to see him, bring him wine and gifts and ask him to tell their fortunes. Everything he says works.

古文：每进酒食，令人跪拜，授闱里，不得开视。
现代文：每次送酒饭，他都让人跪下，把酒饭送进门里，但不准开门而视。
English: Every time he served wine and rice, he made people kneel down and brought the wine and rice to the door, but they were not allowed to open the door and look.

古文：复有一身，疑是狐狸之类，因跪，急把取。此物却还床后，大怒曰： 何敢嫌试都尉？ 
现代文：一天，有个怀疑这位 陈都尉 是狐狸精之类的妖怪的人，刚跪下把酒饭送进去，又急忙夺了回来。 陈都尉 却回到床上，大怒道： 你还敢怀疑并试探都尉？ 
English: One day, a person who suspected that this Lieutenant Chen was a fox spirit or some other kind of monster, just knelt down and sent the wine and rice in, and then hurriedly took it back. However, Lieutenant Chen went back to bed and said angrily: Do you still dare to doubt and test the captain?

古文：此人心痛欲死，主人为扣头谢，良久意解。
现代文：那人立即心痛欲死。陈绪急忙走过来，为那人磕头谢罪，好久他的病情才缓解。
English: The man was immediately heartbroken and wanted to die. Chen Xu hurried over and bowed his head in penitence for the man. It took a long time for his illness to ease.

古文：自后众不敢犯，而绪举家无恙，每事益利，此外无多损益也。
现代文：从此之后，众人谁也不敢冒犯它，而陈绪全家均平安无事，什么事都很吉利，几乎没有什么意外损失。
English: From then on, no one dared to offend it, and Chen Xu's whole family was safe and sound, everything was very auspicious, and there was almost no accidental loss.

古文：白道猷
现代文：白道猷
English: Bai Dao Bridge

古文：章安县西有赤城山，周三十里，一峰特高，可三百余丈。
现代文：章安县西部有座赤城山，方圆三十里，其中一峰特别高大，大约有三百多丈。
English: There is an Akagi mountain in the western part of Zhang'an County, with a circumference of 30 miles. One of the peaks is particularly tall, about 300 meters high.

古文：晋泰元中，有外国道人白道猷，居于此山。
现代文：晋代泰元年间，有一位外国道士名叫白道猷，就居住在这座山上。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, a foreign Taoist named Bai Daojun lived on this mountain.

古文：山神屡遣狼怪形异声往恐怖之，道猷自若。
现代文：山神三番两次地派遣狼变成十分可怕的样子，怪声怪气地嗥叫着吓唬他。白道猷泰然自若。
English: Three times and twice the mountain god sent the wolf into a very terrible shape, howling grotesquely to frighten him. Bai Daojuan was calm.

古文：山神乃自诣之云： 法师威德严重，今推此山相与，弟子更卜所托？ 
现代文：山神便又亲自上山见他，说道： 大法师德重威严，今天，我就把这座山送给你了，希望你不要辜负我之所托。 
English: The mountain deity then went up the mountain to see him in person and said, "Great Mage, you are dignified. Today, I have given you this mountain. I hope you will not fail to live up to my trust."

古文：道猷曰： 君是何神？
现代文：道猷说： 你是什么神？
English: Dogen said, "What kind of god are you?"

古文：居此几时，今若必去，当去何所？ 
现代文：在这住了多长时间？今天如果必须离开，你将去往何处？ 
English: How long have you lived here? If you had to leave today, where would you go?

古文：答云： 弟子夏王之子，居此千余年。
现代文：山神回答道： 我是夏王的儿子，在这里住一千多年了。
English: The mountain god replied, "I am the son of King Xia and have lived here for more than a thousand years.

古文：寒石山是家舅所住，某且往寄憩，将来欲还会稽山庙。 
现代文：寒石山是我舅舅住的地方，我暂且去那寄居一段时间，将来回到会稽山神庙去。 
English: Mount Kanseki is where my uncle lives. I'm going to stay there for a while, and then I'll go back to Mount Hiei Shrine.

古文：临去，遗信赠三奁香。
现代文：临走，留下一封信，又赠给白道猷三奁香。
English: Before leaving, he left a letter and gave Bai Daozhang three musks.

古文：又躬来别，执手恨然，鸣鞞响角，凌空而逝。
现代文：然后，向白道猷躬身告别，举手时感到十分遗憾，吹响号角，敲击刀鞘，凌空而逝。
English: Then, bowing to Bai Daojun to say goodbye, he felt very sorry when he raised his hand, blew the horn, struck the scabbard, and flew away.

古文：高雅之
现代文：高雅之
English: Gao Yazhi

古文：晋太元中，高衡为魏郡太守，戍石头。
现代文：晋代太元年间，高衡为魏郡太守，戍卫石头城。
English: During the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Gao Heng was the governor of Wei County and defended Stone Town.

古文：其孙雅之，在厩中，云： 有神来降，自称白头公，柱杖光耀照屋。
现代文：他的孙子高雅之在马棚中说： 刚才，有位神人来此，自称白头公，他拄的那根拐杖闪闪发光，把屋子都照亮了。
English: His grandson, Gao Yazhi, said in the stable: "Just now, a godman came here, calling himself Baotou Gong, and the crutch he carried glittered and lit up the house.

古文：与雅之轻举宵行，暮至京口，晨已来还。 
现代文：他和我轻轻举着那根拐杖连夜而行，第二天天快黑时到了京口城，早晨已经返回来了。 
English: He and I gently held the crutches and walked all night. The next day, we arrived at Kyoguchi Castle in the dark, and returned in the morning.

古文：后雅之父子，为桓玄所灭。
现代文：后来，高雅之父子，被南郡公桓玄所灭。
English: Later, Gao Ya's father and son were exterminated by the Nan County King Huan Xuan.

古文：罗根生
现代文：罗根生
English: Rogensen

古文：豫章有庐松村。
现代文：豫章县有个庐松村。
English: In Yuzhang County, there is a pine village.

古文：郡人罗根生，来此村侧垦荒，种瓜果。
现代文：郡里有个叫罗根生的人，到村头来开荒，并种上了瓜果。
English: In the county, there was a man named Logan, who came to the village to clear the land and planted melons and fruits.

古文：园中有一神坛。瓜始引蔓，忽见坛上有一新板，墨书云： 此是神地，可速出去。 
现代文：当瓜刚开始爬蔓的时候，园中那个神坛上忽然出现一块新木板，上面用黑墨水写道： 这是神地，请速离开。 
English: When the melons were just beginning to climb the vines, a new board suddenly appeared on the altar in the garden, on which was written in black ink: This is sacred ground, please leave immediately.

古文：根生祝曰： 审是神教，愿更朱书赐报。 
现代文：罗根生当即祝祷说： 神的教示我已知悉，希望换成红字公布于众。 
English: When he was born, Rogen said a prayer: "I know God's teachings, and I hope to change them into the scarlet letter and make them known to the public.

古文：明早往看，向板犹存，字悉以朱代墨。
现代文：第二天早晨，罗根生来园中观看，只见那块新木板还在，上面的字全用朱红代替了墨黑。
English: The next morning, when Logan came to the park to look around, he saw that the new board was still there, and the words on it were all written in red ink instead of black ink.

古文：根生谢而去也。
现代文：罗根生谢罪后离去。
English: Rogan left the court after his acquittal.

古文：沈纵
现代文：沈纵
English: Shen Zheng

古文：余姚人沈纵，家素贫。
现代文：余姚县人沈纵，家中一向贫穷。
English: People in Yuyao County are self-indulgent, and the family has always been poor.

古文：与父同入山，还未至家，见一人。
现代文：一日，他跟父亲一起进山，回来时还没有到家，看见一个大人物迎面走来。
English: One day, he went into the mountains with his father, and when he came back, he had not yet reached home, when he saw a large man coming towards him.

古文：左右导从四五百许，前车辐马鞭，夹道卤簿，如二千石。
现代文：这位大人物前呼后拥的，仅前导和随从就有四五百人。前面闪动着车轮和马鞭，夹道站着仪仗队，如同二千石俸禄的官员。
English: The leader and his retinue alone numbered four or five hundred, and the great man called them forward and behind him. Wheels and whips flashed in front of him, and a guard of honour stood between them, like officials with a salary of two thousand koku.

古文：遥见纵父子，便唤住，就纵手中燃火。
现代文：远远看见沈纵父子，那大人物便将他们喊住，然后靠近沈纵并在他手中点上火。
English: Seeing Shen Zheng and his son in the distance, the big man called them to a halt, then approached Shen Zheng and lit a fire in his hands.

古文：纵因问是何贵人？
现代文：沈纵于是问道： 你是何方贵人？ 
English: Shen Zheng then asked: Who are you, noble person?

古文：答曰： 是斗山王，在余杭南。 
现代文：回答说： 我是斗山之王，住在余杭县南边。 
English: He replied, "I am the king of Doosan, and I live in the southern part of Yuhang County.

古文：纵知是神，叩头云： 愿见祐助。 
现代文：沈纵知道他是神仙，一边叩头一边说： 希望能够得到您的祐护和帮助。 
English: Shen Zheng knew that he was a god, and bowed down and said, "I hope I can get your protection and help."

古文：后入山，得一玉枕，从此如意。
现代文：后来，沈纵进山得到一方玉枕，从此他们家万事如意。
English: Later, Shen Zheng entered the mountain and got a piece of jade pillow. From then on, everything went well for their family.

古文：戴氏女
现代文：戴氏女
English: Dai's daughter

古文：豫章有戴氏女，久疾不瘥。
现代文：豫章郡戴氏有个女儿，久病不愈。
English: Mr. Dai of Yuanzhang County has a daughter who has been ill for a long time.

古文：见一小石，形像偶人。女谓曰： 尔有人形，岂神？
现代文：一天，她看见一块小石头，形状像个人，便对它说： 你有人形，难道是神仙吗？
English: One day, she saw a small stone in the shape of a man, and said to it, "You have a human form. Are you a fairy?"

古文：能差我宿疾者。吾将重汝。 
现代文：如果你能把我的老病治好，我将重重地谢你。 
English: If you can cure my old disease, I will thank you very much.

古文：其夜梦有人告之： 吾将佑汝。 
现代文：当天夜里，她梦见有人告诉她说： 我今后会保祐你的。 
English: That night, she dreamed that someone told her, "I will protect you in the future."

古文：自后疾渐差。遂为立祠山下。戴氏为巫，故名戴侯祠。
现代文：从此以后，她的病情渐渐好转，于是就在山下建起一座祠庙，戴氏就在那做巫师，因此这座祠庙便被称为 戴侯祠 。
English: From then on, her condition gradually improved, so a temple was built at the foot of the mountain, where Dai worked as a sorcerer, so this temple was called Dai Hou Temple.

古文：孙盛
现代文：孙盛
English: Sun Sheng

古文：衡山白槎庙。
现代文：衡山有座白槎庙。
English: Hengshan has an egret temple.

古文：古老相传：昔有神槎，皎然白色，祷之灵无不应。
现代文：很久以前，人们就传说：早年，这儿有一个神奇的木筏子，皎然白色，向它祈祷没有不灵验的。
English: A long time ago, people used to say: In the early years, there was a magical white woodlouse here, and there was no failure in praying to it.

古文：晋孙盛临郡，不信鬼神，乃伐之。
现代文：晋代孙盛来此任郡守，他不信鬼神，便让人砍毁它。
English: The Jin Dynasty's Sun Sheng came to this county seat, but he didn't believe in ghosts and gods, so he had it chopped down.

古文：斧下流血。
现代文：不料，那斧子砍下去，木筏子竟然流出血来。
English: Unexpectedly, the axe went down and the wood louse actually bled.

古文：其夜波流神槎向上，但闻鼓角之声，不知所止。
现代文：当天夜里，水流奇迹般地将木筏子送往上游，只听鼓号声声，不知停在了什么地方。
English: In the night of the same day, the current miraculously sent the raft upstream, listening only to the sound of the drum, and I don't know where it stopped.

古文：开皇九年废，今尚有白槎村在。
现代文：隋代开皇九年，这座庙便毁废了，如今还有个白槎村存在着。
English: In the ninth year of the Sui Dynasty, this temple was destroyed, and now there is still an egret village.

古文：湛满
现代文：湛满
English: Zhanman

古文：须江县江郎山。
现代文：须江县境内有座江郎山。
English: There is a Jianglang Mountain in Sujiang County.

古文：昔有江家在山下居，兄弟三人，神化于此。故有三石峰之异。
现代文：从前，有一户姓江的人家在山下居住，他们兄弟三人，都在这里成神而去，因此留下一座奇异的三石峰。
English: Once upon a time, there was a family with the surname Jiang living at the foot of the mountain. All three of their brothers went mad here, leaving behind a strange three-rock peak.

古文：有湛满者，亦居山下。
现代文：有位叫湛满的人，也住在这座山下。
English: A man named Zhanman also lives at the foot of the mountain.

古文：其子仕洛，永嘉之乱，不得归。
现代文：他的儿子在洛阳做官，赶上杀王公士民数万人的永嘉之乱，有家不能回。
English: His son is an official in Luoyang, caught up in the Yongjia Rebellion, which killed tens of thousands of Wang Gongshi people. Some families can't go back.

古文：满乃使祝宗言于三石之灵，能致其子，靡爱斯牲。
现代文：湛满就来到三石峰下祈祷，求其保祐他的儿子，说： 能让我的儿子回来，一定不会舍不得供祭祀的牲畜 十天之内的某一日，湛满的儿子走到洛水边，看见三位少年。
English: Tamman came to the foot of the three-rock peak to pray, begging for his son's protection, saying: If I can get my son back, I will not be reluctant to offer sacrificial animals. One day within ten days, Tamman's son went to the Luo waterside and saw three boys.

古文：旬日中，湛子出洛水边，见三少年，使闭目伏车栏中间，去如疾风。
现代文：这三位少年让他闭上眼睛趴在车栏中间，那车便像疾风一般跑起来。
English: The three boys told him to close his eyes and lie down in the middle of the barrier, and the car took off like a whirlwind.

古文：俄顷，从空中堕，恍然不知所之。
现代文：有顷，他突然从空中掉了下来。他恍恍惚惚，不知到了何处。
English: One day, he suddenly fell from the sky. He was in a daze and didn't know where he was.

古文：良久，乃觉是家园中。
现代文：好久，他才发现这是自己家的菜园子。
English: It took him a long time to realize that it was his own vegetable garden.

古文：竺昙遂
现代文：竺昙遂
English: 遂

古文：晋太元中，谢家沙门竺昙遂，年二十余，白皙端正，流落沙门。
现代文：东晋太元年间，出家的佛门弟子中有一个叫竺昙遂的，二十多岁，相貌端庄，皮肤白皙。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, one of the Buddhist disciples who became a monk was called Shusui. He was in his twenties, with a dignified appearance and fair skin.

古文：尝行经青溪庙前过，因入庙中看。
现代文：他流落到佛门之后，一次他从青溪庙前路过，于是进庙里看了一番。
English: After he was exiled to the Buddhist gate, he once passed in front of the Qingxi Temple, so he went into the temple to take a look.

古文：暮归，梦一妇人来，语云： 君当来作我庙中神，不复久。 
现代文：晚上回来，他梦见一个女人来了，对他说： 你应当来做我庙中之神，这一天不会太久了。 
English: When he came back in the evening, he dreamed that a woman came to him and said, "You should come and be the god of my temple. This day will not last long."

古文：昙遂问： 妇人是谁？ 妇人云： 我是青溪姑。 
现代文：竺昙遂问那女人是谁，回答说： 我是青溪姑。 
English: She then asked who the woman was and replied, "I am Qingxi Gu."

古文：如此一月许，便卒。
现代文：就这样过了一个月，竺昙遂便死了。
English: Just like that, a month passed, and then she died.

古文：临死，谓同学年少曰： 我无福，亦无大罪，死乃当作青溪庙神。诸君行便，可见看之。 
现代文：临终前，他对僧人们说： 我这辈子没有福，也没有大的罪过，死后能做青溪庙之神，你们从那里路过方便的话，可以进去看看我。 
English: Before his death, he said to the monks: I have no blessings in this life, and no great sins. After I die, I can become the god of Qingxi Temple. If it is convenient for you to pass by there, you can go in and see me.

古文：其伴慧觐，便为作呗讫，犹唱赞。
现代文：竺昙遂死后，那些年轻道人来到青溪庙上，便与之对话互致问候。
English: After Gong Sui's death, those young Taoists came to Qingxi Temple and exchanged greetings with him.

古文：语云： 歧路之诀，尚有悽怆。
现代文：竺昙遂的声音跟生前一样。临别，竺昙遂说： 很久没有听到唱赞偈的声音，真想呵！ 
English: Shusui's voice is the same as it was when he was alive. Before leaving, Shusui said, "It's been a long time since I heard the sound of chanting praise, I really want to sing!"

古文：况此之乖，形神分散。
现代文：他的同伴慧觐，便为他唱了一段。
English: His companion, Hui Yao, sang a passage for him.

古文：窈冥之叹，情何可言。 既而歔欷不自胜，诸道人等皆为流涕。
现代文：接着，他也唱了起来，大意是：歧路之别，尚有悽怆之情；而我们这种情况下的分离，形神各在一方，深远难见，长叹不已，这种心情简直无法表达唱罢，他感慨不已，难以控制。道人们都为他流下了热泪。
English: Then he also began to sing, to the effect of: The parting of the ways is bittersweet; and our separation under these circumstances, with the gods on either side, is far-reaching, difficult to see, and long-suffering. This mood is simply impossible to express in song. He was overcome with emotion and difficult to control. People shed tears for him.

古文：武曾
现代文：武曾
English: Wu Zeng

古文：侯官县常有阁下神。
现代文：侯官县曾经有位阁下神。
English: There used to be a great god in Houkan County.

古文：岁终，诸吏杀牛祀之。
现代文：每年年底，各位官吏都要杀牛来祭祀他。
English: Every year at the end of the year, all officials have to slaughter a cow to worship him.

古文：沛郡武曾作令，断之。
现代文：自从沛郡的武曾来此做县令之后，便将祭品给断了。
English: Ever since Wu Zeng from Pei County came here to serve as the county magistrate, the sacrificial offerings have been broken.

古文：经一年，曾选作建威参军。当去，神夜来问曾： 何以不还食？ 
现代文：一年之后，武曾被选任建威参军，临行前夜那神人来问他： 你为什么不给我送吃的？ 
English: A year later, Wu Zeng was selected by Jian Wei to join the army. On the eve of his departure, the man of God came to ask him: Why didn't you bring me food?

古文：声色极恶，甚相谴责。
现代文：声色俱厉，对他痛加谴责。
English: They were very vocal in their condemnation of him.

古文：诸吏便于道买牛，共谢之，此神乃去。
现代文：官吏们得知此事后，便于当地买牛杀了，共同向阁下神谢罪。此后，那神人就走了。
English: After the officials learned of this, they bought and slaughtered a cow locally, and together they gave thanks to their lord. After that, the man of God left.

古文：晋孝武帝
现代文：晋孝武帝
English: Emperor Jinxiao Wu

古文：晋孝武帝，殿北窗下见一人，著白帢，黄练单衣，自称华林园水池中神，名曰淋涔君。
现代文：东晋孝武帝，在大殿北面的窗下看见一个人，穿着白色的夹袄，黄绢单衣，自称是华林园水池中的神仙，名叫淋涔君。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty saw a man under the window on the north side of the Great Hall, wearing a white jacket and a yellow jacket, claiming to be a god in the pool of the Hualin Garden. His name was Lian Yijun.

古文：帝取所佩刀掷之，空过无碍。
现代文：孝武帝摘下自己的佩刀向他砍去，然而却什么也未砍到。
English: Emperor Xiaowu took out his sword and slashed at him, but nothing came of it.

古文：神忿曰： 当令君知之。 
现代文：那神人忿然地说： 我应当让你知道我的厉害。 
English: The man of God said angrily, "I should have let you know how powerful I am.

古文：少时而暴崩。
现代文：不久，孝武帝就暴死了。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowu died violently.

古文：蔺启之
现代文：蔺启之
English: 啟之

古文：蔺启之家在南乡，有樗蒲娄庙。
现代文：蔺启之家住南乡，那里有座樗蒲娄庙。
English: The Zouqi family lives in Nanxiang, where there is a dragonfly temple.

古文：启之有女名僧因，忽厥而寤，云： 樗蒲君遣婢迎僧坐斗帐中，仍陈盛筵。以金银为俎案，五色玉为杯碗。与僧共食，一宿而醒也。 
现代文：蔺启之有个女儿名叫僧因。一天，她忽然昏倒又醒来，说： 樗蒲君遣侍女迎接我，坐在斗帐之中，又摆上酒席筵菜，用金银做肉案子，用五色玉做杯碗；和我共同吃了顿饭，又住了一宿才醒来呵 
English: One day, she suddenly fainted and woke up, saying: "Shobu-kun sent a maid to meet me, sat in the middle of the table, and set up a banquet of vegetables, made meat cases with gold and silver, and cups and bowls with five-colored gems; and shared a meal with me, and stayed another night before waking up."

古文：王猛
现代文：王猛
English: Wang Meng

古文：王猛者，北海人。少贫贱，曾至洛阳货畚。
现代文：王猛是北海郡的人，少年时家里很穷，曾经到洛阳卖过畚箕。
English: Wang Meng is from Beihai County. When he was a boy, his family was very poor. He once sold cormorants in Luoyang.

古文：有一人，于市贵买其畚，而云无直，家近在此，可随我取。
现代文：一次，有个人在市场上花高价买他的畚箕，却又说没有带钱，家就住在附近，让王猛随他去取。
English: Once, a man paid a high price at the market to buy his yakitori, but he said that he didn't have any money with him and that his family lived nearby, so Wang Meng let him take it.

古文：猛随去。行不觉远，忽至深山中。
现代文：王猛随他而去，没觉走出多远，忽然来到深山里。
English: Wang Meng followed him. He didn't realize how far he had gone, but he suddenly found himself deep in the mountains.

古文：此人语猛，且住树下，当先启道君来。
现代文：那人对王猛说： 你暂且站在树下，我得先回去禀告一声你来了。 
English: The man said to Wang Meng: Stand under the tree for the time being. I have to go back and announce that you have arrived.

古文：须臾，猛进，见一公据胡床，头鬓悉白。侍从十许人。
现代文：不一会儿，王猛便随他进了树洞，看见一个人坐在折叠床上，他的头发和两鬓全白了，有十多个侍从。
English: After a while, Wang Meng followed him into the tree cave and saw a man sitting on a folding bed, his hair and cheeks completely white, with more than ten attendants.

古文：有一人引猛云： 大司马公可进。 因拜，老公曰： 王公何缘拜？ 
现代文：有一个人引王猛来到这老者跟前，并说： 大司马公请进一一 王猛向老者跪拜，老者说： 你为什么要拜我呢？ 
English: A man brought Wang Meng to the old man and said, "Daishi Mago, please come in." Wang Meng bowed to the old man. The old man said, "Why are you bowing to me?"

古文：即十倍售畚价，遣人送猛出。
现代文：当即送王猛十倍于原价的畚箕钱，并派人把他送出树洞。
English: He immediately gave Wang Meng ten times the original price and sent someone to escort him out of the tree cave.

古文：既顾视，乃嵩山也。
现代文：王猛四下看看，这里原来是嵩山呵。
English: Wang Meng took a look around. It turned out to be Songshan Mountain.

古文：封驱之
现代文：封驱之
English: of the ban

古文：始兴林水源里有石室，室前磐石上，行罗十瓮，中悉是饼银。
现代文：在始兴郡老林子山溪的源头，有一座石屋，屋前的大石头上，摆着一排十个陶瓮。
English: At the source of the Laolinzi Mountain Stream in Shixing County, there is a stone house. On the large stone in front of the house, there is a row of ten pottery urns.

古文：采伐遇之，不得取，取之迷闷。
现代文：这瓮里全装着银饼子，采药的伐木的如果看见，也不能拿走，谁拿了谁就得迷路。
English: This basket is full of silver biscuits. If the woodcutter sees them, he can't take them away. Whoever takes them has to get lost.

古文：晋大元初，民封驱之家仆，密窃三饼归，发看，有大蛇螫之而死。
现代文：东晋太元初年，郡民封驱之家里的仆人，悄悄偷三块银饼子回来，到家揭开一看，有一条大蛇爬出来，当即把他咬死。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, a servant in the County People's Feudal Expulsion House quietly stole three pieces of silver cake. When he came home and opened it, a large snake crawled out and immediately bit him to death.

古文：《湘州记》曰： 其夜，驱之梦神语曰： 君奴不谨，盗银三饼。
现代文：《湘州记》里说： 那天晚上，封驱之梦见神人对他说： 你的奴才不老实，偷走银饼子三块，当天就被处决了。
English: "The Hunan Chronicle" says: That night, the god of the banishment dreamed that the man of God said to him: Your slave was dishonest, stole three pieces of silver cake, and was executed that day.

古文：即日显戮，以银相偿。 
现代文：现在，就把那银饼子送给你，作为补偿吧。 
English: Now, I'll give you the silver cake as compensation.

古文：觉视，则奴死银在矣。 
现代文：封驱之醒来一看，那奴才果然死了，而银饼子还在。
English: When he awoke and looked, he saw that his servant was dead, but the money was still there.

