古文：圣宗七七年春正月甲辰，如达离山。二月乙丑朔，拜日，如浑河。
现代文：开泰七年春正月初十，至达离山。二月初一，拜祭太阳，到浑河。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 7th year of the Keitai spring, he reached the mountain. On the first day of February, he worshiped the sun and went to Hunhe.

古文：三月辛丑，命东北越里笃、剖阿里、奥里米、蒲奴里、铁骊等五部岁贡貂皮六万五千，马三百。
现代文：三月初八，命令东北越里笃、剖阿里、奥里米、蒲奴里、铁骊等五个部族每年向辽进贡貂皮六万五千张、马三百匹。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, the five tribes of Northeastern Yue - Leduc, Jia Ali, Orimi, Panuli and Tieqi - were ordered to donate 65,000 yakitori skins and 300 horses to Liaoning each year.

古文：丙午，乌古部节度使萧普达讨叛命敌烈，灭之。
现代文：十三日，乌古部节度使萧普达征讨叛变的敌烈部，灭掉了它。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the governor of Ugubo ordered Shopuda to conquer the rebellious enemy stronghold and destroy it.

古文：夏四月，拜日。
现代文：夏四月，祭拜太阳。
English: In the summer, in April, they worship the sun.

古文：丙寅，振川、饶二州饥。
现代文：初三，赈济川、饶二州饥民。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the starving people of Jecheon and Rao two prefectures.

古文：辛未，振中京贫乏。
现代文：初八，赈济中京贫民。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, he helped the poor in central Beijing.

古文：癸酉，禁匿名书。
现代文：初十，禁止写匿名书信。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it is forbidden to write anonymous letters.

古文：壬辰，以三司使吕德懋为枢密副使。
现代文：二十九日，任命三司使吕德懋为枢密副使。
English: On the 29th, the Third Divisional Envoy Lü Dejun was appointed as the Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：闰月壬子，以萧进忠为彰武军节度使兼五州制置。
现代文：闰四月二十日，任命萧进忠为彰武军节度使兼五州制置。
English: On leap April 20th, Xiao Jinzhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Shouwu Army and the five-state system.

古文：戊午，吐蕃王并里尊奏，凡朝贡，乞假道夏国，从之。
现代文：二十六日，吐蕃王并里尊奏请以后前来朝贡时，借道于夏国，得到允许。
English: On the 26th, when the king of Tubo and his court musicians came to pay tribute, they were allowed to go through Xia Province.

古文：五月丙寅，皇子宗真封梁王，宗元永清军节度使，宗简右卫大将军，宗愿左骁卫大将军，宗伟右卫大将军，皇侄宗范昭义军节度使，宗熙镇国军节度使，宗亮绛州节度使，宗弼濮州观察使，宗奕曹州防御使，宗显、宗肃皆防御使。
现代文：五月初五，封皇子宗真为梁王，宗元为永清军节度使，宗简为右骁卫大将军，宗愿为左骁卫大将军，宗伟为右卫大将军，皇侄宗范为昭义军节度使，宗熙为镇国军节度使，宗亮为绛州节度使，宗弼为濮州观察使，宗奕为曹州防御使，宗显、宗肃均为防御使。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month

古文：以张俭守司徒兼政事令。
现代文：任命张俭为守司徒兼政事令。
English: Zhang Jian was appointed as the Keeper of the Privy Purse and the Chief of State.

古文：六月丙申，品打鲁瑰部节度使勃鲁里至鼻洒河，遇微雨，忽天地晦冥，大风飘四十三人飞旋空中，良久乃堕数里外。勃鲁里幸获免。
现代文：六月初五，品打鲁瑰部节度使勃鲁里到达鼻洒河边时，遇上微雨，突然天昏地暗，大风将四十三人卷到空中，许久才从数里之外跌落下来，勃鲁里幸免于难。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, when the festival of the Pindar Lu and the Rosicrucians brought Bruli to the edge of the Nausori River, there was a light rain, suddenly the sky was dark, and a strong wind swept forty-three people into the air. It took a long time for them to fall down from several miles away, but Bruli survived.

古文：一酒壶在地反不移。
现代文：而一个酒壶在地上却没有移动分毫。
English: But a wine jug on the ground didn't move at all.

古文：八月丙午，行大射柳之礼。
现代文：十五日，皇上举行大射柳之礼。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor held a grand shooting ceremony.

古文：庚申，以耶律留宁、吴守达使宋贺生辰，萧高九、马贻谋使宋贺正旦。
现代文：二十九日，派耶律留宁、吴守达出使宋国贺宋主生辰，萧高九、马贻谋出使宋贺宋正旦。
English: On the 29th, he sent Ye Liuluning and Wu Shuda as envoys to Song to congratulate Song on his birthday, and sent Xiao Gaojiu and Ma Jun as envoys to congratulate Song on his birthday.

古文：加平章萧弘义开府仪同三司、尚父兼政事令。
现代文：任命平章萧弘义为开府仪同三司、尚父兼政事令。
English: Pingzhang Xiao Hongyi was appointed as the third secretary of the General Office of the People's Government of the People's Republic of China, and his father was also appointed as the Minister of State.

古文：秋七月甲子，诏翰林待诏陈升写《南征得胜图》于上京五鸾殿。丁卯，蒲奴里部来贡。
现代文：秋七月初四，诏令翰林待诏陈升在上京五鸾殿绘制《南征得胜图》。初七，蒲奴里部前来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Hanlin Dairei and Chen Sheng Dairei came to draw the "Southern Expedition Victory Map" in the Wusong Hall of Shangjing. On the 7th day of the first month, the Punuli Department came to pay tribute.

古文：九月庚申朔，蒲昵国使奏本国与乌里国封壤相接，数侵掠不宁，赐诏谕之，戊辰，诏内外官，因事受赇，事觉而称子孙仆从者，禁之。
现代文：九月初一，蒲昵国得奏称本国与乌里国国土相邻，乌里国多次侵略掳掠，使得国土不宁，皇上赐诏加以抚慰。初九，下诏凡是内外命官，因事受贿被察觉之后，不得将责任推托到子孙或者仆从身上。
English: On the first day of September, the emperor issued an imperial edict to appease the people of Putuo, who had to report that their country was adjacent to the land of Uri. Uri had invaded and plundered the country many times, making the land restless. On the ninth day of the first month, the emperor issued an imperial edict that all officials at home and abroad who were found to have accepted bribes should not pass the responsibility on to their children, grandchildren, or servants.

古文：庚午，录囚。
现代文：十一日，查看犯人口供。
English: On the 11th, the inmate's confession was examined.

古文：括马给东征军。
现代文：检括马匹以供应东征军。
English: Check the horses to supply the Eastern Expeditionary Force.

古文：是月，驻跸土河川。
现代文：同月，歇驾于土河川。
English: In the same month, it stopped in Tsuchigawa.

古文：冬十月，名中京新建二殿曰延庆，曰永安。
现代文：冬十月，将中京新建成的两座宫殿分别命名为延庆和永安。
English: In the winter of October, the newly built two palaces in Zhongjing were named Yanqing and Yong'an.

古文：壬寅，以顺义军节度使石用中为汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：十三日，任命顺义军节度使石用中为汉人行宫都部署。
English: On the 13th, the appointment of the Shunyi Army Festival led to the deployment of the Chinese marching palace in the middle of the stone.

古文：丙辰，诏以东平郡王萧排押为都统，殿前都点检萧虚列为副统，东京留守耶律八哥为都监，伐高丽。
现代文：二十七日，下诏任命东平郡王萧排押为都统，殿前都点检萧虚列为副都统，东京留守耶律八哥为都监，命他们东征高丽。
English: On the 27th, Wang Xiao Pai, the governor of Dongping County, was appointed as the deputy governor of the capital city of Goryeo, and Xiao Hui, the vice governor of the capital city of Goryeo, was appointed as the deputy governor of the capital city of Goryeo, and Yeruhachi, the governor of the capital city of Tokyo, was appointed as the governor of the capital city of Goryeo.

古文：仍谕高丽守吏，能率众自归者厚赏，坚壁相拒者追悔无及。
现代文：并晓谕高丽守官，如果能够率众归降，将得到厚赏；而如果坚守壁垒抗拒天兵，将追悔莫及。
English: He also told the Goryeo governor that if he could lead the people to surrender, he would receive a great reward; but if he held fast to the wall and resisted the heavenly soldiers, he would regret it.

古文：十一月壬戌，以吕德懋知吏部尚书，杨又玄知详覆院，刘晟为霸州节度使，北府宰相刘慎行为彰武军节度使。
现代文：十一月初四，任命吕德懋知吏部尚书，杨又玄知详覆院，刘晟为霸州节度使，北府宰相刘慎行为彰武军节度使。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of November, Lu Dezhen was appointed as the secretary of the General Staff Department, Yang Yatai and Xuan Zhi were appointed as the deputies of the Provincial Assembly, Liu Zhen was appointed as the deputy of the Provincial Assembly of Bozhou, and Liu Shen, the prime minister of Beifu, was appointed as the deputy of the Provincial Assembly of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：庚辰，禁服用明金、缕金、贴金。
现代文：二十二日，禁止服饰用具用纯金或者镂金、贴金。
English: On the 22nd, it was forbidden to use pure gold, or gold-plated or gold-embossed, for clothing and accessories.

古文：戊子，幸中京。
现代文：三十日，临幸中京。
English: On the 30th, Linxing Zhongjing.

古文：十二月丁酉，宋遣吕夷简、曹璋来贺千龄节。
现代文：十二月初九，宋国派吕夷简、曹璋来祝贺千龄节。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of December, the Song Dynasty sent Lu Yijian and Cao Wei to congratulate the Millennium Festival.

古文：是月，萧排押等与高丽战于茶、陀二河，辽军失利，天云、右皮室二军没溺者众，遥辇帐详稳阿果达、客省使酌古、渤海详稳高清明、天云军详稳海里等皆死之。
现代文：同月，萧排押等与高丽在茶、沱二河交战，辽军失利，天云、右皮室二军淹死者数量众多，遥辇帐详稳阿果达、客省使酌古、渤海详稳高清明、天云军详稳海里均战死。
English: In the same month, Xiao Pai O and others fought with Goryeo in the Tea River and the Erhe River, the Liao Army was defeated, the Tianyun Army and the Second Army of the Right Division were drowned in large numbers, and the soldiers of the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River, the

古文：放进士张克恭等三十七人及第。
现代文：放榜录取进士张克恭等三十七人及第。
English: Zhang Keqiong and other 37 students were admitted to the list.

古文：八年春正月，宋遣陈尧佐、张群来贺。
现代文：八年春正月，宋派陈尧佐、张群前来祝贺。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, Song sent Chen Bingzao and Zhang Qunrong to congratulate.

古文：壬戌，铁骊来贡。
现代文：初四，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：建景宗庙于中京。封沙州节度使曹顺为敦煌郡王。
现代文：在中京修筑景宗庙。封沙州节度使曹顺为敦煌郡王。
English: He built the Jingsong Temple in Zhongjing. He made Cao Shun the king of Dunhuang County by holding the festival in Shazhou.

古文：二月丁未，以前南院枢密使韩制心为中京留守，汉人行宫都部署王继忠南院枢密使。
现代文：二月十九日，任命前南院枢密使韩制心为中京留守，汉人行宫都部署王继忠为南院枢密使。
English: On February 19, the former South Privy Councilor Han Xiexin was appointed to stay in Beijing, and Wang Jizhong was appointed as the South Privy Councilor.

古文：丙辰，祭风伯。
现代文：二十八日，祭祀风伯。
English: On the 28th, the ritual was over.

古文：三月己未，以契丹弘义宫使赫石为兴圣宫都部署，前遥恩拈部节度使控骨里积庆宫都部署，左祗候郎君耶律罕四捷军都监。
现代文：三月初二，任命契丹弘义宫使赫石为兴圣宫都部署，前遥恩拈部节度使控骨里为积庆宫都部署，左祗候郎君耶律罕为四捷军都监。
English: On the second day of March, Khitan Hongyi Palace was appointed to deploy Heshi as the commander of the Xing Sheng Palace, Qianyuan Enbu Sect was appointed to deploy Jieqing Palace, and Zuoying Langjun Yerukhan was appointed as the commander of the four armies.

古文：乙亥，东平王萧韩宁、东京留守耶律八哥、国舅平章事萧排押、林牙要只等讨高丽还，坐失律，数其罪而释之。
现代文：十八日，东平王萧韩宁、东京留守耶律八哥、国舅平章事萧排押、林牙要只等征讨高丽回师，因军纪败坏获罪，在被数落罪状之后得到释放。
English: On the 18th, Dongping Wang Xiao Hanning, Tokyo left-behind Yelu Mogao, Guozhu Pingzhang, Xiao Puyi, and Lin Yao were only waiting to recruit Koryo Hui's division. They were found guilty of poor military discipline and were released after the charges were dropped.

古文：己卯，诏加征高丽有功渤海将校官。
现代文：二十二日，下诏给征伐高丽有功的渤海将领加官进爵。
English: On the 22nd, the general of the Bohai Sea, who had distinguished himself in the conquest of Korea, was given a knighthood.

古文：壬午，阅飞龙院马。
现代文：二十五日，查看飞龙院马匹。
English: On the 25th, check out the horses at Fei Long Yuan.

古文：癸未，回跋部太师踏剌葛来贡。
现代文：二十六日，回跋部太师踏剌葛前来进贡。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Huibabu Daishi came to pay tribute.

古文：丙戌，置东京渤海承奉官都知押班。
现代文：二十九日，设置东京渤海承奉官都知押班。
English: On the 29th, the Tokyo Bokkai Shonan Tochi Detention Center was established.

古文：夏四月戊子朔，如缅山。
现代文：夏四月初一，皇上到缅山。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the emperor went to Mount Myeongsan.

古文：五月壬申，以驸马萧克忠为长宁军节度使。
现代文：五月十六日，任命驸马萧克忠为长宁军节度使。
English: On May 16th, Xiao Ma appointed Xiao Kechuang as the military envoy of the Changning Army.

古文：乙亥，迁宁州渤海户于辽、土二河之间。
现代文：十九日，将宁州渤海民户迁居于辽、土二河之间。
English: On the 19th, the resettlement of Ningzhou Bohai residents was carried out between Liao and Tu Erhe.

古文：己卯，曷苏馆惕隐阿不葛、宰相赛剌来贡。
现代文：二十三日，曷苏馆惕隐阿不葛、宰相赛剌前来朝贡。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Su's envoys, Emperor Jing and Emperor Buge, and the prime minister, Emperor Sei, came to pay tribute.

古文：六月戊子，录征高丽战殁将校子弟。
现代文：六月初三，任用在征伐高丽之役中战死将领的子弟为官。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the son of a general who died in battle during the conquest of Korea was appointed as an official.

古文：己丑，以左夷离毕萧解里为西南面招讨使，御史大夫萧要只为夷离毕。
现代文：初四，任命左夷离毕萧解里为西南面招讨使，御史大夫萧要只为夷离毕。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Zuo Yili Bi Xiao Li was appointed as the southwestern recruiting envoy, and the chief historian Xiao should only be a Yili Bi.

古文：乙亥，惕隐耶律合葛为南府宰相，南面林牙耶律韩留为惕隐。
现代文：十四日，任命惕隐耶律合葛为南府宰相，南面林牙耶律韩留为惕隐。
English: On the 14th, Titiyin Yerut Hege was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu, and the south side of the forest, Yerut Han, was appointed as Titiyin.

古文：癸卯，弛大摆山猿岭采木之禁。
现代文：十八日，废止大摆山猿岭严禁伐木的禁令。
English: On the 18th, the ban on logging in the Daming Mountains was abolished.

古文：乙巳，以南皮室军校等讨高丽有功，赐金帛有差。
现代文：二十日，南皮室军校等因征讨高丽有功，赐给金帛各若干。
English: On the 20th, Nanpi Muru Military Academy and other schools were awarded a number of gold medals for their contributions to Korea.

古文：秋七月己未，征高丽战殁诸将，诏益封其妻。
现代文：秋七月初四，诏令给征高丽战死诸将的妻子增加封号。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the wife of a general who died in the Korean War was given an additional seal by imperial decree.

古文：庚申，以东北路详稳耶律独迭为北院大王。
现代文：初五，任命东北路详稳耶律独迭为北院大王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed the Northeast Road Jianwen Ye Lu as the King of the Northern Court.

古文：辛酉，肴里、涅哥二奚军征高丽有功，皆赐金帛。
现代文：初六，肴里、涅哥二奚军因征高丽有功，均被赏赐金帛。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the troops of Sakari and Nego II were awarded gold medals for their meritorious service in the conquest of Korea.

古文：癸亥，诏阻卜依旧岁贡马千七百，驼四百四十，貂鼠皮万、青鼠皮二万五千。
现代文：初八，诏令阻卜依旧例每年进贡马一千七百匹，骆驼四百四十头，貂鼠皮一万张，青鼠皮二万五千张。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict forbade the annual tribute of 1,700 horses, 440 camels, 10,000 yakitori skins, and 25,000 green rat skins.

古文：戊辰，观稼。
现代文：十三日，察看庄稼长势。
English: On the 13th, inspect the growth of crops.

古文：己巳，回跋部太保麻门来贡。
现代文：十四日，回跋部太保麻门前来进贡。
English: On the 14th, the returnees came to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，观市，曲赦市中系囚。
现代文：十五日，察看市易，特赦关押于市中的囚犯。
English: On the 15th, he inspected the city and pardoned the prisoners detained in the city.

古文：命解宁、马翼充贺宋生辰使副。
现代文：任命解宁、马翼充任祝贺宋生辰使和副使。
English: He congratulated Song Shengchen on the appointment of Xianning and Ma Ying as envoys and deputy envoys.

古文：八月庚寅，遣郎君曷不吕等率诸部兵会大军讨高丽。
现代文：八月初六，派郎君曷不吕等统帅诸部兵马与大军会合一同征伐高丽。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Emperor Taizong sent generals such as Yongburyu and other generals from various departments to join the great army to conquer Goryeo.

古文：九月己巳，以石用中参知政事。
现代文：九月十六日，任命石用中为参知政事。
English: On September 16th, Shigeyochu was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：宋遣崔遵度、王应昌来贺千龄节。
现代文：宋派崔遵度、王应昌前来祝贺千龄节。
English: Song Dynasty emperors Cui Zundu and Wang Yingchang came to congratulate the Millennium Festival.

古文：壬申，录囚。
现代文：十九日，查看犯人口供。
English: On September 14th, it stopped in Pingyang.

古文：甲戌，复录囚。
现代文：二十一日，再次查看犯人口供。
English: On the 21st, the inmate's statement was reviewed again.

古文：庚辰，曷苏馆惕隐阿不割来贡。
现代文：二十七日，曷苏馆惕隐阿不割前来朝贡。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the Emperor of Su came to pay tribute.

古文：壬午，驻跸土河川。
现代文：二十九日，车驾暂驻于土河川。
English: On the 29th, the driver was temporarily stationed in Tuhe River.

古文：冬十月乙酉，诏诸道，事无巨细，已断者，每三月一次条奏。
现代文：冬十月初二，下诏命诸道，将已处理的事务不论大小巨细，每三月条陈上奏一次。
English: On the 2nd day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor issued an edict to all provinces that the matters that had been dealt with, regardless of size, were to be reported once every three months.

古文：戊子，遣耶律继崇、郑玄瑕贺宋正旦。
现代文：初五，派耶律继崇、郑玄瑕祝贺宋正旦。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he sent Ye Lu to congratulate Song Zhengdan, followed by Chong and Zheng Xuan Ke.

古文：癸巳，诏横帐三房不得与卑小帐族为婚；凡嫁娶，必奏而后行。
现代文：初十，下诏横帐三房不得与鲜卑小帐族联姻；横帐三房的婚姻嫁娶，都要先上奏，得到皇上批准后方可进行。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that people of the three houses of the yakuza should not be allowed to marry members of the lesser house of the Xianbei clan; marriages between people of the three houses of the yakuza should be performed first, and only after obtaining the emperor's approval.

古文：癸卯，以前北院大王建福为阿紥割只。
现代文：二十日，任命前北院大王建福为阿扎割只。
English: On the 20th, Jianfu, the former Grand Prince of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, was appointed as Azawari.

古文：甲辰，改东路耗里太保城为咸州，建节以领之。
现代文：二十一日，改东路耗里太保城为咸州，派使者持符节统领之。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he changed Taibo City, which was on the east road, to Xianzhou, and sent an envoy to lead it.

古文：十一月甲寅，置云州宣德县。
现代文：十一月初二，设置云州宣德县。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Yunnan Xuande County was established.

古文：十二月辛卯，驻跸中京。
现代文：十二月初九，歇驾于中京。
English: On the ninth day of the twelfth month, he stopped in Chukyo.

古文：乙巳，以广平郡王宗业为中京留守、大定尹，韩制心为惕隐。
现代文：二十三日，任命广平郡王宗业为中京留守、大定尹，韩制心为惕隐。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Zongye of Guangping County was appointed as Zhongjing Ruzhu, Dating Yin, and Han Xiexin as Tiyin.

古文：辛亥，高丽王询遣使乞贡方物，诏纳之。
现代文：二十九日，高丽王询派使者请求进贡高丽土产，皇上下诏接受其贡物。
English: On the 29th, the King of Goryeo sent an envoy to request a tribute of Goryeo local products, and the Emperor issued an edict to accept the tribute.

古文：九年春正月，宋遣刘平、张元普来贺。
现代文：九年春正月，宋派刘平、张元普前来朝贺。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, Song sent Liu Ping and Zhang Yuanpu to pay morning greetings.

古文：二月，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二月，到鸳鸯泊。
English: February, to Oshidomari.

古文：五月庚午，耶律资忠使高丽还，王询表请称藩纳贡，归所留王人只剌里。
现代文：五月二十日，耶律资忠出使高丽回国，王询上表请求称藩纳贡，并遣回被扣押的王人只剌里。
English: On May 20th, Yerutsuchong sent an envoy to Korea, and Wang En made a request for the payment of tribute to the clan, and the detained Wang Zudaoli was sent back.

古文：只剌里在高丽六年，忠节不屈，以为林牙。
现代文：只剌里在高丽六年，始终忠贞不屈，归国后被任为林牙。
English: After six years in Goryeo, Tadaharu remained loyal and was appointed to the position of forest ranger after returning to Japan.

古文：辛未，遣使释王询罪，并允其请。
现代文：二十一日，皇上派使者表示释免王询之罪，答应他的请求。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor sent an envoy to express his forgiveness of Wang En's sin and to grant his request.

古文：癸酉，以耶律宗教检校太傅，宗诲启圣军节度使，刘晟太子太傅，仍赐保节功臣。
现代文：二十三日，任命耶律宗教为检校太傅，宗诲为启圣军节度使，刘晟为太子太傅，又赐给他们保节功臣称号。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Ye Luo Jiao as the inspector of the school, Zong Ji as the festival envoy of the army of enlightenment, and Liu Ye as the prince of the prince, and also gave them the title of the hero of the festival.

古文：秋七月庚戌朔，日有食之，诏以近臣代拜救日。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。下诏让近臣代皇帝行祭拜之礼以救太阳。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of July, there was a solar eclipse. It was decreed that the emperor's close vassals should perform a ritual to save the sun.

古文：甲寅，遣使赐沙州回鹘敦煌郡王曹顺衣物。
现代文：初五，派使者赐给沙州回鹘敦煌郡王曹顺衣物。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, an envoy was sent to give King Cao Shun of Dunhuang County clothing.

古文：以查剌、耿元吉、韩九、宋璋为来年贺宋生辰正旦使副。
现代文：任命查剌、耿元吉、韩九、宋璋为来年贺宋生辰正旦之正副使者。
English: He appointed Zha Rong, Geng Yuanji, Han Jiu and Song Yi as the deputy envoys of He Song Sheng Chen Zhengdan next year.

古文：九月戊午，以驸马萧绍宗平章事。
现代文：九月初十，任命驸马萧绍宗为平章事。
English: On the 10th day of September, Xiao Shaosong was appointed as the next Taira no Shojo.

古文：丁卯，文武百僚奉表上尊号，不许；表三上，乃从之。
现代文：十九日，文武百官奉表给皇上上尊号，没有得到允许；群臣三次上表，皇上方才准奏。
English: On the 19th, hundreds of civil and military officials presented a petition to the Emperor, but were not allowed to do so; the ministers presented their petitions three times, but the Emperor only gave his assent.

古文：乙亥，沙州回鹘敦煌郡王曹顺遣使来贡。
现代文：二十七日，沙州回鹘敦煌郡王曹顺派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, King Cao Shun of Dunhuang County, the capital of Shazhou Province, sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：括诸道汉民马赐东征军。
现代文：检括诸道汉人马匹赐给东征军。
English: Han horses from various provinces were given to the Eastern Expeditionary Force.

古文：以夷离毕延宁为兵马副都部署，总兵东征。
现代文：任命夷离毕延宁为兵马副都部署，总领兵马东征。
English: Appointed Yi Li Bi Yanning as deputy commander of the Eastern Expedition and commander of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：是月，驻跸金瓶泺。
现代文：同月，皇上歇驾于金瓶泊。
English: In the same month, the Emperor rested at Kinpetsu.

古文：宋遣宋绶、骆继伦贺千龄节。
现代文：宋派使者宋绶、骆继伦前来祝贺千龄节。
English: The Song Dynasty sent emissaries Song Xi and Luo Jilun to congratulate the Millennium Festival.

古文：冬十月戊寅朔，以涅里为奚王都监，突迭里为北王府舍利军详稳。
现代文：冬十月初一，任命涅里为奚王都监，突迭里为北王府舍利军详稳。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, Nyeri was appointed as the governor of Shao Wang, and Zhudi Li was appointed as the governor of the Northern King's Palace.

古文：郎君老使沙州还，诏释宿累。
现代文：郎君老出使沙州回国，皇上诏令释免他从前的过失。
English: The Emperor's edict absolved him of his past misdeeds.

古文：国家旧使远国，多用犯徒罪而有才略者，使还，即除其罪。
现代文：国家旧制：大多用那些犯有徒罪而有才略的犯人出使远方国家，完成出使任务回国后，即释免其罪。
English: Under the old system, most of the prisoners who had committed crimes were sent to distant countries. After they returned to their home countries, they were released.

古文：戊子，西南招讨奏党项部有宋犀族输贡不时，常有他意，宜以时遣使督之。
现代文：十一日，西南招讨奏称党项部中宋犀族不按时交纳贡赋，常有异心，应该按时派使者前去督促其纳贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Southwest Invitation to Solicit Contributions said that the Song Sais in the Party Department did not pay tribute on time, and there were often dissenters. An envoy should be sent on time to urge them to pay tribute.

古文：诏曰： 边鄙小族，岁有常贡。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 边远小族，每年都按时交纳贡物。
English: The imperial edict said: The outlying small tribes should pay tribute on time every year.

古文：边臣骄纵，征敛无度，彼怀惧不能自达耳。
现代文：边臣骄横跋扈，聚敛无度，以致他们心怀恐惧，不再按时送来贡赋。
English: The vassals were so arrogant and greedy that they were afraid to send the tribute on time.

古文：第遣清慎官将，示以恩信，无或侵渔，自然效顺。 
现代文：现在只须派清廉谨慎的官员将领对他们优加抚恤，对他们示以恩德宠信，不再从中侵吞牟利，他们自然就会归顺效命。 
English: Now all they need to do is to appoint honest and prudent officials and generals to give them generous pensions, show them grace and favor, and no longer make profits from them, and they will naturally submit to their orders.

古文：复奏谛居、迭烈德部言节度使韩留有惠政，今当代，请留。上命进其治状。辛丑，如中京。
现代文：西南招讨又奏称谛居、迭烈德部宣称其节度使韩留在位期间施行仁政，现在任期已满，请求让他继续留任，皇上命令将他实施仁政的情况如实奏上。二十四日，到中京。
English: On the 24th, he went to Chukyo to report on the situation of benevolent government implemented by Han after his term of office had expired. The Emperor ordered him to report on the actual situation of benevolent government implemented by him.

古文：壬寅，大食国遣使进象及方物，为子册割请婚。
现代文：二十五日，大食国派使者进献大象及土产，为王子册割向辽求婚。
English: On the 25th, the big food country sent an envoy to present elephants and local products, and to propose marriage to Liao for the prince.

古文：十一月丁巳，以漆水郡王韩制心为南京留守、析津尹、兵马都总管。
现代文：十一月初十，任命漆水郡王韩制心为南京留守、析津尹、兵马都总管。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of the year, Wang Han Xixin of Lishui County was appointed as the general manager of the Military Region of Nanjing.

古文：己未，以夷离毕萧孝顺为南面诸行宫都部署，加左仆射。
现代文：十二日，任命夷离毕萧孝顺为南面诸行宫都部署，并加左仆射官号。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Yi Li Bi Xiao Xiaozhun to be deployed to all the palaces in the south, and added the title of Left Footman.

古文：十二月丁亥，禁僧燃身炼指。
现代文：十二月十一日，禁止僧人自焚及以香火烧灼手指。
English: On December 11, monks were prohibited from self-immolation and burning their fingers with incense.

古文：戊子，诏中京建太祖庙，制度、祭器皆从古制。
现代文：十二日，诏令中京修建太祖庙，庙之制度、祭器均按古代制度。
English: On the 12th, the emperor ordered the construction of Taizu Temple in Beijing, and the temple system and sacrificial vessels were all in accordance with the ancient system.

古文：乙巳，诏来年冬行大册礼。
现代文：二十九日，下诏来年冬天举行大册礼。
English: On the 29th, it was announced that a grand opening ceremony would be held next winter.

古文：放进士张仲举等四十五人。
现代文：放榜录取进士张仲举等四十五人及第。
English: Forty-five people, including Zhang Zhongji, who were admitted to the list, were ranked second.

古文：太平元年春正月丁丑朔，宋使鲁宗道、成吉来贺。
现代文：太平元年春正月初一，宋派使者鲁宗道、成吉前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year of Taiping, the Song Dynasty sent emissaries Lu Zongdao and Cheng Ji to pay homage.

古文：如浑河。
现代文：皇上到浑河。
English: The emperor went to Hunhe.

古文：二月乙卯，幸钹河。
现代文：二月初十，临幸钹河。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, Linxing Minhe was born.

古文：壬戌，猎高柳林。
现代文：十七日，出猎于高柳林。
English: On the 17th, they went hunting in the high willow forest.

古文：三月戊戌，皇子勃已只生。
现代文：三月二十三日，皇子勃已只出生。
English: On March 23rd, Prince Bo was born.

古文：庚子，驸马都尉萧绍业建私城，赐名睦州，军曰长庆。
现代文：二十五日，驸马都尉萧绍业修建私城，被赐名为睦州，军名为长庆。
English: On the 25th, Captain Xiao Shaoye built a private city and was given the name Mutsuzhou and the military name Changqing.

古文：是月，大食国王复遣使请婚，封王子班郎君胡思里女可老为公主，嫁之。
现代文：同月，大食国王再次派使者前来求婚，皇上封王子班郎君胡思里之女可老为公主，将她嫁给大食王子。
English: In the same month, the king of gluttony once again sent an envoy to propose marriage. The daughter of the emperor's vassal prince Banjun Husiri could always be a princess, and he married her to the prince of gluttony.

古文：夏四月戊申，东京留守奏，女直三十部酋长请各以其子诣阙祗候。
现代文：夏四月初三，东京留守奏称，女真三十部酋长请求让他们的儿子到宫中担任官职。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, according to a report from Tokyo, the chiefs of the thirty provinces of Nyoshin requested that their sons be allowed to take up official positions in the palace.

古文：诏与其父俱来受约。
现代文：皇上诏令他们与其父一起同来供事。
English: The emperor ordered them to come to work with their father.

古文：乙卯，录囚。
现代文：初十，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 12th, the inspectors found the criminal's confession.

古文：丁卯，置来州，是月，清暑缅山。
现代文：二十二日，设置来州。同月，消夏于缅山。
English: On the 22nd, he set out for Suzhou. That same month, he spent the summer in Mount Myeongsan.

古文：秋七月甲戌朔，赐从猎女直人秋衣。
现代文：秋七月初一，赐给随从出猎的女真人秋天的衣服。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, autumn clothes are given to the female real person who accompanies the hunt.

古文：乙亥，遣骨里取石晋所上玉玺于中京。阻卜来贡。
现代文：初二，派骨里到中京取回石晋所献上的玉玺。阻卜前来朝贡。
English: On the second day of the first year, he went to central Kyoto to retrieve the jade scepter presented by Shi Jin. He did not come to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，如沙岭。
现代文：初八，到沙岭。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, to Sha Ling.

古文：是月，猎潢河。
现代文：同月，出猎于潢河。
English: In the same month, they went hunting in the Li River.

古文：九月，幸中京。
现代文：九月，临幸中京。
English: In September, Linxing Zhongjing.

古文：冬十月丁未，敌烈酋长颇白来贡马、驼。
现代文：冬十月初五，敌烈酋长颇白前来进贡马匹和骆驼。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, the hostile chieftain came to pay tribute with horses and camels.

古文：戊申，录囚。
现代文：初六，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the prisoners were inspected and interrogated.

古文：壬子，宋使李懿、王仲宾来贺千龄节，及苏惟甫、周鼎贺来岁元正，即遣萧善、程翥报聘。
现代文：初十，宋国使者李懿、王仲宾前来祝贺千龄节，又有苏惟甫、周鼎来祝贺来年元旦，皇上立即派萧善、程翥回访。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the emissaries of the Song Dynasty, Li Xi and Wang Zhongbin, came to congratulate the Millennium Festival, and Su Wei Fu and Zhou Ding came to congratulate the New Year's Day of the next year. The emperor immediately sent Xiao Shan and Cheng Yao to pay a return visit.

古文：党项长曷鲁来贡。
现代文：党项酋长曷鲁前来进贡。
English: Party chief Zhao Lu came to pay tribute.

古文：己未，以萨敏解里为都点检，高六副点检，耶律罗汉奴左皮室详稳，嗓姑右皮室详稳，聊了西北路金吾，耶律僧隐御史大夫，求哥驸马都尉，萧舂、骨里并大将军。
现代文：十七日，任命萨敏解里为都点检，高六为副点检，耶律罗汉奴为左皮室详稳，嗓姑为右皮室详稳，聊了为西北路金吾，耶律僧隐为御史大夫，求哥为驸马都尉，萧舂、骨里同为大将军。
English: On the 17th, Samin Leili was appointed as the city inspector, Gaorong as the deputy inspector, Yelu Luohannu as the left-hand room inspector, Guo Gu as the right-hand room inspector, Chatai as the northwest road inspector, Yelu Soyin as the chief inspector, Cuigo as the deputy inspector, Xiao Yu and Bone as the general.

古文：庚申，幸通天观，观鱼龙曼衍之戏。
现代文：十八日，临幸通天观，观看鱼龙曼衍之戏。
English: On the 18th, Lin passed through Tiangu, watching the drama of Yu Longman Yan.

古文：翌日，再幸。
现代文：次日，再次临幸通天观。
English: The next day, I went to the Linsen Tong Tiangu again.

古文：还，升玉辂，自内三门入万寿殿，奠酒七庙御容，因宴宗室。
现代文：回宫时，乘坐玉辂，从内三门进入万寿殿，洒酒于地以祭祀七庙御容，然后大宴宗室。
English: When returning to the palace, he rode on a jade palanquin, entered the Manju-den from the inner three doors, sprinkled wine on the ground to worship the seven temples, and then held a grand banquet in the ancestral room.

古文：十一月癸未，上御昭庆殿，文武百僚奉册上尊号曰睿文英武遵道至德崇仁广孝功成治定昭圣神赞天辅皇帝，大赦，改元太平，中外官进级有差。
现代文：十一月十二日，皇上御临昭庆殿，文武百官奉册给皇上上尊号为睿文英武遵道至德崇仁广孝功成治定昭圣神赞天辅皇帝，大赦天下，改元太平，内外命官均加官进爵。
English: On November 12th, the Emperor arrived at the Zhaoqing Palace, and a hundred military and civilian officials were registered to give the Emperor the honorific title of Rui, Wen, Ying, Wu, Zun, Da, De, Chong, Ren, Guang, Xiao, Gong, Zhi, Ding, Zhao, Shen, Zhan, Tian, Fu, Emperor. The world was amnestied, the era was changed to a period of peace, and military and civilian officials both at home and abroad were promoted to the rank of knight.

古文：宋遣使来聘，夏、高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：宋派使者来访，夏、高丽派使者前来朝贡。
English: The Song Dynasty sent emissaries to visit, and the Xia Dynasty and the Goryeo Dynasty sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：甲申，册皇子梁王宗真为皇太子。
现代文：十三日，册封皇子梁王宗真为皇太子。
English: On the 13th, Prince Liang Wang Zongzhen was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：二年春正月，如纳水钓鱼。
现代文：二年春正月，到纳水钓鱼。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, I went fishing in Na Shui.

古文：二月辛丑朔，驻跸鱼儿泺。
现代文：二月初一，歇驾于鱼儿泊。
English: On the first day of February, I rested at the fish pond.

古文：三月甲戌，如长春州。
现代文：三月初五，到长春州。
English: March 5th, to Changchun.

古文：丁丑，宋使薛贻廓来告宋主恒殂，子祯嗣位。
现代文：初八，宋国使者薛贻廓前来告知宋主赵恒崩殂，子赵祯即位。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emissary of the Song Dynasty, Xue Qianku, came to inform the Song Lord Zhao Heng that his son, Zhao Qi, had ascended to the throne.

古文：遣都点检耶律僧隐等充宋祭奠使副，林牙萧日新、观察冯延休充宋后吊慰使副。
现代文：皇上派都点检耶律僧隐等充任宋祭奠使及副使，林牙萧日新、观察冯延休充任宋后吊慰使、副使。
English: The emperor sent Du Dangjian, Ye Li, So Yin and others to serve as Song memorial envoys and deputy envoys, Lin Ya, Xiao Rixin, and Observation Feng Yanju to serve as post-Song condolence envoys and deputy envoys.

古文：戊寅，遣金吾耶律谐领、引进姚居信充宋主吊慰使副。
现代文：初九，派金吾耶律谐领、引进姚居信充任宋主吊慰使、副使。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, he sent Jingwujerutong and introduced Yao Juxin to serve as Song's chief condolence envoy and deputy envoy.

古文：戊子，为宋主饭三京僧。
现代文：十九日，因宋主崩殂而为他在三京斋僧。
English: On the 19th, due to the death of Emperor Song, he became a lay monk in Sanjing.

古文：是月，地震，云、应二州屋摧地陷，嵬白山裂数百步，泉涌成流。
现代文：同月，地震，云、应二州房屋倒塌、地面下陷，嵬白山裂开数百步的缝隙，泉水涌出形成河流。
English: In the same month, an earthquake, clouds, the collapse of houses in two states, and the sinking of the ground caused the Erbai Mountain to crack open a gap of hundreds of steps, and the spring water gushed out to form a river.

古文：夏四月，如缅山清暑。
现代文：夏四月，到缅山避暑。
English: Summer In April, I went to Mount Myeongsan to escape the heat.

古文：五月乙亥，参知政事石用中薨。
现代文：五月初七，参知政事石用中逝世。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of the year, Sanzhi Zhi Shi Ying passed away.

古文：庚辰，铁骊遣使献兀惹十六户。
现代文：十二日，铁骊派使者献上兀惹人十六户。
English: On the twelfth day, Tieyuan sent an envoy to present sixteen families of people from Liaoyang.

古文：六月己未，宋遣使薛由等来馈其先帝遗物。
现代文：六月二十一日，宋派使者薛由等前来赠送其先帝遗物。
English: On June 21, Xue You, an emissary sent by the Song Dynasty, came to present relics of the former emperor.

古文：秋七月乙卯，以耶律信宁为奉陵军节度使，高丽国参知政事王同显静海军节度使，耶律遂忠长宁军节度使，耿延毅昭德军节度使，高守贞河西军节度使。
现代文：秋七月十一日，任命耶律信宁为奉陵军节度使，高丽国参知政事王同显为静海军节度使，耶律遂忠为长宁军节度使，耿延毅为昭德军节度使，高守贞为河西军节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, Ye Lu Xun Ning was appointed as the festival envoy of the Fengling Army, Wang Tong Xian, the senator of Goryeo, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Jing Navy, Ye Lu Sui Zhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Changning Army, Geng Yan Yi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhaode Army, and Gao Shuzhen was appointed as the festival envoy of the Hexi Army.

古文：九月癸巳，遣尚书僧隐、韩格贺宋主即位。
现代文：九月二十六日，派尚书僧隐、韩格前去祝贺宋主即位。
English: On September 26, he sent Shangshu, Sengyin and Han Ge to congratulate Emperor Song on his accession to the throne.

古文：冬十月壬寅，遣堂后官张克恭充贺夏国王李德昭生日使，耶律扫古、韩王充贺宋太后生日使副，耶律仙宁、史克忠充贺宋正旦使副。
现代文：冬十月初六，派堂后官张克恭充任祝贺夏国王李德昭生日使者，耶律扫古、韩王充任祝贺宋太后生日正副使者。耶律仙宁、史克忠充任祝贺宋正旦正副使者。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, Zhang Kegong, a court official, was appointed as the messenger to congratulate the birthday of the king of Xia, Li Dezhao; Yerut Saigu and Han Wangchong were appointed as the deputy messengers to congratulate the birthday of the Empress Dowager of Song; Yerut Xianning and Shik Zhongchong were appointed as the deputy messengers to congratulate the birthday of Song Zhengdan.

古文：是月，驻跸胡鲁古思淀。
现代文：同月，歇驾于胡鲁古思淀。
English: In the same month, he stayed in Hulugushidian.

古文：癸卯，赐宰臣吕德懋、参知政事吴叔达、枢密副使杨又玄、右丞相马保忠钱物有差。
现代文：初九，赐给宰臣吕德懋、参知政事吴叔达、枢密副使杨又玄、右丞相马保忠钱物各若干。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he gave a certain amount of money and goods to Vice-Minister Lü Dejun, Councillor Wu Shuda, Vice-Minister Yang Mataixuan, and Minister of the Right Ma Baotong.

古文：辛亥，至上京，曲赦畿内囚。
现代文：十五日，到上京，特赦京郊囚犯。
English: On the 15th, he went to Beijing and granted amnesty to the prisoners in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：十一月丙戌，宋遣使来谢。
现代文：十一月二十日，宋派使者前来致谢。
English: On November 20th, Song sent an envoy to express his thanks.

古文：十二月辛丑，高丽王询薨，其子钦遣使来报，即命使册钦为高丽国王。
现代文：十二月初六，高丽王询逝世，其子钦派使者前来奏报，皇上即派使者册封王钦为高丽国王。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month of the first month of the year, King Inzen of Goryeo passed away. His son Qin sent an envoy to report the news. The emperor then sent an envoy to crown King Qin as King of Goryeo.

古文：甲寅，宋遣刘烨、郭志言来贺千龄节。
现代文：十九日，宋派刘烨、郭言志前来祝贺千龄节。
English: On the 19th, Song sent Liu Ye and Guo Yan Zhi to congratulate the Millennium Festival.

古文：是年，放进士张渐等四十七人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士张渐等四十七人及第。
English: In the same year, 47 new students, including Zhang Qian, were admitted to the university.

古文：三年春正月丙寅朔，如纳水钓鱼。
现代文：三年春正月初一，到纳水钓鱼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, I went fishing in Na Shui.

古文：以僧隐为平章事。
现代文：任命僧隐为平章事。
English: The appointment of Soin is a matter of record.

古文：乙亥，以萧台德为南王府都监，林牙耶律信宁西北路招讨都监。
现代文：初十，任命萧台德为南王府都监，林牙耶律信宁为西北路招讨都监。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Xiao Tai De was appointed as the governor of Nanwangfu, and Lin Ya Yerut Xinning was appointed as the governor of Northwest Road.

古文：辛巳，赐越国公主私城之名曰懿州，军曰庆懿。
现代文：十六日，赐越国公主私城名为懿州，军名为庆懿。
English: On the 16th, the princess of Yue was given the name of Zhangzhou for her private city and the military name of Qingyuan.

古文：二月丙申，以丁振为武信军节度使，改封兰陵郡王。
现代文：二月初二，任命丁振武为武信军节度使，改封他为兰陵郡王。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Ding Zhenwu was appointed as the chief envoy of the Wuxin Army, and his title was changed to Lanling County King.

古文：戊申，以东平郡王萧排押为西南面都招讨，进封豳王。
现代文：十四日，任命东平郡王萧排押为西南面都招讨，进封他为豳王。
English: On the 14th, Wang Xiao Pai, the governor of Dongping County, was appointed as the southwestern face of the invitation, and he was appointed as the king.

古文：夏四月，以耶律守宁为都点检。
现代文：夏四月，任命耶律守宁为都点检。
English: In the summer of April, Ye Lu Shou Ning was appointed as the inspector of the capital.

古文：五月，清暑缅山。
现代文：五月，在缅山避暑。
English: In May, summering in Mount Myeongsan.

古文：六月戊申，以南院宣徽使刘泾参知政事，萧孝惠为副点检，萧孝恭东京统军兼沿边巡检使。
现代文：六月十六日，任命南院宣徽使刘泾为参知政事，萧孝惠为副点检，萧孝恭为东京统军兼沿边巡检使。
English: On June 16th, the Southern Yuan was appointed to proclaim the emblem, and appointed Liu Zhen as a political advisor, Xiao Xiaohui as a deputy inspector, and Xiao Xiaogong as a Tokyo unified army and border patrol inspector.

古文：戊午，以萧琏为左夷离毕，萧琳为详稳。
现代文：二十六日，任命萧琏为左夷离毕，萧琳为详稳。
English: On the 26th, Xiao Yao was appointed as Zuo Yi Li Bi, and Xiao Lin as Zhe Jian.

古文：秋七月戊寅，以南府宰相耶律合葛为上京留守，封漆水郡王。
现代文：秋七月十六日，任命南府宰相耶律合葛为上京留守，封他为漆水郡王。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he appointed the chancellor of Nanfu, Yeru Hagetsu, to stay in Kyoto and made him the king of Urushimizu County.

古文：丙戌，以皇后生辰为顺天节。
现代文：二十四日，将皇后生日命名为顺天节。
English: On the 24th, the queen's birthday was named Shun Tian Jie.

古文：丁亥，赐缅山名曰永安。
现代文：二十五日，将缅山赐名为永安。
English: On the 25th, Mount Myeongsan was given the name Yongan.

古文：是月，猎赤山。
现代文：同月，出猎于赤山。
English: In the same month, they went hunting in Akayama.

古文：闰九月壬辰朔，以萧柏达、韩绍雍充贺宋正旦使副，唐骨德、程昭文贺宋生辰使副。
现代文：闰九月初一，任命萧伯达、韩绍雍充任庆贺宋正旦正副使者，唐骨德、程昭文为祝贺宋主生辰正副使者。
English: On the first day of September, Xiao Boda and Han Shao Yongchong were appointed as deputy messengers to congratulate Song Zhengtan, and Tang Bode and Cheng Zhaowen were appointed as deputy messengers to congratulate Song Zhengtan.

古文：冬十月庚辰，宋遣薛奎、郭盛来贺顺天节，王臻、慕容惟素贺千龄节。
现代文：冬十月二十日，宋派薛奎、郭盛前来祝贺顺天节，王臻、慕容惟素前来祝贺千龄节。
English: On the 20th day of winter in October, Songpais Xue Kui and Guo Sheng came to congratulate the Spring Festival, and Wang Zhen and Murong Weisu came to congratulate the Millennium Festival.

古文：东征军奏： 统帅谐领、常衮课奴率师自毛母国岭入，林牙高九、裨将大匡逸等率师鼓山岭入。闰月未至挞离河，不遇敌而还。
现代文：东征军奏称 ：统帅谐领、常衮课奴率领部队从毛母国岭进入敌境，林牙高九、偏将大匡逸等人率部从鼓山岭进入敌境，闰月初四到达挞离河，因未遭遇敌军，均回师。
English: The Eastern Expeditionary Force reported: the commander-in-chief, Geng Jun, and his subordinates led the troops to enter the enemy territory from the Mao Motherland Ridge, Lin Ya Gao Jiu, and the commander, Da Kuang Yat, led the troops to enter the enemy territory from the Gushan Ridge, and arrived at the Qili River on the fourth day of the leap month. Since they did not encounter the enemy army, they all returned to the division.

古文：以是月会于弘怕只岭，驼马死者甚众。 
现代文：同月，两军会师于弘怕只岭，骆驼、马匹死亡甚多。 
English: In the same month, the two armies met at Hongxiang Jiaoling, and many camels and horses died.

古文：驻跸辽河。
现代文：皇上歇驾于辽河。
English: The emperor is resting in the Liao River.

古文：十一月辛卯朔，以皇侄宗范为归德军节度使，北府宰相萧孝穆南京留守，封燕王，南京留守韩制心南院大王、兵马都总管，仇正燕京转运使。
现代文：十一月初一，任命皇侄宗范为归德军节度使；北府宰相萧孝穆为南京留守，封为燕王；任命南京留守韩制心为南院大王、兵马都总管；仇正为燕京转运使。
English: On the first day of November, the emperor's nephew Zong Fan was appointed as the envoy for the return of the German army; Xiao Xiaomu, the prime minister of Beifu, stayed in Nanjing and was named King Yan; Han Xiexin, who stayed in Nanjing, was appointed as the king of the Southern Court and the general manager of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses; Quzheng was appointed as the envoy for the transfer of Yan to Beijing.

古文：十二月壬戌，以宗范为平章事，封三韩郡王，仇道衡中京副留守，冯延休顺州刺史。郎玄化西山转运使，赵其枢密直学士。
现代文：十二月初三，任命宗范为平章事，封为三韩郡王，仇道衡为中京副留守，冯延休为顺州刺史，郎玄化为西山转运使，赵其为枢密直学士。
English: On the third day of early December, Zong Fan was appointed as the Pingzhangji, Meng as the king of the three Korean counties, Qiu Daoheng as the vice-resident of Zhongjing, Feng Yanxiu as the governor of Shunzhou, Lang Xuanhua as the transfer envoy of Xishan, and Zhao Qi as the direct bachelor of the Privy Council.

古文：丁卯，以萧永为太子太师。
现代文：初八，任命萧永为太子太师。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Xiao Yong was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：己卯，封皇子重元秦国王。
现代文：二十日，封皇子重元为秦国王。
English: On the 20th, the crown prince Chongyuan became the king of Qin.

古文：四年春正月庚寅朔，宋遣张传、张士禹、程琳、丁保衡来贺。
现代文：四年春正月初一，宋派张传、张士禹、程琳、丁保衡前来祝贺正旦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Spring, Zhang Chuan, Zhang Shiyu, Cheng Lin, and Ding Baoheng of the Song faction came to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：如鸭子河。
现代文：皇上到鸭子河。
English: To the Duck River.

古文：二月己未朔，猎挞鲁河。
现代文：二月初一，出猎于挞鲁河。
English: On the first day of February, they went hunting in the Jilu River.

古文：诏改鸭子河曰混同江，挞鲁河曰长春河。
现代文：下诏改称鸭子河为混同江，挞鲁河为长春河。
English: The following edict changed the names of the Duck River to the Mixed River and the Jilu River to the Changchun River.

古文：三月戊子朔，千龄节，诏赐诸宫分耆老食。
现代文：三月初一，是千龄节，下诏赐给诸宫分老人食物。
English: On the first day of March, it was the Millennium Day, and the imperial edict was issued to distribute food to the elderly in each palace.

古文：夏四月癸酉，以右丞相马保忠之子世弘使岭表，至平地松林，为盗所杀，特赠昭信军节度使。
现代文：夏四月十六日，派右丞相马保忠之子世弘出使岭表，世弘在平地松林被盗贼杀害，皇上特地追赠他为昭信军节度使。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, Seihiro, the son of Ma Baotong, the Minister of the Right, was sent as an envoy to Lingya. Seihiro was killed by thieves in the flat pine forest, and the emperor specially posthumously presented him as the festival envoy of the Shoshin army.

古文：五月，清暑永安山。
现代文：五月，在永安山避暑。
English: In May, summering in Yongan Mountain.

古文：六月己未，南院大王韩制心薨。
现代文：六月初三，南院大王韩制心逝世。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Han Zhe, passed away.

古文：戊辰，以郑弘节为兵部郎中，刘慎行顺义军节度使。
现代文：十二日，任命郑弘节为兵部郎中，刘慎行为顺义军节度使。
English: On the 12th, Zheng Hongjie was appointed as the vice-minister of the military department, and Liu Sheng was appointed as the vice-minister of the Shunyi Army.

古文：辛未，以燕王萧孝穆子顺为千牛卫将军。
现代文：十五日，任命燕王萧孝穆之子萧顺为千牛卫将军。
English: On the 15th, Xiao Shun, the son of Yan Wang Xiao Xiaomu, was appointed the general of Qian Niuwei.

古文：甲戌，以中山郡王查哥为保静军节度使，乐安郡王遂哥广德军节度使，萧解里彰德军节度使。
现代文：十八日，任命中山郡王查哥为保静军节度使，乐安郡王遂哥为广德军节度使，萧解里为彰德军节度使。
English: On the 18th, Zhongshan County's Wang Chago was appointed as the festival envoy of the Baoding Army, Le'an County's Wang Suigo was appointed as the festival envoy of the Guangdong Army, and Xiao Jie Li was appointed as the festival envoy of the Changde Army.

古文：庚辰，以辽兴军节度使周王胡都古为临海军节度使，漆水郡王敌烈南院大王。
现代文：二十四日，任命辽兴军节度使周王胡都古为临海军节度使，漆水郡王敌烈为南院大王。
English: On the 24th, Zhou Wang Hudu Gu was appointed as the Liaoxing Army's festival envoy and the Linyi Navy's festival envoy, and Urushi County's Wang Jirei was appointed as the Southern Court's great king.

古文：秋七月，如秋山。
现代文：秋七月，到秋山。
English: In autumn and July, the emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：八月丙辰朔，以韩始芳为枢密直学士，驸马萧匹敌都点检。
现代文：八月初一，任命韩绍芳为枢密直学士，驸马萧匹敌为都点检。
English: On the first day of August, Han Shaofang was appointed as a privy direct bachelor, and Hao Ma Xiao Biqi was appointed as a capital point examination.

古文：九月，以驸马萧绍宗为武定军节度使，耶律宗福安国军节度使。
现代文：九月，任命驸马萧绍宗为武定军节度使，耶律宗福为安国军节度使。
English: In September, Zou Ma Xiao Shaozong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wuding Army, and Yerut Zongfu was appointed as the festival envoy of the Anguo Army.

古文：冬十月，驻跸辽河。
现代文：冬十月，歇驾于辽河。
English: Winter in October, resting in Liaohe.

古文：宋遣蔡齐、李用和来贺千龄节。
现代文：宋派蔡齐、李用和前来祝贺千龄节。
English: The Song Dynasty sent Cai Qi and Li Yinghe to congratulate the Millennial Day.

古文：十一月，追封南院大王韩制心为陈王。
现代文：十一月，追封南院大王韩制心为陈王。
English: In November, Han Xizhong, the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, was posthumously named King Chen.

古文：十二月，以萧从政为归义军节度使，康筠监门卫，充贺宋正旦使副。
现代文：十二月，任命萧从政为归义军节度使，康筠为监门卫，充任祝贺宋正旦的正副使者。
English: In December, Xiao Zongzhen was appointed as the envoy of the festival of returning to the rebel army, and Kang Yao was appointed as the guard of the gate, and served as the chief and deputy envoy to congratulate Song Zhengdan.

古文：是年，放进士李炯等四十七人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士李鮍等四十七人及第。
English: In the same year, 47 new students, including Li Jun, were admitted to the university.

