古文：二王诸葛李孟
现代文：王重荣，太原府祁县人。
English: Wang Chong Rong, a native of Min County, Taiyuan Prefecture.

古文：王重荣，太原祁人。父纵，太和末为河中骑将，从石雄破回鹘，终盐州刺史。
现代文：父亲王纵，太和末年任河中骑将，随从石雄打败回纥，充任盐州刺史。
English: His father, Wang Zheng, was a middle-ranking cavalry commander in the late Tahe period. He followed Shi Xiong to defeat Hui Zheng and served as the governor of Yan'an.

古文：重荣以父任为列校，与兄重盈皆以毅武冠军，擢河中牙将，主伺察。
现代文：王重荣因其父立功而充任军校，与兄长王重盈都坚毅武勇为三军之冠，被提拔为河中府牙将，掌管察问。
English: Wang Chong Rong was appointed to the military school due to his father's meritorious service. Together with his elder brother Wang Chong Ying, he was the strongest and bravest of the three armies. He was promoted to the commander of the Middle Fuchu, in charge of investigation and interrogation.

古文：时两军士干夜禁，捕而鞭之。
现代文：这时有个禁军的军士违反夜禁规定，王重荣逮捕并鞭打了他。
English: At this time, a sergeant of the forbidden army violated the night ban, and Wang Chongrong arrested and whipped him.

古文：士还，诉于中尉杨玄实，玄实怒，执重荣让曰： 天子爪士，而籓校辱之！ 
现代文：这个军士回营后向禁军首领、中尉杨玄萛投诉，杨玄萛大怒，抓来王重荣斥责他说： 天子的卫士，藩镇的军校竟敢侮辱他？ 
English: After the sergeant returned to the camp, he complained to the leader of the forbidden army, Lieutenant Yang Xuanqian. Yang Xuanqian was furious and arrested Wang Chongrong and scolded him, saying, "Heaven's son's guardian, how dare the military school in the town insult him?

古文：答曰： 夜半执者奸盗，孰知天子爪士？ 
现代文：王重荣回答说： 半夜抓的是犯禁的盗贼，谁知道他是天子卫士？ 
English: Wang Chong Rong replied, "In the middle of the night, we caught a thief who violated the ban. Who knows if he is a guardian of the heavenly son?

古文：具言其状。玄实叹曰： 非尔明辨，孰由知之？ 
现代文：一五一十地陈述了那人的情形，杨玄萛赞叹说： 不是你辨明是非，从谁那儿弄清这件事？ 
English: Yang Xuanqian said with admiration, "You are not the one to distinguish right from wrong. From whom did you get this information?"

古文：更诿于府，擢右署。
现代文：后托身于府署，被提拔为右署。
English: Later, he worked at the prefectural office and was promoted to the right office.

古文：重荣多权诡，众所严惮，虽主帅莫不下之。
现代文：王重荣长于权谋诡诈，使人非常害怕，即使是主帅也无不对他谦让。
English: Wang Chong Rong is good at scheming and cunning, which makes people very afraid. Even the coach is very humble to him.

古文：稍迁行军司马。
现代文：他逐步被提升为行军司马。
English: He was gradually promoted to the rank of Sima.

古文：黄巢陷长安，分兵略蒲，节度使李都不能支，乃臣贼，然内惮重荣，表以自副。
现代文：黄巢攻破长安，分兵夺取蒲州，节度使李都无力抵抗，于是向黄巢称臣，但内心畏惧王重荣，便上表给黄巢自甘为副职。
English: Huang Chao broke through Chang'an, the detachment captured Puzhou, and Li Du was powerless to resist, so he praised Huang Chao as a minister, but he was afraid of Wang Chung Rong in his heart, so he gave Huang Chao the position of deputy.

古文：地迩京师，贼调取横数，使者至百辈，坐传舍，益发兵，吏不堪命。
现代文：蒲州接近京都，黄巢军向他征调纷杂紧迫，派来的使者上百，留住客舍，不断增调派兵，官吏们承受不了差遣。
English: When the Yellow Nest Army approached Kyoto, the envoys sent by the Yellow Nest Army were urgent. Hundreds of envoys were sent, guest houses were kept, and more and more soldiers were sent. The officials could not bear to send them.

古文：重荣胁说都曰： 我所诡谋纾难，以外援未至。
现代文：王重荣警告劝说李都道 ：我之所以诈降以解祸患，是因为援兵未到。
English: Wang Chong Rong warned and persuaded Li Du Dao: The reason why I cheated to solve the calamity was because reinforcements had not arrived.

古文：今贼裒责日急，又收吾兵以困我，则亡无日矣。
现代文：如今叛贼的索求一天比一天急迫，又收去我们的军队来困扼我们，我们的灭亡就在眼前了。
English: Now that the demands of the traitors grow more urgent every day, and they have taken away our army to oppress us, our doom is at hand.

古文：请绝桥，婴城自守，不然，变生何以制之？ 
现代文：请拆断渡桥，环绕城墙来守卫城池，不这样，发生变故如何制止？ 
English: Please tear down the ferry bridge, surround the city wall to guard the city pond, otherwise, how to stop the change?

古文：都曰： 吾兵寡，谋不足，绝之，祸且至，愿以节假公。 
现代文：李都说： 我军兵少，如谋虑不善，断了渡桥，祸患即将临头，我愿将统兵节符拜托给您。 
English: Li Du said: "Our army is small, if the plan is not good, the bridge will be broken, and the disaster will be imminent. I would like to entrust you with the Uniform Day Flag.

古文：遂奔行在。
现代文：而后奔往僖宗逃离京城后所在的地方。
English: He then rushed to the place where he was after fleeing the capital.

古文：重荣乃悉驱出贼使斩之，因大掠居人以悦其下。
现代文：王重荣便将黄巢派来的使者全部撵出去杀了，趁势大肆抢劫居民以取悦于部下。
English: Wang Chong Rong then drove out and killed all the envoys sent by Huang Chao, and took advantage of the situation to rob the residents to please his subordinates.

古文：天子使前京兆尹窦潏间道慰其军，因诏代都。
现代文：皇帝派前任京兆尹窦聖走小路前来慰劳军队，并按诏令替代李都。
English: The emperor sent Jing Zhao's predecessor, Yin Dou Sheng, to come to comfort the troops and replace Li Du according to the imperial edict.

古文：重荣率官属奉迎。
现代文：王重荣带领众官吏僚属迎接。
English: Wang Chong Rong led all officials, colleagues and subordinates to greet him.

古文：潏至，大飨士，倡言曰： 天子以大臣守土，谁得逐之？
现代文：窦聖到后，大行犒劳官吏，席间大声说： 天子派大臣掌管一方政事，谁能驱逐？
English: After Dou Sheng arrived, a large number of overworked officials came forward and said loudly at the table: Heaven sent ministers to take charge of one side of the government, who can expel them?

古文：为我疏首恶者。 
现代文：向我告发首恶者。 
English: Tell me who the bad guy is.

古文：众无敢对。
现代文：大家不敢回答。
English: No one dared to answer.

古文：重荣佩刀历阶曰： 首谋者，我也，尚谁索？ 
现代文：王重荣身佩腰刀登上台阶说： 首谋是我，还找谁？ 
English: Wearing a waist knife, Wang Chongrong mounted the steps and said: "I am the ringleader, who else do you want?

古文：目潏，吏趣具骑，潏即奔还。
现代文：并目示窦聖的随吏，速去备马，窦聖当即匆遽返回。
English: He also told Dou Sheng's attendants to quickly prepare the horses, and Dou Sheng immediately returned in a hurry.

古文：重荣遂主留后。
现代文：王重荣于是掌管留后职。
English: As a result, Wang Chong Rong remained in charge.

古文：贼使健将硃温以舟师下冯翊，黄鄴率众自华阴合攻重荣。
现代文：黄巢派勇将朱温率军乘船顺流赴冯翊，黄邺带领军众从华阴会合攻打王重荣。
English: Huang Chao sent Zhu Wen and his army by boat down the river to Fenghuang. Huang Chao led the army from Huayin to attack Wang Chongrong.

古文：重荣感励士众，大战，败之，贼弃粮仗四十余艘。
现代文：王重荣激励军士，大战，打败了他们，黄巢军丢弃粮食、军械四十余船。
English: Wang Chongrong inspired the sergeants, fought a big battle, defeated them, and the Yellow Nest Army abandoned more than forty ships of grain and ordnance.

古文：即拜检校工部尚书，为节度使。
现代文：朝廷立即委任王重荣为工部尚书，担任节度使。
English: The imperial court immediately appointed Wang Chung Rong as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and he served as a delegate to the festival.

古文：会忠武监军杨复光率陈、蔡兵万人屯武功，重荣与连和，击贼将李详于华州，执以徇。
现代文：适逢忠武监军杨复光率领陈、蔡二州兵马万人驻扎武功，王重荣与他联合，到华州攻打叛军将领李详，生俘李详后将他示众。
English: At the right time, Yang Fuguang, the loyal military commander, led by Chen and Cai Erzhou, stationed tens of thousands of soldiers and horses in Wugong. Wang Chong Rong joined him to attack the rebel general Li Zhao in Huazhou, and after Li Zhao was captured alive, he was shown to the public.

古文：贼使尚让来攻，而硃温将劲兵居前，败重荣兵于西关门，于是出兵夏阳，掠河中漕米数十艘。
现代文：黄巢派尚让前来攻城，朱温率精壮士兵在前，在西关门打败王重荣的军队，于是出兵夏阳，掠夺了河中府的水运粮船数十艘。
English: The Huang Chao faction still came to attack the city, Zhu Wen led the strong soldiers in front, defeated Wang Chung Rong's army at the West Gate, and then sent troops to Xiayang and plundered dozens of water transport grain ships in Hechu Prefecture.

古文：重荣选兵三万攻温，温惧，悉凿舟沉于河，遂举同州降。
现代文：王重荣挑选了三万士兵攻打朱温，朱温害怕，将粮船全部凿沉在黄河里，便献同州投降。
English: Wang Chong Rong selected thirty thousand soldiers to attack Zhu Wen. Zhu Wen was afraid and scuttled all the grain ships in the Yellow River. He then surrendered Tongzhou.

古文：复光欲斩之，重荣曰： 今招贼，一切释罪。
现代文：杨复光要斩朱温，王重荣说： 现今招降叛贼，所有人都应免罪。
English: Yang Fuguang wanted to behead Zhu Wen, Wang Chong Rong said: Now is the time to recruit traitors, everyone should be exonerated.

古文：且温武锐可用，杀之不祥。 
现代文：况且朱温勇猛机敏可以使用，杀了他不利。 
English: What's more, Zhu Wen was brave and quick-witted and could be used, which was to his disadvantage.

古文：表为同华节度使。
现代文：于是向朝廷上表请求任命他为同华节度使。
English: Therefore, he asked the imperial court to appoint him as the Tonghua Festival envoy.

古文：有诏即副河中行营招讨，赐名全忠。
现代文：获得的诏令仅任其为河中行营副招讨，赐名为全忠。
English: The imperial edict he received only allowed him to serve as deputy commander of the middle-of-the-river campaign, and he was given the name Quanzhong.

古文：巢丧二州，怒甚，自将精兵数万壁梁田。
现代文：黄巢丧失两个州，愤怒已极，亲自率精兵数万人驻军梁田。
English: Huang Chao lost two states and was extremely angry. He personally led tens of thousands of elite soldiers to garrison Liang Tian.

古文：重荣军华阴，复光军渭北，掎角攻之，贼大败，执其将赵璋，巢中流矢走。
现代文：王重荣驻军华阴，杨复光驻军渭水北边，成夹击之势进攻，大败黄巢军，生擒其将领赵璋，黄巢中流箭逃走。
English: Wang Chongrong garrisoned Huayin, Yang Fuguang garrisoned the north side of Surabaya, attacked in a pincer attack, defeated the Yellow Nest Army, captured its general Zhao Wei alive, and fled the Yellow Nest.

古文：重荣兵亦死耗相当。
现代文：王重荣的兵力死亡、消耗与敌方相当。
English: The death and attrition rate of Wang Chongrong's troops were comparable to that of the enemy.

古文：惧巢复振，忧之，与复光计，复光曰： 我世与李克用共忧患，其人忠不顾难，死义如己。
现代文：他害怕黄巢重新整顿再来，为此忧虑，与杨复光商议，杨复光说： 我家与李克同世代共忧患，他为人效忠不顾惜遭遇祸难，为守义节而死如同自己的事。
English: He was afraid that the Yellow Nest would be reorganized again, and he was worried about this, so he discussed with Yang Fuguang. Yang Fuguang said: My family and Li Ke are of the same generation. He is loyal to people regardless of misfortune. He died to protect the Day of Righteousness as if it were his own business.

古文：若乞师焉，事蔑不济。 
现代文：若能求来他的军队，凡事无不成功。 
English: If you can get his army, you can get anything.

古文：乃遣使者约连和。
现代文：便派使者去相约联合。
English: So he sent messengers to make a treaty with them.

古文：克用使陈景斯总兵自岚、石赴河中，亲率师从之，遂平巢，复京师。
现代文：李克用派陈景斯统兵从岚、石奔赴河中，并亲自率军跟随而来，终于平定了黄巢，收复京都。
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of Chen Jing Si's commanding officers to rush to Hezhong from Shantou and Shishi, and personally led the army to follow, and finally leveled the Yellow Nest and recovered Kyoto.

古文：以功检校太尉、同中书门下平章事，封琅邪郡王。
现代文：因功被任命为检校太尉、同中书门下平章事，被封为琅笽郡王。
English: For his merits, he was appointed as the inspecting officer of the school, and was awarded the title of the king of Shixian County.

古文：累加检校太傅。
现代文：官职逐步升任检校太傅。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of school inspector.

古文：中人田令孜怒重荣据盐池之饶。
现代文：宦官田令孜恼怒王重荣占有了盐池的丰厚所得。
English: Enraged by the eunuch Tian Lingzhe, Wang Chong Rong took possession of Yanchi's rich income.

古文：于时巨盗甫定，国用大覂，诸军无所仰，而令孜为神策军使，建请二池领属盐铁，佐军食。
现代文：这时黄巢起义刚被平定，国家的财政费用极缺，各军队的供给无所仰赖，而田令孜任神策军使，建议请朝廷将两处盐池归属于盐铁使，以补充军队的供应。
English: At this time, the Yellow Nest Uprising had just been quelled, the country's financial expenses were extremely scarce, and the supply of each army had nothing to rely on. Tian Lingzi, who was appointed as the military envoy of the Divine Providence, proposed to ask the court to assign two salt ponds to the Salt and Iron Envoy to supplement the supply of the army.

古文：重荣不许，奏言： 故事，岁输盐三千乘于有司，则斥所余以赡军。 
现代文：王重荣不应允，上奏说： 旧例，每年献纳三千车盐给官府，而将多余的拿来供给本地军队。 
English: Wang Chong Rong did not agree, and said in his report: In the old days, three thousand cartloads of salt were donated to the government every year, and the surplus was used to supply the local army.

古文：天子遣使者谕旨，不听。
现代文：天子派使者向他宣告旨意，他不听从。
English: The Son of God sent a messenger to tell him his will, but he did not listen.

古文：令孜徙重荣兗海节度使，以王处存代之，诏克用将兵援河中。
现代文：田令孜调王重荣任兖海节度使，以王处存替代他；下诏李克用带兵援助河中。
English: Tian Lingzi transferred Wang Chongrong to the post of Bohai Festival envoy, and replaced him with Wang Shicun; Li Ke led soldiers to help the middle of the river.

古文：重荣上书劾令孜离间方镇。
现代文：王重荣上疏给朝廷，弹劾田令孜离间方镇。
English: Wang Chong Rong surrendered to the imperial court, and the impeachment of Tian Ling led to the separation of the two sides.

古文：令孜遣邠宁硃玫进讨，壁沙苑。
现代文：田令孜派遣宁的朱玫对他进行讨伐，驻军沙苑。
English: Tian Lingzi dispatched Ning's Zhu Mei to wage a crusade against him and stationed troops in Sha Yuan.

古文：重荣诒克用书，且言： 奉密诏，须公到，使我图公。
现代文：王重荣送信给李克用，并说： 奉密诏，等您到来后，让我设法对付您。
English: Wang Chong Rong sent a message to Li Keqiang, saying, "By all means, when you arrive, let me deal with you."

古文：此令孜、硃全忠、硃玫之惑上也。 
现代文：这是田令孜、朱全忠、朱玫惑乱圣上。 
English: This is Tian Lingzi, Zhu Quanzhong, Zhu Mei Zhaozhong.

古文：因示伪诏。
现代文：并出示伪诏。
English: He also produced a fake imperial edict.

古文：克用方与全忠有隙，信之，请讨全忠及玫。
现代文：李克用正好与朱全忠有仇怨，相信了王重荣的话，奏请朝廷讨伐朱全忠和朱玫。
English: Wang Chong Rong told Emperor Wu that Emperor Wu's last imperial edict said: Li Changfu and Zhu Mei cling to evil, hate honesty, and form a party to protect Zhu Wen.

古文：帝数诏和解。
现代文：僖宗多次下诏调和劝解。
English: Emperor Taizong repeatedly issued edicts of conciliation and persuasion.

古文：克用合河中兵战沙苑，玫大败，奔邠州。
现代文：李克用集合河中兵力会战沙苑，朱玫大败，逃奔州。
English: Li Ke used the gathering of troops in the river to fight Shayuan, Zhu Mei was defeated and fled the state.

古文：神策军溃还京师，遂大掠。
现代文：神策军溃败退还京都，乘机大肆抢劫。
English: The defeated Shinsaku army returned to Kyoto and took advantage of the opportunity to loot.

古文：克用乘胜西，天子走凤翔。
现代文：李克用乘胜西进，天子逃亡凤翔。
English: Li Ke used the victory to advance westward, while Tianzi fled to Fengxiang.

古文：俄嗣襄王煴僭位，重荣不受命，与克用谋定王室。
现代文：不久，嗣襄王李誰篡位，王重荣不听命于他，与李克用谋划安定王室。
English: Soon after, his successor, King Li, usurped the throne. Wang Chong Rong disobeyed his orders and used Li Ke to plan and stabilize the royal family.

古文：杨复恭代令孜领神策，故与克用善，遣谏议大夫刘崇望赍诏谕天子意，两人听命，即献缣十万，愿讨玫自赎。
现代文：杨复恭替代田令孜统率神策军，他旧日与李克用很友善，派谏议大夫刘崇望带着诏书宣示天子的旨意，王、李二人听从皇帝命令，立即献纳双丝细绢十万匹，愿意讨伐拥立李誰的朱玫以赎过。
English: Yang Fuxiong replaced Tian Lingzi as the leader of the Divine Providence Army. He used to be very friendly with Li Kegui. He sent Liu Chongwang, an advisor, to proclaim the will of God with an edict. Wang and Li both obeyed the emperor's order and immediately donated 100,000 double silk reeds. They were willing to fight against Zhu Mei, who supported Li, in order to redeem themselves.

古文：崇望还，群臣皆贺。
现代文：刘崇望返回复命，群臣全都庆贺。
English: Liu Chongwang returned to resume his life, and all the ministers celebrated.

古文：重荣遂斩煴，长安复平。
现代文：王重荣终于将李誰斩首，长安复归太平。
English: Wang Chongrong finally beheaded Li Deng, and Chang'an returned to peace.

古文：然性悍酷，多杀戮，少纵舍。
现代文：但王重荣性情凶悍，为人残酷，多行杀戮，少有宽免。
English: However, Wang Chongrong had a fierce temper, was cruel, killed many people, and was rarely pardoned.

古文：尝植大木河上，内设机轴，有忤意者，辄置其上，机发皆溺。
现代文：他曾在河边竖立大木桩，内装机轴，有违反他心意的人，就放在大木桩上，开动机轴，都被淹死。
English: He once erected a large wooden stake by the river, with a machine shaft inside. People who went against his wishes were placed on the large wooden stake, the machine shaft was turned on, and they were all drowned.

古文：尝辱部将常行儒，行儒怨之。光启三年，引兵夜攻府，重荣亡出外，诘旦杀之，推立重盈。
现代文：他曾经侮辱部将常行儒，常行儒恨他，光启三年，常行儒夜晚领兵攻打他的府宅，王重荣逃出府外，次日天明被杀，推举拥立了王重盈。
English: He once insulted the head of the department, a regular Confucian, the regular Confucian hated him, in the third year of Guangqi, a regular Confucian led soldiers to attack his mansion at night, Wang Chong Rong fled the capital, the next day Tianming was killed, and Wang Chong Ying was elected.

