古文：圣宗三五年春正月乙丑，破束城县，纵兵大掠。
现代文：统和五年春正月初二，攻破束城县，纵兵大肆抢掠。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of unification, they broke through Shucheng County and plundered the soldiers.

古文：丁卯，次文安，遣人谕降，不听，遂击破之，尽杀其丁壮，俘其老幼。
现代文：初四，驻于文安，派人前去招降，守将不听，于是攻破文安城，将其丁壮全部杀死，俘虏其老人小孩。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, stationed in Wen'an, he sent someone to solicit surrenders, but the commander did not listen, so he attacked Wen'an City, killed all its young and old, and captured its old people and children.

古文：戊寅，上还南京。
现代文：十五日，皇上回南京。
English: On the 15th, the emperor returned to Nanjing.

古文：己卯，御元和殿，大赉将士。
现代文：十六日，御临元和殿，大赏将士。
English: On the 16th, the Grand Prince's residence, the Grand Reward Ceremony, was held.

古文：壬辰，如华林、天柱。
现代文：二十八日，到华林、天柱。
English: On the 28th, I went to Hualin and Tianzhu.

古文：二月甲午朔，至自天柱。
现代文：二月初一，自天柱回宫。
English: On the first day of February, he returned to the Imperial Palace from Tianzhu.

古文：三月癸亥朔，幸长春宫，赏花钓鱼，以牡丹遍赐近臣，欢宴累日。
现代文：三月初一，临幸长春宫，赏花钓鱼，将牡丹遍赐近臣，欢宴多日。
English: On the first day of March, Rincheng Changchun Palace, enjoy flower fishing, give peonies to the courtiers, and feast for many days.

古文：丁丑，以谛居部下拽剌解里侦候有功，命入御盏郎君班祗候。
现代文：初三，因谛居部下拽剌解里侦察敌情有功，下诏命他进入御盏郎君班里待命。
English: In the third year of junior high school, because he had the merit of reconnaissance of the enemy situation by dragging and leading his subordinates, he was ordered to be on standby in his class.

古文：夏四月癸巳朔，幸南京。
现代文：夏四月初一，临幸南京。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Nanjing was in the midst of a snowstorm.

古文：丁酉，上率百僚册上皇太后尊号曰睿德神略应运启化承天皇太后；礼毕，群臣上皇帝尊号曰至德广孝昭圣天辅皇帝。
现代文：初五，皇上率领百官给皇太后上尊号为睿德神略应运启化承天皇太后，行礼完毕之后，群臣给皇帝上尊号为至德广孝昭圣天辅皇帝。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the emperor led hundreds of officials to give the empress dowager the honorific title of Rui De Shenliao Shi Yun Kai, the successor to the emperor's empress dowager. After the salute, the group of ministers gave the emperor the honorific title of Shi De Guang Xiao Zhao Sheng Tian Fu Emperor.

古文：戊戌，诏有司条上勋旧，等第加恩。
现代文：初六，下诏命有司分条奏上各将领功劳表册，论功加恩行赏。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the next imperial edict ordered a division to record the list of merits of each general, and to reward them according to their merits.

古文：癸丑，清暑冰井。
现代文：二十一日，在冰井避暑。
English: On the 21st, they spent the summer in an ice well.

古文：六月壬辰朔，召大臣决庶政。
现代文：六月初一，召集大臣处理各种政务。
English: On the first day of June, ministers were summoned to deal with various government affairs.

古文：丙申，以耶律苏为遥郡刺史。
现代文：初五，任命耶律苏为遥郡刺史。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he appointed Ye Lu Su as the chief historian of Yao County.

古文：秋七月戊辰，涅剌部节度使撒葛里有惠政，民请留，从之。
现代文：秋七月初七，涅剌部节度使撒葛里因在任实施仁政，百姓请求他留任，皇上听从了百姓的请求。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th day of the 7th month of the year, the Nirvana Festival was held to make Sagiri implement benevolent government. The people asked him to stay in office, and the emperor listened to the people's request.

古文：是月，猎平地松林。
现代文：同月，出猎于平地松林。
English: In the same month, they went hunting in the flat pine forest.

古文：九月丙戌，幸南京。
现代文：九月二十六日，临幸南京。
English: September 26th, Linxing Nanjing.

古文：是冬止焉。
现代文：这年冬天，就在南京过冬。
English: This winter, I spent the winter in Nanjing.

古文：六年春正月庚申，如华林、天柱。
现代文：六年春正月初二，至华林、天柱。
English: On the second day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, to Hualin and Tianzhu.

古文：二月丁未，奚王筹宁杀无罪人李浩，所司议贵，请贷其罪，令出钱赡浩家，从之。
现代文：二月二十日，奚王筹宁错杀无罪之人李浩，有关部门援引议贵减刑之法请求宽恕他的罪过，让他出钱赡养李浩家属，皇上听从了这个建议。
English: On the 20th of February, the Emperor listened to the advice of the relevant authorities, who invoked the Law on the Reduction of Sentences to ask for forgiveness of his crime and for him to pay money to support Li Hao's family.

古文：甲寅，大同军节度使、同平章政事刘京致仕。
现代文：二十七日，大同军节度使、同平章政事刘京辞官归田。
English: On the 27th, Datong military festival envoy and Datong Pingzhang political officer Liu Jing resigned and returned to the field.

古文：三月己未，休哥奏宋事宜，上亲览之。
现代文：三月初二，休哥奏上有关宋国之事的安排和处理，皇上亲自批阅奏章。
English: On the second day of the third month of the year, Emperor Xiu personally approved the reading of the report on the arrangement and handling of matters related to Song.

古文：丙寅，以司天赵宗德、齐泰、王守平、邵祺、阎梅从征四载，言天象数有征，赐物有差。
现代文：初九，因为司天赵宗德、齐泰、王守平、邵祺、阎梅四年来随军出征，所说天象征兆多次被验证，赐给他们财物各若干。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, because the gods Zhao Zongde, Zi Tai, Wang Shuping, Shao Wei and Yan Mei had accompanied the army for four years, the said heavenly symbol was verified many times, and each of them was given a number of possessions.

古文：癸未，李继迁遣使来贡。
现代文：二十六日，李继迁派使者来进贡。
English: On the 26th, Li Jiquan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月乙未，幸南京。
现代文：夏四月初九，临幸南京。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, Lin Xing came to Nanjing.

古文：丁酉，胡里室横突韩德让堕马，皇太后怒，杀之。
现代文：十一日，胡里室从侧面冲突韩德让使之跌落下马，皇太后发怒，杀掉胡里室。
English: On the 11th day, Huli's wife collided with Han De from the side, causing her to fall off her horse. The empress dowager became angry and killed Huli's wife.

古文：戊戌，幸宋国王休哥第。
现代文：十二日，临幸宋国王休哥府第。
English: On the 12th day of the month of Lin, the King of Song, King Xiu Ge, passed away.

古文：五月癸亥，南府宰相耶律沙薨。
现代文：五月初七，南府宰相耶律沙去世。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerusha, passed away.

古文：闰月丙戌朔，奉圣州言太祖所建金铃阁坏，乞加修缮。
现代文：闰五月初一，奉圣州奏称太祖所建的金铃阁已坏，请求加以修缮。
English: On the first day of the fifth month of the leap year, Fong Shengzhou reported that the Golden Bell Pavilion built by Taizu had deteriorated and requested that it be repaired.

古文：诏以南征，恐重劳百姓，待军还治之。
现代文：皇上下诏认为现在恰逢南征，恐怕役使百姓过重，等大军回师以后再行修治。
English: The Emperor's edict said that now coincided with the Southern Expedition, I'm afraid to make the people too heavy, and wait for the great army to return to the division before carrying out repairs.

古文：壬寅，阿萨兰回鹘来贡。
现代文：十七日，阿萨兰回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the Asarans came to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，乌隈于厥部以岁贡貂鼠、青鼠皮非土产，皆于他处贸易以献，乞改贡。
现代文：二十九日，乌隈于厥部因为每年所贡的貂鼠、青鼠皮都不是本地所产，要通过与其他地方贸易换取后才能来上贡，请求改贡其他物产。
English: On the 29th, because the muskrats and green mouse skins that Ukuma Yugebe collected as tribute every year were not produced locally, it was necessary to exchange them with other places for trade before the tribute could be paid, and request that the tribute be changed to other property products.

古文：诏自今止进牛马。
现代文：皇上下诏从现在起只进贡牛马。
English: The Emperor decreed that from now on, only cattle and horses would be brought in as tribute.

古文：六月癸亥，党项太保阿剌恍来朝，贡方物。
现代文：六月初八，党项太保阿剌恍前来朝见，献上土产。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the Party Secretary Ah Yuntang came to see the emperor and presented the local products.

古文：乙丑，谕诸道兵马备南征攻城器具。
现代文：初十，晓谕诸道兵马准备南征的攻城器具。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, he told the soldiers and horses of all sects to prepare the siege equipment for the Southern Expedition.

古文：乙酉，夷离堇阿鲁勃送沙州节度使曹恭顺还，授于越。
现代文：三十日，夷离堇阿鲁勃护送沙州节度使曹恭顺回本州，被任命为于越。
English: On the 30th, Cao Qiongshun returned to Honshu after being escorted to the Shazhou Festival by Yibao Alubo, and was appointed to Yuyue.

古文：秋七月丙戌，观市。
现代文：秋七月初二，察看市易。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, inspect the market.

古文：己亥，遣南面招讨使韩德威讨河、湟诸蕃违命者。
现代文：十五日，派南面招讨使韩德威征讨河水、湟水一带不听辽命令的蕃国。
English: On the fifteenth day, Han Dewei was sent to the south to recruit soldiers to conquer the areas of He Shui and Shishui, which did not listen to Liao's orders.

古文：赐休哥、排亚部诸军战马。
现代文：赐给休哥、排亚所率诸军战马。
English: He gave war horses to the armies led by Shuko and Pleiades.

古文：己酉，驻跸于洛河。
现代文：二十五日，皇上歇驾于洛河。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor retired to the Luo River.

古文：壬子，加韩德威开府仪同三司兼政事令、门下平章事，东京留守兼侍中、漆水郡王耶律抹只为大同军节度使。
现代文：二十八日，任命韩德威为开府仪同三司兼政事令、门下平章事，东京留守侍中、漆水郡王耶律抹只为大同军节度使。
English: On the 28th, Han Dewei was appointed as the keeper of the imperial rescript and the three departments, as well as the political affairs, and the subordinate Taira no Shoji. Tokyo's remaining attendant, Urushimizu County's King Yerushimasu, was only the festival envoy of the Taedong Army.

古文：癸丑，排亚请增置涿州驿传。
现代文：二十九日，排亚请求在涿州增设驿站。
English: On the 29th, Paiya requested to add a station in Zhangzhou.

古文：八月丙辰，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：八月初二，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 2nd day of the 8th month, the heaven and earth are sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：戊午，休哥与排亚、袅里曷捉生，将至易州，遇宋兵，杀其指挥使而还。
现代文：初四，休哥与排亚、袅里曷捕捉俘虏，即将到达易州时，遭遇宋军，斩杀宋军指挥使而回。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, when he was about to reach Yizhou, he encountered the Song Army and killed the Song Army commander and sent him back.

古文：庚申，幸黎园温汤。
现代文：初六，临幸黎园温泉。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the school year, Linxing Liyuan Hot Spring.

古文：癸亥，以将伐宋，遣使祭木叶山。
现代文：初九，因为即将讨伐宋国，派使者前去祭祀木叶山。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, because the Song Dynasty was about to be conquered, an envoy was sent to offer a sacrifice to Mount Muji.

古文：丁丑，濒海女直遣使速鲁里来朝。
现代文：二十三日，濒海女真派使者速鲁里前来朝见。
English: On the 23rd, the emissary sent by Lianhaizhen came to see the emperor.

古文：西北路管押详稳速撒哥以伐折立、助里二部，上所俘获。
现代文：西北路管押详稳速撒哥征讨折立、助里两个部落，向朝廷献上俘虏及财物。
English: The Northwest Road Administration ordered the inspectors to speed up the search for the two tribes, and presented the captives and property to the imperial court.

古文：东路林牙萧勤德及统军石老以击败女直兵，献俘。
现代文：东路林牙萧勤德和统军石老击败女真兵马，献上俘虏。
English: Lin Ya, Xiao Qin De and Shi Lao, the unified army, defeated the Jurchen soldiers and presented them with prisoners.

古文：大同军节度使耶律抹只奏今岁霜旱乏食，乞增价折粟，以利贫民。诏从之。
现代文：大同军节度使耶律抹只奏称今年遭遇霜灾、旱灾，人民缺乏粮食，请求提高所交纳粟米的折估价格，以有利于贫民，皇上下诏听从了他的建议。
English: The festival of the Datong Army made Yelu Mat only report that this year suffered frosts and droughts, the people lacked food, and requested to increase the discounted price of the paid corn to benefit the poor. The emperor and the emperor listened to his suggestion.

古文：滨海女直遣厮鲁里来修土贡。
现代文：滨海女真派厮鲁里前来贡献土产。
English: Women from Binhai Zhenhai sent to Luli to contribute to local production.

古文：九月丙申，化哥与术不姑舂古里来贡。
现代文：九月十二日，化哥与术不姑舂古里前来朝贡。
English: On September 12th, Huagang and Shufugul came to pay tribute.

古文：休哥遣详稳意德里献所获宋谍者。
现代文：休哥派详稳意德里献上俘获的宋国间谍。
English: Zhuge sent the captured Song spies to Delhi as a gift.

古文：丁酉，皇太后幸韩德让帐，厚加赏赉，命从臣分朋双陆以尽欢。
现代文：十三日，皇太后临幸韩德让军帐，对他厚加赏赐，命令侍从大臣分组玩双陆以尽情戏乐。
English: On the 13th, the Empress Dowager Lin Xing and Han De gave him a military account, rewarded him generously, and ordered the attendants of the minister to play double landings in groups to make the most of the play.

古文：戊戌，幸南京。
现代文：十四日，临幸南京。
English: On the 14th, I went to Nanjing.

古文：己亥，有事于太宗皇帝庙。
现代文：十五日，祭祀太宗皇帝庙。
English: On the fifteenth day, a ritual was held at Emperor Taizong's temple.

古文：以唐元德为奉陵军节度使。
现代文：任命唐元德为奉陵军节度使。
English: Tang Yuande was appointed as the chief envoy of the Fengling Army.

古文：癸卯，祭旗鼓南伐。
现代文：十九日，祭祀旗鼓，南伐。
English: On the 19th, the ritual drumming and the Southern Expedition began.

古文：庚戌，次涿州，射帛书谕城中降，不听。
现代文：二十六日，到达涿州，向城中射帛书劝守将投降，守将不听。
English: On the 26th, he arrived in Zhangzhou and sent a message to the city to persuade the defenders to surrender, but they would not listen.

古文：冬十月乙卯，纵兵四面攻之。城破乃降，因抚谕其众。
现代文：冬十月初二，派军队四面进攻涿州，城被攻破以后守将才投降，于是抚慰晓谕民众。
English: On the second day of October in winter, he sent troops to attack Zhangzhou from four directions. After the city was breached, the commander-in-chief surrendered, and then consoled the people.

古文：驸马萧勤德、太师闼览皆中流矢。
现代文：驸马萧勤德、太师闼览都身中流箭。
English: Ma Xiaoqinde and Taishi Zhan are both fluent in archery.

古文：勤德载帝车中以归。
现代文：勤德被放在皇帝车驾上回营。
English: Gongde was put on the emperor's chariot and driven back to the camp.

古文：闻宋军退，遣斜轸、排亚等追击，大败之。
现代文：听到宋军败退的消息，皇上派斜轸、排亚等追击，大败宋军。
English: Hearing the news of the defeat of the Song Army, the emperor dispatched troops to pursue and defeat the Song Army.

古文：戊午，攻沙堆驿，破之。己巳，以黑白羊祭天地。
现代文：初五，攻下沙堆驿。十六日，用黑白羊祭祀天地。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the sandpile was captured. On the 16th day, heaven and earth were sacrificed with black and white sheep.

古文：庚午，以宋降军分置七指挥，号归圣军。
现代文：十七日，将宋降军分设为七个指挥，命名为归圣军。
English: On the 17th, the Song's army was divided into seven commands and named the Guixian Army.

古文：壬申，行军参谋、宣政殿学士马得臣言谕降宋军，恐终不为用，请并放还。诏不允。
现代文：十九日，行军参谋、宣政殿学士马得臣认为这些招降过来的宋兵，恐怕最终不会为我所用，请求将他们放回去，皇上不允许。
English: On the 19th, the marching staff officer, Ma Dezhen, a scholar of the Palace of Proclamation and Government, thought that these Song soldiers who had been recruited and surrendered would probably not be used by me in the end, and requested that they be returned, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：丙子，筹宁奏破狼山捷。
现代文：二十三日，筹宁奏报攻破狼山大捷。
English: On the 23rd, the Cheoning Sonpo defeated the Wolf Mountain.

古文：辛巳，复奏败宋兵于益津关。
现代文：二十八日，又奏报在益津关击败宋军。
English: On the 28th, it was also reported that the Song army was defeated in Yijin Pass.

古文：癸未，进军长城口，宋定州守将李兴以兵来拒，休哥击败之，追奔五六里。
现代文：三十日，进军长城口，宋定州守将李兴派兵抵抗，休哥击败宋军，追击败兵达五六里路之远。
English: On the 30th, marching into the Great Wall, the Song governor of Dingzhou, Li Xing, sent troops to resist, and Hugh defeated the Song army, chasing the defeated soldiers as far as five or six miles.

古文：十一月甲申朔，上以将攻长城口，诏诸军备攻具。
现代文：十一月初一，皇上因为即将进攻长城口，诏令诸军准备攻城器具。
English: On the first day of November, the emperor ordered the troops to prepare siege equipment because they were about to attack the Great Wall.

古文：庚寅，驻长城口，督大军四面进攻。
现代文：初七，皇上驻扎于长城口，督促大军四面进攻。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor was stationed at the entrance to the Great Wall, urging the army to attack on all sides.

古文：士溃围，委城遁，斜轸招之，不降；上与韩德让邀击之，杀获殆尽，获者分隶燕军。
现代文：宋守兵溃败，丢下城池逃跑，斜轸招降，他们仍不听从；皇上与韩德威于是联合进攻宋军，杀俘殆尽，俘虏被分隶于燕军序列。
English: The Song defenders were routed, abandoned the city, and fled. They still refused to surrender. The emperor and Han Dewei then jointly attacked the Song army, killing all the prisoners, and the prisoners were assigned to the sequence of Yan's army.

古文：辛卯，攻满城，围之。
现代文：初八，围攻满城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the city was besieged.

古文：甲午，拔其城，军士开北门遁，上使谕其将领，乃率众降。
现代文：十一日，城被攻克，守军打开北门逃跑，皇上招抚晓谕其将领，于是守将率领部众投降。
English: On the 11th day, the city was conquered, the defenders opened the north gate to escape, the emperor summoned and told his generals, so the commander led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：戊戌，攻下祁州，纵兵大掠。
现代文：十五日，攻下祁州，纵兵大肆抢掠。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhangzhou was captured, and the soldiers looted and plundered.

古文：己亥，拔新乐。
现代文：十六日，攻克新乐。
English: On the 16th, it conquered Xinle.

古文：庚子，破小狼山砦。
现代文：十七日，攻破狼山砦。
English: On the 17th, the Wolf Mountain Fort was breached.

古文：丁未，宋军千人出益津关，国舅郎君桃委、详稳十哥击走之，杀副将一人。
现代文：二十四日，宋军千余人出益津关，国舅郎君桃委、详稳十哥击退宋兵，杀死其副将一人。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, more than a thousand people of the Song Army went out of Iksin Pass, and the father-in-law of the country, Mr. Peach Committee, and the tenth brother of the detailed stability repulsed the Song soldiers and killed one of his vice generals.

古文：己酉，休哥献黄皮室详稳徇地莫州所获马二十匹，士卒二十人。
现代文：二十六日，休哥献上黄皮室详稳在莫州征战时所获的二十匹马、二十个士兵。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Xiu Ge offered the twenty horses and twenty soldiers obtained by Huang Peizhu in the war in Mozhou.

古文：命赐降者衣带，使隶燕京。
现代文：皇上命令赐给投降士兵衣、带，让他们隶属于燕京。
English: The emperor ordered that the surrendered soldiers be given uniforms and belts, and that they be subordinated to Yanjing.

古文：辛亥，西路又送降卒二百馀人，给寒者裘衣。
现代文：二十八日，西路军又送来降兵二百多人，下令赐给衣衫单薄的士兵皮衣。
English: On the 28th, the Western Route Army also sent more than two hundred soldiers, and ordered that soldiers with thin clothes be given fur coats.

古文：以马得臣权宣徽院事。
现代文：命令马得臣暂时代理宣徽院政务。
English: He ordered Ma Desen to temporarily take over the administration of Xuan Hui Academy.

古文：十二月甲寅朔，赐皮室详稳乞得、乞骨里战马。
现代文：十二月初一，赐给皮室详稳乞得、秃骨里战马。
English: On the first day of December, it was given to the leather room to beg for stability, and the war horse to the bald bones.

古文：横帐郎君达打里劫掠，命杖之。
现代文：横帐郎君达打里肆行劫掠，皇上命令给予杖责。
English: The yokozukurō juntadari went on a rampage of looting, and the emperor ordered him to be punished with the cane.

古文：丙辰，畋于沙河。
现代文：初三，田猎于沙河。
English: On the third day of the new year, hunting in the fields begins in Shahe.

古文：休哥献奚详稳耶鲁所获宋谍。
现代文：休哥献上奚详稳耶鲁抓获的宋国间谍。
English: Xue Ge presented the Song Dynasty spies captured by Zou Jianyuan to Yale.

古文：丁巳，遣北宰相萧继远等往觇安平。
现代文：初四，派北宰相萧继远等前往伺探安平。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he sent Northern Vice-Minister Xiao Jiyuan and others to inquire about Anping.

古文：侍卫马军司奏攻祁州、新乐，都头刘赞等三十人有功，乞加恩赏。
现代文：侍卫马军司奏报进攻祁州、新乐时，都头刘赞等三十人立下了战功，请给他们以赏赐。
English: When the Guards and Horse Troops of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army of China launched an attack on Zhangzhou and Xinle, 30 people, including the head of the capital Liu Zan, made great achievements in the war. Please give them a reward.

古文：是月，大军驻宋境。
现代文：同月，辽大军屯驻于宋国境内。
English: In the same month, the Liao Great Army was stationed in Song territory.

古文：是岁，诏开贡举，一人及第。
现代文：这一年，下诏开始进行科举考试，放榜时，录取隐士一人及第。
English: In the same year, the imperial edict began to carry out the imperial examination, and when the list was released, one hermit was admitted and the first.

古文：七年春正月癸未朔，班师。
现代文：七年春正月初一，班师。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, the class division was formed.

古文：戊子，宋鸡壁砦守将郭荣率众来降，诏屯南京。
现代文：初六，宋鸡壁砦守将郭荣带领部众前来投降，皇上下诏令他们屯驻于南京。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Guo Rong, the commander of the Song chicken wall fortress, led his troops to surrender, and the emperor ordered them to stay in Nanjing.

古文：庚寅，次长城口。
现代文：初八，皇上驻于长城口。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the emperor was stationed at the entrance to the Great Wall.

古文：三卒出营劫掠，笞以徇众，以所获物分赐左右。
现代文：有三个士兵偷偷出营抢劫，皇上将他们鞭笞示众，将抢劫所得物品分别赐给左右将领。
English: Three soldiers sneaked out of the camp to loot. The emperor whipped them in public and gave the looted goods to the left and right generals.

古文：壬辰，李继迁与兄继捧有怨，乞与通好，上知其非诚，不许。
现代文：初十，李继迁与兄弟继捧互相仇视，请求与辽通好，皇上知道他心意不诚，没有允许。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Li Jiqian and his brother Sui Hou hated each other and asked Liao Tong to be good. The emperor knew that he was not sincere and did not allow it.

古文：癸巳，谕诸军趣易州。
现代文：十一日，晓谕诸军赴易州。
English: On the 11th day, he ordered the troops to go to Yizhou.

古文：己亥，禁部从伐民桑梓。
现代文：十七日，禁止部下砍伐百姓的桑树梓树。
English: On the 17th, he forbade his subordinates to cut down the people's mulberry trees.

古文：癸卯，攻易州，宋兵出遂城来援，遣铁林军击之，擒其指挥使五人。
现代文：二十一日，进攻易州，宋兵出遂城前来救援，皇上派铁林军迎击，活捉宋军五位指挥使。
English: On the twenty-first day, the attack on Yizhou, the Song soldiers came out of Suicheng to come to the rescue, the emperor sent the Tielin Army to meet the attack and captured the five commanders of the Song Army.

古文：甲辰，大军齐进，破易州，降刺史刘墀，守陴士卒南遁，上帅师邀之，无敢出者。
现代文：二十二日，大军一齐进发，攻克易州，刺史刘墀投降，守城士兵南逃，皇上亲率大军截击，宋军不敢出城。
English: On the 22nd, the great army marched forward together to conquer Yizhou, Liu Bei surrendered, the soldiers defending the city fled south, the emperor's relatives led a large army to intercept, and the Song army did not dare to leave the city.

古文：即以马质为刺史，赵质为兵马都监。
现代文：当下任命马质为刺史，赵质为兵马都监。
English: At this time, Ma Jian was appointed as the chief historian, and Zhao Jian was appointed as the inspector of the Terracotta Army.

古文：迁易州军民于燕京。
现代文：将易州军民迁到燕京。
English: He moved the military and civilians from Yizhou to Yanjing.

古文：以东京骑将夏贞显之子仙寿先登，授高州刺史。
现代文：东京骑将夏贞显之子夏仙寿因率先登上易州城头，被授为高州刺史。
English: As the first to climb the castle tower of Ezhou, Xia Xian Shou, the son of the Tokyo cavalry commander Xia Zhenxian, was awarded the title of Gaozhou's best knight.

古文：乙巳，幸易州，御五花楼，抚谕士庶。
现代文：二十三日，临幸易州，御临五花楼安抚晓谕吏民。
English: On the 23rd, he visited Yizhou and the Five-Flower Pagoda to pacify the people.

古文：丙午，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：二十四日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 24th, the heaven and earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：诏谕三京诸道。
现代文：下诏晓谕三京所辖诸道。
English: The following edict is issued for the three provinces under the jurisdiction of Beijing.

古文：戊申，次涞水，谒景宗皇帝庙。
现代文：二十六日，驻于涞水。拜谒景宗皇帝庙。
English: On the 26th, he stayed in Surabaya and visited the Emperor Yeongjongjong Temple.

古文：诏遣涿州刺史耶律守雄护送易州降人八百，还隶本贯。
现代文：下诏命令涿州刺史耶律守雄送易州投降士卒八百人回本乡。
English: He issued an imperial edict ordering the governor of Bozhou to send the 800 capitulants from Yizhou back to their hometown.

古文：己酉，次歧沟，射鬼箭。
现代文：二十七日，驻于岐沟，射鬼箭。
English: On the 27th, he was stationed in Gifu, shooting arrows.

古文：辛亥，还次南京，六军解严。
现代文：二十九日，回宫途中驻于南京，六军解除戒严状态。
English: On the 29th, stationed in Nanjing on the way back to the palace, the six armies lifted the state of siege.

古文：二月壬子朔，上御元和殿受百官贺。
现代文：二月初一，皇上在元和殿接受百官朝贺。
English: On the first day of February, the Emperor received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials at the Yuanhe Hall.

古文：诏鸡壁砦民二百户徙居檀、顺、蓟三州。
现代文：诏令鸡壁砦居民二百户迁居于檀、顺、蓟三州。
English: The edict ordered two hundred households of Fort Chickenwall residents to relocate to Danzhou, Shun and Handan.

古文：甲寅，回鹘、于阗、师子等国来贡。
现代文：初三，回鹘、于阗、师子等国前来朝贡。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Hui, Yu, Shizi and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：乙卯，大飨军士，爵赏有差。
现代文：初四，大举犒赏士兵，加官晋爵赏赐财物各有等差。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, soldiers were rewarded generously, and there was a disparity in the amount of money given to those who were promoted to higher ranks.

古文：枢密使韩德让封楚国王，驸马都尉萧宁远同政事门下平章事。
现代文：封枢密使韩德让为楚国王，驸马都尉萧宁远为同政事门下平章事。
English: The imperial envoy Han Dejan became the king of Chu, and the horse captain Xiao Ningyuan became the leader of the political affairs.

古文：是日，幸长春宫。
现代文：同日，皇上临幸长春宫。
English: On the same day, the Emperor visited the Chosun Palace.

古文：甲子，诏南征所俘有亲属分隶诸帐者，给官钱赎之，使相从。
现代文：十三日，诏令南征时所获的俘虏如果亲属之间不在一个营帐下的，用官钱将他们赎出来，使之团聚。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor issued an order that if the captives captured during the Southern Expedition were not under the same tent with their relatives, they should be ransomed with government money and reunited.

古文：乙丑，赏南征女直军，使东还。
现代文：十四日，赏赐随军南征的女真部众，让他们回东土本部。
English: On the 14th, he rewarded the Jurchen women who had accompanied the army on its southern expedition, and allowed them to return to the headquarters in the East.

古文：丙寅，禁举人匿名飞书，谤讪朝廷。
现代文：十五日，禁止举人写匿名信诽谤朝廷。
English: On the 15th, it was forbidden to cite people to write anonymous letters to defame the imperial court.

古文：癸酉，吐蕃、党项来贺。
现代文：二十二日，吐蕃、党项前来朝贡。
English: On the 22nd, Tubo and Danzhao came to pay tribute.

古文：甲戌，云州租赋请止输本道，从之。
现代文：二十三日，云州请求将所收纳的赋税只输纳到本道，得到允许。
English: On the 23rd, Yunnan Province requested that the collected taxes be transferred to the province only, which was allowed.

古文：丙子，以女直活骨德为本部相。
现代文：二十五日，任命女真活骨德为本部相。
English: On the 25th, Ms. Zhenzhen Zhucheng was appointed as the head minister.

古文：分遣巫觋祭名山大川。
现代文：分派巫觋祭祀名山大川。
English: The famous Yamayama River is designated as a sacred place for Wushu.

古文：丁丑，皇子佛宝奴生。
现代文：二十六日，皇子佛宝奴出生。
English: On the 26th, Prince Buddha Bao Nu was born.

古文：戊寅，阿萨兰、于阗、辖烈并遣使来贡。
现代文：二十七日，阿萨兰、于阗、辖烈均派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, the emissaries from Asaram, Yuzhang, and Jiali all came to pay tribute.

古文：三月壬午朔，遣使祭木叶山。
现代文：三月初一，派使者祭祀木叶山。
English: On the first day of March, an emissary was sent to offer a sacrifice to Mujiyama.

古文：禁刍牧伤禾稼。
现代文：禁止割草放牧时伤害庄稼。
English: It is forbidden to damage crops when cutting grass and grazing.

古文：宋进士十七人挈家来归，命有司考其中第者，补国学官，馀授县主簿、尉。
现代文：宋进士十七人带领家眷前来归顺。命有司考察其中曾中举者，补为国学官，其余的则授给县主簿、县尉官职。
English: Seventeen Song Jin soldiers and their families came to surrender. Among them, those who had been promoted were examined by the Ministry of People's Commissariat of Military Affairs and promoted to the post of national academician, while the rest were awarded the posts of county magistrate and county lieutenant.

古文：李继迁遣使来贡。
现代文：李继迁派使者来进贡。
English: Li Jijian sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁亥，诏知易州赵质收战亡士卒骸骨，筑京观。
现代文：初六，诏令易州知州赵质收集战死士兵的尸骸，筑城京观。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered Yizhou Zhizhou Zhao Jian to collect the corpses of soldiers killed in battle and build the city of Beijing.

古文：戊子，赐于越宋国王红珠筋线，命入内神帐行再生礼，皇太后赐物甚厚。
现代文：初七，赐给于越宋国王红珠筋线，命他进入内帐举行再生礼，皇太后对他赏赐丰厚。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he gave red beads to the king of the Viet Song Dynasty, ordered him to enter the inner ledger to hold a rebirth ceremony, and the empress dowager rewarded him handsomely.

古文：以鸡壁砦民成廷朗等八户隶飞狐。
现代文：将鸡壁砦民户成廷朗等八户人家拨给飞狐管辖。
English: Eight households, including Cheng Tinglang, a private household in Qibai Fort, will be assigned to the jurisdiction of Flying Fox.

古文：己丑，诏免云州逋赋。
现代文：初八，下诏免除云州拖欠租税。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the lower edict exempted Yunnan from tax arrears.

古文：乙室王贯宁击鞠，为所部郎君高四纵马突死，诏讯高四罪。
现代文：乙室王贯宁在击鞠球时，被属下郎君高四纵马撞死，诏令将高四拘捕讯问定罪。
English: The second wife, Wang Qunning, was killed by a subordinate vassal, Gao Si Zongma, when he was playing a game of bowls. Gao Si was arrested and interrogated and convicted by imperial edict.

古文：丙申，诏开奇峰路通易州市。
现代文：十五日，下诏开放奇峰路与易州通互市。
English: On the 15th, the opening of Qifeng Road and Yizhou Road to each other was announced.

古文：戊戌，以王子帐耶律襄之女封义成公主，下嫁李继迁。
现代文：十七日，封王子帐耶律襄之女为义成公主，下嫁李继迁。
English: On the seventeenth day, the daughter of Prince Ye Lu Xiang was crowned Princess Yicheng, and married Li Jiji.

古文：是春，驻跸延芳淀。
现代文：这年春天，歇驾于延芳淀。
English: In the spring of this year, I stayed in Yanfangyodo.

古文：夏四月甲寅，还京。
现代文：夏四月初四，回京。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of summer, I returned to Kyoto.

古文：乙卯，国舅太师萧闼览为子排亚请尚皇女延寿公主，许之。丙辰，谒太宗皇帝庙。
现代文：初五，国舅太师萧闼览请求将长寿公主嫁与其子排亚，得到皇上答允。初六，拜谒太宗皇帝庙。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the imperial uncle, Grand Master Xiao Jizan, requested that Princess Longevity be married to his son, Choya, and received the emperor's approval. On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizong's temple was visited.

古文：以御史大夫乌骨领乙室大王。
现代文：任命御史大夫乌骨兼任乙室大王。
English: Appointed the Imperial Historian, Ukotsu, who also served as the Second Great King.

古文：己未，幸延寿寺饭僧。
现代文：初九，临幸延寿寺斋僧。
English: At the age of nine, he became a novice monk at Enju-ji Temple.

古文：甲子，谏议大夫马得臣以上好击球，上疏切谏： 臣伏见陛下听朝之暇，以击球为乐。
现代文：十四日，谏议大夫马得臣因为皇上嗜好击球，上书疾言劝谏说 ：臣见皇上在处理政务之余，以击球为乐事。
English: On the 14th, because the emperor was fond of batting, the imperial doctor, Madesen, wrote a letter to the emperor, exhorting him, saying, "Your majesty, in addition to dealing with government affairs, enjoys batting."

古文：臣思此事有三不宜：上下分朋，君臣争胜，君得臣夺，君输臣喜，一不宜也；往来交错，前后遮约，争心竞起，礼容全废，若贪月杖，误拂天衣，臣既失仪，君又难责，二不宜也；轻万乘之贵，逐广场之娱，地虽平，至为坚确，马虽良，亦有惊蹶，或因奔击，失其控御，圣体宁无亏损？
现代文：臣认为此事有三不宜：君臣分组击球，上下互相争胜，皇上得球臣下争夺，皇上输了臣下高兴，这是一不宜；击球之时君臣往来交错奔跑，前后遮挡，争强好胜之心竞起，礼仪全被抛在一边，如果贪玩球杖，一不小心碰着了皇帝的衣衫，臣下既已失礼，皇上又不好责问，这是二不宜；轻弃万乘尊贵之体，追逐在广场上奔驰的乐趣，地面虽平，但地性坚硬，马虽是良马，但难免也有惊厥不受控制之时，如果因为奔走击球乘骑失去了控制，圣体怎会不受损伤？
English: The vassal thought that there were three things that were not appropriate: the prince and the vassal hit the ball in groups, competing with each other, the emperor won the ball, the vassal competed with the emperor, the emperor lost and the vassal was happy, this was not appropriate; when hitting the ball, the prince and the vassal ran back and forth, blocked the front and the back, the strong and the victorious heart competed, and the etiquette was all thrown aside. If you play with the club and accidentally touch the emperor's shirt, the vassal has already made a faux pas, and the emperor is not good at reprimanding, this is

古文：太后岂不惊惧？
现代文：太后怎会不担惊受怕？
English: How could the Queen Mother not be alarmed?

古文：三不宜也。
现代文：这是三不宜。
English: These are the three unfavorable conditions.

古文：臣望陛下念继承之重，止危险之戏。 
现代文：臣望陛下顾念自己继承先皇大业的重任，停止这种危险的游戏。 
English: His Majesty's subjects, mindful of the heavy responsibility of inheriting the great cause of the late Emperor, should stop this dangerous game.

古文：疏奏，大嘉纳之。
现代文：谏书呈上之后，皇上大加赞赏并听从了他的建议。
English: After the imperial edict was presented, the emperor was very appreciative and heeded his advice.

古文：丁卯，吐浑还金、回鹘安进、吐蕃独朵等自宋来归，皆赐衣带。
现代文：十七日，吐浑还金、回鹘安进、吐蕃独朵等人从宋国前来归附，赐给他们衣带。
English: On the 17th, Tu Hun Ho Kim, Hui Hun An Jin, Tu Hun Duc Tho and others came from Song to join him, and he gave them clothes and belts.

古文：皇太后谒奇首可汗庙。
现代文：皇太后拜谒奇首可汗庙。
English: The empress dowager paid her respects at the Khan's temple.

古文：丙子，以舍利军耶律杳为常衮。
现代文：二十六日，以舍利军耶律杳为常衮。
English: On the 26th, it was decided to use the Sheri army's Yerut yoke as the standing yoke.

古文：己卯，驻跸儒州龙泉。
现代文：二十九日，歇驾于儒州龙泉。
English: On the 29th, he rested in Longquan, Confucius.

古文：五月庚辰朔，遣宣徽使蒲领等率兵分道备宋。
现代文：五月初一，派宣徽使蒲领等率兵分道防备宋国侵扰。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Xuanzong sent Pu Lian and other soldiers to guard against Song's invasion.

古文：以遥辇副使控骨离为舍利拽剌详稳。
现代文：任命遥辇副使控骨离为舍利拽剌详稳。
English: The appointment of Yao Zhen as deputy made the control of bone separation more stable.

古文：辛巳，祭风伯于儒州白马村。
现代文：初二，在儒州白马村祭祀风伯。
English: On the second day of junior high school, a memorial service was held for Feng Bo in Baima Village, Confucius County.

古文：休哥引军至满城，招降卒七百馀人，遣使来献，诏隶东京。
现代文：休哥带领军队到满城招得宋降兵七百多人，派使者前来进献，皇上诏令让他们隶属东京。
English: Xiu Ge led the army to Mancheng to invite more than seven hundred Song soldiers, sent envoys to come forward, and the emperor ordered them to be subordinate to Tokyo.

古文：辛卯，猎桑乾河。
现代文：十二日，出猎于桑干河。
English: On the 12th, they went hunting in the Sangan River.

古文：壬辰，燕京奏宋兵至边，时暑未敢与战，且驻易州，俟彼动则进击，退则班师。
现代文：十三日，燕京奏报宋兵已到达边境，当时因天气炎热，不敢与他们交战，现在我军暂时驻在易州，一旦宋军有动静就进击他们，如他们没有动静我军就班师回营。
English: On the 13th, Yan Jingso reported that the Song soldiers had reached the border. At that time, because of the hot weather, they did not dare to fight with them. Now our army is temporarily stationed in Yizhou. As soon as the Song army moves, they will attack them. If they do not move, our army will return to camp.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他们的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：六月庚戌朔，以太师柘母迎合，挝之二十。
现代文：六月初一，因太师柘母阿谀逢迎，鞭打他二十。
English: On the first day of June, he was flogged 20 times for insulting his mother.

古文：辛酉，诏燕乐、密云二县荒地许民耕种，免赋役十年。
现代文：十二日，下诏允许百姓耕种燕乐、密云二州无主荒地，耕种荒地者免除十年的赋税徭役。
English: On the 12th, the following edict allowed the people to cultivate the ownerless wastelands in Yanle and Miyun two states, and those who cultivated wastelands were exempted from ten years of tax servitude.

古文：甲戌，宣政殿学士马得臣卒，诏赠太子少保，赐钱十万，粟百石。
现代文：二十五日，宣政殿学士马得臣去世，下诏追赠他为太子少保，赐给十万钱，一百石粟米。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Ma Desen, a scholar of the Xuancheng Palace, passed away. He was posthumously awarded the title of Prince Junior Protector, and was given 100,000 yuan and 100 koku of corn.

古文：乙亥，诏出诸畜赐边部贫民。
现代文：二十六日，下诏将各种牲畜赐给边境贫苦百姓。
English: On the 26th, Xi Jinping announced that all kinds of livestock would be given to the poor people on the border.

古文：是月，休哥、排亚破宋兵于泰州。
现代文：同月，休哥、排亚在泰州击败宋兵。
English: In the same month, Xiu Ge and Paiya defeated Song He in Taizhou.

古文：秋七月乙酉，御含凉殿视朝。
现代文：秋七月初七，御临含凉殿听政。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：丙戌，以中丞耶律核麦哥权夷离毕，横帐郎君耶律延寿为御史大夫。
现代文：初八，以中丞耶律核麦哥暂时代理夷离毕之职，任命横帐郎君耶律延寿为御史大夫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, with Chujo (middle-ranking officer) Yerutsu and Meiko leading the temporary departure of Rii from his post, he appointed Yoko's brother-in-law, Yerutsu Enju, as goshi taifu.

古文：癸巳，遣兵南征。
现代文：十五日，派兵南征。
English: On the 15th, he sent troops to invade the south.

古文：甲午，以迪离毕、涅剌、乌濊三部各四人益东北路来人婆里德，仍给印绶。
现代文：十六日，从迪离毕、涅剌、乌氵岁三部中各抽调四人充实东北路夫人婆里德力量，并赐给他们印绶。
English: On the 16th, four people from each of the three departments of Di Li Bi, Nirvana, and Wu Xi Li were selected to enrich the strength of the Lady of the Northeast Road, and gave them the seal.

古文：丁酉，劳南征将士。
现代文：十九日，慰劳南征将士。
English: On the 19th, a consolation prize was given to soldiers who fought in the Southern Expedition.

古文：是日，帝与皇太后谒景宗皇帝庙。
现代文：同日，皇上与皇太后拜谒景宗皇帝庙。
English: On the same day, the Emperor and Empress Dowager paid their respects at the Imperial Temple of Emperor Jingzong.

古文：八月庚午，放进士高正等二人及第。
现代文：八月二十二日，放榜录取进士高正等二人及第。
English: On August 22nd, Gao Zheng and two other students were admitted to the school.

古文：冬十月，禁罝网捕兔。
现代文：冬十月，禁止用兔网捕猎兔子。
English: In winter and October, it is forbidden to hunt rabbits with rabbit nets.

古文：十一月甲申，于阗张文宝进内丹书。
现代文：十一月初七，于阗张文宝进献内丹书籍。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of November, Zhang Wenbao presented books from the Inner Dan region to Yu Yu.

古文：十二月甲寅，钓鱼于沈子泺。癸亥，猎于好草岭。
现代文：十二月初七，在沈子泊钓鱼。十六日，出猎于好草岭。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, he went fishing in Shenzi Po. On the 16th day, he went out to hunt in Goodgrass Ridge.

