古文：二凶元凶劭，字休远，文帝长子也。
现代文：元凶刘邵字休远，是宋文帝刘义隆的长子。
English: The culprit, Liu Shao Zi Xuyuan, was the eldest son of the Song Emperor Liu Yilong.

古文：帝即位后生劭，时上犹在谅闇，故秘之。
现代文：文帝即位后生下刘邵，当时仍在守孝期间，所以没有向外公布。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended the throne, Liu Shao was born, but at that time he was still in the period of filial piety, so he did not announce it to the outside world.

古文：三年闰正月，方云劭生。
现代文：三年闰正月，才说刘邵出生。
English: Three years later, in the first month of the leap year, it was announced that Liu Shao was born.

古文：自前代以来，未有人君即位后皇后生太子，唯殷帝乙既践阼，正妃生纣，至是又有劭焉。
现代文：从历代以来，从未有皇帝或国王即位后皇后生太子的，只有殷朝皇帝乙登位之后，他的正妃生纣，到这时又有刘邵。
English: Since time immemorial, there has never been a crown prince born to an empress after an emperor or king ascended to the throne. Only after Emperor B of the Yin Dynasty ascended to the throne, his empress gave birth to a son, and then there was Liu Shao.

古文：体元居正，上甚喜说。
现代文：刘邵既是长子又是嫡子，文帝很喜欢他。
English: Liu Shao was both the eldest son and the legitimate son, and Emperor Wen liked him very much.

古文：年六岁，拜为皇太子，中庶子二率入直永福省。更筑宫，制度严丽。
现代文：刘邵六岁时，被立为太子，中庶子两部卫士到永福省值勤，另外又为他修建宫殿，规模整齐而华美。
English: When Liu Shao was six years old, he was appointed as the crown prince. The two guards of the middle child went to Yongfu Province on duty. In addition, a palace was built for him, neat and gorgeous.

古文：年十二，出居东宫，纳黄门侍郎殷淳女为妃。
现代文：刘邵十二岁时，出外居在东宫，选纳黄门侍郎殷淳的女儿为刘邵妃子。
English: When Liu Shao was twelve years old, he went to live in the East Palace, and he chose the daughter of Yin Chun, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, as Liu Shaofeizi.

古文：十三，加元服。
现代文：十三岁时又加元子服饰。
English: At the age of thirteen, she also began to wear Kaneko clothing.

古文：好读史传，尤爱弓马。及长，美须眉，大眼方口，长七尺四寸。亲览宫事，延接宾客，意之所欲，上必从之。
现代文：刘邵喜欢读史书，尤其喜爱骑马射箭，长大后，更是眉目如画，大眼方口，身高七尺四寸，他亲自管理东宫事务，延纳和接纳宾客，只要他想要的，文帝无不顺从。
English: Liu Shao liked to read history books, especially liked to ride horses and shoot arrows. When he grew up, he was even more picturesque, with large square eyes and a height of seven feet four inches. He personally managed the affairs of the East Palace, extending and accepting guests. As long as he wanted, Emperor Wen would not disobey.

古文：东宫置兵，与羽林等。
现代文：东宫安的守卫部队，和羽林兵等一样多。
English: There are as many guards at Donggong'an as there are warriors in the Hualin Mountains.

古文：十七年，劭拜京陵，大将军彭城王义康、竟陵王诞、尚书桂阳侯义融并从，司空江夏王义恭自江都来会京口。
现代文：十七年刘邵拜谒京陵，大将军彭城王义康、竟陵王刘诞、尚书桂阳王刘休范都随同，司空江夏王刘义恭从江都前来聚会京口。
English: In the seventeenth year, Liu Shao Bai visited the Beijing Mausoleum, accompanied by the great general Pengcheng Wang Yikang, the king of the imperial mausoleum Liu Xing, and the king of Shangshu Guiyang Liu Xuan. Liu Yigong, the king of the Empty River Xia, came from Jiangdu to gather in Beijing.

古文：二十七年，上将北伐，劭与萧思话固谏，不从。
现代文：二十七年，文帝将北伐，刘邵和萧思话反复进谏，文帝没有听从。
English: In the 27th year, Emperor Wen repeatedly urged the Northern Expedition, Liu Shao and Xiao Si, but Emperor Wen did not listen.

古文：索虏至瓜步，京邑震骇。劭出镇石头，总统水军。
现代文：魏人到瓜步，京城震动，刘邵出外镇守石头城，统率水兵，很会管理。
English: Wei people arrived at a snail's pace, the capital city was shaken, Liu Shao went out to guard the stone city, led the sailors, and was very good at management.

古文：善于抚御。上登石头城，有忧色，劭曰： 不斩江湛、徐湛之，无以谢天下。 
现代文：文帝登上石头城墙，面有忧色，刘邵说： 不将江湛徐湛之斩首，无法向天下人交差。 
English: Emperor Wen boarded the stone city wall with a gloomy face. Liu Shao said, "Without beheading Jiang Zhan and Xu Zhan, it is impossible to cross over to the world."

古文：上曰： 北伐自我意，不关二人也。 
现代文：文帝说： 北伐是我的主意，跟他两人不相干。 
English: Wen Di said, "The Northern Expedition was my idea, it had nothing to do with him.

古文：上时务在本业，劝课耕桑，使宫内皆蚕，欲以讽厉天下。有女巫严道育，本吴兴人，自言通灵，能役使鬼物。
现代文：文帝当时一心务本，重视农业，鼓励发展农业和桑业。让宫内都养蚕，想用这来劝勉百姓，有个女巫严道育，本是吴兴人氏，自称能通神，能驱除鬼怪。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen focused on the fundamentals, attached importance to agriculture, and encouraged the development of agriculture and mulberry industry. He had the imperial court raise silkworms, and wanted to use this to persuade the people. There was a witch named Yan Daoyu, originally from the Wu Xingren clan, who claimed to be able to channel the spirit and drive away ghosts.

古文：夫为劫，坐没入奚官。劭姊东阳公主应阁婢王鹦鹉白公主云： 道育通灵有异术。 
现代文：因为丈夫打劫而抓到宫内，刘邵的姐姐东阳公主的应阁婢王鹦鹉对文帝说： 严道育通神有法术。 
English: When Liu Shao's sister, Princess Dongyang, was arrested for her husband's robbery and taken to the imperial palace, she said to Emperor Wen: "There is magic in the strict way of cultivating psychic powers.

古文：主乃白上，托云善蚕，求召入，见许。
现代文：东阳公主告诉文帝，说严会养蚕，请求召进来，文帝点头了。
English: Princess Dongyang told Emperor Wen that Yan would raise silkworms and asked to be called in. Emperor Wen nodded.

古文：道育既入，自言服食，主及劭并信惑之。
现代文：严道育进来后，要求吃和穿的东西。东阳公主和刘邵都迷信她。
English: After her strict upbringing, she demanded to be fed and clothed. Dongyang Princess and Liu Shao were both superstitious about her.

古文：始兴王浚素佞事劭，与劭并多过失，虑上知，使道育祈请，欲令过不上闻。道育辄云： 自上天陈请，必不泄露。 
现代文：始兴王刘浚一向谦恭地服侍刘邵，和刘邵都犯过很多错误，担心文帝知道，便叫严道育祈祷希望文帝不知道这些。严道育说： 向上天请求，必然不会泄露。 
English: Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun had always humbly served Liu Shao, and both Liu Shao and he had made many mistakes. Worried that Emperor Wen knew, he asked Yan Daoyu to pray and hope that Emperor Wen did not know about this. Yan Daoyu said, "If you ask God, it will not be revealed."

古文：劭等敬事，号曰天师。
现代文：刘邵等人恭敬地侍候她，称她为天师。
English: Liu Ye and others reverently served her, calling her a heavenly teacher.

古文：后遂为巫蛊，以玉人为上形像，埋于含章殿前。
现代文：到后来便干巫蛊的勾当，用玉石雕成文帝的模样，埋在含章殿前。
English: Later, he took up the mantle of the sorcerer and carved the image of Emperor Wen from jade, which was buried in front of the Hall of the Sacred Seal.

古文：初，东阳主有奴陈天兴，鹦鹉养以为子，而与之淫通。鹦鹉、天兴及宁州所献黄门庆国并预巫蛊事。
现代文：先前，东阳公主有个奴才陈天兴，鹦鹉养他作儿子，而暗中和他通奸，鹦鹉、天兴和宁州上献的黄门郎庆国都参与巫蛊的勾当。
English: Previously, Princess Dongyang had a servant, Chen Tianxing, and Parrot raised him as her son, while secretly committing adultery with him. Parrot, Tianxing, and Huangmen Lang Qingguo, who was offered by Ningzhou, all participated in the witchcraft activities.

古文：劭以天兴补队主。
现代文：刘邵用天兴补任队长。
English: Liu Shao used Tianxing to fill in as captain.

古文：东阳主薨，鹦鹉应出嫁，劭虑言语难密，与浚谋之。
现代文：东阳公主去世，鹦鹉应该出嫁，刘邵担心他们的言语泄露出去，便和刘浚商量。
English: Dongyang Princess died, the parrot should get married, Liu Shao was worried that their words would leak out, so he discussed it with Liu Jun.

古文：时吴兴沈怀远为浚府佐，见待异常，乃嫁鹦鹉与怀远为妾，不以启上，虑后事泄，因临贺公主微言之。
现代文：当时吴兴人沈怀远当刘浚的府吏，很得刘浚的欢心，于是把鹦鹉嫁给沈怀远做小老婆，而没有把这事启告文帝，又害怕后来泄露出去，利用临贺公主稍稍说知此事。
English: At that time, Wu Xingren, a government official of Shen Huaiyuan when he was Liu Jun, was very pleased with Liu Jun, so he married the parrot to Shen Huaiyuan as a small wife, but did not inform Emperor Wen about this, and was afraid of leaking out later, using Princess Lin He to know a little about the matter.

古文：上后知天兴领队，遣阉人奚承祖诘让劭曰： 临贺公主南第先有一下人欲嫁，又闻此下人养他人奴为兒，而汝用为队主，抽拔何乃速。汝间用主、副，并是奴邪？
现代文：以后文帝知道天兴当了队长，叫宦官奚承祖责备刘邵说： 临贺公主南府有一个下人想出嫁，又听说这个下人养他人的奴才当儿子，而你用这干儿子当队长，提拔怎么这样快，你中间用的队长，副队长都是奴才吗？
English: Later, Emperor Wen knew that Tian Xing had become the captain, and he ordered eunuch Zou Chengzu to reproach Liu Shao, saying: There is a subordinate in the Southern Prefecture of Linhe Princess who wants to get married, and I heard that this subordinate is raising someone else's slave as a son, and you are using this son as a captain. How is the promotion so fast? Are all the captains and vice-captains you use in the middle slaves?

古文：欲嫁置何处？ 
现代文：你想把鹦鹉嫁到哪儿去？ 
English: Where do you want to take the parrot?

古文：劭答曰： 南第昔属天兴，求将驱使，臣答曰： 伍那可得，若能击贼者，可入队。 
现代文：刘邵回答说： 南府当年下属天兴，请求为我效劳，我回答他：参加当皇帝的卫兵是不可能的，如果能杀敌人，可以进入我的卫队。
English: Liu Shao replied: Nanfu was subordinate to Tianxing that year, and he asked to serve me. I answered him: It is impossible to participate in the emperor's guard. If you can kill the enemy, you can enter my guard.

古文：当时盖戏言耳，都不复忆。后天兴道上通辞乞位，追存往为者，不忍食言，呼视见其形容粗健，堪充驱使，脱尔使监礼兼队副。
现代文：当时大概是开玩笑，差不多都忘了，后来一次在路上他又乞求职位，我追念先前说过的话，不忍食言，叫他到我面前来，我看见他形体壮大，能够效劳，一下便叫他当监礼官兼副队长。
English: It was probably a joke at the time, I had almost forgotten about it, but one time on the road he came begging for a position, I remembered what I had said earlier and couldn't resist asking him to come to me, I saw that he had grown and was able to serve, I immediately called him to be a ceremonial officer and vice-captain.

古文：比用人虽取劳旧，亦参用有气干者。谨条牒人囗名上呈。
现代文：因为用人应该用有功劳的人，也应该用有气魄有才干的人，我这就写上人名上献。
English: Because employers should use people with merit, and they should also use people with courage and talent, I will write down the names of people.

古文：下人欲嫁者，犹未有处。 
现代文：我那里的下人想出嫁，还没有着落。 
English: My subordinates there want to get married, but haven't settled down yet.

古文：时鹦鹉已嫁怀远矣。
现代文：实际上此时鹦鹉已嫁给沈怀远了。
English: At that time, the king parrot had already married Shen Huayuan.

古文：劭惧，驰书告浚，并使报临贺主： 上若问嫁处，当言未有定所。 
现代文：刘邵害怕，连忙写信告知刘浚，并叫他告诉临贺公主说： 皇帝如果问你要嫁给谁你便说还没着落。 
English: Liu Shao was afraid and quickly wrote a letter to Liu Jun, telling him to tell Princess Lin He: "If the emperor asks you who you want to marry, say that you haven't decided yet.

古文：浚答书曰： 奉令，伏深惶怖，启此事多日，今始来问，当是有感发之者，未测源由尔。
现代文：刘浚回信说： 接到你的指示，非常惶恐，向皇帝启明此事好多天了，今日你才来回答，大概有些问题，仅仅是不知来由罢了。
English: Liu Jun wrote back, "I received your instructions with great trepidation. I have been clarifying this matter to the emperor for many days. You have only come to answer today. There are probably some questions, I just don't know why."

古文：计临贺故当不应翻覆言语，自生寒热也。
现代文：估计临贺公主是不会言语反复，自找麻烦。
English: It is estimated that Princess Lin He will not repeat herself and get into trouble.

古文：此姥由来挟两端，难可孤保，正尔自问临贺，冀得审实也。
现代文：这个老女人一向心怀两端，难保不可靠，只好亲自问问临贺公主，希望得到真实情况。
English: This old woman has always been concerned about both ends, difficult to protect and unreliable, so she had to ask Princess Lin He in person, hoping to get the real situation.

古文：其若见问，当作依违答之。
现代文：皇帝如果问情况，应灵活地回答他。
English: If asked, she is sure to answer vaguely.

古文：天兴先署佞人府位，不审监上当无此簿领尔。
现代文：天兴先被安置在刘义恭府，没料到宫省中没有他的名字。
English: Tian Xing was first placed in Liu Yigong Prefecture, but he did not expect that there was no name for him in the palace province.

古文：急宜犍之。
现代文：应马上封锁这消息。
English: This message should be blocked immediately.

古文：殿下已见王未？
现代文：你已看见了鹦鹉了没有？
English: Has Your Highness already met the king?

古文：宜依此具令严自躬上启闻。
现代文：应按这一条一条地叫严道育向天神启明。
English: We should follow this one by one and call for strict education to enlighten the heavenly deities.

古文：彼人若为不已，正可促其余命，或是大庆之渐。 
现代文：那个人如果非要追究的话，正好要他的老命，或者这是你做皇帝的根本一步。 
English: That man, if you have to go after him, is asking for his very life, or this is a fundamental step in your becoming emperor.

古文：凡劭、浚相与书疏类如此，所言皆为名号，谓上为 彼人 ，或以为 其人 ；以太尉江夏王义恭为 佞人 ；东阳主第在西掖门外，故云 南第 ，王即鹦鹉姓，躬上启闻者，令道育上天白天神也。
现代文：凡是刘邵刘浚的书信大概都是这样，其中说别的人都有名号，称文帝为 彼人 ，或者为 其人 ，以太尉江夏王义恭为不佞人，东阳公主府第在西掖门外，所以称为 南第 ，王便是鹦鹉的姓， 躬上启闻 便是叫严道育告诉天神的意思。
English: All of Liu Shao Liu Jun's letters are probably like this, in which he says that other people have names, calling Emperor Wen a "he" or "his" person, Emperor Jiangxia Wang Yixiong a "nobody," Princess Dongyang's palace is outside Xicheng Gate, so it is called Nandi, Wang is the surname of a parrot, and bowing to the Enlightenment is the meaning of asking Yan Daoyu to tell the gods.

古文：鹦鹉既适怀远，虑与天兴私通事泄，请劭杀之。
现代文：鹦鹉嫁给沈怀远后，害怕与陈天兴私通的事暴露，叫刘邵杀掉陈天兴。
English: Since King Parrot had already married Shen Huayuan, he was worried that the affair with Chen Tianxing would be leaked, and asked Liu Bei to kill him.

古文：劭密使人害天兴。
现代文：刘邵暗中叫人杀了陈天兴。
English: Liu Bei secretly sent someone to kill Chen Tianxing.

古文：庆国谓宣传往来，唯有二人，天兴既死，虑将见及，乃具以其事白上。上惊惋，即遣收鹦鹉，封籍其家，得劭、浚书数百纸，皆咒诅巫蛊之言，得所埋上形像于宫内。
现代文：庆国以为在这中间往来传信，只有他和陈天兴二人，天兴死后，恐怕自己跟着会死，于是把这些事的前前后后全部告诉了文帝，文帝又震惊又惋惜，马上便派人去捉来鹦鹉，抄她的家，得到刘邵、刘浚的往来书信几百封，都是诅咒巫蛊的话，在宫内挖到被埋的文帝的玉像。
English: Qing Guo thought that he and Chen Tianxing were the only two people who sent letters back and forth between them. After Tianxing's death, he was afraid that he would also die, so he told Emperor Wen all of these things. Emperor Wen was shocked and sorry, and immediately sent someone to catch the parrot, copy her home, get hundreds of letters from Liu Shao and Liu Jun, all of which were cursing Wuxi, and dig up the buried jade statue of Emperor Wen in the palace.

古文：道育叛亡，讨捕不得。上大怒，穷治其事，分遣中使入东诸郡搜讨，遂不获。
现代文：严道育逃跑了，追捕不到，文帝大怒，彻底追究这些事，分派使者到东方各郡搜捕，还是找不到。
English: Yan Daoyu ran away and could not be tracked down, Emperor Wen was furious, thoroughly investigated these matters, and dispatched emissaries to the eastern counties to search for him, but still could not find him.

古文：上诘责劭、浚，劭、浚惶惧无辞，唯陈谢而已。
现代文：文帝追究刘邵刘浚，刘邵刘浚恐惶得无话可说，只是不断地认错而已。
English: Emperor Wen investigated Liu Shao Lujun, and Liu Shao Lujun was so frightened that he had nothing to say, but he just kept admitting his mistakes.

古文：道育变服为尼，逃匿东宫，浚往京口，又载以自随，或出止民张旿家。
现代文：严道育把自己装扮成尼姑，逃到东宫，刘浚到京口，又把严道育带上，有次还在百姓张日午家歇息。
English: Yan Daoyu disguised herself as a nun and fled to Donggong, Liu Jun to Jingkou, and took Yan Daoyu with her. On one occasion, she rested at the home of a commoner, Zhang Rihong.

古文：江夏王义恭自盱眙还朝，上以巫蛊告之，曰： 常见典籍有此，谓之书传空言，不意遂所亲睹。劭虽所行失道，未必便亡社稷，南面之日，非复我及汝事。汝兒子多，将来遇此不幸尔。 
现代文：江夏王刘义恭从盱眙回到朝中，文帝把巫蛊的事告诉他，说道： 常见古书有这样的事，以为是书中的夸张言语，没想到我竟然亲自看见，刘邵干这事是要不得的，但是这样做未必便会毁灭国家，他登位时，跟我和你无关，你儿子比较多，将来他们才是真正的不幸。 
English: Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, returned to the imperial court from Shandong. Emperor Wen told him about Wuxi, saying, "This kind of thing is common in ancient books. I thought it was an exaggeration in the book, but I didn't expect to see it in person. Liu Shao did the right thing, but doing so would not necessarily destroy the country. When he ascended the throne, it had nothing to do with me and you. Your sons are more numerous, and they will be the real misfortune in the future."

古文：先是二十八年，彗星起毕、昴，入太微，扫帝座端门，灭翼、轸。
现代文：先前即元嘉二十八年，慧星从毕昴两宿出现，进入太微，横扫帝座端门两星，使翼轸两宿不见。
English: In the previous year, that is, the 28th year of the Yuan Jia, the comet appeared from the two houses of Bi and Ya, entered Taimiao, swept across the two stars at the end of the emperor's seat, and made the two houses of Ying and Ya disappear.

古文：二十九年，荧惑逆行守氐，自十一月霖雨连雪，太阳罕曜。
现代文：二十九年荧惑星倒行停在氐宿，从十一月小雨不断，夹杂雪花，太阳一直不亮。
English: Twenty-nine years ago, the retrograde motion of the planet stopped in Oshuku. Since November, light rain has continued, mixed with snowflakes, and the sun has not been bright.

古文：三十年正月，大风飞霰且雷。
现代文：三十年正月，天起大风，落冰雹又打雷。
English: In the first month of the thirtieth year, a strong wind arose, hailstones fell and thunder rumbled.

古文：上忧有窃发，辄加劭兵众，东宫实甲万人。车驾出行，劭入守，使将白直队自随。
现代文：文帝担心盗贼发生，经常给刘邵增加防守兵力，东宫内部全副武装的人有一万人，文帝出巡时，刘邵入守，叫他带白色部的值班部队跟从他。
English: Emperor Wen was worried about the occurrence of thieves and often increased Liu Shao's defensive forces. There were ten thousand fully armed people inside the East Palace. When Emperor Wen was out on patrol, Liu Shao entered the guard and told him to bring the duty troops of the White Division to follow him.

古文：其年二月，浚自京口入朝，当镇江陵，复载道育还东宫，欲将西上。有告上云： 京口民张旿家有一尼，服食，出入征北内，似是严道育。 
现代文：这年二月，刘浚从京口入朝，应该镇守江陵，他再带严道育回到东宫，再带她西去，有人密告文帝，京口百姓张日午家有一尼姑，衣服饮食奇异，常进出征北府内，好像是严道育。
English: In February of that year, Liu Jun entered the imperial court from Jingkou, and was supposed to guard Jiangling. He then took Yan Daoyu back to the East Palace, and then took her to the West. Someone tipped off Emperor Wen that the people of Jingkou had a nun at the home of Zhang Liguo, whose clothes and diet were strange, and who often went in and out of the northern capital. It seemed to be Yan Daoyu.

古文：上初不信，试使掩录，得其二婢，云： 道育随征北还都。 
现代文：开始文帝不相信，试着派人去捕拿，得到两个婢女，她们说： 严道育已随征北回到京城。 
English: At first, Emperor Wen did not believe him and tried to send someone to capture him. He got two maidservants, who said: Yan Daoyu has returned to Beijing with the Northern Expedition.

古文：上谓劭、浚已当斥遣道育，而犹与往来，惆怅惋骇。
现代文：文帝以为刘邵和刘浚已经把严遣走了，却仍然保持来往，又是失望又是气愤。
English: Emperor Wen thought that Liu Shao and Liu Jun had sent Yan away, but they still kept in touch. He was both disappointed and angry.

古文：乃使京口以船送道育二婢，须至检核，废劭，赐浚死，以语浚母潘淑妃，淑妃具以告浚。
现代文：使派京口的官员送走严道育的二个婢女，一道命令审查，废去刘邵的太子，赐刘浚自杀。
English: The officials sent to Beijing sent away the two maidservants of Yan Daoyu, ordered a review, abolished Liu Shao's crown prince, and gave Liu Jun to commit suicide.

古文：浚驰报劭，劭因是异谋，每夜辄飨将士，或亲自行酒，密与腹心队主陈叔兒、詹叔兒、斋帅张超之、任建之谋之。
现代文：他把这些打算一古脑儿告诉刘浚的亲生母亲潘淑妃，淑妃又把这些全部告知刘浚，刘浚连忙报告刘邵，刘邵因此顿生最阴恶的心思，每天晚上给他手下将士好酒好肉，甚至亲自为将士们敬酒，又暗中和心腹队长陈淑儿、詹淑儿、斋帅张超之、任建之商量。
English: He told these plans to Liu Shun's biological mother, Pan Shufei, and Shufei told all of this to Liu Shun. Liu Shun quickly reported to Liu Shao. As a result, Liu Shao had the most evil thoughts. Every evening, he gave his soldiers good wine and meat, and even personally toasted the soldiers. He also secretly discussed with his confidant captains Chen Shu'er, Zhan Shu'er, General Zhang Chaozhi, and Ren Jian.

古文：道育婢将至，其月二十一日夜，诈上诏云： 鲁秀谋反，汝可平明守阙，率众入。 
现代文：严道育的婢女将到时，正是当月二十一日夜，刘邵假传文帝圣旨说： 鲁秀谋反，你可以在天亮前守卫宫门，率兵进入宫内。 
English: When the maidservant of Yan Daoyu was about to arrive, it was on the evening of the 21st day of the month that Liu Shao falsely conveyed Emperor Wen's sacred edict, saying: Lu Xiu is plotting a rebellion, you can guard the palace gate before dawn and lead soldiers into the palace.

古文：因使超之等集素所畜养兵士二千余人，皆使被甲，召内外幢队主副，豫加部勒，云有所讨。
现代文：便集中他一向特别照顾的士兵二千多人，叫他们都披上铠甲，又召集内外的卫兵队长，加以集合，说要讨伐反贼。
English: Then he gathered together more than two thousand soldiers, whom he had always taken special care of, and ordered them all to put on armor. He also called together the captains of the guards, both foreign and domestic, and told them to fight against the thieves.

古文：宿召前中庶子、右军长史萧斌，夜呼斌及左卫率袁淑、中舍人殷仲素、左积弩将军王正见，并入宫，告以大事，自起拜斌等，因流涕，众并惊愕，语在淑传。明旦未开鼓，劭以硃服加戎服上，乘画轮车，与萧斌同载，卫从如常入朝之仪，守门开，从万春门入。
现代文：以及之前召至的前中庶子，右军长史萧斌，半夜中叫萧斌和左卫帅袁淑、中舍人殷仲素、左积弩将军王正见，都进入宫内，告知他们自己的计划，刘邵亲自向萧斌等作揖，一边还流着泪，众人都非常惊诧，此事可参见《袁淑传》，在天明还未响五更鼓时，刘邵把红衣服穿在军装之外，坐着画轮车，和萧斌同坐一车，卫从士兵和平时入朝的仪式一样，宫门打开，从万春门进去，过去的制度：东宫卫队不能进入宫城。
English: and the previously summoned former middle-aged illegitimate son, the commander of the right army, Shi Xiaobin, called Xiaobin in the middle of the night, together with the left guard commander Yuan Shu, the middle-aged soldier Yin Zhongsu, and the left-handed general Wang Zhengdi, all entered the palace and informed them of their own plans. Liu Shao personally made a speech to Xiaobin and others, while still shedding tears, and everyone was very surprised. This matter can be seen in "The Biography of Yuan Shu." Before the dawn of the day, Liu Shao put on red clothes outside the military uniform, sat in a cart, and Xiaobin sat in the same car

古文：旧制，东宫队不得入城，劭与门卫云： 受敕，有所收讨。 
现代文：刘邵和门卫说： 接到圣旨，要我逮捕谋反者。 又叫后卫队前来。
English: Liu Shao said to the doorman, "I have received the sacred edict to arrest the rebel plotters.

古文：令后队速来，张超之等数十人驰入云龙、东中华门及斋阁，拔刀径上合殿。上其夜与尚书仆射徐湛之屏人语，至旦烛犹未灭，直卫兵尚寝。超之手行弑逆，并杀湛之。
现代文：张超之等几十人迅速奔进云龙、东中华门和斋阁，手持长刀直上合殿，文帝当天夜晚正和尚书仆射徐湛之单独在一起谈话，到天亮时蜡烛还亮着，值班的卫兵还睡着，张超之亲自上前刺杀文帝，同时杀死徐湛之。
English: Zhang Chaozhi and dozens of others quickly rushed into the Yunlong, the East China Gate and the Hall of Sacrifice, holding long swords straight up to the hall. On the night of the same day, Emperor Wen was talking alone with the monk's servant, Xu Zhanzhi. By dawn, the candles were still lit, and the guards on duty were still asleep. Zhang Chaozhi personally came forward to assassinate Emperor Wen and kill Xu Zhanzhi.

古文：劭进至合殿中阁，太祖已崩，出坐东堂，萧斌执刀侍直。呼中书舍人顾嘏，嘏震惧不时出，既至，问曰： 欲共见废，何不蚤启？ 
现代文：刘邵又接着到合殿中间，文帝已死去，便出来坐在东堂，萧斌握刀站在一旁，又叫中舍人顾嘏，顾嘏害怕之极，好长时间才出来，来了之后，刘邵向他说： 我早就想和你干大事，为什么不早点说？ 
English: Liu Shao then went to the middle of the entrance hall. Emperor Wen was already dead, so he came out and sat in the east hall. Xiao Bin stood by holding a knife. He also called Gu Yao, who was very scared and took a long time to come out. After he came, Liu Shao said to him: I have long wanted to do something big with you, why didn't you say so earlier?

古文：未及答，即于前斩之。
现代文：还未来得及答话，便在面前杀死他。
English: Before he could answer, they killed him in front of him.

古文：遣人于崇礼闼杀吏部尚书江湛。
现代文：刘邵又派人在崇礼门杀死吏部尚书江湛。
English: Liu Shao also sent people to the Chongli Gate to kill the official Shang Shujiang Zhan.

古文：太祖左细杖主卜天与攻劭于东堂，见杀。又使人从东阁入杀潘淑妃，又杀太祖亲信左右数十人。急召始兴王浚，率众屯中堂。又召太尉江夏王义恭、尚书令何尚之。劭即伪位，为书曰： 徐湛之、江湛弑逆无状，吾勒兵入殿，已无所及，号惋崩恤，肝心破裂。今罪人斯得，元凶克殄，可大赦天下。
现代文：又派人从东阁进去杀潘淑妃。又杀死文帝身边亲信几十人。连忙召见始兴王刘浚，率兵屯驻中堂，召太尉、江夏王刘义恭、尚书令何尚之。刘邵登基称帝，下书说： 徐湛之、江斌谋杀皇帝大逆不道，我率兵入宫，已来不及，悲痛伤心，肝肠寸断，如今罪人已被抓获，元凶被正法，可以大赦天下。
English: He also sent people from the East Pavilion to kill Pan Shufei. He also killed dozens of close confidants around Emperor Wen. He immediately summoned Liu Jun, the King of Shixing, and stationed his soldiers in the central hall. He summoned Captain, King of Jiangxia Liu Yigong, and Shang Shuling He Shangzhi. Liu Shao Dengji proclaimed himself emperor, and wrote: Xu Zhanzhi and Jiang Bin's murder of the emperor was a great treason, and it was too late for me to enter the palace with my soldiers. I was heartbroken and heartbroken. Now the criminal has been caught, the culprit has been punished, and the world can

古文：改元嘉三十年为太初元年。
现代文：改元嘉三十年为太初元年。
English: The year of the 30th anniversary of the founding of the Republic of China was the first year of the Taisho era.

古文：文武并赐位二等，诸科一依丁卯。 
现代文：文武将吏各升官二级，其余部按照丁卯年的法令进行。 
English: The civil and military generals were each promoted to the second level, and the rest of the departments were carried out in accordance with the decree of Ding Yu.

古文：初，使萧斌作诏，斌辞以不文，乃使侍中王僧绰为之。
现代文：开始叫萧斌作诏书，萧斌推说自己文章写得不好，于是叫侍中王僧绰写。
English: At the beginning, he asked Xiao Bin to write an edict. Xiao Bin said that his article was not well written, so he asked the attendant Wang Zeng to write it.

古文：使改元为太初，劭素与道育所定。
现代文：王僧绰说： 晋惠帝即位便改换年号。 
English: Wang Sengchao said, "When Emperor Jinhui ascended the throne, he changed the era name.

古文：斌曰： 旧逾年改元。 
现代文：刘邵高兴地听从了。使改年号为太初，这是刘邵和严道育以前约下的。
English: Liu Shao happily obeyed. The date of the change was the first day of the year, which was agreed upon by Liu Shao and Yan Daoyu before.

古文：劭以问僧绰，缯绰曰： 晋惠帝即位，便改号。 
现代文：萧斌说： 按老规矩是一年过完才改年号。 刘邵问王僧绰，王说： 晋惠帝即位，便改换年号。 
English: Xiao Bin said: According to the old rule, the year number should be changed only after a year has passed. Liu Shao asked Wang Sengchu, and Wang said: When Emperor Jinhui ascended the throne, he changed the year number.

古文：劭喜而从之。
现代文：刘邵高兴地听从了。
English: Liu Ye happily complied.

古文：百僚至者裁数十人，劭便遽即位。即位毕，称疾还入永福省，然后迁大行皇帝升太极前殿。
现代文：百官到的才几十人，刘邵便马上即位，即位仪式一完，便称有病回到永福省，然后把文帝的尸体移到太极前殿。
English: Only a few dozen officials arrived, and Liu Shao immediately ascended to the throne. As soon as the enthronement ceremony was over, he said he was ill and returned to Yongfu Province, and then moved the body of Emperor Wen to the Taiji front hall.

古文：是日，以萧斌为散骑常侍、尚书仆射、领军将军；何尚之为司空；前右卫率檀和之戍石头；侍中营道侯义綦为征虏将军、晋陵南下邳二郡太守，镇京城；尚书殷仲景为侍中、中护军。
现代文：当天，以萧斌为散骑常侍、尚书仆射、领军将军，何尚之为司空，前右卫帅檀和之戍守石头，侍中营道侯刘义綦为征虏将军、晋陵南下邳太守镇守京城，尚书殷冲为侍中、中将军。
English: On the same day, Xiao Bin was the strolling equerry, Shang Shuxu the foot soldier and the leading general, He Shang was the second-in-command, the former right guard commander Dan He was the keeper of the stone, Liu Yixuan, the camp commander of the middle camp, was the conscript general, Jinling Nanxiaodai, the keeper of the town, was the keeper of the capital city, and Shang Shuxin was the middle officer and the middle general.

古文：大行皇帝大敛，劭辞疾不敢出。
现代文：文帝的尸体被放进棺材的时候，刘邵称病不敢出来。
English: When Emperor Wen's body was put into the coffin, Liu Shao said that he was too ill to come out.

古文：先给诸王及诸处兵杖，悉收还武库。
现代文：以前发给各亲王的兵器铠甲，以及其他地方的武器一律归武器库。
English: Weapons previously issued to the princes, such as armor, as well as weapons from elsewhere, will all go to the armory.

古文：杀徐湛之、江湛亲党新除始兴内史荀赤松、新除尚书左丞臧凝之、山阴令傅僧祐、吴令江徽、前征北行参军诸葛诩、右卫司马江文纲。
现代文：又杀徐湛之、江湛亲友、刚任命的始兴内史荀赤松、刚任命的尚书左丞臧凝之、山阴令傅僧、吴令江徽、前行北行参军诸葛诩、右卫司马江文纲。
English: They also killed Xu Zhan, Jiang Zhan's relatives and friends, the newly appointed Shi Xing, the newly appointed Shi Xing, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the newly appointed Shang Shuzhong, the

古文：以殷仲素为黄门侍郎，王正见为左军将军，张超之及诸同逆闻人文子、徐兴祖、詹叔兒、陈叔兒、任建之等，并将校以下龙骧将军带郡，各赐钱二十万。遣人谓鲁秀曰： 徐湛之常欲相危，我已为卿除之矣。 
现代文：以殷仲素为黄门侍郎，王正见为左军将军，张超之和其他跟从的闻人文子、徐兴祖、詹淑儿、陈淑儿、任建之等，都是将军校尉，比如龙骧将军等又带郡太守的职位，另外每人赏赐钱二十万，又派人对鲁秀说： 徐湛之常想加害于你，我已为你消灭了。 
English: With Yin Zhongsu as the Yellow Gate Attendant, Wang Zhengjian as the General of the Left Army, Zhang Chaozhi and other followers such as Wenmin Zi, Xu Xingzu, Zhan Shule, Chen Shule, Ren Jianzhi, etc. are all general lieutenants, such as General Longyu, etc. with the position of county governor, and each person is rewarded with money of 200,000, and sent to Lu Xiu to say: Xu Zhanji often wants to harm you, I have been eliminated for you.

古文：使秀与屯骑校尉庞秀之对掌军队。
现代文：叫鲁秀和屯骑校尉庞秀之共掌军权。
English: Let Lu Xiu and the cavalry captain Pang Xiu Zhi jointly take charge of the army.

古文：以侍中王僧绰为吏部尚书，司徒左长史何偃为侍中。
现代文：以侍中王僧绰为吏部尚书，司徒左长史何偃为侍中。
English: With the chamberlain, Wang Soqiao, as the official, Shang Shu, and the steward, Zuo Changshi, as the chamberlain.

古文：成服日，劭登殿临灵，号恸不自持。
现代文：文帝出殡那天，刘邵上殿哭灵，哭喊呼叫，简直站不住了。
English: Wearing mourning clothes that day, Liu Xuan went to the front of the hall to face the coffin, crying loudly and unable to contain himself.

古文：博访公卿，询求治道，薄赋轻徭，损诸游费。田苑山泽，有可弛者，假与贫民。
现代文：又遍访公卿，询问治国之法，薄赋轻徭，减少各种游乐的费用，田园山泽，凡能开放的，都给贫民。
English: He also visited the nobles, inquired about the law of governing the country, reduced the expenses of various amusements, reduced the expenses of various amusements, reduced the expenses of various amusements, reduced the expenses of various amusements, reduced the expenses of various amusements.

古文：三月，遣大使分行四方，分浙以东五郡为会州，省扬州立司隶校尉，以殷冲补之。
现代文：三月，派大使分走各地，划出浙江以东五郡，设置会州；取消扬州府设立司隶尉府，用殷仲补任此官。
English: In March, ambassadors were sent to various regions, and five counties east of Zhejiang were delineated and set up. Yangzhou Prefecture was abolished and replaced with Yangzhong Prefecture, and Yin Zhong was appointed to this post.

古文：长沙王瑾、瑾弟楷、临川王烨、桂阳侯觊、新谕侯球，并以宿恨下狱死。
现代文：用大将军刘义恭为太保，司徒南谯王刘义宣为太尉，卫将军、荆州刺史、始兴王刘浚晋号骠骑将军。王僧绰因为以前向文帝献议废刘邵的太子，被杀掉了。
English: Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Song Dynasty, Liu Yixuan,

古文：礼官希旨，谥太祖不敢尽美称，上谥曰中宗景皇帝。以雍州刺史臧质为丹阳尹，进世祖号征南将军，加散骑常侍，抚军将军南平王铄中军将军，会稽太守随王诞会州刺史。
现代文：长沙王刘瑾、刘瑾的弟弟刘楷、临川王刘烨、桂阳侯刘觊、新渝侯刘，都因旧怨被逮捕到监狱处死，掌礼的官员不敢称美文帝，上谥号中宗景皇帝，用雍州刺史臧质为丹杨尹，晋世祖号为征南将军。会稽太守随王刘诞为会州刺史。
English: Changsha King Liu Ye, Liu Ye's younger brother Liu Kai, Linchuan King Liu Ye, Guiyang Prince Liu Ye, Xinwu Prince Liu, were all arrested and executed in prison because of old grudges. The officials who held the ceremony did not dare to call Emperor Meiwen, Emperor Zhongzongjing with the title of Shang Ye, Tang Yang Yin with the title of Yong Zhou, and the founder of the Jin Dynasty with the title of General of the Southern Expedition. The Censor-in-Chief followed the birth of King Liu as the Censor-in-Chief.

古文：江夏王义恭以太保领大宗师，谘禀之科，依晋扶风王故事。
现代文：江夏王刘义恭以太保兼任大宗师，向他咨询的方式，完全按晋朝敬奉扶风王的老规矩。
English: Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, was also the grand master of Tai Bao, and the way of consulting him was completely in accordance with the old rules of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：世祖及南谯王义宣、随王诞诸方镇并举义兵。
现代文：世祖和南谯王刘义宣、随王刘诞各方镇都宣布起义。
English: Liu Yixuan, the ancestor and the king of Nanxun, and all the towns declared an uprising following the birth of King Liu.

古文：劭闻义师大起，悉聚诸王及大臣于城内，移江夏王义恭住尚书下舍，义恭诸子住侍中下省。
现代文：刘邵听说义兵蜂起，把各亲王和大臣们都送进城内，移江夏王刘义恭住尚书下院，义恭的儿子们住在侍中下省。
English: When Liu Shao heard about the uprising of the loyal soldiers, he sent all the princes and ministers into the city. He moved the Xia king Liu Yi Gong to live in the lower house of Shangshu, and the sons of Yi Gong lived in the lower province.

古文：自永初元年以前，相国府入斋、传教、给使，免军户，属南彭城薛县。
现代文：从永初元年之前，相国府的入斋、传教、给使，免去军徭，都属于南彭城薛县。
English: From the beginning of the year before the first year of the year, the entry of fasting, preaching, and giving envoys, exempt from military pay, all belong to Nan Pengcheng Xue County.

古文：劭下书，以中流起兵，当亲率六师，观变江介，悉召下番将吏。加三吴太守军号，置佐领兵。
现代文：刘邵又下书说长江中游起义，他自己要亲率大军，在江边待机观变。召集全部下级将士，又增加三吴的太守的军队名号，可以在部下设置兵士。
English: Liu Shao also wrote down that there would be an uprising in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, and that he would personally lead a large army and stand by the river to watch the changes. He called up all the lower-ranking soldiers, and added the name of the army of the three emperors of Wu, so that he could set up soldiers under his subordinates.

古文：四月，立妻殷氏为皇后。
现代文：四月，立他的老婆殷氏为皇后。
English: In April, he appointed his wife, Yin Shi, as empress.

古文：先旨以王室不造，家难亟结，故含蔽容隐，不彰其衅，训诱启告，冀能革音。
现代文：世祖向京师下了一道檄文说： 先帝仁明圣智，功盖宇宙，明照万国，道德崇高，泽被四海。
English: The founder of the world sent a message to the Beijing teacher saying: The previous emperor, Emperor Jin, was a great sage, his achievements covered the universe, he enlightened all nations, his morals were lofty, and he was admired by all nations.

古文：何悟狂慝不悛，同恶相济，肇乱巫蛊，终行弑逆，圣躬离荼毒之痛，社稷有翦坠之哀，四海崩心，人神泣血，生民以来，未闻斯祸。
现代文：凶贼刘邵乘借太子的位势早早蒙受宠侍，但反悖天理，逐渐失去皇帝的宠爱。他的凶险的性情从来就是如此。凶贼刘浚轻浮浅薄，品行卑劣，从小到大和刘邵要好，狼狈为奸，先帝因皇家多事，家难多次暴发，所以容忍他们，没有点明他们的罪行，千方训导，希望他们改过自新，哪想他们怙恶不悛，同恶相济，先前暗中制造巫蛊的勾当，最后便干下了弑君的大罪，使皇上蒙上荼毒的痛苦，国家有覆灭的可能，四海无不痛心，神民流泪流血。
English: The thug Liu Shao took advantage of the position of the crown prince to be favored by the emperor early on, but contrary to divine reason, he gradually lost the emperor's favor. His sinister temperament has always been like this. The thug Liu Jun is frivolous and shallow, his behavior is despicable, he is better than Liu Shao from childhood to adulthood, and he is a traitor. The first emperor had many royal affairs and family troubles broke out many times, so he tolerated them, did not point out their crimes, disciplined them in every possible way, and hoped that they would reform. Why do you think they are evil and evil, they are evil and evil, previously secretly

古文：奉讳惊号，肝脑涂地，烦冤腷臆，容身无所。
现代文：自从盘古开天地从未有这么骇人听闻的大祸，我听到这个可怕的消息，真的悲痛欲绝，肝脑涂地，觉得自己都无面目立于天地之间。
English: Never since time immemorial has there been such a terrible calamity. I am truly heartbroken and devastated to hear this terrible news. I feel like I am standing between heaven and earth.

古文：大将军、诸王幽间穷省，存亡未测。
现代文：大将军，亲王们被禁闭宫省，存亡未测。
English: The princes were confined to the palace, and their fate is unknown.

古文：徐仆射、江尚书、袁左率，皆当世标秀，一时忠贞，或正色立朝，或闻逆弗顺，并横分阶闼，悬首都市。宗党夷灭，岂伊一姓，祸毒所流，未知其极。
现代文：徐仆射、江尚书、袁左州，都是当世伟人，今日忠臣，或者是朝廷中的正人君子，或者听说反谋而不顺从，都横尸宫殿，悬首街市，宗族斩杀无遗，岂只一姓，祸害流着的地方，也不知哪儿是尽头。
English: Xu Buxia, Jiang Shangshu, and Yuan Zazhou were all great men in their day. Today, they are loyal vassals, or they are upright gentlemen in the imperial court, or they heard of countermeasures but did not obey. They were all hanged in the palace, hanged in the streets, and their families were all killed. Is it just one family name? Where the scourge is flowing, I don't know where the end is.

古文：昔周道告难，齐、晋勤王，汉历中圮，虚、牟立节，异姓末属，犹或亡躯，况幕府职同昔人，义兼臣子。
现代文： 当年周朝出现祸乱，齐晋大国一心勤王，汉朝中间出了问题，朱虚、中牟等亲王因此立功，异姓远亲尚见忘身为国，况且朱虚职当重任，又是士臣皇子，所以枕戈待旦，卧薪尝胆。
English: In that year, the Zhou Dynasty was plagued by chaos, the Qijin Kingdom was devoted to the king, and there was a problem in the middle of the Han Dynasty. Princes such as Zhu Xiu and Zhong Mou made great contributions as a result. They were distant relatives with different surnames, but they did not forget to be a part of the country. Moreover, Zhu Xiu's duties were important, and he was also a scholar prince, so he waited until he was ready to die.

古文：凡此诸帅，皆英果权奇，智略深赡，名震中土，勋暢遐疆。幕府亲董精悍一十余万，授律枕戈，骆驿继迈。司徒睿哲渊谟，赫然震发，征甲八州，电起荆郢；冠军将军臧质忠烈协举，雷动汉阴；冠军将军硃修之诚节亮款，悉力请奋。荆、雍百万，稍次近涂，蜀、汉之卒，续已出境。
现代文：只要生命一息尚存，一定要歼灭元凶，雪洗先帝大仇，今日派冠军将军兼任中直兵柳元景、宁朔将军兼中直兵马文恭等、统率劲兵三万直抵石头城，分兵而下，辅国将军领谘议中直兵宗懿等，率甲兵二万，征虏将军前司马武昌内史沈庆之等带壮士五万相继出发。其他各部队，或者破釜沉舟，从姑孰前进，或从芜湖乘船，进据云阳，这些将帅们都英雄过人，权谋兼备，智略沉深，名震中国，遐迩闻名，本府亲自带十万大军，整装披甲，随后出发，司徒公圣哲深广，赫然震怒，征集八州壮士，从荆州郢州起兵。冠军将军臧质忠心配合，在汉江起动。冠军将军朱修之诚心投靠，竭力奋进，荆州府的百万大军，各自准备出征上路，蜀汉雄兵，也已离开本土。
English: As long as there is a breath of life left, we must annihilate the main culprit. To wipe out the great revenge of the former emperor, today we will send the champion general concurrently serving as Zhong Zhi soldier Liu Yuanjing, Ningshuo general and Zhong Zhi soldier Ma Wenhong, etc., to arrive at Stone Town with a total of 30,000 strong soldiers, divide the troops and go down, and the general of the auxiliary country will lead the consulting Zhong Zhi soldier Zong Xi, etc., with a total of 20,000 armored soldiers, and the conscript general former Sima Wuchang's internal history Shen Qing, etc. with 50,000 strong men. Other troops, either breaking

古文：又安东将军诞、平西将军遵考、前抚军将军萧思话、征虏将军鲁爽、前宁朔将军王玄谟，并密信俱到，不契同期，传檄三吴，驰军京邑，远近俱发，扬旍万里。
现代文：另外安东将军刘诞、平西将军刘遵考、前抚军将军萧思话、征虏将军鲁爽、前宁朔将军王玄谟，都密秘派使者前来，不期而合，传檄三吴，进军京城。远近同起，扬帆万里，同声讨贼。
English: In addition, Anton General Liu Xing, Pingxi General Liu Zunkao, former Fuzhou Army General Xiao Siwei, Conscript General Lu Shuang, and former Ningshuo General Wang Xuanmu all secretly sent envoys to come, unexpectedly coincide, pass through Sanwu, and march into Beijing. From far and near, sail thousands of miles, in unison to investigate thieves.

古文：赏罚之科，信如日月。原火一燎，异物同灰，幸求多福，无贻后悔。
现代文： 朝中各位大臣或者历代忠良，自身蒙受皇恩，或者是亲戚腹心，命运相连，被凶贼逼迫，俯附于他，含愤隐恨，无可奈何。
English: The ministers of the dynasty, or those who have been loyal throughout the ages, have themselves been favored by the emperor, or are relatives and confidants, their fates are linked, they are persecuted by the thief, they are subordinate to him, they harbor resentment, and they are helpless.

古文：书到宣告，咸使闻知。劭自谓素习武事，语朝士曰： 卿等但助我理文书，勿措意戎陈。
现代文：我军快要到来，威风大振，我们应该乘机立功，洗刷过去的错误，如事不得已，能弃逆从顺，也是第二等的选择，如果执迷不悟，党同凶逆，顽抗到底必将严惩不贷，五族诛灭。赏罚的命令，明如日月，我们檄文到达时期请你们看清。 
English: Our army is about to arrive, and the wind of power is blowing strongly. We should take advantage of the opportunity to make meritorious deeds and wipe out the mistakes of the past. If we have to, we can abandon rebellion and follow the path of obedience, which is also the second choice. If we do not give up, the party will be violent, and resistance will be severely punished, and the five ethnic groups will be annihilated. The order of reward and punishment is as clear as the sun and the moon. Please see clearly when we arrive.

古文：若有寇难，吾当自出，唯恐贼虏不敢动尔。 
现代文：刘邵自以为一向熟习军事，对他的大臣说： 你们只管帮助我处理文书，不必担心军务，如果有战祸，我会自己出去应付的，只怕是敌人不敢动。 
English: Liu Shao thought that he had always been familiar with military affairs, and said to his ministers: "You only need to help me deal with paperwork, don't worry about military affairs. If there is a war disaster, I will go out to deal with it myself, even if the enemy does not dare to move."

古文：司隶校尉殷冲掌综文符，左卫将军尹弘配衣军旅，萧斌总众事，中外戒严。防守世祖子于侍中下省，南谯王义宣诸子于太仓空屋。
现代文：司隶校尉殷冲掌管文书檄信之类的事，左卫将军尹弘管军队供应，萧斌总管全盘，朝廷内外实行戒严，又叫人在侍中下省防守世祖的儿子们，在太仓空屋禁锢南淮王刘义宣的儿子们。
English: Sifu Lieutenant Yin Chong was in charge of matters such as documents and letters, General Zuo Wei Yin Hong was in charge of army supplies, Xiao Bin was in overall charge, martial law was imposed inside and outside the imperial court, and people were ordered to guard the sons of the ancestors in the court, and the sons of Liu Yixuan, King of Nanhuai, were imprisoned in the Taicang empty house.

古文：劭使浚与世祖书曰： 闻弟忽起狂檄，阻兵反噬，缙绅愤叹，义夫激怒。古来陵上内侮，谁不夷灭，弟洞览坟籍，岂不斯具。
现代文：刘邵派刘浚给世祖写信说： 听说老弟忽然发出倡乱的檄文，集兵反叛，使贵族愤怒，义士们激恨，从古以来，凌辱皇上哪个不灭亡的，老弟对古书了如指掌，难道不知这一点吗？
English: Liu Shao sent Liu Jun to write to his ancestor, saying: I heard that my brother suddenly issued a proclamation of rebellion, gathered soldiers to rebel, made the nobles angry, and aroused the hatred of the righteous. Since ancient times, whoever insults the emperor will not perish. My brother knows ancient books like the back of his hand. Don't you know this?

古文：今主上天纵英圣，灵武宏发，自登宸极，威泽兼宣，人怀甘死之志，物竞舍生之节。弟蒙眷遇，著自少长，东宫之欢，其来如昨，而信惑奸邪，忘兹恩友，此之不义，人鬼同疾。
现代文：当今皇上是上天派来的英雄圣贤，神武超人，从登基之日起，威震四方，泽被九州，人们甘心为他效忠，义士们甘心为他拼命，老弟一向受到他们的优待，从小便是如此，东宫和你的友好交情就好比昨日里发生的事一样，却信任奸邪的计策，忘掉这些友情的恩德，这种不义的行为，简直要被人和鬼同时仇恨。
English: Today's emperor is a hero, sage, and divine warrior sent from heaven. From the day he ascended the throne, he has shaken the four quarters of the world. He has been enthroned in Kyushu. People are willing to be loyal to him. The righteous are willing to work hard for him. My brother has always been treated favorably by them. This has been the case since he was a child. Donggong and your friendship is just like what happened yesterday, but you trusted the evil schemes and forgot the benefits of friendship. Such an unjust act is almost hated by both people and ghosts.

古文：今水步诸军悉已备办，上亲御六师，太保又乘钺临统，吾与乌羊，相寻即道。
现代文：如今我们水兵步兵各路已准备好，皇上亲率六军，太保又掌节统帅，我和南平王乌羊相继出发。
English: Now, our sailors and infantry are all ready to go. The emperor's relatives led the six armies, the eunuch was also the commander-in-chief, and I and Nanping Wang Wuyang set off one after another.

古文：所以淹霆缓电者，犹冀弟迷而知返尔。
现代文：之所以缓兵不进，只不过仍希望老弟迷途知返，中途悔悟罢了。
English: The reason for the delay was that he still hoped that his brother would come to his senses.

古文：故略示怀，言不尽意，主上圣恩，每厚法师，今在殿内住，想弟欲知消息，故及。 
现代文：所以有了这些想法。主上皇恩浩荡，每待法师不错，法师现在还在殿中住着，大概老弟想知道这消息，所以也附带提及。 
English: That's why I had these thoughts. The Lord's grace is abundant, and it's good to wait for the mage. The mage is still living in the palace. My brother probably wanted to know this news, so he also mentioned it.

古文：乌羊者，南平王铄；法师，世祖世子小名也。
现代文：乌羊即南平王刘铄，法师即世祖的世子。
English: The black sheep is the Nanping King Liu Ye, and the sorcerer is the ancestor's son.

古文：劭欲杀三镇士庶家口，江夏王义恭、何尚之说之曰： 凡举大事者，不顾家口。且多是驱逼，今忽诛其余累，正足坚彼意耳。 
现代文：刘邵想杀掉三镇起义将士的家属，江夏王刘文恭、何尚之提议说： 凡是搞大事的人，都不顾家人亲属，况且他们的将士大多是被迫，今日如果突然杀掉他们的家属，这是加强了他们的抵抗之心。 
English: Liu Shao wanted to kill the families of the insurgents in the three towns, and Jiangxia King Liu Wengong and He Shang proposed: "Anyone who engages in major events does not care about their families and relatives. Moreover, most of their soldiers are forced. If they suddenly kill their families today, this will strengthen their resistance.

古文：劭谓为然，乃下书一无所问。使褚湛之戍石头，刘思考镇东府。
现代文：刘邵也同意这观点，便下书对义军家属一无所问，叫褚湛之戍守石头城，刘思考镇守东府。
English: Liu Shao also agreed with this point of view, so he wrote a letter asking nothing of the families of the rebels, saying that Yu Zhan's family should guard Stone Town, and Liu Xie's family should guard Dongfu.

古文：浚及萧斌劝劭勒水军自上决战，若不尔，则保据梁山。江夏王义恭虑义兵仓卒，船舫陋小，不宜水战。乃进策曰： 贼骏少年未习军旅，远来疲弊，宜以逸待之。今远出梁山，则京都空弱，东军乘虚，容能为患。若分力两赴，则兵散势离。不如养锐待期，坐而劝衅。 
现代文：刘浚和萧斌劝刘邵带水兵亲自前往决战，如果不能这样，则保守梁山，江夏王刘义恭担心起义士兵仓猝之际，航船质劣，不应水战，于是献计说： 反贼刘骏年幼不懂军事，远来疲惫，应该以逸待劳，今日远出梁山据守，那么京城空弱，东方的敌兵乘机前来，可能会招致麻烦，如果分兵两处则兵士分散形势不好，不如养锐兵等待时机，望观他们的空隙。 
English: Liu Jun and Xiao Bin advised Liu Shao to take the sailors to the decisive battle in person. If this is not possible, then keep Liangshan. The king of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, was worried that when the insurgent soldiers were in a hurry, the ship was of inferior quality and should not fight. So he proposed a plan: the anti-thief Liu Ye was young and did not understand military affairs. He was tired from a long journey and should wait for labor with pleasure. Today, he was stationed far away from Liangshan. Then the capital was weak and the enemy soldiers from the east came by plane, which could cause trouble. If the soldiers were divided into two places,

古文：劭善其议，萧斌厉色曰： 南中郎二十年少，业能建如此大事，岂复可量。
现代文：刘邵觉得刘浚这个策划很好，萧斌厉声说道： 南中郎二十岁的小伙子，已能办这样的大事，怎么能轻视？
English: Liu Shao thought that Liu Jun's plan was very good, Xiao Bin said sharply: Nan Zhong Lang, a twenty-year-old young man, has been able to do such a big thing, how can he be despised?

古文：三方同恶，势据上流，沈庆之甚练军事，柳元景、宗悫屡尝立功。形势如此，实非小敌。
现代文：三方同时反叛，敌人据守上游，沈庆之很懂军事，柳元景、宗，屡建大功，形势这样确实不是小敌人。
English: The three sides rebelled at the same time, the enemy held the upper reaches, Shen Qingzhi was very knowledgeable about military affairs, and Liu Yuanjing and Zong repeatedly made great achievements. This situation is indeed not a small enemy.

古文：唯宜及人情未离，尚可决力一战。
现代文：只有乘人心还未离散，还可以集中力量决战。
English: Only by taking advantage of the people's will and not being disunited, can we concentrate on the decisive battle.

古文：端坐台城，何由得久。
现代文：坐守台城，怎么能支持长久？
English: How can you support Taiwan for a long time if you are sitting on the sidelines?

古文：主相咸无战意，此自天也。 
现代文：皇上、宰相都不想打，这是天亡我。 
English: The Emperor and the Prime Minister don't want to fight, and that's the end of me.

古文：劭不纳。
现代文：刘邵没有采纳。
English: Liu Ye was not accepted.

古文：疑朝廷旧臣悉不为己用，厚接王罗汉、鲁秀，悉以兵事委之，多赐珍玩美色，以悦其意。
现代文：又疑心朝廷旧臣都不为自己效力，厚接王罗汉、鲁秀，把军事都给他们，赐给他们很多珍奇、美人、宫娥，让他们高兴。
English: He was also suspicious that the old courtiers of the imperial court did not work for themselves, and he generously received the emperors Rohan and Lu Xiu, gave them military power, and gave them many rarities, beautiful women, and imperial concubines to make them happy.

古文：罗汉先为南平王铄右军参军，劭以其有将用，故以心膂委焉。
现代文：罗汉先当南平王刘铄右军参军。刘邵因为有些管理军事的才能，所以把他当成心腹，重任委用。
English: Luo Han was the first to join the army of the Nanping King Liu Shao's right-wing army. Liu Shao regarded him as a confidant and appointed him to important positions because of his ability to manage military affairs.

古文：或劝劭保石头城者，劭曰： 昔人所以固石头，俟诸侯勤王尔。我若守此，谁当见救。唯应力战决之，不然不克。 
现代文：有人让刘邵保守石头城，刘邵说： 前人之所以困守石头城，无非是等待各路的勤王大军，我如果守在这里谁会来救我，只应在激战中决胜负，不然不会成功。 
English: Someone asked Liu Shao to guard Stone Town, and Liu Shao said: The reason why the predecessors were trapped in Stone Town was nothing more than waiting for the diligent army from all directions. If I guard here, who will come to save me should only decide the outcome in a fierce battle, otherwise it will not succeed.

古文：日日自出行军，慰劳将士，亲督都水治船舰，焚南岸，驱百姓家悉渡水北。
现代文：每一天亲自出去巡视军队慰劳将士，亲自督促整治水军船舰，焚烧秦淮河南岸房屋积蓄，驱使其中百姓全部到秦淮北岸，又叫有关人上奏立他的儿子刘伟之为皇太子。
English: Every day, he personally went out to inspect the army to comfort the soldiers, personally urged the rectification of the navy ships, burned the houses and savings on the south bank of the Qinhuai River, drove all the people to the north bank of the Qinhuai River, and asked the relevant people to nominate his son Liu Weiwei as the crown prince.

古文：使有司奏立子伟之为皇太子，以褚湛之为后将军、丹阳尹，置佐史，骠骑将军始兴王浚为侍中、中书监、司徒、录尚书六条事，中军将军南平王铄为使持节、都督南兗兗青徐冀五州诸军事、征北将军、开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史，新除左将军、丹阳尹建平王宏为散骑常侍、镇军将军、江州刺史。庞秀之自石头先众南奔，人情由是大震。
现代文：以褚湛之为后将军、丹阳尹，可以设置部属督吏。骠骑将军始兴王刘浚当侍中、中书监、司徒，录尚书六条事，中军将军、南平王刘铄，为使持节，都督南兖、兖、青、徐、冀五州诸军事、征北将军、开府仪同三司、南兖州刺史。刚任命的左将军、丹阳尹建平王刘宏为散骑常侍、镇军将军、江州刺史，庞秀之从石头城，首先南奔世祖。
English: The next general, Danyang Yin, could appoint subordinate supervisors. The cavalry general, Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun, acted as the attendant, the book supervisor and the sitter, and recorded six records. The general of the Chinese army, Nanping King Liu Wei, was the military governor of the five states of Nanping, Handan, Qinghai, Xu and Hebei, the general of the Northern Expedition, the third secretary of the Kaifu Yi Tong and the secretary of the Southern Zhangzhou. The newly appointed left general, Danyang Yin Jianping King Liu Hong, was the cavalryman, the general of the town army, the secretary of the Jiangzhou, and

古文：以征虏将军营道侯义綦即本号为湘州刺史，辅国将军檀和之为西中郎将、雍州刺史。
现代文：人心因此非常恐惧，刘邵以征虏将军，营道侯刘义綦就本号为湘州刺史，辅国将军檀和之为西中郎将、雍州刺史。
English: As a result, people's hearts were very fearful. Liu Shao used the title of conscript general, and Liu Yixuan, the lord of the camp road, was known as the general of Hunan Province, and the general of the auxiliary province, Dan He, was known as the general of the West Middle Kingdom and the general of Yongzhou.

古文：十九日，义军至新林，劭登石头烽火楼望之。
现代文：十九日起义大军进到新林，刘邵登上石头城烽火楼观望敌兵。
English: On the 19th, the insurgent army entered Xinlin, and Liu Shao boarded the Stone City Tower to watch the enemy soldiers.

古文：二十一日，义军至新亭。时鲁秀屯白石，劭召秀与王罗汉共屯硃雀门。
现代文：二十一日，起义军到达新亭，当时鲁秀驻扎白石，刘邵召回鲁秀和王罗汉共同驻守朱雀门。
English: On the twenty-first day, the rebel army arrived at Xinting. At that time, Lu Xiu was stationed in Baishi. Liu Shao recalled Lu Xiu and Wang Rohan to jointly guard Suzakmen.

古文：萧斌统步军，褚湛之统水军。
现代文：萧斌带步兵，褚湛之统管水兵。
English: Xiao Bin led the infantry, and Yan Zhan was in charge of the sailors.

古文：二十二日，使萧斌率鲁秀、王罗汉等精兵万人攻新亭垒，劭登硃雀门躬自督率，将士怀劭重赏，皆为之力战。
现代文：二十二日，叫萧斌带鲁秀、王罗汉等精兵一万人进攻新亭，刘邵登上朱雀楼亲自督战，他的将士们因为感激刘邵的重赏，都为他苦战。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Xiao Bin to lead 10,000 elite soldiers such as Lu Xiu and Wang Lohan to attack Xinting. Liu Shao personally supervised the battle from the top of the Suzaku Tower. His soldiers fought hard for him because they were grateful for Liu Shao's reward.

古文：将克，而秀敛军遽止，为柳元景等所乘，故大败。
现代文：将要击败对方时，而鲁秀却收兵而止，被柳元景等人抓住了这个机会，所以大败。
English: When they were about to defeat the other side, Lu Xiu withdrew his troops, and Liu Yuanjing and others seized the opportunity, resulting in a crushing defeat.

古文：劭又率腹心同恶自来攻垒，元景复破之；劭走还硃雀门，萧斌臂为流矢所中。
现代文：刘邵又率心腹将士，前来进攻这个营垒，柳元景再次击败了他。刘邵逃回朱雀门，萧斌的手臂被流箭击中。
English: Liu Shao again led his henchmen to attack the camp, and Liu Yuanjing defeated him again. Liu Shao fled back to Zhuzakmen, and Xiao Bin's arm was hit by a stray arrow.

古文：褚湛之携二子与檀和之同共归顺。劭骇惧，走还台城。其夜，鲁秀又南奔。时江夏王义恭谋据石头，会劭已令浚及萧斌备守。
现代文：褚湛之带两个儿子和檀和之共同南逃，归顺世祖，刘邵更加害怕，逃回台城，当天夜间，鲁秀又南投世祖，当时刘义恭打算据有石头城，恰遇刘邵已叫刘浚萧斌防守已固。
English: Yan Zhan took his two sons and Dan He to flee south together and returned to Shun Shizhu. Liu Shao was even more afraid and fled back to Taicheng. On the same night, Lu Xiu also fled south to Shizhu. At that time, Liu Yigong was planning to take control of Stone City, but Liu Shao had already called Liu Jun Xiaobin to say that the defense was solid.

古文：劭并焚京都军籍，置立郡县，悉属司隶为民。
现代文：刘邵于是把新城中的军事物资都烧掉，设立京城为郡县，全部归属到司隶校尉府，京城人成为百姓。
English: Liu Shao then burned all the military supplies in the new city, established the capital city as a county, all belonging to the Sili Lieutenant's Office, and the people of the capital city became commoners.

古文：以前军将军、辅国将军王罗汉为左卫将军，辅国如故，左军王正见为太子左卫率。
现代文：刘邵用前军将军辅国将军王罗汉为左卫将军，辅国将军还照旧。左军王正见为太子左卫帅。
English: Liu Shao used the former army general Wang Luohan as the left guard general, and the auxiliary general is still the same. The left army Wang Zhengjun is the prince left guard commander.

古文：二十五日，义恭单马南奔，自东掖门出，于冶渚过淮。东掖门队主吴道兴是臧质门人，冶渚军主原稚孙是世祖故史，义恭得免。
现代文：二十五日，刘义恭独身一人南逃，从东掖门出来，在治渚渡过秦淮河，东掖门队长吴道兴是臧质的门人，冶渚队长原稚孙是世祖的老部下，刘义恭因此逃脱。
English: On the 25th, Liu Yigong, a single man, fled south, came out of the East Gate, and crossed the Qinhuai River in Zhizhu. The captain of the East Gate, Wu Daoxing, was a loyal man, and the captain of the Yizhu Gate, the original grandson, was an old subordinate of the ancestor. Liu Yigong therefore escaped.

古文：劭遣骑追讨，骑至冶渚，义恭始得渡淮。
现代文：刘邵派人追捕，追捕的骑兵到冶渚时，义恭才得渡过秦淮河。
English: Liu Shao sent men to chase him. When the pursuing cavalry arrived at Ye, Yigong had to cross the Qinhuai River.

古文：义恭佐史义故二千余人，随从南奔，多为追兵所杀。遣浚杀义恭诸子。以辇迎蒋侯神像于宫内，启颡乞恩，拜为大司马，封钟山郡王，食邑万户，加节钺。
现代文：刘义恭部属官吏亲友二千多人随同南奔，多数被追兵杀死，刘邵又派人杀了刘义恭的儿子们，用辇车迎接蒋侯神像到宫内，磕头求保佑，拜蒋侯为大司马，又封钟山郡王食邑万户，加上节仗。
English: More than 2,000 officials, relatives and friends belonging to Liu Yigong's faction accompanied him to the south, and most of them were killed by the pursuing soldiers. Liu Shao also sent people to kill Liu Yigong's sons, used a carriage to welcome the statue of Jiang Hou to the palace, bowed his head to ask for blessings, worshipped Jiang Hou as the grand steed, and sealed off all households in Wangshui Town, Zhongshan County, plus the festival.

古文：苏侯为骠骑将军。
现代文：苏侯为骠骑将军。
English: Suhou was the general of the cavalry.

古文：使南平王铄为祝文，罪状世祖。
现代文：叫南平王刘铄写祝祷文，罪过放在世祖身上。
English: Nanping King Liu Ye was asked to write a prayer of congratulations, placing the blame on his ancestor.

古文：加浚使持节、都督南徐会二州诸军事、领太子太傅、南徐州刺史，给班剑二十人；征北将军、南兗州刺史南平王铄进号骠骑将军，与浚并录尚书事。
现代文：刘邵又加刘浚使持节，都督南徐会二州诸军事、兼任太子太傅、南徐州刺史，赏给班剑二十人，征北将军、南兖州刺史、南平王刘铄进号骠骑将军，和刘浚都当录尚书事。
English: Liu Shao and Liu Jun also made the festival, the governor of Nanxu will be the military of the two states, and he will also serve as the prince of the prince, and the history of South Xuzhou will be awarded to twenty people, and the general of the Northern Expedition, the history of South Xuzhou, the general of the cavalry of the King of Nanping Liu Yujin, and Liu Jun should be recorded.

古文：二十七日，临轩拜息伟之为太子，百官皆戎服，劭独衮衣。下书大赦天下，唯世祖、刘义恭、义宣、诞不在原例，余党一无所问。
现代文：二十七日刘邵到宫内拜他的儿子刘伟之为太子，百官都穿军装，只刘邵一个穿着龙袍，又下书大赦天下，只有世祖、刘骏、刘义恭、刘义宣、刘诞不在免除之列，其余的人一切原谅。
English: On the 27th day, Liu Shao went to the palace to worship his son Liu Wei as the crown prince. All the officials wore military uniforms. Only Liu Shao wore a dragon robe and wrote a letter of amnesty to the world. Only Shizu, Liu Hui, Liu Yigong, Liu Yixuan and Liu Xing were not exempted, and all the others were forgiven.

古文：先遣太保参军庾道、员外散骑侍郎硃和之，又遣殿中将军燕钦东拒诞。
现代文：刘邵首先派太保参军庾道、员外散骑侍郎朱和之、又派殿中将军燕钦东向抵御刘诞。
English: Liu Shao first sent Taibao to join the army, Zhu He, a non-commissioned officer, and Yan Qin, a general in the palace, to the east to resist Liu Xing.

古文：五月，世祖所遣参军顾彬之及诞前军，并至曲阿，与道相遇，与战，大破之。劭遣人焚烧都水西装及左尚方，决破柏岗方山埭以绝东军。
现代文：五月，世祖所派参军顾彬之和刘诞的前锋部队，同时到曲阿，和庾道相遇，向庾道发动攻势，大败庾道，刘邵又派人焚烧都城里面的衣服和左尚书方监，挖破柏岗方山，断绝东方军队来路。
English: In May, the vanguard troops of Gu Binzhi and Liu Xing, who were sent by the Ancestor to join the army, went to Qu'ao at the same time, met with the Shandong, launched an offensive against the Shandong, and defeated the Shandong. Liu Shao also sent people to burn the clothes and Zuo Shangshu Fangguan in the capital, dig through the mountains of Baigang Fangshan, and cut off the way of the Oriental army.

古文：又悉以上守家之丁巷居者，缘淮竖舶船为楼，多设大弩。又使司隶治中监琅邪郡事羊希栅断班渎、白石诸水口。
现代文：又把在前方守卫的家人和住在巷子中的全部百姓召集起来，沿秦淮河一线竖起船舶作楼房，安装很多大弓箭，又派司隶治中监琅王牙郡事羊希用栅栏堵绝班渎、白石几个码头。
English: He also called together the families of the guards at the front and all the people living in the alleys, erected ships along the Qinhuai River as buildings, installed many large bows and arrows, and sent the chief magistrate of Wangya County to block several piers with fences.

古文：于时男丁既尽，召妇女亲役。
现代文：当时男丁征集完了，便召集妇女上阵。
English: At that time, when the recruitment of men was complete, women were called up to fight.

古文：其月三日，鲁秀等募勇士五百人攻大航，钩得一舶。王罗汉副杨恃德命使复航，罗汉昏酣作伎，闻官军已渡，惊惧放仗归降。
现代文：此月三日，鲁秀等招募勇士上百人进攻大航，钩到一艘小船，王罗汉的副将杨恃德叫再通航桥，王罗汉正喝酒作乐，听说义军已过河，惊异地放下武器投降。
English: On the third day of this month, Lu Xiu and others recruited hundreds of warriors to attack Dahu, hooked to a small boat, Wang Lohan's vice-general Yang Bingde called for the bridge to be reopened. Wang Lohan was drinking and playing music when he heard that the rebels had crossed the river and surprisingly laid down his weapons and surrendered.

古文：缘渚幢队，以次奔散，器仗鼓盖，充塞街衢。
现代文：秦淮河的各个部队一个接一个逃散。武器旗帜车盖满街都是。
English: The various troops of Qin Huaihe fled one after another. Weapons, flags and vehicles covered the streets.

古文：是夜，劭闭守六门，于门内凿堑立栅，以露车为楼，城内沸乱，无复纲纪。
现代文：当天夜中，刘邵闭守六个城门，在门内挖沟建栅栏，用露车作楼，但城内沸反盈天，再也没有秩序了。
English: In the middle of the night of the same day, Liu Shao closed six city gates, dug a trench inside the gate to build a fence, and used a caravan as a building, but the city was in turmoil, and there was no order anymore.

古文：丹阳尹尹弘、前军将军孟宗嗣等下及将吏，并逾城出奔。
现代文：丹阳尹尹弘、前军将军孟家嗣等以下将吏，都越城出逃。
English: Danyang Yin Yinhong, former army general Meng Jiazi and other generals fled Yuecheng.

古文：劭使詹叔兒烧辇及衮冕服。
现代文：刘邵派詹叔儿烧掉辇车和皇帝的龙服。
English: Liu Shao sent Uncle Zhan to burn the carriage and the emperor's robe.

古文：萧斌闻大航不守，惶窘不知所为，宣令所统，皆使解甲，自石头遣息约诣阙请罪，寻戴白幡来降，即于军门伏诛。
现代文：萧斌听说大航守不住，惶恐万分，不知怎么办，命令他的部下，都解除武装从石头城派儿子萧约到世祖那里请罪，不久又亲自戴白帽来投降，在军门前世祖便将他斩首。
English: Xiao Bin heard that Dahang could not be defended, panicked and did not know what to do, ordered his subordinates to disarm, sent his son Xiao You from Stone City to the patriarch to plead guilty, and soon he himself wore a white hat to surrender, and the patriarch beheaded him in front of the military gate.

古文：四日，太尉江夏王义恭登硃雀门，总群帅，遣鲁秀、薛安都、程天祚等直趣宣阳门。
现代文：四日，太尉江夏王刘义恭登上朱雀门，总帅各将，派鲁秀、薛安都、程天祚等向宣阳门前进。
English: On the fourth day, Lieutenant Liu Yigong, the King of Jiangxia, ascended the Suzaku Gate, and the commanders-in-chief, including Lu Xiu, Xue Andu, and Cheng Tianyao, advanced toward the Xuanyang Gate.

古文：劭军主徐兴祖、罗训、虞丘要兒等率众来降。
现代文：刘邵队长徐兴祖、罗训、虞丘要儿等率部来投降。
English: Liu Shao's captains Xu Xingzu, Luo Xun, Yu Qiu and others led the troops to surrender.

古文：劭先遣龙骧将军陈叔兒东讨，事急，召还。
现代文：刘邵先派龙骧将军陈叔儿南向讨击，事情紧迫时，又把他召回。
English: Liu Shaoxian sent Longjing General Chen Shuer to the south to counterattack, and recalled him when the situation was urgent.

古文：是日，始入建阳门，遥见官军，所领并弃仗走。劭腹心白直同诸逆先屯阊阖门外，并走还入殿。
现代文：这天才进入建阳门，远远看见世祖的军队，刘邵的军队纷纷丢下武器逃跑，刘邵的心腹白日值班同党先驻屯在阖闾门之外，都逃回殿中。
English: On this day, he entered the Jianyang Gate and saw the ancestor's army far away. Liu Shao's army threw down their weapons and ran away. Liu Shao's henchmen on duty during the day with the party first stationed outside the gate, all fled back to the palace.

古文：天祚与安都副谭金因而乘之，即得俱入。
现代文：程天祚和薛安都的副将谭金乘机跟进。得以进入。
English: Cheng Tianyao and Xue Andu's second-in-command, Tan Jin, took the opportunity to follow. They were able to enter.

古文：安都及军主武念、宋越等相继进，臧质大军从广莫门入，同会太极殿前，即斩太子左卫率王正见。
现代文：薛安都和军队长武念、宗越等相继而进，臧质大军从广莫门进，同会于太极殿前，当即杀了太子左卫帅王正见。
English: Xue Andu and the army chiefs Wu Nian, Zong Yue, etc. advanced one after another. The large army of soldiers entered from Guangmo Gate, gathered together in front of the Taiji Temple, and immediately killed the prince left guard Wang Zhengyi.

古文：建平、东海等七王并号哭俱出。
现代文：建平王、东海王等七王都哭喊而出。
English: The seven kings, including King Jianping and King Donghai, came out crying.

古文：劭穿西垣入武库井中，队副高禽执之。
现代文：刘邵凿穿西墙进入武器库的井中，副队长高禽捉住了他。
English: Liu Shao chiseled through the west wall into the well of the weapons depot. Vice-captain Gao Yu caught him.

古文：浚率左右数十人，与南平王铄于西明门出，俱共南奔。于越城遇江夏王义恭，浚下马曰： 南中郎今何所作？ 
现代文：刘浚率身边的几十人和南平王刘铄从西明门出来一起南逃，在越城碰到江夏王刘义恭，刘浚下马问： 南中郎现在干什么？ 
English: Liu Jun led dozens of people around him and Nanping King Liu Yao out of the Ximing Gate and fled south together. In Yuecheng, he met Jiangxia King Liu Yigong. Liu Jun dismounted and asked: What is Nan Zhong Lang doing now?

古文：义恭曰： 四海无统，百司固请，上已俯顺群心，君临万国。 
现代文：刘义恭答道： 四海无主，百官坚决请求皇上顺应人心，已君临天下做了皇帝。 
English: Liu Yikong replied, "The four seas have no ruler. Hundreds of officials have resolutely requested the emperor to follow the will of the people, and he has become the emperor of the world.

古文：又曰： 虎头来得无晚乎？ 
现代文：刘浚又问： 虎头今天来是不是晚了点？ 
English: Liu Jun also asked: Isn't Hu Tou a little late to come today?

古文：义恭曰： 殊当恨晚。 
现代文：刘义恭说： 很遗憾，太晚了。 
English: Liu Yigong said, "Unfortunately, it's too late.

古文：又曰： 故当不死耶？ 
现代文：刘浚又问： 能保命吗？ 
English: Liu Jun also asked: Can you save your life?

古文：义恭曰： 可诣行阙请罪。 
现代文：义恭答道： 你可以到皇上那儿请罪。 
English: Yoshitaka replied, "You can go to the emperor and ask for forgiveness."

古文：又曰： 未审犹能赐一职自效不？ 
现代文：刘浚又问： 不知能不能得到一官半职为皇上效命？ 
English: Liu Jun also asked: I don't know, can't I get a half-time post to serve the emperor?

古文：义恭又曰： 此未可量。 
现代文：刘义恭说： 这说不清楚。 
English: Liu Yigong said: It's not clear.

古文：勒与俱归，于道斩首。
现代文：叫刘浚和自己一起走，在路上便将刘浚斩首。
English: He told Liu Jun to walk with him and beheaded him on the way.

古文：浚字休明，将产之夕，有鵩鸟鸣于屋上。元嘉十三年，年八岁，封始兴王。
现代文：刘浚字休明，将出生的那天傍晚，有一只鹏鸟在屋顶上号叫，元嘉十三年，刘浚八岁，被封始兴王。
English: In the evening of the day when Liu Junzhi was born, there was a rooster crowing on the roof. Yuan Jia was 13 years old, Liu Junzhi was 8 years old, and he was named Prince Xingwang.

古文：十六年，都督湘州诸军事、后将军、湘州刺史。仍迁使持节、都督南豫豫司雍并五州诸军事、南豫州刺史，将军如故。十七年，为扬州刺史，将军如故，置佐领兵。
现代文：十六年，他被任为都督、湘州诸军事、后将军、湘州刺史，又迁任使持节，都督南豫、豫司、雍、并五州诸军事、南豫州刺史、将军还照旧，十七年，当扬州刺史，将军照旧，可以设置部兵。
English: In the 16th year, he was appointed as the governor, the military of Hunan Province, the next general, and the general of Hunan Province, and he was transferred to the post of envoy. In the 17th year, he was appointed as the governor of Nanyu, Yuzhi, Yong, and the military of the five provinces, the general of Nanyu Province, and the general of the general. In the 17th year, he was appointed as the governor of Yangzhou Province, and the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general.

古文：十九年，罢府。
现代文：十九年，免去州府职务。
English: In 1919, he was removed from his post at the prefectural government.

古文：二十一年，加散骑常侍，进号中军将军。
现代文：二十一年，加官散骑常侍，进号中军将军。
English: In the twenty-first year, he was promoted to officer, horseback rider, and regular attendant, and was given the title of general of the Chinese army.

古文：明年，浚上言： 所统吴兴郡，衿带重山，地多污泽，泉流归集，疏决迟壅，时雨未过，已至漂没。
现代文：明年，刘浚上书说： 我治下的吴兴郡，襟带群山，有很多沼泽地形，溪流汇集，疏导一迟便导致堵塞。时雨还未结束，便已水漂四方。
English: The next year, Liu Jun wrote: "Wuxing County under my administration is dotted with mountains, has a lot of swampy terrain, streams are converging, and dredging will lead to blockage. The rainy season has not yet ended, and the water has drifted in all directions.

古文：或方春辍耕，或开秋沈稼，田家徒苦，防遏无方。彼邦奥区，地沃民阜，一岁称稔，则穰被京城；时或水潦，由数郡为灾。
现代文：或者正当春季农民停止耕种，或者秋初淹没了庄稼，农夫因此非常困苦，无法防治，这一地区，土地肥沃，人民众多，一岁丰收则京城也因此受福；年岁发生水灾，那么几郡都会遭到灾难。
English: Either the farmers stopped cultivating in the spring, or the crops were flooded in the early autumn, so the farmers were very poor and could not be prevented. This area has fertile land and many people. If there is a good harvest in the first year, the capital city will also be blessed; if there is a flood in the second year, then several counties will suffer a disaster.

古文：顷年以来，俭多丰寡，虽赈赉周给，倾耗国储，公私之弊，方在未已。
现代文：近年以来，灾荒多，丰收少，虽然多次赈救。耗费国家储蓄，公私都已困敝不堪，几乎看不到丰收。
English: In recent years, there have been more droughts and fewer good harvests, despite repeated rescue efforts. National savings have been spent, and both the public and private sectors have been overwhelmed, with hardly any good harvests in sight.

古文：州民姚峤比通便宜，以为二吴、晋陵、义兴四郡，同注太湖，而松江沪渎壅噎不利，故处处涌溢，浸渍成灾。
现代文：本州百姓姚峤最近献计，为两吴郡、晋陵义兴四郡同时注入太湖，但松江的沟渠雍塞不通，所以处处水满，浸渍成灾。
English: The people of Honshu, Yao Wei, recently proposed a plan to simultaneously inject Taihu Lake into the two counties of Wu and the four counties of Jinling and Yixing. However, the ditch of the Songjiang River, Yongsai, is impassable, so it is full of water everywhere, resulting in impregnation.

古文：欲从武康珝溪开漕谷湖，直出海口，一百余里，穿渠浛必无阂滞。
现代文：想从武康的纟宁溪开通漕谷湖，直接通到海口，一百多里，挖通渠道必定不会堵塞。
English: If you want to open Caogul Lake from Wu Kang's Huning Creek, it will lead directly to Haikou, more than a hundred miles, and the excavation channel will not be blocked.

古文：自去践行量度，二十许载。
现代文：他亲自去步行测量。二十多年过去，十一年的大水。
English: He himself went to take measurements on foot. More than twenty years have passed, and eleven years of high water have passed.

古文：去十一年大水，已诣前刺史臣义康欲陈此计，即遣主簿盛昙泰随峤周行，互生疑难，议遂寝息。
现代文：已到过前刺史刘义康那里陈说这个计策。刘义康马上派主簿盛昙泰随同姚峤到处视察，因为二人意见不合，这个计划终于被放在一边。
English: He went to Liu Yikang, a former assassin, and told him about the scheme. Liu Yikang immediately sent his chief accountant Sheng Xingtai to accompany Yao Yao to inspect everywhere. Because the two disagreed, the plan was finally put aside.

古文：既事关大利，宜加研尽，登遣议曹从事史虞长孙与吴兴太守孔山士同共履行，准望地势，格评高下，其川源由历，莫不践校，图画形便，详加算考，如所较量，决谓可立。
现代文：然而这事关系到国家的利益，应该加以研究。最近派议曹从事史虞长孙和吴兴太守孔山士共同实行，测量地势，评定高低，其中河溪来源无不亲自察看，图画地形，细加考证，按照他们的计算，这事一定可以实行。
English: However, this matter is related to the interests of the country and should be studied. Recently, Cao Cao was sent to engage in the joint practice of the eldest grandson of Shiyu and the Wu Xingta governor of Kongshan, measuring the terrain, assessing the height, of which the source of rivers and streams must be personally inspected, drawing the terrain, and carefully adding the examination certificate. According to their calculations, this matter can certainly be implemented.

古文：昔郑国敌将，史起毕忠，一开其说，万世为利。
现代文：前段时间四郡同时遭患，不只吴郡，如果此渠得以沟通，几个地区都会蒙受益处。没有暂时的劳苦，便永无宁日。
English: Some time ago, four counties suffered at the same time, not only Wu County. If this canal can be communicated, several regions will benefit. Without temporary labor, there will never be a peaceful day.

古文：峤之所建，虽侧刍荛，如或非妄，庶几可立。 
现代文：然而开创事务很大，起点自然很难，今天想先开小渠，观察水流的势态，只需派乌程、武康、东迁三县的附近百姓，马上开工。如果不是胡言乱语，大概还是可以采用的。 
English: However, starting a business is a big deal, and the starting point is naturally difficult. Today, if you want to open a small canal first and observe the situation of the water flow, you only need to send the nearby people from Wucheng, Wukan and Dongqian counties to start construction immediately. If it is not gibberish, it can probably still be used.

古文：从之；功竟不立。
现代文：文帝采用了这建议，但是此工程最终没有完成。
English: Emperor Wen accepted the proposal, but the project was never completed.

古文：二十三年，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：二十三年，文帝给刘浚鼓吹一套。
English: In 233, Emperor Wen preached a sermon to Liu Jun.

古文：二十六年，出为使持节、都督南徐兗二州诸军事、征北将军、开府仪同三司、南徐兗二州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：二十六年，刘浚出外当使持节，都督南徐、兖二州诸军事、征北将军、开府仪同三司、南徐兖二州刺史，常侍的官还照旧。
English: In the 26th year, Liu Jian made a foreign envoy to hold the festival, the governor of Nanxu, the two states of the military, the general of the Northern Expedition, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, and the two states of the South Xuzhou ceremony, and the officials of the regular attendants were still the same.

古文：二十八年，遣浚率众城瓜步山，解南兗州。三十年，徙都督荆雍益梁宁南北秦七州诸军事、卫将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史、领护南蛮校尉，持节、常侍如故。
现代文：二十八年，派刘浚率兵在瓜步山筑城，免去其南兖州刺史的职务，三十年，刘浚又转任都督荆、雍、益、梁、宁、南、北、秦七州诸军事、卫将军，开府仪同三司、荆州刺史兼任护南蛮校尉、持节常侍还照旧。
English: In the 28th year, he sent Liu Jun and his soldiers to build a city in Guabushan, and relieved him of his duties as the governor of southern Luzhou. In the 30th year, Liu Jun was transferred to the governor of Jing, Yong, Yi, Liang, Ning, South, North, and Qin seven states as the military and guard general. He also served as the keeper of the imperial residences and the third secretary, and the governor of Jingzhou concurrently served as the captain of the guard of Nanban, and the attendant of the festival.

古文：浚少好文籍，姿质端妍。
现代文：刘浚少时便爱好读书，外表俊俏。
English: When Liu Jun was young, he was fond of reading and had a handsome appearance.

古文：母潘淑妃有盛宠，时六宫无主，潘专总内政。
现代文：他的母亲潘淑妃深得文帝宠爱。当时没有立皇后，潘淑妃实际管后宫杂事。
English: His mother, Pan Shu Fei, was deeply loved by Emperor Wen. At that time, there was no empress, and Pan Shu Fei was actually in charge of the harem chores.

古文：浚人才既美，母又至爱，太祖甚留心。
现代文：刘浚人才出众，母亲又当红，文帝颇留意于他。
English: Liu Jun's talent was outstanding, his mother was popular, and Emperor Wen paid close attention to him.

古文：建平王宏、侍中王僧绰、中书侍郎蔡兴宗并以文义往复。
现代文：建平王刘宏、侍中王僧绰、中书侍郎蔡兴宗都因为有文才而与他交往。
English: The King of Jianping, Liu Hong, the King of the Knights Templar, So Zuo, and the Master of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Cai Xingzong, all associated with him because of his literary talent.

古文：初，元皇后性忌，以潘氏见幸，遂以恚恨致崩，故劭深疾潘氏及浚。
现代文：当初元皇后生性妒嫉，因为潘氏被宠爱，以至因愤恨而死，所以刘邵非常憎恨潘氏和刘浚。
English: At first, the former empress was jealous, because Pan was favored, and even died of resentment, so Liu Shao hated Pan and Liu Jun very much.

古文：浚虑将来受祸，乃曲意事劭，劭与之遂善。
现代文：刘浚担心将来发生灾祸，于是屈意侍候刘邵。刘邵又与他交好。
English: Liu Jun was worried that a disaster would happen in the future, so he agreed to wait for Liu Shao. Liu Shao also befriended him.

古文：多有过失，屡为上所诘让，忧惧，乃与劭共为巫蛊。
现代文：刘浚犯过很多错误，多次被文帝责骂，所以他很忧虑害怕，于是共同制造巫蛊的勾当。
English: Liu Jun had made many mistakes and had been scolded many times by Emperor Wen, so he was very worried and afraid, so they worked together to create the witchcraft business.

古文：及出镇京口，听将扬州文武二千人自随，优游外籓，甚为得意。
现代文：到了出镇京口时，文帝允许他带扬州文武将吏二千人跟从自己，在外藩游玩宴乐，很是得意。
English: When he arrived at the outskirts of the town of Jingkou, Emperor Wen allowed him to take 2,000 Yangzhou literati generals to follow him and enjoy the banquet in the foreign domain. He was very proud of it.

古文：在外经年，又失南兗，于是复愿还朝。庐陵王绍以疾患解扬州，时江夏王义恭外镇，浚谓州任自然归己，而上以授南谯王义宣，意甚不悦。
现代文：在外年把时间，又因失去了南兖州刺史职务，于是又召回朝廷，庐陵王刘邵因病被免除扬州刺史职务，当时江夏王刘义恭在外藩任职，刘浚认为这职自然归自己无疑。
English: In his later years, Liu Shao, the King of Fuling, was exempted from the post of Yangzhou historian due to illness. At that time, Liu Yigong, the King of Jiangxia, served in a foreign domain. Liu Jun thought that this post naturally belonged to him.

古文：乃因员外散骑侍郎徐爰求镇江陵，又求助于尚书仆射徐湛之。而尚书令何尚之等咸谓浚太子次弟，不宜远出。
现代文：而文帝却把这职务授给南谯王刘义宣，所以刘浚非常不高兴，于是通过员外散骑侍郎徐爰向文帝请求镇守江陵，另外求助于尚书仆射徐湛之，而尚书令何尚之等都认为刘浚是太子次弟，不应该外出。
English: However, Emperor Wen gave this position to Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxun, so Liu Jun was very unhappy. Therefore, he requested Emperor Wen to guard the Gangneung Tombs through Xu Xi, a non-commissioned cavalry officer. In addition, he asked for help from Shang Shu's servant Xu Zhanzhi, while Shang Shu's commander He Shangzhi and others all believed that Liu Jun was the second younger brother of the prince and should not go out.

古文：上以上流之重，宜有至亲，故以授浚。
现代文：文帝因荆州是上游最重要的藩镇，应该授给至亲之人，所以让刘浚当荆州刺史。
English: Wen Di, because Jingzhou is the most important town in the upper reaches, should be awarded to the closest relatives, so let Liu Jun be the history of Jingzhou.

古文：时浚入朝，遣还京，为行留处分。至京数日而巫蛊事发，时二十九年七月也。
现代文：当时刘浚入朝，又派他到京口，让他呆一下再选用，刘浚到京口后巫蛊的事便暴露了，当时是二十九年七月。
English: At that time, Liu Jian entered the imperial court, and sent him to Beijing to stay for a while before selecting him. After Liu Jian arrived in Beijing, the matter of Wuxi was exposed. It was July 29th at that time.

古文：上惋叹弥日，谓潘淑妃曰： 太子图富贵，更是一理。虎头复如北，非复思虑所及。汝母子岂可一日无我耶！ 
现代文：文帝因此叹息了一整天，对潘淑妃说： 太子图谋富贵还说得过去，虎头也如此，确实是我未想到的，你们母子怎能一日没有我呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen therefore sighed for a whole day and said to Pan Shuhui: "The prince's scheme to get rich can be said to be over, and so can the tiger's head. It's true that I didn't think of it. How can your mother and son live without me for a day?

古文：浚小名虎头。
现代文：刘浚小名叫虎头。
English: Liu Jun's nickname is "tiger head."

古文：使左右硃法瑜密责让浚，辞甚哀切，并赐书曰： 鹦鹉事想汝已闻，汝亦何至迷惑乃尔。且沈怀远何人，其讵能为汝隐此耶？
现代文：文帝叫身边心腹朱法瑜暗中质问刘浚，话说得很悲切，还给刘浚带来一封信： 鹦鹉的事你大概已知道了，你怎么迷惑到这地步，况且沈怀远是什么东西，他怎么能为你保守秘密呢？
English: Emperor Wen called his close confidant Zhu Fayu to secretly question Liu Jun. The words were very sad, and he also brought a letter to Liu Jun: You probably already know about the parrot, how did you get confused to this point, and what is Shen Huaiyuan, how can he keep a secret for you?

古文：故使法瑜口宣，投笔惋慨。 
现代文：所以我叫朱法瑜口头告诉你，写信之际，我非常惋惜遗憾。 
English: That's why I asked Zhu Fayu to tell you verbally that I am very sorry and regret to write to you.

古文：浚惭惧，不知所答。
现代文：刘浚又是惭愧又是害怕，不知答话。
English: Both ashamed and afraid, Liu Jun didn't know what to say.

古文：浚还京，本暂去，上怒，不听归。
现代文：刘浚回到京口，本来是暂时离开，文帝此时大怒，不让他回到京城。
English: When Liu Jun returned to Beijing, he was supposed to leave temporarily, but Emperor Wen became furious and did not allow him to return to Beijing.

古文：其年十二月，中书侍郎蔡兴宗问建平王宏曰： 岁无复几，征北何当至？ 
现代文：当年十二月，中书侍郎蔡兴宗问建平王刘宏： 今年快完了，征北什么时候回来？ 
English: In December of that year, Cai Xingzong, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, asked Liu Hong, the king of Jianping: This year is almost over, when will you return from the Northern Expedition?

古文：宏叹息良久曰： 年内何必还。 
现代文：刘宏叹息好久说： 年内必回来。 
English: Liu Hong sighed for a long time and said: I will definitely come back within the year.

古文：在京以沈怀远为长流参军，每夕辄开便门为微行。上闻，杀其嬖人杨承先。
现代文：在京口刘浚以沈怀远为长流参军。每天便开小门到外边游玩，文帝听说这事，便杀掉刘浚最喜欢的人杨承先。
English: In Jingkou, Liu Jun joined the army with Shen Huaiyuan as the leader. Every day, he opened the small door to play outside. When Emperor Wen heard about this, he killed Liu Jun's favorite person, Yang Chengxian.

古文：明年正月，荆州事方行，二月，浚还朝。
现代文：明年正月，荆州的事正准备进行。二月，刘浚回朝廷。
English: In the first month of the next year, the Jingzhou matter was being prepared. In February, Liu Jun returned to the imperial court.

古文：十四日，临轩受拜。
现代文：十二日，到宫中接受任命。
English: On the 12th, he went to the Imperial Palace to accept the appointment.

古文：其日，藏严道育事发，明旦浚入谢，上容色非常。其夕，即加诘问，浚唯谢罪而已。
现代文：当天隐藏严道育的事被揭发。第二天早晨，刘浚上朝谢罪，文帝面色和平常不一样，当天夜晚便加以质问，刘浚只是说有罪而已。
English: On the same day, the hidden story of Yan Daoyu was exposed. The next morning, Liu Jun went to apologize. Emperor Wen's face was different from usual. That night, he was questioned. Liu Jun only said that he was guilty.

古文：潘淑妃抱持浚，泣涕谓曰： 汝始咒诅事发，犹冀刻己思愆，何意忽藏严道育耶？
现代文：潘淑妃搂着刘浚，哭着对他说： 你开始时的诅咒事暴露，还能改过自新，为什么又藏起严道育呢？
English: Pan Shufei hugged Liu Jun and said to him in tears, "The curse you had at the beginning has been exposed, and you can still reform. Why did you hide Yan Daoyu?

古文：上责汝深，至我叩头乞恩，意永不释。
现代文：皇帝不能宽容你，甚至我磕头请求原谅，他仍不原谅你。
English: The emperor can't tolerate you. Even if I bow my head and ask for forgiveness, he still won't forgive you.

古文：今日用活何为，可送药来，当先自取尽，不忍见汝祸败。 
现代文：今日活着干吗，你可以送药来，我先死了算了，不忍心看到你败亡。 
English: Why are you alive today? You can send medicine. Let me die first. I can't bear to see you fail.

古文：浚奋衣而去，曰： 天下事寻自当判，愿小宽忧煎，必不上累。 
现代文：刘浚奋身而出，大声道： 天下事马上会判明，希望母亲稍稍消愁，我一定不会连累你。 
English: Liu Jun bravely stepped forward and said loudly, "We'll soon find out what's going on. I hope my mother can take away some of her worries. I'm sure I won't bother you."

古文：劭入弑之旦，浚在西州，府舍人硃法瑜奔告浚曰： 台内叫唤，宫门皆闭，道上传太子反，未测祸变所至。 
现代文：刘邵到里面去杀文帝的第二天早晨，刘浚正在西州，他的府中舍人朱法瑜告刘浚说： 台内叫唤，宫门都关闭了。路上传说太子反了，不知道祸变的原因。 
English: On the morning of the second day after Liu Shao went inside to kill Emperor Wen, Liu Jun was in Xizhou. Zhu Fayu, his subordinate in the government, told Liu Jun that: The palace was calling, the palace gates were closed. On the road, it was rumored that the prince had turned against him and did not know the cause of the disaster.

古文：浚阳惊曰： 今当奈何？ 
现代文：刘浚假装惊异道： 现在该怎么办？ 
English: Liu Jun feigned surprise and said, "What should we do now?"

古文：法瑜劝入据石头。浚未得劭信，不知事之济不，骚扰未知所为。
现代文：朱法瑜劝他前去占据石头城，刘浚还未得到刘邵的信息，不知大事成了没有，六神无主，手足无措。
English: Zhu Fayu advised him to go ahead and occupy Stone Town. Liu Jun had not yet received Liu Shao's information. He did not know whether the big event had come to pass. The six gods had no master and were helpless.

古文：将军王庆曰： 今宫内有变，未知主上安危，预在臣子。当投袂赴难。
现代文：他的将军王庆说： 如今宫内发生了异常，不知皇上安宁不安宁，凡是臣子，应该投身赴难。
English: His general, Wang Qing, said: "Nowadays, something unusual has happened in the palace. I don't know if the emperor is at peace or not. All courtiers should devote themselves to the difficulties.

古文：凭城自守，非臣节也。 
现代文：据城自保，不符合做臣的道德。 
English: According to the self-protection of the city, it does not conform to the morality of being a minister.

古文：浚不听，乃从南门出，径向石头，文武从者千余人。
现代文：刘浚不听这一套，于是从南门出来，直到石头城，兵士也有一千多。
English: Liu Jun did not listen to this, so he came out of the south gate and went to Stone Town, where there were more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：时南平王铄守石头，兵士亦千余人。俄而劭遣张超之驰马召浚，浚屏人问状，即戎服乘马而去。
现代文：不久刘邵马上派张超之来召见刘浚。刘浚支走其他人细问情状，便马上穿上军装跃马而去。
English: Liu Shao immediately sent Zhang Chaorong to summon Liu Jun. Liu Shao sent the others to inquire about the situation, and immediately put on a military uniform and left.

古文：硃法瑜固止浚，浚不从。
现代文：朱法瑜坚决阻止刘浚，刘浚根本不听。
English: Zhu Fayu resolutely stopped Liu Jun, and Liu Jun did not listen at all.

古文：出至中门，王庆又谏曰： 太子反逆，天下怨愤。明公但当坚闭城门，坐食积粟，不过三日，凶党自离。公情事如此，今岂宜去。 
现代文：走到中门，王庆又进谏说： 太子谋反，天下憎恨，明公你只需要坚固城门，吃储藏的粮食不过三天，造反党羽自己会离散，形势如此，你怎么能离去呢？ 
English: When he reached the middle gate, Wang Qing entered the gate again and said: The prince is plotting a rebellion, which is hated by the whole world. My lord, all you need to do is to strengthen the gate, eat the stored grain for only three days, and the rebel party members will disperse themselves. The situation is like this, how can you leave?

古文：浚曰： 皇太子令，敢有复言者斩！ 
现代文：刘浚说： 皇太子的命令哪个敢再多说一句，便将他斩首。 
English: Liu Jun said, "Anyone who dares to say one more word against the order of the crown prince will be beheaded."

古文：既入，见劭，劝杀荀赤松等。
现代文：走到里面见了刘邵，劝刘邵杀了荀赤松等人。
English: He went inside and saw Liu Shao. He advised Liu Shao to kill Zou Akamatsu and others.

古文：劭谓浚曰： 潘淑妃遂为乱兵所害。 
现代文：刘邵对刘浚说： 潘淑妃不幸被乱兵杀死了。 
English: Liu Shao said to Liu Jun: Unfortunately, Pan Shufei was killed by the soldiers.

古文：浚曰： 此是下情由来所愿。 
现代文：刘浚说： 这是我心中一直希望的。 
English: Liu Jun said: This is what I have always hoped for in my heart.

古文：其悖逆乃如此。
现代文：他的悖逆不道便是如此。
English: Such was his disobedience and rebellion.

古文：及劭将败，劝劭入海，辇珍宝缯帛下船，与劭书曰： 船故未至，今晚期当于此下物令毕，愿速敕谢赐出船舰。
现代文：到了刘邵将失败时，刘浚劝刘邵到海上去，用辇车装载珍宝绸缎上船，又给刘邵写信说： 船还未到，今晚约定在此处的宝贝全部装走，希望你快点下书叫谢赐弄来船舰。
English: When Liu Shao was about to fail, Liu Jun advised Liu Shao to go to sea and load the precious silk cocoons onto the ship with a cart. He also wrote to Liu Shao, saying, "The ship has not yet arrived. Tonight, we have agreed to load all the treasures here. I hope you will write soon to thank me for bringing the ship."

古文：尼已入台，愿与之明日决也。臣犹谓车驾应出此，不尔无以镇物情。 
现代文：尼姑已到台城里去了，我和她明天告别，我仍然以为你的辇车应该到这里，不然不能震慑人心。 
English: The nun has gone to Taicheng, and I will say goodbye to her tomorrow. I still think that your tuk-tuk should come here, otherwise it will not be able to shock people.

古文：人情离散，故行计不果。浚书所云尼，即严道育也。
现代文：因为人心离散，所以刘浚的计划没有实行，刘浚信中的尼姑即是严道育。
English: Because the hearts of the people were scattered, Liu Jun's plan was not implemented. The nun in Liu Jun's letter was Yan Daoyu.

古文：及劭入井，高禽于井中牵出之。劭问禽曰： 天子何在？ 
现代文：到了刘邵跑到井下，高禽到井中把他牵出来，刘邵向高禽说： 天子在哪儿？ 
English: When Liu Shao arrived, he ran to the bottom of the well. Gao Jiao took him out of the well. Liu Shao said to Gao Jiao, "Where is Tian Zi?"

古文：禽曰： 至尊近在新亭。 
现代文：高禽说： 至尊就在不远的新亭。 
English: Gao Jiao said: The highest point is not far from Xinting.

古文：将劭至殿前，臧质见之恸哭，劭曰： 天地所不覆载，丈人何为见哭。 
现代文：带刘邵到宫殿前，臧质看见刘邵就哭了起来，刘邵说： 我的罪恶天地不容，大人何必哭泣。 
English: Taking Liu Shao to the front of the palace, Yan Qing saw Liu Shao and burst into tears. Liu Shao said, "My sins are intolerable. Why should an adult cry?

古文：质因辨其逆状，答曰： 先朝当见枉废，不能作狱中囚，问计于萧斌，斌见劝如此。 
现代文：臧质于是历数刘邵的罪恶，刘邵回答： 先帝时我被冤枉，将要被废除太子，我不可能当狱中囚犯，向萧斌讨教，萧斌便劝我如此。 
English: He then proceeded to enumerate Liu Shao's sins. Liu Shao replied: I was wronged when I was the former emperor, the crown prince is about to be abolished, I can't be a prisoner in prison, ask Xiao Bin for advice, Xiao Bin advised me to do so.

古文：又语质曰： 可得为启，乞远徙不？ 
现代文：又对臧质说： 可以写上奏，我能充军远方吗？ 
English: And he said unto him, Is it lawful for me to write, or to make a record? and I, should I go far away?

古文：质答曰： 主上近在航南，自当有处分。 
现代文：臧质回答说： 皇上就在航桥南岸，他自有处分。 
English: The eunuch replied, "The emperor is on the south bank of the bridge, he can do what he wants."

古文：缚劭于马上，防送军门。
现代文：捆刘邵到马上，送到军门。
English: Tie up Liu Shao immediately and send him to the military gate.

古文：既至牙下，据鞍顾望，太尉江夏王义恭与诸王皆共临视之。
现代文：到了牙帐下面，刘邵抬头仰望。太尉江夏王刘义恭和亲王们都一同俯视刘邵的到来。
English: At the bottom of the ledge, Liu Shao looked up. Lieutenant Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, and the princes all looked down at Liu Shao's arrival.

古文：义恭诘劭曰： 我背逆归顺，有何大罪，顿杀我家十二兒？ 
现代文：刘义恭质问刘邵说： 我弃逆从顺，有什么大罪，你突然把我的十二个儿子都杀了？ 
English: Liu Yigong questioned Liu Shao and said, "I renounced rebellion and followed Shun. What is the great sin that you suddenly killed my twelve sons?"

古文：劭答曰： 杀诸弟，此事负阿父。 
现代文：刘邵回答说： 杀弟弟们，这事我对不起叔父。 
English: Liu Shao replied, "Kill my brothers, I'm sorry about this, uncle.

古文：江湛妻庾氏乘车骂之，庞秀之亦加诮让，劭厉声曰： 汝辈复何烦尔！ 
现代文：江湛的妻子庾氏乘坐马车怒骂刘邵，庞秀之也对刘邵加以斥责，刘邵厉声喝道： 你们为什么还要如此烦人？ 
English: Jiang Zhan's wife, Ms. Zou, riding in a carriage, scolded Liu Shao. Pang Xiu Zhi also rebuked Liu Shao. Liu Shao snapped, "Why do you have to be so annoying?

古文：先杀其四子，谓南平王铄曰： 此何有哉。 
现代文：刽子手先杀刘邵的四个儿子。刘邵对南平王刘铄说： 这有什么呢？ 
English: The executioner first killed Liu Shao's four sons. Liu Shao said to Nanping King Liu Ye: "What is this?

古文：乃斩劭于牙下。临刑叹曰： 不图宗室一至于此。 劭、浚及劭四子伟之、迪之、彬之、其一未有名；浚三子长文、长仁、长道，并枭首大航，暴尸于市。
现代文：刘邵、刘浚和刘邵的四个儿子刘伟之、刘迪之、刘彬之和其中一个没有名字的，刘浚的三个儿子长文、长仁、长道都在大航被斩首。把他们的尸体丢在街市之中。
English: Liu Shao, Liu Jun and Liu Shao's four sons Liu Wei Zhi, Liu Di Zhi, Liu Bin Zhi and one of them without a name, Liu Jun's three sons Chang Wen, Chang Ren and Chang Dao were all beheaded in Dahang and their bodies were thrown into the streets.

古文：劭妻殷氏赐死于廷尉，临死，谓狱丞江恪曰： 汝家骨肉相残害，何以枉杀天下无罪人。 
现代文：刘邵的妻子殷氏被赐死在监狱之中。殷氏临死时对狱吏江恪说： 你们家骨肉相残，为什么还要枉杀天下无罪的人。 
English: Liu Shao's wife, Yin, was sentenced to death in prison. As she was about to die, Yin said to the prison warden, Jiang Ke: Your family members hate each other, why do you want to kill innocent people all over the world?

古文：恪曰： 受拜皇后，非罪而何？ 
现代文：江恪说： 你被拜为皇后，不是罪是什么？ 
English: Jiang Ke said: You are worshipped as the empress, but what is your crime?

古文：殷氏曰： 此权时尔，当以鹦鹉为后也。 
现代文：殷氏说道： 这不过是暂时的，他将以鹦鹉作皇后。 
English: Mr Yin said: 'It's only temporary, he's going to make the parrot his queen.

古文：浚妻褚氏，丹阳尹湛之女，湛之南奔之始，即见离绝，故免于诛。
现代文：刘浚的妻子褚氏，是丹阳尹褚湛之的女儿，褚湛之南逃开始时，便被刘浚抛弃，所以免于一死。
English: Liu Jun's wife, Ms. Zou, was the daughter of Danyang Yin Yizhanzhi. At the beginning of Yizhanzhi's escape to the south, she was abandoned by Liu Jun, so she was spared from death.

古文：其余子女妾媵，并于狱赐死。
现代文：其他的刘浚的子女、媵妾，都在监狱赐死。
English: All of Liu Jun's other children and concubines died in prison.

古文：投劭、浚尸首于江，其余同逆，及王罗汉等，皆伏诛。
现代文：将刘邵、刘浚的尸体扔到江中，其余的同伴反党人物和王罗汉等被杀死。
English: The bodies of Liu Shao and Liu Jun were thrown into the river, and the rest of their fellow anti-Party figures, including Wang Luohan, were killed.

古文：张超之闻兵入，遂走至合殿故基，正于御床之所，为乱兵所杀。割肠刳心，脔剖其肉，诸将生啖之，焚其头骨。
现代文：张超之听说士兵进去，叛逃到合殿旧址，正在皇帝龙床边上，便被乱兵杀死，大肠割去，心被掏出，一块一块剜他的肉，将士们把他生吃了。他的头骨被烧掉。
English: Zhang Chaozhi heard that soldiers had entered and defected to the former site of the Great Hall of the People. He was on the edge of the emperor's dragon bed when he was killed by the soldiers. His large intestine was cut off, his heart was pulled out, and his flesh was eaten piece by piece. The soldiers ate him alive. His skull was burned.

古文：当时不见传国玺，问劭，云： 在严道育处。 
现代文：当时不见了传国玺，问刘邵，他答说： 在严道育那里。 
English: At that time, Chuan Guozhang was missing. When he asked Liu Shao, he replied: "He is at Yan Daoyu's place."

古文：就取得之。
现代文：马上去取来了。
English: I immediately went to get it.

古文：道育、鹦鹉并都街鞭杀，于石头四望山下焚其尸，扬灰于江。
现代文：严道育、鹦鹉在街上鞭死。在石头城四望山下焚烧她们的尸体，把骨灰撒到长江去。
English: Yan Daoyu and Parrot were flogged to death in the street, and their bodies were burned at the foot of Shiwang Mountain in Stone Town, and their ashes were scattered into the Yangtze River.

古文：毁劭东宫所住斋，污潴其处。
现代文：又毁掉东宫内刘邵住的小房子，把那里弄得脏脏的。
English: They also destroyed the small house where Liu Shao lived in Donggong and made it dirty.

古文：封高禽新阳县男，食邑三百户。追赠潘淑妃长宁园夫人，置守冢。
现代文：封高禽新阳县男，食邑三百户，追认潘淑妃长宁圆夫人，设置一些守护之家。
English: Fong Gao Jiao, the leading man of Xinyang County, with three hundred households in food villages, recognized Pan Shu Fei, the wife of Chang Ningyuan, and set up some guardian homes.

古文：伪司隶校尉殷冲，丹阳尹尹弘，并赐死。
现代文：伪司隶校尉殷冲、丹阳尹尹弘都被赐死。
English: Fake officers Lieutenant Yin Chong and Danyang Yin Yinhong were both sentenced to death.

古文：冲为劭草立符文，又妃叔父也。
现代文：殷冲为刘邵草立檄文，又是殷妃的叔父。
English: Yin Chong is the uncle of Liu Shao Cao, who is also the uncle of Yin Fei.

古文：弘二月二十一日平旦入直，至西掖门，闻宫中有变，率城内御兵至阁道下。
现代文：尹弘二月二十一日早晨进去值班，到西掖门，听说宫中有变，便率城内卫兵到阁楼下。
English: On the morning of February 21st, Yin Hong went on duty, arrived at the West Gate, heard that there was a change in the palace, and led the guards in the city to the attic.

古文：及闻劭入，惶怖通启，求受处分，又为劭简配兵士，尽其心力。
现代文：到听说刘邵进来，惶恐地启告，请求分配他任务，又为刘邵安配兵士，尽力服务。
English: When he heard that Liu Shao had come in, he was alarmed and asked to be assigned a task. He also served Liu Shaoan as a soldier and did his best.

古文：弘，天水冀人，司州刺史冲弟也。为太祖所委任。
现代文：尹弘是天水冀城人，是司州刺史尹冲的弟弟，被文帝所委托。
English: Yin Hong is a native of Tianshui Jicheng, the younger brother of Sizhou poet Yin Chong, and was commissioned by Emperor Wen.

古文：元嘉中，历太子左右卫率、左右卫将军，囗人官爵高下，皆以委之。
现代文：元嘉中历官太子左右卫率、左右卫将军，当时人的大小官爵，刘邵都委托给他。
English: In the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Shao was entrusted with the leadership of the left and right guards, the general of the left and right guards, and the great and small officials at that time.

