古文：南梁之难，韩氏请救于齐。
现代文：魏国进攻韩国的南梁，韩国向齐国求救。
English: Wei attacked South Korea's Nanliang, and South Korea appealed to Qi for help.

古文：田侯召大臣而谋曰： 早救之，孰与晚救之便? 
现代文：齐威王召集大臣谋划说： 早救援韩国，与晚救援韩国，哪种作法对我们有利？ 
English: King Zi Wei called his ministers together to plan and said: to rescue South Korea early or to rescue South Korea late, which way is better for us?

古文：张丐对曰： 晚救之，韩且折而入于魏，不如早救之。 
现代文：张丐回答说， 如果晚救韩国，韩国必将会投靠魏国，不如及早救援他们。 
English: Zhang Gai replied that if it was too late to save South Korea, South Korea would certainly come to the aid of Wei. It would be better to rescue them as soon as possible.

古文：田臣思曰： 不可。
现代文：田臣思说： 不行。
English: Taomi thought for a moment and said, "No.

古文：夫韩、魏之兵未弊，而我救之，我代韩而受魏之兵，顾反听命于韩也。
现代文：韩、魏两国的军队还没打得精疲力尽，我们出兵救援韩国，我们就会代替韩国承受魏军的进攻，反而会使我们受韩国的控制。
English: The armies of Han and Wei have not yet been exhausted by the fighting. If we send troops to rescue South Korea, we will take the place of South Korea to withstand the attack of the Wei army, but we will be controlled by South Korea.

古文：且夫魏有破韩之志，韩见且亡，必东诉于齐。
现代文：再说魏国有击破韩国之心，韩国看见自己将要灭亡，必定跑到东边来向齐国求救。
English: Moreover, the state of Wei broke the heart of Korea, and Korea, seeing that it was about to perish, must have run to the east to seek help from the state of Qi.

古文：我因阴结韩之亲，而晚承魏之弊，则国可重，利可得，名可尊矣。 
现代文：我们趁机暗中与韩国结盟，晚些时候迎战魏国的疲弊军队，齐国就可以举足轻重，利益可以得到手，名声可以尊显了。 齐威王说： 好。 
English: We took advantage of the opportunity to secretly ally with South Korea, and later faced the exhausted army of Wei, so that Qi could play an important role, profits could be obtained, and reputation could be honored.

古文：田侯曰： 善。 乃阴告韩使者而遣之。
现代文：于是就秘密和韩国使臣结为友好，让他返国。
English: So he secretly befriended the South Korean envoy and let him return to his country.

古文：韩自以专有齐国，五战五不胜，东诉于齐，齐因起兵击魏，大破之马陵。
现代文：韩国自己认为有齐国的援助，和魏国五战而五不胜，就求诉于齐国。齐国于是派兵攻打魏国，在马陵把魏军打得大败。
English: South Korea itself believed that it had the assistance of Qi, and after five battles with Wei and five defeats, it appealed to Qi. Qi then sent troops to attack Wei and defeated the Wei army in Maling.

古文：魏破韩弱，韩、魏之君因田婴北面而朝田侯。
现代文：魏军被打败，韩国被削弱，韩国、魏国的国君只好通过田婴共同面向北朝拜齐威王。
English: The Wei army was defeated, South Korea was weakened, and the sovereigns of South Korea and Wei had no choice but to face the Northern Dynasty through Tianying to worship King Qiwei.

