古文：立国
现代文：立国
English: Founding of the country

古文：凡立国都，非于大山之下，必于广川之上；高毋近旱，而水用足；下毋近水，而沟防省；因天材，就地利，故城郭不必中规矩，道路不必中准绳。
现代文：凡是营建都城，不把它建立在大山之下，也必须建在大河的附近。高不可近于干旱，以保证水用的充足；低不可近于水潦，以节省沟堤的修筑。要依靠天然资源，要凭借地势之利。所以，城郭的构筑，不必拘泥于合乎方圆的规矩；道路的铺设，也不必拘泥于平直的准绳。
English: If a capital city is to be built, it must be built near a large river, not under a large mountain. The height should not be close to the drought to ensure sufficient water use; the height should not be close to the floodplain to save the construction of the dike. It should rely on natural resources and take advantage of the terrain. Therefore, the construction of the castle does not have to adhere to the rules of the square; the paving of the road does not have to adhere to the straight line.

古文：大数
现代文：大数
English: Large numbers of

古文：五者其理可知也，为之有道。
现代文：能做到 无为而治 的，就可以成就帝业。
English: If you can do nothing but rule, you can achieve imperial success.

古文：地者政之本也，是故地可以正政也，地不平均和调，则政不可正也；政不正，则事不可理也。
现代文：为政而不为政务所累，显得无可操劳的，就可以成就王业。为政而谦虚不自贵的，就可以成就霸业。不自以为贵是作君主的准则，贵而不超越应守的规范，是做臣子的准则。
English: For politics, but not for the burden of government affairs, if you appear helpless, you can achieve a kingly career. For politics, if you are modest and not arrogant, you can achieve a domineering career. Not self-important is the criterion for being a monarch, and being expensive but not exceeding the norms that should be observed is the criterion for being a courtier.

古文：阴阳
现代文：阴阳
English: Yin and Yang

古文：春秋冬夏，阴阳之推移也。时之短长，阴阳之利用也；日夜之易，阴阳之化也；然则阴阳正矣，虽不正，有余不可损，不足不可益也。
现代文：土地是政事的根本，朝廷是仪法的体现，市场是商品供求的状况的标志，黄金是计量财用的工具，一个诸侯国拥有兵车千辆，是军备的制度。这五个方面，其道理诗可以理解的，实行起来也是有一定规律的。
English: Land is the foundation of politics, the imperial court is the embodiment of ritual, the market is the symbol of the supply and demand of commodities, gold is a tool for measuring financial use, and a vassal state has a thousand chariots, which is the system of armaments. These five aspects, the reason for which is understandable, are also implemented with a certain regularity.

古文：天地莫之能损益也。
现代文：土地是政事的根本。
English: Land is the foundation of politics.

古文：然则可以正政者地也。
现代文：所以，土地可以调整政事。
English: Therefore, the land can adjust the political affairs.

古文：故不可不正也，正地者，其实必正，长亦正，短亦正；小亦正，大亦正；长短大小尽正。
现代文：整顿土地，其实际可耕的数字，一定要进行核正。长的要核正，短的要核正，大的要核正，小的要核正，长短大小都要核正准确。
English: In order to rectify the land, its actual arable figures must be verified. The long should be verified, the short should be verified, the large should be verified, the small should be verified, and the length and size should be verified accurately.

古文：正不正，则官不理；官不理，则事不治；事不治，则货不多；是故何以知货之多也？
现代文：土地不核正准确，官府就无法治理；官府无法治理，农事就办不好；农事办不好物资就不会丰富。所以，怎样知道物资丰富呢？
English: If the land is not verified accurately, the government will not be able to manage it; if the government is not able to manage it, the agricultural affairs will not be well managed; if the agricultural affairs are not well managed, the materials will not be abundant. Therefore, how do you know that the materials are abundant?

古文：曰：事治。
现代文：回答是，农事搞得好。
English: The answer is that farming is going well.

古文：何以知事之治也？
现代文：怎样看出农事搞得好呢？
English: How can you tell if farming is going well?

古文：曰：货多。
现代文：回答是物资丰富。
English: The answer is material abundance.

古文：货多事治，则所求于天下者寡矣，为之有道。
现代文：一旦物资丰富，农事搞好，就可以少求助于他人了。掌握起来，也是有规律的。
English: Once the materials are abundant and the agricultural work is done well, it is possible to have less recourse to others. It is also regular to master.

古文：爵位
现代文：爵位
English: Titles of nobility

古文：朝者，义之理也。
现代文：朝廷是仪法的体现。
English: The imperial court is the embodiment of ceremony.

古文：是故爵位正而民不怨；民不怨，则不乱，然后义可理。
现代文：所以，朝廷爵位安排正确，人民才不会怨恨；人民没有怨恨，就不会作乱；然后，仪法才可以体现。
English: Therefore, if the knighthood of the imperial court is arranged correctly, the people will not resent it; if the people do not resent it, they will not make trouble; then, the ceremony and law can be reflected.

古文：理不正，则不可以治；而不可不理也，故一国之人，不可以皆贵；皆贵，则事不成而国不利也。
现代文：如果安排不公正，就不可能体现。看来，一国之人不可能都尊贵，都尊贵了，事情不好办，对国家也不利。
English: If the arrangement is not fair, it is impossible to manifest. It seems that the people of a country cannot all be honorable, they are all honorable, things are not easy to do, and it is not good for the country.

古文：使无贵者，则民不能自理也，是故辨于爵列之尊卑，则知先后之序，贵贱之义矣，为之有道。
现代文：正因为事情不好办对国家不利，若没有少数人尊贵，人们是无法管理自己的。所以，分清爵位排列的高低，人们才知道先后的次序和贵贱的仪法。管理起来也是有规可循的。
English: It is precisely because things are not well managed that they are not good for the country. If there are not a few people who are distinguished, people cannot manage themselves. Therefore, people only know the order of precedence and the ceremonies of nobility by distinguishing the ranks of nobility. There are also rules to follow when managing.

古文：务市事
现代文：务市事
English: Municipal Affairs

古文：市者，货之准也。是故百货贱，则百利不得。百利不得，则百事治。
现代文：这就是说，事情总是产生于谋虑，成功于努力，失败于骄傲轻心。
English: That is to say, things always arise from deliberation, success from effort, failure from pride and frivolity.

古文：百事治，则百用节矣；是故事者生于虑，成于务，失于傲。不虑则不生，不务则不成，不傲则不失，故曰：市者可以知治乱，可以知多寡，而不能为多寡，为之有道。
现代文：不谋虑则不能产生，不努力则不能成功，不骄傲轻心则不致失败；所以说通过市场，可以通晓社会的治乱，可以通晓物资的多寡，只是不能通过它创造物资的多寡而已。掌握起来，也是有规律的。
English: Without forethought, there can be no production; without effort, there can be no success; without pride and frivolity, there can be no failure. Therefore, through the market, it is possible to understand the management of social turmoil, and to understand the quantity of materials, but it is not possible to create the quantity of materials through it. There are also rules for mastering it.

古文：黄金
现代文：黄金
English: Gold from

古文：黄金者，用之量也。
现代文：黄金是计量财用的工具。
English: Gold is a tool for measuring money.

古文：辨于黄金之理，则知侈俭。
现代文：懂得黄金的道理，就懂得什么是奢侈和俭省。
English: To understand the principle of gold is to understand luxury and thrift.

古文：知侈俭，则百用节矣，故俭则伤事，侈则伤货；俭则金贱，金贱则事不成，故伤事。
现代文：懂得奢侈与俭省，各项用度都能得到适度的满足。国家用度过少，对举办事业不利；过多，对商品资源不利。因为，国用过少，则金价低了，金价低则各项事业不好办，故对事业不利。
English: Know luxury and frugality, and the various uses can be moderately satisfied. If the state uses too little, it will be unfavorable to the business; if it uses too much, it will be unfavorable to the commodity resources. Because if the state uses too little, the price of gold will be low, and if the price of gold is low, it will be unfavorable to the business.

古文：侈则金贵，金贵则货贱，故伤货。
现代文：国用过多则金价高，金价高则商品太贱，所以对资源不利。
English: Too much state use means high gold prices, and high gold prices mean that commodities are too cheap, which is not good for resources.

古文：货尽而后知不足，是不知量也，事已，而后知货之有余，是不知节也，不知量，不知节不可，为之有道。
现代文：等到商品消耗光，才知道不足，这是不懂得适量的原故；等到事业完成后，才发觉商品过剩，这是不懂得合度的原故。不懂得适量，不知道适度都不行。而要懂得它们，也是有规律的。
English: Wait until the goods are consumed to know the shortage, which is the reason for not knowing the right amount; wait until the business is completed to find the surplus of goods, which is the reason for not knowing the fit. Do not know the right amount, do not know the right amount. And there are rules to understand them.

古文：诸侯之地千乘之国
现代文：诸侯之地千乘之国
English: The land of princes, the country of a thousand horsemen

古文：诸侯之地，千乘之国者，器之制也。
现代文：天下各地，驾驭牛马，其负担轻重，都有一定的限度。
English: In all parts of the world, there is a certain limit to how heavy the burden of driving cattle and horses can be.

古文：是知诸侯之地千乘之国者，所以知地之小大也，所以知任之轻重也；重而后损之，是不知任也；轻而后益之，是不知器也。
现代文：有一宿的实际行程，可行的里程远近，也就心中有数了。因此，知道一个诸候国可以出兵车千辆这个标准，就可以算出军备规模的大小，也可以算出负担的轻重。征收重了以后再来削减，那是不了解负担能力；征收轻了以后再来增加，那是不了解军备规模。
English: Therefore, knowing the standard that a country can dispatch a thousand military vehicles, it is possible to calculate the size of the scale of armaments, and also the weight of the burden. If the levy is heavy and then reduced, it is not to understand the affordability; if the levy is light and then increased, it is not to understand the scale of armaments.

古文：不知任不知器不可，为之有道。
现代文：不了解负担能力和军备规模都不行。而要掌握它们，也是有规律的。
English: You can't do it without understanding the affordability and scale of armaments, and there are rules for mastering them.

古文：士农工商
现代文：士农工商
English: Agriculture, Industry and Commerce

古文：地之不可食者，山之无木者，百而当一。涸泽，百而当一。
现代文：对于不生五谷的土地和没有树木的荒山，百亩折合成一亩可耕地。干枯的沼泽，也是百而当一。
English: For barren land and barren mountains without trees, one hundred mu can be converted into one mu of arable land. Dry swamps are also one hundred and one.

古文：地之无草木者，百而当一。
现代文：不生草木的土地，百而当一。
English: A barren land is the best of all.

古文：樊棘杂处，民不得入焉，百而当一。
现代文：荆棘丛杂无法进去人的土地，也是百而当一。
English: The land of thorns and thistles, where no one can enter, is also the most dangerous.

古文：薮，镰缠得入焉，九而当一。
现代文：芦荡草泽，但可以带上镰绳进去采伐的，九亩折合一亩。
English: Nine mu is equivalent to one mu of reed grass, but it can be harvested with a bridle.

古文：蔓山，其木可以为材，可以为轴，斤斧得入焉，九而当一。
现代文：丘陵，其树木可以当材料，可以做车轴，而且人们带上刀斧可以进去采伐的，也是九而当一。
English: Hills, whose trees can be used as materials, can be used as axles, and people can go in with knives and axes to cut them, are also very important.

古文：汎山，其木可以为棺，可以为车，斤斧得入焉，十而当一。
现代文：高山，其树木可以做棺，可以做车，而且人们带上刀斧可以进得去的，十亩折成一亩。
English: Takayama, whose trees can be used to make coffins, can be used to make cars, and people can enter with knives and axes, ten mu are folded into one mu.

古文：流水，网罟得入焉，五而当一。
现代文：水流，可以下网捕鱼的，五亩折成一亩。
English: Five mu of water, which can be fished with a net, is divided into one mu.

古文：林，其木可以为棺，可以为车，斤斧得入焉，五而当一。
现代文：森林，其树木可以做棺，可以做车，而且刀斧能进得去的，也是五而当一。
English: The forest, whose trees can make coffins, can make cars, and knives and axes can get in, is also one of the five.

古文：泽，网罟得入焉，五而当一。
现代文：湖泽，可以下网捕鱼的，也是五亩折成一亩。
English: The lake, which can be fished, is also five mu folded into one mu.

古文：命之曰地均，以实数。
现代文：以上就叫作：以可耕面积的实数对土地进行折算。
English: The above is called: convert the land to the real number of arable area.

古文：方六里，命之曰暴。五暴命之曰部。五部命之曰聚。
现代文：六里见方的区域命名为暴，五暴命名为部，五部命名为聚。
English: The six-mile-square area was named "bully," "five-bully" was named "department," and "five-department" was named "conglomerate."

古文：聚者有市，无市则民乏。
现代文：聚要有集市，没有集市则人们缺乏日用品。
English: If there is a gathering, there must be a bazaar; if there is no bazaar, people lack daily necessities.

古文：五聚命之曰某乡，四乡命之曰方，官制也。
现代文：五聚叫作某乡，四乡叫作方。这是行政组织制度。
English: The five townships are called a township, and the four townships are called townships. This is the administrative organization system.

古文：官成而立邑。
现代文：行政组织一经建立，就来建立地方居民组织。
English: Once the administrative organization is established, the local residents' organization will be established.

古文：五家而伍，十家而连，五连而暴。五暴而长，命之曰某乡。
现代文：把五家编成一伍，十家编成一连，五连编成一暴，五暴编成一长，称它作某乡。
English: The five families are grouped into a team, the ten families are grouped into a company, the five companies are grouped into a gang, and the five gangs are grouped into a team, and it is called a certain township.

古文：四乡命之曰都，邑制也，邑成而制事。
现代文：四乡命名为都。这是居民组织制度。居民组织一经建立，就来组织生产。
English: Shixiang was named the capital. This is the resident organization system. Once the resident organization is established, it will organize production.

古文：四聚为一离，五离为一制，五制为一田，二田为一夫，三夫为一家，事制也。
现代文：四聚算作一离，五离算作一制，五制算作一田，二田算作一夫，三夫算作一家。
English: Four gatherings are counted as one separation, five separations are counted as one system, five systems are counted as one field, two fields are counted as one husband, and three husbands are counted as one family.

古文：事成而制器，方六里，为一乘之地也。
现代文：这是生产组织的制度。生产组织一经建立。就来组织军备。六里见方的土地出兵车一乘。
English: This is the system of production organization. As soon as the production organization is established, it will organize armaments. A six-mile-square land dispatch vehicle will start.

古文：一乘者，四马也。一马其甲七，其蔽五。
现代文：一乘四马，一马配备甲士七人，盾手五人。
English: One four-horse chariot, one horse equipped with seven archers, five shield bearers.

古文：四乘，其甲二十有八，其蔽二十。
现代文：一乘则共有甲士二十八，盾手二十。
English: A total of 28 cavalrymen and 20 shield bearers were assigned to the 1st cavalry.

古文：白徒三十人奉车两，器制也。
现代文：还配备民夫三十人，负责兵车的后勤。
English: It is also staffed with 30 civilian employees, who are responsible for the logistics of the military vehicles.

古文：方六里，一乘之地也。方一里，九夫之田也。
现代文：这就是军备的制度。六里见方的土地出一辆兵车，每一平方里是九个农夫的田地。
English: This is the system of armaments: a six-mile square piece of land produces one military vehicle, and every square mile is nine farmers' fields.

古文：黄金一镒，百乘一宿之尽也，无金则用其绢。季绢三十三制当一镒，无绢则用其布。
现代文：一锐黄金是供应百辆兵车一宿的费用。没有黄金可以用丝绢代替，细绢三十三制折为黄金一镒。
English: One piece of gold is the cost of supplying one hundred chariots for one night. If there is no gold, it can be replaced with silk brocade. Thirty-three types of fine brocade can be folded into one piece of gold.

古文：经暴布百两当一镒，一镒之金，食百乘之一宿，则所市之地，六灸一斗，命之曰中，岁有市无市，则民不乏矣。
现代文：没有绢可以用布，一百匹细白布折为黄金一镒，一镒的黄金即供百乘兵车食用一宿的费用。这样，征收布匹的地方，合六步土地征粮一斗，这是中等年成的税率。要有集市，没有集市则民用缺乏。
English: No straw can be used for cloth, one hundred horses of fine white cloth can be converted into one pile of gold, and one pile of gold is the cost of one night's food for a hundred chariots. In this way, the place where cloth is collected is equal to six steps of land and one bucket of grain, which is the tax rate for the middle years. There must be a market, and if there is no market, there is a lack of civilian use.

古文：方六里，名之曰社，有邑焉，名之曰央，亦关市之赋。
现代文：六里见方的地域，称之为 社 ；有居民的邑，名之为 央 。也要征收关税和市场税。
English: A six-mile-square area is called a "society," and a township with residents is called "central." Tariffs and market taxes are also levied.

古文：黄金百镒为一箧，其货一谷笼为十箧。其商茍在市者三十人。其正月十二月，黄金一镒，命之曰正。
现代文：按黄金百镒为一筐来算，货物一谷笼算作十筐；集市的商人如果达到三十人，从正月到十二月年收黄金一镒，这就叫作征税了。
English: If a hundredweight of gold is counted as one basket, and a basket of goods is counted as ten baskets, and if there are thirty merchants in the bazaar, and they collect one basket of gold from the first month of the year to the end of the year, this is called taxation.

古文：分春曰书比，立夏曰月程，秋曰大稽。与民数得亡。
现代文：每年的春分公布税率；立夏则按月核实，秋天则统计总的征税情况；还要统计商民人数的增减。
English: The tax rate is announced on the spring equinox every year; the beginning of summer is verified on a monthly basis, and the total taxation situation is counted in autumn; it is also necessary to count the increase and decrease in the number of business people.

古文：三岁修封，五岁修界。十岁更制，经正也。
现代文：三年修整一次田埂，五年修整一次田界，十年进行一次重新划定。
English: The rice paddies are repaired once every three years, the rice fields are repaired once every five years, and the boundaries are redrawn once every ten years.

古文：十仞见水不大潦，五尺见水不大旱，十一仞见水轻征，十分去二三，二则去三四，四则去四，五则去半，比之于山。
现代文：这些都应成为常例。一般一切深见水的土地，不会发生大潦；五尺深见水的土地，不会发生大旱。一仍见水的土地，要减轻租税十分之一，二仞则减收十分之二，三仍减十分之三，四仍减十分之四，五仍则减半，相当于山地。
English: In general, all land that is deep in water will not have large floods; land that is five feet deep in water will not have major droughts. A land that still sees water should reduce taxes by one-tenth, two-tenths, three-tenths, four-tenths, and five-tenths, which is equivalent to mountainous areas.

古文：五尺见水，十分去一，四则去三，三则去二，二则去一，三尺而见水，比之于泽。
现代文：至于五尺见水的土地，也减税十分之一；四尺的减十分之二，三尺的减十分之三，二尺的减十分之四；而一尺见水的土地，就相当于沼泽了。
English: As for the land with five feet of water, the tax is also reduced by one-tenth; four feet by two-tenths, three feet by three-tenths, two feet by four-tenths; and one foot of water is equivalent to a swamp.

古文：距国门以外，穷四竟之内，丈夫二犁，童五尺一犁，以为三日之功。
现代文：从都城城门以外，到全国所有地区，成年男子按两犁的定数，未成年男子按一犁定数，都要为君主服役三天。
English: From outside the gates of the capital to all regions of the country, adult men must serve the monarch for three days at a fixed rate of two days and minor men at a fixed rate of one day.

古文：正月，令农始作，服于公田农耕，及雪释，耕始焉，芸卒焉。
现代文：正月就命令农民开始耕作，到公田服役；从雪化春耕时起，直到夏锄为止。
English: In the first month, farmers were ordered to start farming and serve in public fields; from the time of spring plowing when the snow melted until the end of summer.

古文：士闻见博，学意察，而不为君臣者，与功而不与分焉。
现代文：对于见识广、学问博、断事精明的 士 ，凡是没有成为君主臣吏的，也要服役而不分配收益。
English: As for those who are not officers of the state, but are well-informed, well-educated, and shrewd judges, they shall also serve without any share in the revenues.

古文：贾知贾之贵贱，日至于市，而不为官贾者，与功而不与分焉。
现代文：对于熟悉物价贵贱，并在集市上交易的商人，凡不是官商的，也要服劳役而不分配收益。
English: For merchants who are familiar with the high and low prices and trade in the bazaar, all those who are not official merchants must also perform labor service without distributing income.

古文：工治容貌功能，日至于市，而不为官工者，与功而不与分焉。
现代文：对于讲求器物样式功能，参加集市交易的手工业者，凡不是官家工匠的，也要服劳役而不分配收益。
English: For handicraftsmen, who are not government craftsmen, but who are involved in the market transactions, they are required to perform labor service without distribution of income.

古文：不可使而为工，则视货离之实而出夫粟。
现代文：至于不能使其直接出工的人们，就看他们所差的实际数字，交纳补偿力役的粮食。
English: As for the people who cannot be sent to work directly, the actual number they are short of is taken into account, and the grain for compensatory labor is paid.

古文：是故智者知之，愚者不知，不可以教民。
现代文：只有智者明白而愚人不明白的事，不可以要求一般人民。
English: The common people should not be asked to do what only the wise understand and the fools do not.

古文：巧者能之，拙者不能，不可以教民。
现代文：只有巧者能做到而笨人做不到的事，也不可要求一般人民。
English: You cannot ask the common people to do what only the clever can do and the stupid cannot.

古文：非一令而民服之也，不可以为大善。
现代文：若不是命令一下，人人都能实行，就不能达到大治；若不是人人都能做到，就不能建立大功。
English: If you don't give an order and everyone can implement it, you can't achieve great governance; if everyone can't do it, you can't build great achievements.

古文：非夫人能之也，不可以为大功；是故非诚贾不得食于贾，非诚工不得食于工，非诚农不得食于农，非信士不得立于朝。
现代文：因此，非真正的商人，不得经商；非真正的工匠，不得为工；非真正的农夫，不得务农；不是名符其实的士人，不许在朝中做官。
English: Therefore, if you are not a true merchant, you are not allowed to do business; if you are not a true craftsman, you are not allowed to work; if you are not a true farmer, you are not allowed to work in agriculture; if you are not a true scholar, you are not allowed to be an official in the government.

古文：是故官虚而莫敢为之请，君有珍车珍甲而莫之敢有。君举事，臣不敢诬其所不能。
现代文：这样，即使官位有缺，也无人敢于冒请；即使君主有珍车、珍甲的待遇，也无人敢于妄求享有；国家举办大事，臣下也就不敢谎报他们所做不到的事情。
English: In this way, even if there is a shortage of officials, no one dares to invite them; even if the monarch has the treatment of rare cars and armor, no one dares to enjoy it; when the country holds major events, the subjects dare not lie about what they can not do.

古文：君知臣，臣亦知君知己也；故臣莫敢不竭力俱操其诚以来。
现代文：君主了解臣下，臣下也知道君主了解自己。所以，臣下就不敢不尽心竭力、老老实实地为君主服务了。
English: The monarch knows his subjects, and his subjects know that the monarch knows himself. Therefore, his subjects dare not fail to do their best and honestly serve the monarch.

古文：道曰，均地分力，使民知时也，民乃知时日之蚤晏，日月之不足，饥寒之至于身也；是故夜寝蚤起，父子兄弟，不忘其功。为而不倦，民不惮劳苦。
现代文：事理告诉我们：把土地折算分租，实行分户经营，可以使人民自身抓紧农时。他们会关注季节的早晚、光阴的紧迫和饥寒的威胁。这洋，他们就能够晚睡早起，父子兄弟全家关心劳动，不知疲倦并且不辞辛苦地经营。
English: Facts and reason tell us that the conversion of land into rent-sharing and the implementation of sub-household management can make the people themselves pay close attention to agricultural time. They will pay attention to the morning and evening of the season, the urgency of time and the threat of hunger and cold. This way, they can sleep late and get up early, and the whole family, father, son and brother, are concerned about labor, and work tirelessly and hard.

古文：故不均之为恶也：地利不可竭，民力不可殚。
现代文：而不把土地分配下去的害处，就是地利不能充分利用，人力不能充分发挥。
English: But the harm of not allocating land is that the land cannot be fully utilized and manpower cannot be fully exerted.

古文：不告之以时，而民不知；不道之以事，而民不为。
现代文：不告知农时，人民就是不抓紧；不教以农事，人民就是不干活。
English: If they do not inform the farmers, the people will not pay attention; if they do not teach the farmers, the people will not work.

古文：与之分货，则民知得正矣，审其分，则民尽力矣，是故不使而父子兄弟不忘其功。
现代文：实行了与民分货的制度，人民就切实看到有得有征了；再明确征收的标准，人民就会尽力了。于是，不必督促，父子兄弟都会来关心生产的。
English: Once the system of distributing goods among the people is implemented, the people will truly see that there is something to collect; once the standards for collection are clear, the people will do their best. Therefore, there is no need to urge, and both parents and children will be concerned about production.

古文：圣人
现代文：圣人
English: The Saint

古文：圣人之所以为圣人者，善分民也。
现代文：圣人之所以成为圣人，就是因为他善于分利于民。
English: The reason why a saint becomes a saint is because he is good at benefiting the people.

古文：圣人不能分民，则犹百姓也，于己不足，安得名圣。
现代文：圣人不擅长分利于民，就同普通百姓一样了。自己总是贪而不足，怎么能算是圣人呢？
English: If a saint is not good at distributing benefits to the people, he is just like the common people. He is always greedy and not enough, how can he be considered a saint?

古文：是故有事则用，无事则归之于民，唯圣人为善讬业于民。
现代文：所以，国家有事就取用于民，无事就藏富于民，只有圣人才善于把产业寄托于人民。
English: Therefore, when the state has something to do, it takes it to the people, and when it has nothing to do, it hides it from the people. Only saints are good at entrusting their property to the people.

古文：民之生也，辟则愚，闭则类，上为一。下为二。
现代文：人的本性，越是开导就越是通情达理，越是堵塞就越是悖逆。上面提供一个，下面就会回敬两个。
English: The more enlightened human nature is, the more reasonable it is, and the more blocked it is, the more rebellious it is. If there is one above, there will be two below.

古文：失时
现代文：失时
English: Lost time

古文：时之处事精矣，不可藏而舍也。
现代文：农时对于农事来说是非常宝贵的，不能把它收藏起来使之停止不前。
English: Farm time is very valuable for farming, and it cannot be hoarded to stop progress.

古文：故曰，今日不为，明日忘货。
现代文：所以说，今天不进行生产，明天就没有财物。
English: Therefore, if there is no production today, there will be no wealth tomorrow.

古文：昔之日已往而不来矣。
现代文：过去的时光，一经消逝就不再回来了。
English: Once the past is gone, it never comes back.

古文：地里
现代文：地里
English: Dili District

古文：上地方八十里，万室之国一，千室之都四；中地方百里，万室之国一，千室之都四。
现代文：八十里见方的上等土地，可以负担一座上万户人口的城市和四座上千户人口的城镇。百里见方的中等土地，可以负担一座上万户人口的城市和四座上千户人口的城镇。
English: An 80-cubic-meter square of high-grade land can support a city with a population of over 10,000 and four towns with a population of over 1,000. A 100-cubic-meter square of medium-grade land can support a city with a population of over 10,000 and four towns with a population of over 1,000.

古文：下地方百二十里，万室之国一，千室之都四。
现代文：一百二十里见方的下等土地，可以负担一座上万户人口的城市和四座上千户人口的城镇。
English: One hundred and twenty li square of inferior land can afford a city with a population of over ten thousand and four towns with a population of over a thousand.

古文：以上地方八十里，与下地方百二十里，通于中地方百里。
现代文：因此，八十里见方的上等土地与一百二十里见方的下等土地，都相当于一百里见方的中等土地。
English: Therefore, the upper land of eighty square miles and the lower land of one hundred and twenty square miles are equivalent to the middle land of one hundred square miles.

