古文：嘉靖元年巡抚何孟春、郴州籍，江阴人。
现代文：二十三年设立镇守，弘治二年设置金腾道。
English: The town guard was established in 1923, and Kintendo Road was established two years later.

古文：巡按御史陈察常熟人。疏革镇守，设永昌府，立保山县，改金齿指挥使司为永昌卫府，领州一腾越县二，保山、永平。仍统潞江安抚司、凤溪、施甸二长官司。
现代文：嘉靖元年巡抚何孟春、巡按御史陈察上疏革除镇守，设为永昌府，建立保山县，改金齿指挥使司为永昌卫府，治理一个州两个县，仍统领潞江安抚司、凤溪与施甸两个长官司。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the inspector-general He Mengchun and the inspector-general Chen inspected and abolished the town guard, set it as Yongchang Prefecture, established Baoshan County, changed the gold-toothed commander-in-chief to Yongchang Guard, governed two counties in one state, and still presided over the Lijiang River pacification department and the Fengxi and Shidian two chief departments.

古文：保山编户十里。
现代文：保山县编入户籍的有十个里。
English: There are ten villages in Hosan Prefecture that have been incorporated into the household register.

古文：又城北彝民曰 喧 ，共十五；城南彝民曰 寨 ，共二十八。
现代文：又有城北的彝民叫做 喧 ，共十五个；城南的彝民叫做 寨 ，共二十八个。
English: There are also a total of fifteen villages called 喧 in the north of the city, and twenty-eight villages called 寨 in the south of the city.

古文：洪武三十三年，改腾冲守御千户所隶金齿司。
现代文：洪武三十三年，改腾冲守御千户所隶属于金齿军民指挥使司。
English: In the 33rd year of Hongwu's reign, it was changed to the Jinzu Military and Civilian Command and Control Division.

古文：正统十四年，升为腾冲军民指挥使司，与金齿并。
现代文：正统十四年，升级为腾冲军民指挥使司，与金齿同级。
English: In the 14th year of the orthodoxy, he was upgraded to the military and civilian commanding officer of Tengchong, the same level as Jinzu.

古文：永平，即东汉之博南县。以山名。洪武初隶永昌府。
现代文：嘉靖二年，重新设州，隶属永昌府，改指挥使司为腾冲卫，州名叫腾冲。永平，就是东汉的博南县。洪武初年隶属于永昌府。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, it was re-established as a prefecture under Yongchang Prefecture, and the commanding officer was changed to Tengchongwei, and the prefecture was named Tengchong. Yongping is the Bonan County of the Eastern Han Dynasty. Hongwu was subordinated to Yongchang Prefecture for the first year.

古文：三十二年，改府为金齿指挥司，属指挥司管辖。
现代文：二十三年，把府改为金齿指挥使司，属指挥使司管辖。
English: In 1923, the prefecture was changed to Jinzu Command and Envoy Division, which is under the jurisdiction of the Command and Envoy Division.

古文：元柔远路，国初柔远府，永乐九年立安抚司。
现代文：嘉靖二年，恢复府，仍归属府。潞江安抚司，在城西南一百三十里。
English: In the second year of the Jiajing Dynasty, it was restored and still belongs to the prefecture. It is located one hundred and thirty miles southwest of the city.

古文：凤溪长官司，在城东二十五里。
现代文：凤溪长官司，在城东二十五里。
English: Fengxi Chief Magistrate's Office, 25 miles east of the city.

古文：施甸长官司，在城南一百里。
现代文：施甸长官司，在城南一百里。
English: Shidian Chief Magistrate's Court, a hundred miles south of the city.

