古文：黄帝问曰：愿闻十二脏之相使，贵贱何如？
现代文：黄帝问道：我想听你谈一下人体六脏六腑这十二个器官的职务分工，功能主次是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di asked: I would like to hear you talk about the division of duties of the twelve organs of the human body, namely the six viscera and six mesentery. What are the main and secondary functions?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也，请遂言之。
现代文：岐伯回答说：你问的真详细呀！请让我详细讲解这个问题。
English: Gibo replied, "Your question is really detailed! Please let me explain this problem in detail.

古文：心者，君主之官也，神明出焉。
现代文：心，主宰全身，是君主之官，人的精神意识思维活动都由此而出。
English: The mind, which governs the whole body, is the ruler's official, and all of a person's spiritual consciousness and thinking activities emanate from it.

古文：肺者，相傅之官，治节出焉。
现代文：肺，是相傅之官，犹如相傅辅佐着君主，主一身之气而调节全身的活动。
English: The lungs are the officials of the overseer, just as the overseer assists the monarch, regulating the activities of the whole body with the master's breath.

古文：肝者，将军之官，谋虑出焉。
现代文：肝，像将军一样的勇武，称为将军之官，谋略由此而出。
English: Liver, like the general's valor, is called the general's officer, and the strategy comes from this.

古文：胆者，中正之官，决断出焉。
现代文：胆，像中正的判官，主管决断。
English: gall, like Zhongzheng's adjudicator, in charge of making decisions.

古文：膻中者，臣使之官，喜乐出焉。
现代文：膻中，是臣使之官，为君主制造喜乐。
English: In the court, it is the vassal who leads the officials, creating joy for the monarch.

古文：脾胃者，仓廪之官，五味出焉。大肠者，传道之官，变化出焉。
现代文：脾和胃，是仓廪之官，饮食五味的水谷精华靠它们的作用而得以消化、吸收和运输。
English: The spleen and stomach are the organs of the cranium, and the five-flavor Mizutani essence can be digested, absorbed and transported by their action.

古文：小肠者，受盛之官，化物出焉。
现代文：大肠，是传导之官，它能传送食物的糟粕，使其变为粪便排出体外。
English: The large intestine is a conduction organ. It can transport food waste and turn it into feces for excretion.

古文：肾者，作强之官，伎巧出焉。
现代文：小肠，是受盛之官，它承受胃中下行的食物而进一步分化清浊。
English: The small intestine is the receiving organ. It receives food moving down from the stomach and further differentiates purine.

古文：三焦者，决渎之官，水道出焉。
现代文：肾，是作强之官，它能够使人发挥强力而产生各种技巧。三焦，是决渎之官，它能够通行水道。
English: Kidney is the organ of strength, it can make people exert their strength and produce various skills. Sanjiao is the organ of transgression, it can pass through the waterway.

古文：膀胱者，州都之官，津液藏焉，气化则能出矣。
现代文：膀胱，是州都之官，蓄藏津液，通过气化作用，方能排出尿液。
English: The urinary bladder is the organ of the state capital. It stores fluid and is able to expel urine through gasification.

古文：凡此十二官者，不得相失也。
现代文：以上这十二位掌管国家的官员，虽有分工，但其作用应该协调而不能相互脱节。
English: These twelve officials in charge of the country, although there is a division of labor, their roles should be coordinated and not disconnected from each other.

古文：故主明则下安，以此养生则寿，殁世不殆，以为天下则大昌。
现代文：所以君主如果明智顺达，则下属也会安定正常，用这样的道理来养生，就可以使人长寿，终生不会发生危殆，用来治理天下，就会使国家昌盛繁荣。
English: Therefore, if the monarch is wise and successful, the subordinates will also be stable and normal. Using this principle to maintain health can make people live longer, and there will be no danger in life. If it is used to govern the world, it will make the country prosperous and prosperous.

古文：主不明则十二官危，使道闭塞而不通，形乃大伤，以此养生则殃，以为天下者，其宗大危，戒之戒之！
现代文：君主如果不明智顺达，那么，包括心脏在内的十二官就都要发生危险，各器官发挥正常作用的经络闭塞不通，形体就要受到严重伤害。用这种方式养生就会有灾殃，用这样的方式管理天下，宗庙就会有危险，千万要警惕再警惕呀！
English: If the monarch is not wise enough, then the twelve organs, including the heart, will be in danger, the meridians of the organs that play a normal role will be blocked, and the body will be seriously injured. There will be disasters in this way of health care, and there will be danger in managing the world and the ancestral temple in this way. Be vigilant and vigilant!

古文：至道在微，变化无穷，孰知其原！
现代文：至深的道理是从细微之处表现出来的，其变化也没有穷尽，谁能清楚地知道它的本源呢！
English: The deepest truth is expressed in subtleties, and its variations are inexhaustible. Who can clearly know its origin?

古文：窘乎哉！
现代文：实在是困难得很呀！
English: It's really very difficult!

古文：消者瞿瞿，孰知其要！
现代文：仿效的人很多，可又有谁能知道其精要之处呢！
English: There are many people who imitate, but who can know its essence!

古文：闵闵之当，孰者为良！
现代文：各种学说纷繁复杂，可又有谁能分辨何者为良呢！
English: The various doctrines are numerous and complex, but who can distinguish what is good!

古文：恍惚之数，生于毫厘，毫厘之数，起于度量，千之万之，可以益大，推之大之，其形乃制。黄帝曰：善哉！
现代文：产生至深道理的若有若无的毫厘事物，来源于比毫厘更小的不可度量的事物，这些细微事物成千上万地积累扩大，推衍增益，才演变形成了至为精要的理论总结。黄帝说：好啊！
English: The if-there-is-nothing milliliter things that produce the deepest reason come from immeasurable things that are smaller than a milliliter. These subtle things have been accumulated and expanded by thousands of people, and have been derived and gained, and have only evolved to form the most essential theoretical summary. Huang Di said: Good!

古文：余闻精光之道，大圣之业，而宣明大道，非斋戒择吉日不敢受也。
现代文：我听到了精纯明彻的道理，这真是大圣人建立事业的基础，对于这宣畅明白的宏大理论，如果不先斋戒并选择吉日，我可不敢接受啊。
English: I heard a clear and precise teaching, which is the foundation of the great sage's work, and I would not dare to accept this clear and concise grand theory without first fasting and choosing a good day.

古文：黄帝乃择吉日良兆，而藏灵兰之室以传保焉。
现代文：于是，黄帝选择了有好兆头的吉祥日子，把这篇著作珍藏在灵台兰室，很好地保存起来，以让此宝典流传后世。
English: As a result, the Yellow Emperor chose an auspicious day with good omens and treasured this work in the Lingdailan Room, preserving it well so that this treasure could be passed down to future generations.

