古文：丁丑九月二十二日余往崇善寺别静闻，遂下舟。
现代文：丁丑年九月二十二日我前往崇善寺与静闻告别，便下了去太平府的船。
English: On September 22nd, I went to Sozenji Temple to say goodbye to Jingwen, and then got off the boat to Taiping.

古文：余守行李，复令顾仆往候。
现代文：我守着行李，再命令顾仆去侍候。
English: I kept the luggage, and then ordered the servants to wait.

古文：是晚泊于建武驿前天妃宫下。
现代文：这天晚上停泊在建武骚前的天妃宫下。
English: That evening, we anchored in front of Jianwuxao, under the Tianfei Palace.

古文：二十三日舟不早发。
现代文：二十三日船早上不开。
English: On the 23rd, the ship will not sail in the morning.

古文：余念静闻在崇善畏窗前风裂，云白屡许重整，而犹不即备。
现代文：我挂念静闻住在崇善寺畏惧窗前裂洞漏进的风，云白屡次答应重新修整，可仍然不马上办。
English: I'm worried about the wind leaking through the cracked hole in front of the window, and Yun Bai has repeatedly promised to re-repair it, but still does not do it immediately.

古文：余乘舟未发，乃往梁寓携钱少许付静闻，令其觅人代整。
现代文：我乘的船不开，便前去梁家寓所带了少量钱交给静闻，让他找人代为修整。
English: The boat I was on didn't work, so I went to Liang's apartment with a small amount of money and gave it to Jingwen, asking him to find someone to fix the boat.

古文：时寺僧宝檀已归，能不避垢秽，而客僧慧禅、满宗又为整簟蔽风，迥异云白。
现代文：此时寺中的和尚宝檀已归来，能够不避污秽之物，而客居的僧人慧禅、满宗又代为修整竹席遮风，与云白完全不同。
English: At this time, the monk Baodan in the temple has returned, and can not avoid the filth, and the visiting monks Huizan and Manzong have repaired the bamboo seat to cover the wind, which is completely different from Yunbai.

古文：静闻复欲索余所买布履、衡茶，意甚恳。
现代文：静闻又想要我买的布鞋、衡阳的茶叶，意思十分恳切。
English: Jing Huan also wanted the cloth shoes I bought and the tea leaves from Hengyang. He meant it very sincerely.

古文：余语静闻： 汝可起行，余当还候。
现代文：我对静闻说： 你能起床行走时，我将回来间候你。
English: I said to Jingwen, "When you can get up and walk, I will come back and wait for you."

古文：此何必索之今日乎！ 慧禅亦开谕再三，而彼意不释。
现代文：这些东西何必在今天要得到手呢！  慧禅也再三开导，但他的心愿不消。
English: Why do these things need to be handled today? Huizan is repeatedly enlightened, but his desire remains.

古文：时舟已将行，且闻宝檀在天宁僧舍，余欲并取梁钱悉畀之，遂别之出。
现代文：此时船已将出发，而且听说宝檀在天宁寺的僧房中，我打算一并把梁家寓所中的钱取来全数交给他，便告别静闻出来。
English: At this time, the boat was about to set off, and I heard that Baodan was in the monk's room of Tianning Temple, and I planned to take all the money from the Liang family's apartment and give it to him, so I said goodbye to Jing Xuan.

古文：同梁主人觅得宝檀，宝檀慨然以扶危自任。
现代文：同姓梁的房主人找到宝檀，宝檀慷慨地把扶助病危之人看作自己的责任。
English: The owner of the house with the same surname Liang found Baodan. Baodan generously regarded it as his responsibility to help the critically ill.

古文：余下舟，遂西南行。
现代文：我下了船，于是向西南行。
English: I got off the boat and headed southwest.

古文：四里，转西北，又四里，泊于窑头。
现代文：四里，转向西北，又行四里，停泊在窑头。
English: Four miles, turn to the northwest, go another four miles, moor at the end of the kiln.

古文：时日色尚高，余展转念静闻索鞋、茶不已，盖其意犹望更生，便复向鸡足，不欲待予来也。
现代文：此时天色还早，我辗转想着静闻索要鞋子、茶叶的事，想个不停，大概他的意思仍指望再活下去，便可重新走向鸡足山，不想等我回来了。
English: At this time, it was still early in the day, and I kept thinking about Jing Huan's request for shoes and tea leaves. I kept thinking that he probably still hoped to live again, so he could go back to Chicken Foot Mountain, and didn't want to wait for me to come back.

古文：若与其来而不遇，既非余心；若预期其必死，而来携其骨，又非静闻心。
现代文：如果回来时与他不相遇，完全不是我的心愿；如果预期他必死，而回来带他的骨灰，又不是静闻的心愿。
English: If I didn't meet him when I came back, it wouldn't be my wish at all; if he was expected to die, and I came back with his ashes, it wouldn't be my wish.

古文：不若以二物付之，遂与永别，不作转念，可并酬峨眉之愿也。
现代文：不如把两样东西送给他，便与他永别，不考虑转回来，可一并实现我去峨眉山的愿望。
English: It would be better to give him two things and say goodbye to him forever, without considering returning, so that I can realize my wish to go to Mount Emei.

古文：乃复登涯东行，出窑头村，二里，有小溪自西北来，至此东注，遂渡其北，复随之东。
现代文：于是重新登上岸往东行，到了窑头村，二里，有条小溪自西北流来，到此地后向东流注，于是渡到溪北，再顺着溪流往东走。
English: So I went ashore again and headed east. When I reached Yaotou village, two miles away, there was a stream coming from the northwest. When I got there, it flowed east, so I crossed to the north of the stream and then followed the stream to the east.

古文：又二里，其水南去入江。
现代文：又行二里，那溪水向南流去汇入江中。
English: After another two miles, the stream water flows south to join the river.

古文：又东行一里，渡白衣庵西大桥，入崇善寺，已日薄崦嵫。
现代文：又东行一里，走过白衣庵西边的大桥，进入崇善寺，已是日薄西山了。
English: After another mile to the east, I crossed the bridge on the west side of Shiroi-an and entered Sozen-ji Temple. It was already getting late in the afternoon.

古文：入别静闻，与之永诀。
现代文：进寺辞别静闻，与他永别。
English: After entering the temple, quietly listen to his farewell, and bid him farewell forever.

古文：亟出，仍西越白衣庵桥，共五里过窑头，入舟已暮，不辨色矣。
现代文：急忙出寺，仍向西越过白衣庵桥，共五里走过窑头，进到船上已经天黑，辨不清颜色了。
English: Rushing out of the temple, I still crossed the Shiroi-an Bridge to the west, walking a total of five miles past the kiln head. When I got on the boat, it was already dark, and I couldn't distinguish the colors.

古文：二十四鸡三鸣即放舟。
现代文：二十四日鸡鸣三遍立即开船。
English: On the 24th, the cock crowed three times and the ship immediately set sail.

古文：西南十五里，过石埠墟，有石嘴突江右，有小溪注江左，江至是渐与山遇，遂折而南行。
现代文：往西南行十五里，经过石埠墟，有石头山嘴突出在江右，有小溪从江左注入，江流到这里渐渐与山相遇，于是折向南行。
English: Fifteen miles to the southwest, past the stone piers, there is a stone promontory protruding on the right side of the river, a creek flows into it from the left side of the river, and the river gradually meets the mountain here, so it turns south.

古文：八里过岔九，岸下有石横砥水际，其色并质与土无辨，盖土底石骨为江流洗濯而出者。
现代文：八里路过岔九，岸下有岩石平平地横在水边，石头的颜色与质地和土地一样无法分辨，大概是泥土底下的石头被江流冲刷露出来的。
English: Eight miles passed through Fenjiu. Rocks lay flatly on the water's edge under the bank. The color and texture of the stones were as indistinguishable as the land. It was probably the stones under the soil that were washed out by the river.

古文：于是复西向行五里，向西北十里，更向北又十里，转而西又五里，为右江口。
现代文：于是再向西行五里，向西北行十里，再向北又行十里，转向西又行五里，是右江江口。
English: Then he walked five miles to the west, ten miles to the northwest, another ten miles to the north, and another five miles to the west, to the mouth of the Right River.

古文：右江自北，左江自西，至此交会。
现代文：右江从北面，左江从西边，到此地交会。
English: The Right River from the north and the Left River from the west meet here.

古文：左江自交趾广源洲东来，经龙州，又东六十里，合明江南来之水，又东径崇善县，合通利江及逻、陇、教北来之水，绕太平府城东、南、西三面，是名丽江，又东流至此。
现代文：左江自交趾的广源州向东流来，流经龙州，又向东流六十里，会合明江南来的水流，又往东流经崇善县，汇合通利江及逻水、陇水、教水北来的水流，绕过太平府城东、南、西三面，这一段叫丽江，又向东流到此地。
English: The Zuo River flows eastward from Guangyuanzhou, where it meets the Zuo River, flows through Longzhou, and then flows eastward for sixty miles, meeting the water flow from the south of the Ming River, flowing eastward through Chongzhen County, and merging with the water flow from the north of Tongli River and Luoshui, Lishui and Jiaoshui, bypassing the east, south and west of Taiping Prefecture. This section is called Lijiang, and flows eastward to this place.

古文：右江自云南富州东来，经上林峒，又东合利州南下之水，又东经田州南、奉议州北，又东南历上林、果化、隆安诸州县至此。
现代文：右江自云南的富州向东流来，流经上林桐，又往东会合利州南下的水流，又向东经过田州南部、奉议州北部，又向东南经过上林县、果化州、隆安县各州县到此地。
English: The Right River flows from Fuzhou in Yunnan to the east, flowing through Shanglin Tong, and then eastward to join the water flow south of Lishu, and then eastward through the southern part of Tianzhou, the northern part of Bongyezhou, and then southeastward through the counties of Shanglin County, Guohua County, and Longan County to this place.

古文：又按《一统志》： 右江出峨利州。 
现代文：又根据《一统志》： 右江源出于峨利州。 
English: According to the "Historical Record": The source of the Yangtze River originates in Eri Prefecture.

古文：查 峨利 ，皆无其地，惟贵州黎峨里在平越府，有峨峲山，乃牂牁所经，下为大融、柳州之右江者，与此无涉。
现代文：查考 峨利 ，全然没有这个地方，只有贵州有个黎峨里在平越府，有峨刹山，是样柯江流经的地方，往下流是下到大融县、柳州府的右江的江流，与此无关。
English: Investigate Eri, there is no place at all, only Guizhou has a Li Eri in Pingyuefu, there is Echa Mountain, it is the place where the Jian Ke River flows, and the downstream flow is the flow of the Right River in Dayong County and Liuzhou Prefecture, which has nothing to do with this.

古文：至利州有阪丽水，其流虽下田州，然无 峨峲 之名，不识《统志》所指，的于何地。
现代文：至于利州有条阪丽水，它的水流虽下流到田州，但无 峨刹 之名，不知《一统志》指的，究竟在什么地方。
English: As for the Hansari Water in Lizhou, although its water flows down to Tianzhou, it is not called the Agasa, and I do not know where exactly the "Historical Record" refers to.

古文：又按《路志》曰 丽江为左，盘江为右。 
现代文：又据《路志》说： 丽江是左江，盘江是右江。 
English: According to the "Road Record," Lijiang is the left river, and Panjiang is the right river.

古文：此指南盘之发临安者。
现代文：这是指南盘江发源于临安府的水流。
English: This is the water flow of the Guipan River originating in Lin'an.

古文：若北盘之经普安州，下都泥，亦出于来宾，合柳州之右江，与此无涉。
现代文：至于北盘江经过普安州，下流是都泥江，也是流到来宾县，会合柳州府的右江，与此无关。
English: As for the Beipan River passing through Pu'an Prefecture, it has nothing to do with the fact that the downstream is the Du Di River, and the downstream is also the Yu River that flows to Bin County and meets Liuzhou Prefecture.

古文：此古左、右二江之分也。
现代文：这是古代左、右二江的划分法。
English: This is the ancient method of dividing the two rivers into left and right.

古文：二水合至横州，又名郁江。
现代文：两条江水合流后到横州，又叫郁江。
English: After the confluence of the two rivers, it flows into the Yokoshu River, also known as the Iku River.

古文：而庆远之龙江，自贵州都匀、独山来；融县之潭江，自平越、黎平来；迁江之都泥，自普安七星关来。
现代文：而庆远府的龙江，自贵州的都匀府、独山州流来；融县的潭江，自平越卫、黎平府流来；迁江县的都泥江，自普安州的七星关流来。
English: However, the Longjiang River in Qingyuan Prefecture flows from Duyun Prefecture and Duxanzhou in Guizhou Province; the Tanjiang River in Rong County flows from Pingyuewei and Liping Prefecture; and the Duyue River in Qianjiang County flows from Qixingguan in Pu'an Province.

古文：三水经武宣，是名黔江。
现代文：三条江流经武宣县，这一段名叫黔江。
English: The Sanjia River flows through Wuxuan County. This section is called the Minjiang River.

古文：二江俱会于浔。
现代文：两条江都在得州府会合。
English: Both rivers meet at the capital of Texas.

古文：于是又以郁江为左，黔江为右者。
现代文：从这里起又把郁江作为左江，黔江看作右江了。
English: From here on, the Iku River is regarded as the left river, and the Min River as the right river.

古文：而今已左、右二江道因之、彼此互称，不免因而纰缪矣。
现代文：可今天已被左江道、右江道沿用了此名，彼此互称，不免因此而产生错误了。
English: However, today, this name has been used by Zuojiang Road and Zuojiang Road, and they are called each other, which inevitably leads to mistakes.

古文：又按，《一统志》于云南曲靖府盘江下注云： 盘江有二源，在沾益州，北流曰北盘江，南流曰南盘江，各分流千余里，至平伐横山寨合焉。 
现代文：又考，《一统志》在云南曲靖府盘江条下注释说： 盘江有两个源头，在沾益州，往北流的叫北盘江，往南流的叫南盘江，各自分流有千余里，到平伐的横山寨合流。 
English: Also, the "History of Yunnan" commented under the Panjiang River in Qujing Prefecture, Yunnan Province: The Panjiang River has two sources. In Zhangyizhou, the north-flowing stream is called the North Panjiang River, and the south-flowing stream is called the South Panjiang River. Each of their streams has more than a thousand miles, and they meet at the flat-lying Hengshan Zhai.

古文：今考平伐属贵州龙里、新添二卫，横山寨在南宁。
现代文：今天来考察，平伐隶属贵州的龙里、新添二卫，横山寨在南宁府。
English: Today, we will visit Longli, Xintan Erwei, and Hengshan Zhai in Nanning Prefecture, all of which belong to Guizhou.

古文：闻横山寨与平伐相去已千余里，二水何由得合？
现代文：听说横山寨与平伐相距已有千多里，两条江水哪能合流？
English: It is said that there are more than a thousand miles between Hengshan Zhai and Pingfa. How can the two rivers meet?

古文：况龙里、新添之水，由都勾而下龙江，非北盘所经。
现代文：何况龙里、新添的水流，经由都匀府而下流到龙江，不是北盘江经过的地方。
English: What's more, the Longli River and the newly added water flow down to the Longjiang River through Duyunfu, which is not the place where the Beipan River passes.

古文：横山寨别无合水，合者，此左、右二江耳。
现代文：横山寨没有别的前来会合的水流，会合的，是此地的左、右二江而已。
English: There are no other watercourses that come to meet at Hengshan Village, only the two rivers on the right and the left meet here.

古文：左江之源出于交趾，与盘江何涉，而谓两盘之合在此耶？
现代文：左江源出于交趾，与盘江何干，却认为两条盘江的会合处在这里呢？
English: What does the source of the Zuo River have to do with the Pan River, but thinks that the meeting place of the two Pan Rivers is here?

古文：余昔有辨，详著于《复刘愚公书》中。
现代文：我过去有过辨析，详细写在《复刘愚公书》中。
English: In the past, I have made a detailed analysis, which is written in detail in the "Fu Liu Gu Gong Shu."

古文：其稿在衡阳遇盗失去。
现代文：信稿在衡阳遇盗时失去了。
English: The letter was lost when it was stolen in Hengyang.

古文：俟身经其上流，再与愚公质之。
现代文：等到亲身经历了它的上游后，再与刘愚公对证这一点。
English: Wait until you have personally experienced its upstream, and then verify this with Liu Yugong.

古文：余问右江之流，溯田州而上，舟至白隘而止。
现代文：我从前沿右江的江流，上溯到田州，船到白隘便停下了。
English: I followed the current of the right river from the front, upstream to Tianzhou, and the boat stopped at Baiyao.

古文：白隘本其邻境，为田州夺而有之。
现代文：白隘本来是田州的近邻，被田州夺过来占有了。
English: Baiyao was originally a close neighbor of Tianzhou, but was taken over and occupied by Tianzhou.

古文：又考利州有白丽山，乃阪丽水所出，又有 阪 作 泓濛 ，二水皆南下田州者。
现代文：又考察，利州有座白丽山，是阪丽水源出之地，又有 阪 作为 乱潦 的，两条水流都往南下流到田州。
English: It was also investigated that there is a Bai Lai Mountain in Lizhou, which is the source of water for the Han Lai River, and the Han River is a turbulent river. Both water streams flow southward to Tianzhou.

古文：白隘岂即白丽山之隘，而右江之出于峨利者，岂即此水？
现代文：白隘莫非就是白丽山的隘口，而说右江源出于峨利的说法，难道就是指这条水流？
English: Baijiao is the pass of Bai Lishan, and the source of the Yangtze River, according to Elie, is this stream?

古文：其富州之流，又西来合之者耶？
现代文：那富州的水流，又从西面流来汇合进它里边的吗？
English: Does the water of Fuzhou flow from the west and merge into it?

古文：自岔九来，两岸土山逶迤，俱不甚高。
现代文：自忿九以来，两岸土山透透逸巡，都不怎么高。
English: Since the 9th CPC National Congress, both sides of the Taiwan Straits have not been very high.

古文：由右江口北望，其内俱高涯平陇，无崇山之间；而左江南岸，则众峰之内，突兀一圆阜，颇与众山异矣。
现代文：由右江江口向北望，江谷内都是高高的江岸平缓的土陇，没有高山在其间；可左江南岸，却在群峰之中，突立着一座圆形的土山，颇与群山不同。
English: Looking northward from the mouth of the right river, the river valley is made up of high riverbanks and gentle mounds, with no high mountains in between. On the south bank of the left river, however, among the peaks, stands out a round mound of earth, quite different from the mountains.

古文：又西一里，江亦转北，又南一里，是为大果湾。
现代文：又西行一里，江流也转向北，又向南一里，这是大果湾。
English: Another mile to the west, the river turns to the north, and another mile to the south. This is Daguo Bay.

古文：前临左江，后崎右江，乃两江中央脊尽处也。
现代文：前临左江，后靠右江，是两江中间相夹地带山脊到头之处。
English: In front of it is the Zuo River, and behind it is the Zuo River. This is where the ridge ends in the area between the two rivers.

古文：其北有小峰三，石圆亘如骈覆钟，山至是始露石形。
现代文：它北面有三座小峰，石峰浑圆横亘如并排下覆的铜钟，山到这里开始露出石山的形状来。
English: There are three small peaks to the north of it. The rounded stone peaks are as wide as side-by-side copper bells, and the mountain begins to reveal the shape of a stone mountain.

古文：其东有村曰宋村，聚落颇盛，而无市肆。
现代文：它东边有个村庄叫宋村，村落很兴盛，但没有集市店铺。
English: To the east of it there is a village called Songcun. The village is very prosperous, but there are no market stalls.

古文：余夙考有合江镇，以为江夹中大市，至是觅之，乌有也。
现代文：我从前考证有个合江镇，以为是两江相夹之中的大集市，到这里找它，没有。
English: I once visited Hejiang Town, thinking it was a large market sandwiched between two rivers. I didn't find it here.

古文：征之土人，亦无知其名者。
现代文：向当地人打听，也无人知道这个名字。
English: Ask the locals and no one knows the name.

古文：是日行五十里，泊于湾下。
现代文：这一天行船五十里，停泊在河湾下。
English: On this day, the boat traveled fifty miles and anchored at the bottom of the bay.

古文：二十五日鸡再鸣，发舟西向行。
现代文：二十五日鸡叫两遍，开船向西行。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the rooster crowed twice and the boat sailed west.

古文：曲折转西南十五里，复见有突涯之石，已而舟转南向，遂转而东。
现代文：曲曲折折转向西南行十五里，又见有突出岸边的岩石，不久船转向南行，随即转向东。
English: After fifteen miles of twists and turns to the southwest, and seeing rocks jutting out from the shore, the ship soon turned south and then east.

古文：二里，上长滩，有突崖飞石，娉立江北岸。
现代文：二里，上一个很长的河滩，有突起飞空的石崖，姿态婷婷地立在江北岸。
English: Two miles away, on a very long beach, there is a rocky cliff jutting out into the sky, standing precariously on the north bank of the river.

古文：崖前沙亘中流，江分左右环之，舟俱可溯流上。
现代文：石崖前沙滩横亘在中流，江水分流左右环绕着河滩，船都可以溯流而上。
English: The beach in front of the stone cliff stretches in the middle of the stream. The river current surrounds the beach on both sides, and boats can follow the current upstream.

古文：又三里，为杨美，亦名大湾，盖江流之曲，南自杨美，北至宋村，为两大转云。
现代文：又行三里，是杨美，也叫大湾，大体上江流的弯曲，南边始自杨美，北边到达宋村，形成两个大回转。
English: Another three miles away is Yangmei, also known as the Great Bay. It is basically a bend in the upper reaches of the river. The south side starts from Yangmei, and the north side reaches Songcun, forming two large gyres.

古文：自杨美西向行十五里，为鱼英滩。
现代文：自杨美向西行十五里，是鱼英滩。
English: Fifteen miles westward from Yangmei is Yuying Beach.

古文：滩东南有山如玦，中起一圆阜，西向迎江，有沙中流对之。
现代文：河滩东南有座山如像玉块，中央突起一个圆圆的山阜，向西迎着江流，有沙洲在中流对着它。
English: In the southeast of the beach, there is a mountain shaped like a jade block, with a round mountain rising in the center, facing the river to the west, and a sandbar facing it in the middle of the river.

古文：其地甚奇。
现代文：这地方十分奇异。
English: It's a very strange place.

古文：询之舟人，云： 昔有营葬于上者，俗名太子地。
现代文：向船夫打听，回答说： 从前有人葬在山上，俗名叫太子地。
English: He asked the boatman, and he replied, "In the past, people were buried on the mountain, commonly known as the Prince's Land.

古文：乡人恶而凿其两旁，其脉遂伤。 
现代文：乡里人痛恨便挖断了它的两旁，它的地脉便受了损伤。 
English: Villagers dug up both sides of it out of hatred, and its veins were damaged.

古文：今山巅松石犹存，凿痕如新也。
现代文：今天山顶青松石基仍保存着，挖凿的痕迹如新的一样。
English: Today, the mountaintop's blue-pine bedrock is still preserved, and the traces of the excavation are as good as new.

古文：上滩又五里而暮，泊于金竹洲之上流野岸也。
现代文：上河滩又行五里天黑下来，停泊在金竹洲上游野外的岸下。
English: After another five-mile trip to Shanghe Beach, it got dark and we anchored off the shore of the upstream fields of Jinzhuzhou.

古文：二十六日鸡初鸣，发舟。十里，西南过萧村，天色犹熹微也无色微明。
现代文：二十六日鸡叫头遍，开船，十里，往西南过了萧村，天色仍只微微发白。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the rooster crowed, and the boat sailed ten miles to the southwest past Xiao village. The sky was still only slightly white.

古文：至是已入新宁境，至是石山复出，两岸濒江之石，亦时时竞异。
现代文：到这时已进入新宁州境内，在这里石山重又出现，好像屏风排列，好似兽角挺立，两岸濒江的岩石，也时时争奇斗异。
English: By this time, it had entered the territory of Shining Prefecture, where the stone mountains reappeared, like screens lined up, like animal horns standing upright, and the rocks on both sides of the river were always competing with each other.

古文：又五里，折而东，江南岸穹石成洞，外裂多门，如狮象骈立，而空其跨下；江北岸断崖成峡，上架飞梁，如虹霓高映，而缀其两端。
现代文：又行五里，折向东，江南岸岩石隆成山洞，外边裂有多处洞口，如狮象并立，而岩石横跨之下空着；江北岸山崖断成峡，上架飞桥，如彩虹在高空映照，而两端连缀着。
English: After another five miles, turning to the east, the rocks on the south bank of the river bulge into a cave. There are many openings on the outer rift, such as lions and elephants standing side by side, while the rocks are empty below; the cliffs on the north bank of the river break into a gorge, and fly over the bridge, like a rainbow reflected in the sky, and the two ends are intertwined.

古文：又五里，转而西南，与石山时向时背。
现代文：又行五里，转向西南，与石山时而相对时而相背。
English: Another five miles, turning to the southwest, with Ishiyama sometimes opposite and sometimes opposite.

古文：两崖突石愈奇，其上嵲如翅云斜劈，下覆如肺叶倒垂，幻态时时变换；但洞不甚深，崖不甚扩，未成楼阁耳。
现代文：两岸山崖上高突的岩石越来越奇特，那向上高耸的似入云的翅膀斜着劈开，下覆的如肺叶倒垂，奇幻的姿态时时变换；只是洞不十分深，山崖不怎么广阔，未形成楼阁而已。
English: The jutting rocks on the cliffs on both sides of the strait are becoming more and more peculiar. The wings of the soaring cliffs, which seem to reach the clouds, are split diagonally. The lower ones are like lung leaves hanging down, and their fantastic posture changes from time to time. However, the holes are not very deep, the cliffs are not very broad, and no castle has been formed.

古文：又北转五里，为新庄，转西南三里，为旧庄。
现代文：又转向北行五里，是新庄，转向西南行三里，是旧庄。
English: Turning north for five miles, it is Xinzhuang, and turning southwest for three miles, it is Guzhuang.

古文：又西二里，转而南五里，转而北三里，复转西南，更有石山当前矣。
现代文：又向西二里，转向南五里，转向北三里，再转向西南，又有石山挡在前方。
English: Another two miles to the west, five miles to the south, three miles to the north, and then to the southwest, with Ishiyama in front.

古文：又三里，西透两山之腋，挟江北石峰北转，而循其西麓。
现代文：又行三里，往西穿过两座山的侧边，紧靠江北岸的石峰往北转，而后沿着它的西麓行。
English: Another three miles, westward through the flank of the two mountains, turn north of the stone peak close to the north bank of the river, and then along its western foot.

古文：于是东岸则峰排崖拓，穹洞连门；西岸则波激岸回，矶空窍应。
现代文：在这里东岸有峰峦成排山崖横展，弯隆的洞口相连；西岸却江岸回绕波浪激荡，石矶悬空洞穴呼应。
English: Here, on the east coast, there are peaks and rows of cliffs stretching horizontally, with high-pitched cave openings connecting them; on the west coast, however, the riverbank swirls around the waves, echoed by rocky hanging caves.

古文：其东岸之山，南连两峰，北峰洞列三门，门虽外分，皆崆峒内扩；北骈两崖，南崖壁悬两叠，叠俱有洞，复高下中通。
现代文：那东岸的山，南边连着两座山峰，北峰排列着三个洞口，外边虽洞口分列，里面全是扩展进去的空洞；北面并列着两座山崖，靠南的崖壁悬成两层，每层都有洞，上下的洞中间又是相通的。
English: On the east coast of the mountain, two peaks are connected on the south side, and three openings are arranged on the north peak. Although the openings are lined up on the outside, they are all openings that expand inward. On the north side, there are two cliffs side by side, and the cliff wall to the south is suspended in two layers, each layer has a hole, and the middle of the upper and lower holes are connected.

古文：此即狮岩。北行三里，直抵骈崖下，乃转南行。
现代文：向北行三里，直达并列的山崖下，于是转向南行。
English: Drive north for three miles until you reach the bottom of a parallel cliff, then turn south.

古文：顺风挂帆二里，又西行一里，逼一尖峰下，仍转向南。
现代文：顺风挂帆行二里，又往西行一里，逼近一座尖峰下，仍转向南。
English: He sailed two leagues to windward, and a mile to the westward, and drew near to the foot of a pinnacle, and still turned to the south.

古文：西岸复有骈崖平剖，巍临江潭，即笔架山也。
现代文：西岸又有并列的山崖平直地剖开，巍然下临江边，
English: On the west bank, there are also parallel cliffs and cliffs that are straightly cut open, glaring down at the river.

古文：而东岸石根愈耸愈透。
现代文：而东岸岩石耸得更高，透亮的洞穴更多。
English: On the east coast, however, the rocks are higher and there are more transparent caves.

古文：共三里，过象石下，即新宁之西门也。
现代文：共行三里，路过象石下方，就是新宁州的西门了。
English: Three miles together, passing under the Elephant Rock, is the West Gate of Shining State.

古文：风帆方驶，舟人先有乡人泊此，遂泊而互酌。
现代文：刚顺风挂帆迅驶，船夫有个同乡先停泊在此，便停下船来相对饮酒。
English: Just as the wind picked up and the sails set sail, the boatman, a fellow villager, first moored here, then stopped the boat to have a few drinks.

古文：余乃入城，登州廨，读《州记》于仪间官府大门的莅事堂，询狮岩诸胜于土著。
现代文：我于是进城，登上州衙，在仪门内的在事堂读《州记》，向土著人询间狮岩诸处名胜。
English: So I went to the city, climbed the Shuzhou Gate, read the "State Chronicle" in the ceremonial hall inside the ceremonial gate, and asked the indigenous people about the famous places in the Lion Rock.

古文：还登象石，日已薄暮。遂不成行，依象石而泊。
现代文：返回来登上象石，天色已是傍晚，终于不能成行，靠着象石停泊。
English: After returning, we boarded the Elephant Rock. It was already late in the evening, so we couldn't make the trip. We anchored by the Elephant Rock.

古文：其西北为思同、陀陵界；西南为江、忠二州界。
现代文：新宁州的辖地，从前是沙水、吴从等三桐，国朝初年改为土县，后来因为思明土知府有功，划分吴从等村给他，便开始逐渐蚕食。
English: The jurisdiction of Shining Prefecture used to be Shashui, Wuzhong, and Santong. In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, it was changed to Tu County. Later, because it was thought that the local government had done a good job in dividing Wuzhong and other villages for him, it began to gradually encroach.

古文：江水自西南那勒来，绕城西北，转而东南去。万历己丑，州守江右张思中有记在州门，乃建州之初任者。
现代文：后来忠州跟着仿效他，与思明互相争夺，这一地区便朝秦暮楚，人民涂炭没有止境，当权者这才收回这一地区，派武官镇守它。土人酋长黄贤相又制造叛乱首倡叛逆，隆庆，州官江右张思中留有碑记在州城城门，是建州时的第一任州官。
English: Later, Chungju followed his example and competed with Siming. This area was fought over from the dawn of the Qin Dynasty to the twilight of the Ming Dynasty. The people burned charcoal endlessly. Only then did the authorities take back this area and sent military officers to guard it. The native chief Huang Xiansang also created a rebellion and initiated the rebellion. In Longqing, the state official Jiang Yu Zhang Siming left a monument at the city gate of the state. He was the first state official when the state was founded.

古文：州北四里，隔江为狮岩山，州西二里，隔江为笔架山，州南一里为犀牛岩，更南三里为穿山大岩，皆石峰耸拔，石洞崆峒，奇境也。
现代文：州城北面四里，隔江处是狮岩山，州城西边二里，隔江处是笔架山，州城南一里是犀牛岩，再往南三里是穿山大岩，都是耸立挺拔的石峰，石洞空阔，是奇异之境。
English: Four miles north of the state capital, across the river is Lion Rock Mountain, two miles west of the state capital, across the river is Pen Stand Mountain, one mile south of the state capital is Rhino Rock, and three miles further south is Piercing Mountain Rock, all of which are towering stone peaks, stone caves are wide, and it is a strange landscape.

古文：州西远峰排列更奇，象石、狮石俱在含晖门江岸。
现代文：州城西面远处的山峰排列得更加奇异，象石、狮石都在含晖门前的江岸上。
English: The distant peaks to the west of the state capital are even more bizarrely arranged. Elephant Rock and Lion Rock are both on the riverbank in front of Ganmeng Gate.

古文：江流自南衡涌而来，狮石首扼其锐，迎流剜骨，遂成狰狞之状。
现代文：江流自南边冲涌而来，狮石首先扼住江流的锐气，迎着急流刺成骨状的岩石，就形成面貌狰狞的形状。
English: The river comes rushing in from the south, and Lion Rock is the first to catch the river's sharp current. Facing the rapid current, the bone-like rock forms a jagged shape.

古文：下流荡为象石，巍准高耸的鼻子下倩，空颊内含，截水一湾，可泊可憩，而西门之埠因之。
现代文：江水下流激荡为象石，高耸的鼻子下嵌江中，面颊是空的内有水，截下一湾江水，可以停船可以歇息，而西门的码头就依傍着它。
English: The downstream of the river is agitated like a stone, the towering nose is embedded in the river, the cheek is empty with water inside, cutting off a bay of river water, you can stop the boat and rest, and the pier of Ximen is next to it.

古文：狮石之上曰冲口，下流有石梁高架两崖间，下辟成门。
现代文：狮石的上游叫做冲口，下游有石桥高架在两岸山崖之间，下边开辟成门。
English: The upstream of Lion Rock is called the punch, downstream there is a stone bridge elevated between the cliffs on both sides, and the lower side opens up into a gate.

古文：余先闻之邑父老云： 近冲口有仙源洞府。 
现代文：我先前听县里的父老说： 靠近冲口处有个仙源洞府。 
English: I had previously heard the elders of the county say: There is a Xianyuan Cave Town near the mouth of the river.

古文：记忆不真，无可问者，不识即此否？
现代文：记得不真切，无人可问，不知就是这里不是？
English: I don't really remember, no one can ask, I don't know, is it here?

古文：自南宁来至石埠墟，岸始有山，江始有石；过右江口，岸山始露石；至杨美，江石始露奇；过萧村人新宁境，江左始有纯石之山；过新庄抵新宁北郭，江右始有对峙之岫有岩洞之山。
现代文：自南宁来到石埠墟，岸上这才有山，江中才有岩石；过了右江口，岸上的山开始露出岩石；到了杨美，沿江的石山开始露出奇异的姿态；过了萧村进入新宁境内，江左开始有纯石的山；过了新庄来到新宁城的北郭，江右才开始有对峙的山峰。
English: From Nanning to Shibuya, there are mountains on the shore and rocks in the middle of the river; after passing the right river mouth, the mountains on the shore begin to show rocks; after passing Yangmei, the stone mountains along the river begin to show a strange posture; after passing Xiao Village and entering Shining, there are mountains of pure stone on the left side of the river; after passing Xinzhuang and coming to the northern citadel of Shining, there are opposing peaks on the right side of the river.

古文：于是舟行石峰中，或曲而左，或曲而右，旋背一崖，复潆一嶂，既环乎此，转鹜乎彼，虽不成连云之峡，而如梭之度纬，如蝶之穿丛，应接不暇，无过乎此。
现代文：从这里起船航行在石峰之间，时而弯向左，时而弯向右，旋即背靠一座山崖，又再绕过一座峰，既环绕于此，又鸭子般转过彼处，虽未形成浮云样相连的峡谷，可如梭子般地穿过纬线，似彩蝶般地穿梭于花丛之中，应接不暇，没有超得过此地的了。
English: From here, the ship sailed between the stone peaks, sometimes turning to the left, sometimes turning to the right, turning its back to a cliff, and then rounding a peak, both around this and turning around like a duck, although it did not form a canyon connected like a floating cloud, it could pass through the latitude line like a shuttle, like a butterfly through the flowers, it was too busy to catch up, and it did not get beyond this place.

