古文：鲁炅，幽人。
现代文：鲁炅是幽州蓟县人。
English: Lu Wei is a native of Yuzhou's Handan County.

古文：长七尺馀，略通书史。
现代文：身长七尺多，略知经书和史籍。
English: He is more than seven feet tall and knows a little about scriptures and history.

古文：以廕补左羽林长上。
现代文：因先辈功劳任左羽林长上官。
English: Due to the merits of his predecessors, he was appointed to the post of chief superior of the Left Feather Forest.

古文：陇右节度使哥舒翰引为别奏。
现代文：陇右节度使哥舒翰又调他去任别奏官。
English: He was transferred to the position of second violinist by his elder brother Shuhan.

古文：颜真卿尝使陇右，谓翰曰： 君兴郎将，总节制，亦尝得人乎？ 
现代文：颜真卿曾出使陇右，对哥舒翰说 ：您从郎将升官，现任节度使，也曾发现过这样的人才吗？ 
English: Yan Zhenqing once sent an envoy to Zhenyu and said to his brother Shuhan: You have been promoted from the rank of general and are now the minister of the festival, have you ever found such a talent?

古文：炅时立阶下，翰指曰： 是当为节度使。 
现代文：鲁炅当时站在台阶下，哥舒翰指着他说： 这人将任节度使。 
English: Lu Wei was standing at the bottom of the steps at the time. Brother Shu Han pointed at him and said, "This person will be in charge of the festival."

古文：从破石堡城，收河曲，迁左武卫将军。
现代文：他跟随哥舒翰攻破石堡城，攻占河曲，升任左武卫将军。
English: He followed Goshukhan in conquering Shibaku Castle, capturing Hequ, and was promoted to General of the Left Division.

古文：后复以破吐蕃跳荡功，除右领军大将军。
现代文：后又因突袭打败吐蕃军的功劳，任右领军大将军。
English: Later, he was appointed as the right-hand leading general due to his achievements in defeating the Tubo Army in a surprise attack.

古文：安禄山反，拜上洛太守，将行，于帝前画攻守势，迁南阳太守，兼守捉防御使，封金乡公。
现代文：安禄山反叛了，任命他为商州刺史。临行前，他在皇帝面前分析进攻防守的形势，升任邓州刺史，兼任守捉、防御使，封爵为金乡公。
English: An Lushan rebelled and appointed him to be the governor of Shangzhou. Before his departure, he analyzed the situation of attack and defense in front of the emperor, was promoted to the governor of Dangzhou, concurrently served as the governor of capture and defense, and was knighted as the ruler of Jinxiang.

古文：寻为山南节度使，以岭南、黔中、山南东道子弟五万屯滍水南。
现代文：不久任山南节度使，率岭南、黔中、山南东道的五万军队驻扎在蟨水南边。
English: He was soon appointed as the envoy of the Shannan Festival, and led 50,000 troops from Lingnan, Luzhong and Shannan Dongdao stationed in the south of Surabaya.

古文：贼将武令珣、毕思琛等击之，众欲战，炅不可。
现代文：叛军将领武令繤、毕思琛等进攻他们，大家想出战，鲁炅不让。
English: The rebel generals Wu Lingyao, Bi Siyao and others attacked them. Everyone wanted to go to war, but Lu Yao would not let them.

古文：贼右趋，乘风纵火，郁气奔营，士不可止，负扉走，贼矢如雨，炅与中人薛道挺身走，举众没贼。
现代文：叛军绕到右边顺风放火，浓烟飘向营垒，士兵不听劝阻，都顶木板逃跑，叛军射箭像下雨一样，鲁炅和宦官薛道脱身逃脱，全部军队都完了。
English: The rebels went around to the right and set fire to the wind, the smoke drifted to the camp, the soldiers did not listen to dissuasion and all fled with wooden planks, the rebels shot arrows like rain, Lu Wei and eunuch Xue Dao escaped and escaped, the whole army was finished.

古文：时岭南节度使何履光、黔中节度使赵国珍、襄阳节度使徐浩未至，其子弟半在军，挟金为资粮，至是与械偕弃与山等，贼资以富。
现代文：当时岭南节度使何履光、黔中节度使赵国珍、襄阳节度使徐浩没来，他们的军队一半在营中，带着金子好买军需品，到这时和军械一起都丢下堆得像山一样，叛军靠这非常富有。
English: At that time, the Lingnan Festival made He Liguang, the Shuzhong Festival made Zhao Guozhen, and the Xiangyang Festival made Xu Hao not come. Half of their army was in the camp, bringing gold to buy military supplies. By this time, together with the ordnance, they were left piled up like a mountain. The rebels were very rich because of this.

古文：炅揪散兵保南阳。
现代文：鲁炅召集被打散的军队守卫南阳。
English: Lu Wei rallied the scattered troops to defend Nanyang.

古文：潼关失守，贼使哥舒翰招下，不从，使武令珣攻之。
现代文：潼关被攻占后，叛贼要哥舒翰叫他投降，他不听，叛贼派武令繤进攻他。
English: After Shaoguan was captured, the traitors asked Brother Shuhan to surrender, but he did not listen. The traitors sent a military commando to attack him.

古文：令珣死，田承嗣继往。
现代文：武令繤死了，田承嗣接着来进攻。
English: Wu Lingya died, Tian Chengzi then attacked.

古文：颍川来瑱、襄阳魏仲犀合兵援炅。
现代文：颍川郡太守来調、襄阳郡太守魏仲犀合军援助鲁炅。
English: The governor of Beichuan County, Lai Tong, and the governor of Yangyang County, Wei Zhongxiao, joined forces to aid Lu Wei.

古文：仲犀弟孟驯兵至明府桥，望贼走。
现代文：魏仲犀的弟弟魏孟驯率兵到了明府桥，看见叛军就逃跑了。
English: Wei Zhongxiao's brother Wei Mengjie led the troops to Mingfu Bridge, saw the rebels and fled.

古文：炅城中食尽，米斗五十千，一鼠四百，饿者相枕藉。
现代文：鲁炅在城里粮食吃光了，米每斗卖到五万文钱，一只老鼠卖四百文钱，饿死的人一个挨一个。
English: Lu Yao ran out of food in the city. Each bucket of rice sold for 50,000 yuan, a mouse sold for 400 yuan, and people starved to death one by one.

古文：朝廷遣使者曹日昇宣慰，加炅特进、太仆卿，不得入。
现代文：朝廷派宣慰使曹日升来慰劳，提升鲁炅为特进官、太仆卿，但不能进城。
English: The imperial court sent a message of consolation to make Cao Risheng come to comfort and elevate Lu Wei to the special promotion officer, the servant of the emperor, but he could not enter the city.

古文：日昇请单骑致命，仲犀不可。
现代文：曹日升请求一个人去拼命，魏仲犀不让。
English: Cao Risheng asked one person to go desperately, Wei Zhongxiao refused.

古文：会颜真卿自河北至，谓曰： 使者不顾死，致天子命，设为贼获，是亡一使者；脱能入城，则万心固矣。 
现代文：遇到颜真卿从河北来了，对他们说： 使臣不怕死，想传达皇帝的命令，即使被叛军抓住，只丢失一名使者；如进城，那么全军的心都稳固了。 
English: When they met Yan Zhenqing, who had come from Hebei Province, he said to them: Envoys are not afraid of death, they want to convey the emperor's orders, even if they are caught by the rebels, only one messenger is lost; if they enter the city, then the hearts of the whole army are stable.

古文：中官冯廷环亦曰： 将军必入，我请以两骑助。 
现代文：宦官冯延耡也说 ：您一定要进城，我请求派两名骑兵相助。 
English: Eunuch Feng Yanjun also said, "You must enter the city. I request you to send two cavalrymen to help."

古文：仲犀益骑凡十辈。
现代文：魏仲犀将骑兵增加到十名。
English: Wei Zhongxiao increased the number of cavalry to ten.

古文：贼望见，知皆锐兵，不敢击，遂入致命，人心益固。
现代文：叛军看见了，知道都是精兵，不敢攻击，于是进城传达了命令，军心更稳固了。
English: The rebels saw this, knew that they were elite soldiers, and did not dare to attack, so they went into the city and conveyed the order, and the military spirit became more stable.

古文：日昇复以骑趋襄阳，领兵千，由音声道运粮饷炅，故炅得与贼相持逾三月。
现代文：曹日升又骑马到襄阳去，率军千名，从音声道运粮接济鲁炅，因此鲁炅能抵抗叛军超过三月。
English: Cao Risheng also rode to Xiangyang, led an army of a thousand, and transported grain from the audio channel to help Lu Wei, so Lu Wei could resist the rebels for more than three months.

古文：炅被围凡一年，昼夜战，人至相食，卒无救。
现代文：鲁炅被包围共一年，日夜作战，军队以人为食，最终也没有救兵。
English: Lushan was besieged for a total of one year, fighting day and night, the army was fed on human beings, and in the end there was no rescue.

古文：至德二载五月，乃率众突围走襄阳。
现代文：至德二年五月，他率军队突围逃往襄阳。
English: In May of the following year, he led his army to break out of the encirclement and fled to Xiangyang.

古文：承嗣尾击，炅殊死战二日，斩获甚众，贼引去。
现代文：田承嗣尾随追击，鲁炅拼死战斗了两天，杀死很多敌人，叛军退去了。
English: Tian Chengzi followed the pursuit, Lu Yao fought hard for two days, killed many enemies, and the rebels retreated.

古文：俄拜御史大夫、襄邓十州节度使。
现代文：不久被任命为御史大夫，襄、邓等十州节度使。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Imperial Historian, Jo, Deng and other officials of the Ten States.

古文：亦会二京平，贼走河北。
现代文：又赶上长安、洛阳收复，叛军逃往河北。
English: They also recovered Chang'an and Luoyang, and the rebels fled to Hebei.

古文：时襄、汉数百里，乡聚荡然，举无樵烟。
现代文：当时襄阳、汉江几百里之间，既无人迹，也无炊烟。
English: At that time, between Yangyang and the Han River for several hundred miles, there was neither a trace nor smoke.

古文：初，贼欲剽乱江湖，赖炅适扼其冲，故南夏以完。
现代文：当初，叛军想扰乱长江、洞庭湖一带，幸亏鲁炅守住了要道，所以南方得以保全。
English: At first, the rebels wanted to disrupt the Yangtze River and Dongting Lake area, but luckily, Luzhu guarded the important road, so the south was preserved.

古文：策勋封岐国公，实封二百户。
现代文：他被封爵为岐国公，食实封两百户。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Gifu Province, and he was able to feed two hundred households.

古文：乾元元年，又加淮西节度、邓州刺史。
现代文：乾元元年，又升任淮西节度、邓州刺史。
English: In the first year of Qianyuan, he was also promoted to Huaxi Festival and Dengzhou Festival.

古文：与九节度围安庆绪于相州，炅领淮西、襄阳两镇步卒万人、骑三百。
现代文：参加九节度一起在相州包围了安庆绪，鲁炅率领着淮西、襄阳两处步兵一万名、骑兵三百人。
English: Together, they took part in the Nine Festivals and encircled Anqingxu in Xiangzhou. Lu Wei led ten thousand infantry and three hundred cavalry from Huaxi and Xiangyang.

古文：拜太子詹事，才三月，封太原郡公，掌厩苑。累迁检校左散骑常侍，兼右金吾大将军。
现代文：第二年，他们和史思明在安阳作战，唐军不胜，鲁炅中了流箭，就逃跑了，各节度使也都逃走了，并抢劫路过地区，鲁炅的军队尤其抢得厉害。
English: The next year, they fought with Shi Siming in Anyang. The Tang army was invincible. Lu Xun was hit by a stray arrow and fled. All the emissaries also fled, and robbed passing areas. Lu Xun's army was particularly violent.

古文：谦畏无过。卒，赠工部尚书。
现代文：皇帝下诏命来調任淮西节度，把鲁炅降职为郑、陈、亳节度使。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to transfer Huaxi Jiedu and demote Lu Wei to Zheng, Chen and Zou Jiedu.

古文：辛云京，兰州金城人，客籍京兆，世为将家。
现代文：他到了新郑，听说郭子仪军队驻扎在谷水，李光弼回到了太原，鲁炅羞愧担心，就服毒自杀了，享年五十七岁。辛云京是兰州金城人，移居京兆府，世代都任将领。
English: When he arrived in Xinzheng, he heard that Guo Ziyi's army was stationed in Guishui. Li Guangya returned to Taiyuan. Lu Yao was ashamed and worried, so he took poison and committed suicide at the age of 57. Xin Yunjing was from Jincheng, Lanzhou, and moved to Jingzhao Prefecture. He was a general for generations.

古文：云京有胆决，以禽生斩馘常冠军，积功迁特进、太常卿。
现代文：辛云京有胆量和决断，抓俘虏和杀死敌人常为全军第一，积累功劳被任命为特进官、太常卿。
English: Xin Yunjing had courage and determination. He was often the first in the whole army to capture prisoners and kill the enemy. He was appointed as a special envoy and Tai Changqing after accumulating merits.

古文：史思明屯相州，云京以锐兵四千袭滏阳，追破其众，至浪井。
现代文：史思明驻军相州，辛云京率精兵四千名袭击滏阳，追击打败了敌军，打到了浪井。
English: Shi Siming garrisoned in Xiangzhou, Xin Yunjing led 4,000 elite soldiers to attack Fenyang, defeated the enemy army in the pursuit, and hit Namii.

古文：录多，授开府仪同三司，加代州都督、镇北兵马使。
现代文：因功多，被封为开府仪同三司，加官代州都督、镇北兵马使。
English: Due to his many achievements, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and promoted to the post of acting provincial governor, and the post of Zhabei Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：太原军乱，帝恶邓景山绳下无渐，以云京性沉毅，故授太原尹，进封金城郡王。
现代文：太原军队发生了动乱，皇帝讨厌邓景山管理部下不能防患未然，因辛云京生性沉着坚毅，因此任命他为太原尹，升任金城郡王。
English: There was turmoil in the Taiyuan army. The emperor hated the fact that Deng Jingshan's management couldn't prevent it before it happened. Because Xin Yunjing was calm and resolute, he appointed him as Taiyuan Yin and promoted him to King of Jincheng County.

古文：云京治谨于法，下有犯，虽丝毫比不肯贷，及赏功亦如之，故军中畏而信。
现代文：辛云京治军执法严格，部下触犯了军法，即使一点点也不宽容，奖赏功劳也一样，因此兵将害怕并信赖他。
English: Xin Yunjing rules the army with strict law enforcement, his subordinates have violated the military law, even if they are not tolerant at all, the reward is the same, so the soldiers will fear and trust him.

古文：回纥恃旧勋，每入朝，所在暴钞，至太原，云京以戎狄待之，虏畏不敢惕息。
现代文：回纥仗着已有的功劳，每次到唐境内来，所到之处都大肆抢劫。到了太原，辛云京用对异族的方法对待他们，回纥害怕不敢乱动。
English: Hui Xuan took advantage of his already existing achievements, and every time he came to Tang territory, he looted everywhere he went. When he arrived in Taiyuan, Xin Yunjing treated them in the same way as he did to the foreign ethnic groups, and Hui Xuan was afraid and dared not make any moves.

古文：数年，太原大治。
现代文：几年之间，太原治理得很好。
English: Within a few years, Taiyuan was well governed.

古文：加检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：后升任检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: After that, he was promoted to the position of inspector of the school.

古文：大历三年，检校左仆射。
现代文：大历三年，任检校右仆射。
English: In the third year of the great calendar, he was appointed as a school inspector.

古文：卒，年五十五，代宗为发哀流涕，赠太尉，谥曰忠献。
现代文：后去世了，享年五十五岁。唐代宗追悼他时流下了眼泪，赠官为太尉，赐谥号叫忠献。
English: Later, he died at the age of fifty-five. The Tang Dynasty sect shed tears when they mourned him. He was awarded the rank of captain and given the title of Zhongxian.

古文：它日，郭子仪、元载见上，语及云京，帝必泫然。
现代文：后来，郭子仪、元载拜见皇帝时，谈到辛云京，皇帝必定流眼泪。
English: Later, when Guo Ziyi and Yuan Zai met the emperor and talked about Xin Yunjing, the emperor must have shed tears.

古文：及葬，命中使吊祠，时将相祭者至七十余幄，丧车移晷乃得去。
现代文：到他下葬时，皇帝命宦官吊唁祭祀，当时将领、宰相去祭祀的有七十多个帐幕，丧车过了一个时辰才能上路。
English: At the time of his burial, the emperor ordered eunuchs to perform a condolence sacrifice. At that time, there were more than seventy tents where generals and prime ministers went to offer sacrifices. It took an hour for the funeral car to get on the road.

古文：德宗时，第至德以来将相，云京为次。
现代文：唐德宗时，排列至德年以后的将领和宰相，辛云京排在第二位。
English: At the time of Emperor Dezong of Tang, the generals and chancellors ranked after the year of Dezong, and Xin Yunjing ranked second.

古文：从弟京杲，字京杲。
现代文：辛云京的堂弟辛京杲的字叫京杲。
English: Xin Yunjing's cousin, Xin Jingyao, is called Jingyao.

古文：信安王祎节度朔方，京杲与弟旻以策干说，祎评咨加异。
现代文：信安王李祎任朔方节度时，辛京杲和弟弟辛旻去献计策，李祎认为很出色。
English: When the Prince of Xinyan, Lixuan, was appointed as the governor of Shuo Fang, Xin Jingyao and his brother Xin Yao went to offer suggestions. Lixuan thought the performance was excellent.

古文：后从李光弼出井陉，督趫荡先驱，战嘉山尤力，肃宗异之，召见曰： 黥、彭、关、张之流乎！ 
现代文：后来辛京杲跟随李光弼从井陉出兵，率精兵任先锋，在嘉山作战特别有力，唐肃宗对他感到惊异，召见他时说： 你是黥布、彭越、关羽、张飞一类的人哪！ 
English: Later, Xin Jingyao followed Li Guangyao to send troops from Jingyao, led the elite soldiers as the vanguard, and was particularly powerful in the battle of Jiashan. Tang Su Zong was surprised by him and said when summoning him: You are a man of the same type as Zibo, Peng Yue, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei!

古文：累迁鸿胪卿，召为英武军使。
现代文：他多次升官后任鸿胪卿，被召为英武军使。
English: He was promoted several times and later became Lord Hung Hom. He was called up as a British military envoy.

古文：代宗立，封肃国公，迁左金吾卫大将军，进晋昌郡王，历湖南观察使，后为工部尚书致仕。
现代文：唐代宗即位后，封他为肃国公，后升任左金吾卫大将军，增爵为晋昌郡王，又任过湖南观察使，后任工部尚书时辞职。
English: After Emperor Zong of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Su Guogong, later he was promoted to General Zuo Jinwu, he was ennobled as the King of Jinchang County, he was also appointed as the Hunan Observer, and later he resigned from the Ministry of Industry.

古文：硃泚盗京师，以老病不能从，西向恸而卒，赠太子少保。
现代文：朱氵此占据了长安，他因年老生病不能跟随皇帝，朝西边大哭后去世了，赠官为太子少保。
English: Zhu Xi thus occupied Chang'an. He was unable to follow the emperor due to old age and illness, and died after crying loudly to the west. He was given the title of crown prince minor protector.

