古文：王昕，字符景，北海剧人。
现代文：王昕，字元景，北海剧县人氏。
English: Wang Yao, the character Yuanjing, is from the Hokkai Drama County.

古文：六世祖猛，秦苻坚丞相，家于华山之鄜城。父云，仕魏朝有名望。
现代文：六世祖猛，秦苻坚丞相，定居于华山城。父云，在魏朝做官，有声望。
English: The sixth patriarch, Qin Yu Jian, settled in Huashan City. His father, Yun, was a prominent official in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：昕少笃学读书，太尉汝南王悦辟骑兵参军。
现代文：年轻时昕勤奋读书，太尉汝南王悦用为骑兵参军。
English: When he was young, he was a diligent student, and he joined the army as a cavalryman.

古文：旧事，王出射，武服持刀陪从，昕未尝依行列。
现代文：旧制：王出门游射，骑兵参军着武服持刀陪侍，但昕却从来没有加入到这样的行列之中。
English: In the old system, the king would go out shooting and the cavalrymen would accompany him in military uniforms and carry swords, but the eunuch never joined such a procession.

古文：悦好逸游，或骋骑信宿，昕辄弃还。
现代文：悦嗜好逸游，有时会纵马奔驰两天两夜，昕则半途返回。
English: He likes to travel, and sometimes he will ride a horse for two days and two nights, and then return halfway.

古文：悦乃令骑马在前，手为驱策。
现代文：悦就命令昕骑马在前，并亲自为他驱策。
English: Yue ordered Zou to ride ahead and personally drive the horse for him.

古文：昕舍辔高拱，任马所之。
现代文：昕丢掉缰绳，任马奔跑。
English: Throw off the reins and let the horse run.

古文：左右言其诞慢。
现代文：帝的近臣说昕狂妄放纵。
English: The emperor's courtiers said he was arrogant and indulgent.

古文：悦曰： 府望惟在此贤，不可责也。 
现代文：悦说： 王府的希望就寄托在此贤身上，我们就不要责备他了。 
English: Yue said, "The hope of the royal court is pinned on this sage, so let's not blame him."

古文：悦数散钱于地，令诸佐争拾之，昕独不拾。
现代文：悦几次将钱抛撒在地上，命令僚佐们争抢，惟有昕站立一旁，不为所动。
English: Yuan Yue often threw some money on the ground and let his attendants scramble to pick it up, but Wang Yao couldn't pick it up.

古文：悦又散银钱以目昕，昕乃取其一。
现代文：悦又散银钱，用眼神示意昕，昕才拾起一枚。
English: Yue also scattered silver coins, gesturing with his eyes, before picking up one.

古文：悦与府僚饮酒，起自移？人争进手，昕独执版？
现代文：悦与僚佐们饮酒，站起身想移动一下座椅，人们争抢着帮忙，昕却站在一旁观看。
English: Yue, who had been drinking with her colleagues, stood up to move a chair. People scrambled to help, but Zou stood by and watched.

古文：立。悦于是作色曰： 我帝孙帝子帝弟帝叔，今为宴适，亲起舆？
现代文：于是悦变了脸色，说： 我是帝孙帝子帝弟帝叔，今天设宴，亲自动手搬凳子。
English: Then he changed his countenance, and said: I am the Emperor's grandson, the Emperor's son, the Emperor's brother, the Emperor's uncle, and today I am giving a banquet, and I am personally carrying the stools.

古文：卿是何人，独为偃蹇！ 
现代文：你是什么人，如此傲慢！ 
English: What are you, so arrogant!

古文：对曰： 元景位望微劣，不足使殿下式瞻仪形，安敢以亲王僚寀，从？养之役。 
现代文：昕回答说： 元景地位低下，没有必要让殿下看到他的身影，哪里还敢以亲王僚佐的身份，从事厮役们的工作！ 
English: Zou replied: Yuanqing's status was low, there was no need for His Highness to see him, how could he dare to work as a prince's aide-de-camp!

古文：悦谢焉。
现代文：悦听了他的话，表示了歉意。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Yue apologized to him.

古文：坐上皆引满酣畅，昕先起，卧闲室，频召不至。
现代文：赴宴的人们毫无顾忌地大吃猛喝，昕最早离席，躺进闲室，悦多次召请，他也不去。
English: The people who went to the banquet ate and drank without any scruples. He was the first to leave the table, lay down in the spare room, and was invited many times, but he did not go.

古文：悦乃自诣呼之曰： 怀其才而忽府主，可谓仁乎？ 
现代文：悦就亲自跑来喊他： 满腹才能却轻视府主，这算得上仁吗？ 
English: Yue herself came running to call him out: full of talent but despise the ruler, is this benevolence?

古文：昕曰： 商辛沉湎，其亡也忽诸，府主自忽，微僚敢任其咎。 
现代文：昕说： 商纣王沉湎于酒，其灭亡就是迅速。府主自己不注意，小小的僚佐怎能承担其罪责？ 
English: Zou said: The king of merchants was addicted to wine, and his demise was swift. The ruler himself did not pay attention, how could a small colleague bear his guilt?

古文：悦大笑而去。
现代文：悦大笑着走了。
English: Yuan Yue laughed loudly and walked away.

古文：累迁东莱太守。
现代文：迁东莱太守。
English: The governor of Donglai was transferred.

古文：后吏部尚书李神？奏言，比因多故，常侍遂无员限，今以王元景等为常侍，定限八员。
现代文：后来吏部尚书李神俊上奏说： 近世多有变故，常侍之职也就没有了限额，今天请让王元景等人做常侍，定员八人。
English: Later, Li Shenshun, the secretary of the Personnel Department, said in his report: In recent times, there have been many changes, and there is no limit to the position of the regular attendants. Today, please let Wang Yuanjing and others be the regular attendants, with a capacity of eight people.

古文：加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：加金紫光禄大夫。 
English: Wang Qi was also awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：武帝或时袒露，与近臣戏狎，每见昕，即正冠而敛容焉。
现代文：魏孝武帝有时袒露上身，与近臣嘻戏游玩，每当看到昕，马上穿衣正冠而复常态。
English: Emperor Taibu sometimes exposed his body, joking and playing with his vassals, but every time he saw Wang Yao, he straightened his hat and his expression became more solemn.

古文：昕体素甚肥，遭丧后，遂终身羸瘠。
现代文：昕身体肥壮，遭遇父母之丧后，便一直瘦骨嶙峋。
English: He had a fat body, but after the death of his parents, he has always been skinny.

古文：杨愔重其德业，以为人之师表。
现代文：杨忄音尊崇他的品行德业，作为自己的师表。
English: Yang Huiyin revered his moral conduct and virtues as his own teacher.

古文：迁秘书监。
现代文：迁秘书监。
English: The superintendent of the relocation office.

古文：昕少与邢卲俱为元罗宾友，及守东莱，卲举室就之。
现代文：昕年轻时和邢邵都是元罗的宾友，他做东莱太守后，邵全家就投奔而来。
English: When he was young, Zou and Zou Shao were both close friends of Yuan Luo. After he became the governor of Donglai, the entire Shao family came to join him.

古文：郡人以卲是邢杲从弟，会兵将执之，昕以身蔽伏其上，呼曰： 欲执邢子才，当先杀我。 
现代文：郡人认为邵是邢杲的从弟，聚集兵士想把他抓起来，昕用身体遮挡住邵，大声道： 你们想抓邢子才，就先杀了我！ 
English: The people of the county thought that Shao was Shao's younger brother. They gathered soldiers to arrest him. Shao shielded Shao with his body and shouted, "If you want to catch Shao Zi Cai, kill me first!"

古文：卲乃免焉。
现代文：邵才免除了一场祸害。
English: Shao just got rid of a scourge.

古文：昕雅好清言，词无浅俗。
现代文：昕喜好清言，词不俗浅。
English: Wang Yao likes to write poetry, and his verses are not shallow and vulgar.

古文：在东莱，获杀其同行侣者，诘之未服，昕谓之曰： 彼物故不归，卿无恙而反，何以自明？ 
现代文：在东莱，抓到了一个杀害同行伴侣的凶手，审问他，却不承认，昕质问道： 那个人死了不能回来，你却安然无恙地返家了，这怎么解释？ 
English: In Donglai, the murderer of a colleague's partner was caught and interrogated, but he did not admit it. The interrogator asked: That person died and cannot come back, but you returned home safe and sound. How do you explain this?

古文：邢卲后见世宗，说此言以为笑乐。
现代文：邢邵后来拜谒世宗，重复昕说的这句话作为笑乐的材料。
English: Later, Zou Shao paid homage to Zou Shizong and repeated this sentence from Zou as material for laughter.

古文：昕闻之，故诣卲曰： 卿不识造化。 
现代文：昕听到后，特意跑到邵的家里，说： 你不认识造化。 
English: After hearing this, Zou deliberately ran to Shao's home and said, "You don't know creation.

古文：还谓人曰： 子才应死，我骂之极深。 
现代文：回来对人说： 子才应该死了，我很恶毒地辱骂了他。 
English: When he came back, he said, "My son should have died. I cursed him viciously."

古文：显祖以昕疏诞，非济世所须，骂之曰： 好门户，恶人身。 
现代文：显祖认为昕疏阔放纵，不是济世之才，骂他为 好门户，恶人身 。
English: Xianzu thought that Zou was too broad-minded and indulgent, not a benevolent genius, and called him a good portal and an evil person.

古文：又有谗之者曰： 王元景每嗟水运不应遂绝。 
现代文：又有人进谗说： 王元景时常嗟叹水运不该断绝。 
English: Someone else chimed in: "Wang Yuanqing often laments that water transportation should not be cut off.

古文：帝愈怒，乃下诏徙幽州。
现代文：帝听说后就更加恼怒，便下诏将其流放幽州。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he became even more angry and issued an edict to banish him to Yuzhou.

古文：后征还，除银青光禄大夫，判祠部尚书事。
现代文：后召回，除银青光禄大夫，判祠部尚书事。
English: After the recall, in addition to the silver Qing Guanglu doctor, the decision of the ancestral hall is still a matter of record.

古文：帝怒临漳令嵇晔及舍人李文师，以晔赐薛丰洛，文师赐崔士顺为奴。
现代文：帝恼火临漳令嵇晔及舍人李文师，就把晔赏赐给薛丰洛，文师赏赐给崔士顺家为奴。
English: The emperor hated Linyi County's warlord and deserter, Li Wenshi, very much. He gave the scepter to Xue Fengluo and Li Wenshi to Cui Shishun as a slave.

古文：郑子默私谓昕曰： 自古无朝士作奴。 
现代文：郑子默私底下对昕说： 从古到今还没有朝士作奴的。 
English: Zheng Zi quietly said to Zou: From ancient times until now, no Asashi has been a slave.

古文：昕曰： 箕子为之奴，何言无也？ 
现代文：昕说： 箕子就作过奴，怎么能说没有？ 
English: Wang Yao said: Yao Zi had once been someone's slave, how to say no?

古文：子默遂以昕言启显祖，仍曰： 王元景比陛下于殷纣。 
现代文：子默就将昕的话向显祖作了报告，又说： 王元景将陛下比作殷纣王。 
English: Zi Mu reported the words of Yan to Xian Zu, and said, "Wang Yuanjing compared your majesty to the king of Yin and Yang.

古文：杨愔微为解之。
现代文：杨忄音稍微为昕作了一些辩解。
English: Yang Xuanyin slightly made some excuses for Gong Rong.

古文：帝谓愔曰： 王元景是尔博士，尔语皆元景所教。 
现代文：帝对忄音说： 王元景是你的博士，你的话都是王元景教的。 
English: The emperor said to Xuan Yin: Wang Yuanjing is your doctor, your words are all from Wang Yuanjing.

古文：帝后与朝臣酣饮，昕称病不至。
现代文：帝后来又同朝臣畅饮，昕则装病不来参加。
English: The emperor later had a drink with the courtier, but the empress pretended to be ill and did not attend.

古文：帝遣骑执之，见方摇膝吟咏，遂斩于御前，投尸漳水，天保十年也。
现代文：帝派骑士将他抓来之前，他正摇头晃脑地吟咏着诗歌。昕被斩杀于御座前面，尸体被抛弃到漳河之中一一一这是天保十年的事情。
English: Before the imperial knights captured him, he was swaying his head and chanting poetry. He was beheaded in front of the throne, and his body was thrown into the middle of the Li River - this was a matter of ten years.

古文：有文集二十卷。
现代文：昕有文集二十卷。
English: Liu Xuanqiu has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：子顗。昕母清河崔氏，学识有风训，生九子，并风流蕴藉，世号王氏九龙。
现代文：昕母清河人崔氏，学识有风训，生有九个儿子，这九个儿子个个风流而且有涵养，时称 王氏九龙 。
English: Wang's mother, a member of the Cui clan from Qinghe, was well-educated and well-mannered. She had nine sons, all of whom were well-mannered and well-mannered. At that time, they were known as the Wang clan of Jiulong.

古文：弟晞，字叔朗，小名沙弥。
现代文：他的弟弟晞，字叔朗，小名叫沙弥。
English: His younger brother, Shun, also known as Shulang, was nicknamed Shami.

古文：幼而孝谨，淹雅有器度，好学不倦，美容仪，有风则。
现代文：自幼孝顺而恭谨，宽宏儒雅有器度，好学不倦，容颜仪表美好，有风范。
English: Since childhood, he has been filial and respectful. He is broad-minded, elegant and resourceful. He is eager to learn and tireless. He has a beautiful appearance and manners.

古文：魏末，随母兄东适海隅，与邢子良游处。
现代文：魏末年，随舅父束到海边，舆继王皇交游居处。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, he went to the seaside with his uncle, and visited the residence of the successor of the king.

古文：子良爱其清悟，与其在洛两兄书曰： 贤弟弥郎，意识深远，旷达不？简于造次，言必诣理，吟咏情性，往往丽绝。
现代文：王旦喜欢他的清高颖悟，给他在洛的两位兄长写信说： 贤弟弥郎，思想深远，旷达不羁，简于辩言，言必合理，吟咏性情，往往美好绝伦。
English: Wang Dan liked his Qinggao Yingwu, and wrote to his two brothers in Luo, saying: "Wise brother Miro, his thoughts are far-reaching, uninhibited, concise in his arguments, his words must be reasonable, his disposition is eloquent, and he is often beautiful.

古文：恐足下方难为兄，不假虑其不进也。 
现代文：恐怕您已难作他的兄长，不必担心他不能晋升。 
English: I'm afraid you're too old to be his big brother. Don't worry about him not getting promoted.

古文：魏永安初，第二兄晖聘梁，启晞释褐除员外散骑侍郎，征署广平王开府功曹史。
现代文：魏永安初年，二哥王晖出使梁，启奏让王晞出仕任员外散骑侍郎，召任广平王开府功曹史。
English: In the first year of Wei Yong'an, the second brother Wang Xuan sent an envoy, and Wang Xuan was appointed as an attendant, and Guangping Wang Kaifu was appointed as a meritorious scholar.

古文：晞愿养母，竟不受署。
现代文：王晞愿奉养母亲，竟然不接受任命。
English: Wang Xi was willing to support his mother, but he did not accept the appointment.

古文：母终后，仍属迁邺。
现代文：母亲去世后，乃寄迁到邺。
English: After her mother's death, Nao moved to Handan.

古文：遨游巩洛，悦其山水，与范阳卢元明、巨鹿魏季景结侣同契，往天陵山，浩然有终焉之志。
现代文：在巩洛遨游，乐其山水，与范阳卢元明、钜鹿魏季景结伴同行，前往天陵山，大有隐居此山的志向。
English: In Gonglu, he traveled, enjoyed the landscape, accompanied by Fan Yang Lu Yuanming and Elk Wei Jiqing, and went to Tianling Mountain, with the ambition to live in seclusion on this mountain.

古文：及西魏将独孤信入洛，署为开府记室。
现代文：到西魏将领独孤信到洛，任命为开府记室。
English: To the West Wei Dynasty, General Du Guoxin came to Luo and was appointed as the Kefu Records Office.

古文：晞称先被犬伤，困笃不起。
现代文：王晞称此前被犬咬伤，困极不能起身。
English: Wang Yao said that he had been bitten by a dog before, and was too sleepy to get up.

古文：有故人疑其所伤非猘，书劝令起。
现代文：有老朋友怀疑他不是为狂犬所伤，写信劝说让他起身。
English: An old friend, suspecting that he was not injured by a mad dog, wrote to persuade him to get up.

古文：晞复书曰： 辱告存念，见令起疾，循复眷旨，似疑吾所伤未必是猘。
现代文：王晞覆书说： 屈尊地告知您在顾念我，认为我见到任命而生病，反复顾念旨意，好像怀疑我的伤未必是狂犬所致。
English: Wang Yao wrote: "I humbly inform you that you are thinking about me, thinking that I am sick because of the appointment, repeatedly thinking about the will, as if suspecting that my injury may not be caused by a mad dog.

古文：吾岂愿其必猘，但理契无疑耳。
现代文：我难道愿意一定是狂犬，但治理的凭证没有怀疑啊。
English: I'd love to be a mad dog, but there's no doubting my governance credentials.

古文：就足下疑之，亦有过说。
现代文：就您的怀疑，也有不妥之处。
English: There is something wrong with your suspicion.

古文：足下既疑其非猘，亦可疑其是猘，其疑半矣。
现代文：您既然怀疑其不是狂犬，也可以怀疑它是狂犬，这种怀疑各有一半啊。
English: Since you suspect that it is not a mad dog, you can also suspect that it is a mad dog, this suspicion is half.

古文：若疑其是猘而营护，虽非猘亦无损；疑其非猘而不疗，傥是猘则难救。
现代文：如果怀疑它是狂犬所致而救护，即使不是狂犬所致也无害。怀疑它不是狂犬所致而不治疗，倘若是狂犬所致就难以挽救了。
English: If you suspect that it is caused by a mad dog and save it, it is harmless even if it is not caused by a mad dog. If you suspect that it is not caused by a mad dog and do not treat it, if it is caused by a mad dog, it will be difficult to save it.

古文：然则过疗则致万全，过不疗或至死。
现代文：既然如此，那么过分治疗就能万全，过分不治疗或许导致死亡。
English: That being the case, over-treatment can be a panacea, while under-treatment may lead to death.

古文：若王晞无可惜也，则不足取，既取之，便是可惜。
现代文：如果王晞没有什么可惜的，就不足取用，既然取用他，便是可惜。
English: If Wang Yao has nothing to regret, it is not enough to use him, but since he is used, it is a pity.

古文：奈何夺其万全，任其或死。
现代文：怎么能舍弃其万全之策，任凭其或许死亡。
English: How could he abandon his best-laid plans and allow himself to die?

古文：且将军威德所被，飞雾袭，方掩八纮，岂在一介。
现代文：况且将军威德覆盖之处，如狂风大雾，正袭击八方极远之地，难道在乎一个书生。
English: Moreover, the places covered by General Wade, such as strong winds and heavy fog, are attacking far away places in all directions. Does it matter to a student?

古文：若必从隗始，先须济其生灵。
现代文：如果一定从郭隗开始求贤，先必须救其生灵。
English: If we are to seek virtue from Guo Wei, we must first save his life.

古文：足下何不从容为将军言也。 
现代文：您何不从容地向将军说呢。 
English: Why don't you go ahead and tell the general.

古文：于是方得见宽。
现代文：于是才被宽容。
English: That's why they were tolerated.

古文：俄而信返，晞遂归邺。
现代文：不久独孤信返回，王晞于是回到邺。
English: Not long after, Du Guoxin returned, and Wang Yao returned to Yao.

古文：齐神武访朝廷子弟忠孝谨密者，令与诸子游。
现代文：齐神武寻访朝廷子弟忠孝谨慎细密的人，让他们舆众弟子交游。
English: Qi Shenwu searched for loyal, filial and careful people who were sons and daughters of the imperial court, and let them mingle with his disciples.

古文：晞与清河崔瞻、顿丘李度、范阳卢正通首应此选。
现代文：王晞舆清河崔瞻、顿丘李度、范阳卢正通首先应选。
English: Wang Zhiming, Qinghe Cui Zhan, Dongqiu Li Du and Fan Yang Ruzheng Tong should be selected first.

古文：文襄时为大将军，握晞等手曰： 我弟并向成长，志识未定，近善狎恶，不能不移。
现代文：文襄当时为大将军，握着王晞等人的手说： 我的弟弟都在成长，志向未定，接近善恶，不能不受影响。
English: At that time, Wen Xiang was a general, holding the hands of Wang Xuan and others, saying: My younger brother is growing up, his aspirations are undecided, he is close to good and evil, and he cannot be unaffected.

古文：吾弟成立，不负义方，卿禄位常亚吾弟。
现代文：我的弟弟成人，不违背作事的规范和道理，你们的俸禄和职位将永远仅次于我的弟弟。
English: My brother is an adult, do not violate the norms and principles of work, your salary and position will always be second only to my brother.

古文：若苟使回邪，致相诖误，罪及门族，非止一身。 
现代文：如果让他邪恶，导致贻误，罪及同门同族，非止自身。 
English: If you let him be evil, it will lead to mistakes, sin, and the same family, not just himself.

古文：晞随神武到晋阳，补中外府功曹参军带常山公演友。
现代文：王晞随神武到晋阳，补任中外府功曹参军，兼任常山公高演近臣。
English: Wang Hui followed Shenwu to Jinyang and joined the army as the vice-governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces. He also served as a close retainer of Changshan Gong Gao.

古文：齐天保初，行太原郡事。
现代文：齐天保初年，代理太原郡的事宜。
English: In the first year of Qi Tianbao, acting for Taiyuan County.

古文：及文宣昏逸，常山王数谏，帝疑王假辞于晞，欲加大辟。
现代文：到文宣昏乱逸乐，常山王屡次进谏，帝怀疑王藉辞于王晞，欲加死刑。
English: When Wen Xuan fell into a delirium of pleasure, King Changshan repeatedly came to visit him. The emperor suspected that the king wanted to add the death penalty to Wang Xuan's sentence.

古文：王私谓晞曰： 博士，明日当作一条事，为欲相活，亦图自全，宜深体勿怪。 
现代文：王私下对王晞说： 博士，明天应当作一件事，为了使你活，也图自己保全，应深深理解不要怪罪 。
English: Wang privately said to Wang Yao: Doctor, tomorrow you should do one thing. In order to keep you alive, you should also try to keep yourself safe. You should deeply understand and not blame.

古文：乃于？中杖晞二十。
现代文：于是当众打王晞二十杖。
English: So in front of everyone he beat the king with twenty rods.

古文：帝寻发怒，闻晞得杖，以故不杀，钳配甲坊。
现代文：帝不久发怒，听说王晞受到杖责，因此不杀，剃发带枷发配到制甲的作坊。
English: The emperor soon became angry. He heard that Wang Xi had been punished with a cane, so he did not kill him, but shaved his head and put it in a yoke to be sent to an armour-making workshop.

古文：居三年，王又固谏争，大被驱挞，闭口不食。
现代文：过了三年，王又坚决地谏静，大被殴打，闭口不食。
English: Three years later, Wang again resolutely kept quiet, was severely beaten, and refused to talk.

古文：太后极忧之。
现代文：太后非常忧虑这件事。
English: The Empress Dowager is very worried about this.

古文：帝谓左右曰： 傥小儿死，奈我老母何？ 
现代文：帝对左右的人说： 倘若小儿死亡，对我老母怎么办? 
English: The emperor said to those around him, "If my child dies, what will happen to my mother?

古文：于是每问王疾，谓曰： 努力强食，当以王晞还汝。 
现代文：于是每问王病情，对他说： 努力勉强吃东西，就把王晞还给你。 
English: Therefore, whenever he asked Wang about his illness, he said to him, "If you make an effort to eat, I will give Wang Yao back to you."

古文：乃释晞令往。
现代文：就放了王晞让他前往。
English: They released Wang Yao and let him go.

古文：王抱晞曰： 吾气力惙然，恐不复相见。 
现代文：王抱住王晞说： 吾气力虚弱，害怕不能再见面。 
English: Wang hugged Wang Yao and said, "My strength is weak, I'm afraid I won't be able to see you again.

古文：晞流涕曰： 天道神明，岂令殿下遂毙此舍。
现代文：王晞流泪说： 天道神明，难道让殿下就死在此地。
English: Wang Yao shed tears and said, "Heavenly way deity, why don't you let your highness die here?"

古文：至尊亲为人兄，尊为人主，安可与校计。
现代文：皇上亲近为人兄，尊贵为人主，怎么能与他计较。
English: The emperor is close as a brother, and honorable as a master, how can he be reckoned with.

古文：殿下不食，太后亦不食，殿下纵不自惜，不惜太后乎？ 
现代文：殿下不吃，太后也不吃，殿下纵然不自惜，难道不顾惜太后吗? 
English: His Imperial Highness does not eat, nor does the Empress Dowager. Even though His Imperial Highness does not spare himself, does he not spare the Empress Dowager?

古文：言未卒，王强坐而饭。
现代文：话未说完，王勉强坐起吃饭。
English: Before he had finished speaking, Wang reluctantly sat down to eat.

古文：晞由是得免徒，还为王友。
现代文：王晞由此得免徒役，回来为王的近臣。
English: As a result, Wang Yao was exempted from serving as an unskilled laborer and returned as a close vassal of the king.

古文：王复录尚书事，新除官者必诣王谢职，去必辞。
现代文：王又总领尚书事宜，新任官的人必到王那裹谢职，离任必定辞别。
English: The king also supervises the appointment of officials. Newly appointed officials must go to the king to thank him for his service, and those who leave office must resign.

古文：晞言于王曰： 受爵天朝，拜恩私第，自古以为干纪。
现代文：王晞对王说： 接受天朝爵位，在私宅谢恩，自古认为是犯纪。
English: Wang Yao said to the king, "Accepting the title of nobility from the heavenly court and expressing gratitude in a private home has been considered a violation of discipline since ancient times.

古文：朝廷文武，出入辞谢，宜一约绝。
现代文：朝廷文武官员，调出调入辞别和谢恩，应一律辞绝。
English: All the officials of the imperial court, whether they were transferred in or out, should resign.

古文：主上颙颙，赖殿下扶冀。 
现代文：主上的庄重肃敬，依赖殿下的扶持。 
English: With solemn reverence before the Lord, I rely on the support of His Imperial Highness.

古文：王纳焉。
现代文：王采纳了他的意见。
English: The king accepted his opinion.

古文：常从容谓晞曰： 主上起居不恒，卿耳目所具，吾岂可以前逢一怒，遂尔结舌。
现代文：王曾从容地对王晞说： 主上起居不定，你是听到和看到的，我怎么可以上前遇到他发怒，像你一样张口结舌。
English: The king once calmly said to Wang Yao: "The Lord is in no hurry. You have heard and seen. How can I come forward to meet him in anger, with my mouth agape like you?"

古文：卿宜为撰谏草，吾当伺便极谏。 
现代文：你应为我撰写谏书的草稿，我当伺机极力劝谏。 
English: You'll have to draft a letter for me, and I'm going to find an opportunity to try to persuade you.

古文：晞遂条十余事以呈。
现代文：王晞于是条陈十余件事呈上。
English: Wang Yao then reported more than ten cases to the police.

古文：切谏王曰： 今朝廷乃尔，欲学介子匹夫轻一朝之命，狂药令人不自觉，刀箭岂复识亲疏，一旦祸出理外，将奈殿下家业何，奈皇太后何！
现代文：恳切向王进谏说： 今朝廷如此，想学庶子匹夫轻视短暂的生命，狂药让人不能自醒，刀箭难道认识亲疏之人，一旦祸出于预料之外，将对殿下的家业怎么办，将对太后怎么办?
English: He earnestly said to Wang Jinyao, "This morning, the imperial court is like this. They want to learn from the bastard Peifu to despise the short life. The mad medicine makes people unable to wake up. Does the sword and arrow know the relatives and strangers? If the calamity is unexpected, what will happen to the family business of His Imperial Highness and what will happen to the Empress Dowager?

古文：乞且将顺，日慎一日。 
现代文：请求且顺其自然，一日比一日谨慎。 
English: Request and let it be, day by day more and more cautious.

古文：王歔欷不自胜，曰： 乃至是乎？ 
现代文：王慨叹不能克制自己，说： 竟然到这个地步吗? 
English: Wang Lian sighed and could not restrain himself, saying: Has it come to this?

古文：明日见晞曰： 吾长夜九思，今便息意。 
现代文：第二天见王晞说： 我经过长夜反复思考，今天须消除这个念头。 
English: The next day, Wang Yao said: "After a long night of thinking over and over again, I must eliminate this idea today.

古文：便命火对晞焚之。
现代文：就命人点火当着王晞焚烧了条陈的草稿。
English: He ordered someone to light a fire and burn the draft of the article in front of Wang Yao.

古文：后王承间苦谏，遂至忤旨。
现代文：后来王乘机会苦苦劝谏，于是触犯旨意。
English: Later, Wang took the opportunity to painstakingly persuade him, and thus violated the will.

古文：帝使力士反接，拔白刃注颈，骂曰： 小子何知，欲以吏才非我，是谁教汝！ 
现代文：帝让武士反绑两手，拔刀架在颈项说： 小孩子知道什么，想要用为政的才能非议我，是谁教你的! 
English: The emperor had the samurai tie his hands behind his back, drew his sword and held it to his neck, saying: "What does a child know? You want to use your talent for politics to criticize me. Who taught you?"

古文：王曰： 天下噤口，除臣谁敢有言。 
现代文：王说： 天下人闭口，除了我谁敢说话。 
English: And the king said, Let every man keep silence, and let no man speak, save I only.

古文：帝催遣捶楚，乱杖抶数十，会醉卧得解。
现代文：帝催促派人杖击，乱杖笞击数十下，逢皇上醉卧才得以解脱。
English: The emperor urged to send a man to beat him with a cane, and the cane was beaten dozens of times, and the emperor was able to get rid of it only when he was drunk.

古文：尔后亵黩之好，遍于宗戚，所往留连，俾昼作夜，唯常山邸多无适而去。
现代文：此后轻慢之好，遍于宗族外戚，所去之处留恋不舍，把白天当作夜晚，惟有常山王官邸多无人前往，远远离开。
English: After that, it was good to be frivolous, and it was all over the clan's relatives. Wherever they went, they yearned for it and treated the day as night. However, no one went to the official residence of the King of Changshan, and they left far away.

古文：及帝崩，济南嗣立。
现代文：帝逝世，济南王继位。
English: When the emperor died, the Jinan king succeeded to the throne.

古文：王谓晞曰： 一人垂拱，吾曹亦保优闲。 
现代文：王谓王晞说： 一个人垂衣拱手，不亲理政务，我辈也得悠闲。 
English: Wang Zhe said: One person hangs up his coat and hands, does not take care of government affairs, and our generation also has to be leisurely.

古文：因言朝廷宽仁慈恕，真守文良主。
现代文：接着说到朝廷宽恕仁慈，确实是遵循先王法度的良主。
English: Next, he said that the Imperial Court forgives and is merciful, and is indeed a good master who follows the law of the former king.

古文：晞曰： 天保享祚，东宫委一胡人，今卒览万机，驾驭雄杰。
现代文：王晞说： 天保享国，束宫托付一个胡人，如今总览万机，驾驭群雄。
English: Wang Yao said: The protection of the country by heaven is at the top, the Sokgong entrusted a Hu person, and now he has an overview of all the machines and controls the heroes.

古文：如圣德幼？未堪多难，而使他姓出纳诏命，必权有所归。
现代文：如今圣上年龄幼小，经不起多难，而让外姓出纳诏令，必然权力归于他人。
English: Now that His Holiness is too young to endure much hardship, it is inevitable that the power will be transferred to others.

古文：殿下虽欲守藩职，其可得也！
现代文：殿下即使是想自守藩国的职责，难道可以得到吗!
English: Your highness, even if you want to defend the duties of the domain, can you get it?

古文：假令得遂？退，自谓保家祚得灵长不？ 
现代文：假使得以谦让，自己认为能够保护家国广远绵长吗? 
English: Do you think you can protect your country for a long time if you are humble?

古文：王默然思念，久之曰： 何以处我？ 
现代文：王默然思考，很久才说： 我应处在什么位置? 
English: Wang silently pondered for a long time before he said: Where should I stand?

古文：晞曰： 周公抱成王朝诸侯，摄政七年，然后复子明辟，幸有故事，惟殿下虑之。 
现代文：王晞说： 周公抱着成王让诸侯来朝拜，代理政事七年，然后还政于君，幸好有过去的事，希望殿下考虑这件事。 
English: Wang Yao said: Zhou Gong held Cheng Wang to let the princes come to worship, acting as a government for seven years, and then returned to rule over you. Fortunately, there are past events, and I hope that Your Highness will consider this matter.

古文：王曰： 我安敢自拟周公。 
现代文：王说： 我怎么敢把自己和周公相比。 
English: Wang said: How dare I compare myself to Zhou Gong.

古文：晞曰： 殿下今日地望，欲避周公得耶？ 
现代文：王晞说： 殿下今天的地位威望，想避开周公能行吗? 
English: Wang Yao said: Your highness, with today's status and prestige, is it possible to avoid Zhou Gong?

古文：王不答。
现代文：王不回答。
English: The king did not answer.

古文：帝临发，王从驾，除晞？州长史。
现代文：帝出发，命王从驾，任王晞并州长史。
English: When the emperor sets out, the king of life is at the wheel, and the appointment of the king and the governor is history.

古文：及王至邺，诛杨、燕等，诏以王为大丞相、都督中外诸军事，督摄文武。
现代文：王至邺，杀了杨、燕等人，诏令以王为大丞相、都督中外诸军事，掌管文武百官。
English: Wang Zhisheng killed Yang, Yan and others, and issued a decree to make Wang the grand secretary of the Central Military Commission, the military governor of China and other countries, and in charge of hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：还至？乃延晞谓曰： 不早用卿言，使？小弄权，几至倾覆。
现代文：回到并州，就宴请王晞说： 不早听你的话，使众小人弄权，几乎到了国家倾覆。
English: When he returned to Anhui Province, he invited Wang Xi to a banquet and said, "I didn't listen to you earlier, and I let all the villains usurp power, almost to the point of overthrowing the country.

古文：今君侧虽获暂清，终当何以处我？ 
现代文：今皇上身边虽然获得暂时清肃，最终当把我放在什么位置? 
English: Now that the Emperor's entourage has been temporarily purged, where should I ultimately be placed?

古文：晞曰： 殿下将往时地位，犹可以名教出处。
现代文：王晞说： 殿下凭往时地位，还可以以名声教化出仕和隐退。
English: Wang Yao said: His Royal Highness, by virtue of his former status, can also use his reputation to teach him to serve and retire.

古文：今日事势，遂关天时，非复人理所及。 
现代文：今天的事势，有关天时，不再是人理所及。 
English: Today's events, concerning the weather, are no longer beyond human reason.

古文：有顷，奏赵郡王叡为左长史，晞为司马。
现代文：不久，启奏赵郡王高教为左长史，王晞为司马。
English: Soon after, Zhao County's Wang Gao Jiao was appointed as Zuo Changshi, and Wang Yao as Sima.

古文：每夜载入，昼则不与语，以晞儒缓，恐不允武将之意。
现代文：每天夜裹车载入内，白天则不同他讲话，因王晞柔弱，恐怕不合武将之意。
English: Every night, he is bundled into the car, but during the day, he speaks differently. Because Wang Yao is so weak, I'm afraid he won't be able to carry out the general's wishes.

古文：后进晞密室曰： 比王侯诸贵每见煎迫，言我违天不祥，恐当或有变起，吾正欲以法绳之。 
现代文：后召王晞到密室说： 近来王侯贵族每每逼迫，说我违天不祥，恐怕会有事变，我正要绳之以法。 
English: Afterward, he called Wang Yao to the secret room and said, "Recently, the princes and nobles have been constantly persecuting me, saying that I am evil and against heaven. I am afraid that something will happen, and I am about to be brought to justice."

古文：晞曰： 朝廷比者疏远亲戚，宁思骨血之重。
现代文：王晞说： 朝廷近来疏远亲族外戚，难道他们又考虑亲族关系的重要。
English: Wang Zhe said: The imperial court has recently alienated relatives and relatives, do they also consider the importance of kinship relations.

古文：殿下仓卒所行，非复人臣之事，芒刺在背，交戟入颈，上下相疑，何由可久。
现代文：殿下仓促所行，不再是人臣的事情，芒刺在脊背，交戟架在脖颈，还上下相互猜疑，怎么能长久。
English: What His Royal Highness did in haste is no longer a matter for a vassal. A thorn in the spine, a millstone around the neck, mutual suspicion, how can it last.

古文：且天道不恒，亏盈迭至，神几变化，蠁斯集。
现代文：况且天道无常，亏盈交替，神机变化，灵感通微则能成功。
English: Moreover, the heavens are fickle, losses and gains alternate, opportunities change, and inspiration can succeed.

古文：虽执谦挹，糠神器，便是违上玄之意，坠先帝之基。 
现代文：即使是坚持谦逊退让，把国家的命运视为秕糠，就是违背上天之意，毁坏先帝的基业。 
English: Even if one insists on humbly conceding and regards the fate of the country as a mirage, it is contrary to the will of heaven and destroys the legacy of the former emperor.

古文：王曰： 卿何敢发非所宜言，须致卿于法。 
现代文：王说： 你怎么敢讲不应讲的话。须对你施加刑法。 
English: The king said, "How dare you say what you shouldn't? You must be punished."

古文：晞曰： 窃谓天时人事，同无异谋，是以冒犯雷霆，不惮斧钺。
现代文：王晞说： 我私下认为天时人事。都无别的谋划，因此冒犯雷霆，不怕斧铁。
English: Wang Yao said, "I privately believe that everything happens at the right time, and there is no other plan. Therefore, I am not afraid to offend thunder and lightning, and I am not afraid of the axe.

古文：今日得披肝胆，抑亦神明攸赞。 
现代文：今天得以披肝沥胆，或许是神明所助。 
English: Perhaps it is the gods who have helped me to be able to wear my heart on my sleeve today.

古文：王曰： 拯难匡辅，方俟圣哲，吾何敢私议，幸勿多言。 
现代文：王说： 拯救灾难匡正辅佐国家，正等待圣哲，吾怎么敢私下议论，希望不要多言。 
English: Wang said: To save the calamity, the Kuang Zheng and the country are waiting for the saint. How dare I talk about it in private? I hope I don't say too much.

古文：寻有诏以丞相任重，普进府僚一班，晞以司马领吏部郎中。
现代文：不久有诏令委以丞相重任，府僚一班人普遍晋升，王晞以司马兼吏部郎中。
English: Soon after, there was a decree-making committee with the chancellor as the most important position, a group of government officials were generally promoted, and Wang Yao was promoted to the position of secretary and secretary.

古文：丞相从事中郎陆杳将出使，临别握晞手曰： 相王功格区宇，天下乐推，歌谣满道，物无异望。
现代文：丞相从事中郎陆杳将出使，临别时握着王晞的手说： 丞相常山王功绩感动天下，天下人乐于拥戴，赞歌满道，人们没有其他希望。
English: At the time of parting, he held Wang Yao's hand and said: "The world is moved by the merits of the King of the Mountain, the world is happy to support, the praise is full of praise, people have no other hope.

古文：杳等愿披赤心而忽奉外使，无由面尽短诚，寸心谨以仰白。 
现代文：陆杳等愿意敞开赤心而忽然奉命出使，没有途径当面表示浅薄的诚意，谨仰首表白寸心。 
English: There is no way for Lu Wei and others who are willing to open their hearts and suddenly receive orders to be sent, to express their shallow sincerity in person. They should raise their heads and show their sincerity.

古文：晞寻述杳言。
现代文：王晞重述陆查的话。
English: Wang Yao repeated the words of Lu Cha.

古文：王曰： 若内外咸有异望，赵彦深朝夕左右，何因都无所论。
现代文：王说： 如果内外都有反叛的意图，赵彦遝朝夕在我左右，为什么都没有谈到。
English: Wang said, "If there is a rebellious intention both inside and outside, Zhao Yanyu is around me morning and evening, why hasn't he talked about it?"

古文：自以卿意试密与言之。 
现代文：自己用你的意思试着秘密地与他讲逭件事。 
English: On your own, try to talk to him in private.

古文：晞以事隙问彦深。彦深曰： 我比亦惊此音谣，每欲陈闻，则口噤心战。
现代文：王晞在王事间隙问产逯，星拯说： 我近来也为此谣传吃惊，每次想要陈说报告，就口闭心战。
English: Wang Yao inquired about the delivery of the baby in the interval of the royal event, and Xing Zheng said: I have recently been surprised by this rumor. Every time I want to make a report, I keep my mouth shut.

古文：弟既发论，吾亦昧死一披肝胆。 
现代文：弟既然发表此论，我也冒死披肝沥胆。 
English: Now that my brother has published this theory, I'm willing to risk my life.

古文：因亦同劝。
现代文：于是也一同劝王。
English: So they also went with him to persuade the king.

古文：是时诸王公将校四方岳牧表陈符命。
现代文：此时众王公、将领、四方封疆大臣上表陈述上天预示帝王受命符兆。
English: At this time, the princes, generals, and ministers of the four fiefdoms made the above statement, which was a sign from heaven that the emperor had been ordered.

古文：干明元年八月，昭帝践祚，诏晞曰： 何为自同外客，略不可见。
现代文：干明元年八月，昭帝登基，韶令型垂说： 为什么把自己当作外人，全不可见。
English: When Emperor Zhao ascended to the throne in August of the 1st year of the Kianming era, he said, "Why do you regard yourself as an outsider, completely invisible?

古文：自今假非局司，但有所怀，随宜作一牒，候少隙即径进也。 
现代文：从今不用凭藉官衙主事者，衹要有所想，随时应作一呈文，等有空闲直接进献。 
English: From now on, it is no longer necessary to rely on officials and those in charge. If you have something to think about, you should make a submission at any time, and then submit it directly when you have time.

古文：因？尚书阳休之、鸿胪卿崔劼等三人，每日本职务罢，并入东廊，共举录历代废礼坠乐、职司废置、朝飨异同、舆服增损。
现代文：于是命尚书坠堡之、鸿胪卿崔攰等三人，每天本睹事务结束后，一起进入束廊，共同抄录历代废除礼乐、官职废置、朝会宴飨的异同、车服的增减等等。
English: As a result, three people, including Shang Shuxu Qianbo Zhi, Hongyu Qing Cui Yu and others, entered the book-binding gallery together after the end of the book-binding business every day, and jointly copied the abolition of ceremonial music, the abolition of official positions, the differences and similarities of the imperial banquet gongs, the increase and decrease of car clothes, and so on.

古文：或道德高？久在沉沦；或巧言眩俗，妖邪害政；爰及田市舟车、征税通塞、婚葬仪轨、贵贱齐衰，有不便于时而古今行用不已者，或自古利用而当今毁弃者：悉令详思，以渐条奏，未待顿备，遇忆续闻。
现代文：或者道德高尚，长久沉沦；或者巧言乱俗，妖邪害政；以及田市舟车、征税通塞、婚葬礼法、贵贱丧服，有不便于当时而古今行用不止的，或者自古利用而当今毁弃的，全令详细思考，按次序分条陈奏，没来得及一下完备的，有想法接着告知。
English: Or high morals, long-term decline; or eloquence and vulgarity, evil and harm to politics; as well as Tian Shi Zhou Cha, taxation and obstruction, marriage and funeral law, and noble and humble mourning clothes, which were inconvenient at the time and have been used since ancient times, or have been used since ancient times and have been destroyed today, all require detailed consideration, and are divided into sections and played in order. If you do not have time to complete it, please let us know if you have any ideas.

古文：朝晡给与御食，毕景听还。
现代文：朝时和晡时供应御食，日落任他们回去。
English: In the morning and at dusk, they were served food, and at sunset, they were allowed to go home.

古文：时百官请建东宫，未许。
现代文：当时百官请求建造东宫，皇上未允许。
English: At that time, the eunuchs requested the construction of the East Palace, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：每令晞就东堂监视太子冠服，导引趋拜。
现代文：每每令型重到束堂监视太子戴帽穿衣，引导趋走拜谒。
English: Every now and then, he would go to the bouquet hall to supervise the prince's hat-wearing and dress-up, and guide him as he went to pay homage.

古文：为太子太傅，晞以局司奉玺绶。
现代文：任太子太傅，王晞以官衙主事者奉玺绶。
English: He was appointed as the prince's daifu, and Wang Yao served him as the official in charge.

古文：皇太子释奠，又兼中庶子。
现代文：皇太子祭奠先圣先师，又兼任中庶子。
English: The crown prince paid homage to the holy forefather, and also served as the middle child.

古文：帝谓曰： 今既当剧职，不得寻常舒慢也。 
现代文：帝对他说： 今天既然担当艰巨的职务，不能像平常舒缓怠慢。 
English: The emperor said to him: Today, since I am in charge of an arduous duty, I cannot relax and slack off as usual.

古文：帝将北征，问外间比何所闻。
现代文：帝将要北征，命问外间近来有什么所闻。
English: The emperor is about to go on the Northern Expedition, and he asks what has been heard from the outside recently.

古文：晞曰： 道路传言，车驾将行。 
现代文：王肿说： 道路上传言，帝车驾将要出行。 
English: Wang Yu said: There is a rumor on the road that the imperial chariot will travel.

古文：帝曰： 库莫奚南侵，我未经亲戎，因此聊欲习武。 
现代文：帝说： 库莫奚向南方进犯，我未经亲自带兵，因此想藉此习武。 
English: The Emperor said, "Kumoru has invaded the south, and I have not personally led an army, so I would like to use this opportunity to practice martial arts.

古文：晞曰： 銮驾巡狩，为复可尔，若轻有驱使，恐天下失望。 
现代文：王晞说： 帝车驾出行。巡枧州郡邦国，还是可以的，如轻易地行动，恐天下人失望。 
English: Wang Yao said: It is still possible to travel by imperial car. It is still possible to patrol the state, county and country. If you act easily, people around the world will be disappointed.

古文：帝曰： 此懦夫常虑，吾自当临时斟酌。 
现代文：帝说： 此是懦夫平常的考虑，我自当临时斟酌。 
English: The emperor said, "This is the usual consideration of a coward. I will think about it on my own."

古文：帝使斋帅裴泽、主书蔡晖伺察？下，好相诬枉，朝士呼为裴、蔡。
现代文：帝派斋帅裴泽、主书蔡晖偷偷观察众人，好诬陷冤枉人，朝臣呼为裴、蔡。
English: Emperor's marshal, Pei Ze, and chief scribe, Cai Ye, surreptitiously observed the crowd in order to frame the wrongdoers, and the courtiers called out for Pei and Cai.

古文：时二人奏车驾北征后，人言阳休之、王晞数与诸人游宴，不以公事在怀。
现代文：当时此二人启奏车驾北征后，人说阳休之、王晞多次与众人宴游，不把公务放在心裹。
English: At that time, after the two of them left for the Northern Expedition, it was said that Yang Xiu Zhi and Wang Yao often went to banquets with everyone and did not care about their official duties.

古文：帝杖休之、晞胫各四十。
现代文：帝杖打休之、王晞小腿各四十。
English: The king's scepter is broken, and the king's sceptre is broken, and the king's sceptre is broken, and each of his legs is broken forty times.

古文：帝斩人于前，问晞曰； 此人合死不？ 
现代文：帝在面前杀人，问王晞说： 此人该死不? 
English: The emperor killed a man in front of him, and asked Wang Yao, "Does this man deserve to die?"

古文：晞曰： 罪实合死，但恨其不得死地。
现代文：王晞说： 罪过确实该死，但遗憾他不得死地。
English: Wang Yao said, "The crime is really worthy of death, but unfortunately he did not have to die."

古文：臣闻刑人于市，与？弃之，殿廷非杀戮之所。 
现代文：我听说过在市场上处决人，当众抛弃他，殿廷不是杀人的地方。 
English: I've heard of executing a man in the marketplace, of abandoning him in public. The court is no place for murder.

古文：帝改容曰： 自今当为王公改之。 
现代文：帝改变面容说： 从今我当为王公改正它。 
English: The emperor changed his countenance and said, "From now on, I shall correct it for the sake of the emperor."

古文：帝欲以晞为侍中，苦辞不受，或劝晞勿自疏。
现代文：帝想让王晞任侍中，苦苦推辞不接受，有人劝王晞不要自己疏远皇上。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint Wang Yao as an attendant, but he refused to accept the refusal. Someone advised Wang Yao not to alienate himself from the emperor.

古文：晞曰： 我少年以来，阅要人多矣，充诎少时，鲜不败绩。
现代文：王晞说： 我从小以来，看到的重要人物多了，短时间得意忘形，很少有不失败的。
English: Wang Yao said, "Since I was a child, I have seen many important people. I get carried away for a short time, and there are few who do not fail.

古文：且性实疏缓，不堪时务，人主恩私，何由可保，万一披猖，求退无地。
现代文：况且我性格懒散迟钝，不能承受时务，入主的恩德偏爱，怎么可保，万一失意，想退身也没有地方。
English: Moreover, my character is lazy and sluggish, I can't bear the current affairs, the benevolence and favoritism of the master, how can I be guaranteed, in case of disappointment, there is no place to retreat.

古文：非不爱作热官，但思之烂熟耳。 
现代文：并不是不爱做权势显赫的热官，衹是担心熟烂啊。 
English: It's not that I don't like being a powerful and prominent official, it's just that I'm worried about getting old.

古文：百官尝赐射，晞中的，当得绢，为不书箭，有司不与。
现代文：曾经赐射百官，王晞射中靶子，应当得到绢，因为不书名于箭，主管官不给他。
English: Once he was given a prize for shooting a target by a hundred officials. Wang Yao shot the target and should get the prize, because if he did not write his name on the arrow, the officials would not give it to him.

古文：晞陶陶然曰： 我今可谓武有余文不足矣。 
现代文：王晞笑着说： 我今天可以说是武有余而文不足啊。 
English: Wang Yao said with a smile: Today I can say that I have more weapons than I need.

古文：晞无子，帝将赐之妾，使小黄门就宅宣旨，皇后相闻晞妻。
现代文：王晞没有儿子，帝将赏赐给他小妾，让小黄门到住宅宣旨，皇后告诉王晞的妻子。
English: Wang Yao did not have a son. The emperor rewarded him with a concubine and asked Xiao Huangmen to go to the residence to announce the decree. The empress told Wang Yao's wife.

古文：晞令妻答，妻终不言，晞以手拊胸而退。
现代文：王晞让妻子回答，妻子最终不说话，王晞用手拊胸退下。
English: Wang Yao asked his wife to answer, but in the end, his wife did not speak, and Wang Yao covered his chest with his hands and retreated.

古文：帝闻之笑。
现代文：帝听说后笑了。
English: Hearing this, the emperor smiled.

古文：孝昭崩，哀慕殆不自胜，因以羸败。
现代文：孝昭帝逝世，哀伤思慕几乎不能承受，因此身体瘦弱。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiao Zhaodi, his grief was almost unbearable, so his body was thin and weak.

古文：武成本忿其儒缓，由是弥嫌之，因奏事大被诃叱，而雅步晏然。
现代文：武成本来气忿他的柔弱，由此更加嫌弃他，因奏事大被呵斥，而他行走安然。
English: Wuchang became enraged at his weakness and despised him even more. He was rebuked for the incident, but he walked away unscathed.

古文：历东徐州刺史、秘书监。
现代文：历任束徐州刺史、秘书监。
English: Successive members of the group include Xuzhou Shishi, Secretary Supervisor.

古文：武平初，迁大鸿胪，加仪同三司，监修起居注，待诏文林馆。
现代文：武平初年，任大鸿胪，加授仪同三司，监修起居注，待诏文林馆。
English: In the first year of Wuping, he was appointed as the Grand Master of the Academy of Fine Arts. He was also awarded the honorary title of three divisions, supervised the construction of the residence, and supervised the construction of the Wenlin Museum.

古文：性闲淡寡欲，虽王事鞅掌，而雅操不移。
现代文：生性闲淡寡欲，虽然王事纷扰烦忙，而高尚的操守也不改变。
English: Idleness and lack of desire are innate, although royal affairs are troublesome and busy, and noble conduct does not change.

古文：在？州，虽戎马填闾，未尝以世务为累。
现代文：在并州，虽然兵马充塞闾巷，也未曾被世务所累。
English: In Bozhou, although the soldiers and horses have blocked the streets, they have not been burdened by worldly affairs.

古文：良辰美景，啸？遨游，登临山水，以谈燕为事，人士谓之物外司马。
现代文：良辰美景，啸咏遨游，登临山水，以聚谈为事，人们称他为超脱于尘世之外的司马。
English: When he is having a good time, admiring the beautiful scenery, taking a whirlwind tour, climbing mountains and rivers, and talking with others, people call him Sima, who is detached from the world.

古文：常诣晋祠，赋诗曰： 日落应归去，鱼鸟见留连。 
现代文：常到晋祠，作诗说： 日落应归去，鱼鸟见留连。 
English: He often went to Jin Temple and wrote a poem saying: The sunset should return, but the fish and birds remain.

古文：忽有相王使至，召晞不时至。
现代文：忽然有相王使者至，召而没有按时到。
English: Suddenly, an emissary of the king arrived, but he did not arrive on time.

古文：明日丞相西合祭酒卢思道谓晞曰： 昨被召已朱颜，得不以鱼鸟致怪？ 
现代文：第二天丞相西合祭酒卢思道对王晞说： 昨曰被召已有羞赧之色，该不是因鱼乌被责怪吧? 
English: The next day, Lu Si Dao, the minister of the west combined with the ritual wine, said to Wang Yao: Yesterday, I was called to be shy. Shouldn't I be blamed for the blackfish?

古文：晞缓笑曰： 昨晚陶然，颇以酒浆被责，卿辈亦是留连之一物，岂直在鱼鸟而已。 
现代文：王晞微笑说： 昨晚和乐，因为饮酒颇被责怪，你辈也是留连的一物，哪裹衹在于鱼和乌而已。 
English: Wang Yao said with a smile: Last night, He Le, because drinking was quite blamed, you are also one of the things left behind, which is just fish and ashes.

古文：及晋阳陷败，与同志避周兵东北走。
现代文：晋阳失陷，与同仁躲避周兵向东北逃跑。
English: After the fall of Jinyang, he and his colleagues fled to the northeast to avoid Zhou soldiers.

古文：山路险迥，惧有土贼，而晞温酒服膏，曾不一废，每未肯去，行侣尤之。
现代文：山路险要曲折，怕有土匪，而王晞温酒吃肉，未曾废弃一次，每当不肯离去，同行的人便责怪他。
English: The mountain road is full of twists and turns, and he is afraid of bandits. However, Wang Xuanwen drinks wine and eats meat, and he has never abandoned it. Whenever he refuses to leave, his companions blame him.

古文：晞曰： 莫尤我，我行事若不悔，久作三公矣。 
现代文：王晞说： 不要责怪我，我做事如果没有悔恨，早作三公了。 
English: Wang Yao said, "Don't blame me. If I didn't have remorse for what I did, I would have become the Three Wise Men.

古文：齐亡，周武以晞为仪同大将军、太子谏议大夫。
现代文：齐灭亡，周武以晞为仪同大将军、太子谏议大夫。
English: After Qi's death, Zhou Wu took Zou as a general and Prince Zou as a doctor.

古文：隋开皇元年，卒于洛阳，年七十一。
现代文：隋开皇元年，卒在洛阳，时年七十一岁。
English: He died in Luoyang in the first year of the Sui Dynasty, at the age of 71.

古文：赠仪同三司、曹州刺史。
现代文：追赠仪同三司、曹州刺史。
English: The posthumous award ceremony is the same as the third division and Caozhou stabbing history.

