古文：李元忠，赵郡柏人人也。
现代文：李元忠，赵郡柏人人氏。
English: Mr. Li Yuanzhong, Mr. Zhao County Bairen.

古文：曾祖灵，魏定州刺史、巨鹿公。
现代文：曾祖父灵，魏定州刺史、巨鹿公。
English: Great-grandfather Ling, Wei Dingzhou Shishi, Giant Deer King.

古文：祖恢，镇西将军。
现代文：祖父恢，镇西将军。
English: His grandfather was General Zhenxi.

古文：父显甫，安州刺史。
现代文：父显甫，安州刺史。
English: His father, Xianfu, was a historian in Anzhou.

古文：元忠少厉志操，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：元忠年轻时有志操，居丧以孝义闻名。
English: When he was young, Mototada had a strong will and was known for his filial piety.

古文：袭爵平棘子。
现代文：袭爵平棘子。
English: He succeeded to the title of Taira no Shoshi.

古文：魏清河王怿为司空，辟为士曹参军。迁太尉，复启为长流参军。
现代文：魏清河王元怿为司空，辟元忠作士曹参军；元怿升任太尉，又启奏朝廷，让他为长流参军。
English: The Wei-Qing dynasty king, Yuan Shao, was Siku, and he sent Yuan Zhong to join the army as an officer. Yuan Shao was promoted to the rank of captain, and he also appealed to the imperial court to let him join the army for a long time.

古文：怿后为太傅，寻被诏为营构明堂大都督，又引为主簿。
现代文：元怿后为太傅，很快受诏为营建明堂的大都督，再引他做主簿。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty, he was Taifu, and soon received the imperial edict to be the grand governor to build Myeongdong, and then he was made the chief secretary.

古文：元忠粗览史书及阴阳数术，解鼓筝，兼好射弹，有巧思。
现代文：元忠粗略地读过一些史书和阴阳数术，通晓鼓筝，加上爱好弹射，故有巧思。
English: Yuan Zhong has read some history books and Yin and Yang numerology, is familiar with the kite drum, and likes catapulting, so he has clever ideas.

古文：遭母忧，去任。
现代文：母亲逝世，辞职归家守孝。
English: After his mother's death, Moritaka resigned and returned home.

古文：未几，相州刺史、安乐王鉴请为府司马，元忠以艰忧，固辞不就。
现代文：未几，相州刺史、安乐王元鉴请他做府司马，元忠以守孝为由，给以了拒绝。
English: Not long after, he was asked to be the prefectural governor by the prince of Songzhou and the king of Anle, Yuan Jian. Yuan Zhong refused on the grounds of filial piety.

古文：初，元忠以母老多患，乃专心医药，研习积年，遂善于方技。
现代文：当初，因为母亲年老多病，元忠就专心医药，研习数年，就擅长方技。
English: At first, because his mother was old and sickly, Yuan Zhong concentrated on medicine, studied for several years, and was good at square techniques.

古文：性仁恕，见有疾者，不问贵贱，皆为救疗。
现代文：元忠宽仁忠恕，看到有病的，不问贵贱，都帮忙治疗。
English: Yuan Zhong forgives and forgives, and when he sees someone who is ill, he helps to treat them, no matter how high or low they are.

古文：家素富实，其家人在乡，多有举贷求利，元忠每焚契免责。
现代文：元忠的家境富厚，家里的人喜欢举贷求利，他就常常烧掉借约，免掉他人的债务。
English: Yuan Zhong's family background is rich. People in his family like to borrow money for interest. He often burns the loan agreement to get rid of other people's debts.

古文：乡人甚敬重之。
现代文：因此，极受乡人敬重。
English: Therefore, it is highly respected by the villagers.

古文：魏孝明时，盗贼蜂起，清河有五百人西戍，还经南赵郡，以路梗共投元忠。
现代文：魏孝明帝时，盗贼蜂起，清河有五百人西戍，回家时经过南赵郡，由于道路被阻，一同投奔了元忠。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Xiaoming, the thieves revolted. Five hundred people from Qinghe fled to Xidi. When returning home, they passed through Nan Zhao County. Since the road was blocked, they fled to Yuanzhong together.

古文：奉绢千匹，元忠唯受一匹，杀五羊以食之，遣奴为导，曰： 若逢贼，但道李元忠遣送。 
现代文：人们送给千匹绢帛，他却只接受了一匹，又宰杀五头羊招待，最后打发家奴做向导，告诉家奴说： 如果遇上寇贼，你只说是李元忠派你护送的。 
English: People gave him thousands of yakitori, but he only accepted one yakitori, slaughtered five sheep to invite guests, and finally sent his manservant as a guide, telling his manservant: "If you encounter a bandit, just say that Li Yuanzhong sent you to escort him."

古文：奴如其言，贼皆舍避。
现代文：奴按照他的话去做，寇贼们都没有阻拦，这五百人便顺利地回家了。
English: He did as he was told, the robbers did not stop him, and the five hundred people went home without a hitch.

古文：永安初，就拜南赵郡太守，以好酒，无政绩。
现代文：永安初，拜南赵郡太守，由于嗜酒没有政绩。
English: At the beginning of the Yongan era, the governor of Zhao County in Binan had no political achievements due to his alcoholism.

古文：值洛阳倾覆，庄帝幽崩，元忠弃官还家，潜图义举。
现代文：适值洛阳陷落，庄帝幽崩，元忠便弃官回到了故乡，试图暗中组织人马，举起义旗。
English: When Luoyang fell and Emperor Zhuang died, Yuan Zhong abandoned his post and returned to his hometown, where he tried to secretly organize people to raise the banner of righteousness.

古文：会高祖率众东出，便自往奉迎。
现代文：会高祖率众东出，元忠就亲自跑来迎接。
English: The founding fathers of the Association of Korean Residents in Japan headed out to the East, and Mototada himself came to meet them.

古文：乘露车，载素筝浊酒以见高祖，因进从横之策，备陈诚款，深见嘉纳。
现代文：他坐着露车，车上放着素筝浊酒，见到了高祖。并向高祖陈述纵横的策略，话语中显露了赤诚忠心，这便赢得了高祖的信任。
English: He met Gao Zu while riding in a trolley car with a vegetarian kite and a bottle of wine. He explained to Gao Zu the vertical and horizontal strategies, and his words revealed his sincerity and loyalty, which won Gao Zu's trust.

古文：时刺史尔朱羽生阻兵据州，元忠先聚众于西山，仍与大军相合，擒斩羽生。
现代文：此时刺史尔朱羽生据州阻兵，元忠先在西山聚集兵众，然后与大军会合，一下子捉住了羽生，并杀了他。
English: At this time, Zhu Hanyu stabbed the state resistance, and Yuan Zhong first gathered soldiers in Xishan, then met with the large army, caught Hanyu at once, and killed him.

古文：即令行殷州事。
现代文：高祖就命令他行殷州事。
English: Gao Zu ordered him to do Yinzhou business.

古文：中兴初，除中军将军、卫尉卿。
现代文：中兴初，除中军将军、卫尉卿。
English: At the beginning of Zhongxing, in addition to the general of the Chinese army, the lieutenant of the guards.

古文：二年，转太常卿、殷州大中正。
现代文：二年，转太常卿、殷州大中正。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to Tai Changqing and became the vice-president of Yinzhou University.

古文：后以从兄瑾年长，以中正让之。
现代文：后来想到从兄瑾比自己年纪大，就把中正让给了他。
English: Later, when I thought that my elder brother was older than me, I gave him the middle seat.

古文：寻加征南将军。
现代文：不久加征南将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the South.

古文：武帝将纳后，即高祖之长女也，诏元忠与尚书令元罗致娉于晋阳。
现代文：武帝准备纳后，后即高祖的大女儿。帝令元忠与尚书令元罗前往晋阳行聘礼。
English: After Emperor Wu prepared to accept her, she became the eldest daughter of Emperor Gaozu. Emperor Mototada and Emperor Shoshu ordered Genro to go to Jinyang for the betrothal ceremony.

古文：高祖每于宴席论叙旧事，因抚掌欣笑云： 此人逼我起兵。 
现代文：每当高祖在宴席上谈论旧事，就拉着元忠的手，笑着说： 是这位逼迫我起兵的。 
English: Whenever Gaozu talked about the past at a banquet, he would take Mototada's hand and say with a smile, "This is the man who forced me to join the army."

古文：赐白马一匹。
现代文：并赐给他一匹白马。
English: And he gave him a white horse.

古文：元忠戏谓高祖曰： 若不与侍中，当更觅建义处。 
现代文：元忠对高祖开玩笑说： 如果不逼迫您侍中，我会再找人举起义旗的。 
English: Mototada jokingly said to Gaozu, "If I don't force you to become an attendant, I'll find someone else to raise the flag of righteousness."

古文：高祖答曰： 建义处不虑无，止畏如此老翁不可遇耳。 
现代文：高祖回答说： 举义旗的人容易找，只是像你这样的人不可遇。 
English: Gaozu replied, "It's easy to find people who raise the banner of righteousness, but it's impossible to find someone like you.

古文：元忠曰： 止为此翁难遇，所以不去。 
现代文：元忠说： 只因这样的人难遇，所以我就不走了。 
English: Li Yuanzhong said: It is precisely because this old man is difficult to meet, so I will not leave.

古文：因捋高祖须而大笑。
现代文：说着捋着高祖的胡须大笑。
English: He said, stroking Gaozu's beard and laughing.

古文：高祖亦悉其雅意，深相嘉重。
现代文：高祖也理解他的好意，十分敬重。
English: Gaozu also understood his kindness and respected him very much.

古文：后高祖奉送皇后，仍田于晋泽，元忠马倒被伤，当时殒绝，久而方苏。
现代文：后高祖奉送皇后，还在晋泽打猎，元忠马倒，身受重伤，当时就像断了气，好久才算苏醒过来。
English: After Gao Zu was sent to the queen, he was still hunting in Jinze. Yuan Zhongma fell and was seriously injured. At that time, it was as if he had lost his breath, and it took him a long time to wake up.

古文：高祖亲自抚视。
现代文：高祖亲自看视护理。
English: Gao Zu personally supervised the nursing.

古文：其年，封晋阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：这年，朝廷封元忠晋阳县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In the same year, the Imperial Court bestowed the title of Yuanzhong to Jinyang County, with more than 500 households in the food village.

古文：后以微谴失官。
现代文：后由于小小过失，丢掉了官职。
English: Later, due to a minor fault, he lost his official position.

古文：时朝廷离贰，义旗多见猜阻。
现代文：这一时期，朝廷离心，义旗之举多遭猜忌。
English: During this period, the imperial court was distracted, and the raising of the banner of righteousness was often met with suspicion.

古文：斛斯椿等以元忠淡于荣利，又不以世事经怀，故不在嫌嫉之地。
现代文：斛斯椿等认为元忠淡于名利，又不以时事放在心上，故不属嫌嫉之列。
English: Yu Shizhun and others believe that Yuanzhong is less important than fame and fortune, and does not pay attention to current affairs, so it is not one of the jealous ones.

古文：寻兼中书令。
现代文：不久，兼中书令。
English: Soon after, he also became a chujo shirei.

古文：天平初，复为太常。
现代文：天平初，复为太常。
English: At the beginning of the balance, the complex is too common.

古文：后加骠骑将军。
现代文：后加骠骑将军。
English: After that came the cavalry general.

古文：四年，除使持节、光州刺史。
现代文：四年，除使持节、光州刺史。
English: In four years, in addition to the festival, Gwangju will make history.

古文：时州境灾俭，人皆菜色，元忠表求赈贷，俟秋征收。
现代文：时州内灾荒，人多菜色，元忠上表请求赈贷，待秋收后归还。
English: When there was a drought in the prefecture and many people wanted to eat, Yuan Zhong went to the table to ask for a loan, which was to be returned after the autumn harvest.

古文：被报，听用万石。
现代文：朝廷同意，准许使用万石。
English: The Imperial Court agreed and permitted the use of Wanshi.

古文：元忠以为万石给人，计一家不过升斗而已，徒有虚名，不救其弊，遂出十五万石以赈之。
现代文：元忠认为万石赈民，平均算来，一家只有升斗而已，徒有虚名，不救其敝，于是拿出十五万石进行赈济。
English: Yuanzhong thought that the average family of 10,000-koku people only had a cup, but it was only a false name, and did not save their money, so he took out 150,000-koku to save money.

古文：事讫表陈，朝廷嘉而不责。
现代文：事情完结后上报朝廷，皇上嘉奖了他。
English: After the matter was over, it was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor rewarded him.

古文：兴和末，拜侍中。
现代文：兴和末，拜侍中。
English: The end of the Heian period, the middle of the Kamakura period.

古文：元忠虽居要任，初不以物务干怀，唯以声酒自娱，大率常醉，家事大小，了不关心。
现代文：元忠虽居要职，最初对日常杂事从不插手，而只以声酒自娱，且常常喝醉。大小家事，也是一点都不关心。
English: Although Mototada held an important position, at first he never interfered with everyday chores, but only entertained himself with alcohol, and was often drunk. He did not care at all about household chores.

古文：园庭之内，罗种果药，亲朋寻诣，必留连宴赏。
现代文：园庭之中，种满了果树药材，亲戚朋友来访，一定留下喝酒。
English: In the middle of the garden, full of fruit trees and medicinal plants, relatives and friends come to visit, and they must stay to drink.

古文：每挟弹携壶，敖游里闬，遇会饮酌，萧然自得。
现代文：经常挟弹携壶，遨游里闾，饮酒作乐，怡然自得。
English: He often carries a jug with him, goes for a walk, drinks, and enjoys himself.

古文：常布言于执事云： 年渐迟暮，志力已衰，久忝名官，以妨贤路。
现代文：常对身边的办事人员说： 我的年纪大了，身体衰弱，虽然久居显位，但还是阻塞了进贤之路。
English: He often said to the clerks around him: I am old and weak, and although I have been in a prominent position for a long time, I still blocked the road to becoming a scholar.

古文：若朝廷厚恩，未便放弃者，乞在闲冗，以养余年。 
现代文：如果朝廷恩惠，还想用我的话，请安置在闲冗之中，好让我静静地度过余生。 
English: If, by the grace of the court, you still want to use my words, please place me in idleness, so that I can spend the rest of my life quietly.

古文：武定元年，除东徐州刺史，固辞不拜。
现代文：武定元年，除东徐州刺史，元忠坚决推辞而没有接受。
English: In the first year of Wuding, in addition to the East Xuzhou stabbing history, Yuan Zhong resolutely refused and did not accept.

古文：乃除骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：乃除骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In addition to the grand marshal of the equestrian team, there are three officers of the ceremonial team.

古文：曾贡世宗蒲桃一盘。
现代文：曾向世宗贡献蒲桃一盘。
English: He once donated a bowl of sweet potatoes to the Sejong.

古文：世宗报以百练缣，遗其书曰： 仪同位亚台铉，识怀贞素，出藩入侍，备经要重。
现代文：世宗则回赠给百练缣，还附有一短简，简称： 仪同之位仅次于宰相，学识胸怀，正直朴素，出藩入侍，历职要重。
English: On the other hand, the Sejong gave back the Baireun gong, together with a short epitaph, in short: He was second only to the prime minister in rank, learned, honest and unpretentious, he entered the service after leaving the domain, and his career was important.

古文：而犹家无担石，室若悬磬，岂轻财重义，奉时爱己故也。
现代文：然而家无担石之积，室如悬磬，难道是轻财重义，只不过为奉时爱己而已。
English: However, a house without a load-bearing stone, a room like a suspended anchor, is it light on money and heavy on meaning, but just for the sake of self-love.

古文：久相嘉尚，嗟咏无极，恒思标赏，有意无由。
现代文：久已尊尚，嗟叹无极，恒思奖赏，有意无由。
English: For a long time, he has been revered, admired, and rewarded, and there is no reason to do so.

古文：忽辱蒲桃，良深佩带。
现代文：忽然收到送来的蒲桃，深受感动。
English: She was deeply moved when she suddenly received a sweet peach.

古文：聊用绢百匹，以酬清德也。 
现代文：聊以绢帛百匹，报答你的清德。 
English: Talk to hundreds of horses, repay your virtue.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：仅此一事，即可见世宗对他的敬重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：孙腾、司马子如尝共诣元忠，见其坐树下，拥被对壶，庭室芜旷。
现代文：孙腾、司马子如曾一同拜访过元忠，见他坐在庭院中的树底下，披着被端着酒壶，周围再无长物。
English: Sun Teng and Sima Zi once visited Yuan Zhong together and saw him sitting under a tree in the courtyard, wearing a quilt and carrying a wine jug, surrounded by nothing.

古文：谓二公曰： 不意今日披藜藿也。 
现代文：元忠对二位说： 没有想到今天只有粗糙的饭食。 
English: Mototada said to the two, "I didn't expect to have only rough food today.

古文：因呼妻出，衣不曳地。
现代文：边说边呼妻出来，其妻衣不曳地。
English: While talking, he calls his wife out, and his wife's dress does not drag.

古文：二公相顾叹息而去，大饷米绢衣服，元忠受而散之。
现代文：二位互相看了一眼，感叹着走了，马上给他送来了许多的米绢衣服，元忠接受了，却很快分发给了周围的人。
English: The two of them looked at each other, sighed and walked away. They immediately sent him a lot of rice bran clothes. Yuan Zhong accepted, but quickly distributed them to the people around him.

古文：三年，复以本官领卫尉卿。
现代文：三年，复以本官领卫尉卿。
English: Three years later, he was reinstated to his position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：其年卒于位，年六十。
现代文：这年死，年六十。
English: He died this year, aged 60.

古文：诏赠缣布五百匹，使持节、督定冀殷幽四州诸军事、大将军、司徒、定州刺史，谥曰敬惠。
现代文：帝诏赠缣布五百匹，使持节、督定冀殷幽四州诸军事、大将军、司徒、定州刺史，谥号敬惠。
English: Emperor Zhaozhao presented five hundred pieces of embroidered cloth to the military, generals, magistrates, and court officials of the four prefectures of Jizhou, Hebei, Anhui, and Yunnan.

古文：初，元忠将仕，梦手执炬火入其父墓，中夜惊起，甚恶之。
现代文：早年元忠将要任官，梦见自己手拿火把走进了父亲的墓室，半夜惊醒，心情十分不好。
English: In his early years, Mototada was about to be appointed as an official. He dreamed that he walked into his father's tomb with a torch in his hand. He woke up in the middle of the night and was in a very bad mood.

古文：旦告其受业师，占云： 大吉，此谓光照先人，终致贵达矣。 
现代文：早上起床后就告诉了塾师，塾师给他占了一卦，说： 大吉，这便是光照先人，你的官位终究是要显达的。 
English: After getting up in the morning, he told his tutor. The tutor gave him a piece of advice, saying, "Dakichi, this is the light of the ancestors, your official position is ultimately to be revealed."

古文：子搔嗣。
现代文：子搔继嗣。
English: His son became his successor.

古文：搔，字德况，少聪敏，有才艺，音律博弈之属，多所通解。曾采诸声，别造一器，号曰八纟玄，时人称其思理。
现代文：搔，字德况，少时聪敏，有才艺，通晓音律博弈。搔曾采集诸声，新造一器，号称 八弦 ，时人称其思理。
English: Zou, the character of virtue, was intelligent and talented when he was young, and was familiar with the game of musical rhythms. Zou had collected voices and created a new instrument, known as the eight-stringed instrument, which was called "thinking" at the time.

古文：起家司徒行参军。
现代文：起家司徒行参军。
English: Start a family and join the army.

古文：子伽林袭。
现代文：任河内太守，使百姓安宁。
English: He was appointed governor of Hanoi to keep the people calm.

古文：卢文伟，字休族，范阳涿人也。
现代文：入为尚书仪曹郎。天保八年卒。卢文伟，字休族，范阳涿地人氏。
English: Lu Wenwei, a member of the Xiu family, from the Fanyang Shiji clan, entered the priesthood in the eighth year of the Tenpo era.

古文：为北州冠族。
现代文：为北方豪族。
English: They are a northern powerful tribe.

古文：父敞，出后伯假。
现代文：父敞，过继伯父假为儿子。
English: Like father, like son.

古文：文伟少孤，有志尚，颇涉经史，笃于交游，少为乡闾所敬。
现代文：文伟少时为孤儿，有志向，读了很多的经史书籍，喜好交游，年轻时便得乡里敬重。
English: When he was young, Wen Wei was an orphan. He had aspirations, read a lot of books on history, and liked to travel. When he was young, he was respected by the villagers.

古文：州辟主簿。
现代文：州郡辟举为主簿。
English: Honshu Hakuho is the main book.

古文：年三十八，始举秀才。
现代文：年三十八，才被举为秀才。
English: Thirty-eight years old, only to be promoted as a great talent.

古文：除本州平北府长流参军，说刺史裴俊按旧迹修督亢陂，溉田万余顷，民赖其利，修立之功，多以委文伟。
现代文：除本州平北府长流参军，劝说刺史裴俊依旧迹整修督亢陂，溉田万余顷，民得其利。其修整之工，裴俊一并委托给了文伟。
English: In addition to the governor of Honshu's Pingbei Prefecture joining the army, he persuaded Sashi Peijun to continue to renovate the duchy, irrigating more than 10,000 hectares of farmland for the benefit of the people. Peijun also entrusted his renovation work to Wen Wei.

古文：文伟既善于营理，兼展私力，家素贫俭，因此致富。
现代文：文伟善于营理，加之巧使私力，使贫寒之家，很快富足起来。
English: Wen Wei was good at business management, and in addition, he skillfully used his own strength to make the poor family quickly become rich.

古文：孝昌中，诏兼尚书郎中，时行台常景启留为行台郎中。
现代文：孝昌中，诏兼尚书郎中，这时行台常景上书朝廷请留文伟为行台郎中。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, Emperor Zhao and Emperor Shang, the Emperor requested that Emperor Wenwei remain in the middle of the reign of Emperor Xingtai.

古文：及北方将乱，文伟积稻谷于范阳城，时经荒俭，多所赈赡，弥为乡里所归。
现代文：当北方快要动乱的时候，文伟早在范阳城屯积了很多粮食，一出现荒灾，马上进行赈济，更是赢得了乡里民心。
English: When the north was on the verge of turmoil, Wen Wei had accumulated a lot of grain in Fanyang City. As soon as there was a disaster, he immediately carried out relief work, and won the hearts of the people in the countryside.

古文：寻为杜洛周所虏。
现代文：不久被杜洛周俘虏。
English: He was soon captured by Doulou Zhou.

古文：洛周败，复入葛荣，荣败，归家。
现代文：洛周败，投奔葛荣，葛荣败，回到故家。
English: Luo Zhou defected to Ge Rong, Ge Rong defected and returned to his hometown.

古文：时韩楼据蓟城，文伟率乡闾屯守范阳，与楼相抗。
现代文：韩楼盘踞蓟城，文伟率乡民屯守范阳，与楼对抗。
English: Han Lou was besieged in the city, and Wen Wei led the villagers to defend Fanyang and fight against Lou.

古文：乃以文伟行范阳郡事。
现代文：朝廷便让文伟行范阳郡事。
English: The imperial court then allowed Wen Wei to go to Fanyang County.

古文：防守二年，与士卒同劳苦，分散家财，拯救贫乏，莫不人人感说。
现代文：与士卒同甘共苦，分散家财，拯救贫乏，使得人人感悦，就这样防守了两年。
English: He and his soldiers shared the joys and hardships, dispersed the family wealth, saved the poor, and made everyone feel happy. In this way, they defended themselves for two years.

古文：尔朱荣遣将侯深讨楼，平之，文伟以功封大夏县男，邑二百户，除范阳太守。
现代文：尔朱荣派出将领侯深讨伐韩楼，平定了蓟城。文伟因功封大夏县男，食邑二百户，拜范阳太守。
English: Zhu Rong sent his generals and lords to fight against Hanlu and subdue Lucheng. As a result, Wen Wei was awarded the title of Daxia County Man, 200 households were provided with food, and he was named the Fanyang Governor.

古文：深乃留镇范阳。
现代文：侯深便留下镇守范阳。
English: Hou Shen then left the town guard Fan Yang behind.

古文：及荣诛，文伟知深难信，乃诱之出猎，闭门拒之。深失据，遂赴中山。
现代文：尔朱荣被诛杀，文伟知道侯深不可靠，就引诱他出外打猎，然后紧闭城门不让进来，深无城镇守，只得前往中山。
English: When Zhu Rong was killed, Wen Wei knew that Hou Sheng was not reliable, so he lured him out to hunt, and then closed the city gate to prevent him from entering. There was no town guard, so he had to go to Zhongshan.

古文：庄帝崩，文伟与幽州刺史刘灵助同谋起义。
现代文：庄帝崩，文伟与幽州刺史刘灵助同谋起义。
English: When Emperor Zhuang died, Wen Wei and Liu Lingsu, the governor of Yuzhou, conspired to start an uprising.

古文：灵助克瀛州，留文伟行事，自率兵赴定州，为尔朱荣将侯深所败，文伟弃州，走还本郡，仍与高乾邕兄弟共相影响。
现代文：灵助攻克瀛州，留文伟行瀛州事，自己领兵赶赴定州，却被尔朱荣的将领侯深打败。文伟弃州，逃归本郡，仍然同高乾邕兄弟互为影响。
English: Ling assisted in the conquest of Kezhu, left Wen Wei to conduct the affairs of Kezhu, led the troops to Dingzhou himself, but was defeated by Zhu Rong's general Hou Sheng. Wen Wei abandoned the state, fled to this county, and still influenced each other with Gao Qianqian's brothers.

古文：属高祖至信都，文伟遣子怀道奉启陈诚，高祖嘉纳之。
现代文：适逢高祖来到信都，文伟便派其子怀道奉表陈诚，高祖高兴地收纳了他们。
English: When Gao Zu came to Xindu, Wen Wei sent his son Huai Dao to pay homage to Chen Cheng, and Gao Zu gladly received them.

古文：中兴初，除安东将军、安州刺史。
现代文：中兴初，除安东将军、安州刺史。
English: At the beginning of ZTE, in addition to General Anton, Anzhou stabbed history.

古文：时安州未宾，仍居帅任，行幽州事，加镇军、正刺史。
现代文：此时安州没有宾服朝廷，文伟还是留居帅任，行幽州事，加镇军、正刺史。
English: At this time, Anzhou did not have a guest to serve the imperial court, and Wen Wei still remained in the commanding position, carrying out state affairs, adding town troops, and making history.

古文：时安州剌史卢曹亦从灵助举兵，助败，因据幽州降尔朱兆，兆仍以为刺史，据城不下。
现代文：安州刺史卢曹也随灵助起兵，灵助失败，乘机占据幽州投降了尔朱兆，兆还是让他做刺史。
English: Lu Cao, the governor of Anzhou, also followed Lingzhu in raising an army. Lingzhu failed, and took the opportunity to occupy Yuzhou and surrendered to Zhu Zhao. Zhao still let him be the governor.

古文：文伟不得入州，即于郡所为州治。
现代文：文伟不能入州，便将郡所升格为州治。
English: Wen Wei could not enter the state, so he upgraded the county seat to the state government.

古文：太昌初，迁安州刺史，累加散骑常侍。
现代文：太昌初，迁安州刺史，累加散骑常侍。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, he moved to Anzhou and made history, accumulating a number of horseback riding attendants.

古文：天平末，高祖以文伟行东雍州事，转行青州事。
现代文：天平末，高祖命令文伟行东雍州事，又转行青州事。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Gao Zu ordered Wen Wei to go to Dongyang and then to Qingzhou.

古文：文伟性轻财，爱宾客，善于抚接，好行小惠，是以所在颇得人情，虽有受纳，吏民不甚苦之。
现代文：文伟轻财，爱交宾客，善于抚安，好行小惠，所以在任职之地颇得民心，虽有受纳，但吏民还能承担。
English: Wen Wei is easy to make money, loves to make friends with guests, is good at appeasing, and is good at doing small favors, so he is quite popular in his place of employment. Although he is accepted, he can still bear the responsibility of the people.

古文：经纪生资，常若不足，致财积聚，承候宠要，饷遗不绝。
现代文：经营资财，常感不足，致财积蓄，承候宠要，馈送不绝。
English: The management of capital and resources is often insufficient, resulting in financial savings, waiting for favors, and continuous feeding.

古文：兴和三年卒于州，年六十。
现代文：兴和三年死在州刺史位上，年六十。
English: Xinghe died three years later in his sixtieth year.

古文：赠使持节、侍中、都督定瀛殷三州军事、司徒、尚书左仆射、定州刺史，谥曰孝威。
现代文：赠使持节、侍中、都督定瀛殷三州军事、司徒、尚书左仆射、定州刺史，谥号孝威。
English: He was given the title of Jisai, the title of Jizhong, the military title of Jianyin, the military title of Sanzhou, the military title of Sittu, the military title of Shangshuzhaopu, the military title of Dingzhou, and the honorary title of Xiaowei.

古文：子恭道，性温良，颇有文学。
现代文：子恭道，宽厚温良，颇有文才。
English: Zi Gongdao, generous and mild-mannered, quite a literary talent.

古文：州辟主簿。
现代文：本州辟举为主簿。
English: Honshu Hakuho is the main book.

古文：李崇北征，以为开府墨曹参军。
现代文：李崇北征，任命为开府墨曹参军。
English: Li Chong led the Northern Expedition and was appointed to join the army in Kaifu Mo Cao.

古文：自文伟据范阳，屡经寇难，恭道常助父防守。
现代文：自从文伟占据范阳，多次经受寇贼之乱，也多亏了恭道时常协助父亲进行防守。
English: Since Wen Wei occupied Fanyang, he has suffered many times from the chaos of bandits, and thanks to Gongdao, he often assists his father in defense.

古文：七兵尚书郭秀素与恭道交款，及任事，每称荐之，高祖亦闻其名。
现代文：七兵尚书郭秀一向与恭道关系密切，他有地位后，不断地向朝廷推荐，高祖也因此听到了他恭道的名字。
English: Guo Xiu, one of the seven soldiers of Shangshu, has always had a close relationship with Gongdao. After attaining his position, he constantly recommended Gongdao to the imperial court. Gaozu therefore heard the name of Gongdao from him.

古文：天平初，特除龙骧将军、范阳太守。
现代文：天平初，特拜龙骧将军、范阳太守。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpyo era, General Longyu Tepai and Fanyang Taishu came to power.

古文：在郡有德惠。
现代文：在郡有德政仁惠。
English: In the county, there is Desheng Renhui.

古文：先文伟卒。
现代文：比父亲文伟早死。
English: He died earlier than his father, Wen Wei.

古文：赠使持节、都督幽平二州军事、幽州刺史、度支尚书，谥曰定。
现代文：赠使持节、都督幽平二州军事、幽州刺史、度支尚书，谥号定。
English: He was given the title of Jishu, the military governor of Yuzhou and Yuping, the history of Yuzhou, and a copy of Duozhi Shangshu, and his posthumous name was set.

古文：子询祖，袭祖爵大夏男。
现代文：恭道子询祖，袭祖父爵大夏男。
English: Kyo Michiko inquired about his ancestry and followed in the footsteps of his grandfather, Count Daxia.

古文：有术学，文章华靡，为后生之俊。
现代文：有术学，文章华丽，为后辈之俊。
English: He is a scholar of acrobatics, a brilliant essayist, and a good example for the younger generation.

古文：举秀才入京。
现代文：举秀才入京师。
English: Let's promote talented people to enter the Beijing division.

古文：李祖勋尝宴文士，显祖使小黄门敕祖勋曰： 茹茹既破，何故无贺表？ 
现代文：李祖勋曾设宴款待文士，显祖打发小黄门送书给祖勋之母说： 蠕蠕已被我们打败，为什么没有看到你们家的贺表？ 
English: Li Zuxun once held a banquet to entertain the scribes, Hsien Zu sent Xiao Huangmen to send a book to Zu Xun's mother, saying: "Chu Chu has been defeated by us, why haven't you seen your family's greeting card?

古文：使者伫立待之。
现代文：使者站立一旁等候着。
English: The messenger stood waiting.

古文：诸宾皆为表，询祖俄顷便成。
现代文：诸位宾客都作起表来，只一会功夫，祖询就写成了。
English: All of you guests have made a starting table, just a moment of effort, ancestral inquiry is written.

古文：后朝廷大迁除，同日催拜。
现代文：后来有次朝廷大量地拜官迁除，一天之中就要很多的任官诏令。
English: Later, there was a time when the imperial court moved a large number of officials, and a large number of appointment decrees were required in one day.

古文：询祖立于东止车门外，为二十余人作表，文不加点，辞理可观。
现代文：询祖站在东止车门外边，为二十多人作表，文不加点，辞文通畅。
English: Anzu stood outside the east gate of the station and made a list for more than 20 people. He did not add any points, and his words flowed smoothly.

古文：询祖初袭爵封大夏男，有宿德朝士谓之曰： 大夏初成。 
现代文：询祖初次袭爵为大夏男，有位高德朝士对他说： 大夏初成。 
English: An inquiring ancestor was a Daxia man for the first time, and a high-class moralist said to him: Daxia is the beginning.

古文：应声答曰： 且得燕雀相贺。 
现代文：询祖应声回答： 暂得燕雀相贺。 
English: The inquiring ancestor replied: "We have received the congratulations of the sparrows for the time being."

古文：天保末，以职出为筑长城子使。
现代文：天保末，以职出任筑长城子使。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as an envoy to build the Great Wall.

古文：自负其才，内怀郁怏，遂毁容服如贱役者，以见杨愔。
现代文：询祖自认为有才，心怀不满，于是毁容改装，像贱役一样，去见杨忄音。
English: Enzo thought he was talented and was dissatisfied, so he disfigured and remodeled himself to look like a lowly servant and went to see Yang Xuan Rong.

古文：愔曰： 故旧皆有所縻，唯大夏未加处分。 
现代文：忄音说： 故旧都有合适的安排，惟有大夏未加处理。 
English: Zou Yin said: There have been suitable arrangements in the past, but Daxia has not been dealt with.

古文：询祖厉声曰： 是谁之咎！ 
现代文：询祖高声说： 是谁的过失？ 
English: Inquisitor Zou said in a loud voice: Whose fault is it?

古文：既至役所，作《筑长城赋》，其略曰： 板则紫柏，杵则木瓜，何斯材而斯用也？
现代文：来到役所，作《筑长城赋》，其中有： 板是紫柏，杵为木瓜，为何有此材而有此用？
English: Came to the government office to make "Building the Great Wall Fu," among which: the board is cypress, the beak is papaya, why is this material used for this purpose?

古文：草则离离靡靡，缘岗而殖，但使十步而有一芳，余亦何辞间于荆棘。 
现代文：草青青而繁茂，满山遍地都是，如让十步而有一芳，我为什么要辞别那荆棘？ 
English: The grass is green and luxuriant, the whole mountain is full of cicadas. If there are ten steps and there is a fan, why should I say goodbye to that thorn?

古文：邢邵曾戏曰： 卿少年才学富盛，戴角者无上齿，恐卿不寿。 
现代文：邢邵曾开玩笑地说： 你是少年才学富盛，生角的动物是不长上齿的，我以为你不会长寿的。 
English: Zou Shao once jokingly said: You are a young man who can learn and prosper. Horned animals do not grow upper teeth. I thought you would not live long.

古文：对曰： 询祖初闻此言，实怀恐惧，见丈人苍苍在鬓，差以自安。 
现代文：回答说： 询祖初闻此言，实在恐惧战惊，看到您老人家白发苍苍，才稍稍有些安心。 
English: He replied, "When I first heard this, I was really scared. Seeing your old man with white hair, I felt a little relieved.

古文：邵甚重其敏赡。
现代文：邵极其看重他的敏捷。
English: Shao places great value on his agility.

古文：既有口辩，好臧否人物，尝语人曰： 我昨东方未明，过和氏门外，已见二陆两源，森然与槐柳齐列。 
现代文：由于他能言善辩，所以好臧否评价人物，曾对人说： 昨天东方欲晓之时，我走过和氏的门外，已经看见二陆两源，像槐柳一样整齐地排列着。 
English: Because of his eloquence, he was good at evaluating people. He once said to people: Yesterday, when the East was about to dawn, I walked past the door of Mr. He and saw two lands and two sources, neatly arranged like willows.

古文：盖谓彦师、仁惠与文宗、那延也，邢邵盛誉卢思道，以询祖为不及。
现代文：大概指的是彦师、仁惠与文宗、那延等人。邢邵高度赞誉卢思道，认为询祖赶不上。
English: It probably refers to Hikonshi, Renhui and Wenzong, Nanyan and others. Zou Shao highly praised Lu Si Dao and believed that it could not catch up with the ancestor.

古文：询祖曰： 见未能高飞者借其羽毛，知逸势冲天者剪其翅翮。 
现代文：询祖说： 看到不能高飞的鸟儿借助羽毛，知道能升云天的鸟儿被剪除了翅膀。 
English: Inquisitor said: Seeing birds that cannot fly high with the help of feathers, knowing that birds that can rise to the sky have been clipped wings.

古文：谤毁日至，素论皆薄其为人。
现代文：毁谤每天都有，时论都鄙薄他的为人。
English: Slander is an everyday occurrence, and he is despised by all.

古文：长广太守邢子广目二卢云： 询祖有规检祢衡，思道无冰棱文举。 
现代文：长广太守邢子广看了二卢说： 询祖想效法祢衡，思道无冰棱文举。 
English: Changguang Grand Empress Dowager Shanzi looked at Erlu and said: Enquiring ancestors want to follow the example of Youheng, and think in an ice-free manner.

古文：后颇折节。
现代文：后一改往日脾气。
English: The latter has lost his temper.

古文：历太子舍人、司徒记室，卒官。
现代文：历太子舍人、司徒记室，卒于官。
English: The Prince Regent abdicated and died in office.

古文：有文集十卷，皆致遗逸。
现代文：有文集十卷，后来都散失了。
English: There are ten volumes of the anthology, all of which have since been lost.

古文：尝为赵郡王妃郑氏制挽歌词，其一篇云： 君王盛海内，伉俪尽寰中。
现代文：询祖曾为赵郡王之妃郑氏制作挽歌辞，第一篇云： 君王盛海内，伉俪尽寰中。
English: Qianzu once composed an elegy for Zheng, the princess of Zhao County, the first part of which reads: "The king is at sea, and the queen is in the middle of the sea."

古文：女仪掩郑国，嫔容映赵宫。
现代文：女仪掩郑国，嫔容映赵宫。
English: A woman's beauty covers Zheng Guo, and her beauty reflects Zhao Gong.

古文：春艳桃花水，秋度桂枝风。
现代文：春艳桃花水，秋度桂枝风。
English: Bright peach blossoms in spring, and the wind of the osmanthus in autumn.

古文：遂使丛台夜，明月满床空。 
现代文：遂使丛台夜，明月满床空。 
English: The bright moon filled the bed with light.

古文：恭道弟怀道，性轻率好酒，颇有慕尚，以守范阳勋，出身员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：恭道弟怀道，性格轻率，喜好饮酒，却极有追求。因父守范阳的功劳，赐出身为员外散骑侍郎。
English: His younger brother, Kyodo, has a reckless personality and a penchant for drinking alcohol, but he pursues his passion. Due to his father's efforts to protect Fanyang, he was born as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：文伟遣奉启诣高祖。
现代文：文伟派他带着奏启拜访高祖。
English: Wen Wei sent him to visit Gao Zuo with the transcript.

古文：中兴初，加平西将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：中兴初，加平西将军、光禄大夫。
English: At the beginning of ZTE, General Ga Pingxi and Doctor Guanglu were promoted.

古文：元象初，行台薛琡表行平州事，征赴霸府。
现代文：元象初，行台薛王叔向朝廷推荐行平州事，又召征到高祖的霸府。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, Uncle Xue Wang of Xingtai recommended Pingzhou to the imperial court, and he was summoned to Gao Zu's Bafu.

古文：兴和中，行汾州事。
现代文：兴和中，行汾州事。
English: Xingzhong, the state affairs are in full swing.

古文：怀道家预义举，高祖亲待之，出为乌苏镇城都督，卒官。
现代文：怀道参预了举义，高祖待他们极好。出任乌苏镇城都督，死于任上。
English: Gao Zu treated them very well. He served as the governor of Wusu Town and died in office.

古文：怀道弟宗道，性粗率，重任侠。
现代文：怀道弟宗道，性情粗鲁，讲义气。
English: His younger brother, Zong Dao, is rude and has an air of entitlement.

古文：历尚书郎、通直散骑常侍，后行南营州刺史。
现代文：历职尚书郎、通直散骑常侍，后行南营州刺史事。
English: He was a Shiro Shobo and a Tsuchidana Sanzhijiki no Tsuneishi, and later became a member of the Nanying State Council.

古文：卿之妻子任在州住，当使汉儿之中无在卿前者。 武定二年卒，年三十二。
现代文：曾在晋阳置酒设宴，引来满坐宾客。中书舍人马士达看着那位弹箜篌的女妓说： 手十分纤细。 
English: He once held a banquet in Jinyang, attracting a full house of guests. Ma Shida, a Chinese scholar, looked at the slender prostitute and said, "Your hands are very slender.

古文：勇有马五百匹，缮造甲仗六车，遗启尽献之朝廷。
现代文：宗道便将此婢送给了士达，士达坚决不收，宗道就下令家人假意要将她的手臂砍下，士达无可奈何，也就接受了。
English: Sondo then gave this handmaid to Sida, who resolutely refused to accept it. Sondo then ordered the family members to pretend to cut off her arm, and Sida reluctantly accepted.

古文：赙物之外，别赐布绢四千匹。
现代文：宗道准备动身前往营州，就在督亢陂大会乡人，杀牛备酒聚饮。
English: As the patriarch prepares to leave for Yingzhou, the villagers gather in the village hall to slaughter cattle and prepare wine.

古文：赠司空、冀州刺史，谥曰武贞侯。
现代文：有一旧门生喝醉了酒，谈话之间，稍有疏失，宗道就下令将他沉入水中。
English: There was an old disciple who was drunk, and when there was a slight lapse in the conversation, the patriarch ordered him to be immersed in water.

古文：李义深，赵郡高邑人也。
现代文：后由于残酷滥杀而被朝廷除名。李义深，是趟郡高邑人。
English: Later, he was expelled by the imperial court for his cruel and indiscriminate killing. Li Yishen was from Gaoyu County.

古文：祖真，魏中书侍郎。
现代文：祖父李真，是魏代中书侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Li Zhen, was a chancellor in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父绍宗，殷州别驾。
现代文：父亲绍宗，任殷州别驾。
English: Father Shaozong, stay away from Yinzhou.

古文：义深学涉经史，有当世才用。
现代文：义深博学阅读了许多经史典籍，有治世之才。
English: Yishen was well-read and read many historical classics. He had a talent for ruling the world.

古文：解褐济州征东府功曹参军，累加龙骧将军。
现代文：出仕首任济州征东府功曹参军，几次加授至龙骧将军。
English: The first person to serve in the Jeju Eastern Expedition, Gong Cao, joined the army and was promoted several times to the rank of general.

古文：义旗初，归高祖于信都，以为大行台郎中。
现代文：义旗初举，在信都归附高祖，被任命为大行台郎中。
English: When the flag of righteousness was raised for the first time, the capital was attached to Gao Zu, and he was appointed as a member of the Taihang Taira.

古文：中兴初，除平南将军、鸿胪少卿。
现代文：中兴初年，任平南将军、鸿胪少卿。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was appointed as the General of Pingnan and the Junior Secretary of Hongtao.

古文：义深见尔朱兆兵盛，遂叛高祖奔之。
现代文：义深见氽朱兆兵力强盛，便背叛高祖投奔氽朱兆。
English: Yixin saw that Gao Zhuzhao's army was strong, so he betrayed Gao Zu and rushed to Gao Zhuzhao.

古文：兆平，高祖恕其罪，以为大丞相府记室参军。
现代文：氽朱兆被荡平，高祖宽恕了义深的罪过，让他做大丞相府记室参军。
English: Gong Zhu Zhao was flattened, Gaozhu forgave the sins of Yixing, and let him join the army as a grand secretary of the prime minister's office.

古文：累迁左光禄大夫、相府司马，所经称职。
现代文：多次升任左光禄大夫、相府司马，在任上很称职。
English: He was promoted many times to the positions of Sakoroku-dokufu and Sangufu-sima, and was very competent in his duties.

古文：转并州长史。
现代文：改任并州长史。
English: He was reappointed and left the governor's office.

古文：时刺史可朱浑道元不亲细务，民事多委义深，甚济机速。
现代文：当时刺史可朱浑道元不亲自处理具体事务，民事多交给义深办理，义深办得又好又快。
English: At that time, Zhu Hun Dogen did not personally deal with specific matters, and civil affairs were mostly handled by Yishen. Yishen handled it well and quickly.

古文：复为大丞相司马。
现代文：后又任大丞相司马。
English: Later, he was also appointed as Dajo Minister Sima.

古文：武定中，除齐州剌史，好财利，多所受纳。
现代文：武定年间，拜任齐州刺史，喜好财利，收受了不少财物。
English: During the years of Wuding, he was appointed as the chief historian of Qizhou, was fond of money and interest, and received a lot of property.

古文：天保初，行郑州事，转行梁州事，寻除散骑常侍，为阳夏太守。
现代文：天保初年，代理郑州刺史，改任代理梁州事务，不久拜任散骑常侍，为阳夏太守。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed acting governor of Zhengzhou and acting governor of Liangzhou. Soon after, he was appointed as a knight errant and became Yangxia's regent.

古文：段业告其在州聚敛，被禁止，送梁州穷治，未竟。
现代文：段业状告义深在州中聚敛财富，义深被软禁，送到梁州追究处理，未结案。
English: Duan filed a complaint accusing Yishen of amassing wealth in the prefecture. Yishen was placed under house arrest and sent to Liangzhou for investigation. The case is still pending.

古文：三年，遇疾，卒于禁所，年五十七。
现代文：三年后，得病死于软禁之所，时年五十七岁。
English: Three years later, he fell ill and died under house arrest at the age of 57.

古文：子騊駼，有才辩，尚书郎、邺县令，武平初，兼通直散骑常侍。聘陈，为陈人所称。
现代文：儿子驹騌，有辩才，曾任尚书郎、邺县令。亘迎初年，兼任通直散骑常侍时出访肿，被迷人称赏。
English: His son, Zou, was a talented debater and had served as Shang Shuro and Zou County magistrate. When he was in his first year, he went abroad to visit Zou when he was also a Zou riding attendant, and was charmingly praised.

古文：后为寿阳道行台左丞，与王琳等同陷。
现代文：后任寿阳道行台左丞，与王琳等人同时陷落。
English: His successor, Shouyang Dangdai Zuojo, fell at the same time as Wang Lin and others.

古文：周末逃归。
现代文：周末逃回。
English: Flee back at the weekend.

古文：开皇初，永安太守。
现代文：开皇初年，任永安太守。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was appointed Yongan governor.

古文：卒于绛州长史。
现代文：在任绛州长史时去世。
English: He died while serving as governor of Shandong Province.

古文：子正藻，明敏有才干。
现代文：儿子正藻，聪敏而有才干。
English: His son, Zhengsao, is smart and talented.

古文：武平末，仪同开府行参军、判集书省事。
现代文：武平末年，任仪同开府行参军、判集书省事。
English: In the last years of Wu Ping, Ren Yi went to join the army together with Kaifu, and he was careful about collecting books.

古文：以父騊余没陈，正藻便谢病解职，忧思毁瘠，居处饮食若在丧之礼，人士称之。
现代文：因父亲驹騌陷没在速，正莲便称病辞职，因忧伤思虑遇度而消瘦，居住饮食好像处于丧礼之期，人们都称赞他。
English: Because his father's fall from grace did not happen quickly, Zhenglian resigned from his post, saying he was ill. He lost weight due to sadness and worries about his health, and his living and eating habits seemed to be in the funeral period. People praised him.

古文：隋开皇中，历尚书工部员外郎、盩厔县令。
现代文：隋朝开皇年间，历任尚书工部员外郎、垫屋县令。
English: During the reign of the Emperor of the Sui Dynasty, the successive members of the Department of Calligraphy were Gairo and Mataya.

古文：卒于宜州长史。
现代文：在任宜州长史时去世。
English: He died while serving as governor.

古文：騊駼弟文师，中书舍人、齐郡太守。
现代文：驹騌的弟弟文师，曾任中书舍人、齐郡太守。
English: Yao's younger brother, Wen Shi, was once a scholar and the governor of Qi County.

古文：义深兄弟七人，多有学尚。
现代文：羞迳兄弟七人，多有学问志向。
English: There are seven Shizhao brothers, many of whom have academic aspirations.

古文：第二弟同轨，以儒学知名。
现代文：第二弟同轨以儒学知名。
English: The second brother is also famous for Confucianism.

古文：第六弟，稚廉别有传。
现代文：第六弟稚廉另有传记。
English: There is another biography of the sixth brother, Chikaren.

古文：义深族弟神威。
现代文：盏遝有一族弟名叫控盛。
English: Zhengyi has a younger brother named Hengsheng.

古文：曾祖融，魏中书侍郎，神威幼有风裁，传其家业，礼学粗通义训。
现代文：曾祖父奎型，是墓中书侍郎。控盛从小就有风度气派，继承家业，粗通礼学义训。
English: His great-grandfather, Kuei Kata, is the scribe in the tomb. From a young age, Kengsheng had an air of elegance, inherited the family business, and learned courtesy and loyalty.

古文：又好音乐，撰集《乐书》，近于百卷。
现代文：又喜好音乐，撰写《乐书》，近百卷。
English: He was also fond of music and wrote the "Music Book," nearly a hundred volumes.

古文：魏武之末，尚书左丞。
现代文：馥武末年，任尚书左丞。
English: At the end of his military service, he was appointed to the post of Shojo-zojo.

古文：天保初卒。
现代文：玉堡初年，去世。
English: He died in the first year of the castle.

古文：赠信州刺史。
现代文：赠值业刺史。
English: The award-winning industry is making history.

古文：史臣曰：元忠本自素流，有闻教义，人伦之誉，未以纵横许之。
现代文：史臣曰：元忠原本出身寒素，闻习教义，有讲人伦的美誉，未被作为纵横家赞许。
English: Shichen said, "Originally, Mototada was a cold-blooded person, he was not familiar with the teachings, he had a reputation of being a moralist, and he was not praised as a man of integrity.

古文：属庄帝幽崩，群胡矫擅，士之有志力者皆望勤王之师。
现代文：时值庄帝驾崩，群胡作乱，有志向有能力的人都希望为王师效命。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhuang's death, the crowd was running amok, and anyone with ambition and ability wanted to serve Wang Shi.

古文：及高祖东辕，事与心会，一遇雄姿，遂沥肝胆，以石投水，岂徒然哉？
现代文：待到高祖束进，事遂心愿，一遇雄姿。便披肝沥胆，以石投水，岂能徒劳无益?
English: If you wait until you reach Gaozhuzhujin, your wish will be fulfilled, and you will become a hero. Then you will put on the liver and gallbladder and throw water with a stone. Won't it be useless?

古文：既享功名，终知止足，进退之道，有可观焉。
现代文：既已享受功名，最终知足止步，进退之道，由此可观。
English: Having already enjoyed fame, finally contentment stops, and the way forward and backward is remarkable.

古文：文伟望重地华，早有志尚，间关夷险之际，终遇英雄之主，虽礼秩未弘，亦为佐命之一。
现代文：塞伟德高望重，早有志向，危难之际，终遇英雄之主，虽未达到理想的高位，但也是朝廷重臣之一。
English: Sevid was highly respected, he had long-held ambitions, and in a time of crisis, he finally met the hero's master. Although he did not reach the ideal high position, he was also one of the senior courtiers of the imperial court.

古文：询祖词情艳发，早著声名，负其才地，肆情矜矫，京华人士，莫不畏其舌端。
现代文：趔旦词情艳发，早著名声，自负有才华地位，肆意骄矜，京华人士，没有不怕他的舌头的。
English: There is no one in Beijing who is not afraid of his tongue.

古文：任遇未闻，弱年夭逝，若得终介眉寿，通塞未可量焉。
现代文：还未闻达，便英年夭折早逝，如果能长寿的话，境遇顺利会不可限量。
English: If they can live long, they will be able to enjoy unlimited prosperity.

古文：赞曰：晋阳、大夏，抱质怀文。
现代文：赞曰：晋阳、大夏，文质彬彬。
English: Praise says: Jinyang, Daxia, the literary quality is excellent.

古文：蹈仁履义，咸会风云。
现代文：履行仁义，感动风云。
English: Carrying out benevolence and righteousness, moved by the storm.

古文：卢婴货殖，李厌嚣氛。
现代文：卢塞伟以经商为羁绊，奎五盅以喧嚣为祸患。
English: Lu Seiwei took business as a hindrance, and Kui Wuxuan took noise as a disaster.

古文：始终之操，清浊斯分。
现代文：操守始终如一，清浊分明。
English: The ethics are consistent and clear.

古文：义深参赞，有谢忠勤。
现代文：盏盗参赞，有不及忠良臣子之处。
English: A robber counsellor is not as good as a loyal vassal.

