古文：十有五年春，季孙行父如晋。
现代文：十五年春季，季文子去晋国。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Ji Fumiko went to Jin Province.

古文：三月，宋司马华孙来盟。
现代文：三月，宋国华耦来鲁国会盟。
English: In March, Song Guohua and his wife came to the Russian National League.

古文：夏，曹伯来朝。
现代文：夏季，曹文公来鲁国朝见。
English: In the summer, Cao Wengong came to see the emperor of Lu.

古文：齐人归公孙敖之丧。
现代文：齐国人来为公孙敖送丧。
English: People from Qi Province came to pay their respects to Gongsun Yao.

古文：六月辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月辛丑这天是初一，有日食发生。
English: It was the first day of June, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：鼓，用牲于社。
现代文：击鼓，用牲畜在土地神庙里祭祀。
English: They beat drums and sacrificed animals in the land temple.

古文：单伯至自齐。
现代文：周王室单伯从齐国到鲁国来。
English: The Zhou royal family came alone from Qi to Lu.

古文：晋郤缺帅师伐蔡。
现代文：晋国郤缺率领军队讨伐蔡国。
English: Jin Guozhong led the army to fight against Cai Guozhong.

古文：戊申，入蔡。
现代文：戊申日，进入蔡国。
English: Entered Cai Guo on Wushen Day.

古文：秋，齐人侵我西鄙。
现代文：秋季，齐国军队侵犯我西面边境。
English: In autumn, the Qi army invaded our western border.

古文：季孙行父如晋。
现代文：季孙行父到晋国。
English: Ji Sun Xingfu went to Jin Province.

古文：冬十有一月，诸侯盟于扈。
现代文：冬季十一月，各诸侯在扈地结盟。
English: In the winter of November, all the lords made an alliance in Shunde.

古文：十有二月，齐人来归子叔姬。
现代文：十二月，齐国人来送回了子叔姬。
English: In December, the people of Qi came to send back Zi Shuji.

古文：齐侯侵我西鄙。
现代文：齐侯率兵侵犯我国西面边境。
English: Qi Hou and his soldiers invaded the western border of our country.

古文：遂伐曹，入其郛。
现代文：接着又去攻打曹国，攻入曹国的郛地。
English: Then he went to attack Cao's country, and invaded Cao's Shantian.

古文：十五年春，季文子如晋，为单伯与子叔姬故也。
现代文：十五年春季，季文子去晋国，为了单伯和子叔姬的缘故。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Ji Wenzi went to Jin Province, for the sake of Shanbo and his daughter Shuqi.

古文：三月，宋华耦来盟，其官皆从之。
现代文：三月，宋国的华耦前来会盟，他的部属都跟随前来。
English: In March, Hua Kuan of the Song Dynasty came to the League, and his subordinates followed.

古文：书曰 宋司马华孙 ，贵之也。
现代文：《春秋》称他为 宋司马华孙 ，这是表示尊重他。
English: "Spring and Autumn" called him Song Sima Huasun, which is a sign of respect for him.

古文：公与之宴，辞曰： 君之先臣督，得罪于宋殇公，名在诸侯之策。
现代文：鲁文公要和他同席宴会。华耦婉辞谢绝说： 君王的先臣督得罪了宋殇公，名字记载在诸侯的简册上。
English: Prince Lu Wen wanted to have a banquet with him. Hua Kuan declined, saying, "The king's senior vassal offended Prince Song Xi, and his name is recorded in the register of princes."

古文：臣承其祀，其敢辱君！
现代文：下臣承继他的祭祀，怎么敢使君王蒙受耻辱？
English: How dare a vassal disgrace the king after his sacrifice?

古文：请承命于亚旅。 
现代文：请在亚旅那里接受命令。 
English: Please take your orders from the Asian Brigade.

古文：鲁人以为敏。
现代文：鲁国人认为华耦措辞得体。
English: The Lu people thought that Hua Kuan's wording was appropriate.

古文：夏，曹伯来朝，礼也。
现代文：夏季，曹文公前来朝见，这合于礼。
English: In the summer, Cao Wengong came to see him in the morning, which was appropriate.

古文：诸侯五年再相朝，以修王命，古之制也。
现代文：诸侯每五年再一次互相朝见，以重温天子的命令，这是古代的制度。
English: It is an ancient system for princes to visit each other once every five years to review the order of the Son of Heaven.

古文：齐人或为孟氏谋，曰： 鲁，尔亲也。饰棺寘诸堂阜，鲁必取之。 
现代文：齐国有人为孟氏策划，说： 鲁国，是你的亲戚，把公孙敖的饰棺放在堂阜，鲁国必定会取去的。 
English: Someone in Qi planned for Meng, saying: Lu, your relative, put Gongsun Yao's decorated coffin in the hall, and Lu will surely take it away.

古文：从之。
现代文：孟氏听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：卞人以告。
现代文：卞邑大夫把这件事作了报告。
English: Dr. Zouyi made a report on the matter.

古文：惠叔犹毁以为请，立于朝以待命。
现代文：惠叔仍然很悲哀，容颜消瘦，请求取回饰棺，立在朝廷上以等待命令。
English: Uncle Hui, still sad and thin-faced, asked for the decorated coffin back and stood in front of the court to wait for the order.

古文：许之，取而殡之。
现代文：鲁国答应了这项请求，于是取回了饰棺停放。
English: The request was granted, and the decorated coffin was retrieved and parked.

古文：齐人送之。书曰： 齐人归公孙敖之丧。 为孟氏，且国故也。
现代文：齐国人也来送丧，《春秋》记载说： 齐人归公孙敖之丧 ，这是为了孟氏，同时又为了国家的缘故。
English: The people of Qi also came to the funeral. "Spring and Autumn" recorded that: "Qi people came to the funeral of Gongsun Qi, which was for the Meng clan, but also for the sake of the country.

古文：葬视共仲。
现代文：依照安葬共仲的葬礼安葬了公孙敖。
English: Gongsun Yao was buried in accordance with the funeral of Gongzhong.

古文：声己不视，帷堂而哭。
现代文：声己不肯去看棺材，在帷堂里哭泣。
English: She refused to see the coffin and wept in the vestibule.

古文：襄仲欲勿哭，惠伯曰： 丧，亲之终也。
现代文：襄仲不想去哭丧，惠伯说： 办丧事，是对待亲人的最后大事。
English: Xiangzhong didn't want to go to mourn, and Huibo said: "Holding a funeral is the last thing you should do for your relatives.

古文：虽不能始，善终可也。
现代文：虽不能有一个好的开始，有一个好的终结是可以的。
English: While it is impossible to have a good beginning, it is possible to have a good ending.

古文：史佚有言曰： 兄弟致美。 
现代文：史佚有这样的话，说： 兄弟之间各自尽力做到完美。
English: Shi Yan had this to say: Brothers try their best to be perfect.

古文：救乏、贺善、吊灾、祭敬、丧哀，情虽不同，毋绝其爱，亲之道也。
现代文：救济困乏，祝贺喜庆，吊唁灾祸，祭祀恭敬，丧事悲哀，感情虽然不一样，不要断绝他们之间的友爱，这就是对待亲人的道义。 
English: Relief for the needy, congratulations for joyous occasions, condolences for calamities, worship for the dead, mourning for the dead, although the feelings are different, do not break the friendship between them, this is the morality of treating relatives.

古文：子无失道，何怨于人？ 
现代文：您自己只要不丧失道义，怨恨别人干什么呢？ 
English: As long as you yourself do not lose your morality, why do you resent others?

古文：襄仲说，帅兄弟以哭之。
现代文：襄仲听了很高兴，带领了兄弟们前去哭丧。
English: Xiang Zhong was very happy to hear this and led the brothers to go and mourn.

古文：他年，其二子来，孟献子爱之，闻于国。
现代文：后来，穆伯的两个儿子回来，孟献子喜爱他们，闻名于全国。
English: Later, Mubo's two sons came back. Meng Xianzi loved them, and they became famous throughout the country.

古文：或谮之曰： 将杀子。 献子以告季文子。
现代文：有人诬陷他们，对孟献子说： 这两个人准备杀死你。 孟献子把这话告诉季文子。
English: Someone framed them and said to Meng Xianzi: "These two are going to kill you." Meng Xianzi told this to Ji Wenzi.

古文：二子曰： 夫子以爱我闻，我以将杀子闻，不亦远于礼乎？
现代文：这两个人说： 他老人家因为爱我们，全国都知道，我们以准备杀死他而臭名在外，这不是远离于礼了吗？
English: The two said, "Isn't it a far cry from his old man loving us so much that the whole country knows that we are notorious for plotting to kill him?"

古文：远礼不如死。 
现代文：远离于礼还不如死。 
English: It is better to die than to stay away from the ceremony.

古文：一人门于句鼆，一人门于戾丘，皆死。
现代文：后来，两兄弟一人在句鼆守门，一人在戾丘守门，都战死了。
English: Later, two brothers, one of whom guarded the gate in Guzheng and the other in Shaoshan, both died in battle.

古文：六月辛丑朔，日有食之，鼓用牲于社，非礼也。
现代文：六月初一日，发生日食。击鼓，用牲畜在土地神庙里祭祀，这是不合于礼的。
English: On the first day of June, when the solar eclipse occurred, it was improper to beat drums and use livestock to make sacrifices in the land temple.

古文：日有食之，天子不举，伐鼓于社，诸侯用币于社，伐鼓于朝，以昭事神，训民事君。
现代文：发生日食，天子减膳撤乐，在土地神庙里击鼓。诸侯用玉帛在土地神庙里祭祀，在朝廷上击鼓，以表明事奉神灵、教训百姓、事奉国君。
English: When a solar eclipse occurs, the Son of Heaven cuts down on meals and withdraws from music, and begins to play the drums in the land temple. Princes and lords use jade gongs to make sacrifices in the land temple, and play the drums in the imperial court to show that they serve the gods, teach the people, and serve the sovereign.

古文：示有等威，古之道也。
现代文：表示威仪有等级，这是古代的制度。
English: This is an ancient system.

古文：齐人许单伯请而赦之，使来致命。
现代文：齐国人允许了单伯要子叔姬回国的请求而赦免了他，派遣他来鲁国传达命令。
English: The people of Qi pardoned him by allowing the request of the son of the important personage Shuhei to return to China, and sent him to Lu to convey the order.

古文：书曰： 单伯至自齐。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说 单伯至自齐 ，这是表示尊重他。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Shanbo is self-sufficient, which is a sign of respect for him.

古文：贵之也。新城之盟，蔡人不与。
现代文：在新城的盟会，蔡国人不参加。
English: At the league meeting in New Town, Cai Kunitomo did not attend.

古文：晋郤缺以上军、下军伐蔡，曰： 君弱，不可以怠。 
现代文：晋国的郤缺率领上军、下军攻打蔡国，说： 国君年少，不能因此懈怠。 
English: Jin Guo's lackeys led the advance and retreating troops to attack Cai Guo, saying, "The king is young, so he can't slack off.

古文：戊申，入蔡，以城下之盟而还。
现代文：六月初八日，进入蔡国，订立了城下之盟，然后回国。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, he entered Cai Province, concluded the alliance under the city, and then returned to China.

古文：凡胜国，曰 灭之 ；获大城焉，曰 入之 。
现代文：凡是战胜别的国家，叫做 灭之 ；得到大城，叫做 入之 。
English: Whoever conquers a country is called a conqueror; whoever conquers a great city is called a conqueror.

古文：秋，齐人侵我西鄙，故季文子告于晋。
现代文：秋季，齐军侵犯我国西部边境，所以季文子向晋国报告。
English: In autumn, the Qi army invaded the western border of our country, so Ji Wenzi reported to Jin.

古文：冬十一月，晋侯、宋公、卫侯、蔡侯、陈侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯盟于扈，寻新城之盟，且谋伐齐也。
现代文：冬季，十一月，晋灵公、宋昭公、卫成公、蔡庄侯、陈灵公、郑穆公、许昭公、曹文公在扈地结盟，重温新城盟会的友好，同时策划攻打齐国。
English: In winter, in November, Jin Ling Gong, Song Zhaogong, Wei Cheng Tong, Cai Zhuang Hou, Chen Ling Gong, Zheng Mu Gong, Xu Zhaogong and Cao Wen Gong allied in Handan, reliving the friendship of the New Town Alliance, while planning to attack Qi.

古文：齐人赂晋侯，故不克而还。于是有齐难，是以公不会。
现代文：齐国人给晋灵公馈送财礼，所以没有战胜就回来了。
English: The people of Qi gave financial gifts to Jinling Gongfei, so he returned without victory.

古文：书曰： 诸侯盟于扈。 
现代文：在这时候发生了齐国进攻我国的灾难，所以文公没有参加盟会。
English: At this time, the disaster of Qi's attack on our country occurred, so Wengong did not participate in the alliance.

古文：无能为故也。凡诸侯会，公不与，不书，讳君恶也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 诸侯盟于扈 ，这是由于没有救援我国的缘故。凡是诸侯会见，鲁公不参加，《春秋》就不加记载，这是由于隐讳国君的过失。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that the vassals of the feudal lords met in Shao, this is because there was no rescue of our country. Whenever the feudal lords met, Lu Gong did not participate, and "Spring and Autumn" did not record it, this is due to the fault of concealing the sovereign.

古文：与而不书，后也。
现代文：参加了而不记载，这是由于迟到。
English: Attendance not recorded due to lateness.

古文：齐人来归子叔姬，王故也。
现代文：齐国人前来送回子叔姬，这是由于天子有命令的缘故。
English: The people of Qi came to send back Zi Shuxi, which was due to the order of the Son of Heaven.

古文：齐侯侵我西鄙，谓诸侯不能也。
现代文：齐懿公发兵进攻我国西部边境，他认为诸侯不能救援。
English: Qizhong sent troops to attack the western border of our country. He believed that the princes could not come to the rescue.

古文：遂伐曹，入其郛，讨其来朝也。
现代文：并因此而攻打曹国，进入外城，讨伐曹国曾经前来朝见过鲁国。
English: As a result, he attacked Cao and entered the outer city. He came to fight against Cao and saw Lu.

古文：季文子曰： 齐侯其不免乎？
现代文：季文子说： 齐侯恐怕不能免于患难吧？
English: Ji Wenzi said, "I'm afraid Qi Hou is not exempt from suffering, right?

古文：己则无礼，而讨于有礼者曰： 女何故行礼！ 
现代文：自己就不合于礼，反而讨伐合于礼的国家，说： 你为什么实行礼？ 
English: He does not behave properly himself, but attacks countries that do, saying, "Why do you behave properly?

古文：礼以顺天，天之道也。
现代文：礼用来顺服上天，这是上天的常道。
English: Etiquette is used to obey God, this is God's way.

古文：己则反天，而又以讨人，难以免矣。
现代文：自己就违反上天，反而又因此付伐别人，这就难免有祸难了。
English: If one violates God's law and then punishes others, there will inevitably be calamity.

古文：《诗》曰： 胡不相畏，不畏于天？ 
现代文：《诗》说： 为什么不互相敬畏？因为不敬畏上天。 
English: Why do you not fear each other? says the Psalmist, because you do not fear God.

古文：君子之不虐幼贱，畏于天也。
现代文：君子不虐待幼小和卑贱，这是由于畏惧上天。
English: A gentleman does not ill-treat the young and the humble, for fear of Heaven.

古文：在《周颂》曰： 畏天之威，于时保之。 
现代文：在《周颂》里说： 畏敬上天的威灵，因此就能保有福禄。 
English: In the "Song of Zhou," it says: Fear the heavenly spirit, and thus you will be able to keep the fortune.

古文：不畏于天，将何能保？
现代文：不畏敬上天，如何能保得住？
English: Without reverence for the heavens, how can the reeds be preserved?

古文：以乱取国，奉礼以守，犹惧不终，多行无礼，弗能在矣！ 
现代文：用动乱取得国家，奉行礼仪来保持国君的地位，还害怕不得善终，多做不合于礼的事情，这就不得善终了。 
English: Acquiring a country through turmoil, maintaining the position of the sovereign by following etiquette, and being afraid of not having a good end, doing more things that are not proper, this will not have a good end.

