古文：三年春正月，公会齐侯于嬴。
现代文：三年春的正月，桓公与齐侯在嬴地会面。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year, Prince Kan and Prince Qi met in Shunde.

古文：夏，齐侯、卫侯胥命于蒲。
现代文：夏季，齐侯、卫侯在蒲地见面。
English: In the summer, Qi Hou and Wei Hou meet in Pudong.

古文：六月，公会杞侯于郕。
现代文：同年六月，桓公与杞侯在郕地会面。
English: In June of the same year, Prince Kan met with Soho at Soho.

古文：秋七月壬辰朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：秋季七月壬辰这天，正好是初一，发生了日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the new year in the autumn month of July.

古文：公子翚如齐逆女。
现代文：鲁国公子翚到齐国替桓公迎接齐女姜氏。
English: Prince Lu of the State of Lu went to Qi to replace Prince Kan to welcome Lady Jiang of Qi.

古文：九月，齐侯送姜氏于讙。
现代文：九月，齐僖公护送姜氏出嫁，到了讙地。
English: In September, Qi Yigong escorted Mr. Jiang to get married and arrived in Handan.

古文：公会齐侯于讙。
现代文：桓公与齐僖公在讙地会面。
English: Lord Kan met with Lord Qi in the Land of Reclamation.

古文：夫人姜氏至自齐。
现代文：夫人姜氏从齐国来到鲁国。
English: Mrs. Jiang came from Qi to Lu.

古文：冬，齐侯使其弟年来聘。
现代文：冬季，齐侯派他的弟弟夷仲年来鲁国访问。
English: In winter, Qi Hou sent his younger brother, Yizhong, to visit Lu.

古文：有年。
现代文：今年丰收。
English: Good harvest this year.

古文：三年春，曲沃武公伐翼，次于陉庭。
现代文：三年春季，曲沃武公进攻翼城，军队驻扎在陉庭。
English: In the spring of the third year, Qu Wo Wukong launched an attack on Yingcheng, and the army was stationed in Xingting.

古文：韩万御戎，梁弘为右，逐翼侯于汾隰，骖絓而止。
现代文：韩万为武公驾车，梁弘作为车右。在汾水边的低洼地追赶晋哀侯，由于骖马被绊住才停下来。
English: Han Wan drove for Wu Gong, and Liang Hong drove on the right. They chased after Jin Weihou in the low-lying area on the edge of Surabaya, and only stopped when their horse got stuck.

古文：夜获之，及栾共叔。
现代文：夜里，俘获了晋哀侯和栾共叔。
English: In the night, they captured Jin Aihou and Zou Guanzhong.

古文：会于嬴，成昏于齐也。
现代文：桓公和齐僖公在嬴地会见，这是由于和齐女订婚。
English: Prince Kan and Prince Qi met in Handan because he and Lady Qi were engaged to be married.

古文：夏，齐侯、卫侯胥命于蒲，不盟也。
现代文：夏季，齐僖公、卫宣公在蒲地只是会谈，没有结盟。
English: In the summer, Prince Qishan and Duke Weixuan only held talks in Pudong, but did not form an alliance.

古文：公会杞侯于郕，杞求成也。
现代文：桓公和杞侯在郕地会见，这是由于杞国要求议和。
English: Prince Kan and Prince Ye met in Ye, because Ye wanted to negotiate a peace treaty.

古文：秋，公子翚如齐逆女。修先君之好，故曰公子。
现代文：秋季，公子翚到齐国迎接齐女，因为是重修前代国君的友好关系，所以《春秋》称翚为 公子 。
English: In the autumn, Prince Gong came to Qi Province to meet Lady Qi. "Spring and Autumn" called Gong Gong "Prince Gong" because he was reestablishing the friendly relations of the previous generation of sovereigns.

古文：凡公女嫁于敌国，姊妹则上卿送之，以礼于先君；公子则下卿送之；于大国，虽公子亦上卿送之；于天子，则诸卿皆行，公不自送；于小国，则上大夫送之。
现代文：齐僖公护送姜氏出嫁，到了讙地，这是不合于礼的。凡是本国的公室女子出嫁到同等国家，如果是国君的姐妹，就由上卿护送她，以表示对前代国君的尊敬。如果是国君的女儿，就由下卿护送她。出嫁到大国，即便是国君的女儿，也由上卿护送她。嫁给天子，就由各位大臣都去护送，国君不亲自护送。出嫁到小国，就由上大夫护送她。
English: It is not proper for the Prince of Qi to escort Jiang's bride to Shantou. If a commoner marries a commoner, if she is the sister of the sovereign, the Lord High Admiral will escort her to show respect for the former sovereign. If she is the daughter of the sovereign, the Lord Low Admiral will escort her. If she marries into a large country, even if she is the daughter of the sovereign, the Lord High Admiral will escort her. If she marries into a small country, the Lord High Admiral will escort her. If she marries into a small country, the Lord High Admiral will escort her. If she marries into a small country, even if she is the daughter of

古文：冬，齐仲年来聘，致夫人也。
现代文：冬季，齐仲年前来聘问，这是为了把姜氏护送到鲁都。
English: In winter, Qizhong came to ask for an escort to take Jiang to Ludu.

古文：芮伯万之母芮姜恶芮伯之多宠人也，故逐之，出居于魏。
现代文：芮伯万的母亲芮姜嫌恶芮伯的宠姬太多，因此把他赶走，让他住到魏城。
English: Zou Bo Wan's mother, Zou Jiang, disliked Zou Bo's pet too much, so she drove him away and let him live in Weicheng.

