古文：晋公子重耳至曹，曹共公闻其骈胁，使浴而窥之。
现代文：原文晋公子重耳到达曹国时，曹共公听说重耳天生肋骨连成一片，于是就趁重耳洗澡时，故意走近他身边偷看。
English: When Prince Jin's heavy ear arrived in Cao's country, Cao Conggong heard that the heavy ear's natural ribs were fused together, so he took advantage of the heavy ear to take a shower and deliberately walked close to him to peek.

古文：曹大夫僖负羁之妻曰： 吾观晋公子之从者皆足以相国，若以相，夫子必反其国，反其国，必得志于诸侯，得志于诸侯而诛无礼，曹其首也，子盍早自贰焉。 
现代文：曹大夫僖负羁的妻子说： 我看晋公子重耳的随从，个个都是将相之才，重耳在他们辅佐下，日后一定能重返晋国，登上王位；重耳成为晋君之后，也一定能成为天下诸侯的霸主；一旦成为霸主，必然会诛伐以前曾对他无礼的国家，那么第一个遭殃的一定是曹国。
English: Cao Cao's wife said, "I think that every one of the followers of the Jin prince Jige Er is a great talent. With their assistance, Jige Er will surely be able to return to Jin and ascend to the throne. After Jige Er becomes the Jin prince, he will surely be able to become the overlord of the princes of the world. Once he becomes the overlord, he will inevitably attack the country that had been rude to him before, so the first to suffer must be Cao.

古文：乃馈盘餐，置璧焉，公子受餐反璧，及重耳入曹，令无入僖负羁之宫。
现代文：你为什么不趁现在结交重耳呢？ 于是僖负羁派人送了一盘食物给重耳，并且暗中放了一块宝玉在食物里，可是重耳只收下食物，却退回宝玉。
English: Why don't you take advantage of the opportunity to make friends with the heavy-eared one? Therefore, the wicked sent a plate of food to the heavy-eared one, and secretly put a precious stone in the food, but the heavy-eared one only took the food, but returned the precious stone.

古文：僖负羁始不能效郑叔詹之谏，而私欢晋客；及晋报曹，又不能夫妻肉袒为曹君谢罪，盖庸人耳。
现代文：日后，重耳即位为晋文公，果然攻打曹国，他念及僖负羁当年的厚遇，特别下令三军不得侵入僖负羁住的地方。僖负羁不能仿效叔詹劝郑伯杀重耳在先，却私下巴结重耳；等重耳再返曹国，僖负羁又没有挺身为曹共公的怠慢谢罪在后，实在是没有见识的庸人。
English: Later, when Chung E was enthroned as the Prince of Jin and successfully attacked Cao, he remembered the good fortune of the year when he was the prince of Cao, and specifically ordered the three armies not to invade the place where Chung E was living. Chung E could not follow the example of Uncle Zhan to persuade Zheng Bo to kill Chung E first, but he secretly sided with Chung E; when Chung E returned to Cao, Chung E did not stand up for Cao's negligence and crime. He was really a mediocre person with no insight.

古文：独其妻能识人，能料事，有不可泯没者。
现代文：唯独他的妻子，不仅有眼光，而且能推断事理，不得不令人另眼相看。
English: His wife, on the other hand, not only has vision, but is also able to deduce things, and has to make people look at her differently.

