古文：文二王明七王文惠太子四男：安皇后生郁林王昭业；宫人许氏生海陵恭王昭文；陈氏生巴陵王昭秀；褚氏生桂阳王昭粲。
现代文：文惠太子有四子：安皇后生郁林王萧昭业，宫人许氏生海陵恭王萧昭文，陈氏生巴陵王萧昭秀，褚氏生桂阳王萧昭粲。
English: Prince Wenhui had four sons: Yu Lin Wang Xiao Zhaoye, born to Empress An; Hai Ling Gong Wang Xiao Zhaowen, born to Prince Xu; Baling Wang Xiao Zhaohui, born to Prince Chen; and Guiyang Wang Xiao Zhaohui, born to Prince Gong.

古文：巴陵王昭秀，字怀尚，太子第三子也。
现代文：巴陵王萧昭秀字怀尚，是文惠太子的第三子。
English: The king of Baling, Xiao Zhaoxiu, was the third son of Prince Wen Hui.

古文：永明中封曲江公，千五百户。
现代文：永明年间，封为曲江公，食一千五百户租税。
English: In the future, it will be named Qujiang Public, and it will be used to pay taxes for 1,500 households.

古文：十年，为宁朔将军、济阳太守。
现代文：永明十午，任宁朔将军、济陆太守。
English: At ten o'clock in the afternoon of Yongming, he was appointed General of Ningshuo and Governor of Jilu.

古文：郁林即位，封临海郡王，二千户。
现代文：郁林王即位后，又被封为临海郡王，食二千户租税。
English: After the enthronement of King Yulin, he was also named the King of Linhai County, and paid taxes for two thousand households.

古文：隆昌元年，为使持节、都督荆雍益宁梁南北秦七州军事、西中郎将、荆州刺史。
现代文：隆昌元年，受命为使持节，都督荆、雍、益、宁、梁、南秦、北秦七州军事，西中郎将，荆州刺史。
English: In the first year of Longchang, he was ordered to hold the festival, and the governors of Jing, Yong, Yixing, Ning, Liang, South Qin and North Qin were sent to the seven military states, the West was sent to the middle, and the Jing State was sent to the history.

古文：延兴元年，征为车骑将军，卫京师，以永嘉王昭粲代之。
现代文：延兴元年，征拜为车骑将军，受命护卫京师，而以永嘉王萧昭粲代理他原先的职务。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, he was enlisted as a chariot and cavalry general and was ordered to escort the Beijing Division, with Yongjia Wang Xiao Zhaojun acting in his former position.

古文：明帝建武二年，通直常侍庾昙隆启曰： 周定雒邑，天子置畿内之民；汉都咸阳，三辅为社稷之卫。
现代文：明帝建武二年，通直常侍庾昙隆上奏说： 周定都雏旦后，天子设置畿辅以管辖京城地区的百姓；汉朝定都咸阳，设置三辅作为国家的保卫。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Ming Dynasty, Tong Zhi's constant attendant, Gong Long, made the following report: After Zhou Dingdu was born, Heaven's Son set up Kiji Fu to govern the people in the capital area; during the Han Dynasty, Xianyang was set up as the capital, and the three Fu were set up to protect the country.

古文：中晋南迁，事移威弛，近郡名邦，多有国食。
现代文：中晋南迁，国事变化威势松弛，近郡名邦之内，多有皇亲国戚的食邑。
English: In the middle of the Jin Dynasty, the country moved south, and the country's power became weaker and weaker. Within the famous counties, there were many food villages of the emperor's relatives.

古文：宋武创业，依拟古典，神州部内，不复别封。
现代文：宋武帝创业，依照摹拟古代的典章制度，在国家内部，不再分封给别人。
English: When Emperor Songwu started a business, according to the ancient award system, within the country, it would no longer be assigned to others.

古文：而孝武末年，分树宠子，苟申私爱，有乖训准。
现代文：而孝武帝末年，却分封食邑以宠爱其子，草率地表示了私人的爱心，却违背了典章制度的准则。
English: However, in the last years of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, he favored his son by dividing the fiefs and dynasties. He hastily expressed his personal love, but violated the principles of the award system.

古文：隆昌之元，特开母弟之贵，窃谓非古。
现代文：隆昌之始，尤其开创了贵重母弟的先例，我认为这都不是遵守古制。
English: At the beginning of Longchang, in particular, it created a precedent of valuing mother and brother, which I think is not in accordance with the old system.

古文：圣明御宇，礼旧为先，畿内限断，宜遵昔制，赐茅授土，一出外州。 
现代文：圣明的君王驾御海内，应当以遵循旧礼制度为先，京都畿辅的划界，应当遵守古代的体制，若分封土地，都要分给外部州郡。 
English: When the emperor of the Holy Ming Dynasty enters the imperial palace, he should first follow the old ritual system, and the demarcation of Kyoto-Kiev should abide by the ancient system. If land is to be divided, it should be divided among the outer prefectures.

古文：诏付尚书详议。
现代文：有诏将庾昙隆的奏章交给尚书台详细讨论。
English: There is an edict to hand over Gong Long's musical score to Shang Shudai for detailed discussion.

古文：其冬，改封昭秀为巴陵王。
现代文：这年冬天，改封萧昭秀为巴陵王。
English: In the winter of that year, Xiao Zhaoxiu was given the title of King of Baling.

古文：永泰元年见杀，年十六。
现代文：他于永泰元年被杀，时年十六岁。
English: He was 16 years old when he was killed in the first year of Yongtai.

古文：桂阳王昭粲，太子第四子也。
现代文：桂阳王萧昭粲，是文惠太子的第四子。
English: Guiyang King Xiao Zhaohui was the fourth son of Prince Wen Hui.

古文：郁林立，以皇弟封永嘉郡王，南徐州刺史。
现代文：郁林王即位，因为是皇弟而被封为永嘉郡王，南徐州刺史。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne, and because he was the younger brother of the king, he was named the king of Yongjia County, and the history of South Xuzhou was written.

古文：延兴元年，出为使持节、都督荆雍益宁梁南北秦七州军事、西中郎将、荆州刺史。
现代文：延兴元年，出任为使持节，都督荆、雍、益、宁、梁、南秦、北秦七州军事，西中郎将，荆州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, he served as the military governor of Jing, Yong, Yi, Ning, Liang, South Qin, and North Qin seven states, the West Middle Lord, and the Jing state stabbing history.

古文：明帝立，欲以闻喜公遥欣为荆州，转昭粲为右将军，中书令。
现代文：明帝即位，想让间喜公萧遥欣作荆州刺史，便将萧昭粲转官为右将军、中书令。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he transferred Xiao Zhaojun to the post of Right General and the position of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee in order to let Zi Xi Gong Xiao Yaoxin make the history of Jing Province.

古文：建武二年，改封桂阳王。
现代文：建武二年，又改封他为桂阳王。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was renamed Guiyang King.

古文：四年，迁太常，将军如故。
现代文：建武四年，升任为太常，将军职衔照旧。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he was promoted to Taizhang, and his military rank remained the same.

古文：永泰元年见杀，年八岁。
现代文：萧昭粲于永泰元年被杀，年龄八岁。
English: Xiao Zhaohui was eight years old when he was killed in the first year of Yongtai.

古文：明帝十一男：敬皇后生东昏侯宝卷，江夏王宝玄，鄱阳王宝夤，和帝；殷贵嫔生巴陵隐王宝义，晋熙王宝嵩；袁贵妃生庐陵王宝源；管淑妃生邵陵王宝攸；许淑媛生桂阳王宝贞。
现代文：明帝有十一子：敬皇后生东昏侯萧实卷、江夏王萧宾玄、鄱阳王萧宝夤、和帝萧宝融；殷贵嫔生巴陵隐王萧宝义、晋熙王萧宝嵩；袁贵妃生庐陵王萧宝源；管淑妃生邵陵王萧宝攸；许淑媛生桂阳王萧宝贞。
English: Emperor Ming had eleven sons and daughters: Empress Gui gave birth to Dongwu Hou Xiao Jizhong, Jiangxia King Xiao Binxuan, Shenyang King Xiao Baojun, and Emperor Xiao Baorong; Yang Gui gave birth to Baling Yin Wang Xiao Baoyi, Jinxi King Xiao Baosong; Yuan Gui gave birth to Fuling King Xiao Baoyuan; Guan Shuxi gave birth to Shao Ling King Xiao Baoyu; Xu Shuyuan gave birth to Guiyang King Xiao Baozhen.

古文：余皆早夭。
现代文：其余的儿子很早便天夭了。
English: The other son died very early.

古文：巴陵隐王宝义，字智勇，明帝长子也。本名明基。
现代文：巴陵隐王萧宝义字智勇，是明帝的长子，本名明基。
English: Xiao Bao Yizi Zhiyong, King of the Hidden Kingdom of Baling, was the eldest son of Emperor Ming. His real name was Mingji.

古文：建武元年，为持节、都督扬南徐州军事、前将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：建武元年任持节，都督扬州、南徐州军事，前将军，扬州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he was appointed to hold the festival, the military governor of Yangzhou and South Xuzhou, the former general, and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：封晋安郡王，三千户。
现代文：受封为晋安郡王，食三千户税赋。
English: He was given the title of King of Jinan County, and was responsible for the taxation of 3,000 households.

古文：宝义少有废疾，不堪出人间，故止加除授，仍以始安王遥光代之。
现代文：萧宝义很小便患有残疾，不能在人群中出入行动，所以衹拜授官职，而以始安王萧遥光代理其职权。
English: At a very young age, Xiao Baoyi suffered from a disability and was unable to move in and out of crowds. Therefore, he was given an official position, and Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, acted as his representative.

古文：转宝义为右将军，领兵置佐，镇石头。
现代文：又将萧宝义转官为右将军，统领兵卒，设置辅佐官员，镇守石头城。
English: He also transferred Xiao Baoyi to the post of right general, commanding the soldiers, setting up assistant officials, and guarding Stone Town.

古文：二年，出为使持节、都督南徐州军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：建武二年，出任使持节、都督南徐州军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he served as the envoy to hold the festival, the military governor of South Xuzhou, the general of Zhenbei and the historian of South Xuzhou.

古文：东昏即位，进征北大将军，开府仪同三司，给仗。
现代文：束昏侯即位，晋升为征北大将军，开府仪同三司，并赐给扶相一人。
English: Sokumo ascended the throne, was promoted to the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, and was given the ceremony of opening the capital and the three offices, as well as the post of vice-premier.

古文：永元元年，给班剑二十人。
现代文：永元元年，又给予佩班剑的扈从二十人。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, the sword of the Pei Ban sword was given to twenty people.

古文：始安王遥光诛，为都督扬南徐二州军事、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：始安王萧遥光被诛杀后，萧宝义又任都督扬州、南徐州军事，骠骑大将军，扬州刺史，持节照旧。
English: After Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, was assassinated, Xiao Baoyi was appointed as the military governor of Yangzhou and South Xuzhou, the general of the cavalry, and the historian of Yangzhou. He kept the festival as before.

古文：东府被兵火，屋宇烧残，帝方营宫殿，不暇修葺。宝义镇西州。
现代文：治所东府城遭受兵火，房屋被烧得残破不堪，当时东昏侯正营建宫殿，无暇修葺东府，于是萧宝义便坐镇西州。
English: Dongfucheng, the seat of government, was set on fire, and the houses were burnt to a crisp. At the time, Dongdimou was building a palace and had no time to repair Dongfucheng, so Xiao Baoyi took up residence in Xizhou.

古文：三年，进位司徒。
现代文：永元三年，晋升为司徒。
English: In the third year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year.

古文：和帝西台建，以为侍中、司空，使持节、都督、刺史如故。
现代文：和帝在江陵即位，以萧实义为侍中、司空，而照旧是使持节、都督二州军事、扬州刺史。
English: Emperor He ascended to the throne in Gangneung, with Xiao Siyi as an attendant and secretary, but as usual, he was the envoy to the festival, the military governor of the two states, and the historian of Yangzhou.

古文：梁王定京邑，宣德太后令以宝义为太尉，领司徒。
现代文：梁王萧衍平定京邑，宣德太后令以萧宾义为太尉，领司徒。
English: Liang Wang Xiao Yan subdued Jingyi, and Xuan De's empress dowager ordered Xiao Bin Yi to be the first lieutenant and the leader of the officers.

古文：诏云： 不言之化，形于自远。 
现代文：诏书说： 不用言辞的感化，其形迹来自高远之处。 
English: The edict said: Without the influence of words, its traces come from far away.

古文：时人皆云此实录也。
现代文：时人都说这是确切的记录。
English: At the time, people said it was an accurate record.

古文：梁受禅，封谢沐县公，寻封巴陵郡王，奉齐后。
现代文：接受禅让之后，封萧宜盏为谢沐县公，不久又封为巴陵郡王，奉养变室后人。
English: After accepting Zen's offer, Xiao Yilin was given the title of Xie Mu County Magistrate, and soon after, the title of Baling County Magistrate, in order to look after the heir to the throne.

古文：天监中薨。
现代文：天监年间去世。
English: He died during his time as overseer of heaven.

古文：江夏王宝玄，字智深，明帝第三子也。
现代文：江夏王萧宝玄字智深，是齐明帝的第三个儿子。
English: Xiao Bao Xuan Zi Sheng, King of Jiangxia, was the third son of Emperor Qiming.

古文：建武元年，为征虏将军，领石头戍事，封江夏郡王。
现代文：建武元年，为征虏将军，兼领石头戍的防卫事宜，被封为江夏郡王。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was named the King of Jiangxia County for the purpose of recruiting generals and leading the defense of the Stone Fort.

古文：仍出为持节、都督郢司二州军事、西中郎将、郢州刺史。
现代文：后出任为持节，都督郢、司二州军事，西中郎将，郢州刺史。
English: After that, he served as Jisetsu, the governor of the capital, the secretary of the two-state military, the west middle-ranking general, and the governor of the state.

古文：永泰元年，还为前将军，领石头戍事。
现代文：永泰元年，又回任为前将军，领石头戍镇守事。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, he was reappointed as a former general, leading the stone guarding the town.

古文：未拜，东昏即位，进号镇军将军。
现代文：尚未拜官授职，东昏侯即位，又进号为镇军将军。
English: He had not yet been appointed to an official post, but he was enthroned as Dongdimou and given the title of general of the town army.

古文：永元元年，又进车骑将军，代晋安王宝义为使持节、都督南徐兖二州军事、南徐兖二州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：永元元年，又晋升为车骑将军，代晋安王萧宝义为使持节，都督南徐、兖二州军事，南徐州、兖州二州刺吏，照旧是车骑将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry. On behalf of King Xiao Baoyi of Jin'an, it was the Festival of Envoys. The military governors of Nanxu and Guizhou, and the assassins of Nanxu and Guizhou, were still the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：宝玄娶尚书令徐孝嗣女为妃，孝嗣被诛离绝，少帝送少姬二人与之，宝玄恨望，密有异计。
现代文：萧实玄娶尚书令徐孝嗣的女儿为妃子，徐孝嗣被杀后，两人被迫分离，断绝关系。柬昏侯送给萧实玄两位年轻的女子，但萧宝玄非常怨恨他，心中暗存异志。
English: Xiao Shixuan married the daughter of Shang Shuling Xu Xiaozhi as his concubine. After Xu Xiaozhi was killed, the two were forced to separate and break off the relationship. Camden gave Xiao Shixuan two young women, but Xiao Baoxuan was very resentful of him and harbored a secret ambition.

古文：明年，崔慧景举兵，还至广陵，遣使奉宝玄为主。
现代文：第二年，崔慧景起兵，回到广陵，派使者遵奉萧宝玄为君。
English: In the second year, Cui Huijing raised an army, returned to Guangling, and sent an envoy to obey Xiao Baoxuan.

古文：宝玄斩其使，因是发将吏防城。
现代文：萧宝玄斩了来使，趁此机会发派将吏防卫城池。
English: Xiao Baoxuan cut off the envoy and took the opportunity to send officers to defend the city.

古文：帝遣马军主戚平、外监黄林夫助镇京口。
现代文：东昏侯也派遣马军主戚平、外监黄林夫协助镇守京口。
English: Dongdimou also sent the commander of the horse army, Qi Ping, and the overseer, Huang Linfu, to assist the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：慧景将渡江，宝玄密与相应，杀司马孔矜、典签吕承绪及平、林夫，开门纳慧景。
现代文：崔慧景将要渡江，萧宝玄暗中与他相呼应，杀死司马孔矜、典签吕承绪以及戚平、黄林夫，开门迎接崔慧景。
English: Cui Huiqing was about to cross the river. Xiao Baoguan secretly agreed with him and killed Sima Kongyu, Lv Chengxu, Qi Ping and Huang Linfu, and opened the door to welcome Cui Huiqing.

古文：使长史沈佚之、谘议柳憕分部军众，乘八扛舆，手执绛麾幡，随慧景至京师，住东城，百姓多往投集。
现代文：并派长史沈佚之、谘议柳恺分别带领部分军众，乘坐八抬大轿，手拿红色指挥旗，随同崔慧景来到京都，驻扎在柬城，有很多百姓前去投奔他们。
English: He also sent Changshi Shenshi and Yanukovych to lead some of the troops separately, riding in an eight-carriage sedan, holding a red command flag, accompanied by Cui Huiqing to Kyoto, stationed in Cambodia, and many people went to join them.

古文：慧景败，收得朝野投宝玄及慧景军名，帝令烧之，曰： 江夏尚尔，岂复可罪余人。 
现代文：崔慧景兵败后，束昏侯获得了朝野之人投奔萧宝玄及崔慧景的名单，便下令烧毁，说： 江夏王尚且如此，怎能够再去处罚其他的人呢! 
English: After the defeat of Cui Huiqing's soldiers, Shao Douhou obtained a list of the names of Xiao Baoxuan and Cui Huiqing, who were supported by the people of the court and the people of the countryside, and ordered them to be burned, saying: Jiangxia King is still like this, how can he punish other people again!

古文：宝玄逃奔数日乃出。
现代文：萧宝玄逃亡躲避了好几天后才露面。
English: Xiao Baoxuan did not show up until several days after he had fled.

古文：帝召入后堂，以步鄣裹之，令群小数十人鸣鼓角驰绕其外，遣人谓宝玄曰： 汝近围我亦如此。 
现代文：柬昏侯召见他进入后殿，用帐幕围住他，命令几十名下人敲着鼓吹着号，绕着帐幕奔跑，并派人对萧宝玄说： 你最近也是这样地围困我。 
English: He was summoned to the inner hall of the palace and surrounded by a tent. He ordered dozens of subordinates to run around the tent, beating drums and blowing trumpets. He also sent someone to say to Xiao Baoxuan, "You have been besieging me like this recently."

古文：少日乃杀之。
现代文：没过几天便把萧宝玄杀了。
English: A few days later, he killed Xiao Baoxuan.

古文：庐陵王宝源，字智渊，明帝第五子也。
现代文：庐陵王萧宝源字智渊，是明帝第五个儿子。
English: Xiao Baoyuan, also known as Zhi Yuan, the King of Fuling, was the fifth son of Emperor Ming.

古文：建武元年，为北中郎将，镇琅邪城，封庐陵郡王。
现代文：建武元年，任北中郎将，镇守琅邪城，封为庐陵郡王。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was appointed as the general of the Northern Middle Palace Guards, the town guard of Shanyi Town, and was crowned the King of Fuling County.

古文：迁右将军，领石头戍事，乃出为使持节、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、后将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：升为右将军，统领石头防守事宜。并出任使持节，都督南兖、兖、徐、青、冀五州军事，后将军，南兖州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the right general, in charge of the stone defense. He also served as the commander-in-chief, the military governor of the five states of Nanxun, Handan, Xu, Qing and Hebei, the rear general, and the governor of Nanxun.

古文：王敬则伏诛，徙宝源为都督会稽东阳临海永嘉新安五郡军事、会稽太守，将军如故。
现代文：王敬则被诛杀，调任萧宝源为都督会稽、东阳、临海、永嘉、新安五郡军事，会稽太守，将军照旧。
English: Wang Jing was killed in the battle, and Xiao Baoyuan was transferred to be the military governor of five counties, Dongyang, Linhai, Yongjia, and Xin'an, as well as the auditor general, and the general as before.

古文：永元元年，进号安东将军。
现代文：永元元年，进号为安东将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, his posthumous name was changed to General Anton.

古文：和帝即位，以为侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司，都督、太守如故。
现代文：和帝即位，以萧宝源为侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司，都督与太守的职务照旧。
English: When Emperor He ascended the throne, Xiao Baoyuan was appointed to the posts of chamberlain, general of cavalry and cavalry, keeper of the imperial residences and the three offices, and governor of the capital and governor-general as before.

古文：未拜，中兴二年薨。
现代文：尚未拜官授职，便于中兴二年去世。
English: He passed away two years after he was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：鄱阳王宝夤，字智亮，明帝第六子也。
现代文：鄱阳王萧实夤字智亮，是明帝第六子。
English: Shanyang King Xiao Shizhen, nicknamed Zhiliang, was the sixth son of Emperor Ming.

古文：建武初，封建安郡王。
现代文：建武初年封建安郡王。
English: He became the king of An County in the first year of the Jianwu era.

古文：二年，为北中郎将，镇琅邪城。
现代文：建武二年为北中郎将，镇守琅邪城。
English: In the second year of Kenmu's reign, he became the general of Kitanakura, and was appointed as the town guard of Shinya-jo.

古文：明年，出为持节、都督江州军事、南中郎将、江州刺史。
现代文：过了一年，出任为持节、都督江州军事、南中郎将、江州刺史。
English: A year later, he was appointed as Jisetsu, the military governor of Jiangzhou, the vice-commander of the south, and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：东昏即位，为使持节、都督郢司二州军事、征虏将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：柬昏侯即位、萧实夤任使持节，都督郢、司二州军事，征虏将军，郢州刺史。
English: Camden was enthroned as a dowager prince, and Xiao Shihong was appointed as an envoy to hold the festival, to be the governor of the capital, to be in charge of the military in two states, to be a conscript general, and to write the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：寻进号前将军。
现代文：不久又进号为前将军。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of general.

古文：永元二年，征为抚军，领石头戍事，未拜。
现代文：永元二年，征召为抚军，兼领石头戍事务，但未拜职受命。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, he was conscripted into the army and was also in charge of the affairs of the Stone Palace, but he did not take up the post.

古文：三年，为车骑将军、开府仪同三司，镇石头。
现代文：永元三年，任车骑将军、开府仪同三司，镇守石头戍。
English: In the third year of the Yongyuan era, he was appointed as the chariot and cavalry general, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments, and the town watchman of Stone Town.

古文：其秋，雍州刺史张欣泰等谋起事于新亭，杀台内诸主帅，事在《欣泰传》。
现代文：这年秋天，雍州刺史张欣泰等密谋在新亭起事，杀死禁城中的几位主帅，详情记录在《张欣泰传》内。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Yongzhou assassin Zhang Xintai and others plotted to rise up in Xingting and kill several coaches in the Forbidden City. Details are recorded in "Zhang Xintai Biography."

古文：难作之日，前南谯太守王灵秀奔往石头，率城内将吏见力去车脚载宝夤向台城，百姓数千人皆空手随后，京邑骚乱。
现代文：发难的这天，前南谯郡太守王灵秀跑到石头戍，率领城中的将吏和现有的兵力，去掉辕马，用人力推着装载着萧宝夤的车子向禁城进发，有数千百姓空手跟随在后面，整个京城都骚动起来。
English: On the day of the disaster, Wang Lingxiu, the former governor of Nanlu County, ran to Shijiazhuang, led the officers and existing troops in the city, removed the horses, and pushed the cart loaded with Xiao Baodi to the Forbidden City. Thousands of people followed behind empty-handed, and the entire capital city was in turmoil.

古文：宝夤至杜姥宅，日已欲暗，城门闭，城上人射之，众弃宝夤逃走。
现代文：萧宝夤等来到杜姥宅，天色已经很晚了，城门已经关闭，城上的兵士用箭射他们，众人抛下萧宝夤逃跑了。
English: Xiao Baojun and others came to Du Baojun's house. It was very late, the gate was closed, the soldiers in the city shot them with arrows, and everyone left Xiao Baojun and ran away.

古文：宝夤逃亡三日，戎服诣草市尉，尉驰以启帝，帝迎宝夤入宫问之。
现代文：萧宝夤逃亡三天后，穿着军服去见草市尉，尉官急忙向东昏侯报告，束昏堡把萧置董接进宫中询问他。
English: Three days after Xiao Baojun's escape, he went to see the lieutenant of Cao Shi in his military uniform. The lieutenant hurriedly reported to Dong Dumo, and Dong Dumo took Xiao Jidong into the palace to interrogate him.

古文：宝夤涕泣称： 尔日不知何人逼使上车，仍将去，制不自由。 
现代文：芦宜鱼流着泪说： 那天不知是谁硬逼着我上车，我想要离开，却受到挟制，身不由己。 
English: "I don't know who forced me to get on the bus that day. I wanted to leave, but I couldn't help myself.

古文：帝笑，乃复爵位。
现代文：东昏侯笑了，恢复了他的官爵职位。
English: Dong Dou Hou smiled and resumed his position as a peer.

古文：和帝立，西台以宝夤为使持节、都督南徐兖二州军事、卫将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：和帝即位，西台以藐宜鱼为使持节，都督亩徐、兖二州军事，卫将军，南徐州刺史。
English: Emperor He ascended to the throne. West Taiwan celebrated the enthronement of Emperor He with a fish festival. The governor of the capital, Mu Xu, the military commander of the two states, Wei Zhen, and the governor of the southern state of Xuzhou attended the ceremony.

古文：少帝以为使持节、都督荆益宁雍梁南北秦七州军事、荆州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：而少帝任命他为使持节，都督荆、益、宁、雍、梁、南台、王远七州军事，荆州刺史，卫将军职照旧。
English: However, the young emperor appointed him as the commander-in-chief of Jing, Yixing, Ning, Yong, Liang, Nantai, and Wangyuan seven military provinces, and Jing Province as the military governor.

古文：宣德太后临朝，梁王为建安公，改封宝夤为鄱阳王。
现代文：宣德太后临朝视政，梁王萧堑为建室公，改封蕴宝夤为鄱阳王。
English: The Empress Dowager Xuan De became the ruler of the Lin Dynasty, Liang Wang Xiao Wei became the Prince of Jianshu, and Guan Bao Wei became the King of Shenyang.

古文：中兴二年谋反，奔魏。
现代文：中兴二年，因谋反而被诛杀。
English: Two years after the founding of ZTE, he was beaten to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：邵陵王宝攸，字智宣，明帝第九子也。
现代文：邵陵王萧宾攸字智宣，是明帝第九子。
English: Shao Ling Wang Xiao Bin You Zi Xuan is the ninth son of Emperor Ming.

古文：建武元年，封南平郡王。
现代文：建武元年封南平郡王。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he was named the king of Nanping County.

古文：二年，改封。
现代文：建武二年改封。
English: The name was changed in the second year of the Kenmu era.

古文：三年，为北中郎将，镇琅邪城。永元元年，为持节、都督南北徐南兖青冀五州军事、南兖州刺史，郎将如故。
现代文：建武三年为北中郎将，镇守琅邪城永元元年，又任持节，都督南徐、北徐、南兖、青、冀五州军事，南兖州刺史，照售是北中郎将。
English: In the 3rd year of Jianwu, he was the North Vice Admiral, and in the 1st year of Yongyuan, he was appointed as the Town Marshal of Shijiazhuang. He was also appointed as the Military Governor of Nanxu, Beixu, Nanxun, Qing and Hebei Five Provinces, and the Military Historian of Nanxun. He was also the North Vice Admiral.

古文：未拜，迁征虏将军，领石头戍事。丹阳尹，戍事如故。
现代文：还未拜授，又升为征虏将军，兼领石头戍事又为丹杨尹，照旧领石头戍事。
English: He has not yet been ordained, and has been promoted to the general of conscription, and is also the leader of the stone anecdote and the leader of the stone anecdote.

古文：陈显达事平，出为持节、督江州军事、左将军、江州刺史。
现代文：陈显达事件被平息后，萧实攸出任持节、都督江州军事、左将军、江州刺史。
English: After the Chen Xianda incident was quelled, Xiao Shiyou served as the military commander, the military governor of Jiangsu Province, the left general and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：以本号还京师，授中军将军，秘书监。
现代文：以原征虏将军的称号回到京都，被授命为中军将军，秘书监。
English: He returned to Kyoto with the title of the original conscript general, and was appointed as the general of the Chinese army and the supervisor of secretaries.

古文：中兴二年谋反，宣德太后令赐死。
现代文：中兴二年，参与谋反，宣德太后下令赐死。
English: Two years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, she took part in plotting a rebellion and was ordered to be put to death by Empress Dowager Xuande.

古文：晋熙王宝嵩，字智靖，明帝第十子也。
现代文：晋熙王萧宝嵩字智靖，是明帝第十子。
English: King of Jinxi, Xiao Baosong, also known as Zhijing, was the 10th son of Emperor Ming.

古文：永元二年，为冠军将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：永元二年，为冠军将军、丹杨县尹。
English: Yongyuan two years, for the champion general, Danyang County Yin.

古文：仍迁持节、都督南徐兖二州军事、南徐州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：又升任持节，都督南徐、兖二州军事，南徐州刺史，将军称号照旧。
English: He was also promoted to Jisai, the governor of South Xuzhou, the military governor of the two states of Yunnan and Hebei, and the historian of South Xuzhou, with the title of general as before.

古文：中兴元年，和帝以为中书令。
现代文：中兴元年，和帝以他作中书令。
English: In the first year of the People's Republic of China, Emperor He used him to make the Chinese calligraphy.

古文：明年，谋反伏诛。
现代文：第二年，因谋反被诛杀。
English: The following year, he was beaten to death for plotting rebellion.

古文：桂阳王宝贞，明帝第十一子也。
现代文：桂阳王萧宝贞，是明帝第十一子。
English: Xiao Baozhen, King of Guiyang, was the 11th son of Emperor Ming.

古文：永元二年，为中护军、北中郎将，领石头戍事。
现代文：永元二年，为中护车、北中郎将，兼领石头事务。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, he became the middle guard and the north middle guard, and also led the stone affairs.

古文：中兴二年谋反，伏诛。
现代文：中兴二年，因谋反而被杀。
English: Two years after the founding of ZTE, he was killed for plotting rebellion.

古文：史臣曰：《春秋》书 郑伯克段于鄢 ，兄弟之恩离，君臣之义正。
现代文：史臣曰：《春秋》写 郑伯克段于鄢 ，表示兄弟的情谊已断绝，而君臣的恩义才是根本。
English: Shichen said: "Spring and Autumn" was written by Zheng Bock, who said that the brotherhood had been severed, and the gratitude of the monarchs and ministers was fundamental.

古文：夫逆顺有势，况亲兼一体，道穷数尽，或容触啄。
现代文：大凡事物的逆顺都有一定的情势，何况君势与亲情兼容成一体，如果强行违背它，便会穷途末路，气数殆尽，陷入羝羊触藩、黄鸟啄谷的进退两难的境地。
English: The ups and downs of all things have a certain situation, not to mention that the monarch's position is compatible with family affection. If you forcibly violate it, you will end up in a dead end, run out of energy, and fall into the dilemma of the sheep touching the domain and the yellow bird touching the valley.

古文：而宝玄自寻干戈，欣受家难。曾不悟执柯所指，跗萼相从，以此而图万全，未知其仿佛也。
现代文：而萧宝玄却因为家室之鸡而在兄弟之间择取了兵戎相见的道路，他不明白夫妻间婚姻关系与兄弟间跗萼相从的关系哪种更为亲密，并因此而谋取保存自身的万全之策，真不知道他是如何考虑的。
English: Xiao Baoxuan, however, because he was the "chicken" of the family, chose the path of warring between brothers. He did not understand which relationship between husband and wife and between brothers and sisters was more intimate, and therefore sought to preserve himself. I really do not know how he considered it.

古文：赞曰：文惠二王，于嗟夭殇。
现代文：赞曰：文惠太子的两位王子，可叹很早便夭折了。
English: Zang said: The two princes of Prince Wen Hui passed away very early.

古文：明子七国，终亦衰亡。
现代文：明帝的七位王广，最终也衰败丧亡。
English: The seven emperors of the Ming Dynasty, including Wang Guang, eventually fell into decline and perished.

