古文：开平四年十月乙亥，东京博王友文入觐，召之也。
现代文：开平四年十月十九日，东京博王朱友文应召入京拜见太祖。
English: On October 19 of the 4th year of the Heian period, Tokyo Bo-Wang Zhu Youwen was summoned to Beijing to visit Taizu.

古文：比者有谍皆以诈败，而未尝罪所过地，叛将逃卒窃其妻孥而影附使者，亦未尝诘其所经。今海内未同，而缓法弛禁，非所以息奸诈、止奔亡也。
现代文：近来多有间谍因欺诈而被发现，而未曾追究他所经关防的责任；叛将逃兵偷带他们的妻子儿女而伪装为出使的官员，也未曾追究他所经地方的责任。现海内尚未统一，而法禁松弛，这就不能制止奸诈和逃亡。
English: In recent times, many spies have been found to have committed fraud, but have not been held accountable for their actions; renegade deserters have stolen their wives and children and disguised themselves as officials on a mission, and have not been held accountable for the places they visited. Now that the country is not unified, and the law is lax, it is impossible to stop treachery and escape.

古文：应在京诸司，不得擅给公验。
现代文：凡在京各部门，不准擅自发给官方凭证。
English: All departments in Beijing are not allowed to issue official certificates without authorization.

古文：如有出外须执凭由者，其司门过所，先须经中书门下点检，宜委宰臣赵光逢专判出给，俾由显重，冀绝奸源。仍下两京、河阳及六军诸卫、御史台，各加钤辖。
现代文：如有出外必须拥有的证件，须先经中书门下审核，交宰臣赵光逢专门主管签发，以期慎重，杜塞奸源。又请两京、河阳及六军各卫、御史台，各加查验管辖。
English: If there are documents that must be possessed when going abroad, they must first be reviewed by the Chinese Academy of Letters and submitted to Vice-Minister Zhao Guangfeng for issuance by a special supervisor, with a view to cautiously finding the source of Duce's treachery. In addition, the two capitals, Heyang and the six military guards, and the History Channel should all be investigated and governed.

古文：公私行李，复不得带挟家口向西。
现代文：公私使者，均不准挟带家属往西方去。
English: Both public and private envoys were not allowed to take their families to the West.

古文：其襄、邓、鄜、延等道，并同处分。 
现代文：其襄、邓？延等道，均准此执行。 
English: Its Xiang, Dengyan and other roads are all allowed to carry out this.

古文：以宁国军节度使王景仁充北面行营都招讨使，潞州副招讨使韩勍为副，相州刺史李思安为先锋使。
现代文：以宁国军节度使王景仁充任北面行营都招讨使，潞州副招讨使韩京力为副，相州刺史李思安为先锋使。
English: With the Ning Army Festival, Wang Jingren was appointed as the northern campaign envoy, the Bozhou deputy envoy was Han Jingli, and the Sanzhou envoy was Li Sian.

古文：帝指授方略，依前充北面都招讨使，恩赉甚厚，使督军进发。
现代文：当时镇州王、定州王处直叛变，结连晋人，所以派将领征讨他们。乾化元年正月一日，日食，太祖身穿素服避开正殿。二日，太阳旁边出现不祥之气，向背如环，崇政使敬翔望见后说 ：军队可忧呀。 
English: At that time, the king of Zhenzhou and the king of Dingzhou were in direct rebellion, linking the Jin people, so the generals were sent to recruit them. On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Qianhua, the solar eclipse, the great-grandfather dressed in plain clothes to avoid the main hall. On the second day, the ominous atmosphere appeared next to the sun, like a ring to the back, and the high-ranking envoy, Qian Xiang, said after seeing it: the army should be worried.

古文：《五代会要》：二月，晋师侵魏州，杨师厚帅师援邢州，晋人还师。
现代文：太祖因此推迟吃饭。这天，朝廷军队果然被晋军以及镇州、定州部队打败，都将十多人被俘，其余溃败逃走。
English: On this day, the imperial army was indeed defeated by the Jin army as well as the Zhenzhou and Dingzhou troops, more than ten people were captured, and the rest fled in defeat.

古文：二月丙辰朔，帝御文明殿，群臣入阁。以蔡州顺化军指挥使王存俨权知军州事。
现代文：太祖下诏征陕州镇国军节度杨师厚赴京，太祖在崇勋殿接见他，指示方略，依旧任杨师厚为东北面都招讨使，恩赐甚厚，令他督军进发。二月，以蔡州顺化军指挥使王存俨临时主持军政事务。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict to Yang Shihou, commander of the Shaanxi Town National Army, to go to Beijing for the festival. The great-grandfather received him at the Chongxun Hall and instructed him on the strategy. Yang Shihou was still appointed as envoy to the northeast, and the gift was very rich, so that he drove the army forward. In February, Wang Cunxu temporarily presided over military and political affairs as the commander of the Caizhou Hunhua Army.

古文：蔡人久习叛逆，刺史张慎思又裒敛无状，帝追慎思至京，而久未命代。
现代文：蔡人长久习惯于叛逆，刺史张慎思聚敛财物不成体统，太祖追究张慎思，召往京城，而久未任命取代他的人。
English: Cai people have long been accustomed to rebellion, and the accumulation of wealth by Zhang Shanshi does not become a style. Grandfather investigated Zhang Shanshi, summoned him to Beijing, and has not appointed a person to replace him for a long time.

古文：右厢指挥使刘行琮乘虚作乱，因纵火驱拥，为渡淮计。
现代文：右厢指挥使刘行琮乘虚作乱放火驱赶部众，准备渡过淮河。
English: The commander of the right compartment ordered Liu Xingyao to set fire to the troops and prepare to cross the Huai River.

古文：存俨诛行琮而抚遏其众，都将郑遵与其下奉存俨为主，而以众情驰奏。
现代文：王存俨诛杀了刘行琮而安抚遏制了部众，都将郑遵与部下奉王存俨为主帅，而将众人的意愿飞报朝廷。
English: Wang Cunxu killed Liu Xingyao and pacified and restrained his subordinates. Both Zheng Zun and his subordinates served Wang Cunxu as their commander-in-chief, and reported the will of the people to the imperial court.

古文：时东京留守博王友文不先请，遂讨其乱。兵至鄢陵，上闻之曰： 诛行琮功也，然存俨方惧，若临之以兵，蔡必速飞矣！ 
现代文：这时东京留守博王朱友文未先请示朝廷，就前往征讨蔡州的动乱，兵到鄢陵，太祖闻讯说 ：诛杀刘行琮是有功，然王存俨正心怀畏惧，如果以兵压境，蔡人必飞速逃离了。 
English: At this time, Zhu Youwen, the king of Bo, who stayed in Tokyo, went to investigate the turmoil in Caizhou without first requesting the imperial court. The soldiers went to Fuling. The great-grandfather heard the news that the killing of Liu Xingyao was a success, but Wang Cunxu was afraid. If the border was pressed by soldiers, Cai people would flee quickly.

古文：五月甲申朔，帝被冕旒御朝元殿视朝，仗卫如式。
现代文：于是派使者驰马让朱友文回师，而擢升王存俨官职，蔡人才安下心。五月一日，太祖身穿礼服到朝元殿视朝，仪仗卫队按规定排列。
English: Therefore, an envoy was sent on horseback to have Zhu Youwen return to his teacher, while Wang Cunxu was promoted to the post of eunuch, and Cai talent was reassured. On May 1, the great-grandfather wore a gown to the Imperial Palace to see the emperor, and the honor guard was arranged according to regulations.

古文：制：改开平五年为乾化元年，大赦天下。
现代文：诏令改开平五年为乾化元年，大赦天下。
English: The imperial edict changed the first year of the fifth year of the Heian period to the first year of the Qianhua period, and the country was amnestied.

古文：有司以立冬太庙荐享上言，诏丞相杜晓赴西都摄祭行事。
现代文：七月，太祖身体不适，稍稍不适应于秋天的暑热。九月二十日，太祖亲自统帅六军，到达河阳。二十四日，到卫州。二十五日，到宜沟。二十六日，到相州。十月一日，御驾驻扎在相州。
English: In July, Taizu was unwell and slightly unprepared for the heat of autumn. On September 20, Taizu personally commanded the Six Armies and arrived in Hayang. On the 24th, he went to Weizhou. On the 25th, to Yigou. On the 26th, to Xiangzhou. On October 1, he was stationed in Xiangzhou.

古文：既而渔人获巨鱼以献，帝命放之中流，从臣以帝有仁恻之心，皆相顾欣然。是日，名其潭曰万岁潭。
现代文：三日，在州城外城南楼阅兵。左龙骧都教练使邓季筠、魏博马军都指挥使何令稠、右厢马军都使陈令勋，因为部下战马羸瘦，一并在军营门前被腰斩。六日，到魏县，先锋将黄文靖伏诛。十八日，到城西的白龙潭观鱼。不久渔夫捕获大鱼献上，太祖命把大鱼送往潭中放生，随从的臣子因为太祖有仁爱之心，都相顾而高兴，当天将白龙潭改名为万岁潭。
English: On the third day, there was a military parade in the south tower of the city outside the state capital. Deng Jizhe, the coach of the left Long March, commanded the Wei Bo Horse Army, and Chen Lingxun, the right Horse Army, because his subordinates were thin, and they were beheaded in front of the military camp. On the sixth day, to Wei County, the vanguard will be Huang Wenzhing. On the 18th day, to Bai Longtan in the west of the city to watch the fish. Soon the fisherman caught the big fish and presented it, the great-grandfather ordered to send the big fish to the pond to be released, and the courtiers

古文：丙子，帝御城东教场阅兵，诸军都指挥、北面招讨使、太尉杨师厚总领铁马步甲十万，广亘十数里陈焉。
现代文：二十六日，到城东教练场阅兵，各军都指挥、北面招讨使、太尉杨师厚率领铁马步甲十万，陈列纵横十多里。
English: On the 26th, a military parade was held at the east of the city's training ground. All the armies were commanded by the north recruiting envoy, Second Lieutenant Yang Shihou, who led the cavalry and infantry of 100,000, displaying more than ten miles in length and width.

古文：士卒之雄锐，部队之严肃，旌旗之杂遝，戈甲之照耀，屹若山岳，势动天地，帝甚悦焉。
现代文：士兵的英武精锐，队列的严整肃穆，旌旗的壮盛，戈甲的照耀，屹立如山岳，声势动天地，太祖很是高兴。
English: The soldiers of the Yingwu elite, the strict orderliness and solemnity of the queue, the grandeur of the banner, the shining of the Gorga, standing like a mountain, the momentum of the world, the great-grandfather was very happy.

古文：是月，魏博节度上言，于泾县北戮杀镇州王熔兵士七千余人，夺马二千余匹，戈甲未知其数，并擒都将以下四十余人。
现代文：魏博节度使报告，在泾县以北杀死镇州王兵士七千多人，夺得战马二千多匹，武器不计其数，并活捉都将以下军官四十多人。
English: According to the report of the Wei Bo Festival, more than seven thousand soldiers of Zhenzhou Wang were killed, more than two thousand horses were captured, countless weapons were captured, and more than forty officers were captured alive.

