古文：东海之内，北海之隅，有国名曰朝鲜；天毒，其人水居，偎人爱之。
现代文：东海之内，北海的角上，有两个国家，名叫朝鲜和天毒，这两个国家的人都居住在水上或水滨，大家紧挨在一起并相互友爱。
English: In the East Sea, at the corner of the North Sea, there are two countries, named Korea and Tianyao. The people of these two countries live on the water or on the waterfront, they are close together and love each other.

古文：西海之内，流沙之中，有国名曰壑市。
现代文：在西海以内，流沙的中央，有一个国家，名叫壑市国。
English: Within the West Sea, in the middle of the quicksand, there is a country called the Republic of Kunming.

古文：西海之内，流沙之西，有国名曰泛叶。
现代文：在西海以内，流沙的西边，有一个国家，名叫氾叶国。
English: Within the West Sea, on the west side of the quicksand, there is a country called the Flooded Leaf Country.

古文：流沙之西，有鸟山者，三水出焉。
现代文：流沙西面，有一座山叫鸟山，三条河流共同发源于这座山。
English: On the west side of the sands, there is a mountain called Bird Mountain. Three rivers originate from this mountain.

古文：爰有黄金、璇瑰、丹货、银铁，皆流于此中。
现代文：这里所有的黄金、璿玉瑰石、丹货、银铁，全都产于这些水中。
English: All the gold, diamonds, precious stones, Tanzanite, silver and iron are produced in these waters.

古文：又有淮山，好水出焉。
现代文：又有座大山叫淮山，好水就是从这座山发源的。
English: There is also a big mountain called Huai Mountain, and good water comes from this mountain.

古文：流沙之东，黑水之西，有朝云之国、司彘之国。
现代文：流沙的东边，黑水的西边，有朝云国和司彘国。
English: To the east of the quicksand, to the west of the black water, there is the country of the morning clouds and the country of the priests.

古文：黄帝妻嫘祖，生昌意。
现代文：黄帝的妻子嫘祖生了昌意。
English: Huangdi's wife, Xizou, gave birth to Changyi.

古文：昌意降处若水，生韩流。
现代文：昌意被放逐到若水，生了韩流。
English: Changyi was banished to Wakamizu, and the Korean Wave was born.

古文：韩流擢首、谨耳、人面、豕喙、麟身、渠股、豚止，取淖子曰阿女，生帝颛顼。
现代文：韩流长着长长的头、小小的耳朵，人一样的脸，猪一样的嘴，麒麟一样的身子，罗圈腿，猪一样的脚。他娶了一位蜀山氏的女子，名叫阿女，生了帝颛顼。
English: Hallyu has a long head, small ears, a human-like face, a pig-like mouth, a unicorn-like body, bandy legs, and pig-like feet. He married a woman from the Shushan clan, named A-Mei, and gave birth to a son, Dangun.

古文：流沙之东，黑水之间，有山名不死之山。
现代文：在流沙的东面，黑水流经的地方，有一座山，名叫不死山。
English: To the east of the quicksand, where the black water flows, there is a mountain called Mount Undying.

古文：华山青水之东，有山名曰肇山。
现代文：在华山青水的东面，有一座山名叫肇山。
English: In the east of Huashan Qingshui, there is a mountain called Zhao Mountain.

古文：有人名曰柏高，柏高上下于此，至于天。
现代文：山中有位仙人，名叫柏高，柏高上下于这座山，直至到达天上。
English: There is a hermit in the mountain named Baigao. Baigao climbs up and down the mountain until he reaches the sky.

古文：西南黑水之间，有都广之野，后稷葬焉。
现代文：在西南方黑水流经的地方，有一处叫都广野，后稷就埋葬在这里。
English: In the southwest, where the Black Water flows, there is a place called Miyako Hirono, where Houjun was buried.

古文：爰有膏菽、膏稻、膏黍、膏稷，百谷自生，冬夏播琴。
现代文：这一带有味美如膏的豆类、稻、黍和稷，各种谷物在这里自然生长，无论冬季还是夏季都可以播种。
English: This delicious legume, rice, bean and bean, all kinds of cereals grow naturally here, and can be sown in winter or summer.

古文：鸾鸟自歌，凤鸟自儛，灵寿实华，草木所聚。
现代文：在这里，鸾鸟在自由地歌唱，凤鸟在自在地跳舞，灵寿木开花结果，各种草木聚集生长。
English: Here, the ostrich is singing freely, the phoenix is dancing freely, the lingzhu tree is in full bloom, and all kinds of plants and trees are growing.

古文：爰有百兽，相群爰处。
现代文：这里还有各种野兽成群相处。
English: There are also herds of all kinds of wild animals.

古文：此草也，冬夏不死。
现代文：这里生长的草无论冬夏都不会死。
English: The grass that grows here never dies, winter or summer.

古文：南海之外，黑水青水之间，有木名曰若木，若水出焉。
现代文：在南海以内，黑水青水流经的地方，有一种树木名叫若木，而若水就从若木生长的地底下发源。
English: Within the South China Sea, where black water and blue water flow together, there is a kind of tree called the young tree, and the young water springs from the underground where the young tree grows.

古文：有禺中之国。
现代文：有一个禺中国。
English: There is only one China.

古文：有列襄之国。
现代文：又有一个列襄国。
English: There is another country in the queue.

古文：有灵山，有赤蛇在木上，名曰蠕蛇，木食。
现代文：有一座灵山，山中的树上有一种红颜色的蛇，叫做耎蛇，以树木为食物。
English: There is a spiritual mountain. In the trees of the mountain, there is a red-colored snake, called the boa constrictor, which eats trees.

古文：有盐长之国。
现代文：有一个盐长国。
English: There is a salt-growing country.

古文：有人焉鸟首，名曰鸟氏。
现代文：这里的人长着鸟一样的脑袋，称作鸟氏。
English: The people here have bird-like heads and are called Tori.

古文：有九丘，以水络之：名曰陶唐之丘、有叔得之丘、孟盈之丘、昆吾之丘、黑白之丘、赤望之丘、参卫之丘、武夫之丘、神民之丘。
现代文：有九座山丘，都被水环绕着，名称分别是陶唐丘、叔得丘、孟盈丘、昆吾丘、黑白丘、赤望丘、参卫丘、武夫丘、神民丘。
English: There are nine hills, all of which are surrounded by water, with the names of Toutang Hill, Shude Hill, Meng Ying Hill, Kunwu Hill, Black and White Hill, Chabang Hill, Sangwei Hill, Wufu Hill, and Shenmin Hill.

古文：有木，青叶紫茎，玄华黄实，名曰建木，百仞无枝，有九欘，下有九枸，其实如麻，其叶如芒。
现代文：有一种树木，青色的叶子紫色的茎干，黑色的花朵黄色的果实，叫做建木，高达一百仞的树干上不生长枝条，而树顶上有九根弯蜒曲折的桠枝，树底下有九条盘旋交错的根节，它的果实像麻子，叶子像芒树叶。
English: There is a kind of tree with blue leaves, purple stems, black flowers, and yellow fruits, called Jianmu. There are no branches growing on the trunk of the tree, which is up to a hundred branches, but there are nine twisted branches on the top of the tree, and nine intertwined roots under the tree. Its fruits are like pockmarks, and its leaves are like mango leaves.

古文：大皞爰过，黄帝所为。
现代文：大皞凭借建木登上天，黄帝栽培了建木。
English: Dafu ascended to heaven by virtue of Jianmu, and the Yellow Emperor cultivated Jianmu.

古文：有窫窳，龙首，是食人。
现代文：有一种窫窳兽，长着龙一样的脑袋，会吃人。
English: There is a beast with a dragon-like head that eats people.

古文：有青兽，人面，名是曰猩猩。
现代文：还有一种野兽，长着人一样的面孔，名叫猩猩。
English: There is also a beast with a human-like face, called the orangutan.

古文：西南有巴国。
现代文：西南方有个巴国。
English: In the south-west there is the state of Bahia.

古文：大皞生咸鸟，咸鸟生乘厘，乘厘生后照，后照是始为巴人。
现代文：大皞生了咸鸟，咸鸟生了乘厘，乘厘生了后照，而后照就是巴国人的始祖。
English: The giant pheasant gave birth to the salty bird, the salty bird gave birth to the rooster, the rooster gave birth to the hen, and the hen is the ancestor of the Pakok people.

古文：有国名曰流黄辛氏，其域中方三百里，其出是尘土。
现代文：有一个国家，名叫流黄辛氏国，它的疆域方圆三百里，这里出产一种大鹿。
English: There is a country called Liu Huang Xin's country. Its territory is 300 miles in circumference. A kind of deer is produced here.

古文：有巴遂山，渑水出焉。
现代文：还有一座巴遂山，渑水从这座山发源。
English: There is also Mount Basui, the source of Surabaya's water.

古文：又有朱卷之国。
现代文：又有一个朱卷国。
English: There is also a red scroll.

古文：有黑蛇，青首，食象。
现代文：这里有一种黑蛇，长着青色脑袋，能吞食大象。
English: There is a black snake with a blue head that can devour an elephant.

古文：南方有赣巨人，人面长臂，黑身有毛，反踵，见人笑亦笑，唇蔽其面，因即逃也。
现代文：南方有一种赣巨人，长着人的面孔而嘴唇长长的，黑黑的身上长满了毛，脚尖朝后而脚跟朝前反长着，看见人笑它也会笑，一发笑而嘴唇便会遮住他的脸面，人就趁此立即逃走。
English: In the south, there is a giant salamander with a human face and long lips. Its black body is covered with hair. Its toes point backwards and its heels point forwards. It laughs when it sees people smile. When it laughs, its lips cover its face and people immediately run away.

古文：又有黑人，虎首鸟足，两手持蛇，方啖之。
现代文：还有一种黑人，长着老虎一样的脑袋禽鸟一样的爪子，两只手都拿着蛇，正在吞食它。
English: There is also a black man with a tiger-like head, bird-like talons, holding a snake in both hands and devouring it.

古文：有嬴民，鸟足，有封豕。
现代文：有一种人称作嬴民，长着禽鸟一样的爪子。
English: There is a kind of person called "Hengmin" with bird-like claws.

古文：有人曰苗民。
现代文：还有大野猪。有一种人称作苗民。
English: There are also large wild boars. There is a kind of people called Miao Min.

古文：有神焉，人首蛇身，长如辕，左右有首，衣紫衣，冠旃冠，名曰延维，人主得而飨食之，伯天下。
现代文：这地方有一位神，长着人一样的脑袋，蛇一样的身子，身长如车辕，左右两侧各有一个脑袋，穿着紫色的衣服，戴着用毡做成的帽子，名叫延维，一个国家的国君若能得到并祭祀他，就能称霸天下。
English: There is a god in this place with a human-like head and a snake-like body. He is as long as a chariot and has a head on each side. He wears purple clothes and a hat made of skulls. His name is Yanwei. If the ruler of a country can obtain and worship him, he will be able to dominate the world.

古文：有鸾鸟自歌，凤鸟自舞。
现代文：有鸾鸟在自由地歌唱，凤鸟在自在地跳舞。
English: There are ostriches singing freely, and phoenixes dancing freely.

古文：凤鸟首文曰德，翼文曰顺，膺文曰仁，背文曰义，见则天下和。
现代文：凤鸟头部的花纹像 德 字，翅膀上的花纹像 顺 字，胸部的花纹像 仁 字，背部的花纹像 义 字。只要这种鸟一出现，天下就会和谐太平。
English: The pattern on the head of the phoenix is like the character "德," the pattern on the wings is like the character "顺," the pattern on the chest is like the character "仁," and the pattern on the back is like the character "義." As long as this bird appears, the world will be harmonious and peaceful.

古文：又有青兽如菟名曰菌狗有桂山。有翠鸟。有孔鸟。
现代文：另外有一种青兽，形状像兔，名叫菌狗。还有翠鸟，有孔雀。
English: In addition, there is a young animal, shaped like a rabbit, called a fungus dog. There is also a kingfisher and a peacock.

古文：南海之内，有衡山，有菌山，有桂山。
现代文：在南海以内，有一座衡山，又有一座菌山，还有一座桂山。
English: Within the South China Sea, there is a Hengshan, a Fungshan, and a Guishan.

古文：有山名三天子之都。
现代文：还有一座山叫做三天子都山。
English: There is also a mountain called the Three Sons Mountain.

古文：南方苍梧之丘，苍梧之渊，其中有九嶷山，舜之所葬，在长沙零陵界中。
现代文：南方有一片山丘叫苍梧丘，还有一个深渊叫苍梧渊，在苍梧丘和苍梧渊的中间有座九嶷山，帝舜就葬埋在这里。九嶷山位于长沙零陵境内。
English: In the south, there is a hill called the Cangwu Hill and a deep abyss called the Cangwu Abyss. In the middle of the Cangwu Hill and the Cangwu Abyss, there is a Nine Mountains, where Emperor Qianlong was buried. The Nine Mountains are located in the territory of the Changsha Mausoleum.

古文：北海之内，有蛇山者，蛇水出焉，东入于海。
现代文：在北海以内，有一座山，叫蛇山，蛇水从蛇山发源，向东流入大海。
English: Within the North Sea, there is a mountain called Snake Mountain. Snake water originates from Snake Mountain and flows eastward into the sea.

古文：有五采之鸟，飞蔽一乡，名曰翳鸟。
现代文：有一种长着五彩羽毛的鸟，成群地飞起而遮蔽一乡的上空，名叫翳鸟。
English: There is a bird with multicolored feathers, flying in flocks and covering the sky of a township, called the ostrich.

古文：又有不距之山，巧倕葬其西。
现代文：还有座不距山，巧倕便葬在不距山的西面。
English: There is also a mountain not far away, and Qiao Wei was buried on the west side of the mountain not far away.

古文：北海之内，有反缚盗械、带戈常倍之佐，各曰相顾之尸。
现代文：在北海以内，有一个反绑着戴刑具、带着戈而图谋叛逆的臣子，名叫相顾尸。
English: In the North Sea, there was a vassal named Zang Gu Zi, who was tied up, wearing a torture device, and carrying a cross to plot treason.

古文：伯夷父生西岳，西岳生先龙，先龙是始生氐羌，氐羌乞姓。
现代文：伯夷父生了西岳，西岳生了先龙，先龙的后代子孙便是氐羌，氐羌人姓乞。
English: Bo Yi's father gave birth to Xidake, and Xidake gave birth to Xianlong. Xianlong's descendants and descendants are Yao, and Yao's surname is Ruo.

古文：北海之内，有山，名曰幽都之山，黑水出焉。
现代文：北海以内，有一座山，名叫幽都山，黑水发源于这座山。
English: Within the North Sea, there is a mountain called Yudu Mountain, from which the black water springs.

古文：其上有玄鸟、玄蛇、玄豹、玄虎、玄狐蓬尾。
现代文：山上有黑色鸟、黑色蛇、黑色豹子、黑色老虎，有毛蓬蓬尾巴的黑色狐狸。
English: There are black birds, black snakes, black leopards, black tigers, and black foxes with shaggy tails in the mountains.

古文：有大玄之山。
现代文：有座大玄山。
English: There's a big mountain behind it.

古文：有玄丘之民。
现代文：有一种玄丘民。
English: There is a kind of Xuanqiu people.

古文：有大幽之国。
现代文：有个大幽国。
English: There's a whole country out there.

古文：有赤胫之民。
现代文：有一种赤胫民。
English: There is a kind of red-bearded people.

古文：有钉灵之国，其民从膝已下有毛，马蹄，善走。
现代文：有一个钉灵国，国中之人膝盖以下的部位都生有长毛，长着马一样的蹄子，擅长奔跑。
English: There is a nailing country, where people have long hair below the knee, have horse-like hooves, and are good at running.

古文：炎帝之孙伯陵，伯陵同吴权之妻阿女缘妇，缘妇孕三年，是生鼓、延、殳。
现代文：炎帝的孙子叫伯陵，伯陵与吴权的妻子阿女缘妇私通，阿女缘妇怀孕三年，这才生下鼓、延、殳三个儿子。
English: Emperor Yan's grandson was named Boling. Boling had an adulterous affair with Wu Quan's wife, Ah Niang, and Ah Niang was pregnant for three years before she gave birth to their three sons, Drum, Yan, and Zou.

古文：始为侯，鼓、延是始为钟，为乐风。
现代文：殳最初发明了箭靶，鼓、延二人发明了钟，作了乐曲和音律。
English: Gong originally invented the arrow target, and two people, Drum and Yan, invented the bell, and made music and melody.

古文：黄帝生骆明，骆明生白马，白马是为鲧。
现代文：黄帝生了骆明，骆明生了白马，这白马就是鲧。
English: The Yellow Emperor gave birth to Luo Ming, Luo Ming gave birth to a white horse, and this white horse is the dragonfly.

古文：帝俊生禺号，禺号生淫梁，淫梁生番禺，是始为舟。
现代文：帝俊生了禺号，禺号生了淫梁，淫梁生了番禺，这位番禺最初发明了船。
English: The Emperor Jun gave birth to the Dragonfly, the Dragonfly gave birth to the Dragonfly, the Dragonfly gave birth to the Dragonfly, and the Dragonfly gave birth to the Dragonfly, who originally invented the boat.

古文：番禺生奚仲，奚仲生吉光，吉光是始以木为车。
现代文：番禺生了奚仲，奚仲生了吉光，这位吉光最初用木头制做出车子。
English: Panyu gave birth to Yizhong, and Yizhong gave birth to Jiguang, who originally made cars out of wood.

古文：少皞生般，般是始为弓矢。
现代文：少皞生了般，这位般最初发明了弓和箭。
English: He was the first to invent the bow and arrow.

古文：帝俊赐羿彤弓素矰，以扶下国，羿是始去恤下地之百艰。
现代文：帝俊赏赐给后羿红色弓和白色矰箭，用他的射箭技艺去扶助下界各国，后羿便开始去救济世间人们的各种艰苦。
English: Emperor Jun rewarded Hou Yi with a red bow and a white crossbow, and he used his archery skills to help the countries of the underworld. Hou Yi then began to relieve the hardships of people in the world.

古文：帝俊生晏龙，晏龙是为琴瑟。
现代文：帝俊生了晏龙，这位晏龙最初发明了琴和瑟两种乐器。
English: Emperor Qianjun gave birth to Qianlong, who initially invented two musical instruments, the qin and the se.

古文：帝俊有子八人，是始为歌舞。
现代文：帝俊有八个儿子，他们开始创作出歌曲和舞蹈。
English: Dijun had eight sons, and they began to create songs and dances.

古文：帝俊生三身，三身生义均，义均是始为巧倕，是始作下民百巧。
现代文：帝俊生了三身，三身生了义均，义均是最早的巧匠，他开始为下界的百姓发明了各种巧妙的工艺和技术。
English: Emperor Jun was born with three bodies, and the three bodies gave birth to Yijun. Yijun was the earliest craftsman, and he began to invent all kinds of ingenious crafts and technologies for the people of the lower realm.

古文：后稷是播百谷。
现代文：后稷发明了播种百谷的方法。
English: Houyi invented the method of sowing millet.

古文：稷之孙曰叔均，是始作牛耕。
现代文：后稷的孙子叔均发明了用牛来耕地。
English: Houyi's grandsons and uncles all invented the use of cattle to cultivate the land.

古文：大比赤阴，是始为国。
现代文：大比赤阴建立了历史上最早的国家。
English: Dabi Akiyoshi established the first nation in history.

古文：禹、鲧是始布土，均定九州。
现代文：禹和鲧开始区分规划疆土，并划定了九州。
English: Yu Hejun began to divide and plan the territory, and delineated Kyushu.

古文：炎帝之妻，赤水之子听訞生炎居，炎居生节并，节并生戏器，戏器生祝融。
现代文：炎帝的妻子，即赤水氏的女儿听訞生下炎居，炎居生了节并，节并生了戏器，戏器生了祝融。
English: Emperor Yan's wife, the daughter of the Akamizu clan, gave birth to Yanju, who gave birth to Jie, who gave birth to Jie, who gave birth to Jie, who gave birth to Jie, who gave birth to Zhu Rong.

古文：祝融降处于江水，生共工。
现代文：祝融被放逐到长江岸边居住，便生了共工。
English: Zhu Rong was banished to live on the banks of the Yangtze River, and a co-worker was born.

古文：共工生术器，术器首方颠，是复土穰，以处江水。
现代文：共工生了术器。术器的头是平顶呈方形，他发明了通过翻耕土地而导致农作物丰收的方法，并回到祝融曾经住过的长江边居住。
English: The co-worker produced a surgical instrument. The head of the surgical instrument is a flat-topped square, he invented a method of cultivating the land to produce a bumper crop, and returned to live by the Yangtze River, where Zhu Rong once lived.

古文：共工生后土，后土生噎鸣，噎鸣生岁十有二。
现代文：共工生了后土，后土生了噎鸣，噎鸣生了一年中的十二个月。
English: The co-worker gave birth to the soil, the soil gave birth to the chirp, and the chirp gave birth to the twelve months of the year.

古文：洪水滔天。
现代文：大荒时代大地上洪水滔天。
English: In the time of the Great Drought, the floods on the earth were tremendous.

古文：鲧窃帝之息壤以堙洪水，不待帝命。
现代文：鲧偷拿天帝的息壤来堵塞洪水，而未等待天帝下令。
English: He stole the Emperor's resting place to block the flood, without waiting for the Emperor's order.

古文：帝令祝融杀鲧于羽郊。
现代文：天帝派遣祝融把鲧杀死在羽山的郊野。
English: The Heavenly Emperor sent Zhu Rong to kill the baboons in the countryside of Hasan.

古文：鲧复生禹。
现代文：鲧死以后，从鲧的遗体肚腹中生出了禹。
English: After Yu died, Yu was born from the abdomen of Yu's corpse.

古文：帝乃命禹卒布土，以定九州。
现代文：于是天帝命令禹治理洪水，禹最终区分规划了疆土，并划定了九州。
English: As a result, the Heavenly Emperor ordered Yu to control the flood, and Yu planned the final division of the territory and delineated Kyushu.

