古文：太史公读《春秋历谱谍》，至周厉王，未尝不废书而叹也。曰：呜呼，师挚见之矣！
现代文：太史公读《春秋历谱牒》这些古籍的时候，每读到周厉王时，都会合书感叹万分说： 哎，鲁国的太师挚可真是有真知灼见啊！
English: When Taishi publicly read the "Spring and Autumn Almanac" of these ancient books, whenever he read Zhou Liwang, he would sigh and say: Hey, Lu's Taishi is really insightful!

古文：纣为象箸而箕子唏。
现代文：但还是无能为力，商纣王用象牙做筷子的时候箕子也同样叹息。
English: But there is still nothing that can be done. When the merchant Shun Wang used ivory to make chopsticks, the mule also sighed.

古文：周道缺，诗人本之衽席，《关雎》作。
现代文：周朝的政治尚有缺陷，诗人作《关雎》以男女情爱昭示仁义道德。
English: The politics of the Zhou Dynasty still had flaws, and the poet's work "Guanzhang" showed benevolence, righteousness and morality with the love between men and women.

古文：仁义陵迟，《鹿鸣》刺焉。
现代文：仁义日渐衰败，诗人作《鹿鸣》讥刺。
English: Benevolence and righteousness are waning day by day, and the poet's "Deer Song" is a satire.

古文：及至厉王，以恶闻其过，公卿惧诛而祸作，厉王遂奔于彘，乱自京师始，而共和行政焉。
现代文：周厉王是最不喜欢别人说他的过失的人，那时的三公九卿都惧怕诛灭不敢直谏而作祸生乱。厉王只好出京师逃到彘这个地方避祸，祸乱从京师爆发，京师就由周公和召公联合执政。
English: Zhou Li Wang was the person who did not like others to talk about his mistakes the most. At that time, the three princes and nine nobles were afraid of being destroyed and did not dare to attack directly, creating a disaster. Li Wang had no choice but to escape from the Beijing Division to this place to avoid disaster. The disaster broke out from the Beijing Division, and the Beijing Division was ruled jointly by Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong.

古文：是后或力政，强乘弱，兴师不请天子。
现代文：从那以后各诸侯便开始相互杀伐，强大的国家欺压弱小的国家，动用军队根本就不用请示周天子。
English: From then on, the various lords began to fight each other, the powerful countries oppressed the weak countries, and there was no need to ask Zhou Tianzi for permission to use the army.

古文：然挟王室之义，以讨伐为会盟主，政由五伯，诸侯恣行，淫侈不轨，贼臣篡子滋起矣。
现代文：但这些诸侯都借着王室名义征讨攻伐他国，更有充当诸侯盟主者，政令均出自五霸，诸侯横行霸道，骄奢淫欲，行为不轨，置法度而不顾；乱臣贼子层出不穷。
English: However, these lords used the name of the royal family to conquer and invade other countries, and even acted as lords of the lords. The decrees were all issued by the five lords. The lords were domineering, arrogant and lustful, and behaved improperly, disregarding the law; there was an endless stream of ruffian thieves.

古文：齐、晋、秦、楚其在成周微甚，封或百里或五十里。
现代文：齐、晋、秦、楚在周建立的时候都十分弱小，他们其中封邑大者方圆百余里，小者仅方圆五十里。
English: Qi, Jin, Qin and Chu were all very weak and small at the time of Zhou's establishment. The largest of their fiefs was more than a hundred miles in circumference, while the smallest was only fifty miles.

古文：晋阻三河，齐负东海，楚介江淮，秦因雍州之固，四海迭兴，更为伯主，文武所褒大封，皆威而服焉。
现代文：而晋依仗三河之险，齐背靠东海，楚盘踞长江淮河之间，秦拥雍州险要之地。他们在周的四方兴起，充当各方霸主。
English: Jin, on the other hand, relied on the danger of the three rivers, with their backs to the East Sea, Chu Pan and the Yangtze River between the Huaihe River, and Qin held the dangerous place of Yongzhou. They arose in the four directions of Zhou, acting as the overlords of all parties.

古文：是以孔子明王道，干七十余君，莫能用。
现代文：当初文王、武王褒封的大诸侯摄于他们的武力而从服于他们，因此孔子为了彰显王道，游说于七十余诸侯国君，都没能得到重用。
English: At the beginning, the great lords of King Wen and King Wu took advantage of their power and obeyed them. Therefore, in order to highlight the royal way, Confucius lobbied more than 70 lords and princes, but was not able to get much use.

古文：故西观周室，论史记旧闻，兴于鲁而次《春秋》，上记隐，下至哀之获麟。
现代文：所以孔子西行到周王室之地考察，讨论史籍记载和以前的旧闻，然后回到鲁国编撰《春秋》。上至鲁隐公元年，下至鲁哀公时的猎麟之年。
English: Therefore, Confucius went to the west to investigate the land of the Zhou royal family, discuss the historical records and previous old news, and then returned to Lu to compile "Spring and Autumn." Up to the year of Luyin, down to the year of the fowl of Ruye.

古文：约其辞文，去其烦重，以制义法，王道备，人事浃。
现代文：他简约文字，精炼语句；删除繁冗以定修史的义理和法度，进而让王道更加齐备，人事周全。
English: He simplified the text, refined the sentences; removed the cumbersome to fix the history of the doctrine and law, and then make the royal road more complete, personnel well-rounded.

古文：七十子之徒口受其传指，为有所刺讥褒讳挹损之文辞不可以书见也。
现代文：他的七十多个徒弟都接受了他亲口传授的意旨，因为《春秋》中包含着批评、规劝、褒扬、隐讳、贬抑、损伤之类言语而不便于书写示众。
English: His more than seventy disciples have accepted the intention of his own oral teaching, because "Spring and Autumn" contains words such as criticism, exhortation, praise, concealment, disparagement, and injury, which are not convenient to write and show to the public.

古文：鲁君子左丘明惧弟子人人异端，各安其意，失其真，故因孔子史记具论其语，成《左氏春秋》。
现代文：鲁国君子左丘明害怕众弟子各持己见，各以所解，以至尚失《春秋》本意所以依照孔子《春秋》论述详尽真实的记录成书，编撰成《左氏春秋》。
English: Zuo Qiuming, a gentleman from the State of Lu, was afraid that all his disciples would hold their own opinions and interpret things differently, so he lost the original meaning of "Spring and Autumn." Therefore, he compiled "Zuo's Spring and Autumn" according to the detailed and true records of Confucius's "Spring and Autumn."

古文：铎椒为楚威王傅，为王不能尽观《春秋》，采取成败，卒四十章，为《铎氏微》。
现代文：铎椒任楚威王太傅，由于楚王不能全面理解《春秋》要义，他便抄摘其中关于国家兴衰成败的地方辑合成四十章名为《铎氏微》。
English: Because King Chu could not fully understand the essence of "Spring and Autumn," he copied and compiled forty chapters on the rise and fall of the country into a local collection called "Shan's Weakness."

古文：赵孝成王时，其相虞卿上采《春秋》，下观近势，亦着八篇，为《虞氏春秋》。
现代文：赵孝成王的时候，他的宰辅虞卿上采《春秋》，下看近代各国形势也编辑成八篇，是为《虞氏春秋》。
English: When Zhao Xiaocheng became king, his chief aide, Yu Jing, compiled "Spring and Autumn" and also compiled eight articles on the situation of modern countries, which were for "Spring and Autumn of Yu Shi."

古文：吕不韦者，秦庄襄王相，亦上观尚古，删十《春秋》，集六国时事，以为八览、六论、十二纪，为《吕氏春秋》。
现代文：吕不韦，是秦庄襄王的丞相，也上看前代古史，删减补合《春秋》汇集当时六国局势，编成八览、六论、十二纪，而成《吕氏春秋》。
English: Lu Buwei, the prime minister of King Xiang of Qinzhuang, also looked at the ancient history of the previous generation, edited and supplemented the "Spring and Autumn" to compile the situation of the six countries at that time, compiled into eight surveys, six theories, and twelve disciplines, and became "Lu's Spring and Autumn."

古文：及如荀卿、孟子、公孙固、韩非之徒，各往往捃摭春秋之文以著书，不可胜纪。汉相张苍历谱五德，上大夫董仲舒推《春秋》义，颇着文焉。
现代文：至于荀卿、孟子、公孙固、韩非等人也都时常摘取《春秋》的文义著书立说，这样的人事很多就不一一列举，汉朝的丞相张苍采用历谱的格式写出了《终始五德传》，上大夫董仲舒推究《春秋》所包含的微言大义，也很是写出了一些文章。
English: As for Qin Xuanqing, Mencius, Gongsun Gu, Han Fei and others, they also often extracted the literary meaning of "Spring and Autumn" and wrote books, saying that there are many such personnel matters that cannot be enumerated one by one. The Han Dynasty's prime minister Zhang Cang used the format of the chronology to write "The Five Virtues at the Beginning and the End," and the senior doctor Dong Zhongshu investigated the subtle meaning contained in "Spring and Autumn" and also wrote some articles.

古文：太史公曰：儒者断其义，驰说者骋其辞，不务综其终始；历人取其年月，数家隆于神运，谱谍独记世谥，其辞略，欲一观诸要难。
现代文：太史公说：对于《春秋》来说，儒家截取其要义，辩论家取其雅词；都忽略其前后贯通的历史过程。历法家只取其年月记载，术数方士只看到《春秋》的神运；整饬谱谍的人只借鉴《春秋》的世系称颂雅号；他们都只是片面的摄取，要从他们的抄录里了解全面的历史和要义是非常困难的。
English: Tai Shikong said: For "Spring and Autumn," the Confucianists took its essence, the polemicists took its elegant words; they all ignored the historical process of its continuity. The almanacists only took its chronological records, the numerologists only saw the divine fortune of "Spring and Autumn"; the rectification spies only drew on the lineage of "Spring and Autumn" to praise the elegant name; they were only one-sided intake, and it was very difficult to understand the comprehensive history and essence from their transcription.

古文：于是谱十二诸侯，自共和讫孔子，表见《春秋》《国语》学者所讥盛衰大指着于篇，为成学治古文者要删焉。
现代文：于是我就将春秋时期的十二个诸侯国编成系谱，就是《十二诸侯世系年表》，从共和到孔子辞世。列表反映《春秋》《国语》之要旨，学者所注意的兴盛衰败主要文件都抄录在这一篇中，为那些立志成学治古文的人提举纲要，删繁留要。
English: Therefore, I compiled the genealogy of the twelve princely states in the Spring and Autumn period, that is, the "Twelve Princes' Genealogy Timeline," from the Republic to the death of Confucius. The list reflects the essence of "Spring and Autumn" and "National Language," and the main documents of prosperity and decline that scholars pay attention to are copied in this article. For those who are determined to study ancient texts, outline and delete unnecessary things.

