古文：《易》曰： 君子遁世无闷，独立不惧。 
现代文：《易》说： 君子逃离尘世，不觉得烦闷，特立独行，不知道畏惧。 
English: "Yi" said: A gentleman escapes from the world, does not feel bored, is a maverick, and does not know fear.

古文：孔子称长沮、桀溺隐者也。
现代文：孔子称长沮、桀溺为隐士。
English: Confucius said that he was a recluse because he was always depressed and depressed.

古文：古之隐者，或耻闻禅代，高让帝王，以万乘为垢辱，之死亡而无悔。
现代文：古代的隐士，有的以听到禅代之事为羞耻，以让出帝位为高尚，把万乘帝位当作是垢辱，走向死亡却毫不后悔。
English: Some of the ancient hermits were ashamed to hear about the Zen dynasty, thought it was noble to give up the imperial throne, and regarded the imperial throne as a disgrace, but they did not regret going to death.

古文：此则轻生重道，希世间出，隐之上者也。
现代文：这种人轻视生命，看重道义，世所罕有，间或出现，是上等的隐士。
English: This kind of person despises life, values morality, is rare in the world, appears from time to time, and is a superior hermit.

古文：或托仕监门，寄臣柱下，居易而以求其志，处污而不愧其色。
现代文：有的充任监门以自养，在柱下作吏而托身，生活简易是为了实现自己的志向，地位低下却毫不显露惭愧的神色。
English: Some work as prison guards to support themselves, work as clerks under the pillar to support themselves, live a simple life in order to achieve their aspirations, and have a low status, but they do not show any shame.

古文：此所谓大隐隐于市朝，又其次也。
现代文：造就是所谓隐于市朝的大隐士，地位又在上等隐士之下。
English: Zou is the so-called great hermit hidden in the city, and his status is below that of high-ranking hermits.

古文：或裸体佯狂，盲喑绝世，弃礼乐以反道，忍孝慈而不恤。
现代文：有的裸露身体，假装疯狂，弄瞎眼睛，弄哑嗓子，离绝尘世，抛弃礼乐以回归正道，强忍住不谈孝道慈爱，不顾恤亲情。
English: Some bare their bodies, pretend to be mad, blind their eyes, muffle their voices, renounce the world, abandon liturgical music to return to the right path, forcibly endure not to talk about filial piety and love, and disregard the compassion of relatives.

古文：此全身远害，得大雅之道，又其次也。
现代文：这种人保全自身，避开祸害，掌握了德高有才的人避世之道，地位又在大隐士之下。
English: This kind of person preserves himself, avoids evil, has mastered the way of avoiding the world of the virtuous and talented, and his status is below the great hermit.

古文：然同不失语默之致，有幽人贞吉矣。
现代文：然而这些人都同样没有忘记缄默不言的要领，处在幽隐之中守住正道，最终得到好的结果。
English: However, these people also did not forget the essentials of silence, kept the right path in obscurity, and finally got good results.

古文：与夫没身乱世，争利干时者，岂同年而语哉！《孟子》曰： 今人之于爵禄，得之若其生，失之若其死。 
现代文：他们和那些投身乱世之中，争逐财利、迎合世俗的人，哪裹能够同而语啊《孟子》说： 现在的人对于爵禄，得到它就好像获得生命，失去它就好像失去生命。
English: "Mencius" said: "For the people of today, if they get a peerage, it is like gaining life, and if they lose it, it is like losing life.

古文：《淮南子》曰： 人皆鉴于止水，不鉴于流潦。 
现代文：《淮南子说： 人们都用静止的水作镜，不用流水作镜。 
English: "Hua Nan Zi said: People use still water as a mirror, not running water.

古文：夫可以扬清激浊，抑贪止竞，其惟隐者乎！
现代文：能够激扬正气，冲去污浊，遏制贪脏枉法的风气，制止争权逐利的行为，恐怕衹有隐士才能做到吧!
English: I'm afraid that only a hermit can arouse the spirit of righteousness, sweep away the filth, curb the culture of corruption, and stop the pursuit of power and profit.

古文：自古帝王，莫不崇尚其道。
现代文：从古以来，没有一位帝王不崇尚隐士的操守。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been an emperor who did not respect the ethics of the hermit.

古文：虽唐尧不屈巢、许，周武不降夷、齐；以汉高肆慢而长揖黄、绮，光武按法而折意严、周；自兹以来，世有人矣！
现代文：即使是唐尧也不能使巢父、许由屈志相从，周武王也不能使伯夷、叔齐丢下自己的操守称臣。漠高祖放肆傲慢却恭敬地礼待绮里季、夏黄公，漠光武帝按法治理天下却对严光、周党屈意顺从，从那以后，世世代代都有这样的情况。
English: Even Tang Xuan could not make his father-in-law, Xu Yu, submit to him, and King Zhou Wu could not make Bo Yi and Uncle Qi abandon their ethics and become his vassals. Emperor Gaozhu was arrogant, but treated Baliji and Xia Huang Gong with respect. Emperor Mokuang Wu governed the world according to the law, but bowed down to Yan Guang and the Zhou Party. Since then, this situation has existed for generations.

古文：有梁之盛，继绍风猷。斯乃道德可宗，学艺可范，故以备《处士篇》云。
现代文：有梁一代，国家兴盛，继承前代的风教德政，凡是道德值得效法，学问可作楷模的隐士，都把他们列入《处士篇》。
English: All the hermits who have a great generation, the country is flourishing, inheriting the previous generation's customs and politics, and whose morals are worthy of imitation, and whose learning can be used as a model, are included in the "Deputy."

古文：何点，字子晳，庐江灊人也。
现代文：何点字子皙，庐江潜入。
English: With a few strokes of the pen, the Lijiang River dives in.

古文：祖尚之，宋司空。
现代文：他的祖父何尚之，宋时任司空。
English: His grandfather, He Shangzhi, was a Song Dynasty official.

古文：父铄，宜都太守。
现代文：父亲何铄，任宜都太守。
English: His father, He Xuan, was the de facto ruler.

古文：铄素有风疾，无故害妻，坐法死。
现代文：何铄一向患有疯病，无缘无故杀害妻子，按法律被处死。
English: He Ying had always suffered from mental illness and killed his wife for no reason. He was executed in accordance with the law.

古文：点年十一，几至灭性。
现代文：何点当时十一岁，几乎因失去双亲的哀痛而毁灭生命。
English: At just 11 years old, the pain of losing her parents nearly destroyed her life.

古文：及长，感家祸，欲绝婚宦，尚之强为之娶琅邪王氏。
现代文：到长大成人之后，何点因为家中曾出现的祸事而感伤，想要不结婚，不出仕，何尚之强行为他娶琅邪王氏。
English: After he became an adult, he sometimes felt sad because of the misfortune that had occurred in his family, and he wanted not to get married, not to serve, but he had no choice but to marry the evil Wang clan.

古文：礼毕，将亲迎，点累涕泣，求执本志，遂得罢。
现代文：其他礼仪都已完成，将要行亲迎之礼的时候，何点一次又一次向着何尚之流泪哭泣，请求让自己坚守原来的意愿，于是才得以停办婚事。
English: Other ceremonies have been completed, and when the welcoming ceremony is about to take place, at what time, again and again, they cry to what kind of tears, and ask themselves to stick to their original wishes, so they can stop the marriage.

古文：容貌方雅，博通群书，善谈论。
现代文：何点容貌端庄清秀，又博通群书，善于言谈议论。
English: He has a dignified and handsome appearance, is well-read, and is good at talking.

古文：家本甲族，亲姻多贵仕。
现代文：何点家本是世家大族，宗族姻亲中很多人任高官。
English: The family was originally a large clan, and many of the clan's in-laws were high-ranking officials.

古文：点虽不入城府，而遨游人世，不簪不带，或驾柴车，蹑草矰，恣心所适，致醉而归，士大夫多慕从之，时人号为 通隐 。
现代文：何点虽然不进城，不入官府，衹是穿家居衣服，不用头簪，不系衣带，在民间遨游，有时驾着柴车，穿着草鞋，随顺心意，想去哪裹就去那襄，直到喝醉才回来，士大夫中很多人仰慕他、仿效他。当时人把何点称为 通隐 。
English: Although he did not go to the city or the government, he wore household clothes, did not wear a headdress, did not wear a belt, traveled among the people, sometimes drove a fire truck, wore straw sandals, went wherever he wanted, and did not return until he was drunk. Many scholars admired him and emulated him. At that time, people called him Tongyin.

古文：兄求，亦隐居吴郡虎丘山。
现代文：何点之兄何求，也隐居在吴郡虎丘山。
English: He also lived in seclusion in Huqiu Mountain, Wuxi County.

古文：求卒，点菜食不饮酒，讫于三年，要带减半。
现代文：何求去世之后，何点在为兄长服丧期间，衹是吃素食，不饮酒，到三年服丧期满之后，何点的腰围减小了一半。
English: After the death of his brother, during the mourning period for his brother, he ate vegetarian food and did not drink alcohol. After the three-year mourning period, his waistline was reduced by half.

古文：宋泰始末，征太子洗马。齐初，累征中书郎、太子中庶子，并不就。
现代文：宋泰始末年，朝廷征召何点为太子洗马；齐代初年，朝廷又多次征召何点为中书郎、太子中庶子，何点都不应征。
English: In the last years of the Song Dynasty, the imperial court conscripted several princes to wash horses; in the first year of the Qi Dynasty, the imperial court repeatedly conscripted several princes to be middle school teachers and middle school sons of princes, but none of them were conscripted.

古文：与陈郡谢瀹、吴国张融、会稽孔稚珪为莫逆友。
现代文：他和陈郡谢满、吴国张融、会稽孔稚珪成为莫逆之交。
English: He became close friends with Chen County's Xie Man, Wu Country's Zhang Rong, and Confucian scholar Kong Zhi Yao.

古文：从弟遁，以东篱门园居之，稚珪为筑室焉。
现代文：何点的堂弟何遁，拿东篱门一座庄园给何点居住，孔稚珪为何点在园中建了幢房子。
English: He's cousin, He Jian, gave him a manor to live in, and Kong Zhiqi built a house in the garden.

古文：园内有卞忠贞冢，点植花卉于冢侧，每饮必举酒酹之。
现代文：园内有卞忠贞的墓，何点在墓侧种上花卉，他每次饮酒一定要先举酒洒地祭奠卞忠贞。
English: In the garden, there is the tomb of Zou Zhongzheng. At some points, flowers are planted on the side of the tomb. Every time he drinks, he must first pour wine to pay tribute to Zou Zhongzheng.

古文：初，褚渊、王俭为宰相，点谓人曰： 我作《齐书赞》，云 渊既世族，俭亦国华；不赖舅氏，遑恤国家 。 
现代文：起初，褚渊、王俭担任宰相，何点对人说： 我作《齐书赞》，赞中说 褚渊是世家大族，王俭也是国家的英才；不依靠这些亲故旧臣，有谁来顾恤国家 。 
English: At the beginning, Gongyuan and Wang Jian served as prime ministers, and what did they say to the people: I wrote "Qi Shuxuan," and said in praise that Gongyuan was a great family and Wang Jian was also a national talent; without relying on these relatives and former ministers, who would take care of the country.

古文：王俭闻之，欲候点，知不可见，乃止。
现代文：王俭听到这话，本想去拜访何点，后来知道不能见到何点，于是就放弃了拜访的打算。
English: When Wang Jian heard this, he originally wanted to visit at what time, but later he knew that he could not see at what time, so he gave up the plan to visit.

古文：豫章王嶷命驾造点，点从后门遁去。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷驾车去拜访何点，何点从后门逃走了。
English: At what time did Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi drive to visit, and at what time did he escape through the back door?

古文：司徒、竟陵王子良欲就见之，点时在法轮寺，子良乃往请，点角巾登席，子良欣悦无已，遗点嵇叔夜酒杯、徐景山酒铛。
现代文：司徒竟陵王萧子良想要屈驾去见何点，当时何点在法轮寺，萧子良于是去法轮寺请求与何点相见，何点穿着隐士的服装入席，萧子良高兴不已，把嵇叔夜的酒杯、徐景山的酒铛赠给何点。
English: What time did Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum, want to bend down to see, what time was he at the Falun Temple at that time, what time did Xiao Ziliang go to the Falun Temple to request to meet him, what time did he wear a hermit's costume to enter the hall, what time was Xiao Ziliang overjoyed, and what time did he give him the wine glass of Uncle Xie's night and the wine goblet of Xu Jingshan.

古文：点少时尝患渴痢，积岁不愈。
现代文：何点年轻时曾经患有渴痢病，多年都未治愈。
English: At some point in his youth, he had suffered from dysentery and was not cured for many years.

古文：后在吴中石佛寺建讲，于讲所昼寝，梦一道人形貌非常，授丸一掬，梦中服之，自此而差，时人以为淳德所感。
现代文：后来何点在吴中石佛寺建立讲坛，他曾在讲经的地方午睡，梦见一个形貌特别的道人交给自己一掬丸药，他在梦中把丸药吞服了下去，从此以后病就痊愈了。当时人认为这是何点淳厚的德行带来的福佑。
English: Later, he built a pulpit in the Wuzhongshi Buddhist Temple. He used to take a nap in the place where he was preaching. He dreamed that a Taoist with a special appearance gave him a bunch of pills. In his dream, he swallowed the pills and was cured of the disease. At that time, people thought that this was a blessing brought about by his virtuous deeds.

古文：性通脱，好施与，远近致遗，一无所逆，随复散焉。
现代文：何点生性放达，不拘小节，喜欢施赠给人，远远近近的人赠送给他东西，他都一概不违逆，全都接受，随即又把接受的东西分赠给人。
English: No matter how generous he is, no matter how petty, he likes to give gifts to people, and when people far away or close to him give him things, he does not disobey at all, he accepts them all, and then he gives away part of what he has accepted.

古文：尝行经硃雀门街，有自车后盗点衣者，见而不言，傍有人擒盗与之，点乃以衣施盗，盗不敢受，点命告有司，盗惧，乃受之，催令急去。
现代文：何点曾经坐车经过朱雀门街，有人从车后偷取何点的衣物，何点见到了，却不作声，旁边有人抓住偷衣人交给何点，何点于是把衣物赠送给偷衣人，偷衣人不敢接受，何点声言要报告官府，偷衣人害怕了，才接受了何点施赠的衣物，何点又催促偷衣人赶快离开。
English: How many times have you been in a car passing through Suzakumen Street, someone steals some clothes from the back of the car, how many times have you seen it but remained silent, someone next to you grabs the clothes thief and hands it to you, how many times have you then given the clothes to the clothes thief, the clothes thief is afraid to accept it, how many times have you said that you want to report it to the authorities, the clothes thief is afraid, and only then did you accept some donated clothes, and how many times have you urged the clothes thief to leave as soon as possible.

古文：点雅有人伦识鉴，多所甄拔，知吴兴丘迟于幼童，称济阳江淹于寒素，悉如其言。
现代文：何点对识别人才很有眼光，他识别荐拔的人很多。吴兴丘迟还是幼童，何点就很赏识他；济阳江淹还处在地位卑下的时候，包匙就称扬他。
English: Wu Xingqiu was still a child when he was praised; Jiyang Jianguang was still in a lowly position when he was praised.

古文：点既老，又娶鲁国孔嗣女，嗣亦隐者也。
现代文：后来逭两人全都像何点说的那样，显露了才能。何点年老之后，又娶鲁国孔嗣的女儿为妻，孔嗣也是个隐士。
English: Later on, both of them showed their talent, just like Ji Dot said. After Ji Dot became old, he married the daughter of Lu Kong Ci, who was also a hermit.

古文：点虽婚，亦不与妻相见，筑别室以处之，人莫喻其意也。
现代文：何点虽然结了婚，但也不与妻子见面，另外建了座房子安置妻子，没有人明白他遣样做的用意。
English: At some point, although he was married, he did not meet his wife, built another house to accommodate his wife, and no one understood what he was trying to do.

古文：吴国张融少时免官，而为诗有高尚之言，点答诗曰： 昔闻东都日，不在简书前。 
现代文：吴国张融年轻时被免官，他写的诗中有表示不求仕进的语句，何点酬答诗说： 昔闻塞都日，不在简书前。 
English: Zhang Rong of the State of Wu was dismissed from his post when he was young. In the poem he wrote, there is a sentence that indicates that he did not seek promotion. How many points does the poem say?

古文：虽戏也，而融久病之。
现代文：意思是说张融被免去官职，没有处理文书的繁忙。
English: This means that Zhang Rong has been relieved of his official duties and is not busy with paperwork.

古文：及点后婚，融始为诗赠点曰： 惜哉何居士，薄暮遘荒淫。 
现代文：这虽然是戏言，但退融很久都把遣诗当作一块心病。后来到何点结婚的时候，张融才又写诗赠给何点说： 惜哉，薄暮遘荒淫。 
English: Although this is a play on words, for a long time, Wenyong regarded writing poetry as a heart disease. Later, when he was about to get married, Zhang Rong wrote a poem and gave it to him, saying, "What a pity, the twilight is so wild."

古文：点亦病之，而无以释也。
现代文：拿包韪晚年结婚逭事开玩笑。何点也把这诗当作一块心病，但一直没有找到机会消释它。
English: Bao Bao joked about his marriage in his later years. He took the poem as a heartache at some points, but he never found a chance to dissolve it.

古文：高祖与点有旧，及践阼，手诏曰： 昔因多暇，得访逸轨，坐修竹，临清池，忘今语古，何其乐也。
现代文：高祖和何点原来就有交情，高祖登上帝位之后，亲手书写诏书说： 从前因为空闲较多，能够和你交往，我们共坐修竹林中，栖息清池之上，忘记眼前的烦扰，议论古人古事，多么快乐啊。
English: Gao Zu had a friendship with him from the very beginning. After Gao Zu ascended to the throne, he wrote an edict with his own hand, saying: "In the past, because I had more free time, I was able to socialize with you. We sat together in the bamboo grove, perched on the clear pond, forgot the troubles in front of us, and talked about ancient people and ancient things. How happy we were.

古文：暂别丘园，十有四载，人事艰阻，亦何可言。
现代文：自从我暂时告别家乡，已有十四年，遇到的艰难险阻，又哪能说得尽。
English: Fourteen years have passed since I temporarily bid farewell to my hometown, and I can't say enough about the hardships and obstacles I encountered.

古文：自应运在天，每思相见，密迩物色，劳甚山阿。
现代文：从我顺应天命，登上帝位，就常常想着和你见面，近来身体怎么样，在哪座山上劳累?
English: Ever since I ascended to the throne in accordance with my destiny, I have often thought about meeting you. How is your health these days? On which mountain are you tired?

古文：严光排九重，践九等，谈天人，叙故旧，有所不臣，何伤于高？文先以皮弁谒子桓，伯况以縠绡见文叔，求之往策，不无前例。
现代文：以前严光推开皇宫的大门，走上宫廷的台阶，与光武帝谈论天人之道，共叙故旧之情，有不遵臣道的行为，遣对他的高洁操守有什么妨碍杨文先戴着皮弁谒见魏文帝曹子桓，周伯况戴着毂皮巾谒见光武帝刘文叔，到以往的史册中去寻找，这样的先例并不少。
English: In the past, Yan Guang pushed open the gate of the imperial palace, walked up the steps of the palace, talked with Emperor Guangwu about the way of heaven and man, shared the feelings of the old days, there were behaviors that did not follow the way of the subject, and what prevented Yang Wen from wearing a leather belt to see Emperor Weiwen Cao Zihuan, and Zhou Bo Jian wore a mink scarf to see Emperor Guangwu Liu Wenshu, and went to the past history books to find out, there are many such precedents.

古文：今赐卿鹿皮巾等。
现代文：现在赐给你鹿皮巾等物品。
English: Now I'm giving you a deerskin scarf and other items.

古文：后数日，望能入也。 
现代文：希望再过几天，你能够进宫来。 
English: I hope that in a few days you will be able to come to the Imperial Palace.

古文：点以巾褐引入华林园，高祖甚悦，赋诗置酒，恩礼如旧。
现代文：何点穿着平民的布巾褐衣进入华林园，高祖十分高兴，置办酒宴，赋诗赠答，对何点的恩宠和礼遇同以前一样。
English: Gao Zu was very happy when he entered the Hualin Garden wearing a civilian cloth and brown coat. He held a wine banquet, gave out poems and received the same grace and courtesy as before.

古文：仍下诏曰： 前征士何点，高尚其道，志安容膝，脱落形骸，栖志窅冥。
现代文：接着，高祖下韶说： 征士何点，操守高洁，不求仕宦，安于容膝之陋室，放浪形骸，不拘形迹，寄情于幽隐之中。
English: Then, Gao Zu said, "What is the point of recruiting soldiers, keeping a high standard of conduct, not seeking promotion, being content with the humble abode, wandering the corpse, regardless of appearance, and sending love in seclusion."

古文：朕日昃思治，尚想前哲；况亲得同时，而不与为政。
现代文：我从早到晚，思考治国之道，仰慕前代哲人；何况我能舆贤哲之人生活在同一时代，怎能不与贤哲之人一同治理国家。
English: From morning to night, I think about the way of governing the country and admire the philosophers of the previous generation; moreover, if I can live in the same era as the sages, how can I not govern the country together with the sages.

古文：喉脣任切，必俟邦良，诚望惠然，屈居献替。
现代文：朝中亲近大臣位尊任重，一定要由国中的杰出人才担任。我诚心希望贤哲惠然肯来，屈居献可替否之职。
English: The position of the minister who is close to the North and the Middle East is an important one, and it must be held by an outstanding person in the country. I sincerely hope that the sages will be willing to come and offer their services.

古文：可征为侍中。 
现代文：应当征召何点为侍中。 
English: It is unclear at what point a person should be conscripted as a samurai.

古文：辞疾不赴。
现代文：何点以有病为理由，拒绝任官，不应征召。
English: Those who refuse to be appointed on the grounds of illness should not be conscripted.

古文：乃复诏曰： 征士何点，居贞物表，纵心尘外，夷坦之风，率由自远。
现代文：高祖于是又再下诏说： 征士何点，寄心世外，遵守正道，随任心性，脱离尘世，心胸坦荡的君子之风，全都秉承古代先贤。
English: Gao Zu then issued another edict, saying, "What is the point of recruiting soldiers, setting one's heart outside the world, adhering to the right path, following one's heart, detaching oneself from the world, and having an open-minded gentleman's style, all of which adhere to the ancient sages.

古文：往因素志，颇申宴言，眷彼子陵，情兼惟旧。
现代文：以前因为我们平素的志向相同，曾经亲切地交往，像汉光武帝怀念严子陵那样，我也眷怀自己的旧友。
English: In the past, because we have the same aspirations, we used to have a cordial relationship. Like Han Guangwu Emperor misses Yan Zi Mausoleum, I also miss my old friends.

古文：昔仲虞迈俗，受俸汉朝；安道逸志，不辞晋禄。
现代文：从前郑仲虞超世脱俗，但也接受汉朝俸禄；戴安道也有超脱世俗之志，却也不拒绝晋朝的俸禄。
English: Once upon a time, Zheng Zhongyu was detached from the world, but he also accepted the salary of the Han Dynasty; Dian Dao also had the desire to be detached from the world, but he did not refuse the salary of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：此盖前代盛轨，往贤所同。
现代文：这都是前朝盛德美行的典范，以前的贤哲共有的品行。
English: All of these are examples of the virtuous and virtuous practices of the former dynasty, and are common to all the sages of the past.

古文：可议加资给，并出在所，日费所须，太官别给。
现代文：应当斟酌拨给何点资财，全由所在地官府供给，日常所需的费用，由太官另外拨给。
English: The amount of funds to be allocated should be carefully considered, all of which should be provided by the local government, and the daily expenses should be allocated separately by the eunuch.

古文：既人高曜卿，故事同垣下。 
现代文：何点既然德行高于袁曜卿，所以也可以像魏太祖对待袁曜卿那样，凭亲旧之情拨给垣下谷。 
English: Since the virtue is higher than that of Yuan Youqing, some points can also be allocated to Kakishitani based on kinship, just as Wei Taizu treated Yuan Youqing.

古文：天监三年，卒，时年六十八。
现代文：天监三年，何点去世，死时六十八岁。
English: He died at the age of sixty-eight, three years after becoming overseer of heaven.

古文：诏曰： 新除侍中何点，栖迟衡泌，白首不渝。
现代文：高祖下韶说： 新授任的侍中何点，出世隐居，寄情于衡泌之中，志向终身不变。
English: Gao Zu said: The newly-appointed chamberlains are born in seclusion, live in seclusion, and their aspirations remain unchanged for life.

古文：奄至殒丧，倍怀伤恻。
现代文：他突然间去世。我倍感凄恻哀伤。
English: He died suddenly and I was devastated.

古文：可给第一品材一具，赙钱二万、布五十匹。丧事所须，内监经理。 
现代文：可以赐给何点一具用第一等木材制作的棺木，送二万钱、五十匹布给他家办理丧事，办丧事所需的各种东西，由内监营办。 
English: A coffin made of first-class wood can be given to anyone, twenty thousand yuan and fifty pieces of cloth can be sent to his family for the funeral, and all kinds of things needed for the funeral will be handled by the supervisor.

古文：又敕点弟胤曰： 贤兄征君，弱冠拂衣，华首一操。
现代文：又命鱼凿之弟鱼凰说： 贤兄征君包艳，从弱冠之年就隐居不出，直到垂暮之年操守始终不变。
English: The fish chisel's younger brother, the fish phoenix, also said: "The wise elder brother, Zekun Baoyan, can not live in seclusion from the year of the weak crown, until the year of the twilight, his ethics remain unchanged.

古文：心游物表，不滞近迹；脱落形骸，寄之远理。
现代文：他寄情尘世之外，不追求名利富贵；放浪形骸，致力追寻深奥的哲理。
English: He is detached from the world and does not pursue fame, fortune or wealth; he is a vagabond, dedicated to the pursuit of profound philosophy.

古文：性情胜致，遇兴弥高；文会酒德，抚际逾远。
现代文：他情趣高雅，有了兴致就更能体现；他有文才酒德，交接之际更感到他旨趣高远。
English: His taste is elegant, with interest, it can be better reflected; he has literary talent and virtue, and at the time of handover, he feels that his taste is far-reaching.

古文：朕膺箓受图，思长声教。
现代文：我得受图表，应运为帝，想要弘扬教化。
English: I have to be guided by the chart, I have to be the emperor, I want to promote enlightenment.

古文：朝多君子，既贵成雅俗；野有外臣，宜弘此难进。
现代文：朝中多有谦谦君子，能够使风雅之士流俗之辈崇尚君子之风；郊野有隐居之臣，也应当弘扬不图仕进的品格。
English: There are many modest gentlemen in the imperial court, who can make the elegant and vulgar generation admire the gentleman's style; there are secluded subjects in the countryside, who should also promote the character of not trying to advance.

古文：方赖清徽，式隆大业。
现代文：我正要依赖他们高雅的谈吐，兴隆銮塑的帝业。
English: I was about to rely on their high-brow chatter, their burgeoning modeling empire.

古文：昔在布衣，情期早著，资以仲虞之秩，待以子陵之礼，听览暇日，角巾引见，窅然汾射，兹焉有托。
现代文：从前恒艳还是普通百姓的时候，我和他的情谊就已经显露，我像漠章帝对待郑仲虞那样给他俸禄，像光武帝对待严子陵那样待之以礼，在我处理政务的闲暇之日，曾让他布衣晋见，在他隐居的深幽之处，我供给他资粮，让他生活有依靠。
English: Once upon a time, when Heng Yan was still an ordinary citizen, my friendship with him had already been revealed. I gave him a salary like Emperor Mo Zhang treated Zheng Zhongyu, and treated him with courtesy like Emperor Guangwu treated Yan Zi Ling. On the day of my leisure to deal with government affairs, I let him see me in civilian clothes. In the secluded place where he lived, I provided him with food and resources, so that he could have a life to rely on.

古文：一旦万古，良怀震悼。
现代文：突然间他去世了，这实在使我震惊哀悼。
English: All of a sudden he passed away, which really shocked and saddened me.

古文：卿友于纯至，亲从凋亡；偕老之愿，致使反夺；缠绵永恨，伊何可任。
现代文：你和坦韪兄弟感情十分深厚，现在亲人离开了人间，共享天年的愿望，再也不能实现，这缠绕不断的遣憾，叫我怎能承受。长此以往怎么办! 
English: You and the Tange brothers have very deep feelings. Now that your relatives have left this world, your wish to share eternity with them can no longer be fulfilled. How can I bear this constant regret? What should I do in the long run?

古文：永矣柰何！ 点无子，宗人以其从弟耿子迟任为嗣。
现代文：但黏没有儿子，他同宗的人把何点堂弟何挞之子何虽作为鱼艳的后嗣。
English: However, he did not have a son, and his relatives regarded his cousin, the son of Ho Ho, as Fuyan's heir.

古文：胤，字子季，点之弟也。
现代文：何胤字王季，是何点之弟。
English: Ho Tien, alias Wang Ji, is Ho Ting's younger brother.

古文：年八岁，居忧哀毁若成人。既长好学。
现代文：八岁的时候，他为父母亲守丧，像成人一样因哀痛而毁伤了身体。长大成人之后，他爱好学习。
English: When he was eight years old, he mourned the death of his parents and, like an adult, his body was ravaged by grief. As an adult, he loved to study.

古文：师事沛国刘献，受《易》及《礼记》、《毛诗》，又入钟山定林寺听内典，其业皆通。
现代文：拜沛国刘珊为师，学习《易》及《礼记》、《毛诗》；又进钟山定林寺学习佛经。这些东西他都学得精通。
English: He studied "Yi" (易) and "Li Ji" (礼記) and "Mao Shi" (毛詩) under the tutelage of Liu Shan of Baipegu, and went to study Buddhist scriptures at the Dinglin Temple in Zhongshan. He was well versed in all of these things.

古文：而纵情诞节，时人未之知也，唯献与汝南周颙深器异之。
现代文：但是他随任情性，不拘小节，当时没有人了解他，衹有汝南周颙深深器重他，认为他是奇才。
English: But he was capricious and unconstrained. At that time, no one knew him. Some people, such as Runan Zhou, held him in high esteem and thought he was a genius.

古文：起家齐秘书郎，迁太子舍人。
现代文：何胤初仕任齐秘书郎，迁任太子舍人。
English: He was first appointed as Qi's secretary and then moved to the position of crown prince.

古文：出为建安太守，为政有恩信，民不忍欺。
现代文：出京任建安太守，他施政讲究恩德信义，百姓不忍心欺骗他。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jian'an, and his policies were characterized by benevolence, loyalty, and righteousness. The people did not have the heart to deceive him.

古文：每伏腊放囚还家，依期而返。
现代文：每逢伏日腊日，何胤都把关押的囚犯放回家，这些囚犯也都如期返回，没有一个乘机逃跑。
English: Every V-J Day, He Ying would release the prisoners to go home. These prisoners also returned as scheduled, and none of them took the opportunity to escape.

古文：入为尚书三公郎，不拜，迁司徒主簿。
现代文：何胤入京任尚书三公郎，还未受任，又迁任司徒主簿。
English: Ho Tan entered Beijing as the third prince of Shosho, but before he was appointed, he was transferred to the position of the chief bookkeeper.

古文：注《易》，又解《礼记》，于卷背书之，谓为《隐义》。
现代文：何胤注解《易》，又解说《礼记》，解说的文句就写在原书书卷的背面，因此称为《礼记隐义》。
English: He Yin annotated "Yi Zong" and also explained "Li Ji," and the words of the commentary were written on the back of the original book volume, so it is called "Li Ji Hidden Meaning."

古文：累迁中书郎、员外散骑常侍、太尉从事中郎、司徒右长史、给事黄门侍郎、太子中庶子、领国子博士、丹阳邑中正。
现代文：又积功迁任中书郎，员外散骑常侍，太尉从事中郎，司徒右长史，给事黄门侍郎，太子中庶子，领国子博士，丹阳邑中正。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the post of junior secretary, non-commissioned officer riding horseback as a regular attendant, lieutenant engaged in a junior clerk, Satoru Uchoshi, attendant of the Yellow Gate, prince's junior illegitimate child, provincial governor's son doctor, and Danyang-eup junior high school.

古文：尚书令王俭受诏撰新礼，未就而卒。又使特进张绪续成之，绪又卒；属在司徒竟陵王子良，子良以让胤，乃置学士二十人，佐胤撰录。
现代文：尚书令王俭奉皇上诏命撰写新的礼法，还没写成王俭就去世了，皇上又命特进张绪继续写完，张绪又去世了，皇上就把续写的任务委托给竟陵王萧子良，萧子良把逭任务让给何胤；于是朝廷配属二十名学士给何胤，让他们帮助何胤撰写新礼法。
English: Shang Shu ordered Wang Jian to write a new etiquette according to the emperor's edict, but Wang Jian died before it was written, and the emperor ordered Zhang Xiu to continue to write, and Zhang Xiu died again. The emperor entrusted the task of continuing to write to Xiao Ziliang, the king of Jing, and Xiao Ziliang gave the task to He Yin; so the court assigned twenty bachelors to He Yin, and let them help He Yin write a new etiquette.

古文：永明十年，迁侍中，领步兵校尉，转为国子祭酒。
现代文：永明十年，何胤迁任侍中，领步兵校尉，转为国子祭酒。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Yongming, He Yin was transferred to the position of chamberlain, leading the infantry lieutenant, and became the head of the Kuniko Festival.

古文：郁林嗣位，胤为后族，甚见亲待。
现代文：郁林王继位为帝，何胤因为是皇后的亲族，所以很受亲宠优待。
English: King Yulin succeeded to the throne as emperor, and because He Yin was a relative of the empress, he was favored by her relatives.

古文：累迁左民尚书、领骁骑、中书令、领临海、巴陵王师。
现代文：又积功迁任左民尚书，领骁骑，中书令，领临海王、巴陵王师。
English: In addition, he made great achievements in being transferred to the positions of Zuo Min Shang Shu, Lian Xuan Jie, Zhong Shu Ling, Lian Hao Wang, and Baling Wang Shi.

古文：胤虽贵显，常怀止足。
现代文：何胤虽然富贵颢达，但他却常有辞官退隐之心。
English: Although He Yan was rich and accomplished, he often felt a sense of resignation.

古文：建武初，已筑室郊外，号曰小山，恒与学徒游处其内。
现代文：建武初年，他已在郊外建了座房子，称之为小山，他常常和士林友人在造座房子裹栖游。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he had built a house in the suburbs, which he called a hill. He often went camping with his friends in the house.

古文：至是，遂卖园宅，欲入东山，未及发，闻谢朏罢吴兴郡不还，胤恐后之，乃拜表辞职，不待报辄去。
现代文：到遣时，何胤就卖掉了自己的宅院，想归隐东山。还没开始筹办逭事，何胤就听说谢绌免去吴兴郡太守之职后并不回京，他担心谢肋占先隐居东山，于是就上表辞职，不等朝廷回覆就擅自离京。
English: When he arrived, He Yin sold his house and wanted to go into seclusion in Dongshan. Before he began to prepare the anecdote, He Yin heard that Xie Yao would not return to Beijing after he was relieved of his duties as the governor of Wuxing County. He was worried that Xie Li would stay in seclusion in Dongshan first, so he resigned from the table and left Beijing without waiting for the reply from the imperial court.

古文：明帝大怒，使御史中丞袁昂奏收胤，寻有诏许之。
现代文：明帝十分生气，命御史中丞塞昂上表启奏收捕何胤，不久，又下韶准许包凰辞职。
English: Emperor Ming was very angry, and ordered the Historian Chujo Ceon to issue a proclamation to arrest Ho Yin. Soon after, he issued a proclamation to allow Bao Ying to resign.

古文：胤以会稽山多灵异，往游焉，居若邪山云门寺。
现代文：何胤认为会稽的山灵妙神奇，就去那儿游览，住在若邪山云门寺。
English: He thought that the mountain of Huaiqi was wonderful and magical, so he went there for a tour and stayed at the Yunmen Temple on Mount Wakasa.

古文：初，胤二兄求、点并栖遁，求先卒，至是胤又隐，世号点为大山；胤为小山，亦曰东山。
现代文：起初，何胤的两位兄长都已经避世隐居，何求先已去世，到这时何胤又隐居，当时人们称何点为大山，何胤为小山，又称做东山。
English: At first, both of Ho Tan's brothers had already secluded themselves from the world, and Ho Kuixian had already passed away. At this time, Ho Tan again secluded himself. At that time, people called Ho Tan a big mountain, and Ho Tan a small mountain, also known as the East Mountain.

古文：永元中，征太常、太子詹事，并不就。
现代文：永元年间，朝廷征召皿皿为太常，太子詹事，都不赴任。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, it was common for the imperial court to call up many princes, but none of them went to work.

古文：高祖霸府建，引胤为军谋祭酒，与书曰： 想恒清豫，纵情林壑，致足欢也。
现代文：高祖藩王府建立，选拔何胤任军谋祭酒。高祖写信给何胤说： 你在山林中尽情栖游，定能带来无穷的欢乐，希望你常常安适。
English: The royal palace of Gaozu Domain was established, and He Yin was selected to be the commander of the army to plan the sacrificial wine. Gaozu wrote to He Yin, saying, "You can travel as much as you like in the mountains and forests, which will surely bring you endless joy. I hope you are always at ease."

古文：既内绝心战，外劳物役，以道养和，履候无爽。
现代文：内心既已断绝对名利的追慕，也就不会再有被外物役使的烦劳，用道来调养内心的和谐，一举一动也就不会违逆自己的心意。
English: Once the heart has broken off the pursuit of absolute fame and fortune, it will no longer be bothered by external things, use the Tao to cultivate inner harmony, and every move will not go against one's own will.

古文：若邪擅美东区，山川相属，前世嘉赏，是为乐土。
现代文：若邪山独占东部的美景，山川相连，前代人就已赞赏逭襄的美景，遣裹确实是一方乐土。
English: If the evil mountains monopolize the beauty of the east, and the mountains and rivers are connected, the previous generation has already appreciated the beauty of Xiangyang. Jianwu is indeed a happy land.

古文：仆推迁簿官，自东徂西，悟言素对，用成睽阕，倾首东顾，曷日无怀。
现代文：我在官场辗转迁徙，束奔西劳，静下来想和老友促膝长谈，竟因相互离违，不能相见，我仰首束望，哪天不在想念你?
English: I was in the government, moving from place to place, rushing to West Germany, settling down to have a long talk with an old friend, but because of mutual estrangement, we couldn't see each other. I looked up with my head in my hands. When will I not miss you?

古文：畴昔欢遇，曳裾儒肆，实欲卧游千载，畋渔百氏，一行为吏，此事遂乖。
现代文：从前我们欢乐相聚，一起在学校就读，我实在想在学校游学千年，遍读百子之书，一旦走上仕途，这种想法就无法实现。
English: Once upon a time, we had a happy reunion and went to school together. I really wanted to study for a thousand years at school and read the book of a hundred sons and daughters. Once I embarked on my career, this idea could not be realized.

古文：属以世道威夷，仍离屯故，投袂数千，克黜衅祸。
现代文：正逢世道衰颓，国家接二连三地陷入祸乱之中，幸亏有数千激扬奋发的勇士，才能够战胜凶徒清除祸患。
English: At the time of the world's decline, the country fell into calamity one after another. Fortunately, there were thousands of enthusiastic warriors who were able to defeat the villains and eliminate the scourge.

古文：思得瞩卷谘款，寓情古昔，夫岂不怀，事与愿谢。
现代文：我也想捧读书卷，随时咨询请教，寄情于古人古事之中，我也时常思念着你，但事与愿违。
English: I also want to hold a reading book, consult at any time, send love to the ancients, and I often miss you, but it is against my wishes.

古文：君清襟素托，栖寄不近，中居人世，殆同隐沦。
现代文：你胸襟坦荡，情怀恬淡，栖游山林，虽处人世之中，几乎和退隐相近。
English: You are open-hearted, light-hearted, and live in the mountains and forests. Although you live in the midst of the world, you are almost like a hermit.

古文：既俯拾青组，又脱屣硃黻。
现代文：你获取高官之后，又挂冠辞职。
English: After you got the top job, you resigned in disgrace.

古文：但理存用舍，义贵随时，往识祸萌，实为先觉，超然独善，有识钦嗟。
现代文：有取舍不同之理，有崇尚随顺时势之义，能预见后事，识别祸端，实在算是先知先觉，能超然世外，独善其身，有识之人自会钦慕嗟叹。
English: There is a reason to choose to make a difference, there is a reason to follow the trend of the times, to be able to foresee the future, to identify the scourge, it is really a precognition, to be able to transcend the world, to be good to oneself, people with insight will admire and sigh.

古文：今者为邦，贫贱咸耻，好仁由己，幸无凝滞。
现代文：现在政治昌明，居于昌盛之邦，仍然处在贫贱之中，人人都会感到羞耻；皇上好仁，实行仁德就在于自己，希望你不要再犹豫迟疑。
English: Now that politics is flourishing, living in a prosperous country, still in poverty, everyone will feel ashamed; Emperor Yoshihito, it is up to you to practice benevolence, I hope you will no longer hesitate.

古文：比别具白，此未尽言。
现代文：以前我去信全都说过，逭裹就不再全说。
English: In the past, when I wrote to you, I told you everything, but now I won't tell you everything.

古文：今遣候承音息，矫首还翰，慰其引领。 胤不至。
现代文：现在派专人等你的消息，我翘首期盼着你的回信，希望你能使我殷切期望之情得到安慰。 何胤不肯到王府任职。
English: I am now sending a special envoy to wait for news from you, and I am eagerly awaiting your reply, hoping that you will be able to comfort my ardent feelings of expectation.

古文：高祖践阼，诏为特进、右光禄大夫。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，下诏任命何胤为特进、右光禄大夫。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God, and under the imperial edict, He Yin was appointed as a special advancement and Uguanglu doctor.

古文：手敕曰： 吾猥当期运，膺此乐推，而顾己蒙蔽，昧于治道。
现代文：高祖亲自写手令给何胤说： 我正遇上好的机运，百姓乐于拥戴，我登上了帝位。祇不过我昏庸无知，不精通治国之道。
English: Gaozu himself wrote a handwritten letter to Ho Yin saying, "I am experiencing good fortune, the people are happy to support me, and I have ascended to the throne. However, I am dim-witted and ignorant, and I am not familiar with the way of governing the country.

古文：虽复劬劳日昃，思致隆平，而先王遗范，尚蕴方策，自举之用，存乎其人。
现代文：即使是从早到晚，日夜劬劳，也想要帝业兴隆，天下升平。而先代圣王留下的典范，还衹是记载在典籍之中，施政的取舍、政令的废举，都和用人密切相关。
English: Even if he worked from morning to night, day and night, he also wanted the empire to flourish and the world to be leveled. And the model left by the previous holy king is also recorded in the classics. The choice of governance and the abolition of decrees are closely related to the employer.

古文：兼以世道浇暮，争诈繁起，改俗迁风，良有未易。
现代文：再加上世道浇薄，奸诈蜂起，要改变风俗，实在不易。
English: In addition, with the rise of the world's corrupt and treacherous uprisings, it is really not easy to change customs.

古文：自非以儒雅弘朝，高尚轨物，则汩流所至，莫知其限。
现代文：如果不能用儒雅君子弘益朝政，用高雅的标准规范政令，那么国家就会堕入急流，谁也不知道它将漂往何方。
English: If it is not possible to use the Confucian and elegant gentleman Hong Yi to lead the government, and use elegant standards to standardize government decrees, then the country will fall into the rapids, and no one knows where it will drift.

古文：治人之与治身，独善之与兼济，得失去取，为用孰多。
现代文：治理百姓和修养自身，独善其身和兼济天下，得失取舍，哪样功用更多?
English: Governance of the people and self-cultivation, self-improvement and helping the world, give or take, which function is more?

古文：吾虽不学，颇好博古，尚想高尘，每怀击节。
现代文：我虽然学问不多，但很爱广泛了解古事，想起那些脱离尘世的高士，每每赞叹不已。
English: Although I don't have much knowledge, I like to learn a lot about ancient things. I think of those great men who left this world and admire them.

古文：今世务纷乱，忧责是当，不得不屈道岩阿，共成世美。
现代文：现在世务纷乱，我重任在肩，不得不请你放下隐居山林的打算，和我一起实现治世的美业。
English: Now that world affairs are in turmoil, I have a heavy responsibility on my shoulders, and I have to ask you to give up your plan to live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, and to work with me to achieve the beautiful business of ruling the world.

古文：必望深达往怀，不吝濡足。
现代文：希望你一定要深深体察我们往日的情谊，不要因为怕尘世玷污而滞留不来。
English: I hope that you must deeply appreciate our past friendship, and not stay away for fear of being tarnished by the world.

古文：今遣领军司马王果宣旨谕意，迟面在近。 
现代文：现在派领军司马王果宣谕我的旨意。希望近期就和你见面。 
English: Now I am sending the leader of the army, Sima Wangguo, to proclaim my will. I hope to meet you soon.

古文：果至，胤单衣鹿巾，执经卷，下床跪受诏书，就席伏读。
现代文：王果到何胤处，何胤穿着朝服但头戴隐士常用的鹿皮巾，手执经书，走下坐榻跪着接过韶书，然后回到坐榻上拜读诏书。
English: Wang Guo went to He Yin's place. He Yin was wearing a royal robe but a deerskin scarf commonly used by hermits, holding a scripture in his hand. He kneeled down and picked up the book, and then returned to the bed to read the edict.

古文：胤因谓果曰： 吾昔于齐朝欲陈两三条事，一者欲正郊丘，二者欲更铸九鼎，三者欲树双阙。
现代文：何胤接着对王墨说： 从前我在蛮曲时就想陈奏两三件事，一是想要订正郊丘之礼，二是想要重新铸造九鼎，三是想要建立双阙。
English: Ho Yan then said to Wang Mo, "In the past, when I played barbarian music, I wanted to perform two or three things. First, I wanted to revise the suburb hill ritual, second, I wanted to recast the nine triplets, and third, I wanted to establish a double yoke.

古文：世传晋室欲立阙，王丞相指牛头山云： 此天阙也 ，是则未明立阙之意。
现代文：世人传说晋朝想要建阙，王丞相指着牛头山说： 造就是天然的宫阙，逭正是没有明了建立宫阙的意思。
English: According to legend, when the Jin Dynasty wanted to build a palace, the minister Wang Zheng pointed to the Niu Tou Mountain and said: "To build a palace is to build a natural palace. It is precisely because we did not understand the meaning of building a palace."

古文：阙者，谓之象魏。
现代文：阙，又称之为象魏。
English: , also known as Xiang Wei.

古文：县象法于其上，浃日而收之。
现代文：把国家的法律条文悬挂在阙上面，过十天就把它收藏起来。
English: He hung the country's legal code on a hook and put it away after ten days.

古文：象者，法也；魏者，当涂而高大貌也。
现代文：象的意思是法；魏，是正处在路当中而高大的样子。
English: Zhe means law; Wei means standing tall in the middle of the road.

古文：鼎者神器，有国所先，故王孙满斥言，楚子顿尽。
现代文：造就是阙又称做象魏的原因。鼎是象征帝王威严的神器，有国家的人就要先有鼎，所以王孙满斥责楚子问鼎之轻重的举动，楚子顿时无言可对。
English: Ding is an artifact that symbolizes the majesty of the emperor, and those who have a country must first have a ding, so Wang Sunman rebuked Chu Zi for the weighty act of asking for a ding, and Chu Zi was speechless.

古文：圆丘国郊，旧典不同。
现代文：在圜丘祭天和在南郊祭天，依照以前的典籍，遣两者有所不同。
English: According to the previous books, there is a difference between the festivals held in the hills and in the southern suburbs.

古文：南郊祠五帝灵威仰之类，圆丘祠天皇大帝、北极大星是也。
现代文：在南郊是祭五帝灵威仰之类神灵，在圜丘是祭天皇大帝、北极大星。
English: In the southern suburbs, deities such as the Five Emperor Deities are worshipped, and in the hills, the Emperor and the North Star are worshipped.

古文：往代合之郊丘，先儒之巨失。
现代文：以往朝代合称为郊丘，这是上代儒生的重大失误。
English: In the past, dynasties were collectively referred to as suburb hills, which was a major mistake of the previous generation of Confucians.

古文：今梁德告始，不宜遂因前谬。
现代文：现在梁朝的德政刚刚开始，不应当因袭前朝的谬误。
English: Now that the German policy of the Liang Dynasty has just begun, it should not be affected by the fallacies of the previous dynasty.

古文：卿宜诣阙陈之。 
现代文：你应当到宫廷中去陈奏。 
English: You should go to the court to play.

古文：果曰： 仆之鄙劣，岂敢轻议国典？此当敬俟叔孙生耳。 
现代文：王果说： 我地位鄙下，才能拙劣，岂敢随便议论国家的典章制度，这事要恭敬地等待像叔孙生那样的大儒来议论。 
English: Wang Guo said: I am in a lowly position and my ability is poor. How dare I casually discuss the country's award system? We should respectfully wait for a great scholar like my uncle and grandson to discuss this matter.

古文：胤曰： 卿讵不遣传诏还朝拜表，留与我同游邪？ 
现代文：何胤说： 你为什么不派那传送诏书的官员回朝廷拜献表章，而你自己留下来和我一同栖游山林呢? 
English: Ho Yan said, "Why didn't you send the official who delivered the imperial edict back to the imperial court to offer the imperial insignia, while you stayed and roamed the mountains and forests with me?"

古文：果愕然曰： 古今不闻此例。 
现代文：王果感到愕然，说： 古今都没听说这种先例。 
English: Wang Guo was stunned and said: I have never heard of such a precedent.

古文：胤曰： 《檀弓》两卷，皆言物始。
现代文：何胤说： 《檀弓》两卷，谈的全是事物的起始。
English: He Tan said: "The two volumes of "Danyu" are all about the beginning of things.

古文：自卿而始，何必有例。 
现代文：从你就可以首先这样做，为什么一定要有先例? 
English: Since you can do it first, why does there have to be a precedent?

古文：果曰： 今君遂当邈然绝世，犹有致身理不？ 
现代文：王果说： 现在你已经超然世外，还有出仕、为君献身的想法吗? 
English: Wang Guo said: Now that you have transcended the world, do you still have the idea of serving and devoting yourself to you?

古文：胤曰： 卿但以事见推，吾年已五十七，月食四斗米不尽，何容得有宦情？
现代文：何胤说： 你衹要凭实际情况就可以推测到我会不会出仕。我已经五十七岁，每月连四斗米都吃不完，哪能还有精力出仕做官。
English: He Yan said: You can only guess whether I will serve or not by the actual situation. I am fifty-seven years old, I can't even eat four buckets of rice a month, how can I still have the energy to serve as an official.

古文：昔荷圣王跂识，今又蒙旌贲，甚愿诣阙谢恩，但比腰脚大恶，此心不遂耳。 
现代文：从前承蒙圣王眷顾，现在又蒙圣王褒美，我很想赶往宫廷拜谢皇恩，但是近来腰腿都不灵便，这个心愿就无法实现了。 
English: Once I was favored by the holy king, and now I am rewarded by the holy king. I would like to rush to the court to thank the royal grace, but recently my hips and legs are not convenient, and this wish can not be realized.

古文：果还，以胤意奏闻，有敕给白衣尚书禄，胤固辞。
现代文：王果回到京城，把何胤说的主要内容向高祖启奏，高祖下命令赐给何胤白衣尚书的封号，领取尚书俸禄，何胤坚决拒绝。
English: Wang Guo returned to Beijing and explained to Gao Zu the main content of He Yin's speech. Gao Zu ordered that He Yin be given the title of the white-robed scholar and receive the scholar's salary, but He Yin resolutely refused.

古文：又敕山阴库钱月给五万，胤又不受。
现代文：高祖又命令从山阴库中每月供给何胤五万钱，何胤又不肯接受。
English: Gao Zu also ordered to provide He Yin with 50,000 yuan per month from the Shanyin Bank, but He Yin refused to accept it.

古文：乃敕胤曰： 顷者学业沦废，儒术将尽，闾阎搢绅，鲜闻好事。
现代文：高担于是下诏给坦腿说： 近来学问之道被废弃，儒术将要失传，世家大族，揞绅之家，都很少听说有喜爱读书的人。
English: Gao Dang then issued an edict to Tan Shih, saying, "Recently, the way of learning has been abandoned, Confucianism is about to be lost, and it is rare to hear of people who like to read.

古文：吾每思弘奖，其风未移，当扆兴言为叹。
现代文：我常想大力鼓励儒学，但风气仍未改变，我在朝中祇有万分感叹。
English: I often want to vigorously encourage Confucianism, but the culture still hasn't changed, and I can't help but sigh.

古文：本欲屈卿暂出，开导后生，既属废业，此怀未遂，延伫之劳，载盈梦想。
现代文：本想委屈你暂且出山，开导年轻后辈，以继承近于废弃的儒学。逭心愿未能实现，我延颈企望，画思夜想。
English: I originally wanted to do you a disservice and go out to the mountains for the time being, to enlighten the younger generation, in order to inherit the nearly abandoned Confucianism. My wish was not realized, so I craned my neck and thought about it at night.

古文：理舟虚席，须俟来秋，所望惠然，申其宿抱耳。
现代文：朝廷的职位还虚席以待，我等到今年秋天，期望你惠然肯来，实现我素来的心愿。
English: The position at the Imperial Court is still vacant. I will wait until this autumn, hoping that you will come willingly and fulfill my long-held wish.

古文：卿门徒中经明行修，厥数有几？
现代文：你的门生当中经学精通、德行善美的共有几人?
English: How many of your disciples are well-versed in the study of the scriptures, virtuous, and virtuous?

古文：且欲瞻彼堂堂，置此周行。
现代文：我想要见见他们的堂堂仪表，把他们选拔到朝廷来做官。
English: I want to see them in their full regalia and select them to serve in the imperial court.

古文：便可具以名闻，副其劳望。 
现代文：你即刻就可把他们的姓名呈报给我，希望你能满足我这个要求。 
English: You can submit their names to me immediately, and I hope you will be able to meet my request.

古文：又曰： 比岁学者殊为寡少，良由无复聚徒，故明经斯废。每一念此，为之慨然。
现代文：又说： 近年来学者非常少，实在是因为没有再聚集学生讲授经学，所以用明经射策取士的办法都废弃了，每次一想到遣一点，就万分感慨。
English: He also said: In recent years, there have been very few scholars, really because there are no more students gathered to teach the study of scripture, so the method of using a clear shot to select scholars has been abandoned. Every time I think of sending a point, I am overwhelmed with emotion.

古文：卿居儒宗，加以德素，当敕后进有意向者，就卿受业。
现代文：你是儒学的宗师，再加上你德行修美，我将命有志儒学的年轻后辈，到你那儿去向你学习儒家的学问。
English: You are the guru of Confucianism, and together with your virtue and beauty, I will order the younger generation of Confucianism to come to you to learn Confucianism from you.

古文：想深思诲诱，使斯文载兴。 
现代文：希望你捆加斟酌，教诲诱导他们，使礼乐教化从此振兴。 
English: I hope you will give them more consideration and guidance, so that the culture of worship music will be revitalized from now on.

古文：于是遣何子朗、孔寿等六人于东山受学。
现代文：高祖于是派何子朗、孔寿等六人到束山何胤处去学习。
English: Gaozu then sent six people, including He Zilang and Kong Shou, to study under He Tan in Soksan.

古文：太守衡阳王元简深加礼敬，月中常命驾式闾，谈论终日。
现代文：太守衡阳王萧元简对何胤十分尊崇，以礼相待，每月都常常驾车去何胤家，和他整天谈论。
English: Xiao Yuanjian, the eunuch of Hengyang King, highly respected He Yatong and treated him with courtesy. He often drove to He Yatong's house every month and talked with him all day.

古文：胤以若邪处势迫隘，不容生徒，乃迁秦望山。
现代文：何胤因为若邪山地势狭隘，容不下学生，于是迁往台望业。
English: He moved to Taiwan because Wakayama is too narrow to accommodate students.

古文：山有飞泉，西起学舍，即林成援，因岩为堵。
现代文：山上有瀑布，包腿在瀑布西边建造学校，山林就恰像学校的园篱，山岩正恰如学校的垣墙。
English: There is a waterfall on the mountain, Baojun built a school on the west side of the waterfall, the mountain forest is just like a school fence, and the mountain rock is just like a school wall.

古文：别为小阁室，寝处其中，躬自启闭，僮仆无得至者。
现代文：何胤在学校裹专门造了座小阁，自己坐卧都在合内，亲自开关门户，没有一个僮仆能进入遣小阁。
English: He built a small pavilion in the school, and he himself sat and slept in it. He himself opened and closed the gate, and none of his attendants could enter the pavilion.

古文：山侧营田二顷，讲隙从生徒游之。
现代文：何胤又在山侧购置顷田，讲论闲暇他就带着学生去这地方游览。
English: He also bought a hectare of land on the mountain side, and in his spare time he took his students to visit this place.

古文：胤初迁，将筑室，忽见二人著玄冠，容貌甚伟，问胤曰： 君欲居此邪？ 
现代文：何胤刚刚迁来秦望山的时候，正准备造房子，忽然见到两个戴着黑帽子的人，容貌十分壮伟，他们问何胤： 你想要住在这地方吗? 
English: When He Yin had just moved to Qinwang Mountain, he was preparing to build a house, when he suddenly saw two men wearing black hats, very magnificent in appearance. They asked He Yin: Do you want to live in this place?

古文：乃指一处云： 此中殊吉。 
现代文：于是指着一块地对何胤说： 遣块地很吉利。 
English: So he pointed to a piece of land and said to Ho Tan, "It is very lucky to have a piece of land."

古文：忽不复见，胤依其言而止焉。
现代文：忽然间二人都不见了。何胤照他们的话选定了房子的基址。
English: Suddenly, both of them were gone. According to their words, He Yin selected the foundation site of the house.

古文：寻而山发洪水，树石皆倒拔，唯胤所居室岿然独存。
现代文：不久山洪暴发。山石被冲走，树木被冲倒，衹有何胤住的房子岩然不动，依然完好。
English: A flash flood soon broke out. Rocks and stones were washed away, trees were washed down, and the house where Yu Hatane lived was still intact.

古文：元简乃命记室参军钟嵘作《瑞室颂》，刻石以旌之。
现代文：萧元简就命记室参军钟嵘撰写《瑞室颂》，并且刻在石上用以褒扬。
English: Xiao Yuanjian wrote the "Ode to the Suizhong" for the life-memory room of the military commander Zhong Qi, and engraved it on the stone to praise it.

古文：及元简去郡，入山与胤别，送至都赐埭，去郡三里，因曰： 仆自弃人事，交游路断，自非降贵山薮，岂容复望城邑？
现代文：萧元简要离开堕垦瞪的时候，进山与包胤辞别，包腿送芦亟个回城，一直送到离郡城三里的都赐埭，就告别说： 我自从弃绝世间之事，舆人的交游也就中断了，如果不是你屈尊降临山野，我又哪会再到离郡城这么近的地方来?
English: When Xiao Yuan briefly left Fudan, he went into the mountains to say goodbye to Baotian, and sent Baotian back to the city. He sent Baotian all the way to the county seat three miles away, and said goodbye: Since I abandoned worldly affairs, the social intercourse has also been interrupted. If it were not for your condescension to descend into the mountains, where would I come to a place so close to the county seat?

古文：此埭之游，于今绝矣。 
现代文：在都赐埭上，从此以后再也见不到我的足迹了。 
English: After that, my footprints will never be seen again.

古文：执手涕零。
现代文：两人手拉着手，都流下了眼泪。
English: The two held hands and shed tears.

古文：何氏过江，自晋司空充并葬吴西山。
现代文：南渡过江之后，何家的人从晋司空何充开始，世代都埋葬在吴西山。
English: After crossing the river to the south, generations of the He family were buried in Wuxi Mountain, starting with the Jin Shi Ku He Cheng.

古文：胤家世年皆不永，唯祖尚之至七十二。
现代文：何胤家几代人寿命都不长，祇有他祖父何尚之活到七十二岁。
English: Several generations of He's family did not have a long life expectancy, with only his grandfather He Shangzhi living to the age of 72.

古文：胤年登祖寿，乃移还吴，作《别山诗》一首，言甚凄怆。
现代文：何胤年纪到了七十二岁时，就离开秦望山，迁移到吴，他作了一首《别山诗，言辞十分凄怆哀伤。
English: At the age of seventy-two, He Yin left Qinwangshan and moved to Wu. He wrote a poem "Beishan Poem, the words are very sad."

古文：至吴，居虎丘西寺讲经论，学徒复随之，东境守宰经途者，莫不毕至。
现代文：到之后，何胤在虚丘西寺讲论经学，学生们又都跟随他学习，东部地方长官往来途中经过吴，个个都要到寺中听何胤讲经。
English: After he arrived, He Yin gave a sermon on the sutras at the Western Temple of Huiqiu, and the students followed him to study. The Eastern prefects passed through Wu on their way to and from the capital, and everyone had to go to the temple to listen to He Yin's sermon.

古文：胤常禁杀，有虞人逐鹿，鹿径来趋胤，伏而不动。
现代文：何胤常常禁止杀生，有个虞人追逐鹿，鹿一直跑向何胤，伏在他身旁一动不动。
English: He often forbade the killing of animals. There was a wealthy man who chased a deer. The deer kept running towards He and lay motionless beside him.

古文：又有异鸟如鹤，红色，集讲堂，驯狎如家禽焉。
现代文：又有一种奇异的鸟，形状像鹤，红色，聚集在讲堂，乌儿驯服，和人亲近，如同家禽。
English: There is also a strange bird, shaped like a crane, red, gathered in the lecture hall, tame, and close to people, like poultry.

古文：初，开善寺藏法师与胤遇于秦望，后还都，卒于钟山。
现代文：以前，开善寺藏法师曾和何胤在秦望山相见，后来回到京城，在钟山去世。
English: In the past, the head priest of Kaisen-ji Temple had met He Yin in Qinwang Mountain, and later returned to Beijing and died in Zhongshan.

古文：其死日，胤在般若寺，见一僧授胤香奁并函书，云 呈何居士 ，言讫失所在。
现代文：死的那天，何胤在般若寺，见到一个僧人把盛着香炉的奁和一函书交给自己，并且说 呈交何居 。话说完人就不见了。
English: On the day of his death, He Yin was at the Prajna Temple when he saw a monk handing him an incense burner and a letter and saying, "Where should I send it?" After he said this, he disappeared.

古文：胤开函，乃是《大庄严论》，世中未有。
现代文：何胤打开函，函中竟然是人世间没有的《大庄严论》。
English: He opened the letter, and it turned out to be a copy of "The Great Solemnity," which does not exist anywhere else in the world.

古文：又于寺内立明珠柱，乃七日七夜放光，太守何远以状启。
现代文：何胤又在寺内立明珠柱，这柱竟然连续七天七夜放光，太守何远把遣情况向朝廷启奏。
English: He also set up a pillar of pearls in the temple, which was lit up for seven days and seven nights in a row. Taishu He Yuan reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：昭明太子钦其德，遣舍人何思澄致手令以褒美之。
现代文：昭明太子钦敬何胤的德行，派舍人何思澄送去手令褒美何胤。
English: Prince Shomei admired Ho-in's virtuous conduct, and sent his son-in-law, Ho Sisho, to reward him.

古文：中大通三年，卒，年八十六。
现代文：中大通三年，何胤去世，死时八十六岁。
English: Three years after graduating from junior high school, He Yin passed away at the age of 86.

古文：先是胤疾，妻江氏梦神人告之曰： 汝夫寿尽。既有至德，应获延期，尔当代之。 
现代文：以前，何胤曾经患病，何胤之妻江氏梦见神人告诉自己说： 你的丈夫寿敷已尽，但是他有至美的德行，应当获得延长寿命的回报，你将要替代你丈夫去死。 
English: In the past, He Yin had been ill, and He Yin's wife, Ms. Jiang, had a dream in which a god-man told her: "Your husband has reached the end of his life, but he has the most beautiful virtue and should be rewarded with a longer life. You will die in place of your husband."

古文：妻觉说焉，俄得患而卒，胤疾乃瘳。
现代文：江氏醒过来，说了梦中情形，不久之后返就患病去世，病竟然好了。
English: Mr. Jiang woke up and recounted the dream. Soon after, he fell ill and passed away.

古文：至是胤梦一神女并八十许人，并衣帢，行列至前，俱拜床下，觉又见之，便命营凶具。
现代文：到死之前，何胤梦见一群神女，有八十多人，都穿着蛤衣，排列整齐地走到何胤面前，都在床下向何腿行拜礼，醒来之后，何胤又见到逭情景，于是他就吩咐家中人营办丧葬用品。
English: Before his death, He Ying dreamed of a group of goddesses. More than 80 people, all dressed in long robes, lined up neatly in front of He Ying, and all prayed to He Jiao under the bed. After waking up, He Ying saw the scene of the coffin, so he ordered his family members to arrange funeral supplies.

古文：既而疾动，因不自治。
现代文：不久何胤病情加剧，于是不治而亡。
English: Soon his condition worsened and he died.

古文：胤注《百法论》、《十二门论》各一卷，注《周易》十卷、《毛诗总集》六卷、《毛诗隐义》十卷、《礼记隐义》二十卷、《礼答问》五十五卷。
现代文：何胤注《百法论》、《十二门论》各一卷，注倜易》十卷《毛诗总集》六卷，《毛诗隐义》十卷，《礼记隐义》二十卷，《礼答问》五十五卷。
English: He annotated one volume each of "On the Hundred Laws" and "On the Twelve Disciplines," ten volumes of "Complete Collection of Mao's Poetry," six volumes of "Complete Collection of Mao's Poetry," ten volumes of "Secret Meanings of Mao's Poetry," twenty volumes of "Secret Meanings of Etiquette," and fifty-five volumes of "Questions and Answers on Etiquette."

古文：子撰，亦不仕，庐陵王辟为主簿，不就。
现代文：何胤之子何撰，也不进入仕途，庐陵王征召他为主簿，他不肯就任。
English: None of the sons of any of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of the sons of

古文：阮孝绪，字士宗，陈留尉氏人也。
现代文：阮孝绪字士宗，陈留尉氏人。
English: Nguyn Ho Hu was a member of the Nguyn dynasty and a member of the Trn dynasty.

古文：父彦之，宋太尉从事中郎。
现代文：他的父亲彦之，宋时任太尉从事中郎。
English: His father, Hikozhi, was a lieutenant in the Song Dynasty.

古文：孝绪七岁，出后从伯胤之。
现代文：阮孝绪七岁时，阮孝绪过继给从伯阮胤之作后嗣。
English: When he was seven years old, Nguyn Hng Xu was adopted by Nguyn Thnh's son, Nguyn Thnh.

古文：胤之母周氏卒，有遗财百余万，应归孝绪，孝绪一无所纳，尽以归胤之姊琅邪王晏之母，闻者咸叹异之。
现代文：阮胤之之母周氏去世，留下了一百多万遣产，遣产都应当由阮孝绪继承，但阮孝绪一点也不接受，把遗产全给了阮胤之的姐姐，即琅邪王晏之母，听到遣事的人都十分惊叹。
English: When Chou, the mother of Nguyen Tan, passed away, she left more than one million renminbi. All the renminbi should have been inherited by Nguyen Hsiao-hsu, but Nguyen Hsiao-hsu did not accept it at all and gave the entire inheritance to Nguyen Tan's sister, that is, the mother of Nguyen Tan's sister. People were very surprised when they heard about the transfer.

古文：幼至孝，性沉静，虽与儿童游戏，恒以穿池筑山为乐。
现代文：阮孝绪从小就非常孝敬，生性沉稳少言，即使和孩童们一起玩耍游戏，也常是把挖池筑山当作娱乐。
English: From a young age, Nguyn Ho Xu was very respectful. He was calm and reserved. Even when he played games with children, he often used digging ponds and building mountains as entertainment.

古文：年十三，遍通《五经》。
现代文：十三岁时，他对《五经》就全都精通。
English: By the time he was 13, he had mastered the entire Five Classics.

古文：十五，冠而见其父，彦之诫曰： 三加弥尊，人伦之始。
现代文：十五岁行冠礼之后，阮孝绪去见自己的父亲阮彦之，阮彦之告诚阮孝绪说： 行加冠礼之后，你的地位更加重要，这是长大成人参预人事的起始。
English: After the coronation ceremony at the age of 15, Nguyn Ho Th went to see his father, Nguyn Hn Th, who told Nguyn Ho Th: "After the coronation ceremony, your position is more important. This is the beginning of adult participation in personnel affairs.

古文：宜思自勖，以庇尔躬。 
现代文：你应当常常想到自己勉励自己，用以庇护你自己。 
English: You should always think of protecting yourself by encouraging yourself.

古文：答曰： 愿迹松子于瀛海，追许由于穹谷，庶保促生，以免尘累。 
现代文：阮孝绪回答说： 我愿意追踪赤松子的足迹直到瀛海，仿效许由的行为隐于深谷，希望藉此保住短促的一生，免去尘世的拖累。 
English: Nguyn Ho Xu replied, "I would like to follow the footprints of the Red Pine Crab to the Bohai Sea and imitate the behavior of Hu Quyên hiding in the deep valley, hoping to save my short life and avoid the drag of the world."

古文：自是屏居一室，非定省未尝出户，家人莫见其面，亲友因呼为 居士 。
现代文：从此阮孝绪就避开入独处一室，除了探望父母，他足不出产，家中没有谁见到他，亲友们因此称他为 居士 。
English: From then on, Nguyn Hu Hu avoided being alone in a room. Except for visiting his parents, he did not work. No one in his family saw him, so his relatives and friends called him 居士.

古文：外兄王晏贵显，屡至其门，孝绪度之必至颠覆，常逃匿不与相见。
现代文：阮孝绪的表兄王晏居于显达之位，多次到阮孝绪家中，阮孝绪估计王晏一定会倾败，所以常常躲藏起来不舆王晏相见。
English: Ruan Xiaoxu's cousin, Wang Hui, lived in a prominent position and visited Ruan Xiaoxu's home many times. Ruan Xiaoxu expected that Wang Hui would definitely be defeated, so he often hid to avoid seeing Wang Hui.

古文：曾食酱美，问之，云是王家所得，便吐飧覆醢。
现代文：阮孝绪曾经吃到一种肉酱，觉得味道鲜美，他问遣肉酱的来历，当听说是从王晏家得来的，他便呕吐出吃下去的东西，倒掉肉酱。
English: Ruan Xiaoxu once ate a kind of meat sauce and thought it tasted delicious. He asked the origin of the meat sauce. When he heard that it came from Wang Hui's family, he vomited what he had eaten and poured out the meat sauce.

古文：及晏诛，其亲戚咸为之惧，孝绪曰： 亲而不党，何坐之及？ 
现代文：王晏因罪被诛，王家的亲戚都为此而害怕。阮孝绪说： 我们虽是亲戚，但未结为一党，怎么会连坐到我们? 
English: Wang Hui was arrested for a crime, and the relatives of the Wang family were afraid of this. Nguyn Ho Xu said: Although we are relatives, we are not a single party, how can we be seated together?

古文：竟获免。
现代文：后来果然没有陷入这场灾难。
English: Later, I did not fall into this disaster.

古文：义师围京城，家贫无以爨，僮妾窃邻人樵以继火。
现代文：讨伐东昏侯的义军围攻京城的时候，阮孝绪家因为贫穷竟然无柴煮饭，男女仆人去窃取邻人的木柴烧火煮饭。
English: At the time of the siege of the capital by the rebels who were besieging Dongdowon, the Nguyn Ho Hu family was so poor that they had no firewood to cook with. The male and female servants would steal their neighbors' firewood to cook with.

古文：孝绪知之，乃不食，更令撤屋而炊。所居室唯有一鹿床，竹树环绕。
现代文：阮孝绪知道后竟不肯吃饭，接着就命仆人拆下房上的木料来煮饭。阮孝绪住的房中祇有一张鹿床，房子四周竹树环绕。
English: After learning of this, Nguyn Ho Hu refused to eat, and then ordered his servants to remove the wood from the room to cook rice. Nguyn Ho Ho lived in a room with only a deer bed, and the house was surrounded by bamboo trees.

古文：天监初，御史中丞任昉寻其兄履之，欲造而不敢，望而叹曰： 其室虽迩，其人甚远。 
现代文：天监初年，御史中丞任办寻找阮孝绪之兄阮履之。也想乘便拜访阮孝绪，却又不敢前去，最后望着阮孝绪的房子感叹地说： 房子离我们虽近，那人的德行却远比我们高尚得多。 
English: In the first year of the Custodian of Heaven, the Custodian of History was looking for Nguyn Trai, the brother of Nguyn Ho Thiệu. He also wanted to visit Nguyn Ho Thiệu, but he did not dare to go. Finally, he looked at Nguyn Ho Thiệu's house and said with admiration: Although the house is close to us, that person's virtue is far more noble than ours.

古文：为名流所钦尚如此。
现代文：阮孝绪被知名人士钦敬尊崇竟然到了如此的程度。
English: This is the extent to which Ruan Xiaoxu has been admired and respected by famous people.

古文：十二年，与吴郡范元琰俱征，并不到。
现代文：天监十二年，阮孝绪和吴郡范元琰同被征召，两人都不应召。
English: In the 12th year of the Heaven's Guardian, both Nguyn Hu Hu and Nguyn Văn Quang were conscripted, but neither of them should be conscripted.

古文：陈郡袁峻谓之曰： 往者，天地闭，贤人隐；今世路已清，而子犹遁，可乎？ 
现代文：陈郡袁峻对阮孝绪说： 从前，天地壅塞，贤人隐退；现在世道清明，但你却还隐遁，这样做行吗? 
English: Chen County Yuan Jun said to Nguyn Ho Xu: Once upon a time, heaven and earth were blocked, and the wise men retreated; now the world is clear, but you are still hiding. Is this acceptable?

古文：答曰： 昔周德虽兴，夷、齐不厌薇蕨；汉道方盛，黄、绮无闷山林。
现代文：阮孝绪回答说： 从前周朝的德政虽然兴隆，但伯夷、叔齐却不食周粟，甘心吃薇蕨；汉朝正值兴盛，夏黄公、绮里季却仍以隐居山林为快乐。
English: Nguyn Ho Xu replied: Although the Zhou Dynasty was prosperous, Bi and Cc C did not eat cornflowers, but were happy to eat cranberries. The Han Dynasty was prosperous, but Hà Hng and B Lc were still happy to live in seclusion in the mountains.

古文：为仁由己，何关人世！
现代文：实践仁德，全凭自己，和人世有什么关系!
English: Practice benevolence, all by yourself, and what does it have to do with the world!

古文：况仆非往贤之类邪？ 
现代文：你估量我和以前的贤者不是一类人吗? 
English: Don't you think that I'm in the same category as the sages of the past?

古文：后于钟山听讲，母王氏忽有疾，兄弟欲召之。
现代文：后来阮孝绪在钟山听人讲经，他的母亲王氏忽然得病，阮孝绪的兄弟想要把他叫回来。
English: Later, when he was listening to a sermon in Zhongshan, his mother, Wang, suddenly fell ill, and his brother wanted to call him back.

古文：母曰： 孝绪至性冥通，必当自到。 
现代文：阮孝绪的母亲说： 耋绪天性暗通神明，他一定会自己赶回来。 
English: Ruan Xiaoxu's mother said: Ruan Xiaoxu's nature is divine, he will definitely come back on his own.

古文：果心惊而返，邻里嗟异之。
现代文：阮孝绪果然因为在钟山心中惊悸而赶回家，邻人都为遣事而惊叹。
English: Nguyn Ho Xu indeed rushed home because he was shocked in the heart of Zhongshan, and his neighbors were amazed at his action.

古文：合药须得生人参，旧传钟山所出，孝绪躬历幽险，累日不值。
现代文：阮孝绪母亲服药一定要用新鲜人参调制，以前传说钟山出产人参，阮孝绪于是亲自翻山越岭，进深山幽谷寻找，过了很多天都没有找到。
English: Nguyn Hu Hu's mother's medicine must be made with fresh ginseng. In the past, it was said that the Zhongshan Mountains produced ginseng. Nguyn Hu Hu Hu then personally climbed over the mountains and went into the deep mountains and valleys to look for it. After many days, he did not find it.

古文：忽见一鹿前行，孝绪感而随后，至一所遂灭，就视，果获此草。
现代文：他忽然间看见一只鹿在往前走，医耋赌似有感应，就紧跟着鹿往前走，走到一处，鹿突然消失，阮孝绪赶上前来，果然找到自己所要的人参草。
English: All of a sudden, he saw a deer walking ahead. The doctor seemed to have a feeling, so he followed the deer and walked forward. When he came to a place, the deer suddenly disappeared, and Ruan Xiaoxu caught up with him and found the ginseng grass he wanted.

古文：母得服之，遂愈。
现代文：他母亲用人参调药服用，病就治愈了。
English: His mother took the ginseng medicine and was cured.

古文：时皆叹其孝感所致。
现代文：当时人们都为此嗟叹，认为这是阮孝绪孝心感动神明所致。
English: At the time, people lamented this and believed that it was the result of the divine intervention of the filial heart of Nguyn Ho Th.

古文：时有善筮者张有道谓孝绪曰： 见子隐迹而心难明，自非考之龟蓍，无以验也。 
现代文：当时有个善于卜筮的人，名叫张有道，他对阮孝绪说： 看到你隐居的行动，但你的心迹难以让人明白，如果不用卜筮的方法来考求，就没有办法证明。 
English: At that time, there was a person who was good at divination, named Zhang Youdao. He said to Ruan Xiaoxu, "I have seen your actions of seclusion, but your thoughts are difficult to understand. If you don't use the method of divination, there is no way to prove it.

古文：及布卦，既揲五爻，曰： 此将为《咸》，应感之法，非嘉遁之兆。 
现代文：张有道为阮孝绪排列卦象的时候，已经列出五爻，张有道说： 从这情况看，将会出现《咸卦》，这是感应的表现，不是嘉遁之兆。 
English: When Zhang Youdao was arranging the Chinese zodiac for Nguyen Xiaoxu, he had already listed five signs. Zhang Youdao said, "From this situation, the Chinese zodiac will appear. This is a manifestation of induction, not a sign of auspiciousness."

古文：孝绪曰： 安知后爻不为上九？ 
现代文：医耋钟说： 你怎么知道下一爻不会出现上九阳爻? 
English: The doctor said, "How do you know that there won't be a Jiuyang earthquake next time?"

古文：果成《遁卦》。
现代文：亟直道继续排列卦象，最后果然出现《逐卦》。
English: Immediately, they continued to line up the Chinese characters, and finally, "one by one" appeared.

古文：有道叹曰： 此谓 肥遁无不利。 象实应德，心迹并也。 
现代文：张有道感叹地说： 这象辞说 肥遁无不利，卦象和你的德行相应，你的内心和行动一致。 
English: Zhang Youdao said with a sigh: This is like saying that there is no disadvantage in being fat, and it corresponds to your virtue, and your heart and actions are consistent.

古文：孝绪曰： 虽获《遁卦》，而上九爻不发，升遐之道，便当高谢许生。 
现代文：阮孝绪说： 虽然获得《邂卦》，但是上九阳爻没有出现，隐居之道，就要像许由那样离绝人世。 
English: Nguyn Ho Thu said: Although I won the "Encounter," I did not appear in the upper nine yang dynasties. The way to live in seclusion is to be as far away from the mortal world as Xu Yue.

古文：乃著《高隐传》，上自炎、黄，终于天监之末，斟酌分为三品，凡若干卷。
现代文：匝耋绪于是着《高隐传》，为从炎、黄开始，直到；左监末年的隐士作传，把这些人斟酌品评分为三等，一共有若干卷。
English: The prelude was "The Biography of Gao Ying," a biography of the hermit from the beginning of the fire and yellow to the end of the left prison, and these people were divided into three classes according to their quality, with a total of several volumes.

古文：又著论云： 夫至道之本，贵在无为；圣人之迹，存乎拯弊。
现代文：阮孝绪又撰写《高隐传论》说： 最高的道之根本，在于崇尚无为；圣人的行动，在于拯救时弊。
English: Nguyn Ho Thu also wrote "Tales of the Hidden" and said: "The essence of the highest path lies in advocating inaction; the saint's action lies in saving the time."

古文：弊拯由迹，迹用有乖于本，本既无为，为非道之至。
现代文：拯救时弊就要采取行动，靠行动取得功效就违背了道的根本，道的根本既然是崇尚无为，那么采取行动也就不是道的最高准则。
English: In order to save oneself, one must take action. To rely on action to achieve effectiveness is to violate the fundamental principle of the Tao. Since the fundamental principle of the Tao is to advocate inaction, then taking action is not the highest principle of the Tao.

古文：然不垂其迹，则世无以平；不究其本，则道实交丧。
现代文：然而不付诸行动，那么世间就无法安定；如果不贯彻道的根本，那道终究还会衰败。
English: However, without action, the world will not be stable; if the fundamentals of the path are not carried out, the path will eventually decay.

古文：丘、旦将存其迹，故宜权晦其本；老、庄但明其本，亦宜深抑其迹。
现代文：孔丘、姬旦想要坚持采取行动，所以暂且把道的根本掩藏起来；老聃、庄周衹要弘扬道的根本，也就应当掩蔽他们的行动。
English: Confucius and Hidan wanted to persist in their actions, so they temporarily concealed the fundamentals of the Way; Lao Zi and Zhuang Zhouyi wanted to promote the fundamentals of the Way, so they should conceal their actions.

古文：迹既可抑，数子所以有余；本方见晦，尼丘是故不足。
现代文：行动可以掩蔽，逭就是老、庄感到闲暇自如的原因；根本被掩藏，所以孔丘为世事奔忙感到力不从心。
English: Action can be covered up, and shyness is the reason why the old and dignified feel at ease in their leisure; it is completely hidden, so Kongqiu is too busy for worldly affairs.

古文：非得一之士，阙彼明智；体二之徒，独怀鉴识。
现代文：士人如果不能掌握其中一方面，就会缺少明智的见解；如果能够理解两方面的道理，就能具有独特的审察辨别能力。
English: If a scholar cannot grasp one of these aspects, he will lack wise opinions; if he can understand the two aspects, he will have a unique ability to examine and discriminate.

古文：然圣已极照，反创其迹；贤未居宗，更言其本。
现代文：这样，圣人已经光照天下，就回过头扩大行动的影响；贤人还未处于被人尊崇的地位，就更加要提倡道的根本。
English: In this way, sages, who have already shone brightly on the world, turn around to expand the influence of their actions; sages, who are not yet in a position to be respected by people, should promote the fundamentals of the Tao even more.

古文：良由迹须拯世，非圣不能；本实明理，在贤可照。
现代文：逭实在是因为行动应当拯救时弊，不是圣人就不能承担这项任务；根本应当用以说明道理，贤人就可以知晓并昭示天下。
English: Indeed, because action should save the time, not a saint can not undertake this task; it should be used to explain the truth, the wise can know and show the world.

古文：若能体兹本迹，悟彼抑扬，则孔、庄之意，其过半矣。 
现代文：假如能够了解根本与行动的关系，领悟一抑一扬的道理，那么孔丘、庄周的思想，就可以理解大半了。 
English: If we can understand the fundamental relationship between action and action, and understand the principle of "one step forward, one step back," then we can understand most of the thoughts of Confucius and Zhuang Zhou.

古文：南平元襄王闻其名，致书要之，不赴。
现代文：南平元襄王听到阮孝绪的名声，写信邀请阮孝绪，阮孝绪不肯前去。
English: Nanping Yuanxiang Wang heard of Nguyn Ho Xu's fame and wrote to invite Nguyn Ho Xu, but Nguyn Ho Xu refused to go.

古文：孝绪曰： 非志骄富贵，但性畏庙堂。
现代文：阮孝绪说： 并不是我有意要在尊贵之人面前显示傲慢，衹是我生性害怕见帝王。
English: "It is not my intention to show arrogance in front of dignitaries, but I am afraid of seeing the emperor," said Nguyn Ho Xu.

古文：若使籞軿可骖，何以异夫骥騄。 
现代文：假如磨麝都能驾车，那它们和良马有什么区别? 
English: If horseshoes can drive, what is the difference between them and good horses?

古文：初，建武末，青溪宫东门无故自崩，大风拔东宫门外杨树。
现代文：以前，在建武末年的时候，青溪宫的束门无缘无故自己崩塌，大风吹拔束宫门外的杨树。
English: In the past, at the end of the Jianwu period, the gate of Qingxi Palace collapsed without any reason, and the wind blew away the poplars outside the gate of the palace.

古文：或以问孝绪，孝绪曰： 青溪皇家旧宅。
现代文：有人就逭事去询问阮孝绪，阮孝绪说： 青溪宫是皇上原来的住宅。
English: When asked about the anecdote, Nguyn Ho Thu said, "Qingxi Palace was the original residence of the emperor.

古文：齐为木行，东者木位，今东门自坏，木其衰矣。 
现代文：齐五行属木，东方是五行中木的方位，现在束门自己崩塌，恐怕是木将要衰败了。 
English: Qi and the five elements belong to the wood, and the east is the position of the wood in the five elements. Now that the bunch gate has collapsed, I am afraid that the wood will decay.

古文：鄱阳忠烈王妃，孝绪之姊。
现代文：鄱阳忠烈王妃是阮孝绪的姐姐。
English: Princess Suyang Zhongliao is the sister of Nguyn Hu Hu.

古文：王尝命驾，欲就之游，孝绪凿垣而逃，卒不肯见。
现代文：鄱阳王曾经想驾车到阮茎钟那儿去游玩，阮孝绪凿开垣墙逃开了，始终不肯与鄱阳王见面。
English: King Puyang once wanted to drive to Nguyn Phúc Bình to visit, but Nguyn Ho Hu chiseled through a wall to escape and refused to meet King Puyang.

古文：诸甥岁时馈遗，一无所纳。
现代文：外甥们逢年过节馈赠的东西，阮孝绪全不接受。
English: Nguyn Hu Hu did not accept any gifts from his nephews during the annual holiday.

古文：人或怪之，答云： 非我始愿，故不受也。 
现代文：有人对阮孝绪这样做感到奇怪，阮孝绪回答： 受礼不是我自己本来的愿望，所以不接受。 
English: Some people found it strange that Nguyn Hu Hu would do this. Nguyn Hu Hu replied, "Receiving a gift is not my original wish, so I do not accept it."

古文：其恒所供养石像，先有损坏，心欲治补，经一夜忽然完复，众并异之。
现代文：阮孝绪常年供奉的石像，先就有损坏，阮孝绪心中想要修补，经过一夜，石像忽然变得完好无损。
English: The stone statue, which had been worshipped by Nguyn Ho Thiệu for many years, was damaged at first, and Nguyn Ho Thiệu wanted to repair it in his heart. After one night, the stone statue suddenly became intact.

古文：大同二年，卒，时年五十八。
现代文：大家都为此感到惊异。大同二年，阮孝绪去世，当时五十八岁。
English: Everyone was surprised by this. That same year, Nguyn Hu Hu died at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：门徒诔其德行，谥曰文贞处士。
现代文：阮孝钟的门徒累列阮孝绪的德行，确定他的谧号为文贞处士。
English: The disciples of Nguyn H Chung listed the virtues of Nguyn Hu Hu and confirmed that his nickname was Nguyn Hu Trng.

古文：所著《七录》等书二百五十卷，行于世。
现代文：他着的《七录》等书共有二百五十卷，在世间流传。
English: His "Seven Commentaries" and other books have a total of two hundred and fifty volumes, and have been circulated around the world.

古文：陶弘景，字通明，丹阳秣陵人也。
现代文：陶弘景字通明，丹阳秣陵人。
English: Tao Hongjing's character is clear, and he is from Danyang.

古文：初，母梦青龙自怀而出，并见两天人手执香炉来至其所，已而有娠，遂产弘景。
现代文：原先，陶弘景之母梦见青龙从自己怀中出来，同时又见到两个天神手捧香炉来到自己住的地方，过不久陶母就有了身孕，于是生下了陶弘景。
English: Originally, Tao Hongjing's mother dreamed of a blue dragon coming out of her womb, and at the same time saw two celestial gods holding incense burners come to her place of residence. Soon after, Tao's mother became pregnant, and gave birth to Tao Hongjing.

古文：幼有异操。
现代文：陶弘景从小就有独特的禀赋。
English: Tao Hongjing has had a unique gift for dancing since childhood.

古文：年十岁，得葛洪《神仙传》，昼夜研寻，便有养生之志。
现代文：他十岁的时候，得到了葛洪写的神仙传》，就白天黑夜研学探究它，于是萌生了摄生长寿的想法。
English: When he was ten years old, he got hold of "The Legend of the Immortals" written by Ge Hongwu and studied it day and night, and the idea of longevity was born.

古文：谓人曰： 仰青云，睹白日，不觉为远矣。 
现代文：陶弘景对人说： 仰望青云，看见太阳，都不觉得远。 
English: Tao Hongjing said to people: Looking up at the clouds, seeing the sun, do not feel far away.

古文：及长，身长七尺四寸，神仪明秀，朗目疏眉，细形长耳。
现代文：长大成人之后，陶弘景身长七尺四寸，神情仪表，明净秀美，眼睛明亮，眉宇开阔，耳朵捆长。
English: After becoming an adult, Tao Hongjing grew to be seven feet four inches tall, with an elegant appearance, clear and beautiful, bright eyes, wide eyebrows, and long ears.

古文：读书万余卷。
现代文：陶弘景读书一万余卷。
English: Tao Hongjing has read more than 10,000 volumes.

古文：善琴棋，工草隶。
现代文：他善于弹琴下棋，精于草书隶书。
English: He is good at playing the piano and playing chess, and is good at cursive writing.

古文：未弱冠，齐高帝作相，引为诸王侍读，除奉朝请。
现代文：齐高祖作宰相，还未到弱冠之年的陶弘景被选拔为诸王侍读，被授为奉朝请。
English: As the prime minister of Qi Gaozu, Tao Hongjing, who had not yet reached the age of the weak crown, was selected as the attendant of the kings and was awarded the honor of serving the emperor.

古文：虽在硃门，闭影不交外物，唯以披阅为务。
现代文：陶弘景虽然身处帝王之家，但闭门独处，不与外人交往，祇是一味读书。
English: Although Tao Hongjing is in the emperor's house, he is alone behind closed doors, does not socialize with outsiders, and is only reading.

古文：朝仪故事，多取决焉。
现代文：朝廷礼仪制度，多半取决于陶弘景。
English: The imperial court etiquette system mostly depends on Tao Hongjing.

古文：永明十年，上表辞禄，诏许之，赐以束帛。
现代文：永明十年，陶弘景上表辞去官职，皇上下诏准许他辞职，赐给他一束帛。
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Yongming, Tao Hongjing submitted his resignation from his official post. The emperor permitted him to resign and gave him a bunch of money.

古文：及发，公卿祖之于征虏亭，供帐甚盛，车马填咽，咸云宋、齐以来，未有斯事。
现代文：到陶弘景离开京城的时候，朝廷公卿在征虏亭为他饯行，酒宴规模十分盛大，送行人的车马阻塞了道路。大家都说，宋、齐以来，都没有这么盛大的送行场面。
English: By the time Tao Hongjing left Beijing, the imperial court nobles were waiting for him at the Conquest Pavilion. The scale of the wine banquet was very grand, and the cars and horses that saw off the pedestrians blocked the road. Everyone said that there had not been such a grand send-off scene since Song and Qi.

古文：朝野荣之。
现代文：朝野人士都认为这是一种荣耀。
English: People in both the government and opposition see this as an honor.

古文：于是止于句容之句曲山。
现代文：于是陶弘景定居在句容的句曲山。
English: As a result, Tao Hongjing settled in Guqu Mountain in Guanzhong.

古文：恒曰： 此山下是第八洞宫，名金坛华阳之天，周回一百五十里。
现代文：陶弘景常说： 这座山下是第八洞宫，名叫金坛华阳之天，周围有一百五十里。
English: Tao Hongjing often said: This mountain is the eighth cave palace, called the Golden Altar Huayang Heaven, with a circumference of one hundred and fifty miles.

古文：昔汉有咸阳三茅君得道，来掌此山，故谓之茅山。 
现代文：从前漠代有个咸阳三茅君道行修炼成功，来掌管这座山，所以这山称做茅山。 
English: Once upon a time, in the desert era, a Xianyang Sanmaojun succeeded in cultivating and controlling this mountain, so this mountain is called Mao Mountain.

古文：乃中山立馆，自号华阳隐居。
现代文：于是陶弘景在山的中部建造房子，自己把房子称为华阳隐居。
English: So Tao Hongjing built a house in the middle of the mountain and called it the Huayang Retreat.

古文：始从东阳孙游岳受符图经法。
现代文：陶弘景开始跟随束阳孙游岳学习符图经法。
English: Tao Hongjing began to follow Sok Yangsun Yu Yue in studying the Fu Tu Jing Fa.

古文：遍历名山，寻访仙药。
现代文：他走遍名山，寻访仙药。
English: He travelled all over the famous mountains in search of the elixir.

古文：每经涧谷，必坐卧其间，吟咏盘桓，不能已已。
现代文：每当经过溪涧山谷，陶弘景一定要在其中盘桓，吟咏游览，不能休止。
English: Whenever passing through the creek valley, Tao Hongjing must be in the middle of it, and the tour cannot be stopped.

古文：时沈约为东阳郡守，高其志节，累书要之，不至。
现代文：当时沈约任束阳郡守，他敬仰陶弘景的操守涵养，多次去信邀约陶弘景，陶弘景都没有答应。
English: At that time, Shen was appointed as the governor of Sokyang County. He admired Tao Hongjing's integrity and forbearance. He wrote to Tao Hongjing many times to invite him, but Tao Hongjing did not agree.

古文：弘景为人，圆通谦谨，出处冥会，心如明镜，遇物便了，言无烦舛，有亦辄觉。
现代文：陶弘景为人通达事理，处事灵活，待人谦敬有礼，无论是出仕还是退隐，他的举动都符合这标准。
English: Tao Hongjing is an intelligent and rational person, he is flexible in handling things, and he treats people with courtesy and respect. Whether he is serving or retiring, his actions meet this standard.

古文：建武中，齐宜都王铿为明帝所害，其夜，弘景梦铿告别，因访其幽冥中事，多说秘异，因著《梦记》焉。
现代文：遇上事情就能立即作出决断，说话不拖沓冗繁，即使有也会立即感觉到。建武年间，齐宜都王萧铿被明帝害死，萧铿被害的那天夜晚，陶弘景梦见萧铿来向自己告别，陶弘景就向萧铿问及阴间之事，萧铿说出了很多阴间隐秘奇异之事，陶弘景就根据这些事撰写了《梦记》。
English: In the Jianwu period, King Xiao Yao of Qi was killed by Emperor Ming. On the night of Xiao Yao's death, Tao Hongjing dreamed that Xiao Yao came to say goodbye to him. Tao Hongjing asked Xiao Yao about things in the underworld. Xiao Yao said a lot of secret and strange things in the underworld. Tao Hongjing wrote "Dream" based on these things.

古文：永元初，更筑三层楼，弘景处其上，弟子居其中，宾客至其下，与物遂绝，唯一家僮得侍其旁。
现代文：永元初年，陶弘景又另外建了一座三层的楼房。陶弘景居住在最上一层，他的弟子们住在中间一层，宾客来了就住在下层。陶弘景就从此舆世人断绝来往，衹有一名家中的僮仆能在他身边服侍。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, Tao Hongjing built another three-story building. Tao Hongjing lived on the top floor, his disciples lived on the middle floor, and guests lived on the lower floor. Tao Hongjing cut off the world from coming and going, but he had a servant at home to serve him.

古文：特爱松风，每闻其响，欣然为乐。
现代文：陶弘景特别喜爱松林中的风声，每次听风吹动松林的声音，都感到欣喜快乐。
English: Tao Hongjing especially likes the sound of the wind in the pine forest. Every time he hears the wind blowing the sound of the pine forest, he feels delighted and happy.

古文：有时独游泉石，望见者以为仙人。
现代文：陶弘景有时一个人在泉水山石之旁游玩，远远望见他的人，都以为是仙人。
English: Tao Hongjing sometimes travels alone by the side of springs, mountains and rocks. People who see him from afar think he is a hermit.

古文：性好著述，尚奇异，顾惜光景，老而弥笃。
现代文：陶弘景生性爱好著述，著述中崇尚奇异。他爱惜光阴，年老之后就更加珍惜。
English: Tao Hongjing loves to write, and in his writings he praises the bizarre. He cherishes time, and cherishes it even more now that he is old.

古文：尤明阴阳五行，风角星算，山川地理，方图产物，医术本草。
现代文：他尤其精通阴阳五行、风角星算、山川地理、方圆产物、医术本草。
English: He is especially proficient in yin and yang five elements, wind angle and star calculation, mountain and river geography, square and circle products, and herbal medicine.

古文：著《帝代年历》，又尝造浑天象，云 修道所须，非止史官是用 。
现代文：陶弘景着有《帝代年历》，又曾经制造浑天象，陶弘景说，浑天象 不祇是史官使用，也是毕道所必需的东西 。
English: Tao Hongjing is the author of the "Imperial Calendar" and once made the Hun Tian Zi. According to Tao Hongjing, the Hun Tian Zi is not only used by historians, but is also essential for the Buddhist path.

古文：义师平建康，闻议禅代，弘景援引图谶，数处皆成 梁 字，令弟子进之。
现代文：讨伐东昏侯的义军平定建康之后，陶弘景听说在议论桦代之事，他就援引圃谶，几次推演都成为 梁 字，于是陶弘景就命弟子把推演结果进呈朝廷。
English: After suppressing Jiankang, a rebel army that had been besieging the dwindling eastern provinces, Tao Hongjing heard that they were discussing the succession of the throne. He quoted Po Ye, and several times the deduction became a "beam," so Tao Hongjing ordered his disciple to present the deduction results to the imperial court.

古文：高祖既早与之游，及即位后，恩礼逾笃，书问不绝，冠盖相望。
现代文：高祖早已舆陶弘景有交游，他登上帝位之后，对陶弘景的恩宠和礼遇就更加隆厚和周到，他和陶弘景之间书信往来不绝，派去看望陶弘景的使者一个接着一个。
English: Gao Zu had been a friend of Tao Hongjing for a long time. After he ascended to the throne, his grace and courtesy to Tao Hongjing were even more generous and thoughtful. He and Tao Hongjing exchanged letters incessantly, and sent emissaries to visit Tao Hongjing one after another.

古文：天监四年，移居积金东涧。
现代文：天监四年，陶弘景移居积金束涧。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Tao Hongjing moved to Jiejinzhuan.

古文：善辟谷导引之法，年逾八十而有壮容。
现代文：陶弘景善于辟谷导引的养生之术，他年龄超过八十却还保持着健康的容貌。
English: Tao Hongjing is good at the health regimen of avoiding the valley, he is over eighty years old but still maintains a healthy appearance.

古文：深慕张良之为人，云 古贤莫比 。
现代文：陶弘景深深仰慕张良的人品，说张良逭人， 古代贤人中，没有谁能舆他相提并论 。
English: Tao Hongjing deeply admired Zhang Liang's character. He said that among the sages of ancient times, no one could compare with Zhang Liang.

古文：曾梦佛授其菩提记，名为胜力菩萨。
现代文：陶弘景曾经梦见佛把菩提记授给自己，神佛说他名为胜力菩萨。
English: Tao Hongjing once had a dream in which the Buddha bestowed the title of Bodhi on himself. The Buddha said that his name was Shengli Bodhisattva.

古文：乃诣鄮县阿育王塔自誓，受五大戒。
现代文：陶弘景于是到邓县阿育王塔自己发誓，受五大戒。
English: Tao Hongjing then went to the Ayuwang Pagoda in Deng County to swear by himself and receive the five precepts.

古文：后太宗临南徐州，钦其风素，召至后堂，与谈论数日而去，太宗甚敬异之。
现代文：后来太宗来到南徐州，他钦仰陶弘景的风采和素养，就把陶弘景召进后堂，两人在一起谈论了很多天，陶弘景才离去，太宗非常敬重陶弘景，认为他异于常人。
English: Later, Taizong came to South Xuzhou. He admired Tao Hongjing's style and quality, so he called Tao Hongjing into the back hall. The two talked together for many days, and Tao Hongjing only left. Taizong respected Tao Hongjing very much and thought that he was different from ordinary people.

古文：大通初，令献二刀于高祖，其一名养胜，一名成胜，并为佳宝。
现代文：大通初年，陶弘景把两把刀进献给高祖，一把刀名为善胜，一把刀名为威胜，都是精美的宝物。
English: In the first year of the Great Succession, Tao Hongjing presented two swords to Gao Zu. One sword was named Zensheng, and the other was named Wei Sheng. Both were exquisite treasures.

古文：大同二年，卒，时年八十五。
现代文：大同二年，陶弘景去世，时年八十一岁。
English: In the same year, Tao Hongjing passed away at the age of 81.

古文：颜色不变，屈申如恒。
现代文：死后，陶弘景的容颜没有改变，身体屈伸如同往常。
English: After his death, Tao Hongjing's face did not change, and his body remained as stooped as usual.

古文：诏赠中散大夫，谥曰贞白先生，仍遣舍人监护丧事。
现代文：皇上下韶赠为中散大夫，赠谧为贞白先生，接着派舍人监办丧事。
English: The Emperor and Empress presented the Imperial Regalia to Dr. Zhongshan, and the Imperial Regalia to Mr. Zhenbai, and then sent an attendant to supervise the funeral.

古文：弘景遗令薄葬，弟子遵而行之。
现代文：陶弘景留下遣言要实行薄葬，他的弟子们遵照遣言实行。
English: Tao Hongjing left instructions for a short funeral, and his disciples followed his instructions.

古文：诸葛璩，字幼玟，琅邪阳都人，世居京口。
现代文：诸葛璩字幼玟，琅邪阳都人，他家世代居住在京口。
English: Zhuge Zou Zi, a native of Yanyangdu, has lived in Jingkou for generations.

古文：璩幼事征士关康之，博涉经史。
现代文：诸葛璩幼时以征士关康之为师，广泛地涉猎经史。
English: When Zhuge Liang was a child, his teacher was the Conqueror Guan Kang, and he was widely involved in the study of history.

古文：复师征士臧荣绪。荣绪著《晋书》，称璩有发擿之功，方之壶遂。
现代文：后来他又以征士咸荣绪为师，臧荣绪着《晋书》，他称赞诸葛璩对自己着的书有阐发隐微事义的功劳。
English: Later, he studied under the renowned scholar Xian Rongxu. He praised Zhuge Rongxu for his book "Jin Shu." He also praised Zhuge Rongxu for his book's ability to elucidate subtle meanings.

古文：齐建武初，南徐州行事江祀荐璩于明帝曰： 璩安贫守道，悦《礼》敦《诗》，未尝投刺邦宰，曳裾府寺，如其简退，可以扬清厉俗。
现代文：臧荣绪把诸葛璩和漠代的壶遂相提并论。
English: Yan Rongxu compared the pots of Zhuge Liang and the pots of the desert era.

古文：请辟为议曹从事。 
现代文：请求征召诸葛璩为议曹从事。 
English: The request to conscript Zhuge Liang to serve as a councillor.

古文：帝许之，璩辞不去。
现代文：明帝答应了江祀的请求，诸葛璩却拒绝不肯应召。
English: Emperor Ming agreed to Jiang's request, but Zhuge Liang refused to be summoned.

古文：陈郡谢朓为东海太守，教曰： 昔长孙东组，降龙丘之节；文举北辎，高通德之称。
现代文：当时陈郡谢跳任束海太守，他为告谕属下写了一篇教，教文说： 从前任长孙束行为官，就使龙丘苌折节出仕；孔文举教令北行，就使郑玄得到高立 通德门 的荣耀。
English: At that time, Chen County Xie Jie was appointed as the governor of the Sokha Sea, and he wrote a teaching for his subordinates. The teaching said: From the time that his predecessor, the eldest grandson Sokha, became an official, he sent Longqiu to serve; from the time that Confucius sent his teaching to the north, he made Zheng Xuan get the glory of Gaoling Tongde Gate.

古文：所以激贪立懦，式扬风范。
现代文：这是抑制贪鄙之风，使懦弱之人立下志向，弘扬风范的好办法。
English: This is a good way to curb the greedy style, make the cowardly people set an aspiration, and promote the style.

古文：处士诸葛璩，高风所渐，结辙前修。
现代文：处士诸葛璩，被前贤的高风亮节所熏陶，也走上了隐居的道路。
English: The clerk Zhuge Liang, influenced by the high winds and bright festivals of the previous sages, also embarked on the path of seclusion.

古文：岂怀珠披褐，韬玉待价？
现代文：他哪是那种怀藏珠宝却身披褐衣、身有才艺却想待价而沽的虚假之辈?
English: Is he one of those phonies who hides his jewels but dresses in brown, who has talent but wants to sell it?

古文：将幽贞独往，不事王侯者邪？
现代文：他正是操守高洁、独守孤高、不事王侯的隐逸之士。
English: He is precisely a secluded person of high integrity, self-sufficiency, and no-nonsense prince.

古文：闻事亲有啜菽之窭，就养寡藜蒸之给，岂得独享万钟，而忘兹五秉？
现代文：听说他奉养父母，却穷得衹能啜菽饮水，连粗茶淡饭都难以为继。我哪能独享万钟的俸禄，却忘了赈穷济贫的责任。
English: I heard that he supported his parents, but he was so poor that he could barely drink water, and it was difficult to sustain even coarse tea and light meals. How could I enjoy a million-dollar salary, but I forgot the responsibility of helping the poor.

古文：可饷谷百斛。 
现代文：应当赠给诸葛璩百斛谷。 
English: It should be given to Zhuge Li Baiyu Valley.

古文：天监中，太守萧琛、刺史安成王秀、鄱阳王恢并礼异焉。
现代文：天监年间，太守萧琛、刺史安成王萧秀、鄱阳王萧恢都给诸葛璩以特殊的礼遇。
English: During the time of the Celestial Inspector, the Empress Dowager Xiao Yao, the Prince of Ancheng, Xiao Xiu, and the Prince of Shenyang, Xiao Hui, all gave Zhuge Yao special courtesy.

古文：璩丁母忧毁瘠，恢累加存问。
现代文：诸葛璩母亲去世，他在守丧期间因遇度悲哀而极度瘦弱，萧恢多次去探望慰问。
English: Zhuge Liang's mother passed away. During the mourning period, he was extremely thin due to his grief. Xiao Hui visited Zhuge Liang many times to offer condolences.

古文：服阕，举秀才，不就。
现代文：服丧期满，诸葛璩被举为秀才，他不肯就任。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Zhuge Liang was promoted to the top as a talented person, but he refused to take office.

古文：璩性勤于诲诱，后生就学者日至，居宅狭陋，无以容之，太守张友为起讲舍。
现代文：诸葛璩生性勤于教诲诱导学生，天天都有许多到他这裹来学习的年轻人。诸葛璩家的宅院简陋狭小，无法容纳逭么多人。太守张友为诸葛璩建造了讲舍。
English: Zhuge Liang was a diligent student who taught and guided students, and many young people came to study with him every day. Zhuge Liang's house was too small to accommodate so many people. The Emperor Zhang You built a lecture hall for Zhuge Liang.

古文：璩处身清正，妻子不见喜愠之色。
现代文：诸葛璩为人清廉正直，妻子儿女都看不到他喜怒的表情。
English: Zhuge Liang is a clean and honest person. His wife and children can't see his angry and happy expression.

古文：旦夕孜孜，讲诵不辍，时人益以此宗之。
现代文：他从早到晚，孜孜不倦，或是讲学，或是诵读，从不停息。当时人们因此也就更加尊重他。
English: He worked tirelessly from dawn to dusk, either lecturing or reading, never stopping, which made people respect him even more.

古文：七年，高祖敕问太守王份，份即具以实对，未及征用，是年卒于家。
现代文：天监七年，高祖下诏向太守王份询问诸葛璩的学问德行，王份全按实情回答，朝廷还没来得及征召任用诸葛璩，诸葛璩就于天监七年在家中去世。
English: In the seventh year of Tianjing, Gao Zu issued an edict to inquire about the scholarly virtues of Zhuge Liang from the governor Wang Quan. Wang Quan answered truthfully. Before the imperial court could recruit and appoint Zhuge Liang, Zhuge Liang died at home in the seventh year of Tianjing.

古文：璩所著文章二十卷，门人刘曒集而录之。
现代文：诸葛璩所著的文章共二十卷，是他的门人刘暾为他收集编绿的。
English: A total of twenty volumes of articles written by Zhuge Liang were collected and edited for him by his disciple Liu Wei.

古文：沈顗，字处默，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈顗字处默，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Rongzhu is silent, Wu Xingwukang is silent.

古文：父坦之，齐都官郎。
现代文：他的父亲沈坦之，齐时任都官郎。
English: His father, Shen Tanzhi, was a high-ranking government official at the time.

古文：顗幼清静有至行，慕黄叔度、徐孺子之为人。
现代文：从幼年开始，沈顗心性就清正恬静，有卓绝的品行，他敬慕黄叔度、徐孺子的为人处世。
English: From an early age, Shen Yao's heart was pure, upright and quiet, and he had an outstanding moral character. He admired Huang Shudu and Xu Yanzi's way of life.

古文：读书不为章句，著述不尚浮华。
现代文：沈顗读书不拘泥于注释，著述不追求浮华。
English: Shen Yao's reading is not sticking to notes, and his writing does not pursue pomposity.

古文：常独处一室，人罕见其面。
现代文：沈颢常常独自一个人待在屋子裹，别人很少见到他。
English: Shen Yao often stays alone in his room, and is rarely seen by others.

古文：顗从叔勃，贵显齐世，每还吴兴，宾客填咽，顗不至其门。
现代文：沈顗的堂叔沈勃在齐代位居高官，声名显赫。他每次回到吴兴，都是宾客盈门，沈顗却从不到他的家门。
English: Shen Bo, the uncle of Shen Yao, was a high-ranking official in the Qi Dynasty and was famous. Every time he returned to Wuxing, he was a guest at the gate, but Shen Yao never came to his door.

古文：勃就之，顗送迎不越于阃。
现代文：沈勃去看望沈颢，沈顗迎送沈勃，从不超出大门。
English: Shen Bo went to visit Shen Yao, Shen Yao welcomed and sent Shen Bo, and never went beyond the gate.

古文：勃叹息曰： 吾乃今知贵不如贱。 
现代文：沈勃感叹地说： 我现在才知道处在富贵中的人比不上贫贱之人。 
English: Shen Bo sighed and said, "Only now do I know that those who are rich are not as good as those who are poor.

古文：俄征为南郡王左常侍，不就。
现代文：不久，沈顗被征召为南郡王左常侍，他不去赴任。
English: Soon after, Shen Qi was called up to serve as the Nan County Wang Zuo's personal attendant, but he did not go to the post.

古文：顗内行甚修，事母兄弟孝友，为乡里所称慕。
现代文：沈顗平日家居的品行很好，事奉父母十分孝敬，兄弟之间十分友爱，他被同乡之人称道仰慕。
English: Shen Yao's daily home conduct is very good. He serves his parents with great filial piety, and his brothers are very friendly. He is praised and admired by his fellow villagers.

古文：永明三年，征著作郎；建武二年，征太子舍人，俱不赴。
现代文：永明三年，沈颤被征召为著作郎；建武二年，沈颉又被征召为太子舍人，他都不去赴任。
English: In the third year of Yongming, Shen Tiao was conscripted as a writer; in the second year of Jianwu, Shen Yao was also conscripted as a prince, but he did not go to the post.

古文：永元二年，又征通直郎，亦不赴。
现代文：永元二年，沈顗又被征召为通直郎，他也不去赴任。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, Shen Yao was again conscripted as Tong Nairo, but he did not go to the post.

古文：顗素不治家产，值齐末兵荒，与家人并日而食。
现代文：沈顗素来不置办家产，时值齐末，兵荒马乱，沈颉家中生活艰难，他与家人都衹能两天分吃一天的食粮。
English: Shen Yao has never owned any household property. With the end of the war, war and chaos, life in Shen Yao's home is difficult. He and his family can only eat one day's food for two days.

古文：或有馈其梁肉者，闭门不受。
现代文：有人馈赠粮食和肉给沈颉，沈顗就把门关上，不肯接受。
English: Some people gave him gifts of grain and meat, but he closed the door and refused to accept them.

古文：唯以樵采自资，怡怡然恒不改其乐。
现代文：他衹是靠打柴维持生计，但仍是怡然自得，并不改变自己的旨趣。
English: He earns his living by collecting firewood, but he is still happy and does not change his taste.

古文：天监四年，大举北伐，订民丁。
现代文：天监四年，梁大举北伐，因而征集壮丁。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Liang launched a large-scale northern expedition, and thus recruited young men.

古文：吴兴太守柳恽以顗从役，扬州别驾陆任以书责之，恽大惭，厚礼而遣之。其年卒于家。
现代文：吴兴太守柳恽埋命沈顗去服劳役，扬州别驾陆任写信去责备柳惮，柳惮十分惭愧，送了丰厚的礼物给沈颤，让沈顗回家。
English: Wu Xingta guard Liu Zhe buried his life to send Shen Zhe to labor service, Yangzhou don't drive Lu Ren to write a letter to reproach Liu Shuo, Liu Shuo was very ashamed, sent a rich gift to Shen Zhe, let Shen Zhe go home.

古文：所著文章数十篇。
现代文：沈颢就在这一年在自己家中去世。沈顗所著的文章有数十篇。
English: Shen Yao died in the same year at his home. There are dozens of articles written by Shen Yao.

古文：刘慧斐，字文宣，彭城人也。
现代文：刘慧斐字文宣，彭城人。
English: Liu Huifei, also known as Wen Xuan, is from Pengcheng.

古文：少博学，能属文，起家安成王法曹行参军。
现代文：他从小学问渊博，会写文章。刘慧斐初出仕任玄虚王法曹行参军。
English: Since elementary school, Liu Hui Fei has been an inquisitive person and can write articles. Liu Hui Fei first joined the army when he was assigned as a legal assistant to King Xuehu.

古文：尝还都，途经寻阳，游于匡山，过处士张孝秀，相得甚欢，遂有终焉之志。
现代文：刘慧斐曾经在回京城途中经过寻阳，到匡山去游览。他去拜访处士张孝秀，两人志趣相同，十分投合，刘慧斐于是萌生了在匡山安居终老的想法。
English: On his way back to Beijing, Liu Huifei once passed through Guangyang and went to Guanshan for a tour. He went to visit the official Zhang Xiaoxiu. The two had the same interests and were very compatible. Liu Huifei then had the idea of living in Guanshan for the rest of his life.

古文：因不仕，居于东林寺。
现代文：于是他就不再做官，自己居住到束林寺中。
English: As a result, he no longer worked as an official and went to live in Sokurin Temple.

古文：又于山北构园一所，号曰离垢园，时人乃谓为离垢先生。
现代文：他又在山北建造了一座园，取名为离垢园。当时人就称刘慧斐为离垢先生。
English: He also built a garden in the northern part of Shandong Province, which was named Liwu Garden. At that time, people called Liu Huifei "Mr. Liwu."

古文：慧斐尤明释典，工篆隶，在山手写佛经二千余卷，常所诵者百余卷。
现代文：刘慧斐特别精通佛教经典，他精于篆书和隶书，在匡山上他手抄佛经二千余卷，其中经常诵读的就有一百余卷。
English: Liu Huifei is particularly proficient in Buddhist classics. He is good at copying and transcribing. On Mount Kuangshan, he hand-copied more than two thousand volumes of Buddhist scriptures, of which more than one hundred volumes are regularly read.

古文：昼夜行道，孜孜不怠，远近钦慕之。
现代文：刘慧斐白天黑夜都诵习佛经，孜孜不倦，远远近近的人都敬慕他。
English: Liu Huifei recites Buddhist scriptures day and night, tirelessly, and people from far and near admire him.

古文：太宗临江州，遗以几杖。
现代文：太宗来到辽，送几杖给刘墓斐。
English: Taizong came to Liao and sent a few sticks to Liu Grabfei.

古文：论者云：自远法师没后，将二百年，始有张、刘之盛矣。
现代文：评论遣事的人说，自从远法师去世之后，过了将近二百年，匡山上才出现像张孝秀、刘慧斐这样的盛德之人。
English: Commentators said that since the death of Master Yuan, nearly two hundred years have passed, and people of great virtue such as Zhang Xiaoxiu and Liu Huifei have only appeared on Mount Kuang.

古文：世祖及武陵王等书问不绝。
现代文：世祖和武陵王等人给刘盏莹的书信不断。
English: Letters to Liu Lingying from the Patriarch and the King of Wuling were incessant.

古文：大同二年，卒，时年五十九。
现代文：去世，死时五十九岁。
English: He was fifty-nine when he died.

古文：范元琰，字伯珪，吴郡钱唐人也。
现代文：范元琰字伯珪，吴郡钱唐人。
English: Fan Yuanxuan, also known as Bo Xuan, was a Qian Tang man from Wu County.

古文：祖悦之，太学博士征，不至。
现代文：他的祖父范悦之，被征召为太学博士，他不赴任。
English: His grandfather, Fan Yuezhi, was conscripted to become a doctor of science, but he did not take up the post.

古文：父灵瑜，居父忧，以毁卒。
现代文：范元琰之父范灵瑜，在为父亲守丧时，因哀痛过度而去世。
English: Fan Lingyu, the father of Fan Yuanjun, died of excessive grief while attending his father's funeral.

古文：元琰时童孺，哀慕尽礼，亲党异之。
现代文：范灵瑜去世时，范元琰还是个孩童，但他哀痛思慕之情、恪守礼法、竭尽礼仪的举动，使亲属们都感到惊异。
English: At the time of Fan Lingyu's death, Fan Yuanlu was still a child, but his grief and longing, his adherence to etiquette, and his behavior of exhausting etiquette all surprised his relatives.

古文：及长好学，博通经史，兼精佛义。
现代文：长大成人之后，范元琰爱好学习，学问广博，精通经史，又同时精通佛教教义。
English: After he became an adult, Fan Yuanjun was fond of learning, had a broad knowledge, was well versed in the history of scripture, and was also well versed in Buddhist teachings.

古文：然性谦敬，不以所长骄人。
现代文：但他生性谦逊恭谨，不凭藉自己的长处傲慢待人。
English: However, he is humble and respectful by nature, and does not treat others arrogantly based on his own strengths.

古文：家贫，唯以园蔬为业。
现代文：范元琰家中贫苦，衹是依靠在园中种菜维持生计。
English: Fan Yuanjun's family is poor, and he relies on growing vegetables in the garden to make ends meet.

古文：尝出行，见人盗其菜，元琰遽退走，母问其故，具以实答。
现代文：曾有一次，范元琰出外时，见到有人正在偷他家的菜，他急急忙忙地退回家，他母亲问他退回家的缘故，他全按实情回答了母亲。
English: Once upon a time, when Fan Yuanzhang went out, he saw someone stealing his family's vegetables. He hurriedly returned home. His mother asked him why he had returned home. He answered his mother completely truthfully.

古文：母问盗者为谁，答曰： 向所以退，畏其愧耻。今启其名，愿不泄也。 
现代文：母亲又问他偷菜的是谁，范元琰回答说： 刚才急忙退回来的原因，就是怕偷菜人见到我而感到羞耻，现在我把那人的名字告诉你，希望你不要泄露出去。 
English: His mother also asked him who had stolen the vegetables. Fan Yuanjun replied, "The reason why I hurried back just now was that I was afraid that the person who stole the vegetables would be ashamed to see me. Now I will tell you the name of that person, and I hope you will not reveal it."

古文：于是母子秘之。
现代文：于是母子二人对逭事秘而不宣。
English: So the mother and son kept the incident a secret.

古文：或有涉沟盗其笋者，元琰因伐木为桥以渡之。
现代文：有人涉过沟来偷范元琰家园中的笋，范元琰就砍树搭桥方便偷笋的人来往过沟。
English: Someone waded across the ditch to steal the plough from Fan Yuanqi's home. Fan Yuanqi cut down trees and built a bridge to make it easier for the plough thief to cross the ditch.

古文：自是盗者大惭，一乡无复草窃。
现代文：从此那些偷东西的人感到十分羞惭，全乡再没有盗窃的事情发生。
English: From then on, those who stole things felt very ashamed, and there were no more thefts in the whole village.

古文：居常不出城市，独坐如对严宾，见之者莫不改容正色。
现代文：范元琰经常家居，不至闸市，即使一人独坐时也是端庄恭敬，如同面对贵宾，见他的人也都个个神色庄重。
English: Fan Yuanzhang often stays at home and does not go to the city gate. Even when he sits alone, he is dignified and respectful. As if he were facing a distinguished guest, everyone who sees him looks dignified.

古文：沛国刘献深加器异，尝表称之。
现代文：沛国刘献对范元琰深为器重，曾经上表称扬他。
English: Pei Guo Liu Xian holds Fan Yuanxian in high esteem and once praised him.

古文：齐建武二年，始征为安北参军事，不赴。
现代文：齐建武二年，范元琰开始被朝廷征召为官，任命他为安北参军事，范元琰不赴任。
English: In the second year of Qi Jianwu, Fan Yuanxuan began to be called up by the imperial court and appointed as a military officer of Anbei, but Fan Yuanxuan did not take up the post.

古文：天监九年，县令管慧辨上言义行，扬州刺史、临川王宏辟命，不至。
现代文：天监九年，县令管慧辨上书称赞范元琰的德义操行，扬州刺史临川王萧宏用王府名义召范元琰来任官，范元琰不应召。
English: In the 9th year of Tianjing, the county commander Guan Huiban wrote a letter praising Fan Yuanqi's moral conduct. Yangzhou prefectural governor Linchuan Wang Xiaohong called Fan Yuanqi in the name of the royal court to be appointed as an official, but Fan Yuanqi should not be called.

古文：十年，王拜表荐焉，竟未征。
现代文：天监十年，临川王上表举荐范元琰，朝廷竟未征召。
English: Ten years after the appointment of the Heaven's Supervisor, King Linchuan recommended Fan Yuanjun, but the Imperial Court did not conscript him.

古文：其年卒于家，时年七十。
现代文：逭一年，范元琰在家中去世，死时七十岁。
English: A year later, Fan Yuanlu died at home, at the age of seventy.

古文：刘訏，字彦度，平原人也。
现代文：刘訏字彦度，平原人。
English: Liu Xuan, the character Hikando, is from the plains.

古文：父灵真，齐武昌太守。
现代文：他的父亲刘灵真，齐时任武昌太守。
English: His father, Liu Lingzhen, was the governor of Wuchang at the time.

古文：訏幼称纯孝，数岁，父母继卒，訏居丧，哭泣孺慕，几至灭性，赴吊者莫不伤焉。
现代文：刘訏幼时被称为孝心纯厚，几岁的时候，父母相继亡故，他在为父母守丧期间，哀痛哭泣，悼伤思慕，几乎要毁灭自己的生命，去吊唁的人没有一个不为他伤心。
English: When Liu Ye was a child, he was known for his pure filial piety. When he was a few years old, his parents passed away one after another. During the mourning period for his parents, he cried with sorrow, mourned and yearned, and almost wanted to destroy his own life. No one who went to mourn was not sad for him.

古文：后为伯父所养，事伯母及昆姊，孝友笃至，为宗族所称。
现代文：刘訏后来被伯父养育，他事奉伯母、对待兄弟姐妹，十分孝敬和友爱，被本宗族的人称道。
English: Liu Ye was later raised by his uncle. He served his aunt, treated his brothers and sisters with great filial piety and love, and was praised by the people of his clan.

古文：自伤早孤，人有误触其讳者，未尝不感结流涕。
现代文：刘訏因为很早就失去父母而哀伤，有人一时失误触犯了父母的名讳，他就会心情郁结，伤心落泪。
English: Liu Wei was sad because he lost his parents very early. If someone made a mistake and violated his parents' reputation, he would be sad and cry.

古文：长兄洁为之娉妻，克日成婚，訏闻而逃匿，事息乃还。
现代文：长兄刘絮为刘訏聘定女子为妻，已经确定日子成婚，刘纡听到逭事就逃出去藏匿起来，事情平息之后才回家。
English: The eldest brother, Liu Xu, hired a woman to be Liu Yao's wife and had already set a date for the marriage. When Liu Yao heard about this, he ran away and went into hiding. He only returned home after the situation had calmed down.

古文：本州刺史张稷辟为主簿，不就。主者檄召，訏乃挂檄于树而逃。
现代文：本州刺史张稷召他为主簿，他不去就职，主管吏员发下檄令召刘訏，刘訏于是把檄令挂在树上，自己逃开了。
English: He did not go to the inauguration, but the supervisor issued an order to summon Liu Ye. Liu Ye then hung the order on a tree and fled.

古文：訏善玄言，尤精释典。
现代文：刘訏善于谈论道家的玄理，又特别精通佛教的经典。
English: Liu Ye is good at talking about the metaphysics of Taoism, and is particularly proficient in Buddhist classics.

古文：曾与族兄刘高听讲于钟山诸寺，因共卜筑宋熙寺东涧，有终焉之志。
现代文：刘訏曾经和他的族兄刘敌一同在钟山各寺庙中听人讲经，两人就一起在宋熙寺束涧选址建房，萌生了在这儿定居终老的想法。
English: Liu Hui used to listen to sermons in the temples of Zhongshan with his elder brother Liu Ju, and the two of them built a house together at the site of Song Xi Temple in Sokcho, and the idea of settling here for the rest of their lives was born.

古文：天监十七年，卒于高舍，时年三十一。
现代文：天监十七年，刘訏在刘敌的家中去世，死时三十一岁。
English: In the 17th year of Tianjun, Liu Yao died at the home of Liu Ji, at the age of 31.

古文：临终，执高手曰： 气绝便敛，敛毕即埋，灵筵一不须立，勿设飨祀，无求继嗣。 
现代文：临终的时候，刘訏拉着刘敌的手说： 我气绝之后立即就殡殓，殡殓完毕就立即埋葬，灵堂奠筵，全不需设置，不要设置供品祭祀，不要给我立后嗣。 
English: On his deathbed, Liu Ye held Liu Bei's hand and said, "After I die, I will be buried immediately. After the funeral, I will be buried immediately. There is no need to set up a memorial hall, no need to set up offerings, and no need to give me an heir.

古文：高从而行之。
现代文：刘敌全都依照施行。
English: All of Liu's enemies were executed accordingly.

古文：宗人至友相与刊石立铭，谥曰玄贞处士。
现代文：刘訏的同宗之人和他的好友为他在石碑上刻写铭文，赠他谧号为玄贞处士。
English: Members of Liu Ye's family and his friends inscribed an inscription for him on a stone monument, giving him the nickname Xuanzhen.

古文：刘高，字士光，訏族兄也。
现代文：刘献字士光，他是訏族的族兄。
English: Liu Xianzhi Guang, he is the elder brother of the Yi people.

古文：祖乘民，宋冀州刺史；父闻慰，齐正员郎。
现代文：刘献的祖父刘乘民，宋时任冀州刺史；父亲刘闻慰，齐时为正员郎。
English: Liu Xian's grandfather, Liu Xianmin, was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province during the Song Dynasty; his father, Liu Wenyu, was a high-ranking official during the Qi Dynasty.

古文：世为二千石，皆有清名。
现代文：父子相继担任二千石之职，两人都有清美的声誉。
English: Father and son successively held the post of two thousand stone, and both of them had a reputation for beauty.

古文：高幼有识慧，四岁丧父，与群儿同处，独不戏弄。
现代文：刘献幼年时就聪慧而有见识。他四岁的时候，父亲去世了。与儿童们在一起，就他一个人不玩耍。
English: When Liu Xian was a child, he was smart and insightful. When he was four years old, his father died. When he was with children, he didn't play alone.

古文：六岁诵《论语》、《毛诗》，意所不解，便能问难。
现代文：刘献六岁就能背诵《论语》、《毛诗》，不理解文意的地方，他也能提出问题，并相与辩驳。
English: At the age of six, Liu Xian could recite "Analects of Confucius" and "Mao Poems" by heart. Where he did not understand the meaning of the text, he could also ask questions and argue with it.

古文：十一，读《庄子·逍遥篇》，曰： 此可解耳。 
现代文：十一岁时，刘献读《庄子逍遥篇》，他说： 逭文章我能解说了。 
English: At the age of eleven, Liu read Zhuang Zi Xuan Yu to his class. He said, "I can explain this article.

古文：客因问之，随问而答，皆有情理，家人每异之。
现代文：有人就向他提问，他针对问题随口回答，说法也都合情合理，家中人都常为此而惊异。
English: People would ask him questions, and he would answer them off-the-cuff in a way that made sense, often to the surprise of his family.

古文：及长，博学有文才，不娶不仕，与族弟訏并隐居求志，遨游林泽，以山水书籍相娱而已。
现代文：长大成人之后，刘敌学问渊博，有文才。他不娶妻，不出仕，和族弟刘訏一起隐居以实现自己的追求，遨游山林水泽，在山水、书籍当中追求乐趣。
English: After he became an adult, Liu Chu was well-read and literate. He did not marry, did not serve, and lived in seclusion with his younger brother Liu Yao to pursue his own pursuits. He traveled to mountains, forests, and lakes, and pursued fun in the mountains, rivers, and books.

古文：常欲避人世，以母老不忍违离，每随兄霁、杳从宦。
现代文：刘敌常想脱离尘世，但因为母亲年老而不忍离开，因此常常随着到兄长刘霁、型查做官的任所。
English: Liu Ju often wanted to get away from the world, but because his mother was too old to leave, he often followed his elder brother, Liu Ye, to work as a government official.

古文：少时好施，务周人之急，人或遗之，亦不距也。
现代文：型趑年轻时喜欢施舍，遇上别人有急难，他一定给予周济，有人赠送东西给他，他也不拒绝。
English: When he was young, he liked to give alms. If someone was in dire straits, he would certainly give them money. If someone gave him a gift, he would not refuse it.

古文：久而叹曰： 受人者必报，不则有愧于人。
现代文：久而久之，他感叹道： 接受别人的东西一定要回报，不然的话，就会感到有愧于人。
English: Over time, he lamented: Accepting other people's things must be reciprocated, otherwise, you will feel ashamed of yourself.

古文：吾固无以报人，岂可常有愧乎？ 
现代文：我本来就没有能力回报别人，哪能让自己常常心中有愧呢? 
English: I don't have the ability to repay others. How can I make myself feel guilty all the time?

古文：天监十七年，无何而著《革终论》。
现代文：没过多久，刘献着《革终论》，主张改变丧葬习俗，时间是天监十七年。论中说：关于生死的事情，圣人很少谈及。
English: Not long after, Liu dedicated "The End of the Revolution" to Wang, advocating a change in funeral customs. The time was the seventeenth year of the celestial prison. In the essay, he said, "Saints rarely talk about matters of life and death.

古文：其辞曰：死生之事，圣人罕言之矣。孔子曰： 精气为物，游魂为变，知鬼神之情状，与天地相似而不违。 
现代文：孔子说： 精灵之气聚合成为人，魂魄游散就会发生变化，由此知道鬼神的情形与天地相似而不背离。 
English: Confucius said, "When the spirit of a genie gathers together and becomes a human being, the wandering soul will change. From this, we know that the situation of ghosts and gods is similar to that of heaven and earth, and does not deviate from it.

古文：其言约，其旨妙，其事隐，其意深，未可以臆断，难得而精核，聊肆狂瞽，请试言之。
现代文：他的言辞简约，话的主旨精妙，他讲的事情很精深，话的含意很玄妙，不可以凭猜测来推断，也很难仔细考察，我姑且凭藉我的愚妄无知，放胆试着说说遣方面的事情。
English: His words are concise, the essence of his words is exquisite, the things he said are profound, the meaning of his words is very subtle, it is impossible to deduce by guessing, and it is difficult to examine carefully. I dare to try to talk about things in the way of talking with my foolish ignorance.

古文：夫形虑合而为生，魂质离而称死；合则起动，离则休寂。
现代文：形体和精神结合就是生，精神和形体分离就称为死，两者结合就会言语动作，两者分离那就静寂无声。
English: The union of form and spirit is life, the separation of spirit and form is called death, the union of the two is speech and action, and the separation of the two is silence.

古文：当其动也，人皆知其神；及其寂也，物莫测其所趣。
现代文：在有言语动作的时候，人们都知道精神的表现；在静寂无声的时候，就没有人能知道精神的去向。
English: When there is verbal action, people know the performance of the spirit; when there is silence, no one can know the direction of the spirit.

古文：皆知则不言而义显，莫测则逾辩而理微。
现代文：人人都知道，那即使不说道理也就很明白，没有人知道，那就愈解说而道理愈玄妙。
English: Everyone knows that it is clear even if it is not reasoned, and no one knows that the more it is explained, the more mysterious it is.

古文：是以勋、华旷而莫陈，姬、孔抑而不说，前达往贤，互生异见。
现代文：因此，以勋、华旷、莫陈，姬、孔抑都避开这个问题不加评说，前代的贤达人士，也往往产生不同的见解。
English: Therefore, Yixun, Hua Kuang, Mo Chen, Ji, and Kong Yan all avoided this issue without comment, and the sages of the previous generation often had different opinions.

古文：季札云： 骨肉归于土，魂气无不之。 
现代文：季札说： 人死之后，骨肉回归土中，魂魄处处可去。 
English: Ji Zha said: After death, the bones and flesh return to the soil, and the soul can go everywhere.

古文：庄周云： 生为徭役，死为休息。 
现代文：庄周说： 生如同服徭役，死好比静止不动。 
English: Zhuang Zhou said: "Life is like doing military service, and death is like standing still.

古文：寻此二说，如或相反。
现代文：探究遣两种说法，似乎观点相反。
English: Examining the two statements, it seems that the opposite view prevails.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：气无不之，神有也；死为休息，神无也。
现代文：魂魄处处可去，是认为精神存在；死好比静止不动，是认为精神不存在。
English: The soul can go everywhere, which means that the spirit exists; death is like standing still, which means that the spirit does not exist.

古文：原宪云： 夏后氏用明器示民无知也；殷人用祭器，示人有知也；周人兼用之，示民疑也。 
现代文：原宪说： 夏后氏祭送死人用明器，这是明白地告诉百姓，人死后没有知觉。殷人祭送死人用祭器，这是明白地告诉百姓，人死后还有知觉。
English: The original constitution said: Xia Guo's festival sends the dead with a bright vessel, which clearly tells the people that there is no consciousness after death. Yin people's festival sends the dead with a sacrificial vessel, which clearly tells the people that there is consciousness after death.

古文：考之记籍，验之前志，有无之辩，不可历言。
现代文：周人祭送死人兼用明器和祭器，这是告诉百姓，对人死后有无知觉尚疑惑不定，未能确定。 
English: The Zhou Ren Festival sends the dead with both a light and a sacrificial vessel. This is to tell the people that there is still doubt and uncertainty about whether there is ignorance after death, and it cannot be determined.

古文：若稽诸内教，判乎释部，则诸子之言可寻，三代之礼无越。
现代文：考察古书典籍、前代的史志，关于死后有知无知的争论，不能一一尽言。假若根据佛教教义来查核，依据佛教经典来判断，那么以上诸人的言论可以找到依据，三代的礼法并没有什么失误。
English: An examination of ancient books and classics, the history of previous generations, and the debate about knowledge and ignorance after death cannot be exhausted. If we check according to Buddhist teachings and judge according to Buddhist classics, then the statements of the above people can be found. There is no mistake in the etiquette of the three generations.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：神为生本，形为生具。死者神离此具，而即非彼具也。
现代文：精神是生的根本，形体是生的外壳，死去之后精神离开了遣外壳，而依附这外壳以外的其他物体。
English: The spirit is the basis of life, the body is the shell of life. After death, the spirit leaves the shell and attaches to other objects outside the shell.

古文：虽死者不可复反，而精灵递变，未尝灭绝。
现代文：虽然死去的人不能复生，但精神发生演变，未曾灭绝。
English: Although the dead cannot be brought back to life, the spirit has evolved and has not become extinct.

古文：当其离此之日，识用廓然，故夏后明器，示其弗反。
现代文：在精神离开形体的时候，人的见识才能全都荡然无存，所以夏后氏祭送死人用明器，是表示精神不会再回来。
English: When the spirit leaves the body, all of a person's insight is lost, so the Hachiou Ujisai sends the dead with a lighted vessel, indicating that the spirit will not return.

古文：即彼之时，魂灵知灭，故殷人祭器，显其犹存。
现代文：依附于其他物体的时候，原来这个人的精神知觉也都全部失去，所以殷人祭送死人用祭器，是要显示精神依然存在。
English: When attached to other objects, originally this person's spiritual awareness is also completely lost, so in human sacrifice, the dead person is sent with a sacrificial vessel to show that the spirit still exists.

古文：不存则合乎庄周，犹存则同乎季札，各得一隅，无伤厥义。
现代文：精神不会返回的说法和庄周的观点一致，精神依然存在的说法和季札的观点一致，各抓住了一个方面，并不损害关于生死的认识。
English: The view that the spirit will not return is consistent with the view of Zhuang Zhou, and the view that the spirit still exists is consistent with the view of Ji Fata. Each grasps one aspect, and does not damage the understanding of life and death.

古文：设其实也，则亦无，故周人有兼用之礼，尼父发游魂之唱，不其然乎？
现代文：如果从实质上来说，那么人死后都是无知觉，所以周人祭送死人有兼用明器、祭器的礼仪，孔丘提出魂魄游散的说法，不正是这样的吗!
English: If from the essence, then people are unconscious after death, so the Zhou Ren Festival to send the dead people have the etiquette of using both the revealing tool and the sacrificial tool. Confucius put forward the theory that the soul wanders. Isn't this exactly the case!

古文：若废偏携之论，探中途之旨，则不仁不智之讥，于是乎可息。
现代文：假如抛弃偏执一端的说法，探寻两相折衷的见解，那么互相指责不仁不智的言论，从此就可以平息了。
English: If we discard the paranoid side of the argument and explore the views of compromise between the two sides, then the mutual accusations of unkindness and unintelligence can be calmed down.

古文：夫形也者，无知之质也；神也者，有知之性也。
现代文：形体是没有知觉的外壳，精神是有知觉的天性。
English: The body is an insentient shell, the spirit is a sentient nature.

古文：有知不独存，依无知以自立，故形之于神，逆旅之馆耳。
现代文：精神有知觉但不能单独存在，衹有依附没有知觉的形体才能自立。所以形体对于精神，就如同旅途中的旅馆。
English: The spirit is sentient but cannot exist alone. It can only stand on its own if it is attached to a non-sentient form. Therefore, for the spirit, the form is like a hotel on a journey.

古文：及其死也，神去此而适彼也。
现代文：到人死的时候，人的精神离开这个旅馆而去别的地方。
English: When you die, your spirit leaves this hotel and goes somewhere else.

古文：神已去此，馆何用存？
现代文：精神已经离开了，旅馆凭什么还存留?
English: The spirit has left, so why does the hotel still exist?

古文：速朽得理也。
现代文：人死之后薄葬而求速朽的主张合乎道理。
English: The idea of a short burial after death in order to hasten death is reasonable.

古文：神已适彼，祭何所祭？
现代文：精神已经到了别的地方，那祭祀的对象是什么?
English: The spirit has gone elsewhere, so what is the object of the sacrifice?

古文：祭则失理。
现代文：祭祀就违背了道理。
English: Sacrifices are contrary to reason.

古文：而姬、孔之教不然者，其有以乎！
现代文：但周公、孔子的训导不是这样，逭恐怕另有原因吧!
English: However, Zhou Gong and Confucius' teachings are not like this. I'm afraid there is another reason!

古文：盖礼乐之兴，出于浇薄，俎豆缀兆，生于俗弊。
现代文：大概是因为礼乐制度的建立，是在民风浇薄的时代；祭器的使用，舞步的规定，是在鄙陋民俗中产生。
English: Probably because the establishment of the ritual music system was in an era when folk customs were weak; the use of sacrificial instruments and the stipulation of dance steps were born in vulgar folk customs.

古文：施灵筵，陈棺椁，设馈奠，建丘陇，盖欲令孝子有追思之地耳，夫何补于已迁之神乎？
现代文：设置灵筵，陈放棺椁，供奉奠品，建造坟墓，都是为了想让孝子有追念思慕已故亲人的场所，这对于已经离开的精神又有什么益处呢?
English: The setting up of the casket, the placing of the coffin, the offering of the votive offerings, and the construction of the grave are all for the purpose of giving the filial son a place to remember and think about the deceased relative. What good is this for the departed spirit?

古文：故上古衣之以薪，弃之中野，可谓尊卢、赫胥、皇雄、炎帝蹈于失理哉？
现代文：所以上古时代，人死之后衹是用柴草包裹，然后抛弃在野外，能够说尊卢氏、赫胥氏、皇雄氏、炎帝做出了违背事理的事情吗?
English: Therefore, in ancient times, after a person died, the cocoon was wrapped in firewood and then abandoned in the open. Can it be said that the Lu clan, the Hsiang clan, the Hsiung clan, and the Yan emperor did something against reason?

古文：是以子羽沉川，汉伯方圹，文楚黄壤，士安麻索。
现代文：因此澹台子羽把儿子尸体沉入江中进行水葬，景漠伯衹要求葬在土穴中，赵文楚留下遣命，在棺中铺上黄土，皇甫士安衹要用麻索捆扎尸体。
English: Therefore, Zi Yu sank his son's body into the river for water burial, Jingmo Boqi requested to be buried in an earthen pit, Zhao Wenchu left the death notice and covered the coffin with loess, and the imperial official An Qi wanted to tie up the body with a rope.

古文：此四子者，得理也，忘教也。
现代文：这四位先生，可算是掌握了天理，忘记了教化。
English: These four gentlemen may be said to have grasped the principles of heaven, but they have forgotten how to be enlightened.

古文：若从四子而游，则平生之志得矣。
现代文：我假如能够追随这四位先生，那么我平生的志向算是实现了。
English: If I can follow these four gentlemen, then my lifelong ambition will be fulfilled.

古文：然积习生常，难卒改革，一朝肆志，傥不见从。
现代文：但是多年的习俗相传已久，丧葬的规矩很难一下子改变，突然间要完全顺应自己的想法办事，就担心亲人们出于爱心不顺从我。
English: But many years of customs have been passed down for a long time, funeral rules are difficult to change at once, and suddenly I have to fully comply with my own ideas, I am worried that my loved ones will not obey me out of love.

古文：今欲剪截烦厚，务存俭易；进不裸尸，退异常俗；不伤存者之念，有合至人之道。
现代文：现在我衹想要除去烦琐的礼仪，革除厚葬的习俗，丧事一定要节俭，礼仪要简易，不要那么激进，裸尸而葬，也不要过于守旧，要做到和固有的习俗有区别，既不伤害世上亲人的感情，也要符合道德高超的至人的准则。
English: Now I want to get rid of the cumbersome etiquette, get rid of the custom of heavy burial, the funeral must be frugal, the etiquette should be simple, not so radical, buried naked, and not too conservative, to be different from the inherent customs, neither hurt the feelings of loved ones in the world, but also meet the standards of moral excellence.

古文：孔子云： 敛首足形，还葬而无椁。 
现代文：孔子说： 死了之后把身体包殓起来，运回家乡安葬，有棺而无椁。 
English: Confucius said: After death, the body should be wrapped up, transported back to the hometown for burial, and the coffin should be intact.

古文：斯亦贫者之礼也，余何陋焉？
现代文：遣也是贫穷之家的丧事礼仪，我怎么会把这种礼仪看作简陋呢?
English: How could I regard this as a poor form of etiquette when it is also the funeral etiquette of a poor family?

古文：且张奂止用幅巾，王肃唯盥手足，范冉殓毕便葬，奚珍无设筵几，文度故舟为椁，子廉牛车载柩，叔起诫绝坟陇，康成使无卜吉。
现代文：况且张奂留下遣言，祇要用幅巾为自己包裹尸身，王肃遗言衹要盥洗手足，范冉遣言穿衣入殓之礼完毕就立即下葬，奚珍留下遣言，不要在灵前设置几筵，塞仅遗言衹要用旧船作棺椁，何子廉遗言衹要用牛车装运自己的灵柩，叔起遗言告诫子孙，不要给自己建造坟墓，郑康成遗言不要用卜筮的方法选择葬地。
English: Moreover, Zhang Qian left a message saying that the only thing to do was to wrap the body in a cloth. Wang Su left a message saying that the body should be washed. Fan Ran left a message saying that the body should be dressed and buried immediately after the burial ceremony. Zou Zhen left a message saying that several coffins should not be placed in front of the body. Zai Jian left a message saying that the coffin should be made of an old ship. He Zi Lian left a message saying that the coffin should be transported by ox cart. He left a message warning his children and grandchildren not to build a tomb for themselves. Zheng Kangcheng left a message saying that the

古文：此数公者，尚或如之；况于吾人，而当华泰！
现代文：以上这几位先辈，尚且衹要求简易的葬礼，更何况像我们这样的人，怎么能够追求奢华的葬礼呢!
English: How is it possible for the above-mentioned ancestors to ask for a simple funeral, and how is it possible for people like us to ask for a luxurious funeral?

古文：今欲仿佛景行，以为轨则，傥合中庸之道，庶免徒费之讥。
现代文：现在我想仿效先贤的高尚德行，把他们的行动作为自己的准则，或许可以符合中庸之道，希望能够免受白白浪费的批评。
English: Now I want to emulate the noble deeds of the sages and take their actions as my own. Perhaps I can conform to the middle way and hope to be able to avoid the criticism of waste.

古文：气绝不须复魂，盥洗而敛。以一千钱市治棺、单故裙衫、衣巾枕履。
现代文：我气绝之后不要举行招魂的仪式，盥洗尸身之后就可入殓，衹要用一千钱备办棺木，购买普通的裙衫、衣巾枕头鞋子等。
English: Don't hold a soul-winning ceremony after I pass away. After washing the corpse, it can be buried. I need to prepare a coffin with a thousand money, buy ordinary skirts, towels, pillows, shoes and so on.

古文：此外送往之具，棺中常物，及余阁之祭，一不得有所施。
现代文：除此之外，其他祭送死者的物件，棺中随葬的用具，以及下葬之前设奠祭祀之物，全都用不着准备。
English: In addition to this, there is no need to prepare any other objects to be offered to the deceased, the equipment to be buried with the coffin, and the objects to be offered as a memorial before the burial.

古文：世多信李、彭之言，可谓惑矣。
现代文：世人多相信彭祖、李耳的说法，可以算是糊涂了。
English: Many people in the world believe in the sayings of Peng Zu and Li Er, which can be regarded as being confused.

古文：余以孔、释为师，差无此惑。
现代文：我以孔子、佛祖为师，可以免除这种困惑。
English: With Confucius and Buddha as my teachers, I can get rid of this confusion.

古文：敛讫，载以露车，归于旧山，随得一地，地足为坎，坎足容棺，不须砖甓，不劳封树，勿设祭飨，勿置几筵，无用茅君之虚座，伯夷之杅水。
现代文：尸身殡殓之后，用无帷盖的车子装运棺木，归葬于故乡，随意找一块地，这块地可以挖个坑，坑能容得下棺木就行了。不要用砖瓦砌造墓穴，不要堆土为坟，植树为饰，不要陈设供品祭祀，不要设置几筵。用不着像对茅君那样，设虚座供奉；也不要像对伯夷那样，用杯水祭祀。
English: After the body is buried, the coffin is transported by a car without a curtain to be buried in the hometown. Feel free to find a piece of land, this land can be dug into a pit, the pit can accommodate the coffin. Do not use bricks and mortar to build a grave, do not pile up soil for the grave, plant trees for decoration, do not display offerings, do not set up several urns. There is no need to set up an empty seat for offering, as in the case of Mao Jun; do not use a glass of water for sacrifice, as in the case of Bo Yi.

古文：其蒸尝继嗣，言象所绝，事止余身，无伤世教。
现代文：至于以后后代子孙的祭祀，我这裹概不提及，上面说的事情，祇用在我一人身上，不要因为这而影响教化。
English: As for the sacrificial rites of future generations, I will not mention this at all. The things I said above are only applicable to me. Don't let this affect your enlightenment.

古文：家人长幼，内外姻戚，凡厥友朋，爰及寓所，咸愿成余之志，幸勿夺之。
现代文：家中的成人幼孩，内外亲属，以及朋友，衹要来到我的寓所，希望都能够促成我的遗愿实现，希望不要违背我的愿望。
English: My adult children, relatives at home and abroad, as well as friends, all want to come to my apartment, hoping to be able to contribute to the realization of my last wish, hoping not to violate my wishes.

古文：明年疾卒，时年三十二。
现代文：第二年刘敌就因病去世，死时三十二岁。
English: The following year, Liu Qi died of illness at the age of thirty-two.

古文：高幼时尝独坐空室，有一老公至门，谓高曰： 心力勇猛，能精死生；但不得久滞一方耳。 
现代文：刘献幼年时曾经单独坐在一间空房裹，有一位老者到房中，对刘献说： 你的才智强于寻常之人，能够精通死生之道，祇是不能长久待在一个地方罢了。 
English: When Liu Xian was a child, he used to sit alone in an empty room. An old man came to the room and said to Liu Xian, "Your talent is stronger than that of ordinary people. You can master the way of life and death, but you can't stay in one place for a long time."

古文：因弹指而去。
现代文：说完就忽然间消失了。
English: After he finished speaking, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：高既长，精心学佛。
现代文：刘献长大成人之后，精心学习佛学。
English: After Liu Xian became an adult, he diligently studied Buddhism.

古文：有道人释宝志者，时人莫测也，遇高于兴皇寺，惊起曰： 隐居学道，清净登佛。 
现代文：有个僧人释宝志，当时没有人能了解他。释实志在兴皇寺遇见刘敌，惊异地对刘歒说： 隐居学道，清静登佛。 
English: There was a monk named Shih Pao Zhi, but no one could understand him at the time. Shih Shih Zhi met Liu Ji at Xinghuang Temple and said to Liu Yao in surprise: "Study Buddhism in seclusion and ascend the Buddha in peace."

古文：如此三说。
现代文：一连说了三遍。
English: He said it three times in a row.

古文：高未死之春，有人为其庭中栽柿，高谓兄子弇曰： 吾不见此实，尔其勿言。 
现代文：刘敌将要死的那年春天，有人在他的庭院内种上柿子树。刘敌对他兄长之子刘弁说： 我见不到这柿树结果，希望你不要对别人说。 
English: In the spring of the year that Liu Qi was going to die, someone planted a persimmon tree in his courtyard. Liu Qi said to his brother's son Liu Ben: I can't see the result of this persimmon tree, I hope you don't tell others.

古文：至秋而亡，人以为知命。
现代文：到秋天刘歒就去世了。当时人都认为刘敌能预先知道命运。
English: By the autumn, Liu Qi had passed away. At that time, people thought that Liu Qi could know his fate in advance.

古文：亲故诔其行迹，谥曰贞节处士。
现代文：亲戚朋友们陈述刘敌的德行业绩，给他确定谧号为贞节处士。
English: Relatives and friends reported Liu Qi's moral performance and gave him the nickname of "Chastity Officer."

古文：庾诜，字彦宝，新野人也。
现代文：庾诜字彦宝，新野人。
English: The character of Hikobo, a new wildling, appears.

古文：幼聪警笃学，经史百家无不该综，纬候书射，棋釐机巧，并一时之绝。
现代文：他从小聪明伶俐，酷爱学习。经史百家，没有一样不全面了解，对纬书、射御六书、下棋计数、巧思的技艺，全都超过当时之人。
English: He was bright and eager to learn from an early age. He had a comprehensive understanding of hundreds of books on history, and his skills in reading, archery, chess counting, and ingenuity were all superior to those of his contemporaries.

古文：而性托夷简，特爱林泉。
现代文：但戏担生性平易质朴，特别喜爱山林泉石。
English: However, the play's protagonists are simple and rustic, especially fond of mountains, forests and hot springs.

古文：十亩之宅，山池居半。
现代文：他家住宅占地十亩，而山石、池塘占了一半。
English: His family home covers an area of ten mu, while the mountains, ponds and lakes account for half of it.

古文：蔬食弊衣，不治产业。
现代文：庾诜平素吃蔬食，穿旧衣，不置办家产。
English: He is a vegetarian, eats vegetables, wears old clothes, and does not own any household goods.

古文：尝乘舟从田舍还，载米一百五十石，有人寄载三十石。
现代文：曾有一次，庾说乘船从农舍回家，船上装载着一百五十石米，有个人在船上托载三十斛米。
English: Once upon a time, Zou said that he took a boat from the farmhouse to go home. The boat was loaded with one hundred and fifty kilos of rice, and there was a person on board who was carrying thirty bushels of rice.

古文：既至宅，寄载者曰： 君三十斛，我百五十石。 
现代文：回到家之后，托载米的人说： 你的米是三十斛，我托载的米是一百五十石。 
English: After returning home, the rice porter said, "Your rice is thirty monme, and the rice I'm carrying is one hundred and fifty koku.

古文：诜默然不言，恣其取足。
现代文：庾说默不作声，听任他恣意取足一百五十石米。
English: The baboon said nothing, and allowed him to take as much as he wanted.

古文：邻人有被诬为盗者，被治劾，妄款，诜矜之，乃以书质钱二万，令门生诈为其亲，代之酬备。
现代文：庾说有个邻人被诬陷为盗贼，被收捕定罪，遣邻人也被迫供认。庾说同情逭邻人的遭遇，于是他用自己的书作抵押，筹得二万钱，叫自己的门生出面，假称是邻人的亲戚，为邻人赔偿失物。
English: Zou said that a neighbor was framed as a thief, arrested and convicted, and his neighbor was forced to confess. Zou said that he sympathized with the plight of his neighbor, so he used his book as collateral, raised twenty thousand dollars, and asked his protégé to come forward, pretending to be a relative of the neighbor, to compensate the lost property for the neighbor.

古文：邻人获免，谢诜，诜曰： 吾矜天下无辜，岂期谢也。 
现代文：邻人被免罪，来向庾说道谢，庾诜说： 我同情天下无辜而受罚的人，哪裹会期望别人的道谢? 
English: When his neighbor was exonerated, he came to thank Gong. Gong said, "I sympathize with all the innocent people in the world who have been punished. Who would expect thanks from others?

古文：其行多如此类。
现代文：庾说像遣一类的言行很多。
English: There are a lot of words and deeds of the kind that are said to be insulting.

古文：高祖少与诜善，雅推重之。
现代文：高祖年轻时和豌霪交情很好，平素十分推重庾诜。
English: When Gao Zu was young, he had a good relationship with his mother, and he always put a lot of emphasis on her.

古文：及起义，署为平西府记室参军，诜不屈。
现代文：高祖组织义兵之后，任命庾诜为平西府记室参军，庾诜不肯改变不图仕宦的志向，没有接受任命。
English: After Gao Zu organized the volunteer soldiers, he appointed Zou to join the army as the record office of Pingxi Prefecture. Zou refused to change his intention of not trying to serve Zou, and did not accept the appointment.

古文：平生少所游狎，河东柳恽欲与之交，诜距而不纳。
现代文：庾诜干生很少舆人交游往来，河东柳惮想要和彪走交往，庾诜拒绝，不肯接钠他。
English: Zou Gansheng rarely interacted with the public. Hedong Liu Shuo wanted to interact with Biao, but Zou refused to meet him.

古文：后湘东王临荆州，板为镇西府记室参军，不就。
现代文：用王府名义任命庾诜为镇西府记室参军，庾诜不去赴任。
English: In the name of the royal government, he was appointed to join the army as the secretary of Zhenxi prefecture, but he did not go to the post.

古文：普通中，诏曰： 明扬振滞，为政所先；旌贤求士，梦伫斯急。
现代文：普通年间，皇上下韶说： 举拔久未任用的贤人，是施政治国的首要事情；表彰贤人，寻求贤士，是我日夜操心的当务之急。
English: In an ordinary year, the emperor said: "Promoting sages who have not been appointed for a long time is the first thing to do in a political country; commending sages and seeking sages is my top priority.

古文：新野庾诜，止足栖退，自事却扫，经史文艺，多所贯习；颍川庾承先，学通黄、老，该涉释教；并不竞不营，安兹枯槁，可以镇躁敦俗。
现代文：新野庾诜，退隐不仕，闭门谢客，经史文艺，多数精通。颖川庾诜先精通黄、老之学，博览佛教之书。逭两人都不逐利不营私，安于贫困的生活，他们这种德行可以抑制狡诈之人，使民风淳厚质朴。
English: Niino Shizuku, retiring but not retiring, thanking guests behind closed doors, versed in most of the history, literature and art. Yingchuan Shizuku was the first to be proficient in the study of Huang and Lao, and was well versed in Buddhist books. Both of them did not pursue profit or private interests, and were content to live in poverty. This virtue of theirs can restrain the cunning and make the folk style pure and simple.

古文：诜可黄门侍郎，承先可中书侍郎。
现代文：尘说应当任黄门侍郎，庾承先应当任中书侍郎。
English: Dust said that he should be appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and that he should be appointed as the First Secretary's chamberlain.

古文：勒州县时加敦遣，庶能屈志，方冀盐梅。 
现代文：命令他们所在州县随时准备恭送他们入朝，希望他们能改变不肯出仕的志向，将期待他们担负治理国家的重任。 
English: He ordered their prefectures and counties to be ready to escort them to the DPRK at any time, hoping that they can change their unwillingness to serve, and expecting them to shoulder the heavy responsibility of governing the country.

古文：诜称疾不赴。
现代文：庾诡称说自己有病，不肯赴任。
English: Zou Qi said that he was ill and refused to take up the post.

古文：晚年以后，尤遵释教。宅内立道场，环绕礼忏，六时不辍。
现代文：晚年之后，庾诜特别尊奉佛教，他在自己宅院之内设立道场诵经礼拜，每天环绕佛菩萨拜忏，昼夜不停。
English: After his old age, Zou especially revered Buddhism. He set up a dojo for chanting and worshiping in his home, and worshipped around Buddhas and Bodhisattvas every day, day and night.

古文：诵《法华经》，每日一遍。
现代文：他每天诵读《法华经》一遍。
English: He recites the Lotus Sutra once a day.

古文：后夜中忽见一道人，自称愿公，容止甚异，呼诜为上行先生，授香而去。
现代文：后来一天夜晚，庾诜忽然看见一个僧人，逭僧人自称为盐公，像貌举止都非常特别，他称呼庾说为匕行先生，把香交给厘邈就离开了。
English: Later, one night, Zou suddenly saw a monk. The monk called himself Yan Gong, and his appearance and demeanor were very special. He called Zou as Mr. Min Xing, handed the incense to Li Zou, and left.

古文：中大通四年，因昼寝，忽惊觉曰： 愿公复来，不可久住。 
现代文：中大通四年，庾诜在白天午睡时突然惊醒说： 愿公又来了，我不能再久住了。 
English: In the fourth year of middle and high school, Zou suddenly woke up during a daytime nap and said: "May the Lord come again, I can't stay any longer."

古文：颜色不变，言终而卒，时年七十八。
现代文：他面色没有发生变化，讲完话就去世了，死时七十八岁。
English: There was no change in his countenance, and when he had finished speaking, he died at the age of seventy-eight.

古文：举室咸闻空中唱 上行先生已生弥净域矣 。
现代文：他去世的时候，全家人都听见空中有人呼叫说： 上行先生已经在西方极乐净土投生了。 
English: At the time of his death, the whole family heard someone calling from the sky, "Mr. Shanghang has been reborn in the Western Pure Land of Bliss."

古文：高祖闻而下诏曰： 旌善表行，前王所敦。
现代文：高祖听到庾说去世的消息，下诏说： 表彰善行，弘扬美好的德行，是前代帝王注重的事情。
English: When Gaozu heard the news of Zou's death, he issued the following edict: "Celebrating good deeds and promoting good morals are things that previous emperors paid attention to.

古文：新野庾诜，荆山珠玉，江陵杞梓，静侯南度，固有名德，独贞苦节，孤芳素履。
现代文：新野庾诜，如同荆山的美珠宝玉，如同江陵的杞梓良材，他好像是我们南方的靖侯，本来就有盛名和美德，他又独自贞守节操，高洁绝俗，质朴无华，清白自处。
English: Xinwu Yao, like the beautiful jewel jade of Jing Mountain, like the high-quality jade of Jiangling, he seems to be the Jing Hou of our south, he originally had fame and virtue, and he alone adhered to the discipline, clean and pure, simple and unadorned, pure and innocent.

古文：奄随运往，恻怆于怀。宜谥贞节处士，以显高烈。 
现代文：突然间命运把他带离人世，我心中十分凄恻悲伤。应当赠给庾说谧号为贞节处士，以表彰他的清高节操。 
English: Suddenly fate took him away from the world, and my heart is very sad. He should be given the title of "Chastity Officer" in recognition of his high integrity.

古文：诜所撰《帝历》二十卷、《易林》二十卷、续伍端休《江陵记》一卷、《晋朝杂事》五卷、《总抄》八十卷，行于世。
现代文：庾诜撰写的《帝历》二十卷、《易林》二十卷、续伍端休《江陵记》一卷、《晋朝杂事》五卷、《总抄》八十卷，都在世上流传。
English: Twenty volumes of "Imperial Calendar," twenty volumes of "Yilin," one volume of "Jiangling Ji," five volumes of "Jin Dynasty Miscellaneous Matters" and eighty volumes of "General Abstract" all circulated around the world.

古文：子曼倩，字世华，亦早有令誉。
现代文：庾诜之子庾曼倩，字世华，也很早就有美好的声誉。
English: Zou's son, Zou Man Zou, known as Zi Hua, also had a good reputation early on.

古文：世祖在荆州，辟为主簿，迁中录事。
现代文：世祖在荆州时，召庾曼倩任主簿，迁任中绿事。
English: When the ancestor was in Jingzhou, he called Zou Mengyao to be the chief accountant, and he was transferred to Zhonglu.

古文：每出，世祖常目送之，谓刘之遴曰： 荆南信多君子，虽美归田凤，清属桓阶，赏德标奇，未过此子。 
现代文：庾曼倩每次从世祖府中离去，世祖常常目送他。世祖对刘之遴说： 荆南真的有很多君子，虽然容仪端庄有后漠的田凤，见识卓越数魏国的桓阶，但德堪褒赏、风范突出，没有超过逭人的。 
English: Whenever Yao Mengyao left the ancestral residence, the ancestor often saw him off. The ancestor said to Liu Zhiban: Jingnan really has a lot of gentlemen, although the demeanor is dignified, there are Tianfeng in the back desert, and I have seen an outstanding number of Wei countries, but the virtue is rewarded, the demeanor is outstanding, and it does not exceed that of Yao people.

古文：后转谘议参军。
现代文：庾曼倩后来转任谘议参军。
English: Later, Yu Mengyao was transferred to an advisory position to join the army.

古文：所著《丧服仪》、《文字体例》、《庄老义疏》，注《算经》及《七曜历术》，并所制文章，凡九十五卷。
现代文：庾曼倩着的懊服仪》、《文字体例》、《庄老义疏》，注释的《算经》和《七曜历术》，和他所写的文章，一共九十五卷。
English: There are a total of ninety-five volumes, including the well-known "Choufu Yi," "Text Style," "Zhuo Lao Yi Shu," the annotated "Analects of Confucius" and "Lunar Calendar," as well as the articles he wrote.

古文：子季才，有学行。
现代文：庾曼倩之子庾季才，学问、德行都很好。
English: He is the son of a mandarin ducks. He is a good student and has a good moral character.

古文：承圣中，仕至中书侍郎。
现代文：承圣年间，他官职升到中书侍郎。
English: During the year of his consecration, he was promoted to the official position of chusho-sajiro.

古文：江陵陷，随例入关。
现代文：江陵被周攻陷，庾季才按惯例迁入关。
English: Gangneung was conquered by Zhou, and it was not until the following year that the capital was moved to Guan, as was customary.

古文：张孝秀，字文逸，南阳宛人也。
现代文：张孝秀字文逸，南阳宛人。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiu is a well-spoken person from Nanyang.

古文：少仕州为治中从事史。
现代文：年轻时，他在州中任治中从事史。
English: As a young man, he studied history as a state middle school student.

古文：遭母忧，服阕，为建安王别驾。
现代文：遇上母亲去世而离职守丧。服丧期满，他任建安王别驾。
English: When his mother died, he left his post to attend her funeral. When the mourning period was over, he was appointed as the King of Jian'an.

古文：顷之，遂去职归山，居于东林寺。
现代文：过了不久，张孝秀就离职归隐，住在束林寺。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xiaoxiu resigned from his post and went into seclusion, living in the Soklin Temple.

古文：有田数十顷，部曲数百人，率以力田，尽供山众，远近归慕，赴之如市。
现代文：寺中有数十顷田，敷百仆役，仆役全都耕种田地，收获全部供给寺中僧人。远远近近的人都倾慕归附，人们像奔赴市集那样赶往东林寺。
English: There are dozens of hectares of fields in the temple, hundreds of servants, and the servants all cultivate the fields, and all the harvest is provided to the monks in the temple. People from far and near are all yearning to join, and people are rushing to Donglin Temple like they are rushing to the market.

古文：孝秀性通率，不好浮华，常冠谷皮巾，蹑蒲履，手执并榈皮麈尾。
现代文：张孝秀性情旷达直率，不喜爱浮华，他常常头戴谷皮巾，脚穿蒲制草鞋，手执榈皮编制的麈尾。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiu's temperament is straightforward and straightforward, and he does not like flashy things. He often wears a grain leather scarf on his head, straw sandals made of pooh on his feet, and a palm-leather appendix on his hand.

古文：服寒食散，盛冬能卧于石。
现代文：张孝秀服用寒食散，隆冬季节能躺卧在石头上。
English: Zhang Xiaoxiu takes cold medicine and can lie on the stone in midwinter.

古文：博涉群书，专精释典。
现代文：他广泛涉猎群书，特别精通佛教的经典。
English: He read widely and was particularly well versed in Buddhist classics.

古文：善谈论，工隶书，凡诸艺能，莫不明习。
现代文：善于与人交谈议论，精于隶书，各种技艺，没有一样不精通熟悉。
English: Good at talking and discussing with people, good at writing, all kinds of skills, there is no one who is not proficient and familiar.

古文：普通三年，卒，时年四十二，室中皆闻有非常香气。
现代文：三年，张孝秀去世，死时四十二岁，他去世时在房中的人都闻到一种特别的香气。
English: Three years ago, Zhang Xiaoxiu passed away at the age of forty-two. Everyone in the room when he died smelled a special aroma.

古文：太宗闻，甚伤悼焉，与刘慧斐书，述其贞白云。
现代文：主塞听到去世的消息，十分伤心悲痛，他写信给刘慧斐，专门谈及退垄秀的高尚清白的节操。
English: Hearing the news of his death, Master Seth was very sad and sorrowful. He wrote a letter to Liu Huifei, specifically talking about the noble and innocent act of retiring from the show.

古文：庾承先，字子通，颍川焉陵人也。
现代文：庾承先字子通，颖川隅陵人。
English: Succession of the former Zizi-dori Street, Yingchuan Sumirejin Street.

古文：少沉静有志操，是非不涉于言，喜愠不形于色，人莫能窥也。
现代文：他年轻时沉稳冷静，有志向，有操守，言谈中不议论别人是非，表情上不显露喜怒神色，没有人能窥伺他的内心活动。
English: When he was young, he was calm and steady, he had ambition and integrity, he did not discuss the rights and wrongs of others in his speech, he did not show emotions on his face, and no one could spy on his inner activities.

古文：弱岁受学于南阳刘虬，强记敏识，出于群辈。
现代文：弱冠之年师从于南阳刘虬学习，他记忆力强，聪明而又知识广博，超出一同学习的其他人。
English: In his early years, he studied under Yu Nanyang Liu Ye. He had a strong memory, was intelligent and knowledgeable, surpassing the others he studied with.

古文：玄经释典，靡不该悉；九流《七略》，咸所精练。
现代文：道家《老子》，以及佛教经典，样样他都能全面掌握，十分熟悉；各种技艺，各类图书，没有一样不精研贯通。
English: Taoist "Lao Zi," as well as Buddhist classics, he can fully grasp everything, very familiar; all kinds of skills, all kinds of books, none of them are not well studied.

古文：郡辟功曹不就，乃与道士王僧镇同游衡岳。
现代文：郡府征召庾承先为功曹，庾承先不肯就职，他和僧人王僧镇一同到衡岳游览。
English: The county government conscripted Zou Chengxian as a meritorious person, but Zou Chengxian refused to take up the post. He and the monk Wang Zengzhen went on a tour of Hengyue.

古文：晚以弟疾还乡里，遂居于土台山。
现代文：晚年之后，庾承先因为弟弟患病而返回家乡，就居住在土台山。
English: In his later years, he returned to his hometown because his younger brother was ill, and lived in Dutai Mountain.

古文：鄱阳忠烈王在州，钦其风味，要与游处。
现代文：鄱阳忠烈王当时正在州中，他钦仰庾承先人品高雅，于是邀约庾承先同自己一同游憩。
English: At that time, King Shenyang Zhongliao was in middle school. He admired his ancestor's elegance, so he invited his ancestor to have a rest with him.

古文：又令讲《老子》，远近名僧，咸来赴集，论难锋起，异端竞至，承先徐相酬答，皆得所未闻。
现代文：鄱阳忠烈王又命庾承先讲说《老子》。远远近近的名僧都聚集而来，各种诘间纷纷提出，异端之说竞相出现，庾承先不慌不忙、慢条斯理地一一应对回答，赴会的人都听到了闻所未闻的道理。
English: Shanyang King Zhongliao also ordered Zoucheng to speak about "Lao Zi" first. Famous monks from far and near gathered, and various theories were put forward one after another. Heretical theories appeared in competition. Zoucheng first responded slowly and logically, and the people who attended the meeting heard the unheard truth.

古文：忠烈王尤加钦重，征州主簿；湘东王闻之，亦板为法曹参军；并不赴。
现代文：鄱阳忠烈王对庾承先更加钦服敬重，把他征为州主簿，湘束王听到这消息，也用自己王府名义任命庾承先为法曹参军，庾承先都没有赴任。
English: The king of Shenyang Zhongliao had more admiration and respect for Zou Chengxian and enlisted him as the state chief accountant. When the king of Hunan Shu heard this news, he also appointed Zou Chengxian as a legal officer to join the army in the name of his royal court. Zou Chengxian did not take up the post.

古文：中大通三年，庐山刘慧斐至荆州，承先与之有旧，往从之。
现代文：中大通三年，庐山刘慧斐到荆州，庾承先原来就和刘慧斐有交情，于是就去拜访刘慧斐。
English: In the third year of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shaoshan Liu Huifei came to Jingzhou. He had a friendship with Liu Huifei before, so he went to visit Liu Huifei.

古文：荆陕学徒，因请承先讲《老子》。
现代文：荆陕的学者就藉此机会请庾承先讲说《老子》。
English: Jing and Shaanxi scholars took this opportunity to ask Zhu Rongcheng to talk about "Lao Zi" first.

古文：湘东王亲命驾临听，论议终日，深相赏接。
现代文：湘东王亲自驾临听讲，并和庾承先论说了一整天，对他深为赏识。
English: The king of eastern Hunan personally came to listen to the lecture, and discussed the whole day with Zou Chengxian, and was deeply appreciative of him.

古文：留连月余日，乃还山。
现代文：湘束王还把庾承先延请至王府，挽留了一个多月，庾承先才返回山中。
English: The king of Hunan also invited Yancheng to the royal palace, where he stayed for more than a month before returning to the mountains.

古文：王亲祖道，并赠篇什，隐者美之。
现代文：他回山的时候，湘束王亲自为他设宴饯行，并且作诗相赠，隐居的人都觉得这是一种荣耀。
English: When he returned to the mountains, the king of Hunan personally held a banquet for him and gave him a gift of poetry. People who lived in seclusion felt this was an honor.

古文：其年卒，时年六十。
现代文：这一年，庾承先去世，死时六十岁。
English: In the same year, Zou Chengxuan passed away at the age of 60.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：世之诬处士者，多云纯盗虚名而无适用，盖有负其实者。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察噬说：世上说处士坏话的人，多数指责他们是纯粹盗取空名，却没有适合世用的长处，实在是名不副实的人。
English: "Most of the people in the world who speak ill of officials accuse them of purely stealing empty names, but they do not have strengths that are suitable for the world, and they are really people who do not deserve the name.

古文：若诸葛璩之学术，阮孝绪之簿阀，其取进也岂难哉？
现代文：像诸葛璩的学问，阮孝绪的出身门第，他们要求取仕进哪有什么困难呢?
English: Like Zhuge Liang's learning and Ruan Xiaoxu's family background, what difficulties do they have in asking for promotion?

古文：终于隐居，固亦性而已矣。
现代文：在隐居中度过一生，本来就是他们的心性罢了。
English: It's just in their nature to spend their lives in seclusion.

