古文：李义府，瀛州饶阳人。其祖尝为射洪丞，因客永泰。
现代文：李义府，瀛州饶阳人，其祖父曾任射洪丞，因而客居永泰。
English: Li Yifu, a native of Raoyang, Zhangzhou, whose grandfather was once known as Sha Hongzheng, is a guest of Yongtai.

古文：贞观中，李大亮巡察剑南，表义府才，对策中第，补门下省典仪。
现代文：贞观年间，李大亮巡察剑南，上表称李义府有才，对策时中选，补为门下省典仪。
English: During the Zhenguan years, Li Dalyang inspected Jiannan, and the above table said that Li Yifu was talented. When the countermeasure was selected, it was supplemented as a provincial ceremony.

古文：刘洎、马周更荐之，太宗召见，转监察御史，诏侍晋王。
现代文：刘洎、马周也推荐他，太宗召见后转任监察御史，诏令侍晋王。
English: Liu Bei and Ma Zhou also recommended him, and after being summoned by Emperor Taizong, he was transferred to the post of inspector of imperial history and ordered to serve Emperor Jin.

古文：王为太子，除舍人、崇贤馆直学士，与司议郎来济俱以文翰显，时称 来李 。
现代文：后来晋王立为太子，任李义府为舍人、崇贤馆直学士，与司议郎来济都以文笔著称，当时称之为 来、李 。
English: Later, Jin Wang was appointed as the crown prince, Li Yifu was appointed as the tutor, and Chongxian Pavilion as the direct bachelor. He was famous for writing and writing with the Councilor Lang Laiji. At that time, it was called Lai and Li.

古文：献《承华箴》，末云： 佞谀有类，邪巧多方。其萌不绝，其害必彰。 
现代文：义府曾献《承华箴》，文末说： 阿谀谗媚实不少，奸邪巧饰有多方，萌芽不彻底铲除，危害必严重显著。 
English: Yifu once presented "The Conquest of China" and said at the end of the article: There are many flatterers, there are many traitors and evil-doers, and if the buds are not completely eradicated, the harm will be serious and obvious.

古文：义府方谄事太子，而文致若谠直者，太子表之，优诏赐帛。
现代文：其时，李义府正在巴结奉承太子，而文章却像是耿直坦荡的人。太子上表夸奖，得皇帝优诏赐帛。
English: At that time, Li Yifu was fawning over the crown prince, but the article seemed to be a straightforward person. The crown prince was praised on the table and received the Emperor's commendation.

古文：高宗立，迁中书舍人，兼修国史，进弘文馆学士。
现代文：高宗即位，升李义府为中书舍人、兼修国史，进弘文馆学士。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, and Li Yifu was promoted to the position of middle school teacher, concurrently studied national history, and received a bachelor's degree from the Hongwu Library.

古文：为长孙无忌所恶，奏斥壁州司马。诏未下，义府问计于舍人王德俭。
现代文：长孙无忌厌恶其人品，上奏斥他为壁州司马，诏书还未下发，义府知道后，与舍人王德俭商议对策。
English: The eldest grandson was disgusted with his character, and denounced him as the Sima of Bishu in a report. The imperial edict had not yet been issued, and after the Yifu learned about it, they discussed countermeasures with Wang Dejian, the overseer.

古文：德俭者，许敬宗甥，瘿而智，善揣事，因曰： 武昭仪方有宠，上欲立为后，畏宰相议，未有以发之。
现代文：王德俭，是许敬宗的外甥，颈上长个瘤，但人很聪明，善于看风使舵，乃对义府说 ：武昭仪现在正得宠，皇上想立她为皇后，又害怕宰相们否定，所以还没有正式提出。
English: Wang Dejian, the nephew of Xu Jingzong, who had a mole on his neck, but was very clever and good at reading the wind, said to Yifu: Wu Zhaoyi is now favored, the emperor wants to make her the empress, and he is afraid that the prime ministers will deny it, so he has not officially proposed it.

古文：君能建白，转祸于福也。 
现代文：君如果在这事上提出建议，推助一把，定能转祸为福。 
English: If you can offer suggestions and support in this matter, you will surely be able to turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：义府即代德俭直夜，叩阁上表，请废后立昭仪。
现代文：于是李义府就替代王德俭值夜，趁机叩门上表，要求废王皇后而立昭仪为后。
English: As a result, Li Yifu replaced Wang Dejian on duty at night, took the opportunity to knock on the door of the upper table, demanding the abolition of the queen and the rise of Zhaoyi.

古文：帝悦，召见与语，赐珠一斗，停司马诏书，留复侍。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，召见义府与他谈话，又赐珍珠一斗，停发要他出京任司马的诏书，留下复为侍。
English: The emperor was very pleased, summoned Yifu to talk with him, gave him another pearl, stopped issuing an imperial decree to send him to Beijing to serve as a steward, and left him as a retainer.

古文：武后已立，义府与敬宗、德俭及御史大夫崔义玄、中丞袁公瑜、大理正侯善业相推毂，济其奸，诛弃骨鲠大臣，故后得肆志攘取威柄，天子敛衽矣。
现代文：武则天已立为皇后后，李义府、许敬宗、王德俭及御史大夫崔义玄、中丞袁公瑜、大理正侯善业互相吹捧，在私心干坏事上推波助澜。诛杀贬弃赤诚忠耿之臣，因此武后得以称心如意地制造夺取威势权柄，天子也只得俯首听命。
English: After Wu Zetian was installed as empress, Li Yifu, Xu Jingzong, Wang Dejian, and the imperial historian Cui Yixuan, the chancellor Yuan Gongyu, and Dali Zhenghou praised each other's good deeds and helped each other in doing bad things. They killed and disparaged the loyal subjects of the Red Emperor, so Wu Zetian was able to create and seize power as he pleased, and the emperor had to bow his head and obey his orders.

古文：义府貌柔恭，与人言，嬉怡微笑，而阴贼褊忌著于心，凡忤意者，皆中伤之，时号义府 笑中刀 。
现代文：李义府看上去随和有礼，与人谈话，总是和言悦色，但心里却阴险偏狭，嫉妒记仇。凡是冒犯了他、不中他的意的人，都要设法中伤陷害，当时人称他为 笑中刀 。
English: Li Yifu looked easygoing and polite, talked with people, and was always pleasant, but his heart was insidiously narrow, jealous and vengeful. Anyone who offended him and was not to his liking had to try to slander and frame him. At that time, people called him the laughing knife.

古文：又以柔而害物，号曰 人猫 。
现代文：又因为他表面柔顺实质害人而称他为 人猫 。
English: He is also known as the "human cat" because he is soft on the outside but harmful on the inside.

古文：永徽六年，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下三品，封广平县男，又兼太子右庶子，爵为侯。
现代文：永徽六年，委任为中书侍郎、同中书门下三品，封广平县男，又兼太子右庶子，爵为侯。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the third grade of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the man of Guangping County, and also the right illegitimate son of the prince, and the marquess.

古文：洛州女子淳于以奸系大理，义府闻其美，属丞毕正义出之，纳以为妾。卿段窦玄以状闻。诏给事中刘仁轨、侍御史张伦鞫治。义府且穷，逼正义缢狱中以绝始谋。
现代文：有个洛州女子淳于犯了奸淫罪，关在大理狱中。李义府听说她很美，暗嘱大理丞毕正义枉法释放，娶为己妾，正卿段宝玄将这事报告了皇帝，诏令给事中刘仁轨、侍御史张伦复审此案，李义府怕毕正义供出实情，竟逼令毕正义在狱中自缢以断绝实证。
English: There was a woman in Lozhou, Junyu, who committed the crime of adultery and was locked up in Dali Prison. Li Yifu heard that she was very beautiful, and he gave a secret order to Dali-Cheng Bi Zhengyi to release her and marry her as his concubine. Zhengqing Duan Bao Xuan reported this to the emperor, who ordered Liu Renzhong and the attendant Zhang Lun to review the case. Li Yifu was afraid of Bi Zhengyi giving out the truth, and forced Bi Zhengyi to commit suicide in prison to cut off the evidence.

古文：侍御史王义方廷劾，义府不引咎，三叱之，然后趋出。
现代文：侍御史王义方在廷上检举，李义府均不承认，经三次叱责，才不得不退出。
English: The attendant, Wang Yifang, reported it to the court, but Li Yifu did not acknowledge it. After three reprimands, he had to withdraw.

古文：义方极陈其恶，帝阴德义府，故贷不问，为抑义方，逐之。
现代文：王义方一条条陈述李义府的罪恶，但皇帝因他助立武后的事心中感激他，所以宽赦不追究。为压制王义方，将他逐出。
English: Wang Yifang described the evils of Li Yifu one by one, but the emperor was so grateful to him for helping to establish the Empress Dowager that he did not pursue the matter. In order to suppress Wang Yifang, he was expelled.

古文：未几进中书令，检校御史大夫，加太子宾客，更封河间郡公，诏造私第。
现代文：不久，进李义府为中书令、检校御史大夫，加太子宾客，改封河间郡公，诏许建造私宅。
English: Soon, he entered Li Yifu as a Chinese scholar, inspector of schools, guest of the crown prince, changed his title to the governor of Kawama County, and was allowed to build a private house.

古文：诸子虽褓负皆补清官。
现代文：义府的儿子们即使还在襁褓中的，都补为清官。
English: The sons of Yifu, even if they are still in their infancy, have all become officials.

古文：初，杜正伦为黄门侍郎，义府才典仪。
现代文：当初，杜正伦为黄门侍郎，李义府不过是个典仪。
English: At first, Du Zhenglun was a Yellow Gate attendant, and Li Yifu was just a ceremonial leader.

古文：及同辅政，正伦恃先进不相下，密与中书侍郎李友益图去义府，反为所诬，交讼帝前。
现代文：及至一同辅政，杜正伦自恃先进瞧不起李义府，秘密与中书侍郎李友益商议设法除去义府，事情泄露，反被李义府诬告，两人在皇帝面前争论。
English: When they became co-emperors, Du Zhenglun boasted that he was the first to despise Li Yifu. He secretly discussed with Li Youyi, the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, to try to remove Li Yifu. The matter was leaked, and he was falsely accused by Li Yifu. The two argued in front of the emperor.

古文：帝两黜之，正伦为横州刺史，义府普州刺史，流友益峰州。
现代文：皇帝将两人都贬谪出京：杜正伦任横州刺史，李义府任普州刺史，将李友益流放峰州。
English: The emperor banished both of them from Beijing: Du Zhenglun was appointed governor of Hengzhou, Li Yifu was appointed governor of Puzhou, and Li Youyi was exiled to Fengzhou.

古文：明年，召为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：第二年，召回李义府任为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: In the second year, Li Yifu was recalled and appointed as the secretary of Shangshu and the third grade of the middle school of Shangshu.

古文：母丧免，夺丧为司列太常伯、同东西台三品。
现代文：因母丧而免，另又夺丧起用为司列太常伯、同东西台三品。
English: Due to his mother's death, he was exempted, and in addition, he was appointed as the third-ranking official of the Eastern and Western Regions, and the third-ranking official of the Eastern and Western Regions.

古文：更葬其先永康陵侧，役县人牛车输土筑坟，助役者凡七县，高陵令不胜劳而死。
现代文：改葬其先人于永康陵侧，役使县里的人及牛车运土筑坟，来干活的民工征调自七个县，高陵县令竟劳累而死。
English: His ancestors were reburied on the side of Yongkang Mausoleum, people from the county and ox carts were used to transport soil and build graves, and migrant workers were recruited from seven counties to do the work. The governor of Gaoling County actually died from exhaustion.

古文：公卿争赗遗。
现代文：公卿们争赠奠仪。
English: The nobles compete to present the memorial service.

古文：葬日，诏御史节哭。
现代文：入葬日，诏令御史前往哭吊。
English: On the day of the funeral, the Emperor ordered the Emperor to go to the cemetery to mourn.

古文：送车从骑相衔，帷帟奠帐自灞桥属三原七十里不绝，轜輴刍偶，僭侈不法，人臣送葬之盛无与比者。
现代文：送车及从骑相连，奠帐帷绶等物自灞桥连三原七十里不断，柩车及草人等的规格僭越侈大，人臣送葬之盛礼没有谁能比得上。
English: The carriage and horse-drawn carriage are connected, the curtains and other objects for the laying of the wreaths are connected with each other continuously for seventy miles from the bridge to the Three Plains, and the carriage and straw men are of the most extravagant specifications. No one can match the grandeur of the funeral of a dignitary.

古文：殷王出阁，又兼府长史，稍迁右相。
现代文：殷王出京师去所封藩，义府又兼府长史，渐升为右相。
English: Yin Wang left Beijing to go to the feudal domain, and Yifu was also the prefectural governor, gradually rising to the right.

古文：义府已贵，乃言系出赵郡，与诸李叙昭穆，嗜进者往往尊为父兄行。
现代文：李义府地位显赫了，自称是出身赵郡，就与各李姓人叙起辈份来，那些好巴结想借此进身的人往往尊李义府为父兄辈。
English: As Li Yifu's status became prominent, people who claimed to be from Zhao County began to refer to their ancestors with the surname Li. Those who were eager to use this to advance themselves often respected Li Yifu as their father and elder brother.

古文：给事中李崇德引与同谱，既谪普州，亟削去，义府衔之，及复当国，傅致其罪，使自杀于狱。
现代文：给事中李崇德自称与义府是同宗。
English: At the time of the incident, Li Chongde claimed to be from the same clan as Yifu.

古文：贞观中，高士廉、韦挺、岑文本、令狐德棻修《氏族志》，凡升降，天下允其议，于是州藏副本以为长式。
现代文：至义府被贬普州时，又亟亟地否认与他同宗。义府记恨在心，到他再次当权时，就罗致其罪名，将李崇德投入牢狱，最后李崇德在狱中自杀。贞观年间，高士廉、韦挺、岑文本、令狐德修《氏族志》，对每一个的升降褒贬，天下人均认可其判断，于是各州收藏副本作为永久之式。
English: When Yifu was demoted to Pu Prefecture, he emphatically denied that he was a member of the same clan. Yifu kept the grudge in his heart, and when he came to power again, he convicted him and put Li Chongde in prison, and finally Li Chongde committed suicide in prison. During the Zhenguan years, Gao Shilian, Wei Ting, Yan Wenbin, and Ling Xudexiu "Genshi" praised and criticized the promotion and demotion of each one, and the world recognized their judgment, so each state collected copies as a permanent form.

古文：时许敬宗以不载武后本望，义府亦耻先世不见叙，更奏删正。
现代文：而许敬宗提出该《氏族志》没有载入武后家族，李义府也因此志中没记入他的先世而不满，奏请重新删正。
English: However, Xu Jingzong proposed that the "History of the Clan" was not included in the Wu's family, and Li Yifu was dissatisfied that his previous life was not recorded in the history, so please re-edit it.

古文：委孔志约、杨仁卿、史玄道、吕才等定其书，以仕唐官至五品皆升士流。于是兵卒以军功进者，悉入书限，更号《姓氏录》，缙绅共嗤靳之，号曰 勋格 。
现代文：于是委任孔志约、杨仁卿、史玄道、吕才等人修订，凡是在唐任官至五品的都升为 士 ，兵卒因立功而升官的也都入册，改书名为《姓氏录》，望族缙绅们都鄙弃耻笑，称改后的《姓氏录》为 勋格 。
English: Therefore, Kong Zhiyou, Yang Renqing, Shi Xuandao, Lu Cai and others were appointed to revise it. All those who were promoted to the fifth grade in Tang were promoted to knights, and soldiers who were promoted for their meritorious service were also registered. The book was renamed "Surname Record," and the noblemen and gentry all despised the mockery and called the revised "Surname Record" as "Honor."

古文：义府奏悉收前志烧绝之。
现代文：李义府奏请将以前的《氏族志》全部收回烧毁。
English: Li Yifu requested that all of the previous "Genshi" be taken back and burned.

古文：自魏太和中定望族，七姓子孙迭为婚姻，后虽益衰，犹相夸尚。
现代文：自从魏太和年间确定望族，七姓子孙互为婚姻，后来虽说有些渐衰，但依旧相互以身份门第自豪。
English: Since the establishment of the prestigious family in the Wei and Taichung dynasties, the descendants of the seven surnames have been married to each other. Later, although there has been some decline, they are still proud of each other's identity.

古文：义府为子求婚不得，遂奏一切禁止。
现代文：李义府替儿子向他们求婚而不得，于是奏请禁止所有门阀等第界限。
English: Li Yifu was unable to propose marriage to them for his son, so he requested that all door valves and other boundaries be banned.

古文：既主选，无品鉴才，而溪壑之欲，惟贿是利，不复铨判，人人咨讪。
现代文：皇帝让李义府主管选拔人才。一则他自己无品，无以鉴别人才，二则贪欲永无厌足，因此选拔任用只问贿赂而不再考核查验，以致人人叹息不齿。
English: The emperor put Li Yifu in charge of selecting talents. On the one hand, he himself had no quality, no talent to compare with others, and on the other hand, his greed was insatiable. Therefore, the selection and appointment only asked for bribes and no longer examined and tested, so that everyone sighed.

古文：又母、妻、诸子卖官市狱，门如沸汤。
现代文：再加上他母亲、妻子、儿子们收贿卖官买狱，门庭若市，沸沸扬扬。
English: Add to this the fact that his mother, wife and sons have been bribing officials to buy their way out of prison, and the whole place is abuzz.

古文：自永徽后，御史多制授，吏部虽有调注，至门下覆不留。
现代文：自从永徽年后，御史均为制授，吏部虽然也偶有调迁的，但到门下复核均不得通过。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Yonghu, imperial histories have been awarded on the basis of merit, and although officials have occasionally been transferred, they are not allowed to pass the review.

古文：义府乃自注御史、员外、通事舍人，有司不敢却。
现代文：现在李义府自己注属御史、员外、通事舍人，有司不敢退回。
English: Now, Li Yifu himself is a subordinate to the Minister of History, a non-member, and a passer-by, and the department does not dare to return.

古文：帝尝从容戒义府曰： 闻卿儿子女婿桡法多过失，朕为卿掩覆，可少勖之。 
现代文：皇帝曾很和缓地告诫义府说 ：听说你的儿子女婿枉法多有过失，我还为你打了掩护。你该对他们略加警戒。 
English: The emperor had gently admonished Yifu, saying, "I heard that your son-in-law committed many faults, and I covered for you. You should be a little wary of them."

古文：义府内倚后，揣群臣无敢白其罪者，不虞帝之知，乃勃然变色，徐曰： 谁为陛下道此？ 
现代文：义府倚仗武后为靠山，认为群臣中没有人敢告发他的罪行，不想皇帝竟然有所听闻，于是勃然变了脸色问皇帝 ：是谁对陛下说这些的？ 
English: Relying on Empress Wu for support, Yifu thought that no one among his courtiers would dare to denounce his crimes, and he did not want the emperor to hear about them, so he suddenly changed his face and asked the emperor, "Who said these things to Your Majesty?"

古文：帝曰： 何用问我所从得邪！ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：还用问我是从哪儿知道的吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Is there any need to ask how I knew?"

古文：义府謷然不谢，徐引去，帝由是不悦。
现代文：李义府居然傲然不谢罪，缓步自去。皇帝由此而对义府不喜欢。
English: Li Yifu was so proud that he did not apologize and walked away. The emperor did not like Yifu.

古文：会术者杜元纪望义府第有狱气，曰： 发积钱二千万，可以厌胜。 
现代文：有个术士名杜元纪，望见李义府的宅第有狱气。还说： 拿出二千万积储来，可以压住狱气。 
English: There was a sorcerer named Du Yuanji, who saw that Li Yifu's mansion had prison gas. He also said: Take out twenty million accumulated reserves and you can suppress prison gas.

古文：义府信之，裒索殊急。
现代文：李义府相信了，却去向百姓搜刮。
English: Li Yifu believed it, but went to scrounge from the people.

古文：居母丧，朔望给告，即羸服与元纪出野，冯高窥觇灾眚，众疑其有异谋。
现代文：在他母丧期间，初一十五都给哭假，他就微服与杜元纪去郊野登高窥察灾气，众人怀疑他将有异图。
English: During his mother's funeral, the first 15 students were given a day off to cry. He put on a pair of overalls and went to the countryside with Du Yuanji to climb high and spy on the disaster. Everyone suspected that he would have a different plan.

古文：又遣子津召长孙延，谓曰： 吾为子得一官。 
现代文：李义府又派儿子李津去召来长孙延，对长孙说： 我为你谋得一个官职。 
English: Li Yifu also sent his son Li Jin to summon the eldest grandson Yan, and said to the eldest grandson: I have found an official position for you.

古文：居五日，延拜司津监，索谢钱七十万。
现代文：五天后，就任长孙延为司津监，索钱七十万。
English: Five days later, Sun Yan, who was appointed to the post of Tsin supervisor, demanded 700,000 yuan.

古文：右金吾仓曹参军杨行颖白其赃，诏司刑太常伯刘祥道与三司杂讯，李勣监按，有状，诏除名，流巂州，子率府长史洽、千牛备身洋及婿少府主簿柳元贞并流廷州，司议郎津流振州，朝野至相贺。
现代文：右金吾仓曹参军杨行颖说了他所得赃款，诏令司刑太常伯刘祥道与三司共同审讯此事，李责力监讯，审出许多罪状，诏命革职除名，流放隽州。其子率府长史李洽、千牛备身李洋及女婿少府主簿柳元贞一并流放廷州，司议郎李津流放振州，朝野均相庆贺。
English: On the right, Yang Xingying, a member of the Qingwu Cang Cao army, said that he had received stolen money. Li Liang ordered Liu Xiangdao, the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of

古文：三子及婿尤凶肆，既败，人以为诛 四凶 。
现代文：他的三个儿子及女婿尤其凶残肆虐，既遭流放，人们都称之为诛 四凶 。
English: His three sons and son-in-law were particularly vicious, and after they were exiled, they were known as the "Four Thugs."

古文：或作《河间道元帅刘祥道破铜山大贼李义府露布》，榜于衢。
现代文：有人写了篇《河间道元帅刘祥道破铜山大贼李义府露布》，张贴在街市上。
English: Someone wrote an article, "Hebei Road Marshal Liu Xiang Road Breaks the Copper Mountain Thief Li Yifu's Deception," and posted it on the street market.

古文：乾封元年大赦，独流人不许还，义府愤恚死，年五十三。
现代文：乾封元年大赦，独流放的罪人不许回来，李义府愤恨而死，年五十三岁。
English: In the first year of Qianfeng, there was an amnesty. The criminals who had been exiled were not allowed to return. Li Yifu died of resentment at the age of fifty-three.

古文：自其斥，天下忧且复用，比死，内外乃安。
现代文：自从李义府被斥，天下仍有些担心他会再度起用，到他死了，内外才完全安心。
English: Since Li Yifu was ousted, the world is still a little worried that he will be reappointed. Only when he is dead will there be complete peace of mind inside and outside.

古文：上元初，赦妻子还洛阳。
现代文：上元初年，赦免李义府的妻子回到洛阳。
English: In the first year of Shangyuan, Li Yifu's wife was pardoned and returned to Luoyang.

古文：然岁中即败，前古少其比云。李林甫，长平肃王叔良曾孙。
现代文：如意年间，追赠李义府扬州大都督，崔义玄益州大都督，王德俭、袁公瑜魏州、相州刺史，又各赐实封。睿宗立，有诏停止封赏，其幼子名李湛，事见《李多祚》传。李林甫，是长平肃王叔良的曾孙。
English: During the Ruyi years, Li Yifu, Yangzhou Grand Governor, Cui Yiguan, Yixian Grand Governor, Wang Dejian, Yuan Gongyu, Wei Zhou, and Xiang Zhou were posthumously awarded. Rui Zongli, there was a decree to stop the award, and his child's name was Li Zhan, as seen in the "Li Dorje" biography. Li Linfu, is the great-grandson of Changping Su Wang Shuliang.

古文：初为千牛直长，舅姜晈爱之。
现代文：最初任千牛直长，舅舅姜皎很喜欢他。
English: He was originally named Qian Niu Zhizhong, and Uncle Jiang Yao liked him very much.

古文：开元初，迁太子中允。
现代文：开元初年升任太子中允。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Crown Prince Middle Consort.

古文：源乾曜执政，与晈为姻家，而乾曜子为林甫求司门郎中，乾曜素薄之，曰： 郎官应得才望，哥奴岂郎中材邪？ 
现代文：源乾曜执政，与姜皎是姻亲，乾曜的儿子源挈为李林甫求官司门郎中，乾曜一向看不起他，说 ：郎官应有才干和声望，哥奴哪里是任郎中的材料呢？ 
English: Yuan Qianyou was in power, and he was related by marriage to Jiang Hui. Yuan Qianyou's son, Yuan Hui, was one of Li Linfu's suitors for the position. Qian Yu always looked down on him, saying, "A successor should have talent and prestige. Where is the material for a successor?

古文：哥奴，林甫小字也。
现代文：哥奴，是李林甫的小名。
English: Brother, is the nickname of Li Linfu.

古文：即授以谕德，累擢国子司业。
现代文：乃任他为谕德，逐步升到国子司业。
English: Instead, he was appointed as a preceptor, and gradually rose to the position of imperial secretary.

古文：宇文融为御史中丞，引与同列，稍历刑、吏部侍郎。
现代文：宇文融为御史中丞时，引李林甫与之同列，渐渐历任刑、吏部侍郎。
English: When Uwen Rong became the imperial historian, Li Linfu was put on the same level as him, and gradually he was appointed to various posts, including that of an attendant of the cadre department.

古文：初，吏部置长名榜，定留放。宁王私谒十人，林甫曰： 愿绌一人以示公。 
现代文：当初，吏部置长都要列名榜示，以定留放，宁王心中有十人希望能入选，李林甫说： 希望能黜一人以表示公正。 
English: At the beginning, the heads of the cadre departments were all required to be listed in the list of names to be reserved and released. Ning Wang hoped that ten people would be selected. Li Linfu said: I hope I can select one person to show fairness.

古文：遂榜其一，曰： 坐王所嘱，放冬集。 
现代文：于是在一个人名旁注 ：恐与王嘱有连，宜放冬集。 
English: So there was a note next to a person's name: for fear of being associated with the king's edict, it is advisable to put out a winter collection.

古文：时武惠妃宠倾后宫，子寿王、盛王尤爱。
现代文：当时武惠妃专宠，儿子寿王、盛王尤得玄宗宠爱。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was the favorite of Empress Wu, and his sons, Emperor Shou and Emperor Sheng, were the favorites of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：林甫因中人白妃，愿护寿王为万岁计，妃德之。
现代文：李林甫借中人高力士告知惠妃，愿保护寿王为万岁，于是惠妃对他感恩。
English: Li Linfu asked the middle-aged Gao Lixi to tell Hui Fei that he was willing to protect Shou Wang for a long time, so Hui Fei was grateful to him.

古文：侍中裴光庭夫人，武三思女，尝私林甫，而高力士本出三思家。
现代文：侍中裴光庭的夫人，是武三思的女儿，与李林甫有私情，高力士本是出自武三思家的。
English: The wife of the chamberlain, Pei Guangting, was the daughter of Wu Sansi, and had a personal relationship with Li Linfu. Gao Lixi was originally from the Wu Sansi family.

古文：及光庭卒，武请力士以林甫代为相。
现代文：至裴光庭死，武氏就请高力士推荐李林甫代为相。
English: After Pei Guangting's death, Mr. Wu asked Mr. Gao to recommend Li Linfu as his successor.

古文：力士未敢发，而帝因萧嵩言，自用韩休。方具诏，武擿语林甫，使为休请。
现代文：高力士因相位重大，未敢说话。皇帝此时正因中书令萧嵩的举荐，任用了韩休，正要写诏令，武氏告诉林甫，要他去为韩休请官。
English: At this time, the emperor was appointing Han Xiu due to the recommendation of the Chinese calligrapher Xiao Song. Just as he was about to write the edict, Mr. Wu told Lin Fu that he wanted him to find a position for Han Xiu.

古文：休既相，重德林甫，而与嵩有隙，乃荐林甫有宰相才，妃阴助之，即拜黄门侍郎。寻为礼部尚书、同中书门下三品，再进兵部尚书。
现代文：韩休任宰相后，很感激林甫而与萧嵩有了疙瘩。于是推荐林甫有宰相之才，惠妃也暗中撺掇，皇帝竟提拔林甫为黄门侍郎，不久又任礼部尚书、同中书门下三品，再进为兵部尚书。
English: After Han Xiu was appointed prime minister, he was very grateful to Lin Fu and had a betrothal with Xiao Song. Therefore, Lin Fu was recommended to have the talent of prime minister, and Hui Fei also secretly suggested that the emperor actually promoted Lin Fu to the Yellow Gate waiter, and soon he was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies, the Ministry of the Middle School, and then the Ministry of the Military.

古文：皇太子、鄂王、光王被谮，帝欲废之。张九龄切谏，帝不悦。林甫惘然，私语中人曰： 天子家事，外人何与邪？ 
现代文：皇太子、鄂王、光王被诬陷，皇帝欲废太子另立，张九龄恳切劝谏，皇帝不高兴，李林甫当面不说什么，退朝后却私下里与中人说： 天子的家事，外人干预个啥。 
English: The crown prince, the king of H, and the king of Guang were framed, the emperor wanted to abolish the crown prince and set up another one, Zhang Jiuling earnestly advised him, the emperor was not happy, Li Linfu did not say anything in person, but after retiring from the court, he said to the middle man in private: What is the outsider's interference in the family affairs of the Son of Heaven?

古文：二十四年，帝在东都，欲还长安。
现代文：开元二十四年，皇帝在东都洛阳，想回长安。
English: In the 24th year of the first century, the emperor was in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and wanted to return to Chang'an.

古文：裴耀卿等建言： 农人场圃未毕，须冬可还。 
现代文：裴耀卿等人建议： 农民们秋收事还未结束，待到冬天农闲再回最好。 
English: Pei Yaoqing and others suggested: The farmers' autumn harvest is not yet over, it is best to stay until the winter and then return.

古文：林甫阳蹇，独在后。帝问故，对曰： 臣非疾也，愿奏事。
现代文：李林甫假装跛着脚，一个人走在最后，皇帝问他脚怎么啦，他说 ：我不是腿有病，而是想奏件事。
English: Li Linfu pretended to stomp his feet. A man walked at the end. The emperor asked him what was wrong with his feet. He said, "I don't have a bad leg, but I want to play something."

古文：二都本帝王东西宫，车驾往幸，何所待时？
现代文：两个都城本来就是帝王的东西宫，车驾要到哪一处去，何需等待什么时机？
English: The two capital cities were originally the emperor's east and west palaces. Which place should the car drive to, why wait for what time?

古文：假令妨农，独赦所过租赋可也。 
现代文：即使有妨农事，赦免所过地方的租赋不就行了。 
English: Even if there is interference with agricultural affairs, it is not enough to pardon the rent of the places passed.

古文：帝大悦，即驾而西。
现代文：皇帝十分高兴，即刻车驾西行。
English: The emperor was very happy and immediately drove west.

古文：始九龄繇文学进，守正持重，而林甫特以便佞，故得大任，每嫉九龄，阴害之。
现代文：当初，张九龄由于文章写得好而进官，为相时坚守正直持重的作风，而李林甫则是由于会拍马屁得任大官，故而非常嫉恨张九龄，私下里进谗陷害。
English: At first, Zhang Jiuling was promoted to a high-ranking official because of his well-written articles, and he adhered to an honest and upright work style, while Li Linfu was promoted to a high-ranking official because of his flattery, so he was very jealous of Zhang Jiuling and secretly set up a trap.

古文：帝欲进朔方节度使牛仙客实封，九龄谓林甫： 封赏待名臣大功，边将一上最，可遽议？要与公固争。 
现代文：皇帝想赏朔方节度使牛仙客实封，张九龄对李林甫说： 封赏是为了奖励名臣的大功，边将要第一功的，怎可匆忙决定，我将与你争辩。 
English: The emperor wanted to award Shuo Fang with the title of "Cow Immortal," so Zhang Juling said to Li Linfu, "The award is to reward the great merit of the famous minister. If you want the first merit, how can you make a hasty decision? I will argue with you."

古文：林甫然许。及进见，九龄极论，而林甫抑嘿，退又漏其言。
现代文：李林甫同意在廷前各抒己见，及至进见时，张九龄多方说明不可封，而李林甫则默不发言，退朝后又在背后说东道西。
English: Li Linfu agreed to let everyone express their opinions in front of the court, and when he came to the court, Zhang Juering explained that many parties could not be sealed, while Li Linfu did not speak, and after retiring from the court, he said "welcome to the west" behind his back.

古文：仙客明日见帝，泣且辞。
现代文：牛仙客第二天来见皇帝，哭着辞谢请不加封，皇帝就更加想赏仙客了。
English: The next day, Niu Xianke came to see the emperor, crying and thanking him for not adding a seal, and the emperor wanted to appreciate Xianke even more.

古文：帝滋欲赏仙客，九龄持不可。林甫为人言： 天子用人，何不可者？ 
现代文：张九龄坚持不可，李林甫对别人说： 天子用人，有什么行不行的。 
English: Zhang Jiuling could not insist, and Li Linfu said to others, "God uses people, no matter what.

古文：帝闻，善林甫不专也。
现代文：皇帝听说后，很喜欢李林甫的不坚持己见。
English: After hearing this, the emperor liked Li Linfu's non-persistence.

古文：由是益疏薄九龄，俄与耀卿俱罢政事，专任林甫，相仙客矣。
现代文：由此更加疏远张九龄了。不久，张九龄和裴耀卿都罢了宰相职，而专任用李林甫、牛仙客了。
English: This further alienated Zhang Jiuling. Soon, Zhang Jiuling and Pei Yaoqing both resigned from the post of prime minister, and Li Linfu and Niu Xianke were appointed full-time.

古文：初，三宰相就位，二人磬折趋，而林甫在中，轩骜无少让，喜津津出眉宇间。观者窃言： 一雕挟两兔。 
现代文：当初，三位宰相就位时，两人弯腰疾趋，而林甫在中间昂首阔步毫无谦让之意，春风得意的样子流溢在眉宇之间，观看的人偷偷议论： 一雕挟两兔。 
English: At the beginning, when the three prime ministers took their seats, the two of them bent down and hurried forward, while Lin Fu strutted in the middle without any sense of modesty. The look of spring breeze overflowed between their eyebrows, and the people watching secretly discussed: a carving between two rabbits.

古文：少选，诏书出，耀卿、九龄以左右丞相罢，林甫嘻笑曰： 尚左右丞相邪？ 
现代文：不久，诏书下来，裴耀卿、张九龄左右丞相被免官，李林甫幸灾乐祸嘲笑说 ：你们还当左右丞相吗？ 
English: Soon after, the imperial edict came down, and Pei Yaoqing and Zhang Julin, the left and right chancellors, were dismissed. Li Linfu gloated and scoffed, saying, "Are you still the left and right chancellors?

古文：目恚而送乃止，公卿为战栗。
现代文：眼里露着阴险而送。其他公卿见了都为之战栗。
English: He went away with a sinister look in his eyes. Other nobles shuddered when they saw him.

古文：于是林甫进兼中书令。
现代文：此时，李林甫进兼中书令。
English: At this time, Li Linfujin also became the General Secretary of the CPC.

古文：帝卒用其言，杀三子，天下冤之。
现代文：皇帝到底听了李林甫的话，杀了太子瑛、鄂王瑶、光王琚三个亲生儿子，天下人均觉得三人死得冤。
English: After all, the emperor listened to Li Linfu's words and killed the three biological sons of Prince Ying, Hwangtao, and Kwangtao, and everyone in the world felt that the three died unjustly.

古文：大理卿徐峤妄言： 大理狱杀气盛，鸟雀不敢栖。
现代文：大理卿徐峤居然胡说什么 ：历来大理狱杀气盛，鸟雀不敢栖息。
English: Dali Lord Xu Xi actually said nonsense: Dali prison has always been murderous, birds and finches do not dare to roost.

古文：今刑部断死，岁才五十八，而乌鹊巢狱户，几至刑措。 
现代文：如今刑部断狱，死罪的一年才五十八人，乌鹊都在狱户上做窝了，死刑几乎弃置了。 
English: Now that the Department of Corrections has broken up the prison, there are only fifty-eight people sentenced to death each year, and the criminals have all made their nests in the prison houses. The death penalty has almost been abandoned.

古文：群臣贺帝，而帝推功大臣，封林甫晋国公，仙客豳国公。
现代文：群臣祝贺皇帝，皇帝又说这是大臣的功劳，于是封李林甫晋国公，封牛仙客豳国公。
English: The courtiers congratulated the emperor, and the emperor said that this was the minister's achievement, so he appointed Li Linfu as the prince of Jin and Niu Xian Hakka as the prince of Qin.

古文：及帝将立太子，林甫探帝意，数称道寿王，语秘不传，而帝意自属忠王，寿王不得立。
现代文：皇帝将要重立太子了，李林甫探得皇帝的心思，就多次称道寿王。皇帝对此秘而不传，皇帝心中属意忠王，终于，寿王未能立。
English: When the emperor was about to reinstate the crown prince, Li Linfu, having tapped into the emperor's thoughts, repeatedly praised Prince Shou. The emperor did not reveal this to the public. The emperor's heart belonged to Prince Yizhong. In the end, Prince Shou could not be reinstated.

古文：太子既定，林甫恨谋不行，且畏祸，乃阳善韦坚。
现代文：太子已定，李林甫一则恨自己的谋划未能得逞，再则也从此事悟出自己恐会有祸，于是表面上与韦坚亲善。
English: The prince had already decided that Li Linfu hated himself for the failure of his plan, and he also realized from this that he might be in trouble, so he was friendly with Wei Jian on the surface.

古文：坚，太子妃兄也。使任要职，将覆其家，以摇东宫。
现代文：韦坚，是太子妃的哥哥，让他任要职，准备扳倒他家以动摇东宫的地位。
English: Wei Jian, the brother of the crown princess, had him appointed to a high-ranking position and was preparing to overthrow his family in order to shake up the status of the East Palace.

古文：乃构坚狱，而太子绝妃自明，林甫计黜。
现代文：于是设计使韦坚犯罪入狱，太子上表请求与韦妃离婚以示与韦坚绝无往来。李林甫的计谋未达目的。
English: As a result, Wei Jian was sent to prison for his crime, and the crown prince asked for a divorce from Wei Fei to show that he had no dealings with Wei Jian. Li Linfu's scheme did not achieve its goal.

古文：杜良娣之父有邻与婿柳勣不相中，勣浮险，欲助林甫，乃上有邻变事，捕送诏狱赐死。
现代文：杜良娣之父杜有邻与女婿柳责力彼此看不惯。柳责力生性疏狂浮躁，想帮助李林甫动摇太子，竟诬告杜有邻妄图有变，将杜有邻逮捕，诏令审讯，最后赐死。
English: Du Yucheng, the father of Du Liangyao, and his son-in-law Liu Baili did not like each other. Liu Baili had a restless and impetuous nature, and wanted to help Li Linfu to shake the prince. He falsely accused Du Yucheng of scheming and plotting, arrested Du Yucheng, ordered him to stand trial, and finally sentenced him to death.

古文：逮引裴敦复、李邕等，皆林甫素忌恶者，株连杀之。
现代文：为此案牵连到裴敦复、李邕等人，都是李林甫平日嫉恨不喜欢的人，一起株连杀掉。
English: For this case, Pei Dunfu, Li Yao and others were implicated, all of whom Li Linfu envied and disliked on a daily basis, and they killed Zhu Lian together.

古文：太子亦出良娣为庶人。
现代文：太子亦贬杜有邻的女儿杜良娣为庶人赶出东宫。
English: The prince also ousted the daughter of Du's neighbour, Du Liangyao, from the East Palace for being a commoner.

古文：未几，擿济阳别驾魏林，使诬河西节度使王忠嗣欲拥兵佐太子。
现代文：不久，又唆使济阳别驾魏林，诬告河西节度使王忠嗣密谋兴兵拥立太子。
English: Soon, he also instigated Jiyang to leave Wei Lin and falsely accused Hexi Jiedu of conspiring with Wang Zhongzhi to raise an army to support the crown prince.

古文：帝不信，然忠嗣犹斥去。
现代文：皇帝不相信，但仍将王忠嗣贬谪出京。
English: The emperor did not believe it, but still banished Wang Zhongzhi from Beijing.

古文：林甫数曰： 太子宜知谋。 
现代文：李林甫告诉皇帝 ：太子一定知道他的阴谋。 
English: Li Linfu told the emperor: The crown prince must have known about his plot.

古文：帝曰： 吾儿在内，安得与外人相闻？
现代文：皇帝说： 我的儿子一向处于深宫，怎会与外人通谋？
English: The emperor said: My son has always been in the deepest palace, how could he conspire with outsiders?

古文：此妄耳！ 
现代文：这一定是有人故意诬陷。 
English: This must be a deliberate frame-up.

古文：林甫数危太子，未得志，一日从容曰： 古者立储君必先贤德，非有大勋力于宗稷，则莫若元子。 
现代文：李林甫多次陷害太子，都没有成功。一天故作从容地说 ：古代立储君，必先着重贤德，若不是对国家宗稷有极大功劳的，那谁也比不上嫡长子。 
English: Li Linfu set up the crown prince many times, without success. One day, he pretended to calmly say: In ancient times, the establishment of the crown prince must first emphasize virtue. If it is not a great service to the country's patriarch, then no one can match the eldest son.

古文：帝久之曰： 庆王往年猎，为豽伤面甚。 
现代文：皇帝沉吟半天才说 ：庆王往年狩猎，脸被豸内伤得厉害。 
English: The emperor pondered for half a day before he said, "King Qing used to go hunting, and his face was badly injured by a boa constrictor.

古文：答曰： 破面不愈于破国乎？ 
现代文：李林甫答 ：破了脸不是比破国强些吗？ 
English: Li Linfu replied: Isn't it better to ruin one's face than to ruin one's country?

古文：帝颇惑，曰： 朕徐思之。 
现代文：皇帝颇受惑，说： 待我慢慢想想。 
English: The emperor was quite puzzled and said: Wait for me and think about it.

古文：然太子自以谨孝闻，内外无槊言，故飞语不得入，帝无所发其猜。
现代文：不过太子一直以谨慎孝顺闻名，内外都没有坏名，所以谣言飞语不能侵害他，皇帝也无理由猜疑他。
English: However, the prince has always been known for his prudence and filial piety, and has no bad reputation both at home and abroad. Therefore, rumors cannot infringe on him, and the emperor has no reason to suspect him.

古文：林甫善刺上意，时帝春秋高，听断稍怠，厌绳检，重接对大臣，及得林甫，任之不疑。
现代文：李林甫善于刺探皇帝的心意。那时，皇帝年事已高，亲自听事做决断渐渐倦怠，不大耐烦以法规来检校事理，却重视接对大臣，有了李林甫任宰相后，对他十分信任，毫不猜疑。
English: Li Linfu was good at probing the emperor's mind. At that time, the emperor was very old, and he was getting tired of making decisions by himself. He did not have much patience for checking the school's affairs with laws and regulations, but he attached importance to the appointment of ministers. After Li Linfu was appointed as prime minister, he trusted him very much and had no doubts.

古文：林甫善养君欲，自是帝深居燕适，沈蛊衽席，主德衰矣。
现代文：李林甫又善于培养皇帝的个人欲望。从此皇帝安居在深宫，沉溺在歌舞声色之中。
English: Li Linfu was also good at cultivating the emperor's personal desires. From then on, the emperor lived peacefully in the Deep Palace, indulging in singing and dancing.

古文：林甫每奏请，必先饷遗左右，审伺微旨，以固恩信，至饔夫御婢皆所款厚，故天子动静必具得之。
现代文：君王之德被遗忘了，李林甫每有奏请，一定先贿赂左右，窥视各种动静，设法巩固皇帝的恩宠和信任。即使是厨夫御婢也都得到他的厚赏，所以天子有些微动静林甫全都知晓。
English: The king's virtue was forgotten. Whenever Li Linfu had a request, he must first bribe the right and left, spy on all kinds of movements, and try to consolidate the emperor's grace and trust. Even the cooks and maidservants also received his rich reward, so Linfu knew all the minor movements of the heavenly son.

古文：性阴密，忍诛杀，不见喜怒。面柔令，初若可亲，既崖阱深阻，卒不可得也。
现代文：他生性阴险，工于心计，杀人残忍，但喜怒均不形于色，脸上总是很柔和地微笑，初看上去和蔼可亲，相处的时间长了，就觉城府深阻，终究掌握不了他的心思。
English: He is insidious by nature, scheming, murderous and cruel, but his emotions are all the same. He always has a soft smile on his face. At first glance, he seems amiable. After spending a long time together, he feels that the city government is deeply opposed to him. After all, he can't control his mind.

古文：公卿不由其门而进，必被罪徙；附离者，虽小人且为引重。
现代文：公卿如果不是由他荐举而得官的，一定会获罪遭贬；依附他的，即使是无识小人，也必引荐为重臣。
English: If a courtier is not recommended by him, he will certainly be punished and demeaned; even if he is ignorant, he will be recommended as a senior minister.

古文：同时相若九龄、李适之皆遭逐；至杨慎矜、张瑄、卢幼临、柳升等缘坐数百人，并相继诛。
现代文：与他同时为宰相的，如张九龄、李适之等人，后来都遭逐斥；甚至杨慎矜、张蠧、卢幼临、柳升等几百人都被牵连，相继被杀。
English: His fellow prime ministers, such as Zhang Jiuling, Li Shizhi and others, were later ousted; even Yang Shengkun, Zhang Ye, Lu Youlin, Liu Sheng and hundreds of others were implicated and killed one after another.

古文：以王鉷、吉温、罗希奭为爪牙，数兴大狱，衣冠为累息。
现代文：李林甫以王妒、吉温、罗希为爪牙，多次制造大案。官吏缙绅均惴惴不安，屏息不敢动。
English: With Wang Zhen, Ji Wen and Luo Xi as his minions, Li Linfu repeatedly fabricated major cases. Officials and gentry alike were uneasy and held their breath.

古文：适之子霅尝盛具召宾客，畏林甫，乃终日无一人往者。
现代文：李适之的儿子李雨言曾设盛筵招待宾客，但终一天都没一个人敢去。
English: Li Shizhi's son, Li Yugen, once set up a grand table to invite guests, but in the end, no one dared to go.

古文：林甫有堂如偃月，号月堂。
现代文：李林甫有个堂形状像半弦月，称之为 月堂 。
English: Li Linfu had a hall shaped like a crescent moon, called the Moon Hall.

古文：每欲排构大臣，即居之，思所以中伤者。
现代文：每遇到想排挤诬陷哪个大臣了，就住到那里，思考设计如何中伤人家。
English: Whenever he wants to oust or frame a minister, he goes to live there and thinks about how design can defame people.

古文：若喜而出，即其家碎矣。
现代文：假若他高兴地出堂来，那个人就要家破人亡了。
English: If he had come out happy, that man would have lost his family.

古文：子岫为将作监，见权势熏灼，惕然惧，常从游后园，见辇重者，跪涕曰： 大人居位久，枳棘满前，一旦祸至，欲比若人可得乎？ 
现代文：其子李岫任将作监，见父亲权势熏天灼人，悚然而惊心，曾随从父亲游后园，看见一挽重车的人，就跪着流泪对父亲说： 大人长久以来位居宰相，树敌甚多，以致前途满是荆棘，哪一天祸事临头，想与这个人一样恐怕还不能呢。 
English: His son, Li Shuren, who will serve as a prison warden, was shocked and horrified to see his father's power. He once followed his father on a tour of the backyard, and when he saw a man towing a heavy truck, he knelt down and shed tears and said to his father: "The adult has been prime minister for a long time, and has made many enemies, so that the future is full of thorns. When disaster strikes, I'm afraid I can't think like this man.

古文：林甫不乐曰： 势已然，可奈何？ 
现代文：林甫听了很不高兴，说： 形势已然如此，又有什么办法？ 
English: Lin Fu was very unhappy to hear this and said, "The situation is already like this, what can we do?

古文：时帝诏天下士有一艺者得诣阙就选，林甫恐士对诏或斥己，即建言： 士皆草茅，未知禁忌，徒以狂言乱圣听，请悉委尚书省长官试问。 
现代文：那时，皇帝诏令天下士有一艺之长的都到京师来备选，李林甫担心士人面对皇帝谈话时，会有人责斥自己，就建议说 ：这些士人都是些草野之人，不懂宫禁，只会胡言乱语来烦扰陛下，请将这些人都交给尚书省长官去考察询问。 
English: At that time, the emperor decreed that all the scholars in the world with the highest level of skill should come to Beijing to be selected. Li Linfu was worried that when the scholars were talking to the emperor, someone would reproach himself, so he suggested saying: These scholars are all people of the grassland, do not understand the palace ban, and only talk nonsense to annoy His Majesty. Please hand these people over to the Governor of Shangshu Province to investigate and inquire.

古文：使御史中丞监总，而无一中程者。
现代文：接着又派御史中丞主持监督，结果没一个人能入选。
English: Next, they sent Mishi Nakajo to preside over the supervision, and as a result, no one could be selected.

古文：林甫因贺上，以为野无留才。
现代文：林甫还就此向皇帝庆贺，表示没有一个有才干的人遗落在外。
English: Lin Fu also congratulated the emperor on this, saying that no talented person was left out.

古文：俄兼陇右、河西节度使。
现代文：不久林甫又兼任陇右、河西节度使。
English: Soon after, Lin Fu also held the posts of Shao Yu and Hexi Festival Envoy.

古文：改右相，罢节度，加累开府仪同三司，实封户三百。
现代文：又改任右相，免节度，加官开府仪同三司，实封三百户。
English: He was also appointed to the post of the right minister, exempted from the festival, and was promoted to the post of the head of the prefectural government and the three departments, with 300 households.

古文：咸宁太守赵奉璋得林甫隐恶二十条，将言之，林甫讽御史捕系奉璋，劾妖言，抵死；著作郎韦子春坐厚善贬。
现代文：咸宁太守赵奉璋收集了李林甫所干坏事二十条，准备揭发。林甫暗示御史将赵奉璋治罪，检举他妖言惑众，罪当死。著作郎韦子春也因与赵奉璋友善而牵连遭贬。
English: Zhao Fengyun, the governor of Xianning, collected 20 bad deeds done by Li Linfu and prepared to expose them. Linfu suggested that the imperial historian should punish Zhao Fengyun, accuse him of witchcraft, and sentence him to death. The author's brother Wei Zichun was also implicated in the scandal because of his friendship with Zhao Fengyun.

古文：帝尝大陈乐勤政楼，既罢，兵部侍郎卢绚按辔绝道去，帝爱其愬藉，称美之。
现代文：皇帝曾在勤政殿大陈乐舞，结束后，兵部侍郎卢绚乘马横道而去，皇帝见他温雅有英气，赞美了几句。
English: The emperor once danced the Chenrezig Dance at the Palace of Good Governance. After the dance was over, Lu Huan, the attendant of the military department, rode away on a horse. The emperor saw that he was gentle and heroic, and praised him a few words.

古文：明日林甫召绚子曰： 尊府素望，上欲任以交、广，若惮行，且当请老。 
现代文：第二天，林甫将卢绚的儿子召来，对他说 ：你父亲一向声望很高。现在皇帝想让他到交、广去任职，如果觉那里荒凉艰苦不想去的话，可以现在就告老请求退休。 
English: The next day, Lin Fu called Lu Huan's son Zhu and said to him, "Your father has always had a high reputation. Now the emperor wants him to work in Jiaotong and Guangyang. If you don't want to go there because of the desolation and hardship, you can retire now."

古文：绚惧，从之。因出为华州刺史，俄授太子员外詹事，绚繇是废。
现代文：卢绚很害怕，听从林甫的话，后来贬出京都任华州刺史，不久，任他为太子员外詹事，卢绚由此不被任用。
English: Lu Huan was very scared, he listened to Lin Fu's words, and later he was appointed as the governor of Huazhou in Kyoto. Soon, he was appointed as the prince's assistant, and Lu Huan was not appointed as a result.

古文：于时有以材誉闻者，林甫护前，皆能得于天子抑远之，故在位恩宠莫比。
现代文：当时有些人因才能或好声誉闻名的，李林甫妒在前，故都会受到天子的冷落或疏远，所以李林甫在位时恩宠无人可比。
English: At that time, some people were famous for their talent or good reputation, and Li Linfu was jealous of them, so they would all be snubbed or alienated by the Son of Heaven, so Li Linfu's grace during his reign was incomparable.

古文：凡御府所贡远方珍鲜，使者传赐相望。帝食有所甘美，必赐之。
现代文：凡是御府所贡献的远方珍奇美味，均要使者转赐给他，皇帝吃到什么美味，也一定赐给他一些。
English: The envoys were to pass on to the emperor all the rare and delicious delicacies from far away that the imperial court had contributed, and the emperor was also to be given some of whatever delicacies he had eaten.

古文：尝诏百僚阅岁贡于尚书省，既而举贡物悉赐林甫，辇致其家。
现代文：曾经诏令百官在尚书省检阅一年来所得之贡物，参观完后，把所有贡物都赐给他，还让车辇将东西送到他家。
English: He once issued an edict to the hundred officials in Shangshu Province to inspect the tributes that had been received over the past year. After the visit, they gave him all the tributes, and also asked the cart to deliver the things to his home.

古文：从幸华清宫，给御马、武士百人、女乐二部。
现代文：李林甫随皇帝去华清宫，赐给御马，还有武士一百人、女乐两部。
English: Li Linfu went to the Huaqing Palace with the emperor and was given a horse, a hundred warriors, and two pieces of female music.

古文：薛王别墅胜丽甲京师，以赐林甫，它邸第、田园、水硙皆便好上腴。
现代文：薛王的别墅其胜景秀丽在京师要数第一，也赐给林甫，其他的宅第、田园、水磨等都是最好的、最肥腴的、最便捷的。
English: King Xue's villa, with the most scenic beauty in Beijing, was also given to Lin Fu. The other homesteads, rural areas, and mills are the best, the most fertile, and the most convenient.

古文：车马衣服侈靡，尤好声伎。侍姬盈房，男女五十人。
现代文：李林甫的车马衣服极其奢侈靡丽，他尤其喜欢声伎，侍姬满宅，男女各有五十人，以往的规矩，宰相都是有极大功劳、极高品德的人。
English: Li Linfu's chariot and horse clothes were extremely luxurious. He was particularly fond of the acrobats, and his house was full of attendants and concubines, with fifty men and fifty women each. According to the rules of the past, the prime ministers were all people of great merit and high moral character.

古文：故事，宰相皆元功盛德，不务权威，出入骑从简寡，士庶不甚引避。
现代文：从不考虑什么权威，出入时的随从都很少，普通士人百姓见了也不需要回避。
English: Never considering any authority, there are few attendants when going in and out, and ordinary people do not need to avoid seeing them.

古文：林甫自见结怨者众，忧刺客窃发，其出入，广驺骑，先驱百步，传呼何卫，金吾为清道，公卿辟易趋走。
现代文：李林甫自己知道与许多人结了怨仇，深怕突然冒出个刺客。所以他出入时，用很多骑兵卫士，先行一百步，喝道护卫，再有金吾为之赶人清道，即使公卿也要赶快退避让路。
English: Li Linfu himself knew that he had a grudge against many people, and he was deeply afraid that an assassin would suddenly appear. Therefore, when he went in and out, he used many cavalry guards, a hundred paces ahead, to escort the way, and then there was Kingu to clear the way for him. Even the nobles had to quickly retreat and give way.

古文：所居重关复壁，络版甃石，一夕再徙，家人亦莫知也。
现代文：住的地方，重重门关，间间有复壁，还有版石机关，一个晚上要搬两次，即使家人也不知他此刻在何处。
English: The place where he lives is full of doors and gates, with a double wall in between, as well as a slab organ, which has to be moved twice in one night. Even his family doesn't know where he is at the moment.

古文：或帝不朝，群司要官悉走其门，台省为空。
现代文：有时皇帝不上朝，各司的要官都要到他门上来请示，台、省都因之而空。
English: Sometimes the emperor does not go to the court, and the leading officials of all departments have to come to his door to ask for instructions. As a result, the capital and the provinces are empty.

古文：左相陈希烈虽坐府，卒无人入谒。
现代文：左相陈希烈虽然在省府办公，但无人去见他。
English: Although the leftist Chen Xilei works in the provincial capital, no one goes to see him.

古文：林甫无学术，发言陋鄙，闻者窃笑。
现代文：李林甫没什么学问，说起话来俚俗浅薄，听到的人往往在背后耻笑。
English: Li Linfu didn't have much education. When he spoke, he was vulgar and shallow. People who heard him would often laugh behind his back.

古文：善苑咸、郭慎微，使主书记。
现代文：他看中了苑咸、郭慎微，让他们主管书记。
English: He took a fancy to Yuan Xian and Guo Shenwei and put them in charge of the secretarial work.

古文：然练文法，其用人非谄附者一以格令持之，故小小纲目不甚乱，而人惮其威权。
现代文：他们精熟文法，所用之人若不是谄附的一律用格令来衡量，所以小小纲目没有乱离谱，而人们都害怕他的威严权势。
English: They are well-versed in grammar, and all the people they use, if they are not attached, are measured by the letter, so the small outline is not out of line, and people are afraid of his majesty and power.

古文：久之，又兼安西大都护、朔方节度使。
现代文：后来，林甫又兼安西大都护、朔方节度使。
English: Later, Lin Fu also served as the Anxi Daduo and Shuo Fang's envoy.

古文：俄兼单于副大都护，以朔方副使李献忠反，让还节度。
现代文：不久又兼任单于副大都护，后因朔方副使李献忠反叛，让还节度之职。
English: Soon, he also concurrently held the post of vice-metropolitan protector, and later, due to the rebellion of Vice-Governor Shuo, Li Xianzhong was forced to give up the post of governor.

古文：始厚王鉷，为尽力。
现代文：当初，李林甫厚待王钅共，王钅共也为他尽力。
English: At the beginning, Li Linfu was kind to Wang Xizhong, and Wang Xizhong also did his best for him.

古文：及鉷败，诏宰相治状，林甫大惧，不敢面鉷，狱具署名，亦无所申救。
现代文：后来王钅共出事了，诏令宰相审讯，林甫十分害怕，不敢见钅共，案件审讯结果送上来，也没有为之申辩救援。
English: Later, Wang Qigong was involved in an accident. Lin Fu was very scared and did not dare to meet with Wang Qigong. The result of the case was sent to him, and there was no defense or rescue.

古文：因以杨国忠代为御史大夫。林甫薄国忠材孱，无所畏，又以贵妃故善之。
现代文：后来就让杨国忠代为御史大夫，李林甫瞧不起杨国忠，所以无所畏惧，只因贵妃的缘故与杨国忠亲善。
English: Later, he made Yang Guotong's deputy the imperial historian. Li Linfu looked down on Yang Guotong, so he was fearless. He was friendly with Yang Guotong only because of his wife.

古文：及是权益盛，贵震天下，始交恶若仇敌。
现代文：及至杨国忠权势日盛，地位之显赫，天下侧目，这才与他合不来且势如仇敌。
English: It was only when Yang Guotong's power and influence were on the rise, and his position was prominent, and the whole world turned a blind eye, that he could not get along with him and became an enemy.

古文：然国忠方兼剑南节度使，而南蛮入寇，林甫因建遣之镇，欲离间之。
现代文：那时，杨国忠正兼任剑南节度使，而南蛮入侵，李林甫趁机建议要杨国忠到剑南镇守，好让杨国忠离开京都。
English: At that time, Yang Guozhong was concurrently serving as an envoy to the Southern Jianan Festival, and when the Southern Barbarians invaded, Li Linfu took the opportunity to suggest that Yang Guozhong should go to Jianan to guard the town, so that Yang Guozhong could leave Kyoto.

古文：国忠入辞，帝曰： 处置且讫，亟还，指日待卿。 
现代文：国忠无奈，入朝向皇帝告辞，皇帝安慰说 ：你去那里，待你处置军事完毕，我就召你回京的。 
English: Guozhong reluctantly entered the court to bid farewell to the emperor, who consoled him by saying: "You go there, and when you have disposed of the military, I will call you back to Beijing."

古文：林甫闻之忧懑。
现代文：李林甫得知后既忧且恨。
English: After learning this, Li Linfu was both worried and angry.

古文：是时已属疾，稍侵。
现代文：这时李林甫已有病在身，加上这事，病日渐沉重。
English: At this time, Li Linfu was already ill, and in addition to this, his illness became increasingly severe.

古文：会帝幸温汤，诏以马舆从，御医珍膳继至，诏旨存问，中官护起居。
现代文：此时皇帝赴温泉，诏令车马载林甫同行，御医诊治，珍膳调养，皇帝不时存问，中官照顾起居，真是无微不至。
English: At this time, the emperor went to the hot spring, ordered the chariot and horse to carry Lin Fu to accompany him, the doctor diagnosed and treated him, the precious meal was prepared, the emperor asked questions from time to time, and the lieutenant general took care of him. It was all perfect.

古文：病剧，巫者视疾云： 见天子当少间。 
现代文：病危了，巫者看了病后说： 见天子一面将有起色。 
English: When he was critically ill, the sorcerer looked at him and said, "See, your son will get better."

古文：帝欲视之，左右谏止。
现代文：皇帝想再见林甫，左右劝阻。
English: The emperor wanted to see Lin Fu again, but was dissuaded from doing so.

古文：乃诏林甫出廷中，帝登降圣阁，举绛巾招之。
现代文：于是诏令李林甫走出廷来，皇帝登上降圣阁，手举红巾对林甫挥招。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered Li Linfu to come out of the court, and the emperor ascended the Qibao Pavilion and waved a red handkerchief at Linfu.

古文：林甫不能兴，左右代拜。
现代文：林甫已不能起身了，左右代为拜谢。
English: Lin Fu was no longer able to get up. He bowed his head in thanks.

古文：俄而国忠至自蜀，谒林甫床下，垂涕托后事，因不食卒。
现代文：不久，杨国忠从四川回来，即到林甫家，谒拜床下。林甫流泪托付后事，最后因不能进食而死。
English: Soon after, Yang Guozhong returned from Sichuan, and immediately went to Lin Fu's home to pray under the bed. Lin Fu tearfully consigned the aftermath, and finally died because he could not eat.

古文：诸子护还京发丧，赠太尉、扬州大都督。
现代文：他的儿子们将灵柩护送回京发丧，追赠太尉、扬州大都督。
English: His sons escorted the coffin back to Beijing for the funeral, and presented him with the posthumous titles of captain and Yangzhou grand governor.

古文：林甫居相位凡十九年，固宠市权，蔽欺天子耳目，谏官皆持禄养资，无敢正言者。补阙杜璡再上书言政事，斥为下邽令。
现代文：李林甫居宰相位共十九年，邀宠揽权，欺瞒天子的耳目，谏官们都居其位而养其资，没有一个敢主持正义的，补阙杜两次上书议论政事，结果被斥为下圭阝县令。
English: Li Linfu held the position of prime minister for a total of nineteen years. He invited his favorites to gain power and deceived the eyes and ears of the heavenly beings. The eunuchs all held their positions to maintain their wealth. No one dared to preside over justice. He twice sent a letter to discuss political affairs. As a result, he was dismissed as the county magistrate of Guizhou County.

古文：因以语动其馀曰： 明主在上，群臣将顺不暇，亦何所论？
现代文：李林甫借此事说给其他的人听： 明主在上，我们当臣子的顺着皇帝的心意还来不及，还要议论些什么？
English: Li Linfu used this incident to say to the others: "Ming Lord, we are too late to follow the emperor's will as courtiers. What should we discuss?

古文：君等独不见立仗马乎，终日无声，而饫三品刍豆；一鸣，则黜之矣。
现代文：你们难道没看见立仗马？整天默不做声，能得到三品的饲料；若一声嘶鸣，马上就逐出队伍。
English: Don't you see the war-horse? He is silent all day and gets three rations of fodder; if he neighs once, he is immediately thrown out of the ranks.

古文：后虽欲不鸣，得乎？ 
现代文：以后即使想不叫了，还能有机会吗？ 
English: In the future, even if you don't want to compete, will you still have a chance?

古文：由是谏争路绝。
现代文：从此，谏争之路断绝。
English: From then on, the path of conflict was cut off.

古文：贞观以来，任蕃将者如阿史那社尔、契苾何力皆以忠力奋，然犹不为上将，皆大臣总制之，故上有馀权以制于下。
现代文：贞观以来，蕃人而任将职的如阿史那社人小、契必艹何力，都极忠心效力，但总不能当上将，皆由大臣控制，所以上面还有余权可以节制下属。
English: Since the time of Zhenguan, those who have been appointed to the position of commander, such as Ashinashe, have been extremely loyal and effective, but they can never become generals. They are all controlled by ministers, so they still have the power to restrain subordinates.

古文：先天、开元中，大臣若薛讷、郭元振、张嘉贞、王晙、张说、萧嵩、杜暹、李适之等，自节度使入相天子。
现代文：先天、开元年间，大臣中如薛讷、郭元振、张嘉贞、王、张说、萧嵩、杜暹、李适之等人，都是从节度使而升为宰相的。
English: The day before yesterday, during the first year of the year, ministers such as Xue Ne, Guo Yuan Zhen, Zhang Jiazhen, Wang, Zhang Say, Xiao Song, Du Siam, Li Shizhi and others were promoted from the position of deputy minister to prime minister.

古文：林甫疾儒臣以方略积边劳，且大任，欲杜其本，以久己权，即说帝曰： 以陛下雄材，国家富强，而夷狄未灭者，繇文吏为将，惮矢石，不身先。
现代文：李林甫嫉恨儒臣因筹划方略而得靖边的功劳，又得高位，因而想杜绝这一条升官接近皇帝的路，好巩固自己的权势，于是劝说皇帝： 以您陛下的雄才大略，国家富强，而夷狄竟然未能剿灭的原因，都是由文官为将，他们不敢冒矢石而身先士卒。
English: Li Linfu envied Ju Chen's achievement in winning the Battle of Jingbei and his high position due to his planning strategy, and therefore wanted to prevent this path of promotion closer to the emperor in order to consolidate his power, so he persuaded the emperor: With your majesty's great talent, the country is rich and strong, but the reason why the Yidi could not be annihilated is because of the civil servants. They dare not take the initiative and lead the way.

古文：不如用蕃将，彼生而雄，养马上，长行阵，天性然也。
现代文：不如任用蕃将，他们出生于雄健的父母，哺养在马背上，成长在行阵中，天性骁勇。
English: They were born to strong parents, nursed on horseback, grew up in the trenches, and are naturally brave.

古文：若陛下感而用之，使必死，夷狄不足图也。 
现代文：假若陛下能感化他们而任用之，他们定能效死，夷狄就不愁不能剿灭了。 
English: If His Majesty could influence them and appoint them, they would surely die, and the barbarians would be destroyed.

古文：帝然之，因以安思顺代林甫领节度，而擢安禄山、高仙芝、哥舒翰等专为大将。
现代文：皇帝很同意他的说法，因而让安思顺代替李林甫统领节度，提升安禄山、高仙芝、哥舒翰等专为大将。
English: The emperor very much agreed with his statement, so he let An Shishun replace Li Linfu as the leader of the military and promoted An Lushan, Gao Xianzhi, and Goshukhan to the rank of general.

古文：林甫利其虏也，无入相之资，故禄山得专三道劲兵，处十四年不徙，天子安林甫策，不疑也，卒称兵荡覆天下，王室遂微。
现代文：林甫看中了这些人都不是汉人，没有入朝当宰相的资格，因此之故安禄山能专控三个道的劲兵，十四年不迁动。天子很满意李林甫的策略，安然不疑，终究让安禄山统兵动乱天下，使王室从此衰微。
English: Lin Fu was impressed by the fact that these people were not Han Chinese and did not have the qualifications to enter the imperial court as prime minister. As a result, An Lushan was able to exclusively control the strong soldiers of the three realms and did not move for fourteen years. The emperor was very satisfied with Li Lin Fu's strategy and was safe and sound. In the end, he let An Lushan's unified army disturb the world, causing the royal family to decline from then on.

古文：初，林甫梦人皙而髯，将逼己。
现代文：起先，李林甫曾梦见一个人白白的而有胡须，逼他退位。
English: At first, Li Linfu had a dream about a man who had a beard for nothing, and forced him to abdicate.

古文：寤而物色，得裴宽类所梦，曰： 宽欲代我。 
现代文：醒后就到处寻找梦中的人，发现裴宽很像，心中念叨 ：裴宽想取代我。 
English: After waking up, he searched everywhere for the person in the dream, found that Pei Kuan was very similar, and said in his heart: Pei Kuan wants to replace me.

古文：因李适之党逐之。
现代文：于是借与李适之一党将裴宽赶出京都。
English: As a result, the party, together with Li Shih, drove Pei Kuan out of Kyoto.

古文：其后易国忠代林甫，貌类宽云。
现代文：后来杨国忠代李林甫为宰相，据说杨国忠的样子极像裴宽。
English: Later, Yang Guozhong replaced Li Linfu as prime minister. It is said that Yang Guozhong's appearance is very similar to that of Pei Kuan.

古文：国忠素衔林甫，及未葬，阴讽禄山暴其短。禄山使阿布思降将入朝，告林甫与思约为父子，有异谋。
现代文：杨国忠一向心里仇视李林甫，李林甫死尚未入葬时，杨国忠就暗示安禄山揭发李林甫，安禄山就要阿布思的降将入朝，告发李林甫曾与阿布思约为父子，准备叛乱。
English: Yang Guozhong had always hated Li Linfu in his heart. When Li Linfu died and had not yet been buried, Yang Guozhong hinted that Anlu Mountain had exposed Li Linfu, that Anlu Mountain wanted Abusi to surrender to the North, and that Li Linfu had been father and son with Abusi and was preparing to rebel.

古文：事下有司，其婿杨齐宣惧，妄言林甫厌祝上，国忠劾其奸。
现代文：于是把这事交给有司查核，林甫的女婿杨齐宣害怕连坐，乃胡说什么李林甫祭神诅咒皇帝，杨国忠又检举林甫种种恶行。
English: Therefore, this matter was submitted to a judge for investigation. Lin Fu's son-in-law Yang Qixuan was afraid to attend the trial. Li Lin Fu sacrificed a god to curse the emperor, and Yang Guozhong also accused Lin Fu of various evil deeds.

古文：帝怒，诏林甫淫祀厌胜，结叛虏，图危宗社，悉夺官爵，斫棺剔取含珠金紫，更以小槥，用庶人礼葬之；诸子司储郎中儒、太常少卿屿及岫等悉徙岭南、黔中，各给奴婢三人，籍其家；诸婿若张博济、郑平、杜位、元捴，属子复道、光，皆贬官。
现代文：皇帝怒，下诏说李林甫滥祀餍人，勾结叛虏，图谋危害社稷。着令剥夺他所有官职爵位，斫开棺材，脱去身上的金紫官服，取出口中所含珍珠，改用薄棺，用庶人的规则落葬；他的儿子司储郎中李萫、太常少卿李屿及李岫等人均迁往岭南、黔中，各人给奴婢三人，家产抄没；女婿们如张博济、郑平、杜位、元扌为及亲属子弟在官者李复、李道、李光等人一并贬官。
English: The emperor was furious and issued an edict saying that Li Linfu had been indiscriminately worshipping barbarians, colluding with rebels, and plotting to endanger society. He ordered that he be stripped of all official ranks and titles, opened the coffin, took off his gold and purple official clothes, took out the pearls contained in the exit, changed to a thin coffin, and buried according to the rules of the commoners; his sons, the Vice-Premier Li Hongzhi, the Vice-Minister Li Yu, the Vice-Minister Li Yu and Li Hongzhi, all moved to Lingnan and Longzhong, each of them gave three slaves, and the family property

古文：博济亦憸薄自肆。为户部郎中，部有考堂，天下岁会计处，博济废为员外郎中听事，壮伟华敞，供拟丰侈至千品；别取都水监地为考堂，擅费诸州籍帐钱不赀，有司不敢言。
现代文：张博济也是个奸佞自肆的人，曾任户部郎中，户部有考堂，天下一年的会计均在此处。张博济被废为员外郎中听事，别取都水监地为考堂，擅自取用诸州上缴的钱很不少，有司不敢声张。
English: Zhang Boji is also a self-indulgent person. He was once a junior member of the household department. The household department has an examination hall, and the accountants of the next year are all here. Zhang Boji was dismissed as a junior member of the household department. Don't take the capital water supervision area as an examination hall. You can use a lot of money paid by the states without authorization. You don't dare to speak out.

古文：帝之幸蜀也，给事中裴士淹以辩学得幸。
现代文：皇帝至蜀，给事中裴士淹因辩才博学而得重视。
English: Emperor Zhi Shu gave Baishuang great importance because of his erudition in debate.

古文：时肃宗在凤翔，每命宰相，辄启闻。
现代文：那时，肃宗在凤翔，每任命宰相都要启禀太上皇。
English: At that time, Su Zong was in Fengxiang, and every appointment of a prime minister had to be approved by the emperor.

古文：及房琯为将，帝曰： 此非破贼才也。若姚元崇在，贼不足灭。 
现代文：肃宗任房为将，太上皇评论说： 他不是个能破贼兵的人，假如姚元崇还在，这些贼人全不在话下。 
English: Su Zong Ren Fang as the commander, the emperor commented: He is not a person who can break the thief soldiers, if Yao Yuan Chong is still alive, these thieves are all out of the question.

古文：至宋璟，曰： 彼卖直以取名耳。 
现代文：选拔宋瞡，太上皇说： 他只是靠耿直取得声望罢了。 
English: On the selection of Song Tao, the emperor said, "He only gained popularity through Geng Zhi."

古文：因历评十余人，皆当。
现代文：前后评论了十多人，都十分准确精当。
English: More than ten people commented back and forth, all very accurate and precise.

古文：至林甫，曰： 是子妒贤疾能，举无比者。 
现代文：及至评论到李林甫，太上皇说： 这家伙嫉贤妒能，荐举的人都是比他更下的人。 
English: When it came to commenting on Li Linfu, the emperor said, "This guy is jealous and envious. The people who recommended him are even lower than him.

古文：士淹因曰： 陛下诚知之，何任之久邪？ 
现代文：裴士淹接着问： 陛下全然知道，但为什么任用他这么久呢？ 
English: Bae Shih-wan then asked, "Your Majesty knows everything, but why did you appoint him for so long?"

古文：帝默不应。
现代文：太上皇默然不答。
English: The Empress Dowager did not reply.

古文：至德中，两京平，大赦，唯禄山支党及林甫、杨国忠、王鉷子孙不原。
现代文：肃宗至德年间，两京的变乱平定，大赦，惟有安禄山支党及李林甫、杨国忠、王钅共的子孙不赦。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suizong and the reign of Emperor Dezong, the upheavals in the two capitals were pacified and amnestied, except for the Anlu Mountain branch party and the descendants of Li Linfu, Yang Guozhong and Wang Xizhong.

古文：天宝时，尝镂玉为玄元皇帝及玄宗、肃宗像于太清宫，复琢林甫、陈希烈像列左右序。
现代文：天宝时，曾用玉雕刻了玄元皇帝及玄宗、肃宗的像放在太清宫，后来又雕了李林甫、陈希烈的像排列左右。
English: At the time of Tianbao, the statues of Emperor Xuan Yuan, Xuan Zong and Su Zong were carved with jade and placed in the Taiqing Palace. Later, the statues of Li Linfu and Chen Xilei were carved and placed on the left and right.

古文：代宗时，或言： 林甫阴险，尝不利先帝，宗庙几危，奈何留像至今？ 
现代文：代宗时，有人说： 李林甫阴险，曾经不利于先帝，宗庙几乎被毁，为什么把他的像留到今天？ 
English: At the time of enthronement, some people said: Li Linfu is insidious, he was once unfavorable to the former emperor, the ancestral temple was almost destroyed, why leave his image to this day?

古文：杞有口才，体陋甚，鬼貌蓝色，不耻恶衣菲食，人未悟其不情，咸谓有祖风节。
现代文：代宗下诏埋掉。到僖宗广明初年，卢携任太清宫使，挖地挖出了李林甫的像，送到京师后毁掉。卢杞，字子良，父亲卢弈，被安禄山杀害，卢杞有口才，但十分丑陋，脸如鬼，呈蓝色。居常衣食寒碜不以为耻，人们不知其矫情，都说他有乃祖卢怀慎遗风。
English: In the first year of Emperor Guangming's reign, Lu Tzu, who served as an envoy to the Taiqing Palace, dug up the statue of Li Linfu and sent it to Beijing to be destroyed. Lu Ziliang, the father of Lu Yi, was killed by An Lushan. Lu Ziliang was eloquent, but very ugly, his face was like a ghost and was blue. He was not ashamed to live in poor clothing and food, and people did not know his arrogance. They all said that he had the legacy of his ancestor Lu Huaixin.

古文：藉廕为清道率府兵曹参军，仆固怀恩辟朔方府掌书记，病免。补鸿胪丞，出为忠州刺史。上谒节度府卫伯玉，伯玉不喜，乃谢归。
现代文：靠父荫任清道率府兵曹参军，仆固怀恩曾召他为朔方府掌书记，因病而免，补为鸿胪卿，出任忠州刺史，曾去谒见节度府卫伯玉，伯玉不喜欢他，乃辞谢而回。
English: He relied on his father, Yin Ren Qing Dao, to lead the prefectural soldiers to join the army. His servant, Gu Wai En, once called him to be the secretary of the Shao Fang prefectural government, but he was exempted due to illness. He was later appointed as the secretary of Hong Zhiqing, and served as the prefectural historian of Chungju. He once went to see the governor of the Jiedu prefecture, Wei Bo-yu. Bo-yu did not like him, but he thanked him and returned.

古文：稍迁吏部郎中，为虢州刺史。
现代文：后来渐升任吏部郎中，出任虢州刺史。
English: Later, he gradually rose to the position of vice-minister, and served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：奏言虢有官豕三千为民患。德宗曰： 徙之沙苑。 
现代文：曾上奏称虢州有官猪三千头，人民负担不起而成患，德宗说： 把它们迁到沙苑去。 
English: In his report to the emperor, Dezong said that there were three thousand official pigs in Zhangzhou, and the people could not afford to keep them. Dezong said, "Move them to Sha Yuan."

古文：杞曰： 同州亦陛下百姓，臣谓食之便。 
现代文：卢杞说： 沙苑地在同州，同州也是陛下的百姓。臣以为不如宰杀吃掉为好。 
English: Lu Wei said: Sha Yuan's land is in the same state, and the same state is also His Majesty's people. The minister thought it would be better to slaughter and eat the horse.

古文：帝曰： 守虢而忧它州，宰相材也。 
现代文：皇帝嘉奖道 ：身为虢州刺史还考虑到别的州，是宰相之才啊。 
English: Emperor's commendation: As the governor of Zhangzhou, he also considered other provinces, which is the talent of a prime minister.

古文：诏以豕赐贫民，遂有意柄任矣。
现代文：于是诏令将猪赐给贫民。皇帝也就有意要委以重任了。
English: So the emperor decreed that pigs should be given to the poor. The emperor also had the idea of entrusting the pigs with an important task.

古文：俄召为御史中丞，论奏无不合。
现代文：不久，召卢杞为御史中丞，凡有论奏，无不合皇帝的心意。
English: Soon after, Lu Xun was called to be the imperial historian, and anything that had to do with music was in line with the emperor's wishes.

古文：逾年迁大夫，不阅旬，擢门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：过了年升为大夫，不到十天，又提拔为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: After a year, he was promoted to doctor, and less than ten days later, he was promoted to attendant of the gate, and was promoted to assistant of the gate of the middle school.

古文：既得志，险贼浸露。贤者媢，能者忌，小忤己，不傅死地不止。
现代文：卢杞得志以后，阴险狠毒的一面渐渐表露出来，忌妒有贤德的人，猜疑有才能的人，稍稍冒犯了他，不将人置之死地不罢休。
English: After Lu Xun achieved his ambition, a sinister and vicious side gradually emerged. He envied those with virtue, suspected those with talent, offended him slightly, and did not stop at putting people to death.

古文：将大树威，胁众市权为自固者。
现代文：他想树立威势，乃胁迫众人以示自己的权威。
English: He wanted to assert his authority, to bully people to demonstrate his authority.

古文：杨炎与杞俱辅政，炎鄙杞才下，不悦，未半岁，谮罢炎。
现代文：杨炎与卢杞同为宰相，杨炎瞧不起卢杞才能低下。卢杞心里不高兴，不到半年，就诬陷杨炎使他罢官了。
English: Yang Yan and Lu Yao were both prime ministers. Yang Yan looked down on Lu Yao. Lu Yao was not happy. Less than half a year later, he framed Yang Yan and had him removed from office.

古文：时大理卿严郢与炎有隙，即擢郢御史大夫以自助，炎卒逐死。
现代文：那时大理卿严郢与杨炎有隔阂，卢杞即提拔严郢为御史大夫，使其成为自己的助手，杨炎终于被逐而死。
English: At that time, there was a rift between Yan Xuan and Yang Yan, and Lu Yao promoted Yan Xuan to the post of Imperial Historian, making him his assistant. Yang Yan was finally expelled and died.

古文：张镒材裕忠懿，帝所倚爱，未有以间。
现代文：张镒才能平平，为人迂缓，是皇帝倚重亲近的人，没有机会排挤他。
English: Zhang Ye could only be a mediocre, slow-moving person. He was someone the emperor relied on to be close to him, and there was no opportunity to oust him.

古文：会陇右用兵，杞乃见帝，伪请行，帝不可，即荐镒守凤翔。
现代文：恰好陇右用兵，卢杞去见皇帝，假装请求带兵出征，皇帝不同意，于是就推荐张镒去守凤翔。
English: It just so happened that Zou Yu used soldiers. Lu Yao went to see the emperor and pretended to ask him to send soldiers. The emperor did not agree, so he recommended Zhang Ye to guard Fengxiang.

古文：既又恶郢。
现代文：后来，又不喜欢自己提拔的严郢了。
English: Later, I didn't like the strictness of my own promotion.

古文：时幽州硃滔与泚有违言，诬其军司马蔡廷玉间阋，请杀之。
现代文：那时，幽州的朱滔与朱氵此因言语而失和，就诬称是朱滔的司马蔡廷玉挑拨兄弟之情，请杀廷玉。
English: At that time, Zhu Tao and Zhu Xi of Yuzhou fell out with each other because of their words, so they falsely called Zhu Tao's Sima Cai Tingyu to incite brotherly feelings. Please kill Tingyu.

古文：俄而滔反，帝欲斥之以悦滔，下御史郑詹按状，贬柳州司户参军，敕吏护送。廷玉疑送滔所，因自沈于河。
现代文：不久朱滔谋反，皇帝想以斥责蔡廷玉的办法来取悦于朱滔，将事情交给御史郑詹查询，最后定罪贬为柳州司户参军，令派吏护送，蔡廷玉以为要把他送给朱滔，于是自己投黄河溺死。
English: Before long, Zhu Tao plotted a rebellion. The emperor wanted to please Zhu Tao by reprimanding Cai Tingyu. He turned the matter over to the imperial historian Zheng Zhan for investigation. Finally, he was convicted of joining the army as a Liu Zhou steward and ordered to send officers to escort him. Cai Tingyu thought he was going to give him to Zhu Tao, so he drowned himself in the Yellow River.

古文：杞奏，恐泚疑为诏所杀，愿下詹三司杂治，并劾大夫郢。
现代文：卢杞将事情上奏皇帝，说恐怕朱氵此会怀疑杀死蔡廷玉是皇帝的意思，希望能将郑詹交给三司共同查询，同时检举严郢。
English: Lu Wei reported the matter to the emperor, saying that he feared that Zhu Xi would suspect that the killing of Cai Tingyu was the emperor's intention, and hoped that Zheng Zhan would be handed over to the three departments to jointly investigate, and at the same time report to Yan Yan.

古文：初，詹善张镒，每伺杞间，独诣镒，杞知之。
现代文：以前，郑詹与张镒友善，每当卢杞有什么挑三拨四时，郑詹就来张镒处。
English: In the past, Zheng Zhan was friendly with Zhang Ye. Whenever Lu Ye had something to discuss, Zheng Zhan would come to Zhang Ye's place.

古文：它日伺詹来，即径至镒便坐。
现代文：卢杞知道这情况后，等到一天郑詹去张镒处了，他就也去张镒家，径直就坐下，郑詹避开了。
English: After Lu Yao knew the situation, when Zheng Zhan went to Zhang Ye's place one day, he also went to Zhang Ye's house and sat down directly. Zheng Zhan avoided him.

古文：詹趋避，杞遽及机事，镒不得已，曰： 郑侍御在。 
现代文：卢杞就与张镒谈论机密事，张镒不得已，说： 别说了，郑侍御在这里。 
English: Lu Yao talked with Zhang Ye about confidential matters, and Zhang Ye had no choice but to say: Stop talking, Zheng You is here.

古文：杞阳惊曰： 向所言，非外所得闻。 
现代文：卢杞假装吃惊地说： 刚才所说的话，绝不是外人可以听的。 
English: Lu Wei pretended to be surprised and said, "What you just said is definitely not for outsiders to listen to.

古文：至是并按。
现代文：这时，就把这事一并治罪。
English: At this point, the matter is dealt with as a single crime.

古文：有诏詹杖死，流郢费州。
现代文：最后有诏令郑詹用廷杖打死，严郢流放费州。
English: In the end, Zheng Zhan was ordered to be beaten to death with a cane and banished to Feizhou.

古文：杜佑判度支，帝尤宠礼。杞短毁百绪，讫贬苏州刺史。
现代文：杜佑管理财政，皇帝十分宠信礼待，卢杞千方百计诋毁诬蔑，终于将杜佑贬为苏州刺史。
English: Du You was in charge of finance, the emperor was very fond of him and treated him with courtesy. Lu Ye did his best to slander and defame Du You, and finally, Du You was relegated to the history of Suzhou.

古文：李希烈反，杞素恶颜真卿挺正敢言，即令宣慰其军，卒为贼害。
现代文：李希烈反叛，卢杞一向嫉恨颜真卿严正耿直而敢说，就让皇帝命颜真卿到李希烈叛军中去说服劝降，终于被叛军杀害。
English: When Li Xilai rebelled, Lu Wei, who had always been jealous of Yan Zhengying and dared to speak out, had the emperor order Yan Zhengying to go to Li Xilai's rebels to persuade them to surrender, and he was finally killed by the rebels.

古文：故宰相李揆有雅望，畏复用，遣为吐蕃会盟使，卒于行。
现代文：以前的宰相李揆声望很高，卢杞担心皇帝再起用他，就让他出使吐蕃任会盟使，李揆死在路途中。
English: The former prime minister, Li Qian, was highly respected. Lu Qian was worried that the emperor would use him again, so he sent him to Tibet to be the envoy of the confederation. Li Qian died on the way.

古文：李洧以徐州降，有所经略，使人误先白镒，杞怒，沮解之，不使有功。
现代文：李洧带领徐州归顺，还有一个很好的建议，卢杞就设计让人将此事先报告张镒，卢杞大怒，不让该建议施行，不让李洧有功。
English: There was also a good suggestion that Lu Yao should have someone report this to Zhang Ye in advance, but Lu Yao was furious and did not allow this suggestion to be implemented, and did not allow Li Yao to have any merit.

古文：其狙害隐毒，天下无不痛愤，以杞得君，故不敢言。
现代文：卢杞的阴险狠毒，天下无不痛恨，但因为皇帝宠信他，都不敢说。
English: Lu Xun's insidious viciousness, the world all hate, but because the emperor trusted him, are afraid to say.

古文：是时兵屯河南、北，挐不解，财用日急。于是度支条军所仰给，月费缗百馀万，而藏钱才支三月。
现代文：此时，兵屯于河南、河北，战事相持不下，财政十分紧张，仅军事所需，每月约一百多万缗，府库里的钱仅够支付三个月。
English: At this time, the soldiers were stationed in Henan and Hebei, the war was raging, the finances were very tight, only the military needs were about one million baht per month, and the money in the government treasury was only enough to pay for three months.

古文：杞乃以户部侍郎赵赞判度支，其党韦都宾等建言： 商贾储钱千万，听自业；过千万者，貣其赢以济军。
现代文：卢杞让户部侍郎赵赞管理财政收支，太常博士韦都宾等人建议： 商人们资产一千万的，听任他们自己经营，资产超过一千万的，把多的借出来助军费。
English: Lu Wei asked the steward of the household department, Zhao Zan, to manage the financial income and expenditure. Dr. Wei Dubin and others suggested: merchants with assets of ten million should be allowed to operate on their own, and those with assets of more than ten million should lend more to help military expenses.

古文：军罢，约取偿于官。 
现代文：待战争结束再还给他们。 
English: Give it back to them when the war is over.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：京兆暴责其期，校吏颈大搜廛里，疑占列不尽，则笞掠之，人不胜冤，自殒沟渎者相望，京师嚣然不阕日。
现代文：京城中严格规定交钱日期，校吏们大肆搜括，怀疑商人藏匿不报，动辄鞭打捆绑，人们不胜其苦，不少人为此而自杀，整个京师每日喧嚣不止。
English: The date of payment of money is strictly stipulated in the capital city, the school officials conduct extensive searches, suspect businessmen of hiding and not reporting, and whip and tie them at will. People are overwhelmed by the hardships, many people commit suicide for this reason, and the entire Beijing division is noisy every day.

古文：然悉田宅奴婢之直，缗止八十万。
现代文：然而集中所有的再加上田宅奴婢的钱也只八十万缗。
English: However, all the money collected, plus the money from the slaves, only amounted to 800,000 baht.

古文：又僦、质舍、居贸粟者，四貣其一，仅至二百万。
现代文：又命凡典当的、出租房屋的、有余粮出售的都要 借 出四分之一，就这样也只得二百万缗，而长安再无商业可言。
English: He also ordered all pawnbrokers, those who rented out houses, and those who had surplus grain to sell, to lend a quarter of it. In this way, they only got two million baht, and there was no more business in Chang'an.

古文：而长安为闭肆，民皆邀宰相祈诉。杞无以谕，驱而去。
现代文：百姓们都拦住宰相诉苦恳求，卢杞没办法回答，令人将百姓赶走。
English: The people stopped the prime minister and pleaded with him, but Lu Yao had no way to answer, so he had the people driven away.

古文：帝知民愁忿，而所得不足给师，罢之。
现代文：皇帝知道了百姓的愁怨，则所得不足以支付军费，乃停止此种做法。
English: When the emperor learned of the people's grievances, the income was not enough to pay the military expenses, so he stopped this practice.

古文：赞术穷，于是间架、除陌之暴纵矣。
现代文：赵赞没有办法，于是间架税、除陌税等暴政畅行。
English: Zhao Zan had no choice, so the inter-war tax, the removal of foreign taxes and other tyrannies went smoothly.

古文：其法：屋二架为间，差税之，上者二千，中千，下五百，吏执筹入第室计之，隐不尽，率二架抵罪，告者以钱五万畀之。
现代文：所谓间架税，即每幢房子，两根撑木之间称为一间，每间房屋按等级纳税：上等的每间两千、中等的一千、下等的五百。派吏拿着筹码到房子里来计算登记。若有隐匿，一律加倍抵罪，告发者能得五万赏钱。
English: The so-called mezzanine tax, that is, each house, between two supporting beams, is called one room. Each house is taxed according to the level: two thousand per room for the upper class, one thousand for the middle class, and five hundred for the lower class. Officers are sent to the house with chips to calculate and register. If there is concealment, the crime is doubled, and the informant can get fifty thousand reward money.

古文：凡公私贸易，旧法率千钱算二十，请加五十，主侩注所售，入其算有司；其自相市，为私籍自言，隐不尽，率千钱没二万，告者以万钱畀之。
现代文：所谓除陌税，凡是公私贸易，原税法是每一缗交税二十钱，现在则加到每一缗交钱五十。
English: The so-called "removal of foreign tax" applies to all public and private trade. The original tax law was 20 yuan per tax payment, and now it has been increased to 50 yuan per tax payment.

古文：由是主侩得操其私以为奸，公上所入常不得半，而恨诽之声满天下。
现代文：于是中间人就能大做手脚，大捞油水。公家所得往往不到一半，而怨恨牢骚之声满天下皆是。
English: As a result, middlemen are able to make a lot of money. Public income is often less than half, and resentment and complaints are heard all over the world.

古文：及泾师乱，呼于市曰： 不夺而商人僦质矣，不税而间架、除陌矣！ 
现代文：所以到泾原兵乱时，乱军在街上大喊 ：以后再也不夺你们商人的资产了，以后再也不收你们的间架除陌税了。 
English: Therefore, at the time of the Hibara Rebellion, the rebels shouted in the streets, "We will no longer seize the assets of your merchants, and we will no longer collect taxes from you."

古文：其倡和造作以召怨挻乱，皆杞为之。
现代文：响应起而造反的人极多。这种招怨造乱，都是卢杞一手造成的。
English: There were a lot of people who rebelled in response. This kind of stirring up resentment and creating turmoil was all caused by Lu Wei.

古文：帝出奉天，杞与关播从。
现代文：皇帝避乱去奉天，卢杞与关播跟随。
English: The emperor fled to Fengtian to escape the turmoil, and Lu Xi and Guan Bo followed.

古文：后数日，崔宁自贼中来，以播迁事指杞，杞即诬宁反，帝杀之。
现代文：几天后，崔宁从贼攻陷处来，指责使皇室颠沛流离都是卢杞造成的，卢杞即诬告崔宁反叛，皇帝将崔宁杀了。
English: A few days later, Cui Ning came from the scene of the attack and accused Lu Yao of causing the royal family to be displaced. Lu Yao falsely accused Cui Ning of rebellion, and the emperor killed Cui Ning.

古文：灵武杜希全率盐、夏二州士六千来赴，帝议所从道，杞请道漠谷。
现代文：灵武杜希全率领盐、夏二州的兵六千人来赴国难，皇帝与大家商议让他们从哪儿走。卢杞要他们道经漠谷。
English: Lingwu Du Xi led a total of six thousand soldiers from the states of Yan and Xia to go to the country in distress. The emperor discussed with everyone where they should go. Lu Xun wanted them to go through the valley.

古文：浑瑊曰： 不然，彼多险，且为贼乘，不如道乾陵北，逾鸡子堆而屯，与为掎角，贼可破矣。 
现代文：浑蠨说： 不行，那里路险，且已被贼人所占，不如经乾陵北，越过鸡子堆而扎营，成为掎角，破贼就容易了。 
English: Humpty Dumpty said, "No, that is not a good idea. There is a dangerous road there, and it is already occupied by thieves. It would be better to go through the northern part of Qianling, go over the chicken heap, and make camp there. It would be easier for the thieves to break through.

古文：帝从杞议，贼果拒隘，兵不得入，奔还邠州。
现代文：皇帝用卢杞的建议，贼人果然把守险隘，兵不得通过，还回州。
English: The emperor used Lu Xun's suggestion, and the thieves indeed guarded the dangerous pass, the soldiers were not allowed to pass, and returned to the state.

古文：李怀光自河北还，数破贼，泚解去。
现代文：李怀光从河北回来，多次击败贼人，朱氵此兵退走。
English: Li Huaguang returned from Hebei Province and defeated the bandits many times, while Zhu Xi retreated.

古文：或谓王翃、赵赞曰： 闻怀光尝斥宰相不能谋，度支赋敛重，而京兆刻损军赐，宜诛之以谢天下。
现代文：有人对王罖、赵赞说： 听说李怀光曾经斥责宰相不善于出谋划策，财政上赋敛很重，京师克减军赐，应该诛杀以向天下人致歉。
English: Someone said to Wang Qian and Zhao Zhan: I heard that Li Huai Guang once scolded the prime minister for not being good at making plans and suggestions, for being financially restrained, and for Beijing's restraint in reducing the number of troops, and that he should apologize to the world.

古文：方怀光有功，上必听用其言，公等殆矣！ 
现代文：现在怀光正建了功，皇上必定听他的话，公等的地位可就危险了。 
English: Now that Huai Guang Zheng Jian has made great achievements, the emperor will surely listen to his words, and the position of the public is in danger.

古文：二人以白杞。杞惧，即谲帝曰： 怀光勋在宗社，贼惮之破胆，今因其威，可一举而定。
现代文：两人将此话告诉卢杞，卢杞害怕了，就对皇帝说： 李怀光为社稷建立了大功劳。贼人听到他的名字就丧胆奔逃。
English: The two of them told Lu Yao about this. Lu Yao was scared and said to the emperor: Li Huai Guang has made great contributions to the society. When the thief heard his name, he was scared and ran away.

古文：若许来朝，则犒赐留连，贼得裒整残馀为完守计，图之实难，不如席胜使平京师，破竹之势也。 
现代文：现在可以趁其威势，一举而彻底歼灭贼人，假若要他来朝，那么犒劳赏赐等要留连很多日子，贼人就能得暇招集残部，修筑工事，调整部署。那时再去打他们就难了，不如让他乘胜去攻克京师，定会势如破竹的。 
English: Now he can take advantage of his power to completely annihilate the bandits in one fell swoop. If he were to come to the DPRK, he would have to stay for a long time to receive rewards and rewards, and the bandits would have time to recruit remnants, build construction, and adjust deployment. At that time, it would be difficult to fight them again. It would be better to let him take advantage of the victory to conquer the Beijing division, and the situation would be unstoppable.

古文：帝然之。诏怀光无朝，进屯便桥。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得有理，就诏令李怀光不必还朝，而进屯便桥。
English: The emperor thought he was right, so he ordered Li Huaiguang not to return to the court, but to go to Tunbin Bridge.

古文：怀光自以千里勤难，有大功，为奸臣沮间，不一见天子，内怏怏无所发，遂谋反，因暴言杞等罪恶。
现代文：李怀光认为自己千里来赴难，建立了大功，却被奸臣阻挠，不能见天子一面，心内忧郁又无可发泄。于是打算反抗，公开揭发卢杞等人的罪恶。
English: Li Huaguang thought that he had come thousands of miles to face difficulties and built up great achievements, but was obstructed by treacherous vassals, unable to see the face of the Son of God, and unable to vent his inner melancholy. Therefore, he planned to resist and publicly expose the sins of Lu Yao and others.

古文：士议哗沸，皆指目杞，帝始寤，贬为新州司马。
现代文：他的揭发，引起汹汹的士议，大家都指斥卢杞，皇帝才开始醒悟，将卢杞贬为新州司马。
English: His disclosure caused fierce debate among scholars. Everyone rebuked Lu Wei, and only then did the emperor begin to wake up and relegate Lu Wei to the position of Xinzhou Sima.

古文：始，帝即位，以崔祐甫为相，专以道德导主意，故建中初纲纪张设，赫然有贞观风。及杞相，乃讽帝以刑名绳天下，乱败踵及。其阴害矫谲，虽国屯主辱，犹謷然肆为之。
现代文：当初，德宗皇帝刚即位，任崔甫为宰相，总是以道与德来引导皇帝的思想，所以建中初年纲纪肃然，赫然有贞观之风，及至卢杞为宰相，劝说皇帝以刑名来要求天下，叛乱及败政接踵而至，卢杞的狡诈阴毒，即使国事受挫、国主受辱，他依然恣肆妄为。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Dezong had just ascended the throne and appointed Cui Fu as prime minister. He always guided the emperor's thoughts with Tao and virtue. Therefore, in the first year of Jianzhong Middle School, discipline was solemn and there was a style of chastity. And when Lu Wei became prime minister, he persuaded the emperor to demand the world in the name of punishment. Rebellion and political defeat followed. Lu Wei's cunning and insidious, even if national affairs were frustrated and the sovereign was insulted, he still acted arbitrarily.

古文：后虽斥，然帝念之不衰。
现代文：后来虽遭贬斥，但皇帝仍时刻念叨他。
English: Although he was later reprimanded, the emperor still talked about him all the time.

古文：及兴元赦令，俄徙吉州长史。
现代文：到兴元年下赦令，不久升他为吉州长史。
English: He was pardoned in the first year of the Heian period, and was soon promoted to the position of prefectural governor.

古文：杞乃曰： 上必复用我。 
现代文：卢杞说 ：皇上定会再用我。 
English: Lu Wei said, "The emperor will surely use me again."

古文：贞元元年，诏拜饶州刺史。
现代文：贞元元年，诏令任卢杞为饶州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the imperial edict appointed Lu Yao as the governor of Raozhou.

古文：给事中袁高当行诏书，不肯草，白宰相曰： 杞反易天常，使万乘播迁，幸赦不诛，又委大州，失天下望。 
现代文：给事中袁高该替皇帝起草诏书，不肯写这一诏书，对宰相说 ：卢杞违背天理，使皇上流离失所，已万幸赦他不死，如今再把一个大州交给他，大失天下之所望。 
English: During the incident, Yuan Gao was supposed to draft an imperial edict for the emperor, but he refused to write the imperial edict and said to the prime minister: Lu Xun violated the principles of heaven and displaced the emperor. Fortunately, he was pardoned and did not die. Now, he has been given another large province, which is a great loss to the world.

古文：宰相不悦，乃召它舍人作制，高固执不得下。于是谏臣赵需、裴佶、宇文炫、卢景亮、张荐等众对，极言杞罪四海共弃，今复用之，忠臣寒膺，良士痛骨，必且阶祸。
现代文：宰相不高兴了，就召别的舍人起草，袁高坚持，此诏书不得下发，这时，谏臣赵需、裴佶、宇文炫、卢景亮、张荐等人共同议论，都说卢杞之罪四海之人都鄙弃，现在再起用他，会使忠臣寒心，良士痛骨，且一定会再启祸端。
English: When the prime minister was displeased, he called in other courtiers to draft the edict, and Yuan Gao insisted that this edict must not be issued. At this time, his vassals, Zhao Bei, Wu Wenxuan, Lu Jingliang, Zhang Recommend and others discussed together. They all said that Lu Wei's crime was despised by people from all over the world. To use him again now would chill the hearts of loyal subjects and pain the bones of good men, and would surely bring disaster again.

古文：其言恳到。
现代文：他们的话极为恳切中肯。
English: Their words are profoundly pertinent.

古文：帝语宰相曰： 授杞小州可乎？ 
现代文：皇帝对宰相说 ：给卢杞一个小州可以吗？ 
English: The emperor said to the prime minister: Is it okay to give Lu Wei a small prefecture?

古文：李勉曰： 陛下与大州亦无难，如四方之谤何？ 
现代文：李勉说 ：陛下要给他大州也没什么难的，但怎样平息四方的责难呢？ 
English: Li Mian said, "It is not difficult for His Majesty to give him Dazhou, but how can he quell the criticism from the four quarters?"

古文：乃诏为澧州别驾。
现代文：于是诏令为澧州别驾。
English: As a result, the imperial edict was issued to stay away from Zhangzhou.

古文：后散骑常侍李泌见，帝曰： 高等论杞事，朕可之矣！ 
现代文：后来散骑常侍李泌来朝，皇帝说： 袁高他们议论了卢杞的事，我已同意他们了。 
English: Later, when Li Xiu, the imperial equerry, came to the imperial court, the emperor said: Yuan Gao, they have discussed the matter of Lu Wei, and I have agreed with them.

古文：泌顿首贺曰： 比日外谓陛下汉之桓、灵，今乃知尧、舜主也。 
现代文：李泌叩头庆贺说： 前些日子，外面议论陛下有如汉朝的桓帝、灵帝，今日才知陛下是尧舜一样的国主啊。 
English: Li Jie bowed his head in celebration and said, "A few days ago, people outside were talking about how Your Majesty was like the Han Dynasty's Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling, but today they know that Your Majesty is the same kind of sovereign."

古文：帝喜。
现代文：皇帝听了很高兴。
English: The emperor was delighted to hear this.

古文：杞遂死澧州。
现代文：卢杞最后死在澧州。
English: Lu Yao eventually died in Ganzhou.

古文：初，尚父郭子仪病甚，百官造省，不屏姬侍。
现代文：当初，尚父郭子仪病得很重，百官都来他家探望，郭子仪的姬侍们都不回避。
English: At first, Guo Ziyi's father Guo Ziyi was very ill. Hundreds of officials came to visit his home, and Guo Ziyi's concubines did not shy away.

古文：及杞至，则屏之，隐几而待。
现代文：及至卢杞来看望，郭子仪让姬妾们全都回避，自己靠着小几等卢杞。
English: When she came to visit Lu Wei, Guo Ziyi let all the concubines avoid her, and she waited for Lu Wei by leaning on a small table.

古文：家人怪问其故，子仪曰： 彼外陋内险，左右见必笑，使后得权，吾族无类矣！ 
现代文：家里人很奇怪，问这是为什么。郭子仪说： 卢杞这个人外貌丑陋，内心阴毒，侍妾们见了他的模样一定会笑，他以后若得大权，那我们家就会灭族了。 
English: The family members were very puzzled and asked why. Guo Ziyi said, "This Lu Wei is ugly on the outside and poisonous on the inside. When the concubines saw his appearance, they would surely laugh. If he gains great power in the future, our family will be exterminated."

古文：崔胤，字垂休，宰相慎由子也。
现代文：崔胤字垂休，是宰相慎由的儿子。
English: Choi In-ji is the son of Prime Minister Shin Yoo.

古文：擢进士第，累迁中书舍人、御史中丞。
现代文：考中进士，升官至中书舍人、御史中丞。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher after passing the junior high school entrance examination, and was promoted to junior high school teacher and junior high school teacher.

古文：喜阴计，附离权强，其外自处若简重，而中险谲可畏。
现代文：喜弄阴谋，附依权势。外表看起来简朴谨慎，实则内心险诈狡猾。
English: They enjoy intrigue and cling to power. They appear simple and prudent on the outside, but they are devious and cunning on the inside.

古文：崔昭纬屡荐之，由户部侍郎同中书门下平章事。
现代文：崔昭纬多次荐举他，由户部侍郎同中书门下平章事。
English: Cui Zhaowei recommended him many times, and he was appointed by the head of the household and the head of the middle school.

古文：方王珙兄弟争河中，以胤为节度使，不得赴，半岁，复以中书侍郎留辅政。
现代文：其时王珙兄弟争河中之职，派胤为节度使，不能赴任。半年后，仍以中书侍郎职留京辅政。
English: At that time, Wang Yao's brothers were competing for the post of the middle of the river, and Pai Yan was the festival envoy and could not go to the post. Half a year later, he still stayed in Beijing as a vice-governor with the post of the middle secretary.

古文：及昭纬以罪诛，罢为武安节度使。
现代文：及至崔昭纬犯罪被杀，胤被贬为武安节度使，陆执政。
English: When Cui Zhaowei was killed for his crimes, Yan was demoted to the post of military and security envoy, and Lu came to power.

古文：陆扆当国，时王室不竞，南、北司各树党结籓镇，内相凌胁。
现代文：其时王室孱弱，南、北司各树党羽结交藩镇，内部相互排挤。
English: At that time, the royal family was weak, and the southern and northern branches of the party made friends with the towns of the domain, and crowded each other out internally.

古文：胤素厚硃全忠，委心结之。
现代文：胤一向与朱全忠要好，倾心与之联结。
English: I've always been friendly with Zhu Quanzhong, and I'm in love with him.

古文：全忠为言胤有功，不宜处外，故还相而逐扆。
现代文：全忠上言胤有功劳，不宜安置在京都外，故而召回仍为宰相而驱逐陆。
English: It was not appropriate to relocate him outside of Kyoto, since he had rendered meritorious service as a chancellor, so he was recalled to Kyoto and expelled from the country.

古文：光化初，昭宗至自华，务安反侧，而胤阴为全忠地，俾擅兵四讨。
现代文：光化初年，昭宗自华州返都，力求抚平内部，而崔胤暗中为朱全忠撑腰，使他拥兵四出讨伐。
English: In the first year of Guanghua, Zhaozong returned to the capital from Huazhou in an attempt to pacify the country, while Cui Yin secretly supported Zhu Quanzhong and encouraged him to send troops to fight on all fronts.

古文：帝丑其行，罢为吏部尚书，复倚扆以相。
现代文：皇帝厌恶他的做法，贬他为吏部尚书，又倚重陆为宰相。
English: The emperor abhorred his actions, demoted him to the position of secretary, and made Shigeharu prime minister.

古文：会清海无帅，因拜胤清海节度使。
现代文：适逢清海缺统帅，于是任胤为清海节度使。
English: As Qinghai lacked a commander-in-chief, Renyin was appointed as the envoy to the Qinghai Festival.

古文：始，昭纬死，皆王抟等白发其奸，胤坐是赐罢，内衔憾。
现代文：当初，崔昭纬之死，都是王抟等人揭发其罪状的，胤连累遭贬，心中记恨。
English: At the beginning, the death of Cui Zhaowei was exposed by Wang Qi and others, and he was belittled and hated in his heart.

古文：既与抟同宰相，胤议悉去中官，抟不助，请徐图之。
现代文：待到与王抟同为宰相，胤建议罢黜所有宦官，王抟不支持并劝说皇帝慢慢来。
English: When he became the prime minister together with Wang Yao, he proposed to dismiss all eunuchs. Wang Yao did not support this and persuaded the emperor to take his time.

古文：及是不欲外除，即漏其语于全忠，令露劾抟交敕使共危国，罪当诛。
现代文：如今皇帝又把他外调了，就把王抟对皇帝说的话告诉全忠，要他揭发弹劾王抟依附宦官共谋害国，其罪该杀。
English: Now that the emperor had transferred him out again, he told Quanzhong what Wang Yao had said to the emperor, and asked him to expose and impeach Wang Yao for conspiring with eunuchs to harm the country. His crime deserved to be killed.

古文：胤次湖南，召还守司空、门下侍郎、平章事，兼领度支、盐铁、户部使，而赐抟死，并诛中尉宋道弼、景务修，繇是权震天下，虽宦官亦累息。
现代文：其时崔胤在湖南，皇帝召回，仍居司空、门下侍郎、平章事，兼领度支、盐铁、户部使，而赐王抟自尽。中尉宋道弼、景务等人也都被诛。从此崔胤权震天下，虽宦官亦皆侧目屏息。
English: At that time, Cui Yan was in Hunan, and the emperor recalled him, and he was still in the position of the second-in-command, the under-waiter, and the second-in-command, and he was also in charge of the branch office, the salt iron, and the household department, and he ordered Wang Qi to commit suicide. Lieutenant Song Daojun, Jing Wu, and others were also executed. Since then, Cui Yan Quan has shaken the world, although the eunuchs are all looking sideways and holding their breath.

古文：至是，四拜宰相，世谓 崔四入 。
现代文：到此，胤四次拜相，人称 崔四入 。
English: At this point, I met my wife for the fourth time, known as Cui Si Rong.

古文：刘季述幽帝东内，奉德王监国，畏全忠强，虽深怨胤，不敢杀，止罢政事。
现代文：中尉刘季述将皇帝幽禁在东内，拥戴德王执政。刘季述虽深恨胤，但惧怕全忠的强悍，不敢杀胤，只是罢免了他的政府职务。
English: Liu Jishu, a lieutenant, imprisoned the emperor in Dong Nai and supported the reign of King De. Although Liu Jishu deeply hated Quanzhong, he was afraid of Quanzhong's toughness and did not dare to kill Quanzhong, but only dismissed him from his government post.

古文：胤趣全忠以师西，问所以幽帝状。
现代文：胤催促全忠发兵西进，责问季述幽禁皇帝的罪状。
English: Yan urged Quanzhong to send troops to the west, and asked Ji to describe the emperor's crimes.

古文：全忠乃使张存敬攻河中，掠晋、绛。
现代文：全忠派张存敬攻河中，掠取晋、绛。
English: Zhang Cunjing of the Quanlian faction attacked the middle of the river and plundered Jin and Shan.

古文：神策军大将孙德昭常忿阉尹废辱天子，胤令判官石戬与游，乘间伺察。
现代文：神策军大将孙德昭常表现出对阉人软禁侮辱天子的事十分愤懑，胤指使判官石戬与德昭交游，窥察其心。
English: Sun Dezhao, the general of the Divine Policy Army, often showed great indignation at the fact that Xingren was under house arrest and had insulted the Son of Heaven, and he ordered the judge Shi Jun to cross paths with Dezhao and spy on his heart.

古文：德昭饮酣必泣，胤揣得其情，乃使戬说曰： 自季述废天子，天下之人未尝忘，武夫义臣搏手愤惋。
现代文：德昭每次醉酒后必哭，胤探得他的心事后，就要戬去劝说： 自从刘季述废天子，天下人从未忘记，武夫义臣都切齿痛恨。
English: De Zhao cried every time he got drunk, and after I probed his heart, I had to go to persuade him: Since Liu Ji wrote about the abolition of Tianzi, people around the world have never forgotten, and martial artists hate him with all their teeth.

古文：今谋反者特季述、仲先耳，它人劫于威，无与也。
现代文：此次谋反，只是季述、仲先罢了，别人慑于他们的权威，并未参与谋划。
English: This time of plotting a rebellion is just a recounting and a forerunner. Others are intimidated by their authority and do not participate in the planning.

古文：君能乘此诛二竖，复天子，取功名乎？
现代文：如果你能诛杀这两个混蛋，迎皇上复辟，岂不功成名立？
English: If you can kill these two bastards and usher in the emperor's restoration, won't you become famous?

古文：即不早计，将有无之者。 
现代文：如果不早打算，这功怕会被别人抢先了呢。 
English: If you don't plan it in advance, you may be overtaken by others.

古文：德昭感寤，乃告以胤谋。德昭许诺，胤斩带为誓。
现代文：德昭认为对，戬于是把胤的计谋告诉他，德昭同意，胤割断衣带与他盟誓。
English: De Zhao thought he was right, so he told him about Tan's plan. De Zhao agreed, and Tan cut off his belt and swore to him.

古文：俄而季述、仲先诛，以功进司徒，不就，复辅政，并还使领。
现代文：不久就杀了季述与仲先。论功升胤为司徒，胤辞谢不就，仍使辅政，归还被夺的政职。
English: Soon after, he killed Ji Su and his predecessor. On the basis of merit, he promoted Tan to the position of chief secretary, but Tan refused to accept the offer and continued to serve as vice-governor, returning the political position he had been deprived of.

古文：帝德之，延见或不名，以字呼之，宠遇无比。
现代文：皇帝感胤之恩，每次接见他不称其名而呼其字，胤所得宠遇无可比拟。
English: The emperor was so grateful to him that every time he met him, he called him by his first name instead of his surname. The favors he received from him were beyond comparison.

古文：天复元年，全忠已取河中，进逼同、华。
现代文：天复元年，全忠已攻陷河中，进逼同州、华州。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Quanzhong had fallen into the middle of the river, forcing Tongzhou and Huazhou to retreat.

古文：中尉韩全诲以胤与全忠善，恐导之翦除君侧，乃白罢政事，未及免，仓卒挟帝幸凤翔。
现代文：中尉韩全诲因胤与全忠要好，担心会诱导全忠来清君侧。于是要求皇帝罢胤的政职，没等到皇帝同意下令，就急匆匆地把皇帝挟持到凤翔。
English: Lieutenant Han Zhenquan, because he liked Quanzhong more than Quanzhong, was worried that Quanzhong would be induced to side with the Qing Dynasty. Therefore, he asked the emperor to dismiss Quanzhong from his post. Without waiting for the emperor's consent, he hurriedly took the emperor to Fengxiang.

古文：胤怨帝见废，不肯从，召全忠以兵迎天子，令太子太师卢渥率群臣迎全忠。
现代文：胤恨皇帝被挟持，不肯跟去，召全忠领兵来迎回天子，令太子太师卢渥率群臣欢迎全忠。
English: Tanin hated that the emperor was held hostage and refused to go with him. He summoned Quanzhong to lead the troops to welcome the heavenly son back, and ordered the prince daishi Luwo to lead a group of ministers to welcome Quanzhong.

古文：始，全忠至华，遣幕府裴铸奏事。帝不得已，听来朝。
现代文：起先，全忠到华州，派幕府裴铸奏事，皇帝不得已，只好听任他来朝。
English: At first, Quanzhong went to Huazhou and sent the bakufu to make a report. The emperor had no choice but to allow him to come to the imperial court.

古文：至是胤为之谋，乃以兵迫行在。
现代文：至此，胤为他策划，用兵威慑行营。
English: At this point, I planned for him and used soldiers to deter him from going to the camp.

古文：帝下诏趣还镇，因诏遣渥等俱西。
现代文：皇帝下诏促他回镇。同时诏令卢渥等人西来。
English: The emperor issued an edict urging him to return to the town. At the same time, he issued an edict ordering Luwo and others to come west.

古文：全忠上表具言： 向书诏皆出宰相，乃今知非陛下意，为所诖误。
现代文：全忠上表说： 过去写诏书都由宰相执笔，如今得知不是陛下的本意，臣已被他误引。
English: Quanzhong said at the table: In the past, the imperial edict was written by the prime minister, but now it is known that it was not His Majesty's intention, and the minister was misled by him.

古文：师业入关，请得与李茂贞约释憾以迎乘舆。 
现代文：现军队已经入关，请求能与李茂贞相约消除误会，共同迎接銮驾回京。 
English: Now that the army has entered the pass, he asked to make an appointment with Li Maozhen to eliminate misunderstandings and jointly welcome him back to Beijing.

古文：茂贞劾奏： 胤畜死士，用度支使榷利，令亲信陈班与京兆府募兵保所居坊。
现代文：茂贞却弹劾道： 崔胤畜养玩命之徒，竟然支用专利之款，又令亲信陈班与京兆府募兵保卫其私宅。
English: Maozhen, however, protested: Cui Ying raised a playboy, spent the patent money, and ordered his close confidant Chen Ban and the Beijing Municipal Government to recruit soldiers to protect his private home.

古文：天子出次，遣使者五辈往召，安卧不动，一奉表陈谢。 
现代文：天子出巡，派五位使者去召他，他安卧不动，只是上表辞谢。 
English: The Son of Heaven went on a tour and sent five emissaries to summon him, but he did not move from his bed, except to say thank you.

古文：时帝见全忠表，亦大恚，因下诏显责之，以工部尚书罢知政事，胤出居华州。
现代文：当时皇帝见了全忠的表也很生气，于是下诏书严责崔胤，命他为工部尚书，免除其政职，胤出京居于华州。
English: At that time, the emperor was very angry when he saw Quanzhong's watch, so he issued an edict severely reprimanding Cui Yin, ordered him to write a letter to the Ministry of Industry, exempted him from his political position, and sent Yin out of Beijing to live in Huazhou.

古文：初，天复后宦官尤屈事胤，事无不咨。
现代文：当初改元天复后，宦官们对崔胤委屈听命，无事不先和他商议。
English: After the restoration of the Yuan Dynasty, the eunuchs obeyed Cui Yan's orders and consulted with him before doing anything.

古文：每议政禁中，至继以烛，请尽诛中官，以宫人掌内司事。
现代文：每次皇帝与他在宫中议论军政大事，往往谈到天黑。胤建议除绝所有宦官，令宫人掌管宫内事宜。
English: Every time the emperor discussed military and political matters with him in the palace, they often talked about the darkness of the sky. He suggested that all eunuchs should be eliminated and the palace people should take charge of the affairs of the palace.

古文：韩全诲等密知之，共于帝前求哀。
现代文：韩全诲等探知后，一起到皇帝面前乞求哀怜。
English: After Han Quanzhang and others detected it, they went to the emperor together to beg for mercy.

古文：乃诏胤后当密封，无口陈。
现代文：皇帝于是诏令胤以后有所奏请时，都用书面密封，免被窃听。
English: The emperor then issued an edict that whenever there was a request for a report, it had to be sealed in writing to prevent eavesdropping.

古文：中官益恐，滋欲得其谋，乃求知书美人宗柔等内左右以刺阴事。
现代文：宦官们越发恐惧，更加想知道胤的计谋。于是找到识字的美女宗柔等人，安排在皇帝左右，侦察他们的计划。
English: The eunuchs became more and more afraid and wanted to know more about the plot of the seed. So they found the literate beauty Zong Rong and others and arranged them around the emperor to spy out their plan.

古文：胤计稍露，宦者或相泣无憀，不自安，劫幸之谋固矣。
现代文：胤的计谋渐渐泄露出去，宦官们或哭泣或怨恨，人人自危。劫持天子的计策就这样确定了。
English: The eunuch's plot gradually leaked out, and the eunuchs were either crying or resentful, and everyone was at risk. The plot to kidnap the divine son was thus confirmed.

古文：居华时，为全忠数画丑计。
现代文：崔胤在华州时，多次替全忠筹划歹计。
English: When Cui Yin was in Huazhou, he repeatedly plotted evil schemes for Quanzhong.

古文：全忠引兵还屯河中，胤迎谒渭桥，奉觞为全忠寿，自歌以箅酒。
现代文：全忠率兵回驻河中，胤到渭桥迎接，向全忠敬酒，还亲自唱歌以助兴。
English: Quanzhong led the soldiers back to the middle of the river, and I went to the bridge to meet him, to toast to Quanzhong, and also to sing in person to add to the fun.

古文：会茂贞杀全诲等，与全忠约和。
现代文：其时李茂贞杀死韩全诲等人，与全忠言和。
English: At that time, Li Maozhen killed Han Quanzhang and others and made peace with Quanzhongyan.

古文：帝急召之，墨诏者四、硃札三，皆辞疾。
现代文：皇帝急召崔胤，墨笔诏书发了四道，朱笔御札也发了三封，但胤却称有病而辞谢。
English: The emperor urgently summoned Cui Yan. He sent four imperial edicts in ink and three imperial edicts in red, but Cui Yan said he was ill and declined to attend.

古文：及帝出凤翔，幸全忠军，乃迎谒于道，复拜平章事，进位司徒，兼判六军诸卫事，诏徙家舍右军，赐帷帐器用十车。
现代文：及至皇帝离开凤翔到全忠军中，胤才在路上迎接圣驾。仍任他为平章事，晋升司徒，兼掌六军十二卫等事。又下令将他的家迁居右军，赐给帷帐器用等物十车。
English: It was not until the emperor left Fengxiang and went to the Quanzhong Army that Yan finally met the holy driver on the road. He still left him in charge of the Taihang affairs, promoted him to the position of scribe, and also in charge of the 12 guards of the Sixth Army. He also ordered his home to be moved to the right army, and gave him ten carts of things such as curtains.

古文：胤遂奏： 高祖、太宗无内侍典军，天宝后宦人浸盛，德宗分羽林卫为左右神策军，令宦者主之，以二千人为率。
现代文：胤奏道： 高祖、太宗时没有内侍掌军权的。天宝以后宦官权渐盛。德宗分羽林军为左右神策军，令宦者主掌，不过以二千人为限。
English: Taniso: When Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Taizong were in power, there was no inner palace attendant in charge of the military. After Emperor Tianbao, the power of eunuchs gradually increased. Emperor Taizong divided the Wu Lin Army into the Left and Right Divisions, with the eunuchs in charge, but limited to two thousand people.

古文：其后参掌机密，至内务百司悉归中人，共相弥缝为不法，朝廷微弱，祸始于此。
现代文：以后参与执掌机密，以致内务百司全归中人主管。他们彼此包庇为非作歹，朝廷权威减弱。祸患就是从这里开始的。
English: Later, he participated in the management of confidential information, so that all of the internal affairs departments were managed by middle-ranking officials. They covered up each other's misdeeds, and the authority of the imperial court weakened. This is where the trouble began.

古文：请罢左右神策、内诸司使、诸道监军。 
现代文：恳请罢斥左右神策、宫内各司使以及各道监军。 
English: I earnestly request you to expel the left and right divine policy, the palace envoys and the provincial supervisors.

古文：于是中外宦官悉诛，天子传导诏命，只用宫人宠颜等。
现代文：于是宫内外宦官全部诛杀，诏命的传送宣读只用宫人宠颜等人。
English: As a result, all the eunuchs inside and outside the palace were killed, and the transmission of the imperial edict was read out only by courtiers and others.

古文：帝之在凤翔，以庐光启、苏检为相，胤皆逐杀之，分斥从幸近臣陆扆等三十余人，惟裴贽孤立可制，留与偕秉政。
现代文：皇帝在凤翔时，用卢光启、苏检为宰相，胤都把他们赶走杀掉。对跟随去凤翔的近臣陆等三十多人也都罢斥，只有裴贽一向孤立可控制，留下共掌政事。
English: When the emperor was in Fengxiang, he used Lu Guangqi and Su Jian as prime ministers, and drove them away and killed them. More than thirty people, including Lu, a close vassal who followed him to Fengxiang, were also expelled. Only Pei Xuan was always isolated and controllable, leaving him in charge of politics.

古文：帝动静一决于胤，无敢言者。
现代文：至此，皇帝的动静全取决于胤，没人敢说一句话。
English: At this point, the emperor's movements depended entirely on the seed, and no one dared to say a word.

古文：胤议以皇子为元帅，全忠副之，示褒崇其功。
现代文：胤建议由皇子为元帅，全忠为副帅，以示褒奖他迎驾的功劳。
English: Tan suggested that the prince be made marshal and Quanzhong vice-marshal as a sign of praise for his service.

古文：全忠内利辉王冲幼，故胤藉以请。
现代文：全忠私心觉得辉王年幼可利用，所以胤有这样的建议。
English: Zengzhong selfishly thought that Hui Wang was too young and could be used, so he made such a suggestion.

古文：帝曰： 濮王长，若何？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 濮王年长，派他如何？ 
English: The emperor said, "King Yao is old, how about sending him?

古文：还禁中，召翰林学士韩偓以谋。偓阴佐胤，卒不能却。
现代文：回到宫中召翰林学士韩亻屋商量，亻屋暗中助胤，终于不能改变胤的建议。
English: Returning to the palace, Han Yingya, the scholar of Hanlin, was called to discuss, and Yingya secretly helped Yingya, and finally could not change Yingya's suggestion.

古文：全忠还东，到长乐，群臣班辞，胤独至霸桥置酒，乙夜乃还。
现代文：全忠东归，群臣列班直送至长乐驿，胤更远送到灞桥饯行，欢饮至二更天才回。
English: All loyal subjects returned to the east, and the courtiers were sent to Changleqiao in groups, and the vassals were sent further afield to Qiaoqiao, and they stayed there drinking until the next day.

古文：帝即召问： 全忠安否？ 
现代文：皇帝立时召见问 ：全忠一路顺利吗？ 
English: The emperor immediately summoned him and asked: Did Quanzhong have a smooth journey?

古文：与饮，命宫人为舞剑曲，戊夜乃出，赐二宫人，固让乃许。
现代文：又与胤对饮，命宫女做舞剑曲，直至四更天。胤回去，还赐两个宫女，胤坚持辞谢才作罢。
English: He also had a drink with Tan, and they danced a sword dance until the fourth day of the month. When Tan went back, he was also given two maids of honor, but Tan insisted that he would only do so if he was thanked.

古文：是时天子孤危，威令尽去，胤之劫持类如此。
现代文：这时，天子孤危无助，威严全失，胤的挟持皇帝竟到了这地步。
English: At this time, the Son of Heaven was helpless, his majesty was completely lost, and the emperor who was holding his son hostage had actually reached this point.

古文：进侍中、魏国公。
现代文：又进官侍中，封爵魏国公。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of courtier, and was given the title of Wei Guogong.

古文：自凤翔还，揣全忠将篡夺，顾己宰相，恐一日及祸，欲握兵自固，谬谓全忠曰： 京师迫茂贞，不可无备，须募军以守。
现代文：自凤翔回京，崔胤揣度全忠有篡夺之心，自己位居宰相，担心哪一天祸发，因此想掌握一部分兵权。他假意对全忠说 ：京师太靠近李茂贞，不可不防，需要募兵守卫。
English: After Fengxiang's return to Beijing, Cui Yin suspected that Quanzhong had a usurping heart. He was the prime minister and was worried about what day the disaster would happen, so he wanted to control a part of the military power. He pretended to say to Quanzhong: The Beijing division is too close to Li Maozhen, it must be guarded, and it is necessary to recruit soldiers to guard it.

古文：今左右龙武、羽林、神策，播幸之馀，无见兵。
现代文：如今左右龙武军、羽林军、神策军徒有虚名。
English: Nowadays, the Left and Right Longwu Armies, Ulin Army, and Shenchao Army have false names.

古文：请军置四步将，将二百五十人；一骑将，将百人。
现代文：请每军设置四名步将，每将率领二百五十人；设置一名骑将，率领一百人。
English: Let every army have four captains, each of whom should command two hundred and fifty men; and one captain of horsemen, who should command one hundred men.

古文：使番休递侍。 
现代文：让他们轮番值卫。 
English: Let them take turns on guard duty.

古文：以京兆尹郑元规为六军诸卫副使，陈班为威远军使，募卒于市。
现代文：派京兆尹郑元规为六军诸卫副使，陈班为威远军使，在京师市井募兵。
English: Beijing Zhaozhou sent Yin Zheng Yuan Gui as the deputy envoy of the Six Armies of Wei, and Chen Ban as the envoy of Wei Yuan, to recruit soldiers in Beijing.

古文：全忠知其意，阳相然许。
现代文：全忠明白他的意思，表面同意。
English: Quanzhong understood what he meant and ostensibly agreed.

古文：胤乃毁浮图，取铜铁为兵仗。
现代文：胤于是拆毁佛塔，取铜铁做兵械。
English: So Tan tore down the pagoda and used the copper and iron to make weapons.

古文：全忠阴令汴人数百应募，以其子友伦入宿卫。
现代文：全忠暗中让手下的汴人几百个来应募，又派儿子朱友伦入宿卫军。
English: Quanzhong secretly let hundreds of his subordinates apply for recruitment, and sent his son Zhu Yulun to join the Home Guard.

古文：会为球戏，坠马死，全忠疑胤阴计，大怒。
现代文：一次玩球，友伦不幸从马上跌下身死，全忠怀疑是胤的阴谋，大怒。
English: One time when they were playing ball, Yulun tragically fell off his horse and died. Quanzhong suspected it was a plot by Tan, and flew into a rage.

古文：时传胤将挟帝幸荆、襄，而全忠方谋胁乘舆都洛，惧其异议，密表胤专权乱国，请诛之。
现代文：当时，有传言说崔胤将挟持皇帝到荆、襄，而全忠也正打算胁迫皇帝在洛阳建都，担心其建议会遭到反对，于是密表揭发崔胤专权乱国的罪行，请问罪诛杀。
English: At that time, there was a rumor that Cui Yan would take the emperor to Jing and Xiang, and Quanzhong was also planning to coerce the emperor to build a capital in Luoyang. Fearing that his proposal would be opposed, the secret table exposed Cui Yan's crime of despotism and disruption of the country. Please ask about the crime of assassination.

古文：即罢为太子少傅。
现代文：皇帝遂罢胤为太子少傅。
English: The emperor then promoted him to crown prince.

古文：全忠令其子友谅以兵围开化坊第，杀胤，汴士皆突出，市人争投瓦砾击其尸，年五十一，元规、陈班等皆死，实天复四年正月。
现代文：全忠令儿子友谅带兵包围开化坊崔宅，杀死崔胤。应募的汴州兵士都出来控制局势，市民们争相用瓦砾掷击胤尸，该年胤五十一岁。郑元规、陈班等都被杀。此乃天复四年正月之事。
English: Quanzhong ordered his son Yuyuan to surround Cui's house in Kaifeng with soldiers and kill Cui Yin. The recruited soldiers from Zhangzhou came out to control the situation, and the citizens rushed to throw the body of Yin, who was 51 years old, with rubble. Zheng Yuanbai, Chen Ban and others were all killed. This was the first month of the fourth year.

古文：胤罢凡三日死，死十日，全忠胁帝迁洛，发长安居人悉东，彻屋木自渭循河下。
现代文：崔胤罢官后三天被杀。死后十天，全忠胁迫皇帝迁居洛阳，并将长安的居民都赶出东迁，拆房子的木材在渭河中顺流而东。
English: Cui Yan was killed three days after his dismissal. Ten days after his death, Quanzhong coerced the emperor to move to Luoyang, and drove the residents of Chang'an to move eastward. The wood for demolishing the house flowed eastward in the Li River.

古文：老幼系路，啼号不绝，皆大骂曰： 国贼崔胤导全忠卖社稷，使我及此！ 
现代文：老人孩子也赶上路，啼哭声沿路不绝，都大骂： 国贼崔胤引来朱全忠出卖社稷，使我们流离失所。 
English: The old people and children also caught up with the road, and the wailing was incessant along the road, and they all swore loudly: National traitor Cui Yan brought Zhu Quanzhong to betray the company, and we were displaced.

古文：先是，全忠虽据河南，顾强诸侯相持，未敢决移国。
现代文：起先，全忠虽据有河南，但各强悍诸侯互相牵制，还不敢决然篡夺。
English: At first, although Quanzhong controlled Henan, the powerful lords tried to keep each other in check and did not dare to usurp it.

古文：及胤间内隙，与相结，得梯其祸，取朝权以成强大，终亡天下，胤身屠宗灭。
现代文：及至崔胤离间宫廷，与他相结，才得步步实现野心，取皇权而成强大之势，终于亡唐天下。崔胤身被杀，宗族遭灭。
English: It wasn't until Choi In separated from the court and joined with him that Choi In was able to realize his ambition step by step, take the imperial power and become powerful, and finally died under the Tang dynasty. Choi In was killed and his family was destroyed.

古文：世言慎由晚无子，遇异浮屠，以术求，乃生胤，字缁郎。
现代文：世人说崔慎由晚年无子，曾遇见一个怪和尚，得到他的法术，才生了胤，取字缁郎。
English: People say that Cui Shen was childless in his later years, and that he met a strange monk, received his magic, and gave birth to a son, Cui Zhaolang.

古文：及为相，其季父安潜唶曰： 吾父兄刻苦以持门户，终为缁郎坏之！ 
现代文：及胤任宰相，他叔父崔安潜曾感叹 ：我们父兄辈刻苦以保持的门户，将来一定会被缁郎败坏的。 
English: His uncle Cui Anqian, who served as prime minister, once lamented: "The gateway that our fathers and brothers have worked so hard to maintain will surely be corrupted by the tyrant in the future."

