古文：上古结绳记事，苍颉制字代绳。
现代文：上古时期，人们用在绳子上打结的方式记载事件，史官苍颉创造出文字后，才取代了结绳。
English: In ancient times, people used to tie knots on ropes to record events. It was only after the historian Heron created writing that knots replaced ropes.

古文：龙马负图，伏羲因画八卦；洛龟呈瑞，大禹因列九畴。
现代文：伏羲时有龙马背负太极图自黄河中浮出来，伏羲依据图上的阴阳点画成八卦；大禹治平洪水，洛水中出现了神龟，是吉祥的征兆，大禹按照龟背上的文字，列出洪水范九畴。
English: At the time of Fuxi, there was a dragon and horse carrying a Taiji diagram floating out of the Yellow River. Fuxi drew eight horoscopes according to the yin and yang points on the diagram; Dayu ruled the flood, and a divine turtle appeared in the Luo water, which was an auspicious sign. Dayu listed the nine areas of the flood according to the words on the back of the turtle.

古文：历日是神农所为，甲子乃大桡所作。
现代文：历法节气是神农创造的，大挠以十天干配上十二地支，造为甲子。算书由隶首所作，音乐律吕是伶伦创造。
English: The solar terms of the calendar were created by Shennong, and the great crane was created by combining the ten heavenly stems with the twelve earthly stems to form a girdle. The book of calculations was made by the head of the bureaucracy, and the musical rhythms were created by Gu Lun.

古文：算数作于隶首，律吕造自伶伦。
现代文：铠甲、头盔、船只、车辆，都是黄帝发明的；权量衡度也是由黄帝首立规模。
English: Armour, helmets, ships and vehicles were all invented by the Yellow Emperor; the scale of weights and measures was also invented by the Yellow Emperor.

古文：甲胄舟车，系轩辕之创始；权量衡度，亦轩辕之立规。伏羲氏造网罟，教佃渔以赡民用；唐太宗造册籍，编里甲以税田粮。
现代文：伏羲氏造了网，教导民众打猎捕鱼，使得人们食用富足；唐太宗造户籍登记人口和田地，设置里甲等基层组织来征收田粮税。
English: Fuxi built nets, taught the people to hunt and fish, and made people rich in food; Tang Taizong built a household register to register the population and fields, and set up grassroots organizations such as Li Jia to collect field grain tax.

古文：兴贸易，制耒耜，皆由炎帝；造琴瑟，教嫁娶，乃是伏羲。
现代文：实行货物交易，制造耒耜等农器，创始的人都是炎帝；造出琴瑟来调五音，教导婚姻礼仪，创始的人都是伏羲。
English: The founder of the practice of goods trading and the manufacture of ploughs and other agricultural implements was Yan Ti; the founder of the creation of the zither to tune the pentatonic scale and the teaching of marriage etiquette was Fuxi.

古文：冠冕衣裳，至黄帝而始备；桑麻蚕绩，自元妃而始兴。
现代文：冠冕衣裳创自虞舜，至黄帝时才趋完备；采桑养蚕是黄帝元妃嫘祖所发明。
English: The crown dress was created from the yew tree and was perfected by the Yellow Emperor. Mulberry picking and silkworm rearing were invented by the ancestor of the Yellow Emperor Yuanfei.

古文：神农尝百草，医药有方；后稷播百谷，粒食攸赖。
现代文：神农尝遍百草，察其药性辨其配伍，始有医药医方；后稷教民众种五谷，粮食依靠此而来。
English: Shennong tasted all kinds of herbs, examined their medicinal properties and distinguished their compatibility, and began to have medical prescriptions; Houyi people planted grain, and food came from this.

古文：燧人氏钻木取火，烹饪初兴；有巢氏构木为巢，宫室始创。
现代文：燧人氏钻木取火，自此开始有烹饪的方法；有了有巢氏的构木为巢，宫室的制度从此创立。
English: The Hayato clan drilled wood to start a fire, and from then on there was a method of cooking; with the Arisode clan's construction of wood as a nest, the palace room system was created from then on.

古文：夏禹欲通神祗，因铸镛钟于郊庙；汉明尊崇佛教，始立寺观于中朝。
现代文：夏禹想与天地神灵沟通，所以铸造了大钟放在郊庙中。汉明帝尊崇佛教，派人去印度求佛经，在中国大兴土木兴建佛寺。
English: Xia Yu wanted to communicate with the gods of heaven and earth, so he cast a large bell and placed it in a suburban temple. Emperor Han Ming respected Buddhism, sent people to India to seek Buddhist scriptures, and built a Buddhist temple in China.

古文：周公作指南车，罗盘是其遗制；钱乐作浑天仪，历家始有所宗。
现代文：周公发明了指南车，后来所用的罗盘就是它遗留下来的样式。钱乐铸浑天仪，以此察看天象，历法才有了依据。
English: Zhou Gong invented the compass car, and the compass later used was the style left over from it. Qian Le cast the armillary sphere to observe the celestial bodies, and the calendar only had a basis.

古文：育王得疾，因造无量宝塔；秦政防胡，特筑万里长城。
现代文：阿育王因得病，搜罗佛舍利，在一天一夜造成了无量塔。秦始皇为了防止胡人入侵，修筑了万里长城。
English: As a result of his illness, Emperor Ashoka collected Buddhist relics and created the Immeasurable Pagoda in a single day and night. In order to prevent the Hu people from invading, Emperor Qin Shihuang built the Great Wall.

古文：叔孙通制立朝仪，魏曹丕秩序官品。
现代文：叔孙通制定朝廷礼仪，魏文帝曹丕制定九品中正法，确定了选拔才士任官的等次。
English: Uncle Sun Tong formulated the imperial court etiquette, Wei Emperor Cao Pi formulated the Nine Articles of the Middle Ages, and determined the order of the selection of officials.

古文：周公独制礼乐，萧何造立律条。
现代文：周公特别制定了礼乐制度，萧何制立了法律条文。
English: Zhou Gong specially formulated the ceremonial music system, and Xiao He formulated the legal provisions.

古文：尧帝作围棋，以教丹朱；武王作象棋，以象战斗。
现代文：尧帝发明了围棋，为的是教育儿子丹朱；周武王发明了象棋，用来象征两军对垒时的进退攻守。
English: Emperor Qian invented Go in order to educate his son, Dan Zhu; King Zhouwu invented chess to symbolize the advance and retreat of the two armies when facing each other.

古文：文章取士，兴于赵宋；应制以诗，起于李唐。
现代文：用文章策论选拔人才开始于宋朝，用诗赋选拔人才，开始于唐朝。
English: The use of essays to select talents began in the Song Dynasty, and the use of poems to select talents began in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：梨园子弟，乃唐明皇作始；《资治通鉴》，乃司马光所编。
现代文：《资治通鉴》是司马光编撰的；唐明皇精通音律，选宫女乐士在梨园教授，梨园遂成为艺人的别称。
English: "Zizhi Tongjian" was compiled by Sima Guang Rong; Emperor Tang Ming was well-versed in musical notation, and the court musicians were taught in the Pear Garden, which eventually became a nickname for artists.

古文：笔乃蒙恬所造，纸乃蔡伦所为。
现代文：毛笔由蒙恬所造，纸系蔡伦所制，这些都是文房中的贵品。
English: The brushes are made by Mengyao, and the paper is made by Cai Lun. These are precious items in the library.

古文：凡今人之利用，皆古圣之前民。
现代文：大凡当今人们所用之物，都是古代圣贤发明创造的。
English: Most of the things that people use today were invented by ancient sages.

