古文：周秦行记
现代文：周秦行记
English: The Travels of Zhou Qin

古文：余真元中，举进士落第，归宛叶间。
现代文：我在真元年间，考进士没考上，回宛叶一带。
English: During the first year of my life, I did not pass the entrance examination, and returned to the Wanye area.

古文：至伊阙南道鸣皋山下，将宿大安民舍。
现代文：走到伊阙南道的鸣皋山下，打算到大安百姓家中住宿。
English: He walked to the foot of the Mingtang Mountain on the South Road of Yili, intending to stay at the Da'an people's home.

古文：会暮，失道不至。
现代文：当时天已黑了，迷了路，没找到大安。
English: At that time it was already dark, I lost my way and couldn't find Daan.

古文：更十余里，行一道甚易，夜月始出，忽闻有异气如贵香，因趋进行，不知厌远。
现代文：又走了十多里，走上了一条很平坦的路。夜晚的月亮才出来，忽然闻到有异常的气味，像贵重的香料。立刻加快脚步向前赶，也不觉得远了。
English: He walked more than ten miles and walked on a very flat road. It was only when the moon came out at night that he suddenly smelled an unusual smell, like precious spices. He immediately sped up his pace to catch up and didn't feel far away.

古文：见火明，意庄家，更前驱，至一宅，门庭若富家。
现代文：渐渐看到了有火的光亮，心想可能是村庄人家，更向前急走。不久，到了一座房前，看那门和院子像富贵人家。
English: Gradually, I saw the light of a fire and thought that it might be a villager's house, and I hurried forward. Soon, I arrived in front of a house, and the door and yard looked like a rich person's house.

古文：有黄衣阍人曰： 郎君何至？ 
现代文：有个穿黄衣服的守门人问： 公子从什么地方来？ 
English: A doorkeeper dressed in yellow asked: Where did the young man come from?

古文：余答曰： 僧孺姓牛，应进士落弟，本往大安民舍，误道来此，直乞宿，无他。 
现代文：我答道： 我叫牛僧孺，考进士没考上，本来想到大安的百姓家借宿，走错了路来到了这里。只求住一宿，没有别的要求。 
English: I replied, "My name is Niu Seng Yao. I didn't pass the entrance examination. Originally, I wanted to stay at a local people's home in Da'an, but I took the wrong path and came here. I only asked for one night's stay, I didn't have any other requests."

古文：中有小髻青衣出，责黄衣曰： 门外谓谁？ 
现代文：门里有个梳着小发髻的丫鬟出来了，问黄衣人： 在门外跟谁说话？ 
English: At the door, a maid with a short haircut came out and asked the man in yellow: Who are you talking to outside the door?

古文：黄衣曰： 有客有客。 
现代文：黄衣人说： 有客人，有客人。 
English: The man in yellow says: There are guests, there are guests.

古文：黄衣入告，少时出曰： 请郎君入。 
现代文：黄衣人进去报告，不一会儿出来说： 请公子进去。 
English: The man in yellow went in to report, and soon came out to say, "Please let the young man in."

古文：余问谁大宅，黄衣曰： 但进，无须问。 
现代文：我问是谁家的大房子？黄衣人说： 只管进去，用不着问。 
English: I asked whose big house it was. The man in yellow said, "Just go in, there's no need to ask."

古文：入十余门，至大殿，蔽以珠帘，有朱衣黄衣阍人数百。
现代文：走过十几道门，到了大殿。殿上有珠帘遮挡着，有穿着红衣黄衣的守门人好几百，站在台阶上。
English: After walking through more than a dozen doors, we arrived at the main hall. The hall was shielded by a beaded curtain, and several hundred gatekeepers, dressed in red and yellow, stood on the steps.

古文：立阶，左右曰： 拜。 
现代文：左右的人说： 拜见！ 
English: People on both sides say: Bye bye!

古文：帘中语曰： 妾汉文帝母薄太后，此是庙，郎君不当来，何辱至此？ 
现代文：帘子里有人说道： 我是汉文帝的母亲薄太后。这是庙，公子不该来，为什么来这里？ 
English: Someone in the curtain said: I am Emperor Hanwen's mother, Empress Dowager Bo. This is a temple, the prince should not come, why come here?

古文：余曰： 臣家宛叶，将归失道，恐死豺虎，敢托命。 
现代文：我说： 臣的家在宛叶，要回去，走错了道，怕死在豺狼口中，斗胆请求保护性命。 
English: I said: The minister's home is in Wan Ye, I want to go back, I have taken the wrong path, I am afraid of dying in the jaws of a wolf, I dare to ask for protection of my life.

古文：语讫，太后命使轴帘避席曰： 妾故汉室老母，君唐朝名士，不相君臣，幸希简敬，便上殿来见。 
现代文：说完，太后命人卷起帘子，自己离开坐位说： 我是原先汉朝的老母，您是唐朝的名士，不是君臣关系，希望不要多礼。就上殿来见面吧！ 
English: After that, the empress dowager ordered someone to roll up the curtain, and she left her seat and said: I am the old mother of the original Han Dynasty, you are a famous person of the Tang Dynasty, not a monarch-vassal relationship, I hope you will not be rude. Come to the palace to meet!

古文：太后着练衣，状貌瑰玮，不甚年高。
现代文：太后穿着白色的绢衣，姿态容貌美好，年龄不显得老。
English: The empress dowager wore a white satin dress, her posture and appearance were beautiful, and she did not look old.

古文：劳余曰： 行役无苦乎？ 
现代文：慰劳我说： 走路不辛苦吗？ 
English: As a consolation, I said: Isn't it hard to walk?

古文：召坐。
现代文：招呼坐下。
English: Sit down.

古文：食顷，闻殿内有笑声。太后曰： 今夜风月甚佳，偶有二女伴相寻，况又遇嘉宾，不可不成一会。 
现代文：过了一顿饭的工夫，听到殿内传出笑声，太后说： 今天晚上风光月色都很好，偶尔有两个女伴要来找我，况且又碰上嘉客，不可不搞个聚会。 
English: After a meal, the Empress Dowager heard laughter in the hall and said, "The scenery is beautiful this evening. Occasionally, two female companions come to see me. Moreover, I met distinguished guests, so I must have a party."

古文：呼左右屈二娘子出见秀才。
现代文：招呼左右的人委屈二位娘子出来见见秀才。
English: People on both sides of the aisle called for the two aggrieved daughters to come out and meet the talent.

古文：良久，有女子二人从中至，从者数百。
现代文：过了好久，有两个女子从殿中走来，随从有好几百人。
English: After a long time, two women came from the hall, accompanied by several hundred people.

古文：前立者一人，狭腰长面，多发不妆，衣青衣，仅可二十余。
现代文：在前面站着的那个人，窄腰长脸，头发很厚，没有化妆，穿着青色的衣服，约二十多岁。
English: The man standing in front of me is narrow-waisted, long-faced, with thick hair, no make-up, wearing blue clothes, and in his twenties.

古文：太后曰： 高祖戚夫人。 
现代文：太后说： 这是高祖的戚夫人。 
English: The empress dowager said, "This is Gaozu's relative's wife."

古文：余下拜，夫人亦拜。
现代文：我便下拜，夫人也还礼。
English: I bowed, and my wife bowed back.

古文：更一人，柔肌稳身，貌舒态逸，光彩射远近，多服花绣，年低太后。
现代文：另一个人，肌肉柔嫩，身姿稳重，面容舒展，姿态潇洒，光彩照映远近，穿着花花绿绿，上面刺绣着不少图案。年龄比太后要小些。
English: Another person, with soft muscles, a steady body, a stretched face, a dashing posture, a radiance that shines far and wide, wearing flowers and greenery, embroidered with many patterns, is younger than the Empress Dowager.

古文：后曰： 此元帝王嫱。 
现代文：太后说： 这是汉元帝的王嫱。 
English: The empress dowager said, "This is the imperial egret of Emperor Han Yuan."

古文：余拜如戚夫人，王嫱复拜。
现代文：我又像对戚夫人那样下拜，王嫱也还拜。
English: I bowed again, as I did to my cousin's wife, and Wang Yao also bowed.

古文：各就坐，坐定，太后使紫衣中贵人曰：迎杨家潘家来。 
现代文：各坐到坐位上。坐好后，太后让穿紫衣的宦官说： 去把杨家潘家迎来！ 
English: After they were seated, the empress dowager asked the eunuch in purple to say, "Go and welcome the Yang family to the Pan family!"

古文：久之，空中见五色云下，闻笑语声寝近。
现代文：过了好久，看见空中落下了五色云彩，并听到说笑声越来越近。
English: After a long time, I saw five-colored clouds falling in the sky, and heard the laughter getting closer and closer.

古文：太后曰： 杨家至矣。 
现代文：太后说： 杨家来了。 
English: The empress dowager said: The Yang family is coming.

古文：忽车音马迹相杂，罗绮焕耀，旁视不给。
现代文：忽听到车马的嘈杂声音，又看见罗绮鲜明晃眼，眼睛都没工夫住旁边看；就看见有两位女子从云中走下来。
English: Suddenly, he heard the noisy sound of chariots and horses, and saw Luo Yao's bright eyes, his eyes did not have time to look around; he saw two women coming down from the clouds.

古文：有二女子从云中下，余起立于侧，见前一人，纤腰修眸，仪容甚丽，衣黄衣，冠玉冠，年三十许。
现代文：我站起来，立在旁边，看见前面的一个人细腰长眼，面貌很美丽。穿着黄色衣服，戴着嵌玉的帽子，年龄三十岁左右。
English: I stood up, stood to the side, and saw in front of me a man with a slim waist, long eyes, a beautiful face, wearing yellow clothes and a beaded hat, about thirty years old.

古文：太后曰： 此是唐朝太真妃子。 
现代文：太后说： 这是唐代的太真妃子。 
English: The empress dowager said, "This is the Tang Dynasty's Taizhenfeizi."

古文：予即伏谒，拜如臣礼。
现代文：我就伏到地上拜见，就像臣子拜见妃子。
English: I prostrated myself on the ground and bowed to her, just as a courtier would bow to a concubine.

古文：太真曰： 妾得罪先帝，皇朝不置妾在后妃数中，设此礼，岂不虚乎？不敢受。 
现代文：太真说： 我得罪了先帝，所以朝廷不把我列在后妃行列中，使用这样的礼节，不是太不实在了吗？不敢接受。 
English: Taizhen said: I offended the former emperor, so the court does not list me among the queens. Isn't it too unrealistic to use such etiquette? I dare not accept it.

古文：却答拜。
现代文：退了几步做了答拜。
English: He took a few steps back and bowed.

古文：更一人，厚肌敏视，小质洁白，齿极卑，被宽博衣。
现代文：还有一个，肌肉丰满，眼神灵活，身体小巧，皮肤洁白，年龄极小，穿着宽大的衣服。
English: There is another one, with full muscles, flexible eyes, small body, white skin, very young age, wearing wide clothes.

古文：太后曰： 齐潘淑妃。 
现代文：太后说： 这是南齐时代的潘淑妃。 
English: The empress dowager said, "This is the Pan Shu Fei of the Nanqi era.

古文：余拜之如妃子。
现代文：我又像对待妃子那样拜见她。
English: I went to see her again, just as I did with my wife.

古文：既而太后命进馔，少时馔至，芳洁万端，皆不得名，余但欲充腹，不能足食。
现代文：过了一会儿，太后命令摆上酒席。不一会儿酒菜就送来了，又香又干净，种类多得很，但都叫不出名来。
English: After a while, the empress dowager ordered a banquet to be set up, and soon the food and drink arrived, fragrant and clean, with a wide variety of dishes, but none of them famous.

古文：已更具酒，其器用尽如王者。
现代文：我只想填饱肚子，还没等饱，又拿来了各种酒。那些吃喝的用具全都像当帝王的人家用的。
English: I just wanted to fill my stomach, and before I was full, they brought me all kinds of wine. All those eating and drinking utensils were like those used by an imperial family.

古文：太后语太真曰： 何久不来相看？ 
现代文：太后对太真说： 你怎么很长时间不来看我？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said to Taizhen, "Why have you not come to see me for a long time?"

古文：太真谨容对曰： 三郎数幸华清宫，扈从不得至。 
现代文：太真表情很恭敬地回答说： 三郎常去华清池，我跟着侍候，所以来不了。 
English: Taizhen replied with a very respectful expression, "Saburo often goes to Huaqing Pool, and I have to wait on him, so I can't come."

古文：太后又谓潘妃曰： 子亦不来，何也？ 
现代文：太后又对潘妃说： 你也不来，怎么回事？ 
English: The empress dowager also said to Pan Fei: You are not coming either, what's the matter?

古文：潘妃匿笑不禁，不成对。
现代文：潘妃掩着嘴笑得说不出话来。
English: Pan Fei covered her mouth with a smile and was speechless.

古文：太真乃视潘妃而对曰： 潘妃向玉奴说，懊恼东昏侯疏狂，终日出猎，故不得时谒耳。 
现代文：太真就看着潘妃回答说： 潘妃向我说，东昏侯放纵无忌，整天出去打猎她感到烦恼，所以不能时常来谒见。 
English: Taizhen looked at Pan Fei and replied, "Pan Fei told me that Dongwu Hou indulged in everything and went out hunting all day. She felt troubled, so she couldn't come to see me often.

古文：太后问余： 今天子为谁？ 
现代文：太后又问我： 现在的天子是谁？ 
English: The empress dowager asked me again: Who is the son of heaven now?

古文：余对曰： 今皇帝先帝长子。 
现代文：我回答说： 当今的皇帝是先帝的长子。 
English: I replied: The current emperor is the eldest son of the former emperor.

古文：太真笑曰： 沈婆儿作天子也，大奇。 
现代文：太真笑道： 沈婆的儿子做了天子了，太出奇了。 
English: Taizhen laughed and said, "Shenba's son has become a heavenly son. It's so surprising."

古文：太后曰： 何如主？ 
现代文：太后说： 是个什么样的君主？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "What kind of monarch is he?"

古文：余对曰： 小臣不足以知君德。 
现代文：我回答说： 小臣不可能了解国君的德行。 
English: I replied: It is impossible for a junior minister to understand the virtues of the sovereign.

古文：太后曰： 然无嫌，但言之。 
现代文：太后说：你不要有疑虑，只管说好了。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Don't have any doubts, just say it."

古文：余曰： 民间传圣武。 
现代文：我说： 民间流传着圣武的说法。 
English: I said, "There is a folk saying about the sacred martial arts.

古文：太后首肯三四。
现代文：太后点头三四下。
English: The Empress Dowager nodded three or four times.

古文：太后命进酒加乐，乐妓皆年少女子。
现代文：太后又命上酒并演奏音乐。奏乐的艺人都是年轻女子。
English: The Queen Mother also ordered wine to be poured and music to be played, all by young women.

古文：酒环行数周，乐亦随辍。
现代文：酒轮了几圈儿，乐队也随着停止了演奏。
English: After a few rounds, the band stopped playing.

古文：太后请戚夫人鼓琴，夫人约指玉环，光照于座，引琴而鼓，其声甚怨。
现代文：太后请戚夫人弹琴，夫人在手指上戴上了玉环。它的光辉照到了四座。夫人拿过琴弹了起来，那琴声很哀怨。
English: The empress dowager asked her relative to play the piano, and the lady put a jade ring on her finger. Its radiance shone to the four directions. The lady took the piano and played, and the sound of the piano was very sad.

古文：太后曰： 牛秀才邂逅到此，诸娘子又偶相访，今无以尽平生欢。
现代文：太后说： 牛秀才是偶然的机会来到这里，各位娘子又是偶尔来探望我，现在没有什么可以用来尽情表达平生的高兴。
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Niu Xiu only came here by chance, and the ladies came to visit me once in a while. There is nothing I can use now to fully express the happiness of my life.

古文：牛秀才固才士，盍各赋诗言志，不亦善乎？ 
现代文：牛秀才当然是有才的读书人，为什么不各自做诗来表达心意呢？
English: Of course, Niu XiuCai is a talented reader. Why don't they each write a poem to express their thoughts?

古文：遂各授与笺笔，逡巡诗成。
现代文：这不是很好的事吗？ 于是交给每人一支笔和一些纸，稍过了一会儿诗都做完了。
English: Isn't that a good thing? So I gave each of them a pen and some paper, and after a while the poems were finished.

古文：太后诗曰： 月寝花宫得奉君，至今犹愧管夫人。
现代文：太后的诗写道： 月寝花宫得奉君，至今犹愧管夫人。
English: The empress dowager's poem reads: "The moon-sleeping flower palace must serve you, I am still ashamed to be your wife."

古文：汉家旧是笙歌处，烟草几经秋复春。 
现代文：汉家旧是笙歌处，烟草几经秋复春。 
English: The Han family used to be a place of poetry, and tobacco has been reborn several times.

古文：王嫱诗曰： 雪里穹庐不见春，汉衣虽旧泪痕新。
现代文：王嫱的诗是： 雪里穹庐不见春，汉衣虽旧泪痕新。
English: Wang Yao's poem is: In the snow, the dome does not see the spring, although the Chinese clothes are old, the tears are new.

古文：如今最恨毛延寿，爱把丹青错画人。 
现代文：如今最恨毛延寿，爱把丹青错画人。 
English: Nowadays, he hates Mao Yanshou the most, and loves to draw Danqing the wrong way.

古文：戚夫人诗曰： 自别汉宫休楚舞，不能妆粉恨君王。
现代文：戚夫人的诗写的是： 自别汉宫休楚舞，不能妆粉恨君王。
English: The poem written by the relative's wife is: Farewell to the Han Palace and farewell to the Chu dance, you can't hate the king with makeup.

古文：无金岂得迎商叟，吕氏何曾畏木强。 
现代文：无金岂得迎商叟，吕氏何曾畏木强。 
English: If you don't have money, you can't welcome merchants, and the Lv clan has never been afraid of wood.

古文：太真诗曰： 金钗堕地别君王，红泪流珠满御床。
现代文：太真的诗是： 金钗堕地别君王，红泪流珠满御床。
English: The all-too-true poem is: "Kim Soo-hyun has fallen and is no longer the king, red tears are streaming down the empress's bed."

古文：云雨马嵬分散后，骊宫不复舞《霓裳》。 
现代文：云雨马嵬分散后，骊宫不复舞《霓裳》。 
English: After the rain and thunderstorms dispersed, the Imperial Palace no longer danced the "Dancing Princess."

古文：潘妃诗曰： 秋月春风几度归，江山犹是业宫非。
现代文：潘妃的诗是： 秋月春风几度归，江山犹是业宫非。
English: Pan Fei's poem is: The autumn moon and spring breeze return several times, and the country is still in the wrong.

古文：东昏旧作莲花地，空想曾披金缕衣。 
现代文：东昏旧作莲花地，空想曾披金缕衣。
English: The East dusk used to be a lotus field, and fantasy was once dressed in gold.

古文：再三邀余作诗，余不得辞，遂应命作诗曰： 香风引到大罗天，月地云阶拜洞仙。
现代文：大后再三邀请我作诗，我推辞不掉，便答应要求，作了一首诗： 香风引到大罗天，月地云阶拜洞仙。
English: The empress dowager repeatedly invited me to write a poem. I could not refuse, so I agreed to the request and wrote a poem: The fragrance leads to the great heaven, and the moon and the clouds bow to the dongxian.

古文：共道人间惆怅事，不知今夕是何年。 
现代文：共道人间惆怅事，不知今夕是何年。 
English: I don't know what year it is tonight.

古文：别有善笛女子，短发丽服，貌甚美，而且多媚。
现代文：另有善于吹笛的一位女子，梳着短发，衣服很华丽，容貌也很美，而且很有魅力。
English: And there was also a woman skillful in playing the flute, with short hair, and arrayed in fine apparel, and of a beautiful countenance, and very lovely.

古文：潘妃偕来，太后以接座居之，时令吹笛，往往亦及酒。
现代文：是潘妃带来的，太后让她靠近自己坐着。不时让她吹笛子，也不断叫她喝酒。
English: It was brought by Pan Fei, and the empress dowager had her sit close to her. From time to time, she had her play the flute, and she kept asking her to drink.

古文：太后顾而问曰： 识此否？
现代文：太后回过头来看着说： 认识这个人吗？
English: The Queen Mother looked round and said, "Do you know this man?"

古文：石家绿珠也。
现代文：这是石家的绿珠啊。
English: This is the green pearl of Shijiazhuang.

古文：潘妃养作妹，故潘妃与俱来。 
现代文：潘妃当作妹妹养着，所以潘妃与她一起来。 
English: Pan Fei was raised as a younger sister, so Pan Fei came with her.

古文：太后因曰： 绿珠岂能无诗乎？ 
现代文：太后接着说： 绿珠怎么能没有诗呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager continued: "How can a green bead be without a poem?

古文：绿珠乃谢而作诗曰： 此日人非昔日人，笛声空怨赵王伦。
现代文：绿珠于是表示了歉意，然后作了一首诗： 此日人非昔日人，笛声空怨赵王伦。
English: Green Bead then apologized, and then composed a poem: On this day, people are not the same as in the past, and the flute's sound is all about Zhao Wanglun.

古文：红残翠碎花楼下，金谷千年更不春。 
现代文：红残翠碎花楼下，金谷千年更不春。 
English: Red remnants of verdant shredded flowers downstairs, the golden valley of the millennium is even less spring.

古文：诗毕，酒既至，太后曰： 牛秀才远来，今夕谁人为伴？
现代文：写完诗后，酒又拿来了。太后说： 牛秀才从远处来，今晚上谁人跟他作伴？ 
English: After the poem was written, the wine was brought again. The empress dowager said, "Cowherd came from far away, who will be his companion tonight?"

古文：戚夫人先起辞曰： 如意成长，固不可，且不可如此。 
现代文：戚夫人首先站起来推辞说： 儿子如意已经长大，当然不能相陪，也确实不该这样做。 
English: The relative's wife stood up first and said, "My son has grown up, of course I can't accompany him, and I really shouldn't do this.

古文：潘妃辞曰： 东昏以玉儿身死国除，玉儿不宜负也。 
现代文：潘妃也推辞说： 东昏侯认为我玉儿身死去国，我玉儿不该辜负他。 
English: Panfei also declined, saying: Dongdimou thinks that I am the one who died, and I should not let him down.

古文：绿珠辞曰： 石卫尉性严急，今有死，不可及乱。 
现代文：绿珠推辞说： 石卫尉性格严厉，急躁，今天就是死，也不可涉及淫乱的事。 
English: Green bead rebuttal said: Shi Weiwei's character is stern, impatient, today is death, and must not be involved in adultery.

古文：太后曰： 太真今朝光帝贵妃，不可言其他。 
现代文：太后说： 太真是本朝先帝的贵妃，更没有可能。 
English: The empress dowager said, "It's really impossible to become a noble consort of the late emperor.

古文：乃顾谓王嫱曰： 昭君始嫁呼韩单于，复为株累弟单于妇，固自用，且苦寒地胡鬼何能为？
现代文：于是回头看着王嫱说： 昭君开始嫁给呼韩单于，后又作了株累弟单于的媳妇，本来是按自己的心意，再说严寒地方的胡鬼又能做什么？
English: Then, looking back at Wang Yao, he said, "Zhaojun started to marry Han Shan Yu, and later became the daughter-in-law of Zhu Lai's younger brother Shan Yu. Originally, she did it according to her own will. Besides, what can a ghost do in a cold place?

古文：昭君幸无辞。 
现代文：希望昭君不要推辞。 
English: I hope Akira doesn't refuse.

古文：昭君不对，低眉羞恨。
现代文：昭君不回答，低眉羞涩怨恨。
English: Zhaojun didn't answer, his brow furrowed with shame and resentment.

古文：俄各归休，余为左右送入昭君院。
现代文：不一会各回去休息。我被左右的人送到昭君的房中。
English: After a while, everyone went home to rest. I was escorted to Akira's room by people on both sides.

古文：会将旦，侍人告起，昭君垂泣持别。
现代文：当时天快要亮了，侍候的人告诉起床，昭君垂泪握手告别。
English: At that time, the day was about to dawn, the waiters told him to get up, and Akojun tearfully shook his hand to say goodbye.

古文：忽闻外有太后命，余遂出见太后。
现代文：忽听外面有太后的命令，我于是便出来见太后。
English: Suddenly I heard the empress's order outside, so I went out to see her.

古文：太后曰： 此非郎君久留地，宜亟还，便别矣，幸无忘向来欢。 
现代文：太后说： 这儿不是郎君久留之地，应该赶快回去。马上就要分别了，希望不要忘了刚才的欢聚。 
English: The empress dowager said, "This is not a place for my husband to stay for a long time, he should go back soon. We are going to separate soon, I hope you will not forget the happy reunion just now."

古文：更索酒，酒再行已，戚夫人、潘妃、绿珠皆泣下，竟辞去。
现代文：又要了酒，喝了两巡就停了。戚夫人、潘妃、绿珠都流下了眼泪，终于辞别而去。
English: He asked for more wine, drank two rounds and then stopped. His wife, Pan Fei, and Green Bead all shed tears and finally said goodbye.

古文：太后使朱衣送往大安，抵西道，旋失使人所在。
现代文：太后使朱衣人送我去大安，到达西道时，不久就找不到送行的人了。
English: The Empress Dowager sent Zhu Yiren to escort me to Da'an. When I arrived at Xi Dao, I soon couldn't find anyone to escort me.

古文：时始明矣，余就大安里，问其里人，里人云： 此十余里，有薄后庙。 
现代文：当时天才亮，我到了大安里。问那里人，那里人说： 距这十多里，有个薄后庙。
English: It was just before dawn when I arrived in Da'an. When I asked people there, they said, "There's a Hakuo Temple more than ten miles from here."

古文：余却回，望庙宇，荒毁不可入，非向者所见矣。
现代文：我又返回去，看那庙宇，荒凉破败进不去人，不是昨晚所见到的景象了。
English: I went back again to look at the temple, and the desolate, ruined and inaccessible temple was not the same as the one I had seen last night.

古文：余衣上香经十余日不歇，竟不知其何如。
现代文：可我衣服上的香味十多天也没散，我一直也不知道这到底怎会回事。
English: But the fragrance on my clothes didn't dissipate for more than ten days, and I never knew what was going on.

古文：冥音录
现代文：冥音录
English: 冥音录 Chorus

古文：庐江尉李侃者，陇西人，家于洛之河南。
现代文：庐江府尉李侃是陇西人，家在洛水之南。
English: Li Kan, the governor of Minjiang, is a native of Shaanxi Province, and his home is in the south of Loushui.

古文：太和初，卒于官。
现代文：太和初年，死于任上。
English: She died in her first year in office.

古文：有外妇崔氏，本广陵倡家，生二女，既孤且幼，孀母抚之以道，近于成人，因寓家庐江。
现代文：李侃有个情妇姓崔，本是广陵的歌妓，生了两个女儿。现在两个女儿既失去了父亲，又很幼小，寡母用正确的思想方法抚养她们，已快长成人，便安家在庐江。
English: Li Kan had a mistress named Cui Rong, who was originally a prostitute in Guangling. She gave birth to two daughters. Now the two daughters have both lost their father and are very young. The widowed mother raised them with the correct way of thinking. They are almost grown up, and they have settled in Lijiang.

古文：侃既死，虽侃之宗亲居显要者，绝不相闻。
现代文：李侃死后，即使是官在显要的李侃的本家，也决不跟她来往。
English: After Li Kan's death, even officials in the prominent Li Kan's own family would never associate with her.

古文：庐江之人，咸哀其孤藐而能自强。
现代文：庐江的人都同情她抚养孤女尚能自强。
English: People in Lijiang all sympathize with her for being able to support her orphaned daughter.

古文：崔氏性酷嗜音，虽贫苦求活。常以弦歌自娱。
现代文：崔寡妇平生爱音乐，虽然贫苦勉强生活，却常自拉自唱进行娱乐。
English: Widow Cui loved music all her life. Although she lived in poverty, she often sang to entertain herself.

古文：有女弟菃奴，风容不下，善鼓筝，为古今绝妙，知名于时。
现代文：崔有个妹妹菃奴，风度容貌都不错。擅长弹筝，是古今无双的，在当时就很出名。
English: Cui had a younger sister, Xiongnu, who was good-looking and good-natured. She was good at playing the kite, which was unparalleled, and was very famous at the time.

古文：年十七，未嫁而卒，人多伤焉。
现代文：十七岁时，还没有出嫁就死了，很多人都为她伤感。
English: At the age of seventeen, she died before getting married, and many people felt sad for her.

古文：二女幼传其艺。
现代文：崔寡妇的两个女儿幼年时就学习过她的技艺。
English: Widow Cui's two daughters learned her craft at a young age.

古文：长女适邑人丁玄夫，性识不甚聪慧。
现代文：长女嫁给了镇上的丁玄夫。
English: The eldest daughter married Ding Xuanfu from the town.

古文：幼时，每教其艺，小有所未至，其母辄加鞭棰，终莫究其妙。
现代文：这个女儿天资不很聪明，幼年时，每当教她技艺时，稍有学得不到家的地方，她的母亲就用鞭子打，但始终没掌握技艺的巧妙。
English: The daughter was not very bright, and when she was young, her mother whipped her every time she tried to teach her a skill that she could not learn at home, but she never mastered the skill.

古文：每心念其姨曰： 我姨之甥也，今乃死生殊途，恩爱久绝。
现代文：这个女儿常心中想念她的姨，说： 我是姨的外甥女，现在一生一死，走上了不同的路，深切的恩情爱心早已中断。
English: This daughter often thought of her aunt in her heart, saying: I am my aunt's niece, now I am dying, I have taken a different path, and my deep love and affection have long been interrupted.

古文：姨之生乃聪明，死何蔑然，而不能以力祐助，使我心开目明，粗及流辈哉？ 
现代文：姨活着时很聪明，为什么死后什么反应也没有。能不能用特别的力量来帮助我使我思想开窍、眼睛明亮，能赶上同辈的人呢？ 
English: My aunt was very smart when she was alive, so why is there no reaction after her death? Can you use a special power to help me open my mind, brighten my eyes, and catch up with my peers?

古文：每至节朔，辄举觞酹地，哀咽流涕，如此者八岁。
现代文：每到节日和每月初一都举起酒杯以酒浇地祭奠，悲伤的呜咽，流着眼泪。这样情况持续了八年。
English: Every holiday and on the first day of the month, they raised their glasses to pour wine on the ground, sobbing with sorrow and shedding tears. This went on for eight years.

古文：母亦哀而悯焉。
现代文：她的母亲也很伤心并且很同情她。
English: Her mother was also heartbroken and sympathised with her.

古文：开成五年，四月三日，因夜寐，惊起号泣，谓其母曰： 向者梦姨执手泣曰： 我自辞人世，在阴司簿属教坊，授曲于博士李元凭。
现代文：唐文宗开成五年，四月三日，长女在夜晚睡觉时，突然惊醒大声哭起来，对她的母亲说： 刚才我梦见我姨拉着我的手哭着说： 我自从离开人世，在阴间户籍上属音乐部门，教博士李元凭曲子。
English: In the fifth year of Tang Wenzong's reign, on April 3, when the eldest daughter was sleeping at night, she suddenly woke up crying loudly and said to her mother: Just now I dreamed that my aunt was holding my hand and crying: Since I passed away, I have belonged to the music department in the family register in the underworld, and my teacher, Dr. Li Yuan, is a musician.

古文：元凭屡荐我于宪宗皇帝，帝召居宫一年。以我更直穆宗皇帝宫中，以筝导诸妃，出入一年。
现代文：元凭屡次向宪宗皇帝推荐我，于是皇帝召我进宫住了一年，让我在穆宗皇帝宫中轮流值班，用筝指导各位妃子。
English: Yuan Biao repeatedly recommended me to Emperor Gensong, so the emperor invited me to live in the palace for a year, and let me take turns on duty in Emperor Gensong's palace, guiding the concubines with a kite.

古文：上帝诛郑注，天下大酺。
现代文：天帝杀了郑注，天下大规模聚餐庆贺。
English: Emperor Tianyi killed Zheng Zhu, and the whole world celebrated with a large-scale banquet.

古文：唐氏诸帝宫中互选妓乐，以进神尧、太宗二宫，我复得侍宪宗。
现代文：唐朝各个皇帝的宫中互选歌舞艺伎，把他们进献到高祖和太宗二宫中，我因此又能够侍候宪宗了。
English: The courts of the emperors of the Tang Dynasty selected kabuki actors from each other and presented them to Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Taizong's second palace, so I was able to serve Emperor Xianzong.

古文：每一月之中，五日一直长秋殿，余日得肆游观，但不得出宫禁耳。
现代文：每月当中，五天到长秋殿值班一次，其余日子可以随便游玩参观，只是不能出宫禁罢了。
English: Once a month, he is on duty at the Choshu-den for five days. On the other days, he can visit as he pleases, but he is not allowed to leave the palace.

古文：汝之情恳，我乃知也，但无由得来。
现代文：你的恳切的心情，我知道了，只是无理由来此。
English: Your earnest mood, I know, but there is no reason to come here.

古文：近日襄阳公主以我为女，思念颇至，得出入主第。
现代文：近日襄阳公主把我收为女儿，常很想念我，我便可以进出公主的住宅了。
English: Recently, Princess Yangyang adopted me as her daughter and often misses me very much. I can now enter and leave the princess's residence.

古文：私许我归，成汝之愿，汝早图之。
现代文：公主私下允许我回来，满足你的心愿。
English: Privately, the princess has given me permission to return and grant your wish.

古文：阴中法严，帝或闻之，当获大谴，亦上累于主。 
现代文：你要早下手准备，因为阴间法律很严，皇帝偶或听到了这事，会犯大罪的，也会连累公主。 
English: You have to start preparing early, because the laws of the underworld are very strict. If the emperor hears about this, he will commit a serious crime and will also implicate the princess.

古文：复与其母相持而泣。
现代文：说完又抱着她的母亲哭起来。
English: She then hugged her mother and began to cry.

古文：翼日，乃洒扫一室，列虚筵，设酒果，仿佛如有所见。因执筝就坐，闭目弹之，随指有得。
现代文：第二天，就收拾了一间屋子，打扫干净，又洒了些水，安排了空的坐位，摆上了酒和果品。依稀看到了什么，长女就拿着筝坐到坐位上，闭着眼睛弹起来，随弹随有体会。
English: The next day, they tidied up a room, cleaned it, sprinkled some water, arranged empty seats, and set out wine and fruit. Seeing nothing, the eldest daughter took the kite and sat on the seat, closed her eyes and played it, gaining experience as she played.

古文：初授人间之曲，十日不得一曲，此一日获十曲。
现代文：当初教给人间的曲子，十天也学不会一曲，今天一天就学了十支曲子。
English: In the beginning, when I taught folk songs, I couldn't learn a song in ten days. Today, I learned ten songs in one day.

古文：曲之名品，殆非生人之意。
现代文：曲子的名称种类，几乎不是活人想得出来的。
English: The names and types of tunes are rarely thought out by the living.

古文：声调哀怨，幽幽然鸮啼鬼啸，闻之者莫不嘘唏。
现代文：声调哀怨深邃幽远像猫头鹰哭又像鬼长啸，听到的人没有不呜咽的。
English: The tone is mournful, deep and distant, like an owl's cry or a ghost's howl. No one can hear it without sobbing.

古文：曲有《迎君乐》、《槲林叹》、《秦王赏金歌》、《广陵散》、《行路难》、《上江虹》、《晋城仙》、《丝竹赏金歌》、《红窗影》。
现代文：曲有《迎君乐》、《槲林叹》、《秦王赏金歌》、《广陵散》、《行路难》、《上江虹》、《晋城仙》、《丝竹赏金歌》、《红窗影》。
English: The songs include "Welcome to the King," "Yulin Lament," "Qin King's Bounty Song," "Guangling San," "Difficult Journey," "Upper River Rainbow," "Jincheng Immortal," "Silk Bamboo Bounty Song" and "Red Window Shadow."

古文：十曲毕，惨然谓女曰： 此皆宫闱中新翻曲，帝尤所爱重。
现代文：十支曲学完了，姨很凄惨的对长女说： 这都是宫中新谱出的曲子，皇帝尤其喜爱重视。
English: When the ten pieces of music had been learned, the aunt said to the eldest daughter, very sadly: These are all new pieces composed in the palace, and the emperor likes to pay special attention to them.

古文：《槲林叹》《红窗影》等，每宴饮，即飞球舞盏，为佐酒长夜之欢。
现代文：《槲林叹》《红窗影》等曲，每当宴会时，就飞球舞盘，把它作为助酒的乐曲，进行通宵达旦的娱乐。
English: "Yulin sigh" "Red Window Shadow" and other songs, whenever there is a banquet, the flying ball dance is played, and it is used as the music to accompany the wine, for all-night entertainment.

古文：穆宗敕修文舍人元稹撰其词数十首，甚美，宴酣，令宫人递歌之。
现代文：穆宗下令让修文舍人元稹作了数十首歌词，用以配曲，都很美。
English: Mu Zong ordered dozens of song lyrics to be composed by Xiu Wenshe and Yuan Zang, and they were all beautiful.

古文：帝亲执玉如意，击节而和之。
现代文：当宴会达到高潮时，就叫宫人轮流歌唱。皇帝亲手拿着玉如意，敲着节拍进行配合。
English: When the banquet reached its climax, the courtiers were asked to take turns singing. The emperor himself held the ball in his hand and tapped the beat to accompany it.

古文：帝秘其调极切，恐为诸国所得，故不敢泄。
现代文：皇帝对这些曲调保密极严，唯恐被各国学去，所以我不敢泄露。
English: The emperor is very secretive about these tunes, so I dare not divulge them for fear of being copied by other countries.

古文：岁摄提，地府当有大变，得以流传人世。
现代文：到寅年，地府会有大的变动，这些曲子就会流传于人世间。
English: In the year of the rooster, there will be great changes in the underworld, and these songs will spread to the human world.

古文：幽明路异，人鬼道殊，今者人事相接，亦万代一时，非偶然也。
现代文：阴间阳间路不同，人和鬼各有各的一套。现在我跟人间进行了联系，也是万代难逢的事，这也不是偶然的。
English: The path between the sun and the underworld is different, and people and ghosts each have their own set. Now I have made contact with the human world, which is also a rare thing in all generations, and this is not accidental.

古文：会以吾之十曲，献阳地天子，不可使无闻于明代。 
现代文：应当把我这十支曲子，献给阳间的天子，不可让它在圣明的时代埋没。 
English: These ten pieces of mine should be dedicated to the heavenly Son of Heaven, and should not be allowed to be buried in the age of holiness.

古文：于是县白州，州白府，刺史崔璹亲召试之，则丝桐之音，枪鏦可听，其差琴调不类秦声。
现代文：于是县报告了州，州报告了府，府的刺史崔璹亲自召来长女试奏。就发现琴声鎗鏦好听，那奇异的琴调不像秦地的音乐。
English: So the county reported to the prefecture, the prefecture reported to the prefecture, and the prefecture's chief magistrate, Cui Wei, personally summoned the eldest daughter to try out the music. She found that the sound of the qin was pleasant, and that the strange tone of the qin was not like the music of Qin.

古文：乃以众乐合之，则宫商调殊不同矣。
现代文：于是用各种乐器跟它配合，却发现宫商调很不相同。
English: As a result, various musical instruments were used to cooperate with it, but it was found that the Palace Chamber Tuning was very different.

古文：母令小女再拜，求传十曲，亦备得之，至暮诀去。
现代文：母令小女给姨拜了两拜，请求也教给她这十支曲。小女也全部学会了。
English: The little girl prayed to her aunt for two days and asked her to teach her these ten songs. The little girl learned them all.

古文：数日复来曰： 闻扬州连帅欲取汝，恐有谬误，汝可一一弹之。 
现代文：到了黄昏的时候诀别而去。过了几天又来了，说： 听说扬州的连帅要让你去，恐怕有弹错的地方，你可以一一的再弹一遍。 
English: At dusk, he said goodbye and left. A few days later, he came again, saying: "I heard that the Yangzhou company commander wants you to go, I'm afraid there is a mistake in the play, you can play it again one by one."

古文：又留一曲曰《思归乐》。
现代文：又留下一曲叫《恩归乐》。
English: He also left behind a song called "Enkui Raku."

古文：无何，州府果令送至扬州，一无差错。
现代文：不久，州府果然叫人送女到扬州，弹奏后，毫无差错。
English: Soon after, the prefectural government did send someone to escort her to Yangzhou. After the performance, there was no mistake.

古文：廉使故相李德裕议表其事，女寻卒。
现代文：廉使即原来的宰相李德裕商量表彰这件事，可是不久长女就死了。
English: The former prime minister, Li Deyu, discussed the award, but his eldest daughter died soon after.

