古文：裴光庭安禄山孙思邈孙生衡相马禄师李含章尚衡柳芳陈昭卢齐卿梁十二冯七马生
现代文：裴光庭安禄山孙思邈孙生衡相马禄师李含章尚衡柳芳陈昭卢齐卿梁十二冯七马生
English: Pei Guang, Ting An, Lu Shan, Sun Si, Sun Sheng, Heng Xiang, Ma Lu, Li Han, Zhang Shang, Heng Liu, Fang Chen, Zhao Lu, Sir Liang XII, Feng Qi, Ma Sheng

古文：裴光庭
现代文：裴光庭
English: Pei Guangting

古文：姚元崇，开元初为中书令。
现代文：姚元崇，唐玄宗开元初年任中书令。
English: Yao Yuan Chong, the first year of Tang Xuan Zong's first year in office.

古文：有善相者来见，元崇令密於朝堂。
现代文：有位相士来拜见他，姚元崇让这位相士隐藏在大殿旁边。
English: A fortune-teller came to see him, and Yao Yuan Chong asked the fortune-teller to hide next to the Great Hall.

古文：目诸官后当为宰辅者，见裴光庭白之。
现代文：暗中察看各位官员以后有谁能担任宰相的要职。相士看见裴光庭时说：这个人可以任宰相。
English: They secretly watched the officials to see who would be able to assume the important post of prime minister in the future. When the consort saw Pei Guangting, she said, "This man can be prime minister."

古文：时光庭为武官，姚公命至宅与语，复使相者于堂中垂帘重审焉。
现代文：当时，裴光庭是位武官。姚元崇让裴光庭到家中，说有话要和他说，又让相士藏在堂屋门帘后面重新审看裴光庭。
English: At that time, Pei Guangting was a military attaché. Yao Yuan Chong asked Pei Guangting to come to his home, saying that he had something to say to him, and asked his comrade-in-arms to hide behind the door curtain of the hall to re-examine Pei Guangting.

古文：光庭既去，相者曰：定矣。
现代文：裴光庭走后，相士说：一定是的，就是这个人。
English: After Pei Guangting left, the matchmaker said, "It must be, it's this person."

古文：姚公曰：宰相者，所以佐天成化，非其人莫可居之。
现代文：姚崇媛说：听说宰相是能够辅佐天子成就大业的人。不是这样的人，这种人是不可以担任宰相重任的。
English: Yao Chongyuan said: I have heard that the prime minister is a person who can assist the Son of Heaven in accomplishing the great cause. Not such a person, such a person can not serve as the prime minister.

古文：向者与裴君言，非应务之士，词学又寡，宁有其禄乎？
现代文：刚才我和裴光庭谈过话，他不是那种善于应对时务的人，学问又浅，怎么能任宰相呢？
English: Just now, I had a conversation with Pei Guangting. He is not the kind of person who is good at dealing with current affairs, and his knowledge is shallow. How can he be appointed prime minister?

古文：相者曰：公之所云者才也，仆之所述者命也。
现代文：相士说：您所说的是才气，我所说的是命啊！
English: The companion said: What you say is talent, what I say is life!

古文：才与命固不同焉。
现代文：才与命本来就不同嘛！
English: Talent and life are inherently different!

古文：姚默然不信。
现代文：姚元崇不相信相士说的话，也不再说什么了。
English: Yao Yuan Chong didn't believe what the matchmaker said, and didn't say anything more.

古文：后裴公果为宰相数年，及在庙堂，亦称名相。
现代文：后来，裴光庭果然担任了好几年宰相，在朝廷中也算得上名相。
English: Later, Pei Guangting did indeed serve as prime minister for several years, and was considered a famous minister in the imperial court.

古文：安禄山
现代文：安禄山
English: Anlu Mountain

古文：玄宗御勤政楼，下设百戏，坐安禄山于东间观看。
现代文：唐玄宗在勤政楼设御宴招待文武百官，在楼下还安排了各种杂艺表演。唐玄宗与安禄山一同坐在东间观看。
English: Tang Xuan Zong held a banquet in the Gongzheng Building to invite hundreds of civil and military officials, and also arranged various acrobatic performances downstairs. Tang Xuan Zong and An Lushan sat together in the east room to watch.

古文：肃宗谏曰：历观今古，无臣下与君上同坐阅戏者。
现代文：后来继位成唐肃宗的太子李亨直言规劝说：儿臣读遍古往今来的所有典籍，也没有臣下与君王坐在一起看戏的记载。
English: Later, Li Heng, the prince who succeeded to the throne and became the Tang Su Zong, persuaded him bluntly: his sons read all the classics from ancient times to the present, and there is no record of his subjects sitting together with the king to watch the play.

古文：玄宗曰：渠有异相，我欲禳之故耳。
现代文：唐玄宗说：安禄山相貌奇特，我是想借他祭祷除邪啊！
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: Mt. Anlu has a strange appearance. I want to use his prayer to get rid of evil.

古文：又尝与之夜晏，禄山醉卧，化为一猪而龙头。
现代文：唐玄宗曾与安禄山一起在夜间饮宴，安禄山喝醉后，躺到那儿变成了一头猪，却长着龙的头。
English: Tang Xuan Zong once had a nighttime banquet with An Lushan. After getting drunk, An Lushan lay down and turned into a pig, but with the head of a dragon.

古文：左右遽告，帝曰：渠猪龙，无能为也。终不杀之。
现代文：手下人忙去禀报唐玄宗，玄宗皇帝说：他是一头猪龙，没有什么作为！终于没有杀他。
English: His subordinates hurried to inform Tang Xuan Zong, and Emperor Xuan Zong said: "He is a pig dragon, there is nothing to be done! Finally, he did not kill him."

古文：禄山初为韩公张仁愿帐下走使之吏，仁愿常令禄山洗脚。
现代文：开始时安禄山在韩国公张仁愿帐下做一名走使小吏，张仁愿经常让安禄山给他洗脚。
English: At the beginning, An Lushan worked as an errand boy under the South Korean official Zhang Renzhen. Zhang Renzhen often asked An Lushan to wash his feet.

古文：仁愿脚下有黑子，禄山因洗而窃窥之。
现代文：张仁愿脚下有一颗黑痣，安禄山在给他洗脚时偷看那颗痣。
English: Zhang Renzhen has a black mole on his foot. An Lushan peeked at the mole while washing his foot.

古文：仁愿顾笑曰：黑子吾贵相也，汝独窃视之，岂汝亦有之乎？禄山曰：某贱人也，不幸两足皆有之。
现代文：安禄山说：我是一个微不足道的人，不巧的是我的两只脚上都有痣，比将军的颜色黑而大，竟不知道这是什么好兆头？
English: An Lushan said, "I am an insignificant person. Unfortunately, I have warts on both my feet. They are darker and larger than the general's color. I don't know if this is a good omen."

古文：比将军者色黑而加大，竟不知其何祥也。
现代文：张仁愿看了安禄山脚上的痣后很惊异，越发亲近、厚待他了。
English: Zhang Renzhong was very surprised when he saw the dragonfly at the foot of Anlu Mountain. He became closer to it and treated it kindly.

古文：仁愿观而异之，益亲厚之。约为义儿，而加宠荐焉。
现代文：并且相互约定安禄山做了张仁愿的义子。从此以来，张仁愿更加宠幸并极力向朝廷推荐安禄山。
English: It was also mutually agreed that Anlu Mountain would become Zhang Renzhen's son-in-law. Since then, Zhang Renzhen has been more favored and has strongly recommended Anlu Mountain to the imperial court.

古文：孙思邈
现代文：孙思邈
English: Sung Si-soo

古文：孙思邈年百余岁，善医术。
现代文：孙思邈活了一百多岁，擅长医术。
English: Sun Siyu lived more than a hundred years and was good at medicine.

古文：谓高仲舒曰：君有贵相，当数政刺史。
现代文：他曾对高仲舒说： 你生有贵人的相貌，应该担任几年刺史的官职。
English: He once said to Gao Zhongshu: You were born with the appearance of a nobleman, you should serve as an official for several years.

古文：若为齐州刺史，邈有一儿作尉，事使君，虽合得杖，君当忆老人言，愿放之。
现代文：如果你任齐州刺史，我有一个儿子在你那任尉官，侍奉刺史您。一次不小心他解犯了刑律，虽说他应该受杖刑，你要记住我这位百岁老人今天说的话，希望您能免除他的杖刑。 
English: If you are the governor of Chizhou, I have a son who is your lieutenant and serves as your governor. Once, he accidentally broke the criminal law. Although he should be punished with the cane, you should remember what I, a centenarian, said today. I hope you can exempt him from the cane.

古文：后果如其言，已剥其衣讫，忽记忆，遂放。孙生
现代文：后来，果然如孙思邈所说的那样。孙思邈儿子的衣服已经被扒下来，就要对他行杖刑，高仲舒忽然想起当年老人家的这番话，于是免去了孙思邈儿子的杖刑。孙生
English: Later, it turned out to be as Sun Siyi said. Sun Siyi's son's clothes had been ripped off and he was to be caned. Gao Zhongshu suddenly remembered the old man's words and spared Sun Siyi's son the caning. Sun Sheng

古文：有孙生者不载其名，善相人。
现代文：有一位姓孙的读书人，没有记载他的名字，是位擅长相术的人。
English: There is a reader surnamed Sun, whose name is not recorded, who is good at physiognomy.

古文：因至睦州，郡守令遍相僚吏。
现代文：一次，他因事来到睦州，睦州的郡守让他给所有的僚属们相面。
English: Once, he came to Mutsu due to an incident, and the county governor of Mutsu asked him to meet all his colleagues.

古文：时房琯为司户，崔涣为万年尉，贬桐庐县丞。
现代文：当时，房琯任司户，崔涣任万年县县尉，被降职到桐庐县任县丞。
English: At that time, Fong Yao was appointed as a steward, Cui Yao was appointed as a county lieutenant of Wan Nian County, and was demoted to Tonglu County to be appointed as a county magistrate.

古文：孙生曰：些二公位至台辅。
现代文：孙生指着房琯和崔涣说：这二位官人，将来都能做宰相。
English: Pointing to Fang Jun and Cui Jun, Sun Sheng said, "These two officials can both be prime minister in the future."

古文：然房，神气大宝，合在掌握中。
现代文：尤其是房司户，皇帝的江山社稷、玉玺印绶应该归他掌管。崔县丞以后能迁任杭州刺史。
English: In particular, the steward of the house, the emperor's Jiangshan Company Seal and the Jade Seal Seal should be under his control. After Cui Xian Rong, he can be transferred to Hangzhou to make history.

古文：崔后为杭州刺史，某虽不覩，然尚蒙其恩惠。
现代文：到那时，我虽然看不到崔县丞的富贵荣耀，但是还能丞蒙您的照顾。
English: At that time, although I can't see the rich glory of Cui Xuan Rong, I can still receive your care.

古文：既后房以赍册文，自蜀至灵武授肃宗。
现代文：这以后不久，房琯带着唐玄宗册封肃宗的诏书，从四川到灵武授予肃宗。
English: Soon after this, Fang Zang took the imperial decree of Tang Xuan Zong to seal Su Zong, and awarded Su Zong from Sichuan to Lingwu.

古文：崔果为杭州，下车访生，则已亡殁旬日矣。
现代文：崔涣果然任杭州刺史，上任时途经孙生家，崔涣下车去拜访他，然而孙生已经去世十来天了。
English: Cui Wei was indeed appointed as Hangzhou's chief historian. On his way to the post, he passed by Sun Sheng's home. Cui Wei got off the bus to visit him. However, Sun Sheng had been dead for about ten days.

古文：因署其子为牙将，以采帛赠恤其家。
现代文：崔涣就任命孙生的儿子在自己手下做一名低级军官，并赠送彩色丝绢给孙生的家属。
English: Choe Son appointed Sun Son's son as a low-ranking officer under his command, and presented colorful silk scarves to Sun Son's family members.

古文：衡相
现代文：衡相
English: Heng Xiang

古文：开元中有相者不知姓名，自言衡山来，人谓之衡相。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间有一位擅长相术的人，不知道他的姓名，他自己说是从衡山来的。人们就叫他衡相。
English: In the first year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, there was a person who was good at the art of physiognomy. I don't know his name, but he said he came from Hengshan. People called him Hengxiang.

古文：在京舍宣平里。
现代文：他住在京城的宣平里。
English: He lives in Beijing's Xuanping Village.

古文：时李林甫为太子谕德，往见之。
现代文：当时，李林甫任太子谕德。一天，他去拜访衡相。
English: At that time, Li Linfu was appointed as the crown prince. One day, he went to visit Heng Xiang.

古文：入门，则郑少微、严杲、已在中庭。
现代文：进了屋门，看见郑少微、严杲已经坐在中厅里。
English: Entering the door, he saw Zheng Shaowei and Yan Jun already sitting in the middle hall.

古文：相者引坐，谓李公曰：自仆至此，见人众矣，未有如公贵者也。
现代文：衡相请李林甫入坐，对他说：自从我到这里来，见过很多人，还从没见过像你这样贵相的人呢。
English: Heng Xiang invited Li Linfu to sit down and said to him, "Since I came here, I have seen many people, but I have never seen someone with such a distinguished appearance as you.

古文：且国家以刑法为重，则公典司寇之职。朝廷以铨管为先，则公居冢宰之任。然又秉丹青之笔，当节制之选。
现代文：国家把刑法看得很重要时，你就能出任司寇，掌管刑罚；朝廷把量才授官的准则放在首位时，你就能坐在吏部尚书的位置上，举才用士选授官吏。
English: When the state regards criminal law as important, you will be able to serve as a scout and take charge of criminal punishment; when the imperial court places the criterion of awarding officials according to merit in the first place, you will be able to sit in the position of a clerk in the personnel department and use merit to select and award officials.

古文：加以列茅分土，穷荣极盛，主恩绸缪，又望浃洽。
现代文：同时你还执掌着记勋的丹册，根据每个人功勋的大小，选任节度使，分封侯位，赐给土地。
English: At the same time, you are also in charge of the Dan Book of Honors, and according to the size of each person's merit, you will appoint the festival envoy, assign the position of the lord of the manor, and give land.

古文：兼南省之官，秩增数四，握中枢之务，载盈二九，搢绅仰威，黎度赡惠，将古所未有也。
现代文：你的荣华富贵能达到顶点，圣上对你已经是情重恩厚，还望你进一步与圣上和谐、融洽，你就能兼任南方省份的官吏，并且你的职位不断升高直到掌握朝廷中枢要务，就达到了鼎盛极至。再不能发展了。那时，官宦士绅们将仰仗您的恩威，黎民百姓们将受到您的恩惠，那将是从古到今也未曾有过的啊！
English: Your glory and wealth can reach its peak. The Almighty is already very fond of you. He also hopes that you will further harmonize and get along with the Almighty. You can also serve as an official in the southern provinces. And your position will continue to rise until you master the central tasks of the imperial court. Then you will reach your peak. You can no longer develop. At that time, the officials and gentlemen will rely on your grace, and the people of Li will be favored by you. That will be unprecedented from ancient times to the present!

古文：顾严郑曰：预闻此者，非不幸也。公二人宜加礼奉，否则悔吝生矣。
现代文：衡相看了看严杲和郑少微说：先听听这个人的，并没有什么不好，你二人应该更加敬奉礼待他，不然要悔恨终生的。
English: Heng Xiang looked at Yan Xuan and Zheng Shaowu and said, "There is nothing wrong with listening to this man first. You two should treat him with more respect, otherwise you will regret it for the rest of your lives."

古文：时严郑各负才名，李尤声誉未达。
现代文：当时严杲和郑少微都已经很有名气了，而李林甫的声誉还不够显赫。
English: At that time, Yan Xuan and Zheng Shaowei were already very famous, and Li Linfu's reputation was not prominent enough.

古文：二公有轥轹之心，及闻相者言，以为其不然。唯唯而起，更不复问。
现代文：严杲和郑少微想在李林甫前面让衡相给他们看相，听衡相这样说，认为很不是那么回事，二人就谦恭地站起来，也就不再让他看相了。
English: Yan Yan and Zheng Shaowei wanted to let Heng Xiang look at them in front of Li Linfu. Hearing Heng Xiang say this, they thought it was not the case. The two stood up humbly and no longer let him look at them.

古文：李因辞去。
现代文：李林甫也告辞回去了。
English: Li Linfu also resigned and went back.

古文：后李公拜中书，郑时已为刑部侍郎。
现代文：后来，李林甫升任中书令。这时郑少微已经做了刑部侍郎。
English: Later, Li Linfu was promoted to the position of the middle secretary. At this time, Zheng Shaowei had already become the sergeant of the criminal investigation department.

古文：因述往事，谓郑曰：曩者宣平相人，咸以荒唐之说，乃微有中者。
现代文：他们在一起述说往事时，李林甫对郑少微说：以前宣平里那位看相的人，说的都是不着边际的话，哪有几句被他说中的啊！
English: When they were recounting the past together, Li Linfu said to Zheng Shaowei, "The person in Xuanping Village who used to look at people's faces used to say things that were out of bounds. How many words did he put into his mouth?

古文：无何，郑出为歧州刺使，与所亲话其事。
现代文：不久，郑少微由朝官改任歧州刺史，就向他的亲朋好友讲了这件事情。
English: Not long after, Zheng Shaowei, who had been transferred from a court official to the post of Gwanzhou historian, told his relatives and friends about this matter.

古文：未期，又贬为万州司马。
现代文：不到一年，郑少微又被降职任万州司马。
English: Less than a year later, Zheng Shaowei was demoted to the post of Banzhou Sima.

古文：严自郎中，亦牧远郡。
现代文：严杲也从郎中的职位上被放逐到边远的地方去了。
English: Yan Xun was also banished to a remote place from his position as a retainer.

古文：又李林甫少孤，为元氏姨所育，住在伊川。
现代文：又李林甫很小的时候就父母双亡成了孤儿，被他的姨娘元氏收养，住在伊川。
English: When Li Linfu was very young, his parents died and he became an orphan. He was adopted by his aunt, the Yuan family, and lived in Ichuan.

古文：时林甫年十岁，与诸儿戏于路旁。有老父叹而目焉，人问之。
现代文：李林甫十岁时，与几个小孩在路边玩耍，一位老翁感叹地望着李林甫。
English: When Li Linfu was ten years old, he was playing with some children on the roadside. An old man looked at Li Linfu with regret.

古文：老父曰：富贵诚不自知。
现代文：有人问老翁，老翁说：真是富贵自己不知道啊！
English: Someone asked the old man, and the old man said: "You don't know how rich you are!"

古文：指李公曰：此童后当为中书令，凡二十年。
现代文：老人指着李林甫说：这个孩子以后能做中书令，大概也就二十年以后吧。
English: The old man pointed to Li Linfu and said, "This child will be able to write Chinese characters in about 20 years."

古文：所叹与凡小戏谁辨也。
现代文：我感叹的是他与这些平常的小孩在一起玩耍，有谁能辨别出来他是未来的宰相呢？
English: What I lament is that he is playing with these ordinary children, who can tell that he is the future prime minister?

古文：马禄师
现代文：马禄师
English: Maru Division

古文：武功马禄师善相，长安主簿肖璇与县尉李峤、李全昌同诣求决。
现代文：武功县的马录师擅长给人相面。长安主簿肖璇与县尉李峤、李全昌，一同到他那里去求他给看个结果。
English: Martial artist in Wugong County is good at giving people a face to face. Chang'an's chief bookkeeper Xiao Yao, together with county lieutenants Li Yao and Li Quanchang, went to him to ask him to show them the result.

古文：马生云：三人俱贵达。
现代文：马录师说：你三人全都能发达显贵。
English: The editor said: All three of you can be developed and distinguished.

古文：大李少府，位极人臣，声名振耀，南省官无不虚任，三入中书。
现代文：大李少府的官位能达到为人臣子的最高一级，并将名振四海，声耀天下。
English: The official rank of Dai Li Shao Fu can reach the highest level of a vassal, and will be famous all over the world.

古文：小李少府，亦有清资，得五品以上要官，位终卿监。
现代文：但是所任的南方各省的官都是虚职。你能三次进入中书省任职。少李少府，他也有高贵显要的官职，得五品以上重要职务，一直做到卿监，就不再升迁了。
English: However, the officials appointed to the southern provinces are all empty posts. You can only enter the Central Book Ministry three times. Shao Li Shao Fu, he also has a noble and important official post, has more than five important posts, and has been promoted to Sir Supervisor, he will no longer be promoted.

古文：肖主簿中年烟沉，晚达亦大富贵。
现代文：肖主簿中年被埋没了，到晚年才能发达，也是大富大贵。
English: Xiao's main book was buried in his middle years, and only developed in his later years. He was also very wealthy.

古文：从今后十年，家有大难，兄弟并流，唯公与一弟获全。
现代文：从现在起十年以后，你家有大难，兄弟一起被流放只有你和你的一个兄弟能够保全住生命。
English: Ten years from now, your family is in trouble. You and your brother are exiled together. Only you and your brother can survive.

古文：又十年之后，方却得官。
现代文：再过十年之后，才能再次得官。
English: It would be another ten years before he would hold office again.

古文：遇大李少府在朝堂日，当得引用。
现代文：遇大李少府在朝中执政，能得到荐举而被任用。
English: Li Shaofu, who was in power in the middle of the dynasty, was able to get a recommendation and was appointed.

古文：小李少府入省官时，为其断割。
现代文：小李少府进入省官时，被人割断了你的官路。
English: When Xiao Li Shaofu entered the provincial government, someone cut off your official path.

古文：后璇离长安任，作秘书郎。
现代文：后来，肖璇离开长安到别的地方任职，作秘书郎。
English: Later, Xiao Yao left Chang'an to work elsewhere as a secretary.

古文：则天既贵，皇后王氏破灭。
现代文：武则天执掌朝政后，王皇后被诛灭。
English: After Emperor Wu Zetian took control of the imperial government, Empress Wang was exterminated.

古文：肖璇是其外姻，举家流窜。
现代文：肖璇是王皇后的外戚，因此受牵连，全家被流放。
English: Xiao Yao was a maternal relative of the queen, so he was implicated, and the whole family was exiled.

古文：兄弟六人，配向岭南。唯璇与弟瑗，配辽东。
现代文：兄弟六人发配到岭南，只有肖璇与弟弟肖瑗发配到辽东。
English: Six brothers were sent to Lingnan, and only Xiao Yao and his brother Xiao Yao were sent to Liaodong.

古文：无何有处置流移使出，岭南者俱死，唯辽东者获全。兄弟二人，因亡命十余年。至神龙初，方蒙洗涤。
现代文：发配到岭南的人，被安排在什么也没有的不毛之地，结果都死了。肖家只有发配到辽东的肖璇兄弟二人保全了生命。兄弟二人逃亡在外十多年，到神龙初年，才得到昭雪。
English: Those who were sent to Lingnan were placed in a barren land with nothing, and they all died as a result. Only the Xiao brothers, who were sent to Liaodong, saved the lives of the Xiao family. The two brothers fled abroad for more than ten years, and only in the first year of the dragon did they get the snow.

古文：其时李峤作相，於街中忽逢璇。使人问是肖秘书耶，因谓之曰：公岂忘武功马生之言乎。
现代文：这时候李峤已经做了宰相，一天在街上忽然遇肖璇，他派人去询问才知道是肖秘书郎，李峤便对肖璇说：你怎么忘了当年武功县的马禄师说的话了呢？
English: At this time, Li Yao had already become the prime minister. One day, he suddenly met Xiao Yao on the street. He sent someone to inquire, only to find out that it was Xiao Jiefang. Li Yao then said to Xiao Yao: How did you forget what Maru from Wugong County said?

古文：于是擢用。
现代文：于是，李峤委肖璇以重任。
English: As a result, Xiao Wei, a member of the Li Gang Committee, was given an important task.

古文：时小李少府作刑部员外，判还其家。肖公竟历中外清要，位至崇班，三品官十余政。
现代文：这时，小李少府作刑部员外，被革职还乡，肖璇竟然多次担次朝内朝外的显要官职，一直升到殿内崇班，任三品官十多次。
English: At this time, Xiao Li Shofu was dismissed from his position as a member of the Penal Department and returned to his hometown, and Xiao Yao even repeatedly held important official positions inside and outside the imperial court, and was promoted to the inner palace's high class, and was appointed as the third grade official more than ten times.

古文：李含章
现代文：李含章
English: Li Hanzhang

古文：崔圆微时，欲举进士。
现代文：崔圆微当时想去考进士，在魏县见到掌管市场的李含章。
English: At that time, Cui Yuanwei wanted to take the entrance examination and met Li Hanzhang, who was in charge of the market, in Wei County.

古文：于魏县见市令李含章云：君合武出身，官更不停，直至宰相。
现代文：李含章说：你应当是武官出身，才能不停地升迁，直到宰相。
English: Li Hanzhang said: You should be a military attaché before you can be promoted continuously until you become prime minister.

古文：开元二十三年，应将帅举科。
现代文：唐玄宗开元二十三年，崔圆微去应选拔将帅的举科考试。
English: In the 23rd year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, Cui Yuanwei went to take the entrance examination for the selection of generals.

古文：又于河南府充乡贡进士。
现代文：稍后又在河南府充当乡贡进士。
English: Later, he served as a township tax collector in Henan Province.

古文：其日正于福唐观试，遇敕下，便于试场中唤将。拜执戟参谋河西军事。
现代文：这天他正在福唐观看考试，正巧遇到圣上下来诏书，让就便在试场中选拔将领，崔圆微被选中，授予执戟参谋河西军事。
English: On this day, he was watching the examination in Futang, and just happened to come across the imperial edict issued by the emperor, so he selected generals in the test field. Cui Yuanwei was selected and awarded the post of general staff officer of Hexi Military.

古文：应制时，与越州剡县尉窦公衡同场并坐，亲见其事。
现代文：应诏时和越州剡县尉窦公衡同时被诏见，并排坐在一起，窦公衡亲眼看见了这件事情。
English: In response to the edict, he and Dou Gongheng, a lieutenant of Yue Prefecture, were given the edict at the same time and sat side by side. Dou Gongheng saw the incident with his own eyes.

古文：后官更不停，不逾二十年，拜中书令赵国公，实食封五百户。
现代文：后来，崔圆微便不停地升迁，不到二十年，升任中书令封赵国公，实际封赐他食禄五百户。
English: Later, Cui Yuanwei was constantly promoted, and less than twenty years later, he was promoted to the title of Zhao Guogong in the middle of the letter, and he was actually awarded 500 households.

古文：又圆微当作司勋员外，释服往见会昌寺克慎师。
现代文：崔圆微又作为司勋员外郎掌管功赏的事务。一次，崔圆微脱下朝服换上便装去会昌寺拜访克慎禅师。
English: Once, Cui Yuanwei took off his formal attire and put on casual clothes to visit Keshen Zen Master at Hoechang Temple.

古文：师笑云：人皆自台入省，公乃自省入台。
现代文：克慎禅师笑着说：人家都是从御史台进入中书省、您却从中书省进入御史台。
English: Keshen laughed and said, "People enter the Central Shosho from the History Channel, but you enter the Central Shosho from the History Channel."

古文：从此常合在枪槊中行，后当大贵。
现代文：从今往后，你该常在兵戈中行走，以后一定能显贵的。
English: From now on, you should always walk in the middle of the war, and you will certainly be able to be distinguished in the future.

古文：无何为刑部员外兼侍御使，充剑南节度留后。
现代文：不久，崔圆微任刑部员外兼侍御史，担当剑南节度留后，总摄剑南的军政要务。
English: Soon after, Cui Yuanwei was appointed as an external member of the criminal investigation department and also as the attendant of the imperial historian, in charge of the Jian'nan Festival, and the chief photographer of the military and political affairs of Jian'nan.

古文：入剑门后，每行常有兵戈。
现代文：到剑门后，每次行动常遇到战事。
English: After reaching the Jianmen Gate, each operation often encountered fighting.

古文：未逾一年，便致勋业。
现代文：不到一年，便建功立业。
English: In less than a year, he made his mark.

古文：崔初入蜀，常于亲知自说如此。
现代文：崔圆微初到四川时，常在亲人和知己中说这些事。
English: When Cui Yuanwei first arrived in Sichuan, he often said these things to his relatives and friends.

古文：尚衡
现代文：尚衡
English: Shangheng

古文：御史中丞尚衡童幼之时游戏，曾脱其碧衫，唯著紫衫。有善相者见之曰：此儿已后，当以脱碧著紫矣。
现代文：御史中丞尚衡童年时，一次在外面玩耍，脱掉了青绿色的外衣，只穿着一件紫色的衣衫，有一位擅长相面的人看见了，说：这小孩以后，应该也是脱绿穿紫呵。
English: In his childhood, when he was playing outside, he took off his turquoise coat and wore only a purple shirt. A person who was good at facial recognition saw this and said, "After this child, he should also take off the green and wear purple."

古文：后衡为濮阳丞，遇安禄山反，守节不受贼官。
现代文：后来尚衡任濮阳县丞时，遇上安禄山叛乱。尚衡坚守节操，不接受贼党赐给他的官位。
English: Later, when Shang Heng served as the governor of Shenyang County, he encountered the Anlu Mountain Rebellion. Shang Heng adhered to the principle of discipline and did not accept the official position given to him by the thief party.

古文：将军某乙使衡将绯衣鱼袋，差摄一官，衡不肯受曰：吾当脱碧着紫，此非吾衣。
现代文：将军某乙派人给尚衡送象征权位的红色官服和鱼袋，授给他一个临时的官职。尚衡不肯接受，说：我应该脱绿穿紫，这不是我的衣服。
English: General A sent someone to give Shang Heng a red official uniform and a fish bag, which symbolize power, and granted him a temporary official position. Shang Heng refused to accept, saying: I should take off the green and wear purple, this is not my clothes.

古文：曾未旬月，有敕命改官赐紫。
现代文：不到一个月，尚衡便接到皇上的任命，改换官职，赐赠紫色官服。
English: Less than a month later, Shangheng received an appointment from the emperor, changed his official position, and was given a purple official uniform.

古文：于是脱碧着紫。
现代文：于是，尚衡脱绿着紫。
English: As a result, Shang Heng took off the green and put on the purple.

古文：衡自又云：当做七十政。
现代文：尚衡自己又说：我应当作七十任官。
English: And he measured himself, and said, I shall be a captain of seventy.

古文：今历十余政，已为中丞大夫矣。
现代文：现在尚衡作了十多任，已经是中丞大夫了。
English: Now, Shangheng has served more than ten posts, and is already a middle-ranking doctor.

古文：柳芳
现代文：柳芳
English: Liu Fang

古文：柳芳尝应进士举，累岁不及第。
现代文：柳芳曾参加进士考试，接连好几年都未考中。
English: Liu Fang once took the entrance examination, but she did not take it for several years in a row.

古文：诣朝士宴，坐客八九人皆朱绂，亦有畿赤官。
现代文：一次参加朝廷官员的宴会，同座的八九个人，个个都是大权在握的要员，也有的是京城所属及附近各县的地方官。
English: Once, I attended a banquet for officials of the imperial court. There were eight or nine people present, all of whom were high-ranking dignitaries in positions of great power, as well as local officials from the capital and nearby counties.

古文：芳最居坐末，又衣服粗故，客咸轻焉。
现代文：柳芳坐在最后边，而且他穿的是粗布的旧衣服，同座的人都很瞧不起他。
English: Liu Fang sat at the end, and he was wearing a coarse old dress, and everyone at the table looked down on him.

古文：有善相者，众情属之。
现代文：席上有位擅长看相的人，大家都请他给看相。
English: There was a person at the table who was good at taking pictures, and everyone asked him to take pictures.

古文：独谓芳曰：柳子合无兄弟姐妹，无庄田资产，孑然一身，羁旅辛苦甚多。
现代文：他只对柳芳说：柳先生，你没有兄弟姐妹，没有庄田资产。孤孤单单就你一个人，作客在外会有许多的艰辛。
English: He only said to Liu Fang: Mr. Liu, you don't have any brothers or sisters, and you don't have any Shoda assets. You are all alone, and there are many hardships as a guest.

古文：后二年当及第，后禄位不歇。
现代文：过二年该能考中了，以后你的禄位就不能停止了。
English: In two years, you should be able to pass the mid-term exam. After that, you will not be able to stop working.

古文：一座之客，寿命官禄，皆不如君。
现代文：在座的各位，无论是寿命还是官禄，全都不如你。
English: All of you here are not as good as you, whether in terms of longevity or official rank.

古文：诸客都不之信。
现代文：在座的客人都不信他的话。
English: None of the guests present believed him.

古文：后二年果及第，历校书郎畿尉丞，游索于梁宋间。
现代文：过了二年，柳芳科考果然得中，于是连续担任校书郎，京城辖属县的尉丞，一个人奔走在商丘、大梁之间。
English: Two years later, Liu Fang successfully passed the entrance examination, and then served as a school librarian, the lieutenant of the county under the jurisdiction of Beijing, and ran between the commercial hills and girders.

古文：遇太常博士有阙，工部侍郎韦述知其才，通明谱第，又识古今仪注，遂举之于宰辅，恩敕除太常博士。
现代文：后来，有一次遇到朝中太常博士这一职位空缺，工部侍郎韦述知道柳芳有才学，通晓谱系，还懂得古今的礼仪制度，于是把柳芳荐举给宰相，圣上颁下诏书，授予柳芳太常博士。
English: Later, when there was a vacancy for the position of Doctor of the Imperial Household, Wei Shu, the chamberlain of the engineering department, knew that Liu Fang had talent in learning, knew the genealogy, and understood the ancient and modern etiquette system, so he recommended Liu Fang to the prime minister, and the emperor issued an imperial decree and awarded Liu Fang to Doctor of the Imperial Household.

古文：时同座客，亡者已六七人矣。
现代文：这时，当年朝士宴会上的同座客人，已经有六七个人不在人世了。
English: By this time, six or seven of the guests at the morning tea banquet that year were no longer alive.

古文：陈昭
现代文：陈昭
English: Chen Zhao

古文：仆射房琯、相国崔涣并曾贬任睦歙州官。
现代文：宰相房琯、崔涣当年曾经一同被贬到睦、歙二州任州官。
English: The prime ministers, Fong Quan and Cui Quan, were both demoted to Moo Moo that year, and were appointed as state officials in two states.

古文：时有婺州人陈昭见之云：后二公并为宰相，然崔公为一大使，来江南。
现代文：当时有位婺州人陈昭看见他俩，说：以后二公将一齐任宰相，但是崔公将任重要使节，出巡江南。
English: At that time, Chen Zhao, a native of Zhangzhou, saw the two of them and said, "In the future, both princes will serve as prime ministers, but Cui Gong will serve as an important envoy and go on a tour to the south of the Yangtze River."

古文：及至德初，上皇入蜀，房崔二公，同时拜相。
现代文：到了唐肃宗至德初年，玄宗皇上来到蜀中，房琯、崔涣同时被授任宰相。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign in Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong came to Shuzhong, and Fang Zong and Cui Zong were simultaneously appointed as prime ministers.

古文：崔后为选补使，巡按江东。
现代文：后来崔涣被任命为选补使，巡行视察江南。
English: Later, Cui Gan was appointed as the envoy of choice and made a tour to inspect the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：至苏杭间，崔公自说。
现代文：在巡察苏杭期间，崔涣自己讲述这件事情。
English: During the inspection of Suhang, Cui Rong himself talked about this matter.

古文：卢齐卿
现代文：卢齐卿
English: Lord Lucan

古文：卢齐卿有知人之鉴。
现代文：卢齐卿有鉴别人才的能力。
English: Lord Lucan had a knack for spotting talent.

古文：年六七岁时性慢率，诸叔父每令一奴人随后。
现代文：他六、七岁的时候性格轻率，他的叔叔们常常让一个仆人在后面跟着他。
English: When he was six or seven years old, he was so reckless that his uncles often had a servant follow him.

古文：至十五六好夜起，于后园空庭中坐。
现代文：到了十五、六岁的时候。他常常夜间起来，在后花园空庭中坐着。
English: By the time he was 15 or 16, he would often get up in the night and sit in the empty space in the back garden.

古文：奴见火炬甚多，侍卫亦众，有人持伞盖盖之。
现代文：有一次，仆人看见他周围有许多火把，并有很多侍卫在他的身边，还有人站在他的身后为他撑着伞盖。
English: Once, a servant saw him surrounded by many torches, with many attendants at his side, and others standing behind him holding umbrellas for him.

古文：以告叔父，叔父以为妖精怪媚。
现代文：仆人把这事告诉了他的叔父，他的叔父以为是妖精鬼怪在迷惑他。
English: The servant told this to his uncle, who thought he was being haunted by goblins.

古文：有巫者教以艾灸在手中心。
现代文：有位巫师教他叔父用艾草灼烧他的手心。
English: A sorcerer had taught his uncle to burn his palms with wormwood.

古文：袁天纲见之，大惊异曰：此人本合知三世事，缘灸掌损，遂遗灭却两世事，只知当世事。
现代文：袁天纲看见这种情形，非常惊异地说：他本该能知道三世的事情，因为灸烤他的手掌，就使他遗忘、失去了两世的事，现在他只知道当世的事情了。
English: When Yuan Tiangang saw this, he was very surprised and said, "He should have been able to know the things of the third generation. Because the moxibustion burned his palms, he forgot and lost the things of the second generation. Now he only knows the things of the present generation."

古文：从此每有所论，无不中者。
现代文：从此以后，卢齐卿每次谈论什么，没有不被他说中的。
English: From then on, every time Lord Lucan spoke about something, it was never out of his mouth.

古文：官至秘书监。
现代文：后来卢齐卿官任秘书监。
English: Later, Lord Luzi was appointed as the superintendent of secretaries.

古文：张嘉贞之任宰相也，有人诉之。自虑左贬，命齐卿视焉。
现代文：张嘉贞任宰相。有人向他讲述关于卢齐卿的一些事情。
English: Zhang Jiazhen was appointed prime minister. Someone told him some things about Lu Qi.

古文：不为决定，因其入朝，乃书笏上作台字，令张见之。
现代文：张嘉贞担心自己会被降职，让卢齐卿给他看视一下。卢齐卿没有给他明确答复，知道他要去上朝，就在他的笏板上写一台字，让张嘉贞看。
English: Zhang Jiazhen was worried that he would be demoted, so he asked Lord Luzi to take a look at him. Lord Luzi did not give him a clear answer. Knowing that he was going to the Imperial Court, he wrote a word on his chopping board for Zhang Jiazhen to see.

古文：张以为不离台座，及敕出，贬台州刺史。
现代文：他以为不能离开台座宰相之职。待到皇上颁下诏书，才知道原来是被降职到台州任刺史。
English: He thought he couldn't leave the post of prime minister. It wasn't until the emperor issued an imperial edict that he learned that he had been demoted to Taizhou to serve as a magistrate.

古文：张守珪，河北人，事县尉梁万顷。
现代文：张守珪河北人，侍奉县尉梁万顷。
English: Zhang Shouqi, a native of Hebei Province, served the county lieutenant Liang Wanhao.

古文：万顷令捉马，失衣襟，遂挞一顿。
现代文：一次梁万顷让他捉马，张守珪在捉马时，扯掉了衣襟，于是梁万顷让人鞭打了他一顿。
English: Once, Liang Wanha asked him to catch a horse. When Zhang Shouyi caught the horse, he tore off his collar, so Liang Wanha had someone whip him.

古文：因此发愤从军，为幽州一果毅。
现代文：张守珪气愤之下。立志从军，后来在幽州作了一名果毅。
English: Under Zhang Shouyi's anger and indignation, he decided to join the army and later became a soldier in Yuzhou.

古文：齐卿常引对坐云：公后当富贵，秉节钺。
现代文：卢齐卿常召唤他坐在一起聊天。一次卢齐卿说：以后你能够富贵，能掌握重要的兵权。
English: Lord Luzi often summoned him to sit and talk with him. Once Lord Luzi said, "In the future, you will be able to be rich and have important military power."

古文：守珪踧踖，不意如此。下阶拜。
现代文：张守珪听了后，显得有些局促不安，他原来并未想到象卢齐卿所说的那样，忙走下台阶，恭敬地拜谢卢齐卿。
English: After listening, Zhang Shoukun seemed a little embarrassed and uneasy. He had not originally thought of hastily walking down the steps and respectfully bowing to Sir Lu Qi, as Sir Lu Qi had said.

古文：卢公未离幽州，而守珪为将军节度矣。
现代文：卢齐卿一直没有离开幽州，而张守珪后来果然升为将军，官任执掌一方军政大权的节度使。
English: Lord Lu Qi never left Yuzhou, and Zhang Shouyi was later promoted to general, and served as the military governor of a military and political power.

古文：梁万顷为河南县尉，初考满。
现代文：梁万顷任河南县尉，任职期满后，张守珪传唤他前来相见。
English: Liang Wanhao served as Henan County Lieutenant, after the expiration of his term of office, Zhang Shouyi summoned him to come and see him.

古文：守珪唤与相见，万顷甚惧，守珪都不恨之。谓曰：向者不因公责怒，某亦不发愤自达。
现代文：梁万顷知道后，非常惧怕。张守珪一点都没有恨他，对他说：从前如果你不责罚我，我也不会发愤自强的。
English: After Liang Wanhao knew, he was very afraid. Zhang Shoucheng didn't hate him at all, and said to him: "In the past, if you didn't punish me, I wouldn't have been so angry."

古文：乃遗其财物，使疗病。
现代文：临别时，张守珪还送钱和物品给梁万顷，让他治病用。
English: At the time of parting, Zhang Shoucheng also sent money and goods to Liang Wanhe, so that he could treat his illness.

古文：梁十二
现代文：梁十二
English: Liang XII

古文：有梁十二者名知人。
现代文：有位叫梁十二的人，是有名的能预测人未来的人。
English: There was a man named Liang XII, who was famous for being able to predict people's future.

古文：至宋州，刺史司马诠作书，荐与苏州刺史李无言。云：梁十二今之管辂。
现代文：他来到了宋州，刺史司马诠写信把梁十二推荐给苏州刺史李无言，说：梁十二是当今的管辂。
English: He came to Songzhou, and wrote a letter to Sima Yin to recommend Liang XII to Suzhou's Li Mugu, saying: Liang XII is today's Guan Yu.

古文：李无言遣日暮引入宅，无言乃著黄衣衫，令一客著紫，替作无言，与相抵对。
现代文：李无言让天黑时带梁十二到他家中去。李无言自己穿上黄色衣服，让他的一位门客穿上紫色的衣服，扮作李无言与梁十二对答。
English: Li Wuzhong asked Liang XII to go to his house with him when it was dark. Li Wuzhong dressed himself in yellow clothes and asked one of his guests to dress in purple clothes and pretend to be Li Wuzhong and Liang XII.

古文：梁子谓客云：向闻公语声，未有官禄。
现代文：梁十二对这位门客说：如果听你说话的声音，没有官禄。
English: Liang XII said to this doorkeeper: If you listen to the voice of your words, there is no official reward.

古文：又闻黄衣语，乃是三品。
现代文：再听穿黄衣服的人说话，却是三品。
English: Listening to the man in yellow again, however, is a travesty.

古文：今章服不同，岂看未审。
现代文：现在你们的官服不同，这样叫我看，我怎么能鉴察清楚呢？
English: Now that your official uniforms are different, if you ask me to look like this, how can I see clearly?

古文：无言信之，乃以实对云：某昨有事，恐被宣尉使恶奏，君视如何？
现代文：这回李无言相信梁十二了，于是实话告诉梁十二说：我昨天出了点事，担心宣尉使到皇上那儿说我的坏话，你看应该怎么办？
English: This time, Li believed Liang XII without a word, so he told Liang XII the truth and said, "Something happened to me yesterday. I'm worried that the imperial envoy will go to the emperor to speak ill of me. What should I do?

古文：梁云：公即合改得上州刺史。
现代文：梁十二说：你马上就能变更职位，任上一级州的刺史。
English: Liang XII said: You can immediately change your position and be appointed as the chief historian of a higher-level state.

古文：后果改为睦州刺使，无言赠钱二百贯。
现代文：后来，李无言果然改任睦州刺史。李无言赠送给梁十二二百贯钱。
English: Later, Li Wuzhong changed his post to Muzhou chief historian. Li Wuzhong presented Liang with twelve hundred and two hundred crowns.

古文：梁子云：公至彼州，必得重厄。
现代文：梁十二说：你到睦州以后，一定有大难。
English: Liang XII said, "After you come to Mutsuzhou, you are sure to have great difficulties.

古文：某为公作一法禳之，公当须嗔责某乙。云是妄语人，鞭背十下，仍不得令妻子知也。
现代文：我作一法替你祭祷消灾。你必须怒责我一顿，就说我是胡说八道的人，用鞭子抽我背十下，但不要让你妻子知道。
English: I will make a sacrifice for you and pray for you to get rid of the disaster. You must scold me angrily, say that I am a nonsense person, and whip my back ten times, but don't let your wife know.

古文：无言再三不可，梁子再三以请，无言闵默而从之。
现代文：李无言再三推却说不可，梁十二再三请求他这样做。
English: Li was speechless and repeatedly urged him not to do so, while Liang XII repeatedly asked him to do so.

古文：明早，李公当衙决梁子十下，小苍头走报其妻。无言入门，妻云：何以打梁子？
现代文：李无言家的小奴仆跑去把这事告诉了李无言的妻子。李无言回家一进门，妻子就问：为什么打梁先生？
English: Li Mujing's manservant ran to tell Li Mujing's wife about this. As soon as Li Mujing came home, his wife asked, "Why did you hit Mr. Liang?"

古文：无言恨云：忘却他不遣家内知。
现代文：李无言悔恨地说：我忘了十二告诉我，不让告诉家属的。
English: Li was speechless with remorse and said, "I forgot to tell my family.

古文：俄而梁子叩铃，请见无言曰：公何以遣妻子知，厄不免矣。
现代文：过了一会儿，梁十二来叩门，要求见李无言，说：你为什么要告诉你妻子知道这件事？
English: After a while, Liang XII knocked on the door and asked to see Li Wuzhong, saying: "Why did you tell your wife that you knew about this?

古文：公既强与某二百千文，有一事以报公德。
现代文：这回，大难是免不了啦。你既然硬是给我二百千文钱，我用一件事报答你的恩德。
English: This time, a big disaster is inevitable. Since you gave me two hundred thousand dollars, I will repay your kindness with one thing.

古文：公厄虽不免，然令公得二千贯，以充家资，取之必无事。
现代文：虽然你的灾难是免不了的，但是可以让你得到二千贯钱，来充实你家的财产，你收下它不会有什么事的。
English: Although your misfortune is unavoidable, you can get two thousand yuan to enrich your family's property, and you will not have any problems accepting it.

古文：无言在州，果取得二千贯钱而死。
现代文：李无言到睦州后，果然得到二千贯钱，就死了。
English: After Li arrived in Mutsu without saying a word, he received two thousand kroner and died.

古文：梁十二又谓丹徒主簿卢惟雅云：从此得通事舍人。
现代文：梁十二又对丹徒主簿卢惟雅说：从此你能得到通事舍人的官职。
English: Liang XII also said to Lu Weiya, the principal of Dantou, "From now on, you can get the official post of the person who is willing to give up everything."

古文：如其言。后于京见之。
现代文：真象梁十二说的那样，卢惟雅得到了那个职位。后来在京城，梁十二见到卢惟雅。
English: Just as Liang XII said, Lu Weiya got the position. Later, in Beijing, Liang XII met Lu Weiya.

古文：云：至某年，财物庄宅合破散，公当与某五十千文，某教公一言即免。
现代文：梁十二说：到某一年，你的家产和庄宅该要破败散失。你应该给我五十千文钱，我教给你一句话，就可以免去这场灾难。
English: Liang XII said: In a certain year, your family property and manor house should be ruined and scattered. You should give me fifty thousand yuan, and I will teach you a word, and you can avoid this disaster.

古文：卢不之信，不与是钱。
现代文：卢惟雅不相信他的话，不给他这份钱。
English: Lu Weiya did not believe his words and did not give him the money.

古文：至某年，卢果因蒱博赌赛，庄宅等并尽。
现代文：到了那一年，卢惟雅果然因为赌博，庄宅、钱物等全都输光了。
English: In that year, Lu Weiya lost everything because of gambling, including his mansion and money.

古文：冯七
现代文：冯七
English: Feng Qi

古文：校书正字，虽一两资，亦望得之，奈何一尉。
现代文：李汤不信，说：我已经四次参加候选，每次都只是保留了候选的资格。不应该嫌弃官职的。校书正字。这官虽小奉禄也少，也希望得到它。怎么能得到一个尉官呢？
English: Li Tang didn't believe him and said, "I've been a candidate four times, and each time I've only retained the qualification of a candidate. One shouldn't be reluctant to give up an official post. I'm a schoolmaster. I hope to get this post even though the stipend is small. How can I get a lieutenant?

古文：冯曰：君但记之，从此更作一县尉，即骑马不住矣。
现代文：冯七说：不过你记着，从今以后你将更换着地方作一县尉，就是骑马不停地走呵！
English: Feng Qi said, "But remember, from now on, you will change places to become a county lieutenant, that is, you will ride a horse and keep walking!"

古文：又问李君婚未，李云：未婚，有一姨母在家。
现代文：冯七又问李汤结婚没有。李汤说：没有结婚，有个姨母在家。
English: Feng Qi also asked Li Tang if he was married. Li Tang said, "I am not married, I have an aunt at home."

古文：冯曰：君从今便不复与相见矣。
现代文：冯七说：从现在起就再不能与你姨母见面了。
English: Feng Qi said: From now on, I can no longer meet with your aunt.

古文：李到京，选得留。
现代文：李汤到京后，被选中留用。
English: After Li Tang arrived in Beijing, he was selected to stay.

古文：属禄山之乱，不愿作京官，欲与校正，不受。自索湖州乌程县尉。
现代文：正值安禄山叛乱，他不愿在京城里做官，朝廷想授予他任校正，他没有接受，自己讨了一个湖州乌程县尉当。
English: At the time of the An Lushan Rebellion, he did not want to be an official in the capital. The court wanted to appoint him as a proofreader, but he did not accept, and he himself became a lieutenant of Wucheng County, Huzhou.

古文：经一年，廉使奏为丹阳尉，遂充判官，因乘官马不住。
现代文：过了一年，观察使上奏朝廷，请求任他为丹阳尉，进而改任判官，从此骑乘官马不停地走。
English: After a year, the observation envoy appealed to the imperial court, requesting to be appointed as Lieutenant Danyang, and then to be appointed as a judge. From then on, he rode the official horse non-stop.

古文：离乱之后，道路隔绝，果与姨母不复相见。
现代文：安使之乱后，道路不通，果然与姨母没有再相见。
English: After the Anzhi Rebellion, the road was impassable, and I never saw my aunt again.

古文：马生
现代文：马生
English: Ma Sheng

古文：天宝十四年，赵自勤合入考。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十四年，赵自勤应当进京参加选官考试。
English: In the 14th year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, Zhao Ziqin was supposed to go to Beijing to take the official selection examination.

古文：有东阳县瞽者马生相谓云：足下必不动，纵去亦却来。
现代文：东阳县有个姓马的盲人，给他看相说：你一定不要去，在这里你的禄位还没有完呢。
English: In Dongyang County, there was a blind man surnamed Ma. His guide said to him, "You must not go. Your rook position here is not over yet."

古文：于此禄尚未尽，后至三品，著紫。又云：自六品即登三品。
现代文：以后你能三品官，穿紫色官服。他又说：从六品一下你就能升到三品。
English: In the future, you can be a third-grade official and wear a purple official uniform. He also said: you can rise to third grade from sixth grade.

古文：自勤其年累不入考。
现代文：赵自勤这年真的没有去参加选官考试。
English: Zhao Ziqin really did not go to take the election official examination this year.

古文：至冬，有敕赐紫。
现代文：到了冬天，皇上颁下诏书，赏赐赵自勤紫色官服。
English: In winter, the emperor issued an imperial edict, awarding Zhao Ziqin with a purple official uniform.

古文：乾元二年九月，马生又来。
现代文：唐肃宗乾元二年，姓马的盲人又来了。
English: In the second year of Qianyuan, the blind man surnamed Ma came again.

古文：自勤初诳云：庞仓曹家唤。
现代文：开始，赵自勤骗他说：我是庞仓曹家的仆人。
English: At first, Zhao Ziqin lied to him and said, "I am a servant of the Pangcang Cao family.

古文：至则捏自勤头骨云：合是五品，与赵使君骨法相似。
现代文：姓马的盲人走到赵自勤面前就去捏他的头骨，说：应该是五品，你的骨法和赵使君的差不多。
English: A blind man surnamed Ma walked up to Zhao Ziqin and pinched his skull, saying, "It should be five pins. Your bone structure is similar to that of Zhao Zijun."

古文：所言年寿并官政多少，与前时所说并同也。
现代文：姓马的盲人所说的关于赵自勤的年寿，以及任多少任官，与以前说的一样。
English: What the blind man surnamed Ma said about Zhao Ziqin's longevity and how many officials he appointed is the same as before.

