古文：六年春，晋赵盾、卫孙免侵陈。
现代文：六年春季，晋国赵盾、卫国的孙免率兵入侵陈国。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Zhao Dun of the Jin Dynasty and Sun Mian of the Qing Dynasty led troops to invade Chen.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季四月，无事。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋八月，螽。
现代文：秋季八月，有螽。
English: In the autumn, in August, there are crickets.

古文：冬，十月。
现代文：冬季十月，无事。
English: Winter in October.

古文：六年春，晋、卫侵陈，陈即楚故也。
现代文：六年春季，晋国、卫国入侵陈国，这是由于陈国偏向楚国的缘故。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Jin and Wei invaded Chen. This was due to Chen's inclination towards Chu.

古文：夏，定王使子服求后于齐。
现代文：夏季，周定王派遣子服到齐国求娶齐女为王后。
English: In the summer, King Zhou Ding sent Zifu to Qi Province to marry Qi's daughter as his queen.

古文：秋，赤狄伐晋。围怀，及邢丘。
现代文：秋季，赤狄进攻晋国，包围了怀地和邢丘。
English: In the autumn, the Red Di attacked Jin Province and encircled Huaiji and Mengqiu.

古文：晋侯欲伐之。
现代文：晋成公打算反攻。
English: Jincheng planned to counterattack.

古文：中行桓子曰： 使疾其民。以盈其贯，将可殪也。
现代文：中行桓子说： 让他危害他自己的百姓，以使他恶贯满盈，到时候大概就可以歼灭了。
English: Chuang Xinghuanzi said: Let him endanger his own people, so that his evil streak will be full, and then it will probably be possible to annihilate him.

古文：《周书》曰： 殪戎殷。 此类之谓也。 
现代文：《周书》说： 歼灭大国殷朝 ，说的就是这一类的事情。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: To annihilate the great country Yin Dynasty, it is this kind of thing that is being said.

古文：冬，召桓公逆王后于齐。
现代文：冬季，周卿士召桓公到齐国迎接王后。
English: In winter, Prince Zhou summoned Prince Huan to Qi Province to meet the queen.

古文：楚人伐郑，取成而还。
现代文：楚国攻打郑国，讲和以后就回去了。
English: Chu attacked Zheng, made peace, and then went back.

古文：郑公子曼满与王子伯廖语，欲为卿。
现代文：郑国的公子曼满对王子伯廖说，他想要做卿。
English: Manman, the prince of Zheng, told Prince Ba Liao that he wanted to be a lord.

古文：伯廖告人曰： 无德而贪，其在《周易·丰》之《离》，弗过之矣。 
现代文：伯廖告诉别人说： 没有德行而又贪婪，他是应在《周易》《丰》卦变成《离》卦这样的卦象上，不会超过三年，必然灭亡。 
English: Bo Liao told others: "He is not virtuous and greedy. He should not exceed three years in "Zhou Yi" "Feng" Gua and "Leave" Gua, and he will inevitably perish.

古文：间一岁，郑人杀之。
现代文：隔了一年，郑国人杀死了公子曼满。
English: A year later, the Zheng people killed Man Man.

