古文：胡藩字道序，豫章南昌人也。
现代文：胡藩字道序，豫章南昌人。
English: The word "Hu" in the name of the Han Dynasty, and "Yuzhang" in the name of the Nanchang Dynasty.

古文：少孤，居丧以毁闻。
现代文：少年时成为孤儿，居丧以哀伤闻名。
English: Orphaned as a boy, he was known for his sadness.

古文：太守韩伯见之，谓藩叔尚书少广曰： 卿此侄当以义烈成名。 
现代文：太守韩伯见了他，对胡藩的叔叔尚书胡少广说： 您的这个侄子一定会以义烈成名。 
English: When Governor Han Bo saw him, he said to the uncle of the Hu clan, Shang Shuxu Hu Shao Guang, "This nephew of yours will surely become famous as a virtuous man."

古文：州府辟不就，须二弟冠婚毕，乃参郗恢征虏军事。
现代文：州府征召，他不去上任，等二弟加冠结婚完毕，才到郗恢的军幕中担任参谋。
English: He was called up by the prefectural government, but he did not go to take up the post. He waited until his second brother, Ka Guan, was married before he went to serve as a staff officer in the army.

古文：时殷仲堪爲荆州刺史，藩外兄罗企生爲仲堪参军。
现代文：当时殷仲堪为荆州刺史，胡藩的妻兄罗企生是殷仲堪的参军。
English: At that time, Yin Zhongkang was the governor of Jingzhou, and Luo Qisheng, the brother-in-law of Hu Han, was Yin Zhongkang's entry into the army.

古文：藩过江陵省企生，因说仲堪曰： 桓玄意趣不常，节下崇待太过，非将来计也。 
现代文：胡藩从江陵经过，去看望罗企生，从而劝说殷仲堪说： 桓玄的意趣没有常性，您对他的崇信太过分了，不是迎接未来的好方法。 
English: The Hu clan passed through Gangneung to visit Luo Qisheng, thus persuading Yin Zhongkan to say: "Huan Xuan's intentions are not permanent, your reverence for him is too excessive, and it is not a good way to meet the future."

古文：仲堪不悦。
现代文：殷仲堪很不高兴。
English: Yin Zhongkang was very unhappy.

古文：藩退谓企生曰： 倒戈授人，必至大祸，不早去，后悔无及。 
现代文：胡藩下来后对罗企生说： 倒过戈柄来交给别人，必定会导致大祸，如果不早早离开，后悔就来不及了。 
English: After Hu Han came down, he said to Luo Qisheng: If you hand over the reins to others, it will surely lead to a big disaster. If you don't leave early, you won't have time to regret it.

古文：后玄自夏口袭仲堪，藩参玄后军军事。
现代文：后来桓玄从夏口袭击殷仲堪，胡藩参谋殷仲堪后军军事。
English: Later, Huan Xuan attacked Yin Zhongkan from Xiakou, and the Hu clan's staff officer, Yin Zhongkan, led the rearguard military.

古文：仲堪败，企生果以附从及祸。
现代文：殷仲堪失败，罗企生果然因为跟从他而遭了祸患。
English: Yin Zhongkan failed, Luo Qisheng really suffered a calamity because of following him.

古文：藩转参太尉大将军相国军事。
现代文：胡藩转换职务为太尉大将军相国参谋军事。
English: Hu Han was transferred to the post of Lieutenant-General and became the military staff officer of the neighboring country.

古文：宋武帝起兵，玄战败将出奔，藩扣马曰： 今羽林射手犹有八百，皆是义故西人，一旦舍此，欲归可复得乎？ 
现代文：宋武帝起兵，桓玄战败将要逃跑。胡藩拉着马缰说： 现在羽林军的射手还有八百人，都是过去西部的义兵，一旦舍弃他们，再想回归难道还能做得到吗？ 
English: Emperor Songwu raised an army, and Huan Xuan, defeated, was about to flee. Hu Han pulled his horse and said, "Now there are still eight hundred archers of the Ulin Army, all of whom were former western volunteers. If we abandon them, will we still be able to return?"

古文：玄直以鞭指天而已。
现代文：桓玄只是用鞭子指着天空。
English: Kuan Xuan just pointed to the sky with his whip.

古文：于是奔散相失，追及玄于芜湖。
现代文：从此奔逃，互相失散，后来他在芜湖追上了桓玄。
English: From then on, they ran away and lost contact with each other. Later, he caught up with Kuan Xuan in Wuhu.

古文：玄见藩喜谓张须无曰： 卿州故爲多士，今复见王修。 
现代文：桓玄见了胡藩，高兴地对张须无说： 您这一州总是多出士人，今天又见到了王修。 
English: When Kuan Xuan saw the Hu clan, he happily said to Zhang Shumu, "In your state, there are always more samurai, and today I saw Wang Xiu again.

古文：桑落之败，藩舰被烧，并铠入水，潜行三十许步，方得登岸。
现代文：桑落失败后，胡藩的军舰被烧毁，他穿着铠甲跳入水中，潜泳了三十来步，才得以登岸。
English: After the failed landing, the warship of the Hu clan was burned, he jumped into the water wearing armor, and swam for thirty steps before he was able to land.

古文：乃还家。
现代文：于是回到了家中。
English: So he returned home.

古文：武帝素闻藩直言于殷氏，又爲玄尽节，召参镇军军事。
现代文：武帝平时听说胡藩对殷仲堪直言劝告，又为桓玄尽节，便召聘他到本镇军中参谋军事。
English: Emperor Wu had heard that the Hu clan could give frank advice to Yin Zhong in peacetime, and for the sake of Huan Xuan, he summoned and hired him to be a military staff officer in the town's army.

古文：从征慕容超，超军屯聚临朐。
现代文：跟随征讨慕容超，慕容超的军队屯聚在临朐。
English: Following the recruitment of Murong Chao, Murong Chao's army gathered in Linyi.

古文：藩言于武帝曰： 贼屯军城外，留守必寡，今往取其城而斩其旗帜，此韩信所以克赵也。 
现代文：胡藩告诉武帝说： 贼军屯兵城外，留守部队必然很少，现在前往攻取他的城池而斩断他的旗帜，这便是韩信战胜赵军的办法。 
English: Hu Han told Emperor Wu, "The invading army has left the city, and there must be very few troops left. Now, we will attack his city and cut off his flag. This is how Han Xin defeated Zhao's army."

古文：帝乃遣檀韶与藩潜往，即克其城。
现代文：武帝便派檀韶与胡藩秘密前往，于是攻克了此城。
English: Emperor Wu then sent Dang Xuan to secretly travel with the Hu clan and conquered the city.

古文：贼见城陷，一时奔走，还保广固。
现代文：贼军见城池陷落，立即逃走，退军去保广固。
English: The invaders saw the city fall and immediately fled, retreating to Baoganggu.

古文：围之，将拔之夜，忽有鸟大如鹅，苍黑色，飞入帝帐里，衆以爲不祥。
现代文：武帝又把它包围起来，将要攻下的那天夜里，忽然有一只鸟像鹅一样大，青黑色，飞入武帝帐幕中。众人都认为不祥。
English: Emperor Wu encircled it again, and on the night he was about to attack it, suddenly a bird as big as a goose, blue and black, flew into Emperor Wu's tent. Everyone thought it was ominous.

古文：藩贺曰： 苍黑者，胡虏色。
现代文：胡藩庆贺说： 青黑，是胡虏的颜色。
English: Hu Han said in celebration: "Blue and black is the color of the cucumber.

古文：胡虏归我,大吉之祥。 
现代文：胡虏归我，大吉大祥。 
English: Hu Rui belongs to me, it's very auspicious.

古文：明旦攻城，陷之。
现代文：第二天早晨攻城，城被攻陷。
English: The next morning the city was attacked and taken.

古文：从讨卢循于左里，频战有功，封吴平县五等子。
现代文：他跟随征讨卢循到达左里，屡战有功，被封为吴平县五等子。
English: He followed the enlistment of Lu Xun and arrived in Zuoli. He was awarded the title of Wu Ping County's Fifth Rank.

古文：寻除鄱阳太守，从伐刘毅。
现代文：不久任命为鄱阳太守，跟随讨伐刘毅。
English: He was soon appointed the governor of Shenyang and followed Liu Yi's crusade.

古文：初，毅当之荆州，表求东道还建邺辞墓。
现代文：起初，刘毅要去荆州，上表请求绕道东部回建邺辞别陵墓。
English: At first, Liu Yi wanted to go to Jingzhou, and the above table requested that he take a detour to the east to return to the farewell mausoleum.

古文：去都数十里，不过拜阙。
现代文：离都城还有几十里，没再前行，面向宫阙叩拜。
English: There are still dozens of miles to go before the capital, and there is no need to go any further.

古文：帝出倪塘会毅，藩请杀之，乃谓帝曰： 公谓刘卫军爲公下乎？ 
现代文：武帝前往倪塘会见刘毅，胡藩请求把他杀掉，便对武帝说： 您认为刘卫军在您以下么？ 
English: Emperor Wu went to Niitan to meet Liu Yi. The Hu clan requested that he be killed, and said to Emperor Wu: Do you think Liu Wei Jun is inferior to you?

古文：帝曰： 卿谓何如？ 对曰： 夫豁达大度，功高天下，连百万之衆，允天人之望，毅固以此服公。
现代文：武帝说： 您以为怎样？ 他说： 要论豁达大度，功高天下，聚集百万之众，合乎天人愿望，刘毅当然应该佩服您。
English: Emperor Wu said, "What do you think?" He said, "If you want to talk about being open-minded and magnanimous, making great contributions to the world, and gathering millions of people, which is in line with God's desire, then Liu Yi should certainly admire you.

古文：至于涉猎记传，一咏一谈，自许以雄豪，加以夸伐，搢绅白面之士，辐凑而归，此毅不肯爲公下也。 
现代文：至于涉猎记传，吟咏谈说，自许为雄杰，进行夸口，官绅白面之士，纷纷投归，在这方面刘毅就不肯在您之下了。 
English: As for the hunting biography, Jingya said that Liu Yi would not be inferior to you in this respect.

古文：帝曰： 吾与毅俱有克复功，其过未彰，不可自相图。 
现代文：武帝说： 我与刘毅都有克复的功劳，他的罪过还没有彰显，不可以自相图谋。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Both Liu Yi and I have contributed to his recovery. His sins have not yet been revealed. We should not conspire against each other.

古文：至是谓藩曰： 昔从卿倪塘之谋，无今举也。 
现代文：到了现在，又对胡藩说： 以前如果听从了你在倪塘的计谋，就不需要有今天的行动了。 
English: Now, he said to Hu Han, "If you had listened to my advice in Niitang, there would be no need for today's action.

古文：又从征司马休之，复爲参军。
现代文：他又跟随征讨司马休之，做了参军。
English: He also followed the enlistment of Sima Xiu and joined the army.

古文：徐逵之败没，帝怒，即日于马头岸度江。
现代文：徐逵之败亡，武帝非常生气，当天就在马头岸渡江。
English: Emperor Wu was very angry at the defeat of Xu Bei and crossed the river on the same day at the Ma Tou River.

古文：江津岸壁立数丈，休之临岸置阵，无由可登。
现代文：江津岸边峭壁千丈，司马休之临岸布阵，无法攀登。
English: The cliffs along the bank of the Yangtze River are towering, and Sima Xiu's approach to the shore is blocked, making it impossible to climb.

古文：帝呼藩令上，藩有疑色。
现代文：武帝叫来胡藩，命令攀登上岸，胡藩脸色犹疑。
English: Emperor Wu called the Hu clan and ordered them to climb ashore. The Hu clan looked hesitant.

古文：帝怒，命左右录来，欲斩之。
现代文：武帝发怒了，命令左右把他押来，想要斩他。
English: Emperor Wu was furious and ordered that he be brought to him from left to right, intending to behead him.

古文：藩不受命，顾曰： 宁前死耳。 
现代文：胡藩不甘被杀，回过头来说： 宁可前进而死。 
English: Unwilling to be killed, Hu Han turned around and said, "I'd rather die than advance."

古文：以刀头穿岸，劣容脚指径上，随之者稍多。
现代文：便用刀头在岸上凿孔，勉强容下脚指，径直上攀，随着攀上的人越来越多。
English: He then used the tip of his knife to cut a hole in the bank, barely allowing his toes to come out, and climbed straight up. As he climbed, more and more people followed.

古文：及登，殊死战，败之。
现代文：登上以后，拼死战斗，终于打败了敌人。
English: After boarding, he fought hard and finally defeated the enemy.

古文：从伐关中，参太尉军事，统别军至河东。
现代文：跟随讨伐关中时，为太尉军事参谋，统领另一支队伍到了河东。
English: When he followed the crusade against Guanzhong, he was a lieutenant military staff officer and led another team to Hedong.

古文：暴风漂辎重舰度北岸，魏军牵得此舰。
现代文：暴风吹着辎重舰漂到北岸，魏军得到了这只军舰。
English: The storm blew the heavy ship to the north coast, and the Wei army got this warship.

古文：藩气愤，率左右十二人乘小船径往。
现代文：胡藩十分气愤，率领身边十二人乘小船径直前往。
English: Hu Han was very angry and led the twelve people around him in a small boat to go straight.

古文：魏骑五六百，见藩来并笑之。
现代文：魏骑兵五六百人，看见胡藩前来，一齐笑他。
English: When five or six hundred Wei cavalrymen saw Hu Han coming, they all laughed at him.

古文：藩素善射，登岸射之，应弦而倒者十许人。
现代文：胡藩善于骑射，登岸射击，应弦而倒的约有十人。
English: Hu Han is good at riding and shooting, shooting ashore, and there are about ten people who fall in line.

古文：魏军皆退，悉收所失而反。
现代文：魏军通通退走，全部收复了所失的土地，然后返回。
English: The Wei army withdrew completely, recovered all the lost land, and then returned.

古文：又遣藩及朱超石等追魏军于半城，魏骑数万合围，藩及超石不盈五千，力战，大破之。
现代文：又派遣胡藩和朱超石等追魏军到达半城，魏军几万人进行合围，胡藩和朱超石兵不满五千，奋力作战，大破了敌军。
English: They also sent the Hu clan and Zhu Chao Shi to chase the Wei army to the middle of the city. The Wei army was surrounded by tens of thousands of people, and the Hu clan and Zhu Chao Shi's soldiers were less than five thousand. They fought hard and defeated the enemy army.

古文：武帝还彭城，参相国军事。
现代文：武帝回到彭城，参与相国军事。
English: Emperor Wu returned to Pengcheng and took part in the country's military campaigns.

古文：论平司马休之及广固功，封阳山县男。
现代文：议论他平定司马休之和广固的功劳，封为阳山县男。
English: He was awarded the title of "Man of Yangshan County" for his contribution to the pacification of Sima Xiu and Guanggu.

古文：元嘉中，位太子左卫率。
现代文：元嘉年间，位居太子左卫率。
English: During the Yuan and Jia dynasties, he was the highest-ranking prince left guard.

古文：卒，諡曰壮侯。
现代文：死后，谥号为壮侯。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：子隆世嗣。
现代文：儿子胡隆世继承了他的爵位。
English: His son, Hulong, succeeded to his title.

古文：藩诸子多不遵法度，第十四子遵世同孔熙先逆谋，文帝以藩功臣，不欲显其事，使江州以他事杀之。
现代文：胡藩的几个儿子，大都不遵守法度，第十四子胡遵世伙同孔熙先谋反，文帝因为胡藩是功臣，不想暴露这件事，便让江州官员借其他事情把他杀死。
English: Several sons of the Hu clan, most of them did not abide by the law. The 14th son Hu Zun Shih and his associates plotted a rebellion with Kong Xi. Emperor Wen, because the Hu clan was a meritorious vassal, did not want to expose this matter, so he let Jiangzhou officials use other things to kill him.

古文：十六子诞世，十七子茂世，后欲奉庶人义康，交州刺史檀和之至豫章讨平之。
现代文：第十六子胡诞世，第十七子胡茂世，后来企图拥戴平民刘义康，交州刺史檀和之前往豫章，将他们讨平。
English: The sixteenth son, Hu Zhixing, and the seventeenth son, Hu Maoxing, later attempted to embrace the commoner Liu Yikang, and went to Yuzhang before the Jiaozhou stabbing of Shi Danhe to level them.

