古文：苏子谓楚王曰： 仁人之于民也，爱之以心，事之以善言。孝子之于亲也，爱之以心，事之以财。忠臣之于君也，必进贤人以辅之。
现代文：苏秦对楚王说： 仁爱的人爱护百姓，真心实意去爱他们，用好话去抚慰他们，让他们为自己服务；孝子对自己的父母，用真心去爱他们，用钱财去奉养他们；忠臣对自己的国君，一定要推荐贤能的人来辅佐国君。
English: Su Qin said to King Chu: A benevolent person loves and protects the people, loves them with a sincere heart, soothes them with kind words, and lets them serve themselves; a filial son loves his parents with a sincere heart, and supports them with money; a loyal subject to his sovereign must recommend a capable person to assist the sovereign.

古文：今王之大臣父兄，好伤贤以为资，厚赋敛诸臣百姓，使王见疾于民，非忠臣也。
现代文：现在大王的重臣和宗亲喜好毁谤贤能的人，用这来当作他们进身的条件，对臣子和百姓课以沉重的赋税，导致国君被百姓怨恨，他们称不上是忠臣。
English: Now, the senior vassals and relatives of the great king like to slander the virtuous, and use this as a condition for their advancement, levying heavy taxes on the vassals and the people, causing the king to be resented by the people. They cannot be called loyal vassals.

古文：大臣播王之过于百姓，多赂诸侯以王之地，是故退王之所爱，亦非忠臣也，是以国危。
现代文：那些大臣在百姓当中传播国君的不是，用您的土地大肆地贿赂诸侯。因此和大王的所爱相违背，这也称不上是忠臣。这样下去，国家就危险了。
English: Those ministers spread among the people the rumor that you are not the sovereign, and use your land to bribe the lords. Therefore, if you go against the king's wishes, you cannot be called a loyal subject. If this continues, the country will be in danger.

古文：臣愿无听群臣之相恶也，慎大臣父兄；用民之所善，节身之嗜欲，以百姓。
现代文：我希望您不要去听信大臣们之间互相攻击诋毁的话，要审慎地任用大臣和宗亲。要任用那些百姓所喜欢的人，节制自己的嗜好和欲望，依据百姓的喜好来决定各种事情。
English: I hope you will not listen to the words of mutual attacks and slander between ministers, carefully appoint ministers and relatives, appoint those who are liked by the people, control your own hobbies and desires, and decide on various matters according to the preferences of the people.

古文：人臣莫难于无妒而进贤。
现代文：做人臣最难做到的，莫过于没有嫉妒之心又能推荐贤才。
English: The most difficult thing to do as a courtier is to be able to recommend a wise man without envy.

古文：为主死易，垂沙之事，死者以千数。
现代文：为国君去死是很容易的，就拿垂沙之战来说，死的人数以千计。
English: It is easy to die for the sovereign, for example, in the Battle of the Suez Canal, the death toll was in the thousands.

古文：为主辱易，自令尹以下，事王者以千数。
现代文：为国君忍受屈辱也很容易，像令尹以下的人，侍奉大王的人数以千计。
English: It is also easy to endure humiliation for the sovereign. There are thousands of people like Ling Yin and below who serve the great king.

古文：至于无妒而进贤，未见一人也。
现代文：至于无忌妒之心又能推荐贤才的，却不见一人。
English: As for those who are not envious and can recommend the wise, there is not a single one.

古文：故明主之察其臣也，必知其无妒而进贤也。
现代文：所以，英明的国君考察他的臣子，必须了解他们是否有忌妒之心，是否能推荐贤才。
English: Therefore, when a wise prince examines his courtiers, he must know whether they are jealous and whether they can recommend a wise man.

古文：贤之事其主也，亦必无妒而进贤。
现代文：贤能的人侍奉国君，也必须无忌妒之心，又能推荐贤才。
English: A virtuous person who serves the sovereign must also be free from envy and be able to recommend a virtuous person.

古文：夫进贤之难者，贤者用且使己废，贵且使己贱，故人难之。 
现代文：推荐贤才之所以很难，是因为贤能的人被任用，自己就会被废弃，贤能的人地位尊贵，自己就会卑贱。所以，人们难以做到。 
English: The reason why it is difficult to recommend a virtuous person is that if a virtuous person is appointed, he will be discarded, and if a virtuous person has a high status, he will be low. Therefore, it is difficult for people to do it.

