古文：五行《木传》曰： 东方。《易经》，地上之木为《观》。故木于人，威仪容貌也。
现代文：《木传》说： 东方，《易经》地上之木是《观》卦，所以木对于人代表威仪容貌。
English: "Biography of Trees" says: In the East, the trees on the ground in the "Book of Changes" are "Kuan" and "Gua," so the trees represent the appearance of people.

古文：木者，春生气之始，农之本也。
现代文：木是表示春天气息的开始，是农业的根本。
English: Wood signifies the beginning of spring and is the basis of agriculture.

古文：无夺农时，使民岁不过三日，行什一之税，无贪欲之谋，则木气从。
现代文：不要耽误农时，让百姓一年服役不超过三天，实行十分之一的税法，没有贪婪之心。那么木气就会顺。
English: Do not delay the agricultural time, let the people serve no more than three days a year, implement the one-tenth tax law, and have no greed. Then the wood gas will be smooth.

古文：如人君失威仪，逆木行，田猎驰骋，不反宫室，饮食沈湎，不顾礼制，出入无度，多发繇役，以夺民时，作为奸诈，以夺民财，则木失其性矣。
现代文：如果国君失去威仪，违背木德行事，一味狩猎，不回宫廷，沉湎于宴饮，不顾礼制，挥霍无度，大量征发徭役，耽误农时，行为奸诈，掠夺百姓财产，那么木就失去了本性。
English: If the sovereign loses his dignity, acts contrary to the ethics of the wood, hunts blindly, does not return to the court, indulges in feasting, disregards etiquette, spends extravagantly, conscripts a large number of laborers, delays the time of farmers, acts treacherously, and plunders the property of the people, then the wood will lose its nature.

古文：盖以工匠之为轮矢者多伤败，故曰木不曲直。 
现代文：这样工匠制作车轮箭矢多数不能成功，所以说木不能随意弯曲挺直。 
English: Most craftsmen cannot succeed in making wheel arrows in this way, so the wood cannot be bent and straightened at will.

古文：宋泰豫元年，京师祗垣寺皂荚树枯死。
现代文：宋泰豫元年，京城返旦寺的皂荚树枯死。
English: In the first year of the Song and Taiyuan dynasties, the soap birch tree of Beijing Fuetan Temple died.

古文：升明末，忽更生花叶。
现代文：升明末年，忽然又生出花和叶。
English: At the end of the Ascendant, flowers and leaves suddenly appear.

古文：《京房易传》曰： 树枯冬生，不出二年，国丧，君子亡。 
现代文：《京房易传》说： 枯树冬天复活，不出二年，国家有大的丧事，国君之子死。 
English: "The Biography of Beijing Fang Yi" says: The dead tree is resurrected in winter, and within two years, the country has a great funeral, and the son of the sovereign dies.

古文：其占同。
现代文：与这一占卜相同。
English: It is the same with this divination.

古文：宋氏禅位。
现代文：宋氏禅让帝位。
English: The Song dynasty abdicated the throne.

古文：建元元年，朱爵行华表柱生枝叶。
现代文：建元元年，朱爵逝的华表柱长出枝叶。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, Zhu Jie's deceased flower table column sprouted branches and leaves.

古文：建元初，李子生毛。
现代文：建元初年，李子长毛。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, plum trees began to grow hair.

古文：二年，武陵沅头都尉治有桑树，方冬生叶。
现代文：二年，武陵沅头都尉治所有棵桑树冬天长出叶子。
English: In the second year, all the mulberry trees in Wuling Shantou were able to grow leaves in winter.

古文：《京房易传》曰： 木冬生花，天下有丧。 
现代文：《京房易传》说： 树木冬天开花，天下有丧事。 
English: "Beijing History" says: Trees bloom in winter, and there are funerals all over the world.

古文：其占同。
现代文：与这一占卜相同。
English: It is the same with this divination.

古文：后二年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：二年后，皇帝死亡。
English: In the third year, Emperor Wu died.

古文：四年，巴州城西古楼脚柏柱数百年，忽生花。
现代文：四年，巴州城西古楼墙脚的一根数百年的柏柱忽然开花。
English: In 2004, a hundred-year-old cypress pillar at the foot of the wall of the ancient West Tower of Bazhou City suddenly bloomed.

古文：永明六年，石子岗柏木长二尺四寸，广四寸半，化为石。
现代文：永明六年，互王鱼一块长二尺四寸宽四寸半的柏木，化为石头。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongming era, a piece of cypress with a length of two feet four inches and a width of four and a half inches was turned into stone.

古文：时车驾数游幸，应本传 木失其性 也。
现代文：当时御驾数次光临，应验了本传所说木失去了本性。
English: At that time, you came several times, fulfilling the legend that the tree had lost its nature.

古文：永明中，大行一舶无故自沉，艚中无水。
现代文：永明年间，大析一艘船无故沉没，船中没有水。
English: Once upon a time, in Daesei, a ship sank for no reason. There was no water in the ship.

古文：隆昌元年，庐陵王子卿斋屋梁柱际无故出血。
现代文：隆昌元年，庐陵王萧子卿房屋梁柱头上无故出血。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, there was an unexplained haemorrhage on the beam of the pillar of King Xiao Zicheng's house in Fuling.

古文：建武初，始安王遥光治庙，截东安寺屋以直庙垣，截梁，水出如泪。
现代文：建武初年，始安王萧遥光修庙，截断塞室寺的房屋来修直庙墙，截断房梁时，水流如泪。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, King Xiao Yaoguang of the First An Dynasty repaired the temple. He cut off the building of the Sejong Temple to repair the temple wall. When he cut off the beam of the house, the water flowed like tears.

古文：《貌传》曰： 失威仪之制，怠慢骄恣，谓之狂，则不肃矣。
现代文：《貌传》说： 失去威仪，怠慢骄纵，称为狂，就是不严肃。
English: "Mao Zhuan" said: losing dignity, neglecting arrogance, being called crazy, is not serious.

古文：下不敬，则上无威。
现代文：下不敬，上就没有威严。
English: If there is no respect at the bottom, there is no dignity at the top.

古文：天下既不敬，又肆其骄恣，肆之则不从。
现代文：天下既不尊敬，又放肆骄纵，放肆就会不顺从。
English: There is neither respect nor arrogance in the world. Arrogance leads to disobedience.

古文：夫不敬其君，不从其政，则阴气胜，故曰厥罚常雨。 
现代文：不尊敬自己的国君，不顺从他的统治，阴气就会占上风，所以惩罚它经常阴雨。 
English: If you do not respect your sovereign and do not submit to his rule, the evil spirit will prevail, so it is often punished by rain.

古文：永明八年四月，己巳起阴雨，昼或暂晴，夜时见星月，连雨积霖，至十七日乃止。
现代文：永明八年四月，己巳日开始下雨，白天偶尔放晴，夜裹偶尔见到星月，阴雨连绵，一直下到十七日才停止。
English: In April of the eighth year of the Yongming era, it began to rain. It occasionally cleared up during the day, and the star and moon were occasionally seen at night. It rained continuously until the 17th.

古文：十一年四月辛巳朔，去三月戊寅起，而其间暂时晴，从四月一日又阴雨，昼或见日，夜乍见月，回复阴雨，至七月乃止。
现代文：十一年四月辛巳初一，自三月戊寅以来，其间虽有暂时的放晴，但从四月一日起又是阴雨，白天有时能见到太阳，夜裹偶尔见一下月亮，又回到阴雨状态，直到七月才停止。
English: April 11th was the first day of the new year. Since March, although there was a temporary clearing, it has been rainy since April 1st. Sometimes the sun can be seen during the day, and occasionally the moon can be seen at night. It returned to the rainy state and did not stop until July.

古文：永泰元年十二月二十九日雨，至永元元年五月二十一日乃晴。
现代文：永泰元年十二月二十九下雨，直到永元元年五月二十一日才放晴。
English: It rained from December 29th of the first year of Yongtai and didn't clear up until May 21st of the first year of Yongtai.

古文：时虏寇雍州，余应本传。
现代文：京房占卜说： 冬天下雨，天下会有饥荒春天下雨，会有小的战争。 
English: Jingfang divination said: It will rain in winter, and there will be famine in the world. It will rain in spring, and there will be small wars.

古文：《传》曰： 大雨雪，犹庶征之常雨也，然有甚焉。
现代文：当时胡虏入侵雍州，其余的也应验了本传的事情。《传》说： 大雨雪。犹如是雨水正常的预兆，然而也有严重的。
English: At that time, the Khuriks invaded Yongzhou, and the rest also fulfilled this legend. "Legend" said: Heavy rain and snow. As if the rain was a normal omen, but it was also serious.

古文：雨，阴。
现代文：雨属阴。
English: Rain is yin.

古文：大雨雪者，阴之畜积甚也。
现代文：大雨雪就是阴气的大量蓄积。
English: Heavy rain and snow is the accumulation of negative energy.

古文：一曰与大水同象，曰攻为雪耳。 
现代文：另一种说法是与大水有共同的征象，称战事的预兆是下雪。 
English: Another theory is that snowfall is a harbinger of war, as it shares the same symptoms as high water.

古文：建元二年闰月己丑，雨雪。
现代文：建元二年闰月己丑，下雨雪。
English: The leap month in the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China was a bad one, with rain and snow.

古文：三年十一月，雨雪，或阴或晦，八十余日，至四年二月乃止。
现代文：三年十一月，下雨雪，时阴时暗，八十多天，到四年二月才停止。
English: In November 2003, it rained and snowed, and it was cloudy and dark at times, for more than eighty days, and it did not stop until February 2004.

古文：《传》曰： 雷于天地为长子，以其首长万物，与之出入。故雷出万物出，雷入万物入。
现代文：《传》说： 雷对于天地是长子，因为它先于万物出现，万物随着它出入，所以雷出万物出，雷入万物入。
English: "Legend" says: For heaven and earth, thunder is the firstborn, because it precedes all things, and all things go in and out with it. Therefore, thunder brings all things out, and lightning brings all things in.

古文：夫雷者，人君之象，入则除害，出则兴利。
现代文：雷象征着国君，进去就会除害，出来就会兴利。
English: The thunderbolt symbolizes the sovereign. If you go in, you will remove the harm, and if you come out, you will prosper.

古文：雷之微气以正月出，其有声者以二月出，以八月入，其余微者以九月入。
现代文：雷的微弱气息在正月发出，有声的雷在二月发出，在八月收回，其余微弱的气息在九月收回。
English: The faint breath of thunder is emitted in the first month, the loud thunder is emitted in February and withdrawn in August, and the remaining faint breath is withdrawn in September.

古文：冬三月雷无出者；若是阳不闭阴，则出涉危难而害万物也。 
现代文：冬季的三个月雷不会出现，如果是阳关不住阴，那么雷的出现就会危害万物。 
English: In the three months of winter, lightning will not appear. If it is the yang does not close the yin, then the appearance of lightning will harm all things.

古文：建元元年十月壬午，夜电光，因雷鸣。
现代文：建五元年十月壬午夜，电闪，随后就有雷鸣。
English: At midnight of October in the year of Jianwen, lightning flashed, followed by thunder.

古文：十一月庚戌，电光，有顷雷鸣，久而止。
现代文：十一月庚戌，电闪，不久雷鸣，很长时间才停止。
English: November hailstorm, lightning, soon thunder, for a long time to stop.

古文：永明五年正月戊申，夜西北雷声。
现代文：永明五年正月戊申夜，西北有雷声。
English: On the night of the first month of Yongming Year 5, there was thunder in the northwest.

古文：六年十月甲申，夜阴细雨，始闻雷鸣于西北上。
现代文：六年十月甲申夜，下起细雨，听到在西北方向有雷鸣。
English: On the night of October 6th, a light rain fell, and thunder was heard in the northwest.

古文：七年正月甲子，夜阴，雷鸣西南坤宫，隆隆一声而止。
现代文：七年正月甲子夜，天阴，西南坤宫发出雷鸣，隆隆一声就停止了。
English: On the night of Jiazi in the first month of the seventh year, with the sky overcast, the southwestern Kunming issued thunder, and the rumbling stopped.

古文：八年正月庚戌，夜雷起坎宫水门，其音隆隆，一声而止。
现代文：八年正月庚戌，夜间雷声在坎宫水门方位发出，它的声音很大，仅一声。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, the night thunder was emitted in the direction of the water gate of the Kan Palace. It was very loud, only one sound.

古文：九年二月丙子，西北有电光，因闻雷声隆隆，仍续十声而止。
现代文：九年二月丙子，西北方有闪电，随后雷声隆隆，连续十声。
English: In February of the ninth year, there was lightning in the northwest, followed by the rumble of thunder, ten consecutive sounds.

古文：十年二月庚戌，夜南方有电光，因闻雷声隆隆相续，丁亥止。
现代文：十年二月庚戌，夜裹南方有闪电，随后就听到雷声隆隆连续不断，到丁亥曰停止。
English: In February of the 10th year, there was lightning in the night in the south, and then thunder was heard continuously, and it stopped after the Chinese New Year.

古文：十月庚子，电雷起西北。
现代文：十月庚子，雷电从西北发出。
English: In October, thunder and lightning came from the northwest.

古文：十一月丁丑，西南有光，因闻雷声隐隐，再声而止。
现代文：十一月丁丑，西南方有闪电，随后就听到隐隐的雷声，到第二声就停止了。
English: In November, there was lightning in the southwest, followed by the faint sound of thunder, which stopped at the second sound.

古文：西南坤宫。
现代文：方位是西南坤宫。
English: The location is southwest of Kunming.

古文：十二月甲申，阴雨，有电光，因闻西南及西北上雷鸣，频续三声。
现代文：十二月甲申，天阴下雨，有闪电，随后就听到西南及西北上空有雷鸣，连续响了三声。
English: In December in Jiaxing, it was cloudy and rainy, with lightning, and then thunder was heard in the southwest and northwest, and three consecutive sounds were heard.

古文：丙申，夜闻西北上雷频续二声。
现代文：丙申，夜裹听到西北上空连续响了二声雷。
English: In the evening, I heard two consecutive thunderclaps in the northwest sky.

古文：辛亥，雷雨。
现代文：辛亥，雷雨。
English: Xinhai, thunderstorm.

古文：《传》曰： 雨雹，君臣之象也。
现代文：《传》说： 下冰雹是君臣关系的象征。
English: "Biography" says: The hailstorm is a symbol of the relationship between monarch and subject.

古文：阳之气专为雹，阴之气专为霰。
现代文：阳气为主就形成冰雹，阴气为主就形成霰。
English: When yang is predominant, hail is formed, and when yin is predominant, hail is formed.

古文：阳专而阴胁之，阴盛而阳薄之。
现代文：阳气为主阴气就会威胁它，阴气旺盛阳气就会逼近它。
English: If the yang is predominant, the yin will threaten it, and if the yin is strong, the yang will approach it.

古文：雹者，阴薄阳之象也。
现代文：冰雹是阴气逼近阳气的象征。
English: Hail is a symbol of yin approaching yang.

古文：霰者，阳胁阴之符也。
现代文：霰是阳气威胁阴气的征兆。
English: Wrinkles are a sign that yang is threatening yin.

古文：《春秋》不书霰者，犹月蚀也。 
现代文：《春秋》没有记载霰，就好像是没有记载月食。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record the dragonflies, just as there is no record of the lunar eclipse.

古文：建元四年五月戊午朔，雹。
现代文：建元四年五月戊午初一，下冰雹。
English: On the morning of the first day of the fifth month of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, hail fell.

古文：永明元年九月乙丑，雹落大如蒜子，须臾乃止。
现代文：永明元年九月乙丑，落下的冰雹大如蒜头，不久就停了。
English: In September of the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, the second month of the year, the hailstones that fell were as big as garlic, and they soon stopped.

古文：十一年四月辛亥，雹落大如蒜子，须臾灭。
现代文：十一年四月辛亥，冰雹大得像蒜头，一会儿就没了。
English: On April 11th, Xinhai, the hail was as big as garlic, and it was gone in an instant.

古文：《貌传》又曰： 上失节而狂，下怠慢而不敬，上下失道，轻法侵制，不顾君上，因以荐饥。
现代文：《貌传》又说： 君上失去节制而狂妄，臣下怠慢而不敬，上下都失去应遵守的道德，轻视法律违反制度，不顾君主，因而连年饥荒。
English: "Mao Zhuan" also said: The ruler lost control and became arrogant, his subjects were negligent and disrespectful, and all levels lost the morality that should be observed, despised the law, violated the system, and disregarded the monarch, resulting in years of famine.

古文：貌气毁，故有鸡祸。 
现代文：外貌之气毁坏，所以有鸡作祸。 
English: The appearance of the gas destroyed, so there is a chicken to do mischief.

古文： 一曰水岁鸡多死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一种说法说： 水年鶸死和作怪的比较多，也是这意思。
English: One theory is that this is also the meaning of the saying: There are more water-year deaths and monsters.

古文：上下不相信，大臣奸宄，民为寇盗，故曰厥极恶。 
现代文：上下互不信任。大臣奸诈，百姓做贼，所以说它极其恶毒。 
English: The ministers are treacherous and the people are thieves, so it is said to be extremely vicious.

古文： 一曰民多被刑，或形貌丑恶，风俗狂慢，变节易度，则为轻剽奇怪之服，故曰时则有服妖。 
现代文：一种说法说： 百姓受刑的多；有的外貌丑恶，风俗狂妄怠慢，轻易变节，就会穿轻浮奇怪的服装，所以说当时就会有穿奇装异服的妖怪。 
English: One theory says: People are punished more; some are ugly in appearance, arrogant and negligent in customs, easily disobedient, and will wear frivolous and strange clothes, so there will be monsters in strange clothes at that time.

古文：永明中，宫内服用射猎锦文，为骑射兵戈之象。
现代文：永明年间，宫内穿着射猎图案的锦缎，是骑马射箭战争的象征。
English: Forever and a day, the imperial family wears hunting-patterned brocades, a symbol of the horse-mounted archery war.

古文：至建武初，虏大为寇。
现代文：到建武初年，胡虏大举入侵。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, the Huns invaded in force.

古文：永明中，萧谌开博风帽后裙之制，为破后帽。
现代文：永明年间，萧谌开创博风帽的帽裙在后的风气，叫破后帽。
English: In the middle of the 17th century, Xiao Yao pioneered the style of wearing a bowler hat with a hat skirt behind, known as breaking the back cap.

古文：世祖崩后，谌建废立，诛灭诸王。
现代文：世祖去世后，萧谌左右皇帝的废立，诛杀各王。
English: After the death of the founder of the dynasty, Xiao Yao overthrew the emperor and killed all the kings.

古文：永明末，民间制倚劝帽。
现代文：永明末年，民间制作倚劝帽。
English: At the end of the Yongming era, the production of folk-style hats began.

古文：及海陵废，明帝之立，劝进之事，倚立可待也。
现代文：等到海陵王被废黜，明帝即位，奉劝登帝位的事，顷刻之间就出现了。
English: When King Hailing was deposed and Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, the matter of being advised to ascend to the throne appeared in an instant.

古文：建武中，帽裙覆顶；东昏时，以为裙应在下，而今在上，不详，断之。
现代文：建武年间，帽裙盖在头顶，东昏侯时期，认为帽裙应该在下边，可是现在在上边，不吉利，禁止。
English: During the Jianwu period, the cap and skirt were placed on the top of the head. During the Eastern Zhou period, it was believed that the cap and skirt should be on the bottom, but now they are on the top, which is unlucky and forbidden.

古文：群下反上之象也。
现代文：这是下人反叛上司的征兆。
English: This is a sign of a subordinate rebelling against the boss.

古文：永元中，东昏侯自造游宴之服，缀以花采锦绣，难得详也。
现代文：永元年间，束昏侯自己制作了游玩宴会的服装，花团锦簇，难以详加描述。
English: During the Yongyuan period, Sok Douhou himself made the costumes for the banquet, and the flowers were so beautiful that it is difficult to describe them in detail.

古文：群小又造四种帽，帽因势为名：一曰山鹊归林者，《诗》云 《鹊巢》，夫人之德 ，东昏宠嬖淫乱，故鹊归其林薮；二曰兔子度坑，天意言天下将有逐兔之事也；三曰反缚黄离喽，黄口小鸟也，反缚，面缚之应也；四曰凤皇度三桥，凤皇者嘉瑞，三桥，梁王宅处也。
现代文：诸位小人又制作了四种帽子，帽子因其外形取名。第一种叫 山鹊归林 ，《诗经》说 《鹊巢》，描述夫人的品德 ，东昏侯宠爱嬖妾极其淫乱，所以鸟鹊飞回森林。第二种叫 兔子度坑 ，上天的意思是说天下将要有逐免的事。第三种叫 反缚黄离喽 ，是指黄口小鸟，反缚，应了投降之意。第四种叫 凤凰度二桥 ，凤凰是吉祥征兆，三桥是梁王居住的地方。
English: The villains also made four kinds of hats, which were named for their shape. The first was called "Mountain Goat Returns to the Forest," "Song of Songs" said "Goat's Nest," describing the lady's character, and "Eastern Twilight Prince Loves His Concubine" was extremely lewd, so the goose flew back to the forest. The second was called "Rabbit's Den," which means that the world will have to be banished. The third was called "Anti-Bound Yellow Bird," which refers to the yellow-billed bird, anti-bound, meaning surrender. The fourth was called "Phoenix's Den," phoenix is

古文：《貌传》又曰： 危乱端见，则天地之异生。木者青，故曰青眚，为恶祥。
现代文：《貌传》又说： 危机动乱的端倪出现，天地就会产生灾异木属青色，所以称作青灾异，是非常不吉利的。
English: "Mao Zhuan" also said: "When there is a hint of crisis and turmoil, the heavens and earth will produce disasters. Wood is blue, so it is called blue disasters, which is very unlucky.

古文：凡貌伤者，金沴木，木沴金，衡气相通。 
现代文：凡是外表受伤害者，金危害木木危害金，气碰撞相通。 
English: For those who are injured on the outside, money harms wood, wood harms money, and gas collisions are all connected.

古文：延兴元年，海陵王初立，文惠太子冢上有物如人，长数丈，青色，直上天，有声如雷。
现代文：延兴元年，海陵王刚即位，文惠太子的坟上有个像人一样的东西，高几丈，青色，直上天空，发出雷鸣般的声响。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing Dynasty, when King Hailing ascended to the throne, there was a man-like object on the tomb of Prince Wen Hui. It was tall and blue, soaring into the sky and emitting a thunderous sound.

古文：火，南方，扬光辉，出炎龠为明者也。
现代文：火，对应南方，发出光芒，射出火光，照耀明亮。
English: Fire, corresponding to the south, emits light, shoots fire, shines brightly.

古文：人君向明而治，盖取其象。
现代文：君主面向南听朝治国，大概就是取的追一象征。
English: The monarch faces south to listen to the imperial court and govern the country, which is probably a symbol of the emperor's pursuit.

古文：以知人为分，谗佞既远，群贤在位，则为明而火气从矣。
现代文：火以分辨人为本分，谗佞小人已被疏远，众位贤人在位，就会发出光明而且火气顺从。
English: It is the duty of fire to distinguish between people. If a lesser person has been alienated, and many wise people are in power, it will emit light and the fire will obey.

古文：人君疑惑，弃法律，不诛谗邪，则谗口行，内间骨肉，外疏忠臣，至杀世子，逐功臣，以妾为妻，则火失其性，上灾宗庙，下灾府榭，内本朝，外阙观，虽兴师众，不能救也。
现代文：君主昏庸，抛弃法律，不杀谗佞奸邪的小人，那么就会谗言盛行，对内疏远亲人，对外疏远忠臣，以至于杀死太子，驱逐功臣，把妾作为妻子，那么火就会失去它的本性，上烧宗庙，下烧府第台榭，内烧宫城，外烧宫观，虽然兴师动众，也不能抢救。
English: If the monarch is dull-witted, abandons the law, and does not kill villains who commit treason, then slander will prevail, alienating relatives internally and loyal retainers externally, to the extent of killing the prince, expelling meritorious retainers, and taking a concubine as a wife, then the fire will lose its nature, burning up the ancestral temple, burning down the first floor of the palace, burning down the palace city internally, and burning down the palace view externally. Although the teachers are motivated, they cannot be rescued.

古文：永明三年正月，甲夜西北有野火，光上生精。西北有四，东北有一，并长七八尺，黄赤色。
现代文：永明三年正月某，初更西北方有野火，火光上生出精怪，西北有四个，东北有一个，都是高七八尺，黄红色。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Yongming era, there were wildfires in the northwest at the beginning of the year, and strange things were born on the flames. There were four in the northwest and one in the northeast, all seven or eight feet high and yellow-red.

古文：三月庚午，丙夜北面有野火，光上生精，长六尺；戊夜又有一枚，长五尺，并黄赤色。
现代文：三月庚午，夜裹丙时北面有野火，火光上生出精怪，高六尺，夜裹戊时又有一只，高五尺，都是黄红色。
English: In the middle of March, in the middle of the night, there was a wildfire in the north, and a strange creature, six feet high, was born from the light of the fire. In the middle of the night, there was another one, five feet high, all yellow and red.

古文：四年正月丁亥，夜有火精三处。
现代文：四年正月丁亥夜，有三处火精。
English: On the evening of the first day of the month of Dinghai in the fourth year, there were three fire spirits.

古文：闰月丁巳，夜有火精四所。
现代文：闰月丁巳夜，有四处火精。
English: On the evening of the third day of the leap month, there are four fire spirits.

古文：十二月辛酉，夜东南有野火精二枚。
现代文：十二月辛酉夜，东南方有二只野火精怪。
English: On a crisp December night, two wildfires rage in the Southeast.

古文：五年十二月丙寅，夜西北有野火，火上生精，一枚，长三尺，黄白色。
现代文：五年十二月丙寅夜，西北方有野火，火光上生出精怪，一只，高三尺，黄白色。
English: On the night of December 5th, there was a wildfire in the northwest. A strange creature, a three-foot-tall, yellow-and-white dragonfly, emerged from the flames.

古文：六年十一月戊申，夜西南及北三面有野火，火生精，九枚，并长二尺，黄赤色。
现代文：六年十一月戊申夜，西、南及北三面有野火，火光上生出精怪，九只，都是高二尺，黄红色。
English: On the night of November 6th, there were wildfires in the west, south, and north. The flames gave birth to nine strange creatures, all two feet tall and yellow-red in color.

古文：九年二月丙寅，甲夜北面有野火，火上生精，二枚，西北又一枚，并长三尺，须臾消。
现代文：九年二月丙寅夜，初更时分北面有野火，火光上生出精怪，二只，西北面又有一只，都是高三尺，不一会儿就消失了。
English: On the night of February 9, there was a wildfire in the north at the time of the New Year's Eve, and two elves were born on the firelight, and another one in the northwest, all three feet high, and they disappeared in a short while.

古文：永元二年八月，宫内火，烧西斋芃仪殿及昭阳、显阳等殿，北至华林墙，西及秘阁北，屋三千余间。
现代文：永元二年八月，宫内起火，烧了西房璇仪殿以及昭阳、显阳等殿，北到华林墙，西到秘阁，总共三干多间房屋。
English: In August of the second year of the Yongyuan era, a fire broke out in the palace, burning down the West Hall of the Imperial Palace, as well as the Halls of Zhaoyang and Xianyang, the North Hall of the Imperial Palace, and the West Hall of the Imperial Palace, a total of more than three buildings.

古文：《京房易传》曰： 君不思道，厥妖火烧宫。 
现代文：《京房易传》说： 君主不想着道义，那妖火就会焚烧宫殿。 
English: "Beijing House Easy Biography" said: If the monarch does not care about morality, the demon fire will burn the palace.

古文：秘阁与《春秋》宣榭火同，天意若曰，既无纪纲，何用典文为也！
现代文：秘阁舆《春秋》记载的宣榭起火相同，上天的意思好像是说，既然没有了纲纪，还要典籍做什么!
English: The proclamation of the fire is the same as that recorded in the "Spring and Autumn" of the Secret Cabinet, and the meaning of heaven seems to be that since there is no discipline, what should the classics do?

古文：二年冬，京师民间相惊云当行火灾，南岸人家往往于篱间得布火缠者，云公家以此禳之。
现代文：二年冬，京城民间相互吃惊地传说，会流行火灾，江南岸的住户经常在篱笆间得到分发的火绳，说公家用这个来祈祷。
English: In the winter of the second year, the people of Beijing were surprised to hear from each other that there would be a fire epidemic, and the residents on the south bank of the river often received fire ropes distributed between the fences, saying that the public would use this to pray.

古文：三年正月，豫章郡天火烧三千余家。
现代文：三年正月，豫章郡天火烧掉三千多户人家。
English: In the first month of the third year, the fire in Yuzhang County burned down more than three thousand homes.

古文：京房《易》占曰： 天火下烧民屋，是谓乱治杀兵作。 
现代文：塞廛用《周易》占卜说： 天火烧下界的民宅，这是说治乱双方爆发战争。 
English: Saying with the divination of "Zhou Yi": The sky and fire burned the houses of the lower realm, which means that war broke out between the two sides.

古文：是年，台军与义师偏众相攻于南江诸郡。
现代文：这年，政府军与起义军偏师在南江各郡相互进攻。
English: In this year, the government army and the rebel army attacked each other in the counties of the Nanjiang River.

古文：三年二月，乾和殿西厢火，烧屋三十间。
现代文：三年二月，干和殿西厢起火，烧掉房屋三十间。
English: In February of the third year, a fire broke out in the west wing of the Ganhe Hall, burning down thirty houses.

古文：是时西斋既火，帝徙居东斋，高宗所住殿也。
现代文：当时西屋已经起火，皇帝搬到东房居住，是高宗所住过的宫殿。
English: At that time, the west wing had already caught fire, and the emperor moved to the east wing to live. This was the palace where Emperor Gaozong lived.

古文：与烧宫占同。
现代文：这个结果与烧宫的占卜相同。
English: This result is the same as the prediction of the Burning Palace.

古文：《传》又曰： 犯上者不诛，则草犯霜而不死。
现代文：《传》又说： 犯上作乱者不杀，草就会遭霜打而不死。
English: "Biography" also said: If the perpetrator of the riot does not kill, the grass will be hit by frost and not die.

古文：或杀不以时，事在杀生失柄，故曰草妖也。 
现代文：或者不在适当的时令诛杀，事情就出在失去了生杀大权，所以叫草妖。 
English: Or if they do not fight at the right time, it is because they have lost the power of life and death, so they are called grass demons.

古文：一曰： 草妖者，失众之象也。 
现代文：一种说法是： 草出现灾异，是失去民众的征兆。 
English: One theory is that the emergence of grass disasters is a sign of the loss of the people.

古文：永元中，御刀黄文济家斋前种昌蒲，忽生花，光影照壁，成五采，其儿见之，余人不见也。
现代文：永元年间，御刀黄文济家房前的菖蒲，忽然生出花来，照在墙壁上形成五彩，他的儿子看见了，其他人都看不见。
English: In the year of Yongyuan, the irises in front of the house of Huang Wenzhi suddenly produced flowers and shined on the walls to form five colors. His son saw it, but no one else could see it.

古文：少时，文济被杀。
现代文：不久，黄文济被杀。
English: Soon after, Huang Wenzhi was killed.

古文：刘歆《视传》有羽虫之孽，谓鸡祸也。
现代文：京房《视传》中有鸟类作孽，称为鸡祸。
English: In Kyobo's "Visual Biography," there are birds that do evil, known as the chicken plague.

古文：班固案《易》鸡属《巽》，今以羽虫之孽类是也，依歆说附《视传》云。
现代文：逛固根据《周易》确定鸡属于《巽》卦，现在鸟类作孽与此相同，依照型逖的说法附在《视传》。
English: According to "Zhou Yi," it was determined that the chicken belonged to "Dao" Gua, and now the birds do the same, according to the words of the type, attached to "Video Biography."

古文：建武二年，有大鸟集建安，形如水犊子。
现代文：建武二年，有只大乌栖息在建安郡，形状像水犊子。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, there was a large cormorant inhabiting Jian'an County, shaped like a water louse.

古文：其年，郡大水。
现代文：这年，该郡发大水。
English: That year, the county was hit by a major flood.

古文：三年，大鸟集东阳郡，太守沈约表云： 鸟身备五采，赤色居多。 
现代文：三年，有只大鸟栖息在东阳郡，太守沈约上表说： 鸟身上五颜六色，红色居多。 
English: Three years ago, there was a large bird roosting in Dongyang County, and the eunuch Shen said about the above table: The bird is multi-colored, mostly red.

古文：案《乐纬叶图征》云： 焦明鸟质赤，至则水之感也。 
现代文：据《乐纬叶图征》说： 鵾瞩乌是红色，是发大水的感应。 
English: According to the Le Wei Ye Zheng, "The red color of the black locust is caused by the large amount of water.

古文：永明二年四月，乌巢内殿东鸱尾。
现代文：永明二年四月，乌鸦在内殿束鸱尾上筑巢。
English: In April of the second year of the Yongming era, a crow built a nest on the cormorant's tail in the inner hall.

古文：三年，大鸟集会稽上虞。
现代文：三年，有大鸟栖息在会稽郡上虞县。
English: For three years, a large bird has been roosting in Shangyu County, Heji County.

古文：其年，县大水。
现代文：这年，该县发大水。
English: This year, the county was hit by a major flood.

古文：《传》曰： 维水沴火。 
现代文：《传》说： 水危害火。 
English: "Legend" says: Water is harmful to fire.

古文：又曰： 赤眚赤祥。 
现代文：又说： 红色灾异红色吉祥。 
English: He also said: "Red is disastrous, red is auspicious."

古文：建武四年，王晏子德元所居帷屏，无故有血洒之，少日而散。
现代文：永明四年，王垦的儿子王擅五居室的帷帐屏风，无缘无故有血洒在上面，没几天后消散。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, the curtain screen of the fifth bedroom of Wang Xuan's son, Wang Xuan, had blood sprinkled on it for no reason, and it dissipated after a few days.

古文：晏寻被诛。
现代文：王晏不久被杀死。
English: Wang Yao was killed soon after.

古文：《思心传》曰： 心者，土之象也。
现代文：《思心传》说： 心是土的象征。
English: "Heart to Heart" says: The heart is the symbol of the soil.

古文：思心不睿，其过在瞀乱失纪。
现代文：思虑的心不宽容，其过错就会表现为混乱没有纲纪。
English: If a thoughtful heart is intolerant, its faults will manifest as chaos and lack of discipline.

古文：风于阳则为君，于阴则为大臣之象，专恣而气盛，故罚常风。
现代文：风对于阳就是君主，对于阴就是大臣的象征，专擅恣肆而且气盛，所以惩罚经常刮风。
English: The wind is the symbol of the monarch for the yang and the minister for the yin. It is arbitrary and powerful, so the punishment is often windy.

古文：心为五事主，犹土为五行主也。 
现代文：心是五事之主，好比土是五行之主。 
English: The mind is the master of the five elements, just as the earth is the master of the five elements.

古文：一曰： 阴阳相薄，偏气阳多为风，其甚也常风。
现代文：一种说法说： 阴阳相逼，气偏向阳多形成风，其中严重的要经常刮风。
English: One theory says: Yin and yang are opposite, and qi is biased toward the yang to form wind. In severe cases, the wind should blow frequently.

古文：阴气多者，阴而不雨，其甚也常阴。 
现代文：阴气偏多的，天阴可是不下雨，其中严重的要经常阴天。 
English: The weather tends to be gloomy, but it does not rain when it is gloomy, and it is often cloudy when it is severe.

古文：一曰： 风宵起而昼晦，以应常阴同象也。 
现代文：一种说法说： 风夜晚刮起白天阴暗，对应天气经常阴，征象相同。 
English: One theory says: Wind blows at night and the day is dark, corresponding to the weather is often cloudy, the signs are the same.

古文：建元元年十一月庚戌，风夜暴起，云雷合冥，从戌亥上来。
现代文：建元元年十一月庚戌夜，突然刮起风，云雷交加天气阴暗，从戌亥方位上刮来。
English: On the night of November of the first year of Jianyuan, the wind suddenly blew, the clouds and thunder were mixed and the weather was gloomy, blowing from the direction of Jianhai.

古文：四年十一月甲寅，酉时风起小駃，至二更雪落，风转浪津。
现代文：四年十一月甲寅酉时，刮起迅疾的小风，到二更时下起了雪，风向转移浪峰冲上渡口。
English: In November 2004, when the moon was in Aquarius, a swift breeze began to blow. By the second day, it was snowing, and the wind shifted and the wave crested and rushed onto the ferry.

古文：永明四年二月丙寅，巳时风迅急。
现代文：永明四年二月丙寅巳时，风急速刮起。
English: In February of the 4th year of the Yongming Dynasty, when the cormorant was rising, the wind was blowing rapidly.

古文：十一月己丑，戌时风迅急，从西北戌亥上来。
现代文：十一月己丑戌时，风变得急速，从西北戌亥方位上刮来。
English: When November turned ugly, the wind became rapid, blowing from the northwest direction.

古文：五年五月乙酉，子时风迅急，从西北戌亥上来。
现代文：五年五月乙酉子时，风变得迅猛，从西北戌亥方位上刮来。
English: In May of 2005, when there was a thunderstorm, the wind became fast and furious, blowing from the northwest direction.

古文：七年正月丁卯，阳徵阴贼之日，时加子，风起迅急，从北方子丑上来，暴疾浪津，寅时止。
现代文：七年正月丁卯，阳征阴毒残忍的日子，在于时，风迅猛刮起，从北方子丑方位上刮来，暴风迅猛浪峰冲上渡口，寅时停止。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, Dingwu, the day of the poisonous and cruel Yangzheng, when the wind blew rapidly and violently, blowing from the northern Zougou direction, the storm's rapid and violent wave peak rushed onto the ferry, and when it stopped.

古文：八年六月乙酉，时加子，风起迅急，暴疾浪津，发屋折木，尘沙，从西南未上来，因雷雨，须臾，风微雨止。
现代文：八年六月乙酉子时之后，风迅猛刮起，暴风迅猛浪峰冲上渡口，刮毁房屋，折断树木，扬起尘土，从西南未位上刮来，伴随着雷雨，不久，风小雨停。
English: Eight years in June, after the spring thaw, the wind blew rapidly and violently, the storm's rapid and violent wave peak rushed onto the ferry, destroyed houses, broke trees, raised dust, blew from the southwest, accompanied by thunderstorms, and soon the wind and rain stopped.

古文：九年七月甲寅，阳羽廉贞之日，时加亥，风起迅急，从东方来，暴疾彭勃浪津，至乙卯阴贼时渐微，名羽动羽。
现代文：九年七月甲寅，阳羽廉洁忠贞的子，在亥时，风骤起，从东方刮来，猛烈蓬勃，浪峰冲上渡口，到乙卯残忍狠毒时分风逐渐变小，此种风名羽能吹出羽音。
English: In July of the ninth year, the wind suddenly rose, blowing from the east, violently vigorous, and the wave peak rushed up to the ferry. The wind gradually became smaller when the eagle was cruel and venomous. This kind of wind can blow the sound of feathers.

古文：九月乙丑，时加未，雷，骤雨，风起迅急，暴疾浪津，从西北戌上来。
现代文：九月乙丑未时之后，打雷，骤然下雨，风迅猛刮起，暴风剧烈浪峰冲上渡口，从西北方戌位上刮来。
English: In September, after a long absence, there was thunder, sudden rain, strong winds, and the storm's violent wave crested over the ferry and swept in from the northwest.

古文：十月壬辰，阳羽奸邪之日，时加丑，风起从北方子丑上来，暴疾浪津，迅急，尘埃，五日寅时渐微，名羽动宫。
现代文：十月壬辰，阳羽奸诈邪恶的子，丑时之后，风从北方子丑方位上来，暴风剧烈浪峰冲上渡，迅猛，扬起尘埃，五寅时逐渐减小，此风名羽能吹出宫音。
English: In October, at the time of Yin and Yang, the yang and feather are treacherous and evil, and after the ugly time, the wind comes up from the north and the ugly direction, and the storm's violent wave peak rushes upstream, is swift and strong, and raises dust. At the time of Yin and Yang, it gradually decreases, and this wind can blow out the palace sound.

古文：十年正月辛巳，阳商宽大之日，时加寅，风从西北上来，暴疾浪津，迅急，扬沙折木，酉时止。
现代文：十年正月辛巳，阳商宽大的日子，寅时之后，风从西北方刮来，暴风剧烈浪峰冲上渡，风势迅猛，扬起沙石折断树木，酉时停止。
English: Ten years ago, on the first day of the month of Xin, the day of Yang Shang's magnanimity, after the hour of Yin, the wind blew from the northwest, the storm was violent, the wave peak washed ashore, the wind was rapid, the sand and stones were lifted to break the trees, and the hour of Yin stopped.

古文：二月甲辰，阳徵奸邪之日，时加辰，风起迅急，从西北亥上来，暴疾彭勃浪津，至酉时止。
现代文：二月甲辰，阳征奸诈邪恶的日子，辰时之后，风迅猛刮起，从西北方亥位上来，暴风剧烈蓬勃，浪峰冲上渡口，到酉时停止。
English: February is the first hour, the day of the treacherous and evil Yang Zheng. After the hour, the wind blows rapidly and violently, coming up from the northwest at the height of the winter, the storm is violent and vigorous, the wave crests rush onto the ferry, and stops at dusk.

古文：三月丁酉，阳徵廉贞之日，时加未，风从北方子丑上来，迅急，暴疾浪津，戌时止。
现代文：三月丁酉，阳征廉洁忠贞的子，未时之后，风从北方子丑位上来，风势迅猛，暴风剧烈浪峰冲上渡口，戌时停止。
English: In March, Ding Xi, the son of Yang Zheng, the son of integrity and loyalty, after a long time, the wind came up from the north of the north, the wind was swift, the storm was violent, the wave peak rushed onto the ferry, and it stopped at dusk.

古文：七月庚申，阴角贪狼之日，时加午，风从东北丑上来，迅急浪津，至辛酉巳时渐微。
现代文：七月庚申，阴角贪婪狠毒的日子，午时之后，风从东北方丑位上刮来，风势迅猛，浪峰冲上渡口，到辛酉巳时逐渐减弱。
English: In July, at the height of the monsoon, the day of the greedy and vicious, after noon, the wind blew from the north-eastern Ugly, the wind was rapid, the wave peak washed up on the ferry, and gradually weakened by the end of the day.

古文：十一年二月庚寅，阳角廉贞之日，时加亥，风从西北亥上来，迅疾浪津，丑时渐微，为角动角。
现代文：十一年二月庚寅，阳角廉洁忠贞的日子，亥时之后，风从西北方亥位上刮来，风势迅猛，浪峰冲上渡口，丑时逐渐减弱，此风名为角能吹出角音。
English: In February of the 11th year of Geng Yin, the days when Yangjiao was honest and loyal, after the Haijiao, the wind blew from the northwest Haijiao, the wind was rapid, the wave peak rushed to the ferry port, and the ugly time gradually weakened. This wind is called the horn can blow the horn sound.

古文：七月甲寅，阳羽廉贞之日，时加巳，风从东北寅上来，迅疾浪津，发屋折木，戊夜渐微，为羽动徵。
现代文：七月甲寅，阳羽廉洁忠贞的日子，巳时之后，风从东北方寅位上刮来，风势迅猛浪峰冲上渡口，刮毁房屋折断树木，夜裹戊时逐渐减弱，是羽吹动征音。
English: In July, on the day of the integrity and loyalty of the sun and the feather, the wind blew from the northeast of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north-east of the north

古文：己巳，阳角宽大之日，时加未，风从戌上来，暴疾，良久止，为角动商及宫。
现代文：己巳日，阳角宽大的日子，未时之后，风从戌位上刮来，风势暴烈，很久才停止，此风名为角能吹出商音及宫音。
English: Once upon a time, on a day when the sun was high in the sky, the wind blew from the top of the tower. The wind was fierce, and it took a long time to stop. This wind, called the horn, was able to blow out commercial sounds and palace sounds.

古文：凡时无专恣，疑是阴阳相薄。
现代文：凡是当时没有专擅恣肆的现象，就怀疑是阴阳相逼。
English: Whenever there was no arbitrary phenomenon at that time, it was suspected that yin and yang were in conflict.

古文：建武元年三月乙酉，未时风起，浪津暴急，从北方上来，应本传瞀乱。
现代文：建武元年三月乙酉，未时起风，浪峰冲上渡口，风势猛烈，从北方刮来，正应验了本传上所说的混乱。
English: In March of the first year of the Jianwu era, the wind suddenly rose, the wave peak rushed onto the ferry, the wind was fierce and blew from the north, just fulfilling the chaos mentioned in this legend.

古文：建武二年、三年、四年，每秋七月、八月，辄大风，三吴尤甚，发屋折木，杀人。
现代文：建武二年、三年、四年，每年秋天七月、八月，就刮起大风，三吴地区尤其厉害，刮毁房屋折断树木，杀死人。
English: In the second, third and fourth years of the Jianwu period, every autumn in July and August, there were strong winds, especially in the Sanwu area, which destroyed houses, broke trees and killed people.

古文：京房占： 狱吏暴，风害人。 
现代文：《京氏易传》说： 监狱官吏残暴，风就会害人 。
English: "Beijing History" says: If the prison officials are cruel, the wind will harm people.

古文：时帝严刻。
现代文：当时皇帝严酷刻薄。
English: At that time, the emperor was harsh and mean.

古文：永元元年七月十二日，大风，京师十围树及官府居民屋皆拔倒，应本传。
现代文：永元元年七月十二日，刮大风，京城十人合抱粗的树以及官府居民房屋都被拔出吹倒，应验了本传的说法。
English: On the 12th of July in the year of Yongyuan, a strong wind blew, and ten people in the capital city hugged thick trees and the houses of government residents were pulled out and blown down, fulfilling the legend.

古文：《传》又曰： 山之于地，君之象也。
现代文：《传》又说： 山对于大地是君主的象征。
English: "Biography" also said: The mountain is the symbol of the monarch for the earth.

古文：山崩者，君权损，京陵易处，世将变也。
现代文：山崩塌是君权受到损害，京城的山陵迁移，世间将要发生变化。
English: The collapse of the mountain is the damage to the royal power, the relocation of the mountains of the capital, and the world is about to change.

古文：陵转为泽，贵将为贱也。 
现代文：山陵转化为水泽，高贵就将变为低贱。 
English: The mountains will be turned into pools of water, and the rich into the poor.

古文：建元二年夏，庐陵石阳县长溪水冲激山麓崩，长六七丈，下得柱千余口，皆十围，长者一丈，短者八九尺，头题有古文字，不可识。
现代文：建元二年夏天，庐陵郡石阳县长溪水冲激山麓造成崩塌，长六七丈，山下得到一千多条石柱，都是十围粗，长的一丈，短的八九尺，头上题刻着古文字，无法辨认。
English: In the summer of the second year of the founding of the Republic of China, the water of the Changxi River in Shiyang County, Fuling County, caused the collapse of the foot of the mountain. It was 67 meters long, and more than a thousand stone pillars were obtained at the bottom of the mountain. They were all 10 meters thick, 1 meter long, and 89 meters short. They were inscribed with ancient characters on their heads, and were unrecognizable.

古文：江淹以问王俭，俭云： 江东不闲隶书，此秦汉时柱也。 
现代文：江淹向王俭请教，王纤： 不习惯写隶书，这是秦、汉时的石柱。 
English: Jiangran asked Wang Jian for advice. Wang Jian: I'm not used to writing documents. This is a stone pillar from the Qin and Han dynasties.

古文：后年宫车晏驾，世变之象也。
现代文：后年皇帝去世，这是世事变化的征兆。
English: The emperor's death the following year was a sign of changing times.

古文：永明二年秋，始兴曲江县山崩，壅底溪水成陂。
现代文：永明二年秋，始兴郡曲江县山体崩塌，在河底堵塞形成水塘。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Yongming, a mountain collapsed in Qujiang County, Shixing County, blocking the river bottom and forming a reservoir.

古文：京房占： 山崩，人主恶之。 
现代文：《京氏易传》说： 山体崩塌，君主厌恶。 
English: "The History of the Imperial Family" says: Mountains collapse, monarchs are disgusted.

古文：《传》又曰： 雷电所击，盖所感也。
现代文：《传》又说： 雷电的震击，大概是有所感应。
English: "Biography" also said: The shock of lightning is probably induced.

古文：皆思心有尤之所致也。 
现代文：都是由于内心的思虑有过失造成的。 
English: All of them were caused by the negligence of my inner thoughts.

古文：建元二年闰六月丙戌，戊夜震电。
现代文：建元二年闰六月丙戌夜，五更电闪雷鸣。
English: On the night of leap June in the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there was lightning and thunder on the 5th.

古文：四年五月五日，雷雹暗都，雷震于乐游安昌殿，电火焚荡尽。
现代文：四年五月五日，阴云冰雹使都城变得昏暗，雷声震击到乐游安昌殿，闪电引起的火灾使建筑物荡然无存。
English: On May 5, 2004, the capital was darkened by clouds and hail, thunder shook the Leyou Anchang Hall, and the building was completely destroyed by fire caused by lightning.

古文：永明八年四月六日，雷震会稽山阴恒山保林寺，刹上四破，电火烧塔，下佛面窗户不异也。
现代文：永明八年四月六日，雷声震击，会稽郡山阴县恒山保林寺佛塔上四处震裂，闪电的火光烧着了佛塔，塔下面的佛面窗户没有受到破坏。
English: On April 6th, the 8th year of the Yongming era, thunder shook and cracked the pagoda of Hengshan Baolin Temple in Sanyin County, Hefei County. The fire of lightning burned the pagoda, but the windows of the Buddha's face under the pagoda were not damaged.

古文：永明中，雷震东宫南门，无所伤毁，杀食官一人。
现代文：永明年间，雷震击束宫的南门，没有什么毁坏，衹是击死了一位掌管饮食的官员。
English: Once upon a time, a thunderbolt struck the south gate of the Summer Palace. Nothing was destroyed, but an official in charge of catering was killed.

古文：十一年三月，震于东斋，栋崩。
现代文：十一年三月，雷声在东房上震击，房梁崩塌。
English: In March of the eleventh year, thunder shook the east wing, and the beams of the house collapsed.

古文：左右密欲治缮，竟陵王子良曰： 此岂可治！留之志吾过，且旌天之爱我也。 
现代文：身边的人私下想整治修缮，竟陵王萧子良说： 这个怎么能整修，保留下来证明我的过失，而且显示上天对我的爱。 
English: People around him privately wanted to repair and renovate it, but the mausoleum king Xiao Ziliang said: "How can this be repaired, preserved to prove my fault, and show the love of heaven for me."

古文：明年，子良薨。
现代文：第二年，萧子良去世。
English: The following year, Xiao Ziliang passed away.

古文：《传》又曰： 土气乱者，木金水火乱之。 
现代文：《传》又说： 土气的错乱，是木金水火的失调造成的。 
English: "Biography" also said: The disorder of the local atmosphere is caused by the imbalance of wood, metal, water and fire.

古文：建武二年二月丁巳，地震。
现代文：建武二年二月丁巳，地震。
English: In February of the following year, there was an earthquake.

古文：永元元年七月，地日夜十八震。
现代文：永元元年七月，一昼夜十八次地震。
English: In July of the year 1199, there were 18 earthquakes in one day and night.

古文：九月十九日，地五震。
现代文：九月十九日，五次地震。
English: September 19th, five earthquakes.

古文：金者，西方，万物既成，杀气之始也。
现代文：金，对应西方，万物收获，是肃杀之气的开始。
English: Gold, corresponding to the West, the harvest of all things, is the beginning of the spirit of suppression.

古文：其于王事，兵戎战伐之道也。
现代文：这表现在政事上，是走向战争讨伐之路。
English: This manifests itself in politics as the road to war.

古文：王者兴师动众，建立旗鼓，仗旄把钺，以诛残贼，止暴乱，杀伐应义，则金气从。
现代文：国王兴师动众，树起旗帜摆下战鼓，举着旗手持铁，诛杀残暴的强盗，制止暴乱，如果杀戮符合道义，金气就会顺从。
English: The king rallied the people, raised the flag, set up the war drums, held the flag with an iron hand, killed the brutal robbers, stopped the riot, and if the killing was moral, the gold would obey.

古文：工冶铸化，革形成器也。
现代文：也就是冶炼铸造，做成器形。
English: That is, smelting and casting, made into a shape.

古文：人君乐侵陵，好攻战，贪城邑，轻百姓之命，人民不安，内外骚动，则金失其性。
现代文：如果君主以侵犯为乐，喜欢战争，贪图城邑，轻视百姓的性命，百姓不安，内外骚动，那么金就会失去它的本性。
English: If the monarch enjoys aggression, likes war, covets cities, despises the lives of the people, the people are uneasy, and there is internal and external turmoil, then gold will lose its nature.

古文：盖冶铸不化，冰滞固坚，故曰金不从革，又曰维木沴金。
现代文：大概会无法熔化了去冶炼铸造，像水一样凝固坚硬，所以说金无法被冶铸，又说木气与金气不合。
English: It would probably not be able to be melted down for smelting and casting, solidifying and hardening like water, so it is said that gold cannot be smelted, and it is also said that wood gas is incompatible with metal gas.

古文：建武四年，明帝出旧宫送豫章王第二女绥安主降嫔，还上辇，辇上金翅无故自折落地。
现代文：建武四年，明帝走出旧宫送豫章王的第二个女儿绥安主出嫁，回来上了乘辇，辇上的金翅无缘无故掉到地上。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianwu era, Emperor Ming walked out of the old palace to see King Yuanzhang's second daughter, Lady An, get married. When he returned, he was riding on a donkey. The golden wings on the donkey fell to the ground for no reason.

古文：《言传》曰： 言《易》之道，西方曰《兑》，为口。
现代文：《言传》说： 言在《易经》的体系中，对应西方称《兑》卦，是因为有口。
English: "Gon legend" says: In the system of "I Ching," "Gon" is called "Wen" in the West, because it has a mouth.

古文：人君过差无度，刑法不一，敛从其重，或有师旅，炕阳之节，若动众劳民，是言不从。
现代文：君主失误没有节制，刑法不统一，从重搜刮，不时还有战争，不施行恩惠，如果还劳动百姓，造就会致使言的不顺从。
English: There is no restraint on the monarch's blunders, the criminal law is not unified, it is heavily scrounged, there are wars from time to time, no favors are granted, and if the people are forced to work, it will lead to disobedience of the emperor's words.

古文：人君既失众，政令不从，孤阳持治，下畏君之重刑，阳气胜则旱象至，故曰厥罚常阳也。 
现代文：君主已经失去百姓，政令没人服从，孤立的阳气统治，下面畏惧君主的重刑，阳气胜就会出现旱象，所以说其惩罚是持续的阳气。 
English: The monarch has lost the people, no one obeys the decrees, isolated yang qi rules, and the monarch's heavy punishment is feared below. If yang qi wins, there will be drought, so its punishment is continuous yang qi.

古文：建元三年，大旱，时有虏寇。
现代文：建元三年，大旱，有敌寇入侵。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, there was a severe drought and an invasion of enemy raiders.

古文：永民三年，大旱，明年，唐宇之起。
现代文：永民三年，大旱，第二年，唐寓之起事。
English: In the third year of Yongmin, there was a big drought. In the second year, there was an uprising in Tangye.

古文：建武二年，大旱，时虏寇方盛，皆动众之应也。
现代文：建武二年，大旱，当时敌寇大举入侵，都是扰动百姓的报应。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the drought, when the enemy invaded en masse, was the retribution of disturbing the people.

古文：《言传》曰： 下既悲苦君上之行，又畏严刑而不敢正言，则必先发于歌谣。
现代文：《言传》说： 下民既悲苦于君主的行为，又畏惧严酷的刑罚，不敢正面说，就一定首先在歌谣中发泄。
English: "The Legend" says: The common people are both saddened by the behavior of the monarch and afraid of the harsh punishment, and dare not say it directly, so they must first vent in songs.

古文：歌谣，口事也。口气逆则恶言，或有怪谣焉。 
现代文：歌谣是口头创作，口气不顺就会有恶言恶语，或者有古怪的歌谣。 
English: Ballads are oral creations. If the tone is not right, there will be bad language, or there will be strange ballads.

古文：宋泰始既失彭城，江南始传种消梨，先时所无，百姓争欲种植。
现代文：宋泰始年间失去彭城后，江南才流行种植消梨，这是过去没有的，百姓争相种植。
English: After the loss of Pengcheng during the Song Dynasty, it was not until the south of the Yangtze River that the planting of pear trees became popular. This was not the case in the past, and people scrambled to plant pear trees.

古文：识者曰： 当有姓萧而来者。 
现代文：有见识的人说： 将会有姓萧的人来。 
English: A person with insight said: There will be a person with the surname Xiao.

古文：十余年，齐受禅。
现代文：十多年后，齐接受宋的惮让。
English: More than a decade later, Qi accepted Song's surrender.

古文：元徽中，童谣曰： 襄阳白铜蹄，郎杀荆州儿。 
现代文：元徽年间，童谣说： 襄阳白铜蹄，郎杀荆州儿。 
English: In the Yuanhui era, the nursery rhyme said: "Xiangyang white copper hoof, the son-in-law killed Jingzhou."

古文：后沈攸之反，雍州刺史张敬儿袭江陵，杀沈攸之子元琰等。
现代文：后来沈攸之反叛，雍州刺史张敬儿袭击江陵，杀掉沈攸之的儿子沈元琰等人。
English: Later, Shen Youyou rebelled, and the Yongzhou assassin Zhang Jing'er attacked Jiangling, killing Shen Youyou's son Shen Yuanxuan and others.

古文：永明元年元日，有小人发白虎樽，既醉，与笔札，不知所道，直云 忆高帝 。
现代文：永明元年正月初一，有个下人打开白虎樽，喝醉之后，给他笔纸，不知写什么，祇是说 回忆高帝 。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the Yongming era, a subordinate opened a white tiger barrel. After getting drunk, he gave him a pen and paper. He did not know what to write, only to say that he remembered Gao Di.

古文：敕原其罪。
现代文：赦免了他的罪过。
English: and forgave him his sins.

古文：世祖起青溪旧宫，时人反之曰： 旧宫者，穷厩也。 
现代文：世祖修建青溪旧宫，当时人反对说： 旧宫是一处破马棚。 
English: When the founder of the world was building the Qingxi Old Palace, people objected saying: The old palace is a broken stable.

古文：及上崩后，宫人出居之。
现代文：等到世祖驾崩后，宫人搬出来居住。
English: After the death of the ancestor, the palace people moved out to live.

古文：永明初，百姓歌曰： 白马向城啼，欲得城边草。 
现代文：永明初年，百姓歌唱说： 白马向城叫，想吃到城边的草。 
English: In the first year of Yongming, the people sang: The white horse called to the city, wanting to eat the grass on the edge of the city.

古文：后句间云 陶郎来 。
现代文：后一句之间有 陶郎来 字样。
English: Between the last sentence there is the word "Toro."

古文：白者金色，马者兵事。
现代文：白是指金，马是代表战争。
English: The white represents gold, and the horse represents war.

古文：三年，妖贼唐宇之起，言唐来劳也。
现代文：三年，妖贼唐寓之造反，歌谣是说唐寓之前来骚扰。
English: Three years ago, there was a rebellion by the bandits of the Tang Apartments. The ballad says that they came to harass the Tang Apartments.

古文：世祖起禅灵寺初成，百姓纵观。或曰： 禅者授也，灵非美名，所授必不得其人。 
现代文：世祖刚建成禅灵寺，百姓随意参观，有人说： 禅是授位，灵不是好名，传授的一定不是合适的人。 
English: The founder of the world had just built the Zen Ling Temple, and people were freely visiting it. Some people said, "Zen is a conferral of rank, and Ling is not a good name, and it is definitely not the right person to teach."

古文：后太孙立，见废也。
现代文：后来太孙即位，被废黜。
English: Later, his great-grandson ascended the throne and was deposed.

古文：永明中，宫内坐起御食之外，皆为客食。
现代文：永明年间，宫内起居除皇帝用餐之外，都是客食。
English: For centuries, all meals at the Imperial Court, with the exception of the Emperor's meals, were served to guests.

古文：世祖以客非家人名，改呼为别食，时人以为分别之象。
现代文：世祖认为客不是对家人的称呼，改称为别食，当时人认为是分别的迹象。
English: The ancestor thought that "guest" was not the name of the family, and changed it to "special meal." At that time, people thought it was a sign of separation.

古文：少时，上晏驾。
现代文：不久，皇帝去世。
English: Soon after, the emperor died.

古文：文惠太子在东宫，作 两头纤纤 诗，后句云 磊磊落落玉山崩 ，自此长王宰相相继薨徂，二宫晏驾。
现代文：文惠太子在束宫时，作两头纤纤诗，最后一句说 磊磊落落玉山崩 。从此以后很长时间宰相连续逝世，两宫去世。
English: When Prince Wen Hui was in the palace, he composed a two-part poem, the last sentence of which said, "A long time ago, a long time ago, a long time ago, a long time ago, a long time ago, a long time ago, a long time ago."

古文：文惠太子作七言诗，后句辄云 愁和谛 。
现代文：文惠太子创作七言诗，最后一句就说： 愁和谛 。
English: Prince Wen Hui composed a seven-character poem, the last sentence of which said: "Sorrow and longing."

古文：后果有和帝禅位。
现代文：后来果然有和帝惮位。
English: Later, there was indeed a meeting with the emperor.

古文：永明中，虏中童谣云： 黑水流北，赤火入齐。 
现代文：永明年间，胡人中有童谣说： 黑水北流，赤火入齐。 
English: Forever and ever, among the Hu people, there is a nursery rhyme that says: Black water flows north, red fire flows in.

古文：寻而京师人家忽生火，赤于常火，热小微，贵贱争取以治病。
现代文：不久京城人家忽然起火，比一般的火要红，不是很热，无论贵贱都争着以此治病。
English: Not long after, a fire suddenly broke out in a house in the capital. It was redder than a normal fire and not very hot. Both the rich and the poor were competing to use it to cure their illnesses.

古文：法以此火灸桃板七炷，七日皆差。
现代文：方法是用这火灸烤七炷桃板，七天就都能够痊愈。
English: The method is to use this fire moxibustion to roast the seven-leaved peach board, and the seven days will be able to recover.

古文：敕禁之，不能断。
现代文：朝廷下令禁止，也无效。
English: A ban ordered by the Imperial Court is also invalid.

古文：京师有病瘿者，以火灸数日而差。
现代文：京城有人长了个瘤子，用火灸烤了几天就好了。
English: Someone in the capital had a tumor, and it was fine to use moxibustion for a few days.

古文：邻人笑曰： 病偶自差，岂火能为。 
现代文：邻人嘲笑说： 病是偶尔自己好了，火怎么能起作用。 
English: Neighbors scoffed and said, "Sickness occasionally gets better on its own, so how can fire work?"

古文：此人便觉颐间痒，明日瘿还如故。
现代文：这人便觉得脖子间痒，第二天瘤子长回原先的样子。
English: The man felt an itch between his neck, and the next day the lump grew back to its original appearance.

古文：后梁以火德兴。
现代文：后来梁凭火德兴起。
English: Later, Liang Biyu Fu De rise.

古文：文惠太子起东田，时人反云： 后必有癫童。 
现代文：文惠太子修建束田，当时人反对说 后世必定会有癫狂的孩子 。
English: When Prince Wen Hui was building Sokcho, people objected that there would be crazy children in the future.

古文：果由太孙失位。
现代文：果然从太孙失去了帝位。
English: His great-grandson did indeed lose the imperial throne.

古文：齐宋以来，民间语云： 扰攘建武上。 
现代文：齐宋以来，民间传言说 扰乱发生在建武年间 。
English: Since the Song Dynasty, folk rumors have said that the disturbance occurred during the Jianwu period.

古文：明帝初，诛害蕃戚，京师危骇。
现代文：明帝初年，杀害藩王亲属，京城惊骇。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the capital was shocked by the killing of a relative of the king of the domain.

古文：永元元年，童谣曰： 洋洋千里流，流翣东城头。
现代文：永元元年，童谣说： 洋洋千里流，篓漂东城头。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, the nursery rhyme said: "The ocean is flowing for thousands of miles, and the east city is drifting."

古文：乌马乌皮袴，三更相告诉。
现代文：骑乌马穿乌皮裤，半夜三更前去相告。
English: Riding a horse, wearing cowhide trousers, and going to report to the emperor at midnight.

古文：脚跛不得起，误杀老姥子。 
现代文：脚跛没能起来，误杀了老姥子。 
English: The shackles failed to come up, accidentally killing the old woman.

古文：遥光夜举事，垣历生者乌皮袴褶往奔之。
现代文：千里流是指江柘。束城足指遥光。遥光夜裹起事，垣历生穿着乌皮裤褶前往投奔。
English: The thousand-mile flow refers to Jiangxi. Sokchen's toe is far away. Far away, the night is wrapped in trouble, and Gaki Lian Sheng is wearing a black leather crotch to rush.

古文：跛脚，亦遥光。
现代文：跛脚，也是指遥光。
English: Lame, also refers to the distant light.

古文：老姥子，孝字之象，徐孝嗣也。
现代文：老姥子，孝字的象形，是指徐孝嗣。
English: The old granny, the pictogram of the Chinese character for filial piety, refers to Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：永元中，童谣云： 野猪虽嗃嗃，马子空闾渠。
现代文：永元年间，童谣说： 野猪虽然嘀嘀地叫，马子在空荡的街巷沟渠。
English: In the Yongyuan era, the nursery rhyme said: Although the wild boar is braying, the horse is in the empty streets and ditches.

古文：不知龙与虎，饮食江南墟。
现代文：不知道龙还是虎，饮食于遍的废墟。
English: I don't know if I'm a dragon or a tiger, eating and drinking in the ruins of Henan.

古文：七九六十三，广莫人无余。
现代文：七九六十三，在庐墓门丢失了性命。
English: Seventy-nine-and-sixty-three lost their lives at the Gate of the Tombs.

古文：乌集传舍头，今汝得宽休。
现代文：乌鸦栖息在旅舍的房头，如今你就能得到放松休息。
English: Crows have taken up residence at the front of the hostel, so now you can relax and unwind.

古文：但看三八后，摧折景阳楼。 
现代文：但看之后，摧折景阳楼。 
English: But after seeing it, the Jingyang Tower collapsed.

古文：识者解云 陈显达属猪，崔慧景属马 ，非也。
现代文：有见识的人解释说 陈显达属猪，崔慧景属马 ，是不对的。
English: People with insight explained that Chen Xanda is a pig and Cui Huijing is a horse, which is wrong.

古文：东昏侯属猪，马子未详，梁王属龙，萧颖胄属虎。
现代文：塞昼堡属猪， 马子 不知道什么意思，髻延属龙，萧颖胄属虎。
English: Zi Rongbao is a pig, Ma Zi I don't know what it means, Yan Yan is a dragon, Xiao Yingyao is a tiger.

古文：崔慧景攻台，顿广莫门死，时年六十三。
现代文：崔孟速攻打朝廷，在尘墓门受挫战死，终年六十三岁。
English: Cui Meng quickly attacked the imperial court, was defeated at the gate of the tomb, and died at the age of 63.

古文：乌集传舍，即所谓 瞻乌爰止，于谁之屋 。
现代文：乌鸦栖息在旅舍，就是所谓 看那乌栖息，在谁的房屋 。
English: In whose house do the ravens make their nests?

古文：三八二十四，起建元元年，至中兴二年，二十四年也。
现代文：三八二十四，从建元元年，到中兴二年，是二十四年。
English: Thirty-eight twenty-four, from the founding of the first year of the first year to the second year of ZTE, is twenty-four years.

古文：摧折景阳楼，亦高台倾之意也。言天下将去，乃得休息也。
现代文：摧折量垦隧，也就是高台倾倒的意思，是说天下将要易主，才能得到休息。
English: The word "tunnel," which means "to topple over," means that the world is about to change hands, and only then will we be able to rest.

古文：齐、宋之际，民间语云 和起 ，言以和颜而为变起也。
现代文：齐、宋之际，民间传言说 和起 ，说是用平和的态度发生变化。
English: On the occasion of the Qi and Song dynasties, folk rumors said that they would make peace, that is, they would change with a peaceful attitude.

古文：后和帝立。
现代文：后来和帝即位。
English: Later, Emperor He ascended to the throne.

古文：崔慧景围台城，有一五色幡，飞翔在云中，半日乃不见，众皆惊怪，相谓曰： 幡者，事寻当翻覆也。 
现代文：崔慧景包围台球，有一竿五色幡在云中飞翔，半天后才看不见了，众人都很惊奇，相互说： 幡是预示事情不久将会有反覆。 
English: Cui Huijing surrounded the billiard ball. There was a five-colored banner flying in the clouds, which was not visible until half a day later. Everyone was surprised and said to each other: The banner is a sign that things will soon be repeated.

古文：数日而慧景败。
现代文：几天后崔慧景战败。
English: A few days later, Cui Huijing was defeated.

古文：《言传》曰： 言气伤则民多口舌，故有口舌之痾。
现代文：《言传》说： 言气受伤害百姓就会多嘴多舌，所以得口舌的病。
English: "Tale of the Tongue" says: When people are hurt by words, they will be more talkative, so they will get the disease of the tongue.

古文：金者白，故有日眚，若有白为恶祥。 
现代文：金对应白，所以有白灾异，如果出现白色就是不祥的征兆。 
English: Gold corresponds to white, so there is a white plague, and if white appears, it is an ominous sign.

古文：宋升明二年，飙风起建康县南塘里，吹帛一匹入云，风止，下御路。
现代文：宋升明二年，建康县南塘里刮起狂风，把一匹帛吹到云中，风停后，落到御路上。
English: In the second year of Song Shengming, a strong wind blew up in Nantang, Jiankang County, blowing a dragonfly into the clouds. After the wind stopped, it landed on the main road.

古文：纪僧真启太祖当宋氏禅者，其有匹夫居之。
现代文：纪僧真启奏太祖将是宋代禅让的对象，哪有一般人能够得到的。
English: Ji Sang Zhen Kai So Taizu will be the object of the Song Dynasty Zen, which can be obtained by ordinary people.

古文：水，北方，冬藏万物，气至阴也，宗庙祭祀之象。
现代文：水，对应北方，时令是冬季收藏万物，气是最阴的，宗庙祭祀的天象。
English: Water, corresponding to the north, the season is the winter collection of all things, the qi is the most cloudy, the ancestral temple's sacrificial star.

古文：死者精神放越不反，故为之庙以收其散，为之貌以收其魂神，而孝子得尽礼焉。
现代文：死去的人灵魂四处游荡不回，所以给他们建庙，给他们画像收拢灵魂，而孝子能够藉此尽心。
English: The souls of the dead wander around and do not return, so they build temples for them, give them images to gather their souls, and the filial son can do his best with this.

古文：敬之至，则神歆之，此则至阴之气从，则水气从沟渎随而流去，不为民害矣。
现代文：尊敬到极点，神灵就会享用祭品，造就是最阴的气顺从，就是水气从沟渎中随着水流去，不祸害百姓。
English: With the utmost respect, the deities will enjoy the offerings, and the creation is the most yin qi obedience, that is, the water qi goes from the ditch along with the water flow, and does not harm the people.

古文：人君不祷祀，简宗庙，废祭祀，逆天时，则雾水暴出，川水逆溢，壤邑轶乡，沉溺民人，故曰水不润下。
现代文：君主不祈祷奉祀，简慢宗庙，废弃祭祀，违背天时，就会突然出现水雾，河水逆流溢出，冲坏城镇乡村，使人民溺水，所以说水不能湿润低下之地。
English: If the monarch does not pray and pay homage, reduces the size of the ancestral temple, abandons the sacrificial rites, and disobeys heaven, water mist will suddenly appear, the river water will overflow, wash away the towns and villages, and drown the people, so it is said that water cannot wet the land.

古文：建元二年，吴、吴兴、义兴三郡大水。
现代文：建元二年，吴、吴兴、义兴三郡发大水。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, the three counties of Wu, Wuxing and Yixing were flooded.

古文：二年夏，丹阳、吴二郡大水。
现代文：二年夏，丹阳、吴二郡发大水。
English: In the summer of the second year, Danyang and Wu Er County were flooded.

古文：四年，大水。
现代文：四年，发大水。
English: Four years later, it's all over.

古文：永明五年夏，吴兴、义兴水雨伤稼。
现代文：永明五年夏，呈璺、盏垒洪水降雨毁坏庄稼。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of the Yongming era, there were floods and torrential rains that destroyed crops.

古文：六年，吴兴、义兴二郡大水。
现代文：六年，吴兴、义兴二郡发大水。
English: In the sixth year, two counties, Wuxing and Yixing, experienced serious water shortages.

古文：建武二年冬，吴、晋陵二郡水雨伤稼。
现代文：建武二年冬，呈、置陆二郡洪水降雨毁坏庄稼。
English: In the winter of the second year of Jianwu, floods and rains in two counties in Jinglu damaged crops.

古文：永元元年七月，涛入石头，漂杀缘淮居民。
现代文：永元元年七月，波涛灌入互头，水漂起来淹死了沿进回居住的百姓。
English: In July of the first year of the Yongyuan era, the waves crashed into each other, the water floated up and drowned the people who lived along the river.

古文：应本传。
现代文：应验了本传的说法。
English: The legend has come true.

古文：荆州城内有沙池，常漏水。
现代文：荆州城内有处沙迤，经常漏水。
English: There is a sand dune in the city of Jingzhou, and water often leaks.

古文：萧颖胄为长史，水乃不漏，及颖胄亡，乃复竭。
现代文：蓝题直担任长史，水就不漏了，等到萧颖胄去世，水就又干涸了。
English: The blue theme has served as a long history, and the water will not leak. When Xiao Yingyao died, the water dried up again.

古文：《传》曰： 极阴气动，故有鱼孽。
现代文：《传》说： 阴极气动，所以有鱼作孽。
English: "Biography" said: The cathode is pneumatic, so there are fish doing evil.

古文：鱼孽者，常寒罚之符也。 
现代文：鱼作孽是上天以连续寒冷惩罚的征兆。 
English: The sins of the fish are a sign of God's punishment with continuous cold.

古文：永明九年，盐官县石浦有海鱼乘潮来，水退不得去，长三十余丈，黑色无鳞，未死，有声如牛。土人呼为海燕，取其肉食之。
现代文：永明九年，盐官县五适有条海鱼乘着潮水游来，潮水退去后无法游回，长三十多丈，黑色没有鳞，还活着，没有死，发出牛一样的声音，当地人称为海燕，割它的肉吃。
English: In the ninth year of the Ming Dynasty, there was a sea fish in Wuxi, Yanquan County, which swam with the tide and could not swim back after the tide receded. It was more than 30 meters long, black, without scales, still alive, not dead, and made a sound like a cow. The locals called it a petrel and ate its meat.

古文：永元元年四月，有大鱼十二头入会稽上虞江，大者近二十余丈，小者十余丈，一入山阴称蒲，一入永兴江，皆暍岸侧，百姓取食之。
现代文：永元元年四月，有十二条大鱼游入会稽上虞江，大的近二十多丈，小的十多丈，一批游入山阴县称浦，一批游入永兴江，都枯晒在岸边，百姓割它的肉吃。
English: In April of the first year of the Yonggen era, twelve large fish swam into the Shangyu River, the largest was nearly twenty meters long, and the smallest was more than ten meters long. A group of them swam into Shanyin County, and a group of them swam into the Yongxing River. They all dried up on the shore, and the people cut it into pieces to eat.

古文：《听传》曰： 不聪之象见，则妖生于耳，以类相动，故曰有鼓妖也。 
现代文：《听传》说： 不听取意见的现象出现，耳朵裹就会生出妖异，因为同类相互牵动，所以说有鼓声作妖。 
English: "Listening to the legend" said: If the phenomenon of not listening to opinions appears, the ear wrap will give rise to monsters, because the same kind of things affect each other, so it is said that there is a drum sound as a demon.

古文：一曰，声属鼓妖。
现代文：一种说法，声响属于鼓作妖。
English: One theory is that the sound belongs to a drumming demon.

古文：永明元年十一月癸卯夜，天东北有声，至戊夜。
现代文：永明元年十一月癸卯夜，东北方天空有声响，一直到五更天。
English: In the early evening of November in the first year of the Yongming era, there was a sound in the northeastern sky, which lasted until the 5th day of the month.

古文：《传》曰： 皇之不极，是谓不建，其咎在霿乱失听，故厥咎霿。思心之咎亦雾。
现代文：《传》说： 君主的行为失去中正，就不能有所建树，其过失在于错乱不听取意见，所以上天的谴责是天大雾。
English: "Legend" said: If a monarch's behavior is not upright, he cannot build anything. His fault lies in disorder and not listening to opinions. Therefore, heaven's condemnation is a great fog.

古文：天者，正万物之始，王者，正万事之始，失中则害天气，类相动也。
现代文：思虑的过失也表现为雾气。天端正万物的开始，帝王端正万事的开始，不能端正就会危害天气，引起同类事物的反应。
English: Mistakes made in deliberation are also manifested as fog. Heaven directs the beginning of all things, the emperor directs the beginning of all things, and if it cannot be directed, it will harm the weather and cause the reaction of similar things.

古文：天者转于下而运于上，云者起于山而弥于天，天气动则其象应，故厥罚常阴。
现代文：天在下面转动在上面运行，云产生于山中弥漫于天空，天气变动就会有相应的征兆，所以其惩罚就是持续阴。
English: The sky rotates below and runs above, clouds are generated in the mountains and pervade the sky, and there will be corresponding signs of weather changes, so the punishment is continuous shade.

古文：王者失中，臣下盛强，而蔽君明，则云阴亦众多而蔽天光也。
现代文：帝王失去端正，臣下强盛，蒙蔽塞君主的视听，就会阴云密布遮蔽天光。
English: If the emperor loses his propriety, if his vassals become powerful, and if the monarch's audio-visual equipment is blinded, the sky will be covered with dark clouds.

古文：建元四年十月丙午，日入后土雾勃勃如火烟。
现代文：建五四年十月丙午，太阳落山后尘土弥漫好像烧火的烟。
English: It was mid-afternoon in October of 1954, and after the sun had set, the air was thick with dust, like smoke from a fire.

古文：永明二年十一月己亥，四面土雾入人眼鼻，至辛丑止。
现代文：永明二年十一月己亥，漫天尘土，眯眼扑鼻，到辛丑日停止。
English: In November of the second year of Yongming, the year of the boar, the sky was full of dust, the eyes were narrowed, and the ugly day came to a halt.

古文：二年十一月丙子，日出后及日入后，四面土雾勃勃如火烟。
现代文：二年十一月丙子，日出及曰入后，尘土弥漫如烟。
English: In November of the second year, after sunrise and sunset, the dust was thick as smoke.

古文：六年十一月庚戌，丙夜土雾竟天，昏塞浓厚，至六日未时小开，到甲夜后仍浓密，勃勃如火烟，辛惨，入人眼鼻。
现代文：六年十一月庚戌夜三更，尘土漫天，浓重昏黑，到六日未时稍见明亮，到夜一更时仍然像烟雾一样弥漫，辛辣呛鼻。
English: In November of the sixth year, the moon rose three times in the night. The sky was full of dust, thick and dark. By the morning of the sixth day, it was slightly bright, and by the evening, it was still as dense as smoke, spicy and pungent.

古文：八年十月壬申，夜土雾竟天，浓厚勃勃如火烟，气入人眼鼻，至九日辰时开除。
现代文：八年十月壬申夜，尘土满天，浓厚弥漫好像放火的烟雾，土气灌入人的眼鼻，到九辰时才消散。
English: On the night of October 8th in Jinshin, the sky was full of dust. It was thick and pervasive, like smoke from a bonfire. The earthy atmosphere filled people's eyes and noses, and only dissipated at 9 o'clock.

古文：九年十月丙辰，昼夜恒昏雾勃勃如火烟，其气辛惨，入人眼鼻，兼日色赤黄，至四日甲夜开除。
现代文：九年十月丙辰，昼夜大雾弥漫，好像烟雾，辛辣呛人，连日太阳呈红黄色，到四日夜一更消散。
English: In October of the ninth year, the fog was thick day and night, like smoke, spicy and sultry. The sun was red and yellow for days and days, and it dissipated on the fourth day and night.

古文：十年正月辛酉，酉初四面土雾勃勃如火烟，其气辛惨，入人眼鼻。
现代文：十年正月辛酉，酉时初土雾像烧火的烟一样弥漫，气味辛辣呛鼻。
English: The first month of the year is hot and humid, and at dusk the early morning mist is as thick as smoke from a fire, and the smell is pungent and pungent.

古文：《传》曰： 《易》曰 乾为马 。逆天气，马多死，故曰有马祸。 
现代文：《传》说： 《易经》说 《干》是马，违逆天气，马多有死亡，所以说有马祸。 
English: "Biography" said: "I Ching" said that "dry" is a horse, contrary to the weather, the horse often dies, so it is said that there is a horse accident.

古文：一曰，马者，兵象也。
现代文：一种说法，马是战争的象征。
English: One theory is that the horse is a symbol of war.

古文：将有寇戎之事，故马为怪。
现代文：将会有入侵战争的事情，所以马作怪。
English: There's going to be an invasion, there's going to be a war.

古文：建武四年，王晏出至草市，马惊走，鼓步从车而归，十余日，晏诛。
现代文：建武四年，王晏出行到草市，马受惊逃跑，迈步随着车回来，十几天后，王晏被杀。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, Wang Hui traveled to Cao Shi. His horse was frightened and ran away, and he came back with the car. Ten days later, Wang Hui was killed.

古文：建武中，南岸有一兰马，走逐路上女子，女子窘急，走入人家床下避之，马终不置，发床食女子股脚间肉都尽。禁司以闻，敕杀此马，是后频有寇贼。
现代文：建武年间，南岸有一匹兰马追逐路上的女子，女子被逼逃入人家的床下躲避，马最终掀起床把腿脚间的肉都吃了，防卫部门上报此事，皇帝下令杀掉此马，此后接连有贼寇之事。
English: During the Jianwu era, there was a horse on the south bank chasing a woman on the road. The woman was forced to hide under someone's bed. The horse eventually got up and ate the meat between its legs and feet. The defense department reported the matter. The emperor ordered the horse to be killed. Since then, there have been a series of robberies.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 生子二胸以上，民谋其主。
现代文：《京房易传》说： 生子有两个以上的胸部，百姓算计其主。
English: "Beijing Fang Yi Biography" said: If a child has more than two breasts, the people will consider it to be the main one.

古文：三手以上，臣谋其主。二口已上，国见惊以兵。
现代文：有三只以上的手，臣下算计他们的君主有二张以上的口，国家会被战争惊吓。
English: If there are more than three hands, and his subjects calculate that their sovereign has more than two mouths, the state will be alarmed by war.

古文：三耳已上，是谓多听，国事无定。
现代文：有三个以上的耳朵，造就叫多听，国事无法确定。
English: If you have more than three ears, you will listen more, and you will not be able to determine the state of affairs.

古文：二鼻以上，国主久病。
现代文：有二个以上的鼻子，君主长期生病。
English: If there are more than two noses, the monarch has been ill for a long time.

古文：三足三臂已上，天下有兵。 
现代文：有三只以上的脚和手臂，天下会有战争。 
English: If there are more than three legs and arms, there will be war.

古文：其类甚多，盖以象占之。
现代文：这类事很多，大概用物象占卜。
English: There's a lot of this sort of thing going on, and it's probably using things like divination.

古文：永明五年，吴兴东迁民吴休之家女人双生二儿，胸以下齐以上合。
现代文：永明五年，吴兴束迁百姓吴休之家女人生了两个孩子，胸部以下肚脐以上连体。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, a woman from the Wu Xingcuan and Wu Hui family gave birth to two children. They were conjoined from the chest down to the navel.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 野兽入邑，其邑大虚。 
现代文：《京房易传》说： 野兽进入城市，该城大为空虚。 
English: "Beast enters the city, the city is very empty.

古文：又曰： 野兽无故入邑朝廷门及宫府中者，邑逆且虚。 
现代文：又说： 野兽无缘无故进入城市朝廷大门以及宫内府中，城市会有反叛而且造成空虚。 
English: He also said: "If a wild beast enters the city gate of the imperial court and the palace without any reason, the city will rebel and create a void.

古文：永明中，南海王子罕为南兖州刺史，有獐入广陵城，投井而死，又有象至广陵，是后刺史安王子敬于镇被害。
现代文：永明年间，南海王萧子罕任南兖州刺史，有头獐进入广陵城，投井而死，又有象到广陵，此后刺史安陆王萧子敬在镇所被害。
English: During the Yongle era, the South Sea King Xiao Zi Han served as the chief historian of Nanlu Prefecture. He entered Guangling City and died after throwing himself into a well, and he also went to Guangling. After that, the chief historian of Anlu, King Xiao Zi Jing, was killed in the town.

古文：建武四年春，当郊治圜丘，宿设已毕，夜虎攫伤人。
现代文：建武四年春，应当郊祭圆丘，头天已经陈设完毕，夜裹虎抓伤了人。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jianwu, it should be the suburb festival round hill, the first day has been set up, and at night the tiger scratched people.

古文：建武中，有鹿入景皇寝庙，皆为上崩及禅代也。
现代文：建武年间，有鹿进入量皇的寝庙，都是预示皇上驾崩以及禅让帝位。
English: During the Kenmu era, a deer entering the Emperor's sleeping temple was an omen of the Emperor's death and Zen's abdication.

古文：凡无占者，皆为不应本传。
现代文：凡是没有占卜的，都是没有应验本传。
English: If there is no divination, there is no fulfillment of the text.

古文：赞曰：木怪夔魍，火为水妃。
现代文：赞曰：木成精怪，火与水相对。
English: Zang Zhai said: Wood is a strange element, fire is opposite to water.

古文：土产载物，金作明威。
现代文：土能载万物，金显明威严。
English: The earth can support all things, and gold shows its majesty.

古文：形声异迹，影响同归。
现代文：形体和声响不同，可影响归于一致。
English: The shape and the sound are different, but the effect can be the same.

古文：皆由象应，莫不类推。
现代文：都足由物象对应，没有不是依类相推的。
English: All of them correspond to objects, and none of them are not derived by analogy.

